古文：尹思贞，京兆长安人也。
现代文：尹思贞，京兆长安人。
English: Yin Sizhen, a resident of Chang'an, Beijing.

古文：弱冠明经举，补隆州参军。
现代文：二十岁应试中举，任隆州参军。
English: At the age of 20, he took the middle school entrance examination and was assigned to Longzhou to join the army.

古文：时晋安县有豪族蒲氏，纵横不法，前后官吏莫能制。
现代文：当时晋安县有土豪蒲氏，横行霸道，无法无天，前后官吏，谁也奈何不得他。
English: At that time, there was a local tyrant in Jin'an County, the Pu clan, who was domineering, lawless, and a former and current government official.

古文：州司令思贞推按，发其奸赃万计，竟论杀之，远近称庆，刻石以纪其事，由是知名。
现代文：他查出了蒲氏奸赃数以万计，依法将他斩首。远近的人无不拍手称快，并刻石来记下这件事，由此尹思贞知名。
English: He discovered tens of thousands of traitors of the Pu clan and beheaded him in accordance with the law. People near and far applauded and carved stones to record the event, which made Yin Shizhen famous.

古文：累转明堂令，以善政闻。
现代文：后调任明堂县，以善政闻名。
English: He was later transferred to Myeongdong County and is known for his good governance.

古文：三迁殿中少监，检校洺州刺史。
现代文：后升任殿中少监、检校氵名州刺史。
English: Later, he was promoted to junior high school superintendent, and served as inspector of Meishu Elementary School.

古文：会契丹孙万荣作乱，河朔不安，思贞善于绥抚，境内独无惊扰，则天降玺书褒美之。
现代文：正当契丹孙万荣叛乱，河朔一带极不安宁，尹思贞善于绥抚，只有他的治地没有被惊扰，武则天特别下玺书褒扬赞美他。
English: At the time of the rebellion of the Khitan Sun Wanyong, the area around Hexuo was extremely restless, and Yin Sizhen was good at caressing. Only his province was not disturbed, and Wu Zetian praised and praised him in a special imperial edict.

古文：长安中，七迁秋官侍郎，以忤张昌宗被构，出为定州刺史，转晋州刺史。
现代文：长安年中，七次迁任秋官侍郎，因不听从奸臣张昌宗而被诬构罪名，降职到定州任刺史，又调任晋州刺史。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an era, he was transferred seven times to be the attendant of the autumn official, and was falsely accused of disobeying the treacherous vassal Zhang Changzong. He was demoted to the post of Dingzhou official and transferred to the post of Jinzhou official.

古文：寻复入为司府少卿。
现代文：不久，又调入朝廷任司府少卿。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Imperial Court as Shifu Shokei.

古文：时卿侯知一亦厉威严，吏人为之语曰： 不畏侯卿杖，惟畏尹卿笔。 
现代文：当时司府少卿中有侯如一，处事也极严厉，吏人曾传这样一句话： 不怕侯卿杖，只怕尹卿笔。 
English: At that time, there was only one Hou among the Shifu Shokei, and they were very strict in their dealings. The officials once said: "Don't be afraid of Hou Ching's cane, just be afraid of Yin Ching's pen."

古文：其为人所伏若此。
现代文：他为众人所敬服达到如此地步。
English: He has earned the respect of many for getting this far.

古文：寻加银青光禄大夫。于宅中掘得古戟十二，俄而门加棨戟，时人异焉。
现代文：不久，加银青光禄大夫，在住宅中挖出古戟十二，接着门前有了有衣之戟，时人很是惊异。
English: Not long after, Dr. Jia Yin and Dr. Qing Guanglu dug up twelve ancient skeletons in the house, and then there was a clothed skeleton in front of the door. People were very surprised.

古文：神龙初，为大理卿，时武三思擅权，御史大夫李承嘉附会之。壅州人韦月将上变，告三思谋逆，中宗大怒，命斩之。
现代文：神龙初年，尹思贞任大理卿。当时武三思专权，御史大夫李承嘉随声附合，雍州人韦月将告武三思谋反，唐中宗大怒，下命将韦月将处死。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, Yin Sizhen was appointed as the grand secretary. At that time, Wusan Sisi had absolute power, and the chief historian Li Chengjia followed suit. Wei Yue, a native of Yongzhou, accused Wusan Sisi of plotting a rebellion. Tang Zhongzong was furious and ordered Wei Yue to be executed.

古文：思贞以发生之月，固执奏以为不可行刑，竟有敕决杖配流岭南。
现代文：尹思贞以春季是万物得生的月份，坚持奏请不可行刑，便改为杖刑流配岭南。
English: Yin Sizhen took the spring as the month in which all things are born, and insisted that the punishment could not be carried out, so it was changed to the rod punishment for Lingnan.

古文：三思令所司因此非法害之，思贞又固争之。
现代文：武三思令有司非法加害，尹思贞又坚持抵制。
English: Wu Sansi ordered Yusi to illegally inflict harm, and Yin Sizhen insisted on resisting.

古文：承嘉希三思旨，托以他事，不许思贞入朝廷。
现代文：李承嘉领会武三思的旨意，托以另外的事，不许尹思贞入朝廷。
English: Li Chengjia understood Wu Sanshi's intention and asked him to do something else to prevent Yin Sizhen from entering the imperial court.

古文：谓承嘉曰： 公擅作威福，不顾宪章，附托奸臣，以图不轨，将先除忠良以自恣耶？ 
现代文：尹思贞对李承嘉说 ：你擅作威福，不顾国法，附和奸臣，谋图不轨，是要除掉忠良来为所欲为吗？ 
English: Yin Sizhen said to Li Chengjia, "You are good at being a tyrant, disregarding the laws of the country, siding with traitors, and scheming to do wrong. Do you want to get rid of the loyal and do whatever you want?

古文：承嘉大怒，遂劾奏思贞，出为青州刺史。
现代文：李承嘉大怒，便劾奏尹思贞，尹思贞被贬为青州刺史。
English: Li Chengjia flew into a rage, so he impeached Yin Sizhen, and Yin Sizhen was relegated to being a mere footnote in the history of Qingzhou.

古文：境内有蚕一年四熟者，黜陟使、卫州司马路敬潜八月至州，见茧叹曰： 非善政所致，孰能至于此乎！ 
现代文：青州境内有蚕一年四熟。黜陟使、卫州司马路敬潜八月到青州，见蚕茧叹道： 不是善政所致，谁又能出现这种盛况呢！ 
English: There are silkworms in Qingzhou that mature four times a year. 使、卫州司马路敬潜In August, when I went to Qingzhou, I saw the silkworms sighing: It's not due to good governance, who could have caused such a grand event!

古文：特表荐之。
现代文：特意上表荐举尹思贞。
English: Yin Sizhen was specially recommended.

古文：思贞前后为十三州刺史，皆以清简为政，奏课连最。睿宗即位，征为将作大匠，累封天水郡公。
现代文：尹思贞前后任十三州刺史，皆是清廉治政。睿宗即位，征用为将作大匠，封为天水郡公。
English: Before and after Yin Sizhen, he served as the governor of thirteen states, and all of them were clean and honest. Ruizong ascended the throne, was requisitioned as the grand master, and was made the governor of Tianshui County.

古文：时左仆射窦怀贞兴造金仙、玉真两观，调发夫匠，思贞常节减之。
现代文：当时左仆射窦怀贞兴土木建金仙、玉真两座道观，调动工匠，尹思贞常节减人员财物。
English: At that time, Zuo Shu shot Dou Huai Zhen, built civil engineering, built Jin Xian and Yu Zhen two Taoist temples, mobilized craftsmen, and Yin Sizhen constantly reduced personnel and property.

古文：怀贞怒，频诘责思贞，思贞曰： 公职居端揆，任重弼谐，不能翼赞圣明，光宣大化，而乃盛兴土木，害及黎元，岂不愧也！
现代文：窦怀贞怒，频频指责尹思贞。尹思贞道： 阁下身为宰相，任重在辅弼谐和，然不能赞助圣明，却大兴土木，害及百姓，难道不感到惭愧吗？
English: Dou Huai Zhen was angry and frequently accused Yin Sizhen. Yin Sizhen said: Your Excellency, as the prime minister, is responsible for promoting harmony and harmony, but you can't sponsor Shengming, but you do a lot of civil engineering, harming the people. Don't you feel ashamed?

古文：征先王之体要，敷衽必陈；折佞臣之怙权，拂衣而谢。
现代文：又受小人的谮言，轻视侮辱朝臣，今日之事，不能随便了事。 
English: He has also been criticized by villains, belittled and insulted courtiers. Today's matter cannot be taken lightly.

古文：故以事闻海内，名动京师，鹰隼是击，豺狼自远。必能条理前弊，发挥旧章，宜承弄印之荣，式允登车之志。
现代文：说罢拂衣而去，闭门数天，皇上听说就特令他不要放弃职守。那一年窦怀贞伏法处死，皇帝下诏表彰他贤良方正，能 折佞臣之枯权，拂衣而谢 。
English: That year, Dou Huai Zhenfu was put to death, and the emperor issued an imperial edict commending him as a virtuous and upright man who was able to break the power of his vassals. Dou Huai Zhenfu was grateful for the imperial edict.

古文：可御史大夫。 俄兼申王府长史，迁户部尚书，转工部尚书。以老疾累表请致仕，许之。
现代文：不久尹思贞兼任申王府长史，又迁任户部尚书，因年老多病多次上表请求告老还乡，后得准允。
English: Soon, Yin Sizhen also served as the chief historian of Shenwangfu, and then moved to the household department of Shangshu. Due to his old age and illness, he repeatedly requested to return to his hometown, and was later approved.

古文：开元四年卒，年七十七，赠黄门监，谥曰简。
现代文：开元四年去世，享年七十七岁，赠黄门监，谥号为简。
English: He died four years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, at the age of seventy-seven. He was given the title of Yellow Doorkeeper, and his nickname was Jane.

古文：李杰，本名务光，相州滏阳人。
现代文：李杰，本名务光，相州滏阳人。
English: Li Jie, whose real name is Mu Guang, is from Shenyang, Sichuan Province.

古文：后魏并州刺史宝之后也，其先自陇西徙焉。
现代文：他是后魏并州刺史李宝的后代。其先人由陇西迁至滏阳。
English: He is a descendant of Li Bao, a post-Wei dynasty member who moved from Shaanxi to Shenyang.

古文：杰少以孝友著称，举明经，累迁天官员外郎，明敏有吏才，甚得当时之誉。
现代文：李杰少年时就以孝友著称，中举，累任天官员外郎，明敏有治政的才能，深得人们的赞誉。
English: When Li Jie was a boy, he was famous for his filial piety. He was a junior high school student, the son of a long-serving high-ranking official. He was astute and had the ability to govern, which won people's praise.

古文：神龙初，累迁卫尉少卿，为河东道巡察黜陟使，奏课为诸使之最。
现代文：神龙初年，迁任卫尉少卿，任河东道巡察黜陟使，在所有黜陟使中他考核评议最好。
English: In the first year of the Holy Dragon, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and appointed as the chief inspector of the river, and he had the best assessment and evaluation among all the envoys.

古文：开元初，为河南尹。杰既勤于听理，每有诉列，虽衢路当食，无废处断。由是官无留事，人吏爱之。
现代文：开元初，李杰任河南尹，勤于治理，每有公事，无论是如何难办，也从不搁置不处理，由此官府内无积压的公事，吏民都很敬爱他。
English: At the beginning of the 21st century, Li Jie served as the governor of Henan Province. He was diligent in governance, and he never put aside and did not deal with every business, no matter how difficult it was. As a result, there was no backlog of business in the government, and the officials and the people all respected him.

古文：先是，河、汴之间有梁公堰，年久堰破，江、淮漕运不通。
现代文：先是河、汴之间有梁公堰，年久失修堰破，致使江、淮的漕运不通。
English: First of all, there is the Liang Gong Weir between the river and the estuary. The weir, which has been in disrepair for a long time, has broken, resulting in the river and the Huai River being impassable.

古文：杰奏调发汴、郑丁夫以浚之，省功速就，公私深以为利，刊石水滨，以纪其绩。
现代文：李杰上奏调拨汴、郑的人工来疏通，省功而且很快完工，于公于私都带来很大的便利，于是在水岸边刻石来记他的功绩。
English: Li Jie played the tuning fork and Zheng's labor to clear the way, saving effort and quickly completed, bringing great convenience to both public and private, so he carved stones on the water's edge to record his achievements.

古文：寻代宋璟为御史大夫。
现代文：不久，他代宋王景任御史大夫。
English: Soon after, he replaced Song Wangjing as goshi daibu.

古文：时皇后妹婿尚衣奉御长孙昕与其妹婿杨仙玉因于里巷遇杰，遂殴击之，上大怒，令斩昕等。
现代文：当时皇后的妹婿尚衣奉御长孙昕与他的妹婿杨仙玉因在里巷遇见李杰，便殴打李杰。皇上大怒，下令斩长孙昕等。
English: At that time, the queen's brother-in-law, Shang Yi, and his brother-in-law, Yang Xianyu, met Li Jie in the alley and beat him. The emperor was furious and ordered the beheading of Sun Jie and others.

古文：散骑常侍马情素以为阳和之月，不可行刑，累表陈请。
现代文：散骑常侍马怀素认为中春阳和的月份，不可行刑，多次上表陈请。
English: Zangjie Zangjie Ma Huai Su believed that the month of the Mid-Autumn Festival and the month of the Mid-Autumn Festival could not be executed, and repeatedly asked for the table.

古文：乃下敕曰： 夫为令者自近而及远，行罚者先亲而后疏。
现代文：皇上于是下令 ：行法令应由近及远，行罪应先亲后疏。
English: The emperor then ordered that laws should be enforced from near and far, and crimes should be committed by relatives first.

古文：长孙昕、杨仙玉等凭恃姻戚，恣行凶险，轻侮常宪，损辱大臣，情特难容，故令斩决。
现代文：长孙昕、杨仙玉等凭自己是皇亲国戚，恣行凶险，违法乱纪，损辱大臣，情特难容，故令斩决。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, Yang Xianyu, and others, by virtue of being relatives of the emperor and relatives of the country, arbitrarily committed dangerous acts, violated the law and discipline, damaged and insulted the minister, and the situation was extremely difficult to tolerate, so the decision was made.

古文：今群官等累陈表疏，固有诚请，以阳和之节，非肃杀之时，援引古今，词义恳切。
现代文：今群臣多次上表，诚心诚意坚持相请，以阳春季节，非肃杀之时，援引古今，词义恳切。
English: Now the courtiers have repeatedly shown up, sincerely insisted on inviting each other, with the spring season, not the time to kill, invoking the past and the present, the meaning of the word sincere.

古文：朕志从深谏，情亦惜法，宜宽异门之罚，听从枯木之毙。即宜决杀，以谢百僚。 
现代文：朕虽想听取众臣的意见，情也惜法，但既应当宽异门之法，顺应枯木的凋敝，就应决杀，以谢百僚。 
English: Although I would like to listen to the opinions of all my ministers, I also feel sorry for the law, but since the law should be broad and adapt to the fading of dead trees, it should be killed to thank the hundred colleagues.

古文：杰明年以护桥陵作，赐爵武威子。
现代文：李杰第二年监督桥陵的建造，赐爵武陵子。
English: In the second year, Li Jie supervised the construction of the bridge and tomb, and conferred a knighthood on Wu Lingzi.

古文：初，杰护作时，引侍御史王旭为判官。
现代文：开始，李杰监督建造，引荐侍御史王旭为判官。
English: At the beginning, Li Jie supervised the construction and recommended the chamberlain Shi Wangxu to be the judge.

古文：旭贪冒受赃，杰将绳之而不得其实，反为旭所构，出为衢州刺史。
现代文：王旭贪财受赃，李杰将要依法处理但未得证据，反被王旭所诬陷，贬为衢州刺史。
English: Wang Xu was accused of being greedy for money, Li Jie will be dealt with according to law, but no evidence has been obtained, but he was framed by Wang Xu and relegated to the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：俄转扬州大都督府长史，又为御史所劾，免官归第。
现代文：不久，调任扬州大都督府长史，又被所劾奏，免官归乡。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of governor of Yangzhou, and was again impeached, dismissed and returned home.

古文：寻卒，赠户部尚书。
现代文：不久去世。追赠户部尚书。
English: He died soon after and was posthumously awarded the Ihube Shojo.

古文：解琬，魏州元城人也。
现代文：解琬，魏州元城人。
English: He is a native of Yuancheng, Weizhou.

古文：少应幽素举，拜新政尉，累转成都丞。
现代文：少年应试中举，任新政县尉，又调任成都县丞。
English: The boy passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as the New Politics County Lieutenant, and then transferred to the Chengdu County Governor.

古文：因奏事称旨，超迁监察御史，丁忧离职。
现代文：因为奏章很合皇上的心意，超升监察御史，因父丧丁忧而离职。
English: Because the play is very much in line with the emperor's wishes, he was promoted to inspector of imperial history, and he left his post because of his father's death.

古文：则天以琬识练边事，起复旧官，令往西域安抚夷虏，抗疏固辞。
现代文：武则天认为解琬善于处理边防事务，起用他复任原官，令他去西域安抚少数民族，他因守丧而坚持辞拒。
English: Wu Zetian thought that Xie Jun was good at handling border defense affairs, appointed him to reinstate the original official, and ordered him to go to the western region to appease the ethnic minorities. He insisted on refusing to resign because of the funeral.

古文：则天嘉之，下敕曰： 解琬孝性淳至，哀情恳切，固辞权夺之荣，乞就终忧之典。足可以激扬风俗，敦奖名教，宜遂雅怀，允其所请。
现代文：武则天很称赞他的孝心，并下旨： 解琬孝性很是淳正，哀情恳切，坚辞任官之荣誉，乞请完成丧礼，这实可以激扬风俗，勉励名节，允其所请。
English: Wu Zetian highly praised his filial piety, and wrote: Xie Xuan's filial piety is very upright, sorrowful and sincere. It is an honor to resign from his post, and he begged to complete the funeral. This can really promote customs, encourage famous festivals, and grant his request.

古文：仍令服阕后赴上。 
现代文：还是让他守丧完而赴任。 
English: Or let him complete the funeral and take office.

古文：圣历初，迁侍御史，充使安抚乌质勒及十姓部落，咸得其便宜，蕃人大悦，以功擢拜御史中丞，兼北庭都护、持节西域安抚使。
现代文：圣历初年，解琬任侍御史，充当使节去安抚乌质勒及十姓部落，都处理得顺利而且合适，藩人大悦，因有功迁升御史中丞，兼任北庭都护、持节西域安抚使。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, he was relieved of his duties as an attendant to the governor and served as an envoy to pacify Wu Jile and the Ten Tribes, all of which were handled smoothly and appropriately. The people of the domain were very pleased, and because of his meritorious service, he was promoted to vice-governor of the governor and concurrently served as the guardian of the Northern Court and the pacifying envoy for the Western Regions.

古文：琬素与郭元振同官相善，遂为宗楚客所毁，由是左迁沧州刺史。为政务存大体，甚得人和。
现代文：解琬平素与郭元振同官，很友好，于是被宗楚客所诽谤，因此降任沧州刺史，任职时治政务求存大体，有全局观，很得人和。
English: He was very friendly with Guo Yuanzhen, a fellow official, so he was slandered by Zong Chuk, so he was demoted to the post of Cangzhou chief historian. When he was in office, he had a general view of the overall situation and was very popular.

古文：景龙中，迁右台御史大夫，兼持节朔方行军大总管。
现代文：景龙年中，升任右台御史大夫，兼持节朔方行军大总管。
English: In the middle of the Jinglong era, he was promoted to the post of the Right Division's Chief Historian, and concurrently held the post of the General Manager of the Spring Festival Parade.

古文：琬前后在军二十余载，务农习战，多所利益，边境安之。
现代文：解琬前后在军中任职二十余年，屯田习战，多有所利益，边境安宁。
English: He served in the army for more than 20 years before and after his release from the shackles of the shackles. He lived in a rural area and learned how to fight. He mostly made a profit, and the border was peaceful.

古文：景云二年，复为朔方军大总管。
现代文：景云二年，他仍为朔方军大总管。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, he was still the commander-in-chief of the Shuo Fang Army.

古文：琬分遣随军要籍官河阳丞张冠宗、肥乡令韦景骏、普安令于处忠等校料三城兵募，于是减十万人，奏罢之。
现代文：解琬分派随军要籍官河南县丞张冠宗、肥乡县令韦景骏、普安县令于处忠等校检三城的军员，在这里减兵十万人。
English: Zhang Guanzong of Henan County, Wei Jingyao of Feixiang County, and Yu Zhanzhong of Pu'an County, who were assigned to check the three cities, were reduced by 100,000 soldiers.

古文：寻授右武卫大将军，兼检校晋州刺史，赐爵济南县男。
现代文：不久授右武卫大将军、兼检校晋州刺史，赐爵济南县男。
English: The man from Jinan County was soon awarded the title of General of the Right Division of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the title of Vice-President of the Jinzhou Provincial Inspection School, and a peerage.

古文：以年老乞骸骨，拜表讫，不待报而去。
现代文：以年老多病，上表请求告老还乡，上方还未批准便离去。
English: Due to his old age and illness, he requested to return to his hometown according to the above table, but he left without approval from his superiors.

古文：优诏加金紫光禄大夫，听致仕，其禄准品全给。
现代文：随后皇上也特别优待了下诏加授他金紫光禄大夫之荣誉职务，准许他告老还乡，俸禄按品级全给。
English: Subsequently, the emperor also gave him a special preferential treatment and awarded him the honorary position of gold and purple doctor, allowing him to return to his hometown, with full salary according to his rank.

古文：今知脱屣归闲，拂衣高谢，固可以激励颓俗，仪刑庶僚。永言终始，良可嘉尚。宜善摄养，以介期颐。 
现代文：今脱靴归闲，拂衣高谢，其高尚品德本可以激励端正民俗，其清正廉洁可以作为做官的典范，良可嘉善，宜很好地安养以求百年长寿。 
English: Now take off your shoes and return to your leisure, whisk your clothes with high appreciation, its noble character could have inspired the upright folk customs, its purity and integrity can be used as a model for officials, it is good to be virtuous, and it is advisable to keep well in order to live a hundred years long.

古文：未几，吐蕃寇边，复召拜左散骑常侍，令与吐蕃分定地界，兼处置十姓降户。
现代文：不多久，吐蕃侵犯边土，又召回解琬任散骑常侍，令他与吐蕃划定地界，兼处置十姓的降户。
English: Not long after, Tubo invaded the borderlands, and recalled the chief horseman of the disbanded cavalry, ordering him to delimit the land boundary with Tubo, and also to dispose of the demotion of the ten surnames.

古文：琬言吐蕃必潜怀叛计，请预支兵十万于秦、渭等州严加防遏。其年冬，吐蕃果入寇，竟为支兵所击走之。
现代文：解琬说吐蕃一定暗怀叛计，请求派兵十万在秦、渭等州严加防范，那年冬季，吐蕃果然侵犯边境，被解琬所布署的军队击败逃走。
English: Xie Yu said that Tubo must be secretly plotting to rebel, and requested that 100,000 soldiers be sent to Qin, Min and other states to take strict precautions. That winter, Tubo did indeed violate the border, and was defeated by the troops deployed by Xie Yu and fled.

古文：代宗时，为左司郎中、兼侍御史、河东道租庸判官。
现代文：不久，解琬又上表请求解甲归田，未得允许，调任太子宾客。
English: Not long after that, he went to the table to request that he be allowed to return to the field, but he was not allowed to do so and was transferred to the Prince's guest.

古文：王丘，光禄卿同皎从兄子也。
现代文：开元五年，外调任同州刺史。第二年去世，享年八十余岁。王丘，是光禄卿王同皎的堂兄的儿子。
English: In the fifth year of the first year of the year, he was transferred to the post of Tongzhou chief historian. He died the following year, at the age of over eighty. Wang Qiu was the son of the cousin of Wang Tongyu, the lord of Guanglu.

古文：父同晊，左庶子。
现代文：父亲王同日至，左庶子。
English: From the same day as his father Wang, he was an illegitimate son.

古文：丘年十一，童子举擢第，时类皆以诵经为课，丘独以属文见擢，由是知名。
现代文：王丘十一岁时，应童子科考试登第，当时所有的童子都是以背经文应试，只有王丘独以文章考中，因此知名。
English: When Wang Qiu was eleven years old, he ranked first in the examination of children's science. At that time, all the children took the examination by reciting scriptures. Only Wang Qiu took the examination by writing, and thus he became famous.

古文：弱冠，又应制举，拜奉礼郎。
现代文：他二十岁时，又应试中举，拜奉礼郎。
English: When he was twenty years old, he took the middle school entrance examination again.

古文：丘神气清古，而志行修洁，尤善词赋，族人左庶子方庆及御史大夫魏元忠皆称荐之。
现代文：王丘神气清古，而且志行修洁，特别善于词赋。族人左庶子王方庆和御史大夫魏元忠皆称扬推荐他。
English: Wang Qiu's demeanor is ancient and refined, and he is particularly good at poetry. Wang Fangqing, the left illegitimate son of the tribe, and Wei Yuanzhong, the chief historian, both praised and recommended him.

古文：长安中，自偃师主簿擢第，拜监察御史。
现代文：长安年中，他由偃师主簿提拔，拜监察御史。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an year, he was promoted from the main book of Zou Shi to the inspector of the history.

古文：开元初，累迁考功员外郎。
现代文：开元初年，调任考功员外郎。
English: In the first year of the founding of the school, he was transferred to the post of examiner, Wairo.

古文：先是，考功举人，请托大行，取士颇滥，每年至数百人，丘一切核其实材，登科者仅满百人。
现代文：原先，考功举人，开后门拉关系盛行，取士很滥，每年达数百人之多。王丘一一复核材料，登科的仅只有一百人。
English: Originally, people were selected on the basis of their performance in examinations, and the practice of pulling people out of the door after it had been opened prevailed. The number of applicants was very high, reaching several hundred each year. Wang Qiu reviewed the materials one by one, and only one hundred people were admitted to the university.

古文：议者以为自则天已后凡数十年，无如丘者，其后席豫、严挺之为其次焉。
现代文：人们议论，认为从武则天以后数十年，没有谁能赶得上王丘的，其后席豫、严挺之再其次。
English: People argue that in the decades since Wu Zetian, no one has been able to catch up with Wang Qiu, followed by Shi Yu and Yan Ting.

古文：三迁紫微舍人，以知制诰之勤，加朝散大夫，再转吏部侍郎。
现代文：王丘三任紫微舍人，以主管制诰的勤谨，加朝散大夫之职，又调任吏部侍郎。
English: Wang Qiu, the third Zi Wei's subordinate, with the diligence of the person in charge of the imperial edict system, was promoted to the post of the Choshan doctor, and was also transferred to the post of the secretary of the cadre.

古文：典选累年，甚称平允。擢用山阴尉孙逖、桃林尉张镜微、湖城尉张晋明、进士王泠然，皆称一时之秀。
现代文：选拔人才多年，都很公平恰当，他提拔任用了山阴县尉孙逖、桃林县尉张镜微、湖城县尉张晋明、进士王泠然，都被世人称为一时之秀。
English: For many years, the selection of talents has been fair and appropriate. He has promoted and appointed Shanyin County First Lieutenant Sun Qian, Taolin County First Lieutenant Zhang Jingwei, Hucheng County First Lieutenant Zhang Jinming, and Jin Shi Wang Yulan, all of whom are known to the world as one-time stars.

古文：俄换尚书左丞。
现代文：不久换职尚书左丞。
English: Soon after, he changed his job to Shoshu Sojo.

古文：十一年，拜黄门侍郎。其年，山东旱俭，朝议选朝臣为刺史以抚贫民，制曰： 昔咎繇与禹言曰： 在知人，在安人。 
现代文：开元十一年，王丘任黄门侍郎，那一年，山东大旱歉收，朝廷从朝臣中选刺史去安抚贫民，下旨道： 古代咎繇对大禹说： 在知人，在安人。 
English: In the eleventh year of the first century, Wang Qiu served as the Yellow Gate's steward. That year, Shandong suffered from a severe drought and poor harvest, and the imperial court chose Shishi from among the courtiers to appease the poor. He said: The ancient Guan Yu said to Dayu: In acquaintance, in peace.

古文：此皆念存邦本，光于帝载，乾乾夕惕，无忘一日。
现代文：这都是说心上想着国家的根本，光大帝业，小心谨慎，无一日遗忘。
English: All of this is to say that they are thinking about the fundamentals of the country, glorifying the empire, being careful and cautious, and never forgetting.

古文：而长吏或不称，苍生或未宁，深思循良，以矫过弊，仍重诸侯之选，故自朝廷始之。 
现代文：但是长吏中有不称职的，百姓中有不能安生的，朕深思依循良好的政治，来矫正过失，依旧要很重视诸侯的选拔。 
English: However, there are incompetent officials among the officials, and there are people who cannot secure their lives. I am deeply thinking about following good politics to correct mistakes. We still need to attach great importance to the selection of princes.

古文：于是以丘为怀州刺史，又以中书侍郎崔沔等数人皆为山东诸州刺史。
现代文：这样就派王丘为怀州刺史，又派中书侍郎崔沔等数人都去任山东诸州的刺史。
English: In this way, Wang Qiu was sent to serve as the chief historian of Waizhou, and several people, including Choi Hao, the chief secretary, were sent to serve as the chief historian of Shandong.

古文：至任，皆无可称，唯丘在职清严，人吏甚畏慕之。
现代文：到任，皆没有什么可称道的，只有王丘在职清严，官民又敬又畏。
English: When they took office, none of them had anything to commend them. Only Wang Qiu was strict in his duties, and the officials and the people respected and feared him.

古文：俄又分知吏部选事，入为尚书左丞，丁父忧去职，服阕，拜右散骑常侍，仍知制诰。
现代文：不久，又分管吏部选拔人才的工作，入台阁任尚书左丞。父丧去职，期满，拜右散骑常侍，仍管天子的诏书等制诰之事。
English: Soon after, he was also put in charge of the work of selecting talent in the Personnel Department, and was appointed to the Cabinet of the Republic of China as Shangshu Zuojo. When his father passed away and his term of office expired, he was appointed to the position of the Right Hand Cavalryman, and he was still in charge of the Emperor's rescript and other matters of the imperial edict system.

古文：二十一年，侍中裴光庭病卒，中书令萧嵩与丘有旧，将荐丘知政事，丘知而固辞，且盛推尚书右丞韩休，嵩因而奏之。及休作相，遂荐丘代崔琳为御史大夫。
现代文：开元二十一年，侍中裴光庭病卒，中书令肖嵩与王丘有老交情，将推荐王丘任宰相，王丘得知坚决辞谢，并且极力推荐尚书右丞韩休，肖嵩也固请上奏，到韩休做了宰相，便推荐王丘代崔琳任御史大夫。
English: In the 21st year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the chamberlain Pei Guangting died of illness. The Chinese envoy Xiao Song had a long friendship with Wang Qiu and would recommend Wang Qiu to be the prime minister. Wang Qiu was informed of the resolute resignation, and strongly recommended the imperial envoy Han Xiu. Xiao Song was also firmly invited to play. When Han Xiu became the prime minister, he recommended Wang Qiu to be the imperial secretary.

古文：丘既讷于言词，敷奏多不称旨。
现代文：王丘因不善言辞，奏对多不称皇上的心意。
English: Wang Qiu was not good at speech and did not appreciate the emperor's intentions.

古文：俄转太子宾客，袭父爵宿预男，寻以疾拜礼部尚书，仍听致仕。
现代文：不久调任太子宾客，袭父爵为宿预男。不久带病拜任礼部尚书，后告老还乡。
English: He was soon transferred to be a guest of the crown prince, following his father as a son-in-law. He soon fell ill and bowed to the ceremonial minister, Shang Shu, and then returned to his hometown.

古文：丘虽历要职，固守清俭，未尝受人馈遗，第宅舆马，称为敝陋。
现代文：王丘虽然历任要职，但却固守清廉，从不受人馈送，住宅车马，均是很敝陋的。
English: Although Wang Qiu has held important positions in the past, he has always adhered to honesty and integrity, and has never been fed by others. His house, car and horse are all very shabby.

古文：致仕之后，药饵殆将不给。
现代文：辞官归田以后，病了连吃药的钱都有困难。
English: After the judge returned to the field, he was sick and even had difficulty getting the money to take medicine.

古文：上闻而嘉叹，下制曰： 王丘夙负良材，累升茂秩，比缘疾疹，假以优闲。
现代文：皇上闻知而赞叹，下书道： 王丘一向富有才华，累升要位，由于多病，借此辞官在家。
English: The emperor admired Wang Qiu and wrote: Wang Qiu has always been talented and has been promoted to important positions. Due to his frequent illnesses, he is now at home.

古文：闻其家道屡空，医药靡给，久此从宦，遂无余资。
现代文：闻其家道屡空，医药不给，长期做官，竟无余资。
English: He has heard that his family's way is often empty, medicine is not given, and he has been an official for a long time, but he has no spare funds.

古文：其俸禄一事已上，并宜全给，式表殊常之泽，用旌贞白之吏。 
现代文：持操如此，离古圣人何远！王丘俸禄，应当全给，以此来表示殊常的待遇，用来表彰廉洁之吏。 
English: Wang Qiu's salary should be given in full, as a sign of exceptional treatment, to commend the incorruptible officials.

古文：天宝二年卒，赠荆州大都督。
现代文：天宝二年去世，追赠荆州大都督。
English: Tianbao died two years later and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Governor of Jingzhou.

