古文：清神生心，心生规，规生矩，矩生方，方生正，正生历，历生四时，四时生万物。
现代文：精神产生心，心产生规，规产生矩，矩产生方位，方位产生正中，正中产生时历，时历产生四时，四时产生万物。
English: The spirit produces the mind, the mind produces the measure, the measure produces the moment, the moment produces the position, the position produces the center, the center produces the calendar, the calendar produces the four o'clock, the four o'clock produces all things.

古文：圣人因而理之，道遍矣。
现代文：圣人根据四时产生万物的状态加以调理，治世之道也就完备起来了。
English: The sage adjusted it according to the state in which all things came into being at four o'clock, and the way of governing the world was completed.

古文：以冬日至始，数四十六日，冬尽而春始。
现代文：从冬至算起，数四十六天，冬尽而春始。
English: Counting from the winter solstice, forty-six days, winter ends and spring begins.

古文：天子东出其国四十六里而坛，服青而絻青，搢玉总，带玉监，朝诸侯卿大夫列士，循千百姓，号曰祭日，牺牲以鱼。
现代文：此时天子东出其国都四十六里而立坛，穿青衣，戴青冕，插玉笏，带玉鉴，朝会诸侯卿大夫列士，周示于百姓，号称祭日，祭品用鱼。
English: At this time, the heavenly son traveled forty-six miles east from the capital of his country and erected an altar, wearing a blue dress, wearing a blue crown, inserting a jade gong, with a jade appraisal, the imperial court of princes, lords and ladies, and showed it to the people, known as the festival day, with fish as a sacrifice.

古文：发出令曰： 生而勿杀，赏而勿罚，罪狱勿断，以待期年。 
现代文：天子发令说： 此时节应生而不应杀，应赏而不应罚，罪狱不必判决，以待年终再定。 
English: The heavenly son issued an order: At this time, the festival should be born but not killed, should be rewarded but not punished, and should not be sentenced to prison, but should be rescheduled for the end of the year.

古文：教民樵室钻鐩，墐灶泄井，所以寿民也。
现代文：此时应当教百姓薰烤室屋，钻木取火，涂修新灶，掏井换水，这都是为了使人民健康。
English: At this time, the people should be taught to light the room, drill the fire, paint the new stove, dig a well to change the water, all in order to make the people healthy.

古文：耟、耒、耨、怀、鉊、鈶、叉、橿、权渠、繉紲，所以御春夏之事也，必具。
现代文：耜、宋、耨？鉊、鈶、义、桓、护渠及纟晁妹等各种农家用具，都是用于春耕夏耘的，必须备好。
English: All kinds of farm tools such as hoe, Song, hoe, hoe, hoe, hoe, moat and moat are used for spring plowing and summer plowing, and must be prepared.

古文：教民为酒食，所以为孝敬也。
现代文：还要教百姓置办酒食设宴，是为了表示孝敬尊长。
English: It is also necessary to teach the common people to hold a banquet in order to show their filial piety to their elders.

古文：民生而无父母谓之孤子；无妻无子，谓之老鳏；无夫无子，谓之老寡。
现代文：民之无父无母者，叫作孤子；无妻无子者，叫作老鳏；无夫无子者，叫作老寡。
English: Among the people, a man who has no father or mother is called an orphan; a man who has no wife or children is called an old man; and a man who has no husband or children is called a widow.

古文：此三人者，皆就官而众，可事者不可事者，食如言而勿遗。
现代文：这三种人，都应依靠官府生活。无论能做事或不能做事，都应按其自报的条件进行供养而不可遗弃。
English: All three of these people should live off the government. Whether they can work or not, they should be supported according to their self-reported conditions and not abandoned.

古文：多者为功，寡者为罪，是以路无行乞者也。
现代文：官府多收养者有功，少者有罪。所以，路上不能有乞食的。
English: The government considers most adopters to be meritorious, while the few are guilty. Therefore, there should be no beggars on the road.

古文：路有行乞者，则相之罪也。
现代文：如有乞食者，就要归罪于宰相了。
English: If there are beggars, the prime minister is to blame.

古文：天子之春令也。
现代文：这是天子春天的政令。
English: This is also the decree of spring.

古文：以冬日至始，数九十二日，谓之春至。
现代文：从冬至算起，数九十二天，叫作春至。
English: Ninety-two days from the winter solstice is called the spring solstice.

古文：天子东出其国九十二里而坛，朝诸侯卿大夫列士，循于百姓，号曰祭星，十日之内，室无处女，路无行人。
现代文：此时，天子向东出国都九十二里而立祭坛，朝会诸侯大夫列士，周示于百姓，号称祭星。要求十日内全体下田，做到 室无处女，路无行人。 
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven went ninety-two miles east to the capital and erected an altar. The imperial court gathered the lords, nobles, and nobles, and presented it to the people, known as the sacrificial star. He asked everyone to go down to the fields within ten days, so that there would be no virgins in the house and no pedestrians on the road.

古文：苟不树艺者，谓之贼人；下作之地，上作之天，谓之不服之民；处里为下陈，处师为下通，谓之役夫。
现代文：如有不事耕作者，称之为贼人；耕作不勤，只依靠天地恩赐者，称之为不服之民；在里中劳动最差，在军中战绩最差者，称之为役夫。
English: If there are careless cultivators, they are called thieves; if there are careless cultivators, they are called disobedient people; if there are careless cultivators who rely only on the gifts of heaven and earth, they are called disobedient people; if there are people who do the worst work in the village and have the worst record in the army, they are called service men.

古文：三不树而主使之。
现代文：这三种不努力耕作的人都应由主管官吏强制使役之。
English: These three kinds of people who do not work hard should be forced to work by the competent officials.

古文：天子之春令也。
现代文：这也是天子春天的政令。
English: This is also the decree of spring.

古文：以春日至始，数四十六日，春尽而夏始。
现代文：从春分算起，数四十六天，春尽而夏始。
English: Counting from the vernal equinox, there are 46 days, the end of spring and the beginning of summer.

古文：天子服黄而静处，朝诸侯卿大夫列士，循于百姓，发号出令曰： 毋聚大众，毋行大火，毋断大木，诛大臣，毋斩大山，毋戮大衍。
现代文：天子应当穿黄而居静，朝会诸侯卿大夫列士，周示于百姓，发出号令说： 不可聚会众人，不可引发大火，不可砍伐大木，不可开掘大山，不可伐大泽。
English: The Son of Heaven should wear yellow and stay quiet. The imperial court, consisting of princes, lords, and emperors, issued an order to the people, saying, "Do not gather together, do not start a fire, do not cut down large trees, do not excavate large mountains, and do not cut down Osawa."

古文：灭三大而国有害也。 
现代文：破坏大木、大山、大泽是于国有害的。
English: It is harmful to the country to destroy large trees, large mountains and large lakes.

古文：天子之夏禁也。
现代文：这是天子夏天的禁令。
English: This is a summer ban.

古文：以春日至始，数九十二日，谓之夏至，而麦熟。
现代文：从春分算起，数九十二天，叫作夏至，而此时新麦成熟。
English: From the vernal equinox, count ninety-two days, called the summer solstice, and at this time the new wheat is ripe.

古文：大子祀于太宗，其盛以麦。
现代文：天子此时应祭祀太宗，其祭品即用新麦。
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven should offer a sacrifice to Taizong, and his offering should be fresh barley.

古文：麦者，谷之始也。宗者，族之始也。
现代文：因为，麦，是粮食中最早生的；宗，是家族中最原始的。
English: Because, wheat, is the earliest born in the grain; Zong, is the most primitive in the family.

古文：同族者人，殊族者处。
现代文：同族者可以入场致祭，异族者止步。
English: Members of the same ethnic group may enter the venue to offer a sacrifice, while members of a different ethnic group may not.

古文：皆齐大材，出祭王母。
现代文：但不论同族异族应当共同斋戒。以大牲致祭，同时要祭祀祖母。
English: However, regardless of whether they are of the same or different ethnicity, they should fast together. They should offer a sacrifice with a large animal, and at the same time, they should sacrifice their grandmothers.

古文：天子之所以主始而忌讳也。
现代文：这是表示天子尊重血缘之始和追思死去的先人。
English: This indicates that the divine son respects the beginning of the blood relationship and remembers the dead ancestors.

古文：以夏日至始，数四十六日，夏尽而秋始，而黍熟。
现代文：从夏至算起，数四十六天，夏尽而秋始，而此时新黍成熟。
English: Counting from the summer solstice, there are forty-six days, the end of summer and the beginning of autumn, and at this time the new buds mature.

古文：天子祀于太祖，其盛以黍。
现代文：天于此时应祭祀太祖，祭品即用新黍。
English: At this time, the heavens should be sacrificed to the great ancestor, and the sacrificial offering should be a new yakitori.

古文：黍者，谷之美者也；祖者，国之重者也。
现代文：因为，黍，是粮食中最佳美的；祖，是国家中最重要的。
English: Because millet is the most beautiful grain, and sorghum is the most important crop in the country.

古文：大功者太祖，小功者小祖，无功者无祖。
现代文：大功者大庙，小功者小庙，无功者无庙。
English: A great temple for those who have made great contributions, a small temple for those who have made small contributions, and no temple for those who have made no contributions.

古文：无功者皆称其位而立沃，有功者观于外。
现代文：有功的参祭者皆按其职位站立行宴食礼，无功者观礼于庙外。
English: The meritorious participants all stood up according to their positions to perform the feast and meal ceremony, while the non-meritorious ones watched the ceremony outside the temple.

古文：祖者所以功祭也，非所以戚祭也。
现代文：祭祖，是因功而祭，不是因亲而祭。
English: Sacrificing ancestors is a sacrifice for merit, not a sacrifice for relatives.

古文：天子之所以异贵贱而赏有功也。
现代文：这是天子为了区别贵贱而赏赐有功进行的。
English: This was done by the Son of Heaven in order to distinguish between the noble and the lowly and to reward the meritorious.

古文：以夏日至始，数九十二日，谓之秋至。秋至而禾熟。
现代文：从夏至算起，数九十二天，叫作秋分，而此时新粟成熟。
English: From the summer solstice, ninety-two days are counted, called the autumn equinox, and at this time the new corn is ripe.

古文：天子祀于太惢，西出其国百三十八里而坛，服白而絻白，搢玉总，带锡监，吹埙篪之风，凿动金石之音，朝诸侯卿大夫列士，循于百姓，号曰祭月，牺牲以彘。
现代文：天于此时应祭祀太郊，向西出国都一百三十八里而立祭坛，穿白衣，戴白冕，插玉笏，带锡鉴，吹奏援的乐曲，打奏钟碧的音律，朝会诸侯卿大夫列士，周示于百姓，号称祭月，祭品用猪。
English: At this time, the heavens should be sacrificed in the suburbs, and an altar should be set up one hundred and thirty-eight miles west of the capital, wearing white clothes, wearing a white crown, inserting a jade bracelet, with a tin book, playing music, playing the melody of the bell, the imperial court, the lords and ladies of the court, and showing it to the people, known as the month of sacrifice, and the pig used as a sacrifice.

古文：发号出令： 罚而勿赏，夺而勿予；罪狱诛而勿生，终岁之罪，毋有所赦。
现代文：发出号令说： 此时节行罚而不行赏，夺取而不赐予，罪狱叛死者不可使之生，终年之罪犯不宽赦。
English: A proclamation was issued, saying: At this time, punishments will be given without rewards, and plunder will not be given. Prisoners who have committed treason will not be allowed to live, and those who have been criminals for years will not be pardoned.

古文：作衍牛马之实，在野者王。 
现代文：此时节牛马之在野放牧者，必然兴旺。
English: At this time of the year, those who graze cattle and horses in the wild are bound to prosper.

古文：天子之秋计也。
现代文：这是天子秋天的大计。
English: This is the master plan of autumn.

古文：以秋日至始，数四十六日，秋尽而冬始。
现代文：从秋分算起，数四十六天，秋尽而冬始。
English: Counting from the autumnal equinox, there are 46 days, the end of autumn and the beginning of winter.

古文：天子服黑絻黑而静处，朝诸侯卿大夫列士，循于百姓，发号出令曰： 毋行大火，毋斩大山，毋塞大水，毋犯天之隆。 
现代文：天子穿黑戴黑而居处宜静，朝会诸侯卿大夫列士，周示于百姓，发出号令说： 不可引发大火，不可开掘大山，不堵塞大水，不可侵犯天的尊严。 
English: The heavenly son wears black and black and lives in a quiet place. The imperial council of princes, lords, and nobles issued an order to the people, saying: Do not cause a fire, do not excavate a mountain, do not block a large body of water, and do not violate the dignity of heaven.

古文：天子之冬禁也。
现代文：这是天子冬天的禁令。
English: This is a winter ban imposed by God.

古文：以秋日至始，数九十二日，天子北出九十二里而坛，服黑而絻黑，朝诸侯卿大夫列士，号曰发繇。
现代文：从秋分算起，数九十二天，天子向北出国都九十二里而立坛。穿黑衣而戴黑冕，朝会诸侯卿大夫列士，号称祭辰。
English: Counting from the autumnal equinox, ninety-two days, the heavenly son went to the north of the country, ninety-two miles, and erected the altar. Dressed in black and wearing a black crown, the imperial court of princes, lords, and nobles, known as the sacrificial altar.

古文：趣山人断伐，具械器；趣菹人薪雚苇，足蓄积。
现代文：此时节要促使山村百姓砍伐木材，备足械器；促使菹泽之地的居民樵采柴薪，储备充足。
English: At this time of the festival, it is necessary to encourage the villagers of mountain villages to cut wood and prepare foot equipment; encourage the residents of Heze to collect firewood and have sufficient reserves.

古文：三月之后，皆以其所有易其所无，谓之大通三月之蓄。
现代文：三个月以后，让他们以其所有，易其所无，大力推销三个月以来的贮备物资。
English: After three months, let them, with everything they have and with nothing they lack, vigorously promote the supplies they have been stockpiling for the past three months.

古文：凡在趣耕而不耕，民以不令，不耕之害也。
现代文：凡有督促春耕而不进行耕作的地方，百姓的境况恶劣不佳，这表现不耕之害。
English: Wherever spring ploughing is urged but not carried out, the people are in a bad situation, which shows the harm of not ploughing.

古文：宜芸而不芸，百草皆存，民以仅存，不芸之害也。
现代文：应进行夏芸而不芸草的地方，百草皆存，老百姓仅可勉强维持生活，这是不芸之害。
English: In places where summer activities should be carried out but there is no grass, all kinds of grasses exist, and the people can only barely maintain their lives. This is the harm of not doing sports.

古文：宜获而不获，风雨将作，五谷以削，士民零落，不获之害也。
现代文：应进行秋收而不收获的地方，风雨一来，五谷减收，百姓死亡丧败，这是不收之害。
English: In places where the autumn harvest should be carried out but not harvested, when the wind and rain come, the grain harvest will be reduced, and the people will die and be defeated. This is the harm of not harvesting.

古文：宜藏而不藏，雾气阳阳，宜死者生，宜蛰者鸣，不藏之害也。
现代文：应进行冬藏而不及时藏闭的地方，那就雾气阳阳，宜死者反而生动起来，宜蛰居者反而鸣叫起来，这就是不藏之害了。
English: If the place where winter storage should be carried out is not closed in time, it will be foggy and foggy, and the dead should be vivid instead, and the hermit should sing instead. This is the harm of not hiding.

古文：张耜当弩，铫耨当剑戟，获渠当胁，蓑笠当栐橹，故耕械具则战械备矣。
现代文：还应当让农民以耜为弓弩，以锄为剑朝，以蓑衣充当胁甲，以草笠充当盾牌，这样，农具完备则习战的 武器 也都完备了。
English: Farmers should also be allowed to use the plough as a bow and arrow, the hoe as a sword, the yakitori as armor, and the straw hat as a shield. In this way, if the farm tools are complete, the weapons for practicing warfare are also complete.

