古文：黄帝问曰：天元九窒，余已知之。愿闻气交何名失守？
现代文：黄帝说：关于天元之气窒抑的情况，我已经知道了，还想听听气交变化，怎样叫失守呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I have already known about the situation of Tianyuan's qi asphyxiation, but I still want to hear about the changes in qi circulation. How do you call losing control?

古文：岐伯曰：谓其上下升降，迁正退位，各有经论，上下各有不前，故名失守也。
现代文：岐伯说：说的是司天在泉的迁正退位与左右间气升降的问题，司天在泉的迁正退位，各有经文论述之，左右间气各有升降不前的反常现象，所以叫做失守。
English: Qibo said: It is about the issue of the ascension and abdication of Siten in the spring and the ascension and abdication of the air between the left and right. The ascension and abdication of Siten in the spring has been discussed in various scriptures, and the air between the right and left has an abnormal phenomenon of rising and falling, so it is called losing one's way.

古文：是故气交失易位，气交乃变，变易非常，即四时失序，万化不安，变民病也。
现代文：由于气交失守，不能移易其时位，气交就要发生非常的变化，也就是四时节令失去正常的秩序，万物生化不得平安，人类就要发生疾病。
English: Due to the fact that the four seasons of the year are out of order and cannot be shifted to their proper time, the four seasons of the year will have to undergo drastic changes. In other words, the four seasons will cause the normal order to be lost, all living things will not be able to live in peace, and human beings will have to suffer from diseases.

古文：帝曰：升降不前，愿闻其故，气交有变，何以明知？
现代文：黄帝说：关于升降不前的问题，我想听听它的原因，气交发生变化，怎样才能晓得呢？
English: Huang Di said: "Regarding the problem of the rise and fall, I would like to hear the reason for it, the air exchange changes, how can I know?

古文：岐伯曰：昭乎问哉！
现代文：岐伯说：你提的问题很高明啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very clear!

古文：明乎道矣。
现代文：必须明白其中的道理。
English: We must understand the reason for this.

古文：气交有变，是为天地机，但欲降而不得降者，地窒刑之。
现代文：气交所以发生一定的变化，乃是天地运转固有的机理，气欲降而不得降的，是由于地之五气窒抑相胜所致。
English: It is the inherent mechanism of the movement of heaven and earth that causes a certain change in the air exchange. If the qi desire drops but cannot be lowered, it is due to the five qi of the earth being suppressed.

古文：又有五运太过，而先天而至者，即交不前，但欲升而不得其升，中运抑之，但欲降而不得其降，中运抑之。
现代文：又有五运之气太过，先天时而至，使气交升降不前，也是受中运的阻抑，但欲降而不得降，也是受中运的阻抑。
English: In addition, there are five kinds of qi that are too strong, which come from nature, causing the rise and fall of qi, which is also inhibited by the middle transport, but if you want to fall but cannot fall, it is also inhibited by the middle transport.

古文：于是有升之不前，降之不下者；有降之不下，升而至天者；有升降俱不前，作如此之分别，即气交之变，变之有异，常各各不同，灾有微甚者也。
现代文：于是有升之不前而降之不下的；有降之不下而升之至天的；有升降俱不得前进的，作出这样分别，乃是由于在气交的各种变化之中，变化之中存有差异，各自的常态即不相同，因此，发生的灾害也就有轻有重了。
English: Therefore, there are ascending but not advancing and descending but not descending; there are ascending but not descending but ascending to the sky; there are ascending and descending but not advancing. This distinction is made because in the various changes of the atmosphere, there are differences in the changes, and their respective normal states are different. Therefore, the disasters that occur are also lighter and heavier.

古文：帝曰：愿闻气交遇会胜抑之由，变成民病，轻重何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听关于气交相遇、相会、相胜、相抑的原因，变而为疾，其病情轻重是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I would like to hear about the reasons why air intercourse encounters, meets, wins, and suppresses each other, and turns into a disease, and what is the severity of the disease?"

古文：岐伯曰：胜相会，抑伏使然。
现代文：岐伯说：气交有胜气相会时，就可以抑伏而使气交有变。
English: Qi Bo said: When there is a meeting of superior qi and inferior qi, it is possible to suppress and make the qi and inferior qi change.

古文：是故辰戌之岁，木气升之，主逢天柱，胜而不前。
现代文：因此在辰戌之年，厥阴风木应从上年在泉的右间，升为本年司天的左间，若遇到天柱金气过胜，是木气升之不前。
English: Therefore, in the year of the dragon's roar, the wood of the Yin wind should rise from the right of the spring of the previous year to the left of the heaven of this year. If the gold of the pillar of heaven prevails, the wood will not rise.

古文：又遇庚戌，金运先天，中运胜之，忽然不前。
现代文：又若遇到庚戌之年，金运之气先天时而至，中运之胜气，乃使木气忽然升之不前。
English: In addition, if it is the year of Geng Zi, the air of financial fortune will come from the heavens, and the air of victory in the middle will make the wood gas suddenly rise and not move forward.

古文：木运升天，金乃抑之，升而不前，即清生风少，肃杀于春，露霜复降，草木乃萎。
现代文：木气欲升天，金气抑制之，升而不前，则发生清凉之气，风气反而减少，肃杀之气行于春季，露霜再次降下，草木因而枯萎。
English: The wood spirit wants to ascend to heaven, but the metal spirit restrains it. If it rises but does not advance, then a cool spirit will occur, but the spirit will decrease. The spirit of killing will occur in the spring, the dew will fall again, and the plants will wither.

古文：民病瘟疫早发，咽嗌乃干，四肢满，肢节皆痛。
现代文：人们易患温疫早发，咽喉干燥，两胁胀满，肢节皆痛等病。
English: People are prone to early onset of heatstroke, dry throat, swollen glands, joint pain and other ailments.

古文：久而化郁，即大风摧拉，折陨鸣紊。
现代文：木气不升，久而化为郁气，郁极则发，就要出现大风摧拉折损，鸣声紊乱。
English: If the wood gas does not rise, it will turn into stagnant gas for a long time, and if it is extremely stagnant, it will cause wind damage and sound disturbance.

古文：民病卒中，偏痹，手足不仁。
现代文：人们易患卒中，半身麻痹，手足不仁等病。
English: People are prone to stroke, hemiplegia, hand and foot insensitivity and other diseases.

古文：是故巳亥之岁，君火升天，主窒天蓬，胜之不前。
现代文：因此在巳亥之年，少阴君火应从上年在泉的右间，升为本年司天的左间，若遇到天蓬水气过胜，是君火升之不前。
English: Therefore, in the year of the boar, the fire of Shao Yin should rise from the right of the spring in the previous year to the left of the heaven in this year. If the heavens and the clouds prevail, the fire of Shao Yin will not rise.

古文：又厥阴未迁正，则少阴未得升天，水运以至其中者。
现代文：又若遇到厥阴司天，未得迁居正位，则少阴君火也就不能升于司天的左间，这是由于水运在中间阻抑所致。
English: In addition, if the Jueyin Emperor met the Jueyin Emperor and was not able to move to the right place, the Shaoyin Emperor's fire could not rise to the left of the Jueyin Emperor, which was caused by the water transport being blocked in the middle.

古文：君火欲升，而中水运抑之，升之不前，即清寒复作，冷生旦暮。
现代文：少阴君火欲升司天的左间，受到水运的阻抑，而升之不前，则清凉寒冷的气候再度发作，早晚都有冷气发生。
English: Shouyin's ardent desire to ascend to the left side of heaven is blocked by water transport, but if he does not ascend, the cool and cold weather will occur again, and cold air will occur in the morning and evening.

古文：民病伏阳而内生烦热，心神惊悸，寒热间作。
现代文：人们易患阳气伏郁于内而生烦热，心神惊悸，寒热交作等病。
English: People are prone to suffer from internal yang qi depression, resulting in fever, mental panic, cold and fever, and other diseases.

古文：日久成郁，即暴热乃至，赤风肿翳，化疫，温疠暖作，赤气彰而化火疫，皆烦而躁渴，渴甚治之，以泄之可止。
现代文：君火不升，久而化为郁气，郁极则发，就要出现暴热发作，易患风火之气生为目肿遮蔽的病症，化为疫气，温疠逢温暖之时乃发作，由于火气暴露化为火疫，则可发生心烦而躁动、口渴等症，渴甚的，可以泻其火热，则诸症可止。
English: If the fire does not rise, it will turn into depression for a long time, and if it is extremely depressed, it will be necessary to have a fever attack. It is easy to suffer from wind and fire, and the gas is a disease that covers the eyes and turns into an epidemic. When the temperature is warm, it is an attack. Since the fire gas is exposed and turns into a fire plague, it can cause irritability and restlessness, thirst and other diseases. If it is very thirsty, it can relieve its fiery heat, and then the symptoms can be stopped.

古文：是故子午之岁，太阴升天，主窒天冲，胜之不前，又或遇壬子，木运先天而至者，中木运抑之也，升天不前，即风埃四起，时举埃昏，雨湿不化。
现代文：因此在子午年，太阴湿土应从上年在泉的右间，升为本年司天的左间，若遇到天冲木气过胜，是土气升之不前。又若遇到壬子年，木运之气先天时而至，中运之胜气，土气升天则风土埃尘昏暗，雨湿之气不得布化。
English: Therefore, in the year of the meridian, the moist soil that is too cloudy should rise from the right of the spring in the previous year to the left of the sky in the current year. If the wood gas is overpowered by the wind, the soil gas will not rise. If it is the year of the dog, the wood wind will come from the day before yesterday, the wind will win in the middle of the year, and the earth will rise to the sky, the soil dust will be dim, and the rain and moisture will not be able to spread.

古文：民病风厥、涎潮、偏痹不随、胀满。
现代文：人们易患风厥、涎液上涌、半身麻痹不遂、腹部胀满等病。
English: People are prone to wind convulsions, pus rising, paralysis of half of the body, bloated abdomen and other diseases.

古文：久而伏郁，即黄埃化疫也，民病夭亡，脸支府黄疸满闭，湿令弗布，雨化乃微。
现代文：土气不升，久而化为郁气，郁极则发，就要发生土气尘埃化为疫病，人们容易患猝然死亡，易患面部、四肢、脏腑出现黄疸和胀满闭塞的病症，湿气不能布化，雨水就要减少。
English: If the earth's atmosphere does not rise, it will turn into stagnant air for a long time, and if it is extremely stagnant, it is necessary for the earth's atmosphere and dust to turn into a plague. People are prone to sudden death, and are prone to jaundice and bloating in the face, limbs, and internal organs. Moisture cannot be converted into cloth, and rainwater must be reduced.

古文：是故丑未之年，少阳升天，主窒天蓬，胜之不前。
现代文：因此在丑未年，少阳相火应从上年在泉的右间，升为本年司天的左间，若遇到天蓬水气过胜，是少阳相火升之不前。
English: Therefore, in the Ugly New Year, the Shao Yang phase fire should rise from the right of the spring in the previous year to the left of the heaven this year. If it encounters the heavens and clouds, the Shao Yang phase fire will not rise.

古文：又或遇太阴未迁正者，即少阴未升天也，水运以至者。
现代文：又或遇到太阴司天，未得迁居正位，则少阴相火也就不能升于司天的左间，这是由于水运阻抑所致。
English: Or, if the sun is too low in the sky and cannot move to the positive position, the fire cannot rise to the left of the sun, which is caused by water blockage.

古文：升天不前，即寒雰反布，凛冽如冬，水复涸，冰再结，喧暖乍作，冷复布之，寒暄不时。
现代文：少阳之气欲升司天的左间，受到水运的阻抑而升之不前，则寒冷的雾露反而布化，气候凛冽如似冬季，河水又干涸，冰冻再次凝结，突然出现温暖的气候，接着就有寒气的布化，忽冷忽热，发作不时。
English: The desire of the sun rises to the left of the sky, but it is blocked by the movement of water and does not rise. The cold mist instead spreads. The climate is like winter, the river dries up again, the ice condenses again, a warm climate suddenly appears, followed by the spread of cold, cold and hot, and occurs from time to time.

古文：民病伏阳在内，烦热生中、心神惊骇、寒热间争。
现代文：人们易患阳气伏郁在内之证，出现烦热升于心中、心神惊骇、寒热交作等病症。
English: People are prone to the symptoms of yang qi depression, including the appearance of fever rising in the heart, mental shock, cold and fever, and other diseases.

古文：以久成郁，即暴热乃生，赤风气肿翳，化成郁疠，乃化作伏热内烦、痹而生厥，甚则血溢。
现代文：相火不繁荣昌盛，久而化为郁气，郁极则发，就要出现暴热之气，易患风火之气生为目肿遮蔽的病症，化为郁疠，变为伏热内烦、肢体麻痹而厥逆等病症，甚时发生血液外溢的病变。
English: If the phase of fire is not prosperous and flourishing, it will turn into depression after a long time, and if it is extremely depressed, it will be necessary to have a fever, and it is easy to suffer from the disease of wind and fire, and it will be a disease that is covered by swelling, and it will turn into depression, and it will become a disease such as fever, limb paralysis, and so on, and even a blood spill will occur.

古文：是故寅申之年，阳明升天，主窒天英。
现代文：因此在寅申年，阳明燥金应从上年在泉的右间，升为本年司天的左间，若遇到天英火气过胜，是金气升之不前。
English: Therefore, in the year of Yin and Yang, the Yang Ming dried gold should rise from the right of the spring in the previous year to the left of the heaven this year. If it encounters the fire of heaven, it is the gold that does not rise.

古文：胜之不前，又或遇戊申戊寅，火运先天而至，金欲升天，火运抑之，升之不前，实时雨不降，西风数举，咸卤燥生。
现代文：又若遇到戊申、戊寅年，中运之火则先天时而至，金气欲升之为司天之左间，中运之火阻抑之，金气升之不前，则应时之雨不得降下，西风频作，土地干燥，咸卤发生。
English: In addition, if it is the year of Boshin or Boshin, the fire of Mid-Autumn Festival will come from nature, the fire of Mid-Autumn Festival will be suppressed, the fire of Mid-Autumn Festival will be suppressed, the fire of Mid-Autumn Festival will not rise, the rain will not fall, the west wind will blow frequently, the land will be dry, and salt brine will occur.

古文：民病上热，喘、嗽，血溢。
现代文：人们易患上热证，病发气喘、咳嗽、血液外溢等症。
English: People are prone to heatstroke, which causes asthma, coughing, blood loss and other symptoms.

古文：久而化郁，即白埃翳雾，清生杀气，民病胁满、悲伤、寒、鼽、嚏、嗌干、手坼、皮肤燥。
现代文：燥气不升，久而化为郁气，郁极则发，就要发生白色埃雾笼罩天空，清冷而肃杀之气，人们易患胁下胀满、容易悲伤、伤寒、鼻塞、喷嚏、咽喉干燥、手部皴裂、皮肤干燥等病。
English: If the dryness does not rise, it will turn into depression in the long run, and if the depression is extreme, it will cause a white mist to cover the sky, a cold and chilling atmosphere, and people are prone to bloating under duress, sadness, typhoid, nasal congestion, sneezing, dry throat, cleft palate, dry skin and other diseases.

古文：是故卯酉之年，太阳升天，主窒天芮，胜之不前。
现代文：因此在卯酉年，太阳寒水应从上年在泉的右间，升为本年司天的左间，若遇到天芮土气过胜，使太阳寒水升之不前。
English: Therefore, in the year of the rabbit, the sun's cold water should rise from the right of the spring in the previous year to the left of this year's heaven. If it encounters the weather, the sun's cold water will not rise.

古文：又遇阳明未迁正者，即太阳未升天也。
现代文：又或遇到阳明司天，未得迁居正位，则太阳寒水也就不能升于司天的左间。
English: Or, if you encounter the Yang Ming Si Tian, before moving to the positive position, the sun's cold water cannot rise to the left of the Si Tian.

古文：土运以至，水欲升天，土运抑之，升之不前，即湿而热蒸，寒生两间。
现代文：土运应时以至，寒水之气欲升司天的左间，受到土运的阻抑，而升之不前，则湿热相蒸，寒气发生于天地之间。
English: Due to the earth movement, cold water rises to the left of the sky, which is inhibited by the earth movement. If it does not rise, it will be humid and hot, and cold air will occur between heaven and earth.

古文：民病注下、食不及化。
现代文：人们易患泄泻如注，食谷不化等病。
English: People are prone to diarrhea, diarrhea, diarrhea and other diseases.

古文：久而成郁，冷来客热，冰雹卒至。
现代文：寒水不升，久而化为郁气，郁极则发，冷气又胜过客热之气，冰雹突然降下。
English: The cold water does not rise, and after a long time, it turns into stagnant air, and the extreme depression occurs, and the cold air prevails over the hot air, and the hail suddenly falls.

古文：民病厥逆而哕，热生于内，气痹于外，足胫酸疼、反生心悸燠热、暴烦而复厥。
现代文：人们易患厥逆而打嗝的病症，热病生于内，阳气痹于外，则病发足胫酸疼、烦躁而引心悸和闷热、暴烦而厥逆等症。
English: People are prone to suffer from the disease of hiccups, fever is born inside, yang qi is paralyzed outside, then the disease causes foot cramps, acid pain, irritability and heart palpitations and muggy heat, irritability and hiccups and other diseases.

古文：黄帝曰：升之不前，余已尽知其旨。
现代文：黄帝说：六气升之不前的问题，我已经完全明白了它的意义。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I have fully understood the significance of the problem of not moving forward.

古文：愿闻降之不下，可得明乎？
现代文：还想听听关于六气降之不下的问题，可以让我明白吗？
English: I'd also like to ask you about the six breaths, can you let me understand?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问的很全面啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：是谓天地微旨，可以尽陈斯道。
现代文：这其中讲的是天气与地气变化的精妙意义，我可以全面来讲述其道理。
English: This one is about the subtle significance of weather and geomagnetic changes, and I can tell you the whole story.

古文：所谓升已必降也，至天三年，次岁必降，降而入地，始为左间也，如此升降往来，命之六纪也。
现代文：简言之，就是说六气上升之后，必然还要下降。六气中的每一气，上升至天，居时三年，至火年即第四年，必然下降入地，成为地之左间，又在之居时三年。这样一升一降，一往一来，共为六年，叫做六纪。
English: In short, it means that after the rise of the six qi, it will inevitably fall. Each of the six qi, rising to the sky, lives for three years, to the fire year, that is, the fourth year, it will inevitably fall into the earth, become the left of the earth, and live for three years. Such a rise and fall, one after another, is a total of six years, called the six ages.

古文：是故丑未之岁，厥阴降地，主窒地晶，胜而不前。
现代文：因此，丑未之年，厥阴风木应从上年司天的右间，降为本年在泉的左间，若遇到地白金气过胜，则厥阴风木降之不前。
English: Therefore, in the year of the Ugly Goat, the Jueyin Wind Tree should be lowered from the right of the previous year's heaven to the left of this year's spring. If it encounters the platinum gas, the Jueyin Wind Tree will not move forward.

古文：又或遇少阴未退位，即厥阴未降下，金运以至中，金运承之，降之未下，抑之变郁，木欲降下，金承之，降而不下。
现代文：又或遇到少阴司天，不得退位，则厥阴风木也就不能降于在泉的左间，居中的金运应时而至，金运居于司天之下而承其气，则厥阴风木降之不下。
English: Or, if there is less yin than yang, and it is not possible to abdicate, then the yang wind tree cannot descend to the left of the spring, and the golden wind in the middle should come from time to time. If the golden wind lives under the yang wind tree and bears its breath, then the yang wind tree cannot descend.

古文：苍埃远见，白气承之，风举埃昏，清燥行杀，霜露复下，肃杀布令。
现代文：天空中青色的尘埃远见于上，白气承之于下，大风时起，尘埃昏暗，清燥之气行杀令，霜露再次降下，肃杀之气施布其令。
English: The blue dust in the sky is seen above, the white gas is carried below, when the wind blows, the dust is dim, the dry air kills, the frost dew falls again, and the killing air kills.

古文：久而不降，抑之化郁，即作风燥相伏，暄而反清，草木萌动，杀霜乃下，蛰虫未见，惧清伤藏。
现代文：若木气日久不降，其气被抑则化为郁气，就会发生风气与燥气伏郁，气才温暖而反见清冷，草木虽已萌芽生长，严寒霜冻又至，蛰虫不能出现，人们也惧怕这种清凉之气要伤害脏气。
English: If the wood gas does not fall for a long time, and if its gas is suppressed, it will turn into stagnant gas. This will lead to stagnant air and dry air. The gas will be warm, but it will be cold. Although the plants have sprouted and grown, severe frosts will come, and aphids cannot appear. People are also afraid that this cool air will harm the dirty air.

古文：是故寅申之岁，少阴降地，主窒地玄，胜之不入。
现代文：因此在寅申年，少阳君火应从上年在泉的右间，降为本年在泉的左间，若遇到地玄火气过胜，则少阴君火不得降入地下。
English: Therefore, in the year of Yin and Yang, the fire of Shao Yang Jun should be lowered from the right of the spring in the previous year to the left of the spring in this year. If the earth's dark fire prevails, the fire of Shao Yin Jun must not descend into the ground.

古文：又或遇丙申、丙寅，水运太过，先天而至，君火欲降，水运承之，降而不下。
现代文：又或遇到丙申、丙寅年，则水运太过，先天时而至，少阴君火欲降，水运居中承之，使君火不得降下。
English: Or, in the year of Yin Yin and Yin Yin, the water transport is too strong, it comes a priori from time to time, Shao Yin Jun's fire wants to descend, and the water transport is in the middle of it, so that the fire cannot descend.

古文：即彤云才见，黑气反生，暄暖如舒，寒常布雪，凛冽复作，天云惨凄。
现代文：天空中赤色之云气始现，黑色云气反生，温暖的气候使万物舒适，又有寒雪降下，严寒发作，天云凄凉。
English: Red clouds began to appear in the sky, black clouds formed, warm weather made everything comfortable, cold snow fell, severe cold occurred, and the sky was bleak.

古文：久而不降，伏之化郁，寒胜复热，赤风化疫，民病面赤、心烦、头痛、目眩也。
现代文：少阴君火久伏而不降，则化为郁气，郁久必发，所以寒气过胜之后，又有热气发火，火风化为疫气，则人们易患面赤、心烦、头痛、目眩等病。
English: If the minor yin and yang do not fall for a long time, they will turn into depression, and if they do not fall for a long time, they will turn into depression. Therefore, after the cold weather is over, the hot weather will turn into anger, and the fire weather will turn into plague. People are prone to red face, upset, headache, dizziness and other diseases.

古文：赤气彰而温病欲作也。
现代文：火气暴露之后，温病就有可能要发作。
English: After exposure to fire, hypothermia is likely to occur.

古文：是故卯酉之岁，太阴降地，主窒地苍，胜之不入。
现代文：因此在卯酉年，太阴湿土应从上年司天的右间，升为本年在泉的左间，若遇到地苍木气过胜，是太阴湿土不得降入地下。
English: Therefore, in the year of the rabbit, the soil that is too cloudy and wet should rise from the right of the previous year's heaven to the left of this year's spring. If the ground is overpowered by the wood gas, the soil that is too cloudy and wet must not descend into the ground.

古文：又或少阳未退位者，即太阴未得降也；或木运以至，木运承之，降而不下。
现代文：又或遇到少阳司天不退位，则太阴湿土不得降入在泉的左间；或者木运应时以至，木运居于司天之下而承其气，太阴湿土降之不下。
English: Or, if Shao Yang did not abdicate the throne, the earth would be too cloudy and wet to descend to the left of the spring; or if Muxun came at the right time, Muxun would live under the throne and bear its breath, and the earth would be too cloudy and wet to descend.

古文：即黄云见而青霞彰，郁蒸作而大风，雾翳埃胜，折损乃作。
现代文：天空中出现黄云而又有青色云霞显露，云气郁蒸而大风发作，雾气遮蔽，尘埃过胜，草木为之折损。
English: Yellow clouds appear in the sky and blue haze appears, clouds are thick and windy, fog obscures, dust prevails, and plants and trees are damaged.

古文：久而不降也，伏之化郁，天埃黄气，地布湿蒸，民病四肢不举、昏眩、支节痛、腹满、䐜臆。
现代文：若太阴湿土日久不降，伏而不布则化为郁气，天空出现尘埃黄气，地上湿气郁蒸，人们易患四肢不能举动、头晕眩、肢节疼痛、腹胀、胸满等病症。
English: If it is too cloudy and humid, the soil will not yield for a long time, and the cloth will turn into a gloomy atmosphere, the sky will appear dusty yellow, and the ground will be damp. People are prone to limb immobility, dizziness, joint pain, bloating, fullness of the chest and other diseases.

古文：是故辰戌之岁，少阳降地，主窒地玄，胜之不入。
现代文：因此在辰戌年，少阳相火应从上年司天的右间，降为本年在泉的左间，若遇到地玄火气过胜，则少阳相火不得降入地下。
English: Therefore, in the year of the dragon, the Shao Yang phase fire should be lowered from the right of the previous year's heaven to the left of this year's spring. If the earth's dark fire prevails, the Shao Yang phase fire must not descend into the ground.

古文：又或遇水运太过，先天而至也，水运承之，降而不下。
现代文：又或遇到水运太过，则先天时而至，水运居中承之，相火欲降而不得降下。
English: Or if the water transport is too much, it will come from nature, the water transport will be in the middle, and the fire will rise and not fall.

古文：即彤云才见，黑气反生，暄暖欲生，冷气卒至，甚即冰雹也。
现代文：天空中赤色云气始见，黑色云气反常而发生，温暖的之气才欲发生，冷气又突然而至，甚至降下冰雹。
English: Red clouds began to appear in the sky, black clouds occurred abnormally, warm air only occurred, cold air came suddenly, and even hail fell.

古文：久而不降，伏之化郁，冷气复热，赤风化疫。
现代文：若少阳相火日久不得降下，伏而不布则化为郁气，冷气之后随又生热，火风之气化为疫气。
English: If Shao Yang is in the phase of fire, it will not go down for a long time. If Fubu is not in the phase of fire, it will turn into depression. If it is cold, it will turn into heat. If it is hot, it will turn into epidemic.

古文：民病面赤、心烦、头痛、目眩也。
现代文：人们易患面赤、心烦、头痛、目眩等病。
English: People are prone to suffer from red face, upset, headache, dizziness and other diseases.

古文：赤气彰而热病欲作也。
现代文：火气暴露之后，温病就要发作。
English: After exposure to fire, hypothermia sets in.

古文：是故巳亥之岁，阳明降地，主窒地彤，胜而不入。
现代文：因此在巳亥年，阳明燥金应从上年司天的右间，升为本年在泉的左间，若遇到地彤火气过胜，则阳明燥金不得降入地下。
English: Therefore, in the year of the boar, the yang ming dried gold should rise from the right of the previous year's heaven to the left of this year's spring. If it encounters the earth's fire, the yang ming dried gold must not fall into the ground.

古文：又或遇太阳未退位，即阳明未得降，即火运以至之，火运承之，降而不下。
现代文：又或遇到太阳司天不退位，则阳明燥金不得降入在泉的左间，火运应时已至，火运居于司天之下而承其气，阳明燥金降之不下。
English: Or, if the sun does not abdicate, the yang ming dried gold must not fall into the left of the spring. The fire fortune has already arrived. The fire fortune is under the sun and bears its breath. The yang ming dried gold cannot fall.

古文：即天清而肃，赤气乃彰，暄热反作。
现代文：天气清冷而肃降，火气显露，则温热反常发作。
English: If the weather is clear and cold, the temperature will drop, and if there is a fire, abnormal heat and temperature will occur.

古文：民皆昏倦，夜卧不安，咽干、引饮、懊热内烦。
现代文：人们感到昏沉困倦，夜卧不安，易患咽喉干燥、口渴引饮、懊憹烦热等病。
English: People feel drowsy and sleepy, restless at night, and are prone to diseases such as dry throat, thirst, and fever.

古文：大清朝暮，暄还复作。
现代文：如果早晚有大凉之气，则温热将再次发作。
English: If there is a big cool breeze in the morning or evening, then the warm and hot weather will occur again.

古文：久而不降，伏之化郁，天清薄寒，远生白气。
现代文：若阳明燥金日久不降，伏而不布则化为郁气，天空清凉而寒冷，远处有白气发生。
English: If the sun is bright and dry, the gold will not surrender for a long time. If the sun is not clothed, it will turn into a gloomy atmosphere. The sky is cool and cold, and there is white gas in the distance.

古文：民病掉、眩、手足直而不仁、两胁作痛、满目䀮䀮。
现代文：人们易患四肢抽搐、眩晕、手足强直而麻木不仁、两胁作痛、双目视物不清等病。
English: People are prone to limb twitching, dizziness, stiffness and numbness in limbs, double vision, and blurred vision.

古文：是故子午之年，太阳降地，主窒地阜胜之，降而不入。
现代文：因此在子午年，太阳寒水应从上年司天的右间，降为本年在泉的左间，若遇到地阜土气太过，则太阳寒水不得降入地下。
English: Therefore, in the year of the meridian, the sun's cold water should be lowered from the right of the previous year's heaven to the left of this year's spring. If there is too much soil, the sun's cold water should not fall into the ground.

古文：又或遇土运太过，先天而至，土运承之，降而不入。
现代文：又或遇到土运太过，则先天时而至，土运居中承之，太阳寒水欲降而不得降下。
English: Or if the earth movement is too strong, it will be caused by the a priori, the earth movement will be in the middle, and the sun and cold water will want to fall, but cannot.

古文：即天彰黑气，暝暗凄惨，才施黄埃而布湿，寒化令气，蒸湿复令。
现代文：天空中彰显黑气，昏暗凄惨，刚才出现黄色尘埃而布化湿气，寒气又来袭扰，出现热化与湿化反常的时令。
English: The sky is dark, gloomy and gloomy. Just now, yellow dust has appeared and spread moisture. The cold has come again, and there is an abnormal season of heat and humidity.

古文：久而不降，伏之化郁。
现代文：若太阳寒水日久不得降下，伏而不布则化为郁气。
English: If the sun and cold water do not go down for a long time, it will turn into depression.

古文：民病大厥、四肢重怠、阴痿、少力。
现代文：人们易患大厥、四肢沉重卷怠、阳萎、少力等病。
English: People are prone to suffer from diseases such as turgor, heavy limbs, laziness, impotence, and weakness.

古文：天布沉阴，蒸湿间作。
现代文：天气阴沉，热气与湿气交替发作。
English: The weather was gloomy, alternating between heat and humidity.

古文：帝曰：升降不前，晰知其宗。
现代文：黄帝说；关于间气升降的问题，我已经完全明白了它的意义。
English: Huang Di said, "Regarding the issue of the rise and fall of the air, I have fully understood its significance.

古文：愿闻迁正，可得明乎？
现代文：还想听听关于六气迁正的问题，可以使我明白吗？
English: I'd also like to ask you about the six phases of qi, can you explain it to me?

古文：岐伯曰：正司中位，是谓迁正位。
现代文：岐伯说：值年的岁气，迁居于一年的中位，叫做迁正位。
English: Qi Bo said: The year of the year, moving to the middle of the year, is called moving to the positive position.

古文：司天不得其迁正者，即前司天以过交司之日，即遇司天太过有余日也，即仍旧治天数，新司天未得迁正也。
现代文：司天之气不得迁居于正位，就是上年司天之气超过了交司之日，也就是上年司天之气太过，其值时日超期，仍旧占领着本年的司天之位，所以使新司天不得迁正。
English: The energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's energy of the previous year's

古文：厥阴不迁正，即风暄不时，花卉萎瘁，民病淋溲，目系转，转筋，喜怒，小便赤。
现代文：厥阴风木不能按时迁正，即温暖之气不能应时施化，则花卉枯萎，人们易患淋病、目系转、转筋、善怒、小便赤等病。
English: If the wind and trees are not able to move in time, that is, if the warm air cannot be transmuted in time, the flowers will wither, and people will be prone to gonorrhea, eye strain, muscle strain, anger, red urine and other diseases.

古文：风欲令而寒由不去，温暄不正，春正失时。
现代文：风气欲施其令而寒气不退，温暖的气候不得正时，则失去正常的春令。
English: If the climate wants to impose its will and the cold does not retreat, and the warm weather is not timely, the normal spring time will be lost.

古文：少阴不迁正，即冷气不退，春冷后寒，暄暖不时。
现代文：少阴君火不得迁正，冷气不退，春天先冷而后又寒，温暖之气不能应时施化。
English: If there is little shade, the fire cannot be moved to the right, the cold air will not retreat, the spring will be cold first and then cold, and the warm air cannot be transformed in time.

古文：民病寒热，四肢烦痛、腰脊强直。
现代文：人们易患寒热证，病发四肢烦痛、腰脊强直等症。
English: People are prone to cold and fever symptoms, the onset of pain in the extremities, lumbar spine stiffness and other symptoms.

古文：木气虽有余，而位不过于君火也。
现代文：厥阴木气虽有余，但其不退位的情况，不超过二之气君火当令之时。
English: Although there is more than enough jueyin wood gas, the situation of its non-abdication does not exceed the time when the second jueyin fire is ordered.

古文：太阴不迁正，即云雨失令，万物枯焦，当生不发。
现代文：太阴湿土不得迁正，雨水不能及时，万物枯焦，应当生长发育的不能生发。
English: If the soil is too cloudy and wet, it cannot be rectified, the rain cannot come in time, and all things are scorched. Things that should grow and develop cannot.

古文：民病手足肢节肿满、大腹水肿、䐜臆、不食、飧泄、胁满、四肢不举。
现代文：人们易患手足肢节肿满、大腹水肿、胸满、不食、飧泄、胁满、四肢不能举动等病。
English: People are prone to swollen hands, feet and limbs, bloated abdomen, engorged chest, not eating, defecation, fullness, inability to move the limbs and other diseases.

古文：雨化欲令，热犹治之，温煦于气，亢而不泽。
现代文：雨气欲布其令，但由于少阴君火仍居天位而治之，所以温暖之气化亢盛而缺少雨泽。
English: The rain wants to spread its rule, but since the lesser yin and the greater fire still reign supreme, the warmth is transmuted into prosperity and there is a lack of rain.

古文：少阳不迁正，即炎灼弗令，苗莠不荣，酷暑于秋，肃杀晚至，霜露不时。
现代文：少阳相火不得迁正，炎热的气候不得施布其令，植物的苗莠不能繁荣，少阳之气晚治，则酷暑见之于秋季，肃杀之气亦必晚至，霜露不得应时而降。
English: When the sun is low, the fire cannot move to the right, when the weather is hot, it cannot spread, when plants are young, they cannot flourish. When the sun is low, the heat is in the autumn, when the sun is hot, the heat is in the autumn, when the sun is cold, the frost cannot fall.

古文：民病痎疟、骨热、心悸、惊骇，甚时血溢。
现代文：人们易患痎疟、骨热、心悸、惊骇，严重时出现血溢。
English: People are prone to scarlet fever, bone fever, palpitations, shock and, in severe cases, haemorrhage.

古文：阳明不迁正，则暑化于前，肃杀于后，草木反荣。
现代文：阳明燥金不迁正，则暑化于前，肃杀于后，草木反常复荣。
English: If the sun does not move to the right, then the heat will be in the front, the cold will be in the back, and the plants and trees will return to glory.

古文：民病寒热，鼽、嚏、皮毛折、爪甲枯焦，甚则喘嗽息高，悲伤不乐。
现代文：人们易患寒热证，病发鼻塞、喷嚏、毛发脆折、爪甲枯焦，甚则喘咳上气、悲伤不乐等病。
English: People are prone to suffer from cold and heat symptoms, nasal congestion, sneezing, brittle hair, burnt fingernails, and even coughing, sadness, and other diseases.

古文：热化乃布，燥化未令，即清劲未行，肺金复病。
现代文：由于热化之令继续施布，燥令不行，也就是清冷急切之气不行，肺金又要患病。
English: Due to the heat order to continue to apply, the dry order can not, that is, the cold and urgent air can not, and the lung gold will get sick.

古文：太阳不迁正，即冬清反寒，易令于春，杀霜在前，寒冰于后，阳光复治，凛冽不作，雾云待时。
现代文：太阳寒水不得迁正，致使冬季寒冷之令，反而改行于春季，肃杀霜冻之气在前，严寒冰雪之气在后，若阳光之气复得而治，则凛冽之气不得发作，雾云待时而现。
English: The sun and cold water must not be aligned, causing the winter cold to begin in the spring instead of the winter cold. The frost-killing air is in the front, the cold ice and snow air is in the back, and if the sun's air is restored, the chilling air must not occur. Fog clouds are waiting to appear.

古文：民病温、疠至，喉闭、嗌干、烦躁而渴、喘息而有音也。
现代文：人们易患温病、疫疠，病发喉闭、咽干、烦躁、口渴，喘息有音等病。
English: People are prone to suffer from fever, epidemic, sore throat, dry throat, irritability, thirst, wheezing and other diseases.

古文：寒化待燥，犹治天气，过失序，与民作灾。
现代文：太阳寒化之令，须待燥气过后，才能司天主治，若燥气过期不退，时令失去正常规律，人们就会发生病害。
English: According to the order of the sun's cooling, it is necessary to wait for the dry air to pass before ruling the world. If the dry air does not recede, and the seasons lose their normal pattern, people will suffer from diseases.

古文：帝曰：迁正早晚，以命其旨，愿闻退位，可得明哉？
现代文：黄帝说：对于迁正早晚的问题，你已将它的意义告知了我，还想听听有关退位的情况，可以使我明白吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "As for the question of whether it is too early or too late to transfer the throne, you have already told me the meaning of it. Do you still want to hear about the circumstances of the abdication? Can you make me understand?

古文：岐伯曰：所谓不退者，即天数未终，即天数有余，名曰复布政故名曰再治天也，即天令如故而不退位也。
现代文：岐伯说：所谓不退位，就是指旧司天的时数不终止，也就是旧司天时数延长，名叫复布政，所以也叫再治天，这就是旧司天之令依然如故而不退位。
English: Qibo said: "The so-called non-abdication means that the number of days of the old emperor will not end, that is, the number of days of the old emperor will be extended. It is called the restoration of power, so it is also called the reign of the emperor. This is the order of the old emperor is still the same and will not abdicate.

古文：厥阴不退位，即大风早举，时雨不降，湿令不化。
现代文：厥阴风木不退位时，则大风早起，时雨不得降下，温令不能施化。
English: If the trees do not abdicate, the wind will rise early, the rain will not fall, and the temperature will not rise.

古文：民病温疫、疵、废；风生，民病皆肢节痛，头目痛，伏热内烦，咽喉干，引饮。
现代文：人们易患瘟疫、黑斑、偏废等病；风证发生，人们普遍出现肢节痛、头目痛，伏热在内而心烦、咽喉干燥、口渴引饮等病症。
English: People are prone to plague, black spot, waste and other diseases; wind symptoms occur, people generally have joint pain, headache, fever, irritability, dry throat, thirst, and other diseases.

古文：少阴不退位，即温生春冬，蛰虫早至，草木发生。
现代文：少阴君火不退位时，则温暖之气发生于春冬季节，蛰虫提早出现，草木提前发芽生长。
English: When the sun does not abdicate, the warm air occurs in the spring and winter seasons, the aphids appear early, and the plants germinate and grow ahead of schedule.

古文：民病膈热、咽干、血溢、惊骇、小便赤涩、丹瘤疹、疮疡、留毒。
现代文：人们易患膈热、咽干、血液外溢、惊骇、小便赤涩、丹瘤疹、疮疡等病。
English: People are prone to scarlet fever, pharyngitis, blood spill, shock, red urine, erysipelas, sores and other diseases.

古文：太阴不退位，而取寒暑不时，埃昏布作，湿令不去。
现代文：太阴湿土不退位时，则寒冷与暑热不时发生于春季，尘埃昏暗弥布天空，湿令不去。
English: When it is too cloudy and wet, cold and heat occur from time to time in the spring, and the sky is covered with dark dust. Humidity does not go away.

古文：民病四肢少力、食饮不下、泄注、淋满、足胫寒、阴痿、闭塞、失溺、小便数。
现代文：人们易患四肢少力、饮食不下、泄泻如注、小便淋沥、腹满、足胫寒冷、阳萎、大便闭塞、小便失禁、小便频数等病。
English: People are prone to limb weakness, poor diet, diarrhea, urination, fullness, cold feet, impotence, fecal obstruction, urinary incontinence, frequency of urination and other diseases.

古文：少阳不退位，即热生于春，暑乃后化，冬温不冻，流水不冰，蛰虫出见。民病少气、寒热更作、便血、上热、小腹坚满、小便赤沃，甚则血溢。
现代文：少阳相火不退位时，则炎热的气候发生于春季，由于暑热在后期布化，故冬季温暖而不冻，流水不冰，蛰虫出现，人们易患少气、寒热交替发作、便血、上部发热、小腹坚硬而胀满、小便赤色粘沫，甚则血液外溢等病。
English: When the waxing and waning phases of the sun are not abdicated, the hot weather occurs in the spring. Since the heat dissipates later, the winter is warm but not freezing, the running water is not icy, and aphids appear. People are prone to diseases such as low blood pressure, alternating cold and fever, blood in the stool, fever in the upper part of the body, a hard and swollen lower abdomen, red mucus in the urine, and even blood overflow.

古文：阳明不退位，即春生清冷，草木晚荣，寒热间作。
现代文：阳明燥金不退位时，则春天发生清冷之气，草木繁荣推迟，寒气与热气相间发作。
English: When the sun does not abdicate, the spring will be cool, the prosperity of plants and trees will be delayed, and cold and hot weather will occur.

古文：民病呕吐、暴注、食饮不下、大便干燥、四肢不举、目瞑、掉、眩。
现代文：人们易患呕吐、暴发泄泻、饮食不下、大便干燥、四肢不能举动、眼闭不想睁开、四肢振颤、头目眩晕等病。
English: People are prone to vomiting, violent diarrhea, poor diet, dry stool, inability to move the limbs, closing the eyes and not wanting to open them, tremors in the limbs, vertigo and other diseases.

古文：太阳不退位，即春寒夏作，冷雹乃降，沉阴昏翳，二之气寒犹不去。
现代文：太阳寒水不退位时，则春季又发生寒冷的气候，冰雹降下，阴沉之气昏暗覆盖，至二之气时，寒气尚未退去。
English: When the sun and cold water do not abdicate, the cold weather occurs in the spring, hail falls, and the gloomy air is covered with gloom. When the sun and cold water do not abdicate, the cold air has not yet retreated.

古文：民病痹厥，阴痿，失溺，腰膝皆痛，温疠晚发。
现代文：人们易患寒痹厥逆、阳痿、小便失禁、腰膝皆痛等病，温病、疫疠发作较晚。
English: People are prone to cold paralysis, impotence, urinary incontinence, and pain in the hips and knees, and the onset of fever and dysentery is late.

古文：帝曰：天岁早晚，余以知之，愿闻地数，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝说：岁气司天的早晚，我已经知道了。还想听听在泉之数，你可以告知我吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I already know the morning and evening of the lunar calendar. I would also like to know the number of springs, can you tell me?"

古文：岐伯曰：地下迁正、升天及退位不前之法，即地上产化，万物失时之化也。
现代文：岐伯说：地之三气，每年有一气迁正，一气升天，一气退位，其不得前进，便应于土地的生化，使万物的生化失于正常的时令。
English: Qi Bo said: Of the earth's three qi, each year one qi changes to positive, one qi ascends to heaven, and one qi abdicates. If it cannot advance, it should be due to the biochemistry of the land, so that the biochemistry of all things is lost to the normal season.

古文：帝曰：余闻天地二甲子，十干十二支。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说天地用甲、子二组数字表示，即十天干与十二地支配和。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I have heard that heaven and earth are represented by two sets of numbers, "a" and "z," that is, ten days of dry and twelve days of rain.

古文：上下经纬天地，数有迭移，失守其位，可得昭乎？
现代文：司天在泉，上下相合而主治天地之气，其数能互相更移，有时失守其位，你可以使我明白吗？
English: Can you make me understand that the number of the spirits of heaven and earth can shift from place to place, and sometimes lose their positions?

古文：岐伯曰：失之迭位者，谓虽得岁正，未得正位之司，即四时不节，即生大疫。
现代文：岐伯说：失其更移之正位的，就是说虽然已得岁时之正位，但是未得司正位之气，就会四时不节，发生大疫。
English: Qi Bo said: "If you lose the positive position of its shift, that is to say, although you have obtained the positive position of the year, but you have not obtained the positive position of the division, there will be a great epidemic at any time.

古文：假令甲子阳年，土运太窒，如癸亥天数有余者，年虽交得甲子，厥阴犹尚治天；地已迁正，阳明在泉，去岁少阳以作右间，即厥阴之地阳明，故不相和奉者也。
现代文：假如甲子年，本为阳年，但土运受到抑塞，比如上年是癸亥年，其司天的木运气数太过而有余，因此在时间上虽已交得甲子年，但厥阴风木仍居于司天之位；本年地气已经迁正，阳明在泉，去年在泉之少阳，已退为本年在泉的右间，这样，去年司天之厥阴不退位在上，本年在泉之阳明已迁正在下，因此二者不相奉和。
English: If the Year of the Rooster was originally a year of the Sun, but the earth movement was suppressed. For example, the previous year was the Year of the Rooster, and the number of lucky trees that were the rulers of heaven was too much. Therefore, although the Year of the Rooster had been handed over in time, the trees of the Year of the Rooster were still in the position of the rulers of heaven. This year, the earth's atmosphere had moved to the right, and the sun was in the spring. Last year, the sun was in the spring, but the sun was not in the spring, and the sun had retreated to the right of the spring this year. Thus, the

古文：癸己相会，土运太过，虚反受木胜，故非太过也，何以言土运太过，况黄钟不应太窒，木既胜而金还复，金既复而少阴如至，即木胜如火而金复微，如此则甲己失守，后三年化成土疫，晚至丁卯，早至丙寅，土疫至也，大小善恶，推其天地，详乎太一。
现代文：由于司天之癸与在泉之己相会，则本应太过的土运，却变虚而反为木气胜，所以就不是太过了，所以无从说起土运太过，况且应于土运之阳年的黄钟之音不应受到太过抑塞，今木气既胜，则土之子金气来复，金气来复，若少阴君火随之而至，则木之胜气随从君火之气，故金之复气乃微弱，这样，司天之甲与在泉之已失守其位，其后三年则化成土疫，晚至丁卯年，早在丙寅年，土疫就要发作，发作的大小和善恶，可以根据当年司天、在泉之气的盛衰及太乙游宫的情况去推断。
English: Because of the meeting of the god of heaven and the god of the spring, the earth movement, which should have been too much, turned out to be empty and turned into the victory of the wood gas. Therefore, it is not too much, so it is impossible to say that the earth movement is too much. Moreover, the sound of the yellow bell, which should be in the solar year of the earth movement, should not be suppressed too much. Now that the wood gas is victorious, the son of the earth comes back with the golden gas. If there is less shade and the fire of the king comes along, the victory of the wood gas follows the fire of the king. Therefore, the revival of the gold gas is

古文：又只如甲子年，如甲至子而合，应交司而治天，即下己卯未迁正，而戊寅少阳未退位者，亦甲己未合德也，即土运非太过，而木乃乘虚而胜土也，金次又行复胜之，即反邪化也。
现代文：又只如甲子年，在上的甲与子相合，交于司天已治天之位，而在下的己卯未得迁正，上年戊寅在泉至少阳不得退位，也属于上甲与下已未能合德，也就是土运不是太过，而木气则要乘虚克土，土之子金气又来报复而胜之，以反其邪气之化。
English: It is just like the Year of the Goat. In the Year of the Goat, the upper Goat and the lower Goat are in harmony, and they have been given the position of ruling the heavens by the ruler of heaven, but the lower Goat and the lower Goat have not been promoted. In the Year of the Goat, the upper Goat and the lower Goat are not allowed to abdicate, and the upper Goat and the lower Goat have not been able to unite, that is, the earth is not too far away, and the wood gas has to take advantage of the earth, and the son of the earth, the gold gas, has to take revenge and defeat it,

古文：阴阳天地殊异尔，故其大小善恶，一如天地之法旨也。
现代文：司天、在泉的阴阳属性不同，其变为疫疠之气的大小善恶，和司天、在泉失守其位的变化规律是一致的。
English: The yin and yang attributes of Siten and Zaiquan are different, and the size of good and evil that they become is consistent with the change of Siten and Zaiquan losing their positions.

古文：假令丙寅阳年太过，如乙丑天数有余者，虽交得丙寅，太阴尚治天也；地已迁正，厥阴司地，去岁太阳以作右间，即天太阴而地厥阴，故地不奉天化也。
现代文：假如丙寅年，本为阳年太过，如果上年乙丑年司天的气数太过而有余，在时间上虽已交得丙寅年，但太阴湿土仍居于司天之位；本年地气已经迁正，厥阴在泉，去年在泉之少阳，已退为本年在泉的右间，这样，去年司天之太阴不退位在上，本年在泉之厥阴已迁正在下，因此，在泉的厥阴不能奉和于司天的气化。
English: If in the year of Yin and Yang, the original Yang year is too much, if the number of qi in the previous year of Yin and Yang is too much and there is too much, although the time has been handed over to the year of Yin and Yang, the moist soil is still in the position of the heaven; this year, the earth's qi has moved to the positive, the qi is in the spring, last year's Xiaoyang in the spring has retreated to the right of this year's spring, thus, last year's yin and yang in the heaven does not abdicate, this year's yin and yang in the spring has moved to the

古文：乙辛相会，水运太虚，反受土胜，故非太过，即太簇之管，太羽不应，土胜而雨化，水复即风。
现代文：由于在上的乙与在下的辛反而相会，则本应太过的水运，却变虚而为土气所胜，所以就不是太过了，也就是太簇之律管，不应太羽之音。
English: Since the B above and the hardships below meet instead, the water transport that should have been too much, but turned out to be empty and was defeated by the local atmosphere, so it is not too much, that is, it is too much of a pipe, it should not be too much of a sound.

古文：此者丙辛失守其会，后三年化成水疫，晚至己巳，早至戊辰，甚即速，微即徐，水疫至也。大小善恶，推其天地数，乃太一游宫。
现代文：土胜而雨气施化，水之子来复为风化，这样，上丙与下辛失守其位而不得相会，其后三年则化成水疫，晚至已巳年，早在戊辰年，水疫甚者发作迅速，水疫微者发作徐缓，水疫发作的大小善恶，可以根据当年司天在泉之气的盛衰及太一游宫的情况去推断。
English: In this way, the upper crab and the lower crab lost their positions and could not meet, and the next three years turned into water plague. As late as the year of the snake, as early as the year of the peacock, the water plague had a rapid onset, the water plague had a slow onset, and the magnitude of the water plague could be inferred according to the rise and fall of the qi in the spring and the situation in the palace of Taichi.

古文：又只如丙寅年，丙至寅且合，应交司而治天，即辛巳未得迁正，而庚辰太阳未退位者，亦丙辛不合德也，即水运亦小虚而小胜，或有复，后三年化疠，名曰水疠，其状如水疫，治法如前。
现代文：又只如丙寅年，在上的丙与寅相合，交于司天已治天之位，而在下的辛巳未得迁正，上年庚辰在泉至少阳不得退位，也属于上丙与下辛未能合德，便使水运小虚而有小的胜气，或有小的复气，其后三年化而为疠，名叫水疫，其症状如水疫，治法同前。
English: For example, in the year of xing and yin, xing and yin at the top coincided, and xing and yin at the bottom could not be moved to the right, while xin and xi at the bottom could not be moved to the right. In the year of qing and yin, xing and yin at the top coincided, and xing and yin at the bottom could not be moved to the right, and xing and yin at the bottom could not be moved to the right, and xing and yin at the bottom could not be moved to the right, and xing and yin at the bottom could not be moved to the right.

古文：假令庚辰阳年太过，如己卯天数有余者，虽交得庚辰年也，阳明犹尚治天；地以迁正，太阴司地，去岁少阴以作右间，即天阳明而地太阴也，故地下奉天也。
现代文：假如庚辰年，本为阳年太过，如果上年已卯年司天的气数太过而有余，在时间上虽已交得庚辰年，但阳明燥金仍居于司天之位；本年地气已经迁正，太阴在泉，去年在泉的少阴已退为本年在泉的右间，这样，去年司天之阳明不退位在上，本年在泉之太阴已迁正在下，因此，在泉的太阴不能奉和于司天的气化。
English: If in the year of Geng Chen, the number of qi was too much for the year of Yang, if the number of qi in the year of Jian Chen was too much for the previous year, although the year of Geng Chen had been passed in time, the sun was still in the position of the king of heaven; this year, the earth's qi had moved to the right, the yin was in the spring, and last year's yin in the spring had retreated to the right of this year's spring. Thus, last year's yang in the king of heaven did not retreat to the top, and this year's yin in the spring had moved to the

古文：乙己相会，金运太虚，反受火胜，故非太过也，即姑洗之管，太商不应，火胜热化，水复寒刑，此乙庚失守，其后三年化成金疫也，速至壬午，徐至癸未，金疫至也。
现代文：由于在上的己与在下的乙相会，则本应太过的金运，却变虚而为火气所胜，所以就不是太过了，也就是姑洗之律管，不应太商之音。火之胜气热化，则金之子水气来复，寒而制热，这样上庚与下乙失守其位而不得相会，其后三年化成金疫，迅速的至壬午年，徐缓的至癸未年，金疫就要发作。
English: As the upper self and the lower B meet, the gold fortune that should have been too much, but turned out to be empty and was defeated by the fire, so it is not too much, that is, the law of purification, should not be too commercial. When the victory of fire is hot, the son of gold, water vapor, returns, cold and heat, so that the upper G and the lower B lose their position and cannot meet, and the next three years turn into a gold epidemic, quickly to the year of the horse, slowly to the year of the horse, and the gold epidemic will occur.

古文：大小善恶，推本年天数及太一也。
现代文：发作的大小善恶，可以根据当年司天之气的盛衰及太一游宫的情况去推断。
English: The size of the outbreak of good and evil can be inferred according to the rise and fall of the Qi of the emperor and the situation of the palace.

古文：又只如庚辰，如庚至辰，且应交司而治天，即下乙未未得迁正者，即地甲午少阴未退位者，且乙庚不合德也，即下乙未柔干失刚，亦金运小虚也，有小胜或无复，后三年化疠，名曰金疠，其状如金疫也，治法如前。
现代文：又只如庚辰年，在上的庚与辰相合，交于司天已治天之位，而在下的乙未未得迁正，也就是上年甲午在泉的少阴未得退位，也属于上庚与下乙未能合德，也就是下乙的柔干失于与上庚刚干的配合，使金运小虚而小有胜气，或虽有胜气而无复气，其后三年化为疫疠，名叫金疠，其症状如金疫，治法同前。
English: In addition, just as in the year of Geng Chen, the upper G coincided with the Chen, and was handed over to the position of ruling heaven, while the lower B did not succeed in being transferred to the right, that is, the last year of the first year of the second year in the spring did not succeed in being abdicated, it also belongs to the upper G and the lower B failed to meet virtue, that is, the soft dryness of the lower B was lost in the cooperation with the upper G and the hard dry, so that the fortune was small and there was little victory, or although there was victory, there was no recovery, and the next three years turned into a plague, called

古文：假令壬午阳年太过，如辛巳天数有余者，虽交得壬午年也，厥阴犹尚治天；地已迁正，阳明在泉，去岁丙申少阳以作右间，即天厥阴而地阳明，故地不奉天者也。
现代文：假如壬午年，本为阳年太过，如果上年辛巳年司天的气数太过而有余，在时间上虽已交得壬午年，但厥阴风木仍居于司天之位；本年地气已经迁正，阳明在泉，去年丙申在泉的少阳已退为本年在泉的右间，这样，去年司天之厥阴不退位在上，本年在泉之阳明已迁正在下，因此，在泉的阳明不能奉和于司天的气化。
English: If it is the year of the dragon, the yang year is too much, if the number of qi in the previous year, the year of the dog, is too much and there is too much, although the time has been handed over to the year of the dragon, the yang wind tree is still in the position of the master; this year, the earth's qi has moved to the positive, the yang is in the spring, last year, the yang in the spring has retreated to the right of this year's spring, so last year, the yang in the spring has not retreated to the top, this year, the yang in the spring has moved to

古文：丁辛相合会，木运太虚，反受金胜，故非太过也，即蕤宾之管，太角不应，金行燥胜，火化热复，甚即速，微即徐，疫至大小善恶，推疫至之年天数及太一。
现代文：由于在上的辛与在下的丁相会，则本应太过的木运，却变虚而为金气所胜，所以就不是太过了，也就是蕤宾之律管，不应太角之音。金气行而燥气胜，木之子火气来复则热化，其后化成木疫，疫甚的发作迅速，疫微的发作徐缓，木疫发作的大小善恶，可以根据当年司天在泉之数的盛衰及太一游宫的情况去推断。
English: Because of the meeting of the upper pain and the lower ding, the wood luck that should have been too much, but became vain and was defeated by the gold gas, so it was not too much, that is, the law pipe of the gong, should not be the sound of the horn. The gold gas went and the dry gas won, the wood son of the fire gas came and heated up, and then turned into wood plague. The onset of the epidemic was rapid, the onset of the epidemic was slow, and the size of the wood plague could be inferred according to the rise and fall of the number of Siten in the spring and the situation of the palace.

古文：又只如壬午，如壬至午，且应交司而治天，即下丁酉未得迁正者，即地下丙申少阳未得退位者，且丁壬不合德也，即丁柔干失刚，亦木运小虚也，有小胜小复，后三年化疠，名曰木疠，其状如风疫也，治法如前。
现代文：又只如壬午年，在上的壬与午相合，交于司天已治天之位，而在下的丁酉未得迁正，也就是上年丙申在泉的少阳不得退位，也属于上壬与下丁未能合德，也就是下丁的干失与上壬刚干的配合，也可以使木运小虚，并有小的胜气与小的复气，其后三年化而为疠，名叫木疫，其症状与风疫相似，治法同前。
English: It is just like the Year of the Horse and the Horse. In the year of the Horse and the Horse, the Horse at the top coincided with the Horse and the Horse at the top, and the Horse at the bottom did not have to abdicate. That is to say, the Horse at the top and the Horse at the bottom did not have to abdicate. It also belongs to the Horse and the Horse at the top and the Horse at the bottom. That is to say, the Horse and the Horse at the bottom did not match. That is to say, the Horse and the Horse at the top and the Horse at the bottom did not match. The Horse and the Horse at the top and the Horse

古文：假令戊申阳年太过，如丁未天数太过者，虽交后戊申年也，太阴犹尚治天；地已迁正，厥阴在泉，去岁壬戌太阳以退位作右间，即天丁未，地癸亥，故地不奉天化也。
现代文：假如戊申年，本为阳年太过，如果上年丁未年司天的气数太过而有余，在时间上虽已交得戊申年，但太阴湿土仍居于司天之位；本年地气已经迁正，厥阴在泉，去年壬戌在泉的太阳已经退为本年在泉的右间，这样，去年丁未司天之太阴不退位而仍在上，本年癸亥在泉之厥阴已迁正在下，因此在泉的厥阴不能奉和于司天的气化。
English: If, in the year of Wu Shen, the present yang year is too much, if the number of qi in the previous year of Ding Wei year is too much and there is more than enough, although the time has been handed over to the year of Wu Shen, the moist soil is still in the position of the heaven; this year, the earth's qi has moved to the positive, the qi is in the spring, last year's sun in the spring has retreated to the right of this year's spring, so last year's Ding Wei day's qi is still on the up, this year's qi in the spring has moved to the down, so the

古文：丁癸相会，火运太虚，反受水胜，故非太过也，即夷则之管，上太徵不应。
现代文：由于在上的丁与在下的癸相会，则本应太过的火运，却变虚而为水气所胜，所以就不是太过了，也就是夷则之律管，不应太徵之音。
English: Since the upper ding and the lower gong meet, the fire luck that should have been too much, but turned out to be false and was defeated by the water vapor, so it is not too much, that is, it is the rule of the rules, and should not be too much.

古文：此戊癸失守其会，后三年化疫也，速至庚戌，大小善恶，推疫至之年天数及太一。
现代文：这样上戊与下癸失守其位而不得相会，其后三年化而为疫，迅速的至庚戌年便要发作，发作的大小善恶，可以根据当年司天之气的盛衰及太一游宫的情况去推断。
English: In this way, the upper and lower gongs lost their positions and could not meet, and then it turned into a three-year epidemic, and it would quickly occur in the year of the rooster. The size of the attack, good or evil, can be inferred according to the rise and fall of the qi of the emperor and the situation of the Taiyiyu Palace.

古文：又只如戊申，如戊至申，且迁交司而治天，即下癸亥未得迁正者，即地下壬戌太阳未退位者，见戊癸未合德也，即下癸柔干失刚，见火运小虚也，有小胜或无复也，后三年化疠，名曰火疠也，治法如前。
现代文：又只如戊申年，在上的戊与申相会，且应交于司天已治天之位，而在下的癸亥未得迁正，也就是上年壬戌在泉的太阳未得退位，属于上戌与下癸未能合德，即下癸的柔干失与上戌刚干的配合，使火运小虚，有小胜气，或虽有胜气而无复气，其后三年化而为疠，名叫火疠，治法同前。
English: It is just as in the Year of the Horse and the Horse, the Horse on the top meets the Horse on the bottom, and it should be handed over to the Lord of Heaven, who has already ruled the heavens, while the Horse on the bottom has not been transferred to the right, that is, the Sun on the previous year's Horse in the spring has not been abdicated. It belongs to the failure of the Upper and Lower Horses to be in harmony, that is, the loss of softness of the Lower Horses and the cooperation of hardness of the Upper Horses, so that the fire luck is small, there is a small victory, or although there is victory but no recovery, it will turn into a

古文：治之法，可寒之泄之。
现代文：其治法可以用寒法与泄法。
English: It can be cured by the cold method and the discharge method.

古文：黄帝曰：人气不足，天气如虚，人神失守，神光不聚，邪鬼干人，致有夭亡，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝说：人的正气不足，天气如不正常，则神志失守，神光不得聚敛，邪气伤人，导致暴亡，我可以听听这是什么道理吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "People's righteous energy is insufficient. If the weather is not normal, people will lose their sanity. The divine light cannot be concentrated. Wicked anger hurts people and leads to violent death. May I ask what is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：人之五藏，一藏不足，又会天虚，感邪之至也。
现代文：岐伯说：人的五脏，只要有一脏不足，又遇上岁气不及，就要感受邪气。
English: Qi Bo said: As long as a person's five internal organs are deficient in one organ, and they are too old, they must feel evil.

古文：人忧愁思虑即伤心，又或遇少阴司天，天数不及，太阴作接间至，即谓天虚也，此即人气天气同虚也。
现代文：人若过度忧愁思虑就要伤及心脏，又或遇少阴司天之年，天气不及，则间气太阴接之而至，这就是所谓天虚，也就是人气与天气同虚。
English: If a person is overly sad and worried, it will hurt his heart, or if the weather is not good, the weather will be too cloudy. This is the so-called natural deficiency, that is, the popularity and the weather are the same.

古文：又遇惊而夺精，汗出于心，因而三虚，神明失守。
现代文：又遇受到惊吓而劫夺精气，汗出而伤心之液，因而形成三虚，则神明失守。
English: In the case of being frightened and robbing energy, sweating and sad liquid, resulting in the formation of three defects, the gods are lost.

古文：心为君主之官，神明出焉，神失守位，即神游上丹田，在帝太一帝君泥丸宫下，神既失守，神光不聚，却遇火不及之岁，有黑尸鬼见之，令人暴亡。
现代文：心为一身之君主，神明由此而出，神明失守其位，则游离于丹田，也就是太一游宫的泥丸宫下，神既失守而不得聚敛，却又遇到火运不及之年，必有水疫之邪气发病，使人突然死亡。
English: The heart is the monarch of the body, from which the deities emerge. If the deities lose their position, they float away in Dantian, that is, under the muddy palace of the Taiyiyu Palace. Since the gods are lost and cannot be gathered, but they are too young for fire, there must be the evil disease of water plague, causing sudden death.

古文：人饮食劳倦即伤脾，又或遇太阴司天，天数不及，即少阳作接间至，即谓天虚也，此即人气虚而天气虚也。
现代文：人若饮食不节，劳倦过度就要伤脾，又或遇太阴司天之年，天气不及，则间气少阳接之而至，这就是所谓天虚，也就是人气虚与天气虚。
English: If one's diet is not regular and one is over-tired, one's spleen will be injured, or if the weather is not good in the year of the yin and yang, the intermittent qi will be followed by a lack of sun. This is the so-called heavenly deficiency, that is, the popularity deficiency and the weather deficiency.

古文：又遇饮食饱甚，汗出于胃，醉饱行房，汗出于脾，因而三虚，脾神失守。
现代文：又遇饮食过饱，汗出伤胃之液，或醉饱行房，汗出伤脾之液，因而形成三虚，则脾之神志失守。
English: In the case of eating too much, sweating out the liquid that hurts the stomach, or going to bed drunk, sweating out the liquid that hurts the spleen, thus forming three defects, the spleen's spirit is lost.

古文：脾为谏议之官，智周出焉，神既失守，神光失位而不聚也，却遇土不及之年，或己年或甲年失守，或太阴天虚；青尸鬼见之，令人卒亡。
现代文：脾的职能如谏议官，智谋周密自此而出，神既失守其位而不得聚敛，却又遇土运不及之年，或己年或甲年失守，或太阴天虚，必有土疫疠之邪气发病，使人突然死亡。
English: The function of the spleen is like that of a mediator, and the wisdom and strategy come from it. If a god loses his position and cannot be gathered, but if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if it is a year when the earth is unlucky, or if

古文：人久坐湿地，强力入水即伤肾。
现代文：人若久坐湿地，或强力劳动而又入水则必伤肾脏。
English: If a person sits in a wetland for a long time, or goes into the water after hard work, the kidney will be injured.

古文：肾为作强之官，伎巧出焉，因而三虚，肾神失守，神志失位，神光不聚，却遇水不及之年，或辛不会符，或丙年失守，或太阳司天虚，有黄尸鬼至见之，令人暴亡。
现代文：肾的职能是作强，一切技巧都由此而出，由于人虚加以天气虚，因而形成三虚，使肾的神志失守，神志失守其位而不得聚敛，却又遇水运不及之年，或辛年上辛与下丙不相符合，或丙年上丙与下辛失守其位，或太阳司天气不及，必有土疫邪气发病，使人突然死亡。
English: The function of the kidney is to make strength, and all techniques are derived from it. Due to the fact that the human body is weak, the weather is weak, resulting in the formation of three weaknesses. The spirit of the kidney is lost, the spirit loses its place and cannot be concentrated, but it is not the year of water transport, or the hard work of the year does not match the hard work of the year, or the hard work of the year and the hard work of the year lose their place, or the sun is not the weather, there must be a local epidemic evil disease, causing sudden death.

古文：人或恚怒，气逆上而不下，即伤肝也，又遇厥阴司天，天数不及，即少阴作接间至，是谓天虚也，此谓天虚人虚也。
现代文：人有时候忿怒，气上逆而不下，就要伤肝，又或遇厥阴司天，天气不及，则间气少阴接之而至，这就是所谓天虚，也就是天虚与人虚。
English: People sometimes get angry, and if their anger does not go down, it will hurt their liver. Or if the weather is bad, the weather is not good, then the weather is not good, and the weather is not good. This is the so-called "heavenly deficiency," that is, the "heavenly deficiency" and the "human deficiency."

古文：又遇疾走恐惧，汗出于肝，肝为将军之官，谋虑出焉，神位失守，神光不聚，又遇木不及年，或丁年不符，或壬年失守，或厥阴司天虚也，有白尸鬼见之，令人暴亡也。
现代文：又或遇急走中受到恐吓，则汗出而伤肝之液。肝的职能如将军，人的谋虑自此而出，神志失守其位而不聚敛，却又遇木运不及之年，或丁年上丁与下壬不相符合，或壬年上壬与下丁失守其位，或厥阴司天天气不及，必有金疫邪气发病，使人突然死亡。
English: The liver functions like a general, and people's deliberation comes from this. The spirit loses its place and does not gather, but it also encounters a year of bad luck, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match, or a year in which the top and bottom do not match.

古文：已上五失守者，天虚而人虚也，神游失守其位，即有五尸鬼干人，令人暴亡也，谓之曰尸厥。
现代文：上述五种失守其位，乃是由于天气虚与人气虚，致使神志游离失守其位，便会有五疫之邪伤人，使人突然死亡，名叫尸厥。
English: The above-mentioned five kinds of losing one's position are due to bad weather and bad popularity, resulting in the loss of one's position, there will be the evil of the five plagues, causing sudden death, called corpse.

古文：人犯五神易位，即神光不圆也，非但尸鬼，即一切邪犯者，皆是神失守位故也。
现代文：人犯了五脏神志易位，就会使神光不圆，不但是疫邪，一切邪气伤人，都是由于神志失守其位的缘故。
English: If a person commits the transposition of the five internal organs of the mind, it will make the divine light not round, not only the plague, all evil spirits hurt people, are due to the reason that the mind lost its place.

古文：此谓： 得守者生，失守者死；得神者昌，失神者亡。 
现代文：所以说： 神志内守的就可以生，神志失守的就要死亡。得神者就会安康，失神者就要死亡。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who keep their sanity can live, and those who lose their sanity will die. Those who gain God will be healthy, and those who lose their sanity will die.

