古文：莒太子仆弑纪公，以其宝来奔。
现代文：莒国的太子仆杀了纪公，带着宝物来投奔鲁国。
English: The prince's servant from the State of Min killed Ji Gong and fled to the State of Lu with the treasure.

古文：宣公使仆人以书命季文子曰： 夫莒太子不惮以吾故杀其君，而以其宝来，其爱我甚矣。
现代文：鲁宣公派仆人拿着公文去命令季文子说： 莒太子为了我无所顾忌地杀了他的国君，并带着他的宝物来投奔，他太好了。
English: Lu Xuan sent a servant with an official document to order Ji Wenzi to leave, saying: "For my sake, the crown prince killed his sovereign without any scruples and fled with his treasure. He was so kind."

古文：为我予之邑。今日必授，无逆命矣。 
现代文：替我封给他采邑，今天必须执行，不得违抗命令。 
English: Give him the fief for me. It must be done today. You must not disobey the order.

古文：里革遇之而更其书曰：夫莒太子杀其君而窃其宝来，不识穷固又求自迩，为我流之于夷。
现代文：里革遇见仆人，把公文的内容改为： 莒太子杀了他的国君，并偷窃了他的宝物来投奔，他不认识自己的穷凶顽固还想来接近我们，替我把他放逐到东夷去。
English: Lige met the servant and changed the content of the official document to: The crown prince killed his sovereign and stole his treasure to escape. He did not know his own obstinacy and wanted to get close to us and banish him to Dongyi for me.

古文：今日必通，无逆命矣。 
现代文：今天必须执行，不得违抗命令。 
English: Today must be carried out, orders must not be defied.

古文：明日，有司复命，公诘之，仆人以里革对。
现代文：次日，有关官员汇报命令执行情况，宣公责问他们，仆人便把里革的事告诉了宣公。
English: The next day, the relevant officials reported on the implementation of the order, the public announcement reprimanded them, and the servant told the public announcement about the Riga.

古文：公执之，曰： 违君命者，女亦闻之乎？ 
现代文：宣公把里革抓来问道： 违抗国君命令该当何罪，你听说过吗？ 
English: The proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation

古文：对曰： 臣以死奋笔，奚啻闻之也！
现代文：里革回答说： 我拼着一死奋笔改写公文，岂止是听说！
English: Rieger replied: "I worked my fingers to the bone to rewrite the official document, and that's not all I heard!

古文：臣闻之曰： 毁则者为贼，掩贼者为藏，窃宝者为宄，用宄之财者为奸。 
现代文：我还听说过： 破坏法纪的人是乱贼，掩匿乱贼的人是窝主，窃取财宝的人是内盗，用内盗财宝的人是奸邪。 
English: I have also heard: Those who break the law are bandits, those who cover up bandits are harborers, those who steal treasure are thieves, and those who use stolen treasure are traitors.

古文：使君为藏奸者，不可不去也。
现代文：会使国君成为窝主、奸邪的人，是不能不除去的。
English: It is essential to remove those who would turn the sovereign into a lair or a traitor.

古文：臣违君命者，亦不可不杀也。 
现代文：我违抗了国君的命令，也不能不处死。 
English: I disobeyed the sovereign's order, and I must die.

古文：公曰： 寡人实贪，非子之罪。 
现代文：宣公说： 我确实太贪心，不是你的罪过。 
English: The preacher said, "It is not your fault that I am too greedy.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：于是赦免了里革。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

