古文：○虞世基
现代文：○虞世基
English: ○Yu Shiji

古文：虞世基，字茂世，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：虞世基字茂世，会稽余姚人。
English: Yu Shiji character Mao Shiji, auditor Yu Yao people.

古文：父荔，陈太子中庶子。
现代文：父亲虞荔，陈国的太子中庶子。
English: His father, Yu Li, was an illegitimate son of the middle son of the prince of Chen.

古文：世基幼沉静，喜愠不形于色，博学有高才，兼善草隶。
现代文：世基小时即很沉静，喜怒不形于色，博学有高才，兼善草书、隶书。
English: Shiji was very quiet at that time, indifferent to joy and anger, well-educated and talented, and good at cursive and cursive writing.

古文：陈中书令孔奂见而曰： 南金之贵，属在斯人。 
现代文：陈国的中书令孔奂见了，感叹说： 南方人才之所以优秀，就因为有了这个人啊！ 
English: Chen Guo's Chinese calligrapher, Confucius, saw him and exclaimed, "The reason why Nanfang talent is excellent is because of this man!"

古文：少傅徐陵闻其名，召之，世基不往。
现代文：少傅徐陵听到他的大名，召他去，世基不去。
English: When Fu Xuling heard his name, he summoned Yu Shiji, but Yu Shiji did not come.

古文：后因公会，陵一见而奇之，顾谓朝士曰： 当今潘、陆也。 
现代文：后来因公聚会，徐陵一看见他，就惊奇不已，对大臣们说： 这是当今的潘岳、陆机呀！ 
English: Later, at a business meeting, as soon as Xu Ling saw him, he was astonished and said to the ministers: This is today's Pan Yue, the land plane!

古文：因以弟女妻焉。
现代文：因此把弟弟的女儿嫁给了他。
English: Therefore, he married his brother's daughter to Yu Shiji.

古文：仕陈，释褐建安王法曹参军事，历祠部殿中二曹郎、太子中舍人。
现代文：世基仕陈国，开始任建安王的法曹参军事，历任祠部殿中二曹郎、太子中舍人。
English: Chen Guo, the secretary of the world foundation, began to serve as the legal officer of King Jianan and participated in the military, successively serving as the second sergeant in the ancestral hall, and the prince in the prince.

古文：望云亭而载跸，礼升中而告成。
现代文：升任中庶子、散骑常侍、尚书左丞。
English: He was promoted to junior illegitimate son, horseback riding attendant, and Shoshozojo.

古文：实皇王之神武，信荡荡而难名者也。陈主嘉之，赐马一匹。
现代文：陈后主曾在莫府山打猎，让世基作《讲武赋》，世基就在座中献上此赋，陈后主很赞赏他，赐马一匹。
English: Empress Chen once went hunting in Mofu Mountain and asked Shiji to make "Talking about Martial Arts." Shiji presented this fu at the ceremony. Empress Chen appreciated him very much and gave him a horse.

古文：及陈灭归国，为通直郎，直内史省。
现代文：陈国灭亡之后，世基归顺隋国，任通直郎，在内史省值班。
English: After the demise of Chen Guo, Shiji surrendered to Sui Guo, and was assigned to Tong Nairo, who was on duty in the Ministry of History.

古文：贫无产业，每佣书养亲，怏怏不平。
现代文：他家贫无产业，每每为人抄书，以养父母家人，心里怏怏不平。
English: His family was poor and had no property. Everyone copied books in order to support their parents and family.

古文：尝为五言诗以见意，情理凄切，世以为工，作者莫不吟咏。
现代文：曾作五言诗以表达感情，情理凄切，世人认为作得很好，诗人们没有不吟咏的。
English: He once wrote a five-syllable poem to express his feelings. The world thought it was a great poem, and the poets had no choice but to sing it.

古文：未几，拜内史舍人。
现代文：不久，授为内史舍人。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Inner History Scholar.

古文：炀帝即位，顾遇弥隆。
现代文：炀帝即位后，对他更加礼遇。
English: The Sui and Qin emperors ascended the throne, and the favors were more plentiful.

古文：礼书监河东柳顾言博学有才，罕所推谢，至是与世基相见，叹曰： 海内当共推此一人，非吾侪所及也。 
现代文：秘书监河东人柳顾言博学有才，很少推重他人，到这时与世基相见，感叹说： 天下当会共同推许此人，他不是我们这些人所能赶得上的。 
English: Liu Guyan, the secretary-supervisor from the eastern part of the river, was well-educated and talented, and rarely pushed others. At this time, he met with Shiji and lamented: The world should jointly recommend this person, he is not what we can catch up with.

古文：俄迁内史侍郎，以母忧去职，哀毁骨立。
现代文：世基不久迁任内史侍郎，因遭母丧而离职，悲哀过度，只存一副骨头架子。
English: Shiki was soon transferred to the position of Naishi waiter, but left the position due to his mother's death. He was too sad, and only a skeleton remains.

古文：有诏起令视事，拜见之日，殆不能起，帝令左右扶之。
现代文：有诏书令他复职管事。拜见皇上那一天，他差点站不起来，皇上让左右扶他起来，同情他那骨瘦如柴的样子，让他吃肉。
English: On the day of his meeting with the emperor, he could hardly stand up. The emperor asked his right and left aides to help him up, sympathized with his scrawny appearance, and let him eat meat.

古文：哀其羸瘠，诏令进肉，世基食辄悲哽，不能下。帝使谓之曰： 方相委任，当为国惜身。 
现代文：世基一吃肉，就悲哽不已，不能下咽。皇上让人对他说： 正委任你作官，你要为国家珍惜自己的身体。 
English: As soon as Shiji ate meat, he was overcome with grief and could not swallow. The emperor had someone say to him: You are being appointed as an official, you must value your body for the country.

古文：前后敦劝者数矣。
现代文：前后几次劝他。
English: She consoled him sincerely many times.

古文：帝重其才，亲礼逾厚，专典机密，与纳言苏威、左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴等参掌朝政。
现代文：皇上重视他的才干，对他很亲近很礼遇，让他专管机密，与纳言苏威、左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴等掌管朝政。
English: Emperor Xuan valued his talent, and treated him more generously. He was in sole charge of secrets, and participated in the management of imperial politics with Nagan Su Wei, General Zuo Wei Yu Wenshu, Yellow Gate chamberlain Pei Keng, and Grand Historian Pei Yun.

古文：于时天下多事，四方表奏日有百数。
现代文：那时天下多事，四方的表奏每天都有数以百计的。
English: At that time, there were a lot of things going on in the world, and there were hundreds of performances every day.

古文：帝方凝重，事不庭决，入閤之后，始召世基口授节度。
现代文：炀帝那时正显示老成持重，不在朝廷上断事，而是在入阁之后，才召世基去，口授旨意。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan was showing the importance of seniority, and did not adjudicate matters in the imperial court, but only after entering the cabinet, he summoned Shiji to dictate his will.

古文：世基至省，方为敕书，日且百纸，无所遗谬。
现代文：世基回到省里后，才起草诏书，每天都要写上百张纸，没什么遗漏错误。
English: It was only after Shiji returned to the province that he drafted the edict. He had to write a hundred pieces of paper every day, and there were no mistakes.

古文：其精审如是。
现代文：他就是这样精确严密。
English: That's how precise and meticulous he is.

古文：辽东之役，进位金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：辽东战争后，世基升任金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, Yu Shiji was promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：后从幸雁门，帝为突厥所围，战士多败。
现代文：后随炀帝到雁门，炀帝被突厥人包围，战士们多遭失败。
English: Later, they followed Emperor Gong to the Wild Goose Gate. Emperor Gong was surrounded by Turks, and the soldiers suffered many defeats.

古文：世基劝帝重为赏格，亲自抚循，又下诏停辽东之事。
现代文：世基劝炀帝多用重赏，亲自安抚将士，又下诏书暂停讨伐辽东的战事。
English: The World Foundation advised Emperor Gong to reward generously, personally pacify the soldiers, and issue an edict to suspend the war against Liaodong.

古文：帝从之，师乃复振。
现代文：炀帝听了他的建议，军心这才重新振作起来。
English: Emperor Xuan listened to Yu Shiji's advice, and morale began to pick up again.

古文：及围解，勋格不行，又下伐辽之诏。由是言其诈众，朝野离心。
现代文：雁门之围被解后，赏赐没兑现，又下了讨伐辽东的诏书，因此世人说炀帝骗人，朝野离心离德。
English: After the siege of the Wild Goose Gate was lifted, the reward was not honored, and an edict was issued to fight against Liaodong. Therefore, the world said that the emperor was a liar, and the emperor and the country were separated from Germany.

古文：长子肃，好学多才艺，时人称有家风。
现代文：炀帝巡幸江都，途中住在巩县。世基因盗贼一天比一天厉害，请皇上发兵屯驻在洛口仓，以防不测。
English: Emperor Gao was on a tour of the Yangtze River capital, and on the way he stayed in Gong County. The thieves of the world were getting more and more powerful every day, so he asked the emperor to send troops to stay in Lokuchang, just in case.

古文：弱冠早没。肃弟熙，大业末为符玺郎。
现代文：炀帝不听，只回答说： 你是书生，一定还很害怕。 
English: Hao Di did not listen and only replied, "You are a scholar, you must still be very scared."

古文：次子柔、晦，并宣义郎。化及将乱之夕，宗人虞亻及知而告熙曰： 事势以然，吾将济卿南渡，且得免祸，同死何益！ 
现代文：那时天下大乱，世基知道炀帝无法劝阻，又因高赹、张衡等人相继被杀，怕自己遭祸，所以虽任近臣，也只是唯唯诺诺，不敢忤逆炀帝的心意。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil. The World Foundation knew that Emperor Gong could not be dissuaded, and because Gao Tong, Zhang Heng and others were killed one after another, they were afraid of suffering misfortune. Therefore, although they were close vassals, they were only obedient and did not dare to go against Emperor Gong's will.

古文：熙谓亻及曰： 弃父背君，求生何地？
现代文：盗贼一天比一天厉害，郡县多被攻陷。
English: Thieves are getting more powerful every day, and more counties have been invaded.

古文：感尊之怀，自此诀矣。 
现代文：世基知道炀帝厌恶多次听到这类消息，于是少交表状，不告诉实情。
English: The World Foundation knew that Emperor Xuan disliked hearing this kind of news many times, so it submitted fewer forms and did not tell the truth.

古文：及难作，兄弟竞请先死，行刑人于是先世基杀之。
现代文：因此后来外面有巨变，炀帝也不知道。
English: As a result, there were drastic changes on the outside, and Emperor Gong did not know about it.

古文：○裴蕴
现代文：○裴蕴
English: ○ Baekhyun

古文：裴蕴，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴蕴，河东闻喜人。
English: Baekin, the hero of the Hedong story.

古文：祖之平，梁卫将军。
现代文：祖父裴之平，梁国的卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Pei Zhiping, was a general of the National Guard of Liang Province.

古文：父忌，陈都官尚书，与吴明彻同没于周，赐爵江夏郡公，在隋十余年而卒。
现代文：父亲裴忌，陈国的都官尚书，与吴明彻一起，被北周俘虏，赐爵江夏郡公，入隋十几年后去世。
English: His father Pei Jie, the governor of Chen Province, together with Wu Ming Che, was captured by the Northern Zhou Dynasty and given the title of the governor of Jiangxia County. He died more than ten years after entering the Sui Dynasty.

古文：蕴性明辩，有吏干。
现代文：裴蕴生性明辩，有吏才。
English: Baekhyun is a natural debater, and has the ability to deal with officials.

古文：在陈仕历直阁将军、兴宁令。
现代文：在陈国时，历任直阁将军、兴宁县令。
English: At the time of Chen Guo, the successive generals of Zhougu and the Xingning County were in power.

古文：蕴以其父在北，阴奉表于高祖，请为内应。
现代文：裴蕴因其父亲在北方，偷偷奉表给高祖，请求当内应。
English: Because his father was in the north, Pei Yun secretly sent a letter to Gao Zu, requesting immediate response.

古文：及陈平，上悉阅江南衣冠之士，次至蕴，上以为夙有向化之心，超授仪同。
现代文：平定陈国后，皇上全部看了江南文士的材料，到裴蕴，皇上因他向有向化忠隋之心，越级提拔他当仪同。
English: After subduing Chen Guo, the emperor looked at all the materials of the writers from the south of the Yangtze River. As for Pei Yun, the emperor promoted him to a higher rank because of his loyalty to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：左仆射高颎不悟上旨，进谏曰： 裴蕴无功于国，宠逾伦辈，臣未见其可。 
现代文：左仆射高赹未领会皇上的意图，劝谏说： 裴蕴无功于国，但他得到的宠爱超过了同辈人，我看不出这样作有什么合适。 
English: The left-hand servant, Gao Jian, did not understand the emperor's intention and advised him, "Pei Yun has no merit in the country, but he is favored more than his contemporaries. I do not see how this is appropriate.

古文：上又加蕴上仪同，颎复进谏，上曰： 可加开府。 
现代文：皇上又加授裴蕴上仪同。高赹又劝告，皇上说： 可加授裴蕴开府。 
English: Emperor Gaozong also advised that Emperor Gaozong said, "You can award Pei Yun the same honor as Emperor Gaozong.

古文：颎乃不敢复言，即日拜开府仪同三司，礼赐优洽。
现代文：高赹才不敢再说，当即授他开府仪同三司，礼遇优宠。
English: Gao Yao did not dare to say it again, and he was immediately given the ceremony of opening the government and the three offices. He was treated with great courtesy.

古文：历洋、直、隶三州刺史，俱有能名。
现代文：裴蕴历任洋州、直州、棣州三刺史，俱有能干之名。
English: Pei Yun successively held the posts of Yangzhou, Zhouzhou and Zhangzhou three-pronged history, all of which have the reputation of being capable.

古文：大业初，考绩连最。
现代文：大业初，裴蕴的政绩，经过考察，连年第一。
English: In the first year of my career, my performance was the best year after year.

古文：炀帝闻其善政，征为太常少卿。
现代文：炀帝听说他善于为政，调他当太常少卿。
English: Emperor Qian heard that he was good at politics, and promoted him to the position of Shaoqing.

古文：初，高祖不好声技，遣牛弘定乐，非正声清商及九部四儛之色，皆罢遣从民。
现代文：起初，高祖不好声色，派牛弘定乐，只要不是正声、清商及九部四亻舞之色，全部不要，让其到民间去。
English: At first, Gao Zu did not have a good voice, and sent Niu Hongding to play music. As long as it was not the color of the positive voice, the clear merchant and the nine four-part dance, he did not want it all, and let it go to the folk.

古文：至是，蕴揣知帝意，奏括天下周、齐、梁、陈乐家子弟，皆为乐户。
现代文：到现在，裴蕴揣摩到炀帝的意思，上奏炀帝，把天下周、齐、梁、陈各国的乐家子弟，都搜来当乐户。
English: In the current situation, Pei Yun speculated on the meaning of Emperor Gong, and invited the children of the vocal music families of the four dynasties of Luo, Zhou, Qi, Liang and Chen to play as musicians.

古文：其六品已下，至于民庶，有善音乐及倡优百戏者，皆直太常。
现代文：六品官以下，一直到庶民百姓，凡有善于音乐和倡优百戏的，全部到太常当值。
English: From the sixth grade officials and below, all the way down to the common people, all those who are good at music and advocating excellent hundred plays, all go to Taizhong.

古文：是后异技淫声咸萃乐府，皆置博士弟子，递相教传，增益乐人至三万余。
现代文：此后异技淫声全部汇集到乐府，各行各当都设博士弟子，让其转相教习，把乐人增加到三万多人。
English: After that, all the musicians with different skills were brought together at the Music Academy, and all schools were required to set up doctoral students to allow them to learn in a different way, increasing the number of musicians to more than 30,000.

古文：帝大悦，迁民部侍郎。
现代文：炀帝很高兴，升他为民部侍郎。
English: Emperor Xuan was so pleased that he promoted him to the position of the people's minister.

古文：于时犹承高祖和平之后，禁网疏阔，户口多漏。
现代文：那时，尚承高祖和平之后，法网疏阔，户口多有遗漏。
English: At that time, after the peace of Shangcheng Gaozu, the legal network was broad, and there were many omissions in the household registration.

古文：或年及成丁，犹诈为小，未至于老，已免租赋。
现代文：有的已经成年，仍说还小；有的还未年老，就已免除了赋税。
English: Some have become children and are still fraudulently called children, and some have not reached old age and have been exempted from tax.

古文：蕴历为刺史，素知其情，因是条奏，皆令貌阅。
现代文：裴蕴历任刺史，素知其内情。因此逐条奏告皇上，让一个个目测。
English: Pei Yun, who has been a historian, knew about this situation, so he recorded the stories one by one and had everyone's appearance checked.

古文：若一人不实，则官司解职，乡正里长皆远流配。
现代文：如有一人情况不属实，那么有关官员就要被解职，乡正和里长都要被流放到远方。
English: If one person's situation is not true, then the relevant officials will be dismissed, and the head of the township and the head of the village will be exiled to a distant place.

古文：又许民相告，若纠得一丁者，令被纠之家代输赋役。
现代文：又允许百姓互相告状，如纠察到一个谎报年龄的壮丁，就让被纠察的那一家，世世代代为他交税和代他作劳役。
English: It also allowed the people to inform on each other, and if anything was found to be hidden, the family of the person who was caught would be made to pay taxes and labor service.

古文：是岁大业五年也，诸郡计帐，进丁二十四万三千，新附口六十四万一千五百。
现代文：这一年是大业五年。诸郡计算，增加壮丁二十四万三千，新近归顺的人口有六十四万一千五百。
English: This year is the fifth year of the Great Leap Forward. Counted by counties, the number of able-bodied men has increased by 243,000 and the newly-converted population has increased by 641,500.

古文：帝临朝览状，谓百官曰： 前代无好人，致此罔冒。
现代文：炀帝上朝看了报告，对百官说： 前朝没有好人，以至被蒙骗。
English: The Emperor of the Sui and Song dynasties, who was in the imperial court, looked at the report and said to the hundred officials: There were no good people in the previous generation, which led to this kind of deception and presumption.

古文：今进民户口皆从实者，全由裴蕴一人用心。
现代文：现在增加户口都从实的原因，全因裴蕴一个人用心。
English: Now, the reasons for increasing the hukou are all real, all because of Pei Yun's one-man effort.

古文：古语云，得贤而治，验之信矣。 
现代文：古话说，得到贤人，天下就大治了。
English: According to an ancient saying, if you get a wise man, the world will be governed well.

古文：由是渐见亲委，拜京兆赞治，发擿纤毫，吏民慑惮。
现代文：看来真是这样啊！ 因此，裴蕴渐渐被亲近重用，授他为京兆赞治。他即使连一丝一毫的问题都要处理，官吏百姓都很怕他。
English: It seems that this is indeed the case! As a result, Baekhyun gradually came to be used more and more, and he was given the title of Beijing Zhao Zanzhi. He had to deal with even the slightest problems, and the officials and people were very afraid of him.

古文：未几，擢授御史大夫，与裴矩、虞世基参掌机密。
现代文：不久，提拔他当御史大夫，与裴矩、虞世基参予掌管机密。
English: Soon, Pei Yun was promoted to the position of imperial historian, and participated in the management of secrets together with Pei An and Yu Shiji.

古文：蕴善候伺人主微意，若欲罪者，则曲法顺情，锻成其罪。
现代文：裴蕴善于揣摩炀帝细微的心理活动，炀帝想加罪的，他就曲法顺情，构成其罪。
English: Pei Yun is good at guessing the subtle psychological activities of Emperor Gong. If Emperor Gong wants to add to his crime, he will compose a song to suit his mood, constituting his crime.

古文：所欲宥者，则附从轻典，因而释之。
现代文：炀帝想原谅的，裴蕴就随之减轻处罚，因而释放别人。
English: If Emperor Xuan wanted to forgive, Pei Yun would reduce the punishment and release others.

古文：是后大小之狱皆以付蕴，宪部大理莫敢与夺，必禀承进止，然后决断。
现代文：此后大小案件都交给裴蕴办，司法部门不敢与他争夺，总是按他的意思，然后作出判断。
English: Since then, large and small cases have been handed over to the Pei Yun Office, and the judicial department does not dare to compete with him, always according to his will, and then make a judgment.

古文：蕴亦机辩，所论法理，言若悬河，或重或轻，皆由其口，剖析明敏，时人不能致诘。
现代文：裴蕴也很机灵善辩，说起法理来，口若悬河，或重或轻，都由他口里决定。他又很会剖析案情，时人不能反问他。
English: Peiyun was also quick-witted and discerning. When discussing the criminal law of the code, his mouth was like a river. Regardless of the severity of the punishment, it was all determined by Peiyun. He was keen on dissection and argumentation, so people at the time could not have any doubts.

古文：杨玄感之反也，帝遣蕴推其党与，谓蕴曰： 玄感一呼而从者十万，益知天下人不欲多，多即相聚为盗耳。
现代文：杨玄感造反时，炀帝派裴蕴追究他的党羽，对裴蕴说： 杨玄感一呼，而随从他的有十万之众，更知天下人不要多，多了只是相聚为盗罢了。
English: When Yang Xuanquan rebelled, Emperor Qian sent Pei Rong to investigate his followers. He said to Pei Rong: Yang Xuanquan called out once, but he has a hundred thousand people following him. Moreover, he knows that there should not be too many people in the world. If there are too many people, they are just gathering to steal.

古文：不尽加诛，则后无以劝。 
现代文：不都杀掉，那么以后就无法劝戒。 
English: If we don't kill them all, we won't be able to discipline the next generation.

古文：蕴由是乃峻法治之，所戮者数万人，皆籍没其家。
现代文：裴蕴因此就严法究治，所杀的有几万人，都登记没收家财。
English: As a result, Peiyun was investigated and punished according to strict laws. Tens of thousands of people were killed, and all of them were registered for confiscation of family assets.

古文：帝大称善，赐奴婢十五口。
现代文：炀帝大称很好，赐他奴婢十五口。
English: Emperor Yao was very appreciative and gave Baekhyun fifteen male and female slaves.

古文：司隶大夫薛道衡以忤意获谴，蕴知帝恶之，乃奏曰： 道衡负才恃旧，有无君之心。
现代文：司隶大夫薛道衡因忤逆炀帝旨意而被责备。裴蕴知道炀帝厌恶他，于是上奏说： 道衡恃才气，靠旧恩，有无君之心。
English: Sifu doctor Xue Daoheng was scorned for violating Emperor Xuan's will. Pei Yun knew that Emperor Xuan hated Xue Daoheng, so he said: Xue Daoheng is arrogant and talented, but he is an old minister, and he has no monarch in his heart.

古文：见诏书每下，便腹非私议，推恶于国，妄造祸端。
现代文：每次看到诏书下来，便不以为然，而私下议论，把错处都推给皇上，妄造祸端。
English: Every time they see an imperial edict, they inwardly blame and criticize it, push their own malice onto the country, and wantonly create calamity.

古文：论其罪名，似如隐昧，源其情意，深为悖逆。 
现代文：论其罪名，好像不太好定，但追查他的心意，实际上他深为悖逆。 
English: As for his crime, it seems to be obscure and obscure, and to explore the source of his feelings, he is very rebellious and rebellious.

古文：帝曰： 然。
现代文：炀帝说： 对。
English: Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：我少时与此人相随行役，轻我童稚，共高颎、贺若弼等外擅威权，自知罪当诬惣。
现代文：我小时和这个人一起行役，他轻视我年幼不懂事，与高赹、贺若弼等人外擅威权，自知有诬陷之罪。
English: When I was a child, I served with this man. He despised me for being young and inexperienced, and abused his authority with people like Gao Qi and He Ruoqi. He knew that he was guilty of frame-up.

古文：及我即位，怀不自安，赖天下无事，未得反耳。
现代文：我即位后，他心里不安。好在天下太平无事，未能造反罢了。
English: After I ascended the throne, he was uneasy in his heart. Fortunately, the world was at peace, and he was unable to rebel.

古文：公论其逆，妙体本心。 
现代文：你论他的叛逆，非常符合我的心意。 
English: You think he's being rebellious, but he's just realised what I'm up to.

古文：于是诛道衡。
现代文：于是杀了薛道衡。
English: So he killed Xue Daoheng.

古文：又帝问苏威以讨辽之策，威不愿帝复行，且欲令帝知天下多贼，乃诡答曰： 今者之役，不愿发兵，但诏赦群盗，自可得数十万。
现代文：另外，炀帝问苏威讨伐辽东的计策，苏威不希望炀帝再去打辽东，而且想让炀帝知道天下多有造反的盗贼，于是回答说： 现在去打仗，不要调兵，只要下诏书赦免群盗，自可得几十万人。
English: In addition, Emperor Zhou asked Su Wei about the strategy of fighting against Liaodong. Su Wei did not want Emperor Zhou to fight against Liaodong again, and wanted to let Emperor Zhou know how many rebellious thieves there are in the world. So he replied: Go to war now, do not send troops, as long as you issue an edict to pardon the bandits, you can get hundreds of thousands of people.

古文：遣关内奴贼及山东历山飞、张金称等头别为一军，出辽西道，诸河南贼王薄、孟让等十余头并给舟楫，浮沧海道，必喜于免罪，竞务立功，一岁之间，可灭高丽矣。 
现代文：派关内的奴贼和华山东边的历山飞、张金称等头领组成一支人马，出辽西道；黄河南的反贼王薄、孟让等十几个头领，都给舟楫，浮沧海道，他们必定高兴被免罪，竞相立功，一年之间，可以消灭高丽了。 
English: The bandits in Zhuguang and the leaders such as Leshanfei and Zhang Jinrong in the east of Huashan formed a team and set out for the west of Liao Dao; the anti-bandit Wang Bo and Meng Zhan in the south of the Yellow River and more than a dozen other leaders all went to Zhouzhuang and Fucang Dao. They must be happy to be exonerated and compete for merits. Within a year, they can eliminate Goryeo.

古文：帝不怿曰： 我去尚犹未克，鼠窃安能济乎？ 
现代文：炀帝不高兴说： 我去尚未打下来，鼠辈怎能成大事？ 
English: Emperor Xuan was not happy and said, "I haven't been defeated yet, how can a mouse become a great man?"

古文：威出后，蕴奏曰： 此大不逊，天下何处有许多贼！ 
现代文：苏威出去后，裴蕴上奏道： 他这么说真是太不应该，天下哪里有这么多反贼？ 
English: After Su Wei went out, Pei Yun said: This man is too disrespectful. Where in the world are there so many thieves?

古文：帝悟曰： 老革多奸，将贼胁我。
现代文：炀帝明白过来说： 老东西很奸猾，用反贼来威胁我。
English: Zou Di Guoxu said: Su Wei, the old thief, is more treacherous and threatens me with thieves.

古文：欲搭其口，但隐忍之，诚极难耐。 
现代文：想和他搭个口争辩吧，他又隐晦得很，我真是很难忍耐。 
English: You want to use his mouth, so you just tolerate it. He's really hard to put up with.

古文：蕴知上意，遣张行本奏威罪恶，帝付蕴推鞫之，乃处其死。
现代文：裴蕴知道皇上的心意，派张行本告苏威有罪，炀帝把苏威交给裴蕴推问，裴蕴于是想把他处死。
English: Knowing the Emperor's intention, Baekhyun sent Zhang Xing to record Su Wei's crimes in a book. Emperor Baekhyun handed Su Wei over to Baekhyun for trial, and then killed Su Wei.

古文：帝曰： 未忍便杀。 
现代文：炀帝说： 还不忍心马上杀他。 
English: Emperor Qian said, "If you can't bear it, kill it."

古文：遂父子及孙三世并除名。
现代文：于是把他家父、子、孙三代都除名为民。
English: As a result, Suwei's father, son and three generations of grandchildren were all removed from the family register.

古文：蕴又欲重己权势，令虞世基奏罢司隶刺史以下官属，增置御史百余人。
现代文：裴蕴又想加重自己的权势，让虞世基报告罢了司隶刺史以下的官吏，增加御史一百多人。
English: Pei Yun also wanted to increase his own power. He asked Yu Shiji to remove the officials who were subordinate to officials below Shishi, and to add more than a hundred people to Shishi.

古文：于是引致奸黠，共为朋党，郡县有不附者，阴中之。
现代文：于是，裴蕴招致奸猾之徒，一起结成朋党。郡县有不依附他的，就偷偷地中伤人，害别人。
English: As a result, Baekhyun invited treacherous people and formed a crony party with them. Some counties and counties did not adhere to him, and he secretly slandered and harmed others.

古文：于时军国多务，凡是兴师动众，京都留守，及与诸蕃互市，皆令御史监之。
现代文：当时国家多事，凡是兴师动众，京师留守，及与各蕃国互作买卖，都让御史监视。
English: At this time, there were many events in the country, and whenever there was a need to motivate people to study and stay in Kyoto, or when there was a need for the various domains and towns to trade with each other, the governor was ordered to supervise the situation.

古文：宾客附隶，遍于郡国，侵扰百姓，帝弗之知也。
现代文：裴家的门客和依附的隶人，遍布在郡国。他们侵扰百姓，炀帝不知道。
English: Guests and all kinds of dependents are all over the county, abusing and harassing the people, and the emperor does not know these things.

古文：以渡辽之役，进位银青光禄大夫。
现代文：因辽东战争，他升任银青光禄大夫。
English: Due to the Liaodong War, he was promoted to the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu.

古文：及司马德戡将为乱，江阳长张惠绍夜驰告之。
现代文：到司马德戡将造反作乱时，江阳县张惠绍夜里奔驰而来报告情况。
English: When Sima Dejun was about to rebel and create a disturbance, Zhang Huishao of Jiangyang County arrived at night in a Mercedes to report the situation.

古文：蕴共惠绍谋，欲矫诏发郭下兵民，尽取荣公来护兒节度，收在外逆党宇文化及等，仍发羽林殿脚，遣范富娄等入自西苑，取梁公萧钜及燕王处分，扣门援帝。
现代文：裴蕴与惠绍谋划，想假传圣旨调发郭下的兵民，都交给荣公来护儿指挥，逮捕在外的逆党宇文化及等，再调羽林军殿后，派范富娄等从西苑进来，交给梁公萧钜和燕王指挥，守住宫门，扣押皇上。
English: Pei Yun and Hui Shao planned to transfer the soldiers and people under the Guo, who wanted to falsely preach the holy will, to the Rong Gong to guard the command, arrest the outside anti-party culture and so on, and then transfer the Ulin Army Hall, send Fan Fuxiong and so on to come in from the West Garden, give the command to Liang Gong Xiaojun and Yan Wang, guard the palace gate, and detain the emperor.

古文：谋议已定，遣报虞世基。
现代文：谋划已定，派人报告虞世基。
English: The planning discussion has been decided, send someone to report to Yu Shiji.

古文：世基疑反者不实，抑其计。
现代文：世基怀疑反叛事不可靠，没支持这一计谋。
English: Yu Shiji suspected that the rebellion was not true, so he suppressed Pei Yun's plot.

古文：须臾，难作，蕴叹曰： 谋及播郎，竟误人事。 
现代文：过了不久，大难发生了。裴蕴感叹说： 原想与你这个博学之士谋划，你却误了大事！ 
English: Soon after, the great calamity occurred. Baekhyun lamented, "I wanted to make a plan with you, a learned man, but you missed the big event!

古文：遂见害。
现代文：于是被杀。
English: He was killed.

古文：子愔为尚辇直长，亦同日死。
现代文：儿子裴忄音为尚书辇直长，也同日被杀。
English: Pei's son, Shang Shuxuan Zhichang, was also killed on the same day.

古文：○裴矩
现代文：○裴矩
English: ○ Pei Minoru

古文：裴矩，字弘大，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴矩字弘大，是河东闻喜人。
English: Pei Momoku, also known as Hongdae, is a famous actor from Hedong.

古文：祖他，魏都官尚书。
现代文：祖父裴他，曾任魏国都官尚书。
English: His grandfather, Pei Ta, was a former official of the capital of Wei Dynasty.

古文：父讷之，齐太子舍人。
现代文：父亲裴讷之，曾任北齐太子舍人。
English: His father, Pei Ne Zhi, was once the Prince of Northern Qi.

古文：矩襁褓而孤，及长好学，颇爱文藻，有智数。
现代文：裴矩在襁褓中就成了孤儿，到长大成人，勤奋好学，很爱好写文章，有聪明才智。
English: Pei-Ming became an orphan when he was a toddler. When he became an adult, he was diligent and eager to learn, loved to write, and was very intelligent.

古文：世父让之谓矩曰： 观汝神识，足成才士，欲求宦达，当资干世之务。 
现代文：伯父裴让之对他说： 看你超凡的才识，足以成为人才，但是要求得为官显达，还应学习一些处理世事的学问。 
English: Uncle Pei Janzhi said to him: Look at your extraordinary talent, it is enough to become a talent, but it is required to be a dignified official, and you should also learn some knowledge of dealing with the world.

古文：矩始留情世事。
现代文：裴矩开始留心当时的政事。
English: Pei-Ming began to pay attention to the politics of the time.

古文：齐北平王贞为司州牧，辟为兵曹从事，转高平王文学。
现代文：北齐北平王高贞做司州牧，征召裴矩做兵曹从事，随后，又转任高平王文学从事。
English: North Qi Beiping King Gao Zhen served as the state pastor, recruited Pei An to serve as a petty officer, and then transferred to Gao Ping Wang to engage in literature.

古文：及齐亡，不得调。
现代文：直到北齐灭亡，裴矩都没有得到调迁。
English: Until the demise of Beiqi, Pei Zhen had not been transferred at all.

古文：高祖为定州总管，召补记室，甚亲敬之。
现代文：高祖做定州总管，召来裴矩并授给他记室职务，很亲近尊重他。
English: Gaozu, as the governor of Dingzhou, summoned Pei Rong and gave him the post of secretary. He was very close to and respected him.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：后来，裴矩因母亲去世离了职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：高祖作相，遣使者驰召之，参相府记室事。
现代文：高祖做国相后，派使者骑快马召来裴矩，让他参与相府记室事务。
English: After Gaozu became the minister of state, he sent an envoy on a fast horse to summon Pei Rong and let him participate in the affairs of the cabinet secretary's office.

古文：及受禅，迁给事郎，奏舍人事。
现代文：到高祖受禅得到皇位，他又迁升为给事郎，掌管舍人要事。
English: After Emperor Gaozhu was enthroned, he was promoted to the position of Zhezhuang, in charge of important matters.

古文：伐陈之役，领元帅记室。
现代文：在讨伐陈的战事中，他又兼任元帅记室。
English: When attacking Chen Guo, he was assigned to the marshal's office.

古文：既破丹阳，晋王广令矩与高颎收陈图籍。
现代文：隋军已经攻破丹阳，晋王杨广让裴矩同高赹收集陈国的地图和户籍。
English: After defeating Danyang, the Jin king Yang Guang ordered Pei Rong and Gao Yao to receive the books and classics of Chen Guo.

古文：明年，奏诏巡抚岭南，未行而高智慧、汪文进等相聚作乱，吴、越道闭，上难遣矩行。
现代文：次年，奉诏巡抚岭南，还没起程，就遇上高智慧、汪文进等聚众作乱，吴、越一带道路被堵塞，皇上难以派遣裴矩前去。
English: The following year, the imperial order was issued to dispatch the governor of Lingnan, but before he set off, he encountered Gao Zhizhong, Wang Wenzhin and others who gathered to make trouble. Roads in Wu and Yue were blocked, and it was difficult for the emperor to send Pei Neng forward.

古文：矩请速进，上许之。
现代文：裴矩请求迅速出发，皇上同意了。
English: Pei-Ming requested a speedy departure, and the emperor agreed.

古文：行至南康，得兵数千人。
现代文：走到南康，获得数千兵卒。
English: Walked to Nankang, got thousands of soldiers.

古文：时俚帅王仲宣逼广州，遣其所部将周师举围东衡州。
现代文：当时，俚人的元帅王仲宣逼进广州，并派遣部将周师举围攻东衡州。
English: At that time, Wang Zhongxuan, the marshal of Xingren, forced his way into Guangzhou, and dispatched a detachment of Zhou division to besiege Donghengzhou.

古文：矩与大将军鹿愿赴之，贼立九栅，屯大庾岭，共为声援。
现代文：裴矩同大将军鹿愿赶到那里，贼军已经设置了很多栅栏，兵马驻扎在大庾岭，互为援助。
English: Pei Jian and General Deer would like to get there, the bandits have set up a lot of fences, and soldiers and horses are stationed in Dalatling to help each other.

古文：矩进击破之，贼惧，释东衡州，据原长岭。
现代文：裴矩进兵攻破敌人，贼军害怕，就放弃了东衡州，占据原长岭。
English: Pei Jian marched into the army to break through the enemy, and the thief army was afraid, so they abandoned Donghengzhou and occupied the original Changling.

古文：又击破之，遂斩师举，进军自南海援广州。
现代文：裴矩又进兵攻破原长岭，于是斩周师举。接着，他又从南海发兵援助广州。
English: Pei Jian also marched into the army to break through the original Changling, and then defeated Zhou Shifu. Next, he sent troops from the South China Sea to aid Guangzhou.

古文：仲宣惧而溃散。
现代文：王仲宣因害怕就溃逃了。
English: Wang Zhongxuan fled in fear.

古文：矩所绥集者二十余州，又承制署其渠帅为刺史、县令。
现代文：裴矩安抚的地区有二十多个州，又按隋朝制度设置官职，安排那些首领任刺史、县令。
English: There are more than 20 prefectures in the region pacified by Pei Ru, and the official posts were set up according to the Sui Dynasty system, and the leaders were appointed as chief historian and county magistrate.

古文：及还报，上大悦，命升殿劳苦之，顾谓高颎，杨素曰： 韦洸将二万兵，不能早度岭，朕每患其兵少。
现代文：等到回报皇上，皇上非常高兴，让他上殿慰劳他。皇上对高赹、杨素说： 韦氵光率领二万士兵，不能早过庾岭，我还时时担心他的兵少。
English: The Emperor was very pleased and let him go to the palace to console him. The Emperor said to Gao Wei and Yang Su, "Wei Bingguang led twenty thousand soldiers and could not cross the Jiaoling Mountains early. I was always worried that he was short of soldiers."

古文：裴矩以三千敝卒，径至南康。有臣若此，朕亦何忧！ 
现代文：裴矩凭借三千残破之兵，一直打到南康，有像这样的臣子，我还有什么忧虑的呢！ 
English: With the help of three thousand broken soldiers, Pei Momotu fought all the way to Nankang. With a vassal like this, what do I have to worry about?

古文：以功拜开府，赐爵闻喜县公，赉物二千段。
现代文：裴矩因功被授为开府，赐封为闻喜县公，得赏布帛二千段。
English: Pei Rong was awarded the title of Kaifu, granted the title of Wensi County Governor, and received a reward of two thousand baht.

古文：除民部侍郎，寻迁内史侍郎。
现代文：后来，又被授为民部侍郎，接着又迁升为内史侍郎。
English: Later, he was also awarded the position of a chamberlain of the Ministry of People's Affairs, and then was promoted to the position of a chamberlain of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：时突厥强盛，都蓝可汗妻大义公主，即宇文氏之女也，由是数为边患。
现代文：当时，突厥很强盛，都蓝可汗的妻子大义公主，就是北周宇文氏之女，因此多次制造边患。
English: At that time, the Turks were very powerful, and the wife of the Tulan Khan, Princess Dayi, was the daughter of the Northern Zhou Uwen clan, so she repeatedly created border troubles.

古文：后因公主与从胡私通，长孙晟先发其事，矩请出使说都蓝，显戮宇文氏。
现代文：后因大义公主同随从的胡人私通，长孙晟先揭发这件事。裴矩请求出使，劝说都蓝可汗公开惩治大义公主。
English: Later, because of Princess Dayi's adultery with her attendant Hu Ren, her eldest grandson Hao first exposed the affair. Pei Neng requested to send an envoy to persuade Du Lan Khan to publicly punish Princess Dayi.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上同意了他的请求。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：竟如其言，公主见杀。
现代文：果然像裴矩说的那样，大义公主被杀。
English: Princess Dayi was indeed killed, just as Baikang had said.

古文：后都蓝与突利可汗构难，屡犯亭鄣，诏太平公史万岁为行军总管，出定襄道，以矩为行军长史，破达头可汗于塞外。
现代文：后来，都蓝可汗与突利可汗勾结作难，多次侵犯亭障，皇上命令太平公史万岁任行军总管，出兵定襄，命令裴矩做行军长史，在塞外攻破达头可汗。
English: Later, Du Lan Khan colluded with Turi Khan to make difficulties and repeatedly violated the pavilion barriers. The emperor ordered Taiping Gongshi to serve as the general manager of the march, dispatched troops to Dingxiang, and ordered Pei Jian to make a long march history and attack and break the Dadu Khan outside of Tibet.

古文：万岁被诛，功竟不录。
现代文：史万岁被杀，裴矩的战绩竟未被叙录。
English: Shi Wanlian was later beaten to death, and Baikang's achievements went unrecorded.

古文：上以启民可汗初附，令矩抚慰之，还为尚书左丞。
现代文：皇上因为启民可汗刚刚归附，就命令裴矩抚慰他，回京后裴矩任尚书左丞。
English: The emperor ordered Pei Momot to soothe him because the Qimin Khan had just been annexed, and after returning to Beijing, Pei Momot was appointed as the secretary of the left.

古文：其年，文献皇后崩，太常旧无仪注，矩与牛弘据齐礼参定之。
现代文：那年，文献皇后去世，太常卿不知道礼节制度，裴矩和牛弘参照《齐礼》制定殡葬礼仪。
English: That year, the Empress of Literature passed away, the Grand Duke did not know the etiquette system, Pei Rui and Niu Hong referenced "Qi Li" to formulate the funeral etiquette.

古文：转吏部侍郎，名为称职。
现代文：转任吏部侍郎，有称职之名。
English: He was also transferred to the position of the secretary of the personnel department, and he was able to outperform the incumbent.

古文：炀帝即位，营建东都，矩职修府省，九旬而就。
现代文：炀帝即皇位，要在洛阳建造东都，裴矩任修府省，九十天就完成了。
English: Emperor Xuan, that is, the imperial throne, wanted to build the eastern capital in Luoyang, and Pei Jian served as the governor of Shuifu, and it was completed in ninety days.

古文：时西域诸蕃，多至张掖，与中国交市。
现代文：当时，西域各蕃邦大多到张掖同中原往来通商。
English: At that time, most of the western Shan states went to Zhangye to trade with the Central Plains.

古文：帝令矩掌其事。
现代文：炀帝命令裴矩掌管那里的事务。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered Pei Jian to take charge of the affairs there.

古文：矩知帝方勤远略，诸商胡至者，矩诱令言其国俗山川险易，撰《西域图记》三卷，入朝奏之。
现代文：裴矩了解炀帝正努力经营远方的谋划，于是，对那些到张掖来经商的胡人，裴矩就引诱他们，让他们说出自己国家的风俗习惯和山川险要，撰写了《西域图记》三卷，回朝把它上奏给朝廷。
English: Pei Min understood that Emperor Xizong was trying to manage distant plans. Therefore, for those Hu people who came to Zhangye to do business, Pei Min lured them to tell them about the customs and habits of their country and the mountains and rivers. He wrote three volumes of "Westland Atlas" and submitted it to the imperial court.

古文：其序曰：臣闻禹定九州，导河不逾积石；秦兼六国，设防止及临洮。
现代文：其序说：我听说夏禹平定九州恶水，疏导黄河没有超越积石，强秦兼并六国，设防御也只到达临洮。
English: The preamble said: I heard that Xia Yu calmed the turbulent waters of Kyushu, diverted the Yellow River without going beyond the sedimentary rock, forced the Qin Dynasty to annex six countries, and set up defenses to only reach Linyi.

古文：故知西胡杂种，僻居遐裔，礼教之所不及，书典之所罕传。
现代文：故知西域蕃胡种族混杂，居住地方偏远，是礼仪教化不容易到达，典章文化很少传播到的地方。
English: Therefore, it can be known that the countries in the western region are remote, etiquette cannot be imposed, and classics are rarely disseminated.

古文：自汉氏兴基，开拓河右，始称名号者，有三十六国，其后分立，乃五十五王。
现代文：自从汉朝兴起，开拓黄河以西地区，才开始有名称的，有三十六个国家，那以后又分崩离析，这才有五十五个国王。
English: Since the rise of the Han Dynasty and the exploration of the region west of the Yellow River, there have only been thirty-six countries with names, and since then they have fallen apart, and there are only fifty-five kings.

古文：仍置校尉、都护，以存招抚。
现代文：那时，仍然设置校尉、都护等官职，以便存恤招抚。
English: The Hanshitsu has set up positions such as school captain and tutor to recruit and comfort them.

古文：然叛服不恆，屡经征战，后汉之世，频废此官。
现代文：然而，那些胡人时而归顺时而背叛反复无常，屡屡经过战争。到了后汉，才逐步废了这些官职。
English: However, those Hu people capriciously surrendered and betrayed from time to time, and repeatedly went through wars. It was not until the Later Han Dynasty that these official positions were gradually abolished.

古文：虽大宛以来，略知户数，而诸国山川，未有名目。
现代文：虽然自大宛以来，还略略知道人户的多少，但是各国的山川地域没有名目。
English: Although the number of households has been known only slightly since the Great Leap Forward, there are no names for mountain and river regions in various countries.

古文：至如姓氏风土，服章物产，全无纂录，世所弗闻。
现代文：至于那些姓氏风俗、服饰物产，全无编纂记载，所以世上没听说过。
English: As for those surnames, customs, clothing and property, there is no compilation record, so it has not been heard of in the world.

古文：复以春秋递谢，年代久远，兼并诛讨，互有兴亡。
现代文：又因朝代的更替，时代相隔久远，讨伐兼并，有的兴，有的亡。
English: In addition, because of the spring and autumn metabolism, the age is long, and the mergers and acquisitions are fought against each other, each has its own prosperity and defeat.

古文：或地是故邦，改从今号，或人非旧类，因袭昔名。
现代文：有的地方原是旧的种族，却又用现在的称号，有的人不属原来的氏族，却又沿袭往时的名称。
English: There are places where the old race still uses the current name, and there are people who do not belong to the original clan, but still use the old name.

古文：兼复部民交错，封疆移改，戎狄音殊，事难穷验。
现代文：加上部落百姓交错居住，疆界改变，戎人狄人语言不同，情况实在是难以全部验实。
English: Coupled with the fact that tribal people live in different places at different times, the borders have changed, and the languages of the two peoples are different, it is really difficult to fully verify the situation.

古文：于阗之北，葱岭以东，考于前史，三十余国。
现代文：于阗之北、葱岭以东地区，从前朝史书中考证，有三十多个国家。
English: There are more than 30 countries to explore the history of the previous generation in the north of Handan and the east of Qiuling.

古文：其后更相屠灭，仅有十存。
现代文：后来又遭陷没，仅有十个存在。
English: Later it was shut down again, and only ten exist.

古文：自余沦没，扫地俱尽，空有丘墟，不可记识。
现代文：其他被消灭俱尽，空有废墟的，就无法记载了。
English: Others have been completely destroyed, and those that are empty and in ruins cannot be recorded.

古文：皇上膺天育物，无隔华夷，率土黔黎，莫不慕化。
现代文：皇上膺受天命，化育万物，不让华夏和四夷隔绝，四海之内百姓，没有不仰慕教化的。
English: The emperor was commanded by heaven to transform and nurture all things, not to allow China to be isolated from the four barbarians, and there is no people in the four seas who do not admire the civilized.

古文：风行所及，日入以来，职贡皆通，无远不至。
现代文：凡是风吹到的地方，太阳能照临的地方，各地赋税贡献全都到了朝廷，不管多远没有不到达的。
English: For some time now, countries have been competing for tribute items, no matter how far away they are.

古文：臣既因抚纳，监知关市，寻讨书传，访采胡人，或有所疑，即详众口。依其本国服饰仪形，王及庶人，各显容止，即丹青模写，为《西域图记》，共成三卷，合四十四国。
现代文：我既然抚纳了他们，观察了解边关要塞的贸易情况，寻找探索书传，采访胡人，对有些有怀疑的事情，我就广泛听取各自不同的说法，按照他们本国的服饰仪态，从国王到一般百姓，表现出他们各自不同的形貌举止，又即刻用丹青摹仿勾画出，写成《西域图记》，一共是三卷，记有四十四个国家。
English: Since I accepted them, observed and learned about the trade situation of the border fortress, searched for and explored books and biographies, interviewed the Hu people, and had some doubts about some things, I listened to their different accounts extensively, according to their own national dress and etiquette, from the king to the general public, showed their different appearances and manners, and immediately outlined them with the imitation of the Danqing dragonfly, and wrote the "Westland Atlas," a total of three volumes, recording forty-four countries.

古文：仍别造地图，穷其要害。从西顷以去，北海之南，纵横所亘，将二万里。
现代文：又另画地图，画出其要害，从西顷以远，到北海之南，纵横绵延，将近二万里。
English: He also drew another map, depicting its key points, stretching from the west to the south of the North Sea, nearly twenty thousand miles.

古文：谅由富商大贾，周游经涉，故诸国之事，罔不遍知。
现代文：我推想这里从来就是富商大贾周游经过的地方，所以，对各国情况没有不普遍了解的。
English: I deduce that this has always been the place where the rich merchant Dajia passed through, so there is no general understanding of the situation in various countries.

古文：复有幽荒远地，卒访难晓，不可凭虚，是以致阙。
现代文：还有一些地方，因地荒路远，仓猝寻访，还很难一下弄明白，但是又不能凭空虚造，因此缺如。
English: There are also those remote and isolated places that are difficult to visit and understand, and cannot be created out of thin air, so they are vacant.

古文：而二汉相踵，西域为传，户民数十，即称国王，徒有名号，乃乖其实。
现代文：而两汉相继立国，西域作为驿舍，几十户百姓就称一个国家，有名号，名不符实。
English: However, the Han Dynasty and the Han Dynasty were successively established, and the western region was regarded as a county, and dozens of people called it a country. It was a famous name, but it did not match reality.

古文：今者所编，皆余千户，利尽西海，多产珍异。
现代文：现在编入户册的，都有千多户，他们利尽西海，多产珍贵奇异之物。
English: The countries now included all have more than a thousand households, their products are well known in the West China Sea, and most of them produce rare treasures.

古文：其山居之属，非有国名，及部落小者，多亦不载。
现代文：那些在山里居住的人们，没有国名，至于那些小的部落，大多也没有记载。
English: Those who live in the mountains have no country name, and as for those small tribes, most of them are not recorded.

古文：发自敦煌，至于西海，凡为三道，各有襟带。
现代文：从敦煌出发，到达西海，共有三条路，各条路又有它的路线。
English: Starting from Dunhuang and reaching the West Sea, there are a total of three roads. Each road has its own route.

古文：北道从伊吾，经蒲类海铁勒部突厥可汗庭，度北流河水，至拂菻国，达于西海。
现代文：北道从伊吾，经过蒲类海铁勒部，突厥可汗处，渡过北流河水，到拂艹林国，到达西海。
English: The Northern Route runs from Igu, through the Putuo Sea, the Tieluo Department, and the Turkic Khanate, across the Beilu River, to the Fenglin Country, and reaches the West Sea.

古文：其中道从高昌、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒、度葱岭，又经钹汗、苏对沙那国、康国、曹国、何国、大小安国、穆国，至波斯，达于西海。
现代文：那中道从高昌、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒，越过葱岭，又经过钅发汗、苏对沙那国、康国、曹国、何国、大安国、小安国、穆国，到波斯，最后到达西海。
English: The middle route went from Gaochang, Yancheng, Gezi, and Shule, crossed the Qilian Mountains, and passed through Qufang, Suvanshan, Kang, Cao, He, Da'an, Xiao'an, and Mu, to Persia, and finally reached the West Sea.

古文：其南道从鄯善，于阗，硃俱波、喝槃陀，度葱岭，又经护密、吐火罗、挹怛、忛延，漕国，至北婆罗门，达于西海。
现代文：那南道从鄯善、于阗、朱俱波、喝般木陀，过葱岭，再经过护密、吐火罗、挹怛、忄凡延、漕国，到北婆罗门，最后到达西海。
English: The southern route runs from Shaoshan, Yucheng, Zhujubo, Baibangguda, through Zhulianling, then through Shoumi, Tuhuaro, Handan, Zhufanyan, and Cao Guo, to North Brahman, and finally to the West Sea.

古文：其三道诸国，亦各自有路，南北交通。
现代文：三条路上的各个国家，也各有各的路，南北往来通达。
English: Of these three routes, each country has its own route, which runs from north to south.

古文：其东女国、南婆罗门国等，并随其所往，诸处得达。
现代文：那东女国、南婆罗门国等，如果一齐顺着要去的地方前行，各处都能通达。
English: If you travel along the places you want to go to, such as the East Goddess Country and the South Brahman Country, you will be able to reach everywhere.

古文：故知伊吾、高昌、鄯善，并西域之门户也。总凑敦煌，是其咽喉之地。
现代文：所以了解到伊吾、高昌、鄯善都是西域的大门户，全都汇合到敦煌，是西域的咽喉之地。
English: Therefore, I learned that Igu, Gaochang, and Jinsan are all major gateways to the western region, and all converge to Dunhuang, which is the throat of the western region.

古文：以国家威德，将士骁雄，泛濛汜而扬旌，越昆仑而跃马，易如反掌，何往不至！
现代文：凭借国家的威望和恩德，将士的勇猛雄健，旌旗一举则能渡过氵蒙汜，战马腾跃能跨过昆仑，像翻一下手掌那样容易，哪里不能到达呢！
English: By virtue of the country's prestige and benevolence, the soldiers' bravery and valor, the banner can pass through the clouds in one fell swoop, and the warhorse can leap across the Kunlun Mountains. It is as easy as turning over the palm of your hand, where can you not reach?

古文：但突厥、吐浑分领羌胡之国，为其拥遏，故朝贡不通。
现代文：只是突厥、吐谷浑分别管辖羌族和匈奴，成为那里的障碍，所以给朝廷贡献的物品不能到达。
English: However, the Turks and Tugu Huns, who ruled the Yi and Huns, respectively, became an obstacle there, so the goods contributed to the imperial court could not reach them.

古文：今并因商人密送诚款，引领翘首，愿为臣妾。
现代文：现在又因为西域商人秘密送来财物，盼望归附朝廷，愿意作臣子。
English: Nowadays, many sincere letters have been secretly sent by merchants, hoping to become subjects of the Great Sui Dynasty.

古文：圣情含养，泽及普天，服而抚之，务存安辑。
现代文：圣上福泽给养人类，恩惠普及天下，如果使他们信服，让他们得到抚恤，那么就一定能归顺安定。
English: Almighty God provides for mankind, and His grace is spread all over the world. If they are convinced and receive sustenance, then they will surely be able to submit and be stable.

古文：故皇华遣使，弗动兵车，诸蕃即从，浑、厥可灭。
现代文：所以，皇上派遣使者，不要发动战事。只要各蕃邦归顺，吐谷浑和突厥也就能够消灭。
English: Therefore, the emperor sent an envoy, not to start a war. As long as the Shan states submit, the Tugu Huns and Turks can also be eliminated.

古文：混一戎夏，其在兹乎！
现代文：我朝统一四夷和华夏，大概就在此时了！
English: I'm going to unify Shii and Huaxia, probably at this time!

古文：不有所记，无以表威化之远也。
现代文：如果不记载什么情况，就无以表达皇上声威教化的深远。
English: Without a record of this, it is impossible to express the vastness of our country's prestige.

古文：帝大悦，赐物五百段，每日引矩至御坐，亲问西方之事。
现代文：炀帝看后非常高兴，赏给裴矩布帛五百段。每天召裴矩到殿上侍坐，亲自询问西域的情况。
English: Emperor Yao was very pleased to see this, and rewarded him with five hundred silken horses. Every day, he invited Pei to come to the throne and personally inquire about matters in the western region.

古文：矩盛言胡中多诸宝物，吐谷浑易可并吞。
现代文：裴矩盛赞胡蕃中有很多珍宝，吐谷浑容易并吞。
English: There are many treasures in Hu, which is highly praised by Pei Zhen, but easily swallowed by Tuyun.

古文：帝由是甘心，将通西域，四夷经略，咸以委之。
现代文：炀帝因此很快意，将沟通西域，经营四方的重任全都委派给裴矩。
English: Emperor Xuan was so pleased that he assigned all the important tasks of communicating with the western region and managing the four regions to Pei Jian.

古文：转民部侍郎，未视事，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：裴矩转任民部侍郎，还没开始办事，就又调迁黄门侍郎。
English: Pei Jian was transferred to the post of the Minister of People's Affairs, but before he could start his duties, he was transferred to the post of the Yellow Gate Minister.

古文：帝复令矩往张掖，引致西蕃，至者十余国。
现代文：炀帝又命令裴矩前往张掖，引导西域蕃邦入朝贡献，到朝廷贡献土产的有十多个国家。
English: Emperor Xuan also ordered Pei Jian to go to Zhangye to guide the Western Shan States to contribute to the DPRK. There are more than ten countries that contribute local products to the imperial court.

古文：大业三年，帝有事于恆岳，咸来助祭。
现代文：大业三年，炀帝到恒岳祭祀，这十几国都来助祭。
English: In the third year of the great undertaking, Emperor Gong went to Nangyue Hengshan to worship, and asked Pei Ru to come to assist the priest.

古文：帝将巡河右，复令矩往敦煌。
现代文：炀帝将要巡视黄河以西地区，又命令裴矩前往敦煌。
English: Emperor Yao was going to inspect the area west of the Yellow River, and he also ordered Pei Mom to go to Dunhuang.

古文：矩遣使说高昌王麹伯雅及伊吾吐屯设等，啖以厚利，导使入朝。
现代文：裴矩派使者劝说高昌王曲伯雅和伊吾的吐屯设等，用丰厚的利益好处来引诱他们，让他们入朝。
English: Pei Ruo sent an envoy to persuade the king of Gaochang, Qubo Ya, and the king of Igu, Tutun Shi, to entice them with rich benefits and let them enter the imperial court.

古文：及帝西巡，次燕支山，高昌王、伊吾设等及西蕃胡二十七国，谒于道左。
现代文：到炀帝西巡，驻扎在燕支山时，那高昌王、伊吾设等人和西蕃的二十七国国主，都到道路左边拜见炀帝。
English: When Emperor Gaochang was on his westward inspection tour and stationed in Yanzhishan, Gaochang Wang, Iwushai and other people, as well as the 27 sovereigns of Xidi, all went to the left side of the road to meet Emperor Gaochang.

古文：皆令佩金玉，被锦罽，焚香奏乐，歌儛喧噪。
现代文：炀帝让他们都佩金玉，披锦缎，焚香奏乐，歌舞喧哗。
English: Emperor Qian let them all wear gold and jade, wear brocade, play incense, and sing and dance.

古文：复令武威、张掖士女盛饰纵观，骑乘填咽，周亘数十里，以示中国之盛。
现代文：又让武威、张掖等郡的官家女子穿着盛装跟随观看，车马堵塞，绵延十多里，来显示中原的强盛。
English: In addition, the official women of Wuwei, Zhangye and other counties were allowed to follow the parade in full dress, and the procession was blocked by cars and horses, stretching for more than ten miles, to show the strength of the Central Plains.

古文：帝见而大悦。
现代文：炀帝看到这情景，非常高兴。
English: Emperor Gong was very happy to see it.

古文：竟破吐谷浑，拓地数千里，并遣兵戍之。
现代文：隋军终于击败了吐谷浑，扩展疆土数千里，朝廷都派兵把守，每年输出的物产以亿万计。
English: The Sui army finally defeated the Tuyugun, expanding the territory by thousands of miles, the imperial court sent soldiers to guard, and the annual output of goods was in the hundreds of millions.

古文：每岁委输巨亿万计，诸蕃慑惧，朝贡相续。帝谓矩有绥怀之略，进位银青光禄大夫。
现代文：各蕃邦害怕，来朝廷上贡的络绎不绝。炀帝认为裴矩有安抚民心的才略，提升他为银青光禄大夫。
English: The various Shan states were afraid, and there was an endless stream of tributes coming to the imperial court. Emperor Wu thought that Pei Jian had the talent to appease the people's hearts, and promoted him to the position of silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：其冬，帝至东都，矩以蛮夷朝贡者多，讽帝令都下大戏。
现代文：那年冬天，炀帝到东都，裴矩因前来朝贡的蛮人夷人，就劝谏炀帝命令都府大演百戏，召集天下奇怪的技艺，排列在端门街。
English: That winter, Emperor Zhou went to Dongdu, and Pei Rui, because of the barbarians and barbarians who came to pay tribute, advised Emperor Zhou to order the capital to perform a hundred plays, gather the world's strange skills, and arrange them in Danmen Street.

古文：征四方奇技异艺，陈于端门街，衣锦绮、珥金翠者以十数万。又勒百官及民士女列坐棚阁而纵观焉。
现代文：当时，身穿锦绮、披金戴银的人达十多万。炀帝又命令文武百官和平民百姓列坐棚阁任意观看。
English: At that time, there were more than one hundred thousand people dressed in brocade and wearing gold and silver. Emperor Qian also ordered hundreds of officials and civilians to sit in rows of pavilions to watch.

古文：皆被服鲜丽，终月乃罢。
现代文：人们都披着色彩鲜丽的衣服，一月之后才结束。
English: People dress up in brightly coloured clothes for the procession, which only ends in January.

古文：又令三市店肆皆设帷帐，盛列酒食，遣掌蕃率蛮夷与民贸易，所至之处，悉令邀延就坐，醉饱而散。
现代文：炀帝又命令丰都、大同、通远三市饮食店都设置帷帐，摆着丰盛的酒席，并且派掌管蕃邦的官员带领那些蛮夷商民与汉民贸易交往，凡是蕃民到达的地方，店肆就把他们全部邀请入席，让他们喝醉吃饱才离开。
English: Emperor Xuan also ordered the restaurants in the three cities of Fengdu, Datong and Tongyuan to set up curtains and set up sumptuous banquets, and sent the officials in charge of Shan State to lead the barbarian merchants to trade with the Han people. Wherever the barbarians arrived, the restaurants invited them all to sit down and let them get drunk and eat until they left.

古文：蛮夷嗟叹，谓中国为神仙。
现代文：那些蛮夷赞叹不已，称中原是神仙之地。
English: These guests from far away were very impressed and thought that China was a place where immortals lived.

古文：帝称其至诚，顾谓宇文述、牛弘曰： 裴矩大识朕意，凡所陈奏，皆朕之成算。未发之顷，矩辄以闻。
现代文：炀帝赞赏裴矩的挚诚，回头对宇文述、牛弘说： 裴矩很理解我的心意。凡是呈奏的事情，都是我做了打算的事，我还没有宣布的时候，裴矩就已经说出来了。
English: Emperor Xuan appreciated Pei Rui's sincerity, and turned to Wu Wenshu and Niu Hong and said, "Pei Rui understood my intentions very well. Everything that was presented was what I had planned, and when I hadn't announced it, Pei Rui had already said it.

古文：自非奉国用心，孰能若是！ 
现代文：假如不是尽心奉国，哪能像这样呢？ 
English: If you don't serve the country wholeheartedly, how can you perform like this?

古文：帝遣将军薛世雄城伊吾，令矩共往经略。
现代文：炀帝派将军薛世雄在伊吾建造城市，命令裴矩一同前往西域经营策划。
English: Emperor Qian sent General Xue Shixiong to build Igu City, and Mu Pei Rong worked with him to plan and operate it.

古文：矩讽谕西域诸国曰： 天子为蕃人交易悬远，所以城伊吾耳。 
现代文：裴矩讽谏西域各国说： 天子觉得蕃人贸易经商相距太远，所以才在伊吾建造城市。 
English: Pei Jiao ridiculed the countries in the western region, saying, "The emperor thought that the distance between China and Japan in trade and business was too far, so he built a city in Igu Ro.

古文：咸以为然，不复来竞。
现代文：蕃人都认为是这样，也就不再来干扰。
English: They all think it's a good thing and no longer compete for harassment.

古文：及还，赐钱四十万。
现代文：裴矩回到朝廷，炀帝赏给他钱四十万。
English: When Pei Jian returned to Beijing, Emperor Qian gave him a reward of 400,000 yuan.

古文：矩又白状，令反间射匮，潜攻处罗，语在《突厥传》。
现代文：裴矩又上奏皇上，请求让他用反间计，让射匮秘密进攻处罗，这些话记载在《西突厥传》里。
English: Pei Jiao also appealed to the emperor, asking him to use countermeasures to secretly attack Silla, and these words are recorded in the "Western Turkic Biography."

古文：后处罗为射匮所迫，竟随使者入朝。
现代文：后来，处罗被射匮逼迫，终于随使者入朝进见。
English: Later, he was forced to send an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to pay homage.

古文：帝大悦，赐矩以貂裘及西域珍器。
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，拿豹皮和西域珍宝赏给裴矩。
English: Emperor Yao was very pleased and rewarded Pei with a leopard skin and a treasure from the Western Regions.

古文：从帝巡于塞北，幸启民帐。
现代文：裴矩随从炀帝到塞北巡视，炀帝驾莅启民可汗帐篷。
English: Pei Jian followed the emperor to the north of the island for inspection, and the emperor drove the khan's tent.

古文：时高丽遣使先通于突厥，启民不敢隐，引之见帝。
现代文：那时，高丽已先派使者与突厥沟通，启民不敢隐瞒，便带领高丽使者前来拜见炀帝。
English: At that time, Goryeo had already sent an envoy to communicate with the Turks, and the Qin people did not dare to conceal it, so they led the Goryeo envoy to come to see Emperor Zhao.

古文：矩因奏状曰： 高丽之地，本孤竹国也。周代以之封于箕子，汉世分为三郡，晋氏亦统辽东。
现代文：裴矩于是上奏皇上说： 高丽这地方，本来是孤竹国，周代把它封给箕子，汉代又把它分为三个郡，晋代也统辖辽东。
English: Pei Jian then appealed to the emperor, saying, "This place, Goryeo, was originally a lone bamboo country. Zhou Dynasty gave it to Jiazi, Han Dynasty divided it into three counties, and Jin Dynasty also governed Liaodong.

古文：今乃不臣，别为外域，故先帝疾焉，欲征之久矣。
现代文：现在竟然不称臣，另为外域。所以先帝对它很憎恨，要讨伐它也很久了。
English: Now it's not even a subject, it's a foreign territory. That's why the former emperor hated it so much, and it's been a long time since he's had to fight it.

古文：但以杨谅不肖，师出无功。当陛下之时，安得不事，使此冠带之境，仍为蛮貊之乡乎？
现代文：只是因为杨谅无能，发兵征讨没有结果，陛下在这个时候，怎么能不成就大业，让这文明之地仍为蛮夷之乡呢？
English: Just because Yang Peng was incompetent and there was no result from sending troops to solicit recruits, how could His Majesty fail to accomplish a great deed at this time, and let this civilized land remain the home of barbarians?

古文：今其使者朝于突厥，亲见启民，合国从化，必惧皇灵之远暢，虑后伏之先亡。
现代文：现在，高丽的使者向突厥朝拜，拜见启民，他们全国百姓顺从归化，高丽一定害怕皇上的神通广大，考虑到后降伏的要先灭亡。
English: Now, the emissaries of Goryeo pay homage to the Turks and meet with the Qiming people, and their people throughout the country submit to naturalization. Goryeo must be afraid of the vastness of the emperor's supernatural power, considering that those who surrender later will perish first.

古文：胁令入朝，当可致也。 帝曰： 如何？ 
现代文：如果强迫他们入朝，应该是能达到目的的。 炀帝问道： 怎么办？ 
English: If they are forced to enter the imperial court, it should be able to achieve the goal. Emperor Zhao asked: What should we do?

古文：矩曰： 请面诏其使，放还本国，遣语其王，令速朝观。
现代文：裴矩回答说： 请让我当面告诫使者，放他们回到自己的国家，派他们告诉他们的国王，命令他们的国王迅速来朝廷进见。
English: Pei replied: "Please let me warn the envoys in person, let them return to their own country, send them to tell their king, and order their king to come to the court quickly.

古文：不然者，当率突厥，即日诛之。 
现代文：如果不这样的话，就要带领突厥，马上除掉他们。 
English: Otherwise, he will lead the Turkish army and immediately destroy it.

古文：帝纳焉。
现代文：炀帝听取了这个建议。
English: Emperor Shun accepted his opinion.

古文：高元不用命，始建征辽之策。
现代文：后来，因为高元不听命，才考虑征讨辽东的策略。
English: The king of Goryeo disobeyed the order of the Sui Dynasty, so Emperor Gao began to plan the conquest of Liao.

古文：王师临辽，以本官领武贲郎将。
现代文：军队到辽东，裴矩以本官身份兼任武贲郎将。
English: The Sui soldiers were approaching the Liao territory, and Pei Mom took the original position and became the commander of the army.

古文：明年，复从至辽东。
现代文：第二年，他又随军队来到辽东。
English: The following year, he followed Emperor Xizong to Liaodong.

古文：兵部侍郎斛斯政亡入高丽，帝令矩兼掌兵事。
现代文：后来，兵部侍郎斛斯政逃到高丽，炀帝命令裴矩兼管军队事务。
English: Because of his participation in the conspiracy to escape to Goryeo, the attendant of the military department, Gensimasa, was also in charge of the army.

古文：以前后渡辽之役，进位右光禄大夫。
现代文：因为裴矩前后到辽参战，又被迁升为右光禄大夫。
English: Because Pei Jian went to Liao to participate in the war, he was promoted to Uguanglu Doctor.

古文：于时皇纲不振，人皆变节，左翊卫大将军宇文述、内史侍郎虞世基等用事，文武多以贿闻。唯矩守常，无赃秽之响，以是为世所称。
现代文：在当时，朝廷纲纪不振，人们都改变了节操。左翊卫大将军宇文述，内史侍郎虞世基等滥用职权，徇私枉法，文武百官也多因行贿受赂而闻名，只有裴矩还保持原来的节操，没有贪赃枉法的名声，因此，被人们称颂。
English: At that time, the discipline of the imperial court was not strong, and people changed their discipline. Zuo Wei general Wu Wenshu, the secretary of the history, Yu Shiji, and others abused their powers and abused the law. Many civil and military officials were also known for bribery. Only Pei Rui still maintained the original discipline and did not have the reputation of corrupting the law, so he was praised by people.

古文：还至涿郡，帝以杨玄感初平，令矩安集陇右。
现代文：裴矩回到涿郡，炀帝因刚刚平定杨玄感叛军，命令裴矩安抚陇西一带。
English: Pei Rui returned to Shishun. Emperor Wu, who had just defeated the Yang Xuanxuan rebels, ordered Pei Rui to pacify the western part of Shaanxi Province.

古文：因之会宁，存问曷萨那部落，遣阙达度设寇吐谷浑，频有虏获，部落致富。
现代文：裴矩因此到会宁，抚慰曷萨那部落，派阙达度设骚扰吐谷浑，常有俘虏劫获，部落渐渐富裕。
English: As a result, Pei Rui went to Huining to appease the Buxana tribe, and dispatched his troops to harass the Tukuhun. Prisoners were often captured, and the tribe gradually became wealthy.

古文：还而奏状，帝大赏之。
现代文：裴矩回到朝廷，上奏炀帝，炀帝很赞赏。
English: After returning and recounting these circumstances, Emperor Gong rewarded him.

古文：后从师至怀远镇，诏护北蕃军事。
现代文：后来裴矩随军队到怀远镇，炀帝命令他总管北蕃军事要务。
English: Later, Pei Jian followed the army to Huaiyuan Town, and Emperor Qian ordered him to be in charge of the military affairs of Beilun.

古文：矩以始毕可汗部众渐盛，献策分其势，将以宗女嫁其弟叱吉设，拜为南面可汗。
现代文：裴矩因始毕可汗部落逐日强大，就向炀帝献计分散突厥势力，要把王室女儿嫁给始毕弟弟叱吉设，并授叱吉设为南面可汗。
English: As the Shibi Khan tribe became more powerful day by day, Pei-Ming proposed to Emperor Wu to disperse the Turkic forces by marrying the royal daughter to Shibi's younger brother, Choe-Gil-Sik, and making Choe-Gil-Sik the Southern Khan.

古文：叱吉不敢受，始毕闻而渐怨。
现代文：叱吉设不敢接受，始毕听到这件事后，就逐渐产生怨恨。
English: He did not dare to accept the reprimand. However, he was very angry when he first heard about it.

古文：矩又言于帝曰： 突厥本淳，易可离间，但由其内多有群胡，尽皆桀黠，教导之耳。
现代文：裴矩又对炀帝说： 突厥本来就淳朴，容易离间，只是由于他们内部多有群胡，又全都凶狠狡猾，把突厥人教坏了。
English: Baikang also said to Emperor Xuan, "Turks are originally simple and easy to be divided, but because they have a lot of internal vices and are all fierce and cunning, they have ruined the Turks.

古文：臣闻史蜀胡悉尤多奸计，幸于始毕，请诱杀之。 
现代文：我听说史蜀胡悉最多奸诈诡计，受始毕宠信，请让我诱杀他。 
English: I have heard that Shi Shuhu knows the most treacherous tricks, and has been favored by the emperor. Please let me trap him.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：炀帝说： 好。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：矩因遣人告胡悉曰： 天子大出珍物，今在马邑，欲共蕃内多作交关。若前来者，即得好物。 
现代文：裴矩于是就派人告诉胡悉说： 皇上现在在马邑大摆奇珍异物，要供蕃内贸易交换，如果先来，就能换得上等物品。 
English: Pei Jian then sent someone to tell Hu Xilang: The emperor is now displaying strange and rare foreign objects in Ma'eup. They are to be exchanged for domestic trade. If you come first, you will be able to exchange high-quality items.

古文：胡悉贪而信之，不告始毕，率其部落，尽驱六畜，星驰争进，冀先互市。
现代文：胡悉贪图好处，就相信了这话，没告诉始毕，就带领他的部落，赶着六畜，连夜急驰，争先恐后，希望能最先交易。
English: Knowing that Hu was greedy for benefits, he believed this, and without telling Zhu Bi, he led his tribe, driving six animals, rushing all night, scrambling, hoping to be the first to trade.

古文：矩伏兵马邑下，诱而斩之。
现代文：裴矩在马邑埋伏军队，引诱他于是杀了他。
English: Baikang ambushed an army in Mayeup, lured him away and then killed him.

古文：诏报始毕曰： 史蜀胡悉忽领部落走来至此，云背可汗，请我容纳。
现代文：炀帝告诉始毕说： 史蜀胡悉突然带领部落人马来到我这里，说是要背叛可汗，请求我收容他。
English: Emperor Qian told Zhi Bi, "Shu Husi suddenly led a horde of men and horses to come to me, saying that he was going to betray the Khan, and asked me to take him in.

古文：突厥既是我臣，彼有背叛，我当共杀。
现代文：突厥已经是我的臣子，那里有叛臣，我们应当协同处治。
English: The Turk is already my vassal, there are traitors there, we should work together to deal with them.

古文：今已斩之，故令往报。 
现代文：现在已经杀了他，因此让人前往相告。 
English: I've put him to death, so I'm sending word.

古文：始毕亦知其状，由是不朝。
现代文：始毕知道其中情况，因此不入朝。
English: Shi Bi also knew the true situation of the matter, so he no longer paid tribute.

古文：十一年，帝北巡狩，始毕率骑数十万，围帝于雁门。
现代文：大业十一年，炀帝到北方狩猎，始毕带领数十万骑兵，在雁门围困炀帝。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taie, Emperor Gong went hunting in the north, and led hundreds of thousands of cavalrymen to besiege Emperor Gong at the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：诏令矩与虞世基每宿朝堂，以待顾问。
现代文：炀帝命令裴矩和虞世基每天住在大堂，以便咨询。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered Pei Rong and Yu Shiji to stay in the lobby every day for consultation.

古文：及围解，从至东都。
现代文：到解除雁门的包围，裴矩随从炀帝到东都。
English: When the siege was lifted, Pei Mom followed Emperor Zou to Dongdu.

古文：属射匮可汗遣其犹子，率西蕃诸胡朝贡，诏矩宴接之。
现代文：射匮可汗派他兄弟之子带领西蕃诸胡来朝廷进贡，炀帝命裴矩设宴接待他们。
English: Shaka Khan sent his brother's son to lead the Xidi Zhuhu to pay tribute to the imperial court, and Emperor Gao ordered that a banquet be held to receive them.

古文：寻从幸江都宫。
现代文：不久，裴矩随从炀帝驾临江都宫。
English: Soon after, he followed Emperor Xizong to the imperial palace in Jiangdu.

古文：时四方盗贼蜂起，郡县上奏者不可胜计。
现代文：当时，四方叛军蜂拥而起，郡县上奏作乱之事不可胜数。
English: At this time, thieves from all over swarmed, and counties reported the news of the rebellion one after another.

古文：矩言之，帝怒，遣矩诣京师接候蕃客，以疾不行。
现代文：裴矩把这情况告诉炀帝，炀帝很气愤，派裴矩到京师接待蕃客，裴矩因病就没有去。
English: Pei-Ming told Emperor Xuan about this. Emperor Xuan was very angry and sent Pei-Ming to Beijing to receive guests. However, due to illness, Pei-Ming did not go.

古文：及义兵入关，帝令虞世基就宅问矩方略。
现代文：到义军入关之时，炀帝命令虞世基到裴矩住舍询问对策。
English: When the rebels entered the customs, Emperor Zhao ordered Yu Shiji to go to Pei Neng's residence to inquire about countermeasures.

古文：矩曰： 太原有变，京畿不静，遥为处分，恐失事机。唯愿銮舆早还，方可平定。 
现代文：裴矩说： 太原已有变化，京城又不安宁，相隔遥远作出处理，恐怕失去机会，希望皇上早点从江淮回京都，才能平定事态。 
English: Pei Nang said: Taiyuan has changed, the capital is restless, and it is far away from each other. I am afraid that I will lose the opportunity to deal with it. I hope that the emperor will return to Kyoto from Jianghuai as soon as possible in order to calm down the situation.

古文：矩复起视事。
现代文：裴矩又复出管事。
English: Pei Mom is back in charge.

古文：俄而骁卫大将军屈突通败问至，矩以闻，帝失色。
现代文：不久，骁卫大将军屈突通兵败的消息传来，裴矩把这件事告诉炀帝，炀帝脸色剧变。
English: Not long after, the news of the sudden defeat of General Xie Wei came, Pei Mom reported to Emperor Xuan, Emperor Xuan was shocked and disgraced.

古文：矩素勤谨，未尝忤物，又见天下方乱，恐为身祸，其待遇人，多过其所望，故虽至厮役，皆得其欢心。
现代文：裴矩平时勤勉谨慎，没有触犯他人的事，又见天下正处于混乱，怕造成杀身之祸，于是，他对待别人，大多超过那些人所希望得到的，所以，即使是服劳役的下人，他都能得到他们欢心。
English: Pei Jian is usually diligent and prudent, has not offended others, and sees that the world is in chaos, afraid of causing a disaster, so he treats others, mostly more than those people hope to get, so even if he is a laborer, he can get their favor.

古文：时从驾骁果数有逃散，帝忧之，以问矩。矩答曰： 方今车驾留此，已经二年。
现代文：当时，跟从炀帝的骁勇之士，大多数都已逃亡，炀帝担心这事，就询问裴矩，裴矩回答说： 现在，皇上滞留这里，已经两年了。
English: At that time, most of the valiant warriors who had followed Emperor Xizong had already fled. Emperor Xizong was worried about this and asked Pei Jian. Pei Jian replied, "Now, the emperor has been staying here for two years.

古文：骁果之徒，尽无家口，人无匹合，则不能久安。臣请听兵士于此纳室。 
现代文：这些骁勇之士都没有家室，人没有妻偶，就不能长时间安居，我请求让士兵在这里成家。 
English: These soldiers of the guard have no families. A man without a wife cannot live in peace for long. I request that the soldiers be allowed to marry and start a family here.

古文：帝大喜曰： 公定多智，此奇计也。 
现代文：炀帝听了非常高兴，说： 你必定多智谋，这是个妙计啊。 
English: Emperor Xuan was very pleased to hear this and said, "You must be very resourceful. This is a brilliant plan."

古文：因令矩检校，为将士等娶妻。
现代文：于是，炀帝就命令裴矩核实将士情况，给将士们娶妻室。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuan ordered Pei Jian to verify the situation of the soldiers and marry the soldiers.

古文：矩召江都境内寡妇及未嫁女，皆集宫监，又召将帅及兵等恣其所取。
现代文：裴矩召集江都境内寡妇和未出嫁的女子，把她们都集中在宫监之中，又召来将帅以及兵众任凭他们挑选。
English: Pei Niang called together all the widows and unmarried women in Jiangdu and concentrated them among the palace guards. He also called in generals and soldiers to let them choose.

古文：因听自首，先有奸通妇女及尼、女冠等，并即配之。
现代文：让她们自首，让那些先前就已与人通奸的妇女和尼姑、女道士等，也都配人。
English: Let them turn themselves in, and let those women and nuns, female moralists, etc. who have previously committed adultery also be worthy.

古文：由是骁果等悦，咸相谓曰： 裴公之惠也。 
现代文：因此，骁勇之士都高兴，都相互称道说： 这是裴公的恩惠啊。 
English: Therefore, the generals were very happy and told each other, "This is all thanks to Baigong!"

古文：宇文化及之乱，矩晨起将朝，至坊门，遇逆党数人，控矩马诣孟景所。
现代文：在宇文化及叛乱之时，裴矩早晨起来将去上朝，走到坊门，遇到几个叛逆党徒，他们挟持裴矩的马到孟景的住处去。
English: At the time of the Yu Culture and Rebellion, Pei Jian got up in the morning to go to Shang Dynasty, walked to the gate, met several traitorous party members, who took Pei Jian's horse and went to Meng Jing's residence.

古文：贼皆曰： 不关裴黄门。 
现代文：叛军都说： 这不与裴黄门相关。 
English: The rebel parties all said: This is not about Pei Huangmen.

古文：既而化及从百余骑至，矩迎拜，化及慰谕之。
现代文：一会儿，宇文化及带领百多人马到来，裴矩相迎拜见，化及安慰谕示他。
English: Next, U Bunka and his more than one hundred cavalrymen arrived, and Pei Jin stepped forward to kneel and greet them.

古文：令矩参定仪注，推秦王子浩为帝，以矩为侍内，随化及至河北。
现代文：化及命令裴矩参照制度，推举炀帝侄子秦王杨浩做皇帝，授裴矩为侍内，随宇文化及到黄河以北。
English: and ordered the Pei-Ming reference system, and promoted Emperor Qin's nephew, Qin Wang Yanghao, to be the emperor. He also appointed Pei-Ming as an attendant, and followed the culture of the world to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：及僭帝位，以矩为尚书右仆射，加光禄大夫，封蔡国公，为河北道安抚大使。
现代文：宇文化及僭越皇位，将裴矩迁升为尚书右仆射，加任光禄大夫，封为蔡国公，任河北道安抚大使。
English: With the establishment of the Yu Culture and the succession to the imperial throne, Pei Jian was promoted to Shang Shuxu Yu Minzu, appointed as Guanglu Doctor, named Cai Guogong, and appointed as the Ambassador of Pacification of Hebei Province.

古文：及宇文氏败，为窦建德所获，以矩隋代旧臣，遇之甚厚。
现代文：宇文化及失败，裴矩被窦建德俘获。因为裴矩是隋朝老臣，窦建德待他很优厚。
English: Due to his superior culture and failure, Baikang was captured by Dou Jiande. Because Baikang was an old retainer of the Sui Dynasty, Dou Jiande treated him very generously.

古文：复以为吏部尚书，寻转尚书右仆射，专掌选事。
现代文：又任裴矩为吏部尚书，接着又迁职为尚书右仆射，专管铨选之事。
English: In addition, Pei Jian was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, and then he was transferred to the position of the secretary's right-hand man, in charge of the selection of cadres.

古文：建德起自群盗，未有节文，矩为制定朝仪。
现代文：由于窦建德出身于群盗，没有礼节，裴矩替他制定朝纲制度。
English: Since Dou Jiande was born as a bandit and had no etiquette, Pei Jiande established the morning program system for him.

古文：旬月之间，宪章颇备，拟于王者。
现代文：十月之间，典章法度就已经很齐备，就像君王一样。
English: By October, the rules and regulations are in place, just like a king.

古文：建德大悦，每谘访焉。
现代文：窦建德非常高兴，经常向裴矩询问要事。
English: Dou Jiande was very happy and often asked Pei Ru about important matters.

古文：及建德渡河讨孟海公，矩与曹旦等于洺州留守。
现代文：窦建德渡黄河讨伐孟海公，裴矩同曹旦等留在氵名州留守。
English: Dou Jiande crossed the Yellow River to fight against Meng Haigong, while Pei Neng and Cao Dan stayed in Shennai Prefecture.

古文：建德败于武牢。群帅未知所属，曹旦长史李公淹、大唐使人魏徵等说旦及齐善行令归顺。
现代文：窦建德在武牢兵败，将帅不知归从哪里，曹旦长史李公淹、大唐使人魏征等人归劝曹旦和齐善行归顺大唐。
English: Dou Jiande was defeated in the military prison, and the general did not know where to return from. Cao Dan Changshi, Li Gongyun, Datang made Wei Zheng and others to persuade Cao Dan and Qi Shanzhong to submit to Datang.

古文：旦等从之，乃令矩与徵、公淹领旦及八玺，举山东之地归于大唐。
现代文：曹旦等人听从了他们的劝告，于是就让裴矩把八枚传国玉玺，给魏征和李公淹，将崤山以东的土地全部归顺到大唐。
English: Cao Dan and others listened to their advice, so they asked Pei Neng to give Wei Zheng and Li Gongyun the eight jade shields that had been passed down from generation to generation, and to submit all the land east of Mount Lushan to the Great Tang.

古文：授左庶子，转詹事、民部尚书。
现代文：裴矩被授为左庶子，后转任詹事、民部尚书。
English: Pei Rong was given the title of the left illegitimate son, and later he was transferred to the posts of Zhanji and Minbu Shangshu.

古文：史臣曰：世基初以雅淡著名，兼以文华见重，亡国羁旅，特蒙任遇。
现代文：曾派太仆杨义臣到河北围剿反贼，投降的反贼有几十万。义臣列表上报。炀帝叹息说： 我先前没听说反贼一下子这么多，义臣俘虏贼人怎么这么多呀！ 世基回答说： 鼠辈虽多，不足为忧。义臣打败他们后，自己拥兵不少。
English: He once sent his eunuch Yang Yixian to Hebei to encircle the rebels, and there were hundreds of thousands of rebels who surrendered. The list of rebels was reported. Emperor Zou sighed and said, "I had never heard of so many rebels at once, how come there are so many rebels captured by the rebels!" Shiji replied, "Although there are many rats, there are not enough to worry about. After Yixian defeated them, he had a lot of soldiers.

古文：参机衡之职，预帷幄之谋，国危未尝思安，君昏不能纳谏。
现代文：他久在外头，这是最不该的。 炀帝说： 你说得对。 立即派人追回杨义臣，把他的士兵都遣散。
English: He has been away for a long time, which is the worst thing to do. Emperor Gao said, "You are right. Immediately send someone to bring back Yang Yichen and dismiss all his soldiers.

古文：方更鬻官卖狱，黩货无厌，颠陨厥身，亦其所也。
现代文：另外，越王杨侗派太常丞元善达从反贼地区偷偷到江都报告事情，说李密有上百万人，围逼京都。反贼占据了洛口仓，京城中没有粮食。
English: In addition, the king of Yue, Yang Pi, sent the grand vizier, Yuan Shanda, to sneak from the anti-thief region to Jiangdu to report the situation, saying that Li Mi had a million people besieging Kyoto. The anti-thieves occupied the Lokuchang warehouse, and there was no grain in the capital.

古文：裴蕴素怀奸险，巧于附会，作威作福，唯利是视，灭亡之祸，其可免乎？
现代文：如陛下速回，乌合之众必散；不然的话，东都肯定完了。元善达报告完毕，哭泣流泪，炀帝也为之改容。世基见炀帝面有愁容，进言道： 越王年纪小，这些人骗他。
English: If His Majesty returns quickly, the rabble will be dispersed; otherwise, Dongdu will definitely be over. Yuan Shanda finished his report, weeping and shedding tears, and Emperor Gong also changed his appearance for it. Shiji saw Emperor Gong with a sad face and said: Yue Wang is young, these people lied to him.

古文：裴矩学涉经史，颇有干局，至于恪勤匪懈，夙夜在公，求诸古人，殆未之有。
现代文：如像他说的那样，善达怎能到这儿来？ 炀帝于是勃然大怒，说： 元善达你这个小人，怎敢在朝廷上侮辱我！ 
English: As he said, how could Shanda come here? Emperor Gao then flew into a rage, saying: Shanda, you villain, how dare you insult me at court!

古文：与闻政事，多历岁年，虽处危乱之中，未亏廉谨之节，美矣。
现代文：因此派他再经贼人之地，向东阳去催运粮食，善达于是被群盗所杀。
English: Therefore, he sent him through the land of thieves to the east to transport grain, but Shanda was killed by the bandits.

古文：然承望风旨，与时消息，使高昌入朝，伊吾献地，聚粮且末，师出玉门，关右骚然，颇亦矩之由也。
现代文：此后外人杜口，没有谁再敢报告贼人的事。世基的样子很沉着持重，说话大多符合炀帝的心意，因此特别被炀帝亲爱，朝中大臣无人与他可比。他的后妻孙氏，生性骄淫，世基被她迷惑，任其奢侈。他家雕器饰服，再无寒士之风。
English: After that, no outsider dared to report the thief. Shiji's appearance was very calm and dignified, and most of his speech was in line with Emperor Xuan's wishes, so he was especially loved by Emperor Xuan. No other minister in the Middle Kingdom could compare with him. His second wife, Sun, was naturally arrogant, and Shiji was confused by her and allowed her to be extravagant. His family's carvings adorned clothing, and there was no longer a cold man's style.

