古文：袁枢，字机仲，建之建安人。
现代文：袁枢字机仲，建州建安人。
English: Yuan Zhaoji, Jian Zhong, Jianzhou Jian Anren.

古文：幼力学，尝以《修身为弓赋》试国子监，周必大、刘珙皆期以远器。
现代文：幼年时努力学习，曾以《修身为弓赋》考国子监，周必大、刘珙都对他的将来抱有很大的希望。
English: He studied hard when he was a child, and once took the national exam on "Self-cultivation as a bow," and both Zhou Bida and Liu Xuan had great hopes for his future.

古文：试礼部，词赋第一人，调温州判官，教授兴化军。
现代文：袁枢参加礼部的考试，词赋为第一名，被调任温州判官、兴化军教授。
English: Yuan Zu took part in the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was awarded the first place. He was transferred to the post of Wenzhou judge and professor of Xinghua Army.

古文：乾道七年，为礼部试官，就除太学录，轮对三疏，一论开言路以养忠孝之气，二论规恢复当图万全，三论士大夫多虚诞、侥荣利。
现代文：乾道七年，袁枢任礼部试官，又任太学录，轮对时上了三疏，一论广开言路以培养忠孝之风气，二论谋划恢复国土的万全之策，三论士大夫多以虚语欺骗上面、以侥幸获得荣利。
English: After seven years of hard work, Yuan Zu was appointed as an examiner of the Ministry of Rites and Rituals, and was also appointed as the Taishu Record. At the time of the match, he came up with three theories, one of which was to open wide the way to cultivate a culture of loyalty and filial piety, two of which were to plan a comprehensive strategy to restore the country, and three of which were to say that the Shidafu mostly deceived the upper class with false words and obtained honor and profit by chance.

古文：张说自阁门以节钺签枢密，枢方与学省同僚共论之，上虽容纳而色不怡。
现代文：张说从门以节钺升为签书枢密事，袁枢正与学省同僚一起指责他，皇上虽然容纳了他们的意见，但脸色不悦。
English: Zhang said that from the gate to the festival, it was a confidential matter to sign the letter. Yuan Zu Zheng and his colleagues from the Ministry of Education accused him. Although the emperor accepted their opinions, he was not pleased.

古文：枢退诣宰相，示以奏疏，且曰： 公不耻与哙等伍邪？ 虞允文愧甚。
现代文：袁枢退朝后报告宰相，给他看奏疏，并说 ：你不以与平庸之辈为伍为耻吗？ 虞允文很惭愧。
English: After Yuan Zu retired from the imperial court, he reported to the prime minister, showed him the records, and said, "Aren't you ashamed to be in the company of mediocre people? Yu Yunwen was very ashamed.

古文：枢即求外补，出为严州教授。
现代文：袁枢就要求出朝补外官，被任命为严州教授。
English: Yuan Zu requested to go to the DPRK to fill the post of foreign minister, and was appointed as a professor of Yanzhou University.

古文：枢常喜诵司马光《资治通鉴》，苦其浩博，乃区别其事而贯通之，号《通鉴纪事本末》。参知政事龚茂良得其书，奏于上，孝宗读而嘉叹，以赐东宫及分赐江上诸帅，且令熟读，曰： 治道尽在是矣。 
现代文：袁枢常喜欢朗诵司马光的《资治通鉴》，苦于其浩博，于是按类区分又使之贯通，号称《通鉴纪事本末》，参知政事龚茂良得到此书，上奏皇上，孝宗读后很是赞叹，把它赐给东宫，又分别赐给长江流域的各位将帅，并令他们熟读，说 ：治国之道全在这里了。 
English: Yuan Zu often liked to recite Sima Guang's "A Comprehensive Guide to Governance" and was puzzled by its vastness, so he divided it into categories and made it comprehensive. It was known as the "End of the Comprehensive Guide to the Chronicle." The book was obtained by the sage and statesman Yan Maoliang. He presented it to the emperor. After reading it, Xiaozong was very impressed. He gave it to the East Palace, and separately to the generals in the Yangtze River basin, and made them familiar with it, saying: "The way to govern the country is all here."

古文：他日，上问袁枢今何官，茂良以实对，上曰： 可与寺监簿。 于是以大宗正簿召登对，即因史书以言曰： 臣窃闻陛下尝读《通鉴》，屡有训词，见诸葛亮论两汉所以兴衰，有 小人不可不去 之戒，大哉王言，垂法万世。 遂历陈往事，自汉武而下至唐文宗偏听奸佞，致于祸乱。
现代文：第二天，皇上问袁枢现在任何官，茂良告诉实情，皇上说： 可以给寺监簿之职。 于是袁枢以大宗正簿之职被召进宫对话，就根据史书奏言说： 我私下听说陛下曾读《通鉴》，屡有训词，看到诸葛亮论述两汉所以兴衰时，有 小人不可以不去除 的警告，皇上的话伟大啊，永垂万世。 于是袁枢历陈往事，从汉武帝以降至唐文宗偏听奸佞，以致祸乱。
English: The next day, the emperor asked Yuan Zu if he was any kind of official. Maoliang told him the truth, and the emperor said, "I can give you the post of temple supervisor." So Yuan Zu was summoned to the palace for a dialogue in the position of chief official, and according to the history book, he made a speech saying, "I heard in private that Your Majesty had read "Tong Jian," there were many precepts, I saw Zhuge Liang discuss the rise and fall of the two Han dynasties, there was a warning that the villain could not be removed, the emperor's words were great and eternal. So Yuan Zu went through the past, from Emperor Han

古文：且曰： 固有诈伪而似诚实，憸佞而似忠鲠者，苟陛下日与图事于帷幄中，进退天下士，臣恐必为朝廷累。 上顾谓曰： 朕不至与此曹图事帷幄中。 枢谢曰： 陛下之言及此，天下之福也。 
现代文：并说： 本来内怀诈伪而表面上好像很诚实，阴险、邪恶而表面上好像很忠诚的人，如果陛下每天与他们在帷幄中策划大事，讨论选拔、辞退天下的士人，我担心必定成为朝廷的祸患。 皇上回头看看说 ：我不至于与这些人图谋大事于帷幄中。 袁枢拜谢说 ：陛下话说到这样，是天下百姓的福气呀。 
English: He also said, "If Your Majesty were to discuss the selection and dismissal of the world's scholars with people who are deceptive and deceitful on the inside but appear to be honest on the outside, and with people who are insidious and evil but appear to be loyal on the outside, I am afraid that they would become a scourge to the Imperial Court." The Emperor looked back and said, "I will not be able to conspire with these people on the outside." Yuan Zubaixie said, "If Your Majesty were to say such a thing, it would be a blessing to the people of the world."

古文：迁太府丞。
现代文：袁枢被升任太府丞。
English: Yuan Zu was promoted to taifu cheng.

古文：时士大夫颇有为党与者。
现代文：当时士大夫中颇有结为私党的。
English: At that time, quite a few of the Shidafu became members of their own party.

古文：枢奏曰： 人主有偏党之心，则臣下有朋党之患。
现代文：袁枢奏道 ：人主有偏爱派别的心，那么就会有大臣结为朋党之患。
English: Yuan Shuxiao said, "If a ruler has a partiality for a faction, then there will be a minister who becomes a friend of the faction.

古文：比年或谓陛下宠任武士，有厌薄儒生之心，猜疑大臣，亲信左右，内庭行庙堂之事，近侍参军国之谋。
现代文：近年有人说陛下宠爱任用武士，有厌恶、轻视儒生之心，对大臣们猜疑，亲近、信任左右侍从，宫禁内的人代行国家大事，近侍参与军国大事的策划。
English: In recent years, some people have said that His Majesty favors the appointment of samurai, has an aversion to and contempt for Confucianism, is suspicious of ministers, is close to and trusts his right and left attendants, people within the Imperial Palace carry out national events on his behalf, and attendants participate in the planning of military events.

古文：今虽总权纲，专听览，而或壅蔽聪明，潜移威福。
现代文：今天即使总揽了大权，专听偏看，还是可能堵塞明智之言，滋生作威作福的思想。
English: Today, even if the general has seized great power and listens to biased opinions, it is still possible to block wise words and breed the idea of arrogance.

古文：愿可否惟听于国人，毁誉不私于左右。 上方锐意北伐，示天下以所向。
现代文：希望皇上对国事的处理只能听取国人的反映，无论是赞成，还是反对，不对左右近臣有偏心。 皇上正锐意北伐，让天下人看看他的志向。
English: It is hoped that the emperor's handling of state affairs can only be reflected by the people of the country, whether for or against, and that he will not be biased towards his close vassals.The emperor is determined to go to the north, and let the world see his aspirations.

古文：枢奏： 古之谋人国者，必示之以弱，苟陛下志复金仇，臣愿蓄威养锐，勿示其形。 复陈用宰执、台谏之术。
现代文：袁枢上奏说 ：古代谋图敌人国土的，一定让对方看到自己弱的方面，如果陛下立志报金仇，我希望蓄威养锐，不要轻易暴露实力。 袁枢又陈述了用宰执、台谏的方法。
English: Yuan Zu said in his report: "In ancient times, when plotting the enemy's land, one must let the other side see one's weak aspects. If Your Majesty is determined to take revenge, I hope that you will grow in strength and not easily expose your strength." Yuan Zu also stated the methods of using Zai Xie and Taibei.

古文：时议者欲制宗室应举锁试之额，限添差岳祠，减臣僚荐举，定文武任子，严特奏之等，展郊禋之岁，缓科举之期，枢谓： 此皆近来从窄之论，人君惟天是则，不可行也。 遂抗疏劝上推广大以存国体。
现代文：这时有议事者想限制宗室应举锁试的数额，限制添差岳祠官，减少大臣们的荐举，定下文武大臣任子数目，严格特奏等级，推迟郊礼的年份，延缓科举的期限，袁枢说： 这都是近来不关大局的议论，人君要以天命为准则，不可实行这些措施。 于是上疏抗议劝皇上以大局为重，以保存国体。
English: At this time, there were deliberators who wanted to limit the amount of lock trials that should be held in the family room, limit the number of officials in the ancestral hall, reduce the number of ministers' recommendations, fix the number of children appointed as ministers of the lower court, strict special grade, postpone the year of the suburb ceremony, and delay the deadline of the imperial examination. Yuan Zu said: These are all recent discussions that are not related to the overall situation. People should take the fate of heaven as the criterion and cannot implement these measures. Therefore, Shang Su protested and advised the emperor to focus on the overall situation and preserve the national body.

古文：兼国史院编修官，分修国史传。
现代文：袁枢兼任国史院编修官，被分配修国史传。
English: Yuan Zu also served as an editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History and was assigned to revise the national history.

古文：章惇家以其同里，宛转请文饰其传，枢曰： 子厚为相，负国欺君。吾为史官，书法不隐，宁负乡人，不可负天下后世公议。 时相赵雄总史事，见之叹曰： 无愧古良史。 
现代文：章家因与他是同乡，婉转地请袁枢文饰其传，袁枢说： 子厚这宰相，辜负国家欺骗国君，我为史官，记史不能隐瞒事实，宁愿辜负同乡人，不可以对不起天下后世大家的议论。 当时宰相赵雄总管史事，见到袁枢说： 无愧于古代良史。 
English: Zhang Jia, because he was a fellow villager, gently asked Yuan Zuwen to embellish his biography. Yuan Zu said: Zi Hou, the prime minister, betrayed the country and deceived the sovereign. I am a historian, a historian cannot hide the facts, I would rather betray my fellow countrymen, and I cannot be sorry for the discussion of everyone in the world. At that time, the prime minister Zhao Xiong, the head of history, saw Yuan Zu and said: It is worthy of ancient history.

古文：权工部郎官，累迁兼吏部郎官。
现代文：袁枢任工部郎官，历升吏部郎官。
English: Yuan Zu served as the steward of the Engineering Department, and Lisheng served as the steward of the Accounting Department.

古文：两淮旱，命廉视真、杨、庐、和四郡。
现代文：两淮干旱，皇上令袁枢巡视真、扬、庐、和四郡。
English: After two years of drought, the emperor ordered Yuan Zu to inspect Zhen, Yang, Handan, and Shixian counties.

古文：归陈两淮形势，谓： 两淮坚固则长江可守，今徒知备江，不知保淮，置重兵于江南，委空城于淮上，非所以戒不虞。
现代文：回朝后陈述两淮的形势，说： 两淮坚固那么长江可守得住，今天只知道防备长江，不知道保住淮河，置重兵于江南，把空城放弃在淮河流域，这不是警惕不测事件的做法。
English: After returning to the DPRK, he stated the situation of the two Huai, saying: The two Huai are so strong that the Yangtze River can be protected. Today, we only know how to guard the Yangtze River, but we do not know how to protect the Huai River. Placing heavy troops in the south of the river and abandoning the air city in the Huai River basin is not a practice of guarding against unforeseen events.

古文：瓜洲新城，专为退保，金使过而指议，淮人闻而叹嗟。
现代文：瓜洲是新城，专门为退保之地，金使路过对其指点、议论，淮人听说感叹不已。
English: Guazhou is a new city, specially for the place of withdrawal of insurance. Jin Zi passed by to point out and discuss it. Huai people heard and sighed.

古文：谁为陛下建此策也？ 
现代文：谁为陛下定的这个策略？ 
English: Who devised this strategy for His Majesty?

古文：迁军器少监，除提举江东常平茶盐，改知处州，赴阙奏事。
现代文：袁枢被升为军器少监，任命为提举江东常平茶盐，改知处州，到朝廷奏事。
English: Yuan Zu was promoted to the junior inspector of military equipment, appointed to promote Jiangdong Changping Tea Salt, changed his title to prefectural governor, and reported to the imperial court.

古文：枢之使淮入对也，尝言： 朋党相附则大臣之权重，言路壅塞则人主之势孤。 时宰不悦。
现代文：袁枢出使两淮回到朝廷回答问题，曾说： 朋党互相依附，那么大臣的权力就大，言路被堵塞，那么人主的势力就孤单。 当时宰相不高兴。
English: Yuan Zu sent two Huai to return to the imperial court to answer questions. He once said: "If the two parties are mutually dependent, then the power of the minister will be greater, the speech path will be blocked, and the power of the master will be alone." At that time, the prime minister was not happy.

古文：至是又言： 威权在下则主势弱，故大臣逐台谏以蔽人主之聪明；威权在上则主势强，故大臣结台谏以遏天下之公议。
现代文：到这时又说： 威严、权力在下面，那么君主势力就被削弱，所以大臣逐除台谏以蒙蔽君主的聪明；威严、权力在上面，那么君主势力张大，所以大臣勾结台谏来阻挡天下的公正意见。
English: At this time, he also said: If the majesty and power are at the bottom, then the monarch's power will be weakened, so the minister will remove the tablecloth to blind the monarch's wisdom; if the majesty and power are at the top, then the monarch's power will increase, so the minister will collude with the tablecloth to block the just opinions of the world.

古文：今朋党之旧尚在，台谏之官未正纪纲，言路将复荆榛矣。 
现代文：今天朋党的故交还在，台谏之官没正明纲纪，言路将又充满棘荆了。 
English: Today, the old friends of the party are still there, the officials of the Taiwan Straits Administration do not have a clear discipline, and the way of speech will be full of thorns again.

古文：除吏部员外郎，迁大理少卿。
现代文：袁枢被任命为吏部员外郎，升为大理少卿。
English: Yuan Zu was appointed as a member of the cadre, and was promoted to the rank of Dali Shaoqing.

古文：通州民高氏以产业事下大理，殿中侍御史冷世光纳厚赂曲庇之，枢直其事以闻，人为危之。
现代文：通州民高氏因为产业之事下大理寺狱，殿中侍御史冷世光收取重贿包庇他，袁枢把此事弄清楚上报皇上，人们认为很危险。
English: Mr. Tongzhou Mingao was imprisoned in Dali Temple because of an industrial matter. The palace attendant, Mr. Leng Shiguang, took a heavy bribe to cover up for him. Yuan Zu clarified the matter and reported it to the emperor. People thought it was very dangerous.

古文：上怒，立罢世光，以朝臣劾御史，实自枢始。
现代文：皇上听后大怒，立即罢免冷世光，以朝臣之职弹劾御史，实是从袁枢开始的。
English: Upon hearing this, the emperor flew into a rage, immediately dismissed Leng Shiguang, and impeached him as a courtier, which actually started with Yuan Zu.

古文：手诏权工部侍郎，仍兼国子祭酒。
现代文：皇上亲自写诏书任命袁枢为代理工部侍郎，仍兼国子祭酒。
English: The emperor personally wrote an imperial edict to appoint Yuan Zu as the acting chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, and he was still the son of the country.

古文：因论大理狱案请外，有予郡之命，既而贬两秩，寝前旨。
现代文：袁枢因为论述了大理狱案请求外官，于是有让他赴郡任职的命令，不久贬了二级，前面的旨令停止未发。
English: Yuan Zu's request for the foreign minister to come because he had discussed the Dali prison case, so there was an order for him to serve in the county, which was soon downgraded to the second level, and the previous order was not issued.

古文：光宗受禅，叙复元官，提举太平兴国宫、知常德府。
现代文：光宗即位，袁枢被收叙任用为原来的官职，提举太平兴国宫、知常德府。
English: When Emperor Guangzong ascended the throne, Yuan Zu was appointed to his former official post, and Taiping Xingguo Palace and Zhizhongdefu were promoted.

古文：宁宗登位，擢右文殿修撰、知江陵府。
现代文：宁宗登基，提拔袁枢为右文殿修撰、知江陵府。
English: Ningzong ascended to the throne, and Yuan Zu was promoted to the post of Umenden Shusan, and Zhijiang Lingfu.

古文：江陵濒大江，岁坏为巨浸，民无所托。
现代文：江陵濒临大江，每年田地遭到大水冲击，百姓无所依托。
English: Gangneung is on the edge of the Yangtze River. Every year, the fields are inundated with water, and the people have nowhere to turn.

古文：楚故城楚观在焉，为室庐，徙民居之，以备不虞。
现代文：楚国故城楚观在这里，袁枢把它作为房舍，移民居住，以备难以预料之患。
English: Chu Guan, the old city of Chu, is here. Yuan Zu used it as a house for immigrants to live in, in case of unforeseen disasters.

古文：种木数万，以为捍蔽，民德之。
现代文：袁枢率民种树数万棵，以捍卫堤坝，百姓获得实惠。
English: Yuan Zu led the people to plant tens of thousands of trees to defend the dam, and the people gained real benefits.

古文：寻为台臣劾罢，提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：不久袁枢被台臣弹劾罢官，提举太平兴国宫。
English: Soon after, Yuan Zu was impeached and dismissed by the Taiwanese, and Taiping Xingguo was promoted.

古文：自是三奉祠，力上请制，比之疏傅、陶令。
现代文：到这时袁枢三次主管祠观，极力上书请求退休，自比为疏传、陶令。
English: At this time, Yuan Zu, who was in charge of the ancestral hall for the third time, tried his best to write a letter requesting retirement, comparing himself to Shou Chuan and Tao Ling.

古文：开禧元年，卒，年七十五。
现代文：开禧元年，逝世，终年七十五岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy-five in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：自是闲居十载，作《易传解义》及《辩异》、《童子问》等书藏于家。
现代文：从此闲居十年，著《易传解义》及《辩异》、《童子问》等书藏于家中。
English: Since then, he has been idle for ten years, with books such as "Easy to Teach and Explain" and "Dispute" and "Children's Questions" stored at home.

古文：李椿，字寿翁，洺州永年人。
现代文：李椿字寿翁，洺州永年人。
English: Li Chunzhi, surnamed Shouweng, is a long-time resident of Zhangzhou.

古文：父升，进士起家。
现代文：父亲李升，起家于进士。
English: His father, Li Sheng, started his family in Jinji.

古文：靖康之难，升翼其父，以背受刃，与长子俱卒。
现代文：靖康之难时，李升为保护其父，以致背部受刺，与长子一起死亡。
English: When Jing Kang was in trouble, Li Sheng protected his father, so that he was stabbed in the back and died with his eldest son.

古文：椿年尚幼，藁殡佛寺，深竁而详识之；奉继母南走，艰苦备尝，竭力以养。
现代文：李椿年纪尚小，他用稻草包起灵柩把它停放在佛寺里，深挖墓穴而葬并细细地记下位置；李椿侍奉着继母南迁，尝尽了千辛万苦，竭力奉养继母。
English: Li Qin was still young. He wrapped the coffin with straw and placed it in a Buddhist temple. He dug a deep grave and buried it and carefully recorded the location. Li Qin served his stepmother when she moved to the south. He tried his best to provide for his stepmother.

古文：以父泽，补迪功郎，历官至宁国军节度推官。
现代文：因为受父亲的恩泽，李椿被荫补为迪功郎，历官至宁国军节度推官。
English: Because of his father's benevolence, Li Tsubaki was awarded the title of "Di Gong Lang" and became the highest-ranking officer of the Ningguo Army.

古文：治豪民伪券，还陈氏田，吏才精强，人称之。
现代文：李椿整治豪民利用伪券占田，归还了陈氏的田地，李椿治政才能精湛，得到人们的称赞。
English: Li Qin rectified the use of counterfeit coupons by wealthy people to occupy fields and returned the Chen family's fields. Li Qin's ability to govern was superb and was praised by the people.

古文：张浚辟为制司准备差遣，常以自随。
现代文：张浚召李椿为制司以备差遣，常常让他跟随自己。
English: Zhang Jun summoned Li Qin as a casting director to prepare for the assignment, and often let him follow him.

古文：椿奔走淮甸，绥流民，布屯戍，察庐、寿军情，相视山水砦险要，周密精审，所助为多。
现代文：李椿奔走于淮甸，安抚流民，安排屯田、戍守之事，考察庐、寿二州军情，察看山水险要之处，周密详细、精心策划，对张浚的帮助很大。
English: Li Chun-peng traveled to Huai-Dian, pacified the displaced people, arranged the affairs of military camps and garrisons, investigated the military situation in Shou and Shou's two states, and inspected the important points of landscape and river insurance. He planned in detail and meticulously, and was of great help to Zhang Jun.

古文：隆兴元年春，诸将有以北讨之议上闻者，事下督府，椿方奉檄至巢，亟奏记浚曰： 复雠伐敌，天下大义，不出督府而出诸将，况藩篱不固，储备不丰，将多而非才，兵弱而未练，议论不定，纵得其地，未易守也。 既而师出无功。
现代文：隆兴元年春，诸将领有北伐的意见被报告给皇上，此事下到督府讨论，李椿正奉命到巢州，他立即写奏记给张浚说 ：复仇伐敌，是最合乎天下人心的，此提议不是出自督府而出自诸将口中，况且我们藩篱不坚固，储备不丰裕，将虽多但无才能，士兵弱而且未训练，意见又不统一，即使夺得了土地，未必容易守住。 结果朝廷派兵出征没有成功。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Longxing Dynasty, the generals' opinions on the Northern Expedition were reported to the emperor, and the matter was discussed at the governor's office. Li Chun was ordered to Chaozhou, and he immediately wrote a report to Zhang Jun, saying: "Revenge on the enemy is the most popular thing in the world. This proposal did not come from the governor's office, but from the mouths of the generals. Moreover, our barriers are not strong, reserves are not abundant, generals are many but not talented, soldiers are weak and not trained, and opinions are not unified. Even if we seize the land, it may not be easy to keep it

古文：浚尝叹实才之难，椿曰： 岂可厚诬天下无人，唯不恶逆耳而甘逊志，则庶其肯来耳。 浚复除右相，椿知事不可为，劝之去。
现代文：张浚曾感叹真正有才能的人难发现，李椿说： 怎么可以严重地诬蔑天下没有人才，只要不讨厌逆耳之言而甘愿退让，那么他们很快就肯来了。 张浚又拜官右相，李椿知道此官不可做，劝他离去。
English: Zhang Jun once lamented that truly talented people are hard to find, Li Chun said: How can you seriously slander that there is no talent in the world, as long as you don't hate what you hear and are willing to concede, then they will soon be willing to come. Zhang Jun also worshiped the official right phase, Li Chun knew that this official could not do, and advised him to leave.

古文：明年春，浚出视师，椿曰： 小人之党已胜，公无故去朝廷，踪迹必危。 复申前说甚苦。
现代文：第二年春，张浚离开朝廷去视察军队，李椿说： 小人之私党已经胜了，你无故离开朝廷，必定危险。 李椿苦苦地重申以前所说的话。
English: In the spring of the following year, when Zhang Jun left the imperial court to inspect the troops, Li Chun said: "The villain's private party has already won. If you leave the imperial court without any reason, you will certainly be in danger." Li Chun painstakingly reiterated what he had said before.

古文：浚心是之，而自以宗臣任天下之重，不忍决去，未几果罢。
现代文：张浚决心已定，而自以为宗臣应承担国家的重任，不忍心辞去职位，不久果然被罢职。
English: Zhang Jun had already made up his mind, but he thought that his father-in-law should shoulder the heavy responsibilities of the country, and he could not bear to resign from his post, and he was soon dismissed.

古文：监登闻鼓院，有所不乐，请通判廉州以归。
现代文：李椿被分配监管登闻鼓院，心中有所不悦，请求回去任廉州通判。
English: Li Tsubaki was assigned to supervise the Dengwen Drum Academy. He was not happy and asked to go back to serve as a judge of the Lianzhou Intermediate People's Court.

古文：未上，召对，知鄂州。
现代文：未等上任，召他对话，任命他为鄂州知州。
English: Before taking office, he summoned him for dialogue and appointed him as the leader of Ezhou Zhizhou.

古文：请行垦田，复户数千，旷士大辟。
现代文：李椿请求推行垦田政策，恢复户数达数千，旷土大辟。
English: Li Tsubaki requested the implementation of the reclamation policy, and the number of households restored reached several thousand.

古文：移广西提点刑狱，狱未竟者，一以平决之，释所疑数十百人。
现代文：李椿改任广西提点刑狱，对讼事没有结案的，一概加以解决，释放了有疑问的犯人数千人。
English: Li Chun was transferred to the Guangxi Provincial Penitentiary, and the cases that had not been closed were generally resolved, and thousands of doubtful criminals were released.

古文：奏罢昭州金坑，禁仕者毋市南物。
现代文：李椿奏请罢除昭州金坑，禁止官吏不得买南方来的货物。
English: Li Chin-soo asked for the removal of the Zhaozhou gold mine and the prohibition of government officials from buying goods from the south.

古文：移湖北漕，适岁大侵，官强民振粜，且下其价，米不至，益艰食。
现代文：李椿改任湖北漕官，适遇荒年，官府强迫百姓赈荒卖粮，并压低收购价格，结果官府米未收到，百姓更加缺乏粮食。
English: Li Chun was appointed as the Hubei water conservancy official. In the event of a bad year, the government forced the people to sell grain, and lowered the purchase price. As a result, the government did not receive rice, and the people were even more short of grain.

古文：椿损所强粜数而不遏其直，未几米舟凑集，价减十三。
现代文：李椿减去百姓被强行卖粮的数额并又不限止价格，不久运米的船汇集湖北，粮食的价钱也降低了十分之三。
English: Li Tsubing reduced the amount of grain that the people were forced to sell and set an unlimited price. Soon, ships carrying rice converged on Hubei, and the price of grain was also reduced by three-tenths.

古文：每行部，必前期戒吏具州县所当问事列为籍，单车以行，所至取吏卒备使令。
现代文：李椿每次巡视部属，考察刑政，必定提前警告官吏准备好各州县应当问的事并记在纸上，李椿独自前往，所到之处叫来官吏士兵以供使唤。
English: Every time Li Chun inspects subordinates and criminal justice, he must warn officials in advance to prepare the things that should be asked in each state and county and write them down on paper. Li Chun travels alone and calls officials and soldiers to serve him wherever he goes.

古文：凡以例致馈，一不受，言事者请下诸道为式。
现代文：凡是按惯例赠送给他的东西，他一概不受，言官请求把他出行的方式、做法作为范例推广到各道。
English: He did not accept anything that was given to him as a gift according to the usual practice, and the official asked him to promote his travel method and practice as a model to all provinces.

古文：召为吏部郎官，论广西盐法，孝宗是其说，遂改法焉。
现代文：李椿被召为吏部郎官，他论述广西盐法，孝宗同意他的意见，于是改变了盐法。
English: Li Tsubaki was called to be an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. He discussed the salt law of Guangxi, and Xiaozong agreed with his opinion, so he changed the salt law.

古文：除枢密院检详。
现代文：李椿拜官为枢密院检详官。
English: Mr Lee Chin Pai is the Attorney General of the Privy Council.

古文：小吏持南丹州莫酋表，求自宜州市马者，因签书张说以闻。
现代文：一小官吏拿着南丹州莫酋表，请求从宜州买马，通过签书枢密院事张说上奏皇上。
English: A minor official, holding a Nantan Mochi watch, requested to buy a horse from Yizhou, and reported this to the emperor by signing a Privy Council petition.

古文：椿谓： 邕远宜近，故迁之，岂无意？
现代文：李椿说 ：邕州远宜州近，所以易地购马，难道这里面没有其他用意？
English: Li Chin said: Zhangzhou is far away from Yizhou, so it is easy to buy horses. Isn't there any other intention?

古文：今莫氏方横，奈何道之以中国地里之近？
现代文：今天莫氏正横行，怎能说这事是因为距朝廷地理的远近呢？
English: Today, Mohs is rampant, how can we say that this is because of the distance from the imperial geography?

古文：小吏妄作，将启边衅，请论如法。 说怒，椿因求去，上慰谕令安职。
现代文：小吏妄自所为，将会引起边地灾祸，请求按法律论他的罪。 张说大怒，李椿于是请求去职，皇上安慰他要他安心任职。
English: Zhang said he was furious, and Li Tsiming then asked to be relieved of his duties, and the emperor consoled him by telling him that he could do his job with peace of mind.

古文：迁左司，复请外，除直龙图阁、湖南运副。
现代文：李椿升为左司，又请求朝外职，皇上于是任命他为直龙图阁、湖南转运副使。
English: Li Chun Sheng was appointed as the Left Division, and he also requested to be assigned to foreign affairs. The emperor then appointed him as the vice-envoy of Zhilong Tu Ge and Hunan Transshipment.

古文：兼请十三事，同日报可，大者减桂阳军月桩钱万二千缗，损民税折银之直，民刻石纪之。
现代文：他请求十三件事，同一天得到批准，这些事中大的方面是减去桂阳军月桩钱一万二千缗，减少百姓以税折银之价值，百姓把此事刻在石碑上以示纪念。
English: He requested thirteen things, which were approved on the same day. The major aspects of these things were to reduce the monthly pile money of the Guiyang Army by 12,000 baht, and to reduce the value of the people's tax money. The people engraved the matter on the stone monument as a memorial.

古文：除司农卿。
现代文：李椿拜官司农卿。
English: Li Chinbai, the official secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：椿会大农岁用米百七十万斛，而省仓见米仅支一二月，叹曰： 真所谓国非其国矣。 力请岁储二百万斛为一年之蓄。
现代文：李椿统计大农每年需米一百七十万斛，而省仓观有米仅够一二个月的支用，就感叹地说： 这真是所谓的国将不国了。 于是竭力请求每年储备二百万斛粮食作为一年的储蓄。
English: Li Tsun, who calculated that a large farmer needs 1.7 million baht of rice per year, while according to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, there is only enough rice to last for one or two months, said with a sigh: "This is really the so-called country will no longer be a country." Therefore, he made every effort to request an annual reserve of 2 million baht of grain as a year's savings.

古文：择临安守，椿在议中，执政或谓其于人无委曲，上曰： 正欲得如此人。 遂兼临安府，视事三月，竟以幸不便解去。
现代文：朝廷选拔临安郡守，李椿在候选之中，执政中有人说他对人不会委曲求全，皇上说 ：我正想得到这样的人。 于是李椿兼任临安府知府，执政三个月后，最终由于权贵、皇上的亲宠感到不便而去职。
English: The imperial court selected the governor of Lin'an County, and Li Chun was one of the candidates. During his reign, some people said that he would not try to please everyone, and the emperor said: I just want to get such a person. Therefore, Li Chun also served as the governor of Lin'an Prefecture. After three months in power, he eventually left the post because he was inconvenienced by the powerful and the emperor's favorite.

古文：椿在朝，遇事辄言，执政故不悦。
现代文：李椿在朝廷时，遇到事情就说，执政所以对他不满。
English: When Li Tsubaki was in the imperial court, whenever he encountered a problem, he would say that he was dissatisfied with him because he was in power.

古文：及是转对，又言： 君以刚健为体而虚中为用，臣以柔顺为体而刚中为用。
现代文：等到这次轮到他回答皇上提问时，又说： 国君以刚强、稳健为本而以诚敬为公，大臣以柔顺为本而以刚中为用。
English: When it was his turn to answer the emperor's question, he also said, "The sovereign is based on strength and steadiness and uses sincerity and respect for the public, while the minister is based on meekness and uses firmness and moderation.

古文：陛下得虚中之道，以行刚健之德矣。
现代文：陛下得到了诚敬之道，就可用以行刚强、稳健的德行了。
English: Having gained the way of sincerity and respect, His Majesty can use it to practice the virtue of being strong and steady.

古文：在廷之臣，未见其能以刚中守柔顺而事陛下者也。 执政滋不悦，出知婺州。
现代文：在朝廷的大臣中，没有看到能以刚守柔而事奉陛下的。 执政非常不高兴，让李椿离朝任婺州知州。
English: Among the ministers of the imperial court, there was no one who could serve His Majesty with firmness and gentleness. The government was very unhappy and let Li Chin leave the imperial court to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：会诏市牛筋，凡五千斤。
现代文：正遇皇上诏令买牛筋，共五千斤。
English: He had just received an imperial edict to buy beef tendon, a total of five thousand catties.

古文：椿奏： 一牛之筋才四两，是欲屠二万牛也。 上悟，为收前诏。
现代文：李椿奏道： 一条牛的筋只有四两，要买五千斤牛筋，这就要杀二万条牛啊。 皇上顿悟，收回前令。
English: Li Qinxiao said: A cow's sinew is only forty-two, if you want to buy five thousand pounds of beef sinew, you have to kill twenty thousand cows. The emperor had an epiphany and withdrew the previous order.

古文：除吏部侍郎，又极言阍寺之盛，曰： 自古宦官之盛衰，系国家兴亡。
现代文：李椿拜官吏部侍郎，又极力说宫中宦官太兴盛，他说： 自古宦官的盛衰，关系国家的兴亡。
English: Li Chinbai, an attendant of the officials' department, also insisted that the eunuchs in the palace were too prosperous. He said: Since ancient times, the rise and fall of eunuchs has been related to the rise and fall of the country.

古文：其盛也，始则人畏之，甚则人恶之，极则群起而攻之。
现代文：宦官刚兴盛时，开始人们害怕他们，等他们更盛时那么人们憎恶他们，宦官兴盛到了极点就会群起攻之了。
English: When eunuchs were first flourishing, people began to fear them. When they became more prosperous, people hated them. When eunuchs reached the peak of their prosperity, people would attack them in droves.

古文：汉、唐勿论，靖康、明受之祸未远，必有以裁制之，不使至极，则国家免于前日之患，宦官亦保其富贵。
现代文：汉、唐之事不用说，靖康、明受之祸距今不远，一定要对他们加以制裁、限制，不让他们达到极盛程度，那么国家可以免去以前出现过的灾祸，宦官又保住了他们的富贵。
English: As for the Han and Tang Dynasties, it goes without saying that the calamities suffered by the Jingkang and Ming Dynasties are not far away. It is imperative to impose sanctions and restrictions on them and prevent them from reaching their peak, so that the country can avoid the calamities that have occurred before, and the eunuchs can preserve their wealth.

古文：门禁宫戒之外，勿得预外事，严禁士大夫兵将官与之交通。 上闻靖康、明受语，蹙頞久之，曰： 幼亦闻此。 因纳疏袖中以入。
现代文：除了朝廷规定的宫廷戒规之外，还不能让他们干预其他事，严禁士大夫、兵将官与他们交往勾结。 皇上听到靖康、明受之祸的话，皱眉很久，说： 我年幼时也听说过这件事。 
English: In addition to the palace rules and regulations stipulated by the imperial court, they must not be allowed to interfere in other matters, and it is strictly forbidden for officers and generals to interact and collude with them.When the emperor heard the words of the calamity of Jing Kang, he frowned for a long time and said: I also heard about this when I was young.

古文：最后极言： 当预边备，如欲保淮，则楚州、盱眙、昭信、濠梁、涡口、花靥、正阳、光州皆不可以不守；如欲保江，则高邮、六合、瓦梁、濡须、巢湖、北峡亦要地也。 
现代文：于是收起李椿的奏书于袖中进殿去了。最后李椿急切地说： 应当预备边境的储备，如果想保住淮河，那么楚州、盱眙、昭信、濠梁、涡口、花靥、正阳、光州都不可以不守护；如想保住长江，那么高邮、六合、瓦梁、濡须、巢湖、北峡也是要地。 
English: At last, Li Chun said eagerly, "We should prepare reserves for the border. If we want to protect the Huai River, then Chuzhou, Handan, Zhaoxin, Handan, Vortex, Huadu, Zhengyang, and Gwangju cannot be left unguarded. If we want to protect the Yangtze River, then Gaoyou, Liuhe, Jialiang, Nuxu, Chaohu, and North Gorge are also important places."

古文：以病请祠，不许，面请益力，乃除集英殿修撰、知宁国府，改太平州，赐尚方珍剂以遣。
现代文：李椿因病请求管理一祠观，未得到批准，李椿当皇上的面更加极力请求，于是被拜官集英殿修撰、宁国府知府，后改为太平州知州，皇上还赐给李椿尚方制造的珍剂。
English: Due to his illness, Li Chun requested the management of an ancestral hall, but it was not approved. Li Chun made more strenuous requests to the emperor, so he was written by the worshiper Ji Ying, the prefect of Ningguo Prefecture, and later changed to Taiping Prefecture Chizhou. The emperor also gave Li Chun a rare medicine made by Shangfang.

古文：既至，力图上流之备，请选将练习，缓急列舰，上可以援东关、濡须，下可以应采石。
现代文：李椿到达太平州后，极力图谋上流的防备，请求选将加以训练，准备好船以备急用，往北可以支援东关、濡须，往南可以接应采石。
English: After arriving in Taiping, Li Tsubing tried his best to prepare for the upstream. He requested that the divers be trained and the ship be prepared for emergency use. It could support Dongguan and Wushu in the north and quarry in the south.

古文：年六十九，上章请老，以敷文阁待制致仕。
现代文：李椿六十九岁了，他上书请求告老，最后以敷文阁待制之职退休。
English: Li Chin was 69 years old. He wrote a letter requesting to retire, and finally retired with the post of Shibunkaku.

古文：越再岁，上念湖南兵役之余，欲镇安之，谓椿重厚可倚，命待制显谟阁、知潭州、湖南安抚使。
现代文：又过了一年，皇上考虑到湖南兵役的余波，想加以镇抚，认为李椿忠诚可靠，命他为待制显谟阁、潭州知州、湖南安抚使。
English: A year later, considering the aftermath of Hunan's military service, the emperor wanted to pacify it, and thought that Li Qin was loyal and reliable. He ordered him to be the pacifying envoy for Jiaoxing, Tanzhou, Zhizhou and Hunan.

古文：累辞不获，乃勉起，至则抚摩凋瘵，气象一如盛时。
现代文：李椿多次推辞没有批准，于是勉强动身，到湖南后就抚绥凋敝，使其呈现出兴盛时一样的气象。
English: Li Tsubaki repeatedly refused to give his approval, so he reluctantly set off, and after arriving in Hunan, he patted it, so that it showed the same weather as when it was flourishing.

古文：复酒税法，人以为便。岁旱，发廪劝分，蠲租十一万，粜常平米二万，活数万人。
现代文：李椿下令恢复酒税法，发放仓中粮食并劝说人们有天相济，不用担心，又蠲免租十一万，卖常平米二万，使几万人得以生存。
English: Li Tsiming ordered to restore the liquor tax law, distribute grain in warehouses and persuade people that there is no need to worry, and give 110,000 yuan rent-free and sell 20,000 square meters of rice, so that tens of thousands of people could survive.

古文：潭新置飞虎军，或以为非便，椿曰： 长沙一都会，控扼湖、岭，镇抚蛮徭，二十年间，大盗三起，何可无一军？
现代文：潭州新建飞虎军，有人以为不合适，李椿说 ：长沙一个都会，控扼着湖、岭二州，镇抚蛮族瑶民，二十年间，大的变乱有三起，怎么可以没有一支军队呢？
English: Some people thought it was inappropriate to build a new Flying Tiger Army in Tanzhou, but Li Chin said: Changsha is a metropolis, controlling the lake, the ridge and two states, pacifying the barbarians and the people. In twenty years, there have been three major upheavals. How can there be no army?

古文：且已费县官缗钱四十二万，何可废耶？
现代文：况且已花费县官缗钱四十二万，怎么可以废除呢？
English: Moreover, it has already cost the prefectural government 420,000 yuan, so how can it be abolished?

古文：亦在驭之而已。 未满岁，复告归，进敷文阁直学士致仕，朝拜命，夕登舟，归老野塘上。
现代文：关键在于如何驾驭它而已。 李椿任职未满一年，又告老还乡，被提为敷文阁直学士退休，早晨接到命令，晚上他就上船，回到野塘上养老。
English: The key lies in how to control it. Li Chun served for less than a year, and then returned to his hometown, was promoted to Shibunkaku straight bachelor retirement, received orders in the morning, and in the evening he got on the boat and returned to the pond to retire.

古文：椿年十五岁避地南来，贫无以为养，不得专力于学。
现代文：李椿十五岁时为躲避战祸而南迁，贫困无以生存，不能专心于学习。
English: At the age of fifteen, Li Chin moved to the south to escape the war. He was too poor to survive and could not concentrate on his studies.

古文：年三十始学《易》，其言于朝廷，措诸行事，皆《易》之用。
现代文：三十岁才开始学习《易》，他在朝廷所说的，以及所作所为，都是根据《易》指导。
English: He did not begin to study the Yi until he was thirty years old. Everything he said and did at court was guided by the Yi.

古文：仪凤苦学，至老不倦，尤工于诗。
现代文：李椿内心品德高尚有操守，以忠诚厚道为本，尤其厌恶佛老之邪说。淳熙十年，李椿死去，终年七十三岁。
English: In his heart, Li Chun was a person of high moral character and integrity, with loyalty and benevolence as the foundation, and he especially detested the evil teachings of the Buddha. In the tenth year of Chunxi, Li Chun died at the age of seventy-three.

古文：然颇慕晋人简傲之风，不乐与庸辈接，故平生多蹭蹬，一跌遂不振云。
现代文：朱熹曾为他做墓志铭，说他 从反面了解得失，不假借蓍草龟申占卜 。 不阿谀主子的喜好，不求一时的赞誉 等。
English: Zhu Xi once made an epitaph for him, saying that he should understand the gains and losses from the opposite side, should not use the tortoise to make divination, should not flatter his master's preferences, should not seek momentary praise, and so on.

古文：张孝祥，字安国，历阳乌江人。
现代文：张孝祥字安国，历阳乌江人。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang is from An Guo, Liyang and Wujiang.

古文：读书过一目不忘，下笔顷刻数千言，年十六，领乡书，再举冠里选。绍兴二十四年，廷试第一。
现代文：他读书过目不忘，下笔顷刻数千字。十六岁时，张孝祥乡试中试，又被乡里推荐为第一名。绍兴二十四年，张孝祥参加廷试考到第一名。
English: At the age of 16, Zhang Xiaoxiang took the junior high school entrance examination in his hometown and was recommended as the first place. In 24 years, Zhang Xiaoxiang took the imperial examination in Shaoxing and won the first place.

古文：时策问师友渊源，秦埙与曹冠皆力攻程氏专门之学，孝祥独不攻。
现代文：当时策问师友渊源，秦埙与曹冠都竭力攻击程氏专门之学，张孝祥独独不这样做。
English: At that time, Qin Yu and Cao Guan tried their best to attack Cheng's special study, but Zhang Xiaoxiang was the only one who did not do so.

古文：考官已定埙冠多士，孝祥次之，曹冠又次之。
现代文：考官已定下秦埙为士人中之冠，张孝祥次之，曹冠又次之。
English: The examiner has determined that Qin Hui is the crown among the scholars, Zhang Xiaoxiang is the second, and Cao Guan is the second.

古文：高宗读埙策皆秦桧语，于是擢孝祥第一，而埙第三，授承事郎、签书镇东军节度判官。
现代文：高宗读了秦埙的对策都是秦桧所说过的话，于是把张孝祥提为第一名，而秦埙为第三名，授予张孝祥承事郎、签书镇东军节度判官。
English: Gao Zong read that Qin Yu's countermeasures were all Qin Yu's words, so he nominated Zhang Xiaoxiang as the first, and Qin Yu as the third, and awarded Zhang Xiaoxiang as the secretary and judge of the East Army Festival.

古文：谕宰相曰： 张栻孝祥词翰俱美。 
现代文：皇上告诉宰相说 ：张孝祥诗词、文笔都很美。 
English: The emperor told the prime minister that Zhang Xiaoxiang's poetry and writings were beautiful.

古文：先是，上之抑埙而擢孝祥也，秦桧已怒，既知孝祥乃祁之子，祁与胡寅厚，桧素憾寅，且唱第后，曹泳揖孝祥于殿庭，以请婚为言，孝祥不答，泳憾之。
现代文：开始，皇上抑制秦埙而提拔张孝祥，秦桧已经很不高兴了，后来又知道张孝祥是张祁的儿子，张祁与胡寅关系密切，秦桧一向不满意胡寅，况且公布廷试名次后，曹泳在殿廷对张孝祥拱手让礼，请求结为姻亲，张孝祥不答应，曹泳对他很不满意。
English: At first, the emperor suppressed Qin Yu and promoted Zhang Xiaoxiang. Qin Yu was already very unhappy. Later, he learned that Zhang Xiaoxiang was the son of Zhang Ye. Zhang Ye had a close relationship with Hu Yin. Qin Yu had always been dissatisfied with Hu Yin. Moreover, after the announcement of the court examination rankings, Cao Yong made a concession to Zhang Xiaoxiang in the imperial court and requested to be married to him. Zhang Xiaoxiang did not agree, and Cao Yong was very dissatisfied with him.

古文：于是风言者诬祁有反谋，系诏狱。
现代文：于是暗示言官诬陷张孝祥有造反的企图，张孝祥被牵连，由皇上下诏关进监狱。
English: He then insinuated that the spokesman had framed Zhang Xiaoxiang in an attempt to rebel. Zhang Xiaoxiang was implicated and sent to prison by imperial edict.

古文：会桧死，上郊祀之二日，魏良臣密奏散狱释罪，遂以孝祥为秘书省正字。
现代文：正遇秦桧死去，皇上郊祀的第二天，魏良臣私下奏请皇上为张孝祥解除监禁洗脱罪名，于是任命张孝祥为秘书正字。
English: On the day of Qin Yu's death, the day after the emperor's burial, Wei Liangchen secretly petitioned the emperor to release Zhang Xiaoxiang from imprisonment, and then appointed Zhang Xiaoxiang as secretary of Zheng Zi.

古文：故事，殿试第一人，次举始召，孝祥第甫一年得召由此。
现代文：过去，殿试第一名者，要次年举荐才被用，张孝祥中第只一年由此得以召用。
English: In the past, the first-place finisher in the entrance examination had to be recommended the following year before being used, and Zhang Xiaoxiang Middle School was only able to use the first-place finisher in the first year.

古文：初对，首言乞总揽权纲以尽更化之美。
现代文：张孝祥首次回答皇上的提问，首先说请皇上总揽朝纲大权以使国家变得更加完善。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang answered the emperor's questions for the first time. First, he said that he would like to ask the emperor to take over the supreme power to make the country more perfect.

古文：又言： 官吏忤故相意，并缘文致，有司观望锻炼而成罪，乞令有司即改正。 又言： 王安石作《日录》，一时政事，美则归己。
现代文：又说 ：官吏违背已故宰相的意见，一同凭借舞文弄法，陷人入罪，有关部门观望不管，任其罗织罪名陷人于罪，请令有关部门立即加以改正。 张孝祥又说 ：王安著《日录》，把一时政事，做得好的就归功自己。
English: He also said, "Officials, against the advice of the late prime minister, together with the help of the dance and song method, entrapped people, and the relevant departments did not care to watch, let them fabricate charges and entrap people, and asked the relevant departments to correct them immediately." Zhang Xiaoxiang also said, "Wang An wrote "Diary" and took the credit for doing well in politics for a while.

古文：故相信任之专，非特安石。
现代文：已故宰相的专信专用，并不只有王安石。
English: Wang Anshi is not the only one with a special connection to the late prime minister.

古文：臣惧其作《时政记》，亦如安石专用己意，乞取已修《日历》详审是正，黜私说以垂无穷。 从之。
现代文：我担心所著的《时政记》，也如王安石专用自己的意思，乞求把所修订的《日历》详细审查加以改正，罢黜私家之说以垂青史。 
English: I am worried that my book, "History of Politics," is also like Wang Anshi's own will, begging for a detailed review of the revised "Calendar" to correct it, and rejecting the private saying to pass into history.

古文：迁校书郎。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。张孝祥升为校书郎。
English: The emperor listened to his advice. Zhang Xiaoxiang was promoted to school scribe.

古文：芝生太庙，孝祥献文曰《原芝》，以大本未立为言，且言： 芝在仁宗、英宗之室，天意可见，乞早定大计。 迁尚书礼部员外郎，寻为起居舍人、权中书舍人。
现代文：太庙里长出灵芝，张孝祥献上文章《原芝》，以国家的根本未立为主要内容，并说： 灵芝长在仁宗、英宗的坟墓上，可明白天意，乞求早日定下大计。 张孝祥升为礼部员外郎，不久为起居舍人、权中书舍人。
English: Ganoderma lucidum sprouted in the Great Temple, and Zhang Xiaoxiang presented an article, "The Original Ganoderma Lucidum," with the country's failure to be established as the main content, and said, "The Ganoderma lucidum growing on the tombs of Emperor Renzong and Emperor Yingzong can understand the will of heaven, and implore that a grand plan be established at an early date.

古文：初，孝祥登第，出汤思退之门，思退为相，擢孝祥甚峻。
现代文：当初，张孝祥考中进士，出自汤思退门下，思退为宰相，对张孝祥大力提拔。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Xiaoxiang, a junior high school entrance examination candidate, came from Tang Siyi, and Siyi became the prime minister, and promoted Zhang Xiaoxiang vigorously.

古文：而思退素不喜汪澈，孝祥与澈同为馆职，澈老成重厚，而孝祥年少气锐，往往陵拂之。
现代文：汤思退一向不喜欢汪澈，张孝祥与汪澈一同任馆职，汪澈老成持重诚实，而张孝祥年少气盛，往往凌驾在他之上不顺从他。
English: Tong Siti has always disliked Wang Chieh. Zhang Xiaoxiang and Wang Chieh worked together at the museum. Wang Chieh has always been honest, while Zhang Xiaoxiang is young and energetic. He often overrides Wang Chieh and disobeys him.

古文：至是澈为御史中丞，首劾孝祥奸不在庐杞下，孝祥遂罢，提举江州太平兴国宫，于是汤思退之客稍稍被逐。
现代文：到汪澈为御史中丞时，他首先弹劾张孝祥奸邪程度不亚于卢杞，张孝祥于是被罢职，提举江州太平兴国宫，于是汤思退的门客渐渐被驱逐。
English: When Wang Chieh became the imperial historian, he first impeached Zhang Xiaoxiang, whose treachery was as evil as that of Lu Xi. Zhang Xiaoxiang was then dismissed from his post and promoted to Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace, and Tang Siqi's protégé was gradually expelled.

古文：寻除知抚州。
现代文：不久张孝祥任抚州知州。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xiaoxiang was assigned to Fuzhou and Chizhou.

古文：年未三十，莅事精确，老于州县者所不及。
现代文：他年纪不到三十，处理事情很精明、准确，州县中很老练的人比不上他。
English: He is less than thirty years old, and he is very shrewd and accurate in handling things. The most experienced people in the state and county are no match for him.

古文：孝宗即位，复集英殿修撰，知平江府。
现代文：孝宗即位后，张孝祥又任集英殿修撰、平江府知府之职。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Zhang Xiaoxiang was also appointed to the post of Shusan of Shueiden and the post of governor of Pingjiang Prefecture.

古文：事繁剧，孝祥剖决，庭无滞讼。
现代文：事务繁重艰巨，张孝祥一一加以分析解决，知府庭上没有滞留的案件。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang analyzed and solved the complicated and arduous cases one by one, and there were no pending cases in the court of the prefectural government.

古文：属邑大姓并海囊橐为奸利，孝祥捕治，籍其家得谷粟数万。
现代文：平江府所属县中的大姓把海中利润一起装入自己口袋获得暴利，张孝祥派人捕捉他们并加以处理，没收其家谷粟几万斛。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang sent people to catch them and deal with them, confiscating tens of thousands of baht of his family's millet.

古文：明年，吴中大饥，迄赖以济。
现代文：第二年，吴中饥荒，一直靠这些粮食赈济百姓。
English: The following year, Wuzhong suffered a famine and relied on this grain to feed the people.

古文：张浚自蜀还朝，荐孝祥，召赴行在。
现代文：张浚从蜀国回到朝廷，向皇上推荐张孝祥，皇上召张孝祥前往行在。
English: Zhang Jun returned to the imperial court from Shu, recommended Zhang Xiaoxiang to the emperor, and the emperor summoned Zhang Xiaoxiang to the imperial court.

古文：孝祥既素为汤思退所知，及受浚荐，思退不悦。
现代文：张孝祥既然一向被汤思退所赏识，等到他被张浚推荐，汤思退感到不悦。
English: Since Zhang Xiaoxiang has always been appreciated by Tang Siwei, when he was recommended by Zhang Jun, Tang Siwei felt unhappy.

古文：孝祥入对，乃陈 二相当同心戮力，以副陛下恢复之志。
现代文：张孝祥进宫回答皇上的问题，于是陈述： 二位宰相应当同心协力，以辅佐皇上完成恢复国家的大任。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang entered the palace to answer the emperor's question, and then stated: The two prime ministers should work together to assist the emperor in completing the task of restoring the country.

古文：且靖康以来惟和战两言，遗无穷祸，要先立自治之策以应之。 复言： 用才之路太狭，乞博采度外之士以备缓急之用。 上嘉之。
现代文：况且靖康以来只有和与战两种意见，留下无穷的祸害，必须先制定自治之策来对付现在的形势。 又说 ：选用人才的路太狭窄，请求广泛征择朝外有识之士以备缓急之用。 皇上认为很对。
English: Moreover, since Yasukuni, there have only been two opinions, conciliation and war, leaving an endless scourge, and it is necessary to first formulate a self-governance policy to deal with the current situation. He also said: the way to select talents is too narrow, and requested that a wide range of insightful people from inside and outside the DPRK be selected to prepare for urgent use. The Emperor thought it was right.

古文：除中书舍人，寻除直学士院兼都督府参赞军事。
现代文：张孝祥拜官中书舍人，不久拜官直学士院兼都督府参赞军事。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang was a pupil at the Baiguan Middle School, and soon became a military adviser to the Baiguan Zhi Academy and the Governor's Office.

古文：俄兼领建康留守，以言者改除敷文阁待制，留守如旧。
现代文：不久又兼任建康留守，因为言官的意见改任敷文阁待制，留守之职照旧。
English: Soon after, he also served as Jiankang's aide-de-camp, but because of the speaker's opinion, he was reassigned to Shibunkaku's aide-de-camp, and his duties as aide-de-camp remained the same.

古文：会金再犯边，孝祥陈金之势不过欲要盟。
现代文：遇金再次入侵边境，张孝祥陈述金的目的不过是想结盟约。
English: When Kim invaded the border again, Zhang Xiaoxiang stated that Kim's only goal was to form an alliance.

古文：宣谕使劾孝祥落职，罢。
现代文：宣谕使弹劾张孝祥使之失去职位，被罢黜。
English: The proclamation led to the impeachment of Zhang Xiaoxiang, who lost his position and was ousted.

古文：复集英殿修撰、知静江府、广南西路经略安抚使，治有声绩，复以言者罢。
现代文：张孝祥复职为集英殿修撰、静江府知府、广南西路经略安抚使，他治政有声有色，大有作为，又因为言官的意见被罢。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang was reinstated as the Shuxian of the Shuei Palace, the governor of Jingjiang Prefecture, and the pacifying envoy of the Guangnan West Road. He governed with a colorful voice and great achievements, and was ousted because of the opinion of the speaker.

古文：俄起知潭州，为政简易，时以威济之，湖南遂以无事。
现代文：不久张孝祥被起用任潭州知州，治政简明易行，不时以威力佐政，湖南于是平安无事。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xiaoxiang was appointed as the leader of Tanzhou and Zhizhou. He governed the state with simplicity and ease, and from time to time he used his power to support the government. As a result, Hunan was safe and sound.

古文：复待制，徙知荆南、荆湖北路安抚使。
现代文：张孝祥恢复待制，改任荆南、荆湖北安抚使。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang was reinstated as a vice-premier and reassigned to the post of Jingnan and Jinghubei Pacifying Envoy.

古文：筑寸金堤，自是荆州无水患，置万盈仓以储诸漕之运。
现代文：他组织修筑了寸金堤，从此荆州没有洪水之患，又设立万盈仓来储备各种漕运的粮食。
English: He organized the construction of an embankment, from which there was no flood in Jingzhou, and set up a warehouse to store all kinds of grain transported by boat.

古文：请祠，以疾卒，孝宗惜之，有用才不尽之叹。
现代文：张孝祥请求管理一祠观，后因病死去，孝宗感到十分惋惜，有用才不尽的感触。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang asked for the management of an ancestral hall, and then died of illness. Xiaozong felt very sorry, and felt that it was useful.

古文：进显谟阁直学士致仕，年三十八。
现代文：张孝祥进为显阁学士致仕，终年三十八岁。
English: Zhang Xiao Xiangjin retired as a Henkaku scholar at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：孝祥俊逸，文章过人，尤工翰墨，尝亲书奏札，高宗见之，曰： 必将名世。 但渡江初，大议惟和战，张浚主复仇，汤思退祖秦桧之说力主和，孝祥出入二人之门而两持其说，议者惜之。
现代文：张孝祥才智出众，文章水平超过一般的人，尤其工于笔墨，曾亲自书写奏札，高宗看了后说他： 将来一定闻名于世。 不过宋朝南迁之初，朝廷内部主要意见只有和与战二种，张浚主张复仇，汤思退因袭秦桧的意见力求议和，张孝祥出入这二人之门而持二种意见，态度不明朗，人们为他感到惋惜。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiang's talent was outstanding, his level of writing was above that of the average person, especially in pen and ink, he once wrote a musical score in person, Gao Zong read it and said that he would be famous in the future. However, at the beginning of the Song Dynasty's move to the south, there were only two main opinions within the imperial court, Zhang Jun advocated revenge, Tang Siwei tried to negotiate peace by attacking Qin Hui's opinion, Zhang Xiaoxiang entered and left the door of these two people and held two opinions, his attitude was unclear, people felt sorry for him.

