古文：乌孙国，大昆弥治赤谷城，去长安八千九百里。
现代文：乌孙国，大昆弥治赤谷城，束到长安八千九百里。
English: In the Wusun Kingdom, the Great Kunming Emperor ruled Akaya City, which is 8,900 li away from Chang'an.

古文：户十二万，口六十三万，胜兵十八万八千八百人。
现代文：有户十二万，人口六十三万，军队十八万八千八百人。
English: There are 120,000 households, a population of 630,000, and a military of 188,800.

古文：相，大禄，左右大将二人，侯三人，大将、都尉各一人，大监二人，大吏一人，舍中大吏二人，骑君一人。
现代文：有相，大禄，左右大将二人，侯三人，大将、都尉各一人，大监二人，大吏一人，舍中大吏二人，骑君一人。
English: There was a sexton, a major, two generals on the left and right, three marquesses, one general and one lieutenant each, two superintendents, one major, two junior major officers, and one equerry.

古文：东至都护治所千七百二十一里，西至康居蕃内地五千里。
现代文：束到西域都护治所乌垒城一千七百二十一里，西到康居蕃内地五千里。
English: It is 1,721 miles to the western capital city of Wuji, and 5,000 miles west to the inland of Kangju.

古文：地莽平。多雨，寒。
现代文：土地草莽平坦，多雨，气候寒冷。
English: The land is grassy, flat, rainy, and the climate is cold.

古文：山多松樠。
现代文：山上多松椭。
English: There are many pine trees on the mountain.

古文：不田作种树，随畜逐水草，与匈奴同俗。
现代文：居民不种田植树，随牲畜逐水草而居，和匈奴的风俗相同。
English: The inhabitants do not cultivate fields and plant trees, but live with their livestock, following the grass and water, which is the same as the Huns' customs.

古文：国多马，富人至四五千匹。
现代文：国内多产马，富有的人有马多达四五千匹。
English: Horses are prolific in the country, with wealthy people owning as many as four or five thousand horses.

古文：民刚恶，贪狼无信，多寇盗，最为强国。
现代文：民性刚强，贪财，不讲信义，有很多盗贼，是一个强大的国家。
English: The people are strong-willed, greedy for money, dishonest, there are many thieves, it is a powerful country.

古文：故服匈奴，后盛大，取羁属，不肯往朝会。
现代文：以前曾臣服于匈奴，后来强盛，对匈奴采取羁縻态度，不肯去朝拜。
English: Formerly subject to the Xiongnu, he later prospered and adopted a protective attitude towards the Xiongnu, refusing to go to the temple.

古文：东与匈奴、西北与康居、西与大宛、南与城郭诸国相接。
现代文：东与匈奴、西北与康居、西与大宛、南与城郭诸国相接。
English: It is bordered by Xiongnu in the east, Kangju in the northwest, Dawan in the west, and castle countries in the south.

古文：本塞地也，大月氏西破走塞王，塞王南越县度。大月氏居其地。
现代文：造裹本来是塞人的土地，大月氏向西击破并赶走了塞王，塞王迁到县度以南，大月氏就占据了塞人的土地。
English: It was originally Cypriot land, but the Otsuki clan broke through to the west and drove out the Cypriot king. The Cypriot king moved to the south of the county, and the Otsuki clan occupied the Cypriot land.

古文：后乌孙昆莫击破大月氏，大月氏徙西臣大夏，而乌孙昆莫居之，故乌孙民有塞种、大月氏种云。
现代文：后来乌孙昆莫击破大月氏，大月氏西迁，臣服大夏，乌孙昆莫占据了原大月氏地，所以乌孙的居民中有塞人、大月氏人。
English: Later, Uson Kunmo defeated the Otsuki clan, the Otsuki clan moved westward and submitted to Daxia, and Uson Kunmo occupied the original Otsuki clan's land, so there are Cypriots and Otsuki clan people among the residents of Uson.

古文：始张骞言乌孙本与大月氏共在敦煌间，今乌孙虽强大，可厚赂招，令东居故地，妻以公主，与为昆弟，以制匈奴。
现代文：开始张骞说乌孙本与大月氏本来都在敦煌一带，如今乌孙虽然强大了，还是可以送些厚礼，招他们东归故地；再将公主嫁给昆莫，与！
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye said that U Sun Ben and the Big Moon clan were originally in the Dunhuang area. Now, although U Sun is powerful, he can still send some gifts and invite them to return to their hometowns; and then marry the princess to Kunmo, and!

古文：语在《张骞传》。
现代文：皇亟约为兄弟之国，用这样的办法制约匈奴。
English: The emperor was anxious to establish a brotherly country, and used this method to keep the Huns in check.

古文：武帝即位，令骞赍金币住。
现代文：此事记在《张骞传》中。汉武帝即位，命张骞带着金币财宝到乌孙。
English: This event is recorded in the "Biography of Zhang Ye." When Emperor Hanwu ascended the throne, he ordered Zhang Ye to take gold and treasure to Emperor Wusun.

古文：昆莫见骞如单于礼，骞大惭，谓曰： 天子致赐，王不拜，则还赐。 
现代文：昆莫以匈奴单于的态度与张骞相见，张骞很羞怒，对昆莫说： 天子赐给你的礼物，你不拜谢，那就把礼物归还我们。 
English: Kunmo met Zhang Ye with a Hun-like attitude. Zhang Ye was very angry and said to Kunmo, "If you don't thank God for the gift He has given you, then return the gift to us."

古文：昆莫起拜，其它如故。
现代文：昆莫起而拜谢，其他方面还是那个样子。
English: Kun Mo stood up and said thanks, but other aspects remained the same.

古文：初，昆莫有十余子，中子大禄强，善将，将众万余骑别居。
现代文：当初，昆莫有十几个儿子，中子大禄很强，善于带兵，率领一万余骑兵住在别处。
English: At the beginning, Kunmo had more than a dozen sons. He had a lot of money and was good at leading soldiers. He led more than ten thousand cavalry and lived elsewhere.

古文：大禄兄太子，太子有子曰岑陬。
现代文：大禄之兄是太子，太子有个儿子叫岑陬。
English: Oroku's brother is the Crown Prince, and the Crown Prince has a son named Sumo.

古文：太子蚤死，谓昆莫曰： 必以岑陬为太子。 
现代文：太子早死，死前对昆莫说： 一定要以岑陬为太子。 
English: The crown prince died early, and before his death he said to Kunmo, "You must make Zou the crown prince."

古文：昆莫哀许之。
现代文：昆莫很难过就同意了。
English: Kunmo reluctantly agreed.

古文：大禄怒，乃收其昆弟，将众畔，谋攻岑陬。
现代文：大禄对这件事很生气，就把其他兄弟都捉了起来，率领士卒反叛，准备进攻岑陬。
English: Enraged by this, Oroku rounded up the other brothers and led his soldiers in a mutiny, preparing to attack the castle.

古文：昆莫与芩陬万余骑，令别居，昆莫亦自有万余骑以自备。
现代文：昆莫给了岑陬一万余骑兵，命他屯驻别处，自己也有一万余骑兵用以自卫。
English: Kunmo gave Yao more than ten thousand cavalry and ordered him to garrison elsewhere. He also had more than ten thousand cavalry to defend himself.

古文：国分为三，大总羁属昆莫。
现代文：这时国家分为三部分，都归昆莫节制。
English: At this time, the country was divided into three parts, all under the control of Kunmo.

古文：骞既致赐，谕指曰： 乌孙能东居故地，则汉遣公主为夫人，结为昆弟，共距匈奴，不足破也。 
现代文：张骞将汉朝赐给昆莫的礼物送交以后，对昆莫说： 乌孙如能束归故地，汉朝就遣送公主作为昆莫的夫人，两国结为兄弟之国，一同抗拒匈奴，匈奴一定能打败。 
English: After handing over the gift given to Kunmo by the Han Dynasty, Zhang Ye said to Kunmo: If the grandson of the emperor can return to his homeland, the Han Dynasty will send a princess as Kunmo's wife, the two countries will become a brotherly country, resist the Xiongnu together, and the Xiongnu will surely be defeated.

古文：乌孙远汉，未知其大小，又近匈奴，服属日久，其大臣皆不欲徙。
现代文：但是乌孙远离汉朝，不知汉朝大小，乌孙自己靠近匈奴，服从匈奴已很久，大臣们都不愿东迁。
English: However, U Sun was far away from the Han Dynasty and did not know the size of the Han Dynasty. U Sun himself was close to the Xiongnu and had obeyed the Xiongnu for a long time. The ministers were not willing to move east.

古文：昆莫年老国分，不能专制，乃发使送骞，因献马数十匹报谢。
现代文：昆莫年老，国家分裂，权力不能集中。于是派使者送张骞回长安，同时献马数十匹作为报谢。
English: Kunmo was old, the country was divided, and power could not be concentrated. So he sent an envoy to send Zhang Ye back to Chang'an, and at the same time offered dozens of horses as a reward.

古文：其使见汉人众富厚，归其国，其国后乃益重汉。
现代文：使者见汉朝人口众多，物产丰富，归国后，乌孙越来越尊重汉朝。
English: The envoy saw that the Han Dynasty had a large population and abundant products. After returning to China, U Sun respected the Han Dynasty more and more.

古文：匈奴闻其与汉通，怒欲击之。
现代文：匈奴听说乌孙与汉往来，很生气，要进攻乌孙。
English: When the Xiongnu heard that Usun was in contact with the Han, they were very angry and wanted to attack Usun.

古文：又汉使乌孙，乃出其南，抵大宛、月氏，相属不绝。
现代文：又汉朝使者经乌孙之南到大宛、月氏的，不绝于路。
English: In addition, the Han dynasty emissaries passed through the south of Wusun to Dayuan and the Moon clan, and they were constantly on the road.

古文：乌孙于是恐，使使献马，愿得尚汉公主，为昆弟。
现代文：乌孙很惶恐，就派使者献马给汉朝，并愿娶漠公主，两国结为兄弟。
English: Wusun was very frightened, so he sent an envoy to offer a horse to the Han Dynasty, and was willing to marry Princess Mo, and the two countries became brothers.

古文：天子问群臣，议许，曰： 必先内聘，然后遣女。 
现代文：皇帝问群臣的意见，朝议同意。决定： 必须先纳聘礼，然后遣送公主。 
English: The emperor asked for the opinion of the courtiers, and the court agreed. Decision: The bride price must be paid first, and then the princess must be sent away.

古文：乌孙以马千匹聘。
现代文：乌孙以一千匹马为聘礼。
English: Uson received a thousand horses as a dowry.

古文：汉元封中，遣江都王建女细君为公主，以妻焉。赐乘舆服御物，为备官属宦官侍御数百人，赠送甚盛。
现代文：汉朝在元封年间，派江都王刘建之女细君作为公主嫁给昆莫，皇帝赐给车马和皇室用的器物，还为她配备官吏、宦官、宫女、役者数百人，赠送礼品极丰盛。
English: During the Yuan dynasty, the Han dynasty sent the daughter of the king of the Yangtze River, Liu Jian, to marry Kunmo as a princess. The emperor gave her a carriage and horses and royal utensils. She was also equipped with hundreds of officials, eunuchs, courtesans, and actors. The gifts were very rich.

古文：乌孙昆莫以为右夫人。
现代文：乌孙昆莫以捆君为右夫人。
English: Usun Kunmo takes Bundu as his right-hand woman.

古文：匈奴亦遣女妻昆莫，昆莫以为左夫人。
现代文：匈奴也派女子嫁给昆莫，昆莫以匈奴女为左夫人。
English: The Xiongnu also sent a princess to marry Kunmo, who took her as his second wife.

古文：公主至其国，自治宫室居，岁时一再与昆莫会，置酒饮食，以币、帛赐王左右贵人。
现代文：公主到乌孙后，自己建造宫室居住，在一年中几次与昆莫聚会，喝酒吃饭，还用财物、丝织品等赏给昆莫左右的贵人。
English: After the princess came to the Emperor's grandson, she built her own palace to live in, and met with Kunmo several times a year, drinking and eating, and also rewarded the nobles around Kunmo with property and silk products.

古文：昆莫年老，言语不通，公主悲愁，自为作歌曰： 吾家嫁我兮天一方，远托异国兮乌孙王。
现代文：昆莫年老，语言不通，公主很悲伤，自己作歌说： 吾家嫁我兮天一方，远托异国兮乌王延。
English: Kunmo was old and did not speak the language well. The princess was very sad and wrote her own song, saying, "My family would marry me to the other side of the world, far away in a foreign country."

古文：穹庐为室兮旃为墙，以肉为食兮酪为浆。
现代文：穹庐为室兮旃为墙，以肉为食兮酪为浆。
English: The dome is the room, the eaves are the walls, the meat is the food, and the cheese is the paste.

古文：居常土思兮心内伤，愿为黄鹄兮归故乡。 
现代文：居常土思兮心内伤，愿为黄鹄兮归故乡。 
English: He is homesick and heartbroken, and would like to return to his hometown.

古文：天子闻而怜之，间岁遣使者持帷帐锦绣给遗焉。
现代文：皇帝听说后很怜悯她，每隔一年就派使者送去帷帐、锦绣等物。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he felt very sorry for her. Every other year, he would send an emissary to bring her curtains, brocade, and other things.

古文：昆莫年老，欲使其孙岑陬尚公主。
现代文：昆莫年老，想使孙子岑陬娶公主。
English: Kunmo is old and wants his grandson to marry a princess.

古文：公主不听，上书言状，天子报曰： 从其国俗，欲与乌孙共灭胡。 
现代文：公主不同意，上书给皇帝说明了此事，皇帝回信说： 随从乌孙国风俗，漠想要与乌孙联合灭匈奴。 
English: The princess did not agree, and wrote to the emperor to explain the matter. The emperor replied in a letter, "I will follow the customs of the Ussun nation, and I do not want to unite with the Ussun to exterminate the Xiongnu."

古文：岑陬遂妻公主。
现代文：岑陬就娶了公主。
English: So he married the princess.

古文：昆莫死，岑陬代立。
现代文：昆莫死，岑陬代立为王。
English: Kun Mo died, and his son became king.

古文：岑陬者，官号也，名军须靡。
现代文：岑陬，是官号，他的名字叫军须靡。
English: His name is Jun Shumai, which is his official title.

古文：昆莫，王号也，名猎骄靡。
现代文：昆莫，是王号，他的名字叫猎骄靡。
English: Kunmo is the king's horn, and his name is Hunt the Arrogant.

古文：后书 昆弥 云。
现代文：后来称王号为 昆弥 。
English: Later, the king's name was Kunmi.

古文：岑陬尚江都公主，生一女少夫。
现代文：岑陬娶江都公主，生一女，名叫少夫。
English: Yao married Princess Jiangdu and had a daughter named Shaowu.

古文：公主死，汉复以楚王戊之孙解忧为公主，妻岑陬。
现代文：公主死后，汉朝又派楚王刘戊之孙女解忧为公主嫁给岑陬。
English: After the death of the princess, the Han Dynasty sent Liu Wu, the granddaughter of King Chu, to marry the princess.

古文：岑陬胡妇子泥靡尚小，岑陬且死，以国与季父大禄子翁归靡，曰： 泥靡大，以国归之。 
现代文：岑陬的匈奴妻生的儿子泥靡还小，岑陬将要死时，把王位传给了叔父大禄的儿子翁归靡，他说： 等泥靡长大了，再把王位归还泥靡。 
English: Mehmet's son by his Hun wife was still young. When Mehmet was about to die, he passed the throne to his uncle Dalo's son, Weng Quimai. He said, "When Mehmet grows up, I will give the throne back to Mehmet."

古文：翁归靡既立，号肥王，复尚楚主解忧，生三男两女：长男曰元贵靡；次曰万年，为莎车王；次曰大乐，为左大将；长女弟史为龟兹王绛宾妻；小女素光为若呼翕侯妻。
现代文：翁归靡即位，号肥王，又娶解忧为妻，生了三个儿子、两个女儿：长子名元贵靡；次子名万年，为莎车王；三子名大乐，为左大将；长女名弟史，为龟兹王绛宾之妻；小女名素光，为若呼翎侯之妻。
English: Weng Guimai ascended to the throne, called himself King Fatty, and married King Jie Zhen as his wife. They had three sons and two daughters: the eldest son, named Yuan Guimai; the second son, named Wan Nian, was King Zha Cha; the third son, named Dalek, was General Zuo; the eldest daughter, named Brother Shi, was the wife of King Jie Zi Bin; the youngest daughter, named Su Guang, was the wife of Prince Ruohu.

古文：昭帝时，公主上书，言： 匈奴发骑田车师，车师与匈奴为一，共侵乌孙，唯天子幸救之！ 
现代文：汉昭帝时，解忧公主上书皇帝，说 匈奴发骑兵在车师种田，车师与匈奴联合，一同侵略乌孙，希望皇帝救援。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, Princess Qie Zhao wrote to the emperor, saying that the Huns had sent cavalry to cultivate the fields in the coach division. The coach division and the Huns united to invade Wusun together, hoping for the emperor's rescue.

古文：汉养士马，议欲击匈奴。
现代文：汉朝准备了士卒、战马，将进击匈奴。
English: The Han Dynasty has prepared soldiers and horses to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：会昭帝崩，宣帝初即位，公主及昆弥皆遣使上书，言： 匈奴复连发大兵侵兵乌孙，取车延、恶师地，收人民去，使使谓乌孙趣持公主来，欲隔绝汉。
现代文：正遇上昭帝去世，宣帝刚即位，解忧公主和昆弥都派使者上书，说 匈奴又连续发大兵侵略袭击乌孙，攻取车延、恶师等地，将当地居民都掠走了。还派使者告诉乌孙赶快将公主送给匈奴，想破坏乌孙舆汉的关系。
English: Just as Emperor Zhao died and Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne, Princess Jiezheng and Kunmi sent an envoy to the emperor, saying that the Huns had invaded and attacked Wusun again and again, capturing Cheyan, Qushi and other places, and robbed the local residents. They also sent an envoy to tell Wusun to quickly give the princess to the Huns, and wanted to destroy the relationship between Wusun and Han.

古文：昆弥愿发国半精兵，自给人马五万骑，尽力击匈奴。
现代文：昆弥愿发全国一半精兵，自备五万骑兵，全力打击匈奴。
English: Wu Chuan Wang is willing to conscript half of the elite troops in the country, equip himself with fifty thousand soldiers and horses, and make every effort to attack the Huns.

古文：唯天子出兵以救公主、昆弥。 
现代文：希望皇帝赶快出兵救公主、昆弥。 
English: I hope the emperor will quickly send troops to rescue the princess and Kunmi.

古文：汉兵大发十五万骑，五将军分道并出。
现代文：汉朝发大兵十五万骑，由五位将军率领分道出发。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched 150,000 soldiers, led by five generals, to set out on a separate route.

古文：语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：这件事记在《匈奴传》中。
English: The incident is recorded in the "History of the Huns."

古文：遣校尉常惠使持节护乌孙兵，昆弥自将翕侯以下五万骑从西方人，至右谷蠡王庭，获单于父行及嫂、居次、名王、犁氵于都尉、千长、骑将以下四万级，马、牛、羊、驴、橐驼七十余万头，乌孙皆自取所虏获。
现代文：汉又派校尉常惠为使者持节护乌孙兵，昆弥亲自率翕侯以下共五万骑士从西面进击匈奴。打到匈奴右谷蠡王庭，俘虏单于父辈和嫂、居次、名王、犁污都尉、千长、骑将以下四万人，马牛羊驴骆驼七十余万头，乌孙都将这些战利品取走。
English: The Han also sent Captain Chang Hui as an envoy to protect the Wusun soldiers, and Kunmi personally led a total of 50,000 knights under the Xiong Hou to attack the Xiong Niu from the west. When they reached the Xiong Niu Right Valley and the Xiong Wang Court, they captured 40,000 people including the fathers and sisters-in-law, the second-in-command, the famous king, the dirty lieutenant, the chiliarch, and the cavalry commander, and more than 700,000 horses, cattle, sheep, donkeys, and camels. The Wusun took all these trophies.

古文：还，封惠为长罗侯。
现代文：汉军回国，宣帝封常惠为长罗侯。
English: When the Han army returned to China, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Chang Hui as Chang Luo Hou.

古文：是岁，本始三年也。
现代文：这年是本始三年。
English: This year marks the third year of the project.

古文：汉遣惠持金币赐乌孙贵人有功者。
现代文：汉朝又派常惠带着贵重财物和丝织品赐给乌孙贵人中有战功的。
English: The Han Dynasty also sent Chang Hui with valuable property and silk products to give to the Uson noblemen who had distinguished themselves in the war.

古文：元康二年，乌孙昆弥因惠上书： 愿以汉外孙元贵靡为嗣，得令复尚汉公主，结婚重亲，畔绝匈奴，原聘马、骡各千匹。 
现代文：元康二年，乌孙昆弥通过常惠上书宣帝说： 愿以汉朝的外孙元贵靡为王位继承人，让他也娶汉公主，结两重姻亲，断绝与匈奴的关系。愿用马骡各一千匹作为聘礼。 
English: In the second year of the Yuan-Kang Dynasty, Emperor Wusun Kun'yi wrote to Emperor Xuan via Chang Hui, saying: I would like to make the grandson of the Han Dynasty, Yuan Guimai, the heir to the throne, let him also marry a Han princess, make double in-laws, and break off relations with the Xiongnu. I would like to use a thousand horses as a betrothal gift.

古文：诏下公卿议，大鸿胪萧望之以为： 乌孙绝域，变故难保，不可许。 
现代文：宣帝命大臣们讨论此事，大鸿胪萧望之认为： 乌孙地处极远，难保不发生变化，不要答应他们的要求。 
English: The ministers of imperial proclamation discussed the matter, and Dahongjiao Xiwangzhi thought: "The Ussun is very far away, it is difficult to guarantee that it will not change, do not agree to their request.

古文：上美乌孙新立大功，又重绝故业，遣使者至乌孙，先迎取聘。
现代文：宣帝很赞赏乌孙新近所立大功，很难断绝已建立的婚亲关系，就遣使者到乌孙，先迎取聘礼。
English: Emperor Xuan appreciated U Sun's recent great achievement. It was difficult to break off the established marriage relationship, so he sent an envoy to U Sun to receive the bride price first.

古文：昆弥及太子、左右大将、都尉皆遣使，凡三百余人，入汉迎取少主。
现代文：昆弥和太子、左右大将、都尉都派出入组成三百余人的使团，到汉朝迎接少公主。
English: Kunmi, the crown prince, the left and right generals, and the captain were all sent in a delegation of more than three hundred people to the Han Dynasty to welcome the young princess.

古文：上乃以乌孙主解忧弟子相夫为公主，置官属侍御百余人，舍上林中，学乌孙言。
现代文：宣帝就以解忧公主的侄女相夫为公主，设置官属、宫女等一百余人，住在上林苑中，学乌孙语。
English: Emperor Xuan took Princess Jiexuan's niece and brother-in-law, Moru, as his princess, and set up more than a hundred officials, court ladies, and others to live in Shanglinyuan Middle School and learn the Wusun language.

古文：天子自临平乐观，会匈奴使者、外国君长大角抵，设乐而遣之。使长罗侯光禄大夫惠为副，凡持节者四人，送少主至郭煌。
现代文：宣帝亲自到平乐观，会见匈奴使者和外国君长，大演角抵之戏和音乐、歌舞，然后遣送相夫公主西嫁，使长罗侯光禄大夫常惠辅佐，持节为使的有四人，送少公主到敦煌。
English: Emperor Xuan personally went to Pingxing, met with the Hun envoys and foreign monarchs, attended the grand performance and music, song and dance, and then sent the prince's brother-in-law, the princess's sister-in-law, to make the chief Luo, the prince Guanglu, the doctor Changhui, and four people to hold the festival, and send the young princess to Dunhuang.

古文：未出塞，闻乌孙昆弥翁归靡死，乌孙贵人共从本约，立岑陬子泥靡代为昆靡，号狂王。
现代文：还未出边塞，就听说乌孙昆弥翁归靡已死，乌孙贵人按照岑陬生前之约，立岑陬之子泥靡为昆弥，号狂王。
English: Before they left the frontier fortress, they heard that Uson Kunmio Kumpai had died. According to the agreement between Uson and Kunmio before his death, Uson Kumpai's son was Kunmio, known as the Mad King.

古文：惠上书： 愿留少主郭煌，惠驰至乌孙责让不立元贵靡为昆靡，还迎少主。 
现代文：常惠上书宣帝说： 想要留少公主暂驻敦煌，常惠赶到乌孙，责备不立元贵靡为昆弥之事，回头再接少公主回长安。 
English: Chang Hui wrote to Emperor Xuan and said: If you want to keep the young princess temporarily stationed in Dunhuang, Chang Hui will rush to Usun, reproach Yuan Guimai for not standing up, and then take the young princess back to Chang'an.

古文：事下公卿，望之复以为： 乌孙持两端，难约结。
现代文：此事由大臣们讨论，萧望之又说： 乌孙首鼠两端，难与立约。
English: The matter was discussed by the ministers, and Shouwangzhi said, "It is difficult to conclude an agreement when the head of the mouse and the head of the ox are at opposite ends."

古文：前公主在乌孙四十余年，恩爱不亲密，边竟未得安，此已事已验也。
现代文：解忧公主在乌孙四十余年，两国关系不亲密，边境未得安宁，造就是证明。
English: Princess Zhaozhou has been in Wusun for more than 40 years. The relationship between the two countries is not close, and the border has not been tranquilized. This is proof.

古文：令少主以元贵靡不立而还，信无负于夷狄，中国之福也。
现代文：今天少公主因元贵靡不得立而回长安，并没有对不起乌孙的地方，也是汉朝的福气。
English: Today, the young princess has returned to Chang'an due to the decline of the Yuan dynasty, which is not a bad thing for the grandson, but also a blessing for the Han dynasty.

古文：少主不止，徭役将兴，其原起此。 
现代文：如果少公主不停止去乌孙，徭役将要大兴，根源由此而起。 
English: If the young princess does not stop going to the grandchild, the eunuch will be very happy, and the root causes will arise from this.

古文：天子从之，征还少主。
现代文：宣帝接受了这个意见，就接少公主回长安。
English: Emperor Xuan accepted this suggestion and took the young princess back to Chang'an.

古文：狂王复尚楚主解忧，生一男鸱靡，不与主和，又暴恶失众。
现代文：狂王又娶解忧公主，生一子名鸥靡。狂王与公主不和，又暴虐，失掉民心。
English: The Mad King also married Princess Jie Zhao, and they had a son who became very famous. The Mad King and the princess were not on good terms, they were violent, and they lost the hearts of the people.

古文：汉使卫司马魏和意、副侯任昌送侍子，公主言狂王为乌孙所患苦，易诛也。
现代文：汉朝派卫司马魏和意、副候任昌送侍子到乌孙，公主说了狂王为乌孙人所不满之事，并说容易诛除掉。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Ma Wei, He Yi, and Ren Chang to escort the attendant to the Ussun. The princess said that the Mad King was dissatisfied with the Ussun people and that it was easy to get rid of him.

古文：遂谋置酒会，罢，使士拔剑击之。
现代文：于是，他们设谋在酒会上使人用剑击杀狂王。
English: So they plotted to have the Mad King killed with a sword at a drinking party.

古文：剑旁下，狂王伤，上马驰去。
现代文：剑未砍准，狂王受伤，上马逃走。
English: The sword was not aimed, the mad king was wounded, and he mounted his horse and fled.

古文：其子细沈瘦会兵围和意、昌及公主于赤谷城。
现代文：他的儿子捆沈瘦率兵将魏和意、任昌和解忧公主包围在赤谷城中。
English: His son Bundu Shen Lean led the soldiers to surround Wei He Yi, Ren Chang, and Princess Diao Zang in Akaya Castle.

古文：数月，都护郑吉发诸国兵救之，乃解去。
现代文：几个月后，西域都护郑吉征发附近各国之兵前往救援，捆沈瘦退走。
English: A few months later, Zheng Jie, the protector of the western region, conscripted soldiers from nearby countries to go to the rescue, bundled up and retreated.

古文：汉遣中郎将张遵持医药治狂王，赐金二十斤，采缯。
现代文：汉朝廷派中郎将张遵带着医药去给狂王治伤，还赐给狂王黄金二十斤及各色丝织品。
English: The Han court sent Zhang Zun with medicine to the mad king to treat his injuries, and also gave the mad king twenty catties of gold and silk fabrics of all colors.

古文：因收和意、昌系锁，从尉犁槛车至长安，斩之。
现代文：并逮捕了魏和意、任昌，从尉犁用囚车解到长安后斩首。
English: He also arrested Wei Heyi and Ren Chang. They were taken to Chang'an in a prisoner transport vehicle and beheaded.

古文：车骑将军长史张翁留验公主与使者谋杀狂王状，主不服，叩头谢，张翁捽主头骂詈。
现代文：车骑将军长史张翁留在赤谷调查解忧公主与魏和意、任昌谋杀狂王的情况。公主不服，向张翁叩头，拒绝认罪。张翁摔着公主的头发大骂。
English: The head of the cavalry, General Shi Zhang Weng, stayed in Akaya to investigate the circumstances of the murder of the Mad King by Princess Xie Zhen, Wei He Yi and Ren Chang. The princess was not satisfied, bowed to Zhang Weng and refused to confess. Zhang Weng threw the princess's hair and cursed.

古文：主上书，翁还，坐死。
现代文：公主上书宣帝，张翁回到长安，被处死。
English: The princess wrote to Emperor Xuan, Zhang Weng returned to Chang'an and was executed.

古文：副使季都别将医养视狂王，狂王从十余骑送之。
现代文：汉副使季都另外率人医治养护狂王的伤。在回长安时，狂王率十余骑士送他。
English: Han vice-emissary Ji Du led another group to treat and care for the mad king's injuries. When he returned to Chang'an, the mad king led more than ten knights to see him off.

古文：都还，坐知狂王当诛，见便不发，下蚕室。
现代文：季都回到长安，因知道狂王有罪应当斩首，但未能就便除掉狂王，受宫刑。
English: Ji Du returned to Chang'an, because he knew that the mad king was guilty and should be beheaded, but he could not get rid of the mad king and was punished by the palace.

古文：初，肥王翁归靡胡妇子乌就屠，狂五伤时惊，与诸翕侯俱去，居北山中，扬言母家匈奴兵来，故众归之。
现代文：在狂王受伤的时候，肥王翁归靡的匈奴妻生的儿子乌就屠与诸翕侯都逃到北山中，扬言说他的外婆家匈奴的兵快来了，所以很多人都归服于他。
English: When the Mad King was wounded, Wu Rongtu, the son of the Hun's wife and son of the fat king, who was defeated, fled to the North Mountain with all the princes, threatening that his grandmother's Hun soldiers would soon come, so many people surrendered to him.

古文：后遂袭杀狂王，自立为昆弥。
现代文：后来他攻杀狂王，自立为昆弥。
English: Later, he attacked and killed the Mad King and became Kunmi himself.

古文：汉遣破羌将军辛武贤将兵万五千人至郭煌，遣使者案行表，穿卑鞮侯井以西，欲通渠转谷，积居庐仓以讨之。
现代文：汉朝命破羌将军辛武贤率兵一万五千人到敦煌，派人测量地形，树立标记，开凿卑千侯井，向西通渠，准备运粮建仓，讨伐乌就屠。
English: Xin Wu Xian, the general who broke the shackles of the Han Dynasty, led 15,000 soldiers to Dunhuang, sent people to survey the terrain, set up markers, dig wells in Beqianhou, open canals to the west, prepare to transport grain and build warehouses, and fight against Wu.

古文：初，楚主侍者冯嫽能史书，习事，尝持汉书为公主使，行赏赐于城郭诸国，敬信之，号曰冯夫人。
现代文：解忧公主原来有个侍者名冯缭，懂史书，熟悉西域事务，曾持汉朝之节作为公王之使到西域各国赏赐各国王贵人，很得各国尊敬信任，号称为冯夫人。
English: Princess Zhaozhou originally had a servant named Fengyan, who understood history books and was familiar with Western affairs. She once held the Han Dynasty Festival as the prince's envoy to the Western countries to reward the kings and nobles of all countries. She was highly respected and trusted by all countries. She was known as Mrs. Feng.

古文：为乌孙右大将妻，右大将与乌就屠相爱，都护郑吉使冯夫人说乌就屠，以汉兵方出，必见灭，不如降。
现代文：后嫁给乌孙右大将为妻，右大将与乌就屠关系密切。这时，西域都护郑吉派冯夫人去劝说乌就屠，就说：汉朝正发大兵到西域，乌孙必被灭掉，不如早投降。
English: Later, she married U Sun Udai, who had a close relationship with U Songtu. At that time, Zheng Ji, the protector of the Western Regions, sent Mrs. Feng to persuade U Songtu, saying, "The Han Dynasty is sending soldiers to the Western Regions, U Songtu will be destroyed, it is better to surrender as soon as possible."

古文：乌就屠恐，曰： 愿得小号。 
现代文：乌就屠很害怕，说： 我衹愿保留个小昆弥之号就行了。 
English: Wu Rongtu was very scared and said, "I only want to keep the name of Xiao Kunmi.

古文：宣帝征冯夫人，自问状。
现代文：汉宣帝召冯夫人到长安，亲自询问乌孙的情况。
English: Emperor Han Xuan summoned Mrs. Feng to Chang'an to personally inquire about the condition of the grandson.

古文：遣谒者竺次、期门甘延寿为副，送冯夫人。
现代文：后派遣谒者竺次、期门甘延寿为副使，送冯夫人回乌孙。
English: Later, he sent his deputy, Gan Yanshou, to escort Mrs. Feng back to Wusun.

古文：冯夫人锦车持节，诏乌就屠诣长罗侯赤谷城，立元贵靡为大昆弥，乌就屠为小昆弥，皆赐印绶。
现代文：冯夫人乘锦衣车、持节为汉正使，传达宣帝诏令，命乌就屠到赤谷城长罗侯常惠处，立元贵靡为大昆弥，乌就屠为小昆弥，都赐给印绶。
English: Mrs. Feng took the brocade carriage and held the festival as the Han Zheng envoy to convey the proclamation of the imperial edict, and the order of Wu Rongtu to the Akaya city governor Luo Hou Changhui, the establishment of Yuan Guimai as the great Kunya, and Wu Rongtu as the small Kunya, were all given to the seal.

古文：破羌将军不出塞还。
现代文：破羌将军辛武贤未出塞就返回了长安。
English: The defeated general Xin Wuxian returned to Chang'an before leaving the city.

古文：后乌就屠不尽归诸翕侯民众，汉复遣长罗侯惠将三校屯赤谷，因为分别其人民地界，大昆弥户六万余，小昆弥户四万余，然众心皆附小昆弥。
现代文：后来乌就屠不把诸翕侯的民众都归还原主，汉朝又派长罗侯常惠率三校在赤谷屯田，并划分乌孙内部的统治区，大昆弥为六万余户，小昆弥为四万余户，可是人心都倾向小昆弥。
English: Later, Wu Zongtu returned all the people of Zhuye Hou to their original owners, and the Han Dynasty also sent Luo Hou Changhui and three schools to Akaya Tonden, and divided the ruling area within Wusun, with more than sixty thousand households in Da Kunya and more than forty thousand households in Xiao Kunya, but people's hearts are inclined to Xiao Kunya.

古文：元贵靡、鸱靡皆病死，公主上书言年老土思，愿得归骸骨，葬汉地。
现代文：元贵靡、鹃靡都病死，公主上书宣帝，说自己年老思乡，希望老死在汉地。
English: Both Yuan Guimai and Ximai died of illness, and the princess sent a letter to the emperor, saying that she was homesick and wished to die in Han.

古文：天子闵而迎之，公主与乌孙男女三人俱来至京师。
现代文：宣帝很怜悯她，派人迎接她和她的孙子孙女三人到长安。
English: Emperor Xuan took pity on her and sent someone to welcome her and her three grandchildren to Chang'an.

古文：是岁，甘露三年也。
现代文：这一年是甘露三年，公主已将近七十岁了。
English: This year is the third year of nectar, and the princess is nearly seventy years old.

古文：时年且七十，赐以公主田宅、奴婢，奉养甚厚，朝见仪比公主。
现代文：宣帝赐给公主田地、宅第、奴婢等，奉养优厚，朝见皇帝的礼仪同皇帝亲生公主一样。
English: Emperor Xuan gave the princess fields, a mansion, slaves, etc. She was well-fed. The etiquette for meeting the emperor was the same as for the emperor's own princess.

古文：后二岁卒，三孙因留守坟墓云。
现代文：两年后，解忧公主去世，二个孙儿孙女就留在长安看守坟墓。
English: Two years later, Princess Xie Zhen died, and her two grandchildren remained in Chang'an to guard the tomb.

古文：元贵靡子星靡代为大昆弥，弱，冯夫人上书，愿使乌孙镇抚星靡。
现代文：元贵靡之子星靡代为大昆弥，年纪幼小，冯夫人上书宣帝，希望出使乌孙辅佐星靡。
English: Xingmai, the son of the original noble Xingmai, was the younger of the two sons, and Lady Feng wrote to Emperor Xuan in the hope that he would send his grandson to assist Xingmai.

古文：汉遣之，卒百人送焉。
现代文：宣帝派一百余人送冯夫人到乌孙。
English: Emperor Xuan sent more than a hundred people to escort Mrs. Feng to Wusun.

古文：都护韩宣奏，乌孙大吏、大禄、大监皆可以赐金印紫绶，以尊辅大昆弥，汉许之。
现代文：起初，西域都护韩宣上奏宣帝，建议对乌孙的大吏、大禄、大监都可以赐给金印紫绶，让他们辅佐大昆弥，宣帝同意。
English: At first, the protector of the western region, Han Xuan, appealed to Emperor Xuan, suggesting that the great officials, great rewards, and great supervisors of the U-sun could all be given the golden seal and purple ribbon, so that they could assist Da Kunyi, and Emperor Xuan agreed.

古文：后都护韩宣复奏，星靡怯弱，可免，更以季父左大将乐代为昆弥，汉不许。
现代文：后来韩宣又上书星靡软弱，可以免去大昆弥，让他的叔父左大将乐代替他为大昆弥，宣帝不同意。
English: Later, Han Xuan also wrote to Emperor Xuan that Xingfei was too weak and that he could spare Da Kunya and let his uncle Zuo Da Zhenle replace him as Da Kunya. Emperor Xuan did not agree.

古文：后段会宗为都护，招还亡畔，安定之。
现代文：以后段会宗为西域都护，招回乌孙叛亡的人口，社会得到安定。
English: In the latter half of the period, Kaizong served as the protector of the western region, called back the people who had defected from the Wusun Dynasty, and the society became stable.

古文：星靡死，子雌栗靡代。
现代文：星靡死，儿子雌栗靡为大昆弥。
English: The star died, and his son, the chestnut tree, became the great Kunya.

古文：小昆弥乌就屠死。
现代文：小昆弥乌就屠死，儿子拊离为小昆弥。
English: Little Kunmiyu was killed, and his son became Little Kunmi.

古文：子拊离代立，为弟日贰所杀。
现代文：拊离为其弟日贰所杀。
English: He was killed by his younger brother Nichiro.

古文：汉遣使者立拊离子安日为小昆弥。
现代文：汉朝派使者至乌孙立拊离之子安日为小昆弥。
English: The Han Dynasty sent an emissary to the Ussun Emperor to ask his estranged son, Anri, to marry Kunmi.

古文：日贰亡，阻康居。
现代文：日贰逃到康居。
English: Nichiren fled to Kangju.

古文：汉徙已校屯姑墨，欲候便讨焉。
现代文：汉徙己校尉屯驻姑墨，伺机进讨日贰。
English: Han Yiyi stationed his lieutenant in Gumo, waiting for an opportunity to discuss the Japanese invasion.

古文：安日使贵人姑莫匿等三人诈亡从日贰，刺杀之。
现代文：安日派贵人姑莫匿等三人伪装叛逃者，投奔曰贰，将曰贰刺杀。
English: An Rong sent three disguised defectors, including the noblewoman Gu Mengniu, to attack and assassinate Zhaoyuan.

古文：都护廉褒赐姑莫匿等金人二十斤，缯三百匹。
现代文：西域都护廉褒赐给姑莫匿等人黄金二十斤，丝织品三百匹。
English: The Western Capital of Guolian awarded 20 catties of gold and 300 pieces of silk to Gu Mo Yan and others.

古文：后安日为降民所杀，汉立其弟末振将代。
现代文：后来安日被降民所杀，汉朝又立安日之弟末振将为小昆弥。
English: Later, An Il was killed by the defeated people, and the Han Dynasty also established that An Il's younger brother, Sui Zhen, would become Xiao Kun's successor.

古文：时大昆弥雌栗靡健，翕侯皆畏服之，告民牧马畜无使人牧，国中大安和翁归靡时。
现代文：这时大昆弥雌栗靡雄健，各翎侯都惧怕他，服从他。各翎侯告知民众牧马畜时，不要进入在昆弥的牧群区，以免混扰。国中很太平，和翁归靡时一样。
English: At this time, the Great Kunmi's chestnuts were in full bloom, and all the lords were afraid of him and obeyed him. When the lords told the people to herd horses and cattle, they should not enter the herding area in Kunmi, so as not to disturb. The country was very peaceful, just like when Weng fell ill.

古文：小昆弥末振将恐为所并，使贵人乌日领诈降刺杀雌栗靡。
现代文：小昆弥末振将害怕被大昆弥吞并，就派贵人乌日领诈降于雌栗靡，并把他刺杀。
English: Afraid of being swallowed up by Da Kunya, Xiao Kunya's second-in-command, Late Zhen, sent a nobleman, Wuhi, to trick Meli into surrendering to him, and assassinated him.

古文：汉欲以兵讨之而未能，遣中郎将段会宗持金币与都护图方略，立雌栗靡季父公主孙伊秩靡为大昆弥。
现代文：汉朝想发兵讨伐末振将，后未出兵，就派中郎将段会宗带着金宝丝绸到西域与都护策谋，立雌栗靡的叔父、解忧公主之孙伊秩靡为大昆弥。
English: The Han dynasty wanted to send an army to fight the late Zhen Zheng, but before sending the army, they sent the middle-ranking general Duan Huizong to the western region with the golden silk to plot with the capital's protector, and made I Chizhimai, the uncle of Heshurimai and the grandson of the Sorrowful Princess, the Great Kunya.

古文：汉没入小昆弥侍子在京师者。
现代文：汉朝把小昆弥在长安的侍子没为官奴婢。
English: The Han Dynasty did not make Xiao Kunya's servant in Chang'an into an official slave.

古文：久之，大昆弥翕侯难栖杀末振将，末振将兄安日子安犁靡代为小昆弥。
现代文：很久以后，大昆弥的翕侯难栖杀掉末振将，原被杀之小昆弥安日之子安犁靡被立为小昆弥。
English: A long time later, Daikunmiya's vassal Naganosuke killed Suetsubun, and the son of Daikunmiya who was originally killed, Anchimai, was established as Daikunmiya.

古文：汉恨不自诛末振将，复使段会宗即斩其太子番丘。
现代文：汉朝以未能亲杀末振将为遗憾，就又命令段会宗杀掉末振将的太子番丘。
English: The Han Dynasty regretted not being able to personally kill Late Zhen Rong, and ordered Duan Huizong to kill Late Zhen Rong's son, Prince Banqiu.

古文：还，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：段会宗回到长安，封为关内侯。
English: Duan Huizong returned to Chang'an and was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：是岁，元延二年也。
现代文：这一年是成帝元延二年。
English: This year is the second anniversary of Emperor Chengdu's accession to the throne.

古文：会宗以翕侯难栖杀末振将，虽不指为汉，合于讨贼，奏以为坚守都尉。
现代文：段会宗认为翎侯难栖杀掉末振将虽不是为汉朝，但是符合汉诛讨末振将的目的，就奏请成帝封他为坚守都尉。
English: Duan Huizong thought that although it was not for the Han Dynasty, it was in line with the purpose of the Han Dynasty to kill the late Zhen Shou, so he asked the emperor to appoint him as a captain.

古文：责大禄、大吏、大监以雌栗靡见杀状，夺金印紫绶，更与铜墨云。
现代文：汉责备大禄、大吏、大监等官对雌栗靡被杀负有责任，收夺了他们的金印紫绶，改换为铜印墨绶。
English: Han reproached officials such as Dalu, Dai Li, and Dai Jian for being responsible for the killing of the female chestnut, and confiscated their gold-sealed inkstone and replaced it with a copper-sealed inkstone.

古文：末振将弟卑爰疐本共谋杀大昆弥，将众八万余口北附康居，谋欲借兵兼并两昆弥。
现代文：末振将之弟卑爰禀本来参与谋杀大昆弥雌栗靡，后率八万余人北附于康居，想藉康居之兵兼并大、小雨昆弥。
English: Hebei, the younger brother of General Suetsubun, was originally involved in the murder of Da Kunya, and later led more than 80,000 people north to attach to Kangju, hoping to annex Da and Xiao Yu Kunya with the help of Kangju's soldiers.

古文：两昆弥畏之，亲倚都护。
现代文：两个昆弥都怕卑爰直，就亲附都护。
English: Both Kunis are afraid of being humiliated, so they become close to the tutelary deity.

古文：哀帝元寿二年，大昆弥伊秩靡与单于并入朝，汉以为荣。
现代文：哀帝元寿二年，大昆弥伊秩靡与匈奴单于都来长安朝见哀帝，汉朝以为光荣。
English: In the second year of Emperor Ai's first birthday, Da Kun Mii Chichimai and Xiong Nuan came to Chang'an to see Emperor Ai, which was considered glorious by the Han Dynasty.

古文：至元始中，卑爰疐杀乌日领以自效，汉封为归义侯。
现代文：到平帝元始年间，卑爰直杀乌曰领以投效汉朝，汉封他为归义侯。
English: In the early years of the Ping Dynasty, Hebei killed Wu Zhi to force him to join the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty made him a Guiyi Hou.

古文：两昆弥皆弱，卑爰疐侵陵，都护孙建袭杀之。
现代文：大、小两昆弥都很弱，卑爰霆不断侵凌两昆弥，都护孙建袭杀卑爰直。
English: Both the big and small Kunmies were weak, and the lowly Kuomintang constantly encroached on the two Kunmies, and both protected Sun Jian and attacked and killed the lowly Kuomintang.

古文：自乌孙分立两昆弥后，汉用忧劳，且无宁岁。
现代文：自乌孙分立了两个昆弥以后，汉朝时而安抚，时而镇压，没有一年太平。
English: Since the Wusun separated the two Kunmies, the Han Dynasty has alternately appeased and suppressed, and there has not been a year of peace.

古文：姑墨国，王治南城，去长安八千一百五十里。
现代文：姑墨国，国王治南城，束到长安八千一百五十里。
English: In Gu Mo's country, the king ruled Nancheng, which was 8,150 li away from Chang'an.

古文：户二千二百，口二万四千五百，胜兵四千五百人。
现代文：有户三千五百，人口二万四千五百，军队四千五百人。
English: There are 3,500 households, 24,500 people, and 4,500 military personnel.

古文：姑墨侯、辅国侯、都尉、左右将、左右骑君各一人，译长二人。
现代文：有姑墨侯、辅国侯、都尉、左右将、左右骑君各一人，译长二人。
English: There is a gumao, an auxiliary governor, a lieutenant, a left and right general, a left and right cavalryman, and two chief translators.

古文：东至都护治所二千二十一里，南至于阗马行十五日，北与乌孙接。
现代文：束到西域都护治所乌垒城二千零二十一里，南到于阗马行要十五天，北与乌孙相接。
English: It is 2,021 miles to Uji Castle, the capital protection and cure center of the western region, and it takes 15 days to travel south to Yuma, and it is connected to Usun in the north.

古文：出铜、铁、雌黄。
现代文：出产铜、铁、雌黄等矿产。
English: It produces copper, iron, topaz and other minerals.

古文：东通龟兹六百七十里。
现代文：柬到龟兹六百七十里。
English: It takes six hundred and seventy miles to get from Cambodia to Tibet.

古文：王莽时，姑墨王丞杀温宿王，并其国。
现代文：王莽统治时期，姑墨王丞杀温宿国王，吞并了温宿国。
English: During the reign of Wang Mang, Gu Mo Wang Chung killed the king of Onjuku and annexed the country.

古文：温宿国，王治温宿城，去长安八千三百五十里，户二千二百，口八千四百，胜兵千五百人。
现代文：温宿国，国王治温宿城，东去长安八千三百五十里。有户二千二百，人口八千四百，军队一千五百人。
English: Wenzhou, the king ruled Wenzhou City, 8,350 miles east of Chang'an. There were 2,200 households, 8,400 people, and 1,500 soldiers.

古文：辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、左右骑君、译长各二人。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、左右骑君、译长各二人。
English: There are two assistant governors, two generals, two captains, two equerries, and two interpreters.

古文：东至都护治所二千三百八十里，西至尉头三百里，北至乌孙赤谷六百一十里。土地物类所有与鄯善诸国同。
现代文：束到西域都护治所乌垒城二千三百八十里，西到尉头三百里，北到乌孙赤谷六百一十里，土地物产等都与鄯善诸国相同。
English: It is 2,380 miles to the western capital city of Wuyi, 300 miles to the western capital of Wuzhou, and 610 miles to the northern capital of Wusun and Akitani. The land, property, etc. are the same as those of other countries.

古文：东通姑墨二百七十里。
现代文：束到姑墨二百七十里。
English: Two hundred and seventy li from the bundle to Gumo.

古文：龟兹国，王治延城，去长安七千四百八十里。
现代文：龟兹国，国王治延城，东到长安七千四百八十里。
English: Gezi country, the king ruled Yancheng, east to Chang'an seven thousand four hundred and eighty miles.

古文：户六千九百七十，口八万一千三百一十七，胜兵二万一千七十六人。
现代文：有户六千九百七十，人口八万一千三百一十七，军队二万一千零七十六人。
English: There are 6,970 households, with a population of 81,317 and an army of 21,076.

古文：大都尉丞、辅国侯、安国侯、击胡侯、却胡都尉、击车师都尉、左右将、左右都尉、左右骑君、左右力辅君各一人，东西南北部千长各二人，却胡君三人，译长四人。
现代文：有大都尉丞、辅国侯、安国侯、击胡侯、却胡都尉、击车师都尉、左右将、左右都尉、左右骑君、左右力辅君各一人，东西南北部千长各二人，却胡君三人，译长四人。
English: There was one grand captain, assistant governor, governor of An Province, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion commander, battalion

古文：南与精绝、东南与且末、西南与杅弥、北与乌孙、西与姑墨接。
现代文：南与精绝、东南与且末、西南与杆弥、北与乌孙、西与姑墨相接。
English: It is bordered to the south by Jingzhu, to the southeast by Qiemo, to the southwest by Jiaoyi, to the north by Wusun, and to the west by Gumo.

古文：能铸冶，有铅。
现代文：已有铸冶金简技，还产铅。
English: It has foundry and metallurgy skills, and also produces lead.

古文：东至都护治所乌垒城三百五十里。
现代文：束到西域都护治所乌垒城三百五十里。
English: It is three hundred and fifty miles to the Western Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center, Uji Castle.

古文：乌垒，户百一十，口千二百，胜兵三百人。
现代文：乌垒，有户一百一十，人口一千二百，军队三百人。
English: Wuye has 110 households, a population of 1,200, and an army of 300.

古文：城都尉、译长各一人。
现代文：有城都尉、译长各一人。
English: Captain Yuki and Chief Translator, one each.

古文：与都护同治。
现代文：与酉越都护同治乌垒越。
English: and the defense of Suiyue and the administration of Wuyue.

古文：其南三百三十里至渠犁。
现代文：向南三百三十里到渠犁。
English: Three hundred and thirty leagues south to the mouth of the canal.

古文：渠梨，城都尉一人，户百三十，口千四百八十，胜兵百五十人。
现代文：渠犁，有城都尉一人，户一百三十，人口一千四百八十，军队一百五十人。
English: Duxun, there is a city captain, a hundred and thirty households, a population of one thousand four hundred and eighty, and an army of one hundred and fifty.

古文：东北与尉犁、东南与且末、南与精绝接。
现代文：东北与尉犁、东南与且末、南与精绝相接。
English: The northeast is connected with 尉, the southeast with且末, and the south with精绝.

古文：西有河，至龟兹五百八十里。
现代文：西有河，到龟兹五百八十里。
English: There is a river to the west, and it is five hundred and eighty miles to Kuez.

古文：自武帝初通西域、置校尉，屯田渠犁。
现代文：从汉武帝开通西域时起，设置校尉，在渠犁屯田。
English: From the time when Emperor Hanwu opened the western region, a school captain was set up, and there was a military garrison in the canal.

古文：是时，军旅连出，师行三十二年，海内虚耗。
现代文：这时汉朝连续出兵三十二年，国力虚耗严重。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty had continuously dispatched troops for thirty-two years, and the national strength was seriously depleted.

古文：征和中，贰师将军李广利以军降匈奴。
现代文：征和年间，贰师将军李广利率军投降匈奴。
English: During the War of Conquest, the general Li Guangren's army surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：上既悔远征伐，而搜粟都尉桑弘羊与丞相御史奏言： 故轮台东捷枝、渠犁皆故国，地广，饶水草，有溉田五千顷以上，处温和，田美，可益通沟渠，种五谷，与中国同时孰。
现代文：武帝很后悔远征之事。这时，搜粟都尉桑弘羊与丞相、御史对武帝说： 轮台以束捷枝、渠犁都是以前建国之地，土地广大，水草富饶。有灌溉田五千顷以上，气候温和，田地肥美，灌溉方便，种五谷和中原地区同时成熟。
English: Emperor Wu regretted the expedition very much. At this time, the commander of the poppy-picking expedition, Kuang Hongyang, together with the prime minister and the minister of history, said to Emperor Wu: The wheel platform, with its bundles of twigs and branches, and canals, were all the places where the country was founded before. The land is vast and rich in aquatic plants. There are more than five thousand hectares of irrigation fields, the climate is mild, the fields are fertile and easy to irrigate, and the Central Plains region is ripe for grain cultivation.

古文：臣愚以为可遣屯田卒诣故轮台以东，置校尉三人分护，各举图地形，通利沟渠，务使以时益种五谷，张掖、酒泉遣骑假司马为斥候，属校尉，事有便宜，因骑置以闻。
现代文：旁边的国家缺少锥刀等铁器，珍贵黄金彩缯，漠可用这类东西换取他们的谷物供给田卒，不愁缺粮。臣等认为漠可派士卒到原轮台以束屯田，设置三个校尉分部护领。让他们就各自辖区画出地图，开修灌溉沟渠，每年按照季节种五谷。张掖、酒泉二郡各派骑假司马率士卒为屯田者了望放哨。骑假司马属于屯田校尉节制。有重要情况，可利用驿马报告皇上。
English: The neighboring countries lacked iron tools such as cones and knives, as well as precious gold-painted ploughshares. The mosses could use such things in exchange for grain to supply their peasants, so they would not have to worry about grain shortages. The courtiers thought that the mosses could send soldiers to the original wheelhouse to bundle the peasants, and set up three brigadier divisions to guard the collars. Let them draw a map of their respective jurisdictions, open irrigation ditches, and plant grain every year according to the season. Zhang Ye and Jiuquan two counties each sent horsemen to keep a lookout for the peasants. Riding horsemen is part of the brigadier

古文：田一岁，有积谷，募民壮健有累重敢徙者诣田所，就畜积为本业，益垦溉田，稍筑列亭，连城而西，以威西国，辅乌孙，为便。
现代文：种田一年有存粮，就可招募身体壮健、甘愿迁徙的民众到屯田所，以存粮为老本，扩大灌溉田区，增修些亭候，城城相连，通向西方，以威镇西方的国家，对辅助乌孙国很有利。
English: If there is a year's supply of grain in the fields, it is possible to recruit able-bodied people who are willing to migrate to the farmsteads. With the grain supply as the basis, expand the irrigation fields, add some pavilions, connect the city to the west, and the country west of Yiwu Town, it is very beneficial to assist the Wusun country.

古文：臣谨遣征事臣昌分部行边，严敕太守、都尉明烽火，选士马，谨斥候，蓄茭草。
现代文：臣等可派征事臣昌分部巡行于西部边境地区，严令有关太守、都尉备好烽火，精选士马，谨慎警戒，蓄积粮草。
English: The ministers and others can send the recruiting officers of the Minchang Division to patrol the western border area, and strictly order the relevant governor and lieutenant to prepare bonfires, select horses, be cautious and alert, and accumulate grain and grass.

古文：愿陛下遣使使西国，以安其意。臣昧死请。 
现代文：希望陛下派使者到西方国家，让他们不要因畏惧匈奴而不安。臣等冒死请言此事。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will send envoys to the Western countries, so that they will not be disturbed by the fear of the Xiongnu.

古文：上乃下诏，深陈既往之悔，曰：
现代文：武帝就颁下韶书，沉痛检讨了以往的失误。
English: Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict, and painfully reviewed the past mistakes.

古文：前有司奏，欲益民赋三十助边用，是重困老弱孤独也。
现代文：韶书说： 以前有关部门奏请，打算增加民赋每人三十钱，以供给边疆费用。这是加重老弱孤独人口的困苦。
English: The encyclical said: Previously, the relevant departments requested and planned to increase the people's endowment by 30 yuan per person in order to supply the frontier expenses. This is to aggravate the hardships of the old, weak and lonely population.

古文：而今又请遣卒田轮台。
现代文：今天又请派士卒到轮台屯田。
English: Today, I would also like to ask you to send officers to Rundai Tonden.

古文：轮台西于车师千余里，前开陵侯击车师时，危须、尉犁、楼兰六国子弟在京师者皆先归，发畜食迎汉军，又自发兵，凡数万人，王各自将，共围车师，降其王。
现代文：轮台在车师以西一千余里，以前开陵侯攻击车师时，危须、尉犁、楼兰等六国子弟在长安的都先回国，运发粮畜迎接汉军。各国又自发士卒数万人，都由国王亲自率领，共同包围车师，迫使车师王投降。
English: The wheelhouse was more than a thousand miles west of the coachman. Previously, when Kailing Hou attacked the coachman, the sons of the Six Kingdoms in Chang'an, such as Genshu, Ye and Loulan, all returned home first to transport and distribute grain and livestock to meet the Chinese army. Tens of thousands of volunteers from various countries, all led by the king himself, jointly surrounded the coachman and forced the coachman to surrender.

古文：诸国兵便罢，力不能复至道上食汉军。
现代文：西域各国兵已疲惫不堪，亦无力至大道上为汉军供应食粮。
English: The soldiers of the western countries were exhausted and unable to go to the main road to supply food to the Chinese army.

古文：汉军破城，食至多，然士自载不足以竟师，强者尽食畜产，羸者道死数千人。
现代文：汉军攻破车师城时，粮食很多，但自己带粮，回不到长安就吃光了。身体强壮的吃牲畜，身体病弱的死于道路上多达几千人。
English: When the Chinese army broke through Cheji City, there was a lot of grain, but they brought their own grain and ate it up before returning to Chang'an. The physically strong ate livestock, and the physically weak died on the road as many as several thousand people.

古文：朕发酒泉驴、橐驼负食，出玉门迎军。
现代文：我发酒泉郡的驴、骆驼运粮食出玉门关去迎接军队。
English: I sent the donkeys and camels of Jiuquan County to carry grain out of Yumen to meet the army.

古文：吏卒起张掖，不甚远，然尚厮留其众。
现代文：又命张掖郡发吏卒接迎，路都不很远，但掉队离群滞留的很多。
English: He also ordered Zhangye County officials to meet him. The road is not very far, but there are many left-behinds.

古文：曩者，朕之不明，以军候弘上书言 匈奴缚马前后足，置城下，驰言 秦人，我匄若马  ，又汉使者久留不还，故兴遣贰师将军，欲以为使者威重也。
现代文：从前，我的头脑糊涂因军候弘上书说： 匈奴人捆住马的前后蹄，放在长城脚下，骑着马叫喊： 秦人，我给你们分马。 又汉朝使者被匈奴扣留的很久不得归来。所以我就派贰师将军征伐，以增强汉使的威信。
English: In the past, my mind was confused because of a military report that said: The Huns tied the front and back hooves of horses and placed them at the foot of the Great Wall, riding a horse and shouting: Qin people, I will give you a horse. Also, the Han Dynasty emissaries detained by the Huns would not be able to return for a long time. Therefore, I sent General Zou to conquer in order to strengthen the prestige of the Han Dynasty emissaries.

古文：古者卿大夫与谋，参以蓍龟，不吉不行。
现代文：古时候卿大夫参与谋事，都参照占卜，不吉利不去做。
English: In ancient times, when doctors were involved in planning, they all referred to divination, and it was unlucky not to do it.

古文：乃者以缚马书遍视丞相、御史、二千石、诸大夫、郎为文学者，乃至郡属国都尉成忠、赵破奴等，皆以 虏自缚其马，不祥甚哉！ 
现代文：当时我也曾把捆马书拿给丞相、御史大夫、二千石、诸大夫、郎为文学的都看了，甚至郡、属国都尉成忠、趟破奴等也看了，都说 匈奴人自己捆马，很不吉祥啊！ 
English: At that time, I also showed the horse-tying book to the chancellor, the chief historian, the 2,000-koku, the doctors, and the literary scholars, and even the county, the vassal captain Chengzhong, and the traveling slave. They all said, "The Huns are tying their own horses, which is very unlucky!"

古文：或以为 欲以见强，夫不足者视人有余。 
现代文：也有人认为，匈奴人 是要显示自己的强大，就像穷人假装富有一样。 
English: Others believe that the Huns wanted to show that they were powerful, just as the poor pretend to be rich.

古文：《易》之卦得《大过》，爻在九五，匈奴困败。
现代文：我曾查阅《易经》，得《大遇》卦，爻为九五，预示匈奴将要困败。
English: I once looked up the "I Ching" and got the "Great Encounter" gua, which was 95, indicating that the Xiongnu would be defeated.

古文：公军方士、太史治星望气，及太卜龟蓍，皆以为吉，匈奴必破，时不可再得也。
现代文：公车接来的方士、太史观看天象，和太卜占卦，都认为是吉象，匈奴必定要被打败，机会难得。
English: Fang Shi, Tai Shi, who came from the bus, watched the celestial object, and Tai Bo divination, all thought that it was a good omen. The Xiongnu was bound to be defeated, and the opportunity was rare.

古文：又曰： 北伐行将，于鬴山必克。 卦诸将，贰师最吉。
现代文：又说： 率军北伐，硝山必克，对诸将占卦，贰师将军最吉。
English: He also said, "If you lead the army in the Northern Expedition, you will surely conquer the mountains. As opposed to the generals, the general of the Kui Division is the most fortunate."

古文：故朕亲发贰师下鬴山，诏之必毋深入。
现代文：所以我亲派贰师将军进攻黼山，命他不要深入。
English: Therefore, I personally sent the general of Shaoshan Division to attack Shaoshan and ordered him not to go deeper.

古文：今计谋卦兆皆反缪。
现代文：今天看来，这些计谋卦兆都与事情相反，实在谬误。
English: From today's perspective, all these signs and portents are contrary to the facts and are really fallacious.

古文：重合侯得虏候者，言： 闻汉军当来，匈奴使巫埋羊牛所出诸道及水上以诅军。
现代文：重合侯俘虏了一个匈奴侦探，说： 听说汉军快来了，匈奴命巫师将羊牛埋在汉军必经的道路及河流处，以诅咒汉军。
English: Chonghe Hou captured a Hun detective and said: I heard that the Chinese army is coming soon, the Huns ordered the sorcerer to bury the sheep and cattle in the roads and rivers that the Chinese army must pass through to curse the Chinese army.

古文：单于遗天子马裘，常使巫祝之。
现代文：单于送给皇帝的马裘，都命巫师诅咒过。
English: Only the horse that was given to the emperor, Ma Qiu, was cursed by the sorcerer.

古文：缚马者，诅军事也。 又卜 汉军一将不吉 。
现代文：捆马前后蹄，是诅咒汉军必败的事，又占卦，得 汉军一将不吉 的话。
English: Tying the horse's front and back hooves is a curse that the Chinese army will be defeated, and it is also a divination that the Chinese army will be unlucky.

古文：匈奴常言： 汉极大，然不能饥渴，失一狼，走千羊。 
现代文：匈奴常说 汉朝极大，但是汉人不耐饥渴。失一狼。走干羊 。
English: The Xiongnu often said that the Han Dynasty was great, but the Han people did not tolerate hunger and thirst.

古文：乃者贰师败，军士死略离散，悲痛常在朕心。
现代文：从前贰师将军失败，士卒死的死，被俘的被俘，逃散的逃散，我心中常感悲痛。
English: I often feel sorrow in my heart for the defeat of the former general, the death of the dead soldiers, the capture of the captured, the escape of the escape.

古文：今请远田轮台，欲起亭隧，是扰劳天下，非所以优民也。
现代文：今天又有人建议在遥远的轮台屯田，还要筑亭开道，这是扰乱劳累天下，不是使人民受到好处的作法。
English: Today, some people are suggesting that we should build pavilions and open roads in the far-away railway stations, which is a way to disturb the world, not a way to benefit the people.

古文：今朕不忍闻。
现代文：今天我不忍心听轮台屯田的话。
English: Today, I can't bear to listen to the words of Tun Tian.

古文：大鸿胪等又议，欲募囚徒送匈奴使者，明封侯之赏以报忿，五伯所弗能为也。
现代文：大鸿胪等又商议，打算招募囚徒护送匈奴使者回去，明确告诉他封他为侯，让他刺杀单于。
English: Dahongyu and others also discussed, intending to recruit prisoners to escort the Hun envoy back, clearly telling him to appoint him as a marquis and let him assassinate Han Yu.

古文：且匈奴得汉降者，常提掖搜索，问以所闻。
现代文：这种做法是春秋五霸都不肯干的。况且匈奴得到投降的汉人，都是进行搜身，盘问他们所知道的情况。
English: This was something that the Five Dynasties did not want to do. Moreover, the Han Chinese who surrendered to the Xiongnu were all searched and interrogated about what they knew.

古文：今边塞未正，阑出不禁，障候长吏使卒猎兽，以皮肉为利，卒苦而烽火乏，失亦上集不得，后降者来，若捕生口虏，乃知之。
现代文：现在边塞的管制不严，对擅自出境的不能禁止，障候的官长驱使士卒打猎，以野兽的皮肉谋利，士卒劳苦，烽火事很少有人过问，这些情况，都不上报。后有来投降的，或是捉到俘虏，才知这些情况。
English: At the present time, the control of the border fortress is not strict, and those who leave the country without permission cannot be prohibited from doing so. Incompetent officials drive the soldiers to hunt and use the flesh of wild animals for profit. The soldiers work hard, and few people inquire about the bonfires. These situations are not reported. Later, those who surrendered or captured the captives learned about these situations.

古文：当今务在禁苛暴，止擅赋，力本农，修马复令，以补缺，毋乏武备而已。
现代文：现在的主要任务是严禁官吏对人民苛刻残暴，停止官府擅增赋税，大力发展农业生产，实行马复令，以补充边防的需要，但足够边防需要就行了。
English: The main task now is to strictly prohibit officials from being harsh and cruel to the people, to stop the government from arbitrarily increasing taxes, to vigorously develop agricultural production, and to implement the Ma Fuxi order to supplement the needs of border defense, but enough border defense needs are enough.

古文：郡国二千石各上进畜马方略补边状，与计对。
现代文：各郡国的太守、王国相都要上报畜养马匹的方法及善补边防的计划。
English: The governors-general and ministers-general of each county should report on the methods of raising horses and the plans for improving border defense.

古文：由是不复出军。
现代文：和上计吏同来京师讨论。 
English: He came to Beijing to discuss the matter with the higher-ranking officials.

古文：而封丞相车千秋为富民侯，以明休息，思富养民也。
现代文：从这以后汉朝不再出兵打仗。同时封丞相车千秋为富民侯，以表明执行休养生息政策，是思富养民之意。
English: From then on, the Han Dynasty would no longer send troops to fight. At the same time, it was decided to appoint the prime minister, Che Chi Qiu, as a rich peasant, to show that the implementation of the rest and recuperation policy was the meaning of thinking about wealth and nourishing the people.

古文：初，贰师将军李广利击大宛，还过杅弥，杅弥遣太子赖丹为质于龟兹。
现代文：当初，贰师将军李广利攻击大宛，经过杆弥，当时杆弥的太子赖丹在龟兹为质。
English: At first, the general Li Guangli attacked Dayuan, passing through Jiaoyi, when Jiaoyi's prince Lai Dan was a pawn in the tortoise.

古文：广利责电兹曰： 外国皆臣属于汉，龟兹何以得受杅弥质？ 
现代文：李广利责备龟兹说： 外国都臣服于汉朝，龟兹为什么接受杆弥的质子？ 
English: Li Guangli reproached Guze, saying: Foreign countries are all subject to the Han Dynasty, why did Guze accept the proton of Juya?

古文：即将赖丹入至京师。
现代文：就把赖丹带到长安。
English: He took Raidan to Chang'an.

古文：昭帝乃用桑弘羊前议，以杅弥太子赖丹为校尉，将军田轮台，轮台与渠犁地皆相连也。
现代文：昭帝就用桑弘羊以前的建议，以赖丹为校尉，率军在轮台屯田，轮台与渠犁地相连接。
English: Emperor Zhao used Kuang Hongyang's previous suggestion to take Lai Dan as a lieutenant and led the army to Tun Tian wheelhouse, which was connected to the canal.

古文：龟兹贵人姑翼谓其王曰： 赖丹本臣属吾国，今佩汉印绶来，迫吾国而田，必为害。 
现代文：龟兹贵人姑翼对龟兹王说： 赖丹本来臣属于我国，今天佩带着汉的印绶前来，靠近我国屯田，必有害于我国。 
English: Kamezi's noble aunt Tsubasa said to Kamezi's king: Raidan originally belonged to our country, today he came with Han's seal, close to our country's military cantonment, it will be harmful to our country.

古文：王即杀赖丹，而上书谢汉，汉未能征。
现代文：龟兹王就杀死赖丹，又上书给汉朝表示认罪。汉未能给予惩罚。
English: King Kamezi killed Laidan and sent a letter to Han Dynasty to admit his guilt, but Han failed to punish him.

古文：宣帝时，长罗侯常惠使乌孙还，便宜发诸国兵，合五万人攻龟兹，责以前杀校尉赖丹。
现代文：宣帝时，长罗侯常惠出使乌孙，在回来的路上，乘机发诸国兵共五万人进攻龟兹，谴责以前杀害校尉赖丹之事。
English: When Emperor Xuan was proclaimed, the chief Luo Hou often sent his emissary U Sun. On his way back, he took the opportunity to send a total of fifty thousand soldiers from all over the country to attack Kuez, condemning the previous killing of Lieutenant Laidan.

古文：龟兹王谢曰： 乃我先王时为贵人姑翼所误，我无罪。 
现代文：龟兹王认罪说： 是我先王在世时被贵人姑翼所误，我没有罪。 
English: King Kamezi pleaded guilty and said, "It was my former king who was misled by a noble aunt when he was alive. I am not guilty."

古文：执姑翼诣惠，惠斩之。
现代文：就捉姑翼送给常惠，常惠斩了姑翼。
English: He gave the catch to Chang Hui, and Chang Hui cut off the wing.

古文：时乌孙公主遣女来至京师学鼓琴，汉遣侍郎乐奉送主女，过龟兹。
现代文：当时解忧公主派女儿到长安学鼓琴，汉派侍郎乐奉送公主女回乌孙，路过龟兹。
English: At that time, Princess Jie Zhao sent her daughter to Chang'an to learn the drum and harp, and the Han faction's attendant Lang Le accompanied the princess back to the grandson, passing by the tortoise.

古文：龟兹前遣人至乌孙求公主女，未还。
现代文：龟兹王以前曾派人到乌孙要求娶公主女，还未回来。
English: The turtle king had previously sent a man to Uson to ask him to marry the princess, but he had not yet returned.

古文：会女过龟兹，龟兹王留不遣，复使使报公主，主许之。
现代文：正巧公主女经过龟兹，龟兹王就留住公主女不让走，又派使者到乌孙报告公主，公主答应了。
English: It just so happened that the princess passed through Kuez, and the king of Kuez kept the princess and did not let her go. He also sent an envoy to Usun to report to the princess, and the princess agreed.

古文：后公主上书，愿令女比宗室入朝，而龟兹王绛宾亦受其夫人，上书言得尚汉外孙为昆弟，愿与公主女俱入朝。
现代文：后来公主上书宣帝，希望她的女儿同于皇族入朝皇帝；龟兹王绛宾也很爱他的夫人，上书给宣帝，说自己得以娶汉的外孙女而为女婿，希望能与公主之女一起入朝。
English: Later, the princess wrote to Emperor Xuan that she hoped her daughter would join the imperial family and join the emperor. King Kamezi Shubin also loved his wife very much and wrote to Emperor Xuan that he was able to marry Han's granddaughter and become her son-in-law, and hoped to join the princess's daughter in the imperial court.

古文：元康元年，遂来朝贺。王及夫人皆赐印绶。
现代文：元康元年，龟兹王和夫人同来朝贺，都受赐印绶。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Kang era, King Guizi and his wife came to the morning greeting together, and both were given the seal.

古文：夫人号称公主，赐以车骑旗鼓，歌吹数十人，绮绣杂缯琦珍凡数千万。
现代文：夫人号称公主，宣帝赐给公主车马旗鼓，歌舞、作乐的数十人，丝绸珍宝共值数千万钱。
English: His wife was known as the princess, and Emperor Xuan gave the princess dozens of musicians, dancers, and musicians, and silk treasures worth tens of millions of yuan.

古文：留且一年，厚赠送之。
现代文：留住了一年，又赠给大量的礼物送回龟兹。
English: They stayed there for a year and were given a large number of gifts to take back to Käthe.

古文：后数来朝贺，乐汉衣服制度，归其国，治宫室，作檄道周卫，出入传呼，撞钟鼓，如汉家仪。外国胡人皆曰： 驴非驴，马非马，若龟兹王，所谓骡也。 
现代文：以后龟兹公主数次来长安朝贺。她喜欢汉朝的衣服和各种制度。归国后，修建宫室，设置禁道环卫，出入传呼，击钟鼓，如汉朝礼仪。外国的胡人都说： 驴不是驴，马不是马，就像龟兹王，是个骡子。 
English: After that, Princess Kamezi came to Chang'an several times to offer morning greetings. She liked the clothes and various systems of the Han Dynasty. After returning to China, she built a palace room, set up a forbidden road guard, called for people to come and go, and played the bell and drum, such as the etiquette of the Han Dynasty. Foreign people said: Donkey is not a donkey, horse is not a horse, just like King Kamezi, he is a mule.

古文：绛宾死，其子丞德自谓汉外孙，成、哀帝时往来尤数，汉遇之亦甚亲密。
现代文：绛宾死，他的儿子丞德自称是漠的外孙，在成帝、哀帝时，往来于长安的次数更多，汉朝对待他也很亲密。
English: After the death of Qin Bin, his son Zheng De claimed to be the grandson of the emperor. When the emperor was enthroned or mourned, he visited Chang'an more often. The Han Dynasty also treated him very closely.

古文：东通尉犁六百五十里。
现代文：龟兹柬到尉犁六百五十里。
English: It's six hundred and fifty miles from Kamezkam to Ipoh.

古文：尉犁国，王治尉犁城，去长安六千七百五十里。
现代文：尉犁国，国王治尉犁城，束到长安六千七百五十里。
English: The king ruled the country and the city, stretching to Chang'an six thousand seven hundred and fifty miles.

古文：户千二百，口九千六百，胜兵二千人。
现代文：有户一千二百，人口九千六百，军队二千人。
English: There are twelve hundred households, a population of nine thousand six hundred, and an army of two thousand.

古文：尉犁侯、安世侯、左右将、左右都尉、击胡君各一人，译长二人。
现代文：有尉犁侯、安世侯、左右将、左右都尉、击胡君各一人，译长二入。
English: There was a lieutenant, a vassal lord, a vassal lord, a left and right captain, a left and right captain, and a vassal lord each, and two chief translators.

古文：西至都护治所三百里，南与鄯善、且未接。
现代文：西到酉球都护治所旦垒球三百里，南与堑差、旦苤相接。
English: It is three hundred miles to the west to the 球都護治所, and it is connected to the 差 and 旦 in the south.

古文：危须国，王治危须城，去长安七千二百九十里。
现代文：危须田，国王治危须城，东到匡玄七千二百九十里。
English: It is 7,290 leagues east of Gyeongsu-tae, Gyeongsu-seong, Gyeongsu-gun, and Gyeongsu-hyeon.

古文：户七百，口四千九百，胜兵二千人。
现代文：有户七百，人四千九百，军队二千人。
English: There were seven hundred families, four thousand nine hundred people, and two thousand soldiers.

古文：击胡侯、击胡都尉、左右将、左右都尉、左右骑君、击胡君、译长各一人。
现代文：有击胡侯、击胡都尉、左右将、左右都尉、左右骑君、击胡君、译长各一人。
English: There is a batting captain, a batting captain, a batting captain, a batting captain, a batting captain, a batting captain, a batting captain and a translator.

古文：西至都护治所五百里，至焉耆百里。
现代文：西到西域都护治所乌垦越五百里，到噩昼一百里。
English: To the west, the Western Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center Wuyue is more than five hundred miles, and to the afternoon, it is one hundred miles.

古文：焉耆国，王治员渠城，去长安七千三百里。
现代文：焉耆国，国王治员渠城，束到长安七千三百里。
English: Yanqi Province, the king's magistrate Quicheng, bundled to Chang'an seven thousand three hundred miles.

古文：户四千，口三万二千一百，胜兵六千人。
现代文：有户四千，人口三万二千一百，军队六千人。
English: There are four thousand households, a population of thirty-two thousand one hundred, and six thousand soldiers.

古文：击胡侯、却胡侯、辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、击胡左右君、击车师君、归义车师君各一人，击胡都尉、击胡君各二人，译长三人。
现代文：有击胡侯、却胡侯、辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、击胡左右君、击车师君、归义车师君各一人，击胡都尉、击胡君各二人，译长三人。
English: There was one person from each of Hu Hou, Ho Hu Hou, Auxiliary Marquis, Left and Right Generals, Left and Right Lieutenants, Hu Zuo Jun, Hu Chhaishi Jun, Guiyi Chhaishi Jun, two people from each of Hu Du Fu and Hu Jun, and three chief translators.

古文：西南至都护治所四百里南至尉犁百里，北与乌孙接。
现代文：西南到都护治所四百里，南到尉犁一百里，北与乌孙相接。
English: It is four hundred miles to the southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center, and one hundred miles to the south to Fuxin. It is adjacent to Wusun in the north.

古文：近海水多鱼。
现代文：附近的海水中多鱼。
English: There are a lot of fish in the sea nearby.

古文：乌贪訾离国，王治于娄谷，去长安万三百三十里。
现代文：乌贪訾离国，国王治于娄谷，东到长安一万零三百三十里。
English: Wu Qianqian left the country, and the king ruled in Shibuya, 10,330 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：户四十一，口二百三十一，胜兵五十七人。
现代文：有户四十一，人口二百三十一，军队五十七入。
English: There are forty-one households, a population of 231, and fifty-seven enlisted in the army.

古文：辅国侯、左右都尉各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右都尉各一人。
English: There is a vice-governor and a lieutenant on each side.

古文：东与单桓、南与且弥、西与乌孙接。
现代文：束与单桓、南与且弥、西与乌孙相接。
English: Soku is adjacent to Shankan, Minami to Kechiya, and Nishi to Usun.

古文：卑陆国，王治天山东乾当国，去长安八千六百八十里。
现代文：卑陆国，国王治玉山东茎当厘，束到垦茬八千六百八十里。
English: In the country of Bailu, the king ruled the eastern stem of the Jade Mountain, reaching a length of 8,680 li.

古文：户二百二十七，口千三百八十七，胜兵四百二十二人。
现代文：有户二百二十七，人口一千三百八十七，军队四百二十二人。
English: There were 227 households, with a population of 1,387 and an army of 422 men.

古文：辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、左右译长各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、左右译长各一人。
English: There is a deputy governor, a left and right captain, a left and right lieutenant, and a left and right translator.

古文：西南至都护治所千二百八十七里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千二百八十七里。
English: It is 1,287 li from the southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center.

古文：卑陆后国，王治番渠类谷，去长安八千七百一十里。
现代文：卑陆后国，国王治番渠类谷，东到长安八千七百一十里。
English: After the country of Pei Lu, the king ruled the Banqiu Valley, 8,710 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：户四百六十二，口千一百三十七，胜兵三百五十人。
现代文：有户四百六十二，人口一千一百三十七，军队三百五十人。
English: There are four hundred and sixty-two households, with a population of eleven hundred and thirty-seven and an army of three hundred and fifty.

古文：辅国侯、都尉、译长各一人，将二人。
现代文：有辅国侯、都尉、译长各一人，将二人。
English: There is a vice-governor, lieutenant and translator, one each, and two generals.

古文：东与郁立师、北与匈奴、西与劫国、南与车师接。
现代文：束与郁立师、北与匈奴、西与劫国、南与车师相接。
English: Sokcho is connected to Yuletide Division, the north to Xiongnu, the west to Nationalists, and the south to Chariots Division.

古文：郁立师国，王治内咄谷，去长安八千八百三十里。
现代文：郁立师国，国王治内旦鲢，束到星叁八千八百三十里。
English: The king ruled the country and the country ruled the king, bound to the star eight thousand eight hundred and thirty miles.

古文：户百九十，口千四百四十五，胜兵三百三十一人。
现代文：有户一百九十，人口一千四百四十五，军队三百三十一人。
English: There are one hundred and ninety households, a population of one thousand four hundred and forty-five, and an army of three hundred and thirty-one.

古文：辅国侯、左右都尉、译长各一人，东与车师后城长、西与卑陆、北与匈奴接。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右都尉、译长各一人。束与车师后城长、西与皇陆、北与鲤躯相接。
English: There is a vice-provincial governor, left and right captains, and a translator. The bundle is connected to the driver, the rear mayor, the west is connected to the emperor, and the north is connected to the body.

古文：单桓国，王治单桓城，去长安八千八百七十里。
现代文：单桓国，国王治理单桓城，到长安有八千八百七十里。
English: In Shanhuang Province, the king governed Shanhuang City, which is 8,870 li away from Chang'an.

古文：户二十七，口百九十四，胜兵四十五人。
现代文：有户二十七，人口一百九十四，军队四十五人。
English: There are 27 households, a population of 194, and an army of 45.

古文：辅国侯、将、左右都尉、译长各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、将、左右都尉、译长各一人。
English: There is a vice-governor, a general, a left and right captain, and a translator each.

古文：蒲类国，王治天山西疏榆谷，去长安八千三百六十里。
现代文：蒲类国，国王治天山西疏榆谷，束到长安八千三百六十里。
English: The king of Putuo Province ruled the Tianshan Mountains and the West Shaoshan Valley, stretching 8,360 miles to Chang'an.

古文：户三百二十五，口二千三十二，胜兵七百九十九人。
现代文：有户三百二十五，人口二千零三十二，军队七百九十九人。
English: There are 325 households, with a population of 2032 and 799 military personnel.

古文：辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉各一人。
English: There is a vice-governor, a left and right captain, and a left and right lieutenant.

古文：西南至都护治所千三百八十七里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千三百八十七里。
English: It is 1,387 li from the southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center.

古文：蒲类后国，王去长安八千六百三十国。
现代文：蒲类后国，国王治地东到星窒八千六百三十里。
English: In the Kingdom of Pudong, the king ruled from east to west for 8,630 miles.

古文：户百，口千七十，胜兵三百三十四人，辅国侯、将、左右都尉、译长各一人。
现代文：有户一百，人口一千零七十，军队三百三十四人。有辅国侯、将、左右都尉、译长各一人。
English: There are one hundred households, a population of one thousand and seventy, and three hundred and thirty-four soldiers, including a deputy governor, a general, a left and right captain, and a translator.

古文：西且弥国，王治天山东于大谷，去长安八千六百七十里。
现代文：西且弥国，国王治玉山东王太谷，东到旦昼八干六百七十里。
English: To the west is the country of Kameya, the king rules the Jade Mountain, to the east is the valley of King Tai, and to the east is eight hundred and sixty-seven miles.

古文：户三百三十二，口千九百二十六，胜兵七百三十八人。
现代文：有户三百三十二，人口一千九百二十六，军队七百三十八人。
English: There are three hundred and thirty-two households, with a population of nineteen hundred and twenty-six and an army of seven hundred and thirty-eight.

古文：西且弥侯、左右将、左右骑君各一人。
现代文：有西且弥侯、左右将、左右骑君各一人。
English: There is a west and a south, a left and right captain, and a left and right cavalryman.

古文：西南至都护治所千四百八十七里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千四百八十七里。
English: It is 1,487 li from the southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center.

古文：东且弥国，王治天山东兑虚谷，去长安八千二百五十里。
现代文：东且弥国，国王治玉山东旦卢谷，束到昼塞八千二百五十里。
English: In the East, the king ruled the kingdom of Yushan, and in the East, the king ruled the kingdom of Lugu.

古文：户百九十一，口千九百四十八，胜兵五百七十二人。
现代文：有户一百九十一，人口一千九百四十八，军队五百七十二人。
English: There are 191 households, with a population of 1,948. There are 572 military personnel.

古文：东且弥侯、左右都尉各一人。
现代文：有束且弥侯、左右都尉各一人。
English: There is a shogun and a shogun's son, and a captain on each side.

古文：西南至都护治所千五百八十七里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千五百八十七里。
English: The distance from the southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center is 1,587.

古文：劫国，王治天山东丹渠谷，去长安八千五百七十里。
现代文：劫国，国王治玉山东丹渠谷，东到长安八千五百七十里。
English: After the invasion of the country, the king ruled the Yushan East Danqiu Valley, east to Chang'an eight thousand five hundred seventy miles.

古文：户九十九，口五百，胜兵百一十五人。
现代文：有户九十九，人口五百，军队一百一十五人。
English: There are ninety-nine households, a population of five hundred, and an army of one hundred and fifteen.

古文：辅国侯、都尉、译长各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、都尉、译长各一人。
English: There is a vice-governor, lieutenant and translator, one each.

古文：西南至都护治所千四百八十七里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千四百八十七里。
English: It is 1,487 li from the southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center.

古文：狐胡国，王治车师柳谷，去长安八千二百里。
现代文：狐胡国，国王治车师柳谷，东到旦玄八千二百里。
English: Fox Hu country, the king's chauffeur willow valley, east to Dan Xuan eight thousand two hundred miles.

古文：户五十五，口二百六十四，胜兵四十五人。
现代文：有户五十五，人口二百六十四，军队四十五人。
English: There are 55 households, a population of 264, and 45 soldiers.

古文：辅国侯、左右都尉各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右都尉各一人。
English: There is a vice-governor and a lieutenant on each side.

古文：西至都护治所千一百四十七里，至焉耆七百七十里。
现代文：西到都护治所一千一百四十七里，到聂昼七百七十里。
English: To the west, it is 1,147 miles to the capital protection and control center, and 770 miles to the noon.

古文：山国，王去长安七千一百七十里。
现代文：山国，东到长安七千一百七十里。
English: Mountain country, east to Chang'an seven thousand one hundred and seventy miles.

古文：户四百五十，口五千，胜兵千人。
现代文：有户四百五十，人口五千，军队一千人。
English: There are 450 households, a population of 5,000, and a military force of 1,000.

古文：辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、译长各一人。
现代文：有辅国侯、左右将、左右都尉、译长各一人。
English: There is a vice-governor, a left and right captain, a left and right lieutenant, and a translator.

古文：西至尉犁二百四十里，西北至焉耆百六十里，西至危须二百六十里，东南与鄯善、且末接。
现代文：西到尉犁二百四十里，西北到焉耆一百六十里，西到危须二百六十里，东南与鄯善、且末相接。
English: It is 240 miles to the west of Lijiang, 160 miles to the northwest of Yancheng, and 260 miles to the west of Wuxu. It is connected to Shanshan and Qianmen in the southeast.

古文：山出铁，民出居，寄田籴谷于焉耆、危须。
现代文：有铁矿山，产铁，人民居山间，到焉耆、危须种田、买粮。
English: There are iron mines, which produce iron, and people live in the mountains, and go to the mountains to farm and buy grain.

古文：车师前国，王治交河城。河水分流绕城下，故号交河。去长安八千一百五十里。
现代文：车师前国，国王治交巡，河水分支绕流城下，所以名奎回，束到旦昼八千一百五十里。
English: In the former country, the king ruled the traffic patrol, and the river branches flowed around the city, so it was famous, and it was bundled to eight thousand one hundred and fifty miles.

古文：户七百，口六千五十，胜兵千八百六十五人。
现代文：有户七百，人口六千零五十，军队一千八百六十五人。
English: There are seven hundred households, a population of six thousand and fifty, and an army of one thousand eight hundred and sixty-five.

古文：辅国侯、安国侯、左右将、都尉、归汉都尉、车师君、通善君、乡善君各一人，译长二人。
现代文：有辅国侯、安国侯、左右将、都尉、归汉都尉、车师君、通善君、乡善君各一人，译长二人。
English: There was a vice governor, a governor of An, a left and right captain, a captain, a captain who returned to Han, a coachman, a scholar, a scholar, and two chief translators.

古文：西南至都护治所千八百七里，至焉耆八百三十五里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千八百零七里，到噩董八百三十五里。
English: To the southwest, it is 1,807 miles to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center, and 835 miles to Badong.

古文：车师后国，王治务涂谷，去长安八千九百五十里。户五百九十五，口四千七百七十四，胜兵千八百九十人。
现代文：车师后国，国王治务涂谷，束到垦玄八千九百五十里，有户五百九十五，人口四千七百七十四，军队一千八百九十人。
English: After the division of the chariots, the king ruled Tu Valley, which stretched for 8,950 li, with 595 households, a population of 4,774 and an army of 1,890.

古文：击胡侯、左右将、左右都尉、道民君、译长各一人。
现代文：有击胡侯、左右将、左右都尉、导民君、译长各一人。
English: Hu Hou, the left and right captains, the left and right lieutenants, the leader of the people, and the translator are all one person.

古文：西南至都护治所千二百三十七里。
现代文：西南到都护治所一千二百三十七里。
English: Southwest to the Capital Protection and Rehabilitation Center is twelve hundred and thirty-seven miles.

古文：车师都尉国，户四十，口三百三十三，胜兵八十四人。
现代文：车师都尉国，有户四十，人口三百三十三，军队八十四人。
English: There are 40 households, 333 residents, and 84 soldiers in the division.

古文：车师后城长国，户百五十四，口九百六十，胜兵二百六十人。
现代文：车师后城长国，有户一百五十四，人口九百六十，军队二百六十人。
English: There are one hundred and fifty-four households, nine hundred and sixty inhabitants, and two hundred and sixty soldiers in Hecheng Changguo.

古文：武帝天汉二年，以匈奴降者介和王为开陵侯，将楼兰国兵始击车师，匈奴遣右贤王将数万骑救之，汉兵不利，引去。
现代文：武帝天汉二年，汉武帝封降于汉朝的匈奴介和王为开陵侯，命他率楼兰国兵开始进击车师，匈奴派右贤王率数万骑士救车师，漠兵作战失利，退走。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu's reign, Emperor Wu conferred the title of Xiongnu Suke and Wang Bei Kailing on Wang Bei, who was at the top of the Han Dynasty. He ordered him to lead the Loulan soldiers to attack the chariot division. The Xiongnu sent King Uxian with tens of thousands of knights to rescue the chariot division. The desert soldiers lost the battle and retreated.

古文：征和四年，遣重合侯马通将四万骑击匈奴，道过车师北，复遣开陵侯将楼兰、尉犁、危须凡六国兵别击车师，勿令得遮重合侯。
现代文：征和四年，汉派重合侯马通率四万骑兵经车师北进击匈奴；又派开陵侯率楼兰、尉犁、危须等六国之兵攻击车师，以阻止车师截击重合侯军。
English: In the fourth year of the Conscription, the Han Dynasty sent the concurrent Hou Matong and his 40,000 cavalrymen north to attack the Xiongnu through the chariot division; they also sent the concurrent Kailing Hou and the soldiers of the six countries such as Loulan, Yixuan, and Guisu to attack the chariot division to prevent the chariot division from intercepting the concurrent Hou army.

古文：诸国兵共围车师，车师王降服，臣属汉。
现代文：六国之兵包围了车师，车师王投降，臣属于汉朝。
English: The soldiers of the six countries surrounded the coachman, the coachman Wang surrendered, and the vassal belonged to the Han Dynasty.

古文：昭帝时，匈奴复使四千骑田车师。
现代文：昭帝时，匈奴又派四千骑士到车师屯田。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhao, the Xiongnu sent another four thousand knights to the coachman Tonden.

古文：宣帝即位，遣五将将兵击匈奴，车师田者惊去，车师复通于汉。
现代文：宣帝继位，派遣五位将军率兵进击匈奴，在车师屯田的匈奴兵因害怕而逃走，车师又与汉恢复往来。
English: Emperor Xuan ascended the throne and sent five generals to attack the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu soldiers who were in the coachman's camp fled in fear, and the coachman resumed contact with the Han.

古文：匈奴怒，召其太子军宿，欲以为质。
现代文：匈奴单于很生气，要车师派太子军宿到匈奴，以为人质。
English: The Xiongnu was very angry and asked the coachman to send the prince's army to lodge with the Xiongnu, thinking that they were hostages.

古文：军宿，焉耆外孙，不欲质匈奴，亡走焉耆。车师王更立子乌贵为太子。
现代文：军宿是焉耆国王的外孙，不愿到匈奴为质，就逃到焉耆；车师王立另一个儿子乌贵为太子。
English: Junshu is the grandchild of the king of Yancheng. He did not want to go to the Huns as a pledge, so he fled to Yancheng. The coachman Wang made another son, Ugui, the crown prince.

古文：及乌贵立为王，与匈奴结婚姻，教匈奴遮汉道通乌孙者。
现代文：后来乌贵立为车师王，与匈奴结为婚姻关系，为匈奴截击汉朝到乌孙的使者提供情况。
English: Later, Ugui became the king of chariots, married the Xiongnu, and provided information for the Xiongnu to intercept the envoys of the Han Dynasty to Wusun.

古文：地节二年，汉遣侍郎郑吉、校尉司马憙将免刑罪人田渠犁，积谷，欲以攻车师。
现代文：地节二年，汉朝派侍郎郑吉、校尉司马意率领免刑的罪人在渠犁屯田，积聚粮食，准备进攻车师。
English: In the second year of the festival, the Han Dynasty sent the attendant Zheng Ji and the lieutenant Sima Yi to lead the criminals who were exempted from punishment to gather grain and prepare to attack the chariot division.

古文：至秋收谷，吉、憙发城郭诸国兵万余人，自与所将田士千五百人共击车师，攻交河城，破之。
现代文：到了秋收之时，郑吉和司马意征发附近各国的军队一万余人，又与自己的屯田士卒一千五百人，共同进击车师，攻破交河城。
English: By the time of the autumn harvest, Zheng Ji and Sima had conscripted and dispatched more than 10,000 troops from nearby countries, and another 1,500 soldiers from their own garrisons, to jointly attack the division and break through the city of Jiahe.

古文：王尚在其北石城中，未得，会军食尽，吉等且罢兵，归渠犁田。
现代文：当时，车师王在交河城北的石城中，未被抓获。这时，汉军粮尽，郑吉等撤兵回到渠犁，继续屯田。
English: At that time, the driver Wang was in Shicheng, north of Jiahe City, and was not captured. At this time, the Han army ran out of food, and Zheng Ji and other soldiers withdrew back to the ditch and continued to occupy the fields.

古文：收秋毕，复发兵攻车师王于石城。
现代文：秋收完了，郑吉等又发兵攻打车师王于石城。
English: After the autumn harvest was over, Zheng Ji and others also sent troops to attack the carmaker Wang Yu in Shicheng.

古文：王闻汉兵且至，北走匈奴求救，匈奴未为发兵。
现代文：车师王听说汉兵快到了，就北到匈奴求救，匈奴没有发救兵。
English: When coachman Wang heard that the Han soldiers were about to arrive, he went north to the Xiongnu for help, but the Xiongnu did not send any rescuers.

古文：王来还，与贵人苏犹议欲降汉，恐不见信。
现代文：车师王又回国，与车师贵人苏犹商量投降汉朝，又怕汉朝不相信。
English: The coachman Wang returned to China and discussed surrendering to the Han Dynasty with the coachman Su Yu, fearing that the Han Dynasty would not believe him.

古文：苏犹教王击匈奴边国小蒲类，斩首，略其人民，以降吉。
现代文：苏犹就建议车师王进击匈奴边境上的小蒲类国，杀小蒲类国王，掳掠其人民，再投降郑吉。
English: Su Yu suggested that Chariot Master Wang should attack the kingdom of Xiaopu on the border with the Huns, kill the king of Xiaopu, kidnap his people, and then surrender to Zhengji.

古文：车师旁小金附国随汉军后盗车师，车师王复自请击破金附。
现代文：车师旁的小金附国随汉军后盗掠车师，车师王请准于汉，亲自击破金附。
English: The coachman's neighbor, Koganefuke Province, followed the Han army to plunder the coachman. The coachman, Wang, asked Han for permission to personally defeat Koganefuke.

古文：匈奴闻车师降汉，发兵攻车师，吉、憙引兵北逢之，匈奴不敢前。
现代文：匈奴听说车师投降汉朝，发兵进攻车师，碰上郑吉、司马憙率军北上，匈奴兵不敢前进。
English: The Xiongnu heard that the Chariot Division had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, sent troops to attack the Chariot Division, and encountered Zheng Ji and Sima Yi leading the army northward. The Xiongnu soldiers did not dare to advance.

古文：吉、憙即留一候与卒二十人留守王，吉等引兵归渠犁。
现代文：郑吉、司马意就留下一候和二十个士卒保卫车师王，郑吉等率军回渠犁。
English: Zheng Jie and Sima Yi stayed behind with twenty soldiers to guard the coachman Wang, and Zheng Jie led the army back to the canal.

古文：车师王恐匈奴兵复至而见杀也，乃轻骑奔乌孙，吉即迎其妻子置渠犁。
现代文：车师王怕匈奴兵再来，他将被杀死，就骑马逃向乌孙；郑吉就迎接车师王的妻子留在渠犁。
English: Wang, the driver, was afraid that the Hun soldiers would come again and he would be killed, so he fled on horseback to Wusun; Zhengji greeted Wang's wife, who stayed behind at the canal.

古文：东奏事，至酒泉，有诏还田渠犁及车师，益积谷以安西国，侵匈奴。
现代文：郑吉东到酒泉，向宣帝报告情况。宣帝命他回渠犁和车师屯田，大量积聚粮食，使西域各国安心，并准备打击匈奴。
English: Zheng Jidong went to Jiuquan to report the situation to Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan ordered him to go back to the canal and the coachman Tun Tian, accumulate a large amount of grain, make the countries in the western region feel at ease, and prepare to fight the Huns.

古文：吉还，传送车师王妻子诣长安，赏赐甚厚，每朝会四夷，常尊显以示之。
现代文：郑吉回渠犁，用驿车送车师王的妻子到长安，宣帝对车师王妻子赏赐接待都很优厚，每次朝会各少数民族首领时，常常向他们显示汉对车师王妻子的厚待。
English: Zhengji returned to the canal and sent the wife of the coachman Wang to Chang'an by tuk-tuk. Emperor Xuan treated the wife of the coachman Wang very well. Every time the leaders of the ethnic minorities met in the imperial court, they often showed them the kind treatment of Han to the wife of the coachman Wang.

古文：于是吉始使吏卒三百人别田车师。
现代文：于是郑吉派吏卒三百人在车师屯田。
English: As a result, Zheng Ji dispatched 300 officers and men to Tonden.

古文：得降者，言单于大臣皆曰： 车师地肥美，近匈奴，使汉得之，多田积谷，必害人国，不可不争也。 
现代文：有匈奴人投降郑吉，说匈奴单于的大臣们都说： 车师土地肥美，靠近匈奴，如果使汉朝得到这块地方，就广开田地，积聚粮食，必然有害于别人的国家，因此不能不争这块地方。 
English: Some Huns surrendered to Zhengji, and the ministers who said that the Huns were alone all said: the land of Cheji is fertile and close to the Huns, if the Han Dynasty gets this place, it will expand the fields and accumulate grain, which will inevitably be harmful to other countries, so we must fight for this place.

古文：果遣骑来击田者，吉乃与校尉尽将渠犁田士千五百人往田，匈奴复益遣骑来，汉田卒少不能当，保车师城中。
现代文：果然匈奴派骑士来攻击汉的屯田吏卒，郑吉就与校尉把在渠犁屯田的吏卒一千五百人都带到车师屯田。但匈奴又增派骑士前来，汉屯田吏卒太少，不能抵挡匈奴的侵袭，就退保于车师城中。
English: Sure enough, the Xiongnu sent knights to attack the Han's garrison officers, and Zheng Ji and the captain led the 1,500 officers of the garrison at the canal to the coachman's garrison. But the Xiongnu sent more knights to come, and the Han's garrison officers were too few to resist the invasion of the Xiongnu, so they retreated to the coachman's castle.

古文：匈奴将即其城下谓吉曰： 单于必争此地，不可田也。 
现代文：匈奴将军到城下对郑吉说： 匈奴单于一定要争夺这个地方，你们不要在这裹屯田了。 
English: The Xiongnu general went to the outskirts of the city and said to Zheng Ji: "The Xiongnu alone must fight for this place. Don't get bogged down here."

古文：围城数日乃解。
现代文：匈奴包围车师城数日才退走。
English: The Huns besieged the chariot city for several days before retreating.

古文：后常数千骑往来守车师，吉上书言： 车师去渠犁千余里，间以河山，北近匈奴，汉兵在渠犁者势不能相救，愿益田卒。 
现代文：以后汉常派数千骑兵往来保卫车师。郑吉上书宣帝说： 车师到渠犁一千余里，中间隔着河山，北边靠近匈奴，汉兵在渠犁的来不及援救。希望增加车师屯田卒。 
English: Later, the Han Dynasty often sent thousands of cavalry to protect the chariot division. Zheng Ji wrote to Emperor Xuan saying: The chariot division is more than a thousand miles away from the canal, separated by mountains and rivers in the middle, and close to the Xiongnu in the north. The Han soldiers are too late to rescue the chariot division. It is hoped to increase the number of chariot division soldiers.

古文：公卿议以为道远烦费，可且罢车师田者。
现代文：汉朝大臣们讨论，认为车师的路途太远，花费太大，可以暂且撤走车师屯田吏卒。
English: The ministers of the Han Dynasty discussed it, and thought that the journey of the coachman was too far and the expense too great, so they could temporarily remove the coachman, Tonden Li Zi.

古文：诏遣长罗侯将张掖、酒泉骑出车师北千余里，扬威武车师旁。
现代文：宣帝命长罗侯常惠率张掖、酒泉两郡骑兵到车师以北一千余里，宣扬威武。
English: Emperor Xuan's commander, Luo Hou Chang Hui, led the cavalry from Zhangye and Jiuquan counties to more than a thousand miles north of Cheji, to proclaim their prowess.

古文：胡骑引去，吉乃得出，归渠犁，凡三校尉屯田。
现代文：匈奴骑士退走，郑吉才得出车师城，回渠犁，用三个校尉屯田。
English: When the Xiongnu knights retreated, Zheng Jizhi only came out of the coachman's city, went back to the canal, and used three lieutenants to occupy the field.

古文：车师王之走乌孙也，乌孙留不遣，遣使上书，愿留车师王，备国有急，可从西道以击匈奴。
现代文：车师王逃到乌孙国，乌孙留住车师王不让他回国，派使者上书宣帝，说愿意留下车师王，以备在匈奴进犯时，可从西道进击匈奴。
English: Chariot Master Wang fled to the Wusun Kingdom. The Wusun kept Chariot Master Wang and did not allow him to return to the country. They sent an envoy to the emperor, saying that they were willing to keep Chariot Master Wang, so that when the Huns attacked, they could attack the Huns from the west.

古文：汉许之。
现代文：宣帝准许。
English: The Han Dynasty agreed to the request of the Xiongnu.

古文：于是汉召故车师太子军宿在焉耆者，立以为王，尽徙车师国民令居渠犁，遂以车师故地与匈奴。
现代文：于是汉朝召已逃到焉耆的原车师太子军宿立为车师王，把车师国的民众都迁到渠犁，把车师原有土地让给匈奴。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty summoned the prince's army, which had fled to Yanqi, to stand up as the king of chariots, moved the people of the chariot country to the canal, and gave the original land of the chariots to the Huns.

古文：车师王得近汉田官，与匈奴绝，亦安乐亲汉。
现代文：车师王靠近漠的田官，与匈奴隔绝，也很安乐，与汉亲密。
English: The coachman Wang was close to the field officers in the desert, isolated from the Xiongnu, very happy, and close to the Han.

古文：后汉使侍郎殷广德责乌孙，求车师王乌贵，将诣阙，赐第与其妻子居。
现代文：后来汉派侍郎殷广德为使，责备乌孙，要出原车师王乌贵，一起到长安，宣帝赐给原车师王宅第，与妻广住在一起。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty sent the steward Yin Guangde as an envoy to reproach U Son, to bring out the original coachman Wang U Gui, to go to Chang'an together, and Emperor Xuan gave the original coachman Wang Zhai to live with his wife Guang.

古文：是岁，元康四年也。
现代文：这一年是元康四年。
English: This year is the fourth year of the Yuan Kang.

古文：其后置戍己校尉屯田，居车师故地。
现代文：以后，设置戊己校尉屯田，居住在车师旧地。
English: After that, Lieutenant Wu Zi was assigned to Tonden, living in the old place of the coachman.

古文：元始中，车师后王国有新道，出五船北，通玉门关，往来差近，戊己校尉徐普欲开以省道里半，避白龙堆之厄。
现代文：元始中，车师后王国有一条新道，从五船以北，可通到玉门关，往来较近，戊己校尉徐普想要开此新道，可以省一半的路程，又可避开白龙堆的危险地区。
English: In the early days, there was a new road in the kingdom of Chariot Master Hou. From the north of Wufeng, it could lead to Yumen Pass. The traffic was relatively close. If Wu Zi's Lieutenant Xu Pu wanted to drive this new road, he could save half of the distance and avoid the dangerous area of the White Dragon Pile.

古文：车师后王姑句以道当为拄置，心不便也。
现代文：车师后王姑句以为新道直贯本国，内心不高兴。
English: The driver, Queen Wang Gu, thought that the new road would go straight through the country, and she was not happy.

古文：地又颇与匈奴南将军地接，曾欲分明其界然后奏之，召姑句使证之，不肯，系之。
现代文：新道所在地与匈奴南将军地连接，徐普想划明此界限以报告皇上，就召姑句，让他帮助证明。
English: The location of the new road was connected to the Xiongnu's southern general area. Xu Pu wanted to draw this boundary to report to the emperor, so he called Guku to help him prove it.

古文：姑句数以牛羊赇吏，求出不得。
现代文：可是姑句不肯，徐普就把他逮捕了。
English: But the aunt refused, and Xu Pu arrested him.

古文：姑句家矛端生火，其妻股紫陬谓姑句曰： 矛端生火，此兵气也，利以用兵。
现代文：姑句几次用牛羊贿赂汉宫，要求放他出去，都未获准。姑句家的矛头上冒火花，姑句之妻股紫陬对姑句说： 矛头上冒火花，这是兵气，有利于打仗。
English: Several times, Gu Gu bribed the Han Palace with cattle and sheep and asked to be let out, but was not allowed. Sparks flew from the spearhead of Gu Gu's family. Gu's wife, Gu Ziqi, said to Gu: Sparks fly from the spearhead. This is military spirit and is conducive to war.

古文：前车师前王为都护司马所杀，今久系必死，不如降匈奴。 
现代文：以前车师前王被都护司马杀死，今天你长时间被关押，必定也要死。不如投降匈奴。 
English: In the past, the coachman, the former king, was killed by the city guard, Sima. Today, you have been detained for a long time, and you will surely die. It is better to surrender to the Xiongnu.

古文：即驰突出高昌壁，入匈奴。
现代文：于是就骑马逃出高昌壁，投降匈奴。
English: So he rode out of Gaochang and surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：又去胡来王唐兜，国比大种赤水羌，数相冠，不胜，告急都护。
现代文：又去胡来王唐兜的国家靠近大种赤水羌，几次被寇掠。唐兜不能取胜，就向都护告急。
English: He also went to the country of Hu Lai Wang Tang Dabang, which was close to the large species of red water dragonfly, and was plundered several times. Tang Dabang could not win, so he sent urgent protection to the capital.

古文：都护但钦不以时救助，唐兜困急，怨钦，东守玉门关。
现代文：都护但钦没有及时前往救援，唐兜被困危急，怨恨但钦，就向东逃至玉门关。
English: The tutelary of the capital, Dangqin, did not go to the rescue in time. Tang Dabou was trapped in a critical situation. He resented Dangqin and fled eastward to Yumen Pass.

古文：玉门关不内，即将妻子人民千余人亡降匈奴。
现代文：玉门关守将不让进，他就率领妻子、人民一千余人逃亡，降于匈奴。
English: When the guards at the Jade Gate refused to let him in, he led his wife and more than a thousand people to escape and surrender to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴受之，而遣使上书言状。
现代文：匈奴收容了之后，就派使者到汉向皇上报告了这一晴况。
English: After the Huns were contained, they sent an envoy to Han to report this good situation to the emperor.

古文：是时，新都侯王莽秉政，遣中郎将王昌等使匈奴，告单于西域内属，不当得受。
现代文：这时，新都侯王莽执掌朝政，派中郎将王昌等出使匈奴，告诉单于，说西域内属于汉，匈奴不应当接受唐兜来降。
English: At this time, the new capital lord Wang Mang was in charge of the imperial government, and he sent Wang Chang and other middlemen to dispatch envoys to the Xiongnu to tell the Xiongnu that the western region belonged to the Han, and that the Xiongnu should not accept Tang's invasion.

古文：单于谢属。执二王以付使者。
现代文：单于认罪，就逮捕了两个王交给汉使。
English: Just by confessing, they arrested two kings and handed them over to the Han envoys.

古文：莽使中郎王萌待西域恶都奴界上逢受。
现代文：王莽派中郎王萌到西域的恶都奴界上等候接受二王。
English: Wang Mang sent his middle son Wang Meng to the evil capital slave world in the western region to wait for the two kings.

古文：单于遣使送，因请其罪。
现代文：单于派使送二王来，请汉免除二王之罪。
English: He simply sent an envoy to bring the two kings and ask Han to absolve them of their sins.

古文：使者以闻，莽不听，诏下会西域诸国王，陈军斩姑句、唐兜以示之。
现代文：使者报告王莽，王莽不同意，下令会集西域各国国王，摆开军阵，将姑句、唐兜二王斩首于众人之前。
English: The envoy reported to Wang Mang, but Wang Mang disagreed and ordered to gather the kings of the Western Regions, set up military lines, and behead the two kings, Gu Gu and Tang Diao, in front of everyone.

古文：至莽篡位，建国二年，以广新公甄丰为右伯，当出西域。
现代文：王莽篡位，建国二年，命广新公甄丰为右伯，将到西域去。
English: Wang Mang usurped the throne, and in the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he appointed Guangxin Gong Zhenfeng as his right-hand man, and will go to the western region.

古文：车师后王须置离闻之，与其右将股鞮、左将尸泥支谋曰： 闻甄公为西域太伯，当出，故事给使者牛、羊、谷、刍茭，导译，前五威将过，所给使尚未能备。
现代文：车师后王须置离听说，和他的右将股鞑、左将尸泥支商量说： 听说甄丰将要为西域太伯，正要来了。旧例，我们要供给汉使者牛羊粮食和喂牲口的草料，还有向导、翻译。以前五威将王奇从这裹经过，应供给的东西尚且没有备齐。
English: It was heard that the coachman, Queen Wang, had to leave, and he discussed with his right-hand captain, Guan Yu, and his left-hand captain, Guan Di, saying, "I heard that Zhen Feng is going to be the grand prince of the Western Regions, and he is about to come. In the old days, we had to provide the Chinese envoy with grain, cattle and sheep, and grass to feed the cattle, as well as a guide and interpreter. Previously, the Five Dynasties had passed through here, and the things that should be provided were not yet ready.

古文：今太伯复出，国益贫，恐不能称。 
现代文：今天西域太伯又来，我们的国家就越发穷了，恐怕无力供应。 
English: Today, the Western Cape typhoon is coming again, and our country is getting poorer and poorer, and I'm afraid we won't be able to supply.

古文：欲亡入匈奴。
现代文：想逃到匈奴去。
English: He wanted to escape to the Huns.

古文：戊己校尉刀护闻之，召置离验问，辞服，乃械致都护但钦在所埒娄城。
现代文：戊己校尉刀护听说此事，就把置离找来查问，置离招认了，就被押送到都护但钦的驻地埒娄城。
English: Upon hearing of the incident, Wu Zi's lieutenant, Cobao, went to inquire about the separation and confessed to the separation, and was escorted to Danzhong, the garrison of Danzhong.

古文：置离人民知其不还，皆哭而送之。
现代文：置离的人民知道置离是不能回来了，都哭着送他。
English: The people he had left behind knew that he could not come back, and they all sent him away crying.

古文：至，钦则斩置离。
现代文：置离到埒娄城，但钦把他斩首。
English: He was exiled to Lucheng, but Qin had him beheaded.

古文：置离兄辅国侯狐兰支将置离众二千余人，驱畜产，举国亡降匈奴。
现代文：置离的哥哥辅国侯狐兰支率置离的民众二千余人，赶着牲畜，全国都逃奔投降了匈奴。
English: His estranged brother, Fu Guozhonguo, led by Fu Lan, the leader of the estranged people, more than two thousand people, drove the livestock, and the whole country fled and surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：时戊己校尉刀护病，遣史陈良屯桓且谷备匈奴寇。史终带取粮食，司马丞韩玄领诸壁，右曲候任商领诸垒，相与谋曰： 西域诸国颇背叛，匈奴欲大侵。要死。
现代文：这时，王莽将 匈奴单于玺 改为 新匈奴单于章 ，单于对此事很怨恨，狐兰支来降，他就接受了，并派兵和狐兰支一起进攻车师，杀车师后城长，伤都护司马，狐兰支兵又退回匈奴。这时戊己校尉刀护生病，派史陈良率兵屯守于桓且谷，以防备匈奴侵犯；史终带运粮，司马丞韩玄管领各壁，右曲候任商管领各垒。陈良等商量说： 现在西域各国有很多已叛汉，匈奴又要大规模入侵，我们恐怕是要死了。
English: At this time, Wang Mang changed 匈奴單于 to 新匈奴單于章, simply because he was very resentful of this matter. He accepted the fact that the Foxtail Branch came to surrender, and sent soldiers and the Foxtail Branch to attack the chariot division together. After killing the chariot division, he attacked the city commander, injured the capital guard Sima, and the Foxtail Branch soldiers returned to the Huns. At this time, when the captain of the Wuji Sword Guard was ill, he sent Shi Chen Liang and his soldiers to stay in Huanjia Valley to prevent the Huns from encroaching; the last time the grain was transported

古文：可杀校尉，将人众降匈奴。 
现代文：我们不如杀掉校尉，率领人马投降匈奴。 
English: We might as well kill the captain and surrender to the Huns.

古文：即将数千骑至校尉府，胁诸亭令燔积薪，分告诸壁曰： 匈奴十万骑来人，吏士皆持兵，后者斩！ 
现代文：于是率领数千骑兵前往校尉府，威胁诸亭点起烽火，分头告知诸壁垒，说： 匈奴十万骑来攻。官吏士卒都要拿起武器迎敌，落后的要斩首！ 
English: He then led thousands of cavalrymen to the captain's house, threatened to light bonfires in the pavilions, and separately informed the ramparts, saying: "The Hun is coming with a hundred thousand horsemen. All officials and clerks must take up arms against the enemy, and those who lag behind must be beheaded!"

古文：得三四百人，去校尉府数里止，晨火然。
现代文：集合了三四百人，在距离校尉府数里时停止前进。
English: They gathered three or four hundred people and stopped advancing when they were a few miles from the captain's house.

古文：校尉开门击鼓收吏士，良等随人，遂杀校尉刀护及子男四人、诸昆弟子男，独遗妇女小儿。
现代文：天亮时，点燃烽火。校尉开城门击鼓集合官吏士卒，陈良等乘机而入，杀死校尉刀护和四个儿子及其兄弟子侄，衹剩下妇女和小孩未杀。
English: At dawn, a bonfire was lit. The captain opened the city gate to beat the drums to gather officials and officers. Chen Liang and others took the opportunity to enter and killed the captain and his four sons and their brothers and nephews. The remaining women and children were not killed.

古文：止留戊己校尉城，遣人与匈奴南将军相闻，南将军以二千骑迎良等。良等尽胁略戊己校尉吏士男女二千余人入匈奴。
现代文：陈良等留驻戊己校尉城，派人向匈奴南将军通报情况，南将军派二千骑士迎接陈良等，陈良等胁略戊己校尉官吏士卒男女共二千余人北投匈奴。
English: Chen Liang and others stayed in Wuxi Captain's Town and sent people to inform the Hun general Nam about the situation. Nam general sent two thousand knights to meet Chen Liang and others. Chen Liang and others coerced Wuxi captain's officers and men, a total of more than two thousand men and women, to join the Huns in the North.

古文：单于以良、带为乌贲都尉。
现代文：匈奴单于任陈良、终带为乌贲都尉。
English: Xiongnu alone in the position of Chen Liang, and eventually became the captain of Wuyi.

古文：后三岁，单于死，弟乌累单于咸立，复与莽和亲。
现代文：又过三年，单于死，其弟乌弃单于咸立为单于，又与王莽和亲。
English: After another three years, Shan Yu died, and his brother Wu abandoned Shan Yu to stand alone, and made peace with Wang Mang.

古文：莽遣使者多赍金币赂单于，购求陈良、终带等。
现代文：王莽派使者带了很多金宝绸缎送给单于，要求交出陈良、终带等。
English: Wang Mang sent an envoy with a lot of gold and silver silk brocades to send to Shan Yu, demanding to hand over Chen Liang, the final tape and so on.

古文：单于尽收四人及手杀刀护者芝音妻子以下二十七人，皆械槛车付使者。
现代文：单于逮捕了陈良、终带、韩玄、任商四人和亲手杀死刀护的芝音及他们的妻子等共二十七人，都押入囚车，交给汉使。
English: Only arrested Chen Liang, the last band, Han Xuan, four merchants, and Zhiyin, who personally killed the sword guard, and their wives, a total of 27 people, all pushed into the prison car and handed over to the Han envoy.

古文：到长安，莽皆烧杀之。
现代文：到长安后，王莽把这些人都烧杀了。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, Wang Mang burned these people to death.

古文：其后莽复欺诈单于，和亲遂绝。
现代文：以后王莽又欺骗单于，匈奴与汉的和亲关系断绝。
English: Later, Wang Mang cheated Zheng Rong again, and the Xiongnu broke off the amicable relationship with the Han.

古文：匈奴大击北边，而西域瓦解。
现代文：匈奴大举侵扰汉的北部边境，汉在西域的统治也瓦解了。
English: The Huns invaded the northern border of the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty's rule in the western region collapsed.

古文：焉耆国近匈奴，先叛，杀都护但钦，莽不能讨。
现代文：焉耆国靠近匈奴，首先叛漠，杀死都护但钦，王莽不能出兵征讨。
English: Yan's country was close to the Huns, and he first rebelled and killed the tutelary Danqin. Wang Mang could not send troops to fight against the Huns.

古文：天凤三年，乃遣五威将王骏、西域都护李崇将戊己校尉出西域，诸国皆郊迎，送兵谷，焉耆诈降而聚兵自备。
现代文：天凤三年才派五威将王骏、西域都护李崇率戊己校尉郭钦到西域，西域各国都在郊外欢迎，供应粮食等。焉耆王也诈降汉，但却暗地调兵自备。
English: It took Tianfeng three years to send Wuwei to send Wang Qian, Li Chong, the guardian of the western region, and Guo Qin, his lieutenant, to the western region. All countries in the western region welcomed them in the suburbs and supplied them with grain. Yan Qian also defrauded Han, but secretly dispatched his own troops.

古文：骏等将莎车、龟慈兵七千余人，分为数部入焉耆，焉耆伏兵要遮骏。及姑墨、尉犁、危须国兵为反间，还共袭击骏等，皆杀之。
现代文：王骏等率领莎车、龟兹等国兵七千余人，分为数部进入焉耆，焉耆设下埋伏截击王骏等，又蛄墨、显垦、鱼题等国兵暗通聂壹，共同袭击王坠等，全部杀掉王坠官兵。
English: Wang Hui and others led more than seven thousand soldiers such as Shache and Guzi. They were divided into several groups and entered Yancheng. Yancheng set up an ambush to intercept Wang Hui and others, and soldiers such as Zhuo Mo, Xian Hui, and Yu Zhi worked together to attack Wang Hui and others, killing all Wang Hui officers and soldiers.

古文：唯戊己校尉郭钦别将兵，后至焉耆。
现代文：衹有戊己校尉郭钦另率一部军队后来才到焉耆。
English: It was only later that Guo Qin, a lieutenant of Wuqi, led another army to Yancheng.

古文：焉耆兵未还，钦击杀其老弱，引兵还。
现代文：焉耆兵打仗还未回来，郭钦把他们城中的老弱都杀死，退兵回长室。
English: When the soldiers had not yet returned from the war, Guo Qin killed all the old and weak soldiers in the city and withdrew to the governor's office.

古文：莽封钦为剼胡子。
现代文：王菱封堑趑为参胡子。
English: Wang Ryongfeng's beard is a ginseng beard.

古文：李崇收余士，还保龟兹。
现代文：奎塞收拾残余的士卒，退守于龟兹。
English: Kwesi rounded up the remaining soldiers and retreated to Kwezi.

古文：数年莽死，崇遂没，西域因绝。
现代文：过了几年，王莽死去，李崇就流落西域，西域与中原王朝断绝了往来。
English: A few years later, Wang Mang died, and Li Chong was exiled to the Western Regions, which severed ties with the Central Plains Dynasty.

古文：最凡国五十。
现代文：总计有国家五十。
English: In total, there are 50 countries.

古文：自译长、城长、君、监、吏、大禄、百工、千长、都尉、且渠、当户、将、相至侯、王，皆佩汉印绶，凡三百七十六人。
现代文：自译长、城长、君、监、吏、大禄、百长、千长、都尉、且渠、当户、将、相至侯、王，都佩带汉朝发给的印绶的，共有三百七十六人。
English: There were a total of three hundred and seventy-six people who wore the seals issued by the Han Dynasty, including the chief translator, the city chief, the prince, the inspector, the official, the magistrate, the centurion, the chieftain, the captain, the bailiff, the head of the household, the general, the vassal, and the king.

古文：赞曰：孝武之世，图制匈奴，患者兼从西国，结党南羌，乃表河西，列四郡，开玉门，通四域，以断匈奴右臂，隔绝南羌、月氏。
现代文：康居、大月氏、安息、扇宾、乌弋等国，都因距漠极远，不在五十国中。这些国如到长安来有所贡献，汉朝则以相当的财物回报，并不统辖他们。赞曰：汉武帝时，力图制服匈奴。但匈奴胁从西域各国，又联合南羌，构成汉朝的大患。汉武帝就设河西四郡，开玉门关，通于西域，以切断匈奴的右臂，隔开与南羌、月氏的联系。
English: Kangju, the Otsuki clan, Shibuya, Senshibin, Wuyi and other countries are not among the fifty countries because they are far away from the desert. These countries have contributed to Chang'an, but the Han Dynasty has returned with considerable wealth and does not control them. Zang said: When Emperor Hanwu, he tried to subdue the Xiongnu. But the Xiongnu threatened from the countries in the western region and united with the Southern Xiongnu, constituting a great danger to the Han Dynasty. Emperor Hanwu set up four counties in the west of the river and opened the gate to the western region to cut off the right arm of the Xion

古文：单于失援，由是远遁，而幕南无王庭。
现代文：单于失去了西域各国和羌人的支援，从此向远方逃去，沙漠以南没有匈奴的王庭了。
English: However, having lost the support of the countries of the Western Region and the Xiongnu, they fled far away. There was no royal court of the Xiongnu south of the desert.

古文：遭值文、景玄默，养民五世，天下殷富，财力有余，士马强盛。
现代文：经历文景无为而治，休养生息五代，天下富庶，财力有余，兵马强盛。
English: After experiencing the culture of doing nothing, five generations of rest and recuperation, the world is rich, the financial resources are more than enough, and the soldiers and horses are strong.

古文：故能睹犀布、玳瑁则建珠崖七郡，感枸酱、竹杖则开牂柯、越巂，闻天马、蒲陶则通大宛、安息。
现代文：所以汉武帝能见到犀、象、玳瑁就开建了珠崖等七郡，有感于枸酱、竹杖就开设了烊柯、越隽等郡，听说天马、葡萄就打通了大宛、安息之路。
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwu could see the rhinoceros, elephant and dragonfly and started to build the Pearl Cliff and other seven counties; if he was impressed by the dipping sauce and bamboo cane, he opened the Shinko and Yuexiu counties; and when he heard about the Heavenly Horse and grapes, he opened the Dawan and the Road of Rest.

古文：自是之后，明珠、文甲、通犀、翠羽之珍盈于后宫，薄梢、龙文、鱼目、汗血之马充于黄门，巨象、师子、猛犬、大雀之群食于外囿。
现代文：从造以后，明珠、玳瑁、通犀、翠羽等珍宝积满了后宫，蒲梢、龙文、鱼目、汗血各种骏马充满了黄门，大象、狮子、猛犬、鸵鸟成群地游食于苑囿中。
English: Since its construction, the harem has been filled with precious jewels such as pearls, dragonflies, rhinoceroses, and emeralds; the Yellow Gate has been filled with horses with feathers, dragon patterns, fish eyes, and sweat and blood; and elephants, lions, fierce dogs, and ostriches have swarmed to feed in the courtyard.

古文：殊方异物，四面而至。
现代文：远方的珍奇异物自四面而来。
English: Strange and exotic objects from far away are coming from all directions.

古文：于是广开上林，穿昆明池，营千门万户之宫，立神明通天之台，兴造甲乙之帐，落以随珠和璧，天子负黼依，袭翠被，冯玉几，而处其中。
现代文：于是汉武帝扩大上林苑，开掘昆明池，建千门万户之宫，筑神明通天之台，制甲乙之帐，系随珠和璧，武帝列彩绣之屏风，披翠羽之外衣，依玉饰之几案。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu expanded Shanglinyuan, excavated Kunming Pool, built the Palace of a Thousand Doors and Ten Thousand Households, built the Divine Doorway to Heaven, made the A and B accounts, the system of beads and gems, the screen of Emperor Wu embroidered with colors, the outer robe of green feathers, and several cases of jade ornaments.

古文：设酒池肉林以飨四夷之客，作《巴俞》都卢、海中《砀极》、漫衍鱼龙、角抵之戏以观视之。
现代文：武帝住在这裹，设酒池肉林招待四周少数民族客人；表演《巴俞》之舞，都卢、海中《肠极》，鱼龙幻术，化装角抵等戏。
English: Emperor Wu lived here, set up a wine pool and meat forest to invite ethnic minority guests around; performed the dance of "Baju," "Dulu," "intestines" in the sea, fish and dragon illusion, and came to the masquerade corner.

古文：及赂遗赠送，万里相奉，师旅之费，不可胜计。
现代文：还有赏赐送礼，万里供给，军队花费，不计其数。
English: There are also countless rewards and gifts, thousands of miles of supplies, and military expenses.

古文：至于用度不足，乃榷酒酤，管盐铁，铸白金，造皮币，算至车船，租及六畜。
现代文：财政不够使用，就国家专卖酒，专营盐铁，铸白金造皮币为钱，征收车船六畜之税。
English: Due to insufficient use of finances, the state monopoly on the sale of liquor, the salt and iron monopoly, the minting of platinum coins for money, and the levying of taxes on vehicles, ships, and livestock.

古文：民力屈，财力竭，因之以凶年，寇盗并起，道路不通，直指之使始出，衣绣杖斧，断斩于郡国，然后胜之。
现代文：民力屈尽，财用枯竭，再加之荒年歉收，寇盗并起，道路不通，于是武帝命直指使者暴胜之等穿绣衣，持斧铁，到各郡国进行镇压，然后取得胜利。
English: The people's strength was exhausted, the financial resources were exhausted, coupled with the poor harvest in the year of famine, robberies and thefts were on the rise, and the roads were impassable, so Emperor Wu ordered the messenger to wear embroidered clothes, hold an axe and iron, and go to each county to suppress, and then achieve victory.

古文：是以末年遂弃轮台之地，而下哀痛之诏，岂非仁圣之所悔哉！
现代文：到武帝末年，放弃丫轮台屯田，下了沉痛诏书，这不是仁人圣者所悔悟的事吗！
English: At the end of Emperor Wu's life, he gave up the Yalongdae Tunden and issued a painful edict. Isn't this something that a benevolent sage would have repented of?

古文：且通西域，近有龙堆，远则葱岭，身热、头痛、县度之厄。
现代文：况且通西域的道路上，近的有白龙堆，远的有葱岭，还有身热、头痛、县度等险要地区。
English: Moreover, on the road leading to the western region, there are White Dragon Mound in the near distance, Green Onion Ridge in the far distance, as well as dangerous areas such as body heat, headache, and county.

古文：淮南、杜钦、扬雄之论，皆以为此天地所以界别区域，绝外内也。
现代文：淮南王刘安、杜钦、扬雄的议论，都认为这是天地设置来划分区域的，以隔绝内外。
English: Liu An, Du Qin and Yang Xiong, the kings of Huainan, all believed that this was the setting of heaven and earth to divide the region, to isolate the inside and outside.

古文：《书》曰 西戎即序 ，禹即就而序之，非上威服致其贡物也。
现代文：《尚书》说 西戎即序 ，是说禹在治洪水、划九州之后，把西戎各国划在一定的范围之内，不是靠皇上的威武来让他们进贡的。
English: "Shangshu" says that Xi'erun is in order, which means that after Yu ruled the floods and Kyushu, he placed the countries of Xi'erun within a certain range, and did not rely on the emperor's might to make them pay tribute.

古文：西域诸国，各有君长，兵众分弱，无所统一，虽属匈奴，不相亲附。
现代文：西域诸国，各有自己的君长，军队分散力弱，不能统一。虽曾属于匈奴，但与匈奴并不亲密。
English: The countries of the Western Regions, each with its own ruler, have weakly dispersed armies and cannot be unified. Although they once belonged to the Huns, they were not close to the Huns.

古文：匈奴能得其马畜旃罽，而不能统率与之进退。
现代文：匈奴能得到他们的马畜毡厨，但不能统率他们进攻或退却。
English: The Huns could get their horses and beasts, but they could not lead them to attack or retreat.

古文：与汉隔绝，道里又远，得之不为益，弃之不为损。
现代文：他们与汉朝隔绝，道路遥远，得到他们不算有益，抛弃他们不算损失。
English: They are isolated from the Han Dynasty, the road is far away, it is not beneficial to get them, and it is not a loss to abandon them.

古文：盛德在我，无取于彼。
现代文：汉朝的盛德是我们自己创造的，并不依靠他们得来。
English: The prosperity of the Han Dynasty was our own creation, and we did not rely on them for it.

古文：故自建武以来，西域思汉威德，咸乐内属。
现代文：所以自光武帝建武以来，西域各国思念汉朝的威德，都愿意内属。
English: Therefore, since Emperor Guangwu Jianwu, the countries in the western region have been thinking about the virtue of the Han Dynasty and are willing to belong to it.

古文：唯其小邑鄯善、车师，界迫匈奴，尚为所拘。
现代文：衹有小国如鄯善、车师地近匈奴，还受到匈奴的控制。
English: There are small countries, such as Shaoshan, which are geographically close to the Huns and are also controlled by the Huns.

古文：而其大国莎车、于阗之属，数遣使置质于汉，愿请属都护。
现代文：其他大国如莎车、于阗等，数次派使者送质子来汉朝，并希望允准他们属于都护。
English: Other great powers, such as Yarkand and Yunnan, sent emissaries several times to send protons to the Han Dynasty, and hoped that they would be allowed to belong to the capital protection.

古文：圣上远览古今，因时之宜，羁縻不绝，辞而未许。
现代文：光武帝考察古今历史，根据当时的形势，采取羁縻政策，不同意派出西域都护，亦遣回各国的质子。
English: Emperor Guangwu examined ancient and modern history. According to the situation at that time, he adopted a policy of restraint, did not agree to send the western region to protect the capital, and also sent protons back to various countries.

古文：虽大禹之序西戎，周公之让白雉，太宗之却走马，义兼之矣，亦何以尚兹！
现代文：虽然大禹划定西戎之区域，周公不收越裳氏之白雉，汉文帝不收千里马，都是古圣贤之美事，但光武帝之所为都兼有此义，没有比遣一做法更高明的了。
English: Although Dayu's delineation of the region of West Ryukyu, Zhou Gong's refusal to accept the white horses of the So clan, and Emperor Wen's refusal to accept thousands of horses are all beautiful things of ancient sages, but Emperor Guangwu's actions all have this meaning, and there is no more clever way than sending one.

