古文：二年春，公会戎于潜。
现代文：隐公二年春季，鲁隐公与戎国人在 潜 进行了会谈。
English: In the spring of the second year of Emperor Inko's reign, Emperor Inko and the people of Edo held talks in the submarine.

古文：夏五月，莒人入向。
现代文：夏季五月，莒国人侵入了向国。
English: In the summer of May, the Qiang people invaded Xiangguo.

古文：无骇帅师入极。
现代文：无骇率领军队侵入了 极 这个诸侯国。
English: Without hesitation, he led an army into the farthest reaches of this princely state.

古文：秋八月庚辰，公及戎盟于唐。
现代文：秋季八月，鲁隐公与戎在唐地结盟。
English: In the autumn of August, Lu Ying Gong and Eun were allied in Tang.

古文：九月，纪裂繻来逆女。
现代文：九月，纪国的裂繻来鲁国迎亲。
English: In September, Ji Guo's daughter, Lai Ying, came to Lu Province to meet her relatives.

古文：冬十月，伯姬归于纪。
现代文：冬季十月，鲁国的伯姬嫁到了纪国。
English: In the winter of October, Lu's Boji married Ji Guo.

古文：纪子帛、莒子盟于密。
现代文：纪子帛和莒子在密地结盟。
English: Noriko and Shoko form a close alliance.

古文：十有二月乙卯，夫人子氏薨。
现代文：十二月乙卯这一天，夫人子氏去世。
English: On this day in December, Mrs. Zi passed away.

古文：郑人伐卫。
现代文：郑国进攻卫国。
English: Zheng attacked Wei.

古文：二年春，公会戎于潜，修惠公之好也。戎请盟，公辞。
现代文：二年春季，鲁隐公在潜地与戎人会见，再一次加强惠公时期的友好关系，戎人请求结盟，隐公婉言拒绝了。
English: In the spring of the second year, Lu Yin Gong met with the eunuchs in the underground, once again strengthening the friendly relations of the Hui Gong period. The eunuchs asked for an alliance, and the eunuchs politely refused.

古文：莒子娶于向，向姜不安莒而归。
现代文：莒子在向国娶了妻子，向姜在莒国不安心而回到向国。
English: Xun Zi married a wife in Xiang Guo, and Xiang Jiang returned to Xiang Guo with uneasiness.

古文：夏，莒人入向，以姜氏还。
现代文：夏季，莒子领兵进入向国，带着向姜回国。
English: In the summer, Xun Zi led the troops into Xiang Guo and returned with Xiang Jiang.

古文：司空无骇入极，费庈父胜之。
现代文：司空无亥进入极国，被费庈父占领了。
English: Siku no Hai entered the polar country and was occupied by Fei Yao's father.

古文：戎请盟。
现代文：戎人请求结盟。
English: The eunuchs asked for an alliance.

古文：秋，盟于唐，复修戎好也。
现代文：秋季，在唐地结盟，这是为了再次加强和戎人的友好关系。
English: In the autumn, they made an alliance in Tang, in order to once again strengthen the friendly relationship with the Edo people.

古文：九月，纪裂繻来逆女，卿为君逆也。
现代文：九月，纪国的裂繻来迎接隐公的女儿，这是卿为了国君而来迎娶的。
English: In September, Ji Guo's brother-in-law came to welcome Ying Guo's daughter, whom Ji Guo had come to marry for the sake of the king.

古文：冬，纪子帛、莒子盟于密，鲁故也。
现代文：冬季，纪子帛和莒子在密地结盟，这是为了调解鲁国和莒国之间的不和。
English: In the winter, Noritsugu and Saeko formed an alliance in secret, in order to mediate the discord between Lu and Saigo.

古文：郑人伐卫，讨公孙滑之乱也。
现代文：郑国攻打卫国，讨伐公孙滑的叛乱。
English: Zheng attacked and defended the country and fought against Gongsunlu's rebellion.

