古文：子墨子言曰： 仁人之所以为事者，必兴天下之利，除去天下之害，以此为事者也。 
现代文：墨子说： 仁人处理事务的原则，一定是为天下兴利除害，以此原则来处理事务。 
English: Mozi said: The principle of benevolence in dealing with affairs must be to eliminate harm for the benefit of the world, and this principle should be used to deal with affairs.

古文：然则天下之利何也？天下之害何也？
现代文：既然如此，那么天下的利是什么，而天下的害又是什么呢？
English: That being the case, what is the benefit to the world, and what is the harm?

古文：子墨子言曰： 今若国之与国之相攻，家之与家之相篡，人之与人之相贼，君臣不惠忠，父子不慈孝，兄弟不和调，此则天下之害也。 
现代文：墨子说： 现在如国与国之间相互攻伐，家族与家族之间相互掠夺，人与人之间相互残害，君臣之间不相互施惠、效忠，父子之间不相互慈爱、孝敬，兄弟之间不相互融洽、协调，这就都是天下之害。 
English: Mozi said, "Nowadays, if countries attack each other, families plunder each other, people harm each other, princes and ministers do not reciprocate favors and loyalty, fathers and sons do not reciprocate love and filial piety, and brothers do not harmonize and coordinate with each other, all of these are the harm of the world.

古文：然则崇此害亦何用生哉？
现代文：既然如此，那么考察这些公害又是因何产生的呢？
English: That being the case, what is the reason for investigating these public hazards?

古文：以不相爱生邪？
现代文：是因不相爱产生的吗？
English: Is it because they don't love each other?

古文：子墨子言： 以不相爱生。 
现代文：墨子说： 是因不相爱产生的。 
English: Mozi said: It happened because they didn't love each other.

古文：今诸侯独知爱其国，不爱人之国，是以不惮举其国，以攻人之国。
现代文：现在的诸侯只知道爱自己的国家，不爱别人的国家，所以毫无忌惮地发动他自己国家的力量，去攻伐别人的国家。
English: Today's princes only know how to love their own country, not someone else's, so they brazenly unleash the power of their own country to attack someone else's.

古文：今家主独知爱其家，而不爱人之家，是以不惮举其家，以篡人之家。
现代文：现在的家族宗主只知道爱自己的家族，而不爱别人的家族，因而毫无忌惮地发动他自己家族的力量，去掠夺别人的家族。
English: The current head of the family only knows how to love his own family, but not other people's families, so he unscrupulously unleashes the power of his own family to plunder other people's families.

古文：今人独知爱其身，不爱人之身，是以不惮举其身，以贼人之身。
现代文：现在的人只知道爱自己，而不爱别人，因而毫无忌惮地运用全身的力量去残害别人。
English: People nowadays only know how to love themselves, but not others, so they unscrupulously use all their strength to harm others.

古文：是故诸侯不相爱，则必野战；家主不相爱，则必相篡；人与人不相爱，则必相贼；君臣不相爱，则不惠忠；父子不相爱，则不慈孝；兄弟不相爱，则不和调。
现代文：所以诸侯不相爱，就必然发生野战；家族宗主不相爱，就必然相互掠夺；人与人不相爱，就必然相互残害；君与臣不相爱，就必然不相互施惠、效忠；父与子不相爱，就必然不相互慈爱、孝敬；兄与弟不相爱，就必然不相互融洽、协调。
English: Therefore, if the princes do not love each other, there will inevitably be a field battle; if the head of the family does not love each other, there will inevitably be mutual plunder; if people do not love each other, there will inevitably be mutual destruction; if the prince and the vassal do not love each other, there will inevitably be no mutual benefit and loyalty; if the father and the son do not love each other, there will inevitably be no mutual love and filial piety; if the brother and the brother do not love each other, there will inevitably be no mutual harmony and coordination.

古文：天下之人皆不相爱，强必执弱，富必侮贫，贵必敖贱，诈必欺愚。
现代文：天下的人都不相爱，强大的就必然控制弱小的，富足的就必然欺侮贫困的，尊贵的就必然傲视卑贱的，狡猾的就必然欺骗愚笨的。
English: People all over the world do not love each other. The powerful inevitably control the weak, the rich inevitably bully the poor, the noble inevitably look down on the lowly, and the cunning inevitably deceive the stupid.

古文：凡天下祸篡怨恨，其所以起者，以不相爱生也，是以仁者非之。
现代文：举凡天下祸患、掠夺、埋怨、愤恨产生的原因，都是因不相爱而产生的。所以仁者认为它不对。
English: All the world's ills, depredations, grievances, and resentments are caused by not loving each other. Therefore, the benevolent think it is wrong.

古文：既以非之，何以易之？
现代文：既已认为不相爱不对，那用什么去改变它呢？
English: If you already think it's wrong not to love each other, what can you do to change it?

古文：子墨子言曰： 以兼相爱、交相利之法易之。 
现代文：墨子说道： 用人们全都相爱、交互得利的方法去改变它。 
English: Mozi said: To change it in a way that people all love each other and benefit from each other.

古文：然则兼相爱、交相利之法，将奈何哉？
现代文：既然这样，那么人们全都相爱、交互得利应该怎样做呢？
English: Since this is the case, how should people all love each other and benefit from each other?

古文：子墨子言： 视人之国，若视其国；视人之家，若视其家；视人之身，若视其身。
现代文：墨子说道： 看待别人国家就象自己的国家，看待别人的家族就象自己的家族，看待别人之身就象自己之身。 
English: Mozi said, "Treat other people's countries as if they were your own, treat other people's families as if they were your own, and treat other people's bodies as if they were your own."

古文：是故诸侯相爱，则不野战；家主相爱，则不相篡；人与人相爱，则不相贼；君臣相爱，则惠忠；父子相爱，则慈孝；兄弟相爱，则和调。
现代文：所以诸侯之间相爱，就不会发生野战；家族宗主之间相爱，就不会发生掠夺；人与人之间相爱就不会相互残害；君臣之间相爱，就会相互施惠、效忠；父子之间相爱，就会相互慈爱、孝敬；兄弟之间相爱，就会相互融洽、协调。
English: Therefore, when princes love each other, there will be no war; when heads of families love each other, there will be no plunder; when people love each other, there will be no mutual destruction; when princes and ministers love each other, there will be mutual benefit and loyalty; when fathers and sons love each other, there will be mutual love and filial piety; when brothers love each other, there will be mutual harmony and coordination.

古文：天下之人皆相爱，强不执弱，众不劫寡，富不侮贫，贵不敖贱，诈不欺愚。
现代文：天下的人都相爱，强大者就不会控制弱小者，人多者就不会强迫人少者，富足者就不会欺侮贫困者，尊贵者就不会傲视卑贱者，狡诈者就不会欺骗愚笨者。
English: All the people of the world will love each other. The strong will not control the weak, the many will not force the few, the rich will not bully the poor, the noble will not look down on the lowly, and the cunning will not deceive the stupid.

古文：凡天下祸篡怨恨，可使毋起者，以相爱生也，是以仁者誉之。 
现代文：举凡天下的祸患、掠夺、埋怨、愤恨可以不使它产生的原因，是因为相爱而生产的。所以仁者称赞它。
English: All the evils of the world, all the plunder, all the grudges, all the resentments, are caused by love, and that is why the benevolent praise it.

古文：然而今天下之士君子曰： 然！
现代文：然而现在天下的士君子们说： 对！
English: Now, however, the gentlemen of the world are saying: Yes!

古文：乃若兼则善矣；虽然，天下之难物于故也。 
现代文：兼爱固然是好的。即使如此，它也是天下一件难办而迂阔的事。 
English: Of course, love is good. Even so, it is a difficult and circuitous thing in the world.

古文：子墨子言曰： 天下之士君子，特不识其利、辩其故也。
现代文：墨子说道： 天下的士君子们，只是不能辨明兼爱的益处、辨明兼爱的原故。
English: Mozi said, "Fellow scholars and gentlemen of the world, it's just that you can't discern the benefits of both love and discern the reasons for both love.

古文：今若夫攻城野战，杀身为名，此天下百姓之所皆难也。
现代文：现在例如攻城野战，为成名而杀身，这都是天下的百姓难于做到的事。
English: Nowadays, for example, siege warfare, killing for fame, these are all things that are difficult for the people of the world to do.

古文：苟君说之，则士众能为之。
现代文：但假如君主喜欢，那么士众就能做到。
English: But if the monarch likes it, then the clergy can do it.

古文：况于兼相爱、交相利，则与此异！
现代文：而兼相爱、交相利与之相比，则是完全不同的。
English: However, compared with the simultaneous love and mutual benefit, it is completely different.

古文：夫爱人者，人必从而爱之；利人者，人必从而利之；恶人者，人必从而恶之；害人者，人必从而害之。
现代文：凡是爱别人的人，别人也随即爱他；有利于别人的人，别人也随即有利于他；憎恶别人的人，别人也随即憎恶他；损害别人的人，别人随即损害他。
English: Whoever loves others will be loved by others; whoever benefits others will be benefited by others; whoever hates others will be hated by others; whoever harms others will be harmed by others.

古文：此何难之有？
现代文：实行这种兼爱有什么困难呢？
English: What are the difficulties in implementing this combination?

古文：特上弗以为政，士不以为行故也。 
现代文：只是由于居上位的人不用它行之于政，士人不用它实之于行的缘故。 
English: It's just because the people at the top don't use it to do politics, and the politicians don't use it to do politics.

古文：昔者晋文公好士之恶衣，故文公之臣，皆牂羊之裘，韦以带剑，练帛之冠，入以见于君，出以践于朝。
现代文：从前晋文公喜欢士人穿不好的衣服，所以文公的臣下都穿着母羊皮缝的裘，围着牛皮带来挂佩剑，头戴熟绢作的帽子，进可以参见君上，出可以往来朝廷。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wengong of the Jin Dynasty liked nobles to wear bad clothes. Therefore, Wengong's vassals wore sheepskin coats, wore swords around cowhide belts, and wore hats made of well-worn silk. They could see the emperor when they entered the palace, and could go to and from the palace when they left.

古文：是其故何也？
现代文：这是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：君说之，故臣为之也。
现代文：因为君主喜欢这样，所以臣下就这样做。
English: Because the sovereign likes it that way, his subjects do it that way.

古文：昔者楚灵王好士细要，故灵王之臣，皆以一饭为节，胁息然后带，扶墙然后起。
现代文：从前楚灵王喜欢细腰之人，所以灵王的臣下就吃一顿饭来节食，收着气然后才系上腰带，扶着墙然后才站得起来。
English: Once upon a time, King Chuling liked people with thin waists, so King Chuling's vassals would eat a meal to lose weight, hold their breath before tying their belts, and stand up after leaning against a wall.

古文：比期年，朝有黧黑之色。
现代文：等到一年，朝廷之臣都面有深黑之色。
English: By the end of the year, the courtiers of the imperial court were all wearing deep black.

古文：是其故何也?
现代文：这是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：君说之，故臣能之也。
现代文：因为君主喜欢这样，所以臣下能做到这样。
English: Because the sovereign likes it that way, the subjects can do it that way.

古文：昔越王勾践好士之勇，教驯其臣和合之，焚舟失火，试其士曰： 越国之宝尽在此！ 
现代文：从前越王句践喜爱士兵勇猛，训练他的臣下时，先把他们集合起来，放火烧船，考验他的将士说： 越国的财宝全在这船里。 
English: Once upon a time, the king of Yue, Quancheng, loved soldiers so much that when he was training his vassals, he first gathered them together, set fire to the ship, and tested his soldiers by saying: "The treasures of Yue are all in this ship."

古文：越王亲自鼓其士而进之。
现代文：越王亲自擂鼓，让将士前进。
English: Yue Wang himself beat the drum and let the soldiers march forward.

古文：士闻鼓音，破碎乱行，蹈火而死者，左右百人有余，越王击金而退之。
现代文：将士听到鼓声，打乱了队伍，蹈火而死的人，近臣达一百人有余。越王于是鸣金让他们退下。
English: When the soldiers heard the sound of the drums, they disrupted the procession, and those who died in the fire included more than a hundred of his closest vassals. King Yue then demanded money to make them withdraw.

古文：是故子墨子言曰： 乃若夫少食、恶衣、杀身而为名，此天下百姓之所皆难也，若苟君说之，则众能为之；况兼相爱、交相利，与此异矣！
现代文：所以墨子说道： 象少吃饭、穿坏衣、杀身成名，这都是天下百姓难于做到的事。
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "Eating less, wearing bad clothes, killing oneself to become famous, these are all things that are difficult for the people of the world to do.

古文：夫爱人者，人亦从而爱之；利人者，人亦从而利之；恶人者，人亦从而恶之；害人者，人亦从而害之。
现代文：爱别人的人，别人也随即爱他；有利于别人的人，别人也随即有利于他；憎恶别人的人，别人也随即憎恶他；损害别人的人，别人也随即损害他。
English: He who loves others is loved by others; he who benefits others is benefited by others; he who hates others is hated by others; he who harms others is harmed by others.

古文：此何难之有焉？
现代文：这种兼爱有什么难实行的呢？
English: What is so difficult about this combination?

古文：特君不以为政，而士不以为行故也。
现代文：只是居上位的人不用它行之于政，而士人不用它实之于行的缘故。 
English: It's just that the people at the top don't use it to do politics, and the people at the bottom don't use it to do business.

古文：然而今天下之士君子曰： 然！
现代文：然而现在天下的士君子们说： 对！
English: Now, however, the gentlemen of the world are saying: Yes!

古文：夫挈太山而越河、济，可谓毕劫有力矣。
现代文：兼爱固然是好的。即使如此，也不可能行之于事，就象要举起泰山越过黄河、济水一样。 墨子说道： 这比方不对。
English: Of course, it's good to have both, but even so, it's not possible to do so, just like lifting Mount Tai to cross the Yellow River to provide water. Mozi said, "That's not a correct analogy."

古文：自古及今，未有能行之者也；况乎兼相爱、交相利，则与此异，古者圣王行之。 
现代文：举起泰山而越过黄河、济水，可以说是强劲有力的了，但自古及今，没有人能做得到。而兼相爱，交相利与此相比则是完全不同的。古时的圣王曾做到过。 
English: Lifting Mount Tai and crossing the Yellow River and Jishui River can be said to be strong and powerful, but no one has been able to do it from ancient times to the present. And loving each other and benefiting each other is completely different from this. The holy kings of ancient times did it.

古文：何以知其然？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know this is the case?

古文：古者禹治天下，西为西河渔窦，以泄渠、孙、皇之水。北为防、原、派、注后之邸，噱池之窦洒为底柱，凿为龙门，以利燕代胡貉与西河之民。
现代文：古时大禹治理天下，西边疏通了西河、渔窦，用来排泄渠水、孙水和皇水；北边疏通防水、原水、泒水，使之注入召之邸和滹沱河，在黄河中的厎柱山分流，凿开龙门以有利于燕、代、胡、貉与西河地区的人民。
English: In ancient times, Dayu governed the world. On the west side, he dredged the West River and the Yuzhu River to drain canal water, sun water and imperial water; on the north side, he dredged water, raw water and brackish water to inject it into the Zhao residence and the Yangtze River, and diverted it from the Huangshan Mountains in the Yellow River, and opened the gantry to benefit the people of Yan, Dai, Hu, Handan and the West River area.

古文：东为漏大陆，防孟诸之泽，洒为九浍，以楗东土之水，以利冀州之民。
现代文：东边穿泄大陆的迂水，拦入孟诸泽，分为九条河，以此限制东土的洪水，用来利于冀州的人民。
English: In the east, the diversion of water from the mainland is blocked by Meng Zhuze and divided into nine rivers, thus limiting the flooding of the eastern land and benefiting the people of Jizhou.

古文：南为江、汉、淮、汝，东流之注五湖之处，以利荆楚、干、越与南夷之民。
现代文：南边疏通长江、汉水、淮河、汝水，使之东流入海，以此灌注五湖之地，以利于荆楚、吴越和南夷的人民。
English: The Yangtze River, the Han River, the Huai River and the Ye River are dredged in the south, and flow into the sea in the east, thus filling the land of the Five Lakes to benefit the people of Jingchu, Wuyue and Nanyi.

古文：此言禹之事，吾今行兼矣。
现代文：这是大禹的事迹，我们现在要用这种精神来实行兼爱。
English: This is Dayu's achievement, and we must now use this spirit to practice dual love.

古文：昔者文王之治西土，若日若月，乍光于四方，于西土。
现代文：从前周文王治理西土，象太阳象月亮一样，射出的光辉照耀四方和西周大地。
English: In the past, King Zhou Wen governed the West, and like the sun and the moon, the radiance radiated from him shone in all directions and the land of West Zhou.

古文：不为大国侮小国，不为众庶侮鳏寡，不为暴势夺穑人黍稷狗彘。
现代文：他不倚仗大国而欺侮小国，不倚仗人多而欺侮鳏寡孤独，不倚仗强暴势力而掠夺农夫的粮食牲畜。
English: He does not rely on a large country to bully a small country, does not rely on a large number of people to bully the poor and lonely, and does not rely on violent forces to plunder farmers' grain and livestock.

古文：天屑临文王慈，是以老而无子者，有所得终其寿；连独无兄弟者，有所杂于生人之闲间，少失其父母者，有所放依而长。
现代文：上天眷顾文王的慈爱，所以年老无子的人得以寿终，孤苦无兄弟的人可以安聚于人们中间，幼小无父母的人有所依靠而长大成人。
English: Heaven has favored the benevolence of King Wen, so that the old and childless can end their lives, the lonely and brotherless can gather among the people, and the young without parents can rely on and grow up.

古文：此文王之事，则吾今行兼矣。
现代文：这是文王的事迹，我们现在应当用这种精神实行兼爱。
English: This is the story of King Wen, and we should now use this spirit to practice dual love.

古文：昔者武王将事太山，隧传曰： 泰山，有道曾孙周王有事。
现代文：从前武王将祭祀泰山，于是陈述说： 泰山！有道曾孙周王有祭事。
English: Once upon a time, King Wu would make a sacrifice to worship Mount Tai, so he stated: Mount Tai! There is a way, great-grandson King Zhou has a sacrifice.

古文：大事既获，仁人尚作，以祗商、夏、蛮夷丑貉。
现代文：现在大事已成功，一批仁人起而相助，用以拯救商夏遗民及四方少数民族。
English: Now that the event has been successful, a group of benevolent people have come forward to help save the Shangxia people and the ethnic minorities in the four directions.

古文：虽有周亲，不若仁人，万方有罪，维予一人。 
现代文：即使是至亲，也不如仁人。万方之人有罪，由我一人承当。 
English: Even a close relative is not as good as a benevolent person. People from all walks of life are guilty, and I alone bear the responsibility.

古文：此言武王之事，吾今行兼矣。
现代文：这是说周武王的事迹，我们现在应当用这种精神实行兼爱。
English: This refers to the deeds of King Zhouwu, and we should now use this spirit to practice dual love.

古文：是故子墨子言曰： 今天下之士君子，忠实欲天下之富，而恶其贫；欲天下之治，而恶其乱，当兼相爱、交相利。
现代文：所以墨子说道： 现在天下的君子，内心确实希望天下富足，而厌恶其贫穷；希望天下治理好，而厌恶其混乱，那就应当全都相爱、交互得利。
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "Nowadays, the gentlemen of the world truly hope for the world to be rich, but hate its poverty; hope for the world to be well governed, but hate its chaos, then they should all love each other and benefit from each other.

古文：此圣王之法，天下之治道也，不可不务为也。 
现代文：这是圣王的常法，天下的治道，不可不努力去做。 
English: This is the normal law of the holy king, the ruling way of the world, and we must work hard to do it.

