古文：孙子曰：凡地之道，阳为表，阴为里，直者为纲，术者为纪。
现代文：孙膑说： 就地形的一般状况而言，向阳的地方是表，背阴的地方是里，大路为纲，小路为纪，掌握了大小道路的分布状况，布阵用兵就可以自如了。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: As far as the general condition of the terrain is concerned, the place facing the sun is the table, and the place facing the shade is the valley. The main road is the outline, and the small road is the discipline. Once you have mastered the distribution of large and small roads, you can use soldiers freely.

古文：纪纲则得，阵乃不惑，直者毛产，术者半死。
现代文：大路畅通的地区有利于运动作战，而小路难行的地区就不便于运动作战了。
English: Areas with smooth major roads are conducive to sports combat, while areas with difficult minor roads are not conducive to sports combat.

古文：凡战地也，日其精也，八风将来，必勿忘也。
现代文：凡是用于作战的地方，日照的条件都很重要，对于四面八方风向的变化，千万不能忘记观察了解。
English: Wherever it is used for combat, the conditions of sunshine are very important. For the changes in the wind direction in all directions, we must not forget to observe and understand.

古文：绝水、迎陵、逆流、居杀地、迎众树者，钧举也，五者皆不胜。
现代文：渡河涉水，向山陵进发，处在河流下游，在死地扎营驻守，靠近树林，在这五种情况下，都容易招致失败，用兵时要特别注意。
English: Wading across the river, marching into the mountains, being in the lower reaches of the river, camped in the dead zone, and near the forest are all five situations that are likely to lead to failure, and special attention should be paid when using soldiers.

古文：南阵之山，生山也。
现代文：适于南面布阵的山是生山。
English: The mountains that are suitable for the formation of a line of trenches in the south are the bare mountains.

古文：东阵之山，死山也。
现代文：运于东面布阵的山是死山。
English: The mountain to the east is a dead mountain.

古文：东注之水，生水也。北注之水，死水。不流，死水也。
现代文：向东流的水是生水，向北流的水是死水，不流动的水也是死水。
English: The water flowing to the east is fresh water, the water flowing to the north is stagnant water, and the water that does not flow is also stagnant water.

古文：五地之胜曰：山胜陵，陵胜阜，阜胜陈丘，陈丘胜林平地。
现代文：就五种地形对用兵的优劣比较而言，山地胜过丘陵，丘陵胜过土山，土山胜过小土丘，小土丘又胜过有树林的平地。
English: As far as the merits and demerits of the five types of terrain for the use of soldiers are concerned, mountains are better than hills, hills are better than mounds, mounds are better than small mounds, and small mounds are better than flatlands with forests.

古文：五草之胜曰：藩、棘、椐、茅、莎。
现代文：五种草的优劣依次是：知母草、荆棘、灵寿木、茅草、莎草。
English: The merits and demerits of the five kinds of grasses are as follows: motherwort, thorn, reishi, thatch, and rush.

古文：五壤之胜：青胜黄，黄胜黑，黑胜赤，赤胜白，白胜青。
现代文：五种土壤的优劣比较是：青土胜过黄土，黄土胜过黑土，黑土胜过红土，红土胜过白土，白土又胜过青土。
English: Five types of soil were compared in terms of their merits and demerits: blue soil is better than yellow soil, yellow soil is better than black soil, black soil is better than red soil, red soil is better than white soil, and white soil is better than blue soil.

古文：五地之败曰：谿、川、泽、斥。
现代文：五种可能导致作战失败的地形是：山溪、河流、沼泽、盐碱地。
English: The five types of terrain that can lead to the failure of a battle are: mountain streams, rivers, swamps, and saline soil.

古文：五地之杀曰，天井、天宛、天离、天隙、天柖。五墓，杀地也，勿居也，勿囗也。
现代文：五种可能导致全军覆没的地形是：似天井般四周封闭的洼地，四周是高山、易进难出的地方，草木丛生有罗网的地方，两面高山夹峙的狭窄山沟，沼泽地区。这五种地形犹如军队的坟墓一般，都是凶多吉少的 杀地 ，不能在这里驻扎。
English: The five types of terrain that may lead to the destruction of the entire army are: a depression that is closed around like a ceiling, a place that is surrounded by high mountains and is difficult to access, a place where there are tangled webs of vegetation, a narrow ravine sandwiched between two high mountains, and a swampy area. These five types of terrain are like the graves of the army in general, they are all murderous, and cannot be stationed here.

古文：春毋降，秋毋登，军与阵皆毋政前右，右周毋左周。
现代文：春天不能在低洼地扎营，秋天不能在高处扎营。驻军和布阵时，都不要改变右前方的有利地形，要选择右翼有丘陵或高地作屏障，而不要左翼有屏障。 
English: In spring, you cannot camp in low-lying areas, and in autumn, you cannot camp at high altitudes. When garrisoning and deploying troops, do not change the favorable terrain in the right front, choose the right wing with hills or highlands as a barrier, and do not have a barrier on the left.

