古文：起阏逢困敦二月，尽四月，不满一年。
现代文：起阏逢困敦二月，尽四月，不满一年。
English: The uprising occurred in February, April, and less than a year later.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝五
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝五
English: Emperor Shenwu of the Germanic Dynasty V

古文：兴元元年甲子，公元七八四年二月，戊申，诏赠段秀实太尉，谥曰忠烈，厚恤其家。
现代文：唐德宗兴元元年二月，戊申，德宗颁诏追赠段秀实为太尉，谥号称为忠烈，以优厚的待遇抚恤段秀实的家人。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty, Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict to promote Duan Shuxi to the rank of Tai Lai, and he was given the title of Zhong Rong (忠烈). Duan Shuxi's family members were given generous pensions.

古文：时贾隐林已卒，赠左仆射，赏其能直言也。
现代文：当时，贾隐林已经去世，德宗追赠他为左仆射，表彰他能够直言。
English: At that time, Jia Yinglin had already passed away, and Dezong posthumously awarded him the title of "Left-Handed Archer" in recognition of his ability to speak frankly.

古文：李希烈将兵五万围宁陵，引水灌之。濮州刺史刘昌以三千人守之。
现代文：李希烈领兵五万人围攻宁陵，引来河水灌城，濮州刺史刘昌率三千人守卫宁陵。
English: Li Xilei led 50,000 soldiers to besiege Ningling, attracting river water to flood the city. Liu Chang, the governor of Zhangzhou, led 3,000 people to guard Ningling.

古文：滑州刺史李澄密遣使请降，上许以澄为汴滑节度使。
现代文：滑州刺史李澄秘密派来使者请求归降，德宗答应任命李澄为汴、滑节度使。
English: Emperor Dezong agreed to appoint Li Cheng, the governor of Nanzhou and the governor of Nanzhou, as the envoy.

古文：澄犹外事希烈。希烈疑之，遣养子六百人戍白马，召澄共攻宁陵。
现代文：李澄表面上仍然事奉李希烈，李希烈却怀疑他，派遣养子六百人戍守白马，传召李澄前来共同攻打宁陵。
English: On the surface, Li Cheng still served Li Xilai, but Li Xilai became suspicious of him and sent 600 of his adopted sons to guard the White Horse, summoning Li Cheng to come and jointly attack Ningling.

古文：澄至石柱，使其众阳惊，烧营而遁。
现代文：李澄来到石柱，指使他的部众佯作受惊，烧掉营房，便逃跑了。
English: Li Cheng came to Shizhu, ordered his subordinates to frighten the soldiers, burned down the barracks, and fled.

古文：又讽养子令剽掠，澄悉收斩之，以白希烈，希烈无以罪也。
现代文：李澄又暗示李烈的养子，让他们抢劫掳掠，而李澄又将他们全部收捕斩杀，并将此事告诉李希烈，但李希烈无法加罪于他。
English: Li Cheng also hinted that Li Lie's adopted son, let them rob and plunder, and Li Cheng also arrested and killed all of them, and told this to Li Xilai, but Li Xilai could not add guilt to him.

古文：刘昌守宁陵，凡四十五日不释甲。
现代文：刘昌守卫宁陵，计有四十五天不曾脱下铠甲。
English: Liu Chang guarded the Wei Ning Mausoleum for a total of forty-five days without taking off his armor.

古文：韩滉遣其将王栖曜将兵助刘洽拒希烈，栖曜以强弩数千游汴水，夜，入宁陵城。
现代文：韩派遣他的将领王栖曜领兵援助刘洽抵御李希烈，王栖曜使强健的弩手数千人游过汴水，在夜间进入宁陵城。
English: Han dispatched his general Wang Qiyou to lead the troops to help Liu Cai to resist Li Xilai. Wang Qiyou made thousands of strong swimmers swim across Surabaya and enter Ningling City at night.

古文：明日，从城上射希烈，及其坐幄。
现代文：第二天，弩手从城上用箭射击李希烈，射到他所坐镇的帐幕里边。
English: The next day, Xun Man shot arrows at Li Xilai from the top of the city, hitting him inside the tent where he was sitting.

古文：希烈惊曰： 宣、润弩手至矣！ 
现代文：李希烈吃惊地说： 宣、润的弩手到了！ 
English: Surprised, Li Xilei said, "Xuan and Run's gongs have arrived!"

古文：遂解围去。
现代文：于是解除了宁陵的围困，自行离去。
English: As a result, the siege of Ningling was lifted and they left of their own accord.

古文：硃泚既自奉天败归，李晟谋取长安。
现代文：朱从奉天大败而归，李晟谋划攻取长安。
English: Zhu returned from the great defeat of Fengtian, and Li Xi planned to attack Chang'an.

古文：刘德信与晟俱屯东渭桥，不受晟节制。
现代文：刘德信与李晟一道屯驻在东渭桥，但他不接受李晟的管束。
English: Liu Dexin was stationed in Dongluoqiao with Li Qian, but he did not accept Li Qian's control.

古文：晟因德信至营中，数以沪涧之败及所过剽掠之罪，斩之。
现代文：李晟借刘备信来到营中之机，列举他在涧战败和沿途抢劫掳掠的罪行，将他斩杀。
English: Using Liu Bixin's letter, Li Qian took the opportunity to come to the camp, enumerate the crimes of his defeat in the Second World War and robberies and kidnappings along the way, and kill him.

古文：因以数骑驰入德信军，劳其众，无敢动者，遂并将之，军势益振。
现代文：李晟因而以数名骑兵奔入刘德信军中，慰劳他的部众，没有人敢有所举动。于是李晟一并统领了此军，军队的声势益发振作。
English: As a result, Li Lan rushed into Liu Dexin's army with several cavalrymen to comfort his subordinates, but no one dared to take any action. Therefore, Li Lan led the army together, and the army's momentum increased.

古文：李怀光既胁朝廷逐卢杞等，内不自安，遂有异志。
现代文：李怀光胁迫朝廷贬逐了卢杞等人以后，内心不能自安，于是有了反叛朝廷的意图。
English: After Li Huaiguang coerced the imperial court to expel Lu Yao and others, his heart could not be at peace, so he had the intention to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：又恶李晟独当一面，恐其成功，奏请与晟合军。诏许之。
现代文：李怀光又嫌恶李晟独当一面，惟恐他有所建树，便上奏请求与李晟合兵，德宗颁诏答应了他的请求。
English: Li Huaguang also disliked the fact that Li Qiye was in sole charge. Fearing that he might achieve something, he requested to join forces with Li Qiye. Emperor Dezong issued an edict to grant his request.

古文：晟与怀光会于咸阳西陈涛斜，筑垒未毕，泚众大至，晟谓怀光曰： 贼若固守宫苑，或旷日持久，未易攻取。
现代文：李晟与李怀光在咸阳西面的陈涛斜会师，营垒还没有修筑完毕，朱军队大批开到。李晟对李怀光说： 假如敌军顽固把守宫城和苑城，也许会空废时日，延宕许久，不容易攻打下来。
English: Li Yu and Li Huaiguang met Chen Tao's division in the west of Xianyang. The camp was not yet completed, and Zhu's army arrived in large numbers. Li Yu said to Li Huaiguang: If the enemy stubbornly defends the palace city and the garden city, it may waste time, delay for a long time, and it is not easy to attack.

古文：今去其巢穴，敢出求战，此天以贼赐明公，不可失也！ 
现代文：现在敌军离开了他们的巢穴，竟敢出城挑战，这是上天把敌军赐给明公，决不能放走他们！ 
English: Now that the enemy troops have left their lair, how dare they venture out of the city to challenge? This is God's gift of the enemy troops to Ming Gong. They must never be released!

古文：怀光曰： 军适至，马未秣，士未饭，岂可遽战邪！ 
现代文：李怀光说： 我军刚刚赶到，战马还没有喂料，士兵还没有吃饭，哪能匆匆接战呢！ 
English: Li Huaiguang said: Our army has just arrived, the horses have not been fed, the soldiers have not eaten, how can we rush into battle!

古文：晟不得已乃就壁。
现代文：李晟没有办法，只好自回营垒。
English: Li Yao had no choice but to return to the camp.

古文：晟每与怀光同出军，怀光军士多掠人牛马，晟军秋毫不犯。
现代文：每次李晟与李怀光一同派出军队，李怀光的将士常常掠夺百姓的牛马，李晟军却秋毫无犯。
English: Every time Li Lan and Li Huai Quang sent an army together, Li Huai Quang's soldiers often plundered the cattle and horses of the people, but Li Lan's army did not commit any crimes.

古文：怀光军士恶其异己，分所获与之，晟军终不敢受。
现代文：李怀光的将士嫌恶李晟军与自己两样，将所得物品分给他们，但李晟军始终不敢接受。
English: Li Huaiqing's generals detested Li Shijun as much as he did, and distributed the items he received to them, but Li Shijun never dared to accept them.

古文：怀光屯咸阳累月，逗留不进。
现代文：李怀光在咸阳屯驻了好几个月，不肯前进。
English: Li Huaguang stayed in Xianyang for several months, refusing to move.

古文：上屡遣中使趣之，辞以士卒疲弊，且当休息观衅。
现代文：德宗屡次派遣中使催使他，他便以士兵疲困不堪，而且应当保养兵力，观察敌军的破绽为理由而推辞。
English: Emperor Dezong was repeatedly urged to send him, but he refused on the grounds that the soldiers were exhausted and that it was necessary to maintain the troops and observe the weaknesses of the enemy army.

古文：诸将数劝之攻长安，怀光不从，密与硃泚通谋，事迹颇露。
现代文：诸将领好几次劝说李怀光攻打长安，李怀光不肯听从，还暗中与朱勾结合谋。
English: The generals tried several times to persuade Li Huaiguang to attack Chang'an. Li Huaiguang refused to listen and secretly conspired with Zhu He.

古文：李晟屡奏，恐其有变，为所并，请移军东渭桥。上犹冀怀光革心，收其力用，寝晟奏不下。
现代文：李晟屡屡上奏，惟恐发生变故，被李怀光吞并，请求将军队转移到东渭桥，但德宗仍然希望李怀光洗心革面，争取使他尽力效命，便压了李晟的奏章，不肯批示。
English: Li Xi repeatedly played, fearing that something would happen and he would be swallowed up by Li Huai Guang, he asked for the army to be transferred to the East Fen Bridge. However, Dezong still hoped that Li Huai Guang would change his mind and try his best to serve his life, so he suppressed Li Xi's playing and refused to give orders.

古文：怀光欲缓战期，且激怒诸军，奏言： 诸军粮赐薄，神策独厚，厚薄不均，难以进战。 
现代文：李怀光准备延缓接战的日期，并且激怒各军，便上奏说： 各军粮食供给微少，只有神策军供给丰厚，多少不均，难以进军开战。 
English: Li Huaguang prepared to postpone the date of the engagement, and angered all the armies, he made a report saying: The grain supply of each army is small, only the Shensha army is well supplied, somewhat uneven, and it is difficult to march into battle.

古文：上以财用方窘，若粮赐皆比神策，则无以给之，不然，又逆怀光意，恐诸军觖望。
现代文：德宗因财物用度还正窘困，如果都按照神策军的标准供给粮食，便拿不出粮食来供给各军。
English: The Dezong was still in dire straits due to the use of property. If they all supplied grain according to the standard of the Shinsaka army, they would not be able to supply grain to all the armies.

古文：乃遣陆贽诣怀光营宣慰，因召李晟参议其事。
现代文：但不这样又惟恐逆了李怀光的意思，引起各军抱怨，于是派遣陆贽到李怀光营中安抚将士，顺便传召李晟参予商议粮饷供给之事。
English: However, he did not do so for fear of going against Li Huai-kuang's wishes and causing complaints from the troops. Therefore, he sent Lu Wei to Li Huai-kuang's camp to pacify the soldiers, and also summoned Li Wei to discuss the supply of grain.

古文：怀光意欲晟自乞减损，使失士心，沮败其功，乃曰： 将士战斗同而粮赐异，何以使之协力！ 
现代文：李怀光本意打算让李晟自己请求削减供给，使他失去军心，败坏他的功绩，便说： 将士一个样地与敌军战斗，而粮食供给却彼此不同，怎么能让将士齐心合力呢！ 
English: Li Huaiguang originally intended to make Li Xuan himself request a reduction in supplies, so that he would lose his military spirit and ruin his achievements, and said: Soldiers fight with the enemy army in the same way, but the food supply is different from each other, how can soldiers be made to work together?

古文：贽未有言，数顾晟。
现代文：陆贽没有发言，几次回头去看李晟。
English: Lu Yao did not speak, but repeatedly looked at Li Yao.

古文：晟曰： 公为元帅，得专号令；晟将一军，受指踪而已。
现代文：李晟说： 你是主帅，得以专擅号令。我不过带领着一支军队，接受你的指挥罢了。
English: Li Yao said, "You are the commander-in-chief, so you can call the shots. I am just leading an army and accepting your command.

古文：至于增减衣食，公当裁之。 
现代文：说到增加或减少军中衣食供给，自当由你裁断。 
English: When it comes to increasing or decreasing the supply of food and clothing for the military, it is up to you to decide.

古文：怀光默然，又不欲自减之，遂止。
现代文：李怀光一言不发，又不愿由自己削减李晟军的粮食供给，此事便搁置了。
English: Li Huaiguang did not say a word, and did not want to reduce the grain supply of Li Yingjun by himself, so the matter was shelved.

古文：时上遣崔汉衡诣吐蕃发兵，吐蕃相尚结赞言： 蕃法发兵，以主兵大臣为信。今制书无怀光署名，故不敢进。 
现代文：当时，德宗派遣崔汉衡到吐蕃去让他们发兵，吐蕃国相尚结赞说： 按照吐蕃礼法发兵，以主掌兵权的大臣的署名为凭信，现在制书上没有李怀光的署名，所以不敢进军。 
English: At that time, Emperor Dezong sent Cui Hanheng to Tubo to have them send troops. Tubo's minister of state, Shang Jizan, said: "In accordance with Tubo's etiquette, the troops were sent out with the signature of the minister in charge of the military. Now there is no signature of Li Huaiqing on the book, so I dare not march into the army."

古文：上命陆贽谕怀光，怀光固执以为不可，曰： 若克京城，吐蕃必纵兵焚掠，谁能遏之！
现代文：德宗令陆贽晓示李怀光，李怀光坚持认为不可让吐蕃发兵，他说： 如果攻克京城，吐蕃必然要放纵士兵焚烧掳掠，有谁能够制止他们！
English: Emperor Dezong ordered Lu Wei Xiao to tell Li Huai Guang, and Li Huai Guang insisted that Tu Wei should not be allowed to send troops, saying: If the capital is conquered, Tu Wei will inevitably indulge soldiers to burn and plunder, who can stop them!

古文：此一害也。
现代文：这是第一个害处。
English: This is the first harm.

古文：前有敕旨，募士卒克城者人赏百缗，彼发兵五万，若援敕求赏，五百万缗何从可得！
现代文：不久前颁布的敕旨规定，凡是召募士兵攻破城池者。每人奖赏钱一百缗，吐蕃发兵五万人，如果援引敕旨，要求奖赏，五百万缗钱要到哪儿才能弄到！
English: The imperial edict issued not long ago stipulates that anyone who recruits soldiers to break through the city will receive a reward of 100 baht per person, and 50,000 soldiers will be sent to Tibet. If you invoke the imperial edict and ask for a reward, where can you get 5 million baht?

古文：此二害也。
现代文：这是第二个害处。
English: This is the second harm.

古文：虏骑虽来，必不先进，勒兵自固，观我兵势，胜则从而分功，败则从而图变，谲诈多端，不可亲信，此三害也。 
现代文：吐蕃骑兵虽然到来，必定不肯率先进军，而是按兵不动，保存实力，观望我方军队的形势，胜利了，便跟着瓜分功劳，失败了，便借机图谋变乱，诡诈多端，不可亲近信任。这是第三个害处。 
English: Although the Tubo cavalry has arrived, they will certainly refuse to lead the advanced army. Instead, they will stand still, preserve their strength, and watch the situation of our army. If they win, they will share the credit. If they fail, they will take the opportunity to plot chaos, be deceitful, and not be trusted. This is the third harm.

古文：竟不肯署敕。尚结赞亦不进兵。
现代文：李怀光始终不肯往敕旨上署名，尚结赞也没有让军队进发。
English: Li Huaiguang always refused to sign the imperial edict, and he did not allow the army to march in.

古文：陆贽自咸阳还，上言： 贼泚稽诛，保聚宫苑，势穷援绝，引日偷生。
现代文：陆贽从咸阳回来以后，上奏说： 逆贼朱为了拖延被诛灭的时间，聚兵退保宫城和禁苑，大势已去，外援断绝，迁延时日，苟且偷生。
English: After Lu Yao returned from Xianyang, Shang Zuo said: In order to delay the time of being annihilated, the rebel Zhu gathered troops to withdraw from the palace city and the forbidden garden, the general situation has gone, foreign aid has been cut off, the time has been delayed, and it has been stolen.

古文：怀光总仗顺之师，乘制胜之气，鼓行芟翦，易若摧枯，而乃寇奔不追，师老不用，诸帅每欲进取，怀光辄沮其谋，据兹事情，殊不可解，陛下意在全护，委曲听从，观其所为，亦未知感。
现代文：陛下的本意在于保全回护李怀光，对他委曲求全，言听计从。
English: His Majesty's intention is to preserve and protect Li Huaguang, to seek perfection in his work, and to listen to his words.

古文：若不别务规略，渐思制持，惟以姑息求安，终恐变故难测。
现代文：观察他做的事情，也并没有因此而被打动。如果不采取另外的谋略，逐渐控制住他，而只是对他无原则地宽容下去，以求平安无事，最终恐怕还是要发生难以测度的变故。
English: If we do not adopt a different strategy and gradually control him, but only tolerate him without principle in order to be safe, I am afraid that in the end there will be changes that are difficult to measure.

古文：此诚事机危迫之秋也，固不可以寻常容易处之。
现代文：现在是事功机缘面临危险促迫的时候，当然不能够用通常的、轻易的态度来对待。
English: Now is a time of great opportunity and great danger, and of course, it cannot be treated with the usual, easy attitude.

古文：今李晟奏请移军，适遇臣衔命宣慰，怀光偶论此事，臣遂泛问所宜。
现代文：现在李晟奏请转移自己的军队，恰好遇到我奉命前去安抚将士，李怀光偶然谈论到这件事，于是我泛泛地问他应当如何处理。
English: At this time, Li Yongsong asked me to move his army. I happened to meet Li Huaguang, who was ordered to go and pacify the soldiers. Li Huaguang happened to talk about this matter, so I asked him in general terms how he should deal with it.

古文：怀光乃云： 李晟既欲别行，某亦都不要藉。 
现代文：李怀光便说： 李晟既然愿意到别处去，我也全不需要借助他为我用命效力。 
English: Li Huaiguang then said: Since Li Yao is willing to go elsewhere, I do not need to use him to work hard for me.

古文：臣犹虑有翻覆，因美其军盛强。
现代文：我仍顾虑李怀光会再改变主意，便称赞他的军队强盛。
English: I was still worried that Li Huaiguang would change his mind again, so I praised his army for being strong.

古文：怀光大自矜夸，转有轻晟之意。
现代文：李怀光大大地自夸了一番，转而有轻视李晟的意思。
English: Li Huaguang boasted a great deal, which in turn meant that he despised Li Xuan.

古文：臣又从容问云： 回日，或圣旨顾问事之可否，决定何如？ 
现代文：我又不慌不忙地问他： 我回去时，或许会有圣旨询问此事可行与否，不知你是怎么决定的？ 
English: I also asked him calmly: When I go back, there may be a decree to inquire whether the matter is feasible or not. I don't know how you decided?

古文：怀光已肆轻言，不可中变，遂云： 恩命许去，事亦无妨。 
现代文：李怀光已经肆意讲出了不慎重的话，无法中途改变，于是他说： 皇上的命令若是允许李晟离开，对于事体也并无妨碍。 
English: Li Huaiguang had already spoken carelessly and could not change his mind, so he said, "If the emperor's order allows Li Yao to leave, there is no obstacle to the matter.

古文：要约再三，非不详审，虽欲追悔，固难为辞。
现代文：我与他再三约定，不能不说是够审慎周密的了，即使李怀光打算翻悔，实在也难于开口。
English: I have repeatedly made an agreement with him, which I must say is quite prudent and thorough. Even if Li Huaguang intends to repent, it is really difficult to open his mouth.

古文：解斗不可以不离，救焚不可以不疾，理尽于此，惟陛下图之。 
现代文：希望立即将李晟的奏表转出，交给中书省，下敕批准依所奏，另外再赐给李怀光手诏，向他说明转移军队的理由。此手诏的大致意思这样说： 昨天得到李晟的奏章，他请求把军队转移到长安城东边，以便分去敌军兵势。
English: It is hoped that the report form of Li Xi will be immediately transferred and handed over to the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, and the approval of the lower court will be based on the report. In addition, Li Huigang will be given a handshake to explain to him the reason for the transfer of the army. The general meaning of this handshake is as follows: Li Xi's handshake was received yesterday, and he requested that the army be transferred to the east of Chang'an City in order to separate the enemy troops.

古文：上曰： 卿所料极善。然李晟移军，怀光不免怅望，若更遣建徽、惠元就东，恐因此生辞，转难调息，且更俟旬时。 
现代文：朕本来打算委托你来商量，恰遇陆贽回朝上奏说，与你相见时，你已谈到此事，还说允许李晟离去，事体并无妨碍，才是朕便给李晟本军颁发了敕书，应允了他的请求。 这样说，用词既委婉又直切，顺理成章，意义明了，李怀光即使蓄有异谋，他又有什么理由与朝廷结怨呢！ 德宗听从了陆贽的建议。
English: I had originally planned to entrust you with the discussion, but it so happened that Lu Xun reported back to the Imperial Court, saying that when he met you, you had already talked about the matter and said that there was no obstacle to allowing Li Qiye to leave. It was only then that I issued an imperial edict to Li Qiye's army and agreed to his request. In this way, the words are both euphemistic and straightforward, logical and meaningful. Even if Li Hui Guang harbors a grudge, what reason does he have to quarrel with the Imperial Court? Dezong listened to Lu Xuan's suggestion.

古文：辛酉，加王武俊同平章事兼幽州、卢龙节度使。
现代文：辛酉，德宗加封王武俊同平章事，兼任幽州、卢龙节度使。
English: Xin Zheng, Dezong and Wang Wujun were appointed to the same level, and also served as Yuzhou and Lulong Festival envoys.

古文：李晟以为： 怀光反状已明，缓急宜有备，蜀、汉之路不可壅，请以裨将赵光铣等为洋、利、剑三州刺史，各将兵五百以防未然。 
现代文：李晟认为： 李怀光造反的情状已经很清楚，在危急的关头，应当有所准备。通往蜀郡、汉中的道路是不能堵塞的，请任命副将赵光铣等人为洋、利、剑三州刺史，让他们各自领兵五百人，以便防患于未然。 
English: Li Yan thought: The situation of Li Huai Guang's rebellion is already very clear, and in a critical moment, preparations should be made. The roads leading to Shu County and Hanzhong cannot be blocked. Please appoint Vice Admiral Zhao Guangyao and others to write the history of the three states of Yang, Li and Jian, and let them each lead five hundred soldiers, so as to prevent problems in advance.

古文：上疑未决，欲亲总禁兵幸咸阳，以慰抚为名，趣诸将进讨。
现代文：德宗迟疑不决，准备亲自总领禁兵出走咸阳，以抚慰将士的名义，督促各将领进军讨伐。
English: De Zong hesitated and was ready to personally lead the banned soldiers to leave Xianyang, urging the generals to march into the crusade in the name of comforting the soldiers.

古文：或谓怀光曰： 此汉祖游云梦之策也！ 
现代文：李怀光大为恐惧，造反的谋划愈发加紧了。
English: Li Huaiguang was greatly frightened, and the planning of the rebellion became more and more intense.

古文：怀光大惧，反谋益甚。
现代文：德宗将近出行之际，李怀光讲话益发不恭顺。
English: As Dezong was about to leave, Li Huaiguang's speech became more and more disrespectful.

古文：上垂欲行，怀光辞益不逊，上犹疑谗人间之，甲子，加怀光太尉，增实食，赐铁券，遣神策右兵马使李卞等往谕旨。
现代文：德宗仍然怀疑有好进谗言的人从中离间他。甲子，德宗加封李怀光为太尉，增加食实封，赐铁券，派遣神策右兵马使李卞等人前往传达圣旨。
English: Dezong still suspected that someone who was good at gossiping was trying to drive a wedge between him and the Emperor. So, Dezong appointed Li Huaiguang as the first lieutenant, increased the food and clothing allowance, gave him iron coupons, and sent Shen Zheyu's envoy, Li Jun, and others to deliver the sacred edict.

古文：怀光对使者投铁券于地曰： 圣人疑怀光邪？
现代文：李怀光当着使者的面，把铁券丢在地上说： 皇上怀疑我李怀光吗？
English: In front of the envoy, Li Huaiguang threw the iron certificate on the ground and said, "Does the emperor suspect me of being Li Huaiguang?"

古文：人臣反，赐铁券；怀光不反，今赐铁券，是使之反也！ 
现代文：臣下造反时，才赐铁券。我不曾造反，现在赐铁券，这是让我造反的吧！ 
English: When my vassals rebelled, I was given iron coupons. I never rebelled, but now I am given iron coupons. Does this mean I will rebel?

古文：辞气甚悖。
现代文：他的言辞和语气都很无礼。
English: His words and tone were disrespectful.

古文：朔方左兵马使张名振当军门大呼曰： 太尉视贼不许击，待天使不敬，果欲反邪！
现代文：朔方左兵马使张名振面对军营的大门大声喊道： 太尉对待敌军，不许出击，对待皇上的使者，很不恭敬，果真是要造反吗！
English: Shuo Fangzao ordered Zhang Nianzhen to face the gate of the military camp and shouted loudly: "The captain treats the enemy army, and is not allowed to attack, and treats the emperor's envoy, very disrespectfully, is he really going to rebel?"

古文：功高太山，一旦弃之，自取族灭，富贵他人，何益哉！
现代文：你的功劳象泰山一样高，忽然舍弃了它们，自取灭族，而让他人去享受富贵，这有什么好处呢！
English: Your merits are as high as Mount Tai, and what is the benefit of suddenly abandoning them, destroying your own people, and letting others enjoy wealth?

古文：我今日必以死争之！ 
现代文：我今天一定要不惜一死，前去争论。 
English: I'm going to go out there and argue to the death today.

古文：怀光闻之，谓曰： 我不反，以贼方强，故须蓄锐俟时耳。 
现代文：李怀光听了，对他说： 我不会造反。只是以为正当敌军强盛，必须积蓄锐气，等待时机罢了。 
English: Li Huaiguang listened and said to him, "I won't rebel. I just think that since the enemy is strong, we must gather our strength and wait for the right time."

古文：怀光又言： 天子所居必有城隍。 
现代文：李怀光又说： 皇上所住的地方一定要有城壕。 
English: Li Huaiguang also said: Wherever the emperor lives, there must be a trench.

古文：乃发卒城咸阳，未几，移军据之。
现代文：于是，李怀光派出士兵去修筑咸阳城。不久，他迁移军队，占据了咸阳城。
English: As a result, Li Huaiguang sent soldiers to build Xianyang City. Soon, he moved his army and occupied Xianyang City.

古文：张名振曰： 乃者言不反，今日拔军此来，何也？
现代文：张名振说： 以前你说不会造反，现在你调动军队到这里来，这是为什么？
English: Zhang Nanzhen said, "Previously, you said you would not revolt, but now you are mobilizing troops to come here. Why is that?

古文：何不攻长安，杀硃泚，取富贵，引军还邠邪？ 
现代文：为什么你不进攻长安，杀掉朱，获取富贵，然后率领军队回到州去呢！ 
English: Why don't you attack Chang'an, kill Zhu, get rich, and then lead the army back to the state!

古文：怀光曰： 名振病心矣！ 
现代文：李怀光说： 张名振得了精神病了！ 
English: Li Huaiguang said: Zhang Mingzhen is mentally ill!

古文：命左右引去，拉杀之。
现代文：李怀光命令侍从人员将他拉到外面，把他摧折至死。
English: Li Huaguang ordered the attendants to drag him outside and beat him to death.

古文：右武锋兵马使石演芬，本西域胡人，怀光养以为子。
现代文：右武锋兵马使石演芬，本是西域胡族人，李怀光将他收养为子。
English: The right martial arts soldier and horse rider, Shi Yunfen, was originally from the Western Hu ethnic group, and Li Huaiguang adopted him as his son.

古文：怀光潜与硃泚通谋，演芬遣其客郜成义诣行在告之，请罢其都统之权。
现代文：李怀光暗中与朱勾结，石演芬派遣他的门客郜成义到行在报告此事，请求免除李怀光都统的兵权。
English: Li Huaiguang secretly colluded with Zhu, and Shi Yanfen sent his protégé Yu Chengyi to report the matter and request that Li Huaiguang be exempted from the military power of the capital.

古文：成义至奉天，告怀光子璀。璀密白其父。
现代文：郜成义来到奉天，告诉了李怀光的儿子李璀，李璀又密告他父亲。
English: Rui Chengyi came to Mukden and told Li Huaiqing's son Li Yao, who in turn tipped off his father.

古文：怀光召演芬责之曰： 我以尔为子，奈何欲破我家！
现代文：李怀光召来石演芬，责备他说： 我把你当作儿子，你怎么打算叫我家破人亡！
English: Li Huaguang summoned Shi Yanfen and scolded him: "I treat you as a son, how dare you want to ruin my family!

古文：今日负我，死甘心乎？ 
现代文：今天你辜负了我，你死甘心吗？ 
English: Today you failed me. Are you willing to die?

古文：演芬曰： 天子以太尉为股肱，太尉以演芬为心腹；太尉既负天子，演芬安得不负太尉乎！
现代文：石演芬说： 圣上把太尉视为辅佐朝政的大臣，太尉把我当作亲信，太尉既然辜负了圣上，我怎么能够不辜负太尉呢！
English: Shi Yanfen said, "The Holy Father regards the captain as a minister who assists the government, and the captain regards me as a close confidant. Since the captain has failed the Holy Father, how can I live up to the captain?"

古文：演芬胡人，不能异心，惟知事一人。苟免贼名而死，死甘心矣！ 
现代文：我是一个胡人，不能怀有二心，只知道事奉一人，如果能够免去逆贼的恶名而死，死也甘心了！ 
English: I am a Hu person, I cannot have two hearts, I only know how to serve one person. If I can avoid the bad reputation of the traitor and die, I am willing to die!

古文：怀光使左右脔食之，皆曰： 义士也，可令快死！ 
现代文：李怀光让侍从人员把他切成碎块，吃他的肉。众人都说： 石演芬是一位义士啊，应该让他死得快一些。 
English: Li Huaguang asked the attendants to cut him into pieces and eat his flesh. Everyone said: Shi Yanfen is a righteous man, he should be allowed to die faster.

古文：以刀断其喉而去。
现代文：用刀割断他的喉咙就离开了。
English: He cut his throat with a knife and left.

古文：李卞等还，言怀光骄慢之状，于是行在始严门禁，从臣皆密装以待。
现代文：李卞等人回朝，讲了李怀光骄横傲慢的情况，于是行在开始对宫门城关严加警戒，侍从皇上的官员都暗中置办行装，等待离开奉天。
English: When Li Xi and others returned to the imperial court, they told the emperor about Li Huai Guang's arrogance and haughtiness. Therefore, they began to keep a close watch on the palace gate, and the officials who served the emperor secretly put on their uniforms and waited to leave for heaven.

古文：乙丑，加李晟河中、同绛节度使。
现代文：乙丑，德宗加封李晟为河中、同绛节度使。
English: Yixiu, Dezong and Li Jie were appointed as the envoys to the middle of the river and to the dynasties.

古文：上犹以为薄，丙寅，又加同平章事。
现代文：德宗仍然认为封拜不够优厚，丙寅，又加封李晟同平章事。
English: Dezong still thought that the sealing was not good enough, and he also added the Li Xi Tongping Inscription.

古文：上将幸梁州，山南节度使盐亭严震闻之，遣使诣奉天奉迎，又遣大将张用诚将兵五千至盩厔以来迎卫。
现代文：德宗即将出走梁州的消息，被山南节度使盐亭人严震听说了，他派遣使者到奉天迎候德宗，又派遣大将张用诚领兵五千人到一带来迎驾护卫。
English: The news that Dezong was about to leave Liangzhou was heard by the Shannan Festival, which made the Yan Ting people very shocked. He sent an envoy to Feng Tian to welcome Dezong, and sent General Zhang Yicheng to lead five thousand soldiers to bring a welcoming escort.

古文：用诚为怀光所诱，阴与之通谋，上闻而患之。
现代文：张用诚被李怀光所引诱，暗中与李怀光互通阴谋，德宗听说很是担心。
English: Zhang Yicheng was seduced by Li Huaguang and secretly conspired with Li Huaguang. Dezong was very worried.

古文：会震继遣牙将马勋奉表，上语之故。勋请： 亟诣梁州取严震符召用诚还府，若不受召，臣请杀之。 
现代文：适逢严震又派遣牙将马勋进献表章，德宗向他讲了担心的原故，马勋请求： 赶紧到梁州去取严震的兵符，传召张用诚返回军府。如果张用诚不接受传召的命令，请让我把他杀掉。 
English: At the time of the earthquake, Ma Xun, the commander-in-chief, was sent to present the medal. Dezong told him the reason for his concern. Ma Xun requested: Hurry to Liangzhou to get the military badge of the earthquake, and summon Zhang Yicheng to return to the military headquarters. If Zhang Yicheng does not accept the summoning order, please let me kill him.

古文：上喜曰： 卿何时复至此？ 
现代文：德宗欢喜地说： 你什么时候再到这里？ 
English: Dezong said happily, "When will you come here again?"

古文：勋刻日时而去。
现代文：马勋给自己限定了日期，然后离去。
English: Ma Xun gave himself a deadline and then left.

古文：既得震符，请壮士五人与之俱出骆谷。
现代文：马勋得到严震的兵符以后，请求严震派出勇士五人与他一起出骆谷。
English: After Ma Xun received the military insignia from Yan Zhen, he asked Yan Zhen to send five warriors to accompany him out of Luogu.

古文：用诚不知事泄，以数百骑迎之，勋与之俱入驿。
现代文：张用诚不知道事情泄露，让数百人骑马迎接马勋，马勋与他们一起进入驿站。
English: Zhang Yicheng did not know that the matter was leaked, and let hundreds of people ride horses to meet Ma Xun. Ma Xun entered the station with them.

古文：时天寒，勋多然藁火于驿外，军士皆往附火。
现代文：当时，天气寒冷，马勋在驿舍外面用禾秆点燃了许多火堆，士兵们都到火堆前烤火去了。
English: At that time, the weather was cold, and Ma Xun used straw to light many fires outside the hut, and the soldiers all went to the fire to make a fire.

古文：勋乃从容出怀中符，以示用诚曰： 大夫召君。 
现代文：马勋从容不迫地从怀中拿出兵符给张用诚过目说： 严大夫传召你回去。 
English: Ma Xun unhurriedly took out the military insignia from his arms and showed it to Zhang Yicheng, saying, "Dr. Yan has summoned you to return."

古文：用诚错愕起走，壮士自后执其手擒之。
现代文：张用诚猝然而惊，站起来就要逃跑，勇士们从他背后抓住他的手，捉住了他。
English: Zhang Yicheng suddenly panicked, stood up and was about to run away. The warriors grabbed his hands from behind and caught him.

古文：用诚子在勋后，斫伤勋首。
现代文：张用诚的儿子在马勋背后，砍伤了马勋的头部。
English: Zhang Yicheng's son stabbed Ma Xun in the back, wounding his head.

古文：壮士格杀其子，仆用诚于地，跨其腹，以刀拟其喉曰： 出声则死！ 
现代文：勇士们击杀了张用诚的儿子，将张用诚摔倒在地，骑在他的肚子上，用刀在他的喉咙前面比划着说： 你要是吱声，就杀死你！ 
English: The warriors killed Zhang Yicheng's son, threw Zhang Yicheng to the ground, rode on his stomach, and drew a sword in front of his throat, saying: "If you squeak, I'll kill you!"

古文：勋入其营，士卒已擐甲执兵矣。
现代文：马勋进入张用诚的营房，士兵们已经穿好铠甲，拿好兵器了。
English: Ma Xun entered Zhang Yicheng's barracks. The soldiers were already wearing armor and carrying weapons.

古文：勋大言曰： 汝曹父母妻子皆在汉中，一朝弃之，与张用诚同反，于汝曹何利乎！
现代文：马勋大声说： 你们的父母、妻子、儿子都住在汉中，一时舍弃了他们，与张用诚一起造反，这对你们有什么好处呢！
English: Ma Xun said in a loud voice: Your parents, wives, and sons all live in Hanzhong. You abandoned them for a moment and rebelled together with Zhang Yicheng. How is this good for you?

古文：大夫令我取用诚，不问汝曹，无自取族灭！ 
现代文：严大夫只让我来捉拿张用诚，不追究你们，你们不要自取灭族！ 
English: Dr. Yan only asked me to capture Zhang Yixing, not to investigate you. Don't kill your own people!

古文：众皆詟服。
现代文：大家都惧怕屈服了。
English: The sergeants were afraid to obey.

古文：勋送用诚诣梁州，震杖杀之，命副将领其众。
现代文：马勋将张用诚押送到梁州，严震用棍棒将他打死，命令副将统领他的部众。
English: Ma Xun pushed Zhang Yicheng to Liangzhou. Yan Zhen clubbed him to death and ordered the vice-general to lead his subordinates.

古文：勋裹其首，复命于行在，愆期半日。
现代文：马勋将张用诚的头裹起来，到行在回报完成使命的情况，按照规定的日期，只超过了半天。
English: Ma Xun wrapped Zhang Yicheng's head up, and it took only half a day to complete the mission in return, according to the specified date.

古文：李怀光夜遣人袭夺李建徽、杨惠元军，建徽走免，惠元将奔奉天，怀光遣兵追杀之。
现代文：李怀光派人在夜间突袭夺取李建徽、杨惠元的军队。李建徽逃脱而去，杨惠元准备逃奔奉天，李怀光派兵追击，将他杀死。
English: Li Huaiguang sent people to raid and capture Li Jianhui and Yang Huiyuan's army at night. Li Jianhui escaped, Yang Huiyuan was preparing to flee to Fengtian, Li Huaiguang sent soldiers to chase and kill him.

古文：怀光又宣言曰： 吾今与硃泚连和，车驾且光远避！ 
现代文：李怀光还扬言说： 我现在就与朱联合起来，皇上的车驾应当远远地回避！ 
English: Li Huaiguang also threatened: I will unite with Zhu right now, the emperor's chariot should be avoided at all costs!

古文：怀光以韩游瑰朔方将也，掌兵在奉天，与游瑰书，约使为变，游瑰密奏之。
现代文：李怀光因韩游是朔方的将领，现在又在奉天掌管军事，便给韩游写了一封书信，约他发起叛乱，韩游将此事秘密上奏德宗。
English: Because Han Yu was the general of the Shuo side and was now in charge of the military in Mukden, Li Huai Guang wrote a letter to Han Yu, asking him to launch a rebellion, and Han Yu secretly reported the matter to Dezong.

古文：明日，又以书趣之，游瑰又奏之。上称其忠义，因问： 策安出？ 
现代文：第二天，李怀光又用书信催促他及早起事。德宗称许韩游的忠义，又问他说： 你有什么计策？ 
English: The next day, Li Huai Guang again urged him to get up early in a letter. Dezong praised Han You's loyalty and asked him: What are your plans?

古文：对曰： 怀光总诸道兵，故敢恃众为乱。
现代文：韩游回答说： 李怀光总辖各道兵马，所以才敢仗着兵众作乱。
English: Han Yu replied: General Li Huai Guang controls the soldiers and horses of each province, so he dared to use the soldiers to make trouble.

古文：今邠宁有张昕，灵武有宁景璿，河中有吕鸣岳，振武有杜从政，潼关有唐朝臣，渭北有窦觎，皆守将也。
现代文：现在宁有张昕，灵武有宁景，河中有吕鸣岳，振武有杜从政，潼关有唐朝臣，渭北有窦觎，都是守卫一方的将领。
English: Now Ning has Zhangye, Lingwu has Ningjing, He has Lvmingyue, Zhenwu has Du in politics, Shaoguan has Tang courtiers, and Beibei has Douye, all of whom are generals guarding one side.

古文：陛下各以其众及地授之，尊怀光之官，罢其权，则行营诸将各受本府指麾矣。
现代文：陛下可以将李怀光所统辖的地段及其兵众分别交给他们，提升李怀光的官职，免除他的兵权，那么，行营各将领便都分别接受本军府的指挥了。
English: Your Majesty can give the areas under Li Huai Guang's jurisdiction and his soldiers to them separately, promote Li Huai Guang's official position, and exempt him from military power. Then, all the generals and commanders in the camp will separately accept the command of their own military headquarters.

古文：怀光独立，安能为乱！ 
现代文：李怀光被孤立起来，又怎么能够作乱呢！ 
English: Li Huaiguang is isolated, how can he make trouble!

古文：上曰： 罢怀光兵权，若硃泚何？ 
现代文：德宗说： 免除了李怀光的兵权以后，怎么对付朱呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "How should we deal with Zhu Rong after we exempted Li Huaiguang from military service?

古文：对曰： 陛下既许将士以克城殊赏，将士奉天子之命以讨贼取富贵，谁不愿之！
现代文：韩游回答说： 既然陛下许诺，将士们攻克敌城便给与特殊的奖赏，奖士们便是遵循天子的命令讨伐逆贼，获取富贵，谁不愿意这样做呢！
English: Han Yu replied, "Since His Majesty has promised to give special rewards to those who conquer the enemy city, the awardees are following the order of the Son of Heaven to fight against the traitors and gain wealth. Who would not want to do so?"

古文：邠府兵以万数，借使臣得而将之，足以诛泚。况诸道必有杖义之臣，泚不足忧也！ 
现代文：府兵马数以万计，假使我能够率领此军，便足可以诛杀朱，何况各道必定会有主持正义的臣属，朱是不值得忧虑的！ 
English: There are tens of thousands of soldiers and horses in the prefecture. If I can lead this army, it will be enough to fight and kill Zhu. Moreover, each province will certainly have a subordinate to preside over justice. Zhu is not worth worrying about!

古文：上然之。
现代文：德宗认为韩游言之有理。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：丁卯，怀光遣其将赵升鸾入奉天，约其夕使别将达奚小俊烧乾陵，令升鸾为内应以惊胁乘舆。
现代文：丁卯，李怀光派遣他的将领赵升鸾进入奉天城，约定在当天傍晚让别将达奚小俊焚烧乾陵，让赵升鸾作为内应，来威胁德宗的车驾。
English: In the evening of the same day, Li Huiguang sent his general Zhao Shengkun into Fengtian City, and agreed to let Deng Xiaojun burn the Qianling Mausoleum, and let Zhao Shengkun threaten Dezong's chauffeur as an inside job.

古文：升鸾诣浑瑊自言，瑊遽以闻，且请决幸梁州。
现代文：赵升鸾到浑处主动讲了此事，浑赶忙上奏德宗，并且请德宗出走梁州。
English: Zhao Shengkun took the initiative to spread the news everywhere. He hurriedly summoned Dezong and asked him to leave Liangzhou.

古文：上命瑊戒严，瑊出，部勒未毕，上已出城西，命戴休颜守奉天，朝臣将士狼狈扈从。
现代文：德宗命令浑戒严。浑从朝中出来，部署尚未停当，德宗已经出城西行，命令戴休颜防守奉天，朝中的臣僚和将士们狼狈不堪地随从而行。
English: Dezong ordered Hun to impose a strict curfew. Hun came out of the court, the deployment had not yet stopped, Dezong had already left the city to the west, ordered Dai Xiuyan to defend Mukden, and the ministers and soldiers of the court followed him in confusion.

古文：戴休颜徇于军中曰： 怀光已反！ 
现代文：戴休颜在军队中当众宣布说： 李怀光已经造反了！ 
English: Dai Xiuyan publicly announced in the army: Li Huai Guang has rebelled!

古文：遂乘城拒守。
现代文：于是他便登城防守。
English: So he went to the city to defend it.

古文：硃泚之称帝也，兵部侍郎刘乃卧病在家，泚召之，不起。
现代文：朱自称大秦皇帝时，兵部侍郎刘病卧在家。
English: When Zhu claimed to be the Great Qin Emperor, Liu, the attendant of the military department, was ill at home.

古文：使蒋镇自往说之，凡再往，知不可诱胁，乃叹曰： 镇亦忝列曹，不能舍生，以至于此，岂可复以己之腥臊污漫贤者乎！ 
现代文：朱传召他，他不肯起床，朱让蒋镇亲自前往说服他，蒋镇前后去了两次，知道刘难以引诱胁迫，叹道： 我也官列工部侍郎，自愧不能够舍去性命，以致到了这般地步，难道可以再用自己秽恶的行为去玷污贤人吗！ 
English: Zhu summoned him, but he refused to get up. Zhu asked Jiang Zhen to personally go to persuade him. Jiang Zhen went back and forth twice, knowing that Liu was difficult to entice and coerce. He sighed, "I am also a servant of the work department, and I am ashamed that I can't give up my life, so that it has come to this, can I use my filthy and evil behavior to defile a wise man?

古文：歔郗而返。
现代文：蒋镇哽咽着回去了。
English: Jiang Zhen choked and went back.

古文：乃闻帝幸山南，搏膺大呼，自投于床，不食，数日而卒。
现代文：刘听说德宗出行南山以南，拍着胸膛，大声呼叫着跳下床来，好几天不肯吃饭而死。
English: Liu heard that Dezong traveled south of Nanshan, beat his chest, shouted loudly and jumped out of bed. He refused to eat for several days and died.

古文：太子少师乔琳从上至盩厔，称老疾不堪山险，削发为僧，匿于仙游寺。
现代文：太子少师乔琳跟随德宗来到，说自己老迈多病，禁受不住艰险的山路，削去头发为僧，躲藏在仙游寺中。
English: Jolin, the prince's apprentice, came with Dezong, saying that he was too old and sick to endure the arduous mountain path, that he had shaved off his hair to become a monk, and that he was hiding in Senyu Temple.

古文：泚闻之，召至长安，以为吏部尚书。
现代文：朱听说此事，将乔琳传召到长安，任命他为吏部尚书。
English: When Zhu heard about this, he summoned Qiaolin to Chang'an and appointed him as the head of the personnel department.

古文：于是朝士之窜匿者多出仕泚矣。
现代文：于是许多逃避叛军的朝廷官吏去给朱当官了！
English: As a result, many court officials who had fled the rebels went to work for Zhu!

古文：怀光遣其将孟保、惠静寿、孙福达将精骑趣南山邀车驾，遇诸军粮料使张增于盩厔。
现代文：李怀光派遣他的将领孟保、惠静寿、孙福达率领精锐骑兵急奔南山，阻截德宗的车驾，在遇到诸军粮料使张增。
English: Li Huiguang sent his generals Meng Bao, Hui Jing Shou, and Sun Fuda to lead the elite cavalry to rush to Nanshan, intercept the car of Dezong, and increase the grain supply of the army.

古文：三将曰： 彼使我为不臣，我以追不及报之，不过不使我将耳。 
现代文：孟保等三将领说： 李怀光让我们去做背叛圣上的事情，我们便报告他说没有追赶上圣上。他不过不让我们领兵就是了。 
English: Meng Bao and the other three generals said, "Li Huaiguang asked us to do something to betray the emperor, so we reported that he said he didn't catch up with the emperor. He just didn't let us lead the troops."

古文：因目增曰： 军士未朝食，如何？ 
现代文：三将领因而以目光向张增示意着说： 我们的士兵还没有吃早饭，怎么办呢？ 
English: The three generals therefore looked at Zhang Zeng and said, "Our soldiers haven't had breakfast yet, what should we do?"

古文：增绐其众曰： 此东数里有佛祠，吾贮粮焉。 
现代文：张增欺骗三将领的部众说： 从这里向东走几里地，有座佛祠，我在那里储存着粮食。 
English: Zhang Zeng deceived the subordinates of the three generals and said: From here, walk a few miles to the east, there is a Buddhist shrine, where I store grain.

古文：三将帅众而东，纵之剽掠，由是百官从行者皆得入骆谷，以追不及还报，怀光皆黜之。
现代文：孟保等三将领率部众向东而去，听任士兵去抢劫掳掠，因此跟随德宗出行的朝廷百官都得以进入骆谷。孟保等三将领回去报告说没有追上德宗的车驾，李怀光将他们全都贬黜了。
English: Meng Bao and the other three generals led the troops to the east and allowed the soldiers to rob and plunder. As a result, the hundreds of imperial officials who accompanied Dezong were able to enter Luogu. Meng Bao and the other three generals returned and reported that they did not catch up with Dezong's car, and Li Huai Guang dismissed them all.

古文：河东将王权、马汇引兵归太原。
现代文：河东将领王权、马汇领兵返回太原。
English: Hedong led the royal power and Ma Hui led the troops back to Taiyuan.

古文：李晟得除官制，拜哭受命，谓将佐曰： 长安，宗庙所在，天下根本，若诸将皆从行，谁当灭贼者！ 
现代文：李晟接到任官的制书，拜倒在地，哭泣着接受了任命。 他对将佐说： 长安是宗庙的所在地，是全国的根本。如果各位将领都跟从皇上出行，那将由谁来担当消灭敌军的任务呢！ 
English: Upon receiving the appointment letter, Li Lan prostrated himself on the ground and wept as he accepted the appointment. He said to General Zuo: Chang'an is the location of the ancestral temple and is the foundation of the whole country. If all the generals travel with the emperor, who will take on the task of destroying the enemy army?

古文：乃治城隍，缮甲兵，为复京城之计。
现代文：于是，李晟整治城壕，修缮铠甲兵器，做着收复京城的打算。
English: As a result, Li Hong repaired the trenches and armored weapons, with the intention of recapturing the capital.

古文：先是东渭桥有积粟十馀万斛，度支给李怀光军，凡尽。
现代文：在此之前，东渭桥有积存的粮食十万余斛，度支供给李怀光军，几乎把粮食用尽。
English: Prior to this, Dongluqiao had accumulated more than 100,000 mu of grain, which was supplied to Li Huaiguang's army, and almost exhausted the grain.

古文：是时怀光、硃泚连兵，声势甚盛，车驾南幸，人情扰扰。
现代文：当时，李怀光和朱联合用兵，声势很是盛大，德宗向南出走，民情纷乱不堪。
English: At that time, Li Huaiguang and Zhu jointly used soldiers, and the momentum was very grand. Dezong fled to the south, and the people's feelings were in turmoil.

古文：晟以孤军处二强寇之间，内无资粮，外无救援，徒以忠义感激将士，故其众虽单弱而锐气不衰。
现代文：李晟仅凭一支孤立无援的军队，处在两个强大的敌寇中间，内部没有资财粮草，外部没有救援，他只用忠义来感发激励将士，所以他的兵力虽然单薄微弱，但锐气并未衰减。
English: With only an isolated and helpless army, Li Qiye was in the middle of two powerful enemy raiders. He had no resources, wealth, grain or grass inside, and no help from the outside. He only used loyalty to inspire and motivate his soldiers. Therefore, although his strength was weak, his spirit did not decline.

古文：又以书遣怀光，辞礼卑逊，虽示尊崇而谕以祸福，劝之立功补过。故怀光惭恧，未忍击之。
现代文：李晟又给李怀光去信，措辞执礼都很谦卑恭顺。他虽然表示对李怀光的尊敬与推崇，但开导他去祸就福，规劝他建树功劳，弥补过失，所以李怀光感到惭愧，不忍心向他出击。
English: Although he expressed his respect and admiration for Li Huaguang, he enlightened him to go from bad to good, and advised him to make achievements and make up for mistakes, so Li Huaguang felt ashamed and did not have the heart to attack him.

古文：晟曰： 畿内虽兵荒之馀，犹可赋敛。
现代文：李晟说： 畿辅地区虽在经受战乱之后，但仍然可以征收赋税。
English: Li Wei said: Although the Kiyev region is recovering from the war, it is still possible to collect taxes.

古文：宿兵养寇，患莫大焉！ 
现代文：军队停滞不前，姑息敌寇，没有比这更大的祸患了！ 
English: There is no greater calamity than for an army to remain stagnant and appease the enemy.

古文：乃以判官张彧假京兆尹，择四十馀人，假官以督渭北诸县刍粟，不旬日，皆充羡。
现代文：于是，李晟使判官张代理京兆尹，选择了四十余人，让他们都代理一定的官职，以便督促渭北的粮草。不到十天，各处粮草都充足有余了。
English: As a result, Li Yu sent the judge Zhang to represent Jing Zhaoyun, and selected more than forty people, so that they would all represent a certain official position, in order to supervise the grain and grass in northern Anhui. Within ten days, there was plenty of grain and grass everywhere.

古文：乃流涕誓众，决志平贼。
现代文：于是，李晟流着眼泪与部众起誓，决意平定敌寇。
English: As a result, Li Ye shed tears and swore with his subordinates that he was determined to defeat the enemy.

古文：田悦用兵数败，士卒死者什六七，其下皆厌苦之。
现代文：田悦在战事上屡次失败，死去的士兵有十分之六七，他的部下都苦于用兵，不愿意再去打仗。
English: Tian Yue was repeatedly defeated in battle. Sixty-seven out of every ten soldiers died, and his subordinates were reluctant to fight.

古文：上以给事中孔巢父为魏博宣慰使。
现代文：德宗任命给事中孔巢父为魏博宣慰使。
English: Dezong appointed Kong Chao, the father of Wei Bo, as a consoling envoy.

古文：巢父性辩博，至魏州，对其众为陈逆顺祸福，悦及将士皆喜。
现代文：孔巢父生性能言善辩，来到魏州后，他当着田悦部众的面向他陈述叛逆朝廷招祸和顺承朝廷得福的道理，田悦及其将士都很高兴。
English: Kong Chao's father was an eloquent speaker. After he came to Weizhou, he told Tian Yue and his soldiers in front of Tian Yue's subordinates that it was better to rebel against the imperial court than to obey it. Tian Yue and his soldiers were very happy.

古文：兵马使田绪，承嗣之子也，凶险，多过失，悦不忍杀，杖而拘之。
现代文：兵马使田绪是田承嗣的儿子。他凶恶阴险，多有过失，田悦不忍心将他杀掉，便用棍棒打了他一顿，然后将他拘留起来。
English: The soldiers and horses told Tian Xu that he was the son of Tian Chengzhi. He was vicious and treacherous, and often made mistakes. Tian Yue did not have the heart to kill him, so he beat him with a club and then detained him.

古文：悦既归国，内外撤警备。
现代文：田悦归顺朝廷以后，撤除了里里外外的警戒。
English: After Tian Yue submitted to the imperial court, he removed the internal and external vigilance.

古文：三月，壬申朔，悦与孔巢父宴饮，绪对弟侄有怨言，其侄止之，绪怒，杀侄，既而悔之，曰： 仆射必杀我！ 
现代文：三月，壬申朔，田悦与孔巢父在宴席上饮酒，田绪对弟侄说了一些埋怨的话，他的弟侄制止了他，田绪很生气，杀死弟侄。不久田绪后悔，说道： 仆射一定会杀死我的！ 
English: In March, Jinshen Shuo, Tian Yue and Kong Xue's father were drinking at a banquet. Tian Xue said some complaining words to his nephew. His nephew stopped him. Tian Xue was very angry and killed his nephew. Soon, Tian Xue regretted and said, "The gunshot will surely kill me!"

古文：既夕，悦醉，归寝，绪与左右密穿后坦入，杀悦及其母、妻等十馀人，即帅左右执刀立于中门之内夹道。
现代文：到了傍晚，田悦喝醉了酒，回去就寝。田绪与亲信暗中穿越后墙而入，杀了田悦及其母亲、妻子等十余人，随即率领亲信，在中门里面夹道持刀而立。
English: In the evening, Tian Yue got drunk and went back to bed. Tian Xiang and his cronies secretly entered through the back wall and killed more than ten people, including Tian Yue, his mother, and his wife. He then led his cronies and stood in the middle of the door holding a knife.

古文：将旦，以悦命召行军司马扈崿、判官许士则、都虞候蒋济议事。
现代文：天快要亮时，田绪假托田悦的命令，传召行军司马扈、判官许士则、都虞候蒋济前来商议事情。
English: When the day was about to dawn, Tian Xue, on the orders of Tian Yue, summoned the marching army, Sima Yao, the judge, Xu Shizhe, and the governor, Jiang Ji, to come and discuss the matter.

古文：府署深邃，外不知有变，士则、济先至，召入，乱斫杀之。
现代文：由于军府衙署深密，外面不知道发生了变故。许士则、蒋济率先来到，田绪将二人传召进去，乱劈乱砍，杀了二人。
English: Due to the military government's deep secrecy, the outside world did not know that there had been a change. Xu Shi and Jiang Ji arrived first, and Tian Xu summoned the two men inside, slashed them indiscriminately, and killed the two.

古文：绪恐既明事泄，乃出门，遇悦亲将刘忠信方排牙，绪疾呼谓众曰： 刘忠信与扈崿谋反，昨夜刺杀仆射。 
现代文：田绪惟恐天亮以后事情泄露，便走出门来，遇到田悦的亲信将领刘忠信正在打点仪仗，安排属官参见主帅，田绪急声喊着对大家说： 刘忠信与扈阴谋造反，昨天夜里将仆射杀死了！ 
English: Fearing that things would leak out after dawn, Tian Xu walked out of the door and encountered Tian Yue's close confidant, General Liu Zhongxin, who was fighting a battle of honor, arranging for his subordinates to see the commander. Tian Xu shouted to everyone: Liu Zhongxin conspired with Zhai to rebel, and shot his servant to death last night!

古文：众大惊，喧哗。
现代文：大家极为震惊，喊叫声乱作一片。
English: Everyone was very shocked and there was a lot of shouting.

古文：忠信未及自辨，众分裂杀之。
现代文：刘忠信来不及为自己的辩解，大家便将他割裂而死。
English: Liu Zhongxin didn't have time to defend himself, so everyone tore him apart and he died.

古文：扈崿来，及戟门遇乱，招谕将士，将士从之者三分之一。
现代文：扈来了，当他走到军府列戟门时，遇到了变乱。他劝诫将士们不要作乱，将士中跟从他的人有三分之一。
English: When he arrived at the gate of the military headquarters, there was a riot. He exhorted the soldiers not to riot, and one-third of the soldiers followed him.

古文：绪惧，登城而立，大呼谓众曰： 绪，先相公之子，诸君受先相公恩，若能立绪，兵马使赏缗钱二千，大将半之，下至士卒，人赏百缗，竭公私之货，五日取办。 
现代文：田绪害怕，登到牙城上站立着，大声喊着对众人说： 我田绪是先公的儿子，诸位深受先公的恩惠，如果你们能够拥立我，兵马使赏给缗钱两千，大将赏给兵马使的一半，下至士兵，每人赏给缗钱一百，我将竭尽公家和我私人的资财，在五天之内办理。 
English: Terrified, Tianxu climbed to the top of the tower and stood there, shouting loudly to the crowd: "I, Tianxu, am the son of the forefather. You are all deeply favored by the forefather. If you can support me, the commander will reward me with two thousand taels of silver, the general will reward him with half a tael of silver, and the soldiers will each be rewarded with one hundred taels of silver. I will exhaust all my public and private resources and complete the task within five days."

古文：于是将士回首杀扈崿，皆归绪，军府乃定。
现代文：于是将士们回过头来，杀了扈，全都归依了田绪，军府这才安定下来。
English: As a result, the generals turned around, killed Shao, and all of them converted to the Tao. Only then did the military government settle down.

古文：因请命于孔巢父，巢父命绪权知军府。
现代文：田绪因而向孔巢父请示，孔巢父让田绪暂时代理主持军府。
English: As a result, Tian Xiu asked his father Kong Chao for instructions, and Kong Chao's father allowed Tian Xiu to temporarily preside over the military government.

古文：后数日，众乃知绪杀其兄，虽悔怒，而绪已立，无如之何。
现代文：过了几天，大家才知道田绪杀了他的堂兄，虽然为田绪杀了田悦而愤怒，为自己拥立田绪而懊悔，然而，田绪已经就任，也就对他无可奈何。
English: It took a few days before everyone knew that Tian Xiu had killed his cousin. Although he was angry that Tian Xiu had killed Tian Yue and remorseful that he had supported Tian Xiu, Tian Xiu had already taken office and there was nothing he could do about it.

古文：绪又杀悦亲将薛有伦等二十馀人。
现代文：田绪又诛杀了田悦的亲信将领薛有伦等二十余人。
English: In addition, Tago killed more than twenty people, including General Xue Yulun, a close confidant of Tian Yue.

古文：李抱真、王武俊引兵将救贝州，闻乱，不敢进。
现代文：李抱真、王武俊准备领兵援救贝州时，听说田绪作乱，便不敢进军。
English: When Li Baozhen and Wang Wujun were preparing to lead an army to rescue Beizhou, they heard that Tianxu was making trouble, so they did not dare to march in.

古文：硃滔闻悦死，喜曰： 悦负恩，天假手于绪也！ 
现代文：朱滔听说田悦死去，高兴地说： 田悦辜负我的恩德，上天便借着田绪的手将他杀掉了。 
English: Zhu Tao heard that Tian Yue had died, and said happily: "Tian Yue betrayed my kindness, and Heaven killed him by the hand of Tian Xu."

古文：即遣其执宪大夫郑景济等将步骑五千助马寔，合兵万二千攻魏州。
现代文：朱滔当即派遣他的执宪大夫郑景济等人率领步兵、骑兵共五千人协助马，合兵共一万二千人，攻打魏州。
English: Zhu Tao immediately dispatched his constitutional doctor Zheng Jingji and others to lead a total of five thousand infantry and cavalry to assist Ma, with a total of twelve thousand soldiers, to attack Weizhou.

古文：寔军王莽河，纵骑兵及回纥四出剽掠。
现代文：马在王莽河驻扎，放任骑兵和回纥兵四处抢劫掳掠。
English: The horses were stationed at Wang Manghe, and the cavalry and Hui soldiers were allowed to rob and plunder everywhere.

古文：滔别遣人入城说绪，许以本道节度使。
现代文：朱滔另外派人去劝说田绪，答应委任他为本道节度使。
English: Zhu Tao also sent someone to persuade Tian Xu and promised to appoint him as the official of the festival.

古文：绪方危迫，遣随军侯臧诣贝州送款于滔，滔喜，遣臧还报，使亟定盟约。
现代文：田绪正处在危急关头，便派遣随军侯臧到贝州去向朱滔表示诚意，朱滔很高兴，打发侯臧回去报告，让田绪赶快定下盟约。
English: Tian Xun was in a critical situation, so he sent a military escort to Beizhou to express his sincerity to Zhu Tao. Zhu Tao was very happy and sent the escort back to report to Tian Xun to quickly make a pact.

古文：明绪部署城内已定，李抱真、王武俊又遣使诣绪，许以赴援，如悦存日之约。
现代文：当时，田绪对城内的部署已经就绪，李抱真、王武俊又派遣使者来到田绪处，答应前来援救，就像田悦活着时的约定一样。
English: At that time, Tian Yue's deployment to the city was already in place, and Li Bozhen and Wang Wujun sent messengers to come to Tian Yue's place and promised to come to his rescue, just as they had agreed to do when Tian Yue was alive.

古文：绪召将佐议之，幕僚曾穆、卢南史曰： 用兵虽尚威武，亦本仁义，然后有功。
现代文：田绪传召将佐商议此事，幕僚曾穆、卢南史说： 虽然用兵崇尚威武，但也要遵循仁义，才会取得成功。
English: Tian Xiu summoned the generals to discuss the matter, and the staff members Zeng Mu and Lunan Shi said: Although the use of soldiers advocates might and power, they must also follow benevolence and righteousness in order to succeed.

古文：今幽陵之兵恣行杀掠，白骨蔽野，虽先仆射背德，其民何罪！
现代文：现在幽州兵肆意屠杀掳掠，白骨遮盖了原野，虽然先仆射辜负了朱滔的恩德，但是老百姓有什么罪！
English: Now the Yuzhou soldiers wantonly slaughter and plunder, the white bones cover the plain, although the forerunners have lived up to Zhu Tao's benevolence, but what are the sins of the common people!

古文：今虽盛强，其亡可跂立而待也。
现代文：现在朱滔虽然强盛，但他的灭亡是象提起脚后跟而立一样可等待得到的。
English: Although Zhu Tao is powerful now, his demise can be expected just as if he stood up on his own two feet.

古文：况昭义、恒冀方相与攻之，奈何以目前之急欲从人为返逆乎！
现代文：何况昭义、恒冀正在一块儿攻打朱滔，怎么能够因为眼前的危急，便打算随着人家做反叛呢！
English: What's more, Zhao Yi and Heng Ji are attacking Zhu Tao together, how can they plan to rebel with others because of the current crisis!

古文：不若归命朝廷，天子方蒙尘于外，闻魏博使至必喜，官爵旋踵而至矣。 
现代文：不如归顺朝廷。皇上正流亡在外，听到魏博使者前来一定高兴，官职与爵位在转足之间便会到来了。 
English: It would be better to submit to the imperial court. The emperor was in exile, and he must have been pleased to hear that Wei Bo's emissaries had come. Official posts and peerages would come in the twinkling of an eye.

古文：绪从之，遣使奉表诣行在，城守以俟命。
现代文：田绪听从了曾穆、卢南史的建议，派遣使者带着表章前往行在，自己防守着魏州城，等待朝廷的命令。
English: Tianxu heeded the advice of Zeng Mu and Lunanshi and sent an emissary with a badge to travel there. He guarded the city of Weizhou and waited for the order from the imperial court.

古文：上之发奉天也，韩游瑰帅其麾下八百馀人还邠州。
现代文：德宗从奉天出发时，韩游率领着他的部下八百余人回到州。
English: When Dezong set out from Mukden, Han You led more than eight hundred of his subordinates back to the state.

古文：李怀光以李晟军浸盛，恶之，欲引军自咸阳袭东渭桥。
现代文：李怀光因李晟军渐渐强盛，憎恶他，打算率领军队从咸阳袭击东渭桥。
English: Li Huaiguang detested him because of the growing strength of the Li Bei army, and planned to lead an army to attack Dongluo Bridge from Xianyang.

古文：三令其众，众不应，窃相谓曰： 若与我曹击硃泚，惟力是视；若欲反，我曹有死，不能从也！ 
现代文：李怀光给部众前后下达了三次命令，大家仍然不肯答应，还私下相互交谈说： 如果他与我辈去进击朱，我辈有多大力气便使多大力气。他如果打算造反，我辈唯有一死，决不能服从他的命令！ 
English: Li Huaguang ordered his subordinates three times before and after the battle, but they still refused to agree, and they also talked to each other privately, saying: "If he and our generation go to attack Zhu, we will do our best. If he intends to rebel, our generation can only die, and we must never obey his orders!"

古文：怀光知众不可强，问计于宾佐，节度巡官良乡李景略曰： 取长安，杀硃泚，散军还诸道，单骑诣行在，如此，臣节亦未亏，功名犹可保也。 
现代文：李怀光知道大家不可勉强，便向宾客将佐征询计策。节度巡官良乡人李景略说： 攻取长安，诛杀朱，解散军队，返回各道，你单人匹马前往行在。做到这些，臣下的操守也不算亏缺，已有的功名还可以保住。 
English: Li Huaguang knew that everyone could not be forced, so he asked the guest general for advice. Li Jingliao, the inspector of discipline and a good villager, said: Conquer Chang'an, kill Zhu, disband the army, return to each road, and you will go there alone. If you can do these things, the conduct of your subjects is not a disadvantage, and the existing reputation can be preserved.

古文：顿道恳请，至于流涕，怀光许之。
现代文：李景略向李怀光伏地叩拜，恳切地请求，以至于流下了眼泪，李怀光答应了他。
English: Li Jingliao bowed to Li Huai photovoltaically, earnestly requested that he shed tears, and Li Huaiguang agreed to him.

古文：都虞候阎晏等劝怀光东保河中，徐图去就，怀光乃说其众曰： 今且屯泾阳，召妻孥于邠，俟至，与之俱往河中。
现代文：都虞候阎晏等人劝说李怀光东进，防守河中，何去何从，再从长计议。于是李怀光劝说他的部众说： 现在我们姑且在泾阳屯驻，将妻子儿女从州召来，等他们到后，与他们一同前往河中。
English: Therefore, Li Huai Guang persuaded his subordinates to say: Now we will stay in Puyang, call our wives and children from the state, and wait for them to arrive, and then go with them to the middle of the river.

古文：春装既办，还攻长安，未晚也。
现代文：待春天的衣装置办好了，再回军进攻长安，也为时不晚。
English: By the spring, the clothing system will be ready, and it will not be too late for the army to return and attack Chang'an.

古文：东方诸县皆富实，军发之日，听尔曹俘掠。 
现代文：东边各县都很富庶，在军队出发那一天，任凭你们掳掠。 
English: Every county in the east is very affluent. On the day of the army's departure, you are free to plunder and pillage.

古文：众许之。
现代文：大家都答应下来。
English: Everyone said yes.

古文：怀光乃谓景略曰： 曏者之议，军众不从，子宜速去，不且见害！ 
现代文：于是，李怀光对李景略说： 你前些时候的建议，将士们不肯依从。你最好赶紧逃跑吧，不然会遭到杀害的！ 
English: As a result, Li Huaiguang said to Li Jingliao: The generals refused to follow your earlier suggestion. You'd better run away quickly, or you'll be killed!

古文：遣数骑送之。
现代文：他让几个人骑马护送李景略。
English: He sent several people on horseback to escort Li Jingliao.

古文：景略出军门，恸哭曰： 不意此军一旦陷于不义！ 
现代文：李景略出了军营的大门，极其悲切地哭着说： 不料这支军队沉陷于不义之中了！ 
English: Li Jing slipped out of the gate of the military camp, wept bitterly and said, "Unfortunately, this army has sunk into injustice!"

古文：怀光遣使诣邠州，令留后张昕悉发所留兵万馀人及行营将士家属会泾阳，仍遣其将刘礼等将三千馀骑胁迁之。
现代文：李怀光派遣使者来到州，命令州留后张昕让留在那里的士兵一万余人和行营将士的家属全部出发，在泾阳会合，还派遣他的将领刘礼等人带领骑兵三千余人胁迫他们迁移。
English: Li Huaguang sent an envoy to the prefecture, ordered the prefecture to stay, and then Zhang Xuan ordered the more than ten thousand soldiers and the families of the soldiers who stayed there to leave and meet in Fenyang. He also sent his general Liu Li and others to lead more than three thousand cavalry to force them to move.

古文：韩游瑰说昕曰： 李太尉功高自弃，已蹈祸机。
现代文：韩游劝说张昕说： 李太尉的功劳很高，却自踩祸患的机括。
English: Han Yu persuaded Zhang Ye to say: Lieutenant Li's merits are very high, but he is a self-made disaster.

古文：中丞今日可以自求富贵，游瑰请帅麾下以从。 
现代文：中丞现在可以独自寻求富贵，请让我率领部下跟随着你吧。 
English: Chujo can now seek riches on his own. Please let me lead my men to follow you.

古文：昕曰： 昕微贱，赖李太尉得至此，不忍负也！ 
现代文：张昕说： 我出身寒微贫贱，靠着李太尉才得以到此地步，我不忍心有负于他啊！ 
English: Zhang Jun said: I come from a humble background, and it was thanks to Lieutenant Li that I was able to get to this point. I can't bear to be inferior to him!

古文：游瑰乃谢病不出，阴与诸将高固、杨怀宾等相结。
现代文：韩游于是称病不出，暗中与诸将领高固、杨怀宾等人相互连络。
English: As a result, Han You claimed that he was not ill and secretly communicated with generals Gao Gu and Yang Huibin.

古文：时崔汉衡以吐蕃兵营于邠南，高固曰： 昕以众去，则邠城空矣。 
现代文：当时，崔汉衡让吐蕃兵在州南面扎营，高固说： 如果张昕带着众人离开，城便空了。 
English: At that time, Cui Hanheng let the Tuoba soldiers set up camp in the south of the state, Gao Gu said: If Zhang Ye left with everyone, the city would be empty.

古文：乃诈为浑瑊书，召吐蕃使稍逼邠城。
现代文：于是他假造浑的书信，传召吐蕃，让他们对城稍加进逼。
English: So he forged a letter from Hun and summoned the Tujue to force them to advance on the city.

古文：昕等惧，竟不敢出。
现代文：张昕等人害怕，终究没敢出城。
English: Zhang Qian and others were afraid, and eventually did not dare to leave the city.

古文：昕等谋杀诸将之不从者，游瑰知之，先与高固等举兵杀昕，遣杨怀宾奉表以闻，且遣人告崔汉衡。
现代文：张昕等人谋划诛杀诸将领中不肯从命的人，韩游知道了此事，事先便与高固等人起兵杀死张昕，派遣杨怀宾带着表章上奏朝廷，而且派人告诉了崔汉衡。
English: Zhang Ye and others plotted to kill those generals who refused to die. Han Yu knew about this, and in advance he and Gao Gu and others raised an army to kill Zhang Ye, sent Yang Huaibin with a badge to report to the court, and sent someone to tell Cui Hanheng.

古文：汉衡矫诏以游瑰知军府事，军中大喜。
现代文：崔汉衡假托德宗有诏书任命韩游主持军府事务，军中将士都很喜欢。
English: Choe Han Hyon Phu Thodtsong issued an edict appointing Han You to preside over the affairs of the military government, and the lieutenant generals liked him very much.

古文：怀光子旻在邠，游瑰遣之，或曰： 不杀旻，何以自明？ 
现代文：李怀光的儿子李正在州，韩游打发他走了。有人说： 不杀死李，怎么能向朝廷表明你的心迹呢？ 
English: Li Zhengzhou, the son of Li Huaiqing, was sent away by Han Yu. Some people said, "Without killing Li, how can you show your intentions to the court?"

古文：游瑰曰： 杀旻，则怀光怒，其众必至，不如释旻以走之。 
现代文：韩游说： 若是杀了李，惹得李怀光恼怒了，他的人马是必然要来的，不如放了李，让他逃走。 
English: Han You said, "If you kill Li, and make Li Huaguang angry, he is bound to come. It is better to release Li and let him escape."

古文：时杨怀宾子朝晟在怀光军中为右厢兵马使，闻之，泣白怀光曰： 父立功于国，子当诛夷，不可典兵。 
现代文：当时，杨怀宾的儿子杨朝晟在李怀光军中担任右厢兵马使，他听说此事以后，哭泣着向李怀光禀告说： 我的父亲杀张昕为国家立下了功劳，我作为他的儿子应当遭受处罚，不可以掌管军事。 
English: At that time, Yang Chaohui, the son of Yang Huibin, served as the right-wing envoy in Li Huai Guang's army. After he heard about the incident, he cried and told Li Huai Guang: My father killed Zhang Jun and did a great service to the country. As his son, I should be punished and should not be in charge of the military.

古文：怀光囚之。
现代文：李怀光将他囚禁起来。
English: Li Huaiguang imprisoned him.

古文：于是游瑰屯邠宁，戴休颜屯奉天，骆元光屯昭应，尚可孤屯蓝田，皆受李晟节度，晟军声大振。
现代文：于是韩游在宁屯扎，戴休颜在奉天屯扎，骆元光在昭应屯扎，尚可孤在蓝田屯扎，都接受李晟的节制调度，李晟军的声势大为振作。
English: As a result, Han You in Ningdunza, Dai Xiuyan in Bongtiandunza, Luo Yuanguang in Zhaoyingdunza, and Shang Kehua in Lantiandunza all accepted the restrained dispatching of Li Qiye, and Li Qiye's army was greatly invigorated.

古文：始，怀光方强，硃泚畏之，与怀光书，以兄事之，约分帝关中，永为邻国。
现代文：开始时，正当李怀光强盛，朱畏惧他。朱给李怀光书信，以兄长对待他，约定与他分别在关中称帝，永远互为邻邦。
English: At the beginning, when Li Huaiguang was strong and powerful, Zhu feared him. Zhu sent Li Huaiguang a letter, treating him as an older brother, and agreed to proclaim him emperor in Guanzhong separately, and to be neighbors forever.

古文：及怀光决反，逼乘舆南幸，其下多叛之，势益弱。
现代文：及至李怀光决意谋反，逼迫德宗向南出走时，他的部下有许多人背叛了他，势力也日益薄弱。
English: By the time Li Huai Guang decided to rebel and forced Dezong to flee to the south, many of his subordinates had betrayed him and his power was weakening.

古文：泚乃赐怀光诏书，以臣礼待之，且征其兵。
现代文：于是朱向李怀光颁赐诏书，以臣属的礼节对待他，并且征调他的军队。
English: So Zhu issued an imperial edict to Li Huaguang, treated him with the courtesy of a subject, and conscripted his army.

古文：怀光惭怒，内忧麾下为变，外恐李晟袭之，遂烧营东走，掠泾阳等十二县，鸡犬无遗。
现代文：李怀光既惭愧，又气愤，对内担心部下作乱，对外恼怒李晟的袭击，于是烧掉营房，向东而去，将泾阳等十二县掳掠得鸡犬不剩。
English: Li Huaguang was ashamed and angry at the same time. He was worried about his subordinates causing trouble at home, and was angry at Li Yao's attack on the outside world. Therefore, he burned down the barracks and went east. He plundered twelve counties including Fenyang until there were no chickens or dogs left.

古文：及富平，大将孟涉、段威勇将数千人奔于李晟，将士在道散亡相继。
现代文：李怀光来到富平时，大将孟涉、段威勇带领数千人投奔李晟，将士沿途一批批散失流亡。
English: When Li Huaguang came to Fuping, General Meng Zang and Duan Weiyong led thousands of people to rush to Li Gan, and a group of soldiers were scattered and exiled along the way.

古文：至河中，或劝河中守将吕鸣岳焚桥拒之，鸣岳以兵少恐不能支，遂纳之，河中尹李齐运弃城走。
现代文：李怀光来到河中时，有的人劝河中守将吕鸣岳烧掉蒲津桥，阻止李怀光，吕鸣岳因自己兵力薄弱，惟恐不能支撑下去，于是让李怀光开过蒲津桥来，河中尹李齐运放弃府城逃走。
English: When Li Huai Guang came to the middle of the river, some people advised the middle of the river guard to burn the Puting Bridge to prevent Li Huai Guang. Because of his weak military strength, Lv Ming Yue was afraid that he could not support it, so he let Li Huai Guang drive across the Puting Bridge, and the middle of the river Yin Li Qi Yun abandoned the capital and fled.

古文：怀光遣其将赵贵先筑垒于同州，刺史李纾惧，奔行在。
现代文：李怀光派遣他的将领赵贵先在同州修筑壁垒，同州刺史李纾害怕，逃往行在。
English: Li Huaiguang sent his general Zhao Gui to build a barrier in the same province. Li Yu, the governor of the same province, was afraid and fled to Xingye.

古文：幕僚裴向摄州事，诣贵先，责以逆顺之理，贵先感寤，遂请降，同州由是获全。
现代文：李纾的幕僚裴向代理同州事务，他到赵贵先处，用叛逆与效忠的道理谴责赵贵先。赵贵先深受触动，翻然醒悟，于是请求归降，同州因此得以保全。
English: He went to Zhao Guixian's place and condemned Zhao Guixian on the basis of treason and loyalty. Zhao Guixian was deeply moved and suddenly awakened, so he asked to surrender, and thus the state was preserved.

古文：向，遵庆之子也。
现代文：裴向是裴尊遵庆的儿子。
English: Pei Xiang is the son of Pei Zunqing.

古文：怀光使其将符峤袭坊州，据之，渭北守将窦觎帅猎团七百围之。峤请降。
现代文：李怀光让他的将领符峤袭击并占据了坊州，渭北守将窦觎率领由猎户组成的队伍七百人围困坊州，符峤请求归降。
English: Li Huaiguang let his general Fuxi attack and occupy Fangzhou, and the northern governor of Yan attacked Fang and besieged Fangzhou with a team of seven hundred hunters led by Dou Xuan. Fuxi requested to surrender.

古文：诏以觎为渭北行军司马。
现代文：德宗颁诏任命窦觎为渭北行军司马。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict appointing Dou Jun as the commander of the army marching to the north of Shandong.

古文：丁亥，以李晟兼京畿、渭北、鄜、坊、丹、延节度使。
现代文：丁亥，德宗命李晟兼任京畿、渭北？坊、丹、延节度使。
English: Dinghai, Dezong's Li Jie concurrently served as the envoy to Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeongbuk-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do

古文：庚寅，车驾至城固。
现代文：庚寅，德宗的车驾来到城固。
English: Geng Yin and Dezong drove to Chenggu.

古文：唐安公主薨，上长女也。
现代文：唐安公主去世，她是德宗的长女。
English: Princess Tang An passed away. She was the eldest daughter of Emperor Dezong.

古文：上在道，民有献瓜果者，上欲以散试官授之，访于陆贽，贽上奏，以为： 爵位恒宜慎惜，不可轻用。
现代文：德宗在路途上，百姓中有奉献瓜果的，德宗准备授给他散试官，便向陆贽询问。陆贽进上奏，认为： 授给爵位，通常应该慎重、珍惜，不能轻易封拜。
English: When Dezong was on his way, some of the common people offered him fruits and melons. Dezong was about to give him the title of probation officer, so he asked Lu Xun. Lu Xun stepped forward and said, "A title of nobility should usually be given with caution and treasured, and should not be given lightly."

古文：起端虽微，流弊必大。
现代文：事情的发端虽然微小，以后的流弊肯定严重。
English: Although the beginning of the matter is small, the subsequent malpractice is certainly serious.

古文：献瓜果者，止可赐之钱帛，不当酬以官。 
现代文：对于奉献瓜果的人，只能赐给钱帛，不应该用官位来酬报。 
English: For those who donate fruits and vegetables, only money can be given, and they should not be rewarded with official positions.

古文：上曰： 试官虚名，无损于事。 
现代文：德宗说： 试官只有个虚名，对事体是没有损害的。 
English: Dezong said: The examiner only has a false name, which does no harm to the cause.

古文：贽又上奏，其略曰： 自兵兴以来，财赋不足以供赐，而职官之赏兴焉。
现代文：陆贽又进上奏疏，他大略是说： 自从战事兴起以来，财赋不足以供应对将士的赏赐，于是以职官为赏赐的办法便兴起了。
English: Lu Yao went on to say, roughly: Since the outbreak of the war, the financial resources have not been sufficient to provide rewards for soldiers, so the method of rewarding officers has emerged.

古文：青硃杂沓于胥徒，金紫普施于舆皁。
现代文：身著青、绯色朝服的人混杂在小吏和供给使役的人们中间，金鱼袋和紫色的朝服普遍加封给地位微贱的人们。
English: People in blue and navy blue morning dress mingled among the petty officials and the people who supplied them with services. Goldfish bags and purple morning dress were commonly given to people of low status.

古文：当今所病，方在爵轻，设法贵之，犹恐不重，若又自弃，将何劝人！
现代文：如今所弊的，正是爵位显得太轻，想方设法使爵位高贵起来，仍然担心爵位显得不重，如果再把原来的爵赏办法自己放弃了，那将拿什么去勉励人们！
English: What is wrong now is that the title of nobility is too light, and they are trying to make the title of nobility noble. They are still worried that the title of nobility is not heavy. If they give up the original method of awarding the title of nobility, what will they use to encourage people!

古文：夫诱人之方，惟名与利，名近虚而于教为重，利近实而于德为轻。
现代文：一般说来，诱导人们的方法，只有名誉与利益。名誉接近虚无，但对教化来说却是重要的；利益接近实际，但对道德来说却是次要的。
English: In general, the only methods of inducing people are reputation and interest. Reputation is close to nothing, but it is important for education; interest is close to reality, but it is secondary to morality.

古文：专实利而不济之以虚，则耗匮而物力不给。专虚名而不副之以实，则诞谩而人情不趋。
现代文：专门给人实际利益而不以虚无的名誉加以补助，就会耗费资财，物力难以供给；专门给人虚无的名誉而不以实际利益作补助，就成了空话而人心不肯归附。
English: Exclusively giving people real benefits without subsidizing them with nothing but reputation will consume resources and it will be difficult to supply material resources. Exclusively giving people nothing but reputation without subsidizing them with real benefits will become empty talk and people will not adhere to it.

古文：故国家命秩之制，有职事官，有散官，有勋官，有爵号，然掌务而授俸者，唯系职事之一官也，此所谓旋实利而寓虚名者也。
现代文：所以，国家任命官吏的职位与品级的制度，虽有职事官，有散官，有勋官，有爵号，但掌管实务因而也授给薪俸的官员，只有职事官这一种官职罢了，这就是人们所说的给予实际利益而使虚无的名誉寓于其中的方法。
English: Therefore, the system of the state appointing positions and ranks of officials, although there are career officials, non-career officials, decorated officers, and knighthoods, but the officials who are in charge of practical affairs and thus also awarded salaries are only the official position of career officials. This is what people call the method of giving practical benefits and making the reputation of nothingness dwell in it.

古文：其勋、散、爵号三者所系，大抵止于服色、资廕而已，此所谓假虚名以佐实利者也。
现代文：而那勋官、散官、爵号三项所关系着的，大致只限于朝服的颜色和随官品荫庇子孙罢了，这就是人们所说的将虚无的名誉假借给人们而用实有的利益作为佐助的办法。
English: But the three things related to the title of honor, the rank of non-commissioned officer, and the title of nobility are generally limited to the color of the imperial robe and the descendants of the official. This is what people call the method of lending people the false reputation of nothingness and using the real benefits as support.

古文：今之员外、试官，颇同勋、散、爵号，虽则授无费禄，受不占员，然而突銛锋、排患难者则以是赏之，竭筋力、展劳效者又以是酬之。
现代文：如今的员外官和试官，与勋官、散官、爵号很有些类似，虽然授给这种官不用消耗薪俸，不占去名额。然而对于冒着锐利的刀锋，去排除忧患与危难的人们，是用这种官来奖赏他们的；对于竭尽全力，付出劳苦，显示成效的人们，又是用这种官来酬报他们的。
English: Today's commissioners and examiners are very similar to officers of the order, non-commissioned officers, and knighthoods, although they do not consume salary and do not occupy a place. However, for those who risk a sharp blade to eliminate sorrow and danger, they are rewarded with this kind of official; for those who do their best, work hard, and show results, they are rewarded with this kind of official.

古文：若献瓜果者亦授试官，则彼必相谓曰 吾以忘躯命而获官，此以进瓜果而获官，是乃国家以吾之躯命同于瓜果矣 。
现代文：倘苦对奉献瓜果的人也授给试官，他们必然就会相互谈论说： 我们抛下生命才得到官，这些人因进瓜果也得到官，这乃是国家将我们的性命看得像瓜果一样了。 
English: If those who offer the fruit of the gourd are also given probationary officers, they will inevitably talk to each other and say: We gave up our lives to get an officer, these people also got an officer because of the fruit of the gourd. This is because the state regards our lives as if they were fruit of the gourd.

古文：视人如草木，谁复为用哉！
现代文：把人看得如同草木，谁还能为国家效力呢！
English: If you treat people like plants, who will be able to serve the country?

古文：今陛下既未有实利以敦劝，又不重虚名而滥施，人无藉焉。
现代文：现在，陛下既然没有实际的利益来勉励人们，又不重视虚无的名誉，反而过多地加施于人，人们便无所依凭了。
English: Now, since Your Majesty does not have any real interests to encourage people, and does not pay attention to the reputation of nothingness, but gives too much to people, people have nothing to rely on.

古文：则后之立功者，将曷用为赏哉！ 
现代文：那么，对以后立下功劳的人，将用什么作为奖赏呢！ 
English: So, what will be used as a reward for those who make merit in the future?

古文：贽在翰林，为上所亲信，居艰难中，虽有宰相，大小之事，上必与贽谋之，故当时谓之内相，上行止必与之俱。
现代文：陆贽供职翰林院，受到德宗的亲近信任。在艰难的日子里，虽然有宰相，但是无论大事小事，德宗一定要与陆贽商量，所以当时人们把他叫做内宰相。
English: In the difficult days, although there was a prime minister, no matter how big or small, Dezong must consult with Lu Wei, so at that time people called him the Minister of the Interior.

古文：梁、洋道险，尝与贽相失，经夕不至，上惊忧涕泣，募得贽者赏千金。
现代文：德宗无论到哪里去，也一定要有陆贽伴随。由于梁州、洋州道路险恶难行，德宗曾经与陆贽失散。过了一夜，陆贽还没有到来，德宗担惊发愁流眼泪，征召能够找到陆贽的人，赏赐一千金。
English: No matter where Dezong goes, he must be accompanied by Lu Yao. Due to the treacherous and difficult roads in Liangzhou and Yangzhou, Dezong once lost contact with Lu Yao. After one night, Lu Yao had not yet arrived, and Dezong was shocked, saddened and in tears. He called for people who could find Lu Yao and rewarded them with a thousand gold.

古文：久之，乃至，上喜甚，太子以下皆贺。
现代文：过了许久，陆贽才到，德宗非常高兴，太子以下的人们都来祝贺。
English: It took a long time before Lu Yao arrived. Dezong was very happy, and everyone from the prince on down came to congratulate him.

古文：然贽数直谏，迕上意，卢杞虽贬官，上心庇之。
现代文：然而，陆贽常常直言谏诤，有违德宗的意旨。卢杞虽被贬官，但德宗内心中还是庇护他。
English: However, Lu Wei often spoke bluntly, which was against the intention of Dezong. Although Lu Wei was demoted, Dezong still sheltered him in his heart.

古文：贽极言杞奸邪致乱，上虽貌从，心颇不悦，故刘从一、姜公辅皆自下陈登用，贽恩遇虽隆，未得为相。
现代文：陆贽极力陈诉卢杞的邪恶导致了变乱，德宗虽然表面上同意，心中却很不高兴。所以，刘从一、姜公辅都从低的职位进用为宰相，陆贽得到德宗的恩宠和知遇虽然隆盛，却没有出任宰相。
English: Lu Xun tried his best to accuse Lu Xun's evil of causing the turmoil, but although Dezong agreed on the surface, he was very unhappy in his heart. Therefore, Liu Congyi and Jiang Gongfu were both promoted to prime minister from low-level positions, and although Lu Xun received Dezong's grace and wisdom, he did not serve as prime minister.

古文：壬辰，车驾至梁州。
现代文：壬辰，德宗的车驾来到梁州。
English: Imjin, Dezong's car drove to Liangzhou.

古文：山南地薄民贫，自安、史以来，盗贼攻剽，户口减耗太半，虽节制十五州，租赋不及中原数县。
现代文：山南道土地瘠薄，人民贫困。自从安禄山、史思明作乱以来，强盗攻打，寇贼抢劫，户口减少了一多半。虽然该道管辖十五个州，但所有的税收还赶不上中原几个县。
English: Shannan Province is land-scarce and its people are poor. Since the Anlu Mountain and Shishiming Rebellion, robbers have attacked and bandits have robbed, and the number of household registrations has decreased by more than half. Although the province is under the jurisdiction of fifteen states, the total tax revenue is still less than that of several counties in the Central Plains.

古文：及大驾驻跸，粮用颇窘。
现代文：及至德宗的车驾暂驻于此地，粮食与一应用度颇为困窘。
English: As far as Dezong's driver is temporarily stationed here, the food and one application degree is quite embarrassing.

古文：上欲西幸成都，严震言于上曰： 山南地接京畿，李晟方图收复，借六军以为声援。
现代文：德宗打算西行到成都，严震对德宗说： 山南道与京畿接连，李晟正在计划收复京城，借助陛下六军作为声援。
English: Dezong planned to travel west to Chengdu. Yan Zhen said to Dezong: Shannan Province is connected to Gyeonggi Province, and Ri Yong is planning to recapture the capital, with the support of His Majesty's Six Armies.

古文：若幸西川，则晟未有收复之期也。 
现代文：倘若出行西川，李晟收复京城便没有日期了。 
English: If he travels to Saikawa, there will be no date for Ri Sui to recapture the capital.

古文：众议未决，会李晟表至，言： 陛下驻跸汉中，所以系亿兆之心，成灭贼之势。
现代文：大家还没有议论出结果，适逢李晟的表章送到，他说： 陛下车驾驻扎在汉中，是维系天下民心，造成消灭赋寇形势的保证。
English: Everyone had not yet discussed the results, when Li Yao's seal was delivered, he said: His Majesty's car was stationed in Hanzhong, which is a guarantee to maintain the world's people's hearts and cause the elimination of the fuko situation.

古文：若规小舍大，迁都岷、峨，则士庶失望，虽有猛将谋臣，无所施矣！ 
现代文：倘若图谋不利，舍弃大业，将都城迁到岷峨一带，士子与庶民便会失去希望，虽然有勇猛的将领、多谋的大臣，也没有什么办法了！ 
English: If you try to plot against the odds, abandon the great cause, and move the capital to the Saga area, the scholars and the common people will lose hope. Although there are brave generals and resourceful ministers, there is nothing to be done!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：于是，德宗停止西行。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：严震百方以聚财赋，民不至困穷而供亿无乏。
现代文：严震千方百计地征敛税赋，使百姓不至于穷困，而供给车驾的东西又不缺少。
English: The earthquake made every effort to collect taxes, so that the people would not be impoverished, and there was no shortage of things to supply the drivers.

古文：牙将严砺，震之从祖弟也，震使掌转饷，事甚修办。
现代文：牙将严砺是严震的堂弟，严震让他掌管转运粮饷，他把诸事办理得甚是周备。
English: Yanzhong is the cousin of Yan Zhen. Yan Zhen put him in charge of transporting grain, and he handled everything very carefully.

古文：初，奉天围既解，李楚琳遣使入贡，上不得已除凤翔节度使，而心恶之。
现代文：当初，奉天的围困已经解除，李楚琳派遣使者入朝进贡，德宗不得已任命他为凤翔节度使，但心中却憎恶他。
English: At first, the siege of Fengtian had been lifted, and Li Chulin sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute. De Zong had no choice but to appoint him as Fengxiang's envoy to the festival, but he hated him in his heart.

古文：议者言楚琳凶逆反覆，若不堤防，恐生窥伺。
现代文：议论此事的人说，李楚琳凶险忤逆，反覆无常，倘若对他不加提防，恐怕他还会伺机而动。
English: People who discuss this matter say that Li Chuling is dangerous and capricious, and if he is not guarded, I am afraid he will wait for an opportunity to move.

古文：由是楚琳使者数辈至，上皆不引见，留之不遣。
现代文：此后李楚琳的使者数人来，德宗都不接见，却将他们留下，不打发他们离去。
English: After that, several of Li Chuling's emissaries came, but Dezong did not receive them, but left them and did not send them away.

古文：甫至汉中，欲以浑瑊代楚琳镇凤翔，陆贽上奏，以为： 楚琳杀帅助贼，其罪固大，但以乘舆未复，大憝犹存，勤王之师悉在畿内，急宣速告，晷刻是争。
现代文：德宗刚到汉中时，打算让浑代替李楚琳出镇凤翔，陆贽进上奏疏认为： 李楚琳杀节帅张镒，帮助逆贼朱，他的罪过固然很大。但目前陛下的车驾还没有返回京城，元凶仍在，出兵援救朝廷的军队全在京城辖区之内，紧急宣旨，快速禀报，一时片刻，都要争取。
English: When Dezong had just arrived at Hanzhong Middle School, he planned to have Hun replace Li Chuling and leave the town of Fengxiang. Lu Yujing, who had just entered the school, thought: Li Chuling killed the commander Zhang Ye and helped the traitor Zhu. His crime is certainly great. But at present, His Majesty's car has not yet returned to Beijing. The culprit is still there. The troops dispatched to rescue the imperial court are all within the jurisdiction of Beijing. An emergency proclamation and a quick report must be sought.

古文：商岭则道迂且遥，骆谷复为盗所扼，仅通王命，唯在褒斜，此路若又阻艰，南北遂将夐绝。
现代文：而商岭的道路迂回而且遥远，骆谷关又被敌寇所控制，唯一能够传达陛下命令的道路，只有褒斜道，倘若这条道路再有阻隔之患，南方和北主就会变得远不可及。
English: But the road to Shangling is circuitous and distant, and Luogu Pass is under the control of the enemy. The only road that can convey His Majesty's order is the Hoba Slope. If this road is blocked again, the south and the north will become unreachable.

古文：以诸镇危疑之势，居二逆诱胁之中，汹汹群情，各怀向背。
现代文：目前各节镇形势垂危，心怀疑虑，置身于朱、李怀光两个逆贼的诱惑胁迫之中，群情动荡不宁，各自怀着对朝廷或归向或背叛的心思。
English: At present, the situation of each festival town is in danger, they are suspicious and worried, they are in the midst of the temptation and coercion of Zhu and Li Huaguang, the two traitors, the group mood is turbulent and restless, and each of them has the thought of returning to the imperial court or betraying.

古文：倘或楚琳发憾，公肆猖狂，南塞要冲，东延巨猾，则我咽喉梗而心膂分矣。
现代文：倘若李楚琳一旦生出怨恨，公然肆意妄行，向南堵塞交通要道，向东延引恶人，我方的咽喉便会被梗塞，心脏与脊骨也会分张了。
English: If Li Chuling were to hold a grudge and act recklessly, block traffic routes to the south and lure evildoers to the east, our throats would be blocked, and our hearts and spines would be dislocated.

古文：今楚琳能两端顾望，乃是天诱其衷，故通归涂，将济大业。
现代文：如今李楚琳还能够对双方持观望态度，这便是上天在开导他的内心，有意开通归路，将要助成伟大的业绩。
English: Today, Li Chuling is still able to take a wait-and-see attitude towards both sides, which means that God is enlightening his heart, deliberately opening a way back, and will help great performance.

古文：陛下诚宜深以为念，厚加抚循，得其持疑，便足集事。
现代文：陛下实在应该深深记住这一点，对李楚琳厚加安抚，争取使他犹豫不决，便足以成就事功。
English: His Majesty really should remember this deeply, and appeasing Li Chuling and trying to make him hesitant will be enough to accomplish great feats.

古文：必欲精求素行，追抉宿疵，则是改过不足以补愆，自新不足以赎罪。
现代文：如果打算过于认真地责求人们平素的行为，刻意追究以往的过失，那么就是改正过错也不足以弥补过失，重新作人也不足以赎回罪过。
English: If you are going to be too earnest in calling people to account for their ordinary behaviour, if you are going to deliberately pursue past mistakes, then correcting mistakes is not enough to make up for mistakes, and remaking people is not enough to atone for sins.

古文：凡今将吏，岂得尽无疵瑕，人皆省思，孰免疑畏！
现代文：凡是如今的将吏，哪能全无过失？如果人人都反省自己过失，谁能免除疑虑与畏惧！
English: How can all today's generals be completely free from fault? If everyone reflects on their own faults, who can be free from doubt and fear!

古文：又况阻命之辈，胁从之流，自知负恩，安敢归化！
现代文：又何况那些抗拒朝命的人和那被迫随从作乱的人，知道自己辜负了陛下的恩典，怎么还敢归向教化呢！
English: Moreover, how dare those who have resisted the imperial edict, and those who have been forced to follow and make trouble, dare to return to civilization, knowing that they have betrayed His Majesty's grace!

古文：斯衅非小，所宜速图。
现代文：此一争端，并非小事，应当快作打算。
English: This dispute is no small matter and should be dealt with quickly.

古文：伏愿陛下思英主大略，勿以小不忍亏挠兴复之业也。 
现代文：希望陛下能想一想英明君主的伟大才略，不要因为对一些小事不能忍耐而损害和阻挠了兴复的事业啊。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty can think about the great talent of a wise monarch, and not damage and obstruct the cause of recovery because of impatience with some small things.

古文：上释然开悟，善待楚琳使者，优诏存慰之。
现代文：德宗消除了疑虑，明白了道理，好好地款待了李楚琳的使者，还颁诏好言安尉李楚琳。
English: Dezong eliminated his doubts, understood the truth, treated Li Chuling's envoy well, and also issued an edict to speak well of Li Chuling.

古文：丁酉，加宣武节度使刘洽同平章事。
现代文：丁酉，德宗加封宣武节度使刘洽为同平章事。
English: Ding Xi, Dezong and the proclamation of martial law made Liu Cai a peer.

古文：己亥，以行在都知兵马使浑瑊同平章事亦朔方节度使，朔方、邠宁、振武、永平、奉天行营兵马副元帅。
现代文：己亥，德宗任命行在都知兵马使浑为同平章事，兼任朔节度使，出任朔方、宁、振武、永平、奉天行营兵马副元帅。
English: At the same time, he also served as the deputy marshal of the troops and horses in the Shuo, Ning, Zhenwu, Yongping, and Fengtian Battalions.

古文：庚子，诏数李怀光罪恶，叙朔方将士忠顺功名，犹以怀光旧勋，曲加容贷，其副元帅、太尉、中书令、河中尹并朔方等诸道节度、观察等使，宜并罢免，授太子太保。
现代文：庚子，德宗颁诏数说李怀光的罪恶，评定朔方将士忠心顺承朝廷的功绩和声名。德宗仍然看在李怀光是原来的有功之臣的份上，对他曲意宽容，将他的副元帅、太尉、中书令、河中尹连同朔方诸道节度使、观察使等职务一并罢免，授给他太子太保的名号。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict saying that Li Huai Guang's crimes, and evaluated the loyalty of Shuo Fang's soldiers to the achievements and reputation of the imperial court. Emperor Dezong still regarded Li Huai Guang as a meritorious vassal, and was tolerant of him. He dismissed his vice-marshal, lieutenant, middle secretary, and Kechu Yin, along with Shuo Fang's all-way festival envoy and observation envoy, and gave him the title of Prince Taibo.

古文：其所管兵马，委本军自举一人功高望重者便宜统领，速具奏闻，当授旌旄，以从人欲。
现代文：他所掌管的兵马，委托本军自行推举一个功劳高、威望重的人，因利乘便地加以统领，赶快草拟奏章上报朝廷，朝廷自当授给旌节，以便顺从人们的愿望。
English: He entrusted the soldiers and horses under his command to the army to nominate a person of high merit and prestige on their own, to take advantage of the convenience to command them, to quickly draft and report to the court, and the court should award the festival in order to comply with people's wishes.

古文：夏，四月，壬寅，以邠宁兵马使韩游瑰为邠宁节度使。
现代文：夏季四月，壬寅，德宗任命宁兵马使韩游为宁节度使。
English: In the summer of April, in Ren'in, Dezong appointed Ning Terracotta Warriors and Horses to make Han You the Ning Festival envoy.

古文：癸卯，以奉天行营兵马使戴休颜为奉天行营节度使。
现代文：癸卯，任命奉天行营兵马使戴休颜为奉天行营节度使。
English: At the same time, Dai Xiuyan, the military commander of the Feng Tian Xing Battalion, was appointed as the commander of the Feng Tian Xing Battalion.

古文：灵武守将宁景璿为李怀光治第，另将李如暹曰： 李太尉逐天子，而景璿为之治第，是亦反也！ 
现代文：灵武守将宁景替李怀光建造宅第，别将李如暹说： 李太尉驱逐皇帝，而宁景替他建造宅第，这也是造反啊！ 
English: Lingwu Shou ordered Ningjing to build a mansion for Li Huaguang, not Li Ruxu, saying: "Lieutenant Li expelled the emperor, and Ningjing built a mansion for him. This is also a rebellion!"

古文：攻而杀之。
现代文：李如暹攻打宁景，将他杀了。
English: Li Ruxi attacked Ningjing and killed him.

古文：甲辰，加李晟鄜坊、京畿、渭北、商华副元帅。
现代文：甲辰，德宗加封李晟为坊、京畿、渭北、商华副元帅。
English: Jia Chen, Dezong and Li Yingweifang, vice-marshals of Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang and Shanghwa Provinces.

古文：晟家百口及神策军士家属皆在长安，硃泚善遇之。
现代文：李晟一家百口以及神策军将士的家属都留在长安，朱对他们都给与很好的待遇。
English: The hundred members of the Li Yu family and the families of the Shen Zhe soldiers all stayed in Chang'an, and Zhu treated them all very well.

古文：军中有言及家者，晟泣曰： 天子何在，敢言家乎！ 
现代文：军中有人谈到家室，李晟哭着说： 还不知道皇上在哪儿呢，哪敢谈论自己的家室！ 
English: Someone in the army talked about his family, Li Yao cried and said, "I still don't know where the emperor is, how dare I talk about my family!"

古文：泚使晟亲近以家书遗晟曰： 公家无恙。 
现代文：朱让李晟所亲近的人将李晟的家信送给他，并说： 你家没事儿。 
English: Zhu asked someone close to Li Yao to give him a letter from Li Yao's family, saying: "There is nothing wrong with your family.

古文：晟怒曰： 尔敢为贼为间！ 
现代文：李晟生气地说： 你竟敢替贼寇充当奸细！ 
English: Li Yao said angrily: How dare you act as a spy for the bandits!

古文：立斩之。
现代文：立刻将此人斩杀了。
English: The man was immediately beheaded.

古文：军士未授春衣，盛夏犹衣裘褐，终无叛志。
现代文：将士们没有发给春天的服装，盛夏还穿着皮衣和粗布衣服，但始终没有背叛的打算。
English: The soldiers were not issued with spring clothing, and in the height of summer they still wore fur coats and coarse cloth clothing, but they never had any intention of betraying.

古文：乙巳，以陕虢防遏使唐朝臣为河中、同终节度使。前河中尹李齐运为京兆尹，供晟军粮役。
现代文：乙巳，德宗任命陕虢防遏使唐朝臣为河中、同绛节度使，任命前河中尹李齐运为京兆尹，为李晟军供给粮食和劳役。
English: At this time, Emperor Dezong appointed Shaanxi and Fujian to prevent and suppress the Tang Dynasty, and appointed the Tang Dynasty's courtier to be the envoy to Hezhong and Tonglu, and appointed the former Hezhong Yin and Li Qiyun to be the envoy to Beijing, and provided grain and labor for Li Qiyun's army.

古文：庚戌，以魏博兵马使田绪为魏博节度使。
现代文：庚戌，德宗任命魏博兵马使田绪为魏博节度使。
English: Geng Zong and Dezong appointed Tian Xu, the envoy of the Wei Bo soldiers and horses, as the envoy of the Wei Bo festival.

古文：浑瑊帅诸军出斜谷，崔汉衡劝吐蕃出兵助之，尚结赞曰： 邠军不出，将袭我后。 
现代文：浑率领各军开出斜谷，崔汉衡劝说吐蕃出兵援助浑，尚结赞说： 宁军没有出兵，他们将会从背后袭击我们。 
English: Hun led the armies out of the valley. Cui Hanheng persuaded Tubo to send troops to help Hun. Shang Jizan said: Ning's army did not send troops, they will attack us from behind.

古文：韩游瑰闻之，遣其将曹子达将兵三千往会瑊军，吐蕃遣其将论莽罗依将兵二万从之。
现代文：韩游闻知此言，便派遣他的将领曹子达领兵三千人前去会合浑军，吐蕃也派遣他的将领论莽罗依领兵两万人跟随着曹子达。
English: When Han Yu heard this, he sent his general Cao Zida to lead three thousand soldiers to meet the Hun army, and Tubo also sent his general Ong Meng Loi to lead twenty thousand soldiers to follow Cao Zida.

古文：李楚琳遣其将石锽将卒七百从瑊拔武功。
现代文：李楚琳派遣他的将领石领兵七百人跟随浑攻克了武功。
English: Li Chuling dispatched his general Shishi to lead seven hundred soldiers to follow and conquer the martial arts.

古文：庚戌，硃泚遣其将韩旻等攻武功，锽以其众迎降。
现代文：庚戌，朱派遣他的将领韩攻打武功，石带领他的部众迎降了韩。
English: Geng Yao, Zhu sent his general Han to attack Wugong, and Shi led his troops to meet and defeat Han.

古文：瑊战不利，收兵登西原。
现代文：浑接战不利，收拾兵马登上西原。
English: The close combat was unfavorable, and the soldiers and horses were packed up and taken to the Western Plains.

古文：会曹子达以吐蕃至，击旻，大破之于武亭川，斩首万馀级，旻仅以身免。
现代文：适值曹子达领着吐蕃军赶到，进击韩，在武亭川大破韩，斩首一万余级，韩仅自身免于一死。
English: At the right time, Cao Zida led the Tubo army to arrive, invaded South Korea, defeated South Korea in the Wuting River, beheaded more than ten thousand levels, and South Korea was only spared from death.

古文：瑊遂引兵屯奉天，与李晟东西相应，以逼长安。
现代文：于是浑领兵屯驻奉天，与李晟东西相互呼应，以便进逼长安。
English: As a result, Hun led the troops to stay in Mingtian, echoing each other with Li Xun and others, in order to advance and force Chang'an.

古文：上欲为唐安公主造塔，厚葬之，谏议大夫、同平章事姜公辅表谏，以为 山南非久安之地，公主之葬，会归上都，此宜俭薄，以副军须之急。 
现代文：德宗准备为唐安公主建造寺塔，用优厚的待遇安葬她。谏议大夫、同平章事姜公辅上表进谏认为： 山南不是长久安葬的地点，公主的安葬，要在返回上都后，在这里应当从俭从薄，以便适应军需的急需。 
English: Emperor Dezong prepared to build a pagoda for Princess Tang'an, and buried her with generous treatment. The leading doctor, Tongping Zhangji, Jiang Gongfu, and the upper table, Jinjun, believed that: Shannan is not a place for long-term burial, and the burial of the princess, after returning to Shangdu, should be from thrift to thin here, in order to meet the urgent needs of the military.

古文：上使谓陆贽曰： 唐安造塔，其费甚微，非宰相所宜论。
现代文：德宗让人对陆贽说： 为唐安公主建造寺塔，费用很是微薄，不是宰相所应当议论的。
English: Dezong had someone say to Lu Yao: The cost of building a pagoda for Princess Tang An is very small, and it is not something a prime minister should discuss.

古文：公辅正欲指朕过失，自求名耳。
现代文：姜公辅恰好想借此指责朕的过失，来求得自己的声名罢了。
English: Jiang Gongfu just wanted to make a name for himself by accusing me of wrongdoing.

古文：相负如此，当如何处之？ 
现代文：对朕辜负到如此地步，应当怎样处治他呢？ 
English: How should he be dealt with for failing me to such an extent?

古文：贽上奏，以为公辅任居宰相，遇事论谏，不当罪之，其略曰： 公辅顷与臣同在翰林，臣今据理辨直则涉于私党之嫌，希旨顺成则违于匡辅之义。
现代文：陆贽上奏认为，姜公辅负有宰相的责任，遇到事情，议论规谏，不应当加罪于他，他大略是说： 不久前，姜公辅与我一起在翰林院供职。现在我依据事理争辩说姜公辅没有过错，便会牵涉到私结党羽的嫌疑；迎合意旨，顺着陛下的成说，便会违背了匡正、辅佐的本义。
English: Lu Yao believed that Jiang Gongfu bore the responsibility of the prime minister and should not be punished for discussing the rules and regulations when he encountered things. He said roughly: Not long ago, Jiang Gongfu served with me at the Hanlin Academy. Now I argue on the basis of facts that Jiang Gongfu is not at fault, it will involve the suspicion of private party feather; to meet the consensus and follow His Majesty's words, it will violate the original meaning of rectification and assistance.

古文：涉嫌止贻于身患，违义实玷于群恩。
现代文：牵涉嫌疑，只限于给自身留下祸患；违背本义，却实在是玷污了皇上的恩典。
English: Involving suspicion is only limited to leaving a disaster for oneself; violating the original meaning, but it really tarnishes the grace of the emperor.

古文：徇身忘君，臣之耻也！ 
现代文：曲从己身，忘记国君，这是我的耻辱啊！ 
English: The song is from myself, forget the sovereign, this is my shame!

古文：又曰： 唯暗惑之主，则怨讟溢于下国而耳不欲闻，腥德达于上天而心不求寤，迨乎颠覆，犹未知非。 
现代文：他又说： 只有昏庸不明的君主，当怨恨在地方上充满时，还不愿意耳闻其事；当秽恶的行为传送到上天时，还不希望内心有所醒悟；到国家颠覆时，还不知道自己的过失。 
English: He also said: "Only a befuddled monarch, when resentment fills the land, does not want to hear about it; when filthy deeds are transmitted to heaven, he does not want his heart to wake up; when the country is subverted, he does not know his fault.

古文：又曰： 当问理之是非，岂论事之大小！
现代文：他又说： 应当先问道理是对是错，岂能只论事情是大是小！
English: He also said: We should first ask whether it is right or wrong to reason, can we only discuss whether things are big or small!

古文：《虞书》曰： 兢兢业业，一日二日万机。 
现代文：《虞书》说： 办事兢兢业业，经常日理万机。 
English: "The Book of Fortunes" says: Work diligently and conscientiously, and make frequent adjustments.

古文：唐、虞之际，主圣臣贤，虑事之微，日至万数。
现代文：在唐尧、虞舜时期，君主圣明，臣下贤明，考虑事情，至为细微，一天要考虑的事情数以万计。
English: In the Tang and Yuezhi dynasties, the monarchs were saintly and the subjects were wise. They considered things very finely, and there were tens of thousands of things to consider in a day.

古文：然则微之不可不重也，如此，陛下又安可忽而念乎！ 
现代文：由此可见，对细微的事情不能不如此重视，陛下又怎么能够忽视他们而不挂念呢！ 
English: From this it can be seen that he cannot but attach such importance to minor matters, and how can His Majesty ignore them and not worry about them!

古文：又曰： 若以谏争为指过，则剖心之主不宜见罪于哲王；以谏争为取名，则匪躬之臣不应垂训于圣典。 
现代文：他又说： 倘若认为谏诤是指责过失，那剖除谏臣心脏的君主就不会被睿哲的帝王所归罪了；倘若认为谏诤是猎取名声，那不顾自己、尽忠国家的大臣便不会在圣人的经典上给后人留下榜样了。 
English: He also said: "If it were thought that covetousness was a fault, the prince who cut out the heart of his vassal would not have been condemned by the wise emperor; if covetousness were thought to be a hunt for fame, the minister who was loyal to his country in spite of himself would not have left an example for posterity in the canon of saints.

古文：又曰： 假有意将指过，谏以取名，但能闻善而迁，见谏不逆，则所指者适足以彰陛下莫大之善，所取者适足以资陛下无疆之休。因而利焉，所获多矣。
现代文：他又说： 即使是有意地指责过失，用谏诤猎取名声，但只要能够听到好的建议便去改过，遇见直言劝谏就肯接受，那么，人家所指责的过失，恰恰足以显示陛下至善的品格，人家所猎取的名声，恰恰足以给陛下带来无穷的福气，陛下由此而得到的益处是太多了。
English: He also said: Even if you deliberately accuse faults and hunt for fame with a crossbow, as long as you can listen to good advice to correct them and are willing to accept straightforward advice, then the fault you are accused of is just enough to show your majesty's excellent character, and the reputation you are hunting for is just enough to bring your majesty endless blessings, and your majesty's benefits from it are too much.

古文：傥或怒其指过而不改，则陛下招恶直之讥；黜其取名而不容，则陛下被违谏之谤。
现代文：倘若为别人指责过错而恼怒，不肯改正，陛下便会招致厌恶直言的讥讽；贬斥别人猎取名声，不能含容，陛下便会蒙受禁阻谏诤的谤言。
English: If angered by someone else's accusation of fault and refusing to correct it, His Majesty will incur the ridicule of detesting outspokenness; if he cannot tolerate the disparagement of others for hunting fame, His Majesty will suffer the ban of obstructing slander.

古文：是乃掩己过而过弥著，损彼名而名益彰。
现代文：这便是掩盖自己的过失，而过失愈加显著；贬损别人的名声，而人家的名声益发彰明。
English: It is to cover up one's own faults, which become more and more conspicuous; to tarnish another's reputation, which becomes more and more conspicuous.

古文：果而行之，所失大矣。 
现代文：果真这样去做，陛下所失去的就太大了。 
English: If you do, your majesty will have lost too much.

古文：上意犹怒，甲寅，罢公辅为左庶子。
现代文：德宗仍有怒意。甲寅，将姜公辅罢免为左庶子。
English: Emperor Dezong was still angry. Emperor Jia removed Jiang Gongfu as his illegitimate son.

古文：加西川节度使张延赏同平章事，赏其供亿无乏故也。
现代文：德宗加封西川节度使张延赏为同平章事，这是奖赏他能保证天子在汉中时充足的贡赋供应。
English: The enthronement of Emperor Dezong and the celebration of the West River Festival made Zhang Yan's reward a matter of equal importance. This was a reward for his ability to ensure sufficient supply of tribute for the emperor when he was in Han.

古文：硃泚、姚令言数遣人诱泾原节度使冯河清，河清皆斩其使者。
现代文：朱、姚令言屡次派人引诱泾原节度使冯河清，冯河清每次都将来使杀了。
English: Zhu and Yao Lingyan repeatedly sent people to lure Gongyuan Jiedu to make Feng Heqing, and Feng Heqing would kill him every time.

古文：大将田希鉴密与泚通，杀河清，以军府附于泚。泚以希鉴为泾原节度使。
现代文：大将田希鉴暗中与朱勾结，杀了冯河清，将军府依附于朱，朱任命田希鉴为泾原节度使。
English: General Tian Xijian secretly colluded with Zhu to kill Feng Heqing, the General Staff attached itself to Zhu, and Zhu appointed Tian Xijian as the deputy of the Sheng Yuan.

古文：上问陆贽： 近有卑官自山北来者，率非良士。
现代文：德宗向陆贽问道： 最近从南山北面来的低级官吏，一般都不是贤良之士。
English: Dezong asked Lu Yao: The low-level officials who have recently come from the north of Nanshan are generally not good people.

古文：有刑建者，论说贼势，语最张皇，察其事情，颇似窥觇，今已于一所安置。
现代文：有个叫邢建的人，论说贼军的形势，说的话最为张狂，察看此人的情形，很象是在窥探情报，现在已经在某一住所安置下来。
English: There was a man named Zou Jian, who talked about the situation of the Kleptocracy, and his words were the most provocative. Looking at this person's situation, it was very much like snooping for information. He has now settled down in a certain residence.

古文：如此之类，更有数人，若不追寻，恐成奸计。
现代文：象这类人，还有好几个人，如果不予以追查，恐怕会成就他们邪恶的计划。
English: There are several others of this type who, if not tracked down, may succeed in their nefarious plans.

古文：卿试思之，如何为更？ 
现代文：你试着想一想，怎么办才好？ 
English: You try to think, what can I do?

古文：贽上奏，以为今盗据宫阙，有冒涉险远来赴行在者，当量加恩赏，岂得复猜虑拘囚！
现代文：陆贽上奏认为，如今强盗占据了宫廷，如有冒着危险，长途跋涉，前来行在的人，应当酌情加以恩宠奖赏，哪里能够再加以猜疑拘禁呢！
English: Lu Yao believed that now that robbers occupied the court, if there were people who risked danger and traveled long distances to come here, they should be rewarded with grace as appropriate. Where else could they be suspected and detained!

古文：其略曰： 以一人之听览而欲穷宇宙之变态，以一人之防虑而欲胜亿兆之奸欺，役智弥精，失道弥远。
现代文：他的奏疏大略说： 以一个人的见闻便想穷尽宇宙的变化形态，以一个人的戒心便希望战胜众人的邪恶欺诈，付出的心智愈精，在大道上迷失就愈远。
English: His sonnet roughly says: With one's knowledge one would like to exhaust the universe's changing forms, with one's alertness one would hope to overcome the evil deception of many people, the more one's mind is exerted, the farther one gets lost on the highway.

古文：项籍纳秦降卒二十万，虑其怀诈复叛，一举而尽坑之，其于防虞，亦已甚矣。
现代文：项羽收纳了秦朝归降的士兵二十万人，担心他们怀有诈谋，再次反叛，一下子便将他们全部活埋了。
English: Xiang Yu received 200,000 soldiers who had surrendered to the Qin Dynasty. Fearing that they were plotting to rebel again, he immediately buried them all alive.

古文：汉高豁达大度，天下之士至者，纳用不疑，其于备虑，可谓疏矣。
现代文：他在防备顾虑方面是太过分了。汉高祖胸襟开阔，气度宏大，天下的士人到他那儿去的，他都收纳任用，毫不怀疑，他在防备的顾虑方面可以说是够疏忽的了。
English: He went too far in guarding against scruples. Henkel was broad-minded and magnanimous, and he accepted appointments from all over the world. There is no doubt that he was quite negligent in guarding against scruples.

古文：然而项氏以灭，刘氏以昌，蓄疑之与推诚，其效固不同也。
现代文：然而项氏因此而灭亡，刘氏因彼而昌盛，存心猜疑与推心置腹，它们的效果的确是不同的啊。
English: However, Mr. Xiang died because of this, and Mr. Liu prospered because of him. With suspicion and insinuation, their effects are indeed different.

古文：秦皇严肃雄猜，而荆轲奋其阴计；光武宽容博厚，而马援输其款诚。
现代文：秦始皇严厉峻急，雄心大而疑忌多，但仍有荆轲奋力实行他的秘计；东汉光武帝宽宏大量，通达而仁厚，却有马援献纳自己的忠诚。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang was stern, ambitious and suspicious, but he still had the courage to carry out his secret plan; Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty was magnanimous, knowledgeable and benevolent, but he had Ma'an to offer his loyalty.

古文：岂不以虚怀待人，人亦思附；任数御物，物终不亲！
现代文：这难道不是说明用谦逊的襟怀对待人们，人们也是愿意归附的；使用权术驾驭事物，事物终究还是不会亲附的！
English: Doesn't this show that if you treat people with a humble heart, people are also willing to attach; the right to use technology to control things, things will not be attached after all!

古文：情思附则感而悦之，虽寇亿化为心膂矣；意不亲则惧而阻之，虽骨肉结为亿慝矣。 
现代文：要使人心归附，就要感动他，从而使他悦服，这样，即使是仇敌也会化为亲信；认为人心不能亲附，就害怕他，从而阻挠他，这样，即使是骨肉之情也会结成仇敌。 
English: If you want to win a person's heart, you must move him, so that he is pleased, so that even an enemy can become a close friend; if you think that a person's heart cannot be close, you must fear him, so that you can obstruct him, so that even the feelings of flesh and blood can become enemies.

古文：又曰： 陛下智出庶物，有轻待人臣之心；思周万机，有独驭区寓之意；谋吞众略，有过慎之防；明照群情，有先事之察；严束百辟，有任刑致理之规；威制四方，有以力胜残之志。
现代文：奏疏又说： 陛下的智慧超出万物，有看不起人臣的心思；陛下的思虑遍及纷繁的政务，有独自制驭全国的意向；陛下的谋划包容了众人的方略，有过于慎重的防范；陛下的英明洞照群情，有先于事态的觉察；陛下严格管束百官，有专任刑法以求政治修明的规略；陛下的威严辖制四方，有以勇力战胜残暴的志向。
English: The report also said: His Majesty's wisdom surpasses all things, and he has a mind to look down on his subordinates; His Majesty's thoughts pervade the numerous government affairs, and he has the intention to control the whole country independently; His Majesty's plan has embraced the strategy of many people, and there are overly cautious precautions; His Majesty's wisdom shines through the feelings of the people, and he is aware of the situation before it happens; His Majesty strictly controls the officials, and has a full-time criminal law to seek political reform; His Majesty's majesty controls the four directions, and has the ambition to overcome the brutality with courage.

古文：由是才能者怨于不任，忠荩者忧于见疑，著勋业者惧于不容，怀反侧者迫于及讨，驯致离叛，构成祸灾。
现代文：因此，有才能的人为得不到任用而埋怨，竭尽忠心的人为遭受猜疑而忧虑，勋业卓著的人为无法容身而畏惧，居心反复无常的人迫于被讨伐，渐渐达到背叛的程度，造成祸患灾殃。
English: Thus, the talented complain of not being appointed, the most loyal worry about being suspected, the distinguished are intimidated because they cannot tolerate it, and the capricious are forced to fight, gradually reaching the level of betrayal and causing disasters.

古文：天子所作，天下式瞻，小犹慎之，矧又非小！
现代文：天子所做的事情，为天下人所瞻仰，对于小事，尚且应当慎重对待，况且并非小事呢！
English: The things done by the Son of God are admired by the whole world. Even small things should be treated with caution. Moreover, they are not small things!

古文：愿陛下以覆车之辙为戒，实宗社无疆之休。 
现代文：希望陛下将前车之鉴引以为戒，这实在是宗庙社稷无穷的福分。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will take this warning as a warning. This is truly an infinite blessing for the family temple.

古文：丁巳，以前山南东道节度使南皮贾耽为工部尚书。
现代文：丁巳，德宗任命前山南东道节度使南皮人贾耽为工部尚书。
English: Ding Si, Dezong appointed the former Shannan Host Festival to make Nanpi Jia Tan as the Ministry of Industry.

古文：先是，耽使行军司马樊泽奏事行在。
现代文：在此之前，贾耽让行军司马樊泽前往行在奏事。
English: Prior to this, Jia Tan let the marching sergeant Ma Junze go to the march to report.

古文：泽既复命，方大宴，有急牒至，以泽代耽为节度使。
现代文：樊泽完成使命后向贾耽回报，正赶上大摆酒宴，忽有紧急公文送到，是任命樊泽代替贾耽担任节度使。
English: After fulfilling his mission, Heze returned the favor to Jia Tan. He was just in time for the grand wine banquet when an urgent official document was sent, appointing Heze to replace Jia Tan as the festival envoy.

古文：耽内牒怀中，宴饮如故，颜色不改。
现代文：贾耽将公文揣到怀中，宴饮一如既往，面色毫不改变。
English: Jia Tan cradled the document in his arms, feasting as usual, his face unchanged.

古文：宴罢，召泽告之，且命将吏谒泽。
现代文：宴会结束后，贾耽传召樊泽，将朝廷的任命告诉了他，并命令众将和官吏拜见樊泽。
English: After the banquet, Jia Tan summoned Heze, told him about the appointment of the imperial court, and ordered the generals and officials to visit Heze.

古文：牙将张献甫怒曰： 行军为尚书问天子起居，乃敢自图节钅戊，夺尚书土地，事人不忠，众心不服，请杀之。 
现代文：牙将张献甫生气地说： 行军司马是替尚书去问候皇上起居的，怎么竟敢自己图谋节度使的旌节，夺走尚书管辖的土地！他事奉于人不尽忠心，请将他杀了吧。 
English: Toothmaster Zhang Xianfu said angrily, "Marching Sima went to greet the emperor on behalf of Shangshu. How dare he plot to usurp the land under Shangshu's jurisdiction! He served others without loyalty. Please kill him."

古文：耽曰： 是何言也！
现代文：贾耽说： 这是什么话啊！
English: Jia Tan said: What kind of words are these!

古文：天子所命，即为节度使矣！ 
现代文：樊泽是皇上任命的，他现在是节度使了！ 
English: Heze was appointed by the emperor, and he is now an official of the imperial court!

古文：即日离镇，以献甫自随，军府遂安。
现代文：贾耽当天便离开节镇，让张献甫跟随自己，军府于是安定下来。
English: On the same day, Jia Tan left the garrison and let Zhang Xianfu follow him, so the military government was safe.

古文：左仆射李揆自吐蕃还，甲子，薨于凤州。
现代文：左仆射李揆从吐蕃回来，甲子，在凤州去世。
English: His left-hand man, Li Yao, returned from Tubo, and his second son, Jia Zong, died in Fengzhou.

古文：韩游瑰引兵会浑瑊于奉天。
现代文：韩游领兵在奉天与浑会合。
English: Han You, the leader of the soldiers, meets with Hun in Mukden.

古文：丙寅，加平卢节度使李纳同平章事。
现代文：丙寅，德宗加封平卢节度使李纳同平章事。
English: Cui Yin, Dezong and Feng Pinglu made Li Na the winner.

古文：丁卯，义王泚薨。
现代文：丁卯，义王李去世。
English: Dingwu, Yi Wang Li passed away.

古文：硃滔攻贝州百馀日，马寔攻魏州亦逾四旬，皆不能下。
现代文：朱滔进攻贝州己有一百余天，马进攻魏州也超过了四十天，都未能攻克。
English: Zhu Tao has been attacking Bozhou for more than a hundred days, and Ma has been attacking Weizhou for more than forty days, but they have not been able to conquer.

古文：贾林复为李抱真说李武俊曰： 硃滔志吞贝、魏，复值田悦被害，傥旬日不救，则魏博皆为滔有矣，魏博既下，则张孝忠必为之臣。
现代文：贾林再次替李抱真规劝王武俊说： 朱滔的本意是吞并贝州和魏州，加上正当田悦被人杀害时，假如十天不去救援，魏博便全都被朱滔占有了。魏博失陷后，张孝忠便必定会成为朱滔的臣属。
English: Jialin once again advised Wang Wujun on behalf of Li Bangzhen, saying: Zhu Tao's intention was to annex Beizhou and Weizhou, and when Tian Yue was killed, if he did not go to the rescue for ten days, Weibo would all be occupied by Zhu Tao. After Weibo fell, Zhang Xiaozhong would certainly become Zhu Tao's vassal.

古文：滔连三道之兵，益以回纥，进临常山，明公欲保其宗族，得乎！
现代文：朱滔连结幽州、易定、魏博三道兵马，加上回纥，进军兵临常山，您就是打算保全自己的宗族，能做得到吗？
English: Zhu Tao linked the three armies of Yuzhou, Yiding, and Weibo, plus Hui Zang, and marched into Linchang Mountain. You are planning to preserve your own clan. Can you do it?

古文：常山不守，则昭义退保西山，河朔尽入于滔矣。
现代文：常山失陷后，昭义军便要退守西山，河朔地区全部落入朱滔手中了。
English: After the fall of Changshan, the Shao Yi Army had to retreat to Xishan, and the whole of the Hexuo region fell into Zhu Tao's hands.

古文：不若乘贝、魏未下，与昭义合兵救之。
现代文：不如乘贝州、魏州尚未失陷，与昭义合兵援救他们。
English: It would be better to take advantage of the fact that Bechuan and Weizhou had not yet fallen and join forces with Zhao Yi to rescue them.

古文：滔既破亡，则关中丧气，硃泚不日枭夷，銮舆反正，诸将之功，孰有居明公之右者哉！ 
现代文：朱滔被打败后，关于便会意气颓丧。不久，朱遭到诛灭，圣上拨乱反正，诸将领的功劳，有谁能够在您之上呢！ 
English: After Zhu Tao was defeated, he would be discouraged. Soon, Zhu was annihilated, and it was up to the emperor to put an end to the turmoil. After all, who can surpass you in the merits of generals!

古文：武俊悦，从之。
现代文：王武俊高兴，听从了贾林的劝说。
English: Wang Wujun was happy and listened to Jia Lin's persuasion.

古文：戊辰，武俊军于南宫东南，抱真自临洺引兵会之，与武俊营相拒十里。
现代文：戊辰，王武俊在南宫东南驻军，李抱真从临领兵同他会合，与王武俊的营地相距十里。
English: At that time, Wang Wujun was garrisoned in the southeast of the Southern Palace, and Li Bozhen joined him to lead the troops from the front. It was ten miles away from Wang Wujun's camp.

古文：两军尚相疑，明日，抱真以数骑诣武俊营，宾客共谏止之，抱真命行军司马卢玄卿勒兵以俟，曰： 吾之此举，系天下安危，若其不还，领军事以听朝命亦惟子，励将士以雪仇耻亦惟子。 
现代文：两军还在相互猜疑。第二天，李抱真要带领几个人骑马到王武俊的营地去，幕府的宾客都劝说他不要前去，李抱真命令行军司马卢玄卿统领军兵，等待消息，他说： 我的这一行动，关系到天下的安定与危亡。如果我回不来，统领军中事务、听候朝廷的调遣就看你的了；勉励将士、来为我报仇雪耻也看你的了。 
English: The two armies were still suspicious of each other. The next day, Li Po Zhen wanted to lead several people on horseback to Wang Wujun's camp. The guests of the shogunate persuaded him not to go. Li Po Zhen ordered the marshal of the army, Malu Xuanqing, to lead the soldiers and wait for news. He said: This action of mine is related to the stability and peril of the world. If I can't come back, it's up to you to lead the affairs of the army and wait for the dispatch of the court; it's up to you to encourage the soldiers to come and avenge me.

古文：言终，遂行。
现代文：李抱真说罢，就前去了。
English: Li Bozhen said, and went forward.

古文：武俊严备以待之，抱真见武俊，叙国家祸难，天子播迁，持武俊哭，流涕纵横。
现代文：王武俊做好严密防备，等候李抱真到来。李抱真见到王武俊后，叙谈到国家遭受的祸患灾难，德宗的流亡迁徙，握着王武俊的手哭，满面都是泪水。
English: Wang Wujun prepared well and waited for Li Bozhen to arrive. After Li Bozhen saw Wang Wujun, he talked about the disasters and calamities suffered by the country, the exile and migration of Dezong, holding Wang Wujun's hand and crying, his face was full of tears.

古文：武俊亦悲不自胜，左右莫能仰视。遂与武俊约为兄弟，誓同灭贼。
现代文：王武俊也禁不住悲伤起来，周围的人们也都难过得抬不起头来。于是李抱真与王武俊结为兄弟，发誓共同消灭贼寇。
English: Wang Wujun also couldn't help but feel sad, and the people around him couldn't even lift their heads. So Li Baozhen and Wang Wujun became brothers and vowed to destroy the bandits together.

古文：武俊曰： 相公十兄名高四海，曏蒙开谕，得弃逆从顺，免菹醢之罪，享王公之荣。
现代文：王武俊说： 相公十哥的名声传扬四海，以往蒙十哥开导，才能够背弃叛军，归顺朝廷，避免了要被剁成肉酱的罪过，享受着王公大臣的荣耀。
English: Wang Wujun said, "The reputation of the 10th brother of the Prince Consort has spread far and wide. In the past, it was only through the enlightenment of the 10th brother of the Prince Consort that he was able to abandon the rebel army, surrender to the imperial court, avoid the sin of being made into meat sauce, and enjoy the glory of the prince minister.

古文：今又不间胡虏，辱为兄弟，武俊当何以为报乎！
现代文：如今十哥又不嫌弃我是胡人，屈尊与我结为兄弟，我王武俊应当拿什么报答你呢！
English: Now, the tenth brother does not dislike me for being a Hu, and condescends to become a brother with me. What should I, Wang Wujun, repay you with?

古文：滔所恃者回纥耳，不足畏也。
现代文：朱滔所仗恃的，是回纥兵而已，这没有什么可怕的。
English: What Zhu Tao is afraid of is the Hui soldiers, which is nothing terrible.

古文：战日，愿十兄按辔临视，武俊决为十兄破之。 
现代文：开战之日，十哥只要勒住缰绳前去观看就行了，我一定要为十哥打败他们。 
English: On the day of the battle, the tenth brother just needs to hold the reins and go to watch. I must defeat them for the tenth brother.

古文：抱真退入武俊帐中，酣寝久之。
现代文：李抱真退入王武俊的营帐之中，酣睡了很长时间。
English: Li Bozhen retreated into Wang Wujun's tent and slept for a long time.

古文：武俊感激，待之益恭，指心仰天曰： 此身已许十兄死矣！ 
现代文：王武俊感激他，对待他就益发恭敬。王武俊指心仰天发誓： 此身已经决心为十哥而死了！ 
English: Wang Wujun was grateful to him and treated him with ever-increasing respect. Wang Wujun pointed to the heavens and swore: I have resolved to die for my tenth brother!

古文：遂连营而进。
现代文：于是二人军营相连，一同进军。
English: So the two linked their camps and marched out together.

古文：山南地热，上以军士未有春服，亦自御夹衣。
现代文：山南地区天气炎热，德宗因将士还没有穿上春天的服装，自己也只穿衣。
English: The weather in Shannan is hot, and because the soldiers have not yet put on their spring clothes, Dezong himself is only wearing clothes.

