古文：黄帝曰：经脉十二，而手太阴、足少阴、阳明独动不休，何也？
现代文：黄帝问：在十二经脉中，唯独手太阴、足少阴、足阳明这三条经脉搏动不止，是为什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: Of the twelve meridians, only the three meridians of the hand, foot, and foot are too yin, too yang, and too yang. Why is this?

古文：岐伯曰：是明胃脉也。
现代文：岐伯答道：足阳明是胃脉。
English: Qi Bo replied: "Foot yangming is the stomach vein."

古文：胃为五脏六腑之海，其清气上注于肺，肺气从太阴而行之，其行也以息往来，故人一呼脉再动，一吸脉亦再动，呼吸不已，故动而不止。
现代文：胃是五脏六腑所需营养汇聚于其中的大海，其水谷精微所化生的清气由胃向上流注于肺而成肺气，肺气从手太阴肺经开始循行于十二经脉，其运行是随呼吸而上下往来的，所以，人一呼气脉跳动两次，一吸气脉也是跳动两次，呼吸不停止，脉搏的跳动也不停止。
English: The stomach is a sea in which the nutrients required by the five viscera and six glands are gathered. The clean air generated by its water troughs is poured upward from the stomach into the lungs to form lung gas. The lung gas follows the twelve meridians from the palate to the lungs. Its movement is up and down with the breath. Therefore, a person's exhalation pulse beats twice, and an inhalation pulse also beats twice. The breath does not stop, and the pulse does not stop.

古文：黄帝曰：气之过于寸口也，上十焉息，下八焉伏，何道从还？
现代文：黄帝问：手太阴肺经的脉气到达寸口前，先经过上面的尺脉，尺脉的脉动为十分，而下行到寸口，脉动只有八分，再下行脉气还会继续减少，这样脉气从什么道路返还本脉呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Before the pulse gas of the palmar-pulmonary meridian reaches the cusp, it first passes through the upper ulnar vein. The pulsation of the ulnar vein is ten, and when it goes down to the cusp, the pulsation is only eight. The downward pulse gas will continue to decrease, so from what path will the pulse gas return to the home vein?

古文：不知其极。
现代文：我不知其究竟。
English: I don't know what happened.

古文：岐伯曰：气之离脏也，卒然如弓弩之发，如水之下岸，上于鱼以反衰，其余气衰散以逆上，故其行微。
现代文：岐伯答道：手太阴肺经的脉气离开肺脏而循行于经脉中时，像离弦之箭一样疾急，如冲决堤岸之洪水一样迅猛，开始时脉势是强盛的，但当脉气到达手鱼际部之后，就呈现由盛而衰的现象，这是因为脉气至此已经衰散，而且是向上逆行，所以它运行的气势就减弱了。
English: Qi Bo replied, "When the pulse of the palmar-pulmonary meridians leaves the lungs and travels along the meridians, it is as rapid as an arrow leaving the string, and as swift as a flood breaking through the embankment. At the beginning, the pulse potential is strong, but when the pulse reaches the interphalangeal part of the hand, it shows the phenomenon of waxing and waning. This is because the pulse has already decayed and is moving in the opposite direction, so the momentum of its operation is weakened.

古文：黄帝曰：足之阳明，何因而动？
现代文：黄帝问：足阳明胃经为什么搏动不止呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: "Why does the bright foot-and-sun stomach meridian pulsate endlessly?

古文：岐伯曰：胃气上注于肺，其悍气上冲头者，循咽，上走空窍，循眼系，入络脑，出顑，下客主人，循牙车，合阳明，并下人迎，此胃气别走于阳明者也。
现代文：岐伯答道：因为胃气上注于肺，其中迅猛而剽悍之气上冲于头部，循咽而上走于孔窍，循眼系向内络循于脑，从脑出于面部，下行会于足少阳胆经的客主人穴，沿颊车穴合于足阳明胃经，再循经下行至结喉两旁的人迎穴，这就是胃气别出阳明而又合于阳明，使阳明脉搏动不休的原因。
English: Qi Bo replied: Because the gastric qi flows up to the lungs, and the swift and powerful qi rushes up to the head, follows the pharynx and goes up to the orifice, follows the eye system inward to the brain, from the brain out of the face, the downward movement will be in the host hole of the foot-less yang qi meridian, along the cheek-car hole to meet the foot-yang qi meridian, and then follow the meridian downward to meet the people on both sides of the throat. This is the reason why the gastric qi does not come out of the yang qi but fits into the yang qi

古文：故阴阳上下，其动也若一。
现代文：所以，手太阴的寸口脉，与足阳明的人迎脉，阴阳上下相应，其搏动是一致的。
English: Therefore, the pulse at the base of the hand, which is too yin, is the same as that of the foot, which is too yang.

古文：故阳病而阳脉小者，为逆；阴病而阴脉大者，为逆。
现代文：因此，阳病而阳脉反而小的，是逆证；阴病而阴脉反而大的，也是逆证。
English: Therefore, a yang disease with a small yang vein is a counterexample; a yin disease with a large yang vein is also a counterexample.

古文：故阴阳俱静俱动，若引绳相倾者病。
现代文：因此，寸口脉与人迎脉阴阳应合，静则俱静，动则俱动，就像牵引同一根绳子似的，如果二者之间失去平衡，有一方偏盛就是病态。
English: Therefore, the pulse of the crotch and the pulse of the person meet the yin and yang, the static is quiet, and the moving is moving, just like pulling the same rope. If the balance between the two is lost, one side is sick.

古文：黄帝曰：足少阴何因而动？
现代文：黄帝问：足少阴肾经的动脉为何跳动不休呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: Why does the artery of the foot-small-shin-kidney meridian beat incessantly?

古文：岐伯曰：冲脉者，十二经之海也，与少阴之大络，起于肾下，出于气街，循阴股内廉，邪入腘中，循胫骨内廉，并少阴之经，下入内踝之后，入足下；其别者，邪入踝，出属跗上，入大趾之间，注诸络，以温足胫，此脉之常动者也。
现代文：岐伯说：足少阴脉的搏动，是因为与冲脉并行的原因。冲脉为十二经脉之海，它和足少阴的络脉，共同起于肾下，出于足阳明胃经的气冲穴，沿大腿内侧，向下斜行入于腘窝中，沿小腿内侧，与足少阴经并行，下行进入于足内踝之后，入于足下；其中分出一条支脉，斜入内踝，再进入胫骨与跗骨相连的部位，经足背入大趾之间，最后进入络脉，发挥温养小腿和脚的作用，这便是足少阴经脉不停地跳动的原因。
English: Qi Bo said: "The pulsation of the foot-less yin vein is due to the reason that it is parallel to the pulse. The pulse is the sea of the twelve meridians. It and the vein of the foot-less yin jointly originate under the kidney, from the air-punching hole of the foot-yang bright gastric meridian, along the inner side of the thigh, descending diagonally into the armpit, along the inner side of the calf, parallel to the foot-less yin meridian, descending into the foot after the inner ankle, and entering the foot; a branch vein is separated from it, obliquely entering the inner ankle, then entering

古文：黄帝曰：营卫之行也，上下相贯，如环之无端，今有其卒然遇邪风，及逢大寒，手足懈惰，其脉阴阳之道，相输之会，行相失也，气何由还？
现代文：黄帝问道：营气和卫气的运行，贯通全身上下，循环往返而不停息。如果有人突然遇到邪气的侵袭，或受到严寒的刺激，外邪留滞四肢，使得手足懈惰无力，则其经脉阴阳的循行道路，气血相互输注的会合，就会出现混乱失错，那么，气又将从哪里回还而往来运行呢？
English: Huangdi asked: The movement of ying qi and yin qi runs through the whole body and circulates back and forth without stopping. If someone suddenly encounters the invasion of evil qi, or is stimulated by severe cold, and the external evil lingers on the limbs, making the hands and feet lazy and weak, then the path of yin and yang, the meeting of the mutual infusion of qi and blood, will be confused and erroneous. Then, where will the qi come back and run?

古文：岐伯曰：夫四末阴阳之会者，此气之大络也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：四肢末端是阴阳会合的地方，也是营卫之气循行的必经大路。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The extremity of the limbs is the place where yin and yang meet, and it is also the road along which the qi of Yingwei must travel.

古文：四街者，气之径路也。故络绝则径通，四末解则气从合，相输如环。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：邪气阻塞了四肢末端后，像四街这样的一些旁通路径就会开通，营卫之气仍然能够循环运行。所以，即使大路被阻塞断绝但是旁径仍能开通，四肢虽然懈怠而脉气仍能顺和，像圆环似的相互转输不止。黄帝说：讲得好。
English: After the evil gas blocked the end of the limbs, some bypass routes such as the fourth street would be opened, and the camp guard's gas could still circulate. Therefore, even if the main road was blocked but the bypass could still be opened, although the limbs were slack, the pulse gas could still be smooth, and the mutual transfer would continue like a ring. Huang Di said: Well said.

古文：此所谓如环无端，莫知其纪，终而复始，此之谓也。
现代文：所说的，如环无端，终而复始，难以测知其纲纪，讲得就是这个道理。
English: What is said, such as the ring without reason, the end and the beginning, it is difficult to know its discipline, this is the reason.

