古文：太平公主，则天皇后所生，后爱之倾诸女。
现代文：太平公主，为则天皇后所生，则天皇后喜爱她超过了别的公主。
English: Taiping Princess, born to the Empress Dowager, was loved by the Empress Dowager more than any other princess.

古文：荣国夫人死，后丐主为道士，以幸冥福。
现代文：荣国夫人死后，武后将太平公主舍为女道士，以求冥福。
English: After the death of Mrs. Rongguo, Empress Wu made Princess Taiping a female Taoist in order to rest in peace.

古文：仪凤中，吐蕃请主下嫁，后不欲弃之夷，乃真筑宫，如方士薰戒，以拒和亲事。
现代文：仪凤年间，吐蕃请求将公主下嫁给其赞普，武后不欲将她弃于夷狄，便真的修筑宫观，如同方士薰沐斋戒，以拒绝和亲之事。
English: In the years of Yi and Feng, Tubo requested to marry the princess to his Zampu, and the Empress Wu did not want to abandon her to the Yidi, so she really built a palace view, just as the Fang Shishi abstained from fasting, in order to refuse the matter of reconciliation.

古文：久之，主衣紫袍玉带，折上巾，具纷砺，歌舞帝前。
现代文：过后不久，公主穿紫袍系玉带，折叠上巾，披挂打扮，歌舞于帝、后面前。
English: Soon after, the princess put on a purple robe with a jade belt, folded her shawl, dressed up, and sang and danced in front of the emperor and empress.

古文：帝及后大笑曰： 儿不为武官，何遽尔？ 
现代文：高宗与武后大笑道： 女儿又不当武官，为何这样打扮？ 
English: Gao Zong and Wu Hou laughed loudly, "My daughter is not a military attaché, why is she dressed like this?"

古文：主曰： 以赐驸马可乎？ 
现代文：公主说 ：赐给驸马不行吗？ 
English: The princess said, "Can't I have a pony?"

古文：帝识其意，择薛绍尚之。
现代文：高宗明白她的意思，选择薛绍作为驸马。
English: Gao Zong understood her meaning and chose Xue Shao as his horse.

古文：假万年县为婚馆，门隘不能容翟车，有司毁垣以入，自兴安门设燎相属，道樾为枯。
现代文：借万年县衙门作为婚馆，因门狭窄不能容纳翟车，有关官员拆毁院墙让车进入，从兴安门设置燎烛相连，路旁大树为此枯焦。
English: They borrowed the county government gate as a wedding hall for ten thousand years. Due to the narrow gate, it could not accommodate the carriage. The relevant officials demolished the courtyard wall to let the car enter, and set up candles from the Xing'an gate. The roadside trees were scorched.

古文：绍死，更嫁武承嗣，会承嗣小疾，罢昏。
现代文：薛绍被杀之后，改嫁给武承嗣，恰逢承嗣生病，便取消婚约。
English: After Xue Shao was killed, she remarried to Wu Chengzhi, but when Chengzhi fell ill, they called off the wedding.

古文：后杀武攸暨妻，以配主。
现代文：武后便杀掉武攸暨之妻，将公主改嫁给攸暨。
English: Queen Wu then killed Wu Youcai's wife and married the princess to Youcai.

古文：主方额广颐，多阴谋，后常谓 类我 。
现代文：太平公主额头方，脸颊宽，足智多谋，武后常说与自己相似。
English: Princess Taiping's forehead is square, her cheeks are broad, and she is resourceful. Empress Wu often said that she resembled her.

古文：而主内与谋，外检畏，终后世无它訾。
现代文：而公主内虽善谋，外则检点畏惧，在整个武后当政的时代未出差错。
English: However, although the princess was well-intentioned on the inside, she was cautious and fearful on the outside, and she did not make any mistakes during the entire time that Empress Wu was in power.

古文：永淳之前，亲王食实户八百，增至千辄止；公主不过三百，而主独加户五十。
现代文：永淳年间以前，亲王享受实封八百户，增至一千就停止了；公主封邑不超三百户，而太平公主额外再加五十。
English: Before the Yongjun era, the prince enjoyed the real fief of eight hundred households, and stopped when it increased to one thousand; the princess fief did not exceed three hundred households, and the Taiping princess added an extra fifty.

古文：及圣历时，进及三千户。
现代文：到圣历年间时，增至三千户。
English: By the time of the Gregorian calendar year, this had increased to three thousand households.

古文：预诛二张功，增号镇国，与相王均封五千，而薛、武二家女皆食实封。
现代文：因参预诛除二张立功，进号为镇国太平公主，与相王一样增封至五千户，而公主所生的薛、武两家之女全都享受实封户邑。
English: As a result of her participation in the preliminaries, in addition to the two merits, she was given the title of the town's Taiping Princess, and the number of households was increased to five thousand, the same as that of the king, while the daughters of the two families of Xue and Wu, who were born to the princess, all enjoyed the status of real households.

古文：主与相王卫王成王、长宁安乐二公主给卫士，环第十步一区，持兵呵卫，僭肖宫省。
现代文：太平公主与相王、卫王、成王、长宁公主、安乐公主并给卫士，环宅每十步设一哨所，持兵器巡逻警卫，僭拟宫禁之制。
English: Princess Taiping and Prince Soo, King Wei, King Cheng, Princess Changning, and Princess Anle were also given guards, and a guard post was set up every ten steps around the house, with guards patrolling with weapons, imitating the palace ban system.

古文：神龙时，与长宁、安乐、宜城、新都、定安、金城凡七公主，皆开府置官属，视亲王。
现代文：神龙年间，太平与长宁、安乐、宜城、新都、定安、金城总共七位公主，全都开建府署设置官属，视同亲王。
English: During the years of the divine dragon, Taiping and Changning, Anle, Yicheng, Xindu, Ding'an, and Jincheng, a total of seven princesses, all started to build government offices, set up officials, and regarded themselves as princes.

古文：安乐户至三千，长宁二千五百，府不置长史。
现代文：安乐公主封户达到三千，长宁公主封户二千五百，其府不设长史。
English: Princess Anle had 3,000 households, and Princess Channing had 2,500 households. Their prefectures do not have long histories.

古文：宜城、定安非韦后所生，户止二千。
现代文：宜城、定安二公主非韦后所生，只封二千户。
English: Yicheng, the birthplace of Ding'an's second princess Fei Wei, has only 2,000 households.

古文：主三子：崇简、崇敏、崇行，皆拜三品。
现代文：太平公主的三个儿子崇简、崇敏、崇行，全都授予三品官衔。
English: Princess Taiping's three sons, Chong Jian, Chong Min and Chong Xing, were all awarded the rank of Sanpin.

古文：韦后、上官昭容用事，自以谋出主下远甚，惮之。
现代文：当时韦后与上官昭容擅权于禁中，都认为自己的智谋比太平公主差得太远，很畏惧她。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Wei and Shangguan Zhaorong, who was in charge of the Forbidden City, both thought that their wisdom was too far from that of Princess Taiping, and they were very afraid of her.

古文：主亦自以轧而可胜，故益横。
现代文：公主也自认为可以倾轧而取胜，因此日益豪横。
English: The princess also thought that she could roll over and win, so she became more and more arrogant.

古文：于是推进天下士，谓儒者多窭狭，厚持金帛谢之，以动大议，远近翕然响之。
现代文：于是推举进用天下之士。她认为儒生文人往往贫寒困窘，便厚送金帛以资助，由此以取美名，远近士人交口称颂。
English: She believed that Confucian scholars were often poor and destitute, so she generously sent gold ingots to support them, thereby gaining a good reputation and being praised by scholars from near and far.

古文：玄宗将诛韦氏，主与秘计，遣子崇简从。
现代文：玄宗准备诛除韦氏时，太平公主参与密谋，还派其子崇简随从玄宗。
English: When Xuanzong was preparing to eliminate the Wei clan, Princess Taiping took part in the conspiracy and also sent her son Chong Jian to follow Xuanzong.

古文：事定，将立相王，未有以发其端者。
现代文：事定之后，准备拥立相王为帝，但不好下手。
English: After the matter was settled, preparations were made to install Emperor Sanguo as emperor, but it did not go well.

古文：主顾温王乃儿子，可劫以为功，乃入见王曰： 天下事归相王，此非儿所坐。 
现代文：太平公主认为温王不过是个小孩子，可以劫持他建立大功，便入见温王说： 天下事权已归相王，此位非儿所坐。 
English: Princess Taiping thought that King Wen was just a child, and that she could kidnap him to establish a great achievement, so she went to see King Wen and said: The power of the world has been given to King Si, this person is not a child.

古文：乃掖王下，取乘舆服进睿宗。
现代文：便抱温王下座，取乘舆服用之物进奉睿宗。
English: He then took the throne from King Wen, and took advantage of the opportunity to enter the Ruizong Sect.

古文：睿宗即位，主权由此震天下，加实封至万户，三子封王，余皆祭酒、九卿。
现代文：睿宗即位，太平公主的权势由此而震动天下，增加实封达到万户，三个儿子封为异姓王，其余尽为祭酒、九卿。
English: When Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, the power of Princess Taiping shook the world. She increased the number of real fiefs to 10,000 households, three sons were made kings with different surnames, and the rest were made into sacrificial wine and nine nobles.

古文：主每奏事，漏数徙乃得退，所言皆从。
现代文：太平公主每次入朝奏事，计时漏壶数换方才退下，所说之话尽都听从。
English: Every time Princess Taiping went into the morning to report a matter, she only retreated after changing the time and the number of pots, and she obeyed everything she said.

古文：有所论荐，或自寒冗躐进至侍从，旋踵将相。
现代文：所荐举之人，有的从寒冗之位骤升至侍从清职，不久接连拜将为相。
English: Those recommended for promotion, some of whom have been promoted from the position of coldness and redundancy to the position of an attendant, will soon be promoted one after another.

古文：朝廷大政事非关决不下，闻不朝，则宰相就第咨判，天子殆画可而已。
现代文：朝廷政事，非她参预不可，有时不入朝，那么宰相就上门商议政事可否，天子只须画押而已。
English: In the political affairs of the imperial court, she must participate in advance, and sometimes she does not enter the imperial court, so the prime minister will go to the door to discuss whether the political affairs are possible, and the emperor only has to sign.

古文：主侍武后久，善策人主微指，先事逢合，无不中。
现代文：太平公主侍奉武后很长时间，由此善于观察君主微意，先事逢迎，无不中意。
English: Princess Taiping served the empress dowager for a long time, so she is good at observing the monarch's subtle intentions, anticipating everything, and is always pleased.

古文：田园遍近甸，皆上腴。
现代文：其家田园遍布近郊，全是上等好田。
English: His family's fields are spread all over the suburbs, and they are all first-class rice fields.

古文：吴、蜀、岭峤市作器用，州县护送，道相望也。
现代文：往吴、蜀、岭表地区买造器物，州县派人护送，道路相望不绝。
English: They went to Wu, Shu and Lingyue areas to buy handicrafts, and the prefectures and counties sent people to escort them.

古文：天下珍滋谲怪充于家，供帐声伎与天子等。
现代文：天下奇珍异宝充斥于家。供应之物、歌舞之乐与天子相等。
English: The world is full of rare treasures at home. Supplies, songs and dances are equal to the heavenly son.

古文：侍儿曳纨谷者数百，奴伯妪监千人，陇右牧马至万匹。
现代文：侍儿披服绸缎者数百人，奴伯监妪上千人，陇右牧马上万匹。
English: There are hundreds of attendants dressed in silk and brocade, over a thousand slave overseers, and tens of thousands of right-hand shepherds.

古文：长安浮屠慧范畜赀千万，谐结权近，本善张易之。及易之诛，或言其豫谋者，于是封上庸郡公，月给奉稍。
现代文：长安僧人慧范资财上千万，善于结交权贵。本与张易之友善，易之被诛杀之后，有人上言说慧范参与过谋议，由此被封为上庸郡公，每月给俸禄供应。
English: Hui Fan, a monk from Chang'an, had a fortune of tens of millions and was good at making powerful friends. He was friendly with Zhang Yi, and after Yi was killed, it was rumored that Hui Fan had participated in the conspiracy. As a result, he was made Shangyong County's governor and was paid a monthly stipend.

古文：主乳媪与通，奏擢三品御史大夫。
现代文：公主的奶妈与他相通，便上奏提升为三品官衔的御史大夫。
English: The princess's wet nurse was related to him, so he was promoted to the third grade official rank of goshi daifu.

古文：御史魏传弓劾其奸赃四十万，请论死。
现代文：御史魏传弓弹劾慧范奸赃四十万，奏请处以死刑。
English: Shi Wei issued a proclamation to impeach Hui Fan for treason and fined her 400,000 yuan. She was sentenced to death.

古文：中宗欲赦之，进曰： 刑赏，国大事，陛下赏已妄加矣，又欲废刑，天下其谓何？ 
现代文：中宗想赦免他，魏传弓上前说： 刑赏是国家大事，陛下之赏已妄加其人身上，又想为他废刑，天下人将会说什么呢？ 
English: Zhongzong wanted to pardon him, and Wei Chuanyu stepped forward and said, "Punishment and reward is a national event. His Majesty's reward has been arbitrarily imposed on his person, and he wants to abolish the punishment for him. What will the world say?

古文：帝不得已，削银青阶。
现代文：中宗不得已，只好下令削夺其银青光禄大夫的官爵。
English: As a last resort, Zhongzong had no choice but to order that his silver Qingguanglu doctor's title be taken away.

古文：大夫薛谦光劾慧范不法，不可贷，主为申理，故谦光等反得罪。
现代文：大夫薛谦光劾奏慧范行为不轨，不可宽贷。太平公主为他申辩，以故谦光等人反倒获罪。
English: Dr. Xue Qianguang accused So Hui Fan of improper conduct and could not be pardoned. Princess Taiping defended him, so Qianguang and others were convicted.

古文：玄宗以太子监国，使宋王、岐王总禁兵。
现代文：后来玄宗以太子身份监国治政，派宋王、岐王总率禁兵。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanzong, in his capacity as the overseer of state affairs, sent Song Wang and Qi Wang to lead the troops.

古文：主恚权分，乘辇至光范门，召宰相白废太子。
现代文：太平公主愤恨其权被夺，乘车至光范门，召集宰相商议废黜太子。
English: Princess Taiping, indignant that her power had been usurped, rode to Guangfan Gate and summoned the prime minister to discuss the dethronement of the crown prince.

古文：于是宋璟、姚元之不悦，请出主东都，帝不许，诏主居蒲州。
现代文：由此宋瞡、姚元之不高兴，奏请让太平公主出居东都，睿宗不答应，下诏公主出居蒲州。
English: As a result, Song Tao and Yao Yuan were displeased and requested that Princess Taiping move out of Dongdu, but Emperor Ruizong did not agree and ordered the princess to move out of Puzhou.

古文：主大望，太子惧，奏斥璟、元之以销戢怨嫌。
现代文：公主大为不满，太子恐惧，上奏斥退宋瞡、姚元之以消除怨嫌。
English: The princess was very dissatisfied, the prince was afraid, and Song Tao and Yao Yuan eliminated the grudge by rebuffing Song Tao and Yao Yuan.

古文：监察御史慕容珣复劾慧范事，帝疑珣离间骨肉，贬密州司马。
现代文：监察御史慕容繤再次劾奏慧范之事，睿宗怀疑慕容繤离间皇室骨肉，将他贬为密州司马。
English: When the inspector of imperial history, Murong Yao, once again impeached Soe Hui Fan, Ruizong suspected that Murong Yao was trying to split the royal family, and relegated him to the position of the secretary of state of Myeongju.

古文：主居外四月，太子表追还京师。
现代文：公主居外四个月后，太子上表追请公主返回京师。
English: After the princess had been away for four months, the prince asked her to return to the capital.

古文：时宰相七人，五出主门下。
现代文：当时共有宰相七人，其中五人出自公主门下。
English: At that time, there were a total of seven chancellors, five of whom came from the princess.

古文：又左羽林大将军常元楷、知羽林军李慈皆私谒主。
现代文：另外，左羽林大将军常元楷、知羽林军李慈全都私自拜见公主。
English: In addition, the General of the Left Feather Lin Army, Changyuan Kai, and the General of the Right Feather Lin Army, Li Ci, all went to see the princess in private.

古文：主内忌太子明，又宰相皆其党，乃有逆谋。
现代文：太平公主内忌太子英明，外见宰相多是其党徒，便着手策划叛逆阴谋。
English: The Taiping princess, who was close to the crown prince and many of the foreign ministers were her party members, began to plan a treasonous plot.

古文：先天二年，与尚书左仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲、中书令萧至忠崔湜、太子少保薛稷、雍州长史李晋、右散骑常侍昭文馆学士贾膺福、鸿胪卿唐晙及元楷、慈、慧范等谋废太子，使元楷、慈举羽林兵入武德殿杀太子，怀贞、羲、至忠举兵南衙为应。
现代文：先天二年，与尚书左仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲、中书令萧至忠、崔、太子少保薛稷、雍州长史李晋、右散骑常侍昭文馆学士贾膺福、鸿胪卿唐以及常元楷、李慈、慧范等人谋议废黜太子，派常元楷、李慈率领羽林兵进入武德殿杀害太子，窦怀贞、岑羲、萧至忠起兵于南衙作为接应。
English: Two years before yesterday, the left attendant of Shangshu, Sho Dou Huai Zhen, the attendant of Zhongzheng, the attendant of Zhongshu, Xiao Zhizhong, the attendant of Cui, the attendant of Xiao Bao Xue Yao, the attendant of Yong Zhou, Shi Li Jin, the attendant of the right, the attendant of Shouwen Academy, Jia Yufu, the attendant of Hong Yuqing, Tang, Chang Yuan Kai, Li Ci, Hui Fan and others conspired to depose the crown prince, sent Chang Yuan Kai and Li Ci to lead the Ulin soldiers into the Wude Hall to

古文：既有日矣，太子得其奸，召岐王、薛王、兵部尚书郭元振、将军王毛仲、殿中少监姜晈、中书侍郎王琚、吏部侍郎崔日用定策。
现代文：既已定下日期，而太子已先掌握其奸谋，便召集歧王、薛王、兵部尚书郭元振、将军王毛仲、殿中少监姜皎、中书侍郎王琚、吏部侍郎崔日用商议决策。
English: The date had already been set, and the prince had already mastered his treacherous plot, so he summoned King Bi, King Xue, the military secretary Guo Yuan Zhen, the general Wang Maozhong, the junior inspector Jiang Qi, the secretary Wang Qi, and the secretary Cui Nichi to discuss and make decisions.

古文：前一日，因毛仲取内闲马三百，率太仆少卿李令问王守一、内侍高力士、果毅李守德叩虔化门，枭元楷、慈于北阙下，缚膺福内客省，执羲、至忠至朝堂，斩之，因大赦天下。
现代文：在太平公主准备动手的前一天，派毛仲取出内苑马匹三百，率领太仆少卿李令问、王守一、内侍高力士、果毅李守德往叩虔化门，枭示常元楷、李慈之首于北阙之下，绑缚贾膺福于内客省，抓获岑羲、萧至忠至朝堂之上，将他们斩杀，随后大赦天下。
English: On the day before the Taiping Princess was ready to take action, he sent Mao Zhong to take out three hundred horses from the inner courtyard, led by the eunuch Shaoqing Li Lingqian, Wang Shouyi, the servant Gao Lixi, and Gu Yi Li Shoude to knock on the door of piety, showed the heads of Changyuan Kai and Li Ci under the North Pagoda, tied up Jia Xifu in the Neigai Province, captured Zou and Xiao Zhizhong to the top of the morning hall, killed them, and then pardoned the world.

古文：主闻变，亡入南山，三日不出，赐死于第。
现代文：太平公主闻知事变，逃入终南山中，三天之后才出来，命她自尽于家。
English: The Taiping princess heard that the governor had changed his mind and fled into the mountains, only to come out three days later, ordering her to commit suicide at home.

古文：诸子及党与死者数十人。
现代文：诸子以及党徒被处死者有数十人。
English: Dozens of sons and sons-in-law and party members were executed.

古文：簿其田赀，瑰宝若山，督子贷，凡三年不能尽。
现代文：没其田产资财，珍宝堆积如山，督其借贷，历时三年还不能征收完毕。
English: There is no field production, capital and wealth, treasures are piled up like a mountain, and it has taken three years to complete the collection.

古文：崇简素知主谋，苦谏，主怒，榜掠尤楚，至是复官爵，赐氏李。
现代文：崇简素知太平公主的逆谋，尽力苦谏，太平公主大怒，棍棒责打极为楚毒。到这时仍旧恢复他的官职，赐姓为李氏。
English: Knowing that Taiping Princess was plotting against him, Chong Jian tried his best to appease her, but Taiping Princess got very angry and beat him very badly with a club. At this time, he still resumed his official position and was given the surname of Li.

古文：大足中，忤张易之，为武后所杀。
现代文：起初，太平公主建造观池于乐游原上，作为盛大集会之用。
English: At first, Princess Taiping built a viewing pond on the Leyou Plain for grand gatherings.

古文：帝追赠，以礼改葬，号墓为陵。
现代文：既败之后，赐予宁、申、歧、薛四王，京都人士每年拔除不祥于其地。
English: After the defeat, Ning, Shen, Bi, and Xue were given to the four kings, and the people of Kyoto removed the evil from their land every year.

古文：安乐公主，最幼女。
现代文：安乐公主是韦后所生的最小的女儿。
English: Princess Anle is the youngest daughter of Empress Dowager Wei.

古文：帝迁房陵而主生，解衣以褓之，名曰裹儿。
现代文：中宗谪迁房陵时出生于路上，解下衣服用作襁褓，由此取名为裹儿。
English: He was born on the road when the Chuzong Empress was moving the imperial mausoleum. He took off his clothes to be used as a cocoon, which is how he got the name Wai Rong.

古文：姝秀辩敏，后尤爱之。
现代文：相貌秀美，聪明善辩，韦后特别喜爱她。
English: She was beautiful, clever and eloquent. Empress Dowager Wei was particularly fond of her.

古文：下嫁武崇训。
现代文：下嫁给武崇训。
English: She married Wu Chongxun later.

古文：帝复位，光艳动天下，侯王柄臣多出其门。
现代文：中宗恢复帝位之后，安乐公主恃其宠爱权倾天下，侯王权臣多出其门。
English: After Emperor Zhongzong restored the imperial throne, Princess Anle's favored power spread to the world, and more princes and ministers of state came from her family.

古文：尝作诏，箝其前，请帝署可，帝笑从之。
现代文：曾自做诏书，蒙住前面的内容，请中宗画押，中宗笑着答应其请。
English: He once made his own edict, covered up the previous content, and asked Zhongzong to seal it, and Zhongzong smiled and agreed to do so.

古文：又请为皇太女，左仆射魏元忠谏不可，主曰： 元忠，山东木强，乌足论国事？
现代文：还奏请立为皇太女，左仆射魏元忠劝谏不可如此行事，安乐公主说： 元忠是山东愚顽倔强之人，怎能与他商议国事？
English: She also requested that she be made the crown princess. Wei Yuanzhong, her right-hand man, advised her not to do so. Princess Anle said, "Yuanzhong is a stubborn person from Shandong Province. How can I discuss state affairs with him?"

古文：阿武子尚为天子，天子女有不可乎？ 
现代文：阿武尚且当上皇帝，我本是皇帝的女儿，有何不可呢？ 
English: I am the emperor's daughter, so why shouldn't I become emperor?

古文：与太平等七公主皆开府，而主府官属尤滥，皆出屠贩，纳訾售官，降墨敕斜封授之，故号 斜封官 。
现代文：与太平等七公主全都开置府署，而安乐公主府属官员尤为浮滥，尽都出自屠贩之家，因是捐纳资财买得官职，批降墨敕斜封授职，以故被称之为 斜封官 。
English: All of the seven princesses, including Tai Ping, set up government offices, and the officials of the Anle Princess's government were particularly extravagant. They all came from a family of butchers. They donated money to buy an official post, and were awarded the post with a diagonal seal. For this reason, they were called diagonal seal officials.

古文：主营第及安乐佛庐，皆宪写宫省，而工緻过之。
现代文：安乐公主营建居室及安乐佛庐，全都模拟宫禁，而工巧还要超出一头。
English: The Anle Princess's living room and the Anle Buddha Hall are all simulated palace fences, and the workmanship goes beyond the limit.

古文：尝请昆明池为私沼，帝曰： 先帝未有以与人者。 
现代文：她曾奏请将昆明池赐给她作为私家池沼，中宗说 ：先帝从未将它给过别人。 
English: She once asked for Kunming Pond to be given to her as a private pond, and Nakasone said, "The former emperor never gave it to anyone else."

古文：主不悦，自凿定昆池，延袤数里。定，言可抗订之也。
现代文：安乐公主不高兴，便自己动手开凿定昆池，绵延数里之地。 定 的意思是可与之相抗衡的意思。
English: Princess Anle was not happy, so she took it upon herself to start digging a pond, called Ding Kunchi, which stretched for several miles.

古文：司农卿赵履温为缮治，累石肖华山，隥彴横邪，回渊九折，以石瀵水。
现代文：司农卿赵履石为她家缮治，累砌石头以模仿华山，石阶石桥，纵横交错，溪水九折回旋，并造石泉喷水。
English: Zhao Lishi, Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, began to renovate her house, piling up stones to imitate Mount Huashan, stone steps, stone bridges, criss-crossing, circling streams, and creating stone fountains.

古文：又为宝炉，镂怪兽神禽，间以璖贝珊瑚，不可涯计。
现代文：还铸造宝炉，镂刻怪兽神鸟于其上，其间镶嵌王车王渠珊瑚不计其数。
English: He also cast a treasure furnace, engraved a monster god bird on it, and inlaid countless king car king canal corals.

古文：崇训死，主素与武延秀乱，即嫁之。
现代文：驸马武崇训死后，安乐公主因素与武延秀私通，便随即嫁给他。
English: After the death of Shima Wudongxun, Princess Anle had an affair with Wu Yanxiu and married him immediately.

古文：是日，假后车辂，自宫送至第，帝与后为御安福门临观，诏雍州长史窦怀贞为礼会使，弘文学士为傧，相王障车，捐赐金帛不赀。
现代文：出嫁这天，借用皇后车驾，自宫中送至其家，中宗与韦后为之出临安福门观览，并下诏雍州长史窦怀贞为礼会使、弘文馆学士作为傧相，相王为之障车，捐赐金帛不计其数。
English: On the day of their wedding, they borrowed the empress's car and drove it from the palace to their home. Zhong Zong and Wei Guo went to the Lin'an Fortune Gate to watch the wedding. They also sent a message to the governor of Yongzheng Province, Shi Dou Huai Zhen, as a courtesy to the society, and to the scholar of the Hongwen Museum as the bridegroom's best man. The bridegroom gave him a carriage, and donated countless gold brooches.

古文：翌日，大会群臣太极殿，主被翠服出，向天子再拜，南面拜公卿，公卿皆伏地稽首。
现代文：第二天，大会群臣于太极殿，安乐公主披服翠衣以出，向天子叩头两次，又南面拜见公卿，公卿大夫全都伏地叩头。
English: On the second day, the ministers of the assembly gathered in the Taiji Hall. Princess Anle put on a green dress and went out. She bowed twice to the heavenly son, and went south to meet the nobles. The nobles and doctors all bowed their heads.

古文：武攸暨与太平公主偶舞为帝寿。
现代文：武攸暨与太平公主双舞于前为帝拜寿。
English: Wu Youcai and Princess Taiping's double dance is preceded by the Imperial Birthday.

古文：赐群臣帛数十万。
现代文：赐予群臣绢帛数十万。
English: He gave hundreds of thousands of ryo to his vassals.

古文：帝御承天门，大赦，因赐民酺三日，内外官赐勋，缘礼官属兼阶、爵。
现代文：中宗临御承天门，大赦天下，赏赐民众宴饮三天，内外官员普赐勋爵，缘礼官属兼赐官阶与爵号。
English: Zhongzong adhered to the Gate of Heaven, granted amnesty to the whole world, rewarded the people with three days of feasting, and gave lordships to officials at home and abroad, and gave official ranks and titles to officials.

古文：夺临川长公主宅以为第，旁彻民庐，怨声嚣然。
现代文：夺取临川长公主的旧宅作为府第，广拆民房，怨声载道。
English: The seizure of the former residence of Princess Linchuan as the prefectural capital, the widespread demolition of private homes, and the outcry.

古文：第成，禁藏空殚，假万骑仗、内音乐送主还第，天子亲幸，宴近臣。
现代文：宅第建成之后，禁中财物为之一空，还借用万骑仪仗、内府音乐护送公主还家，天子亲出临幸，宴飨近臣。
English: After the completion of the residence, the forbidden property was emptied, and the princess was escorted home with the help of a horse-drawn chariot and music from the inner palace. The emperor himself came to the palace and entertained his close vassals.

古文：崇训子方数岁，拜太常卿，封镐国公，实封户五百。
现代文：崇训之子年仅数岁，就授职太常卿，封为镐国公，享受实封五百户。
English: When he was only a few years old, the son of Chongxun was given the post of Taizhongqing and the title of the Prince of the State of Shandong. He enjoyed the title of 500 households.

古文：公主满孺月，帝、后复幸第，大赦天下。
现代文：安乐公主生子满月，中宗与韦后再临其家，并大赦天下。
English: On the full moon of the birth of Princess Anle's son, Zhong Zong and Wei Hou returned to her home and pardoned the whole world.

古文：时主与长宁、定安三家厮台掠民子女为奴婢，左台侍御史袁从一缚送狱，主入诉，帝为手诏喻免。
现代文：当时安乐公主与长宁公主、定安公主三家家丁掠取平民子女作为奴婢，左台侍御史袁从一缚送下狱，公主入朝申诉，中宗为她下手诏，命令从一释放。
English: At that time, Princess Anle, along with Princess Changning and Princess Ding'an, were the heads of three families who plundered the children of commoners as slaves and maidservants. The attendant of the Left Division, Shiyuan, was sent to prison with one bound. The princess appealed to the court, and Zhongzong issued an edict for her and ordered her to be released with one bound.

古文：从一曰： 陛下纳主诉，纵奴驺掠平民，何以治天下？
现代文：从一说 ：陛下接受公主的申诉，纵容奴仆掠取平民，凭什么治理天下？
English: From one saying: His Majesty accepts the princess's appeal, connives at the servants' plundering of the common people, and by what right does he rule the world?

古文：臣知放奴则免祸，劾奴则得罪于主，然不忍屈陛下法，自偷生也。 
现代文：臣知道释放其奴就可免祸，劾治其奴就会得罪公主，但不忍亏屈陛下之法，以苟且偷生。 
English: The vassal knew that releasing his slave would avert disaster, and punishing his slave would offend the princess, but he could not bear to disobey his majesty's law and live a life of deception.

古文：不纳。
现代文：中宗对他的奏请不予接受。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：临淄王诛庶人，主方览镜作眉，闻乱，走至右延明门，兵及，斩其首。追贬为 悖逆庶人 。
现代文：临淄王诛除韦庶人时，安乐公主正在揽镜画眉，闻知乱起，逃至右延明门，追兵赶到，斩其首级，追贬为 悖逆庶人 。
English: When Linyi Wang Ya was expelling Wei commoners, Princess Anle was picking up mirrored eyebrows, heard the disturbance, fled to the Right Yanming Gate, chased the soldiers, beheaded them, and relegated them to "rebellious commoners."

古文：睿宗即位，诏以二品礼葬之。
现代文：睿宗即位之后，下诏按二品官的礼节予以安葬。
English: After Emperor Ruizong ascended the throne, he was buried according to the etiquette of second-rank officials.

古文：赵履温谄事主，尝褫朝服，以项挽车。
现代文：赵履温谄事安乐公主，曾脱去朝服，以项颈亲挽其车。
English: Zhao Liwen told the story of Princess Anle, who once took off her imperial robes and hitched her carriage by the scruff of her neck.

古文：庶人死，蹈舞承天门呼万岁，临淄王斩之，父子同刑。
现代文：韦庶人死后，他在承天门前手舞足蹈高呼万岁，临淄王下令斩其首级，父子同被处死。
English: After the death of Wei's son-in-law, he danced and shouted "long live" in front of the Gate of Heaven. The King of Linyi ordered his head to be chopped off, and both father and son were executed.

古文：百姓疾其兴役，割取肉去。
现代文：百姓恨他兴起徭役害民，争割其肉而去。
English: The people hated him, and they rose up against him to harm the people and to cut off his flesh.

