古文：起屠维大渊献，尽重光赤奋若，凡三年。
现代文：起屠维大渊献，尽重光赤奋若，一共三年。
English: From, to, a total of three years

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝中天福四年春，正月，辛亥，以澶州防御使太原张从恩为枢密副使。
现代文：后晋高祖天福四年春季，正月，辛亥，后晋高祖任用澶州防御使太原人张从恩为枢密副使。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Tianfu, the first month of Xinhai, after the promotion of Gao Zu, he appointed Zhang Cong'en, a Taiyuan native, as a confidential deputy envoy for the defense of Zhangzhou.

古文：朔方节度使张希崇卒，羌胡寇钞，无复畏惮。甲寅，以义成节度使冯晖为朔方节度使。
现代文：朔方节度使张希崇去世，北方的羌胡入侵和抢掠，无所忌惮，甲寅，后晋高祖任用义成节度使冯晖为朔方节度使。
English: Zhang Xizhong died as a result of the Shuo-side festival, the northern Zhou-side invasion and looting was unbridled, and Jia Yin, the later Jingu Gao Zu, appointed Yicheng festival to make Feng Jun the Shuo-side festival.

古文：党项酋长拓跋彦超最为强大，晖至，彦超入贺，晖厚遇之，因为于城中治第，丰其服玩，留之不遣，封内遂安。
现代文：党项族的酋长拓跋彦超最为强大，冯晖到镇后，拓跋彦超来镇祝贺，冯晖待他很是厚重，在城中替他修建宅第，置放了很多华服珍玩，留下他不让回去。这样，辖境之内始安宁下来。
English: The chieftain of the Dangxiang tribe, Tuoba Yanchao, was the most powerful. After Feng Jun arrived in the town, Tuoba Yanchao came to congratulate him. Feng Jun treated him very generously. He built a mansion for him in the town, and placed a lot of beautiful clothes and precious things for him. He did not let him go back. In this way, the territory began to calm down.

古文：唐群臣江王知证等累表请唐主复姓李，立唐宗庙，乙丑，唐主许之。
现代文：南唐群臣江王徐知证等几次上表请求南唐王徐诰恢复姓李，建立唐室宗庙，乙丑，南唐主准许。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's vassals, including Jiang Wang Xu Zhixian, repeatedly petitioned Southern Tang Dynasty's King Xu Xi to restore the surname Li, establish the Tang Dynasty's ancestral temple, Yixiu, with the permission of the Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：群臣又请上尊号，唐主曰： 尊号虚美，且非古。 
现代文：群臣又请求上帝王尊号，南唐主说： 尊号是一种虚美，并且不是古制。 
English: The ministers also asked for the title of God King, and the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said: The title of God King is a false beauty, and it is not an ancient system.

古文：遂不受。
现代文：便没有接受。
English: He finally refused to accept it.

古文：其后子孙皆踵其法，不受尊号，又不以外戚辅政，宦者不得预事，皆他国所不及也。
现代文：此后，子孙都依照这种做法，不受尊号，又不用外戚辅理政事，宦官不准干预国事，这都是其他国家所做不到的。
English: Since then, the descendants have followed this practice, and they do not receive the title of honor, do not have to assist their relatives in government affairs, and eunuchs are not allowed to intervene in state affairs, which is something that other countries cannot do.

古文：二月，乙亥，改太祖庙号曰义祖。
现代文：二月，乙亥，更改南唐太祖徐温的庙号称为义祖。
English: In February, Yihai, the temple name of the Southern Tang Emperor Xu Wen was changed to Yizhu.

古文：己卯，唐主为李氏考妣发哀，与皇后斩衰居庐，如初丧礼，朝夕临凡五十四日。
现代文：己卯，南唐主为李氏父母举行哀悼，同皇后一起披麻戴孝，值守于祭堂，像初丧之礼一样，早晚拜祭达五十四天。
English: At the same time, the Lord of Southern Tang held a mourning ceremony for Li's parents, and together with the empress, he wore a filial piety robe and kept a vigil in the hall. Like the first funeral ceremony, the morning and evening worship lasted for 54 days.

古文：江王知证、饶王知谔请亦服斩衰；不许。
现代文：徐温的亲子江王徐知证、饶王徐知谔请求也披麻戴孝；南唐主不准许。
English: Xu Wen's own sons, Jiang Wang Xu Zhizhen and Rao Wang Xu Zhizhen, also requested to wear the Ma Dai Xiao; the Southern Tang Dynasty did not allow it.

古文：李建勋之妻广德长公主假衰绖，入哭尽哀，如父母之丧。
现代文：李建勋之妻广德长公主假借丧服到祭堂哀哭尽礼，如同父母之丧一样。
English: The wife of Li Jianxun, the eldest princess of Guangde, borrowed mourning clothes and went to the hall to mourn, just like the mourning of her parents.

古文：辛巳，诏国事委齐王璟详决，惟军旅以闻。庚寅，唐主更名昪。
现代文：辛巳，南唐主下诏书，国事委授齐王李具体决处，只有军事问题要上报南唐主知道。庚寅，南唐主更名为李。
English: Suddenly, the Lord of Southern Tang issued an edict, and the State Affairs Commission ordered the specific execution of Qi Wang Li. Only military issues should be reported to the Lord of Southern Tang. Goyin, the Lord of Southern Tang changed his name to Li.

古文：诏百官议二祚合享礼。
现代文：南唐主下诏，令百官讨论把徐、李二姓的先人合起来同受祭享的礼制。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty issued an edict, ordering the officials to discuss the ritual of bringing together the ancestors of the surnames of Xu and Li to receive and enjoy the offerings.

古文：辛卯，宋齐丘等议以义祖居七室之东。
现代文：辛卯，宋齐丘等建议把义祖徐温的灵位放在第七室的东侧。
English: Xinwu, Song Qiqiu and others suggested that the spiritual seat of Yizhu Xuwen be placed on the east side of the seventh room.

古文：唐主命居高祖于西室，太宗次之，义祖又次之，皆为不祧之主。
现代文：南唐主命令把唐高祖李渊的灵位放在西室，唐太宗李世民居其次，义祖徐温再其次，都作为肇始之主。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty ordered that the spiritual seat of Li Yuan, the Tang Emperor's ancestor, be placed in the west room, followed by the residence of Li Shimin, the Tang Emperor's father-in-law, and then that of Xu Wen, the father-in-law, as the initiators.

古文：群臣言： 义祖诸侯，不宜与高祖、太宗同享，请于太庙正殿后别建庙祀之。 
现代文：群臣说： 义祖是诸侯，不适于与高祖、太宗同样祭享，建议在太庙正殿之后另行建庙祭祀他。 
English: The courtiers said, "Yizu is a vassal of a feudal lord, and is not suitable to be worshipped in the same way as Gaozu and Taizong. It is recommended that a separate temple be built to worship him after the main hall of the Imperial Temple.

古文：帝曰： 吾自幼托身义祖，向非义祖有功于吴，朕安能启此中兴之业？ 
现代文：南唐主说： 我从小托身给义祖，如果不是过去义祖有大功于吴国，朕怎能开创今天的中兴之大业？ 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said: I have entrusted myself to Yizhu since I was a child. If Yizhu did not do great service to the State of Wu in the past, how could I create today's great cause of ZTE?

古文：群臣乃不敢言。
现代文：群臣便不敢再说什么。
English: The courtiers did not dare to say anything.

古文：唐主欲祖吴王恪，或曰： 恪诛死，不若祖郑王无懿。 
现代文：南唐主想要把自己世系的始祖定为唐高祖的儿子吴王李恪，有人说： 李恪是被唐高宗诛杀的，不如以郑王李元懿为始祖。 
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty wanted to identify the founder of his lineage as Wu Wang Li Ke, the son of Tang Gaozhu. Some people said: Li Ke was killed by Tang Gaozong, it is better to take Zheng Wang Li Yuanqi as the founder.

古文：唐主命有司考二王苗裔，以吴王孙祎有功，祎子岘为宰相，遂祖吴王，云自岘五世至父荣。
现代文：南唐主便命有关部门考核二王的后裔，因为吴王的孙子李在历史上有戍守边疆之功，李的儿子李岘又当过宰相，于是以吴王为祖。说是从李岘之后，经过五世而至于南唐主之父李荣。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang ordered the relevant departments to assess the descendants of the two kings, because the grandson of King Wu, Li, had the merit of guarding the frontier in history, and Li's son, Li Ye, had been the prime minister, so he was the ancestor of King Wu. It is said that after Li Ye, through the fifth generation, the father of the Lord of Southern Tang, Li Rong.

古文：其名率皆有司所撰。
现代文：他们的名字，大体都是有关部门所杜撰。
English: Their names are mostly made up by the relevant departments.

古文：唐主又以历十九帝、三百年，疑十世太少。
现代文：南唐主又觉得自唐初至今，已然经历十九个皇帝，长达三百年，觉得自己的世系才经过十世太少。
English: The Southern Tang Lord also felt that since the beginning of the Tang Dynasty until now, he had already experienced nineteen emperors, up to three hundred years, and felt that it was too little for his lineage to go through ten generations.

古文：有司曰： 三十年为世，陛下生于文德，已五十年矣。 
现代文：有关部门奏称： 三十年为一世，陛下出生在唐僖宗文德年间，已经五十年了。 
English: Relevant departments reported: Thirty years is a lifetime, and it has been fifty years since His Majesty was born during the reign of Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty.

古文：遂从之。
现代文：于是，便依从了他们。
English: So the midwife followed his advice.

古文：卢损至福州，闽主称疾不见，命弟继恭主之。
现代文：卢损作为后晋朝廷的册礼使到达福州，闽主王昶称说有病，不予接见，命他的弟弟王继恭主持招待晋使。
English: Lu Kui arrived in Fuzhou as the envoy of the court of the Later Jin Dynasty. The master of the envoy, Wang Xi, said that he was ill and would not be received. He ordered his brother, Wang Jigong, to preside over the invitation of the envoy.

古文：遗其礼部员外郎郑元弼奉继恭表随损入贡。
现代文：派遣他的礼部员外郎郑元弼带着王继恭的表章跟随卢损入朝进贡。
English: He sent his brother-in-law Zheng Yuanqi, a member of the ceremonial department, to follow Lu Ji into the North with Wang Jigong's badge to pay tribute.

古文：闽主不礼于损，有士人林省邹私谓损曰： 吾主不事其君，不爱其亲，不恤其民，不敬其神，不睦其邻，不礼其宾，其能久乎！
现代文：闽主对卢损不礼貌，有个士人林省邹私下对卢损说： 我的国主不侍奉其君，不爱护其亲，不体恤其民，不崇敬其神，不敦睦其邻，不礼遇其宾，这样的人，他能够持久吗！
English: The lord was not courteous to Lu Qi. A scholar from Lin Province said to Lu Qi in private: My lord does not serve his prince, does not love his relatives, does not sympathize with his people, does not worship his god, does not make peace with his neighbors, and does not treat his guests with courtesy. Can he last?

古文：余将僧服而北逃，会相见于上国耳。 
现代文：我将要穿着僧服而向北逃走，以后会同您相见在中原吧。 
English: I'm going to put on my monk's robes and run away to the north. I'll meet you in the Central Plains later.

古文：三月，庚戌，唐主追尊吴王恪为定宗孝静皇帝，自曾祖以下皆追尊庙号及谥。
现代文：三月，庚戌，南唐主李追尊吴王李恪为定宗孝静皇帝，从他的曾祖以下都追尊庙号和谥称。
English: In March, the Southern Tang Dynasty lord Li Chongzong and the Western Tang Dynasty king Li Ke became Emperor Jingsong Xiao Jing. From his great-grandfather onward, he was known as Emperor Jingsong.

古文：己未，诏归德节度使刘知远、忠武节度使杜重威并加同平章事。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏，命归德节度使刘知远、忠武节度使杜重威一起加官同平章事。
English: After he was promoted to high priest, Liu Zhiyuan was given the order to return to virtue, and Du Chongwei was given the order to be loyal to the military, and both were promoted to the same rank.

古文：知远自以有佐命功，重威起于外戚，无大功，耻与之同制。制下数日，杜门四表辞不受。
现代文：刘知远自以为有辅佐后晋高祖创业的功劳，而杜重威是以外戚起家，没有大功，把与他同时受制令加官视为羞耻，制令下达好几天，关了门四次上表推辞不接受。
English: Liu Zhiyuan thought that he had the merit of assisting the founding father of the company, while Du Chongwei was a relative who started the company and did not have much merit. He regarded it as a shame to be punished and promoted at the same time as him. The order was issued for several days and the door was closed four times. He did not accept the letter of resignation.

古文：帝怒，谓赵莹曰： 重威，朕之妹夫，知远虽有功，何得坚拒制命！
现代文：后晋高祖发怒，对赵莹说： 重威是朕的妹夫，知远虽然有功，怎么能坚决拒受制命！
English: After the promotion, Gao Zu was angry and said to Zhao Ying: Chong Wei is my brother-in-law. Although Zhiyuan has made great achievements, how can he resolutely refuse to accept orders!

古文：可落军权，令归私第！ 
现代文：可以把他的军权削除，让他回到自己家里去。 
English: You can remove his military status and let him go back to his own home.

古文：莹拜请曰： 陛下昔在晋阳，兵不过五千，为唐兵十馀万所攻，危于朝露，非知远心如铁石，岂能成大业！
现代文：赵莹下拜请求说： 陛下从前在晋阳时，兵众不超过五千，被唐兵十余万人所进攻，危险得像早晨的露水一样，当时若不是知远心如铁石似的坚定，怎能成今日的大业！
English: Zhao Ying bowed down and pleaded: "Your Majesty, when you were in Jinyang, the number of soldiers was no more than five thousand, and you were attacked by more than one hundred thousand Tang soldiers. The danger was like the morning dew. If you did not have a mind as strong as iron at that time, how could you achieve today's great cause!

古文：奈何以小过弃之，窃恐此语外闻，非所以彰人君之大度也。 
现代文：为什么竟因小的过失而丢弃他！我担心这个话如果传出去，是不能够表现作为人君的宏大度量啊！ 
English: Why did you throw him away for a small mistake! I'm afraid that if this word gets out, it won't be able to express your grandeur as a human being!

古文：帝意乃解，命端明殿学士和凝诣知远第谕旨，知远惶恐，起受命。
现代文：后晋高祖的心情才舒解了，命端明殿学士和凝到刘知远的府第传谕皇帝的意旨，刘知远感到惶恐，敬起接受制令。
English: It was only after the enthronement of Emperor Gaozu that the Emperor's mood eased. He ordered the scholar of the Ming Dynasty and the prefect of the prefecture to convey the Emperor's will to Liu Zhiyuan. Liu Zhiyuan was alarmed and respectfully accepted the order.

古文：寻州戌将王彦忠据怀远城叛，上遣供奉官齐延祚往招谕之；彦忠降，延祚杀之。
现代文：灵州戍将王彦忠据怀远城叛变，后晋高祖派供奉官齐延祚去招谕他投降；王彦忠投降了，齐延祚却把他杀了。
English: The Lingzhou Emperor ordered Wang Yanzhong to defect to Huaiyuancheng, and later Emperor Jingu sent the tributary official Qi Yanjun to invite him to surrender; Wang Yanzhong surrendered, but Qi Yanzhong killed him.

古文：上怒曰： 朕践祚以来，未尝失信于人，彦忠已输仗出迎，延祚何得擅杀之！ 
现代文：后晋高祖发怒，说道： 朕登极以来，不曾失信于人，王彦忠已经打着旌旗仪仗出迎投降，齐延祚怎么能擅自把他杀了！ 
English: After the promotion, Gaozu became angry and said, "Since I ascended the throne, I have never been disloyal to anyone. Wang Yanzhong has already fought a battle of honor and surrendered. How could Qi Yanjun kill him without permission!

古文：除延祚名，重杖配流，议者犹以为延祚不应免死。
现代文：便罢了齐延祚的官，重杖责打之后流放发配到远地。议论的人还觉得对齐延祚不应当免除他的死刑。
English: He was punished with a heavy cane and banished to a faraway land. Some commentators also felt that he should not have been spared the death penalty.

古文：辛酉，册回鹘可汗仁美为奉化可汗。
现代文：辛酉，后晋朝廷册立回鹘可汗仁美为奉化可汗。
English: Soon after, the Later Jin Dynasty set up the Hui Khan Renmei as the Fenghua Khan.

古文：夏，四月，唐江王徐知证等请亦姓李；不许。
现代文：夏季，四月，南唐江王徐知证等也请求改姓为李，南唐主李没有答应。
English: In the summer, in April, Xu Zhixian, the King of the Southern Tang Dynasty, also requested to change his surname to Li. However, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, did not agree.

古文：辛巳，唐主祀南郊；癸未，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，南唐主祭祀南郊；癸未，实行大赦。
English: Sooner or later, the Southern Tang Dynasty will sacrifice the Southern Suburbs; sooner or later, an amnesty will be implemented.

古文：梁太祖以来，军国大政，天子多与崇政、枢密使议，宰相受成命，行制敕，讲典故，治文事而已。
现代文：自从后梁太祖朱温以来，军国大政，天子往往同崇政使、枢密使议定，宰相不过是接受成命，颁行制敕，讲求典故，治理文事而已。
English: Since Liang's great-great-great-grandfather Zhu Wen, the military ruler, the emperor often agreed with the high political envoys and the privy council envoys that the prime minister merely accepted the mission, issued the edict, talked about the allusion, and governed the literary affairs.

古文：帝惩唐明宗之世安重诲专横，故即位之初，但命桑维翰兼枢密使。
现代文：后晋高祖借鉴后唐明宗时期安重诲专横的教训，因此，即位之初，只任用桑维翰兼枢密使。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Jin Gaozong learned from the tyranny of Emperor Anzong in the post-Tang and Ming dynasties. Therefore, at the beginning of his reign, he only appointed Sun Weihan as a privy envoy.

古文：及刘处让为枢密使，奏对多不称旨，会处让遭母丧，甲申，废枢密院，以印付中书，院事皆委宰相分判。
现代文：到刘处让任枢密使时，奏言对事往往不能称意，适逢上刘处让的母亲去世而守丧，甲申，废除枢密院，把印交给中书省，枢密院的事务都委交宰相分别判处。
English: When Liu was appointed to the Privy Council, his report on the matter was often unsatisfactory. When Liu's mother died and was in mourning, Jia Shen abolished the Privy Council, handed the seal to the Ministry of Literature, and the Privy Council Affairs Committee submitted to the Prime Minister for separate sentencing.

古文：以副使张从恩为宣徽使，直学士、仓部郎中司徒诩、工部郎中颜衎并罢守本官。
现代文：任用枢密副使张从恩为宣徽使；直学士、仓部郎中司徒诩，工部郎中颜一起罢守本官。
English: Zhang Cong'en, vice-envoy of the privy council, was appointed as the envoy of the imperial seal; the direct bachelor, the son of the warehouse, the son of the middle school, the son of the middle school, the son of the middle school, and the son of the engineering department, the son of the middle school, together guarded the post.

古文：然勋臣近习不知大体，习于故事，每欲复之。
现代文：然而勋旧大臣近来的习惯不识大体，习惯于老的做法，常常想恢复老办法。
English: However, the honorable former minister's recent habits do not know the general, accustomed to the old practice, often want to restore the old way.

古文：帝以唐之大臣除名在两京者皆贫悴，复以李专美为赞善大夫，丙戌，以韩昭胤为兵部尚书，马胤孙为太子宾客，房暠为右骁卫大将军，并致仕。
现代文：后晋高祖因为后唐的大臣罢除官职后仍在东、西两京的都比较清贫困迫，便重新任用李专美为赞善大夫，丙戌，任命韩昭胤为兵部尚书，马胤孙为太子宾客，房为右骁卫大将军，一同以此终官退休。
English: Because the Eastern and Western capitals were still relatively poor and impoverished after the post-Tang ministers had been removed from office, Emperor Gaozu reappointed Li Zhanmei as Zanzan Daifu and Bijie, appointed Han Zhaotian as Hyobu Shangshu, Ma Yinsun as the prince's guest, and Fang as Uluowei Daifu, and retired from office together.

古文：闽主忌其叔父前建州刺史延武、户部尚书延望才名，巫者林兴与延武有怨，托鬼神语云： 延武、延望将为变。 
现代文：闽主王昶忌妒其叔父前建州刺史王延武、户部尚书王延望的才干和名声，卜巫人林兴与王延武有怨隙，借托鬼神的话，说 王延武、王延望将要叛变。 
English: The lord Wang Yao was jealous of the talent and fame of his uncles Wang Yanwu, the former Jianzhou scribe, and Wang Yanwang, the head of the household, and Lin Xing, the sorcerer, had a grudge against Wang Yanwu. Using the words of ghosts and gods, he said that Wang Yanwu and Wang Yanwang would rebel.

古文：闽主不复诘，使兴帅壮士就第杀之，并其五子。
现代文：闽主没有再查核，就让林兴率领强壮兵卒在他们的府第中把他们杀死，连同他们的五个儿子也一齐杀了。
English: Without further investigation, the tyrant ordered Lin Xing to lead his strong soldiers to kill them in their homes, together with their five sons.

古文：闽主用陈守元言，作三清殿于禁中，以黄金数千斤铸宝皇大帝、天尊、老君像，昼夜作乐，焚香祷祀，求神丹。
现代文：闽主采用陈守元的建议，在宫中建造三清殿，用黄金数千斤铸造宝皇大帝、天尊、老君像，昼夜作乐，焚香祷告，寻求神丹。
English: Adopting Chen Shouyuan's suggestion, the emperor built the Sanqing Hall in the palace, and used thousands of pounds of gold to cast the statues of Emperor Bao, Heaven, and Laojun. He played music day and night, burned incense, prayed, and sought the gods.

古文：政无大小，皆林兴传宝皇命决之。
现代文：政事不论大小，都由林兴传达宝皇的神命来决定。
English: Political affairs, no matter how big or small, are decided by Lin Xing conveying Bao Wang's divine mission.

古文：戊申，加楚王希范天策上将军，赐印，听开府置官属。
现代文：五月，戊申，后晋朝廷加封楚王马希范为天策上将军，赐予官印，听由他开府设置官属。
English: In May, Buxin, the Later Jin Dynasty's Tingja Emperor, crowned King Ma Xifan of Chu as the Tianze Shang general, bestowed the official seal, and allowed him to establish the government and set up officials.

古文：辛亥，唐徙吉王景遂为寿王，立寿阳公景达为宣城王。
现代文：辛亥，南唐调徙吉王李景遂为寿王，册立寿阳公李景达为宣城王。
English: In Xinhai, the Southern Tang Dynasty transferred Ji Wang Li Jing to become Shou Wang, and established Shouyang Gong Li Jingda as Xuancheng King.

古文：乙卯，唐镇海节度使兼中书令梁怀王徐知谔卒。
现代文：乙卯，南唐镇海节度使兼中书令梁怀王徐知谔去世。
English: Second, Xu Zhisheng, the envoy of the Southern Tang Zhenhai Festival and Liang Huai Wang, the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, died.

古文：唐人迁让皇之族于泰州，号永宁宫，防卫甚严。
现代文：南唐人把吴国让皇杨溥的族人迁移到泰州，号永宁宫，防卫很严密。
English: The Southern Tang people moved the people of Emperor Yang Di to Taizhou, known as Yongning Palace, and the defense was very tight.

古文：康化节度使兼中书令杨珙称疾，罢归永宁宫。
现代文：康化节度使兼中书令杨珙称说有病，罢官回到永宁宫。
English: Kanghua's envoy to the festival and the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Yang Hui, claimed to be ill and returned to the Yongning Palace.

古文：乙丑，以平卢节度使兼中书令杨琏为康化节度使；琏固辞，请终丧，从之。
现代文：乙丑，任用平卢节度使兼中书令杨琏为康化节度使；杨琏坚决推辞，请求守完让皇的丧事，南唐主答应了他。
English: Second Ugly, appointed the Pinglu Festival Envoy and ordered Yang Jiong to be the Kanghua Festival Envoy; Yang Jiong firmly refused, requesting to observe the funeral of Emperor Zhang, and the Lord of Southern Tang promised him.

古文：唐主将立齐王璟为太子，固辞；乃以为诸道兵马大元帅、判六军诸卫、守太尉、录尚书事、升、扬二州牧。
现代文：南唐主将要立齐王李为太子，李坚决辞让；便把他任用为诸道兵马大元帅、判六军诸卫、守太尉、录尚书事、扬二州牧。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty was about to make Qi King Li the crown prince, but Li resolutely refused to give in. He appointed him as the grand marshal of the armies and horses of all provinces, the commander of the six armies, the captain of the guards, the recorder of the records, and the governor of two states.

古文：闽判六军诸卫建王继严得士心，闽主忌之，六月，罢其兵柄，更名继裕；以弟继镛判六军，去诸卫字。
现代文：闽国的判六军诸卫建王王继严能得将士之心，闽主王昶嫉妒他，六月，罢免了他的兵权，把他的名字改为继裕；任用闽王之弟王继熔为判六军，删去诸卫二字。
English: Jian Wang Jian, the commander of the Six Armies of the Guards of the State of Shandong, was able to win the hearts of the soldiers. The commander of the Six Armies of the State of Shandong, Wang Jian, was jealous of him. In June, he was relieved of his military power and his name was changed to Jiyu. Wang Jiyu, the brother of the King of Shandong, was appointed as the commander of the Six Armies of the State of Shandong, and the word "guard" was deleted.

古文：林兴诈觉，流泉州。
现代文：林兴的欺诈被发觉，流放到泉州。
English: Lin Xing's fraud was discovered and he was exiled to Quanzhou.

古文：望气者言宫中有灾，乙未，闽主徙居长春宫。
现代文：望气的人说宫中要发生灾祸，乙未，闽主迁居到长春宫。
English: Hopeful people said that there would be a disaster in the palace, and that the tyrant would move to Changchun Palace.

古文：秋，七月，庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚子朔，出现日食。
English: Autumn, July, Geng Zi Shuo, solar eclipse.

古文：成德节度使安重荣出于行伍，性粗率，恃勇骄暴，每谓人曰： 今世天子，兵强马壮则为之耳。 
现代文：成德节度使安重荣出身于行伍，性情粗率，倚仗自己勇武而骄傲暴躁，常常对人们说： 现在的天子，兵强马壮就可以当。 
English: The Chengde Festival caused An Chongrong to be born in the military, with a rude temperament, relying on his bravery and proud and irritable, often saying to people: "Nowadays, son of heaven, you can be a strong soldier."

古文：府廨有幡竿高数十尺，尝挟弓矢谓左右曰： 我能中竿上龙首者，必有天命。 
现代文：他的衙门里有一个幡竿有几十尺高，他曾经挟着弓箭对左右的人说： 我如果能射中竿上龙首，必有当人君的天命。 
English: There is a flagpole in his gate that is dozens of feet high. He used to hold a bow and arrow and say to the people around him, "If I can hit the dragon's head with the pole, I will surely have the destiny of being a great man."

古文：一发中之，以是益自负。
现代文：一发而射中，由此就更加自负。
English: One shot and you're in, which makes you more arrogant.

古文：帝之遣重荣代秘琼也，戒之曰： 琼不受代，当别除汝一镇，勿以力取，恐为患滋深。 
现代文：后晋高祖当初派遣安重荣去代替秘琼时，告诫他说： 如果秘琼不接受你去代职，将要为你另委一镇做节度使，不要用武力去夺取，怕以后为患越来越深。 
English: When Emperor Gaozu sent An Chong Rong to replace Hercule Poirot, he warned him: "If Hercule Poirot doesn't accept you as his deputy, he will assign you to another town to be the governor. Don't try to take it by force, for fear that your troubles will get worse in the future."

古文：重荣由是以帝为怯，谓人曰： 秘琼匹夫耳，天子尚畏之，况我以将相之重，士马之众乎！ 
现代文：安重荣因此以为后晋高祖怯懦，对别人说： 秘琼是个匹夫小人，天子尚且怕他，何况对我这样有将相的重要地位，有众多兵马的人啊！ 
English: As a result, An Chong Rong thought that the late Jin Gao Zu was cowardly, and said to others, "He Qiong is a coward, and Heaven is still afraid of him, not to mention that I have such an important position as commander-in-chief, and there are many soldiers and horses!"

古文：每所奏请多逾分，为执政所可否，意愤愤不快，乃聚亡命，市战马，有飞扬之志。
现代文：有所奏请往往超越本份，被执政者或可或否，心里愤愤不愉快，便聚合亡命之徒，购买战马，有自求飞扬的意图。
English: Those who have something to say often overstep their bounds, those who are in power may or may not be swayed, they are resentful and unhappy, they gather desperadoes, buy war horses, and have the intention to fly.

古文：帝知之，义武节度使皇甫遇与重荣姻家，甲辰，徙遇为昭义节度使。
现代文：后晋高祖知道这种情况，义武节度使皇甫遇与安重荣是姻亲，甲辰，把皇甫遇调迁为昭义节度使来隔离他们。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong knew about this situation. The Emperor Fu En and Emperor An Chong Rong were in-laws, and Emperor Jia transferred the Emperor Fu En to the Emperor Zhoyi to isolate them.

古文：乙巳，闽北宫火，焚宫殿殆尽。
现代文：乙巳，闽国北宫失火，把宫殿几乎焚烧殆尽。
English: Suddenly, a fire broke out in the North Palace of Shandong Province, and the palace was almost completely burned down.

古文：戊申，薛融等上所定编敕，行之。
现代文：戊申，后晋薛融等上奏所定的编敕，加以施行。
English: Wushin, later Jin Xue Rong, and others performed the arrangements set forth in the report and implemented them.

古文：丙辰，敕： 先令天下公私铸钱，今私钱多用铅锡，小弱缺薄，宜皆禁之，专令官司自铸。 
现代文：丙辰，后晋高祖敕令： 以前令天下公私铸钱，现在私铸钱多用铅，而且小弱缺薄，应该都加以禁止，专门由主管官司自行铸造。 
English: Cixin, the founder of the Jingu School, said: In the past, the world was ordered to mint money privately and privately. Now, privately minted money mostly uses lead, and it is small and weak. It should be banned. It should be specially minted by the competent court.

古文：西京留守杨光远疏中书侍郎、同平章事桑维翰迁除不公及营邸肆于两都，与民争利；帝不得已，闰月，壬申，出维翰为彰德节度使兼侍中。
现代文：西京留守杨光远上疏奏称：中书侍郎、同平章事桑维翰对官吏调、任不公，以及允许任意两都营造官邸，与民争利；后晋高祖不得已，闰七月，壬申，把桑维翰外调为彰德节度使，兼任侍中。
English: Yang Guangyuan, who stayed in West Beijing, wrote in his diary: "Chuan Shushijiro, Tongping Zhangji, and San Weihan were unfair to the officials and allowed them to build official residences in any two cities to compete with the people. Later, Emperor Gaozong had no choice but to transfer San Weihan to the Jiaodei Festival in July, and he also served as an attendant."

古文：初，义武节度使王处直子威，避王都之难，亡在契丹，至是，义武缺帅，契丹主遣使来言， 请使威袭父土地，如我朝之法。 
现代文：以前，义武节度使王处直的儿子王威，为了躲避王都叛乱的灾难，逃亡在契丹。到此时，义武军因为皇甫遇调迁而缺少主帅，契丹主耶得德光遣派使者来说： 请求让王威承袭他父亲的土地，如同我朝的法律规定。 
English: In the past, the Yiwu Festival made Wang Wei, the son of Wang Shanzhong, flee to Khitan in order to avoid the calamity of the Wangdu rebellion. At this time, the Yiwu army lacked a commander because of the emperor's transfer, and the Khitan lord Yedde Deguang sent an envoy to say: Request that Wang Wei inherit his father's land, as stipulated by the laws of my dynasty.

古文：帝辞以 中国之法必自刺史、团练、防御序迁乃至节度使，请遣威至此，渐加进用。 
现代文：后晋高祖推辞，认为： 中原之法，必须从刺史、团练使、防御使依照顺序迁升，才能到节度使，请把王威派到这里来，逐渐加以进用。 
English: After being promoted to a higher rank, the ancestor of Wang Wei suggested that: the law of Zhongyuan must be promoted from stabbing history, group training, and defense in order to reach the festival. Please send Wang Wei here and gradually apply it.

古文：契丹主怒，复遣使来言曰： 尔自节度使为天子，亦有阶级邪！ 
现代文：契丹主发怒，再次遣派使者来说道： 你自己从节度使升到天子，也是按阶梯上去的吗！ 
English: Enraged, the Khitan lord sent another messenger to say: "Did you yourself ascend from the world to the heavenly son, and did you ascend by a ladder?"

古文：帝恐其滋蔓不已，厚赂契丹，且请以处直兄孙彰德节度使廷胤为义武节度使以厌其意。契丹怒稍解。
现代文：后晋高祖怕这样做法会滋蔓没有止境，便厚重地贿赂契丹，并且请求用王处直哥哥的孙子彰德节度使王廷胤为义武节度使以满足他们的愿望，契丹的怒气稍有缓解。
English: Later, fearing that this practice would continue without end, the Shingao ancestors bribed the Khitan generously, and requested that Wang Tingyan be used as the grandson of Wang Shanzhong's brother, Zhang De, to satisfy their wishes. The anger of the Khitan eased slightly.

古文：初，闽惠宗以太祖元从为拱宸、按鹤都，及康宗立，更募壮士二千人为腹心，号宸卫都，禄赐皆厚于二都；或言二都怨望，将作乱，闽主欲分隶漳、泉二州，二都益怒。
现代文：过去，闽惠宗王把太祖王审知的原来侍从立为拱宸、控鹤二都，等到康宗王昶即位后，又募集壮士二千作为腹心，号称宸卫都，俸禄和赏赐都厚于二都；有人传言，二都有怨气，将要作乱，闽主想把二者分别隶属于漳、泉二州，二都更加愤怒。
English: In the past, King Gong Huizong set up the original attendants of the great-grandfather Wang Qianchen as the keystone and the control crane of the two capitals. When King Kangzong ascended the throne, he also recruited two thousand strong men as confidants, claiming to be the guardian of the two capitals, and the salary and reward were thicker than the two capitals. Some people rumored that both had grudges and would make trouble, and the tyrant wanted to subordinate the two to the two states of Quan and Quan respectively. Both were more angry.

古文：闽主好为长夜之饮，强群臣酒，醉则令左右伺其过失；从弟继隆醉失礼，斩之。
现代文：闽主喜欢作长夜的饮宴，强制群臣喝酒，喝醉了便让左右之人伺机找他的过失；闽主的堂弟王继隆醉后失礼，把他斩了。
English: The tyrant's master liked to make a long night of drinking, forcing his ministers to drink, and when he was drunk, he let those around him wait for him to find his fault; the tyrant's cousin Wang Jilong was drunk and was rude, and he was beheaded.

古文：屡以猜怒诛宗室，叔父左仆射、同平章事延羲阳为狂愚以避祸，闽主赐以道士服，置武夷山中；寻复召还，幽于私第。
现代文：这样，由于多次猜疑、发怒而诛杀宗室。闽主的叔父左仆射、同平章事王延羲表面上装作狂呆用来躲避祸端，闽主赐给他道士服装，把他放置在武夷山中；不久，又把他召回来，幽禁在他自己的私第。
English: In this way, because of his many suspicions and anger, he killed his father's family. The tyrant's uncle, Zuo Shuai, and Tongping Zhangji Wang Yanqi pretended to be mad on the surface to avoid the disaster. The tyrant gave him a Taoist costume and placed him in the Wuyi Mountains; soon, he called him back and imprisoned him in his own private place.

古文：闽主数侮拱宸、控鹤军使永泰硃文进、光山连重遇，二人怨之。
现代文：闽主几次轻侮拱宸、控鹤军使永泰人朱文进、光山人连重遇，二人很怨恨。
English: The warlord insulted Gong Zhao several times, and Zhu Wenjin from Yongtai and Guangshan from Lianlian repeatedly encountered the envoys of the controlling crane army, and the two men were very resentful.

古文：会北宫火，求贼不获；闽主命重遇将内外营兵扫除馀烬，日役万人，士卒甚苦之。
现代文：没过多久，北宫失火，查究放火贼人但没有寻获；闽主命令连重遇带领内外营兵扫除余烬，每天役使上万人，士兵很劳苦。
English: Not long after, the North Palace caught fire, and the arsonists were investigated but not found; the tyrant ordered to repeatedly lead domestic and foreign soldiers to sweep away the embers, serving tens of thousands of people every day, and the soldiers were very hardworking.

古文：又疑重遇知纵火之谋，欲诛之；内学士陈郯私告重遇。
现代文：又怀疑连重遇知道纵火的阴谋，想要把他杀了；内廷学士陈郯私下告诉了连重遇。
English: He also suspected that Lian Lian knew about the arson plot and wanted to kill him; Inner Court Scholar Chen Xi privately told Lian Lian about the encounter.

古文：辛巳夜，重遇入直，帅二都兵焚长春宫以攻闽主，使人迎延羲于瓦砾中，呼万岁；复召外营兵共攻闽主；独宸卫都拒战，闽主乃与李后如宸卫都。
现代文：辛巳夜，连重遇进宫值勤，率领二都之兵焚烧了长春宫，袭击闽主，派人从瓦砾中把王延羲迎接出来，对着他呼喊万岁，又召集外营的二都兵众共同攻击闽主；只有宸卫都的兵土抗拒进行战斗，闽主便和皇后李春燕避往宸卫都。
English: In the middle of the night, he happened to be on duty in the palace for the second time in a row. He led the soldiers of the two capitals to burn the Changchun Palace, attacked the tyrant, sent people to meet Wang Yanqi from the rubble, shouted "long live" to him, and gathered the soldiers of the two capitals outside the camp to jointly attack the tyrant. Only the soldiers of the two guard capitals resisted to fight, so the tyrant and the queen Li Chunyan fled to the two guard capitals.

古文：比明，乱兵焚宸卫都，宸卫都战败，馀众千馀人奉闽主及李后出北关，至梧桐岭，众稍逃散。
现代文：待到天亮，乱兵焚烧了宸卫。宸卫都打败，剩下的千余人保护着闽主和李后出了北关，到达梧桐岭，剩下的人又有逃散的。
English: After waiting until dawn, the ruffians burned the guards. The guards were all defeated, and the remaining thousand or so people protected the tyrant and Li, and then they went out of Beiguan and reached Wu Tongling. The rest of the people fled.

古文：延羲使兄子前汀州剌史继业将兵追之，及于村舍；闽主素善射，引弓杀数人。
现代文：王延羲让他哥哥的儿子前汀州刺史王继业带兵追赶他们，一直逃到村舍；闽主平素擅长射术，拉起弓射杀几个人。
English: Wang Yanqi sent his brother's son, Wang Jiye, the former governor of Tingzhou, to chase after them with his soldiers and fled to the village. The warlord, who was good at archery, drew his bow and shot several people.

古文：俄而追兵云集，闽主知不免，投弓谓继业曰： 卿臣节安在！ 
现代文：不多时，追兵云集，闽主自知不能逃脱，便丢下弓箭对王继业说： 你的臣节到哪里去了！ 
English: Not infrequently, when the pursuers had gathered, the tyrant, knowing that he could not escape, threw down his bow and arrow and said to Wang Jiye: "Where is your vassal!

古文：继业曰： 君无君德，臣安有臣节！
现代文：王继业说： 君既然没有君德，臣还有什么臣节！
English: Wang Jiye said, "Since you have no virtue, what do you have to celebrate?

古文：新君，叔父也，旧君，昆弟也，孰亲孰疏？ 
现代文：新君，是我的叔父，旧君，是我的兄弟，分得清谁亲谁远吗？ 
English: The new prince is my uncle, the old prince is my brother. Can you tell who is closer to whom?

古文：闽主不复言。
现代文：闽主不再说话。
English: The Lord did not speak again.

古文：继业与之俱还，至陀庄，饮以酒，醉而缢之，并李后及诸子、王继恭皆死。
现代文：王继业同他一起回来，到达陀庄，让他喝酒，醉后把他勒死了。连同李后及几个儿子，王继恭都杀死了。
English: Wang Jiye came back with him, arrived at Dazhuang, made him drink alcohol, and strangled him when he was drunk. Together with Li Hou and several sons, Wang Jigong killed them all.

古文：宸卫馀众奔吴越。
现代文：宸卫都的余众投奔吴越。
English: The rest of the defenders of the capital fled to Wuyue.

古文：延羲自称威武节度使、闽国王，更名曦，改元永隆，赦系囚，颁赉中外。
现代文：五延羲自称威武节度使、闽国王，改名王曦，改年号为永隆。赦放系押的囚犯，对朝廷内外进行赐赏。
English: Wu Yanjun, who claimed to be a mighty military envoy of the festival and the king, changed his name to Wang Xi and his era name to Yonglong. He pardoned prisoners held in custody and rewarded both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：以宸卫弑闽主赴于邻国；谥闽主曰圣神英睿文明广武应道大弘孝皇帝，庙号康宗。
现代文：宣称宸卫都杀了闽主投赴邻国，谥号闽主为圣神英睿文明广武应道大弘孝皇帝，庙号康宗。
English: He claimed that all the guards had killed their lord and fled to a neighboring country. His posthumous name was Emperor Hongxiao of the Holy Spirit, Wisdom and Civilization, Guangwu Ying Tao, and his temple name was Kangzong.

古文：遣商人间道奉表称籓于晋；然其在国，置百官皆如天子之制。
现代文：遣派商人从便道去上表，向后晋朝廷称藩；然而在他的国内，设置百官都如同天子的制度。
English: He sent merchants from the roadside to the table, and later promoted the imperial court to the domain; however, in his country, the establishment of a hundred officials is like the system of the son of heaven.

古文：以太子太傅致仕李真为司空兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任用已经以太子太傅名义退休的李真为司空兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: He appointed Li Zhen, who had already retired in the name of Etsuko Taifu, as the secretary and the junior secretary and the same rank.

古文：连重遇之攻康宗也，陈守元在宫中，易服将逃，兵人杀之。
现代文：连重遇攻击康宗时，陈守元正在宫中，换了衣服将要逃跑，兵士把他杀了。
English: When they repeatedly attacked Kangzong, Chen Shouyuan was in the palace. He changed his clothes and was about to run away. The soldiers killed him.

古文：重遇执蔡守蒙，数以卖官之罪而斩之。
现代文：连重遇抓住了蔡守蒙，数责他的卖官之罪而把他杀了。
English: He repeatedly caught Cai Shumeng and killed him after repeatedly accusing him of being a traitor.

古文：闽王曦既立，遣使诛林兴于泉州。
现代文：闽王王曦即位以后，派使者到泉州去把林兴也杀了。
English: After the enthronement of Wang Xi, the king of Qi, he sent an envoy to Quanzhou to kill Lin Xinglu.

古文：河决亳州。
现代文：黄河在薄州决口。
English: The Yellow River bursts its banks in Bozhou.

古文：八月，辛丑，以冯道守司徒兼侍中。
现代文：八月，辛丑，后晋高祖任用冯道守职司徒兼侍中。
English: In August, after the Xinwu Incident, Emperor Gaozong appointed Feng Daoshu as an official and a chamberlain.

古文：壬寅，诏中书知印止委上相，由是事无巨细，悉委于道。
现代文：壬寅，后晋高祖下诏：中书知印只委予上相，从此事无大小，都委交给冯道办理。
English: Ren Yin, the late Jingu Gao Zu, issued the following edict: the printing of the Chinese book of knowledge was only entrusted to the chief minister, and the matter was left to Feng Dao to handle.

古文：帝尝访以军谋，对曰： 征伐大事，在圣心独断。
现代文：后晋高祖曾经把关于用兵的谋略征询冯道的意见，冯道回答说： 征伐是国家的大事，取决于圣上意志的独断。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu asked Feng Dao for his opinion on the strategy of using soldiers. Feng Dao replied: Conquest is an important matter for the country, and it depends on the arbitrary decision of the supreme will.

古文：臣书生，惟知谨守历代成规而已。 
现代文：我是个书生，只知道谨守历代的成规而已。 
English: I'm a bookworm, I only know how to stick to the rules of past generations.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：后晋高祖以为他说得对。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：道尝称疾求退，帝使郑王重贵诣第省之，曰： 来日不出，朕当亲往。 
现代文：冯道曾经称病要求退职，后晋高祖让郑王石重贵到冯道的府第探视他，并说： 明天还不出来，朕就要亲自去请他。 
English: Feng Dao once said that he was ill and asked to retire. After promotion to Gaozhu, he asked Zheng Wangshi to visit him at Feng Dao's residence, and said, "I can't come out tomorrow, so I'll invite him in person."

古文：道乃出视事。
现代文：冯道这才出来视事。
English: It was only then that Feng Dao came out to see the situation.

古文：当时宠遇，群臣无与为比。
现代文：当时的宠遇，群臣没有能同他相比的。
English: At that time, the favors of the courtiers could not be compared with him.

古文：己酉，以吴越王元璟为天下兵马元帅。
现代文：己酉，后晋朝廷任吴越王钱元为天下兵马元帅。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, Wu Yue Wang Qianyuan became the marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：黔南巡内溪州刺史彭士愁引蒋、锦州蛮万馀人寇辰、澧州，焚掠镇戍，遣使乞师于蜀；蜀主以道远，不许。
现代文：黔南节度使巡属之内的溪州刺史彭士愁率领奖州、锦州蛮族万余人袭扰辰州、澧州，焚掠镇戍之所，派遣使者到蜀国请求出兵支援；后蜀主孟昶因为道路太远，没有答应。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty festival, more than ten thousand barbarians from Xizhou and Jinzhou, led by Xizhou's vassal, Spen Shixu, attacked and harassed Chenzhou and Ganzhou, burned and looted towns and villages, and sent envoys to Shu to request the dispatch of troops for support. Later, Shu's lord, Meng Wei, did not agree because the road was too far.

古文：九月，辛未，楚王希范命左静江指挥使刘勍、决胜指挥使廖匡齐帅衡山兵五千讨之。
现代文：九日，辛未，楚王马希范命令左静江指挥使刘、决胜指挥使廖匡齐率领衡山兵五千去讨伐。
English: On the 9th day of Xinwei, King Ma Xifan of Chu ordered the commander of Zuo Jingjiang to send Liu and the commander of the decisive victory to send Liao Kuangqi to lead five thousand Hengshan soldiers to fight.

古文：癸未，以唐许王从益为郇国公，奉唐祀。
现代文：癸未，后晋朝廷封后唐许王李从益为郇国公，奉行后唐的祭祀。
English: Later, after the Later Jin Dynasty, the Tang Emperor Xu Wang Li Congyi became the ruler of the State of Shan, and he followed the sacrificial rituals of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：从益尚幼，李后养从益于宫中，奉王淑妃如事母。
现代文：由于李从益还年幼，后晋高祖的李皇后是后唐明宗曹皇后的女儿，便把许王留养在宫中，又对明宗次妃王淑妃侍奉如同母亲。
English: Since Li Congyi was still young, the Queen of Li, the founder of Later Jin Gao, was the daughter of the Empress Cao of the Later Tang and Ming Dynasties. She kept King Xu in the palace and served as a mother to the Second Empress of the Later Tang and Ming Dynasties, Empress Wang Shuxi.

古文：冬，十月，庚戌，闽康宗所遣使者郑元弼至大梁。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚戌，闽国康宗王曦所遗派的使者郑元弼到达晋朝东京大梁。
English: In the winter of October, Geng Zheng, the emissary of Zheng Yuanzhong, who was sent by Wang Xi, the Kangzong Emperor of Jin, arrived in the capital of the Jin Dynasty, Tokyo.

古文：康宗遗执政书曰： 闽国一从兴运，久历年华，见北辰之帝座频移，致东海之风帆多阻。 
现代文：康宗给执政者的信说： 闽国自从兴运以来，一直统续贡职至今，年华久历，现在，北辰的帝座频繁变换，以致东海的风帆常常受阻。 
English: Kangzong's letter to the ruler said: "Since the rise of the Qing Dynasty, Shandong has been paying tribute to the emperor. Now, the emperor's seat in the north frequently changes, so that the sails of the East Sea are often blocked.

古文：又求用敌国礼致书往来。
现代文：又要求用对等国家的礼节致书往来。
English: He also requested that correspondence be conducted with the etiquette of a peer country.

古文：帝怒其不逊，壬子，诏却其贡物及福、建诸州纲运，并令元弼及进奏官林恩部送速归。
现代文：后晋高祖恼怒他的态度不够谦逊，壬子，下诏退还其贡物以及福州、建州等地的成批纲运的物资，并命令郑元弼及闽国驻后晋朝廷的进奏官林恩部送他们即速回去。
English: Enraged that his attitude was not humble enough, Emperor Gaozhu of the Later Jin Dynasty issued an edict to return his tribute as well as the materials transported in batches from Fuzhou, Jianzhou and other places, and ordered Zheng Yuan and Lin Enbu, the imperial envoy stationed in the court of the Later Jin Dynasty, to send them back immediately.

古文：兵部员外郎李知损上言： 王昶僭慢，宜执留使者，籍没其货。 
现代文：兵部员外郎李知损上奏说： 王昶僭越傲慢，应该拘留他的使者，登记没收他的货物。 
English: Li Zhizai, the son of a member of the military department, said in his report: Wang Xiyue is arrogant, he should detain his envoy, register and confiscate his goods.

古文：乃下元弼、恩狱。
现代文：后晋高祖便把郑元弼、林恩投进监狱里。
English: After he was promoted to Gaozu, he threw Zheng Yuanyao and Lynn into prison.

古文：吴越恭穆夫人马氏卒。
现代文：吴越王钱元的恭穆夫人马氏去世。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qianyuan's wife Ma passed away.

古文：夫人，雄武节度使绰之女也。
现代文：夫人是雄武节度使马绰之女。
English: His wife was the daughter of the great warrior, Sekido, and his horse, Matsuo.

古文：初，武肃王镠禁中外畜声妓，文穆王元瓘年三十馀无子，夫人为之请于镠，镠喜曰： 吾家祭祀，汝实主之。 
现代文：以前，武肃王钱禁止内外蓄养歌舞女伎，文穆王钱元年过三十多还没有儿子，马夫人为此向钱请求允许钱元纳妾，钱高兴地说： 我家的祭礼香火，实际上是由你做主的。 
English: In the past, King Qian of Wuxu prohibited the breeding of female kabuki actors both at home and abroad. King Qian of Wenmu did not have a son until he was over thirty in the first year of the year. For this reason, Lady Ma asked Qian to allow Qian to take a concubine. Qian said happily, "The sacrificial incense of my family is actually decided by you."

古文：乃听元璟纳妾。
现代文：于是，便听由钱元纳妾。
English: As a result, he asked Qianyuan for a concubine.

古文：鹿氏，生弘僔、弘倧；许氏，生弘佐；吴氏，生弘亻叔；众妾生弘偡，弘亿、弘仪、弘偓、弘仰、弘信；夫人抚视慈爱如一。
现代文：鹿氏，生下钱弘、弘；许氏，生弘佐；吴氏，生弘；众妾还生下弘、弘、弘、弘仰、弘信；马夫人对他们抚养看待，慈爱如一。
English: The Deer clan gave birth to Qian Hong and Hong; the Xu clan gave birth to Hong Sa; the Wu clan gave birth to Hong; the concubines also gave birth to Hong, Hong, Hong, Hong Yang and Hong Xin; Mrs. Ma treated them with care and love.

古文：常置银鹿于帐前，坐诸儿于上而弄之。
现代文：常常置放银鹿在自己的帐前，让诸儿全在上面，逗弄他们嬉戏。
English: She often put a silver deer in front of her bookcase and let all the children play on it, teasing them.

古文：十一月，戊子，契丹遣其臣遥折来使，遂如吴越。
现代文：十一月，戊子，契丹派遣其臣遥折出使晋廷，于是又到了吴越。
English: In November, the Empress Dowager Wu Zi and the Emir of Khitan sent their envoys to the Jin court, and then to Wu Yue.

古文：楚王希范始开天策府，置护军都尉、领军司马等官，以诸弟及将校为之。
现代文：楚王马希范始开天策府，设置护军中尉、领军司马等官，任用其诸弟及将校充任。
English: King Ma Xifan of Chu began to establish a heavenly government, set up officers such as the lieutenant of the escort and the leader of the army, and appointed his brothers and officers to fill the positions.

古文：又以幕僚拓跋恒、李弘皋、廖匡图、徐仲雅等十八人为学士。
现代文：又任用幕僚拓跋恒、李弘、廖匡图，徐仲雅等十八人为学士。
English: He also appointed 18 staff members including Tuoba Heng, Li Hong, Liao Kuang Tu, and Xu Zhongya as academicians.

古文：刘勍等进攻溪州，彭士愁兵败，弃州走保山寨；石崖四绝，勍为梯栈上围之。
现代文：刘勍等进攻溪州，彭士愁的兵打了败仗，放弃了州城，退保在山寨；石崖四面绝壁，刘遣梯栈登上去包围了他们。
English: Liu Wei and others attacked Xizhou. Peng Shixu's soldiers fought a losing battle, gave up the state capital, and withdrew to the cottage. The cliff was surrounded by steep walls on all sides, and Liu Yuan climbed up the ladder to surround them.

古文：廖匡齐战死，楚王希范遣吊其母，其母不哭，谓使者曰： 廖氏三百口受王温饱之赐，举族效死，未足以报，况一子乎！
现代文：廖匡齐战死，楚王马希范派人吊问他的母亲，其母不哭，对使者说： 廖氏全家三百口，受楚王给予温饱的恩惠，全族效死于国家，不足以报答，何况一个儿子啊！
English: When Liao Kuangqi died in battle, King Ma Xifan of Chu sent someone to inquire about his mother. His mother did not cry, and said to the messenger: Liao's entire family of three hundred people, who were given food and clothing by the King of Chu, died for the country, which is not enough to repay, let alone a son!

古文：愿王无以为念。 
现代文：请大王不要把此事记在心上。 
English: Please don't take this to heart, Your Majesty.

古文：王以其母为贤，厚恤其家。
现代文：楚王认为廖匡齐的母亲很贤慧，丰厚地抚恤其家。
English: King Chu believed that Liao Kuangqi's mother was very wise and generously supported her family.

古文：十二月，丙戌，禁剙造佛寺。
现代文：十二月，丙戌，后晋朝廷禁止创建佛寺。
English: In December, the Later Jin Dynasty banned the establishment of Buddhist temples.

古文：闽王作新宫，徙居之。
现代文：闽王王曦建造新宫，徙居到里面。
English: The Dragon King Wang Xi built a new palace and moved into it.

古文：是岁，汉门下侍郎、同平章事赵光裔言于汉主曰： 自马后崩，未尝通使于楚，亲邻旧好，不可忘也。 
现代文：这一年，南汉门下侍郎、同平章事赵光裔对南汉主刘龚说： 自从马皇后去世后，没有再通使于楚，亲邻旧好是不可忘记的。 
English: In the same year, Zhao Guangxu, a courtier of the Southern Han Dynasty and Tongping Zhangyi, said to the Southern Han Emperor Liu Bei: Since the death of Empress Ma, there has been no further communication with Chu, and the old friendship between neighbors is unforgettable.

古文：因荐谏议大夫李纾可以将命，汉主从之；楚亦遣使报聘。
现代文：因而举荐谏议大夫李纾可以领命出使楚国，南汉主听从他的意见；楚国也派遣使者来答谢聘问。
English: Therefore, it was recommended and discussed that Dr. Li Xi could be appointed as an envoy to the State of Chu, and the Southern Han rulers followed his advice; the State of Chu also sent an envoy to thank him for his offer.

古文：光裔相汉二十馀年，府库充实，边境无虞。
现代文：赵光裔在南汉当宰相二十余年，府库充实，边境没有忧患。
English: Zhao Guangren has been the prime minister of Southern Han for more than 20 years, the treasury is full, and there is no trouble at the border.

古文：及卒，汉主复以其子翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞损为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：赵光裔死后，南汉主又任用他的儿子翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞赵损为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: After the death of Zhao Guangyuan, the Southern Han Emperor also appointed his sons Hanlin Baccalaureate Zongzhi and Shangshu Zuozhong Zhao Jia as his subordinate attendants and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝中天福五年
现代文：五年春季，正月，后晋高祖接见闽国来使郑元弼等。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, in the first month, the late Jingu Gaozu met with Zheng Yuanzhong to make Zheng Yuanzhong and others.

古文：春，正月，帝引见闽使郑元弼等。元弼曰： 王昶蛮夷之君，不知礼义，陛下得其善言不足喜，恶言不足怒。臣将命无状，愿伏鈇锧以赎昶罪。 
现代文：郑元弼说： 王昶是蛮夷的君主，不懂得礼仪，陛下听到他的善言不足为喜，恶言不足为怒。我受他的差遣，办事不得体，愿意接受斧质腰斩之刑以赎王昶的罪过。 
English: Zheng Yuanzhang said: Wang Yao is a barbaric monarch who does not understand etiquette. His Majesty was pleased to hear that his kind words were not enough, and his evil words were not enough to anger. I was sent by him, I did not behave properly, and I am willing to accept the punishment of axe and beheading to atone for Wang Yao's sins.

古文：帝怜之，辛未，诏释元弼等。
现代文：后晋高祖可怜他，辛未，下诏释放了郑元弼等人。
English: Later, Emperor Jin Gao Zu took pity on him, and Xin Wei issued an edict to release Zheng Yuanjun and others.

古文：楚刘勍等因大风，以火箭焚彭士愁寨而攻之，士愁帅麾下逃入奖、锦深山，乙未，遣其子师暠帅诸酋长纳溪、锦、奖三州印，请降于楚。
现代文：楚国刘等借着大风，用火箭焚烧彭士愁的山寨，向他进攻，彭士愁率领他指挥下的兵逃入奖州、锦州的深山，乙未，遣派他的儿子彭师率领诸酋长献纳溪、奖、锦三州的印信，请求向楚国投降。
English: Liu of Chu took advantage of the strong winds and used rockets to burn Peng Shizhu's cottage and attack him. Peng Shizhu led the soldiers under his command to flee into the deep mountains of Zhaozhou and Jinzhou. Biyi sent his son Peng Shih to lead the chiefs to offer the Hsin of Nanaxi, Zhaozhou and Jinzhou and request surrender to Chu.

古文：二月，庚戌，北都留守、同平章事安彦威入朝，上曰： 吾所重者信与义。
现代文：二月，庚戌，北都太原留守、同平章事安彦威入京朝见，后晋高祖说： 我所重视的是信与义。
English: In February, at the end of the Heian period, Emperor Gaozong left Taiyuan for the northern capital, Tongping, and met with Emperor Anyan in Beijing. Emperor Gaozong said, "What I value is faith and righteousness."

古文：昔契丹以义救我，我今以信报之；闻其征求不已，公能屈节奉之，深称朕意。 
现代文：从前契丹出于道义救援于我，我现在用信守协约来报答他；听说他们不断地征索求取，您能委曲自己的节操来侍奉他，是很能称合朕的意图的。 
English: Once upon a time, the Khitan came to my moral rescue, and I am now repaying him by honoring the agreement; I have heard that they are constantly soliciting, and you can bend your own discipline to serve him, which is very much in line with my intentions.

古文：对曰： 陛下以苍生之故，犹卑辞厚币以事之，臣何屈节之有！ 
现代文：安彦威回答说： 陛下为了苍生百姓，尚且卑词厚币来对待他，臣有什么屈节可说！ 
English: Yasuhiko replied, "Your Majesty, for the sake of the common people, even if you treat him with contempt, what can I say?

古文：上悦。
现代文：后晋高祖很高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：刘勍引兵还长沙。
现代文：刘领兵回师长沙。
English: Liu led the troops back to Changsha.

古文：楚王希范徙溪州于便地，表彭士愁为溪州刺史，以刘勍为锦州刺史；自是群蛮服于楚。
现代文：楚王马希范把溪州的治所迁移到离楚境近便于制命的地方，表奏彭士愁为溪州刺史，任用刘为锦州刺史；从此群蛮归服于楚国。
English: King Ma Xifan of Chu moved the administrative center of Khezhou to a place close to the territory of Chu, which was convenient for the administration of the state. He appointed Peng Shixu as the governor of Khezhou and appointed Liu as the governor of Jinzhou. From then on, the barbarians were subjugated to the state of Chu.

古文：希范自谓伏波之后，以铜五千斤铸柱，高丈二尺，入地六尺，铭誓状于上，立之溪州。
现代文：马希范自称汉代马援的的后人，便用铜五千斤铸立一个铜柱，高一丈二尺，埋入地下六尺，铭刻誓词在柱上，把它立在溪州。
English: Ma Xifan, who claimed to be a descendant of Ma Yuan of the Han Dynasty, used five thousand catties of copper to cast a copper pillar, two feet high, buried six feet underground, inscribed the oath on the pillar, and erected it in Xizhou.

古文：唐康化节度使兼中书令杨琏谒平陵还，一夕，大醉，卒于舟中，唐主追封谥曰弘农靖王。
现代文：南唐康化节度使兼中书令杨琏进谒埋葬其父吴让皇杨溥的平陵归来，一个晚上，饮酒大醉，在船中去世。南唐主追封他谥号为弘农靖王。
English: During the Kanghua Festival in Southern Tang Dynasty, the envoy of the Chinese Emperor Yang Jintao, who was also in charge of the imperial rescript, came back from burying his father, Emperor Yang Jintao, in the Pingling Mausoleum. One night, he drank too much and died on the ship. The ruler of Southern Tang Dynasty gave him the posthumous title of Hongnong Jingwang.

古文：闽王曦既立，骄淫苛虐，猜忌宗族，多寻旧怨。
现代文：闽主王曦即位以后，骄奢淫逸，酷苛暴虐，猜忌宗族，常常寻找旧怨加以报复。
English: After the enthronement of the tyrant Wang Xi, he was arrogant, lascivious, harsh and tyrannical, suspicious of his clan, and often sought revenge for old grudges.

古文：其弟建州刺史延政数以书谏之，曦怒，复书骂之；遣亲吏业翘监建州军，教练使杜汉崇监南镇军，二人争捃延政阴事告于曦，由是兄弟积相猜恨。
现代文：他的弟弟建州刺史王延政多次上书劝谏他，王曦发怒，复书责骂王延政；派遣亲信官吏业翘监察建州军，教练使杜汉崇监福州与建州之间的南镇军。这两个人争着搜集王延政的阴私之事向王曦报告，因此兄弟二人长期相互猜忌怨恨。
English: His younger brother, Jianzhou assassin Wang Yanzheng, wrote to him many times to persuade him; Wang Xi was angry and wrote back to scold Wang Yanzheng; he sent his trusted official Ye Zhuo to inspect the Jianzhou army, and the coach sent Du Han to supervise the Nanzhen army between Fuzhou and Jianzhou. The two men competed to collect Wang Yanzheng's shady business to report to Wang Xi, so the two brothers have long suspected and resented each other.

古文：一日，翘与延政议事不叶，翘诃之曰： 公反邪！ 
现代文：有一天，业翘与王延政议论事情意见不和，业翘呵斥王延政说： 你要造反啊！ 
English: One day, Ye Hua and Wang Yan Zheng had a disagreement over a matter of discussion. Ye Hua rebuked Wang Yan Zheng and said, "You want to rebel!

古文：延政怒，欲斩翘；翘奔南镇，延政发兵就攻之，败其戍兵。翘、汉崇奔福州，西鄙戍兵皆溃。
现代文：王延政发怒，要杀业翘；业翘奔向南镇，王延政发兵到南镇攻击他，打败了南镇的守兵，业翘、杜汉崇奔向福州，西郊边境的守兵都溃散了。
English: Wang Yan Zheng got angry and wanted to kill Ye; Ye ran to Nan Zhen, Wang Yan Zheng sent troops to attack him and defeated the guards of Nan Zhen, Ye and Du Han Chong ran to Fuzhou, and the guards of the western border were dispersed.

古文：二月，曦遣统军使潘师逵、吴行真将兵四万击延政。
现代文：二月，王曦派遣统军使潘师逵、吴行真统兵四万攻打王延政。
English: In February, Wang Xi dispatched the unified army to send Pan Shizhen and Wu Xingzhen to attack Wang Yanzheng with 40,000 soldiers.

古文：师逵军于建州城西，行真军于城南，皆阻水置营，焚城外庐舍。
现代文：潘师逵屯军在建州城西，吴行真屯军在建州城南，都隔着水设置营地，焚烧了城外的房舍。
English: Pan's army set up camp in the west of Jianzhou City, and Wu Xingzhen's army set up camp in the south of Jianzhou City. They both set up camp across the water and burned the houses outside the city.

古文：延政求救于吴越，壬戌，吴越王元瓘遣宁国节度使、同平章事仰仁诠、内都监使薛万忠将兵四万救之，丞相林鼎谏，不听。
现代文：王延政求救于吴越，壬戌，吴越王钱元派宁国节度使、同平章事仰仁诠、内都监使薛万忠统兵四万去救援他；闽国丞相林鼎谏阻王曦，不听。
English: Wang Yanzheng appealed to Wu Yue for help, but Wu Yue's King Qianyuan sent Ning Guo's ceremonial envoy, Tongping Zhang's subordinate Yan Yan, and Inner Capital Supervisor Xue Wanzhong's 40,000 soldiers to rescue him; Lin Dingyao, the prime minister of Yunnan, opposed Wang Xi and did not listen.

古文：三月，戊辰，师逵分兵三千，遣都军使蔡弘裔将之出战，延政遣其将林汉彻等败之于茶山，斩首千馀级。
现代文：三月，戊辰，潘师逵分兵三千，派都军使蔡弘裔领着他们出战。王延政派其将林汉彻等在茶山把他们打败，斩首千余级。
English: In March, Wuchen, Pan's division, sent 3,000 soldiers to the capital and sent the envoy Cai Hongxi to lead them into battle. Wang Yanzheng sent his general Lin Hancher to defeat them in Chashan, beheading more than a thousand.

古文：安彦威、王建立皆请致仕；不许。
现代文：安彦威、王建立都向后晋高祖请求退休；后晋高祖不准许。
English: Both Yasuhiko and Wang Jianli requested retirement from their successors; however, their successors did not allow them to retire.

古文：辛未，以归德节度使、侍卫马步都指挥使、同平章事刘知远为鄴都留守，徙彦威为归德节度使，加兼侍中。
现代文：辛未，任用归德节度使、侍卫马步都指挥使、同平章事刘知远为邺都留守，调迁安彦威为归德节度使，加官兼任侍中。
English: In Xinwei, the Returning Officer was appointed as the Returning Officer of the Festival, the Attendant of the Horse Guards was appointed as the Commanding Officer of the Horse Guards, Liu Zhiyuan, the Commander of the Tongping Chapter, was appointed as the Returning Officer of the Festival, and An Yanwei was appointed as the Returning Officer of the Festival. He was also appointed as an attendant.

古文：癸酉，徙建立为昭义节度使，进爵韩王；以建立辽州人，割辽、沁二州隶昭义。
现代文：癸酉，调迁王建立为昭义节度使，进爵为韩王；因为王建立是辽州人，割划辽、沁二州隶属于昭义军。
English: At that time, Wang Jianli was appointed as the envoy of the Shouyi Emperor, and Han Wang was promoted to the peerage; because Wang Jianli was from Liaozhou, the two states of Liaoning and Shandong were assigned to the Shouyi Army.

古文：徙建雄节度使李德珫为北都留守。
现代文：调迁建雄节度使李德为北都留守。
English: The relocation of the Jianxiong Festival kept Li De away from Beijing.

古文：山南东道节度使，同平章事安从进恃其险固，阴蓄异谋，擅邀取湖南贡物，招纳亡命，增广甲卒；元随都押牙王令谦、押牙潘知麟谏，皆杀之。
现代文：山南东道节度使，同平章事安从进依恃他所镇守襄阳之地的险要和牢固，暗蓄叛离的心计，擅自截取楚国从湖南送往后晋朝廷的进贡物品，招纳亡命之徒，增加扩充兵众；从开始就跟随他的都押牙王令谦、押牙潘知麟劝阻他，都被他杀了。
English: As the host of the festival in Shannan, Tong Pingzhang promoted the cause of peace and stability, relying on the precariousness and solidity of the land he was guarding in Xiangyang, secretly plotting to defect, illegally intercepting the tributes sent by Chu from Hunan to the Later Jin court, recruiting the outlaws, and increasing the expansion of the army. He was killed by Duasoga Wang Lingqian and Duasoga Pan Zhilin, who had followed him from the beginning to dissuade him.

古文：及王建立徙潞州，帝使问之曰： 朕虚青州以待卿，卿有意则降制。 
现代文：及至王建立受任昭义节度使迁镇潞州，后晋高祖使人问他说： 朕把镇戍青州的平卢节度使虚位等待着你，你如果有意去，我就降旨委任你。 
English: When the king established the Zhaoyi Festival, he was appointed to move the festival to the town of Bozhou. Later, Emperor Gaozong asked him: "I am waiting for you to move the Pinglu Festival to the town of Bozhou. If you are willing to go, I will issue an order to appoint you."

古文：从进对曰： 若移青州置汉南，臣即赴镇。 
现代文：安从进回答说： 如果把青州移置在汉水以南，我就去赴任镇所。 
English: An Congjin replied: If Qingzhou is moved to the south of Hanshui, I will go to Ren Township.

古文：帝亦不之责。
现代文：后晋高祖也不责怪他。
English: His father, who was later promoted to higher education, did not blame him either.

古文：丁丑，王延政募敢死士千馀人，夜涉水，潜入潘师逵垒，因风纵火，城上鼓噪以应之，战棹都头建安陈诲杀师逵，其众皆溃。
现代文：丁丑，闽国建州刺史王延政募集了一千多敢于冒死的士卒，乘着夜间涉水，潜伏进入潘师逵的营垒，顺风纵火，城上擂鼓呐喊来响应他们，战棹都头建安人陈诲杀了潘师逵，他的兵众都溃散了。
English: Ding Gou, the founder of the state of Shandong, Wang Yanzheng, recruited more than a thousand soldiers who dared to risk death. They waded into the water at night, lurked into Pan Shizhao's camp, set fire to the wind, and shouted and shouted on the castle to respond to them. Chen Ji, the founder of the capital, killed Pan Shizhao, and his soldiers dispersed.

古文：戊寅，引兵欲攻吴行真寨，建人未涉水，行真及将士弃营走，死者万人。
现代文：戊寅，王延政率领兵卒要进攻吴行真的营寨，还未等到建州兵涉水过来，吴行真和将士就弃营逃走，死亡达万人。
English: In Wu Yin, Wang Yan Zheng led the soldiers to attack Wu Xing Zhen's camp. Before the Jianzhou soldiers waded into the water, Wu Xing Zhen and his soldiers abandoned the camp and fled, killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：延政乘胜取永平、顺昌二城。
现代文：王延政乘胜攻取了永平、顺昌二城。
English: Wang Yanzheng took advantage of the victory to capture Yongping and Shunchang.

古文：自是建州之兵始盛。
现代文：从此以后，建州的兵卒开始强盛起来。
English: From then on, the soldiers of Jianzhou began to flourish.

古文：夏，四月，蜀太保兼门下侍郎、同平章事赵季良请与门下侍郎、同平章事毋昭裔，中书侍郎、同平章事张业分判三司，癸卯，蜀主命季良判户部，昭裔判盐铁，业判度支。
现代文：夏季，四月，蜀国太保兼门下侍郎、同平章事赵季良奏请，与门下侍郎、同平章事毋昭裔、中书侍郎、同平章事张业分判三司，癸卯，蜀主孟昶使赵季良主管户部，毋昭裔主管盐铁，张业主管度支。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhao Qiliang, the Taipo of Shu and the attendant of his disciple, and Tongping Zhangye were invited to play, and the attendant of his disciple, Tongping Zhangye, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disciple, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disciple, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disciple, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disciple, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disciple, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disciple, the attendant of Zhao Qiliang's disci

古文：庚戌，以前横海节度使马全节为安远节度使。
现代文：庚戌，后晋朝廷任用前横海节度使马全节为安远节度使。
English: Geng Zheng, the post-Jin Dynasty imperial court appointed the former Henghai Festival envoy Ma Quanzhong as the Anyuan Festival envoy.

古文：甲子，吴越孝献世子弘僔卒。
现代文：甲子，吴越国孝献世子钱弘去世。
English: Qian Hong, the eldest son and heir of Wu Yue Guotiao, passed away.

古文：吴越仰仁诠等兵至建州，王延政以福州兵已败去，奉牛酒犒之，请班师；仁诠等不从，营于城之西北。
现代文：吴越国仰仁诠等率援军到达建州，王延政因为闽国福州兵已经败走，取出肉酒犒劳他们，请他们班师回吴越。仰仁诠等不依从，在建州城的西北扎营。
English: Yang Rinyi of Wuyue led the reinforcements to Jianzhou, but Wang Yanzheng, because the Fuzhou soldiers of Yan had already been defeated, took out the meat and wine to reward them and asked them to return to Wuyue. Yang Rinyi and others did not obey and camped in the northwest of Jianzhou.

古文：延政惧，复遣使乞师于闽王。
现代文：王延政害怕，又遣使者向闽王请求发兵救援。
English: Wang Yanzheng was afraid and sent an envoy to the king of Qi to ask him to send troops to rescue him.

古文：闽王以泉州刺史王继业为行营都统，将兵二万救之；且移书责吴越，遣轻兵绝吴越粮道。
现代文：闽王王曦任命泉州刺史王继业为行营都统，率兵二万来救援；并且送信责备吴越，派遣轻兵断绝吴越的运粮道路。
English: The warlord Wang Xi appointed the Quanzhou warlord Wang Jiye as the commander-in-chief, and led 20,000 soldiers to rescue; and sent a message to blame Wu Yue, and dispatched light soldiers to cut off Wu Yue's grain transportation route.

古文：会久雨，吴越军食尽，五月，延政遣兵出击，大破之，俘斩以万计。
现代文：正好遇上长时间下雨，吴越兵粮食用尽，五月，王延政派兵出击，大破吴越之兵，俘虏斩杀上万人。
English: It just so happened that it rained for a long time, and the Wu Yue soldiers ran out of food. In May, Wang Yan Zheng sent troops to attack, defeated the Wu Yue soldiers, and killed tens of thousands of prisoners.

古文：癸未，仁诠等诠遁。
现代文：癸未，仰仁诠等乘夜间逃走。
English: Gong Wei, Yang Ren Yi and others fled by night.

古文：胡汉筠既违诏命不诣阙，又闻贾仁沼二子欲诉诸朝；及除马全节镇安州代李金全，汉筠绐金全曰： 进奏吏遣人倍道来言，朝廷俟公受代，即按贾仁沼死状，以为必有异图。 
现代文：胡汉筠既已依仗李金全的庇护违背后晋高祖诏命不肯入京朝见，又听说被他所杀害的朝廷使官贾仁沼的两个儿子要向朝廷告发；及至后晋朝廷任命马全节为安远节度使取代李金全镇戍安州时，胡汉筠便欺骗李金全说： 派驻朝廷的进奏吏派人加倍赶路来说，朝廷等您接受替代命令，就要查究贾仁沼是怎么死的，认为您必然有叛变的图谋。 
English: Not only did Hu Han Rong rely on the protection of Li Jinquan and disobey the imperial edict of the high-ranking ancestors behind him to refuse to enter Beijing to see the imperial court, but he also heard that the two sons of the imperial envoy Jia Renmu, who was killed by him, were going to denounce him to the imperial court; and later, when the imperial court appointed Ma Quanzhong to replace Li Jinquan in Lu'an, Hu Han Rong deceived Li Jinquan and said, "The courier stationed at the imperial court has sent people to double the speed, saying that the imperial court will investigate how Jia Renmu died after you accept the

古文：金全大惧。
现代文：李金全大为恐惧。
English: Li Jinquan was terrified.

古文：汉筠因说金全拒命，自归于唐；金全从之。
现代文：胡汉筠便进而劝说李金全拒绝接受代命，自行归顺于南唐；李金全听从了他的意见。
English: Hu Hanju then persuaded Li Jinquan to refuse to accept the substitute mission and voluntarily submit to Nantang; Li Jinquan listened to his opinion.

古文：丙戌，帝闻金全叛，命马全节以汴、洛、汝、郑、单、宋、陈、蔡、曹、濮、申、唐之兵讨之，以保大节度使安审晖为之副。
现代文：丙戌，后晋高祖闻知李金全叛变，命令马全节统率汴、洛、汝、郑、单、宋、陈、蔡、曹、濮、申、唐诸州的兵马征讨他；任用保大节度使安审晖做他的副帅。
English: After learning of Li Jinquan's defection, Bn Th, the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, ordered Ma Quanzhi to lead the armies and horses of the states of Nhu, Luo, Ru, Zheng, Shan, Song, Chen, Cai, Cao, Qu, Shen, and Tang to recruit him; he appointed Baoda Tho to make An Cui Qu his second-in-command.

古文：审晖，审琦之兄也。
现代文：安审晖是安审琦的哥哥。
English: An Jianjun is the elder brother of An Jianjun.

古文：李金全遣推官张纬奉表请降于唐，唐主遣鄂州屯营使李承裕、段处恭将兵三千逆之。
现代文：李金全遣派推官张纬带着表章向南唐请求归降，南唐主李遣鄂州屯营使李承裕、段处恭领兵三千迎他。
English: Li Jinquan dispatched the commander Zhang Wei with a badge to South Tang to request his surrender. The master of South Tang, Li, sent Li Chengyu to camp in Ezhou and led 3,000 soldiers to welcome him.

古文：唐主遣客省使尚全恭如闽，和闽王曦及王延政。
现代文：南唐主遣派客省使尚全恭赴闽国，与闽王王曦及王延政议和。
English: The master of Southern Tang dispatched a guest provincial envoy, Shang Quan Gong, to Min Province to negotiate peace with the king of Min, Wang Xi, and Wang Yan.

古文：六月，延政遣牙将及女奴持誓书及香炉至福州，与曦盟于宣陵。
现代文：六月，王延政派遣牙将及女奴带着誓书及香炉到福州，与王曦定盟于闽太祖王审知的宣陵。
English: In June, Wang Yanzheng sent his general and female slave to Fuzhou with an oath and an incense burner to make an alliance with Wang Xi at the Xuanling Mausoleum of King Xuancheng.

古文：然兄弟相猜恨犹如故。
现代文：但是，兄弟相互猜疑忌恨依然如故。
English: But the brothers' mutual suspicion and hatred remain.

古文：癸卯，唐李承裕等引兵至安州。
现代文：癸卯，南唐李承裕等到达安州。
English: Yu Yu, Southern Tang Li Chengyu and others arrived in Anzhou.

古文：是夕，李金全将麾下数百人诣唐军，妓妾资财皆为承裕所夺，承裕入据安州。
现代文：这天晚上，李金全带领他指挥下的兵卒数百人进见南唐军，妓妾资财都被李承裕的人所夺取，李承裕进占安州。
English: That evening, Li Jinquan led hundreds of soldiers under his command to march into the Southern Tang Army. The prostitutes, concubines and wealth were all seized by Li Chengyu's men. Li Chengyu marched into Anzhou.

古文：甲辰，马全节自应山进军大化镇，与承裕战于城南，大破之。
现代文：甲辰，马全节从应山进军到大化镇，与李承裕在城南交战，把他打得大败。
English: Jia Chen and Ma Quanzi marched from Yingshan to Dahua Town and fought with Li Chengyu in the south of the city, defeating him.

古文：承裕掠安州南走，全节入安州。
现代文：李承裕抢掠安州后向南败走，马全节进入安州。
English: After Li Chengyu plundered Anzhou, he was defeated and fled to the south. Ma Quanzhong entered Anzhou.

古文：丙午，安审晖追败唐兵于黄花谷，段处恭战死。
现代文：丙午，安审晖追赶南唐兵，在黄花谷又把他们打败，段处恭战死。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, An Ziqi chased the Southern Tang soldiers, defeated them again in Huanghua Valley, and died in the battlefield.

古文：丁未，审晖又败唐兵于云梦泽中，虏承裕及其众。
现代文：丁未，安审晖又在云梦泽中把南唐兵打败，俘虏了李承裕及他的兵众。
English: At the same time, An Ziqi defeated the Southern Tang soldiers and captured Li Chengyu and his soldiers.

古文：唐将张建崇据云梦桥拒战，审晖乃还。
现代文：南唐将领张建崇占据云梦桥抵抗，安审晖使带兵归还。
English: Zhang Jianchong, the general of the Southern Tang Dynasty, occupied the Yunmeng Bridge and resisted, but was ordered to return with his troops after a security review.

古文：马全节斩承裕及其众千五百人于城下，送监军杜光业等五百七人于大梁。
现代文：马全节在安州城下斩杀了李承裕及他的兵众一千五百人，俘送监军杜光业等五百零七人到大梁。
English: At the foot of Anzhou Castle, Ma Quanzi killed Li Chengyu and 1,500 of his soldiers, and took captive 5007 soldiers including the overseer Du Guangye to Daliang.

古文：上曰： 此曹何罪！ 
现代文：后晋高祖说： 这些人有什么罪！ 
English: After being promoted to high priest, the ancestor said, "What is the sin of these people?

古文：皆赐马及器服而归之。
现代文：便都赐给马匹和器物服装，把他们送回南唐。
English: They were all given horses, equipment and clothing and sent back to Nantang.

古文：初，卢文进之奔吴也，唐主命祖全恩将兵逆之，戒无入安州城，陈于城外。俟文进出，殿之以归，无得剽惊。
现代文：过去，卢文进投奔吴国时，南唐主命祖全恩统兵迎击，告诫祖全恩不要进入安州城，列阵在城外，等待卢文进出来，尾随他回来，不许劫掠。
English: In the past, when Lu Wen entered and fled to the State of Wu, the Lord of Southern Tang ordered Zu Quan'en to lead an army to meet the attack, and warned Zu Quan'en not to enter Anzhou City, to line up outside the city, to wait for Lu Wen to enter and leave, to follow him back, and not to loot.

古文：及李承裕逆李金全，戒之如全恩；承裕贪剽掠，与晋兵战而败，失亡四千人。
现代文：及至李承裕迎击李金全时，告诫他也像告诫祖全恩一样；而李承裕却贪图劫掠，与晋兵交战而被打败，逃跑死亡的有四千人。
English: When Li Chengyu confronted Li Jinquan, he admonished him in the same way as he had admonished Zu Quan'en. Li Chengyu, however, was greedy for plunder, fought with Jin soldiers and was defeated. Four thousand people died while fleeing.

古文：唐主惋恨累日，自以戒敕之不熟也。
现代文：南唐主惋惜悔恨好多天，自己认为对告诫敕令之类的事情不熟练，把握不住。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang regretted and repented for many days. He thought that he was unskilled in matters such as admonitions and edicts, and could not grasp them.

古文：杜光业等至唐，唐主以其违命而败，不受，复送于淮北，遗帝书曰： 边校贪功，乘便据垒。 
现代文：杜光业等被遣送回来到达南唐，南唐主因为他们是违背命令才失败的，不接纳，又把他们送回淮河以北，并且给后晋高祖写信说： 边境将校贪图功利，乘着方便占据堡垒。 
English: Du Guangye and others were sent back to Southern Tang. The Southern Tang rulers did not accept them because they failed because they disobeyed orders, and sent them back to the north of the Huaihe River. They also wrote a letter to Emperor Gaozu, saying: "Border officers are greedy for profit and take advantage of convenience to occupy fortresses.

古文：又曰： 军法朝章，彼此不可。 
现代文：又说： 不论是律以军法，或是衡之朝章，彼此都不可容忍。 
English: He also said, "Whether it is military law or imperial edict, they cannot tolerate each other.

古文：帝复遣之归，使者将自桐墟济淮，唐主遣战舰拒之，乃还。
现代文：后晋高祖再次把他们遣送回去，使者要从宿州的桐墟渡过淮河南返，唐主派战船阻拒他们，只好又北还。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu sent them back again. The envoys wanted to cross the Tongxu River from Suzhou to the south of the Huai River. The Tang Dynasty sent warships to stop them, but they had to return to the north.

古文：帝悉授唐诸将官，以其士卒为显义都，命旧将刘康领之。
现代文：后晋高祖便把南唐诸将都授以官职，把他们的士兵建立为显义都，命随兵起于晋阳的旧将刘康率领他们。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu conferred official positions on all the generals of Southern Tang, established their soldiers as the capital of righteousness, and ordered the former general Liu Kang, who had risen from Jinyang, to lead them.

古文：巨光曰：违命者，将也，士卒从将之令者也，又何罪乎！
现代文：臣司马光曰：违背诏命的是将领，士兵是听从将领之令的，又有什么罪呢！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: It is the generals who violate the imperial edict, the soldiers obey the orders of the generals, so what is the crime?

古文：受而戮其将以谢敌，吊士卒而抚之，斯可矣，何必弃民以资敌国乎！
现代文：接纳遣返而杀其将领用来回报敌国，同情士兵而安抚他们，这就可以了，何必要抛弃自己的子民去帮助敌国啊！
English: Accept repatriation and kill their generals to repay the enemy country, sympathize with the soldiers and appease them, that's fine, why should they abandon their own people to help the enemy country!

古文：唐主使宦者祭庐山，还，劳之曰： 卿此行甚精洁。 
现代文：南唐主李让宦官去祭祀庐山，宦官回来，南唐主慰劳他说： 你这次出行很是谦洁。 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, asked the eunuch to go and worship Lushan. When the eunuch returned, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty consoled him, saying, "You were very modest on this trip.

古文：宦者曰： 臣自奉诏，蔬食至今。 
现代文：宦官说： 我从奉诏命出去，一直吃素到现在。 
English: The eunuch said, "I have been a vegetarian since I was ordered to go out by the emperor.

古文：唐主曰： 卿某处市鱼为羹，某日市肉为羹，何为蔬食？ 
现代文：南唐主说： 你在某处曾买鱼作羹，某日曾买肉切大块烹食，怎么叫吃素？ 
English: The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty said: You once bought fish to make soup somewhere, and once bought meat to cut into large pieces for cooking. How can you call yourself a vegetarian?

古文：宦者惭服。
现代文：宦官感到惭愧而且承认了这些事。
English: The eunuch was ashamed and confessed to these things.

古文：仓吏岁终献羡馀万馀石，唐主曰： 出纳有数，苟非掊民刻军，安得羡馀邪！ 
现代文：管仓库的官吏岁终呈献盈余的赋税租米万余石，南唐主说： 支出和收入都有数额，如果不是聚敛百姓扣军粮，哪里来的盈余呀！ 
English: At the end of the year, the official in charge of the warehouse presented a surplus of tax and rent, and the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty said: There is an amount of expenditure and income, if it is not to gather the people to withhold military grain, where does the surplus come from!

古文：秋，七月，闽主曦城福州西郭以备建人。
现代文：秋季，七月，闽主王曦在福州西面修建城廓用来防备建州人。
English: In the autumn, in July, the warlord Wang Xi built a fortress on the west side of Fuzhou to guard against the Jianzhou people.

古文：又度民为僧，民避重赋多为僧，凡度万一千人。
现代文：又让民众离俗当和尚，民众为了逃避沉重的赋税，很多人出家为僧，共有一万一千人当了和尚。
English: In order to escape heavy taxation, many people became monks, and a total of 11,000 people became monks.

古文：乙丑，帝赐郑元弼等帛，遣归。
现代文：乙丑，后晋高祖赐给闽国使臣郑元弼等丝帛，把他们送回闽国。
English: Second Ugly, after the Jingu Gaozhu gave silk brocades to the envoys of Shan State, such as Zheng Yuanqi, and sent them back to Shan State.

古文：李金全之叛也，安州马步副都指挥使桑千、威和指挥使王万金、成彦温不从而死，马步都指挥使庞守荣诮其愚，以徇金全之意。
现代文：李金全叛晋时，安州马步副都指挥使桑千、威和指挥使王万金、成彦温不追随他而死，马步都指挥使庞守荣讥诮他们愚蠢，以迎合李金全的意图。
English: When Li Jinquan rebelled against the Jin Dynasty, the deputy commander of Anzhou Ma Bu ordered Sang Qian, Wei and the commander ordered Wang Wanjin and Cheng Yanwen not to follow him and die, and the commander of Ma Bu ordered Pang Shou Rong to ridicule their stupidity in order to meet Li Jinquan's intention.

古文：己巳，诏赠贾仁沼及桑千等官，遣使诛守荣于安州。
现代文：己巳，后晋高祖下诏，赠予贾仁沼及桑千等人官，遣派使者到安州诛杀了庞守荣。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong issued an edict, bestowed officials such as Jia Rinnuma and Kuang Qian, and sent an envoy to Anzhou to kill Pang Shurong.

古文：李金全至金陵，唐主待之甚薄。
现代文：李金全到了金陵，南唐主待他很冷淡。
English: When Li Jinquan arrived in Jinling, the Southern Tang Dynasty treated him very coldly.

古文：丁巳，唐主立齐王璟为太子，兼大元帅，录尚书事。
现代文：丁巳，南唐主册立齐王李为太子，兼大元帅，录尚书事。
English: Ding Si, the master of the Southern Tang Dynasty, made Qi Wang Li the crown prince and grand marshal, and recorded it in his records.

古文：太子太师致仕范延光请归河阳私第，帝许之。
现代文：后晋太子太师退休的范延光请求回到在河阳的私人宅第，后晋高祖准许了他。
English: Fan Yanguang, a retired prince of the Later Jin Dynasty, requested to return to his private residence in Hayao, and Emperor Gaozu allowed him to do so.

古文：延光重载而行。
现代文：范延光载运了很丰厚的财物出发。
English: Fan Yanguang set off with a very rich load of goods.

古文：西京留守杨光远兼领河阳，利其货，且虑为子孙之患，奏： 延光叛臣，不家汴、洛而就外籓，恐其逃逸入敌国，宜早除之！ 
现代文：西京洛阳留守杨光远兼领河阳军镇，贪图范延光的财货，并且顾虑他以后会成为杨氏子孙的祸患，便上奏说： 范延光是叛臣，不把家放在汴梁和洛阳而放归外地，恐怕他要逃跑到敌国去，应该早日把他除掉！ 
English: Yang Guangyuan, who stayed in Luoyang, West Beijing, and also led the military town of Heyang, coveted Fan Yanguang's wealth and goods, and worried that he would become a scourge to the descendants of the Yang clan in the future, he said: Fan Yanguang is a traitor, he does not put his home in Luoyang and Luoyang, but let him go abroad. I am afraid that he will escape to the enemy country. He should be eliminated as soon as possible!

古文：帝不许。
现代文：后晋高祖不准许。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：光远请敕延光居西京，从之。
现代文：杨光远又请求敕令范延光留居西京洛阳，后晋高祖同意了。
English: Yang Guangyuan also requested that Fan Yanguang be ordered to stay in Luoyang, West Beijing. Later, Emperor Gaozu agreed.

古文：光远使其子承贵以甲士围其第，逼令自杀。
现代文：杨光远让他的儿子杨承贵带领着甲士兵包围了范延光的宅第，逼令他自杀。
English: Yang Guangyuan ordered his son Yang Chenggui to surround Fan Yanquan's house with A soldiers and force him to commit suicide.

古文：延光曰： 天子在上，赐我铁券，许以不死，尔父子何得如此？ 
现代文：范延光说： 天子在上，赐给我铁券，答应我不死，你们父子怎能这样！ 
English: Fan Yanguang said: "Heavenly Son, grant me the iron ticket, promise me not to die, how can your father and son do this!

古文：己未，承贵以白刃驱延光上马，至浮梁，挤于河。
现代文：己未，杨承贵拿着刀逼迫范延光上马，行径浮桥时，把他挤落在黄河里。
English: Not long after, Yang Chenggui took a knife and forced Fan Yanguang to mount a horse. When he was walking on the pontoon, he was squeezed into the Yellow River.

古文：光远奏云自赴水死，帝知其故，惮光远之强，不敢诘；为延光辍朝，赠太师。
现代文：杨光远上奏说他自己要投水而死，后晋高祖知道其原因，但是惧怕杨光远的强悍，不敢究问；后晋高祖因为范延光之死而停止上朝，追赠他为太师。
English: Yang Guangyuan reported that he was going to throw himself into the water and die. Later Jin Gaozu knew the reason, but he was afraid of Yang Guangyuan's strength and dared not inquire. Later Jin Gaozu stopped going to the court because of Fan Yanguang's death, and posthumously granted him the title of grandmaster.

古文：唐齐王璟固辞太子；九月，乙丑，唐主许之，诏中外致笺如太子礼。
现代文：南唐齐王李坚决辞让被封为太子；九月，乙丑，南唐主允许了他，下诏朝廷内外向他致书按太子礼施行。
English: King Li of Qi of Southern Tang resolutely refused to be made crown prince; in September, the second month of the year, the lord of Southern Tang allowed him to do so, and issued an edict to him inside and outside the court to carry out the prince ceremony.

古文：丁卯，以翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎和凝为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁卯初五，后晋高祖任用翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎和凝为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the 5th year of Dingwu's reign, the founder of the school was later promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate Zongji, Hubei Attendant, and He was promoted to Zhongshu Attendant, Tongping Attendant.

古文：己巳，鄴都留守刘知远入朝。
现代文：己巳，邺都留守刘知远入朝。
English: At this time, Liu Zhiyuan, who had stayed behind, entered the imperial court.

古文：辛未，李崧奏： 诸州仓粮，于计帐之外所馀颇多。 
现代文：辛未，李崧奏言： 诸州的仓粮，在计账以外所盈余的相当多。 
English: Xin Wei, Li Wei's speech: The surplus of grain stored in the states is quite large.

古文：上曰： 法外税民，罪同枉法。
现代文：后晋高祖说： 法定之外向民众征税，罪过可同枉法一样。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu said, "The crime of levying taxes on the people in violation of the law is the same as the crime of lawlessness."

古文：仓吏特贷其死，各痛惩之。 
现代文：仓库官吏特免其一死，但都要严惩他们。
English: Warehouse officials will be spared death, but they will be severely punished.

古文：翰林学士李澣，轻薄，多酒失，上恶之，丙子，罢翰林学士，并其职于中书舍人，澣，涛之弟也。
现代文：翰林学士李浣，为人轻薄，常常因酒误事，后晋高祖厌恶他，丙子，罢去翰林学士的官职，把它的职掌并归中书舍人，李浣是李涛的弟弟。
English: Li Lan, the scholar of Hanlin, was a light-hearted person, often due to drunkenness. Later, Emperor Gaozong detested him. He removed Li Lan from the official post of scholar of Hanlin and gave it to the scholar of Zhongshu. Li Lan was Li Tao's younger brother.

古文：杨光远入朝，帝欲徙之它镇，谓光远曰： 围魏之役，卿左右皆有功，尚未之赏，今当各除一州以荣之。 
现代文：河阳节度使杨光远入朝，后晋高祖想把他调徙到别的军镇，对杨光远说： 围攻魏州之役，你的左右都立了功，还没有封赏他们，现在应当各授官一州来荣显他们。 
English: The Heyang Festival brought Yang Guangyuan to the imperial court. Later, Emperor Gaozong wanted to transfer Yang Guangyuan to another military town. He said to Yang Guangyuan, "In the siege of Weizhou, both your right and left sides have made great contributions. You have not yet rewarded them. Now, you should honor them with an official post in each state."

古文：因以其将校数人为刺史。
现代文：便把他的将校几个人用为刺史。
English: He used several of his officers as scapegoats.

古文：甲申，徙光远为平卢节度使，进爵东平王。
现代文：甲申调迁杨光远为平卢节度使，进爵为东平王。
English: Yang Guangyuan, who was transferred from Jiaxing to Pinglu, became the envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and Dongping Wang was ennobled.

古文：冬，十月，丁酉，加吴越王元瓘天下兵马都元帅，尚书令。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁酉，后晋高祖加封吴越王钱元为天下兵马都元帅、尚书令。
English: In the winter, in October, Ding Xi, the great-great-great-grandfather of Wu Yue Wang Qianyuan, was promoted to marshal of the world's armies and cavalry and Shang Shuling.

古文：壬寅，唐大赦，诏中外奏章无得言 睿 、 圣 ，犯者以不敬论。
现代文：壬寅，南唐实行大赦，诏令中外奏章不得用 睿 、 圣 、字样，违犯者按不敬论。
English: Jinyin, Southern Tang implemented amnesty, and issued an edict forbidding the use of the words "wisdom," "holy," and "reverence" in Chinese and foreign musical scores. Violators were judged as disrespectful.

古文：术士孙智永以四星聚斗，分野有灾，劝唐主巡东都，乙巳，唐主命齐王璟监国。
现代文：术士孙智永因为四个星聚于斗宿，分野有灾，劝说南唐主李巡视东都，乙巳，南唐主命齐王李监国。
English: The sorcerer Sun Zhiyong persuaded the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, to inspect the Eastern Capital, because the four stars were gathered in the Du's lodgings and there was a disaster in the field. The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then ordered the King of Qi, Li, to supervise the country.

古文：光政副使、太仆少卿陈觉以私憾奏泰州刺史褚仁规贪残；丙午，罢仁规为扈驾都部置，觉始用事。
现代文：光政副使、太仆少卿陈觉由于私人憾怨奏言泰州刺史褚仁规贪婪残虐；丙午，罢免褚仁规做扈驾都部署，陈觉开始当权。
English: Chen Jue, the vice-envoy of Guang Zheng and the servant of Shaoqing, was greedy and cruel because of his private grievances; in the afternoon, he dismissed Jue Rengui to make the capital deployment, and Chen Jue began to take power.

古文：庚戌，唐主发金陵；甲寅，至江都。
现代文：庚戌，南唐主从西都金陵出发；甲寅，到达东都江都。
English: Geng Zheng, the lord of Southern Tang, set out from the western capital Jinling; Jia Yin, reached the eastern capital Jiangdu.

古文：闽王曦因商人奉表自理；十一月，甲申，以曦为威武节度使，兼中书令，封闽国王。
现代文：闽王王曦乘商人入京，带着表章向后晋朝廷为自己申说未尝称帝；十一月，甲申，后晋高祖任命王曦为威武节度使，兼中书令，封闽国王。
English: Wang Xi, the king of Jurchen, entered Beijing as a merchant and took the seal to the Later Jin court to declare that he did not try to become emperor; in November, Jurchen Emperor Gaozhu appointed Wang Xi as the Great Martial Arts Festival envoy, as well as the Chinese Calligrapher, and crowned him king.

古文：唐主欲遂居江都，以水冻，漕运不给，乃还；十二月，丙申，至金陵。
现代文：南唐主打算在江都居留下来，因为水冻冰，漕运供应不上，只有西归，十二月，丙申，到达金陵。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty intended to stay in the capital of Jiangdu, but because the water was frozen, the supply of rowing transport was not possible. Only Xigui, December, Bishen, arrived in Jinling.

古文：唐右仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事张延翰卒。
现代文：南唐右仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事张延翰去世。
English: Zhang Yanhan, the right-hand servant of the Southern Tang Dynasty, who also served as a footman and a subordinate of Tongping Zhang, passed away.

古文：是岁，汉门下侍郎、同平章事赵损卒；以宁远节度使南昌王定保为中书侍郎、同平章事，不逾年亦卒。
现代文：这一年，南汉门下侍郎、同平章事赵损去世；任用宁远节度使南昌人王定保为中书侍郎、同平章事，不到一年也去世了。
English: In the same year, Zhao Zai, a servant of the Southern Han Dynasty and Tongping Zhangji, passed away; Wang Dingbo, a Nanchang man, who was appointed by Ningyuan Jiedu to be a servant of the Middle Han Dynasty and Tongping Zhangji, also passed away less than a year later.

古文：初，帝割雁门之北以赂契丹，由是吐谷浑皆属契丹，苦其贪虐，思归中国；成德节度使安重荣复诱之，于是吐谷浑帅部落千馀帐自五台来奔。
现代文：过去，后晋高祖割划雁门关以北来贿赂契丹，从此吐谷浑之地都归属于契丹，苦于契丹人贪求和暴虐，想归附于中原；成德节度使安重荣又引诱它，于是吐谷浑率领部落千余帐从五台来投奔。
English: In the past, the ancestors of the Later Jin Gao ceded the area north of the Wild Goose Gate to bribe the Khitans. From then on, all the land of the Tuggu Hun belonged to the Khitans. They suffered from the greed and tyranny of the Khitans and wanted to attach themselves to the Central Plains. Chengde Festival made An Chongrong lure it again, so the Tuggu Hun led the tribe of more than a thousand tents to flee from Wutai.

古文：契丹大怒，遣使让帝以招纳叛人。
现代文：契丹大怒，遣派使者责备后晋高祖招纳叛变的人。
English: The Khitan enraged and sent an envoy to rebuke the later Jin Gaozhu for recruiting mutineers.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝中天福六年
现代文：六年
English: Six years

古文：春，正月，丙寅，帝遣供奉官张澄将兵二千索吐谷浑在并、镇、忻、代四州山谷者，逐之使还故土。
现代文：春季，正月，丙寅，后晋高祖遣派供奉官张澄领兵二千搜索吐谷浑在并、镇、忻、代四州山谷之中的人，驱逐他们使之还归故土。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Xizong sent Zhang Cheng, a tributary official, to lead two thousand soldiers to search for people in the valley of Shizhou, who were living in villages, towns, townships, and dynasties, and to expel them and return them to their homeland.

古文：王延政城建州，周二十里，请于闽王曦，欲以建州为威武军，自为节度使。
现代文：王延政在建州修筑城池，周围二十里，请求闽王王曦在建州设置威武军，他自己做节度使。
English: Wang Yan Zheng was building a castle in Jianzhou, twenty miles around, and he asked King Xi to set up a powerful military force in Jianzhou, and he himself was the chief envoy.

古文：曦以威武军福州也，乃以建州为镇安军，以延政为节度使，封富沙王；延政改镇安曰镇武而称之。
现代文：王曦因为福州称威武军，便以建州为镇安军，任命王延政为节度使，封为富沙王；王延政把镇安改称为镇武以为军镇之名。
English: Because Fuzhou was said to have a powerful military force, Wang Xi took Jianzhou as the Zhen'an Army, appointed Wang Yanzheng as the festival envoy, and made him the king of Fusha; Wang Yanzheng changed the name of Zhen'an to Zhenwu as the name of the military town.

古文：二月，壬辰，作浮梁于德胜口。
现代文：二月，壬辰，后晋朝廷在黄河德胜口建造一座浮桥。
English: In February, the Later Jin Dynasty built a pontoon bridge at Dezhengkou of the Yellow River.

古文：彰义节度使张彦泽欲杀其子，掌书记张式素为彦泽所厚，谏止之。
现代文：彰义节度使张彦泽要杀他的儿子，掌书记张式素为张彦泽所亲厚，劝阻他。
English: Zhang Yizhe wanted to kill his son because of the Zhangyi Festival. Zhang Shixu, the chief secretary, was close to Zhang Yizhe and tried to dissuade him.

古文：彦泽怒，射之；左右素恶式，从而谗之，式惧，谢病去，彦泽遣兵追之，式至邠州，静难节度使李周以闻，帝以彦泽故，流式商州。
现代文：张彦泽发怒，用箭射他；左右之人素来厌恶张式，乘机讲张式的坏话。张式害怕，用有病辞谢而去，张彦泽派兵追赶他。张式到了州，静难节度使李周向后晋朝廷作了报告，后晋高祖因为顾及张彦泽，把张式流放到商州。
English: Zhang Yanze got angry and shot him with an arrow; people around him had always disliked Zhang Xizhe and took the opportunity to speak ill of Zhang Xizhe. Zhang Xizhe was afraid and used the excuse of illness to leave, Zhang Yanze sent soldiers to chase him. Zhang Xizhe arrived in the state, and the difficult situation made Li Zhou report to the Later Jin court, and the Later Jin Emperor Gaozu exiled Zhang Xizhe to Shangzhou because of his consideration for Zhang Yanze.

古文：彦泽遣行军司马郑元昭诣阙求之，且曰： 彦泽不得张式，恐致不测。 
现代文：张彦泽派行军司马郑元昭到朝廷讨要他，并且说： 张彦泽如得不到张式，恐怕要引起不测的事情。 
English: Zhang Yanze sent his marshal Zheng Yuan Zhao to the imperial court to ask for him, and said: If Zhang Yanze does not get Zhang Shi, I am afraid it will cause unforeseen things.

古文：帝不得已，与之。
现代文：后晋高祖不得已，给了他。
English: After he was promoted to high school, his father had no choice but to give him the money.

古文：癸未，式至泾州，彦泽命决口，剖心，断其四支。
现代文：癸巳，张式到达泾州，张彦泽命令把他决口、剖心、剁断四肢。
English: Soon after, Zhang arrived in Zhangzhou. Zhang Yanzhe ordered him to be disemboweled, his heart to be cut out, and his limbs to be amputated.

古文：凉州军乱，留后李文谦闭门自焚死。
现代文：凉州军叛乱，留后李文谦闭门自焚而死。
English: Liangzhou Army rebelled, and Li Wenqian closed the door behind him and burned himself to death.

古文：蜀自建国以来，节度使多领禁兵，或以它职留成都，委僚佐知留务，专事聚敛，政事不治，民无所诉。
现代文：蜀自从建国以来，节度使大多兼领禁兵，或者用别的职务留在成都，委派僚佐管理留职的事务，专门从事聚敛财物，政事治理不善，民众也无处申诉。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC), most of the ceremonial envoys have also received the forbidden soldiers, or have stayed in Chengdu with other duties, and have appointed officials to manage the affairs of staying in office, specializing in the accumulation of wealth. Political affairs are not well managed, and the people have nowhere to complain.

古文：蜀主知其弊，丙辰，加卫圣马步都指挥使、武德节度使兼中书令赵廷隐、枢密使、武信节度使、同平章事王处回、捧圣控鹤都指挥使、保宁节度使、同平章事张公鐸检校官，并罢其节度使。
现代文：蜀主孟昶知道了这些弊病，丙辰，加封卫圣马步都指挥使、武德节度使兼中书令赵廷隐，枢密使、武信节度使、同平章事王处回，捧圣控鹤都指挥使、保宁节度使、同平章事张公铎为检校官，把他们的节度使都罢免了。
English: Meng Xuan, the Lord of Shu, was aware of these ills. He dismissed the commanders of Jian Chen, Jia Feng Wei Sheng Ma Bu Du, Zhao Tingyin, the commander of Wude Festival and the scribe of Zhongshu, the envoy of the Privy Council, the commander of Wuxin Festival, Tongping Zhang, the king of affairs, the commander of Huping Festival, the commander of Boryeong Festival, and Zhang Gongyi, the commander of Tongping Festival, who was the inspector of the school.

古文：三月，甲戌，以翰林学士承旨李昊知武德军，散骑常侍刘英图知保宁军，谏议大夫崔銮知武信军，给事中谢从志知武泰军，将作监张讠赞知宁江军。
现代文：三月，甲戌，任用翰林学士承旨李昊主持武宁军，散骑常侍刘英图主持保宁军，谏议大夫崔銮主持武信军，给事中谢从志主持武泰军，将作监张主持宁江军。
English: In March, Jiaxuan appointed Hanlin Scholar Li Hao to preside over the Wuning Army, Liu Yingtu, a cavalryman, to preside over the Boryeong Army, Choi Min, a medical officer, to preside over the Wuxin Army, Zhongxie Zongzhi to preside over the Wutai Army, and Zhang to preside over the Ningjiang Army.

古文：夏，四月，闽王曦以其子亚澄同平章事、判六军诸卫。
现代文：夏季，四月，闽王王曦任用他的儿子王亚澄为同平章事，判六军诸卫。
English: In the summer, in April, Wang Xi, the king of Qi, appointed his son, Wang Yacheng, to the position of Tongping Zhangji, and he was awarded the six military guards.

古文：曦疑其弟汀州刺史延喜与延政通谋，遣将军许仁钦以兵三千如汀州，执延喜以归。
现代文：王曦怀疑他的弟弟汀州刺史王延喜与王延政勾结通谋，派遣将军许仁钦带兵三千到汀州，抓住王延喜把他带回来。
English: Wang Xi suspected that his brother Wang Yanxi, the governor of Tingzhou, had colluded with Wang Yanzheng, and sent General Xu Renqin with three thousand soldiers to Tingzhou to catch Wang Yanxi and bring him back.

古文：唐主以陈觉及万年常梦锡为宣徽副使。
现代文：南唐主任用陈觉和万年人常梦锡为宣徽副使。
English: The director of the Southern Tang Dynasty used Chen Jue and Everlasting Dream Tin as deputy envoys.

古文：辛巳，北京留守李德珫遣牙校以吐谷浑酋长白承福入朝。
现代文：辛巳，北京太原留守李德派遣牙校率领吐谷浑酋长白承福入京朝见后晋高祖。
English: Soon after, Li De, who stayed behind in Taiyuan, Beijing, sent the dental school, led by Chief Bai Chengfu of Tuyun, to Beijing to meet with Emperor Gaozu.

古文：唐主遣通事舍人欧阳遇求假道以通契丹，帝不许。
现代文：南唐主派遣通事舍人欧阳遇请求从晋国辖境借道来通往契丹，后晋高祖不准许。
English: The lord of Southern Tang dispatched a courier to Ouyang, who requested to take a route from the territory under the jurisdiction of Jin to Qidan. Later, Emperor Gaozu did not allow him to do so.

古文：自黄巢犯长安以来，天下血战数十年，然后诸国各有分土，兵革稍息。
现代文：自从黄巢进犯长安以来，天下血战几十年，然后诸国各有分土，兴兵作战的事情稍微停息。
English: Since Huang Chao's invasion of Chang'an, the world has been at bloody war for decades, and then each country has its own territory, and the matter of raising troops to fight has slightly subsided.

古文：及唐主即位，江、淮比年丰稔，兵食有馀，群臣争言 陛下中兴，今北方多难，宜出兵恢复旧疆。 
现代文：及至南唐主李即位，长江、淮河一带连年丰收，军粮有了富余，群臣争着上言： 陛下中兴，现在北方多难，应该出兵北讨，恢复盛唐旧的疆域。 
English: When the Southern Tang Lord Li ascended to the throne, the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River areas had bumper harvests for years on end, and there was a surplus of military grain. The courtiers argued: Your Majesty, the North is difficult now, you should send troops to the North to discuss and restore the old territory of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：唐主曰： 吾少长军旅，见兵之为民害深矣，不忍复言。
现代文：南唐主说： 我从年少时就生活在军旅之中，看到用兵对于民众的害处是很深的，不忍再提战争。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said: I have lived in the midst of military expeditions since I was young, and I have seen that the use of soldiers is very harmful to the people. I can't bear to mention war again.

古文：使彼民安，则吾民亦安矣，又何求焉！ 
现代文：让他的百姓安宁，那么我的百姓也安宁了，又有什么要索求的呢！ 
English: Let his people go in peace, so that my people also may go in peace; for what more can a man ask?

古文：汉主遣使如唐，谋共取楚，分其地；唐主不许。
现代文：南汉主刘龚遣派使者来到南唐，谋求共同夺取楚国，分占他的疆土；南唐主不答应。
English: The lord of the Southern Han, Liu Bei, sent an envoy to Southern Tang, seeking to jointly seize the state of Chu and occupy its territory; the lord of Southern Tang did not agree.

古文：山南东道节度使安从进谋反，遣使奉表诣蜀，请出师金、商以为声援；丁亥，使者至成都。
现代文：山南东道节度使安从进准备造反，派使者带着表章到蜀国，请求出兵攻打金州、商州作为声援；丁亥，使者到达成都。
English: Shannan, the host of the festival, made An Congjin prepare for rebellion, sent an envoy with a badge to Shu, and requested that troops be sent to attack Jinzhou and Shangzhou as solidarity; Dinghai, the envoy to Chengdu.

古文：蜀主与群臣谋之，皆曰： 金、商险远，少出师则不足制敌，多则漕輓不继。 
现代文：蜀主孟昶与群臣谋划，都说： 金州，商州险阻遥远，出兵少了不足以制服敌人，多了水陆运输粮秣跟不上。 
English: Shu's lord, Meng Xuan, and his vassals began to plan, saying: Jinzhou and Shangzhou are far away from danger, fewer troops are not enough to subdue the enemy, and more land and water transportation of grain can not keep up.

古文：蜀主乃辞之。
现代文：蜀主便推辞了这件事。
English: The Lord of Shu then dismissed the matter.

古文：又求援于荆南，高从诲遗从进书，谕以祸福；从进怒，反诬奏从诲。
现代文：安从进又向荆南求援，荆南的高从诲给安从进写信，晓以祸福；安从进发怒，反而向后晋朝廷诬奏高从诲。
English: An Congjin also asked Jing Nan for help. Gao Congyou of Jing Nan wrote a letter to An Congjin, informing him of the misfortune and good fortune; An Congjin became angry, but on the contrary, he slandered Gao Congyou to the Jin court.

古文：荆南行军司马王保义劝从诲具奏其状，且请发兵助朝廷讨之；从诲从之。
现代文：荆南行军司马王保义劝高从诲把实际情况向朝廷奏报，并且请求发兵帮助朝廷去讨伐他；高从诲采纳了王保义的建议。
English: Wang Baoyi, the secretary of the Jingnan march, advised Gao Congyou to report the actual situation to the imperial court, and requested that troops be sent to help the imperial court to fight him; Gao Congyou adopted Wang Baoyi's suggestion.

古文：成德节度使安重荣耻臣契丹，见契丹使者，必箕踞慢骂，使过其境，或潜遣人杀之；契丹以让帝，帝为之逊谢。
现代文：成德节度使安重荣耻于向契丹称臣，会见契丹使者时，一定伸开两腿箕踞漫骂，使者经过他的辖境，有时暗中派人把使者杀了；契丹以此责备后晋高祖，后晋高祖常替他道歉谢过。
English: The Chengde Festival made An Chongrong ashamed of being a subordinate to the Khitan. When he met the Khitan envoy, he must have stretched out his legs and cursed. The envoy passed through his jurisdiction, and sometimes he secretly sent someone to kill the envoy. The Khitan reproached the Later Jin Gaozu with this, and the Later Jin Gaozu often apologized for him and thanked him.

古文：六月，戊午，重荣执契丹使拽剌，遣骑掠幽州南境，军于博野，上表称： 吐谷浑、两突厥、浑、契苾、沙陀各帅部从归附；党项等亦遣使纳契丹告身职牒，言为虏所陵暴，又言自二月以来，令各具精甲壮马，将以上秋南寇，恐天命不佑，与之俱灭，愿自备十万众，与晋共击契丹。
现代文：六月，戊午安重荣拘执契丹使者拽刺，派出骑兵掠抢幽州的南境，把军队屯扎在博野，上表称说： 吐谷浑、两突厥、浑、契、沙陀各自帅领部众来归附；党项等也遣派使者缴出契丹委任职务的告身职牒，诉说被契丹所欺凌虐待，又说自从二月以来，契丹命令他们各自准备精兵壮马，将要在入秋时向南寇掠，他们害怕老天爷不保佑，与契丹一道灭亡，愿意自己准备十万人马，与晋国共同攻击契丹。
English: In June, Wu Wu, An Chong Rong, acting on the order of the Khitan envoy, pulled the thorn, sent cavalry to plunder the southern border of Yuzhou, and stationed the army in Bono. The above table said: Tugu Hun, two Turks, Hun, Chi, and Shatou each led their leaders to attach themselves; the party and other parties also sent envoys to submit the resignation letter of the Khitan appointed position, saying that they were bullied and abused by the Khitan, and that since February, the Khitan ordered them to prepare their own elite soldiers and strong horses, and they would plunder the southern invaders in the autumn. They

古文：又朔州节度副使赵崇已逐契丹节度使刘山，求归命朝廷。
现代文：又有朔州节度副使赵崇已经驱逐了契丹任命的节度使刘山，请求归顺朝廷。
English: In addition, Zhao Chong, the vice-commander of the Shuozhou Festival, has expelled Liu Shan, the commander of the festival appointed by the Khitan, and requested to submit to the imperial court.

古文：臣相继以闻。
现代文：我已经把这些情况相继报告朝廷。
English: I have reported these situations one after another to the Imperial Court.

古文：陛下屡敕臣承奉契丹，勿自起衅端；其如天道人心，难以违拒，机不可失，时不再来。
现代文：陛下多次命令我仰承恭奉契丹，不要自己去挑起衅端；可是现在天道人心，难以违抗，机不可失，时不再来。
English: Your Majesty has ordered me many times to obey and respect the Khitan, and not to provoke a provocation myself; however, it is the will of heaven, it is difficult to disobey, the opportunity must not be lost, and the time will not come again.

古文：诸节度使没于虏庭者，皆延颈企踵以待王师，良可哀闵。
现代文：诸节度使被执陷在胡虏境内的都伸长脖子、提起脚跟在等待着王师北伐，实在值得同情哀怜。
English: It is truly worthy of sympathy and pity that all the rulers made the horses that were trapped in the territory of the Khuriks stretch their necks and lift their heels while waiting for Wang Shi to go to the north.

古文：愿早决计。 
现代文：愿朝廷早作决计。 
English: I hope the Imperial Court will make a decision soon.

古文：表数千言，大抵斥帝父事契丹，竭中国以媚无厌之虏。
现代文：表章共有几千言，大体都是斥责后晋高祖把契丹当作父亲来侍奉，竭尽中原所有以谄媚贪得无厌的胡虏。
English: The frontispiece has a total of several thousand words, most of which are rebukes after the Shingaku Shinshu to serve Khitan as a father, exhausting all the Central Plains' insatiable lust for flattery.

古文：又以此意为书遗朝贵及移籓镇，云已勒兵，必与契丹决战。
现代文：安重荣又用这种意思写信送给朝中贵官，并且传送给各藩镇，说已经调动兵将，决心同契丹决战。
English: With this intention, An Chongrong also wrote a letter to the dignitaries of the DPRK and China, and sent it to all the provinces and towns, saying that he had mobilized soldiers and was determined to fight a decisive battle with the Khitan.

古文：帝以重荣方握强兵，不能制，甚患之。
现代文：后晋高祖由于安重荣正掌握着强大兵力，不能辖制他，极为忧虑。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu was extremely worried because An Chong Rong was in control of a strong army and he could not control him.

古文：时鄴都留守、侍卫马步都指挥使刘知远在大梁；泰宁节度使桑维翰知重荣已蓄奸谋，又虑朝廷重违其意，密上疏曰： 陛下免于晋阳之难而有天下，皆契丹之功也，不可负之。
现代文：当时，邺都留守、侍卫马步都指挥使刘知远在大梁入朝；泰宁节度使桑维翰知道安重荣已经心怀奸谋，又怕朝廷难违其意，秘密上疏说： 陛下免除了晋阳之难而领有天下，都是契丹的功绩啊，不可亏负他。
English: At that time, Yu Du stayed behind, and the attendants and guards led Liu Zhiyuan to enter the imperial court in Daliang; the Taining Festival made San Weihan know that An Chongrong was already plotting treachery, and he was afraid that the court would not go against his wishes, and secretly said: His Majesty was spared the difficulties of Jinyang and gained the world, all of which were the merits of the Khitan, and he should not be disadvantaged.

古文：今重荣恃勇轻敌，吐浑假手报仇，皆非国家之利，不可听也。
现代文：现在，安重荣依恃勇悍，轻视敌人，吐谷浑想借我们的手来报仇，都不是对国家有利的事，不能听从他们。
English: Now, relying on the brave, despising the enemy, and wanting to take revenge by our hands are not things that are beneficial to the country, and we cannot listen to them.

古文：臣窃观契丹数年以来，士马精强，吞噬四邻，战必胜，攻必取，割中国之土地，收中国之器械；其君智勇过人，其臣上下辑睦，牛马蕃息，国无天灾，此未可与为敌也。
现代文：我观察契丹数年以来，士马精强，吞并四邻，战必胜，攻必取，割据中原的土地，收缴中原的器械；他的君主智勇过人，他的臣僚上下洽睦，牛羊繁殖茂盛，国家没有天灾，是不可以把他视为敌人的。
English: I have observed Qidan over the past few years. He is strong, he has annexed four neighbors, he will win the war, he will attack and capture, he has divided the land of the Central Plains and seized the equipment of the Central Plains; his monarch is wiser than others, his ministers are harmonious, cattle and sheep are thriving, the country has no natural disasters, and he should not be regarded as an enemy.

古文：且中国新败，士气彫沮，以当契丹乘胜之威，其势相去甚远。
现代文：而且，中原刚刚败给他们，士气低落沮丧，用这样的军队去抵挡契丹乘胜的威势，这种形势，相差太远。
English: Moreover, the Central Plains had just been defeated by them, morale was low and depressed, and using such an army to resist the might of Khitan's victory, this situation, is too far apart.

古文：又，和亲既绝，则当发兵守塞，兵少则不足以待寇，兵多则馈运无以继之。
现代文：再者，和亲的关系即已断绝，就应当发兵戍守边塞，但是，兵少了是不足以应付敌寇的，兵多了又使得后勤运输接济不上。
English: Furthermore, once the relationship with relatives has been severed, troops should be sent to defend the border fortress. However, a small number of soldiers is not enough to deal with the enemy, and a large number of soldiers makes logistical transportation difficult.

古文：我出则彼归，我归则彼至，臣恐禁卫之士疲于奔命，镇、定之地无复遗民。
现代文：我军出战，他就退走，我军回守，他又出来骚扰，我担心禁卫的士兵疲于奔命，镇州、定州之地不能再有遣留的民众。
English: When our army goes out to fight, he withdraws, when our army returns to defend, he comes out again to harass. I'm worried that the soldiers on guard duty are exhausted from running for their lives. There can't be any more civilians left behind in Zhenzhou and Dingzhou.

古文：今天下粗安，疮痍未复，府库虚竭，蒸民困弊，静而守之，犹惧不济，其可妄动乎！
现代文：现在，天下刚刚稍有安定，国家的创伤没有恢复，府库空虚穷竭，百姓困苦凋弊，平静地来守护还怕不能济事，怎么可以再妄作举动呢！
English: Now, when there is just a little bit of stability in the world, the country's trauma has not been restored, the treasury is empty and exhausted, the people are poor and destitute, and it is afraid that it can't help to guard calmly, how can we act recklessly again!

古文：契丹与国家恩义非轻，信誓甚著，彼无间隙而自启衅端，就使克之，后患愈重；万一不克，大事去矣。
现代文：契丹与我们国家恩义不浅，彼此对信守誓约都很重视，他没有差错而我们自取衅端，即使战胜了他，后患也会更加严重；万一不能战胜他，大事就完了。
English: The Khitan owed a great debt of gratitude to our country, and we both attached great importance to keeping our promises. He did not make any mistakes, and since we provoked him, even if we defeated him, the aftermath would be more serious; if we could not defeat him, the great event would be over.

古文：议者以岁输缯帛谓之耗蠹，有所卑逊谓之屈辱，殊不知兵连而不休，祸结而不解，财力将匮，耗蠹孰甚焉！
现代文：人们议论认为每年运送缯帛给他们叫作耗蠹，有所卑恭谦逊叫作屈辱。殊不知如果兵战连绵而不罢休，灾祸纠结而不解除，财力将要匮乏，耗蠹哪个更厉害呢！
English: People argue that the annual delivery of straw to them is called consumption, and some are humble and call it humiliation. After all, if the war is continuous and does not stop, the disaster is entangled and does not resolve, the financial resources will be scarce, which is more powerful?

古文：用兵则武吏功臣过求姑息，边籓远郡得以骄矜，下陵上替，屈辱孰大焉！
现代文：用兵就会使得武将功臣过份要求姑息迁就他们，边藩远郡因此得以骄傲矜伐，下颓上废，不思振作，屈辱哪个更大呢！
English: The use of soldiers will make the generals and heroes excessively demand appeasement and accommodate them, so the border provinces and far counties can be proud, wasteful, and do not think to cheer up. Which humiliation is greater?

古文：臣愿陛下训农习战，养兵息民，俟国无内忧，民有馀力，然后观衅而动，则动必有成矣。
现代文：我希望陛下训劝农耕，习练军战，养备兵众，与民休息，等到国家没有内忧，民众有了余力，然后看形势而动，才能动必有成。
English: I hope that His Majesty will exhort them to farm, practice military warfare, train soldiers, and rest with the people, and wait until the country is free from internal worries and the people have more energy, and then move according to the situation, in order to achieve success.

古文：又，鄴都富盛，国家籓屏，今主帅赴阙，军府无人，臣窃思慢藏诲盗之言，勇夫重闭之义，乞陛下略加巡幸，以杜奸谋。 
现代文：再者，邺都丰富繁盛，是国家的屏障，现在它的主帅赴阙朝见，军府无人主事，我想到《易经》上说的不谨守所藏，要招引盗贼的话，《左传》上所讲勇敢的人重视守护的道理，请求陛下略作巡视检查，以杜绝奸谋。 
English: Furthermore, Handan is rich and prosperous, and is a barrier to the country. Now its commander-in-chief is visiting Handan for a state visit, and the military government has no one in charge. I thought of the words in the "I Ching" that one should not guard what is hidden in order to attract thieves, and the words in "Zhuo Zhuan" that the brave people should pay attention to the principle of guarding, and asked His Majesty to make a brief inspection to prevent treachery.

古文：帝谓使者曰： 朕比日以来，烦懑不决，今见卿奏，如醉醒矣，卿勿以为忧。 
现代文：后晋高祖对来使说： 朕这几天心里烦扰，不能决定怎么办，今天见到你们节帅的奏章，就像酒醉醒来，告诉你们节帅不要忧虑。 
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu said to the envoy, "I have been worried for the past few days, and I can't decide what to do. Seeing your commander's report today is like waking up drunk and telling your commander not to worry.

古文：闽王曦闻王延政以书招泉州刺史王继业，召继业还，赐死于郊外，杀其子于泉州。
现代文：闽主王曦听说王延政写信招泉州刺史王继业，便把王继业召回福州，赐死于郊外，又在泉州把他的儿子杀了。
English: After hearing that Wang Yanzheng had written a letter to invite Wang Jiye, the Quanzhou assassin, the assassin's master Wang Xi called Wang Jiye back to Fuzhou, ordered him to die in the suburbs, and killed his son in Quanzhou.

古文：初，继业为汀州刺史，司徒兼门下侍郎、同平章事杨沂丰为士曹参军，与之亲善。或告沂丰与继业通谋，沂丰方侍宴，即收下狱，明日斩之，夷其族。
现代文：以前，王继业做汀州刺史，闽国司徒兼门下侍郎、同平章事杨沂丰当时是士曹参军，与他相亲善；有人告称杨沂丰与王继业同谋，杨沂丰正在陪侍闽主的宴会，立即抓起来下狱，第二天便杀了，还夷灭了他的家族。
English: In the past, Wang Jiye served as the prefect of Tingzhou, and Yang Jifeng, the prefect of Shandong Province, served as his attendant, and Yang Jifeng was an officer in the army at that time, and they were friendly with him. Some people accused Yang Jifeng of being an accomplice of Wang Jiye. Yang Jifeng was attending a banquet of his master, and he was immediately arrested and imprisoned, and the next day he was killed, and his family was also exterminated.

古文：沂丰，涉之从弟也，时年八十馀，国人哀之，自是宗族勋旧相继被诛，人不自保，谏议大夫黄峻舁榇诣朝堂极谏，曦曰： 老物狂发矣！ 
现代文：杨沂丰是杨涉的堂弟，当时已经八十多岁，闽国的民众很为他悲哀。从此宗族勋旧相继被诛杀，人人不能自保，谏议大夫黄峻抬着棺材到朝堂极力进谏，王曦说： 老东西狂病发作了！ 
English: Yang Qifeng was the cousin of Yang Watan, who was already over eighty years old at the time, and the people of Shandong were very sad for him. Since then, the family members have been killed one after another, and everyone can not protect themselves. Dr. Huang Jun carried the coffin to the morning hall and tried his best to enter the coffin. Wang Xi said: The old man had a mad attack!

古文：贬漳州司户。
现代文：把他贬官为漳州司户。
English: He was demoted to the post of Chenzhou steward.

古文：曦淫侈无度，资用不给，谋于国计使国安陈匡范，匡范请日进万金；曦悦，加匡范礼部侍郎，匡范增算商贾数倍。
现代文：王曦淫侈无度，资金用度接不上，于是就同国计使南安人陈匡范商讨办法，陈匡范请求每天进万金；王曦高兴，加封陈匡范为礼部侍郎，陈匡范向商贾收费时增算数倍。
English: Wang Xi was so extravagant that he couldn't keep up with the expenditure of funds, so he asked Chen Kuangfan from Nan'an to discuss with him. Chen Kuangfan asked to be paid 10,000 yuan a day. Wang Xi was pleased to appoint Chen Kuangfan as the attendant of the ceremonial department, and Chen Kuangfan charged merchants several times more.

古文：曦宴群臣，举酒属匡范曰： 明珠美玉，求之可得；如匡范人中之宝，不可得也。 
现代文：王曦宴会群臣时，举酒对陈匡范说： 明珠美玉，求之可以得到；像匡范这样的人是人中之宝，不可得啊！ 
English: When Wang Xi was holding a banquet for his ministers, he raised his glass and said to Chen Kuangfan: "You can get the pearl and the jewel if you ask for it; a person like Kuangfan is a treasure among people, you cannot get it!

古文：未几，商贾之算不能足日进，贷诸省务钱以足之，恐事觉，忧悸而卒，曦祭赠甚厚。
现代文：没多久，商贾的增收之数不能凑足日进之额，就借用各部门的经费来补足，又怕被发觉，陈匡范忧惧而死，王曦对他祭奠赠赐很丰厚。
English: Not long after, the merchant Jia's increase in income could not make up for the daily increase, so he borrowed funds from various departments to make up for it. At the same time, he was afraid of being found out. Chen Kuangfan was worried and died. Wang Xi gave him a rich memorial gift.

古文：诸省务以匡范贷贴闻，曦大怒，斫棺，断其尸弃水中，以连江人黄绍颇代为国计使。
现代文：各部门把陈匡范挪代理经费的贷钱文书上奏，王曦大怒，劈了他的棺材，斩断他的尸体抛掷到水中。另行任用连江人黄绍颇代做国计使。
English: All departments played up the loan document of Chen Kuangfan's transfer of agency funds, Wang Xi was furious, split his coffin, cut off his body and threw it into the water. In addition, he appointed Huang Shao Po, a Lianjiang person, to be the national envoy.

古文：绍颇请 令欲仕者，自非廕补，皆听输钱即授之，以资望高下及州县房口多寡定其直，自百缗至千缗。 
现代文：黄绍颇建议： 命令那些要做官的人，只要不是因功绩荫庇补官的，都听凭送钱就授给他，从百缗直到千缗，用资望高下及州县户口多少来定价格。 王曦听从了这个办法。
English: Huang Shoupo suggested: "Order those who want to be officials, as long as they are not appointed because of their merits, to give him money, from 100 baht to 1000 baht, with the amount of capital and the number of state and county accounts to set the price." Wang Xi obeyed this method.

古文：从之。唐主自以专权取吴，尤忌宰相权重，以右仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事李建勋执政岁久，欲罢之。
现代文：南唐主李自己是由于专权夺取了吴国皇位，尤其忌怕宰相权重，因为右仆射兼中书侍郎，同平章事李建勋执政的时间太长，想要罢免他。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li himself, seized the throne of the State of Wu due to his absolute power. In particular, he was afraid of the weight of the prime minister, because his right-hand man, Shao, was also the secretary of the Central Committee, and because Li Jianxun had been in power for too long, he wanted to remove him.

古文：会建勋上疏言事，意其留中，既而唐主下有司施行。
现代文：正好李建勋上疏言事，他想会留在宫中，不久南唐主却颁下诏令到有关部门施行。
English: It so happened that Li Jianxun did not keep his word, he thought he would stay in the palace, but soon the Lord of Southern Tang issued an edict to the relevant departments.

古文：建勋自知事挟爱憎，密取所奏改之；秋，七月，戊辰，罢建勋归私第。
现代文：李建勋自己知道事情掺挟着自己的爱憎，暗中取出所奏偷改了；秋季，七月，戊辰，罢免了李建勋的官职，让他退归私第。
English: Li Jianxun himself knew that the matter was mixed with his own love and hate, secretly took out the transcript and secretly changed it; in the autumn, in July, in Bo Chen, Li Jianxun was dismissed from his official post and allowed him to return to private life.

古文：帝忧安重荣跋扈，己巳，以刘知远为北京留守、河东节度使，复以辽、沁隶河东；以北京留守李德珫为鄴都留守。
现代文：后晋高祖忧患安重荣跋扈，己巳，任命刘知远为北京留守、河东节度使，仍然把辽州、沁州隶属于河东；把北京留守李德调任为邺都留守。
English: After he was promoted to Gaozhu, he was worried about the safety and prosperity of his ancestors. Therefore, he appointed Liu Zhiyuan as the Beijing left-behind and the Hedong Festival envoy. He still subordinated Liaozhou and Ganzhou to Hedong; and transferred the Beijing left-behind Li De to the Shidu left-behind.

古文：知远微时，为晋阳李氏赘婿，尝牧马，犯僧田，僧执而笞之。
现代文：刘知远卑微时，是晋阳李姓人家的招赘女婿，曾经放牧马匹，侵犯了僧人的田地，僧人把他抓住打了板子。
English: When Liu Zhiyuan was humble, he was the son-in-law of Jinyang Li. He used to herd horses and encroached on the monk's fields. The monk caught him and beat him.

古文：知远至晋阳，首召其僧，命之坐，慰谕赠遗，众心大悦。
现代文：刘知远到了晋阳，首先把那个僧人找来，让他坐下，安慰他，并赠送东西给他，众人心里大为高兴。
English: When Liu Zhiyuan arrived in Jinyang, he first found the monk, sat him down, comforted him, and gave him gifts. Everyone was very happy.

古文：吴越府署火，宫室府库几尽。
现代文：吴越王的府署着火，宫室府库几乎烧光。
English: The government office of King Wu Yue caught fire, and the palace treasury was almost burnt out.

古文：吴越王元瓘惊惧，发狂疾，唐人争劝唐主乘弊取之，唐主曰： 奈何利人之灾！ 
现代文：吴越王钱元惊惧，得了狂疾。南唐人争着劝说南唐主乘其弊患而攻取吴越，南唐主说： 怎么能从人家的灾难中取利！ 
English: King Qian Yuan of Wu Yue panicked and fell into madness. The Southern Tang people tried to persuade the Lord of Southern Tang to take advantage of their misfortune and conquer Wu Yue. The Lord of Southern Tang said: How can you take advantage of other people's misfortune!

古文：遗使唁之，且赒其乏。
现代文：使遣派使者去慰问，并且赈济其匮乏。
English: He sent messengers to console them and to provide for their needs.

古文：闽主曦自称大闽皇，领威武节度使，与王延政治兵相攻，互有胜负，福、建之间，暴骨如莽。
现代文：闽主王曦自称大闽皇，领威武节度使，与王延政训练兵众互相攻伐，各有胜负，福州和建州之间，暴露的骨骸如同草莽一样繁茂。
English: The warlord Wang Xi, who claimed to be the great warlord emperor and led the powerful military commander, fought against each other with Wang Yanzheng's trained soldiers, each with a victory or defeat. Between Fuzhou and Jianzhou, the exposed skeletons flourished like weeds.

古文：镇武节度判官晋江潘承祐屡请息兵修好，延政不从。
现代文：镇武节度判官晋江人潘承屡次请求他们息兵修好，王延政不听。
English: Pan Cheng, the judge of the Zhenwu Festival and a native of Jinjiang, repeatedly asked them to stop fighting and make peace, but Wang Yanzheng did not listen.

古文：闽主使者至，延政大陈甲卒以示之，对使者语甚悖慢；承祐长跪切谏，延政怒，顾左右曰： 判官之肉可食乎！ 
现代文：闽主的使者到来，王延政大列甲兵以显示兵力，对使者语言极其逆悖轻慢；潘承裕长跪恳切劝谏，王延政发怒，对他的左右说： 判官的肉可以吃吗！ 
English: When the Lord's messenger arrived, Wang Yan Zheng led a large column of armored soldiers to show his strength, and he was extremely disdainful and contemptuous of the messenger's language. Pan Chengyu Long knelt down and earnestly advised him. Wang Yan Zheng became angry and said to his right and left, "Is the judge's meat safe to eat?"

古文：承祐不顾，声色愈厉，闽主曦恶泉州刺史王继严得众心，罢归，鸩杀之。
现代文：潘承裕不顾一切，声色更加严厉。闽主王曦厌恶泉州刺史王继严得众心，把他罢免回家，用毒酒鸩杀了他。
English: Pan Chengyu defied all odds, and his tone became even harsher. The tyrant Wang Xi detested the Quanzhou assassin Wang Jian, won the hearts of everyone, sent him home, and killed him with poisoned wine.

古文：八月，戊子朔，以开封尹郑王重贵为东京留守。
现代文：八月，戊子朔，后晋朝廷任用开封尹郑王石重贵为东京留守。
English: In August, after the death of Emperor Wu Zixu, the Later Jin Dynasty court appointed Kaifeng Yin Zheng Wang Shigong to stay in Tokyo.

古文：冯道，李崧屡荐天平节度使兼侍卫亲军马步副都指挥使、同平章事杜重威之能，以为都指挥使，充随驾御营使，代刘知远，知远由是恨二相，重威所至黩货，民多逃亡，尝出过市，谓左右曰： 人言我驱尽百姓，何市人之多也！ 
现代文：冯道、李崧屡次推荐天平节度使兼侍卫亲军马步副都指挥使，同平章事杜重威能干，把他任用为都指挥使，充当随驾御营使，代替刘知远；刘知远因此怀恨两个宰相。杜重威所到之处搜刮财货，民众多有逃亡。他曾经出来经过市街，对左右的人说： 人们说我把老百姓都驱赶光了，为什么市场上还有这么多的人呢！ 
English: Feng Dao and Li Qian repeatedly recommended Tianping Zhengdu Envoy and bodyguard Ma Bu Deputy Commander of the Capital, and Du Chongwei, who was capable of the same rank, appointed him as Commander of the Capital, acting as the escorting envoy, replacing Liu Zhiyuan; Liu Zhiyuan therefore held a grudge against the two prime ministers. Du Chongwei searched for wealth and goods everywhere he went, and many people fled. He once went out through the city and said to the people around him: People say that I drove out all the people, why are there still so many people in the market!

古文：壬辰，帝发大梁。己亥，至鄴都。壬寅，大赦。
现代文：壬辰，后晋高祖从大梁出发；己亥，到达邺都；壬寅，实行大赦。
English: Imjin, the ancestor of the later Jin Gaoshu, set out from Daliang; Ji Hai, arrived in Shendu; Imjin, implemented amnesty.

古文：帝以诏谕安重荣曰： 尔身为大臣，家有老母，忿不思难，弃君与亲。
现代文：后晋高祖用诏书谕示安重荣说： 你身为大臣，家中还有老母，愤怒中不想到困难，抛弃君主与至亲。
English: After he ascended the throne, Emperor Gaozu used an imperial edict to reassure Chongrong, saying, "You, as a minister, still have an old mother at home. In your anger, you don't think about the difficulties and abandon the monarch and your closest relatives.

古文：吾因契丹得天下，尔因吾致富贵，吾不敢忘德，尔乃忘之，何邪？
现代文：我因契丹而得天下，你因我而得到富贵。我不敢忘人家的恩德，你却忘了，这是为什么？
English: I won the world because of the Khitan, and you became rich because of me. I dare not forget the kindness of others, but you have forgotten. Why is that?

古文：今吾以天下臣之，尔欲以一镇抗之，不亦难乎！
现代文：现在，我用天下臣属于契丹，你想用一镇之地来抗契丹，不也太难了吗！
English: Now, I am using the world to belong to the Khitan, you want to use a town to resist the Khitan, isn't it too difficult!

古文：宜审思之，无取后悔！ 
现代文：你应该审慎地思考，不要招来后悔啊？ 
English: You should think carefully, don't cause regret?

古文：重荣得诏愈骄，闻山南东道节度使安从进有异志，阴遣使与之通谋。
现代文：安重荣得到这个诏书更加骄傲，听到山南东道节度使安从进有叛乱之心，暗中派使者与他通同谋划。
English: An Chongrong was even more proud to receive this edict. He heard that Shannan, the host of the festival, made An Congjin have a rebellious heart and secretly sent an envoy to conspire with him.

古文：吴越文穆王元瓘寝疾，察内都监章德安忠厚，能断大事，欲属以后事，语之曰： 弘佐尚少，当择宗人长者立之。 
现代文：吴越文穆王钱元病重起不了身，他发现内都监章德安为人忠厚，能够决断大事，便想把身后的事情托付给他，对他说： 弘佐年纪小，应当选择宗室中的年长者立之为主。 
English: Wu Yue Wenmu King Qian Yuan was seriously ill and could not get up. He found that the Inner Capital Supervisor Zhang De'an was a loyal person who could make important decisions, so he wanted to entrust him with the things behind him. He said to him: Hong Sa is young, he should choose the older person in the family to be the master.

古文：德安曰： 弘佐虽少，群下伏其英敏，愿王勿以为念！ 
现代文：章德安说： 弘佐虽然年轻，但是众臣下佩服他的英明敏捷，请您不要为这个忧虑！ 
English: Zhang De'an said, "Although Hirosa is young, his cleverness and agility are admired by all his subjects. Please don't worry about this!

古文：王曰： 汝善辅之，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：吴越王说： 你能好好辅助他，我就没有忧虑了。 
English: Wu Yue Wang said, "If you can assist him well, I won't be worried."

古文：德安，处州人也。
现代文：章德安是处州人。
English: Zhang De'an is from Zhanzhou.

古文：辛亥，元瓘卒。
现代文：辛亥，钱元去世。
English: Xinhai, Qianyuan passed away.

古文：初，内牙指挥使戴恽，为元瓘所亲任，悉以军事委之。
现代文：以前，内牙指挥使戴恽是钱元所亲信依靠的，把军事全部委托给他。
English: In the past, the commander of the Inner Teeth had relied on Dai Ye, a close confidant of Qian Yuan, and had entrusted all military affairs to him.

古文：元瓘养子弘侑乳母，恽妻之亲也，或告恽谋立弘侑。
现代文：钱元养子弘侑的乳母，是戴恽妻子的亲戚，有人告发戴恽蓄谋拥立钱弘侑。
English: The nanny of Qianyuan's adopted son, Hongyao, is a relative of Daiyao's wife. Some people have accused Daiyao of scheming to support Qianyuan.

古文：德安秘不发丧，与诸将谋，伏甲士于幕下；壬子，恽入府，执而杀之，废弘侑为庶人，复姓孙，幽之明州。
现代文：章德安便把钱元去世的消息封锁，不发表讣告，并同诸将密谋，在幕后埋伏带甲士兵；壬子，戴恽进入王府，把他抓住杀了，废掉钱弘侑为平民，恢复姓孙，幽禁在明州。
English: Zhang De'an then blocked the news of Qian Yuan's death, did not publish an obituary, and conspired with the generals to ambush the soldiers with armor behind the scenes; Ren Zi, wearing shackles, entered the royal palace, caught and killed him, abolished Qian Hongyi as a civilian, restored the surname Sun, and imprisoned in Mingshou.

古文：是日，将吏以元瓘遗命，承制以镇海、镇东副大使弘佐为节度使，时年十四。
现代文：这一天，将吏根据钱元的遗命，奉承朝廷制命任用镇海、镇东副大使钱弘佐为节度使，当时年纪是十四岁。
English: On this day, in accordance with Qian Yuan's last order, the generals flattered the imperial system and appointed Qian Hongsa, the deputy ambassador of Zhenhai and Zhendong, as the festival envoy. He was 14 years old at the time.

古文：九月，庚申，弘佐即王位，命丞相曹仲达摄政。
现代文：九月，庚申，钱弘佐即王位，任命丞相曹仲达摄掌政务。
English: In September, Emperor Go-shin transferred Qian Hongso to the throne and appointed the chancellor Cao Zhongda to take charge of government affairs.

古文：军中言赐与不均，举仗不受，诸将不能制；仲达亲谕之，皆释仗而拜。
现代文：军队里声言赐予不均衡，举擎仪仗不接受所赐，诸将不能制止；曹仲达亲自去告谕大家，便都放下仪仗而拜受。
English: The army claimed that the gifts were not balanced, and that the generals would not be able to stop them if they did not accept the gifts. Cao Zhongda himself went to tell everyone, and they all put down the ceremonial war and worshiped.

古文：弘佐温恭，好书，礼士，躬勤政务，发擿奸伏，人不能欺。
现代文：钱弘佐温和谦恭，好读书，能礼士，亲自勤理政务，发现剔指隐伏不当之事，人们不能欺骗他。
English: Qian Hongsa is gentle and courteous, good at reading, capable of etiquette, diligently manages government affairs in person, and discovers hidden and improper things. People cannot deceive him.

古文：民有献嘉禾者，弘佐问仓吏： 今蓄积几何？ 
现代文：庶民中有人奉献嘉禾，钱弘佐问司掌仓库的官吏： 现在粮食蓄积有多少？ 
English: Some of the common people offered Jiahe. Qian Hongsa asked the official in charge of the warehouse: How much grain is stored now?

古文：对曰： 十年。 
现代文：回答说： 能用十年。 
English: He replied, "I can do it for ten years."

古文：王曰： 然则军食足矣，可以宽吾民 。
现代文：钱弘佐说： 那么军粮是够了，可以对我的民众松宽一些。 
English: Qian Hongsa said: Then the military food is enough, I can be more lenient with my people.

古文：乃命复其境内税三年。
现代文：便命令免除境内税三年不纳。
English: He then ordered that the domestic tax be exempted for three years.

古文：辛酉，滑州言河决。
现代文：辛酉，滑州上报：黄河决口。
English: Xinqian, Slum reported: the Yellow River mouth.

古文：帝以安重荣杀契丹使者，恐其犯塞，乙亥，遣安国节度使杨彦询使于契丹。
现代文：后晋高祖因为安重荣杀了契丹使者，怕他们前来侵犯边塞，乙亥，派遣安国节度使杨彦询出使契丹。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu killed the Khitan envoy because of An Chong Rong, fearing that they would come to encroach on the border fortress, and sent An Guo Jiedu to make Yang Yan inquire about the envoy of the Khitan.

古文：彦询至其帐，契丹主责以使者死状，彦询曰： 譬如人家有恶子，父母所不能制，将如之何？ 
现代文：杨彦询到了契丹的营帐，契丹责问使者遭杀的情况，杨彦询说： 比如人家里有了恶子，父母管不住他，那将怎么办？ 
English: Yang Yan inquired about the Khitan's camp, the Khitan asked the messenger about the circumstances of the killing, Yang Yan said: For example, if there is a villain in a family and the parents can't control him, what will happen?

古文：契丹主怒乃解。
现代文：契丹主的怒气才消解了。
English: It was only then that the anger of the Khitan lord subsided.

古文：闽主曦以其子琅邪王亚澄为威武节度使、兼中书令，改号长乐王。
现代文：闽主王曦任用他的儿子琅邪王王亚澄为威武节度使、兼中书令，改封号为长乐王。
English: King Xi, the Lord of the Dragon, appointed his son, King Asen, the King of Evil, to be the envoy of the Great Martial Arts Festival, as well as the scribe of the Middle Kingdom, and changed his title to the King of Choule.

古文：刘知远遣亲将郭威以诏旨说吐谷浑酋长白承福，令去安重荣归朝廷，许以节钺。
现代文：刘知远派遣他的亲近将领郭威，根据朝廷诏命去劝说吐谷浑酋长白承福，让他脱离安重荣归附后晋朝廷，答应让他当节度使。
English: Liu Zhiyuan dispatched his close general Guo Wei, according to the imperial order of the court, to persuade the chief of Tuyugun, Bai Chengfu, to let him leave An Chongrong and join the court of Later Jin, and promised to let him be the festival envoy.

古文：威还，谓知远曰： 虏惟利是嗜，安铁胡止以袍袴赂之，今欲其来，莫若重赂乃可致耳。 
现代文：郭威回来，对刘知远说： 胡虏只喜欢对自己有好处的事，安重荣只是用袍之类贿赂他；现在，我们要把他拉过来，不如用重赂，才能让他过来。 
English: Guo Wei came back and said to Liu Zhiyuan: "Hurupi only likes things that are good for him. An Chongrong only bribes him with robes and the like. Now, if we want to bring him over, it would be better to bribe him heavily.

古文：知远从之，且使谓承福曰： 朝廷已割尔曹隶契丹，尔曹当自安部落；今乃南来助安重荣为逆，重荣已为天下所弃，朝夕败亡。尔曹宜早从化，勿俟临之以兵，南北无归，悔无及矣。 
现代文：刘知远听了他的建议，并且让使者去告诉白承福说： 朝廷已经把你们割划隶属于契丹，你们就应该安分治理自己的部落，现在竟然南来帮助安重荣当叛逆，安重荣已经被天下所唾弃，早晚之间就要败亡，你们要早日顺从归化，不要等到用兵力加临于你们，弄得南、北都无所适从，那时后悔就来不及了。 
English: Liu Zhiyuan listened to his advice, and sent an envoy to tell Bai Chengfu: The imperial court has assigned you to the Khitan, you should peacefully divide and govern your tribe, now it turns out that the south will help An Chong Rong to rebel, An Chong Rong has been spurned by the world, it will be defeated sooner or later, you should obey naturalization as soon as possible, don't wait until the army comes to you, making the south and the north have nowhere to go, then regret will be too late.

古文：承福惧，冬，十月，帅其众归于知远。
现代文：白承福害怕，冬季，十月，率领他的兵众依附于刘知远。
English: Bai Chengfu was afraid, and in the winter, in October, he led his soldiers to attach themselves to Liu Zhiyuan.

古文：知远处之太原东山及岚、石之间，表承福领大同节度使，收其精骑以隶麾下。
现代文：刘知远把他们置放在太原东山及岚州、石州之间，上表请任白承福领受大同节度使，收揽他的精锐骑兵隶属在自己的指挥之下。
English: Liu Zhiyuan placed them between Taiyuan Dongshan and Luzhou and Shizhou, and asked Bai Chengfu to receive the envoy of Datong Festival and recruit his elite cavalry to be under his command.

古文：始，安重荣称檄诸道，云与吐谷浑、达靼，契苾同起兵，既而承福降知远，达靼、契苾亦莫之赴，重荣势大沮。
现代文：开始，安重荣传送檄文给诸道，说与吐谷浑、达靼、契共同起兵，不久，白承福向刘知远投降，达靼、契芯也不去参加起兵，安重荣的势力大为沮丧。
English: At the beginning, An Chulong Rong sent a message to all the provinces, saying that he would raise an army together with Tu Guhun, Datar and Qi. Soon, Bai Chengfu surrendered to Liu Zhiyuan, Datar and Qi Xin did not participate in the army, and An Chulong Rong's forces were greatly frustrated.

古文：闽主曦即皇帝位。王延政自称兵马元帅。
现代文：闽主王曦即皇帝位，王延政自称兵马元帅。
English: Wang Xi, the lord of the imperial throne, and Wang Yanzheng, the self-proclaimed marshal of the soldiers and horses.

古文：闽同平章事李敏卒。
现代文：闽国同平章事李敏去世。
English: Li Min passed away as a result of the Tongping scandal in Shan State.

古文：帝之发大梁也，和凝请曰： 车驾已行，安从进若反，何以备之？ 
现代文：后晋高祖从大梁出发东巡时，和凝请示说： 陛下车驾已经出行，安从进如果在此时造反，怎么防备他？ 
English: Later, when Emperor Jingu's ancestor Gaozu was on an eastward inspection tour departing from Dayang, He Zhen said: His Majesty's car has already left, if An Zongjin rebels at this time, how can he be prevented?

古文：帝曰： 卿意如何？ 
现代文：后晋高祖说： 你的意见怎么样？ 
English: After promotion, Gaozu said, "What is your opinion?

古文：凝请密留空名宣敕十数通，付留守郑王，闻变则书诸将名，遣击之；帝从之。
现代文：和凝请求秘密留下空着名字的宣旨和敕令十多份，交付给留守东京的郑王石重贵，听到变故便写上诸将之名，遣派他们去攻打安从进；后晋高祖依从了他。
English: He requested that more than ten copies of the imperial decree and imperial edict with names left blank be secretly handed over to Zheng Wangshi, who was staying in Tokyo. When he heard of the change, he wrote down the names of the generals and sent them to attack Anzongjin; Emperor Gaozu obeyed him.

古文：十一月，从进举兵攻邓州，唐州刺史武延翰以闻。
现代文：十一月，安从进发兵攻打邓州，唐州刺史武延翰向朝廷报告。
English: In November, An Zong sent troops to attack Dengzhou, and Tangzhou's governor, Wu Yanhan, reported to the imperial court.

古文：郑王遣宣徽南院使张从恩、武德使焦继勋、护圣都指挥使郭金海、作坊使陈思让将大梁兵就申州刺史李建崇兵于叶县以讨之。
现代文：郑王石重贵遣派宣徽南院使张从恩、武德使焦继勋、护圣都指挥使郭金海、作坊使陈思让统领大梁兵到叶县与中州刺史李建崇的兵会合去征讨他。
English: Zheng Wang Shizhong sent Zhang Cong'en, Wu De, Jiao Jixun, Guo Jinhai, and Chen Sijian, commanders of the Great Beam Army, to Ye County to meet with the soldiers of Li Jianchong, the famous scholar from Zhongzhou.

古文：金海，本突厥；思让，幽州人也。
现代文：郭金海本是突厥人，陈思让是幽州人。
English: Guo Jinhai is originally a Turk, while Chen Sijan is from Yuzhou.

古文：丁丑，以西京留守高行周为南面军前都部署，前同州节度使宋彦筠副之，张从恩监焉；又以郭金海为先锋使，陈思让监焉。
现代文：丁丑，任命西京留守高行周为南面军前都部署，前同州节度使宋彦筠为他的副手，张从恩为监军；又任命郭金海为先锋使，陈思让为他的监军。
English: Ding Wuxi appointed Gao Xing Zhou, who stayed in West Beijing, as the commander of the Southern Front Army. The former Tongzhou Jiedu appointed Song Yanqi as his deputy and Zhang Cong En as his supervisor. He also appointed Guo Jinhai as the vanguard envoy and Chen Sijian as his supervisor.

古文：彦筠，滑州人也。
现代文：宋彦筠是滑州人。
English: Song Yanyuan is a resident of Nanzhou.

古文：庚辰，以鄴都留守李德珫权东京留守，召郑王重贵如鄴都。
现代文：庚辰，后晋高祖任用邺都留守李德暂时署理东京留守，召唤郑王石重贵到邺都。
English: Geng Chen, after the promotion of Gao Zu, appointed Li De to stay in the capital temporarily as deputy to stay in Tokyo, and summoned Zheng Wangshi Chonggui to the capital.

古文：安从进攻邓州，威胜节度使安审晖据牙城拒之，从进不能克而退。
现代文：安从进攻打邓州，威胜节度使安审晖依据牙城抗拒他，安从进不能攻克而退兵。
English: An attacked and attacked Dengzhou, and won the victory, so that An Ji, according to Fangcheng, resisted him, and An could not be defeated and withdrew.

古文：癸未，从进至花山，遇张从恩兵，不意其至之速，合战，大败，从恩获其子牙内都指挥使弘义，从进以数十骑奔还襄州，婴城自守。
现代文：癸未，安从进到达花山，遇上张从恩的兵，没想到他来得这样快，交战，大败，张从恩俘获了安从进的儿子牙内都指挥使安弘义，安从进带着几十名骑兵奔回襄州，自己绕城固守。
English: Not long ago, An Congjin arrived at Huashan and met Zhang Congun's soldiers. He did not expect him to come so quickly. They fought and suffered a great defeat. Zhang Congun captured An Congjin's son, Yanai, and commanded him to lead An Hongyi. An Congjin ran back to Xiangzhou with dozens of cavalrymen and defended himself around the city.

古文：唐主性节俭，常蹑蒲屦，盥颒用铁盎，暑则寝于青葛帷，左右使令惟老丑宫人，服饰粗略。
现代文：南唐主李性格节俭，常常脚穿用蒲草编织的鞋子，洗手洗脸用铁盆，暑天便睡在用青葛做的蚊帐里，左右使用的只是又老又丑的宫人，服饰粗糙简单。
English: Li, the ruler of the Southern Tang Dynasty, was a frugal person. He often wore shoes woven with rushes, washed his hands and face with an iron basin, and slept in a mosquito net made of arrowroot on hot days. He only used old and ugly courtiers on his right and left, and his clothing was coarse and simple.

古文：死国事者虽士卒皆给禄三年。
现代文：为国家而死亡的人，都给俸禄三年。
English: Those who die for the country are paid for up to three years.

古文：分遣使者按行民田，以肥瘠定其税，民间称其平允。
现代文：分派使者按察民田，根据田地肥瘦核定租税，民间称道公平合理。
English: Envoys are assigned to inspect people's fields, and the tax is assessed according to field fatness and leanness, which is praised by the public as fair and reasonable.

古文：自是江、淮调兵兴役及它赋敛，皆以税钱为率，至今用之。
现代文：从此，江、淮地带的调兵、兴办劳役以及其他赋捐收入，都按税金作比率征收，直到现在仍采用这个办法。
English: Since then, the transfer of troops, the establishment of labor service and other donated income in the Jiangsu and Huaihai regions have all been levied according to the tax rate, and this method is still used until now.

古文：唐主勤于听政，以夜继昼，还自江都，不复宴乐；颇伤躁急，内侍王绍颜上书，以为 今春以来，群臣获罪者众，中外疑惧。 
现代文：南唐主勤于听政，夜以继曰，从江都巡视回来之后，不再举行宴会作乐，事情处理有些过于急躁，内侍王绍颜上书，认为 今春以来，群臣获罪的相当多，内外疑虑恐惧。 
English: The head of the Southern Tang Dynasty was diligent in listening to the government. Night after night, after returning from the inspection of the Yangtze River, he no longer held banquets and played music. The handling of the matter was a bit too hasty. The palace attendant Wang Shaoyan wrote a letter, saying that since this spring, a considerable number of ministers have been convicted, and there are doubts and fears at home and abroad.

古文：唐主手诏释其所以然，令绍颜告谕中外。
现代文：南唐主用手诏解释为什么会这样，让王绍颜宣示中外。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty used a hand gesture to explain why this was so, and let Wang Shaoyan announce it to the world.

古文：十二月，丙戌朔，徙郑王重贵为齐王，充鄴都留守；以李德珫为东都留守。
现代文：十二月，丙戌朔，后晋朝廷调徙郑王石重贵为齐王，充邺都留守；任用李德为东都留守。
English: In December, the Later Jin Dynasty court transferred Zheng Wang Shizhonggui to be the king of Qi, leaving Zheng Zonggui behind; and appointed Li De to be the king of Dongdu.

古文：丁亥，以高行周知襄州行府事。
现代文：丁亥，后晋高祖任用高行周主持襄州行府事。
English: Dinghai, later promoted to Gaozhu, appointed Gao Xing Zhou to preside over the affairs of Xiangzhou.

古文：诏荆南、湖南共讨襄州。
现代文：下诏命荆南、湖南共同讨伐据守襄州的安从进。
English: The following edict ordered Jingnan and Hunan to jointly fight and defend Anzong in Xiangzhou.

古文：高从诲遣都指挥使李端将水军数千至南津，楚王希范遣天策都军使张少敌将战舰百五十艘入汉江助行周，仍各运粮以馈之。
现代文：荆南高从诲遣派都指挥使李端统领水军数千至南津，楚王马希范遣派天策都军使张少敌统领战船一百五十艘进入汉江帮助高行周，仍然各处漕运粮食以保证给养。
English: Jing Nanggao ordered Li Duan to lead thousands of naval troops to Nanjin from the command of Yu Yu, and King Ma Xifan of Chu sent Zhang Shaoqi to lead one hundred and fifty warships into the Han River to help Gao Xizhou, and still transported grain everywhere to ensure supply.

古文：少敌，佶之子也。
现代文：张少敌是张佶的儿子。
English: Zhang Shaoqi is the son of Zhang Ye.

古文：安重荣闻安从进举兵反，谋遂决，大集境内饥民，众至数万，南向鄴都，声言不朝。
现代文：安重荣听说安从进兴兵反晋便也决定谋反，大举收集境内饥民，人众达到数万，南向邺都，声称要入朝。
English: When An Chung Rong heard that An Cong Heung's soldiers were rebelling against the Jin Dynasty, he decided to rebel as well. He gathered tens of thousands of starving people in the country and marched south to the capital, claiming that he wanted to enter the imperial court.

古文：初，重荣与深州人赵彦之俱为散指挥使，相得欢甚。
现代文：起初，安重荣与深州人赵彦之都是散指挥使，互相处的很融洽。
English: At first, An Chung-Rong and Zhao Yan-Zhi, a native of Shenzhou, were both liaison officers, and they got along well with each other.

古文：重荣镇成德，彦之自关西归之，重荣待遇甚厚，使彦之招募党众；然心实忌之，及举兵，止用为排陈使，彦之恨之。
现代文：安重荣镇成德时，赵彦之从关西来依附他，安重荣待他很厚重，让赵彦之招募党众；然而内心实际上是猜忌他，等到举兵造反时，只是任用他充当排阵使，所以，赵彦之怀恨于他。
English: When An Chong Rong Zhen became virtuous, Zhao Yan Zhi came from Kansai to cling to him. An Chong Rong treated him very generously, allowing Zhao Yan Zhi to recruit party members; however, his heart was actually suspicious of him, and when he raised an army to rebel, he only appointed him to act as a platoon commander, so Zhao Yan held a grudge against him.

古文：帝闻重荣反，壬辰，遣护圣等马步三十九指挥击之。
现代文：后晋高祖听说安重荣反叛，壬辰，遣派护圣等马步三十九指挥迎击他。
English: After he was promoted, Gaozu heard that An Chong Rong had rebelled, and sent guards to meet him.

古文：以天平节度使杜重威为招讨使，安国节度使马全节副之，前永清节度使王周为马步都虞候。
现代文：任用天平节度使杜重威为招讨使，安国节度使马全节为副招讨使，前永清节度使王清为马步都虞候。
English: The appointment of the Tianping Festival made Du Chongwei the chief envoy, the An Guo Festival made Ma Quan Festival the deputy chief envoy, and the former Yongqing Festival made Wang Qing the chief envoy.

古文：安从进遣其弟从贵将兵逆均州刺史蔡行遇，焦继勋邀击，败之，获从贵，断其足而归之。
现代文：安从进遣派他的弟弟安从贵领兵迎接均州刺史蔡行遇的援兵，焦继勋堵击他，把他打败，俘获了安从贵，斩断他的脚而后把他送回去。
English: An Cong sent his younger brother An Cong to meet the reinforcements sent by the governor of Junzhou, Jiao Jixun, who blocked him, defeated him, captured An Cong, cut off his feet and sent him back.

古文：戊戌，杜重威与安重荣遇于宗城西南，重荣为偃月陈，官军再击之，不动；重威惧，欲退。
现代文：戊戌，杜重威与安重荣相遇在宗城西南，安重荣作偃月阵，官军一再进击，攻不动；杜重威害怕，想退兵。
English: In Wuzhen, Du Chongwei and An Chungrong met in the southwest of Zongcheng. An Chungrong made a crescent moon formation. The government army repeatedly attacked, but could not attack; Du Chungwei was afraid and wanted to retreat.

古文：指挥使宛丘王重胤曰： 兵家忌退。
现代文：指挥使宛丘人王重胤说： 用兵的人禁忌退兵。
English: Wang Shigetian, the commander of the envoys, said: "It is taboo for soldiers to leave the army.

古文：镇之精兵尽在中军，请公分锐士击其左右翼，重胤为公以契丹直冲其中军，彼必狼狈。 
现代文：安重荣镇州的精锐都在中军，请您分用锐利之士进击他的左右两翼，重胤为您用契丹兵直冲其中军，他必然狼狈不堪。 
English: The elite of An Chong Rong Township are all in the Chinese army, please use the sharp men to attack his left and right wings, and Chong Yat for you to use the Khitan soldiers to directly attack the Chinese army, he is bound to be overwhelmed.

古文：重威从之。
现代文：杜重威依从他。
English: Du Chongwei obeyed him.

古文：镇人陈稍却，赵彦之卷旗策马来降。
现代文：镇州兵的阵列稍有退却，赵彦之旗打马来投降。
English: The array of the town's National Guard retreated slightly, and Zhao Yan's banner was raised to surrender.

古文：彦之以银饰铠胄及鞍勒，官军杀而分之。
现代文：赵彦之是用银子装饰铠甲及鞍勒的，官军把他杀了而分抢了他的东西。
English: Zhao Yanzhi used silver to decorate his armor and saddle. The government army killed him and robbed his belongings.

古文：重荣闻彦之叛，大惧，退匿于辎重中，官军从而乘之，镇人大溃，斩首万五千级。
现代文：安重荣听说赵彦之叛变，大为恐惧，退兵藏在辎重队伍之中。官军追随其后而乘机进攻他，镇州兵大溃，斩首一万五千级。
English: When An Chong Rong heard of Zhao Yan's mutiny, he was terrified and hid the retreating soldiers in the thick ranks. The government army followed him and took the opportunity to attack him, routing the Zhenzhou soldiers and beheading 15,000 of them.

古文：重荣收馀众，走保宗城，官军进攻，夜分，拔之。
现代文：安重荣收集余众，退保宗成，官军进攻，天快黑时攻了下来。
English: An Chong Rong gathered the rest of the crowd, Taibao Zongcheng led the way, the government army attacked, and it was soon dark when they attacked.

古文：重荣以十馀骑走还镇州，婴城自守。
现代文：安重荣带着十多个骑兵逃回镇州，围绕起城池自守。
English: An Chong Rong fled back to Zhenzhou with more than ten cavalrymen and defended himself around Kichengchi.

古文：会天寒，镇人战及冻死者二万馀人。契丹闻重荣反，乃听杨彦询还。
现代文：正好遇上天寒，有两万多镇州人战死和冻死。契丹听说安重荣造反，便听凭杨彦询还归后晋。
English: Just as the weather turned cold, more than twenty thousand people in Zhenzhou were killed in battle and froze to death. When Khitan heard of An Chong Rong's rebellion, he listened to Yang Yan's request and returned to Later Jin.

古文：庚子，冀州刺史张建武等取赵州。
现代文：庚子，冀州刺史张建武等攻取了赵州。
English: Geng Zi, Jizhou assassin Zhang Jianwu and others conquered Zhaozhou.

古文：汉主寝疾，有胡僧谓汉主名龚不利；汉主自造  字名之，义取 飞龙在天 ，读若俨。
现代文：南汉主病重不起，有个胡僧说南汉主名龚不吉利；南汉主自己造了一个  字作名字，取 飞龙在天 之义，读间若俨。
English: The Southern Han Emperor was gravely ill. A wise monk said that the name of the Southern Han Emperor was unlucky; the Southern Han Emperor himself created a character for his name. He took the dragon as the meaning of heaven, and was happy while reading.

古文：庚戌，制以钱弘佐为镇海、镇东军节度使兼中书令、吴越国王。
现代文：庚戌，后晋高祖下制令，任用钱弘佐为镇海、镇东军节度使兼中书令、吴越国王。
English: Genghis Khan, the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, issued an order appointing Qian Hongsa as the regent of Zhenhai and Zhendong armies, as well as the king of Wuyue.

