古文：尹真人卢山人薛玄真于涛
现代文：尹真人卢山人薛玄真于涛
English: Yin Zhen, Lu Shan, Xue Xuan Zhen, Yu Tao

古文：尹真人
现代文：尹真人
English: Yin Zhenren

古文：犍为郡东十余里，有道观在深岩中，石壁四壅，有颜道士居之。
现代文：犍为郡东面十多里。有一座道观，在深岩中，石壁四面堵塞，有颜道士居住在那里。
English: It is more than ten miles to the east of the county. There is a Taoist temple, in the deep rock, the stone walls are blocked on all sides, and there are Yan Taoists living there.

古文：观殿有石函，长三尺余，其上錾出鸟兽花卉，文理纤妙，邻于鬼工。而缄锁极固，泯然无毫缕之隙。
现代文：道观的殿内有一个石匣子，长三尺多，它的上面雕刻出鸟兽花卉，条理纤细巧妙，近似于鬼斧神工，并且封锁得非常坚固，没有丝毫的缝隙。
English: In the hall of the Taoist temple, there is a stone box, more than three feet long, on top of which are carved birds, animals and flowers. The arrangement is delicate and ingenious, similar to the work of a wizard, and it is sealed very firmly, without the slightest gap.

古文：里人相传，云是尹喜石函。
现代文：同里的人相传，说这是尹喜的石匣子。
English: The people in the village told each other that this was Yin Xi's stone box.

古文：真人事迹，显于纪传详矣。
现代文：关于尹真人的事迹，在他的传记里记录得很详尽。
English: The story of Yin Zhenren is recorded in great detail in his biography.

古文：真人将上升，以石函付门弟子，约之曰： 此函中有符箓，慎不得启之，必有大祸。 
现代文：尹真人将要升仙的时候，把石匣子交付给本门弟子，并约束他们说： 这个匣子中有符箓，要慎重保管，不能打开，否则必有大祸。 
English: When Yin Zhenren was about to become an immortal, he handed over a stone box to his disciples and told them: "This box contains talismans. You must keep it carefully and not open it, otherwise there will be a great disaster."

古文：于是郡人尽敬之。
现代文：于是郡里的人都很尊敬它。
English: As a result, people in the county hold it in high esteem.

古文：大历中，有青河崔君，为犍为守。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，青河有一位崔君，做犍为郡太守。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a Cui Jun in Qinghe, who served as the county governor.

古文：崔君素以刚果自恃，既至郡，闻有尹真人函，笑谓属官曰： 新垣平之诈见矣。 
现代文：崔向来就凭着自己的刚强果敢而有恃无恐。他到犍为郡守后，听说了有关尹真人的石匣子的事，就笑着对属下官员说： 新垣平的骗局又出现了。 
English: Cui has always been fearless with his strong courage. After he arrived in Handan as the county governor, he heard about the stone box of Yin Zhenren, and said to his subordinate officials with a smile: The fraud of Xinyakidaira has reappeared.

古文：即诣之，且命破锁。
现代文：他立即到道观去，并且命令打开锁。
English: He immediately went to the Taoist Temple and ordered the lock to be opened.

古文：颜道士曰： 此尹真人石函，真人有遗教曰： 启吾函者有大祸。 
现代文：颜道士对崔君说： 这是尹真人的石匣子，尹真人有遗留的教导说： 开我匣子的必有大祸。 
English: Yan Daoist said to Cui Jun, "This is a stone box made by Yin Zhen people. Yin Zhen people left behind a teaching saying, 'Opening my box is bound to bring great disaster.'

古文：幸君侯无犯仙官之约。 
现代文：希望君侯不要触犯仙官的约束。 
English: I hope that the prince will not violate the restrictions of the eunuch.

古文：崔君怒曰： 尹真人死千岁，安得独有石函在乎？
现代文：崔尹发怒说： 尹真人死了上千年了，怎么能单独有石匣子存在呢？
English: Cui Yin said angrily, "Yin Zhen has been dead for thousands of years. How can a stone box exist by itself?

古文：吾不信。 
现代文：我不相信。 
English: I don't believe it.

古文：颜道士确其词，而崔君固不从。于是命破其锁。久之而坚然不可动。
现代文：颜道士说明确实有那些话。但是崔君坚决不听从，于是命令破那石匣子的锁，弄了好长时间，但很坚固，不可开启。
English: Yan Taoist explained that there were indeed those words. But Cui Jun resolutely disobeyed, so he ordered to break the lock of the stone box. It took a long time, but it was very strong and could not be opened.

古文：崔君怒，又以巨絙系函鼻，用数十牛拽其絙，鞭而驱之。
现代文：崔君大怒，又用粗绳索拴住石匣子的鼻孔，用几十头牛拽那绳索，用鞭子赶牛。
English: Enraged, Cui Jun tied a thick rope around the nostrils of the stone box, pulled the rope with dozens of cattle, and drove the cattle away with a whip.

古文：仅半日，石函遂开。
现代文：将近半天的时间，石匣子终于开了。
English: After nearly half a day, the stone box was finally opened.

古文：中有符箓数十轴，以黄缣为幅，丹书其文，皆炳然如新。
现代文：石匣中有符箓几十轴，用黄色的细绢做幅。丹砂书写的那些文字，显明得像新的一样。
English: In the stone box, there are dozens of spindles, with yellow thin spindles as the width. The characters written by Dansa are clearly like new.

古文：崔君既观毕，顾谓颜道士曰： 吾向者意函中有奇宝，故开而阅之；今徒有符箓而已。 
现代文：崔君全看完后，回过头来对颜道士说： 我先前猜想石匣子有奇宝，所以要打开察看它，现在看，只是有符箓罢了。 
English: After Cui Jun had finished reading, he turned back to Yan Daoist and said, "I had previously guessed that the stone box contained a miraculous treasure, so I wanted to open it and examine it. Now I see that there are only symbols.

古文：于是令缄锁如旧。
现代文：于是命令封锁如旧，立即回郡了。
English: As a result, the order was given to continue the blockade as before, and they immediately returned to the county.

古文：既归郡，是夕，令忽暴卒，后三日而悟。
现代文：这天晚上，郡守突然死了，三天后又醒过来。
English: That night, the county magistrate suddenly died, only to wake up three days later.

古文：其官属将吏辈，悉诣崔君问之、且讯焉。
现代文：他手下的那些官属将吏等，全到崔君家问候他，并且打听是怎么回事。
English: All the officials, subordinates and generals under his command went to Cui Jun's home to greet him and inquire what was going on.

古文：崔君曰： 吾甚憨，未尝闻神仙事，前者偶开尹真人石函，果为冥官追摄。
现代文：崔尹说： 我很鲁莽，未曾听过神仙的事，前者偶然打开了尹真人的石匣子，果然被冥官追捕。
English: Cui Yin said: I am very reckless, I have never heard of the immortal, the former accidentally opened the stone box of Yin Zhenren, and was indeed pursued by the underworld officer.

古文：初见一人，衣紫衣，至寝，谓吾曰： 我吏于冥司者也，今奉命召君。固不可拒，拒则祸益大矣，宜疾去。 
现代文：起初我看见一个人，穿着紫色的衣服，到我的寝室，对我说： 我在冥司为吏，现在奉命来招唤你，所以，不可以抗拒，如果抗拒，祸就更大了，应当快去。 
English: At first I saw a man, dressed in purple, who came to my bedroom and said to me: I am an official at Hades, and now I am ordered to summon you, so you must not resist, if you resist, the disaster will be greater, you should go quickly.

古文：吾始闻忧，欲以辞免。然不觉与使者俱出郡城，仅行五十里，至冥司。其官即故相吕公也。
现代文：我开始听说很发愁，想要用推辞获免，然而不知不觉地和使者一起出了郡城，走了将近五十里，到了冥司，那里的官就是已故的相国吕公。
English: I began to hear that they were very worried and wanted to use excuses to be exempted, but I unknowingly left the county seat with the messenger, walked nearly fifty miles, and arrived at Hades, where the official was the late King Lu.

古文：谓吾曰： 子何为开尹真人石函乎？
现代文：吕公对我说： 你为什么要开尹真人的石匣子呢？
English: Lu Gong said to me: Why did you open Yin Zhenren's stone box?

古文：奉上帝命，且削君之禄寿，果如何哉！ 
现代文：奉上天命令，将要削减你的禄和寿。 这可怎么办呢？ 
English: By order of Heaven, your salary and life span will be reduced. What should you do?

古文：已而召掾吏至，令按吾禄寿之籍。 
现代文：吕公旋即呼唤他的属吏来，让属吏考察记载我的禄和寿数的簿册。
English: Lu Gongzhu immediately called his subordinates to come and have them inspect the book that recorded my salary and life expectancy.

古文：掾吏白吕公曰： 崔君有官五任。有寿十七年。今奉上帝符，尽夺五任官，又削十五年寿。今独有二年任矣。 
现代文：属吏告诉吕公说： 崔君有官五任，有寿十七年，现在奉上天的命符，全部夺去五任官，再削去十五年寿，现在唯有二年任了。  
English: A subordinate official told Lü Gong, "Cui Jun held five posts and had a life expectancy of seventeen years. Now, according to Heaven's decree, all five posts have been taken away from him, and his life expectancy of fifteen years has been reduced to two years.

古文：于是听崔君还。
现代文：于是判崔君还阳。
English: As a result, Cui Jun was sentenced to return to the sun.

古文：后二年果卒。
现代文：二年后崔君果然死了。
English: Two years later, Cui Jun died.

古文：卢山人
现代文：卢山人
English: People from Lushan

古文：唐宝历中，荆州卢山人，常贩烧朴石灰，往来于白洑南草市。时时微露奇迹，人不之测。
现代文：唐敬宗宝历年间，荆州卢山人，经常贩卖烧朴石灰，往来于白洑南草市，时常微微露出奇异的迹象。人们不能推测他。
English: During the Tang and Jing Dynasties, a man from Lushan, Jingzhou, often sold calcined lime and traveled to and from Nancao, Baiyun. He often showed signs of strangeness. People cannot speculate about him.

古文：贾人赵元卿好事，将从之游。乃频市其所货，设果茗，访其息利之术。
现代文：商人赵元卿好事，就要跟他交游，于是就多次买他所卖的货物，请他喝茶吃点心，以便调查他获利的方法。
English: When the merchant Zhao Yuanqing did something good, he had to travel with him, so he repeatedly bought the goods he sold and invited him to drink tea and eat snacks in order to investigate his methods of making a profit.

古文：卢觉，谓曰： 观子意似不在所市，意何也？ 
现代文：卢山人发觉了赵元卿的意图，就对他说： 我看你的意图好像不是仅仅为了我的货物，那么你的意图是什么呢？ 
English: The people of Lushan discovered Zhao Yuanqing's intention and said to him: I see that your intention is not just for my goods, so what is your intention?

古文：赵乃言： 窃知长者埋形隐德，洞过蓍龟，愿垂一言。 
现代文：赵元卿知道卢山人已经知道了自己的意图，就坦白地说： 我了解长者隐藏的真实身份和品行、长者的明察超过占卜，愿一听长者垂训。 卢山人笑着说： 今天将可验证。
English: Knowing that the Lushan people had already known their intentions, Zhao Yuanqing said frankly: I understand the hidden true identity and conduct of the elders, the elders' discernment is more than divination, and I am willing to listen to the elders.

古文：卢笑曰： 今日且验，君主人午时有非常之祸。
现代文：你的房东午时有不寻常的灾祸，如果相信我的话，必定能免。
English: Your landlord had a freak accident this afternoon, and if you believe me, you'll get over it.

古文：若信吾言，当免。子可告之。将午，当有匠者负囊而至，囊中有银二两余，必非意相干也。
现代文：你可以告诉他，将近中午的时候，必定有一个工匠背着口袋到来，口袋里有银子二两多，必然出乎意料之外的相犯。
English: You can tell him that when it is almost noon, a craftsman will arrive with a sack on his back, with more than a few pieces of silver in his pocket, and there will be an unexpected partner.

古文：可闭关，妻孥勿轻应对。
现代文：可以闭门谢绝人事，妻子儿女不要轻意应付答对。
English: You can decline a job offer behind closed doors, but your wife and children should not take it lightly.

古文：及午，必极骂，须尽家临水避之。
现代文：到中午，那个人必然使劲大骂。需要全家到河边去避开他。
English: By midday, the man is bound to be swearing profusely, requiring the whole family to go to the river to avoid him.

古文：若尔，徒费钱三千四百。 
现代文：如果这样，仅仅花费三千四百文钱就行了。 
English: In this case, you only need to spend 3,400 yuan.

古文：时赵停于百姓张家，即遽归告之。张亦素神卢生，乃闭门伺之。
现代文：当时赵元卿寄住在平民张家。他立即回去告诉他，张也一向知道卢山人神奇，就闭门等候。
English: At that time, Zhao Yuanqing was staying at the home of Zhang, a commoner. He immediately went back and told him that Zhang had always known that the people of Lushan were magical, so he waited behind closed doors.

古文：欲午，果有人状如卢所言，叩门求籴，怒其不应，因蹴其门。
现代文：将要到中午的时候，果然有一个样子如卢山人所说的人，叩门要求买米，生气他不答应，就踢他的门。
English: Just before noon, there was indeed a man with the appearance of the Lushan people knocking on the door and asking to buy rice. When he refused, they kicked his door in anger.

古文：张重箦捍之。
现代文：张加上竹席封住门。
English: A curtain and a bamboo seat seal the door.

古文：少顷聚人数百。
现代文：不一会儿，聚集了几百人。
English: Soon, several hundred people had gathered.

古文：张乃由后门，与妻子回避。
现代文：张就和妻子由后门出去躲避。
English: Zhang and his wife went out the back door to hide.

古文：才差午，其人乃去，行数百步，忽蹶倒而死。
现代文：刚刚过了中午，那个人就离去了，走了几百步，忽然跌倒死了。
English: Just after midday, the man left, walked a few hundred steps and suddenly fell to his death.

古文：其妻至，众人具告其所为，妻痛哭，乃适张家，诬其夫死有因。官不能评。
现代文：死者的妻子来到这里，众人一五一十地告诉他在这里的所作所为。他的妻子痛哭，就到张家去，诬赖她丈夫死与张家有关，官府不能评判。
English: The wife of the deceased came here, and everyone told him in detail what he had done here. His wife cried bitterly and went to Zhang's house, accusing her husband's death of being related to Zhang's family. The government could not judge.

古文：众具言张闭户逃避之状。
现代文：众人全面地向官府述说了张闭门逃避的情形。
English: All of them comprehensively told the authorities about the circumstances of Zhang's escape behind closed doors.

古文：理者谓张曰： 汝固无罪，可为办其送死。 
现代文：审理此案的官吏对张说： 你本来没有什么罪，但可以给他办一办送殡的事。 
English: The official who heard the case said to Zhang: You are not guilty, but you can arrange a funeral for him.

古文：张欣然从断，其妻亦喜。
现代文：张欣然服从判决，那人的妻子也满意。
English: Zhang readily complied with the ruling, and the man's wife was also satisfied.

古文：及市槥僦举，正当三千四百文。
现代文：等到买了棺材、雇车运送、抬埋完毕，刚好花费了三千四百文。
English: After buying the coffin, hiring a car to transport it, and carrying it to be buried, the cost was just 3,400 mon.

古文：因是人赴之如市。
现代文：因为这件事人们前去卢山人那求卜就如同市场一样。
English: Because of this, people go to the Lushan people to pray, just like the market.

古文：卢意以为烦，潜逝至复州界，维舟于陆奇秀才庄门。
现代文：卢山人很烦，就偷偷地离去，到了复州地界，系舟在陆奇秀才的庄门。
English: The people of Lushan were very bored, so they secretly left. They arrived at the border of Fuzhou, and the boat was anchored at the village gate of Lu Qi Xiu Cai.

古文：或语陆： 卢山人非常人也。 
现代文：有的人告诉陆秀才： 卢山人不是一个平常人。 
English: Some people told Lu Xiucai: Lu Shanren is not an ordinary person.

古文：陆乃请之。
现代文：陆秀才就去请教他。
English: Lu Xiucai went to consult him.

古文：陆时将入京投相知，因请决疑。
现代文：陆秀才当时将要入京去投奔朋友，于是请求他决定疑虑。
English: Lu Xiucai was about to go to Beijing to join a friend, so he asked him to resolve his doubts.

古文：卢曰： 君今年不动，忧旦夕祸作。
现代文：卢山人说： 你今年不要行动，恐怕不久就会有灾祸发作。
English: Lu Shan said, "Don't do anything this year. I'm afraid a disaster will happen soon."

古文：君所居堂后，有钱一瓿，覆以板，非君有也。
现代文：你所居住的正屋后面，有钱一瓿，上面用板盖着，这钱不是你的，钱主现在才三岁。
English: Behind the main house where you live, there is a pile of money, covered with a board. This money is not yours, the owner of the money is only three years old.

古文：钱主今始三岁，君其勿用一钱，用必成祸。能从吾戒乎？ 
现代文：你不要用他的一文钱，用了必然成祸，你能听从我的告诫吗？ 
English: Don't use a single penny of his money. It will only lead to disaster. Can you follow my advice?

古文：陆矍然谢之。
现代文：陆秀才显出左右惊顾的样子，谢了卢山人。
English: Lu Xiucai showed a look of surprise to the left and right, thanking the Lushan people.

古文：及卢生去，水波未定。
现代文：等到卢山人走了，船桨打击的水波还未平静。
English: When the Lushan people left, the water wave hit by the boat's oars had not yet calmed down.

古文：陆笑谓妻曰： 卢生言如是，吾更何求乎？ 
现代文：陆秀才就笑着对妻子说： 卢山人的话假如真这样，我还再求什么呢？ 
English: Lu Xiucai smiled and said to his wife: "If this is true, what more can I ask for?

古文：乃命家童掘地，未数尺，果遇板，彻之。有巨瓮，散钱满焉。
现代文：说完就命令家童掘地，没有几尺，果然遇到板，撤去板，有一个大缸，装满了散钱。
English: Having said that, he ordered the children to dig in the ground. Within a few feet, they found a board, removed the board, and found a large jar filled with loose money.

古文：陆喜甚，妻亦搬运，纫草贯之，将及一万，儿女忽暴头痛不可忍。
现代文：陆秀才很欢喜，他的妻子也来搬运。搓草绳穿起来，将到一万。他们的孩子突然头痛不可忍受。
English: Lu Xiucai was very happy, and his wife also came to carry the load. When the reed rope was put on, it would weigh up to ten thousand. Their child suddenly had an unbearable headache.

古文：陆曰： 岂卢生言将微乎？ 
现代文：陆秀才说： 难道是卢山人的话将要应验吗？ 
English: Lu Xiu Cai said: Is it possible that the words of Lu Shan people will come true?

古文：因奔马追及，谢违戒。
现代文：于是骑快马追赶上卢山人，向他道歉，请求原谅自己的违戒。
English: So he rode a fast horse to catch up with Lu Shanren, apologized to him, and asked for forgiveness for his disobedience.

古文：卢生怒曰： 君用之，必祸骨肉。骨肉与利轻重，君自度也。 
现代文：卢山人生气说： 你用它，必然祸害你的儿女；儿女与利，哪个轻，哪个重，你自己揣度吧！ 
English: The people of Lushan angrily said, "If you use it, you will certainly harm your children; children and profits, which is lighter, which is heavier, you can figure out for yourself!

古文：棹舟去之不顾。
现代文：卢山人说完划船就走了，连头都没回。
English: Lu Shan said that he left after rowing, and did not even go back.

古文：陆驰归，醮而瘗焉，儿女乃愈。
现代文：陆秀才飞快地跑回来，设坛祭祀并把钱重新埋起，小孩的病才好了。
English: Lu Xiucai quickly ran back, set up a sacrificial altar and buried the money again, and the child's illness was cured.

古文：卢生到复州，又常与数人闲行，途遇六七人盛服，俱带酒气逆鼻。
现代文：卢山人到了复州，又曾经和几个人在一起闲走，路上遇六七个人，衣冠穿戴整齐，全都带着扑鼻的酒气。
English: When the Lushan people arrived in Fuzhou, they used to walk around with a few people. On the road, they met six or seven people, neatly dressed, all of them with the smell of alcohol.

古文：卢生忽叱之曰： 汝等所为不悛，性命无几。 
现代文：卢山人忽然叱责他们说： 你们几个坚持作恶，不肯改悔，生命没有几天了。
English: The people of Lushan suddenly reprimanded them, saying: "Some of you persist in doing evil and refuse to repent. You have only a few days to live."

古文：其人悉罗拜尘中曰： 不敢不敢。 
现代文：那些人都四面围绕着卢山人不停地下拜，并说： 不敢，不敢。 
English: All those people around the Lushan people kept bowing and saying, "Don't you dare, don't you dare."

古文：其侣讶之。
现代文：他的同行人对此很惊讶。
English: His colleagues were surprised.

古文：卢曰： 此辈尽劫贼也。 
现代文：卢山人说： 这一类人都是些盗贼啊。 
English: Lu Shan said, "This kind of people are all thieves."

古文：常语赵生曰： 世间刺客隐形者不少，道者得隐形术，能不试，二十年可以化形，名曰脱离，后二十年，名籍于地仙矣。 
现代文：卢山人的奇异神奇竟然如此。赵元卿对人说： 卢山人的身形相貌，老少不是固定的，或老或少，也不见他经常吃东西。卢山人经常对我说： 人世中刺客和隐蔽真形的人是不少的。道者获得隐形术，能够不用此术作恶的话，二十年可以变化形体，名叫脱离。之后二十年，名字就列在地仙的名册里了。 
English: Zhao Yuanqing said to the man: The figure and appearance of the Lushan people are not fixed, whether old or young, or old or young, and he does not often eat. The Lushan people often said to me: There are not a few assassins and people who hide their true form in the world. The Taoists have obtained the invisibility technique, and if they can do evil without this technique, they can change their shape for twenty years, which is called separation. After twenty years, their names are listed in the roster of earth immortals.

古文：又言 刺客之死，尸亦不见。 
现代文：又说 刺客死了，也不见尸体。 
English: He also said that the assassin was dead, but no body was found.

古文：所论多奇怪，盖神仙之流也。 
现代文：他所谈论的多半都是神奇怪异的，大概是神仙之流的吧！ 
English: Most of the things he talks about are supernatural, probably supernatural!

古文：薛玄真
现代文：薛玄真
English: Xue Xuanzhen

古文：薛玄真者，唐给事中伯高之高祖也。少好道，不嗜名宦。遨游云泉，得长生之道。
现代文：薛玄真，是唐朝给事中薛伯高的高祖，青年时期就爱好道术，不喜欢名声仕宦，遨游在云泉之间，获得了长生的道术，经常山岭间居住休息。
English: Xue Xuanzhen is the great-great-grandfather of Xue Bo Gao, who was born in the Tang Dynasty. In his youth, he was fond of Taoism, disliked fame, traveled between the clouds and springs, obtained the Taoism of longevity, and often lived and rested between the mountains.

古文：常于五岭间栖憩，每遇人曰： 九疑五岭，神仙之墟，山水幽奇，烟霞胜异。
现代文：每逢遇到人就说： 九疑和五岭是神仙的汇聚地，那里山水幽雅奇特，云霞优美奇异。
English: Whenever he meets people, he says: Jiuzi and Wuling are the gathering place of immortals, where the landscape is quiet and strange, and the clouds are beautiful and strange.

古文：如阳朔之峰峦挺拔，博罗之洞府清虚，不可忘也。
现代文：像阳朔的峰峦那样直立而高耸，像博罗的洞府那样秀丽幽静，让人不可以忘怀。
English: As upright and towering as the peaks of Yangshuo, as beautiful and quiet as the caves of Borough, it is unforgettable.

古文：所以祝融栖神于衡阜，虞舜登仙于苍梧，赫胥耀迹于潜峰。
现代文：所以，祝融在衡阜栖神，虞舜在苍梧登仙，赫胥在潜峰耀迹，黄帝在鼎湖飞轮。
English: Therefore, Zhu Rong is a deity in Hengfu, Yu Zi is a god in Cangwu, He Zi is a deity in Qianfeng, and Huangdi is a flying wheel in Dinghu.

古文：黄帝飞轮于鼎湖；其余高真列仙，人臣辅相，腾翥逍遥者，无山无之。
现代文：其余的高真列仙，人臣辅相，飞腾的逍遥者，那个名山没有他们呢？
English: The rest of Gaozhen's list of immortals, courtiers and attendants, and soaring adventurers, what would that famous mountain be without them?

古文：其故何哉？
现代文：那原因是什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：山幽而灵，水深而清，松竹交映，云萝杳冥，固非凡骨尘心之所爱也；况邃洞之中，别开天地，琼膏滴乳，灵草秀芝，岂尘目能窥，凡屣可履也？
现代文：山幽而灵气现，水深而清凉生，松树竹林交相辉映，云萝杳冥，这本来不是凡骨尘心的凡人所喜爱的；何况深洞中，又是另一种天地，琼膏滴乳，灵草秀芝，怎么能是凡夫的眼睛可能窥视，凡夫的鞋可以践踏的呢？
English: The mountains are shadowy, but the spirit is present, the water is deep and cool, the pine trees and bamboo groves are intertwined, and the clouded radish is dark. This is not what ordinary people like. What's more, in the deep cave, there is another heaven and earth. How can ordinary people's eyes be able to peep, and ordinary people's shoes be able to trample?

古文：得延年之道，而优游其地，信为乐哉。 
现代文：获得延年的道术，并且悠闲自得地游览那些地方，实在是个乐趣呀！ 
English: It's really fun to acquire long-lasting techniques and visit those places at your own pace!

古文：真元末，郑余庆谪郴州长史，门吏有自远省余庆者，未至郴十余里，店中驻歇，与玄真相遇，状貌如二十三四，神彩俊迈，词多稽古，时语及开元、麟德间事，有如目睹。
现代文：德宗真元末年郑余庆被贬谪到郴州作长史，他门下的官吏有从远方来探望郑余庆的，还没有到郴州，在离郴州十多里的店中住下歇息，与薛玄真相遇。薛玄真的身形相貌象二十三四岁的样子，神采奕奕，才智出众，词多考古，经常说到开元、麟德年间的事，有如亲眼所见一样。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Dezong Zhengyuan, Zheng Yuqing was exiled to Ganzhou to write a long history. Some of the officials under his command came from afar to visit Zheng Yuqing, but they had not yet arrived in Ganzhou. They stayed and rested in a shop more than ten miles away from Ganzhou, and met Xue Xuan. Xue Xuan's appearance was like that of a twenty-three-four-year-old. He was energetic, intelligent, and had a lot of words about archaeology. He often talked about the events of the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan and Emperor Lingde, as if he had seen them with

古文：又言明年二月，余庆当复归朝；余言皆神异。
现代文：又说明年二月，郑余庆应当官复原职回朝。其余的话都神奇异常。
English: It also said that in February of the following year, Zheng Yuqing should be reinstated and returned to the North. The rest of the words are miraculous and abnormal.

古文：问其姓氏，再三不答。
现代文：问他的姓氏，三番五次，都不予回答。
English: When asked his surname, he repeatedly refused to answer.

古文：恳诘之。云： 某有志林泉，久弃乡国，不欲骨肉知此行止。
现代文：后来，恳切地追问他，他才说： 我有志于山林，抛弃家乡、故国都已经很久了，不想让子孙知道我在这里的行止。
English: Later, after earnestly questioning him, he finally said: I am interested in the mountains and forests. It has been a long time since I abandoned my hometown and my home country. I don't want my children and grandchildren to know what I am doing here.

古文：姓薛，名玄真。 
现代文：我姓薛，名玄真。 
English: My surname is Xue, my given name is Xuanzhen.

古文：门吏话于余庆。
现代文：门吏把所见告诉给郑余庆。
English: The doorman told Zheng Yuqing what he had seen.

古文：令人访寻，无复踪迹。
现代文：郑余庆派人寻访，不再有他的踪迹了。
English: Zheng Yuqing sent someone to look for him, but there was no trace of him.

古文：明年二月，余庆徵还，及到长安，语及异事，给事中薛伯高流涕对曰： 某高祖，自左常侍弃官入道，隐终南，不知所终，是矣。 
现代文：明年二月，郑余庆应召还朝。到达长安，说到奇异的事，给事中薛伯高流涕对郑余庆说： 薛玄真是我的高祖，自左常侍，弃官入道，隐居终南山，不知道他的终了，看来你说的就是他了。 
English: In February of the next year, Zheng Yuqing was summoned to the morning. Arriving in Chang'an, he spoke of a strange thing, and in the middle of the matter, Xue Bo Gaolu said to Zheng Yuqing: Xue Xuan is really my great-grandfather, from the left attendant, abandoned officialdom and entered the Tao, and lived in seclusion until Nanshan. I do not know his end, it seems that you are talking about him.

古文：于涛
现代文：于涛
English: Yu Tao

古文：于涛者。唐宰相琮之侄也。
现代文：于涛，是唐宰相于琮的侄儿。
English: Yu Tao is the nephew of Tang Prime Minister Yu Yao.

古文：琮南迁，途经平望驿，维舟方食，有一叟自门而进，直抵厅侧小阁子，以诣涛焉。
现代文：于琮南迁，中途经过平望驿站。拴上船，准备吃饭，有一个老头儿从门进来，直接到达厅侧小阁子，来到于涛那里。
English: They moved to the south of Yunnan, passing through Pingwang Ferry Station on the way. As they boarded the boat and prepared to eat, an old man came in through the door, went directly to the small pavilion on the side of the hall, and came to Yu Tao.

古文：叟之来也，驿吏疑从相国而行，不之问；相国疑是驿中人，又不之诘。
现代文：老头儿的到来，驿站的官吏怀疑他是跟随相国来的，没有问他；相国怀疑他是驿站中的人，也没有问他。
English: When the old man arrived, the officials at the station suspected that he had come with his countrymen and did not question him; the countrymen suspected that he was someone from the station and did not question him.

古文：既及涛所憩，涛问 叟何人也。 对曰： 曹老儿。 
现代文：不一会儿，到了于涛休息的地方。于涛问老头儿是什么人。老头儿回答说： 曹老儿。 
English: Soon, they arrived at Yu Tao's resting place. Yu Tao asked the old man who he was. The old man replied, "Cao Lao'er."

古文：问其所来。
现代文：问他从什么地方来。
English: Ask him where he's from.

古文：对曰： 郎君极有好官职，此行不用忧。 
现代文：他回答说： 公子有最好的官职，这次行动不用忧虑。 
English: He replied, "My son has the best post, so there is no need to worry about this operation.

古文：涛方将远陟，深抱忧虑，闻其言，欣然迎待，揖之即席。
现代文：于涛正要远行，怀有很深的忧虑，所以听了老头儿的话，很喜悦，对他迎接招待，拱手请他就坐入席。
English: Yu Tao was about to go on a long journey and was deeply worried, so he listened to the old man's words and was very pleased. He accepted the invitation and invited him to sit down.

古文：涛与表弟前秘书省薛校书俱与之语，问其所能。
现代文：于涛和表弟前秘书省薛校书，都和他在一起谈话，问他有什么能力。
English: Yu Tao and his cousin, the former secretary of the Provincial Xue School, both talked with him and asked him what he was capable of.

古文：云： 老叟无解，但见郎君此后官职高显，不可一一叙之，请濡毫执笔，随语记录之也。 
现代文：他回答说： 我老头子不懂得什么，只见公子以后官职高贵显荣，不可不一一地叙说。请握沾墨的笔，随着我的话记录一下吧。 
English: He replied: My old man doesn't understand anything, but I see that the noble and dignified official position after the prince can't be described one by one. Please hold the ink-stained pen and record my words.

古文：如是涛随叟所授数章，词多隐密，迨若谣谶；亦叙相国牵复之事。
现代文：这样，于涛就随着老头儿所授给的记录了几篇，词多半都很隐密，好象歌谣谶语。也说些相国受牵累和恢复的事。
English: In this way, Yu Tao followed the records given to him by the old man. Most of the words were very secret, like song slang. They also said something about the involvement and recovery of the neighboring countries.

古文：因问薛校书如何。
现代文：顺便询问薛校书怎么样。
English: By the way, how is Xue Rong's school book?

古文：叟曰： 千里之外，遇西则止。
现代文：老头儿说： 千里之外，遇到西就停止，那里有你的官职。
English: The old man said: "Thousands of miles away, if you come across the West, stop, there is your official position.

古文：其有官职，虽非真刺史，亦作假郡守。 
现代文：即使不是真刺史，也是假郡守。 
English: Even if it's not true, it's a fake county governor.

古文：涛又问 某京中宅内事，可以知否？ 
现代文：于涛又问某氏京里住宅内的事情，可以知道吗？
English: Yu Tao also asked about the things inside a certain person's residence in Beijing. Can you find out?

古文：叟俛首良久曰： 京宅甚安。今日堂前有某夫人、某尼。 
现代文：老儿低头很久说： 京城里的住宅很平安，今天正屋前有某夫人某尼姑。 
English: The old man bowed his head for a long time and said, "The residences in the capital are very safe. Today, there is a certain lady, a certain nun, in front of the main building.

古文：宾客名字，一一审识。 某廊下有小童某，牵一铜龟子驰戏。 
现代文：宾客的名字，一一详细知道，某廊下有一个小孩某某，牵一个铜龟子跑着游戏。
English: The names of the guests, one by one, are known in detail. In a certain corridor, there is a child, so-and-so, who is running around playing with a copper beetle.

古文：涛亦审其谛实，皆书于编上。荏苒所载，已是数幅。相顾笑语，即将昏瞑。
现代文：于涛也审察出那真实的，都写在篇上，渐渐记载，已经是几幅了，相互说笑，马上就要傍晚天黑了。
English: Yu Tao also examined the real thing, all written on the article, gradually recorded, already several pictures, laughing with each other, it will be dark in the evening soon.

古文：涛因指薛芸香姬者。谓叟曰。 此人如何？ 
现代文：于涛顺便指着薛芸香姬者，对老头儿说： 这个人怎么样？ 
English: Yu Tao pointed to Xue Yi Xiangji by the way and said to the old man: How is this person?

古文：对曰： 极好，三千里外亦得好官。 
现代文：老头儿回答说： 很好，三千里外也能得到好官。 
English: The old man replied, "That's good. You can get a good post even three thousand miles away.

古文：涛初随语书事，心志锐信；及闻此姬亦有好官，讶其疏诞，意亦中怠矣。
现代文：于涛最初随着老头的话写事，心里很相信。等到听说这个女人也有好官，惊奇他疏忽荒诞，心意也中间懈怠了。
English: At first, Yu Tao followed the old man's words and wrote, believing in his heart. When he heard that this woman also had a good official, he was surprised by his negligence and absurdity, and his mind also slackened in the middle.

古文：时涛表弟杜孺休给事，刺湖州。寄箬下酒一壶，可五斗。
现代文：当时于涛表弟杜孺休给事，任湖州刺史，寄来箬下酒一罐，约有五斗。
English: At that time, Yu Tao's cousin Du Yuxiu, who was in charge of Huzhou's history, sent a jar of wine, about five bucks.

古文：因问叟颇好酒否。
现代文：于是问老头是不是喜好酒，老头儿欣然请求。
English: So he asked the old man if he liked wine, and the old man gladly obliged.

古文：叟忻然为请，即以银盂授之，令自酌饮，顷之酒尽，已昏晦矣。
现代文：于涛就用银盂装酒给他，让他自酌自饮。不一会儿，酒喝尽了。
English: Yu Tao used a silver ladle to fill the wine for him, and let him drink it by himself. In a moment, he had drunk all the wine.

古文：遂以银盂枕首而睡，时蚊蚋盛，无有近叟者。
现代文：这时已经是昏黑的晚上了，于是老头用银盂当枕头倒头便睡。当时蚊子很多，却没有靠近老头的。
English: By this time it was already dark in the evening, so the old man used a silver shovel as a pillow and slept upside down. There were a lot of mosquitoes at the time, but they didn't come near the old man.

古文：及旦失叟，唯银盂在焉。
现代文：到第二天早晨，老头儿失踪了，只有银盂在那里。
English: By the next morning, the old man was gone and only the egret was there.

古文：方惊问访求，莫知所止。
现代文：于涛惊骇不已，派人四处寻找，却不知道老头儿究竟到哪里去了。
English: Yu Tao was shocked and sent people to search everywhere, but he did not know where the old man had gone.

古文：人或云： 此即曹休博士也。 
现代文：人们有的说，这个老头儿就是曹休博士。
English: Some people say that this old man is Dr. Cao Xiu.

古文：曹休，魏之宗室，仕晋为史官，齐梁间或处朝列，得神仙之道，多游江湖间，往来贾贩，常拯救人，以阴功及物。人多有见之，受其遗者。
现代文：曹休是魏的宗室，仕晋以后作史官，齐梁时期还在朝列中。获得神仙的道术之后，多半是游荡江湖，为商贾，往来贩卖，经常援助人，使人脱离灾难或危险，用阴功及物，有很多人都见过他，受他的馈赠。
English: Cao Xiu was Wei's ancestral wife. After serving Jin, he became a historian. During the Qiliang period, he was still in the imperial line. After obtaining the Taoism of the immortals, he mostly wandered the rivers and lakes, was a merchant, traded, often helped people, saved people from disaster or danger, and used yin gong and objects. Many people have seen him and received his gifts.

古文：涛自后授泗州防御使歙州刺史，佐淮南吴王杨公行密为副使。
现代文：于涛从这以后授泗州防御使歙州刺史，辅佐淮南吴王杨行密作副使。
English: From then on, Yu Tao was assigned to the defense of Bozhou, and assisted Huainan Wu Wang Yang Xing as deputy envoy.

古文：相国寻亦北归。
现代文：相国不久也北归。
English: His partner soon returned north as well.

古文：辍其寿官而瘗。斯棺装漆金彩，颇甚珍华，既瘗之后，方验得好棺之言。
现代文：薛校书辅佐江西宾幕，主持袁州军务，遇到用军之际，带领家属到福建，在一个小镇，姬者突然得病死了，山中找不到做棺材的店铺，得求一个村翁的寿棺才埋葬了姬者，这棺材涂漆金彩，很是珍贵华丽。埋完了之后，方验证了曹老儿所说的得一好棺之言。
English: Xue Xue, who was the assistant to the governor of the western part of Jiangsu Province and presided over the military affairs of Yuanzhou, led his family members to Fujian when he was called up for military service. In a small town, the deceased suddenly fell ill and died. There was no coffin shop in the mountains, so he had to ask a villager for a coffin to bury the deceased. The coffin was painted gold and was very precious and gorgeous. After the burial, Fang verified what Cao Lao'er said about a good coffin.

古文：及京宅，是日宾客、小童牵铜龟游戏之事，无不验者。
现代文：说到京宅这天宾客、小孩牵铜龟游戏之事，没有不应验的。
English: When it comes to the Kyotaku, there is nothing untoward about the guests and children playing with a bronze turtle on this day.

