古文：简文帝太宗简文皇帝，讳纲，字世缵，小字六通，高祖第三子，昭明太子母弟也。
现代文：太宗简文皇帝名纲，字世缵，乳名六通，是高祖的第三个儿子、昭明太子的同母兄弟。
English: Emperor Taizong Jianwen, also known as Emperor Taizong, was the third son of Emperor Gaozu and the half-brother of Prince Zhaoming.

古文：天监二年十月丁未，生于显阳殿。
现代文：天监二年十月二十八日，出生在显阳殿里。
English: He was born in the Hsien Yang Palace on October 28 of the second year of the Heaven's Guardianship.

古文：五年，封晋安王，食邑八千户。
现代文：天监五年，封为晋安王，食邑八千户。
English: After five years as the supervisor of heaven, he was given the title of the king of Jinan, and he fed eight thousand households.

古文：八年，为云麾将军，领石头戍军事，量置佐吏。
现代文：天监八年任云麾将军，领石头戍军事，斟酌设置顾问官。
English: The overseer of heaven has been the general of the cloud for eight years, leading the military of the stone, and setting up the advisory officer.

古文：九年，迁使持节、都督南北兗、青、徐、冀五州诸军事、宣毅将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：天监九年，升任使持节、都督南、北兖、青、徐、冀五州诸军事、宣毅将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of Tianjing, he was promoted to the position of envoy to Jizhixi, the military governor of the five states of South, Beilun, Qing, Xu, and Hebei, General Xuan Yi, and the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：十二年，入为宣惠将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：天监十二年，入任惠将军、丹阳尹。
English: In the 12th year of Tianjing, General Hui and Danyang Yin were appointed.

古文：十三年，出为使持节、都督荆、雍、梁、南北秦、益、宁七州诸军事、南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：天监十三年，出任使持节，都督荆、雍、梁、南、北秦、益、宁七州诸军事、南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，将军仍旧。
English: In the 13th year of Tianjun, he was appointed as the commander of Jing, Yong, Liang, South, North Qin, Yixing, and Ning seven military provinces, Nanban lieutenant, Jingzhou stabbing history, and the general is still the same.

古文：十四年，徙为都督江州诸军事、云麾将军、江州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：天监十四年，调任都督江州诸军事、云麾将军、江州刺史，持节仍旧。
English: In the 14th year of Tianjing, he was transferred to the military governor of Jiangzhou, the general of Yunqi, and the governor of Jiangzhou, and still holds the festival.

古文：十七年，征为西中郎将、领石头戍军事，寻复为宣惠将军、丹阳尹，加侍中。
现代文：天监十七年，征召为西中郎将，领石头戍军事，不久又任宣惠将军、丹阳尹，加侍中。
English: In the seventeenth year of Tianjing, he was conscripted as the general of the West Middle Lord, leading the stone army, and soon he was appointed as the general of Xuan Hui, Danyang Yin, and the attendant.

古文：普通元年，出为使持节、都督益、宁、雍、梁、南北秦、沙七州诸军事、益州刺史；未拜，改授云麾将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：普通元年，出任使持节、都督益、宁、雍、梁、南、北秦、沙七州诸军、益州刺史，还没有上任，即改授云麾将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the common era, he served as the envoy of Jizhixi, the governor of Yixing, Ning, Yong, Liang, Nan, North Qin, Shashizhou and Yizhou, and before he took office, he was awarded the title of Yunnan general and South Xuzhou general.

古文：四年，徙为使持节、都督雍、梁、南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事，平西将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：普通四年，调任使持节、都督雍、梁、南、北秦四州以及郢州竟陵、司州随郡诸军事、平西将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: Usually four years, he was assigned as envoy to Jizhixi, the governor of Yong, Liang, South, and North Qin Provinces, as well as Gongzhou Jingling, Sizhou Suigun Military, Pingxi General, Ningban Lieutenant, and Yongzhou Zhishi.

古文：五年，进号安北将军。
现代文：普通五年，晋号安北将军。
English: Ordinary five years, Jin title Anbei general.

古文：七年，权进都督荆、益、南梁三州诸军事。
现代文：普通七年，权进都督荆、益、南梁三州诸军事。
English: In seven years, the three states of Jing, Yixing, and Nanliang became militarily powerful.

古文：是岁，丁所生穆贵嫔丧，上表陈解，诏还摄本任。
现代文：这年，丁母穆贵嫔死，上奏陈述自己的见解，下诏令回任本职。
English: In the same year, Ding's mother, Mu Guizhen, died. She made a report on her views and was ordered to return to her post.

古文：中大通元年，诏依先给鼓吹一部。
现代文：中大通元年，下诏依照先例供给鼓吹乐一部。
English: In the first year of the junior high school, the lower edict provided a part of the propaganda music in accordance with the precedent.

古文：二年，征为都督南扬、徐二州诸军事、骠骑将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：中大通二年，征召为都督南扬、徐二州诸军事、骠骑将军、扬州刺史。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was called up as the governor of Nanyang, the military of Xu Erzhou, the cavalry general, and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：三年四月乙巳，昭明太子薨。
现代文：中大通三年四月六日，昭明太子去世。
English: On April 6th, the third year of his junior high school, Prince Akime passed away.

古文：五月丙申，诏曰： 非至公无以主天下，非博爱无以临四海。
现代文：五月二十八日，下诏： 不是大公无私便不可以治理国家，不是兼爱百姓便不可以君临四海。
English: On May 28, the following edict was issued: If you are not selfless, you cannot govern the country; if you do not love the people, you cannot reign over the four seas.

古文：所以尧舜克让，惟德是与；文王舍伯邑考而立武王，格于上下，光于四表。
现代文：因此，尧能够让贤于舜，只要有懿德就举荐他；文王舍弃伯邑考而立武王，至于上下，光辉普照四方。
English: Therefore, the king can let the virtuous man be superior to the king, and recommend him as long as he is virtuous. King Wen abandoned the peasantry and established King Wu. As for the upper and lower levels, the brilliance shines everywhere.

古文：今岱宗牢落，天步艰难，淳风犹郁，黎民未乂，自非克明克哲，允武允文，岂能荷神器之重，嗣龙图之尊。
现代文：尔今岱宗荒寥，国运艰难，淳厚的风气却依然浓郁，百姓没有治理，如果不是既贤明而又有才能、既能文又能武的人，怎能够担当得起国家的重任啊！
English: At present, the Han Sect is desolate, the national movement is difficult, the honest and generous culture is still strong, and the people have no governance. If they are not wise and talented, able to write and fight, how can they be able to shoulder the heavy responsibility of the country!

古文：晋安王纲，文义生知，孝敬自然，威惠外宣，德行内敏，群后归美，率土宅心。
现代文：晋安王纲，文章的内涵不待学而知，善事尊长犹出于自然，威望、恩惠宣扬于外，内在德行聪明、机智，诸后归附于美，境域之内，齐心一意。
English: Jinan Wanggang, the connotation of the article does not need to be learned, good deeds and respect still come from nature, prestige and favors are promoted externally, internal virtues are clever and witty, and later they are attached to beauty, within the territory, with one heart and one mind.

古文：可立为皇太子。 
现代文：适合立为皇太子。 
English: He is suitable to be crown prince.

古文：七月乙亥，临轩策拜，以修缮东宫，权居东府。
现代文：七月七日，至正殿前授策而拜，因修缮东宫，暂时居住在东府。
English: On the 7th of July, he went to the front of the main hall to pray for guidance. Due to the renovation of the East Palace, he temporarily lived in the East Prefecture.

古文：四年九月，移还东宫。
现代文：中大通四年九月，移回东宫居住。
English: In September 2004, Nakadamichi moved back to the East Palace to live.

古文：太清三年五月丙辰，高祖崩。
现代文：太清三年五月二日，高祖驾崩。
English: Gao Zu passed away on May 2nd, the 3rd year of the Taiqing Dynasty.

古文：辛巳，即皇帝位。
现代文：二十八日，即皇帝位。
English: On the 28th, he became emperor.

古文：诏曰： 朕以不造，夙丁闵凶。
现代文：下诏： 朕因丧父，遭逢不幸。
English: The following message: Due to the death of my father, I have suffered misfortune.

古文：大行皇帝奄弃万国，攀慕号絺，厝身靡所。
现代文：大行皇帝突然丢下万国，攀慕号頢，身处失所。
English: Emperor Da Xing suddenly abandoned the world, and lost his position.

古文：猥以寡德，越居民上，茕茕在疚，罔知所托，方赖籓辅，社稷用安。
现代文：朕德行寡薄，却越居万民之上，孤单痛苦，不知所托，正仰赖藩辅，国家因此安定。
English: I have little virtue, but I am more and more superior to all the people. I am lonely and in pain, I do not know what to do, I am relying on the help of the domain, and the country is stable.

古文：谨遵先旨，顾命遗泽，宜加亿兆。
现代文：谨遵照先帝意旨，给全国的平民百姓带来恩惠。
English: In accordance with the will of the former emperor, I would like to bring benefits to the common people throughout the country.

古文：可大赦天下。 
现代文：可对全国已判罪犯减刑或免刑。 
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：壬午，诏曰： 育物惟宽，驭民惟惠，道著兴王，本非隶役。
现代文：二十九日，下诏： 培育事物宜采取宽松政策，治理百姓应给他们带来福惠，道著兴王，本非奴隶。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: It is appropriate to adopt a loose policy to cultivate things, and the governance of the people should bring them benefits. The principle of rejuvenating the king is not a slave.

古文：或开奉国，便致擒虏，或在边疆，滥被抄劫。
现代文：有的开创侍奉国家，便被捕当了俘虏；有的在边疆，无端被抄家、抢劫。
English: Some served the country for the first time and were arrested as prisoners; others had their homes ransacked and were robbed at the border for no reason.

古文：二邦是竞，黎元何罪！
现代文：国与国之间的争逐，黎民百姓有什么罪！
English: Competition between countries, what is the fault of the Lebanese people!

古文：朕以寡昧，创承鸿业，既临率土，化行宇宙，岂欲使彼独为匪民。
现代文：朕寡昧无知，创承鸿大事业，既然治理国家，化行宇宙，怎么打算让他们独独成为寇盗呢！
English: I am ignorant and ignorant, creating a great career, since the governance of the country, the implementation of the universe, how do you plan to let them become thieves!

古文：诸州见在北人为奴婢者，并及妻儿，悉可原放。 
现代文：各州只要是活着的北方人做奴婢的，以及他们的妻子、儿女，当全部释放。 
English: Let all the states free their male and female slaves who are still alive in the North, together with their wives and children.

古文：癸未，追谥妃王氏为简皇后。
现代文：三十日，给王妃追加谥号为 简皇后 。
English: On the 30th, she was given the additional title of Empress Jane.

古文：六月丙戌，以南康嗣王会理为司空。
现代文：六月二日，任南康嗣王会理为司空。
English: On June 2nd, he was appointed as the secretary of the Southern Kangxi Wang Association.

古文：丁亥，立宣城王大器为皇太子。
现代文：三日，立宣城王大器为皇太子。
English: On the third day, the king of Xuancheng was proclaimed crown prince.

古文：壬辰，封当阳公大心为寻阳郡王，石城公大款为江夏郡王，宁国公大临为南海郡王，临城公大连为南郡王，西豊公大春为安陆郡王，新涂公大成为山阳郡王，临湘公大封为宜都郡王。
现代文：八日，封当阳公大心为寻阳郡王，石城公大款为江夏郡王，宁国公大临为南海郡王，临城公大连为南郡王，西丰公大春为安陆郡王，新淦公大成为山阳郡王，临湘公大封为宜都郡王。
English: On the 8th, Feng Dangyang Gong Daxin became the king of Xuanyang County, Shicheng Gong Daxin became the king of Jiangxia County, Ningguo Gong Daxin became the king of Nanhai County, Lincheng Gong Dailian became the king of Nan County, Xifeng Gong Dachun became the king of Anlu County, Xinzhuang Gong Daxin became the king of Shanyang County, and Linxiang Gong Daxin became the king of Yidu County.

古文：秋七月甲寅，广州刺史元景仲谋应侯景，西江督护陈霸先起兵攻之，景仲自杀，霸先迎定州刺史萧勃为刺史。
现代文：秋七月一日，广州刺史元景仲策划响应侯景，西江督护陈霸先率兵攻打他，元景仲自杀，陈霸先迎接定州刺史萧勃为刺史。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the Guangzhou assassin, Yuan Jingzhong, plotted a response to Hou Jing. The governor of the West River, Chen Baxi, led the troops to attack him. Yuan Jingzhong committed suicide, and Chen Baxi first greeted the Dingzhou assassin, Xiao Bo, as the assassin.

古文：戊辰，以吴郡置吴州，以安陆王大春为刺史。
现代文：十五日，以吴郡设置吴州，任安陆王大春为刺史。
English: On the 15th, Wu County was designated as Wuzhou, and Wang Dachun of Anlu was appointed as governor.

古文：庚午，以司空南康嗣王会理兼尚书令，南海王大临为扬州刺史，新兴王大庄为南徐州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任司空南康嗣王会理兼尚书令，南海王大临为扬州刺史，新兴王大庄为南徐州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Sikyong Namkhangshi Wang was appointed as the chairman of the association and wrote a letter, Nanhai Wang Dairin was appointed as the Yangzhou historian, and the emerging Wang Dazhuang was appointed as the South Xuzhou historian.

古文：是月，九江大饥，人相食十四五。
现代文：这月，九江发生大饥荒，人吃人的有十分之四、五。
English: This month, a great famine occurred in Jiujiang, and four-fifths of the people were cannibals.

古文：八月癸卯，征东大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史萧渊藻薨。
现代文：八月二十日，征东大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史萧渊藻去世。
English: On August 20th, Xiao Yuanmao, the general of the Eastern Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and South Xuzhou Jishi, passed away.

古文：冬十月丁未，地震。
现代文：冬十月二十五日，发生地震。
English: In winter, on October 25th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月，百济国派遣使者贡献土产。
English: In December, Baekje sent an envoy to contribute local produce.

古文：大宝元年春正月辛亥朔，以国哀不朝会。
现代文：大宝元年春正月初一日，因国哀没有举行朝会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Dabao, the imperial court meeting was not held due to the national mourning.

古文：诏曰： 盖天下者，至公之神器，在昔三五，不获已而临莅之。
现代文：下诏： 国家是大公无私的神圣器物，从前三皇五帝，不得已而即位。
English: The following edict: The state is a sacred and selfless thing. Three emperors and five emperors ascended to the throne as a last resort.

古文：故帝王之功，圣人之余事。轩冕之华，傥来之一物。
现代文：所以帝王的成功，圣人的闲事，轩冕的华丽，或许都来源于一个事物。
English: So the success of emperors, the affairs of saints, and the splendor of crowned heads may all stem from one thing.

古文：太祖文皇帝含光大之量，启西伯之基。
现代文：太祖文皇帝胸怀光大的气魄，开启西伯那样的基业。
English: Emperor Taizowen, with a big heart and great courage, started a foundation like Xibe.

古文：高祖武皇帝道洽二仪，智周万物。
现代文：高祖武皇帝道洽二仪，智周万物。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu of the Second Dynasty of Confucianism, the wisdom of all things.

古文：属齐季荐瘥，彝伦剥丧，同气离入苑之祸，元首怀无厌之欲，乃当乐推之运，因亿兆之心，承彼掎角，雪兹仇耻。
现代文：看到齐末危机深重，人伦剥落丧失，同气离入苑之祸，君主怀贪得无厌的欲望，乃当乐推之运，顺着平民百姓的意愿，并以他们为依靠，雪此仇恨与耻辱。
English: Seeing the profound crisis at the end of the Qi Dynasty, the loss of human relations, the disaster of the same spirit of separation into the courtyard, the monarch's insatiable desire, is to push the luck, follow the will of the common people, and rely on them, snow this hatred and shame.

古文：事非为己，义实从民。故功成弗居，卑宫菲食，大慈之业普薰，汾阳之诏屡下。
现代文：事情不是为了一己的私利，真正归于人民，所以才大功告成而不居功，住着卑陋宫室，吃的是素菜，大慈之业普薰，汾阳之诏多次下达。
English: The matter is not for one's own selfish interests, but truly belongs to the people. That is why great achievements are made without taking credit. He lives in a humble palace, eats vegetarian food, is very kind and generous, and has repeatedly issued the edict of Shanyang.

古文：于兹四纪，无得而称。
现代文：到现在已有四纪，无得而称。
English: Up to now, there have been four disciplines, which can be said to be unprecedented.

古文：朕以寡昧，哀茕孔棘，生灵已尽，志不图全，僶俛视阴，企承鸿绪。
现代文：朕寡昧无知，孤单孔棘，生灵已尽，志不图全。亻黾俯视阴，企图承继鸿业。
English: I am obscure and ignorant, a lonely thorn in the side, my life is over, my aspirations are not complete. I look down on the shadows, trying to succeed the great cause.

古文：悬旌履薄，未足云喻。
现代文：悬旌履薄，不足云喻。
English: Hanging on by a thread.

古文：痛甚愈迟，谅暗弥切。
现代文：痛甚痛迟，谅弥切。
English: Painfully, painfully late, my apologies.

古文：方当玄默在躬，栖心事外。
现代文：方当玄默在躬，栖心事外。
English: Fang Dangxuan was silent, sitting on the sidelines.

古文：即王道未直，天步犹艰，式凭宰辅，以弘庶政。
现代文：即王道未直，国运艰难，式凭宰辅，以弘政务。
English: That is to say, the king's path is not straight, the national movement is difficult, the style is to be assisted, and the government affairs are to be promoted.

古文：履端建号，仰惟旧章。
现代文：履端建号，抑唯旧章。
English: Build a name at the end of the line, but keep the old chapter.

古文：可大赦天下，改太清四年为大宝元年。 
现代文：可对全国已判罪犯减刑或免刑，改太清四年为大宝元年。 
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences reduced or be exempted, and the fourth year of the Taiching era can be changed to the first year of the Taibao era.

古文：丁巳，天雨黄沙。
现代文：七日，天上下雨，并降黄沙。
English: On the seventh day, it rained and rained and rained.

古文：己未，太白经天，辛酉乃止。
现代文：九日，太白星通过天空，十一日才消失。
English: On the 9th, a very white star passed through the sky, only to disappear on the 11th.

古文：西魏寇安陆，执司州刺史柳仲礼，尽没汉东之地。
现代文：西魏进犯安陆，拘捕司州刺史柳仲礼，全部攻陷汉东之地。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty invaded Anlu, arrested the provincial magistrate Liu Zhongli, and all of them invaded the land of the Han Dynasty.

古文：丙寅，月昼见。
现代文：十六日，月亮在白昼里出现。
English: On the 16th, the moon appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，前江都令祖皓起义，袭广陵，斩贼南兗州刺史董绍先。
现代文：二十三日，前江都令祖皓起义，袭击广陵，杀贼南兖州刺史董绍先。
English: On the 23rd, the former Jiangdu ordered Zu Xi to revolt, attacked Guangling, and the killers stabbed Dong Shaoxian in Nanluozhou.

古文：侯景自帅水步军击皓。
现代文：侯景亲自率领水步军攻打祖皓。
English: Hou Jing personally led the water marching army to attack Zuye.

古文：二月癸未，景攻陷广陵，皓等并见害。
现代文：二月三日，侯景攻陷广陵，祖皓等均被杀害。
English: On February 3, Guangling was captured by Hou Jing, and Zhu Xi and others were all killed.

古文：丙戌，以安陆王大春为东扬州刺史。
现代文：六日，任安陆王大春为东扬州刺史。
English: On the 6th, Wang Dechun of Anlu was appointed to write the history of East Yangzhou.

古文：省吴州，如先为郡。
现代文：察看吴州，像先前一样仍改为郡。
English: Inspecting Wuzhou, it was still changed to a county as before.

古文：诏曰： 近东垂扰乱，江阳纵逸。上宰运谋，猛士雄奋，吴、会肃清，济、兗澄谧，京师畿内，无事戎衣。
现代文：下诏： 近来国境东面侵扰纷乱，江阳荡动不安，宰相运筹谋划，勇士精神奋发，肃清吴、会，安定济、兖，京城畿内，无事戎衣。
English: The following edict: Recently, the eastern side of the border has been plagued by disturbances and turmoil, the Yangtze River has been unstable, the prime minister's operation has been planned, and the warriors have worked hard to clean up the Wu, Hui, Jing, Jie, and Gyeonggi regions, and there is nothing to do.

古文：朝廷达宫，斋内左右，并可解严。 
现代文：朝廷达官，斋内左右，均可解除戒严令。 
English: High-ranking officials of the imperial court, both inside and outside the palace, can lift the martial law.

古文：乙巳，以尚书仆射王克为左仆射。
现代文：二十五日，任尚书仆射王克为左仆射。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Shang Shu's servant Sha Wangke as his left-hand man.

古文：是月，邵陵王纶自寻阳至于夏口，郢州刺史南平王恪以州让纶。
现代文：这月，邵陵王纶从寻阳到达夏口，郢州刺史南平王恪将郢州转让给邵陵王纶。
English: This month, Shaoling Wangye arrived in Xiakou from Huanyang. Nanping Wangke, the governor of Zhangzhou, transferred Zhangzhou to Shaoling Wangye.

古文：丙午，侯景逼太宗幸西州。
现代文：二十六日，侯景逼迫太宗巡幸西州。
English: On the 26th, Hou Jing forced Taizong to make an inspection tour of Xizhou.

古文：夏五月庚午，征北将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳嗣王范薨。
现代文：夏五月二十二日，征北将军、开府仪同三司鄱阳嗣王范去世。
English: On the 22nd day of the fifth month of the summer, the general of the Northern Expedition, Kaifu Yi, and the third secretary, Shenyang Wang Fan, passed away.

古文：自春迄夏，大饥，人相食，京师尤甚。
现代文：从春天到夏天，发生大饥荒，人吃人，京城的情形更加严重。
English: From spring to summer, there was a great famine, people were eating each other, and the situation in the capital was even more serious.

古文：六月辛巳，以南郡王大连行扬州事。
现代文：六月三日，任南郡王大连行扬州事。
English: On June 3, Wang Dalian of Renan County left for Yangzhou.

古文：庚子，前司州刺史羊鸦仁自尚书省出奔西州。
现代文：二十二日，前司州刺史羊鸦仁从尚书省逃到西州。
English: On the 22nd day, the former Sizhou scholar Yang Rongren fled from Shangshu to Xizhou.

古文：秋七月戊辰，贼行台任约寇江州，刺史寻阳王大心以州降约。
现代文：秋七月二十日，贼行台任约进犯江州，刺史寻阳王大心向任约投降。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the bandit Emperor Taizong invaded Jiangzhou, and Emperor Daishin surrendered to Emperor Taizong.

古文：是月，以南郡王大连为江州刺史。
现代文：这月，任南郡王大连为江州刺史。
English: This month, Wang Dalian of Renan County made history in Jiangsu Province.

古文：八月甲午，湘东王绎遣领军将军王僧辩率众逼郢州。
现代文：八月十七日，湘东王绎派遣领军将军王僧辩率兵迫近郢州。
English: On August 17th, Wang Yuanzhong of Hunan dispatched the leading general Wang Sangye to lead the troops to approach Zhangzhou.

古文：乙亥，侯景自进位相国，封二十郡为汉王。
现代文：乙亥，侯景自封相国，并封二十郡为汉王。
English: Eihei, Houjing self-annointed a sister country, and twenty counties were crowned as Han kings.

古文：邵陵王纶弃郢州走。
现代文：邵陵王纶放弃郢州逃跑。
English: Shaoling Wang Yao abandons Ganzhou and flees.

古文：冬十月乙未，侯景又逼太宗幸西州曲宴，自加宇宙大将军、都督六合诸军事。
现代文：冬十月十九日，侯景又逼迫太宗巡幸西州，并私自宴请，自封宇宙大将军、都督六合诸军事。
English: In the winter of October 19th, Hou Jing again forced Taizong to visit Xizhou, and privately invited him to a banquet, proclaiming himself the universal general and the sixth military governor.

古文：立皇子大钧为西阳郡王，大威为武宁郡王，大球为建安郡王，大昕为义安郡王，大挚为绥建郡王，大圜为乐梁郡王。
现代文：立皇子大钧为西阳郡王，大威为武宁郡王，大球为建安郡王，大昕为义安郡王，大挚为绥建郡王，大圜为乐梁郡王。
English: Prince Dazhao is the king of Xiyang County, Prince Dawei is the king of Wuming County, Prince Daqiu is the king of Jian'an County, Prince Dazhao is the king of Yian County, Prince Dazhong is the king of Jian'an County, Prince Dazhao is the king of Leliang County.

古文：壬寅，景害南康嗣王会理。
现代文：二十六日，侯景杀害南康嗣王会理。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Hou Jing killed Wang Hui Li of South Kangxi.

古文：十一月，任约进据西阳，分兵寇齐昌，执衡阳王献送京师，害之。
现代文：十一月，任约进据西阳，分兵进犯齐昌，拘捕衡阳王献，押送到京城，杀害了他。
English: In November, Ren Yotong marched to Xiyang, and a detachment of soldiers marched to Qichang, arrested Wang Xian of Hengyang, escorted him to Beijing, and killed him.

古文：湘东王绎遣前宁州刺史徐文盛督众军拒约。
现代文：湘东王绎派遣宁州刺史徐文盛统率大军抵抗任约。
English: Wang Yu of eastern Hunan dispatched Xu Wensheng, the governor of Ningzhou, with a large army to resist the appointment.

古文：南郡王前中兵张彪起义于会稽若邪山，攻破浙东诸县。
现代文：南郡王前中兵张彪在会稽若邪山起义，攻破浙东各县。
English: Zhang Biao, a former middle-ranking soldier of Wang County in the south, was in the meeting to investigate the Jiaozhan Uprising, and broke through the counties in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：二年春二月，邵陵王纶走至安陆董城，为西魏所攻，军败，死。
现代文：大宝二年春二月，邵陵王纶逃到安陆董城，遭到西魏的攻击，兵败而死。
English: In the spring and February of the second year of Dabao, Shao Ling Wang Qi fled to Anlu Dongcheng, was attacked by the West Wei Dynasty, and died in defeat.

古文：三月，侯景自帅众西寇。
现代文：三月，侯景亲自率兵向西进犯。
English: In March, Hou Jing personally led the troops to attack westward.

古文：丁未，发京师，自石头至新林，舳舻相接。
现代文：三日，从京城出发，从石头到新林，船头和船尾相互连接。
English: On the third day, starting from Beijing, from Stone to Xinlin, the bow and stern of the ship are connected to each other.

古文：四月，至西阳。
现代文：四月，到达西阳。
English: In April, he arrived in Xiyang.

古文：乙亥，景分遣伪将宋子仙、任约袭郢州。
现代文：乙亥，侯景分别派遣伪将宋子仙、任约袭击郢州。
English: Eihei and Houjing respectively dispatched the pseudo generals Song Zisen and Ren You to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：丙子，执刺史萧方诸。
现代文：丙子，拘捕刺史萧方绪。
English: He Zi, arrested for stabbing Shi Xiao Fangxu.

古文：闰月甲子，景进寇巴陵，湘东王绎所遣领军将军王僧辩连战不能克。
现代文：二十一日，侯景进犯巴陵，湘东王绎派遣的领军将军王僧辩连续作战，未能取胜。
English: On the twenty-first day, Hou Jing invaded Baling, and Wang Sangye, the leading general dispatched by Wang Yiyu of Shandong, fought continuously, but failed to win.

古文：五月癸未，湘东王驿遣游击将军胡僧祐、信州刺史陆法和援巴陵，景遣任约帅众拒援军。
现代文：五月十一日，湘东王绎派遣游击将军胡僧、信州刺史陆法和增援巴陵，侯景派遣任约率军抵抗增援军队。
English: On May 11, Shandong Wang Yu dispatched the guerrilla generals Hu Zeng, Shinshu Zhishi, Lufa and reinforcements to Baling, and Hou Jing dispatched a resistance reinforcement army led by Ren Yu.

古文：六月甲辰，僧祐等击破任约，擒之。
现代文：六月二日，胡僧等攻破任约的防线，擒获任约。
English: On June 2, Hu Xiang and others broke through Ren Rong's defense line and won Ren Rong.

古文：乙巳，景解围宵遁，王僧辩督众军追景。
现代文：三日，侯景解开重围，深夜逃跑，王僧辩率兵围追侯景。
English: On the third day, Hou Jing broke the heavy siege and fled in the middle of the night. Wang Sheng led the soldiers to chase Hou Jing.

古文：庚申，攻鲁山城，克之，获魏司徒张化仁、仪同门洪庆。
现代文：十八日，攻克鲁山城，俘获魏司徒张化仁、仪同门洪庆。
English: On the 18th, they attacked the city of Kru Mountain and captured Zhang Huaren, a Wei disciple, and Hong Qing, a Yi disciple.

古文：辛酉，进围郢州，下之，获贼帅宋子仙等。
现代文：十九日，进围并攻克郢州，俘获贼帅宋子仙等。
English: On the 19th, they encircled and conquered Zhangzhou and captured the handsome thief Song Zixian.

古文：鄱阳王故将侯瑱起兵，袭伪仪同于庆于豫章，庆败走。
现代文：鄱阳王旧将侯調起兵，在豫章袭击伪仪同于庆，于庆兵败逃跑。
English: King Shenyang raised an army from his former vassals. In Yuzhang, he attacked the pseudo-ceremony of Tongyu Qing. In Qing, he was defeated and fled.

古文：秋七月丁亥，侯景还至京师。
现代文：秋七月十六日，侯景返抵京城。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Hou Jing returned to Beijing.

古文：辛丑，王僧辩军次湓城，贼行江州事范希荣弃城走。
现代文：三十日，王僧辩驻军湓城，贼行江州事范希荣弃城而逃。
English: On the 30th, Wang Sangyan stationed troops in Lucheng, and Fan Xirong abandoned the city and fled.

古文：八月丙午，晋熙人王僧振、郑宠起兵袭郡城，伪晋州刺史夏侯威生、仪同任延遁走。
现代文：八月五日，晋熙人王僧振、郑宠起兵袭击郡城，伪晋州刺史夏侯威生、仪同任延逃跑。
English: On August 5th, Wang Sang Zhen and Zheng Diao, the leaders of the Jin Dynasty, attacked the county seat, and the pseudo-Jin statesmen Xia Hou Weisheng and Yi Tong Ren Yan ran away.

古文：戊午，侯景遣卫尉卿彭俊、厢公王僧贵率兵入殿，废太宗为晋安王，幽于永福省。
现代文：十七日，侯景派遣卫尉卿彭俊、厢公王僧贵率兵进入宫殿，废黜太宗为晋安王，囚禁在永福省。
English: On the seventeenth day, Hou Jing sent Peng Jun, the captain of the imperial guards, and Xiang Gong Wang Seng Gui, to lead the soldiers into the palace, deposed Taizong as the King of Jinan, and imprisoned him in Yongfu Province.

古文：害皇太子大器、寻阳王大心、西阳王大钧、武宁王大威、建平王大球、义安王大昕及寻阳王诸子二十人。
现代文：杀害皇太子大器、寻阳王大心、西阳王大钧、武宁王大威、建平王大球、义安王大昕以及寻阳王诸儿二十人。
English: He killed twenty people, including Crown Prince Daiki, King Daishin, King Siyang, King Dawei, King Jianping, King Jianan, and King Siyang's children.

古文：矫为太宗诏，禅于豫章嗣王栋，大赦改年。
现代文：假传太宗诏令，禅位给豫章嗣王栋，对全国已判罪犯减、免刑，改换年号。
English: The Emperor Taizong's edict was falsely transmitted, and the throne was given to Yuanzhang's heir, Wang Dong, and the sentences of convicted criminals across the country were reduced or waived, and the year was changed.

古文：遣使害南海王大临于吴郡，南郡王大连于姑孰，安陆王大春于会稽，新兴王大庄于京口。
现代文：派人在吴郡杀害南海王大临，在姑孰杀害南郡王大连，在会稽杀害安陆王大春，在京口杀害新兴王大庄。
English: They sent people to kill Nanhai Wang Dairin in Wu County, Nan County Wang Dalian in Guzhen, Anlu Wang Dachun in Hefei, and Xinxing Wang Dazhuang in Jingkou.

古文：冬十月壬寅，帝谓舍人殷不害曰： 吾昨夜梦吞土，卿试为我思之。 
现代文：冬十月二日，太宗皇帝对亲信殷不害说： 我昨天晚上梦见自己在咽土，爱卿试着替我解释解释。 
English: On October 2nd, winter, Emperor Taizong said to his close confidant Yin Nonghuang, "I dreamt last night that I was in the throat of the earth.

古文：不害曰： 昔重耳馈塊，卒还晋国。
现代文：殷不害说： 过去重耳接受赠送的土块，最终回到晋国。
English: Yin Nonsense said: In the past, I have been reluctant to accept the gift of soil, and eventually returned to Jin Province.

古文：陛下所梦，得符是乎。 
现代文：陛下您所梦见的，正是这种吉祥的符瑞呀。 
English: Your Majesty, it is this auspicious fury that you have dreamt of.

古文：及王伟等进觞于帝曰： 丞相以陛下忧愤既久，使臣上寿。 
现代文：等到王伟等人给太宗皇帝敬酒说： 下臣以为，陛下您忧愤已久，特奉上寿酒。 
English: Wait until Wang Wei and others make a toast to Emperor Taizong and say: "Our vassals think that Your Majesty has been sad and angry for a long time, so we are specially presenting him with the anniversary wine.

古文：帝笑曰： 寿酒，不得尽此乎？ 
现代文：太宗皇帝笑道： 寿酒，还不能够完全表达这种心境吧！ 
English: Emperor Taizong laughed and said, "It's not possible to fully express this state of mind with the anniversary wine!

古文：于是并赉酒肴、曲项琵琶，与帝饮。
现代文：于是一齐送上美酒佳肴、曲项琵琶，与太宗皇帝饮酒。
English: So they all sent fine wine and delicacies, musical pipa, and drank alcohol with Emperor Taizong.

古文：帝知不免，乃尽酣，曰： 不图为乐一至于斯！ 
现代文：太宗皇帝自知难免一死，于是喝得大醉，说： 想不到醉酒的乐趣竟能到达这种境地啊！ 
English: Emperor Taizong knew that his death was inevitable, so he got very drunk and said, "I can't believe the fun of getting drunk has reached such a state!"

古文：既醉寝，伟乃出，俊进土囊，王修纂坐其上，于是太宗崩于永福省，时年四十九。
现代文：酒醉后睡觉，王伟、彭俊奉上装土的口袋压在他身上，王纂坐在口袋上面，这样，太宗在永福省驾崩，时年四十九岁。
English: After getting drunk and going to bed, Wang Wei and Peng Jun handed him a bag filled with soil and pressed it on him, while Wang Zuo sat on the bag. Thus, Taizong died in Yongfu Province at the age of forty-nine.

古文：贼伪谥曰明皇帝，庙称高宗。
现代文：贼伪追谥他为 明皇帝 ，庙号称 高宗 。
English: The thieves falsely claimed that he was Emperor Ming, and the temple was called Gaozong.

古文：明年，三月癸丑，王僧辩率前百官奉梓宫升朝堂，世祖追崇为简文皇帝，庙曰太宗。
现代文：大宝三年年三月二十一日，王僧辩率领前百官奉梓宫升朝堂，世祖追崇为 简文皇帝 ，庙号为 太宗 。
English: On March 21st, the third year of the Great Treasure, Wang Sofen led the first hundred officials to ascend to the imperial palace, the ancestor was revered as Emperor Jianwen, and the temple name was Taizong.

古文：四月乙丑，葬庄陵。
现代文：四月二十九日，安葬在庄陵。
English: On April 29, he was buried in a mausoleum.

古文：初，太宗见幽絷，题壁自序云： 有梁正士兰陵萧世缵，立身行道，终始如一，风雨如晦，鸡鸣不已。
现代文：当初，太宗被囚禁时，曾在墙壁上叙述自己的生平道： 有梁正直之士兰陵萧世缵，树立己身，追求道义，自始至终，没有改变，国势动荡不安，战争连绵不断。
English: At the beginning, when Taizong was imprisoned, he had described his life path on the walls: There is a beam of an honest man, Lancelin Xiao Shiyan, establish oneself, pursue morality, from beginning to end, there is no change, the national situation is turbulent and unstable, the war is continuous.

古文：弗欺暗室，岂况三光，数至于此，命也如何！ 
现代文：没有欺侮幽暗无人之处，更何况是日、月和星辰呢！屡次如此，谁知道命运怎么样啊！ 
English: There is no bullying in the dark and uninhabited, let alone the sun, the moon and the stars! Repeatedly so, who knows what fate will be!

古文：又为《连珠》二首，文甚凄怆。
现代文：又作《连珠》二首，文辞极为伤感。
English: He also composed two pieces of "Lian Zhu," the lyrics of which are extremely sad.

古文：太宗幼而敏睿，识悟过人，六岁便属文，高祖惊其早就，弗之信也。乃于御前面试，辞采甚美。
现代文：太宗幼时聪明机智而通达，见识和领悟力超过常人，六岁时便能作文，高祖惊叹他的早熟，不相信这是真的，于是亲自面试，果真文辞、风采均极为优秀。
English: When Taizong was young, he was clever and witty, and his insight and comprehension exceeded that of ordinary people. At the age of six, he was able to write a composition. Gaozu marveled at his precociousness and did not believe it was true, so he interviewed him in person. His true words and style were extremely excellent.

古文：高祖叹曰： 此子，吾家之东阿。 
现代文：高祖感叹道： 这孩子，将成为我家的东阿。 
English: Gao Zu lamented, "This child will become the father of my family.

古文：既长，器宇宽弘，未尝见愠喜。
现代文：长大成人后，胸怀宽广、宏大，轻易不会表露出自己的喜怒哀乐。
English: After growing up, they are broad-minded and big-hearted, and will not easily reveal their emotions.

古文：方颊豊下，须鬓如画，眄睐则目光烛人。
现代文：腮颊方而丰满，髯和鬓发如画一般，顾盼一下即觉目光灼人。
English: Her cheeks are square and plump, her cheeks and hair are picturesque, and when you look at her, your eyes are burning.

古文：读书十行俱下。
现代文：读书一目十行。
English: Reading ten lines at a time.

古文：九流百氏，经目必记；篇章辞赋，操笔立成。
现代文：九种流派数百个人物的思想，过目不忘，牢记在心。文章辞赋，一挥而就。
English: The thoughts of hundreds of characters from nine genres are not forgotten, but kept in mind.

古文：博综儒书，善言玄理。
现代文：博学儒书，长于玄理。
English: He is well-versed in Confucianism and good at metaphysics.

古文：自年十一，便能亲庶务，历试蕃政，所在有称。
现代文：从十一岁起，便能熟悉国家的各种政务，多次尝试着处理对外事务，均受到称赞。
English: From the age of eleven, he was able to familiarize himself with the various government affairs of the country, and made many attempts to deal with foreign affairs, all of which were praised.

古文：在穆贵嫔忧，哀毁骨立，昼夜号泣不绝声，所坐之席，沾湿尽烂。
现代文：为穆贵嫔服丧期间，因亲丧悲哀而瘦损异常，如仅以骨支拄身体一般，号泣啼哭，不绝于声，所坐过的席子，因泪水浸湿而全部朽烂。
English: During the mourning period for Mugui, due to the grief of bereavement, the loss of weight was abnormal, such as only supporting the body with bones, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying, crying.

古文：在襄阳拜表北伐，遣长史柳津、司马董当门，壮武将军杜怀宝、振远将军曹义宗等众军进讨，克平南阳、新野等郡，魏南荆州刺史李志据安昌城降，拓地千余里。
现代文：在襄阳上奏北伐，派遣长史柳津、司马董当门、壮武将军杜怀宝、振远将军曹义宗等几支军队前往讨伐，平定南阳、新野等郡，魏南荆州刺史李志盘踞安昌城投降，扩张领土一千多里。
English: The Northern Expedition was launched in Xiangyang, and several armies, including the Long Shi Liujin, Sima Dong Dangmen, Zhuangwu General Du Huai Bao, and Zhenyuan General Cao Yizong, were dispatched to the crusade to pacify Nanyang, Xinyang and other counties, and the Southern Wei Jingzhou Jishi Li Zhiban and Anchang City surrendered, expanding the territory by more than a thousand miles.

古文：及居监抚，多所弘宥，文案簿领，纤毫不可欺。
现代文：等到任监国与抚军，多有宽容宏大的举动，负责处理案卷，丝毫没有差错。
English: When he was appointed to supervise the country and the army, he was more tolerant of grand gestures. He was responsible for handling the case file and did not make any mistakes.

古文：引纳文学之士，赏接无倦，恒讨论篇籍，继以文章。
现代文：吸引、招纳文学之士，赏识、接待没有厌倦，常常讨论篇籍，继之以文章。
English: It is not tired of attracting and recruiting literary figures, appreciating and receiving them, and often discusses books, followed by articles.

古文：高祖所制《五经讲疏》，尝于玄圃奉述，听者倾朝野。
现代文：高祖所定《五经讲疏》，曾在玄圃奉述，听众倾动朝野上下。
English: Gao Zu's "Five Classics Lectures" was once recited in the garden, and the audience swayed from side to side.

古文：雅好题诗，其序云： 余七岁有诗癖，长而不倦。 
现代文：雅好题诗，他的序文写道： 我七岁嗜诗，成人后一直没有懈怠。 
English: His preface reads: I fell in love with poetry at the age of seven, and I haven't slacked off since I became an adult.

古文：然伤于轻艳，当时号曰 宫体 。
现代文：然而伤于轻，时称 宫体 。
English: However, the injury was minor, and at the time it was called a corpus callosum.

古文：所著《昭明太子传》五卷，《诸王传》三十卷，《礼大义》二十卷，《老子义》二十卷，《庄子义》二十卷，《长春义记》一百卷，《法宝连璧》三百卷，并行于世焉。
现代文：所著《昭明太子传》五卷、《诸王传》三十卷、《礼大义》二十卷、《老子义》二十卷、《庄子义》二十卷，《长春义记》一百卷、《法宝连璧》三百卷，一并流传在世上。
English: He wrote five volumes of "Biography of Prince Zhao Ming," 30 volumes of "Biography of the Kings," 20 volumes of "Rite and Virtue," 20 volumes of "Virtue of Lao Zi," 20 volumes of "Virtue of Zhuang Zi," 100 volumes of "Virtue of Changchun" and 300 volumes of "Legendary Treasure," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：史臣曰：太宗幼年聪睿，令问夙标，天才纵逸，冠于今古。
现代文：史臣曰：太宗幼年聪明睿智，美好的学问早就传扬，才华横溢，超越今古。
English: Shi Zhen said: Taizong was clever and wise when he was young, he had already spread the good knowledge, and he was brilliant, surpassing the present age.

古文：文则时以轻华为累，君子所不取焉。
现代文：文章因为受当时轻浮华艳的文风的连累，不被君子所赞赏。
English: The article was not appreciated by the gentleman because it was affected by the frivolous and flamboyant literary style of the time.

古文：及养德东朝，声被夷夏，洎乎继统，实有人君之懿矣。
现代文：等到太宗在东朝修养道德，声名传遍全国，到他继承帝位，实在具有人君的美德了。
English: By the time Taizong cultivated morality in the Eastern Dynasty, his reputation had spread throughout the country. By the time he succeeded to the throne, he truly possessed the virtues of a gentleman.

古文：方符文、景，运钟《屯》、《剥》，受制贼臣，弗展所蕴，终罹怀、愍之酷，哀哉！
现代文：正当太宗像文、景二帝一样治理国家时，他的命运却如《屯》、《剥》,所示不吉，受贼臣控制，不能施展他所具有的才华，终于遭遇了晋怀帝、晋愍帝那样残酷的结局，多么的悲哀！
English: Just when Emperor Taizong was governing the country like Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, his fate, as shown in "Tun" and "Peel," was not good. He was under the control of vassals and could not use his talent. Finally, he met the cruel end like Emperor Jinhuai and Emperor Jinbi. How sad!

