古文：元明善元明善，字复初，大名清河人。
现代文：元明善字复初，大名清河人。
English: Formerly known as Fuchu, the daimyo (feudal lord) of Qinghe.

古文：其先盖拓跋魏之裔，居清河者，至明善四世矣。
现代文：其祖先大概是拓跋魏的后裔，居住在清河的到明善已是第四世了。
English: His ancestors were probably descendants of the Tuoba Wei, and he is the fourth generation to live in Qinghe.

古文：明善资颖悟绝，出读书，过目辄记，诸经皆有师法，而尤深于《春秋》。
现代文：明善资质颖悟，读书过目不忘，学习诸经都能理解，而对《春秋》更为深刻。
English: He is bright and insightful, never forgets what he has read, and can understand all the scriptures, but he is more profound about "Spring and Autumn."

古文：弱冠游吴中，已名能文章。
现代文：二十岁游吴中，文章名声卓著。
English: He toured Wuzhong Middle School at the age of 20 and became famous for his articles.

古文：浙东使者荐为安丰、建康两学正。
现代文：由浙东使者荐为安丰、建康两县学正。
English: He was recommended by the emissary of East Zhejiang Province to be the head of the two counties of Anfeng and Jiankang.

古文：辟掾，行枢密院。时董士选佥院事，待之若宾友，不敢以曹属御之。
现代文：后来征召为枢密院属官，当时董士选为院佥事，对待他像宾客、朋友一样，不敢以属官对待他。
English: Later, he was called to be a Privy Councillor. At that time, he was elected as a member of the Privy Council, and he was treated like a guest and a friend. He did not dare to treat him as a subordinate.

古文：及士选升江西左丞，又辟为省掾。
现代文：士选升为江西左丞，又征召他为省的属官。
English: Shi Xuan was promoted to Jiangxi Zojo, and was also conscripted as a provincial official.

古文：会赣州贼刘贵反，明善从士选将兵讨之，擒贼三百人。明善议缓诖误，得全活者百三十人。
现代文：当时赣州刘贵反叛，明善随士选统兵讨伐，擒三百人，明善对一些牵连的一律从轻惩处，使一百三十人免于死刑。
English: At that time, Liu Gui of Zhangzhou rebelled, and Ming Son led the soldiers to fight against Liu Gui. There were 300 people, and Ming Son gave light punishment to some implicated people, so that 130 people were exempted from the death penalty.

古文：一日，将佐白： 宜多戮俘获，及尸一切死者，以张军声。 
现代文：有天，将佐说： 应该多杀俘获的叛逆，死了的应戮尸示众，以振军威。 
English: One day, Zhao Zuo said, "We should kill more captured rebels. The dead should be slaughtered and their bodies displayed to the public in order to boost the military's prestige."

古文：明善固争，以为王者之师，恭行天罚，小丑跳梁，戮其渠魁可尔，民何辜焉。
现代文：明善坚决争辩，认为朝廷的军队，应奉行先帝的惩罚，这些人是小丑跳梁，杀大头子就可以了，百姓有什么罪。
English: Ming Sheng resolutely argued that the imperial army should carry out the punishment of the former emperor, these people are clowns jumping the beam, it is enough to kill the leader, what are the people guilty of.

古文：既又得贼所书赣、吉民丁十万于籍者，有司喜，欲滋蔓为利，明善请火其籍以灭迹，二郡遂安。
现代文：所以后来才得到赣、吉两地民丁十万人，有司企图从中得利，而明善请求焚烧反叛者名册以灭其迹，于是二郡百姓安宁无事。
English: Therefore, it was only later that 100,000 people from the two counties of Min and Ji were obtained. Some officials tried to profit from this, while Myoshin requested that the rebels' names be burned to erase their traces. As a result, the people of the two counties were left in peace.

古文：升掾南行台。
现代文：升明善为南行台属官。
English: Sheng Mingshan became a subordinate officer of the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：未几，授枢密院照磨。
现代文：不久授枢密院照磨。
English: He was soon appointed Privy Councillor.

古文：转中书左曹掾，掾曹无留事。
现代文：后又迁职中书左曹的属官。
English: Later, he was transferred to be a subordinate officer of Cao Zuo.

古文：始，明善在江西时，张瑄为其省参政，明善有马，骏而瘠，瑄假为从骑，久益壮，瑄爱之，致米三十斛酬其直。
现代文：当初明善在江西时，张王宣为该省参政，明善有匹骏马，但是很瘦，张王宣借来骑用，时间长了，马养得肥壮起来，王宣非常喜爱，给三十斛米作为酬谢。
English: At the beginning, when Ming Shan was in Jiangxi, Zhang Wangxuan was the first to participate in politics for the province. Ming Shan had a fine horse, but it was very thin. Zhang Wangxuan borrowed it to ride. It took a long time, and the horse grew fat. Wang Xuan was very fond of it, and gave him thirty stalks of rice as a reward.

古文：后瑄败，江浙行省籍其家，得金谷之簿，书 米三十斛送元复初 ，不言以酬马直，明善坐免。
现代文：后来王宣倒台，江浙行省清查其家产，金谷簿中写有 米三十斛送元复初 ，不说是酬谢马的钱，明善因此判罪免职。
English: Later, after Wang Xuan's fall from power, the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Party Committee investigated his family's assets, and found that there was 30 baht in rice sent to the Yuan Dynasty at the beginning of the second half of the 19th century, not to mention the money to reward Xie Ma. As a result, Ming Shan was convicted and removed from office.

古文：久之，有为辨白其事者，乃复掾省曹。
现代文：很久以后，才有人为他辩白这件事，恢复省属官之职。
English: It was not until much later that he was vindicated and reinstated as a provincial official.

古文：仁宗居东宫，首擢为太子文学。
现代文：仁宗在东宫时，首先提拔他为太子文学。
English: When Nanzong was in the East Palace, he was first promoted to Prince of Literature.

古文：及即位，改翰林待制。
现代文：即位后改任翰林待制。
English: After the enthronement, he was transferred to the position of Hanlin josei.

古文：与修成宗、顺宗《实录》，升翰林直学士。
现代文：参知编修《成宗实录》、《顺宗实录》，升翰林直学士。
English: Sangchi edited "Chengzong Record" and "Shunzong Record" and was promoted to Hanlin Zhi Bao.

古文：诏节《尚书》经文，译其关政要者以进。
现代文：诏令他节录《尚书》经文，译其涉及政治者献上。
English: He was ordered to make an abridged version of the "Shang Shu" and present a translation of the verses related to politicians.

古文：明善举宋忠臣子集贤直学士文升同译润，许之。
现代文：明善推荐宋代忠臣集贤直学士同译润色。
English: Ming Shan recommended the Song Dynasty loyalists to collect and polish the translation of Xian Zhi Bao.

古文：书成，每奏一篇，帝必称善，曰： 二帝三王之道，非卿莫闻也。 
现代文：书编成后，每上奏一篇，帝一定称赞，并说： 二帝三王之道，要不是你，我不可能知道。 
English: After compiling the book, every time he played a piece of music, the emperor praised it and said, "If it were not for you, I would not have known the way of the two emperors and three kings."

古文：兴圣太后既受尊号，廷臣请因肆赦，明善曰： 数赦，非善人之福，宥过可也。 
现代文：兴圣太后受尊号后，廷臣请求赦免罪人，明善说 ：多次赦免，不是好人之福，宽容过失就可以了。 
English: After Empress Dowager Xing was given the title of nobility, a courtier asked for the pardon of a sinner, saying clearly, "Multiple pardons are not a blessing for a good person. Forgiveness of faults is enough."

古文：奉旨出赈山东、河南饥，时彭城、下邳诸州连数十驿，民饿马毙，而官无文书赈贷，明善以钞万二千锭分给之，曰： 擅命获罪，所不辞也。 
现代文：奉旨去山东、河南救灾，当时彭城、下邳各州连着几十个驿站，人饿马死，而官府不下达文书赈济借贷，明善用二千锭分给百姓，并说： 我擅自命令，就是犯罪也不推辞。 
English: He was ordered to go to Shandong and Henan to help with the disaster. At that time, there were dozens of post stations in Pengcheng and lower Yunnan provinces. People were starving to death, but the government did not issue any documents to help and lend money. Instead, it used 2,000 baht to distribute to the people. He said, "I did not disobey the order, even if it was a crime."

古文：还，修《武宗实录》，又升翰林侍讲学士，预议科举、服色等事。
现代文：回来后修编《武宗实录》，又升翰林侍讲学士，参预讨论科举、服色等事务。
English: After returning, he edited "Wuzong Shih Lu" and was promoted to Hanlin Attendant Lecturer, and participated in the preliminary discussion of science education, clothing color and other affairs.

古文：延祐二年，始会试天下进士，明善首充考试官，及廷试，又为读卷官，所取士后多为名臣。
现代文：延二年开始进士考试，任明善为考官；廷试时又为阅卷官，所取士后来多为名臣。
English: In the second year of the extension, the entrance examination began, and Ming Shan was appointed as the examiner; at the time of the court examination, he was also the reading officer, and most of the candidates were later famous ministers.

古文：改礼部尚书，正孔氏宗法，以宣圣五十四世孙思晦袭封衍圣公，事上，制可之。
现代文：又改任礼部尚书，整饬孔氏宗法，使宣圣五十四世孙思晦袭封衍圣公。此情上报后，帝认为可以。
English: He was also appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Literature to rectify the Confucian patriarchal law, so that the 54th generation grandson of the proclamation of sainthood, Siyu, would succeed to the title of sainthood. After this situation was reported, the emperor thought it was okay.

古文：擢参议中书省事，旋复入翰林为侍读，岁中拜湖广行省参知政事。
现代文：提拔为参议中书省事，不久，入翰林为侍读，授湖广行省参知政事。
English: He was promoted to be a councillor in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, and soon after, he was appointed as an attendant in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, and was awarded the title of councillor in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports.

古文：又召入集贤为侍读，议广庙制。升翰林学士，修《仁宗实录》。
现代文：又召入集贤任侍读，讨论扩充庙制，升翰林学士，修编《仁宗实录》。
English: In addition, scholars were called in to serve as readers, to discuss the expansion of the temple system, the promotion of Hanlin scholars, and the revision of the "Ninzong True Record."

古文：英宗亲课太室，礼官进祝册，请署御名，命明善代署者三，眷遇之隆，当时莫并焉。
现代文：英宗亲自到太室祭奠，礼官送上祝册请署御名，帝命明善三次代帝签名，对他关怀之深厚，当时无人能相比。
English: Emperor Yingzong himself went to the throne room to pay his respects. The etiquette official sent a congratulatory booklet to the emperor, asking him to sign his name, and Emperor Mingzen signed on behalf of the emperor for the third time. There was a deep concern for him that no one could compare to at that time.

古文：至治二年，卒于位。
现代文：至治二年卒。
English: He is now two years old.

古文：泰定间，赠资善大夫、河南行省左丞，追封清河郡公，谥曰文敏。
现代文：泰定年间赠资善大夫、河南行省左丞，追封清河郡公，谥号文敏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiding, he was bestowed the title of Zishan Doctor, the title of Henan Province Provincial Secretary, the title of Qinghe County Governor, and the nickname of Wenmin.

古文：明善早以文章自豪，出入秦、汉间，晚益精诣，有文集行世。
现代文：明善早就以文章自豪，到晚年造诣更深，有文集流行于社会上。
English: Ming Shan has long been proud of his articles, and has become more accomplished in his later years. Some of his collections have become popular in society.

古文：初在江西、金陵，每与虞集剧论，以相切劘。
现代文：当初在江西、金陵时，常同虞集进行激烈争论相互切磋。
English: At the beginning, when he was in Jiangxi and Jinling, he often had heated debates with Yu Ji.

古文：明善言： 集治诸经，惟朱子所定者耳，自汉以来先儒所尝尽心者，考之殊未博。 
现代文：明善说 ：虞集整理诸经，只选朱熹所定，自汉以来先儒曾对经书尽心尽力，但考释很不广博。 
English: Ming Shan said, "Gyu Ji collated all the scriptures and only selected the ones stipulated by Zhu Xi. Since the Han Dynasty, the early Confucians had made every effort to study the scriptures, but the interpretation was not very extensive.

古文：集亦言： 凡为文辞，得所欲言而止，必如明善云 若雷霆之震惊，鬼神之灵变 然后可，非性情之正也。 
现代文：虞集也说 ：凡文辞能表达自己想说的话就可以了，一定要像明善说的 像雷霆那样震惊，像鬼神那样灵变 然后才行，这不是性情端正的表现。 
English: Yu Ji also said: Any words that can express what you want to say are fine, you must be shocked like a thunderbolt, like a ghost, and then you can do it, this is not a good temperament.

古文：二人初相得甚欢，至京师，乃复不能相下。
现代文：两个人原相处很好。到京师后，各不相让。
English: The two of them used to get along very well. After moving to Beijing to study, they couldn't stand each other.

古文：董士选之自中台行省江浙也，二人者俱送出都门外，士选曰： 伯生以教导为职，当早还，复初宜更送我。 
现代文：董士选到江浙中台行省，两人一块送他到门外，士选说： 伯生以教导为职责，应该早回，复初可以再送我一程。 
English: Dong Shizhen went to Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Zhongtai and Huancheng provinces. The two of them walked him out the door together. Shizhen said, "Bo Sheng's duty is to teach, so he should come back early. You can give me another ride at the beginning of the year."

古文：集还，明善送至二十里外，士选下马入邸舍中，为席，出橐中肴，酌酒同饮，乃举酒属明善曰： 士选以功臣子，出入台省，无补国家，惟求得佳士数人，为朝廷用之，如复初与伯生，他日必皆光显，然恐不免为人构间。
现代文：集回去了，明善送到二十里外，士选下马入旅舍，备置菜肴，与明善同饮，士选举杯嘱咐说： 士选以功臣之子，出入台省，对国家没什么补益，只求得几个好的士人，被朝廷使用，像复初和伯生，以后一定会显赫，但也难免被人挑拨离间。
English: The collection went back, the Ming Son was sent twenty miles away, the officials selected the horse to enter the hostel, prepared the dishes, and drank with the Ming Son. The election cup of the officials ordered: The election of the officials as the son of the hero, entering and leaving Taiwan Province, has nothing to do with the country, but only to get a few good officials, to be used by the court, like Fuchu and Bo Sheng, will certainly be prominent in the future, but will inevitably be picked apart by others.

古文：复初中原人也，仕必当道；伯生南人，将为复初摧折。
现代文：复初是中原人，仕途上会受到重用；伯生是南方人，将被复初摧折。
English: Fuzhong is from the Central Plains, and will be heavily used in the process; Boseong is from the South, and will be crushed by Fuzhong.

古文：今为我饮此酒，慎勿如是。 
现代文：现在饮下我这杯酒，希望你不要像这样。 
English: Now take this glass of wine from me. I hope you don't feel like this.

古文：明善受卮酒，跪而酹之。起立，言曰： 诚如公言，无论他日，今隙已开矣。请公再赐一卮，明善终身不敢忘公言！ 
现代文：明善接过酒杯，跪着饮干后起立说 ：确实像您说的，且不说以后，现在已有缝隙，请您再赐一杯，我终身不敢忘您的话。 
English: Akechi took the glass, drank it dry on his knees, and then stood up and said, "It's true what you said, but there's a gap now. Please give me another glass. I'll never forget what you said."

古文：乃再饮而别。
现代文：饮完第二杯就告别了。
English: After the second glass, we say goodbye.

古文：真人吴全节，与明善交尤密，尝求明善作文。既成，明善谓全节曰： 伯生见吾文，必有讥弹，吾所欲知。
现代文：真人吴全节与明善交往密切，曾求明善做文，明善对他说： 伯生见了我的文章一定会讥笑，我很想知道他说什么。
English: Wu Quanzhi, a real person, was in close contact with Ming Sheng. He had asked Ming Sheng to write an article. Ming Sheng said to him, "Bo Sheng must have laughed when he saw my article. I really want to know what he said."

古文：成季为我治具，招伯生来观之，若已入石，则无及矣。 
现代文：成季为我准备，请伯生来看，如已镌刻石上就不好办了。 
English: If it is already engraved on the stone, it is not easy to do.

古文：明日，集至，明善出其文，问何如，集曰： 公能从集言，去百有余字，则可传矣。 
现代文：第二天虞集来了，明善拿出文章给集看，集说： 你能按我的话，删去一百多字，就可以了。 
English: The next day, Yu Ji came. Ming Sheng took out the article and showed it to Ji. Ji said, "If you can follow my instructions and delete more than a hundred words, that's fine.

古文：明善即泚笔属集，凡删百二十字，而文益精当。
现代文：明善立即将笔蘸好墨，嘱集修改，共删一百二十多字，文章更加精当。
English: Ming Shan immediately sharpened his pen and revised the collection, deleting a total of more than one hundred and twenty words, making the article more precise.

古文：明善大喜，乃欢好如初。
现代文：明善大喜，于是二人和好如初。
English: They were overjoyed, and the two are now as close as ever.

古文：集每见明经之士，亦以明善之言告之。
现代文：集每见深明经书的人士，也把明善的话告诉他们。
English: Those who have read the profound and clear scriptures will also tell them the clear and good words.

古文：祖珏，知连州，亦以文学知名。
现代文：虞集，字伯生，宋朝丞相允文五代孙。
English: He was the fifth-generation grandson of Gu Ji, Zhaobosheng, and Song Dynasty Premier Yunwen.

古文：父汲，黄冈尉。
现代文：其父汲，黄冈县尉。
English: His father was a lieutenant of Huanggang County.

古文：宋亡，侨居临川崇仁，与吴澄为友，澄称其文清而醇。
现代文：宋亡，寄居于临川崇仁，与吴澄为友，吴说他的文章明白朴实。
English: Song Zi, who lived as a guest in Linchuan Chongren, was friends with Wu Cheng. Wu said that his articles were clear and simple.

古文：比还长沙，就外傅，始得刻本，则已尽读诸经，通其大义矣。
现代文：虞集家境贫寒。晚年稍有发迹，后以翰林院编修官之职位隐退。
English: He was born into a poor family. In his later years, he made a bit of a name for himself, and later retired as an editor of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：文仲世以《春秋》名家，而族弟参知政事栋，明于性理之学，杨氏在室，即尽通其说，故集与弟槃，皆受业家庭，出则以契家子从吴澄游，授受具有源委。
现代文：娶国子祭酒文仲之女杨氏为妻。虞集三岁就知读书，至元十二年，汲携带家眷赴岭外，战争中无法携带书籍，杨氏口授《论语》、《孟子》、《左氏传》和欧、苏的文章，集听后都能背诵。返长沙后，在外傅处就读，虞集和弟弟虞般木都是在家接受学业的，离家后又与意志相合的世伯吴澄交往，故教与学都有深厚的渊源。
English: At the age of three, Yu Ji knew how to read. In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he took his family to the outskirts of Ling. During the war, he was unable to take books with him. Yang dictated "Analects of Confucius," "Meng Zi," "The Biography of Zuo" and articles from Europe and the Soviet Union, which he was able to recite after listening to Yu Ji. After returning to Changsha, he studied at the Foreign Cuisine Office. Yu Ji and his younger brother Yu Pang Mu both received their education at home. After leaving home, they came into contact with Wu Cheng, a world-renowned scholar with whom they had a

古文：左丞董士选自江西除南行台中丞，延集家塾。大德初，始至京师。
现代文：左丞董士选任江西南行台中丞，请虞集任家教，直到大德初年，才去京师。
English: Zuo Zheng selected Dong Shi to be a middle school teacher in Southwest Jiangxi Province, and asked Yu Ji to be his tutor. It was not until the first year of his senior year that he went to Beijing to study.

古文：丁内艰，服除，再为助教，除博士。监祭殿上，有刘生者，被酒失礼俎豆间，集言诸监，请削其籍。
现代文：经大臣推荐，任命为大都路儒学教授，他虽以教诲儒生为业，但更重充实自己，从不浪费时间。
English: On the recommendation of the minister, he was appointed professor of Confucianism at Da Du Lu. Although he teaches Confucianism as his profession, he is more concerned with enriching himself and never wastes time.

古文：大臣有为刘生谢者，集持不可，曰： 国学，礼义之所出也，此而不治，何以为教！ 
现代文：后任国子助教，把执行师道作为己任。在国子监祭祀的大殿上，有个名叫刘生的儒生酒醉失礼，虞集要将他除名，大臣中有人为刘生谢罪，虞集不允，说： 国学是培养礼义人才之所，如此失礼而不处理，何以为教？ 
English: Later, as an assistant teacher of Guo Zi, he took it as his duty to implement the teacher's way. In the main hall of the Guo Zi overseer's ritual, there was a Confucian scholar named Liu Sheng who was drunk and impolite, and Guo Shu wanted to expel him. Some of the ministers apologized for Liu Sheng, but Guo Shu did not agree, saying: Chinese classics is a place for cultivating people with propriety and righteousness. How can you teach without dealing with such impoliteness?

古文：仁宗在东宫，传旨谕集，勿竟其事，集以刘生失礼状上之，移詹事院，竟黜刘生，仁宗更以集为贤。
现代文：仁宗传诏命集勿狠追此事，集把刘生失礼的情况陈述于上，并迁詹事院办公，刘生终被除名。仁宗更认为虞集是一位贤德之人。
English: Rinzong ordered Ji not to pursue the matter. Ji reported Liu Sheng's discourtesy to the emperor and transferred him to the office of the Zhan Academy. Liu Sheng was eventually expelled. Rinzong also believed that Yu Ji was a virtuous person.

古文：大成殿新赐登歌乐，其师世居江南，乐生皆河北田里之人，情性不相能，集亲教之，然后成曲。
现代文：大成殿新赐登歌乐曲，而来自江南的琴师与来自河北各封地的乐生，性情各异，虞集亲自教他们，然后才能演奏。
English: Dacheng Palace newly bestowed on the singing music, and the musicians from the south of the Yangtze River and the musicians from the fiefdoms in Hebei have different temperaments. Yu Ji personally taught them before they could play.

古文：复请设司乐一人掌之，以俟考正。
现代文：虞集请求设立司乐一人做总管，便于考核。
English: Yu Ji requested to set up a person to be the general manager of Sile to facilitate the assessment.

古文：仁宗即位，责成监学，拜台臣为祭酒，除吴澄司业，皆欲有所更张，以副帝意，集力赞其说。
现代文：仁宗即位后责令监学拜台臣为祭酒，任命吴澄为司业，希冀有所改革，以符合仁宗的意愿。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he ordered the supervising scholar Baidai Sheng to serve as the sacrificial wine, and appointed Wu Cheng as the director, hoping to make some reforms to meet the wishes of Emperor Nanzong.

古文：有为异论以沮之者，澄投檄去，集亦以病免。
现代文：虞集竭力赞助这种主张。因持不同主张的人阻止改革，吴澄弃官而去，虞集也称病辞官。
English: Yu Ji tried his best to support this idea. Because people with different ideas blocked the reform, Wu Cheng resigned and left the post. Yu Ji is also known as the "sick-leave official."

古文：未几，除太常博士，丞相拜住方为其院使，间从集问礼器祭义甚悉，集为言先王制作，以及古今因革治乱之由，拜住叹息，益信儒者有用。
现代文：不久又任命为太常博士。丞相拜住刚任院使，问集关于礼器、礼节、仪式的事，集对答如流。拜住听后，甚为叹息，更信儒生是有用的了。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a doctor of the Imperial Household Agency. The prime minister bowed to the newly-appointed envoy of the Imperial Household Agency, and asked Shu about the matter of etiquette, etiquette, and ceremony, and Shu answered in unison. After bowing and listening, he was very sighing, and even more believed that Confucianism was useful.

古文：朝廷方以科举取士，说者谓治平可力致，集独以谓当治其源。
现代文：朝廷要以科举选拔人才，有人认为治理天下只要有武力即可，只有虞集认为要长治久安，必须从根本着手。
English: The imperial court wanted to use the imperial examinations to select talents. Some people thought that the world could be governed by force only. Only Yu Ji believed that in order to maintain long-term peace and stability, it was necessary to start from scratch.

古文：迁集贤修撰。
现代文：后任命虞集为集贤修撰。
English: Later, he appointed Yu Ji as the chief editor of Ji Xianshu.

古文：因会议学校，乃上议曰： 师道立则善人多，学校者，士之所受教，以至于成德达材者也。
现代文：大德六年任命集为翰林待制兼国史院编修官，仁宗曾对左右的人叹息说： 儒生都已启用了，只有虞伯生没有提拔。 
English: In the sixth year of the Great German Reign, Ji was appointed to the Hanlin Waiting System and the Editor-in-Chief of the National Academy of History. Ren Zong once said with a sigh to the people around him: All Confucian students have been promoted, only Yu Boseong has not been promoted.

古文：今天下学官，猥以资格授，强加之诸生之上，而名之曰师尔，有司弗信之，生徒弗信之，于学校无益也。
现代文：当时正逢仁宗驾崩，未能重用。英宗即位后，任拜住为相，能重用有德才之人，拜住就向皇上推荐了他。
English: At that time, Rinzong had just passed away and could not be reused. After Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he appointed Baizhu as his consort, and Baizhu recommended him to the emperor as a person who could reuse his virtues.

古文：圣经深远，非一人之见可尽，试艺之文，推其高者取之，不必先有主意。若先定主意，则求贤之心狭，而差自此始矣。 
现代文：泰定初年，在礼部主持考试，对共事的人说 ：国家考试各科的办法，经书的注释都虽各有见解，但主要是用来统一道德、同化风俗，而不是使学生专门擅长某一家的学说，像近代学习五经的陋习，经典道理深远，不是一个人的见解能阐明的。考试要录取成绩优秀的，不要先有定见，否则求贤就会受到局限，错误就会从这里开始。 
English: In his first year, he presided over the examination in the etiquette department and said to his colleagues: Although the methods of the national examination in various subjects and the commentaries on the scriptures all have their own opinions, they are mainly used to unify morality and assimilate customs, rather than to make students specialize in the doctrine of a particular family. Like the bad habit of studying the Five Classics in modern times, the classics are far-reaching and cannot be explained by one person's opinion. To enter the examination, you must have excellent grades, do not have a preconceived opinion, otherwise the search for excellence will be limited, and mistakes will start from here.

古文：后再为考官，率持是说，故所取每称得人。
现代文：以后又两次担任考官，大致都按这个说法，所以每次都能录取合意的人才。
English: Since then, he has served as an examiner twice more, both times roughly in accordance with this statement, so he was able to admit the agreed talent each time.

古文：泰定初，除国子司业，迁秘书少监。
现代文：泰定初年任命虞集为国子司业，后升迁为秘书少监。
English: In the first year of Tai Ding, Yu Ji was appointed as the Secretary of the State Council, and later he was promoted to the position of Secretary and Junior Supervisor.

古文：天子幸上都，以讲臣多高年，命集与集贤侍读学士王结执经以从，自是岁尝在行。
现代文：天子驾临上都，因经筵讲臣多年事已高，命虞集和集贤侍读学士王结携经书跟随。从此常随帝行。
English: When the Son of Heaven came to the capital, because many years had passed since he had lectured in the imperial court, he was accompanied by the scholars Wang Jie, the attendant of the scholar Wang Jie, and the scholars Shigou Ji and Shixian. From then on, he often accompanied the emperor.

古文：尝因讲罢，论京师恃东南运粮为实，竭民力以航不测，非所以宽远人而因地利也。
现代文：经筵之制，专门选取经史中合乎德行治国的内容，采用蒙古文、汉文荐与皇上阅读。而虞集每选一篇文章，都以古今名物进行反复的辨析，做到言辞通达。很多人都不如他，都无不暗自惊叹。
English: According to the system of the imperial edict, he specially selected the contents of the imperial edict that were suitable for governing the country, and used Mongolian and Chinese to recommend and read to the emperor. And each selected article of the imperial edict was repeatedly analyzed with the famous works of ancient and modern times to achieve fluency in words. Many people are not as good as him, and they are all surprised.

古文：与同列进曰： 京师之东，濒海数千里，北极辽海，南滨青、齐，萑苇之场也，海潮日至，淤为沃壤，用浙人之法，筑堤捍水为田，听富民欲得官者，合其众分授以地，官定其畔以为限，能以万夫耕者，授以万夫之田，为万夫之长，千夫、百夫亦如之，察其惰者而易之。
现代文：帝又任命虞集为翰林直学士，不久又兼国子祭酒，在研讨事情时，他列举京师依赖东南运粮的事例，指出耗民力运输是无法估量的，他对同僚们说： 京师之东，沿海几千里，北邻辽海，南近青州、齐鲁，是长芦苇的地方，利用海潮淤泥为沃壤，采用浙江人的办法，筑堤挡水为田。富人中想做官的，将他们召集来，分给土地，官府划定边界，能用一万人耕地的，授给万夫之田，使他成为万夫之长。千夫、百夫同是如此，发现懒惰的就换掉他。
English: The emperor also appointed Yu Ji as Hanlin's direct scholar, and soon also the national son's sacrificial wine. When discussing the matter, he listed the cases of Beijing's dependence on the southeastern grain transportation, pointing out that the consumption of people's transportation was immeasurable. He said to his colleagues: The east of Beijing, several thousand miles along the coast, north near the Liaohai, south near Qingzhou and Qilu, is a place of long reeds, using sea silt as fertile soil, using the method of Zhejiang people to build a dike to block water as a field. Among the rich people who want to be officials, they are called together, given land,

古文：一年，勿征也；二年，勿征也；三年，视其成，以地之高下，定额于朝廷，以次渐征之；五年，有积蓄，命以官，就所储给以禄；十年，佩之符印，得以传子孙，如军官之法。
现代文：第一、二年免税；第三年看收成和土地优劣，由朝廷规定征收数目，以后按等次逐渐征收；五年就有积蓄了，给他官爵，按储蓄给以俸禄；十年发给符印，并能传给子孙，像军官的法规一样。
English: The first and second years are tax-free; in the third year, depending on the harvest and the quality of the land, the number of levies is determined by the court, and then gradually levied according to the same order; in five years, there are savings, give him a peerage, and pay him a salary according to the savings; in ten years, give him a seal, and can be passed on to his descendants, like an officer's regulations.

古文：则东面民兵数万，可以近卫京师，外御岛夷；远宽东南海运，以纾疲民；遂富民得官之志，而获其用；江海游食盗贼之类，皆有所归。 
现代文：那么东面有几万民兵，可以保卫京师，抵御岛上来犯的敌人，东南可以放宽海运，以减轻百姓的劳累。于是有钱想当官的人，能够用他；在江海间游荡的盗贼，也都有所归宿。 
English: Then there are tens of thousands of militia in the east, which can defend the Beijing Division and resist the enemies who come to the island, and the southeast can relax the shipping to reduce the fatigue of the people. Therefore, those who are rich and want to be an official can use him; thieves wandering between the rivers and seas also have a home.

古文：尝以先世坟墓在吴、越者，岁久湮没，乞一郡自便，帝曰； 尔材何不堪，顾今未可去尔。 
现代文：在议论中，由于有人认为执行的人一定会受贿赂，不可行。此事就放下了。以后海口设万户制，大概就是按上述做法。
English: In the discussion, because someone thought that the person who carried it out would definitely be bribed, it was not feasible. The matter was dropped. In the future, Haikou will set up a million-household system, probably according to the above approach.

古文：除奎章阁侍书学士。
现代文：文宗当太子时，已知虞集之名，即位后仍命集兼经筵及奎章阁侍书学士。
English: When Emperor Wenzong was crown prince, his name was known as Gu Ji, and after his accession to the throne, he was still referred to as Mingshi and Keizhangge.

古文：时关中大饥，民枕籍而死，有方数百里无孑遗者，帝问集何以救关中，对曰： 承平日久，人情宴安，有志之士，急于近效，则怨讟兴焉。
现代文：当时关中灾情严重，饿死者众多，方圆几百里都没有幸存者，帝问怎样救关中，集说 ：太平的日子长了，人们贪图安逸，有志的人，急功近利，怨言就出现了。
English: At that time, the disaster in Guanzhong was serious, many people died of starvation, and there were no survivors for hundreds of miles around. When the emperor asked how to save Guanzhong, he said: The days of peace are long, people are greedy for comfort, people with aspirations, quick success, and complaints appeared.

古文：不幸大灾之余，正君子为治作新之机也，若遣一二有仁术、知民事者，稍宽其禁令，使得有所为，随郡县择可用之人，因旧民所在，定城郭，修闾里，治沟洫，限畎亩，薄征敛，招其伤残老弱，渐以其力治之，则远去而来归者渐至，春耕秋敛，皆有所助，一二岁间，勿征勿徭，封域既正，友望相济，四面而至者，均齐方一，截然有法，则三代之民，将见出于空虚之野矣。 
现代文：重灾之后，执政者要采用新的办法，拯救灾荒，如果派遣一、两位有才能又熟悉民情的人，稍稍放宽禁令，使他们能有所作为，由郡县选择可办事的人，在故居处划定城郭，修建闾里，开通河渠，限制田亩，减轻徭赋，把伤、残、老、弱的人组织起来，以他们的力量来治理灾害。那么远离家乡的人就会逐渐回来，春耕秋收有人帮助，一年两年不征税，免徭役。田亩划分既定，友邻相助，各方的人都聚集在此，整治有方，那时三代的百姓将会出现在这旷野的地方了。 
English: After a major disaster, the rulers should adopt new methods to save the disaster. If they send one or two talented people who are familiar with the people's conditions, slightly relax the ban so that they can make a difference, select people who can do things from the county, delimit the castle at the former residence, build villages, open canals, restrict acres, reduce endowments, and organize the injured, the remaining, the old and the weak to use their strength to control disasters. Then people who are far away from home will gradually return, the spring and autumn harvests will be helped, and there will be no tax for one year and two years, and they will be exempted from forced labor.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：文宗认为很好。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：因进曰： 幸假臣一郡，试以此法行之，三五年间，必有以报朝廷者。 
现代文：他又进言说 ：希望给我一个郡，试用此法，三五年中，一定能回报朝廷。 
English: He added, "I hope you will give me a county and try this method. In three to five years, I will surely be able to repay the imperial court."

古文：左右有曰： 虞伯生欲以此去尔。 
现代文：左右的人说 ：虞伯生想借此走掉。 
English: People on the right and left said: Yu Bosen wants to take advantage of this to leave.

古文：遂罢其议。
现代文：于是此事又作罢了。
English: So let's call it a day.

古文：有敕诸兼职不过三，免国子祭酒。时宗藩暌隔，功臣汰侈，政教未立，帝将策士于廷，集被命为读卷官，乃拟制策以进，首以 劝亲亲，体群臣，同一风俗，协和万邦 为问，帝不用。
现代文：当时宗藩之间有隔阂，功臣奢侈越制，政教未能确立，文宗要通过朝廷考试，选拔人才，虞集被任命为阅卷官，他先提出以 劝亲亲，体群臣，同一风俗，协和万邦 为试题，帝未采用。
English: At that time, there was a gap between the Zong clan and the Zong clan, the heroes and heroines were extravagant and excessive, and the political and religious leaders were not established. The Emperor Wenzong had to pass the imperial examination to select talents, and Yu Ji was appointed as the reading officer. He first proposed the test questions of "persuade relatives and relatives," "be a group of ministers," "have the same customs," and "harmonize the world," but the Emperor did not adopt it.

古文：集以入侍燕闲，无益时政，且媢嫉者多，乃与大学士忽都鲁都儿迷失等进曰： 陛下出独见，建奎章阁，览书籍，置学士员，以备顾问。
现代文：集因任侍书学士无事可做，妒忌的人又多，就与大学士忽都鲁都儿迷失等对皇上说 ：皇上有独到见解，建立奎章阁，读群书，设学士员作为顾问。
English: Since there was nothing for him to do as an attendant scholar, and there were many envious people, he said to the emperor, together with the university scholar, who had lost his way: The emperor had a unique opinion, established Quizhang Pavilion, read books, and set up scholars as advisers.

古文：臣等备员，殊无补报，窃恐有累圣德，乞容臣等辞职。 
现代文：我们没有什么能效力，恐有碍您的圣德，请允许我们辞职。 
English: There is nothing we can do that would offend your sanctity, so please allow us to resign.

古文：帝曰： 昔我祖宗，睿智聪明，其于致理之道，生而知之，朕早岁跋涉难阻，视我祖宗，既乏生知之明，于国家治体，岂能周知？
现代文：帝说： 从前我的祖宗聪明睿智，对治国之道生而知之，我早年经历过艰难险阻，与祖宗相比，无生而知之的聪慧，对国家的治理，怎能知道得周全呢？
English: The emperor said: In the past, my ancestors were clever and wise, and they knew the way of governing the country from birth. I experienced hardships and obstacles in my early years. Compared with my ancestors, how can I know the governance of the country from birth?

古文：故立奎章阁，置学士员，以祖宗明训、古昔治乱得失，日陈于前，卿等其悉所学，以辅朕志。
现代文：所以才建立奎章阁，设置学士员，以求祖宗的教诲，古今治乱的得失，每天都能陈列在我面前，你们把所学到的全部知识，用来帮助我。
English: That is why I established Kuizhang Pavilion and set up academicians, so that the teachings of the ancestors, the gains and losses of the past and present, can be displayed in front of me every day, and you can use all the knowledge you have learned to help me.

古文：又请以国书《脱卜赤颜》增修太祖以来事迹，承旨塔失海牙曰： 《脱卜赤颜》非可令外人传者。 
现代文：不要辞职了。 圣上要收集本朝典故，仿《唐、宋会要》，编《经世大典》，命虞集与中书平章政事赵世延，同任总裁。
English: Don't resign. The saint wants to collect allusions to this dynasty, imitate the "Tang and Song Society," compile the "Great Book of History," the "Collection of Fate and Destiny" and the "Chapter of Ping" in the book, and the political affairs Zhao Shiyan, the same president.

古文：遂皆已。俄世延归，集专领其事，再阅岁，书乃成，凡八百帙。既上进，以目疾丐解职，不允，乃举治书侍御史马祖常自代，不报。
现代文：集说： 礼部尚书马祖常，很懂古典典章；国子司业杨宝瑞，素来懂得天文地理，可以统率经典；翰林修撰谢端、应奉苏天爵、太常李好文、国子助教陈旅、前詹士院照磨宋耿衣、通事舍人王士点，都多见多闻，可以协助撰录。若是这样便能早日成书。 不久世延返乡，由集专负此责，历时两年，书成，共八百帙，进呈皇帝后，因眼疾求解职，帝不允。
English: According to the collection: the ceremonial department Shang Shumazhu Ma Zu Chang, very knowledgeable about classical ceremonies; the national children's division Yang Bao Rui, has always understood astronomical geography, can lead the classics; Hanlin Shuxing Xie Duan, should be dedicated to Su Tianjie, too often Li Haowen, the national children's assistant teacher Chen Liang, the former Zhanzhi Academy Shouma Song Geng Yi, and the expert Wang Shidi, are all well-known and can assist in writing. If this is the case, it will be possible to complete the book as soon as possible. Soon after the world returned home, the collection took on this responsibility

古文：御史中丞赵世安乘间为集请曰： 虞伯生久居京师，甚贫，又病目，幸假一外任，便医。 
现代文：御史中丞赵世安乘空为集请求说： 虞伯生长期住京师，家境贫困，又患眼病，恳请给他出京任职的机会，以便就医。 
English: Zhao Shian, the vice-chairman of the Central Military History Commission, flew to Beijing to make a request: "Gyu Boseong has been living in Beijing for a long time, his family is poor, and he suffers from an eye disease. Please give him the opportunity to work in Beijing so that he can see a doctor.

古文：帝怒曰： 一虞伯生，汝辈不容耶！ 
现代文：帝怒斥说 ：一个虞伯生你们也不能容纳吗？ 
English: The emperor angrily rebuked, "Can't you even accommodate a commoner?"

古文：帝方向用文学，以集弘才博识，无施不宜，一时大典册咸出其手，故重听其去。
现代文：帝正要专用他从事文学，以他的弘才博识，在任何方面施展，都无不当之处。近来一些重要的典册都出自他的笔下，因此不让他离职。
English: The emperor wanted to dedicate him to literature, and there was no reason why he should not use his vast knowledge in any way. Recently, some important manuals have come from his pen, so he was not allowed to leave his post.

古文：集每承诏有所述作，必以帝王之道、治忽之故，从容讽切，冀有感悟，承顾问及古今政治得失，尤委曲尽言，或随事规谏，出不语人。
现代文：集每受命有所述作时，必以帝王之道分析治理疏忽的缘故，从容恳切地希望皇上有所感悟。如果问他历史上的成败教训，更是委婉地详尽其言。
English: Whenever he was ordered to write something, he would analyze the causes of negligence in the manner of an emperor, and calmly and earnestly hoped that the emperor would be impressed. If he was asked about the lessons of success and failure in history, he would euphemistically elaborate on his words.

古文：谏或不入，归家悒悒不乐。家人见其然，不敢问其故也。
现代文：有时因某处问题随时规劝，出宫后也从不告诉别人；有时进谏后帝不能采纳，他回到家中就郁郁不乐。家里人见此情形，也不多问。
English: Sometimes, because of a certain problem, he was persuaded at any time, and he never told others after he left the palace; sometimes, the emperor could not accept him, and he was depressed when he returned home. When the family saw this situation, they did not ask much.

古文：虽以此二者忤物速谤，终不为动。光人龚伯璲，以才俊为马祖常所喜，祖常为御史中丞，伯遂游其门，祖常亟称之，欲集为荐引，集不可，曰： 是子虽小有才，然非远器，亦恐不得令终。 
现代文：光人龚伯，因才智英俊得到马祖常的喜爱，祖常任御史中丞，伯常到他家与之交往，祖常请虞集引荐，集不允，说： 此人有些小聪明，但不是大器，恐怕将来不会有圆满的结果。 
English: The light-skinned young man, Zou Bo, was loved by Ma Zu Chang because of his intelligence and good looks. Zou Chang was a middle-ranking official in the imperial court, and Bo often went to his home to socialize with him. Zou often asked Yu Ji for a recommendation, but Ji was not pleased and said, "This man is a little clever, but he is not a big tool. I'm afraid there will be no satisfactory result in the future."

古文：祖常犹未以为然。
现代文：祖常不以为然。
English: Zu is often unconvinced.

古文：一日，邀集过其家，设宴，酒半，出荐牍求集署，集固拒之，祖常不乐而罢。
现代文：一天在家设宴请集，酒过三巡，祖常拿出引荐信，请集签名，集断然拒绝，祖常很不高兴地作罢。
English: One day, a banquet was held at home, and after three rounds of drinks, the ancestor often took out a letter of introduction, asked the signature of the collection, and flatly refused the collection. The ancestor was often very unhappy to give up.

古文：文宗崩，集在告，欲谋南还，弗果。
现代文：文宗驾崩，集正在休假，计划南归故里，未能实现。
English: Wen Zong passed away, Xi Zeng was on vacation, and his plan to return to his hometown failed to materialize.

古文：幼君崩，大臣将立妥欢帖穆尔太子，用至大故事，召诸老臣赴上都议政，集在召列。
现代文：幼君宁宗又驾崩，大臣要仿效武宗即位的前例，立妥欢帖穆尔太子为帝，召集老臣赴上都议事，集也在召集之列。
English: The young prince, Ningzong, had died, and the minister wanted to follow the example of the enthronement of Emperor Wu Zong, and set up the Prince of Tuo, Huan Ti Mur, as the emperor, and summon the old ministers to go to Shangdu for deliberation. Ji was also among those summoned.

古文：祖常使人告之曰： 御史有言。 
现代文：祖常派人对集说 ：御史有话。 
English: Ancestors often sent people to the collection to say: History has a word.

古文：乃谢病归临川。
现代文：于是集推说有病回临川了。
English: As a result, he tweeted that he was ill and had returned to Linchuan.

古文：初，文宗在上都，将立其子阿剌忒纳答剌为皇太子，乃以妥欢帖穆尔太子乳母夫言，明宗在日，素谓太子非其子，黜之江南，驿召翰林学士承旨阿邻帖木儿、奎章阁大学士忽都鲁笃弥实书其事于《脱卜赤颜》，又召集使书诏，播告中外。
现代文：当初文宗在上都，要立其子阿剌忒纳答剌为皇太子，只因妥欢帖穆尔太子乳母的丈夫说明宗在世时，一向认为太子不是自己的儿子，贬到江南，用急件召翰林学士阿邻帖木儿，奎章阁大学士忽都鲁笃尔实将这件事写在《脱卜赤颜》中。又召虞集草拟诏书，宣告于朝廷内外。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wenzong wanted to make his son, Prince Ahnadatsu, crown prince in Shangdu. However, the husband of Prince Tamerlane's wet-nurse, Tamerlane, said that when Emperor Wenzong was alive, he had always believed that the prince was not his son. He was banished to the south of the Yangtze River. He sent an urgent letter to Hanlin Scholar Ahchong Tamerlane and Kuizhangge University Scholar Khudo Rudul Shih to write about this matter in "Dodging the Red Flag." He also summoned Yugi Ji to draft an edict, which was announced inside and outside the

古文：吴澄以道学自任，少许可，尝曰： 若亨父，可谓特立独行之士矣。 
现代文：当时省、台诸臣，都是文宗平素信用的人，御史不敢斥责这件事，用意在讽劝虞集赶快离开。伯后因执政败事，招致杀身之祸，当世的人才都佩服虞集能识别人。元统二年顺帝遣使，召他回禁林，因病发作，不能启程。
English: At that time, the provincial and Taiwanese courtiers were all people who trusted Wenzong. The historian did not dare to reprimand this matter, intending to ironically advise Yuji to leave quickly. Because the empress was defeated in power, she incurred the misfortune of killing herself. People of today admire Yuji's ability to recognize others. In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Shun sent an envoy to call him back to the Forbidden Forest. Due to an attack of illness, he was unable to leave.

古文：为文志其墓，以东汉诸君子拟之。
现代文：至正八年五月二十三日，病卒，享年七十七岁。
English: He died of illness on May 23, 1868, at the age of 77.

古文：揭傒斯揭傒斯，字曼硕，龙兴富州人。
现代文：诏赠江西行中书省参知政事、护军，封仁寿郡公。揭傒斯，字曼硕，龙兴富州人。
English: The imperial edict presented Jiangxi Province in the middle of the trip with the title of the governor of the province, the title of the governor of Renshou County, the title of the governor of the province, and the title of the governor of the province.

古文：父来成，宋乡贡进士。
现代文：父亲揭来成，是宋代乡贡进士。
English: His father, Hui Lai Cheng, was a Song Dynasty township gongjin.

古文：傒斯幼贫，读书尤刻苦，昼夜不少懈，父子自为师友，由是贯通百氏，早有文名。
现代文：傒斯幼年时家贫，他读书很刻苦，无论昼夜，从不懈怠。父子自为师友，因此对诸子百家的学说能透彻了解，文章早已出名。
English: His family was poor when he was young, and he studied very hard, day and night, never slacking off. Father and son were mentors and friends, so he could thoroughly understand the teachings of hundreds of schools. The article has long been famous.

古文：大德间，稍出游湘、汉，湖南帅赵淇，雅号知人，见之惊曰： 他日翰苑名流也。 
现代文：大德年间，出游湘、汉，湖南帅赵淇，人们送给他的美称是：知人、见到傒斯惊讶地说： 他日定是翰苑的名流。 
English: During the Great German Era, Zhao Qi, the famous horseman of Hunan, Hunan and Hunan provinces, was given the title of "acquaintance" by people. When they saw him, they were surprised and said, "He must be a famous person from Hunan."

古文：程钜夫、卢挚，先后为湖南宪长，咸器重之，钜夫因妻以从妹。
现代文：程钜夫、卢挚，先后任湖北地方长官，都很器重他，钜夫把堂妹嫁给了他。
English: Cheng Shufu and Lu Zhiqi, successively serving as Hubei local governors, were very respectful of him. Shufu married his cousin Wu to him.

古文：延祐初，钜夫、挚列荐于朝，特授翰林国史院编修官。
现代文：延初年，钜夫、挚向朝廷推荐，特授傒斯翰林国史院编修官。
English: In the first year of Yan, the widower, sincerely recommended to the imperial court, specially awarded the editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History of Jinshanlin.

古文：时平章李孟监修国史，读其所撰《功臣列传》，叹曰： 是方可名史笔，若他人，直誊吏牍尔。 
现代文：当时平章李孟监修国史，读了他撰写的《功臣列传》后，感叹地说： 这才是名史的笔法，若是别人，只是誊录罢了。 
English: At that time, Pingzhang Li Meng was supervising the national history, and after reading the "Celebrated Heroes and Heroines" he wrote, he said with regret: This is the writing style of famous history, if it is someone else, it is just a transcription.

古文：升应奉翰林文字，仍兼编修，迁国子助教，复留为应奉。
现代文：升应奉翰林文字，仍兼编修，调迁国子助教，又留为应奉。
English: He was promoted to be a teacher of Hanlin characters, but he was still an editor and a teacher. He was transferred to be a Kuniko assistant teacher, but he remained as a teacher.

古文：南归省母，旋复召还。
现代文：回南方看望母亲，不久又召回。
English: He returned to the south to visit his mother, but was soon called back.

古文：傒斯凡三入翰林，朝廷之事，台阁之仪，靡不闲习，集贤学士王约谓： 与傒斯谈治道，大起人意，授之以政，当无施不可。 
现代文：傒斯三次入翰林，朝廷的事，尚书省的礼节，无不熟悉，集贤学士王约说： 与傒斯谈治国之道，得到很大启发，授给政事，没有不能办到的。 
English: He has been to China three times. He is familiar with the affairs of the imperial court, the etiquette of the provinces, and the etiquette of the provinces. He said, "Talking with him about the way of governing the country, I have been greatly inspired, and there is nothing I can't do when it comes to government affairs.

古文：天历初，开奎章阁，首擢为授经郎，以教勋戚大臣子孙。
现代文：天历初年，开设奎章阁，首先提拔他为授经郎，以教育有功勋的国戚大臣子孙。
English: In the first year of the calendar, Kuizhangge was opened, and he was first promoted to be the scribe to educate the children and grandchildren of meritorious ministers.

古文：文宗时幸阁中，有所咨访，奏对称旨，恒以字呼之而不名。每中书奏用儒臣，必问曰： 其材何如揭曼硕？ 
现代文：文宗到官署察访，都称呼他的字而不呼名。每当中书奏用儒臣时，一定要问 此人才能比揭曼硕如何？ 
English: When Wen Zong visited government offices, everyone called him by his first name instead of his surname. Every time a Confucian scholar was used in calligraphy, it was necessary to ask, "What is this person's talent compared to Mansuo?"

古文：间出所上《太平政要策》以示台臣，曰： 此朕授经郎揭曼硕所进也。 
现代文：不久，拿出《太平政要策》给台臣看，并说： 这是朕的授经郎揭曼硕所奉呈的。 
English: Before long, he took out "The Essentials of the Taiping Government" to show to the Taiwanese, and said, "This was presented to me by my tutor, Manso.

古文：其见亲重如此。
现代文：可见皇帝对他之亲密和重视。
English: You can see how close and important the emperor is to him.

古文：富州地不产金，官府惑于奸民之言，为募淘金户三百，而以其人总之，散往他郡，采金以献，岁课自四两累增至四十九两。
现代文：富州不产金，官府听信奸民的话，召募三百户淘金，让这个人总领，分往别郡采金交给官府，每年征收赋税由七两增到四十九两。
English: Fuzhou did not produce gold, the government listened to the words of the traitors and recruited three hundred gold panning households, let this person be the leader, distributed to other counties to collect gold and hand it over to the government, and increased the annual tax from seven to forty-nine taels.

古文：其人既死，而三百户所存无什一，又贫不聊生，有司遂责民之受役于官者代输，民多以是破产。
现代文：这个人死后，三百户剩下来的不到十分之一，又贫困无法生活，地方官府要求他们以服劳役代交金课，百姓多因此破产。
English: After the death of this person, less than one-tenth of the remaining 300 households were impoverished and unable to live. The local government required them to pay a fee in lieu of labor service, and many people went bankrupt as a result.

古文：中书因傒斯言，遂蠲其征，民赖以苏，富州人至今德之。
现代文：中书根据傒斯的建议，减免了赋税，百姓才能安息，富州人至今还感激他。
English: According to the suggestion of Xie Si, Zhongshu reduced and exempted taxes, so that the people could rest in peace. The people of Fuzhou are still grateful to him.

古文：与修《经世大典》，文宗取其所撰《宪典》读之，顾谓近臣曰： 此岂非《唐律》乎！ 
现代文：编修《经世大典》时，文宗拿出傒斯撰写的《宪典》来读，并对近臣说： 这难道不是《唐律》吗？ 
English: When compiling the "Great Book of Confucianism," Wenzong took out the "Constitution" written by Jins to read, and said to his close vassal: "Isn't this the "Law of Tang"?

古文：特授艺文监丞，参检校书籍事，且屡称其纯实，欲进用之，会文宗崩而止。
现代文：特授傒斯艺文监丞，参与检校书籍的事，屡次都说书中的内容确实可信，想提升任用他，正逢文宗驾崩而止。
English: The special instructor and literary supervisor, who was involved in the inspection of the school's books, repeatedly said that the content of the book was indeed credible. He wanted to promote his appointment, just as Wenzong was dying.

古文：先是，儒学官赴吏部铨者，必移集贤，考较其所业，集贤下国子监，监下博士，吏文淹稽，动逾累月。
现代文：元统初年，迁翰林待制，升集贤学士，官阶为中顺大夫。以前儒学官先到吏部考核，然后转集贤院考核其能力和水平，集贤转国子监，国子监转博士考核，时间要经历数月。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hanlin was transferred to the waiting system, Xianren was promoted to the bachelor's degree, and the official rank was Zhongshun doctor. Previously, Confucian officials first went to the cadre department for assessment, and then transferred to the Xianren Academy for assessment of their ability and level. It took several months for the transfer of Xianren to the provincial overseer, and for the provincial overseer to transfer to the doctoral examination.

古文：傒斯请更其法，以事付本院属官，人甚便之。
现代文：傒斯请求更改这种烦琐的考核程序，把这件事交给本院属官办理，大家都感到方便。
English: It was convenient for all of us to request that this cumbersome assessment procedure be changed and that the matter be referred to the officials of this hospital.

古文：奉旨祠北岳、济渎、南镇，便道西还，时秦王伯颜当国，屡促其还，傒斯引疾固辞。
现代文：傒斯奉旨到北岳、济渎、南镇祭祀，取西道而归。当时秦王伯颜主持国政，屡次催促他返回，傒斯因病坚决辞谢。
English: At that time, Qin King Boyan presided over state affairs and repeatedly urged him to return, but he resolutely declined due to illness.

古文：既而天子亲擢为奎章阁供奉学士，乃即日就道，未至，改翰林直学士，及开经筵，再升侍讲学士、同知经筵事，以对品进阶中奉大夫。
现代文：不久，天子亲自提拔他为奎章阁供奉学士，于是立即上路，还未到京，又改任翰林直学士及开经筵，再升侍讲学士、同知经筵事，并按品进阶中奉大夫。
English: Soon after, Heavenly Son personally promoted him to be a scholar of Quizhangge, so he immediately went on the road, and before he arrived in Beijing, he was re-appointed as a scholar of Hanlin Zhi and Kaizheng, and then promoted to an assistant lecturer, a scholar of Tongzhi Zhi, and a junior doctor according to the advanced level.

古文：时新格超升不越二等，独傒斯进四等，转九阶，盖异数也。
现代文：当时规定趋升不能过二等，只有揭傒斯进四等，转为九级。
English: At that time, it was stipulated that the promotion could not go beyond the second grade, and only Jie Ying Si was promoted to the fourth grade and converted to the ninth grade.

古文：经筵无专官，曰领曰知，多宰执大臣，故微辞奥义，必属傒斯订定而后进，其言往往寓献替之诚，务以裨益治道。
现代文：经筵没有专官，多为宰执大臣兼任，凡含有贬意的言辞和深奥的道理，都要由傒斯审定后进讲，或是或非，一定要有益治国之道。
English: There are no special officials in the State Council, and most of them are concurrently acting as the prime minister. Any derogatory words and profound principles must be approved by the State Council before they can be put into practice, and whether or not they are, they must be conducive to the governance of the country.

古文：天子嘉其忠恳，数出金织文段以赐。
现代文：天子称赞他的忠恳，多次赐给他金织纹缎。
English: Praising him for his loyalty, the Son of Heaven repeatedly bestowed on him a golden loincloth.

古文：至正三年，年七十，致其事而去，诏遣使追及于漷南。
现代文：至正三年，揭傒斯年已七十，辞官而去，皇帝令遣使追到氵郭南。
English: In the third year of Zheng He's 70th year, he resigned and left, and the emperor sent an envoy to chase him to the south of Zengguo.

古文：寻复奉上尊谕旨，还撰《明宗神御殿碑》，文成，赐楮币万缗、白金五十两，中宫赐白金亦如之。
现代文：不久谕旨要傒斯回去撰写《明宗神御殿碑》，文章写成之后，赐楮币万缗、白金五十两，皇后也赐给他这些。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered him to go back and write "The Monument of the Mingsong God's Palace." After the article was written, he was given ten thousand taels of silver and fifty taels of platinum, which were also given to him by the queen.

古文：求去，不许，命丞相脱脱及执政大臣面谕毋行，傒斯曰： 使揭傒斯有一得之献，诸公用其言而天下蒙其利，虽死于此，何恨！
现代文：傒斯请求离职，不允，命宰相脱脱及执政大臣当面劝他不要走，他说： 使揭傒斯能有一得之献，诸公用我的话而使天下的人能蒙受其利，那么即使死在这件事上，又有什么可怨恨的呢？
English: Xie Xie asked to leave the post, but was not allowed to do so. He ordered the prime minister to get rid of him and the ruling minister to persuade him not to leave in person. He said, "In order for Xie Xie to be able to make a contribution, and for everyone in the world to benefit from my words, then even if I die in this matter, what is there to hate?

古文：不然，何益之有！ 
现代文：如果不是这样，会有什么益处呢？ 
English: If not, what would be the benefit?

古文：丞相因问： 方今政治何先？ 
现代文：丞相因而问他 ：当今的政治应以什么为先？ 
English: The prime minister therefore asked him: What should be the priority in today's politics?

古文：傒斯曰： 储材为先，养之于位望未隆之时，而用之于周密庶务之后，则无失材废事之患矣。 
现代文：傒斯说： 应以储材为先，在他们地位和声望未突出的时候加以培养，而在要周密管理各种事务时任用，这样才没有失材废事情的忧虑。 
English: "Storage materials should be given priority. They should be trained when their status and reputation are not prominent, and they should be appointed when it is necessary to carefully manage various affairs, so that there is no concern about lost materials and waste.

古文：一日，集议朝堂，傒斯抗言： 当兼行新旧铜钱，以救钞法之弊。 
现代文：一天，集会在朝廷议事，傒斯直言说： 应当兼行新旧铜钱，以挽救钞法的弊端。 
English: One day, a meeting was held at the Imperial Court, and Niece bluntly said: It is necessary to concurrently issue new and old copper coins in order to save the drawbacks of the banknote method.

古文：执政言不可，傒斯持之益力，丞相虽称其不阿，而竟莫行其言也。
现代文：执政者认为不可，傒斯更是坚持己见，丞相虽称赞他刚直不阿，然而还是不采行他的意见。
English: The ruler thought it was impossible, and Hoess even insisted on his own opinion. Although the prime minister praised him for his straightforwardness, he still did not implement his opinion.

古文：诏修辽、金、宋三史，傒斯与为总裁官，丞相问： 修史以何为本？ 
现代文：诏令他编修辽、金、宋三史，并任总裁官。丞相问 ：修史以什么为本？ 
English: The emperor ordered him to edit the three histories of Liao, Jin, and Song, and he served as the president.

古文：曰： 用人为本，有学问文章而不知史事者，不可与；有学问文章知史事而心术不正者，不可与。
现代文：他回答说 ：用人为本，有学问能写文章但不知道史事的，不能参加；有学问能写文章也知道史事，然而心术不正的人，也不能参加。
English: He replied: People-oriented, learned people who can write articles but don't know history can't participate; learned people who can write articles and know history, but whose minds are not right, can't participate.

古文：用人之道，又当以心术为本也。 
现代文：用人又应该以心术为本。 
English: Employing people should also be based on mental skills.

古文：且与僚属言： 欲求作史之法，须求作史之意。
现代文：并对僚属说 ：想要得到写史之法，须求写史之意。
English: And he said to his colleagues: if you want to get the method of writing history, you must seek the meaning of writing history.

古文：古人作史，虽小善必录，小恶必记。不然，何以示惩劝！ 
现代文：古人写史，很小的好事一定要记录；很小的坏事也一定要记载，不然怎么能告诫后人呢？ 
English: The ancients wrote history, very small good things must be recorded; very small bad things must also be recorded, otherwise how can we warn future generations?

古文：由是颜然以笔削自任，凡政事得失，人材贤否，一律以是非之公。至于物论之不齐，必反覆辨论，以求归于至当而后止。
现代文：因此，毅然把修改文章作为己任，凡政事得失，人材贤否、是非一律秉公而论；至于对事物的论述有差别时，一定反复分辨论析，以求得到恰当的看法为止。
English: Therefore, he resolutely took it as his duty to revise the article, and discussed the merits and demerits of all political affairs, and the merits and demerits of human resources in an impartial manner. As for the differences in the discussion of things, he must repeatedly distinguish and analyze in order to obtain an appropriate view.

古文：四年，《辽史》成，有旨奖谕，仍督早成金、宋二史。
现代文：至正四年，《辽史》编成后，有诏令给以奖励，他仍督促早日完成宋、金两部历史。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, after the compilation of "Liao Shi," a decree was issued to reward him, and he still urged the early completion of the two histories of Song and Jin.

古文：傒斯留宿史馆，朝夕不敢休，因得寒疾，七日卒。
现代文：傒斯在史馆住宿，朝夕不能休息，因而得了寒疾，病七日而卒。
English: He stayed at the History Museum and couldn't rest in the morning and evening. As a result, he caught a cold and died seven days later.

古文：时方有使者至自上京，锡宴史局，以傒斯故，改宴日。使者以闻，帝为嗟悼，赐楮币万缗，仍给驿舟，护送其丧归江南。
现代文：当时有使者自上京来，赐宴史局，因傒斯病故，而更改了时间，使者奏报皇帝，帝为之哀悼，赐楮币万缗，仍给驿舟，护送灵柩回江南。
English: At that time, an emissary came from Beijing, gave the banquet history bureau, changed the time due to his illness, the emissary reported to the emperor, the emperor mourned for him, gave him thousands of dollars, still gave him a boat, and escorted the coffin back to the south of the river.

古文：六年，制赠护军，追封豫章郡公，谥曰文安。
现代文：六年赠护军，追封豫章郡公，谥号文安。
English: He was awarded the title of county magistrate of Yuzhang County, posthumously known as Wen'an.

古文：有勋爵而无官阶者，有司失之也。
现代文：傒斯有勋爵而无官阶是官府失职所致。
English: The fact that there is a Lord but no official rank is the result of the government's dereliction of duty.

古文：傒斯少处穷约，事亲菽水粗具而必得其欢心，既有禄入，衣食稍逾于前，辄愀然曰： 吾亲未尝享是也。 
现代文：傒斯年幼时，家境穷困，侍奉双亲虽是粗茶淡饭，但一定使他们愉快，有了俸禄后，衣食稍稍比以前好一点，却总是哀叹地说 ：我的父母不曾享受过这样的生活。 
English: When he was young, his family was poor, and although serving his parents was a piece of cake, it certainly made them happy. After he received his salary, his food and clothing were a little better than before, but he always said sadly, "My parents never enjoyed such a life."

古文：故平生清俭，至老不渝。
现代文：所以平生清俭，至老不变。
English: That's why I've been frugal all my life, and it hasn't changed.

古文：友于兄弟，终始无间言。
现代文：对兄弟友爱，始终亲密无间。
English: For brotherly love, always intimate.

古文：立朝虽居散地，而急于荐士，扬人之善惟恐不及，而闻吏之贪墨病民者，则尤不曲为之掩覆也。
现代文：在朝廷虽处不重要的地位，但急于荐士，谈别人的优点生怕说得不全面。听说官吏贪图谋利，残害百姓，就绝不为他们掩盖。
English: Although he did not hold an important position in the imperial court, he was eager to recommend others, and he was afraid that he would not be able to speak comprehensively about the merits of others. When he heard that officials were greedy for profit and brutalized the people, he would never cover up for them.

古文：为文章，叙事严整，语简而当；诗尤清婉丽密；善楷书、行、草。
现代文：写文章叙事严密，语言简练，写诗尤其婉转细腻，善楷书、行书、草书。
English: The narration of writing articles is strict, the language is concise, and the writing of poetry is especially delicate, good at block letters, cursive, and cursive.

古文：朝廷大典册及元勋茂德当得铭辞者，必以命焉。
现代文：朝廷重大文献以及德高望重的元勋墓志铭，一定命他执笔。
English: Important documents of the imperial court as well as the epitaph of the highly respected founder of the order must have been written by him.

古文：母童氏，梦大星坠于怀，乃有娠，历二十四月始生溍。溍生而俊异，比成童，授以书诗，不一月成诵。
现代文：在极远的他乡的人都仰慕他的名气，能得到他的文章，没有不感到荣幸的。黄溍，字晋卿，婺州义乌人。生来英俊，不同一般，儿时教给诗书，不到一月就能背诵。
English: People in faraway hometowns admire his fame and are honored to receive his articles. Huang Qi, Zi Jinqing, a native of Yiwu, Zhangzhou. He was born handsome, different from the average, was taught poetry as a child, and could recite it in less than a month.

古文：迨长，以文名于四方。
现代文：成人后，以文章闻名四方。
English: As an adult, Shifang became famous for his articles.

古文：中延祐二年进士第，授台州宁海丞。
现代文：延二年中进士，授台州宁海县丞。
English: He was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar of the Year" for the second year in a row, and was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar of Taizhou Ninghai County."

古文：县地濒盐场，亭户恃其不统于有司，肆毒害民；编户隶漕司及财赋府者，亦谓各有所凭，横暴尤甚。
现代文：该县临近盐场，生产盐的亭户因不受当地官府管辖，肆意残害百姓；隶属于漕运司及财赋府的编户，有所依恃，对待百姓则更加横暴。
English: The county is close to the salt fields, and the pavilions that produce salt, because they are not under the jurisdiction of the local government, wantonly brutalize the people; the knitting households that are affiliated with the Rowing Department and the Finance Department, have some support, but they treat the people more violently.

古文：初无获财左验，事久不决，溍为之疏剔，以其狱上，论之如本条，免死者十余人。
现代文：溍对他们都绳之以法。胥吏劝他不要得罪这些人，但他全不理会。有个百姓的继母与僧人私通，并谋害了他的父亲，反诬告是他干的，将判刑。溍微服私访，终于弄清案情，为冤者昭雪。
English: He brought all of them to justice. The magistrates advised him not to offend these people, but he completely ignored them. There was a commoner's stepmother who had sexual intercourse with a monk and murdered his father. He was falsely accused and will be sentenced. He paid a few private visits and finally clarified the case and cleared up the injustice.

古文：迁两浙都转运盐使司石堰西场监运，改诸既州判官。
现代文：迁两浙都转运盐使司石堰西场监运，又改任诸暨州判官。
English: He was transferred to supervise the transportation of salt between the two capitals of Zhejiang and Shijiazhuang, and was also appointed judge of Zhuji Province.

古文：巡海官舸，例以三载一新，费出于官，而责足于民。
现代文：在海里巡逻的官船，按惯例是三年一更新，费用出于百姓。有多余的钱，总管都据为私有。
English: The official ship patrolling the sea is renewed every three years, according to the usual practice, and the cost is borne by the people. If there is extra money, the general manager will be privately owned.

古文：有余，则总其事者私焉。
现代文：而黄溍则节省消耗，把剩余的钱还给百姓，深受百姓称赞。
English: Huang Qi, on the other hand, saved consumption and returned the remaining money to the people, which was highly praised by the people.

古文：溍撙节浮蠹，以余钱还民，欢呼而去。奸民以伪钞钩结党与，胁攘人财，官若吏听其谋，挟往新昌、天台、宁海、东阳诸县，株连所及数百家，民受祸至惨。
现代文：奸民用伪钞勾结朋党，强夺民财，官和吏听从他们的，横行于新昌、天台、宁海、东阳等县，牵连达几百家，百姓遭受极大祸害。因此郡府下令给黄溍，由他审讯惩治。
English: The county government ordered Huang Qi to be tried and punished for conspiring with his cronies to steal people's money and counterfeit money in Xinchang, Tiantai, Ninghai, Dongyang and other counties, involving hundreds of families and causing great harm to the people.

古文：郡府下溍鞫治，溍一问，皆引伏，官吏除名，同谋者各杖遣之。
现代文：溍一审便都认罪伏法，于是将官吏除名，同谋的人各施以杖刑后遣散。
English: In the first trial, they all pleaded guilty to subversion, so the officials were removed from the list, and the conspirators were each punished with a cane and dismissed.

古文：有盗系于钱唐县狱，游民赂狱吏私纵之，假署文牒，发其来为向导，逮捕二十余家。
现代文：有些盗贼关押在钱塘县监狱，游民贿赂狱吏私自放走，并伪造公文带领人来逮捕二十多家的百姓。
English: Some of the thieves were detained in Qiantang County Prison. The vagrants bribed the prison officers to let them go, and forged official documents to lead people to arrest more than two dozen people.

古文：溍访得其情，以正盗宜傅重议，持伪文书来者又非州民，俱械还钱唐，诬者自明。
现代文：溍了解到以上情况，对真正的盗贼则施以重刑；拿假文书来的又不是本州州民，就押送还钱塘，受冤者得到昭雪。
English: After learning the above situation, the real thief was given a heavy sentence; the person who took the fake document was not a citizen of Honshu and was escorted back to Qiantang. The wronged person was awarded the title of "Xiao Xue."

古文：入为应奉翰林文字、同知制诰，兼国史院编修官，转国子博士。视弟子如朋交，未始以师道自尊，轻纳人拜，而来学者滋益恭，业成而仕，皆有闻于世。
现代文：入朝任应奉翰林文字、同知制诰，兼国史院编修官，转调国子博士，对待弟子如同朋友一样，从不以师道自尊轻易接受别人的跪拜，对来向他求学的学生很客气地敬重他们，当他们结束学业而任官职后，在社会上都是很有名望的人。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he was assigned to be a scholar of Hanlin characters, a scholar of Tongzhi, an editor of the Academy of National History, and a doctor of Kuniko. He treated his disciples as friends. He never bowed down to others out of pride as a teacher. He was very polite and respectful to the students who came to study with him. When they finished their studies and became officials, they were very famous people in the society.

古文：时欲增设礼殿配位四，配位合东坐而西向，学官或议分置于左右，同列不敢争，溍独面折之，事乃止。
现代文：当时要在礼殿增设四个配享座位，都是坐东向西，学官有时讨论时分别坐在左右两旁，同列都不敢相争，溍一人当面指责学官的错误，事情才作罢。
English: At that time, four additional seats were to be allocated in the hall, all facing east and west. Sometimes, when discussing, the academic officials sat separately on the left and right sides. They did not dare to compete with each other. Only when one of them accused the academic officials of making a mistake did the matter come to an end.

古文：出为江浙等处儒学提举。
现代文：出任浙江等处儒学提举。
English: He was promoted to the post of Confucian scholar in Zhejiang and other places.

古文：溍年始六十七，不俟引年，亟上纳禄侍亲之请，绝江径归。
现代文：溍年六、七十岁还不到引退的年龄，极力上书请求回家侍奉双亲，便渡江直接回家。
English: When he was in his sixties or seventies, he was too young to retire, so he wrote to his parents to ask them to let him return home to serve them. He then crossed the river and went straight home.

古文：俄以秘书少监致仕，未几，落致仕，除翰林直学士、知制诰同修国史。
现代文：不久辞秘书少监而退隐。没多长时间，起任，授职翰林直学士、知制诰同修国史。
English: Soon after, he resigned as secretary and retired as a junior inspector. Not long after taking office, he conferred the titles of Hanlin Zhi Bao, Zhizhe Xing Tong and Xiu Guo.

古文：寻兼经筵官，执经进讲者三十有二，帝嘉其忠，数出金织纹段赐之。
现代文：不久又兼经筵官，为皇帝讲解经史三十二次，帝赞扬他的忠诚，多次以金织纹缎赐给他。
English: Soon he was also a eunuch, explaining the history of the sutras for the emperor thirty-two times. The emperor praised his loyalty and gave him gold braided hair many times.

古文：升侍讲学士、知制诰同修国史、同知经筵事。
现代文：升侍讲学士、知制诰同修国史、同知经筵事。
English: He was promoted to be a lecturer and a bachelor, and he also studied national history and the Anecdotes of Confucius.

古文：阶自将仕郎七转至中奉大夫。
现代文：官阶自将仕郎七次调迁至中奉大夫。
English: He was transferred seven times in his career to the position of junior medical officer.

古文：几上章求归，不俟报而行，帝闻之，遣使者追还京师，复为前官。
现代文：他屡上奏章请求回家，不等上报就走了，帝听说此事，派遣使者追他回到京师，复任前官。
English: He repeatedly requested to go home, and left without waiting for the report. When the emperor heard about this, he sent an envoy to chase him back to Beijing and reinstate him as a former official.

古文：久之，始得谢南还，优游田里间，凡七年，卒于绣湖之私第，年八十一。
现代文：过了很长时间，才准许回南方，在田野间悠闲自得，共七年时间，逝世在绣湖自己宅第中，终年八十一岁。
English: It took a long time before he was allowed to return to the south, where he spent a total of seven years relaxing in the fields. He died at his home in Lake Shucheng at the age of 81.

古文：赠中奉大夫、江西等处行中书省参知政事、护军，追封江夏郡公，谥曰文献。
现代文：赠中奉大夫、江西等处行中书省参知政事、护军，追封江夏郡公，谥号文献。
English: He was given the titles of Zhongfeng Dafu, Jiangxi Province, and other places, and was appointed to the post of the governor of the province, the post of the governor of the province, the post of the governor of Jiangxia County, and the post of the governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：溍天资介特，在州县唯以清白为治，月俸弗给，每鬻产以佐其费。
现代文：溍天资突出，在州县政治清明为官廉洁，月俸不给时，常常卖自己的家产以补助不足的费用。
English: He has outstanding talent, and when the state and county politics are clear and the officials are clean, and the monthly salary is not paid, he often sells his family property to subsidize the insufficient expenses.

古文：及升朝行，挺立无所附，足不登巨公势人之门，君子称其清风高节，如冰壶玉尺，纤尘弗污。
现代文：升入朝廷任职，不依附任何人，从不登大富翁和权势人家的门，君子都称赞他清风高节，如冰壶玉尺，不污染丝毫灰尘。
English: He was promoted to the imperial court, did not cling to anyone, and never went to the door of the rich and powerful. The gentlemen all praised him for his clean air, like a curling jade ruler, and did not pollute the slightest dust.

古文：然刚中少容，触物或弦急霆震，若未易涯涘，一旋踵间，煦如阳春。
现代文：但刚强中缺少容忍，有时遇事性急如雷霆，好像没有限度，一会儿事过之后，又和悦如春。
English: But there is a lack of tolerance in the strong, sometimes the urgency is like thunder, there seems to be no limit, after a while, it is like spring.

古文：溍之学，博极天下之书，而约之于至精，剖析经史疑难，及古今因革制度名物之属，旁引曲证，多先儒所未发。
现代文：溍学问广博，博览天下书籍，把握其精深含义，能剖析经史的疑难，以及古今承袭或改革的制度，能旁征博引，多为先儒未发现的问题。
English: He has a wide range of knowledge, has read all the books in the world, grasps their profound meaning, can analyze the difficulties of history, as well as the system of inheritance or reform from ancient times to modern times, and can read extensively, most of which are problems that were not discovered by the early Confucianists.

古文：文辞布置谨严，援据精切，俯仰雍容，不大声色，譬之澄湖不波，一碧万顷，鱼鳖蛟龙，潜伏不动，而渊然之光，自不可犯。所著书，有《日损斋稿》三十三卷、《义乌志》七卷、《笔记》一卷。
现代文：写文章时，文辞结构严谨，引据精确。他一举一动都表现了从容不迫的风度，不动声色，宛如清澈的湖面，水波不兴，一碧万里，鱼鳖蛟龙，潜伏水中一动不动。他所著的书有《日损斋稿》三十三卷、《义乌志》七卷、《笔记》一卷。
English: When writing an article, the wording structure is rigorous and the citation is precise. His every move shows a leisurely demeanor, immobile, like a clear lake, the water waves are not happy, a million miles, the fish is a dragon, and it does not move in the lurking water. The books he has written include 33 volumes of "Days of Loss," seven volumes of "Yiwu History," and one volume of "Notes."

古文：同郡柳贯、吴莱，皆浦阳人。
现代文：同郡的柳贯、吴莱，皆是浦阳人。
English: Liu Gang and Wu Lai, both from the same county, are from Urayang.

古文：贯字道传，器局凝定，端严若神。
现代文：柳贯，字道传，才干和度量都集中于一身，端庄严肃如神一般。
English: Liu Gang, word transmission, talent and measure are concentrated in one body, dignified and serious as a god.

古文：尝受性理之学于兰溪金履祥，必见诸躬行，自幼至老，好学不倦。
现代文：曾在兰溪金履祥处学习性理学说，并见之于行动。从幼到老，好学不倦。
English: He studied sexology at Lanxi Jinluxiang and saw it in action. From young to old, he is eager to learn.

古文：凡《六经》、百氏、兵刑、律历、数术、方技、异教外书，靡所不通。
现代文：凡《六经》、百氏、兵刑、律历、数术、方技、以及其他非儒家书稿，没有不通晓的。
English: All the "Six Classics," the "Hundred Classics," the "Martial Law," the "Laws and Calendars," the "Mathematics," the "Fangzhi" and other non-Confucian manuscripts are not incomprehensible.

古文：始用察举为江山县儒学教谕，仕至翰林待制。
现代文：他的文章深沉广博，人们都传诵它。最初任江山县儒学教谕，任官职到翰林待制。
English: His articles are profound and wide-ranging, and people all recite them. At first, he served as the Confucian scholar of Jiangshan County, and was assigned to Hanlin as a government official.

古文：与溍及临川虞集、豫章揭傒斯齐名，人号为儒林四杰。
现代文：与黄溍及临川虞集、豫章揭亻奚斯齐名，人们称他们为 儒林四杰 。
English: Together with Huang Qi, Linchuan Yu Ji and Yu Zhang Jieyi, they are known as the "Four Outstanding Confucianists."

古文：所著书，有文集四十卷、《字系》二卷、《近思录广辑》三卷、《金石竹帛遗文》十卷。
现代文：所著书有文集四十卷、《字系》二卷、《近思录广辑》三卷、《金石竹帛遗文》十卷。
English: The books he has authored include forty volumes of anthologies, two volumes of "Syllabary," three volumes of "Recent Thoughts," and ten volumes of "The Remains of Jinshi Zhukou."

古文：年七十三卒。
现代文：终年七十三岁。
English: He was 73 years old.

古文：莱字立夫，集贤大学士直方之子也，辈行稍后于贯、溍。
现代文：吴莱，字立夫，集贤大学士吴直方之子，所处时代稍后于贯、溍。
English: Wu Lai, Zhe Lifu, the son of Wu Naofang, a scholar of Jixian University, lived in the later period of Jang and Zang.

古文：天资绝人，七岁能属文，凡书一经目，辄成诵，尝往族父家，日易《汉书》一帙以去，族父迫扣之，莱琅然而诵，不遗一字，三易他编，皆如之，众惊以为神。
现代文：天资超人，七岁能写文章，凡书一看就能背诵。曾经往同族伯父家，每天借一册《汉书》回去，读后能朗朗背诵，一字不漏，多次更换别的篇目，都一样熟悉，大家惊叹认为是神。
English: A gifted superman, he was able to write articles at the age of seven, and could recite any book at a glance. He used to go to his uncle's house and borrow a book of "Chinese Classics" every day. After reading it, he could recite it loudly, without missing a word. He changed the other chapters many times, and they were all equally familiar. Everyone was amazed and thought it was a god.

古文：延祐七年，以《春秋》举上礼部，不利，退居深袅山中，益穷诸书奥旨，著《尚书标说》六卷、《春秋世变图》二卷、《春秋传授谱》一卷、《古职方录》八卷、《孟子弟子列传》二卷、《楚汉正声》二卷、《乐府类编》一百卷、《唐律删要》三十卷、文集六十卷。
现代文：延七年，参加会试，未中，退居深袅山中，更加钻研各书的旨要之处，著有《尚书标说》六卷、《春秋世变图》二卷、《春秋传授谱》一卷、《古职方录》八卷、《孟子弟子列传》二卷、《楚汉正声》二卷、《乐府类编》一百卷、《唐律删要》三十卷、文集六十卷。
English: For seven years, he took the entrance examination, failed the middle school, and retired to the mountains of Shushan. He studied the essential points of each book more thoroughly. He was the author of "Shangshu Biao" six volumes, "Spring and Autumn World Map" two volumes, "Spring and Autumn Teaching" one volume, "Ancient Vocations" eight volumes, "Mencius's Disciples" two volumes, "Chu Han Zhengsheng" two volumes, "Lefu Collection" one hundred volumes, "Tang Dynasty" thirty volumes, and sixty volumes of anthologies.

古文：他如《诗传科条》、《春秋经说》、《胡氏传证误》，皆未脱稿。
现代文：其他还有《诗传科条》、《春秋经说》、《胡氏传证误》，但都未脱稿。
English: There are also "Poetry Transmission Science Article," "Spring and Autumn Classic," "Hu's Transmission Error," but they have not been removed from the manuscript.

古文：莱尤喜论文，尝云： 作文如用兵，兵法有正有奇，正是法度，要部伍分明，奇是不为法度所缚，举眼之顷，千变万化，坐作进退击刺，一时俱起，及其欲止，什伍各还其队，元不曾乱。 
现代文：吴莱更喜欢论文，曾认为做文如用兵，兵法有正、有奇，正是法度，要队伍分明，奇是不为法度束缚，转瞬间，千变万化，如同击剑，时进时退，自始至终不曾混乱。听的人都很佩服。
English: Wu Lai prefers to write essays. He once thought that writing is like using soldiers, the methods of warfare are positive and strange, just like the law, the team should be clear, the strange is not bound by the law, instantaneous, ever-changing, like fencing, advancing and retreating, and there is no confusion from beginning to end. Listeners are very impressed.

古文：闻者服之。贯平生极慎许与，每称莱为绝世之才。
现代文：柳贯平生赞许人十分慎重，但每称赞莱为绝世之才。
English: Liu Jun has always been very cautious in praising people, but every time he praises Lai as an extraordinary talent.

古文：溍晚年谓人曰： 莱之文，崭绝雄深，类秦、汉间人所作，实非今世之士也。
现代文：溍晚年对别人说： 莱的文章雄浑突出，类似秦、汉间的人所做，与今世文风不同。
English: In his later years, Zou said to others, "Lai's articles are bold and outstanding, similar to those written by people in Qin and Han dynasties, and different from the literary style of this world.

古文：吾纵操觚一世，又安敢及之哉！ 
现代文：我即使做文一生，又怎赶得上他呢？ 
English: Even if I write for the rest of my life, how can I catch up with him?

古文：其为前辈所推许如此。
现代文：他被前辈赞得这样好。
English: He was praised so highly by his predecessors.

古文：莱以御史荐，调长芗书院山长，未上，卒，年仅四十有四，君子惜之。
现代文：莱因御史推荐，调长芗书院山长，未上任，四十四岁逝世，君子都很惋惜。
English: Recommended by Rein Mishi, he was appointed chief inspector and the head of the mountain of Shizhu Academy, but died before taking office, at the age of forty-four, which was regretted by all the nobles.

古文：私谥曰渊颖先生。
现代文：私谥 渊颖先生 。
English: My name is Mr. Yuanying.

