古文：君子行不贵苟难，说不贵苟察，名不贵苟传，唯其当之为贵。
现代文：君子对于行为，不以不正当的难能为可贵；对于学说，不以不正当的明察为宝贵；对于名声，不以不正当的流传为珍贵；只有行为、学说、名声符合了礼义才是宝贵的。
English: A gentleman does not value conduct for its improper difficulty; does not value learning for its improper insight; does not value reputation for its improper propagation; and does not value conduct, learning, and reputation unless they are in accordance with propriety.

古文：故怀负石而赴河，是行之难为者也，而申徒狄能之；然而君子不贵者，非礼义之中也。
现代文：所以怀中抱着石头投河自尽，这是难以做到的行为，但申徒狄却能做到；然而君子并不推崇这种行为，是因为它不合礼义的中正之道。
English: So he threw himself into the river with a stone in his arms. This is a difficult act to perform, but it can be done. However, a gentleman does not recommend this act, because it is not a proper way.

古文：山渊平，天地比，齐、秦袭，入乎耳，出乎口，钩有须，卵有毛，是说之难持者也，而惠施、邓析能之；然而君子不贵者，非礼义之中也。
现代文：高山和深渊高低相等，天和地高低一样，齐国、秦国相毗连，从耳朵中进去从嘴巴里出来，女人有胡须，蛋有羽毛，这些都是难以把握的学说，但惠施、邓析却能论证它们；然而君子并不赏识，是因为它们不合礼义的中正之道。
English: Mountain and abyss are equal in height and depth, heaven and earth are equal in height and depth, Qi and Qin are adjacent to each other, what goes into the ear comes out of the mouth, women have beards, eggs have feathers, these are all difficult to grasp theories, but Hui Shi and Deng Xie can prove them; however, gentlemen do not appreciate them, because they are not polite.

古文：盗跖吟口，名声若日月，与舜、禹俱传而不息；然而君子不贵者，非礼义之中也。
现代文：盗跖的名字常挂在人们嘴边，名声就像太阳、月亮一样无人不知，和舜、禹等一起流传而永不磨灭；然而君子并不珍重，是因为它不合礼义的中正之道。
English: The name of the thief is often on people's lips, the reputation is like the sun and the moon, no one knows, and it will never be erased, but the gentleman is not precious, because it is not polite.

古文：故曰：君子行不贵苟难，说不贵苟察，名不贵苟传，唯其当之为贵。《诗》曰： 物其有矣，惟其时矣。 
现代文：所以说：君子对于行为，不以不正当的难能为可贵；对于学说，不以不正当的明察为宝贵；对于名声，不以不正当的流传为珍贵；只有行为、学说、名声符合了礼义才是宝贵的。《诗》云： 既要有其物，又要得其时。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "A gentleman does not value his behavior with unjustified difficulty; he does not value his learning with unjustified insight; he does not value his reputation with unjustified propagation; he is only valuable if his behavior, learning, and reputation are in accordance with propriety."

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：君子易知而难狎，易惧而难胁，畏患而不避义死，欲利而不为所非，交亲而不比，言辩而不辞。
现代文：君子容易结交却不可以戏谑，容易恐惧却不可以胁迫；害怕祸患却不会逃避愿意为了正义而牺牲；希望获得利益，但不做自己认为是错误的事；与人结交很亲密，却不结党营私；言谈雄辩，却不故意玩弄辞藻。
English: A gentleman is easy to get along with, but not to tease; easy to fear, but not to coerce; afraid of evil, but not to escape; willing to sacrifice for justice; hoping to gain benefits, but not to do what he considers to be wrong; very intimate with people, but not partisan; eloquent, but not deliberately play with words.

古文：荡荡乎，其有以殊于世也。
现代文：胸怀是多么宽广啊！他是和世俗有所不同的。
English: How broad-minded he is! He is different from the world.

古文：君子能亦好，不能亦好；小人能亦丑，不能亦丑。
现代文：君子无论有没有才能都是美好的，小人有没有才能都是丑恶的。
English: A gentleman is beautiful whether he has talent or not, a villain is ugly whether he has talent or not.

古文：君子能则宽容易直以开道人，不能则恭敬繜绌以畏事人；小人能则倨傲僻违以骄溢人，不能则妒嫉怨诽以倾覆人。
现代文：君子有才能，就宽宏大量、平易正直地来启发引导别人；没有才能，就恭恭敬敬谦虚退让来小心侍奉别人。小人有才能，就骄傲自大邪僻背理地来傲视欺凌别人；没有才能，就嫉妒怨恨诽谤来倾轧搞垮别人。
English: If a gentleman has talent, he will inspire and guide others with magnanimity, simplicity and honesty; if he does not have talent, he will serve others with respect, deference and modesty; if a villain has talent, he will bully others with pride and arrogance; if he does not have talent, he will bully others with envy, resentment and slander.

古文：故曰：君子能则人荣学焉，不能则人乐告之；小人能则人贱学焉，不能则人羞告之。
现代文：所以说：君子有才能，那么别人就会以向他学习为荣；没有才能，那么别人就会乐意地告诉他知识。小人有才能，那么别人会以向他学习为耻；没有才能，那么别人就不愿意告诉他什么。
English: Therefore, it is said: If a gentleman has talent, then others will be proud to learn from him; if he has no talent, then others will be happy to tell him knowledge; if a villain has talent, then others will be ashamed to learn from him; if he has no talent, then others will not want to tell him anything.

古文：是君子、小人之分也。
现代文：这就是君子和小人的区别。
English: This is the difference between a gentleman and a villain.

古文：君子宽而不僈，廉而不刿，辩而不争，察而不激，寡立而不胜，坚强而不暴，柔从而不流，恭敬谨慎而容。
现代文：君子宽宏大量，但不懈怠马虎；方正守节，但不尖刻伤人；能言善辩，但不去争吵；洞察一切，但不过于激切；卓尔不群，但不盛气凌人；坚定刚强，但不粗鲁凶暴；宽柔和顺，但不随波逐流；恭敬谨慎，但待人宽容。
English: A gentleman is magnanimous, but not sloppy; upright, but not harsh; able to argue, but not to quarrel; insightful, but not over-excitable; not arrogant, but not domineering; firm and strong, but not rude and violent; gentle and obedient, but not drifting with the tide; respectful and prudent, but tolerant.

古文：夫是之谓至文。
现代文：这可以称为最文雅最合乎礼义的了。
English: This may be called the most genteel and proper.

古文：《诗》曰： 温温恭人，维德之基。 
现代文：《诗》云： 温柔谦恭的人们，是以道德为根本。 
English: "Poetry" cloud: Gentle and humble people are based on morality.

古文：此之谓矣。
现代文：说的就是这种人了。
English: That's a good point.

古文：君子崇人之德，扬人之美，非谄谀也；正义直指，举人之过，非毁疵也；言己之光美，拟于舜、禹，参于天地，非夸诞也；与时屈伸，柔从若蒲苇，非慑怯也；刚强猛毅，靡所不信，非骄暴也。
现代文：君子推崇别人的德行，赞扬别人的优点，并不是出于谄媚阿谀；公正地议论、直接地指出别人的过错，并不是出于诋毁挑剔；说自己十分美好，可以和舜、禹相比拟，和天地相并列，并不是出于浮夸欺骗；随着时势或退缩或进取，柔顺得就像香蒲和芦苇一样，并不是出于懦弱胆怯；刚强坚毅，没有什么地方不挺直，并不是出于骄傲横暴。
English: It is not out of flattery that a gentleman praises the virtues of others and praises the merits of others; it is not out of slander and fault-finding that he justly discusses and directly points out the faults of others; it is not out of pompous deception that he is very beautiful, that he can be compared with Yu and Yu, and that he is on a par with heaven and earth; it is not out of cowardice and timidity that he is as soft as cattails and reeds in accordance with the current situation or retreat or advance; it is not out of pride and violence that he is strong and firm, and there is no place where he is not upright.

古文：以义变应，知当曲直故也。
现代文：这些都是根据道义来随机应变、知道该屈曲就屈曲该伸直就伸直的缘故啊。
English: All of this is the result of random adjustments based on morality, of knowing when to bend, and when to straighten.

古文：《诗》曰： 左之左之，君子宜之；右之右之，君子有之。 
现代文：《诗》云： 该在左就在左，君子在左无不可；该在右就在右，君子在右也常有。 
English: "Poetry" cloud: The right is on the left, and the gentleman is on the left; the right is on the right, and the gentleman is often on the right.

古文：此言君子以义屈信变应故也。
现代文：这说的是君子能根据道义来屈伸进退随机应变的事。
English: This is to say that a gentleman can flex and flex according to morality.

古文：君子，小人之反也。
现代文：君子，与小人相反。
English: A gentleman, as opposed to a villain.

古文：君子大心则敬天而道，小心则畏义而节；知则明通而类，愚则端悫而法；见由则恭而止，见闭则敬而齐；喜则和而理，忧则静而理；通则文而明，穷则约而详。
现代文：倘若君子往大的方面用心，就会敬奉自然而遵循规律；倘若往小的方面用心，就会敬畏礼义而有所节制；倘若聪明，就会明智通达而触类旁通；倘若愚钝，就会端正诚笃而遵守法度；倘若得到任用，就会恭敬而不放纵；倘若不被任用，就会戒慎而整治自己；倘若高兴，就会平和地去治理；倘若忧愁，就会冷静地去处理；倘若显贵，就会文雅而明智；倘若贫困，就会自我约束而明察事理。
English: If a gentleman has a large heart, he will respect nature and follow the rules; if he has a small heart, he will fear etiquette and be restrained; if he is clever, he will be wise and knowledgeable, but will not be influenced by others; if he is stupid, he will be upright and honest, but will obey the law; if he is appointed, he will be respectful, but not indulgent; if he is not appointed, he will be cautious and self-disciplined; if he is happy, he will govern peacefully; if he is sad, he will deal with it calmly; if he is distinguished, he will be elegant and wise; if he is poor, he will

古文：小人则不然，大心则慢而暴，小心则淫而倾；知则攫盗而渐，愚则毒贼而乱；见由则兑而倨，见闭则怨而险；喜则轻而翾，忧则挫而慑；通则骄而偏，穷则弃而儑。
现代文：小人就不是这样，倘若往大的方面用心，就会傲慢而粗暴；倘若往小的方面用心，就会邪恶而倾轧别人；倘若聪明，就会巧取豪夺而用尽心机；倘若愚钝，就会狠毒残忍而作乱；倘若得到任用，就会高兴而傲慢；倘若不被任用，就会怨恨而险恶；倘若高兴，就会轻浮而急躁；倘若忧愁，就会垂头丧气而心惊胆战；倘若显贵，就会骄横而不公正；倘若贫困，就会自暴自弃而志趣卑下。
English: This is not the case with the little man. If he is ambitious, he will be arrogant and rude; if he is petty, he will be wicked and cruel; if he is clever, he will exploit others; if he is stupid, he will be violent and cruel; if he is appointed, he will be happy and arrogant; if he is not appointed, he will be resentful and malicious; if he is happy, he will be frivolous and impatient; if he is sad, he will be depressed and despondent; if he is noble, he will be arrogant and unjust; if he is poor, he will be self-sacrificing and mean-spirited.

古文：传曰： 君子两进，小人两废。 
现代文：古书上说： 君子在相对的两种情况下都在进步，小人在相对的两种情况下都在堕落。 
English: An ancient book said: A gentleman is making progress in both relative circumstances, and a villain is falling in both relative circumstances.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：君子治治，非治乱也。
现代文：君子治理安定的国家，而不整治混乱的国家。
English: A gentleman governs a stable country, not a chaotic one.

古文：曷谓邪？
现代文：这是什么意思呢？
English: What does that mean?

古文：曰：礼义之谓治，非礼义之谓乱也。
现代文：这是说：符合礼义叫做有安定，违背礼义叫做混乱。
English: This is to say: conforming to etiquette is called stability, violating etiquette is called chaos.

古文：故君子者，治礼义者也，非治非礼义者也。
现代文：所以君子治理符合礼义的国家，而不治理违背礼义的国家。
English: Therefore, a gentleman governs a country that conforms to etiquette, but not a country that violates etiquette.

古文：然则国乱将弗治与？
现代文：这样的话，那么国家混乱了就不进行治理了吗？
English: In this case, if the country is in chaos, will there be no governance?

古文：曰：国乱而治之者，非案乱而治之之谓也。
现代文：回答说：国家混乱而去治理它，并不是说依据原有的混乱去治理它，而是要先去除混乱再进行治理。
English: He replied: To govern a country in chaos does not mean to govern it according to the original chaos, but to first remove the chaos and then govern.

古文：去乱而被之以治；人污而修之者，非案污而修之之谓也，去污而易之以修。
现代文：这就如同一个人的品行有污秽需要整治，并非在污秽的基础上去整治它，而是去掉污秽换上美好的品行。
English: This is like saying that a person's conduct is filthy and needs to be rectified. It is not necessary to rectify it on the basis of filth, but to remove the filth and replace it with good conduct.

古文：故去乱而非治乱也，去污而非修污也。
现代文：因此除去混乱并不等于整治混乱，除去污秽并不等于整治污秽。
English: Therefore, removing chaos is not the same as rectifying chaos, and removing filth is not the same as rectifying filth.

古文：治之为名，犹曰君子为治而不为乱，为修而不为污也。
现代文：治理作为一个概念，就好比是说君子只治理安定的国家而不治理混乱的国家，只做美好的事而不做污秽的事。
English: Governance as a concept is like saying that a gentleman only governs a stable country and does not govern a chaotic country, and only does good things and does not do dirty things.

古文：君子絜其身而同焉者合矣，善其言而类焉者应矣。
现代文：君子洁身自好，那么那些和他志同道合的人就会聚拢过来；完善自己的学说，那么那些和他观点相同的人就会前来响应。
English: If a gentleman purifies himself, then those who are like-minded with him will come together; if he improves his doctrine, then those who share his views will come to respond.

古文：故马鸣而马应之，非知也，其势然也。
现代文：所以马叫就有马来应和它，牛叫就有牛来应和它，这并不是因为它们懂事，而是那客观情势就是这样的。
English: Therefore, when a horse calls, there is a horse to answer it, and when a cow calls, there is a cow to answer it. This is not because they are sensible, but the objective situation is like this.

古文：故新浴者振其衣，新沐者弹其冠，人之情也。
现代文：所以刚洗过澡的人总要抖一下自己的衣服，刚洗过头的人总要弹一下自己的帽子，这是人之常情啊。
English: So people who have just taken a shower always have to shake their clothes, and people who have just washed their heads always have to bounce their hats, which is human nature.

古文：其谁能以己之潐潐，受人之掝掝者哉！
现代文：有谁能让自己的洁净清白蒙受别人的玷污呢？
English: Who would allow his purity and innocence to be tarnished by others?

古文：君子养心莫善于诚，致诚则无它事矣，唯仁之为守，唯义之为行。
现代文：君子保养身心没有比真诚更好的了，做到了真诚，那就没有其他的事情了，只需要坚守住仁德、奉行道义就行了。
English: There is nothing better than sincerity to maintain a gentleman's mind and body. Once sincerity is achieved, there is nothing else to do. All that is needed is to adhere to benevolence and morality.

古文：诚心守仁则形，形则神，神则能化矣；诚心行义则理，理则明，明则能变矣。
现代文：真心实意地坚守仁德，仁德就会在行为上表现出来，仁德在行为上表现出来，就显得神明，显得神明，就能够感化他人了；真心实意地奉行道义，就会变得理智，理智了，就能明察事理，明察事理，就能改造别人了。
English: If you sincerely adhere to benevolence, benevolence will be manifested in your behavior; if benevolence is manifested in your behavior, you will appear divine; if you appear divine, you will be able to influence others; if you sincerely pursue morality, you will become rational; if you are rational, you will be able to see things rationally; if you see things rationally, you will be able to transform others.

古文：变化代兴，谓之天德。
现代文：改造感化轮流起作用，这叫做天德。
English: Transformation and influence take turns to work, which is called Tiande.

古文：天不言而人推其高焉，地不言而人推其厚焉，四时不言而百姓期焉。夫此有常，以至其诚者也。
现代文：上天不说话而人们都推崇它高远，大地不说话而人们都推崇它深厚，四季不说话而百姓都知道春、夏、秋、冬变换的时期：这些都是有了常规因而达到真诚的。
English: Heaven does not speak, yet people hold it in high esteem; the earth does not speak, yet people hold it in deep esteem; the four seasons do not speak, yet people know the changing seasons of spring, summer, autumn, and winter: all of these have a routine and thus achieve sincerity.

古文：君子至德，嘿然而喻，未施而亲，不怒而威。夫此顺命，以慎其独者也。
现代文：君子有了极高的德行，虽沉默不言，人们也都明白；没有施舍，人们却亲近他；不用发怒，就很威严：这是顺从了天道因而能在独自一人时也谨慎不苟的人。
English: A gentleman has great virtue, and though he is silent, people understand him; he has no charity, but people are close to him; he does not need to be angry, he is very dignified: this is a person who has obeyed the heavenly way and can be careful when he is alone.

古文：善之为道者，不诚则不独，不独则不形，不形则虽作于心，见于色，出于言，民犹若未从也，虽从必疑。
现代文：君子改造感化人之道是这样的：如果不真诚，就不能慎独；不能慎独，道义就不能在日常行动中表现出来；道义不能在日常行动中表现出来，那么即使发自内心，表现在脸色上，发表在言论中，人们仍然不会顺从他；即使顺从他，也一定迟疑不决。
English: The way for a gentleman to reform and influence people is as follows: if he is not sincere, he cannot be discreet; if he is not discreet, morality cannot be shown in his daily actions; if morality cannot be shown in his daily actions, then even if it comes from his heart, shows on his face, and is published in his speech, people will still not obey him; even if they obey him, they will still hesitate.

古文：天地为大矣，不诚则不能化万物；圣人为知矣，不诚则不能化万民；父子为亲矣，不诚则疏；君上为尊矣，不诚则卑。
现代文：天地要算大的了，不真诚就不能化育万物；圣人要算明智的了，不真诚就不能感化万民；父子之间要算亲密的了，不真诚就会疏远；君主要算尊贵的了，不真诚就会受到鄙视。
English: If heaven and earth are to be considered great, then insincerity cannot foster all things; if saints are to be considered wise, then insincerity cannot influence all people; if father and son are to be considered close, then insincerity will alienate them; if monarchs are to be considered honorable, then insincerity will be despised.

古文：夫诚者，君子之所守也，而政事之本也，唯所居以其类至，操之则得之，舍之则失之。
现代文：真诚，是君子的操守，政治的根本。只要立足于真诚，同类就会聚拢来了；保持真诚，会获得同类；丢掉真诚，会失去同类。
English: Sincerity is the ethics of a gentleman and the basis of politics. As long as it is based on sincerity, the same kind of people will gather; maintain sincerity, it will gain the same kind of people; lose sincerity, it will lose the same kind of people.

古文：操而得之则轻，轻则独行，独行而不舍则济矣。
现代文：保持真诚而获得了同类，那么感化他们就容易了；感化他们容易了，那么慎独的作风就能流行了；慎独的作风流行了再紧抓不放，那么人们的真诚就养成了。
English: Maintain sincerity and gain the same kind, then it is easy to influence them; influence them easily, then the style of cautious independence can be popular; if the style of cautious independence is popular, then people's sincerity will be developed.

古文：济而材尽，长迁而不反其初，则化矣。
现代文：人们的真诚养成了，他们的才能就会完全发挥出来，使人们永远地趋向于真诚而不回返到他们邪恶的本性上，那么人们就完全被教化了。
English: When people's sincerity is cultivated and their talents are fully brought into play, and when people are forever inclined toward sincerity and do not revert to their evil natures, then people are fully enlightened.

古文：君子位尊而志恭，心小而道大，所听视者近而所闻见者远。
现代文：君子地位尊贵但内心仍很恭敬，心只有方寸大但志向高远；能听到、能看到的很近，而听见、看见的东西却很远。
English: A gentleman has a high position but is still very respectful in his heart, his heart is only a square inch large but has high aspirations; what can be heard and seen is very close, but what can be heard and seen is very far away.

古文：是何邪？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：则操术然也。
现代文：是因为君子掌握了一定的方法。
English: It is because a gentleman has mastered a certain method.

古文：故千人万人之情，一人之情也。天地始者，今日是也；百王之道，后王是也。
现代文：因为那无数人的心情，和一个人的心情是一样的；天地初开时的情形，和今天是一样的；上百代帝王的统治之道，和后代帝王是一样的。
English: Because the mood of those countless people is the same as the mood of one person; the situation at the dawn of the world is the same as it is today; the way of ruling of hundreds of emperors is the same as that of future emperors.

古文：君子审后王之道而论于百王之前，若端拜而议。
现代文：君子审察了当代帝王的统治之道，从而再去考查上百代帝王之前的政治措施，就像端正身体拱着手来议论之从容不劳。
English: A gentleman who has examined the methods of rule of a contemporary emperor, and then goes on to examine the political measures of a hundred emperors before him, is like a man who does not have to strain his body to talk about it.

古文：推礼义之统，分是非之分，总天下之要，治海内之众，若使一人，故操弥约而事弥大。
现代文：推究礼义的纲领，分清是非的界限，总揽天下的要领，治理天下的百姓，与役使一个人是同一个道理。
English: Investigating the program of etiquette, distinguishing the boundaries of right and wrong, comprehensively grasping the essentials of the world, and governing the people of the world are the same as serving a person.

古文：五寸之矩，尽天下之方也。
现代文：所以掌握的方法越简约，能办成的事业就越大；就像五寸长的曲尺，能够画出天下所有的方形一样。
English: Therefore, the simpler the method you master, the greater the business you can accomplish; just like a five-inch-long ruler, you can draw all the squares in the world.

古文：故君子不下室堂而海内之情举积此者，则操术然也。
现代文：所以君子不用走出内室厅堂而天下的情况就都聚集在他这里了，这是因为掌握了一定的方法。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not have to go out of the inner room hall and the world's situations are gathered here, because he has mastered a certain method.

古文：有通士者，有公士者，有直士者，有悫士者，有小人者。
现代文：有通达事理的人，有公正无私的人，有耿直爽快的人，有拘谨老实的人，还有小人。
English: There are reasonable people, there are fair and selfless people, there are straightforward and cheerful people, there are prudent and honest people, and there are villains.

古文：上则能尊君，下则能爱民，物至而应，事起而辨，若是，则可谓通士矣。
现代文：上能尊敬君主，下能爱抚民众，事情来了能应付，事件发生了能处理，像这样就可以称为通达事理的人了。
English: A person who can respect the monarch above and caress the people below, who can deal with things when they come and handle them when they happen, can be called a reasonable person.

古文：不下比以暗上，不上同以疾下，分争于中，不以私害之，若是，则可谓公士矣。
现代文：不在下面互相勾结去愚弄君主，不向上迎合君主去残害臣民，在一些事情中有了分歧争执，不因为个人的利益去陷害对方，像这样就可以称为公正无私的人了。
English: Those who do not collude with each other below to fool the monarch, do not pander to the monarch to harm the subjects, have disagreements and disputes in some matters, and do not frame each other for personal interests, can be called fair and selfless people.

古文：身之所长，上虽不知，不以悖君；身之所短，上虽不知，不以取赏；长短不饰，以情自竭，若是，则可谓直士矣。
现代文：本身的长处，君主即使不知道，也不将它瞒过君主；本身的短处，君主即使不知道，也不靠它骗取奖赏；长处短处都不加掩饰，将真实的情况主动地暴露无遗，像这样就可以称为耿直爽快的人了。
English: The strengths of himself, even if the monarch does not know, will not hide it from the monarch; the weaknesses of himself, even if the monarch does not know, will not rely on it to defraud the reward; the strengths and weaknesses are not concealed, and the true situation is actively exposed. In this way, it can be called a straightforward and cheerful person.

古文：庸言必信之，庸行必慎之，畏法流俗而不敢以其所独甚，若是，则可谓悫士矣。
现代文：说一句平常的话也一定老老实实，做一件平常的事也一定小心谨慎，不敢效法流行的习俗，也不敢干他个人特别爱好的事，像这样就可以称为拘谨老实的人了。
English: To speak a commonplace must be honest, and to do a commonplace must be prudent, not daring to follow the popular customs, nor daring to do his personal special hobby, like this can be called a prudent and honest person.

古文：言无常信，行无常贞，唯利所在，无所不倾，若是，则可谓小人矣。
现代文：说话经常不老实，行为经常不忠贞，只要是有利可图的地方，就没有不使他倾倒的，像这样就可以称为小人了。
English: He often speaks dishonestly, his actions are often unfaithful, and there is nothing that will not bring him down as long as it is profitable. In this way, he can be called a villain.

古文：公生明，偏生暗，端悫生通，诈伪生塞，诚信生神，夸诞生惑。
现代文：公正就耳聪目明，偏私就昏暗愚昧；端正谨慎就通达，欺诈虚伪就闭塞；真诚老实会产生神明，大言自夸会产生糊涂。
English: Fairness is clear-sightedness, partiality is dim-wittedness; uprightness and prudence are open-mindedness, and deceit and hypocrisy are closed-mindedness; sincerity and honesty will produce gods, and boasting will produce confusion.

古文：此六生者，君子慎之，而禹、桀所以分也。
现代文：这六种相生，君子要谨慎对待，它也是禹和桀不同的地方。
English: These six kinds of cross-fertilization should be treated with caution by a gentleman, and it is also a place where Yu and Zou are different.

古文：欲恶取舍之权：见其可欲也，则必前后虑其可恶也者；见其可利也，则必前后虑其可害也者；而兼权之，孰计之，然后定其欲恶取舍。
现代文：喜爱还是厌恶、获取还是舍弃的权衡标准是：看到自己喜欢的事物，就必须前前后后考虑一下它厌恶的一面；看见有利可图的事情，就必须前前后后考虑一下它可能造成的危害；两方面权衡一下，仔细考虑一下，然后决定是喜欢还是厌恶、是获取还是舍弃。
English: The criteria for weighing up liking or disliking, acquiring or discarding are: when you see something you like, you must think about its disliking side; when you see something that is profitable, you must think about the harm it may cause; weigh up the two aspects, consider them carefully, and then decide whether to like or dislike, acquire or discard.

古文：如是，则常不失陷矣。
现代文：如此，就不会经常出现偏差了。
English: In this way, deviations do not occur as often.

古文：凡人之患，偏伤之也。见其可欲也，则不虑其可恶也者；见其可利也，则不虑其可害也者。
现代文：大凡人们的祸患，往往都是片面性害了他们：看到自己喜欢的事物，就不考虑它可厌的一面；看见有利可图的事情，就不去反顾一下它可能造成的危害。
English: The great misfortune of ordinary people is that they are often harmed by one-sidedness: when they see something they like, they do not consider its unpleasant side; when they see something profitable, they do not look back at the harm it may cause.

古文：是以动则必陷，为则必辱，是偏伤之患也。
现代文：因此行动起来就必然失足，干了就必然受辱，这是片面性害了他们而造成的祸患啊。
English: Therefore, when they take action, they are bound to fail, and when they fail, they are bound to suffer humiliation. This is the calamity caused by one-sidedness harming them.

古文：人之所恶者，吾亦恶之。
现代文：别人讨厌的，我也讨厌它。
English: What others hate, I hate it too.

古文：夫富贵者则类傲之，夫贫贱者则求柔之。是非仁人之情也，是奸人将以盗名于晻世者也，险莫大焉。
现代文：对那富贵的人一律傲视，对贫贱的人一味屈就，这并不是仁人的性情，这是奸邪的人用来在黑暗的社会里盜取名誉的做法，用心再险恶没有了。
English: It is not a benevolent disposition to look down on everyone who is rich, and to be subservient to everyone who is poor. It is a practice used by treacherous people to steal honor in a dark society. There is nothing more sinister than this.

古文：故曰：盗名不如盗货。
现代文：所以说： 欺世盜名的不如偷窃财物的。 
English: Therefore, he said, it is better to steal property than to deceive the world.

古文：田仲、史鰌不如盗也。
现代文：田仲、史鰌还不如个贼。
English: Tian Zhong and Shi Yan are not as good as a thief.

