古文：官府受錢者，千錢一畚，以丞、令印印。
现代文：官府收入银币，以一千钱装为一畚，用其令、丞的印封缄。
English: Government revenue silver coins, with a thousand money loaded as a hoe, with its order, the seal of the hoe.

古文：不盈千者，亦封印之。
现代文：钱数不满一千的，也应封缄。
English: If the amount of money is less than one thousand, it should also be sealed.

古文：錢善不善，雜實之。
现代文：钱质好的和不好的，应装在一起。
English: Good money and bad money should be kept together.

古文：出錢，獻封丞、令，乃發用之。
现代文：出钱时，要把印封呈献令，丞验视，然后启封使用。
English: When withdrawing money, the seal should be presented, inspected, and then opened for use.

古文：百姓市用錢，美惡雜之，勿敢異。
现代文：百姓在交易时使用钱币，质量好坏一起通用，不准选择。
English: People use coins in transactions, and the quality of coins is the same for both good and bad. They are not allowed to choose.

古文：布袤八尺，福廣二尺五寸。
现代文：布长八尺，幅宽二尺五寸。
English: The cloth is eight feet long and two feet five inches wide.

古文：布惡，其廣袤不如式者，不行。
现代文：布的质量不好，长宽不合标准的，不得流通。
English: If the quality of the cloth is not good and the length and width are not up to standard, it may not be distributed.

古文：錢十一當一布。
现代文：十一钱折合一布。
English: Eleven coins equal one cloth.

古文：其出入錢以當金、布，以律。
现代文：如出入钱来折合黄金或布，应按法律规定。
English: If money is exchanged for gold or cloth, it shall be done in accordance with the law.

古文：賈市居列者及官府之吏，毋敢擇行錢、布；擇行錢、布者，列伍長弗告，吏循之不謹，皆有罪。
现代文：市肆中的商买和官家府库的吏，都不准对钱和布两种货币有所选择；而列伍长不告发，吏检查不严，都有罪。
English: Merchants in the city and officials of the government treasury were not allowed to choose between money and cloth; and the head of the column did not report, officials did not check strictly, and they were all guilty.

古文：有買及買，各嬰其賈；小物不能各一錢者，勿嬰。
现代文：有所买卖，应分别系木签标明价格；小件物品每件值不到一钱的，不必系签。
English: If there is a transaction, the price should be separately marked with a wooden tag; if the value of each small item is less than one yuan, there is no need to tie a tag.

古文：官相輸者，以書告其出計之年，受者以入計之。
现代文：官府输送物品，应以文书通知其出账的年份，接受者按收到的时间记帐。
English: If the goods are transported by a government office, it shall notify the year of invoice in a document. The recipient shall invoice according to the time of receipt.

古文：八月、九月中其有輸，計其輸所遠近，不能逮其輸所之計，□□□□□□□移計其後年，計毋相繆。
现代文：如在八月、九月中输送，估计所运处所的距离，不能赶上所运处的结账，改计入下一年帐内，双方帐目不要矛盾。
English: If the delivery is made in August or mid-September, the distance of the place to be transported will be estimated, and if it cannot catch up with the checkout of the place to be transported, it will be transferred to the next year's account. The accounts of both parties should not conflict.

古文：工獻輸官者，皆深以其年計之。
现代文：工匠向官府上缴产品，都应固定按其产年计帐。
English: All products handed over by craftsmen to the government should be accounted for according to the year of production.

古文：都官有秩吏及離官嗇夫，養各一人，其佐、史與共養；十人，車牛一兩，見牛者一人。
现代文：都官的有秩吏及其分机构的啬夫，每人分配做饭的一人，他们的佐、史、他们一起使用；每十人，分配牛车一辆，看牛的一人。
English: The magistrates of the metropolis and their subordinate organizations are assigned one person to cook, and their assistants, historians, and they are used together; for every ten people, one cattle car is assigned, and one person is assigned to look after the cattle.

古文：都官之佐、史冗者，十人，養一人；十五人，車牛一兩，見牛者一人；不盈十人者，各與其官長共養、車牛，都官佐、史不盈十五人者，七人以上鼠車牛、僕，不盈七人者，三人以上鼠養一人；小官毋嗇夫者，以此鼠僕、車牛。
现代文：都官的佐、史人数多的，每十人分配作饭的一人；每十五人，分配牛车一辆，看牛的一人；不满十人的，各自与的官长共用做饭的和牛车。都官的佐、史不满十五人的，七人以上分配牛车和赶车的，不满七人的，三人以上分配做饭的一人；不设啬夫的小机构，按此标准配予赶车的牛车。
English: If there are a large number of officials and historians, one cook will be assigned to every ten people; if there are fifteen people, one ox cart will be assigned, and one person will look after the oxen; if there are less than ten people, they will share the cooking and the ox cart with the officials. If there are less than fifteen officials and historians, more than seven people will be assigned to the ox cart and the driving, and if there are less than seven people, more than three people will be assigned to the cooking; if there is no small organization, the ox cart will be assigned according to this standard.

古文：豤生者，食其母日粟一斗，旬五日而止之，別以之。
现代文：牛产仔困难，每天饲给母牛粮谷一斗，至十五天截止，分开喂养以备借出使用。
English: Cows have difficulty giving birth. Cows are fed a bucket of grain cereal every day until the 15th day. Cows are fed separately to prepare for loaning out.

古文：有責於公及貲、贖者居它縣，輒移居縣責之。
现代文：欠官府债和被判处赀、赎者住在另一县，应即发文书到所住的县，由该县索缴。
English: If a person who owes debts to the government and has been sentenced to fine or redemption lives in another county, he or she shall immediately send a document to the county where he or she lives, and the county shall collect the debt.

古文：公有責百姓未賞，亦移其縣，縣賞。
现代文：官府欠百姓债而未偿还，也应发文书给百姓所在的县，由该县偿还。
English: If the government owes debts to the people and has not repaid them, it shall also issue a document to the county where the people are located, and the county shall reimburse the debts.

古文：百姓公器及有責未賞，其日以收責之，而弗收責，其人死亡；及隸臣妾有亡公器、畜生者，以其日月其衣食，毋過三分取一，其所亡眾，計之，終歲衣食不以稍賞，令居之，其弗令居之，其人死亡，令其官嗇夫及吏主者代賞之。
现代文：百姓借用官府器物和负债未还，时间足够收回，而未加收回，该人死亡，令该官府啬夫和主管其事的吏代为赔偿。隶臣妾有丢失官府器物或牲畜的，应从丢失之日起按月扣除隶臣妾的衣食，但不能超过衣食的三分之一，若所丢失数多，算起来隶臣妾整年衣食还不够全部赔偿，应令隶臣妾居作，如果不令居作，该人死亡，令该官府啬夫和主管其事的吏代为赔偿。
English: If a commoner borrows government property and the debt is not repaid, there is enough time to recover it, but if the borrower does not recover it and the borrower dies, the miser of the government and the official in charge of the matter shall be compensated. If a vassal's concubine has lost government property or livestock, the clothing and food of the vassal's concubine shall be deducted on a monthly basis from the date of loss, but shall not exceed one-third of the clothing and food. If the number of losses is more than that, the clothing and food of the vassal's concubine for the whole year is not enough to

古文：縣、都官坐效、計以負賞者，已論，嗇夫即以其直錢分負其官長及冗吏，而人與參辨券，以效少內，少內以收責之。
现代文：县、都官在点验或会计中有罪而应赔偿者，经判处后，有关官府啬夫即将其应偿钱数分摊给其官长和吏，发给每人一份木券，以便向少内缴纳，少内凭券收取。
English: If a prefectural or city government official is found guilty in a point inspection or accounting and is liable for compensation, after being sentenced, the relevant bureaucrat will divide the amount of money he or she owes to his or her superiors and officials, and issue each person with a wooden coupon, so that he or she can pay it to the shao nai, and the shao nai can collect it with the coupon.

古文：其入贏者，亦官與辨券，入之。
现代文：如有盈余应上缴的，也由官府发给木券，以便上缴。
English: If there are surpluses to be handed over, the government will also issue wooden coupons for them to be handed over.

古文：其責毋敢隃歲，隃歲而弗入及不如令者，皆以律論之。
现代文：欠债不得超过当年，如超过当年仍不缴纳，以及不按法令规定缴纳的，均依法论处。
English: The debt owed must not exceed the current year. If the debt is not paid beyond the current year, or if it is not paid in accordance with the law, it will be dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：官嗇夫免，復為嗇夫，而坐其故官以貲賞及有它責，貧窶毋以賞者，稍其秩、月食以賞之，弗得居；其免，令以律居之。
现代文：机构的啬夫免职，以后又任啬夫，由于前任时间有罪应缴钱财赔偿，以及有其他债务，而因贫困无力偿还的，应分期扣除其俸禄和口粮作为赔偿，不得令他居作；尚未分担而死去，以及因有罪而被捕，应免去其所分担的一份。
English: If a miser in an organization is dismissed from his post and is later reappointed as a miser, he shall pay monetary compensation due to the guilt of his predecessor, as well as other debts, and if he is unable to repay them due to poverty, his salary and rations shall be deducted in installments as compensation, and he shall not be allowed to work; if he dies without sharing, and if he is arrested for guilt, he shall be exempted from his share.

古文：官嗇夫免，效其官而有不備者，令與其稗官分，如其事。吏坐官以負賞，未而死，及有罪以收，抉出其分。
现代文：如已分担而死去，以及为官府经营手工业而负债，或放牧官有牲畜而将牲畜杀死、丢失，尚未偿还及居作未完而死去，都可免除，不必责令其妻和同居者赔偿。
English: In the case of a death that has been apportioned, as well as a debt incurred for the operation of handicrafts by the government, or a herdsman who has livestock and kills the livestock, loses it, has not been repaid and dies before the work is completed, can be exempted, and his wife and cohabitant do not have to be ordered to compensate.

古文：縣、都官以七月糞公器不可繕者，有久識者靡之。
现代文：各县、都官在七月处理已经无法修理的官有器物，器物上有标识的应加磨除。
English: In July, prefectural and city officials will dispose of government-owned equipment that can no longer be repaired. If there is a mark on the equipment, it should be removed.

古文：其金及鐵器入以為銅。
现代文：铜器和器要上缴作为金属原料。
English: Copperware and utensils are to be handed over as metal raw materials.

古文：都官輸大內，內受買之，盡七月而觱。
现代文：都官所处理的器物应运交大内，由大内收取变卖，至七月底完事。
English: The goods handled by the prefectural government should be transported to the university, collected and sold by the university, and completed by the end of July.

古文：都官遠大內者輸縣，縣受買之。
现代文：都官距大内路远的运交给县，由县收取变卖。
English: If the goods are transported to a county that is far away from the inner city, the county will collect and sell the goods.

古文：糞其有物不可以須時，求先買，以書時謁其狀內史。
现代文：处理时如有物品不能拖延时间，要求先卖，应以文书将其情况及时报告内史。
English: If there are items that cannot be delayed during handling, and it is required to be sold first, the situation should be reported to the internal history in a timely manner.

古文：凡糞其不可買而可以為薪及蓋〈蘙〉者，用之；毋用，乃燔之。
现代文：所处理物品如无法变卖而可以作薪柴和盖障用的，仍应使用；无用的，始得烧毁。
English: If the treated items cannot be sold and can be used for firewood and covering obstacles, they should still be used; if they are useless, they must be burned.

古文：傳車、大車輪，葆繕參邪，可。
现代文：传车或大车的车输，可修理其歪斜不正处。
English: The carriage of a passing vehicle or a large vehicle can be repaired at the wrong place.

古文：韋革、紅器相補繕。
现代文：皮革或织物制造的物品，坏了可以互相修补。
English: Items made of leather or fabric can mend each other when broken.

古文：取不可葆繕者，乃糞之。
现代文：已经不能修理的，始得加以处理。
English: What can't be fixed has to be dealt with.

古文：受衣者，夏衣以四月盡六月稟之，冬衣以九月盡十一月稟之，過時者勿稟。
现代文：发放衣服的，夏衣从四月到六月底发给，冬衣从九月到十一月底发给，过期不领的不再发给。
English: For clothing distribution, summer clothing will be distributed from April to the end of June, winter clothing will be distributed from September to the end of November, and expired clothing will no longer be distributed.

古文：後計冬衣來年。
现代文：冬衣应记在下一年帐上。
English: Winter coats should be put on the next year's account.

古文：囚有寒者為褐衣。
现代文：囚犯寒冷可做褐衣。
English: Prisoners can wear brown coats in the cold.

古文：為布一，用枲三斤。
现代文：做布一条，用粗麻三斤。
English: Make a cloth, and make it out of three catties of fine linen.

古文：為褐以稟衣；大褐一，用枲十八斤，直六十錢；中褐一，用枲十四斤，直六錢；小褐一，用枲十一斤，直卅六錢。
现代文：做发放用的褐衣：大褐衣一件，用粗麻十八斤，值六十钱；中褐衣一件，用粗麻十四折，值四十六钱；小褐衣一件，用粗麻十一斤，值三十六钱。
English: The brown cloth for distribution: a large brown cloth, made of 18 pounds of coarse hemp, worth 60 dollars; a medium brown cloth, made of 14 pounds of coarse hemp, worth 46 dollars; a small brown cloth, made of 11 pounds of coarse hemp, worth 36 dollars.

古文：已稟衣，有餘褐十以上，輸大內，與計偕。
现代文：发放过衣服以后，剩余褐衣十件以上，应送交大内，与每年的帐簿同时缴送。
English: After the clothes have been distributed, more than ten leftover brown clothes should be sent to the university, and sent at the same time as the annual account book.

古文：都官有用□□□□其官，隸臣妾、舂城旦毋用。
现代文：都官有用其官，隶臣妾、舂城旦不得用。
English: A magistrate may use his officials, but subordinates, concubines, and vassals may not.

古文：在咸陽者致其衣大內，在它縣者致衣從事之縣。
现代文：在咸阳服役的，凭券向大内领衣；在其他县服役的，凭券向所在的县领衣。
English: Those who served in Xianyang will receive a large inner collar with a voucher; those who served in other counties will receive a county collar with a voucher.

古文：縣、大內皆聽其官致，以律稟衣。
现代文：县或大内都按照其所属机构所发的券，依法律规定发给衣服。
English: In accordance with the vouchers issued by their affiliated institutions, both counties and universities distribute clothes in accordance with the law.

古文：稟衣者，隸臣、府隸之毋妻者及城旦，冬人百一十錢，夏五十五錢；其小者冬七十七錢，夏四錢。
现代文：领取衣服的，隶臣、府隶中没有妻的以及城旦，冬季每人缴一百一十钱，夏季五十五钱；其中属于小的，冬季七十七钱，夏季四十四钱。
English: Those who receive clothes, including subordinates, subordinates without wives, and townspeople, pay 110 yuan per person in winter and 55 yuan in summer; those who are small, pay 77 yuan in winter and 44 yuan in summer.

古文：舂冬人五十五錢，夏四錢；其小者冬四錢，夏卅三錢。隸臣妾之老及小不能自衣者，如舂衣。
现代文：春，冬季每人缴五十五钱，夏季四十四钱；其中小的，冬季四十四钱，夏季三十三钱；隶臣妾属于老、小，不能自备衣服的，按春的标准给衣。
English: In spring, winter, and summer, each person should pay 55 yuan and 44 yuan, respectively; among them, the small ones should pay 44 yuan in winter and 33 yuan in summer. If the subordinates and concubines are old or small and cannot provide their own clothes, they should be clothed according to the spring standard.

古文：亡、不仁其主及官者，衣如隸臣妾。
现代文：逃亡或冒犯主人、官长的臣妾按隶臣的标准给衣。
English: If a retainer or concubine ran away or offended their master or government official, they would be dressed according to the standards of a vassal.

