古文：惠公未至，蛾析谓庆郑曰： 君之止，子之罪也。
现代文：晋惠公还没有回到晋国时，蛾析对庆郑说： 国君被秦俘获，是你的罪过。
English: When Jin Huigong had not yet returned to Jin, Mo Xie said to Qing Zheng: It is your fault that the sovereign was captured by Qin.

古文：今君将来，子何俟？ 
现代文：现在国君就要回来了，你还等待什么？ 
English: Now that the sovereign is returning, what are you waiting for?

古文：庆郑曰： 郑也闻之曰： 军败，死之；将止，死之。 
现代文：庆郑说： 我听说： 军队溃败了，应该为之而死。主将被俘，也应为之而死。 
English: Qing Zheng said, "I have heard that if the army is defeated, one should die for it. If the Lord is captured, one should also die for it."

古文：二者不行，又重之以误人，而丧其君，有大罪三，将安适？
现代文：这两样我没有做到，又加上误了别人救国君的机会，致使国君被俘，有这样三条大罪，还能逃到哪里去？
English: I didn't do these two things, plus I missed the opportunity for others to save the sovereign, resulting in the sovereign's capture. With these three major sins, where can I escape to?

古文：君若来，将待刑以快君志；君若不来，将独伐秦。
现代文：国君如果能回来，我准备等待受刑，好让国君感到痛快；国君如果回不来，我将独自率兵讨伐秦国。
English: If he can come back, I am ready to wait for the punishment to make him feel happy; if he can't come back, I will lead my own troops to fight against Qin.

古文：不得君，必死之。
现代文：不救回国君，便把命豁上。
English: If you don't save the sovereign, you risk your life.

古文：此所以待也。
现代文：这就是我等待的原因。
English: That's why I'm waiting.

古文：臣得其志，而使君瞢，是犯也。
现代文：我若逃走而遂了私意，会使国君不高兴，这是背逆的行为。
English: If I ran away and did what I wanted, it would displease the sovereign, which is a traitorous act.

古文：君行犯，犹失其国，而况臣乎？ 
现代文：国君的行为背逆，尚且会失去国家，何况做臣子的呢？ 
English: If a sovereign acts treacherously, he will lose his country. How much more so if he is a subject?

古文：公至于绛郊，闻庆郑止，使家仆徒召之，曰： 郑也有罪，犹在乎？ 
现代文：晋惠公到了国都郊外，听说庆郑被捕，就命家仆徒把他召来，问道： 你有罪，还留在都城干什么？ 
English: When Jin Huigong arrived on the outskirts of the capital and heard that Qing Zheng had been arrested, he ordered his servants to summon him and asked: You are guilty, why are you still in the capital?

古文：庆郑曰： 臣怨君始入而报德，不降；降而听谏，不战；战而用良，不败。
现代文：庆郑说： 我怨恨国君，当初你要是回国时就报答秦国的恩德，不至于使国势下降；国势下降后要是能听取劝谏，也不至于发生战争；战争发生要是能选用良将，也不至于失败。
English: Qing Zheng said: I resent the sovereign. If you had returned to China at the beginning, you would have repaid the kindness of the Qin State and would not have reduced the national strength; if you could listen to advice after the decline of the national strength, there would be no war; if you could choose a good general in the event of a war, you would not fail.

古文：既败而诛，又失有罪，不可以封国。
现代文：已经战败就要处死有罪的人，如对有罪的人不能伏法，还怎么守卫国家疆土？
English: If the guilty cannot be punished, how can the country's territory be defended?

古文：臣是以待即刑，以成君政。 
现代文：我因此等待就刑，以成全国君的政令。 
English: Therefore, I am waiting for my sentence to be carried out so that I can become the ruler of the whole country.

古文：君曰： 刑之！ 
现代文：惠公说： 杀了他。 
English: Huigong said, "Kill him."

古文：庆郑曰： 下有直言，臣之行也；上有直刑，君之明也。
现代文：庆郑说： 臣下直言劝谏，是臣子的行为准则；君上刑杀得当，是国君的圣明表现。
English: Qing Zheng said: It is the code of conduct for a vassal to advise a vassal directly; it is a sacred act for a sovereign to kill a vassal properly.

古文：臣行君明，国之利也。
现代文：臣子尽责而国君圣明，是国家的利益所在。
English: The interests of the country lie in the fact that the vassals do their duty and the sovereign is sacred.

古文：君虽弗刑，必自杀也。 
现代文：国君即使不杀我，我也一定要自杀的。 
English: Even if the Emperor does not kill me, I will definitely commit suicide.

古文：蛾析曰： 臣闻奔刑之臣，不若赦之以报仇。
现代文：蛾析说： 我听说对主动认罪接受刑罚的臣子，不如赦免他，用他来报仇。
English: Moth Analysis said: I have heard that it is better to pardon a vassal who has voluntarily pleaded guilty and accepted punishment, and use him to take revenge.

古文：君盍赦之，以报于秦？ 
现代文：国君何不赦免庆郑，叫他去报秦的仇呢？ 
English: Why doesn't the sovereign pardon Qing Zheng and tell him to avenge Qin?

古文：梁由靡曰： 不可。
现代文：梁由靡说： 不可以。
English: Liang Yumai said, "No."

古文：我能行之，秦岂不能？
现代文：晋国这样做了，难道秦国就不能？
English: If Jin did it, can't Qin?

古文：且战不胜，而报之以贼，不武；出战不克，入处不安，不智；成而反之，不信；失刑乱政，不威。
现代文：况且交战不胜，而用不正当的手段去报仇，不能算勇武；出战不利，回国后又要惹出麻烦，不能算明智；与秦国讲和之后又背弃诺言，不能算诚信；失去刑法乱了国政，不能算威严。
English: Moreover, it cannot be regarded as bravery if one does not win a battle, but takes revenge by improper means; it cannot be regarded as wisdom if one does not win a battle, but causes trouble after returning home; it cannot be regarded as honesty if one reneges on a promise after making peace with Qin; it cannot be regarded as majesty if the loss of the criminal law disrupts national politics.

古文：出不能用，入不能治，败国且杀孺子，不若刑之。 
现代文：若这样做了，对外不能胜敌，对内不能治国，将会败坏国家，而且太子也会被害，不如杀了庆郑。 
English: If you do this, you will not be able to defeat the enemy abroad, you will not be able to govern the country at home, you will corrupt the country, and the prince will also be harmed. It is better to kill Qing Zheng.

古文：君曰： 斩郑，无使自杀。 
现代文：惠公说： 杀了庆郑，不能让他自杀！ 
English: Huigong said, "You killed Qing Zheng, you can't let him commit suicide!"

古文：家仆徒曰： 有君不忌，有臣死刑，其闻贤于刑之。 
现代文：家仆徒说： 当国君的不计较前嫌，当臣子的甘愿死于刑戮，这样的名声要比杀了庆郑更好。 
English: The manservant said, "When a prince does not care about the past, when a courtier is willing to die by torture, such a reputation is better than killing Qing Zheng."

古文：梁由靡曰： 夫君政刑，是以治民。
现代文：梁由靡说： 国君的政令刑法，是用来治理百姓的。
English: Liang Yumai said: The political and criminal laws of the sovereign are used to govern the people.

古文：不闻命而擅进退，犯政也；快意而丧君，犯刑也。
现代文：不听命令而擅自进退，就是触犯政令；幸灾乐祸而使国君被俘，就是触犯刑法。
English: To retreat without orders is to violate a government order; to take pleasure in the capture of the sovereign is to violate the criminal law.

古文：郑也贼而乱国，不可失也！
现代文：庆郑伤害和扰乱了国家，不能让他逍遥法外！
English: Qing Zheng has harmed and disturbed the country, he cannot be allowed to go unpunished!

古文：且战而自退，退而自杀；臣得其志，君失其刑，后不可用也。 
现代文：再说临战而自退，败退而自杀，臣下可以随心所欲，国君却失去了刑法的威严，以后又怎么用人作战。 
English: Furthermore, it is said that a vassal can do as he pleases, but a sovereign has lost the majesty of criminal law. How can he use people to fight in the future?

古文：君令司马说刑之。
现代文：于是惠公命司马说执刑。
English: So Huigong ordered Sima to carry out the sentence.

古文：司马说进三军之士而数庆郑曰： 夫韩之誓曰：失次犯令，死；将止不面夷，死；伪言误众，死。
现代文：司马说召来三军兵士，当众列举庆郑的罪状说： 韩原之战前全军宣过誓，扰乱军阵违抗军令的，处死；主将被俘，部下脸上不挂彩的，处死，散布谣言动摇军心的，处死。
English: Sima said that soldiers from the three armies were summoned and publicly listed the charges against Qing Zheng, saying: Before the Battle of Hanwon, the entire army swore an oath that those who disrupted the army line and defied military orders would be put to death; the leader would be taken prisoner, those who did not wear a badge on the face of their subordinates would be put to death, and those who spread rumors to shake the army's spirit would be put to death.

古文：今郑失次犯令，而罪一也；郑擅进退，而罪二也；女误梁由靡，使失秦公，而罪三也；君亲止，女不面夷，而罪四也：郑也就刑！ 
现代文：现在庆郑扰乱军阵违抗军令，这是第一项罪；擅自进退，这是第二项罪；耽误梁由靡而放跑了秦君，这是第三项罪；国君被俘，你不割破面颊，这是第四项罪；庆郑，你就刑吧！ 
English: Now, Qing Zheng disrupted the army formation and defied the military order, which is the first crime; advancing and retreating without authorization, which is the second crime; delaying Liang Yimai and letting Qin Jun run away, which is the third crime; the king was captured, but you didn't cut his cheek, which is the fourth crime; Qing Zheng, you should be punished!

古文：庆郑曰： 说！
现代文：庆郑说： 司马说！
English: Qing Zheng said: Sima said it!

古文：三军之士皆在，有人能坐待刑，而不能面夷？
现代文：三军兵士都在这里，我能坐着等待就刑，难道还怕脸上挂彩吗？
English: The soldiers of the three armies are all here. Can I sit and wait for my sentence to be carried out, or am I still afraid of getting a mark on my face?

古文：趣行事乎！ 
现代文：赶快用刑吧！ 
English: Hurry up with the punishment!

古文：丁丑，斩庆郑，乃入绛。
现代文：丁丑这天，庆郑被斩首，然后惠公才进入国都绛城。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, Qing Zheng was beheaded, and then Hui Gongcai entered the national capital, Handan.

古文：十五年，惠公卒，怀公立，秦乃召重耳于楚而纳之。
现代文：晋惠公在执政的第十五年上故世，晋怀公继位，秦人于是从楚国接来重耳。
English: Jin Huigong died in the fifteenth year of his reign, and Jin Huigong succeeded to the throne. Qin people then took over the throne from Chu.

古文：晋人杀怀公于高梁，而授重耳，实为文公。
现代文：晋人在高梁杀了怀公，把君位授与重耳，这就是晋文公。
English: The Jin people killed Huai Gong in Gaoliang and conferred the title of king on Chonglu, which is Jinwen Gong.

