古文：李夫人病笃，上自临候之。
现代文：原文
English: Original text from

古文：夫人蒙被谢曰： 妾久寝病，形貌毁坏，不可以见帝，愿以王及兄弟为托。 
现代文：李夫人病势危急之时，汉武帝亲自来探病，李夫人听说皇帝来了，赶紧用被子蒙住脸说： 臣妾生病期间，形容憔悴，不敢见皇上，只希望将臣妾儿子昌邑哀王以及臣妾兄弟托付给皇上。 
English: When Mrs. Li was critically ill, Emperor Hanwu himself came to check on her. When Mrs. Li heard that the emperor was coming, she quickly covered her face with a quilt and said, "During the illness of my vassal and concubine, I am so embarrassed that I dare not see the emperor. I only hope to entrust my vassal and concubine's son, Prince Changyi and his brother, to the emperor."

古文：李生昌邑哀王。上曰： 夫人病甚，殆将不起，属托王及兄弟，岂不快哉! 
现代文：武帝说： 夫人既然病重，快要不行了，当面托付昌邑王和兄弟，那样不是更好吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Since my wife is seriously ill and about to die, wouldn't it be better to entrust King Changyi and his brother to me in person?

古文：夫人曰： 妇人貌不修饰，不见君父，妾不敢以燕媠见帝。 
现代文：夫人说： 女人不修饰容貌，不能见君主和父亲。臣妾没有修饰装扮，不能见皇上。 
English: His wife said, "A woman who does not beautify her appearance cannot meet the sovereign and her father. A vassal and concubine cannot meet the emperor without beautifying their appearance."

古文：上曰： 夫人第一见我，将加赐千金，而予兄弟尊官。 
现代文：武帝说： 只要夫人肯见朕一面，朕立即赐予千金，封夫人的兄弟高官厚爵。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "As long as my wife is willing to see me, I will immediately give her a thousand gold coins and make her brother, a high-ranking official, a knight."

古文：夫人曰： 尊官在帝，不在一见。 
现代文：夫人说： 封官是陛下的恩典，和见面没有关系。 
English: His wife said, "His Majesty's grace is the reason why he was appointed to the post, and it has nothing to do with the meeting.

古文：上复言，必欲见之，夫人遂转向嘘唏而不复言。
现代文：武帝仍然坚持要见一面，可是李夫人索性转身向内，抽抽噎噎地哭了起来，汉武帝十分不高兴地离开了。
English: Emperor Wu still insisted on seeing her, but Lady Li simply turned inward and began to cry convulsively. Emperor Han left in a very unhappy mood.

古文：于是上不悦而起，夫人姊妹让之曰： 贵人独不可一见上，属托兄弟耶？
现代文：夫人的姊妹纷纷埋怨说： 你为什么就不肯见皇上最后一面，托付自己的兄弟呢？
English: The lady's sisters complained one after another, saying: "Why did you not want to see the Emperor's last face, and entrust your brother?

古文：何为恨上如此？ 
现代文：为什么要让皇上怨恨呢？ 
English: Why should the Emperor hold a grudge?

古文：夫人曰： 夫以色事人者，李夫人色衰而爱弛，爱弛则恩绝，上所以恋恋我者，以平生容貌故。
现代文：夫人说： 以容貌侍奉君王的人，一旦容貌衰老，对方的爱意也会随之衰退；爱意一旦消退，那么恩情也就要断绝了。
English: His wife said, "He who serves the king by his looks, if his looks grow old, his love will also grow old, and if his love grows old, his favor will also grow old."

古文：今日我毁坏，必畏恶吐弃我，尚肯复追思闵录其兄弟哉？
现代文：皇上之所以对我还恋恋不舍，就是因为贪恋我往昔的美貌，如果今天看到我憔悴的样子，一定会失望厌恶的，还怎么肯以往日的恩情照顾我的兄弟呢。
English: The reason why the Emperor is still in love with me is because he is greedy for my past beauty. If he saw my emaciated appearance today, he would surely be disappointed and disgusted. How could he take care of my brother with the kindness of the past?

古文：所以不欲见帝者，乃欲以深托兄弟也。 
现代文：我之所以不肯见皇上，正是为了要托付自己的兄弟啊。 
English: The reason why I did not want to see the Emperor was to entrust my brother.

古文：及夫人卒，上思念不已。
现代文：不久李夫人死了，武帝对她果然是思念不已。
English: Soon after, Mrs. Li died, and Emperor Wu really missed her.

