古文：贺齐字公苗，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：贺齐传，贺齐，字公苗，会稽郡山阴县人。
English: He Qi Chuan, He Qi, surnamed Gong Miao, was from Shanyin County, Heji County.

古文：少为郡吏，守剡长。
现代文：他年轻时为郡吏，署理过郯县县长。
English: When he was young, he was a county official, acting for the county governor of Handan County.

古文：县吏斯从轻侠为奸，齐欲治之。主簿谏曰： 从，县大族，山越所附，今日治之，明日寇至。 
现代文：县吏有叫斯从的人轻薄放荡、为非作歹，贺齐想惩治他，但县主簿劝他说： 斯从，郯县豪门大族，山越人都附从他，您今天惩治了他，明天贼寇就会前来进犯。 
English: He Qi wanted to punish him, but the county's chief accountant advised him: "Szong, the great families of Shixian County and the people of Shan Yue all follow him. If you punish him today, the bandits will come to attack tomorrow.

古文：齐闻大怒，便立斩众。
现代文：贺齐闻言大怒，当即就斩杀了斯从。
English: Hearing this, He Qi flew into a rage and immediately killed Shizong.

古文：从族党遂相纠合，众千余人，举兵攻县。
现代文：斯从的族人党羽便相互纠集联合，聚众千余人，举兵进攻县城。
English: The party members of the people of Shizong then gathered together and united with each other, gathered more than a thousand people, and raised an army to attack the county seat.

古文：齐率吏民，开城门突击，大破之，威震山越。
现代文：贺齐率领官吏百姓，打开城门发起突然进击，大获全胜，威震山越。
English: He Qi led the officials and commoners, opened the city gate and launched a sudden attack, won a complete victory, and swept the mountains.

古文：后太末、丰浦民反，转守太末长，诛恶养善，期用尽平。
现代文：后来太末、丰浦县的百姓造，贺齐转任为太末县县长，诛杀恶徒扶持良民，一个月内便将骚乱全部平定。
English: Later, He Qi, the people's son of the last emperor and Fengpu County, was transferred to the post of the governor of the last emperor's county. He fought the villains and supported the good people, and the riots were all quelled within a month.

古文：建安元年，孙策临郡，察齐孝廉。
现代文：建安元年，孙策来到会稽郡，察举贺齐为孝廉。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Sun Ce came to Hui County and inspected He Qi as a filial son.

古文：时王朗奔东冶，侯官长商升为朗起兵。
现代文：当时王朗逃奔东冶，侯官县县长商升助王朗发兵反叛。
English: At that time, Wang Lang fled to Dongye, and the head of Houkan County, Shang Sheng, helped Wang Lang to rebel.

古文：策遣永宁长韩晏领南部都尉，将兵讨升，以齐为永宁长。
现代文：孙策派遣永宁县县长韩晏兼任南部都尉，带兵讨伐商升，以贺齐为永宁县县长。
English: Sun Ce dispatched the governor of Yongning County, Han Qi, who also served as the governor of the southern part of the county. He led the troops to fight against the merchants, and He Qi became the governor of Yongning County.

古文：晏为升所败，齐又代晏领都尉事。
现代文：韩晏被商升所击败，贺齐又替代韩晏兼任都尉职事。
English: Han Zheng was defeated by Shang Sheng, and He Qi also replaced Han Zheng as captain.

古文：升畏齐威名，遣使乞盟。
现代文：商升畏惧贺齐的威名，派人前来请求订立盟约。
English: Shang Sheng was afraid of He Qi's prestige and sent someone to request the conclusion of a treaty.

古文：齐因告喻，为陈祸福，升遂送上印绶，出舍求降。
现代文：贺齐因此告谕商升，向他陈述祸福利害关系，商升于是送上印绶，走出府邸请求投降。
English: He Qi therefore summoned Shang Sheng and explained to him the relationship between disaster and welfare. Shang Sheng then sent the seal and went out of the mansion to request surrender.

古文：贼帅张雅、詹强等不愿升降，反共杀升，雅称无上将军，强称会稽太守。
现代文：叛军头领张雅、詹强等人不愿商升投降，反而一起杀死商升，张雅自称无上将军，詹强自称会稽太守。
English: The rebel leaders Zhang Ya, Zhan Qiang and others did not want Shang Shang to surrender, but instead killed him together. Zhang Ya claimed to be the supreme general, and Zhan Qiang claimed to be the auditor general.

古文：贼盛兵少，未足以讨，齐住军息兵。
现代文：叛军人多而贺齐兵少，无力前往征讨，于是贺齐驻军休息。
English: There were many rebel soldiers, but few Heqi soldiers, and they were unable to go to collect, so the Heqi garrison rested.

古文：雅与女婿何雄争势两乖，齐令越人因事交构。遂至疑隙，阻兵相图。
现代文：张雅与他的女婿何雄两人争夺权势不相和睦，贺齐便令山越人借故让他们结怨，使他们猜忌对立，各自拥兵图谋对方。
English: Zhang Ya and his son-in-law He Xiong were at odds with each other in their struggle for power, and He Qi made the people of Shan Yue hold grudges against each other, causing them to be suspicious of each other, and to plot against each other.

古文：齐乃进讨，一战大破雅，强党震惧，率众出降。
现代文：贺齐于是领兵进讨，一仗就大败张雅，詹强党羽震慑恐惧，率众出来投降。
English: He Qi then led the troops into the discussion, Zhang Ya was defeated in one battle, Zhan Qiang shook off the fear and led the crowd to surrender.

古文：侯官既平。而建安、汉兴、南平复乱，齐进兵建安，立都尉府，是岁八年也。
现代文：候官县被平定，而建安、汉兴、南平又乱起来，贺齐进兵建安，设置都尉府。这一年为建安八年。
English: Xuanguan County was pacified, but Jian'an, Hanxing and Nanping were again in turmoil. He Qi marched into Jian'an and set up a prefectural government. This year was the eighth year of Jian'an.

古文：郡发属县五千兵，各使本县长将之，皆受齐节度。
现代文：郡府征调所属各县五千兵卒，让本县县长带领自己县内军队，统一归属贺齐调度指挥。
English: The county government conscripted and transferred five thousand soldiers from each county to which it belonged, and let the county governor lead his own army in the county, which belonged to the Hechi dispatching command.

古文：贼洪明、洪进、苑御、吴免、华当等五人，率各万户，连屯汉兴，吴五六千户别屯大潭。邹临六千户别屯盖竹，大潭同出馀汗。
现代文：贼寇洪明、洪进、苑御、吴免、华当等五人，率领各自部属一万户，兵营相连驻扎在汉兴，吴五的六千户人马另驻扎在大潭，邹临的六千户人马另驻扎在盖竹，共同出兵余汗。
English: The five thieves, Hong Ming, Hong Jin, Yuan Gu, Wu Meng, and Huadong, led ten thousand households belonging to their respective departments, and the barracks were stationed in Hanxing, the six thousand households of Wu Wu were stationed in Datan, and the six thousand households that came were stationed in Gaizhu, and the soldiers were dispatched together.

古文：军讨汉兴，经馀汗。
现代文：贺齐军队讨伐汉兴，经过余汗。
English: The Heqi army fought against Han Xing, and after some sweat, they won.

古文：齐以为贼众兵少，深入无继，恐为所断，令松阳长丁蕃留备余汗。
现代文：贺齐考虑到贼兵势众而自己军队兵力弱小，深入敌境无以为继，担心为敌人所截断，于是命令松阳县县长丁蕃留守余汗。
English: He Qi took into account the large number of thieves and soldiers and the weak strength of his own army, it was unsustainable to go deep into the enemy territory, and he was afraid of being cut off by the enemy, so he ordered the county governor of Songyang County, Ding Qi, to stay behind.

古文：蕃本与齐邻城，耻见部伍，辞不肯留。
现代文：丁蕃本来与贺齐为相邻两县的县长，耻于成为贺齐所统辖的部下，便推辞不肯留守。
English: Ding Xi, who was originally the head of the two neighboring counties with He Qi, was ashamed to become a subordinate under the jurisdiction of He Qi, and refused to stay behind.

古文：齐乃斩蕃，于是军中震栗。无不用命。
现代文：贺齐于是斩杀丁蕃，由是全军震动，无人不敢不效命听用。
English: He Qi then killed Ding Xi, which shook the whole army, and no one dared to disobey his orders.

古文：遂分兵留备，进讨明等，连大破之。
现代文：于是贺齐分兵留备余汗，自己亲率大军讨伐洪明等人，连获大胜。
English: As a result, He Qi's detachment kept the remaining sweat, and he led his own army to fight against Hongming and others, and won a great victory.

古文：临陈斩明，其免、当、进、御皆降。
现代文：贺齐临阵斩杀洪明，其余吴免、华当、洪进、苑御都向贺齐投降。
English: He Qi attacked and killed Hong Ming, and the remaining Wu Min, Huadang, Hong Jin, and Yuan Yu all surrendered to He Qi.

古文：转击盖竹，军向大潭，三将又降。
现代文：贺齐转而进击盖竹，挺军大潭，吴五、邹临二将又降。
English: He Qi turned to attack Gaizhu, advanced the army to Datan, Wu V and Xing Lin II will rise and fall.

古文：凡讨治斩首六千级，名帅尽擒。复立县邑，料出兵万人，拜为平东校尉。
现代文：在讨伐进击中共斩首六千名，有名的贼首全部擒获，贺齐又重整县城，选出精兵一万人，被升任为平东校尉。
English: In the crusade and attack, a total of six thousand people were beheaded, and all the famous thieves' heads were captured. Hechi also reorganized the county seat, selected ten thousand elite soldiers, and was promoted to Pingdong lieutenant.

古文：十年，转讨上饶，分以为建平县。
现代文：建安十年，贺齐转而征讨上饶，分析上饶另置建平县。
English: In the 10th year of Jian'an, He Qi turned to collecting Shangrao, and analyzed Shangrao and set up Jianping County.

古文：十三年，迁威武中郎将，讨丹阳黟、歙。
现代文：建安十三年，贺齐升为威武中郎将，征讨丹阳的黟县、歙县。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jian'an, He Qi was promoted to the middle commander of Weiwu, and led the conquest of Danyang's Jixian and Jixian.

古文：时武强、叶乡、东阳、丰浦四乡先降，齐表言以叶乡为始新县。
现代文：当时武强、叶乡、东阳、丰浦四乡已先归降，贺齐上表改置叶乡为始新县。
English: At that time, Wuqiang, Ye Township, Dongyang and Fengpu four townships were the first to surrender, and Ye Township was changed to Shixin County in the table above.

古文：而歙贼帅金奇万户屯安勒山，毛甘万户屯乌聊山，黟帅陈仆，祖山等二万户屯林历山。
现代文：而歙县贼寇首领金奇驻兵万户安勒山，毛甘驻兵万户乌聊山，黟县贼寇首领陈仆、祖山等驻兵二万户林历山。
English: However, Jinqi, the leader of the bandits in Handan County, garrisoned ten thousand households in Anle Mountain, Mao Gan garrisoned ten thousand households in Wulaishan, and the leaders of the bandits in Handan County, such as Chen Bu and Zu Shan, garrisoned twenty thousand households in Linlishan.

古文：林历山四面壁立，高数十丈，径路危狭，不容刀楯，贼临高下石，不可得攻。
现代文：林历山四面峭壁耸立，高几十丈，山径危险狭隘，不能施展刀盾，贼兵居高临下推滚石块，根本无法进攻。
English: The cliffs on all sides of Linlishan Mountain are dozens of meters high, the mountain paths are dangerously narrow, and it is impossible to wield swords and shields. The robber soldiers stand high and push down the rolling stones, and they cannot attack at all.

古文：军住经日，将吏患之。
现代文：军队驻守山下多日，将吏都很着急。
English: The army had been garrisoned below the mountain for several days, and the generals were very anxious.

古文：齐身出周行，观视形便，阴募轻捷士，为作铁弋，密于隐险贼所不备处，以戈拓斩山为缘道，夜令潜上，乃多县布以援下人，得上百数人，四面流布，俱鸣鼓角，齐勒兵待之。
现代文：贺齐亲自出行山间，观察地形路势，暗中募集行动敏捷的兵士，为他们打造铁弋，悄悄隐蔽在贼兵不防备的地方，用铁弋凿挖山壁形成可以攀缘的小径，夜里命令兵士偷偷地爬上去，又垂下很多布带让下边的人攀登上去，一共上去百多人，四散布置，一齐擂鼓吹号，贺齐又部署大部队在山下等待。
English: He Qi personally traveled to the mountains, observed the terrain and road conditions, secretly recruited soldiers who were agile in action, built a raft for them, quietly concealed in places where the thieves were not prepared, and used the raft to dig the mountain wall to form a path that could be climbed. At night, he ordered the soldiers to secretly climb up, and hung down a lot of cloth to let the people below climb up. A total of more than a hundred people went up, spread out, and shouted and trumpeted together. He Qi also deployed a large force to wait under the mountain.

古文：贼夜闻鼓声四合，谓大军悉已得上，惊惧惑乱，不知所为，守路备险者，皆走还依众。
现代文：贼众夜里听到鼓角之声四面响起，以为贺齐的大军已全部打上了山，惊慌失措，不知如何是好。那些防守险要路口的人，也都逃回山中大寨。
English: The thieves heard the sound of drums and horns in the night and thought that He Qi's army had all reached the mountain. They panicked and did not know what to do. Those who were defending the dangerous intersection also fled back to Dazhai in the mountains.

古文：大军因是得上，大破仆等，其余皆降，凡斩首七千。
现代文：贺齐的大部队因此才得以上山，大败陈仆等人，其余贼寇全部投降，总共斩杀敌人七千。
English: As a result, Hechi's large army was able to go up the mountain, defeat Chen Huan and others, and the remaining bandits all surrendered, killing a total of seven thousand enemies.

古文：齐复表分歙为新定；黎阳、休阳。并黟、歙凡六县。权遂割为新都郡，齐为太守，立府于始新，加偏将军。
现代文：贺齐再次上表分析歙县为新定、黎阳、休阳三县，连同黟、歙共六县，孙权于是分出六县为新都郡，以贺齐为郡太守，郡治所在始新县，加授贺齐为偏将军。
English: Once again, He Qi analyzed the table and found that the three counties of Handan County were Xinding, Liyang and Xuyang, and together with Handan and Handan, there were a total of six counties. Sun Quan then divided the six counties into Xindu County, with He Qi as the governor of the county, the county seat was in Shixin County, and He Qi was awarded the title of partial general.

古文：十六年，吴郡余杭民郎稚合宗起贼，复数千人，齐出讨之。即复破稚，表言分余杭为临水县。
现代文：建安十六年，吴郡余杭县百姓郎稚纠集宗族叛乱作寇，随即又有数千人加入其中，贺齐出兵征讨，很快又大败郎稚，上表述说，分析余杭县加设临水县。
English: In the 16th year of Jian'an, the peasants of Yuhang County, Wuxi County rallied together to stage a clan rebellion, and thousands of people immediately joined them. He Qi sent troops to fight the rebels, but they were quickly defeated. According to the above description, the analysis of Yuhang County added Linshui County.

古文：被命诣所在，及当还郡，权出祖道，作乐舞象。赐齐軿车骏马，罢坐住驾，使齐就车。齐辞不敢，权使左右扶齐上车，令导吏卒兵骑，如在郡仪。
现代文：贺齐受命回往始新郡治所，待他将要起程返往时，孙权亲自出来为他饯行，奏乐舞蹈，孙权赐予贺齐车并车和骏马，结束宴席后让贺齐坐到自己的御车上，贺齐辞谢不敢坐，孙权叫左右将贺齐扶上车，令吏卒兵骑开道，就像自己在郡中举行仪式一样。
English: He Qi was ordered to go back to the New County Juvenile Detention Center. When he was about to leave and return, Sun Quan personally came out to walk for him, play music and dance. Sun Quan gave He Qi a car and a horse. After the banquet, He Qi sat on his own car. He Qi did not dare to sit down. Sun Quan called around to put He Qi on the car and let the officers and soldiers ride on the road, just like he held a ceremony in the county.

古文：权望之笑曰： 人当努力，非积行累勤，此不可得。 
现代文：孙权望着仪仗队笑着说： 人应努力奋斗，不积累艰辛勤奋的行为功绩，此种荣誉决不可得到。 
English: Looking at the honor guard, Sun Quan said with a smile: People should strive hard, without accumulating hard and diligent deeds, such an honor can never be obtained.

古文：去百余步乃旋。
现代文：车行百余步开外才转去。
English: I had to walk more than a hundred paces from the bus stop before I could turn around.

古文：十八年，豫章东部民彭材、李玉、王海等起为贼乱，众万余人。
现代文：建安十八年，豫章郡东部百姓彭材、李玉、王海等起兵作贼叛乱，聚众万余人。
English: In the 18th year of Jian'an, the people in the eastern part of Yuzhang County, including Peng Zai, Li Yu and Wang Hai, raised an army and rebelled, gathering more than ten thousand people.

古文：齐讨平之，诛其首恶，余皆降服。
现代文：贺齐讨伐平定，并诛杀首恶者，其余叛贼全部降服。
English: He Qi fought and pacified, and killed the chief villain, and the remaining traitors all surrendered.

古文：拣其精健为兵，次为县户。
现代文：贺齐挑选其中精健者加入自己的部队，差一些的就安置他们为本县编民。
English: Hechi selected the most capable among them to join his troops, and those who were less capable were placed as citizens of the county.

古文：迁奋武将军。
现代文：贺齐被升任为奋武将军。
English: He Qi was promoted to General Tengwu.

古文：二十年，从权征合肥。
现代文：建安二十年，贺齐跟随孙权征讨合肥。
English: Twenty years after the establishment of Jian'an, He Qi followed Sun Quan to conquer Hefei.

古文：时城中出战，徐盛被创失矛，齐引兵拒击，得盛所失。
现代文：城中守军出城交战时，徐盛被刺伤丢失了手中的长矛，贺齐领兵抗击敌军，抢回徐盛的兵器。
English: When the defenders of the city went out to fight, Xu Sheng was stabbed and lost his spear. He Qi led the troops to fight against the enemy and recapture Xu Sheng's weapon.

古文：二十一年，鄱阳民尤突受曹公印绶，化民为贼，陵阳、始安、泾县皆与突相应。
现代文：建安二十一年，鄱阳百姓尤突接受曹操所赐印绶，引导百姓作寇，陵阳、始安、泾县都与尤突相呼应。
English: In the 21st year of Jian'an, the people of Shenyang suddenly accepted the seal of Cao Cao to guide the people to make a raid. Lingyang, Shi'an, and Shixian all echoed the suddenness.

古文：齐与陆逊讨破突，斩首数千，余党震服，丹杨三县皆降，料得精兵八千人。
现代文：贺齐与陆逊征讨击败尤突，斩杀几千人，剩余贼众震慑归服，丹杨三县的寇贼全都投降，贺齐从中选择得精兵八千人。
English: He Qi and Lu Xun defeated and killed several thousand bandits, and the remaining bandits were shocked into submission. The bandits in the three counties of Danyang all surrendered, and He Qi selected eight thousand elite soldiers from them.

古文：拜安东将军，封山阴侯，出镇江上，督扶州以上至皖。
现代文：贺齐被授予安东将军，封爵山阴侯，出任镇守长江江面上的防护，督扶州以上直到皖城的水域。
English: He Qi was awarded the title of General Anton, knighted as the Prince of Shanyin, and served as the town guard of the Yangtze River, supervising the waters above Fuzhou and up to Fucheng.

古文：黄武初，魏使曹休来伐。齐以道远后至，因住新市为拒。
现代文：黄武初年，魏国派遣曹休征伐东吴，贺齐因路远而后到，便驻扎在新市抗击曹军。
English: In the first year of Huangwu, Wei dispatched Cao Xiu to conquer Dongwu. He Qi arrived later due to the long distance, and was stationed in Xincheng to resist Cao's army.

古文：会洞口诸军遭风流溺，所亡中分，将士失色，赖齐未济，偏军独全，诸将倚以为势。
现代文：时逢洞口各军因遭大风漂流沉溺，死亡兵卒占有一半人数，将士们都惊吓失色，幸亏贺齐的部队尚未渡江，故这支部队得以保全，诸将依赖他们才稳住了阵势。
English: At that time, all the troops in Dongkou were drifting and drowning due to the strong winds. The dead soldiers accounted for half of the number, and the soldiers were shocked and disgraced. Fortunately, Hechi's troops had not yet crossed the river, so this force was preserved, and the generals relied on them to stabilize the situation.

古文：齐性奢绮，尤好军事，兵甲器械极为精好，所乘船雕刻丹镂，青盖绛襜，干橹戈矛，葩爪文画，弓弩矢箭，咸取上材，蒙冲斗舰之属，望之若山。
现代文：贺齐生性奢侈华丽，尤其喜好军事，兵甲器械都极为精良漂亮，所乘的船只都雕镂彩饰，青色篷盖、绛色帷幔，桅杆、桨橹及兵器上都描绘花卉瓜果的纹彩，弓弩矢箭，都取材上料，蒙冲战舰前后连接，远望犹如连绵山峰。
English: He Qi was extravagant and gorgeous, especially fond of the military. The military equipment was extremely sophisticated and beautiful. The ships he sailed on were decorated with carvings, blue canopies, scarlet curtains, and the masts, oars, and weapons were decorated with flower and fruit patterns. The bows, arrows, and arrows were all made from materials. The warships were connected back and forth, and the view was like a continuous mountain range.

古文：休等惮之，遂引军还。
现代文：曹休等对此颇畏惧，于是引军退还。
English: Cao Xiu and others were quite afraid of this, so they withdrew their troops.

古文：迁后将军，假节领徐州牧。
现代文：贺齐被升任为后将军、假节，兼任徐州牧。
English: He Qi was promoted to the post of general, the holiday, and also served as the Xuzhou herdsman.

古文：初，晋宗为戏口将，以众叛如魏，还为蕲春太守，图袭安乐，取其保质。
现代文：起初，晋宗为戏口的守将，率领部众叛变到魏国，被派还为蕲春太守，图谋袭击安乐，想占取安乐作为投降魏国的 见面礼 。
English: At first, Jinzong was the mouthpiece of the play, leading the troops to rebel against Wei. He was also sent as the governor of Hunchun, plotting to attack Anle, and wanted to seize Anle as a gift for the surrender of Wei.

古文：权以为耻忿，因军初罢，六月盛夏、出其不意，诏齐督麋芳、鲜于丹等袭蕲春，遂生虏宗。
现代文：孙权对此深感耻辱忿恨，借着军队刚停战，于六月盛夏之日，出其不意，诏令贺齐督率麋芳、鲜于丹等部袭取蕲春，于是生擒晋宗。
English: Sun Quan was deeply humiliated and angry about this, and on the day of midsummer in June, just after the armistice, he ordered He Qi Guo, led by Yu Fang and Sheng Yu Dan, to attack Hunchun, thus giving birth to Yu Jin Zong.

古文：后四年卒，子达及弟景皆有令名，为佳将。
现代文：四年后，贺齐去世，他的儿子贺达和弟弟贺景都有良好声誉，为军中良将。
English: Four years later, He Qi passed away. His son, Heda, and his brother, He Jing, both had good reputations and were good generals in the army.

古文：全琮字子璜，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：全琮传，全琮，字子璜，吴郡钱塘县人。
English: He is a native of Qiantang County, Wuxi County.

古文：父柔，汉灵帝时举孝廉。
现代文：他的父亲全柔，汉灵帝时期被察举孝廉，补任尚书郎右丞。
English: His father, Zhen Rong, was given the title of Xiao Lian during the reign of Han Lingdi, and was later appointed as Shang Shuro Yu Rong.

古文：补尚书郎右丞，董卓之乱，弃官归。州辟别驾从事，诏书就拜会稽东部都尉。
现代文：董卓播乱时，他弃官归家，州府征召他为别驾从事，皇帝诏令就地授予他会稽郡东部都尉。
English: When Dong Zhuo incited a riot, he resigned from his post and returned home. The state government called him to work as a second driver, and the emperor's edict awarded him the post of the eastern captain of the county.

古文：孙策到吴，柔举兵先附，策表柔为丹杨都尉。
现代文：孙策进军吴地后，全柔率先带领部队归附，孙策上表授任他为丹杨都尉。
English: After Sun Ce marched into Wudi, Quan Rong took the lead in leading the troops to annexation, and Sun Ce was awarded the title of Lieutenant Danyang.

古文：孙权为车骑将军，以柔为长史，徙桂阳太守。
现代文：孙权为车骑将军，以全柔为长史，转任桂阳太守。
English: Sun Quan was the general of chariot and cavalry, with a long history of Quanzhou, and was transferred to the governor of Guiyang.

古文：柔尝使琮赍米数千斛到吴，有所市易。
现代文：全柔曾派全琮送米数千斛到吴郡，让他作些生意。
English: Quanzhou once sent Quanzhang to send thousands of cormorants of rice to Wuxian County for him to do some business.

古文：琮至，皆散用，空船而还。
现代文：全琮到吴地后，将米全部散发用尽，空船回到家里。
English: After arriving in Wudi, they exhausted all the rice and returned home empty-handed.

古文：柔大怒，琮顿首曰： 愚以所市非急，而士大夫方有倒县之患，故便振赡，不及启报。 
现代文：全柔气恼异常，全琮叩头说： 我自以为要买的东西并非急于要用之物，而士大夫们正面临生命倒悬之祸患，故此便以米赈济他们，一时来不及向您禀报。 
English: Jeonjo was extremely angry, and Jeonjo bowed his head and said, "What I thought I was going to buy was not something I was in a hurry to use, and the scholars and doctors are facing a life-threatening disaster, so I gave them rice. I can't wait to report to you."

古文：柔更以奇之。
现代文：全柔转而觉得他非同常人。
English: All of a sudden, he felt like a different person.

古文：是时中州士人避乱而南，依琮居者以百数，琮倾家给济，与共有无，遂显名远近。
现代文：其时中原地区士子躲避战乱前往南方，依靠附从全琮生活的有几百人，全琮倾尽家资周济供给他们，与他们共享有无，于是声名远播。
English: At that time, scholars in the Central Plains region fled to the south to escape the war, and there were several hundred people who depended on the life of Quanzhang. Quanzhang devoted all his family resources to provide for them, and shared with them, so his fame spread far and wide.

古文：后权以为奋威校尉，授兵数千人，使讨山越。
现代文：后来孙权任命他为奋威校尉，授与兵卒数千人，让他征讨山越。
English: Later, Sun Quan appointed him as the captain of Fenwei, awarded thousands of soldiers, and asked him to conquer Shan Yue.

古文：因开募召，得精兵万余人，出屯牛渚，稍迁偏将军。
现代文：全琮借机公开招募，得精兵一万多人，出军驻扎牛渚，渐升为偏将军。
English: Quanzhang took the opportunity to recruit openly, gained more than 10,000 elite soldiers, went to the army and stationed in Niuhuazhu, and gradually rose to the rank of general.

古文：建安二十四年，刘备将关羽围樊、襄阳，琮上疏陈羽可讨之计，权时已与吕蒙阴仪袭之，恐事泄，故寝琮表不答。
现代文：建安二十四年，刘备的将领关羽围攻樊城、襄阳，全琮上疏陈述可以攻打关羽的计策，当时孙权已经与吕蒙暗地商议袭击关羽，担心事情泄露，故此将全琮的上表置至一边不予答复。
English: In the 24th year of Jian'an, Liu Bei's general Guan Yu besieged Shicheng and Yangyang, and Quanzhang Shang So stated that it was possible to attack Guan Yu. At that time, Sun Quan had secretly discussed attacking Guan Yu with Lu Meng, fearing that the matter would be leaked, so he put Quanzhang's report to one side and did not reply.

古文：及禽羽，权置酒公安。顾谓琮曰： 君前陈此，孤虽不相答，今日之捷，抑亦君之功也。 
现代文：及至生擒关羽，孙权在公安置酒设宴，他回头对全琮说： 您以前陈述这一计策，我虽说没有答复，但今天的胜利，也有您的一份功劳。 
English: When he reached Zengqi Guanyu, Sun Quan was holding a banquet at the public wine house. He turned back to Quanzhang and said, "You have stated this strategy before, although I have no answer, but today's victory is also your achievement.

古文：于是封阳华亭侯。
现代文：于是封全琮阳华亭侯。
English: As a result, he was banished from Shinyang Huating.

古文：黄武元年，魏以舟军大出洞口，权使吕范督诸将拒之，军营相望。
现代文：黄武元年，魏国大举水军出兵洞口，孙权派吕范督率诸将抗击曹军，双方军营对峙相望。
English: In the first year of Huangwu, the Wei Dynasty sent a large number of naval troops to Dongkou, and Sun Quan sent Lu Fan and other generals to fight against Cao's army. The military camps of the two sides faced each other.

古文：敌数以轻船抄击，琮常带甲仗兵，伺候不休。
现代文：敌军数次用轻舟抄击，全琮常身着铠甲、手持兵器，一直观察防备。
English: The enemy used a light boat several times to snipe at them, and all of them were always wearing armor and armed with weapons. They were always on the alert.

古文：顷之，敌数千人出江中，琮击破之，枭其将军尹卢。
现代文：不久，敌军数千人出兵江中，全琮将他们击败，将他们的将军尹卢斩首。
English: Soon, thousands of enemy troops were dispatched to the middle of the river, and Quanzhang defeated them and beheaded their general, Yin Lu.

古文：迁琮绥南将军，进封钱唐侯。
现代文：孙权升全琮为绥南将军，晋封钱塘侯。
English: Sun Quan was promoted to be the general of Southern Fujian Province, and promoted to Qiantang County.

古文：四年，假节领九江太守。
现代文：黄武四年，全琮假节兼任九江太守。
English: In the fourth year of Huangwu, he also served as the governor of Jiujiang during the Spring Festival.

古文：七年，权到皖，使琮与辅国将军陆逊击曹休，破之于石亭。
现代文：黄武七年，孙权到皖城，派全琮与辅国将军陆逊一起进击曹休，在石亭将曹休打败。
English: In the seventh year of Huangwu, Sun Quan went to Shicheng and sent Quanzhang and the auxiliary general Lu Xun to attack Cao Xiu. They defeated Cao Xiu at Shiting.

古文：是时丹杨、吴、会山民复为寇贼，攻没属县，权分三郡险地为东安郡，琮领太守。
现代文：其时丹杨、吴、会稽的山民再次作乱为寇，攻陷三郡所辖县城，孙权分析三郡的险要地域另置东安郡，让全琮兼任郡太守。
English: At that time, Danyang, Wu and the mountain people of the audit committee once again made a disturbance and invaded the county seat under the jurisdiction of the three counties. Sun Quan analyzed the critical areas of the three counties and set up Dong'an County, and let Quanzhang also serve as the county governor.

古文：至，明赏罚。招诱降附，数年中，得万余人。
现代文：全琮到任明定赏罚，招诱贼寇前来归降，几年间，就得到一万多人。
English: Quanzhang Ren clearly set rewards and punishments, inviting thieves to come and surrender, and in a few years, he got more than ten thousand people.

古文：权召琮还牛渚，罢东安郡。
现代文：孙权征召全琮回到牛渚，撤除东安郡。
English: Sun Quan conscripted Quanzhang to return to Ushi-nagasaki and remove Dong'an County.

古文：黄龙元年，迁卫将军、左护军、徐州牧，尚公主。
现代文：黄龙元年，全琮升为卫将军、左护军、徐州牧，娶公主为妻。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Quanzhang rose to the rank of Wei general, left guard, and Xuzhou herdsman, and married a princess.

古文：嘉禾二年，督步骑五万征六安，六安民皆散走，诸将欲分兵捕之。琮曰： 夫乘危侥幸，举不百全者，非国家大体也。
现代文：嘉禾二年，全琮督率步、骑兵五万征伐六安，六安百姓都四散逃走，诸将打算分派兵卒追击捕捉，全琮说： 乘人之危侥幸得利，行动不考虑周全，这不是国家的大政。
English: In the second year of the Jiahe era, the commander-in-chief Quanzhang led fifty thousand cavalry to conquer Lopan. The people of Lopan fled in all directions, and the generals planned to send soldiers to chase and capture them. Quanzhang said: Taking advantage of human danger and chance to make a profit, and not considering comprehensive action, this is not the country's great policy.

古文：今分兵捕民，得失相半，岂可谓全哉？
现代文：如今分兵追捕百姓，得失相半，难道这算是行事周全吗？
English: Now the detachment of soldiers is chasing the people, and the gains and losses are equal. Is this a well-rounded action?

古文：纵有所获，犹不足以弱敌而副国望也。
现代文：纵然有所获取，还是不足以使敌人衰弱，符合国家的指望。
English: Even if gains are made, they will not be enough to weaken the enemy, in line with the country's expectations.

古文：如或邂逅，亏损非小，与其获罪，琮宁以身受之。不敢徼功以负国也。 
现代文：如果我们与敌人不期而遇，吃亏就非同小可，与其招致罪责，全琮我宁肯自己承受出兵无所获取的责任，不敢为了邀功而有负于国家。 
English: If we meet the enemy unexpectedly, the loss will not be small, and rather than incurring guilt, I would rather bear the responsibility of sending troops without gaining anything, and dare not be responsible to the country for the sake of inviting merit.

古文：赤乌九年，迁右大司马、左军师。
现代文：赤乌九年，全琮升为右大司马、左军师。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Quanzhang was promoted to the position of the right-hand grand secretary and the left-hand military instructor.

古文：为人恭顺，善于承颜纳规，言辞未尝切迕。
现代文：他为人恭顺，善于应承别人脸色而接受规劝，言辞从不严厉冒犯。
English: He is an obedient person, good at accepting the face of others and accepting persuasion, and his words are never harshly offensive.

古文：初，权将围珠崖及夷州，皆先问琮。琮曰： 以圣朝之威，何向而不克？
现代文：起初，孙权准备出兵围攻珠崖和夷州，都先询问全琮，全琮说： 凭我圣朝的雄威，所向哪有不克之处？
English: At first, when Sun Quan was preparing to send troops to besiege Zhuyao and Yizhou, he first asked Quanzhang. Quanzhang said, "With the might of my holy dynasty, is there anything I should not do?"

古文：然殊方异域，隔绝障海，水土气毒，自古有之，兵入民出，必生疾病，转相污染，往者惧不能反，所获何可多致？
现代文：然而远方异地，被大海屏障隔绝，水土中的毒气，自古就有，兵民杂处，一定生发疾病，相互传染流行，前往者恐怕就不能再回来，怎会获得很大的收获呢？
English: However, far away, isolated by the sea barrier, poisonous gas in the soil and water, since ancient times, soldiers and civilians everywhere, certain diseases, mutual infection and epidemic, visitors may not be able to come back, how can they get a great harvest?

古文：猥亏江岸之兵，以冀万一之利，愚臣犹所不安。 
现代文：损失大江两岸的兵员，去希冀图取万分之一的小利，愚臣对此心中不安。 
English: Having lost soldiers on both sides of the Yangtze River, and hoping to gain a small profit of one ten-thousandth of a percent, the foolish minister was uneasy about this.

古文：权不听。
现代文：孙权不采纳他的意见。
English: Sun Quan did not accept his opinion.

古文：军行经岁，士众疾疫死者十有八九，权深悔之。
现代文：出兵一年，兵卒生病染疫死去十分之八九，孙权深为后悔。
English: One year after the soldiers were sent out, 89% of the soldiers died of disease. Sun Quan deeply regretted this.

古文：后言次及之，琮对曰： 当是时，群臣有不谏者，臣以为不忠。 
现代文：后来谈话涉及到这件事，全琮回答说： 在当时情形下，群臣有人不进行劝谏，为臣认为这种人不忠诚。 
English: Later, when the conversation turned to this matter, Quanzhang replied: Under the circumstances at that time, some ministers did not carry out persuasion, and the minister considered this person to be disloyal.

古文：琮既亲重，宗族子弟并蒙宠贵，赐累千金，然犹谦虚接士，貌无骄色。
现代文：全琮被孙权亲近重用后，他的家族子弟一道受宠显贵。全琮所受赏赐累计千金，然而他还是谦虚地接待士人，脸上从无骄矜之色。
English: After Quanzhang was closely used by Sun Quan, his family members were favored and distinguished. Quanzhang was rewarded with thousands of dollars, but he still humbly received scholars, and his face was never proud.

古文：十二年卒，子怿嗣。
现代文：赤乌十二年，全琮去世，儿子全怿承继爵位。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Wu, Quanzhang died, and his son Quanzhang succeeded to the peerage.

古文：后袭业领兵，救诸葛诞于寿春，出城先降，魏以为平东将军，封临湘侯。
现代文：全怿后来继承父业带领军队，前往寿春救援诸葛诞时，出城先投降了魏军，魏国任命他为平东将军，封爵临湘侯。
English: Later, Quanzhang inherited his father's business and led the army. When he went to Shuchun to rescue Zhuge Liang, the Wei army surrendered before he left the city. Wei appointed him as the general of Pingdong and knighted him as the Marquis of Hunan.

古文：怿兄子祎、仪、静等亦降魏，皆历郡守列侯。
现代文：全怿哥哥的儿子全、全仪、全静等人也投降魏国，都历任郡守、封侯。
English: The sons of his elder brother, Quan Quan, Quan Yi, Quan Jing and others also surrendered to Wei, all successively serving as county governors and feudal lords.

古文：吕岱字定公，广陵海陵人也，为郡县吏，避乱南渡。
现代文：吕岱传，吕岱，字定公，广陵郡海陵县人，做过郡县的官员，躲避战乱南渡长江。
English: Lv Yu Chuan, Lv Yu, the character Ding Gong, a native of Hailing County, Guangling County, worked as a county official, and escaped the war by crossing the Yangtze River.

古文：孙权统事，岱诣幕府，出守吴丞。
现代文：孙权统管国事，吕岱前来孙权幕府，出任吴县县丞。
English: Sun Quan was in overall charge of state affairs, and Lv Ying came to Sun Quan's shogunate to serve as the county magistrate of Wuxian County.

古文：权亲断诸县仓库及囚系，长丞皆见，岱处法应问，甚称权意，召署录事，出补余姚长，召募精健，得千余人。
现代文：孙权亲自查点各县仓库的储存和监狱的囚犯，县令县丞都来拜见，吕岱处置事务的方法和应对提问，很合孙权心意，便征召到郡署为录事，出任补为余姚县县长，招募精健人员，共得一千多名。
English: Sun Quan personally checked the storage of warehouses and prisoners in prisons in each county. The county magistrate and the county magistrate all came to see him. Lv Ying's method of handling affairs and responding to questions was very much in line with Sun Quan's heart, so he was summoned to the county office to record, served as a supplement to the Yuyao County governor, and recruited a total of more than one thousand qualified personnel.

古文：会稽东冶五县贼吕合、秦狼等为乱，权以岱为督军校尉，与将军蒋钦等将兵讨之，遂擒合、狼，五县平定，拜昭信中郎将。
现代文：会稽、东冶五县贼寇吕合、秦狼等人作乱，孙权以吕岱为督军校尉，与将军蒋钦等领兵前往征讨，于是生擒吕合、秦狼，五县于是被平定，吕岱被任命为昭信中郎将。
English: Li He, Qin Wol and others from the five counties of Huiqi, Dongye made a disturbance, and Sun Quan appointed Lyu He as the inspector-general of the army, and led the soldiers to go and recruit with General Jiang Qin. As a result, Lyu He, Qin Wol and the five counties were pacified, and Lyu He was appointed as the commander-in-chief of Zhaoxin.

古文：建安二十年，督孙茂等十将从取长沙三郡。又安成、攸、永新、茶陵四县吏共入阴山城，合众拒岱，岱攻围，即降，三郡克定。
现代文：建安二十年，吕岱督率孙茂等十将跟随孙权进取长沙三郡，而安成、攸、永新、茶陵四县的官吏一道进入阴山城，聚合兵众抗拒吕岱，吕岱进攻围寨，这些人众全都投降，三郡于是平定。
English: In the 20th year of Jian'an, Governor Lv Ying, led by Sun Mao, and other ten generals followed Sun Quan to advance into the three counties of Changsha, while the officials of Ancheng, You, Yongxin, and Chaling counties entered Yinshan City together, gathered soldiers to resist Lv Ying, and Lv Ying attacked the encirclement. These people all surrendered, and the three counties were pacified.

古文：权留岱镇长沙。
现代文：孙权留下吕岱镇守长沙。
English: Sun Quan left Lvyu Town to guard Changsha.

古文：安成长吴砀及中郎将袁龙等首尾关羽，复为反乱。
现代文：安成县县长吴砀及中郎将袁龙等响应关羽，再为反乱。
English: The county head of Ancheng County, Wu Gan, and the middle brother, Yuan Long, responded to Guan Yu, and then rebelled.

古文：砀据攸县，龙在醴陵。
现代文：吴砀占据攸县，袁龙守在醴陵。
English: Wu Gan occupied You County, and Yuan Longguo was in Fuling.

古文：权遣横江将军鲁肃攻攸，砀得突走。
现代文：孙权派遣横江将军鲁肃攻打攸县，吴砀突围逃走。
English: Sun Quan dispatched Lu Su, the general of the Yangtze River, to attack You County, and Wu Gan broke through the encirclement and fled.

古文：岱攻醴陵，遂禽斩龙。迁庐陵太守。
现代文：吕岱进攻醴陵，于是生擒袁龙并将其斩杀，吕岱升为庐陵太守。
English: Lü Gan attacked Fuling, and Yuan Long was born and killed, and Lü Gan was promoted to the position of the governor of Fuling.

古文：延康元年，代步骘为交州刺史。
现代文：延康元年，吕岱替代步骘为交州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yan Kang era, Lv Xuan replaced Bu Xuan as the chief historian of Jiaozhou.

古文：到州，高凉贼帅钱博乞降，岱因承制，以博为高凉西部都尉。
现代文：他到了交州，高凉贼寇头领钱博乞求归降，吕岱承袭旧制，以钱博为高凉西部都尉。
English: When he arrived in Jiaozhou, Qian Bo, the leader of the Gaoliang Thieves and Robbers, begged for surrender. Lv Ying inherited the old system, with Qian Bo as the western captain of Gaoliang.

古文：又郁林夷贼攻围郡县，岱讨破之。
现代文：又郁林少数民族兵卒进犯并保卫郡县，吕岱讨伐击败了他们。
English: In addition, the soldiers of the Yulin ethnic minority attacked and defended the county, and the Lvong Campaign defeated them.

古文：是时桂阳、浈阳贼王金合众于南海界上，首乱为害，权又诏岱讨之，生缚金，传送诣都，斩首获生凡万余人。
现代文：其时桂阳、浈阳贼寇王金聚众在南海境界上，领头作乱为害，孙权又诏令吕岱征讨，生获绑缚王金，传送到京都，斩首和生擒共达一万多人。
English: At that time, Guiyang and Shenyang bandits led by the bandit Wang Jin gathered on the border of the South China Sea and led a riot to do harm. Sun Quan also ordered Lv Ying to investigate, and Wang Jin was captured alive, bound, and transported to Kyoto. A total of more than 10,000 people were beheaded and crucified alive.

古文：迁安南将军，假节，封都乡侯。
现代文：吕岱升为安南将军、假节，封爵都乡侯。
English: Lv Yansheng was promoted to General Annan, Fuxi, and knighted as the lord of the township.

古文：交址太守士燮卒，权以燮子徽为安远将军，领九真太守，以校尉陈时代燮。
现代文：交阯太守士燮去世，孙权以士燮的儿子士徽为安远将军，兼任九真太守，以校尉陈时接代士燮。
English: After the death of Jiuzhen Daju Shijie, Sun Quan appointed Shijie's son Shihui as General Anyuan, concurrently appointed Jiuzhen Daju, and appointed Lieutenant Chen Shi to succeed Shijie.

古文：岱表分海南三郡为交州，以将军戴良为刺史，海东四郡为广州，岱自为刺史。
现代文：吕岱上表分析南海三郡设置交州，以将军戴良为刺史，海东四郡另置广州，吕岱自任为刺史。
English: In the table above, Lv Ying analyzed that the three counties in the South China Sea were set up as Jiaozhou, with General Dai Liang as the chief historian, and the four counties in the East China Sea were set up as Guangzhou, with Lv Ying himself as the chief historian.

古文：遣良与时南入，而徽不承命，举兵戍海口以拒良等。
现代文：孙权派遣戴良与陈时南往，而士徽不服从命令，发兵防守海口以抵拒戴良等人。
English: Sun Quan sent Dai Liang and Chen Shih to the south, but Shi Hui disobeyed the order and sent troops to defend Haikou to resist Dai Liang and others.

古文：岱于是上疏请讨徽罪，督兵三千人晨夜浮海。
现代文：吕岱于是上疏请求征讨士徽抗命之罪，督领兵卒三千人日夜渡海进军。
English: Lv Ying then asked Shang Shou to levy a fine for the crime of disobeying orders, and the governor led three thousand soldiers to march across the sea day and night.

古文：或谓岱曰： 徽藉累世之恩，为一州所附，未易轻也。 
现代文：有人对吕岱说： 士徽凭借几代的恩宠，被全州人所依附，不可轻视他。 
English: Some people said to Lv Ying: Shi Hui, by virtue of the grace of several generations, has been attached by the people of the whole state, do not despise him.

古文：岱曰： 今徽虽怀逆计，未虞吾之卒至，若我潜军轻举，掩其无备，破之必也。
现代文：吕岱说： 如今士徽虽说心怀反计，但未曾料到我会猝然杀到，如果我军轻装悄然疾进，攻其无备，一定能打败他。
English: Lv Ying said: Although Shi Hui is now plotting against him, I did not expect that I would suddenly kill him. If our army lightly and quietly rushes in and attacks him unprepared, it will surely defeat him.

古文：稽留不速，使得生心，婴城固守，七郡百蛮，云合响应，虽有智者，谁能图之？ 
现代文：如果我军滞留不疾速挺进，使他产生疑心，固城坚守，七郡的少数民族，到时云集响应，即使有智谋之人，又有谁能图谋他们？ 
English: If our army is delayed and does not advance rapidly, he will be suspicious, the city is firmly held, and the ethnic minorities in the seven counties will gather to respond at the time. Even if there are people with wisdom, who can plot them?

古文：遂行，过合浦，与良俱进。
现代文：于是进军，过合浦时，与戴良合兵共进。
English: As a result, he marched into the army, and when he passed Hepu, he marched together with Dai Liang.

古文：徽闻岱至，果大震怖，不知所出，即率兄弟六人肉袒迎岱。
现代文：士徽听说吕岱前来，果然大为惊惧，不知如何是好，当即率领兄弟六人赤膊跪迎吕岱。
English: When Shi Hui heard that Lv Ying was coming, he was greatly alarmed. Not knowing what to do, he immediately led six brothers to kneel shirtless to welcome Lv Ying.

古文：岱皆斩送其首，徽大将甘醴，桓治等率吏民攻岱，岱奋击大破之，进封番禺侯。
现代文：吕岱将他们全部斩首，并送首级至京城。士徽大将甘醴、桓治等率领官吏百姓攻打吕岱，吕岱奋击将他们打得大败，晋封为番禺侯。
English: Lv Ying decapitated all of them and sent their heads to the capital. Shih General Am Ying, Huan Zhi and other leading officials and commoners attacked Lv Ying. Lv Ying fought hard and defeated them, and was promoted to Panyu.

古文：于是除广州，复为交州如故。
现代文：于是取消广州，仍恢复交州如前。
English: As a result, Guangzhou was cancelled, but the exchange with Guangzhou was still resumed as before.

古文：岱既定交州，复进讨九真，斩获以万数。
现代文：吕岱平定交州后，又进军讨伐九真，斩首与俘获贼兵数以万计。
English: After Lv Ying's subjugation of Jiaozhou, he marched against Jiu Zhen, beheading and capturing tens of thousands of bandits.

古文：又遣从事南宣国化，暨徼外扶南、林邑、堂明诸王，各遣使奉贡。
现代文：又派遣从事南往宣传国家的有关政策教化，招引境外扶南、林邑、堂明诸国王，各自派使者前来进贡。
English: They also sent envoys to the south to promote the country's relevant policies and education, and invited overseas kings from Funan, Linyi and Dongming, each of whom sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：权嘉其功，进拜镇南将军。
现代文：孙权嘉赏吕岱的功绩，晋升他为镇南将军。
English: Sun Quan appreciated Lv Yao's achievements and promoted him to the highest rank of Zhenan General.

古文：黄龙三年，以南土清定，召岱还屯长沙沤口。
现代文：黄龙三年，考虑到南方清平稳定，吕岱被召还率军驻扎长沙郡沤口。
English: In the third year of Huanglong, considering the stability of the south, Lv Ying was called back to lead the army stationed in Hukou, Changsha County.

古文：会武陵蛮夷蠢动，岱与太常潘浚共讨定之。
现代文：时逢武陵地区少数民族骚动，吕岱与太常潘濬共同领兵讨伐平定。
English: At the time of ethnic minority unrest in the Wuling region, Lv Ying and Pan Ying jointly led an army to fight and quell the unrest.

古文：嘉禾三年，权令岱领潘璋士众，屯陆口，后徙蒲圻。
现代文：嘉禾三年，孙权命令吕岱率领潘璋的部队，驻扎陆口，后迁往蒲圻。
English: In the third year of Jiahe, Sun Quan ordered Lv Ying to lead Pan Ye's troops, stationed in Lukou, and then moved to Pucheng.

古文：四年，庐陵贼李桓、路合、会稽东冶贼随春、南海贼罗厉等一时并起。权复诏岱督刘纂、唐咨等分部讨击，春即时首降，岱拜春偏将军，使领其众，遂为列将，桓、厉等皆见斩获，传首诣都。权诏岱曰： 厉负险作乱，自致枭首；桓凶狡反复，已降复叛。
现代文：嘉禾四年，庐陵贼寇李桓、路合，会稽东冶贼寇随春，南海贼寇罗厉等人同时发乱，孙权又诏令吕岱督率刘纂、唐咨等人分兵讨伐，随春当即率先投降，吕岱任命随春为偏将军，让他继续率随旧部，于是随春成为将领行列的一员，李桓、罗厉等都被擒获斩首，首级传送到京都，孙权诏令吕岱说： 罗厉凭借险地犯上作乱，自己招致杀头之祸，李桓凶狠狡诈反复无常，投降后又再叛乱。
English: In the fourth year of the Jiahe era, the Fuling bandits Li Huan and Lu He, the Dongye bandits Su Chun, and the South Sea bandits Luo Li and others simultaneously caused a disturbance. Sun Quan also ordered Lv Ying to lead Liu Zuo, Tang Zhao and other detachments to fight. Su Chun immediately took the lead in surrendering. Lv Ying appointed Su Chun as a partial general and let him continue to lead the old department, so Su Chun became a member of the ranks of generals. Li Huan and Luo Li were all captured and beheaded, and their heads were sent to Kyoto. Sun Quan ordered Lu

古文：前后讨伐，历年不禽，非君规略，谁能枭之？
现代文：前后讨伐多次，历年来未能擒获，如果不是您的规划策略，谁能将他斩首？
English: If it is not your planning strategy, who can behead him?

古文：忠武之节，于是益者。
现代文：您忠武的节操，在此事上更为显著。
English: Your loyalty and self-restraint are even more remarkable in this matter.

古文：元恶既除，大小震慑，其余细类，扫地族矣。
现代文：元凶已除，大小贼寇被震慑，其余小股匪寇，扫地以尽。
English: The main culprits have been eliminated, large and small bandits have been deterred, and the remaining small-scale bandits have been wiped out.

古文：自今巳去，国家永无南顾之虞，三郡晏然，无怵惕之惊。又得恶民以供赋役，重用叹息。
现代文：从今以后，国家永无南顾之忧，三郡安定，无惴惴不安的惊恐，又获得刁恶之民供给赋税徭役，值得深深赞叹。
English: From now on, the country will never have to worry about the south, the three counties will be stable, there will be no fear of unrest, and the evil people will be provided with tax relief, which is worthy of deep admiration.

古文：赏不逾月，国之常典，制度所宜，君其裁之。 
现代文：奖赏不超过一月，这是国家的常规，制度所允许的，请您考虑定夺。 
English: The reward does not exceed one month, which is the country's normal practice and allowed by the system. Please consider making a decision.

古文：潘浚卒，岱代浚领荆州文书，与陆逊井在武昌，故督蒲圻。
现代文：潘濬去世，吕岱接替他处理荆州文书公务，与陆逊都在武昌，故督管蒲圻。
English: After the death of Pan Zheng, Lv Zheng took over his official duties of dealing with paperwork in Jingzhou. He and Lu Xun were both in Wuchang, and the governor was Pu Zheng.

古文：顷之，廖式作乱。攻围城邑，零陵、苍梧、郁林诸郡骚扰，岱自表辄行，星夜兼路。
现代文：不久，廖式作乱，进攻围困城镇，零陵、苍梧、郁林诸郡受到骚扰，吕岱上表自动请战出兵，星夜兼程。
English: Soon after, Liao staged a riot, attacked and besieged towns, the counties of Luling, Cangwu, and Yulin were harassed, and Lv Ying took the initiative to send troops to fight, all under the starry night.

古文：权遣使追拜岱交州牧，及遣诸将唐咨等骆驿相继，攻讨一年破之，斩式及遣诸所伪署临贺太守费杨等，并其支党，郡县悉平，复还武昌。
现代文：孙权派遣使者追授吕岱为交州牧，并派遣诸将唐咨等人不断地前往增援，攻讨了一年，将廖式打败，斩杀了廖式及他任命的伪官员临贺太守费杨等人，收编他们的队伍，郡县全部平定后，吕岱又回到武昌。
English: Sun Quan sent an envoy to posthumously confer Lv Shi on the position of Jiaozhou pastor, and dispatched generals such as Tang Zhe to continuously go to reinforce, and fought for a year, defeated Liao Shih, killed Liao Shih and the pseudo-officials appointed by him, such as Lin He Taishou Fei Yang, and compiled their teams. After all counties were pacified, Lv Shi returned to Wuchang.

古文：时年已八十，然体素精勤，躬亲王事。
现代文：这时他已八十岁，但他的身体素来精力充沛，依然亲自处理政事。
English: By this time he was eighty years old, but his body was always full of energy, and he still personally dealt with political affairs.

古文：奋威将军张承与岱书曰： 昔旦奭翼同，《二南》作歌，今则足下与陆子也。
现代文：奋威将军张承给吕岱的信说： 从前周公、召公辅佐周天子，人们作《周南》、《召南》歌颂他们，如今您与陆逊就像他们两人。
English: General Zhang Cheng of the Fenwei Army wrote a letter to Lu Xun, saying: Formerly, Zhou Gong, Zhao Gong's assistant, Zhou Tianzi, people sang their praises in "Zhou Nan" and "Zhao Nan," but now you and Lu Xun are just like them.

古文：忠勤相先，劳谦相让，功以权成，化与道合，君子叹其德，小人悦其美。
现代文：忠诚勤奋都在人前，劳苦谦逊相让，功绩因审时度势而成就，道义随教化而推行，君子赞叹您们崇高的品德，百姓喜爱您们美好的本质。
English: Loyalty and diligence are in front of people, hard work and humility are conceded, merit is achieved by judging the time and situation, morality is promoted with enlightenment, gentlemen admire your noble character, and the people love your beautiful essence.

古文：加以文书鞅掌，宾客终日，罢不舍事，劳不言倦。又知上马辄自超乘，不由跨蹑，如此足下过廉颇也。何其事事快也。
现代文：加上公务文书繁多，宾客终日不绝，疲惫而不放下公事，劳累而不诉说疲倦，还了解到您上马动辄自己跃上马背，不用跨踩脚蹬攀上，这样看来您就胜过廉颇了，件件事情对您来说是何等的快意！
English: In addition to the large number of official documents, the constant stream of guests, the fatigue without giving up work, the fatigue without complaining about it, and the knowledge that you can get on the horse and jump onto the horse's back without stepping on the bridle, it seems that you are more than generous, what a pleasure this is for you!

古文：《周易》有之，礼言恭，德言盛，足下何有尽此美耶！ 
现代文：《周易》有言，礼仪讲究恭敬，道德讲究发扬，您怎么占尽了这些美质啊！ 
English: "Zhou Yi" has a saying that etiquette is about respect, and morality is about development. How have you exhausted these virtues?

古文：及陆逊卒，诸葛恪代逊，权乃分武昌为两部，岱督右部，自武昌上至蒲圻。迁上大将军，拜子凯副军校尉，监兵蒲圻，孙亮即位，拜大司马。
现代文：及至陆逊去世，诸葛恪接替陆逊职位，孙权于是分武昌为两部，吕岱督领右部，自武昌而上至蒲圻，被升任为大将军，儿子吕凯也被授予副军校尉，在蒲圻监军。孙亮登基后，任命吕岱为大司马。
English: When Lu Xun died, Zhuge Ke took over the position of Lu Xun. Sun Quan then divided Wuchang into two parts, with Lv Ying leading the right part, and from Wuchang to Pucheng, he was promoted to general. His son Lu Kai was also awarded the vice-army lieutenant and supervised the army in Pucheng. After Sun Liang ascended to the throne, he appointed Lv Ying as the grand steward.

古文：岱清身奉公，所在可述。
现代文：吕岱清明守正廉洁奉公，他所处过的地方都称道他。
English: Lv Ying is a man of integrity, and he has been praised everywhere he has been.

古文：初在交州，历年不饷家，妻子饥乏。
现代文：当初在交州时，多年未给家中钱财，妻子儿女饥饿困乏。
English: At first, when he was in Jiaozhou, he did not give money to his family for many years, and his wife and children were starving.

古文：权闻之叹息，以让群臣曰： 吕岱出身万里，为国勤事，家门内困，而孤不早知。
现代文：孙权听说叹息不止，因此责备群臣说： 吕岱出征，身处万里之外，为国家勤苦办事，家中如此困顿，而我未能及早知晓。
English: Sun Quan was heard to be sighing endlessly, so he reproached his ministers, saying, "I didn't know about Lv Ying's going to the front, being thousands of miles away, working diligently for the country, and having such a difficult time at home.

古文：股肱耳目，其责安在？ 
现代文：您们身为股肱耳目之臣，责任哪里去了？ 
English: Where is your responsibility, you who are the eyes and ears of the people?

古文：于是加赐钱米布绢，岁有常限。
现代文：于是加倍赏赐吕家钱米布绢，每年都有一个固定的数目。
English: As a result, the amount of rice cloth given to the Lyu family was doubled, and there is a fixed amount every year.

古文：始，岱亲近吴郡徐原，慷慨有才志，岱知其可成，赐巾褠，与共言论，后遂荐拔，官至侍御史。
现代文：起初，吕岱与吴郡人徐原亲近友好，徐原慷慨且有才志，吕岱知道他能成大器，便赏与他头巾、单衣，与他谈论时事，后来便举荐选拔徐原，官至侍御史。
English: At first, Lv Ying and Xu Yuan, a native of Wu County, were close and friendly. Xu Yuan was generous and talented. Lv Ying knew that he could become a great man, so he gave him a headscarf and a singlet, and talked with him about current affairs. Later, he recommended the selection of Xu Yuan as an official to serve the Emperor.

古文：原性忠壮，好直言，岱时有得失，原辄谏诤，又公论之，人或以告岱，岱叹曰： 是我所以贵德渊者也。 
现代文：徐原秉性忠直慷慨，喜欢直言，吕岱有时有过失，他就当即谏劝，又在众人面前公开议论这些事，有人将这些情况告诉吕岱。吕岱赞叹地说： 这就是我看重德渊的原因。 
English: Xu Yuan was loyal and generous, and liked to be outspoken. Lv Yuen sometimes made mistakes, so he immediately advised Lv Yuen, and discussed these things openly in front of everyone. Someone told Lv Yuen about these circumstances. Lv Yuen said with admiration: This is why I value De Yuan.

古文：及原死，岱哭之甚哀。曰： 德渊，吕岱之益友，今不幸，岱复于何闻过？ 
现代文：及至徐原去世，吕岱极为痛苦悲哀，说： 德渊，是我吕岱的益友，如今不幸归西，我再从何处听到责备我过失的言语呢？ 
English: When Xu Yuan passed away, Lv Er was extremely pained and sad, saying, "Dehuan, my good friend Lv Er, has unfortunately returned to the West, where else would I hear words of reproach for my mistakes?

古文：谈者美之。
现代文：人们谈到这件事都赞美他们的友情。
English: People have spoken of their friendship in glowing terms.

古文：太平元年，年九十六卒，子凯嗣。
现代文：太平元年，吕岱九十六岁去世，儿子吕凯继承爵位。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, Lü Xuan died at the age of ninety-six, and his son Lü Kai inherited the title.

古文：遣令殡以素棺，疏巾布褠，葬送之制，务从俭约，凯皆奉行之。
现代文：他留下遗言，以一般棺材收殓安葬他，穿戴粗布头巾和单衣，送葬规模和礼仪，务必节约俭朴。吕凯对这些遗言全部照办。
English: He left his last words, saying that he would be buried in an ordinary coffin, wearing a coarse cloth headscarf and a singlet, and that the funeral scale and etiquette must be economical and simple. Lü Kai complied with all of these last words.

古文：周鲂字子鱼，吴郡阳羡人也。
现代文：周鲂传，周鲂，字子鱼，吴郡阳羡县人。
English: Zhou Yu Chuan, Zhou Yu, Zi Zi Yu, a native of Yangshan County, Wuxi County.

古文：少好学，举孝廉，为宁国长，转在怀安。
现代文：他年少好学，被举荐为孝廉，任宁国县长，又转任怀安县长。
English: He was young and eager to learn, was recommended as a filial son, appointed as the governor of Ningguo County, and then became the governor of Huai'an County.

古文：钱唐大帅彭式等蚁聚为寇，以鲂为钱唐侯相，旬月之间，斩式首及其支党，迁丹杨西部都尉。
现代文：钱塘盗寇大头领彭式等聚众为寇作乱，朝廷任命周鲂为钱塘侯相，一个月之内，便斩杀彭式及其党羽，周鲂由是被升为丹杨西部都尉。
English: Peng Shih, the leader of the Qiantang bandits, and others rallied the masses to create chaos for the bandits. The imperial court appointed Zhou Qi as the marquis of Qiantang. Within a month, he killed Peng Shih and his party. Zhou Qi was promoted to the western captain of Danyang.

古文：黄武中。鄱阳大帅彭绮作乱，攻没属城，乃以鲂为鄱阳太守，与胡综戮力攻讨，遂生禽绮，送诣武昌，加昭义校尉。
现代文：黄武年间，鄱阳盗寇大头领彭绮叛乱，攻陷鄱阳所属城池，朝廷任命周鲂为鄱阳太守，与胡综协力攻讨，于是活捉彭绮，将其押送武昌，周鲂被加任昭义校尉。
English: During the Huangwu era, Peng Rong, the leader of the Poyang bandits, rebelled and attacked the city of Poyang. The imperial court appointed Zhou Rong as the governor of Poyang, and he and Hu Zi worked together to attack the city. As a result, Peng Rong was captured alive and sent to Wuchang, and Zhou Rong was promoted to the rank of Shao Yi lieutenant.

古文：被命密求山中旧族名帅为北敌所闻知者，令谲挑魏大司马扬州牧曹休。
现代文：周鲂受命暗中寻找山里以前各聚落的有名头目并为魏国知晓的人，让他们前去欺骗挑唆魏国大司马、扬州牧曹休。
English: Zhou Yu was ordered to secretly search for the famous leaders of the previous settlements in the mountains and those who were known to the State of Wei, and let them go to deceive and instigate the Grand Master of the State of Wei, Yangzhou Mu Cao Xiu.

古文：鲂答，恐民帅小丑不足仗任，事或漏泄，不能致休，乞遣亲人赍笺七条以诱休。
现代文：周鲂回答说，恐怕这些低贱的小头目不足以依靠他们来担当此事，假若事情泄露出去，不能诱使曹休前来，请求派自己的亲信者送笺书七条招诱曹休。
English: Zhou Yu replied that he was afraid that these lowly petty chiefs were not enough to rely on them to take charge of the matter. If the matter leaked out, he would not be able to entice Cao Xiu to come, and asked to send his relatives to send a seven-point letter to entice Cao Xiu.

古文：其一曰： 鲂以千载饶幸，得备州民，远隔江川，敬恪未显，瞻望云景，天实为之。
现代文：第一条说：周鲂我以千载难逢的机会，有幸作您的州民，远隔江河，所以我的敬意未能显示，只能瞻望云霓，实在是上天所造成。
English: The first article said: Zhou Wei, I took advantage of a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, I am fortunate to be a citizen of your state, far away from the rivers, so I could not show my respect, I could only look at the clouds, it was really created by heaven.

古文：精诚微薄，名位不昭，虽怀焦渴，曷缘见明？
现代文：我心怀精诚而身份低微，名位不显，虽然怀有焦灼的渴望心情，又能借什么来表明？
English: What can I do to show that I have a sincere heart, but a lowly status, and my position is not obvious, although I have a burning desire?

古文：狐死首丘，人情恋本，而逼所制，奉觌礼违。
现代文：狐死头朝自己洞穴的山丘，人的感情总是眷恋本土，而我却被迫受人控制，前往拜谒又与礼制相违。
English: The fox heads for the hills of his cave. People's feelings are always attached to the motherland, but I am forced to be controlled by others. Going to worship is contrary to etiquette.

古文：每独矫首西顾，未尝不寤寐劳叹，展转反侧也。
现代文：每每独自翘首西望，未尝不日夜劳神哀叹，辗转反侧不能入眠。
English: Every single day, I look to the west, day and night, I lament the god of labor, and I can't fall asleep.

古文：今因隙穴之际，得陈宿昔之志，非神启之，岂能致此！
现代文：如今借空隙时机，得以陈述自己向来的志向，如果不是神灵启示，岂能表达此番心意？
English: Now, by taking advantage of the gap, I am able to state my long-standing aspirations. If it were not for divine revelation, would I be able to express this intention?

古文：不胜翘企，万里托命。
现代文：我极为翘首仰慕，不辞万里相托归附。
English: I admire him very much, and I owe him a great deal.

古文：谨遣亲人董岑、邵南等托叛奉笺。
现代文：谨派我的亲信董岑、邵南等托附叛降之心，奉上我的笺书。
English: I would like to send my cronies Dong Jun, Shao Nan and others to entrust the heart of rebellion to you, and present you with my imperial edict.

古文：时事变故，列于别纸，惟明公君侯垂日月之光，照远民之趣，永令归命者有所戴赖。 
现代文：至于时事变故，我另纸陈述。希望明公您降下日月般的光辉，照耀远方士民的方向，永远使归顺者有所爱戴依赖。
English: As for the current situation, I would like to make a separate statement. I hope that you, Ming Gong, will shine like the sun and the moon, illuminate the direction of the distant scholars and the people, and always make the followers love and rely on you.

古文：其二曰： 鲂远在边隅，江汜分绝；恩泽教化，未蒙抚及，而于山谷之间，遥陈所怀，惧以大义，未见信纳。
现代文：第二条说：周鲂我远在边远角落，江河分断，没有蒙受皇恩泽被教化的抚育，而在山谷之间，隔着遥远的路程陈述自己心中所思，担心因为自己与吴国的君臣大义，未能受到信任接纳。
English: The second said: Zhou Er I am far away in a remote corner, the rivers are divided, I have not been educated by the emperor's grace, but between the valleys, across a long distance, I express my thoughts in my heart, I am afraid that I can not be trusted and accepted because of my loyalty to the princes and ministers of Wu.

古文：夫物有感激，计因变生，古今同揆；鲂仕东典郡，始愿已获，铭心立报，永矣无贰。
现代文：人有感激情感，计策根据事势变化而生，这是古今相同的道理。我为官东吴掌管一郡政务，初愿得到实现，铭心戴德立志报答，永无二心。
English: People have feelings of gratitude, and strategies are born according to changes in the situation, which is the same principle from ancient times to the present. I am in charge of a county government for the official Dongwu, my initial wish has been realized, I have a strong determination to repay, and I have no second thoughts.

古文：岂图顷者中被横谴，祸在漏刻，危于投卵，进有离合去就之宜，退有诬罔枉死之咎，虽志行轻微，存没一节，顾非其所，能不怅然！
现代文：岂料不久前我横遭谴责，灾祸顷刻而至，危如鸡蛋碰石头，向前则有分合去留的选择，向后则有遭受诬陷屈死的灾祸，虽说自己志向操守低微，但生死都应保持同一节操，看到自己蒙受不白之冤，岂能不惆怅！
English: However, not long ago, I was condemned from all sides, and the calamity came upon me in an instant. It was as dangerous as an egg hitting a stone. In the past, there was a choice to stay or leave, and in the future, there was a calamity of being framed and succumbing to death. Although my ambition and integrity were low, I should maintain the same discipline in life and death. Seeing that I had suffered a great misfortune, I couldn't help but be sad.

古文：敢缘古人，因知所归，拳拳输情，陈露肝膈。乞降春天之润，哀拯其急，不复猜疑，绝其委命。
现代文：我冒昧比附古人，因此才明白自己的归宿，输献拳拳之心情，坦露地说出肺腑之言，请求您降下春天的甘霖，哀怜拯救我的危急，不再对我有所猜疑，拒绝我委身相托。
English: I dared to compare myself with the ancients, and only then did I understand my destination, express my heartfelt feelings, openly speak my heartfelt words, ask you to send the spring rain, pity and save me from danger, no longer have any suspicion of me, and refuse to commit myself to each other.

古文：事之宣泄。受罪不测，一则伤慈损计，二则杜绝向化者心，惟明使君远览前世，矜而愍之，留神所质，速赐秘报。
现代文：此事若被宣露，我将受到无法预料的罪罚，一则伤损您的仁慈名誉，损害我的整个计划，二则杜绝了归向教化者的用心。希望明君您远鉴前人，怜悯同情我的心意，留神我的信笺，迅速赐我秘密的回音。
English: If this matter were to be revealed, I would be subjected to unforeseeable punishments, one of which would tarnish the honor of your kindness and damage my entire plan, and the other would put an end to the intentions of the convert. I hope that you will learn from your predecessors, pity and sympathize with my heart, pay attention to my letter, and quickly give me a secret echo.

古文：鲂当候望举动，俟须响应。 
现代文：我自当候望您的举动，等待机会作出响应。
English: I've been anxiously awaiting your move, waiting for an opportunity to respond.

古文：其三曰： 鲂所代故太守广陵王靖，往者亦以郡民为变，以见谴责，靖勤自陈释，而终不解，因立密计，欲北归命，不幸事露，诛及婴孩。
现代文：第三条说：周鲂我所接替的原太守广陵人王靖，先前也因郡内百姓作乱，而遭到谴责，王靖竭力自我表白辩解，但最终未能解脱。因而立下秘密计划，打算归附北方，不幸事情败露，累带家中婴孩都被杀害。
English: The third article said: "The former governor of Guangling, Wang Jing, whom I replaced, was also previously condemned because of the people in the county making disturbances. Wang Jing tried his best to justify himself, but ultimately could not free himself. Therefore, he made a secret plan to join the north, but the unfortunate thing was revealed, and the babies in his family were killed.

古文：鲂既目见靖事，且观东主一所非薄，婳不复厚，虽或暂舍，终见翦除。
现代文：周鲂我既目睹王靖事件，又看到东吴国君一旦菲薄某人，其人再不会得到厚待，虽说可能会暂时留用，最终要被剪除。
English: I witnessed the Wang Jing incident, and I saw that once Dongwu Guojun undermines someone, that person will no longer receive favorable treatment, although they may be temporarily retained, and will eventually be eliminated.

古文：今又令鲂领郡者，是欲责后效，必杀鲂之趣也。
现代文：现在又令我统管郡中政务，这是想责难我以后的成效，必定要杀我的趋势。
English: Now they have put me in charge of the county's internal affairs. This is an attempt to blame me for my future performance, and is bound to kill me.

古文：虽尚视息，忧惕焦灼，未知躯命，竟在何时。
现代文：虽然尚能苟活，但心中忧虑恐惧焦灼不安，不知身家性命，究竟何时了结。
English: Although I can still live, I'm worried, fearful, anxious, and I don't know when my life will end.

古文：人居世间，犹白驹过隙，而常抱危怖，其可言乎！
现代文：人生在世，如白驹过隙，而常常心怀危险恐怖，这种滋味还能言说吗？
English: Is it possible to describe the taste of living life like a egret passing through a gap, but always with danger and fear in mind?

古文：惟当陈愚，重自披尽，惧以卑贱，未能采纳。
现代文：只能陈述自己的愚见，竭力表白心意，又担心自己身卑位贱，未能被您采纳。
English: They can only state their own stupid opinions, try their best to express their true intentions, and worry that they are inferior and cannot be adopted by you.

古文：愿明使君少垂详察，忖度其言。
现代文：希望明使君您稍加详察，思忖我所说的话。
English: I hope this will make you look a little deeper and think about what I've said.

古文：今此郡民，虽外名降首，而故在山草，看伺空隙，欲复为乱。为乱之日，鲂命讫矣。
现代文：如今此郡的百姓，虽说表面上名为降服，实际却在山林草野之间，窥伺时机，准备再次作乱，他们作乱之日，即是我的性命了结之时。
English: Today, the people of this county, although they are ostensibly surrendering, are actually in the mountains and forests, watching the time, ready to make trouble again. The day they make trouble is the time when my life is over.

古文：东主顷者潜部分诸将，图欲北进。
现代文：东吴国君不久前暗遣众将，企图进军北方。
English: Not long ago, Dongwu Guojun secretly dispatched generals in an attempt to invade the north.

古文：吕范、孙韶等入淮，全琮、朱桓趋合肥，诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然到襄阳。陆议、潘璋等讨梅敷。
现代文：吕范、孙韶等进入淮河地区，全琮、朱桓奔赴合肥，诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然前至襄阳，陆议、潘璋等讨伐梅敷。
English: Lv Fan and Sun Yat-sen entered the Huaihe region, Quanzhang and Zhu Huan went to Hefei, Zhu Gejun, Bu Xuan and Zhu Ranzeng went to Xiangyang, and Lu Zhe and Pan Yat-sen fought against Muishiki.

古文：东主中营自掩石阳，别遣从孙奂治安陆城，修立邸阁，辇赀运粮，以为军储，又命诸葛亮进指关西，江边诸将无复在者，才留三千所兵守武昌耳。
现代文：东吴国主自己率领中军杀至石阳，另遣堂弟孙奂管理安陆城，修建粮仓，运送粮草物资，作为军事储备，又令诸葛亮进军关西，长江沿岸诸将再也没有留下的，只留有三千左右兵卒驻守武昌。
English: The Dongwu sovereign himself led the Chinese army to Shiyang, and sent his cousin Sun Yat-sen to administer Anlu City, build granaries, transport grain and grass materials as military reserves, and ordered Zhuge Liang to march into Kansai. The generals along the Yangtze River no longer remained, leaving only about three thousand soldiers stationed in Wuchang.

古文：若明使君以万兵从皖南首江渚，鲂便从此率厉吏民，以为内应。
现代文：如果明使君您以一万人马自皖南进军江渚，周鲂我便在这里率领激励官兵民众，作为您的内应。
English: If you are ordered by the emperor to march into the Yangtze River with ten thousand soldiers from the south of the country, I will lead you here to inspire the officers and soldiers as your inner response.

古文：此方诸郡，前后举事，垂成而败者，由无外援使其然耳；若北军临境，传檄属城，思咏之民，谁不企踵？
现代文：这一带各州郡，相继举兵反叛，但都功败垂成，其原因是没有外部援军。如果北军亲临边境，传送檄文到各城邑，那些思念北方的人民，谁不企踵盼望呢？
English: The states and counties of this region have successively raised armies to rebel, but all have failed, and the reason is that there are no external reinforcements. If the Union Army comes to the border and sends letters to the cities, those people who miss the north, who do not aspire to hope?

古文：愿明使君上观天时，下察人事，中参蓍龟，则足昭往言之不虚也。 
现代文：希望您上观天时，下察民情，中验卜筮之兆，则足以证明我前面所说并非虚辞。
English: I hope that when you go to see the sky, you will look at the people's feelings and examine the signs of divination, which is enough to prove that what I said earlier is not a lie.

古文：其四曰： 所遣董岑、邵南少长家门。亲之信之，有如儿子。
现代文：第四条说：我所派遣的董岑、邵南从小在我家长大，我亲信他们，就像自己的儿子，故此特地派他们前来送上笺书，托他们表明我的归顺心意。
English: The fourth article said, "I sent my sons Dong Xuan and Shaonan, who grew up in my family. I trusted them as if they were my own sons. Therefore, I sent them here specially to deliver the letter, asking them to express my willingness to surrender.

古文：是以特令赍笺，托叛为辞，目语心计，不宣唇齿，骨肉至亲，无有知者。又已敕之，到州当言往降，欲北叛来者得传之也。
现代文：意会心传，不便口述，我自己的骨肉至亲也无人知晓。我又命令他们，到了州府一定说明前来归顺投降，企求北来叛逃者借以传告。
English: I also ordered them that when they arrived at the state capital, they must come to surrender and surrender, and try to inform the defectors from the north.

古文：鲂建此计，任之于天，若其济也，则有生全之福。邂逅泄漏，则受夷灭之祸。
现代文：我设下如此计策，全由上天安排，如若成功，则有保全性命之福；消息不意外泄，则受灭族之祸。
English: I have devised such a plan, all arranged by heaven, if successful, then there is the blessing of preserving life; if the news does not accidentally leak, then it will be the scourge of extermination.

古文：常中夜仰天，告誓星辰。
现代文：常常半夜仰望天空，向星辰告誓。
English: He often looks up at the sky in the middle of the night and swears by the stars.

古文：精成之微，岂能上感，然事急孤穷，惟天是诉耳。
现代文：我的精诚微不足道，岂能感动上天，然而事情急迫个人力穷无助，只有向上天诉说了。
English: My sincerity is insignificant, how can I move heaven, but things are urgent and I am helpless, I can only appeal to heaven.

古文：遣使之日，载生载死，形存气亡，魄爽恍惚。
现代文：派人前往之日，我像活着又像死去，形存气亡，神情恍惚。
English: On the day they sent someone, I felt like I was both alive and dead. I was out of breath and in a daze.

古文：私恐使君未深保明，岑、南二人可留其一，以为后信。
现代文：私下担心使君您不能完全相信我的表白，董岑、邵南二人您可留下一个，作为以后的凭信。
English: Privately, I'm worried that you can't fully believe my confession. Dong Ye and Shao Nan, you can keep one of them as a future reference.

古文：一赍教还，教还故当言悔叛还首。
现代文：一待笺书送来您便遣他们回来，遣他们回来就一定会被说成他们因后悔背叛而回来自首。
English: You will send them back as soon as the official document is sent to you. If you send them back, it will definitely be said that they returned because they regretted their betrayal and turned themselves in.

古文：东主有常科，悔叛还者，皆自原罪。
现代文：东吴国主有既定的法律，悔叛回来者，都按原罪处理。
English: The East Wu sovereign has established laws, and those who repent and turn back are all dealt with according to the original crime.

古文：如是彼此俱塞，永无端原。
现代文：如此则我进退两路全被堵死，永无出头之日。
English: In such a case, I would be blocked in both directions and would never be able to get ahead.

古文：县命西望，涕笔俱下。 
现代文：我悬着性命西望仰托于您，眼泪随着笔墨一起落下。
English: I'm hanging on for dear life, looking up to you, with tears falling as I write.

古文：其五曰： 鄱阳之民，实多愚劲，帅之赴役。
现代文：第五条说：鄱阳的百姓，其实大多为愚昧而强悍之人，带领他们作战，他们不会随即响应，鼓动他们作乱，他们就会闻风而动。
English: The fifth article said: "The people of Shenyang are actually mostly ignorant and tough people. If you lead them to fight, they will not immediately respond. If you incite them to make trouble, they will be moved by the wind.

古文：未即应人，倡之为变，闻声响拚今虽降首，盘节未解，山栖草藏，乱心犹存。而今东主图兴大众，举国悉出。江边空旷，屯坞虚损，惟有诸刺奸耳。
现代文：现在他们虽然已经降服，但盘根错节的关系并未消解，栖身深山草野，作乱之心依然存在，而现在东吴国主企图大规模兴兵，出动全国兵马，江边防守空虚，军营船坞兵员大为减少，只有那些刺探军情的奸细而已。
English: Now, although they have surrendered, the entangled relationship has not been resolved. Hiding deep in the mountains and grasslands, the heart of chaos still exists. And now the East Wu sovereign is attempting to raise a large-scale army and dispatch national soldiers and horses. The riverside defense is empty, and the number of soldiers in the military camp dock has been greatly reduced. Only those spies are spying on the military situation.

古文：若因是际而骚动此民，一旦可得更会，然要恃外援，表里机互，不尔以往，无所成也。
现代文：如果借此机会来骚动此地百姓，一下子即可得手，不过需要依靠外援，内外配合互助，否则就不可能成功。
English: If you take this opportunity to stir up the local people, you can get it right away, but you need to rely on foreign aid and mutual assistance at home and abroad, otherwise it will not be possible to succeed.

古文：今使君若从皖道进住江上，鲂当从南对岸历口为应。
现代文：现在明君您从皖道进军驻扎江边，我当从南面对岸的历口作内应。
English: Now that you, Mingjun, are marching to the riverside from the main road, I should respond from the south side of the river.

古文：若未径到江岸，可住百里上。令此间民知北军在彼，即自善也。
现代文：如果没有直接到达江边，可驻扎在百里洲上，使这里的百姓知道北军就在彼地，就会自己行动。
English: If they do not reach the riverside directly, they can be stationed on Baili Zhou, so that the people here know that the Northern Army is in the other place, and they will act on their own.

古文：此间民非苦饥寒而甘兵寇，苦于征讨，乐得北属，但穷困举事，不时见应，寻受其祸耳。
现代文：这里的百姓并非苦于饥寒而甘愿军队入侵，而是苦于征讨，乐于北归魏国，只是在穷困时节举事，不能及时得到北方的呼应，很快就受到灾祸而已。
English: The people here are not suffering from hunger and cold and are willing for the army to invade, but are suffering from conscription and are willing to return to the northern Wei state. They only take action in times of poverty. If they cannot get the response from the north in time, they will soon be plagued.

古文：如使石阳及青、徐诸军首尾相衔，牵缀往兵，使不得速退者，则善之善也。
现代文：如果让石阳和青州、徐州各军首尾相连，牵制住东吴派往的部队，使其不能迅速返回，则好上加好了。
English: If the armies of Shiyang, Qingzhou and Xuzhou were to be linked end-to-end, holding back the troops sent to Dongwu so that they could not return quickly, it would be even better.

古文：鲂生在江、淮，长于时事，见其便利，百举百捷，时不再来，敢布腹心。 
现代文：我生在江、淮，在动荡的时局中长大，深知其地的便利之处，百战百胜，时不再来，故此冒昧地表述心腹之言。
English: I was born in Jiangsu and Huaiyin, and grew up in the turbulent times. I am well aware of the convenience of this place, and know that there is no time like the present. Therefore, I dare to express the words of my confidant.

古文：其六曰： 东主致恨前者不拔石阳，今此后举，大合新兵，并使潘浚发夷民，人数甚多，闻豫设科条，当以新羸兵置前，好兵在后，攻城之日。云欲以羸兵填堑，使即时破，虽未能然，是事大趣也。
现代文：第六条说：东吴国主痛恨以往没有拔取石阳，现在作事后行动，大聚新兵，并使潘王睿征发夷人，人数甚多。听说预先设下方案，将以体弱的新兵打头阵，精兵放在后面，攻城之日，说要以弱兵来填塞壕沟，使城池及时攻破，虽说未必真是这样，但事情大致不差。
English: Article 6 said: The ruler of the State of Eastern Wu hated the fact that Shiyang had not been taken in the past, and now, as an after-the-fact action, he gathered a large number of new soldiers, and made Pan Wangrui recruit and dispatch a large number of barbarians. I heard that the plan was set in advance, and the weak recruits would be at the forefront, and the elite soldiers would be placed behind. On the day of the siege, it was said that the weak soldiers would be used to fill the trench and break through the city in time. Although this is not necessarily true, things are generally not bad.

古文：私恐石阳城小，不能久留往兵，明使君速垂救济，试宜疾密。
现代文：我私下担心石阳城小，不能长时间阻止进攻的军队，您应当迅速前去救援，千万要快速机密。
English: I am privately worried that Shiyang is a small city and cannot hold off the attacking army for a long time. You should go to the rescue quickly, and be sure to act quickly and secretly.

古文：王靖之变，其鉴不远。
现代文：王靖的变故，借鉴不远。
English: Wang Jing's change of fortune is not far away.

古文：今鲂归命，非复在天，正在明使君耳。
现代文：如今我的归顺，不再取决于天，而正决定于您了。
English: Now my surrender no longer depends on the heavens, but on you.

古文：若见救以往，则功可必成，如见救不时，则与靖等同祸。
现代文：如果救援及时，则大功定可告成；如果不及时援救，则与王靖等人一样横遭祸患。
English: If the rescue is timely, the great work can be accomplished; if the rescue is not timely, it will be the same as Wang Jing and others.

古文：前彭绮时，闻旗麾在逢龙，此郡民大小欢喜，并思立效，若留一月日间，事当大成，恨去电速，东得增众专力讨绮，绮始败耳。
现代文：从前彭绮举事时，听说您的军队在逢龙驻扎，此郡百姓老少皆大欢喜，并想马上效力。如果多拖延一月时间，其事一定大成，遗憾您像闪电般的离去，使东吴得以增援兵力专门征讨彭绮，彭绮才遭到失败。
English: Once upon a time, when Peng Rong raised an army, he heard that your army was stationed in Fenglong. The people of this county, both young and old, were very happy and wanted to serve immediately. If you had delayed for one more month, the matter would have been completed. It is regrettable that you left like lightning, so that Dongwu could recruit reinforcements specifically to recruit Peng Rong. Peng Rong was defeated.

古文：愿使君深察此言。 
现代文：希望使君您深察我的话语。
English: I hope that you will ponder my words.

古文：其七曰： 今举大事，自非爵号无以劝之，乞请将军、侯印各五十纽，郎将印百纽，校尉、都尉印各二百纽，得以假授诸魁帅，奖厉其志，并乞请幢麾数十，以为表帜，使山兵吏民，目瞻见之，知去就之分己决，承引所救画定。
现代文：第七条说：如今想成大事，没有爵位称号无法鼓动人家，恳切请求您赐以将军、侯爵印玺各五十纽，郎将印五十纽，校尉、都尉印各二百纽，使我能用来授予各头领，奖赏并鼓励他们的士气，并恳切请求您赐予贵军旗盖数十副，作为标帜，使山越的官兵百姓，都能观见，知道去留何方的选择已经定下，接应的救援部队已经布置妥当。
English: The seventh article said: "Nowadays, I want to achieve great things. Without a title of nobility, I cannot inspire others. I earnestly request that you give the general and the marquis fifty New Zealand dollars each, the lord of the manor fifty New Zealand dollars each, and the lieutenant and captain two hundred New Zealand dollars each, so that I can use it to award the leaders, reward and encourage their morale. I also earnestly request that you give your army dozens of flag covers as a banner, so that the officers, soldiers and people across the mountains can see and know where to stay. The choice has been made, and the rescue forces have been properly arranged.

古文：又彼此降叛，日月有人，阔狭之间，辄得闻知。
现代文：又双方投降叛逃的人，每天每月都有，迟早之间，即会知道此事。
English: And those who have surrendered and defected on both sides, day after day, month after month, will know about this sooner or later.

古文：今之大事，事宜神密，若省鲂笺，乞加隐秘。
现代文：今日所计划的大事，处理应当神密，如果您看过我的笺书，恳求倍加隐秘。
English: The great affair planned for today should be treated with the utmost secrecy, and if you have seen my secret letter, I beg you to make it doubly secret.

古文：伏知智度有常，防虑必深，鲂怀忧震灼，启事蒸仍，乞未罪怪。 
现代文：我知您智虑有定数，防范的考虑必定深远，我由于心怀忧虑而十分焦灼，禀陈事情繁杂口罗嗦，恳求不要怪罪。
English: I know that your wisdom has a fixed number, and the precautionary considerations must be far-reaching. I am very anxious because of my worries, and I have a lot of things to say. I beg you not to blame.

古文：鲂因别为密表曰： 方北有逋寇，固阻河洛，久稽王诛，自擅朔土，臣曾不能吐奇举善。上以光赞洪化，下以输展万一，忧心如捣，假寐忘寝。
现代文：周鲂又另写了一份秘密奏章说： 如今北方有窜逃的贼寇，顽固地拒守黄河、洛水，长期阻止大军前往诛伐。擅自盘踞北方国土，为臣尚不曾拿出奇计作出良举，在上光大辅佐宏大的教化，对下输献施展万分之一的功绩，故此忧心如受捶击，夜里躺着不能入睡。
English: Zhou Yu also wrote another secret report, saying: Nowadays, there are escaping bandits in the north, stubbornly refusing to defend the Yellow River and Luoshui, and preventing large armies from going to the battle for a long time. They have occupied the northern land without authorization, and have not yet come up with a good plan for the minister, and have made a great contribution to the enlightenment of the Shangguang Daifu, and have performed one-ten-thousandth of the merits to the inferior countries. Therefore, this worry is like being beaten, and I can't fall asleep at night.

古文：敕臣以前诱致贼休，恨不如计，令于郡界求山谷魁帅为北贼所闻知者。令与北通。
现代文：我朝圣明如天盖大地，含育为臣而臣无什么效力，辱没朝廷优厚的任命，让我在前线将曹休老贼诱来，深恨不能按计划办事。令我在本郡地方内寻找山林中为北贼所熟知的头目，让他们与北方联络。
English: My pilgrimage was as obvious as the sky covering the earth, including education as a vassal and a vassal had no effect, and I disgraced the generous appointment of the imperial court. I was asked to lure Cao Xiu, the old thief, to the front line, and I deeply regret that I could not do things as planned. I was asked to search for the well-known leaders of the northern thieves in the mountains and forests in this county, and let them communicate with the north.

古文：臣伏思惟，喜怖交集。窃恐此人不可卒得，假使得之，惧不可信，不如令臣谲休，于计为便。
现代文：为臣潜心思考，高兴与不安相加，私下担心此类人物不可能较快地寻到，即使得到，只怕也不可信，不如让臣亲自诱骗曹休，这样能更为妥当地实现计划。
English: Thinking deeply for the minister, he was both happy and uneasy, privately worried that such a person could not be found quickly, and even if he did, he would not be trusted. It would be better to let the minister deceive Cao Xiu in person, so that the plan could be implemented more appropriately.

古文：此臣得以经年之冀愿。逢值千载之一会，辄自督竭，竭尽顽蔽，撰立笺草以诳诱休者，如别纸。
现代文：这就使为臣能实现多年的心愿，正好用于这千载难得的一次机会上，因此为臣自督尽力，竭尽愚顽的心智，撰写了笺书来骗诱曹休，内容另附于纸。
English: This made it possible for the minister to realize his long-cherished wish, just for this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Therefore, the minister tried his best, exhausted his foolish mind, and wrote a fake book to deceive Cao Xiu, the content of which is attached to another paper.

古文：臣知无古人单复之术，加卒奉大略，伀蒙狼狈，惧以轻愚，忝负特施。豫怀忧灼。
现代文：为臣深知没有古人那种独行复杂之计，加之仓促奉献重大方略，惶恐狼狈，害怕自己轻率鲁莽，忝负朝廷特恩，故事先即忧虑焦灼。
English: The vassal is well aware that there is no such thing as the ancients' complex strategy of going it alone, coupled with the hasty dedication of major strategies, he is terrified, afraid of his own imprudence and recklessness, incurring the favor of the imperial court, and the story begins with anxiety.

古文：臣闻唐尧先天而天弗违，博询刍荛，以成盛勋。
现代文：为臣听说唐尧总是先请示上天，而上天不违他的意旨，广泛征询下层社会意见，故能成就伟大的功勋。
English: The vassal heard that Tang Xuan always asked Heaven for guidance first, and Heaven did not go against his will, extensively soliciting the opinions of the lower social strata, so he could achieve great feats.

古文：朝廷神谟，欲必致休于步度之中，灵赞圣规，休必自送，使六军囊括，虏无孑遗，威风电迈，天下幸甚。
现代文：如今朝廷神明的谋略，意在一定把曹休引入我们设置的圈套，神灵赞助圣贤筹划，曹休必定自己送上门来，使六军囊括以尽，一个也不得漏网，我朝威势如同闪电传照四海，天下之人庆为幸运。
English: Nowadays, the strategy of the gods of the imperial court is intended to bring Cao Xiu into the trap we set. The gods sponsor the sages to plan. Cao Xiu will certainly send them to the door himself, so that the six armies are fully covered, and no one can escape the net. My imperial might is like lightning shining across the sea, and people all over the world are celebrating as lucky.

古文：谨拜表以闻，并呈笺草，惧于浅局，追用悚息。 
现代文：为臣谨拜表以示，并呈上笺书草稿，担心自己浅见狭识，一想起来即惶恐喘息。 
English: As a vassal, I respectfully bowed to the table to show it, and submitted a draft of the letter, worried that I was shallow and narrow-minded, and gasped with fear when I thought about it.

古文：被报施行。
现代文：周鲂的奏章被批准施行。
English: Zhou Jun's report was approved and implemented.

古文：休果信鲂，帅步骑十万，辎重满道，径来入皖。
现代文：曹休果然相信周鲂，统率步、骑兵十万之众，辎重车辆沿路都是，径直前入皖城。
English: Cao Xiu really believed Zhou Yu. He marched at the head of a hundred thousand cavalry, with heavy vehicles along the road, and went straight to the city.

古文：鲂亦合众，随陆逊横截休，休幅裂瓦解，斩获万计。
现代文：周鲂也集中部队，随陆逊截断曹休队伍，曹休的军队幅裂瓦解，一败涂地，被吴军斩杀俘获者数以万计。
English: Zhou Bin also concentrated his troops, and cut off Cao Xiu's army with Lu Xun. Cao Xiu's army disintegrated and was defeated. Tens of thousands of people were killed and captured by the Wu Army.

古文：鲂初建密计时，频有郎官奉诏诘问诸事，鲂乃诣部郡门下，因下发谢，故休闻之，不复疑虑。
现代文：周鲂当初设立秘密计划时，不断有郎官奉诏前来诘问各种事情，周鲂于是前往部郡门前，借此剃去头发以示认罪，故此曹休听说后，就不再对他有什么怀疑。
English: When Zhou Qi initially set up a secret plan, there were constantly officials coming to interrogate various things. Zhou Qi then went to the front of the ministry to shave off his hair to show his confession. Therefore, after hearing this, Cao Xiu no longer had any doubts about him.

古文：事捷军旋，权大会诸将欢宴，酒酣。
现代文：战争结束军队凯旋，孙权召集各位将领大摆酒宴。
English: At the end of the war, the army returned in triumph, and Sun Quan called together the generals for a grand wine banquet.

古文：谓鲂曰： 君下发载义，成孤大事，君之功名，当书之竹帛。 
现代文：酒兴正酣，孙权对周鲂说： 您落发载义，成就孤家大事，您的功名，一定记入史册。 
English: As the wine was flowing, Sun Quan said to Zhou Qi: You have accomplished a great deal, and your name will be recorded in the history books.

古文：加裨将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：他加授周鲂裨将军，赐予爵位 关内侯 。
English: He also conferred the title of General of Zhou Enlai and the title of Lord of Guanzhong.

古文：贼帅董嗣负阻劫钞，豫章、临川并受其害。
现代文：盗贼首领董嗣凭借险阻抢劫抄掠，豫章、临川二郡都受到他的危害。
English: The leader of the thieves, Dong Ci, robbed and plundered with the help of obstacles. Both Yuzhang County and Linchuan County were harmed by him.

古文：吾粲、唐咨尝以三千兵攻守，连月不能拔。
现代文：吾粲、唐咨曾用三千兵马攻打他的防地，一连几个月都不能攻破。
English: Wu Zheng and Tang Zhe used three thousand soldiers and horses to attack his defense, and they could not break through for several months.

古文：鲂表乞罢兵，得以便宜从事。
现代文：周鲂上表请求停止进兵，以便寻找机会再行事。
English: Zhou Yu requested to stop the advance of troops on the table, so as to find an opportunity to act again.

古文：鲂遣间谍，授以方策，诱狙杀嗣。
现代文：周鲂派出间谍，授给他们具体的计策，诱诓董嗣并将其杀死。
English: Zhou Yu sent spies and gave them specific strategies to lure Dong Ci and kill him.

古文：嗣弟怖惧，诣武昌降于陆逊，乞出平地，自改为善，由是数郡无复忧惕。
现代文：董嗣的弟弟十分害怕，前到武昌向陆逊投降，乞求出山到平原地区生活，自我改恶从善，自是几个郡不再有所忧惧担心了。
English: Dong Xi's younger brother was very scared. He went to Wuchang to surrender to Lu Xun, begged to go out of the mountains to live in the plains, and changed himself from evil to good. He was no longer worried about several counties.

古文：鲂在郡十三年卒，赏善罚恶。威恩并行。
现代文：周鲂在郡守职位上十三年去世，他奖善惩恶，恩威并用。
English: Zhou Jun passed away after thirteen years as county magistrate. He rewarded the good, punished the evil, and was benevolent.

古文：子处，亦有文武材干，天纪中为东观今、无难督。
现代文：他的儿子周处，也有文武才干，天纪年间，任东观令，无难督。
English: All around his son, there are also talents in literature and martial arts. During the years of discipline, he was appointed to Dongguan, and there was no difficulty.

古文：钟离牧字子干，会稽山阴人，汉鲁相意七世孙也。
现代文：钟离牧传，钟离牧，字子干，会稽郡山阴县人，汉代鲁国相钟离意的第七代孙。
English: Zhong Li Muxuan, Zhong Li Muxuan, Zi Zi Gan, a native of Shanyin County, Hebei Province, is the seventh-generation grandson of Xi Zhong Li Rui.

古文：少爰居永兴，躬自垦田，种稻二十余亩。
现代文：他年少时迁居永兴，亲自耕种田地，种水稻二十多亩。
English: When he was young, he moved to Yongxing and personally cultivated fields and planted more than 20 mu of rice.

古文：临熟，县民有识认之。牧曰： 本以田荒，故垦之耳。 
现代文：将要成熟时，县里有人按标志来认领稻田，钟离牧说： 本来就是荒芜弃田，故此才将它开垦。 
English: When it was about to mature, someone in the county claimed the rice field according to the sign, and Zhong Yimou said: Originally, it was a barren abandoned field, so I had to reclaim it.

古文：遂以稻与县人。
现代文：于是就将水稻给了那人。
English: So he gave the rice to the man.

古文：县长闻之，召民系狱，欲绳以法，牧为之请。
现代文：县长听说后，将那人召去关进监狱，打算对他绳之以法，钟离牧前去为他求情。
English: After the county magistrate heard about it, he summoned the man to prison, intending to bring him to justice. Zhong Liangmu went to intercede for him.

古文：长曰： 君慕承宫，自行义事，仆为民主，当以法率下，何得寝公宪而从君邪？ 
现代文：县长说： 您敬慕汉代承宫的为人处世之道，可以自行仁义之事，而我是百姓之主，则应以法令约束百姓，怎能舍置国家法令而顺从您的心愿呢？ 
English: The county governor said: You admire the way of life of the Han Dynasty's Chenggong, you can do benevolence and righteousness on your own, but I am the master of the people, so I should restrain the people with laws and regulations. How can I dispense with national laws and regulations and obey your wishes?

古文：牧曰： 此是郡界，缘君意顾，故来暂住。
现代文：钟离牧说： 这里是郡界，由于您有心照顾，故此我才得以暂住。
English: Zhong Li Mu said, "This is the county boundary. Because of your care, I was able to stay here temporarily.

古文：今以少稻而杀此民，何心复留？ 
现代文：如今为了一点稻子就杀掉这个人，我还有什么心意再住下来呢？ 
English: Now I have to kill this man for a bit of rice. How can I live here anymore?

古文：遂出装，还山阴，长自往止之，为释系民。
现代文：于是出县衙回家整顿行装，准备回到山阴去，县长亲自前往家门劝阻他，为他释放了那个人。
English: So he went out of the county and went home to straighten up and prepare to go back to the mountains. The county governor himself went to the house to dissuade him and released the man for him.

古文：民惭惧，率妻子舂所取稻得六十斛米，送还牧，牧闭门不受。
现代文：那人十分惭愧害怕，带领妻儿把那些稻子舂成六十斛米，送还钟离牧，钟离牧关起门不接受。
English: The man was so ashamed and afraid that he led his wife and children to chop the rice into sixty stalks of rice and send it back to Zhong Li Mu. Zhong Li Mu closed the door and refused to accept it.

古文：民输置道旁，莫有取者。牧由此发名。
现代文：那人将米送来放在他家路边，无人去取。钟离牧由此出了名。
English: The man sent the rice and left it on the roadside of his house, and no one went to pick it up. This is how Zhong Yimou became famous.

古文：赤乌五年，从郎中补太子辅义都尉，迁南海太守。
现代文：赤乌五年，钟离牧由郎中补任为太子辅义都尉，升为南海太守。
English: In the 5th year of the Ako era, Zhong Li Maki was appointed by his brother-in-law as the prince's second lieutenant, and was promoted to the Nankai governor.

古文：还为丞相长史，转司直，迁中书令。
现代文：返回朝中为丞相长史，转任司直，升中书令。
English: He returned to the Imperial Court as chancellor chosho choshi, transferred to the position of tsunao, and was promoted to chusho rei.

古文：会建安、鄱阳、新都三郡山民作乱，出牧为监军使者，讨平之。
现代文：正逢建安、鄱阳、新都三郡山越百姓作乱，钟离牧出任为监军使者，讨伐平定骚乱。
English: At the same time, the people of the three counties of Jian'an, Fenyang and Xindu, Shan Yue, were rioting. Zhong Li Mu served as an emissary to supervise the troops and fight to quell the riots.

古文：贼帅黄乱、常俱筹出其部伍，以充兵役。
现代文：贼首黄乱、常俱等人交出他们的队伍，以充实兵役。
English: Thieves Huang Ran, Chang Qu and others handed over their teams to complete their military service.

古文：封秦亭侯，拜越骑校尉。
现代文：朝廷封钟离牧为秦亭侯，授任越骑校尉。
English: The imperial court named Zhong Li Mu as the lord of Qinting and appointed him as the captain of the Yue cavalry.

古文：永安六年，蜀并于魏，武陵五溪夷与蜀接界。时论惧叛乱，乃以牧为平魏将军，领武陵太守，往之郡。
现代文：永安六年，蜀国被魏国兼并，武陵郡五奚谷夷与蜀国接界，当时谈论此事者都担心那里会发生叛乱，于是朝廷任命钟离牧为平魏将军，兼任武陵太守，他前往郡所就任。
English: In the sixth year of Yongan, Shu was annexed by Wei, and Wuling County, Wuzhugu County, was on the border with Shu. At that time, those who talked about the matter were worried that there would be a rebellion there. Therefore, the imperial court appointed Zhong Yimou as the general of Pingwei and also as the governor of Wuling, and he went to the county seat to take office.

古文：魏遣汉葭县长郭纯试守武陵太守，率涪陵民入蜀迁陵界，屯于赤沙，诱致诸夷邑君，或起应纯，又进攻酉阳县，郡中震惧。
现代文：魏国派遣汉葭县县长郭纯试任武陵太守，率领涪陵百姓进入蜀地的迁陵境内，驻扎在赤沙，引诱招致各少数民族部落的首领。这些首领中有人起来响应郭纯，郭纯又进攻酉阳县，郡中人人震惊害怕。
English: Wei dispatched Guo Chun, the governor of Hanzhong County, to serve as the governor of Wuling on a trial basis. He led the people of Hanzhong into the territory of Qianling in Shu, stationed in Chisha, and lured the leaders of various ethnic minority tribes. Some of these leaders rose up in response to Guo Chun, and Guo Chun attacked Poyang County. Everyone in the county was shocked and afraid.

古文：牧问朝吏曰： 西蜀倾覆，边境见侵，何以御之？ 
现代文：钟离牧问府中官员说： 西蜀灭亡，我们边境受侵，现在如何抵御？ 
English: Zhong Li Mu asked the middle-ranking official: "Western Shu has perished, our border has been invaded, how can we defend ourselves now?"

古文：皆对曰： 今二县山险，诸夷阻兵，不可以军惊扰，惊扰则诸夷盘结。
现代文：这些人都说： 如今这两个县山势险阻，各蛮夷部落拥兵自守，不可用军队去惊扰他们，惊扰就会使他们勾结一起。
English: These people all said, "Nowadays, the situation in these two counties and mountains is perilous, and each barbarian tribe is defending itself with soldiers. We must not use the army to alarm them. Alarming them will cause them to collude together."

古文：宜以渐安，可遣恩信吏宣教慰劳。 
现代文：应当逐渐安抚，可以派遣有恩德信义的官员去告谕教化并慰劳他们。 
English: They should be gradually pacified, and officials with benevolence and sincerity can be sent to tell them, enlighten and comfort them.

古文：牧曰： 不然。
现代文：钟离牧说： 不可。
English: Zhong Li Mu said, "No."

古文：外境内侵，诳诱人民，当及其根柢未深而扑取之，此救火贵速之势也。 
现代文：外敌入侵我们境内，骗诱百姓，应当乘他们根基未稳之机将其扑灭攻取，这是救火贵在迅快的情势。 
English: A foreign enemy invades our territory and deceives the people. We should seize the opportunity of their unstable foundation to extinguish and capture them. This is a situation where it is important to quickly put out the fire.

古文：敕外趣严，掾史沮仪者便行军法。
现代文：于是命令迅速整装待发，县吏官员中有阻挠议论者便军法处置。
English: As a result, the order was quickly prepared for dispatch, and the obstructionists among the county officials were dealt with by military law.

古文：抚夷将军尚说牧曰： 昔潘太常督兵五万，然后以讨五溪夷耳。
现代文：抚夷将军高尚劝说钟离牧： 从前潘濬太常督率兵卒五万，然后才能讨伐五溪夷。
English: Fuxi General Gao Shang persuaded Zhong Li Mu: Formerly, Pan Bingtao led fifty thousand soldiers, and then he could fight against Wuxi Yi.

古文：是时刘氏连和，诸夷率化，今既无往日之援，而郭纯已据迁陵，而明府以三千兵深入，尚未见其利也。 
现代文：当时与蜀国结盟和好，各蛮夷部落遵奉教化，如今既没有过去那种援助，而且郭纯已占据迁陵，而您仅以三千兵卒深入险地，我看不出会有什么好处。 
English: At that time, you allied with and made peace with the State of Shu, and the barbarian tribes followed the edification. Today, you don't have the kind of assistance you had in the past, and Guo Chun has occupied Qianling, and you are only three thousand soldiers deep into the dangerous land. I don't see what good it will do.

古文：牧曰： 非常之事，何得循旧？ 
现代文：钟离牧说： 特殊的情况，怎可因循守旧？ 
English: Zhong Li Mu said: Under special circumstances, how can we follow the old way?

古文：即率所领，晨夜进道，缘山险行，垂二千里，从塞上，斩恶民怀异心者魁帅百余人及其支党凡于余级，纯等散，五溪平。
现代文：当即率领部下，日夜兼程，沿着山中险要道路行军，走了将近两千里，到边塞，斩杀怀有异心的刁民首领计一百多人及其党羽一千多人。郭纯等人四散逃亡，五奚谷得以平定。
English: He immediately led his subordinates, day and night, marching along the dangerous road in the mountains, walked nearly two thousand miles, to the border fortress, and killed more than one hundred leaders of the Min people and more than one thousand of their party members. Guo Chun and others fled in all directions, and Wushan Valley was pacified.

古文：迁公安督、扬武将军，封都乡侯，徙濡须督。
现代文：钟离牧被升任为公安督、扬武将军，封爵都乡侯，转任濡须督。
English: Zhong Li Mu was promoted to the post of the public security governor, Yangwu general, knighted as the lord of the township, and transferred to the post of the governor of Wuxu.

古文：复以前将军假节，领武陵太守。
现代文：后来再以前将军、假节的身份，兼任武陵太守。
English: Later, as a former general and a false festival, he also served as the governor of Wuling.

古文：卒官。
现代文：他去世于官任上。
English: He later died in office.

古文：家无余财，士民思之。
现代文：家中没有剩余财产，官民都很怀念他。
English: There is no surplus property in the family, and both the public and private miss him very much.

古文：子袆嗣，代领兵。
现代文：他儿子钟离继承爵位，接替他带领部队。
English: His son Zhong Li inherited the title and succeeded him to lead the troops.

