古文：丁晋公之逐，土大夫远嫌，莫敢与之通声问。
现代文：丁晋公被放逐，士大夫避嫌疑，没有人敢与他互通声息，以书信问讯往来。
English: Ding Jin Gong was banished, and the scholar avoided suspicion. No one dared to communicate with him or ask him for information by letter.

古文：一日，忽有一书与执政。执政得之，不敢发，立具上闻。
现代文：有一天，忽然有他的一封信投给执政大臣，执政大臣收信后不敢打开，立即报告给了皇上。
English: One day, he suddenly sent a letter to the ruling minister. After receiving the letter, the ruling minister did not dare to open it and immediately reported it to the emperor.

古文：洎发之，乃表也，深自叙致，词颇哀切。
现代文：等到打开信封，才知道里面装的是给皇上的奏表，表中用尽心机委婉陈述自己的处境，为自己开脱，言词似乎恳切，心迹颇令人同情。
English: It wasn't until I opened the envelope that I realized it contained a report for the emperor. In the report, I tried my best to explain my situation in a tactful manner, exonerating myself. The words seemed sincere, and my intentions were quite sympathetic.

古文：其间两句曰： 虽迁陵之罪大，念立主之功多。 
现代文：其中有两句说： 虽迁移先帝陵址之事罪大，还望皇上念及罪臣辅佐先帝之功多。 
English: Among them, there are two sentences that say: Although the relocation of the former emperor's tomb site is a great sin, I also hope that the emperor will remember the great merits of the former emperor's vassals.

古文：遂有北还之命。
现代文：于是有仁宗允许他迁居内地的诏命。
English: Therefore, Emperor Kazuchika allowed him to move inland.

古文：谓多智变，以流人无因达章秦，遂托为执政书。度以上闻，因蒙宽宥。
现代文：丁谓多智术权变，以流放之人没有途径把私人章奏送到皇帝手上，于是假托为写给执政的书信，估计执政会不敢开拆而报告给皇帝，竟因此获得皇帝的宽恕而内迁。
English: Ding called it a multi-intellectual power shift. The exiled person had no way to deliver the private chapter to the emperor, so he pretended to write a letter to the government, estimated that the government would not dare to open it and reported it to the emperor. As a result, he received the emperor's forgiveness and moved in.

古文：段成式《酉阳杂俎》记事多诞。
现代文：段成式的《酉阳杂俎》一书，记事多有荒诞不经之处。
English: The book, which is in the form of a series of paragraphs, contains many absurdities.

古文：其间叙草木异物，尤多谬妄。率记异国所出，欲无根柢。
现代文：其中记叙奇花异草、珍贵树木尤多错误和歪曲，大抵记别国所出者几乎没有根底。
English: Among them, there are many errors and distortions in the descriptions of exotic flowers and plants and precious trees, and most of the descriptions from other countries have almost no foundation.

古文：如云 一木五香：根旃檀，节沉香，花鸡舌，叶藿，胶薰陆。 
现代文：如书中说： 有一种树能产五种香料：它的根是檀香，枝节是沉香，花是鸡舌香，叶是藿香，流出的胶是薰陆香。 
English: As it says in the book: There is a kind of tree that can produce five kinds of spices: its root is sandalwood, branches are agarwood, flowers are cockscomb, leaves are musk, and the glue that flows out is incense.

古文：此尤谬。
现代文：这是特别荒谬的。
English: This is particularly absurd.

古文：旃檀与沉香，两木元异。
现代文：檀香与沉香两种树木原是不同的。
English: Sandalwood and agarwood are two different trees.

古文：鸡舌即今丁香耳，今药品中所用者亦非。藿香自是草叶，南方至多。
现代文：鸡舌香就是现在的丁香，今日药品中所用的鸡舌香也不是真正的鸡舌香。藿香自是草本植物，叶也是草叶，南方极为多见。
English: Cochineal is what cloves are today, and the cochineal used in medicines today is not true cochineal. Fennel is itself a herb, and its leaves are also blades of grass, and it is extremely common in the south.

古文：薰陆，小木而大叶，海南亦有薰陆，乃其胶也，今谓之乳头香。
现代文：薰陆香是小木本而大叶子，海南也有，所谓 薰陆 指的是它的胶，现在叫做 乳头香 。
English: Lavender incense is a small tree and large leaves, Hainan also has, the so-called Lavender refers to its gum, now called Paprika.

古文：五物迥殊，元非同类。
现代文：这五种植物迥然不同，原不属于同一类别。
English: The five plants are so different that they do not belong to the same genus.

古文：包孝肃尹京，号为明察。
现代文：包孝肃为权知开封府，以明察著称。
English: Bao Xiaoshu was a scholar who opened the imperial court, and was known for his keen observation.

古文：有编民犯法，当杖脊。吏受赇，与之约曰： 今见尹，必付我责状。
现代文：有个平民犯法当受杖脊之刑，府中有个吏人受了他的贿赂，与他约定说： 今天府尹要提讯你，一定会把写具结书的事交给我。
English: There was a commoner who broke the law and was punished with the cane. An official in the prefectural government received a bribe from him and agreed with him, saying, "Today, the prefectural government is going to summon you, so be sure to hand over the matter of writing and signing to me."

古文：汝第呼号自辩，我与汝分此罪。汝决杖，我亦决杖。 
现代文：你只管呼天喊地地为自己辩解，我给你分担罪责，你被判打板子，我也被判打板子。 
English: All you have to do is shout to the heavens to justify yourself, I will give you a share of the blame, you are sentenced to be beaten, and I am also sentenced to be beaten.

古文：既而包引囚问毕，果付吏责状。囚如吏言，分辩不已。
现代文：没过多会儿，包拯叫人押囚犯上堂审讯完毕，果然叫吏人起草案子的具结书，囚犯按吏人事先的嘱咐，辩解个不停。
English: Not long after, Bao Zheng called for the prisoners to be taken to the court, and after the interrogation was over, the officials were indeed asked to draw up a final report. The prisoners, as the officials had ordered in advance, argued incessantly.

古文：吏大声诃之曰： 但受脊杖出去，何用多言！ 
现代文：吏人大声诃斥说： 你只管受脊杖滚出去，何必啰唆！ 
English: The magistrate loudly rebuked him, saying: Just get out with your cane, why do you have to instigate!

古文：包谓其市权，捽吏于庭，杖之十七。特宽囚罪，止从杖坐，以抑吏势。
现代文：包拯以为这吏人越职卖权，把他揪到公堂上，打他屁股十七板，而特地宽减了囚犯的罪行，也只判他受臀杖，以抑制吏人的权势。
English: Bao Zheng thought that this official was overstepping his duty and selling power, so he dragged him to the court and beat his ass with seventeen boards, but he specially mitigated the prisoner's crime, and only sentenced him to receive a cane, in order to curb the official's power.

古文：不知乃为所卖，卒如素约。
现代文：其实包拯不知道已为吏人所卖，判决的结果最终和吏人事先与犯人的约定一样。
English: In fact, Bao Zheng did not know that he had been sold by the official, and the result of the judgment was ultimately the same as the official's prior agreement with the prisoner.

古文：小人为奸，固难防也。
现代文：小人做奸诈的勾当，本来就是很难防范的。
English: It is inherently difficult to prevent villains from engaging in treacherous activities.

古文：孝肃天性峭严，未尝有笑容，人谓 包希仁笑比黄河清 。
现代文：包孝肃天性峭刻严厉，未尝有笑容，时人称 包拯笑比黄河清 。
English: Bao Xiaozhong was stern and stern by nature, and did not have a smile. People said at the time that Bao Zheng's smile was clearer than the Yellow River.

古文：李溥为江、淮发运使，每歳奏计，则以大船载东南美货，结纳当途，莫知纪极。
现代文：李溥为江淮发运使，每年的年终进京奏报财计状况，即以大船装载东南地区珍贵土产交结贿赂朝中当权大臣，肆无忌惮，不知收敛。
English: Li Wei was the emissary of the Jianghuai River, and every year he went to Beijing at the end of the year to report on the financial situation, that is, he bribed the ministers in power in the DPRK and China with large ships loaded with precious local products in the southeast region. He was unscrupulous and did not know how to restrain himself.

古文：章献太后垂帘时，溥因奏事，盛称浙茶之美，云： 自来进御，唯建州饼茶，而浙茶未尝修贡。
现代文：章献太后垂帘听政时，李溥利用奏事的机会，盛称浙江茶叶的优美精善，又说： 自来向皇宫进贡的，只有建州的饼茶，而浙江茶不曾修贡。
English: When Zhang Xian and the empress dowager were listening to the government, Li Yan took advantage of the opportunity to make a report, praising the beauty and excellence of Zhejiang tea, and said: Only Jianzhou cake tea has paid tribute to the imperial palace, while Zhejiang tea has never paid tribute.

古文：本司以羡余钱买到数千斤，乞进入内。 
现代文：本司用节余的钱买到浙江茶数千斤，请求允许贡入内宫。 
English: The department used the extra money to buy thousands of pounds of Zhejiang tea and requested permission to donate it to the Inner Palace.

古文：自国门挽船而入，称进奉茶纲，有司不敢问。
现代文：他所调度的运茶船，直接从京城大门下的汴水道牵挽到城里，号称是 进奉皇帝的茶纲 ，有关部门都不敢盘查。
English: The tea-carrying boat he dispatched was towed to the city directly from the Lugu Waterway under the gate of the capital, claiming to be the emperor's tea program, and the relevant departments did not dare to investigate.

古文：所贡余者，悉入私室。
现代文：那些进贡剩余的茶叶，他都装入了私囊。
English: He pocketed all the tea that was left over from the tribute.

古文：溥晚年以贿败，窜谪海州。然自此遂为发运司歳例，每发运使入奏，舳舻蔽川，自泗州七日至京。
现代文：李溥晚年以贿赂遭查处落败，被贬斥流放到海州，然而他所首开的茶贡却从此成为江淮发运司每年例行的进贡。每当发运使入奏茶纲进京，长长的大船遮蔽河面，从泗州连行七日到达京城。
English: In his later years, Li Xuan was investigated for bribery and was banished to Haizhou. However, his first tea tribute has since become an annual tribute of the Jianghuai Shipping Company. Whenever the shipping company enters Beijing to play the tea program, a long boat covers the river surface and arrives in Beijing in seven days from Zhangzhou.

古文：余出使淮南时，见有重载入汴者，求得其籍，言两浙笺纸三暖船，他物称是。
现代文：我出使淮南时，见有满载着货物准备入汴京的船只，曾设法弄到这些船只的货物单，上面虽写着 两浙笺纸三暖船 ，其实所运送的其他贡物或私载的货物，都不亚于簿子上所登记的物品的数量。
English: When I was dispatched to Huainan, I saw ships full of goods ready to sail to Beijing. I tried to get the cargo manifest of these ships, and although it said "two sets of paper and three warm boats," in fact, the other tributes or privately loaded goods transported were not less than the number of items registered in the book.

古文：海物有车渠，蛤属也，大者如箕，背有渠垄，如蚶壳，故以为器，致如白玉。
现代文：海中有种生物叫砗磲，属于蚌蛤之类。大的有簸箕那么大，背上有沟有垄，像蚶子的壳，所以人们用它的壳作装饰器物，纹理细密，如同白玉。
English: There is a kind of creature in the sea called the cormorant, which belongs to the cormorant family. The big ones are as big as cormorants, with grooves and ridges on their backs, like a cormorant's shell, so people use its shell as a decorative object, with a fine texture, like white jade.

古文：生南海。
现代文：生于南海中。
English: Born in the South China Sea.

古文：《尚书大传》曰： 文王囚于羑里，散宜生得大贝，如车渠以献纣。 
现代文：《尚书大传》说： 文王被囚禁于羑里，散宜生得一大贝如砗磲，以献给纣王。 
English: "Shangshu Daquan" says: King Wen was imprisoned in Yunnan, and Sanyi gave birth to a large pigeon, which was dedicated to King Yunnan.

古文：郑康成乃解之曰： 渠，车罔也。 
现代文：郑康成竟解释说： 渠，就是车辋。 
English: Zheng Kangcheng actually explained: "The canal is the chariot.

古文：盖康成不识车渠，谬解之耳。
现代文：大概康成不知道什么是砗磲，不过误解之而已。
English: It's possible that Kangcheng didn't know what gong was, but it was just a misunderstanding.

