古文：元稹，字微之，河南人。
现代文：元稹字微之，河南人。
English: He is originally from Henan Province.

古文：后魏昭成皇帝，稹十代祖也。
现代文：后魏昭成皇帝，是元稹的十代远祖。
English: Emperor Wei Zhaocheng is the 10th generation distant ancestor of Yuan Shao.

古文：兵部尚书、昌平公岩，六代祖也。
现代文：兵部尚书、昌平公元岩，是他的六代祖。
English: He is the sixth generation descendant of Hyobu Shoshu and Shohei Iwa.

古文：曾祖延景，岐州参军。
现代文：曾祖元延景，为岐州参军。
English: Zeng Zuyuan Yanjing joined the army in Qizhou.

古文：祖悱，南顿丞。
现代文：祖父元悱，为南顿县丞。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Qi, was the county magistrate of Nantong County.

古文：父宽，比部郎中、舒王府长史，以稹贵，赠左仆射。
现代文：其父元宽，任比部郎中、舒王府长史，因元稹身贵位显，追赠左仆射。
English: His father, Motohiro, who was appointed as the junior vassal of Hibu and the prefect of Shuwangfu, was posthumously awarded the title of Zuhojo because he was a distinguished person.

古文：稹八岁丧父。
现代文：元稹八岁丧父。
English: He lost his father when he was eight years old.

古文：其母郑夫人，贤明妇人也；家贫，为稹自授书，教之书学。
现代文：其母郑夫人，是一位贤明的妇人，因家贫，便自己教元稹读书和写字。
English: His mother, Mrs. Zheng, was a wise woman. Due to the family's poverty, she taught Yuan Yuan to read and write by herself.

古文：稹九岁能属文。
现代文：元稹九岁能写文章。
English: Yuan Qi was able to write articles at the age of nine.

古文：十五两经擢第。
现代文：十五岁应两经科试及第。
English: At the age of fifteen, he got a C and a D in two subject examinations.

古文：二十四调判入第四等，授秘书省校书郎。
现代文：二十四岁吏部判试入第四等，授秘书省校书郎。
English: At the age of twenty-four, he was awarded a fourth-class examination by the Ministry of Civil Affairs and promoted to secretary of the provincial school.

古文：二十八应制举才识兼茂、明于体用科，登第者十八人，稹为第一，元和元年四月也。
现代文：二十八岁应制试才识兼茂、明于体用科，登第者十八人，元稹名列第一，那是元和元年正月。
English: Twenty-eight-year-olds should take the examination, and they should be able to understand and know more, and they should be good at physical science. Eighteen people were ranked first, and the Yuan Dynasty ranked first. It was the first month of the Yuan Dynasty and the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：制下，除右拾遗。
现代文：诏书下，授右拾遗。
English: Under the imperial edict, the right to collect relics was conferred.

古文：稹性锋锐，见事风生。
现代文：元稹天性锋芒毕露，遇事急切不可阻遏。
English: Yuan Xuan's natural sharpness is revealed, and he is impatient in the face of things.

古文：既居谏垣，不欲碌碌自滞，事无不言，即日上疏论谏职。
现代文：即居谏官之位，不想碌碌无为自阻宦路，因此事无不言，受命后当天即上疏论奏履行谏官职责。
English: Even though he held the position of eunuch, he did not want to do anything to obstruct the eunuch's path. Therefore, he had no choice but to perform his duties as eunuch on the very day after receiving the order.

古文：又以前时王叔文、王伾以猥亵待诏，蒙幸太子，永贞之际，大挠朝政。
现代文：又因先前王叔文、王亻丕以下流之品行谋求要职，蒙蔽太子而获宠幸，永贞之际，大大扰乱朝政。
English: In addition, due to the fact that Wang Shouwen and Wang Yao had previously deceived the crown prince to seek important positions, they were favored. On the occasion of Yongzheng, they greatly disrupted the imperial government.

古文：是以训导太子宫官，宜选正人。乃献《教本书》曰：
现代文：因而主张训导太子的宫官，应遴选方正之士，于是呈献《教本书》说道：
English: Therefore, he advocated that the palace officials who would train the prince should be selected from the people of Fang Zheng, so he presented the "Teaching Book" and said:

古文：臣伏见陛下降明诏，修废学，增胄子，选司成。
现代文： 臣俯首，陛下降圣明诏书，重兴废弃之国学，增添国子学生，选派国子祭酒。
English: The vassals bowed their heads, His Majesty lowered the imperial rescript, revived the abandoned national studies, increased the number of national students, and selected the national children's festival wine.

古文：大哉，尧之为君，伯夷典礼，夔教胄子之深旨也！
现代文：伟大呀尧之为君，让伯夷掌管礼仪，夔教育贵族子弟，其意义深远啊。
English: Great ah, let it be you, let Bo Yi control the etiquette, let it educate the children of the aristocracy, its significance is far-reaching ah.

古文：然而事有万万于此者，臣敢冒昧殊死而言之。
现代文：然而这方面的事情真是形形色色，臣大胆冒殊死之罪而陈说。
English: However, this kind of thing is really all over the place, and the minister dared to say it at the risk of death.

古文：臣闻诸贾生曰： 三代之君，仁且久者，教之然也。 
现代文：臣从贾生文章中听说： 三代之君，仁爱而居位久远，是良好的教育导致的结果。 
English: The minister heard from Jia Sheng's article: The prince of three generations, benevolent and long-serving, is the result of good education.

古文：诚哉是言！
现代文：这话确实不假。
English: This is indeed true.

古文：且夫周成王，人之中才也，近管、蔡则谗入，有周、召则义闻，岂可谓天聪明哉？
现代文：先说那周成王，人才一般，亲近管叔、蔡叔则听信谗言，仰赖周公、召公则大义闻于天下，难道能说是天生聪明吗？
English: First of all, that Zhou Cheng Wang, talent is average, close to Uncle Guan, Uncle Cai is to listen to advice, rely on Zhou Gong, call for public service is widely known in the world, can it be said to be born smart?

古文：然而克终于道者，得不谓教之然耶？
现代文：然而他能始终恪守王道，能说不是教育导致的结果吗？
English: However, he can always adhere to the royal road, can we say that it is not the result of education?

古文：俾伯禽、唐叔与之游，《礼》、《乐》、《诗》、《书》为之习，目不得阅淫艳妖诱之色，耳不得闻优笑凌乱之音，口不得习操断击博之书，居不得近容顺阴邪之党，游不得纵追禽逐兽之乐，玩不得有遐异僻绝之珍。
现代文：使伯禽、唐叔伴他游玩，《礼》、《乐》、《诗》、《书》让他学习，目不得览淫荡妖艳诱人之色，耳不得听逗乐取笑凌乱之音，口不得诵操刀殴斗搏击之书，平时不得接近逢迎阴邪之徒，出游不得放纵于追禽逐兽之乐，赏玩不得有奇异独绝之珍。
English: Let the bird and Uncle Tang accompany him to play, and let him study "Rite," "Music," "Poetry" and "Books." The eyes should not see the lascivious and seductive color, the ears should not hear the amusing and messy sounds, the mouth should not recite the book of sword fighting, the mouth should not be close to the evil-doers, the outing should not indulge in the fun of chasing birds and animals, and the play should not have the unique and rare.

古文：凡此数者，非谓备之于前而不为也，亦将不得见之矣。
现代文：上述种种，不是说摆在面前克制不做，而是根本不屑一顾。
English: The above-mentioned things are not to say that we should not do them, but that we should not pay any attention to them at all.

古文：及其长而为君也，血气既定，游习既成，虽有放心快己之事日陈于前，固不能夺已成之习、已定之心矣。
现代文：待他长成做了君主，血气已定，习性已成，即使有开心乐己之事每日陈现于眼前，也丝毫不能改变已养成的习性、已树立的心志。
English: By the time he grows up to be a monarch, his blood has already been determined and his habits have already been formed. Even if there are things that make him happy and happy every day, it can not change the habits that have been developed and the aspirations that have been established.

古文：则彼忠直道德之言，固吾之所习闻也，陈之者有以谕焉；彼庸佞违道之说，固吾之所积惧也，谄之者有以辨焉。
现代文：而那忠诚正直有德之言，本为我之惯听，陈奏上来我能理解；那庸俗谄佞违道之言，本为我所积惧，逢迎于前我能辨别。
English: But the words of loyalty, honesty and virtue, which I am accustomed to hearing, I can understand when they come up; the vulgar and immoral words, which I am afraid of, I can distinguish before they come up.

古文：人之情，莫不欲耀其所能而党其所近；苟将得志，则必快其所蕴矣。
现代文：人之常情，莫不欲炫耀其才能、结交亲近之人，一旦得志，则必实现夙愿而后快。
English: It is human nature to want to show off one's talents and make close friends. Once one achieves one's goal, one's long-cherished wish will surely come true.

古文：物之性亦然。是以鱼得水而游，马逸驾而走，鸟得风而翔，火得薪而炽。此皆物之快其所蕴也。
现代文：物之天性亦如此，所以鱼得水而游，马脱缰而奔，鸟得风而翔，火得薪而旺，这都是外物以实现夙愿为快事呀。
English: This is also true of the nature of things. That is why a fish swims when it is given water, a horse runs when it is released from its stirrup, a bird flies when it is given wind, and a fire burns when it is given fuel. These are all external things, and it is a pleasure to realize one's wishes.

古文：今夫成王所蕴道德也，所近圣贤也。
现代文：现在成王所蕴蓄的是道德，所亲近的是圣贤。
English: Now, what Chengwang has stored up is morality, and what he is close to is sages.

古文：是以举其近，则周公左而召公右，伯禽鲁而太公齐。快其蕴，则兴礼乐而朝诸侯，措刑罚而美教化。
现代文：所以举用其亲近者，则周公列左而召公列右，伯禽封鲁而太公封齐；快意于实现夙愿，则礼乐振兴而诸侯来朝，设置刑罚而完善教化。
English: Therefore, those who are close to him should be promoted, Zhou Gong should be promoted to the left and Zhou Gong should be promoted to the right, Bo Jiao should be promoted to Lu, and Tai Gong should be promoted to Qi; those who are eager to realize their long-cherished wish should be promoted, and those who are princes should come to the DPRK, and punishments should be set up to improve education.

古文：教之至也，可不谓信然哉！
现代文：教育为至大之事，难道说不是真理吗？
English: Isn't it true that education is the most important thing?

古文：及夫秦则不然。灭先王之学，曰将以愚天下；黜师保之位，曰将以明君臣。
现代文： 及至秦代则不然，灭绝先王之学，目的在于使天下人愚昧；贬低师保之位，说是为了明辨君臣名分。
English: However, this was not the case in the Qin Dynasty. The purpose of eradicating the previous king's learning was to make the people of the world ignorant. The position of teacher and guardian was belittled, saying that it was to distinguish between the titles of prince and subject.

古文：胡亥之生也，《诗》、《书》不得闻，圣贤不得近。
现代文：胡亥生前，《诗》、《书》不得习读，圣贤不亲近。
English: During Hu Hai's lifetime, he was not allowed to study "poetry" or "books," and he was not close to the sages.

古文：彼赵高者，诈宦之戮人也；而傅之以残忍戕贼之术，且曰恣睢天下以为贵，莫见其面以为尊。
现代文：赵高那家伙，是个狡诈的宦官，有罪之人，教给胡亥残忍戕贼的治国方针，将肆意虐害天下人称为高贵，将君王不让臣下见面说成是尊崇。
English: That guy Zhao Gao is a cunning eunuch, a guilty person, who taught Hu Hai, a cruel thief, the policy of governing the country. He called the wanton abuse of the people of the world noble, and said that the king's refusal to let his subjects meet was respect.

古文：是以天下之人人未尽愚，而胡亥固已不能分兽畜矣。赵高之威慑天下，而胡亥固已自幽于深宫矣。
现代文：因此天下之人尚未个个变得愚蠢，而胡亥却已不能分辨鹿马了；赵高权势威慑天下，而胡亥却已被幽禁在深宫了。
English: Therefore, people around the world have not yet become stupid, but Hu Hai can no longer distinguish between deer and horse; Zhao Gao's power intimidates the world, but Hu Hai has been imprisoned in the Deep Palace.

古文：彼李斯，秦之宠丞相也。因谗冤死，无所自明，而况于疏远之臣庶乎！
现代文：那李斯，本是秦朝权位尊宠的丞相，却因谗言而含冤致死，没法为自己辩白，何况那些同朝廷疏远的臣子们呢！
English: But Li Si, who was the favorite of the Qin Dynasty, died unjustly as a result of his criticism. He could not defend himself, let alone those courtiers who were estranged from the imperial court!

古文：若然，则秦之亡有以致之也。
现代文：正因为这样，所以秦朝之灭亡有必然的原因啊。
English: Because of this, the downfall of the Qin Dynasty was inevitable.

古文：汉高承之以兵革，汉文守之以廉谨，卒不能苏复大训。
现代文： 汉高祖以武力承继天下，汉文帝以文治保守帝业，终究不能复苏古代圣王之大道。
English: Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty succeeded to the world by force, and Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty preserved the imperial heritage by means of literature. In the end, it was not possible to revive the avenue of the ancient holy kings.

古文：是以景、武、昭、宣，天资甚美，才可以免祸乱；哀、平之间，则不能虞篡弑矣。
现代文：所以景帝、武帝、昭帝、宣帝，天资极高，才干可以免除祸乱，至哀帝、平帝之间，却不能防备弑君篡位之事。
English: Therefore, Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu, Emperor Zhao, and Emperor Xuan were all highly gifted and capable of avoiding calamity, but Emperor Yao and Emperor Ping were not able to prevent Emperor Xizhong from usurping the throne.

古文：然而惠帝废易之际，犹赖羽翼以胜邪心。
现代文：然而晋惠帝废易之际，还是依赖其羽翼才战胜了邪恶之心。
English: However, when Emperor Jinhui abdicated, he still relied on his wings to defeat the evil heart.

古文：是后有国之君，议教化者，莫不以兴廉举孝、设学崇儒为意，曾不知教化之不行，自贵始。
现代文：此后在位的君主，商议教化之事，没有不将兴廉举孝、设学崇儒放在首位的，却不懂得教化之不能施行是从尊贵者开始的。
English: Since then, the reigning monarchs, when discussing the matter of enlightenment, have not failed to put the promotion of filial piety and the establishment of a school of Confucianism in the first place, but they do not understand that enlightenment cannot be carried out from the beginning.

古文：略其贵者，教其贱者，无乃邻于倒置乎？
现代文：忽略了尊贵之人，而去教那些卑贱之身，恐怕可以说是本末倒置了吧？
English: Ignoring the nobles to teach the lowly is, I'm afraid to say, putting the cart before the horse.

古文：洎我太宗文皇帝之在籓邸，以至于为太子也，选知道德者十八人与之游习。
现代文： 及至我太宗文皇帝在藩邸，直到做了太子，遴选通晓道德者十八人同他们交往研习。
English: Emperor Taizongwen lived in the residence of the domain until he became the crown prince, and he selected 18 people who were well versed in morality to study and interact with them.

古文：即位之后，虽游宴饮食之间，若十八人者，实在其中。
现代文：即位之后，即使游宴饮食之际，这十八人也侧身其中。
English: After the enthronement, even when eating and drinking at the banquet, these eighteen people also leaned in.

古文：上失无不言，下情无不达。不四三年而名高盛古，岂一日二日而致是乎？
现代文：皇上之过失没有不指出的，下臣庶民之议论没有不上达的，不到三四年盛名即超过古之圣君，哪里是一天两天能达到这境地的呢？
English: There is no fault of the emperor that has not been pointed out, there is no subject of the common people that has not been discussed, and in less than three or four years, the reputation has surpassed that of the ancient saint. Where can one achieve this status in a day or two?

古文：游习之渐也！
现代文：完全是通过交游学习日积月累逐步导致的。
English: It is entirely due to the gradual accumulation of learning through travel.

古文：贞观已还，师傅皆宰相兼领，其余宫僚，亦甚重焉。
现代文：贞观以来，太子师傅皆由宰相兼任，对于别的官员，也很慎重地挑选。
English: Since the time of Zhenguan, the prime minister has also served as the prince's mentor, and other officials have been carefully selected.

古文：马周以位高恨不得为司议郎，此其验也。
现代文：马周职位虽高却以不能任司议郎深感遗憾，这便是一个证明。
English: It is a proof that although Ma Zhou's position is high, he deeply regrets that he cannot serve as the chairman.

古文：文皇之后，渐疏贱之。
现代文：太宗之后，对师傅之职逐渐看得轻贱。
English: After Emperor Taizong, the position of master was gradually looked down upon.

古文：用至母后临朝，翦弃王室。
现代文：以致母后临朝，翦灭王室。
English: As a result, his mother, the Empress Dowager, came to the throne and destroyed the royal family.

古文：当中、睿二圣勤劳之际，虽有骨鲠敢言之士，既不得在调护保安之职，终不能吐扶卫之一辞。而令医匠安金藏剖腹以明之，岂不大哀也耶？
现代文：当中宗、睿宗二圣理政之际，虽然也有鲠直敢言之士，但因不能担任调护保安的官职，终究不能为匡扶和维护国家利益吐露一句话，而逼得医匠安金藏剖腹以自我表白，岂不是莫大的悲哀吗？
English: When Zhongzong and Ruizong were both in power, although there were those who dared to speak out, because they could not serve as officials to regulate security, they could not utter a word to support and safeguard national interests, and forced the physician An Jinsang to disembowel himself to confess. Isn't it a great sorrow?

古文：兵兴已来，兹弊尤甚。
现代文： 朝廷动兵以来，这种弊病更加厉害。
English: Since the imperial court mobilized troops, this malady has become more severe.

古文：师资保傅之官，非疾废眊聩不任事者为之，即休戎罢帅不知书者处之。至于友谕赞议之徒，疏冗散贱之甚者，缙绅耻由之。
现代文：师资保傅这类官职，不是让病残盲聋不能干事的人担任，就是要不知书的退役将帅承当，甚至于是那些一味顺从夸赞之徒，十分疏慵鄙陋的人，连一般官绅都耻于任用他们。
English: This kind of official position, such as teacher's guarantor, is not for the sick, the disabled, the blind and the deaf who can't be an officer, but for the retired generals who don't know the book. Even those who are obedient to the praise, are very rude and despicable, and even the general officials and gentry are ashamed to appoint them.

古文：夫以匹士之爱其子者，犹求明哲慈惠之师以教之，直谅多闻之友以成之。岂天下之元良，而可以疾废眊聩不知书者为之师乎？
现代文：匹夫爱其子，尚且寻求明哲慈惠的老师教育他，让诚挚博学的朋友助成他，难道天下尊崇的太子，却可以让病残盲聋不知书者做他的老师吗？
English: If the prince loves his son and seeks a wise and benevolent teacher to educate him, and a sincere and learned friend to assist him, can the prince, who is revered throughout the world, allow a crippled, blind, deaf, and illiterate man to be his teacher?

古文：疏冗散贱不适用者为之友乎？
现代文：让疏慵鄙陋不合用者做他的朋友吗？
English: To make friends with a petty, mean-spirited misfit?

古文：此何不及上古之甚也！
现代文：这比上古真是差得太远了！
English: That's a far cry from ancient times!

古文：近制，宫僚之外，往往以沉滞僻老之儒，充侍直、侍读之选，而又疏弃斥逐之，越月逾时，不得召见，彼又安能傅成道德而保养其身躬哉？
现代文：近时规矩，太子属官之外，往往从呆滞守旧的儒者中选人充任侍直、侍读，而又摒弃斥逐他们，十天月余，得不到召见，他们又怎能帮助太子育成道德而保养自身呢？
English: Recently, in addition to the prince's subordinate officials, it is often the rule to select people from the old-fashioned Confucians to serve as attendants and attendants, but they refuse to expel them, and they have not been summoned for more than ten days and months. How can they help the prince cultivate morality and maintain themselves?

古文：臣以为积此弊者，岂不以皇天眷佑，祚我唐德，以舜继尧，传陛下十一圣矣，莫不生而神明，长而仁圣，以是为屑屑习仪者故不之省耳。
现代文：臣以为造成此弊端的原因，是因为皇天庇佑，赐我大唐以恩德，以舜继尧以来，传至陛下共有十一位圣君，没有一人不是生而神明，长而仁圣，所以把这看作区区小事而不省悟。
English: The minister thought that the reason for this drawback was that the Emperor, under the protection of Heaven, had bestowed the grace of the Great Tang Dynasty on me. Since then, there have been a total of eleven saints who have been passed down to His Majesty. There is no one who was not born as a god and grew up as a benevolent saint. Therefore, he regarded this as a trivial matter and did not reflect on it.

古文：臣独以为于列圣之谋则可也，计传后嗣则不可。
现代文：臣私下认为作为列圣一时之谋略固然可以，但决计将此仪制传给后代则不可以。
English: Privately, the vassal thought that it was all right as a strategy for canonization, but it was not all right to pass on this ritual system to future generations.

古文：脱或万代之后，若有周成之中才，而又生于深宫优笑之间，无周、召保助之教，则将不能知喜怒哀乐之所自矣，况稼穑艰难乎？
现代文：倘或万代之后，有像周成王一般才能平庸之人，而又生长在深宫优人笑乐之间，没有周公、召公那样的老师予以卫护扶助，那么他将连喜怒哀乐应由何而生都不能懂得，何况稼穑之事的艰难呢！
English: If, after thousands of generations, there is a person with mediocre talent like Zhou Chengwang, but grew up in a deep palace between good people and laughter, without a teacher like Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong to protect and support him, then he will not even be able to understand where the emotions come from, let alone the difficulties of making money!

古文：今陛下以上圣之资，肇临海内，是天下之人倾耳注心之日。
现代文： 现在陛下凭着最圣明的天资，开始统御海内，这是天下人衷心盼望的日子。
English: Now His Majesty, with the most sacred talent, begins to reign over the sea, which is the day that people around the world sincerely hope for.

古文：特愿陛下思成王训导之功，念文皇游习之渐，选重师保，慎择宫僚，皆用博厚弘深之儒，而又明达机务者为之。
现代文：特祝陛下思周成王得益于训导之效，念太宗文皇帝交游研习日积月累之功，慎重地选择师保和宫僚，皆用品学博大深厚之儒者，而行事又通达机智的人来充当。
English: In particular, I wish that His Majesty King Zhoucheng will benefit from the effect of training, learn from the time-consuming study of Emperor Taizongwen, and carefully select teachers and courtiers, all of whom are Confucianists with profound knowledge and wisdom, and act as witty people.

古文：更相进见，日就月将。
现代文：递相进见，日训月导。
English: Progressing step by step, day by day, month by month.

古文：因令皇太子聚诸生，定齿胄讲业之仪，行严师问道之礼。至德要道以成之，彻膳记过以警之。
现代文：进一步命皇太子聚集众儒生，奉行论年齿研习学业之仪，向严师请教事理之礼，让他们以至德要道辅之成功，以撤膳记过对其警告。
English: He further ordered the crown prince to gather all the Confucian students, to follow the ritual of studying and studying their studies, to ask Yan Shi for the courtesy of teaching, to let them succeed with virtue, and to warn them by withdrawing their meals.

古文：血气未定，则去禽色之娱以就学；圣质已备，则资游习之善以弘德。
现代文：血气未养成，则抛却禽兽美色之乐而从事学习；圣质已具备，则资助交游研习之友以弘扬道德。
English: If the temperament is not developed, they will abandon the beauty of animals and beasts and engage in learning; if the sacred quality is already available, they will support the friends of travel and study to promote morality.

古文：此所谓 一人元良，万方以贞 之化也。
现代文：这便是所谓一人卓异而能使万方守正的教化啊。
English: This is the so-called enlightenment that one person is outstanding and can make all sides correct.

古文：岂直修废学，选司成，而足伦匹其盛哉？
现代文：难道只是重振废学，遴选导师，而足以同盛世相匹配吗？
English: Is it just a matter of reviving abandoned schools and selecting teachers, but is it enough to match the prosperity of the world?

古文：而又俾则百王，莫不幼同师，长同术，识君道之素定，知天伦之自然，然后选用贤良，树为籓屏。
现代文：不仅如此，并且要使百王遵循成规，无不幼小受教于同样的老师，长成奉行相同的治国之术，懂得为君之道本有规律，知道天伦之情出于自然，选用贤良，树为屏障。
English: Not only that, but it is also necessary to make the hundred kings follow the rules, all of them are taught by the same teachers, grow up to pursue the same skills of governing the country, understand that the way to be a king has its own rules, know that the feelings of heaven are natural, choose virtuous, and use trees as a barrier.

古文：出则有晋、郑、鲁、卫之盛，入则有东牟、硃虚之强，盖所谓宗子维城、犬牙盘石之势也，又岂与夫魏、晋以降，囚贱其兄弟而自翦其本枝者，同年而语哉？
现代文：出外有晋、郑、鲁、卫这样兴旺之邦，入内有东牟、朱虚之类强大之郡，就是所谓宗子连城，犬牙盘石的形势啊，又岂能与魏、晋以来囚禁贱弃兄弟、自己翦灭同株枝叶的局面相提并论呢？ 
English: There are prosperous states such as Jin, Zheng, Lu and Wei abroad, and powerful counties such as Dongmou and Zhu Hui at home. This is the situation of the so-called "father-son connection," the situation of the "dog-toothed stone," and can it be compared with the situation of the imprisonment of the despised brothers and the self-destruction of the branches and leaves of the same tree since Wei and Jin?

古文：宪宗览之甚悦。
现代文：宪宗览阅之后心悦诚服。
English: After reading the Constitution, my heart was filled with joy.

古文：又论西北边事，皆朝政之大者。宪宗召对，问方略。
现代文：元稹又论奏西北边防之事，均为朝政要事，宪宗召入应对，询问方针策略。
English: Yuan Shao also discussed the Northwest Frontier Defense, both of which were important matters of court politics, and summoned Xianzong to respond and inquire about policies and strategies.

古文：为执政所忌，出为河南县尉。
现代文：此举遭到执政宰相忌恨，让他出任河南县尉。
English: This move was hated by the ruling prime minister, who made him a lieutenant of Henan County.

古文：丁母忧，服除，拜监察御史。
现代文：逢母丧，服丧期满，拜监察御史。
English: When a mother is in mourning, the mourning period is over, and the inspector's history is worshiped.

古文：四年，奉使东蜀，劾奏故剑南东川节度使严砺违制擅赋，又籍没涂山甫等吏民八十八户田宅一百一十一、奴婢二十七人、草千五百束、钱七千贯。
现代文：元和四年，奉命出使东蜀，启奏弹劾故剑南东川节度使严砺违制擅征赋税，又籍没涂山甫等吏民八十八户、田宅一百一十一亩、奴婢二十七人、草一千五百束、钱七千贯。
English: In the 4th year of the Yuan and the 4th year of the Heian, he was ordered to send an envoy to Dongshu to open the impeachment of the late Jiannan Dongchuan Festival, to severely punish the violation of the system of unauthorized tax collection. He was also a member of 88 households of officials and people, such as the mountain priest, 111 mu of farmhouses, 27 slaves and maids, 1500 bundles of grass, and 7000 yuan of money.

古文：时砺已死，七州刺史皆责罚。
现代文：此时严砺已死，所辖七州刺史皆遭责罚。
English: At this time, Yan Xuan was already dead, and the seven states under his jurisdiction were all punished.

古文：稹虽举职，而执政有与砺厚者恶之。
现代文：元稹虽尽职，而执政宰相中有同严砺交情深厚者却嫉恨他。
English: Although Yuan Shao fulfilled his duties, some of the ruling chancellors who had a deep friendship with Yan Shao envied him.

古文：使还，令分务东台。
现代文：元稹出使还朝，便令他分管门下省。
English: When Yuan Shao's envoy returned, he put him in charge of the province under his control.

古文：浙西观察使韩皋封杖决湖州安吉令孙澥，四日内死。
现代文：浙江观察使韩皋对湖州安吉县令孙氵解施以杖刑，孙于四日内死亡。
English: According to Zhejiang Watch, Han Wei ordered Sun Yuling, the magistrate of Anji County, Huzhou, to be punished with a cane. Sun died within four days.

古文：徐州监军使孟升卒，节度使王绍传送升丧柩还京，给券乘驿，仍于邮舍安丧柩。
现代文：徐州监军使孟升去世，节度使王绍运送孟升丧柩回京，持牒文乘坐驿车，便在驿站停放丧柩。
English: Meng Sheng, the military governor of Xuzhou, passed away. Wang Shao sent Wang Shao to transport Meng Sheng's funeral urn back to Beijing. He took a train with a letter of invitation and parked the urn at the train station.

古文：稹并劾奏以法。
现代文：上述两事，元稹一并据法启奏弹劾。
English: The above-mentioned two things, together with the law, led to the initiation of impeachment.

古文：河南尹房式为不法事，稹欲追摄，擅令停务。
现代文：河南尹房式做了违法之事，元稹欲加追究，擅自令其停职。
English: Henan Yinfang style did something illegal, Yuan Qi wanted to investigate further, so he arbitrarily suspended him.

古文：既飞表闻奏，罚式一月俸，仍召稹还京。
现代文：飞表上奏之后，朝廷罚房式一月俸禄，便召元稹回京。
English: After the flying watch was played, the imperial court fined him one month's salary, and then summoned Yuan Xuan back to Beijing.

古文：宿敷水驿，内官刘士元后至，争。士元怒，排其户，稹袜而走后。
现代文：途中宿敷水驿，内官刘士元后至，却与元稹争厅，刘士元怒，强行推门而入，元稹脚上只穿着袜子慌忙退避厅后。
English: On the way, he stayed at the Mizuho, but when Liu Shiyuan, an internal affairs officer, arrived later, he was angry with the Mizuho Disputes Office, and Liu Shiyuan forced the door, and the Mizuho was wearing only socks on his feet and hurriedly fled the office.

古文：士元追之，后以棰击稹伤面。
现代文：刘士元追上去，后来用马鞭击伤元稹面部。
English: Liu Shiyuan chased after him, and later used a horsewhip to injure Yuan Xuan's face.

古文：执政以稹少年后辈，务作威福，贬为江陵府士曹参军。
现代文：执政官反认为无稹年轻属于后辈，却一味作威作福，便将他贬为江陵府士曹参军。
English: The consul, on the other hand, thought that Muxian belonged to the younger generation, but he was a bully, so he demoted him to the rank of Gangneung prefectural Cao to join the army.

古文：稹聪警绝人，年少有才名，与太原白居易友善。
现代文：元稹聪明机智过人，年少即有才名，与太原白居易相友善。
English: Yuan Xuan was extremely clever and witty, and had a reputation for talent at a young age. He was friendly with Taiyuan Bai Juyi.

古文：工为诗，善状咏风态物色，当时言诗者，称元、白焉。
现代文：工于做诗，善于描绘歌咏事物之风姿特色，一时谈诗者以元、白并称。
English: He is good at writing poetry, and is good at describing the style and characteristics of things in poetry. At one point, the poet is referred to as Yuan and Bai.

古文：自衣冠士子，至闾阎下俚，悉传讽之，号为 元和体 。
现代文：自士大夫学子，到闾巷俚俗之人，尽皆传诵，号称 元和体 。
English: People from all walks of life, from scholars to laymen, all recite it, and it is known as the Yuanhe Tiao.

古文：既以俊爽不容于朝，流放荆蛮者仅十年。
现代文：元稹因才华出众、性格豪爽不为朝廷所容，流放荆蛮近十年。
English: Due to his outstanding talent and heroic personality, Yuan Shao was not tolerated by the imperial court, and he was banished for nearly ten years.

古文：俄而白居易亦贬江州司马，稹量移通州司马。
现代文：随即白居易也贬为江州司马，元稹量移通州司马。
English: Subsequently, Bai Juyi was also downgraded to Jiangzhou Sima, and the original power was transferred to Tongzhou Sima.

古文：虽通、江悬邈，而二人来往赠答。凡所为诗，有自三十、五十韵乃至百韵者。
现代文：虽然通州、江州天远地隔，可两人来往赠答，计所做诗，有自三十韵、五十韵直至百韵者。
English: Although Tongzhou and Jiangzhou are far away from each other, the two can exchange gifts, and there are poems from thirty rhymes, fifty rhymes to one hundred rhymes.

古文：江南人士，传道讽诵，流闻阙下，里巷相传，为之纸贵。
现代文：江南人士，驿舍道途讽诵，一直流传至宫中，里巷之人互相传诵，致使市上纸贵。
English: People from the south of the Yangtze River have been reciting the Tao Te Ching all the way to the palace, and people from all walks of life have been reciting it to each other, resulting in the high price of paper on the market.

古文：观其流离放逐之意，靡不凄惋。
现代文：由诗中可知其流离放逐之心境，无不凄惋。
English: From the poem, it can be seen that his heart of exile and exile is terrible.

古文：十四年，自虢州长史征还，为膳部员外郎。
现代文：元和十四年，自虢州长史任上召还，授膳部员外郎。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the self-proclaimed governor Shi was recalled to his post, and Gairo, a member of the catering department, was recalled.

古文：宰相令狐楚一代文宗，雅知稹之辞学，谓稹曰： 尝览足下制作，所恨不多，迟之久矣。
现代文：宰相令狐楚为一代文宗，素知元稹诗文造诣，对元稹道： 曾览足下创作，遗憾的是所见不多，等待很久了。
English: The prime minister designated Foxtrot as a generation of writers. He was aware of Yuan Qi's poetic and literary accomplishments, and said to Yuan Qi: "I've seen your works, but unfortunately, I haven't seen much. I've been waiting for a long time."

古文：请出其所有，以豁予情。 
现代文：请出示所有大作，使我畅意开怀。 
English: Please show me all the great works, so that I can enjoy myself.

古文：稹因献其文，自叙曰：
现代文：元稹因而献其诗作，自叙道：
English: As a result, Yuan Xuan dedicated his poem, which begins with the following lines:

古文：稹初不好文，徒以仕无他歧，强由科试。
现代文： 稹当初不好做诗文，只因入仕无别的门路，勉强经由科试。
English: In the beginning, it was not easy to write poetry, but because there was no other way to enter the service, I barely passed the science exam.

古文：及有罪谴弃之后，自以为废滞潦倒，不复为文字有闻于人矣。
现代文：及至有罪遭贬之后，自以为废滞潦倒，不再写作文字给人看了。
English: After his conviction was overturned, he considered himself a failure and stopped writing for others to see.

古文：曾不知好事者抉擿刍芜，尘渎尊重。
现代文：却不知好事者挑中我这粗疏之作，本应弃置尘土沟渎却得到尊重。
English: But I didn't know that the good-doers had chosen my crude work, which should have been abandoned to the dustbin, but was respected.

古文：窃承相公特于廊庙间道稹诗句，昨又面奉教约，令献旧文。
现代文：承蒙相公特意在朝廷言及稹之诗句，昨又面奉教诲，令献旧作。
English: Thanks to the courtesy of the minister of foreign affairs, the imperial court was specifically referred to the poem of the egret, and yesterday he was again instructed to present the old work.

古文：战汗悚踊，惭靦无地。
现代文：战抖汗颜，羞愧难当。
English: Shaking with sweat, ashamed.

古文：稹自御史府谪官，于今十余年矣。
现代文： 稹自御史府谪官，至今十余年了。
English: He has been a eunuch of the Imperial Household Agency for more than ten years.

古文：闲诞无事，遂专力于诗章。
现代文：闲散无事，于是专心写作诗章。
English: There was nothing to do, so he concentrated on writing poetry.

古文：日益月滋，有诗句千余首。
现代文：日积月累，有诗千余首。
English: Over the years, he has composed more than a thousand poems.

古文：其间感物寓意，可备矇瞽之风者有之。
现代文：其中见物感怀咏物寓意，有些可备发蒙之用。
English: Some of them can be used for hairstyling.

古文：辞直气粗，罪尤是惧，固不敢陈露于人。
现代文：但言辞率直气势粗犷，惧怕获罪，根本不敢暴露于他人眼前。
English: However, he is outspoken and rude, and does not dare to expose himself in front of others for fear of being punished.

古文：唯杯酒光景间，屡为小碎篇章，以自吟暢。
现代文：惟有杯酒景物之间，屡做小碎篇章，用以自抒胸臆。
English: However, between the scenes of drinking wine, there are often small chapters, which are used to express oneself.

古文：然以为律体卑痹，格力不扬，苟无姿态，则陷流俗。
现代文：然而稹以为律体品味较低，格调气势不够高昂，如果缺乏精彩的笔墨，就会陷于俗气。
English: However, he thought that the taste of the rhythm was low, the style was not high-spirited enough, and if it lacked wonderful brushstrokes, it would be stuck in tackiness.

古文：常欲得思深语近，韵律调新，属对无差，而风情宛然，而病未能也。
现代文：常常希望做到内容深刻语辞浅近，声韵严密格调新颖，律联对偶没有差误，而风采神态宛然若生，但是苦于未能做到啊。
English: It is often hoped that the content will be profound, the words will be simple and concise, the rhyme will be strict and precise, the tone will be novel, there will be no error in the pairing of the rhythms, and the style will be lifelike, but it has been unable to do so.

古文：江湖间多新进小生，不知天下文有宗主，妄相放效，而又从而失之，遂至于支离褊浅之辞，皆目为元和诗体。
现代文：各地多有新登科的年轻人，不知天下早有诗文之大家，妄相仿效，而追随却又失其根本，以至于学得一些支离破碎狭隘浅浮的辞句，都称作元和诗体。
English: There are many young people in various regions who are new to science, but they don't know that there are people in the world who have been studying poetry for a long time. They imitate, but follow, but lose their fundamentals, so that they learn some fragmented, narrow and shallow phrases, all of which are called Yuan and poetic style.

古文：稹与同门生白居易友善。
现代文： 稹与同门学子白居易相友善。
English: He is friendly with fellow student Bai Juyi.

古文：居易雅能诗，就中爱驱驾文字，穷极声韵，或为千言，或五百言律诗，以相投寄。
现代文：居易素来擅长做诗，写作时会驾驭文字，极尽声韵之美，有时写成千言，有时写成五百言律诗，投寄于我。
English: Juyi has always been good at making poems. When writing, he can control the words and make the most of the beauty of rhyme. Sometimes he writes a thousand words, sometimes he writes a 500-word rhythm poem and sends it to me.

古文：小生自审不能过之，往往戏排旧韵，别创新辞，名为次韵相酬，盖欲以难相排。
现代文：我估计自己不能超过他，往往戏步他的原韵，别创新辞，题名为次韵酬和，是想以不寻常之笔墨去打动读者。
English: I reckoned I couldn't beat him, and I often copied his original rhyme and created a new rhyme, called the secondary rhyme, in order to impress the reader with an unusual stroke.

古文：自尔江湖间为诗者，复相放效，力或不足，则至于颠倒语言，重复首尾，韵同意等，不异前篇，亦目为元和诗体。
现代文：从那以后江湖间做诗者，竞相仿效，有的工力不足，以至于语言颠倒，首尾重复，用韵及诗意雷同，后篇与前篇没有差别，也称为元和诗体。
English: Since then, poets from all walks of life have been competing to imitate each other, and some have been so underpowered that they have turned the language upside down, repeating it from beginning to end, using rhyme and poetry in the same way, and the latter part is no different from the former part, also known as the original and the body of the poem.

古文：而司文者考变雅之由，往往归咎于稹。
现代文： 而从事写作的人考察诗风不正之根由，往往归罪于稹。
English: But those who are engaged in writing look into the root cause of the injustice of the poetic style, and often blame it on Hao.

古文：尝以为雕虫小事，不足以自明。
现代文：过去我这是雕虫小事，不值得为自己辩白。
English: In the past, I thought it was a trivial matter, not worth defending myself.

古文：始闻相公记忆，累旬已来，实虑粪土之墙，庇之以大厦，使不复破坏，永为板筑者之误。
现代文：然而得知相公记着我的诗作，多少天来，着实忧虑我这道污秽的土墙，置于您的大厦庇护之下，使它不再遭到破坏，可就永远成了您这位建筑师的失误。
English: However, knowing that my poems are remembered by my father-in-law, how many days have I really worried about my dirty earthen wall, placed it under the shelter of your building, so that it would no longer be destroyed, but it has always been your architect's mistake.

古文：辄写古体歌诗一百首，百韵至两韵律诗一百首，为五卷，奉启跪陈。
现代文：于是书写古体歌诗一百首，百韵至两韵律诗一百首，编为五卷，奉进跪陈。
English: So he wrote one hundred ancient-style poems, one hundred rhymes to two rhymes, compiled into five volumes, and submitted to genuflection.

古文：或希构厦之余，一赐观览，知小生于章句中栾栌榱桷之材，尽曾量度，则十余年之邅回，不为无用矣。
现代文：恳望您在构筑大厦之闲暇，或许能一赐览阅，了解小生对于章句中斗拱椽子等材料，是经过仔细挑选度量的，那么小生十余年困顿不前，不是没有作为了。 
English: I hope that in your leisure time of constructing the building, you may be able to read it and understand that Xiao Sheng's materials such as the battlements in the chapters and sentences are carefully selected and measured, so Xiao Sheng's more than ten years of stagnation is not a failure.

古文：楚深称赏，以为今代之鲍、谢也。
现代文：令狐楚览阅之后深为赞赏，认为是当今之鲍、谢。
English: After reading it, Ling Xuchu deeply appreciated it and thought that it was the present-day Bao and Xie.

古文：穆宗皇帝在东宫，有妃嫔左右尝诵稹歌诗以为乐曲者，知稹所为，尝称其善，宫中呼为元才子。
现代文：穆宗皇帝在东宫时，有妃嫔及左右侍从曾诵唱元稹歌诗谱成的乐曲，穆宗闻知为元稹所做，曾加称赞，宫中称呼元才子。
English: When Emperor Mu Zong was in the East Palace, there were concubines and attendants on his right and left who used to sing the music composed by Yuan Xing's poems. Mu Zong heard that it was done by Yuan Xing and praised it. The palace called Yuan Xing Zi.

古文：荆南监军崔潭峻甚礼接稹，不以掾吏遇之，常征其诗什讽诵之。
现代文：荆南监军崔潭峻接待元稹礼节很是周到，不把他当作一般属吏看待，常求其诗篇诵读。
English: Cui Tanjun, the inspector of the Jingnan Army, was very thoughtful in his reception of Yuan Shao. He did not regard him as an ordinary subordinate official, and often asked him to recite his poems.

古文：长庆初，潭峻归朝，出稹《连昌宫辞》等百余篇奏御。穆宗大悦，问稹安在。对曰： 今为南宫散郎。 
现代文：长庆初，崔潭峻归朝，出示元稹《连昌宫词》等百余篇禀奏皇上，穆宗大悦，问元稹现在何处，回答说： 现为南宫散郎。 
English: At the beginning of the Long Qing Dynasty, Cui Tanjun returned to the dynasty, presented more than one hundred pieces of music to the emperor, Mu Zong Da Yue, such as "Lianchang Palace Words" to Yuan Zang, asked where Yuan Zang was now, and replied: He is now Nan Gong Sanro.

古文：即日转祠部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：当天便调任祠部郎中、知制诰。
English: On the same day, he was transferred to the position of a junior member of the ancestral hall, and became a chisel maker.

古文：朝廷以书命不由相府，甚鄙之。然辞诰所出，夐然与古为侔，遂盛传于代，由是极承恩顾。
现代文：朝廷因元稹所书诏诰未经由相府，对他甚为鄙视，然而诰辞写成，其文之美可与古人相比并，于是盛传于一时，从此元稹备受恩宠。
English: The imperial court despised him because he did not get the imperial edict from the imperial palace. However, the imperial edict was written, and its beauty can be compared to that of the ancients, so it was popular for a while, and from then on, he was favored by the imperial court.

古文：尝为《长庆宫辞》数十百篇，京师竞相传唱。
现代文：曾写作《长庆宫辞》数十百篇，京师竞相传唱。
English: He has written tens of hundreds of "Changqing Palace Speeches," which have been passed down from master to master.

古文：居无何，召入翰林，为中书舍人、承旨学士。
现代文：过了不久，召入翰林，授中书舍人、承旨学士。
English: Soon after, he was called to Hanlin, awarded the title of high school student, and received a bachelor's degree.

古文：中人以潭峻之故，争与稹交，而知枢密魏弘简尤与稹相善，穆宗愈深知重。
现代文：中官因崔潭峻看重元稹，争相与他交往，而知枢密魏弘简尤与元稹相友善，穆宗越发深加敬重。
English: The middle-ranking officer, Cui Tanjun, valued Yuan Shao and tried to get in touch with him. Knowing that Wei Hongjian and Yuan Shao were friendly, Mu Zong became more and more respected.

古文：河东节度使裴度三上疏，言稹与弘简为刎颈之交，谋乱朝政，言甚激讦。
现代文：河东节度使裴度再三上疏，说元稹与魏弘简结成刎颈之交，图谋扰乱朝政，其言辞十分激烈。
English: Hedong Jiedu repeatedly lured Pei Du, saying that Yuan Shao and Wei Hongjian had formed a close friendship and were plotting to disrupt the imperial government. His words were very fierce.

古文：穆宗顾中外人情，乃罢稹内职，授工部侍郎。
现代文：穆宗顾及朝内外舆论，便罢免元稹朝内职务，授以工部侍郎。
English: Taking into account the public opinion inside and outside the court, Mu Zong dismissed Yuan Zang from his position in the court and gave him the title of chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：上恩顾未衰。长庆二年，拜平章事。
现代文：皇上恩宠未减，长庆二年，拜平章事。
English: The emperor's favor did not diminish, and in the second year of Changqing, he was awarded the title.

古文：诏下之日，朝野无不轻笑之。
现代文：诏下之日，朝野之人无不轻视嘲笑。
English: On the day the imperial edict was issued, everyone in the court and the country scorned and mocked it.

古文：时王廷凑、硃克融连兵围牛元翼于深州，朝廷俱赦其罪，赐节钺，令罢兵，俱不奉诏。
现代文：此时王廷凑、朱克融合兵围困牛元翼于深州，朝廷对二人俱赦罪，赐节钺，令其罢兵，二人俱不奉诏。
English: At this time, Wang Tingpiao and Zhu Ke fusion soldiers besieged Niu Yuan Ying in Shenzhou. The imperial court pardoned both of them, gave them the imperial edict, and ordered them to strike. Both of them did not obey the imperial edict.

古文：稹以天子非次拔擢，欲有所立以报上。
现代文：元稹因己身受天子破格提拔，希望有机会立功以报圣恩。
English: Motohiro, having received an extraordinary promotion from the Son of Heaven, hopes to have the opportunity to perform meritorious service to repay the grace of God.

古文：有和王傅于方者，故司空頔之子，干进于稹。言有奇士王昭、王友明二人，尝客于燕、赵间，颇与贼党通熟，可以反间而出元翼。仍自以家财资其行，仍赂兵吏部令史为出告身二十通，以便宜给赐，稹皆然之。
现代文：有个任和王傅的名叫于方，是故司空于由页之子，到元稹处谋事，说有奇士王昭、王友明二人，曾客居燕赵间，颇与贼党来往相熟，可利用他们行反间之计救出牛元翼，并拿出自己的家财作为行动费用，还贿赂兵部、吏部令史出具委任文书二十份，以便伺机赏赐，元稹全都同意了。
English: There was a man named Ren and Wang Fu, who was the son of the late director Kuang Yu Yu Chih, who came to the Yuan Dynasty to seek advice. He said that there were two wizards, Wang Zhao and Wang Youming, who had lived in Yan Zhao and were quite familiar with the thieves. They could use their strategy to rescue Niu Yuan Ying, and take out their own family wealth as the cost of action. They also bribed the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Ministry of Civil Affairs to issue twenty documents of appointment to history, in order to wait for the opportunity to reward. The Yuan Dynasty all agreed.

古文：有李赏者，知于方之谋，以稹与裴度有隙，乃告度云： 于方为稹所使，欲结客王昭等刺度。 
现代文：有个叫李赏的，得知于方的计谋，利用元稹同裴度有怨隙，就向裴度密报，说于方为元稹所支使，企图结交刺客王昭等人刺杀裴度。
English: There was a man named Li Yun, who learned of Yu Fang's scheme to take advantage of the rift between Yuan Shao and Pei Du, and he secretly reported to Pei Du that Yu Fang was an emissary of Yuan Shao and was trying to make friends with the assassin Wang Zhao and others to assassinate Pei Du.

古文：度隐而不发。
现代文：裴度记在心中不动声色。
English: Pei Du Ji was speechless in his heart.

古文：及神策军中尉奏于方之事，乃诏三司使韩皋等讯鞫，而害裴事无验，而前事尽露。遂俱罢稹、度平章事，乃出稹为同州刺史，度守仆射。
现代文：及至神军中尉禀奏于方之事，皇上命三司使韩皋等人进行审理，谋害裴度之事没有证据，而先前那些事尽皆败露，于是二人俱罢免平章事，元稹出任同州刺史，裴度任仆射。
English: When it came to the matter of Shenjun's Lieutenant Zeng playing in the square, the emperor ordered the three departments to send Han Zheng and others to conduct a trial. There was no evidence of plotting to kill Pei Du, and those things had all been revealed, so both of them dismissed Ping Zhang, Yuan Zheng served as the governor of the same province, and Pei Du served as the deputy.

古文：谏官上疏，言责度太重，稹太轻。上心怜稹，止削长春宫使。
现代文：谏官上疏，说裴度处罚太重，元稹太轻，皇上心中怜惜元稹，只削去长春宫使。
English: The eunuch Shang Zuo said that Pei Du's punishment was too heavy, and Yuan Xuan's was too light. The emperor felt sorry for Yuan Xuan, and only cut off the Changchun imperial envoy.

古文：稹初罢相，三司狱未奏，京兆尹刘遵古遣坊所由潜逻稹居第，稹奏诉之。
现代文：元稹初罢相，三司审理此案尚未奏报，京兆尹刘遵古令坊署属吏秘密探察元稹居宅。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a general strike, and the Third Division had yet to report on the case. Officials from the Beijing Zhaoyin Liu Zungu Lingfang Office secretly investigated the residence of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：上怒，罚遵古，遣中人抚谕稹。
现代文：元稹奏诉此事，皇上发怒，处罚刘遵古，派中官抚慰元稹。
English: The emperor became angry, punished Liu Zungu, and sent a middle-ranking official to console Yuan Shao.

古文：稹至同州，因表谢上，自叙曰：
现代文：元稹至同州，呈表感谢皇上，自述道：
English: Yuan Xuan went to Tongzhou, presented a form to thank the emperor, and said to himself:

古文：臣稹辜负圣明，辱累恩奖，便合自求死所，岂谓尚忝官荣？
现代文： 臣元稹辜负圣上，屡蒙恩奖，本应自求葬身之所，难道说还怕辱没做官的荣耀吗？
English: Subordinate Yuan Xuan lived up to the sacred, repeatedly received the award of grace, should have asked for the place of burial, is it still afraid of humiliation without the glory of being an official?

古文：臣稹死罪。
现代文：臣元稹该当死罪。
English: It should be a capital crime to be a retainer.

古文：臣八岁丧父，家贫无业。
现代文： 臣八岁丧父，家贫无以为生。
English: At the age of eight, Omi lost his father, and the family lived in poverty.

古文：母兄乞丐以供资养。
现代文：母亲、兄长四处乞讨，以供生存所需。
English: His mother and elder brother had to go begging to survive.

古文：衣不布体，食不充肠。
现代文：衣不蔽体，食不果腹。
English: No clothes, no food, no appetite.

古文：幼学之年，不蒙师训。
现代文：幼小入学之年，未蒙老师教训。
English: In the year of entering elementary school, he did not receive any lessons from the teacher.

古文：因感邻里兒稚有父兄为开学校，涕咽发愤，愿知《诗》、《书》。
现代文：因感慨邻里儿童有父兄为其开设学堂，便涕泣发愤，盼望知晓《诗》、《书》。
English: Because of the emotion of the children in the neighborhood who have a father or brother to open a school for them, they were crying and angry, hoping to know "poetry" and "books."

古文：慈母哀臣，亲为教授。
现代文：慈母哀怜，亲自教授。
English: A mother's lament, taught by the star herself.

古文：年十有五，得明经出身，由是苦心为文，夙夜强学。
现代文：年及十五，参加明经科试得中，从此潜心习文，日夜苦学。
English: In his fifteenth year, he passed the entrance examination of the Chinese classics, and from then on, he devoted himself to the study of literature, studying hard day and night.

古文：年二十四，登吏部乙科，授校书郎。
现代文：年二十四，登吏部乙科，授校书郎。
English: Twenty-four years old, Department of Civil Registration, Eighth Grade, school librarian.

古文：年二十八，蒙制举首选，授左拾遗。
现代文：年二十八，受制试名列榜首，授左拾遗。
English: In the 28th year, he was ranked first in the list of candidates who passed the examination.

古文：始自为学，至于升朝，无朋友为臣吹嘘，无亲戚为臣援庇。
现代文：从最初自学，至登朝为官，没有朋友为臣吹嘘，没有亲戚给臣帮忙。
English: From the beginning of his self-education to his ascension to the imperial court, he had no friends to boast of, and no relatives to help him.

古文：莫非苦己，实不因人，独立性成，遂无交结。
现代文：无非自己苦干，确实不靠别人，养成独立个性，因此不务交往。
English: All they have to do is to work hard and not rely on others to develop an independent personality, so they don't have to socialize.

古文：任拾遗日，屡陈时政，蒙先皇帝召问于延英。
现代文：任拾遗时，屡次陈说政见，幸蒙先帝召问于延英殿。
English: When he was in charge of collecting relics, he repeatedly stated his political views, and was fortunately summoned by the former emperor to the Yan Ying Palace for questioning.

古文：旋为宰相所憎，出臣河南县尉。
现代文：旋即为宰相所憎恨，遣臣出任河南县尉。
English: He was immediately hated by the prime minister, who sent him to serve as a lieutenant of Henan County.

古文：及为监察御史，又不规避，专心纠绳，复为宰相怒臣下庇亲党，因以他事贬臣江陵判司。
现代文：及至任监察御史，又不设法躲避，一心据法谏奏，又被宰相恼怒臣不庇护其亲党，因而利用别的事贬臣为江陵判司。
English: When he was appointed to supervise imperial history, he did not try to evade it, he was determined to play according to the law, and he was annoyed by the prime minister and angry that the minister did not protect his parent party, so he used other things to demean the minister as the judge of Gangneung.

古文：废弃十年，分死沟渎。
现代文：臣遭废弃十年之久，论命当死于沟渎之中。
English: The vassal has been abandoned for ten years, and it is said that he should die in a ditch.

古文：元和十四年，宪宗皇帝开释有罪，始授臣膳部员外郎。
现代文： 元和十四年，宪宗皇帝开释有罪之臣，这才授臣膳部员外郎。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Xianzong pardoned the guilty vassal, and it was only then that he conferred the title of vassal on Wairo, a member of the kitchen staff.

古文：与臣同省署者，多是臣登朝时举人；任卿相者，半是臣同谏院时拾遗、补阙。
现代文：与臣同省署者，多是臣登朝时举人，任卿相者，半是臣同谏院时拾遗、补阙。
English: Most of those who worked in the provincial office together with their vassals were promoted when their vassals ascended to the throne, while those who were appointed as ministers were half of those who worked together with their vassals in the imperial court to collect relics and supplement the imperial edicts.

古文：愚臣既不料陛下天听过卑，知臣薄艺，硃书授臣制诰，延英召臣赐绯。
现代文：愚臣完全没料到陛下天听及于臣卑贱之身，知臣才能平凡，朱笔诏书授臣制诰，于延英殿召臣赐绯衣。
English: Foolish vassals did not fully expect that His Majesty would listen to a humble vassal, that a wise vassal would be able to be ordinary, that the Emperor would give him the imperial scepter with a red scepter, and that he would give him the imperial robe at the palace of Yan Ying.

古文：宰相恶臣不出其门，由是百万侵毁。
现代文：宰相嫉恨臣非由其门而出，因此百般侵毁。
English: The prime minister was jealous of the minister because he did not come from his family, so he attacked and destroyed him in every possible way.

古文：陛下察臣无罪，宠奖逾深，召臣固授舍人，遣充承旨翰林学士，金章紫服，光饰陋躯，人生之荣，臣亦至矣。
现代文：陛下察臣无罪，宠奖愈深，召臣面授舍人，遣臣充任承旨翰林学士，金章紫服，光彩加于我这鄙陋之躯，人生之荣耀，臣也享受尽了。
English: Your Majesty, the inspector is not guilty, the award is deeper, the subordinate is awarded, the subordinate is appointed as a scholar, the gold medal is purple, the glory is added to my humble body, the glory of life, and the minister has also enjoyed it.

古文：然臣益遭诽谤，日夜忧危。唯陛下圣鉴昭临，弥加保任，竟排群议，擢授台司。
现代文：然而臣越发遭到诽谤，日夜忧惧，惟独陛下圣鉴明察，更加保护和任用，竟然排除众议，擢升台辅之职。
English: However, the vassal was increasingly slandered and feared day and night. Only His Majesty the Sage could see clearly, protect and appoint him even more, to the point of excluding public discussion and promoting him to the post of assistant to the emperor.

古文：臣忝有肺肝，岂并寻常宰相？
现代文：臣枉有一副心肝，哪能同寻常宰相相比并？
English: A vassal does not have a heart and soul. How can he be compared to an ordinary prime minister?

古文：况当行营退散之后，牛元翼未出之间，每闻陛下轸念之言，愚臣恨不身先士卒。
现代文：况且当行营退散之后，牛元翼未救出之时，每听到陛下深切怀念之言，愚臣恨不能身先士卒。
English: Moreover, whenever he heard His Majesty's words of deep remorse after the retreat of the encampment, when Niu Yuan Ying was not rescued, the follower could not help but be the first.

古文：所问于方计策，遣王友明等救解深州，盖欲上副圣情，岂是别怀他意？
现代文：之所以向于方询问计策，遣王友明等解救深州，是希望报答圣上慈爱之情，岂是别怀他意？
English: The reason why he inquired about the strategy and sent Wang Youming and others to rescue Shenzhou was in the hope of repaying the feelings of holy love. Was it not his intention?

古文：不料奸人疑臣杀害裴度，妄有告论，尘渎圣聪，愧羞天地。
现代文：不料奸人猜疑臣企图杀害裴度，妄加奏告，亵渎圣听，愧对天地。
English: Unexpectedly, the traitor suspected that the minister was trying to kill Pei Du, so he filed a report, blasphemed, and was ashamed of heaven and earth.

古文：臣本待辨明一了，便拟杀身谢责，岂料圣慈尚加，薄贬同州。
现代文：臣本待辩明冤屈事情了结，便拟杀身谢职，岂料圣上犹加恩慈，轻贬同州。
English: The subject waited for the dispute to be resolved and the grievance to be settled, and then planned to kill himself in gratitude for his service. However, the saintly Yuga was merciful and belittled Tongzhou.

古文：虽违咫尺之间，不远郊圻之境，伏料必是宸衷独断，乞臣此官。
现代文：仅隔咫尺之间，离京城郊野不远，臣料定必是圣心独断，赐臣此官。
English: Only a few feet apart, not far from the suburbs of the capital, the vassal must be the sole decision of the Sacred Heart to give the vassal this position.

古文：若遣他人商量，乍可与臣远处方镇，岂肯遣臣俯近阙廷？
现代文：若命他人裁决，宁可遣臣遥处方镇，岂肯让臣近傍宫阙？
English: If you were to let others decide, would you rather send your vassal far away to the prescription town, or would you rather let your vassal stay close to the palace?

古文：所恨今月三日，尚蒙召对延英。
现代文： 遗憾的是本月三日，犹蒙圣上召对于延英殿。
English: Regrettably, on the third day of this month, I received the call to the priesthood for Yan Ying Dian.

古文：此时不解泣血，仰辞天颜，乃至今日窜逐。
现代文：此时不思解除内心的痛苦，仰辞圣颜，乃至于今日被逐斥。
English: At this time, I didn't think about relieving my inner pain, saying goodbye to my sacred face, and even being expelled today.

古文：臣自离京国，目断魂销。
现代文：臣自离京师，目断魂销。
English: The vassal has been away from Beijing for a long time.

古文：每至五更朝谒之时，实制泪不已。
现代文：每至五更朝谒之时，着实泪落不已。
English: At the time of the Hajj pilgrimage, which takes place every five years, tears fall steadily.

古文：臣若余生未死，他时万一归还，不敢更望得见天颜，但得再闻京城钟鼓之音，臣虽黄土覆面，无恨九泉。
现代文：臣若残生未死，他时万一回还，不敢指望更睹天颜，但愿能再听京城钟鼓之音，臣即使黄土覆面，也死而无憾。
English: If the vassal survives and does not die, he will be reborn time and time again. He dares not hope to see the face of heaven again, but hopes to be able to hear the sound of the bells and drums of the capital again. Even if the vassal is covered with loess, he will die without regret.

古文：臣无任自恨自惭，攀恋圣慈之至。
现代文：臣不胜自恨自惭、眷恋圣慈之至。 
English: A vassal cannot help but hate himself, feel sorry for himself, and yearn for the Most Merciful.

古文：在郡二年，改授越州刺史、兼御史大夫、渐东观察使。
现代文：在同州二年，改授越州刺史、兼御史大夫、浙东观察使。
English: In the second year in the same state, he was re-awarded the title of Yuezhou Sashishi, concurrently the title of Master of History, and East Zhejiang Observation Envoy.

古文：会稽山水奇秀，稹所辟幕职，皆当时文士，而镜湖、秦望之游，月三四焉。
现代文：会稽山水奇秀，元稹所聘幕僚，皆为当时文士，因而相随做镜湖、秦望山之游，一月中总有三四回。
English: The inspector of scenic beauty and the staff hired by Yuan Shao were all scribes at that time, so they went on a tour of Jinghu Lake and Qinwang Mountain together, three or four times in January.

古文：而讽咏诗什，动盈卷帙。
现代文：所咏诵诗作，往往写满卷帙。
English: The poems they recite are often full of rhymes.

古文：副使窦巩，海内诗名，与稹酬唱最多，至今称兰亭绝唱。
现代文：副使窦巩，海内有诗名，与元稹互相酬唱最多，至今号称兰亭绝唱。
English: The vice-envoy Dou Gong, who has a poetic name in the sea, has the most mutual singing with Yuan Xuan, and has been known as the Lan Ting Ying Zang.

古文：稹既放意娱游，稍不修边幅，以渎货闻于时。
现代文：元稹即纵情娱乐游玩，渐渐不修边幅，以亵渎财物名噪一时。
English: Yuan Xuan, that is, indulgent entertainment and play, gradually unkempt, with profanation of property and reputation.

古文：凡在越八年。
现代文：在越州八年之久。
English: He has been in Yuezhou for eight years.

古文：太和初，就加检校礼部尚书。
现代文：大和初，就地加授检校礼部尚书。
English: At the beginning of the Yamato era, the school's proctored etiquette book was added on site.

古文：三年九月，入为尚书左丞。
现代文：三年九月，入朝为尚书左丞。
English: In September of the third year, he entered the imperial court as Shoshu Sajo.

古文：振举纪纲，出郎官颇乖公议者七人。
现代文：振兴纲纪，将郎官中颇遭公众舆论指责的七人贬谪出京。
English: In order to revitalize discipline, seven officials who had been criticized by the public were banished from the capital.

古文：然以稹素无检操，人情不厌服。
现代文：然而因元稹素无操行，人心不服。
English: However, due to the fact that elemental arsenic does not act, people are not satisfied.

古文：会宰相王播仓卒而卒，稹大为路歧，经营相位。
现代文：时值宰相王播突然去世，元稹大受挫折，多方努力谋居相位。
English: At the time of the sudden death of the Prime Minister Wang Bo, Yuan Zhen suffered a great setback and made many efforts to find a suitable place to live.

古文：四年正月，检校户部尚书，兼鄂州刺史、御史大夫、武昌军节度使。
现代文：大和四年正月，检校户部尚书，兼鄂州刺史、御史大夫、武昌军节度使。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Yamato era, he was the inspector of the school's household department, and also served as the Ezhou chief historian, the chief historian, and the Wuchang military festival envoy.

古文：五年七月二十二日暴疾，一日而卒于镇，时年五十三，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：大和五年七月二十二日暴病，一日后便在镇署去世，时年五十三，追赠尚书右仆射。
English: He fell violently ill on July 22, 1905, and died at the town office one day later, at the age of fifty-three. He was posthumously awarded the posthumous title of Shangshu Yuhusa.

古文：有子曰道护，时年三岁。
现代文：其子名道护，时年三岁。
English: His son was named Dōshō, and was three years old.

古文：稹仲兄司农少卿积，营护丧事。
现代文：元稹之次兄司农少卿元积，操办丧事。
English: The second elder brother of Yuan Zang, Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture Yuan Zi, is in charge of the funeral.

古文：白居易，字乐天，太原人。
现代文：白居易字乐天，太原人。
English: Bai Juyi, also known as Lotte, is from Taiyuan.

古文：北齐五兵尚书建之仍孙。
现代文：北齐五兵尚书白建的远代孙。
English: He is the great-great-grandson of the Beiqi Five Soldiers.

古文：建生士通，皇朝利州都督。
现代文：建子白士通，为我朝利州都督。
English: Kenji Shiraseki, my governor of Asari.

古文：士通生志善，尚衣奉御。
现代文：士通子白志喜，官任御前尚衣。
English: Shitoshi's son, Shiraishi, was appointed to the Imperial Court.

古文：志善生温，检校都官郎中。
现代文：志喜子白温，任检校都官郎中。
English: Shikiko Hakuen, a junior high school official in charge of inspecting schools.

古文：温生锽，历酸枣、巩二县令。
现代文：温子白，做过酸枣、巩二县令。
English: Warm white bean paste, made sour jujube, Gongyi County order.

古文：锽生季庚，建中初为彭城令。
现代文：子白季庚，建中初年任彭城县令。
English: His son, Bai Jigeng, became the Pengcheng County magistrate in the first year of middle school.

古文：时李正己据河南十余州叛。
现代文：这时李正己占据河南十余州叛乱。
English: At this time, Li Zhengyi occupied more than ten provinces in Henan Province.

古文：正己宗人洧为徐州刺史，季庚说洧以彭门归国，因授朝散大夫、大理少卿、徐州别驾，赐绯鱼袋，兼徐泗观察判官。
现代文：他的族人李洧任徐州刺史，白季庚说服李洧使徐州归附朝廷，因此被授朝散大夫、大理少卿、徐州别驾，赐服绯衣佩银鱼袋，兼任徐州泗州观察判官。
English: His kinsman Li Qigang was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou, and Bai Ji Geng persuaded Li Qigang to annex Xuzhou to the imperial court. As a result, he was awarded the title of Dr. Zongsan, the title of Dali Shaoqing, the title of Xuzhou Beigai, the title of Gongyi Pei Silver Fish Bag, and also served as the Xuzhou Bozhou Observation Judge.

古文：历衢州、襄州别驾。
现代文：又历任衢州、襄州别驾。
English: He also served as governor of Zhangzhou and Xiangzhou.

古文：自锽至季庚，世敦儒业，皆以明经出身。
现代文：从白到白季庚，累代研习儒学，皆由明经科考试而步入仕途。
English: From Bai to Bai Jigeng, successive generations have studied Confucianism, and all of them have entered the career through the Mingjing exam.

古文：季庚生居易。
现代文：白季庚生白居易。
English: Bai Jiangsheng Bai Juyi.

古文：初，建立功于高齐，赐田于韩城，子孙家焉，遂移籍同州。
现代文：当初，白建对北齐有功，受赐田地在韩城，子孙便在那里定居，于是籍贯迁移到同州。
English: At first, Bai Jian had a great contribution to North Qi, and was given a field in Hancheng. His children and grandchildren settled there, so they moved to the same state.

古文：至温徙于下邽，今为下邽人焉。
现代文：到了白温徙居下圭阝，就成了下圭阝人了。
English: When they migrated to Baiyuan and settled in Lower Guiyang, they became Lower Guiyang people.

古文：居易幼聪慧绝人，襟怀宏放。
现代文：白居易从小聪慧过人，胸襟豁达开朗。
English: Bai Juyi was extremely intelligent from a young age, with an open mind and a cheerful disposition.

古文：年十五六时，袖文一编，投著作郎吴人顾况。
现代文：十五、六岁时，袖中装了自己的一篇诗作，投交著作郎顾况。
English: At the age of fifteen or sixteen, he sewed a poem of his own onto his sleeve and submitted it to his teacher, Gu Zhou.

古文：况能文，而性浮薄，后进文章无可意者。
现代文：顾况善做诗文，可性情浮躁浅薄，后学之诗文他没有看得上的。
English: He was good at writing poems, but he was impetuous and shallow, and he did not appreciate the poems he learned later.

古文：览居易文，不觉迎门礼遇，曰： 吾谓斯文遂绝，复得吾子矣。 
现代文：读罢白居易的诗作，禁不住到门口以礼相迎道： 我只道斯文已断绝，没想到又有您了。 
English: After reading Bai Juyi's poem, I couldn't help but greet him at the door with a polite greeting: I've only given up writing, I didn't expect to see you again.

古文：贞元十四年，始以进士就试，礼部侍郎高郢擢升甲科，吏部判入等，授秘书省校书郎。
现代文：贞元十四年，白居易才以应贡进士身份参加考试，礼部侍郎高郢取他高中甲科，又经吏部试判录取，官授秘书省校书郎。
English: In the 14th year of the Zhengyuan era, Bai Juyi was the first to take the examination as a tribute-paying scholar. He was admitted to the Class A of the senior high school by Gao Jun, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and he was also admitted to the provincial school by the probation of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：元和元年四月，宪宗策试制举人，应才识兼茂、明于体用科，策入第四等，授盩厔县慰、集贤校理。
现代文：元和元年四月，宪宗当廷策试制举应考者，白居易参加才识兼茂明于体用科廷试，录入四等，授周至县尉、集贤殿校理。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the new year, Bai Juyi, who was the best candidate for the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination of the examination.

古文：居易文辞富艳，尤精于诗笔。
现代文：白居易文辞丰富艳丽，尤精于做诗。
English: Bai Juyi's words are rich and colorful, and he is especially good at writing poetry.

古文：自雠校至结绶畿甸，所著歌诗数十百篇，皆意存讽赋，箴时之病，补政之缺。而士君子多之，而往往流闻禁中。
现代文：从学习写作到任职京师，所著诗歌数十百篇，皆含讽谏之意，针砭时弊，弥补政务之缺漏，受到那些有志有识之士的赞赏，并往往流传到宫中。
English: From learning to write to serving as a scholar in Beijing, he wrote tens of hundreds of poems, all of which contained irony and satire, alleviated the ills of the times, and made up for the shortcomings of government affairs. They were appreciated by those with ambition and insight, and were often passed on to the palace.

古文：章武皇帝纳谏思理，渴闻谠言，二年十一月，召入翰林为学士。
现代文：章武皇帝纳谏思治，渴望听到正直言论，元和二年十一月，白居易被召入长安任翰林学士。
English: Emperor Zhangwu was eager to hear honest words, and in November of Yuan and Year 2, Bai Juyi was called to Chang'an to serve as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：三年五月，拜左拾遗。
现代文：元和三年五月，官拜左拾遗。
English: In May of the first and third years of the Yuan Dynasty, the government paid homage to the relics.

古文：居易自以逢好文之主，非次拔擢，欲以生平所贮，仰酬恩造。
现代文：白居易认为遇到了喜好文治的主上，自己被破格提升，决心竭尽生平所贮积的才识，仰报圣恩。
English: Bai Juyi thought that he had encountered a master who liked the rule of law, and he had been promoted to an unprecedented level. He was determined to make the best use of the talent he had accumulated in his life, and to report the holy grace.

古文：拜命之日，献疏言事曰：
现代文：拜诏受命那一天，献疏言及此事道：
English: On the day he received the order, Baizhao mentioned the matter and said:

古文：蒙恩授臣左拾遗，依前翰林学士，已与崔群同状陈谢。
现代文： 蒙恩授臣左拾遗，依照前次授臣的翰林学士之例，已与崔群同状陈谢。
English: He has been graciously bestowed with the title of minister, and in accordance with the example of the previous minister Hanlin, he has been awarded the same title as Cui Qun.

古文：但言忝冒，未吐衷诚。
现代文：但害怕言语冒犯，未能尽吐衷肠。
English: But he was afraid of offending people with his words, so he couldn't express his true feelings.

古文：今再渎宸严，伏惟重赐详览。臣谨按《六典》，左右拾遗，掌供奉讽谏，凡发令举事，有不便于时、不合于道者，小则上封，大则廷诤。
现代文：现在再次亵渎圣上尊严，俯首恳请重赐圣恩详加览阅；臣谨依《六典》规定，左右拾遗，掌管供奉讽谏之职，但凡发布诏令办理政务，有与时势不相适应、与正道不相符合的，臣小则封书上奏，大则当廷批评。
English: Now, he is once again desecrating the dignity of the sacred, bowing his head and imploring that the sacred grace be bestowed again and read in detail. In accordance with the provisions of the "Six Books," the minister is obliged to collect the relics left and right, and is in charge of the duty of offering the eulogy. However, when issuing the edict to handle government affairs, if it is not suitable for the current situation and does not conform to the righteous path, the minor minister will seal the document and publish it, and the major minister will criticize it in court.

古文：其选甚重，其秩甚卑，所以然者，抑有由也。
现代文：朝廷对拾遗一职选人很郑重，这职位却很卑下，之所以如此，也许有缘由吧。
English: The imperial court is very serious about selecting a person for the position of collecting relics, but this position is very lowly. Perhaps there is a reason for this.

古文：大凡人之情，位高则惜其位，身贵则爱其身；惜位则偷合而不言，爱身则苟容而不谏，此必然之理也。
现代文：大抵人之常情，位高则珍惜其位，身贵则珍爱其身；珍惜其职位则易于苟合而不说真话，珍爱身份则易于偷安而不敢进谏，这是理所当然的。
English: Most people have common feelings. Those who are high in rank cherish their rank, while those who are low in rank cherish their bodies. Those who cherish their positions are more likely to have sex without telling the truth, and those who cherish their status are more likely to be insecure and not dare to be promoted. This is a matter of course.

古文：故拾遗之置，所以卑其秩者，使位未足惜，身未足爱也。所以重其选者，使下不忍负心，上不忍负恩也。
现代文：因而设置拾遗一职，之所以将品位定得很低，正为了让这职位不足珍视，这身份不足珍爱；之所以重视选人，正为了使圣上对下不忍负心、人臣对上不忍负恩呀。
English: Therefore, the reason why the position of the scavenger was set up, and the reason why the grade was set very low, was precisely in order to make this position less precious, this status less cherished; the reason why the selection of people was important, was precisely in order to make the saint not bear the heart, and the vassal not bear the grace.

古文：夫位不足惜，恩不忍负，然后能有阙必规，有违必谏。朝廷得失无不察，天下利病无不言。
现代文：职位不足惜，圣恩不忍负，然后才能做到有缺漏必规劝，有过失必进谏，朝廷得失无不明察，天下利弊无不陈说。
English: The position is not enough, the grace is not enough, and in order to do so, there are shortcomings that must be persuaded, mistakes must be corrected, the imperial court is not unaware of the gains and losses, and the world's advantages and disadvantages must be presented.

古文：此国朝置拾遗之本意也。
现代文：这是国家设置拾遗官职的根本意图啊。
English: This is the fundamental intention of the state in setting up the position of official for the collection of remains.

古文：由是而言，岂小臣愚劣暗懦所宜居之哉？
现代文：由此而言，这职位岂是小臣这种愚笨拙劣内心怯懦的人所能担当的呢？
English: In view of this, is this a post that can be held by a stupid, clumsy, and cowardly person like the junior minister?

古文：况臣本乡校竖儒，府县走吏，委心泥滓，绝望烟霄。
现代文： 何况臣本是乡校卑贱书生，府县跑腿小吏，甘居泥淖之中，断绝了高上云霄的奢望。
English: What's more, the subject was a lowly student at a rural school, a prefectural errand boy, content to live in the mud, and had given up his lofty aspirations.

古文：岂意圣慈，擢居近职，每宴饮无不先预，每庆赐无不先沾，中厩之马代其劳，内厨之膳给其食。
现代文：没想到圣恩慈祥，提拔臣靠近圣上供职，每有宴饮总是先行参与，每有庆赏无不先沾恩惠，出门有圣上的车马代劳，进食有圣上的膳肴供餐。
English: I did not expect the grace and mercy of the saint, the promotion of the minister close to the saint to serve, every banquet is always the first to participate, every celebration is always the first to receive grace, the saint's chariot and horse go out to work, and the saint's meal is served for meals.

古文：朝惭夕惕，已逾半年，尘旷渐深，忧愧弥剧。
现代文：朝夕惭愧忧惧，已有半年以上，阅历渐深，惭愧越发加剧。
English: For more than half a year, I have been worried and ashamed every morning and evening. As my experience has deepened, my shame has intensified.

古文：未申微效，又擢清班。
现代文：未能奉献微薄之力，又升任清贵的官职。
English: Failing to contribute his meager efforts, he was promoted to a noble post.

古文：臣所以授官已来仅经十日，食不知味，寝不遑安。唯思粉身以答殊宠，但未获粉身之所耳。
现代文：臣自授官以来将近十日，食不知味，寝不安眠，只是想着粉身碎骨报答圣上的特殊恩宠，但未找到粉身碎骨的机会呀。
English: It's been nearly ten days since the vassal was awarded the post. He doesn't know what to eat, and he can't sleep. He just wants to shatter his body and bones to repay the special grace of the saint, but he hasn't found the opportunity to shatter his body and bones.

古文：今陛下肇临皇极，初受鸿名，夙夜忧勤，以求致理。
现代文： 现在陛下始登皇位，初受伟名，日夜操心操劳，以求国泰民安。
English: Now that His Majesty has ascended the throne for the first time, and has received a great reputation for the first time, he is working day and night to ensure the safety of the country and the people.

古文：每施一政、举一事，无不合于道、便于时者。
现代文：每施行一政令，举办一政事，无不合于正道、适于时势。
English: Every time a government decree is implemented and a government event is held, it is in line with the righteous path and suitable for the current situation.

古文：万一事有不便于时者，陛下岂不欲闻之乎？
现代文：万一政事有不适应时势的，陛下难道不想听说吗？
English: In case there is something in the government that is not suited to the current situation, doesn't His Majesty want to hear about it?

古文：万一政有不合于道者，陛下岂不欲知之乎？
现代文：万一政令有不符合正道的，陛下难道不想知道吗？
English: If there is anything improper in the decree, does not His Majesty want to know?

古文：倘陛下言动之际，诏令之间，小有阙遗，稍关损益，臣必密陈所见，潜献所闻，但在圣心裁断而已。
现代文：倘若陛下说话、行动之际，诏令之间，哪怕小有缺漏，对治政得失稍有影响，臣必定将自己的见解和听闻，秘密奏告，意在请求圣上裁断罢了。
English: If, at the time of His Majesty's speech and action, there is even a small gap between the edicts, which has a slight impact on the success or failure of governance, the minister will certainly report his own opinions and hearsay in secret, with the intention of requesting the sacred judgment.

古文：臣又职在禁中，不同外司，欲竭愚诚，合先陈露。
现代文：臣又在宫禁中任职，不同于外官，想要尽力献出愚忠，也会先向陛下表露。
English: As opposed to foreign ministers, vassals, who serve under palace ban, will first reveal their disloyalty to His Majesty if they want to do their best.

古文：伏希天鉴，深察赤诚。
现代文：俯首恳请陛下明察，深深理解臣的一片赤诚之心。 
English: I bow my head and implore Your Majesty to see clearly and deeply understand the sincerity of my heart.

古文：居易与河南元稹相善，同年登制举，交情隆厚。
现代文：白居易与河南人氏元稹相友善，同年应制举之试得中，彼此交谊深厚。
English: Bai Juyi is on friendly terms with Henan native Shi Yuanjun, who was a candidate for promotion in the same year, and the two have a deep friendship.

古文：稹自监察御史谪为江陵府士曹掾，翰林学士李绛、崔群上前面论稹无罪，居易累疏切谏曰：
现代文：元稹从监察御史贬为江陵府士曹属吏，翰林学士李绛、崔群在皇上面前辩说元稹无罪，白居易也屡次上疏极力奏谏道：
English: Yuan Xuan was demoted from the position of inspector of imperial history to the position of Gangneung prefectural magistrate. Hanlin scholars Li Xi and Cui Qun argued in front of the emperor that Yuan Xuan was not guilty. Bai Juyi also repeatedly went to the imperial court to plead his case:

古文：臣昨缘元稹左降，频已奏闻。
现代文： 臣目前因元稹降职一事，已多次奏禀皇上。
English: At present, due to the demotion of Yuan Xuan, the minister has repeatedly appealed to Emperor Xuan.

古文：臣内察事情，外听众议，元稹左降有不可者三。
现代文：臣内察事情本末，外听众人议论，认为不可将元稹降职，理由有三。
English: After looking into the matter from the inside and listening to the discussion from the outside, the minister believed that it was not possible to demote Yuan Xuan. There were three reasons for this.

古文：何者？
现代文：理由何在？
English: Why is that?

古文：元稹守官正直，人所共知。
现代文：元稹为官正直，人所共知。
English: It is well known that Yuan Shao was an honest official.

古文：自授御史已来，举奏不避权势，只如奏李佐公等事，多是朝廷亲情。
现代文：自任御史以来，举报不避权势，仅以举报李公佐等人一事而言，这些人多是朝廷大员的亲党。
English: In the history of self-appointed emperors, reporting does not avoid power, only in terms of reporting Li Guanzao and others, these people are mostly pro-party members of the Imperial Court.

古文：人谁无私，因以挟恨，或假公议，将报私嫌，遂使诬谤之声，上闻天听。
现代文：人谁无私心，便因此事而怀恨，有人企图公报私仇，于是将诽谤元稹的话语，奏禀皇上。
English: Someone who is selfless will hold a grudge over this, someone will try to make a personal vendetta public, and will then slander the words of Yuan Shao and report it to the emperor.

古文：臣恐元稹左降已后，凡在位者，每欲举职，必先以稹为诫，无人肯为陛下当官守法，无人肯为陛下嫉恶绳愆。
现代文：臣耽心元稹降职以后，所有官员，每欲履行职责时，必以元稹为前车之鉴，再无人肯为陛下当官守法，再无人肯为陛下嫉恶惩罪。
English: After the demotion of Yuan Shikai, all officials, whenever they want to perform their duties, must take Yuan Shikai as a precedent. No one will be willing to abide by the law for His Majesty's officials, and no one will be willing to punish His Majesty's crimes.

古文：内外权贵亲党，纵有大过大罪者，必相容隐而已，陛下从此无由得知。
现代文：朝内外的权贵亲党，纵然有人犯了大错大罪，必然只会彼此宽容互相遮掩，陛下从此无法得知。
English: Even if someone committed a big mistake or a big crime, the powerful aristocrats inside and outside the DPRK would only tolerate and cover up for each other, and His Majesty would never know about it.

古文：此其不可者一也。
现代文：此为元稹不可降职的理由之一。
English: This is one of the reasons why Yuan Qi cannot be demoted.

古文：昨元稹所追勘房式之事，心虽徇公，事稍过当。
现代文： 日前元稹追查房式一事，他虽一心为公，但做得稍微过分。
English: A few days ago, although he was determined to serve the public, he did a little too much.

古文：既从重罚，足以惩违，况经谢恩，旋又左降。
现代文：此事既已重罚，足为违犯制度者之惩戒，何况元稹已认罚，可是跟着又加贬谪。
English: This matter has already been heavily punished, which is sufficient punishment for those who violate the system. What's more, the original punishment has been acknowledged, but it has been followed by a demotion.

古文：虽引前事以为责辞，然外议喧喧，皆以为稹与中使刘士元争，因此获罪。
现代文：虽然以先前这事作为责罚的理由，然而朝外议论纷纷，都认为元稹是与宫中使臣刘士元住宿争厅，因此获罪。
English: Although the previous incident was used as the reason for the punishment, there was a lot of discussion outside of the North Korean government, and it was believed that Yuan Di was in conflict with the palace envoy, Liu Shiyuan, and was therefore found guilty.

古文：至于争事理，已具前状奏陈。
现代文：至于争厅一事，臣先前已具状禀奏。
English: As far as the dispute hall is concerned, the minister has already made a statement.

古文：况闻士元蹋破驿门，夺将鞍马，仍索弓箭，吓辱朝官，承前已来，未有此事。
现代文：何况又听说刘士元踢破驿舍之门，抢夺武将鞍马，而且拉弓按箭，恐吓侮辱朝廷命官，自前代以来，没有这样的事。
English: What's more, I heard that Liu Shiyuan kicked down the gate of the imperial villa, snatched the warrior's pommel horse, and pulled the bow and arrows, intimidating and insulting the imperial officer. Since the previous generation, there has been no such thing.

古文：今中官有罪，未闻处置；御史无过，却先贬官。
现代文：现在宫中官有罪，未闻处置；御史无过，却先贬官。
English: Now the palace official is guilty, but the disposition is unknown; the emperor is innocent, but he was demoted first.

古文：远近闻知，实损圣德。
现代文：远近之人闻知此事，确实有损陛下名声。
English: People near and far have heard about this, and it has really tarnished His Majesty's reputation.

古文：臣恐从今已后，中官出使，纵暴益甚；朝官受辱，必不敢言。纵有被凌辱殴打者，亦以元稹为戒，但吞声而已。
现代文：臣耽心从今以后，宫中官出使外地，肆意施暴会更加厉害，朝廷命官受了屈辱，必不敢言说，纵然有人遭凌辱殴打，也以元稹为戒，只好忍气吞声。
English: From now on, if a palace official is sent to a foreign country, the wanton violence will be even more severe. If an official of the imperial court is humiliated, he will not dare to speak out. Even if someone is beaten and insulted, he will take Yuan Xuan as a warning and have to swallow his anger.

古文：陛下从此无由得闻。
现代文：陛下从此无法得知真情。
English: His Majesty was never able to learn the truth.

古文：此其不可二也。
现代文：此为元稹不可降职的理由之二。
English: This is the second reason why it cannot be implemented.

古文：臣又访闻元稹自去年已来，举奏严砺在东川日枉法，没入平人资产八十余家；又奏王沼违法给券，令监军押柩及家口入驿；又奏裴玢违敕征百姓草；又奏韩皋使军将封杖打杀县令。
现代文： 臣又查访得知元稹自去年以来，上奏举报严砺在东川时违法，吞没平民资产八十余家；又奏报王绍违法派发驿券，命监军押送棺柩及家属留驻驿站；又奏报裴玢违反诏令征收百姓谷草；又奏报韩皋命军将用封杖打杀县令。
English: During the inspection, the minister also learned that since last year, Yuan Shao had reported that Yan Xuan had violated the law when he was in Dongchuan and had swallowed up more than 80 civilian assets; he also reported that Wang Shao had illegally distributed coupons, and the lifeguards had escorted coffins and their families to stay at the station; he also reported that Pei Xuan had collected people's hay in violation of the edict; and he also reported that Han Shao's lifeguards would kill the county magistrate with a cane.

古文：如此之事，前后甚多，属朝廷法行，悉有惩罚。
现代文：这类事，前后很多，属于朝廷法规以内的，都给以惩罚。
English: There are many such cases, all of which fall within the scope of the imperial court's regulations, and all of which are punished.

古文：计天下方镇，皆怒元稹守官。
现代文：想来天下方镇守臣，都恼怒元稹严于职守。
English: If you want to come to the world, Fang Zhen Shou Zhen, you are annoyed by Yuan Xuan's strictness in duty.

古文：今贬为江陵判司，即是送与方镇，从此方便报怨，朝廷何由得知？
现代文：现将他贬为江陵判司，便是将他送与方镇，此后他们乘便报仇，朝廷怎能知晓？
English: If they now demote him to judge of Gangneung, they will send him to Fangzhen. After that, they will take advantage of the opportunity to take revenge. How can the court know?

古文：臣伏闻德宗时有崔善贞者，告李锜必反，德宗不信，送与李锜，锜掘坑炽火，烧杀善贞。
现代文：臣俯首听闻德宗时有个崔善贞，奏报李钅奇必反，德宗不信，反将崔善贞送交李钅奇，李钅奇掘坑燃火，烧杀崔善贞。
English: When the vassal bowed his head and heard that Dezong had a Choe Son Jeong, he sent a report to Lee Byung-kee, but the latter did not believe it and sent Choe Son Jeong to Lee Byung-kee. Lee Byung-kee dug a pit, lit it on fire and burned Choe Son Jeong to death.

古文：曾未数年，李锜果反，至今天下为之痛心。
现代文：未过几年，李钅奇果然反叛，至今天下人尚为此事而痛心。
English: A few years later, Li Rongqi did indeed rebel, and to this day, people are still heartbroken over this.

古文：臣恐元稹贬官，方镇有过，无人敢言，陛下无由得知不法之事。
现代文：臣耽心元稹贬官后，方镇有越轨行为，无人敢言，陛下无法得知那些不法之事。
English: After the demotion of Yuan Zang, Fang Zhen had deviant behavior, and no one dared to say that His Majesty could not know those illegal things.

古文：此其不可者三也。
现代文：此为元稹不可降职的理由之三。
English: This is the third reason why Geng Yao cannot be demoted.

古文：若无此三不可，假如朝廷误左降一御史，盖是小事，臣安敢烦渎圣听，至于再三！
现代文： 如果没有上述三桩不可的理由，假如朝廷只是误降了一位御史的官职，不过是一桩小事，臣怎敢烦扰亵渎圣上的耳目，以至于再三唠叨呢。
English: If there were not the above-mentioned three unavoidable reasons, and if the Imperial Court had only mistakenly demoted a member of the Imperial Historian's official post, which is just a small matter, how could the minister dare to bother the eyes and ears of the sacrilegious, to the point of repeatedly nagging them.

古文：诚以所损者深，所关者大，以此思虑，敢不极言！
现代文：臣的确认为此事损害太深，关系重大，因此思虑，不敢不竭力禀奏。 
English: Indeed, the minister thought that the matter was too damaging and important, so he did not dare to play it down.

古文：疏入不报。
现代文：奏疏上交后却未报与皇上知道。
English: However, he did not inform the emperor about it after he submitted his resignation.

古文：又淄青节度使李师道进绢，为魏徵子孙赎宅。居易谏曰： 徵是陛下先朝宰相，太宗尝赐殿材成其正室，尤与诸家第宅不同。
现代文：又有淄青节度使李师道献绢，为魏征子孙赎买住宅，白居易谏奏道： 魏征是陛下先朝宰相，太宗曾赐宫殿建筑用材给他修成正宅，与诸官的宅第大不相同。
English: There was also a gongqing festival, in which Li Shidao donated a gong and bought a house for Wei Zheng's descendants. Bai Juyi played the gong: Wei Zheng was the prime minister of the first dynasty. Emperor Taizong had given him palace building materials to build his main residence, which was very different from the residences of other officials.

古文：子孙典贴，其钱不多，自可官中为之收赎，而令师道掠美，事实非宜。 
现代文：子孙欲典押，需钱不多，自然可由公家为他赎买，而让李师道掠此美名，此事的确不合适。 
English: If his descendants want to place a pledge, they do not need much money. Naturally, the public can buy it for him, but it is really inappropriate for Li Shidao to steal this good name.

古文：宪宗深然之。
现代文：宪宗深以为然。
English: Kenso strongly disagrees.

古文：上又欲加河东王锷平章事，居易谏曰： 宰相是陛下辅臣，非贤良不可当此位。
现代文：皇上又欲加授河东王锷以平章事，白居易谏道： 宰相是陛下辅佐之臣，非贤德良材不能居此位。
English: The emperor also wanted to bestow the title of Prince of Hedong with the title of Pingzhang, Bai Juyi said: The prime minister is a vassal of His Majesty's assistant, and a person who is not a virtuous person cannot hold this position.

古文：锷诛剥民财，以市恩泽，不可使四方之人谓陛下得王锷进奉，而与之宰相，深无益于圣朝。 
现代文：王锷勒索民财进奉，为换取恩泽，不能让天下人认为陛下得了王锷进奉，便授他宰相之位，这对我圣朝极为不利。 
English: Wang Qian blackmailed people's money into offering, in exchange for favors, we cannot let the world think that His Majesty won Wang Qian offering and then awarded him the position of prime minister, which is extremely unfavorable to my holy dynasty.

古文：乃止。
现代文：此事便作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：王承宗拒命，上令神策中尉吐突承璀为招讨使，谏官上章者十七八。居易面论，辞情切至。
现代文：王承宗反叛，皇上命神策中尉吐突承璀为招讨使，谏官中十有七八上奏劝止，白居易面谏皇上，情辞极其恳切。
English: Wang Chengzong rebelled, and the emperor ordered Lieutenant Tutu Chengzong to act as an envoy to persuade him. Of the eunuchs, seven or eight out of ten appealed to the emperor to dissuade him from doing so, but Bai Ju refused. The emperor was extremely sincere in his words.

古文：既而又请罢河北用兵，凡数千百言，皆人之难言者，上多听纳。
现代文：接着又奏请停止河北用兵，奏文共有数百上千言，都是别人想说而不敢说的话，皇上大都听取采纳了。
English: Next came a petition to stop the use of troops in Hebei. The petition contained hundreds of thousands of words, all of which were things that others wanted to say but were afraid to say. The emperor mostly listened to and accepted the petition.

古文：唯谏承璀事切，上颇不悦，谓李绛曰： 白居易小子，是朕拔擢致名位，而无礼于朕，朕实难奈。 
现代文：惟独谏吐突承璀之事言辞太尖锐，皇上很不高兴，对李绛说： 白居易这小子，是朕提拔他才有这样的声名地位，他却对朕无礼，朕确实难以忍受。 
English: However, the Emperor was very displeased with the sharpness of his words, and said to Li Qiye, "This boy Bai Juyi, it was I who promoted him to such a prestigious position, but he was rude to me, I really can't stand it.

古文：绛对曰： 居易所以不避死亡之诛，事无巨细必言者，盖酬陛下特力拔擢耳，非轻言也。
现代文：李绛回答说： 白居易之所以不避死亡的惩罚，事无巨细必定要说，正为报答陛下对他的大力提拔，并非说话轻佻。
English: Li Yan replied: Bai Juyi did not avoid the punishment of death, no matter how small, it must be said that it was precisely to reward His Majesty's vigorous promotion of him, it is not a frivolous word.

古文：陛下欲开谏诤之路，不宜阻居易言。 
现代文：陛下欲开谏诤之路，不宜阻止白居易讲话。 
English: His Majesty wants to pave the way, it is not appropriate to prevent Bai Juyi from speaking.

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇上说： 卿所说有道理。 
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：由是多见听纳。
现代文：从此白居易的意见多被采纳。
English: Since then, most of Bai Juyi's opinions have been adopted.

古文：五年，当改官，上谓崔群曰： 居易官卑俸薄，拘于资地，不能超等，其官可听自便奏来。 
现代文：元和五年，例当改授官职。皇上对崔群说： 白居易官卑俸薄，限于资历地位，不能超等提拔，愿任何职可听其自便奏来。 
English: Yuan and five years, for example, to be re-assigned to an official position. The emperor said to Cui Qun: Bai Juyi official salary is low, limited to seniority status, can not be super-promoted, and any position can be done at his own discretion.

古文：居易奏曰： 臣闻姜公辅为内职，求为京府判司，为奉亲也。
现代文：白居易奏道： 臣听说姜公辅原任内职，请求做京兆府判司，为的是奉养双亲。
English: Bai Juyi said: The minister heard that Jiang Gongyu had been appointed to an internal position, and requested to be the judge of Jingzhao Prefecture in order to support his parents.

古文：臣有老母，家贫养薄，乞如公辅例。 
现代文：臣有老母，家境贫穷奉养很差，请求像姜公辅一样。 
English: The vassal has an old mother, the family situation is poor and the upbringing is very poor, and he asks to be like Jiang Gongfu.

古文：于是，除京兆府户曹参军。
现代文：于是，授白居易京兆府户曹参军。
English: As a result, the honorable Juyi Jingzhao Fuhu Cao joined the army.

古文：六年四月，丁母陈夫人之丧，退居下邽。
现代文：元和六年四月，其母陈夫人去世，白居易退职还居下圭阝。
English: In April, Yuan and six years, his mother Mrs. Chen passed away, Bai Juyi retired and Gui Yao took over.

古文：九年冬，入朝，授太子左赞善大夫。十年七月，盗杀宰相武元衡，居易首上疏论其冤，急请捕贼以雪国耻。宰相以宫官非谏职，不当先谏官言事。
现代文：元和九年七月，盗贼诛杀宰相武元衡，白居易领头上疏论其冤屈，请求迅急捕贼以雪国耻。执政宰相认为白居易是太子属官而非谏官，不应在谏官之先议论政事。
English: In July of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, a thief tried to kill the prime minister, Bu Yuanheng, and Bai Juyi led the way in discussing his grievances, requesting that the thief be quickly caught and the country be shamed. The ruling prime minister believed that Bai Juyi was a crown prince subordinate, not a eunuch, and that political affairs should not be discussed before eunuchs.

古文：会有素恶居易者，掎摭居易，言浮华无行，其母因看花堕井而死，而居易作《赏花》及《新井》诗，甚伤名教，不宜置彼周行。
现代文：正碰上有人一向嫉恨白居易，便挑他的毛病，说他浮华无德行，他母亲因看花堕井而死。白居易所做《赏花》及《新井》诗，十分有伤于教化，不宜大庭广众之中传播。
English: Just now, someone who has always been jealous of Bai Juyi is picking on him, saying that he is flashy and immoral, and that his mother died from watching flowers fall into a well. Bai Juyi's "Flower Appreciation" and "New Well" poems are very harmful to enlightenment and should not be spread among the general public.

古文：执政方恶其言事，奏贬为江表刺史。
现代文：执政宰相正厌恶他多言，奏请皇上贬他为江表刺史。
English: The ruling prime minister is disgusted by his verbosity and has asked the emperor to demote him to the status of a footnote in history.

古文：诏出，中书舍人王涯上疏论之，言居易所犯状迹，不宜治郡，追诏授江州司马。
现代文：诏令发出，中书舍人王涯上疏议论此事，说根据白居易所犯过错，不宜让他治理州郡，于是追发诏令授任江州司马。
English: After the edict was issued, Wang Ya, the person in charge of China's calligraphy, casually discussed the matter, saying that according to the mistakes made by Bai Juyi, it was not appropriate for him to govern the state and county, so the edict was issued to award him the post of Jiangzhou Sima.

古文：居易儒学之外，尤通释典，常以忘怀处顺为事，都不以迁谪介意。
现代文：白居易除儒学外，尤其通晓佛教精义，常能淡忘宠辱忧乐安处逆境，从来不把遭贬谪当回事。
English: In addition to Confucianism, Bai Juyi is especially familiar with the essence of Buddhism. He often forgets humiliation, joy and happiness in adversity, and never takes being belittled seriously.

古文：在湓城，立隐舍于庐山遗爱寺，尝与人书言之曰： 予去年秋始游庐山，到东西二林间香炉峰下，见云木泉石，胜绝第一。爱不能舍，因立草堂。
现代文：在浔阳时，修建隐居之房舍于庐山遗爱寺，曾给人写信说到这事： 我去年秋天始游庐山，到东西二林间香炉峰下，见云木泉石，景色最美，爱不能舍，于是在此修建草堂。
English: When he was in Shenyang, he built a secluded house at the Shengshan Youai Temple. He once wrote a letter to someone about this: I started to visit Shengshan last autumn. I went to the bottom of the incense stove peak between the east and west forests. I saw the cloud-wood spring stone. The scenery was the most beautiful. I couldn't help but love it. So I built a grass hut here.

古文：前有乔松十数株，修竹千余竿，青罗为墙援，白石为桥道，流水周于舍下，飞泉落于檐间，红榴白莲，罗生池砌。 
现代文：堂前有高松十数株，美竹千余竿，青藤爬满墙头，白石铺桥作路，流水环绕舍下，飞泉洒落檐间，红榴白莲，遍生池中阶前。 
English: In front of the hall, there are more than a dozen tall pine trees, more than a thousand beautiful bamboo poles, green wisteria climbing all over the wall, white stone bridges for the road, running water surrounding the house, flying springs sprinkling between the rafters, red durian and white lotus, middle steps in front of the pond.

古文：居易与凑、满、朗、晦四禅师，追永、远、宗、雷之迹，为人外之交。
现代文：白居易与凑、满、朗、晦四位禅师，追踪永、远、宗、雷的足迹，成为超脱凡尘的交好。
English: Bai Juyi followed the footsteps of Yong, Yuan, Zong, and Lei with the four Zen masters, Compass, Man, Long, and Wei, and became a friend beyond the ordinary.

古文：每相摧游咏，跻危登险，极林泉之幽邃。至于翛然顺适之际，几欲忘其形骸。
现代文：每每结伴游玩吟咏，登高历险，尽享林间泉下幽深静谧之美，到了心境极其自在舒畅之时，几乎忘记自身形骸的存在。
English: Every time you travel with a companion, you sing, climb high, enjoy the beauty of the deep silence under the forest spring, and when you are extremely comfortable, you almost forget the existence of your own skeleton.

古文：或经时不归，或逾月而返，郡守以朝贵遇之，不之责。
现代文：有时几个时辰不归，有时逾月才返，刺史把他当作朝廷显贵对待，从不责备他。
English: Sometimes he did not return for several hours, sometimes he did not return for more than a month. Sashi treated him as an imperial dignitary and never reproached him.

古文：时元稹在通州，篇咏赠答往来，不以数千里为远。
现代文：那时元稹在通州，二人互相做诗赠答，不因远隔数千里而中断来往。
English: At that time, Yuan Xuan was in Tongzhou, and the two of them exchanged poems and answered each other's questions, without interrupting their visits because they were separated by thousands of miles.

古文：尝与稹书，因论作文之大旨曰：
现代文：白居易写信给元稹，论述写作文章的要领道：
English: Bai Juyi wrote a letter to Yuan Xuan, discussing the essentials of writing an article:

古文：夫文，尚矣，三才各有文。
现代文： 文章的渊源很久远了，天地人三才各有其文章。
English: The origin of the article is very long ago, and it is only now that people in all three worlds have their own articles.

古文：天之文三光首之；地之文五材首之；人之文《六经》道之。
现代文：天之文章以日月星三光为首，地之文章以金木水火土五材为首，人之文章以《六经》为首。
English: Heaven's article is headed by the Sun, Moon and Stars, Earth's article is headed by the Five Elements, and Man's article is headed by the Six Classics.

古文：就《六经》言，《诗》又首之。
现代文：就《六经》而言，《诗经》又为其首。
English: As far as the "Six Classics" are concerned, the "Book of Songs" is the first.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：圣人感人心而天下和平。
现代文：因为古代圣人能感动人心所以天下和平。
English: Because ancient sages can move people's hearts, the world is at peace.

古文：感人心者，莫先乎情，莫始乎言，莫切乎声，莫深乎义。
现代文：感动人心的东西，没有比情感更有力的，没有比语言更原始的，没有比声音更亲切的，没有比思想更深刻的。
English: There is nothing more powerful than emotion, nothing more primal than language, nothing more intimate than sound, nothing more profound than thought.

古文：诗者，根情，苗言，华声，实义。
现代文：诗这东西：感情是它的根本，语言是它的苗叶，声音是它的花朵，思想是它的果实。
English: This thing of poetry: emotion is its root, language is its seedling, sound is its flower, thought is its fruit.

古文：上自贤圣，下至愚騃，微及豚鱼，幽及鬼神。群分而气同，形异而情一。未有声入而不应、情交而不感者。
现代文：上自圣贤，下至愚人，渺小如豚鱼，幽隐如鬼神，群类不同而精神相似，形体有异而情感相通，没有听到声音而不起反应，接触感情而不受感动的。
English: From the highest to the wisest, from the lowest to the stupidest, small as a porpoise, obscure as a ghost, different groups but similar in spirit, different shapes but similar in emotion, unable to react without hearing a sound, unable to be moved by emotional contact.

古文：圣人知其然，因其言，经之以六义；缘其声，纬之以五音。
现代文：圣人明白这个道理，凭借它的语言，以 六义 贯串其中；根据它的声音，将它组成 五音 。
English: The sage understood this principle, and by virtue of its language, he interwove it with six meanings; by virtue of its sound, he composed it into five tones.

古文：音有韵，义有类。
现代文：五音有韵律，六义有类别。
English: The pentatonic scale has a rhythm, and the hexameter has a category.

古文：韵协则言顺，言顺则声易入；类举则情见，情见则感易交。
现代文：韵律协调语言就通顺，语言通顺声音就易于接受；义类分明情感就突出，情感突出就容易引起共鸣。
English: When the prosody is coordinated, the language is smooth, and when the language is smooth, the sound is easy to accept; when the meaning is clear, the emotion is prominent, and when the emotion is prominent, it is easy to resonate.

古文：于是乎孕大含深，贯微洞密，上下通而二气泰，忧乐合而百志熙。
现代文：这样就能含蕴宽广深厚，表达细微精密，天地二气通畅祥和，人们忧乐交融心志和悦。
English: In this way, it can contain a wide range of depth, express subtlety and precision, the two worlds can be smooth and peaceful, and people's sorrow and joy can mingle with their hearts and minds.

古文：二帝三王所以直道而行、垂拱而理者，揭此以为大柄，决此以为大窦也。
现代文：二帝三王之所以能沿直道行进、垂衣拱手治理天下，就因为掌握了这个武器，抓住了这个法宝呀。
English: The reason why the two emperors and three kings were able to march along the straight road and rule the world with their hands tied behind their backs was because they mastered this weapon and seized this magic weapon.

古文：故闻 元首明，股肱良 之歌，则知虞道昌矣。闻五子洛汭之歌，则知夏政荒矣。
现代文：所以听到 君主圣明，臣子贤良 的歌唱，就知道虞舜之世政治昌盛；听到五子洛之歌，就知道夏代政务荒废了。
English: Therefore, when you hear the song of the wise monarch and the wise and virtuous vassal, you will know that politics flourished in the age of Yunyang; when you hear the song of the five sons of Luo, you will know that the government affairs of the Xia Dynasty were wasted.

古文：言者无罪，闻者作诫，言者闻者莫不两尽其心焉。
现代文：言者无罪，闻者足戒，言者闻者双方都尽了心。
English: The speaker is not guilty, the listener is admonished, and both the speaker and the listener have done their best.

古文：洎周衰秦兴，采诗官废，上不以诗补察时政，下不以歌泄导人情。
现代文： 自周代衰亡秦朝兴起，采诗之官被废除，上面的人不靠诗歌来考察政治的得失，下面的人不用诗歌来疏导人们的情绪。
English: Since the decline and fall of the Zhou Dynasty and the rise of the Qin Dynasty, the office of poetry collector was abolished. The people above did not rely on poetry to examine political gains and losses, and the people below did not use poetry to guide people's emotions.

古文：用至于谄成之风动，救失之道缺。
现代文：乃至于恭维成绩的风气泛滥，补救失误的德行欠缺。
English: Moreover, the culture of praising achievements is rampant, and the virtue of correcting mistakes is lacking.

古文：于时六义始剚矣。
现代文：此时 六义 开始被削弱了。
English: At this point, the six senses begin to be weakened.

古文：《国风》变为《骚辞》，五言始于苏、李。
现代文：《国风》变为《骚辞》，五言诗始于苏武、李陵。
English: "Kokufu" was changed to "Sojie" and the five-character poem began with Su Wu and Li Ling.

古文：《诗》、《骚》皆不遇者，各系其志，发而为文。
现代文：《诗》、《骚》的作者，都是命运不济的人，各依据他们的情志，抒发成为文字作品。
English: The authors of "Poetry" and "Shao" are all people who have suffered a bad fate, each according to their sentiments, expressing them as literary works.

古文：故河梁之句，止于伤别；泽畔之吟，归于怨思。
现代文：所以苏、李的诗句，停留在伤感别离；屈原的诗赋，集中写哀怨忧思。
English: Therefore, Su and Li's poems stay in the sad parting; Qu Yuan's poems concentrate on grief and sorrow.

古文：彷徨抑郁，不暇及他耳。
现代文：尽是彷徨抑郁之情，无力涉及别的内容。
English: It's all about feeling lost and depressed, and not being able to relate to anything else.

古文：然去《诗》未远，梗概尚存。
现代文：然而离《诗》的年代不远，风貌尚有遗存。
English: However, it is not far from the era of "Poem," and the style still remains.

古文：故兴离别则引双凫一雁为喻，讽君子小人则引香草恶鸟为比。
现代文：因此吟咏离别便用双凫一雁譬喻，褒贬君子小人便以香草恶鸟比方。
English: Therefore, in parting, the ginger uses the metaphor of a double beak and a goose, and in praising and criticizing the gentleman, the villain uses the metaphor of a vanilla evil bird.

古文：虽义类不具，犹得风人之什二三焉。
现代文：虽然义类不完备，但《诗》的精神还有十分之二三。
English: Although the sense category is incomplete, the spirit of "Poetry" still has two-thirds of a tenth.

古文：于时六义始缺矣。
现代文：此时 六义 开始缺损了。
English: At this time, the six senses begin to deteriorate.

古文：晋、宋已还，得者盖寡。
现代文：晋、宋以来，能保留《诗》的精神作品就很少了。
English: Since the Jin and Song dynasties, there have been few works that can retain the spirit of "Poetry."

古文：以康乐之奥博，多溺于山水；以渊明之高古，偏放于田园。
现代文：谢康乐倚仗深奥渊博，多半沉溺于山水；陶渊明凭恃高雅古朴，偏偏寄情于田园。
English: Xie Kangle relies on the profound and profound, mostly indulging in the landscape; Tao Yuanming relies on the elegant and quaint, and is partial to the countryside.

古文：江、鲍之流，又狭于此。
现代文：江淹、鲍照之流，比他们还要狭隘。
English: Rivers and streams are narrower than they are.

古文：如梁鸿《五噫》之例者，百无一二。
现代文：像梁鸿《五噫》这样的作品，不到百分之一二啊。
English: Works such as Liang Hong's "Five Gourds" are less than two percent.

古文：于时六义浸微矣！
现代文：此时 六义 逐渐衰微了。
English: At this time, Liu Yi gradually faded away.

古文：陵夷至于梁、陈间，率不过嘲风雪、弄花草而已。
现代文：这下坡路走到梁、陈之际，一般都不过是吟咏风雪、玩弄花草罢了。唉！
English: When this downhill road comes to Liang and Chen, it is generally nothing more than singing and playing with flowers and plants. Alas!

古文：噫！风雪花草之物，三百篇中岂舍之乎？
现代文：风雪花草这些东西，《诗》三百篇中难道舍弃不写吗？
English: In the 300 poems of "Poetry," are these things, such as wind, snow, flowers and grass, not written?

古文：顾所用何如耳。
现代文：没有。但只是如何去写罢了。
English: No. But it's just how to write it.

古文：设如 北风其凉 ，假风以刺威虐； 雨雪霏霏 ，因雪以愍征役； 棠棣之华 ，感华以讽兄弟； 采采芣苡 ，美草以乐有子也。
现代文：比如 北风其凉 ，借风来讽刺威势虐行； 雨雪霏霏 ，通过雪来哀怜征役之苦； 棠棣之华 ，用见花之感触来颂扬兄弟友情； 采采苤苡 ，借草表达有子之乐。
English: For example, the cold of the north wind, using the wind to satirize the abuse of power; the rain and snow, using the snow to mourn the suffering of conscription; the bloom of the dragonfly, using the touch of the flower to celebrate brotherly friendship; and the grasshopper, using the grass to express the joy of having children.

古文：皆兴发于此而义归于彼。
现代文：都是情感激发于此而义蕴归结于彼。
English: It's all emotionally driven and it's all about him.

古文：反是者，可乎哉！
现代文：违反这种规律，难道可以吗？
English: Is it possible to violate this rule?

古文：然则 余霞散成绮，澄江净如练 ， 归花先委露，别叶乍辞风 之什，丽则丽矣，吾不知其所讽焉。
现代文：这样看来，那么 余霞散成绮，澄江净如练 ， 归花先委露，别叶乍辞风 这类诗篇，华丽倒是华丽，但我不知道其涵义何在。
English: Seen in this way, then, the lingering haze dissipates into a haze, the clear river is clear as if practiced, the returning flowers are revealed first, and the parting leaves are left behind, this kind of poem is gorgeous, but I don't know what its meaning is.

古文：故仆所谓嘲风雪、弄花草而已。
现代文：所以我说这不过是调笑风雪、玩弄花草罢了。
English: That's why I say it's just making fun of the wind and snow, playing with flowers and plants.

古文：于时六义尽去矣。
现代文：此时 六义 完全不存在了。
English: At this point, the six senses no longer exist.

古文：唐兴二百年，其间诗人不可胜数。
现代文： 大唐立国二百年，其间诗人不可胜数。
English: In the two hundred years since the founding of the Great Tang Dynasty, countless poets have emerged.

古文：所可举者，陈子昂有《感遇诗》二十首，鲍防《感兴诗》十五篇。
现代文：值得一提的佳作，有陈子昂《感遇诗》二十首，鲍防《感兴诗》十五首。
English: Worth mentioning are Chen Zi'ang's 20 "poems of inspiration" and Bao Fang's 15 "poems of inspiration."

古文：又诗之豪者，世称李、杜。
现代文：又诗中豪杰，世人推崇李、杜。
English: In addition, in the poem, the world praises Li and Du as heroes.

古文：李之作，才矣！
现代文：李白的诗作，才华罕见，人品却不怎么样。
English: Li Bai's poetry is rare in talent, but not in character.

古文：奇矣！人不迨矣！索其风雅比兴，十无一焉。
现代文：要从他的诗中找到赋、比、兴一类的作品，不到十分之一。
English: To find works of Fu, Bi and Xing in his poems is less than one-tenth.

古文：杜诗最多，可传者千余首。
现代文：杜甫诗作最多，值得传世的有一千多首。
English: Du Fu wrote the most poems, with more than a thousand worth passing down.

古文：至于贯穿古今，覙缕格律，尽工尽善，又过于李焉。
现代文：要说贯穿古今，格律谨严，极尽工巧完美，又超过李白。
English: It should be said that throughout the ancient and modern times, the discipline is strict, the workmanship is perfect, and it surpasses Li Bai.

古文：然撮其《新安》、《石壕》、《潼关吏》、《芦子关》、《花门》之章， 硃门酒肉臭，路有冻死骨 之句，亦不过十三四。
现代文：然而汇集他的《新安吏》、《石壕吏》、《潼关吏》、《塞芦子》、《留花门》之类的篇章， 朱门酒肉臭，路有冻死骨 之类诗句，也不过三四十首。
English: However, there are no more than thirty or forty of his poems, such as "Xin'an Li," "Shidong Li," "Shiguan Li," "Sailu Zi" and "Left-over Flower Gate," as well as "Zhumen Wine Flesh Smell, Road with Frozen Dead Bones."

古文：杜尚如此，况不迨杜者乎？
现代文：杜甫尚且如此，何况那些不及杜甫的诗人呢！
English: This is still the case with Du Fu, let alone those poets who are not as good as Du Fu!

古文：仆常痛诗道崩坏，忽忽愤发，或废食辍寝，不量才力，欲扶起之。
现代文：我常常痛心做诗之正道被毁坏，便神魂颠倒一般发愤努力，有时废寝忘食，不顾自己才力低下，想重振诗道。啊呀！
English: I am often heartbroken that the true path of poetry has been destroyed, and then I am overwhelmed by the general indignation and effort, sometimes losing sleep and forgetting to eat, despite my low talent, I want to revive the poetry. Ah!

古文：嗟乎！事有大谬者，又不可一二而言，然亦不能不粗陈于左右。
现代文：事实与愿望大大相反，又难于一点一点地说清楚，然而也不能不简略地向您陈说。
English: The facts are very much the opposite of what you would like them to be, and it is difficult to make them clear bit by bit, but it is impossible to present them to you without abbreviations.

古文：仆始生六七月时，乳母抱弄于书屏下，有指 之 字、 无 字示仆者，仆口未能言，心已默识。后有问此二字者，虽百十其试，而指之不差。则知仆宿习之缘，已在文字中矣。
现代文： 我出生六七个月时，乳母抱着我在书屏前逗耍，有时指着 无 字 之 字让我认，我虽口不能言，心已默识；后来有人问我这两个字，虽然数千上百次考我，我指认从无差错，看来我前世定下的缘份已在文字之中了。
English: When I was six or seven months old, my nanny would hold me and play with me in front of the bookshelf. Sometimes she would point to a word I couldn't pronounce and ask me to recognize it. Although I couldn't speak, I already knew it by heart. Later, someone asked me about these two words. Although I had been tested thousands of times, I never made a mistake. It seemed that the fate I had set in my past life was already written.

古文：及五六岁，便学为诗。九岁谙识声韵。
现代文：到了五六岁便学做诗，九岁熟知声韵。
English: At the age of five or six, he learned to make poems, and at the age of nine, he was familiar with sound rhyme.

古文：十五六，始知有进士，苦节读书。二十已来，书课赋，夜课书，间又课诗，不遑寝息矣。
现代文：十五六岁才知有进士，便立志苦读，二十岁以后，白天学赋，夜晚学书法，间或又学诗，连睡觉也没时间了。
English: At the age of fifteen or sixteen, he was determined to study hard. After the age of twenty, he studied during the day, studied calligraphy at night, and occasionally studied poetry. He didn't even have time to sleep.

古文：以至于口舌成疮，手肘成胝。既壮而肤革不丰盈，未老而齿发早衰白；瞀然如飞蝇垂珠在眸子中者，动以万数，盖以苦学力文之所致！
现代文：以至于口舌生疮，手肘生茧，人到壮年肌肤也不丰满，未至老年却已脱了牙齿白了头发，眼花缭乱好像无数飞蝇垂珠在眼睛里乱动，这都是刻苦努力学习造成的。
English: To the extent that the mouth and tongue have sores, the elbows are raw, the skin is not plump until the prime of life, but before old age, the teeth have been removed and the hair has turned white, and the eyes are dazzling like countless flies dangling in the eyes, all of which are caused by hard work and study.

古文：又自悲家贫多故，年二十七，方从乡赋。
现代文： 自己又悲叹家贫多变故，都二十七岁了，才参加乡试。
English: He also lamented that his family was poor and changeable, so he was only twenty-seven years old when he took part in the village test.

古文：既第之后，虽专于科试，亦不废诗。
现代文：考取之后，虽专心致力于进士考试，却不停止学习写诗。
English: After taking the entrance examination, although he devoted himself to passing the entrance examination, he did not stop learning and writing poetry.

古文：及授校书郎时，已盈三四百首。
现代文：到任校书郎时，已积累了三四百首。
English: By the time he was appointed school scribe, he had amassed three or four hundred poems.

古文：或出示交友如足下辈，见皆谓之工，其实未窥作者之域耳。
现代文：有时出示朋友中像您这样的人，看过的都说写得好，其实我还没有窥见诗人的门径。
English: Sometimes I show people like you among my friends, and everyone who has read them says that they are well written, but in fact I have not seen the poet's path.

古文：自登朝来，年齿渐长，阅事渐多。每与人言，多询时务；每读书史，多求理道。始知文章合为时而著，歌诗合为事而作。
现代文：自到朝廷任职以来，年齿渐长，经历的事渐多，每与人谈话，多询问时事，每读书史，多探求道理，这才懂得文章应为现实而写，诗歌应为现实而作。
English: Since taking office at the Imperial Court, I have grown older and experienced more and more things. Every time I talk to someone, I ask more questions about current affairs, and every time I read a book, I explore more reasons. This is how I know that articles should be written for reality, and poems should be written for reality.

古文：是时皇帝初即位，宰府有正人，屡降玺书，访人急病。
现代文：这时皇帝初即位，宰相都是正直的人，屡降诏书，询问民间疾苦。
English: At this time, the emperor was newly enthroned, and the prime ministers were all honest people. They repeatedly abrogated imperial edicts and inquired about the hardships of the people.

古文：仆当此日，擢在翰林，身是谏官，月请谏纸。
现代文：正当此时，我被提拔入翰林，身为谏官，每月领取书写奏疏的纸张。
English: It was at this time that I was promoted to the Hanlin, as a eunuch, and received a monthly paper for writing.

古文：启奏之间，有可以救济人病，裨补时阙，而难于指言者，辄咏歌之，欲稍稍进闻于上。上以广宸听，副忧勤；次以酬恩奖，塞言责；下以复吾平生之志。
现代文：启奏的言辞，有的可以救济百姓疾苦，弥补政务缺漏，而那些难于明言的，就写成诗歌，想让皇上多少能听到一些，首先可以此拓宽皇上听闻，帮助皇上治理国事；其次可报答皇上提拔的恩德，尽到谏官进言的职责；最后是为了实现自己平生志向。
English: Some of the opening speeches can relieve the suffering of the people and make up for the shortcomings of government affairs, and those that are difficult to say clearly are written as poems. If you want the emperor to hear more, you can first broaden the emperor's hearing and help the emperor to manage state affairs; secondly, you can repay the grace of the emperor's promotion and fulfill the duty of eunuch's speech; and finally, it is to realize your lifelong ambition.

古文：岂图志未就而悔已生，言未闻而谤已成矣！
现代文：哪料到志向未实现后悔之心已生，忠言未让皇上听到毁谤已加身了。
English: He did not expect that the regret of not realizing his ambition was already born, and the loyality of not letting the emperor hear the slander has been added.

古文：又请为左右终言之。
现代文： 请让我对您痛痛快快地说完吧。
English: Please let me finish speaking to you.

古文：凡闻仆《贺雨诗》，众口籍籍，以为非宜矣；闻仆《哭孔戡诗》，众面脉脉，尽不悦矣；闻《秦中吟》，则权豪贵近者，相目而变色矣；闻《登乐游园》寄足下诗，则执政柄者扼腕矣；闻《宿紫阁村》诗，则握军要者切齿矣！
现代文：只要读过我的《贺雨诗》都有闲话，认为写得不妥当。读我的《哭孔甚戈诗》，都板起面孔，很不高兴。读《秦中吟》，权豪势要们相视而变了脸色。读《登乐游园》这首寄赠给您的诗，当权者便扼腕生怒。读《宿紫阁村》诗，掌握军事大权的人便切齿痛恨。
English: As long as people have read my "He Yu Shi," they have gossips and think that it is not written properly. When they read my "Crying Kong Shiguo Poem," they all grimace and are very unhappy. When they read "Qin Zhongyin," the powerful dignitaries look at each other and change their faces. When they read "Dengle Yu Yuan," the poem sent to you, those in power clench their fists in anger. When they read "Shu Zi Ge Village" poem, those who hold military power grind their teeth and hate it.

古文：大率如此，不可遍举。
现代文：情况大抵如此，不能一一列举。
English: This is usually the case, and it is not possible to list them all.

古文：不相与者，号为沽誉，号为诋讦，号为讪谤。
现代文：同我没交情的人，说我沽名钓誉，攻击朝廷，诽谤他人。
English: People who have no friendship with me say that I am fishing for fame, attacking the imperial court, and slandering others.

古文：苟相与者，则如牛僧孺之诫焉。
现代文：如果有同我交好的人，也以牛僧孺为鉴戒呀。
English: If there are people who are good friends with me, they should also take this as a warning.

古文：乃至骨肉妻孥，皆以我为非也。其不我非者，举世不过三两人。
现代文：乃至弟兄、妻子都认为我有错，那些不认为我有错的，举世不过三两人。
English: Even my brothers and my wife think I'm wrong, and those who don't think I'm wrong are only three or two people in the world.

古文：有邓鲂者，见仆诗而喜，无何鲂死。
现代文：其中有邓鲂，见到我的诗就欢喜，但没活多久便死了。
English: One of them was Deng Xuan, who was delighted to see my poem, but died not long after.

古文：有唐衢者，见仆诗而泣，未几而衢死。
现代文：有唐衢，读了我的诗便流泪，没多久也死了。
English: There was a Don Juan who shed tears when he read my poem, and died not long after.

古文：其余即足下。足下又十年来困踬若此。
现代文：此外就是足下，可足下十年来又身处困厄。啊呀！
English: In addition, it is underfoot, but it has been in trouble for the last ten years. Ah!

古文：呜呼！岂六义四始之风，天将破坏，不可支持耶？
现代文：难道 六义 诗风是上天要破坏，无法坚持了吗？
English: Is it possible that Heaven wants to destroy the six sense poetry style, and it cannot be sustained?

古文：抑又不知天意不欲使下人病苦闻于上耶？
现代文：或者不知是否天意不想让人们的疾苦被皇上知道呢？
English: Or I don't know if it was God's will not to let the emperor know about people's suffering.

古文：不然，何有志于诗者，不利若此之甚也！
现代文：如果不是这样，为什么立志以诗传言的人如此不利已极呢？
English: If this is not the case, why are those who aspire to be poets and storytellers at such a disadvantage?

古文：然仆又自思关东一男子耳，除读书属文外，其他懵然无知，乃至书画棋博，可以接群居之欢者，一无通晓，即其愚拙可知矣！
现代文： 然而我又想自己是关东一普通男子。除读书作文外，其他都茫然无知，乃至书画、棋艺、博戏这些可以结交众人的技艺，一样也不懂，由此可知我的愚笨低能了。
English: However, I also thought of myself as an ordinary man in Kanto. Except for reading and writing, I was clueless about everything else. I didn't even understand calligraphy, painting, chess, or acting, which are all skills that can bring people together. This showed that I was stupid and incompetent.

古文：初应进士时，中朝无缌麻之亲，达官无半面之旧；策蹇步于利足之途，张空拳于战文之场。
现代文：当初应进士科考时，朝中绝无沾亲之人，达官贵人里也没有一面之交，一瘸一拐地走上奔走趋附的仕途，赤手空拳进入比赛文章的战场。
English: At the time of the entrance examination, there were no relatives in the DPRK, and there were no friends among the dignitaries. They limped along the path of running and clinging, and entered the battlefield of the competition article with bare hands.

古文：十年之间，三登科第，名落众耳，迹升清贯，出交贤俊，入侍冕旒。
现代文：十年之间，三次考中，名声传入众人之耳，足迹登上清高的官职，出外有贤俊交往，入朝便侍奉圣主。
English: Between ten years and three middle school examinations, his fame spread to the ears of everyone, his footsteps ascended to high-ranking official positions, he went abroad to meet with wise and talented people, and he entered the imperial court to serve the Lord.

古文：始得名于文章，终得罪于文章，亦其宜也。
现代文：当初靠文章成名，最终因文章获罪，也是理所当然。
English: It is only natural that he became famous through his articles and was eventually convicted for them.

古文：日者闻亲友间说，礼、吏部举选人，多以仆私试赋判为准的。
现代文： 日前听亲友私下说，礼部、吏部选拔人才，多以我应试所做辞赋、判词为标准。
English: Recently, I have heard relatives and friends say in private that the selection of talents for the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Personnel is mostly based on the speeches and sentences I made when I took the exam.

古文：其余诗句，亦往往在人口中。
现代文：其余诗句也往往被人传诵。
English: The remaining verses are also often recited.

古文：仆恧然自愧，不之信也。
现代文：我自觉惭愧，不相信这话。
English: I'm ashamed to say I didn't believe it.

古文：及再来长安，又闻有军使高霞寓者，欲聘倡妓，妓大夸曰： 我诵得白学士《长恨歌》，岂同他哉？ 
现代文：等到再来长安，又听说一个名叫高霞寓的军使，打算娶一歌妓，那歌妓大肆夸口说： 我能唱诵白学士《长恨歌》，别人哪能相比？ 
English: When I came back to Chang'an, I heard that a military envoy named Gao Xiayou was planning to marry a singer. The singer boasted: "I can sing and recite Bai Bao's "Song of Longing," how can others compare?"

古文：由是增价。
现代文：因此身价倍增。
English: As a result, his net worth doubled.

古文：又足下书云：到通州日，见江馆柱间有题仆诗者。
现代文：又足下信中写道：到通州时，江边旅馆柱子上有人题了我的诗作。
English: He also wrote in his next letter: When I arrived in Tongzhou, someone inscribed my poem on the pillar of the Riverside Hotel.

古文：何人哉？
现代文：是什么人呢？
English: Who are they?

古文：又昨过汉南日，适遇主人集众娱乐，他宾诸妓见仆来，指而相顾曰：此是《秦中吟》、《长恨歌》主耳。
现代文：又先前经过汉南时，正碰着主人聚集许多歌妓娱乐别的宾客。歌妓们见我到来，指着我交头接耳说： 这人就是《秦中吟》、《长恨歌》的作者啊。 
English: When I passed through Hannan earlier, I ran into the owner who was gathering a lot of geishas to entertain other guests. When the geishas saw me arrive, they pointed at me and whispered: This man is the author of "Qin Zhongyin" and "Chang Huan Ge."

古文：自长安抵江西三四千里，凡乡校、佛寺、逆旅、行舟之中，往往有题仆诗者；士庶、僧徒、孀妇、处女之口，每有咏仆诗者。
现代文：从长安到江西三四千里路，所有乡校、佛寺、旅舍、航船之中，往往题写我的诗作；士大夫或平民、僧侣、孀妇、少女的口中，时常吟咏我的诗歌。
English: From Chang'an to the three or four thousand mile road in Jiangxi, in all the village schools, Buddhist temples, hostels, and ships, my poems are often inscribed; in the mouths of scholars or civilians, monks, concubines, and girls, they often sing my poems.

古文：此诚雕篆之戏，不足为多，然今时俗所重，正在此耳。
现代文：做诗本是雕虫小技，不值得称道，然而当今风气所重，正在于此呀。
English: Making a book of poems is a minor skill, not worthy of praise, but it is the focus of today's culture.

古文：虽前贤如渊、云者，前辈如李、杜者，亦未能忘情于其间。
现代文：即使是前代贤才如王褒、扬雄，前辈诗人如李白、杜甫，也不能忘情于诗歌创作。
English: Even the previous generation of geniuses such as Wang Bao and Yang Xiong, and the previous generation of poets such as Li Bai and Du Fu, cannot forget their passion for poetry.

古文：古人云： 名者公器，不可多取。 
现代文： 古人说： 名誉属天下人共有，个人不可多取。 
English: The ancients said: Honor belongs to everyone in the world, and no one should have more than one.

古文：仆是何者，窃时之名已多。
现代文：我是什么样的人，窃取当世名誉已很多。
English: What kind of person I am, stealing the world's reputation has been a lot.

古文：既窃时名，又欲窃时之富贵，使己为造物者，肯兼与之乎？
现代文：既已窃取当世之名誉，又想窃取当世之富贵，即使自己是造物主，肯不肯将两者同时给予一个人呢？
English: Having already stolen the world's reputation, and wanting to steal the world's wealth, even if he is the Creator, would he not be willing to give both to a person?

古文：今之屯穷，理固然也。
现代文：如今处于困穷，是理所当然的。
English: To be poor today is to be taken for granted.

古文：况诗人多蹇，如陈子昂、杜甫，各授一拾遗，而屯剥至死。
现代文：何况诗人命运多艰，如陈子昂、杜甫，都只做过左拾遗，困厄而死。
English: What's more, poets with difficult fates, such as Chen Zi'ang and Du Fu, have only done the left gleaning, and died of hardship.

古文：孟浩然辈不及一命，穷悴终身。
现代文：孟浩然连最小的官也未做过，穷愁潦倒一生。
English: Meng Haoran never held even the smallest government post, and lived a life of poverty and misery.

古文：近日孟郊六十，终试协律；张籍五十，未离一太祝。
现代文：今人孟郊六十岁，终身只试任协律郎；张籍五十岁，未离开太祝的职位。
English: Meng Jiao, who is now sixty years old, has only been appointed as a procurator for life; Zhang Qi, who is fifty years old, has not left the position of Tai Zhu.

古文：彼何人哉！
现代文：他们都是什么样的人啦！
English: What kind of people are they!

古文：况仆之才又不迨彼。
现代文：何况我的才干又不如他们。
English: Besides, my ability is not as good as theirs.

古文：今虽谪佐远郡，而官品至第五，月俸四五万，寒有衣，饥有食，给身之外，施及家人。
现代文：现在虽然贬谪远郡，而仍居五品官位，每月俸禄四五万钱，寒有衣穿，饿有饭吃，自身享用之外，还可供养家人。
English: Now, although he has been demoted to Shiyuan County, he still holds the rank of the fifth grade official, has a monthly salary of 450,000 yuan, has cold clothes to wear, hungry meals to eat, and can feed his family in addition to enjoying himself.

古文：亦可谓不负白氏子矣。
现代文：也可以说不枉做白家子孙了。
English: It can also be said that it is not in vain to be a descendant of the White family.

古文：微之，微之！
现代文：微之，微之！
English: Little by little, by little!

古文：勿念我哉！
现代文：不要耽心我呀！
English: Don't worry about me!

古文：仆数月来，检讨囊帙中，得新旧诗，各以类分，分为卷目。
现代文： 数月来，我检寻书函，集中新旧体诗，按类分别，编成卷目。
English: Over the past few months, I have been searching for letters, collecting old and new poems, separating them by category, and compiling them into volumes.

古文：自拾遗来，凡所遇所感，关于美刺兴比者；又自武德至元和，因事立题，题为《新乐府》者，共一百五十首，谓之讽谕诗。
现代文：自任拾遗以来，凡遇事或有感又可用比兴来寄寓褒贬的，按照武德到元和的次序，因事立题，题为《新乐府》的，共一百五十首，称为讽喻诗。
English: Since his appointment as a scavenger, anyone who has encountered an event or has a feeling and can use a parable to praise or disparage, in accordance with the order of martial arts to Yuan He, has set up a theme for the event, entitled "New Music Palace," a total of one hundred and fifty poems, known as allegorical poems.

古文：又或退公，或卧病闲居，知足保和，吟玩性情者一百首，谓之闲适诗。
现代文：又有时退班独处，有时卧病闲居，知足不烦安心保养，自在地抒发情感的诗有一百首，称为闲适诗。
English: In addition, there are a hundred poems that express emotions freely, such as sometimes being alone after work, sometimes lying ill and idle, being content without being bothered, and being cared for with peace of mind, which are called leisurely poems.

古文：又有事物牵于外，情理动于内，随感遇而形于叹咏者一百首，谓之感伤诗。
现代文：又有被外物牵惹，内心被情理激发，随着感受和遭遇发泄为咏叹的一百首，称为感伤诗。
English: There are also a hundred songs that are provoked by external things, internally stimulated by circumstances, and released as feelings and encounters, which are called sentimental poems.

古文：又有五言、七言、长句、绝句，自百韵至两韵者，四百余首，谓之杂律诗。
现代文：又有五言、七言、长句、绝句，自长至百韵到短至两韵的四百余首，称为杂律诗。
English: There are also five-syllable, seven-syllable, long-sentence, and final-sentence rhymes, and more than four hundred poems from the longest to one hundred rhymes to the shortest to two rhymes, which are called miscellaneous rhymes.

古文：凡为十五卷，约八百首。
现代文：总计十五卷，约八百首。
English: A total of fifteen volumes, about eight hundred poems.

古文：异时相见，当尽致于执事。
现代文：日后相见，当全部呈送给您一阅。 微之！
English: See you later, when everything is presented to you for perusal.

古文：微之，古人云： 穷则独善其身，达则兼济天下。 
现代文：古人说： 穷则独善其身，达则兼济天下。 
English: The ancients said: Poor people are good for themselves, rich people are good for the world.

古文：仆虽不肖，常师此语。
现代文：我虽不贤，却常常按此话去做。
English: Although I am not virtuous, I often act according to this saying.

古文：大丈夫所守者道，所待者时。
现代文：大丈夫坚守的是原则，等待的是时运。
English: It's okay to stick to the principles and wait for the right time.

古文：时之来也，为云龙，为风鹏，勃然突然，陈力以出；时之不来也，为雾豹，为冥鸿，寂兮寥兮，奉身而退。
现代文：时运到来，像腾云之龙，像乘风之鹏，勃发而起，全力冲出；时运不来，如雾中之豹，如遥天之鸿，寂寞无声，无挂无碍地引身而退。
English: When the time comes, like the dragon of the clouds, like the peng of the wind, it bursts out and rushes out with all its might; when the time does not come, like the leopard in the fog, like the giant of the distant sky, it is lonely and silent, and retreats unhindered.

古文：进退出处，何往而不自得哉！
现代文：或是出来奉职，或是隐退不仕，往哪儿不能悠然自得呢？
English: Either come out to serve, or retire, where can't you take it easy?

古文：故仆志在兼济，行在独善，奉而始终之则为道，言而发明之则为诗。
现代文：所以我的志向在于兼济天下，行动在于独善其身，始终奉行不悖便是我的人生原则，将这用语言表达出来就是我的诗歌。
English: Therefore, my aspiration is to help the world, my action is to be good to myself, and it is my life principle to always follow it. To express this in words is my poetry.

古文：谓之讽谕诗，兼济之志也；谓之闲适诗，独善之义也。
现代文：称为讽喻诗，体现了兼济天下的志向；称为闲适诗，表明了独善其身的意愿。
English: Known as allegorical poetry, it embodies the ambition to help the world; known as idle poetry, it shows the will to be good to oneself.

古文：故览仆诗者，知仆之道焉。其余杂律诗，或诱于一时一物，发于一笑一吟，率然成章，非平生所尚者，但以亲朋合散之际，取其释恨佐欢，今铨次之间，未能删去。
现代文：其余杂律诗，或是被一时一物所触动，或是为一笑一吟所诱发，随意成篇，不是我生平看重的，只是在亲友聚会或分别时，用以消愁或助兴，如今编排时，未能删去。
English: The rest of the miscellaneous rhymes, either touched by one thing at a time, or induced by a laugh or a chant, are at random, not important to my life, but only used to dispel sorrow or help when relatives and friends gather or separate. Now, when arranging, it cannot be deleted.

古文：他时有为我编集斯文者，略之可也。
现代文：日后如有人为我重编诗集时，可将这部分删略。 微之！
English: In the future, if someone re-edits the book of poems for me, you can delete this part.

古文：微之，夫贵耳贱目，荣古陋今，人之大情也。
现代文：珍视耳闻，轻视目睹，推崇往古，贬低现时，是人之常情。
English: It is human nature to value what we hear, despise what we see, venerate the past, and disparage the present.

古文：仆不能远征古旧，如近岁韦苏州歌行，才丽之外，颇近兴讽；其五言诗，又高雅闲淡，自成一家之体，今之秉笔者谁能及之？
现代文：我不能引征远古旧闻，像近代韦应物的歌行体诗，除才情辞藻之外，内容颇近于讽喻诗，他的五言诗，又清高雅致闲适淡泊，自成一家风格，现今诗人谁能赶上他？
English: I can't invoke ancient and old stories, like the songs and poems of modern Wei Ying, except for the words and phrases, the content is quite close to the allegorical poem. His five-sentence poem, but also elegant and leisurely, has become a style of its own. Who can catch up with him today?

古文：然当苏州在时，人亦未甚爱重，必待身后，人始贵之。
现代文：然而韦应物生前，人们也不太看重他，必定要到身死之后，人们才推崇他。
English: However, people didn't think much of Wei Yingwu before he died. It was only after his death that people began to respect him.

古文：今仆之诗，人所爱者，悉不过杂律诗与《长恨歌》已下耳。
现代文：现在我的诗，人们珍爱的，都不过是杂律诗和《长恨歌》以下的作品。
English: Now my poems, which are treasured by people, are nothing more than miscellaneous poems and works below the "Song of Longing and Hatred."

古文：时之所重，仆之所轻。
现代文：世人看重的，正是我所轻视的。
English: What the world values, I despise.

古文：至于讽谕者，意激而言质；闲适者，思澹而辞迂。
现代文：至于讽喻诗，寓意尖锐而语言质朴；闲适诗，意趣恬淡而文辞迂缓。
English: As for the allegorical poem, the meaning is sharp and the language is simple; the leisurely poem, the meaning is light and the words are slow.

古文：以质合迂，宜人之不爱也。
现代文：既然质朴加迂缓，当然人们不喜爱。
English: Since it's rustic and leisurely, of course people don't like it.

古文：今所爱者，并世而生，独足下耳。
现代文：现在能赏识我，和我同辈的，惟有足下啊。
English: The only people who can appreciate me and my peers now are the underclass.

古文：然百千年后，安知复无如足下者出，而知爱我诗哉？
现代文：然而千百年后，怎知再无像足下这样的人出生并喜爱我的诗呢？
English: However, thousands of years later, how do I know that no one else like me has been born and loves my poetry?

古文：故自八九年来，与足下小通则以诗相戒，小穷则以诗相勉，索居则以诗相慰，同处则以诗相娱。
现代文：所以八九年来，时运稍通便与足下以诗互相告诫，稍受挫折就以诗互相勉励，寂寞独处以诗彼此安慰，相聚时则以诗共同娱乐。
English: Therefore, in the past eighty-nine years, when the time is a little better, we have warned each other with poems, encouraged each other with poems when we are a little frustrated, comforted each other with poems when we are lonely, and entertained each other with poems when we are together.

古文：知吾罪吾，率以诗也。
现代文：了解我或是谴责我，都由于我的诗啊。
English: Whether you understand me or condemn me, it's all because of my poetry.

古文：如今年春游城南时，与足下马上相戏，因各诵新艳小律，不杂他篇，自皇子陂归昭国里，迭吟递唱，不绝声者二十里余。
现代文： 比如今年春游城南时，与足下在马上一同游戏，于是各诵清新艳丽的小律，不混杂其他体裁诗篇，从皇子陂回昭国里，此唱彼和，二十余里不绝吟诵之声。
English: For example, during this year's spring tour of the southern part of the city, I played with my feet on the horse, so we each recited fresh and beautiful melodies, not mixed with other genres of poems. From the prince's return to Shokoku, we sang this and that, and the voice of chanting continued for more than twenty miles.

古文：攀、李在傍，无所措口。
现代文：樊、李二人在旁，无法插嘴。
English: Gong and Li were both nearby, unable to intervene.

古文：知我者以为诗仙，不知我者以为诗魔。
现代文：了解我的人认为我是诗仙，不了解我的人为我是诗魔。
English: People who know me think I'm a poet, and people who don't know me think I'm a poet.

古文：何则？
现代文：何以如此？
English: Why is that?

古文：劳心灵，役声气，连朝接夕，不自知其苦，非魔而何？
现代文：花费心血，消耗力气，从早到晚，自己不知苦累，不是魔怪是什么？
English: Expend effort, expend energy, from morning to night, I don't know how tired I am, what is not a monster?

古文：偶同人当美景，或花时宴罢，或月夜酒酣，一咏一吟，不觉老之将至。虽骖鸾鹤、游蓬瀛者之适，无以加于此焉，又非仙而何？
现代文：与志趣相投的人做伴侣，有时花下宴饮，有时月夜酒酣，一咏一吟，忘了自己是将老之人，即使乘鸾驾鹤遨游蓬莱瀛洲仙境的人，也没有我们快乐，不是神仙又是什么呢？
English: Being a companion with people who share the same interests, sometimes having a banquet under the flowers, sometimes drinking wine on a moonlit night, singing and chanting, forgetting that you are an old man, even if you take a crane to visit the fairyland of Penglai and Luzhou, we are not happy. What is a fairy?

古文：微之，微之！
现代文：微之，微之！
English: Little by little, by little!

古文：此吾所以与足下外形骸、脱踪迹、傲轩鼎、轻人寰者，又以此也。
现代文：我之所以与足下一起不拘形迹、摆脱交往、蔑视权贵、看轻人世，也因为这呀。
English: That's why I'm walking with my feet in a casual manner, getting rid of contacts, despising the powerful, and despising the world, because of this.

古文：当此之时，足下兴有余力，且欲与仆悉索还往中诗，取其尤长者，如张十八古乐府，李二十新歌行，卢、杨二秘书律诗，窦七、元八绝句，博搜精掇，编而次之，号为《元白往还集》。
现代文：正当此时，足下兴致未尽，还打算与我一同收集友人唱和之诗，选取各自最佳之作，如张籍的古乐府，李绅的新歌行，卢拱、杨巨源二秘书郎的律诗，窦巩、元宗简的绝句，广搜精选，按序编排，取名《元白往还诗集》。
English: Just at this time, my interest was not exhausted, and I also planned to collect the poems of my friends singing harmony together with me, and select their best works, such as Zhang Ji's ancient music palace, Li Sheng's new song line, Lu Gong, Yang Jiuyuan's second secretary's poem, Dou Gong, and Yuan Zongjian's last sentence, widely selected and arranged in order, named "Yuan Bai's Return Poem Collection."

古文：众君子得拟议于此者，莫不踊跃欣喜，以为盛事。
现代文：众君子闻知将选录他们的诗作，莫不欣喜雀跃，视为盛事。
English: All the gentlemen were overjoyed to hear that their poems would be selected for recording, and regarded it as a great event.

古文：嗟乎！
现代文：哎呀！
English: Oh dear!

古文：言未终而足下左转，不数月而仆又继行，心期索然，何日成就？
现代文：未商议停当足下便被降职，没几个月我接着也遭贬谪，心中兴致顿消，哪天才能办成这事呢？
English: I was immediately demoted without any discussion. A few months later, I was demoted as well. My enthusiasm vanished in a flash. When will this be done?

古文：又可为之太息矣！仆常语足下，凡人为文，私于自是，不忍于割截，或失于繁多。
现代文：又叫人为此叹息啊。 我常对足下说，但凡人做诗文，总是认为自己的好，舍不得删削，有时就因繁复冗长而失当。
English: I often say to my friends, but when ordinary people write poetry, they always think they are good at it and are reluctant to cut things out, and sometimes they make mistakes due to the complexity and length.

古文：其间妍媸，益又自惑。必待交友有公鉴无姑息者，讨论而削夺之，然后繁简当否，得其中矣。
现代文：文字间的优劣，自己更是看不清楚，必定要等待朋友中能公正评价而不姑息迁就的人，讨论并删改，然后繁简优劣，便有正确判定。
English: The merits and demerits between the characters are not clear to me. I must wait for a friend who can make a fair evaluation and not tolerate accommodation, discuss and edit, and then simplify and simplify the merits and demerits, then have a correct judgment.

古文：况仆与足下，为文尤患其多。
现代文：何况我与足下，尤其害怕冗杂。
English: What's more, I'm afraid of clutter, especially with my feet.

古文：己尚病，况他人乎？
现代文：自己尚且犯此毛病，何况他人呢？
English: If you are guilty of this, how much more so are others?

古文：今且各纂诗笔，粗为卷第，待与足下相见日，各出所有，终前志焉。
现代文：现在暂且各自编纂诗作，大致编成卷次，待与足下相见时，各人拿出所编书卷，最后了结宿愿。
English: For the time being, each of them is compiling poems, roughly compiled into volumes. When they meet, each of them will take out the book they have compiled, and finally, they will conclude their vows.

古文：又不知相遇是何年，相见是何地，溘然而至，则如之何？
现代文：又不知相遇是何年，相见是何地，万一身死，那怎么办呢？
English: They don't know what year they met, where they met, and what to do in case they die.

古文：微之知我心哉！
现代文：微之，您理解我的心情呀！
English: In short, you understand my mood!

古文：浔阳腊月，江风苦寒，岁暮鲜欢，夜长少睡。
现代文： 浔阳腊月，江风苦寒，岁暮少欢，夜长难眠。
English: Banyan waxing gibbous, river winds bitter cold, years of little joy, long nights of sleeplessness.

古文：引笔铺纸，悄然灯前，有念则书，言无铨次。
现代文：引笔铺纸，悄然独坐灯前。想到哪儿写到哪儿，言语杂乱无章。
English: Pencils and paper, quietly sitting alone in front of the lamp. Words are jumbled as I try to figure out where to write.

古文：勿以繁杂为倦，且以代一夕之话言也。
现代文：请不要因此信繁杂而生倦意，姑且用以代替与足下一夕之谈吧。 
English: Please don't get tired of believing in all sorts of things. Let's just use it as a substitute for having a conversation with our feet.

古文：居易自叙如此，文士以为信然。
现代文：白居易自叙如此，文士认为真实无欺。
English: Bai Juyi described himself as such, and the scribes believed that there was no deception.

古文：十三年冬，量移忠州刺史。自浔阳浮江上峡。
现代文：元和十三年冬，白居易遇赦调任忠州刺史，自浔阳乘船逆江上三峡。
English: In the winter of the 13th year of the Yuan and Heian dynasties, Bai Juyong was pardoned and transferred to the post of the governor of Chungju Province. He took a boat from Shenyang to the Three Gorges along the Yangtze River.

古文：十四年三月，元稹会居易于峡口，停舟夷陵三日。
现代文：十四年三月，元稹和白居易在峡口相会，在夷陵停留三天。
English: In March of the 14th year, Yuan Li and Bai Juyi met at the mouth of the gorge and stayed in Yiling for three days.

古文：时季弟行简从行，三人于峡州西二十里黄牛峡口石洞中，置酒赋诗，恋恋不能诀。
现代文：当时幼弟白行简随行，三人在峡州以西二十里黄牛峡口石洞中，置酒赋诗，恋恋不忍告别。
English: At that time, Bai Xingjian, the younger brother of Bai Xingjian, accompanied him. The three of them had a drink and a poem in a stone cave at the mouth of Yellow Cow Gorge, 20 miles west of Xiaozhou. They couldn't bear to say goodbye.

古文：南宾郡当峡路之深险处也，花木多奇。居易在郡，为《木莲荔枝图》，寄朝中亲友，各记其状曰： 荔枝生巴、峡间，形圆如帷盖。
现代文：忠州正当三峡途中纵深险要处，多奇花异树，白居易在忠州任上，写了《木莲荔枝图》，寄赠朝中诸友，分别描述木莲荔枝的情状道： 荔枝生长巴州、峡州之间，树冠圆形像车帷和车盖。
English: On the way to the Three Gorges in Chungju, Bai Juyi, who was in charge of Chungju, wrote "Mulan Lychee Map" and sent it to friends in the Imperial Court, describing the situation of Mulan Lychee: Lychee grows between Bachow and Gorges, the canopy is round like a car curtain and a car cover.

古文：叶如桂，冬青；华如橘，春荣；实如丹，夏熟。
现代文：其叶如桂，冬仍青绿；花如橘，春天吐芳；果实如丹，夏季成熟。
English: Its leaves are like cinnamon and are still green in winter; its flowers are like oranges and bloom in spring; and its fruits are like dates and ripen in summer.

古文：朵如蒲萄，核如枇杷，壳如红缯，膜如紫绡，瓤肉莹白如雪，浆液甘酸如醴酪。
现代文：果实累累下垂像葡萄，果核像枇杷，外壳似红缯，内膜似紫绡，瓤肉洁白如雪，浆液甜酸如美酒乳汁。
English: The fruits are hanging down like grapes, the core is like gourd, the outer shell is like red gourd, the inner film is like purple gourd, the flesh is white as snow, and the sweet and sour liquid is like wine and milk.

古文：大略如此，其实过之。
现代文：其状大略如此，实际比上述描绘还要好。
English: As it is, it's actually better than the above depiction.

古文：若离本枝，一日而色变，二日而香变，三日而味变，四五日外，色香味尽去矣。 
现代文：荔枝摘下，一日后颜色变，两日后香气变，三日后味道变，四五日后，色香味全都没了。 
English: After the lychee is picked, the color changes after one day, the aroma changes after two days, the taste changes after three days, and after four or five days, the color and fragrance are all gone.

古文： 木莲大者高四五丈，巴民呼为黄心树，经冬不凋。
现代文： 木莲大的高四五丈，当地人称为黄心树，经冬不凋谢。
English: The magnolia is four and a half meters tall, and the locals call it the yellow heart tree. It does not wither in the winter.

古文：身如青杨，有白文。
现代文：树身如白杨，有白色纹路。
English: The body of the tree is like poplar, with white lines.

古文：叶如桂，厚大无脊。
现代文：树叶似桂，肥厚宽大而无脊脉。
English: The leaves resemble cinnamon, thick, broad and without a backbone.

古文：花如莲，香色艳腻皆同，房独蕊有异。
现代文：花如莲，香色之浓郁均相同，只是花蕊形状有异。
English: The flower is like a lotus, the fragrance is the same, but the shape of the stamens is different.

古文：四月初始开，自开迨谢，仅二十日。
现代文：四月初始开，从开到谢，仅二十天。
English: It opened at the beginning of April, and from opening to closing, only twenty days.

古文：元和十四年夏，命道士毋丘元志写之。
现代文：元和十四年，命道士毋丘元志将木莲描画下来。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the famous Taoist monk, Nezoku Motoshi, drew a lotus.

古文：惜其遐僻，因以三绝赋之。 
现代文：我为它生长在这偏远之地而惋惜，便为它写了三道绝句。 
English: I felt sorry for it growing up in the middle of nowhere, so I wrote three rejection slips for it.

古文：有 天教抛掷在深山 之句，咸传于都下，好事者喧然模写。
现代文：诗中有 天教抛掷在深山 等句，均传至京师，好事者纷纷仿作。
English: In the poem, there are sentences such as "Tianjiao is thrown deep into the mountains," all of which have been transmitted to the Beijing division, and the good-doers have imitated them.

古文：其年冬，召还京师，拜司门员外郎。
现代文：那年冬天，白居易被召回京师，授司门员外郎。
English: In the winter of that year, Bai Juyi was recalled to the capital, and the gatekeeper, Wairo, was assigned to him.

古文：明年，转主客郎中、知制诰，加朝散大夫，始著绯。
现代文：次年，调任主客郎中、知制诰，加授朝散大夫，这才服绯衣。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the post of host, guest, junior high school student and junior high school student, and was awarded the title of Chosan doctor.

古文：时元稹亦征还为尚书郎、知制诰，同在纶阁。
现代文：这时元稹也被召回做了尚书郎、知制诰，与白居易同在内阁。
English: At this time, Yuan Xuan was also recalled to serve as Shang Shuro and Zhisheng Xuan, and was in the cabinet together with Bai Juyi.

古文：长庆元年三月，受诏与中书舍人王起覆，试礼部侍郎钱徽下及第人郑朗等一十四人。
现代文：长庆元年三月，白居易受诏与中书舍人王起一道，对礼部侍郎钱徽录取的进士郑朗等十四人进行复试。
English: In March of the first year of the Changqing era, Bai Juyi together with Wang Qi, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, re-examined fourteen students, including Zheng Lang, who had been admitted to the Ministry of Ceremonies as a servant of Qianhui.

古文：十月，转中书舍人。
现代文：十月，白居易调任中书舍人。
English: In October, Bai Juyi was transferred to the position of a middle school teacher.

古文：十一月，穆宗亲试制举人，又与贾餗、陈岵为考策官。
现代文：十一月，穆宗亲试应举考生，白居易又与贾饣束、陈佑同为考策官。
English: In November, Mu Zongchen took part in the examination of candidates, and Bai Juyi was the examiner together with Jia Yingzhu and Chen You.

古文：凡朝廷文字之职，无不首居其选，然多为排摈，不得用其才。
现代文：朝廷内只要是关涉文字的职务，白居易无不首当其选，然而多遭排斥，不能施展他的才干。
English: In the imperial court, as long as it was a post related to writing, Bai Juyi was the first choice, but he was often ostracized and could not display his talent.

古文：时天子荒纵不法，执政非其人，制御乖方，河朔复乱。
现代文：当时天子荒淫纵欲不遵礼法，执政官不胜其任，治政失策，河朔再次发生动乱。
English: At that time, the emperor's wild sexual indulgence did not follow the etiquette law, the consul was incompetent in his duties, the government made policy mistakes, and there was another disturbance in Hexuo.

古文：居易累上疏论其事，天子不能用，乃求外任。
现代文：白居易屡次上疏论说此事，天子不能采纳，于是他请求离京任职。
English: Bai Juyi repeatedly said that this matter could not be accepted by Tianzi, so he asked to leave Beijing.

古文：七月，除杭州刺史。
现代文：次年七月，授杭州刺史。
English: In July of the following year, he was awarded the Hangzhou History Prize.

古文：俄而元稹罢相，自冯翊转浙东观察使。
现代文：不久元稹罢相，又由同州刺史调任浙东观察使。
English: Not long after, Geng Yao resigned from the post of prime minister, and he was transferred to the post of East Zhejiang Observation Envoy by the governor of the same province.

古文：交契素深，杭、越邻境，篇咏往来，不间旬浃。
现代文：二人一向交谊深厚，杭州与越州地域相邻，篇咏往来，十日之内必有一次唱和。
English: The two have always had a deep friendship. Hangzhou is adjacent to the Yuezhou region, and there have been many exchanges. Within ten days, there will be a rapprochement.

古文：尝会于境上，数日而别。
现代文：曾在两州交界处聚会，数日才分手。
English: They once met at the border between the two states, only to break up a few days later.

古文：秩满，除太子左庶子，分司东都。
现代文：在杭任期已满，白居易被授太子左庶子，分派到东都洛阳任职。
English: At the end of his term of office in Hangzhou, Bai Juyi was given the title of the left illegitimate son of the crown prince and assigned to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：宝历中，复出为苏州刺史。
现代文：宝历年间，又出京任苏州刺史。
English: During the Horyu era, he also went to Beijing to serve as Suzhou chief historian.

古文：文宗即位，征拜秘书监，赐金紫。
现代文：文宗即位，召他回朝官拜秘书监，赐佩金鱼袋服紫衣。
English: When Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne, he summoned him back to the imperial court to pay homage to the secretary-supervisor, and gave him a goldfish bag dress and a purple robe.

古文：九月上诞节，召居易与僧惟澄、道土赵常盈对御讲论于麟德殿。
现代文：九月上诞节，皇上召白居易与僧惟澄、道士赵常盈在麟德殿御前讲学。
English: In September, on the first day of the Chinese New Year, the emperor summoned Bai Juyi, the monk Wei Cheng and the Taoist priest Zhao Changying to give a lecture in front of the Lin De Palace.

古文：居易论难锋起，辞辨泉注，上疑宿构，深嗟挹之。
现代文：白居易说理深奥谈锋锐不可挡，言辞清晰畅快如泉涌，皇上简直要怀疑他事先拟了讲稿，深为叹服。
English: Bai Juyi said that the profound and esoteric talk was irresistible, and the words were clear and smooth as a spring. The emperor was deeply impressed and suspected that he had prepared the speech in advance.

古文：太和二年正月，转刑部侍郎，封晋阳县男，食邑三百户。
现代文：大和二年正月，调任刑部侍郎，封晋阳县男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first month of the 2nd year of the Yamato era, he was transferred to the position of a waiter of the Criminal Investigation Department, and was assigned to Jinyang County, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：三年，称病东归，求为分司官，寻除太子宾客。
现代文：三年告病东归，求任分司官，不久授太子宾客。
English: Three years later, he returned home due to illness, applied for the position of sub-secretary, and soon became the guest of the crown prince.

古文：居易初对策高第，擢入翰林，蒙英主特达顾遇，颇欲奋厉效报，苟致身于訏谟之地，则兼济生灵，蓄意未果，望风为当路者所挤，流徙江湖。
现代文：白居易当初应试成绩优异，提拔入翰林，承蒙英明君主格外恩顾，很想竭力报效，如果身居要职，必定救助百姓。谁料夙愿未偿，却一直被当权者所排挤，以致流离转徙江湖。
English: Bai Juyi initially had excellent exam results and was promoted to the Hanlin. Thanks to the special favor of the wise monarch, he wanted to do his best to repay the favor. If he was in an important position, he would certainly help the people. However, he was always pushed out by those in power, resulting in displacement and migration.

古文：四五年间，几沦蛮瘴。
现代文：有四五年，几乎要死在蛮荒烟瘴之地。
English: For four or five years, I almost died in a wild and smoky land.

古文：自是宦情衰落，无意于出处，唯以逍遥自得，吟咏情性为事。
现代文：从此做官的兴致低落，不介意职位的升降，一心追求逍遥自在，以诗歌抒发情怀为乐事。
English: Since then, his interest in being an official has been low, he doesn't mind the promotion and demotion of his position, he pursues leisure and pleasure, and he enjoys expressing his feelings through poetry.

古文：太和已后，李宗闵、李德裕朋党事起，是非排陷，朝升暮黜，天子亦无如之何。
现代文：大和以后，李宗闵、李德裕两大朋党之争发生，相互指责，彼此排挤陷害，常常早上升了官晚上便被罢黜，天子也无可奈何。
English: After the Great Harmony, there was a dispute between the two great friends of the Party, Li Zongyao and Li Deyu. They accused each other, crowded each other out and set traps. They were often promoted early and dismissed in the evening, and there was nothing the emperor could do.

古文：杨颖士、杨虞卿与宗闵善，居易妻，颖士从父妹也。
现代文：杨颖士、杨虞卿同李宗闵相好，白居易的妻子是杨颖士的姑母。
English: Yang Yingshi and Yang Yuqing were good friends with Li Zongyao, and Bai Juyi's wife was Yang Yingshi's aunt.

古文：居易愈不自安，惧以党人见斥，乃求致身散地，冀于远害。
现代文：他心中愈益不安，害怕被当作李宗闵一党而遭罢黜，于是请求置身闲散之地，希望远避祸害。
English: He became more and more uneasy in his heart, fearing that he would be ousted as a member of Li Zongyao's party, so he asked to stay in an idle place, hoping to avoid harm.

古文：凡所居官，未尝终秩，率以病免，固求分务，识者多之。
现代文：凡任官职，未能任满期限，大多因生病而免职，他坚决要求做分司官，有见识的人都称赞他。
English: He insisted on being appointed as a sub-secretary, and people with insight praised him.

古文：五年，除河南尹。
现代文：大和五年，任河南尹。
English: He served as Henan Yin for five years.

古文：七年，复授太子宾客分司。
现代文：七年，再度授太子宾客分司。
English: Seven years later, it was renamed the Prince's Guest Division.

古文：于履道里得故散骑常侍杨凭宅，竹木池馆，有林泉之致。
现代文：先前，白居易杭州刺史任满，回洛阳，在履道里得到前散骑常侍杨凭的宅第。宅中竹木池馆，有山林泉石景致之美。
English: Previously, Bai Juyi was appointed to the post of Hangzhou chief historian and returned to Luoyang. On his way back, he obtained the residence of Yang Biao, a former horseback riding attendant. In the residence, there is a bamboo pond pavilion with a beautiful mountain, forest, spring and stone landscape.

古文：家妓樊素、蛮子者，能歌善舞。
现代文：家中歌妓樊素、蛮子二人，能歌善舞。
English: In the family, there are two singers, a prostitute and a barbarian, who are good at singing and dancing.

古文：居易既以尹正罢归，每独酌赋咏于舟中，因为《池上篇》曰：
现代文：白居易以刺史身份罢归后，每每在池上舟中独酌并吟诗作赋，于是做《池上篇》：
English: After Bai Juyi retired as a historian, he always drank alone in the boat on the pond and chanted poems to make fu, so he made "Pond on the Pond":

古文：东都风土水木之胜在东南偏，东南之胜在履道里，里之胜在西北隅，西闬北垣第一第，即白氏叟乐天退老之地。
现代文： 东都风土水木之胜景在东南边，东南之胜景在履道里，里之胜景在西北隅，其西门北墙第一座府第，就是白氏老人乐天退休养老之地。
English: Dongdu's culture, soil, water, and trees are located in the southeast corner, the southeast corner is located in the path, and the center corner is located in the northwest corner. The first prefecture on the west side of the north wall is the place for Bai's old man Lotte to retire.

古文：地方十七亩，屋室三之一，水五之一，竹九之一，而岛树桥道间之。
现代文：范围纵横十七亩，屋室占三分之一，水面占五分之一，竹林占九分之一，而岛树桥路分布其间。
English: The area is 17 mu in length and width, with houses accounting for one-third, water surface accounting for one-fifth, bamboo forest accounting for one-ninth, and island tree bridge road distributed among them.

古文：初乐天既为主，喜且曰： 虽有池台，无粟不能守也 ，乃作池东粟廪。
现代文：开初乐天既成了主人，欣喜地说： 虽有池塘楼台，无粟不能久居。 于是修建池东粮仓。
English: At the beginning of the year, when Lotte became the owner, he said with joy: Although there is a pond terrace, no poppy can live for a long time. Therefore, the Chidong Granary was built.

古文：又曰： 虽有子弟，无书不能训也。 
现代文：又说： 虽有子弟，无书不能训导。 
English: He also said, "Even if you have children, you can't teach them without books."

古文：乃作池北书库。
现代文：于是修建池北书库。
English: As a result, the Chihoku Library was built.

古文：又曰： 虽有宾朋，无琴酒不能娱也 ，乃作池西琴亭，加石樽焉。
现代文：又说： 虽有宾朋，无琴酒不能相娱乐。 于是修建池西琴亭，在亭上加修石头酒樽。
English: He also said, "Even if you have guests, you can't have fun without gin," so he built a gin pavilion on the west side of the pond and repaired the stone wine barrels on the pavilion.

古文：乐天罢杭州刺史，得天竺石一、华亭鹤二以归。
现代文： 乐天杭州刺史任满时，携天竺石一块、华亭鹤二只回来。
English: At the end of his term of office, Lotte Hangzhou came back with a piece of celestial flint and two Huating cranes.

古文：始作西平桥，开环池路。
现代文：最初造了西平桥，开辟环池路。
English: At first, Xiping Bridge was built to open up a ring road around the pond.

古文：罢苏州刺史时，得太湖石五、白莲、折腰菱、青板舫以归，又作中高桥，通三岛迳。
现代文：苏州刺史任满时，携太子湖石五块、白莲、折腰菱、青板舫回来，又修建中高桥，沟通三岛之间路径。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to Suzhou with five pieces of Prince Edward Lake stone, white lotus, folded loincloth, and green board, and built a medium-high bridge to communicate the path between the three islands.

古文：罢刑部侍郎时，有粟千斛，书一车，洎臧获之习管磬弦歌者指百以归。
现代文：刑部侍郎任满时，有粟千斛，书一车，并带了善于弹奏歌唱的奴婢十人回来。
English: At the end of his term of office, the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law came back with a thousand pieces of corn, a cartload of books, and ten slaves who were good at playing and singing.

古文：先是颍川陈孝仙与酿酒法，味甚佳；博陵崔晦叔与琴，韵甚清；蜀客姜发授《秋思》，声甚淡；弘农杨贞一与青石三，方长平滑，可以坐卧。
现代文：这之前得颍川陈孝仙教酿酒法，酒味甚佳；博陵崔晦叔赐琴，琴音清雅；蜀地客人姜发授《秋思》曲，曲声动人；弘农杨贞一赠青石三块，方长平滑，可供坐卧。
English: Prior to this, Chen Xiao Xian, a farmer from Gongchuan, taught him how to brew wine, and the wine tasted very good; Cui Yu, an uncle from Boling, gave him a qin, and the qin's tone was elegant; Jiang Fa, a guest from Shoudi, taught him the "Qiu Si" melody, and the melody was moving; Yang Zhen, a farmer from Hongnong, gave him three pieces of bluestone, which are smooth and can be used for sitting.

古文：太和三年夏，乐天始得请为太子宾客，分秩于洛下，息躬于池上。
现代文： 大和三年夏，乐天才获准做太子宾客，分司东都洛阳，栖身池上以休息。
English: In the summer of the 3rd year of the Yamato era, Lotte was allowed to be a guest of the crown prince. He was assigned to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and rested on the pond.

古文：凡三任所得，四人所与，洎吾不才身，今率为池中物。
现代文：三次任职所得，四人所赠，以及不才我自身，现在都成了池中之物。
English: The fruits of my three terms in office, given to me by four people, and not just by myself, have now become a thing of the past.

古文：每至池风春，池月秋，水香莲开之旦，露清鹤唳之夕，拂杨石，举陈酒，援崔琴，弹《秋思》，颓然自适，不知其他。
现代文：每当春风秋月满池，水香莲开之日或露清鹤唳之夕，拂净杨石，举饮陈酒，张开崔琴，弹奏《秋思》，自觉超然安适，忘却身外一切。
English: Whenever the spring breeze, the autumn moon and the full pond, the day of the water incense lotus or the evening of the dew-clearing cranes, brush the poplar stone, drink the old wine, open the clavichord, play "Autumn Thoughts," consciously transcend and relax, and forget everything outside the body.

古文：酒酣琴罢，又命乐童登中岛亭，含奏《霓裳散序》，声随风飘，或凝或散，悠扬于竹烟波月之际者久之。
现代文：酒兴正浓，琴曲奏罢，又命乐童登上池中岛亭，合奏《云裳散序》之曲，声随风飘，或凝或散，修扬之声在竹烟波月之际久久萦绕。
English: The wine is strong, the piano music is played, and the music children are ordered to board the Chichu-jima Pavilion. The ensemble plays the song of "Clouds and Disorder," and the sound drifts with the wind, either condensed or dispersed. The sound of cultivation lingers for a long time at the time of the bamboo smoke wave and moon.

古文：曲未竟，而乐天陶然石上矣。
现代文：乐曲未毕，而乐天在石上已陶然如醉。
English: The music had not yet ended, but Lotte was already intoxicated on the stone.

古文：睡起偶咏，非诗非赋，阿龟握笔，因题石间。
现代文：睡起偶咏，非诗非赋，阿龟握笔，于是题写在石上。
English: When he fell asleep, it was neither a poem nor a poem, but a turtle holding a pen, so he inscribed it on the stone.

古文：视其粗成韵章，命为《池上篇》云：
现代文：看它不过是篇粗疏的韵文，取名《池上篇》，全文如下：
English: It appears to be nothing more than a crude rhyme, called "The Pool Chapter," the full text of which is as follows:

古文：十亩之宅，五亩之园，有水一池，有竹千竿。
现代文： 十亩之宅，五亩之园，有水一池，有竹千竿。
English: A ten mu house, a five mu garden, a pond with water, and a thousand bamboo poles.

古文：勿谓土狭，勿谓地偏，足以容膝，足以息肩。
现代文：勿谓土狭，勿谓地偏，足以容膝，足以息肩。
English: It should not be narrow, it should not be slanted, it should be enough to accommodate the knees, enough to rest the shoulders.

古文：有堂有亭，有桥有船，有书有酒，有歌有弦。
现代文：有堂有亭，有桥有船，有书有酒，有歌有弦。
English: There are halls and pavilions, bridges and boats, books and wine, songs and strings.

古文：有叟在中，白须飒然，识分知足，外无求焉。
现代文：有叟在中，白发飒然，识分知足，外无求焉。
English: In the middle, the white hair shines brightly, the discernment is contented, and there is nothing to seek outside.

古文：如鸟择木，姑务巢安；如蛙作坎，不知海宽。
现代文：如鸟择木，姑务巢安；如蛙作坎，不知海宽。
English: If a bird chooses a tree, its nest will be safe; if a frog builds a mound, it does not know the width of the sea.

古文：灵鹊怪石，紫菱白莲，皆吾所好，尽在我前。
现代文：灵鹊怪石，紫菱白莲，皆吾所好，尽在我前。
English: The mysterious stone of the coffin, the purple and white lotus, all of them are my favorites, all of them are in front of me.

古文：时引一杯，或吟一篇。
现代文：时引一杯，或吟一篇。
English: A cup of tea every hour, or a piece of chanting.

古文：妻孥熙熙，鸡犬闲闲。
现代文：妻孥熙熙，鸡犬闲闲。
English: My wife is happy, my dogs and chickens are happy.

古文：优哉游哉，吾将老乎其间。
现代文：游哉游哉，吾将老乎其间。 
English: Amuse yourself, amuse yourself, I'll be right there.

古文：又效陶潜《五柳先生传》，作《醉吟先生传》以自况。
现代文：又仿效陶潜《五柳先生传》，做《醉吟先生传》以自喻。
English: He also imitated Tao Qian's "The Tale of Mr. Woryu" and made "The Tale of Drunken Mr. Yin" as a self-parody.

古文：文章旷达，皆此类也。
现代文：所谓白文气势开阔奔放，就是指这类作品。
English: The so-called Baiwen momentum open and unrestrained, refers to this kind of work.

古文：太和末，李训构祸，衣冠涂地，士林伤感，居易愈无宦情。
现代文：大和末年，李训遭祸，衣冠弃地，士大夫们为之伤感，白居易更无仕宦之心。
English: At the end of the Yamato era, Li Xun suffered a misfortune, abandoned the land, the scholars and doctors were saddened by it, and Bai Juyi was even more heartbroken.

古文：开成元年，除同州刺史，辞疾不拜。
现代文：开成元年，授同州刺史，他告病推辞不受。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, he was awarded the same state history, and he did not accept his resignation.

古文：寻授太子少傅，进封冯翊县开国侯。
现代文：接着授太子少傅，加封冯翊县开国侯。
English: Then, he was given the title of Crown Prince Junior Fu, and he was also given the title of Founding Marquis of Fengye County.

古文：四年冬，得风病，伏枕者累月，乃放诸妓女樊、蛮等，仍自为墓志，病中吟咏不辍。
现代文：四年冬，患风痹之病，卧床数月不起，于是遣放诸妓女樊素、蛮子等人，并自做墓志，病中仍不停止做诗。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, suffering from rheumatic fever, he was bedridden for several months. Therefore, he sent prostitutes such as Xinsu and Barbarians, and made his own epitaph. He still did not stop making poems during his illness.

古文：自言曰： 予年六十有八，始患风痹之疾，体郤首胘，左足不支。
现代文：自言道： 我年已六十有八，患了风痹之疾，体病头晕，左足不能站立。
English: He said to himself, "I am sixty-eight years old. I suffer from the disease of wind palsy. I am dizzy and cannot stand on my left foot.

古文：盖老病相乘，有时而至耳。
现代文：这是老病交加，临到我的身上了。
English: It's an old disease that has come back to haunt me.

古文：予栖心释梵，浪迹老、庄，因疾观身，果有所得。
现代文：我寄心于佛教，行为依老、庄，就疾病而观察自身，果然有所得。
English: I put my heart into Buddhism, acted according to the old and dignified, observed myself in terms of illness, and really gained something.

古文：何则？
现代文：所得何在？
English: Why is that?

古文：外形骸而内忘忧患，先禅观而后顺医治。
现代文：将形骸置之度外而内心忘却忧患，先经禅心观照然后按病求医。
English: Put the skeleton outside and forget the sorrow inside, first observe through Zen and then seek medical treatment according to the disease.

古文：旬月以还，厥疾少间，杜门高枕，淡然安闲。
现代文：一月之后，病症便有减轻，闲门高枕，淡然安闲。
English: After one month, the symptoms have been alleviated, the idle door high pillow, indifferent leisure.

古文：吟咏兴来，亦不能遏，遂为《病中诗》十五篇以自谕。 
现代文：诗兴发作，不能遏止，于是做《病中吟》十五篇以自喻。 
English: Poetry bursts forth and cannot be contained, so he wrote the fifteen poems of "The Canticle of Illness" as self-parables.

古文：会昌中，请罢太子少傅，以刑部尚书致仕。
现代文：会昌年间，白居易请求免除太子少傅职务，以刑部尚书身份辞官归家。
English: During the Huichang era, Bai Juyi requested to be exempted from the post of the prince's junior tutor, and resigned from the position as the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law to return home.

古文：与香山僧如满结香火社，每肩舆往来，白衣鸠杖，自称香山居士。
现代文：与香山僧如满结成香火社，每每乘竹轿来去，著白衣，扶鸠杖，自称香山居士。
English: With the Fragrant Mountain Monk Ruman, they formed the Fragrant Fire Society, and every time they came and went by bamboo sedan, wearing white robes and carrying canes, they called themselves Fragrant Mountain Monks.

古文：大中元年卒，时年七十六，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：大中元年，白居易去世，时年七十六岁，追赠尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of the Great Middle Ages, Bai Juyi died at the age of seventy-six, and was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu Yuhubei.

古文：有文集七十五卷，《经史事类》三十卷，并行于世。
现代文：有诗文集七十五卷，《经史事类》三十卷，并行于世。
English: There are seventy-five volumes of poetry and prose anthologies, and thirty volumes of "Classes of History and Literature," both of which are still in circulation.

古文：长庆末，浙东观察使元稹，为居易集序曰：
现代文：长庆末年，浙东观察使元稹为白居易诗文集做序道：
English: At the end of the Changqing era, the East Zhejiang Observer asked Yuan Qi to write a preface for Bai Juyi's poetry anthology:

古文：乐天始未言，试指 之 、 无 字，能不误。
现代文： 乐天孩提时，考他 之  无 二字能不误指。
English: When Rakuten was a child, the word "success" could not be misspelled.

古文：始既言，读书勤敏，与他兒异。
现代文：刚会说话，便勤奋读书反应敏捷，与别的小儿不一般。
English: As soon as he can speak, he diligently reads and reacts quickly, which is unusual for other children.

古文：五六岁识声韵，十五志辞赋，二十七举进士。
现代文：五六岁识声韵，十五岁立志习辞赋，二十七岁考中进士。
English: At the age of five or six, he knew the sound and rhyme, at the age of fifteen, he made up his mind to study rhetoric, and at the age of twenty-seven, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：贞元末，进士尚驰竞，不尚文，就中六籍尤摈落。
现代文：贞元末年，进士崇尚驰竞，不崇尚文章，其中六经尤遭冷落。
English: At the end of the Zhengyuan era, Jin Shi advocated competition, but not articles, of which the Six Classics in particular were snubbed.

古文：礼部侍郎高郢始用经艺为进退，乐天一举擢上第。
现代文：礼部侍郎高郢开始用经学为取舍标准，乐天以优异成绩一举得中。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Gao Qi, began to use the study of the classics as the criterion for selection, and Lotte won the first prize with excellent results.

古文：明年，中拔萃甲科，由是《性习相近远》、《玄珠》、《斩白蛇剑》等赋洎百节判，新进士竞相传于京师。
现代文：次年，考中拔萃甲科，从此《性习相近远》、《玄珠》、《斩白蛇》等赋及百节判辞，均被新科进士在京师竞相传诵。
English: In the following year, he was selected for the junior high school entrance examination, and from then on, "Sexual Practice is Near and Far," "The Gem" and "Chopping the White Snake" were given a hundred-syllable sentence, all of which were competitively recited by new students in Beijing.

古文：会宪宗皇帝策召天下士，对诏称旨，又登甲科。
现代文：正值宪宗皇帝当廷策试召天下人才，白居易应对得到皇帝赏识，又登甲科。
English: It was the time when Emperor Gensong was trying to summon the world's talent, and Bai Juyi was able to get the emperor's appreciation and enter the A-level course.

古文：未几，选入翰林，掌制诰。
现代文：不久被选拔入翰林，掌管制诰。
English: He was soon selected to join Hanlin, where he was in charge of the control room.

古文：比比上书言得失，因为《贺雨诗》、《秦中吟》等数十章，指言天下事，时人比之《风》、《骚》焉。
现代文：屡屡上疏陈说治政得失，同时做《贺雨诗》、《秦中吟》等数十首，意在论天下事，当时人们将他的诗作比作《风》、《骚》。
English: He often spoke about the merits and demerits of political governance, and at the same time composed dozens of poems such as "He Yu Shi" and "Qin Zhong Yin," which were intended to discuss world affairs. At that time, people compared his poems to "Wind" and "So."

古文：予始与乐天同秘书，前后多以诗章相赠答。
现代文： 我最初与乐天同在秘书省任职，先后多以诗章互相赠答。
English: At first, I worked with Lotte at the Ministry of Secretaries, and we gave each other poems.

古文：予谴掾江陵，乐天犹在翰林，寄予百韵律体及杂体，前后数十诗。
现代文：我被贬到江陵为属吏，乐天尚在翰林，前后寄赠我百韵、律体及杂体诗共数十首。
English: I was relegated to Gangneung as a subordinate official, and Lotte was still in Hanlin. He sent me hundreds of rhymes, rhymes and miscellaneous poems, totaling dozens.

古文：是后各佐江、通，复相酬寄。
现代文：此后各在江州、通州为属吏，仍然互相唱和寄答。
English: Since then, each has been a subordinate official in Jiangzhou and Tongzhou, and they still sing and send replies to each other.

古文：巴、蜀、江、楚间洎长安中少年，递相仿效，竞作新辞，自谓为元和诗。而乐天《秦中吟》、《贺雨》讽谕闲适等篇，时人罕能知者。
现代文：巴、蜀、江、楚及长安城中年轻人，纷纷仿效，争做新辞，自称为元和诗，但乐天《秦中吟》、《贺雨》等讽喻闲适之诗，当时人极少有能理解的。
English: The young people in Ba, Shu, Jiang, Chu and Chang'an cities followed suit and tried to make new words. They called themselves Yuanhe poems, but Lotte's "Qin Zhongyin" and "He Yu" and other allegorical and idle poems were rarely understood at that time.

古文：然而二十年间，禁省观寺、邮候墙壁之上无不书；王公妾妇、牛童马走之口无不道。
现代文：然而二十年间，宫禁官署、道观寺庙、驿站旅舍的墙壁上，无处不题写着他的诗；从王侯公卿的妾妇到童仆奴婢，人人口中都吟诵着他的诗。
English: However, for twenty years, his poems have been inscribed everywhere on the walls of the Imperial Palace Forbidden City, the Taoist Temple, and the post station hostel; from the concubines of princes and nobles to the servants and slaves, his poems have been recited by the human population.

古文：其缮写模勒，炫卖于市井，或因之以交酒茗者，处处皆是。
现代文：至于将他的诗缮写刻印，到街市上叫卖，或用以易酒换茶的，处处皆是。
English: As for those who write and engrave his poems, go to the street market to sell them, or use them to exchange wine for tea, they are everywhere.

古文：其甚有至盗窃名姓，苟求自售，杂乱间厕，无可奈何。
现代文：甚至盗窃乐天名姓，随意出售己之所作，真假杂糅，无可奈何。
English: Even the theft of Lotte's name and surname, the random sale of his own work, the mixture of true and false, can't be helped.

古文：予尝于平水市中，见村校诸童，竞习歌咏，召而问之，皆对曰： 先生教我乐天、微之诗。 
现代文：我曾在平水市中，见村校学童们比赛诵习歌诗，唤他们前来询问，都回答说： 先生教我们白乐天、元微之诗。 
English: In the city of Pingshui, I once saw a competition of village schoolchildren reciting poems. I called them to come and inquire, and they all replied: "Teacher, teach us the poems of Bai Le Tian and Yuan Wei."

古文：固亦不知予为微之也。
现代文：当然他们不知道我就是元微之。
English: Of course, they don't know that I'm the original.

古文：又鸡林贾人求市颇切，自云： 本国宰相，每以一金换一篇，甚伪者，宰相辄能辨别之。 
现代文：又在鸡林见一买卖人急欲出售乐天诗作，自称： 本国宰相，每每用一金换一篇，是真是假，宰相自能辨别。 
English: Also, in the chicken forest, I saw a salesman eager to sell Lotte poems, claiming: "The prime minister of my country, every time he uses one gold for one piece, is true or false, the prime minister can distinguish himself."

古文：自篇章已来，未有如是流传之广者。
现代文：从有诗文创作以来，还没有这样广为流传的。
English: Not since the creation of poetry has a poem been so widely circulated.

古文：长庆四年，乐天自杭州刺史以右庶子召还，予时刺会稽，因得尽征其文，手自排缵，成五十卷，凡二千二百五十一首。
现代文： 长庆四年，乐天从杭州刺史任上被召回授右庶子，我当时任职越州，于是搜集他的全部诗作，亲手编排成五十卷，总计二千二百五十一首。
English: In the fourth year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Lotte was recalled from his post as the chief historian of Hangzhou to be given to his son-in-law. I was in charge of Yuezhou at the time, so I collected all of his poems and arranged them by hand into 50 volumes, a total of 2,251 poems.

古文：前辈多以前集、中集为名，予以为陛下明年当改元，长庆讫于是矣，因号《白氏长庆集》。
现代文：前辈诗人多半取名前集、中集，我认为皇帝陛下明年理当改元，长庆年号便要结束，故取名《白氏长庆集》。
English: The predecessors of the poets mostly took the first collection and the middle collection. I think that His Majesty the Emperor should change the era next year, and the Changqing Year should end. Therefore, it was named "Bai's Changqing Collection."

古文：大凡人之文各有所长，乐天长可以为多矣。
现代文： 大抵文人之作，各有所长，乐天之作可以说长处更多。
English: Most of the works of writers have their own strengths, but Rakuten's works have more strengths.

古文：夫讽谕之诗长于激，闲适之时长于遣，感伤之诗长于切，五字律诗百言而上长于赡，五字、七字百言而下长于情，赋赞箴诫之类长于当，碑记叙事制诰长于实，启奏表状长于直，书檄辞册剖判长于尽。
现代文：那讽喻之诗以激昂见长，闲适之诗以超脱见长，感伤之诗以深切见长，五字律诗百言以上以内容充实见长，五字七字百言以下以感情真挚见长，赋赞箴诫之类以准确恰当见长，碑记叙事制诰以真实无误见长，启奏表状以率直无私见长，书檄辞册剖判以淋漓尽致见长。
English: The poem of the simile is long with passion, the poem of the idle is long with detachment, the poem of the sentimental is long with deep feeling, the poem of the five-character law is long with more than 100 words with rich content, the five-character seven-character 100 words or less is long with sincere feelings, the praise of the precepts is long with accuracy and appropriateness, the inscription of the narrative system is long with truth and accuracy, the opening form is long with frankness and selflessness, and the dictionary of the book is long with vividness.

古文：总而言之，不亦多乎哉！
现代文：总而言之，长处不是很多吗？ 
English: All in all, aren't there a lot of advantages?

古文：人以为稹序尽其能事。
现代文：人们认为元稹这篇序文写得很不错。
English: People thought that this preface written by Yuan Zang was very good.

古文：居易尝写其文集，送江州东西二林寺、洛城香山圣善等寺，如佛书杂传例流行之。
现代文：白居易曾抄写了他的诗文集，送交江州东西二林寺、洛阳香山圣善寺等处，希图像佛书杂传一样广为流传。
English: Bai Juyi once copied his poetry collection and sent it to Jiangzhou East and West Erlin Temple, Luoyang Fragrant Hill Shenzen Temple and other places, and it has been widely circulated like the miscellaneous Buddhist books.

古文：无子，以其侄孙嗣。
现代文：白居易无子，以其侄孙承嗣。
English: Bai Juyi had no son, but was succeeded by his grandnephew.

古文：遗命不归下邽，可葬于香山如满师塔之侧，家人从命而葬焉。
现代文：临终遗嘱不要归葬下圭阝，可葬于香山如满师塔旁边，家人遵嘱将他安葬在那里。
English: According to his last will and testament, he did not want to be buried under Guiyang, but could be buried next to the Fragrant Mountain Ru Man Shi Pagoda. His family followed his wishes and buried him there.

