古文：中军、左、右、前、后军，皆有，方之以行垣，而无通其交往。
现代文：中军和左、右、前、后各军，都有分配的营地，营地四周围以矮墙，不能互相来往。
English: The Chinese army and the left, right, front and rear armies all have assigned camps. The camps are surrounded by low walls and cannot come and go from each other.

古文：将有分地，帅有分地，伯有分地，皆营其沟域，而明其塞令。使非百人无得通。
现代文：将有营地，帅有营地，伯也有营地，各个营地周围都挖有界沟，并明确颁布营地的禁令，规定各 伯 驻地，不是同 伯 的人不得进入。
English: There will be a camp, a commander will have a camp, a deputy will have a camp, and each camp will have a ditch dug around it, and a camp ban will be clearly issued, stipulating that no one who is not a deputy may enter each deputy's residence.

古文：非其百人而入者，伯诛之；伯不诛，与之同罪。
现代文：如有不同 伯 的人擅自进入，伯长应惩罚他们。伯长不惩罚他们，就和他门同罪。
English: If people from other cities enter without permission, the mayor should punish them. If the mayor does not punish them, they are just as guilty as him.

古文：军中纵横之道，百有二十步而立一府柱，量人与地，柱道相望，禁行清道。非将吏之符节，不得通行。
现代文：军中纵横方向的道路，每隔一百二十步设立一个岗哨，根据人数和地形使岗哨能够监视到各条道路，负责限制行人往来，保障交通顺畅，除非持有将吏的符节一律不准通行。
English: A guard post will be set up at intervals of one hundred and twenty paces along the vertical and horizontal roads in the army. According to the number of people and the terrain, the guard post will be able to monitor all roads. It will be responsible for restricting pedestrian traffic and ensuring smooth traffic. Except for holding the official's insignia, no one will be allowed to pass.

古文：采薪牧者，皆成行伍；不成行伍者，不得通行。
现代文：打架和放牧的人员，都要整队行动，不整队的不得通行。
English: Fighting and grazing personnel must act as a whole team, and if they do not form a team, they are not allowed to pass.

古文：吏属无节，士无伍者，横门诛之。
现代文：官吏没有符节，士兵没有整队的，都由担任营门警卫的军官惩罚他们。
English: Officials without insignia, soldiers without regiments, were all punished by the officers who guarded the camp gates.

古文：逾分干地者，诛之。
现代文：凡是越出自己营地范围，进入别人营地的，都应加以惩罚。
English: Anyone who goes beyond the bounds of his own camp and enters someone else's camp should be punished.

古文：故内无干令犯禁，则外无不获之奸。
现代文：这样，内部就没有触犯禁令的人，外来的奸细也就不难查获了。
English: In this way, there are no internal violators of the ban, and foreign spies are not difficult to detect.

