古文：二十七日平明行，舟多北向。二十里，抵祁阳东市，舟人复泊而市米，过午始行。
现代文：二十七日天亮出发，船多是向北行二十里后，抵达祁阳县城东边的市镇，船夫又停泊下来去买米，过了中午才开船。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the boat set off at dawn. After sailing north for 20 miles, it arrived at a town on the east side of the city of Fenyang County. The boatman anchored to buy rice, and the boat did not leave until after noon.

古文：不半里，江涨流横，众舟不前，遂泊于杨家坝，东市南尽处也。
现代文：行不到半里，江水上涨，纵横流淌，众船不再向前航，于是停泊在杨家坝，那里是城东市镇的南面尽头处。
English: With less than half a mile to go, the river water rose, flowing vertically and horizontally, and the boats no longer sailed forward, so they anchored at Yangjiaba, which is the southern end of Chengdong Town.

古文：下午舟既泊，余乃同静闻渡杨家桥，共一里，入祁阳西门。
现代文：下午，船既然已经停泊；我便和静闻上岸跨过杨家桥，共走一里，进了祁阳县城西门。
English: In the afternoon, since the boat had already moored, I went ashore with Jingwen, crossed the Yangjia Bridge, walked a mile, and entered the West Gate of Chengdu, Poyang County.

古文：北经四牌坊，东出东门外，又东北一里，为甘泉寺。
现代文：向北经过四牌坊，往东走出东门外，又朝东北走一里，为甘泉寺。
English: Walk north past the four-flag gate, walk east out of the east gate, and walk one mile to the northeast, to Ganquan Temple.

古文：泉一方，当寺前坡下，池方丈余，水溢其中，深仅尺许，味极淡冽，极似惠泉水。
现代文：有一眼泉，在寺前面的山坡下，他子方圆翻丈多，泉水充满池中，深仅有一尺左右，水味极淡而冷凉，极似惠泉的水。
English: There is a spring, at the foot of the hill in front of the temple, which is much larger than the others. The spring water fills the pool, and is only about a foot deep. The taste of the water is very light and cool, very similar to the water of Huiquan.

古文：城东山陇缭饶，自北而南，两层成峡，泉出其中。
现代文：城东面山陇缭绕，自北向南回旋事两层出陇间形成山峡，泉水就从山峡中涌出来。
English: To the east of the city, there is a dazzling mountain range, which swirls from north to south, forming a mountain gorge between the two layers of ridges. Spring water gushes out of the canyon.

古文：寺东向，倚城外第一冈。殿前楹有吾郡宋邹忠公名浩，贬此地与蒋湋游。
现代文：寺朝询东面，背靠城外的第一冈，殿前房中立有我家乡常州府中宋代人邹忠公书写的碑文《甘泉铭碑》。
English: On the east side of the temple, facing the first hill outside the city, there is an inscription "Ganquan Inscription" written by my hometown Changzhou prefect, the Song Dynasty person Gong Zhonggong.

古文：《甘泉铭碑》，张南轩名栻。从郡中蒋氏得之，跋而镌此。
现代文：张南轩从本府申姓蒋的人家得到这篇铭文，为它书写了跋语并且刻在此处。
English: Zhang Nanxuan obtained this inscription from the family of a person surnamed Jiang Shen in this prefecture, wrote a eulogy for it and engraved it here.

古文：邹大书，而张小楷，笔势遒劲，可称二绝。
现代文：邹浩写的是大字体，而张南轩写的是小楷，笔势遒劲，可以称为二绝。
English: Hao Hao wrote in a large font, while Zhang Nanxuan wrote in small block letters, with a vigorous brushstroke, which can be called the two extremes.

古文：其前山第二层之中，盘成一窝，则九莲庵也。旧为多宝寺，邑人陈尚书重建而复之，中有法雨堂、藏经阁、三教堂。
现代文：寺前的第二层山中，盘结成一个山窝；那里是九莲庵的所在、它原先是多宝寺 ，县中人陈尚书重建而恢复了旧时的规模，里面有法雨堂、藏经阁和三教堂。
English: The second level of the mountain in front of the temple, coiled into a mountain nest; there is the location of Jiulian An, which was originally the Dobao Temple, rebuilt by Chen Shangshu, a person from the county, and restored to its old scale. It has a Dharma rain hall, a collection of scriptures and three churches.

古文：而藏经阁中供高皇帝像，唐包巾，丹窄衣，眉如卧蚕而中不断，疏须开张而不志文，乃陈氏得之内府即皇宫而供此者。
现代文：而藏经阁中供着本朝高皇帝的像，头裹唐朝时的包巾，身穿朱红色的窄衣，眉如卧蚕而中间不断开，稀疏的胡须分扬而不加修饰，它是一个姓陈的从皇宫内得到而拿来供在这个阁中的。
English: In the bookcase, however, there is a portrait of Emperor Gao of this dynasty, his head wrapped in a handkerchief from the Tang dynasty, wearing a scarlet narrow robe, his eyebrows like silkworms and constantly parted in the middle, his sparse beard parted and unadorned. It was obtained from the imperial palace by a man named Chen and kept in this cabinet.

古文：今尚书虽故，而子孙犹修饰未已，视为本家香火矣。
现代文：如今尚书虽然已经不在世，但他的子孙仍对寺庙常加修整，将其看作自家的香火。
English: Although Shangshu is no longer alive, his children and grandchildren still regularly renovate the temple and regard it as their own.

古文：寺前环堵左绕，其中已芜，而闭户之上，有砖镌 延陵道意 四字，岂亦邹忠公之遗迹耶？
现代文：寺前的墙垣环绕向左边，墙内已经杂草丛生，而关闭着的墙门上，有块砖上刻着 延陵道意 四个字，这难道也是邹忠公的遗迹吗？
English: The wall in front of the temple is encircled to the left, and weeds have grown inside the wall. On the closed wall door, there is a brick engraved with the four characters of the Yanling Taoism. Is this also the relic of Gong Zhonggong?

古文：而土人已莫知之，那得此字之长为糖羊也。
现代文：但当地人已没有谁知道，确实，怎可能使这些字长久地被作为佳话流传下去呢？
English: But no one in the area knows for sure, so how could these words have been passed down as legend for so long?

古文：九莲庵之山，南垂即为学宫。
现代文：九莲庵所在那山的南睡就是县李堂。
English: The southern sleeping place of the mountain where the Jiulian Temple is located is the county's Li Hall.

古文：学在城外而又倚山，倚山而又当其南尽处，前有大池，甘泉之流，南下东绕，而注于湘。
现代文：学堂在城外而又背靠着山，背靠着山而义位于山的南边尽头处，前面有个大池子，甘泉的食流水，往南流下而后绕过学堂的东边，注入湘江。
English: The school is located outside the city with its back against the mountain. The school is located at the southern end of the mountain with its back against the mountain. There is a large pond in front of it, and the flowing water of the spring flows southward and then bypasses the east side of the school and flows into the Xiangjiang River.

古文：其入湘处为潇湘桥。
现代文：它汇人湘江处为潇湘桥。
English: It is connected to the Xiangjiang River by the Xiao Xiang Bridge.

古文：桥之北奇石灵幻，一峰突起，为城外第二层之山。
现代文：桥的北边奇奇怪怪的石头灵异变幻，一座山峰突起，这是城外的第二层山。
English: On the north side of the bridge, there is a strange transformation of the stone, and a mountain peak rises, which is the second layer of the mountain outside the city.

古文：一盘而为九莲，再峙而为学宫，又从学宫之东度脉突此，为学宫青龙之沙。
现代文：此山起先盘绕而为九莲庵所在的地方，再度耸起就形成学堂所背靠的山，然后山脉又从学堂的东面越过来，突立在潇湘桥北面，成为学堂的青龙砂。
English: The mountain first coiled around the place where Jiulian's hermitage was located, then rose again to form the mountain behind the school, and then the mountains came over from the east of the school and protruded north of Xiaoxiang Bridge, becoming the blue dragon sand of the school.

古文：其前湘江从南至此，东折而去；祁江从北至此，南向入湘；而甘泉活水，又绕学前，透出南胁，而东向入湘。
现代文：山前，湘江从南流到此处，折向东去；祁江从北流到此处，向南汇入湘江；而甘泉常流，又绕过学堂前，穿出山南，向东注入湘江。
English: In front of the mountain, the Hunan River flows from the south to here and turns to the east; the Minjiang River flows from the north to here and flows south into the Hunan River; and the Ganquan Current, bypassing the front of the school, flows out of Shannan and flows east into the Hunan River.

古文：乃三交会之中，故桥曰潇湘桥，亭曰潇湘亭，今改建玄华阁，庙曰潇湘庙，谓似潇、湘之合流也。
现代文：它是三条水流交汇处的中间部分，所以桥叫潇湘桥，亭名潇湘亭，如今亭子改建为玄华阁，庙称潇湘庙，但从称谓上看似乎是潇、湘两水的合流处。
English: It is the middle part of the confluence of three water streams, so the bridge is called Xiao Xiang Bridge, the pavilion is named Xiao Xiang Pavilion, and now the pavilion has been converted into Xuanhua Pavilion, and the temple is called Xiao Xiang Temple, but from the point of view of the appellation, it seems to be the confluence of Xiao and Hunan waters.

古文：庙祀大舜像，谓巡守由此，然隘陋不称。峰之东北，有石梁五拱跨祁水上，曰新桥，乃东向白水道，而衡州道则不由桥而北溯祁流矣。时余欲觅工往浯溪拓《中兴摩崖颂》，工以日暮不及往，故探历诸寺。
现代文：潇湘庙后面的石头如分开的花薯、似紧簇的花瓣，形态各异、庙中祭祀着大舜的像，传说大舜巡狰时经由此处，然而庙狭窄简陋，与大舜的身傲不相称、山峰的东北面，有座五孔的石桥横架在祁水上，叫新桥、它是向东到白水所经的道路，而到衡州府的路却不由桥而是往北溯祁江水流态当时我想找一个拓工前往语溪为我拓《中兴摩崖颂》，拓工因为天晚来不及去，所以我便去探历各寺庙。
English: Xiao Xiang The stones behind the temple are like separated flowers and potatoes, like tightly clustered petals, with different shapes. The temple is dedicated to the image of the big dragonfly. Legend has it that the big dragonfly passed through this place when it was on patrol. However, the temple is narrow and simple, which is not commensurate with the pride of the big dragonfly. On the northeast side of the peak, there is a five-hole stone bridge across the Surabaya water, called the new bridge. It is the road to the east to Baishui, but the road to Hengzhou is not through the bridge but to the north to trace the water flow of the Liji

古文：大抵甘泉古朴，九莲新整，一以存旧，一以征今焉。
现代文：大抵说来滋泉寺古朴；九莲庵新整，一个保存旧迹，一个可以征询今事。
English: For the most part, Shisen-ji Temple is quaint and simple; Jiulian Temple is newly renovated. One is to preserve the old, and the other is to inquire about the present.

古文：日暮，由江市而南，经三吾驿，即次山吾水、吾山、吾亭境也，去 山 、去 水 而独以 吾 甚是。
现代文：日落时，我从江市往南走，途经三吾骤，即元次山吾水、吾山、吾亭的所在处所，如今原来的字分别去掉 山 字旁和 水 字旁，只写作 吾 ，这非常正确。
English: At sunset, I walked from Jiangshi to the south, passing through the three Wuzhuan, that is, the location of the original Wuzhuan, Wuzhan and Wuting. Now, the original characters have been removed from the side of the mountain and the side of the water, and only written as "Wu," which is very correct.

古文：自新桥三里，南至杨家桥，下舟已昏黑矣。
现代文：从新桥走三里，往南到达杨家桥，上到船中天已经昏黑了。
English: After walking three miles from Xinqiao to Yangjiaqiao in the south, it was already dark when we got on the boat.

古文：是两日共行五十里，先阻雨，后阻水也。
现代文：这两天一共行了五十里，因为先是被雨阻，后是被江水阻。
English: For these two days, we walked a total of fifty miles, because first we were held back by the rain, and then by the river.

古文：是夜水声汹汹，其势愈急。
现代文：这天夜里江中水声汹汹，流势更加迅急。
English: On this night, the sound of the water in the middle of the river was loud and the current was more rapid.

古文：二十八日水涨舟泊，竟不成行。
现代文：二十八日江水上涨船只停泊，竟然走不成。
English: On the 28th, the river water rose and the boats were anchored, but they couldn't get away.

古文：亟枵ā即空虚腹趋甘泉，觅拓碑者，其人已出。
现代文：我赶忙空腹奔到甘泉寺，寻找拓碑的人，但那人已经外出了。
English: I hurried to Ganquan Temple on an empty stomach to look for the person who removed the monument, but he had already left.

古文：又从大街趋东门，从门外朱紫衙觅范姓，八角坊觅陈姓裱工，皆言水大难渡，以涪溪、阳江也。为余遍觅拓本，俱不得。复趋甘泉，则王姓拓工已归，索余重价，终不敢行，止就甘泉摹铭二纸。
现代文：我又从大街上奔到城东门，从东门外朱紫衙找姓范的从八角坊找姓陈的裱工，他们都说水势大难以渡过，替我到处去寻拓本，又都没找到，又奔回甘泉寺，则姓王的拓工已经回来了：他虽然向我索要了重价，但终究不敢前去拓印，仅就甘泉寺中的铭文临摹了两页。
English: I also ran from the main street to the east gate of the city, from the east gate outside Zhu Zijian to find the surnamed Fan from the octagonal square to find the forger surnamed Chen. They all said that the water was very difficult to cross. I went everywhere to find the rubbing, but did not find it. I ran back to Ganquan Temple, and the forger surnamed Wang had returned. Although he asked me for a heavy price, he finally did not dare to go to the printing. He only copied two pages of the inscription in Ganquan Temple.

古文：余先返舟中，留静闻候拓焉。
现代文：后我先返回船中，留下静闻等候拓印。
English: After that, I went back to the ship first, and waited quietly for the transfer.

古文：祁阳东门外大街与濒江之市，阛闠连络，市肆充牣è满且多高门大第，可与衡郡比隆。
现代文：祁阳城东门外的大街与临江的集市上，街道纵横相连，店铺房屋充满各处，并且有许多高门大尾，可以和衡州府城的隆盛相匹比。
English: The main street outside the east gate of Shenyang City is similar to the market on the Linjiang River. The streets are connected vertically and horizontally, the shops are full of houses everywhere, and there are many high gates, which can be compared to the prosperity of the capital city of Hengzhou.

古文：第城中寥寂，若只就东城外观，可称岩邑。
现代文：只是城中寥落冷寂，若只就东城外观览，可称得上是个险要的城池。
English: However, the city is desolate and cold. If you only look at the exterior of Dongcheng, it can be said to be a dangerous city.

古文：二十九日昧爽放舟。
现代文：二十九日拂晓开船。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 29th.

古文：五里过浯溪，摩崖在西。东溯流从西，又二十里，过媳妇塘，娉婷傍北，沿洄自南，俱从隔江矫首。
现代文：晓色中朝霞升上天空，山林间层层雾气变幻出多种色彩，随即火轮般的太阳涌起，腾焰飞芒，直从船尾缝隙射到我枕头间，泰山日出的景象，也不能和我在卧游中所见到的相比行五里，经过涪溪，刻着文篇的崖壁在江流的西边。从东面溯流向西，又行二十里，经过媳妇塘，媳妇石婚婷依傍在江北，人们无论顺水还是溯流从它南面经过，都隔江翘首观览。
English: The morning haze rose into the sky in the dawn, and the layers of fog between the mountains and forests changed into many colors. Then the sun rose like a wheel of fire, soaring and flying, and shot straight from the stern gap to my pillow. The scene of the sunrise on Mount Tai cannot be compared with what I saw in the lying tour. I walked for five miles, passed through Lushan Creek, and the cliff wall engraved with literary texts was on the west side of the river flow. From the east, it flowed westward, and walked for another twenty miles, passed through the daughter-in-law's pond, and the daughter-in-law's stone wedding ring was

古文：所称 媳妇石 者，江边一崖，从山半削出，下插江底，其上一石特立而起，昂首西瞻，岂其良人即丈夫犹玉门未返耶？
现代文：所称的 媳妇石 ，是江边的一座山崖从半山中刀削般伸突出来，下插到江底，山崖上有块石头独立上耸，昂首西望，难道她丈夫还未从遥远的玉门关返回家吗？
English: The so-called "daughter-in-law's rock" is a cliff on the river's edge that juts out from the middle of the mountain like a razor blade, plunging down to the bottom of the river. There is a rock on the cliff that rises independently, looking westward with its head held high. Hasn't her husband returned home from the distant Yumen Pass yet?

古文：又二十里，过二十四矶，矶数相次。
现代文：又行二十里，经过二十四矶，一个个矶次第排列在江岸边。
English: Another twenty miles, through twenty-four islets, one islet after another lined up on the riverbank.

古文：又五里泊于黄杨铺。
现代文：再行五里，停泊在黄杨铺。
English: Go another five miles and moor at Huang Yang Pu.

古文：黄杨铺已属零陵。
现代文：黄杨铺已经属于零陵县。
English: Huangyangpu already belongs to Ziling County.

古文：其东即为祁阳界，其西遥望大山，名驷马山，此山已属东安，则西去东安界约三十里。
现代文：它东面就是祁阳县界。它西面远远地望得见的大山，叫驯马山，此山已经属于东安县，铺西距东安县界约三十里。
English: To the east of it is the boundary of Shenyang County. To the west of it is a large mountain that can be seen from far away, called Tame Horse Mountain. This mountain already belongs to Dong'an County, and is about thirty miles west of the Dong'an County boundary.

古文：西北有大路通武冈州，共二百四十里。
现代文：它西北边有条大路通往武冈州，路程共二百四十里。
English: To the northwest, there is a highway leading to Wookang, a distance of 240 miles.

古文：黄杨有小水自西而来，石梁跨其上，名大桥。
现代文：黄杨有条小水从西边流来，一座石桥横架在水流上，名叫大桥。
English: There is a small stream of water coming from the west of Poplar. A stone bridge is built across the stream of water. It is called the Great Bridge.

古文：桥下通舟，入止三五里而已。不能上也。
现代文：桥下通行船只，逆流进去仅三五里而已，不能再往上航。
English: Vessels passing under the bridge are only three to five miles upstream, and cannot sail any further.

古文：闰四月初一日昧爽，从黄杨铺放舟，至是始转南行。
现代文：闰四月初一日拂晓，从黄杨铺开船，到珍处后才折往南行。
English: At dawn on the first day of April, the ship set sail from Huangyangpu, and only after reaching Zhenjiang did it turn south.

古文：其先自祁阳来，多西向行。十五里大护滩，有涡成漩，诸流皆奔入漩中，其声如雷，盖漏卮漏斗也。
现代文：行十五里到大护滩，有处地方的水流形成漩涡，众流都奔入漩涡中，声如雷鸣，大略如一个渗漏的酒器。
English: Fifteen miles to the large beach, there are places where the water currents form a whirlpool, and the currents all rush into the whirlpool, sounding like thunder, roughly like a leaking wine container.

古文：又上为小护滩。
现代文：又往上为小护滩。
English: Further up is a small breakwater.

古文：又十五里为高栗市。
现代文：又行十五里为高栗市，它就是方激释。
English: It's another fifteen miles to Takaguri City, which is called Fangqiao.

古文：即方潋驿也。又二十里过青龙矶，矶石巑岏。
现代文：又行二十里经过青龙矶，矶石高峭，横啮江流。
English: Another twenty miles pass through the Qinglong Mountains, high cliffs, and the Hengye River.

古文：横啮即 咬 江流。又十里，昏黑而后抵冷水湾。
现代文：又行十里，天昏黑以后抵达冷水湾。
English: After another ten miles, we arrived at Lengshui Bay after dark.

古文：下午，余病鱼腹，为减晚餐。
现代文：下午，我身体不适，肚腹鼓胀，为此晚餐减了量。
English: In the afternoon, I felt unwell and my stomach was bloated, so I skipped dinner.

古文：泊西岸石涯下，水涨石没，不若前望中峥嵘也。
现代文：船停泊在江西岸石崖边，江水上涨石头被淹没了些，因而江边的石头不如前次在这里所望见的那样峥嵘。
English: The boat was moored at the edge of a rocky cliff on the west bank of the river. As the river rose, the stones were somewhat submerged, so the stones along the river were not as rugged as we had last seen here.

古文：初二日舟人登涯市薪菜，晨餐时乃行。
现代文：初二日船夫登上江边集市去买柴禾菜蔬，早餐时才出发。
English: On the first two days, the boatmen boarded the riverside market to buy firewood, grass and vegetables, and only set off at breakfast time.

古文：雷雨大作，距午乃晴。
现代文：隆隆的雷声中雨大下起来，到中午才转晴。
English: It rained heavily with the rumble of thunder and didn't clear up until midday.

古文：共四十里，泊于湖口关，日尚高舂也。
现代文：共行了四十里，停泊在湖口关，这时太阳还高挂在天空。
English: They traveled forty miles and anchored at Hukou Pass, when the sun was still high in the sky.

古文：自冷水湾来，山开天旷，目界大豁，而江两岸，啖水之石时出时没，但有所遇，无不赏心悦目。
现代文：从冷水湾过来，山开天旷，视野大为开阔，而江的两岸，吞衔水流的石头时出时没，只要遇见，无不赏心悦目。
English: Coming from Lengshui Bay, the mountains are open to the sky, the view is very broad, and the two banks of the river, swallowing the water flow of the stone, whenever they meet, they are all pleasing to the eye.

古文：盖入祁阳界，石质即奇，石色即润；过祁阳，突兀之势，以次渐露，至此而随地涌出矣；初三日平明，放舟入湘口，于是去潇而转向湘矣。
现代文：大体上进入祁阳县地界，石头的质地就变得奇特，色泽就变得温润；过了祁阳县城，石头高耸特出的态势，依次渐渐显露出来，到此地便随地向上冒出来了；到进入湘口处，却是那些出现在前面的高耸而曲折绵延的石崖，变成为尖峭直立如盘旋飞翔的了。初三日天亮时，驶船进入湘口，从此处起便离开潇水而专门向湘江中航行了。
English: In general, when entering the boundary of Shuyang County, the texture of the stone becomes strange, and the color becomes warm and mellow; after passing the city of Shuyang County, the towering and outstanding posture of the stone gradually reveals itself, and here it pops up randomly; when entering the Xiangkou, it is those towering and meandering stone cliffs that appear in front of it that become sharp and upright as if flying in a circle. At dawn on the first three days, the ship entered the Xiangkou, and from here it left Xiaoshui and sailed exclusively to the middle of the Xiangjiang River.

古文：潇即余前入永之道，与湘交会于此。
现代文：潇水就是我前些时候进入永州府所走的水路，它与湘水交汇在此处。
English: Xiaoshui is the waterway I took to enter Yongzhou some time ago. It intersects with Xiangshui here.

古文：二水一东南，潇。一西南，湘。
现代文：两水一条从东南来，一条从西南来，会同而向北流去，为洞庭湖众多水流中的主流。
English: The two streams, one from the southeast and one from the southwest, flow together to the north and are the mainstream of the many streams in Dongting Lake.

古文：会同北去，为洞庭众流之主，界其中者即芝山之脉，直走而北尽。尽处两流夹之，尖若龙尾下垂，因其脊无石中砥，故两流挫也必锐而后已。
现代文：位于中间分隔开两条水流的，就是芝山山脉，它直往北延伸。山脉尽头处两条水流夹着它，尖得像龙尾下垂，因为山脊无中流砒柱般的石头，所以两条水流从两侧冲刷侵蚀，必然是使其变得尖细而后才停止。
English: In the middle, separating the two streams, is the Zhishan Mountain Range, which extends to the north. At the end of the mountain range, it is sandwiched between the two streams, and the tip is drooping like a dragon's tail. Because the ridge does not have a stone like a pillar in the middle stream, the two streams wash and erode from both sides, which must make it become thin and then stop.

古文：潇之东岸即湘口驿。有古潇湘祠，祀舜帝之二妃。
现代文：潇水的东岸有个古潇湘祠，祭祀舜帝的两个妃子。
English: On the east bank of the Xiaoshui River, there is an ancient Xiaoxiang ancestral hall, where the two concubines of Emperor Xuan are enshrined.

古文：由祠前截潇水而西，盘龙尾而入湘。
现代文：我们的船由祠前向西横截潇水，盘绕过龙尾似的山尾部而进入湘水。
English: Our boat cut across the Xiangshui from the front of the ancestral hall to the west, winding around the tail of the mountain like a dragon and entering the Xiangshui.

古文：湘口之中，有砂碛中悬，丛木如山，湘流分两派潆之，若龙口之含珠，上下之舟，俱从其西逼山崖而上。
现代文：湘口的中央，有堆砂石悬立着，上面树木丛生如同山峦，湘水分成两股回旋在周围，若像龙口里含着的珠子，上下的船只，都从它西面迫近山崖航行。
English: In the middle of the Hunan estuary, there is a pile of sand and stone, with trees clustering above it like a mountain cocoon. The Hunan water swirls around in two strands, like beads contained in a dragon's mouth. Ships up and down approach the cliff from the west.

古文：时因流涨，即从珠东夹港沿龙尾以进。
现代文：我们的船向上行时，因为水流上涨，就从那珠子东面的夹港沿龙尾似的山尾部而进。
English: As our boat moved upstream, because of the rising water, it went from the port on the east side of the bead along the dragon tail-like tail of the mountain.

古文：一里，绕出珠后，即分口处也。
现代文：行一里，绕出珠子后面，这里就是分口处。
English: Walk one mile, go around the back of the bead, and here is the branch.

古文：于是西北溯全湘，若入咽喉然，其南有小水北向入湘，即芝山西麓之水，余向登岭所望而见之者也。
现代文：从那里往西北溯湘水而行，若像进入咽喉中似的，南边有条小水向北汇入湘江，它就是芝山西麓的水，是我以前登岭燎望时见到的那条水。
English: From there, I followed the Xiangshui River to the northwest. If it were like entering the throat of a crocodile, a small stream on the south side would flow north into the Xiangjiang River. It is the water at the western foot of Shishan Mountain. It is the water I saw when I climbed the ridge.

古文：是时潇水已清，湘水尚浊。
现代文：这时潇水已经变清，但湘水仍然浑浊。
English: At this time, the water has become clear, but the Hunan water is still turbid.

古文：入湘口时，有舟泊而待附，共五人焉，即前日鲤鱼塘被劫之人也。
现代文：我们的船进入湘江时，有只船停泊着等待一帮人上船搭乘，他们一共五人，就是前日子鲤鱼塘被抢劫的那些人。
English: When our boat entered the Hunan River, there was a boat moored waiting for a group of people to board. There were a total of five of them, the same people who had robbed the carp pond the day before.

古文：由湘口而上，多有西北之曲，滩声愈多，石崖愈奇。
现代文：由湘口往上行，江流中有许多曲向西北的弯道，滩声更多，石崖更奇。
English: Going up from Xiangkou, there are many curves to the northwest in the river flow, more beach sounds, and more strange stone cliffs.

古文：二十里，有斜突于右者，上层峭而下嵌空。
现代文：行二十里，有座斜突在江右边的石崖，上边重叠陡峭而下边玲珑变幻。
English: Twenty miles along, there is a rocky cliff that juts out diagonally on the right side of the river. The upper side is steep and overlapping, while the lower side is ever-changing.

古文：又二十里，有平削于左者，黄斑白溜，相间成行；又有骈立于右者，与江左平剖之崖，夹江对峙，转而西行五里，过军家埠。
现代文：又行二十里，江左边有座仿佛是被平平地切削而成的山崖，上面黄色的石纹和白色的水流相间成行；又有一座并立在江右边的山崖，与江左边平平剖开的山崖夹江对峙，如同庐山五老峰并排耸立，更加显得奇异峻峭。折往西行五里，经过军家埠。
English: Twenty miles further on, on the left side of the river, there is a cliff that seems to have been carved out of a flat rock, with yellow stone patterns and white water flowing side by side. There is also a cliff on the right side of the river, which stands side by side with the cliff on the left side of the river. It is like the five old peaks of Lushan Mountain standing side by side, and it looks even more strangely steep. Go west for five miles and pass the military cottages.

古文：又转而南，又一山中剖卑平插江右，询之，无知其名者。
现代文：再折往南行，又有一座山中间破开而低平，插立在江右，山脚倒浸在重重水波间。
English: Turning south again, there is another mountain that is broken in the middle but low and flat, standing on the right side of the river, with the foot of the mountain submerged upside down between the waves of heavy water.

古文：由山下转而东，泊于军家埠、台盘子之间，去军家埠又五里矣。初四日昧爽发舟，东过挂榜崖。
现代文：向旁人询问，没有知道它名称的人。这时落日正衔在山外，当船过到江面的东侧时，忽然见山峰间有一片孔穴通明透亮，那景象仿佛是弯弯的新月与日并悬，但随即就被遮蔽掉。我们的船由山下折往东，停泊在军家埠、台盘子之间，这里距离军家埠又有五里了。初四日拂晓开船，往东经过挂榜崖。
English: At this time, the setting sun was hanging outside the mountain, when the ship passed to the east side of the river, suddenly there was a hole between the peaks that was bright and clear. The scene seemed to be a curved crescent moon hanging with the sun, but it was immediately obscured. Our ship turned from the bottom of the mountain to the east, anchored between Junjiabutsu and Taipansi, and here it was another five miles from Junjiabutsu. On the fourth day of the first month, the ship set sail at dawn and passed the Hangbang Cliff to the east.

古文：崖平削江左，下至水面，嵌入成潭，其上石若磨崖，色间黄白，外方整而中界三分北之，前所见江左成行者，无其高广。
现代文：这崖仿佛是被平平地切削而成的，立在江左边，卞面接到水面，并嵌入清澈的潭中。它上面的岩石若像摩崖，颜色黄白相间，远远超过临武县的那块，外形方整而中间分成三部分，比以前见到的江左岸成行的山崖，没有更高峻宽广的了。
English: This cliff seems to have been cut flat, standing on the left side of the river, with its surface connected to the water and embedded in a clear pool. The rock above it looks like a cliff, with a yellow-white color, far exceeding the one in Linwu County. It is square in shape and divided into three parts in the middle. There is no higher, steeper and wider cliff than the one seen before on the left bank of the river.

古文：由挂榜下舟转南，行二十里，上西流滩。
现代文：船从挂榜崖下转往南，行二十里，上西流滩。
English: The boat turned south from under the hanging cliff, traveled twenty miles, and arrived at the upper west current beach.

古文：又十里，石溪驿，已属东安矣。
现代文：又行十里，到石溪释，此绎已经属于东安县了。
English: Another ten miles, to Shixi, this interpretation already belongs to Dong'an County.

古文：驿在江南岸，今已革。有东江自南而北，注于湘，市廛á夹东江之两岸，有大石梁跨其口，名曰复成桥。
现代文：有条叫东江的溪流自南向北汇入湘江，许多商肆夹立在东江的两岸，有座大石桥横架在东江的江口处，名叫复成桥。
English: There is a stream called the East River that flows from south to north into the Hunan River. Many businesses stand on both sides of the East River. There is a large stone bridge at the mouth of the East River, called the Fuxing Bridge.

古文：其水发源于零陵南界，舡由桥下南入，十五里为零陵界。
现代文：这条水发源子零陵县南部边境，船由桥下往南溯流进去，行十五里为零陵县界。
English: This water originates from the southern border of Ziling County, and the boat flows southward from under the bridge. It is fifteen miles to the border of Ziling County.

古文：又二十五里为东江桥，其上有小河三支，通筏而已。
现代文：又行二十五里为东江桥，桥以上有三条小河，仅能通行竹木筏子而已。
English: Another twenty-five miles is the Dongjiang Bridge. There are three small rivers above the bridge, and only bamboo and wooden rafts can pass.

古文：石溪驿为零陵、东安分界。
现代文：按志书上记载： 永水源出永山，那地方在永州城西南九十里，它往北流入湘江。 
English: According to the record: Yongshui source comes from Yongshan, that place is ninety miles southwest of Yongzhou city, it flows north into the Hunan River.

古文：石溪，考本地碑文曰石期，东江，土人又谓之洪江，皆音相溷ù混乱也。
现代文：永水就是此水无疑。石溪骚为零陵、东安两县分界处。石溪，考本地的碑刻和文献记载叫石期；东江，当地人又称之为洪江，这都是音相混淆而造成的。
English: There is no doubt that Yongshui is this water. Shixixao is the demarcation point between the two counties of Luling and Dong'an. Shixi, according to local inscriptions and documents, is called the Stone Age; Dongjiang, also known as Hongjiang by locals, is caused by phonological confusion.

古文：石期之左，有山突兀，崖下插江中，有隙如重门悬峡。
现代文：石期的左边，有座山高耸特出，石崖下插江中，崖间有条孔隙朝向北面，如同重门悬峡。
English: On the left side of the stone phase, there is a towering mountain, the stone cliff is inserted into the river, and there is a pore between the cliffs facing north, like a heavy gate hanging gorge.

古文：山之后顶为狮子洞，洞门不甚高敞。
现代文：山的后面顶上为狮子洞，洞门向着东南方，不很高敞。
English: At the top of the mountain at the back is the Lion Cave. The cave entrance faces southeast and is not very high.

古文：穿石窟而下一里，可透出临江门峡，惜时方水溢，其临江处既没浸中，而洞须秉炬入。
现代文：从石洞中向下穿行一里，可以穿出临江那重门悬峡似的孔隙，可惜当时正好水涨江满，山的临江处既被淹没在水流中，而洞又必须点着火把进去。
English: Walking one mile down from the stone cave, it is possible to pass through the pores of the heavy gate of the river, which looks like a hanging gorge. Unfortunately, at that time, the river was full of water. The river side of the mountain was submerged in the current, and the hole had to be lit with a torch.

古文：先，余乘舟人泊饭市肉，一里攀山椒而上，徘徊洞门，恐舟人不余待，余亦不能待炬入洞，急返舟中。
现代文：起先，我趁船夫停泊下来吃饭买肉，向上攀一里到达山顶，徘徊在洞门口，因怕船夫不等我，而我也找不到火把进洞，便急忙回船中。
English: At first, I took advantage of the boatman stopping to eat and buy meat, climbed a mile up to the top of the mountain, lingered at the entrance of the cave, for fear that the boatman would not wait for me, and I could not find a torch into the cave, I hurried back into the boat.

古文：适顾仆亦市鱼鸭入舟，遂带雨行。
现代文：这时正好顾仆也买了鱼和鸭回到船中，于是船冒雨往前行。
English: At this time, Gu's servant also bought fish and duck and returned to the boat, so the boat sailed in the rain.

古文：又五里，泊于白沙洲。
现代文：又行五里，停泊在白沙洲。
English: Another five miles, anchored in Baishazhou.

古文：其对崖有石壁临江，黄白灿然满壁，崖北山巅又起一崖，西北向有庵倚之，正与余泊舟对，雨中望之神飞，恨隔江不能往也。
现代文：沙洲对面山崖上有块石壁临江，黄白两色灿然满壁，此崖北边的山顶上又耸起一座石崖，它的西北方向有一个庵背靠石崖而立，那石崖正好和我乘坐的停泊着的船只对着，雨中望去令人神飞，遗憾的是隔着江不能前往。
English: On the opposite side of the sandbar there is a stone wall on the cliff facing the river, the yellow and white colors are brilliantly full. On the top of the mountain to the north of this cliff, there is another stone cliff. In the northwest direction of it, there is a hermitage standing against the cliff. The cliff is just opposite the anchored ship I am on. The view is breathtaking in the rain, but unfortunately it is not possible to travel across the river.

古文：是日共行四十里，天雨滩高，停泊不时耳。
现代文：这天共行了四十里，这是因为天空下着雨而江涌滩高，船不时停泊的缘故。
English: On this day, we traveled a total of forty miles. This was due to the fact that the sky was raining and the beach of Jiangyuan was high, and the boat was anchored from time to time.

古文：初五日雨彻夜达旦，晨餐乃行。
现代文：初五日雨彻夜下着直到天亮，吃过早餐才出发。
English: It rained for the first five days and nights until dawn, and we didn't leave until after breakfast.

古文：十里，江南岸石崖飞突，北岸有水自北来注，曰右江口。
现代文：行十里，江南岸石崖飞突，北岸有水自北流来汇入江中，此处叫右江口。
English: After a journey of ten miles, the south bank of the river is full of rocky cliffs, and water from the north stream flows into the middle of the river on the north bank. This place is called the right river mouth.

古文：或曰幼江。又五里，上磨盘滩、白滩埠，两岸山始峻而削。
现代文：又行五里，上了磨盘滩、白滩埠，江两岸的山才变得高峻如削。
English: After another five miles, we reached the Grindstone Beach and the White Beach, and the mountains on both sides of the river became as high as a skyscraper.

古文：峭崖之突于右者，有飞瀑挂其腋间，虽雨壮其观，然亦不断之流也。
现代文：突立在江右岸的陡峭的山崖上，有条飞瀑悬挂在它的侧面崖壁间，虽然雨水使得它的景象更加雄伟壮观，然而它本身也是常流不断的瀑流。
English: Protruding from the steep cliffs on the right bank of the river, there is a waterfall hanging between the cliffs on its side. Although the rain makes it look more majestic, it is also a constant waterfall.

古文：又五里，崖之突于左，为兵书峡。
现代文：又行五里，山崖突立在江左岸的地方，为兵书峡。
English: After another five miles, the cliff juts out on the left bank of the river, forming Heishu Gorge.

古文：崖裂成峃è大石，有石嵌缀其端，形方而色黄白，故效颦三峡之称。
现代文：崖壁崩裂，形成许多大石堆叠的一座山崖，有一块石头镶嵌连缀在它的头端，形状方正而颜色黄中带白，因而便东施效肇似地仿用了长江三峡中兵书峡的名称。
English: The cliff wall collapsed, forming a mountain cliff with many large stones stacked on top of each other. There was a stone inlaid on its head end, square in shape and yellow-white in color. Therefore, the name of Heishu Gorge in the Three Gorges of the Yangtze River was imitated.

古文：其西坳亦有瀑如练，而对岸江滨有圆石如盒，为果盒塘。
现代文：它西面山坳中也有一条瀑布，如同白练，而对岸江边有一块圆形石头如同盒子，那里为果盒塘。
English: In the mountains to the west of it, there is also a waterfall, like Bairen, and on the opposite bank of the river, there is a round stone like a box, which is the Fruit Box Pond.

古文：果盒、兵书，一方一圆，一上一下，皆对而拟之者也。
现代文：果盒石和兵书石，一方一圆，一上一下，都是对照、比拟着果盒和兵书而起的名称。
English: Fruit box stone and soldier's book stone, one side is a circle, one side is up and one side is down, are names that compare and compare the fruit box and soldier's book.

古文：又西五里，为沉香崖。
现代文：又往西行五里，为沉香崖。
English: Another five miles to the west is the Agarwood Cliff.

古文：崖端高迥处叠纹忽裂，中吐两枝，一曲一直，望之木形黝色，名曰沉香，不知是木是石也。
现代文：崖石倾斜累叠形成一条条纹路，高远的崖端处，叠纹忽然裂开，中间冒出两根枝条似的东西，一曲一直，望去如树木的形态，呈微青黑色，名叫沉香，不知是木还是石。
English: The cliff stones are tilted and stacked to form a striped road. At the high cliff edge, the stripe suddenly cracks, and two branches-like things emerge in the middle. They look like trees, with a bluish-black appearance. It is called agarwood, and it is not known whether it is wood or stone.

古文：亦漫语也。
现代文：沉香的上面有一棵大树，正好位于崖顶。
English: There is a large tree on top of the agarwood, right at the top of the cliff.

古文：过崖，舟转而南，泊于罗埠头之东岸。是日止行二十五里，滩高水涨，淋雨不止也。
现代文：又有一重山崖耸立在崖顶内，有个庵仿佛是镶嵌在那崖间似的，望上去山林中的层层雾气里耸翠叠青，往下若如拽带着遥遥的江流，真是一片奇异的境地。过了沉香崖，船折向南行，停泊在罗埠头的东岸。这天只行了二十五里，因为滩高水涨，雨不停地往下浇注。
English: Another mountain cliff towered within the cliff top, and there was a hermitage that seemed to be inlaid between the cliffs. Looking up into the layers of mist in the mountain forest, the emerald-blue towered. Looking down, it was as if it was being dragged by the distant river, a truly bizarre situation. After passing the heavy cliff, the ship turned south and anchored on the east shore of Luo Wharf. On this day, it only traveled twenty-five miles, because the beach was high and the water was rising, and the rain kept pouring down.

古文：罗埠头在江西岸，倚山临流，聚落颇盛，其地西北走东安大道也。
现代文：罗埠头在江西岸，背靠山岭前临水流，村落较大，从此地向西北走是前往东安县城的大路。
English: Luo Wharf is located on the west bank of the river, with its back to the mountains and its front to the water stream. The village is quite large, and walking northwest from here is the main road to the county seat of Dongan.

古文：初六日夜雨虽止，而江涨有声，遂止不行。
现代文：初六日夜雨虽然停了，但江水上涨，涛声澎湃，于是船停泊着不走。
English: Although the rain stopped on the night of the sixth day of the first month, the river water rose and the waves surged, so the boat moored and did not go.

古文：西望罗埠，一水盈盈，舟渡甚艰。
现代文：向西望去，罗埠头隔着盈盈一水，舟船摆渡很艰难。
English: Looking to the west, Luo Wharf is separated by Ying Ying Water, and it is very difficult to ferry boats.

古文：舟中薪尽，东岸无市处，令顾仆拾坠枝以供朝夕焉。
现代文：船中柴禾烧完了，东岸没有买的地方，我叫顾仆拾了些树上坠落的枝子以供早晚烧火用。
English: The firewood in the ship had burned out, and there was no place to buy it on the east bank. I asked Gu's servant to pick up some fallen branches from the trees for use in the morning and evening fires.

古文：下午，流杀风顺，乃挂帆东南行。
现代文：下午，江流减退而风向顺，这才挂帆向东南航行。
English: In the afternoon, when the current of the river had abated and the wind was favourable, they set sail for the south-east.

古文：五里，东泊于石冲湾。
现代文：行五里，往东停泊在石冲湾。
English: We sailed five miles and anchored in Shek Chong Bay to the east.

古文：是夕月明山旷，烟波渺然，有西湖南浦之思。
现代文：这晚月光明亮，山野空阔，仿佛有烟雾笼罩着的远处江面上水波渺茫，我心中不禁又思念起西湖、南浦。
English: This evening, the moon is bright and bright, the mountains and fields are wide open, and the distant water waves on the river seem to be shrouded in smoke. I can't help but think of West Lake and Nampo.

古文：前一夕，江涨六七尺；停一日，落痕亦如之。
现代文：初七日拂晓开船，向西折四里为下厂。又往西行一里，江南面一座山岭自南奔向北，再往西行一里，江北面一座山岭从北奔向南来。
English: On the morning of the 7th day of the first month, the ship set sail at dawn, turned four miles to the west to leave the factory, and then sailed one mile to the west. A mountain range in the south of the river ran from south to north, and then sailed one mile to the west. A mountain range in the north of the river ran from north to south.

古文：其界始不从水而从山。
现代文：两山夹江聚拢，犹如立起一道门，从而便划分了湖广、广西两省的界限。
English: When two mountains and a river come together, it is as if a door has been set up, thus dividing the boundaries of the two provinces of Hunan and Guangxi.

古文：又五里为上厂。
现代文：又行五里为上厂。
English: Another five miles to the factory.

古文：于是转而南行，共十五里，迤逦而西，为柳浦驿。
现代文：从此处起船折向南行，共十五里，曲折驶向西面，到柳浦骚。
English: From here, the boat heads south for a total of fifteen miles, zigzagging to the west, to Liu Puxao.

古文：又南十里，为金华滩。
现代文：后又往南行十里，为金华滩。
English: After that, it heads south for another ten miles, ending up at Jinhua Beach.

古文：滩左有石崖当冲，轰流崭壁，高下两绝，险胜一时。
现代文：滩左面有座石崖立在山冲口，轰轰作响的江流和高峻的崖壁，形成高低两绝，险峻奇美同时呈现。
English: On the left side of the beach, there is a rock cliff standing at the mouth of the mountain. The roaring river and the high cliff wall form two extremes, both steep and beautiful.

古文：西转八里，为夷襄河口，有水自北岸入湘。
现代文：过了滩后折向西行八里，为夷襄河口，有一条水流从北岸汇入湘江中。
English: After passing the beach and turning westward for eight miles, there is a stream flowing from the north bank into the middle of the Hunan River at the mouth of the Yixiang River.

古文：舟人二里，为夷襄，大聚落也。
现代文：船从那条水流中溯流进去两里，为夷襄，这是一个大村落。
English: The boat followed the stream for two miles and arrived at Yixiang, a large village.

古文：又西二里，泊于庙头。
现代文：又往西行两里，停泊在庙头。
English: Another two miles to the west, moored at the end of the temple.

