古文：天下有道，无急患，则曰静，遽传不用。
现代文：天下太平，没有急难祸患，就叫做静。传递紧急公文的车马都不用了，所以《老子》说： 歇下奔跑的马，用来运肥耕田。 
English: The world is at peace, there is no sudden disaster, it is called calm. There is no need for cars or horses to deliver emergency documents, so "Lao Zi" said: Stop running horses and use them to transport fertilizer to farmland.

古文：故曰： 却走马以粪。 天下无道，攻击不休，相守数年不已，甲胄生虮虱，燕雀处帷幄，而兵不归。故曰： 戎马生于郊。 
现代文：天下不太平，战争频繁，相互防备着多年都不停止，将士的盔甲上都长出了虱子，燕雀在军帐上都筑起了窝，而军队依然不能够返回。所以《老子》说： 战马在郊外产下马驹。 
English: The world is not peaceful, wars are frequent, mutual defense has not stopped for many years, lice have grown on the armor of soldiers, birds have built nests on the military account, and the army is still unable to return. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: War horses give birth to foals in the suburbs.

古文：翟人有献丰狐、玄豹之皮于晋文公。
现代文：有个翟人把大狐狸、黑豹的皮进献给晋文公。
English: An eunuch offered the skin of a big fox and a black panther to Jinwen.

古文：文公受客皮而叹曰： 此以皮之美自为罪。 夫治国者以名号为罪，徐偃王是也；以城与地为罪，虞、虢是也。
现代文：文公接受客人的兽皮后感叹道： 狐豹因为皮毛美丽就给自己带来了灾祸。 国君因为名号而带来祸害的，徐偃王就属于这种情况；因城池与土地造成祸害的，虞国、虢国就事这样。
English: After accepting the guest's animal skin, Wengong lamented, "The leopard brought disaster upon itself because of its beautiful fur; the king of the country brought disaster because of his name, and this is the case with King Xu Xi; the city and the land brought disaster, and this is the case with the states of Yu and Yan."

古文：故曰： 罪莫大于可欲。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 罪过中没有比可以引起欲望的东西更大的了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no greater sin than something that can cause desire.

古文：智伯兼范、中行而攻赵不已，韩、魏反之，军败晋阳，身死高梁之东，遂卒被分，漆其首以为溲器。
现代文：智伯兼并范氏、中行氏后，又不停地进攻赵氏，韩、魏两家就背叛智伯反过来进攻它，智伯的军队在晋阳战败，智伯死在高梁东边，他的封地最终被赵、魏、韩瓜分，他的头骨被涂漆后用作饮器。
English: After Zhibo annexed the Fan and Zhongxing clans, he attacked the Zhao clan again and again. Han and Wei betrayed Zhibo and attacked it in turn. Zhibo's army was defeated in Jinyang. Zhibo died on the east side of Gaoliang. His fief was eventually divided by Zhao, Wei and Han. His skull was painted and used as a drinking vessel.

古文：故曰： 祸莫大于不知足。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 祸患中没有比不知足更大的了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no greater calamity than not being satisfied.

古文：虞君欲屈产之乘与垂棘之璧，不听宫之奇，故邦亡身死。
现代文：虞国君主贪图晋国屈地产出的良马和垂棘出的壁玉，不听宫之奇的劝谏，所以导致自己的国家灭亡，自己也因此而亡。
English: The monarch of the State of Yu coveted the good horses produced by the land of Jin and the wall beads produced by the thorns, and did not listen to the advice of the palace, so he led his country to ruin, and he also died because of it.

古文：故曰： 咎莫惨于欲得。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 过失中没有比贪欲更惨痛的了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no fault more grievous than greed.

古文：邦以存为常，霸王其可也；身以生为常，富贵其可也。
现代文：国家把生存作为根本，称霸称王也就有了可能；身体以生命为根本，富裕尊贵也就有了可能。
English: The country regards survival as fundamental, and it has become possible to claim supremacy; the body regards life as fundamental, and it has become possible to be rich and noble.

古文：不以欲自害，则邦不亡，身不死。
现代文：不用贪欲来危害自身，那国家就不会灭亡，自身就不会死亡。
English: If it does not use greed to harm itself, then the country will not perish, and it will not die.

古文：故曰： 知足之为足矣。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 知道满足才是真正的满足。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Knowing that satisfaction is the real satisfaction.

古文：楚庄王既胜，狩于河雍，归而赏孙叔敖。
现代文：楚庄王救郑获胜后，在河雍地带打败晋国，回国后赏赐孙叔敖。
English: After the victory of the King of Chuzhuang to save Zheng, he defeated Jin in the area of Heyong, and rewarded Sun Shuxuan after returning to China.

古文：孙叔敖请汉间之地，沙石之处。
现代文：孙叔敖请求汉水附近的一块贫瘠的土地。
English: Sun Shuxuan asked for a barren piece of land near the Han River.

古文：楚邦之法，禄臣再世而收地，唯孙叔敖独在。
现代文：楚国的法律，享受奉禄的大臣，到第二代就要收回封地，只有孙叔敖的封地独存。
English: According to the laws of the State of Chu, the second generation of a minister who enjoys a stipend is required to reclaim the fief. Only Sun Shuxuan's fief survives.

古文：此不以其邦为收者，瘠也，故九世而祀不绝。
现代文：他的封地不被收回的原因，是因为土地贫瘠，所以子孙后代仍旧能享有这块封地。
English: The reason why his fief is not taken back is because the land is poor, so future generations can still enjoy this fief.

古文：故曰： 善建不拔，善抱不脱，子孙以其祭祀，世世不辍。 孙叔敖之谓也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 善于树立的就拔不掉，善于抱持的就脱不开，子孙因为善守封地而代代香火不绝。 说的就是孙叔敖这种情况。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Those who are good at establishing cannot pull out, those who are good at holding cannot get rid of, and the descendants will keep the incense burning for generations because they are good at protecting the fief.

古文：制在己曰重，不离位曰静。
现代文：控制权掌握在自己手中叫做重，不离开君位叫做静。
English: Holding control in one's own hands is called heavy, and not leaving one's position is called calm.

古文：重则能使轻，静则能使躁。
现代文：君权重就能役使臣下，君主静就能驾驭浮躁的群臣。
English: The weight of the monarch can serve his subjects, and the tranquility of the monarch can control the impetuous ministers.

古文：故曰： 重为轻根，静为躁君。 故曰： 君子终日行，不离辎重也 。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 重是轻的根本，静是躁的主宰。 所以说： 君子整天走路，离不开载着行礼的车子。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: heavy is the foundation of light, and quiet is the master of manic. Therefore, it said: a gentleman walks all day, and cannot do without a carriage carrying the salute.

古文：邦者，人君之辎重也。
现代文：国家即是君主的辎重。
English: The state is the primary concern of the monarch.

古文：主父生传其邦，此离其辎重者也，故虽有代、云中之乐，超然已无赵矣。
现代文：赵武灵王活着的时候就传位给儿子，这就是离开了他的 辐重 ，所以虽然有代和云中之地的乐事，却轻易地失掉了赵国。
English: When King Zhao Wuling was alive, he passed on the throne to his son. This is the weight of the burden that left him, so although there were generations and the joys of a land in the clouds, he easily lost Zhao.

古文：主父，万乘之主，而以身轻于天下。
现代文：武灵王是大国君主，却让自己被天下人所轻视。
English: King Wuling is a great power monarch, but he let himself be despised by the world.

古文：无势之谓轻，离位之谓躁，是以生幽而死。
现代文：失去权势叫做轻，离开君位叫做躁，因此他被囚禁，被活活饿死了。
English: The loss of power is called light, leaving the throne is called mania, so he was imprisoned and starved to death.

古文：故曰： 轻则失臣，躁则失君。 主父之谓也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 轻，就会失去臣下；躁，就会丢掉君位。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you are light, you will lose your vassals; if you are impatient, you will lose your dignity.

古文：势重者，人君之渊也。
现代文：说的就是赵武灵王这类情况。权势是君主的深潭。
English: He was talking about a situation like that of King Zhao Wuling. Power is the bottomless pit of a monarch.

古文：君人者，势重于人臣之间，失则不可复得矣。
现代文：君主的权势一旦落到了臣下的手中，失去后就不可能再得到了。
English: Once a monarch's power falls into the hands of his subjects, it cannot be regained after it has been lost.

古文：简公失之于田成，晋公失之于六卿，而上亡身死。
现代文：齐简公权势落到田成子手中，晋国君权落到六卿手中，最终国破身死。
English: The power of Qi Jian Gong fell into the hands of Tian Shanzi, and the power of Jin Guo Jun fell into the hands of the six nobles, and finally Guo Rui died.

古文：故曰： 鱼不可脱于深渊。 赏罚者，邦之利器也，在君则制臣，在臣则胜君。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 鱼不可以脱离深渊。 赏罚是国家的锐利武器，握在君主手中就能控制臣下，握在臣下手中就能制服君主。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "The fish cannot get out of the abyss." Reward and punishment are the sharp weapons of the state, and when held in the hands of the monarch, they can control the vassals, and when held in the hands of the vassals, they can subdue the monarch.

古文：君见赏，臣则损之以为德；君见罚，臣则益之以为威。
现代文：君主表示要行赏，臣子就扣除一部分用作自己的私赏；君主表示要行罚，臣子就加重刑罚来焙耀私人威风。
English: When the monarch says he wants to reward, the vassal deducts a part of it to use as his own reward; when the monarch says he wants to punish, the vassal increases the punishment to boast his personal prestige.

古文：人君见赏，则人臣用其势；人君见罚，而人臣乘其威。
现代文：君主表示要行赏，而臣子利用了他的权势；君主表示要行罚，而臣子凭借了他的威风。
English: The monarch said he wanted to reward, and the vassal took advantage of his power; the monarch said he wanted to punish, and the vassal took advantage of his prestige.

古文：故曰： 邦之利器，不可以示人。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 国家的锐利武器，不可以拿给别人观看。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "The sharp weapons of the state should not be shown to others."

古文：越王入宦于吴，而观之伐齐以弊吴。
现代文：越王勾践去到吴国做吴王的奴仆，却示意吴王北上攻打齐国，以便削弱吴国。
English: King Gojong of Yue went to the State of Wu to be a servant of the King of Wu, but he suggested that the King of Wu go north to attack the State of Qi in order to weaken the State of Wu.

古文：吴兵既胜齐人于艾陵，张之于江、济，强之于黄池，故可制于五湖。
现代文：吴军已在艾陵战胜了齐军，势力扩张到长江、济水流域，又在黄池盟会上逞强，由于出兵在外，久战力衰，所以才会在太湖地区被越国制服。
English: The Wu army had already defeated the Qi army in Ailing, and its forces had expanded to the Yangtze River and Jishui River basins. It was also strong at the Yellow Pond Alliance. However, due to the fact that the soldiers were sent abroad, the military strength had been declining for a long time, so it was only in the Taihu area that it was subdued by the Yue country.

古文：故曰： 将欲翕之，必固张之；将欲弱之，必固强之。 晋献公将欲袭虞，遗之以璧马；知伯将袭仇由，遗之以广车。
现代文：所以《老子》说； 想要缩小它，就必须暂时扩张它；想要削弱它，必须暂时让它强大。 晋献公想要偷袭虞国，就先将宝玉良马赠送给虞君；智伯准备袭击仇由，就先将载着大钟的广车赠送给他们。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said; if you want to shrink it, you must temporarily expand it; if you want to weaken it, you must temporarily make it strong. If Jin Xian Gong wanted to raid Yu Guo, he would first give Yu Jun a precious metal horse; if Zhi Bo was preparing to attack the enemy, he would first give them a carriage carrying a large clock.

古文：故曰： 将欲取之，必固与之。 起事于无形，而要大功于天下， 是谓微明 。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 想要夺取它，必须暂且给与它。 不露形迹地开始行动，求得在天下获取大功， 这就叫微妙的明智。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you want to seize it, you must temporarily give it; if you start to act without showing any signs, and seek to obtain great achievements in the world, this is called subtle wisdom.

古文：处小弱而重自卑，谓 损弱胜强也。 
现代文：处在弱小地位而能注重自行谦卑克制，说的是 弱能胜强 的道理。
English: If you are in a weak position and can pay attention to self-humility and self-restraint, it is said that "weakness can overcome strength."

古文：有形之类，大必起于小；行久之物，族必起于少。
现代文：有形体的东西，大的必定从小的发展起来；历时经久的事物，数量多的一定是由数量少发展而来。
English: For corporeal things, if they are large, they must have developed from small ones; for things that have endured over time, if they are numerous, they must have developed from a small number.

古文：故曰： 天下之难事必作于易，天下之大事必作于细。 是以欲制物者于其细也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 天下的难事必定开始于简易，天下的大事必定开始于微细。 因此要想控制事物，就要从微细时着手。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The world's difficult things must begin with simplicity, and the world's great things must begin with subtlety. Therefore, if you want to control things, you must start with subtlety.

古文：故曰： 图难于其易也，为大于其细也。 千丈之堤，以蝼蚁之穴溃；百尺之室，以突隙之烟焚。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 解决难题要从易处着手，想干大事要从小处着手。 千丈长堤，因为楼蚁营窟而导致溃决；百尺高屋，因为烟囱漏火而导致焚毁。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: To solve a difficult problem, you should start from an easy place, and if you want to do something big, you should start from a small place. A thousand-meter-high embankment, because of the ant camp, led to the breakout; a hundred-foot-high building, because of the chimney leakage, led to the destruction.

古文：故曰：白圭之行堤也塞其穴，丈人之慎火也涂其隙，是以白圭无水难，丈人无火患。
现代文：所以说：白圭巡视长堤时堵塞小洞，老人谨防跑火而涂封缝隙，因此白圭没有水灾，老人没有火灾。
English: Therefore, it is said that when Bai Gui inspected the long embankment, he blocked the small hole, and the old man was careful not to run away from the fire and painted the gap. Therefore, Bai Gui did not have a flood, and the old man did not have a fire.

古文：此皆慎易以避难，敬细以远大者也。
现代文：这些都是谨慎地对待容易的事来避免难事发生，郑重地对待细小的漏洞以避开大锅临头。
English: It's all about being careful with the easy things to avoid the hard things, and being careful with the small things to avoid the big things.

古文：扁鹊见蔡桓公，立有间。
现代文：扁鹊拜见蔡桓公，站了一会儿，扁鹊说： 您有病在表皮上，不治怕会加深。 
English: Bian Que met Cai Huan Gong and stood for a while. Bian Que said, "You have a disease on your epidermis, and I'm afraid it will get worse.

古文：扁鹊曰： 君有疾在腠理，不治将恐深。 桓侯曰： 寡人无疾。 扁鹊出。
现代文：桓公说： 我没有病。 扁鹊走了。桓公说： 医生喜欢医治没病的人来作为自己的功劳。 
English: Kuan Kung said: I am not sick. Bian Que walked away. Kuan Kung said: Doctors like to treat people who are not sick as their own merit.

古文：桓侯曰： 医之好治不病以为功。 居十日，扁鹊复见曰： 君之病在肌肤，不治将益深。 桓侯不应。扁鹊出。
现代文：过了十天，扁鹊又拜见桓公说： 您的病到肌肤了，不治就会进一步加深了。 
English: After ten days, Bian Que again went to see Huan Gong and said, "Your illness has reached the skin, and if it is not cured, it will deepen further."

古文：桓侯又不悦。
现代文：桓侯不理睬。
English: Kanhō again expressed his displeasure.

古文：居十日，扁鹊复见曰： 君之病在肠胃，不治将益深。 桓侯又不应。
现代文：扁鹊走了。桓侯再次表示不高兴。过了十天，扁鹊又拜见桓侯说： 您的病到了肠胃，不治会更加厉害。 桓侯再次不予理睬。
English: Ten days later, Bian Que went to see Huan Hou again and said, "Your illness has reached the intestines and stomach, and if left untreated, it will become more severe." Huan Hou once again ignored Bian Que.

古文：扁鹊出。
现代文：扁鹊走了。
English: The tadpoles are gone.

古文：桓侯又不悦。
现代文：桓侯再次表示不高兴。
English: Kanhō again expressed his displeasure.

古文：居十日，扁鹊望桓侯而还走，桓侯故使人问之。
现代文：过了十天，扁鹊看见桓侯转身就跑，桓侯特意派人问他。
English: After ten days, Bian Que saw Huan Hou turn around and run. Huan Hou specifically sent someone to question him.

古文：扁鹊曰： 病在腠理，汤熨之所及也；在肌肤，针石之所及也；在肠胃，火齐之所及也；在骨髓，司命之所属，无奈何也。
现代文：扁鹊说： 病在表皮，药物熏敷可以治好；在肌肤，针灸可以治好，在肠胃，清热的汤药可以治好；在骨髓，属于主宰生命之神管辖的范围，没有办法了。
English: Bian Que said: The disease is in the epidermis, which can be cured by medicated fumigation; in the skin, which can be cured by acupuncture and moxibustion; in the intestines and stomach, which can be cured by clear and hot decoction; and in the bone marrow, which is under the jurisdiction of the god who dominates life. There is no other way.

古文：今在骨髓，臣是以无请也。 居五日，桓侯体痛，使人索扁鹊，已逃秦矣。
现代文：现在君主病入骨髓，因此我就不再求见了。 过了五天，桓侯身体疼痛，派人找扁鹊，扁鹊已逃往秦国了。
English: Now the monarch is sick to the bone, so I no longer ask to see him. After five days, the Khan was in pain and sent someone to look for Bian Que. Bian Que had already fled to Qin.

古文：桓侯遂死。
现代文：于是桓侯死了。
English: As a result, Kanhō fell ill and died.

古文：故良医之治病也，攻之于腠理。
现代文：所以良医治病，趁它还在表皮就加以治疗，这都是为了抢在事情细小的时候及早处理。
English: Therefore, good treatment of the disease, while it is still in the epidermis to be treated, this is all in order to deal with things as early as possible when they are small.

古文：此皆争之于小者也。夫事之祸福亦有腠理之地，故圣人蚤从事焉。
现代文：事情的祸福也有刚露苗头的时候，所以圣人能够及早加以处理。
English: The blessing and the curse of things are also in the bud, so the sage can deal with them as early as possible.

古文：昔晋公子重耳出亡，过郑，郑君不礼。
现代文：从前晋公子重耳出外流亡，路过郑国，郑国君主不以礼相待。
English: Once upon a time, Prince Jin Chong Er went into exile and passed through Zheng. The Zheng monarch did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：叔瞻谏曰： 此贤公子也，君厚待之，可以积德。 郑君不听。
现代文：叔瞻劝说道： 这是一位贤德的公子，您好好待他，可以借此积下您的恩德。 郑君不听从。
English: Uncle Zhan advised: This is a virtuous young man, you should treat him well, you can use this to accumulate your grace. Zheng Jun did not listen.

古文：叔瞻又谏曰： 不厚待之，不若杀之，无令有后患。 郑君又不听。
现代文：叔瞻又劝说道： 不好好待他，不如将他杀了，不要让他日后给我们带来祸患。 郑君又不听从。
English: Uncle Zheng also persuaded him, saying, "If you don't treat him well, it's better to kill him, and don't let him bring disaster to us in the future." Zheng Jun didn't listen.

古文：及公子返晋邦，举兵伐郑，大破之，取八城焉。
现代文：等到重耳返回晋国，起兵伐郑，大败郑国，夺取了郑国的八座城。
English: When Chong Er returned to Jin Province, he raised an army to attack Zheng, defeated Zheng Province, and captured eight cities in Zheng Province.

古文：晋献公以垂棘之璧假道于虞而伐虢，大夫宫之奇谏曰： 不可。
现代文：晋献公用垂棘的宝玉相赠来向虞国借路去攻打虢国，大夫宫之奇劝说道： 不可借路。
English: Jin Xian publicly presented the thorny treasure jade phase as a gift to Yu Guo to take the road to attack Shao Guo, and Dr. Gong Ziqi advised: Do not take the road.

古文：脣亡而齿寒，虞、虢相救，非相德也。
现代文：唇亡而齿寒，虞国、虢国互相救援，不是互相施受恩惠。
English: With chilled lips and chilled teeth, the yakitori countries and the yakitori countries have come to each other's rescue, not to each other's favor.

古文：今日晋灭虢，明日虞必随之亡。 虞君不听，受其璧而假之道。
现代文：如果今天晋国灭掉了虢国，明天虞国必定会跟着灭亡。 虞君不听，接受晋国宝玉，借给晋军道路。
English: If today the Jin State annihilated the Min State, tomorrow the Yu State will surely follow suit.Yu Jun did not listen, accepted the Jin State treasure, and lent the road to the Jin Army.

古文：晋已取虢，还，反灭虞。
现代文：晋在攻取虢后，返回路上就灭掉了虞国。
English: After conquering Yunnan, Jin annihilated the State of Yu on his way back.

古文：此二臣者皆争于腠理者也，而二君不用也。然则叔瞻、宫之奇亦虞、虢之扁鹊也，而二君不听，故郑以破，虞以亡。故曰： 其安易持也，其未兆易谋也。 
现代文：这两位臣子都抢在祸害刚露苗头时就想出了办法，但两位君主都没有采纳他们的建议，所以郑国因此战败了，虞国因此灭亡了。所以《老子》说： 事情安定时容易维持，事情的征兆还没有显露时容易想法处理。 
English: These two courtiers thought of a solution as soon as the scourge appeared, but the two monarchs did not adopt their suggestions, so Zheng Guo was defeated and Yu Guo was destroyed. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: It is easy to maintain when things are stable, and it is easy to deal with when the signs of things have not yet appeared.

古文：昔者纣为象箸而箕子怖，以为象箸必不加于土铏，必将犀玉之杯；象箸玉杯必不羹菽藿，必旄、象、豹胎；旄、象、豹胎必不衣短褐而食于茅屋之下，则锦衣九重，广室高台。
现代文：从前商纣制作了象牙筷子，箕子非常担忧，认为使用象牙筷子一定不会在陶制器皿里使用，一定会配合使用犀牛角杯或玉杯；象筷玉杯一定不会用于吃豆类食品熬的浓汤，一定要去吃牦牛、大象、豹子的幼体；吃牦牛、大象、豹子的幼体就一定不会穿粗布短衣，不会在茅屋下面食用，就一定要穿多层的织锦衣服，住在宽敞房屋和高台。
English: Once upon a time, merchants made ivory chopsticks, and the lame were very worried, thinking that the use of ivory chopsticks would definitely not be used in pottery dishes, and would definitely be combined with the use of rhinoceros horn cups or jade cups; elephant chopsticks jade cups would definitely not be used to eat bean soup, and must eat snails, elephants, and leopard cubs; eating snails, elephants, and leopard cubs would definitely not wear coarse cloth shorts, and would not be eaten under huts, and must wear multi-layered brocade clothes, and live in spacious houses and high places.

古文：吾畏其卒，故怖其始。
现代文：箕子害怕出现这样的结果，所以对这样的开端感到恐惧。
English: Lice are afraid of such an outcome, so they are afraid of such a beginning.

古文：居五年，纣为肉圃，设砲烙，登糟丘，临酒池，纣遂以亡。
现代文：过了五年，商纣王摆设肉林，建炮烙之刑，登上酒糟山，俯临酒池，他最终因此灭亡。
English: After five years, the merchant Wang set up a meat forest, built a cannon to burn the punishment, ascended the wine mountain, and descended to the wine pool, and he eventually died.

古文：故箕子见象箸以知天下之祸。
现代文：因此箕子看见象牙筷子就预感到了天下的祸害。
English: Therefore, when the lame man saw the ivory chopsticks, he foresaw the scourge of the world.

古文：故曰： 见小曰明。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 能够看到事物的萌芽状态，就叫做明。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Being able to see the budding state of things is called Ming.

古文：勾践入宦于吴，身执干戈为吴王洗马，故能杀夫差于姑苏。
现代文：勾践到吴国服贱役，亲自拿着兵器做吴王的前驱，所以能在吴国的国都姑苏城杀死夫差。
English: He went to the State of Wu to perform menial labor, and personally took the weapon to be the forerunner of the King of Wu, so he was able to kill his husband in the capital of the State of Wu, Suzhou.

古文：文王见詈于王门，颜色不变，而武王擒纣于牧野。
现代文：文王在玉门受到辱骂，面不改色，结果武王在牧野捉住了纣王。所以《老子》说： 能够保持柔弱即是刚强。 
English: King Wen was abused at the Jade Gate, but he did not change his face, and as a result, King Wu caught the Dragon King in the pasture. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: To be able to maintain softness is to be strong.

古文：故曰： 守柔曰强。 越王之霸也不病宦，武王之王也不病詈。故曰： 圣人之不病也，以其不病，是以无病也。 
现代文：越王勾践能够成就霸业，并不因为担任贱役而苦恼；周武王据有天下，并不因为当初父亲被骂为苦恼。所以《老子》说： 圣人之所以不苦恼，是因为他不把那些事情看作苦恼，所以就不觉得不苦恼。 
English: The reason why the sage is not distressed is because he does not regard those things as distress, so he does not feel that he is not distressed. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The sage is not distressed because he does not regard those things as distress, so he does not feel that he is not distressed.

古文：宋之鄙人得璞玉而献之子罕，子罕不受。
现代文：宋国有个乡下人得到一块玉璞，然后把它进献给子罕，子罕不接受。
English: A villager in Song got a piece of jade ingot, and then presented it to Zihan. Zihan did not accept it.

古文：鄙人曰： 此宝也，宜为君子器，不宜为细人用。 子罕曰： 尔以玉为宝，我以不受子玉为宝。 是以鄙人欲玉，而子罕不欲玉。
现代文：乡下人说： 这是宝玉，应该作为您的器物，不应被小人使用。 子罕说： 你把玉看成宝，我把不接受你的玉看成宝。 这即是乡下人想要玉，而子罕不想要玉。
English: The villager said, "This is a precious jade, it should be your property and should not be used by villains." Zohan said, "You regard the jade as a treasure, I regard the jade that does not accept you as a treasure." This means that the villager wants the jade, but Zohan does not want the jade.

古文：故曰： 欲不欲，而不贵难得之货。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 把没有欲望当作欲望，不要把难得的财物看得贵重。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Take the absence of desire as desire, and do not regard the rare wealth as precious.

古文：王寿负书而行，见徐冯于周涂。
现代文：王寿正背着书走路，在四通八达的大路上碰到了徐冯。
English: Wang Shou was walking with a book on his back when he ran into Xu Feng on the highway.

古文：冯曰： 事者，为也；为生于时，知者无常事。
现代文：徐冯说： 事情是人做出来的，人的行为产生于当时的需要，聪明的人没有固定不变的做事方法。
English: Xu Feng said: Things are made by people, people's behavior arises from the needs of the time, smart people do not have a fixed way of doing things.

古文：书者，言也；言生于知，知者不藏书。
现代文：书本是记载言论的，言论产生于认识，明达的人是不藏书的。
English: A book is a record of speech, speech arises from knowledge, and people of knowledge do not collect books.

古文：今子何独负之而行？ 于是王寿因焚其书而舞之。
现代文：现在你为什么偏要背着书本走路呢？ 于是王寿烧了他的书并高兴得手舞足蹈。
English: Now why do you want to walk with books on your back? So Wang Shou burned his books and danced with joy.

古文：故知者不以言谈教，而慧者不以藏书箧。
现代文：所以有才智的人不用空言说教，聪明的人不用藏书箱子。
English: Therefore, a talented person does not need to preach empty words, and a clever person does not need to collect books.

古文：此世之所过也，而王寿复之，是学不学也。
现代文：不说教、不藏书是世人所指责的，而王寿重复了这样的做法，这是把不学习作为学习了。
English: The world accuses people of not preaching and not collecting books, but Wang Shou repeated this practice, which is to regard not learning as learning.

古文：故曰： 学不学，复归众人之所过也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 把不学习作为学习，重新走上众人认为错误的道路。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Take not learning as learning, and re-embark on the road that everyone thinks is wrong.

古文：夫物有常容，因乘以导之。
现代文：万物都有常态，应该因势利导。
English: Everything has a normal state and should be guided by snobbery.

古文：因随物之容，故静则建乎德，动则顺乎道。
现代文：由于顺应了万物的常态，所以静止的时候能保持本性，活动的时候能顺应规律。
English: Because it conforms to the normal state of all things, it can maintain its nature when it is still, and it can conform to the law when it is active.

古文：宋人有为其君以象为楮叶者，三年而成。
现代文：有个宋国人，为他的君主用象牙雕刻褚叶，三年刻成了。
English: There was a man from the Song Dynasty who carved a maple leaf from ivory for his sovereign, which took three years to complete.

古文：丰杀茎柯，毫芒繁泽，乱之楮叶之中而不可别也。
现代文：它的宽狭、筋脉、绒毛、色泽，即使是混杂在真的楮叶中也不能辨别出来。
English: Its width, sinews, villi, and color are indistinguishable even when mixed with true bracts.

古文：此人遂以功食禄于宋邦。
现代文：这个人因为这一功劳而在宋国当了官。
English: This man became an official in the Song Dynasty because of this achievement.

古文：列子闻之曰： 使天地三年而成一叶，则物之有叶者寡矣。 故不乘天地之资而载一人之身，不随道理之数而学一人之智，此皆一叶之行也。
现代文：列子听到后说； 假使自然界要经过三年才长成一片叶子，那么有叶子的东西也就太少了！ 所以不依靠自然条件而仅凭一个人的本事，不顺应自然法则而表现一个人的智巧，那就都是用三年时间雕刻一片叶子的行为了。
English: Upon hearing this, Letson said: If it takes three years for nature to grow a leaf, then there are too few things with leaves! Therefore, not relying on natural conditions and relying only on one's own ability, not conforming to the laws of nature and showing one's cleverness, then it is all the act of carving a leaf in three years.

古文：故冬耕之稼，后稷不能羡也；丰年大禾，臧获不能恶也。
现代文：所以冬天里种出的庄稼，后稷也不能使它多产；丰年里旺盛的庄稼，奴仆也不能使它枯败。
English: Therefore the plowman shall not plow in the winter, nor the thresher in the summer, nor the handmaid in the harvest.

古文：以一人之力，则后稷不足；随自然，则臧获有余。
现代文：仅凭一人力量，就是后稷也将难以成事；顺应自然规律，就是奴仆也会成事有余。
English: With only one person's strength, it is difficult to accomplish things, even if it is a henchman; if it is in accordance with the laws of nature, even if it is a slave, it will be more than enough.

古文：故曰： 恃万物之自然而不敢为也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 仰仗万物自然而然地发展而不敢勉强去做。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Rely on the natural development of all things and do not dare to do it reluctantly.

古文：空窍者，神明之户牖也。
现代文：人的五官是精神的门窗。
English: The five human senses are the doors and windows of the spirit.

古文：耳目竭于声色，精神竭于外貌，故中无主。
现代文：听力和视力全花在声色上，精神尽耗在外貌上，所以内心就没有主宰。
English: Hearing and sight are all spent on the timbre of the voice, the spirit is exhausted on the appearance, so the heart does not dominate.

古文：中无主，则祸福虽如丘山，无从识之。
现代文：内心没有主宰，祸福即使像山丘那么明显，也无从认识它。
English: The mind is not mastered, and good and evil cannot be known, even if they are as obvious as hills.

古文：故曰： 不出于户，可以知天下；不窥于牖，可以知天道。 此言神明之不离其实也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 不出门户，可以知道天下的事情；不从窗口向外张望，可以知道自然的规律。 这是说精神不要离开自身形体。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "If you do not go out of the portal, you can know the things of the world; if you do not look out of the window, you can know the laws of nature.

古文：赵襄主学御于王子于期，俄而与于期逐，三易马而三后。
现代文：赵襄子向王子于期学习驾驭车马的技巧，不久和于期赛马，两人换了三次马而赵襄子三次都落后了。
English: Zhao Xiangzi learned the skills of driving a horse and carriage from the prince ahead of time, and soon after the horse race, the two changed horses three times, and Zhao Xiangzi fell behind all three times.

古文：襄主曰： 子之教我御，术未尽也？ 对曰： 术已尽，用之则过也。
现代文：襄子说： 您教我驾马，技巧没有全教给我吧？ 于期回答说： 技巧已全部教给您了，但您在使用时还有错误。
English: Xiangzi said, "You taught me how to ride a horse, but you didn't teach me all the techniques, right?" Hui replied, "The techniques have all been taught to you, but you still make mistakes when using them.

古文：凡御之所贵：马体安于车，人心调于马，而后可以进速致远。
现代文：驾驭车马应重视的，是要让马的身体在车子里感到安适，人的注意力和马的动作相协调，然后才能够奔得快，跑得远。
English: What should be paid attention to when driving a horse is to make the horse's body feel comfortable in the car, and the human attention and the horse's movements should be coordinated, and then it can run fast and run far.

古文：今君后则欲逮臣，先则恐逮于臣。
现代文：现在您落在后面，就想赶上我；跑到前面，又怕被我赶上。
English: Now that you are behind, you want to catch up with me; when you are ahead, you are afraid that I will catch up with you.

古文：夫诱道争远，非先则后也，而先后心皆在于臣，上何以调于马？
现代文：引导马作远程赛跑，不是领先，就是落后；不管您是在前还是在后，注意力都在我身上，还怎么能和马协调一致呢？
English: Guiding a horse in a long-distance race, either leading or lagging behind; whether you are in front or behind, your attention is on me, how can you coordinate with the horse?

古文：此君之所以后也。 
现代文：这就是您落后的原因。 
English: That's why you're behind.

古文：白公胜虑乱，罢朝，倒杖而策锐贯颐，血流至于地而不知。
现代文：白公胜策划政变，朝会结束后，他倒拿着马鞭，因而鞭杆上的尖针刺穿了脸颊，他连血流到地上都不觉察。
English: Bai Gongsheng planned a coup, after the end of the imperial meeting, he took the horse whip, so the needle on the whip pierced his cheek, he did not even notice the blood flowing to the ground.

古文：郑人闻之曰： 颐之忘，将何不忘哉！ 故曰： 其出弥远者，其智弥少。 此言智周乎远，则所遗在近也。
现代文：郑人听到后说： 脸颊都忘记了，还有什么不会忘记呀！ 所以《老子》说： 人们外出越远，知道的反而越少。 这是说思想围着远事转，就会丢掉眼前的事情。
English: When Zheng Rong heard this, he said, "The cheeks have all forgotten, what else will they not forget!" Therefore, "Lao Zi" said, "The farther people go out, the less they know." This means that if people's thoughts revolve around distant things, they will lose sight of what is right in front of them.

古文：是以圣人无常行也。
现代文：因此圣人没有恒定如一的行为。
English: That is why sages do not always act in the same way.

古文：能并智，故曰： 不行而知。 能并视，故曰： 不见而明。 随时以举事，因资而立功，用万物之能而获利其上，故曰： 不为而成。 
现代文：能够同时考虑远近事情，所以《老子》说 不行动就全知道了 。
English: Being able to consider both far and near things at the same time, "Lao Zi" said that all is known without action.

古文：楚庄王莅政三年，无令发，无政为也。
现代文：能同时看到远近各处，所以说 没看到就清楚了 。
English: I can see far and near at the same time, so it's clear without seeing.

古文：右司马御座而与王隐曰： 有鸟止南方之阜，三年不翅，不飞不鸣，嘿然无声，此为何名？ 王曰： 三年不翅，将以长羽翼；不飞不鸣，将以观民则。
现代文：根据时机来办事，依靠条件来立功，利用万物的特性而在此基础上获利，所以说 不去做就成功了 。楚庄王执政三年，没有发布过任何命令，没有处理过政事。右司马侍座，用隐语对庄王说： 有一只鸟栖息在南边的土丘上，三年不展翅，不飞不鸣。默然无声，这鸟该怎么称呼？ 庄王说： 三年不展翅，是用来长羽翼的；不飞不鸣，是用来观察民众的习惯。
English: According to the opportunity to do things, to rely on conditions to make merit, to take advantage of the characteristics of all things and make profit on this basis, so it is said that if you do not do it, you will succeed. Chu Zhuang Wang has been in power for three years, has not issued any orders, has not dealt with political affairs. Right Sima Attendant, said to Zhuang Wang in secret language: There is a bird perched on the southern mound, three years without wings, not flying, not singing. Silent, silent, what should this bird be called? Zhuang Wang said: Three years without wings, is used to grow wings; not flying, not singing, is used to observe

古文：虽无飞，飞必冲天；虽无鸣，鸣必惊人。
现代文：虽然没有起飞，一飞必定冲天；虽然没有鸣叫，一鸣必定惊人。
English: Although there is no take-off, a flight will surely soar into the sky; although there is no hooting, a hooting must be amazing.

古文：子释之，不谷知之矣。 处半年，乃自听政。
现代文：您别管了吧，我已经知道了。 过了半年，庄王就亲自处理政事了。
English: Don't worry about it, I already know. After half a year, Zhuang Wang will personally deal with political affairs.

古文：所废者十，所起者九，诛大臣五，举处士六，而邦大治。
现代文：废掉的事情有十件，兴办的事情有九件，诛杀了五个大臣，进用了六个处士，结果把国家治理得非常好。
English: Ten things were abolished, nine things were started, five ministers were killed, and six officials were brought in. As a result, the country was governed very well.

古文：举兵诛齐，败之徐州，胜晋于河雍，合诸侯于宋，遂霸天下。
现代文：起兵伐齐，在徐州打败了齐国，在河雍战胜了晋军，在宋地会合诸侯，于是称霸天下。
English: He raised an army to invade Qi, defeated Qi in Xuzhou, defeated the Jin army in Heyong, and rallied the princes in Song, and then claimed hegemony over the world.

古文：庄王不为小害善，故有大名；不蚤见示，故有大功。
现代文：庄王不让小事妨碍自己的长处，因而能有大名；不过早表露出来，因而能有大功。
English: Zhuang Wang did not let small things interfere with his own strengths, so he could have a big name; however, he revealed it early, so he could have great merit.

古文：故曰： 大器晚成，大音希声。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 大器晚成，大音稀声。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said, "Large instruments are made late, and loud sounds are muffled."

古文：楚庄王欲伐越，杜子谏曰： 王之伐越，何也？ 曰： 政乱兵弱。 庄子曰： 臣患智之如目也，能见百步之外而不能自见其睫。
现代文：楚庄王想攻打越国，杜子进谏说： 大王攻打越国，为的什么？ 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang wanted to attack Yue Guo, Du Zi Jinqi said: The great king attacked Yue Guo, for what?

古文：王之兵自败于秦、晋，丧地数百里，此兵之弱也。
现代文：楚王说： 越国政乱兵弱。 杜子说： 愚臣很为此事担忧。
English: Chu Wang said: Yue Guo's political turmoil has made the soldiers weak. Du Zi said: The fools are very worried about this.

古文：庄跷为盗于境内而吏不能禁，此政之乱也。
现代文：智慧好比眼睛，能看见百步以外的东西，却不能看见自己的眼睫毛。
English: Wisdom is like the eye, which can see a hundred paces ahead, but cannot see its own eyelashes.

古文：王之弱乱，非越之下也，而欲伐越，此智之如目也。 王乃止。
现代文：大王您的军队曾被秦、晋打败，丧失了数百里的土地，这是兵弱；庄在境内造反，官府却不能加以禁止，这是政乱。大王兵弱政乱，并不在越国之下，反而想去攻打越国，这就是智慧如同眼睛，见远不见近啊。 
English: Great King, your army was defeated by Qin and Jin and lost hundreds of miles of land. This is a weak army; Zhuang rebelled in the territory, but the government could not prohibit it. This is a political turmoil. Great King, your army is weak and your country is in a political turmoil. You are not inferior to Yue, but you want to attack Yue. This is wisdom like the eye, seeing far but not seeing near.

古文：故知之难，不在见人，在自见。
现代文：庄王就停止了行动。所以了解事物的困难，不在于看清别人，而在于看清自己。
English: So the difficulty of understanding things is not to see others clearly, but to see oneself clearly.

古文：故曰： 自见之谓明。 子夏见曾子。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 能自己认识自己就叫做明。 子夏碰到了曾子，曾子说： 你怎么胖了？ 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you can know yourself, you are called Ming. Zixia met Zeng Zi, Zeng Zi said: How fat are you?

古文：曾子曰： 何肥也？ 对曰： 战胜，故肥也。 曾子曰： 何谓也？ 子夏曰： 吾入见先王之义则荣之，出见富贵之乐又荣之，两者战于胸中，未知胜负，故癯。
现代文：子夏回答说： 思想斗争胜利了，所以胖了。 
English: Zixia replied, "I won the ideological struggle, so I got fat."

古文：今先王之义胜，故肥。 是以志之难也，不在胜人，在自胜也。
现代文：曾子说： 这话怎么讲？ 子夏说： 我在家里学习先王的道理，总会非常敬仰，出门后看见富贵的乐事又总会十分羡慕，这两种情绪在心里发生了斗争，弄不清谁胜谁负，所以瘦了。现在先王的道理终于取胜了，所以胖了。 
English: Zeng Zi said, "How should I say this?" Zixia said, "When I was at home, I would study the principles of the first king, and I would always have great respect for them. When I went out, I would always be very envious when I saw rich entertainment. These two emotions fought in my heart, and I couldn't figure out who was winning and who was losing, so I lost weight. Now the principles of the first king have finally won, so I have gained weight."

古文：故曰： 自胜之谓强。 
现代文：因此立志的困难，不在于胜过别人，而在于战胜自己。
English: The difficulty of ambition, therefore, lies not in outdoing others, but in outdoing oneself.

古文：周有玉版，纣令胶鬲索之，文王不予；费仲来求，因予之。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 能够战胜自我，就叫做强。 周人拥有一块玉版，殷纣王派胶鬲前去索取，文王不给他；费仲前去索求，文王就给了。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "If you can overcome yourself, you are strong." Zhou Ren owned a jade plate, Yin Zi Wang sent a rubber dipper to ask for it, Wen Wang did not give it to him; Fei Zhong went to ask for it, Wen Wang gave it to him.

古文：是胶鬲贤而费仲无道也。
现代文：这是因为胶高贤达而费仲不讲道理。
English: This is due to the fact that it is unreasonable to have to go to great lengths to find a qualified rubber technician.

古文：周恶贤者之得志也，故予费仲。
现代文：周人讨厌贤人在殷朝得志，所以给了费仲。
English: Zhou people hated the sages in the Yin Dynasty, so they gave Feizhong.

古文：文王举太公于渭滨者，贵之也；而资费仲玉版者，是爱之也。
现代文：周文王在渭水边提拔了太公，那是尊重他；而把玉版提供给费仲，却是看中他得志后可以扰乱殷纣。
English: In Surabaya, King Zhou Wenzhong promoted Taigong, which was out of respect for him. However, when he offered the jade tablet to Feizhong, he thought that he would be able to disturb Yin Zhao after he had achieved his goal.

古文：故曰： 不贵其师，不爱其资，虽知大迷，是谓要妙。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 假如不尊重他的老师，不爱惜可资利用的条件，尽管聪明，终是大糊涂，这就叫做奥妙。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you do not respect his teacher, do not cherish the conditions that can be used, even if you are smart, you will end up being confused. This is called mystery.

