古文：四国为一，将以攻秦。
现代文：燕、赵、吴、楚四个国家联合起来，准备进攻秦国。
English: Yan, Zhao, Wu and Chu four countries united and prepared to attack Qin.

古文：秦王召群臣宾客六十人而问焉，曰： 四国为一，将以图秦，寡人屈于内，而百姓靡于外，为之奈何? 
现代文：秦王召集众位大臣和宾客总共六十多人，向他们询问对策。秦王说： 现在四个国家联合进攻我国，而我国正处于财力衰竭的时候，外面的战争又接连失利，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Qin Wang called together a number of ministers and guests, a total of more than sixty people, and asked them about countermeasures. Qin Wang said: Now four countries have jointly attacked our country, and our country is in a time of financial exhaustion, and foreign wars have been lost one after another. What should we do?

古文：群臣莫对。
现代文：大臣们都不知道如何回答。
English: Ministers did not know how to respond.

古文：姚贾对曰： 贾愿出使四国，必绝其谋，而安其兵。 
现代文：这时姚贾回答说： 我愿意替大王出使四个国家，必定能破坏掉他们的阴谋，使他们停止进兵。 
English: At this time, Yao Jia replied: I am willing to send four countries on behalf of the great king, I will surely be able to destroy their plot and make them stop marching.

古文：乃资车百乘，金千斤，衣以其衣，冠舞以其剑。
现代文：于是秦王就给了他战车百辆，黄金千斤，并让他穿戴自己的衣冠，佩带自己的宝剑。
English: So King Qin gave him a hundred chariots, a thousand pounds of gold, and let him wear his own crown and carry his own sword.

古文：姚贾辞行，绝其谋，止其兵，与之为交以报秦。
现代文：姚贾辞别秦王，游说四国，破坏了四个国家联合进攻秦国的谋划，使联军停止进兵，并且和四国建立了友好的外交关系来报效秦国。
English: Yao Jia bid farewell to the Qin King, lobbied the four countries, sabotaged the plan of the four countries to jointly attack Qin, made the allied forces stop marching in, and established friendly diplomatic relations with the four countries to repay Qin.

古文：秦王大悦，贾封千户，以为上卿。
现代文：秦王大为高兴，就封给姚贾一千户的城邑，并让他做了上卿。
English: King Qin was so pleased that he gave Yao Jia a thousand townships and made him Shangnian.

古文：韩非知之，曰： 贾以珍珠重宝，南使荆、吴，北使燕、代之间三年，四国之交未必合也，而珍珠重宝尽于内。
现代文：秦国的大臣韩非知道了这件事情，在秦王的面前进言说： 姚贾拿着珍珠重宝，出使荆、吴、燕、代等地，长达三年，这些地方的国家未必真心实意和秦国结盟，而本国国库中的珍宝却已散尽。
English: Han Fei, the minister of the State of Qin, knew about this matter and said in the presence of the King of Qin: Yao Jia took the pearl treasure and sent it to Jing, Wu, Yan, Dai and other places for three years. The countries of these places may not have sincerely intended to ally with the State of Qin, but the treasures in their treasuries have been exhausted.

古文：是贾以王之权，国之宝，外自交于诸侯，愿王察之。
现代文：这实际上是姚贾借大王的权势，用秦国的珍宝，私自结交诸侯，希望大王明察。
English: This was actually Yao Jia taking advantage of the great king's power, using the treasures of Qin to make friends with the princes, hoping that the great king would notice.

古文：且梁监门子，尝盗于梁，臣于赵而逐。取世监门子，梁之大盗，赵之逐臣，与同知社稷之计，非所以厉群臣也。 
现代文：更何况姚贾不过是魏都大梁一个守门人的儿子，曾在魏国作过盗贼，虽然在赵国作过官，后来却被驱逐出境，这样一个看门人的儿子、魏国的盗贼、赵国的逐臣，让他参与国家大事，不是勉励群臣的办法！ 
English: What's more, Yao Jia is just the son of a gatekeeper of the Great Wall of Wei, who was a thief in Wei, and although he was an official in Zhao, he was later expelled from the country. The son of such a gatekeeper, the thief of Wei, and the exile of Zhao, letting him participate in national affairs is not a way to encourage the ministers!

古文：王召姚贾而问曰： 吾闻子以寡人财交于诸侯，有诸? 
现代文：于是秦王招来姚贾，问他说： 我听说你用我秦国的珍宝在外面结交各国诸侯，有这样的事情吗？ 
English: Then the King of Qin summoned Yao Jia and asked him, "I heard that you used the treasures of my Qin State to make friends with princes from other countries. Is there such a thing?"

古文：对曰： 有。 
现代文：姚贾回答说： 有这样的事。 
English: Yao Jia replied: There is such a thing.

古文：王曰： 有何面目复见寡人? 
现代文：秦王说： 既然有这样的事情，那你还有什么脸面再来见我呢？ 
English: Qin Wang said: Since there is such a thing, then what face do you have to see me again?

古文：对曰： 曾参孝其亲，天下愿以为子；子胥忠于君，天下愿以为臣；贞女工巧，天下愿以为妃。
现代文：姚贾回答说： 过去曾参孝顺他的父母，天下的人都希望有曾参这样的儿子；伍子胥对国君忠诚不贰，天下的诸侯都希望用他这样的臣子；贞女的女工做得精巧，天下的男人都希望娶她这样的女子做妻子。
English: Yao Jia replied: In the past, Zeng Zeng was filial and obedient to his parents, and people all over the world hoped to have a son like Zeng Zeng; Wu Zixuan was loyal to the sovereign, and the princes all over the world hoped to use him as a vassal; the maidservants of the virtuous women were skillfully made, and the men all over the world hoped to marry a woman like her as a wife.

古文：今贾忠王而王不知也。贾不归四国，尚焉之?
现代文：如今我效忠于大王，但大王并不知道，我不把财宝分送给那四个国家，哪还能让他们归服谁呢？
English: Now I am loyal to the great king, but the great king does not know that if I do not give the treasure to the four countries, who can they be subjected to?

古文：使贾不忠于君，四国之王尚焉用贾之身?
现代文：如果我对大王不忠诚的话，四个国家的国君凭什么这么信任我呢？
English: If I am not loyal to the Great King, why do the sovereigns of four countries trust me so much?

古文：梁听谗而诛其良将，纣闻谗而杀其忠臣，至身死国亡。
现代文：夏桀听信谗言就杀死了他的良将关龙逢，纣王听信谗言就杀死了他的忠臣比干，导致了身死国亡。
English: Xia Yao listened to the advice and killed his good general Guan Longfeng, and the King of Qi listened to the advice and killed his loyal vassal Bi Gan, which led to his death and the death of the country.

古文：今王听谗，则无忠臣矣。 
现代文：如今大王听信了谗言，就没有忠臣了。 
English: Now that the great king has listened to his advisors, there are no loyal subjects left.

古文：王曰： 子监门子，梁之大盗，赵之逐臣。 
现代文：秦王又说道： 我听说你是看门人的儿子、大梁的盗贼、赵国的逐臣。 
English: King Qin also said, "I have heard that you are the son of the gatekeeper, the thief of the great beam, and the exile of Zhao.

古文：姚贾曰： 太公望，齐之逐夫，朝歌之废屠，子良之逐臣，棘津之雠不庸，文王用之而王。
现代文：姚贾仍是不卑不亢： 姜太公吕望，只是一个被老婆赶出家门的齐国人，曾在朝歌卖肉，肉都臭了也卖不出去的屠夫；也是被子良驱逐的家臣，他在棘津时卖劳力都无人雇用。但文王慧眼独具，任用他做自己的辅佐大臣，最终建立王业。
English: Yao Jia is still humble: Jiang Taigong Lvang is just a man from Qi who was driven out of his home by his wife. He was a butcher who used to sell meat in Chaoga, but the meat was so stinky that he couldn't sell it. He was also a vassal who was expelled by Ziliang. When he was selling labor in Heshijin, no one would hire him. However, King Wen had a keen eye and appointed him as his assistant minister, eventually establishing Wangye.

古文：管仲，其鄙人之贾人也，南阳之弊幽，鲁之免囚，桓公用之而伯。
现代文：管仲不过是齐国边邑的商贩，在南阳的时候穷困潦倒，在鲁国时还做过囚犯，齐桓公任用他辅佐自己就建立了霸业。
English: Guanzhong was nothing more than a merchant from a border town of Qi. He was poor and destitute when he was in Nanyang, and he was a prisoner when he was in Lu. Qi Kuan used him as an assistant to establish a domineering business.

古文：百里奚，虞之乞人，传卖以五羊之皮，穆公相之而朝西戎。
现代文：百里奚当初不过是虞国一个乞丐，用五张羊皮就被买走，可是秦穆公任用他做秦国的丞相，竟能无敌于西戎。
English: At first, Bai Lijuan was just a beggar in the State of Yu. He was bought off with five sheepskins, but Qin Mu Gong appointed him to be the prime minister of Qin, and he was able to be invincible against Xi Rong.

古文：文公用中山盗，而胜于城濮。
现代文：还有，过去晋文公倚仗中山国的盗贼，却能在城濮之战中获胜。
English: In addition, in the past, the thieves of the mountain country in the battle of Jinwen were able to win in the battle of the castle.

古文：此四士者，皆有垢丑，大诽天下，明主用之，知其可与立功。
现代文：这些人，出身无不卑贱，身负恶名，甚至为人所不齿，而明主加以重用，是因为知道他们能为国家建立不朽的功勋。
English: These men, all of humble origin, had a bad reputation, and were even despised by the people, but the Lord used them because He knew that they could establish immortal merit for the country.

古文：使若卞随、务光、申屠狄，人主岂得其用哉!
现代文：假如人人都像卞随、务光、申屠狄那样，又有谁能为国效命呢？
English: If everyone is like Gong Sui, Wu Guang, Shen Tu Di, who can serve the country?

古文：故明主不取其汙，不听其非，察其为己用。
现代文：所以英明的君主不会计较臣子的过失，不听信别人的谗言，只考察他们能否为已所用。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch will not take into account the faults of his subjects, will not listen to the advice of others, and will only examine whether they can be used.

古文：故可以存社稷者，虽有外诽者不听；虽有高世之名，无咫尺之功者不赏。
现代文：所以能够安邦定国的明君，不听信外面的毁谤，不封赏空有清高之名、没有尺寸之功的人。
English: Therefore, the Ming Dynasty, which was able to stabilize the country, did not listen to the slander from the outside, and did not reward those who had empty and lofty names, and did not have the merit of size.

古文：是以群臣莫敢以虚愿望于上。 
现代文：这样一来，所有为臣的不就不敢用虚名希求于国君了。 
English: In this way, all vassals would not dare to use false names to appeal to the sovereign.

古文：秦王曰： 然。 
现代文：秦王叹服： 爱卿说的在理。 
English: Qin Wang sighed: Aicheng's words were reasonable.

古文：乃可复使姚贾而诛韩非。
现代文：于是仍让姚贾出使各个国家，而诛杀了韩非。
English: As a result, they still let Yao Jia send envoys to various countries, but killed Han Fei.

