古文：缜字子真。
现代文：范缜字子真。
English: Fan Ye's character Zizima.

古文：父蒙，奉朝请，早卒。
现代文：父亲范氵蒙，作过奉朝请，死得早。
English: His father, Fan Yimeng, died early after serving the imperial court.

古文：缜少孤贫，事母孝谨。
现代文：范缜少年时孤苦贫困，侍奉母亲孝顺恭敬。
English: Fan Qi lost his father at a very young age, his family was poor, and he served his mother dutifully and respectfully.

古文：年未弱冠，从沛国刘瓛学，瓛甚奇之，亲爲之冠。
现代文：二十岁以前，跟沛国刘王献学习，刘王献认为他与众不同，亲自为他行冠礼。
English: Before he was twenty years old, he studied with Liu Wangcheng from Pei Province. Liu Wangcheng thought he was different from others and personally performed the coronation ceremony for him.

古文：在瓛门下积年，恒芒屩布衣，徒行于路。
现代文：在刘王献门下数年，总是草鞋布衣，步行于道路。
English: For several years under the tutelage of Liu Wang, he always wore straw sandals and cloth clothes and walked on the road.

古文：瓛门下多车马贵游，缜在其间，聊无耻愧。
现代文：刘王献门下有许多乘车跨马的贵族子弟，范缜处在他们中间，一点儿也不感到羞愧。
English: Under the tutelage of Liu Wangxian, there are many aristocratic children who ride horses. Fan Ye is among them, and he is not ashamed at all.

古文：及长，博通经术，尤精三礼。
现代文：长大以后，博通儒家经典，尤其精于《三礼》。
English: After he grew up, he became well versed in Confucian classics, especially in the "Three Rites."

古文：性质直，好危言高论，不爲士友所安。唯与外弟萧琛善，琛名曰口辩，每服缜简诣。
现代文：性格诚信直爽，喜欢直言不讳大发宏论，不被士流朋友们接受，只有和表弟萧琛友善，萧琛也是有名的能言善辩，但每每服气范缜的言简意深。
English: Honest and straightforward, he likes to be outspoken and make grand statements, which are not accepted by his scholarly friends. He is only friendly with his cousin Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao is also famous for his eloquence, but his words are concise and profound.

古文：年二十九，发白皤然，乃作伤暮诗、白发咏以自嗟。
现代文：范缜二十九岁时，头发就白花花的了，因此写了《伤暮诗》、《白发咏》自我咏叹。
English: At the age of twenty-nine, Fan Ye's hair turned white, so he wrote "Grief Poem" and "White-Haired Woman" to self-deprecate.

古文：仕齐位尚书殿中郎。
现代文：在齐朝作官为尚书殿中郎。
English: In the Qi Dynasty, he served as the middle son of Shoshoden.

古文：永明中，与魏氏和亲，简才学之士以爲行人，缜及从弟云、萧琛、琅邪顔幼明、河东裴昭明相继将命，皆着名邻国。
现代文：永明年间，和北魏和亲，选拔有才学之士作为外交使节，范缜和他的堂弟范云、萧琛、琅笽颜幼明、河东裴昭明相继奉命出使，都扬名于邻国。
English: During the years of Yongzheng, he and the Northern Wei Dynasty made peace with each other and selected talented scholars as diplomatic envoys. Fan Jun and his cousin Fan Yun, Xiao Jun, Yan Yueming, and Hedong Pei Zhaoming were successively sent on missions, and all of them became famous in neighboring countries.

古文：时竟陵王子良盛招宾客，缜亦预焉。
现代文：当时竟陵王萧子良广招宾客，范缜也在其中。
English: At that time, the mausoleum king, Xiao Ziliang, invited a wide range of guests, including Fan Yu.

古文：尝侍子良，子良精信释教，而缜盛称无佛。
现代文：曾经陪从子良，子良精通并信奉佛教，而范缜则大力宣称无佛。
English: He once accompanied Tzu Le, who was well versed in and believed in Buddhism, while Fan Ye vigorously declared that there was no Buddha.

古文：子良问曰： 君不信因果，何得富贵贫贱？ 
现代文：子良问他： 你不相信因果，哪儿来的富贵贫贱？ 
English: Ziliang asked him, "You don't believe in cause and effect. Where did the rich and poor come from?"

古文：缜答曰： 人生如树花同发，随风而堕，自有拂帘幌坠于茵席之上，自有关篱墙落于粪溷之中。
现代文：范缜回答说： 人生好比树上一起开的花，随风飘落，自然有的拂着帘幕落在茵席上，有的穿越篱笆墙掉到粪坑里。
English: Fan Ye replied: "Life is like a flower that blooms together on a tree and falls with the wind. Naturally, some will fall on the seat of the seat with the curtain, and some will fall through the fence wall into the cesspit.

古文：坠茵席者，殿下是也；落粪溷者，下官是也。
现代文：坠落在茵席上的，就是殿下这样的人，掉进粪坑里的，就是下官这样的人。
English: This is the case for you, Your Highness, on the top of the throne; this is the case for me, the junior officer, who fell next to the cesspit of filth.

古文：贵贱虽复殊途，因果竟在何处。 
现代文：贵贱虽然差别很大，因果又在哪里呢？ 
English: Although there is a big difference between high and low, where is the cause and effect?

古文：子良不能屈，然深怪之。
现代文：子良不能说服他，然而对他很不赞同。
English: Kiora couldn't convince him, but he didn't agree with him.

古文：退论其理，着神灭论。
现代文：范缜回去后推论他的道理，著成《神灭论》。
English: After his return, Fan Kui deduced his theory and wrote "Theory of God's Destruction."

古文：以爲： 神即形也，形即神也，形存则神存，形谢则神灭。
现代文：认为： 神就是形，形就是神，形存则神存，形亡则神灭。
English: He believed that: God is form, form is God, form-existence is God-existence, form-death is God-destruction.

古文：形者神之质，神者形之用。
现代文：形是神的物质实体，神是形的作用表现。
English: The form is the material substance of God, and God is the manifestation of the form.

古文：是则形称其质，神言其用，形之与神，不得相异。
现代文：那么形是指它的物质实体，神是指它的作用表现，只是角度不同，形和神，不能认为是不同的东西。
English: Then the form refers to its material entity, and the god refers to its manifestation, but from different angles. The form and the god cannot be considered as different things.

古文：神之于质，犹利之于刀，形之于用，犹刀之于利。
现代文：神对于实体，好比锋利与刀的关系，形对于作用，好比刀与锋利的关系。
English: God is to substance as sharpness is to a knife, and as form is to function as a knife is to sharpness.

古文：利之名非刀也，刀之名非利也，然而舍利无刀，舍刀无利。
现代文：说锋利并不是指刀，说刀也并不是指锋利，然而舍弃锋利便没有了刀，舍去刀也就没有了锋利。
English: To say "sharp" does not mean "knife," and to say "knife" does not mean "sharp." However, if you give up the sharpness, there will be no knife, and if you give up the knife, there will be no sharpness.

古文：未闻刀没而利存，岂容形亡而神在。 
现代文：没有听说过刀没有了锋利还存在，那么怎么能使形亡失了而神仍存在呢！ 
English: Haven't you heard that a blunt sword still exists, so how can a god still exist if he has lost his shape?

古文：此论出，朝野喧哗。
现代文：此论一出，朝廷内和社会上都一片哗然。
English: As soon as this theory came out, there was an uproar in the imperial court and in society.

古文：子良集僧难之而不能屈。
现代文：萧子良召集僧众和他辩论，却不能使他屈从。
English: Xiao Ziliang gathered a group of monks to debate with him, but they could not make him yield.

古文：太原王琰乃着论讥缜曰： 呜呼范子！
现代文：太原王琰写文章讽刺他说： 可悲啊！
English: Taiyuan Wang Yao wrote an article sarcastically saying, "How pathetic!

古文：曾不知其先祖神灵所在。 
现代文：范先生，居然不知道他先祖的神灵在哪里。 
English: Mr. Fan, he doesn't know where the spirits of his ancestors are.

古文：欲杜缜后对。
现代文：想一下子封住范缜的嘴。
English: I want to shut Fan Xuan's mouth at once.

古文：缜又对曰： 呜呼王子！
现代文：范缜却回答说： 可叹啊！
English: Fan Ye, however, replied: What a pity!

古文：知其祖先神灵所在，而不能杀身以从之。 
现代文：王先生，知道他祖先的神灵在哪儿，却不肯杀身去侍奉他们。 
English: Mr. Wang knew where the gods of his ancestors were, but he did not want to kill himself to serve them.

古文：其险诣皆此类也。
现代文：他的惊人之语都如同此类。
English: His startling pronouncements are like that.

古文：子良使王融谓之曰： 神灭既自非理，而卿坚执之，恐伤名教。
现代文：萧子良叫王融对他说： 神灭之论不合道理，而先生仍要坚持它，恐怕会损伤名声教化。
English: Xiao Ziliang asked Wang Rong to tell him: The theory of God's extinction is unreasonable, and if you still insist on it, I'm afraid it will damage your reputation and enlightenment.

古文：以卿之大美，何患不至中书郎，而故乖刺爲此，可便毁弃之。 
现代文：凭着先生的高才，何愁不能作到中书郎？却非要找别扭这样做，应该抛弃你的观点了。 
English: With your great talent, how can you not be able to become a middle school librarian? But if you have to find it awkward to do so, you should abandon your point of view.

古文：缜大笑曰： 使范缜卖论取官，已至令仆矣，何但中书郎邪。 
现代文：范缜大笑道： 假使范缜要卖论求官，早已作到尚书令和仆射了，岂止是中书郎啊。 
English: Fan Ye laughed loudly, "If Fan Ye wanted to sell his story and run for office, he would have already made Shang Shuling (尚書令) and Zhu Ya (仆射) long ago. He is nothing more than a middle school teacher."

古文：后爲宜都太守。
现代文：后来作宜都太守。
English: Later, he became the governor-general.

古文：性不信神鬼，时夷陵有伍相庙、唐汉三神庙、胡里神庙，缜乃下教断不祠。
现代文：生性不信鬼神，当时夷陵有伍相庙、唐汉三神庙、胡里神庙，范缜下令让断了香火不准祭祀。
English: He did not believe in ghosts and gods by nature. At that time, Yiling had the Wuxiang Temple, the Tang and Han Three Divine Temples, and the Huli Temple. Fan Yu ordered that the incense be cut off and that no sacrifices be allowed.

古文：后以母忧去职。居于南州。
现代文：后来因为母亲去世而离职，住在南州。
English: Later, because of the death of his mother, he left his job and lived in Nanzhou.

古文：梁武至，缜墨縗来迎。武帝与缜有西邸之旧，见之甚悦。
现代文：梁武帝来到这里，范缜穿着黑色丧服来迎接，梁武帝与范缜有同在萧子良西邸共事的旧情，见到他很高兴。
English: Emperor Liangwu came here, and Fan Hui wore a black mourning dress to welcome him. Emperor Liangwu and Fan Hui have a long-standing relationship of working together at the Xiao Ziliang West Residence, and it was nice to see him.

古文：及建康城平，以缜爲晋安太守，在郡清约，资公禄而已。
现代文：等到平定了建康城，委任范缜为晋安太守。范缜在郡内任上为政清廉简约，只享用自己的俸禄而已，不贪余财。
English: After Jiankang City was pacified, Fan Hui was appointed as the governor of Jinan. Fan Hui was politically clean and simple in his position in the county, only enjoying his salary, and did not covet extra money.

古文：迁尚书左丞，及还，虽亲戚无所遗，唯饷前尚书令王亮。
现代文：后升任尚书左丞，等回京时，即使对自己的亲戚也没送任何东西，只是馈赠了前尚书令王亮。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shang Shuling Zuo, and when he returned to Beijing, he did not send anything even to his own relatives, but only gave a gift to the former Shang Shuling Wang Liang.

古文：缜在齐时，与亮同台爲郎，旧相友爱。
现代文：范缜在齐朝时，曾和王亮同在朝内作郎官，旧时关系很好。
English: When Fan Ye was in the Qi Dynasty, he and Wang Liang served as vassals in the imperial court. They had a good relationship in the old days.

古文：至是亮摈弃在家，缜自以首迎武帝，志在权轴，而所怀未满，亦怏怏，故私相亲结，以矫于时。
现代文：到此时王亮无官在家，范缜认为自己最早迎奉梁武帝，所以志在卿相之位，而所希望的未能满足，心里也很不高兴，所以私下与王亮结成亲密关系，以表达与时世的不合。
English: At this time, Wang Liang was not at home. Fan Yu thought that he was the first to serve Emperor Liangwu, so he aspired to the position of nobles. However, what he hoped for was not satisfied, and he was very unhappy, so he formed a close relationship with Wang Liang in private to express his disagreement with the times.

古文：竟坐亮徙广州。
现代文：最后因受王亮牵连被流放到广州。
English: Finally, he was exiled to Guangzhou because he was implicated by Wang Liang.

古文：在南累年，追爲中书郎，国子博士，卒。
现代文：在南方几年后，被追回京城任中书郎、国子博士，后去世。
English: After several years in the south, he was brought back to Kyoto and appointed Chushiro and Kuniko hakase, and later died.

古文：文集十五卷。
现代文：有文集十五卷。
English: He Shizhen has a collection of fifteen volumes.

