古文：魏太子在楚。
现代文：魏国太子在楚国做质子。
English: The Wei princeling became a proton in Chu.

古文：谓楼子于鄢陵曰： 公必且待齐、楚之合也，以救皮氏。
现代文：派人到鄢陵对楼鼻说： 先生一定要等齐国和楚国联合起来，来拯救皮氏。
English: He sent someone to Fuling to tell Lou Nana: "Teacher, you must wait for Qi and Chu to unite to save Pi."

古文：今齐、楚之理，必不合矣。
现代文：现在看齐国、楚国的形势一定不会联合。
English: Looking at the current situation in Qi and Chu, they will definitely not unite.

古文：彼翟子之所恶于国者，无公矣。
现代文：况且那翟强在魏国所厌恶的，没有超过先生的了。
English: Moreover, the obstinacy that Wei detested was no more than that of Mr. Zeng.

古文：其人皆欲合齐、秦外楚以轻公，公必谓齐王曰： 魏之受兵，非秦宾首伐之也，楚恶魏之事王也，故劝秦攻魏。 
现代文：他的人都想联合齐国、秦国疏远楚国来轻视先生，先生一定会对齐王说： 魏国遭到兵祸，并非秦国率先攻打它，楚国憎恨魏国服事大王，所以劝说秦国攻打魏国的。 
English: His people all want to unite Qi and Qin and alienate Chu to despise him. He will surely say to King Qi: Wei suffered a military disaster, and Qin did not attack it first. Chu hated Wei for serving the great king, so he persuaded Qin to attack Wei.

古文：齐王故欲伐楚，而又怒其不己善也，必令魏以地听秦而为和。
现代文：齐王因此要讨伐楚国，并且恼怒楚国对自己不亲善，一定会让魏国用土地服从秦国来求和。
English: Therefore, King Qi wanted to fight against the State of Chu, and he was angry that the State of Chu was not friendly to him. He would definitely make the State of Wei use land to submit to the State of Qin to sue for peace.

古文：以张子之强，有秦、韩之重，齐王恶之，而魏王不敢据也。
现代文：凭着张仪的本事，拥有秦国、韩国雄厚的实力，齐王憎恶他，而魏王也不敢仗恃张仪。
English: With Zhang Yi's ability, he possessed the strong power of Qin and Korea. King Qi detested him, and King Wei did not dare to oppose Zhang Yi.

古文：今以齐、秦之重，外楚以轻公，臣为公患之。
现代文：现在翟强等人以齐国、秦国雄厚的实力，疏远楚国来轻视先生，臣下为先生担忧。
English: Now, stubborn people and others despise him by alienating Chu with the strong power of Qi and Qin, and his subjects are worried about him.

古文：钧之出地，以为和于秦也，岂若有楚乎?
现代文：齐国与楚国割让土地用来同秦国讲和，难道会听凭楚国任意而为吗？
English: Qi and Chu ceded land to be used to make peace with Qin. Will they let Chu do as it pleases?

古文：秦疾攻楚，楚还兵，魏王必惧，公因寄汾北以予秦而为和，合亲以孤齐，秦、楚重公，公必为相矣。
现代文：秦国猛攻楚国，楚国收兵，魏王一定害怕，先生于是就可献出汾水以北之地送给泰国求和，同秦国合亲来孤立齐国。秦国、楚国重视先生，先生一定能做相国。
English: Qin's onslaught on Chu and Chu's withdrawal of troops must have frightened the Wei king, who then offered the land north of Surabaya to Thailand to sue for peace, and allied with Qin to isolate Qi. Qin and Chu valued him, and he would surely be able to make a partner country.

古文：臣意秦王与樗里疾之欲之也，臣请为公说之。 
现代文：遴下意料秦王和樗里疾想要的就是这些，臣下请求替先生去游说。 
English: Surprisingly, this is exactly what Qin Wang and Bao Lisi want, and their vassals ask them to lobby on behalf of their master.

古文：乃请樗里子曰： 攻皮氏，此王之首事也，而不能拔，天下且以此轻秦。
现代文：于是使者对樗里疾说： 攻下皮氏，这是秦王要做的第一位要事，如果不能攻下，天下诸侯将因此轻视秦国。
English: So the envoy said to Bao Lisi: To conquer the Pi clan, this is the first important thing for the Qin king to do. If it cannot be conquered, the princes of the world will despise the Qin state.

古文：且有皮氏，于以攻韩、魏，利也。 
现代文：况且占据皮氏，从那里来进攻韩国、魏国，是非常便利的。 
English: Moreover, it is very convenient to occupy Pi and attack Korea and Wei from there.

古文：樗里子曰： 吾已合魏矣，无所用之。 
现代文：樗里疾说： 我已经同魏国讲和，没有借用皮氏的必要了。 
English: Balizhi said: I have already made peace with Wei, there is no need to borrow Pi's horse.

古文：对曰： 臣愿以鄙心意公，公无以为罪。
现代文：使者回答说： 臣下愿意用自己鄙俗的心理来揣度一下先生，先生不要因此怪罪。
English: The emissary replied: "Your subjects are willing to use their vulgarity to figure you out, sir. Don't blame me for that, sir."

古文：有皮氏，国之大利也，而以与魏，公终自以为不能守也，故以与魏。
现代文：据有皮氏，对国家是非常有利的，而把它送还给魏国，先生始终自认为不能守住它，所以就给了魏国。
English: According to Pi, the cucumber is very beneficial to the country, and when he gave it back to Wei, he always thought that he could not keep it, so he gave it to Wei.

古文：今公之力有余守之，何故而弗有也? 
现代文：先生有余力来据守皮氏，为什么不去占有它呢？ 
English: The teacher has enough power to hold on to Mr. Peel, so why not seize it?

古文：樗里子曰： 奈何? 
现代文：樗里疾说： 那应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Bao Lisi said: What should we do then?

古文：曰： 魏王之所者恃者，齐、楚也；所用者，楼、翟强也。
现代文：使者说， 魏王所依靠的，是齐国、楚国；所重用的，是楼鼻、翟强。
English: The envoy said that the king of Wei relied on the states of Qi and Chu; he relied heavily on the states of Lop Nur and stubbornness.

古文：今齐王谓魏王曰： 欲讲攻于齐王兵之辞也，是弗救也。 
现代文：现在齐王对魏王说， 魏国想要同齐国交战：这是大王兵士所说的。 这样齐国是不会救援魏国的。
English: Now the king of Qi said to the king of Wei, Wei wants to fight with Qi: this is what the great king's soldiers said, so Qi will not rescue Wei.

古文：楚王怒于魏之不用楼子，而使翟强为和也，怨颜已绝之矣。
现代文：楚王恼怒魏国不重用搂鼻，而派翟强去同秦国讲和，怨恨魏国要同它断交，已经看得出来了。
English: It is clear that King Chu was angry that Wei did not pay more attention to cutting off the nose, but sent stubbornly to make peace with Qin. He resented that Wei wanted to break off diplomatic relations with Qin.

古文：魏王之惧也见亡，翟强欲合齐、秦外楚，以轻楼；楼欲合秦、楚外齐，以轻翟强。
现代文：魏王惧怕魏国被灭掉，翟强要联合齐国、秦国排斥楚国，来轻视楼鼻；楼鼻要联合秦国、楚国排斥齐国，来轻视翟强。
English: The king of Wei feared that Wei would be wiped out, and the stubborn ones wanted to unite with Qi and Qin to exclude Chu, so as to despise the princes; the princes wanted to unite with Qin and Chu to exclude Qi, so as to despise the stubborn ones.

古文：公不如按魏之和，使人谓楼子曰： 子能以汾北与我乎?
现代文：先生不如停止同魏国讲和，派人对楼鼻说： 您能把汾水之北送给我吗？
English: Sir, it would be better to stop making peace with Wei and send someone to Lou Nana to say: Can you give me the north of Surabaya?

古文：请合与楚外齐，以重公也，此吾事也。 
现代文：就请同楚国联合疏远齐国，使先生受到重用，是我的事。 
English: It is my business to ask you to alienate the state of Qi jointly with the state of Chu, so that you can be reused.

古文：楼子与楚王必疾矣。
现代文：楼鼻和楚王一定急于行事。
English: Lou Nana and King Chu must be in a hurry to act.

古文：又谓翟子： 子能以汾北与我乎?
现代文：再派人对翟强说。 您能把汾水之北送给我吗？
English: Then send someone to say to the stubborn, can you give me the north of Surabaya?

古文：必为合于齐外于楚，以重公也。 
现代文：一定同齐国联合，疏远楚国，来使先生受到重用。 
English: It is necessary to unite with Qi and alienate Chu, so that you can be reused.

古文：翟强与齐王必疾矣。
现代文：翟强同齐王一定急于这样做。
English: The stubborn Tongqi Wang must be anxious to do so.

古文：是公外得齐、楚以为用，内得楼、翟强以为佐，何故不能有地于河东乎? 
现代文：这样先生外得齐国、楚国可以驱使，内得楼鼻、翟强作为辅佐，有什么原因不能在河东拥有土地呢？ 
English: In this way, if you are from Qi or Chu, you can be driven, and if you are from the interior, you can be stubborn and obstinate as an assistant. What is the reason why you can't own land in Hedong?

