古文：美妇人夷光丽娟赵飞燕薛灵芸孙亮姬朝姝蜀甘后石崇婢翾风浙东舞女
现代文：美妇人夷光丽娟赵飞燕薛灵芸孙亮姬朝姝蜀甘后石崇婢翾风浙东舞女
English: The beautiful woman is bright and beautiful, Zhao Feiyan, Xue Lingyi, Sun Liangji, Chaoyang Shu, Gan Hou, Shishi Chongyi, Zhe Dong Dancer

古文：妒妇车武子妻段氏王导妻杜兰香任瑰妻杨弘武妻房孺复妻李廷璧妻
现代文：妒妇车武子妻段氏王导妻杜兰香任瑰妻杨弘武妻房孺复妻李廷璧妻
English: Jealous wife Che Wuzi's wife Duan Wang's wife Tulan Xiangren's wife Yang Hongwu's wife Fang Yao's wife Li Tingbi's wife

古文：张褐妻吴宗文蜀功臣秦骑将
现代文：张褐妻吴宗文蜀功臣秦骑将
English: Zhang Yongzhu, Wu Zongwen, Shu Gongshen, Qin Jiezhen

古文：美妇人
现代文：美妇人
English: The Beauty

古文：夷光
现代文：夷光
English: Emptiness

古文：越谋灭吴，畜天下奇宝、美人、异味，以进于吴。
现代文：越王为了灭掉吴国，搜集天下奇宝美人和异味，用来进献给吴王。
English: In order to exterminate the state of Wu, King Yue collected the world's treasures of beauty and smell, which he dedicated to King Wu.

古文：得阴峰之瑶，古皇之骥，湘沅之鱓；又有美女，一名夷光，二名修明，以贡于吴。
现代文：搜集到的奇宝有昆仑山北阴的美玉，古代周穆王那样的骏马；异味有湘江沅水出产鳝鱼；美女则有夷光和修明。派人将这些全部贡献给了吴王。
English: The marvelous treasures collected include the gems of the northern shadow of Kunlun Mountain, the horses like the ancient King Zhou Mu, the eels produced by the Xiangjiang River, and the beauties of Iiguang and Shuming. Send people to contribute all of these to the King of Wu.

古文：吴处于椒花之房，贯细珠以为帘幌，朝下以蔽景，夕卷以待月。
现代文：吴王将夷光和修明这两名美女安置建筑别致、装饰华美的房子里，将细小的珠子串起来作为门窗的帘子。早上放下帘子遮蔽太阳。晚上则卷起帘子以望明月。
English: The king of Wu placed the two beauties, Yiguang and Shuming, in a unique and richly decorated house. He strung up tiny beads as curtains for the doors and windows. In the morning, he lowered the curtains to shade the sun. In the evening, he rolled up the curtains to look at the moon.

古文：二人当轩并坐，理镜靓妆于珠幌之内。
现代文：两位美人临窗而坐，隔着帘子便见她们对镜梳妆。
English: Two beautiful women sit by the window, and through the curtains I can see them putting on makeup in the mirror.

古文：窃窥者莫不动心惊魂，谓之 神人 。
现代文：偷偷看见她们的人无不心魂动荡，都说是仙女下凡。
English: People who have secretly seen them are all restless and say that they are fairies.

古文：吴王夫差目之，若双鸾之在轻雾，沚水之漾秋蕖。
现代文：在吴王夫差的眼里，她们就象一对鸾鸟在薄雾之中比翼而飞，又象露出水面的两朵莲花。
English: In Wu Wangfu's poor eyes, they were like a pair of ostriches fluttering in the mist, and like two lotuses emerging from the water.

古文：妖惑既深，怠于国政。
现代文：夫差为她们的姿色深深迷惑，于是懒于上朝处理国事。
English: Her husband was deeply puzzled by her appearance, so he was too lazy to go to the court to deal with state affairs.

古文：及越兵入国。乃抱二人以逃吴苑。
现代文：等到越王发兵攻入吴国时，他便抱起两名美女逃到了吴苑。
English: When King Yue sent troops to invade Wu, he picked up two beautiful women and fled to Wuyuan.

古文：越军既入，见二人在竹树下，皆言 神女 。望而不侵。
现代文：越军进入吴苑时，看见两位美人正在竹林下面，他们都说这是两位仙女，只是远远地观望而不敢有所侵犯。
English: When the Vietnamese army entered Wuyuan, they saw two beautiful women under the bamboo grove. They all said that these were two fairies, but they only watched from a distance and did not dare to encroach.

古文：今吴城蛇门内有折株，尚为祠神女之处。
现代文：如今吴国都城的蛇门内有一棵折断的树，仍是人们供奉仙女的地方。
English: Today, there is a broken tree in the Serpent's Gate of the capital city of Wu, which is still a place where people worship fairies.

古文：丽娟
现代文：丽娟
English: Laiwu

古文：汉武帝所幸宫人，名曰丽娟，年始十四。玉肤柔软，吹气如兰，身轻弱，不欲衣缨拂，恐伤为痕。
现代文：丽娟是汉武帝宠幸的一位宫女，年仅十四，皮肤白皙柔润，呼气犹如兰花吐芳，身体轻柔弱不禁风，似乎经不住衣带的弹拂，生怕碰伤肌肤留下伤痕。
English: Lijuan was a courtesan who was a favorite of Emperor Hanwu. She was only fourteen years old. Her skin was white and soft. Her breath was like an orchid, and her body was so soft and weak that it could not resist the wind. It seemed that she could not stand the whipping of the clothes belt, for fear of bruising her skin and leaving scars.

古文：每歌，李延年和之。于□芝生殿旁，唱回风之曲，庭中树为之翻落。
现代文：她每次唱歌都由乐师李延年伴奏，在□芝生殿旁唱回风之曲时，庭院的树叶都被振荡得纷纷飞落。
English: Every time she sings, she is accompanied by the musician Li Yannian. When she sings the Song of the Wind next to the Lawn Hall, the leaves of the courtyard are shaken and fly down.

古文：常致娟于琉璃帐，恐垢污体也。
现代文：武帝常常把丽娟安置在琉璃帐内，深恐尘垢站污了她的身体。
English: Emperor Wu often placed her in a glass case, fearing that the dust would stain her body.

古文：常以衣带系娟被，闭于重幕中，恐随风起。
现代文：又总是用衣带系住丽娟的锦被，把她关闭在重重帷幕之中，生怕被风刮起来。
English: And he would always tie the ribbon around Liya's brocade quilt, shutting her in the middle of the curtain, for fear of being blown away by the wind.

古文：娟以琥珀为佩，置衣裙里，不使人知，乃言骨节自鸣，相与为神怪也。赵飞燕
现代文：丽娟用琥珀做成环佩，放在衣裙里面，不让别人知道。环佩发出声响时她就对别人说是自己的骨节发出的声音，周围的人都互相议论她是神怪。赵飞燕
English: Lijuan made an amber bracelet and put it inside her dress, not letting others know. When the bracelet made a sound, she told others that it was the sound of her own bones, and everyone around her talked about her being a monster. Zhao Feiyan

古文：汉赵飞燕体轻腰弱，善行步进退。女弟昭仪，不能及也。
现代文：汉朝的赵飞燕身体轻盈腰肢柔软，善以轻曼的步态行路和起舞，这是妹妹昭仪所比不上的。
English: Zhao Feiyan of the Han Dynasty had a light body with a soft waist and limbs, and was good at walking and dancing with a light gait, which was unmatched by her younger sister Zhao Yi.

古文：但弱骨丰肌，尤笑语。
现代文：但昭仪骨骼细弱肌肤丰润，特别能说笑。
English: But Zhaoyi has thin bones and plump skin, and is especially good at telling jokes.

古文：二人并色如红玉，当时第一，擅殊宠后宫。
现代文：姊妹二人都有红玉般的光彩姿色，是当时最美的佳人，占尽了皇上对后宫的宠爱。
English: Both sisters had the radiant beauty of a ruby, and were the most beautiful women of their time, occupying all of the emperor's affection for the harem.

古文：薛灵芸
现代文：薛灵芸
English: by Xue Lingyi

古文：魏文帝所爱美人薛灵芸，常山人也。父名邺，为酂乡亭长，母陈氏，随邺舍于亭傍居。
现代文：魏文帝所宠爱的美人薛灵芸是常山人，父亲薛邺为鄻乡县亭长，母亲是陈氏，跟随薛邺居住在亭旁的房子里。
English: Emperor Wei's favorite beauty, Xue Lingyun, was a native of Changshan. Her father, Xue Yao, was the chief of the pavilion of Qixiang County, and her mother, a member of the Chen clan, lived with Xue Yao in a house next to the pavilion.

古文：生穷贱，至夜，每聚邻妇绩，以麻藁自照。
现代文：薛邺家境贫寒，每天夜晚，灵芸与母亲便与邻居妇女聚在一起纺线，用麻绳与草辫点火照明。
English: Xue Yao's family was poor. Every night, Ling Ying and her mother would gather with the women of the neighborhood to spin yarn and use twine and straw to light fires.

古文：灵芸年十五，容貌绝世，闾中少年多以夜时来窥，终不得见。
现代文：灵芸十五岁时，容貌秀丽绝伦，乡间的小伙子大都在夜晚前来偷看，但是一直见不到她的面。
English: When Ling Ying was fifteen years old, her appearance was stunning. Most of the young men in the countryside came to peep at her at night, but they never saw her face.

古文：咸熙元年，谷习出守常山郡，闻亭长有美女而家甚贫。时文帝选良家子女，以入六宫，习以千金宝赂聘之。既得，便以献文帝。
现代文：咸熙元年，谷习出任常山郡太守，听说亭长薛邺有位美女而家境十分贫寒，当时文帝正在挑选良家女子进宫，谷习便用千金巨资买到灵芸，把她献给文帝。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Gu Xi served as the governor of Changshan County. He heard that the chief of the pavilion, Xue Qi, had a beautiful woman and that his family was very poor. At that time, Emperor Wen was selecting a woman from a good family to enter the palace. Gu Xi used a huge amount of money to buy Ling Yi and dedicated her to Emperor Wen.

古文：灵芸闻别父母，歔欷累日，泪下沾衣。
现代文：灵芸听说要跟父母分手，一连几天长呼短叹，泪水湿透了衣襟。
English: Ling Ying heard that she was going to break up with her parents. She cried for days, tears soaked her clothes.

古文：至升车就路之时，以玉唾壶盛泪，壶中即如红色。
现代文：待到上车登路的时候，便在车上用玉制痰盂盛装眼泪，白玉痰盂都被泪水染成了红色。
English: When it was time to get on the road, they used a jade spittoon on the car to hold tears. The white jade spittoon was dyed red with tears.

古文：既发常山，及至京师，壶中泪凝如血。
现代文：从常山出发直至京都，盂内的泪水便凝结如浓血。
English: From Mt. Jōyama to Kyoto, my tears congealed like thick blood.

古文：帝遣车十乘，以迎灵芸。车皆镂宝为轮，丹画其毂。轭前有杂宝，为龙凤衔百子铃，锵和鸣，响于林野。
现代文：元帝派了十辆车出城迎接灵芸，车轮镶嵌着镂金图案，车毂图画着鲜艳的油彩，车栏前面也有各种珠宝装饰，悬挂的是衔百子的宝铃，行进途中铃声和鸣，响彻林野。
English: The Yuan Emperor sent ten cars out of the city to meet the spirit art, the wheels were inlaid with platinum patterns, the rims were painted with bright oil paints, there were also various jewelry decorations on the front of the car frame, hanging was the treasure bell of the hundred sons, and the bells and chimes rang through the woods and fields on the way.

古文：驾青色骈蹄之牛，日行三百里。此牛尸涂国所献，足如马蹄也。
现代文：驾车的是青色双蹄的牛，每天能走三百里路，是尸涂国进献给朝廷的。
English: The car is driven by a blue two-hoofed cow, which can walk three hundred miles a day, and is dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：道侧烧石叶之香，此石重叠，状如云母，其气辟恶厉之疾，腹题国所献也。
现代文：牛脚象马蹄子一样。大路两旁焚烧起石叶香，这种石头层层迭迭状如云母，焚烧放出的香气能怯除瘟疫等疾病，这是腹提国进献的物产。
English: Cattle's feet are like horses' hooves. Stone leaf incense is burned on both sides of the road. This stone is layered like mica, and the incense released can ward off plagues and other diseases. This is a product donated by China.

古文：灵芸未至京师数十里，膏烛之光，相续不灭。车徒噎路，尘起蔽于星月，时人谓为 尘霄 。
现代文：灵芸距离京城还有几十里远，沿途便点起了绵延不绝的烛光，赶车的徒众拥挤在路上，尘土飞扬遮蔽了星月的光芒，当时人们称此为尘霄。
English: Ling-Yi is still dozens of miles away from Beijing. Along the way, the cranes lit up the continuous candlelight, the crowds of drivers crowded on the road, and the dust flying obscured the light of the star and moon. At that time, people called this the dusty sky.

古文：又筑土为台，基高三十丈，列烛于台下，而名曰 烛台 ，远望如列星之坠地。
现代文：沿途又筑起了高达三十丈的土台，台下燃起一排排蜡烛，此台名为烛台，远远望去有如一排排星辰落在地上。
English: Along the way, a base of up to 30 meters high was built, and rows of candles were lit under the stage. This platform is called a candlestick, and from far away it looks like a row of stars falling to the ground.

古文：又于大道之旁，一里致一铜表，高五尺，以志里数。
现代文：在大道旁边，每隔一里埋设一根五尺高的铜柱，用以标志里程。
English: At intervals of one mile, a five-foot-tall copper pillar was placed next to the road to mark the mileage.

古文：故行者歌曰： 青槐夹道多尘埃，龙楼凤阙望崔嵬。
现代文：所以走路的人口诵歌谣道：青槐夹道多尘埃，龙楼凤阙望崔嵬。
English: Therefore, the walking population chants the ballad: There is a lot of dust on the road between Qingcheng and Longlou.

古文：清风细雨杂香来，土上出金火照台。 时为铜柱，以志里数于道侧，是 土上出金 之义；以烛致台，而则火在土下之义。
现代文：清风细雨杂香来，土上出金火照台。当时在道旁树立铜柱以计里程，这就是土上出金所指的意思。而火照台的意思就是火在土的下面，指的是由一排排蜡烛映照着土台。
English: Clear wind, light rain and mixed scents came, and a gold and fire illumination platform was set up on the ground. At that time, a copper pillar was set up on the roadside to measure the mileage, which is the meaning of the gold on the ground. And the fire illumination platform means that the fire is under the soil, which means that the rows of candles reflect the foundation.

古文：汉火德王，魏土魏王，火伏而土兴也，土上出金，魏灭而晋兴也。
现代文：汉代是火德王、魏代是土德王，火照台即火伏而土兴。也就是汉亡而魏兴。土上出金则隐喻魏灭而晋兴。
English: The Han Dynasty was the reign of fire, and the Wei Dynasty was the reign of soil. The fire was the fire and the soil was the rise. In other words, the Han Dynasty fell and the Wei Dynasty rose. The rise of the soil was a metaphor for the fall of the Wei Dynasty and the rise of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：灵芸未至京师十里，帝乘雕玉之辇，以望车徒之盛，叹曰： 昔者言 朝为行云，暮为行雨 ，今非云非雨，非朝非暮。 因改灵芸之名为 夜来 。
现代文：当灵芸距离京城十里远时，魏文帝则乘坐雕玉专车，观望车队与人众的盛况，看罢叹道：前人形容说 朝为行云，暮为行雨 ，如今是非云非雨，非朝非暮。于是将灵芸的名字改为夜来。
English: When Ling Yi was ten miles away from Beijing, Emperor Wei Wen took a special car made of carved jade to watch the procession and the people, and sighed: The ancients described the morning as cloudy and the evening as rainy, but now it is neither cloudy nor rainy, neither morning nor evening. Therefore, the name of Ling Yi was changed to night.

古文：入宫乘宠爱。外国献火珠龙鸾之钗，帝曰： 明珠翡翠尚不胜，况乎龙凤之重！ 乃止而不进。
现代文：夜来入宫后加倍地受到宠爱，有位外国使臣为夜来进献上一件镶嵌着明珠龙凤的宝钗，文帝便说：佩带较轻的明珠翡翠钗都有些不胜其重，何况这么重的龙凤钗呢！于是没让送进后宫。
English: After he entered the palace at night, he was doubly favored. A foreign envoy presented him with a jewel encrusted with pearl dragon and phoenix, and Emperor Wen said: Wearing a lighter pearl and jade bracelet is a bit too heavy, let alone such a heavy dragon and phoenix bracelet! So he was not allowed to enter the harem.

古文：夜来妙于女功，虽处于深帷重幄之内，不用灯烛，裁制立成。非夜来所缝制，帝不服也。
现代文：夜来的针线活极为巧妙，虽然住在帷幕重重的内室，但不用灯烛照明，一件衣服很快就能裁制而成，所以凡不是夜来缝制的衣服，文帝一概不穿。
English: Although he lived in a heavily curtained inner room, he did not need a candle to light it, and a piece of clothing could be quickly tailored. Therefore, Emperor Wen did not wear any clothes that were not sewn at night.

古文：宫中号曰 神针 。
现代文：宫里的人都称她为神针。
English: The people in the palace called her the Holy Needle.

古文：孙亮姬朝姝
现代文：孙亮姬朝姝
English: Sun Liangji's Morning Glory

古文：孙亮作绿琉璃屏风，甚薄而莹澈，每于月下清夜舒之。
现代文：孙亮制作了绿色琉璃屏风，薄薄的琉璃片晶莹透澈，他常常在清凉的夜晚于月光下面将屏风展开。
English: Sun Liang made a green glazed screen. The thin glazed pieces are crystal clear. He often unfolds the screen under the moonlight on a cool night.

古文：尝爱宠四姬，皆振古绝色：一名朝姝，二名丽居，三名洛珍，四名洁华。
现代文：孙亮有四个深受宠爱的美人，都是绝代佳丽，第一个名叫朝姝，第二个名叫丽居，第三个洛珍，第四个洁华。
English: Sun Liang has four well-loved beauties, all of whom are outstanding beauties. The first is named Morning Glory, the second is named Lijiu, the third is named Luo Zhen, and the fourth is named Jie Hua.

古文：使四人坐屏风内，而外望之，如无隔，唯香气不通于外。
现代文：他让四人坐在屏风后面，自己从前面观望，就象中间没有隔着什么东西似的，看得清清楚楚。
English: He had the four of them sit behind a screen, and he watched from the front, as if there was nothing in between, seeing everything clearly.

古文：为四人合四气香，此香殊方异国所献，凡经岁践蹑宴息之处，香气沾衣，历年弥盛，百浣不歇，因名《百濯香》。
现代文：只是后面的香气透不过来，这是四名佳人合在一起散发出来的一股香气。这种香气有别于异域他国所贡献的诸种香，凡在常年有人践踏的宴会休息场所，有这种香气沾上衣服，时间越久香味越浓，洗涤百遍也不减退，所以起名叫百洗香。
English: However, the fragrance behind cannot be penetrated. It is a fragrance emitted by the four beauties together. This fragrance is different from the various fragrances contributed by foreign countries. In the banquet and resting places that are trampled by people all year round, this fragrance sticks to clothes. The longer the time, the stronger the fragrance. It is washed a hundred times and does not diminish. That is why it is called Hundred-Cleansing Fragrance.

古文：或以人名香，故有朝姝、丽居、洛珍、洁华香。
现代文：或者以人名称呼这种香，于是就有朝姝香、丽居香、洛珍香、洁华香。
English: Or call this incense by a person's name, so there are morning musk, Lijiu incense, Luo Zhenxiang, and Jiehua incense.

古文：亮每游，此四人皆同与席，使来侍，皆以香名前后为次，不得相乱。所居室为《思香媚寝》。
现代文：孙亮出游时总是带上这四位美人，让她们与自己一起赴筵席，让她们侍奉自己时，也都以香名的先后次序依次排列，不许颠倒，他的居室叫做思香媚寝。
English: When Sun Liang travels, he always takes these four beauties with him. He invites them to go to the banquet with him. When he has them serve him, they are also arranged in the order of the incense names. They are not allowed to be upside down. His bedroom is called Shixiangmeishe.

古文：蜀甘后
现代文：蜀甘后
English: Shu Ganguo

古文：蜀先主甘后，沛人，生于贱微。里中相者云： 此女后贵，位极宫掖 。
现代文：西蜀先主刘备的甘皇后是沛县人，出生于贫贱之家，乡里的算命相面先生说：这个女孩以后必然富贵，地位可及后宫之尊。
English: Emperor Liu Bei's Empress Kan was from Pei County. She was born into a poor family. A fortune-teller in the village said, "This girl will certainly be rich and noble in the future, and her status will be as high as that of the harem."

古文：及后生而体貌特异，年至十八，玉质柔肌，态媚容冶。
现代文：后来她出落得体貌形态极为出众，十八岁时，长成一幅玉质柔肌，体态妩媚容貌艳冶。
English: Later, she was born with an outstanding body shape. At the age of eighteen, she grew into a beautiful, soft-skinned woman with a charming appearance.

古文：先主致后于白绡帐中，于户外望者，如月下聚雪。
现代文：先主将甘后安置在洁白透明的轻纱帐内，站在窗外望去，她就象月光笼置下晶莹的雪团。
English: The Ancestor placed Gan Hou in a pure white and transparent light gauze tent. Standing outside the window and looking out, she placed a crystal snowball like a moonlight cage.

古文：河南献玉人，高三尺，乃取玉人致后侧，昼则讲说军谋，夕则拥后而玩玉人。
现代文：河南进献了一个身高三尺玉石人，先主便将它放在甘后的身边。他白天与大臣议论军国大计，夜晚则拥抱着甘后而玩弄玉人。
English: Henan offered a three-foot-tall jade figurine, and the patriarch placed it next to Empress Gansu. During the day, he discussed military plans with the minister, and at night, he hugged Empress Gansu and played with the jade figurine.

古文：常称玉之所贵，比德君子，况为人形，而可不玩乎？
现代文：人们常说玉之可贵可爱处，堪与贤德的君子相比，如今面对有着人体形态的美玉，怎么可以不玩呢？
English: People often say that the preciousness and loveliness of jade is comparable to that of a virtuous gentleman. Now, faced with a beautiful jade with a human form, how can you not play it?

古文：甘后与玉人洁白齐润，观者殆相乱惑。嬖宠者非唯嫉甘后，而亦妬玉人。
现代文：甘后与玉人同样的洁白滋润，看见的人都分不情彼此，受到先主宠爱的人不独嫉妬甘后，而且也嫉妬玉人。
English: The Queen of Hearts is as white and moisturizing as the Jade Emperor, and those who see her can't tell them apart. Those who are favored by the Lord are not only jealous of the Queen of Hearts, but also jealous of the Jade Emperor.

古文：后常欲琢毁坏之，乃戒先主曰： 昔子罕不以玉为宝，《春秋》美之，今吴、魏未灭，安以妖玩经怀。
现代文：甘后时常想把玉人毁坏，便告诫先主道：从前子罕不把玉当作珍宝，受到《春秋》的赞美。如今东吴与魏尚未灭掉，怎么能将盅惑人的玩物整日放在心上呢？
English: Queen Gamgee often wanted to destroy the jade person, so she admonished the patriarch: In the past, the former son rarely regarded the jade as a precious treasure, and was praised by "Spring and Autumn." Nowadays, the Eastern Wu and Wei have not yet been extinguished, how can you keep the seductive toy in your heart all day long?

古文：凡诬惑生疑。勿复进焉。 先主乃撤玉人像，嬖者皆退。
现代文：凡属这类东西和事情必能引起物议和疑窦，不应再让这类东西献进宫中了。先主于是撤去了玉人像。争宠的人也都告退了。
English: Anything and everything of this kind is bound to arouse discussion and suspicion, and such things should no longer be allowed into the palace. The lord then removed the statue of the jade man. Those who were vying for his favor also withdrew.

古文：当时君子以甘后为神智妇人。
现代文：当时的贤人君子以为甘后是一位很有头脑的妇人。
English: At that time, the wise men and gentlemen thought that Queen Kan was a very clever woman.

古文：石崇婢翾风
现代文：石崇婢翾风
English: Ishitaka Tsukuda

古文：石季伦所爱婢，名翾风，魏末，于胡中买得之。
现代文：石崇有个最受宠爱的婢女名叫翾风。魏期末年在胡人中买到时，她才十岁，石崇便放在家里养着。
English: Shi Chong had a most beloved servant girl named Fan Feng. She was only ten years old when he bought her from the Hu people at the end of the Wei Dynasty. Shi Chong kept her at home.

古文：年始十岁，使房内养之，至年十五，无有比其容貌，特以姿态见美。妙别玉声，能观金色。
现代文：十五岁时就长成一幅无与伦比的秀丽容貌，尤其以体态优美出众，还能巧妙地分辨玉石的声音、察看金子的成色。
English: At the age of fifteen, she grew into an incomparably beautiful face, especially distinguished by her graceful physique, and she could also skillfully distinguish the sound of jade and observe the color of gold.

古文：石氏之富，财比王家，骄奢当世。
现代文：石崇家里极富，财产可比王侯之家，生活骄奢闻名于当世，珍奇珠宝在他眼里视如瓦砾，堆积如粪土。
English: Shi Chong's family was extremely rich, with assets comparable to those of a princely family. They were famous for living a luxurious life. In his eyes, the precious jewels looked like rubble, piled up like dung.

古文：珍宝瑰奇，视如瓦砾，聚如粪土，皆殊方异国所得，莫有辨识其处者。
现代文：这些东西都是从不同地方和国度得来的，没人能够识别其出处。若让翾风辨别其声色，都能道出它们的产地。
English: These things are all from different places and countries, and no one can identify their origin. If you let the wind distinguish their sound and color, you can tell their origin.

古文：使翾风别其声色，并知其所出之地，言： 西方北方，玉声沉重而性温润，佩服益人性灵；东方南方，玉声清洁而性清凉，佩服者利人精神。 石氏侍人美艳者数千人，翾风最以文辞擅爱。
现代文：她说：西方与北方出产的玉石，声音沉重而性质温润，佩戴在身上能益人性灵；东方与南方出产的玉石，声音清爽而性质清凉，佩带在身上则利人精神。石崇家的侍女姿容娇艳者有几千人，翾风因擅长文辞最受宠爱。
English: She said: The jade produced in the west and the north has a heavy sound and a warm nature, and wearing it on the body can benefit the human spirit; the jade produced in the east and the south has a crisp sound and a cool nature, and wearing it on the body will benefit the spirit of the people. There are several thousand people with the delicate appearance of the maidservants of the Shi Chong family, and Hao Feng is the most favored because she is good at literature.

古文：石崇常语之曰： 吾百年之后，当指白日，以汝为殉。 答曰： 生爱死离，不如无爱，妾得为殉，身其何朽！ 于是弥见宠爱。
现代文：石崇经常对她说：可以指着青天白日发誓，百年之后，我一定用你殉葬。她答道：活着时相爱死了后就得分离，莫不如别爱我。我若能够为您殉葬，身体不是很快就得腐烂么！于是翾风益加受到宠爱。
English: Shi Chong often said to her: "I can swear by the blue sky and the day, after a hundred years, I will surely use you to die." She replied: "If you love each other when you are alive, you will have to separate after you die, so don't love me. If I can die for you, won't my body soon rot away!" So Fan Fengjia became more and more popular.

古文：崇常择美容姿相类者数十人，装饰衣服，大小一等，使忽视不相分别，常侍于侧。
现代文：石崇曾经挑选姿容美丽而相貌相似的侍女几十人，发饰服装的规格尺寸完全一样，让人骤然间看去无法分别，然后，叫他们经常在身边侍奉。
English: Shi Chong once selected dozens of beautiful and similar-looking maids, with hair and clothing sizes exactly the same, making it impossible to tell them apart, and then asked them to always serve around him.

古文：使翾风调玉以付工人，为倒龙之珮，萦金为凤冠之钗，刻玉为倒龙之势，铸金象凤凰之形。
现代文：吩咐翾风将玉石调配给工人，让他们制作倒龙型玉佩，编织金丝为凤冠上的金钗，将玉石雕刻成龙体倒立的姿式，用金子铸造成凤凰的形状。
English: He ordered Hao Feng to allocate the jade to the workers, let them make the upside-down dragon-shaped jade cap, weave the gold wire into the golden cocoon on the phoenix crown, carve the jade into the upside-down dragon body, and cast the phoenix shape with gold.

古文：结袖绕楹而舞，昼夜相接，谓之 常舞 。
现代文：让这几十名侍女佩带上这样的玉佩与金钗，手拉着手绕着殿堂上的柱子蹁蹁起舞，昼夜相接，永不间断，叫做常舞。
English: Let these dozens of maidservants wear such jade beads and gold brooches, hold hands and dance around the pillars on the hall, day and night, never interrupting, called the regular dance.

古文：若有所召者，不呼姓名，悉听珮声，视钗色，玉声轻者居前，金色艳者居后，以为行次而进也。
现代文：如果要招呼她们时，不喊姓名，一律让翾风根据她们的玉佩声音和金钗的颜色，使玉佩声较轻的排在前面，金钗颜色鲜艳的排在后面，按照顺序依次走上前来。
English: If you want to greet them, do not call their names, always let the wind blow according to the sound of their jade and the color of the gold, so that the light sound of the jade is in the front, the bright color of the gold is in the back, and they come forward in order.

古文：乃闺中相戏曰： 尔非细骨轻躯，那得百粒真珠？ 及翾风年至三十，妙年者争嫉之，或言 胡女不可为群 ，竞相排毁。
现代文：还让这几十人嘴里都含上奇异的香料，使她们在走路时说着笑着行进，吐出的香气便随风飘扬。又将沉水香筛成粉末，撒在象牙床上，如果宠爱的婢女经过时没留下痕迹，石崇就赐给她珍珠百粒；如果谁留下了痕迹，则让她减少饮食以减轻体重；侍女们中间于是流传着一句戏言：你非细骨轻躯，哪得百粒真珠？在翾风已到三十岁时，妙龄侍女便嫉妬起她来，有的则散布翾风乃胡人女子不可与她靠近，大家争相诋毁和排挤她。
English: He also put strange spices in the mouths of these dozens of people, so that when they walked, they talked, laughed and marched, and the aroma they exhaled wafted with the wind. He also sifted the sediment incense into powder and sprinkled it on the ivory bed. If the beloved servant passed by without leaving a trace, Shi Chong would give her a hundred pearls; if anyone left a trace, she would reduce her diet to reduce her weight. The attendants then spread a joke among the maids: If you are not a light-boned body, where can you get a hundred pearls? When the wind has reached the age of thirty, the young maids

古文：崇受谮润之言，即退翾风为房老，使主群少。
现代文：石崇听了这些话后，就把翾风辞退到后房老仆人中，让她主持奴仆的工作。
English: After listening to these words, Shi Chong dismissed Yan Feng to the servants of the master of the back room, and let her preside over the work of the servants.

古文：乃怀怨怼而作五言诗，诗曰： 春华谁不羡？卒伤秋落时；哽咽追自泣，鄙退岂所期？桂芬徒自蠹，失爱在蛾眉；坐见芳时歇，憔悴空自嗤。 石氏房中并歌此为乐曲，至晋末乃止。
现代文：翾风于是心怀怨愤而作了一首五言诗。借以抒发自己的辛酸与不平，诗中说道：春华谁不羡，卒伤秋落时；哽咽追自泣，鄙退岂所期；桂芬徒自蠹，失爱在蛾眉；坐见芳时歇，憔悴空自嗤。石崇家的人都把此诗谱上曲子当歌唱，直到晋朝末年为止。
English: To express his bitterness and dissatisfaction, he composed a five-character poem: "Who does not envy Spring and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Spring and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Summer and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Summer and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Summer and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Winter and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Summer and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Winter and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Summer and Autumn; who does not weep at the end of Winter and Autumn; who does not

古文：浙东舞女
现代文：浙东舞女
English: Eastern Zhejiang Dancers

古文：宝历二年，浙东贡舞女二人：一曰飞燕，一曰轻风。
现代文：唐敬宗宝历二年，浙东送给朝廷舞女二人，一个叫飞燕，一个叫轻凤。
English: In the second year of Tang Jingzong's reign, East Zhejiang sent two dancing girls to the imperial court, one named Feiyan and the other named Xiaofeng.

古文：修眉黟首，兰气融冶。
现代文：细长的眉毛油黑的头发，浑身散发着幽兰的香气。
English: Her long, thin eyebrows and jet-black hair exude the scent of orchids.

古文：冬不纩衣，夏无汗体。
现代文：冬天不用穿棉衣，夏季身上不流汗。
English: You don't have to wear cotton clothes in winter, and you don't sweat in summer.

古文：所食多荔枝榧实，金屑龙脑之类。
现代文：吃的食物多是荔枝与香榧的果实，以及金屑龙脑之类。
English: The food they eat is mostly lychee and citron fruit, as well as dragon's brains and the like.

古文：带轻金之冠，軿罗衣无缝而成。
现代文：头戴轻轻的金丝帽子。身着无缝而成的罗衣。
English: He wore a light gold-silk hat and a seamless robe.

古文：其文织巧，人未能识。
现代文：衣服的织纹精细纤巧，人们都未见过。
English: The weave of the clothes is fine and delicate, and people have never seen it.

古文：轻金冠以金丝结之，为鸾鹤之状，仍饰以五彩细珠，玲珑相续，可高一尺，秤之无三二钱，上更琢玉芙蓉以为顶。
现代文：轻轻的金丝帽是以金丝结成的。呈鸾鹤形状；又以五彩细珠装饰起来，玲珑相接，有一尺来高，秤量一下也不过二三钱重；上面又有玉雕的芙蓉作为帽顶。
English: The light gold silk hat is made of gold silk. It is in the shape of a crane; it is also decorated with multicolored beads, exquisitely connected, a foot high, weighing only a few pennies; there is also a jade-carved hibiscus as a cap.

古文：二女歌舞台，每夜歌舞一发，如鸾凤之音，百鸟莫不翔集其上，及于庭际。
现代文：两个舞女常在台上歌舞，每当夜晚歌舞起来，歌声犹如鸾凤和鸣，百鸟听了无不飞落在台上，一直落满庭院的边上。
English: The two dancers often sing and dance on the stage. Whenever they start to sing and dance in the evening, their singing is like the chirping of phoenixes. Hundreds of birds hear them and fly down to the stage, filling the edge of the courtyard.

古文：舞态艳逸，非人间所有。
现代文：优美神奇的舞姿，也非人间所有。
English: A graceful and magical dance form is not something that everyone possesses.

古文：每歌罢，上令内人藏之金屋宝帐，盖恐风日故也。
现代文：每当歌舞结束，皇上便令内侍把她们藏在金屋宝帐之中，大概是怕风吹日晒着她们的缘故。
English: At the end of each song and dance, the emperor ordered the chambermaid to hide them in the treasure chest, presumably for fear that the wind would blow them into the sun.

古文：由是宫中女曰： 宝帐香重重，一双红芙蓉。 
现代文：于是宫中的女子们便道：宝帐香重重，一双红芙蓉。
English: As a result, the women in the palace said: the treasure is fragrant and heavy, a pair of red hibiscus.

古文：妒妇
现代文：妒妇
English: Jealousy

古文：车武子妻
现代文：车武子妻
English: Che Takeko's wife

古文：俗说，车武子妻大妒。
现代文：民间都说，车武子的妻子是个大妒妇。
English: Folks say that Che Buko's wife is a very jealous woman.

古文：呼其妇兄宿，取一绛裙衣，挂屏风上。
现代文：一天晚上，车武子把大舅哥招呼到自己房里睡，拿一件绛色裙子挂在了屏风上。
English: One night, Che Wu Zi invited his big brother to sleep in his room and took an ochre skirt and hung it on the screen.

古文：其妇拔刀径上床，发被，乃其兄也，惭而退。
现代文：妻子看见裙子后，提刀直奔屏风后的床上，掀开被一看，原来是自己的哥哥，这才羞愧地退了出去。
English: After the wife saw the dress, she went straight to the bed behind the screen with a knife. When she opened it, she saw that it was her brother, and then she retreated in shame.

古文：段氏
现代文：段氏
English: Mr. Duan

古文：临济有妒妇津。
现代文：临济有个叫妒妇津的渡口。
English: In Linji, there is a ferry port called Zhengyuzin.

古文：传言晋太始中，刘伯玉妻段氏字明光，性妒忌。
现代文：传说晋朝泰始年间，刘伯玉的妻子段明光，生性妒忌。
English: Legend has it that in the early years of the Jin Dynasty, Liu Boyu's wife, Duan Mingguang, was jealous.

古文：伯玉尝于妻前诵《洛神赋》。
现代文：伯玉曾在妻子面前诵读《洛神赋》，他对妻子说：要能讨到这样漂亮的女人，我就终生无憾了。
English: He said to his wife: "If I can get such a beautiful woman, I will have no regrets in my life."

古文：吾死，何患不为水神。 其夜乃自沉而死。
现代文：明光说：您怎么因为水神生的美而轻视我，我死了何愁不成为水神呢！当夜她就跳水而死了。
English: Mingguang said: "How can you despise me because of the beauty of the birth of the Water God? Why should I not become the Water God when I die? That night, she jumped into the water and died.

古文：死后七日，梦见与伯玉曰： 君本愿神，吾今得为神矣 。
现代文：死后第七天，她在梦中对伯玉说：您本来是喜欢水神的，我现在已经成为水神了。
English: On the seventh day after her death, she said to Bo-Yu in her dream, "You used to like Suijin, but now I have become Suijin."

古文：伯玉遂终身不复渡水。
现代文：伯玉于是终身不再从这条河上渡过。
English: As a result, Hōjō never crossed the river again.

古文：有妇人渡此津者，皆坏衣枉妆，然后敢济。不尔，风波暴发。
现代文：从此之后，凡有女人从这个渡口过河的，必须先把衣饰打扮弄坏了，然后船夫才敢让她上船，若不如此，行至水中就会有风浪大作。
English: From then on, any woman crossing the river from this ferry must first ruin her dress before the boatman dares to let her on board, otherwise, there will be a storm in the water.

古文：丑妇虽妆饰而渡，其神亦不妒也。
现代文：相貌丑陋的女人，打扮得再好渡河，里面的水神也不妬忌她。
English: An ugly-looking woman, no matter how well-dressed she is to cross the river, the water god inside does not envy her.

古文：妇人渡河无风浪者，以为丑不能致水神。
现代文：凡是不弄坏衣妆而渡河不引发风浪的女人，皆因相貌丑陋而不能招致水神的妬忌。
English: All women who cross the river without ruining their clothes and makeup and without causing a storm are ugly and cannot attract the jealousy of the water god.

古文：丑妇讳之，莫不皆自毁形容，以塞嗤笑也。
现代文：丑女人过河时，因为怕人说她丑，所以无不主动破坏自己的形象，借以避免人们的嗤笑。
English: When an ugly woman crosses the river, because she is afraid of being called ugly, she always takes the initiative to destroy her image in order to avoid people's ridicule.

古文：故齐人语曰： 欲求好妇，立在津口。妇人水傍，好丑自彰。 
现代文：由此，当地人流传着这样的口语：若求好媳妇，立在河渡口；女人到河旁，美丑自分明。
English: As a result, the local people spread the following colloquialism: if you want a good daughter-in-law, stand at the river crossing; if a woman goes to the river, she is beautiful and ugly.

古文：王导妻
现代文：王导妻
English: Wang Daozhu

古文：王导妻曹氏甚妒忌，制丞相不得有侍御，乃至左右小人。有姘少者，必加诮责。
现代文：王导丞相的妻子曹氏，生性十分妒忌，限制丞相身边不得有俊男俏女侍奉，甚至连身边的少儿之中有几个长相好看的，她也必定严加责问。
English: Cao's wife, Wang Duancheng, was very jealous by nature, and restricted the minister from having handsome men and pretty women around him. Even if there were a few good-looking children around, she would also be severely reprimanded.

古文：乃密营别馆，众妾罗列，有数男。
现代文：王导便背着妻子，在外面布置了一个安乐窝，那里有娇妾成群，而且还生了好几个男孩。
English: Wang Du then carried his wife on his back and set up a safe haven outside, where there were hordes of concubines, and also gave birth to several boys.

古文：曹氏知，大惊恚，乃将黄门及婢二十人，人持食刀，欲出讨寻。
现代文：曹氏得知后，大为惊怒，于是率领太监及婢女二十余人，各持菜刀一把，兴兵前往讨伐。
English: When Cao learned of this, he was very angry, so he led more than twenty eunuchs and maidservants, each with a kitchen knife, to go to fight against Xing.

古文：王公遽命驾，患迟，乃亲以尘尾柄助御者打牛，狼狈奔驰，乃得先至。
现代文：王导立即命令备车，害怕延误时间，他便亲自用拂尘的手柄帮助驾车的拼命打牛赶路，急急忙忙奔跑，终于抢先到达了秘设的安乐窝。
English: Wang Du immediately ordered the preparation of the car, afraid of delaying the time, he personally used the handle of the dust brush to help the driver desperately beat the road, hurriedly ran, and finally reached the secret refuge ahead of time.

古文：司徒蔡谟闻，乃诣王谓曰： 朝廷欲加公九锡，知否？ 王自叙谋志，蔡曰： 不闻余物，惟闻短辕犊车，长柄尘尾耳。
现代文：司徒蔡谟听说后，便到王导面前对他说：朝廷加给您九锡之赐，知道不知道？王导亲自讲述他的大计志向，蔡谟说：我没听说其他事情，只听说有短辕的牛车，长柄的拂尘。
English: After hearing this, Szu Zaimu went to Wang Du and said to him, "The imperial court has given you the gift of nine pennies, do you know? Wang Du himself told of his great ambition. Zaimu said, "I have not heard of other things, only heard of a short-handled ox cart and a long-handled whisk.

古文：导大惭。 
现代文：王导羞愧得无地自容。
English: That's reward enough.

古文：杜兰香
现代文：杜兰香
English: Dulan incense

古文：杜兰香降张硕。硕妻无子，娶妾。
现代文：杜兰香降张硕，张硕妻没有生孩子，于是娶妾。
English: Dulan Xiangjun Zhang Shuo, Zhang Shuo's wife did not have a child, so he married a concubine.

古文：妻妒无已，硕谓香： 如此云何？ 香曰： 此易治耳。 言卒而硕妻患创委顿。硕曰： 妻将死如何？ 香曰： 此创所以治妒，创已亦当瘥。 数日之间，创损而妻无妒心，遂生数男。任瑰妻
现代文：过了几天，妻子的疮平复了，她的妒忌心也没了，于是生了几个男孩。任瑰妻
English: After a few days, his wife's sores had subsided, her jealousy was gone, and she gave birth to several boys.

古文：唐初，兵部尚书任瑰。敕赐宫女二，女皆国色。
现代文：唐朝初年，兵部尚书任瑰由皇帝赐给了两名宫女，皆有倾国之姿色。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor gave two maids of honour, both of whom had the appearance of being devoted to the country, the military post of Shangshu Rengui.

古文：妻妬，烂二女头发秃尽。
现代文：妻子十分妒忌，便将宫女的美发烧烂使其变成秃头。
English: The wife is so jealous that she burns the beautiful hair of the lady-in-waiting and turns it into a bald head.

古文：太宗闻之，令上宫赍金胡瓶酒赐之，云： 饮之立死。
现代文：太宗听说后，便命宫内太监带着金胡瓶酒前去赐给她。说：饮下此酒立刻就死。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of this, he ordered the eunuch of the palace to bring a bottle of Jinhu wine and give it to her, saying, "If you drink this wine, you will die immediately."

古文：瑰三品，合置姬媵。
现代文：任瑰位列三品，合当养婢纳妾。
English: Ren Roshi was ranked third, and it was his duty to raise servants and concubines.

古文：尔后不妬，不须饮之；若妬即饮。 柳氏拜敕讫曰： 妾与瑰结发夫妻，俱出微贱，更相辅翼，遂致荣官。
现代文：今后你若不再妒忌，可以不饮此酒；如果还要妒忌，那就立即饮下去。柳氏跪拜接受皇命，礼毕，说道：我与任瑰乃结发夫妻，两人都出身微贱，更加相爱互助，于是荣登高位。
English: In the future, if you are no longer jealous, you can stop drinking this wine; if you are still jealous, then drink it immediately. Liu bowed to accept the imperial order, bowed, and said: I and Ren Guizhong are a husband and wife, both of whom are from a lowly background, love and help each other more, and thus ascended to a high position.

古文：瑰今多内嬖，诚不如死。 遂饮尽。
现代文：任瑰如今要多蓄婢妾，与其这样，我实在不如死掉的好！
English: Ren Zhui now wants to accumulate more concubines, rather than this, I'd really rather die!

古文：然非鸩也，既睡醒。
现代文：说罢，随即将酒一饮而尽。
English: Just say it, and I'll drink myself to death.

古文：帝谓瑰曰： 其性如此，朕亦当畏之。 因诏二女，令别宅安置。
现代文：但这并非毒酒。柳氏睡醒之后，皇帝对任瑰说道：看来夫人秉性如此，无法令其改变，我也惧她三分。于是诏令那两名宫女，将她们安置在其他宅第。
English: But it wasn't poisoned wine. When Liu Shi woke up, the emperor said to Ren Gui, "It seems that your wife has such a nature that she can't be changed, and I'm scared to death of her." He then ordered the two maids of honor to be placed in other quarters.

古文：又房玄龄夫人至妒。
现代文：房玄龄的夫人也是极为妒忌。
English: Fang Xuanling's wife was also extremely jealous.

古文：太宗将赐美人，屡辞不受。
现代文：但是，无论说什么，夫人决不回心转意。
English: But no matter what she says, she will never change her mind.

古文：乃令皇后召夫人，语以媵妾之流，令有常制。
现代文：太宗便传令对她说：是要不妒忌而活着，还是宁可妒忌而死掉？
English: Emperor Taizong then sent a message to her: "Should you live without jealousy, or would you rather die of jealousy?"

古文：且司空年近迟暮，帝欲有优崇之意。
现代文：夫人说：我愿妒忌而受死！于是遣酌酒一杯送给她道：如果是这样，那就饮下这杯毒酒。
English: My wife said, "I would die of envy!" So he gave her a glass of wine and said, "If that's the case, then drink this poisoned wine."

古文：夫人执心不回。
现代文：夫人举杯一饮而尽。
English: My wife raised her glass and downed it.

古文：帝乃令谓曰： 宁不妒而生，宁妒而死。 曰： 妾宁妒而死。 乃遣酌一卮酒与之曰： 若然，可饮此一鸠。 一举便尽，无所留难。
现代文：毫无半点犹豫和留恋。
English: Without the slightest hesitation and nostalgia.

古文：帝曰： 我尚畏见，何况于玄龄乎？ 
现代文：太宗说：我尚且害怕看见这种人，何况是房玄龄呢！
English: Taizong said, "I'm even afraid to see such a person, let alone someone as old as Fang Xuanling!"

古文：杨弘武妻
现代文：杨弘武妻
English: Yang Hongwu's wife

古文：杨弘武为司戎少常伯，高宗谓之曰： 某人何因，辄授此职。 对曰： 臣妻韦氏性刚悍，昨以此见属，臣若不从，恐有后患。 帝嘉不隐，笑而遣之。
现代文：杨弘武被任命为司戎少常伯，高家问他道：这人何能，要给他这个职位？弘武答道：臣妻韦氏性情刚烈强悍，昨天告诉我这么做，我要是不听，恐有后患。皇帝称许他不隐瞒家私，笑着派他上任了。
English: Yang Hongwu was appointed as Sijong Shozhongbo. Gao Jia asked him, "What is this man capable of, to give him this position?" Hongwu replied, "My vassal, Wei Shi, has a strong and tough temperament. Yesterday, I told him to do this. If I didn't listen, I might suffer the consequences." The emperor praised him for not concealing his private life, and sent him to the post with a smile.

古文：房孺复妻
现代文：房孺复妻
English: Fang Ye's remarriage

古文：房孺复妻氏性妒忌，左右婢不得浓妆高髻见。
现代文：房孺复子崔氏性情妒忌，身边的奴婢不允许有浓妆艳抹与头上盘着高高发髻的现象出现。
English: The concubines of the Choe clan were jealous, and the slaves and maidservants around them were not allowed to wear heavy makeup and high hairpins on their heads.

古文：给胭脂一豆，粉一钱。
现代文：每人只发给豆粒大一点胭脂与一钱粉。
English: Each person is only given a bean-sized bit of roux and a coin of flour.

古文：有一婢新买，妆稍佳，崔怒谓曰： 汝好妆耶？
现代文：有一个婢女是新买来的，大概不懂得主人的规矩和脾气，妆扮得稍稍艳丽了一些。
English: There was a newly-bought servant girl, who probably did not understand her master's rules and temper, and was dressed in a slightly more glamorous way.

古文：吾为汝妆。 乃令刻其眉，以青填之，烧鏁桁，灼其两眼角，皮随焦卷，以朱傅之。
现代文：崔氏发现后气恼地对她说：你喜欢化妆吧，我来为你化化妆！于是令人刻她的眼眉，用青色填上；把锁门用的铁柱烧红了，灼她的两只眼角，皮肉被烧焦卷了起来，便用红粉敷上。
English: After discovering this, Mr. Cui angrily said to her, "If you like to wear makeup, I'll do it for you!" So he carved her eyebrows and filled them with cyan; he burned the iron post used to lock the door red, burned the corners of her eyes, and rolled up the charred flesh, and then applied red powder.

古文：及痂落，瘢如妆焉。
现代文：等到疮痂脱落后，瘢痕处处犹如化的妆。
English: By the time the scabs have fallen off, the scars are everywhere like make-up.

古文：李廷璧妻
现代文：李廷璧妻
English: Li Tingbi's wife

古文：李廷璧二十年应举，方于蜀中策名。
现代文：李廷璧致力于科举应试二十年之久，才在蜀中弄到个官职。
English: Li Tingbi worked hard for 20 years to pass the entrance examination for the imperial examinations, and only then did he get an official position in Shu.

古文：歌篇靡丽。
现代文：他精于诗韵，诗词歌赋写得很漂亮。
English: He was good at rhymes and wrote beautiful poetry.

古文：诗韵精能。
现代文：曾在舒州作过军副。
English: He once served as a military deputy in Shuzhou.

古文：一日铃阁连宴，三宵不归，妻达意云，来必刃之。
现代文：妻子生性多疑，为人妒忌。一次，廷璧在铃阁接连参加了几个宴会，三宿没有回家，妻子便传话对他说：回家后一定宰了你！
English: His wife was suspicious by nature and envious of others. Once, Ting Bi took part in several banquets in succession at the Bell Tower. Mishuku did not return home, and his wife sent him a message saying, "I'll definitely kill you when I get home!"

古文：泣告州牧，徙居佛寺，浃辰晦迹，因《咏愁》诗曰： 到来难遣去难留，着骨粘心万事休。
现代文：廷璧将此事哭哭啼啼地告诉了舒州太守，自己躲进寺庙里居住。一连十二天没敢露面，于是写下《咏愁》诗一首，抒发了难以排遣的孤独感和愁绪。诗中写道：到来难遣去难留，着骨粘心万事休。
English: Ting Bi sobbingly told this to the Shuzhou daimyo and hid himself in a temple. He did not dare to show his face for twelve days in a row, so he wrote a poem, "Lingering Sorrow," which expressed the loneliness and sadness that was difficult to dispel. He wrote in the poem: "It is difficult to leave when you arrive, and it is hard to stay when you leave."

古文：潘岳愁丝生鬓里，婕妤悲色上眉头。长途诗尽空骑马，远雁声初独倚楼。
现代文：潘岳愁丝生鬓里，婕妤悲色上眉头；长途诗尽空骑马，远雁声初独倚楼。
English: Pan Yue's sorrow is in the gourd, and his brow is sad; the long-distance poem is riding a horse, and the distant wild goose is sitting alone for the first time.

古文：更有相思不相见，酒醒灯背月如钩。 张褐妻
现代文：更有相思不相见，酒醒灯背月如钩。张褐妻
English: Even more, there is a love-hate relationship, and the wake-up light behind the moon is like a hook.

古文：张褐尚书典晋州，外贮所爱营妓，生一子。
现代文：张褐尚书在执掌晋州郡守时，在外面收纳了一名心爱的的随营妓女，生了一个儿子。
English: When Zhang Rongzhang was in charge of Jinzhou County, he took in a beloved prostitute from outside the camp and had a son.

古文：其内苏氏妒忌，不敢取归。
现代文：因为妻子苏氏为人妒忌，没敢把这个儿子领回家，便送给好友张处士当儿子。
English: Because his wife, Su Shi, was jealous, she did not dare to bring this son home, so she gave him to her friend, Zhang Deyi, as a son.

古文：乃与所善张处士为子，居江津间，常致书题，问其存亡，资以钱帛。
现代文：张处士家住在江津，张褐时常去信打听儿子的情况，并且资助给他们钱财。
English: Officer Zhang's family lived in Jiangjin. Zhang Rong often wrote to inquire about his son's condition, and provided them with money and resources.

古文：及渐成长，其读书。
现代文：孩子长大后，张处士教他读书。
English: After the child grew up, Officer Zhang taught him to read.

古文：有人告以非处士之子，尔父在朝官高。
现代文：有人告诉他不是张处士的儿子，亲生父亲在朝廷作大官。
English: Someone told him that he was not the son of Officer Zhang, but that his biological father was a high-ranking official in the imperial court.

古文：因窃其父与张处士缄札，不告而遁归京国。
现代文：他便偷取了父亲写给张处士的秘信，不告而辞，逃回了京城。
English: He then stole his father's secret letter to Officer Zhang and fled back to Beijing without giving notice.

古文：褐已死，至宅门，僮仆无有识者，但云江淮郎君，兄弟皆愕然。
现代文：张褐已经去世。
English: Zhang Rong has passed away.

古文：其嫡母苏夫人泣而谓诸子曰： 诚有此子，吾知之矣。
现代文：他找到自己家门时，家仆们谁也不认识他。他只说自己是江淮长大的少爷，但兄弟们听了都感到惊愕。嫡母苏夫人一边流泪一边对儿子们说：确实有他这么个儿子，我是知道的。
English: When he found his own door, none of the servants knew him. He only said that he was a young master who had grown up in Jianghuai, but his brothers were surprised to hear it. His mother, Mrs. Su, said to her sons while shedding tears: I know that he really has such a son.

古文：我少年无端，致其父子死生永隔，我罪矣。 家眷众泣，取入宅，齿诸兄之列，名仁龟。
现代文：都怪我年轻时不懂情理，使他们父子永生分离，这都是我的罪过啊！全家人都伤心地流着泪，把他领进屋里，与各位兄弟按照年龄大小排了行。
English: It was all my fault for being so unreasonable when I was young, for separating father and son for all eternity, it was all my fault! The whole family, with tears streaming down their faces, led him into the house and lined him up with his brothers according to their ages.

古文：有文学，修词应进士举，及第，历侍御史。
现代文：他的名字叫仁龟，很有文学特长，后以修词科应举中了进士，历任侍御史。
English: His name is Jinbei. He is very good at literature. Later, he was awarded a prize for his mastery of rhetoric. He has served as an attendant to the emperor throughout history.

古文：因奉使江浙而死。
现代文：后因奉命出使江浙而死。
English: He later died after being ordered to go to Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：出《北梦琐言》吴宗文
现代文：吴宗文
English: Wu Zongwen

古文：王蜀吴宗文，以功勳继领名郡，少年富贵，其家姬仆乐妓十数辈，皆其精选也。
现代文：王蜀吴宗文以功勳继领名郡，年纪轻轻就过上了富贵荣华的生活，家里有奴婢乐妓十多名，全是她精心挑选的美人。
English: Wang Shu Wu Zongwen succeeded to the county with distinguished service, and lived a rich and glorious life at a young age. There were more than ten slaves and prostitutes in her family, all of whom were beauties she had carefully selected.

古文：其妻妒，每怏怏不惬其志。
现代文：但他妻子为人妒忌，管束极严，他常因不能与美人们取乐而心情郁闷。
English: But his wife was jealous and controlling, and he often felt depressed because he couldn't have fun with beautiful women.

古文：忽一日，鼓动趋朝，已行数坊，忽报云 放朝 。
现代文：忽有一天，他听到鼓声便急忙赶着上朝，已经走过几条街了，忽然来人报告说已经散朝了。
English: Suddenly one day, he heard the sound of drums and hurried to catch up with the morning. He had already walked through several streets, when suddenly someone came to report that the morning had broken.

古文：遂密戒从者，潜入，遍幸之。
现代文：他便悄悄告诉随从人员，要偷偷地回家。
English: He quietly told his entourage to sneak back home.

古文：至十余辈，遂据腹而卒。
现代文：回家之后便与所有的美女纵情淫乐，一连玩到十几个人，然后用手按着肚子死掉了。
English: After returning home, he indulged in sex with all the beautiful women, played with more than a dozen people in a row, and then died with his hand on his stomach.

古文：蜀功臣
现代文：蜀功臣
English: Shu Gongxian

古文：蜀有功臣忘其名，其妻妒忌。
现代文：蜀国有位功臣，忘记叫什么名字了。他妻子是个妒妇。
English: There was a great hero in the State of Shu, I forget his name, whose wife was a jealous woman.

古文：家畜妓乐甚多，居常即隔绝之。或宴饮，即使隔帘奏乐，某未尝见也。
现代文：家里有许多歌妓，日常生活中总不让他与歌妓们在一起，家里举行宴会时，就让歌妓们隔着帘幕奏乐，他从未见过她们的面。
English: There are many geishas in his family. In his daily life, he is never allowed to be with geishas. When there is a banquet at home, he lets the geishas play music behind a curtain. He has never seen their faces.

古文：其妻左右，常令老丑者侍之。某尝独处，更无侍者，而居第器服盛甚。
现代文：妻子身边一直让年老或貌丑的仆人侍奉；他则一人独处，身边根本没有奴婢，他的居室内只有齐全的器具和各式多样的衣服。
English: His wife is always attended by servants, old or ugly; he is alone, without a servant or a maid, and his room is furnished with all sorts of utensils and clothes.

古文：后妻病甚，语其夫曰： 我死，若近婢妾，立当取之。 及属圹，某乃召诸姬，日夜酣饮为乐。
现代文：后来，他妻子得了重病，临终前对丈夫说：我死之后，你若亲近婢妾，我会立即来捉你！妻子下葬后，他便召集起家里的婢妾，日日夜夜地饮酒作乐。
English: Later, his wife fell seriously ill. Before dying, she said to her husband: "After I die, if you get close to your maidservant, I will immediately come and catch you!" After his wife was buried, he gathered the maidservants in the house and drank alcohol day and night to make music.

古文：有掌衣婢，尤属意，即幸之。
现代文：有个掌管衣服的婢女，尤其中他的心意，便跟她同居起来。
English: There was a maidservant who was in charge of clothing, and he had a crush on her, so he went to live with her.

古文：方寝息，忽有声如霹雳，帷帐皆裂，某因惊成疾而死。
现代文：刚刚上床熄灯，忽有霹雳般的巨响，屋内的帘幕全被撕裂，他因惊惧成疾，便死了。
English: He had just gone to bed when the lights went out. Suddenly, there was a loud bang, and the curtain inside the house was completely torn apart. He died from panic attacks.

古文：秦骑将
现代文：秦骑将
English: Qin cavalry general

古文：秦骑将石某者，甚有战功。其妻悍且妒，石常患之。
现代文：秦国骑将石某战功赫赫，妻子强悍而妒忌，石某常常想除掉她。
English: Qin's cavalry general, Shi Mou, was famous for his military exploits. His wife was tough and jealous. Shi Mou often wanted to get rid of her.

古文：后其妻独处，乃夜遣人刺之。
现代文：后来妻子一人独处，他便于当夜派人去行刺。
English: Later, when his wife was alone, he sent someone to carry out the assassination that night.

古文：妻手接其刃，号救叫喊。
现代文：妻子用手接住砍来的刀刃，大喊救命。
English: His wife caught the blade in her hand and screamed for help.

古文：婢妾共击贼，遂折镡而去，竟不能害。
现代文：婢妾闻声群来捉贼，刺客的剑环被打折后匆忙逃走。
English: Handmaids and concubines swarm to catch the thief, and the assassin's sword ring is discounted and he flees in a hurry.

古文：妇十指皆伤。
现代文：结果妻子未能杀掉，但她的十个手指都受了伤。
English: As a result, his wife could not kill him, but all ten of her fingers were injured.

古文：后数年，秦亡入蜀，蜀遣石将兵，屯于褒梁，复于军中募侠士，就家刺之。
现代文：过了几年，秦国灭亡后石某到了蜀国。蜀王派遣石某带兵驻守褒梁，他又在军营里召募侠士到家里刺杀妻子。
English: A few years later, after the fall of Qin, Shimao went to Shu. Shu sent Shimao to garrison Baoliang with soldiers, and he called for knights in the military camp to come to the house and assassinate his wife.

古文：褒蜀相去数千里，侠士于是挟刃，怀家书，至其门曰： 褒中信至，令面见夫人。 夫人喜出见，侠拜而授其书，捧接之际，挥刃斫之。妻有一女跃出，举手接刃，相持久之，竟不能害。
现代文：褒梁距离蜀都几千里，侠士提着刀，怀里带着石某的家信，长途跋涉来到了石某的家门，然后说：褒梁来的家信到了，主人命令要面见夫人。夫人高兴地出来相见，侠士行礼递上书信。在夫人捧接书信之际，侠士挥刀砍去，夫人的女儿跳了出来，举手接住了刀刃，双方相持了好长时间，一直没能杀死夫人。
English: Bao Liang was thousands of miles away from Shudu. The knight carried a knife and carried a letter from Shi's family in his arms. He traveled a long distance to the door of Shi's home, and then said, "The letter from Bao Liang has arrived. The master ordered me to meet his wife. His wife came out to meet him happily, and the knight presented the letter with ceremony. While his wife was holding the letter, the knight swung his sword and cut it, and his wife's daughter jumped out and raised her hand to catch the blade. The two sides held each other for a long time, but were unable to kill his wife.

古文：外人闻而救之，女十指并伤。
现代文：外人听到砍杀声后纷纷相救，女儿的十指全被砍伤了。
English: After outsiders heard the sound of the slashing, they rushed to help. Her daughter's ten fingers were all slashed.

古文：后十年，蜀亡，归秦邦，竟与其夫偕老，死于牖下。
现代文：过了十年，蜀国灭亡，石某回到了秦地。妻子终能与他白头偕老，死在乡间。
English: After ten years, Shu died, and Shi returned to Qin. His wife was finally able to grow old with him and died in the countryside.

