古文：摩者，揣之术也。
现代文：揣摩试探，是一种与 揣情 相类似的方法。
English: Guessing and probing is a method similar to guessing.

古文：内符者，揣之主也。
现代文：内心活动是揣摩的对象。
English: Inner activity is the object of speculation.

古文：用之有道，其道必隐。
现代文：进行 揣情 时，有 揣 的规律可依，而这些规律却是隐而不现的。
English: When speculating, there are rules of speculation to follow, but these rules are hidden.

古文：微摩之以其索欲，测而探之，内符必应；其索应也，必有为之。
现代文：适当地去 摩 时，要根据对方欲望投其所好进行测探，其内情就会通过外部形象反映出来。内在的感情要表现出来，必然要有所作为，这就是 摩 的作用。
English: When properly rubbing, it is necessary to test according to the other party's desire to do what they like, and their inner feelings will be reflected through the external image. The inner feelings must be expressed, and they must make a difference, which is the role of rubbing.

古文：故微而去之，是谓塞窌匿端，隐貌逃情，而人不知，故能成其事而无患。
现代文：在 揣摩 之后，要有意识的保持微妙的距离，像把地窖盖上一样隐藏起来，消除痕迹，伪装外表，掩饰真情，使人无法知道是谁办成的这件事。这样，既实现了目的，又不会留祸患。
English: After guessing, it is necessary to consciously keep a subtle distance, hide it like a cellar lid, remove traces, disguise appearances, cover up the truth, and make it impossible to know who did it. In this way, the goal is achieved and no harm is left behind.

古文：摩之在此，符之在彼，从而用之，事无不可。
现代文：在此处 揣摩 对方，而要在另一处，观察对方表现，顺应事物规律，根据对方的内情而采取行动，就没有办不成的事情。
English: There is nothing that cannot be done if we try to figure out the other side here, and observe the other side's performance in another place, conform to the laws of things, and act according to the other side's internal conditions.

古文：古之善摩者，如操钩而临深渊，饵而投之，必得鱼焉。
现代文：古代善于揣摩对方内心的人就像拿着鱼钩临近深渊，只要把带着饵食的钩投入水中，就一定可以钓到鱼。
English: In ancient times, people who were good at guessing each other's hearts were like approaching the abyss with a fishhook. As long as you put the hook with the bait into the water, you can definitely catch fish.

古文：故曰：主事日成，而人不知；主兵日胜，而人不畏也。
现代文：所以说这样的人主持政务日渐成功却没有被察觉；率兵打仗日渐胜利，对手却蒙在鼓里不知畏惧。
English: Therefore, such a person presides over the affairs of state more and more successfully without being noticed; leads the soldiers to war more and more successfully, but the opponent is kept in the dark and is not afraid.

古文：圣人谋之于阴，故曰神；成之于阳，故曰明，所谓主事日成者，积德也，而民安之，不知其所以利。
现代文：圣人谋划什么行动总是在暗中进行的，所以被称为 神 ，而办事成功都显现在光天化日之下，所以被称为 明 。
English: The saint's plans and actions are always carried out in the dark, so they are called God, and the success of the work is revealed in broad daylight, so they are called Ming.

古文：积善也，而民道之，不知其所以然；而天下比之神明也。主兵日胜者，常战于不争不费，而民不知所以服，不知所以畏，而天下比之神明。
现代文：所谓 主事日成 的人是暗中积累德行，老百姓安居乐业，却不知道为什么会享受到这些好处，他们还在暗中积累善行，老百姓生活在善政中却不知道为什么会有这样的局面。人们把 谋之于阴，成之于阳 的政治策略称为 神明 。
English: The so-called masters of success are secretly accumulating virtues, the common people are living a peaceful and happy life, but they do not know why they enjoy these benefits, they are still secretly accumulating good deeds, and the common people are living in a good government, but they do not know why there is such a situation. People call the political strategy of seeking the yin and becoming the yang as divine.

古文：其摩者，有以平，有以正；有以喜，有以怒；有以名，有以行；有以廉，有以信；有以利，有以卑。平者，静也。正者，宜也。
现代文：那些主持军队而日益压倒敌人的统帅，坚持不懈的与敌军对抗，却不去争城夺地，消耗人力物力，老百姓也不知道为何敌国拜服，也不知道什么是恐惧。为此，普天下都称 谋之于阴，成之于阳 的军事策略为 神明 。揣摩试探他人的方法，有用和平进攻的，有用正义征服的，有用娱乐麻痹的，有用愤怒激励的，有用名望威吓的，有用行为逼迫的，有用廉洁感化的，有用信誉说服的，有用利害诱惑的，有用谦卑争取的。
English: Those commanders who preside over the army and increasingly overwhelm the enemy, persistently confront the enemy army, but do not fight for the city and the land, consume manpower and material resources, and the common people do not know why the enemy country worships, nor do they know what fear is. For this reason, the whole world has praised the military strategy of "plotting in the shade and becoming in the sun" as a god. Contemplate the methods of testing others, useful for peaceful attack, useful for justice conquest, useful for entertainment paralysis, useful for anger encouragement, useful for reputation intimidation, useful for behavior persecution, useful for integrity inspiration, useful for credibility persuasion, useful for interest temptation, useful

古文：喜者，悦也。怒者，动也。名者，发也。行者，成也。廉者，洁也。信者，期也。利者，求也。卑者，谄也。
现代文：和平就是宁静，正义就是刚直，娱乐就是喜悦，愤怒就是威吓，名望就是声誉，行为就是实施，廉洁就是干净，信誉就是清明，利益就是求取，谦卑就是谄媚。
English: Peace is tranquility, justice is uprightness, amusement is joy, anger is intimidation, fame is reputation, behavior is implementation, integrity is clean, credibility is clear, profit is acquisition, humility is flattery.

古文：故圣人所以独用者，众人皆有之；然无成功者，其用之非也。
现代文：所以，圣人所施用的 摩 之术，平常人也都可以具有，然而没有能运用成功的，那是因为他们运用不当。
English: Therefore, ordinary people can also have the movement technique used by sages, but they cannot use it successfully because they use it improperly.

古文：故谋莫难于周密，说莫难于悉听，事莫难于必成；此三者唯圣人然后能任之。
现代文：所以说，出谋划策最困难的是考虑周到严密，游说对方最困难的是让对方接受主张，做事情最困难的是确保成功。这三方面只有圣人经过深思熟虑才能做到。
English: Therefore, the most difficult part of making a plan is to consider it carefully, the most difficult part of lobbying is to get the other party to accept the proposal, and the most difficult part of doing things is to ensure success. These three aspects can only be done by a sage after careful consideration.

古文：故谋必欲周密；必择其所与通者说也，故曰：或结而无隙也夫事成必合于数，故曰：道、数与时相偶者也。
现代文：所以说谋划必须周到慎密；游说他人要选择心意相通的对象。所以说： 办事情要稳健，无懈可击。 要想成就事业，必须有适当的方法。所以说： 客观规律是与天时互相依附的。 
English: Therefore, it is said that planning must be thoughtful and prudent; lobbying others should choose the object of the same mind. Therefore, it is said that: to do things should be steady and impeccable. In order to achieve the cause, there must be appropriate methods. Therefore, it is said that: the objective law is interdependent with the weather.

古文：说者听，必合于情；故曰：情合者听。
现代文：进行游说的人必须动之以情晓之以理，双方感情相合才会听取。
English: The person who lobbies must be motivated by emotion and reason, and the two sides must be emotionally compatible before they will listen.

古文：故物归类；抱薪趋火，燥者先燃；平地注水，湿者先濡；此物类相应，于事誓犹是也。
现代文：世界上万事万物都有各自的规律。就好像抱着柴草走向烈火，干燥的柴草就首先着火燃烧；往平地倒水，低湿的地方首先注入水流。这些都是与事物的性质相适应的。以此类推，其他事物也是这样的。
English: Everything in the world has its own laws. It is like carrying firewood to a blazing fire, and the dry firewood is the first to catch fire; pouring water on the flat ground, and the low-moisture place is the first to inject water flow. These are all in accordance with the nature of things. And so on, other things are like this.

古文：此言内符之应外摩也如是，故曰：摩之以其类，焉有不相应者；乃摩之以其欲，焉有不听者。
现代文：这就是 内符 与 外摩 的相适应的道理。所以说按着事物的类别加以揣摩，哪有不呼应的呢？顺着被游说者的欲望进行揣摩，哪有不会听从的呢？
English: This is the reason why the inner symbol corresponds to the outer symbol. Therefore, if you think about it according to the category of things, what will not respond? If you think about it according to the desires of the person being lobbied, what will not obey?

古文：故曰：独行之道。
现代文：所以说只有圣人最能实行揣摩之术。
English: Therefore, only sages are best able to practice the art of guessing.

古文：夫几者不晚，成而不拘，久而化成。
现代文：大凡通晓机微的人都会把握好时机，把事情做成了却不居功自傲，长期坚持下去就一定取得成功。
English: A great man who knows the subtleties will grasp the right time, get things done but not be proud of his achievements. If you stick to it for a long time, you will definitely succeed.

