古文：起强圉作噩，尽著雍阉茂，凡二年。
现代文：起强圉作噩，尽著雍阉茂，一共两年。
English: For a total of two years, he worked hard and did his best.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝上之下天福二年
现代文：后晋高祖天福二年春季正月，乙卯，出现日食。
English: In the first month of the second year of Emperor Tenfu's reign, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：春，正月，乙卯，日有食之。诏以前北面招收指挥使安重荣为成德节度使，以秘琼为齐州防御使。
现代文：后晋高祖石敬瑭下诏，任用前北面招收指挥使安重荣为成德节度使，任用秘琼为齐州防御使。
English: After he was promoted to high rank, Zushi Jing issued an edict, appointing former north recruiting commander An Chong Rong as Chengde Festival envoy, and appointing Hui Qiong as Qi Prefecture defense envoy.

古文：遣引进使王景崇谕琼以利害。
现代文：派遣引进使王景崇去给秘琼讲明利害。
English: The introduction of the dispatch made Wang Jing Chong go to the scene to clarify the interests of the secret.

古文：重荣与契丹将赵思温偕如镇州，琼不敢拒命。
现代文：安重荣与契丹将领赵思温相偕来到镇州，秘琼不敢拒绝接受命令。
English: An Chongrong and the Khitan general Zhao Siwen came to Zhenzhou together. Bai Qiong did not dare to refuse to accept the order.

古文：丙辰，重荣奏已视事。
现代文：丙辰，安重荣上奏称已经视事。
English: Hsin-Chen and An-Chung-Rong stated in their report that they had already considered the matter.

古文：景崇，邢州人也。
现代文：王景崇是邢州人。
English: Wang Jingsong is from Zhangzhou.

古文：契丹以幽州为南京。
现代文：契丹把幽州做为南京。
English: Khitan regarded Yuzhou as Nanjing.

古文：李崧、吕琦逃匿于伊阙民间。
现代文：李崧、吕琦逃匿在伊阙民间。
English: Li Yao and Lyu Yao went into hiding in Yili.

古文：帝以始镇河东，崧有力焉，德之；亦不责琦。
现代文：后晋高祖认为开始镇守河东时，李崧推举有功，心里感激他；也不责备吕琦。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu believed that when he began to guard the eastern part of the river, Li Qiye did a good job, and he was grateful to him in his heart; he did not blame Lyu Qiye.

古文：乙丑，以琦为秘书监；丙寅，以崧为兵部侍郎、判户部。
现代文：乙丑，任用吕琦为秘书监；丙寅，任用李崧为兵部侍郎、判理户部。
English: B Ugly, appointed Lyu Hao as the secretary supervisor; C Yin, appointed Li Hao as the attendant of the military department and the judge of the household department.

古文：初，天雄节度使兼中书令范延光微时，有术士张生语之云： 必为将相。 
现代文：从前，天雄节度使兼中书令范延光微贱时，有个术士张生对他说： 您将来必定做将相。 
English: Once upon a time, when Fan Yanguang, Tianxiong's ceremonial envoy and the commander of the Chinese army, was in a lowly position, a sorcerer Zhang Sheng said to him: "In the future, you will surely be a general."

古文：延光既贵，信重之。
现代文：范延光贵显后，很信任器重他。
English: After Fan Yanguang's appearance, he was trusted and respected.

古文：延光尝梦蛇自脐入腹，以问张生，张生曰： 蛇者龙也，帝王之兆。 
现代文：范延光曾经梦见蛇从肚脐钻入腹中，便把这件事询问张生，张生说： 蛇就是龙，是当帝王的兆头。 
English: Fan Yanguang once dreamed that a snake had burrowed into his belly from his navel, so he asked Zhang Sheng about it. Zhang Sheng said, "A snake is a dragon, a sign of being an emperor."

古文：延光由是有非望之志。
现代文：范延光从此有了非份之想。
English: From then on, Fan Yanguang had a dream.

古文：唐潞王素与延光善，及赵德钧败，延光自辽州引兵还魏州，虽奉表请降，内不自安，以书潜结秘琼，欲与之为乱。琼受其书不报，延光恨之。
现代文：后唐潞王李从珂素来与范延光友善，等到赵德钧败亡后，范延光从辽州领兵返归魏州，虽然他向晋高祖上表请降，内心很不自安，他写信暗中勾结秘琼，想同他一起作乱；秘琼接信后不作回答，范延光很怨恨他。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, King Li of Kesul came to be friendly with Fan Yanguang. After the defeat of Zhao Dejun, Fan Yanguang returned to Weizhou from Liaozhou to lead the army. Although he asked his ancestors to surrender, he was very uneasy. He wrote a letter to secretly collude with Hijong and wanted to make trouble with him. Hijong did not answer after receiving the letter, and Fan Yanguang resented him very much.

古文：琼将之齐，过魏境，延光欲灭口，且利其货，遣兵邀之于夏津，杀之。
现代文：秘琼将要去齐州就任，经过魏州境内，范延光想灭口，并且贪爱他的财货，便派兵在夏津阻挡他，把他杀了。
English: Secret Joan was going to take office in Chizhou, passing through the territory of Weizhou. Fan Yanguang wanted to put an end to him and coveted his wealth, so he sent soldiers to stop him in Xiajin and killed him.

古文：丁卯，延光奏称夏津捕盗兵误杀琼；帝不问。
现代文：丁卯，范延光秦称夏津捕捉强盗，士兵误杀秘琼，后晋高祖不作究问。
English: Dingwu, Fan Yanguang Qin said that Xia Jin caught the robber, the soldiers killed He Qiong by mistake, and the post-promotion Gaozu did not investigate.

古文：戊寅，以李崧为中书侍郎、同平章事，充枢密使，桑维翰兼枢密使。
现代文：戊寅，高祖任用李崧为中书侍郎、同平章事，充枢密使，高祖任用桑维翰兼枢密使。
English: In Wu Yin, Gao Zu appointed Li Xi as the secretary of the Central Committee, Tong Ping Zhangji, as well as a privy councilor, and Gao Zu appointed San Wei Han and a privy councilor.

古文：时晋新得天下，籓镇多未服从；或虽服从，反仄不安。
现代文：当时，后晋新得天下，藩镇大多还没有服从；或者虽然服从，但是还反复不安定。
English: At that time, after the Jin Dynasty was newly established, most of the provinces and towns had not yet obeyed; or, although they obeyed, they were repeatedly unstable.

古文：兵火之馀，府库殚竭，民间困穷，而契丹征求无厌。
现代文：战争焚掠之余，官家府库中的金帛财物已经支用净尽，民间生活困难贫穷，而契丹又征调索求没完没了。
English: In addition to the war plunder, the gold and property in the treasury of the government has been exhausted, the people's life is difficult and poor, and the Qidan has endless solicitations.

古文：维翰劝帝推诚弃怨以抚籓镇，卑辞厚礼以奉契丹，训卒缮兵以修武备，务农桑以实仓廪，通商贾以丰货财。
现代文：桑维翰劝说晋高祖要诚心诚意、放弃前怨，来安抚各地藩镇；用谦卑的言词和丰厚的献礼，来结好于契丹；训练士卒、修缮兵器，来完善武备力量；勤务农桑生产，来充实仓储；通畅商贾贸易，来交流丰富财货。
English: Sang Weihang persuaded Jingao Zu to be sincere and give up past grievances to appease the local clans and towns; to use humble words and rich gifts to make good friends with Khitan; to train soldiers and repair weapons to improve the armed forces; to work in agricultural mulberry production to enrich warehousing; to promote smooth commerce and trade to exchange and enrich goods.

古文：数年之间，中国稍安。
现代文：几年之间，中国就会稍见安定。
English: In a few years, China will see some stability.

古文：吴太子琏纳齐王知诰女为妃。
现代文：吴国太子杨琏娶了齐王徐知诰的女儿做妃子。
English: The prince of the State of Wu, Yang Xuan, married the daughter of the King of Qi, Xu Zhixuan, as his concubine.

古文：知诰始建太庙、社稷，改金陵为江宁府，牙城曰宫城，厅堂曰殿；以左、右司马宋齐丘、徐玠为左、右丞相，马步判官周宗、内枢判官黟人周廷玉为内枢使。
现代文：徐知诰开始修建太庙、社稷祭坛、更改金陵为江宁府，牙城称作宫城，府中的厅堂称为殿；委任左、右司马宋齐丘和徐为左、右丞相，马步判官周宗、内枢判官黟县人周廷玉为内枢使。
English: Xu Zhisheng began to build a grand temple, a shrine and an altar, changed Jinling to Jiangning Prefecture, the capital was called Miyagi, and the hall in the capital was called the hall; appointed the left and right secretary Ma Song Qiqiu and Xu as the left and right chancellor, the magistrate Ma Bu Zong, and the inner judge Zhou Tingyu, a native of Handan County, as the inner envoy.

古文：自馀百官皆如吴朝之制。
现代文：其余百官，都和吴国的制度一样。
English: The remaining hundred officials are all the same as the system of the State of Wu.

古文：置骑兵八军，步兵九军。
现代文：置建骑兵八个军，步兵九个军。
English: Eight cavalry corps and nine infantry corps were built.

古文：二月，吴主以卢文进为宣武节度使，兼侍中。
现代文：二月，吴主杨溥任用卢文进为宣武节度使，兼任侍中。
English: In February, Lu Wenjin was appointed by the ruler of Wu, Yang Pi, as the envoy to the Xuanwu Festival, and also served as a chamberlain.

古文：戊子，吴主使宜阳王璪如西都，册命齐王；王受册，赦境内。册王妃曰王后。
现代文：戊子，吴主让宜阳王杨去西都金陵，册命齐王；齐王徐知诰接受册命，在辖境以内实行大赦，册立王妃称作王后。
English: Wuzi, the Lord of Wu ordered Yang, the King of Yiyang, to go to Jinling, the western capital, and was proclaimed the King of Qi; the King of Qi, Xu Zhisheng, accepted the order and implemented an amnesty within his jurisdiction, and the crown princess was called the queen.

古文：吴越王元瓘之弟顺化节度使、同平章事元珦获罪于元瓘，废为庶人。
现代文：吴越王钱元的弟弟顺化节度使、同平章事钱元得罪了钱元，被废黜为庶民。
English: Qianyuan, the younger brother of Wu Yue King, offended Qianyuan and was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：契丹主自上党归，过云州，大同节度使沙彦旬出迎，契丹主留之，不使还镇。
现代文：契丹主耶律德光从上党北上经过云州时，大同节度使沙彦出城迎接，契丹主把他留下，不让回镇所。
English: When the Khitan lord, Yerudoglu, was passing through Yunnan on his way north from Shangdang, the Datong festival made him leave the city to meet Sahin. The Khitan lord left him behind and would not let him return to the town.

古文：节度判官吴峦在城中，谓其众曰： 吾属礼义之俗，安可臣于夷狄乎！ 
现代文：节度判官吴峦在城中，对他的下属将士说： 我们属于有礼义之俗的国家，怎么可以做夷狄的臣民啊！ 
English: In the middle of the city, Wu Gan, the judge of the festival, said to his subordinate soldiers: "We belong to a country that has the customs of courtesy and righteousness. How can we be the subjects of the barbarians!"

古文：众推峦领州事，闭城不受契丹之命，契丹攻之，不克。
现代文：众人推举吴峦领导全州的事务，关上城门不接受契丹的命令，契丹兵攻城，攻不下来。
English: The people elected Wu Gan to lead the affairs of the whole state, closed the city gate and did not accept the order of the Khitan, the Khitan soldiers attacked the city and could not attack it.

古文：应州马军都指挥使金城郭崇威亦耻臣契丹，挺身南归。
现代文：应州马军都指挥使金城人郭崇威也耻于向契丹称臣，挺身南归。
English: Guo Chongwei from Jincheng, who commanded both the state and the horse army, was ashamed to call himself a subordinate to the Khitan and returned to the south.

古文：契丹主过新州，命威塞节度使翟璋敛犒军钱十万缗。
现代文：契丹主经过新州，命令威塞节度使翟璋收集犒劳军队的钱十万缗。
English: When the Khitan ruler passed through Xinzhou, he ordered the Wessai governor to collect 100,000 baht for the army.

古文：初，契丹主阿保机强盛，室韦、奚、皆役属焉，奚王去诸苦契丹贪虐，帅其众西徙妫州，依刘仁恭父子，号西奚。
现代文：以前，契丹主耶律德光的父亲契丹太祖耶律阿保机强盛，室韦、奚、都成为他的属地而为其役使。奚王去诸苦于契丹的贪求和虐待。带领他的属众向西迁徙到妫州，依附于刘仁恭父子，号称西奚。
English: In the past, the father of the Khitan lord, Yelu Deguang, the Khitan great-grandfather, Yelu Baoqi, was very powerful, and the provinces of Shwe and Nga became his territories to serve him. The king of Nga went to Zhu, where he suffered from the greed and abuse of the Khitan. He led his people to migrate westward to Nha Trang, where he attached himself to Liu Rengong and his son, known as Xi Nga.

古文：去诸卒，子扫刺立。
现代文：去诸死后，他的儿子扫剌继立。
English: After the death of Go Zhu, his son, Broom, succeeded him.

古文：唐庄宗灭刘守光，赐扫刺姓李名绍威。
现代文：后唐庄宗讨灭刘守光时，赐给扫剌姓李，名绍威。
English: Later, when Tangzhuangzong tried to exterminate Liu Shouguang, he gave the broom the surname Li and the name Shaowei.

古文：绍威娶契丹逐不鲁之姊。
现代文：李绍威娶了契丹逐不鲁的姐姐。
English: Li Shaowei married the elder sister of Khitan Emperor Qianlong.

古文：逐不鲁获罪于契丹，奔绍威，绍威纳之；契丹怒，攻之，不克。
现代文：逐不鲁得罪了契丹，投奔李绍威，李绍威接纳了他；契丹发怒，攻打他，没有攻下来。
English: Zhifu Lu offended Khitan and went to Li Shaowei, Li Shaowei accepted him; Khitan was angry and attacked him, but did not attack him.

古文：绍威卒，子拽剌立。
现代文：李绍威死后，子拽剌继立。
English: After the death of Li Shaowei, he was succeeded by his son, Tang Zhaotang.

古文：及契丹主德光自上党北还，拽剌迎降，时逐不鲁亦卒，契丹主曰： 汝诚无罪，扫剌、逐不鲁负我。 
现代文：等到契丹主耶律德光从上党北归时，拽剌迎接并投降于他，当时逐不鲁也死了，契丹主耶律德光说： 你实在是没有罪过的，扫剌、逐不鲁有负于我。 
English: When the lord of the Khitans, Yerudoglu, returned from the upper party to the north, he tugged the broom to meet and surrender to him. At that time, Chifuru also died. The lord of the Khitans, Yerudoglu, said: You really have not sinned. The broom and Chifuru have failed me.

古文：皆命发其骨，硙而扬之。
现代文：便令人把二人的尸骨挖掘出来，磨碎后加以散扬。
English: The two men's bones were then exhumed, ground up and scattered.

古文：诸奚畏契丹之虐，多逃叛。
现代文：各处奚人畏惧契丹的暴虐，很多都叛离逃走。
English: People everywhere are afraid of the tyranny of the Khitan, and many have defected and fled.

古文：契丹主劳翟璋曰： 当为汝除代，令汝南归。 
现代文：契丹主慰劳翟璋说： 我一定找人替代你的职务，让你回到南朝。 
English: The Khitan lord comforted Laoju and said: I will definitely find someone to replace your position and let you return to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：己亥，璋表乞征诣阙。
现代文：己亥，翟璋上表后晋朝廷，请求召他回朝。
English: Ji Hai went to the imperial court and requested to be called back to the imperial court.

古文：既而契丹遣璋将兵讨叛奚、攻云州，有功，留不遣璋，璋郁郁而卒。
现代文：没有多久，契丹派遣翟璋领兵去讨伐叛变的奚人，进攻云州，有功劳，便把他留下，不让他回去，最后翟璋郁郁而死。
English: Not long after, the Khitan sent the leader of the Xiongnu army to fight against the rebellious Xiongnu people and attack Yunnan. He did a great job, so they left him behind and did not allow him to return. In the end, Xiongnu died of depression.

古文：张厉自契丹逃归，为追骑所获，契丹主责之曰： 何故舍我去？ 
现代文：翰林学士张砺从契丹逃归南方，被追赶的契丹骑兵抓获，契丹主责备他说： 你为什么离我而去？ 
English: Zhang Ye, a scholar of Hanlin, fled from Khitan to the south and was caught by the pursuing Khitan cavalry. The Khitan lord reproached him, saying: "Why did you leave me?

古文：对曰： 臣华人，饮食衣服皆不与此同，生不如死，愿早就戮。 
现代文：张砺回答说： 我是中原人，饮食、衣服都同此地不一样，活着还不如死了，我愿意您早日把我杀了。 
English: Zhang Ye replied, "I am from the Central Plains. My diet and clothes are different from those here. I would rather die than live. I wish you would kill me as soon as possible."

古文：契丹主顾通事高彦英曰： 吾常戒汝善遇此人，何故使之失所而亡去？
现代文：契丹主对着翻译高彦英说： 我常常告诫你要优厚地对待这个人，你为什么让他流离失所而逃走？
English: The Khitan lord said to the interpreter, Takahiko In: I have often warned you to treat this man kindly, why did you let him be displaced and flee?

古文：若失之，安可复得邪！ 
现代文：如果失去他，还能到哪里去获得这样的人！ 
English: If you lose him, where else can you get someone like that!

古文：笞彦英而谢厉。
现代文：便笞打高彦英而向张砺道歉。
English: He then beat up Takahiko Ying and apologized to Zhang Ye.

古文：厉事契丹主甚忠直，遇事辄言，无所隐避，契丹主甚重之。
现代文：张砺侍奉契丹主很是忠心和直率，遇到问题往往进言，没有什么隐藏和躲避的，契丹主很器重他。
English: Zhang Ye served the Khitan lord very loyally and straightforwardly. When he encountered problems, he often spoke up. There was nothing to hide or evade. The Khitan lord held him in high regard.

古文：初，吴越王镠少子元术数有军功，镠赐之兵仗。
现代文：以前，吴越王钱的小儿子钱元，多次建立军功，钱赐给他护从用的兵仗。
English: In the past, Qian Yuan, the youngest son of King Qian of Wu Yue, repeatedly achieved military exploits, and Qian Yuan was given to him to protect and serve in the war.

古文：及吴越王元瓘立，元珪为土客马步军都指挥使、静江节度使，兼中书令，恃恩骄横，增置兵仗至数千，国人多附之。
现代文：等到吴越王钱元继立后，钱元被任命为土客马步军都指挥使兼中书令。他依恃恩宠而骄傲蛮横，增设兵仗达数千人，国中的人常常依附他。
English: After Qian Yuan, the king of Wuyue, succeeded to the throne, Qian Yuan was appointed as the commander of the horse cavalry and the commander of the horse cavalry. He was proud and arrogant, relying on his grace, and added thousands of soldiers. People in the country often depended on him.

古文：元瓘忌之，使人讽元珪请输兵仗，出判温州，元珪不从。
现代文：钱元猜忌他，让人去劝钱元自己请求捐献兵仗，出朝去判理温州，钱元不干。
English: Qianyuan suspected him, let people go to persuade Qianyuan to request a military donation, go to court to judge Wenzhou, Qianyuan did not do it.

古文：铜官庙吏告元瓘遣亲信祷神，求主吴越江山；又为蜡丸从水窦出入，与兄元珦谋议。
现代文：铜官庙的司管官员告发钱元派亲信去向神祈祷，求神让他做吴越江山的君主；又告发他制作蜡丸从水洞流进流出，与他哥哥钱元密谋策划。
English: The officials in charge of the Tongguan Temple reported that Qian Yuan had sent his close confidants to pray to God, asking God to make him the monarch of Wu Yue Jiangshan. They also reported that he had made wax balls to flow in and out of the water cave, and conspired with his brother Qian Yuan.

古文：三月，戊午，元瓘遣使者召元术宴宫中，既至，左右称元珪有刃坠于怀袖，即格杀之；并杀元珦。
现代文：三月，戊午，钱元派使者召唤钱元到宫中赴宴，到达后，宫中左右的人声称钱元身上有刀坠挂在怀袖里边，就把他捉拿杀了；同时杀了钱元。
English: In March, at noon, Qianyuan sent an envoy to summon Qianyuan to the palace for a banquet. After arriving, people around the palace claimed that Qianyuan had a sword hanging inside his sleeve, so they caught and killed him; they also killed Qianyuan.

古文：元瓘欲按诸将吏与元珦、元珪交通者，其子仁俊谏曰： 昔光武克王郎，曹公破袁绍，皆焚其书疏以安反侧，今宜效之。 
现代文：钱元还要查究将吏中与钱元、钱元有交往沟通的人。他的儿子钱仁俊劝谏他说： 昔日东汉光武帝打败王莽，三国时曹操破了袁绍，都把他们的往来书信烧了，用以平息出现反叛和倾覆，现在，我们也应该效法他们。 
English: Qian Yuan also wanted to investigate the people among the generals who had contacts with Qian Yuan and Qian Yuan. His son Qian Renjun advised him to say: In the past, Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty defeated Wang Mang, Cao Cao defeated Yuan Shao during the Three Kingdoms, and they all burned their correspondence to quell the rebellion and overthrow. Now, we should also follow their example.

古文：元瓘从之。
现代文：钱元听从了这个意见。
English: Qianyuan heeded this advice.

古文：或得唐潞王膂及髀骨献之，庚申，诏以王礼葬于徽陵南。
现代文：有人得到后唐潞王李从珂自焚后的脊骨和髋骨，拿来进献，庚申，后晋高祖下诏，用王礼葬于徽陵之南。
English: Some people obtained the post-Tang Dynasty King Li Congke's spine and tibia after he self-immolated, and brought them as a gift. Goshun, the post-Jin Gao's ancestor, buried them in the south of Hui Mausoleum with royal honors.

古文：帝遣使诣蜀告即位，且叙姻好；蜀主复书，用敌国礼。
现代文：后晋高祖遣派使者到蜀国去通告自己即位的事，并且叙述姻亲之好；蜀后主孟昶用对待平等国家的礼节回了信。
English: After ascending the throne, Emperor Gaozong sent an envoy to Shu to announce his accession to the throne and to describe the kindness of his in-laws; the Queen of Shu, Meng Yao, replied to the letter with the courtesy of treating the country as an equal.

古文：范延光聚卒缮兵，悉召巡内刺史集魏州，将作乱。
现代文：范延光聚集兵马、修理兵器，把他管辖下的刺史全部召集到魏州，将要作乱造反。
English: Fan Yanguang gathered soldiers and horses, repaired weapons, and gathered all the cadres under his jurisdiction to Weizhou, intending to rebel.

古文：会帝谋徙都大梁，桑维翰曰： 大梁北控燕、赵，南通江、淮，水陆都会，资用富饶。
现代文：适逢后晋高祖打算迁都到大梁，桑维翰说： 大梁北控燕、赵，南通江、淮，是水陆两路都会，物资和财用都很富饶。
English: When it came time for Jinguo Zu to move the capital to Daliang, Sang Weihan said, "Daliang is the capital of both land and water, and is rich in materials and resources.

古文：今延光反形已露，大梁距魏不过十驿，彼若有变，大军寻至，所谓疾雷不及掩耳也。 
现代文：现在范延光的谋反迹象已经显露出来，大梁距离魏州不过十个驿站那么远，他那边如果发生变故，大军很快就可过来，真是像俗话所说的 迅雷不及掩耳 一样啊！ 
English: Now, the signs of Fan Yanqing's plotting have been revealed. The Great Beam is only ten stations away from Weizhou. If there is a change of fortune on his side, the army can quickly come over. It really is like the proverbial thunderbolt!

古文：丙寅，下诏，托以洛阳漕运有阙，东巡汴州。
现代文：丙寅，下诏，托言洛阳漕运不足，东巡汴州。
English: Cui Yin issued the following edict, saying that Luoyang's rowing transport was insufficient, and the eastward cruise was the best.

古文：吴徐知诰立子景通为王太子，固辞不受。
现代文：吴国齐王徐知诰册立他的儿子徐景通为王太子；徐景通坚决辞谢不接受。
English: Xu Zhisheng, the king of Wu and Qi, appointed his son Xu Jingtong as the crown prince; Xu Jingtong resolutely refused to accept the appointment.

古文：追尊考忠武王温曰太祖武王，妣明德太妃李氏曰王太后。
现代文：徐知诰又追尊他的父亲忠武王徐温为太祖武王，他的母亲明德太妃李氏为王太后。
English: Xu Zhisheng also revered his father, Zhongwu Wang Xu Wen, as the great-grandfather of King Wu, and his mother, Mingde Taifei Li, as the empress dowager.

古文：壬申，更名诰。
现代文：壬申，更改自己的名字为诰。
English: Jinshin, change your name to Zou.

古文：庚辰，帝发洛阳，留前朔方节度使张从宾为东都巡检使。
现代文：庚辰，后晋高祖从洛阳出发东巡，留下前朔方节度使张从宾为东都巡检使。
English: Geng Chen, the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, set out from Luoyang on an eastern inspection tour, leaving Zhang Congbin, the former governor of Shuangfang, as the inspector of the eastern capital.

古文：汉主以疾愈，大赦。
现代文：南汉主刘龚因为生病痊愈，实行大赦。
English: South Han ruler Liu Bei was granted amnesty after he recovered from illness.

古文：交州将皎公羡杀安南节度使杨廷艺而代之。
现代文：交州将领皎公羡杀安南节度使杨廷艺并取而代之。
English: The general of Jiaozhou, Zeng Gong, envied the killing of Annan Jiedu and brought Yang Tingyi to replace him.

古文：夏，四月，丙戌，帝至汴州；丁亥，大赦。
现代文：夏季四月，丙戌，后晋高祖到达汴州；丁亥，实行大赦。
English: In the summer of April, Puyi, the late Jingu Gaozu, arrived in Ganzhou; Dinghai, the implementation of amnesty.

古文：吴越王元瓘复建国，如同光故事。
现代文：吴越王钱元恢复建国，如同后唐庄宗同光时期一样。
English: King Qianyuan of Wuyue restored the founding of the country, just like the post-Tangzhuang Zongdongguang period.

古文：丙申，赦境内，立其子弘僔为世子。
现代文：丙申，在辖境以内实行大赦，册立他的儿子钱弘为世子。
English: He declared an amnesty in the territory under his jurisdiction and named his son Qian Hong as his heir.

古文：以曹仲达、沈崧、皮光业为丞相，镇海节度判官林鼎掌教令。
现代文：任用曹仲达、沈崧、皮光业为丞相，镇海节度判官林鼎掌管教令。
English: He appointed Cao Zhongda, Shen Qi, and Pi Guangye as chancellors, and the judge of the Zhenhai Festival, Lin Ding, was in charge of the disciplinary order.

古文：丁酉，加宣武节度使杨光远兼侍中。
现代文：丁酉，后晋朝廷加封宣武节度使杨光远兼任侍中。
English: Ding Xi, after the Jin Dynasty, the court and the proclamation of martial law made Yang Guangyuan concurrently serve as a chamberlain.

古文：闽主作紫微宫，饰以水晶，土木之盛倍于宝皇宫。
现代文：闽主王修建紫微宫，用水晶做装饰，土木工程的盛大，加倍于宝皇宫。
English: The lord king built a purple micro palace, decorated with crystal, and the grandeur of civil engineering doubled that of the treasure palace.

古文：又遣使散诣诸州，伺人隐慝。
现代文：又派出使者分散到所辖各州，暗中侦查人们所隐匿的事情。
English: And he sent messengers throughout all his provinces, to spy out what was hidden from the people.

古文：五月，吴徐诰用宋齐丘策，欲结契丹以取中国，遣使以美女、珍玩泛海修好，契丹主亦遣使报之。
现代文：五月，吴国齐王徐诰采用宋齐丘的计谋，想要勾结契丹来取得对中原的统治，遣派使者用美女、珍玩宝货从海上送去以修好，契丹主耶律德光也遣派使者回报他。
English: In May, King Xu Xi of the State of Qi of the State of Wu used the strategy of Song Qiqiu to collude with the Khitan to gain control of the Central Plains. He sent an envoy with beautiful women and precious goods from the sea to make amends. The lord of the Khitan, Yelu Deguang, also sent an envoy to repay him.

古文：丙辰，敕权署汴州牙城曰大宁宫。
现代文：丙辰，后晋高祖下敕令：暂时把汴州的牙城署名为大宁宫。
English: Hsin-Chen, the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, issued an imperial edict: the capital of Ganzhou was temporarily named Daining Palace.

古文：壬申，进范延光爵临清郡王，以安其意。
现代文：壬申，后晋朝廷进爵范延光为临清郡王，用来安抚他的心意。
English: In Jinshin, Fan Yanguang, who became a peer in the court of the Later Jin Dynasty, was the king of Linqing County, which was used to appease his mind.

古文：追尊四代考妣为帝后。
现代文：后晋高祖追尊四代父母为皇帝和皇后。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gaozong, four generations of his parents were crowned emperor and empress.

古文：己卯，诏太社所藏唐室罪人首听亲旧收葬。
现代文：己卯，下诏，太庙所藏唐室罪人的首级听由其亲属故旧加以收葬。
English: According to the edict, the heads of the criminals of the Tang Dynasty, which were kept in the Great Temple, were to be buried by their relatives.

古文：初，武卫上将军娄继英尝事梁均王，为内诸司使，至是，请其首而葬之。
现代文：当初，武卫上将军娄继英曾经臣事后梁均王朱友，任内诸司使，到这时，请求收殓均王的首级以便埋葬。
English: At that time, Wuwei Shangzheng Zou Ji Ying, who had been Liang Jun Wang's vassal and later Zhu You's subordinate, requested to receive the head of Liang Jun Wang so that he could be buried.

古文：六月，吴诸道副都统徐景迁卒。
现代文：六月，吴国诸道副都统徐景迁去世。
English: In June, Xu Jingqian, the vice-governor of all the provinces of Wu, passed away.

古文：范延光素以军府之政委元随左都押牙孙锐，锐恃恩专横，符奏有不如意者，对延光手裂之。
现代文：范延光向来把军府的政事委任给元随左都押牙孙锐办理，孙锐依恃恩宠而独断专横，符文奏章有不如意的当着范延光的面便把它撕碎了。
English: Fan Yanguang had always delegated the political affairs of the military government to Sun Rui, the former governor of Zuoying, to handle. Sun Rui relied on the favor of Fan Yanguang and was arbitrary. If the rune music was not satisfactory, he tore it up in front of Fan Yanguang.

古文：会延光病经旬，锐密召澶州刺史冯晖，与之合谋逼延光反；延光亦思张生之言，遂从之。
现代文：适逢范延光患病已十多天，孙锐暗中召唤澶州刺史冯晖，同他合谋逼迫范延光造反；范延光也思念术士张生的话，便依从了他们。
English: When Fan Yanguang had been ill for more than ten days, Sun Rui secretly summoned Zhang Zhou's aide Feng Jun and conspired with him to force Fan Yanguang to rebel. Fan Yanguang also thought about the words of the sorcerer Zhang Sheng and obeyed them.

古文：甲午，六宅使张言奉使魏州还，言延光反状；义成节度使符彦饶奏延光遣兵渡河，焚草市；诏侍卫马军都指挥使、昭信节度使白奉进将千五百骑屯白马津以备之。
现代文：甲午，六宅使张言奉晋高祖之命出使魏州回朝，奏言范延光造反的情况；义成节度使符彦饶奏报范延光派兵渡过黄河，焚烧了以草屋为居的滑州城外市里；下诏命令侍卫马军都指挥使、昭信节度使白奉进率领一千五百骑兵屯驻白马津，用来加强防备。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Liutaku sent Zhang Zhen to return Wei Prefecture to the North with the order of Jin Gao Zu to report the situation of Fan Yan Guang's rebellion; Yicheng Jietu sent Fu Yan Rao to report that Fan Yan Guang had sent troops across the Yellow River and burned the cities outside the city of Slate where people lived in grass huts; Liutaku ordered the commander of the Horse Guards and the Horse Army to command the troops, and Zhaoxin Jietu sent Bai Fongjin to lead 1,500 cavalry to stay in Baima Jin to strengthen the defense.

古文：奉进，云州人也。
现代文：白奉进是云州人。
English: Bai Fengjin is from Yunnan.

古文：丁酉，以东都巡检使张从宾为魏府西南面都部署。
现代文：丁酉，任命东都巡检使张从宾为魏府西南面都部署。
English: Ding Rong appointed Zhang Congbin as the inspector of Dongdu and deployed him to the southwest of Weifu.

古文：戊戌，遣侍卫都军使杨光远将步骑一万屯滑州。
现代文：戊戌，遣派侍卫都军使杨光远统领步兵、骑兵一万人屯驻滑州。
English: In response, Yang Guangyuan, the commander of the imperial guard, was dispatched to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry to settle in Leshou.

古文：己亥，遣护圣都指挥使杜重威将兵屯卫州。
现代文：己亥，遣派护圣都指挥使杜重威统兵屯驻卫州。
English: Ji Hai sent Du Chongwei, commander of the Sacred Defense Force, to garrison the troops in Weizhou.

古文：重威，朔州人也，尚帝妹乐平长公主。
现代文：杜重威是朔州人，娶的妻子是晋高祖的妹妹乐平长公主。
English: Du Chongwei is a native of Shuozhou. He married the eldest princess Leping, the younger sister of Emperor Gaozu.

古文：范延光以冯晖为都部署，孙锐为兵马都监，将步骑二万循河西抵黎阳口。
现代文：范延光任用冯晖为都部署，孙锐为兵马都监，统领步兵、骑兵二万人，沿着黄河西岸到达黎阳口。
English: Fan Yanguang appointed Feng Qian to be deployed for the capital, and Sun Rui was the commander of the army and cavalry, leading 20,000 infantry and cavalry along the west bank of the Yellow River to Liangkou.

古文：辛丑，杨光远奏引兵逾胡梁渡。
现代文：辛丑，杨光远奏报：率兵过了胡梁渡。
English: Xin ugly, Yang Guang far away report: led the troops across the Hu Liangdu.

古文：以翰林学士、礼部侍郎和凝为端明殿学士。
现代文：后晋高祖任用翰林学士、礼部侍郎和凝为端明殿学士。
English: Later, the founder of the school appointed Hanlin as a bachelor, Reibu as a waiter, and Tsune as a danmyo-den bachelor.

古文：凝署其门，不通宾客。
现代文：和凝在他家的大门上贴出通告，不迎接宾客。
English: He posted a notice on the gate of his house not to welcome guests.

古文：前耀州团练推官襄邑张谊致书于凝，以为 切近之职为天子耳目，宜知四方利病，奈何拒绝宾客！
现代文：前耀州团练推官襄邑人张谊给和凝写信，认为 切近朝廷的职位是天子的耳目，应该知道四方的利和弊，怎么能拒绝宾客！
English: Former Yaozhou regimental drill officer Xiangyue Zhang Rui wrote a letter to He Jing, saying that the position close to the imperial court was the eyes and ears of the Son of Heaven, and he should know the advantages and disadvantages of the four sides. How could he refuse a guest!

古文：虽安身为便，如负国何！ 
现代文：虽然对自己不受干扰是方便了，但亏负了国家的付托可怎么好！ 
English: Although it is convenient for them not to be disturbed, it is not good to lose the trust of the state!

古文：凝奇之，荐于桑维翰，未几，除左拾遗。
现代文：和凝很惊奇，把他推荐给桑维翰，没多久，被任用为左拾遗。
English: To his surprise, He Jing recommended him to Sun Weihan, and he was soon appointed as the left relic collector.

古文：谊上言： 北狄有援立之功，宜外敦信好，内谨边备，不可自逸，以启戎心。 
现代文：张谊上书说： 北狄契丹有援助立朝的功劳，应该表面上与他敦信修好，内部要认真加强边境上的戒备，不能自己放松警惕，因而开启他的兴兵侵犯之心。 
English: Zhang Yi said in the letter: North Dikitan has the merit of assisting the founding of the DPRK, and it is necessary to establish a good relationship with him on the surface. Internally, it is necessary to seriously strengthen the vigilance on the border, and it is impossible to relax the vigilance, thus opening his heart of invading troops.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：后晋高祖感到讲得很正确。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：契丹攻云州，半岁不能下。
现代文：契丹进攻云州，半年也攻不下来。
English: The Khitan attacked Yunnan, but could not conquer it for half a year.

古文：吴峦遣使间道奉表求救，帝为之致书契丹主请之，契丹主乃命翟璋解围去。
现代文：守将吴峦派人从便道紧急奉表朝廷求救，后晋高祖为他给契丹主写信提出请求，契丹主便下令翟璋解围而去。
English: The governor sent a person from Bindao to urgently appeal to the imperial court for help. Later, Emperor Gaozong sent a letter to the Khitan lord to make a request for him. The Khitan lord then ordered to lift the siege and leave.

古文：帝召峦归，以为武宁节度副使。
现代文：后晋高祖把吴峦召唤回来，任用他为武宁节度副使。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu summoned Wu Xi back and appointed him as the deputy envoy of the Wu Ning Festival.

古文：丁未，以侍卫使光远为魏府四面都部署，张从宾为副部署兼诸军都虞侯，昭义节度使高行周将本军屯相州，为魏府西面都部署。
现代文：丁未，后晋高祖任命侍卫使杨光远为魏府四面都部署，张从宾为副部署兼诸军都虞侯，昭义节度使高行周统领本军屯驻相州，为魏府西面都部署。
English: After the death of Ding Wei, Emperor Gao Zu appointed Yang Guangyuan as his bodyguard and deployed him on all four sides of Wei Prefecture, Zhang Congbin as his deputy and the military governor, and Zhao Yi Jiedu as Gao Xing Zhou's commander and stationed him in Xiangzhou and deployed him on the west side of Wei Prefecture.

古文：军士郭威旧隶刘知远，当从杨光远北征，白知远乞留。
现代文：军士郭威原来隶属于刘知远，应当随从杨光远北征，他向刘知远说明要求留下。
English: Sergeant Guo Wei was originally subordinate to Liu Zhiyuan and was supposed to accompany Yang Guang on the Northern Expedition. He explained to Liu Zhiyuan that he wanted to stay.

古文：人问其故，威曰： 杨公有奸诈之才，无英雄之气，得我何用？
现代文：人们问他为什么，郭威说： 杨公有奸诈之才，无英雄之气，得到我有什么用处？
English: People asked him why, Guo Wei said: Yang Gong has the talent of treachery, no heroism, what is the use of getting me?

古文：能用我者其刘公乎！ 
现代文：能用我的大概就是刘公啊！ 
English: The one who can use mine is probably Liu Gong!

古文：诏张从宾发河南兵数千人击范延光。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏，命令张从宾派数千河南兵出击范延光。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu issued an edict, ordering Zhang to send thousands of soldiers from Henan Province to attack Fan Yanguang.

古文：延光使人诱从宾，从宾遂与之同反，杀皇子河阳节度使重信，使上将军张继祚知河阳留后。继祚，全义之子也。
现代文：范延光让人去诱劝张从宾，张从宾便同范延光一起造反，杀了任河阳节度使的皇子石重信，让上将军张继祚主持河阳留后的事务，张继祚是张全义的儿子。
English: Fan Yanguang sent someone to entice Zhang Congbin, and Zhang Congbin rebelled together with Fan Yanguang, killed the prince Shi Chongxin, who was appointed as the envoy of the Heyang Festival, and let the general Zhang Jixuan, the son of Zhang Quanyi, preside over the affairs of Heyang.

古文：从宾又引兵入洛阳，杀皇子权东都留守重乂，以东都副留守、都巡检使张延播知河南府事。
现代文：张从宾又率领兵马进入洛阳，杀了暂时代理东都留守的皇子石重又，任用东都副留守、都巡检使张延播主持河南府事务，跟随军队行动。
English: Zhang Congbin also led the soldiers and horses into Luoyang, killed the prince Shi Shigemata, who temporarily stayed behind in Dongdu, and appointed Zhang Yanbai, deputy governor of Dongdu and inspector of the capital, to preside over the affairs of Henan Province and follow the army.

古文：从宾取内库钱帛以赏部兵，留守判官李遐不与，兵众杀之。
现代文：又调取内库的钱帛用来犒赏部兵；留守判官李遐不给，兵众把他杀了。
English: He also took money from the treasury and used it to reward the soldiers; the soldiers killed the remaining judge, Li Xi, because he would not give it to them.

古文：从宾引兵东扼汜水关，将逼汴州。
现代文：张从宾带兵扼守汜水关，将要逼近汴州。
English: Zhang Congbin led his soldiers to guard the Danshui Pass, and they were about to approach Zhangzhou.

古文：诏奉国都指挥使侯益帅益兵五千会杜重威讨张从宾；又诏宣徽使刘处让自黎阳分兵讨之。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏奉国都指挥使侯益率领五千禁兵会合杜重威去征讨张从宾；又诏宣徽使刘处让从黎阳分兵讨伐他。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong ordered Houyi to lead the five thousand forbidden soldiers meeting Du Chongwei to recruit Zhang Congbin under the command of Feng Guodu; he also ordered Liu Xuanhu to send a detachment of soldiers from Liyang to fight him.

古文：时羽檄纵横，从官在大梁者无不恟惧，独桑维翰从容指画军事，神色自若，接对宾客，不改常度，众心差安。
现代文：当时，军书往来纷繁，随从晋高祖在大梁的官员没有不烦扰惊恐的，只有桑维翰从容指挥军事，神色自若，接待应对宾客不改正常规范，众人见了心里略觉平静。
English: At that time, there was a lot of military correspondence, and there were no officials who followed Jinguo Zu in Daliang who were not disturbed and frightened. Only Sang Weihan calmly commanded the military, looked confident, and the reception did not change the normal norms for guests. Everyone felt a little calm.

古文：方士言于闽主，云有白龙夜见螺峰；闽主作白龙寺。
现代文：有方士对闽主王言称，有条白龙夜间出现在螺峰，闽主便兴建了白龙寺。
English: A fortune-teller told the chief priest Wang Yan that a white dragon appeared at night on the peak of the mountain, and the chief priest built the White Dragon Temple.

古文：时百役繁兴，用度不足，闽主谓吏部侍郎、判三司候官蔡守蒙曰： 闻有司除官皆受赂，有诸？ 
现代文：当时，各种劳役接连不断，资金用度很不充足，闽主对吏部侍郎、判三司侯官人蔡守蒙说： 听说有关部门委任官员都接受贿赂，有这样的事吗？ 
English: At that time, all kinds of forced laborers were in succession, and the use of funds was very insufficient. The tyrant said to Cai Shumeng, the attendant of the personnel department and the judge of the three magistrates: I heard that the officials appointed by the relevant departments all accepted bribes. Is there such a thing?

古文：对曰： 浮言无足信也。 
现代文：回答说： 流言蜚语不足为信。 
English: He replied: "Gossip is not enough to be believed.

古文：闽主曰： 朕知之久矣，今以委卿，择贤而授，不肖及罔冒者勿拒，第令纳赂，籍而献之。 
现代文：闽主说： 朕知道此事已经很久了，现在把授官任职的事情，委托给你办理，要选择授给贤能的人，不称职和假冒顶替的人也不要拒绝，只是让他们纳贿，立籍造册而加以举荐。 
English: The Lord said, "I have known about this for a long time, and now I am entrusting you with the matter of appointing officials. You should choose to appoint those who are capable, and do not reject those who are incompetent and fake replacements. Just let them take bribes, make a register, and recommend them.

古文：守蒙素廉，以为不可；闽主怒，守蒙惧而从之。
现代文：蔡守蒙素称廉洁，认为不能这样办；闽主发怒，蔡守蒙害怕，便依从了。
English: Cai Shumeng had always claimed to be incorruptible and believed that this could not be done; the tyrant was angry and Cai Shumeng was afraid, so he complied.

古文：自是除官但以货多寡为差。
现代文：从此任用官员就凭纳钱多少来分差等。
English: Since then, officials have been appointed on the basis of how much money they can get to make up the difference.

古文：闽主又以空名堂牒使医工陈究卖官于外，专务聚敛，无有盈厌。
现代文：闽主又让医工陈究用空白不填名姓的委任牒文在外面卖官，专门从事搜刮民财，没有满足，贪得无厌。
English: The boss also had the medical worker, Chen Kuo, use a blank letter of appointment without filling in his name and surname to sell officials outside, specializing in the search for people's money. He was not satisfied and became insatiably greedy.

古文：又诏民有隐年者杖背，隐口者死，逃亡者族。
现代文：又下诏民间如有隐瞒年龄者用刑杖笞背，隐瞒人口者处死，逃亡者诛杀全族。
English: He also ordered the people to beat the backs of those who concealed their age with a cane. Those who concealed their age were to be put to death, and those who fled were to be killed.

古文：果菜鸡豚，皆重征之。
现代文：果、菜、鸡、猪，都征收重税。
English: Fruit, vegetables, chickens and pigs are all subject to heavy taxes.

古文：秋，七月，张从宾攻汜水，杀巡检使宋廷浩。
现代文：秋季七月，张从宾攻打汜水，杀巡检使宋廷浩。
English: In the autumn of July, Zhang Congbin attacked Surabaya and killed the inspector Song Tinghao.

古文：帝戎服，严轻骑，将奔晋阳以避之。
现代文：后晋高祖穿着军装，整备轻骑，准备奔向晋阳避躲。
English: After promotion, Gaozu wore a military uniform, prepared to ride lightly, and prepared to run to Jinyang to hide.

古文：桑维翰叩头苦谏曰： 贼锋虽盛，势不能久，请少待之，不可轻动。 
现代文：桑维翰叩头苦苦谏阻说： 贼兵的锋芒虽然强盛，其势不能持久，请少等待一下，不可轻率动移。 
English: Sanveehan's acolytes bitterly protested: "Though the robber's sharp edge is strong, its power cannot last. Please wait a little longer, and do not move rashly.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：后晋高祖这才留止未动。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：范延光遣使以蜡丸招诱失职者，右武卫上将军娄继英、右卫大将军尹晖在大梁，温韬之子延浚、延沼、延衮居许州，皆应之。
现代文：范延光派遣使者用蜡丸密书招诱失职的人，右武卫上将军娄继英、右卫大将军尹晖在大梁，温韬的儿子温延浚、延沼、延兖居留在许州，都响应范延光而造反。
English: Fan Yanguang sent an envoy with a wax ball secret letter to lure those who had failed in their duties. General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Zou Jiying, and General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Yin Qi, were in Daliang, and the sons of Wen Qi, Wen Yanjun, Yan Numa, and Yan Jiu, stayed in Huzhou. They all rebelled in response to Fan Yanguang.

古文：延光令延浚兄弟取许州，聚徒已及千人。
现代文：范延光命令温延浚兄弟夺取许州，聚集徒众已达千人。
English: Fan Yanguang ordered Wen Yanjun's brothers to seize Huzhou, gathering a crowd of up to a thousand people.

古文：继英、晖事泄，皆出走，壬子，敕以延光奸谋，诬污忠良，自今获延光谍人，赏获者，杀谍人，禁蜡书，勿以闻。
现代文：娄继英、尹晖因为事情泄露，都逃走了。壬子，晋高祖下敕书，认为范延光施用奸谋，诬陷玷污忠良，从今以后，抓获范延光的间谍，奖赏抓获的人，杀死间谍，焚烧蜡书，不必上报。
English: Zou Jiying and Yin Qi both fled because of the leaking of the matter. Ren Zi, the ancestor of Jingu Gao, thought that Fan Yanguang had used treachery and slandered the faithful. From now on, the captured spies of Fan Yanguang would be rewarded, the spies would be killed, and the wax books would be burned, and there would be no need to report it.

古文：晖将奔吴，为人所杀。
现代文：尹晖将要投奔吴国，被人所杀。
English: Yin Xuan was about to flee to the State of Wu and was killed.

古文：继英奔许州，依温氏。
现代文：娄继英投奔许州，依附了温氏兄弟。
English: He followed Ying Ying into Huzhou and became attached to the Wen brothers.

古文：忠武节度使苌从简盛为之备，延浚等不得发，欲杀继英以自明，延沼止之，遂同奔张从宾。
现代文：忠武节度使苌从简以重兵防备他们，温延浚等不敢发作，想杀了娄继英以表白自己，温延沼阻止了他，便一同投奔了张从宾。
English: Zhongwu Jiedu ordered Zhang Zongbin to prepare for them with heavy troops, but Wen Yanjun did not dare to attack. He wanted to kill Zhang Jieying to prove himself, but Wen Yanuma stopped him, and they both rushed to Zhang Zongbin.

古文：继英知其谋，劝从宾执三温，皆斩之。
现代文：娄继英知道了他们的阴谋，劝张从宾捉获温家三兄弟，都把他们杀了。
English: Zhai Jieying learned of their plot and persuaded Zhang Congbin to capture the three brothers of the Wen family and kill them all.

古文：白奉进在滑州，军士有夜掠者，捕之，获五人；其三隶奉进，其二隶符彦饶，奉进皆斩之；彦饶以其不先白己，甚怒。
现代文：白奉进在滑州，有军士在夜间进行抢掠的，便捕捉他们，抓获了五个人，其中三个是白奉进的下属，两个是符彦饶的下属，白奉进把他们都杀了；符彦饶因为他没有先告诉自己，非常恼怒。
English: When Bai Fengjin caught some soldiers looting at night in Leshou, he caught them and captured five people, three of whom were Bai Fengjin's subordinates and two of whom were Fuhiko Rao's subordinates. Bai Fengjin killed them all; Fuhiko Rao was very angry because he didn't tell him first.

古文：明日，奉进从数骑诣彦饶谢，彦饶曰： 军中各有部分，奈何取滑州军士并斩之，殊无客主之义乎！ 
现代文：第二天，白奉进带着几个随从骑兵来拜见符彦饶表示道歉。符彦饶说： 军中各有分属，为什么抓了滑州的军士一起杀了，连一点主人和客人的名份都不顾了！ 
English: The next day, Paik Bongjin came to visit Fuhiko Rao with several of his cavalrymen to apologize. Fuhiko Rao said, "Each army has its own branch. Why did you capture and kill the sergeant from Nago together? You didn't even care about the names of the host and the guests!"

古文：奉进曰： 军士犯法，何有彼我！
现代文：白奉进说： 军士犯了法，怎能分你和我！
English: Bai Fengjin said, "The sergeant broke the law, how can he divide you and me!"

古文：仆已引咎谢公，而公怒不解，岂非欲与延光同反邪！ 
现代文：我已经承担责任来向您道歉，而您还是发怒不止，这岂不成了想与范延光共同造反吗！ 
English: I have already taken the responsibility to apologize to you, but you are still angry. Isn't this trying to rebel with Fan Yanguang?

古文：拂衣而起，彦饶不留；帐下甲士大噪，擒奉进，杀之。
现代文：一甩袖子起身要走，符彦饶不挽留；帐下甲兵大为喧闹，捉住白奉进，把他杀了。
English: As soon as he threw off his sleeve and got up to leave, Fu Yanrao could not hold back; the armored soldiers under his charge were very noisy, they caught Bai Fengjin and killed him.

古文：从骑走出，大呼于外，诸军争擐甲操兵，喧噪不可禁止。
现代文：白奉进的随从骑兵走出营帐，在外边大声呼喊，各方军队争着穿铠甲、手执武器，吵嚷之声不能禁止。
English: Bai Fengjin's attendant cavalrymen came out of the camp and shouted loudly outside. The armies of all sides fought to wear armor and hold weapons, and the noisy voices could not be banned.

古文：奉国左厢都指挥使马万惶惑不知所为，帅步兵欲从乱，遇右厢都指挥使卢顺密帅部出营，厉声谓万曰： 符公擅杀白公，必与魏城通谋。
现代文：奉国左厢都指挥使马万惶惑不知怎么办，率领步兵想跟着暴乱，正好遇上右厢都指挥使卢顺密率领本部人马出营，厉声对马万说： 符公擅自杀了白公，必定与魏城通谋。
English: The commander of the left compartment of the service country made Ma Wan confused and did not know what to do. He led the infantry to follow the riot. Just as the right compartment was encountered, the commander of the right compartment made Lu Shunmi lead the headquarters out of the camp. He said to Ma Wan in a strong voice, "Fu Gong has committed suicide without permission. Bai Gong must have conspired with Wei Cheng."

古文：此去行宫才二百里，吾辈及军士家属皆在大梁，奈何不思报国，乃欲助乱，自求族灭乎！
现代文：这里离天子行宫才二百里，我们这些人和军士的家属都在大梁，为什么不思报效国家，反而要帮助乱兵，自取灭族吗！
English: It's only two hundred miles from the Celestial Palace here, and all of us and the families of the soldiers are in Dalian. Why don't we think about serving the country, but instead want to help the disorderly soldiers and destroy the nation ourselves!

古文：今日当共擒符公，送天子，立大功。
现代文：现在我们应当共同捉拿符公，送交天子，立大功。
English: Now we should jointly capture the Fu Gong, send it to the heavenly son, and make great contributions.

古文：军士从命者赏，违命者诛，勿复疑也！ 
现代文：军士服从命令的奖赏，违背命令的诛杀，不要再有什么疑虑！ 
English: The sergeant will be rewarded for obeying orders, and punished for disobeying orders. Don't have any doubts!

古文：万部兵尚有呼跃者，顺密杀数人，众莫敢动。
现代文：马万所部士兵还有呼喊跳跃的，卢顺密杀了几人，众人就不敢乱动了。
English: The soldiers of the Ma Wan Department still shouted and jumped, Lu Shun secretly killed several people, and everyone did not dare to move.

古文：万不得已从之，与奉国都虞侯方太等共攻牙城，执彦饶，令太部送大梁。
现代文：马万不得已跟从着他，与奉国都虞候方太等共同攻打牙城，抓住符彦饶，命令方太送往大梁。
English: Ma Wan had no choice but to follow him, and together with Fang Tai, the prefectural governor of Fengguo, and others, they attacked Fangcheng, captured Fuhiko Rao, and ordered Fang Tai to be sent to Daliang.

古文：甲寅，敕斩彦饶于班荆馆，其兄弟皆不问。
现代文：甲寅，后晋高祖敕令在班荆馆斩杀了符彦饶，对于他的兄弟们都没有究问。
English: Jia Yin, the late Jingu Gao's ancestor, ordered the killing of Fuhiko Rao in the Ban Jing Pavilion, and his brothers were not questioned.

古文：杨光远自白皋引兵趣滑州，士卒闻滑州乱，欲推光远为主。
现代文：杨光远从白皋领兵向滑州进军，士卒听说滑州动乱，想推举杨光远为君主。
English: Yang Guangyuan marched from Baijiu to lead the army to Nanzhou. When the soldiers heard about the turmoil in Nanzhou, they wanted to promote Yang Guangyuan as the monarch.

古文：光远曰： 天子岂汝辈贩弄之物！
现代文：杨光远说： 天子岂是你们这等人所玩弄的物体！
English: Yang Guangyuan said: Isn't the Son of Heaven just an object for you people to play with?

古文：晋阳之降出于穷迫，今若改图，真反贼也！ 
现代文：当年我在晋阳的投降是出于穷迫无奈，现在如果改变图谋，那就真是反贼了。 
English: Back then, I surrendered in Jinyang out of desperation, but if I change my plans now, then I will truly be an anti-thief.

古文：其下乃不敢言。
现代文：他的部下才不敢再说。
English: His men didn't dare say another word.

古文：时魏、孟、滑三镇继叛，人情大震，帝问计于刘知远，对曰： 帝者之兴，自有天命。
现代文：当时，魏、孟、滑三镇相继叛变，人情大为震动，后晋高祖向刘知远询问怎么办，回答说： 帝王的兴起，自有天命。
English: At that time, the three towns of Wei, Meng and Niu successively mutinied, and the human condition was greatly shaken. Later, Emperor Gaozhu asked Liu Zhiyuan what to do, and replied: The rise of the emperor has its own destiny.

古文：陛下昔在晋阳，粮不支五日，俄成大业。
现代文：陛下当年在晋阳，粮食不足支持五天，转眼成就了大业。
English: When His Majesty was in Jinyang that year, he was short of food for five days and suddenly achieved a great feat.

古文：今天下已定，内有劲兵，北结强虏，鼠辈何能为乎！
现代文：现在，天下已经平定，内有强盛的兵力，向北团结强大的胡虏，这些反叛的鼠辈能够干出什么来呢！
English: Now that the country has been pacified, there is a strong military force, and the powerful Khuruks are united to the north, what can these rebellious rats do?

古文：愿陛下抚将相以恩，臣请戢士卒以威；恩威兼著，京邑自安，本根深固，则枝叶不伤矣。 
现代文：愿陛下用恩德来安抚将相，我替您收敛士卒的威风，恩威兼施，京都自然会安定，树干和树根深固了，那么枝条和叶就不会受伤了。 
English: May His Majesty use grace to appease the generals, I will restrain the pomp of the soldiers for you, grace and power, Kyoto will naturally be stable, the trunk and roots are deep, then the branches and leaves will not be injured.

古文：知远乃严设科禁，宿卫诸军无敢犯者。
现代文：刘知远便严格建立科罚禁犯的条令，宿卫京城的诸军没有敢违犯的。
English: Liu Zhiyuan strictly established the rules of criminal punishment and prohibition, and the troops of Suqian Beijing did not dare to violate them.

古文：有军士盗纸钱一幞，主者擒之，左右请释之，知远曰： 吾诛其情，不计其直。 
现代文：有个军士偷盗纸钱一幞，被其主人抓获，左右的人请求放了他，刘知远说： 我是按事情的情况来诛杀他的，不计较它的多少。 
English: There was a sergeant who stole a roll of paper money and was caught by his master. People on both sides pleaded for his release. Liu Zhiyuan said: I killed him according to the circumstances of the case, regardless of how much it was.

古文：竟杀之。由是众皆畏服。
现代文：居然把他杀了，从此众军士都畏服。
English: He actually killed him, and from then on all the sergeants were awestruck.

古文：乙卯，以杨光远为魏府行营都招讨使、兼知行府事，以昭义节度使高行周为河南尹、东京留守，以杜重威为昭义节度使、充侍卫马军都指挥使，以侯益为河阳节度使。
现代文：乙卯，后晋高祖任命杨光远为魏府行营都招讨使、兼理行府事务，任用昭义节度使高行周为河南尹、东京留守，任用杜重威为昭义节度使、充当侍卫马军都指挥使，任用侯益为河阳节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong appointed Yang Guangyuan as the envoy of the Wei government to invite and handle the affairs of the Wei government, appointed Gaozhong Zhou as the envoy of the Henan government to stay in Tokyo, appointed Du Chongwei as the envoy of the Shoyi government to serve as the envoy of the guard and the commander of the Ma army, and appointed Houyi as the envoy of the Hoyang government to serve as the envoy of the Hoyang government.

古文：帝以渭州奏事皆马万为首，擢万为义成节度使。
现代文：后晋高祖因为滑州奏事都以马万为首，便提升马万为义成节度使。
English: Later, because Ma Wan was at the head of all the reports on the state of Slanting, he promoted Ma Wan to be the chief envoy of the Yicheng Festival.

古文：丙辰，以卢顺密为果州团练使，方太为赵州刺史；既而知皆顺密之功也，更以顺密为昭义留后。
现代文：丙辰，任用卢顺密为果州团练使，方太为赵州刺史；不久得知平定滑州都是卢顺密的功绩，便改任卢顺密为昭义留后。
English: Bing Chen appointed Lu Shunmi as the Cossack regimental drill sergeant and Fang Tai as the historian of Zhao; he soon learned that the pacification of Nanzhou was Lu Shunmi's achievement, so he changed the appointment of Lu Shunmi to Zhao Yi.

古文：冯晖、孙锐引兵至六明镇，光远引之渡河，半渡而击之，晖、锐众大败，多溺死，斩首三千级，晖、锐走还魏。
现代文：冯晖、孙锐带领兵马到了六明镇，杨光远引诱他们渡河，渡了一半就袭击他们，尹晖、孙锐的兵众大败，很多人淹死水中，有三千人被斩杀，尹晖和孙锐逃回魏州。
English: Feng Qi and Sun Rui led the soldiers and horses to Liuming Town. Yang Guangyuan lured them across the river and attacked them halfway across. The soldiers of Yin Qi and Sun Rui were defeated, many people drowned in the water, and three thousand people were beheaded. Yin Qi and Sun Rui fled back to Weizhou.

古文：杜重威、侯益引兵至汜水，遇张从宾众万馀人，与战，俘斩殆尽，遂克汜水。
现代文：杜重威、侯益领兵到达汜水，遇到张从宾的兵众一万多人，同他们交战，几乎全部俘获斩尽，便攻克了汜水。
English: Du Chongwei and Hou Yi led an army to Surabaya, encountered Zhang Congbin's army of more than 10,000 soldiers, fought with them, captured almost all of them, and conquered Surabaya.

古文：从宾走，乘马渡河，溺死。获其党张延播、继祚、娄继英，送大梁，斩之，灭其族。
现代文：张从宾逃走，乘马渡河，结果被淹死了；俘获他的党羽张延播、张继祚、娄继英，押送到大梁，把他们杀了，诛灭了他的家族。
English: Zhang escaped from Bin and crossed the river on a horse, but was drowned; Zhang Yanbo, Zhang Jizhe, and Zou Jieying, his captured followers, were escorted to Daliang, where they were killed, and his family was exterminated.

古文：史馆修撰李涛上言，张全义有再造洛邑之功，乞免其族，乃止诛继祚妻子。
现代文：史馆修撰李涛上书奏言，张继祚的父亲张全义有再造洛阳的功劳，请求赦免他的族人，便只诛杀了张继祚的妻子。
English: The history museum compiled Li Tao's speech in the letter. Zhang Jizhe's father, Zhang Quanyi, had the merit of re-creating Luoyang. He asked for the pardon of his relatives, but only killed Zhang Jizhe's wife.

古文：涛，回之族曾孙也。
现代文：李涛是李回的族曾孙
English: Li Tao is the great-grandson of Li Hui

古文：诏东都留守司百官悉赴行在。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏：东都留守司的百官全部迁赴行在。
English: After he was promoted to high rank, his ancestor issued an edict: All of the hundreds of officials who had stayed behind in Dongdu were to move there.

古文：杨光远奏知博州张晖举城降。
现代文：杨光远奏报，主管博州事务的张晖带领全城投降。
English: Yang Guangyuan delivered the report, and Zhang Xuan, who was in charge of the affairs of Bozhou, led the whole city to surrender.

古文：安州威和指挥使王晖闻范延光作乱，杀安远节度使周瑰，自领军府，欲俟延光胜则附之，败则渡江奔吴。
现代文：安州威和指挥使王晖听说范延光作乱，杀了安远节度使周，自己统领军府，打算等待范延光胜利就依附他，如果他败了就渡过长江投奔吴国。
English: Anzhou Weihe commander Wang Qian heard that Fan Yanguang made a disturbance, killed Anyuan Jietuo commander Zhou, and led the military government himself. He planned to wait for Fan Yanguang's victory and then cling to him. If he was defeated, he would cross the Yangtze River to enter Wu.

古文：帝遣右领军上将军李金全将千骑如安州巡检，许赦王晖以为唐州刺史。
现代文：后晋高祖派遣右领军上将军李金全带领一千骑兵到安州去巡视检查，答应赦免王晖的罪，并任用他为唐州刺史。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu sent the right leader of the army, General Li Jinquan, to inspect Anzhou with a thousand cavalry. He promised to pardon Wang Yao and appointed him as the historian of Tangzhou.

古文：范延光知事不济，归罪于孙锐而族之，遣使奉表待罪，戊寅，杨光远以闻，帝不许。
现代文：范延光知道造反的事不能成功了，便归罪于孙锐，把他的全族人杀了，派出使者到后晋朝廷上表等待治罪。戊寅，杨光远报告了朝廷，后晋高祖不准许。
English: Fan Yanguang knew that the rebellion could not succeed, so he blamed Sun Rui, killed his whole family, and sent an envoy to the court of the Later Jin Dynasty to wait for the punishment. In other words, Yang Guangyuan reported to the court, but the Later Jin Emperor did not allow it.

古文：吴同平章事王令谋如金陵劝徐浩受禅，诰让不受。
现代文：吴国同平章事王令谋到金陵劝徐诰接受吴主的禅让，继位当皇帝，徐诰辞让不接受。
English: King Tongping of the State of Wuxi sent an envoy to Jinling to persuade Xu Rong to accept the emperor's abdication and become the emperor. Xu Rong refused to accept the abdication.

古文：山南东道节度使安从进恐王晖奔吴，遣行军司马张朏将兵会复州兵于要路邀之。
现代文：山南东道节度使安从进担心王晖投奔吴国，派行军司马张领兵会合复州兵在冲要路上阻挡他。
English: Shannan, the host of the festival, made An Congjin worry that Wang Qian would rush to Wu, and sent the marching army Sima Zhang to lead the troops to the meeting of the Fuzhou soldiers to block him on the way.

古文：晖大掠安州，将奔吴，部将胡进杀之。
现代文：王晖在安州大肆抢掠后将要投奔吴国，部将胡进杀了他。
English: After plundering Anzhou extensively, Wang Qian was about to flee to the State of Wu. The general Hu Jin Rong killed him.

古文：八月，癸巳，以状闻。
现代文：八月，癸巳，把情况报告了朝廷。
English: In August, he reported the situation to the Imperial Court.

古文：李金全至安州，将士之预于乱者数百人，金全说谕，悉遣诣阙；既而闻指挥使武彦和等数十人挟贿甚多，伏兵于野，执而斩之。
现代文：李金全到达安州，将士中有几百人参预动乱，李金全谕告他们，都让他们到京城去阙门诣见等待发落；接着，听说指挥使武彦和等数十人挟带行贿的财物很多，便在野外埋伏士兵把他们捉住杀了。
English: When Li Jinquan arrived in Anzhou, there were several hundred soldiers who had participated in the pre-uprising. Li Jinquan ordered them all to go to the capital to wait for the bribe to be paid. Next, he heard that the commanding officer, Takehiko He, and dozens of others had brought a lot of bribe money with them, so he ambushed the soldiers in the field and caught and killed them.

古文：彦和且死，呼曰： 王晖首恶，天子犹赦之；我辈胁从，何罪乎！ 
现代文：武彦和临死前高声喊着说： 王晖是首恶，天子还把他赦免了，我们这些人都是胁从的，有什么罪！ 
English: Takehiko and, before dying, shouted at the top of his voice: Wang Yao is the chief evil, and Heaven has pardoned him. All of us are cowards, what is the sin!

古文：帝虽知金全之情，掩而不问。
现代文：后晋高祖虽然知道李金全的情况，把事情掩盖起来，不加究问。
English: Although he knew Li Jinquan's situation, he covered it up and did not inquire further.

古文：吴历阳公濛知吴将亡，甲午，杀守卫军使王宏。宏子勒兵攻濛，濛射杀之。
现代文：吴国历阳杨公知道吴国快要败亡了，甲午，杀了守卫他的军使王宏；王宏的儿子带领兵卒攻击杨，杨射杀了他。
English: Liyang Yang Gong of the State of Wu, knowing that the State of Wu was about to be defeated, killed Wang Hong, an envoy of the State of Wu, who was guarding him. Wang Hong's son led the soldiers to attack Yang, and Yang shot him.

古文：以德胜节度使周本吴之勋旧，引二骑诣庐州，欲依之。
现代文：因为德胜节度使周本是吴国有功勋的旧臣，便带领两个骑兵来到庐州，想依托于他。
English: Because Zhou Ben was a meritorious old vassal of the State of Wu, he led two cavalrymen to Zhangzhou, hoping to rely on him.

古文：本闻濛至，将见之，其子弘祚固谏，本怒曰： 我家郎君来，何为不使我见！ 
现代文：周本听说杨来了，将要会见他，他的儿子周弘祚坚决劝阻，周本发怒说： 我家的少主来了，为什么不让我见他！ 
English: Zhou Ben heard that Yang was coming and was going to meet him, but his son Zhou Hongyi strongly dissuaded him. Zhou Ben became angry and said, "The young master of my family is coming, why won't you let me see him!"

古文：弘祚合扉不听本出，使人执濛于外，送江都。
现代文：周弘祚关上门不让周本出去，并让人在外边把杨抓起来，送往江都。
English: Zhou Hongyi closed the door to prevent Zhou Ben from going out, and had someone outside arrest Yang and send him to Jiangdu.

古文：徐诰遣使称诏杀濛于采石，追废为悖逆庶人，绝属籍。
现代文：徐诰派使者称吴主下诏，在采石杀了杨，并把他追废为 悖逆庶人 ，灭绝了杨氏属籍。
English: Xu Xi sent an emissary to announce that the Lord of Wu had issued an edict, killing Yang in the quarry, and expelling him as a "rebellious commoner," exterminating the Yang clan.

古文：侍卫军使郭悰杀濛妻子于和州，诰归罪于悰，贬池州。
现代文：侍卫军使郭在和州把杨的妻子杀了，徐诰归罪于郭，把他贬移到池州。
English: The bodyguards ordered Guo to kill Yang's wife in Hezhou. Xu Rong blamed Guo and had him deported to Chizhou.

古文：乙巳，赦张从宾、符彦饶、王晖之党，未伏诛者皆不问。
现代文：乙巳，后晋高祖赦免了张从宾、符彦饶、王晖的党羽，没有被杀的都不再问罪。
English: At this time, Emperor Gaozu pardoned Zhang Congbin, Fu Yanrao, and Wang Qi's followers, and those who had not been killed would no longer be prosecuted.

古文：梁、唐以来，士民奉使及俘掠在契丹者，悉遣使赎还其家。
现代文：后梁，后唐以来，士民中因为奉派出使或被俘掠而在契丹的，全部派人把他们赎回送回家中。
English: Since the late Liang and Tang Dynasties, all the scholars and commoners who were sent as envoys or captured in Khitan were ransomed and sent back home.

古文：吴司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事、内枢使、忠武节度使王令谋老病无齿，或劝之致仕，令谋曰： 齐王大事未毕，吾何敢自安！ 
现代文：吴国司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事、内枢使、忠武节度使王令谋年老有病，连牙齿都没有了，有人劝他退休，王令谋说： 齐王的大事还没完成，我怎么敢自图安逸！ 
English: Wang Lingmo was old and sick, and even had no teeth, as a result of being advised to retire by Wu Guo Si Tu, a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji, an inner envoy, and Zhongwu Jiedu. Wang Lingmo said, "King Qi's important work has not been completed, how dare I try to enjoy myself!"

古文：疾亟，力劝徐诰受禅。
现代文：病得快死了，还极力劝说徐诰接受吴主让位。
English: He was so ill that he was on the verge of death, and he tried his best to persuade Xu Xi to accept Wu Shulun's abdication.

古文：是月，吴主下诏，禅位于齐。
现代文：就在这个月里，吴主杨溥下诏书，把帝位禅让给齐王徐诰。
English: In this very month, the Lord of Wu, Yang Zhen, issued an imperial edict, ceding the imperial throne of Zen to the King of Qi, Xu Zhen.

古文：李德诚等复诣金陵帅百官劝进，宋齐丘不署表。
现代文：李德诚再次到金陵率领百官劝进，宋齐丘不在劝进表上署名。
English: Li Decheng once again went to Jinling to lead hundreds of officials to persuade, but Song Qiqiu did not sign the persuasion form.

古文：九月，癸丑，令谋卒。
现代文：九月，癸丑，王令谋去世。
English: In September, Wang Lingmo passed away.

古文：甲寅，以李金全为安远节度使。
现代文：甲寅，后晋高祖任用李金全为安远节度使。
English: Jia Yin, later promoted to Gao Zu, appointed Li Jinquan as the envoy of Anyuan.

古文：娄继英未及葬梁均王而诛死，诏梁故臣右卫上将军安崇阮与王故妃郭氏葬之。
现代文：娄继英没有来得及安葬后梁钧王朱友就被杀死，后晋高祖下诏后梁旧臣右卫上将军安崇阮与均王旧妃郭氏把他安葬了。
English: Zou Jieying did not have time to be buried, and after he was buried, Zhu You, the king of Liang Province, was killed, and the Guo clan, the former consort of King Jun and the former general of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, An Chong Ruan, buried him.

古文：丙寅，吴主命江夏王璘奉玺绶于齐。
现代文：丙寅，吴主杨溥命江夏王杨奉献皇帝的国玺和绶带给齐王。
English: Cui Yin, the lord of Wu, ordered Jiangxia King Yang to dedicate the emperor's imperial scepter and scepter to King Qi.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，齐王诰即皇帝位于金陵，大赦，改元升元，国号唐。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲申，齐王徐诰在金陵即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为升元，国号唐。
English: In winter, in October, in Jiaxing, King Xu Rong of Qi in Jinling, that is, the emperor's throne, implemented an amnesty, changed the year name to Xingyuan, and the country name to Tang.

古文：追尊太祖武王曰武皇帝。
现代文：追尊他的父亲太祖武王徐温称武皇帝。
English: Emperor Wu was named after his father, King Wu's great-great-grandfather, King Xu Wen.

古文：乙酉，遣右丞相玠奉册诣吴主，称受禅老臣诰谨拜稽首上皇帝尊号曰高尚思玄弘古让皇，宫室、乘舆、服御皆如故，宗庙、正朔、徽章、服色悉从吴制。
现代文：乙酉，遣派右丞相徐奉送上尊号的册文去进诣吴主杨溥，称言受禅老臣诰谨拜稽首上皇帝尊号为高尚思玄弘古让皇，宫室、乘舆、服御都照旧，宗庙、正朔、徽章、服色都仍按吴国制度。
English: Yixuan sent the Minister of the Right, Xu Bong, to send a copy of the honorific title to the Emperor of the State of Wu, Yang Di, saying that the honorific title of the Emperor of the State of Wu was Gaoshang Shixuan Honggu Zhanghuang, and that the imperial palace, the imperial court and the imperial robe were all the same as before, and the ancestral temple, the imperial seal, the emblem and the color of the robe were all still in accordance with the system of the State of Wu.

古文：丁亥，立徐知证为江王，徐知谔为饶王。
现代文：丁亥，册立徐知证为江王，徐知谔为饶王。
English: Dinghai inscribed Xu Zhisheng as the king of Jiang, and Xu Zhisheng as the king of Rao.

古文：以吴太子琏领平卢节度使、兼中书令，封弘农公。
现代文：任用吴太子杨琏领职平卢节度使、兼中书令，封为弘农公。
English: Prince Wu's son, Yang Xuan, was appointed to the post of Pinglu's chief of staff, concurrently acting as the second secretary, and was given the title of Hongnongguo.

古文：唐主宴群臣于天泉阁，李德诚曰： 陛下应天顺人，惟宋齐丘不乐。 
现代文：南唐国主徐诰在天泉阁宴请群臣，李德诚奏称： 陛下应天顺人，只有宋齐丘不愉快。 
English: The Lord of Southern Tang, Xu Xi, invited a group of ministers to a banquet at Tianquan Courtyard, and Li Decheng said: Your Majesty should be in harmony with nature, only Song Qiqiu is not happy.

古文：因出齐丘止德诚劝进书，唐主执书不视，曰： 子嵩三十年旧交，必不相负。 
现代文：因而把宋齐丘阻止李德诚劝进的信拿出来作为证明，南唐主拿着这封信而不看，并说： 子嵩是我三十年的老朋友，必定不会负我。 
English: Therefore, he brought out Song Qiqiu's letter to prevent Li Decheng's persuasion as a proof. The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty took the letter without looking at it and said, "Zigong is my old friend of thirty years. He will not fail me."

古文：齐丘顿首谢。
现代文：宋齐丘顿首拜谢。
English: Song Qiqutong bowed his head in thanks.

古文：己丑，唐主表让皇改东都宫殿名，皆取于仙经。
现代文：己丑，南唐主上表让皇，请求更改东都江都的宫殿名称，都是从神仙经书中取名的。
English: Ji Jiu, the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, petitioned the emperor to change the name of the palace in the eastern capital Jiangdu, all of which were named from the Immortal Book.

古文：让皇常服羽衣，习辟穀术。
现代文：让皇经常穿着道士羽衣，习练辟谷修仙的法术。
English: Let the emperor often wear Taoist pajamas and practice the magic of warding off evil spirits.

古文：辛卯，吴宗室建安王珙等十二人皆降爵为公，而加官增邑。
现代文：辛卯，吴国宗室建安王杨珙等十二人都降爵为公，但加授了官职并增了食邑，以示安慰。
English: Xinwu, Jianan Wang Yangqin, the ancestral house of Wu, and twelve others were demoted in rank, but they were given additional official posts and food villages to show their consolation.

古文：丙申，以吴同平章事张延翰及门下侍郎张居咏、中书侍郎李建勋并同平章事。
现代文：丙申，南唐主任用吴国前同平章事张延翰及门下侍郎张居咏、中书侍郎李建勋都任同平章事。
English: According to Bishin, the head of the Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Zhang Yanhan, a former member of the State Council of Wu, and his attendants Zhang Jiuyong and Li Jianxun, the attendants of the Central Committee of the CPC, as members of the State Council.

古文：让皇以唐主上表，致书辞之；唐主表谢而不改。
现代文：让皇因为南唐主仍用上表的形式，写信表示不能接受，南唐主上表致谢，但仍不改变。
English: Let the emperor still use the form of the above table for the Lord of Southern Tang, write a letter to say that it is unacceptable, the Lord of Southern Tang expresses his thanks on the table, but still does not change.

古文：丁酉，加宋齐丘大司徒。
现代文：丁酉，南唐主加授宋齐丘为大司徒。
English: Ding Xuan, the ruler of Southern Tang, conferred Song Qiqiu with the title of Grand Scholar.

古文：齐丘虽为左丞相，不预政事，心愠怼，闻制词云 布衣之交 ，抗声曰： 臣为布衣时，陛下为刺史；今日为天子，可不用老臣矣。 
现代文：宋齐丘虽然任左丞相，但不能参预政事，心里怨怒，听说南唐主所作词中称是 布衣之交 ，便抗辩说： 我当老百姓时，陛下是刺史，现在当了天子，可以不用老臣了。 
English: Although Song Qiqiu was appointed as the Minister of the Left, he could not participate in the pre-election political affairs, and he was resentful in his heart. When he heard that the speech made by the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said that he was a friend of cloth, he argued: When I was a commoner, His Majesty was a history buff. Now that he is the Son of Heaven, he can do without the old minister.

古文：还家请罪，唐主手诏谢之，亦不改命。
现代文：回家请求治罪，南唐主手诏向他致谢，但也不再改变授官命令。
English: When he returned home, he asked to be punished, and the ruler of Southern Tang issued an edict thanking him, but he did not change the order of awarding positions.

古文：久之，齐丘不知所出，乃更上书请迁让皇于它州，及斥远吴太琏，绝其婚；唐主不从。
现代文：时间长了，宋齐丘不知怎么办为好，便上书建议把让皇行移到其他州府，并疏远吴太子杨琏，断绝与他的婚姻；南唐主没有听从他的意见。
English: After a long time, Song Qiqiu did not know what to do, so he wrote a letter suggesting that the Emperor should be moved to other state capitals, and that he should distance himself from the Prince of Wu, Yang Hui, and break off his marriage; the Lord of Southern Tang did not listen to his advice.

古文：乙巳，立王后宋氏为皇后。戊申，以诸道都统、判元帅府事景通为诸道副元帅、判六军诸卫事、太尉、尚书令、吴王。
现代文：乙巳，南唐主册立王后宋氏为皇后，戊申，任命诸道都统、判元帅府事徐景通为诸道副元帅、判六军诸卫事、太尉、尚书令、吴王。
English: At this time, the master of the Southern Tang Dynasty made Queen Song the empress, and appointed all the provinces to be unified, and appointed Marshal Xu Jingtong to be the deputy marshal of all the provinces, and the six armies to be the guards, the captain, the secretary, and the king of Wu.

古文：闽主命其弟威武节度使继恭上表告嗣位于晋，且请置邸于都下。
现代文：闽主王命令他的弟弟威武节度使王继恭向后晋朝廷上表报告他继承了闽国的君位，并且请求在闽国都建置府邸。
English: Lord Wang ordered his younger brother, Weiwu Jiedu, to have Wang Jigong report to the Later Jin court that he had succeeded to the throne of the state, and to request that a residence be built in the capital of the state.

古文：十一月，乙卯，唐吴王景通更名璟。
现代文：十一月，乙卯，南唐吴王徐景通改名为。
English: In November, the Southern Tang Dynasty's King of Wu, Xu Jingtong, changed his name.

古文：唐主赐杨画家杨琏妃号永兴公主；妃闻人呼公主则流涕而辞。
现代文：南唐主赐杨琏的妃子号为永兴公主，这位妃子听到别人称呼她为公主便流眼泪而推辞。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty gave Yang Jie the concubine name of Yongxing Princess. When this concubine heard others calling her a princess, she shed tears and refused.

古文：戊午，唐主立其子景遂为吉王，景达为寿阳公；以景遂为侍中、东都留守、江都尹，帅留司百官赴东都。
现代文：戊午，南唐主立他的儿子徐景遂为吉王，徐景达为寿阳公；任命徐景遂为侍中、东都留守、江都尹，率领留司百官到东都去。
English: In the afternoon, the Lord of Southern Tang appointed his son Xu Jing to be the King of Ji, and Xu Jingda to be the King of Shouyang. He also appointed Xu Jing to be the attendant, to stay in Dongdu, and to stay in Jiangdu, and led hundreds of officials to go to Dongdu.

古文：戊辰，诏加吴越王元瓘天下兵马副元帅，进封吴越国王。
现代文：戊辰，后晋高祖下诏，加任吴越王钱元为天下兵马副元帅，进封为吴越国王。
English: Wuchen, later promoted to Gaozu, issued an edict to appoint Qianyuan, the king of Wuyue, as the vice-marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and crowned him as the king of Wuyue.

古文：安远节度使李金全以亲吏胡汉筠为中门使，军府事一以委之。
现代文：安远节度使李金全任用亲信属吏胡汉筠为中门使，军府的事务全部委任他办理。
English: The Anyuan Festival made Li Jin fully appoint his close confidant and subordinate official Hu Hanjun as the middle gate envoy, and he was entrusted with all the affairs of the military government.

古文：汉筠贪滑残忍，聚敛无厌。
现代文：胡汉筠贪猾残忍，搜刮贪求无厌。
English: Hu Hanqi is greedy and cruel. He is insatiable for power.

古文：帝闻之，以廉吏贾仁沼代之，且召汉筠，欲授以它职，庶保全功臣。
现代文：后晋高祖听说后，便任用清廉官吏贾仁沼代替了他，并且召回胡汉筠，准备授给他其他官职，以求保全功臣。
English: After hearing of this, Emperor Gaozu appointed Jia Rinnuma, an incorruptible official, to replace him, and recalled Hu Han Rong to prepare to give him other official positions in order to preserve his meritorious service.

古文：汉筠大惧，始劝金全以异谋。
现代文：胡汉筠很害怕，开始劝李金全作叛离的打算。
English: Hu Han Rong was very scared and began to persuade Li Jin Quan to make plans to defect.

古文：乙亥，金全表汉筠病，未任行。
现代文：乙亥，李金全上表说胡汉筠病了，没有能受诏成行。
English: Yi Hai and Li Jinquan openly said that Hu Hanlin was ill and could not be allowed to go.

古文：金全故人庞令图屡谏曰： 仁沼忠义之士，以代汉筠，所益多矣。 
现代文：李金全的老朋友庞令图多次劝谏他说： 贾仁沼是忠义之士，用他来代替胡汉筠，会增加很多好处。 
English: Li Jinquan's old friend, Pang Lingtu, repeatedly persuaded him, saying, "Jia Rinnuma is a loyal person, and using him to replace Hu Hanjun will add a lot of benefits.

古文：汉筠夜遣壮士逾垣灭令图之族，又毒仁沼，舌烂而卒。
现代文：胡汉筠夜里派遣强壮之人跳墙把庞令图的族人都杀了，又去对贾仁沼用毒，贾仁沼舌头烂掉而死。
English: In the middle of the night, Hu Han sent strong men to jump over the wall and kill the people of Pang Lingtu. They also used poison on Jia Ren Numa. Jia Ren Numa's tongue rotted and died.

古文：汉筠与推官张纬相结，以谄惑金全，金全爱之弥笃。
现代文：胡汉筠与推官张玮相勾结，共同谄媚惑乱李金全，李金全宠爱他更加深厚了。
English: Hu Hanjuan colluded with his superior officer Zhang Yuxiang to seduce Li Jinquan. Li Jinquan loved him even more deeply.

古文：十二月戊申，蜀大赦，改明年元曰明德。
现代文：十二月，戊申，蜀国实行大赦，改明年年号为明德。
English: In December, Wushan, Shu State implemented an amnesty, and changed the name of the next year to Mingde.

古文：诏加马希范江南诸道都统，制置武平、静江等军事。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏加马希范为江南诸道都统，下令设置武平、静江等事。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong's ancestor Emperor Gaozong decreed that all the provinces south of the Yangtze River should be unified, and ordered the establishment of Wuping and Jingjiang Provinces.

古文：是岁，契丹改元会同，国号大辽，公卿庶官皆仿中国，参用中国人，以赵延寿为枢密使，寻兼政事令。
现代文：这一年，契丹改年号为会同，国号大辽。公卿庶官的设置都仿效中原，并且参用中原人，任用赵延寿为枢密使，不久，又兼任政事令。
English: In the same year, Khitan changed the era name to Hetong and the country name to Daliao. The establishment of court nobles and lower-ranking officials were modeled on the Central Plains, and the Central Plains people were also used. Zhao Yanshou was appointed as a privy envoy, and soon he also served as a regent.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝上之下天福三年春，正月，己酉，日有食之。
现代文：天福三年春季正月，己酉，出现日食。
English: In the first month of spring in the third year of Tianfu, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：唐德胜节度使兼中书令西平恭烈王周本以不能存吴，愧恨而卒。
现代文：南唐德胜节度使兼中书令西平恭烈王周本因为不能保存吴国，愧恨而去世。
English: Because he could not save the State of Wu, Zhou Ben, the envoy of the Southern Tang Dynasty and the scribe of the Western Tang Dynasty, died of remorse.

古文：丙寅，唐以侍中吉王景遂参判尚书都省。
现代文：丙寅，南唐主任用侍中吉王徐景遂参判尚书都省。
English: Cui Yin, the director of Nantang, used the attendant of King Ji Wang Xu Jing to participate in the judgment of Shangshudu Province.

古文：蜀主以武信节度使、同平章事张业为左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事、枢密使，武泰节度使王处回兼武信节度使、同平章事。
现代文：蜀主孟昶任用武信节度使、同平章事张业为左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事、枢密使，武泰节度使王处回兼任武信节度使、同平章事。
English: Shu lord Meng Xuan appointed Wu Xin as the regent and Tong Ping as the secretary, Zhang Ye as the left footman and the secretary, Tong Ping as the regent and the confidential envoy, Wu Tai as the regent and Wang Zui as the regent and the secretary, and Tong Ping as the secretary.

古文：二月，庚辰，左散骑常侍张允上《驳赦论》，以为： 帝王遇天灾多肆赦，谓之修德。
现代文：二月，庚辰，后晋左散骑常侍张允上书《驳赦论》，他认为： 帝王遇到频繁的天灾便应实行大赦，称作修德。
English: In February, Geng Chen, the attendant of Zhang Yun, the left-handed horseback rider of the Later Jin Dynasty, submitted a letter, "On the Refutation of Pardons," in which he said: If the emperor encounters frequent natural disasters, he should implement an amnesty, which is called cultivating virtue.

古文：借有二人坐狱遇赦，则曲者幸免，直者衔冤，冤气升闻，乃所以致灾，非所以弭灾也。 
现代文：假设有两个人正在坐牢，遇上行赦，那就会出现不老实的人也能侥幸获免，而老实人却要含冤。冤气升闻于天，这正是所以招致天灾，而不是要消除天灾呵。 
English: Suppose two people are in prison and are pardoned, then there will be dishonest people who can get away with it, but honest people will have a grievance. Grievance rises to the sky, which is why it causes natural disasters, not to eliminate natural disasters.

古文：诏褒之。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏褒奖他。
English: After he was promoted to high school, his father issued an edict praising him.

古文：帝乐闻谠言，诏百官各上封事，命使部尚书梁文矩等十人置详定院以考之，无取者留中，可者行之。
现代文：后晋高祖乐于听取善言，下诏百官各上封书言事，命吏部尚书梁文矩等十人设置详定院来加以考核，无可取的留在中枢，有可取的就施行。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong was pleased to listen to the kind words, and issued the following edict: 100 officials should each write a letter, and 10 people, including Shang, Liang, and Wen, of the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Comm

古文：数月，应诏都无十人，乙未，复降御札趣之。
现代文：几个月以后，应诏的不足十人。乙未，再一次颁下御札催促这件事。
English: A few months later, less than ten people responded to the edict. Biyi issued another edict to urge the matter.

古文：三月，丁丑，敕禁民作铜器。
现代文：三月，丁丑，敕令禁止民间制作铜器。
English: In March, Dingwuxi, the imperial edict banned the production of copperware by the people.

古文：初，唐世天下铸钱有三十六冶，丧乱以来，皆废绝，钱日益耗，民多销钱为铜器，故禁之。
现代文：过去，后唐时期天下有三十六个冶铜所铸钱，丧乱以来，都已废绝了，而钱日益耗费，民众往往销毁钱来制作铜器，所以禁止它。
English: In the past, during the post-Tang period, there were thirty-six copper smelters in the world that minted money. Since the turmoil, they have all been abolished, and money is increasingly consumed. People often destroy money to make copperware, so it is prohibited.

古文：中书舍人李详上疏，以为 十年以来，赦令屡降，诸道职掌皆许推恩，而籓方荐论动逾数百，乃至藏典、书吏、优伶、奴仆，初命则至银青阶，被服皆紫袍象笏，名器僭滥，贵贱不分。
现代文：中书舍人李详上疏，他认为 十年以来，多次颁布郝令，对于诸道职掌都允许推广扩充，而各地藩镇的荐举动辄超过几百人，乃至管理帑藏的典吏、书吏、优伶、奴仆，开始任命就要授以银青阶，穿着都是紫色官服象牙笏板，以致名号和器物超越本分滥用，贵贱不能分辨。
English: Li Jiazhang So, the person in charge of the Central Library, believes that since ten years ago, the imperial edict has been issued many times, allowing the promotion and expansion of all kinds of functions, and the number of recommended actions of the various provinces and towns has exceeded several hundred. Even the officials, clerks, nobles, and servants who manage the library have to be awarded the silver blue rank at the beginning of the appointment. They are all wearing purple official uniforms and ivory chopping boards, so that the name and utensils are abused beyond their duties, and the noble and low can not be distinguished.

古文：请自今诸道主兵将校之外，节度州听奏硃记大将以上十人，他州止听奏都押牙、都虞候、孔目官，自馀但委本道量迁职名而已。 
现代文：请求自今以后，除诸道主管军务的将校之外，节度州允许奏报不给铜印的木印朱记大将以上十个人，其他州只允许奏报都押牙、都虞候、孔目官，其余的人员只是委托本道酌量调迁职名罢了。 
English: Request: From now on, in addition to the officers in charge of military affairs of various provinces, the festival state is allowed to report more than ten people who do not give the copper seal to the wooden seal general Zhu Ji, and other states are only allowed to report to the provincial overseers, provincial governors, and provincial officials. The rest of the personnel only entrust the province with the discretionary transfer of job titles.

古文：从之。
现代文：后晋高祖听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：夏，四月，甲申，唐宋齐丘自陈丞相不应不豫政事，唐主答以省署未备。
现代文：夏季四月，甲申，南唐宋齐丘自己陈说丞相不应当不参预政事，南唐主答复说省署还没有准备好。
English: In the summer of April, in Jiaxing, Song Qiqiu of Southern Tang himself said that the prime minister should not not participate in pre-election political affairs, and the head of Southern Tang replied that the provincial department was not ready.

古文：吴让皇固辞旧宫，屡请徙居；李德诚等亦亟以为言。
现代文：吴国让皇坚决辞让，不住在旧宫，多次请求迁徙别处居住；李德诚等极力主张这样办。
English: Wu resolutely refused to let the emperor live in the old palace, and repeatedly requested that he move to another place to live; Li Decheng and others strongly advocated this.

古文：五月，戊午，唐主改润州牙城为丹杨宫，以李建勋为迎奉让皇使。
现代文：五月，戊午，南唐主把润州牙城改名为丹杨宫，任用李建勋为迎奉让皇使。
English: In May, at noon, the ruler of Southern Tang renamed Runchu Ashen City as Danyang Palace, and appointed Li Jianxun as an envoy to welcome the envoy.

古文：杨光远自恃拥重兵，颇干预朝政，屡有抗奏，帝常屈意从之。
现代文：杨光远自恃拥有重兵，很是干预朝中政事，常常提出抗命的奏事，后晋高祖常屈意听从他。
English: Yang Guangyuan boasted that he had a large army and interfered in the political affairs of the DPRK and China. He often raised the issue of disobeying orders. Later, Emperor Gaozu often yielded to him.

古文：庚申，以其子承祚为左威卫将军，尚帝女长安公主，次子承信亦拜美官，宠冠当时。
现代文：庚申，任命他的儿子杨承祚为左威卫将军，娶了后晋高祖女儿长安公主为妻，次子杨承信也拜受美好官职，恩宠为当时之冠。
English: Goshun appointed his son Yang Chengjun as General Zuo Wei, married Princess Chang'an, the granddaughter of Emperor Gao, and his second son, Yang Chengxin, was also given a good official post, which was the crowning grace at that time.

古文：壬戌，唐主以左宣威副统军王舆为镇海留后，客省使公孙圭为监军使，亲吏马思让为丹杨宫使，徙让皇居丹杨宫。
现代文：壬戌，南唐主任用左宣威副统军王舆为镇海留后，客省使公孙圭为监军使，亲近官吏马思让为丹杨宫使，把让皇迁徙到丹杨宫。
English: In Nanzhuang, the director of Nantang used Zuo Xuanwei and the vice-commander of the army Wang Yu to stay in the town and sea, the guest province sent Gongsun Gui as the supervising envoy, the close official Ma Sijan as the envoy of the Danyang Palace, and the emperor moved to the Danyang Palace.

古文：宋齐丘复自陈为左右所间，唐主大怒；齐丘归第，白衣待罪。
现代文：宋齐丘再次陈说自己被左右所间隔架空，南唐主大怒；宋齐丘回到自己府第，穿起白衣等待治罪。
English: Song Qiqiu once again said that he was separated from the right and the left, and the Southern Tang Dynasty was furious; Song Qiqiu returned to his hometown, put on a white robe and waited for punishment.

古文：或曰： 齐丘旧臣，不宜以小过弃之。 
现代文：有人说： 齐丘是旧臣，不应因为小过失而把他抛弃。 
English: Some people said, "Qiqiu is an old minister, we shouldn't abandon him because of a small mistake."

古文：唐主曰： 齐丘有才，不识大体。 
现代文：南唐主说： 齐丘有才干，但是不识大体。 
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said, "Qiqiu is talented, but he doesn't know the big picture.

古文：乃命吴王璟持手诏召之。
现代文：便让吴王徐拿着手诏召唤他。
English: He then asked Wu Wang Xu to hold the imperial edict in his hand and summon him.

古文：六月，壬午，或献毒酒方于唐主，唐主曰： 犯吾法者自有常刑，安用此为！ 
现代文：六月，壬午，有人献毒酒方给南唐主，南唐主说： 违犯我法律的自有正常刑罚，要这个干什么！ 
English: In June, at noon, someone offered poisoned wine to the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty. The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty said: Violating my law has its own normal punishment, what do you want with this!

古文：群臣争请改府寺州县名有吴及杨者，留守判官杨嗣请更姓羊，徐玠曰： 陛下自应天顺人，事非逆取，而谄邪之人专事改更，咸非急务，不可从也。 
现代文：群臣争着请求更改府寺州县的名称中有 吴 和 阳 字的，留守判官杨嗣请求改姓羊，徐说： 陛下自然是应天顺人的，事情不是有意抗逆的，而谄邪之人专门抓住这些事更改讨好，这都不是当务之急，不要听从他们。 
English: The group of courtiers fought over the request to change the names of Fuzhizhou County, which included the characters "Wu" and "Yang." The remaining judge, Yang Zhi, requested to change the surname to "Yang." Xu said: "Your Majesty naturally responds to the will of the heavens, things are not deliberately rebellious, and evil-doers specifically seize on these things to change and please. This is not an urgent matter. Don't listen to them.

古文：唐主然之。
现代文：南唐主认为很对。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty thought it was right.

古文：河南留守高行周奏修洛阳宫。丙戌，左谏议大夫薛融谏曰： 今宫室虽经焚毁，犹侈于帝尧之茅茨；所费虽寡，犹多于汉文之露台。
现代文：河南留守高行周奏请修缮洛阳宫，丙戌，左谏议大夫薛融进谏说： 现在的宫室虽然遭受焚烧毁坏，还是比帝尧的茅草宫殿奢侈得多；所修费用再少，也要多于汉文帝的露台。
English: Henan left Gao Xing and Zhou Zong to repair Luoyang Palace, and Xu Rong, a left-wing doctor, said: Although the current palace room has been burned and destroyed, it is still much more luxurious than the thatched palace of the emperor; the cost of the repair is no less, but also more than the terrace of the Han Emperor.

古文：况魏城未下，公私困窘，诚非陛下修宫馆之日；请俟海内平宁，营之未晚。 
现代文：何况魏城尚未攻下来，公家、民众都处于困窘之中，真不是陛下修建宫馆的时候，等待海内平靖安宁，再经营这些也不为晚。 
English: What's more, the Wei dynasty had not yet been conquered, and both the court and the people were in dire straits. It really wasn't time for His Majesty to build a palace, and it wasn't too late to wait for peace and tranquility in the country, and then deal with these issues.

古文：上纳其言，仍赐诏褒之。
现代文：后晋高祖采纳了他的意见，仍然赐予褒奖的诏书。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu adopted his opinion and still issued the imperial edict of commendation.

古文：己丑，金部郎中经铸奏： 窃见乡村浮户，非不勤稼穑，非不乐安居，但以种木未盈十年，垦田未及三顷，似成生业，已为县司收供徭役，责之重赋，威以严刑，故不免捐功舍业，更思他适。
现代文：己丑，金部郎中张铸奏言： 我看到乡村中没有定籍的浮户，并非不愿勤劳于耕种庄稼，并非不愿乐业安居，只是因为他们种树还不到十年，垦田也不足三顷，将要成为生计之业时，就已被县里司管部门收起，要求供应徭役，要求交纳重赋，用严酷的刑罚震慑他们，因此，不免丢了劳绩，舍弃生业，另谋出路。
English: Zhang casts a speech: I see that the floating households without permanent residence in the countryside are not unwilling to work hard in cultivating crops, and are not unwilling to live happily. However, because they have not planted trees for more than ten years, and the rice fields are less than three hectares, when they are about to become a livelihood, they have been closed down by the county administrative department, demanding the supply of laborers, demanding payment of re-assignment, and deterring them with severe penalties. Therefore, they inevitably lost their work, gave up their livelihood, and found another way out.

古文：乞自今民垦田及五顷以上，三年外乃听县司徭役。 
现代文：请求允许：从今以后，民众垦田到五顷以上的，三年以后才听由县司徭役。 
English: Request for permission: From now on, the people will be allowed to cultivate more than five hectares of land, and the county magistrate will be appointed after three years.

古文：从之。
现代文：后晋高祖听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秋，七月，中书奏： 朝代虽殊，条制无异。
现代文：秋季七月，中书奏言： 朝代虽然不同，条规制度没有变样。
English: In the autumn of July, the Chinese book of records made a speech: Although the dynasties are different, the rules and regulations system has not changed.

古文：请委官取明宗及清泰时敕，详定可久行者编次之。 
现代文：请朝廷委命专门官员选择明宗及清泰时期的敕令，详细审定可以长久施行的条规加以编排。 
English: Please ask the Imperial Household Committee to appoint special officials to select the imperial decrees from the Ming Dynasty and the Qing and Thai Dynasties, verify in detail the rules and regulations that can be implemented for a long time, and arrange them.

古文：己酉，诏左谏议大夫薛融等详定。
现代文：己酉，后晋高祖诏命左谏议大夫薛融等详加审定。
English: It was approved in detail by Dr. Xue Rong, who was a doctor of medicine and later a high-ranking scholar.

古文：辛酉，敕作受命宝，以 受天明命，惟德允昌 为文。
现代文：辛酉，后晋高祖敕令制作受命的宝玺，其文字用 受天明命，惟德允昌 。
English: Emperor Xinzong and Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty ordered the production of the ordered treasure map, and its text was ordered by Heaven, but it was approved.

古文：八月，帝上尊号于契丹主及太后，戊寅，以冯道为太后册礼使，左仆射刘煦为契丹主册礼使，备卤薄、仪仗、车辂，诣契丹行礼；契丹主大悦。
现代文：八月，后晋高祖给契丹国主耶律德光及述律太后上尊号，戊寅，任命冯道为太后册礼使，左仆射刘煦为契丹主册礼使，配备着卤簿、仪仗、车辂，送至契丹行礼；契丹主极为高兴。
English: In August, Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty bestowed the title of nobility on the sovereign of Khitan, Yerutdeguang, and the empress dowager, Su Li, and appointed Feng Dao as the emissary of the empress dowager, and his left-hand man Liu Yao as the emissary of the empress dowager of Khitan. They were equipped with a halo book, a ceremonial sword, and a chariot, and were sent to Khitan to perform the ritual. The empress dowager of Khitan was extremely happy.

古文：帝事契丹甚谨，奉表称臣，谓契丹主为 父皇帝 ；每契丹使至，帝于别殿拜受诏敕。
现代文：后晋高祖事奉契丹很恭谨，上表称臣，叫契丹主为 父皇帝 ；每当契丹的使者来到，后晋高祖在别殿拜接契丹的诏书和敕令。
English: Later, Emperor Jintao's ancestors were very respectful in their service to Khitan. They bowed before him and called him the Father Emperor. Whenever Khitan emissaries came, Emperor Jintao's ancestors bowed to receive Khitan's edicts and decrees in the hall.

古文：岁输金帛三十万之外，吉凶庆吊，岁时赠遗，玩好珍异，相继于道。
现代文：每年除了要输送金帛三十万之外，各种吉凶庆吊，季节馈赠，玩好珍异，运送的车马接连于道路。
English: In addition to transporting 300,000 gold ingots every year, all kinds of auspicious and inauspicious celebrations, seasonal gifts, playing with rarities, and transporting horses and carts are connected to the road.

古文：乃至应天太后、元帅太子、伟王、南、北二王、韩延徽、赵延寿等诸大臣皆有赂遗。小不如意，辄来责让，帝常卑辞谢之。
现代文：而且对于述律太后、元帅太子、伟王、南王、北王、韩延徽、赵延寿等诸大臣都有贿赠；他们小有不如意的，便来责备、索取，后晋高祖往往用谦卑的语言谢罪。
English: Moreover, there were bribes for the ministers such as the Dowager Empress Dowager, the Marshal Prince, the Great King, the South King, the North King, Han Yanhui, and Zhao Yanshou; if they were not satisfied, they would come to reproach and demand, and the post-Jin Gaozu often used humble language to apologize.

古文：晋使者至契丹，契丹骄倨，多不逊语。
现代文：晋朝的使者到契丹，契丹骄横倨慢，语多不逊。
English: The envoys of the Jin Dynasty came to Khitan. Khitan was arrogant, arrogant, and spoke many languages.

古文：使者还，以闻，朝野咸以为耻，而帝事之曾无倦意，以是终帝之世，与契丹无隙。
现代文：使者回朝，向后晋高祖报告，朝廷内外都以为羞耻，而后晋高祖卑恭对待契丹，从来没有怠慢过，因此，整个后晋高祖在位的时期，同契丹没有发生过嫌隙。
English: Envoys returned to the North and reported to Emperor Gaozong that both inside and outside the imperial court were ashamed of him, but Emperor Gaozong treated Khitan humbly and never neglected him. Therefore, during the entire reign of Emperor Gaozong, there was no rift with Khitan.

古文：然所输金帛不过数县租赋，往往托以民困，不能满数。
现代文：然而所输送的金帛，不过是几个县的田租赋税。往往托词说民间困乏，不能满额送到。
English: However, the gold ingots sent are nothing more than the land rent tax of several counties. Often, the excuse is that the people are poor and cannot send the full amount.

古文：其后契丹主屡止帝上表称臣，但令为书称 儿皇帝 ，如家人礼。
现代文：后来，契丹主多次制止后晋高祖上表称臣，只叫他写信时自称 儿皇帝 ，像家庭之间行礼一样。
English: Later, the Khitan lord repeatedly stopped the emperor's great-great-great-grandfather from publicly praising him, and only told him to call himself the "child emperor" when writing letters, just like a greeting between families.

古文：初，契丹主既得幽州，命曰南京，以唐降将赵思温为留守。
现代文：当初，契丹取得幽州后，命名为南京，任用后唐降将赵思温为留守。
English: At first, after the Khitan obtained Yuzhou, it was named Nanjing. After his appointment, the Tang Dynasty demoted Zhao Siwen to a subordinate.

古文：思温子延照在晋，帝以为祁州刺史。
现代文：赵思温的儿子赵延照在后晋朝，后晋高祖任用他为祁州刺史。
English: Zhao Yanzhao, the son of Zhao Siwen, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou by Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty.

古文：思温密令延照言虏情终变，请以幽州内附；帝不许。
现代文：赵思温暗中让他的儿子赵延照上言后晋高祖说契丹的情况终必要变更，请求把幽州内附于后晋；后晋高祖不答应。
English: Zhao Siwen secretly asked his son, Zhao Yan, to say that the situation in Khitan would eventually have to be changed, and requested that Yuzhou be annexed to Houjin; Houjin Gaozu did not agree.

古文：契丹遣使诣唐，宋齐丘劝唐主厚贿之，俟至淮北，潜遣人杀之，欲以间晋。
现代文：契丹遣派使者到南唐，宋齐丘劝南唐主徐诰给他丰厚的贿赠，待到他回途行至淮河以北时，暗中派人杀了他，打算以此来离间契丹同后晋的关系。
English: Khitan sent an envoy to Southern Tang, Song Qiqiu persuaded the Southern Tang lord Xu Xi to give him a rich bribe, and when he was on his way back north of the Huai River, he secretly sent someone to kill him, intending to use this to break the relationship between Khitan and Houjin.

古文：壬午，杨光远奏前澶州刺史冯晖自广晋城中出战，因来降，言范延光食尽穷困；己丑，以晖为义成节度使。
现代文：壬午，杨光远奏报：前澶州刺史冯晖从广晋城中出战，乘机来投降，言说范延光在城中粮食用尽，情况穷困；己丑，后晋朝廷任用冯晖为义成节度使。
English: In the afternoon, Yang Guangyuan reported: Feng Ye, the former governor of Zhangzhou, went to fight in the city of Guangjin and took the opportunity to surrender. He said that Fan Yanguang had run out of food in the city and was in a poor condition. He was so ugly that the Later Jin Dynasty court appointed Feng Ye as the Yicheng Festival envoy.

古文：杨光远攻广晋，岁馀不下，帝以师老民疲，遣内职硃宪入城谕范延光，许移大籓，曰： 若降而杀汝，白日在上，吾无以享国。 
现代文：杨光远攻打广晋，一年多攻不下来。后晋高祖因为师兴过久，百姓困疲，便派在内廷供职的宦者朱宪进入广晋城告谕范延光，答应调他镇守大的藩镇，并说： 如果在你投降后杀你，白日在上，我不能享有国家。 
English: Yang Guangyuan attacked Guangjin, but could not attack it for more than a year. Later, Emperor Gaozhu sent Zhu Xian, an eunuch who served in the Inner Court, to enter the city of Guangjin to tell Fan Yanquan that he would not be able to attack Guangjin because his master had been in power for too long and the people were exhausted. He promised to transfer his town to the largest town of the Han Dynasty, and said: "If I kill you after you surrender, I will not be able to enjoy the country."

古文：延光谓节度副使李式曰： 主上重信，云不死则不死矣。 
现代文：范延光对节度副使李式说： 主上是个看重信用的人，说不死就一定不会死的。 
English: Fan Yanguang said to Li Shiguo, the deputy chief of the festival: The Lord is a person who values trust. If you don't die, you won't die.

古文：乃撤守备，然犹迁延未决。
现代文：便撤下城中守备，然而还犹豫不决。
English: He withdrew from the city, but still hesitated.

古文：宣徽南院使刘处让复入谕之，延光意乃决。
现代文：宣徽南院使刘处让再次进城告谕他，范延光才决意投降。
English: The Southern Yuan of Xuanhui ordered Liu Shujang to enter the city again to tell him that Fan Yanguang had finally decided to surrender.

古文：九月，乙巳朔，杨光远送延光二子守图、守英诣大梁。
现代文：九月，乙巳朔，杨光远把范延光的两个儿子范守图、范守英送往大梁。
English: In September, Yang Guangyuan sent Fan Yanquan's two sons, Fan Shoutu and Fan Shouying, to Daliang.

古文：己酉，延光遣牙将奉表待罪。
现代文：己酉，范延光遣派牙将奉表朝廷等待治罪。
English: As a result, Fan Yanguang will be sent to the imperial court to await punishment.

古文：壬子，诏书至广晋，延光帅其众素服于牙门，使者宣诏释之，硃宪，汴州人也。
现代文：壬子，后晋高祖诏书来到广晋，范延光率领他的属众在牙门丧服迎接，使者宣读诏书将他释放。朱宪是汴州人。
English: When Emperor Jinsi, the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, came to Guangjin with the imperial edict, Fan Yanguang led his followers in mourning clothes to meet him at the Gate of the Teeth. An envoy read out the imperial edict to release him. Zhu Xian was from Zhangzhou.

古文：契丹遣使如洛阳，取赵延寿妻唐燕国长公主以归。
现代文：契丹遗派使者到洛阳，接赵延寿的妻子后唐明宗的女儿燕国长公主北归。
English: Khitan sent an envoy to Luoyang to pick up the wife of Zhao Yanshou and the daughter of Tang Mingzong, the eldest princess of Yan Guo, to return to the north.

古文：壬戌，唐太府卿赵可封请唐主复姓李，立唐宗庙。
现代文：壬戌，南唐太府卿赵可封请求南唐主徐诰恢复姓李，建立唐室宗庙。
English: In Nanning, Zhao Kefeng, the governor of Southern Tang, requested the Southern Tang lord Xu Xi to restore the surname Li and establish a Tang dynasty temple.

古文：庚午，杨光远表乞入朝；命刘处让权知天雄军府事。
现代文：庚午，杨光远上表请求入朝；命刘处让暂时主持天雄军府事。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Yang Guangyuan submitted a request to enter the imperial court; Liu Shide was ordered to temporarily preside over Tianxiong's military affairs.

古文：己巳，制以范延光为天平节度使，仍赐铁券，应广晋城中将吏军民今日以前罪皆释不问；其张从宾、符彦饶馀党及自官军逃叛入城者，亦释之。
现代文：己巳，后晋高祖下制令任用范延光为天平节度使。仍然赐给他铁券，答应广晋城中将吏军民在今日以前的罪行都释除不再究问；那些属于张从宾、符彦饶的余党以及从官军中逃叛入城的人，也都释放了。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong of the Jin Dynasty issued an order to appoint Fan Yanguang as the envoy of the Tianping Festival. He was still given iron certificates and promised that the generals, soldiers and people of the city of Guangjin would be released from the crimes committed before today and would no longer be investigated; those who belonged to the remaining party of Zhang Congbin and Fu Yanrao, as well as those who fled from the government army and entered the city, were also released.

古文：延光腹心将佐李式、孙汉威、薛霸皆除防御、团练使、刺史，牙兵皆升为侍卫亲军。
现代文：范延光的腹心将佐李式、孙汉威、薛霸都任用为防御、团练使、刺史，牙兵都升为侍卫亲军。
English: Fan Yanqing's trusted lieutenants, Za Lishi, Sun Hanwei, and Xue Ba, were all appointed as defense, regimental training envoys, and historians, and the dental soldiers were promoted to guards.

古文：初，河阳行军司马李彦珣，邢州人也，父母在乡里，未尝供馈。
现代文：以前，河阳行军司马李彦是邢州人，父母住在乡下，没有受过供养。
English: In the past, Sima Liyan, the commander of the Hayao March, was from Ganzhou. His parents lived in the countryside and had no means of support.

古文：后与张从宾同反，从宾败，奔广晋，范延光以为步军都监，使登城拒守。
现代文：后来，李彦与张从宾一同反叛，张从宾失败，投奔广晋。范延光任用他为步军都监，让他登城拒守。
English: Later, Li Yan and Zhang Congbin rebelled together. Zhang Congbin was defeated and fled to Guangjin. Fan Yanguang appointed him as the inspector of the marching army, and let him go to the city to refuse to defend.

古文：杨光远访获其母，置城下以招之，彦王旬引弓射杀其母。
现代文：杨光远查访抓获他的母亲，置放在城下来招降李彦，李彦用弓箭把他的母亲射杀了。
English: Yang Guangyuan visited his mother, who had been captured and placed in the city to recruit Li Yan. Li Yan shot his mother to death with a bow and arrow.

古文：延光既降，帝以彦珣为坊州刺史。
现代文：范延光投降后，后晋高祖任用李彦为坊州刺史。
English: After Fan Yanguang's surrender, Li Yan was appointed as the governor of Bozhou by Emperor Gaozu.

古文：近臣言彦珣杀母，杀母恶逆不可赦；帝曰： 赦令已行，不可改也。 
现代文：后晋高祖近臣言说李彦杀母的恶逆不可赦；后晋高祖说： 赦令已经施行，不能再改了。 
English: After promotion, Gao Zu's close vassal said that Li Yan's crime of killing his mother was unforgivable; after promotion, Gao Zu said: The pardon order has been implemented and can no longer be changed.

古文：乃遣之官。
现代文：便仍让他去赴任。
English: He was still allowed to take up his post.

古文：臣光曰：治国家者固不可无信。
现代文：臣司马光曰：治理国家的人固然不可以不讲求信用。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Those who govern the country must not forget to ask for trust.

古文：然彦旬之恶，三灵所不容，晋高祖赦其叛君之愆，治其杀母之罪，何损于信哉！
现代文：然而李彦的罪恶，天神地祗人鬼所不容。如果晋高祖赦了他背叛君主的过错，惩罚他杀母的罪行，有什么损害信用的呢！
English: However, Li Yan's crime was not tolerated by gods and spirits. If Emperor Jingu forgave him for betraying the monarch and punished him for killing his mother, what harm would it do to his credibility?

古文：辛未，以杨光远为天雄节度使。
现代文：辛未，后晋高祖任用杨光远为天雄节度使。
English: Xin Wei and Yang Guangyuan were appointed as Tianxiong's special envoys by Emperor Jingu.

古文：冬，十月，戊寅，契丹遣使奉宝册，加帝尊号曰英武明义皇帝。
现代文：冬季十月，戊寅，契丹派遣使者奉献宝册，加尊后晋高祖为英武明义皇帝。
English: In the winter of October, Wu Yin and Khitan sent an envoy to dedicate the treasure book, and honored Emperor Yingwu Mingyi.

古文：帝以大梁舟车所会，便于漕运，丙辰，建东京于汴州，复以汴州为开封府，以东都为西京，以西都为晋昌军节度。
现代文：后晋高祖认为大梁是船车所汇聚的地方，便于漕运，丙辰，在汴州建立东京。又把汴州立为开封府，把东都洛阳立为西京，把西都长安归为晋昌军节度。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu of the Jin Dynasty thought that the girders were the place where ships and wagons converged, which was convenient for rowing, and established Tokyo in Zhangzhou. He also made Zhangzhou the capital of Kaifeng, the eastern capital Luoyang the capital of the west, and the western capital Chang'an the capital of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：帝遣兵部尚书王权使契丹谢尊号，权自以累世将相，耻之，谓人曰： 吾老矣，安能向穹庐屈膝！ 
现代文：后晋高祖派遣兵部尚书王权出使契丹表示对上尊号的谢意。王权以为自己累世任中原朝廷的将相，感到羞耻，对人说： 我已经老了，怎能向穹庐下跪！ 
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu dispatched the war department Shangshu Wangquan to the Khitan Empire to express his gratitude for the honorific title. Wangquan felt ashamed that he had served as the general of the Central Plains court for many generations, and said to people: I am already old, how can I kneel down to the dome!

古文：乃辞以老疾。
现代文：便说年老有病，推辞不去。
English: He said that he was old and sick, and that he would not go back on his refusal.

古文：帝怒，戊子，权坐停官。
现代文：后晋高祖发怒，戊子，王权坐罪被停官。
English: After the promotion, Gaozu was angry, and Wu Zi was suspended for the crime of siding with Wang Quan.

古文：初，郭崇韬既死，宰相罕有兼枢密使者。
现代文：以前，郭崇韬死后，宰相很少有兼任枢密使。
English: In the past, after the death of Guo Chongzhen, it was rare for a prime minister to also serve as an envoy.

古文：帝即位，桑维翰、李崧兼之，宣徽使刘处让及宦官皆不悦。
现代文：后晋高祖即位，桑维翰、李崧兼任了，宣徽使刘处让和宦官都不高兴。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, Sang Weihang and Li Xi also took office. The announcement of the emblem made Liu Shanzhang and the eunuchs unhappy.

古文：杨光远围广晋，处让数以军事衔命往来，光远奏请多逾分，帝常依违，维翰独以法裁折之。
现代文：杨光远围攻广晋时，刘处让几次以军事身份带着后晋高祖命令往来传达，杨光远奏请事情往往超越本份，后晋高祖常常不作可否，唯独桑维翰按法规加以裁定和批驳。
English: When Yang Guangyuan was besieging Guangjin, Liu Shide several times had Zhuo in his military capacity convey orders to Yang Guangyuan. Yang Guangyuan often asked Zhuo to do things beyond his duties, and Zhuo often did not make decisions, but only Sang Weihan ruled and refuted according to regulations.

古文：光远对处让有不平语，处让曰： 是皆执政之意。 
现代文：杨光远为此对刘处让表示过不满，刘处让说： 这些都是执政者的意思。 
English: Yang Guangyuan expressed dissatisfaction with Liu Shanzhang for this. Liu Shanzhang said: These are the intentions of the ruling party.

古文：光远由是怨执政。
现代文：杨光远因此怨恨执政者。
English: As a result, Yang Guangyuan resented the government.

古文：范延光降，光远密表论执政过失；帝知其故而不得已，加维翰兵部尚书，崧工部尚书，皆罢其枢密使；以处让为枢密使。
现代文：范延光投降以后，杨光远秘密上表论说执政者的过失；后晋高祖知道事情发生的原因但又无法解决，便加官给桑维翰为兵部尚书，李崧为工部尚书，把二人的枢密使都罢免了；任命刘处让为枢密使。
English: After Fan Yanguang's surrender, Yang Guangyuan secretly made a public statement saying that it was the fault of the rulers; the late Emperor Gaozu knew the cause of the incident but could not solve it, so he appointed Sang Weihan as the secretary of the military department and Li Xi as the secretary of the industrial department, and dismissed the two envoys; he appointed Liu Shide as the envoy.

古文：太常奏： 今建东京，而宗庙、社稷皆在西京，请迁置大梁。 
现代文：太常寺奏道： 现在已建东京，而宗庙、社稷的祭祀都在西京，请求把它们迁到大梁。 
English: So-do of Taejoji Temple: Now Tokyo has been built, but the religious services of the ancestral temple and shrine are in West Kyoto, and it is requested that they be moved to Dairyo.

古文：敕旨： 且仍旧。 
现代文：后晋高祖下敕旨： 暂且照旧不动。 
English: After promotion to the highest rank, the ancestor issued a command: "For the time being, do not move as before."

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：戊戌，实行大赦。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：杨延艺故将吴权自爱州举兵攻皎公羡于交州，公羡遣使以赂求救于汉。汉主欲乘其乱而取之，以其子万王弘操为静海节度使，徙封交王，将兵救公羡，汉主自将屯于海门，为之声援。
现代文：杨延艺的旧将吴权从爱州起兵攻打在交州的皎公羡，皎公羡派使者用贿赂求救于南汉，南汉主刘龚想乘其乱而夺取交州，任用他的儿子万王刘弘操为静海节度使，并徙封为交王，统兵去救皎公羡，南汉主自己统兵屯驻海门，作为他的声援。
English: Yang Yanyi's former general Wu Quan led an army from Aizhou to attack Shigong Qian in Jiaozhou. Shigong Qian sent an envoy to bribe Southern Han for help. Southern Han ruler Liu Bei wanted to take advantage of the chaos to seize Jiaozhou. He appointed his son Wan Wang Liu Hongxiao as the envoy of Jinghai Festival, and moved the seal to Jiaozhou. The unified army went to rescue Shigong Qian. The Southern Han ruler stationed his own unified army at Haimen as his support.

古文：汉主问策于崇文使萧益，益曰： 今霖雨积旬，海道险远，吴权桀黠，未可轻也。
现代文：南汉主向崇文使萧益询问计策，萧益说： 现在淋雨已经十天，海道又险远，吴权为人凶猛而狡黠，不可轻视。
English: The lord of Southern Han asked Chongwen's envoy Xiao Yi about the strategy. Xiao Yi said: It has been raining for ten days now, and the sea route is far away. Wu Quan is a fierce and cunning person, and should not be despised.

古文：大军当持重，多用乡导，然后可进。 
现代文：我们的大军应当行动持重，多用向导，然后才可行进。 
English: Our great army should be heavy-handed and use more guides before it can advance.

古文：不听。
现代文：南汉主不听他的意见。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：命弘操帅战舰自白藤江趣交州。
现代文：命令刘弘操率领战舰从白藤江向交州进军。
English: He ordered Liu Hongxu to lead the warship to march from Baidu River to Jiaozhou.

古文：权已杀公羡，据交州，引兵逆战，先于海口多植大弋，锐其首，冒之以铁，遣轻舟乘潮挑战而伪遁，弘操逐之，须臾潮落，汉舰皆碍铁杙不得返，汉兵大败，士卒覆溺者太半；弘操死，汉主恸哭，收馀众而还。
现代文：当时吴权已经杀了皎公羡，占据了交州，率领兵众来迎战，先在海口栽植很多大木橛，把橛头削尖了，用铁包裹，派出轻便的船乘着涨潮来挑战，接着便伪装作逃遁，不长时间潮水回落，南汉的舰船都被铁橛阻挡住，不能返航，南汉兵大败，士兵有一多半被覆舟淹死；刘弘操战死，南汉主痛哭，收集余众而还。
English: At that time, Wu Quan had already killed Zeng Gongen, occupied Jiaozhou, and led the troops to meet the battle. First, he planted a lot of large wooden rafts in Haikou, sharpened the rafts, wrapped them with iron, sent light boats to challenge the rising tide, and then disguised them as escape rafts. Not long after the tide receded, the ships of Southern Han were blocked by iron rafts and could not return. The Southern Han soldiers were defeated, and more than half of the soldiers were drowned by covered boats; Liu Hongxu died in battle, the Southern Han master cried bitterly, collected the rest of the people and returned.

古文：先是，著作佐郎侯融劝汉主弭兵息民，至是以兵不振，追咎融，剖棺暴其尸。
现代文：以前，著作佐郎侯融曾经劝告南汉主息兵养民，到这时把兵力不振归罪于侯融，把他的棺材挖出来，加以暴尸。
English: Previously, the author, Saro Hou Rong, had advised the Southern Han ruler to maintain the army and feed the people. At this time, he blamed Hou Rong for the weakness of the army, dug out his coffin, and mutilated his body.

古文：益，仿之孙也。
现代文：萧益是唐懿宗时宰相萧的孙子。
English: Xiao Yi was the grandson of Xiao Yu, the prime minister of Tang Dynasty.

古文：楚顺贤夫人彭氏卒。
现代文：楚国顺贤夫人彭氏去世。
English: Ms. Peng, the wife of Shunxian of Chu, passed away.

古文：彭夫人貌陋而治家有法，楚王希范惮之；既卒，希范始纵声色，为长夜之饮，内外无别。
现代文：彭夫人相貌长得并不好看，但是治家很得法，楚王马希范畏惧她。她死了以后，马希范开始纵情声色，做通宵的饮宴娱乐，不分内外。
English: Lady Peng's appearance was not good-looking, but she was a good housekeeper. King Ma Xifan of Chu was afraid of her. After her death, Ma Xifan began to indulge in eroticism, doing all-night banquets and entertainment, both inside and outside.

古文：有商人妻美，希范杀其夫而夺之，妻誓不辱，自经死。
现代文：有个商人的妻子长得美丽，马希范杀了她的丈夫而要占有她，商人妻发誓不受玷辱，自己上吊死了。
English: There was a merchant's wife who was beautiful. Mahifan killed her husband to possess her. The merchant's wife swore not to be disgraced and hanged herself.

古文：河决郓州。
现代文：黄河在郓州决口。
English: The Yellow River bursts its banks in Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月，范延光自郓州入朝。
现代文：十一月，范延光从郓州来入京朝拜。
English: In November, Fan Yanguang came from Zhangzhou to worship in Beijing.

古文：丙午，以闽主昶为闽国王，以左散骑常侍卢损为册礼使，赐昶赭袍。
现代文：丙午，后晋朝廷册命闽主王昶为闽国王，委命左散骑常侍卢损为册礼使，赐予王昶天子服用的褚袍。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the court of the Later Jin Dynasty made an order to make the lord Wang Xi the king, and appointed the left horseback riding attendant Lu Jia as the envoy, and gave Wang Xi the robe to wear.

古文：戊申，以威武节度使王继恭为临海郡王。
现代文：戊申，任命威武节度使王继恭为临海郡王。
English: Wushin, appointed Weiwu Jiedu to make Wang Jigong the king of Linhai County.

古文：闽主闻之，遣进奏官林恩白执政，以既袭帝号，辞册命及使者。
现代文：闽主听说后，遣派进奏官林恩向执政者告白，认为闽主已经承袭了闽国帝号，辞却晋廷的册命和使者。
English: After the emperor heard about it, Lin Ru, the envoy, confessed to the ruler that the emperor had already inherited the title of Emperor of the Han Dynasty, but he had resigned as the emperor's messenger and envoy.

古文：闽谏议大夫黄讽以闽主淫暴，与妻子辞诀入谏，闽主欲杖之，讽曰： 臣若迷国不忠，死亦无怨；直谏被杖，臣不受也。 
现代文：闽国谏议大夫黄讽认为闽主荒淫暴虐，他便和妻子诀别而后入朝进谏，闽主要用廷杖责处他，黄讽说： 我若是迷乱国家而不忠，即使死了也没有怨言；若是因为直言进谏而被杖罚，我不能接受。 
English: Huang Rong thought that his master was a lecher and a tyrant, so he said goodbye to his wife and then went to the imperial court. Huang Rong mainly used the imperial scepter to punish him. Huang Rong said, "If I misled the country and was disloyal, I would have no complaints even if I died. If I was punished with the imperial scepter because I was outspoken, I could not accept it."

古文：闽主怒，黜为民。
现代文：闽主发怒，将他罢黜为民。
English: And the Lord was wroth, and removed him out of his sight.

古文：帝患天雄节度使杨光远跋扈难制，桑维翰请分天雄之众，加光远太尉、西京留守兼河阳节度使。
现代文：后晋高祖顾虑天雄节度使杨光远跋扈难以制服，桑维翰请求分散天雄军的兵力，给杨光远加官为太尉、西京留守兼河阳节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu, concerned about Tianxiong's festival, made Yang Guangyuan difficult to subdue. San Weihan requested to disperse the troops of Tianxiong's army, and Yang Guangyuan was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, left for West Beijing and sent to the festival in Heyang.

古文：光远由是怨望，密以赂自诉于契丹，养部曲千馀人，常蓄异志。
现代文：杨光远从此产生了怨恨心理，暗中贿赂契丹并向契丹进行自我表白，他训养私人所有的部曲一千余人，心里常怀叛离的想法。
English: From then on, Yang Guangyuan developed a grudge, secretly bribed the Khitan and confessed himself to the Khitan. He trained more than a thousand people in privately owned units, and often harbored the idea of defection.

古文：辛亥，建鄴都于广晋府，置彰德军于相州，以澶、卫隶之；置永清军于贝州，以博、冀隶之。澶州旧治顿丘，帝虑契丹为后世之患，遣前淄州刺史汲人刘继勋徙澶州跨德胜津，并顿丘徙焉。
现代文：辛亥，后晋朝廷在广晋府恢复建立邺都；在相州设置彰德军，把澶州、卫州划属于它；在贝州设置永清军，把博州、冀州划属于它，澶州的州治过去设在黄河北岸的顿丘，后晋高祖顾虑契丹以后为患于中原，遣派前淄州刺史汲州人刘继勋把澶州迁移到黄河南岸的德胜津，连同顿丘一起划归澶州统辖。
English: In Xinhai, the Later Jin Dynasty resumed the establishment of the capital of Ganzhou in Guangjin Prefecture; set up the Changde Army in Xiangzhou, and assigned Ganzhou and Weizhou to it; set up the Yongqing Army in Beizhou, and assigned Bozhou and Jizhou to it. The governance of Ganzhou used to be located in Dongqiu on the north bank of the Yellow River. Later, the ancestors of the Later Jin Dynasty Gaozhou, concerned about the Central Plains after the Khitan War, sent Liu Jixun, a former Zhangzhou resident, to move Ganzhou to Deshengjin on the south bank of the Yellow River, and together with Dongqiu

古文：以河南尹高行周为广晋尹、鄴都留守，贝州防御使王廷胤为彰德节度使，右神武统军王周为永清节度使。
现代文：任命河南尹高行周为广晋尹、邺都留守，贝州防御使王廷胤为彰德节度使，右神武统军王周为永清节度使。
English: Henan Yin Gao Xing Zhou was appointed as the Guangjin Yin, and Shidu stayed behind, Baizhou Defense Envoy Wang Tingyan was appointed as the Changde Festival Envoy, and Right Divine Military Commander Wang Zhou was appointed as the Yongqing Festival Envoy.

古文：廷胤，处存之孙；周，鄴都人也。
现代文：王廷胤是王处存的孙子；高行用是邺都人。
English: Wang Tinglian is the grandson of Wang Shizhuan; Gao Xingyong is from Shidu.

古文：范延光屡请致仕，甲寅，诏以太子太师致仕，居于大梁，每预宴会，与群臣无异。延光之反也，相州刺史掖人王景拒境不从，戊午，以景为耀州团练使。
现代文：范延光几次请求退休，甲寅，后晋高祖下诏：以太子太师退休，居住在东京大梁，每逢参加宴会，与群臣没有不同范延光造反时，相州刺史掖地人王景在边境抗拒不跟随他，戊午，任用王景为耀州团练使。
English: Fan Yanguang asked several times to retire, and Gao Yin, the post-championship great-grandfather, issued an edict: Eizi Taishi retired, lived in Tokyo Daliang, every time he attended a banquet, he was no different from the courtiers. When Fan Yanguang rebelled, Wang Jing, a scholar from Shandong Province, resisted at the border and did not follow him. In the afternoon, Wang Jing was appointed as the training envoy of the Yaozhou Regiment.

古文：癸亥，敕听公私自铸铜钱，无得杂以铅铁，每十钱重一两，以 天福无宝 为文。仍令盐铁颁下模范，惟禁私作铜器。
现代文：癸亥，后晋高祖下敕令：听由公私自铸侗钱，但不得掺杂进铅和铁，每十钱重一两，用 天福元宝 作文字，仍然由盐铁使司颁行钱模作规范。惟独禁止私自制作铜器。
English: Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty issued an imperial edict: the public and private sectors were allowed to mint their own money, but lead and iron were not allowed to be mixed in. Each ten-yen coin was to be one or two times heavier, with the characters "天福元宝" (天福元宝) and the money model was still to be issued by the Ministry of Salt and Iron. However, the private production of copperware was prohibited.

古文：立右金吾卫上将军重贵为郑王，充开封尹。
现代文：后晋立左金吾卫上将军石重贵为郑王，充任开封府尹。
English: Later, after the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Zuo Wei appointed General Shi Chonggui as King Zheng, and he served as the governor of Kaifeng.

古文：庚辰，敕先许公私铸钱，虑铜难得，听轻重从便，但勿令缺漏。
现代文：庚辰，后晋高祖敕令先行准许公私铸造钱币，又考虑铜料难以得到。便听任轻重可以从便，只是不要使钱币流通缺漏。
English: Geng Chen, the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, first allowed the minting of coins in public and private, and also considered the difficulty of obtaining copper. Then, any weight can be used, but do not make the circulation of coins incomplete.

古文：辛丑，吴让皇卒。
现代文：辛丑，吴国让皇杨溥去世。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, the State of Wu allowed Emperor Yang Di to die.

古文：唐王废朝二十七日，追谥曰睿皇帝。
现代文：南唐主徐诰停止上朝二十七日，追谥让皇为睿皇帝。
English: On the 27th day of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Xu Xi, ceased to ascend to the throne.

古文：是岁，唐主徙吴王璟为齐王。
现代文：这一年，南唐主徙封吴王徐为齐王。
English: In the same year, the lord of Southern Tang transferred the title of King of Wu to King of Qi.

古文：凤翔节度使李从严，厚文士而薄武人，爱农民而严士卒，由是将士怨之。
现代文：凤翔节度使李从，对文士厚重而对武人轻薄，对农民爱惜而对士兵严厉，因此，将士怨恨他。
English: Fengxiang's self-restraint caused Li Cong to be heavy-handed with the scribes and light-hearted with the warriors. He was kind to the peasants but harsh with the soldiers. Therefore, the soldiers resented him.

古文：会发兵戌西边，既出郊，作乱，突门入城，剽掠于市。
现代文：有一天，发兵戍守西部边界，刚开出郊外，发生动乱，冲破门卫入城，在市街上大事劫掠。
English: One day, troops were sent to guard the western border, and just after leaving the suburbs, there was a riot, breaking through the gate guards into the city and looting in the city streets.

古文：从严发帐下兵击之，乱兵帐，东走，欲自诉于朝廷，至华州，镇国节度使太原张彦泽邀击，尽诛之。
现代文：李从发动帐下兵众攻击他们，乱兵失败，向东遁走，想到东京去向后晋朝廷申诉，到达华州时，镇国节度使张彦泽进行阻击，把他们都杀了。
English: Li attacked them by mobilizing the troops under his command. The disorderly soldiers failed, and he marched eastward, thinking of going to Tokyo to appeal to the imperial court. When he arrived in Huazhou, the township government ordered Zhang Yanze to fight back, and he killed them all.

