古文：陈太丘与友期行，期日中。
现代文：太丘长陈寔和朋友约好一同外出，约定好中午出发。
English: Chen Yu, the mayor of Taikoo, made an appointment with a friend to go out together, and they agreed to leave at noon.

古文：过中不至，太丘舍去，去后乃至。
现代文：过了中午，朋友还没有来，陈寔就自己走了。
English: After noon, when his friend still hadn't arrived, Chen Yao left on his own.

古文：元方时年七岁，门外戏。
现代文：走了以后，他的那位朋友才到。当时陈寔儿子元方才七岁，正在门外玩耍。
English: After he left, his friend arrived. At that time, Chen Yao's son, Yuan Fang, was only seven years old and was playing outside the door.

古文：客问元方： 尊君在不？ 
现代文：来客问元方： 令尊在家吗？ 
English: The visitor asked the original party: Is your father at home?

古文：答曰： 待君久不至，已去。 
现代文：元方回答说： 家父等了您很久，见您不来，已经走了。 
English: Yuan Fang replied, "My father has been waiting for you for a long time, but seeing you did not come, he has already left.

古文：友人便怒曰： 非人哉！
现代文：那位朋友便生起气来，说道： 真不是人呀！
English: The friend became angry and said, "That's not a person!

古文：与人期行，相委而去。 元方曰： 君与家君期日中。
现代文：和别人约好一起走，却扔下别人不管，自己走了！ 元方说： 您是跟家父约定中午走的。
English: You made an appointment with someone else to go together, but you left everyone else behind and went on your own! Yuan Fang said: You made an appointment with my father to leave at noon.

古文：日中不至，则是无信；对子骂父，则是无礼。 
现代文：到了中午您还不来。这就是不守信用；对着人家的儿子骂人家的父亲，这是不讲礼貌。 
English: You don't show up at noon. That's not keeping a promise. It's not polite to call someone's father a son.

古文：友人惭，下车引之。
现代文：那位朋友听了很惭愧，就下车来招呼他。
English: Embarrassed, the friend got out of the car to greet him.

古文：元方入门不顾。
现代文：元方掉头回家去，再也不回看一眼。
English: Yuan Fang turned around and went home, never looking back.

古文：南阳宗世林，魏武同时，而甚薄其为人，不与之交。
现代文：南阳郡人宗世林，是和魏武帝曹操同时代的入，他很瞧不起曹操的为人，不肯和曹操结交。
English: The man from Nanyang County lived in Shilin and was a contemporary of the Wei Emperor Cao Cao. He despised Cao Cao and refused to make friends with him.

古文：及魏武作司空，总朝政，从容问宗曰： 可以交未？ 
现代文：曹操到做了司空，总揽朝廷大权的时候，曾经安闲地问宗世林： 现在可不可以结交呢？ 
English: When Cao Cao became the first emperor and took over the supreme power of the imperial court, he once asked Zong Shilin in a relaxed manner: Is it possible to make friends now?

古文：答曰： 松柏之志犹存。 
现代文：宗世林回答说： 我的松柏一样的意志还没有变。 
English: Soseirin replied, "My will, which is like a pine tree, has not changed.

古文：世林既以忤旨见疏，位不配德。
现代文：宗世林因为不合曹操心意被疏远以后， 官职很低，和他的德行不相配。
English: After Zong Shilin was alienated because he did not meet Cao Cao's wishes, his official position was very low and did not match his virtue.

古文：文帝兄弟每造其门，皆独拜床下，其见礼如此。
现代文：但是曹丕兄弟每次登门拜访，都是以晚辈的身分，特别在他的坐床前行拜见礼。他就是这样地受到尊敬。
English: But every time the Cao brothers came to visit him, they did so as his juniors, and especially paid homage to him before he went to bed. This is how he was respected.

古文：魏文帝受禅，陈群有戚容。
现代文：魏文帝称帝，陈群面带愁容。
English: Emperor Wei Wen declared himself emperor, Chen Qun with a sad face.

古文：帝问曰： 朕应天受命，卿何以不乐？ 
现代文：文帝问他： 朕顺应天命即帝位，你为什么不高兴？ 
English: Emperor Wen asked him, "I have obeyed the mandate of heaven, that is, the throne. Why are you not happy?

古文：群曰： 臣与华歆，服膺先朝，今虽欣圣化，犹义形于色。 
现代文：陈群回答说： 臣和华歆铭记先朝，现在虽然欣逢盛世，但是怀念故主恩义的心情，还是不免要流露出来。 
English: Chen Qun replied: With the memory of the previous dynasty in mind, it is inevitable that the feelings of nostalgia for the old master's benevolence will come out, even though they are now enjoying a prosperous life.

古文：郭淮作关中都督，甚得民情，亦屡有战庸。
现代文：郭淮出任关中都督的时候，很得民心，也多次建立过战功。
English: When Guo Huai served as the governor of Guanzhong, he won the hearts and minds of the people, and also repeatedly established his war exploits.

古文：淮妻，太尉王凌之妹，坐凌事当并诛。
现代文：郭淮的妻子，是太尉王凌的妹妹，因为王凌犯罪事受株连，按律法应当一起处死。
English: Guo Huai's wife is the sister of First Lieutenant Wang Ling. According to the law, they should be executed together because Wang Ling committed the crime jointly and severally.

古文：使者徵摄甚急，淮使戒装，克日当发。
现代文：派来逮捕她的官吏要人要得很急，郭淮让妻子准备好行装，限定日子就要上路。
English: The high-ranking official sent to arrest her was in a hurry. Guo Huai told his wife to get ready for the trip and set a date for the trip.

古文：州府文武及百姓劝淮举兵，淮不许。
现代文：州和都督府的文武官员和百姓都劝说郭淮起兵反抗，郭淮不同意。
English: The civil and military officials of the prefecture and the governor's office and the common people all persuaded Guo Huai to raise an army to resist. Guo Huai did not agree.

古文：至期，遣妻，百姓号泣追呼者数万人。
现代文：到期打发妻子上路，百姓们号陶痛哭、一路跟着呼唤不舍的有几万人。
English: When it was time to send his wife on her way, the people cried and cried, and tens of thousands of people followed along the way.

古文：行数十里，淮乃命左右追夫人还，于是文武奔驰，如徇身首之急。
现代文：走了几十里路后，郭淮到底还是叫手下的人去把夫人追回来，于是文武官员飞跑传命，好像救自家性命那么着急。
English: After walking dozens of miles, Guo Huai still asked his subordinates to chase his wife back, so the civil and military officials ran for their lives, as if they were so anxious to save their own lives.

古文：既至，淮与宣帝书曰： 五子哀恋，思念其母，其母既亡，则无五子。
现代文：夫人追回来以后，郭淮写了封信给宣帝司马懿说： 五个孩子哀痛欲绝，恋恋不舍，思念他们的母亲。如果他们的母亲死了，我就会失去五个孩子。
English: After his wife was recovered, Guo Huai wrote a letter to Xuan Di Simatang, saying: "Five children are grief-stricken, desperately in love, and miss their mother. If their mother dies, I will lose five children.

古文：五子若殒，亦复无淮。 
现代文：五个孩子如果死了，也就不再有我郭淮了。 
English: If my five children die, then I, Guo Huai, will no longer exist.

古文：宣帝乃表，特原淮妻。
现代文：司马懿于是上表魏帝，特准赦免了郭淮的妻子。
English: Sima Yi then petitioned Emperor Wei and was granted special permission to pardon Guo Huai's wife.

古文：诸葛亮之次渭滨，关中震动。
现代文：诸葛亮屯兵在渭水南岸的时候，关中地区人心震动。
English: When Zhuge Liang's garrison was on the south bank of Surabaya, the hearts of people in the Guanzhong area were shaken.

古文：魏明帝深惧晋宣王战，乃遣辛毗为军司马。
现代文：魏明帝非常害怕晋宣王司马懿出战，便派辛毗去担任军司马。
English: Emperor Wei Ming was very afraid of Jinxuan Wang Sima Yao going to war, so he sent Xin Bi to serve as the military secretary.

古文：宣王既与亮对渭而陈，亮设诱谲万方。宣王果大忿，将欲应之以重兵。
现代文：司马懿和诸葛亮隔着渭水列成阵势以后，诸葛亮千方百计地设法诱骗他出战，他果然非常愤怒，就打算用重兵来对付诸葛亮。
English: After Sima Yi and Zhuge Liang formed a line of battle across the Surabaya River, Zhuge Liang tried his best to lure him into battle. He was indeed very angry and planned to use heavy troops to deal with Zhuge Liang.

古文：亮遣间谍觇之，还曰： 有一老夫，毅然仗黄钺，当军门立，军不得出。 
现代文：诸葛亮派间谍去侦察他的行动，回报说： 有一个老人拿着金斧，坚定地面对军营门口站着，军队都出不来。 
English: Zhuge Liang sent spies to investigate his actions, and in return said: There is an old man with a golden axe, standing firmly facing the gate of the military camp, the army can not come out.

古文：亮曰： 此必辛佐治也。 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 这一定是辛佐治呀。 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "This must be Xin George."

古文：夏侯玄既被桎梏，时钟毓为廷尉，钟会先不与玄相知，因便狎之。
现代文：夏侯玄被逮捕了，当时钟毓任廷尉，他弟弟钟会先前和夏侯玄没有交情，这时趁机亲近夏侯玄。
English: Xia Houxuan was arrested. At that time, Zhong Hui was a court lieutenant. His brother Zhong Hui had not been friends with Xia Houxuan before, so he took the opportunity to get close to Xia Houxuan.

古文：玄曰： 虽复刑余之人，未敢闻命！ 
现代文：夏侯玄说： 我虽然是罪人，也不敢遵从命令。 
English: Xia Houxuan said: Although I am a sinner, I dare not follow orders.

古文：考掠初无一言，临刑东市，颜色不异。
现代文：经受刑讯拷打，始终不出一声，临到解赴法场行刑，神情也和平时没有两样。
English: After being tortured, he never uttered a word, and when he was sent to the court for execution, his expression was the same as usual.

古文：夏侯泰初与广陵陈本善。
现代文：夏侯泰初和广陵郡人陈本是好朋友。
English: Xia Hou Taichu and Chen Ben, a resident of Guangling County, are good friends.

古文：本与玄在本母前宴饮，本弟骞行还，径入，至堂户。
现代文：当陈本和夏侯玄在陈本母亲面前宴饮时，陈本的弟弟陈骞从外面回来，一直进入堂屋门口。
English: While Chen Ben and Xia Houxuan were feasting in front of Chen Ben's mother, Chen Ben's younger brother Chen Yao came back from outside and went all the way to the door of the hall.

古文：泰初因起曰： 可得同，不可得而杂。 
现代文：于是泰初站起来说： 相同的事可以一齐办，不同的事不能混杂在一起办。 
English: So Tai stood up at the beginning and said: The same thing can be done together, different things cannot be mixed together.

古文：高贵乡公薨，内外諠哗。
现代文：高贵乡公被杀，朝廷内外群情激愤，议论纷纷。
English: Noble townsman was killed, the crowd inside and outside the court was outraged, and discussions ensued.

古文：司马文王问侍中陈泰曰： 何以静之？ 
现代文：文王司马昭问侍中陈泰： 怎样才能让舆论平静下来呢？ 
English: King Sima Zhao asked the chamberlain Chen Tai: How can public opinion be calmed down?

古文：泰云： 唯杀贾充，以谢天下。 
现代文：陈泰说： 只有杀掉贾充来向天下人谢罪。 
English: Chen Tai said: The only way is to kill Jia Cheng to apologize to the world.

古文：文王曰： 可复下此不？ 
现代文：司马昭说： 可以不可以再考虑一个比这轻一些的处理办法呢？ 
English: Sima Zhao said: Can we consider a lighter solution than this?

古文：对曰： 但见其上，未见其下。 
现代文：陈泰回答说： 我只知道比这更重的，不知比这更轻的方法了。 
English: Chen Tai replied, "I only know how to make something heavier than this, I don't know how to make something lighter than this."

古文：和峤为武帝所亲重，语峤曰： 东宫顷似更成进，卿试往看。 
现代文：和峤是晋武帝所亲近、器重的人，有一次武帝对和峤说： 太子近来似乎更加成熟、长进了，你试着去帮我看看。 
English: Emperor Wu once said to Prince He, "Prince He seems to have matured and grown up recently. Try to help me see."

古文：还问 何如？ 答云： 皇太子圣质如初。 
现代文：和峤去了回来，武帝问他怎么样，和峤回答说： 皇太子没有长进，资质同以前一样。 
English: When he returned, Emperor Wu asked him how he was doing. He replied, "The crown prince has not grown, and his qualifications are the same as before.

古文：诸葛靓后入晋，除大司马，召不起。
现代文：诸葛靓后来才到晋朝首都洛阳，被任命为大司马，他不肯应召赴任。
English: It was only later that Zhuge Liang came to Luoyang, the capital of the Jin Dynasty, and was appointed as the grand steward. He refused to accept the call to the post.

古文：以与晋室有讎，常背洛水而坐。
现代文：因为和晋室有仇，他常常背对洛河的方向坐着。
English: Because he had a grudge against Jin's wife, he often sat with his back to the Luo River.

古文：与武帝有旧，帝欲见之而无由，乃请诸葛妃呼靓。
现代文：他和晋武帝有旧交情，武帝很想见他却找不到理由，就请婶母诸葛太妃招呼诸葛靓来。
English: He and Emperor Jinwu had an old friendship. Emperor Wudi wanted to see him very much but could not find a reason, so he asked his aunt, Empress Zhuge, to invite Empress Zhuge.

古文：既来，帝就太妃间相见。
现代文：来后，武帝到太妃那里和他见面。
English: After he arrived, Emperor Wu went to see Tohei.

古文：礼毕，酒酣，帝曰： 卿故复忆竹马之好不？ 
现代文：行礼后，喝到痛快的时候，武帝问： 你还记得我们小时候的交情吗？ 
English: After the salute, when the drinks were flowing, Emperor Wu asked: Do you remember our friendship when we were children?

古文：靓曰： 臣不能吞炭漆身，今日复睹圣颜。 
现代文：诸葛靓说： 臣不能像豫让那样吞炭漆身为父报仇，今天又看到了圣上。 
English: Zhuge Liang said: "A minister cannot eat charcoal and paint his body to avenge his father as Yu Zhan did. Today, I saw His Holiness again.

古文：因涕泗百行。
现代文：说完便涕泪交流。
English: After the speech, there was an exchange of tears.

古文：帝于是惭悔而出。
现代文：武帝于是既惭愧地走了出去。
English: Emperor Wu then walked out in shame.

古文：武帝语和峤曰： 我欲先痛骂王武子，然后爵之。 
现代文：晋武帝告诉和峤说： 我想先痛骂王济，然后才封给他爵位。 
English: Emperor Jinwu told Huan, "I want to scold Wang Jie first, and then give him a peerage."

古文：峤曰： 武子俊爽，恐不可屈。 
现代文：和峤说： 武子才智出众，性情直爽，恐怕不能使他屈服。 
English: "I'm afraid I won't be able to make Takeshi give in to my superior intellect and straightforward nature," said Kazuo.

古文：帝遂召武子，苦责之，因曰： 知愧不？ 
现代文：武帝于是召见武子，狠狠地责骂了他，然后问道： 你知道羞愧了吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu then summoned Takeko, severely scolded him, and then asked: Do you know shame?

古文：武子曰：  尺布斗粟 之谣，常为陛下耻之！
现代文：王武子说： 想起尺布斗粟的民谣，经常替陛下感到羞愧。
English: Wang Wu Zi said, "I often feel ashamed for His Majesty when I think of the folk song "Shakubutsu Doumao."

古文：它人能令疏亲，臣不能使亲疏，以此愧陛下。 
现代文：别人能让关系疏远的人亲近起来，臣却不能使亲近的变得疏远。 
English: Others can bring the estranged closer, but a vassal cannot make the close estranged.

古文：杜预之荆州，顿七里桥，朝士悉祖。
现代文：就因为这一点对陛下有愧。 杜预到荆州去任职，出到七里桥，朝廷的官员全都来到这里给他饯行。
English: Du Yuan went to Jingzhou to take office, and when he got to Qiliqiao, all the officials of the imperial court came here to give him a tour.

古文：预少贱，好豪侠，不为物所许。
现代文：社预年轻时家境贫贱，却喜欢当豪侠之士，得不到大家的赞许。
English: When he was young, he came from a poor family, but he liked to be a hero and did not get everyone's approval.

古文：杨济既名氏，雄俊不堪，不坐而去。
现代文：杨济既是名门中的杰出人物，忍受不了这种场面，不落座就走了。
English: Yang Jie, as an outstanding person in the prestigious family, could not bear this scene and left without taking his seat.

古文：须臾，和长舆来，问： 杨右卫何在？ 
现代文：一会儿，和长舆来了，问： 杨右卫在哪里？ 
English: After a while, He Changmyo came and asked, "Where is Yang Yuwei?"

古文：客曰： 向来，不坐而去。 
现代文：有位客人说： 刚才来了，没坐一坐就走了。 
English: One guest said: "I just came and left without sitting down.

古文：长舆曰： 必大夏门下盘马。 
现代文：和长舆说： 一定是到大夏门下骑马游乐去了。 
English: And Changmyo said, "He must have gone for a horseback ride under the Great Summer Gate."

古文：往大夏门，果大阅骑。
现代文：便到大夏门去，果然是在那里观看大规模的兵马操练。
English: So I went to the Daxia Gate, and sure enough, I was there to watch a large-scale military drill.

古文：长舆抱内车，共载归，坐如初。
现代文：长舆便搂住他拉到车上，一起坐车回到七里桥，好像刚来那样入座。
English: Changmyo grabbed him and pulled him to the car, and they drove back to Qiliqiao together, sitting down as if they had just arrived.

古文：杜预拜镇南将军，朝士悉至，皆在连榻坐。
现代文：杜预任命力镇南将军，朝廷的官员都来庆贺，大家都坐在连榻上。
English: Du Yu appointed General Lijing Nan, officials from the imperial court came to celebrate, and everyone sat on a bunk bed.

古文：时亦有裴叔则。
现代文：当时在座的也有裴叔则。
English: Pei Shuzhe was also present at the time.

古文：羊稚舒后至，曰： 杜元凯乃复连榻坐客！ 
现代文：羊稚舒后来才到，说： 杜元凯竟然用连榻待客！ 
English: Yangzhi Shu arrived later and said, "Du Yuankai is actually using a bunk bed to wait for guests!

古文：不坐便去。
现代文：不落座就走了。
English: He left without taking his seat.

古文：杜请裴追之，羊去数里住马，既而俱还杜许。
现代文：杜预请裴叔则去追他回来，羊稚舒骑马走了几里地就停下了，接着就和裴叔则一起回到杜顶家。
English: Du Yuan asked Uncle Pei to chase him back, Yangzhi Shu rode a few miles and stopped, then he and Uncle Pei returned to Du Ding's house together.

古文：晋武帝时，荀勖为中书监，和峤为令。
现代文：晋武帝时，荀勖ù任中书监，和峤任中书令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, ù was appointed as the middle book supervisor, and  was appointed as the middle book editor.

古文：故事，监、令由来共车。
现代文：按照旧例，监和令向来同坐一辆车上朝。
English: According to the old practice, the supervisors and deputies always travel together in the same car in the morning.

古文：峤性雅正，常疾勖谄谀。
现代文：和峤本性正直，一向憎恶荀勖那种阿谀逢迎的作风。
English: Genuine and honest, he has always detested the flattery and patronizing style of the others.

古文：后公车来，峤便登，正向前坐，不复容勖。
现代文：后来每逢官车来接他们上朝，和峤便上车，只往前坐，不再给荀勖留出位子。
English: Later, whenever the official car came to pick them up, they would get on the car and only sit forward, leaving no seat for the toad.

古文：勖方更觅车，然后得去。
现代文：荀勖还要另外找一辆车，然后才熊走。
English: He had to find another car before he could leave.

古文：监、令各给车自此始。
现代文：以后监和令分别派车，就是从这时开始的。
English: It was from this time that the supervisor and the order were sent to send cars separately.

古文：山公大儿著短帢，车中倚。
现代文：山涛的大儿子戴着便帽，靠在车中。
English: Shantao's oldest son, wearing a cap, leans against the car.

古文：武帝欲见之，山公不敢辞，问儿，儿不肯行。
现代文：晋武帝想见见他，山涛不敢推辞，去问儿子，儿子却不肯去。
English: Emperor Jinwu wanted to see him, but Shantao did not dare to refuse and went to ask his son, but his son refused to go.

古文：时论乃云胜山公。
现代文：于是当时的舆论认为他要胜过山涛。
English: As a result, public opinion at the time believed that he would triumph over the mountains.

古文：向雄为河内主簿，有公事不及雄，而太守刘淮横怒，遂与杖遣之。
现代文：向雄任河内郡的主簿，曾经有一件事情其实和他没太大关系，可是郡太守刘准为这事大动肝火，便对他动了杖刑，之后打发他走了。
English: Xiang Xiong served as the chief registrar of Hanoi County. There was once a matter that actually did not have much to do with him, but the county governor Liu Jun was very angry about this matter, so he punished him with a cane, and then sent him away.

古文：雄后为黄门郎，刘为侍中，初不交言。
现代文：向雄后来调任黄门郎，刘准任侍中，两人虽在同一个衙门，却从来没有过交谈。
English: Xiang Xiong was later transferred to Huang Men Lang and Liu Zheng to attendant. Although the two were at the same gate, they never had a conversation.

古文：武帝闻之，敕雄复君臣之好，雄不得已，诣刘，再拜曰： 向受诏而来，而君臣之义绝，何如？ 
现代文：晋武帝听说这件事，便命令向雄恢复两人原有的上下级和睦关系。向雄不得已，就到刘准那里，行再拜礼后说： 我奉皇上的命令而来，可是我们之间早已恩断义绝了，怎么办？ 
English: When Emperor Jinwu heard of this, he ordered Xiang Xiong to restore the harmonious relationship between the two men. As a last resort, Xiang Xiong went to Liu Jun and, after a second bow, said: "I have come at the Emperor's command, but the friendship between us has already been severed. What should I do?"

古文：于是即去。
现代文：说完，就走了。
English: And with that, he was gone.

古文：武帝闻尚不和，乃怒问雄曰： 我令卿复君臣之好，何以犹绝？ 
现代文：武帝后来听说两人还是不和，就生气地问向雄： 我命令你恢复旧时的和睦关系，为什么还要绝交？ 
English: When Emperor Wu later heard that the two were still at odds, he angrily asked Xiang Xiong: I ordered you to restore the old-time amicable relationship, why do you still want to sever relations?

古文：雄曰： 古之君子，进人以礼，退人以礼；今之君子，进人若将加诸膝，退人若将坠诸渊。
现代文：向雄说： 古时候的君子，按礼法举荐官员，也按礼法贬黜官员；现在的君子举荐人家时就像要抱到膝上那么亲，贬黜人家时就像要推下深渊那样狠。
English: Xiang Xiong said: In ancient times, a gentleman recommended an official according to etiquette, and also demeaned an official according to etiquette; nowadays, when a gentleman recommends someone, it's as if he wants to hug them to his knees, and when he demeans someone, it's as if he wants to push them into the abyss.

古文：臣于刘河内，不为戎首，亦已幸甚，安复为君臣之好？ 
现代文：臣下对刘河内不去挑起争端，已经幸运得很了，怎么还能修复旧有的上下级关系呢？ 
English: The vassal has been very lucky not to provoke a dispute with Liu Hao, how can he still repair the old superior-subordinate relationship?

古文：武帝从之。
现代文：晋武帝听后，也就不再勉强他了。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Jinwu no longer forced him to leave.

古文：齐王冏为大司马辅政，嵇绍为侍中，诣冏咨事。
现代文：齐王司马冏担任大司马，辅理国政，嵇绍当时担任恃中，到司马冏那里去商讨公事。
English: The king of Qi, Sima Yu, served as the grand steward and was in charge of state affairs. At that time, Yan Shao served as the middle steward and went to Sima Yu to discuss public affairs.

古文：冏设宰会，召葛旟董艾等共论时宜。
现代文：司马冏安排了一个僚属的宴会，召来葛旟、董艾等人一起讨论当前政务。
English: Sima Yao arranged a banquet for his colleagues and invited Ge Yao, Dong Ai and others to discuss the current government affairs.

古文：旟等白冏： 嵇侍中善于丝竹，公可令操之。 
现代文：葛旟等人告诉司马冏说： 嵇侍中擅长演奏乐器，您可以叫他演奏一下。 
English: Ge Yao and others told Sima Yao that: "He is good at playing musical instruments, you can ask him to play.

古文：遂送乐器。
现代文：于是便送上乐器，嵇绍便推辞。
English: As a result, musical instruments were sent, but Gong Shao declined.

古文：绍推却不受。冏曰： 今日共为欢，卿何却邪？ 
现代文：司马冏说： 今天大家一起饮酒作乐，你为什么要推迟呢？ 
English: Sima Yi said, "Today, we are all drinking alcohol to make merry. Why did you postpone it?

古文：绍曰： 公协辅皇室，令作事可法。
现代文：嵇绍说： 公辅助皇室，应该给大家树立榜样。
English: Zou Shao said: The public support for the royal family should set an example for everyone.

古文：绍虽官卑，职备常伯。操丝比竹，盖乐官之事，不可以先王法服，为吴人之业。
现代文：我官职虽然卑下，也毕竟忝居常伯之位，吹弹演奏，本是乐官的事情，不能穿着官服来做乐工的事。
English: Although my official position is lowly, I still live in the position of a nobleman. Playing the bagpipes is a musician's job, and I cannot wear an official uniform to do the work of a musician.

古文：今逼高命，不敢苟辞，当释冠冕，袭私服，此绍之心也。 
现代文：我现在迫于尊命，不敢随便推辞，但应该脱下官服，穿上演奏的服装。
English: I am now forced to respect my life and dare not casually refuse, but I should take off my official uniform and put on my performance clothes.

古文：旟等不自得而退。
现代文：这是我的想法。 葛旟等人自觉没趣，就退了出去。
English: This is my idea. Ge Yao and others felt bored and withdrew.

古文：卢志于众坐问陆士衡： 陆逊、陆抗，是君何物？ 
现代文：卢志在大庭广众之下问陆士衡： 陆逊、陆抗是你的什么人？ 
English: Lu Zhi asked Lu Shihheng in front of a large audience: Lu Xun, Lu An, who are you?

古文：答曰： 如卿于卢毓、卢珽。 
现代文：陆士衡回答说： 就像你和卢毓、卢珽的关系一样。 
English: Lu Shiheng replied: Just like your relationship with Lu Yao, Lu Yao.

古文：士龙失色。
现代文：陆士龙听了脸色大变。
English: Lu Shilong's face changed dramatically.

古文：既出户，谓兄曰： 何至如此，彼容不相知也？ 
现代文：出门以后，士龙就对哥哥说： 何必弄到这种地步呢！他可能真是不了解情况呀。 
English: After he left home, Shilong said to his brother, "Why did it have to get to this point? He may really not understand the situation."

古文：士衡正色曰： 我祖名播海内，甯有不知？
现代文：士衡很严厉他说： 我父亲、祖父海内知名，岂有不知道的？
English: Shih Heng was very stern and said, "My father and grandfather are well-known in the country, didn't they know?

古文：鬼子敢尔！ 
现代文：鬼的子孙竟敢这样无礼！ 
English: How dare the children of the devil be so rude!

古文：议者疑二陆优劣，谢公以此定之。
现代文：舆论界对陆家兄弟的优劣一向难于确定，谢安就拿这件事来判定两人的优劣。
English: It has always been difficult for the public opinion community to determine the merits and demerits of the Lu brothers, so Xie An took this incident to judge the merits and demerits of the two.

古文：羊忱性甚贞烈。
现代文：羊忱的性格非常坚贞刚烈。
English: Yang Zhen's character is very steadfast and strong.

古文：赵王伦为相国，忱为太傅长史，乃版以参相国军事。
现代文：赵王司马伦自任相国的时候，羊忱任太傅府长史，司马伦便任命他为参相国军事。
English: When Zhao Wang Sima Lun was appointed as the Minister of State, Yang Zhen was appointed as the Taifu prefect, and Sima Lun appointed him as the military leader of the Minister of State.

古文：使者卒至，忱深惧豫祸，不暇被马，于是帖骑而避。
现代文：传达任命的使者突然来到，羊忱非常害怕牵连受祸，匆忙间来不及备马，于是骑着光身的马逃避。
English: The messenger came suddenly to convey the appointment, and Yang Zhen was very afraid of being implicated in the calamity. In his haste, he did not have time to prepare his horse, so he fled on a bare horse.

古文：使者追之，忱善射，矢左右发，使者不敢进，遂得免。
现代文：使者去追他，羊忱擅长射箭，不断向使者左右开弓。使者不敢再追，这才得以逃脱。
English: The messenger went to chase him, but the sheep was good at archery and kept shooting arrows at the messenger. The messenger did not dare to chase him, so he was able to escape.

古文：王太尉不与庾子嵩交，庾卿之不置。
现代文：太尉王夷甫不和庾子嵩交往，庾敳却不停地用 卿 来称呼他。
English: Captain Wang Yifu didn't socialize with Zou Zixiang, but Zou kept calling him "Sir."

古文：王曰： 君不得为尔。 
现代文：王衍说： 君不能这样称呼我。 
English: Wang Yan said, "You can't call me that.

古文：庾曰： 卿自君我，我自卿卿。我自用我法，卿自用卿法。 
现代文：庾敳说： 你只管用 君 来称呼我，我只管用 卿 来称呼你；我自用我的叫法，你自用你的叫法。 
English: Toad said, You may call me only by your name, and I will call you only by your name; I will call you by mine, and you by yours.

古文：阮宣子伐社树，有人止之。
现代文：阮修要砍掉土地庙的树，有人阻止他。
English: Nguyen Xiu wanted to cut down the trees of the Land Temple, but someone stopped him.

古文：宣子曰： 社而为树，伐树则社亡；树而为社，伐树则社移矣。 
现代文：他说： 设了神坛而种树，砍掉树神坛就不复存在了；假使种了树而后立神坛，砍掉树神坛就不复存在了。 
English: He said: If a shrine is built and a tree is planted, but the tree is cut down, the shrine will no longer exist; if a tree is planted and then a shrine is built, but the tree is cut down, the shrine will no longer exist.

古文：阮宣子论鬼神有无者，或以人死有鬼，宣子独以为无，曰： 今见鬼者，云箸生时衣服，若人死有鬼，衣服复有鬼邪？ 
现代文：阮修与人谈论这世上究竟有没有鬼神存在的问题，有人认为人死后有鬼，唯独阮修认为世上没有鬼神，他说： 现在那些说见到鬼的人，说鬼穿着生前的衣服；假如人死后会变成鬼，难道衣服也会变成鬼吗？ 
English: Ruan Xiu talked with people about the question of whether there are ghosts and gods in this world. Some people think that there are ghosts after death, but Ruan Xiu thinks that there are no ghosts and gods in the world. He said: Now, those who say they have seen ghosts say that the ghosts are wearing the clothes they wore before they died. If people can become ghosts after death, can clothes also become ghosts?

古文：元皇帝既登阼，以郑后之宠，欲舍明帝而立简文。
现代文：晋元帝登位以后，因为郑后得宠，就想废明帝司马绍而改立简文帝司马昱为太子。
English: After Emperor Jin Yuan ascended to the throne, he wanted to abolish Ming Emperor Sima Shao and establish Jianwen Emperor Sima Yong as the crown prince because he was favored by Empress Zheng.

古文：时议者咸谓： 舍长立少，既于理非伦，且明帝以聪亮英断，益宜为储副。 
现代文：当时朝廷的舆论都认为抛开长子而立幼子，不但在道理上不合立嗣的顺序，而且太子司马绍聪明诚实，英明果断，更适合做太子。
English: At that time, the public opinion of the imperial court all believed that setting aside the eldest son and setting up a younger son was not only logically inconsistent with the order of succession, but also that Prince Sima Shao was clever, honest, wise and decisive, and more suitable to be a prince.

古文：周、王诸公，并苦争恳切。唯刁玄亮独欲奉少主，以阿帝旨。
现代文：周、王导诸位大臣都竭力争辩，情辞恳切，只有刁玄亮一人想尊奉少主来迎合元帝的心意。
English: Zhou, Wang Du and all the ministers tried their best to argue with each other, and their words were sincere. Only Yu Xuanliang wanted to honor the young master to cater to the emperor's heart.

古文：元帝便欲施行，虑诸公不奉诏。于是先唤周侯、丞相入，然后欲出诏付刁。
现代文：元帝就想付诸实施，又担心诸大臣不接受命令，于是先召唤武城侯周和丞相王导入朝，然后就想把诏令交给刁玄亮去发布。
English: Emperor Yuan wanted to put it into practice, and was worried that the ministers would not accept the order, so he first summoned Wucheng marquis Zhou and prime minister Wang into the imperial court, and then wanted to give the edict to Yu Xuanliang to issue.

古文：周、王既入，始至阶头，帝逆遣传诏，遏使就东厢。
现代文：周、王两人进来后，才走到台阶上面，元帝已经事先派传诏官迎着他们，拦住不让入内。请他们到东厢房去。
English: Only after Zhou and Wang came in did they go to the top of the steps. The Yuan Emperor had sent a herald to meet them in advance, to stop them from entering. He asked them to go to the east wing.

古文：周侯未悟，即却略下阶。
现代文：周还没醒悟过来，就退下台阶。
English: Before Zhou came to his senses, he retreated down the steps.

古文：丞相披拨传诏，迳至御床前曰： 不审陛下何以见臣。 
现代文：王导拨开传诏官，一直走到元帝座前，说道： 不明白陛下为什么召见臣？ 
English: Wang Shuo pushed aside the herald and walked all the way to the former emperor's throne, saying: "Don't you understand why His Majesty has summoned you?

古文：帝默然无言，乃探怀中黄纸诏裂掷之。
现代文：元帝哑口无言，就从怀里摸出黄纸诏书来撕碎扔掉。
English: Yuan Di was speechless, so he took out the yellow paper edict from his arms, tore it up and threw it away.

古文：由此皇储始定。
现代文：从此太子才算确定了。
English: Only then was the crown prince confirmed.

古文：周侯方慨然愧叹曰： 我常自言胜茂弘，今始知不如也！ 
现代文：周这才又感慨又惭愧地叹道： 我常常自以为胜过茂弘，现在才知道比不上他啊！ 
English: It was only then that Zhou sighed with emotion and shame: I often thought I was better than Shigehiro, but now I know I'm not as good as him!

古文：王丞相初在江左，欲结援吴人，请婚陆太尉。
现代文：丞相王导到江南之初，想要结交江东的世家大族，就向太尉陆玩提出两家联姻。
English: At the beginning of the journey to the south of the Yangtze River, when the prime minister Wang Shuo wanted to make friends with the great families in the east of the Yangtze River, he proposed a marriage between the two families to the captain Lu Yan.

古文：对曰： 培塿无松柏，薰莸不同器。
现代文：陆玩回复说： 小土丘上长不了松柏那样的大树，香草和臭草不能同放在一个器物里。
English: Lu Yanyan replied, "You can't grow a big tree like a conifer on a small mound, and you can't put vanilla and stinkweed in the same container.

古文：玩虽不才，义不为乱伦之始。 
现代文：我虽然没有才能，可是按道理也不能带头来做破坏人伦的事情。 
English: Although I have no talent, I cannot reasonably take the lead in doing things that destroy people's morals.

古文：诸葛恢大女适太尉庾亮儿，次女适徐州刺史羊忱儿。
现代文：诸葛恢的大女儿嫁给太尉庾亮的儿子，二女儿嫁给徐州刺史羊忱的儿子。
English: The eldest daughter of Zhuge Huai married the son of Tai Liang, the second daughter married the son of Xuzhou Zhi Shi and Yang Zhen.

古文：亮子被苏峻害，改适江虨。
现代文：庾亮的儿子被苏峻杀害了，大女儿又改嫁江虨。
English: Su Liang's son was killed by Su Jun, and his eldest daughter remarried to Jiang Chen.

古文：恢儿娶邓攸女。
现代文：诸葛恢的儿子娶了邓攸的女儿为妻。
English: The son of Zhuge Wei married the daughter of Deng You.

古文：于时谢尚书求其小女婚。恢乃云： 羊、邓是世婚，江家我顾伊，庾家伊顾我，不能复与谢裒儿婚。 
现代文：当时尚书谢衷为儿子谢石向诸葛恢求娶他的小女儿，诸葛恢就说： 羊家、邓家和我们是世代姻亲，江家是我看顾他，庾家是他看顾我，我不能再和谢裒的儿子结亲。 
English: At that time, Shang Shuxie sincerely asked Zhuge Huai to marry his little daughter for his son Xie Shi. Zhuge Huai said, "The Yang family, the Deng family, and I have been in-laws for generations. The Jiang family, I took care of him, and the Xie family, he took care of me. I can no longer marry Xie Shi's son."

古文：及恢亡，遂婚。
现代文：等到诸葛恢死了以后，两家终于结亲。
English: After Zhuge Hui passed away, the two families finally tied the knot.

古文：于是王右军往谢家看新妇，犹有恢之遗法，威仪端详，容服光整。
现代文：结婚时，右军将军王羲之到谢家去看新娘，看到新娘还保存着诸葛恢旧有的礼法，容貌举止，端庄安详；风采服饰，华美整齐。
English: At the time of the wedding, the right-wing army general Wang Xizhi went to Xie's home to see the bride. He saw that the bride still preserved Zhuge's old etiquette, her appearance and demeanor were dignified and serene; her dress was elegant and neat.

古文：王叹曰： 我在遣女裁得尔耳！ 
现代文：王羲之叹道： 我活着时嫁女儿，也仅仅能做到这样啊！ 
English: Wang Xizhi sighed, "I can only marry my daughter while I am still alive.

古文：周叔治作晋陵太守，周侯、仲智往别。
现代文：周叔治要出任晋陵太守，他哥哥武城侯周伯仁和仲智去和他话别。
English: Zhou Shuji was to become the governor of Jinling. His brother, Wucheng marquess Zhou Bolin, and Zhongzhi went to bid him farewell.

古文：叔治以将别，涕泗不止。
现代文：叔治因为兄弟就要离别了，哭个不停。
English: As his brother was about to leave, Shuji cried non-stop.

古文：仲智恚之曰： 斯人乃妇女，与人别唯啼泣！ 
现代文：仲智生他的气，说： 你这个人原来是个妇女，和人家告别，只会哭哭啼啼。 
English: Getting angry with him, Zhongzhi said, "You are originally a woman, and when you say goodbye to someone, you only cry and wail.

古文：便舍去。
现代文：便不理他走了。
English: She ignored him and walked away.

古文：周侯独留，与饮酒言话，临别流涕，抚其背曰： 奴好自爱。 
现代文：伯仁独自留下来和他喝酒说话，临别时流着泪，拍着他的背说： 阿奴要好好地爱惜自己！ 
English: Bo Ren was left alone to drink and talk with him. At parting, he shed tears, patted him on the back and said, "Anu, take good care of yourself!"

古文：周伯仁为吏部尚书，在省内夜疾危急。
现代文：周伯仁任吏部尚书时，有一夜在官署里得了病，很危急。
English: When Zhou Boren was in charge of the bookkeeping department, he fell ill one night in the government office. He was in critical condition.

古文：时刁玄亮为尚书令，营救备亲好之至。良久小损。
现代文：当时刁玄亮任尚书令，多方设法抢救，表现得亲密友好极了，过了很久，病情才稍为减轻了些。
English: At that time, Gong Xuanliang was ordered by Ren Shang, and many people tried to rescue him. He was very close and friendly. It took a long time before his condition eased a little.

古文：明旦，报仲智，仲智狼狈来。
现代文：第二天早晨，通知了周伯仁的弟弟仲智，仲智急急忙忙地赶来。
English: The next morning, Zhou Boren's brother, Zhong Zhi, was notified, and Zhong Zhi hurriedly arrived.

古文：始入户，刁下床对之大泣，说伯仁昨危急之状。
现代文：刚进门，刁玄亮就离座对他大哭，并述说伯仁夜里病危的情况。
English: As soon as he entered the door, Yu Xuanliang left his seat and cried loudly to him, and described the critical condition of Boren in the night.

古文：仲智手批之，刁为辟易于户侧。
现代文：仲智扬手给他一耳光，刁玄亮被打得惊退到门边。
English: He was slapped in the face by Zhongzhi Yang's hand, and Zou Xuanliang was knocked back to the door.

古文：既前，都不问病，直云： 君在中朝，与和长舆齐名，那与佞人刁协有情？ 
现代文：仲智走到伯仁床前，一点也不问病况，直截了当地说： 您在西晋时，跟和长舆名望相等，怎么会跟谄佞的人刁协有交情！ 
English: When Zhongzhi walked up to Bo Ren's bedside, he didn't ask about his illness at all, but said bluntly: When you were in West Jin, you were as famous and respected as your father, so how could you have a friendship with such a despicable person!

古文：迳便出。
现代文：说完就头也不回地走了。
English: After saying that, he left without looking back.

古文：王含作庐江郡，贪浊狼籍。
现代文：王含任庐江郡大守，贪赃在法。
English: Wang Han was appointed governor of Minjiang County, and corruption was punished.

古文：王敦护其兄，故于众坐称： 家兄在郡定佳，庐江人士咸称之！ 
现代文：王敦袒护他哥哥，一次特意在大家面前赞扬说： 我哥哥在郡内一定政绩很好，庐江知名人士都称颂他。 
English: Wang Dun took care of his brother, once praising him in front of everyone, saying: My brother must have done a good job in the county, and famous people in the Li River have praised him.

古文：时何充为敦主簿，在坐，正色曰： 充即庐江人，所闻异于此！ 
现代文：当时何充在王敦手下任主簿，也在座，严肃地说： 我就是庐江人，所听到的和你说的不一样。 
English: At that time, He Chong, who was the chief accountant under Wang Dun, was also present and said seriously: I am a Lijiang River person, and what I heard was different from what you said.

古文：敦默然。
现代文：王敦哑口无言。
English: Wang Dun was speechless.

古文：旁人为之反侧，充晏然，神意自若。
现代文：旁人都替何充捏一把汗，何充却十分但然，神态自若。
English: Everyone around him was sweating profusely on his behalf, but he was very calm and confident.

古文：顾孟著尝以酒劝周伯仁，伯仁不受。
现代文：顾孟著有一次向周伯仁劝酒，伯仁不肯喝。
English: Gu Meng once tried to persuade Zhou Boren to drink, but Boren refused to drink.

古文：顾因移劝柱，而语柱曰： 讵可便作栋梁自遇。 
现代文：顾孟著便转向柱子劝酒，并且对柱子说： 难道就可以把自己看成栋梁吗！ 
English: Gu Meng then turned to the pillar to persuade him to drink, and said to the pillar: Can you really see yourself as a pillar?

古文：周得之欣然，遂为衿契。
现代文：周伯仁听到这话很高兴，两人便成了要好的朋友。
English: Zhou Boren was very happy to hear this, and the two became good friends.

古文：明帝在西堂，会诸公饮酒，未大醉，帝问： 今名臣共集，何如尧、舜？ 
现代文：晋明帝在西堂召集众大臣举行宴会，还没有大醉的时候，明帝问道： 今天名臣都聚会在一起，和尧、舜时相比，怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Jinming held a banquet for his ministers in the West Hall. When he was not yet drunk, Emperor Jinming asked, "Today, the eminent ministers are all gathered together. How is it compared to the old days?"

古文：时周伯仁为仆射，因厉声曰： 今虽同人主，复那得等于圣治！ 
现代文：当时周伯仁任尚书仆射，便声音激昂地回答说： 现在圣上和尧、舜虽然同是君主，可又怎么能和那个太平盛世等同起来呢？ 
English: At that time, Zhou Boren was still a scholar, so he replied in an impassioned voice: Although the current emperor and emperors are both monarchs, how can they be equated with the Taiping era?

古文：帝大怒，还内，作手诏满一黄纸，遂付廷尉令收，因欲杀之。
现代文：明帝大怒，回到内宫，亲自写了满满一张黄纸的诏令，便交给廷尉，命令逮捕周伯仁，想就此杀掉他。
English: Enraged, Emperor Ming returned to the Inner Palace and personally wrote a decree full of yellow paper, then handed it to a court lieutenant, ordering the arrest of Zhou Boren, intending to kill him.

古文：后数日，诏出周，群臣往省之。周曰： 近知当不死，罪不足至此。 
现代文：过了几天，又下诏令释放他。众大臣去探望周伯仁，周说： 起初我就知道不会死，因为罪状还不可能到这个地步。 
English: A few days later, he was released by imperial edict. The ministers went to visit Zhou Boren. Zhou said, "At first, I knew I wouldn't die, because the charges couldn't possibly reach this level.

古文：王大将军当下，时咸谓无缘尔。
现代文：大将军王敦就要率兵东下，当时人们都以为他没有借口呢。
English: When the great general Wang Dun was about to lead his troops eastward, people thought he had no excuse.

古文：伯仁曰： 今主非尧、舜，何能无过？
现代文：周伯仁说： 现在的君主不是尧、舜，怎么能没有过失！
English: Zhou Boren said, "The current monarch is not the emperor, how can he have no faults!

古文：且人臣安得称兵以向朝廷？
现代文：再说臣下怎么能兴兵来指向朝廷！
English: Besides, how can a vassal raise an army to point at the imperial court!

古文：处仲狼抗刚愎，王平子何在？ 
现代文：处仲他狂妄自大，刚愎自用，试看王平子到哪儿去了？ 
English: He was arrogant and self-righteous, trying to see where Wang Ping Zi had gone.

古文：王敦既下，住船石头，欲有废明帝意。
现代文：王敦从武昌东下以后，把船停在石头城，他的愿望是想废掉明帝。
English: After Wang Dun sailed east from Wuchang, he anchored his ship in Stone Town. His wish was to abolish the Ming Dynasty.

古文：宾客盈坐，敦知帝聪明，欲以不孝废之。
现代文：有一次宾客满座，王敦知道明帝聪敏明慧，就想借不孝的罪名废掉他。
English: Once, when there was a full house of guests, Wang Dun, knowing that Emperor Ming was clever and astute, tried to get rid of him by accusing him of being unfilial.

古文：每言帝不孝之状，而皆云温太真所说。
现代文：每次说到明帝不孝的情况，都说： 这是温太真说的。
English: Whenever the subject of the emperor's lack of filial piety came up, they would say, "This is what Emperor Wen Taizhen said."

古文：温尝为东宫率，后为吾司马，甚悉之。
现代文：他曾经做过东宫的卫率，后来在我手下担任司马，非常熟悉太子的情况。 
English: He used to be the guard of the East Palace, and later he worked under me as a Sima, so he is very familiar with the situation of the crown prince.

古文：须臾，温来，敦便奋其威容，问温曰： 皇太子作人何似？ 
现代文：一会儿，温太真来了，王敦便摆出他的威严的神色，问太真： 皇太子为人怎么样？ 
English: A moment later, Wen Taizhen arrived, and Wang Dun put on his majestic appearance and asked Taizhen: How is the crown prince?

古文：温曰： 小人无以测君子。 
现代文：温太真回答说： 小人没法儿估量君子。 
English: Wen Taizhen replied: A villain cannot estimate a gentleman.

古文：敦声色并厉，欲以威力使从己，乃重问温： 太子何以称佳？ 
现代文：王敦声色俱厉，想靠威力来迫使对方顺从自己，便重新问道： 根据什么称颂太子好？ 
English: Wang Dun's voice was strident, he wanted to use his power to force the other side to obey him, so he asked again: On what basis is it good to praise the crown prince?

古文：温曰： 钩深致远，盖非浅识所测。然以礼侍亲，可称为孝。 
现代文：温太真说： 太子才识的广博精深，似乎不是我这种认识肤浅的人所能估量的；可是能按照礼法来侍奉双亲，这可以称为孝。 
English: Wen Taizhen said, "The depth and breadth of the prince's knowledge seems beyond the scope of someone with a superficial understanding like me, but to be able to serve his parents according to etiquette can be called filial piety.

古文：王大将军既反，至石头，周伯仁往见之。
现代文：大将军王敦反叛以后，到了石头城，周伯仁去见他。
English: When the great general Wang Dun rebelled and came to Stone Town, Zhou Bolin went to see him.

古文：谓周曰： 卿何以相负？ 
现代文：王敦问周伯仁： 你为什么辜负我？ 
English: Wang Dun asked Zhou Boren: Why did you fail me?

古文：对曰： 公戎车犯正，下官忝率六军，而王师不振，以此负公。 
现代文：周伯仁回答说： 公举兵谋反，下官愧率六军出战，可是军队不能奋勇杀敌，因此才辜负了公。 
English: Zhou Boren replied, "I publicly raised an army to plot a rebellion, and my subordinates were ashamed to lead six armies into battle, but the army could not kill the enemy bravely, so I failed in my duty."

古文：苏峻既至石头，百僚奔散，唯侍中钟雅独在帝侧。
现代文：苏峻率叛军到了石头城后，朝廷百官逃散，只有侍中钟雅独自留在晋成帝身边。
English: After the rebels led by Su Jun arrived at Stone Town, hundreds of court officials fled. Only the chambermaid Zhong Ya remained alone with Emperor Jincheng.

古文：或谓钟曰： 见可而进，知难而退，古之道也。
现代文：有人对钟雅说： 看到情况允许就前进，知道困难就后退，这是古时候的常理。
English: Someone said to Zhongya: It is common sense in ancient times to advance when conditions permit and to retreat when difficulties are known.

古文：君性亮直，必不容于寇讎，何不用随时之宜、而坐待其弊邪？ 
现代文：您本性忠诚正直，一定不会被仇敌宽容。为什么不采取权宜之计，却要坐着等死呢？ 
English: Your nature is loyal and honest, and you will not be tolerated by the enemy. Why not take a stopgap measure, but sit and wait for death?

古文：钟曰： 国乱不能匡，君危不能济，而各逊遁以求免，吾惧董狐将执简而进矣！ 
现代文：钟雅说： 国家有战乱而不能拯救，君主有危难而不能救助，却各自逃避以求免祸，我怕董狐就要拿着竹简上朝来啦！ 
English: Zhong Ya said: The country is in war and cannot be saved, the monarch is in danger and cannot be saved, but they all flee to avoid the disaster. I'm afraid that Dong Foo is going to come up with a bamboo stick!

古文：庾公临去，顾语钟后事，深以相委。
现代文：庾亮将要出逃，回头向钟雅交代自己走后的事，把朝廷重任深切地托付给他。
English: Huan Liang was about to flee, and he turned back to Zhong Ya to tell him what had happened after he left, and earnestly entrusted him with the important task of the imperial court.

古文：钟曰： 栋折榱崩，谁之责邪？ 
现代文：钟雅说： 国家危在旦夕，这是谁的责任呢？ 
English: Zhongya said: The country is in imminent danger. Whose responsibility is this?

古文：庾曰： 今日之事，不容复言，卿当期克复之效耳！ 
现代文：庾亮说： 当前的事，不容许再谈论了，你应该期望取得收复京都的成效啊！ 
English: Hao Liang said: It is not permissible to talk about current affairs any longer, you should expect to achieve the effect of recovering Kyoto!

古文：钟曰： 想足下不愧荀林父耳。 
现代文：钟雅说： 想必您不会有愧于荀林父啊！ 
English: Zhongya said, "I'm sure you won't be ashamed of Father Yulin!"

古文：苏峻时，孔群在横塘为匡术所逼。
现代文：苏峻叛乱时，孔群在横塘受到了匡术的威胁。
English: When Su Jun rebelled, Kong Qun was threatened by Kuang Zhi in Hengtang.

古文：王丞相保存术，因众坐戏语，令术劝酒，以释横塘之憾。
现代文：后来丞相王导把匡术保全下来，并且趁着大家在一起谈笑时，叫匡术给孔群敬酒，来消除横塘一事的不满。
English: Later, the chancellor Wang Du preserved Kuangzhu, and when everyone was talking and laughing together, he asked Kuangzhu to give a toast to Kongqun to eliminate the dissatisfaction of the yokotan.

古文：群答曰： 德非孔子，厄同匡人。
现代文：孔群回答说： 我的德行不能和孔子相比，可是困苦却同孔子遇到匡人一样。
English: Kong Qun replied: My virtue cannot be compared with Confucius, but the hardships are the same as when Confucius met Kuangren.

古文：虽阳和布气，鹰化为鸠，至于识者，犹憎其眼。 
现代文：虽然春气和暖，鹰变成了布谷鸟，至于有识之士，还是厌恶它的眼睛。 
English: Though the spring is warm, the eagle has turned into a cuckoo, and the discerning person still detests its eyes.

古文：苏子高事平，王、庾诸公欲用孔廷尉为丹阳。
现代文：苏子高的叛乱平定以后，王导、庾亮诸大臣想用廷尉孔坦来治理丹阳郡。
English: After Su Zigao's rebellion was quelled, Wang Du and Xing Liang, the ministers, wanted to use the courtier Kong Tan to govern Danyang County.

古文：乱离之后，百姓雕弊，孔慨然曰： 昔肃祖临崩，诸君亲升御床，并蒙眷识，共奉遗诏。
现代文：经过战乱而颠沛流离之后，百姓生活困苦。孔坦激愤地说： 往日先帝临终之时，诸君亲上御床前，一起受到先帝的关怀赏识，共同接受了先帝的遗诏。
English: After being displaced by the war, the people were living in poverty. Kong Tan said indignantly: In the past, when the former emperor was dying, all the relatives went to the imperial bed, were appreciated by the former emperor's care, and jointly accepted the former emperor's will.

古文：孔坦疏贱，不在顾命之列。
现代文：我才疏位卑，不在接受遗诏之列。
English: I am not in the line to receive the imperial edict.

古文：既有艰难，则以微臣为先，今犹俎上腐肉，任人脍截耳！ 
现代文：你们有了困难以后，就把我推到前面，我现在像是砧板上的臭肉，任人细剁细切罢了！ 
English: When you have a problem, you push me to the front. I'm like rotten meat on the chopping block, ready to be chopped up!

古文：于是拂衣而去，诸公亦止。
现代文：说完就拂袖而去。大臣们也就不再提起。
English: After saying this, he stormed off, and the ministers never mentioned it again.

古文：孔车骑与中丞共行，在御道逢匡术，宾从甚盛，因往与车骑共语。
现代文：车犄将军孔愉和御史中丞孔群一起外出，在御道遇见匡术，后面跟随的宾客、侍从很多，匡术便前去和孔愉说话。
English: Chechen General Kong Yu and Grand Historian Confucius Confucius went out together. On the way, they met Kuang Zhi, who was followed by many guests and attendants. Kuang Zhi then went to talk to Kong Yu.

古文：中丞初不视，直云： 鹰化为鸠，众鸟犹恶其眼。 
现代文：孔群却并不看他，只是说： 就算鹰变成了市谷鸟，所有的鸟还是讨厌它的眼睛。 
English: But Kong Qun didn't look at him. He only said, "Even if the eagle turned into a cuckoo, all birds would still hate its eyes."

古文：术大怒，便欲刃之。
现代文：匡术听了大怒，便想杀掉孔群。
English: After listening to the rage, Kuang Shu wanted to kill off the group of holes.

古文：车骑下车，抱术曰： 族弟发狂，卿为我宥之！ 
现代文：孔愉赶紧下车抱住匡术说： 堂弟发疯了，你看在我的面上饶了他吧！ 
English: Kong Yu hurriedly got out of the car, hugged Kuang Shu and said, "My cousin has gone mad, please forgive him for my sake!"

古文：始得全首领。
现代文：孔群这才得以保住脑袋。
English: This is how the group of holes was able to keep its head.

古文：梅颐尝有惠于陶公。
现代文：梅颐曾经对陶侃有过恩德。
English: Mei Xuan had once been kind to Tao Kan.

古文：后为豫章太守，有事，王丞相遣收之。
现代文：后来梅颐任豫章郡太守，犯了罪，丞相王导派人去逮捕了他。
English: Later, Mei Xuan was appointed as the governor of Yuzhang County and committed a crime. The prime minister Wang Tao sent someone to arrest him.

古文：侃曰： 天子富于春秋，万机自诸侯出，王公既得录，陶公何为不可放？ 
现代文：陶佩说： 天子还年轻，政令都由大臣发出；王公既然能逮捕人，我陶公为什么就不能放！ 
English: Tao Pei said, "Heavenly Son is still young, and all government orders are issued by ministers. Since the prince can arrest people, why can't I, Tao Gong, release them?"

古文：乃遣人于江口夺之。
现代文：于是派人到江口把梅颐夺过来。
English: So they sent someone to the estuary to take over the plum grove.

古文：颐见陶公，拜，陶公止之。
现代文：梅颐去见陶侃，下拜，陶侃拦住他不让拜。
English: Mei Xuan went to see Tao Kan, bowed down, Tao Kan stopped him from bowing.

古文：颐曰： 梅仲真膝，明日岂可复屈邪？ 
现代文：梅颐说： 我梅仲真的膝头，以后难道还会向人跪拜吗！ 
English: Meizhong said: My Meizhong is really a kneeler, will I still kneel to people in the future?

古文：王丞相作女伎，施设床席。
现代文：丞相王导设置歌舞女，还安排下床榻坐席。
English: The chancellor Wang Du set up a singing and dancing girl, and also arranged to sit down on the bed.

古文：蔡公先在坐，不说而去，王亦不留。
现代文：蔡谟先已在座，看见这种做法很不高兴，就走了，王导也不挽留他。
English: Cai Mu, who was already present, was not happy to see this practice and left, and Wang Du did not hold him back.

古文：何次道、庾季坚二人并为元辅。
现代文：何次道、庾季坚两人一起受命为辅政大臣。
English: How many times have Gong and Ji Jian been jointly appointed as Vice-Minister of State?

古文：成帝初崩，于时嗣君未定，何欲立嗣子，庾及朝议以外寇方强，嗣子冲幼，乃立康帝。
现代文：晋成帝刚去世，在这时，由谁继位，还没有定下来。何次道主张立皇子，鹿季坚和大臣们的议论都认为外来之敌正强大，皇子年幼，于是就立康帝。
English: Emperor Jincheng had just died, and at that time, it was not yet decided who would succeed to the throne. Several times, Dao advocated the establishment of a prince, and Lu Jijian and the ministers argued that the foreign enemy was powerful and the prince was young, so Emperor Kang was established.

古文：康帝登阼，会群臣，谓何曰： 朕今所以承大业，为谁之议？ 
现代文：康帝登帝位后，会见群臣时问何次道： 朕今天能继承国家大业，是谁的主张？ 
English: After Kang Di ascended the throne, when meeting with his ministers, how many times did he ask: I can inherit the great cause of the country today, whose idea is it?

古文：何答曰： 陛下龙飞，此是庾冰之功，非臣之力。
现代文：何次道回答说： 陛下登帝位，这是庾冰的功劳，不是我的力量。
English: How many times did Dao answer, "Your Majesty's ascension to the throne is the merit of Zhai Bing, not my strength."

古文：于时用微臣之议，今不睹盛明之世。 
现代文：当时如果采纳了小臣的主张，那么今天就看不到太平盛世了。 
English: At that time, if the minister's idea had been adopted, we would not see the Taiping era today.

古文：帝有惭色。
现代文：康帝面有愧色。
English: Emperor Kang was mortified.

古文：江仆射年少，王丞相呼与共棋。
现代文：左仆射江虨年轻时，丞相王导招呼他来一起下棋。
English: When Zuhodo Shoeji was young, the prime minister Wang Du invited him to play chess with him.

古文：王手尝不如两道许，而欲敌道戏，试以观之。江不即下。王曰： 君何以不行？ 江曰： 恐不得尔。 
现代文：王导的棋艺比起他来有两子左右的差距，可是想不让子儿对下，试图拿这事来观察他的为人。江虨并不马上下子儿，王导问： 您为什么不走棋？ 江虨说： 恐怕不行呢。 
English: Compared to him, Wang Du's chess skills were about two steps behind. However, he did not want to let his son lose, and tried to use this to observe him as a person. Jiang Chen did not immediately lose his son. Wang Du asked, "Why don't you play chess?" Jiang Chen said, "I'm afraid I can't."

古文：傍有客曰： 此年少戏迺不恶。 
现代文：旁边有位客人说： 这年轻人的技术原来不错。 
English: A guest next to him said, "This young man's technique is actually quite good.

古文：王徐举首曰： 此年少非唯围棋见胜。 
现代文：王导慢慢抬起头来说： 这年轻人不只是围棋胜过我。 
English: Wang Du slowly raised his head and said, "This young man is not only better than me at Go.

古文：孔君平疾笃，庾司空为会稽，省之，相问讯甚至，为之流涕。
现代文：孔君平病重，司空庾冰当时任会稽郡内史，去探望他，十分恳切地问候病情，并为他病重而流泪。
English: Kong Junping was seriously ill. At that time, Secretary Kong Bingbing, who was in charge of the county's internal history, went to visit him, very sincerely greeted his condition, and shed tears for his serious illness.

古文：庾既下床，孔慨然曰： 大丈夫将终，不问安国甯家之术，迺作儿女子相问！ 
现代文：庾冰离座告辞后，孔君平感慨地说： 大丈夫快死了，却不问安邦定国的办法，竟像妇孺一样来问候我！ 
English: After Yu Bing's farewell speech, Kong Junping said with emotion: "My husband is about to die, but he didn't ask about how to establish a state, and he came to greet me like a woman and child!

古文：庾闻，回谢之，请其话言。
现代文：庾冰听见了，便返回向他道歉，请他留下教诲。
English: When Hao Bing heard this, he went back to apologize to him and asked him to leave a message.

古文：桓大司马诣刘尹，卧不起。
现代文：大司马桓温去探望丹阳尹刘惔，刘惔躺着没起床。
English: Daishi Ma Kanwen went to visit Danyang Yin Liuye. Liuye was lying down and did not get up.

古文：桓弯弹弹刘枕，丸迸碎床褥间。
现代文：桓温用弹弓来射他的枕头，弹丸在被褥上迸碎了。
English: Kuan Wen shot his pillow with a slingshot, and the projectile shattered on the quilt.

古文：刘作色而起曰： 使君如馨地，甯可斗战求胜？ 
现代文：刘惔生气地起床说： 使君怎么这样，难道这也可以靠打仗取胜吗！ 
English: Liu Yao got up angrily and said, "How can you do this, can you win by fighting?"

古文：桓甚有恨容。
现代文：桓温脸色非常不满。
English: Kanen looked very unhappy.

古文：后来年少，多有道深公者。深公谓曰： 黄吻年少，勿为评论宿士。
现代文：后生年少多有谈论竺法深的，竺法深告诉他们说： 黄口小儿，不要做评论界的资深人士。
English: In later years, many young people talked about Gong Fa Sheng, and Gong Fa Sheng told them: Huangkou Xiao, don't be a senior person in the criticism field.

古文：昔尝与元明二帝、王庾二公周旋。 
现代文：以前我曾经和元帝、明帝两位皇帝，王导、庾亮两位名公打过交道呢。 
English: In the past, I have had dealings with two emperors, Emperor Yuan and Emperor Ming, as well as two eminent figures, Wang Du and Xuan Liang.

古文：王中郎年少时，江虨为仆射领选，欲拟之为尚书郎。
现代文：北中郎将王坦之年轻时，江虨任尚书左仆射，兼管吏部尚书职务，他考虑选王坦之任尚书郎。
English: When Wang Tan was a young man, he was assigned to be Wang Tan's left-hand man, and he considered appointing Wang Tan as his right-hand man.

古文：曰： 选曹举汝为尚书郎，幸可作诸王佐邪？  
现代文：有人把这事告诉了王坦之，坦之说： 自从过江以来，尚书郎只甲第二流的人担任，怎么能考虑我呢！ 
English: Someone told Wang Tanzhi about this, and Tanzhi said: Since crossing the river, Shang Shulang has only been a second-rate person, how can he consider me!

古文：此知郎官，寒素之品也。
现代文：江虨听说后，就不再考虑他了。
English: After Jiang Chen heard about it, he didn't think about him anymore.

古文：王述转尚书令，事行便拜。
现代文：王述升任尚书令时，诏命下达了就去受职。
English: When Wang Shu was promoted to Shang Shuling, he went to accept the post after the imperial edict was issued.

古文：文度曰： 故应让杜许。 
现代文：他儿子王文度说： 本来应该让给杜许。 
English: His son, Wang Wendao, said: It should have been given to Du Xiu.

古文：蓝田云： 汝谓我堪此不？ 文度曰： 何为不堪！
现代文：王述说： 你认为我能否胜任这个职务？ 文度说： 怎么不胜任！
English: Wang Shu said, "Do you think I am qualified for this position?" Wenda said, "How incompetent!

古文：但克让自是美事，恐不可阙。 
现代文：不过能谦让一下总是好事，礼节上恐怕不可缺少。 
English: However, it is always a good thing to be able to show a little humility, and I'm afraid it is essential in terms of etiquette.

古文：蓝田慨然曰： 既云堪，何为复让？
现代文：王述感慨地说： 既然说能胜任，为什么又要谦让呢？
English: Wang Su said with emotion: Since you say you are competent, why should you be humble?

古文：人言汝胜我，定不如我。 
现代文：人家说你胜过我，据我看终究不如我。 
English: They say you're better than me, but in my opinion, you're not as good as me.

古文：孙兴公作庾公诔，文多托寄之辞。
现代文：孙兴公写了《庾公诔》，文中有很多寄托情谊的言辞。
English: Sun Xinggong wrote "公," and there are many words of entrusting friendship in the text.

古文：既成，示庾道恩。
现代文：写好了，拿给庾道恩看。
English: Now that you've written it, show it to Xing Dao En.

古文：庾见，慨然送还之，曰： 先君与君，自不至于此。 
现代文：道恩看了，愤激地送还给他，说： 先父和您的交情本来没有达到这一步。 
English: Dawn looked at it, handed it back to him angrily, and said: My father's friendship with you didn't reach this far.

古文：王长史求东阳，抚军不用。
现代文：左长史王仲祖请求出任东阳太守，抚军不肯委任他。
English: Zuochangshi Wang Zhongzu requested to be appointed as the governor of Dongyang, but Fuxun refused to appoint him.

古文：后疾笃，临终，抚军哀叹曰： 吾将负仲祖于此，命用之。 
现代文：后来王仲祖病重，临去世时，抚军哀叹说： 我将会在这件事上对不起仲祖。 便下命令委任他。
English: Later, when Wang Zhongzu was seriously ill and on the verge of death, Fu Jun lamented, "I will feel sorry for Zhongzu in this matter," and gave the order to appoint him.

古文：长史曰： 人言会稽王痴，真痴。 
现代文：王冲祖说： 人们说会稽王痴心，确实痴心。 
English: Wang Chongzu said: People say that they can check the king's foolishness, but it is indeed foolishness.

古文：刘简作桓宣武别驾，后为东曹参军，颇以刚直见疏。
现代文：刘简在桓温手下任别驾，后来又任东曹参军，因为刚强正直，桓温相当疏远他。
English: Liu Jian was assigned as a second-in-command under Kuan Wen, and later he was assigned as Dong Cao to join the army. Because he was strong and honest, Kuan Wen was quite estranged from him.

古文：尝听记，简都无言。
现代文：有一次处理公文，刘简一句话也不说。
English: Once, when dealing with official documents, Liu Jian did not say a word.

古文：宣武问： 刘东曹何以不下意？ 
现代文：桓温问他： 刘东曹为什么不提出意见？ 
English: Kan Wen asked him: Why doesn't Liu Dong Cao put forward his opinions?

古文：答曰： 会不能用。 
现代文：刘简回答说： 一定不会被采纳。 
English: Liu Jane replied, "It will definitely not be accepted."

古文：宣武亦无怪色。
现代文：桓温听了，也没有一点责怪的脸色。
English: After listening to him, Kan-Wen didn't look the least bit guilty.

古文：刘真长、王仲祖共行，日旰未食。
现代文：刘真长、王仲祖一起外出，天色晚了还没有吃饭。
English: Liu Zhenchang and Wang Zhongzu went out together, but they didn't have dinner until it was too late.

古文：有相识小人贻其餐，肴案甚盛，真长辞焉。
现代文：有个认识他们的吏役送来饭食给他们吃，菜肴很丰盛，刘真长辞谢了。
English: An official who knew them brought food for them to eat. The dishes were very rich, and Liu Zhen was very grateful.

古文：仲祖曰： 聊以充虚，何苦辞？ 
现代文：王仲祖说： 暂且用来充饥吧，何苦推辞！ 
English: Wang Zhongzu said, "Let it be used to satisfy hunger for the time being.

古文：真长曰： 小人都不可与作缘。 
现代文：刘真长说： 绝不能跟小人打交道。 
English: Liu Zhenlong said: You must never deal with villains.

古文：王脩龄尝在东山甚贫乏。
现代文：王脩龄曾在东山隐居过一段时间，那时很贫困。
English: Wang Yuling once lived in seclusion in Dongshan for a period of time. At that time, he was very poor.

古文：陶胡奴为乌程令，送一船米遗之，却不肯取。
现代文：陶胡奴当时任乌程县令，就运一船米去送给他。
English: At that time, Tao Hu Nu was the county magistrate of Wucheng County, and a shipload of rice was sent to him.

古文：直答语 王脩龄若饥，自当就谢仁祖索食，不须陶胡奴米。 
现代文：王脩龄推辞了，不肯收下，只是回话说： 王脩龄如果挨饿，自然会到谢仁祖那里要吃的，不需要陶胡奴的米。 
English: Wang Yuling declined and refused to accept it, only replying: "If Wang Yuling is starving, he will naturally go to Xie Renzo for food. He doesn't need Tao Hunu's rice."

古文：阮光禄赴山陵，至都，不往殷、刘许，过事便还。
现代文：光禄大夫阮思旷前去参加晋成帝的葬礼，到京都时，没有去殷浩、刘惔家探望，事情完后就往回走。
English: Guanglu doctor Ruan Siyuan went to attend the funeral of Emperor Jincheng. When he arrived in Kyoto, he did not visit the homes of Yinhao and Liu Xuan. After the event, he went back.

古文：诸人相与追之，阮亦知时流必当逐己，乃遄疾而去，至方山不相及。
现代文：众友好知道了，一起去追赶他。阮思旷也知道这些名士一定会来追赶自己，便急速走了，一直走到方山，他们赶不上为止。
English: Knowing that these celebrities would definitely come to chase him, Nguyn Sn Quang quickly walked all the way to Fng Sn until they couldn't catch up.

古文：刘尹时为会稽，乃叹曰： 我入当泊安石渚下耳。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔当时正请求出任会稽太守，便叹息说： 我如果到会稽，要在靠近安石的小洲旁停船了，再不敢靠近思旷身旁。
English: At that time, Danyang Yin Liuqi was requesting to be appointed as the auditor of the association, he sighed and said: If I go to the auditor, I will stop the boat near the small island of Anshi, and I will not dare to get close to Sina.

古文：不敢复近思旷傍，伊便能捉杖打人，不易。 王、刘与桓公共至覆舟山看。
现代文：否则他就会拿木棒子打人，改不了的。 王濛、刘惔和桓温一起到覆舟山去观赏。
English: Otherwise, he would hit someone with a wooden stick, which cannot be changed. Wang Yao, Liu Yao and Kuan Wen went to Mount Fuzhou together to watch.

古文：酒酣后，刘牵脚加桓公颈。桓公甚不堪，举手拨去。
现代文：喝酒喝得半醉以后，刘惔伸腿放在桓温脖子上，桓温很受不了，抬起手拨开。
English: After drinking until he was half-drunk, Liu Yao stretched out his leg and put it on Kuan Wen's neck. Kuan Wen couldn't stand it and raised his hand to move it away.

古文：既还，王长史语刘曰： 伊讵可以形色加人不？ 
现代文：回来以后，王濛对刘惔说： 他难道可以拿脸色给人看吗！ 
English: After returning, Wang Yao said to Liu Yao: Can he really show his face to people?

古文：桓公问桓子野： 谢安石料万石必败，何以不谏？ 
现代文：桓温问桓子野： 谢安石已经估计到万石一定要失败，为什么不劝他改正错误？ 
English: Kuan Wen asked Kanshino: Xie Anshi has already estimated that Wanshi must fail, why not advise him to correct his mistake?

古文：子野答曰： 故当出于难犯耳！ 
现代文：子野回答说： 自然是由于很难触犯呀。 
English: Kido replied, "Naturally, because it's difficult to offend."

古文：桓作色曰： 万石挠弱凡才，有何严颜难犯？ 
现代文：桓温生气地说： 万石是个软弱的庸才，还有什么威严的面孔不敢触犯！ 
English: Kuan Wen said angrily, "Wan Shi is a weak mediocrity, and what dignified faces dare not offend!

古文：罗君章曾在人家，主人令与坐上客共语。答曰： 相识已多，不烦复尔。 
现代文：罗君章曾经在别人家里作客，主人叫他和在座的客人一起谈谈话，他回答说： 大家相识已经很久了，用不着再讲客套了。 
English: Luo Junzhang was once a guest in someone else's home. The host asked him to have a conversation with the guests present. He replied, "We have known each other for a long time, there is no need to be polite.

古文：韩康伯病，拄杖前庭消摇。
现代文：韩康伯生病在家，经常拄着拐杖在前院里漫步游逛。
English: Han Kangbo is sick at home and often walks around the front yard on crutches.

古文：见诸谢皆富贵，轰隐交路，叹曰： 此复何异王莽时？ 
现代文：他眼看着谢家诸人都富贵了，进出的车子轰鸣于路、便叹道： 这和王葬时又有什么两样呢！ 
English: As he watched the Xie family and others become rich and powerful, and the cars coming and going roar on the road, he sighed: What's the difference between this and a king's funeral?

古文：王文度为桓公长史时，桓为儿求王女，王许咨蓝田。
现代文：王文度在桓温手下担任长史的时候，桓温为儿子求娶文度的女儿，文度答应回去和父亲蓝田侯王述商量。
English: When Wang Windu was serving as the chief historian under Kuan Wen, Kuan Wen asked his son to marry Windu's daughter. Windu agreed to go back and discuss the matter with his father, Lantian Hou Wang Su.

古文：既还，蓝田爱念文度，虽长大犹抱著膝上。
现代文：回家后，王述因为怜爱文度，虽然长大了，也还是抱在膝上。
English: After returning home, Wang Shu still cradled Wenda in his lap, even though he had grown up, because he pitied and loved Wenda.

古文：文度因言桓求己女膝。
现代文：文度便说到桓温求娶自己女儿的事。
English: Wenda then spoke about Kan-Wen's proposal to marry his daughter.

古文：蓝田大怒，排文度下膝曰： 恶见，文度已复痴，畏桓温面？
现代文：王述非常生气，把文度从膝上推下去，说道： 我不喜欢看见文度又犯傻了，是害怕桓温那副面孔！
English: Wang Shu was very angry and pushed Wang Du down from his knees, saying, "I don't like to see Wang Du acting stupid again, I'm afraid of that face of Kuan Wen!"

古文：兵，那可嫁女与之！ 
现代文：当兵的，怎么可以嫁女儿给他家！ 
English: How can a soldier marry off his daughter to his family!

古文：文度还报云： 下官家中先得婚处。 
现代文：文度就回复桓温说： 下官家里已经给女儿找了婆家。 
English: Man-du replied to Kan-Wen saying, "The lower-ranking official's family has already found a mother-in-law for their daughter.

古文：桓公曰： 吾知矣，此尊府君不肯耳。 
现代文：桓温说： 我知道了，这是令尊大人不答应呢。 
English: Kan-Wen said, "I know, it's because your father wouldn't allow it."

古文：后桓女遂嫁文度儿。
现代文：后来桓温的女儿便嫁给文度的儿子。
English: Later, Kuan-Wen's daughter married Mun-Do's son.

古文：王子敬数岁时，尝看诸门生樗蒲。见有胜负，因曰： 南风不竞。 
现代文：王子敬只有几岁的时候，曾经观看一些门客赌博，看见他们要出现输赢的时候，便说： 南风不竞南边的要输。 
English: When Prince Jing was only a few years old, he once watched some gamblers gambling. When he saw them about to lose or win, he said, "The south wind does not compete, the south side must lose."

古文：门生辈轻其小儿，迺曰： 此郎亦管中窥豹，时见一斑。 
现代文：门客们轻视他是小孩子，就说： 这位小郎也是管中窥豹，时见一斑。 
English: The guards despised him as a child and said, "This boy is also a peephole in the prison, you can see him at all times."

古文：子敬瞋目曰： 远惭荀奉倩，近愧刘真长！ 
现代文：子敬气得瞪大眼睛说： 比远的，我愧对荀奉倩；比近的，我愧对刘真长。 
English: The son stared wide-eyed in awe and said, "Compared to those who are far away, I am ashamed to serve them; compared to those who are near, I am ashamed to serve Liu Zhenlong."

古文：遂拂衣而去。
现代文：于是拂袖而去。
English: He just whisked away.

古文：谢公闻羊绥佳，致意令来，终不肯诣。
现代文：谢安听说羊绥很优秀，就下旨意请他来，可是羊绥始终不肯上门。
English: When Xie An heard that the shepherd was excellent, he asked him to come, but the shepherd still refused to come.

古文：后绥为太学博士，因事见谢公，公即取以为主簿。
现代文：后来羊绥任太学博士，因为公事去见谢安，谢安就马上把他调来任主簿。
English: Later, Yang Xuan was appointed as a doctor of science. Because he went to see Xie An for business, Xie An immediately transferred him to be the chief accountant.

古文：王右军与谢公诣阮公，至门语谢： 故当共推主人。 
现代文：右军将军王羲之和谢安去看望阮裕，来到阮家门口，王羲之对谢安说： 我们自然是一同推崇主人。 
English: Wang Xizhi, general of the Right Army, and Xie An went to visit Ruan Yu. When they arrived at the door of Ruan's house, Wang Xizhi said to Xie An, "Naturally, we all respect our master.

古文：谢曰： 推人正自难。 
现代文：谢安说： 推崇别人恰恰最难。 
English: Xie An said, "It is the most difficult to respect others."

古文：太极殿始成，王子敬时为谢公长史，谢送版，使王题之。
现代文：太极殿刚建成的时候，王子敬当时任丞相谢安的长史，谢安派人送块木板去叫王子敬题匾。
English: When the Taiji Hall was first built, the prince respected the long history of the then prime minister, Xie An. Xie An sent someone to bring a piece of wood to the prince to make a dedication plaque.

古文：王有不平色，语信云： 可掷箸门外。 
现代文：子敬露出不高兴的样子，告诉来人说： 把它扔在门外吧。 
English: Zi Jing showed his displeasure and told the visitor: "Throw it outside the door."

古文：谢后见王曰： 题之上殿何若？
现代文：谢安后来看见王子敬，就说： 这是给正殿的题匾，你为什么不帮忙题匾呢？
English: Later, Xie An saw Prince Jing and said, "This is the inscription for the main hall. Why don't you help inscribe it?"

古文：昔魏朝韦诞诸人，亦自为也。 
现代文：从前魏朝韦诞等人也是写过的呀。 
English: In the past, people such as Wei Zhaowei and others also wrote about it.

古文：王曰： 魏阼所以不长。 
现代文：王子敬说： 这就是魏朝国运不能长久的原因。 
English: Prince Jing said: This is the reason why the national movement of the Wei Dynasty could not last long.

古文：谢以为名言。
现代文：谢安认为他说的好，是名言。
English: Xie An thought that what he said was good, and it was a famous saying.

古文：王恭欲请江卢奴为长史，晨往诣江，江犹在帐中。
现代文：王恭打算请江敳做他的长史，清晨前去拜访江敳，江敳还在帐中。
English: Wang Gong planned to ask Jiang Chen to do his long history, and went to visit Jiang Chen in the early morning. Jiang Chen was still in the account.

古文：王坐，不敢即言。良久乃得及，江不应。
现代文：王恭坐下，不敢立刻说明来意，很久之后才说到此事。
English: Wang Qiong sat down, not daring to immediately explain what he meant, and only mentioned the matter after a long time.

古文：直唤人取酒，自饮一碗，又不与王。
现代文：江敳不回答，只是叫人拿酒过来，自己喝了一碗，又不给王恭喝。
English: Jiang Yu didn't answer, he just asked someone to bring him some wine. He drank a bowl himself, but didn't give it to Wang Qiong.

古文：王且笑且言： 那得独饮？ 江云： 卿亦复须邪？ 
现代文：王恭一边笑一边说： 你怎么能自己一个人喝？ 江敳说： 你也需要吗？ 
English: Wang Gong said with a smile, "How can you drink it by yourself?" Jiang Chen said, "Do you need it too?"

古文：更使酌与王，王饮酒毕，因得自解去。
现代文：就再让人斟酒给王恭。王恭喝完酒，于是替自己解了围，告辞而去。
English: Then, someone poured wine for Wang Qiong. Wang Qiong finished drinking the wine, so he unburdened himself and left.

古文：未出户，江叹曰： 人自量，固为难。 
现代文：还没走出门，江敳叹息道： 人有自知之明，本来就很难啊。 
English: Not yet out of the door, Jiang Wei sighed: People have self-knowledge, it's hard to do.

古文：孝武问王爽： 卿何如卿兄。 
现代文：晋孝武帝问王爽： 你和你哥哥相比谁更有文采一些？ 
English: Emperor Jinxiao Wu asked Wang Shuang: Compared to your brother, who is more literary?

古文：王答曰： 风流秀出，臣不如恭，忠孝亦何可以假人！ 
现代文：王爽回答说： 论风雅超群，我比不上哥哥，至于忠孝，又怎么可能让给别人呢！ 
English: Wang Shuang replied, "In terms of superior style and elegance, I am not as good as my brother. As for loyalty and filial piety, how can I give it to others?

古文：王爽与司马太傅饮酒。太傅醉，呼王为 小子。 
现代文：王爽和太傅司马道子在一起饮酒，太傅醉了，叫王爽为小子。
English: Wang Shuang and the grandmaster Sima Daozi were drinking together. The grandmaster was drunk and called Wang Shuang a brat.

古文：王曰： 亡祖长史，与简文皇帝为布衣之交。亡姑、亡姊，伉俪二宫。
现代文：土爽说： 先祖长史，和简文皇帝是布衣之交；已故的姑母、姐姐是两宫的皇后。
English: Do Shuang said: Ancestor Changshi and Emperor Jianwen were close friends; the late aunt and sister were the queens of the two palaces.

古文：何小子之有？ 
现代文：怎么能称为小子！ 
English: How can you call him a kid!

古文：张玄与王建武先不相识，后遇于范豫章许，范令二人共语。
现代文：张玄和建武将军王忱两人原先不认识，后来在豫章太守范宁家相遇。
English: Zhang Xuan and the Jianwu general Wang Zhen did not know each other before, but later they met at the Fanning family, the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：张因正坐敛衽，王孰视良久，不对。
现代文：范宁叫两人交谈交谈。张玄便正襟危坐，王忱却久久地仔细看着他，不答话。
English: Fanning asked the two to have a conversation. Zhang Xuan sat straight-faced, but Wang Zhen looked at him carefully for a long time and did not answer.

古文：张大失望，便去。范苦譬留之，遂不肯住。
现代文：张玄非常失望，便告辞，范宁苦苦地解释并挽留他，他到底不肯留下。
English: Zhang Xuan was very disappointed and said goodbye. Fanning painstakingly explained and persuaded him to stay. In the end, he refused to stay.

古文：范是王之舅，乃让王曰： 张玄，吴士之秀，亦见遇于时，而使至于此，深不可解。 
现代文：范宁是王忱的舅舅，就责怪王忱说： 张玄是吴地名士中的优秀人物，又是当代名流所着重的，你却让他处在这种情况下，真是很难理解。 
English: Fanning, who is Wang Zhen's uncle, reproached Wang Zhen and said: Zhang Xuan is an outstanding figure among the famous people in Wuxi, and is also the focus of contemporary celebrities, but you put him in this situation, it is really difficult to understand.

古文：王笑曰： 张祖希若欲相识，自应见诣。 
现代文：王忱笑着说： 张祖希如果想认识我，自然应该上门来探望我。 
English: Wang Zhen smiled and said, "If Zhang Zuxi wants to get to know me, he should naturally visit me.

古文：范驰报张，张便束带造之。
现代文：范宁赶紧把这话告诉张玄，张玄便穿好礼服去拜访他。
English: Fanning quickly told Zhang Xuan about this, and Zhang Xuan put on a gown and went to visit him.

古文：遂举觞对语，宾主无愧色。
现代文：两人于是一边喝酒一边谈论，宾主都没有抱愧的表情。
English: So the two of them were drinking and talking, and the hosts didn't look at all ashamed.

