古文：绍圣三年，以平江、镇江军节度使封端王，出就傅。
现代文：徽宗体神合道骏烈逊功圣文仁德宪慈显孝皇帝，名估，神宗的第十一个儿子，母亲是钦慈皇后陈氏。元丰五年，以平江、镇江军节度使职衔封为端王，接受师傅的指导，在宫中学习。
English: Emperor Qinzong, the 11th son of Emperor Qinzong and the mother of Emperor Qinzong's mother, Empress Chen. In the fifth year of the Yuanfeng Dynasty, Emperor Qinzong made the military festivals of Pingjiang and Zhenjiang into his official title, and accepted the guidance of masters to study in the palace.

古文：五年，加司空，改昭德、彰信军节度。
现代文：绍圣五年，加为司空，改为昭德、彰信军节度使。
English: In the fifth year of Shaosheng, it was added to the Siku, and changed to Zhao De, Zhangxin Army Festival.

古文：元符三年正月己卯，哲宗崩，皇太后垂帘，哭谓宰臣曰： 国家不幸，大行皇帝无子，天下事须早定。 
现代文：元符三年正月十二日，哲宗逝世，皇太后垂帘听政，哭着对宰臣说： 国家遭到不幸，大宋皇帝哲宗没有儿子，关系国家大事的皇位继承人要早点确定。 
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the third year of the Yuanfu era, Zhezong died. The empress dowager listened to the government and said to the aide-de-camp in tears: The country has suffered misfortune, the Great Song Emperor Zhezong has no son, and the heir to the throne should be determined earlier in relation to national events.

古文：章惇又曰： 在礼律当立母弟简王。 
现代文：章高声回答说： 按照礼制和法规应当立母弟简王。 
English: Zhang replied in a loud voice: In accordance with the etiquette and laws, we should set up the mother and brother, Jian Wang.

古文：皇太后曰： 神宗诸子，申王长而有目疾，次则端王当立。 
现代文：皇太后说： 神宗的各个儿子，申王年长，但眼睛患病，其次就是端王，应当立端王。 
English: The empress dowager said, "The sons of Shenzong, King Shin is the eldest, but his eyes are diseased, followed by King Huan, King Huan should be established."

古文：惇厉声对曰： 以年则申王长，以礼律则同母之弟简王当立。 
现代文：章又说： 按年龄申王年长，按礼法那么应当立皇上同母之弟简王。 
English: Zhang also said: According to age, Shen Wang is older, and according to etiquette, the emperor's younger brother by the same mother, Jian Wang, should be appointed.

古文：皇太后曰： 皆神宗子，莫难如此分别，于次端王当立。 
现代文：皇太后说： 都是神宗的儿子，不要搞得这么难以分别，按长次应当立端王。 
English: The empress dowager said, "They are all sons of Shintō, don't make it so difficult to tell them apart. According to the order of precedence, the eldest should be the king."

古文：知枢密院曾布曰： 章惇未尝与臣等商议，如皇太后圣谕极当。 
现代文：知枢密院曾布说： 章没曾与我们大臣商议，照皇太后的圣旨办极其恰当。 
English: Zengbu of the Privy Council said, "Zhang did not consult with our ministers, and it is extremely appropriate to carry out the sacred will of the empress dowager.

古文：尚书左丞蔡卞、中书门下侍郎许将相继曰： 合依圣旨。 
现代文：尚书左承蔡卞、中书门下侍郎许将接着发言说： 完全应当遵照皇太后的圣旨。 
English: Shangshu Zuo's successor Cai Qi and Zhongshu's subordinate attendant Xu will then make a speech, saying: It is completely necessary to follow the sacred will of the empress dowager.

古文：皇太后又曰： 先帝尝言，端王有福寿，且仁孝，不同诸王。 
现代文：皇太后又说： 先帝曾经说，端王有福寿之相，并且仁义孝道，不同于其他各位王。 
English: The empress dowager also said, "The late emperor once said that King Huan had the appearance of longevity, and his benevolence, righteousness, and filial piety were different from those of other kings.

古文：于是惇为之默然。
现代文：章于是默不作声。
English: Zhang then fell silent.

古文：乃召端王入，即皇帝位，皇太后权同处分军国事。
现代文：于是召端王进宫，即皇帝位，皇太后权同处分军国大事。
English: As a result, the king was summoned to the palace, that is, the emperor's throne, and the empress dowager had the power to deal with military and national affairs.

古文：庚辰，赦天下常赦所不原者，百官进秩一等，赏诸军。
现代文：十三日，赦免全国按常赦所不能原谅的人，文武百官进秩一等，赏赐各军。
English: On the 13th, people who could not be pardoned were pardoned throughout the country according to the usual pardon, and hundreds of civil and military officials were promoted to the first rank, and each army was rewarded.

古文：遣宋渊告哀于辽。
现代文：派遣宋渊向辽国报丧。
English: Song Yuan was dispatched to Liao Province to report the death.

古文：辛巳，尊先帝后为元符皇后。
现代文：十四日，尊先帝后为元符皇后。
English: On the 14th, His Majesty the Emperor and Empress Emerged as the Empress of Yuanfu.

古文：癸未，追尊母贵仪陈氏为皇太妃。
现代文：十六日，追尊母贵仪陈氏为皇太妃。
English: On the 16th, she succeeded her mother, Gui Yi Chen, as Empress Dowager.

古文：甲申，命章惇为山陵使。
现代文：十七日，命令章为哲宗山陵使。
English: On the 17th, the order was issued for the Tetsuzo Mausoleum Envoy.

古文：乙酉，出先帝遗留物赐近臣。
现代文：十八日，拿出哲宗遗留物品赐给近臣。
English: On the 18th, he took out Tetsuzo's leftover items and gave them to his close vassals.

古文：丙戌，以申王佖为太傅，进封陈王，赐赞拜不名。
现代文：十九日，委任申王赵泌为太傅，进封为陈王，赐允他朝拜时赞礼不称姓名。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Shen Wang Zhaoxu as Taifu and enthroned him as Chen Wang, granting him the right to chant praises during the morning worship without mentioning his name.

古文：丁亥，进仁宗淑妃周氏、神宗淑妃邢氏并为贵妃，贤妃宋氏为德妃。
现代文：二十日，进封仁宗淑妃周氏、神宗淑妃邢氏都为贵妃，贤妃宋氏为德妃。
English: On the 20th, Consort Zhou of Emperor Renzong and Consort Yao of Emperor Shenzong were both appointed as honorary consorts, and Consort Song was appointed as honorary consort.

古文：戊子，以章惇为特进，封申国公。
现代文：二十一日，因章为特进，封为申国公。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was promoted to the rank of special envoy and given the title of Shen Guo Gong.

古文：己丑，进封莘王俣为卫王，守太保；简王似为蔡王，睦王偲为定王，并守司徒。
现代文：二十二日，进封苹王赵误为卫王，职衔太保；简王赵似为蔡王，睦王赵为定王，并为司徒。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Wang Zhao of Jinfeng was mistaken for Wei Wang, and his title was Taibo; Zhao Wang Zhao of Jian was mistaken for Cai Wang, and Zhao Wang Mugu was mistaken for Ding Wang, and he was mistaken for Szeto.

古文：罢增八厢逻卒。
现代文：罢除增加八厢巡逻士兵。
English: The number of soldiers on patrol has been increased by eight cars.

古文：二月己亥，始听政。
现代文：二月初二，开始上朝处理政事。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Shang Dynasty began to deal with political affairs.

古文：尊先帝妃朱氏为圣瑞皇太妃。
现代文：尊哲宗妃朱氏为圣瑞皇太妃。
English: Zongzhe Zongfei Zhu is the daughter of Emperor Shengrui.

古文：壬寅，以南平王李乾德为检校太师。
现代文：初五，任命南平王李乾德为检校太师。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Nanping King Li Qiande was appointed as the inspector.

古文：丁未，立顺国夫人王氏为皇后。
现代文：初十，立顺国夫人王氏为皇后。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Lady Wang of Lishun Province became the empress.

古文：庚戌，向宗回、宗良迁节度使，太后弟侄未仕者俱授以官。
现代文：十三日，向宗回、宗良升为节度使，太后弟侄没有出仕的全部授给官职。
English: On the 13th, the Empress Dowager's brothers and nephews, who did not serve, were all given official posts.

古文：癸示，初御紫宸殿。
现代文：十六日，开始到紫哀殿。
English: On the 16th, they started marching to the Purple Shrine.

古文：庚申，以吏部尚书韩忠彦为门下侍郎，资政殿大学士黄履为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十三日，任命吏部尚书韩忠彦为门下侍郎，资政殿大学士黄履为尚书右承。
English: On the 23rd, Han Tadahiko, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a subordinate attendant, and Huang Rui, a scholar of the University of the Palace of Councillors, was appointed as the right successor of the secretary.

古文：辛酉，名懿亲宅潜邸曰龙德宫。
现代文：二十四日，称爵亲宅徽宗当皇帝前居住的府第为龙德宫。
English: On the 24th, the prefectural palace where Emperor Huizong lived before he was ennobled became the Longde Palace.

古文：甲子，毁承极殿。
现代文：二十七日，毁掉承极殿。
English: On the 27th, the Janggi Palace was destroyed.

古文：丙寅，遣吴安宪、朱孝孙以遗留物遗辽国主。
现代文：二十九日，派吴安宪、朱孝孙把哲宗遗留物送给辽国主。
English: On the 29th, Wu Anxian and Zhu Xiaosun were sent to give the relics of Zhezong to the ruler of Liao.

古文：三月戊辰朔，诏宰臣、执政、侍从官各举可任台谏者。
现代文：三月初一，下诏宰臣、执政、侍从官分别推举可以担任台谏的人才。
English: On the first day of March, the lower-ranking vice-ministers, governors, and attendants were separately selected to be able to serve as Taiwans.

古文：庚午，遣韩治、曹谱告即位于辽。
现代文：初三，派遣韩治、曹谱到辽国报告徽宗即位的消息。
English: On the third day of the first month, Han Zhi and Cao Pu were sent to Liao to report the news of Huizong's enthronement.

古文：辛未，诏追封祖宗诸子光济等三十三人为王，女四十八人为公主。
现代文：初四，下诏追封祖宗各子赵光济等三十三人为王，女四十八人为公主。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor issued the following edict: Thirty-three princes and forty-eight princesses, including Zhao Guangji, each son of the founder, were to be crowned.

古文：甲申，以西蕃王陇拶为河西军节度使，寻赐姓名曰赵怀德，邈川首领瞎征为怀远军节度使。
现代文：十七日，任命西蕃王陇摺为河西军节度使，不久赐给他姓名为赵怀德，邀川首领瞎征为怀远军节度使。
English: On the seventeenth day, he appointed Xidi Wang Xizuri as the Hexi Army's Festival Envoy, and soon gave him the surname Zhao Huaide. He also invited the leader of the Sichuan Army, Xian Zheng, as the Huaiyuan Army's Festival Envoy.

古文：己丑，以日当食，降德音于四京：减囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：二十二日，因日食向四京地区颁布德音文告：减轻囚犯罪人罪刑一等，流刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 22nd, due to the solar eclipse, the German-language announcement was issued to the Shijing area: to reduce the criminal punishment of prisoners to the first class, and to release all prisoners below the banishment.

古文：庚寅，录赵普后。
现代文：二十三日，录用赵普后代。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Pu's descendants were hired.

古文：辛卯，诏求直言。
现代文：二十四日，下诏求直言。
English: On the 24th, he issued the following edict.

古文：癸巳，以宁远军节度观察留后世雄为崇信军节度使，封安定郡王。
现代文：二十六日，任命宁远军节度观察使留后世雄为崇信军节度使，封为安定郡王。
English: On the 26th, he appointed the Ningyuan Army Festival Observation Envoy Rui Xiaoxiong as the Chongxin Army Festival Envoy, and was named the King of Stable County.

古文：乙未，却永兴民王怀所进玉器。
现代文：二十八日，拒绝永兴百姓王怀进献的玉器。
English: On the 28th, the Yongxing people refused to accept the jade offered by Wang Huai.

古文：夏四月丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, a solar eclipse. On the seventh day of the first month, I went to Su Mountain.

古文：己亥，令监司分部决狱。
现代文：初三，命令监司分部处理各种案件。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he ordered the supervision division to deal with various cases.

古文：甲辰，以韩忠彦为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，礼部尚书李清臣为门下侍郎，翰林学士蒋之奇同知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，任命韩忠彦为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，礼部尚书李清臣为门下侍郎，翰林学士蒋之奇为同知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Han Tadahiko was appointed as Sho Sho's right-hand man and Cho Cho Sho's page boy, Sho Sho's page boy was appointed as Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho.

古文：乙巳，录曹佾后。
现代文：初九，录用曹情后代。
English: In the ninth grade, Cao's descendants were hired.

古文：丁未，以帝生日为天宁节。
现代文：十一日，把徽宗生日定为天宁节。
English: On the 11th day, Huizong's birthday was designated as Tianning Festival.

古文：己酉，长子亶生。
现代文：十三日，长子赵出生。
English: On the 13th, the eldest son Zhao was born.

古文：辛亥，大赦天下，应元符二年已前系官逋负悉蠲之。
现代文：十五日，大赦全国，凡是元符二年以前拖欠官府的赋税全部免除。
English: On the 15th, the whole country was amnestied, and all taxes that were in arrears to the government before the second year of the Yuan were completely exempted.

古文：癸丑，鹿敏求等以应诏上书迁秩。
现代文：十七日，鹿敏求等因应诏上书升官。
English: On the 17th, Lu Tingqiu and others were promoted in response to the imperial edict.

古文：乙卯，请大行皇帝谥于南郊。
现代文：十九日，在南郊请溢哲宗皇帝。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Yitzhak invited him to the southern suburbs.

古文：丁巳，诏范纯仁等复官、宫观，苏轼等徙内郡居住。
现代文：二十一日，下诏范纯仁等人恢复宫观职务，苏轼等人迁往内地居住。
English: On the twenty-first day of the following year, Fan Chunren and others were reinstated to the palace, and Su Shi and others moved to the mainland.

古文：癸亥，罢编类臣僚章疏局。
现代文：二十七日，罢除编类臣僚章疏局。
English: On the 27th, the Department of Classification and Classification of Ministers was abolished.

古文：乙丑，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身五百十八人。
现代文：二十九日，赐给礼部奏名进士及第、出身五百五十八人。
English: On the 29th, it was given to 558 members of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：五月丁卯朔，罢理官失出之罚。
现代文：五月初一，罢除对大理寺官员因有罪判无罪或重罪轻罚罪行的处罚。
English: On the first day of May, the punishment for Dalian Temple officials who were found not guilty or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor was abolished.

古文：丙子，诏复废后孟氏为元祐皇后。
现代文：初十，下诏恢复废后孟氏为元皇后。
English: At the beginning of the 10th century, after the abolition of the imperial edict, the Meng family became the former empress.

古文：乙酉，蔡卞罢。
现代文：十九日，蔡卞被罢免。
English: On the 19th, Cai Wei was removed from office.

古文：己丑，诏追复文彦博、王珪、司马光、吕公著、吕大防、刘挚等三十三人官。
现代文：二十三日，下诏追复文彦博、巨圭、司马光、吕公著、吕大防、刘挚等三十三人的官职。
English: On the 23rd, the following decree was issued to reinstate the official positions of 33 people, including Wen Yanbo, Jigui, Sima Guang, Lv Gongzhu, Lv Dafo, and Liu Zhi.

古文：辛卯，还司马光等致仕遗表恩。
现代文：二十五日，归还司马光等人退休所享受的种种优待。
English: On the 25th, all kinds of preferential treatment enjoyed by Sima Guang and other retirees were returned.

古文：癸巳，河北、河东、陕西饥，诏帅臣计度振恤。
现代文：二十七日，河北、河东、陕西发生饥荒，下诏帅臣想方设法进行贩济抚恤。
English: On the 27th, a famine occurred in Hebei, Hedong, and Shaanxi, and the generals and ministers tried their best to sell food to the poor.

古文：丁卯，告哲宗钦文睿武昭孝皇帝谥于天地、宗庙、社稷。戊辰，上宝册于福宁殿。
现代文：六月初一，辽主派萧进忠、萧安世等人来吊祭哲宗。秋七月初一，遵从皇太后诏令，不再参与处理军国大事。初二，向天地、宗庙、社翟报告哲宗钦文睿武昭孝皇帝溢号。初三，到福宁殿献上宝册。
English: On the first day of June, the Liao ruler sent Xiao Jinzhong, Xiao Anshi and others to hang Zhezong. On the first day of autumn in July, in accordance with the imperial edict of the empress dowager, he no longer participated in the handling of military affairs. On the second day of the first month, he reported to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple and the community that Zhezong Qin Wenrui Wu Zhaoxiao was the emperor's posthumous name. On the third day of the first month, he presented a treasure book to the Fu Ning Palace.

古文：癸酉，以皇太后还政，减天下囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：初八，因皇太后还政给徽宗，天下囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, as the empress dowager returned power to Huizong, the world's prisoners were given a first-class reduction in punishment and released from exile.

古文：癸未，遣陆佃、李嗣徽报谢于辽。
现代文：十八日，派遣陆佃、李嗣徽答谢辽朝。
English: On the 18th, Lu Xun and Li Conghui were sent to Liao Dynasty to express their gratitude.

古文：罢管勾陕西、京、川路坑冶及江西、广东、湖北、夔、梓、成都路管勾措置盐事官。
现代文：罢除管勾陕西、京西、川路坑冶及江西、广东、湖北、夔、梓、成都路管勾措置盐事官。
English: The officials in charge of supervising the construction of roads in Shaanxi, West Beijing, Sichuan and Jiangxi, Guangdong, Hubei, Handan, Zhuhai and Chengdu were dismissed.

古文：辛卯，封子亶为韩国公。
现代文：二十六日，封儿子赵为韩国公。
English: On the 26th, Fong's son Zhao became the ruler of Korea.

古文：八月戊戌，诏诸路遇民有疾，委官监医往视疾给药。
现代文：八月初四，下诏各路遇到百姓生病，委派官员监督医生前往治疗给药。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, officials were assigned to supervise doctors to treat and administer medicine to people who fell ill.

古文：庚子，作景灵西宫，奉安神宗神御，建哲宗神御殿于其西。
现代文：初六，建制景灵西宫，恭敬安置神宗神主，在它的西边建造哲宗神御殿。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the West Palace of Jingling was established, and the Shinshu Shinshu was respectfully placed, and the Tetsuzo Shinshu Imperial Palace was built on its west side.

古文：辛丑，出内库金帛二百万籴陕西军储。
现代文：初七，拿出内库金帛二百万来买陕西军储。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he took out 2 million gold ingots from the treasury to buy the Shaanxi military reserve.

古文：壬寅，葬哲宗皇帝于永泰陵。
现代文：初八，哲宗皇帝葬于永泰陵。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Emperor Dezong was buried in Yongtai Mausoleum.

古文：丙午，遣董敦逸贺辽主生辰，吕仲甫贺正旦。
现代文：十二日，派遣董敦逸祝贺辽主生辰，吕仲甫祝贺正旦。
English: On the 12th, Dong Dunyi was sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday, and Lü Zhongfu congratulated Zhengdan.

古文：戊申，高丽王王熙遣使奉表来慰。
现代文：十四日，高丽王王熙派遣使臣奉表来慰问。
English: On the 14th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Hee, sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：庚戌，诏以仁宗、神宗庙永世不祧。
现代文：十六日，下诏仁宗、神宗庙神主永世不迁。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the head priest of Jin Sect and Shinshu Sect temples will move permanently.

古文：戊午，以蔡王似为太保。
现代文：二十四日，任命蔡王赵似为太保。
English: On the 24th, Cai Wang Zhao Lian was appointed as the Tai Bao.

古文：癸亥，祔哲宗神主于太庙，庙乐曰《大成之舞》。
现代文：二十九日，在太庙附祭哲宗神主，庙乐为伏成之舞。
English: On the 29th, there was an additional festival for the Tetsuzo Shinto deity at Taimyo, and the temple music was Fushin's dance.

古文：九月甲子，诏修《哲宗实录》。
现代文：九月初一，下诏修撰哲宗实录。
English: On the first day of September, Zhao Xiu compiled the Zhezong record.

古文：丙寅，辽遣萧穆来贺即位。
现代文：初三，辽国派遣萧穆来祝贺皇上即位。
English: On the third day of the first month, Liao sent Xiao Mu to congratulate the emperor on his accession to the throne.

古文：丁卯，减两京、河阳、郑州囚罪一等，民缘山陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：初四，两京、河阳、郑州囚犯减罪一等，百姓为哲宗山陵服役的免除其赋。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, the prisoners in Beijing, Heyang and Zhengzhou had their crimes reduced to the first class, and the people who served for the tomb of Zhezong were exempted from serving.

古文：己巳，幸龙德宫。
现代文：初六，到龙德宫。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, I went to the Longde Palace.

古文：辛未，章惇罢。
现代文：初八，章被罢免。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the chapter was dismissed.

古文：丙子，以陈王佖为太尉。
现代文：十三日，任命陈王赵泌为太尉。
English: On the 13th, Chen Wang Zhaoxu was appointed as the first lieutenant.

古文：丁丑，诏修《神宗史》。
现代文：十四日，下诏修撰件申宗史。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued to revise and compile the history of the Shenzong.

古文：己丑，复均给职田。
现代文：二十六日，又均给职田。
English: On the 26th, they were all sent back to their workplaces.

古文：十月乙未，夏国入贡。
现代文：冬十月初二，夏国来进贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：丙申，蔡京出知永兴军，贬章惇为武昌军节度副使。
现代文：初三，蔡京出朝为永兴知军，章被贬为武昌军节度副使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Cai Jing entered the court as Yongxing Zhijun, and Zhang was demoted to vice-envoy of the Wuchang army.

古文：丁酉，以韩忠彦为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：初四，任命韩忠彦为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Han Tadahiko was appointed as Sho Sho's left-hand servant and junior attendant.

古文：壬寅，以曾布为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初九，任命曾布为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: At the age of nine, Zeng Bu was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man as well as the junior secretary.

古文：乙卯，升端州为兴庆军。
现代文：二十二日，升端州为兴庆军。
English: On the 22nd, the Xingqing army marched into Shifang Prefecture.

古文：己未，诏禁曲学偏见、妄意改作以害国事者。
现代文：二十六日，下诏禁止用狭隘偏颇的言论或妄意改变自己的学说来危害国事。
English: On the 26th, the following edict forbade the use of narrow and biased speech or deliberately changing one's doctrine to endanger state affairs.

古文：辛酉，罢平准务。
现代文：二十八日，罢除平准务。
English: On the 28th, the Vice-Minister was dismissed.

古文：十一月丁卯，诏修《六朝宝训》。
现代文：十一月初五，下诏修撰六朝宝封小。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued to revise and compile the six dynasties of Baofeng.

古文：降德音于端州：减囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：向端州颁降德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: Announcement to Hanzhou: Prisoners will have their crimes reduced to the first degree, and will be released after serving their sentences.

古文：庚午，诏改明年元。
现代文：初八，下诏明年改元。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor decreed that the era name would be changed next year.

古文：戊寅，以观文殿学士安焘知枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，任命观文殿学士安煮知枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, An Nianchi, a scholar of the Confucian Academy, was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：庚辰，黄履罢。
现代文：十八日，黄履被罢免。
English: On the 18th, Huang Lu was removed from office.

古文：己丑，置《春秋》博士。
现代文：二十七日，设置春和博士。
English: On the 27th, Dr. Shunwa was appointed.

古文：辛卯，令陕西兼行铜、铁钱。
现代文：二十九日，命令陕西铜、铁钱兼行。
English: On the 29th, Shaanxi was ordered to issue both copper and iron money.

古文：以礼部尚书范纯礼为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命礼部尚书范纯礼为尚书右承。
English: Appointed the head of the etiquette department, Shosho Fan Junrei, as Shosho's heir apparent.

古文：十二月甲午，以皇太后不豫，祷于宫观、祠庙、岳渎。
现代文：十二月初二，因皇太后身体不适，在宫观、祠庙、岳读祈祷。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, due to the physical discomfort of the Empress Dowager, prayers were read at the palace, ancestral temple, and Yue.

古文：戊戌，出廪粟减价以济民。
现代文：初六，拿出仓凛储蓄的粮食减价卖给百姓，接济他们。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he took out the grain that he had been saving and sold it to the people at a reduced price to help them.

古文：辛丑，虑囚。
现代文：初九，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 14th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：甲辰，诏修《国朝会要》。
现代文：十二日，下诏修撰咽朝会要。
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued.

古文：戊申，降德音于诸路：减囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十六日，向各路颁布德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 16th, a message was issued to all roads: prisoners will have their crimes reduced to the first class, and will be released after being exiled.

古文：戊午，辽人来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽人来祝贺春节。
English: On the 26th, Liao people came to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，出宫女六十九人。
现代文：这一年，放出宫女六十九人。
English: This year, sixty-nine maids of honor were released.

古文：建中靖国元年春正月壬戌朔，有赤气起东北，亘西南，中函白气。将散，复有黑昆在旁。
现代文：建中靖国元年春正月初一，有红气出现在东北方向，绵亘西南，其中有白气点缀；将要消失的时候，又有阴阳二气相侵形成的征象不样的黑色云气出现在旁边。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yasukuni, red gas appeared in the northeast direction, stretching to the southwest, with white gas embellishment; when it was about to disappear, there was also a black cloud of bad signs formed by the invasion of yin and yang.

古文：癸亥，有星自西南入尾，其光烛地。
现代文：初二，有星从西南露出尾部，其光照亮了大地。
English: On the second day of the first month, a star showed its tail from the southwest, and its light illuminated the earth.

古文：癸酉，范纯仁薨。
现代文：十二日，范纯仁逝世。
English: Fan Chunren passed away on the 12th.

古文：甲戌，皇太后崩，遗诏追尊皇太妃陈氏为皇太后。
现代文：十三日，皇太后逝世，留下遗训，追尊皇太妃陈氏为皇太后。
English: On the 13th, the empress dowager passed away, leaving a posthumous instruction to crown the respected crown princess Chen as empress dowager.

古文：丁丑，易大行皇太后园陵为山陵，命曾布为山陵使。
现代文：十六日，改大行皇太后园陵为山陵，命令曾布为山陵使。
English: On the 16th, the garden mausoleum of the empress dowager was changed to a mountain mausoleum, and the order was issued to make it a mountain mausoleum.

古文：己卯，令河、陕募人入粟，免试注官。
现代文：十八日，命令河、陕募人人粟，免试注官。
English: On the 18th, he ordered the provinces of Hebei and Shaanxi to collect everyone's millet, free of trial officials.

古文：二月丙申，雨雹。
现代文：二月初五，降冰雹。
English: On the fifth day of the second month, hail fell.

古文：己亥，汰秦凤路土兵。
现代文：初八，裁汰秦凤路士兵。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, soldiers from Qinfeng Road were executed.

古文：甲辰，始听政。
现代文：十三日，徽宗开始上殿听政。
English: On the 13th, Huizong began to go to the palace to listen to the government.

古文：乙巳，出内库及诸路常平钱各百万，备河北边储。
现代文：十四日，拿出内库及各路常平钱各一百万，准备河北边储。
English: On the 14th, it took out 1 million yuan from its internal treasury and 1 million yuan from each road to prepare for the Hebei border storage.

古文：丁巳，贬章惇为雷州司户参军。
现代文：二十六日，章被贬为雷州司户参军。
English: On the 26th, Zhang was demoted to Leizhou Sihou and joined the army.

古文：三月甲子，始御紫宸殿。
现代文：三月初三，开始到紫哀殿。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, they began to go to the Purple Shrine.

古文：乙丑，辽使萧恭来告其主洪基殂，遣谢瓘、上官均等往吊祭，黄寔贺其孙延禧立。
现代文：初四，辽使萧恭来报告辽主洪基去世，派遣谢文酵、上官均等人前往吊祭，派黄算祝贺他的孙子延禧继立。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, Liao envoy Xiao Qiong came to report the death of Liao Lord Hong Ji, sent Xie Wenya, Shangguan Jun and others to the hanging ceremony, and sent Huang Can to congratulate his grandson Yan Xiyi on his succession.

古文：丁丑，诏以河西军节度使赵怀德知湟州。
现代文：十六日，下诏任命河西军节度使赵怀德为惶州知州。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict appointed the Hexi Military Festival to make Zhao Haide the leader of Panzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：壬午，以日当食，避殿减膳，降天下囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：二十一日，因要出现日食现象，不上殿，减少饮食，全国囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the twenty-first day, because of the eclipse phenomenon, there was no going to the temple, the diet was reduced, and the national prisoners were commuted to the first class and released from exile.

古文：夏四月辛卯朔，日食不见。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食没有出现。
English: On the first day of summer in April, there was no eclipse.

古文：甲午，上大行皇太后谥曰钦圣宪肃。
现代文：初四，敬献皇太后溢号为钦圣宪肃。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the honorific title of the Empress Dowager was changed to "Qin Sheng Xian Su."

古文：乙未，上追尊皇太后谥曰钦慈。
现代文：初五，敬献追尊皇太后溢号为钦慈。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the honorific title of the Empress Dowager was changed to "Kenji."

古文：丁酉，御殿复膳。
现代文：初七，上殿队复饮食。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the Shangdang team resumed eating and drinking.

古文：壬寅，诏诸路疑狱当奏而不奏者科罪，不当奏而辄奏者勿坐，著为令。
现代文：十二日，下诏： 各路难以判明的案件应当奏报而没有奏报的要治罪，不当奏报而动不动就奏报的不追究，写进法律条文。 
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued: All cases that are difficult to determine should be reported, and if they are not reported, they should be punished. If they are not reported, they should not be investigated. This was written into the legal provisions.

古文：五月辛酉朔，大雨雹。
现代文：五月初一，大降冰雹。
English: On the first day of May, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：诏三省减吏员、节冗费。
现代文：下诏三省裁减吏员节俭冗费。
English: The following is the decree of the three provinces to reduce the number of officials, save money and reduce redundancy.

古文：丙寅，葬钦圣宪肃皇后、钦慈皇后于永裕陵。
现代文：初六，钦圣宪肃皇后、钦慈皇后葬在永裕陵。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, Empress Qinsheng Xiansu and Empress Qin Ci were buried in Yongyu Mausoleum.

古文：庚辰，苏颂薨。
现代文：二十日，苏颂逝世。
English: On the 20th, Susong passed away.

古文：丙戌，祔钦圣宪肃皇后、钦慈皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：二十六日，在太庙附祭钦圣宪肃皇后、钦慈皇后。
English: On the 26th, the Queen of Qinsheng Xiansu and the Queen of Qinsi were enshrined in the Great Temple.

古文：戊子，减两京、河阳、郑州囚罪一等，民缘山陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：二十八日，两京、河阳、郑州囚犯减罪一等，人民因服役山陵的人免除其赋。
English: On the 28th, prisoners in Beijing, Heyang and Zhengzhou were given first-class reductions in their sentences, and people were exempted from paying tribute to those who had served in the mountains.

古文：六月庚寅朔，以韩国公亶为开府仪同三司，封京兆郡王。
现代文：六月初一，任命韩国公赵为开府仪同三司，封为京兆郡王。
English: On the first day of June, South Korea's Gong Zhao was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and was named the King of Jingzhao County.

古文：戊申，封向宗回为永阳郡王，向宗良为永嘉郡王。
现代文：十九日，封向宗回为永阳郡王，向宗良为永嘉郡王。
English: On the 19th, the county king of Yongyang County was given to Zong Hui, and the county king of Yongjia County was given to Zong Liang.

古文：甲寅，封吴王颢子孝骞为广陵郡王，頵子孝参为信都郡王。
现代文：二十五日，封吴王赵颖子赵孝赛为广陵郡王，茜页子赵孝参为信都郡王。
English: On the 25th, the King of Wu, Zhao Yingzi, named Zhao Xiaosai as the King of Guangling County, and the King of Xindu, Zhao Xiaoshan, named the King of Xindu County.

古文：戊午，范纯礼罢。
现代文：二十九日，范纯礼被罢免。
English: On the 29th, Fan Chunli was removed from office.

古文：己未，诏班《斗杀情理轻重格》。
现代文：三十日，下诏颁行件杀情理轻重格。
English: On the 30th, the court issued a verdict that the murder case was not serious.

古文：秋七月辛巳，内郡置添差宗室阙。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，在内郡设置添差缺额。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the additional deficit was set up in the inner county.

古文：丙戌，安焘罢。
现代文：二十七日，安煮被罢免。
English: On the 27th, Anhui was removed from office.

古文：丁亥，以蒋之奇知枢密院事，吏部尚书陆佃为尚书右丞，端明殿学士章楶同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，任命蒋之奇知枢密院事，吏部尚书陆佃为尚书右承，端明殿学士章赢为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Jiang Zhiqizhi was appointed as the Privy Councilor, Shang Shuling was appointed as the rightful heir to Shang Shuling, and Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate was appointed as the Tongzhi Privy Councilor.

古文：九月己巳，诏诸路转运、提举司及诸州军，有遗利可以讲求及冗员浮费当裁损者，详议以闻。
现代文：九月十一日，下诏各路转运、提举司及各州军，有没有充分挖掘的利源可以利用的及冗员浮费应当裁减的，详细讨论后奏报朝廷。
English: On September 11th, it was decided that if there were any profit sources that could be used and redundancy costs that should be reduced, it would be reported to the Imperial Court after detailed discussion.

古文：丙戌，子礻圣薨。
现代文：二十八日，徽宗子赵茨去世。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Zi, the founder of Hui Dynasty, passed away.

古文：冬十月乙未，李清臣罢。
现代文：冬十月初八，李清臣被罢免。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, Li Qingcheng was dismissed.

古文：丁酉，天宁节，群臣及辽使初上寿于垂拱殿。
现代文：初十，天宁节，大臣们及辽朝使臣在垂拱殿第一次向徽宗祝寿。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, Tianning Festival, the ministers and envoys of the Liao Dynasty congratulated Huizong on his birthday for the first time.

古文：十一月庚申，以陆佃为尚书左丞，吏部尚书温益为尚书右丞。
现代文：十一月初三，任命陆佃为尚书左承，吏部尚书温益为尚书右承。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Lu Wei was appointed as the left successor of Shang Shu, and Wen Yi, the right successor of Shang Shu, was appointed as the right successor of Shang Shu.

古文：壬戌，以西蕃赊罗撒为西平军节度使、邈川首领。
现代文：初五，任命西蕃赊罗撒为河西军节度使、邀川首领。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xi'eroza was appointed as the envoy of the Hexi Army and the leader of Yingchuan.

古文：辛未，出御制南郊亲祀乐章。
现代文：十四日，出示御制南郊亲祀乐章。
English: On the 14th, the music of the Southern Suburbs of the Imperial Family was presented.

古文：戊寅，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：己卯，飨太庙。
现代文：二十二日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 22nd, the ritual was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚辰，祀天地于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，在圆丘祭祀天地，赦免全国。
English: On the 23rd, heaven and earth were sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：改彰信军为兴仁军，昭德军为隆德军。
现代文：改彰信军为兴仁军，昭德军为隆德军。
English: Changchang Xin's army was changed to Xingren's army, and Zhao De's army to Longde's army.

古文：改明年元。
现代文：明年改元。
English: The name will change next year.

古文：十二月壬辰，赐陈王佖诏书不名。
现代文：十二月初六，赐允陈王赵泌诏书不称姓名。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Emperor Chen Zhao issued an edict without mentioning any names.

古文：癸卯，进神宗昭仪武氏为贤妃。
现代文：十七日，进封神宗昭仪武氏为贤妃。
English: On the 17th, Shogi Takeshi of the Jinpu Shinshu Sect was crowned Empress.

古文：丙午，奉安神宗神御于景灵西宫大明殿。
现代文：二十日，神宗神主迁庙到景灵西宫大明殿。
English: On the 20th, the Shinshu Shinshu moved the temple to Daimyo-den, the western palace of the Jingling Emperor.

古文：丁未，诣宫行礼。
现代文：二十一日，到宫中朝拜神主。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to the palace to worship the Lord.

古文：己酉，降德音于四京，减囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十三日，向四京颁布德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 23rd, a German-language proclamation was issued to Shijing: prisoners will have their crimes reduced to the first degree, and will be released after serving a prison sentence.

古文：是岁，辽人来献遗留物。
现代文：这年，辽人来进献遗留物。
English: This year, Liao people came to donate leftovers.

古文：河东地震，京畿蝗，江、淮、两浙、湖南、福建旱。
现代文：河东发生地震。京瓷发生蝗灾，江、淮、两浙、湖南、福建发生早灾。
English: An earthquake occurred in Hedong, a locust plague occurred in Kyocera, and an early disaster occurred in Jiangsu, Huai, Zhejiang, Hunan, and Fujian.

古文：崇宁元年春正月丁丑，太原等十一郡地震，诏死者家赐钱有差。
现代文：崇宁元年春正月二十一日，太原等十一郡发生地震，下诏赐给死者家属不等的钱。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of spring of the first year of Chongning, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan and eleven other counties, and the following edict gave the families of the deceased varying amounts of money.

古文：二月丙戌朔，以圣瑞皇太妃疾，虑囚。
现代文：二月初一，因圣瑞皇太妃患病，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the first day of February, due to the illness of Princess Shengrui, the status of prisoners was investigated.

古文：甲午，子亶改名烜。
现代文：初九，徽宗儿子赵改名为赵厦。
English: At the age of nine, Huizong's son Zhao changed his name to Zhao Xia.

古文：以蔡确配飨哲宗庙庭。
现代文：以蔡确配享哲宗庙庭。
English: Cai Zhengyi is depicted enjoying the Zhezong temple garden.

古文：戊戌，诏： 士有怀抱道德、久沈下僚及学行兼备、可厉风俗者，待制以上各举所知二人。 
现代文：十三日，下诏： 士人有怀抱道德而长久埋没在基层以及品学兼优可以劝励风俗的，待制以上官员各推举二名。 
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: If there are scholars who embrace morality and have long been buried at the grassroots level, as well as those who can encourage customs with both academic and moral excellence, the officials above the reserve system will each nominate two people.

古文：奉议郎赵谂谋反，伏诛。
现代文：奉议郎赵捻谋反被处以死刑。
English: The instigator, Zhao Zhimou, was sentenced to death.

古文：庚子，封子焕为魏国公。
现代文：十五日，封儿子赵焕为魏国公。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhao Huan, the son of the emperor, became the prince of Wei.

古文：辛丑，圣瑞皇太妃薨，追尊为皇太后。
现代文：十六日，圣瑞皇太妃逝世，追尊为皇太后。
English: On the 16th, the death of Empress Dowager Shengrui was announced, and she was posthumously named Empress Dowager.

古文：庚戌，追封孔鲤为泗水侯，孔伋为沂水侯。
现代文：二十五日，追封孔鲤为泅水侯，孔吸为沂水侯。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, the emperor posthumously made Kong Yao the governor of Shishui and Kong Sui the governor of Shishui.

古文：三月丁巳，奉安哲宗神御于景灵西宫宝庆殿。
现代文：三月初二，哲宗神主迁庙到景灵西宫宝庆殿。
English: On the second day of March, the Tetsuzo Shinshu moved the temple to the Treasure Hall of the Jingling West Palace.

古文：戊午，诣宫行礼。
现代文：初三，徽宗到宫中朝拜。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Huizong went to the palace to worship.

古文：壬戌，以定王偲为太保。
现代文：初七，任命定王赵为太保。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Ding Wang Zhao was appointed as the Tai Bao.

古文：壬申，幸定王第。
现代文：十七日，到定王府第。
English: On the seventeenth day, they arrived at the King's palace.

古文：夏四月己亥，上皇太后谥曰钦成。
现代文：夏四月十五日，敬献皇太后溢号为钦成。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the honorary title of the empress dowager was changed to Kinsho.

古文：五月丁巳，荧惑入斗。
现代文：五月初三，荧惑星进人斗星。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the fluorescent planet entered the ring.

古文：庚申，韩忠彦罢。
现代文：初六，韩忠彦被罢免。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Han Tadahiko was dismissed.

古文：己巳，瞎征卒。
现代文：十五日，瞎征去世。
English: On the 15th, Xuanzheng passed away.

古文：庚午，降复太子太保司马光为正议大夫，太师文彦博为太子太保，余各以差夺官。
现代文：十六日，贬降太子太保司马光为正议大夫，太师文彦博为太子太保，其余分别降官不等。
English: On the 16th, the prince's father-in-law, Sima Guang, was demoted to the position of chief adviser, the prince's father-in-law, Fumihiko Bo, was demoted to the position of prince's father-in-law, and the rest of the officials were demoted.

古文：辛未，诏待制以上举能吏各二人。
现代文：十七日，下诏待制以上官员推举有才能的吏人各二名。
English: On the 17th, two talented officials will be selected by officials above the rank of vice-premiers.

古文：乙亥，黜后苑内侍请以箔金饰宫殿者。
现代文：二十一日，罢斥请求用金箔装饰宫殿的后苑内侍。
English: On the 21st, the palace's ladies-in-waiting were asked to decorate the palace's inner courtyard with gold leaf.

古文：丙子，诏元祐诸臣各已削秩，自今无所复问，言者亦勿辄言。
现代文：二十二日，下诏： 元当政各大臣已经削官夺职，从今以后不再穷追，言事官也不要动不动就以此作为上书的材料。 
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: The ministers who were formerly in power have been removed from office, and from now on, there will be no more chasing after them, and the spokesman should not hesitate to use this as a material for submitting a letter.

古文：戊寅，葬钦成皇后于永裕陵。
现代文：二十四日，钦成皇后葬在永裕陵。
English: On the 24th, Empress Qincheng was buried in Yongyu Mausoleum.

古文：己卯，陆佃罢。
现代文：二十五日，陆佃被免职。
English: On the 25th, Lu Yao was removed from office.

古文：庚辰，以许将为门下侍郎，温益为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨蔡京为尚书左丞，吏部尚书赵挺之为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十六日，任命许将为门下侍郎，温益为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨蔡京为尚书左承，吏部尚书赵挺之为尚书右承。
English: On the 26th, Xu was appointed as the junior attendant of the disciple, Wen Yixing as the junior attendant of the middle school, Hanlin Scholar Zong Zi Cai Jing as the left successor of the high school, and Zhao Ting Yi as the right successor of the high school.

古文：六月己丑，祔钦成皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：六月初五，在太庙附祭钦成皇后神主。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, there was a festival in the Imperial Temple to celebrate the enthronement of the Empress God.

古文：壬辰，减西京、河阳、郑州囚罪一等，民缘山陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：初八，西京、河阳、郑州囚犯减罪一等，百姓为山陵服役的人免除赋税。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, the prisoners of Xijing, Heyang and Zhengzhou were given first-class reduction of crime, and the people who served the mountains and mausoleums were exempted from taxation.

古文：癸卯，诏六曹尚书有事奏陈，许独员上殿。
现代文：十九日，下诏：六曹尚书官员有事奏陈，允许独自上殿。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Six Cao Shangshu officials had something to report and were allowed to go to the palace alone.

古文：己酉，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the same day, a white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬子，改渝州为恭州。
现代文：二十八日，改渝州为恭州。
English: On the 28th, the name of Yuzhou was changed to Gongzhou.

古文：癸丑，诏仿《唐六典》修神宗所定官制。
现代文：二十九日，下诏仿照塘六典修撰神宗所定官制。
English: On the 29th, the following edict imitated the official system established by the Tang Six-Degree Shujing Sect.

古文：封伯夷为清惠侯，叔齐为仁惠侯。
现代文：进封伯夷为清惠侯，叔齐为仁惠侯。
English: Jinfeng Boyi is the Qing Hui Hou, Uncle Qi is the Ren Hui Hou.

古文：闰月甲寅朔，更名哲宗神御殿曰重光。
现代文：闰六月初一，哲宗神主殿改称为重光殿。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, the main hall of Tetsuzo Shrine was renamed the Shigemitsu Hall.

古文：辛酉，虑囚。
现代文：初八，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 25th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：壬戌，曾布罢。
现代文：初九，曾布被罢免。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Zeng Bu was dismissed.

古文：甲子，诏诸路州县官有治绩最著者，许监司、帅臣各举一人。
现代文：十一日，下诏：各路州县官有治绩最为显著的人，允许监司、帅臣各推举一名。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: All prefectural and county officials were allowed to nominate one person from among those with the most outstanding performance.

古文：壬午，追贬李清臣为武安军节度副使。
现代文：二十九日，追贬李清臣为武安军节度副使。
English: On the 29th, Li Qingchen was demoted to vice-envoy of the Wu'an Army.

古文：癸未，诏监司、帅臣于本路小使臣以上及亲民官内，有智谋勇果可备将帅者，各举一人。
现代文：三十日，下诏监司、帅臣在本路小使臣以上和亲民官范围内，各自推举智勇双全、多谋善断可以担任将帅的人才一名。
English: On the 30th day of the following month, the overseer of the imperial edict and the courtier of the imperial edict, within the scope of junior envoys and above and pro-civil servants, will each nominate a person who is both wise and courageous, and can make good decisions, and can serve as a general.

古文：秋七月甲申朔，建长生宫以祠荧惑。
现代文：秋七月初一，修建长生宫用来祭祀荧惑星。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the Chosei-gu Shrine was built to worship the planet.

古文：丙戌，诏省、台、寺、监及监司、郡守，并以三年成任。
现代文：初三，下诏：省、台、寺、监官员和监司、郡守，都以三年作为一个任期。
English: On the third day of the new year, the following edict was issued: provincial, Taiwan, temple, and supervising officials as well as supervisors and county governors all have a three-year term.

古文：戊子，以蔡京为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初五，任命蔡京为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he appointed Cai Jing as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and the junior secretary.

古文：己丑，焚元祐法。
现代文：初六，焚毁元法。
English: Sixth year of junior high school, incineration method.

古文：甲午，诏于都省置讲议司。
现代文：十一日，下诏在都省设置讲议司。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued to set up a discussion division in the capital province.

古文：诏杭州、明州置市舶司。
现代文：下诏杭州、明州设置市舶司。
English: It is hereby decided to set up a municipal shipping department in Hangzhou and Mingzhou.

古文：庚子，章楶罢。
现代文：十七日，章赢被罢免。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Yingwen was dismissed.

古文：甲辰，以雨水坏民庐舍，诏开封府振恤压溺者。
现代文：二十一日，因雨水毁坏百姓庐舍，下诏开封府贩济抚恤压死和淹死的人。
English: On the 21st, due to the rain, people's houses were destroyed, and people were crushed and drowned.

古文：辛亥，罢《春秋》博士。
现代文：二十八日，罢除春秋博士。
English: On the 28th, Dr. Chunqiu was dismissed.

古文：八月乙卯，子烜改名桓，焕改名楷。
现代文：八月初三，徽宗儿子赵恒改名为赵桓，赵焕改为赵楷。
English: On August 3, Huizong's son Zhao Heng changed his name to Zhao Huan, and Zhao Huan changed his name to Zhao Kai.

古文：乙丑，罢权侍郎官。
现代文：十三日，罢除暂代侍郎官。
English: On the 13th, the acting chamberlain was dismissed.

古文：辛未，置安济坊，养民之贫病者，仍令诸郡县并置。
现代文：十九日，设立安济坊养活百姓中的贫穷患病的人，并且命令各郡县都设置。
English: On the 19th, Anji Fang was set up to feed the poor and sick among the people, and it was ordered to be set up in every county.

古文：甲戌，诏天下兴学贡士，建外学于国南。
现代文：二十二日，下诏全国兴学贡士，在国都南建置外学。
English: On the 22nd, it was announced that the whole country would pay tribute to the promotion of education, and a foreign school would be built in the south of the capital.

古文：丙子，诏司马光等二十一人子弟毋得官京师。
现代文：二十四日，下诏司马光等二十一人的子弟不得在京城做官。
English: On the 24th, the children of 21 people, including the next emperor, Ma Guang, were not allowed to work as officials in Beijing.

古文：己卯，以赵挺之为尚书左丞，翰林学士张商英为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十七日，任命赵挺之为尚书左承，翰林学士张商英为尚书右承。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Tingjing was appointed as the left successor of Shangshu, and Hanlin Scholar Zhang Shangying as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：九月戊子，京师置居养院，以处鳏寡孤独，仍以户绝财产给养。
现代文：九月初六，京城设立居养院用来安置鳄寡孤独，仍然用户绝充公的财产给养。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Beijing set up a nursing home to accommodate the lonely crocodiles, but the users still had to pay for the public property.

古文：乙未，诏中书籍元符三年臣僚章疏姓名为正上、正中、正下三等，邪上、邪中、邪下三等。
现代文：十三日，下诏中书省登录元符三年臣僚章疏姓名为正上、正中、正下三等，邪上、邪中、邪下三等。
English: On the thirteenth day of the following year, the three-year-old minister Zhang So's surnames were listed in the original certificate of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, with the names of Zheng Shang, Zheng Zhong, Zheng Xing, Zhe Xing, Zhe Xing, Zhe Xing, Zhe Xing and Zhe Xing.

古文：丁酉，治臣僚议复元祐皇后及谋废元符皇后者罪，降韩忠彦、曾布官，追贬李清臣为雷州司户参军，黄履为祁州团练副使，窜曾肇以下十七人。
现代文：十五日，处罚臣僚商议恢复元皇后、谋划废除元符皇后的人，降韩忠彦、曾布的官，追贬李清臣为雷州司户参军，黄履为祁州团练副使，贬窜曾肇以下十七人。
English: On the 15th, the people who discussed the restoration of the Yuan Empress and planned to abolish the Yuanfu Empress were punished, and Han Tadahiko and Zengbu were demoted to officials, Li Qingchen was demoted to Leizhou Sido to join the army, Huang Lu was demoted to Vice-Envoy of Zhangzhou Reunification, and 17 people below Zeng Zhao were demoted.

古文：己亥，籍元祐及元符末宰相文彦博等、侍从苏轼等、余官秦观等、内臣张士良等、武臣王献可等凡百有二十人，御书刻石端礼门。
现代文：十七日，登记元及元符末年宰相文彦博等、侍从官苏轼等、其余官员秦观等、内臣张士良等、武臣王献可等共一百二十人，御书刻石，立于端礼门。
English: On the 17th, Prime Minister Fumihiko Fumihiro, etc., the attendant Su Shi, etc., the remaining officials Qin Guan, etc., the vassal Zhang Shiliang, etc., and the vassal Wang Xianke, etc., a total of one hundred and twenty people, were registered.

古文：庚子，以元符末上书人钟世美以下四十一人为正等，悉加旌擢；范柔中以下五百余人为邪等，降责有差。
现代文：十八日，确定元符末年上书人钟世美等四十一人为正等，全部加以提升；范柔中以下五百多人为邪等，贬降不等。
English: On the 18th, it was determined that at the end of the Yuan era, 41 people, including the last calligrapher Zhong Shimei, would be promoted to the next grade, and all of them would be promoted; more than 500 people from Fan Rong Middle School and below would be demoted to the next grade.

古文：时世美已卒，诏赠官，仍官其子一人。
现代文：当时钟世美已经去世，下诏赠官，并且任命他一个儿子为官。
English: At that time, Zhong Shimei had already passed away, and the emperor granted him an official post and appointed one of his sons as an official.

古文：壬寅，贬曾布为武泰军节度副使。
现代文：二十日，贬曾布为武泰军节度副使。
English: On the 20th, Zengbu was demoted to vice-envoy of the Thai army.

古文：甲辰，诏： 元符三年、建中靖国元年责降臣僚已经牵复者，其元责告命并缴纳尚书省。 
现代文：二十二日，下诏： 元符三年、建中靖国元年贬降臣僚已经恢复原官的人，原来的贬降文书一律送纳尚书省。 
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: In the third year of the Yuanfu and the first year of the Jianzhong, those ministers who had been demoted and restored to their original positions would have their original documents of demotion sent to Shangshuo.

古文：冬十月癸亥，蒋之奇罢。
现代文：冬十月十二日，蒋之奇被罢免。
English: In the winter of October 12th, Jiang Ziqi was removed from office.

古文：戊辰，诏责降宫观人不得同一州居住。
现代文：十七日，下诏：贬降为主管宫观的人不得在同一州居住。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Those who were relegated to the position of chief palace guard were not allowed to live in the same state.

古文：甲戌，以御史钱遹、石豫、左肤及辅臣蔡京、许将、温益、赵挺之、张商英等言，罢元祐皇后之号，复居瑶华宫。
现代文：二十三日，因御史钱、石豫、左肤及辅臣蔡京、许将、温益、赵挺之、张商英等人上书请求，罢除元皇后的称号，仍旧是居住到瑶华宫。
English: On the 23rd, the title of the former empress was revoked at the request of Empress Dowager Qian, Empress Dowager Shi Yu, Empress Dowager Cixi, and her aides Cai Jing, Xu Zheng, Wen Yi, Zhao Tingzhi, Zhang Shangying, and others, and she continued to live in the Summer Palace.

古文：丙子，刘奉世等二十七人坐元符末党与变法，并罢祠禄。
现代文：二十五日，刘奉世等二十七人因元符末年附和变法获罪，都被罢为祠禄官。
English: On the 25th, 27 people, including Liu Fengshi, were found guilty of adding and changing laws at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, and were all dismissed as officials of the shrine.

古文：戊寅，以资政殿学士蔡卞知枢密院事。
现代文：二十七日，任命资政殿学士蔡卞为知枢密院事。
English: On the 27th, Cai Qi, a scholar of the House of Councillors, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：十一月乙酉，邵州言知溪洞徽州杨光衔内附。
现代文：十一月初四，邵州报告说知溪洞徽州杨光衔内附朝廷。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the 1st month, Shao Zhou reported that Yang Guang of Zhixi-dong, Huizhou Province was annexed by the imperial court.

古文：戊子，以婉仪郑氏为贤妃。
现代文：初七，立婉仪郑氏为贤妃。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wan Yi Zheng was crowned empress.

古文：辛卯，置河北安济坊。
现代文：初十，设置河北安济坊。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Anji Square in Hebei Province was established.

古文：癸巳，置西、南两京宗正司及敦宗院。
现代文：十二日，设置西京、南京宗正司及敦宗院。
English: On the 12th, the West Beijing and Nanjing Patriarchates and the Tun Patriarchate were established.

古文：戊戌，置显谟阁学士、待制官。
现代文：十七日，设置显漠阁学士、待制官。
English: On the 17th, it was decided to set up the post of Xianba Pavilion bachelor and the post of waiting officer.

古文：戊申，子楷为开府仪同三司，封高密郡王。
现代文：二十七日，任命儿子赵楷为开府仪同三司，封为高密郡王。
English: On the 27th, he appointed his son, Zhao Kai, as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and named him Gaomi County King.

古文：己酉，立卿、监、郎官三岁黜陟法。
现代文：二十八日，立卿监、郎官三年升降法。
English: On the 28th, the Act on the Promotion and Relegation of Privy Councillors and Retainers for Three Years came into effect.

古文：十二月癸丑，论弃湟州罪，贬韩忠彦为崇信军节度副使，曾布为贺州别驾，安焘为宁国军节度副使，范纯礼分司南京。
现代文：十二月初三，讨论放弃惶州罪，贬韩忠彦为崇信军节度副使，曾布为贺州别驾，安煮为宁国军节度副使，范纯礼被责降安排在南京。
English: On the third day of early December, they discussed giving up the crime of panicking the state, and demoted Han Tadahiko to vice-envoy of the festival of the Chongxin Army, Zengbu to vice-envoy of the festival of the Hezhou Army, Angui to vice-envoy of the festival of the Ningguo Army, and Fan Chunli was ordered to be demoted and arranged in Nanjing.

古文：庚申，铸当五钱。
现代文：初十，铸造当五钱。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, five coins were minted.

古文：辛酉，赠哲宗子邓王茂为皇太子，谥献愍。
现代文：十一日，赠给哲宗儿子邓王赵茂为皇太子，溢号为献憨。
English: On the 11th, Deng Wang Zhao Mao was presented to Zhezong's son, Deng Wang Zhao Mao, as the crown prince.

古文：丁丑，诏： 诸邪说诐行非先圣贤之书，及元祐学术政事，并勿施用。 
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 凡是歪门邪道，不是先圣贤主的主张，及元学术政事，一律不予施用和采纳。 
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: "Anything that comes from crooked doors and evil ways, is not the opinion of the ancient saints and sages, and is not academic politics, will not be applied and adopted.

古文：是岁，京畿、京东、河北、淮南蝗。
现代文：这一年，京瓷、京东、河北、淮南发生蝗灾。
English: This year, locust plagues occurred in Kyocera, Jingdong, Hebei, and Huainan.

古文：江、浙、熙河、漳、泉、潭、衡、郴州、兴化军旱。
现代文：江、浙和熙、河、漳、泉、潭、衡、郴等州和兴化军发生早灾。
English: Early disasters occurred in Jiang, Zhejiang, Hexi, He, Handan, Quan, Tan, Heng, Handan and other provinces and counties of the Xinghua Army.

古文：辰、沅州徭入寇。
现代文：辰、沉州瑶人攻打边境。
English: Chen and Shenzhou soldiers attacked the border.

古文：出宫女七十六人。
现代文：放出宫女七十六人。
English: Seventy-six maids of honour were released.

古文：二年春正月辛巳朔。
现代文：崇宁二年春正月。
English: Chongning in the first month of the second year of Spring.

古文：乙酉，窜任伯雨、陈瓘、龚居、邹浩于岭南，马涓等九人分贬诸州。
现代文：初五，任伯雨、陈酵、龚、邹浩被贬滴到岭南，马涓等九人分别贬滴各州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Ren Boyu, Chen Ye, Zou and Hao Hao were exiled to Lingnan, while Ma Jun and nine others were exiled to various provinces.

古文：知荆南舒亶平辰、沅州贼，复诚、徽州，改诚州为靖州，徽州为莳竹县。
现代文：荆南知府舒平定辰、沉州瑶贼，收复郴州、徽州，郴州改名为靖州，徽州改为漪竹县。
English: Jingnan prefectures of Shuping, Dingchen and Shenzhou, and recovered Zhangzhou and Huizhou. Zhangzhou was renamed Jingzhou, and Huizhou was renamed Zhuozhu County.

古文：壬辰，温益卒。
现代文：十二日，温益去世。
English: On the 12th, Wen Yi passed away.

古文：乙巳，以复荆湖疆土，曲赦两路。
现代文：二十五日，因收复荆湖疆土，特地赦免荆湖南、北两路。
English: On the 25th, due to the recovery of the territory of Jinghu, he specially pardoned the southern and northern regions of Jinghu.

古文：丙午，以沍寒，令监司分部决狱。
现代文：二十六日，因天寒地冻命令监司分别到各地处理狱讼案件。
English: On the 26th, due to the cold weather, the supervisors were ordered to go to various regions to deal with prison cases.

古文：丁未，以蔡京为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：二十七日，任命蔡京为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Cai Jing as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant and subordinate attendant.

古文：二月辛亥，安化蛮入寇，广西经略使程节败之。
现代文：二月初二，安化蛮攻打边境。广西经略使程节打败安化蛮。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Anhua barbarians attacked the border. Guangxi slightly defeated the Anhua barbarians.

古文：壬子，遣官相度湖南、北地，取其材植入供在京营造。
现代文：初三，派遣官员视察湖南、湖北瑶地，取其材木上供作为营建京城工程用料。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, officials were dispatched to inspect the reclamation sites in Hunan and Hubei and take the timber to use as materials for the construction of the capital city project.

古文：甲寅，进元符皇后为太后，宫名崇恩。
现代文：初五，进封元符皇后为太后，宫名崇恩。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the empress of Jinfu Yuanfu became the empress dowager, and her palace name was Chong'en.

古文：辛酉，置殿中监。
现代文：十二日，在中监置殿。
English: On the 12th, in the junior high school supervisor's hall.

古文：癸亥，奉安哲宗御容于西京会圣宫及应天院。
现代文：十四日，在西京会圣宫及应天院恭敬安置哲宗遗像。
English: On the 14th, statues of Tetsuzo were respectfully placed in the holy palace of the Western Kyokai and in Ying Tian Yuan.

古文：丙子，置诸路茶场。
现代文：二十七日，在各路设置茶场。
English: On the 27th, tea gardens were set up on all roads.

古文：三月壬午，进仁宗充仪张氏为贤妃。
现代文：三月初三，进封仁宗充仪张氏为贤妃。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Zhang Zongcheng was enthroned as empress dowager.

古文：乙酉，减西京囚罪一等。
现代文：初六，西京囚犯减罪一等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, a prisoner in Saikyo received a first-class reduction of his sentence.

古文：诏党人子弟毋得擅到阙下，其应缘趋附党人、罢任在外、指射差遣及得罪停替臣僚亦如之。
现代文：下诏： 元党人子弟不得擅自到朝廷，其中应缘趋附元党人被罢免在外指射差遣和获罪被停职的臣僚，也不能擅自到朝廷。 
English: The following edict: The children of former Party members are not allowed to go to the Imperial Court without permission. Among them, the ministers who were expelled from the Party and suspended from their posts due to their affiliation with former Party members are also not allowed to go to the Imperial Court without permission.

古文：丁亥，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：初八，到集英殿策试进士。
English: At the age of eight, he went to Shueiden to prepare for the entrance exam.

古文：癸卯，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身五百三十八人，其尝上书在正等者升甲，邪等者黜之。
现代文：二十四日，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身五百三十八人，其中曾经上书被确定为正等的升人甲科，邪等的人被取消资格。
English: On the 24th, the Ministry of Ceremonies named and promoted 538 people, including the first- and second-year students. Among them, those who had submitted a letter and were determined to be correct were promoted to Division A, and those who were not were disqualified.

古文：夏四月甲寅，诏侍从官各举所知二人。
现代文：夏四月初六，下诏侍从官各推举所熟知有才能的人二名。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, two well-known and talented people were selected by the lower officials.

古文：乙卯，于阗入贡。
现代文：初七，于闻来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Yu Wenlai paid tribute.

古文：丁卯，诏毁吕公著、司马光、吕大防、范纯仁、刘挚、范百禄、梁焘、王岩叟景灵西宫绘像。
现代文：十九日，下诏毁掉吕公著、司马光、吕大防、范纯仁、刘挚、范百禄、梁煮、王岩雯在景灵西宫的画像。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued to destroy the images of Lü Gongzhu, Sima Guang, Lü Dabao, Fan Chunren, Liu Zhi, Fan Bailu, Liang Ni, and Wang Yanwen in the West Palace of Jingling.

古文：己巳，以初谒景灵宫，赦天下。
现代文：二十一日，因初次朝拜景灵宫赦免全国。
English: On the twenty-first day, the whole country was pardoned for the first time to worship Jingling Palace.

古文：乙亥，诏毁刊行《唐鉴》并三苏、秦、黄等文集。
现代文：二十七日，下诏毁掉刊行的塘鉴和三苏、秦观、黄庭坚等人文集。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued to destroy the published Tang Jian and the three Su, Qin Guan, Huang Ting Jian and other humanities collections.

古文：戊寅，以赵挺之为中书侍郎，张商英为尚书左丞，户部尚书吴居厚为尚书右丞，兵部尚书安惇同知枢密院事。
现代文：三十日，任命赵挺之为中书侍郎，张商英为尚书左承，户部尚书吴居厚为尚书右承，兵部尚书安为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 30th, Zhao Tingling was appointed as the attendant of the Central Secretaries, Zhang Shangying as the left successor of the Central Secretaries, Wu Ju Hou as the right successor of the Household Secretaries, and Shang Shuan of the Military Department as the Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：夺王珪赠谥，追毁程颐出身文字，其所著书令监司觉察。
现代文：削夺赠给巨盖的溢号，追毁程颐出身文字，他所著书命令监司观察上报有关情况。
English: He ordered the supervisor to observe and report the relevant situation.

古文：五月辛巳，以贤妃郑氏为淑妃。
现代文：五月初三，命令立贤妃郑氏为淑妃。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, he ordered that the virtuous empress Zheng should be named as the most virtuous empress.

古文：癸未，以陈王佖为太师。
现代文：初五，任命陈王赵泌为太师。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Chen Wang Zhaoxu was appointed Grand Master.

古文：丙戌，贬曾布为廉州司户参军。
现代文：初八，贬曾布为廉州司户参军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zengbu was demoted to the rank of Lianzhou steward and joined the army.

古文：己亥，封子楫为楚国公。
现代文：二十一日，封儿子赵揖为楚国公。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Fong's son, Zhao Yao, became the Duke of Chu.

古文：丙午，册元符皇后刘氏为太后。
现代文：二十八日，册封元符皇后刘氏为太后。
English: On the 28th, Empress Liu of the Yuanfu Dynasty was enthroned as empress dowager.

古文：六月壬子，册王氏为皇后。
现代文：六月初五，册封王氏为皇后。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Wang was proclaimed empress.

古文：庚申，诏： 元符末上书进士，类多诋讪，令州郡遣入新学，依大学自讼斋法，候及一年，能革心自新者许将来应举，其不变者当屏之远方。 
现代文：十三日，下诏： 元符末年上书进士，大多数人言论涉及诽谤朝政，命令州郡把他们遣送到自讼斋，按照太学自讼斋法，让他们在这里听读，反省错误，等到一年之后，能改过自新的人允许将来应试科举，其中不改变初衷的人应当摒弃远方。 
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: "For those who entered the priesthood at the end of the previous year, most of whose speech involved defamation of the imperial government, the prefectural and county governments were ordered to send them to self-imposed exile. In accordance with the self-imposed exile law of Taigaku, they were allowed to listen to lectures and reflect on their mistakes here. After one year, those who could reform themselves were allowed to take the imperial examinations in the future. Those who did not change their original intention should abandon the distant land."

古文：壬戌，虑囚。
现代文：十五日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 15th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：是月，中太一宫火。
现代文：这个月，中太一宫发生火灾。
English: This month, a fire broke out in Zhongtaiyigu.

古文：复湟州。
现代文：收复惶州。
English: It is time to recover Panzhou.

古文：秋七月己卯，学士院火。
现代文：秋七月初二，学士院发生火灾。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, a fire broke out in the academy.

古文：辛巳，以复湟州，进蔡京官三等，蔡卞以下二等。
现代文：初四，因收复惶州，蔡京升官三级，蔡卞以下官员升二级。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, due to the recovery of Panzhou, Cai Jing was promoted to the third level, and officials below Cai Jun were promoted to the second level.

古文：壬午，白虹贯日。
现代文：初五，白色虹贯通天空。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a white rainbow pierces the sky.

古文：甲申，降德音于熙河兰会路：减囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：初七，向熙河兰会路颁布德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the German-language announcement was issued to Lanhui Road, Xihe: the prisoner's crime was reduced to the first class, and he was released after being exiled.

古文：庚寅，曾肇责授濮州团练副使。
现代文：十三日，曾肇被贬降为攫州团练副使。
English: On the 13th, Zeng Zhao was demoted to vice-envoy of the Zhangzhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：辛卯，诏上书进士见充三舍生者罢归。
现代文：十四日，下诏上书进士现为三舍生者罢除回归。
English: On the 14th, the following imperial edict was issued to remove and reinstate Jin Shi, who was now a renegade.

古文：丁酉，诏自今戚里宗属勿复为执政官，著为令。
现代文：二十日，下诏： 自今以后戚里宗属不再同时当执政官，写进法令条文。 
English: On the 20th, the following edict was issued: From now on, relatives and relatives will no longer be consuls at the same time, and this was written into the provisions of the decree.

古文：乙巳，诏责降人子弟毋得任在京及府界差遣。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：被贬降人的子弟不得担任京城及开封府界差遣官。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: the children of those who had been demoted were not allowed to serve as dispatching officers in the capital city and Kaifeng prefecture.

古文：八月丁未朔，再论弃湟州罪，贬韩忠彦为磁州团练副使，安焘为祁州团练副使，范纯礼为静江军节度副使，削蒋之奇秩三等。
现代文：八月初一，再次讨论放弃惶州罪，贬韩忠彦为磁州团练副使，安煮为祁州团练副使，范纯礼为静江军节度副使，蒋之奇被削官三级。
English: On the first day of August, it was once again discussed to give up the crime of panicking the state, and Han Tadahiko was demoted to vice-envoy of the Gyeongju Rehearsal Corps, Angui was demoted to vice-envoy of the Yeongju Rehearsal Corps, Fan Chunli was demoted to vice-envoy of the Jingjiang Rehearsal Corps, and Jiang Zhiqi was demoted to the third rank.

古文：戊申，张商英罢。
现代文：初二，张商英被罢免。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Zhang Shangying was dismissed.

古文：辛酉，诏张商英入元祐党籍。
现代文：十五日，下诏张商英人元党籍。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Shangyongren resigned from the Party.

古文：九月辛巳，诏宗室不得与元祐奸党子孙为婚姻。
现代文：九月初五，下诏宗室之内不能与元奸党子孙结为婚姻关系。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, it was decreed that no one in the imperial family could marry a descendant of a former traitor.

古文：庚寅，封子枢为吴国公。
现代文：十四日，封儿子赵枢为吴国公。
English: On the 14th, Fong's son Zhao Zu became the prince of Wu.

古文：诏： 上书邪等人，知县以上资序并与外祠，选人不得改官及为县令。 
现代文：下诏： 上书定为邪等的人，知县以上资任一律安排为朝廷外宫观官。幕职州县官不得改官和担任知县。 
English: The following edict: Those who were designated as evil by the imperial edict were to be appointed as palace observers outside the imperial court, regardless of whether they held the title of chigenshu or higher. The shogunate officials of prefectures and counties were not allowed to change their posts or serve as chigenshu.

古文：壬辰，置医学。
现代文：十六日，设置医学。
English: On the 16th, medicine was set up.

古文：癸巳，令天下郡皆建崇宁寺。
现代文：十七日，命令全国各郡设置崇宁寺。
English: On the 17th, he ordered every county in the country to set up a Chongning Temple.

古文：辛丑，改吏部选人自承直郎至将仕郎七阶。
现代文：二十五日，修改吏部选人制度为从承直郎到将仕郎七级官阶。
English: On the 25th, the selection system of the cadre department was revised to be from Zhengzhirong to Zhengshirong, a seven-level official rank.

古文：令天下监司长吏厅各立《元祐奸党碑》。
现代文：命令全国监司长官厅各自设立元奸党碑。
English: It ordered the offices of the national supervisors to each set up a monument to the former traitor.

古文：甲辰，诏郡县谨祀社稷。
现代文：二十八日，下诏各郡县隆重严肃祭祀社翟神。
English: On the 28th, all counties and counties solemnly and solemnly worshiped the god.

古文：冬十一月庚辰，以元祐学术政事聚徒传授者，委监司举察，必罚无赦。
现代文：冬十一月初四，下令用元学术政事召集生徒传授讲学的人，委派监司纠察举报，一定重罚，决不赦免。
English: At the beginning of November, the fourth day of winter, he ordered that the person who used the former academic government affairs to convene students to teach lectures should be appointed as the supervisor to investigate and report the picket, and should be severely punished and never be pardoned.

古文：十二月癸亥，祧宣祖皇帝、昭宪皇后。
现代文：十二月十八日，祭祀先祖宣祖皇帝、昭宪皇后。
English: On December 18th, the ancestor worship of Emperor Xuanzu and Empress Shoken began.

古文：丙寅，诏六曹长贰岁考郎官治状，分三等以闻。
现代文：二十一日，下诏六曹正副长官每年考核郎官治绩情况，划分为三等上报皇帝。
English: On the twenty-first day of the following year, Cao Zheng, the sixth vice-commander, made an annual assessment of the performance of his subordinates, and was divided into three classes and reported to the emperor.

古文：是岁，诸路蝗。
现代文：这一年，各路发生蝗灾。
English: This year, there was a plague of locusts in every direction.

古文：纂府蛮杨晟铜、融州杨晟天、邵州黄聪内附。
现代文：纂府蛮杨晨铜、融州杨晨天、邵州黄聪率众内附朝廷。
English: Yang Chen Cu, Rongzhou Yang Chen Tian, and Shaozhou Huang Cong, all of whom were attached to the imperial court.

古文：三年春正月己卯，安化蛮降。
现代文：崇宁三年春正月初四，安化蛮投降朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of the spring of Chongning, Anhua capitulated to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，诏上书邪等人毋得至京师。
现代文：初六，下诏：上书被定为邪等的人不得到京城开封。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: People whose letters were classified as evil would not be allowed to enter the capital.

古文：戊子，铸当十大钱。
现代文：十三日，铸造当十大钱。
English: On the thirteenth day, the minting of the ten-dollar coin began.

古文：壬辰，增县学弟子员。
现代文：十七日，增加县学学员名额。
English: On the 17th, the number of county students was increased.

古文：甲午，赐蔡京子攸进士出身。
现代文：十九日，赐蔡京儿子蔡枚进士出身。
English: On the 19th, Cai Jing's son, Cai Mai Jin, was born.

古文：癸卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十八日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 23rd, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：甲辰，铸九鼎。
现代文：二十九日，铸造九鼎。
English: On the 29th, Jiuding was minted.

古文：二月丙午，以淑妃郑氏为贵妃。
现代文：二月初二，封淑妃郑氏为贵妃。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：以刊定元丰役法不当，黜钱遹以下九人。
现代文：因刊定元丰役法不当，罢免钱以下九人。
English: Nine people, including Qian, were removed from their posts for improperly promulgating the Fixed-Principal-Amount-of-Labor Law.

古文：丁未，置漏泽园。
现代文：初三，设立漏泽园。
English: In the third year of junior high school, a leaking garden was set up.

古文：己酉，诏王珪、章惇别为一籍，如元祐党。
现代文：初五，下诏：巨盖、章另外登记在册，别为党籍，就像元党籍一样。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: the cap and badge should be registered separately, and they should not be party members, just like former party members.

古文：诏自今御后殿，许起居郎、舍人侍立。
现代文：下诏：从今以后皇上到后殿，允许起居郎、起居舍人侍立。
English: The following edict was issued: From now on, when the Emperor visits the inner palace, he is allowed to be waited on by his attendants.

古文：壬子，以楚国公楫为开府仪同三司，封南阳郡王。
现代文：初八，任命楚国公赵揖为开府仪同三司，封为南阳郡王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Duke of Chu, Zhao Xi, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and was named the King of Nanyang County.

古文：庚申，令天下坑冶金银复尽输内藏。
现代文：十一日，命令全国坑冶金银重新全部输纳内藏库。
English: On the 11th, it ordered the national mine metallurgy gold and silver to be re-allocated to the internal storage.

古文：辛未，雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，降冰雹。
English: On the 22nd, hail fell.

古文：三月辛巳，置文绣院。
现代文：三月初八，设置文绣院。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Wenxiu Academy was set up.

古文：丁亥，作圜土，以居强盗贷死者。
现代文：十四日，修建监狱用来安置强盗罪被免死的人。
English: On the 14th, a prison was built to house those who were exonerated of the crime of robbery.

古文：甲午，跻钦成皇后神主于钦慈皇后之上。
现代文：二十一日，把钦成皇后神主升到钦慈皇后之上。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the deity was elevated above the Queen of Mercy.

古文：辛丑，大内灾。
现代文：二十八日，皇宫发生火灾。
English: On the 28th, a fire broke out in the Imperial Palace.

古文：夏四月乙巳，以火灾降德音于四京：减囚罪一等，流以下原之。
现代文：夏四月初二，因发生火灾向四京颁降德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下恕免。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, due to a fire, Shijing was issued a letter of abatement: the prisoner's crime was reduced to the first class, and the sentence of banishment or less was forgiven.

古文：乙卯，复鄯州，建为陇右都护府。
现代文：十二日，收复都州，建为陇右都护府。
English: On the 12th, Duzhou was recovered and built as the capital of Shandong Province.

古文：辛酉，徙封楫为乐安郡王。
现代文：十八日，赵揖改封为乐安郡王。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Jun changed his title to King of Le'an County.

古文：复廓州。
现代文：收复廓州。
English: Recapture Gorkha.

古文：乙丑，罢讲议司。
现代文：二十二日，废罢讲议司。
English: On the 22nd, the discussion division was abolished.

古文：己巳，曲赦陕西。
现代文：二十六日，因特殊情况赦免陕西。
English: On the 26th, he pardoned Shaanxi due to special circumstances.

古文：壬申，楫薨。
现代文：二十九日，赵揖逝世。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：五月戊寅，罢开封权知府，置牧、尹、少尹。
现代文：五月初六，废罢开封府代理知府，设置牧、尹、少尹。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, the acting governors of the feudal government were abolished and replaced with Maki, Yin and Shao Yin.

古文：改定六曹，以吏、户、仪、兵、刑、工为序，增其员数，仿《唐六典》易胥吏之称。
现代文：改定六曹，以士、户、仪、兵、刑、工为序，增加名额，仿照塘六典改变青吏的称呼。
English: It was decided to change the title of the young officials to "Rokuzo," with the order of the young officials being "Shi," "Hous," "Gi," "Hei," "Chi" and "Gong." The number of young officials was increased, and the title of the young officials was changed to "Tang Rokusen."

古文：己卯，以复鄯、廓，蔡京为守司空，封嘉国公。
现代文：初七，因收复都州、廓州，蔡京被命为守司空，封为嘉国公。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, because of the recovery of Duzhou and Guozhou, Cai Jing was ordered to be the guardian of the sky, and he was given the title of Jiaguogong.

古文：庚辰，许将、赵挺之、吴居厚、安惇、蔡卞各转三官。
现代文：初八，许将、赵挺之、吴居厚、安、蔡卞分别转升三官。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the new year, Xu Zheng, Zhao Tianzhi, Wu Juhou, An and Cai Qi were promoted to the top three officials.

古文：甲申，改鄯州为西宁州，仍为陇右节度。
现代文：十二日，改都州为西宁州，仍为陇右节度。
English: On the 12th, the capital of the province was changed to Xining Province, but it is still the capital of Shandong Province.

古文：辛丑，诏黜守臣进金助修宫庭者。
现代文：二十九日，下诏罢除守臣中进献金银补助修筑宫廷者。
English: On the 29th, an edict was issued expelling the retainers who had contributed gold and silver to subsidize the construction of the palace.

古文：六月壬寅朔，图熙宁、元丰功臣于显谟阁。
现代文：六月初一，绘出神宗熙宁、元丰年间功臣图像供奉于显漠阁。
English: On the first day of June, the images of the meritorious vassals during the reigns of Shinso Hninin and Yuan Feng were drawn and enshrined at the Xianba Pavilion.

古文：癸酉，以王安石配飨孔子庙。
现代文：初二，把王安石神主配于孔子庙中共享祭祀。
English: On the second day of the new year, the Wang Anshi deity will be enshrined in the Confucius Temple.

古文：丙午，增诸州学未立者。
现代文：初五，没有设立学校的各州增置。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, the states that have not set up schools will be added.

古文：壬子，置书、画、算学。
现代文：十一日，设置书学、画学、算学。
English: On the eleventh day, the subjects of calligraphy, painting, and arithmetic were set.

古文：占城入贡。
现代文：占城来进贡。
English: Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：戊午，诏重定元祐、元符党人及上书邪等者合为一籍，通三百九人，刻石朝堂，余并出籍，自今毋得复弹奏。
现代文：十七日，下诏重新审定元、元符年间党人及上书邪等等人，登记造册，合为一籍，共三百零九人，在朝堂上刻石记录，其余的一律出籍，从今以后不得再弹勃上奏。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued to re-verify the number of party members and people with evil deeds in the Yuan and Yuanfu years, to register and make a record, and to merge into one, a total of 309 people, engraved stone records in the morning hall, the rest will be out of the country, and from now on will not be allowed to play the piano.

古文：辛酉，复置太医局。
现代文：二十日，重新设立太医局。
English: On the 20th, the Taiji Bureau was re-established.

古文：癸亥，虑囚。
现代文：二十二日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the investigation records the prisoner's charges.

古文：乙丑，诏内外官毋得越职论事，侥幸奔竞，违者御史台弹奏。
现代文：二十四日，下诏： 朝廷内外官员不得超越职责范围议论国事，不能为了侥幸之利而四处奔走，违犯者，御史台官员上奏弹勃。 
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued: Officials both inside and outside the Imperial Court must not discuss national affairs beyond the scope of their duties, and must not run around for the sake of chance profits. Offenders, officials of the Imperial Historian's Office, would be punished.

古文：秋七月癸酉，以婉仪王氏为德妃。
现代文：秋七月初二，封婉仪王氏为德妃。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Fong Wan Yi Wang became the Empress of Germany.

古文：庚辰，诏自今大礼不受尊号，群臣毋上表。
现代文：初九，下诏：从今以后遇到重大礼仪活动不接受尊号，大臣们不要上表进献。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: From now on, if there is a major ceremonial event, the honorific title will not be accepted, and ministers should not present it at the table.

古文：辛卯，行方田法。
现代文：二十日，实行方田法。
English: On the 20th, the Fangda Law came into effect.

古文：八月庚子，诏诸路知州、通判增入 主管学事 四字。
现代文：八月庚子日，下诏各路知州、通判增人 主管学事 四字。
English: In August, Geng Zi Day, the following edict was issued to increase the number of people in charge of academic affairs.

古文：壬寅，大雨，坏民庐舍，令收瘗死者。
现代文：初一，降大雨，毁坏百姓庐舍，命令收埋死者。
English: On the first day of the new year, heavy rain fell, destroying people's homes and ordering the dead to be buried.

古文：甲辰，蔡京上《神宗史》。
现代文：初三，蔡京呈上件申宗史。
English: On the third day of the new year, Cai Jing submitted the above petition.

古文：丙午，许将罢。
现代文：初五，许将被罢免。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, May will be ousted.

古文：九月乙亥，以赵挺之为门下侍郎，吴居厚为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨张康国为尚书左丞，刑部尚书邓洵武为尚书右丞。
现代文：九月初五，任命赵挺之为门下侍郎，吴居厚为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨张康国为尚书左承，刑部尚书邓询武为尚书右承。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Zhao Tingling was appointed as the under secretary, Wu Ju Hou as the secretary of the middle school, Zhang Kangguo as the left under secretary of the Hanlin Academy, and Deng Xuanwu as the right under secretary of the criminal department.

古文：壬辰，诏诸路州学别置斋舍，以养材武之士。
现代文：二十二日，下诏各路州学另外设置斋舍，用来培养材武之士。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued to the various prefectures to set up a fasting house, which would be used to train warriors.

古文：冬十月辛居朔，大雨雹。
现代文：冬十月初一，降大雨冰雹。
English: On the first day of October in winter, heavy rain and hail fell.

古文：丁未，贤妃张氏薨。
现代文：初七，贤妃张氏逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Princess Zhang passed away.

古文：丙辰，命官编类六朝勋臣。
现代文：十六日，命令官员编类六朝勋臣。
English: On the 16th, he ordered officials to classify the six dynasties.

古文：戊午，夏人入泾原，围平夏城，寇镇戎军。
现代文：十八日，西夏军进人径原，围攻平夏城，攻打镇戎军。
English: On the 18th, the Western Xia Army entered Renren Plain, besieged Pingxia Town, and attacked the town's army.

古文：庚申，熙河兰会路经略安抚使王厚言，河西军节度使赵怀德等出降。
现代文：二十日，熙河兰会路经略安抚使王厚报告说，河西军节度使赵怀德等出降。
English: On the 20th, Wang Hou, a minor pacification envoy of the Xihe Lanhui Association, reported that the Hexi Army Festival made Zhao Huaide and others surrender.

古文：己巳，立九庙，复翼祖、宣祖。
现代文：二十九日，设立九庙，恢复翼祖、宣祖远祖庙。
English: On the 29th, nine temples were established, and the Wing Ancestor and Xuan Ancestor Distant Ancestor temples were restored.

古文：庚午，贵妃邢氏薨。
现代文：三十日，贵妃邢氏逝世。
English: On the 30th, Guifei died.

古文：十一月甲戌，幸太学，官论定之士十六人，遂幸辟雍，赐国子司业吴絪、蒋静四品服，学官推恩有差。
现代文：十一月初四，到太学，授给论定之士十六人官职；于是到太学的外学，赐给国子司业吴纠、蒋静四品官服，学官得到不等的恩惠。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the 1st month of the year, he went to Taixue and conferred official positions on 16 scholars. Then, he went to the foreign school of Taixue and gave four official uniforms to the sons of the state, Wu Guo and Jiang Jing. The scholars received various favors.

古文：丙戌，封子杞为冀国公。
现代文：十六日，封儿子赵祀为冀国公。
English: On the 16th, Fong's son Zhao Rong became the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：丁亥，诏取士并繇学校，罢发解及省试法，科场如故事。
现代文：十七日，下诏：科举取士一律从学校中选拔，罢除原来的发解法和省试法，科场沿袭原来的规定。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: From now on, all candidates for the national science examination will be selected from schools, the original method of issuing the answers and the provincial examination method will be abolished, and the science field will follow the original regulations.

古文：癸巳，更上神宗谥曰体元显道帝德王功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝，加上哲宗谥曰宪元继道显德定功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
现代文：二十三日，改上神宗溢号为体元显道帝德王功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝，加上哲宗溢号为宪元继道显德定功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
English: On the 23rd, the name was changed to the Emperor Shenzong, meaning the Emperor Shenzong, the Emperor Shenzong, the Emperor Shenzong, the Emperor Shenzong, the Emperor Shenzong, the Emperor Shenzong and the Emperor Shenzong.

古文：甲午，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十四日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 24th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：乙未，飨太庙。
现代文：二十五日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, there will be a ritual at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丙申，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：二十六日，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the 26th, the god Haotian was sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：升兴仁、隆德军为府，还彰信、昭德旧节。
现代文：兴仁军、隆德军升为府，彰信、昭德恢复原来的节度。
English: The Xingren Army and the Longde Army were promoted to the capital, and Zhangxin and Zhao De restored their original status.

古文：十二月乙巳，升通远军为巩州。
现代文：十二月初六，升通远军为巩州。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the Shentong Yuan Army entered Gongzhou.

古文：戊午，赐陈王佖入朝不趋。
现代文：十九日，赐允陈王赵泌入朝时不趋。
English: On the 19th, Chen Wang Zhao was allowed to enter the imperial court.

古文：是岁，诸路蝗。
现代文：这一年，各路发生蝗灾。
English: This year, there was a plague of locusts in every direction.

古文：出宫女六十二人。
现代文：放出宫女六十二人。
English: Sixty-two maids of honour were released.

古文：广西黎洞杨晟免等内附。
现代文：广西黎洞杨晨免等率众内附朝廷。
English: Yang Chen of Lidong in Guangxi was exempted from the imperial court.

