古文：李敏，字公勉，襄城人。
现代文：李敏，字公勉，襄城人。
English: Li Min, alias Gong Min, from Xiangcheng.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：景泰五年进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：授御史。
现代文：授御史职。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：天顺初，奉敕抚定贵州蛮。
现代文：天顺初年，李敏奉英宗之命安抚平定贵州的少数民族。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Li Min was ordered by Yingzong to pacify the ethnic minorities in Guizhou.

古文：还，巡按畿内。
现代文：任务完成后，回到京师，以巡按御史职巡视京畿。
English: After the completion of the mission, he returned to the capital division to inspect Gyeonggi Province as a patrol officer.

古文：以蓟州饷道经海口，多覆溺，建议别开三河达蓟州，以避其险，军民利之。
现代文：由于苏州运粮饷道途经海口，船多翻沉，李敏建议另开河道直达苏州，以避海路之险，军民觉得十分便利。
English: As the Suzhou grain transport corridor passes through Haikou, and many ships capsize, Li Min suggested that another river route be opened directly to Suzhou to avoid the risk of the sea route, which the military and civilians found very convenient.

古文：成化初，用荐超迁浙江按察使。
现代文：成化初年，李敏在有力者的推荐下，越级提拔为浙江按察使。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Li Min, under the recommendation of influential people, was promoted to the rank of Zhejiang Inspector General.

古文：再任湖广。历山西、四川左、右布政使。
现代文：后调任湖广按察使，并历任山西、四川左、右布政使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of inspector of Huguang County, and successively served as political envoy to Shanxi and Sichuan.

古文：十三年擢右副都御史，巡抚大同。
现代文：成化十三年，升任右副都御史，巡抚大同边塞。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of Datong Border Town.

古文：敌骑出没塞下，掩杀守墩军，敏伏壮士突擒之。
现代文：当时外敌骑兵出没塞下，骚扰杀害驻防守军，李敏挑选一批壮士潜伏在城堡上，采取突袭的方式擒获了来犯敌人。
English: At that time, the foreign enemy cavalry haunted the castle, harassed and killed the garrison, Li Min selected a group of strong men to lurk in the castle, and took a surprise attack to capture the invading enemy.

古文：修治垣堑，敌不敢犯。
现代文：李敏还督修边墙壕堑，加强防御，从此外敌不敢轻易来犯。
English: Li Min also supervised the repair of border walls and trenches, strengthened defenses, so that the enemy would not dare to attack easily.

古文：十五年召为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：十五年，召为兵部右侍郎。
English: Fifteen years later, he was called to be the right hand man of the military.

古文：逾四年，病归。
现代文：又过了四年，李敏因病回家休养。
English: After another four years, Li Min went home to recuperate due to illness.

古文：河南大饥，条上救荒数事。
现代文：当时，河南发生大饥荒，李敏上疏条列救荒事宜。
English: At that time, a great famine occurred in Henan Province, and Li Min was in charge of famine relief.

古文：诏以左副都御史巡抚保定诸府。二十一年改督漕运，寻召拜户部尚书。
现代文：皇帝下诏让李敏以左副都御史职巡抚保定等府县，二十一年，改任漕运总督，不久升任户部尚书。
English: The emperor decreed that Li Min be appointed as the left vice-governor of Baoding and other prefectures, and in the 21st year, he was appointed as the governor of rowing, and soon he was promoted to the head of the household.

古文：先是，敏在大同，见山东、河南转饷至者，道远耗费，乃会计岁支外，悉令输银。
现代文：此前，李敏在大同，见到来自山东、河南的转运粮饷者，他们路途遥远，耗费巨大，于是李敏命人进行会计核算，除每年需要的粮食供应外，其他饷粮改为输送银两。
English: Previously, Li Min was in Datong and saw grain carriers from Shandong and Henan, who had a long way to travel and spent a lot of money, so Li Min ordered an accounting, and in addition to the annual grain supply, other grain was changed to silver.

古文：民轻赍易达，而将士得以其赢治军装，交便之。
现代文：百姓轻便易带，而边关将士也得以有余钱置办军装，军民两便。
English: The people are light and easy to carry, and the border guards can also have extra money to buy military uniforms, which is convenient for both the military and the people.

古文：至是，并请畿辅、山西、陕西州县岁输粮各边者，每粮一石征银一两，以十九输边，依时值折军饷，有余则召籴以备军兴。帝从之。
现代文：至此，并请畿辅、山西、陕西州县每年输送边粮者，每粮一石折征银一两，以十分之九输边，并依时价折算军饷，有余银就招商购粮以作军储，皇帝表示同意。
English: At this point, the emperor also requested that those who transported border grain from Kiyosu, Shanxi and Shaanxi prefectures each year should pay one or two silver coins for each grain, and transfer nine-tenths of the grain to the border, and convert the military pay according to the current price. The emperor agreed to invite merchants to purchase grain with the remaining silver to use as a military reserve.

古文：自是北方二税皆折银，由敏始也。
现代文：自此北方春秋二税都折银两，这件事是自李敏开始的。
English: Since then, the two taxes in the northern spring and autumn have been converted into two pieces of silver. This matter began with Li Min.

古文：崇文门宣课司税，多为势要所侵渔。
现代文：崇文门宣课司税，大多为权势之人所侵吞。
English: Most of the taxes collected by Chongwenmen were embezzled by powerful people.

古文：敏因马文升言请增设御史主事监视。
现代文：李敏根据马文升的谏言请增设御史专门监视崇文门税课事。
English: Li Min, according to Ma Wensheng's reproach, please set up a special inspector to monitor the door tax affairs of Chongwen.

古文：御史陈瑶斥敏聚敛，敏再疏求去。
现代文：御史陈瑶指斥李敏聚敛，李敏两次上疏请求辞职。
English: The chief historian, Chen Qi, accused Li Min of "concentration," and Li Min twice requested to resign.

古文：帝慰留之。
现代文：皇帝好言慰留。
English: The emperor consoled him with kind words.

古文：贵戚请隙地及鹰房、牧马场千顷，敏执不可，事得寝。
现代文：贵戚请空地及鹰房、牧马场千顷，李敏坚执不同意，事才作罢。
English: Li Min adamantly disagreed with the request for a thousand hectares of open space, a hawk house and a horse ranch, and only then did the matter come to an end.

古文：当宪宗末，中官、佞幸多赐庄田。既得罪，率辞而归之官，罪重者夺之。然不以赋民。
现代文：宪宗末年，宦官、佞幸多得赐庄田，这些人得罪之后，一般都辞去庄田，罪情严重的剥去其庄田，然而并没有交百姓耕种。
English: In the last years of the Kenzong Dynasty, eunuchs and eunuchs were often given shodato. After these people committed a crime, they generally resigned from shodato. If the crime was serious, they were stripped of their shodato, but they were not given to the people to cultivate.

古文：敏请召佃，亩科银三分，帝从之，然他庄田如故也。
现代文：李敏请招佃耕种，每亩征税银三分，皇帝同意，然而其他庄田依然如故。
English: Li Min asked Zhaojun to cultivate the land, and the emperor agreed to levy a tax of three silver coins per mu. However, other villages remained as before.

古文：会京师大水，敏乃极陈其害，言： 今畿辅皇庄五，为地万二千八百余顷；勋戚、中官庄三百三十有二，为地三万三千一百余顷。
现代文：逢京师发生大水灾，李敏就极力陈述利害，说： 畿辅现有皇庄五所，占十一万二千八百余顷；勋戚、中官庄田三百三十二所，占地三万三千一百余顷。
English: When a major flood occurred in the capital, Li Min tried his best to explain the situation, saying: There are currently five imperial estates in Kansai-fu, covering more than 112,800 hectares; and there are 332 tributary estates, covering more than 33,100 hectares.

古文：官校招无赖为庄头，豪夺畜产，戕杀人，污妇女，民心痛伤。灾异所由生。
现代文：官校招无赖作为管庄的庄头，他们恃势夺人牲畜、田产，伤人性命，侮辱妇女，百姓为之痛心，这是灾异发生的原因。
English: The government school recruited scoundrels as the head of the manor. They lost their power, robbed people, livestock and farmland, injured people's lives, insulted women, and the people were heartbroken. This was the cause of the disaster.

古文：皇庄始正统间，诸王未封，相闲地立庄。
现代文：皇庄始于正统间，那时因诸王没有封藩，就据空闲地设立庄田。
English: The imperial estates began during the period of orthodoxy. At that time, since the kings did not have feudal domains, estates were established on vacant land.

古文：王之藩，地仍归官，其后乃沿袭。
现代文：诸王去藩地后，庄田仍归官府，后代沿袭这种做法。
English: After the kings went to the domain, Shoda still belonged to the government, and the descendants followed this practice.

古文：普天之下，莫非王土，何必皇庄。请尽革庄户，赋民耕。亩概征银三分，充各宫用度。
现代文：普天之下，莫非王土，何必另设皇庄，请尽数革去庄户，让百姓佃耕，每亩一概征税银三分，用作后宫的各项开支。
English: Under the whole heaven, if it is not the royal land, why set up another imperial manor, please do your best to go to the manor, let the people plow, and levy silver three cents per mu, which will be used for various expenses of the harem.

古文：无皇庄之名，而有足用之效。
现代文：这样虽无皇庄之名，却有充足的财用之效。
English: Although this does not have the name of the Imperial Villa, it has sufficient financial effect.

古文：至权要庄田，亦请择佃户领之，有司收其课，听诸家领取。
现代文：至于权贵政要诸人的庄田，也请选择佃户领种，由专门机构课税，然后由庄田拥有者到专门机构去领取田税。
English: As for the shoden of the powerful, the noble, and the political elite, please also select the tenant's territory, which will be taxed by a special agency, and then the owner of the shoden will go to a special agency to receive the field tax.

古文：悦民心，感和气，无切于此。 
现代文：如此可能愉悦民心，化解矛盾，再没有比这更有效的办法了。 
English: In this way, it is possible to please the people and resolve conflicts. There is no more effective way.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：建议并没有采用。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：南京御史与守备太监蒋琮相讦，御史咸逮谪，而琮居职如故。
现代文：南京御史与守备太监蒋琮相互攻击责难，御史都被逮捕贬谪，而蒋琮依然在位。
English: The Emperor of Nanjing and the eunuch-in-charge of the garrison, Chiang Kai-shek, attacked and reprimanded each other. Both emperors were arrested and dethroned, but Chiang Kai-shek remained in power.

古文：敏再疏力争，皆不听。
现代文：李敏两次上疏谏争，都不听。
English: Li Min didn't listen to me the first two times.

古文：弘治四年，得疾乞休，帝为遣医视疗。
现代文：弘治四年，得病请求退休，孝宗派御医为他治病。
English: After four years of convalescence, he fell ill and asked to retire. A doctor from the Filial Piety sect came to treat him.

古文：已，复力请，乃以叶淇代，诏敏乘传归。未抵家卒。
现代文：不久，又力请退休，于是以叶淇代为户部尚书，下诏李敏由公车送归，未到家乡就病死了。
English: Soon, he asked me to retire again, so I chose Ye Qidai as the head of the household, and Li Min was sent home by bus. He died of illness before reaching his hometown.

古文：赠太子少保，谥恭靖。
现代文：赠太子少保，谥号恭靖。
English: He was given the title of prince and given the title of Shōhō, and his posthumous name was Kyōjing.

古文：敏生平笃行谊，所得禄赐悉以分昆弟、故人。
现代文：李敏生平注重德行，所得的官禄赐赠都给兄弟、故旧。
English: Li Min focused on virtue in his life, and all the official rewards and gifts he received were given to his brothers.

古文：里居时，筑室紫云山麓，聚书数千卷，与学者讲习。
现代文：在乡隐居时，于紫云山下建读书堂，收集图书数千卷，与学者讲习。
English: While living in seclusion in the village, he built a reading hall at the foot of Mount Ziyun, collected thousands of volumes of books, and held seminars with scholars.

古文：及巡抚大同，疏籍之于官，诏赐名紫云书院。
现代文：巡抚大同时，他将书室献给官府，皇帝赐名紫云书院。
English: At the same time, he dedicated the library to the government, and the emperor gave it the name Ziyun Academy.

古文：大同孔庙无雅乐，以敏奏得颁给如制云。
现代文：大同孔庙没有雅乐，李敏奏请朝廷，如制颁给等。
English: The Confucius Temple in Datong did not have court music, so Li Min asked the imperial court to play it, which was awarded to the troupe.

古文：叶淇，字本清，山阳人。
现代文：叶淇，字本清，山阳县人。
English: Ye Qi, Zhabon Qing, from Sanyang County.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：景泰五年，考中进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：授御史。
现代文：授予御史职务。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：天顺初，石亨谮之下吏，考讯无验，出为武陟知县。
现代文：天顺初年，权臣石享在皇帝英宗那儿说了叶淇的坏话，叶淇被送交有关部门审理，但调查审讯并没有获得他违法的证据，叶淇被贬为武陟知县。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the powerful vassal Shi Xiang spoke ill of Ye Qi to Emperor Yingzong. Ye Qi was sent to the relevant departments for trial, but the investigation and trial did not obtain evidence that he violated the law. Ye Qi was relegated to Wuxi County.

古文：成化中累官大同巡抚。
现代文：成化中年，渐次升为大同巡抚。
English: He became middle-aged and gradually rose to the rank of Datong governor.

古文：孝宗立，召为户部侍郎。
现代文：孝宗即位，召叶淇为户部侍郎。
English: When Takamune ascended the throne, he called Ye Qi to serve him as household attendant.

古文：弘治四年代李敏为尚书，寻加太子少保。
现代文：弘治四年，叶淇接替李敏为户部尚书，不久加太子少保衔。
English: In the fourth year of Hongzhi, Ye Qi succeeded Li Min as the head of the household, and was soon given the title of crown prince.

古文：哈密为土鲁番所陷，守臣请给其遗民廪食，处之内地，淇曰： 是自贻祸也。 
现代文：当时发生了吐鲁番攻陷哈密的事件，边防官员请求给哈密遗民衣食供应，并将他们安置于内地。叶淇说 ：这是给自己留下祸患。 
English: At that time, the incident of Turpan's attack on Hami took place, and the border officials requested that the Hami survivors be provided with food and clothing, and that they be resettled in the mainland. Ye Qi said: This is a disaster for myself.

古文：寝其奏。
现代文：停止了这项奏疏。
English: The orchestra stopped playing.

古文：奸民献大名地为皇庄，淇议归之有司。
现代文：不法之徒献纳大名田地为皇庄，叶淇谏议将这些田地交给有关部门处理。
English: The outlaws offered all the daimyo's fields as imperial estates, and Ye Qiqi suggested that these fields be handed over to the relevant departments for disposal.

古文：内官龙绶请开银矿，淇不可。帝从之。
现代文：宦官龙绶请开银矿，叶淇不同意，孝宗听从了叶淇的意见。
English: The eunuch Long Hao asked Ye Qi to open a silver mine, Ye Qi disagreed, and Xiaozong listened to Ye Qi's opinion.

古文：已，绶请长芦盐二万引，鬻于两淮以供织造费。
现代文：不久，龙绶又请求长芦盐引票二万引，在淮南淮北两地出卖，以供应宫廷织造费用。
English: Not long after, Long Xuan also asked for twenty thousand long reed salt coupons to be sold in Huainan and Huaibei to supply the palace weaving expenses.

古文：淇力争，竟不纳。
现代文：叶淇极力谏争，孝宗竟没有接受。
English: Ye Qi tried his best to argue, but Xiaozong did not accept.

古文：淇居户部六年，直亮有执，能为国家惜财用。
现代文：叶淇执掌户部六年，正直信实而有原则，能够为国家节约财政开支。
English: Ye Qi has been in charge of the Household Department for six years. He is honest, trustworthy and principled, and can save financial expenses for the country.

古文：每廷议用兵，辄持不可。
现代文：每次朝廷议论用兵，叶淇总是持不同意的态度。
English: Every time the imperial court discussed the use of soldiers, Ye Qi always disagreed.

古文：居工部，亦数有争执，名亚于俊。黄绂，字用章，其先封丘人。曾祖徙平越，遂家焉。
现代文：叶淇还改变了由商人输粮于边的开中之制，命令淮地商人输银代粮，盐税骤然增至百万两，并将盐课税全部交给运输部门，边粮储备因此大为减少。弘治九年，叶淇请求退休，归家去世，朝廷封赠他为太子太保。黄绂，字用章，其远祖为封丘人。曾祖父时迁到平越，遂定居于此。
English: Ye Qi also changed the grain delivery system from merchants to peasants, ordered merchants in Huai to deliver silver instead of grain, the salt tax suddenly increased to one million taels, and the salt tax was all handed over to the transportation department, so the grain reserves were greatly reduced. In the ninth year of Hongzhi, Ye Qi asked to retire, returned home and died, and the imperial court granted him the title of Prince Taibo. Huang Qi, a character with a seal, his distant ancestor was a Fengqiu man. His great-grandfather moved to Pingyue and settled here.

古文：绂登正统十三年进士，除行人，历南京刑部郎中。
现代文：黄绂荣登正统十三年的进士榜，授行人官职，接着官任南京刑部郎中。
English: Huang Qi was awarded the honor of being on the official list of the 13th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. He was given an official post, and then he was appointed as a junior official of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：刚廉，人目之曰 硬黄 。
现代文：黄绂为人刚正廉洁，人们送他一个雅号，称为 硬黄 。
English: Huang Qi is an upright and honest person. People give him a nickname, called "Hard Huang."

古文：大猾谭千户者，占民芦场，莫敢问，绂夺还之民。
现代文：当时有一个特别奸猾的谭千户，他强占百姓芦场，人们不敢追究，黄绂却断然将其夺回发还原主。
English: At that time, there was a particularly treacherous Tan Qianhu, who occupied the people's fields. People did not dare to investigate, but Huang Qi resolutely took it back and returned it to its original owner.

古文：成化九年，迁四川左参议。
现代文：成化九年，黄绂调任四川布政司左参议。
English: In the ninth year of Chenghua, Huang Qi was transferred to the post of Sichuan Provincial Political Secretary and left-wing councillor.

古文：久之，进左参政。
现代文：若干年后，升任左参政。
English: A few years later, he was promoted to the post of left-wing politician.

古文：按部崇庆，旋风起舆前，不得行。
现代文：一次巡查部属到崇庆，突然有旋风起于轿前，坐轿不能前行。
English: One time, the inspection department was in Chongqing. Suddenly, a whirlwind arose in front of the car, and the car could not move forward.

古文：绂曰： 此必有冤，吾当为理。 
现代文：黄绂说： 此间必有冤情，我当为之申理。 
English: Huang Qi said, "There must be a grievance here, I should handle it."

古文：风遂散。
现代文：旋风于是散去。
English: The storm then dissipated.

古文：至州，祷城隍神，梦若有言州西寺者。
现代文：来到州城，他祈祷城隍神，晚上梦中似有人说州西寺事。
English: When he came to the city of Shuzhou, he prayed to the god of the city of Shuzhou. In the evening, in his dream, it seemed that someone was talking about the West Temple of Shuzhou.

古文：寺去州四十里，倚山为巢，后临巨塘。
现代文：该寺离州四十里，倚山而建，寺后有一巨大的池塘。
English: The temple is forty miles from the state, built against a hill, with a huge pond behind the temple.

古文：僧夜杀人沉之塘下，分其资。
现代文：寺中的和尚常在夜间杀人，并沉尸于塘中，瓜分被劫掠来的财物。
English: Monks in the temple would often kill people at night and bury their bodies in the pond to divide up the plundered property.

古文：且多藏妇女于窟中。
现代文：而且还藏纳妇女于寺内洞窟之中。
English: Moreover, women were also hidden in caves inside the temple.

古文：绂发吏兵围之，穷诘，得其状，诛僧毁其寺。
现代文：黄绂获得情报后，立即调遣官吏兵卒包围了寺院，在一番追根究底的审讯之后，获得了寺中和尚为非作歹的事实，于是诛杀了寺内和尚，并捣毁了这座寺院。
English: After Huang Qi obtained the information, he immediately dispatched officers and soldiers to surround the temple. After a thorough investigation, he obtained the fact that the monk in the temple was a criminal, so he killed the monk in the temple and destroyed the temple.

古文：仓吏倚皇亲乾没官粮巨万，绂追论如法，威行部中。
现代文：有一个掌管仓库的官吏，倚仗皇亲的权势贪污粮达万石之多，黄绂发现后按法律条文追论其罪，黄绂因此威名大振。
English: There was an official in charge of the warehouse, who relied on the power of the imperial relative to embezzle grain amounting to ten thousand stones. Huang Qi found out and prosecuted him according to the provisions of the law. As a result, Huang Qi's prestige was greatly shaken.

古文：历四川、湖广左、右布政使。
现代文：黄绂历任四川、湖广左、右布政使。
English: Huang Qi successively served as the political envoy of Sichuan, Hunan and Guangxi.

古文：奏闭建昌银矿。
现代文：他奏请关闭建昌银矿。
English: He called for the closure of the Jianchang silver mine.

古文：两京工兴，湖广当输银二万，例征之民，绂以库羡充之。
现代文：在南北两京的维修工程中，湖广当供应白银二万两，按成例这些银两由百姓分摊，但黄绂为了减轻民众负担，动用府库的羡余钱支付。
English: In the maintenance project of the North and South Beijing, Hukangda supplied a maximum of 20,000 taels of silver. According to the established practice, these taels of silver were shared by the people, but in order to reduce the burden on the people, Huang Qi used the surplus money from the government treasury to pay.

古文：荆王奏徙先垄，绂恐为民扰，执不可。
现代文：荆王奏请迁徙先祖坟墓，黄绂担心侵扰百姓，坚决不同意。
English: King Jing requested that the ancestors' graves be moved, but Huang Qi, worried about disturbing the people, strongly disagreed.

古文：二十二年，擢右副都御史，巡抚延绥。劾参将郭镛，都指挥郑印、李铎、王琮等抵罪，计捕奸豪张纲。
现代文：成化二十二年，黄绂升任为右副都御史，巡抚延绥地区，他弹劾参将郭镛、都指挥郑印、李铎、王琮等人的违法行为，并将他们付之刑律。
English: In the 22nd year of Chenghua, Huang Qi was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital and governor of Yancheng region. He impeached Guo Qi, commander of the capital, Zheng Yin, Li Qi, Wang Qi and others for illegal acts, and punished them.

古文：申军令，增置墩堡，边政一新。
现代文：还用计捕获大奸之人张纲。并严申军令，增建墩台、城堡，边地防备为之一新。
English: He also used the plan to capture the great traitor Zhang Gang, and issued a strict military order to build additional forts and castles, making the frontier defense system a new one.

古文：出见士卒妻衣不蔽体，叹曰： 健儿家贫至是，何面目临其上。 
现代文：黄绂在边塞见士卒的妻子衣不蔽体，叹息说： 边防健儿家贫至此，我有何脸面居其上位？ 
English: Huang Yao saw the soldier's wife in the border town, with no clothes on, and said with a sigh: "The border guards are healthy, and my family is poor, so how can I be at the top?

古文：亟豫给三月饷，亲为拊循。
现代文：他即刻预支三个月的兵饷，亲自抚慰士卒。
English: He immediately advanced three months of pay and personally comforted the soldiers.

古文：会有诏毁庵寺，绂因尽汰诸尼，以给壮士无妻者。
现代文：正值皇帝有诏毁除庵寺，黄绂趁此机会将尼姑尽数裁汰，并将她们配给无妻的壮士。
English: At the time when the emperor issued an edict to demolish the hermitage, Huang Qi took the opportunity to kill as many nuns as possible and distribute them among the strong men without wives.

古文：及绂去，多携子女拜送于道。
现代文：等黄绂离开边塞时，他们多带子女跪在道边相送。
English: When Huang Qi left the border, they brought their children to kneel on the roadside to see him off.

古文：弘治三年，拜南京户部尚书。
现代文：弘治三年，黄绂官任南京户部尚书。
English: In the third year of Hongzhi, Huang Yiguan was appointed as the head of the household department in Nanjing.

古文：言官以绂进颇骤，频有言。帝不听，就改左都御史，焚差历簿于庭曰： 事贵得人耳，资劳久近，岂立官意哉。 
现代文：言官因黄绂提升太快，频繁进言，弘治皇帝并不接受，改任黄绂为左都御史，孝宗在庭中当众焚毁履历簿，说： 任事贵在得到合适的人选，按资历功劳的远近大小授官，并不是朝廷设官的本意。 
English: Because Huang Qi was promoted too quickly and made frequent speeches, the Emperor Hongzhi did not accept the promotion, and Huang Qi was reappointed as the Left Capital Imperial Historian. Xiaozong publicly burned his curriculum vitae in the court, saying: "It is not the intention of the imperial court to appoint officials, because it is important to get the right candidates, and to award officials according to the degree of seniority and merit.

古文：弘治元年起南京兵部尚书，卒官，赠太子太保，谥庄懿。
现代文：黄绂历任官职四十余年，性情急躁，缺乏宽容。然而操行廉洁，所到之处，均有建树。
English: Huang Qi, who has served as an official for more than forty years, is impatient and lacks tolerance. However, his conduct is clean, and there are achievements everywhere he goes.

古文：佀钟，字大器，郓城人。
现代文：弘治六年，请求退休，未及起程就辞世而去。侣钟，字大器，郓城人。
English: Hongzhi for six years, asked to retire, died before the start of the journey.

古文：成化二年进士。
现代文：成化二年，考中进士。
English: Two years later, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：授御史，巡盐两淮。
现代文：授予御史职务，巡视两淮盐务。
English: He was awarded the post of imperial historian and inspected the salt business of the two provinces.

古文：按浙江还，掌诸道章奏。
现代文：在任浙江巡按后回京，负责处理各道的奏章文书。
English: He returned to Beijing after his tour of duty in Zhejiang, and was responsible for handling the official documents of each province.

古文：汪直讽钟劾马文升，钟不可，被谮杖阙下。
现代文：宦官汪直暗示侣钟弹劾大臣马文升，侣钟不同意，于是汪直在宪宗面前进谗言，侣钟遭受廷杖的责罚。
English: The eunuch Wang Zhi suggested that Rui Zhong impeach the minister Ma Wensheng. Rui Zhong disagreed, so Wang Zhi made a speech in front of the Constitutionalist, and Rui Zhong was punished by the imperial scepter.

古文：以都御史王越荐，擢大理寺丞，再迁右少卿。
现代文：后来因都御史王越的推荐，侣钟升为大理寺丞，不久调任为右少卿。
English: Later, on the recommendation of Wang Yue, the governor of the capital, he was promoted to the post of Dali Temple chancellor, and was soon transferred to the post of Right Minor Lord.

古文：寇入大同，廷议遣大臣巡视保定诸府，乃以命钟。
现代文：北方游牧部族入侵大同，朝廷讨论派遣大臣巡视保定等府，于是命侣钟负责此项工作。
English: Northern nomadic tribes invaded Datong, and the Imperial Court discussed sending a minister to inspect Baoding and other prefectures, so Mokuhaku Bell was put in charge of this work.

古文：居数月，即擢右副都御史巡抚其地。
现代文：几个月后，侣钟升任为右副都御史，继续巡抚这一地区。
English: A few months later, Rui Zhong was promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, continuing to supervise this area.

古文：河间濒海民地为势家所据，钟夺还之。
现代文：河间府濒海地方的民地被权势之家侵占，侣钟夺地还民。
English: The people's land in the coastal area of Kawama Prefecture was occupied by the powerful family, and the land was returned to the people.

古文：召为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：后来，朝廷召侣钟回刑部任右侍郎之职。
English: Later, the imperial court summoned him to serve as the right hand man of the penal department.

古文：丁内艰，僦运艘载母柩南还。
现代文：侣钟母亲去世，他租赁漕运船只运母亲灵柩南归。
English: When Luo Zhong's mother died, he leased a rowing boat to transport her coffin south.

古文：督漕总兵官王信奏之，逮下吏。
现代文：督理漕运的总兵官王信向皇帝报告了这件事，侣钟被逮捕下狱。
English: Wang Xin, the general officer in charge of supervising the rowing, reported the incident to the emperor. Luo Zhong was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：会当路方逐尹旻党，而钟与旻为同乡，乃贬二秩为曲靖知府，改徽州，复入为大理寺左少卿。
现代文：适逢此时当权者正在排挤朝臣尹等，而侣钟与尹是同乡，因此侣钟被贬官二级，降为曲靖知府。后改任徽州知府，不久又入京城任大理寺左少卿。
English: At this time, those in power were ousting the courtier Yin and others, and Rui Zhong was a fellow villager with Yin. Therefore, Rui Zhong was demoted to the second level and reduced to Qujing Prefecture. Later, he was transferred to Huizhou Prefecture, and soon he was transferred to Beijing to serve as the Left Minor Prelate of Dali Temple.

古文：弘治三年，以右副都御史巡抚苏、松诸府，尽心荒政。
现代文：弘治三年，侣钟以右副都御史的身份巡抚苏州、松江诸府，致力于救荒赈民。
English: In the third year of the Hongzhi era, Rui Zhong became the governor of Suzhou and Matsue prefectures as the right-hand vice-governor of the capital, and devoted himself to rescuing the impoverished people.

古文：召为户部侍郎总督仓场，寻改吏部。
现代文：不多时，朝廷召侣钟任户部侍郎总督仓场事务，随即又改任吏部侍郎。
English: Not infrequently, the imperial court summoned Zhong to serve as the steward of the household, the governor of warehouse affairs, and then he was appointed the steward of the cadre.

古文：十一年迁右都御史。
现代文：十一年，调任为右都御史。
English: Eleven years later, he was reassigned to the post of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian.

古文：居二年，进户部尚书。
现代文：两年之后，晋升为户部尚书。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to head of the Household Division.

古文：十五年，上天下会计之数，言： 常入之赋，以蠲免渐减，常出之费，以请乞渐增，入不足当出。
现代文：弘治十五年，侣钟向皇帝报告天下收支的结算情况时说 ：衡常收入的赋税，因益蜀免而渐渐减少；日常支出的费用，因请开恩赏赐的增加而逐渐扩大，所以收入不足以应付支出。
English: In the 15th year of Hongzhi, Luo Zhong reported to the emperor on the settlement of the world's income and expenditure, saying: The tax on ordinary income has gradually decreased due to the exemption of benefits; the cost of daily expenses has gradually increased due to the increase of gifts, so the income is not enough to meet the expenses.

古文：正统以前军国费省，小民输正赋而已。
现代文：正统以前军政费用节省，百姓仅输纳国家法定的赋税标准。
English: Under the previous system, military and political expenses were saved, and the people only paid the tax standard set by the state.

古文：自景泰至今，用度日广，额外科率。
现代文：自景泰年间至今，支出费用日益扩大，正额之外不断加征。
English: Since the Jingtai period to the present, the expenditure and expenses have been expanding day by day, and the tax has been continuously increased in addition to the positive amount.

古文：河南、山东边饷，浙江、云南、广东杂办，皆昔所无。
现代文：河南、山东的边饷供应，浙江、云南、广东的杂办名色，均为过去所无。
English: Henan and Shandong's supply of edible mushrooms and Zhejiang, Yunnan and Guangdong's famous handicrafts are all unprecedented in the past.

古文：民已重困，无可复增。
现代文：民众困穷已甚，不能再增加他们的负担了。
English: The people are too poor to be burdened any further.

古文：往时四方丰登，边境无调发，州县无流移。
现代文：过去四方丰收，边境不调拨粮饷，州县贫民也无流离迁徙之苦。
English: In the past, there were abundant harvests in all four directions, grain was not allocated across the border, and the poor people in the prefectures and counties did not have to suffer from displacement and migration.

古文：今太仓无储，内府殚绌，而冗食冗费日加于前。
现代文：现今国家仓库已无储备，皇室的储藏也已穷竭，而浮食浮费日益增加。
English: Now the state storehouses have no reserves, the royal storehouses are exhausted, and the floating expenses are increasing day by day.

古文：愿陛下惕然省忧，力加损节。且敕廷臣共求所以足用之术。 
现代文：请陛下忧心于此，大力加以减损裁节，并命朝廷诸臣共同探讨增加收入的措施。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to be concerned about this, to make great efforts to mitigate the cuts, and to order the courtiers of the Imperial Court to jointly explore measures to increase income.

古文：帝乃下廷臣议。
现代文：孝宗于是下令朝臣讨论此事。
English: Takamune then ordered his courtiers to discuss the matter.

古文：议上十二事，其罢传奉冗官，汰内府滥收军匠，清腾骧四卫勇士，停寺观斋醮，省内侍、画工、番僧供应，禁王府及织造滥乞盐引，令有司征庄田租，皆权幸所不便者。
现代文：朝臣在一番议论后，奏上十二条应对办法，其中罢除传奉冗官，裁汰宫廷滥收的军匠，清理腾骧四卫的冒名勇士，停止寺观的斋醮，减省内侍、画工、番僧的供应费用，禁止王府和织造监过度地乞取盐引，命令有司征收庄田的田租，这些都是权贵佞幸之辈所不满意的。
English: After some discussion, the courtier presented twelve measures to deal with the problem, including the removal of officials who were overpaid, the dismissal of court-employed artisans who were overcharging the court, the elimination of impostor warriors, the cessation of temple-viewing feasts, the reduction of the supply costs of attendants, painters, and monks, the prohibition of excessive begging for salt by the royal court and weaving inspectors, and the order to have a steward collect the farmland rent, all of which were unsatisfactory to the powerful and fortunate.

古文：疏留数月不下，钟乃复言之。
现代文：因此奏疏留在宫中数月不予批复，侣钟于是又上疏奏请。
English: As a result, the performance was left in the palace for several months without being approved, and the bell was then rung again.

古文：他皆报可，而事关权幸者终格不行。
现代文：上奏终于批复，有关内容同意施行，但事关权贵佞幸利益者竟未获批准。
English: The reply to the appeal was finally approved, and the relevant contents were agreed to be implemented, but those who were related to rights and interests were not approved.

古文：奸商投外戚张鹤龄，乞以长芦旧引十七万免追盐课，每引纳银五分，别用价买各场余盐如其数，听鬻贩，帝许之。
现代文：有奸商投依外戚张鹤龄，请求将长芦旧引票十七万免予追纳盐课，每张引票纳银两五分，再另外如数用钱购买各盐场的余盐，听其贩卖，孝宗同意。
English: Some profiteers voted for Zhang Hailing, a relative of his mother, and requested that 170,000 long reed old coupons be exempted from the collection of salt, and each coupon be paid two-fifths of silver, and then another amount of money was used to purchase the surplus salt of each salt farm and listen to its sale, and Xiaozong agreed.

古文：后奸民援例乞两淮旧引至百六十万，钟等力持，皆不听。
现代文：后来不法之徒援此成例，请乞两淮盐场旧盐引至一百六十万，侣钟等人坚执不同意，孝宗不予理睬。
English: Later, the illegal aid became a precedent, and the old salt of the two Huai salt fields was reduced to 1.6 million. Rui Zhong and others stubbornly disagreed, and Xiaozong ignored it.

古文：自此盐法大坏，奸人横行江湖，官司无如何矣。
现代文：此后，盐法坏乱，奸人横行江湖，官府无能为力。
English: Since then, the salt law has fallen into disarray, with traitors running rampant and the government powerless to do anything.

古文：东厂侦事者发钟子瑞受金事，钟屡疏乞休，命驰驿归。
现代文：东厂特务揭发侣钟的儿子侣瑞接受贿赂，侣钟屡次上疏请求退休，孝宗命以驿车快捷送归。
English: The East Plant's special agent revealed that Lui Zhong's son Lui Rui accepted bribes, Lui Zhong repeatedly requested retirement, and Xiaozong's life was sent back with a fast car.

古文：正德时，刘瑾摭钟在部时事，至罚米者三。
现代文：正德时，刘瑾搜集侣钟在户部任职时的 差错 ，以致受到三次罚俸的处分。
English: At the time of Zhengde, Liu Yao collected the errors of Rui Zhong when he served in the household department, resulting in a penalty of three times the salary.

古文：又数年卒。
现代文：又过了几年，侣钟病逝。
English: A few years later, Rui Zhong died of illness.

