古文：曾怘，字仲常，中书舍人巩之孙。
现代文：曾怘心字仲常，是中书舍人曾巩的孙子。
English: Zeng Xinzhi Zhongzheng is the grandson of Zeng Gong, the founder of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：补太学内舍生，以父任郊社斋郎，累官司农丞、通判温州，须次于越。
现代文：曾怘心补太学内舍生，因父亲任郊社斋郎，累官司农丞、通判温州，停留在越州。
English: Zeng Yuxin was a reluctant student at Fudaigaku, but stayed in Yuezhou because his father was the Suburban Office Manager, the Executive Officer of the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Chief Judge of Wenzhou.

古文：建炎三年，金人陷越，以琶八为帅，约诘旦城中文武官并诣府，有不至及藏匿、不觉察者，皆死。
现代文：建炎三年，金人攻陷越州，以琶八为主帅，约定早晨城中文武官员一起到州府，有不到及藏匿、不告发的人，都处死。
English: In the third year of Jianyan, the Jin people invaded and occupied Yuezhou, with Pahaba as the main commander, and agreed to go to the state capital together with the Chinese military officials in the morning. Those who failed to come, hid, or did not report were all executed.

古文：怘独不往，为邻人纠察逮捕，见琶八，辞气不屈。
现代文：曾怘心惟独没有前往，被邻人纠察逮捕，见到琶八，言辞气度不折节。
English: Zeng Yuxin was the only one who did not go. He was picketed and arrested by his neighbors. When he saw the eight-stringed lute, his tone was uncompromising.

古文：且言： 国家何负汝，乃叛盟欺天，恣为不道。
现代文：而且说 ：国家有什么负你的，而你叛盟欺天，恣肆为大逆不道。
English: Moreover, they said: "What does the state owe you, while you are betraying the alliance and deceiving the heavens, wantonly committing high treason?

古文：我宋世臣也，恨无尺寸柄以死国，安能贪生事尔狗奴邪？ 时金人帐中执兵者皆愕眙相视，琶八曰： 且令出。 左右尽驱其家属四十口同日杀之越南门外，越人作窖瘗其尸。
现代文：我是宋代世臣，恨无尺寸权柄以死报国，怎么能贪生怕死事奉你这个狗奴呢？ 当时金人营帐中执掌兵权的人都陡然一惊，瞪着眼互相看着，琶八说： 暂且令他出去。 左右之人把他的家属四十人全部驱赶到越州城南门外，在同一天杀掉，越州百姓挖地窖埋葬了他们的尸体。
English: At that time, the people in charge of the military power in the Jin camp were suddenly surprised, staring at each other, and Pahat said: Let him go for the time being. The people around him drove all forty members of his family to the south gate of Yuezhou City, killed them on the same day, and the people of Yuezhou dug a cellar to bury their bodies.

古文：金人去，怘弟朝散郎时知杭州余杭县事，制大棺敛其骨，葬之天柱山。
现代文：金人离开越州，曾怘心的弟弟朝散郎曾旦心当时知杭州余杭县事，制作大棺殓葬他们的尸骨，埋葬在天柱山。
English: When the goldsmiths left Yuezhou, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng Xuan's younger brother, Zeng X

古文：事闻，予三资恩泽，官其弟怤、子崈、兄子，皆将仕郎。
现代文：事情被朝廷知道后，赐予三资恩泽，使其弟曾付心、儿子曾宗山、兄长的儿子曾艶为官，都任将仕郎。
English: After the matter was brought to the attention of the imperial court, Sanji was granted the favor of having his younger brother, Zeng Fu Xin, his son, Zeng Zongshan, and his elder brother's son, Zeng Yan, become officials, all of whom were appointed to serve the shogun.

古文：方遇难时，崇甫四岁，与乳母张皆死。
现代文：曾怘心刚遇难时，曾宗山才四岁，与乳母张氏都昏死过去。
English: Zeng Zongshan was only four years old when he was killed, and he and his nanny, Zhang, both passed out.

古文：夜值小雨，张得苏，顾见崇亦苏，尚吮其乳，郡卒陈海匿崇以归。
现代文：晚上逢下小雨，张氏得以苏醒，回头看见曾宗山也苏醒了，还在吮吸她的乳头，本郡兵士陈海把曾宗山隐藏起来回到故乡。
English: In the evening, a light rain fell, and Ms. Zhang was able to wake up. Looking back, she saw that Zeng Zongshan had also woken up and was still sucking her nipple. Chen Hai, a soldier from this county, hid Zeng Zongshan and returned to his hometown.

古文：既开城门，可与不屈见杀。
现代文：曾宗山后来当官到知南安军。
English: Zeng Zongshan later became an officer in the Zhunanan Army.

古文：可与兄可求建炎中言于朝，官可与之子五人，而忠辅不与，士论惜之。李彦仙，字少严，初名孝忠，宁州彭原人，徙巩州。
现代文：曾怘心从弟曾悟。李彦仙字少严，初名孝忠，宁州彭原人，迁到巩州。
English: Zeng Yuxin was named after his younger brother Zeng Wou. Li Yan Xian's family name was Shao Yan, and his first name was Xiao Zhong. He was born in Pengyuan, Ningzhou, and moved to Gongzhou.

古文：有大志，所交皆豪侠士。
现代文：心有大志，所结交的都是豪侠之士。
English: He is ambitious, and his friends are all heroes.

古文：闲骑射。
现代文：闲时骑马射箭。
English: In his spare time, he rides horses and shoots arrows.

古文：家极边，每出必阴察山川形势，或瞷敌人纵牧，取其善马以归。
现代文：他家住在近边地的地方，每次出来必定暗地观察山川形势，或者窥视敌人放牧，抢取敌人的好马回去。
English: His family lived in a place near the border, and every time they went out, they would surreptitiously observe the situation of the mountains and rivers, or spy on the enemy's grazing, snatch the enemy's good horses and go back.

古文：尝为种师中部曲，入云中，获首级，补校尉。
现代文：他曾经为种师中的部曲，进入云中郡，斩获敌人首级，补为校尉。
English: He was once a member of the seed division, entered Yunzhong County, won the first rank of the enemy, and became a lieutenant.

古文：靖康元年，金人犯境，郡县募兵勤王，遂率士应募，补承节郎。
现代文：靖康元年，金人进犯边境，郡县召募军队起兵救护朝廷，彦仙于是率领士兵应募，补承节郎。
English: In the first year of the Jingkang Dynasty, the Jin people invaded the border, and the counties called up troops to rescue the imperial court. Therefore, Hikosen led the soldiers to enlist, and became the Sui Cheng Jie Lang.

古文：李纲宣抚两河，上书言纲不知兵，恐误国。
现代文：李纲宣抚两河，彦仙上书说李纲不懂得用兵，恐怕误国。
English: Li Gang sent messengers to pacify the two rivers, and Yan Xian wrote a letter saying that Li Gang did not know how to use soldiers. I am afraid that he misled the country.

古文：书闻，下有司追捕，乃亡去，易名彦仙。
现代文：奏书传到朝廷，下令官吏追捕彦仙，于是彦仙逃走，改名彦仙。
English: The report reached the imperial court, and officials were ordered to hunt down Hikosen, who then fled and changed his name to Hikosen.

古文：以效用从河东军，谍金人还，复补校尉。
现代文：以效用的身份随从河东部队，谍报金人北还，又补校尉。
English: He followed the Hedong troops as a utility, spied on the North Korean people, and became a lieutenant.

古文：河东陷，彦仙拔归，道出陕，以兵事见守臣李弥大，弥大与语，壮之，留为裨将，戍淆、渑间。
现代文：河东陷落，彦仙急速返回，道出陕西，以兵事拜见守臣李弥大，李弥大与他谈话，认为他雄壮，留他担任副将，戍守、渑二州之间。
English: After the fall of Hedong, Yanxian made a quick return and headed out of Shaanxi. He paid a military visit to the shogun, Li Yida. Li Yida talked with him, thought he was strong, and kept him on as vice-commander, keeping him between the two provinces.

古文：金人再犯汴，永兴帅范致虚合西兵入援，彦仙遮说曰： 淆、渑道隘难以众进，不若分兵而前，留其半于陕，可为后图。 致虚怒其沮众，罢遣之。
现代文：金人再次进犯汴京，永兴军主帅范致虚会合西兵入援，彦仙阻止他说 ：渑道路险隘难以大规模进兵，不如分兵前进，留一半军队在陕西，可以作为以后的图谋。 范致虚对他沮丧众人感到愤怒，罢免了他的官职并遣走。
English: The Jin attacked Shandong again, and Fan Zhixu, the commander of the Yongxing Army, gathered Western soldiers to come to the aid, but Yan Xian stopped him, saying, "The road is narrow and it is difficult to make a large-scale invasion, so it is better to advance separately and leave half of the army in Shaanxi, which can be used as a future plan."

古文：师至千秋镇，果败，官吏皆遁。
现代文：军队到千秋镇，果然失败，官吏都逃遁。
English: When the army arrived at Qianqiu Town, they failed, and the officials fled.

古文：时彦仙为石壕尉，坚守三觜，民争依之。
现代文：当时彦仙任石壕县尉，坚守三觜，百姓争相依附于他。
English: At that time, Yan Xian served as the commander of Shijie County, adhered to the Three Precepts, and the people clung to him.

古文：下令曰： 尉异县人，非如汝室墓于是。今尉为汝守，若不悉力，金人将尸汝于市。 众皆奋。
现代文：他下令说 ：县尉与本县人不同，不像你们家室、祖坟都在这里，今天县尉替你们守卫，如果不尽力，那么金人将会在街市上把你们的尸体示众。 大家都奋勇争先。
English: He ordered, "The county lieutenant is different from the people of this county. It's not like your family and ancestral graves are all here. Today, the county lieutenant is guarding for you. If you don't do your best, then the golden man will display your bodies in the street market. Everyone is competing to be the first."

古文：金人攻三觜，彦仙战佯北，金人追之，伏发，掩杀千计，分兵四出，下五十余壁。
现代文：金人攻打三觜，彦仙假装战败，金人追击，彦仙埋伏出击，掩杀金人数以千计，分兵四面出击，攻下五十多座营垒。
English: The goldsmiths attacked the three towers, and the hermit pretended to be defeated. The goldsmiths chased them, and the hermit ambushed and attacked them. The number of people who killed the goldsmiths was in the thousands. The detachments attacked from all directions and captured more than fifty camps.

古文：初，金人得陕，用降者守之，使招集散亡，彦仙阴遣士厕其间，金人不觉。
现代文：开始，金人得到陕州，任用投降的人守卫，使他召集流亡，彦仙暗地派士兵置身其间，金人没有觉察。
English: At the beginning, Jinren gained Shaanxi, appointed a guard of surrendered people, made him convene an exile, and secretly sent soldiers to be in the middle of it, Jinren did not notice.

古文：乃引兵攻其南郭，夜潜师薄东北隅，所纳士内应，噪而入，复陕州。
现代文：于是引兵攻打金人的南外城，晚上军队暗中迫近东北角，金人招纳的士兵做内应，喧哗而进，收复陕州。
English: Therefore, the army was brought in to attack Jinren's southern outpost. In the evening, the army secretly approached the northeast corner. Jinren recruited soldiers to do the inner work, enter noisily and recover Shaanxi.

古文：乘胜渡河，列栅中条诸山，旁郡邑皆响附，分遣邵云等下绛、解诸邑。
现代文：彦仙乘胜渡过黄河，在中条诸山列栏栅，近旁的郡县都响应附和，分派邵云等人攻下绛、解等县。
English: Yan Xian crossed the Yellow River in triumph. In the middle of the river, all the mountains were lined up, and the nearby counties all responded in unison, assigning Shao Yun and others to capture and solve counties.

古文：吏行文书，请州印章，彦仙曰： 吾以尉守此，第用吾印。 事闻，上谓辅臣曰： 近知彦仙与金人战，再三获捷，朕喜而不寐。 即命知陕州兼安抚使，迁武节郎、阁门宣赞舍人。
现代文：官吏传布文书，请求州印章，彦仙说 ：我以县尉的身份守卫这里，只使用我的印章。 事情传到朝廷，皇帝对辅佐大臣说： 近来得知彦仙与金人交战，多次取得胜利，我高兴得睡不着觉。 马上命令彦仙为知陕州兼安抚使，升任武节郎、门宣赞舍人。
English: When the officials distributed the documents and asked for the state seal, Yan Xian said, "I am guarding here as a county lieutenant, and I only use my seal." The matter was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor said to the assistant minister, "Recently, I learned that Yan Xian fought with the Jin people and won many times, I was so happy that I couldn't sleep. I immediately ordered Yan Xian to be the peace envoy for Shensi and Shensi, and was promoted to the position of military commander, and the door was announced.

古文：彦仙搜军实，增陴浚湟，益为战守备，尽取家属以来，曰： 吾以家徇国，与城俱存亡。 闻者感服。
现代文：彦仙搜集军用器械，增筑城墙，疏浚低洼积水的地方，愈加做战守的准备，他把家属全部接来，说： 我以家殉国，与城共存亡。 听说的人感动佩服。
English: Hikohsen collected military equipment, built more city walls, dredged low-lying waterlogged areas, and prepared more for the war. He brought all his family members and said, "I was martyred for my family, and I died together with the city. People who heard about it were moved and admired.

古文：邵兴在神稷山，以其众来，愿受节制。
现代文：邵兴在神稷山，率其部众来归附，愿意受彦仙的指挥约束。
English: Shao Xing led his subordinates to join him in Shenshan, and was willing to accept Yan Xian's command and discipline.

古文：彦仙辟兴统领河北忠义军马，屯三门，后赖其力复虢州。
现代文：彦仙征召邵兴统领河北忠义军马，屯扎在三门，后来依靠他的力量收复虢州。
English: Yan Xian conscripted Shao Xing to lead the loyalist army of Hebei Province, stationed in Sanmen, and later relied on his strength to recover Zhangzhou.

古文：金将乌鲁撒拔再攻陕，彦仙极力御之，金人技穷而去。
现代文：金国将领乌鲁撒拔再次进攻陕州，彦仙极力抵御，金人黔驴技穷而离去。
English: The Jin general Ulusaba once again attacked Shaanxi. Yanxian tried his best to resist, but the Jin man was too poor to do so and left.

古文：三年，娄宿悉兵自蒲、解大入，彦仙伏兵中条山击之，金兵大溃，娄宿仅以身免。
现代文：建炎三年，娄宿尽其所有军队从蒲、解二地大举进入，彦仙在中条山伏兵阻击，金兵大败溃散，娄宿仅以身免。
English: In the third year of Jianyan, Oshuku made all its troops enter from the two places of Pu and Xie in a big way. Yanxian blocked the ambush in Zhongjia Mountain, the gold soldiers were defeated and dispersed, and Oshuku was only spared.

古文：授右武大夫、宁州观察使兼同、虢州制置。
现代文：彦仙被授予右武大夫、宁州观察使兼同、虢州制置。
English: Yanxian was awarded the title of Doctor of the Right Division of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, the title of Ningzhou Observation Envoy, and the title of Zhangzhou Scholar.

古文：彦仙度金人必并力来攻，即遣人诣宣抚使张浚求三千骑，俟金人攻陕，即空城度河北趋晋、绛、并、汾，捣其心腹，金人必自救，乃繇岚、石西渡河，道鄜、延以归。
现代文：彦仙估计金人必定合力来进攻，便派人前往宣抚使张浚请求三千骑兵，待金人进攻陕州，立即空城渡过黄河北趋晋、绛、并、汾等地，捣毁金人的心腹之地，金人必定自救，而我就由岚、石二县西渡黄河，经过、延州返回。
English: Yan Xian estimated that the Jin people would certainly join forces to attack, so he sent someone to ask Zhang Jun to request three thousand cavalry. When the Jin people attacked Shaanxi, he immediately flew across the Yellow River to the north of Jin, Shijiazhuang, Nanning and Shijiazhuang, destroying the place of the Jin people's henchmen. The Jin people must save themselves, and I crossed the Yellow River from the west of Shijiazhuang and Shiji County, passing through and returning to Yanzhou.

古文：浚贻书劝彦仙空城清野，据险保聚，俟隙而动。
现代文：张浚写信劝彦仙空城清野，据险保聚，待空隙而行动。
English: Zhang Jun wrote a letter to advise Yanxian Kuangcheng Qingye, according to the risk of gathering, to wait for a gap and act.

古文：彦仙不从。
现代文：彦仙不同意。
English: Hikosen disagrees.

古文：娄宿率叛将折可求众号十万来攻，分其军为十，以正月旦为始，日轮一军攻城，聚十军并攻，期以三旬必拔。
现代文：娄宿率领叛将折可求所部号称十万人来攻打陕州，把军队分成十部分，以正月早晨作为开始，每天轮流一军攻打州城，然后聚集十军合力进攻，期望用三十天时间一定攻克。
English: He divided the army into ten parts, starting from the morning of the first month of the year. Each day, one army took turns to attack the state capital, and then gathered ten armies to attack together, hoping to conquer it in thirty days.

古文：彦仙意气如平常，登谯门，大作技乐，潜使人缒而出，焚其攻具，金人愕而却。
现代文：彦仙意态像平常一样，登上望楼，大肆作技宴乐，暗中使人系绳而出，焚烧金人攻城的器具，金人惊愕而退却。
English: As usual, Hikosen went up to the watchtower, played skillful banquet music, secretly made people tie ropes, and burned Jinren's equipment for attacking the city. Jinren was surprised and retreated.

古文：食尽，煮豆以啖其下，而取汁自饮。
现代文：粮食尽，彦仙煮豆来给部下吃，而取豆汁自饮。
English: When the grain ran out, Hixian boiled beans to give to his subordinates to eat, and took the bean juice to drink.

古文：至是亦尽，告急于浚，浚间道以金币使犒其军，檄都统制曲端泾原兵来援。
现代文：到这时豆子也吃完，彦仙向张浚告急，张浚派人从偏僻的小路拿着金币犒劳守城的军队，檄令都统制曲端率泾原兵来支援。
English: By this time, the beans were also finished, and Yan Xian sent an urgent message to Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun sent someone from a remote path with gold coins to help the army guarding the city, and ordered the capital to control the rate of curvature and the rate of war to support the original soldiers.

古文：端素疾彦仙出己上，无出兵意。
现代文：曲端素来嫉妒彦仙出己之上，没有出兵的意思。
English: Qu Duan has always been jealous of Hikohsen's self-promotion, and has no intention of sending troops.

古文：浚幕官谢升言于浚曰： 金旦暮下陕，则全据大河，且窥蜀矣。 浚乃出师至长安。
现代文：张浚的幕僚官谢升对张浚说 ：金人如果在很短的时间内攻下陕州，就全部据有大河，而且窥视巴蜀了。 张浚于是出师到长安。
English: Zhang Jun's staff officer Xie Sheng said to Zhang Jun: "If the Jin conquer Shaanxi in a very short time, they will have all the rivers, and they will be able to spy on Bashu." Zhang Jun then set out for Chang'an.

古文：道阻不得进，裨将邵隆、吕圆登、杨伯孙自外来援，间关伤仆，仅有至者。
现代文：因道路阻碍不能前进，副将邵隆、吕圆登、杨伯孙从外面来援助，历尽道路艰险伤亡严重，仅仅有人到达而已。
English: Unable to advance due to road obstructions, Vice Generals Shao Long, Lu Yuanden and Yang Balsun came from outside to help. They had to go through hardships on the road and suffered serious casualties. Only a few people arrived.

古文：彦仙日与金人战，将士未尝解甲。
现代文：彦仙每天与金人战斗，将士们未曾解甲。
English: Every day, Hikosen fought against the goldsmiths, and the soldiers never took off their armor.

古文：娄宿雅奇彦仙才，尝啖以河南兵马元帅，彦仙斩其使。
现代文：娄宿很惊奇彦仙的才能，曾经用河南兵马元帅的官职引诱他，彦仙斩杀了金人使者。
English: Shishuku was very surprised by Hikohsen's talent. He once lured him with the post of Henan's Terracotta Warriors and Horses Marshal, and Hikohsen killed the Golden Messenger.

古文：至是使人呼曰： 即降，畀前秩。 彦仙曰： 吾宁为宋鬼，安用汝富贵为！ 命强弩一发毙之。
现代文：到这时娄宿使人呼喊说： 马上投降，给予以前许下的官秩。 彦仙说 ：我宁可做宋朝的鬼，也不需要你的富贵！ 命令发强弩一发击毙喊话的金人。
English: At this time, Shoshuku made people shout and say, "Surrender at once and give me the official rank you promised before." Hikosen said, "I'd rather be a ghost of the Song Dynasty than be rich like you!" He gave the order to fire a powerful shot to kill the goldsmith who was shouting.

古文：设钩索，日钩取金人，舂斮城上。
现代文：彦仙设置钩索，每天钩取金人，撞击斩杀在城楼上。
English: Hikohsen set up a hook and line, and every day he hooked a gold man and hit and killed him on the castle tower.

古文：杀伤相当，守陴者伤夷日尽，金益兵急攻，城陷，彦仙率众巷战，矢集身如猬，左臂中刃不断，战愈力。
现代文：双方杀伤相当，守卫矮墙的人伤亡日尽；而金人增兵加紧攻城，州城陷落，彦仙率领大家展开巷战，箭头像刺猬一样集中在他身上，左手臂多次被刀砍伤，但战斗愈加努力。
English: Both sides killed and injured equally, and the casualties of the people guarding the low wall were exhausted every day; while the gold people increased their troops to intensify the siege of the city, the state capital fell, and Hikosen led everyone to start a street battle. The arrows were concentrated on him like a hedgehog, and his left arm was repeatedly slashed with a knife, but the battle became more and more difficult.

古文：金人惜其才，以重赏募人生致之，彦仙易敝衣走渡河，曰： 吾不甘以身受敌人之刃。 既而闻金人纵兵屠掠，曰： 金人所以甘心此城，以我坚守不下故也，我何面目复生乎？ 遂投河死，年三十六。
现代文：金人爱惜他的才能，重赏招募人生擒他，彦仙换上破旧的衣服逃走渡过黄河，说： 我不甘心用身体承受敌人的刀刃。 不久之后听说金人放纵士兵屠杀抢掠，说： 金人之所以纵杀于此城，是因为我坚守而攻不下的缘故，我有什么面目还生活在这个世上呢？ 于是投黄河而死，终年三十六岁。
English: The goldsmith cherished his talent and rewarded him by recruiting him for life. The hermit put on his worn-out clothes and fled across the Yellow River, saying, "I am not willing to bear the enemy's blade with my body." Soon after, he heard that the goldsmith allowed the soldiers to kill and plunder, saying, "The reason why the goldsmith killed in this city was because I held out and could not be captured. What kind of face do I still have in this world?" So he threw himself into the Yellow River and died at the age of thirty-six.

古文：金人害其家，惟弟夔、子毅得免。
现代文：金人杀害了他的全家，只有弟弟李夔、儿子李毅得以幸免。
English: Jinren killed his entire family, with only his younger brother, Li Yan, and his son, Li Yi, surviving.

古文：浚承制赠彦仙彰武军节度使，建庙商州，号忠烈。
现代文：张浚接受皇帝的诏命赠彦仙为彰武军节度使，在商州建立祀庙，号忠烈。
English: Zhang Jun accepted the emperor's imperial decree to give the gift of Yan Xian as a tribute to the armed forces, and established a temple in Shangzhou. He was given the title of "Faithful."

古文：官其子，给宅一区，田五顷。
现代文：以他的儿子为官，给予住宅一处，田土五百亩。
English: With his son as an official, he was given a house and 500 mu of land.

古文：绍兴九年，宣抚使周聿请即陕州立庙，名义烈。
现代文：绍兴九年，宣抚使周聿请求朝廷在陕州立庙，取名 义烈 。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, the imperial envoy Zhou Jun requested the imperial court to name the Shaanxi state temple after him.

古文：后以商、陕与金人，徙其庙阆州。
现代文：后把商、陕州给金人，把庙迁到阆州。
English: Later, the merchants and the state of Shaanxi were given to the Jin people, and the temple was moved to Bozhou.

古文：乾道八年，易谥忠威。
现代文：乾道八年，易谥号 忠威 。
English: After eight years on the dry road, the name "Tadamichi" (忠威) was born.

古文：彦仙颀而长面，严厉不可犯，以信义治陕，犯令者虽贵不贷。
现代文：彦仙身材高大而且脸长，严厉不可进犯。他以信义治理陕州，违犯命令者即使贵要也严惩不贷。
English: With his tall stature and long face, Yanxian strictly forbids any offense. He governs Shaanxi in good faith, and those who violate his orders will be severely punished, even if it costs them dearly.

古文：与其下同甘苦，故士乐为用。
现代文：与部下同甘共苦，所以士兵乐意为其所用。
English: The soldiers are happy to be of use to their subordinates as they share their joys and sorrows with them.

古文：有筹略，善应变。
现代文：他具有运筹谋略，善于应变。
English: He has operational planning skills and is good at adapting to change.

古文：尝略地至青涧，猝遇金人，众愕眙，彦仙依山植疑帜，徐据柳林，解甲自如。
现代文：曾经强取土地到青涧一带，突然遇见金人，众人都陡然一惊，彦仙依傍山势树立疑兵旗帜，慢慢地占据柳林，解甲自如。
English: Once he forcibly took land to the area of Qingcheng, and suddenly met Jinren, everyone was suddenly surprised. Yanxian set up a suspicious flag according to the situation of the mountains, slowly occupied the willow forest, and disarmed freely.

古文：金人疑有伏，引去，彦仙追袭于隘，躏死相枕。
现代文：金人怀疑有埋伏，引兵而去，彦仙追袭金人于险要之处，金人践踏伤害纵横相枕。
English: The goldsmith suspected an ambush and led the soldiers away. The hermit pursued the goldsmith to the critical point, and the goldsmith trampled on and injured the pillow.

古文：关以东皆下，陕独存，金人必欲下陕，然后并力西向。
现代文：关东都被金人攻下，惟独陕州保全，金人决心打算攻下陕州，然后合力向西进攻。
English: All of Kanto was conquered by the Jin, but only Shaanxi was preserved. The Jin were determined to conquer Shaanxi, and then they joined forces to attack the west.

古文：彦仙以孤城扼其冲再逾年，大小二百战，金人不得西。
现代文：彦仙以孤城控扼要冲之处又一年多，大大小小战斗二百次，金人不能西进。
English: It took more than a year for Yan Xian to control the key points of the lonely city, and there were two hundred large and small battles. The Jin people could not advance westward.

古文：城陷，金人声言求善射者贵之，炎不应，力战死。
现代文：到州城陷落，百姓没有二心，即使是妇女也登上屋顶用瓦投掷金人，哭李观察之声不绝。金人愤怒，毁城市杀居民，整个陕州于是陷没。
English: When the city of Shuzhou fell, the people had no second thoughts. Even women climbed onto the rooftops to throw tiles at the golden man, and there was no end to the cries. The angry golden man destroyed the city and killed the residents, and the whole of Shaanxi fell.

古文：赵立，徐州张益村人。以敢勇隶兵籍。
现代文：副将邵云、吕圆登、宋炎、贾何、阎平、赵成都死去，均被赠以官职录用他们的家人。赵立，徐州张益村人。以果敢英勇附属军籍。
English: Vice Generals Shao Yun, Lyu Yuanden, Song Yan, Jia He, Yan Ping, and Zhao Chengdu all died, and their families were given official posts. Zhao Li, a villager of Zhang Yi in Xuzhou, was awarded the military rank for courage and valor.

古文：靖康初，金人大入，盗贼群起，立数有战功，为武卫都虞候。
现代文：靖康初，金人大举侵入，盗贼群起，赵立多次立有战功，被任为武卫都虞候。
English: At the beginning of the Jingkang Dynasty, the Jin people invaded en masse and the thieves swarmed. Zhao Li repeatedly distinguished himself in battle and was appointed as the military governor of Wuwei.

古文：建炎三年，金人攻徐，王复拒守，命立督战，中六矢，战益厉。
现代文：建炎三年，金人进攻徐州，王复拒守，命令赵立督战，赵立身中五箭，战斗更加勇敢。
English: Jianyan three years, Jin people attacked Xuzhou, Wang Fu refused to defend, ordered Zhao Lidu to fight, Zhao Li was among the five arrows, and fought more bravely.

古文：复壮其勇，酌卮酒挥涕劳之。
现代文：王复认为他勇气雄壮，用卮杯斟酒挥涕犒劳他。
English: Wang Fu thought he was courageous and rewarded him with a goblet of wine.

古文：城陷，复与其家皆死，独子佾先去。
现代文：州城陷落，王复与他的家人都死，只有儿子王佾早先离开。
English: When the provincial capital fell, Wang Fu and his family all died, except for his son Wang Yao, who left earlier.

古文：州教授郑褒亦骂敌而死。
现代文：徐州教授郑褒也痛骂敌人而死，州城开始被攻破时，赵立展开巷战，夺门而出。
English: Xuzhou professor Zheng Bao also scolded the enemy and died. When the city of Xuzhou began to be breached, Zhao Li launched a street battle and went out to seize the door.

古文：城始破，立巷战，夺门以出，金人击之死，夜半得微雨而苏，乃杀守者，入城求复尸，恸哭手瘗之。
现代文：金人把他击昏，夜半时得细雨而苏醒，于是杀死看守，进城寻找王复的尸体，恸哭哀痛亲手把王复埋葬。
English: The goldsmith knocked him unconscious, and in the middle of the night he was awakened by a drizzle, so he killed the guard, went into the city to look for Wang Fu's body, wept and buried Wang Fu with his own hands.

古文：阴结乡民为收复计。
现代文：暗地组织乡民做收复州城的计划。
English: He secretly organized villagers to make a plan to recapture the state capital.

古文：金人北还，立率残兵邀击，断其归路，夺舟船金帛以千计，军声复振。
现代文：金人北归，赵立率领残兵截击金人，切断金人的归路，夺取船只黄金布帛数以千计，再振军声。
English: When the Jin people returned to the north, Zhao Li led the remnants of the army to intercept the Jin people, cut off the return route of the Jin people, seize thousands of ships and gold cloth, and re-energize the military.

古文：乃尽结乡民为兵，遂复徐州。
现代文：于是组织乡民全部为兵，终于收复徐州。
English: So he organized all the villagers as soldiers and finally recovered Xuzhou.

古文：诏授忠翊郎、权知州事。
现代文：朝廷下诏授予赵立忠翊郎、权知徐州事。
English: The imperial court issued an imperial edict to grant Zhao Lizhong Rong and Quanzhi Xuzhou Jie.

古文：立奏为复立庙，每遇岁时及出师，必帅众泣祷曰： 公为朝廷死，必能阴祐其遗民也。 齐人闻之归心焉。
现代文：赵立奏请替王复建立祀庙，每遇到过年以及出师，必定率领大家哭泣祈祷说： 您为朝廷而死，一定能够暗中保佑它的遗民。 齐地的人民听说后心悦诚服而归附于他。
English: Zhao Lizo asked Wang Fu to build a temple for him, and whenever there was a Chinese New Year or he became a teacher, he would lead everyone in weeping and praying, saying, "You died for the imperial court, so you must be able to secretly bless its survivors.

古文：时山东诸郡莽为盗区，立介居其间，威名流闻。
现代文：当时山东各州郡广大地区成为盗贼出没的地方，赵立介居其间，威名流传。
English: At that time, the vast areas of Shandong provinces and counties became a place where thieves haunted. Zhao Lijie lived among them, and his reputation spread.

古文：累迁右武大夫、忠州刺史。
现代文：累迁官右武大夫、忠州刺史。
English: The relocation officer, Dr. Ubu, and the history of Chungju are shown.

古文：会金左将军昌围楚州急，通守贾敦诗欲以城降，宣抚使杜充命立将所部兵往赴之。
现代文：适逢金国左将军昌加紧围困楚州，通守贾敦诗打算以城投降，宣抚使杜充命令赵立率领所部军队前往赴援。
English: At the time when Jin Guoza's General Chang was tightening the siege of Chuzhou, the commander-in-chief Jia Dunshi was planning to surrender the city, and Du Chong, the envoy, ordered Zhao Li to lead the headquarters troops to go to the rescue.

古文：且战且行，连七战胜而后能达楚。
现代文：赵立一边战斗一边前进，连胜七战然后才到达楚州。
English: Zhao Li advanced while fighting, winning seven consecutive battles before reaching Chuzhou.

古文：两颊中流矢，不能言，以手指麾，既入城休士，而后拔镞。
现代文：赵立两颊被流矢射中，不能讲话，用手指挥，不久入城休整士兵，然后才拔掉箭头。
English: Zhao Li was shot in both cheeks by a stream of arrows. Unable to speak, he commanded with his hands and soon entered the city to recuperate the soldiers before removing the arrows.

古文：诏以立守楚州。
现代文：下诏以赵立守楚州。
English: The following edict states that Zhao Lishu will govern Chuzhou.

古文：明年正月，金人攻城，立命撤废屋，城下然火池，壮士持长矛以待。
现代文：第二年正月，金人攻打楚州城，赵立命令撤回废弃的房子，在城下点燃火池，壮士手持长矛严阵以待。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Jin people attacked Chuzhou City. Zhao Li ordered to withdraw the abandoned house, ignite the fire pool under the city, and the strong men armed with spears were waiting.

古文：金人登城，钩取投火中。
现代文：金人登上城楼，钩取金人投入火中。
English: The goldsmith climbs up the tower, hooks the goldsmith and throws him into the fire.

古文：金人选死士突入，又搏杀之，乃稍引退。
现代文：金人挑选敢死队突入，又捕捉杀掉，金人才稍稍引退。
English: The goldsmith selects a death squad to rush in, capture and kill them, and the goldsmith retires a little.

古文：五月，兀术北归，筑高台六合，以辎重假道于楚，立斩其使。
现代文：五月，兀北归，在六合修筑高台，以辎重器物借道于楚州，赵立斩杀金人使臣。
English: In May, Zhao Beigui returned to the north, built a hill at Liuhe, and used heavy equipment to pass through Chuzhou. Zhao Li then killed the Jin envoy.

古文：兀术怒，乃设南北两屯，绝楚饷道，立引兵出战，大破之。
现代文：兀愤怒，于是设立南北两屯，断绝楚州兵饷来路，赵立领兵出战，大破兀。
English: Enraged, Zhao set up the North and South Tunnels to cut off the supply route for the Chuzhou soldiers. Zhao Li led the soldiers into battle, breaking the siege.

古文：会朝廷分镇，以立为徐州观察使、泗州涟水军镇抚使兼知楚州。
现代文：恰逢朝廷分镇，以赵立为徐州观察使、泗州涟水军镇抚使兼知楚州。
English: It coincided with the imperial court's sub-town, with Zhao Li as the Xuzhou observation envoy, and the Zhangzhou Xinshui military township envoy also knew Chuzhou.

古文：立一日拥六骑出城，呼曰： 我镇抚也，可来接战。 有两骑将袭其背，立奋二矛刺之，俱堕地，夺两马而还。
现代文：赵立一天拥着六匹马出城，大喊说： 我是镇抚使，可以来接战。 有两个骑兵将要偷袭他的背部，赵立奋起二矛刺杀，两人都掉到地上，赵立夺取两匹马而归。
English: One day, Zhao Li went out of the city with six horses in his arms, shouting: "I am the town marshal, I can come to fight." Two cavalrymen were about to attack his back, Zhao Li raised two spears to stab them, both of them fell to the ground, Zhao Li seized two horses and returned.

古文：众数十追其后，立瞋目大呼，人马皆辟易。
现代文：金兵几十人在他后面追赶，赵立瞪圆眼睛大喊，人马都惊退。
English: Dozens of gold soldiers chased after him. Zhao Li stared into his round eyes and shouted. Everyone was startled and ran away.

古文：明日，金人列三队邀战，立为三阵应之，金人以铁骑数百横分其阵而围之，立奋身突围，持挺左右大呼，金人落马者不知数。
现代文：第二天，金人排列成三队邀战，赵立以三阵应付，金人用几百铁骑兵横地分割其阵式而包围宋兵，赵立奋身突围，拿着棍棒左右大叫，金人落马者不知其数。
English: The next day, the goldsmiths lined up in three teams to invite the war, Zhao Li responded with three lines. The goldsmiths used several hundred iron cavalry to horizontally divide their lines and encircle the Song soldiers. Zhao Li bravely broke out of the encirclement, holding a club and shouting left and right. The number of goldsmiths who fell off their horses is unknown.

古文：承、楚间有樊梁、新开、白马三湖，贼张敌万窟穴其间，立绝不与通，故楚粮道愈梗。
现代文：承州、楚州之间有樊梁、新开、白马三湖，盗贼张敌万在其间聚集人马，赵立决不与他来往，因此粮道更加阻塞。
English: Between Chenzhou and Chuzhou, there are the three lakes of Yuliang, Xinkai and Baima. The thief Zhang Qimwan gathers people and horses in them. Zhao Li will never come and go with him, so the grain route is even more blocked.

古文：始受围，菽麦野生，泽有凫茨可采，后皆尽，至屑榆皮食之。
现代文：开始被围困时，豆麦野生，湖泽地有野鸭、蒺藜可以采食，后来都光了，以致把榆树皮研成碎末吃。
English: When they were first besieged, they had wild soybeans and wheat, and there were wild ducks and pheasants in the lakes and marshes that they could eat. Later, they ran out of food, so they had to eat the bark of eucalyptus trees.

古文：承州既陷，楚势益孤，立遣人诣朝廷告急。
现代文：承州已经陷落，楚州形势更加孤危，赵立派人前往朝廷告急。
English: Chenzhou had fallen, the situation in Chuzhou was even more desperate, and Zhao Rongren went to the imperial court to express his distress.

古文：签书枢密院事赵鼎欲遣张俊救之，俊不肯行。
现代文：签书枢密院事赵鼎打算派遣张俊去救援，张俊不肯去。
English: The Privy Councillor Zhao Ding planned to send Zhang Jun to the rescue, but Zhang Jun refused to go.

古文：鼎曰： 江东新造，全藉两淮，失楚则大事去矣。
现代文：赵鼎说 ：江东刚刚建立，全凭藉两淮，失去楚州则大事去了。
English: Zhao Ding said: Jiangdong has just been established, all thanks to the two Huai, losing Chuzhou is a big deal.

古文：若俊惮行，臣愿与之偕往。 俊复力辞，乃命刘光世督淮南诸镇救楚。
现代文：如果张俊害怕去，我愿意与他一起前往。 张俊又极力推辞，于是命令刘光世督视淮南各镇援救楚州。
English: If Zhang Jun is afraid to go, I am willing to go with him. Zhang Jun also strongly refused, so he ordered Liu Guangxi to supervise the towns of Huainan to rescue Chuzhou.

古文：东海李彦先首以兵至淮河，扼不得进；高邮薛庆至扬州，转战被执死；光世将王德至承州，下不用命；扬州郭仲威按兵天长，阴怀顾望；独海陵岳飞仅能为援，而众寡不敌。
现代文：东海李彦光最先率兵到达淮河，被金人扼制不得前进；高邮薛庆到达扬州，转战被金人捉住而死；刘光世部将王德到达承州，部下不听命令；扬州郭仲威在天长按兵不动，暗怀观望之心；只有海陵岳飞仅仅能够为援，然而寡不敌众。
English: East China's Li Yanguang was the first to lead his troops to the Huaihe River, but was stifled by the Jin; Gao Po Xueqing reached Yangzhou, was captured by the Jin and died; Liu Guang Shibu led Wang De to Chengzhou, but his subordinates did not listen to orders; Yangzhou Guo Zhongwei did not move his troops in Tianchang, but kept a watchful eye; only Hailing Yuefei could only help, but he was outnumbered.

古文：高宗览立奏，叹曰： 立坚守孤城，虽古名将无以逾之。 以书趣光世会兵者五，光世讫不行。
现代文：高宗看了赵立的奏章，叹气说： 赵立坚守孤城，即使是古代名将也不能超过他。 赵立五次写信急趋刘光世合兵，刘光世竟不行动。
English: Gao Zong looked at Zhao Li's record and sighed: Zhao Li firmly defended the lonely city, even the ancient famous generals could not surpass him. Zhao Li wrote five times to urge Liu Guangshi to join the army, but Liu Guangshi did not act.

古文：金知外救绝，围益急。
现代文：金国知道楚州外援断绝，更加加紧围攻。
English: Knowing that foreign aid to Chuzhou had been cut off, the Chinese intensified their siege.

古文：九月，攻东城，立募壮士焚其梯，火辄反向，立叹曰： 岂天未助顺乎。 一旦风转，焚一梯，立喜，登磴道以观，飞炮中其首，左右驰救之，立曰： 我终不能为国殄贼矣。 言讫而绝，年三十有七。
现代文：九月，攻打东城，赵立招募壮士焚烧金人的云梯，火势立即反向，赵立叹说： 难道是上天不助顺风吗？ 有一天风转向，焚烧了一架梯子，赵立很高兴，登上石级来观战，飞炮击中他的脑壳，左右之人急忙救他，赵立说 ：我终不能为国家消灭贼人了。 讲完话而气绝，年三十七岁。
English: In September, when attacking Dongcheng, Zhao Li recruited strong men to burn Jinren's Cloud Ladder, and the fire immediately reversed. Zhao Li sighed and said, "Is it that the heavens do not help the tailwind?" One day, the wind turned and burned a ladder. Zhao Li was very happy. He climbed the stone steps to watch the battle. A flying cannon hit his skull, and people around him rushed to save him. Zhao Li said, "I can't destroy the thieves for the country after all." He was thirty-seven years old when he finished his speech.

古文：众巷哭。
现代文：众人在里巷里相聚号哭。
English: People gathered in alleys and lanes, crying.

古文：以参谋官程括摄镇抚使以守。
现代文：以参谋官程括摄镇抚使守城。
English: With the staff officer Cheng including the deputy town marshal guarding the city.

古文：金人疑立诈死，不敢动。
现代文：金人怀疑赵立假装死，不敢轻动。
English: The banker suspected that Zhao Li was pretending to be dead and did not dare to move.

古文：越旬余，城始陷。
现代文：过了十多天，州城才陷落。
English: It took more than ten days for the city to fall.

古文：初，朝廷闻楚乏食，与粟万斛，命两浙转运李承造自海道先致三千斛，未发而楚失守矣。
现代文：起初，朝廷听说楚州缺乏食物，给予万石粟米，命令两浙转运使李承造从海路先送达三千石，没有发运而楚州失守了。
English: At first, the imperial court heard that there was a shortage of food in Chuzhou, gave 10,000 kilos of poppy rice, ordered two Zhejiang transshipments to allow Li Chengzong to deliver 3,000 kilos from the sea first, and Chuzhou was lost without shipping.

古文：立家先残于徐，以单骑入楚。
现代文：赵立家先是在徐州被残害，他单骑一人进入楚州。
English: Zhao Lijia was first mutilated in Xuzhou, and he rode alone into Chuzhou.

古文：为人木强，不知书，忠义出天性。
现代文：他为人性直刚强，不识字，忠义出于天性。
English: He is an upright and strong man, illiterate, and loyal by nature.

古文：善骑射，不喜声色财利，与士卒均廪给。
现代文：善长骑马射箭，不喜欢歌舞女色钱财，与士兵均分官府发给的粮米。
English: Good leaders ride horses and shoot arrows, do not like singing and dancing women with money, and divide the grain and rice distributed by the government equally with the soldiers.

古文：每战擐甲胄先登，有退却者，大呼驰至，捽而斩之。
现代文：每次战斗穿上铠甲和头盔捷足先登，有退却的人，他大喊追逐到，揪住斩首。
English: Every time he fights, he puts on his armor and helmet and rushes to the front. If anyone retreats, he chases them shouting, grabs them and beheads them.

古文：初入城，合徐、楚兵不满万，二州众不相能，立善抚驭，无敢私隙。
现代文：刚入城，汇合徐、楚州军队不满万人，二州人不能互相亲善，赵立善于安抚驾驭，没有人敢以个人的感情裂痕为私。
English: When he first entered the city, there were less than ten thousand soldiers in the combined Xu and Chuzhou armies. The people of the two states could not be friendly to each other. Zhao Li was good at pacifying and controlling. No one dared to take personal emotional rifts for me.

古文：仇视金人，言之必嚼齿而怒，所俘获磔以示众，未尝献馘行在也。
现代文：他仇视金人，说到金人必咬牙嚼齿而愤怒，所俘获金人分尸以示众人，未曾向行在献上所割下敌人的左耳以请功。
English: He hated the goldsmith. He said that the goldsmith would gnash his teeth and become angry. The captured goldsmith dismembered the corpse to show the people. He never offered the left ear of the enemy he had cut off.

古文：刘豫遣立故人赍书约降，立不发书，束以油布焚市中，且曰： 吾了此贼，必灭豫乃止。 由是忠义之声远近皆倾下之，金人不敢斥其名。
现代文：刘豫派赵立的故旧带着书信约他投降，赵立不打开信，用油布捆束在市区中焚烧。而且说 ：我了解这个奸贼，一定要灭掉刘豫才停止。 由于这样忠义的声名，远近都钦佩他，金人不敢斥责他的名字。
English: Liu Yu sent Zhao Li's father-in-law with a letter promising his surrender, but Zhao Li did not open the letter and burned it in the middle of the city, tying it up with an oil cloth. He also said, "I know this traitor, and I must kill Liu Yu before I can stop him." Because of his reputation for loyalty, people near and far admired him, and the Jin people dared not criticize his name.

古文：围既久，众益困，立夜焚香望东南拜，且泣曰： 誓死守，不敢负国家。 命其众击鼓，曰： 援兵至，闻吾鼓声则应矣。 如是累月，终无至者。
现代文：围城已经很久，众人愈加困乏，赵立晚上烧香望着东南方向下拜，而且哭泣说： 誓死守城，不敢辜负国家。 命令大家击鼓，说： 援兵到，听见我鼓声就会应和。 像这样几个月，终于没有到来的援兵。
English: The siege of the city had been going on for a long time, and the people were getting more and more exhausted. In the evening, Zhao Li burned incense, looked southeast, bowed down, and wept, saying, "I swear to defend the city to the death, I dare not fail the country." He ordered everyone to play the drums, saying, "When the reinforcements arrive, they will respond to my drumming." After months like this, the reinforcements finally did not arrive.

古文：立尝戒士卒：不幸城破，必巷战决死。
现代文：赵立曾告诫士兵，不幸城被攻破，必须巷战决一死战。
English: Zhao Li once admonished the soldiers that, unfortunately, the city had been breached and they had to fight a street battle to the death.

古文：及陷，众如其言。
现代文：等到陷落，大家都像他所说的那样做了。
English: Until the fall, everyone did as he said.

古文：自金人犯中国，所下城率以虚声胁降，惟太原坚守逾二年，濮州城破，杀伤大相当，皆为金人所惮。
现代文：自从金人进犯中国，所攻克的城池都是因虚张声势胁迫投降，只有太原坚守超过二年，濮州城被攻破，杀伤大体相当，都为金人所忌惮。
English: Since the Jin people invaded China, the cities they conquered were all forced to surrender due to bluffing and intimidation. Only Taiyuan held out for more than two years, and Zhangzhou City was breached, with roughly the same loss of life. All of these were dreaded by the Jin people.

古文：事闻，赠复资政殿学士，谥壮节，立庙楚州，号忠烈，官其家五人。
现代文：然而赵立的威名以及战斗次数之多，都出此之上。朝廷发讣告，中止上朝，赠赵立奉国节度使、开府仪同三司，以他的子孙十人为官，谥号 忠烈 。第二年，金人退走，在矮墙下面得到赵立的尸体，面颊骨上的箭孔还保存着。
English: However, Zhao Li's prestige and the large number of battles were all due to this. The imperial court issued an obituary notice, suspended the imperial visit, and presented Zhao Li with the title of the national festival delegate, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, with ten of his descendants as officials, and the nickname "Faithful." The next year, the Jin people retreated and got Zhao Li's body under the low wall, and the arrow hole on the cheek bone was still preserved.

古文：王忠植，太行义士也。
现代文：朝廷命令官府替他办丧事，以后为他立祠，名叫显忠。王忠植，太行山义士。
English: The imperial court ordered the government to hold a funeral for him, and later a small shrine was built for him, named Xianzhong. Wang Zhongzhi, a righteous man from Taihang Mountain.

古文：绍兴九年，取石州等十一郡，授武功大夫、华州观察、统制河东忠义军马，遂知代州。
现代文：绍兴九年，攻取石州等十一郡，被授为武功大夫、华州观察、统制河东忠义军马，于是知代州。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, he conquered eleven counties such as Shizhou, was awarded the title of Doctor of Military Merit, observed Huazhou, and controlled the loyalist army in Hedong, and then became the governor of Zhidaozhou.

古文：寻落阶官，为建宁军承宣使、龙神卫四厢都指挥使、河东经略安抚使。
现代文：不久被降官，任建宁军承宣使、龙神卫四厢都指挥使、河东经略安抚使。
English: He was soon demoted and appointed as the Jianning Army's successor envoy, the Long Shenwei Commander of the Four Quarters, and the Hedong Economic Relative Pacification Envoy.

古文：明年，金人围庆阳急，帅臣宋万年乘城拒守。
现代文：第二年，金人急围庆阳，帅臣宋万年登城拒守。
English: In the second year, the Jin people quickly surrounded Qingyang, and the handsome vassal Song Wanren refused to defend the city.

古文：会川、陕宣抚副使胡世将檄忠植以所部赴陕西会合，行次延安，叛将赵惟清执忠植使拜诏，忠植曰： 本朝诏则拜，金国诏则不拜。 惟清械诣其右副元帅撒离曷，不能屈。
现代文：恰逢川、陕宣抚副使胡世将檄令王忠植以所部开赴陕西会合，路上驻扎在延安，叛将赵惟清挟持忠植使他跪拜听诏，忠植说： 本朝的诏书就拜，金国的诏书就不拜。 赵惟清把他拘系起来送往金右副元帅撒离曷，忠植不为所屈。
English: At the same time, Hu Shi, the vice-envoy of the Sichuan and Shaanxi Proclamation, ordered Wang Zhongzhi to go to the Shaanxi meeting with the headquarters. He was stationed in Yan'an on the way. The traitor Zhao Weiqing held Zhongzhi and made him kneel to listen to the edict. Zhongzhi said, "I will obey the edict of this dynasty, but I will not obey the edict of the Jin Dynasty." Zhao Weiqing detained him and sent him to the vice-marshal of the Jin Dynasty, Saryuan. Zhongzhi would not give in.

古文：使甲士引诣庆阳城下，谕使降，忠植大呼曰： 我河东步佛山忠义人也，为金人所执，使来招降，愿将士勿负朝廷，坚守城壁。
现代文：撒离曷让士兵牵挽忠植前往庆阳城下，谕示他劝降，忠植大声喊道： 我是河东步佛山忠义人士，被金人所捉，他们派人来招降你们，希望将士们不要辜负朝廷，坚守城壁。
English: Salih ordered the soldiers to drag and carry Zhongzhi to the foot of Qingyang Castle and ordered him to persuade him to surrender. Zhongzhi shouted loudly: "I am a loyal person from Foshan in the eastern part of the river, who was captured by the Jin people. They sent someone to invite you to surrender. I hope the soldiers will not betray the imperial court and hold fast to the city walls."

古文：忠植即死城下。 撒离曷怒诘之，忠植披襟大呼曰： 当速杀我。 遂遇害。
现代文：忠植我就要死在城下。 撒离曷怒骂忠植，忠植披着衣襟大声说： 可以赶快杀掉我。 终于遇害。
English: I was going to die at the foot of the castle if I stayed loyal to him. Salix angrily scolded me, and I put on my coat and said in a loud voice, "You can kill me right away." I was finally killed.

古文：世将上其事，赠奉国军节度使、开府仪同三司，官其家十人。
现代文：胡世将向朝廷上奏忠植之事，朝廷赠忠植为奉国军节度使、开府仪同三司，使他家十人为官。
English: Hu Shi will report to the imperial court on the matter of Zhongzhi, and the imperial court will present Zhongzhi as the festival envoy of the national army, the opening ceremony and the three departments, and ten members of his family will be in office.

