古文：唐穆宗即位之初年，诏曰： 七月六日，是朕载诞大辰。
现代文：唐穆宗李恒登皇帝位的那年，下诏书说： 七月六日，是我的寿诞之日。
English: In the year that Tang Mu Zong Li Heng ascended to the throne, the following edict said: July 6th is my birthday.

古文：其日，百僚命妇宜于光顺门进名参贺，朕于门内与百僚相见。 
现代文：到了那天，百官和诰命妇人把名字递上去，表示参加了朝贺，我可以在门内与百官见面。 
English: On that day, the centurion and the dying woman submitted their names, indicating that they had participated in the morning greeting, and I could meet the centurion inside the gate.

古文：明日，又敕受贺仪宜停。
现代文：第二天，又下诏说，诞辰受百官朝贺的仪术停止，这是怎么回事呢？
English: The next day, the imperial edict was issued again, saying that the birth anniversary would no longer be celebrated with the pomp and ceremony of a state banquet. What was going on?

古文：先是左丞韦绶奏行之，宰臣以古无降诞受贺之礼，奏罢之。
现代文：原来起初是尚书省总辖吏、户、礼三部的左丞韦统上奏幸。要求寿诞受贺，因之允准下诏；接着总揽政务的大臣又以古代就无寿诞受贺为理由，上书要求停止贺礼仪式，于是又下诏停止。
English: Originally, at first, it was the general administrator of Shangshu Province, Zuo Wei, who was in charge of the three departments of households and ceremonies, who made a report to the emperor. He requested that the birthday be celebrated, and the imperial edict was approved; then the minister in charge of government affairs also requested that the ceremony be stopped, citing the fact that no birthdays had been celebrated in ancient times, and the imperial edict was also stopped.

古文：然次年复行贺礼。
现代文：但是到了第二年，又开始寿诞贺礼。
English: But the following year, they started celebrating birthdays again.

古文：诞节之制，起于明皇，今天下宴集休假三日，肃宗亦然。
现代文：皇帝寿诞之日举行贺礼的制度，开始于唐明皇。当时，唐明皇在他寿诞之日下令百官集中设宴庆贺，休假三天，之后，唐肃宗也照此办理。
English: The system of holding a congratulatory gift on the day of the emperor's birthday began with Emperor Tang Ming. At that time, Emperor Tang Ming ordered that on the day of his birthday, all officials should hold a banquet to celebrate and take a three-day holiday. After that, the Tang Su Sect also followed this procedure.

古文：代、德、顺三宗皆不置节名，及文宗以后，始置宴如初。
现代文：后来，代宗、德宗、顺宗三朝都没有设置这一节日名目。直到唐文宗以后，才象玄宗时一样盛宴百官。
English: Later, the three dynasties of Daizong, Dezong and Shunzong did not set up this festival name. It was only after Tang Wenzong that the feast of a hundred officials was held as in the time of Xuanzong.

古文：则受贺一事，盖自长庆年至今用之也。
现代文：由此可知，寿诞受贺之礼，大致从唐穆宗长庆年间一直演用到现在。
English: From this, it can be seen that the celebration of birthdays has been used from the time of Tang Mu Zong's Changqing to the present.

