古文：卫操莫含刘库仁
现代文：卫操，字德元，是代郡人。
English: Wei Du, whose Chinese name is De Yuan, is a representative of the county.

古文：卫操，字德元，代人也。
现代文：年轻时通脱仗义，有才干谋略。
English: When you're young, you can get away with anything, and you have the talent to devise strategies.

古文：少通侠，有才略。晋征北将军卫瓘以操为牙门将，数使于国，颇自结附。
现代文：晋国的征北将军卫璀委任卫操为牙门将，多次出使到国都，有较多交往和依托。
English: Jin's Northern Expeditionary General Wei Xuan appointed Wei Xuan as the gatekeeper, and he was sent to the capital many times, and he had more contacts and support from Jin.

古文：始祖崩后，与从子雄及其宗室乡亲姬澹等十数人，同来归国，说桓穆二帝招纳晋人，于是晋人附者稍众。
现代文：始祖逝世后，卫操和侄子卫雄及其同宗乡亲姬澹等十多人，一起来归附，劝说桓穆二帝招集接纳晋国人，于是晋国人依附的逐渐增多。
English: After the death of the founder, more than ten people, including Wei Cao, his nephew Wei Xiong, and his relatives from the same hometown, came together to join and persuade Emperor Kanmu II to call for the acceptance of the Jin people. As a result, the number of Jin people joining gradually increased.

古文：桓帝嘉之，以为辅相，任以国事。
现代文：桓帝赞许他，作为辅相，将国中大事委任给他。
English: Emperor Kanto approved of him and, as an assistant minister, entrusted him with important state affairs.

古文：及刘渊、石勒之乱，劝桓帝匡助晋氏。
现代文：等到刘渊、石勒发动变乱时，卫操劝说桓帝辅助晋氏。
English: When Liu Yuan and Shi Le started a rebellion, Wei Cao persuaded Emperor Kuan to support the Jin Dynasty.

古文：东瀛公司马腾闻而善之，表加将号。
现代文：束瀛公司马腾听说后称赞他，上奏给予将领名号。
English: After hearing about it, Ma Teng of the Sokcho Company praised him and gave him the title of general.

古文：稍迁至右将军，封定襄侯。
现代文：逐渐升到右将军，封定襄侯。
English: He was gradually promoted to Right General, and given the title of Xiang Hou.

古文：桓帝崩后，操立碑于大邗城南，以颂功德，云： 魏，轩辕之苗裔。 
现代文：桓帝逝世后，卫操在大邗城南立碑，来颂扬功德，说： 魏，是轩辕氏的后裔。 
English: After the death of Emperor Huan, Wei Cao erected a monument in the south of Dalat City to praise his merits, saying: Wei is a descendant of the Xuanwu clan.

古文：言：桓穆二帝 驰名域外，九译宗焉。
现代文：其中说：桓穆二帝 闻名境外，外国归附。
English: It said: Emperor Kanmu is famous abroad, and foreign countries are attached to him.

古文：治国御众，威禁大行。
现代文：治理国家统御民众，威望禁令大行境内。
English: To govern the country and control the people, the prestige ban is in full swing in the country.

古文：声著华裔，齐光纯灵。
现代文：声名传遍中华大地，光辉照耀民众之中。
English: The fame spread all over China, and the glory shone among the people.

古文：智深谋远，穷幽极明。
现代文：智谋深远，穷究幽暗达到光明。
English: Wisdom reaches far and wide, and light shines through the gloom.

古文：治则清断，沉浮得情。
现代文：治理法则清明果断，沉浮得到实情。
English: The governance rules are clear and decisive, and the ups and downs are the truth.

古文：仁如春阳，威若秋零。
现代文：仁义如同春天的阳光，威严犹如秋风扫落叶。
English: Righteousness is like the sunshine of spring, and majesty is like the autumn wind sweeping away the fallen leaves.

古文：强不凌弱，隐恤孤茕。
现代文：强不欺弱，抚恤孤独。
English: Don't bully the weak, but care for the lonely.

古文：道教仁行，化而不刑。
现代文：以道德施教仁义盛行，感化而不用刑。
English: Moral teaching, benevolence and righteousness prevailed, and influence was used instead of punishment.

古文：国无奸盗，路有颂声。
现代文：国中没有奸贼盗窃，道路上有歌颂之声。
English: There are no thieves or robbers in the country, and there are songs of praise on the roads.

古文：自西讫东，变化无形。
现代文：自西到东，变化不显形迹。
English: From west to east, there is no sign of change.

古文：威武所向，下无交兵。
现代文：威武之师所向，不用交战而平。
English: Where there is a master, there is no need to fight.

古文：南壹王室，北服丁零。
现代文：南方归顺王室，北方制服丁零。
English: The south surrendered to the royal family, and the north uniformed.

古文：招谕六狄，咸来归诚。
现代文：招集晓谕夷人，都来归附投诚。
English: He called for the people of the Diaspora to come and join him.

古文：超前绝后，致此有成。
现代文：空前绝后，至此有所成功。
English: This is unprecedented and unprecedented, so far it has been successful.

古文：奉承晋皇，悍御边疆。
现代文：拥戴晋皇，捍卫边境。
English: Support Emperor Jin, defend the border.

古文：王室多难，天网弛纲。
现代文：王室多灾多难，天纲松弛纲领。
English: The royal family has suffered many disasters and difficulties, and the program has been relaxed.

古文：豪心远济，靡离其殃。
现代文：二帝雄心救济远方，不遭受祸殃。
English: The two emperors are ambitious to help the far away, not to suffer the calamity.

古文：岁翦逆命，奸盗豺狼。
现代文：岁中剪除叛逆，以及奸盗豺狼。
English: in the middle of the year, to cut off the traitors, and the thieves, and the wolves.

古文：永安元年，岁次甲子。
现代文：永安元年，岁在甲子。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he was in Koshi.

古文：奸党犹逆，东西狼跱。
现代文：奸党还在作乱，东西如狼峙立。
English: The scoundrels are still wreaking havoc, and everything is in a state of upheaval.

古文：敢逼天王，兵甲屡起。
现代文：竟敢逼迫天王，战事屡次发动。
English: How dare they persecute the King of Heaven and repeatedly start wars.

古文：怙众肆暴，虐用将士。
现代文：仗恃人多肆行暴乱，残酷使用将领士兵。
English: Many of the soldiers went on a rampage and brutally used the generals' soldiers.

古文：鄴洛遘隙，弃亲求疏。
现代文：邺城洛阳产生裂痕，抛弃亲近寻求疏远者。
English: The city of Luoyang has caused a rift, abandoning those who seek closeness and distancing.

古文：乃招暴类，屠各匈奴。
现代文：竟然招集凶暴族类，即屠各匈奴。
English: They even called in the most ferocious of the tribes, the Tuka Huns.

古文：刘渊奸贼，结党同呼。
现代文：刘渊这奸诈贼寇，结成同党共相呼应。
English: Liu Yuan, this treacherous bandit, has formed an alliance with the CCP.

古文：敢击并土，杀害无辜。
现代文：胆敢出击并州疆域，杀害无辜。
English: He dared to invade the state's territory and kill innocent people.

古文：残破狼籍，城邑丘墟。
现代文：肆意破坏一片狼藉，城邑变成丘墟。
English: Wanton destruction is rampant, and towns have been reduced to rubble.

古文：交刃千里，长蛇塞涂。
现代文：交锋战线长达千里，凶恶的敌人充斥道路。
English: The battle lines stretch for thousands of miles, and vicious enemies fill the roads.

古文：晋道应天，言展良谟。
现代文：晋国治道顺应卜天，展示良好谋略。
English: The way of governing the Jin Dynasty was in accordance with Bu Tian, showing a good strategy.

古文：使持节、平北将军、并州刺史、护匈奴中郎将、东瀛公司马腾，才神绝世，规略超远。
现代文：使持节、平北将军、并州刺史、护匈奴中郎将、东瀛公司马腾，才华无人可比，规划策略超迈高远。
English: Zhizhi Jixi, Pingbei General, Bianzhou Zhishi, Zhou Xiongnu Zhonglang, Donglu Company Ma Teng, the talent is incomparable, and the planning strategy is very far-reaching.

古文：时逢多难，惧损皇祀。
现代文：遭遇多灾多难时代，畏惧损害皇室祭祀。
English: In a time of many disasters and hardships, fear of damaging the imperial family's rituals is on the rise.

古文：欲引兵驾，猃狁孔炽。
现代文：打算率领兵马出征，殓狁极为强盛。
English: He planned to lead the soldiers and horses to go to war. He was extremely powerful.

古文：造设权策，济难奇思。
现代文：于是设下权宜计策，救济患难用特异之谋。
English: As a result, stopgap measures were set up, and extraordinary measures were used to relieve the suffering.

古文：欲招外救，朝臣莫应。高算独断，决谋盟意。
现代文：想要招集外地救助，朝臣没人响应高远运思独自决断，定下结盟意向。
English: If they wanted to call in outside help, no courtier would respond to Gaoyuan Yunxi's independent decision and set the intention of alliance.

古文：爰命外国，引军内备。
现代文：于是命令外国，率军到内地防备。
English: Therefore, he ordered foreign countries to lead their troops to the inland to be prepared.

古文：简贤选士，命兹良使。
现代文：挑选贤明士人，命令良好使者。
English: Choose a wise man and command a good messenger.

古文：遣参军壶伦、牙门中行嘉、义阳亭侯卫谟、协义亭侯卫鞬等，驰奉檄书，至晋阳城。 
现代文：派遣参军壶伦、牙门中行嘉、义阳亭侯卫谟、协义亭侯卫鞑等人，奔驰送交文书，到达晋阳城。 
English: He dispatched the following people to join the army: Jurrun, Zhamen Zhong Xingjia, Yiyang Ting Hou Weimu, Xiyi Ting Hou Weijuan, etc. The Mercedes delivered the documents and arrived at Jinyang City.

古文：又称：桓穆二帝 心在宸极。
现代文：又称道：桓穆二帝 心在皇室。
English: Also known as: Emperor Kanmu II's heart is in the imperial family.

古文：辅相二卫，对扬毗翼。
现代文：相辅二卫。同心佐助。
English: Mutually complementary two guards. Concentric Sasuke.

古文：操展文谋，雄奋武烈。
现代文：卫操展示谋略，卫雄奋发英勇。
English: Wei Xiong showed his strategy in the drill, and Wei Xiong fought bravely.

古文：承命会议，谘论奋发，昔桓文匡佐，功著周室，显名载籍，列赍备物。
现代文：秉承命令会同商议，咨询讨论振奋有为。从前齐桓晋文辅佐，功劳闻名于周室。显扬名声于典籍，赏赐各种物品。
English: Adhering to the order of consultation and discussion, the consultation and discussion were exciting and fruitful. Formerly, Qi Huan Jin's assistant, his achievements are famous in the Zhou Dynasty. He is famous in the classics, and he was awarded various items.

古文：大众乃动，照同灵集。
现代文：大众发动，熙熙攘攘如威灵相聚。
English: When the masses are mobilized, they come together in a bustling and boisterous manner.

古文：兴军百万，期不经日。
现代文：出兵百万，不过一天。
English: A million soldiers, but only for a day.

古文：兄弟齐契，决胜庙算。
现代文：兄弟齐心合力，决胜于庙堂算度。
English: The brothers joined their efforts and won the temple arithmetic.

古文：鼓噪南征，平夷险难。 
现代文：击鼓呼叫向南征伐，平定艰难险阻。 
English: The beating of the drum calls for the southward conquest and the pacification of difficulties and obstacles.

古文：又云： 二帝到镇，言若合符。
现代文：又说：二帝到镇守的地方， 言论如合符契。
English: He also said: "When two emperors come to a town, their words are like a contract.

古文：引接款密，信义不渝。
现代文：接待诚挚，信义不改。
English: The reception is sincere, and the sincerity does not change.

古文：会盟汾东，铭篆丹书。
现代文：会盟于汾水束，刻下丹书铁契。
English: The alliance was signed in Surabaya, and the ironclad contract was inscribed.

古文：永世奉承，慎终如初。
现代文：永久尊奉，谨慎终结如同起初。
English: Forever revered, caution ends as it began.

古文：契誓命将，精锐先驱。
现代文：立下誓言命令将领，精锐部队充任前锋。
English: Take the oath and command the generals, and the elite troops will serve as the vanguard.

古文：南救涅县，东解寿阳。
现代文：向南援助涅县，向东解救寿阳。
English: Aid Nie County to the south, rescue Shouyang to the east.

古文：窘迫之邑，幽而复光。
现代文：困迫的城镇，幽暗后再放光彩。
English: Troubled towns shine after dark.

古文：太原、西河，乐平、上党，遽遭寇暴，白骨交横。
现代文：叁愿、酉周，銮垩、上盏，突然遭受敌寇残暴，白骨纵横交错。
English: Xuan Zhan, Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zhou, Shang Zhan, suddenly suffered from the brutality of the enemy, the white bones criss-crossed.

古文：羯贼肆虐，六郡凋伤。
现代文：羯贼肆行暴虐，六郡凋敝损伤。
English: Thieves wreak havoc, six counties suffer damage.

古文：群恶相应，图及华堂。
现代文：各类恶人互相呼应，图谋祸及朝廷。
English: All kinds of evildoers echoed each other, plotting to bring disaster to the imperial court.

古文：旌旗轻指，羯党破丧。
现代文：二帝旌旗轻松指向，羯人党羽闻风丧胆。
English: The two emperors waved their banners with ease, but their followers were discouraged.

古文：遣骑十万，前临淇漳。
现代文：派遣骑兵十万人，向前靠近淇水漳水。
English: Send out a hundred thousand cavalry and advance to the water's edge.

古文：鄴遂振溃，凶逆奔亡。
现代文：邺城于是从溃败中振作，凶恶的叛逆四散逃亡。
English: Shicheng then recovered from the defeat, and the vicious rebels scattered and fled.

古文：军据州南，曜锋太行。
现代文：军队占据州城以南，锋芒闪耀太行。
English: The army occupies the south of the state capital, the edge shines too far.

古文：翼卫内外，镇静四方。
现代文：保卫内外，安定四方。
English: Safeguard both at home and abroad, and maintain stability in all directions.

古文：志在竭力，奉戴天王。
现代文：志在竭尽全力，侍奉拥戴天王。
English: He aspires to do his best to serve the king.

古文：忠恕用晖，外动亦攘。
现代文：忠诚宽恕显赫，对外有攘患举动。
English: Loyalty and forgiveness are conspicuous, and there is a tendency to act aggressively towards outsiders.

古文：于是曜武，振旅而旋。
现代文：于是炫耀武力，整队而归。
English: So they made a show of force and left in a body.

古文：长路匪夷，出入经年。
现代文：绵长道路不乎坦，出入时过一年。
English: The long road is not very smooth, and it takes more than a year to get in and out.

古文：毫毛不犯，百姓称传。
现代文：秋毫不相侵犯，百姓称赞。
English: Autumn did not encroach, and the people praised it.

古文：周览载籍，自古及今，未闻外域，奔救内患。
现代文：遍览典籍，从古到今。没有听说境外之人，奔赴解救内部患难。
English: Reading all the classics, from ancient times to the present. Not hearing of people outside the country, rushing to the rescue of internal difficulties.

古文：弃家忧国，以危易安。
现代文：抛弃家庭忧虑国家，以危险替代安全。
English: Abandoning family and national concerns, and substituting danger for security.

古文：惟公远略，临难能权。
现代文：惟有公正深远谋划，面临艰难能行权变。
English: Only a fair and far-reaching plan can bring about a change of power in the face of difficulties.

古文：应天顺人，恩德素宣。
现代文：奉承天道顺应人心，恩惠德行广为传扬。
English: Flattery is the way of heaven, conforming to the people's will, and benevolence and virtue are widely spread.

古文：和戎静朔，危邦复存。 
现代文：协和戎族安定北方，危难国度又再生存。 
English: The unification of the Korean and Japanese peoples stabilized the north, and the country in danger survived again.

古文：又云： 非桓天挺，忠孝自然。
现代文：又说： 不是桓帝天资卓越，忠诚孝顺出于自然。
English: He also said, "It is not that Emperor Kante's talent is outstanding, but that loyalty and filial piety come naturally.

古文：孰能超常，不为异端。
现代文：谁能超越常道，不做越轨行为?
English: Who can go beyond the norm and not commit deviant behavior?

古文：回动大众，感公之言。
现代文：感动大众，激励于公正之言。
English: Moved by the public, inspired by the words of justice.

古文：功济方州，勋烈光延。
现代文：功劳救助方国州郡，勋绩如光彩绵延。
English: Kudos to the rescuers of Guozhou County, whose achievements continue to shine.

古文：升平之日，纳贡充蕃。
现代文：太平时日，入朝贡奉充任藩国。
English: During the Taiping era, he paid tribute to the imperial court and served as a vassal of the domain.

古文：凭瞻銮盖，步趾三川。
现代文：瞻仰皇宫车驾，步履越过三川。
English: Drive past the Imperial Palace and walk across the Mikawa River.

古文：有德无禄，大命不延。
现代文：有德无禄，寿命不长。
English: Virtue without reward, life is not long.

古文：年三十有九，以永兴二年六月二十四日，寝疾薨殂。
现代文：三十九岁，在永兴二年六月二十四日，患病逝世。
English: He was thirty-nine years old. He died of illness on June 24 of the second year of Yongxing.

古文：背弃华殿，云中名都。
现代文：抛弃豪华殿堂，地为云中名都。
English: Abandon the luxurious palace and become a world-famous city in the clouds.

古文：国失惠主，哀感欷歔。
现代文：国中失去恩德君主，哀伤感慨叹息落泪。
English: When the country lost the Ende monarch, there was sorrow, lamentation and tears.

古文：悲痛烦冤，载号载呼。
现代文：悲痛辛酸，号哭呼叫。
English: Sorrow and bitterness, wailing and crying.

古文：举国崩绝，攀援靡诉。
现代文：全国伤心欲绝，恋恋不舍无处诉说。
English: The whole country is heartbroken, and there is nowhere to talk about being in love.

古文：远近齐轨，奔赴梓庐。
现代文：远近车辆，奔往墓地。
English: Cars zoomed by, heading for the cemetery.

古文：人百其身，盈塞门涂。
现代文：人们愿以己身相赎，堵塞大门。
English: People are willing to use themselves to atone for each other, to block the door.

古文：高山其颓，茂林凋枯。
现代文：高山变得光秃，茂密树林凋落枯萎。
English: The high mountains have become bare, and the thick forests have fallen and withered.

古文：仰诉造化，痛延悲夫！ 
现代文：仰面向苍天诉说，痛哭伤悲。 
English: On her back, facing the sky, she cried bitterly.

古文：又云：桓帝 忠于晋室，骏奔长衢。
现代文：又说：桓帝 忠于晋室，骏马奔驰遥远路途。
English: He also said: Emperor Kantei was loyal to the imperial court, and traveled a long way on horseback.

古文：隆冬凄凄，四出行诛。
现代文：隆冬寒冷，四出征伐。
English: Cold in the middle of winter, four expeditions.

古文：蒙犯霜雪，疹入脉肤。
现代文：遭受霜露雨雪，病入血脉体肤。
English: Suffering from frost, dew, rain and snow, the disease invades the blood vessels of the body.

古文：用致薨殒，不永桑榆。
现代文：以致逝世，寿命不长。
English: So he died, he didn't live long.

古文：以死勤事，经勋同模。
现代文：以死于国事，谋略功勋同为楷模。
English: To die in a state affair, strategize meritorious service is a model.

古文：垂名金石，载美晋书。
现代文：留名于碑刻，记载美事在晋朝史书。
English: His name was engraved on a monument, and his good deeds were recorded in the history books of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：平北哀悼，祭以丰厨。
现代文：平北将军哀悼，以丰厚物品祭奠。
English: We mourn the death of General Pingbuk and pay tribute to him with rich items.

古文：考行论勋，谥曰义烈。
现代文：考察行事评定功勋，谧号为义烈。
English: He was appraised for his meritorious deeds after the inspection, and was given the title of "virtuous martyr."

古文：功施于人，祀典所说。 
现代文：功绩施予人民，为祭祀礼仪制度所称道。 
English: It is praised by the sacrificial ritual system for bestowing merits on the people.

古文：又云： 桓帝经济，存亡继绝。
现代文：又说：桓帝经国济民， 使灭亡国度复存。
English: He also said, "Emperor Kuan's policy was to help the country and the people, and to restore the country that had been destroyed."

古文：荒服是赖，祚存不辍。
现代文：边地民众依赖，国祚保存不绝。
English: The people in the outlying areas rely on it, and the state seal has been preserved.

古文：金龟箫鼓，轺盖殊制。
现代文：金印龟钮排箫鼓鼙，车辆服饰不同常制。
English: Gilded tortoise button row gong gong gong, vehicle dress code is different.

古文：反及二代，莫与同列。
现代文：反推到二代，没人可与同列。
English: Back to the second generation, no one can be on the same level.

古文：并域嘉叹，北国感荣。
现代文：并州境内嘉许赞叹，北方民众感受荣耀。
English: The people in the northern part of the state have been praised and admired, and the people in the north have felt the glory.

古文：各竭其心，思扬休名。
现代文：各自竭尽忠心，思想传扬美名。
English: Each of them tried their best to be loyal and spread the good name of the ideology.

古文：刊石纪功，图像存形。
现代文：刻石纪功，绘制图像。
English: Carve stone records, draw images.

古文：靡辍享祀，飨以牺牲。
现代文：祭祀不绝，供奉纯色全体牲畜。
English: Sacrifices are incessant, and all pure-coloured livestock are offered.

古文：永垂于后，没有余灵。
现代文：永远留名后世，死后有余威。
English: His name will be remembered for generations to come, and his influence will live on after his death.

古文：长存不朽，延于亿龄。 
现代文：长存不朽，绵延亿万年。 
English: Immortal, lasting hundreds of millions of years.

古文：其颂又称：桓帝 金坚玉刚。
现代文：赞颂文字又称道：桓帝 如金玉般坚固刚强。
English: The praise text also praises the way: Emperor Kantei is as solid and strong as a golden ball.

古文：应期顺会，王有北方。
现代文：顺应期待时机，拥有北方。
English: Comply with the expectations of the time, own the north.

古文：行能济国，武平四荒。
现代文：德行能够治理国家，武力平定四方边荒。
English: Virtue can govern the country, and force can pacify the four corners of the country.

古文：无思不服，区域大康。
现代文：没有人不服从，境内大为康乐。
English: No one disobeys, and there is great recreation in the territory.

古文：世路纷纠，运遭播扬。
现代文：世道纷纭交错，遭遇颠沛时运。
English: The world is full of ups and downs, and we are facing a turbulent time.

古文：羯胡因衅，敢害并土。
现代文：羯胡利用缝隙，竟敢危害并州疆土。
English: Yan Hu took advantage of the gap and dared to endanger the state's territory.

古文：哀痛下民，死亡失所。
现代文：可怜下层民众，死亡失去处所。
English: Alas, for the lower classes, death has lost its place.

古文：率众百万，平夷险阻。
现代文：桓帝率领部众百万，平定险阻。
English: Emperor Kantei led millions of troops to quell the danger.

古文：存亡继绝，一州蒙祜。
现代文：使灭亡国度复存使断绝后嗣再续，一州得到祜护。
English: To restore the lost state, to continue the severed heirs, and to protect one state.

古文：功烈桓桓，龙文虎武。
现代文：功绩显赫如龙之文彩虎之威武。
English: His exploits are as illustrious as a dragon's or a tiger's.

古文：朱邑小善，遗爱桐乡。
现代文：朱邑微小善行，留下恩爱在桐乡。
English: Zhuyi's small good deeds left a legacy of kindness in Tongxiang.

古文：勋攘大患，六郡无囗。
现代文：功勋为攘除大患，六郡无。
English: He is credited with eradicating a major disease from six counties.

古文：囗悉之来，由功而存。
现代文：阙悉之来，由功绩而存在。
English: As we all know, we exist by merit.

古文：刊石勒铭，垂示后昆。 
现代文：刻石写下铭文，留给后代观看。 
English: inscribed in stone and left for future generations to see.

古文：时晋光熙元年秋也。
现代文：这时是晋国光熙元年秋季。
English: It was the autumn of the first year of the reign of Emperor Guangxi of Jin.

古文：皇兴初，雍州别驾雁门段荣于大邗掘得此碑，文虽非丽，事宜载焉，故录于传。
现代文：皇兴初年，雍州别驾雁门人段荣在大邗发掘得到这块碑，文辞虽不华丽，事情应该记载，所以收录在本传中。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's rise to power, the Yongzhou Beidou Wild Goose Gate team won the honor of excavating this monument in Dalat. Although the wording is not gorgeous, the matter should be recorded, so it is included in this biography.

古文：桓穆二帝并礼重操。
现代文：桓穆二帝都尊重卫操。
English: Both Emperor Kanmu and Empress Dowager Cixi respected Wei exercises.

古文：穆帝三年卒。
现代文：卫操在穆帝三年去世。
English: Wei Tao died in the third year of Mu Di.

古文：始操所与宗室乡亲入国者：卫勤，安乐亭侯；卫崇、卫清，并都亭侯；卫泥、段繁，并信义将军、都亭侯；王发，建武将军、都亭侯；范班，折冲将军、广武亭侯；贾庆，建武将军、上洛亭侯；贾循，都亭侯；李壹，关中侯；郭乳，关内侯。
现代文：开始同卫操一同进入国内的同宗乡亲：卫翘，封安乐亭侯；卫崇、卫清，都被封都亭侯；卫泥、段繁，都任信义将军、都亭侯；王发，任建武将军、都亭侯；范班，任折冲将军、广武亭侯；贾庆，任建武将军、上洛亭侯；贾循，封都亭侯；李壹，封关中侯；郭乳，封关内侯。
English: Fellow townsmen of the same family who began to enter the country with Wei Du: Wei Gao, Fong An Le Ting; Wei Chong, Wei Qing, were all appointed as Fong Du Ting; Wei Di, Duan Shang, were appointed as Xinyi General, Fong Du Ting; Wang Fa, appointed as Jianwu General, Fong Du Ting; Fan Ban, appointed as Oruchong General, Guangwu Ting; Jia Qing, appointed as Jianwu General, Shangluo Ting; Jia Xun, Fong Du Ting; Li Yi, Fongguan Zhonghou; Guo Yu, Fongguan Naihou.

古文：皆为桓帝所表授也。
现代文：都是桓帝所上奏授予的。
English: All of them were conferred by Emperor Kan.

古文：六修之难，存者多随刘琨任子遵南奔。
现代文：六脩变乱时，活下来的大多随刘琨的质子刘遵向南逃奔。
English: When the six counties were in turmoil, most of the survivors fled south with Liu Zong's proton Liu Zun.

古文：卫雄、姬澹、莫含等名，皆见碑。
现代文：卫雄、姬澹、莫含等人姓名，都记载在碑文中。
English: The names of Wei Xiong, Ji Xuan, Mo Han and others are all recorded in the inscription.

古文：雄字世远，澹字世雅，并勇健多计画，晋世州从事。
现代文：卫雄字世远，姬澹字世雅，都勇敢多谋，晋朝时任州从事。
English: Wei Xiong, known as "world-renowned," and Hime Xiong, known as "world-class," were both brave and resourceful, and were engaged in state affairs during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：既与卫操俱入国，桓帝壮其膂力，并以为将，常随征伐，大著威名。
现代文：和卫操一起进入国内后，桓帝赏识他俩的体力，都委任为将领，时常跟随征伐，威名大为传布。
English: After entering the country together with Wei Tao, Emperor Kuan appreciated the physical strength of both of them, appointed them as generals, often followed the conquest, and their prestige was widely spread.

古文：桓帝之赴难也，表晋列其勋效，皆拜将军。
现代文：桓帝奔赴国难，上奏晋室列举他俩的功勋，都被任命为将军。
English: Emperor Kuan rushed to the national disaster, reported to Jin's office, enumerated the merits of both of them, and both of them were appointed as generals.

古文：雄连有战功，稍迁至左将军、云中侯。
现代文：卫雄接连有战功，逐渐升到左将军、云中侯。
English: Wei Xiong had successive war exploits, and gradually rose to the left general, Yun Zhonghou.

古文：澹亦以勇绩著名，桓帝末，至信义将军、楼烦侯。
现代文：姬澹也以勇敢功绩闻名，桓帝末年，升到信义将军、楼烦侯。
English: Himeji is also famous for his brave exploits. In the last years of Emperor Kantei, he was promoted to Shinyi Shogun (信義将军).

古文：穆帝初，并见委任。
现代文：穆帝初年，都受信任。
English: In the first year of Mu Di, they were all trusted.

古文：卫操卒后，俱为左右辅相。
现代文：卫操去世后，二人都为左右辅佐的人。
English: After the death of Wei Tao, both of them were left and right assistants.

古文：六修之逆，国内大乱，新旧猜嫌，迭相诛戮。
现代文：六脩叛逆，国内大乱，新旧相猜疑，互相杀戮。
English: The Six Dynasties Rebellion, domestic turmoil, suspicion between the old and the new, killing each other.

古文：雄、澹并为群情所附，谋欲南归，言于众曰： 闻诸旧人忌新人悍战，欲尽杀之，吾等不早为计，恐无种矣。 
现代文：卫雄、姬澹都为众人所依附，谋划要回到南方，对众人说： 听说旧人忌惮新人强悍善战，想要全部杀死新人，我们不早日定下计策，恐怕没有人能活了。 
English: Wei Xiong and Hsi Yao, both of whom were supported by many people, planned to return to the south and said to the people: "I heard that the old people were afraid of the new people, who were strong and good at war, and wanted to kill all the new people. If we don't decide on a strategy soon, I'm afraid no one will be able to survive."

古文：晋人及乌丸惊惧，皆曰： 死生随二将军。 
现代文：晋国人和乌丸惊惶恐惧，都说： 无论生死都跟随二位将军。 
English: The people of Jin and the panic-stricken people of Wu Maru both said, "I will follow the two generals whether I live or die."

古文：于是雄、澹与刘琨任子遵率乌丸、晋人数万众而叛。
现代文：于是卫雄、姬澹和刘琨的质子刘遵率领乌丸、晋国人几万人叛变。
English: As a result, the protons of Wei Xiong, Ji Xuan and Liu Xuan, Liu Zun, led tens of thousands of people from Wu Maru and Jin to rebel.

古文：琨闻之大悦，率数百骑驰如平城抚纳之。
现代文：刘琨听说后大为高兴，率领几百骑兵赶到平城安抚接纳他们。
English: After hearing this, Liu Ye was very happy and rushed to Pingcheng with several hundred cavalry to appease and welcome them.

古文：会石勒攻琨乐平，太守韩据请救于琨。
现代文：遇石勒攻打刘琨的乐平，太守韩据向刘琨求救。
English: When Shi Le attacked Liu Ye's Leping, the grand marshal Han Zheng appealed to Liu Ye for help.

古文：琨以得雄、澹之众，欲因其锐，以灭石勒。
现代文：刘琨因得到卫雄、姬澹的部众，想利用他们的锐利，来消灭石勒。
English: Liu Ye, having obtained the followers of Wei Xiong and Hsi Yao, wanted to use their sharpness to eliminate Shi Le.

古文：雄、澹谏曰： 乱民饥疲，未可便用，宜休息观衅而动。 
现代文：卫雄、姬澹规劝说： 动乱的民众饥饿疲劳，不能马上使用，应该休息观察裂痕再行动。 
English: Wei Xiong and Ji Xuan persuaded: the people in turmoil are hungry and tired, they cannot be used immediately, they should take a break to observe the cracks and then act.

古文：琨不从，使雄、澹率众讨勒，琨屯广牧为之声援。
现代文：刘琨不听从，指使卫雄、姬澹率众讨伐石勒，刘琨驻扎在广牧为后援。
English: Liu Bei did not listen, and ordered Wei Xiong and Ji Xuan to lead the people to fight against Shiloh. Liu Bei was stationed in Guangmu as a backup.

古文：勒率轻骑与雄、澹战，澹大败，率骑千余，奔于代郡。
现代文：石勒率领骑兵同卫雄、姬澹交战，姬澹大败，率骑兵一千多人逃到代郡。
English: Shi Ler led the cavalry to fight with Wei Xiong and Hsieh Yao, Hsieh Yao was defeated, and more than a thousand cavalry fled to Dayi County.

古文：勒遣孔苌追灭之。
现代文：石勒派孔苌追击消灭了他们。
English: Shi Le sent Kong Yao to chase and destroy them.

古文：莫含，雁门繁畤人也。
现代文：莫含，是雁门繁时人。
English: Mokhan, is the wild goose gate Shanzhi people.

古文：家世货殖，赀累巨万。
现代文：家族世代经商，资产积累到万万。
English: Generations of the family have been in business, and assets have accumulated to tens of millions.

古文：刘琨为并州，辟含从事。
现代文：刘琨任并外史，征用莫含为从事。
English: Liu Xuan was appointed to be in charge of foreign affairs, and Mokhan was requisitioned to be in charge of foreign affairs.

古文：含居近塞下，常往来国中。
现代文：莫含居住靠近边塞，时常来往于国内。
English: Mokhan lives near the border and often travels within the country.

古文：穆帝爱其才器，善待之。
现代文：穆帝喜爱他的才干，很好地接待他。
English: Mu Di loved his talent and received him well.

古文：及为代王，备置官属，求含于琨。
现代文：等到做代王，设置各种属官，向刘琨求取莫含。
English: Wait until he becomes the acting king, set up various subordinate officials, and ask Liu Bei for anything.

古文：琨遣入国，含心不愿。
现代文：刘琨派遣他进入国内，莫含心中不情愿。
English: Liu Bei was reluctant to send him into the country.

古文：琨谕之曰： 当今胡寇滔天，泯灭诸夏。百姓流离，死亡涂地；主上幽执，沉溺丑虏。
现代文：刘琨开导他说： 当今胡寇势力大，占领了中原，百姓流离失所，死亡在泥途之中，主上被擒，陷落在敌寇中。
English: Liu Wei enlightened him, saying: Today, the Hu Cossacks are very powerful and have occupied the Central Plains, the people have been displaced and died on the muddy road, and the Lord has been captured and trapped among the enemy cossacks.

古文：唯此一州，介在群胡之间，以吾薄德，能自存立者，赖代王之力。
现代文：仅有这一个州，处在各胡族之中，因我的微薄德行，能够保持挺立，是依赖代王的力量。
English: This is the only state, among all the states of the Hu nation, that I, with my meager virtue, have been able to keep standing, relying on the strength of the acting king.

古文：是以倾身竭宝，长子远质，觊灭残贼，报雪大耻。
现代文：所以我俯下身子竭尽财宝，让长子到远地为人质，希望消灭凶残的贼寇，洗刷大耻。
English: So I bent down and exhausted my treasure, let my eldest son go to a distant land as a hostage, hoping to destroy the ferocious bandits and wash away the great shame.

古文：卿为忠节，亦是奋义之时，何得苟惜共事之小诚，以忘出身之大益。
现代文：你有忠诚的节操，也是奋起仗义的时候，怎么能顾惜共事的小诚意，忘记外出行事的大利益?
English: When you have the discipline of loyalty and are also righteous, how can you spare the small sincerity of working together and forget the great benefit of going out?

古文：入为代王腹心，非但吾愿，亦一州所赖。 
现代文：你前去做代王的心腹，不仅是我的心愿，也是一州所依赖的。 
English: It is not only my heart's desire, but also the state's, that you become the king's confidant.

古文：含乃入代，参国官。
现代文：莫含于是进入代地，参与国中大事。
English: Therefore, Mokhan entered the sub-district to participate in the national junior high school event.

古文：后琨徙五县之民于陉南，含家独留。
现代文：从来刘琨迁移五县的民众到井陉山以南，莫含的家族独自留下。
English: Ever since Liu Bei migrated the people of the five counties to the south of Jingye Mountain, Mo Han's family was left alone.

古文：含甚为穆帝所重，常参军国大谋。
现代文：穆帝十分器重莫含，时常参与军队国家大事的谋划。
English: Mu Di is very resourceful, and often participates in the planning of national events for the military.

古文：卒于左将军、关中侯。
现代文：任左将军、关中侯时去世。
English: He died when he was serving as Left General and Guan Zhong Hou.

古文：其故宅在桑乾川南，世称莫含壁，或音讹，谓之莫回城云。
现代文：他的旧房址在桑干以南，世人称为莫含壁，有的音节讹变，称为莫回城。
English: His old house site is in the south of Sangkang, known to the world as Mokhang Wall, and some syllables are transformed, called Mokhuicheng.

古文：子显，知名于时。
现代文：儿子莫显，知名于当时。
English: His son, Mo Xian, was famous at the time.

古文：昭成世，为左常侍。
现代文：昭成帝时，担任左常侍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shōnen, he served as Zui no tsunenari.

古文：显子题，亦有策谋。
现代文：莫显的儿子莫题，也有策略计谋。
English: Mo Xian's son Mo Tie also has a strategy.

古文：太祖使题与将军王建等三军，讨慕容宝广宁太守刘亢泥，斩之。
现代文：太祖派遣墓垄和将军旦芝等三军，讨伐摹窖宣的卢空太守刘亢涂，杀了他。
English: Emperor Taizu dispatched three armies, including Tomb Ridge and General Tan Zhi, to fight against Liu Xuntu, the governor of Lu, and killed him.

古文：徙亢泥部落于平城。
现代文：迁徙亢涂的部落到平城。
English: Tribes migrating from Zhoudou to Pingcheng.

古文：宝上谷太守驎，捐郡逃走，太祖追讨。题为大将，别出东道。
现代文：慕容宝的上谷太守慕容骈，放弃郡城逃走，太祖追击征讨，莫题任大将，另外从东路出兵。
English: Murong Bao's Kamitani Taishu, Murong Yao, abandoned the county seat and fled, while his great-grandfather pursued and recruited. He could not be appointed as a general, and sent troops from the east.

古文：以功赐爵东宛侯。
现代文：因功劳被赐予爵位东宛侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Dongwan due to his merits.

古文：及还京师，常与李栗侍宴。
现代文：等到回京城，时常和李栗侍奉饮宴。
English: When he returned to Kyoto, he often served banquets with Li Kuri.

古文：栗坐不敬获罪，题亦被黜为济阳太守。
现代文：李栗因不恭敬获罪，莫题也被贬为济阳太守。
English: Li Li was found guilty of disrespect and was demoted to Jiyang governor.

古文：后太祖欲广宫室，规度平城四方数十里，将模鄴、洛、长安之制，运材数百万根。
现代文：后来太祖想要扩建宫室，规划平城四面几十里，将模仿邺城、洛阳、长安的制度，运输材料几百万根。
English: Later, the great-great-grandfather wanted to expand the palace, planning dozens of miles on all sides of Pingcheng, imitating the system of Lucheng, Luoyang and Chang'an, and transporting millions of materials.

古文：以题机巧，徵令监之。
现代文：因墓厘机敏灵巧，征召他监督工程。
English: He was called in to supervise the project because of his dexterity.

古文：召入，与论兴造之宜。
现代文：召入宫中，和他讨论兴建所要做的事。
English: He summoned him to the palace to discuss with him what was to be done in the construction of the palace.

古文：题久侍颇怠，赐死。
现代文：莫题长久侍奉颇为懈怠，被赐令自杀。
English: Mo Qi, who had served for a long time, was rather slack and was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：题弟云，好学善射。
现代文：莫题的弟弟莫云，喜好学习善于射箭。
English: Mo Yun, Mo's younger brother, likes to study and is good at archery.

古文：太祖时，常典选曹，转给事中。
现代文：太祖时，时常掌管选曹，改任给事中。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, he was often in charge of the selection of sergeants, and was reassigned to the middle of things.

古文：以功赐爵安德侯。
现代文：因功劳赐爵位为安德侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of the Andes for his services.

古文：迁执金吾，常参军国谋议。
现代文：调任执金吾，时常参与军队国家大事的谋划。
English: He was transferred to the post of acting king and often participated in the planning of national events in the army.

古文：世祖之克赫连昌，诏云与常山王素留镇统万。
现代文：世祖攻克赫连昌后，诏令莫云和常山王元素留下镇守统万。
English: After the ancestor conquered Khe Lianchang, he ordered Mo Yun and Changshan King Element to remain as town guards.

古文：进爵安定公，加平西将军，后迁镇西大将军。
现代文：晋爵位为安定公，加授平西将军，后来升镇西大将军。
English: He was promoted to the peerage as the Prince of Stability, given the additional award of the General of Pingxi, and later promoted to the General of Zhenxi.

古文：时初并河西，人心未一，云抚慰新旧，皆得其所。
现代文：当时刚兼并黄河以西地区，人心不统一，莫云安抚慰问新旧民众，都处置得当。
English: At that time, the area west of the Yellow River had just been annexed, and people's hearts were not unified. Mo Yun appeased and comforted the new and old people, and handled everything properly.

古文：神中卒，谥曰敬公。
现代文：神庞年间去世，谧号为敬公。
English: He died in the Jin Pang era, and his nickname was Jing Gong.

古文：刘库仁，本字没根，刘虎之宗也，一名洛垂。
现代文：刘库仁，本来的表字为没根，是刘虎的同族，一名叫洛垂。
English: Liu Kuren, whose original name means "rootless," is a member of the same family as Liu Hu. His name is Lotrie.

古文：少豪爽，有智略。
现代文：年轻时豪侠爽快，有智慧谋略。
English: When he was young, the hero was cheerful and had a clever strategy.

古文：母平文皇帝之女。
现代文：母亲是平文皇帝的女儿。
English: His mother was the daughter of Emperor Pingwen.

古文：昭成皇帝复以宗女妻之，为南部大人。
现代文：昭成皇帝又把本族的女子嫁给他，他担任南部大人。
English: Emperor Akechi also married the daughter of his father's family to him and appointed him as Nanbu no Okimi.

古文：建国三十九年，昭成暴崩，太祖未立，苻坚以库仁为陵江将军、关内侯，令与卫辰分国部众而统之。
现代文：建国三十九年，昭成皇帝突然逝世，太祖没有登位，苻坚任命库仁为陵江将军、关内侯，命令他和卫辰分割国内部众而统领。
English: In the 39th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhaocheng died suddenly, and Emperor Taizu did not ascend to the throne. Yu Jian appointed Ku Ren as the general of Lingjiang and the governor of Guanai, and ordered him and Wei Chen to divide and rule the people in the interior.

古文：自河以西属卫辰，自河以东属库仁。
现代文：自黄河以西地区属于卫辰，自黄河以东地区属于库仁。
English: The area west of the Yellow River belongs to Weichen, and the area east of the Yellow River belongs to Kuren.

古文：于是献明皇后携太祖及卫秦二王自贺兰部来居焉。
现代文：这时献明皇后携带太祖和卫秦二王从贺兰部前来居住。
English: At this time, the Empress Keng Ming came to live from Helanbu with Emperor Taizu and Emperor Wei Qin II.

古文：库仁尽忠奉事，不以兴废易节，抚纳离散，恩信甚彰。
现代文：库仁竭尽忠心侍奉，不以废兴改变节操，安抚接纳流离散失的人，恩惠信义十分著名。
English: Ku Ren served loyally to the best of his ability, did not use waste and prosperity to change discipline, appeased and accepted the displaced and dispersed people, and was very famous for his benevolence and good faith.

古文：苻坚进库仁广武将军，给幢麾鼓盖，仪比诸侯。
现代文：苻坚升库仁为广武将军，赐给旌旗鼓鼙伞盖一类仪仗，礼仪和诸侯相等。
English: Zou Jian promoted Kuren to Guangwu General, and gave him a flag, drum and umbrella cover as a kind of ceremonial battle, and the etiquette was equal to that of the princes.

古文：处卫辰在库仁之下。
现代文：将卫辰地位列在库仁的下面。
English: He ranked the status of Wei Chen below that of Kuren.

古文：卫辰怒，杀坚五原太守而叛，攻库仁西部。
现代文：卫辰发怒，杀死苻坚的五原太守而反叛，攻打库仁的西部地区。
English: Enraged, Weichen rebelled against the Fifth Empress Dowager and attacked the western region of Kuren.

古文：库仁又伐卫辰破之，追至阴山西北千余里，获其妻子，尽收其众。
现代文：库仁又讨伐卫辰，打败了他，追击卫辰到阴山西北一千多里，擒获他的妻子儿女，全部收集他的部众。
English: Kuren fought against Yichen again, defeated him, chased Yichen more than a thousand miles to the northwest of Yinshan, captured his wife and children, and gathered all his subordinates.

古文：库仁西征库狄部，大获畜产，徙其部落，置之桑乾川。
现代文：库仁向西征伐库狄部，缴获大量牲畜，迁徙他们的部落，安置在桑乾川。
English: Kuren went west to conquer Kude, captured a large number of livestock, migrated their tribes, and settled in Sanggyeongcheon.

古文：苻坚赐库仁妻公孙氏，厚其资送。
现代文：苻坚将公孙氏赐给库仁为妻，以大量财物相赠。
English: Gong Jian was given to Liu Kuren's wife, Gong Sun, who accompanied him with a large sum of money.

古文：库仁又诣坚，加库仁振威将军。
现代文：库仁又前往苻坚那裹，苻坚加授库仁为振威将军。
English: Kuren also went to Shijian, and Shijian promoted Kuren to the rank of General Zhenwei.

古文：后慕容垂围苻丕于鄴，又遣将平规攻幽州刺史王永于蓟，库仁自以受坚爵命，遣妻兄公孙希率骑三千，助永击规，大破之，阬规降卒五千余人。
现代文：后来慕容垂在邺城包围苻丕，又派遣将领平规到蓟城攻打苻坚的幽州刺史王永，库仁自认为受苻坚的爵位任命，派遣妻子的哥哥公孙希率领骑兵三千人，协助王永攻打平规，将他打得大败，活埋平规投降的兵士五千多人。
English: Later, Mu Rongtui besieged Ying in Shicheng, and dispatched the general Pingbei to Shicheng to attack the Yuzhou scribe Wang Yong of Yujian. Ku Ren thought that he was appointed by the peerage of Yujian, and dispatched his wife's brother Gong Sunxi to lead 3,000 cavalry to assist Wang Yong in attacking Pingbei. He was defeated, and more than 5,000 soldiers who surrendered to Pingbei were buried alive.

古文：乘胜长驱，进据唐城，与垂子麟相持。
现代文：乘胜长驱直入，占据唐城，和慕容垂的儿子慕容麟相对峙。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, he drove straight in, occupied Tangcheng, and confronted Murong Lin, the son of Murong Dui.

古文：库仁闻希破规，复将大举以救丕。
现代文：库仁听说公孙希打败平规，又将要大举出兵去救助苻丕。
English: Ku Ren heard that Gongsun Xi had defeated Ping Gu and was going to send a large number of soldiers to rescue Yao.

古文：发雁门、上谷、代郡兵，次于繁畤。
现代文：征发雁门、上谷、代郡的兵士，驻在繁时。
English: Conscripted soldiers from Ganmen, Shanggu and Dai County, stationed in Shandong.

古文：先是，慕容文等当徙长安，遁依库仁部，常思东归，其计无由。
现代文：在这以前，慕容文等人将迁往长安，逃跑依附到库仁部落，时常思念回到东方，没有办法实现。
English: Before this, Murongwen and others would move to Chang'an, flee and attach themselves to the Kuren tribe, and often yearn to return to the East, but there was no way to do so.

古文：至是役也，知人不乐，文等乃夜率三郡人，攻库仁。
现代文：到这次战役，知道人心不乐意，慕容文等人就在夜晚率领三个郡的人，攻打库仁。
English: To this battle, knowing that the people were not happy, Murongwen and others led the people of three counties in the night to attack Kuren.

古文：库仁匿于马厩，文执杀之。
现代文：库仁藏匿在马圈里，慕容文擒获后杀了他。
English: Kuren hid in the stable and killed Murongwen after capturing him.

古文：乘其骏马，奔慕容垂。
现代文：慕容文骑着骏马，投奔慕容垂。
English: Murongwen rode his steed and rode to Murongdiao.

古文：公孙希闻乱，自唐城走于丁零。
现代文：公孙希听到变乱，从唐城逃跑到丁零。
English: When Gongsun Xi heard about the turmoil, he fled from Tangcheng to Dingzilu.

古文：库仁弟眷，继摄国事。
现代文：库仁的弟弟刘眷，继续掌管国内事务。
English: Liu Kuren's younger brother, Liu Zhen, succeeded Liu Kuren in charge of state affairs.

古文：白部大人系佛叛，眷力不能讨。
现代文：白部大人絮佛反叛，刘眷的兵力不足以讨伐。
English: The adults in Baibe rebelled against Shu Buddha, and Liu Xin's troops were not strong enough to fight back.

古文：乃引苻坚并州刺史张蚝击佛，破之。
现代文：就招引苻坚的并州刺史张蚝攻打絮佛，打败了他。
English: He invited Zhang Xuan, a prominent scholar of the Han Dynasty, to attack and defeat Xu Buddha.

古文：眷又破贺兰部于善无，又击蠕蠕别帅胏渥于意亲山，破之，获牛羊数十万头。
现代文：刘眷又在善无打败贺兰部，又在意亲山攻打蠕蠕的别部头领肺渥，打败了他，缴获牛羊几十万头。
English: Liu Xin also defeated the Horan faction in Zhenwu, and he was also concerned about the other faction's leader Wu Wu, who was concerned about the pro-Shan attack on Crum Crum, and defeated him, capturing hundreds of thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：眷第二子罗辰，性机警，有智谋，谓眷曰： 比来行兵，所向无敌，心腹之疾，愿早图之。 
现代文：刘眷的第二个儿子罗辰，性格机敏警惕，有智慧谋略，对刘眷说： 近来用兵，所向无敌，心腹之中的疾患，希望早加考虑。 
English: Liu Yan's second son, Luo Chen, who is quick-witted and alert, and has wisdom and strategy, said to Liu Yan: I have recently used soldiers, I am invincible, and I hope to consider the disease in my heart.

古文：眷曰： 谁也？ 
现代文：刘眷说： 是谁? 
English: Liu Yan said: Who is it?

古文：曰： 从兄显，忍人也，为乱非旦则夕耳。 
现代文：罗辰回答说： 堂兄刘显，是个残忍的人，早晚必定作乱。 刘眷不放在心上。
English: Luo Chen replied, "My cousin Liu Xian is a cruel person, and sooner or later he will surely cause trouble.

古文：眷不以为意。其后，徙牧于牛川，库仁子显，果杀眷而代立。
现代文：后来，迁徙牧场到牛，库仁的儿子刘显，果然杀死刘眷而代位。
English: Later, migratory pastures to cattle, Kuren's son, Liu Xian, indeed killed Liu Zhengyi and took his place.

古文：罗辰奔太祖，事在《外戚传》。
现代文：罗辰投奔太祖，事情记载在《外戚传》。
English: Luo Chen defected to his great-grandfather, and the incident was recorded in "The Tale of a Foreign Relative."

古文：显，本名丑伐，既杀眷代立，又欲谋逆，语在《太祖纪》。
现代文：刘显，本名丑伐，杀死刘眷代立以后，又要谋划作乱，记载在《太祖纪》。
English: After Liu Xian, whose real name was Ugwaba, killed Liu Zhen, he also plotted to create chaos, as recorded in the "Ancestor's Chronicle."

古文：太祖即位，显自善无南走马邑。
现代文：太祖即位，刘显从善无向南逃到马邑。
English: Liu Xian fled southward from Shanwu to Ma'iu when his great-grandfather ascended the throne.

古文：族人奴真领部来附。
现代文：本族人奴真率领部落来依附。
English: Nuzhen, a member of the tribe, led the tribe to attach themselves.

古文：奴真兄犍，先居贺兰部。
现代文：奴真的哥哥刘犍，先前居住在贺兰部。
English: Nuzhen's older brother, Liu Yao, previously lived in Helan.

古文：至是，奴真请召犍而让部焉。
现代文：到这时，奴真请求征召型壁而把部落让给他。
English: By this time, Nu Zhen asked for a conscription-type wall and gave him the tribe.

古文：太祖义而许之。
现代文：主担认为塑真有义气而准许了。
English: The supervisor thought that Shuxin had the spirit of loyalty and allowed it.

古文：犍既领部，自以久托贺讷，德之，乃使弟去斤遗之金马。
现代文：刘犍统领部落后，自认为长久依托贺讷，感激他，就派弟弟去斤送给他黄金马匹。
English: After Liu Ye took over the leadership of the tribe, he thought that he had been relying on Herne for a long time and was grateful to him, so he sent his brother to Jin to give him gold horses.

古文：讷弟染干因谓之曰： 我待汝兄弟厚，汝今领部，宜来从我。 
现代文：贺讷的弟弟逛王于是对圭丘说： 我接待你们兄弟优厚，现在你们统领部落，应该来归顺我。 
English: Then Han Na's younger brother, Han Wang, said to Gui Qu, "I have received your brothers well. Now that you are the leaders of the tribe, you should come and submit to me."

古文：去斤请之奴真。
现代文：去斤请求到躯真那裹劝说。
English: Go to Jin and ask for persuasion from the body.

古文：奴真曰： 父为国家附臣，世效忠贞。
现代文：奴真说： 父亲是国家的臣属，世代忠诚。
English: Nuzhen said, "My father was a subject of the state, and he was loyal from generation to generation.

古文：我志全名节，是故推让。
现代文：我立志保全名声节操，所以把部落推让给你们。
English: I'm determined to keep my reputation intact, so I'm ceding the tribe to you.

古文：今汝等无状，乃欲叛主怀贰。 
现代文：现在你们没德行，竟然要背叛主上怀有二心。 
English: And now are ye unprofitable, and require a double mind to be false to the Lord.

古文：于是杀犍及去斤。
现代文：于是杀死刘犍和去斤。
English: So he killed Liu Yuhe and went to Jin.

古文：染干闻其杀兄，率骑讨之，奴真惧，徙部来奔太祖。
现代文：染干听说奴真杀了哥哥，率领骑兵讨伐他，奴真畏惧，迁徙部落前来投奔太祖。
English: He heard that Nuzhen killed his brother and led the cavalry to fight against him. Nuzhen was afraid, and migrated to the tribe to join Taizu.

古文：太祖自迎之，遣使责止染干。
现代文：太祖亲自迎接他，派遣使者责备制止染干。
English: The great-grandfather met him in person and sent an envoy to reprimand him and stop him.

古文：奴真感恩，请奉妹充后宫，太祖纳之。
现代文：奴真感激恩情，请求送妹妹入后宫，太祖接受了。
English: Nu Zhen was grateful for the favor and asked to send his sister to the harem, which was accepted by the great-grandfather.

古文：后太祖讨显于马邑，追至弥泽，大破之。
现代文：后来太祖到马邑讨伐刘显，追赶到弥泽，将他打得大败。
English: Later, Taizu went to Ma'e to fight Liu Xian and chased him to Yazawa, where he was soundly defeated.

古文：卫辰与慕容垂通好，送马三千匹于垂。垂遣慕容良迎之。
现代文：卫辰和慕容垂来往友好，送马三千匹给慕容垂，慕容垂派遣慕容良迎接。
English: Wei Chen and Murong Diao were friendly with each other. They sent three thousand horses to Murong Diao, and Murong Diao sent Murong Liang to welcome them.

古文：显击败良军，掠马而去。
现代文：刘显打败慕容良的军队，掠取马匹后离去。
English: Liu Xian defeated Murongliang's army, plundered horses and left.

古文：垂怒，遣子麟、兄子楷讨之，显奔马邑西山。
现代文：慕容垂发怒，派遣儿子慕容麟、哥哥的儿子慕容楷讨伐他，刘显逃奔到马邑西部山中。
English: Furious, Murong sent his son, Murong Lin, and his brother's son, Murong Kai, to fight him. Liu Xian fled to the mountains west of Mayi.

古文：麟轻骑追之，遂奔慕容永于长子。
现代文：慕容麟率领轻装骑兵追击他，刘显于是到长子投奔慕容永。
English: Muronglin led the light cavalry to chase him, and Liu Xian sent his eldest son to join Murong Yong.

古文：部众悉降于麟，麟徙之中山。
现代文：部众全部投降慕容麟，慕容麟将他们迁到中山。
English: The entire club surrendered to Muronglin, who moved them to Zhongshan.

古文：显弟亢泥，事在《皇后传》。
现代文：刘显的弟弟亢婆，事情记载在《皇后传》。
English: Liu Xian's younger brother, Zi Hua, recorded the event in "The Story of the Empress."

古文：史臣曰：始祖及桓、穆之世也，王迹初基，风德未展。
现代文：史臣曰：始祖和桓帝、穆帝的时代，帝王业绩刚奠立根基，风范德行没有施展。
English: The historian said: In the era of the founding fathers, Emperor Kan and Emperor Mu, the foundation of the emperor's performance had just been laid, and the moral conduct had not been carried out.

古文：操、含托身驰骤之秋，自立功名之地，可谓志识之士矣。
现代文：卫操、莫含在奔驰骤急的时节归附，处于建立功名的地位，可以说是有志向见识的人。
English: It can be said that Wei Du and Mokhan are people with ambition and insight. They are in a position to build a reputation, and they are attached to the time of the sudden rise of Mercedes.

古文：刘库仁兄弟，忠以为心，盛衰不二，纯节所存，其意盖远，而并贻非命，惜乎！
现代文：刘库仁兄弟，秉性忠诚，无论盛衰没二心，纯洁节操所体现的，意义当很深远，却都遭受不测，可惜啊!
English: Liu Curen brothers, loyal by nature, no matter the ups and downs, no second thoughts, the meaning of purity and discipline is far-reaching, but they all suffer from accidents, it's a pity!

