古文：起强围大渊献，尽重光单阏，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年。陈临海王光大元年
English: a total of five years. Chen Linhai and Wang Guangda in the first year of the

古文：临海王光大元年
现代文：春季正月，癸酉朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the first month of spring.

古文：春，正月，癸酉朔，日有食之。尚书左仆射袁枢卒。
现代文：陈朝尚书左仆射袁枢去世。
English: Chen Zhaozhong's right-hand man Sho Yuan Zu passed away.

古文：乙亥，大赦，改元。
现代文：乙亥，陈朝大赦天下，改年号为光大。
English: Yi Hai, Chen Dynasty amnestied the world, and changed the year name to Guangda.

古文：辛卯，帝祀南郊。
现代文：辛卯，陈废帝到南郊祭祀。
English: Xinwu and Chen Kuaiyi went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：壬辰，齐上皇还鄴。
现代文：壬辰，北齐太上皇回邺城。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Qi Empress Dowager returned to Lucheng.

古文：己亥，周主耕籍田。
现代文：己亥，北周国主在藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: In Jihai, the Lord of the North Zhou Province held a cultivation ceremony in a rented field.

古文：二月，壬寅朔，齐主加元服，大赦。
现代文：二月，壬寅朔，北齐国主举行加冠的仪式，大赦全国。
English: In February, the ruler of Northern Qi held a crowning ceremony and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：初，高祖为梁州，用刘师知为中书舍人。
现代文：当初，陈武帝是梁敬帝的丞相，任用刘师知为中书舍人。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Chen Wu was the chancellor of Emperor Liang Jing, and appointed Liu Shizhi as the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：师知涉学工文，练习仪体，历世祖朝，虽位宦不迁，而委任甚重，与扬州刺史安成王顼、尚书仆射到仲举同受遗诏辅政。
现代文：刘师知学识广博擅长文学，熟悉朝仪礼制，在梁世祖时，虽然为官得不到升迁，但委任他的事情很重要，他和扬州刺史安成王陈顼、尚书仆射到仲举一起受先皇的遗诏辅政。
English: Liu Shizhi was well-versed in literature and was familiar with the ceremonial system of the imperial court. When Liang Shizhu was at the top, although he could not be promoted, his appointment was very important. He and Yangzhou's Prince Ancheng Wang Chen Qi and Shang Shubu were appointed jointly by the emperor's last will and testament.

古文：师知、仲举恒居禁中，参决众事，顼与左右三百人入居尚书省。师知见顼地望权势为朝野所属，心忌之，与尚书左丞王暹等谋出顼于外。
现代文：刘师知、到仲举常常住在宫里，参预决定许多事情。陈顼和三百名身边亲信进驻尚书省，刘师知看到陈顼的门第和权势为朝廷和民间所注目，心中妒嫉，和尚书左丞王暹等策划拟把陈顼排挤出尚书省。
English: Liu Shizhi, who often lived in the palace when it came to mediation, participated in the pre-decision of many things. Chen Xuan and three hundred of his closest confidants were stationed in Shangshu Province. Liu Shizhi was jealous when he saw that Chen Xuan's lineage and power were attracting the attention of the court and the people. Monk Xuan Zuo Wang Siam and others planned to push Chen Xuan out of Shangshu Province.

古文：众犹豫，未敢先发。
现代文：大家犹豫不定，不敢率先发难。
English: Everyone hesitates, not daring to take the lead.

古文：东宫通事舍人殷不佞，素以名节自任，又受委东宫，乃驰诣相府，矫敕谓顼曰： 今四方无事，王可还东府经理州务。 
现代文：东宫通事舍人殷不佞，一贯以维护名望气节为己任，加上在东宫任职，是皇帝亲自任命的，于是赶到尚书省假传圣旨对陈顼说： 现在天下无事，安成王可以回自己的东府管理州务。 
English: The courier of the East Palace did not care about the people, and always took it as his duty to maintain the reputation and prestige. In addition, he was appointed to serve in the East Palace by the emperor himself. Therefore, he rushed to Shangshu Province to pass on the holy will to Chen Xi and said: Now there is nothing wrong with the world, King Ancheng can return to his own East Prefecture to manage state affairs.

古文：顼将出，中记室毛喜驰入见顼曰： 陈有天下日浅，国祸继臻，中外危惧。
现代文：陈顼正准备离开尚书省，中记室毛喜赶来见他，说： 陈朝据有天下为时还很短，国家接连遇到大丧事，上上下下都感到担忧害怕。
English: Chen Xi was preparing to leave Shangshu Province, and Mao Xi, the chief secretary, came to see him and said: Chen's reign is still short, and the country has suffered a series of great tragedies. Everyone is worried and afraid.

古文：太后深惟至计，令王入省共康庶绩。今日之言，必非太后之意。
现代文：太后经过深思熟虑，才决定叫您安成王进尚书省共同兴举各种事功，殷不佞所说的，一定不是太后的意思。
English: After careful consideration, the Empress Dowager has decided to ask you to join with King Ancheng in promoting the study of calligraphy and to work together to accomplish various feats. What Yin Buxuan said is definitely not what the Empress Dowager meant.

古文：宗社之重，愿王三思，须更闻奏，无使奸人得肆其谋。
现代文：社稷的重任在身，希望您能三思，必须另行向朝廷奏报，不要使邪恶之徒的阴谋得逞。
English: I hope you will think twice before reporting to the Imperial Court, so as not to enable the evil plot to succeed.

古文：今出外即受制于人，譬如曹爽，愿作富家翁，其可得邪！ 
现代文：现在离开尚书省就会受到别人的牵制束缚，比如像曹爽那样，只愿当个富家翁，这怎能如愿！ 
English: Now, if you leave Shangshu Province, you will be constrained by others. For example, like Cao Shuang, you only want to be a rich man. How can this be true!

古文：顼遣喜与领军将军吴明彻筹之，明彻曰： 嗣君谅暗，万机多阙。
现代文：陈顼派毛喜和领军将军吴明彻商议，吴明彻说： 继位的国君正在居丧，日常纷繁的政务很多还没有着手。
English: Chen Xi sent Mao Xi to negotiate with the leading general Wu Ming Che. Wu Ming Che said: The heir to the throne is in mourning, and many of the day-to-day complex government affairs have not yet begun.

古文：殿下亲实周、邵，当辅安社稷，愿留中勿疑。 
现代文：殿下亲如周公、召公，应当辅助皇上安定国家，希望殿下留在尚书省，不必疑虑。 
English: The relatives of His Imperial Highness, such as Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, should assist the emperor in stabilizing the country. I hope that His Imperial Highness will stay in Shangshu Province without hesitation.

古文：顼乃称疾，召刘师知，留之与语，使毛喜先入言于太后。
现代文：陈顼于是假装生病，请刘师知来，留住他进行谈话，同时派毛喜先向太后禀告。
English: Chen Xi then pretended to be ill, asked Liu Shizhi to come, kept him for a conversation, and sent Mao Xi to inform the Empress Dowager first.

古文：太后曰： 今伯宗幼弱，政事并委二郎。
现代文：太后说： 现在伯宗皇帝年幼，政事都委托给二郎陈顼。
English: The empress dowager said, "Now that Emperor Bozong is young, all political affairs are entrusted to Jiro Chen Yao.

古文：此非我意。 
现代文：殷不佞所说的不是我的意思。 
English: That's not what I meant.

古文：喜又言于帝。
现代文：毛喜又去向陈废帝说这件事。
English: Mao Xi also went to tell Emperor Chen about this.

古文：帝曰： 此自师知等所为，朕不知也。 
现代文：陈废帝说： 这是刘师知他们自己的所作所为，朕并不知道。 
English: Chen Kuo-tai said, "This is Liu Shiji's doing, I don't know.

古文：喜出，以报顼。
现代文：毛喜回来报告给陈顼。
English: Mao Xi came back to report to Chen Yao.

古文：顼囚师知，自入见太后及帝，极陈师知之罪，仍自草敕请画，以师知付廷尉。其夜，于狱中赐死。
现代文：陈顼把刘师知囚禁起崐来，亲自进宫见太后和皇帝，极力陈述刘师知的罪行，自己起草了诏命请皇帝御批，把刘师知交给廷尉，这天夜里，在牢狱中把他赐死。
English: Chen Xi took Liu Shizhi prisoner, went to the palace in person to see the empress dowager and the emperor, tried his best to state Liu Shizhi's crimes, drafted his own edict to request the emperor's approval, and handed Liu Shizhi over to the court lieutenant. That night, he was put to death in prison.

古文：以到仲举为金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：任命到仲举为金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was appointed to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：王暹、殷不佞并付治。
现代文：王暹、殷不佞一同交送有关部门治罪。
English: Wang Siam and Yin Buyao were both sent to the relevant departments for criminal prosecution.

古文：不佞，不豁之弟也，少有孝行，顼雅重之，故独得不死，免官而已。
现代文：殷不佞是殷不害的弟弟，少年时对父母很孝顺，陈顼平素很看重他，所以唯独他没有被处死，只是被罢官而已。
English: Yin Bu Rong was Yin Bu Rong's younger brother. When he was a boy, he was very filial to his parents. Chen Yu Ping always thought highly of him. Therefore, he was not executed, but only dismissed.

古文：王暹伏诛。
现代文：王暹被处死。
English: Wang Siam was executed.

古文：自是国政尽归于顼。
现代文：从此以后国家大政都归于陈顼。
English: Since then, all major state affairs have been in the hands of Chen Xi.

古文：右卫将军会稽韩子高镇领军府，在建康诸将中士马最盛，与仲举通谋。
现代文：右卫将军会稽人韩子高，镇守幕府，在建康的诸多将帅中，部下的兵马最为强盛，曾经和到仲举联系共谋。
English: Han Zigao, the inspector of the Right Guard General Association and the town guard of the shogunate, was the most powerful of Jiankang's many generals, and his soldiers and horses were the most powerful.

古文：事未发。
现代文：这件事没有揭露。
English: The matter was not revealed.

古文：毛喜请简人马配子高，并赐铁、炭，使修器甲。
现代文：毛喜请陈顼选派士兵马匹给韩子高，并赐给他铁和木炭，供他修治兵器盔甲。
English: Mao Xi asked Chen Xi to send soldiers and horses to Han Zigao, and gave him iron and charcoal to repair his armor.

古文：顼惊曰： 子高谋反，方欲收执，何为更如是邪？ 
现代文：陈顼感到惊讶说： 韩子高参预谋反，正要把他抓起来，为什么反倒这样？ 
English: Surprised, Chen Yao said: Han Zi, a high-ranking staff member, was plotting a rebellion and was about to arrest him. Why did he do this?

古文：喜曰： 山陵始毕，边寇尚多，而子高受委前朝，名为杖顺。
现代文：毛喜说： 先帝的山陵刚修建完毕，边境的盗寇还很多，韩子高受前朝的委用，号称凭倚之材。
English: Mao Xi said: The mountains of the former emperor have just been completed, there are still many robbers on the border, and Han Zi Gao was commissioned by the former dynasty and was known as a reliable person.

古文：若收之，恐不时受首，或能为人患。
现代文：如果抓他，恐怕不能斩杀，或许变成祸患。
English: If they catch him, I'm afraid they won't be able to kill him outright, and he may become a scourge.

古文：宜推心安诱，使不自疑，伺间图之，一壮士之力耳。 
现代文：应当对他推心置腹安抚诱导，使他不产生怀疑，等到有机会再对付他，只要一个壮士的力量就够了。 
English: He should be coaxed, so that he does not have doubts, and wait until the opportunity to deal with him, as long as the strength of a strong man is enough.

古文：顼深然之。
现代文：陈顼非常同意。
English: Chen Yao agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：仲举既废归私第，心不自安。
现代文：到仲举被免职后回到住所，心里很不平静。
English: After he was relieved of his duties, he returned to his home feeling very uneasy.

古文：子郁，尚世祖妹信义长公主，除南康内史，未之官。
现代文：他的儿子到郁，娶文帝的妹妹信义长公主为妻，授南康内史的官职，他没有赴任。
English: His son, Zhu Yu, married Emperor Wen's younger sister, Princess Xinyi, and was appointed to the post of Nankang Inner Historian, but he did not take up the post.

古文：子高亦自危，求出为衡、广诸镇；郁每乘小舆，蒙妇人衣，与子高谋。
现代文：韩子高自己也感到有危险，请求离京镇守衡、广等州；到郁往往坐小轿，蒙上妇女的衣服，到韩子高那里去策划。
English: Han Zigao himself also felt in danger and asked to leave Beijing, Shuheng, Guangzhou and other provinces. When he went to Yu, he often took a sedan, put on women's clothes and went to Han Zigao to plan.

古文：会前上虞令陆昉及子高军主告其谋反。
现代文：恰巧前上虞令陆和韩子高军队的主将检举到郁谋反。
English: Coincidentally, the commander of Shangyu Linglu and Han Zi Gao's army had been reported to be plotting a rebellion.

古文：顼在尚书省，因召文武在位议立皇太子。
现代文：陈顼在尚书省，召集在位的文武大臣们商议立皇太子的事。
English: Chen Xi, in Shangshu Province, called together the reigning ministers of literature and armed forces to discuss the establishment of the crown prince.

古文：平旦，仲举、子高入省，皆执之，并郁送廷尉，下诏，于狱赐死，馀党一无所问。
现代文：清晨，到仲举、韩子高到尚书省，都被抓起来，连同到郁一并押送廷尉，诏令在狱中赐死，他们的余党一个也不追问。
English: In the early morning, Zu Zhongji, Han Zigao and Shang Shuxu were all arrested and sent to the imperial court together with Zu Yu. They were sentenced to death in prison, and none of their remaining party members were questioned.

古文：辛亥，南豫州刺史余孝顷坐谋反诛。
现代文：辛亥，陈朝南豫州刺史余孝顷以谋反罪被杀。
English: In Xinhai, the Chen dynasty assassinated Yu Xiaolong in southern Yuzhou for plotting treason.

古文：癸丑，以东扬州刺史始兴王伯茂为中卫大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：癸丑，陈朝任命东扬州刺史始兴王陈伯茂为中卫大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: At the same time, the Chen Dynasty appointed Chen Bomao, the king of East Yangzhou, as the general of the Middle Guards, the chief of the imperial guard and the third secretary of the Third Division.

古文：伯茂，帝之母弟也，刘师知、韩子高之谋，伯茂皆预之；司徒顼恐扇动中外，故以为中卫，专使之居禁中，与帝游处。
现代文：陈伯茂是废帝的同母兄弟，刘师知、韩子高的阴谋，陈伯茂都曾参预；司徒陈顼恐怕陈伯茂在朝内外煽惑，所以叫他任中卫，专门住在宫里，陪伴废帝出游居住。
English: Chen Bomao was the same-mother brother of Emperor Wotan. Liu Shizhi and Han Zigao plotted against him, and Chen Bomao participated in their plots. Emperor Wotan was afraid that Chen Bomao was instigating intrigues both inside and outside the court, so he had him serve as a bodyguard and live exclusively in the palace, accompanying Emperor Wotan on his travels.

古文：三月，甲午，以尚书右仆射沈钦为侍中、左仆射。
现代文：三月，甲午，陈朝任命尚书右仆射沈钦为侍中、左仆射。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 3rd month, the Chen Dynasty appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Shen Qin as the second-in-command and his left-hand man.

古文：夏，四月，癸丑，齐遣散骑常侍司马幼之来聘。
现代文：夏季四月，癸丑，北齐派散骑常侍司马幼之到陈朝聘问。
English: In the summer of April, the ugly, the North Qi faction rode to the Chen Dynasty to ask for help.

古文：湘州刺史华皎闻韩子高死，内不自安，缮甲聚徒，抚循所部，启求广州，以卜朝廷之意。
现代文：陈朝的湘州刺史华皎听说韩子高被处死，内心忐忑不安，便修造盔甲聚集徒众，安抚部下，上奏要求担任广州刺史，以窥测朝廷的意思。
English: When the Hunan governor of the Chen dynasty, Huayuan, heard that Han Zigao had been executed, he was deeply disturbed. He repaired his armor, gathered followers, pacified his subordinates, and demanded to be the governor of Guangzhou, in order to spy on the intentions of the imperial court.

古文：司徒顼伪许之，而诏书未出。
现代文：司徒陈顼假意答允，而没有下诏书。
English: The magistrate, Chen Xi, pretended to agree, but did not issue an edict.

古文：皎遣使潜引周兵，又自归于梁，以其子玄响为质。
现代文：华皎派使者暗中引来北周军队，自己又投奔后梁，以自己的儿子华玄响作为人质。
English: Hua Tuo sent an envoy to secretly attract the North Zhou army, and he himself fled to Houliang, taking his son Hua Xuan Xing as a hostage.

古文：五月，癸巳，顼以丹杨尹吴明彻为湘州刺史。
现代文：五月，癸巳，陈顼任命丹杨尹吴明彻为湘州刺史。
English: In May, Xi Jinping and Chen Rong appointed Danyang Yin Wu Mingche as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：甲午，齐以东平王俨为尚书令。
现代文：甲午，北齐任命东平王高俨为尚书令。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Northern Qi appointed Dongping Wang Gaoqi as Shang Shuling.

古文：司徒顼遣吴明彻帅舟师三万趣郢州，丙申，遣征南大将军淳于量帅舟师五万继之，又遣冠武将军杨文通从安成步道出茶陵，巴山太守黄法慧从宜阳出澧陵，共袭华皎，并与江州刺史章昭达、郢州刺史程灵洗合谋进讨。
现代文：司徒陈顼派吴明彻率领三万水军进取郢州，丙申，派征南大将军淳于量率领五万水军相继跟进，又派冠武将军杨文通从安成陆路向茶陵进兵，巴山太守黄法慧从宜阳进兵澧陵，共同攻袭华皎，并和江州刺史章昭达、郢州刺史程灵洗合谋进讨。
English: Szeto Chen Rong sent Wu Ming Che to invade Bozhou with 30,000 marines, Bishen to invade Bozhou with 50,000 marines led by the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Jun Yuryo, and sent the general of the Guanwu Army, Yang Wentong, to invade Chaling from Ancheng by land, and the governor of Bashan Province, Huang Fahui, to invade Fuling from Yiyang. They jointly attacked Huayu, and conspired with the governor of Jiangsu Province, Zhang Zhaoda, and the governor of Bozhou Province, Cheng Lingwu.

古文：六月，壬寅，以司空徐度为车骑将军，总督建康诸军，步道趣湘州。
现代文：六月，壬寅，任命司空徐度为车骑将军，总督建康的军队，从陆路进兵湘州。
English: In June, Ren Yin appointed Sikuo Xu Du as the cavalry general, and the army of Governor Jiankang marched into Hunan by land.

古文：辛亥，周主尊其母叱奴氏为皇太后。
现代文：辛亥，北周国主向母亲叱奴氏上皇太后尊号。
English: In Xinhai, the Lord of the Northern Zhou Kingdom scolded his mother and gave her the honorary title of the last empress dowager.

古文：己未，齐封皇弟仁机为西河王，仁约为乐浪王，仁俭为颍川王，仁雅为安乐王，仁直为丹杨王，仁谦为东海王。
现代文：己未，北齐封皇弟高仁机为西河王，高仁约为乐浪王，高仁俭为颍川王，高仁雅为安乐王，高仁直为丹杨王，高仁谦为东海王。
English: In the past, Gao Renji, the younger brother of the Northern Qifeng Emperor, was the king of the West River, Gao Ren Rong was the king of the Le Lang, Gao Ren Jian was the king of the Min River, Gao Ren Ya was the king of the An Le, Gao Ren Zhi was the king of the Danyang River, and Gao Ren Qian was the king of the East Sea.

古文：华皎使者至长安；梁王亦上书言状，且乞师；周人议出师应之。
现代文：华皎的使者到长安；梁王也上书说明情况，请求北周派军队支援；周朝人商议准备派军队答允对方请求。
English: Hua Tuo's envoys arrived in Chang'an; Liang Wang also sent a letter to explain the situation and request the north Zhou Dynasty to send troops to support; the Zhou Dynasty people discussed the preparations to send troops to meet the request of the other side.

古文：司会崔猷曰： 前岁东征，死伤过半。
现代文：司会崔猷说： 前年东征洛阳，军队死伤过半。
English: Secretary Cui Wei said: Last year, the Eastern Expedition to Luoyang, the army suffered more than half of the deaths and injuries.

古文：比虽循抚，疮痍未复。
现代文：近来虽然加以安抚，但遭受的创伤还没有平复。
English: Although recently pacified, the wounds have not yet healed.

古文：今陈氏保境息民，共敦邻好，岂可利其土地，纳其叛臣，违盟约之信，兴无名之师乎！ 
现代文：现在陈朝保境安民，和我们睦邻友好，怎么能贪图它的土地，接纳他们的叛臣，违背和对方盟约的信义，出动无名之师？ 
English: Now that the Chen Dynasty has secured its territory and people, and is a good neighbor and friend of ours, how can it covet its land, accept their traitors, violate the faithfulness of the treaty with the other side, and dispatch an unknown division?

古文：晋公护不从。
现代文：晋公宇文护不接受意见。
English: Jin Gongwu does not accept comments.

古文：闰六月，戊寅，遣襄州总管卫公直督柱国陆通、大将军田弘、权景宣、元定等将兵助之。
现代文：闰六月，戊寅，派襄州总管卫公直督领柱国陆通、大将军田弘、权景宣、元定等率领军队去帮助华皎。
English: In the intercalary month of June, Wu Yin sent troops led by Guo Lutong, commander of the Xiangzhou General Administration of Public Security, General Tian Hong, Quan Jing Xuan, and Yuan Ding to help Hua Tuo.

古文：辛巳，齐左丞相咸阳武王斛律金卒，年八十。
现代文：辛巳，北齐左丞相咸阳武王斛律金死去，终年八十岁。
English: Soon after, the Northern Qi Leftist Minister Xianyang Wu Wang Qilu Jin died at the age of eighty.

古文：金长子光为大将军，次子羡及孙武都并开府仪同三司，出镇方岳，其馀子孙封侯贵显者众甚。
现代文：他的长子斛律光为大将军，次子斛律羡和孙子斛律武都封开府仪同三司，出任州的地方长官，其他子孙被封侯而显贵的很多。
English: His eldest son, Zhaoliguang, was a great general, his second son, Zhaoluzhen, and his grandson, Zhaoluzhuang, were all given the title of prefect and three divisions, and served as local prefects of the state. Many other descendants were given the title of prince and became prominent.

古文：门中一皇后，二太子妃，三公主，事齐三世，贵宠无比。
现代文：斛律氏的门第中出了一个皇后，两个太子妃，娶了三个公主，服事北齐受到恩宠，三代无比。
English: A queen, two crown princesses, and three princesses married into the lineage of the Li Li clan. They have been favored to serve the North Qi, and the three generations are incomparable.

古文：自肃宗以来，礼敬尤重，每朝见，常听乘步挽车至阶，或以羊车迎之。
现代文：自孝昭帝以来，特别礼待尊敬，每当上朝拜见天子，常常准许乘用人推的车辆到宫殿的台阶前，或用羊拉的车去迎接他上朝。
English: Since the time of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi, he has been treated with special courtesy and respect. Whenever the emperor visits heaven, he is often allowed to use a vehicle pushed by a person to go to the front of the palace steps, or to use a car pulled by a sheep to greet him.

古文：然金不以为喜，尝谓光曰： 我虽不读书，闻古来外戚鲜有能保其族者。
现代文：然而斛律金并不为这种待遇而感到高兴，曾经对斛律光说： 我虽然不读书，但听到从古以来帝王的母族、妻族很少有能够保护自己亲族的。
English: However, Gong Li Jin was not happy with this treatment. He once said to Gong Li Guang: Although I do not read books, I have heard that since ancient times, the matriarchs and wives of emperors have rarely been able to protect their relatives.

古文：女若有宠，为诸贵所嫉；无宠，为天子所憎。
现代文：女的如果得到皇帝的宠爱，就会受到公侯权贵们的妒嫉；如果不得宠爱，就会被天子憎恨。
English: If a woman is favored by the emperor, she will be envied by the princes and dignitaries; if she is not favored, she will be hated by the Son of Heaven.

古文：我家直以勋劳致富贵，何必藉女宠也！ 
现代文：我家一直以功勋劳绩而得到富贵，何必依靠女儿受到皇帝的恩宠！ 
English: My family has always been rich through meritorious service. Why should I rely on my daughter to be favored by the emperor?

古文：壬午，齐以东平王俨录尚书事，以左仆射赵彦深为尚书令，数远为左仆射，中书监徐之才为右仆射。
现代文：壬午，北齐任命东平王高俨为录尚书事，左仆射赵彦深为尚书令，并省尚书左仆射娄定远为左仆射，中书监徐之才为右仆射。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Northern Qi appointed Dongping Wang Gaoqi as the recorder, the left-hand servant of the provincial recorder Zhao Yancheng as the recorder, and the left-hand servant of the provincial recorder Shao Dingyuan as the left-hand servant of the provincial recorder, and the Chinese recorder Xu Zhicai as the right-hand servant of the provincial recorder.

古文：定远，昭之子也。
现代文：娄定远是娄昭的儿子。
English: Rui Dingyuan is the son of Rui Zhao.

古文：秋，七月，戊申，立皇子至泽为太子。
现代文：秋季七月，戊申，陈朝立皇子陈至泽为太子。
English: In the autumn of July, Prince Chen Zhe, the son of Emperor Chen, became the crown prince.

古文：八月，齐以任城王湝为太师，冯翊王润为大司马，段韶为左丞相，贺拔仁为右丞相，侯莫陈相为太宰，娄睿为太傅，斛律光为太保，韩祖念为大将军，赵郡王睿为太尉，东平王俨为司徒。
现代文：八月，北齐任命任城王高为太师，冯翊王高润为大司马，段韶为左丞相，贺拔仁为右丞相，侯莫陈相为太宰，娄睿为太傅，斛律光为太保，韩祖念为大将军，赵郡王高睿为太尉，东平王高俨为司徒。
English: In August, the Northern Qi appointed Rencheng Wang Gao as the Grand Master, Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as the Grand Master, Duan Yu as the Left Grand Master, He Bairin as the Right Grand Master, Hou Mo Chen as the Grand Master, Zhai Rui as the Grand Master, Zhaoliguang as the Grand Master, Han Zu Rong as the General, Zhao Gu Wang Gaorui as the Grand Master, and Dongping Wang Gao Rong as the Grand Master.

古文：俨有宠于上皇及胡后，时兼京畿大都督，领军大将军，领御史中丞。
现代文：高俨受到太上皇和胡后的恩宠，当时兼任京畿大都督、领军大将军，领御史中丞。
English: Gao Jiong was favored by the Emperor and Empress Gu, and concurrently served as the Grand Governor of Gyeonggi Province, the leading general, and the leading historian.

古文：魏朝故事：中丞出，与皇太子分路，王公皆遥驻，车去牛，顿轭于地，以待其过；其或迟违，则前驱以赤棒棒之。
现代文：魏朝旧时的制度是：中丞外出时，和皇太子分路而行，王公们离他们很远时就要停车，把驾车的牛牵走，把车轭放在地上，等待他们通过；如果行动稍有迟缓就是违法，开道的前驱就用红色的棍棒打驱逐。
English: The old system of the Wei Dynasty was as follows: when the middle son was out, he and the crown prince went their separate ways. When the princes were far away from them, they had to stop the car, take away the driving oxen, and put the carts on the ground to wait for them to pass. If there was a slight delay in the action, it was illegal. The forerunners of the opening of the road were driven out with red sticks.

古文：自迁鄴以后，此仪废绝，上皇欲尊宠俨，命一遵旧制。
现代文：自从迁都到邺城以后，这种仪式已经废除，太上皇为了表示对高俨的尊重宠爱，下令恢复这种制度。
English: Since the capital was moved to Handan, this ceremony had been abolished, but the emperor, in order to show his respect and affection for Gao Gan, ordered the restoration of this system.

古文：俨初从北宫出，将上中丞，凡京畿步骑、领军官属、中丞威仪、司徒卤簿，莫不毕从。上皇与胡后张幕于华林园东门外而观之，遣中使骤马趣仗。
现代文：高俨刚离开北宫，就职中丞，凡是京畿的步骑、领军的属官、中丞和司徒的仪仗随从，都全部出动，太上皇帝和胡后在华林园东门外设置帷幕观看，派遣使者骑马疾驰到高俨的仪仗队那里。
English: As soon as Gao Gan left the North Palace and assumed the post of Vice-Commander, all the foot cavalry of Gyeonggi, the subordinate officers of the leading army, the Vice-Commander and the honor guard of the officers were all dispatched. The Grand Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager set up a curtain outside the east gate of the Waring Garden to watch, and sent messengers on horseback to gallop to Gao Gan's honor guard.

古文：不得入，自言奉敕，赤棒应声碎其鞍，马惊，人坠。
现代文：使者不得进入，自称是奉皇帝的命令而来的，手持红色棍棒的兵士应声打碎使者的马鞍，马受到惊吓，把使者颠下来。
English: The messenger was not allowed to enter, claiming to have come by order of the emperor. Soldiers armed with red clubs responded by smashing the saddle of the messenger. The horse was frightened and pushed the messenger down.

古文：上皇大笑，以为善，更敕驻车，劳问良久。
现代文：太上皇大笑，以为很好，还下令高俨停车。
English: The Empress Dowager laughed loudly, thought it was great, and ordered Takahata to stop.

古文：观者倾鄴城。
现代文：对他慰问了很久。
English: I felt sorry for him for a long time.

古文：俨恒在宫中，坐含光殿视事，诸父皆拜之。
现代文：全邺城的人都出来观看。高俨常在宫里，坐在含光殿办理政事，同宗族长辈都向他下拜表示尊敬。
English: People from all over Yunnan City came out to watch. Gao Yunnan was often in the palace, sitting in the Hall of Illumination to handle government affairs, and the elders of the same clan bowed down to him to show their respect.

古文：上皇或时如并州，俨恒居守。
现代文：太上皇有时去并州，高俨便常常在宫中留守。
English: Emperor Taejong sometimes went to the Annexed Provinces, and Gao Yao often stayed behind in the palace.

古文：每送行，或半路，或至晋阳乃还。
现代文：给太上皇送行时，或送到半路，或送到晋阳才回宫。
English: When escorting the Emperor, they were either sent halfway or sent to Jinyang before returning to the palace.

古文：器玩服饰，皆与齐主同，所须悉官给。
现代文：他的用具服饰，都和北齐国主的一般，需用的东西都由官府供给。
English: His equipment and clothing are the same as those of the Northern Qi sovereign, and everything he needs is provided by the government.

古文：尝于南宫见新冰早李，还，怒曰： 尊兄已有，我何竟无！ 
现代文：曾经在北齐国主所住的南宫见到刚送来的冰镇的李子，回去后，勃然大怒说： 我的哥哥有这个，我为什么却没有！ 
English: Once in the Southern Palace, where the ruler of Northern Qi lived, he saw the freshly delivered iced plums. After returning, he flew into a rage and said: My brother has this, why don't I have it!

古文：自是齐主或先得新奇，属官及工人必获罪。
现代文：从此以后北齐国主比他先得到新奇的东西，属官和工匠一定会获罪。
English: From then on, officials and craftsmen would be punished if the ruler of Northern Qi got something new before him.

古文：俨性刚决，尝言于上皇曰： 尊兄懦，何能帅左右！ 
现代文：高俨性情刚愎果断，曾对太上皇说： 哥哥懦弱，怎么能统率左右！ 
English: Gao Yao's character was resolute and strong-willed. He once said to the Empress Dowager: My brother is weak, how can he lead the country?

古文：上皇每称其才，有废立意，胡后亦劝之，既而中止。
现代文：太上皇往往称赞他的才能，有废高纬立高俨的意思，胡后也劝他这样做，但不久就中止了这个想法。
English: The Empress Dowager often praised his talent, with the intention of abolishing high latitude and establishing high latitude, and the Empress Dowager also advised him to do so, but soon stopped this idea.

古文：华皎遣使诱章昭达，昭达执送建康。
现代文：华皎派使者去劝诱章昭达，被章昭达捉住送到建康。
English: Hua Tuo sent an envoy to persuade Zhang Zhaoda to seduce him, but Zhang Zhaoda caught him and sent him to Jiankang.

古文：又诱程灵洗，灵洗斩之。
现代文：又派使者去劝诱程灵洗，被程灵洗杀死。
English: He also sent an envoy to persuade Cheng Lingbai, who was killed by Cheng Lingbai.

古文：皎以武州居其心腹，遣使旅都督陆子隆，子隆不从；遣兵攻之，不克。
现代文：华皎因为武州是他的心腹要地，派使者去劝诱武州都督陆子隆，陆子隆不肯听从；华皎派军队去进攻，也没有攻克。
English: Because Wuzhou was an important place in his heart, Hua Wei sent an envoy to persuade the Wuzhou governor, Lu Zilong. Lu Zilong refused to listen; Hua Wei sent an army to attack, but did not conquer.

古文：巴州刺史戴僧朔等并隶于皎，长沙太守曹庆等，本隶皎下，遂为之用。
现代文：巴州刺史戴僧朔等都隶属华皎，长沙太守曹庆等人，原先也隶属华皎，因此都为华皎效命。
English: Bazhou Zhi Shi Dai monk Shuo and others are all subordinate to Huayu, Changsha Governor Cao Qing and others were originally also subordinate to Huayu, so they all work for Huayu.

古文：司徒顼恐上流守宰皆附之，乃曲赦湘、巴二州。
现代文：司徒陈顼担心上游一带的郡守地方官都归附华皎，便特别赦免了湘、巴二州。
English: Because of the fear that the county magistrates in the upstream area would all be attached to Huayu, the chief magistrate Chen Wei specially pardoned Hunan and Bajiao.

古文：九月，乙巳，悉诛皎家属。
现代文：九月，乙巳，把华皎的家属全部处死。
English: In September, the emperor executed all of Hua Tuo's family members.

古文：梁以皎为司空，遣其柱国王操将兵二万会之。
现代文：后梁任命华皎为司空，派柱国王操领兵二万去援助他。
English: Hou Liang appointed Hua Tuo as Siku, and sent the pillar king to lead twenty thousand soldiers to assist him.

古文：周权景宣将水军，元定将陆军，卫公直总之，与皎俱下。淳于量军夏口，直军鲁山，使元定以步骑数千围郢州。
现代文：北周权景宣率领水军，元定率领陆军，由卫公宇文直总辖，和华皎的军队一起顺流而下，淳于量驻军夏口，宇文直驻军鲁山，元定以几千名步、骑兵包围郢州。
English: Northern Zhou Quan Jing Xuan led the navy, and Yuan Ding led the army. He was under the command of the general of the Imperial Guards, Uwen Zhi, and went down the river with the army of Huayu. Jun Yu stationed troops in Xia Kou, Uwen Zhi stationed troops in Lushan, and Yuan Ding surrounded Luzhou with several thousand infantry and cavalry.

古文：皎军于白螺，与吴明彻等相持。
现代文：华皎在白螺驻军，和吴明彻的陈朝军队互相钳制。
English: Huayu garrisoned troops in Bailuo, and Wu Mingche's Chen Dynasty troops fought against each other.

古文：徐度、杨文通由岭路袭湘州，尽获其所留军士家属。
现代文：陈朝的徐度、杨文通从陆路奔袭湘州，把华皎留在湘州的军士家属全部俘虏。
English: Xu Du and Yang Wentong of the Chen Dynasty raided Hunan Province by land, and took all the family members of the sergeant who left Hua Wei in Hunan Province as prisoners.

古文：皎自巴陵与周、梁水军顺流乘风而下，军势甚盛，战于沌口。
现代文：华皎从巴陵与北周、后梁的水军顺流乘风西下，军势很强盛，在沌口和陈崐朝军队发生战斗。
English: From Baling to Beizhou and Houliang, Huaying's naval forces sailed westward with the wind. The army was very strong, and there was a battle with the army of Chen Yichang in Chaokou.

古文：量、明彻募军中小舰，多赏金银，令先出当西军大舰受其拍；西军诸舰发拍皆尽，然后量等以大舰拍之，西军舰皆碎，没于中流。
现代文：淳于量、吴明彻募集了军队中的小船，赏给许多金银，命令先行出发承受北周、后梁水军大船上 拍竿 的攻击；等对方船上 拍竿 发射的石块，淳于量等便用大船上的 拍竿 向对方进攻，北周、后梁的大船都被 拍竿 击破，沉没在沌口中游。
English: Chun Yu Quan and Wu Ming Che recruited small boats from the army, rewarded them with a lot of gold and silver, and ordered them to go first to withstand the attack of the batons on the big ships of the North Zhou and Back Liang navy; waiting for the stones launched by the batons on the other side's ship, Chun Yu Quan and others attacked the other side with the batons on the big ship, and the big ships of the North Zhou and Back Liang were broken by the batons and sank in the middle of Chaokou.

古文：西军又以舰载薪，因风纵火。俄而风转，自焚，西军大败。
现代文：北周、后梁的军队又用船装载了乾柴，借风力纵火引向对方，不久风向转变，火烧到自己，北周、后梁的军队大败。
English: The troops of Beizhou and Houliang loaded a boat with dried firewood and used the wind to set fire to the other side. Soon the wind changed direction and the fire burned itself. The troops of Beizhou and Houliang were defeated.

古文：皎与戴僧朔单舸走，过巴陵，不敢登岸，径奔江陵；卫公直亦奔江陵。
现代文：华皎和戴僧朔乘一只船逃走，路过巴陵，不敢靠岸，直奔江陵，卫公宇文直也奔向江陵。
English: Hua Tuo and Dai Sangshuo fled in a boat, passing Baling, not daring to dock, and headed straight for Gangneung. Wei Gong and Wu Wenzhi also rushed to Gangneung.

古文：元定孤军，进退无路，斫竹开径，且战且引。
现代文：元定的孤军，进退无路，砍断竹子开出道路，且战且退，想退到巴陵。
English: The original lone army, no way to advance or retreat, cut the bamboo to open the road, and fought and retreated, wanting to retreat to Baling.

古文：欲趣巴陵，巴陵已为徐度等所据，度等遣使伪与结盟，许纵之还国；定信之，解仗就度，度执之，尽俘其众，并擒梁大将军李广。
现代文：这时巴陵已经被徐度等所占领，徐度等派使者假装愿意和他结盟，答允放他回北周；元定相信了，解除了武装归顺徐度，徐度捉住他，并俘虏了元定的全部军队，还擒获了后梁的大将军李广。
English: At this time, Baling had already been occupied by Xu Du and others. Xu Du and others sent an envoy to Geng Liang pretending to be willing to ally with him and promising to let him return to North Zhou. Geng Ding believed him, disarmed and surrendered to Shun Xu Du. Xu Du caught him and captured all of Geng Du's army. He also captured Li Guang, the general of Houliang.

古文：定愤恚而卒。
现代文：元定愤怒而死。
English: He died in a fit of rage.

古文：皎党曹庆等四下馀人并伏诛。
现代文：华皎的余党曹庆等四十多人都被杀。
English: More than forty people, including Cao Qing, a member of Hua Wei's Yu Party, were killed.

古文：唯以岳阳太守章昭裕，昭达之弟，桂阳太守曹宣，高祖旧臣，衡阳内史汝阴任忠，尝有密启，皆宥之。
现代文：只有岳阳太守章昭裕因为是章昭达的弟弟，桂阳太守曹宣是陈朝高祖时的老臣，衡阳内史汝阴任忠曾经向朝廷上过密启，这三人被宽恕免罪。
English: Only Yueyang Daju Zhang Zhaoyu, because he was the younger brother of Zhang Zhaoda, Guiyang Daju Cao Xuan, who was an old retainer of the Chen Dynasty's Gao Zu, and Hengyang Naishi Ruyin Renzhong, who had submitted secret revelations to the imperial court, were pardoned and exonerated.

古文：吴明彻乘胜攻梁河东，拔之。
现代文：吴明彻乘胜攻克后梁的河东郡。
English: Wu Mingcher took advantage of the victory to conquer the back of Liang's Hedong County.

古文：周卫公直归罪于梁柱国殷亮；梁主知非其罪，然不敢违，遂诛之。
现代文：北周卫公宇文直把失败归罪于后梁的柱国殷亮；后梁明帝虽然明白不是殷亮的罪过，因为不敢违抗宇文直的意志，便把他杀死。
English: The Northern Zhou general Uwenzhi blamed the defeat on Houliang's vassal Yinliang; Houliang Mingdi, although he understood that it was not Yinliang's fault, because he did not dare to defy the will of Uwenzhiang, killed him.

古文：周与陈既交恶，周沔州刺史裴宽白襄州总管，请益戍兵，并迁城于羊蹄山以避水。
现代文：北周和陈朝既关系破裂，互相仇视，北周的沔州刺史裴宽向襄州总管报告，请求增加卫戍的军队，并把城池迁到羊蹄山以远离水边。
English: The relationship between the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Chen Dynasty had broken down and they hated each other. Bei Zhou's governor of Zhangzhou, Shi Pei Kuan, reported to the governor of Xiangzhou to request an increase in the garrison's army and to move the city to Mount Yotei to be away from the water's edge.

古文：总管兵未至，程灵洗舟师奄至城下。
现代文：襄州总管的援军还没到，程灵洗的水军船队已经来到城下。
English: The reinforcements of the Xiangzhou General Administration have not yet arrived, and the naval fleet of Cheng Ling Zai has already come to the city.

古文：会大雨，水暴涨，灵洗引大舰临城发拍，击楼堞皆碎，矢石昼夜攻之三十馀日；陈人登城，宽犹帅众执短兵拒战；又二日，乃擒之。
现代文：正遇天降大雨，河水猛涨，程灵洗把大船驶到城边用 拍竿 发起攻击，把城上的矮墙都打碎了，又用箭和石块攻打了三十多天；陈朝军队登上城墙，裴宽还率领军队用短兵器抵抗；过了两天，裴宽被擒。
English: It was raining heavily and the river was raging. Cheng Lingzhao launched an attack by sailing a large ship to the edge of the city with a paddle, smashed the low walls of the city, and attacked with arrows and stones for more than 30 days. Chen's army boarded the city wall, and Pei Kuan also led the army to resist with short weapons. Two days later, Pei Kuan was captured.

古文：丁巳，齐上皇如晋阳。
现代文：丁巳，北齐太上皇帝去晋阳。
English: Soon after, the Northern Qi Empress Dowager went to Jinyang.

古文：山东水，饥，僵尸满道。
现代文：山东发生水灾、饥荒，道路上都是尸体。
English: Floods, famine in Shandong, dead bodies on the roads.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，帝享太庙。
现代文：冬季十月，甲申，陈废帝到太庙祭祀祖宗。
English: In the winter of October, Jiashen, Chen Kuaiyi went to the Imperial Temple to worship the ancestors.

古文：十一月，戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，戊戌朔，出现日食。
English: In November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙午，齐大赦。
现代文：丙午，北齐大赦全国。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, North Qi issued a nationwide amnesty.

古文：癸丑，周许穆公宇文贵自突厥还，卒于张掖。
现代文：癸丑，北周许穆公宇文贵从突厥回朝，中途死在张掖。
English: Ugly, Northern Zhou Xu Mu Gong Yu Wengui returned to the North from Turkey, and died in Zhangye.

古文：齐上皇还鄴。
现代文：北齐太上皇回邺城。
English: The Northern Qi Empress Dowager returned to Lucheng.

古文：十二月，周晋公护母卒，诏起，令视事。
现代文：十二月，北周晋公宇文护的母亲死去，周武帝下诏让他不必守丧，叫他就职治事。
English: In December, the mother of Northern Zhou Jin Gongwu Wenju died. Emperor Zhou Wu issued an edict that he did not need to attend the funeral, and told him to return to his duties.

古文：齐秘书监祖珽，与黄门侍郎刘逖友善。
现代文：北齐秘书监祖，和黄门侍郎刘逖关系很好。
English: He was the secretary of Northern Qi and had a good relationship with the Yellow Gate's steward Liu Xuan.

古文：珽欲求宰相，乃疏赵彦深、元文遥、和士开罪状，令逖奏之，逖不敢通。彦深等闻之，先诣上皇自陈。
现代文：祖想做宰相，便上疏陈述赵彦深、元文遥、和士开的罪状，叫刘逖向太上皇奏报，刘逖不敢启奏；赵彦深等人听到后，自己先到太上皇那里申述情况。
English: Zou wanted to be the prime minister, so he went to Shang Zou to state the charges against Zhao Yanshen, Yuan Wenyao, and Shikai, and asked Liu Xuan to report to the Empress Dowager. Liu Xuan did not dare to open the report; after hearing Zhao Yanshen and others, he first went to the Empress Dowager to report the situation.

古文：上皇大怒，执珽，诘之，珽因陈士开、文遥、彦深等朋党、弄权、卖官、鬻狱事。
现代文：太上皇勃然大怒，把祖抓来，亲自审问，祖说出和士开、元文遥、赵彦深等人拉帮结党、玩弄权术、出卖官职、办狱受贿的事实。
English: The Retired Emperor flew into a rage, arrested Zu and interrogated him in person. Zu revealed the facts that He Shikai, Yuan Wenyao, Zhao Yanshen and others helped to form the party, played power games, sold official positions, ran prisons and accepted bribes.

古文：上皇曰： 尔乃诽谤我！ 
现代文：太上皇说： 你是在诽谤我！ 
English: The Empress Dowager said: You are slandering me!

古文：珽曰： 臣不敢诽谤，陛下取人女。 
现代文：祖说： 臣不敢诽谤，因为陛下娶了人家的女儿。 
English: The ancestor said, "The vassal dared not slander you, because your majesty married someone else's daughter."

古文：上皇曰： 我以其饥馑，收养之耳。 
现代文：太上皇说： 我因为她们遭受灾荒饥馑，所以才收养她们。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "I adopted them because they suffered from natural disasters, famine, and famine.

古文：珽曰： 何不开仓振给，乃买入后宫乎？ 
现代文：祖说： 那为什么不开粮仓赈济粮食，反把她们买到后宫？ 
English: The ancestor said, "Then why don't you open a granary to save grain and buy them for the harem?"

古文：上皇益怒，以刀环筑其口，鞭杖乱下，将扑杀之。
现代文：太上皇更加恼怒，用刀把的铁环凿他的嘴，用鞭子棍子乱打，要把他打死。
English: The empress dowager was even more enraged. She chiseled his mouth with the iron ring of the sword handle and beat him with the whip stick, intending to beat him to death.

古文：珽呼曰： 陛下勿杀臣，臣为陛下合金丹。 
现代文：祖大叫说： 陛下不要杀臣，臣能给陛下炼金丹。 
English: Zu Da shouted, "Your Majesty, don't kill your vassal. Your vassal can give your Majesty alchemy.

古文：遂得少宽。
现代文：这才稍为缓和。
English: That's a bit of a relief.

古文：珽曰： 陛下有一范增不能用。 
现代文：祖说： 陛下有一个象范增那样的人却不能用他。 
English: The ancestor said, "Your Majesty has a man like Fan Zeng, but you can't use him.

古文：上皇又怒曰： 尔自比范增，以我为项羽邪？ 
现代文：太上皇又大怒说： 你把自己比作范增，把我比作项羽吗？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said angrily, "Are you comparing yourself to Fan Zeng and me to Xiang Yu?

古文：珽曰： 项羽布衣，帅乌合之众，五年而成霸业。
现代文：祖说： 项羽出身布衣，率领乌合之众，用五年时间而成就霸业。
English: The ancestor said: Xiang Yu was born in Buyi, led the rabble, and achieved hegemony in five years.

古文：陛下藉父兄之资，才得至此，臣以为项羽未易可轻。 
现代文：陛下靠了父兄的地位、声望，才有今天，臣以为不能轻视项羽。 
English: His Majesty relied on his father's and brother's status and reputation to get to where he is today, so I don't think he can look down on Xiang Yu.

古文：上皇愈怒，令以土塞其口。
现代文：太上皇愈加震怒，叫人用土塞在他嘴里。
English: The Empress Dowager became more and more furious, and had him stuffed in the mouth with soil.

古文：珽且吐且言，乃鞭二百，配甲坊，寻徙光州，敕令牢掌。
现代文：祖边吐边说，被鞭打二百，发配甲坊做工，不久又把他迁到光州，命令他做 牢掌 。
English: "He was whipped two hundred lashes and sent to work in an armoury. Soon after, he was transferred to Gwangju and ordered to work as a jailer.

古文：别驾张奉福曰： 牢者，地牢也。 
现代文：别驾张奉福说： 牢，就是地牢。 
English: Don't let Zhang Fengfu say: "A prison is a dungeon."

古文：乃置地牢中，桎梏不离身；夜以芜菁子为烛，眼为所熏，由是失明。
现代文：便把他囚在地牢里，戴上手铐脚镣；晚上点燃蔓菁子油代替蜡烛，眼睛被烟火所熏，从此失明。
English: They imprisoned him in a dungeon, handcuffed him and shackled him; in the evening they lit oil of cranberry instead of candles, his eyes were smoked by the pyrotechnics, and he lost his sight.

古文：齐七兵尚书毕义云为治酷忍，非人理所及，于家尤甚。
现代文：北齐七兵尚书毕义云，治下非常残酷，超乎人理，对家人更是如此。
English: The Beiqi Seven Soldiers were very cruel and unreasonable, especially to their families.

古文：夜为盗所杀，遗其刀，验之，其子善昭所佩刀也。
现代文：夜晚，被人杀死，现场留下刀子，经过查证，是他儿子毕善昭的佩刀。
English: At night, he was killed and a knife was left at the scene. After verification, it was his son Bi Shan Zhao's sword.

古文：有司执善昭，诛之。
现代文：官府逮捕了毕善昭，将他处死。
English: The government arrested Bi Sheng Zhao and executed him.

古文：临海王光大二年
现代文：光大二年
English: 2nd year student at Gwangju University

古文：春，正月，己亥，安成王顼进位太傅，领司徒，加殊礼。
现代文：春季正月，己亥，安成王陈顼进位太傅，领司徒，加特殊的礼遇。
English: In the first month of spring, Ji Hai, Ancheng Wang Chen Hao was promoted to Taifu, the leader of the scholars, and received special courtesy.

古文：辛丑，周主祀南郊。
现代文：辛丑，北周国主到南郊祭祀。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor went to the Southern Suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：癸亥，齐主使兼散骑常侍郑大护来聘。
现代文：癸亥，北齐国主派兼散骑常侍郑大护来陈朝聘问。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Zheng Daguo, the ruler of Northern Qi and a knight errant, came to Chen Dynasty for an interview.

古文：湘东忠肃公徐度卒。
现代文：陈朝的湘东忠肃公徐度死。
English: The Chen dynasty's Shandong Zhongsu Gong slowly died.

古文：二月，丁卯，周主如武功。
现代文：二月，丁卯，北周国主去武功。
English: In February, Dingwu, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to the martial arts.

古文：突厥木杆可汗贰于周，更许齐人以昏，留陈公纯等数年不返。
现代文：突厥木杆可汗对北周产生二心，答允和北齐联姻，把北周派去迎亲的使者陈公纯等人扣留了好几年不放回去。
English: The Turkic Muxu Khan had second thoughts about Northern Zhou, agreed to marry Northern Qi, and detained the envoy Chen Gongchun and others sent by Northern Zhou to meet relatives for several years without letting them go back.

古文：会大雷风，坏其穹庐，旬日不止。
现代文：恰逢天上打雷刮风，木杆可汗所住的毡帐受到破坏，大雷风十天都没有停止。
English: Coinciding with the thunder and wind in the sky, the wooden pole Khan lived in was destroyed, and the thunderstorm did not stop for ten days.

古文：木杆惧，以为天谴，即备礼送其女于周，纯等奉之以归。
现代文：木杆可汗感到惧怕，以为这是上天对他的谴责，于是准备了礼物送女儿去北周，陈公纯等侍奉她归来。
English: Khan was afraid, thinking that this was God's condemnation of him, so he prepared a gift to send his daughter to North Zhou, and Chen Gongjun waited for her to return.

古文：三月，癸卯，至长安，周主行亲迎之礼。
现代文：三月，癸卯，抵达长安，北周君主行亲迎之礼。
English: In March, Emperor Wu arrived in Chang'an, and the Northern Zhou monarchs came to greet him.

古文：甲辰，周大赦。
现代文：甲辰，北周大赦全国。
English: Jia Chen, Northern Zhou amnestied the whole country.

古文：乙巳，齐以东平王俨为大将军，南阳王绰为司徒，开府仪同三司徐显秀为司空，广宁王孝珩为尚书令。
现代文：乙巳，北齐任命东平王高俨为大将军，南阳王高绰为司徒，开府仪同三司徐显秀为司空，广宁王高孝珩为尚书令。
English: At this time, the Northern Qi appointed Dongping Wang Gaojun as the general, Nanyang Wang Gaozhu as the secretary, Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Xu Xianxiu as the secretary, and Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun as the secretary.

古文：戊午，周燕文公于谨卒。
现代文：戊午，北周燕文公于谨去世。
English: At noon, North Zhou Yanwen passed away.

古文：谨勋高位重，而事上益恭，每朝参，所从不过二三骑。
现代文：于谨虽然功勋很高，地位重要，而侍奉皇帝非常恭敬，每逢上朝参拜皇帝，骑马的随从不过二三人。
English: Although Yu Jian's merits were very high and his status was important, he served the emperor very respectfully. Whenever the emperor visited the emperor, there were only two or three horsemen.

古文：朝廷有大事，多与谨谋之。
现代文：朝廷遇到大事，皇帝都和于谨商量。
English: Whenever the imperial court encountered a major event, the emperor would consult with Yu Zhen.

古文：谨尽忠补益，于功臣中特被亲信，礼遇隆重，始终无间；教训诸子，务存静退，而子孙蕃衍，率皆显达。
现代文：于谨竭尽忠诚增益帮助，在所有功臣中特别被亲信，赐给他很高的礼遇，君臣间始终没有隔阂；他还教育儿子们一定要恬静谦虚，后来子孙蕃衍，都很显贵。
English: Because he tried his best to be loyal and helpful, he was especially trusted by his close relatives among all the meritorious vassals. He was given high courtesy, and there was always no estrangement between the monarchs and the vassals. He also taught his sons to be quiet and modest. Later, the descendants of Qianyan were very distinguished.

古文：吴明彻乘胜进攻江陵，引水灌之，梁主出顿纪南以避之。
现代文：吴明彻乘胜进攻江陵，引水淹城。后梁国主出走驻屯在纪南躲避大水。
English: Wu Mingcher took advantage of the victory to attack Gangneung, flooding the city with water. Later, the ruler of Liang went to live in Jinan to avoid the flood.

古文：周总管田弘从梁主，副总管高琳与梁仆射王操守江陵三城，昼夜拒战十旬。梁将马武、吉彻击明彻，败之。
现代文：北周总管田弘跟从后梁国主，副总管高琳和后梁仆射王操守卫江陵三城，日夜拒战达一百天，后梁将领马武、吉彻攻击吴明彻，将他打败。
English: Northern Zhou general manager Tian Hong followed Houliang's governor, vice general manager Gao Lin and Houliang's servant Sha Wang to guard the three cities of Jiangling. They refused to fight day and night for a hundred days. Houliang's generals Ma Wu and Jicher attacked Wu Mingcher and defeated him.

古文：明彻退保公安，梁主乃得还。
现代文：吴明彻退保公安，后梁国主才得以回朝。
English: It was only after Wu Mingcher was released from public security that the ruler of Liang Province was able to return to China.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，周以达奚武为太傅，尉迟迥为太保，齐公宪为大司马。
现代文：夏季四月，辛巳，北周任命达奚武为太傅，尉迟迥为太保，齐公宇文宪为大司马。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Dagongwu as Taifu, Ye Xizhao as Taibo, and Qigong Uwenxian as Daishima.

古文：齐上皇如晋阳。
现代文：北齐太上皇去晋阳。
English: The Northern Qi Empress Dowager went to Jinyang.

古文：齐尚书左仆射徐之才善医，上皇有疾，之才疗之，既愈，中书监和士开欲得次迁，乃出之才为兗州刺史。
现代文：北齐尚书左仆射徐之才精通医术，太上皇生病，徐之才为他治疗，很快就痊愈了；中书监和士开想按次序得到升迁，便将徐之才外放为兖州刺史。
English: Northern Qi Shangshu's left-hand servant shot Xu Zhicai, who was proficient in medicine. When the emperor fell ill, Xu Zhicai treated him, and he soon recovered. When the Chinese Central Library supervisor and scholar Kai wanted to be promoted in order, he released Xu Zhicai to be the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，癸卯，以尚书右仆射胡长仁为左仆射，士开为右仆射。
现代文：五月，癸卯，任命尚书右仆射胡长仁为左仆射，和士开为右仆射。
English: In May, Zou appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Hu Changren as his left-hand man, and He Shikai as his right-hand man.

古文：长仁，太上皇后之兄也。
现代文：胡长仁是太上皇后的哥哥。
English: Hu Changren was the older brother of the empress dowager.

古文：庚戌，周主享太庙；庚申，如醴泉宫。
现代文：庚戌，北周国主到太庙祭祀行礼；庚申，去醴泉宫。
English: Goshun, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, went to the Grand Temple to perform a ritual; Goshun, went to Gusen Palace.

古文：壬戌，齐上皇还鄴。
现代文：壬戌，北齐太上皇回邺城。
English: The Northern Qi Empress Dowager returned to Lushan.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，周随桓公杨忠卒，子坚袭爵。
现代文：秋季七月，壬寅，北周随桓公杨忠去世，儿子杨坚继承爵位。
English: In the autumn of July, Renzhin, Northern Zhou and Huan Gong Yang Zhong passed away, and their son Yang Jian inherited the title.

古文：坚为开府仪同三司、小宫伯，晋公护欲引以为腹心。
现代文：杨坚是开府仪同三司、小宫伯，晋公宇文护想用他作为自己的心腹。
English: Yang Jian is Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Xiao Gong Bo, and Jin Gong Yu Wenyu wants to use him as his confidant.

古文：坚以白忠，忠曰： 两姑之间难为妇，汝其勿往！ 
现代文：杨坚曾把这件事告诉父亲杨忠，杨忠说： 两个婆婆之间的媳妇最难当，你不能去！ 
English: Yang Jian once told this to his father, Yang Zhong. Yang Zhong said, "It's most difficult to be a daughter-in-law between two mothers-in-law. You can't go!"

古文：坚乃辞之。
现代文：杨坚便推辞了。
English: Yang Jian then declined.

古文：丙午，帝享太庙。
现代文：丙午，陈废帝到太庙祭祀行礼。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Chen Kuaiyi went to the Great Temple to perform the ritual.

古文：戊午，周主还长安。
现代文：戊午，北周国主回长安。
English: In the afternoon, the head of the Northern Zhou Dynasty returned to Chang'an.

古文：壬戌，封皇弟伯智为永阳王，伯谋为桂阳王。
现代文：壬戌，陈废帝封弟弟陈伯智为永阳王，陈伯谋为桂阳王。
English: According to the legend, Chen Bozhi, the younger brother of Emperor Chen, was the king of Yongyang, and Chen Bozhuo was the king of Guiyang.

古文：八月，齐请和于周，周遣军司马陆程等聘于齐；九月，丙申，齐使侍中斛斯文略报之。
现代文：八月，北齐向北周求和，北周派军司马陆程到北齐聘问；九月，丙申，北齐派侍中斛斯文略回聘。
English: In August, Northern Qi sued for peace with Northern Zhou, and Northern Zhou sent the army chief Ma Rucheng to Northern Qi to ask for an appointment; in September, Bishen, Northern Qi sent the aide-de-camp Gansu Wen to ask for an appointment.

古文：冬，十月，癸亥，周主享太庙。
现代文：冬季十月，癸亥，北周国主到太庙祭祀行礼。
English: In the winter of October, the Northern Zhou Emperor went to the Taimiao Temple to perform a ritual.

古文：庚午，帝享太庙。
现代文：庚午，陈废帝到太庙祭祀行礼。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Chen Wulai went to the Grand Temple to perform a ritual.

古文：辛巳，齐以广宁王孝珩录尚书事，左仆射胡长仁为尚书令，右仆射和士开为左仆射，中书监唐邕为右仆射。
现代文：辛巳，北齐任命广宁王高孝珩为录尚书事，左仆射胡长仁为尚书令，右仆射和士开为左仆射，中书监唐邕为右仆射。
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi appointed Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojuan to be the record keeper, the left-hand servant Sha Hu Changren to be the record keeper, the right-hand servant Sha He Shikai to be the left-hand servant, and the Chinese book supervisor Tang Jun to be the right-hand servant.

古文：十一月，壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，壬辰朔，发生日食。
English: In November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：齐遣兼散骑常侍李谐来聘。
现代文：北齐派兼散骑常侍李谐来陈朝聘问。
English: Li Jing, a member of the Northern Qi faction and a knight errant, came to Chen for an interview.

古文：甲辰，周主如岐阳。
现代文：甲辰，北周国主去岐阳。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to Qiyang.

古文：周遣开府仪同三司崔彦等聘于齐。
现代文：北周开府仪同三司崔彦等人到北齐聘问。
English: Northern Zhou Kaifu Yi and Third Secretary Cui Yan and others came to the North Qi to ask questions.

古文：始兴王伯茂以安成王顼专政，意甚不平，屡肆恶言。
现代文：陈朝的始兴王陈伯茂因为安成王陈顼专政，心中不平，经常口出恶言。
English: Chen Bomao, the King of Shixing in the Chen Dynasty, was not happy with the dictatorial rule of Ancheng King Chen Qi, and often spoke ill of him.

古文：甲寅，以太皇太后令，诬帝，云与刘师知、华皎等通谋。
现代文：甲寅，陈顼借太皇太后的令诬告废帝，说他和刘师知、华皎等人互通共谋。
English: A Yin, Chen Zhe, falsely accused the deposed emperor by the order of the Empress Dowager, saying that he and Liu Shizhi, Hua Zhe and others had conspired with each other.

古文：且曰： 文皇知子之鉴，事等帝尧；传弟之怀，又符太伯。
现代文：还说： 文皇帝对儿子的审察，不想传位给他，这事相当于唐尧那样；传位给弟弟的胸怀，又像泰伯那样。
English: He also said: Emperor Wen's examination of his son, not wanting to pass the throne to him, is equivalent to that of Tang Jun; passing the throne to his brother's heart, is also like that of Tibet.

古文：今可还申曩志，崇立贤君。 
现代文：现在应当重申文皇帝以前的意向，另立一个贤明的君主。 
English: It is time to reiterate the previous intention of Emperor Wen and establish another wise monarch.

古文：遂废帝为临海王，以安成王入纂。
现代文：于是把在位的皇帝废为临海王，以安成王陈顼入继皇帝位。
English: As a result, the reigning emperor was abolished as the Linhai King, and Ancheng Wang Chen Rong was appointed to succeed the emperor.

古文：又下令，黜伯茂为温麻侯，置诸别馆，安成王使盗邀之于道，杀之车中。
现代文：又下命令把陈伯茂贬为温麻侯，安置在王室成员举行婚礼的别馆里，安成王陈顼嗾使强盗在路上将他截住，把他杀死在车里。
English: He also issued an order to relegate Chen Bomao to the position of "Wen Ma Hou" and place him in a separate hall where members of the royal family were holding a wedding ceremony. Ancheng Wang Chen Wei had robbers intercept him on the road and kill him in his car.

古文：齐上皇疾作，驿追徐之才，未至。
现代文：北齐太上皇生病，派驿使追召徐之才回来，徐之才没能及时赶到。
English: When the Northern Qi Emperor fell ill, he sent an envoy to summon Xu Zhicai to come back, but Xu Zhicai did not arrive in time.

古文：辛未，疾亟，以后事属和士开，握其手曰： 勿负我也！ 
现代文：辛未，太上皇病得很重，把后事委托给和士开，握着他的手说： 你不要辜负我的委托！ 
English: Xin Wei, when the Emperor was seriously ill, entrusted the succession to He Shikai, holding his hand and saying, "Don't fail to live up to my commission!"

古文：遂殂于士开之手。明日，之才至，复遣还州。
现代文：还没放开手就死了。第二天，徐之才赶到，又叫他回兖州。
English: He died before he could let go. The next day, Xu Zhi arrived and told him to go back to Zhangzhou.

古文：士开秘丧三日不发。
现代文：和士开三天秘不发丧。
English: He and his wife did not mourn for three days.

古文：黄门侍郎冯子琮问其故，士开曰： 神武、文襄之丧，皆秘不发。
现代文：黄门侍郎冯子琮问他是什么原因，和士开说： 神武、文襄帝的丧事，都秘而不发。
English: Huangmen waiter Feng Zixuan asked him what the reason was, and he said: The funeral of Shenwu and Emperor Wenxiang are kept secret.

古文：今至尊年少，恐王公有贰心者，意欲尽追集于凉风堂，然后与公议之。 
现代文：现在皇上年幼，恐怕王公中有对朝廷怀二心的，我想把他们都召集到凉风堂，然后和他们一起商量。 
English: Now that the emperor is young, I'm afraid that some princes harbor ill will toward the imperial court. I'd like to gather them all together in the cool breeze hall, and then discuss the matter with them.

古文：士开素忌太尉录尚书事赵郡王睿及领军娄定远，子琮恐其矫遗诏出睿于外，夺定远禁兵，乃说之曰： 大行先已传位于今上，群臣富贵者，皆至尊父子之恩，但令在内贵臣一无改易，王公必无异志。世异事殊，岂得与霸朝相比！
现代文：和士开一贯忌恨太尉录尚书事赵郡王高睿和领军娄定远，冯子琮怕和士开假传遗诏把高睿排挤在外，而去夺取娄定远禁兵的军权，于是对他说： 太上皇帝以前已经把皇位传给当今皇帝，群臣所以能够富贵，都是太上皇和皇帝父子的恩德，只要使在朝的贵臣能保持他们的地位，王公们一定不会有二心，时代变化而事情也各不相同，怎能和神武、文襄帝的时代相提并论！
English: He and Shikai had always resented Taifeng Lu Shang's writings about Zhao County's King Gaorui and the leader of the army, Yu Dingyuan. Feng Zixuan was afraid that he and Shikai's fake testament would exclude Gaorui and seize the military power of Yu Dingyuan's forbidden soldiers. So he said to him: The emperor had previously passed the throne to the current emperor. The reason why the ministers can be rich is the benevolence of the emperor and the emperor's father and son. As long as the dignitaries in the court can maintain their status, the princes will not have second thoughts. Times change and things are different.

古文：且公不出宫门已数日，升遐之事，行路皆传，久而不举，恐有他变。 
现代文：而且您已经几天没出宫门，太上皇驾崩的事，外面都已经传开了，时间过了很久还不举丧，只怕发生别的变化。 
English: Moreover, you have not left the palace gates for several days. The news of the Emperor's death has already spread outside, and it has been a long time since the funeral was held. I am afraid that other changes may occur.

古文：士开乃发丧。
现代文：和士开于是发丧。
English: Washi Kai then went into mourning.

古文：丙子，大赦。
现代文：丙子，大赦全国。
English: Bongzi, amnesty to the whole world.

古文：戊寅，尊太上皇后为皇太后。
现代文：戊寅，给太上皇后上皇太后的尊号。
English: Wuchin, the honorific given to the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：侍中尚书左仆射元文遥，以冯子琮，胡太后之妹夫，恐其赞太后干预朝政，与赵郡王睿、和士开谋，出子琮为郑州刺史。
现代文：侍中尚书左仆射元文遥，因为冯子琮是胡太后的妹夫，怕他帮助胡太后干预朝政，和赵郡王高睿、和士开合谋，把冯子琮贬为郑州刺史。
English: Since Feng Zikang was the sister-in-law of the Empress Dowager Hu, Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, Shao Yuan Wenyao, feared that he would help the Empress Dowager Hu to interfere in the imperial government, and conspired with Zhao Gu Wang Gaorui and He Shikai to disparage Feng Zikang as a traitor to Zhengzhou.

古文：世祖骄奢淫泆，役繁赋重，吏民苦之。
现代文：北齐武成帝在世时骄奢淫佚，徭役繁多赋税苛重，官吏和百姓都感到困苦。
English: When Emperor Wu Cheng of the Northern Qi Dynasty was alive, he was proud of his luxurious lifestyle, he had many servants and paid heavy taxes. Both officials and common people felt hard-pressed.

古文：甲申，诏： 所在百工细作，悉罢之。
现代文：甲申，下诏书： 所有从事营建制造等事的工匠和官员都撤销。
English: Jiaxin, the next edict: All craftsmen and officials engaged in construction and manufacturing are revoked.

古文：鄴下、晋阳、中山宫人、官口之老病者，悉简放。
现代文：邺下、晋阳、中山等宫的宫人和年老有病的官中奴婢，一律放归民间。
English: All servants and maidservants of the Imperial Court, including those under the Emperor, in Jinyang and Zhongshan, as well as those who are old or ill, are to be returned to the people.

古文：诸家缘坐在流所者，听还。 
现代文：凡是崐由于亲属犯罪而遭株连流放在外的，可以回原籍。 
English: Those who were exiled due to crimes committed by their relatives can return to their hometowns.

古文：周梁州恒稜獠叛，总管长史南郑赵文表讨之。
现代文：北周梁州恒棱的獠人反叛，派总管长史南郑人赵文表讨伐。
English: Northern Zhou Liangzhou Hengren's Xiongren rebelled and sent the chief administrator, Shi Nan Zhengren, Zhao Wenbo to fight.

古文：诸将欲四面进攻，文表曰： 四面攻之，獠无生路，必尽死以拒我，未易可克。
现代文：将领们准备从四面进攻，赵文表说： 四面围攻，他们便没有生路，一定会拼死跟我们对抗，这就不容易攻克。
English: The generals are preparing to attack from four sides, Zhao Wenbo said: If they are besieged on all sides, they will have no way out, and they will fight us to the death. This is not easy to overcome.

古文：今吾示以威恩，为恶者诛之，从善者抚之。善恶既分，破之易矣。 
现代文：现在我们向他们分别予以严厉惩治和恩惠笼络，对一意作恶的处死，对改恶从善的安抚，这样可以区分善恶，攻破他们就容易了。 
English: Now we give them strict punishment and favor separately, and execute those who are bent on doing evil, and pacify those who want to change from evil to good. In this way, we can distinguish between good and evil, and it is easy to break through them.

古文：遂以此意遍令军中。
现代文：便把这个意思传达到军队里。
English: He then took this message to the army.

古文：时有从军熟獠，多与恒稜亲识，即以实报之。
现代文：当时有归附北周并参加了军队的獠人，不少和恒棱的獠人沾亲带故，相互认识，便据实告诉他们。
English: At that time, there were people from Handan who had joined the Northern Zhou Dynasty and joined the army, and many of them knew people from Handan who were relatives of Hengren, so they knew each other and told them the truth.

古文：恒稜犹豫未决，文表军已至其境。
现代文：恒棱的獠人犹豫不决，赵文表的军队已经到了那里。
English: The people of Hengren hesitated. Zhao Wenbiao's army had already arrived there.

古文：獠中先有二路，一平一险，有獠帅数人来请为乡导。
现代文：通向恒棱的道路有两条，一条平坦一条险要，有几个獠人头目来见赵文表，愿意充当向导。
English: There are two roads leading to Hengren, a flat one and a perilous one. Several leaders of the Xiongnu came to see Zhao Wenbo and were willing to act as guides.

古文：文表曰： 此路宽平，不须为导。卿但先行好慰谕子弟，使来降也。 
现代文：赵文表说： 这条路宽敞平坦，不用为我们当向导，你们可以先回去劝慰子弟，希望他们来投降。 
English: Zhao Wenchao said, "This road is wide and flat. You don't have to be our guide. You can first go back to comfort your sons and hope that they will surrender.

古文：乃遣之。
现代文：便让他们回去。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he sent him away.

古文：文表谓诸将曰： 獠帅谓吾从宽路而进，必设伏以邀我，当更出其不意。 
现代文：赵文表对将领们说： 獠人的头目以为我们会从宽路前进，一定设下埋伏阻击我们，应当出其不意地行动。 
English: Zhao Wenchao said to the generals: The leader of the instigators thought that we would advance from a wide road and would definitely set up an ambush to block us. They should act unexpectedly.

古文：乃引兵自狭路入，乘高而望，果有伏兵。
现代文：于是率领军队从险路开进。登上高处了望，果然发现伏兵。
English: So he led his army in from the dangerous road, climbed to a high vantage point, and found the ambush.

古文：獠既失计，争帅众来降。
现代文：恒棱的獠人计谋未能得逞，争相带领部众来投降。
English: Hengren's cunning stratagem failed to succeed, and he scrambled to lead his subordinates to surrender.

古文：文表皆慰抚之，仍征其租税，无敢违者。
现代文：赵文表对他们劝慰安抚，仍旧向当地征收租税，没有人敢违抗。
English: Zhao Wenbiao consoled and pacified them, and still levied taxes on the local people. No one dared to resist.

古文：周人以文表为蓬州刺史。
现代文：北周任命赵文表为蓬州长史。
English: North Zhou appointed Zhao Wenbiao as the governor of Pengzhou.

古文：高宗宣皇帝上之上
现代文：高宗宣皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Gao Zongxuan

古文：临海王太建元年
现代文：陈宣帝太建元年
English: Emperor Chen Xuan of Taijian died in the first year of the year

古文：春，正月，辛卯朔，周主以齐世祖之丧罢朝会，遣司会李纶吊赙，且会葬。
现代文：春季正月，辛卯朔，北周国主因为武成帝的丧事停止朝会，派遣司会李纶前往吊唁赠送奠仪，参加丧葬仪式。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Zhou Dynasty stopped the imperial meeting because of the funeral of Emperor Wu Chengdu, and sent the secretary Li Xi to go to the condolence to present the memorial service and participate in the funeral ceremony.

古文：甲午，安成王即皇帝位，改元，大赦。
现代文：甲午，安成王陈顼即皇帝位，改年号，大赦全国。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Ancheng Wang Chen Qi, that is, the emperor, changed the year, and amnestied the whole country.

古文：复太皇太后为皇太后，皇太后为文皇后；立妃柳氏为皇后，世子叔宝为太子；封皇子叔陵为始兴王，奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：恢复太皇太后的皇太后称号，皇太后称文皇后；立妃子柳氏为皇后，世子陈叔宝为太子；封皇子陈叔陵为始兴王，作为昭烈王的后嗣。
English: The title of empress dowager of the grand empress dowager was restored, and the empress dowager was called Empress Wen; the princess Liu was named empress, the heir Chen Shubao was named prince; the prince Chen Shuling was named Prince Shi Xing, as the heir of King Zhaorong.

古文：乙未，上谒太庙。
现代文：乙未，陈宣帝谒太庙。
English: Yi Wei, Chen Xuan Di and the Great Temple.

古文：丁酉，以尚书仆射沈钦为左仆射，度支尚书王劢为右仆射。
现代文：丁酉，任命尚书仆射沈钦为右仆射，度支尚书王劢为右仆射。
English: Ding Xi, appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Shen Qin as his right-hand man, and Du Zhi Shang Shuxu Wang Xi as his right-hand man.

古文：劢，份之孙也。
现代文：王劢是王份的孙子。
English: Wang Yao is the grandson of Wang Quan.

古文：辛丑，上祀南郊。
现代文：辛丑，陈宣帝到南郊祭天。
English: Sinfully ugly, Chen Xuandi went to the southern suburbs to worship the heavens.

古文：壬寅，封皇子叔英为豫章王，叔坚为长沙王。
现代文：壬寅，陈朝封皇子陈叔英为豫章王，陈叔坚为长沙王。
English: Ren Yin, the prince of the Chen Dynasty, Chen Shuying was the king of Yuzhang, and Chen Shujian was the king of Changsha.

古文：戊午，上享太庙。
现代文：戊午，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: In the afternoon, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：齐博陵文简王济，世祖之母弟也，为定州刺史，语人曰： 次叙当至我矣。 
现代文：北齐博陵文简王高济，是武成帝的同母兄弟，任定州刺史，对别人说： 按次序规定应当轮到我做皇帝了。 
English: Wang Gaoji, the brother of Emperor Wu Cheng, who was appointed as the prefect of Dingzhou, said to others: According to the order of succession, it should be my turn to be emperor.

古文：齐主闻之，阴使人就州杀之，葬赠如礼。
现代文：北齐后主高纬听说后，暗中派人去定州将他杀死，按规定仪式将他埋葬，追赠官爵。
English: After Gao Wei, the empress dowager of Northern Qi, heard about it, he secretly sent someone to Dingzhou to kill him, bury him according to the prescribed ceremony, and posthumously bestow the title of nobility.

古文：二月，乙亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：二月，乙亥，陈宣帝到藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: In February, in the Year of the Boar, Chen Xuandi held a cultivation ceremony in a rented field.

古文：甲申，齐葬武成帝于永平陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：甲申，北齐把武成帝葬在永平陵，庙号世祖。
English: Jiashen, North Qi buried Emperor Wu Cheng in Yongping Mausoleum, the founder of the temple.

古文：己丑，齐徙东平王俨为琅邪王。
现代文：己丑，北齐把东平王高俨迁移到琅邪郡为琅邪王。
English: As a result, the Northern Qi moved the Dongping King Gao Qi to Shiyan County as the King of Shiyan.

古文：齐遣侍中叱列长叉聘于周。
现代文：北齐派侍中叱列长叉到北周聘问。
English: Bei Qi sent a long line of courtiers to Bei Zhou to ask questions.

古文：齐以司空徐显秀为太尉，并省尚书令娄定远为司空。
现代文：北齐任命司空徐显秀为太尉，并省尚书令娄定远为司空。
English: Beiqi appointed the Secretary of the Air Force, Xu Xianxiu, as the first lieutenant, and sent a written order to Zou Dingyuan to become the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：初，侍中、尚书右仆射和士开，为世祖所亲狎，出入卧内，无复期度，遂得幸于胡后。
现代文：起初，侍中、尚书右仆射和士开，受武成帝的宠爱亲昵，在皇帝卧室出入，不受限制，因此就和胡太后私通。
English: At first, the chamberlain, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Shikai, who was favored and loved by Emperor Wu Chengdi, were allowed to enter and leave the emperor's bedroom without restriction, so they had sexual intercourse with the Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：及世祖殂，齐主以士开受顾托，深委任之，威权益盛；与娄定远及录尚书事赵彦深、侍中尚书左仆射元文遥、开府仪同三司唐邕、领军綦连猛、高阿那肱、度支尚书胡长粲俱用事，时号 八贵 。
现代文：武成帝死后，北齐后主高纬因为和士开曾经受武成帝的顾托之命，所以对他信任重用，威势和权力更大；他的娄定远、录尚书事赵彦深、侍中及尚书左仆射元文遥、开府仪同三司唐邕、领军綦连猛、高阿那肱、度支尚书胡长粲都在朝廷当权，当时号称 八贵 。
English: After the death of Emperor Wucheng, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi Gao Wei, because he had been entrusted by Emperor Wucheng, trusted him and used him with greater authority and power. He was in power in the imperial court, and was known as the Eight Greats at that time.

古文：太尉赵郡王睿、大司马冯翊王润、安德王延宗与娄定远、元文遥皆言开齐主，请出士开为外任。
现代文：太尉赵郡王高睿、大司马冯翊王高润、安德王高延宗和娄定远、元文遥都对后主说，请后主把和士开调离朝廷去外地任职。
English: Captain Zhao Guan Wang Gao Rui, Major Ma Feng Quan Wang Gao Run, And Wang Gao Yan Zong, Yu Ding Yuan, and Yuan Wen Yao all said to the Empress Dowager that they would like to ask the Empress Dowager to transfer He Shi Kai from the imperial court to serve abroad.

古文：会胡太后觞朝贵于前殿，睿面陈士开罪失云： 士开先帝弄臣，城狐社鼠，受纳货赂，秽乱宫掖。
现代文：适逢胡太后在前殿请朝廷中的亲贵们饮酒，高睿当面陈述和士开的罪过说： 和士开是先帝时的亲近狎玩之臣，仗势作恶，接受贿赂，乱宫廷。
English: When the Empress Dowager Hu invited the dignitaries of the imperial court to drink alcohol in the front hall, Gao Rui made a face-to-face statement about the sins of He Shikai, saying: He Shikai was a close vassal of the former emperor, committed evil, accepted bribes, and disrupted the court.

古文：臣等义无杜口，冒死陈之。 
现代文：臣等出于正义不能闭口不说，所以冒死陈述。 
English: Out of justice, the ministers could not keep silent, so they risked their lives to make a statement.

古文：太后曰： 先帝在时，王等何不言！
现代文：胡太后说： 先帝在世时，你们为什么不说？
English: Empress Dowager Hu said, "Why didn't you say this when the former emperor was alive?

古文：今欲欺孤寡邪？
现代文：今天是不是想欺侮我们孤儿寡母？
English: Are you trying to bully us orphans and widows today?

古文：且饮酒，勿多言！ 
现代文：姑且饮酒，不要多说！ 
English: Let alone drinking, don't say more!

古文：睿等词色愈厉。
现代文：高睿等人的言语和面色更加严厉。
English: Gao Rui and the others were harsher in speech and countenance.

古文：仪同三司安吐根曰： 臣本商胡，得在诸贵行末，既受厚恩，岂敢惜死！
现代文：仪同三司安吐根说： 臣家本来是经商胡人，得以位于诸多亲贵的末尾，既然受到朝廷的厚恩，怎敢怕死！
English: Yi Tong San Si Antugen said, "The vassal family was originally a merchant Hu people, and was able to be located at the end of many dear ones. Since they were favored by the court, how dare they be afraid of death!

古文：不出士开，朝野不定。 
现代文：不把和士开从朝廷调走，朝野上下就不安定。 
English: Without transferring Washikai away from the imperial court, there will be instability in the imperial court and beyond.

古文：太后曰： 异日论之，王等且散！ 
现代文：胡太后说： 改日再谈，你们都走吧！ 
English: The Empress Dowager Hu said, "Let's talk about it another day, you all go!"

古文：睿等或投冠于地，或拂衣而起。
现代文：高睿等有的把帽子扔在地上，有的甩衣袖离开座位，感到生气。
English: Gao Rui and others threw their hats on the ground, and some flung their sleeves off the seat, feeling angry.

古文：明日，睿等复诣云龙门，令文遥入奏之，三返，太后不听。
现代文：第二天，高睿等再次到云龙门，派元文遥进宫启奏，进出三次，胡太后不听。
English: The next day, Gao Rui and others went to Yunlongmen again and sent Yuan Wenyao to enter the palace to open the concert. He went in and out three times, but the Empress Dowager Hu did not listen.

古文：左丞相段韶使胡长粲传太后言曰： 梓宫在殡，事太忽忽，欲王等更思之！ 
现代文：左丞相段韶派胡长粲传太后的话说： 先皇的灵柩还没有殡葬，这件事太匆忙了，望你们再考虑！ 
English: Zuo Zheng's minister, Duan Yu, sent Hu Changyu to convey the words of the empress dowager: The coffin of the first emperor has not yet been buried, this matter is too hasty, I hope you will reconsider!

古文：睿等遂皆拜谢。
现代文：高睿等都表示拜谢。
English: Gao Rui and others all expressed their thanks.

古文：长粲复命，太后曰： 成妹母子家者，兄之力也。 
现代文：胡长粲回宫复命，胡太后说： 成就妹妹我母子全家的，是哥哥你的力量。 
English: When Hu Changtao returned to the palace to resume his duties, the Empress Dowager Hu said, "To make my sister, my mother and my whole family a success, it is my brother who is your strength."

古文：厚赐睿等，罢之。
现代文：又给高睿等人优厚的赏赐，事情暂时作罢。
English: He also gave a generous reward to Gao Rui and others, and temporarily suspended the matter.

古文：太后及齐主召问士开，对曰： 先帝于群臣之中，待臣最厚。
现代文：胡太后和后主把和士开召来询问，和士开回答说： 先帝在群臣中，待臣最优厚。
English: Hu's empress dowager and her husband summoned He Shikai to inquire, and He Shikai replied, "Among all his ministers, the late emperor treated his ministers with the greatest kindness.

古文：陛下谅暗始尔，大臣皆有觊觎。
现代文：陛下刚居丧不久，大臣们都怀有非份的企图。
English: Not long after His Majesty's death, ministers were harbouring sinister intentions.

古文：今若出臣，正是剪陛下羽翼。
现代文：现在如果把臣调走，正好比剪掉陛下的羽翼。
English: If you transfer the minister away now, it is just like clipping the wings of your majesty.

古文：宜谓睿等云： 文遥与臣，俱受先帝任用，岂可一去一留！
现代文：应该对高睿说： 元文遥与和士开，都是受先帝信任重用的，怎么能去一个留一个！
English: It should be said to Gao Rui: Yuan Wenyao and Shikai are both trusted and used by the former emperor, how can one go and one stay!

古文：并可用为州，且出纳如旧。待过山陵，然后遣之。 
现代文：都可以出任州刺史，现在暂时还是担任原有的官职，等太上皇的陵寝完工，然后派出去。 
English: All of them can be appointed to the post of prefectural chief historian. For the time being, they will still hold their original posts until the tomb of the emperor is completed, and then they will be sent out.

古文：睿等谓臣真出，心必喜之。 
现代文：高睿等以为臣真的被调走，心里一定高兴。 
English: Gao Rui and others thought that the minister was really transferred away, and they must be happy.

古文：帝及太后然之，告睿等如其言。
现代文：后主和太后认为很对，就按和士开所说的那样告诉高睿。
English: The lady-in-waiting and the empress dowager thought it was right, so they told Gao Rui what He Shikai had said.

古文：乃以土开为兗州刺史，文遥为西兗州刺吏。
现代文：便任命和士开为兖州刺史，元文遥为西兖州刺史。
English: He then appointed He Shikai as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and Yuan Wenyao as the chief historian of West Zhangzhou.

古文：葬毕，等睿促士开就路。
现代文：丧葬结束，高睿等就催促和士开出发就任。
English: When the funeral was over, Gao Rui and others urged He Shikai to take office.

古文：太后欲留士开过百日，睿不许；数日之内，太后数以为言。
现代文：胡太后打算留和士开过先皇百日祭再走，高睿不许；几天之内，胡太后说了好几次。
English: Empress Dowager Hu planned to stay in Hefei after the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, but Gao Rui did not allow her to leave; within a few days, Empress Dowager Hu said this several times.

古文：有中人知太后密旨者。谓睿曰： 太后意既如此，殿下何宜苦违！ 
现代文：有知道胡太后隐私的太监，对高睿说： 太后的意思既然这样，崐殿下何必苦苦反对！ 
English: A eunuch who knew the private life of the Empress Dowager Hu said to Gao Rui, "Since this is what the Empress Dowager means, why should Your Royal Highness oppose it?

古文：睿曰： 吾受委不轻。
现代文：高睿说： 我受朝廷的委托责任不轻。
English: Gao Rui said: I am entrusted by the imperial court with a heavy responsibility.

古文：今嗣主幼冲，岂可使邪臣在侧！
现代文：现在继位的君主年龄还小，怎么能使奸臣在君主旁边！
English: Now that the reigning monarch is still young, how can a treacherous vassal be allowed to stand next to the monarch!

古文：不守之以死，何面戴天！ 
现代文：如果不是以生命来守护，有何面目和这种人在一个天底下生活！ 
English: If you don't guard it with your life, what would it be like to live under the same sky as such a person!

古文：遂更见太后，苦言之。
现代文：便再次去见胡太后，苦苦陈说。
English: So he went to see the Empress Dowager Hu again, and painstakingly explained.

古文：太后令酌酒赐睿，睿正色曰： 今论国家大事，非为卮酒！ 
现代文：胡太后叫人酌酒赐给他，高睿正颜厉色说： 我今天来是谈国家大事，并不是为了一杯酒！ 
English: Empress Dowager Hu asked someone to give him a glass of wine, and Gao Rui said with a straight face: I came here today to talk about national affairs, not for a glass of wine!

古文：言讫，遽出。
现代文：说完，立即离去。
English: When you're finished, leave immediately.

古文：士开载美女珠帘诣娄定远，谢曰： 诸贵欲杀士开，蒙王力，特全其命，用为方伯。
现代文：和士开送美女和珍珠帘子给娄定远，表示感谢说： 那些亲贵们想杀我，蒙您大王的大力，特地保住了我的性命，任命为一州之长。
English: He sent a beautiful woman and a pearl curtain to the emperor, expressing his gratitude and saying, "Those nobles wanted to kill me, but thanks to the great power of your majesty, you saved my life and appointed me as the governor of a province.

古文：今当奉别，谨上二女子、一珠帘。 
现代文：现在将要和你分别，特意送上两个女子，一张珠帘。 
English: Now I'm going to break up with you and send you two girls and a beaded curtain.

古文：定远喜，谓士开曰： 欲还入不？ 
现代文：娄定远大喜，对和士开说： 你还想回朝吗？ 
English: Yu Dingyuan was overjoyed and said to Washika, "Do you still want to go back to Japan?

古文：士开曰： 在内久不自安，今得出，实遂本志，不愿更入。
现代文：和士开答道： 我在朝内心里不安已经很久了，现在得以离开，使本来的志愿能够实现，不愿意再到朝内做官了。
English: He Shikai replied: I have been uneasy in the heart of the imperial court for a long time. Now that I can leave, my original wish can be realized, and I no longer want to be an official in the imperial court.

古文：但乞王保护，长为大州刺史足矣。 
现代文：但请求您对我加以保护，使我长久做大州的刺史就足够了。 
English: But it is enough for me to ask you to protect me so that I can become a great statesman for a long time.

古文：定远信之。
现代文：娄定远相信了。
English: Yu Dingyuan believed it.

古文：送至门，士开曰： 今当远出，愿得一辞觐二宫。 
现代文：把他送到门口，和士开说： 现在我要远出了，很想见见太后和皇上向他们告辞。 
English: She sent him to the door and said to Shikai, "Now that I am going far away, I would very much like to see the empress dowager and the emperor to bid them farewell."

古文：定远许之。
现代文：娄定远答允他的要求。
English: Yu Dingyuan agreed to his request.

古文：士开由是得见太后及帝，进说曰： 先帝一旦登遐，臣愧不能自死。
现代文：和士开因此见到胡太后和后主，向他们进说道： 先帝去世时，臣惭愧自己没能跟着去死。
English: As a result, Kazuchika saw the Empress Dowager Hu and her husband and approached them, saying, "When the former emperor died, I was ashamed that I couldn't go with him to his death.

古文：观朝贵意势，欲以陛下为乾明。
现代文：臣观察朝廷权贵们的意图和架势，想把陛下当作乾明年间的济南王那样对待。
English: The vassal observed the intentions and postures of the imperial dignitaries and wanted to treat his majesty as if he were the king of Jinan in the dry season.

古文：臣出之后，必有大变，臣何面目见先帝于地下！ 
现代文：我离开朝廷以后，一定有大的变化，我有什么脸面见先帝在九泉之下！ 
English: After I left the imperial court, there must have been a big change. How would I have looked if I had seen the former emperor in the bottom of the well!

古文：因恸哭。帝、太后皆泣，问： 计安出？ 
现代文：于是哀痛地大哭起来，后主、胡太后也哭，问他： 你有什么计策？ 
English: Then he burst into tears of grief. His wife, the Empress Dowager Hu, was also crying. She asked him, "What are your plans?"

古文：士开曰： 臣已得入，复何所虑，正须数行诏书耳。 
现代文：和士开说： 臣已经进来见到你们，还有什么顾虑，只须得到几行字的诏书就行。 
English: Kazuchika said, "The minister has already come to see you. If you have any concerns, you only need to get a few lines of the imperial edict.

古文：于是诏出定远为青州刺史，责赵郡王珽以不臣之罪。
现代文：于是后主下诏把娄定远调出任青州刺史，斥责赵郡王高睿有僭越的罪过。
English: As a result, the emperor sent an imperial edict to transfer Yu Ding to the post of Qingzhou magistrate, and reprimanded Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui for the crime of arrogance.

古文：旦日，睿将复入谏，妻子咸止之，睿曰： 社稷事重，吾宁死事先皇，不忍见朝廷颠沛。 
现代文：第二天，高睿要再次进宫直言规劝胡太后，妻儿们都劝他不要去，高睿说： 国事重大，我宁可死去追随先皇，不忍活着见到朝廷动荡变乱。 
English: The next day, Gao Rui wanted to enter the palace again to speak frankly and persuade Empress Hu. His wives and children all advised him not to go. Gao Rui said, "The state affairs are very important. I would rather die following the first emperor than live to see the court in turmoil."

古文：至殿门，又有人谓曰： 殿下勿入，恐有变。 
现代文：他到了殿门，又有人告诉他： 殿下不要进去，恐怕有变。 
English: When he arrived at the palace gate, someone told him again: "Your highness, don't go in, I'm afraid there's been a change."

古文：睿曰： 吾上不负天，死亦无恨。 
现代文：高睿说： 我上不负天，死也无恨。 
English: He said, "I'm as good as heaven, and I have no regrets about dying."

古文：入，见太后，太后复以为言，睿执之弥固。
现代文：进入宫殿，见了胡太后，太后重申了自己的旨意，高睿更加固执己见。
English: After entering the palace and meeting the Empress Dowager Hu, the Empress Dowager reiterated her will, and Gao Rui became more stubborn.

古文：出，至永巷，遇兵，执送华林园雀离佛院，令刘桃枝拉杀之。
现代文：出宫后，走到深巷，遇到士兵，把他捉住送到华林园的雀离佛院，命令刘桃枝将他殴打致死。
English: After leaving the palace, he walked to a deep alley, met a soldier, caught him and sent him to the Sparrow's Nest Buddhist Temple in Hualing Garden, and ordered Liu Taoji to beat him to death.

古文：睿久典朝廷，清正自守，朝野冤惜之。
现代文：高睿主管朝廷政事的时间很久，清廉正直注意操守，朝野上下都感到冤枉痛惜。
English: Gao Rui had been in charge of the government affairs of the imperial court for a long time. He was clean and honest and paid attention to ethics. Both the imperial court and the common people felt unjustified pity for him.

古文：复以士开为侍中、尚书左仆射。
现代文：重又任命和士开为侍中、尚书左仆射。
English: He also appointed He Shikai as an attendant, and Shoshu as a left-hand servant.

古文：定远归士开所遗，加以馀珍赂之。三月，齐王如晋阳。
现代文：娄定远把和士开送给他的东西又还给他，还添了一些别的珍宝对他贿赂。三月，北齐后主去晋阳。
English: Rui Dingyuan gave back the things that He Shikai had given to him, and added some other precious treasures to bribe him. In March, the ruler of Northern Qi went to Jinyang.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，以并州尚书省为大基圣寺，晋祠为大崇皇寺。
现代文：夏季。四月，甲子，以并州尚书省原址改为大基圣寺，晋祠为大崇皇寺。
English: Summer. In April, Koshi, the original site of the merged state of Shangshu Province was changed to Daiki Holy Temple, and Jin Temple was changed to Daizhong Temple.

古文：乙丑，齐主还鄴。
现代文：乙丑，北齐后主回邺城。
English: Second Ugly, North Qiwen Emperor Xuan returned to Lucheng.

古文：齐主年少，多嬖宠。
现代文：北齐后主年纪很轻，有不少宠幸的佞臣。
English: After the Northern Qi Dynasty, the lord was very young and had many favored vassals.

古文：武卫将军高阿那肱，素以谄佞为世祖琢和士开所厚，世祖多令在东宫侍齐主，由是有宠，累迁并省尚书令，封淮阴王。
现代文：武卫将军高阿那肱，一向以善于花言巧语谄媚受到武成帝与和士开的厚待，武成帝常常叫他在东宫侍奉太子，因而深得宠爱；累次升迁到并省尚书令，封淮阴王。
English: Gao Ananyuan, the general of Wuwei, had always been treated well by Emperor Wu Chengdu and He Shikai, who was good at flattering and charming. Emperor Wu Chengdu often asked him to serve the prince in the East Palace, so he was deeply loved; he was repeatedly promoted to and sent to Shang Shuling, and was named King of Huaiyin.

古文：世祖简都督二十人，使侍卫东宫，昌黎韩长鸾预焉，齐主独亲爱长鸾。
现代文：武成帝曾经挑选二十个都督，派去做太子的侍卫，昌黎人韩长鸾是其中之一，太子唯独喜欢韩长鸾。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdu once selected twenty governors and sent them to be the prince's bodyguards. Han Changyu, a native of Changli, was one of them. The prince only liked Han Changyu.

古文：长鸾名凤，以字行，累迁侍中、领军，总知内省机密。
现代文：长鸾名凤，通常用表字，累次升迁到侍中、领军、总知内省机密。
English: Nagase Meifeng, usually with a watchword, has been repeatedly promoted to attendant, leader, and head of introspection.

古文：宫婢陆令萱者，其夫汉阳骆超，坐谋叛诛，令萱配掖庭，子提婆，亦没为奴。
现代文：有个名叫陆令萱的宫女，丈夫是汉阳人骆超，因为犯谋叛罪被处死，陆令萱被发配到皇宫中当宫女，儿子骆提婆，也没入官府为奴。
English: There was a lady-in-waiting named Lu Lingya, whose husband was Luo Chao from Hanyang. Lu Lingya was executed for conspiracy to commit treason, and Lu Lingya was sent to the imperial palace to be a lady-in-waiting. Lu's son Luo Dibba did not enter the government office as a slave.

古文：齐王之在襁褓，令萱保养之。
现代文：后主还是婴儿时，由陆令萱当保姆。
English: When the latter was still a baby, Lu Lingyao took care of her as a nanny.

古文：令萱巧黠，善取媚，有宠于胡太后，宫掖之中，独擅威福，封为郡君，和士开、高阿那肱皆为之养子。
现代文：陆令萱乖巧狡猾，善于讨好谄媚，所以得到了胡太后的宠爱，宫婢之中，唯独她作威作福，被封为郡君，和士开、高阿那肱都是她的乾儿子。
English: Lu Lingya was good-natured and cunning, good at pleasing and charming, so she was favored by the Empress Hu. Among the maids of honor, she was the only one who was proud and blessed, and was named the county ruler. Both Shikai and Gao Ananyan were her sons.

古文：齐主以令萱为女侍中。
现代文：后主封她为女侍中。
English: Later, the lord made her a lady-in-waiting.

古文：令萱引提婆入侍齐主，朝夕戏狎，累迁至开府仪同三司、虎卫大将军。
现代文：陆令萱引荐骆提婆进宫奉侍国主，从早到晚在一起嬉戏亲近，几经升迁到开府仪同三司、武卫大将军。
English: Lu Lingya recommended Luo Dibang to enter the palace to serve the Lord of the country. They played together from morning to night and became close. After several promotions, Luo Dibang was transferred to the Kaifu ceremony with the Third Division and General Wu Wei.

古文：宫人穆舍利者，斛律后之从婢也，有宠于齐王；令萱欲附之，乃为之养母，荐为弘德夫人，因令提婆冒姓穆氏。
现代文：宫人穆舍利，是斛律后的随从奴婢，也得到后主的宠爱；陆令萱为了依附她，就当了她的养母，并引荐她为弘德夫人，因此叫儿子骆提婆冒姓穆。
English: Musheri, the palace attendant, was a slave who followed the queen, and was also favored by the queen mother; Lu Lingya, in order to cling to her, became her foster mother, and introduced her as Mrs. Hongde, so he named his son Luo Dibba with the name Mu.

古文：然和士开用事最久，诸幸臣皆依附之，以固其宠。
现代文：然而和士开在朝廷当权的时间最久，那些受君主宠信的大臣们都依附他，为了可以保住自己受到恩宠的地位。
English: However, as Shikai had been in power at the court for the longest time, those ministers who were favored by the monarch all clung to him in order to maintain their favored status.

古文：齐主思祖珽，就流囚中除海州刺史。
现代文：北齐后主想念祖，把他从流放的囚徒中授职为海州刺史。
English: The Empress Dowager of Northern Qi thought of her ancestor and appointed him as the governor of Haizhou from among the exiled prisoners.

古文：珽乃遗陆媪弟仪同三司悉达书曰： 赵彦深心腹阴沉，欲行伊、霍事，仪同姊弟岂得平安，何不早用智士邪！ 
现代文：祖给陆令萱的弟弟仪同三司陆悉达去信说： 赵彦深城府很深，想仿效伊尹、霍光那样行事，你们姊弟怎么能够平安，为什么不及早起用有才智的人！ 
English: The ancestor sent a letter to Lu Lingyao's younger brother, Yi Tong, and the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of

古文：和士开亦以珽有胆略，欲引为谋主，乃弃旧怨，虚心待之，与陆媪言于帝曰： 襄、宣、昭三帝之子，皆不得立。
现代文：和士开也因为祖有胆略，想拉拢他当主要谋士，于是抛弃了以前的怨恨，虚心对待，和陆令萱一起对后主说： 文襄、文宣、孝昭三位皇帝的儿子，都没能继承皇位。
English: He Shikai also, because his ancestor had the audacity to try to win him over as his chief strategist, abandoned his previous grudge and treated him with humility. Together with Lu Lingya, he said to his descendant: The sons of the three emperors, Wen Xiang, Wen Xuan, and Xiao Zhao, all failed to inherit the imperial throne.

古文：今至尊独在帝位者，祖孝征之力也。
现代文：现在唯独陛下在帝位，是祖出的力。
English: Now, only His Majesty is on the throne, and it is the power of the ancestors.

古文：人有功，不可不报。
现代文：人如果有功劳，不能不予以报答。
English: If a person has merit, he must be rewarded.

古文：孝征心行虽薄，奇略出人，缓急可使。
现代文：祖的心胸虽然狭窄，但有超出常人的奇谋策略，遇到事情紧急时能够发挥作用。
English: Although the ancestor's mind is narrow, he has an extraordinary strategy and can play a role in an emergency.

古文：且其人已盲，必无反心。请呼取，问以筹策。 
现代文：而且他已经是个瞎子，一定不会有反心，请把他叫回来，听取他的计谋策略。 
English: Moreover, he is already blind, so he will not have any aversion. Please call him back and listen to his strategy.

古文：齐王从之，召入，为秘书监，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：北齐后主采纳了和士开的意见，召回祖，任命他为秘书监，加开府仪同三司。
English: The Empress Dowager of Northern Qi adopted the opinion of He Shi Kai, recalled Zu, appointed him as the secretary supervisor, and added the Kaifu ceremony and three departments.

古文：士开谮尚书令陇东王胡长骄恣，出为齐州刺史。
现代文：和士开向后主进谗言，说尚书令陇东王胡长仁骄横放肆，贬出为齐州刺史。
English: After the scholar opened his mouth, the master said that Shang Shuxu had ordered the Eastern King Hu Changren to be arrogant and impudent, and was relegated to the history of Qizhou.

古文：长仁怨愤，谋遣刺客杀士开。
现代文：胡长仁对和士开怨恨愤慨，打算派刺客杀死他。
English: Hu Changren was so angry and resentful of He Shihai that he planned to send an assassin to kill him.

古文：事觉，士开与珽谋之，珽引汉文帝诛薄昭故事，遂遣使就州赐死。
现代文：事情泄露，和士开和祖商量，祖以汉文帝诛杀薄昭的事情为例，于是派使者去齐州把胡长仁赐死。
English: The matter leaked out, and Shikai and Zu discussed it. Zu took the murder of Bo Zhao by Emperor Hanwen as an example, so he sent an envoy to Qizhou to put Hu Changren to death.

古文：五月，庚戌，周主如醴泉宫。
现代文：五月，庚戌，北周国主去醴泉宫。
English: In May, Geng Zheng, the ruler of Northern Zhou, went to the Spring Palace.

古文：丁巳，以吏部尚书徐陵为左仆射。
现代文：丁巳，陈朝任命吏部尚书徐陵为左仆射。
English: At the same time, the Chen dynasty appointed the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Xuling, as a left-hand man.

古文：秋，七月，辛卯，皇太子纳妃沈氏，吏部尚书君理之女也。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛卯，陈朝皇太子纳沈氏为妃，她是吏部尚书沈君理的女儿。
English: Autumn, July, Xinwu, Chen dynasty crown prince Na Shen as his wife, she is the daughter of the official Shangshu Shen Junli.

古文：辛亥，周主还长安。
现代文：辛亥，北周国主回长安。
English: In Xinhai, the northern Zhou sovereign returned to Chang'an.

古文：八月，庚辰，盗杀周孔城防主，以其地入齐。
现代文：八月，庚辰，盗贼杀死北周的孔城地方长官，把孔城并入北齐。
English: In August, Gengchen, thieves killed the local governor of Kongcheng in North Zhou and merged Kongcheng into North Qi.

古文：九月，辛卯，周遣齐公宪与柱国李穆将兵趣宜阳，筑崇德等五城。
现代文：九月，辛卯，北周派齐公宇文宪和柱国李穆领兵去宜阳，筑起崇德等五座城池。
English: In September, in Xinwu, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Qigong Yu Wenxian and Zhu Guo Li Mu to lead the army to Yiyang, and built five cities including Chongde.

古文：欧阳纥在广州十馀年，威惠著于百越。
现代文：欧阳纥在广州十几年，恩威闻名于百越。
English: Ouyang Kun has been in Guangzhou for more than ten years, and Enwei is famous in more than 100 countries.

古文：自华皎之叛，帝心疑之，征为左卫将军。
现代文：自从华皎叛乱以后，陈宣帝对他心存疑虑，征召他为左卫将军。
English: After the Huayu Rebellion, Chen Xuandi had doubts about him and conscripted him as the General of the Left Division.

古文：纥恐惧，其部下多劝之反，遂举兵攻衡州刺史钱道戢。
现代文：欧阳纥感到恐惧，部下都劝他反叛朝廷，崐于是发兵攻打衡州刺史钱道戢。
English: Ouyang Yao felt fear, his subordinates all advised him to rebel against the imperial court, so he sent troops to attack Hengzhou Jinshi Qian Daoluo.

古文：帝遣中书侍郎徐俭持节谕旨。
现代文：宣帝派中书侍郎徐俭持皇帝的符节和谕旨去见他。
English: Emperor Xuan sent Xu Jian, a middle-ranking courtier, to see him with the emperor's rune festival and edict.

古文：纥初见俭，盛仗卫，言辞不恭。
现代文：欧阳纥初见徐俭时，布置了很多兵器和卫士，说话很不恭敬。
English: When Ouyang Xuan first saw Xu Jian, he arranged a lot of weapons and guards, and spoke very disrespectfully.

古文：俭曰： 吕嘉之事，诚当已远，将军独不见周边、陈宝应乎！转祸为福，未为晚也。 
现代文：徐俭对他说： 汉武帝时吕嘉的故事，虽然离现在已经很远了，您将军唯独看不到周迪、陈宝应不久前因为反叛而被杀的事情！转祸为福，时间还不晚。 
English: Xu Jian said to him: Although the story of Lujiazui in the time of Emperor Hanwu is far away from now, your general can't see the things that Zhou Di and Chen Baoying were killed for rebellion not long ago! It's not too late to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：纥默然不应，置俭于孤园寺，累旬不得还。
现代文：欧阳纥听后沉默不回答，把徐俭安置在孤园寺，过了几十天还不放他回朝。
English: Ouyang Yao listened in silence and did not answer. He placed Xu Jian in the Solitary Garden Temple and did not let him return to the imperial court for dozens of days.

古文：纥尝出见俭，俭谓之曰： 将军业已举事，俭须还报天子。
现代文：欧阳纥曾经到孤园寺去看他，徐俭对他说： 将军已经行动了，我还要回去向天子报告。
English: Ouyang Yao once went to visit him at the Guoyuan Temple, and Xu Jian said to him, "The general has already taken action, and I still have to go back and report to God."

古文：俭之性命，虽在将军，将军成败，不在于俭，幸不见留。 
现代文：我的性命，虽然在将军手里，但是将军的成败，不在于我徐俭，希望你不要扣留我。 
English: Although my life is in the hands of the general, the success or failure of the general does not depend on my frugality. I hope you will not detain me.

古文：纥乃遣俭还。
现代文：于是欧阳纥放徐俭回去。
English: So Ouyang Xuan let Xu Jian go back.

古文：俭，陵之子也。
现代文：徐俭是徐陵的儿子。
English: Xu Jian is the son of Xu Ling.

古文：冬，十月，辛未，诏车骑将军章昭达讨纥。
现代文：冬季十月，辛未，陈宣帝下诏派车骑将军章昭达讨伐欧阳纥。
English: In the winter of October, Xin Wei, Emperor Chen Xuan sent the chariot and cavalry general Zhang Zhaoda to fight Ouyang Xuan.

古文：壬午，上享太庙。
现代文：壬午，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：十一月，辛亥，周鄫文公长孙俭卒。
现代文：十一月，辛亥，北周文公长孙俭去世。
English: In November, Xinhai, Northern Zhou Wenguang Chief Sun Jian passed away.

古文：辛丑，齐以斛律光为太傅，冯翊王润为太保，琅邪王俨为大司马。
现代文：辛丑，北齐任命斛律光为太傅，冯翊王高润为太保，琅邪王高俨为大司马。
English: Xinxiu, Northern Qi appointed Gong Liguang as Taifu, Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as Taibao, and Gong Yao Wang Gaorong as Daishima.

古文：十二月，庚午，以兰陵王长恭为尚书令。
现代文：十二月，庚午，任命兰陵王高长恭为尚书令。
English: In the late afternoon of December, Lanling Wang Gao Changgyong was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：庚辰，以中书监魏收为左仆射。
现代文：庚辰，任命中书监魏收为左仆射。
English: Geng Chen, appointed China's book supervisor Wei Shu as a left-hander.

古文：周齐公宪等周齐宜阳，绝其粮道。
现代文：北周齐公宇文宪围困北齐的宜阳，断绝宜阳的粮道。
English: The Northern Zhou Qigong Emperor Wenxian besieged Yiyang in Northern Qi and cut off Yiyang's food supply.

古文：自华皎之乱，与周人绝，至是周遣御正大夫杜杲来聘，请复修旧好。
现代文：自从华皎之乱起，陈朝和北周绝交，到现在北周才派御正大夫杜杲来聘问，请求和陈朝恢复友好关系。
English: Ever since the Huayu Rebellion, the Chen Dynasty and the Northern Zhou Dynasty had broken off diplomatic relations. It was only now that the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent the Imperial Physician Du Wei to ask for the restoration of friendly relations with the Chen Dynasty.

古文：上许之，遣使如周。
现代文：陈宣帝同意，派使者去北周。
English: Chen Xuan agreed and sent an envoy to North Zhou.

古文：临海王太建二年春，正月，乙酉朔，齐改元武平。
现代文：光大二年春季正月，乙酉朔，北齐改年号为武平。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Guangda University, North Qi changed its name to Wuping.

古文：齐东安王娄睿卒。
现代文：北齐东安王娄睿去世。
English: North Qi Dongan Wang Zhaorui passed away.

古文：丙午，上享太庙。
现代文：丙午，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：戊申，齐使兼散骑常侍裴谳之来聘。
现代文：戊申，北齐派兼散骑常侍裴谳之到陈朝聘问。
English: Wushin, a member of the Northern Qi faction, and his equestrian equerry, Pei Jun, went to Chen Dynasty to ask for a job.

古文：齐太傅斛律光，将步骑三万救宜阳，屡破周军，筑统关、丰华二城以通宜阳粮道而还。
现代文：北齐太傅斛律光，率领三万名步骑兵来救宜阳，屡次打败北周军队，修筑统关、丰化两座城池后就回去了。
English: The Northern Qi emperor Fu Bingruiguang led 30,000 infantry and cavalry to rescue Yiyang, repeatedly defeated the Northern Zhou army, built a customs house and enriched two cities, and then returned.

古文：周军追之，光纵击，又破之，获其开府仪同三司宇文英、梁景兴。
现代文：北周军队在后面追赶，斛律光发起反击，又将他们打败，俘虏北周的开府仪同三司宇文英、梁景兴。
English: The Northern Zhou army chased after them, Bao Riguang launched a counterattack, defeated them again, and captured Northern Zhou's Kaifu Yi, as well as the three generals, Wu Wenying and Liang Jingxing.

古文：二月，己巳，齐以斛律光为右丞相、并州刺史，又以任城王为太师，贺拔录尚书事。
现代文：二月，己巳，北齐任命斛律光为右丞相、并州刺史，任城王高为太师，贺拔仁为录尚书事。
English: In February, the Northern Qi appointed Zou Riguang as the Minister of the Right and the State Historian, appointed Cheng Wanggao as the Grand Master, and He Bajin as the Recorder.

古文：欧阳纥召阳春太守冯仆至南海，诱与同反。
现代文：欧阳纥召阳春太守冯仆到南海，劝说他一同谋反。
English: Ouyang Zang summoned Yangchun's daimyō Feng Bu to the South China Sea to persuade him to join the rebellion.

古文：仆遣使告其母洗夫人。
现代文：冯仆派人告诉母亲洗夫人。
English: Feng Zhong sent someone to tell his mother to wash his wife.

古文：夫人曰： 我为忠贞，今经两世，不能惜汝负国。 
现代文：洗夫人说： 我们忠贞报国，已经两代，不能因为怜惜你而辜负国家。 
English: Lady Chien said, "We have been loyal to the country for two generations. We cannot fail the country out of pity for you."

古文：遂发兵拒境，帅诸酋长迎章昭达。
现代文：于是发兵在境内拒守，并率领部落的酋长迎接章昭达。
English: As a result, he refused to send troops to defend the territory, and led the tribal chiefs to welcome Zhang Zhaoda.

古文：昭达倍道兼行，至始兴。
现代文：章昭达兼程而行，到达始兴。
English: Zhang Zhao made a side trip and arrived at Shixing.

古文：纥闻昭达奄至，恇扰不知所为，出顿洭口，多聚沙石，盛以竹笼，置于水栅之外，用遏舟舰。
现代文：欧阳纥听说章昭达的军队突然来到，惊恐混乱得不知所措，领兵出屯在口，用竹笼装满了沙子石块，放在水栅的外面，用来阻止对方船只的进路。
English: Ouyang Xuan heard that Zhang Zhaoda's army suddenly arrived, panicked and confused at a loss. The leader of the army left the camp at the mouth, filled a bamboo cage with sand and stones, and placed it outside the water gate to block the way of the other side's ships.

古文：昭达居上流，装舰造拍，令军人衔刀潜行水中，以斫笼，篾皆解。
现代文：章昭达在河的上游，装配船只，制造 拍竿 ，命士兵口里衔刀潜入水中，用刀砍断编竹笼的篾片，随后驾大船顺流而下突破敌军的防守。
English: Zhang Zhaoda was in the upper reaches of the river, assembling boats, making paddles, diving into the water with a knife in the mouth of a soldier, cutting the fins of a woven bamboo cage with a knife, and then driving a large boat down the river to break through the enemy's defense.

古文：因纵大舰随流突之，纥众大败，生擒纥，送之。癸未，斩于建康市。
现代文：欧阳纥的部众大败，欧阳纥被活捉，押送回朝；癸未，被斩于建康市中。
English: Ouyang Xuan's followers suffered a crushing defeat. Ouyang Xuan was captured alive and sent back to the North; Zou Wei was beheaded in Jiankang City.

古文：纥之反也，士人流寓在岭南者皆惶骇。
现代文：欧阳纥的反叛，使侨居在岭南的士大夫都感到惊恐害怕。
English: Ouyang Xuan's rebellion made the scholars and doctors living in Lingnan feel scared and frightened.

古文：前著作佐郎萧引独恬然，曰： 管幼安、袁曜卿，亦但安坐耳。
现代文：前著作佐郎萧引却很坦然，说： 以往历史上的管宁、袁涣遇到变故时，也都是静坐待变。
English: However, his previous work, Saro Xiaoqi, is very calm, saying: In the past, when the historical Guanning and Yuan Qi encountered changes, they were also sitting still waiting for change.

古文：君子直己以行义，何忧惧乎！ 
现代文：君子自己行为正直行施正义，何必忧虑恐惧！ 
English: A gentleman conducts himself honestly and does justice, why worry and fear!

古文：纥平，上征为金部侍郎。
现代文：欧阳纥被平定以后，陈宣帝征召萧引为金部侍郎。
English: After Ouyang Province was subdued, Emperor Chen Xuan summoned Xiao Yan to become the attendant of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：引，允之弟也。
现代文：萧引是萧允的弟弟。
English: Xiao Bing is Xiao Yun's younger brother.

古文：冯仆以其母功，封信都侯，迁石龙太守，遣使者持节册命洗氏为石龙太夫人，赐绣宪油络驷马安车一乘，给鼓吹一部，并麾幢旌节，其卤簿一如刺史之仪。
现代文：冯仆由于母亲洗夫人的功劳，被封为信都侯，升迁为石龙太守，朝廷派使者持符节册封洗夫人为石龙太夫人，赐给有彩色帷幔丝质绳网用四匹马拉的坐车一辆，乐队一套，以及旌旗等物，洗夫人驾车出行时的仪仗和州刺史一样。
English: As a result of his mother Mrs. Wash's merits, Fengpu was named the prince of the capital and promoted to the governor of Shilong. The imperial court sent an envoy with a book of symbols to designate Mrs. Wash as the first lady of Shilong. He was given a four-horse carriage with colorful drapery, a silk rope net, a band, and a banner. When Mrs. Wash was driving, the ceremony was the same as the state funeral.

古文：三月，丙申，皇太后章氏殂。
现代文：三月，丙申，陈朝皇太后章氏去世。
English: In March, the Chen Dynasty's Empress Dowager Zhang passed away.

古文：戊戌，齐安定武王贺拔仁卒。
现代文：戊戌，北齐安定武王贺拔仁去世。
English: In Wuzhen, He Bainin, the king of the Northern Qi Dynasty, passed away.

古文：丁未，大赦。
现代文：丁未，陈朝大赦全国。
English: On March 11th, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：夏，四月，甲寅，周以柱国宝文盛为大宗伯。
现代文：夏季四月，甲寅，北周任命柱国宇文盛为大宗伯。
English: In the summer of April, Jia Yin and Bei Zhou appointed Zhuo Guo Yu Wensheng as the grand patriarch.

古文：周主如醴泉宫。
现代文：北周国主去醴泉宫。
English: The Northern Zhou sovereign went to the Spring Palace.

古文：辛酉，齐以开府仪同三司徐之才尚书左仆射。
现代文：辛酉，北齐任命开府仪同三司徐之才为尚书左仆射。
English: Xin Yao, the Northern Qi appointed Kaifu Yi and the Third Division Xu Zhi Cai as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man.

古文：戊寅，葬武宣皇后于万安陵。
现代文：戊寅，陈朝将武宣皇后葬在万安陵。
English: Wu Yin, Chen Dynasty buried Empress Wu Xuan in Wan'an Mausoleum.

古文：闰月，戊申，上谒太庙。
现代文：闰月，戊申，陈宣帝到太庙谒告行礼。
English: In the leap month, Boushen, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to pay homage.

古文：五月，壬午，齐遣使来吊。
现代文：五月，壬午，北齐派使者来陈朝吊唁武宣皇后。
English: In May, at noon, the Northern Qi sent an envoy to the Chen Dynasty to offer condolences to Empress Wu Xuan.

古文：六月，乙酉，齐以广宁王孝珩为司空。
现代文：六月，乙酉，北齐任命广宁王高孝珩为司空。
English: In June, North Qi Province appointed Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojuan as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：甲辰，齐穆夫人生子恒。
现代文：甲辰，北齐穆夫人生下儿子高恒。
English: At that time, Mrs. Kitazimu gave birth to a son, Gao Heng.

古文：齐主时未有男，为之大赦。
现代文：当时北齐后主没有男孩，因此大赦全国。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi did not have a boy, so she granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：陆令萱欲恒为太子，恐斛律后恨怒，乃白齐主，使斛律后母养之。
现代文：陆令萱想以高恒为太子，但恐怕遭到斛律后的忌恨恼怒，于是禀告后主，让斛律后当母亲抚养高恒。
English: Lu Lingya wanted to make Gao Heng the crown prince, but he was afraid that he would be enraged by Yao Liguo's hatred, so he sued his stepmother and asked Yao Liguo to raise Gao Heng as his mother.

古文：己丑，齐以开府仪同三司唐邕为尚书右仆射。
现代文：己丑，北齐任命开府仪同三司唐邕为尚书右仆射。
English: At the same time, Beiqi appointed Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Tang Jun to be Shangshu's right-hand men.

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，齐立肃宗子彦其为城阳王，彦忠为梁郡王。
现代文：秋季七月，北齐立孝昭帝的儿子高彦基为城阳王，高彦忠为梁郡王。
English: In the autumn of July, Takahikoki, the son of Northern Qi Emperor Xiao Zhao, became the King of Chengyang, and Takahikotada became the King of Liang County.

古文：甲寅，以尚书令兰陵王长恭为录尚书事，中领军和士开为尚书令，赐爵淮阳王。
现代文：甲寅，任命尚书令兰陵王高长恭为录尚书事，中领军和士开为尚书令，赐给淮阳王的爵号。
English: Jia Yin appointed Shang Shuling Lanling Wang Gao Changgyang to record Shang Shuling, and the middle leader of the army, He Shikai, to be Shang Shuling, and gave him the title of Huaiyang Wang.

古文：士开威权日盛，朝士不知廉耻者，或为之假子，与富商大贾同在伯仲之列。
现代文：和士开的声势权力越来越大，朝廷中那些不知廉耻的官吏们，有的投靠他当乾儿子，和富商大贾们的行为差不多。
English: He Shikai's reputation and power grew stronger and stronger. The unscrupulous officials in the imperial court, some of whom were his adopted sons, behaved in much the same way as the rich merchants.

古文：尝有一人士参士开疾，值医云： 王伤寒极重，他药无效，应服黄龙汤。 
现代文：曾经有个官员去探视和士开的疾病，正值医生说： 大王的伤寒病很重，应当服用粪汁黄龙汤。 
English: There was once an official who went to visit Shikai when he was ill, and the doctor said, "Your Majesty's typhoid fever is very severe, and you should take Huanglong soup with dung juice."

古文：士开有难色。
现代文：和士开面有难色。
English: It's not easy to make a Wagashi-kaimen.

古文：人士曰： 此物甚易服，王不须疑，请为王先尝之。 
现代文：这个人说： 黄龙汤并不难吃，大王不必多疑，请让我替您先尝尝。 
English: This person said: Huanglong soup is not difficult to eat. You don't have to be suspicious. Please let me taste it for you first.

古文：一举而尽。
现代文：于是将黄龙汤一饮而尽。
English: As a result, he drank all the Huanglong soup.

古文：士开感其意，为之强服，遂得愈。
现代文：和士开感激他的好意，于是勉强服用，病便痊愈。
English: Wushi Kai was grateful for his kindness, so he reluctantly took it and recovered from his illness.

古文：乙卯，周主还长安。
现代文：乙卯，北周国主回长安。
English: Second, the head of the Northern Zhou Dynasty returned to Chang'an.

古文：癸酉，刘以华山王凝为太傅。
现代文：癸酉，北齐任命华山王高凝为太傅。
English: At the same time, North Qi appointed Huashan Wang Gaofeng as Taifu.

古文：司空章昭达攻梁，梁主与周总管陆腾拒之。
现代文：陈朝司空章昭达进攻后梁，后梁国主和北周总管陆腾进行抵抗。
English: Chen Zhaozhi, Kuangzhang Zhaoda attacked Houliang, and Houliang Guozhu and Lu Teng, the head of the Northern Zhou, resisted.

古文：周人于峡口南岩筑安蜀城，横引大索于江上，编苇为桥，以度军粮。
现代文：北周人在西陵峡口的南岸兴筑安蜀城，在长江上牵引大绳，编织蒲苇当作桥梁，用来运输军粮。
English: The Northern Zhou people built the Anshu City on the south bank of the Xiling Gorge. They dragged large ropes on the Yangtze River and wove reeds as bridges to transport military supplies.

古文：昭达命军士为长戟，施于楼船上，仰割其索。索断，粮绝，因纵兵攻安蜀城，下之。
现代文：章昭达叫军士制造长戟，配备在楼船上，在船上仰面割断大绳，绳索被割断，北周人的军粮运输断绝，便指挥军队攻安蜀城，将城攻克。
English: Zhang Zhaoda ordered a sergeant to make a long raft, which was equipped on a barge, cut a large rope on the back of the boat, the rope was cut, and the military grain transportation of the North Zhou people was cut off, then he commanded the army to attack Anshu City and conquer the city.

古文：梁主告急于周襄州总管卫公直，直遣大将军李迁哲将兵救之。
现代文：后梁国主向北周的襄州总管卫公宇文直告急，宇文直派大将军李迁哲率军去援救。
English: After Liang Guozhong made an urgent appeal to Uwen Zhi, the head of the Xiangzhou Military Region in northern Zhou, Uwen Zhi sent General Li Qianzhe to lead the army to rescue him.

古文：迁哲以其所部守江陵外城，自帅骑兵出南门，使步出北门，首尾邀击陈兵，陈兵多死。
现代文：李迁哲将自己的部众防守江陵的外城，自己率领骑兵突出江陵的南门，派步兵突出江陵的北门，从两头夹击陈朝军队，陈朝军队很多战死。
English: Li Qianzhe ordered his subordinates to defend the outer city of Gangneung. He led the cavalry to jut out the south gate of Gangneung, and sent the infantry to jut out the north gate of Gangneung. He clamped down on the Chen Dynasty army from both sides, and many Chen Dynasty troops were killed in the battle.

古文：夜，陈兵窃于城西以梯登城，登者数百人。迁哲与陆腾力战拒之，乃退。
现代文：夜晚，陈朝士兵偷偷地在城西架设梯子登城，上了城头的有几百人，李迁哲和陆腾奋力作战抵抗，打退了陈朝军队的进攻。
English: At night, the soldiers of the Chen Dynasty secretly set up ladders in the west of the city to climb the city. Several hundred people climbed to the top of the city. Li Qianzhe and Lu Teng fought hard to resist and repel the attack of the Chen Dynasty army.

古文：昭达又决龙川宁朔堤，引水灌江陵。
现代文：章昭达又将龙川的宁朔决口，引水倒灌江陵城。
English: Zhang Zhaoda also diverted water from the Ningshuo mouth of the Longchuan River to flood Jiangling City.

古文：腾出战于西堤，昭达兵不利，乃引还。
现代文：陆腾领兵从西出战，章昭达的军队战斗失利，只好引兵退走。
English: Lu Teng led an army to fight from the west, Zhang Zhaoda's army lost the battle and had to withdraw.

古文：八月，辛卯，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：八月，辛卯，北齐国主去晋阳。
English: In August, Xinwu, the ruler of North Qi went to Jinyang.

古文：九月，乙巳，齐立皇子恒为太子。
现代文：九月，乙巳，北齐立皇子高恒为太子。
English: In September, the Prince of Northern Qi, Gao Heng, became crown prince.

古文：冬，十月，辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，辛已朔，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in October, when winter is already in full swing.

古文：齐以广宁王孝珩为司徒，上洛王思宗为司空。
现代文：北齐任命广宁王高孝珩为司徒，上洛王高思宗为司空。
English: North Qi appointed Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun as the tutor, Shangluo Wang Gao Sizong as the tutor.

古文：复以梁永嘉王庄为开府仪同三司、梁王，许以兴复，竟不果。
现代文：又任命后梁的永嘉王萧庄为开府仪同三司、梁王，答允帮助他复国，竟没有成功。
English: He also appointed Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang of Houliang as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Liang Wang, and promised to help him restore the country, but it was not successful.

古文：及齐亡，庄愤邑，卒于鄴。
现代文：等到北齐灭亡，萧庄忧愤抑郁，在邺城死去。
English: After the death of Beiqi, Xiaozhuang became depressed and died in Lucheng.

古文：乙酉，上享太庙。
现代文：乙酉，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: Acetylene, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple for worship.

古文：己丑，齐复威宗谥曰文宣皇帝，庙号显祖。
现代文：己丑，北齐恢复威宗的文宣皇帝谥号，庙号显祖。
English: The Emperor Wenxuan and the Emperor Xianzu of the Northern Qi restored the prestige of the Emperor Wenxuan and the Emperor Xianzu of the Northern Qi restored the prestige of the Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：丁酉，周郑恒公达奚武卒。
现代文：丁酉，北周的郑桓公达奚武去世。
English: Ding Xuan, Zheng Huan of Northern Zhou, died.

古文：十二月，丁亥，齐主还鄴。
现代文：十二月，丁亥，北齐国主回邺城。
English: In December, Dinghai, the ruler of North Qi returned to Lucheng.

古文：周大将军郑恪将兵平越巂，置西宁州。
现代文：北周大将军郑恪领兵平定越，设置了西宁州。
English: Northern Zhou general Zheng Ke led the army to defeat Dingyue and set up Xining Prefecture.

古文：周、齐争宜阳，久不决。
现代文：北周、北齐争夺宜阳，久而不决。
English: North Zhou and North Qi fought for Yiyang, but the outcome was not decided for a long time.

古文：勋州刺史韦孝宽谓其下曰： 宜阳一城之地，不足损益，两国争之，劳师弥年。
现代文：勋州刺史韦孝宽对部下说： 宜阳一城，得和失关系不大，两个国家为此争夺，劳师动众已经一年。
English: Shih Wei Xiaokuan, the governor of Hunan Province, said to his subordinates: Yiyang is the first city, the relationship between gain and loss is not great, two countries are competing for this, and it has been a year since the labor movement began.

古文：彼岂无智谋之士，若弃崤东，来图汾北，我必失地。
现代文：对方难道没有智谋之士，如果放弃崤东，来谋取汾水以北一带地方，我们一定会失去国土。
English: If we give up Shandong to seek a place north of Surabaya, we will surely lose our land.

古文：今宜速于华谷及长秋筑城以杜其意。
现代文：现在应当迅速在华谷和长秋修筑城池，以断绝对方的念头。
English: Now it is time to quickly build a castle in Huayu and Changqiu to break the idea of an absolute party.

古文：脱其先我，图之实难。 
现代文：如果对方先于我们行动，我们要算计他们就很困难了。 
English: If the Qi army goes ahead of us, it will be too late to reconsider.

古文：乃画地形，且陈其状。
现代文：于是画了地形图，向朝廷陈述了这种情况。
English: So he drew a topographical map and explained the situation to the imperial court.

古文：晋公护谓使者曰： 韦公子孙虽多，数不满百。汾北筑城，遣谁过之？ 
现代文：晋公宇文护对使者说： 韦公的子孙虽然很多，但数不满百，在汾水北面修筑城池，派谁去守卫！ 
English: Jin Gong Yu Wengu said to the messenger: Although the descendants of Wei Gong are many, they are less than a hundred. They are building a castle in the north of Surabaya. Who should they send to guard it?

古文：事遂不行。
现代文：这件事便没有实现。
English: Things came to a halt.

古文：齐斛律光果出晋州道，于汾北筑华谷、龙门二城。
现代文：北齐的斛律光果然从晋州一路出兵，在汾水北面修筑起华谷、龙门二座城池。
English: Beiqi's Baoliguang successfully sent troops all the way from Jinzhou to build two castles, Huagu and Longmen, north of Surabaya.

古文：光至汾东，与孝宽相见，光曰： 宜阳小城，久劳争战。
现代文：斛律光到了汾水以东，和韦孝宽见了面。斛律光说： 宜阳一城，久劳争战。
English: Baliguang reached the east of Surabaya and met with Wei Xiaokuan. Baliguang said: Yiyang is a city, and long-term labor is a battle.

古文：今已舍彼，欲于汾北取偿，幸勿怪也。 
现代文：现在我们已经放弃宜阳，准备在汾水以北取得补偿，希望您不要见怪。 
English: Now we have given up Yiyang and are preparing to get compensation north of Surabaya. I hope you won't be surprised.

古文：孝宽曰： 宜阳，彼之要冲，汾北，我之所弃。
现代文：韦孝宽说： 宜阳，是你们的交通紧要之地，汾水以北，是我们所放弃的地方。
English: Wei Xiaokuan said, "Yiyang is a critical place for your transportation, and north of Surabaya is a place we have given up.

古文：我弃彼取，其偿安在！
现代文：我们所放弃的被你们取走，怎么能说是补偿！
English: What we gave up and you took away, how can it be called compensation!

古文：君辅翼幼主，位望隆重，不抚循百姓而极武穷兵，苟贪寻常之地，涂炭疲弊之民，窃为君不取也！ 
现代文：您辅佐幼主，地位和威望都很高，不去安抚百姓而穷兵黩武，如果贪图得到一处平常的地方，而使贫困疲惫的百姓遭到涂炭之灾，我认为您实在不该这样做！ 
English: You are an assistant to the young master, your status and prestige are very high, and you do not want to appease the people, but to make war. If you covet an ordinary place, and make the poor and tired people suffer the scourge of charcoal, I think you really should not do so!

古文：光进围定阳，筑南汾城以逼之。
现代文：斛律光进军围困定阳，筑起南汾城进逼定阳。
English: Pei Liguang marched into the besieged Dingyang and built Nanlu City to force Dingyang.

古文：周人释宜阳之围以救汾北。
现代文：北周军队撤去宜阳之围来援救汾水以北的地方。
English: The Northern Zhou army withdrew from the siege of Yiyang and came to the rescue of areas north of Surabaya.

古文：晋公护问计于齐公宪，宪曰： 兄宜暂出同州以为声势，宪请以精兵居前，随机攻取。 
现代文：晋公宇文护向齐公宇文宪请教计策，宇文宪说： 兄长最好暂时出兵同州以扩大声势，我可以率领精兵在前，看准时机攻取城池。 
English: Jin Gong Uwen Zhou asked Qi Gong Uwen Xian for advice on strategy. Uwen Xian said, "It is best for my brother to temporarily send troops to Tongzhou to expand the momentum. I can lead the elite soldiers in front and seize the opportunity to capture the city."

古文：护从之。
现代文：宇文护采纳了他的计策。
English: Umenosuke adopted his strategy.

古文：临海王太建三年
现代文：太建三年
English: Three years too late

古文：春，正月，癸丑，以尚书右仆射徐陵为左仆射。
现代文：春季正月，乙丑，陈朝任命尚书右仆射徐陵为左仆射。
English: In the first month of spring, the second month of the year, the Chen Dynasty appointed Shang Shul's right-hand man Xu Ling as his left-hand man.

古文：丁巳，齐使兼散骑常侍刘环俊来聘。
现代文：丁巳，北齐派兼散骑常侍刘环俊来陈朝聘问。
English: At the same time, Liu Huanjun, a member of the Northern Qi faction and a straggler, came to Chen Dynasty for an interview.

古文：辛酉，上祀南郊；辛未，祀北郊。
现代文：辛酉，陈宣帝到南郊祭天；辛未，到北郊祭地。
English: In Xin'an, Chen Xuandi went to the southern suburb to hold a festival; in Xinwei, he went to the northern suburb.

古文：齐斛律光筑十三城于西境，马上以鞭指画而成，拓地五百里，而未尝伐功。
现代文：北齐斛律光在国境西面修筑十三座城池，是在马上用马鞭指画出来的，虽然开拓了五百里地方，然而不曾夸耀功劳。
English: The Northern Qi Dynasty built thirteen castles on the western side of the border, which were immediately drawn with a horse whip. Although they opened up five hundred miles of land, they did not boast of their achievements.

古文：又与周韦孝宽战于汾北，破之。
现代文：又和北周的韦孝宽在汾水以北交战，打败了韦孝宽。
English: He also fought with Wei Xiaokang of Beizhou in the north of Surabaya, and defeated Wei Xiaokang.

古文：齐公宪督诸将东拒齐师。
现代文：齐公宇文宪督率将领们在东面抵抗北齐的军队。
English: Qigong Uwen and his generals resisted the Northern Qi army in the east.

古文：二月，辛巳，上祀明堂。丁酉，耕藉田。
现代文：二月，辛巳，陈宣帝到明堂祭祀；丁酉，到藉田举行耕种的仪式。
English: In February, Chen Xuandi went to Myeongdong for a religious service, and Ding Xi went to Yeonjeon to hold a planting ceremony.

古文：壬寅，齐以兰陵王长恭为尉，赵彦深为司空，和士开录尚书事，徐之才为尚书令，唐邕为左仆射，吏部尚书冯子琮为右仆射，仍摄选。
现代文：壬寅，北齐任命兰陵王高长恭为太尉，赵彦深为司空，和士开为录尚书事，徐之才为尚书令，唐邕为左仆射，吏部尚书冯子琮为右仆射，仍旧执掌吏部对官吏的铨选。
English: Minshin, North Qi appointed Lanling Wang Gao Changgong as the first lieutenant, Zhao Yanshen as the secretary, He Shikai as the record clerk, Xu Zhicai as the record clerk, Tang Jun as the left clerk, and the clerk's clerk Feng Zixuan as the right clerk. He was still in charge of the clerk's selection of officials.

古文：子琮素谄附士开，至是，自以太后亲属，且典选，颇擅引用人，不复启禀，由是与士开有隙。
现代文：冯子琮一贯阿谀附和和士开，到这时，自以为是太后的亲属，而且主管选用官吏，于是擅自引荐任命人选，不再向上启奏报告，因此与和士开产生矛盾。
English: At this time, Feng Zikai, who had always been subservient to both the empress dowager and the shikai, thought that he was a relative of the empress dowager, and that he was in charge of selecting officials, so he introduced and appointed candidates without authorization, and no longer sent reports to the top, thus creating a contradiction with the shikai.

古文：三月，丁丑，大赦。
现代文：三月，丁丑，陈朝大赦全国。
English: In March, the Dingwuxi and Chen Dynasties amnestied the whole country.

古文：周齐公宪自龙门渡河，斛律光退保华谷，宪攻拔其新筑五城。
现代文：北周齐公宇文宪从龙门渡过黄河，北齐斛律光退守华谷，宇文宪攻取了斛律光新筑的五座城池。
English: Northern Zhou Qigong Uwen Xian crossed the Yellow River from Longmen, Northern Qigong Lu Guang retreated to Huayao, and Uwen Xian captured the five newly built cities of Lu Guang.

古文：齐太宰段韶、兰陵王长恭将兵御周师，攻柏谷城，拔之而还。
现代文：北齐的太宰段韶、兰陵王高长恭率领军队抵御北周的军队，进攻柏谷城，攻克后就退兵回去了。
English: Northern Qi's Dazaidanzhao and Lanling King Gao Changqiao led the army to resist the northern Zhou army, attacked Kashiwagok Castle, and retreated after conquering it.

古文：夏，四月，戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季四月，戊寅朔，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the summer month of April.

古文：壬午，齐以琅邪王俨为太保。
现代文：壬午，北齐任命琅邪王高俨为太保。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Northern Qi appointed the evil king Gao Jiao as Taibao.

古文：壬辰，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：壬辰，北齐派使者来陈朝聘问。
English: In Imjin, Northern Qi sent an envoy to the Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：周陈公纯等取齐宜阳等九城，齐斛律光将步骑五万赴之。
现代文：北周陈公纯夺取北齐的宜阳等九座城池，北齐斛律光率领五万名步、骑兵赶到那里抵抗。
English: Northern Zhou Chen Gongchun captured nine cities including Yiyang in Northern Qi, and Northern Qi led 50,000 infantry and cavalry to resist there.

古文：五月，癸亥，周使纳言郑诩来聘。
现代文：五月，癸亥，北周派纳言郑翊来陈朝聘问。
English: In May, in the Year of the Rooster, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent a representative, Zheng Qi, to ask the Chen Dynasty for advice.

古文：周晋公护使中外府参军郭荣城于姚襄城南、定阳城西，齐段韶引兵袭周师，破之。
现代文：北周晋公宇文护派中外府参军郭荣在姚襄城南、定阳城西修筑城池。北齐段韶领兵攻袭北周军队，将他们打败。
English: Guo Rong, a member of North Zhou's Jin Gong Yu Wen Bao faction, led troops from central and foreign provinces to build fortresses in the south of Yaoxiang City and the west of Dingyang City. North Qidanzhang led troops to attack North Zhou's army and defeated them.

古文：六月，韶围定阳城，周汾州刺史杨敷固守不下。
现代文：六月，段韶包围定阳城，由于北周的汾州刺史杨敷坚守而未能攻克。
English: In June, Duan Yu encircled Dingyang City, but was unable to conquer it due to the stubborn defense of Yangshiki, the capital city of Zhangzhou, in the northern Zhou.

古文：韶急攻之，屠其外城。
现代文：段韶加紧进攻，屠杀定阳的外城百姓。
English: Duan Yan stepped up the attack and massacred the out-of-town people of Dingyang.

古文：时韶卧病，谓兰陵王长恭曰： 此城三百重涧，皆无走路；唯虑东直一道耳，贼必从此出，宜简精兵专守之，此必成擒。 
现代文：当时段韶生病，对兰陵王高长恭说： 这座城池的三面都有两道河壕，无路可走；恐怕只东南有一条路，贼寇一定会从这里突围。应当挑选精兵专门防守这条道路，这样一定能够捉住他们。 
English: At that time, Duan Qian fell ill and said to Lanling King Gao Changqiong: There are two river trenches on three sides of this city, and there is no way to go; I am afraid that there is only one road in the southeast, and the thieves will definitely break out from here. Elite soldiers should be selected to specifically guard this road, so they will definitely be able to catch them.

古文：长恭乃令壮士千馀人伏于东南涧口。
现代文：高长恭便派一千多名壮士埋伏在东南涧口。
English: Gao Changgong then sent more than a thousand strong men to ambush in the southeastern Hekou.

古文：城中粮尽，齐公宪总兵救之，惮韶，不敢进。
现代文：城中的粮食吃尽，齐公宇文宪集中所有的兵力去救援，但是害怕段韶，不敢前进。
English: The grain in the city was exhausted, and Qigong Yuwen Xian concentrated all his forces to rescue, but he was afraid of Duan Xuan and dared not advance.

古文：敷帅见兵突围夜走，伏兵击擒之，尽俘其众。
现代文：杨敷率领现有的士兵乘夜突围出城，被高长恭的伏兵攻击，全部俘虏。
English: Yang Shiji led the existing soldiers to break out of the city at night, and was attacked by Gao Changgong's ambush, and all of them were captured.

古文：乙巳，齐取周汾州及姚襄城，唯郭荣所筑城独存。
现代文：乙巳，北齐夺取了北周的汾州和姚襄城，只有郭荣所筑的城得以保全。
English: At this time, the Northern Qi conquered the Northern Zhou's Fuzhou and Yao Xiang City, and only the city built by Guo Rong was preserved.

古文：敷，愔之族子也。
现代文：杨敷是杨的族子。
English: Yangshiki is Yang's tribe.

古文：敷子素，少多才艺，有大志，不拘小节。以其父守节陷齐，未蒙赠谥，上表申理。
现代文：杨敷的儿子杨素，年少时才艺很高，有大志，不拘小节，因为父亲杨敷守节而身陷北齐，没有得到朝廷赠给的谥号，于是向朝廷上表申述理由。
English: Yangshiki's son, Yang Su, was very talented when he was young. He had great ambitions, no matter how small. Because his father, Yangshiki, kept the festival, he was trapped in Northern Qi. He did not receive the nickname given by the court, so he complained to the court about the reason.

古文：周主不许，至于再三，帝大怒，命左右斩之。
现代文：北周武帝不答允，杨素接二连三地上表，武帝勃然大怒，命令左右将他斩首。
English: Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou Dynasty did not agree, and Yang Su went to the court one after another. Emperor Wu was furious and ordered Yang Su to be beheaded.

古文：素大言曰： 臣事无道天子，死其分也！ 
现代文：杨素高声喊道： 作为臣子侍奉无道的天子，被杀死是自己的本份！ 
English: Yang Su shouted in a loud voice: As a vassal serving the wayless emperor, it is my duty to be killed!

古文：帝壮其言，赠敷大将军，谥曰忠壮，以素为仪同三司，渐见礼遇。
现代文：武帝见他出言豪壮，于是追赠杨敷为大将军，赐给忠壮的谥号，任命杨素为仪同三司，逐渐对他加以礼遇。
English: Emperor Wu saw his heroic words, so he posthumously awarded Yang Shiki as a great general, gave him the nickname of loyal and strong, appointed Yang Su as the third secretary of the ceremony, and gradually treated him with courtesy.

古文：帝命素为诏书，下笔立成，词义兼美，帝曰： 勉之，勿忧不富贵。 
现代文：武帝叫杨素起草诏书，他下笔立成，辞藻和内容都很好，武帝说： 希望你好好努力，不要担心将来不会富贵。 
English: Emperor Wu asked Yang Su to draft the edict. He wrote it down, and the words and content were very good. Emperor Wu said, "I hope you work hard, and don't worry that you won't be rich in the future."

古文：素曰： 但恐富贵来逼臣，臣无心图富贵也。 
现代文：杨素说： 只怕富贵来逼臣，臣倒无心求取富贵。 
English: Yang Su said, "Even if the rich and noble try to oppress the vassal, the vassal has no intention to seek the rich and noble."

古文：齐斛律光与周师战于宜阳城下，取周建安等四戍，捕虏千馀人而还。
现代文：北齐斛律光和北周军队在宜阳城下交战，夺得北周的建安等四个戍所，捕捉俘虏一千多人而还。
English: The Northern Qi and Northern Zhou armies clashed at the foot of Yiyang City, and captured four fortresses, including Jian'an in Northern Zhou, and captured more than a thousand prisoners before retreating.

古文：军未至鄴，齐主敕使散兵，光以军士多有功者，未得慰劳，乃密通表，请遣使宣旨，军仍且进，齐朝发使迟留。
现代文：军队还没有到邺城，北齐后主派使者遣散军队。斛律光认为军士中很多人都有功劳，却没有得到朝廷的慰劳，于是秘密地向上呈递崐表章，请后主派使臣宣读慰劳的旨意，军队仍旧向邺城前进，朝廷派使者命令军队停止前进，就地停留。
English: The army had not yet arrived in Lucheng, and after the Northern Qi, the master sent an envoy to disperse the army. Lucheng Ruiguang believed that many of the soldiers had merit, but did not receive the consolation of the court, so he secretly presented the imperial seal to the top, and asked the master's envoy to read out the consolation. The army still advanced towards Lucheng, and the court sent an envoy to order the army to stop advancing and stay in place.

古文：军还，将至紫陌，光乃驻营待使。
现代文：军队回来，将要抵达邺城郊外，斛律光便扎营等候朝廷的使者。
English: When the troops returned, they were about to reach the outskirts of Handan. Handan Light then set up camp to wait for the imperial envoys.

古文：帝闻光军已逼，心甚恶之，亟令舍人召光入见，然后宣劳散兵。
现代文：后主听到斛律光军队已经逼近邺城，心里十分厌恶，赶紧派舍人召斛律光入朝觐见，然后宣旨慰劳遣散军队。
English: Afterward, when the lord heard that the army of Zhaoliguang had approached Zhengcheng, he was very disgusted. He quickly sent a courier to summon Zhaoliguang to the imperial court, and then issued an order to comfort and disband the army.

古文：齐琅邪王俨以和士开、穆提婆等专横奢纵，意甚不平。
现代文：北齐琅邪王高俨因为和士开、穆提婆等人专横跋扈奢侈放纵，感到愤愤不平。
English: The evil king of North Qi Province, Gao Wei, was indignant because of the extravagant indulgence of He Shikai, Muti Ba and others.

古文：二人相谓曰： 琅邪王眼光奕奕，数步射人，向者暂对，不觉汗出；吾辈见天子奏事尚不然。 
现代文：和士开、穆提婆二人互相说： 琅邪王的目光奕奕有神，几步路以外就咄咄逼人，以往和他暂时打个照面，不知不觉地就出汗了；我们面见天子奏事时还不致这样。 
English: He, Shikai, and Muti said to each other, "The evil king's eyes are lively, and he is aggressive just a few steps away. In the past, when I met him for a while, I would sweat unknowingly; this will not happen when we meet the Son of Heaven.

古文：由是忌之，乃出俨居北宫，五日一朝，不得无时见太后。
现代文：因此对他忌恨，便将高俨调出住在北宫，五天上朝一次，不准他随时去见太后。
English: Therefore, he hated him, so he transferred Gao Yao to live in the North Palace, once every five days, and did not allow him to see the Empress Dowager at any time.

古文：俨之除太保也，馀官悉解，犹带中丞及京畿。
现代文：高俨被授职太保时，其余的官职都被免掉，不过还带有中丞和京畿大都督的职衔。
English: When Gao Jun was awarded the position of Taiho, the rest of the official positions were exempted, but they also carried the titles of Chujo and Gyeonggi Grand Governor.

古文：士开等以北城有武库，欲移俨于外，然后夺其兵权。
现代文：和士开等人因为北城有武器库，想把高俨调移到城外，然后夺取他总督京畿军队的兵权。
English: As Hoshikai and others had a weapons depot in Bukseong, they wanted to transfer Gao Ye to outside the city, and then seize the military power of the Gyeonggi army from him.

古文：治书侍御史王子宜，与俨所亲开府仪同三司高舍洛、中常侍刘辟强说俨曰： 殿下被疏，正由士开间构，何可出北宫入民间也！ 
现代文：治书侍御史王子宜，和高俨的亲信开府仪同三司高舍洛、中常侍刘辟强对高俨劝说道： 殿下所以被疏远，正由于和士开从中离间挑拨，您怎能离开北宫住到民间去！ 
English: Gao Shi's attendant, Prince Shi, Gao Yao's close confidant, Kaifu Yi, together with the three Gaoshelo, and the middle attendant, Liu Biqiang, said to Gao Yao's persuasion: Your highness has been alienated, and it is precisely because of the separation between you and Shi Kai, how can you leave the North Palace to live among the people!

古文：俨谓侍中冯子琮曰： 士开罪重，儿欲杀之，何如？ 
现代文：高俨对侍中冯子琮说： 和士开罪孽深重，孩儿打算杀掉他，怎么样？ 
English: Gao Yao said to the chamberlain Feng Zi Yao, "Wu Shikai's sins are very serious. The boy is planning to kill him. How about that?

古文：子琮心欲废帝而立俨，因劝成之。
现代文：冯子琮心里想废掉后主另立高俨做皇帝，因此劝高俨这样做。
English: In his heart, Feng Zixuan wanted to abolish the succession of Emperor Gao Jun, so he advised Gao Jun to do so.

古文：俨令子宜表弹士开罪，请付禁推。
现代文：高俨令王子宜上表弹劾和士开的罪状，请求将他收禁并加以审问。
English: Gao Wei ordered the prince to present the impeachment and Shi Kai's charges, and requested that he be detained and interrogated.

古文：子琮杂它文书奏之，齐主不审省而可之。
现代文：冯子琮又夹杂了其他文书一同上奏，后主没有仔细审阅就批准同意。
English: Feng Zixuan also mixed other instruments and played them together, and the latter did not carefully review and approve the agreement.

古文：俨诳领军库狄伏连曰： 奉敕，令领军收士开。 
现代文：高俨欺骗领军库狄伏连说： 奉到皇上的命令，叫领军收禁和士开。 
English: Gao Yao deceived the leader of the army, Kudivulian, saying, "I have received an order from the emperor to order the leader of the army to arrest and expel the scholar.

古文：伏连以告子琮，且请覆奏，子琮曰： 琅邪受敕，何必更奏。 
现代文：库狄伏连把这告诉了冯子琮，请他再次向皇上奏报，冯子琮说： 琅邪王已经接到皇上的敕令，何必再次奏报。 
English: Kudivulian told this to Feng Zixuan and asked him to report to the emperor again. Feng Zixuan said, "King Gong Yidang has already received the emperor's order. Why do you need to report again?"

古文：伏连信之，发京畿军士，伏于神虎门外，并戒门者不听士开入。
现代文：库狄伏连相信了，于是征调京畿的军士，埋伏在神虎门外，并告诫守门人不要让和士开进神虎门。
English: Cudiwulian believed it, so he conscripted and transferred Gyeonggi soldiers to lie in ambush outside the gate and warned the gatekeeper not to let the Japanese soldiers enter the gate.

古文：秋，七月，庚午旦，士开依常早参，伏连执士开手曰： 今有一大好事。 
现代文：秋季，七月，庚午早晨，和士开按常例到宫中早朝，库狄伏连上前握住他的手说： 今天有一件大好事。 
English: In the autumn, in July, on the morning of the second day of the second month, when Shikai went to the palace early in the morning as usual, Kudivulian came forward to hold his hand and said: Today there is a great thing.

古文：王子宜授以一函，云： 有敕，令王向台。 
现代文：王子宜递给和士开一封信，说： 皇上有敕令，叫你去到台省相见。 
English: The prince should hand a letter to the warrior, saying, "The emperor has issued an order for you to go to Taizhou to meet him.

古文：因遣军士护送。
现代文：并派军士护送。
English: and sent a sergeant to escort them.

古文：俨遣都督冯永洛就台斩之。
现代文：高俨派都督冯永洛在台省中将和士开杀死。
English: Gao Jun faction governor Feng Yonglu killed General He Shikai in Taizhou.

古文：俨本意唯杀士开，其党因逼俨曰： 事既然，不可中止。 
现代文：高俨本意只杀死和士开一个人，他的党羽却胁迫高俨说： 事情已经如此，不能中止。 
English: Takahata intended to kill only one person, Hoshikai, but his henchmen coerced Takahata into saying, "Things have come to this and cannot be stopped."

古文：俨遂帅京畿军士三千馀人屯千秋门。
现代文：高俨便率领京畿的军士三千多人驻扎在千秋门。
English: Gao Jun then led more than three thousand Gyeonggi soldiers stationed at Qianqiu Gate.

古文：帝使刘桃枝将禁兵八十人召俨，桃枝遥拜。俨命反缚，将斩之，禁兵散走。
现代文：后主派刘桃枝率领八十名禁兵把高俨召来，刘桃枝离高俨还很远时就惶恐地对他施礼，高俨下令把他反绑起来，要杀死他，禁兵们纷纷走散。
English: Afterward, the master sent Liu Taoji to lead eighty forbidden soldiers to summon Gao Yao. When Liu Taoji was still far away from Gao Yao, he bowed to him in fear. Gao Yao ordered to tie him up and kill him, and the forbidden soldiers dispersed.

古文：帝又使冯子琮召俨，俨辞曰： 士开昔来实合万死，谋废至尊，剃家家发为尼，臣为是矫诏诛之。
现代文：后主又派冯子琮去召高俨，高俨推辞说： 和士开往昔以来的罪行实在应该万死，他图谋废掉天子，叫亲生母亲剃发当尼姑，臣才假托陛下的诏命将他杀死。
English: Later, the lord sent Feng Zixuan to summon Gao Qi. Gao Qi retorted: "Washi Kai's past crimes really deserve death. He plotted to abolish the heavenly son and had his own mother shave her hair to become a nun. The vassal only killed him on the pretext of His Majesty's edict."

古文：尊兄若欲杀臣，不敢逃罪。
现代文：我兄长陛下如果要杀臣，臣不敢逃避罪责。
English: If my brother, Your Majesty, were to kill a vassal, the vassal would not dare to evade responsibility.

古文：若敕臣，愿遣姊姊来迎，臣即入见。 
现代文：如果能宽恕我，希望派乳母来迎接，臣就去见陛下。 
English: If you'll excuse me, I'd like to send a nanny to meet you, so I can go and see Your Majesty.

古文：姊姊，谓陆令萱也，俨欲诱出杀之。
现代文：乳母，是指陆令萱，高俨想骗她出来杀死她。
English: The nanny was a concubine, and Gao Yu wanted to trick her into coming out and kill her.

古文：令萱执刀在帝后，闻之，战栗。
现代文：陆令萱手里拿刀躲在后主背后，听到高俨的要求，怕得浑身打颤。
English: Lu Lingyao hid behind his master with a knife in his hand. When he heard Gao Yao's request, he trembled with fear.

古文：帝又使韩长鸾召俨，俨将入，刘辟强牵衣谏曰： 若不斩穆提婆母子，殿下无由得入。 
现代文：后主又派韩长鸾去召高俨，高俨准备去见后主，刘辟强拉住他的衣服劝道： 如果不杀掉穆提婆母子俩，殿下不能去。 
English: Later, the lord sent Han Changyu to summon Gao Yao. As Gao Yao prepared to meet the lord, Liu Biqiang tugged at his clothes and said, "If you don't kill Muti's mother and son, your highness can't go."

古文：广宁王孝珩、安德王延宗自西来，曰： 何不入？ 
现代文：广宁王高孝珩、安德王高延宗打从西面过来，问道： 为什么不进去？ 
English: Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun and Ando King Gao Yan Zongda came from the west and asked: Why not go in?

古文：辟强曰： 兵少。 
现代文：刘辟强说： 兵太少。 
English: Liu Biqiang said: There are too few soldiers.

古文：延宗顾众而言曰： 孝昭帝杀杨遵彦，止八十人。
现代文：高延宗环顾周围说： 孝昭帝杀杨遵彦时，只有八十人。
English: Gao Yanzong looked around and said, "When Emperor Xiaozhao killed Yang Zunhan, there were only eighty people.

古文：今有数千，何谓少？ 
现代文：现在有几千人，怎能说少？ 
English: Now there are thousands, how can we say less?

古文：帝泣启太后曰： 有缘，复见家家；无缘，永别！ 
现代文：后主哭着对太后说： 如果还有缘份，仍可与母亲相见；没有缘份，就和您永别了！ 
English: The lady-in-waiting cried and said to the empress dowager: "If you still have a predestined relationship, you can still see your mother; if you don't have a predestined relationship, it's goodbye forever!"

古文：乃急召斛律光，俨亦召之。
现代文：于是急忙召斛律光，高俨也召斛律光来。
English: He hurriedly summoned Liguang, and Gao Yao also summoned him.

古文：光闻俨杀士开，抚掌大笑曰： 龙子所为，固自不似凡人！ 
现代文：斛律光听说高俨杀了和士开，拍手大笑说： 这真是龙子的作为，自然不象一般人！ 
English: Hearing that Gao Yao had killed Wuxiai, Baoliguang clapped his hands and laughed loudly, saying, "This is really the act of a dragon, naturally not like an ordinary person!"

古文：入，见帝于永巷。
现代文：于是进宫，在长巷见到后主。
English: So he entered the palace and saw the queen mother in the alley.

古文：帝帅宿卫者步骑四百，授甲，将出战，光曰： 小儿辈弄兵，与交手即乱。
现代文：后主率领在宫中宿卫的步骑兵四百人，授给铠甲，准备出战，斛律光说： 小孩子们动干戈，刚一交手就会乱了阵脚。
English: Afterward, the master led the four hundred infantry and cavalry of the palace guards, gave them armor, and prepared to go to war. Zou Riguang said: Children start to fight, and as soon as they fight, they will be disorganized.

古文：鄙谚云： 奴见大家心死。 
现代文：俗话说： 奴仆见主人，心里就沮丧。 
English: A proverb says: A slave is terrified when he sees the Son of God.

古文：至尊宜自至千秋门，琅邪必不敢动。 
现代文：陛下应该亲自去千秋门，琅邪王一定不敢行动。 
English: Your majesty, you should go to Qianqiu Gate in person. The evil king will certainly not dare to act rashly.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：后主便听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：光步道，使人走出，曰： 大家来。 
现代文：斛律光走在前面做前导，派人离开队伍，喊道： 天子来了。 
English: Pellet Light walked in front to lead the way, sent someone to leave the group, and shouted, "The Son of Heaven has come."

古文：俨徒骇散。
现代文：高俨一伙怕得纷纷散去。
English: The stilted crowd scatter in fright.

古文：帝驻马桥上遥呼之，俨犹立不进，光就谓曰： 天子弟杀一夫，何所苦！ 
现代文：后主在桥上勒住马远远地呼叫他们，高俨还站在那里不敢靠前，斛律光走过去对他说： 天子的兄弟杀一个人，有什么可害怕的！ 
English: Afterward, the master held back his horse on the bridge and called to them from a distance. Gao Yao still stood there, not daring to move forward. Gao Ruiguang walked over to him and said, "Brother of the Son of Heaven, what is there to be afraid of in killing a man?"

古文：执其手，强引以前，请于帝曰： 琅邪王年少，肠肥脑满，轻为举措，稍长自不复然，愿宽其罪。 
现代文：于是抓住他的手，硬拉着他向前，请求后主说： 琅邪王年轻，肠肥脑满，行为轻率，等到年龄大了，自然不会这样，希望能宽恕他的罪过。 
English: So she grabbed his hand, pulled him forward, and begged the Lord, saying, "The Evil King is young, has a fat gut, and acts rashly. When he is older, he won't be like this, and I hope his sins will be forgiven."

古文：帝拔俨所带刀环，乱筑辫头，良久，乃释之。
现代文：后主拔出高俨所带的佩刀，用刀环对他的头乱凿，过了很久，才放了他。
English: Afterward, the master pulled out the saber that Takahata was carrying, and chiseled at his head with the sword ring. It was a long time before he let him go.

古文：收库狄伏连、高舍洛、王子宜、刘辟强、都督翟显贵，于后园支解，暴之都街。
现代文：后主收禁了库狄伏连、高舍洛、王子宜、刘辟强、都督翟显贵，在后园将他们肢解，然后在都城的大街上暴尸示众。
English: Afterward, the master confined Kudivulian, Koshero, Ojiyoshi, Liu Biqiang, and Tuduko, and dismembered them in the backyard, and then paraded the corpses in the streets of the capital.

古文：帝欲尽杀俨府文武职吏，光曰： 此皆勋贵子弟，诛之，恐人心不安。 
现代文：后主要把高俨府里的文武官吏全部杀死，斛律光说： 这些人都是达官贵人的子弟，杀掉他们，恐怕引起人心不安。 
English: After that, he killed all the civil and military officials in Gaoyuan. Gong Riguang said, "These people are the sons of high-ranking officials. If we kill them, I'm afraid it will cause unrest in the hearts of the people."

古文：赵彦深亦曰： 《春秋》责帅。 
现代文：赵彦深也说： 《春秋》里说，军队不听从命令，责任在领兵的将帅。 
English: Zhao Yanshen also said: "Spring and Autumn" says that the army does not follow orders, and the responsibility lies with the general leading the troops.

古文：于是罪之各有差。
现代文：于是区别情况对他们分别判罪。
English: As a result, they were convicted separately under different circumstances.

古文：太后责问俨，俨曰： 冯子琮教儿。 
现代文：太后责问高俨，高俨说： 是冯子琮教我这样做的。 
English: The Empress Dowager reprimanded Gao Yao, and Gao Yao said, "It was Feng Zixuan who taught me to do this.

古文：太后怒，遣使就内省以弓弦绞杀子琮，使内参以库车载尸归其家。
现代文：太后大怒，派使者到台省用弓弦将冯子琮绞死，派太监用库车拉上尸体送到他家里去。
English: The empress dowager was so angry that she sent an envoy to Taiwan Province to hang Feng Zixuan with a bowstring, and sent a eunuch to drag the body to his home with a wagon.

古文：自是太后常置俨于宫中，每食必自尝之。
现代文：从此以后太后常常把高俨安置在宫中，每次吃饭都亲自先尝一尝，怕人毒死高俨。
English: From then on, the empress dowager often placed sorghum in the palace, and she personally tasted it before every meal, fearing that people would poison the sorghum.

古文：八月，己亥，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：八月，己亥，北齐后主去晋阳。
English: In August, Ji Hai, the queen of North Qi went to Jinyang.

古文：九月，辛亥，齐以任城王湝为太宰，冯翊王润为太师。
现代文：九月，辛亥，北齐任命任城王高为太师，冯翊王高润为太师。
English: In September, Xinhai, Northern Qi appointed Rencheng Wanggao as Grand Master and Fengxuan Wanggaorun as Grand Master.

古文：己未，齐平原忠武王段韶卒。
现代文：己未，北齐平原忠武王段韶去世。
English: In the meantime, the North Qi Plain's King Taowu passed away.

古文：韶有谋略，得将士死力，出总军旅，入参帏幄，功高望重，而雅性温慎，得宰相体。
现代文：段韶有谋略，将士们都愿意为他效命，出朝能总辖军队，入朝能参与决策，功劳大威望重，性格谨慎温和，具有宰相的气质才能。
English: Duan Er has a strategy, the generals are willing to serve him, he can command the army when he leaves the government, he can participate in decision-making when he enters the government, he is highly respected for his achievements, his character is cautious and gentle, and he has the temperament and talent of a prime minister.

古文：事后母孝，闺门雍肃，齐勋贵之家，无能及者。
现代文：侍奉继母很孝顺，家中和睦严肃，北齐的勋臣贵族之家，没有能及得上的。
English: He was very dutiful in serving his stepmother, and the family was harmonious and serious. There was no other noble family in Northern Qi that could match him.

古文：齐祖珽说陆令萱，出赵彦深为兗州刺史。
现代文：北齐祖劝陆令萱，叫她把赵彦深调出朝廷做兖州刺史。
English: Bei Qizhu advised Lu Linyi to ask her to transfer Zhao Yanshen from the imperial court to be the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：齐主以珽为侍中。
现代文：北齐后主任命祖为侍中。
English: After the Northern Qi Dynasty, the lord appointed the ancestor as a chamberlain.

古文：陆令萱说帝曰： 人称琅邪王聪明雄勇，当今无敌；观其相表，殆非人臣。
现代文：陆令萱对后主说： 人称琅邪王聪明勇敢，当今无敌；但看他的相貌，几乎不是臣下。
English: Lu Lingya said to his successor: People say that the evil king is clever and brave, and today he is invincible; but judging by his appearance, he is hardly a vassal.

古文：自专杀以来，常怀恐惧，宜早为之计。 
现代文：自从他独断专行杀和士开以来，常常怀有恐惧之心，应该及早作出打算。 
English: Ever since he started killing people on his own, he has often harbored a fear that he should have made plans earlier.

古文：幸臣何洪珍等亦请杀之。
现代文：宠臣何洪珍等人也请后主杀掉高俨。
English: His favorite vassal He Hongzhen and others also asked their lord to kill Gao Yao.

古文：帝未决，以食舆密迎珽，问之，珽称： 周公诛管叔，季友鸩庆父。 
现代文：后主犹豫不决；用装运食物的车子把祖秘密接来，询问他的意见。祖举出 周公诛杀管叔，季友毒死庆父 两个例子。
English: The latter hesitated; using a food delivery vehicle, he secretly brought Zou in and asked him for his opinion. Zou gave two examples: Zhou Gongyan killed his uncle, and Ji You poisoned his father.

古文：帝乃携俨之晋阳，使右卫大将军赵元侃诱俨执之，元侃曰： 臣昔事先帝，见先帝爱王。
现代文：后主便带高俨去晋阳，派右卫大将军赵元侃诱捕高俨，赵元侃说： 臣以前侍奉先帝，看到先帝喜欢琅邪王。
English: Afterward, the lord took Gao Yao to Jinyang and sent the Right Guard General Zhao Yuan Kan to trap Gao Yao. Zhao Yuan Kan said, "I used to serve the former emperor, and I saw that the former emperor liked to torture evil kings.

古文：今宁就死，不忍行此。 
现代文：现在我宁愿被杀，不忍心做这种事。 
English: Now I'd rather be killed than do something like that.

古文：帝出元侃为豫州刺史。
现代文：后主便将赵元侃贬为豫州刺史。
English: Later, the master transferred Yuan Kan out of Beijing and appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：庚午，帝启太后曰： 明旦欲与仁威早出猎。 
现代文：庚午，后主启禀太后说： 明天准备和仁威一早出外打猎。 
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the empress dowager said, "Tomorrow, prepare to go hunting with Ren Wei in the morning."

古文：夜四鼓，帝召俨，俨疑之。
现代文：夜里四更时分，后主召见高俨，高俨产生怀疑。
English: At four o'clock in the evening, the master summoned Gao Yao to see him, and Gao Yao became suspicious.

古文：陆令萱曰： 兄呼，儿何为不去！ 
现代文：陆令萱说： 兄长叫你，孩子你为什么不去？ 
English: Lu Lingyao said: My brother has called you, my child, why don't you go?

古文：俨出，至永巷，刘桃枝反接其手。俨呼曰： 乞见家家、尊兄。 
现代文：高俨出来，走到长巷，刘桃枝将他的双手反绑起来，高俨高喊道： 让我去见母亲、兄长。 
English: Gao Yao came out and walked to the alley. Liu Tao Zhi tied his hands behind his back. Gao Yao shouted, "Let me see my mother and brother."

古文：桃枝以袖塞其口，反袍蒙头负出，至大明宫，鼻血满面，拉杀之，时年十四，裹之以席，埋于室内。
现代文：刘桃枝用衣袖塞在他嘴里，把他的袍子翻过来蒙住头，将他背出来，走到大明宫时，高俨的鼻血流了满面，被人用手摧折而死，当时才十四岁，将尸体用席子包起来，埋在室内。
English: Liu Tao Zhi stuffed his mouth with his sleeve, turned his robe upside down to cover his head, and turned him out. When he walked to the Daming Palace, Gao Yao's nose bled profusely. He was only fourteen years old at the time, and was crushed to death by hand. His body was wrapped in a mat and buried indoors.

古文：帝使启太后，太后临哭，十馀声，即拥入殿。
现代文：后主派人启奏太后，太后到那里哭吊，刚哭了十几声，就被人簇拥着回到殿中。
English: Afterward, the host sent someone to play for the empress dowager, and the empress dowager went there to cry. She had just cried a dozen or so times when she was surrounded by people and returned to the hall.

古文：遗腹四男，皆幽死。
现代文：高俨有四个遗腹男孩，后来都被囚禁而死。
English: Gao Yao had four stillborn boys, all of whom later died in captivity.

古文：冬，十月，罢京畿府，入领军。
现代文：冬季，十月，撤销京畿府，将京畿兵归领军统率。
English: In winter, in October, Gyeonggi Prefecture was abolished, and Gyeonggi soldiers were assigned to lead the army.

古文：壬午，周冀公通卒。
现代文：壬午，北周冀公宇文通去世。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Beizhou Jigong Yu Wentong passed away.

古文：甲申，上享太庙。
现代文：甲申，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀祖先。
English: Emperor Gaoshen and Chen Xuandi went to the Grand Temple to worship their ancestors.

古文：乙未，周遣右武伯谷会琨等聘于齐。
现代文：乙未，北周派右武伯谷会琨等人到北齐聘问。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent some people from the Right Division of the Imperial Army to the Northern Qi Dynasty for consultation.

古文：齐胡太后出入不节，与沙门统昙献通，诸僧至有戏呼昙献为太上皇者。
现代文：北齐胡太后进进出出没有节制，和主管僧人的昙献私通，僧人甚至戏称昙献为太上皇。
English: The Empress Dowager Beiqihu went in and out of the palace without restraint, and had an illicit affair with the head monk Xuan Xian. The monk even jokingly called Xuan Xian the "Emperor."

古文：齐主闻太后不谨而未之信，后朝太后，见二尼，悦而召之，乃男子也。
现代文：北齐后主听说胡太后行为不检点而没有相信，后来有一次去朝见太后时，看到有两个尼姑在旁边，因为喜爱而把她们召来，原来都是男子假扮的。
English: When the Empress Dowager Beiqi heard that the Empress Dowager Hu had behaved improperly, she did not believe it. Later, when she went to see the Empress Dowager, she saw two nuns standing nearby. She had called them because she liked them, but they were all pretending to be men.

古文：于是昙献事亦发，皆伏诛。
现代文：于是昙献的事情被暴露，这些人都被处死。
English: As a result, the sacrificial offering was exposed, and these people were all put to death.

古文：己亥，帝自晋阳奉太后还鄴，至紫陌，遇大风。
现代文：己亥，北齐后主从晋阳奉太后回邺城，到达效外，遇到大风。
English: At the beginning of the year, the empress dowager of Northern Qi returned to Lucheng from Jinyang to serve as empress dowager, and encountered a strong wind.

古文：舍人魏僧伽习风角，奏言： 即时当有暴逆事。 
现代文：舍人魏僧伽懂得测天观象预卜吉凶，上奏说： 立即会有暴乱叛逆的事情发生。 
English: Wei Sangha, who knew how to measure the celestial vision and foretell auspicious and inauspicious events, said in the sermon, "Immediately, there will be a riot and rebellion.

古文：帝诈云 鄴中有变 ，弯弓缠弰，驰入南城，遣宦者邓长颙幽太后于北宫，仍敕内外诸亲皆不得与胡太后相见。
现代文：后主谎称 邺城中有变 ，于是拉足弓弦绷紧弓梢，疾走进入邺都的南城，派太监邓长将太后幽禁在北宫，下令朝廷内外的所有亲属不能去见胡太后。
English: The Empress Dowager falsely claimed that there was a change in Handan, so she tightened the bowstrings and rushed into the southern city of Handan. She sent the eunuch Deng Chang to imprison the Empress Dowager in the North Palace and ordered that all relatives inside and outside the imperial court could not go to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后或为帝设食，帝亦不敢尝。
现代文：太后有时为后主准备了食物，后主也不敢尝。
English: The empress dowager sometimes prepared food for her husband, but he did not dare to try it.

古文：庚戌，齐遣侍中赫连子悦聘于周。
现代文：庚戌，北齐派侍中赫连子悦到北周聘问。
English: Geng Yao, Northern Qi sent the chamberlain, Kherian Ziyue, to Northern Zhou for an interview.

古文：十一月，丁巳，周主如散关。
现代文：十一月，丁巳，北周国主去散关。
English: In November, Ding Si, the ruler of Northern Zhou, went to Sankuan.

古文：丙寅，齐以徐州行台广陵王孝珩录尚书事；庚午，又以为司徒。
现代文：丙寅，北齐任命徐州行台广宁王高孝珩为录尚书事；庚午，又任命他为司徒。
English: Xuzhou Xingtai Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun was appointed by the Northern Qi to be the record keeper; Geng Wu also appointed him as the steward.

古文：癸酉，以斛律光为左丞相。
现代文：癸酉，任命斛律光为左丞相。
English: , appointed 律光 as Minister of the Left.

古文：十二月，己丑，周主还长安。
现代文：十二月，己丑，北周国主回长安。
English: In December, the Northern Zhou ruler returned to Chang'an.

古文：壬辰，邵陵公章昭达卒。
现代文：壬辰，陈朝的邵陵公章昭达去世。
English: In Imjin, Shao Ling Gongzang Zhaoda of the Chen Dynasty passed away.

古文：是岁，梁华皎将如周，过襄阳，说卫公直曰： 梁主既失江南诸郡，民少国贫；朝廷兴亡继绝，理宜资赡，望借数州以资梁国。 
现代文：这一年，后梁的华皎将去北周，经过襄阳时，对卫公宇文直说： 梁主已经失去江南的一些郡，百姓少而国家贫穷；朝廷的兴亡继绝，理应加以资助，希望能借几个州的地方帮助梁国。 
English: That year, after Liang's Huayuan will go to Beizhou, when passing through Yangyang, he said to Wei Gong Yu Wenzhi: Liang Lord has lost some counties in the south of the Yangtze River, the people are few and the country is poor; the rise and fall of the imperial court should be funded, hoping to borrow several states to help Liang country.

古文：直然之，遣使言状，周主诏以基、平、鄀三州与之。
现代文：卫公宇文直表示赞同，派使者向朝廷说明情况，北周国主下诏将基、平、三个州给予后梁。
English: Weigong Uwen Zhi expressed his approval and sent an envoy to explain the situation to the imperial court, and the ruler of the North Zhou Dynasty gave Qi, Ping and the three states to Houliang.

