古文：儒者曰： 日朝见，出阴中；暮不见，入阴中。
现代文：儒者说： 太阳早晨升起，是从阴气中出来的；日落看不见，是又回到阴气中去。
English: Confucians said: The sun rises in the morning and comes out of the gloom; the sunset is not seen, but returns to the gloom.

古文：阴气晦冥，故没不见。 
现代文：阴气昏暗，所以隐没看不见。 
English: It's overcast, so you can't see anything.

古文：如实论之，不出入阴中。
现代文：按实际情况说，不是从阴气中出来，也不是回到阴气中去。
English: According to the actual situation, it is not coming out of the negative atmosphere, nor is it returning to the negative atmosphere.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：夫夜，阴也，气亦晦冥，或夜举火者，光不灭焉。
现代文：因为夜晚是阴气，阴气很昏暗。有人晚上举着火把，火光并不熄灭。
English: Because the night is gloomy, the gloomy is very dark. Someone is holding a torch at night, the flame does not go out.

古文：夜之阴，北方之阴也；朝出日，入所举之火也。
现代文：夜晚的阴气和北方的阴气是一样的。早晨升起的太阳，跟人举着的火把一样。
English: The gloom of night is as the gloom of the north: so is the sun when it ariseth in the morning, as a torch that is lifted up.

古文：火夜举，光不灭；日暮入，独不见，非气验也。
现代文：夜晚举着火把，火光不会熄灭，日暮落山，偏偏看不见，这证明晚上看不见太阳不是阴气昏暗的缘故。
English: Holding torches in the evening, the light of the fire will not be extinguished, and the sunset will not be visible, which proves that the reason why the sun cannot be seen at night is not because of the gloom.

古文：夫观冬日之出入，朝出东南，暮入西南。
现代文：再来看看冬天的日出日落，早晨太阳从东南方升起，傍晚向西南方落下。
English: Let's take a look at the winter sunrise and sunset. In the morning, the sun rises from the southeast and sets in the southwest in the evening.

古文：东南、西南非阴，何故谓之出入阴中？
现代文：东南方和西南方都没有阴气，为什么要说它从阴气中升起又回到阴气中去呢？
English: Neither the southeast nor the southwest has yin, so why should it be said that it rises from yin and returns to yin?

古文：且夫星小犹见，日大反灭，世儒之论，竟虚妄也。
现代文：再说，星星很小晚上还看得见，太阳大反倒会隐没，可见世上儒者的议论，最终是没有根据的假话。
English: Moreover, the stars are still visible in the evening when they are very small, but the sun will fade. It can be seen that the arguments of the Confucians in the world are ultimately unfounded lies.

古文：儒者曰： 冬日短，夏日长，亦复以阴阳。
现代文：儒者说： 冬天短，夏天长，也还是由于阴气和阳气的缘故。
English: Confucians said: Winter is short, summer is long, also because of yin and yang.

古文：夏时，阳气多，阴气少，阳气光明，与日同耀，故日出辄无鄣蔽。
现代文：夏天的时候，阳气多，阴气少，阳气光明，跟太阳同光辉，所以太阳出来就没有遮蔽。
English: In summer, there is more yang and less yin, and the yang is bright and shines with the sun, so when the sun comes out, there is no shade.

古文：冬，阴气晦冥，掩日之光，日虽出，犹隐不见，故冬日日短，阴多阳少，与夏相反。 
现代文：冬天的时候，阴气昏暗，掩住了太阳的光亮，太阳虽然升起，就像被遮着看不见一样，所以冬天白昼短，阴气多阳气少，与夏天正相反。 
English: In winter, the gloomy atmosphere is dim, hiding the light of the sun. Although the sun rises, it is as if it is covered and cannot be seen. Therefore, the winter day is short, and the gloomy atmosphere is more yang and less yang, which is the opposite of summer.

古文：如实论之，日之长短，不以阴阳。
现代文：按实际情况来说，白昼的长和短，跟阴气和阳气没有关系。
English: According to the actual situation, the length and shortness of the day have nothing to do with yin and yang.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：复以北方之星。
现代文：还是拿北方的星来证明。
English: Or take the northern star to prove it.

古文：北方之阴，日之阴也。
现代文：北方的阴气同冬天的阴气一样。
English: The gloom of the north is like the gloom of winter.

古文：北方之阴，不蔽星光，冬日之阴，何故灭日明？
现代文：北方的阴气，不遮蔽星光，冬天的阴气，怎么能使太阳的光亮消失呢？
English: How can the gloom of the north obscure the light of the stars, or the gloom of winter blot out the light of the sun?

古文：由此言之，以阴阳说者，失其实矣。
现代文：这样说来，用阴气和阳气多少来解释白昼长短的人，所说的是不符合实际情况的。
English: In this way, those who use yin and yang to explain the length of the day are not in line with the actual situation.

古文：实者，夏时日在东井，冬时日在牵牛，牵牛去极远，故日道短，东井近极，故日道长。
现代文：实际上，夏天的时候太阳处在东井，冬天的时候太阳处在牵牛。牵牛离北斗星很远，所以白昼短；东井靠北斗星很近，所以白昼长。
English: In fact, in summer, the sun is in the East Well, and in winter, the sun is in the Cowherd. The Cowherd is far away from the Big Dipper, so the day is short; the East Well is very close to the Big Dipper, so the day is long.

古文：夏北至东井，冬南至牵牛，故冬夏节极，皆谓之至，春秋未至，故谓之分。
现代文：夏天太阳向北移到东井，冬天太阳朝南移到牵牛，所以冬、夏的节气到了白昼最短与最长的时刻，因此都称作 至 ；春、秋的节气没有到白昼最短与最长的时刻，所以称作 分 。
English: In summer, the sun moves north to the east well, in winter the sun moves south to the cowherd, so the winter and summer solar terms reach the shortest and longest moments of the day, so they are both called to; the spring and autumn solar terms do not reach the shortest and longest moments of the day, so they are called minutes.

古文：或曰： 夏时阳气盛，阳气在南方，故天举而高；冬时阳气衰，天抑而下。
现代文：有人说： 夏天的时候阳气盛，阳气在南方，所以天就升高了；冬天阳气衰，天就降低了。
English: Some people say: In summer, when the yang is strong, the yang is in the south, so the sky is elevated; in winter, when the yang is weak, the sky is lowered.

古文：高则日道多，故日长；下则日道少，故日短也。 
现代文：天高，那么太阳经过的路程多，所以白昼长；天低，那么太阳经过的路程少，所以白昼短。
English: When the sky is high, the sun passes more distance, so the day is long; when the sky is low, the sun passes less distance, so the day is short.

古文：夏日阳气盛，天南方举而日道长；月亦当复长。
现代文：夏天阳气盛，天的南方升高而太阳经过的路程长，那么月亮经过的路程也应当长。
English: In summer, when the yang is strong and the southern part of the sky is high, and the sun's path is long, the moon's path should also be long.

古文：案夏日长之时，日出东北，而月出东南；冬日短之时，日出东南，月出东北。
现代文：考察夏天白昼长的时候，太阳是从东北方升起，而月亮是从东南方升起；冬天白昼短的时候，太阳是从东南方出来，而月亮是从东北方出来。
English: In summer, when the day is long, the sun rises from the northeast and the moon rises from the southeast; in winter, when the day is short, the sun rises from the southeast and the moon rises from the northeast.

古文：如夏时天举南方，日月当俱出东北，冬时天复下，日月亦当俱出东南。
现代文：按说夏天的时候天从南方升高，太阳和月亮就应当一起从东北方升起；冬天的时候天又降低了，太阳和月亮也应当一起从东南方出来。
English: It is said that when the sky rises from the south in summer, the sun and moon should rise together from the northeast; when the sky lowers in winter, the sun and moon should also rise together from the southeast.

古文：由此言之，夏时天不举南方，冬时天不抑下也。
现代文：照这样说来，夏天的时候天不会从南方升高，冬天的时候天又不会降低。
English: According to this, in summer the sky does not rise from the south, and in winter it does not fall.

古文：然则夏日之长也，其所出之星在北方也；冬日之短也，其所出之星在南方也。
现代文：那么可见，夏天白昼长，是因为太阳出于北方的东井星的缘故；冬天白昼短，是因为太阳出于南方的牵牛星的缘故。
English: So, it can be seen that the summer day is long because the sun is caused by the northern star of the East Well; the winter day is short because the sun is caused by the southern star of the Cowherd.

古文：问曰： 当夏五月日长之时在东井，东井近极，故日道长。
现代文：有人问： 每当夏天农历五月白昼最长的时候，太阳处在东井，东井靠近北斗星，所以白昼最长。
English: Some people asked: Whenever the summer lunar month of May is the longest day, the sun is in the east well, and the east well is close to the Big Dipper, so the day is the longest.

古文：今案察五月之时，日出於寅，入於戌。
现代文：现在考察五月时，太阳寅时从东北升起，戌时向西北落下。
English: Looking at May now, the sun rises in the northeast in the morning and sets in the northwest in the evening.

古文：日道长，去人远，何以得见其出於寅入於戌乎？ 
现代文：太阳经过的路程很长，离人又远，为什么能知道它是寅时从东北升起，戌时向西北落下呢？ 
English: The sun travels a long distance and is far away from people. How can we know that it rises from the northeast at the time of the crescent moon and sets to the northwest at the time of the new moon?

古文：日东井之时，去人极近。
现代文：因为太阳处于东井的时候，离人与北斗星很近。
English: Because when the sun is in the east, it is very close to people and the Big Dipper.

古文：夫东井近极，若极旋转，人常见之矣。
现代文：东井靠近北斗星，沿着北斗星旋转，这样，人们就能经常看到东井和太阳了。
English: The East Well is close to the Big Dipper and rotates along the Big Dipper, so people can often see the East Well and the sun.

古文：使东井在极旁侧，得无夜常为昼乎？
现代文：这时，要是东井在北斗星的旁边，岂不是夜晚就经常成为白昼了！
English: At this time, if Azuma was next to the Big Dipper, wouldn't night often turn into day?

古文：日昼行十六分，人常见之，不复出入焉。
现代文：这样，太阳白昼运行十六分，人们就能常常看见它，而不再有太阳出没的问题。
English: In this way, the sun runs sixteen minutes during the day, people can often see it, and there is no longer a problem of the sun haunting.

古文：儒者或曰： 日月有九道，故曰： 日行有近远，昼夜有长短也。 
现代文：儒者有人说： 太阳和月亮运行有九道，所以说太阳运行有时远有时近，白昼与黑夜也就有时长有时短。 
English: Some Confucians said: The sun and the moon have nine courses. Therefore, the sun's course is sometimes far and sometimes near, and the day and night are sometimes long and sometimes short.

古文：夫复五月之时，昼十一分，夜五分；六月，昼十分，夜六分；从六月往至十一月，月减一分：此则日行，月从一分道也，岁，日行天十六道也，岂徒九道？
现代文：还是就五月的时候来说，太阳白昼运行十一分，夜晚运行五分；六月份，太阳白昼运行十分，夜晚运行六分；从六月往后到十一月份，太阳白昼每月减少运行一分。这就是太阳运行每月遵循一分道的原则，可见，年年太阳每天都按十六分道运行，哪里只是九道呢？
English: Still, as far as May is concerned, the sun runs for eleven minutes during the day and for five minutes at night; in June, the sun runs for ten minutes during the day and for six minutes at night; from June to November, the sun's daily run is reduced by one minute each month. This is the principle that the sun's run follows a one-minute path each month. It can be seen that the sun runs for sixteen minutes every day, but where are the nine paths?

古文：或曰： 天高南方，下北方。
现代文：有人说： 天南方高，北方低。
English: Some people say: The south of the sky is high, the north is low.

古文：日出高，故见；入下，故不见。
现代文：太阳高高升起，所以看得见；太阳落下去，所以看不见。
English: The sun rises high, so it can be seen; the sun sets, so it cannot be seen.

古文：天之居若倚盖矣，故极在人之北，是其效也。
现代文：天就像斜放着的车盖固定在空中，所以北斗星在人的北面，这就是天像个倾斜车盖的证明。
English: The sky is fixed in the air like a tilted car cover, so the Big Dipper is to the north of a person, which is proof that the sky is like a tilted car cover.

古文：极其天下之中，今在人北，其若倚盖，明矣。 
现代文：北斗星在天下的正中，现在在人们的北面，天像个倾斜着的车盖，这已经很清楚了。
English: It is already clear that the Big Dipper is in the middle of the world, now to the north of people, and the sky is like a tilted car cover.

古文：日明既以倚盖喻，当若盖之形也。
现代文：我说：既然把天比喻为倾斜的车盖，就应该像车盖的形状。
English: I said: Since the sky is likened to a tilted car cover, it should resemble the shape of a car cover.

古文：极星在上之北，若盖之葆矣；其下之南，有若盖之茎者，正何所乎？
现代文：北斗星在我们上空的北面，像车盖的帽顶；那么它的下面朝南，该有个像支撑车盖的杆样的东西，它正好在什么地方呢？
English: The North Star, the Big Dipper, rises above us in the north, like the top of a car bonnet; so below it, facing south, there should be something like a rod supporting the car bonnet, and where exactly is it?

古文：夫取盖倚於地不能运，立而树之，然後能转。
现代文：再说，拿车盖斜放在地上，它不会运转，把它树立起来，然后才能转动。
English: Besides, if you put the lid of the car on the ground at an angle, it won't work. You have to set it up before you can turn it.

古文：今天运转，其北际不著地者，触碍何以能行？
现代文：现在天在运转，它的北部边沿接触了大地，要是碰到障碍，怎么能运转呢？
English: Now the sky is moving, its northern edge touches the earth, how can it move if it encounters obstacles?

古文：由此言之，天不若倚盖之状，日之出入不随天高下，明矣。
现代文：像这样说来，天就不像个倾斜着的车盖形状，太阳的出没也不跟天的高低有关，这是很清楚的了。
English: In this way, it is clear that the sky is not like a tilted car cover, and the sun's appearance is not related to the height of the sky.

古文：或曰： 天北际下地中，日随天而入地，地密鄣隐，故人不见。 
现代文：有人说： 天的北边落入地中，太阳也跟随天一起落进地里，由于地严密地遮蔽着，所以人看不见。
English: Some people say: The northern part of the sky falls into the earth, and the sun also falls into the earth with the sky. Because the earth is tightly covered, people cannot see it.

古文：然天地，夫妇也，合为一体。
现代文：然则天地是夫妻，合成一体。
English: However, heaven and earth are husband and wife, a synthetic whole.

古文：天在地中，地与天合，天地并气，故能生物。
现代文：天在地中，地与天合成一体，天和地并成一气，所以能产生万物。
English: Heaven is in the earth, and the earth is one with heaven, and heaven and earth are one, so all things can be produced.

古文：北方阴也，合体并气，故居北方。
现代文：北方属阴，天地合成一体并成一气，因此住在北方。 
English: The north is yin, and heaven and earth are combined into one and become one, so they live in the north.

古文：天运行於地中乎，不则，北方之地低下而不平也。
现代文：天在地中运行吗？否则，是北方的地低下而倾斜了？
English: Doth the heaven walk in the midst of the earth? and is not the earth of the north lower than the earth, and lower than the earth?

古文：如审运行地中，凿地一丈，转见水源，天行地中，出入水中乎，如北方低下不平，是则九川北注，不得盈满也。
现代文：如果天真的在地中运行，凿地一丈，转眼就该看见水源，天在地中运行，在水中出没吗？如果北方低下倾斜，那么所有的河流都应该向北倾注，而不会充满水了。
English: If the sky really moves in the earth, and the earth is hewn to the ground, then in the blink of an eye we should see a water source. Does the sky move in the earth and haunt the water? If the north is low and sloping, then all rivers should pour northward, and not be filled with water.

古文：实者，天不在地中，日亦不随天隐，天平正，与地无异。
现代文：实际上，天下在地中，太阳也不跟随天隐没，天平正跟地没有两样。
English: In fact, the sky is in the earth, the sun does not follow the sky, and the balance is no different from the earth.

古文：然而日出上，日入下者，随天转运，视天若覆盆之状，故视日上下然，似若出入地中矣。
现代文：然而太阳升上天空，太阳落入地下，是跟随着天运转的。看天像盆倒扣的形状，所以看太阳出来是一上一下的样子，好像是从地中升起又落入地中。
English: However, the sun rises in the sky, the sun falls into the ground, and it follows the movement of the sky. Looking at the sky is like the shape of a pot upside down, so looking at the sun coming out is a one-by-one look, as if rising from the ground and falling into the ground.

古文：然则日之出，近也；其入远，不复见，故谓之入，运见於东方近，故谓之出。
现代文：其实，能看见太阳出来，是它靠近人；看见它落下去，是它离人远，不再看见了，所以认为它入地了。太阳运行出现在东方，靠近人了，所以称为日出。
English: In fact, if you can see the sun rise, it is because it is close to you; if you see it set, it is because it is far away from you and you can no longer see it, so you think it has set. The sun appears to move in the east and is close to you, so it is called sunrise.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：系明月之珠於车盖之，转而旋之，明月之珠旋邪？
现代文：把光亮的珠子栓在车盖的轑上，旋转车盖，光亮的珠子本身会转动吗？
English: Put the shiny bead on the hub of the car cover, turn the car cover, will the shiny bead itself turn?

古文：人望不过十里，天地合矣，远非合也。
现代文：人往前看不超过十里，天地就会在一起，这是远的缘故，这不是真正合在一起。
English: People can't see more than ten miles ahead, and heaven and earth will be together. It's because of the distance, it's not really together.

古文：今视日入，非入也，亦远也。
现代文：现在看见太阳落入地下，并不是真落入地下，也是远的缘故。
English: Now I see the sun falling into the ground, but it's not really falling into the ground, it's because it's far away.

古文：当日入西方之时，其下民亦将谓之日中。
现代文：当太阳向西方落下的时候，那些正处在太阳下的人还会认为是中午。
English: When the sun sets in the west, those who are under the sun will still think it is noon.

古文：从日入之下，东望今之天下，或时亦天地合。
现代文：从太阳落下的地方，向东看现在的天下，或许也天地合在一起了。
English: From the place where the sun sets, looking to the east at the world as it is now, perhaps the heavens and the earth have come together.

古文：如是方天下在南方也，故日出於东方，入於北方之地，日出北方，入於南方。
现代文：像这样，现在的中国在南方，所以太阳从东方升起，向西方落下。在北方的土地上，太阳从北方升起，朝南方落下。
English: As such, modern China is in the south, so the sun rises in the east and sets in the west. In the northern land, the sun rises in the north and sets in the south.

古文：各於近者为出，远者为入。
现代文：它们都靠近人所以叫日出，离人远所以叫日落。
English: They are both close to people, so they are called sunrise, and far from people, so they are called sunset.

古文：实者不入，远矣。
现代文：实际上太阳没有落入地下，只是离人远了。
English: In fact, the sun did not fall into the ground, but it was far away from people.

古文：临大泽之滨，望四边之际与天属；其实不属，远若属矣。
现代文：站在靠近大湖的水边，看见大湖四面的边沿都与天相连。实际上并不相连，是因为远了，看起来好像相连一样。
English: Standing on the water's edge near the Great Lake, I saw that the edges of the Great Lake on all four sides are connected to the sky. In fact, they are not connected, because they are far away, they look as if they are connected.

古文：日以远为入，泽以远为属，其实一也。
现代文：太阳以离人远为日落，大湖以离人远为相连，它们实际上道理是一样的。
English: The sun sets when it is far away from people, and the great lakes are connected when they are far away from people. In fact, they are the same.

古文：泽际有陆，人望而不见，陆在，察之若，日亦在，视之若入，皆远之故也。
现代文：大湖那边有陆地，人看不见。陆地是在的，只是看它像没有一样；太阳也是存在的，只是看它像落进地下一样；都是离人远的缘故。
English: There is land on the other side of the great lake, but people can't see it. The land is there, but it looks as if it doesn't exist; the sun also exists, but it looks as if it has fallen into the ground; all because it is far away from people.

古文：太山之高，参天入云，去之百里，不见埵塊。夫去百里不见太山，况日去人以万里数乎？
现代文：泰山很高，高出空际插入云霄，离它百里，连个小土堆的样子都看不见，既然离开百里，就看不见泰山，何况太阳离人要用万里来计算呢？
English: Mount Tai is very high, high above the sky into the clouds, a hundred miles away from it, even the appearance of a small mound can not be seen, since leaving a hundred miles, you can not see Mount Tai, not to mention the sun away from people to use thousands of miles to calculate it?

古文：太山之验，则既明矣，试使一人把大炬火夜行於道，平易无险，去人不一里，火光灭矣，非灭也，远也。
现代文：泰山的验证，就已经很清楚了。假使一个人拿着火炬夜晚在路上走，地面平坦没有障碍，离开人们十里，火光就消失了。不是火光消失了，而是离人太远的缘故。
English: The verification of Mount Tai is already very clear. If a person walks on the road at night with a torch, the ground is flat and there are no obstacles, and it is ten miles away from people, the light of the fire will disappear. It is not that the light of the fire has disappeared, but because it is too far away from people.

古文：今日西转不复见者，非入也。
现代文：现在太阳向西运转不再看得见，并不是它落入地下了。
English: Now that the sun is no longer visible as it moves westward, it is not that it has fallen underground.

古文：问曰： 天平正与地无异，今仰视天，观日月之行，天高南方下北方，何也？ 
现代文：有人问： 既然天平正与地没有两样，那么现今抬头看天，观察太阳和月亮的运行，却是天的南方高北方低，为什么呢？ 
English: Some people asked: Since the balance is no different from that of the earth, why is it that when we look up at the sky and observe the movement of the sun and the moon, it is the south of the sky that is high and the north that is low?

古文：曰：方今天下在东南之上，视天若高，日月道在人之南，今天下在日月道下，故观日月之行，若高南下北也。
现代文：回答是：现今中国在东南方的大地上，所以看天好像很高。太阳和月亮运行的轨道在人们的南面，现在中国在太阳和月亮运行轨道的下面，所以观察太阳和月亮的运行，就像南面高北面低。
English: The answer is: At present, China is located in the southeastern part of the earth, so it seems that the sky is very high. The sun and the moon orbit are in the south of the people. Now China is below the sun and the moon orbit, so observing the sun and the moon is like the south is high and the north is low.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：拿什么证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：即天高南方，之星亦当高，今视南方之星低下，天复低南方乎？
现代文：因为如果天的南方高，南方的星星也应当高。现在看南方的星星很低，那么天的南方反过来不也该变低了吗？
English: Because if the south of the sky is high, the stars in the south should also be high. If the stars in the south are low, shouldn't the south of the sky also be low?

古文：夫视天之居近者则高，远则下焉，极北方之民以为高，南方为下。
现代文：看天处于靠近人的就高，离人远的就低。最北面的人认为高的，最南面的人却认为低。
English: If you look at the sky, if it is close to you, it is high, and if it is far away, it is low. People in the far north think it is high, but people in the far south think it is low.

古文：极东极西，亦如此焉。
现代文：最东面的与最西面的，也是这种情况。
English: This is also the case for the most easterly and the most westerly.

古文：皆以近者为高，远者为下。
现代文：都是以靠近人的为高，离人远的为低。
English: All of them are high for being close to people and low for being far away from people.

古文：从北塞下，近仰视斗极，且在人上。
现代文：从北部边塞下面，就近抬头看北斗星，还是在人们的上空。
English: From below the northern border dam, look up close to see the Big Dipper, still above the people.

古文：匈奴之北，地之边陲，北上视天，天复高北下南，日月之道，亦在其上。
现代文：匈奴的北面，是大地的边沿，从北面往上看天，天反过来北面高南面低，太阳和月亮运行的轨道，也还是在天上。
English: The north side of the Xiongnu is the edge of the earth. Looking up from the north, the sky is high in the north and low in the south. The orbits of the sun and the moon are still in the sky.

古文：立太山之上，太山高，去下十里，太山下。
现代文：站在泰山顶上，觉得泰山很高；离开泰山十里，就觉得泰山变低了。
English: Standing on the top of Mount Tai, I feel that Mount Tai is very high; ten miles away from Mount Tai, I feel that Mount Tai has become lower.

古文：夫天之高下，犹人之察太山也。
现代文：其实，天的高低，就像人观察泰山一样。
English: In fact, the height and depth of the sky is like a person observing Mount Tai.

古文：平正，四方中央高下皆同，今望天之四边若下者，非也，远也。
现代文：天平平正正，四面和中央的高低都是一样的。如今看天的四边好像低了，其实不是，是离人远的缘故。
English: The scales are level, the four sides and the center are the same height and depth. Nowadays, the four sides of the sky seem to be low, but in fact they are not, because they are far away from people.

古文：非徒下，若合矣。
现代文：看起来天的四边不仅仅是低了，而且与地好像是合在一起的。
English: It seems that the four sides of the sky are not only low, but also seem to be united with the earth.

古文：儒者或以旦暮日出入为近，日中为远；或以日中为近，日出入为远。
现代文：儒者有人认为早晨太阳出来和傍晚落下时离人近，太阳正中时离人远；又有人认为太阳正中时离人近，日出日落时离人远。
English: Some Confucians believe that the sun is close to people when it rises in the morning and sets in the evening, and far away from people when the sun is in the middle; others believe that the sun is close to people when it is in the middle, and far away from people when the sun rises and sets.

古文：其以日出入为近，日中为远者，见日出入时大，日中时小也。
现代文：那些认为日出日落离人近、日中离人远的，是见日出日落时太阳大，日中时太阳小。
English: Those who think that the sunrise and sunset are close to people, and the daytime is far away from people, see that the sun is big at sunrise and sunset, and the sun is small during the day.

古文：察物近则大，远则小，故日出入为近，日中为远也。
现代文：观察物体近就大，远就小，所以日出日落时离人近，日中时离人远。
English: Observing objects, the closer they are, the larger they are, and the farther they are, the smaller they are. Therefore, they are close to people at sunrise and sunset, and far away from people during the day.

古文：其以日出入为远，日中时为近者，见日中时温，日出入时寒也。
现代文：那些认为日出日落太阳离人远、日中时离人近的，是见日中时天气温暖，日出日落时天气寒冷。
English: Those who think that the sun is far away at sunrise and sunset and close to people during the day think that the weather is warm during the day and cold at sunrise and sunset.

古文：夫火光近人则温，远人则寒，故以日中为近，日出入为远也。
现代文：由于火光离人近就温暖，离人远就寒冷，所以认为太阳正中时离人近，日出日落时离人远。
English: Since firelight is warm when it is close to a person and cold when it is far away, it is believed that the sun is close to a person when it is in the middle of the day and far away from a person at sunrise and sunset.

古文：二论各有所见，故是非曲直未有所定。
现代文：两种议论各有见解，因此是非曲直无法确定。
English: Both arguments have their own opinions, so the rights and wrongs cannot be determined.

古文：如实论之，日中近而日出入远，何以验之？
现代文：按实际来说，太阳正中时离人近而日出日落时离人远。
English: As a matter of fact, the sun is close to people at noon and far away from people at sunrise and sunset.

古文：以植竿於屋下，夫屋高三丈，竿於屋栋之下，正而树之，上扣栋，下抵地，是以屋栋去地三丈。
现代文：用什么证明呢？拿在屋下树棵竿子来证明。房屋高三丈，竿子在屋梁下面，把它笔直地立起，竿尖顶着屋梁，下面抵着地，这样屋梁离地就刚好三丈。
English: What proof is there? Take the pole of a tree under the roof to prove it. The house is three stories high, the pole is under the roof beam, stand it upright, the tip of the pole is against the roof beam, the bottom is against the ground, so the roof beam is exactly three stories from the ground.

古文：如旁邪倚之，则竿末旁跌，不得扣栋，是为去地过三丈也。
现代文：如果把竿子斜靠着屋梁，那么竿子就会朝一边倾倒，不会顶着屋梁，这是因为离地超过三丈的缘故。
English: If you lean the pole diagonally against the roof beam, then the pole will fall to one side and will not support the roof beam, this is due to the fact that it is more than three stories above the ground.

古文：日中时，日正在天上，犹竿之正树去地三丈也。
现代文：日中的时候，太阳在天的正中，就象竿子笔直地立着离地只有三丈一样。
English: In the middle of the day, when the sun is in the middle of the sky, it is like a pole standing upright only three feet above the ground.

古文：日出入，邪在人旁，犹竿之旁跌去地过三丈也。
现代文：日出日落的时候，太阳斜斜地附着在天边，就象竿子朝一边倾倒离地超过三丈一样。
English: At sunrise and sunset, the sun is obliquely attached to the edge of the sky, just like a pole tilted to one side more than three meters from the ground.

古文：夫如是，日中为近，出入为远，可知明矣。
现代文：像这样，太阳正中时离人近，日出日落时离人远，就可以理解清楚了。
English: In this way, it can be clearly understood that the sun is close to people at midday and far away from people at sunrise and sunset.

古文：试复以屋中堂而坐一人，一人行於屋上，其行中屋之时，正在坐人之上，是为屋上之人，与屋下坐人相去三丈矣。
现代文：试试再让堂屋的正中坐一个人，另一个人在屋顶上走，当他走到屋顶正中的时候，正好在坐着的人上面，这是因为屋顶的人跟屋内坐着的人相离刚好三丈的缘故。
English: Try again to get one person to sit in the middle of the house, and another person to walk on the roof, and when he gets to the middle of the roof, he is right on top of the person sitting, because the person on the roof is just three feet away from the person sitting inside.

古文：如屋上人在东危若西危上，其与屋下坐人相去过三丈矣。
现代文：如果屋顶的人是在东边屋脊或西边屋脊上，那么他与屋内坐着的人相离就会超过三丈。
English: If the person on the roof is on the east ridge or the west ridge, then he will be more than three feet away from the person sitting inside.

古文：日中时犹人正在屋上矣，其始出与入，犹人在东危与西危也。
现代文：日中时的太阳，就像人在屋顶的正中；那刚出来和刚落下的太阳，就像人在东边屋脊与西边屋脊上。
English: The sun in the middle of the day is like a man in the middle of the roof; the sun that has just come out and just fallen is like a man on the east ridge and the west ridge.

古文：日中，去人近，故温，日出入，远，故寒。
现代文：太阳正中离人近，所以温暖；日出日落离人远，所以寒冷。
English: The sun is close to people in the middle of the day, so it is warm; sunrise and sunset are far away from people, so it is cold.

古文：然则日中时日小，其出入时大者，日中光明故小，其出入时光暗故大，犹昼日察火光小，夜察之火光大也。
现代文：但是日中时的太阳小，那日出日落时的大，这是由于太阳正中时阳光明亮，所以看起来小；那日出日落时阳光暗淡，所以看起来大。就像白天看火，火光小；晚上看火，火光大一样。
English: But the sun during the day is small, and the sun at sunrise and sunset is large. This is because the sun is bright when the sun is bright, so it looks small; the sun at sunrise and sunset is dim, so it looks large. Just like looking at a fire during the day, the fire is small; looking at a fire at night, the fire is large.

古文：既以火为效，又以星为验，昼日星不见者，光耀灭之也，夜无光耀，星乃见。
现代文：既然用火作了应证，再用个星星来作证明。白天看不见星星，是因为阳光照耀淹没了它们，夜晚没有阳光照耀，星星才能看见。
English: Since fire was used as evidence, a star was used as proof. Stars cannot be seen during the day because the sun shines on them and drowns them. Stars can only be seen at night when the sun is not shining.

古文：夫日月，星之类也。
现代文：太阳和月亮，跟星星同类。
English: The sun and the moon are of the same kind as the stars.

古文：平旦、日入光销，故视大也。
现代文：由于天亮和傍晚阳光微弱，所以看起来太阳就大了。
English: Due to the weak sunlight at dawn and in the evening, the sun looks bigger.

古文：儒者论日旦出扶桑，暮入细柳。
现代文：儒者议论说，太阳早晨从扶桑升起，傍晚在细柳落下。
English: Confucians argue that the sun rises in the morning from Fusang and sets in the evening in Xiliu.

古文：扶桑，东方地；细柳，西方野也。
现代文：扶桑是东方最远的地方；细柳是西方最远的原野。
English: Fusang is the furthest place in the east; Xiliu is the furthest field in the west.

古文：桑、柳，天地之际，日月常所出入之处。
现代文：扶桑与细柳是天地的边沿，是太阳和月亮天天升起与落下的地方。
English: Fusang and Xiliu are the edge of heaven and earth, the place where the sun and moon rise and set every day.

古文：问曰：岁二月八月时，日出正东，日入正西，可谓日出於扶桑，入於细柳。
现代文：每年农历二月和八月的时候，太阳从正东升起，从正西落下，可以说太阳是出于扶桑，入于细柳了。
English: Every year in February and August of the lunar calendar, the sun rises from due east and sets from due west. It can be said that the sun rises from Fusang and sets in Xiliu.

古文：今夏日长之时，日出於东北，入於西北；冬日短之时，日出东南，入於西南，冬与夏日之出入，在於四隅，扶桑、细柳，正在何所乎？
现代文：如今夏天白昼长的时候，太阳是从东北方升起，朝西北方落下；冬天白昼短的时候，太阳是从东南方升起，朝西南方落下。冬天和夏天，太阳的出入，在天的四角，那么扶桑和细柳又正处在什么地方呢？
English: Now in summer, when the day is long, the sun rises in the northeast and sets in the northwest; in winter, when the day is short, the sun rises in the southeast and sets in the southwest. In winter and summer, the sun rises and sets in the four corners of the sky, so where exactly are Fusang and Xiliu?

古文：所论之言，犹谓春秋，不谓冬与夏也。
现代文：儒者谈论的话，春、秋天还可以这样说，冬、夏天就不能这样说了。
English: If Confucians were to talk about it, the same could be said about spring and autumn, but not about winter and summer.

古文：如实论之，日不出於扶桑，入於细柳。
现代文：按实际情况来说，太阳不是从扶桑升起，也不朝细柳落下。
English: According to the actual situation, the sun does not rise from Fusang and does not set in Xiaoliu.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：随天而转，近则见，远则不见。
现代文：太阳跟随着天运转，离人近就能看见，离人远就看不见。
English: The sun follows the movement of the sky. It can be seen when it is close to a person, but it cannot be seen when it is far away.

古文：当在扶桑、细柳之时，从扶桑、细柳之民，谓之日中之时，从扶桑、细柳察之，或时为日出入。
现代文：当太阳在扶桑或细柳的时候，从扶桑、细柳的人看来，认为是太阳在正中。当我们处于太阳正中的时候，从扶桑、细柳的人看来，或许正是日出或日落的时候。
English: When the sun is in Fusang or Xiliu, from the people of Fusang and Xiliu, it is thought that the sun is in the middle. When we are in the middle of the sun, from the people of Fusang and Xiliu, it may be the time of sunrise or sunset.

古文：以其上者为中，旁则为旦夕，安得出於扶桑，入细柳？
现代文：人们都以太阳在自己的顶上为日中，在两侧就为早晨与傍晚，怎么能说太阳是出于扶桑，入于细柳呢？
English: People regard the sun on their roof as the day, and on both sides as the morning and the evening. How can it be said that the sun comes from Fusang and goes into the willow?

古文：儒者论曰： 天左旋，日月之行，不系於天，各自旋转 。
现代文：儒者议论说： 天向左旋转，太阳和月亮的运行，不是附着在天上，而是各自旋转的。 
English: Confucians argue that: the sky rotates to the left, and the movement of the sun and moon is not attached to the sky, but rotates independently.

古文：难之曰：使日月自行，不系於天，日行一度，月行十三度，当日月出时，当进而东旋，何还始西转？
现代文：我要责难地问：假使太阳和月亮各自运行，不附着在天上，太阳每天运行一度，月亮每天运行十三度，那么当太阳和月亮出来的时候，应该进而由西向东旋转，为什么每天反倒由东开始向西旋转呢？
English: I want to reproachfully ask: If the sun and the moon move independently, not attached to the sky, the sun moves once a day, the moon moves thirteen degrees every day, then when the sun and the moon come out, they should continue to rotate from west to east, why do they start rotating from east to west every day?

古文：系於天，随天四时转行也。
现代文：太阳和月亮由东向西旋转，是因为它们附着在天上，跟随天四季运转的缘故。
English: The sun and moon rotate from east to west because they are attached to the sky and follow the movement of the four seasons.

古文：其喻若蚁行於硙上，日月行迟天行疾，天持日月转，故日月实东行而反西旋也。
现代文：那像蚂蚁在磨盘上行走的比喻，正说明太阳和月亮运行慢，天运行得快，天带着太阳和月亮转动，所以日月实际上是由西向东运行，但看起来却反成了由东向西旋转了。
English: The analogy of ants walking on a grinding wheel shows that the sun and the moon move slowly, the sky moves fast, and the sky rotates with the sun and the moon, so the sun and the moon actually move from west to east, but it looks like they rotate from east to west.

古文：或问： 日、月、天皆行，行度不同，三者舒疾，验之人、物，以喻？ 
现代文：有人问： 太阳、月亮和天都在运行，运行的度数不同，三者有慢有快，用人和物来证明，拿什么来作比喻呢？ 
English: Some people asked: The sun, the moon and the sky are all moving, and the degree of movement is different. The three are slow and fast, and people and things are used to prove it. What should we use as a metaphor?

古文：曰：天，日行一周。日行一度二千里，日昼行千里，夜行千里，昼日亦行千里。
现代文：我说：天，每天运行一周，太阳每天运行一度是二千里，白天运行一千里，夜晚运行一千里。骐骥白天也跑一千里。
English: I said: "Heaven, it runs for a week every day. The sun once ran for two thousand miles every day. It runs for a thousand miles during the day and a thousand miles at night. The dragonfly also runs for a thousand miles during the day.

古文：然则日行舒疾，与之步，相似类也。
现代文：那么太阳每天运行的快慢跟骐骥跑的速度差不多。
English: So the speed at which the sun moves each day is about the same as the speed of a cricket.

古文：月行十三度，十度二万里，三度六千里，月一夜行二万六千里，与晨凫飞相类似也。
现代文：月亮每天运行十三度，十度是二万里，三度是六千里，月亮一天一夜要运行二万六千里，跟早晨飞来的野鸭飞行速度差不多。
English: The moon travels thirteen degrees every day, ten degrees is twenty thousand miles, three degrees is six thousand miles, the moon has to travel twenty-six thousand miles a day and night, which is about the same speed as the wild duck flying in the morning.

古文：天行三百六十五度，积凡七十三万里也，其行甚疾，无以为验，当与陶钧之运，弩矢之流，相类似乎？
现代文：天运行三百六十五度，乘积共七十三万里。它运行得很快，没有可以用来作验证的东西，大概应当与陶钧的运转，射出去的箭的飞行速度差不多吧！
English: The movement of the heavens is three hundred and sixty-five degrees, with a total product of seven hundred and thirty thousand miles. It moves quickly, and there is nothing that can be used to verify it. It should probably be similar to the movement of the potter's wheel and the flight speed of the arrow that shoots out!

古文：天行已疾，去人高远，视之若迟，盖望远物者，动若不动，行若不行。
现代文：天虽然运行很快，由于离人又高又远，因此看起来它好像运行得很慢。但凡看远的东西，运动的就像没有运动一样，运行的就像没有运行一样。
English: Although the sky runs very fast, because it is high and far away from people, it seems to run very slowly. But everything that looks far away moves as if it were not moving, and runs as if it were not running.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：乘船江海之中，顺风而驱，近岸则行疾，远岸则行迟，船行一实也，或疾或迟，远近之视使之然也。
现代文：乘船在江海中，顺风行驶，船靠近岸边人就感到它走得快，远离岸边就觉得它走得慢。其实船行的速度是一样的，有时感到它快，有时又觉得它慢，这是因为看时距离远近不同，才造成这种情况。
English: If you are on a boat in the middle of a river, sailing with the wind, when the boat is close to the shore, you will feel that it is going fast, and when it is far from the shore, you will feel that it is going slow. In fact, the speed of the boat is the same, sometimes you feel it is fast, and sometimes you feel it is slow. This is because the distance is different when you look at it.

古文：仰视天之运，不若负日而驰，暮，而日在其前，何则？
现代文：抬头看天空太阳运行，不如骐骥在太阳底下跑得快，但到了太阳落山的时候，太阳却在骐骥的前边。为什么呢？
English: Looking up at the sky, the sun is moving. It is not as good as the dragonfly running fast under the sun, but when the sun sets, the sun is in front of the dragonfly. Why?

古文：近而日远也。
现代文：因为骐骥离人近而太阳离人远的缘故。
English: Because the earthworm is close to people and the sun is far away from people.

古文：远则若迟，近则若疾，六万里之程，难以得运行之实也。
现代文：离人远就好像很慢，离人近就好像很快，人与天相距六万里的路程，太阳运行的真实情况就很难知道了。
English: When far away from people, it seems to be very slow, when close to people, it seems to be very fast, and when people are sixty thousand miles away from the sky, it is difficult to know the true situation of the sun's movement.

古文：儒者说曰： 日行一度，天一日一夜行三百六十五度，天左行，日月右行，与天相迎。 
现代文：儒者说： 太阳每天运行一度，天一天一夜运行三百六十五度。天由右向左运行，太阳和月亮从左向右运行，刚好跟天相互迎面而行。 
English: Confucians said: The sun runs once a day, and the day and night run 365 degrees. The sky runs from right to left, the sun and the moon run from left to right, and they just meet each other with the sky.

古文：问：日月之行也，系著於天也，日月附天而行，不行也。
现代文：太阳和月亮的运行，是附着于天的。日月依附于天运行，不是直接自己运行的。
English: The movement of the sun and moon is attached to the sky. The sun and moon are attached to the sky and do not move on their own.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：《易》曰： 日月星辰丽乎天，百果草木丽於土。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 太阳、月亮和星星都附着于天，各种果实和草木都附着于地。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: The sun, moon and stars are attached to the sky, and all kinds of fruits and plants are attached to the earth.

古文：丽者，附也。
现代文：丽，是附着的意思。
English: "Li" means "attachment."

古文：附天所行，若人附地而圆行，其取喻若蚁行於上焉。
现代文：日月附着于天运行，就像人在地上转着圆圈行走一样，因此拿像蚂蚁在磨盘上朝相反方向行走来作比喻。
English: The sun and moon are attached to the sky and move like a person walking in a circle on the ground, so the analogy is like ants walking in the opposite direction on a grinding wheel.

古文：问曰： 何知不离天直自行也？ 
现代文：有人问： 怎么知道日月不能脱离天直接自己运行呢？ 
English: Some people asked: How do you know that the sun and moon can't operate directly on their own without the sky?

古文：如日能直自行，当自东行，无为随天而西转也。
现代文：如果太阳能直接自己运行，就应该由西向东运行，用不着跟随天由东向西旋转了。
English: If the solar energy runs directly by itself, it should run from west to east, and there is no need to follow the rotation of the sun from east to west.

古文：月行与日同，亦皆附天。
现代文：月亮的运行与太阳一样，也都附着于天。
English: The movement of the moon, like the sun, is also attached to the sky.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：拿什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：验之云。
现代文：用云来作证明。
English: Using clouds to prove it.

古文：云不附天，常止於所处，使不附天，亦当自止其处。
现代文：云不依附于天，所以不随天运行，而常常在原来的位置上停留。假使太阳不附着于天，那么也应当自动停止在原来的地方。
English: Clouds are not attached to the sky, so they do not move with the sky, but often stay in their original position. If the sun is not attached to the sky, then it should automatically stop in its original place.

古文：由此言之，日行附天明矣。
现代文：像这样说，太阳运行是附着于天的，就很明白了。
English: Put like this, it is clear that the sun's movement is attached to the sky.

古文：问曰： 日，火也。
现代文：有人问： 太阳是火。
English: Someone asked: Why is the sun a fire?

古文：火在地不行，日在天，何以为行？ 
现代文：火在地上不运行，太阳在天上为什么又运行呢？ 
English: If fire does not move on the earth, why does the sun move in the sky?

古文：曰：附天之气行，附地之气不行。
现代文：回答是：附着于天的气运行，附着于地的气不运行。
English: The answer is: the gas attached to the sky moves, the gas attached to the earth does not move.

古文：火附地，地不行，故火不行。
现代文：火附着于地，地不运行，所以火也不运行。
English: Fire adheres to the ground, the ground does not move, so the fire does not move.

古文：难曰： 附地之气不行，水何以行？ 
现代文：责难的人说： 附着于地的气不运行，水为什么流动呢？ 
English: The reprover says, Why does water flow, when the spirit that is in the earth does not move?

古文：曰：水之行也，东流入海也。
现代文：回答是：水流动，是向东流入大海。
English: The answer is: the water flow is eastward into the sea.

古文：西北方高，东南方下，水性归下，犹火性趋高也。
现代文：因为西北方高，东南方低，水的本性流向低处，就像火的本性趋向高处一样。
English: Because the northwest is high and the southeast is low, the nature of water flows to the low, just as the nature of fire tends to the high.

古文：使地不高西方，则水亦不东流。
现代文：假使地不西面高，那么水也不向东面流。
English: If the land is not high in the west, then the water does not flow to the east.

古文：难曰： 附地之气不行，人附地，何以行？ 
现代文：责难的人说： 附着于地气不运行，人附着于地，为什么行走呢？ 
English: The reprover says: Attached to the earth, man does not walk. Attached to the earth, why does man walk?

古文：曰：人之行，求有为也。
现代文：回答是：人能行走，是因为有所寻求有所作为的缘故。
English: The answer is: one can walk because one seeks to do something.

古文：人道有为，故行求。
现代文：人的思想想有所作为，必然要行走要寻求。
English: If people's thoughts want to make a difference, they must walk and seek.

古文：古者质朴，邻国接境，鸡犬之声相闻，终身不相往来焉。
现代文：古代的人朴实，就是邻国接壤，鸡犬的叫声能互相听见，一辈子也不会相互往来。
English: In ancient times, people were simple. Neighbouring countries shared a border, and they could hear each other's dogs and chickens calling. They would never come into contact with each other.

古文：难曰： 附天之气行，列星亦何以不行？ 
现代文：责难的人说： 附着于天的气运行，那么星星又为什么不运行呢？ 
English: The reprover says: If the wind that is attached to the sky moves, why do not the stars also move?

古文：曰：列星著天，天已行也，随天而转，是亦行也。
现代文：回答是：星星附着于天，天已在运行，随着天旋转，这也是在运行了。
English: The answer is: the stars are attached to the sky, the sky is already in motion, and as the sky rotates, it is also in motion.

古文：难曰： 人道有为故行，天道无为何行？ 
现代文：责难的人说： 人的思想想有所作为必然要行走，天意无所作为为什么运行呢？ 
English: The reproachful said: If the human mind wants to do something, it must walk. Why does God's will run without doing anything?

古文：曰：天之行也，施气自然也，施气则物自生，非故施气以生物也。
现代文：回答是：天运行，是在自然而然地散布气，施放了气那么万物就会自然产生。而不是故意施放气来使万物产生。
English: The answer is: the movement of the heavens is the natural distribution of air. If air is released, then all things will naturally come into being. Rather than intentionally releasing air to make all things come into being.

古文：不动，气不施，气不施，物不生，与人行异。
现代文：天不转动，就不会施放出气，不施放气，就不会产生万物，可见天的运行跟人的行走不一样。
English: Without the rotation of the heavens, there would be no outpouring of breath, and without the outpouring of breath, there would be no creation of all things. It can be seen that the movement of the heavens is not the same as the walking of man.

古文：日月五星之行，皆施气焉。
现代文：太阳、月亮和五颗恒星的运行，都是由于天散布了气的缘故。
English: The movement of the sun, the moon and the five stars is due to the dispersion of the atmosphere.

古文：儒者曰： 日中有三足乌，月中有兔、蟾蜍。 
现代文：儒者说： 太阳里有三只脚的乌鸦，月亮里有兔子和癞蛤蟆。 
English: Confucians said: There is a crow with three legs in the sun, and a rabbit and a toad in the moon.

古文：夫日者，天之火也，与地之火无以异也。
现代文：其实，太阳是天上的火，它与地上的火没有什么两样。
English: In fact, the sun is the fire in the sky, it is no different from the fire on the ground.

古文：地火之中无生物，天火之中何故有乌？
现代文：地上的火中没有有生命的东西，天上的火中为什么有乌鸦呢？
English: There is no living thing in the fire on earth, so why are there crows in the fire in the sky?

古文：火中无生物，生物入火中，燋烂而死焉，乌安得立？
现代文：火中不存在有生命的东西，有生命的东西进到火里，会被烧焦而死，乌鸦怎么能生存呢？
English: There is no living thing in the fire. If a living thing falls into the fire, it will be burned to death. How can a crow survive?

古文：夫月者，水也水中有生物，非兔、蟾蜍也。
现代文：月亮是水。水里存在有生命的东西，但不是兔子和癞蛤蟆。
English: The moon is water. There are living things in the water, but they are not rabbits and toads.

古文：兔与蟾蜍久在水中，无不死者。
现代文：兔子和癞蛤蟆长期在水里，没有不死的。
English: The rabbit and the toad have been in the water for a long time, and there is no immortal.

古文：日月毁於天，螺蚌汨於渊，同气审矣，所谓兔、蟾蜍者，岂反螺与蚌邪？
现代文：月亮在天上残缺，螺蚌在深水潭里消减，因为它们同属一种气，这是很明白的。月中的所谓兔子和癞蛤蟆，难道与螺蚌相反不同气吗？
English: It is clear that the moon is incomplete in the sky, and the snail is diminished in the deep pool, because they both belong to one kind of qi. Are the so-called rabbit and dragonfly in the middle of the moon, as opposed to the snail, not qi?

古文：且问儒者：乌、兔、蟾蜍死乎？
现代文：还要问问儒者：乌鸦、兔子、癞蛤蟆是死的呢，还是活的呢？
English: Confucians should also be asked: Are crows, rabbits, and toads dead or alive?

古文：生也？如死，久在日月，燋枯腐朽。如生，日蚀时既，月晦常尽，乌、兔、蟾蜍皆何在？
现代文：如果是死的，长期在太阳与月亮里，要么烧焦了，要么腐朽了；如果是活的，日蚀的时候太阳会完全看不见，月亮在每月末经常会消失，那么乌鸦、兔子、癞蛤蟆又都在什么地方呢？
English: If it is dead, it has been in the sun and moon for a long time, and is either charred or rotten; if it is alive, the sun will be completely invisible during a solar eclipse, and the moon will often disappear at the end of each month, so where are the crows, rabbits, and crickets?

古文：夫乌、兔、蟾蜍，日月气也，若人之腹脏，万物之心膂也。
现代文：其实，乌鸦、兔子、癞蛤蟆，是日月的气，就像人肚子里的五脏、万物的心和脊梁骨一样是看不见的。
English: In fact, crows, rabbits and crickets are the breath of the sun and moon, just like the five viscera in the human stomach, the heart and backbone of all things are invisible.

古文：月尚可察也，人之察日无不眩，不能知日审何气，通而见其中有物名曰乌乎？
现代文：月亮还可以看清，人看太阳眼睛没有不眼花缭乱的，既然不能知道太阳究竟是什么气，又岂能看见它里面有东西名叫乌鸦呢？
English: The moon can still be seen clearly, and people's eyes are dazzled when they look at the sun. Since we cannot know what the sun really is, can we see something called a crow in it?

古文：审日不能见乌之形，通而能见其足有三乎？
现代文：如果不能看清太阳中乌鸦的形状，又岂能看清乌鸦有三只脚呢？
English: If you can't see the shape of a crow in the sun, can you see that a crow has three legs?

古文：此已非实。
现代文：这已清楚不是事实了。
English: This is clearly not the case.

古文：且听儒者之言，虫物非一，日中何为有乌，月中何为有 兔 、 蟾蜍 ？
现代文：姑且听从儒者的说法，动物不止一种，那么太阳中为什么只有乌鸦，月亮中为什么只有兔子和癞蛤蟆呢？
English: According to the Confucians, there is more than one kind of animal, so why are there only crows in the sun and rabbits and baboons in the moon?

古文：儒者谓： 日蚀、月蚀也 。
现代文：儒者说： 日食是月亮侵蚀了太阳。 
English: Confucians said: A solar eclipse is the moon eroding the sun.

古文：彼见日蚀常於晦朔，晦朔月与日合，故得蚀之。
现代文：他们经常在月末和月初看见日食，因为月末和月初月亮与太阳重合，所以月亮能侵蚀太阳。
English: They often see solar eclipses at the end of the month and the beginning of the month. Because the moon coincides with the sun at the end of the month and the beginning of the month, the moon can erode the sun.

古文：夫春秋之时，日蚀多矣。《经》曰： 某月朔，日有蚀之 。
现代文：春秋的时候，日食多。《春秋》经上说： 某月初一，太阳被侵蚀了。 
English: In spring and autumn, there are more solar eclipses. "Spring and Autumn" scripture says: On the first day of a certain month, the sun was eroded.

古文：日有蚀之者，未必月也。
现代文：太阳被侵蚀，未必是月亮侵蚀的。
English: The sun is eclipsed, not necessarily by the moon.

古文：知月蚀之，何讳不言月？
现代文：因为知道是被月亮侵蚀的，为什么回避不提月亮呢？
English: Since it is known to be eroded by the moon, why avoid mentioning the moon?

古文：说日蚀之变，阳弱阴强也，人物在世，气力劲强，乃能乘凌。
现代文：有人说： 日食这种变异，是阳气弱阴气强的缘故。 世上的人和动物，力量强大的，才能欺压弱小的。
English: Some people say: The solar eclipse is caused by the strong yang and weak yin. People and animals in the world are powerful, and they can only oppress the weak.

古文：案月晦光既，朔则如尽，微弱甚矣，安得胜日？
现代文：考察月亮月末的光已经用尽，初一也跟用尽差不多，微弱得很，怎么能胜过太阳呢？
English: Examining the end of the month, the light of the moon has been exhausted, and the first day is also almost exhausted, it is very weak, how can it beat the sun?

古文：夫日之蚀，月蚀也。
现代文：其实，日食与月食一样。
English: In fact, a solar eclipse is the same as a lunar eclipse.

古文：日蚀，谓月蚀之，月谁蚀之者？
现代文：太阳被侵蚀就说是月亮侵蚀的，那么月亮又是被谁侵蚀的呢？
English: If the sun is said to be eroded by the moon, then who eroded the moon?

古文：无蚀月也，月自损也。
现代文：可见没有谁侵蚀月亮，而是月亮自己残缺的。
English: It can be seen that no one erodes the moon, but the moon itself is incomplete.

古文：以月论日，亦如日蚀，光自损也。
现代文：用月亮的情况来判断太阳的情况，也就知道日食时，阳光是太阳自己减弱的。
English: Using the condition of the moon to judge the condition of the sun, it is also known that during a solar eclipse, the sun is weakened by the sun itself.

古文：大率四十一二月，日一食，百八十日，月一蚀，蚀之皆有时，非时为变，及其为变，气自然也。
现代文：大约四十一二个月，有一次日食；一百八十天，有一次月蚀。日食月食都有一定时间，违背时间就是变异，至于发生变异，也是气自然而然形成的。
English: About forty-one and two months, there is a solar eclipse; one hundred and eighty days, there is a lunar eclipse. Solar eclipses and lunar eclipses all have a certain time, and the violation of time is mutation. As for the occurrence of mutation, it is also naturally formed by qi.

古文：日时晦朔，月复为之乎？
现代文：日食的时间总在月末和月初，又是月亮造成的吗？
English: The time of the solar eclipse is always at the end of the month and the beginning of the month. Is it caused by the moon?

古文：夫日当实满，以亏为变，必谓有蚀之者，山崩地动，蚀者谁也？
现代文：太阳应当是圆的满的，把亏损作为变异，就一定认为有侵蚀它的，那么山摇地动，侵蚀者是谁呢？
English: The sun should be round and full. If we regard the loss as a variation, we must think that there is erosion of it. Then the mountains shake, and who is the eroder?

古文：或说： 日食者，月掩之也，日在上，月在下，障於之形也。
现代文：有人说： 日食是月亮遮盖了太阳。太阳在上面，月亮在下面，太阳被月亮遮住了形体。
English: Some people say: A solar eclipse is the moon covering the sun. The sun is above, the moon is below, and the sun is covered by the moon.

古文：日月合相袭，月在上日在下者，不能掩日。日在上，月在日下，障於日，月光掩日光，故谓之食也，障於月也，若阴云蔽日月不见矣。
现代文：日月合在一起，互相重迭，月亮在上面，太阳在下面，无法遮住太阳；太阳在上面，月亮在下面，太阳被月亮遮住了，月亮也遮住了阳光，所以称作 食 。太阳遮住月亮，就像阴云遮蔽了日月看不见一样。
English: The sun and the moon are together, overlapping each other, the moon above, the sun below, unable to cover the sun; the sun is above, the moon below, the sun is covered by the moon, the moon also covers the sun, so it is called eclipse. The sun covers the moon, just as clouds cover the sun and the moon cannot be seen.

古文：其端合者，相食是也。
现代文：太阳和月亮正好相合，相互重迭。
English: The sun and the moon coincide and overlap.

古文：其合相当如袭者，日既是也。 
现代文：要是太阳和月亮合在一起相当于两块玉璧重迭，就是日全食了。
English: If the sun and the moon together are equivalent to two overlapping jewels, it is a total solar eclipse.

古文：日月合於晦朔，天之常也。
现代文：日月月末月初重合在一起，是天常有的。
English: The sun, the moon, the end of the month, and the beginning of the month often coincide.

古文：日食，月掩日光，非也。
现代文：日食是月亮遮住阳光，不对。
English: A solar eclipse is the moon covering the sun, isn't it.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来验证呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：使日月合，月掩日光，其初食崖当与旦复时易处。
现代文：假使日月重合在一起，月亮遮住了阳光，那么开始被侵蚀的那边应当跟将要恢复的地方不同。
English: If the sun and moon coincide, and the moon blocks the sunlight, then the side that starts to be eroded should be different from the place that will be restored.

古文：假令日在东，月在西，月之行疾，东及日，掩日崖，须臾过日而东，西崖初掩之处光当复，东崖未掩者当复食。
现代文：假使太阳在东面，月亮在西面，月亮运行得快，向东运行到太阳在的地方，遮盖了太阳的边沿，一会儿经过太阳继续向东，太阳西边开始被遮住的地方阳光就应当恢复了，而东边没有被遮盖的地方应该继续被侵蚀。
English: Assuming that the sun is in the east and the moon in the west, the moon moves quickly, moving eastward to where the sun is, covering the edge of the sun, passing the sun for a while and continuing eastward, where the west side of the sun begins to be covered, the sunlight should be restored, and where the east side is not covered, it should continue to be eroded.

古文：今察日之食，西崖光缺，其复也，西崖光复，过掩东崖复西崖，谓之合袭相掩障，如何？儒者谓： 日月之体皆至圆 。
现代文：如今观察日食，太阳西边光亮被遮，过会儿就恢复了光亮；西边恢复了光亮，月亮又移过去遮住了东边，这样西边恢复了光亮，这怎么能说成是日月相重迭遮掩呢？儒者认为日月的形体都非常圆。
English: Nowadays, when observing a solar eclipse, the light of the west side of the sun is blocked, and then the light is restored; the west side is restored, and the moon moves to cover the east side, so the west side is restored. How can this be said to be the overlapping of the phases of the sun and the moon? Confucians believe that the shapes of the sun and the moon are very round.

古文：彼从下望见其形，若斗筐之状，状如正圆，不如望远光气，气不圆矣。
现代文：他们从下往上看见日月的形体，像斗筐的形状，像个正圆。他们不懂得了望远方的光气，气就像圆的一样。
English: They see the sun and moon from the bottom up, the shape is like a basket, like a perfect circle. They do not understand the distant light and gas, the gas is like a circle.

古文：夫日月不圆，视若圆者，人远也。
现代文：其实，日月本来不圆，看起来像个圆的，是离人很远的缘故。
English: In fact, the sun and the moon are not round, but they look round because they are far away from people.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：以什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：夫日者，火之精也；月者，水之精也。
现代文：因为太阳是火的精华，月亮是水的精华。
English: Because the sun is the essence of fire, the moon is the essence of water.

古文：在地，水火不圆；在天水火何故独圆？
现代文：在地上水火都不圆，在天上水火为什么偏偏是圆的呢？
English: On earth, water and fire are not round, but why are water and fire round in the sky?

古文：日月在天犹五星，五星犹列星，列星不圆，光耀若圆，去人远也。
现代文：日月在天上就像五颗恒星一样，五颗恒星就像星星一样，星星不圆，但星光闪耀却像个圆的，这是离人很远的缘故。
English: The sun and the moon in the sky are like five stars, five stars are like stars, the stars are not round, but the starlight shines like a circle, this is because they are far away from people.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：春秋之时，星霣宋都，就而视之，石也，不圆。
现代文：春秋的时候，流星坠落在宋国的都城，凑近去看，是砣石头，不圆。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, a meteor fell on the capital city of the Song Dynasty. If you look closely, you will see that it is a round stone, not round.

古文：以星不圆，知日月五星亦不圆也。
现代文：由于流星不是圆的，所以知道日月和五颗恒星也不是圆的。
English: Since meteors are not round, we know that the moon and the five stars are not round either.

古文：儒者说日及工伎之家，皆以日为一。
现代文：儒者说太阳和工伎们一样，都认为太阳是一个。
English: Confucians say that the sun is the same as the workmen, they all think that the sun is one.

古文：禹、《山海经》言日有十，在海外东方有汤谷，上有扶桑，十日浴沐水中，有大木，九日居下枝，一日居上枝。
现代文：禹和伯益的《山海经·海外东经》上说太阳有十个，在海外的东方有座汤谷，汤谷上有棵扶桑树，十个太阳在这里水中洗澡；水中有棵高大的树，九个太阳在树的低枝上，一个太阳在树的高枝上。
English: Yu and Bo Yi's "Mountain and Sea Classic, Overseas Eastern Classic" says that there are ten suns, and in the overseas East there is a soup valley. There is a Fusang tree in the soup valley, and ten suns are bathing in the water here; there is a tall tree in the water, nine suns are on the low branches of the tree, and one sun is on the high branches of the tree.

古文：《淮南书》又言： 烛十日。尧时十日并出，万物焦枯，尧上射十日。 以故不并一日见也。
现代文：《淮南子》上又说，用十个太阳照明；尧的时候十个太阳同时升起，万物被烧焦枯死，于是尧朝天上射十个太阳，因此十个太阳就不同时在一天出现。
English: "Huainanzi" also says that ten suns were used to illuminate the dragonfly; when the dragonfly flies, ten suns rise at the same time, and everything is scorched and withered, so the dragonfly shoots ten suns into the sky in the morning, so ten suns do not appear at the same time in one day.

古文：世俗又名甲乙为日，甲至癸凡十日，日之有十，犹星之有五也。
现代文：社会上一般人又用甲、乙、丙、丁、戊、己、庚、辛、壬、癸作为太阳的名称，从甲到癸共有十个太阳，太阳有十个，就像星星有五颗一样。
English: In society, ordinary people also use A, B, C, D, E, G, G, C, S, R, and K as the names of the sun. From A to K, there are ten suns. There are ten suns, just like there are five stars.

古文：通人谈士，归於难知，不肯辨明。
现代文：就是有学问、有口才的人，也都把它归结为不容易弄明白的问题，不肯辨说清楚。
English: Even men of learning and eloquence reduce it to a question which is not easy to understand, and refuse to make a clear distinction.

古文：是以文二传而不定，世两言而无主。
现代文：因此，一个太阳和十个太阳两种文字记载都流传下来没有定论，而世人对这两种说法也没有明确以谁为主。
English: As a result, the written records of one sun and ten suns have been passed down without a final conclusion, and the world has not clearly decided who is the main one for these two statements.

古文：诚实论之，且无十焉。
现代文：真按实际情况来说，没有十个太阳。
English: True to form, there are not ten suns.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：夫日犹月也，日而有十，月有十二乎？
现代文：因为太阳像月亮一样，太阳有十个，月亮会有十二个吗？
English: Since the sun is like the moon, and there are ten suns, will there be twelve moons?

古文：星有五，五行之精，金、木、水、火、土各异光色。
现代文：星有五星，它们是由五行的精气构成，金、木、水、火、土五星各有各的光色。
English: There are five stars. They are composed of five elements: gold, wood, water, fire, and earth. Each of the five stars has its own light color.

古文：如日有十，其气必异。
现代文：如果太阳有十个，它们的精气必然不同。
English: If there are ten suns, their essence must be different.

古文：今观日光无有异者，察其小大前後若一。
现代文：现在观察阳光没有什么不同，观察它的大小前后好像是一样的。
English: Now there is no difference in observing sunlight, its size seems to be the same before and after observation.

古文：如审气异，光色宜殊；如诚同气，宜合为一，无为十也。
现代文：如果构成十个太阳的气确实不一样，那么光色也该不同；它们如果真的同属一种气，就该合成一个了。
English: If the gasses that make up the ten suns are indeed different, then the light color should also be different; if they really belong to the same gas, they should be combined into one.

古文：验日阳遂，火从天来，日者、大火也，察火在地，一气也，地无十火，天安得十日？
现代文：可以用阳遂来证明火是从天上来的。
English: The sun can be used to prove that fire comes from the sky.

古文：然则所谓十日者，殆更自有他物，光质如日之状，居汤谷中水，时缘据扶桑，禹、益见之，则纪十日。
现代文：太阳是天火。考察在地上的火，是同一种气；地上没有十种不同的火，天上怎么能有十个不同的太阳呢？那么所谓十个太阳，大概另外自有别的东西，它光的质地像太阳的样子，生活在汤谷水中，有时攀缘停留在扶桑树上，被禹和伯益看见了，就记载说有十个太阳。
English: The sun is the fire of the sky. If we look at the fire on the earth, it is the same kind of gas. If there are not ten different kinds of fire on the earth, how can there be ten different suns in the sky? Then the so-called ten suns probably have something else. Its light texture is like the sun, it lives in the water of the soup valley, sometimes it climbs and stays on the fusang tree. When it was seen by Yu and Bo Yi, it was recorded that there were ten suns.

古文：数家度日之光，数日之质，刺径千里，假令日出是扶桑木上之日，扶桑木宜覆万里，乃能受之。
现代文：天文历算家计量了太阳的光，推算了太阳的质地，知道太阳的直径是一千里。假使出来的太阳是扶桑树上的太阳，扶桑树就应该能遮盖一万里，才能承受住它们。
English: The astrologer measured the light of the sun, calculated the texture of the sun, and knew that the diameter of the sun was a thousand miles. If the sun that came out was the sun on the fusang tree, the fusang tree should be able to cover ten thousand miles in order to withstand them.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：一日径千里，十日宜万里也。
现代文：因为一个太阳直径是一千里，十个太阳的直径就该是一万里。
English: Since the diameter of one sun is a thousand miles, the diameter of ten suns should be ten thousand miles.

古文：天之去人万里余也，仰察之，日光眩耀，火光盛明，不能堪也。
现代文：天离人六万多里。抬头看十个太阳，会眼光昏花，因为阳光太明亮了，人无法忍受。
English: The sky is more than sixty thousand miles away from people. If you look up at ten suns, your eyes will be dazzled, because the sun is too bright and unbearable.

古文：使日出是扶桑木上之日，禹、益见之，不能知其为日也。
现代文：即便出来的太阳是扶桑树上的太阳，禹和伯益看见了，也无法知道它们是太阳。为什么呢？
English: Even if the sun that comes out is the sun on the Fusang tree, when Yu and Bo Yi see it, they cannot know that it is the sun. Why?

古文：何则？仰察一日，目犹眩耀，况察十日乎？
现代文：因为抬头看一个太阳，眼睛就感到眼花缭乱，何况是看十个太阳呢？
English: Because looking up at one sun makes your eyes feel dazzled, let alone looking up at ten suns?

古文：当禹、益见之，若斗筐之状，故名之为日。
现代文：当禹和伯益看见它们，像斗筐的形状，所以起名叫做 日 。
English: When Yu and Bo Yi saw them, they were shaped like a basket, which is why they were named the Sun.

古文：夫火如斗筐，望六万之形，非就见之，即察之体也。
现代文：这大如斗筐是远离六万里看到的形状，不是就近看到的形体。
English: The basket-like shape is what you see from 60,000 miles away, not what you see up close.

古文：由此言之，禹、益所见，意似日非日也。
现代文：由此说来，禹和伯益看见的，估计像太阳又不是太阳。
English: Therefore, what Yu and Bo Yi saw was probably like the sun but not the sun.

古文：天地之间，物气相类，其实非者多。
现代文：天地之间，万物的气相类似而实际上不同的东西很多。
English: Between heaven and earth, there are many things that are similar in appearance but different in reality.

古文：海外西南有珠树焉，察之是珠，然非鱼中之珠也。
现代文：海外西南方有种珠树，看它是珠，然而又不是鱼腹中的珍珠。
English: There is a kind of bead tree in the southwest overseas. It looks like a bead, but it is not a pearl in the belly of a fish.

古文：夫十日之日，犹珠树之珠也，珠树似珠非真珠，十日似日非实日也。
现代文：那扶桑树上十个太阳中的太阳，就像珠树一样，珠树像珠而不是真的珠，十个太阳像太阳而又不是真的太阳。
English: The sun in the ten suns on the Fusang tree is like a bead tree, the bead tree is like a bead but not a real bead, the ten suns are like the sun but not a real sun.

古文：淮南见《山海经》，则虚言真人烛十日，妄纪尧时十日并出。
现代文：淮南王看见《山海经》，就虚构说仙人用十个太阳照明，于是随便记载尧的时候十个太阳同时升起。
English: When King Huainan saw the "Song of the Mountains and the Sea," he invented that the immortals used ten suns to illuminate, so he casually recorded that when the dragonfly flies, ten suns rise at the same time.

古文：且日，火也；汤谷，水也。
现代文：何况，太阳是火，汤谷是水。
English: Besides, the sun is fire and the valley is water.

古文：水火相贼，则十日浴於汤谷，当灭败焉。
现代文：水火相克，那么十个太阳浸泡在汤谷里就该熄灭毁坏。
English: Water is stronger than fire, so the ten suns soaked in the soup valley should be extinguished and destroyed.

古文：火燃木，扶桑，木也，十日处其上，宜燋枯焉。
现代文：火烧木，扶桑树是木，十个太阳在它上面，就该被烧焦枯死。
English: Fire burns wood, Fusang tree is wood, ten suns on it, it should be scorched to death.

古文：今浴汤谷而光不灭，登扶桑而枝不燋不枯，与今日出同，不验於五行，故知十日非真日也。
现代文：如今它们浸泡在汤谷里而光不熄灭，爬在扶桑树上而树枝不枯焦，跟今天太阳出来的情况相同，这不符合五行相生相克的道理，所以知道这十个太阳不是真的太阳。
English: Now they are soaking in the soup valley without the light being extinguished, climbing on the Fusang tree without the branches being scorched, the same situation as the sun coming out today. This does not conform to the principle of the five elements, so we know that these ten suns are not the real sun.

古文：且禹、益见十日之时，终不以夜，犹以昼也，则一日出，九日宜留，安得俱出十日？
现代文：况且禹和伯益看见十个太阳的时候，始终不是在晚上。要是在白天，那么一个太阳出来，另外九个太阳就该留下，怎么能十个太阳同时出来呢？
English: Moreover, when Yu and Bo Yi saw ten suns, it was not always at night. If it was during the day, then one sun would come out and the other nine suns would remain, so how could ten suns come out at the same time?

古文：如平旦日未出，且天行有度数，日随天转行，安得留扶桑枝间，浴汤谷之水乎？
现代文：如果是黎明太阳没有出来的时候，则天的运行有一定的度数，太阳是随着天旋转运行的，怎么能停留在扶桑树的树枝上，浸泡在汤谷的水里呢？
English: If it is dawn when the sun does not come out, then the movement of the sky has a certain degree. The sun rotates with the sky, how can it stay on the branches of the fusang tree and soak in the water of the tanggu?

古文：留则失行度，行度差跌，不相应矣。
现代文：要是停留在扶桑树上、汤谷水中，那就不符合运行的度数，运行的度数就要发生差错，跟太阳随天转不相应了。
English: If it stays on the Fusang tree or in the Tanggu water, it does not correspond to the degree of operation. The degree of operation will cause an error, and it does not correspond to the sun's rotation.

古文：如行出之日与十日异，是意似日而非日也。
现代文：如果随天运行出现的太阳与那十个太阳不同，这样推测起来那十个太阳只是像太阳而又不是太阳了。
English: If the sun that appeared in the course of the heavens is different from the ten suns, then the ten suns are only like the sun and are not the sun.

古文：《春秋》 庄公七年夏四月辛卯，夜中恆星不见，星如雨。 
现代文：《春秋》庄公七年中记载： 夏四月辛卯日，晚上看不见常见的星星，而流星却像雨般坠落下来。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" Zhuang Gong recorded in seven years: In summer and April, when the sun is hot, you can't see the common stars at night, but the meteors fall down like rain.

古文：《公羊传》曰 如雨者何？
现代文：《公羊传》解释说： 像雨的东西是什么呢？
English: The Ram explains: What is it that looks like rain?

古文：非雨也。
现代文：不是雨。
English: It's not rain.

古文：非雨则曷为谓之如雨？
现代文：不是雨，那为什么说它像雨呢？
English: It's not rain, but why is it said to be like rain?

古文：不修《春秋》曰：雨星，不及地尺而复。
现代文：没有删修过的《春秋》上说： 坠落的星，离地不到一尺又返回天上去了。 
English: "Spring and Autumn," which has not been revised, says: "Stars fall down like rain, and when they are less than one foot from the ground, they rise back up."

古文：君子修之曰：星霣如雨。 
现代文：君子删修后说： 流星坠落像下雨 。 
English: The gentleman said after the abridgment: "Meteor falls like rain."

古文：不修《春秋》者，未修《春秋》时《鲁史记》，曰 雨，不及地尺而复 。
现代文：没有删修过的《春秋》，就是还没有删修《春秋》时鲁国史官的记载，它上面说： 坠落的星，离地不到一尺又返回天上去了。 
English: If "Spring and Autumn" has not been abridged, it means that the record of the historian of the State of Lu has not been abridged. It says: The falling star, less than a foot from the ground, returned to the sky.

古文：君子者，孔子，孔子修之曰 星霣如雨 孔子之意，以为地有山陵楼台，云不及地尺，恐失其实，更正之曰如雨。
现代文：上面说的君子就是孔子。孔子删修之后说 流星坠落像下雨 。孔子的意思认为地上有大山近陵楼台，说 离地不到一尺 ，恐怕不符合实际情况，就更正说 像下雨 。
English: The gentleman mentioned above is Confucius. Confucius, after editing, said that meteor falls like rain. Confucius meant that there are mountains on the ground near the mausoleum platform, saying that it is less than one foot from the ground, I am afraid that it does not correspond to the actual situation, it is corrected to say like rain.

古文：如雨者，为从地上而下，星亦从天霣而复，与同，故曰如。
现代文：像下雨的意思，是认为雨是从地面上去，而又从天上落下来的，流星也是从天上坠落下来又回到天上去的，跟下雨的情况相同，所以说它 像 。
English: The meaning of "like rain" is that rain rises from the ground and falls from the sky, and meteors also fall from the sky and return to the sky, which is the same as rain, so it is said to be like.

古文：夫孔子虽云不及地尺，但言如雨，其谓霣之者，皆是星也孔子虽定其位，著其文，谓霣为星，与史同焉。
现代文：孔子虽然删去了 离地不到一尺 ，只说 像下雨 ，可是说坠落的东西，都是星星。孔子虽然没有确定陨星坠落的位置，但写了这样的话，说坠落的是星，跟鲁史记上的记载相同。
English: Although Confucius deleted "less than a foot from the ground" and only said "like rain," he said that the falling things were all stars. Although Confucius did not determine the location of the meteorite's fall, he wrote the following words, saying that it was a star that fell, the same as the record in the Records of the Grand Historian.

古文：从平地望泰山之巅，鹤如乌，乌如爵者，泰山高远，物之小大失其实。
现代文：从平地望泰山山顶上，白鹤像乌鸦，乌鸦像麻雀，这是泰山又高又远的缘故，因而物体的大小失去了它们真实的面貌。
English: Looking at the top of Mount Tai from the plain, the white cranes look like crows, and the crows look like sparrows. This is because Mount Tai is high and far away, so the size of objects loses their true appearance.

古文：天之去地六万余里，高远非直泰山之巅也；星著於天，人察之，失星之实，非直望鹤乌之类也。
现代文：天离地六万多里，又高又远的决不只是泰山的山顶。像星星附着在天上，人看见它，已经失去了星星的真实面貌，可见失去真实面貌的不只是看见的白鹤、乌鸦之类。
English: It is more than sixty thousand miles from the earth to the sky, and it is not just the top of Mount Tai that is high and far away. Like stars attached to the sky, when people see it, they have lost the true appearance of the stars. It can be seen that it is not only the white cranes and crows that have lost their true appearance.

古文：数等星之质百里，体大光盛，故能垂耀，人望见之，若凤卵之状，远失其实也。
现代文：推算星的质地有百里。形体巨大光亮极了，所以能向下发出光芒。人看见它像凤卵的形状，这是因为离人很远失去了它真实面貌的缘故。
English: The estimated star has a texture of a hundred miles. The body is huge and extremely bright, so it can emit light downward. People see it like the shape of a phoenix egg, this is because it is far away from people and has lost its true appearance.

古文：如星霣审者天之星霣而至地，人不知其为星也。
现代文：如果星星坠落是真的，那么天上的星坠落到地上，人们应该不知道它是星。为什么呢？
English: If falling stars are real, then if a star in the sky falls to the ground, people should not know that it is a star. Why?

古文：何则？霣时小大，不与在天同也。
现代文：因为星坠落下来时的大小不跟在天上时相同。
English: For the stars, when they fall, are not the same size as they are in the sky.

古文：今见星霣如在天时，是时星霣也；非星，则气为之也。
现代文：如今看见坠落的星像在天上时大小一样，这就不该是星。不是星，那就是气形成的了。
English: If you see a falling star today that is the same size as it was when it was in the sky, it should not be a star. If it is not a star, it is made of gas.

古文：人见鬼如死人之状，其实气象聚，非真死人。
现代文：人看见鬼像死人的样子，其实是气使它像死人的样子，而不是真的死人。
English: When people see a ghost looking like a dead person, it is actually the qi that makes it look like a dead person, not a real dead person.

古文：然则星之形，其实非星。
现代文：那么坠落的星状物，其实不是星。
English: So the falling star-like object is not actually a star.

古文：孔子云正霣者非星，而徙，正言如雨非雨之文，盖俱失星之实矣。
现代文：孔子没有订正坠落下来的不是星，而只订正说星坠落像下雨而不是雨的说法，都是不符合星的真实情况的。
English: Confucius did not revise that it was not the star that fell down, but only revised that the saying that the star fell like rain rather than rain was not in line with the true situation of the star.

古文：《春秋左氏传》： 四月辛卯，夜中恆星不见，夜明也；星霣如雨，与雨俱也。 
现代文：《春秋左氏传》： 鲁庄公七年四月辛卯日，晚上连常见的星星者看不见，夜空很明亮；星星坠落像下雨，而且与雨同时下来。 
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography": In April of the seventh year of Lu Zhuangguo, on the day of Xinwu, in the evening even the common stars could not be seen, the night sky was very bright; the stars fell like rain, and they came down at the same time as the rain.

古文：其言夜明，故不见，与《易》之言日中见斗相依类也。
现代文：它是说夜空很明亮所以看不见星星，与《易经·丰卦》上说的 太阳正中时看见了北斗星 相类似。
English: It means that the night sky is very bright, so you can't see the stars, which is similar to the "I Ching·Feng Gua" saying that when the sun is in the middle, you can see the Big Dipper.

古文：日中见斗，幽不明也；夜中星不见，夜光明也。
现代文：太阳正中时看见北斗星，是因为阳光昏暗不明的缘故；晚上看不见星星，是因为夜空很明亮的缘故。
English: Seeing the Big Dipper when the sun is at mid-height is due to the fact that the sunlight is dim and unclear; stars cannot be seen at night because the night sky is very bright.

古文：事异义同，盖其实也。
现代文：事情不同但道理一样，大概它们都是事实。
English: Different things but the same thing, they're probably all true.

古文：其言与雨俱之集也。
现代文：《春秋左氏传》说的 与雨俱 ，是说星星与雨一齐落下来。
English: "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi" says that the stars and the rain fall together.

古文：夫辛卯之夜明，故星不见，明则不雨之验也，雨气阴暗安得明？
现代文：因为辛卯日的晚上夜空很明亮，所以看不见星星。夜空很明亮，那是不下雨的证明，下雨天气阴暗，怎么会夜空明亮呢？
English: Because the night sky is very bright on the evening of Xinwu Day, the stars cannot be seen. The night sky is very bright, which is proof that it is not raining. If it rains and the weather is gloomy, how can the night sky be bright?

古文：明则无雨，安得与雨俱？
现代文：夜空明亮就没有雨，怎么会与雨一同下来呢？
English: If there is no rain in the bright night sky, how can it fall together with the rain?

古文：夫如是言与雨俱者非实，且言夜明不见，安得见星与雨俱？
现代文：像这样，说与雨一同下来就不是事实。再说，夜空很明亮连星星都看不见，怎么能看见陨星与雨一起落下来呢？
English: In this way, it is not true to say that it fell down with the rain. Moreover, the night sky is very bright and even the stars cannot be seen, so how can you see a meteorite falling down with the rain?

古文：又僖公十六年正月戊申，霣石於宋五，《左氏传》曰： 星也。 
现代文：还有鲁僖公十六年正月戊申日，有五砣陨石落在宋国，《春秋左氏传》说： 是星星。 
English: In addition, in the first month of the 16th year of Lu Xun's reign, on the day of Wushen, there were five meteorites that fell in Song. "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi" said: "They are stars."

古文：夫谓霣石为星，则霣谓为石矣。
现代文：说陨石是星，就是说坠落下来的是石头了。
English: To say that a meteorite is a star is to say that it is a stone that has fallen down.

古文：辛卯之夜，星霣，为星，则实为石矣。
现代文：那么辛卯日的晚上，坠落的星是星，那实际上是石头。
English: Then, on a clear night, the falling star is a star, but it's actually a rock.

古文：辛卯之夜，星霣如是石，地有楼台，楼台崩坏。
现代文：辛卯日的晚上，坠落的星如果是石头，那么地上有楼台，楼台就会被砸坏。
English: On the night of Xinwu Day, if the falling star is a stone, then if there is a platform on the ground, the platform will be smashed.

古文：孔子虽不合言及地尺，虽地必有实数，鲁史目见，不空言者也，云与雨俱，雨集於地，石亦宜然。
现代文：孔子虽然不赞成说陨星离地一尺又返回天上，但它离地一定有确实的数字，鲁国的史官亲眼看见，是不会凭空瞎说的；说 与雨一同落下来 ，雨会聚集在地上，陨石也该是这样。
English: Although Confucius did not approve of saying that a meteorite left the ground a foot and returned to the sky, it must have a precise number of its distance from the ground. The historian of Lu saw it with his own eyes and would not say it out of thin air. He said that if it fell with the rain, the rain would gather on the ground, and so should the meteorite.

古文：至地而楼台不坏，非星明矣。
现代文：陨星落到地上而楼台没有毁坏，那么落下来的不是星，就很明白了。
English: If a meteorite falls to the ground and the building is not destroyed, then it is clear that it is not a star that has fallen.

古文：且左丘明谓石为星，何以审之？
现代文：左丘明说陨石是星，怎么才能弄清楚呢？
English: Zuo Qiu clearly said that the meteorite is a star, how can we figure it out?

古文：当时石霣轻然。何以其从天坠也？
现代文：当时石头坠落下来砰砰砰的，怎么知道是从天上掉下来的呢？
English: At that time, if a stone fell down and smashed, how could it be known that it had fallen from the sky?

古文：秦时三山亡，亡不消散，有在其集下时必有声音，或时夷狄之山，从集於宋，宋闻石霣，则谓之星也。
现代文：秦朝的时候三座大山不见了，不见了又没有消散，在它们一齐落下的时候一定有声音，或许是夷狄的山飞来落在宋国，宋国人听到了石头落地的声音，就认为它是星。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, three large mountains disappeared, disappeared and did not dissipate. When they fell together, there must have been a sound. Perhaps it was the mountain of Yidi flying to and fro in Song. Song people heard the sound of the stone falling to the ground and thought it was a star.

古文：左丘明省，则谓之星。
现代文：左丘明写《左传》时省略了文字，就说是星。
English: Zuo Qiu clearly omitted words when writing "Zo Zhuan" and said it was a star.

古文：夫星，万物之精，与日月同。
现代文：星是万物的精气，跟日月一样。
English: Stars are the essence of all things, just like the sun and the moon.

古文：说五星者，谓五行之精之光也。
现代文：解释五星的人，说五星是金、木、水、火、土五行精气的光。
English: People who explain the five stars say that the five stars are the light of the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth.

古文：五星众星同光耀，独谓列星为石，恐失其实。
现代文：五颗恒星和群星一样闪光照耀，而只说流星是石头，恐怕不符合它的真实情况。
English: The five stars shine with the same brilliance as the stars, but to say that the meteor is stone is probably not true.

古文：实者，辛卯之夜，霣星若雨而非星也，与彼汤谷之十日，若日而非日也。
现代文：实际上，辛卯日的晚上，坠落的流星像下雨而不是星，跟那汤谷的十个太阳，像太阳而不是太阳一样。
English: In fact, on the evening of Xinwu Day, the falling meteors were like rain instead of stars, and the ten suns in the valley were like the sun instead of the sun.

古文：儒者又曰： 雨从天下 ，谓正从天坠也。
现代文：儒者又说： 雨是从天上掉下来的。 这是说雨直接从天上落下来。
English: The Confucianist also said, "Rain falls from the sky," which means that rain falls directly from the sky.

古文：如论之，雨从地上，不从天下，见雨从上集，则谓从天下矣，其实地上也。
现代文：照实说，雨是从地面上去的，而不是从天上产生降下来的。人们看见雨从上空落下来，就认为是天上掉下来的，其实它是从地面上去的。
English: For the rain comes down from the heavens, and does not fall on the earth; so when people see the rain falling from the sky, they conclude that it came from the sky, when in fact it came from the earth.

古文：然其出地起於山。
现代文：然而雨从地面上去，是由山开始的。
English: However, the rain comes up from the ground, starting from the mountains.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来说明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：《春秋传》曰： 触石而出，肤寸而合，不崇朝而遍天下，惟太山也。 
现代文：《春秋公羊传·僖公三十一年》上说： 云贴着山石出来，肤寸之间都云气密集，不到一个早晨，雨就下遍天下，这只有泰山才能做到。 
English: "The Spring and Autumn Ram Story: The 31st Year of King Taigong" said: "Clouds stick to the mountains and rocks, and the clouds are dense between the skin sizes. In less than one morning, rain will fall all over the world, which only Mount Taishan can do.

古文：太山雨天下，小山雨一国，各以小大为近远差。
现代文：泰山的雨能下遍天下，小山的雨能下遍一国，各以山的大小距离的远近而有不同。
English: The rain of Mount Tai can fall all over the world, the rain of a small mountain can fall all over a country, each of which is different depending on the size and distance of the mountain.

古文：雨之出山，或谓云载而行，云散水坠，名为雨矣。
现代文：雨从山里出来，有人说是云载着雨走，云散开水落下来，就称作雨。
English: When rain comes out of the mountains, some people say that clouds carry the rain, and when the clouds disperse and water falls, it is called rain.

古文：夫云则雨，雨则云矣，初出为云，云繁为雨。
现代文：其实云就是雨，雨就是云。刚出来是云，云浓密成雨。
English: In fact, clouds are rain, rain is clouds. Just come out is clouds, clouds dense into rain.

古文：犹甚而泥露濡污衣服，若雨之状。
现代文：如果云非常浓，会像厚露浸湿衣服，跟雨淋湿衣服的样子差不多。
English: If the cloud is very thick, it will look like a thick dew soaking wet clothes, similar to the appearance of rain soaking wet clothes.

古文：非云与俱，云载行雨也。
现代文：可见不是云和雨在一起而是云载着雨走。
English: You can see that it is not clouds and rain together, but clouds carrying rain.

古文：或曰： 《尚书》曰： 月之从星，则以风雨。 
现代文：有人说： 《尚书·洪范》上说： 月亮靠近箕宿和毕宿，就会刮风下雨。 
English: Some people said: "Shangshu Hongfan" said: When the moon is close to the equinox and the solstice, it will be windy and rainy.

古文：《诗》曰： 月丽於毕，俾滂沲矣。 
现代文：《诗经·小雅·渐渐之石》上说： 月亮靠近毕宿，就要大雨滂沱。 
English: "Shijing, Xiaoya, Zhouzhuang Stone" said: When the moon is close to setting, it will rain heavily.

古文：二经咸言，所谓为之非天，如何？ 
现代文：这两种经书都说，造雨的不是天，又怎么解释呢？ 
English: Both scriptures say that it is not the heavens that make rain, so how can this be explained?

古文：夫雨从山发，月经星丽毕之时，丽毕之时当雨也。
现代文：这是因为雨从山上起来，正是月亮经过并靠近毕宿的时候，月亮靠近毕宿的时候，正好下雨。
English: This is because the rain comes down from the mountains just as the moon passes overhead and nears its setting, and it rains just as the moon nears its setting.

古文：时不雨，月不丽，山不云，天地上下自相应也。
现代文：不下雨的时候，月亮不会靠近毕宿，山上也没有云，天地上下就是如此自然相应。
English: When it's not raining, the moon doesn't come close to the end of the month, and there are no clouds on the mountains.

古文：月丽於上，山烝於下，气体偶合，自然道也。
现代文：月亮靠近山，山从下面蒸发出水气，水气跟月亮巧合，这是自然而然的道理。
English: The moon is close to the mountain, the mountain evaporates water vapor from below, and the water vapor coincides with the moon, which is a natural reason.

古文：云雾，雨之征也，夏则为露，冬则为霜，温则为雨，寒则为雪。
现代文：云雾，是雨的征兆，夏天则变成露水，冬天则变成白霜，天气温和则变成雨水，天气寒冷则变成雪花。
English: Fog is a sign of rain, summer turns to dew, winter turns to frost, mild weather turns to rain, cold weather turns to snow.

古文：雨露冻凝者，皆由地发，不从天降也。
现代文：雨水和露水是凝冻成的，它们都是由地面产生上去，而不是在天上产生降下来的。
English: Rain and dew are frozen; they are made on the ground, not in the sky.

