古文：易曰：定天下之吉凶，成天下之亹亹，莫善于蓍龟。
现代文：《易经》上说：确定天下的吉凶，成就天下的美名，最好用蓍草和乌龟占卜。
English: "I Ching" said: to determine the fate of the world, to achieve the world's reputation, it is best to use eelgrass and turtle divination.

古文：是故天生神物，圣人则之。
现代文：所以天生神物，圣人效法。
English: That is why they are born as gods, and saints follow their example.

古文：又神农、桐君论本草药性，黄帝、岐伯说病候治方，皆圣人之所重也。
现代文：神农、桐君谕《本草》的药性，董童、些值指出病症和治疗的药方，这些都是圣人看重的。
English: Shennong, Tongjun, and Dongtong described the medicinal properties of "this herb," while Cui Xian pointed out the symptoms and the prescription for treatment. All of these were valued by the sage.

古文：故太史公着龟策、日者及扁鹊仓公传，皆所以广其闻见，昭示后昆。
现代文：因此司马迁在《史记》中写出了《龟策》、《日者》和《扁鹊仓公传》，都是用来增广人们的见闻，昭示给后人。
English: Therefore, Sima Qian wrote "The Tortoise and the Hare," "The Japanese" and "The Public Biography of the Squat Warehouse" in "Histories," all of which were used to expand people's knowledge and to show it to future generations.

古文：齐氏作霸以来，招引英俊，但有艺能，无不毕策，今并录之以备方伎云。
现代文：北齐立国以来，招纳英俊之士，衹要有技能，全都加以任用，现在收录下来编入《方伎传》。
English: Since the founding of North Qi, handsome men have been recruited, and if they have skills, they have all been appointed, and now they have been recorded and compiled into "Fangqi Biography."

古文：由吾道荣，琅邪人。
现代文：由吾道荣，琅邪人。
English: It's all up to me, I'm the bad guy.

古文：少好道法，与其同类相求入长白、太山潜隐，具闻道术。
现代文：年轻时喜好道术，和一些志趣相投的人互相联络到长白山、泰山潜心隐居，都通晓了道术。
English: When he was young, he was fond of Taoism, and he contacted some like-minded people to live in seclusion in Changbai Mountain and Mount Tai, and they all learned about Taoism.

古文：仍游邹、鲁之间，习儒业。
现代文：于是在邹、鲁之间游历，学习儒学。
English: So he traveled between Shandong and Shandong to study Confucianism.

古文：晋阳人某，大明法术，乃寻之，是人为人家庸力，无识之者，久乃访知。
现代文：听说置昼某人，很精通法术，就去寻找他，某人正为别人做苦力，没有谁认识他，过了很长时间才找到。
English: Heard about someone in the afternoon, very skilled in magic, went to look for him, someone is working as a coolie for others, no one knew him, it took a long time to find.

古文：其人道家符水、□禁、阴阳历数、天文、药性无不通解，以道荣好尚，乃悉授之。
现代文：此人对于道家符水、咒禁、阴阳历敷、天文、药性全都通晓，由于道荣愿意钻研，就全部传授给他。
English: This person knew everything about the Taoist symbols of water, spells, yin and yang, astronomy, and medicinal properties. Since Tao Rong was willing to study, he was taught everything.

古文：是人谓道荣云： 我本恒岳仙人，有少罪过，为天官所谪。
现代文：他对道荣说： 我本是恒山上的仙人，有些小小的罪遇，被天官贬到人间。
English: He said to Tao Rong, "I was originally a hermit on Hengshan Mountain. I had some minor offenses and was relegated to the human world by heavenly officials.

古文：今限满将归，卿宜送吾至汾水。 及河，值水暴长，桥坏，船渡艰难。
现代文：如今期限满了要回到天上去，你可以把我送到抛匕。 到了河边，正好河水暴涨，桥被冲壤了，渡船也很难通过。
English: Now that the deadline has passed to return to the sky, you can send me to the raft. I arrived at the river, just as the river was surging, the bridge was washed away, and the ferry was difficult to pass.

古文：是人乃临水禹步，以一符投水中，流便绝。
现代文：此人在河边一跛一拐地走着，把一道符投到水中，水流断绝。
English: The man limped along the riverbank and dropped a note into the water, cutting off the flow.

古文：俄顷水积将至天，是人徐自沙石上渡。
现代文：很快积聚的水快要涨到天上，此人慢慢从沙石渡过。
English: The quickly accumulating water is about to rise into the sky, and the man slowly makes his way across the sand and rocks.

古文：唯道荣见其如是，傍人咸云水如此长，此人遂能浮过，共惊异之。
现代文：惟有道荣看到他这样渡河，旁人都说河水这样上涨，此人竟然能够浮过去，都非常惊讶。
English: However, when Tao Rong saw him crossing the river in this way, everyone around him said that the river had risen so much, and they were very surprised that this man was able to float across.

古文：道荣仍归本部，隐于琅邪山，辟谷，饵松朮茯苓，求长生之秘。
现代文：道荣回到家乡，在琅邪山隐居，修习辟谷术，仅吃松籽茯苓，探求长生的秘诀。
English: Tao Rong returned to his hometown and lived in seclusion in the Lushan Mountains, practising the art of warding off evil spirits, eating only pine seeds and cucumbers, and seeking the secret of longevity.

古文：寻为显祖追往晋阳。
现代文：不久被颢祖追召到晋阳。
English: Soon after, he was summoned to Jinyang.

古文：至辽阳山中，有猛兽去马十步，所追人惊怖将走。
现代文：走到辽阳山中，有一猛兽出现在马前十步远的地方，征召的人惊怕想逃走。
English: Walking into the Liaoyang Mountains, a ferocious beast appeared ten paces ahead of the horse. The conscript was terrified and wanted to run away.

古文：道荣以杖画地成火坑，猛兽遽走。
现代文：道荣在地上用拐杖画出一火坑，猛兽连忙逃跑。
English: Dorong used his crutch to draw a fire pit on the ground, and the beast quickly ran away.

古文：俄值国废，道荣归周。
现代文：很快北齐覆灭，道荣归顺韭周。
English: Soon, the Northern Qi was destroyed, and the glory of the Tao was transferred to the Southern Qi.

古文：隋初乃卒。
现代文：直到堕初去世。
English: Until his untimely death.

古文：又有张远游者，显祖时令与诸术士合九转金丹。
现代文：又有一位叫亟远避的人，显祖时常命他和其他术士烧炼九转金丹。
English: There is also a person who is to be avoided at all costs. He and other sorcerers are said to burn nine-turned gold.

古文：及成，显祖置之玉匣，云： 我贪世间作乐，不能即飞上天，待临死时取服。 
现代文：练成后，显祖珍藏在玉匣裹，说： 我贪恋人间的欢乐，不能马上飞升上天，等我临死时再拿出来服用。 
English: After practicing, Xianzu treasured it in a jade box and said: "I am greedy for the joys of the human world, I cannot immediately fly up to heaven. I will take it out when I am about to die.

古文：王春，河东人。
现代文：王春，河东人。
English: Wang Chun, from Hedong.

古文：少好易占，明风角，游于赵、魏之间，飞符上天。
现代文：年轻时喜好占之术，知道风角术数，在赵、魏之间游学，可以把纸符送到天上去。
English: When he was young, he liked the art of divination, knew the number of wind angles, traveled between Zhao and Wei, and could send paper symbols to the sky.

古文：高祖起于信都，引为馆客。
现代文：产担从值垫起兵，引他作了门客。
English: The head of the maternity ward raised an army from the mat and brought him in as a concierge.

古文：韩陵之战，四面受敌，从寅至午，三合三离。
现代文：垄堕之战时，四面受敌，从凌晨一直到中午，三次交锋又三次罢战。
English: During the War of Attrition, we were attacked from all sides. From the early morning until noon, there were three engagements and three strikes.

古文：高祖将退军，春叩马谏曰： 比未时，必当大捷。 遽缚其子诣王为质，不胜请斩之。
现代文：高祖想退兵，王春拉着他的马说： 到下午未时，就可以大获全胜。 急忙把他自己的儿子捆上送给高祖作人质，说如果不能取胜可以杀掉儿子。
English: Gao Zu wanted to leave the army, Wang Chun pulled his horse and said: By the late afternoon, we can win a complete victory. He hurriedly tied up his own son and sent him to Gao Zu as a hostage, saying that if he could not win, he could kill his son.

古文：俄而贼大败。
现代文：很快贼军大败。
English: Soon, the bandits were defeated.

古文：其后每从征讨，其言多中，位徐州刺史，卒。
现代文：此后每次出征作战，王壹说的话都能应验。官至途州刺史，去世。
English: After that, every time he went out to fight, Wang Yi's words could be verified. The official went to Tuzhou to make history, and passed away.

古文：信都芳，河间人。
现代文：信都芳，河间人。
English: Nobutoyoshi, a native of Kawama.

古文：少明算术，为州里所称。
现代文：年轻时就精通算术，受到州人称道。
English: At a young age, he was proficient in arithmetic and was praised by the people of the state.

古文：有巧思，每精研究，忘寝与食，或坠坑坎。
现代文：有巧妙构想，常潜心研究，废寝忘食，有时走路会掉到坑裹。
English: He has clever ideas, often devotes himself to research, loses sleep and forgets to eat, and sometimes falls into a pit when walking.

古文：尝语人云： 算之妙，机巧精微，我每一沉思，不闻雷霆之声也。 其用心如此。
现代文：有一次告诉别人说： 算术的学问，非常巧妙深奥，我每次深入思考，连打雷声都听不见。 他就是如此用心。
English: He once told someone: "The study of arithmetic is so subtle and profound that every time I think about it, I can't even hear the thunder.

古文：以术数干高祖为馆客，授参军。
现代文：凭着自己的学问作了直担的门客，授为参军。
English: By virtue of his knowledge, he became a direct disciple of Mao Zedong and was awarded the right to join the army.

古文：丞相仓曹祖珽谓芳曰： 律管吹灰，术甚微妙，绝来既久，吾思所不至，卿试思之。 芳遂留意，十数日，便云： 吾得之矣，然终须河内葭莩灰。 后得河内葭莩，用其术，应节便飞，余灰即不动也。
现代文：丞相仓曹狙矾对他说： 用律管吹灰，测定季节气候，这种方法极其微妙，已经失传很久了，我一直想不出其中的道理，你试着考虑一下。 他就留心这件事，十几天后，就说： 我已经弄通了，但是必须要蚰产的芦苇薄膜的灰。 后来得到了。一加试验，果然到了季节灰就飞扬起来，而其他的灰却不动。
English: The prime minister, Cang Cao Sniping, said to him: "This method of blowing ash with a law pipe to determine the seasonal climate is extremely delicate and has been lost for a long time. I have never been able to figure out the reason for it. Try to think about it." He paid attention to this matter, and after a dozen days, he said: "I have figured it out, but the ash of the reed film must be produced. Later, I got it. One more test, and sure enough, when the season comes, the ash flies up, but the other ash does not move.

古文：不为时所重，竟不行，故此法遂绝云。
现代文：但这种方法没有受到当时人的重视，竟然没有流传，所以失传了。
English: However, this method was not valued by the people of the time, and it did not spread, so it was lost.

古文：芳又撰次古来浑天、地动、欹器、漏刻诸巧事，并画图，名曰器准。
现代文：他又把古代的浑天仪、地动仪、欹器、漏刻等记录成文，并且画出圆，编成《器准》这部书。
English: He also recorded the ancient armillary sphere, the earth-moving instrument, the crockery, the notched vessel, and so on, and drew a circle to compile the book "Instrument Standard."

古文：又着乐书、遁甲经四术、周髀宗。
现代文：又撰写了《乐书》、《遁甲经》、《四术周髀宗》。
English: He also wrote the "Music Book," the "Sangka Sutra" and the "Four Arts of Zhou Enzong."

古文：芳又私撰历书，名为灵宪历，算月有频大频小，食必以朔，证据甚甄明。
现代文：他又自己编制历书，定名叫《灵宪历》，计算月份大小月相间，不足的用朔补足，证据很显明。
English: He also compiled his own calendar, called the "Spiritual Constitution Calendar," calculating the size of the month between the phases of the moon, supplementing the lack with a new calendar, the evidence is very clear.

古文：每云： 何承天亦为此法，不能精，灵宪若成，必当百代无异议。 书未就而卒。
现代文：他常说： 何承天也使用了这方法，但不能精确，如果灵宪历成功了，百代没有异议。 书没有写成就去世了。
English: He often said: He Cheng Tian also used this method, but it is not accurate, if the Ling Xian Calendar is successful, there will be no objection from Baidai, and he died without writing the book.

古文：宋景业，广宗人。
现代文：宋景业，广宗人。
English: Song Jingye, Guang Zongren.

古文：明周易，为阴阳，纬候之学，兼明历数。
现代文：通晓《周易》，研究阴阳谶纬之学，同时精通天文历法。
English: He is familiar with "Zhou Yi," studies the science of yin and yang, and is proficient in the astronomical calendar.

古文：魏末，任北平守。
现代文：魏末，任北平太守。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, he was appointed governor of Beiping.

古文：显祖作相，在晋阳，景业因高德政上言： 易稽览图曰：谨案东北水谓渤海也，高得之，明高氏得天下也。 是时，魏武定八年五月也。
现代文：显祖任丞相时，在晋阳，景业通过高德政上书说： 《易稽览图》上说： 《鼎》卦，五月，圣人作君主，上天赐给他寿命，东北水中，平民称王，高得到。 
English: When Emperor Xianzu was the prime minister, in Jinyang, Jingye wrote a letter through Gao Dezheng: "Easy to check the map" said: "Ding" Gua, in May, the saint was the monarch, God gave him life, in the Northeast Water, the common people praised the king, Gao got.

古文：高德政、徐之才并劝显祖应天受禅，乃之邺。
现代文：贺拔仁等人又说： 景业要误大王，应该把他斩首谢天下。 
English: He Bajin and others also said: If King Jingye wants to be a great king, he should behead him.

古文：至平城都，诸大臣沮计，将还。
现代文：显祖说： 景业可以作帝王的老师，怎么可以杀掉。 回到并州，显祖命他卜卦，得到了《干》卦中的《鼎》卦。
English: Xianzu said, "If Jingye can be the emperor's teacher, how can he be killed?" Returning to Anhui Province, Xianzu ordered him to recite Zhuan Falun, and obtained the "Ding" Zhuan in "Gan" Zhuan.

古文：贺拔仁等又云： 景业误王，宜斩之以谢天下。 显祖曰： 景业当为帝王师，何可杀也。 还至并，显祖令景业筮，遇干之鼎。景业曰： 干为君，天也。
现代文：他说： 《干》代表君，是天。《易经》上说： 此时可以驾着六龙统治天下。 
English: He said: "The representative of "dry" is heaven. "I Ching" said: At this time, you can drive the six dragons to rule the world.

古文：易曰：鼎，五月卦也。
现代文：《鼎》卦，是五月卦，应该在仲夏吉日受禅统治天下。 
English: "Ding" Gua is the May Gua, and it should be ruled by Zen on the auspicious day in the middle of summer.

古文：宜以仲夏吉辰御天受禅。 或曰： 阴阳书，五月不可入官，犯之卒于其位。 景业曰： 此乃大吉，王为天子，无复下期，岂得不终于其位。 显祖大悦。
现代文：有人说： 根据阴阳书的说法，五月不能入官，违犯了就会死在位上。 他说： 这是大吉，大王作了天子，不会再有下台的日子，怎能不终老在皇位上呢。 显祖非常高兴。
English: Some people said, "According to the Yin and Yang book, you can't become an official in May, and if you violate it, you will die on the throne." He said, "This is great good luck, the great king has become a heavenly son, there will be no more days of stepping down, how can I not end up on the imperial throne." Xianzu was very happy.

古文：天保初，授散骑侍郎。
现代文：天保初年，授散骑侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of Jusan Kishiwairo.

古文：又有荆次德，有术数，预知尒朱荣成败，又言代魏者齐。
现代文：还有个人叫荆次德，有术敷，能预先知道氽朱荣的成败，又说代魏的是齐。
English: There is also a person called Jing Zide, who has a magic wand and can know the success or failure of Zou Zhu Rong in advance, and also said that Wei is Qi.

古文：葛荣闻之，故自号齐王。
现代文：葛荣听说后，就自号齐王。
English: After hearing this, Ge Rong called himself King Qi.

古文：待次德以殊礼，问其天人之事。对曰： 齐当兴，东海出天子，今王据渤海，是齐地。
现代文：用特殊的礼节对待他，向他请教有关天子之事，他回答说： 齐应当兴旺，东海出现天子，如今你占据渤海，是古代齐国之地。
English: Treating him with special etiquette and asking him for advice on matters concerning the Celestial Son, he replied: Qi should prosper, the Celestial Son appeared in the East Sea, and now you occupy the Bohai Sea, which is the land of ancient Qi.

古文：又太白与月并，宜速用兵，迟则不吉。 荣不从也。
现代文：而且太白星和月亮挨到一起，要迅速用兵，迟了不吉利。 葛荣没有听从他的建议。
English: Moreover, the white star and the moon were too close to each other, and it was ill-fated to use troops quickly. Ge Rong did not listen to his advice.

古文：许遵，高阳人。
现代文：许遵，高阳人。
English: Xu Zun, from Gaoyang.

古文：明易，善筮，兼晓天文、风角、占相、逆刺，其验若神。
现代文：通晓《周易》，善于卜筮，兼通天文、风角、相面、逆刺，都非常应验。
English: He is familiar with "Zhou Yi" and good at divination, and is also familiar with astronomy, wind angle, phase, and barb, all of which are very satisfactory.

古文：高祖引为馆客，自言禄命不富贵，不横死，是以任性疏诞，多所犯忤，高祖常容借之。
现代文：高祖用他作了门客，他说自己命中注定不能富贵，不会横遭惨死，所以为人放任疏阔，经常违命顶撞，高祖也常常宽容他。
English: Gaozu used him as a concubine. He said that he was fated not to be rich and not to die a cruel death, so he was allowed to stray and often disobeyed orders. Gaozu also often tolerated him.

古文：显祖无道日甚，遵语人曰： 多折算来，吾筮此狂夫何时当死。 遂布算满□，大言曰： 不出冬初，我乃不见。 显祖以十月崩，遵果以九月死。
现代文：说完就回去了。高岳到了京城不久就去世了。颢祖无道日盛一日，他对别人说： 这样做一定会折掉他的寿命，我来占卦遣狂夫什么时候该死。 就在床上铺满了卦，卜算后大声说： 他已经活不过初冬了，而我竟然看不到这一天。 颢祖在十月去世，许遵果然在九月就去世。
English: After saying this, he went back. Gao Yue passed away shortly after arriving in Beijing. On the first day of the festival, he said to others, "Doing this will definitely shorten his lifespan. I'm going to predict when the madman should die." The bed was covered with guesses, and after calculating, he said out loud, "He can't survive the early winter, and I can't even see this day." Gao Yue passed away in October, and Xu Zun passed away in September.

古文：吴遵世，字季绪，渤海人。
现代文：吴遵世，字季绪，渤海人。
English: Wu Zunshi, the character Ji Xu, is from Bohai.

古文：少学易，入恒山从隐居道士游处。
现代文：少年时学习《周易》，进恒山和隐居的道士住在一起。
English: When he was a boy, he studied "Zhou Yi" and went to Mount Hengshan to live with a reclusive Taoist monk.

古文：数年，忽见一老翁谓之云： 授君开心符。 遵世跪取吞之，遂明占候。
现代文：过了几年，忽然看到一个老翁对他说： 给你开心符。 他跪着接过来吞了下去，于是通晓占卜之术。
English: After a few years, he suddenly saw an old man who said to him, "Here is a lucky charm for you," and he knelt down and swallowed it, so he became familiar with divination.

古文：后出游京洛，以易筮知名。
现代文：后来出山到京洛游历，靠《周易》卜筮出名。
English: Later, he traveled from the mountains to Kyoto, and became famous for his poem "Zhou Yi" (周易).

古文：魏武帝之将即位也，使遵世筮之，遇明夷之贲曰： 初登于天，后入于地。 帝曰： 何谓也？ 遵世曰： 初登于天，当作天子。
现代文：魏武帝将即位时，命他占卜吉凶，卜到了《明夷》卦中的《贲》卦说： 初登于天，后入于地。 魏武帝问他： 这是什么意思? 他说： 初登于天，是说你应当作天子。
English: When Emperor Wu of Wei was about to ascend to the throne, he ordered him to tell fortunes. When he arrived at the "" in the "Mingyi" story, he said, "First ascend to heaven, then descend to earth." Emperor Wu asked him, "What does this mean?" He said, "First ascend to heaven means you should be the son of heaven."

古文：后入于地，不得久也。 终如其言。
现代文：后入于地，是说时间不会太久。 结果真如他所说。
English: He said it wouldn't be too long after he hit the ground, and it turned out to be true.

古文：世祖以丞相在京师居守，自致猜疑，甚怀忧惧，谋将起兵，每宿蓍令遵世筮之，遵世云： 不须起动，自有大庆。 俄而赵郡王奉太后令以遗诏追世祖。
现代文：世祖以丞相的身份驻守京师，总觉得会招来别人的猜疑，心中很是忧虑恐惧，谋划起兵，每天晚上让遵世占卜。他说： 不用起兵，自然会有大庆之日不久，趟郡王奉太后的旨意送来诏书追召世祖入朝。
English: He always felt that he would arouse the suspicions of others. In his heart, he was very worried and fearful. He planned to raise an army and had Zun Shih divination every night. He said: "There is no need to raise an army, it is natural that the day of the grand celebration will come soon, and the county king will send an imperial rescript to summon his ancestor to the imperial court according to the will of the empress dowager.

古文：及即祚，授其中书舍人，固辞疾。赵辅和，清都人。
现代文：即位后，授他为中书舍人，他却以有病为由坚决推辞。赵辅和，清都人。
English: After he ascended the throne, he was given the title of Censor of China, but he firmly refused on the grounds that he was ill. Zhao Fu He, a native of Qingdao.

古文：少以明易善筮为馆客。
现代文：少年时因为精通《周易》善于卜筮作了直狙的门客。
English: When he was a boy, he became a direct target because he was proficient in "Zhou Yi" and good at divination.

古文：高祖崩于晋阳，葬有日矣，世宗书令显祖亲卜宅兆相于邺西北漳水北原。
现代文：直担在置盐去世，已经埋葬了几天，世塞写信让题担亲自到邺西北违 ,的原野上选风水宝地。
English: Zhitang died in Jishan and had been buried for a few days. Shisei wrote a letter asking Zhitang to personally go to the fields of northwest Hubei Province to select a feng shui treasure site.

古文：显祖与吴遵世择地，频卜不吉，又至一所，命遵世筮之，遇革，遵世等数十人咸云不可用。
现代文：题担和昱遵世去选地方，多次占卜都不吉利，又到了一个地方，命遵世算，遇到了《革》卦，遵世等几十人都说不能用。
English: He went to choose a place, and many times the divination was not auspicious. Then he came to a place where he had to calculate his life according to the world, and encountered the "Leather" gua, and dozens of people said that it could not be used.

古文：辅和少年，在□人之后，进云： 革卦于天下人皆凶，唯王家用之大吉。
现代文：辅和年轻，跟在众人后面，走上前来说： 《革卦》对天下人来说都是凶兆，惟有帝王家用之大吉。
English: Shuo He, a young man, followed the crowd and stepped forward to say: "The Tale of Genghis Khan" is a bad omen for everyone in the world, but it is good luck for the imperial family.

古文：革彖辞云： 显祖遽登车，顾云： 即以此地为定。 即义平陵也。
现代文：《革彖辞》说： 商汤周武改朝换代，承受天命顺从人心。 ，显祖立刻上车，回头说： 就定下用遣地方。 也就是义平陵。
English: "Gujie" said: Shang Tang Zhouwu changed the dynasty and generation, and accepted the fate of heaven and obeyed the hearts of the people., Xianzu immediately got on the car and turned around and said: I will decide where to send him. That is, Yiping Mausoleum.

古文：有一人父疾，是人诣馆别托相知者筮之，遇泰，筮者云： 此卦甚吉，疾愈。 是人喜。
现代文：有一人的父亲生病，此人到馆裹托朋友来卦，卜到泰卦》，卜卦的人说： 逭卦很吉利，你父亲的病能够痊愈。 此人很高兴。
English: One man's father was ill, and he came to the hall to ask a friend to tell him a story. The storyteller said, "This story is very auspicious, your father's illness can be cured. This man is very happy.

古文：出后，和谓筮者云： 泰卦干下坤上，然则入土矣，岂得言吉？ 果以凶问至。
现代文：他出去后，辅和对卦的人说： 《泰卦》下是《干》上是《坤》，逭表示要入土，怎么能说吉利呢? 果然就传来了凶信。
English: After he went out, the assistant said to the people of the gua: "In the "Taigua," the bottom is "dry" and the top is "kun," and the skull means to sink into the ground. How can it be said to be lucky? Then the ominous letter came.

古文：和大宁、武平中筮后宫诞男女及时日多中，遂授通直常侍。
现代文：辅和在大宁、武平年间为后宫妃子算生男生女和生产日期都能说中，于是授他为通直常侍。
English: During the Tanin and Wuping dynasties, Fu He was the harem concubine who could count the birth of boys and girls and tell the date of birth, so he was awarded the title of Tsuneishi no Tsuneishi.

古文：皇甫玉，不知何许人。
现代文：他曾经替高归彦相面，说： 你可以位极人臣，但不要谋反。 
English: He once met with Takakibohiko and said, "You can be a very good minister, but don't plot against me."

古文：善相人，常游王侯家。
现代文：归彦说： 我为什么会谋反呢? 他说： 不对，你有反骨。 
English: Kunihiko said, "Why would I want to rebel?" He said, "No, you have a backbone."

古文：世宗自颍川振旅而还，显祖从后，玉于道旁纵观，谓人曰： 大将军不作物，会是道北垂鼻涕者。 显祖既即位，试玉相术，故以帛巾□其眼，而使历摸诸人。至于显祖，曰： 此是最大达官。 于任城王，曰： 当至丞相。 于常山、长广二王，并亦贵，而各私掐之。至石动统，曰： 此弄痴人。 至供膳，曰： 正得好饮食而已。 玉尝为高归彦相，曰： 位极人臣，但莫反。 归彦曰： 我何为反？ 玉曰： 不然，公有反骨。 玉谓其妻曰： 殿上者不过二年。 妻以告舍人斛斯庆，庆以启帝，帝怒召之。
现代文：他曾对妻子说： 孝昭帝高演作天子不会超过两年。 
English: He once said to his wife: "It will not take more than two years for Xiao Zhaodi Gao to play the role of the son of heaven.

古文：玉每照镜，自言当兵死，及被召，谓其妻曰： 我今去不回，若得过日午时，或当得活。 既至正中，遂斩之。
现代文：他的妻子告诉了舍人斛斯庆，斛斯庆禀告了皇上，皇上很生气地召见皇甫玉。皇甫玉每次照镜子，都说自己会被杀，这次被召见，对妻子说： 我这次一去不回了，如果能活遇午时，或许能活下来。 到了正午，就被处斩了。
English: His wife told her husband-to-be, Shusqing, and Shusqing reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor was very angry and summoned the Empress Dowager. Every time the Empress Dowager looked in the mirror, she said that she would be killed. This time, when she was summoned, she said to her wife, "I can't go back this time. If I can live until noon, I might be able to survive." At noon, she was beheaded.

古文：世宗时有吴士，双盲而妙于声相，世宗历试之。
现代文：世宗时吴地有位士人，双目失明却善于通过声音相面，世宗命他轮流试验。
English: At the time of King Sejong, there was a scholar in Wudi who was blind in both eyes, but was good at recognizing faces through sounds. King Sejong ordered him to take turns in the experiment.

古文：闻刘桃枝之声，曰： 有所系属，然当大富贵，王侯将相多死其手，譬如鹰犬为人所使。 闻赵道德之声，曰： 亦系属人，富贵翕赫，不及前人。 闻太原公之声，曰： 当为人主。 闻世宗之声，不动，崔暹私掐之，乃谬言： 亦国主也。 世宗以为我□奴犹当极贵，况吾身也。
现代文：他听到刘桃枝的声音，说： 系属于别人，但会大富大贵，王侯将相很多会死在他的手上，如同鹰犬被人驱使、 听到趟鲢的声音，说： 也是系属于别人，富贵颢赫，比不上前一位。 听到太原公的声音，说： 会做帝王。 听到世塞的声音，默然不言，崔逞暗地裹掐他，才乱说道： 也是天子。 世塞认为我这些手下还能极其富贵，何况我自己呢。
English: He heard the voice of Liu Taoji, saying, "It belongs to someone else, but it will be very rich and noble, many princes will die in his hands, like a hawk-dog being driven by a man. He heard the sound of the rattle, saying, "It also belongs to someone else, rich and noble, not as good as the previous one." He heard the voice of Taiyuan Gong, saying, "It will be an emperor." He heard the voice of Shisei, silently, Cui bravely wrapped him, and then said, "It is also the son of heaven. Shisei thinks that my subordinates can still be extremely rich, let alone myself."

古文：解法选，河内人。
现代文：解法选，河内人。
English: Solution selection, people of Hanoi.

古文：少明相术，鉴照人物，皆如其言。
现代文：年轻时通晓相术，能识别人物，都能像他所说的那样。
English: When you are young, you are familiar with the art of physiognomy, you can recognize other people, and you can do as he said.

古文：频为和士开相中，士开牒为府参军。
现代文：多次替塑题相面都说中了，题启奏朝廷授为府中参军。
English: Repeatedly substituting plastic questions for each other, they all hit the mark. The opening theme was awarded by the imperial court to the government to join the army.

古文：魏宁，巨鹿人。
现代文：魏宁马上又改口说： 如果是帝王的，白会有办法。 
English: Wei Ning immediately changed his mind and said: If it is the emperor's, then there is a way.

古文：以善推禄命征为馆客。武成亲试之，皆中。
现代文：又有一人叫阳子术，对人说： 民间歌谲唱道： 卢十六，雉十四，犍子拍头三十二，而四八三十二是天的大数，皇上在位的时间，恐怕不能超过此敷。 
English: There was also a man called Yang Zi Shu, who said to the people: Folk songs sing: Lu xvi, Xi xiv, Zizi batou xii, and 4832 is the number of days, the emperor's reign time, I am afraid, cannot exceed this.

古文：乃以己生年月托为异人而问之，宁曰： 极富贵，今年入墓。 武成惊曰： 是我！ 宁变辞曰： 若帝王自有法。 又有阳子术，语人曰： 谣言：且四八天之大数，太上之祚，恐不过此。 既而武成崩，年三十二也。
现代文：不久武成帝去世，正是三十二岁。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdi died soon after, at the age of thirty-two.

古文：綦母怀文，不知何郡人。
现代文：綦母怀文，不知道是何郡人。
English: I don't know what county he's from.

古文：以道术事高祖。
现代文：以道术追随高祖。
English: Follow the Taoism of Gao Zu.

古文：武定初，官军与周文战于邙山。
现代文：武定初，齐军与周文在邙山大战。
English: At the beginning of Wuding, the Qi army and Zhou Wen fought in Lushan Mountain.

古文：是时官军旗帜尽赤，西军尽黑。
现代文：当时齐军旗帜都是红色，周军是黑色。
English: At that time, the flags of the Qi army were all red, and the Zhou army was black.

古文：怀文言于高祖曰： 赤火色，黑水色，水能灭火，不宜以赤对黑。
现代文：他对高祖说： 红是火的颜色，黑是水的颜色，水能克火，不应该用红色对黑色，土能胜水，应该改成黄色。 
English: He said to Gao Zu: Red is the color of fire, black is the color of water, water can overcome fire, red should not be used for black, earth can overcome water, it should be changed to yellow.

古文：土胜水，宜改为黄。 高祖遂改为赭黄，所谓河阳幡者。又造宿铁刀，其法烧生铁精以重柔铤，数宿则成刚。
现代文：高祖就把旗帜换成赭黄色，就是所说的河阳幡。他又打造宿铁刀，方法是把生铁和熟铁放在一起烧炼，经过几个晚上就变成钢。
English: Gao Zu changed the flag to a bright yellow, which is the so-called Kawayan. He also created a Sukuk iron knife, by putting pig iron and wrought iron together and firing them. After a few nights, it turned into steel.

古文：以柔铁为刀脊，浴以五牲之溺，淬以五牲之脂，斩甲过三十札。
现代文：用熟铁制作刀脊，浸在牲畜的尿中，用牲畜的油脂淬火，可以斩断三十札的锁甲。
English: A knife with a ridge made of wrought iron, dipped in the urine of livestock, and quenched with the grease of livestock, can cut through the locking armor of thirty cards.

古文：今襄国冶家所铸宿柔铤，乃其遗法，作刀犹甚快利，不能截三十札也。
现代文：现在襄国所炼的钢，就用他的方法，铸成刀很锋利，但不能截断三十札。
English: The steel that Xiang Guo is making now is cast using his method. The knife is very sharp, but it can't cut through thirty bills.

古文：怀文云： 广平郡南干子城是干将铸□处，其土可以莹刀。
现代文：他说过： 广平郡南面干子城是干将铸剑的地方，其土可以磨刀。 
English: He said: "Ganzicheng in the south of Guangping County is the place where Gan will make swords, and its soil can sharpen swords.

古文：怀文官至信州刺史。
现代文：怀文官至信州刺史。
English: Waiven official to Shinshu stabbing history.

古文：又有孙正言，谓人曰： 我昔武定中为广州士曹，闻城人曹普演言： 阿保谓天保，德之谓德昌也，灭年号承光，即承之也。张子信，河内人也。
现代文：又有个叫逐正直的，对人说： 过去亘迈年间我为卢业士曹，听城人堕萱远说，矗旦诸王的子孙中，阿保应该作天子，高德之继承，然后就该灭亡了。 阿保说的是玉堡年，德之说的是擅旦年，幽擅灭亡时年号是丞光，也就是继承的意思。张子信，河内人也。
English: There was also a man called "Pursuit of Honesty" who said to people: "In the past long years, I was Lu Ye's Cao. I heard the city people say that among the descendants of the kings of Sutan, Ah Bao should be the son of heaven and the successor of Gao De, and then he should perish. Ah Bao said that it was the year of Jade Fort, De Zhi said that it was the year of Sutan, and the year when Sutan died was Zheng Guang, which means succession. Zhang Zixin, also from Hanoi.

古文：性清净，颇涉文学。
现代文：为人清净，喜爱文学。
English: He is a clean person and loves literature.

古文：少以医术知名，恒隐于白鹿山。
现代文：年轻时以医术闻名，常隐居在白鹿山。
English: When he was young, he was known for his medical skills and often lived in seclusion in Mount Shirakawa.

古文：时游京邑，甚为魏收、崔季舒等所礼，有赠答子信诗数篇。
现代文：到京城游历，很受堕蝗、崔季赶的礼待，与他相互赠和诗敷篇。
English: He traveled to the capital and was treated with great courtesy by the Fallen Locust and Choe Ji Ho. He and Choe Ji Ho presented each other with poems.

古文：后魏以太中大夫征之，听其时还山，不常在邺。
现代文：后来墓以太中大夫的官职征召他，任由他不时回山，不经常住在塑。
English: Later, he was recruited by the official post of doctor in the cemetery, and he was allowed to return to the mountain from time to time, and he did not often live in Shou.

古文：又善易卜风角。
现代文：又擅长《周易》卜卦风角。
English: He is also good at the "Zhou Yi" divination style.

古文：武□奚永洛与子信对坐，有鹊鸣于庭树，□而堕焉。
现代文：武卫奚永洛和他对坐，有喜鹊在树上呜叫，相互争斗掉在地上。
English: There were magpies howling in the trees, fighting with each other and falling to the ground.

古文：子信曰： 鹊言不善，向夕若有风从西南来，历此树，拂堂角，则有口舌事。
现代文：王值说： 喜鹊说的话不好，如果傍晚时会有西南风，刮遇逭棵树，擦过堂角，就会有口舌之争。
English: Wang Zheng said, "What the magpie said is not good. If there is a southwesterly wind in the evening, it will scrape against the camphor tree and pass through the corner of the hall, and there will be a verbal dispute.

古文：今夜有人唤，必不得往，虽□，亦以病辞。 子信去后，果有风如其言。
现代文：今天晚上有人叫你，一定不要去。
English: If someone calls you tonight, don't go.

古文：是夜，琅邪王五使切召永洛，且云□唤。
现代文：虽有王命，也要托病推辞。 子信去后，果真有风从西南吹来。当天晚上，琅邪王五次派人急召永洛，而且说是皇上的旨意。
English: Although it was the king's order, he had to excuse himself on the grounds of illness. After Zixin left, a wind did indeed blow from the southwest. That evening, the Evil King sent people to urgently summon Yonglu five times, and said that it was the emperor's will.

古文：永洛欲起，其妻苦留之，称坠马腰折。
现代文：永洛想动身去，被妻子苦苦劝住，说从马上掉下来摔折了腰。
English: Yongluo wanted to leave, but his wife tried hard to dissuade him, saying that he had fallen off his horse and broken his hip.

古文：诘朝而难作。
现代文：到了早朝时就发生了灾祸。
English: By early morning, disaster had struck.

古文：子信，齐亡卒。
现代文：子信，齐灭亡时去世。
English: The following edict summons you to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：马嗣明，河内人。
现代文：马嗣明，河内人。
English: Ma Siming, a native of Hanoi.

古文：少明医术，博综经方，甲乙、素问、明堂、本草莫不咸诵。
现代文：杨情、邢邵两人在内殿陪皇上喝酒，显祖说： 邢邵的儿子，我想让他在近处任郡守。 杨惰回答说孩子年轻，不宜委以重任。
English: Yang Rong and Yao Shao were drinking wine with the emperor in the inner hall, and Emperor Xianzu said, "Son of Yao Shao, I want him to be a county magistrate in the vicinity." Yang Lian replied that the child was young and should not be entrusted with a heavy responsibility.

古文：为人诊候，一年前知其生死。邢卲子大宝患伤寒，嗣明为之诊，候，退告杨愔云： 邢公子伤寒不治自差，然候不出一年便死，觉之晚，不可治。 杨、邢并侍燕内殿，显祖云： 子才儿，我欲乞其随近一郡。 杨以此子年少，未合剖符。燕罢，奏云： 马嗣明称大宝恶，一年内恐死，若其出郡，医药难求。 遂寝。
现代文：宴会结束后，才启奏说： 马嗣明诊断左宜的脉象很不好，一年之内恐怕会死，如果到外郡任职，医药都难以找到。 
English: After the banquet was over, only then did Kaiso say, "Ma Xi Ming diagnosed Zuo Yi's pulse as very bad. I'm afraid he will die within a year. If he works outside the county, it will be difficult to find medicine.

古文：大宝未期而卒。
现代文：便作罢。大宝果然不到一年就死了。
English: Dabao died less than a year later.

古文：杨令患背肿，嗣明以练石涂之便差。
现代文：遥全背上发肿，题塱用练石抹上就痊愈了。
English: Yao Quan's back was swollen, and he was healed after rubbing his epaulettes with a training stone.

古文：作练石法：以粗黄色石鹅鸭卵大，猛火烧令赤，内淳醋中，自屑，频烧至石尽，取石屑曝干，捣下簁。
现代文：制练石的方法：把鹅鸭蛋大小的粗黄色石头，用猛火烧成红色，放在醇醋裹，就变成粉末，多次烧炼到石头烧完，取出石末晒干，放在筛子裹。
English: The method of making the training stone: the coarse yellow stone the size of a goose and duck egg is burned to red with a fierce fire, wrapped in alcohol and vinegar, and turned into powder. It is fired several times until the stone is burned, and the stone powder is taken out, dried, and wrapped in a sieve.

古文：和醋以涂肿上，无不愈。
现代文：加上醋抹在肿的地方，什么病都可以治好。
English: Add vinegar to the swollen area and any disease can be cured.

古文：后迁通直散骑常侍。
现代文：后来嗣明任通直散骑常侍。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Tsuchida sanshaku (free riding) samurai.

古文：针灸孔穴，往往与明堂不同。
现代文：他针灸的穴位，往往和《明堂》中记载的不同。
English: The acupuncture points of his acupuncture are often different from those recorded in "Myodo."

古文：从驾往晋阳，至辽阳山中，数处见牓，云有人家女病，若有能治差者，购钱十万。
现代文：随从皇上去晋阳，走到辽阳山裹，在几处地方见到告示，说有一人家的女儿病了。如果有人能治愈，就悬赏十万。
English: He followed the emperor to Jinyang and walked to Liaoyang Mountain, where he saw notices in several places saying that a family's daughter was ill. If anyone could cure her, they would offer a reward of one hundred thousand.

古文：诸名医多寻牓至，问病状，不敢下手。
现代文：许多名医按榜文指示前去治病，询问病症后，都不敢下手医治。
English: Many famous doctors follow the instructions of the poster and go to treat the disease. After inquiring about the disease, they are afraid to start treatment.

古文：唯嗣明独治之。问其病由，云曾以手将一麦穟，即见一赤物长二寸似蛇，入其手指中，因惊怖倒地，即觉手臂疼肿，渐及半身俱肿，痛不可忍，呻吟昼夜不绝。
现代文：惟有嗣明一个人前来问女子得病的原因，说曾经用手拿着一麦穗，看见一二寸长像蛇一样的红色东西，钻入手指中，于是惊倒在地，觉得手臂疼痛并且肿起来，渐渐半身都肿，疼得难以忍受，昼夜不停地呻吟。
English: However, a man named Zi Ming came to ask the reason for the woman's illness, saying that he once held an ear of wheat in his hand, saw a snake-like red thing one or two inches long, drilled it into his fingers, then fell to the ground in shock, felt his arm ache and swell up, and gradually half of his body swelled up, the pain was unbearable, and he moaned day and night.

古文：嗣明为处方服汤。
现代文：嗣明开了汤药的处方。
English: Zi Ming prescribed the decoction.

古文：比嗣明从驾还，女平复。
现代文：等他随皇上返回时，女子已经康复。
English: By the time he returned with the emperor, the woman had recovered.

古文：嗣明，隋初卒。
现代文：嗣明在隋初去世。
English: Zi Ming died in the early Sui Dynasty.

