古文：天福八年秋七月丁丑朔，京师雨水深三尺。
现代文：天福八年秋七月一日，京城雨水深积三尺。
English: On the first day of July in the autumn of Tenfu's eighth year, the rainwater in the capital accumulated to a depth of three feet.

古文：辛亥，分命朝臣一十三人分检诸州旱苗。
现代文：五日，许州节度使李从温前来朝拜，进爵为楚国公。十七日，把陕州甘棠驿改名为通津驿，这是为了避先祖名讳。
English: On the 5th, the Xuzhou Festival made Li come from Wen to worship, and he was knighted as the Duke of Chu. On the 17th, he changed the name of Shaanxi Gandang to Tongjin, in order to avoid the name of his ancestors.

古文：泾、青、磁、鄴都共奏逃户凡五千八百九十。
现代文：二十一日，少帝幸临南庄，召唤跟随出行的臣僚练习射猎，路边农夫各赏赐布衫麻鞋。八月二日，右卫上将军杨思权去世，追赠太傅。
English: On the twenty-first day, the young emperor came to Nanzhuang and summoned his ministers to practice shooting, and the farmers on the roadside were each rewarded with cloth shirts and shoes. On August 2, Yang Siquan, the right guard general, died and was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：诸县令佐以天灾民饿，携牌印纳者五。
现代文：五日，分别命令朝中十三位大臣分赴检查各州旱灾庄稼。
English: On the fifth day, thirteen ministers from the two Koreas were ordered to go to inspect drought-stricken crops in each state.

古文：癸酉，以前昭义节度使李从敏为左龙武统军。九月戊寅，尊秦国夫人安氏为皇太妃，帝所生母也。
现代文：泾、青、磁、邺都共奏逃亡户籍达五千八百九十户。九月三日，尊奉秦国夫人安氏为皇太妃，她是少帝的亲生母亲。
English: The escaping households numbered 5,890. On September 3, Lady An, the respected wife of Qin, was crowned Empress Dowager. She was the young emperor's biological mother.

古文：丁亥，追册故魏国夫人张氏为皇后，帝之元妃也。
现代文：十二日，追封已故的魏国夫人张氏为皇后，她是少帝的嫡妻。
English: On the 12th, the late Empress Zhang of Wei was enthroned as empress. She was the legitimate wife of the young emperor.

古文：丙子，以金部郎中、知制诰冯玉为检校尚书右仆射，充颍州团练使。
现代文：这天，调任金部郎中、知制诰冯玉为检校尚书右仆射，兼任颍州团练使。
English: On this day, he was transferred to the position of the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education and the Minister of Education and Culture, Feng Yu, as the vice-minister of the inspection of the school, and also served as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Reunification Army.

古文：戊子，前颍州团练使田令方追夺在身官爵，勒归私第，坐前任耀州日，额外配民曲钱纳归私室故也。
现代文：十三日，原颍州团练使田令方削夺现任官职，勒令归家，是因为他原任耀州时，犯了额外配收百姓酒曲钱并存入私库的原因。
English: On the 13th, the former Bozhou regimental drill sergeant Tian Lingfang was stripped of his current official position and ordered to return home, because when he was originally appointed to Yaozhou, he committed the reason for extra allocation of people's liquor money and deposited it in the private treasury.

古文：延州奏，绥州刺史李彝敏抛弃城郡，与弟彝俊等五人将骨肉二百七十口来投，当州押送赴阙，称与兄夏州节度使彝殷偶起猜嫌，互相攻伐故也。
现代文：延州上奏，绥州刺史李彝敏抛弃郡城，与他的弟弟李彝俊等五人率领亲族儿女二百七十人来投降，被延州押送赴京，称说是因为与他的兄长夏州节度使李彝殷突起猜忌嫌疑，互相攻击讨伐的原因。
English: After Yanzhou surrendered, Li Yimin, the governor of Zhangzhou, abandoned the county seat. He and his brother Li Yujun and five others led 270 relatives and children to surrender. They were escorted to Beijing by Yanzhou, saying that it was because he and his older brother, Xiazhou Jiedu, made Li Yinyin suspicious and attacked each other.

古文：辛卯，夏州奏，差宥州刺史李仁立权知绥州。
现代文：十六日，夏州上奏，派宥州刺史李仁立暂掌绥州。
English: On the 16th, Xia Zhou played the harp and sent Yuzhou's bard, Li Renli, to hold the harp for a while.

古文：癸巳，故绛州刺史张从训赠太尉，追册皇后之父也。甲午，夏州李彝殷奏： 衙内都指挥使拓拔崇斌等五人作乱，当时收擒处斩讫。
现代文：十九日，夏州李彝殷上奏 ：衙内都指挥使拓拔崇斌等五人叛乱，当时被攻杀擒获处斩了。
English: On the 19th, Li Yuyin of Xiazhou issued a proclamation: Five people, including Tuoba Chongbin, who had been ordered by the commander of the Inner Capital to rebel, were killed, captured, and executed.

古文：相次绥州刺史李彝敏擅将兵士，直抵城门，寻差人掩杀，彝敏知事不济，与弟五人将家南走。 
现代文：接着绥州刺史李彝敏擅自率领士兵，直迫夏州城门，旋即派人扑杀，李彝敏知道事情不能成功，与其弟等五人携家南逃。 
English: Then, Li Yu-min, the governor of Zhangzhou, led the soldiers without authorization, directly approached the city gate of Xiazhou, and immediately sent people to kill them. Li Yu-min knew that things could not succeed, and he and his brother and five others fled south with their families.

古文：诏： 李彝敏潜结凶党，显恣逆谋。骨肉之间，尚兴屠害；照临之内，难以含容。送夏州处斩。 
现代文：少帝下诏 ：李彝敏暗结凶党，明目张胆地叛逆谋反，兄弟之间，尚且屠杀谋害，皇朝之下，难以包容，当送夏州处以斩刑。 
English: The young emperor issued an edict: Li Yu-min secretly formed a murderous party, blatantly rebelled and plotted a rebellion, and between brothers, even slaughtered and murdered. Under the imperial dynasty, it was difficult to tolerate, and he should be sent to Xiazhou to be beheaded.

古文：丙申，所司奏议，故天下兵马都元帅、吴越国王钱元瓘谥曰庄穆，诏改为文穆。
现代文：冬十月三日，诏令册封吴国夫人冯氏为皇后。五日晚五更，在东方出现彗星，附于角宿，过了十天才消逝。九日，西京上奏：老百姓马知饶刺杀儿子吴九，但没有杀死，是因为他侵夺他的母亲的食物的原因。少帝下诏赦免了他。
English: On the 3rd of October in winter, the Empress Dowager of the State of Wu, Mrs. Feng, was proclaimed the Empress. On the evening of the 5th, a comet appeared in the East and attached itself to the Corner Inn. It took ten days for it to disappear. On the 9th, the following was announced in the West: the commoner Ma Zhirao stabbed and killed the son of Wu Jiu, but did not kill him because he stole his mother's food. The young emperor pardoned him.

古文：戊戌，遣前复州防御使吴峦权知贝州军事，诏节度使王令温赴阙。
现代文：十一月二十四日，派前复州防御使吴峦暂主管贝州军事，诏令节度使王令温赴京。
English: On November 24th, Wu Gan was put in charge of the military of Bozhou before the defense of Fuzhou, and Wang Lingwen was sent to Beijing by imperial edict.

古文：庚戌，单州军事判官赵岳奏，刺史杨承祚初夜开门出城，称为母病，往青州宁亲，于孔目官齐琪处留下牌印，臣已行用权知州事。
现代文：二十六日，单州军事判官赵岳上奏，刺史杨丞祚初夜开门出城，声言是因为他的母亲病了，前往青州慰宁母亲，在孔目官齐琪那里留下牌笏印玺，赵岳已经代理主持单州事务。
English: On the 26th, Zhao Yue, the military judge of Shan State, opened the door and left the city in the early evening, claiming that it was because his mother was ill. He went to Qingzhou to comfort his mother and left a plaque and seal with the official Qi Qi. Zhao Yue has been acting to preside over the affairs of Shan State.

古文：辛丑，高丽遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十七日，高丽派使臣前来朝拜进贡。
English: On the 27th, the Korean envoys came to pay tribute.

古文：昭化军节度使、瑞慎等州观察等使杜建徽进封郧国公。
现代文：昭化军节度使、瑞慎等州观察使杜建徽进封爵号为郧国公。
English: Du Jianhui was conferred the title of Duke of Shandong Province by Zhaohua's military envoy to the Qing Dynasty and Ruishen's state observation envoy.

古文：遣侍卫步军都指挥使郭谨领兵赴郓州。
现代文：派侍卫步军总指挥使郭谨率兵奔赴郓州。
English: He sent the commander-in-chief of the Foot Guards, Guo Zhen, to rush to Zhangzhou with his soldiers.

古文：五月己亥，遣使如晋，致生辰礼。六月辛酉，晋遣使贡金。
现代文：十二月一日，派左领军卫将军蔡行遇押领兵士驻扎在郓州。又派供奉官殿直二十六人从黄河南到海口，划分地界巡阅检察，是因为青州节度使杨光远谋反的原因。
English: On December 1, Cai Xing, the left-wing military commander, was stationed in Zhangzhou to meet the detained soldiers. He also sent twenty-six officials from the south of the Yellow River to Haikou to divide the land boundary and inspect it. This was because the Qingzhou Festival made Yang Guang far away from the cause of rebellion.

古文：秋八月丁未朔，晋复贡金。己未，如奉圣州，晋遣其子延煦来朝。甲寅，以单州刺史杨承祚为登州刺史，从其便也。华州陕府奏，逃户凡一万二千三百。
现代文：九日，下诏让河阳节度使符彦卿、宋州节度使高行周、贝州节度使王令温、同州节度使李承福、陈州梁汉璋、亳州李萼、怀州薛怀让一并赴京，分派使臣到各州郡巡阅检察，是因为契丹入侵的原因。派遣给事中边光范、原登州刺史郭彦威出使到契丹，走到恒州，敌人已经侵犯州境，不能前往，滞留在公馆达几个月，无果而返。十日，华州、陕府上奏，逃亡户口达一万二千三百户。
English: On the 9th day of the month, the following edict ordered the emissaries of the Heyang Festival, Fu Yanqing; the Songzhou Festival, Gao Xing Zhou; the Beizhou Festival, Wang Ling Wen; and the Tongzhou Festival, Li Chengfu, Chenzhou Liang Hanqi, Zhangzhou Li Cale, and Huizhou Xue Huairang, to go to Beijing together. The reason why the envoys were sent to inspect the counties of various provinces was the invasion of the Khitan Empire. Guangfan, who was at the center of the incident, and Guo Yanwei, the former governor of the province, were sent to Khitan and went to Hengzhou

古文：乙丑，腊，车驾不出。
现代文：二十一日，是腊祭日，车驾不出。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was the wax festival day, so I couldn't drive.

古文：诏前陕州节度使石赟率诸节度使畋于郡郊。
现代文：下诏原陕州节度使石斌贝率领各节度使在近郊田猎。
English: According to the following edict, the former Shaanxi provincial governor Shi Binbei led the provincial governors to hunt in the nearby countryside.

古文：太子宾客聂延祚卒。
现代文：太子宾客聂延祚去世。
English: The prince's guest, Yan Yan, passed away.

古文：淄州奏，青州节度使杨光远反，遣兵士取淄州，劫刺史翟进宗入青州。
现代文：二十三日，淄州奏报，青州节度使杨光远反叛，派军队攻取淄州，刺史翟进宗进入青州。
English: On the 23rd, according to the Bozhou Report, the Qingzhou Festival made Yang Guangyuan rebel, sent troops to conquer Bozhou, and sent Shi Junjin Zong into Qingzhou.

古文：是冬大饥，河南诸州饿死者二万六千余口。
现代文：这年冬天，发生大饥荒，河南各州饿死二万六千多人。
English: In the winter of that year, a great famine occurred, and more than 26,000 people died of starvation in the provinces of Henan.

古文：开运元年春正月甲戌朔，是夕阵云掩北斗之魁星。
现代文：开运元年春正月一日的晚上，阵云掩盖北斗中的魁星。
English: On the evening of the first day of the first month of the first year of the Spring Festival, the clouds obscured the star of the Big Dipper.

古文：乙亥，沧、恆、贝、鄴驰告，契丹前锋赵延寿、赵延昭引五万骑入寇，将及甘陵，青州杨光远召之也。
现代文：二日，沧、恒、贝、邺四州驰马飞告，契丹前锋赵延寿、赵延昭带领五万骑兵入侵，马上就要抵达甘陵了，这是青州杨光远招来的。
English: On the second day, Cang, Heng, Bei and Zou of the Four Provinces announced that the Khitan vanguard Zhao Yan Shou and Zhao Yan Zhao led 50,000 cavalrymen to invade and were about to arrive in Ganling. This was brought about by Yang Guangyuan of Qingzhou.

古文：己卯，契丹陷贝州，知州吴峦死之。
现代文：六日，契丹攻破贝州，知州吴峦战死。
English: On the 6th, Khitan invaded Bechu, and Chizhou's Wu Gan died in battle.

古文：庚辰，以宋州节度使高行周为北面行营都部署，以河阳节度使符彦卿为马军左厢排阵使，以右神武统军皇甫遇为马军右厢排阵使，以陕州节度使王周为步军左厢排阵使，以左羽林统军潘环为步军右厢排阵使。太原奏，契丹入雁门，围忻、代二州。
现代文：七日，太原奏报，契丹进入雁门关，围困了忻、代二州。
English: On the seventh day, Taiyuan reported that the Khitan entered the Wild Goose Gate and besieged Min and Dayi Erzhou.

古文：恆、沧、邢三州上言，契丹大至。
现代文：恒、沧、邢三州上告，契丹大举进攻，这年，天下饿死的有数十万人。
English: Heng, Cang and Zou appealed to the three states, and Khitan launched a large-scale attack. This year, hundreds of thousands of people died of starvation.

古文：是岁，天下饿死者数十万人，诏逐处长吏瘗之。壬午，诏取此月十三日车驾北征，以前邠州节度使李周为权东京留守。
现代文：下令让各地官吏埋葬他们。九日，诏令于本月的十三日御驾北征，任命州节度使李周为临时东京留守。十二日，少帝从东京出发。
English: On the 9th, it was decreed that officials from all over the country should bury them. On the 13th of this month, it was decreed that Li Zhou would go to the north to march, and a prefectural governor was appointed so that Li Zhou could stay in Tokyo temporarily. On the 12th, the young emperor set off from Tokyo.

古文：乙酉，车驾发东京。丁亥，敌骑至黎阳。以侍卫马军都指挥使李守贞为前军都虞候。河北危蹙，诸州求救者人使相望。
现代文：十四日，敌人骑兵抵达黎阳，少帝任命侍卫马军都指挥使李守贞为前军都虞候。河北危急，各州求救的使臣前后相继。
English: On the 14th, the enemy cavalry arrived in Liyang, and the young emperor appointed Li Shuzhen as the commander of the guards and the horse army to wait for the former army. Hebei was in crisis, and the envoys from all states were calling for help one after another.

古文：戊子，车驾至澶州。
现代文：十五日，少帝到达澶州。
English: On the 15th, the young emperor arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：甲午，以北京留守刘知远为幽州道行营招讨使，以恆州节度使杜威副之，定州节度使马全节为都虞候，其职员将校委招讨使便宜署置。乙未，大雾中有白虹相偶，占者曰： 斯为海淫，其下必将有战。 
现代文：任命贝州节度使王令温为邓州节度使，当时王令温的弟弟王令崇从契丹回来，诉说全家都陷于甘陵，所以有这道任命。十八日，邺都留守张从恩派人在夜晚用绳子吊下出城，抄小路前进，奏告契丹国主率铁骑三四万在元城设立大本营，并任命赵延寿为魏博节度使，改封魏王，赵延寿每天率领骑兵到营垒挑战，然后退回。二十二日，大雾中有白虹出现，占卜的人说： 这是海水浸淫，它的下方定将有战争。 
English: At that time, Wang Ling Wen's brother, Wang Ling Chong, returned from Khitan and said that the whole family was trapped in Ganling, so there was this appointment. On the 18th, Zhang Cong En sent a person to stay in Shidu to hang out of the city with a rope at night, take a small road and report that the head of the Khitan state led the cavalry of 340,000 to set up a base camp in Yuancheng, and appointed Zhao Yan Shou as the Wei Bo Festival envoy, renamed Wei Wang. Zhao Yan Shou led the cavalry to challenge the camp every day, and then returned. On the 22nd, a white rainbow appeared in the fog

古文：诏率天下公私之马以资骑军。
现代文：少帝下令让全国公私马匹用来供给骑兵。
English: The young emperor ordered that private and public horses throughout the country be used to supply cavalry.

古文：丙申，契丹攻黎阳。遣右武卫上将军张彦泽等率劲骑三千以御之。
现代文：二十三日，契丹进攻黎阳，少帝派右武卫上将军张彦泽等率领三千精锐骑兵抵御。
English: On the 23rd, the Khitan attacked Liyang, and the young emperor sent the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, led by General Zhang Yanzhe, and 3,000 elite cavalry to defend the city.

古文：己亥，遣译诏官孟守忠致书于契丹主，求修旧好。
现代文：二十六日，派翻译官孟守忠给契丹国主去信，请求重修旧好。
English: On the 26th, the translator Meng Shouzhong sent a letter to the Khitan sovereign, requesting that the old friendship be restored.

古文：守忠自敌帐回，契丹主复书曰： 已成之势，不可改也。 
现代文：孟守忠从敌帐回来，带回契丹国主回信说 ：已经形成的局势，不可改变。 
English: Meng Shouzhong returned from the enemy base and brought back a letter from the Khitan sovereign, saying: The situation that has been formed cannot be changed.

古文：辛丑，太原奏，与契丹战于秀谷，斩首三千级，生擒五百人，获敌将一十七人，贼军散入鸦鸣谷，已进军追袭。
现代文：二十八日，太原上奏，与契丹在秀谷展开战斗，杀敌三千，活捉五百，捕获敌将十七人，敌军分散退入鸦鸣谷，并已经派兵追击。
English: On the 28th, Taiyuan launched a counterattack and fought with Khitan in Xiu Valley. They killed 3,000 of the enemy, captured 500 alive, and captured 17 enemy generals. The enemy army dispersed and retreated into Raven Valley, and has sent troops to pursue them.

古文：二月甲辰朔，遣石赟守麻家口，何建守杨刘镇，白再荣守马家渡，安彦威守河阳。
现代文：二月一日，派石斌贝镇守麻家口，何建镇守杨刘镇，白再荣镇守马家渡，安彦威镇守河阳。
English: On February 1, Shi Binbei Town was assigned to guard Majiakou, He Jian Town was assigned to guard Yang Liu Town, Bai Zairong Town was assigned to guard Majiadu, and Anyanwei Town was assigned to guard Heyang.

古文：郓州奏，博州刺史周儒以城降契丹，又与杨光远潜约，引契丹于马家渡济河。
现代文：郓州上奏，博州刺史周儒献城投降契丹，又与杨光远暗地密约，杨光远带领契丹军队在马家渡渡河。
English: Zhangzhou played up, Bozhou stabbed history, Zhou Ru surrendered the city to Khitan, and secretly made a secret agreement with Yang Guangyuan. Yang Guangyuan led the Khitan army to cross the river in Majia.

古文：时郭谨在汶阳，遣左武卫将军蔡行遇率数百骑赴之。遇伏兵于葭苇中，突然而出，转斗数合，部下皆遁，行遇为贼所执，锋镝重伤，不能乘马，坐畚中舁至幕帐。
现代文：当时郭谨镇守汶阳，派左武卫将军蔡行遇率领几百骑兵奔赴那里时，在芦苇中遇上伏兵突然袭击，转战了几个回合，部下都逃走了，蔡行遇被贼兵抓住，当时他已被锋利的箭矢射成重伤，不能乘马，便坐在轿子中抬至幕帐。
English: At that time, Guo Jianzhong was guarding Wenyang. When he sent Zuo Wei General Cai Xingyun to lead several hundred cavalry to rush there, he was suddenly attacked by an ambush in the reeds. After several rounds of fighting, his subordinates all fled. Cai Xingyun was caught by the robbers. At that time, he had been seriously injured by sharp arrows and could not ride a horse, so he was carried to the tent in a sedan chair.

古文：遣李守贞等水陆进兵而下，以救汶阳。
现代文：朝廷派遣李守贞等分水陆两路进兵，以救汶阳。
English: The imperial court dispatched Li Shouzhen and other soldiers by land and sea to save Wenyang.

古文：丙午，先锋指挥使石公霸与契丹遇于戚城之北，为契丹所围。
现代文：三日，先锋指挥使石公霸与契丹在戚城北相遇，被契丹围住。
English: On the third day, the vanguard commander made Shi Gongba and Khitan meet in the north of the city, and they were surrounded by Khitan.

古文：高行周、符彦卿方息于林下，闻贼至骇愕，督军而进。契丹众甚盛，被围数重，遣人驰告景延广，请益师。
现代文：高行周、符彦卿正在林下休息，听说贼兵到来惊骇不止，督促军队前进，契丹贼众很多，他们被围几层，便派人奔驰告诉景延广，请求派兵增援。
English: Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing were resting under the forest. When they heard that the bandits had arrived, they were shocked and urged the army to advance. There were a lot of Khitan bandits, and they were surrounded by several layers. They sent a messenger to tell Jing Yan Guang and request reinforcements.

古文：登戚城古台，置酒以劳三将，咸咎延广不遣兵赴难，相对泣下。
现代文：景延广迟疑滞留，前进停止只听候少帝命令，高行周等大怒，目奋击贼众，杀伤斩死很多。少帝亲自率领亲兵援救，才算解围。少帝登上戚城古台，备酒劳功三位将领，他们都怪罪景延广不派兵奔赴解围，相向而哭。
English: Jing Yan Guan hesitantly lingered, stopped advancing only to listen to the young emperor's order, Gao Xing Zhou and others were furious, fought with the thieves, and killed and killed a lot. The young emperor personally led his own soldiers to rescue, only to lift the siege. The young emperor boarded the Qicheng Ancient Terrace, and prepared wine for the three generals. They all blamed Jing Yan Guan for not sending troops to relieve the siege, and cried to each other.

古文：戊申，契丹筑垒于马家渡东岸，以骑军列于外，以御王师。李守贞以师搏之，遂破其众。
现代文：五日，契丹在马家渡东岸构筑壁垒，把骑兵摆在外围来抵挡少帝军队，李守贞用军队搏击，才攻破了贼众。
English: On the fifth day, the Khitan built a barrier on the east coast of Majiadu and placed the cavalry on the periphery to resist the young emperor's army. Li Shouzhen fought with the army before breaking through the thieves.

古文：敌骑散走，赴河溺死者数千，遂拔其垒。
现代文：贼寇骑兵分散逃走，跳入黄河溺死的就有几千，于是攻克了敌垒。
English: The robber cavalry scattered and fled, and several thousand of them jumped into the Yellow River and drowned, thus conquering the enemy's fortress.

古文：初，西岸敌军数万，鼓噪扬旗以助其势，及见东岸兵败，号哭而去。
现代文：起初，西岸的敌军有几万人，摇旗呐喊来扩大声势，等到看到东岸敌兵溃败，便号叫而逃。
English: At first, there were tens of thousands of enemy troops on the west coast, waving flags and shouting to expand the momentum. When they saw that the enemy troops on the east coast were defeated, they ran away screaming.

古文：获马八百匹，生擒贼将七十八人，部众五百人，送行在，悉斩之。
现代文：缴获战马八百匹，活捉贼将七十八人、贼兵五百人，送往少帝行营，全部斩杀了。
English: Eight hundred war horses were captured, seventy-eight thieves were captured alive, and five hundred thieves were sent to the camp of the young emperor, all of whom were killed.

古文：辛亥，夏州节度使李彝殷合蕃汉之兵四万抵麟州，济河，侵契丹之境，以牵胁之。
现代文：八日，夏州节度使李彝殷会合蕃汉两军四万抵达麟州，渡过黄河，攻入契丹国境，以此牵制契丹。
English: On the 8th, the Xiazhou Festival made Li Shuyin gather 40,000 troops from both Han and Qin to arrive in Linshou, cross the Yellow River, and break into the Qidan border, in order to contain Qidan.

古文：壬子，以彝殷为契丹西南面招讨使。
现代文：九日，任命李彝殷为契丹西南面招讨使。
English: On the 9th, Li Yuyin was appointed as the envoy to the southwest of Khitan.

古文：易州刺史安审约奏，战契丹于北平，贼退保祁沟关，断其桥梁而还。
现代文：易州刺史安审约上奏，在北平与契丹展开战斗，寇贼退守祁沟关，他们毁断敌军桥梁而回。
English: The Yizhou Zhishi Peace Trial was about to begin, and the battle with the Khitan was launched in Peiping. The bandits retreated to Shigou Pass, and they destroyed the enemy's bridges and returned.

古文：癸丑，博州残兵至自敌中。
现代文：十日，博州残兵从贼寇中逃回来。
English: On the 10th, the remnants of the Boshu soldiers fled back from the bandits.

古文：周儒之降也，敌执其军士，将献于幕帐，行次中途，守者夜寝，其中军士一人自解桎梏，为诸兵释缚，取敌戈矛，尽杀援者二百余人，南走而归，至河无舟，浮水而过，溺死之余，所存者六十七人。
现代文：周儒投降时，贼兵俘获了他的军士，准备带去献给契丹国主，行至中途，趁看守的人夜宿时，其中一个军士自己解开了枷锁，又替各兵士解下了束缚绳索，夺过贼寇的戈矛，全部杀掉了前来增援的二百多人后，向南奔逃回来，到达黄河边没有船只，便游水渡河，溺死后剩下的仅存六七十人。
English: At the time of Zhou Ru's surrender, the bandits captured his sergeant and were preparing to take him as a sacrifice to the Khitan lord. Halfway through the journey, while the guards were sleeping, one of the sergeants unchained himself, loosened the binding ropes for each soldier, seized the bandit's spear, killed all of the more than two hundred people who came to reinforce, ran back south, reached the Yellow River without a boat, and swam across the river. After drowning, only sixty or seventy people remained.

古文：是日，日有黄白晕，二白虹夹日而行。
现代文：这天，太阳有黄白相间的白晕，二条白虹夹着太阳运行。
English: On this day, the sun has a yellow-white halo, and two white rainbows run between the sun.

古文：己未，沧州奏，贼众三千人援送所掠人口宝货等，由长芦入蕃，以轻骑邀之，斩获千余人，人口辎重悉委之而走。
现代文：十六日，沧州奏报，贼众三千人押送所掠人口宝物等，从长芦进入蕃地，便用轻骑兵拦腰进击，斩杀擒获一千多人，贼众丢下所押人口、辎重后逃跑。
English: On the 16th, Cangzhou reported that three thousand thieves escorted the plundered treasures from Changlu and entered Fengtian. They used light cavalry to attack, killed and captured more than a thousand people. The thieves left the captives and fled after the capture.

古文：庚申，宰臣冯道等再上表请听乐，皆不允。
现代文：十七日，宰相冯道等几次上表请求少帝听乐，都没有准允。
English: On the 17th, Prime Minister Feng Dao and others repeatedly requested the young emperor to listen to music, but they were not granted.

古文：时帝自期年之后，于宫中间举细声女乐，及亲征以来，日于左右召浅蕃军校，奏三弦胡琴，和以羌笛，击节鸣鼓，更舞迭歌，以为娱乐。
现代文：当时少帝从登基一周年之后，在宫中间或举行轻声女乐，到御驾亲征以来，每天在近旁召唤蕃军将校，演奏三弦胡琴，并用羌笛来配合，击节鸣鼓，轮番跳舞唱歌，作为娱乐。
English: At that time, from the first anniversary of his accession to the throne, the young emperor held soft female music in the middle of the palace, and since the imperial visit, he summoned the officers of the imperial army every day, played the three-stringed huqin, and used the flute to cooperate, beat the drums, and danced and sang in turn, as entertainment.

古文：常谓侍臣曰： 此非音乐也。 
现代文：少帝曾对侍臣说 ：这不是音乐。 
English: The young emperor once said to a courtier: "This is not music.

古文：故冯道等奏请举乐，诏旨未允而止。
现代文：所以冯道等奏请举乐。少帝下诏不予准允而作罢。
English: Therefore, Feng Dao and others requested that music be played. The young emperor issued an edict not to grant permission and to stop.

古文：壬戌，杨光远率兵围棣州，刺史李琼以州兵击之，弃营而遁。
现代文：十九日，杨光远率兵围困冀州，刺史李琼率州兵进击，杨光远贼兵抛下营寨而逃。
English: On the 19th, Yang Guangyuan and his soldiers besieged Jizhou, and Li Qiong led the National Guard to attack. Yang Guangyuan's soldiers left the camp and fled.

古文：冀州奏，败贼军于城下，见舁棺者，讯其降者，曰 戚城之战，上将金头王中流矢而死，此其榇也。 
现代文：冀州奏报，在冀州城下打败了贼兵，看见抬棺材的人，便加审问，投降的人说 ：戚城那场战争，上将金头王被流矢射中身亡，这就是他的棺材。 
English: According to the Jizhou Report, after defeating the robber soldiers at the foot of Jizhou Castle, when they saw the people carrying the coffin, they were interrogated, and the surrendering people said: In that war in Qicheng, Admiral Jin Tou Wang was killed by a stray arrow, and this is his coffin.

古文：癸亥，以前邓州节度使何建为东南面马步军都部署，率师屯汶阳。
现代文：二十日，任命原邓州节度使何建为东南面马步军总部署，率军屯守汶阳。
English: On the 20th, He Jian, the former Dengzhou governor, was appointed as the general deployment of the southeastern horse cavalry army, and led the army to stay in Wenyang.

古文：甲子，蜀人寇我阶州。
现代文：二十一日，蜀人侵犯阶州。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Shu people invaded Chaozhou.

古文：设伏累日，人马饥顿，赵延寿谋曰： 晋军悉在河上，畏我锋锐，不敢前进，不如径造城下，四面而进，攻夺其桥梁，天下定矣。 
现代文：三月一日，契丹国主率兵十几万前来挑战。当时契丹假装抛弃元城寨已有十来天，埋伏精锐骑兵在顿丘故城，来等待少帝军队。设置埋伏多日，人马饥饿劳顿，赵延寿献计说： 晋军全部扎营在黄河边上，害怕我们的精兵良将，不敢前进，不如直攻城下，四面出击，攻取他们的桥梁，天下大事就算定了。 
English: On March 1st, the head of the Khitan state led more than a hundred thousand soldiers to challenge. At that time, the Khitan pretended to abandon the former castle for more than ten days, and ambushed the elite cavalry in the former city of Dongqiu to wait for the young emperor's army. The ambush lasted for many days, and the people were hungry and exhausted. Zhao Yanshou said: The Jin army is all encamped on the edge of the Yellow River. They are afraid of our elite soldiers and dare not advance. It would be better to attack directly under the city, attack on all sides, and capture their bridges. The world's great events would be

古文：契丹主然之。
现代文：契丹国主认为很好。
English: The Khitan ruler thought this was a good thing.

古文：是日，前军高行周在戚城之南，贼将赵延寿、赵延昭以数万骑出王师之西，契丹主自拥精骑出王师之东，两军接战，交相胜负。
现代文：这天，晋军先头部队高行周在戚城的南面，贼将赵延寿、赵延昭率领几万骑兵出击晋军的西面，契丹国主亲自带领精锐骑兵出击晋军的东面，两军交战，互有胜负。
English: On this day, Gao Xing Zhou, the spearhead of the Jin army, was in the south of Qicheng. The thieves sent Zhao Yan Shou and Zhao Yan Zhao to lead tens of thousands of cavalry to attack the west side of the Jin army. The Qidan sovereign personally led the elite cavalry to attack the east side of the Jin army. The two armies fought and won and lost.

古文：至晡时，契丹主以劲兵中央出而来，帝御亲军列为后阵，东西济河，为偃月之势，旗帜鲜盛，士马严整。
现代文：战到下午四五点钟，契丹国主率劲旅从中间杀将过来，少帝率亲兵列为后阵。向东西两面渡河，摆成偃月之势，旗帜鲜明盛繁，将士马匹严整。
English: The battle lasted until four or five o'clock in the afternoon, when the leader of the Khitan nation led a strong brigade from the middle to kill the enemy, and the young emperor led his own soldiers as a rearguard. Crossing the river to the east and west, the situation was like a full moon, the flags were bright and colorful, and the soldiers and horses were well-groomed.

古文：契丹主望之，谓左右曰： 杨光远言晋朝兵马半已饿死，今日观之，何其壮耶！ 
现代文：契丹国主远望其势，对左右近臣说： 杨光远说晋朝兵马有半数已经饿死，今天观看了他们的斗志，是多么的威武雄壮啊！ 
English: The Khitan sovereign looked far and wide at the situation, and said to his right and left courtiers: Yang Guangyuan said that half of the soldiers and horses of the Jin Dynasty had starved to death, and today I saw their fighting spirit, how powerful and strong they were!

古文：敌骑往来驰突，王师植立不动，万弩齐彀，飞矢蔽空，贼军稍却。
现代文：敌军骑兵往返冲突，少帝军队如木直立，岿然不动，万弩齐发，飞矢蔽空，贼军逐渐退却。
English: The enemy cavalry clashed back and forth, and the young emperor's army stood upright like a tree, motionless, with all hail, flying arrows, and the thief army gradually retreated.

古文：会有亡者告契丹主曰： 南军东面人少，沿河城栅不固，可以攻之。 
现代文：碰上逃亡的人告诉契丹国主说 ：晋军东面人少，沿黄河的护城栅栏也不坚固，可以进攻那里。 
English: A fugitive told the Khitan ruler that there were few people to the east of the Jin army, and the moat fence along the Yellow River was not strong, so they could attack there.

古文：契丹乃率精骑以攻东边，王师败走，敌骑追之。
现代文：契丹国主于是率领精锐骑兵来进攻东面。少帝军队败逃，敌骑在后追击。
English: The Khitan ruler then led the elite cavalry to attack the east. The young emperor's army fled, pursued by the enemy cavalry.

古文：时有夹马军士千余人在堤间治水寨，旗帜之末出于堰埭，敌望见之，以为伏兵所起，追骑乃止。
现代文：当时有两旁的一千多马军士兵正在河堤之间修治水寨，旗帜的末端冒出在围堰河堤之外，敌军望见了，以为是伏兵树起的旗帜，追击的骑兵才停了下来。
English: At that time, more than a thousand soldiers from the two sides of the horse army were repairing the water castle between the river dikes. The end of the flag emerged outside the coffer dam. The enemy army saw it and thought it was a flag raised by an ambush, and the pursuing cavalry stopped.

古文：久之复战，王师又退，李守超以数百骑短兵直起击之，敌稍却。
现代文：过了好久，双方又交战，少帝军队又向后败退，李守超带领几百骑兵持短兵器径直杀将过去，敌兵逐渐退却。
English: After a long time, the two sides fought again, and the young emperor's army was defeated and retreated backwards. Li Shouchao led several hundred cavalry with short weapons to directly kill the enemy, and the enemy gradually retreated.

古文：战场之地，人马死者无算，断箭残镞，横厚数寸。
现代文：战场上，死去的人马不可胜计，断箭残镞，横积地上达几寸之厚。
English: On the battlefield, the dead are incalculable, the remains of broken arrows, lying on the ground up to a few inches thick.

古文：遇夜，贼击钲抽军而退，夜行三十里而舍焉。
现代文：到了夜晚，贼兵才鸣金收兵，趁夜走了三十里才住下来。
English: In the evening, the robber soldiers only received the gold and took advantage of the night to walk thirty miles before settling down.

古文：护圣指挥使协霸协霸 二字上疑有脱文。
现代文：护圣指挥使协霸，逃奔贼军，少帝诛灭了他的家族。
English: The patron saint's commander ordered the co-ruler to flee to the thief army, and the young emperor annihilated his family.

古文：亡入贼中，夷其族。护圣第二军都指挥使安重怀、指挥使乌韩七、监军何彦超等临阵畏怯，手失兵仗，悉斩之。
现代文：护圣第二军都指挥使安金怀、指挥使乌韩七、监军何彦超等临阵畏怯、丢弃兵仗，全部予以斩杀。
English: The Second Holy Protection Army's commanding officer, An Jinhuai, commanding officer, Wu Hanqiu, and supervising officer, He Yanchao, were all afraid of the battle and abandoned the battle, and were all killed.

古文：辽帝北归，所过焚掠民物殆尽。
现代文：三日，契丹国主的帐内小校偷了他的主人的乘马前来投奔，并说： 契丹已经传下木简书信，收兵北回。 
English: On the third day, a schoolboy in the household of the ruler of Khitan stole his master's horse and ran to him, saying: Khitan has sent a message to his troops to withdraw to the north.

古文：齐州奏，青州贼军寇明水镇。
现代文：齐州奏告，青州贼军侵犯明水镇。
English: Qizhou reported that the Qingzhou thief army invaded Mingshui Town.

古文：癸巳，北京留守、兼中书令刘知远封太原王，余如故。
现代文：十日，礼部尚书卢詹去世，追赠为太子太保。十二日，契丹车驾已过贝州，并派赵延昭镇守贝州。
English: On the 10th, Lu Zhan died and was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince. On the 12th, the Khitan car drove past Bozhou and sent Zhao Yan Zhaozhen to defend Bozhou.

古文：是日，诏天下抽点乡兵，凡七户出一士，六户资之，仍自具兵仗，以 武定 为军号。
现代文：十九日，定州马全节攻克泰州，俘获那里的士兵二千人。二十一日，少帝下诏在全国征召乡兵，凡七户派出一兵，其余六户供给他物用，还要各自准备兵器仗具，以 武 作为番号。
English: On the 19th, Dingzhou Ma Quanzhong invaded Ketaizhou and captured two thousand soldiers there. On the 21st, the young emperor issued an edict to conscript village soldiers throughout the country. Each of the seven households sent one soldier, and the remaining six households provided him with material use. They also had to prepare weapons and equipment individually, with Wu as the number.

古文：太常丞王绪弃市。
现代文：大常丞王绪在街上被处斩。
English: Grand Prince Wang Xu was beheaded in the street.

古文：绪家于青州，常致书于杨光远，绪有妾之兄慊绪不为赒给，遂告与光远连谋，密书述朝廷机事，遂收捕斩之。
现代文：王绪家在青州，经常与杨光远有书信来往，王绪有个小妾的兄长恨王绪不给予周济，于是上告他与杨光远勾结谋反，秘密写信报告朝廷机密处，于是收捕斩杀了王绪。
English: Wang Xu's family in Qingzhou often corresponded with Yang Guangyuan. Wang Xu's brother, who had a concubine, hated Wang Xu for not giving Zhou Jizhi, so he sued him for colluding with Yang Guangyuan to plot a rebellion, secretly wrote a letter to report to the Imperial Court's confidential department, and then arrested and killed Wang Xu.

古文：夏四月，车驾在澶州。
现代文：夏天四月，少帝在澶州。
English: In the summer of April, Shao Di was in Zhangzhou.

古文：沧州奏，契丹陷德州，刺史尹居璠为敌所执。
现代文：沧州上奏，契丹攻陷了德州，刺史尹居被敌军擒获。
English: Cangzhou played the first game, Khitan invaded Texas, and Sisi Yinju was captured by the enemy.

古文：甲辰，鄴都留守张从恩来朝。
现代文：二日，邺都留守张从恩进京朝拜。
English: On the second day, Zhang Zong'en went to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：丁未，加从恩平章事，还鄴。
现代文：五日，加封张从恩为平章事，返回邺都。
English: On the fifth day, Zhang Congnong was awarded the title of general and returned to Chengdu.

古文：是日，分命文武臣僚三十六人往诸道州府括率钱帛，以资军用。
现代文：七日，下诏定于本月八日少帝还京，命高行周、王周镇守澶州。
English: On the 7th, it was decreed that the young emperor would return to Beijing on the 8th of this month, and that Guan Zhou and Wang Zhou would remain in charge of Zhangzhou.

古文：癸亥，以西京留守安彦威为晋昌军节度使，以晋昌军节度使赵莹为华州节度使，以左龙武统军皇甫遇为滑州节度使。是日，置酒宫中，召景延广谓之曰： 卿有佐命之功，命保厘伊、洛，非酬勋之地也。 
现代文：附近兵马都交给他们管辖。十二日，少帝自澶州回到京城，特赦京城死刑以下罪人。十九日，分别派文武官员三十六人前往各州府储收括钱帛，以供军需。二十一日，少帝在宫中置备酒宴，召见景延广，并对他说 ：你有辅佐王命的功劳，让你保护治理伊、洛，并不是用那里来酬劳你的功勋。 
English: On the 12th, the young emperor returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou and pardoned the criminals below the death penalty in Beijing. On the 19th, he sent thirty-six civil and military officials to the state treasuries to collect money for military supplies. On the 21st, the young emperor prepared a wine banquet in the palace, summoned Jing Yanguang, and said to him: You have the merit of assisting the king's life, let you protect and govern I and Luo, it is not there to reward your merits.

古文：因解御衣、宝带以赐之。
现代文：便解下御衣、宝带赏赐给他。
English: Then she loosened her robe and gave him the treasure belt as a reward.

古文：丙寅，陇州奏，饿死者五万六千口。
现代文：二十四日，陇州奏报，饿死了五万六千多人。
English: On the 24th, Zhangzhou reported that more than 56,000 people died of starvation.

古文：五月壬申朔，太原刘知远奏，边境未宁，军用甚广，所封王爵，乞未行册命。
现代文：五月一日，太原刘知远奏报，边境动乱，军用开支很大，对封赏的王位，乞求不举行册封典仪。
English: On May 1st, Liu Zhiyuan of Taiyuan reported that the border was in turmoil, military expenditure was very large, and he begged not to hold the enthronement ceremony for the awarded throne.

古文：戊戌，以邓州节度使何建为贝州永清军节度使。
现代文：七日，派侍卫亲军都虞候李守贞率领二万步骑兵，讨伐在青州的杨光远。二十日，张从恩上奏，贝州贼将赵延昭纵火抢掠，弃城而逃。
English: On the seventh day, he sent the bodyguards of the pro-Tuyu army to wait for Li Shuzhen and led 20,000 foot cavalry to fight against Yang Guangyuan in Qingzhou. On the 20th day, Zhang Congnong ascended, and the Beizhou thieves set fire to and robbed Zhao Yanzhao, and fled the city.

古文：是月，泽潞上言，饿死者凡五千余人。
现代文：这个月，泽潞上报，饿死的人达五千多。
English: This month, Ze Lu reported that more than 5,000 people had died of starvation.

古文：六月辛丑朔，王师拔淄州，斩杨光远伪署刺史刘翰。
现代文：六月一日，少帝军队进攻淄州，斩杀杨光远伪任刺史刘翰。
English: On June 1, the young emperor's army attacked Zhangzhou and killed Yang Guangyuan and Liu Han.

古文：昭俭表谏曰： 陛下刻石纪功，不若降哀痛之诏；摛翰颂美，不若颁罪己之文。 
现代文：六日，下令重新设置枢密院。七日，临时开封府尹李周去世，暂停上朝，追赐太师。
English: On the 6th, he ordered the re-establishment of the Privy Council. On the 7th, the provisional Kaifeng governor, Yin Li Zhou, died, suspending the Shang Dynasty and posthumously conferring the title of Grand Master.

古文：言甚切至，少主嗟赏之，卒罢其事。戊午，升府州为团练使额。庚申，襄州献白鹊。
现代文：十六日，滑州黄河溃决，洪水冲进曹、单、濮、郓等州境内，环绕梁山然后合注流入汶水、济水。二十日，襄州进献白鹊。
English: On the 16th, the Yellow River in Luzhou broke through, and the floodwaters rushed into the territory of Cao, Shan, Handan, Handan, Handan and other states, surrounded Liangshan, and then flowed into Wenshui and Jishui. On the 20th, Yangzhou presented egrets.

古文：甲子，复置翰林学士。
现代文：二十四日，重新设置翰林学士。
English: On the 24th, Hanlin College was re-established.

古文：乙丑，宰臣等三上表请听乐，诏允之。
现代文：二十五日，宰相等再三上表，请求听玩声乐，少帝下诏予以准允。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the prime minister and others repeatedly came to the table, requesting to listen to the vocal music, and the young emperor issued an edict to grant permission.

