古文：阿离合懑，景祖第八子也。
现代文：阿离合懑，是景祖的第八个儿子。
English: A Rong Hao was the eighth son of King Jingzhu.

古文：健捷善战。
现代文：他强健敏捷，善于作战。
English: He is strong, agile and good at fighting.

古文：年十八，腊醅、麻产起兵据暮棱水，乌春、窝谋罕以姑里甸兵助之。
现代文：他十八岁时，腊醅、麻产起兵占领暮棱水，乌春、窝谋罕带领姑里甸的军队协助他们。
English: When he was eighteen years old, Lashun and Asao raised an army to occupy Twilight Water, and Wu Chun and Wo Mu Han led the army of Gulidian to assist them.

古文：世祖擒腊醅，暮棱水人尚反侧，不自安，使阿离合懑往抚差之，与斜钵合兵攻窝谋罕。
现代文：世祖捉住腊醅，暮棱水的人尚在犹豫，不能安定。世祖派阿离合懑前去安抚巡察，与斜钵合兵进攻窝谋罕。
English: The ancestor caught Lashan, but the people in the twilight waters were still hesitating and could not be stable. The ancestor sent Ah Ying Hao forward to pacify and inspect, and attacked and plotted with the soldiers of the inclined anchor.

古文：乌春已死，窝谋罕弃城遁去。
现代文：乌春已经死去，窝谋罕弃城逃跑。
English: Wu Chun has died and is planning to abandon the city and escape.

古文：后从撒改讨平留可，阿离合懑功居多。
现代文：后来，阿离合懑跟从撒改平定留可，他立的功劳最多。
English: Later, A Liaohui followed from Zagao to Pingding, but he made the most contributions.

古文：太祖擒萧海里，使阿离合懑献馘于辽。
现代文：太祖抓住萧海里，派阿离合懑把所杀敌兵的左耳割下献给辽国。
English: The great-great-grandfather grabbed Xiao Hai and sent A Liang Hao to cut off the left ear of the killed enemy soldier and offer it to Liao.

古文：太祖谋伐辽，阿离合懑实赞成之。
现代文：太祖谋划要攻伐辽国，阿离合懑真心实意地赞成。
English: The great-grandfather planned to invade Liao, and A Liaohui wholeheartedly agreed.

古文：及举兵，阿离合懑在行间屡战有功。
现代文：到起兵时，阿离合懑在军中屡次作战立功。
English: By the time the army was raised, Ah Ying Hao had repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：及太宗等劝进，太祖未之许也。
现代文：太宗等人劝说太祖称帝，太祖没有答应。
English: Emperor Taizong and others persuaded Emperor Taizu to proclaim himself emperor, but Emperor Taizu did not agree.

古文：阿离合懑、昱、宗翰等曰： 今大功已集，若不以时建号，无以系天下心。
现代文：阿离合懑、昱、宗翰等人说 ：现在大功已经成就，如果不及时登位建号，就无法维系天下人心。 
English: A Lianghe, Zou, Zonghan and others said: Now that the great work has been accomplished, if we do not ascend to the throne in time, we will not be able to maintain the hearts of the world.

古文：太祖曰： 吾将思之。 
现代文：太祖说 ：我要考虑一下。 
English: She said, "I will think about it."

古文：收国元年，太祖即位。
现代文：收国元年，太祖即位。
English: In the first year of the National Reunification, the great-grandfather ascended to the throne.

古文：阿离合懑与宗翰以耕具九为献，祝曰： 使陛下毋忘稼穑之艰难。 
现代文：阿离合懑与宗翰把九副耕作农具作为献礼，祝愿道： 愿陛下不要忘记耕种的艰难。 
English: Giving nine pairs of farming tools as an offering, Ah Ii Hao and Zong Han wished, "May your majesty not forget the hardships of farming."

古文：太祖敬而受之。
现代文：太祖恭敬地接受下来。
English: The great-grandfather respectfully accepted.

古文：顷之，为国论乙室勃极烈。
现代文：不久，阿离合懑成为国论乙室勃极烈。
English: Soon after, A Liaohui became very active in the nationalist movement.

古文：为人聪敏辨给，凡一闻见，终身不忘。
现代文：阿离合懑为人聪敏善辩，凡是听到见过的事情，终身不忘。
English: Ah Yihai is an intelligent and eloquent person. He never forgets anything he hears or sees.

古文：始未有文字，祖宗族属时事并能默记，与斜葛同修本朝谱牒。
现代文：起初没有文字的时候，祖宗家族的事他都能默记下来，与斜葛一同编修本朝记述氏族世系的谱牒。
English: At the beginning, when there was no written language, he was able to memorize everything about his ancestral family, and together with Shige he compiled the genealogy of the clan in this dynasty.

古文：见人旧未尝识，闻其父祖名，即能道其部族世次所出。
现代文：见到以前不认识的人，只要听到那人父亲、祖父的名字，他就能说出那人所出身的部族辈份。
English: When he sees someone he didn't know before, as long as he hears the name of that person's father or grandfather, he can tell what tribe that person is from.

古文：或积年旧事，偶因他及之，人或遗忘，辄一一辨析言之，有质疑者皆释其意义。
现代文：有些多年旧事，偶尔被他触及，别人可能遗忘了，他就一一辨解说明，对提出疑问的人都给解释出意义。
English: There are things that are many years old that he occasionally touches on that others may have forgotten, and he explains them one by one, giving meaning to those who ask questions.

古文：世祖尝称其强记，人不可及也。
现代文：世祖曾经称赞他的记忆能力强，没人能比得上。
English: The founder of the world once praised him for his ability to remember, which no one can match.

古文：天辅三年，寝疾，宗翰日往问之，尽得祖宗旧俗法度。
现代文：天辅三年，阿离合懑卧病在床，有一天宗翰前去探问，得到了全部的祖宗旧俗法规。
English: In the third year of Tianyu, when Ah Yihai was sick in bed, Zonghan went to inquire one day and obtained all the old customs and regulations of the ancestors.

古文：疾病，上幸其家问疾，问以国家事，对曰： 马者甲兵之用，今四方未平，而国俗多以良马殉葬，可禁止之。 
现代文：阿离合懑病重，皇上便到他的家中探视病情，向他讨问国家大事，他回答说： 马是给良兵使用的，现在四方未曾平定，而国中风俗很多人都用好马殉葬，可以禁止这种习俗。 
English: A Liaohui was seriously ill, so the emperor went to his home to check on his condition and asked him about national affairs. He replied, "Horses are used by good soldiers. The country has not been pacified, and many people in the country use good horses to die and be buried. This custom should be banned."

古文：乃献平生所乘战马。
现代文：并献出自己平生骑坐的战马。
English: And he gave up the horse he had ridden all his life.

古文：及以马献太宗，使其子蒲里迭代为奏，奏有误语，即哂之，宗翰从傍为改定。
现代文：把战马献给太宗时，阿离合懑让儿子蒲里迭代替他上奏，奏辞中有错误，就笑着讥责他，宗翰在旁边帮他改正。
English: When dedicating the war horse to Emperor Taizong, he asked his son Buritei to play instead of him. When Buritei made a mistake in his recital, he laughed and scolded him, while Zonghan helped him correct it.

古文：进奏讫，薨，年四十九。
现代文：进奏完了之后，阿离合懑去世，终年四十九岁。
English: After the performance, Ah Ying Hao passed away at the age of forty-nine.

古文：上闻阿离合懑临薨有奏事，曰： 临终不乱，念及国家事，真贤臣也。 
现代文：皇上闻听阿离合懑临终有要进奏的事情，说道： 临终却不慌乱，还挂念国家之事，这真是贤臣呵！ 
English: The emperor heard that there was something to be played at the end of the life of Ah Ying Hao, and said: He did not panic at the end of his life, but was still concerned about the country. This is truly a wise man!

古文：哭之恸。
现代文：哀声痛哭。
English: Wailing and weeping.

古文：及葬，上亲临。
现代文：下葬的时候，世祖亲自驾临。
English: At the time of the burial, the patriarch himself arrived.

古文：熙宗时，追封隋国王。
现代文：熙宗在位时，追封阿离合懑为隋国王。
English: When Heizong was on the throne, he crowned A Liaohui as the king of Sui.

古文：天德中，改赠开府仪同三司、隋国公。
现代文：天德年间，他被改赠为开府仪同三司、隋国公。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tiande, he was given the title of Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi and Sui Guogong.

古文：进拜太尉。复致仕，还乡里。
现代文：大定年间，又被纎祭于太祖庙廷，谥号为 刚宪 。
English: During the Dading period, he was also sacrificed at the ancestral temple court, and his posthumous name was Gangcheng.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：他的儿子是赛也、斡论。
English: He died that year.

古文：诏有司致祭，赙赠银币甚厚。宗尹，本名阿里罕。
现代文：赛也的儿子是宗尹。宗尹，原名阿里罕。
English: Saiya's son is Zong Yin. Zong Yin, formerly known as Alikhan.

古文：以宗室子充护卫，改牌印祗候，授世袭谋克，为右卫将军。
现代文：他因为是皇室宗亲的子弟而充当护卫，改做牌印祗候，又被授与世袭谋克，任右卫将军。
English: Because he was the son of a royal relative, he served as an escort, changed his name to a seal, and was awarded the hereditary title of General of the Right Division.

古文：历顺天、归德、彰化、唐古部族、横海军节度使。
现代文：曾历任顺天、归德、彰化、唐古部族、横海军的节度使。
English: He has served as the festival envoy of Shuntian, Gui De, Changhua, Tanggu tribe, and Heng navy.

古文：正隆南伐，领神略军都总管，先锋渡淮，取扬州及瓜洲渡。
现代文：正隆年间，他南下征战，受领神略军都总管之职，作为前锋渡过淮河，攻取扬州和瓜洲渡。
English: During the reign of Zhenglong, he went to the south to fight, received the post of the commander-in-chief of the Shenliao Army, crossed the Huaihe River as a forward, and conquered Yangzhou and Guazhou.

古文：大定二年，改河南路副都统，驻军许州之境。
现代文：大定二年，宗尹改任河南路副都统，驻军于许州地域。
English: In the second year of Dading, Zong Yin was reappointed as deputy governor of Henan Province and stationed in the Huzhou region.

古文：是时，宋陷汝州，杀刺史乌古孙麻泼及汉军二千人。
现代文：这时候，宋国攻陷汝州，杀死刺史乌古孙麻泼，以及汉军二千人。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty invaded Ruzhou and killed the son of the ancient Chinese general, Zushi Wugu, and two thousand Han soldiers.

古文：宗尹遣万户孛术鲁定方、完颜阿喝懒、夹谷清臣、乌古论三合、渠雏讹只将骑四千往攻之，遂复取汝州。
现代文：宗尹派万户孛术鲁定方、完颜阿喝懒，夹谷清臣、乌古论三合、渠雏讹只等人，率骑兵四千去攻打宋军，于是重又收复汝州。
English: Zong Yin dispatched thousands of soldiers, including Lu Ding Fang, Gan Yan A Ka Lazy, Jie Gu Qing Sheng, Wu Guon Sanhe, and Qu Xiaozhong, and led 4,000 cavalry to attack the Song Army, and then re-conquered Ruzhou.

古文：除大名尹，副统如故。
现代文：宗尹受职大名尹，仍旧任副都统。
English: Zong Yin received the post of daimyo Yin, still serving as vice-metropolitan.

古文：顷之，为河南路统军使，迁元帅左都监，除南京留守。
现代文：不久，他做了河南路统军使，升迁元帅左都监，任南京留守。
English: Soon, he became the Henan Road Unification Envoy, was promoted to Marshal of the Left Capital, and stayed in Nanjing.

古文：上曰： 卿年少壮，而心力多滞。
现代文：皇上说： 你年轻强壮，而心力却大多凝滞。
English: The emperor said, "You are young and strong, but your energy is mostly stagnant.

古文：前任点检京尹，勤力不怠，而处事迷错。
现代文：从前任点检京尹时，辛勤而不懈怠，可是处事混乱，常出错误。
English: From the time of his predecessor, Jing Yin, he worked hard and did not slack off, but things were chaotic and mistakes often occurred.

古文：勉修职业，以副朕意。 
现代文：你要努力研习职业，才合朕的心意。 
English: You have to study hard for a career to match my heart.

古文：赐通犀带、厩马。
现代文：皇上赐给他通犀带和好马。
English: The emperor gave him a fine saddle and a fine horse.

古文：八年，置山东路统军司，宗尹为使。
现代文：大定八年，朝廷设置山东路统军司，宗尹出任统军使。
English: In the 8th year of Dading, the imperial court set up the Shandong Road United Military Department, and Zong Yin served as the United Military Envoy.

古文：迁枢密副使。
现代文：又升迁枢密副使。
English: He was also promoted to Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：录其父功，授世袭蒲与路屯河猛安，并亲管谋克。
现代文：加上他父亲的功劳，皇上授与他世袭蒲与路屯河猛安，并亲自管辖谋克。
English: In addition to the merits of his father, the emperor conferred on him the hereditary title of Pu and Lutunhe Meng'an, and personally governed Mu Ke.

古文：队太子太保，枢密副使如故。
现代文：他就任太子太保，仍做枢密副使。
English: He assumed the post of Crown Prince and still served as a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：上问宰臣曰： 宗尹虽才无大过人者，而性行淳厚，且国之旧臣，昔为达官，卿等尚未仕也。
现代文：皇上问宰执臣子 ：宗尹虽然没有非常过人的才干，但性行淳厚，而且是国家老臣，昔日他做高官之时，你们还未出来当官。
English: The emperor asked the vice-ministers: Although Zong Yin did not have extraordinary talent, he was honest, and he was a senior state minister. When he was a high-ranking official in the past, you were not yet in office.

古文：朕欲以为平章政事何如？ 
现代文：朕想任用他为平章政事，如何？ 
English: I'd like to appoint him as a high-ranking government official, how about that?

古文：宰执皆曰： 宗尹为相，甚协众望。 
现代文：宰执臣子们都说： 宗尹做宰相，很合众人的希望。 
English: The vice-chancellors and ministers all said: Zong Yin as prime minister is a great hope for the common people.

古文：即日拜平章政事，封代国公，兼太子太傅。
现代文：当天皇上就授予他平章政事之职，并封为代国公，兼任太子太傅。
English: When he became emperor, he was awarded the title of Taira no shosho and the post of political affairs, and was named acting sovereign, concurrently serving as Prince Taifu.

古文：是时民间苦钱币不通，上问宗尹，对曰： 钱者有限之物，积于上者滞于下，所以不通。
现代文：当时，民间苦于钱币不流通，皇上询问宗尹，宗尹回答道： 钱是有限的物品，上面累积、下面停滞，所以不流通。
English: At that time, the people were suffering from the non-circulation of coins. The emperor inquired about Zong Yin, and Zong Yin replied: Money is a limited item, accumulating above and stagnating below, so it is not circulated.

古文：海陵军兴，为一切之赋，有菜园、房税、养马钱。
现代文：海陵王起兵时，征收一切赋税，有菜园、房税、养马钱。
English: When King Hailing raised an army, he levied all kinds of taxes, including vegetable gardens, house taxes, and horse-breeding money.

古文：大定初，军事未息，调度不继，故因仍不改。
现代文：大定初年，战事没有平息，调度不能接济，因此仍旧收税，没做改变。
English: In the first year of Dading, the war did not subside, and the dispatch could not receive aid, so the tax was still collected and did not change.

古文：今天下无事，府库充积，悉宜罢去。 
现代文：现在天下没有战乱，国库充实，杂税应当全部免去。 
English: Now there is no war in the world, the treasury is full, and all miscellaneous taxes should be exempted.

古文：上曰： 卿留意百姓，朕复何虑。
现代文：皇上说： 你关心百姓，我还有什么顾虑。
English: The emperor said, "You care about the people, so why do I still have concerns?"

古文：太尉守道老矣，舍卿而谁。 
现代文：太尉守道已经年老，除了你还能有谁。 
English: Captain Shodo is already old. Who else can I have but you?

古文：于是，养马等钱始罢。
现代文：从此，养马钱等杂税开始免除。
English: Since then, horse-raising money and other miscellaneous taxes have been exempted.

古文：他日，上谓宰臣曰： 宗尹治家严密，他人不及也。 
现代文：有一天，皇上对宰执臣子说： 宗尹治家严密，别人不如他。 
English: One day, the emperor said to his vassal: "Dong Yunji is a strict ruler, others are not as good as him.

古文：顾谓宗尹曰： 政事亦当如此矣。 
现代文：回头又对宗尹说 ：治理政事也应当这样。 
English: Turning back to Zong Yin, he said, "This is how political affairs should be managed."

古文：有顷，北方岁饥，军食不足，廷议输粟赈济。
现代文：不久，北方遇上饥年，军队粮食供应不足，朝廷中商议运粮食赈济。
English: Soon, the North was faced with a famine, the army was short of food supplies, and the imperial court began to discuss the transportation of grain to help the economy.

古文：或谓比虽不登，而旧积有余，秋成在近，不必更劳输挽，宗尹曰： 国家平时积粟，本以备凶岁也，必待秋成，则惫者众矣。
现代文：有人说虽然近来收成不好，但往年有存留下的粮食，秋收又即将临近，所以不必费力运输。宗尹说： 国家平时积存的粮食本来就是防备荒年的，如果一定等秋收，那储备的就多了。
English: Some people said that although the recent harvest is not good, there is grain left over from previous years, and the autumn harvest is approaching, so there is no need to transport it. Zong Yin said: The grain stored by the state in peacetime is originally to prevent a bad year. If we wait for the autumn harvest, there will be more reserves.

古文：人有捐瘠，其如防戍何。 
现代文：人有疲劳损伤，更何况还要防守戍边？ 
English: People have fatigue injuries, and what's more, they have to defend the rim?

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：宗尹乞令子银术可袭其猛安，会太尉守道亦乞令其子神果奴袭其谋克。
现代文：宗尹请求皇上让儿子银术可承袭他的猛安之职，正巧太尉守道也请求儿子神果奴承袭他的谋克之位。
English: Zong Yin asked the emperor to allow his son, Yin Shu, to succeed him in the position of Meng An, just as Lieutenant Shudo also asked his son, Shen Guo Niu, to succeed him in the position of Shu Ke.

古文：凡承袭人不识女直字者，勒令习学。
现代文：凡是承袭人不认识女真文字的，皇上勒令让他们学习。
English: If any of the heirs did not know the Jurchen alphabet, the emperor ordered them to learn it.

古文：世宗曰： 此二子，吾识其一习汉字，未习女直字。
现代文：世宗说： 这两个孩子，我知道其中一个学汉字，没学女真文字。
English: Sejong said, "Of these two children, I know that one of them is learning Chinese characters, but is not learning Jurchen characters.

古文：自今女直、契丹、汉字曾学其一者，即许承袭。 
现代文：从今后，曾经学过女真、契丹、汉文字其中一种文字的人，就允许承袭职位。 
English: From now on, people who have studied one of the characters of Jurchen, Khitan, and Chinese characters are allowed to inherit positions.

古文：遂著于令。
现代文：之后，书面写下这条命令。
English: After that, write down this order in writing.

古文：宗尹有疾，不能赴朝。
现代文：宗尹有病，不能去上朝。
English: Zong Yin is ill and can't go to the Shang Dynasty.

古文：上问宰臣曰： 宗尹何为不入朝？ 
现代文：皇上问大臣们 ：宗尹为何不入朝？ 
English: The emperor asked the ministers: Why didn't Soin return to the imperial court?

古文：太尉守道以疾对。
现代文：太尉守道回答他生病了。
English: Captain Shodo replied that he was ill.

古文：曰： 丞相志宁尝言， 若诏遣征伐，所不敢辞。
现代文：皇上说 ：丞相志宁曾说 ：假若皇上下诏书派遣出征，我不敢推辞。
English: The emperor said, "Chancellor Zhining once said, 'If the emperor were to issue an imperial edict to go to war, I would not dare to refuse.'

古文：宰相之职，实不敢当 。
现代文：而宰相的官职，我实在不敢担当。 
English: But I really don't dare to take on the post of prime minister.

古文：宗尹亦岂此意耶。 
现代文：宗尹难道也是这个志愿？ 
English: Is this also Zong Yin's choice?

古文：二十四年，世宗将幸上京。
现代文：大定二十四年，世宗要到上京去。
English: In the 24th year of the Taisho era, Sejong was going to move to Kyoto.

古文：上曰： 临潢、乌古里石垒岁皆不登，朕欲自南道往，三月过东京，谒太后陵寝，五月可达上京。
现代文：皇上说： 临潢、乌古里石垒两处今年都未丰收，朕想取道南下前往，三月路过东京，谒拜太后陵墓，五月可以到达上京。
English: The emperor said, "Linyi and Uguri have not had a good harvest this year. I want to travel south. In March, I will pass through Tokyo, visit the empress dowager's mausoleum, and in May, I can reach Beijing."

古文：春月乌兽孳孕，东作方兴，不必搜田讲事，卿等以为何如？ 
现代文：春天，鸟兽怀胎，农事刚刚开始，不必打猎或商谈国事，你们认为如何？ 
English: It's spring, birds and beasts are in gestation, farming has just begun, there's no need to hunt or discuss state affairs. What do you think?

古文：宗尹曰： 南道岁熟，刍粟贱，宜如圣旨。 
现代文：宗尹说 ：南道年景成熟，粮草便宜，应该就依从圣上的旨意。 
English: Zong Yin said, "Southern Dao has a mature economy, and grain and grass are cheap, so we should follow the will of the Almighty."

古文：遂由南道往焉。
现代文：于是皇上从南道去了。
English: So the Emperor left Southern Province.

古文：世宗至上京，闻同签大宗正事宗宁不能抚治上京宗室，宗室子往往不事生业。
现代文：世宗到了上京，听说同签大宗正事宗宁不能管制上京的皇室宗亲，宗室子弟常常不从事生产。
English: When Sejong arrived in Kyoto, it was rumored that he could not control his imperial relatives who had moved to the capital, and his younger siblings often did not engage in production.

古文：上谓宗尹曰： 汝察其事，宜惩戒之。 
现代文：皇上对宗尹说 ：你去审察此事，要给予惩戒。 
English: The emperor said to Zong Yin, "Go and investigate the matter, and you must give a reprimand."

古文：宗尹奏曰： 随仕之子，父没不还本土，以此多好游荡。 
现代文：宗尹上奏道： 随父到外地就任的子弟，父亲死后不回本土，因此大多好游荡。 
English: Zong Yin Shangsoo said: The children who follow their father to take office in other places do not return to the mainland after their father's death, so most of them are good at wandering.

古文：上命召还。
现代文：皇上下令把这些人召回原地。
English: The emperor gave the order to call these people back to their original place.

古文：宴宗室于皇武殿，击球为乐。
现代文：君王在皇武殿宴请皇室宗亲，击取乐。
English: The monarch entertained the royal family and relatives at the Imperial Palace and enjoyed the show.

古文：上曰： 赏赐宗室，亦是小惠，又不可一概迁官，欲令诸局分收补，其间人材孰可者？ 
现代文：皇上说： 赏赐宗室，也是小恩惠，又不能一概提升官职，要命令各局分别收补，这中间有哪些人才可以任用呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "It is a small favor to reward the imperial family, but it is not possible to promote all officials. Each bureau should be ordered to compensate separately. Which talents can be appointed?

古文：宗尹对曰： 奉国斡准之子按出虎、豫国公昱之曾孙阿鲁可任使。 
现代文：宗尹回答 ：奉国斡准的儿子按出虎、豫国公昱的曾孙阿鲁可以任用。 
English: Zong Yin replied, "The son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state, the son of the minister of state."

古文：上曰： 度可任何职，更访其余以闻。 
现代文：皇上说 ：考虑可以担任什么官职，再访察一下其余人，然后告诉我。 
English: The emperor said, "Consider what kind of official position you can hold, then visit the rest of the people, and then tell me."

古文：诏以按出虎、阿鲁为奉御。
现代文：诏令任按出虎、阿鲁为奉御。
English: The imperial edict appointed Izhitora and Aru to serve him.

古文：二十七年，乞致仕。 
现代文：大定二十七年，宗尹请求辞官。
English: In the 27th year of Dading, Zong Yin asked to resign.

古文：世宗曰： 此老不事事，从其请可也。 
现代文：世宗说： 这老人家不做事了，可以依从他的请求。 
English: Sejong said, "This old man is no longer active, you can comply with his request."

古文：宰臣奏曰： 旧臣宜在左右。 
现代文：大臣们上奏道 ：老臣应该留在身边。 
English: The ministers chimed in: The old minister should stay around.

古文：上曰： 宰相总天下事，非养老之地。若不堪其职，朕亦有愧焉。
现代文：皇上说 ：宰相要处理天下事务，不是养老的地方，假若不能胜任，朕也有愧。
English: The emperor said, "The prime minister should deal with the affairs of the country, not the place for the elderly. If I am not competent, I am also ashamed."

古文：如贤者在朝，利及百姓，四方瞻仰，朕亦与其光美。 
现代文：如是贤人在朝中，对百姓有利，四方敬仰，朕也同时感觉荣耀。 
English: If a wise man is in the middle of the government, it is beneficial to the people and admired by all sides. I also feel honored.

古文：宰臣无以对。
现代文：大臣们无言以对。
English: Ministers were left speechless.

古文：宗尹入谢。
现代文：宗尹入朝谢恩。
English: Zong Yin enters the morning thanks.

古文：上曰： 卿久任外官，不闻有过失，但恨用卿稍晚，今精力似衰矣。
现代文：皇上说： 卿长久在外做官，没听到犯有过失，只恨任用卿稍微迟晚，现在精力是衰退了。
English: The emperor said, "Your Excellency has been working as an official for a long time. I have not heard that you have committed any mistakes. I only hate that you were appointed a little late. Now your energy is fading.

古文：省事至烦，若勉留卿，则四方以朕为私，卿亦不自安也。 
现代文：省去此事却会招来麻烦，如果勉强留你，那么周围人会以为朕徇私情，你自己也不心安。 
English: If you leave it out, you'll get into trouble. If you stay reluctantly, people around you will think you're selfish, and you won't feel at ease.

古文：顷之，上问宗尹子： 汝父致仕，将居何所？ 
现代文：过后不久，皇上问宗尹的儿子： 你父亲辞官后，将会住在哪里？ 
English: Soon after, the emperor asked Zong Yin's son: "Where will your father live after he retires?"

古文：其子曰： 聚属既多，不能复在京师。 
现代文：他儿子说 ：眷属已经太多，不能再住京师。 
English: His son said: "There are already too many family members, I can't live in Kyoto anymore."

古文：上遣使问宗尹曰： 朕欲留卿，时相从游，卿子之言如此，今定何如？ 
现代文：皇上派人去问宗尹： 朕想留你，时常相伴交游，你儿子的话是这样，现在你怎样决定的？ 
English: The emperor sent someone to ask Zong Yin: I want to keep you, I often travel with you. Your son said so. Now, how did you decide?

古文：宗尹曰： 臣岂不欲在此，但余闲之年，犹在辇下，恐圣主心困耳。
现代文：宗尹说： 臣下怎么不想住在这儿？只是剩余的年岁，我还在陛下驾前，恐怕圣上心理困烦。
English: Zong Yin said, "How come your subjects don't want to live here? I only have a few years left, and I'm still ahead of Your Majesty. I'm afraid Your Holiness is psychologically troubled."

古文：赠龙虎卫上将军。宗雄本名谋良虎，康宗长子。
现代文：您既然哀怜老臣不忍心抛弃，我能时常得以瞻仰天颜，臣下怎敢到别处去。乡里故人没剩下谁，即使到了那里，又将能与谁来往呢？ 
English: Since you pity the old minister and cannot bear to abandon him, I can always look up to the heavens, how dare the vassal go elsewhere. There is no one left in the village, and even if I get there, who will I be able to communicate with?

古文：其始生也，世祖见而异之，曰： 此儿风骨非常，他日必为国器。 
现代文：于是，皇上赐给宗尹一座甲等房宅，凡是酒宴、出猎都让他跟随。大定二十八年，宗尹逝世。宗雄，原名谋良虎，是康宗的长子。他刚出生时，世祖看见他很惊异，说 ：这孩子风骨非同寻常，以后必定成为国家大器。 
English: As a result, the emperor gave Zong Yin a first-class mansion, and he was allowed to accompany him to all banquets and hunting trips. Zong Yin died in the 28th year of Datong. Zong Xiong, originally named Mu Lianghu, was the eldest son of Kang Zong. When he was born, the patriarch was surprised to see him and said, "This child has an extraordinary temperament and will surely become a national treasure in the future."

古文：因解佩刀，使常置其侧，曰： 俟其成人则使佩之。 
现代文：于是解下佩刀，让人常放在他身边，并说： 等他长大成人就让他佩带这把刀。 
English: So he took off his sword and had it placed beside him, saying, "When he grows up, let him wear this sword."

古文：九岁能射逸兔。
现代文：宗雄九岁能射奔跑的兔子。
English: Muneo is a nine-year-old who can shoot a running rabbit.

古文：年十一，射中奔鹿。
现代文：十一岁，射中奔跑的鹿。
English: Eleven-year-old shot a running deer.

古文：世祖坐之膝上曰： 儿幼已然，异已出伦辈矣。 
现代文：世祖把他抱坐在膝头上说 ：这孩子小小年纪就已如此，他日必定超过同辈。 
English: The patriarch took him in his arms, sat him on his lap, and said, "This child has been like this from a very young age, he will surely surpass his peers one day."

古文：以银酒器赐之。
现代文：把银酒器赏赐给他。
English: Give him the silver goblet.

古文：既长，风表奇伟，善谈辩，多智略，孝敬谦谨，人爱敬之。
现代文：宗雄长大后，仪表奇伟，能谈善辩，足智多谋，孝敬谦谨，人人喜爱尊敬他。
English: After Muneo grew up, his appearance was marvelous, he could speak well, he was resourceful, he was filial and humble, and everyone loved and respected him.

古文：康宗没，辽使阿息保来，乘马至灵帷阶下，择取赗赠之马。
现代文：康宗去世，辽国派遣阿息保来，骑马到灵帷台阶前，选取皇上赐给丧葬的马匹。
English: After the death of Kangzong, Liao State sent Ashi Bao to ride to the front of the spiritual curtain steps to select the horses given by the emperor for the funeral.

古文：太祖怒，欲杀阿息保，宗雄谏，太祖乃止。
现代文：太祖大怒，要杀阿息保，宗雄劝谏，太祖才住手。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and wanted to kill Ashiho, but Sojo persuaded him to stop.

古文：太祖将举兵，宗雄曰： 辽主骄侈，人不知兵，可取也。
现代文：太祖要起兵，宗雄说： 辽国君主骄横奢侈，不懂兵法，可以攻取。
English: When the great-grandfather wanted to raise an army, Muneo said: The Liao monarch is arrogant and extravagant, and does not understand the art of war. He can be conquered.

古文：不能擒一萧海里，而我兵擒之。 
现代文：他们连一个萧海里也抓不住，而我军却抓到了。 
English: They couldn't even catch a bluefish, but our army did.

古文：太祖善其言。
现代文：太祖赞同他的话。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was on to something.

古文：攻宁江州，渤海兵锐甚。
现代文：进攻宁江州，渤海军队十分坚利。
English: In the attack on Ningjiang, the Bohai army was very strong.

古文：宗雄以所部败渤海兵，以功授世袭千户谋克。
现代文：宗雄部队打败了渤海军，因功受封世袭千户谋克。
English: Zongxiong's troops defeated the Yunnan Navy, and he was awarded the title of Hereditary Hero of the Thousand Households.

古文：太祖败辽兵于出河店，宗雄推锋力战，功多。
现代文：太祖在出河店打败辽兵，宗雄冲锋奋战，立下很多功劳。
English: The great-grandfather defeated the Liao soldiers in Dehe shop, and the great-grandson stormed the battle and did a lot of work.

古文：达鲁古城之役，宗雄将右军，身先士卒战，辽兵当右军者已却，上命宗雄助左军击辽兵。
现代文：在达鲁古城的战役中，宗雄率领右军，身先士卒作战，抵挡右军的辽兵退败后，皇上命令宗雄帮助左军出击辽兵。
English: In the battle of the ancient city of Daru, Muneo led the right army and fought at the forefront. After the Liao soldiers who resisted the right army were defeated, the emperor ordered Muneo to help the left army attack the Liao soldiers.

古文：宗雄绕辽兵后击之，辽兵遂大溃，乘胜逐北。
现代文：宗雄绕到辽兵后方出击，辽兵于是大溃败，宗雄乘胜向北追杀。
English: Muneo went around to the rear of the Liao soldiers to attack, the Liao soldiers were then routed, and Muneo took advantage of the victory to pursue and kill them to the north.

古文：日已暮，围之。
现代文：天色已晚的时候，包围了辽兵。
English: When it was too late, they surrounded the Liao soldiers.

古文：黎明，辽兵突围出，追杀至乙吕白石而还。
现代文：黎明时分，辽兵突围出来，宗雄直追杀到乙吕白石才回还。
English: At dawn, the Liao soldiers broke out of the encirclement, and Zong Xiong chased them all the way to Yilu Baishi before turning back.

古文：上抚其背曰： 朕有此子，何事不济。 
现代文：皇上抚着他的肩背说： 朕有此人，什么事做不成？ 
English: The emperor stroked his shoulder and said, "I have this man, what can't I accomplish?

古文：以御服赐之。
现代文：并把御用衣服赏赐给他。
English: and gave him the royal robe.

古文：及辽帝以七十万众至驰门，诸将皆曰： 辽军势甚盛，不宜速战。 
现代文：辽帝带七十万人马到礥门的时候，诸将都说： 辽军气势旺盛，不应急速交战。 
English: When the Liao Emperor brought 700,000 men to Qimen, the generals all said: The Liao army is powerful and should not rush into battle.

古文：宗雄曰： 不然。
现代文：宗雄说： 不对。
English: Muneo said, "That's not right."

古文：辽兵虽众，而皆庸将，士卒惴惴，不足畏也。
现代文：辽兵虽然人多，但都是平庸将帅，士卒惴惴不安，不足以让人畏惧。
English: Although there are many Liao soldiers, they are all mediocre generals, and the soldiers are uneasy, which is not enough to make people afraid.

古文：战则破之掌握间耳。 上曰： 善。 
现代文：交战就能打败他们是把握中的事。 皇上说： 好。 
English: It was a foregone conclusion that they could be defeated in battle, and the emperor said, "Good."

古文：追及辽帝于护步荅冈。宗雄率众直前，短兵接。
现代文：在护步答冈追上辽帝。宗雄率众人径直冲上前去，短兵相接。
English: He caught up with Liao Di at the guarding and answering hill. Zong Xiong led everyone to rush straight ahead, and the short soldiers met.

古文：宗雄令前行持挺击辽兵马首，后行者射之，大败辽兵。
现代文：宗雄命令前面的兵士用钅廷打辽兵的马头，后面的兵士放箭射击，大败辽兵。
English: Munexiong ordered the soldiers in front to beat the horses of the Liao soldiers with Baoting, and the soldiers behind to shoot arrows, defeating the Liao soldiers.

古文：上嘉宗雄功，执其手劳之，以御介胄及御战马、宝货、奴婢赐之。
现代文：皇上赞许宗雄的战功，拉着他的手慰劳他，把御用铠甲和御用战马、宝物、奴婢赏赐给他。
English: The emperor praised Sōshō's war exploits, took him by the hand and consoled him, and rewarded him with imperial armor and imperial horses, treasures, and slaves.

古文：斜也攻春州，宗雄与宗干、娄室取金山县。
现代文：斜也进攻春州，宗雄与宗干、娄室去攻打金山县。
English: Xian also attacked Chunzhou, and Muneo, along with Zonggan and Shishimuro, went to attack Jinshan County.

古文：行近白鹰林，获候者七人，纵其一人使归。
现代文：走到白鹰林附近，抓住七个敌方的侦察兵，放走一人让他回去。
English: He walked to the vicinity of the White Eagle Forest, captured seven enemy scouts, and released one to let him go back.

古文：县人闻大军至，乃溃，遂下金山县。
现代文：县里人听说大军到了就溃散了，于是取下金山县。
English: When the people in the county heard that the large army had arrived, they broke up and took Jinshan County.

古文：与斜也俱取泰州。
现代文：又和斜也一起攻占了泰州。
English: It also captured Taizhou together with Shiyan.

古文：太祖自将取临潢府，遣宗雄先启行，遇辽兵五千，宗雄与战，大军亦至，大破之。
现代文：太祖亲自率军攻打临潢府，派宗雄先出发，遇上辽兵五千人，宗雄与之交战，大部队到了，大败辽兵。
English: Taizu personally led the army to attack Linyi Prefecture, and sent Zongxiong to go first. He encountered five thousand Liao soldiers, and Zongxiong fought with them. The large army arrived and defeated the Liao soldiers.

古文：及留守挞不野降，上以其女与宗雄，赏其启行破辽援兵之功也。
现代文：到留守挞不野投降时，皇上把他的女儿嫁给宗雄，奖赏他一出兵就战胜辽国援兵的功劳。
English: When he was forced to surrender, the emperor gave his daughter in marriage to Muneo to reward him for defeating the Liao reinforcements.

古文：既而与蒲家奴按视泰州地土，宗雄包其土来奏曰： 其土如此，可种植也。 
现代文：之后，宗雄与蒲家奴巡视泰州土地，宗雄包了些土前来上奏道： 那里的土地是这样，可以耕种栽植。 
English: After that, Muneo and Pachano toured the land of Taizhou. Muneo wrapped some soil and came to recite: The land there is such that it can be cultivated and planted.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上依从了他的话。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：由是徙万余家屯田泰州，以宗雄等言其地可种艺也。
现代文：从此，迁徙了一万多户人家到泰州屯田，因为宗雄等人说那里的土地可以种植。
English: Since then, more than 10,000 families have migrated to Tonden in Taizhou, because Muneo and others say that the land there can be cultivated.

古文：西京既降复叛，时粮饷垂尽，议欲罢攻。
现代文：西京投降后又反叛，当时粮饷将近用完，朝中商议要停止进攻。
English: After the capitulation of Saikyo, it rebelled again. At that time, the grain reserve was almost exhausted, and North Korea and China discussed to stop the attack.

古文：宗雄曰： 西京，都会也，若委而去之，则降者离心，辽之余党与夏人得以窥伺矣。 
现代文：宗雄说： 西京是个都会，如果弃之而去，那么投降的人会背离，辽国余留党羽与夏人就得以窥探时机作乱了。 
English: Muneo said: Xijing is a metropolis, if it is abandoned, then those who surrender will turn away, and the remaining party members and summer people in Liaoning Province will be able to spy out the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：乃立重赏以激士心。
现代文：于是设立重赏来激励士心。
English: Therefore, a reward was set up to encourage the spirit of the scholars.

古文：既而，夜中有火，大如斗，坠于城中。
现代文：不久，夜空里起火，火光大如斗，坠落在城中。
English: Soon, a fire broke out in the night sky. The fire spread like wildfire and fell on the city.

古文：宗雄曰： 此城破之象也。 
现代文：宗雄说： 这是破城的征兆。 
English: Muneo said, "This is a sign that the city has been breached."

古文：及克西京，赐宗雄黄金百两，衣十袭及奴婢等。
现代文：攻克西京以后，皇上赐给宗雄百两黄金，十套服装以及奴婢等。
English: After conquering West Beijing, the emperor gave Sōshō one hundred taels of gold, ten sets of clothing, and slaves.

古文：与宗翰等击耿守忠兵七千于西京之东四十里，大破之。
现代文：宗雄与宗翰等人在西京以东四十里的地方进攻耿守忠的军队七千人，把他们打得大败。
English: Muneo, Zonghan and others attacked Geng Shou Zhong's army of seven thousand at a place forty miles east of West Beijing, and defeated them.

古文：迎谒太祖于鸳鸯泺，从至归化州。
现代文：宗雄在鸳鸯泺恭迎谒见太祖，并跟随到了归化州。
English: Muneo met his great-grandfather in Shingong and followed him to the province of naturalization.

古文：疾笃，宗干问所欲言。
现代文：宗雄病重，宗干问他想说什么。
English: Muneo is seriously ill. Muneo asks him what he wants to say.

古文：宗雄曰： 国家大业既成，主上寿考万年，肃清四方，死且无恨。 
现代文：宗雄说： 国家大业已成，主上高寿万岁，肃清四方敌人，我死而无恨。 
English: Muneo said, "The great cause of the country has been accomplished. Long live the Lord. Eliminate the enemies in all directions. I will die without hatred."

古文：天辅六年，薨，年四十。
现代文：天辅六年，宗雄逝世，终年四十岁。
English: Six years later, Muneo died at the age of forty.

古文：太祖来问疾，不及见，哭之恸。谓群臣曰： 此子谋略过人，临阵勇决，少见其比。
现代文：太祖来探问病情，没赶上见面，悲声痛哭，对群臣说： 此人谋略过人，在阵前勇猛果决，少见能与他相比的人。 
English: The great-grandfather came to inquire about the illness, but did not meet him in time. He cried bitterly and said to the courtiers, "This man outmaneuvered everyone, he was courageous and decisive before the battle, and there are few people who can compare to him.

古文：赙赠加等。
现代文：加倍赏赐丧葬物品。
English: Doubling the bounty on funerary items.

古文：诏合紥千户驸马石家奴护丧归，葬于归化州，仍于死所建佛寺。
现代文：皇上诏令合扎千户驸马石家奴护送灵柩返回，葬在归化州，还在宗雄死去的地方修建佛寺。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to gather a thousand households to escort the coffin back, bury it in the naturalized state, and build a Buddhist temple in the place where Sōshō died.

古文：宗雄好学嗜书，尝从上猎，误中流矢，而神色不变，恐上知之而罪及射者。
现代文：宗雄爱好学习读书。曾经跟从皇上打猎时误中流箭，但神色不变，恐怕皇上知道要治射箭人的罪。
English: Muneo likes to study and read. He once followed the emperor on a hunting trip and accidentally shot an arrow, but his expression didn't change. I'm afraid the emperor knew that he wanted to punish those who shot arrows.

古文：既拔去其矢，托疾归家，卧两月，因学契丹大小字，尽通之。
现代文：之后拔去箭，托辞生病回了家，卧床两个月，趁机学习契丹大小文字，全部通识。
English: After that, I removed the arrows, returned home on the pretext of being ill, stayed in bed for two months, took the opportunity to learn the Khitan alphabet, all general knowledge.

古文：凡金国初建，立法定制，皆与宗干建白行焉。
现代文：金国建立初期，订立的法制条律，都是宗雄与宗干建立写明的。
English: In the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the laws and regulations of the legal system that were established were clearly described by Zongxiong and Zongkang.

古文：及与辽议和，书诏契丹、汉字，宗雄与宗翰、希尹主其事。
现代文：到与辽国议和的时候，要用契丹、汉文字书写诏书，由宗雄和宗翰、希尹主管这件事。
English: When it came time to negotiate peace with Liao, an imperial edict had to be written in Khitan and Chinese characters. Soxiong, Zonghan and Xiyin were in charge of this.

古文：而材武蹻捷，挽强射远，几三百步。
现代文：并且，宗雄武艺矫健，挽强弓远射，几乎能达到三百步。
English: Moreover, Zongxiong's martial arts are vigorous and vigorous, and his long-range archery can reach almost three hundred paces.

古文：尝走马射三獐，已中其二，复弯弓，马蹶，跃而下，控弦如故，遂彀满步射获之。
现代文：他曾经骑马奔驰中射三只獐子，已射中两只，又弯弓，马仆倒，他跳下来，依然拉着弦，随即张满弓走步射中獐子。
English: He once rode in a horse-drawn carriage and shot three pigeons. He had already shot two, and he bent the bow, the horse fell, he jumped down, still pulling the strings, and then he shot the pigeons with a full bow.

古文：宗雄方逐兔，挞懒亦从后射之，已发矢，挞懒大呼曰： 矢及矣。 
现代文：宗雄正追兔子，挞懒也跟在后面射箭，箭已射出，挞懒大叫道： 箭到了。 
English: Muneyoung is chasing a rabbit, and Hazy is also shooting arrows behind him. The arrows have been shot, and Hazy shouts: The arrows have arrived.

古文：宗雄反顾，以手接其矢，就射兔，中之，其轻健如此。
现代文：宗雄回头一看，用手接住箭，顺即射兔，射中了，他是多么轻捷矫健！
English: Looking back, Muneo catches the arrow with his hand, shoots the rabbit, and hits it. How nimble and agile he is!

古文：天眷中，追封太师、齐国王。
现代文：天眷年间，宗雄被追封为太师、齐国王。
English: By the grace of heaven, Muneo was enthroned as Grand Master and King of Qi.

古文：天德二年，加秦汉国王。
现代文：天德二年，被加封为秦汉国王。
English: In the second year of Tiande, he was crowned King of Qin and Han.

古文：正隆二年，改太傅、金源郡王。
现代文：正隆二年，改为太傅、金源郡王。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, it was changed to Taifu, King of Jinyuan County.

古文：大定二年，追封楚王，谥威敏，配享太祖庙廷。十五年，诏图像于衍庆宫。
现代文：大定二年，他被追封为楚王，谥号 威敏 ，大定十五年，皇帝下诏在衍庆宫悬挂宗雄的画像。
English: In the second year of Dading, he was given the posthumous title of King of Chu, with the posthumous name of Weimin. In the fifteenth year of Dading, the emperor issued an edict to hang Mungxiong's picture in the Yanqing Palace.

古文：子蒲鲁虎、按荅海、阿邻。
现代文：宗雄的儿子有蒲鲁虎、按答海、阿邻。
English: Muneo's sons include Bulu Tora, Atsuta Umi, and Ako.

古文：孙常春、胡里刺、胡刺、鹘鲁、茶紥、怕八、讹出。
现代文：他的孙子有常春、胡里剌、胡剌、鹘鲁、茶扎、怕八、讹出。
English: His grandchildren include Changchun, Huli, Hu, Jilu, Cha Zha, Ji Ba, and Xingde.

古文：初，宗干纳宗雄妻，海陵衔之。
现代文：起先，宗干娶了宗雄的妻子，被海陵王接纳过去。
English: At first, Zong Gan married the wife of Zong Xiong and was accepted by King Hailing.

古文：及篡位，使宿直将军晁霞、牌印闾山往河间，囚宗雄妻于府署，明日，与其子妇及常春兄弟、茶紥之子七人皆杀而焚之，弃其骨于濠水。
现代文：到海陵王篡位的时候，他派宿直将军晁霞、牌印闾山去河间，在官署囚禁了宗雄的妻子，第二天，把她和她的儿媳、常春兄弟、茶扎的儿子共七人一同杀死并焚烧，把尸骨丢弃在濠水。
English: At the time of King Hailing's usurpation of the throne, he sent the general of the Sui Dynasty, Sui Xia, and the general of the Sui Dynasty, Bai Yanshan, to Hema. They imprisoned Sōshō's wife in the government office. The next day, they killed and burned her together with her daughter-in-law, brother Changchun, and son of Chazha, a total of seven people, and threw the bones in the river.

古文：大定十七年，诏有司收葬。
现代文：大定十七年，皇上诏令有司收尸埋葬。
English: In the 17th year of the Taisho era, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering officials to collect the body and bury it.

古文：初，蒲鲁虎袭猛安。
现代文：开初，蒲鲁虎承袭猛安之位。
English: At the beginning, Buluhu inherited the position of Meng'an.

古文：蒲鲁虎卒，赠金紫光禄大夫，子桓端袭之，官至金吾卫上将军。
现代文：蒲鲁虎去世，受封金紫光禄大夫，他的儿子桓端承袭了这个官职，官位升至金吾卫上将军。
English: After the death of Buluhu, he was given the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor. His son, Huanduan, took over this official post and was promoted to the rank of Jin Wuwei Senior General.

古文：桓端卒，子袅频未袭而死。
现代文：桓端去世，他的儿子袅频没有承袭职位就死了。
English: Huanduan died, and his son Zoufang died without inheriting the post.

古文：章宗命宗雄孙蒲带袭之。
现代文：章宗命宗雄的孙子蒲带去接袭。
English: The grandson of Zhang Zongmei Mengxiong, Pu, went to take over.

古文：蒲带，大定末，累官同签大睦亲府事。
现代文：蒲带于大定末年逐步任同签大睦亲府事。
English: At the end of the Taisho era, he was gradually appointed to the post of Daimutsuchin-fu.

古文：章宗即位，初置九路提刑司，蒲带为北京临潢提刑使。
现代文：章宗即位，在初期设置九路提刑司，蒲带成为北京临潢提刑使。
English: Zhang Zong ascended to the throne. In the early days, he set up a nine-way punitive division, and Pu Zi became the Beijing Linyi punitive envoy.

古文：诏曰： 朕初即位，忧劳万民，每念刑狱未平，农桑未勉，吏或不循法度，以隳吾治。
现代文：皇帝诏曰 ：朕刚即位，忧心万民，常思虑刑狱未曾持定，农桑未曾勉励，官吏可能不遵循法度，败坏朕的统治。
English: The emperor said: I have just ascended the throne, I am worried about all the people, I often think that the prison sentence has not been upheld, the farmers have not been encouraged, the officials may not follow the law and corrupt my rule.

古文：朝廷遣使廉问，事难周悉。
现代文：朝廷派使臣察访，处事也难以周全。
English: The imperial court sent envoys to inspect the situation, and it was difficult to handle the situation well.

古文：惟提刑劝农采访之官，自古有之。
现代文：唯独提刑是劝农、采访的官员，自古便有。
English: However, since ancient times, there have been officials who have only mentioned punishment to persuade farmers and interviewers.

古文：今分九路专设是职，尔其尽心，往懋乃事。 
现代文：现今分九路专设此职，尔等要尽心去做此事。 
English: Currently, there are nine roads dedicated to this position, so you should do your best to do this.

古文：自熙宗时，遣使廉问吏治得失。
现代文：从熙宗时代开始，朝廷派遣使臣察访官吏治事的得失。
English: From the time of Emperor Hezong, the imperial court dispatched envoys to inspect the merits and demerits of government officials.

古文：世宗即位，凡数岁辄一遣黜陟之，故大定之间，郡县吏皆奉法，百姓滋殖，号为小康。
现代文：世宗即位后，每过几年就有官吏被进退升降，因此大定年间，各郡县官吏都奉职守法，百姓人口滋生，号称小康。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, government officials were promoted and demoted every few years. As a result, during the Taisho era, government officials in every county and prefecture fulfilled their duties and abided by the law, and the population of common people grew, which was known as a period of moderate prosperity.

古文：或谓廉问使者，颇以爱憎立殿最，以问宰相。宰相曰： 臣等复为陛下察之。 
现代文：有人说察访使臣以个人爱憎确定官吏的最好与最坏，皇上用这话问宰相，宰相说 ：臣等再为陛下查问此事。 
English: Some people say that visiting envoys determine the best and worst of officials based on their personal likes and dislikes. The emperor asked the prime minister about this, and the prime minister said, "Let's wait for your majesty to investigate this matter."

古文：是以世宗尝欲立提刑司而未果。
现代文：因而世宗曾经想设立提刑司却没有结果。
English: As a result, Sejong once wanted to set up a criminal prosecution department, but to no avail.

古文：章宗追述先朝，遂于即位之初行之。
现代文：章宗回溯先朝体例，就于即位初期开始实行。
English: The practice of Zhangzong going back to the previous dynasty began at the beginning of his reign.

古文：及九路提刑使朝辞于庆和殿，上曰： 建立官制，当宽猛得中。
现代文：九路提刑使臣早晨在庆和殿辞别，皇上说 ：建立官制，应当宽厚严厉相适中。
English: In the morning of the 9th day of the month, the imperial envoy said goodbye at the Qinghe Hall, and the emperor said, "To establish an official system, it is necessary to be lenient, strict, and moderate.

古文：凡军民事相涉者，均平决遣，钤束家人部曲，勿使沮扰郡县事。
现代文：凡是军民事务相互牵涉，一律公平处理，管束家人部下，不要让他们搅扰郡县公事。
English: All military and civil affairs involving each other should be handled fairly, and subordinates should be controlled and not allowed to interfere with county affairs.

古文：今以司狱隶提刑司，惟翼狱犴无冤耳。 
现代文：现在将司狱附属于提刑司，只希望牢狱中没有冤情。 
English: Now, the director of the prison is attached to the director of the Criminal Investigation Department. I only hope that there are no grievances in the prison.

古文：既退，复遣近臣谕之曰： 卿等皆妙简才良，付以专责，尽心举职，别有旌赏，否则有罚。 
现代文：退朝后，又派近臣去传告说： 卿等都是才学高妙，才交付给专门职责，如果尽心守职，另有奖赏，否则要受惩罚。 
English: After retiring from the throne, he also sent a close vassal to announce, "Sirs and the like are all highly learned, and are only entrusted with special duties. If they conscientiously perform their duties, there will be a reward, otherwise they will be punished.

古文：明年，蒲带乃袭猛安云。
现代文：第二年，蒲带承袭猛安。
English: In the second year, Bushido inherited Meng'an.

古文：阿邻，颖悟辩敏，通女直、契丹大小字及汉字。
现代文：阿邻，聪颖灵悟，机敏善辩，通晓女真、契丹大小文字以及汉字。
English: A neighbor, intelligent and insightful, quick-witted and eloquent, familiar with feminine, Khitan and Chinese characters.

古文：幼时尝入宫，熙宗见而奇之，曰： 是儿他日必能宣力国家。 
现代文：他年幼时曾经入宫，熙宗见了很惊奇，说 ：这孩子日后必能为国出力。 
English: He entered the Imperial Palace when he was young, and Emperor Hezong was surprised to see him and said, "This child will surely be able to contribute to the country in the future."

古文：年十八，授定远大将军，为顺天军节度使。
现代文：阿邻十八岁时，受职定远大将军，任顺天军节度使。
English: At the age of eighteen, he was appointed to the post of General Dingyuan and was appointed as the commander of the Shun Tianjun Army.

古文：天德二年，用廉，迁益都尹兼山东东路兵马都总管，历泰宁、定海、镇西、安国等军节度。
现代文：天德二年，因为政廉明而升迁益都尹，并兼山东东路兵马都总管，历任泰宁、定海、镇西、安国等军节度使。
English: In the second year of Tiande, because of his political integrity, he was promoted to Yidu Yin, and also served as the general manager of the Shandong East Road Military and Horse Capital, and successively served as the military festival envoy of Taining, Dinghai, Zhenxi, and Anguo.

古文：海陵南伐，以为神勇、武平等军都总管，由寿州道渡淮，与劝农使移刺元宜合兵三万为先锋。
现代文：海陵王南下征战，任用阿邻为神勇、武平等军都总管，从寿州取道渡淮水，与劝农使移剌元宜合兵共三万人作为先锋。
English: King Hailing marched south to wage war, appointing A Niang as the commander-in-chief of the Shenyong and Wuding armies, taking the road from Shoushou to Huai Shui, and persuading the agricultural envoys to move to the Yuan Dynasty, with a total of 30,000 soldiers as the vanguard.

古文：是岁十月，至庐州，与宋将王权军十余万战于柘皋镇，渭子桥，败之。
现代文：这年十月，到达卢州，与宋将王权的十万多军队在柘皋镇、渭子桥交战，打败宋军。
English: In October of that year, he arrived in Luzhou and fought with more than 100,000 troops of the Song dynasty in the towns of Handan and Handan Bridge, defeating the Song army.

古文：至和州南，复与王权军八万余会战，又败之，追杀至江上，斩首数千级。
现代文：行军到和州南边，再次与王权的八万多军兵会战，又打败了他，追杀到江上，斩得首级数千颗。
English: They marched to the southern edge of the state and once again fought with the king's more than eighty thousand soldiers, defeated him again, chased him to the river, and cut off thousands of heads.

古文：上即位于辽阳。海陵死，大军北还。
现代文：皇上在辽阳即位，海陵死去，大军返回北方。
English: The emperor ascended the throne in Liaoyang, Hailing died, and the army returned to the north.

古文：将渡淮而舟楫甚少，军士争舟不得亟渡。
现代文：要渡淮水时船只太少，军士争抢船只，不能迅速渡过。
English: When there are too few boats to cross Huai Shui, the sergeants scramble for boats and cannot cross quickly.

古文：阿邻得生口，知可涉处，识以柳枝，命本部涉济。
现代文：阿邻抓到俘虏，得知可以涉水的地方，用柳枝做记号，命令本部人马涉水过去。
English: A neighbor caught the captives, learned where they could wade, marked them with willow branches, and ordered the headquarters to wade past.

古文：既至北岸，而诸军之争渡者果为宋人邀击之。
现代文：上了北岸，而其他各路争渡的军队被宋兵截去。
English: went up the north bank, while the other contending armies were intercepted by Song soldiers.

古文：及入见，上闻阿邻淮止战功，又以全军还，迁兵部尚书，监督经画征窝斡诸军粮饷，授以金牌一、银牌四。
现代文：阿邻入朝进见圣上，圣上听说阿邻在淮水上的战功，又带了全部军兵回归，就提升他做兵部尚书，监督筹划向窝斡各军征讨粮饷，并授与他一块金牌、四块银牌。
English: A neighbor entered the imperial court to see the emperor. When the emperor heard of A neighbor's military exploits on the Huai Shui River and returned with all the soldiers, he promoted him to be the secretary of the military department, supervised and planned the collection of grain from various armies, and awarded him a gold medal and four silver medals.

古文：窝斡败，还至懿州，以疾卒。
现代文：窝斡被打败，阿邻回兵到达懿州，因病去世。
English: Wo Miao was defeated, and Ah Niang Hui arrived in Zhangzhou and died of illness.

古文：丧至京师，上命致祭于永安寺，百官赴吊，赙银五百两、重彩三十端、绢百匹。
现代文：丧讯传到京师，皇上命令在永安寺祭奠，让百官赶去吊唁，并赏赐丧葬所用的白银五百两、深色绸缎三十端、绢一百匹。
English: The news of the funeral reached the capital, and the emperor ordered a memorial service to be held at Yongan Temple, ordering hundreds of officials to rush to pay their condolences, and awarding the 500 taels of silver, 30 taels of dark silk and 100 yakitori used for the funeral.

