古文：定公问于孔子曰： 古之帝王必郊祀其祖以配天，何也？ 
现代文：鲁定公向孔子询问道： 古代帝王在郊外祭祖时一定要祭祀上天，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Luding Gong asked Confucius: Why is it that ancient emperors had to offer sacrifices to heaven when they celebrated ancestors in the suburbs?

古文：孔子对曰： 万物本于天，人本乎祖。
现代文：孔子回答说： 世间万物都来自与天，人又来源于其祖先。
English: Confucius replied, "Everything in the world comes from heaven, and people come from their ancestors.

古文：郊之祭也，大报本反始也，故以配上帝。
现代文：郊祭，就是规模盛大的报答上天和祖先的恩惠反思自己根源的礼仪，所以祭祖时要配祭上天。
English: Suburban festival is a grand scale ritual to repay the blessings of heaven and ancestors, and to reflect on one's roots. Therefore, when offering sacrifices to ancestors, they should be accompanied by sacrifices to heaven.

古文：天垂象，圣人则之，郊所以明天道也。 
现代文：上天显示征兆，圣人就取法这些征兆，举行郊祭就是为了显明天道。 
English: The heavens show signs, and the sages use these signs, and hold the suburb festival in order to show the way of tomorrow.

古文：公曰： 寡人郊而莫同，何也？ 
现代文：鲁定公向孔子询问说： 古代帝王在郊外祭祖时一定要祭祀上天，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Luding Gong asked Confucius: Why did the ancient emperors have to offer sacrifices to heaven when they celebrated ancestors in the suburbs?

古文：孔子曰： 郊之祭也，迎长日之至也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 万物都来源于天，人又来源于其祖先。
English: Confucius replied, "All things come from heaven, and people come from their ancestors.

古文：大报天而主日，配以月，故周之始郊，其月以日至，其日用上辛。
现代文：郊祭，就是规模盛大地报答上天和祖先的恩惠，反思自己根源的礼仪，所以祭祖时要配祭上帝。
English: Suburban festival is a grand scale to repay the grace of heaven and ancestors, and to reflect on the etiquette of one's roots. Therefore, when sacrificing ancestors, it is necessary to match the sacrifice to God.

古文：公曰： 其言郊，何也？ 
现代文：上天显示征兆，圣人就取法这些征兆，举行郊祭就是为了显明天道。 
English: The heavens show signs, and the sages use these signs, and hold the suburb festival in order to show the way of tomorrow.

古文：孔子曰： 兆丘于南，所以就阳位也，于郊，故谓之郊焉。 
现代文：鲁定公说： 它也称作郊祀，这是为什么呢？ 孔子回答说： 祭坛设在南郊，因为南方是阳位，阳光充足。在郊外祭祀，所以叫做郊祀。 
English: Lu Ding Gong said, "It is also called suburb worship, why is that?" Confucius replied, "The altar is located in the southern suburb, because the south is the yang position and there is plenty of sunshine. Sacrifices are held in the suburbs, so it is called suburb worship.

古文：曰： 其牲器何如？ 
现代文：鲁定公问： 祭天用的牲畜和器皿又是怎样的呢？ 
English: Lu Ding Gong asked: What kind of animals and vessels are used to offer sacrifices to Heaven?

古文：孔子曰： 上帝之牛角茧栗，必在涤三月。
现代文：孔子说： 祭上帝的牛，角要小，必须在蓄养祭牲的地方饲养三个月。
English: Confucius said, "The horns of the bulls offered to God should be small, and they must be kept for three months in the place where the sacrificial animals are kept.

古文：后稷之牛唯具，所以别事天神与人鬼也，牲用骍，尚赤也，用犊，贵诚也。
现代文：祭祀牛也要准备好，这是区分祭祀天神与人鬼的不同。祭牲用红色的牛，是因为周人崇尚红色。用小牛犊，是珍视诚信。
English: The sacrificial ox must also be prepared, which is the difference between the sacrifices of the gods and the ghosts. The red ox is used for the sacrifice because Zhou people advocate red, and the calf is used to cherish honesty.

古文：扫地而祭，贵其质也。
现代文：扫地而祭，是珍贵质朴。
English: Sweeping the floor and sacrificing, it is precious and simple.

古文：器用陶匏，以象天地之性也。
现代文：祭器用陶制品，象征天地自然之性。
English: The pottery used for the sacred vessels symbolizes the naturalness of heaven and earth.

古文：万物无可称之者，故因其自然之体也。 
现代文：世间万物没有可和它相称的，因为它体现了自然的本性。 
English: There is nothing in the world that can match it, because it embodies the nature of nature.

古文：公曰： 天子之郊，其礼仪可得闻乎？ 
现代文：鲁定公又问： 天子郊祭，其礼仪可以说给我听听吗？ 
English: Luding also asked: Can you tell me the etiquette of the Tianzi Suburban Festival?

古文：孔子对曰： 臣闻天子卜郊，则受命于祖庙，而作龟于祢宫，尊祖亲考之义也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 我听说天子到郊外祭天要先占卜吉凶，卜人先在太庙接受命令，然后到父庙中占卜，表示尊重祖先、亲近父亲的意思。
English: Confucius replied, "I have heard that when the Son of Heaven goes to the suburbs to hold a festival, he must first tell fortunes. The diviners first receive orders in the Great Temple, and then go to the Father Temple to tell fortunes, to show their respect for their ancestors and their closeness to their fathers.

古文：卜之日，王亲立于泽宫，以听誓命，受教谏之义也。
现代文：占卜这一天，天子亲自站立在泽宫前面，来听取祭祀要注意的礼仪，这是接受教导和劝谏的意思。
English: On the day of divination, the heavenly son himself stood in front of the Ze Palace to listen to the etiquette that should be paid attention to in sacrifice. This is the meaning of receiving instruction and persuasion.

古文：既卜，献命库门之内，所以诫百官也。
现代文：占卜之后，天子在库门之内颁布将要郊祭的命令，这是为了告诫百官。
English: After the divination, the heavenly son issued an order for the upcoming suburb festival inside the gate of the temple, in order to admonish the officials.

古文：将郊，则天子皮弁以听报，示民严上也。
现代文：将郊祭时，天子身穿朝服来听取祭祀准备情况的报告，表示民众要听从天子的命令。
English: During the suburb festival, the heavenly son dressed in a court uniform to listen to a report on the preparation of the ritual, indicating that the people should obey the orders of the heavenly son.

古文：郊之日，丧者不敢哭，凶服者不敢入国门，汜扫清路，行者必止。
现代文：郊祭的日子，有丧事的人家不能哭，穿丧服的人不能入国，郊外的道路都要打扫干净，行人禁止通行。
English: On the day of the suburb festival, mourners cannot cry, people wearing mourning clothes cannot enter the country, roads in the suburbs must be cleaned, and pedestrians are prohibited from passing.

古文：弗命而民听，敬之至也。
现代文：这样不用下命令民众就会听从，民众的恭敬已达到极点。
English: In this way, without giving orders, the people will obey, and the respect of the people has reached the extreme.

古文：天子大裘以黼之，被衮象天，乘素车，贵其质也，旗十有二旒，龙章而设以日月，所以法天也，既至泰坛，王脱裘矣，服衮以临，燔柴戴冕，璪十有二旒，则天数也。臣闻之诵诗三百，不足以一献；祭群小祀一献之礼，不足以大飨；大飨之礼，不足以大旅；大旅具矣，不足以飨帝。
现代文：到了祭天的坛，天子脱去大裘，穿着龙袍来到坛前，戴着冠，垂着十二流苏，仿效天有十二个月之数。我听说，诵读了诗三百首而没有学礼，不足以承担一般的祭祀；仅学了一般的祭祀之礼，不足以承担大礼；学习了大飨之礼，不足以承担大旅之礼；学习了大旅之礼，不足以承担祭祀上帝之礼。
English: When he arrived at the altar of the altar of sacrifice, the heavenly son took off his robe and came to the altar wearing a dragon robe, wearing a crown and hanging twelve tassels, imitating the number of twelve months. I heard that reciting three hundred poems without learning the ritual was not enough to bear the general sacrifice; learning only the general sacrifice was not enough to bear the great sacrifice; learning the great scepter was not enough to bear the great journey; learning the great journey was not enough to bear the sacrifice of God.

古文：是以君子无敢轻议于礼者也。 
现代文：所以君子不敢轻率地祭祀呀。 
English: That's why a gentleman wouldn't dare to make a sacrificial offering rashly.

