古文：襄王十三年，郑人伐滑。
现代文：周襄王十三年，郑国攻打滑国。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of King Zhou Xiang, Zheng attacked and conquered Nian.

古文：王使游孙伯请滑，郑人执之。
现代文：襄王派大夫游孙伯替滑国说情，被郑国人扣留。
English: King Xiang sent doctor You Sun Bo to intercede on behalf of the State of Niu and was detained by the Zheng people.

古文：王怒，将以狄伐郑。
现代文：襄王大怒，准备利用狄去攻打郑国。
English: King Xiang was furious and prepared to use Di to attack Zheng.

古文：富辰谏曰： 不可。
现代文：大夫富辰劝阻说： 不可以这样做。
English: Doctor Fuchen dissuaded him, saying, "You can't do that.

古文：古人有言曰： 兄弟谗阋，侮人百里。 
现代文：古人有言道： 兄弟之间虽受挑拨而争执，但仍一致抵抗外部侵辱。 
English: The ancients had a saying: Although brothers quarrel when provoked, they still unanimously resist external abuse.

古文：周文公之诗曰： 兄弟阋于墙，外御其侮。 
现代文：周公的诗说： 兄弟相争在家内，对外一致抗强暴。 
English: Zhou Gong's poem said, "Brothers fight each other at home, but are united in resisting violence abroad."

古文：若是则阋乃内侮，而虽阋不败亲也。
现代文：如此说来，兄弟不和是内部的冲突，虽有争执但是不影响手足之情。
English: In this way, sibling discord is an internal conflict. Although there is a dispute, it does not affect the brotherhood.

古文：郑在天子，兄弟也。
现代文：郑国国君与天子有兄弟之亲。
English: Zheng Guo Guojun and Tianzi are brothers.

古文：郑武、庄有大勋力于平、桓，我周之东迁，晋、郑是依，子颓之乱，又郑之繇定。
现代文：郑武公、郑庄公为平王、桓王立过大功，我们王室的东迁也依靠过晋国、郑国，子颓作乱又是郑国帮助平定的。
English: Zhengwu Gong and Zhengzhuang Gong performed great feats for King Ping and King Kuan. The eastward migration of our royal family also relied on Jin and Zheng, and Zi Xuan's rebellion was also helped by Zheng.

古文：今以小忿弃之，是以小怨置大德也，无乃不可乎？
现代文：现在由于一点忿恨就遗弃郑国，就是因小怨而忘大德，恐怕不行吧！
English: Now, abandoning Zheng Guo due to a bit of resentment is to forget the great virtue due to a small grudge, I'm afraid it's not possible!

古文：且夫兄弟之怨不征于他，征于他，利乃外矣。
现代文：况且，兄弟之间的纠纷不必牵扯外人插手，否则，利益就会外泄。
English: Moreover, disputes between brothers do not have to involve the intervention of outsiders, otherwise, the benefits will leak out.

古文：章怨外利不义，弃亲即狄不祥，以怨报德不仁。
现代文：暴露内怨而让外人得利，是不义；疏远亲族而和狄人来往，是不祥；以怨报德，是不仁。
English: It is unjust to expose internal grievances and allow outsiders to benefit; it is ominous to alienate relatives and interact with them; it is unkind to repay virtue with grievances.

古文：夫义所以生利也，祥所以事神也，仁所以保民也。
现代文：蕴生利益靠义，奉侍神祇靠祥，养护民众靠仁。
English: Profits depend on righteousness, serving the gods depends on righteousness, and protecting the people depends on benevolence.

古文：不义则利不阜，不祥则福不降，不仁则民不至。
现代文：不义则利不丰厚；不祥则福不降临；不仁则民不归顺。
English: If there is injustice, the profit will not be abundant; if there is evil, the blessing will not come; if there is no benevolence, the people will not surrender.

古文：古之明王不失此三德者，故能光有天下而和宁百姓，令闻不忘。
现代文：古代的英明君王没有失去这三种德行，所以能有广大的疆域，使百姓和睦安宁，美好的名声至今使人不能忘怀。
English: The wise kings of ancient times did not lose these three virtues, so they were able to have a vast territory, make the people harmonious and peaceful, and the beautiful reputation is still unforgettable.

古文：王其不可以弃之。 
现代文：您不能背弃这些德行啊！ 
English: You cannot turn your back on these virtues!

古文：王不听。
现代文：襄王不听劝阻。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：十七年，王降狄师以伐郑。
现代文：十七年，襄王用狄人的军队去讨伐郑国。
English: In the seventeenth year, King Xiang used Di's army to invade Zheng.

古文：王德狄人，将以其女为后，富辰谏曰： 不可。
现代文：襄王感激狄人，打算娶狄人的女子为王后，富辰劝谏说： 不能这样。
English: King Xiang was grateful to Di Ren and planned to marry Di Ren's daughter as his queen. Fu Chen advised him, saying, "This can't be done.

古文：夫婚姻，祸福之阶也。
现代文：婚姻是滋生祸福的土壤。
English: Marriage is a breeding ground for evil and good.

古文：由之利内则福，利外则取祸。
现代文：因此而有利于自己的是福，让外人得益则有祸。
English: Therefore, it is a blessing to benefit oneself, and it is a misfortune to let outsiders benefit.

古文：今王外利矣，其无乃阶祸乎？
现代文：现在您使外人得益，这不是招引祸害吗？
English: Now that you are profiting from others, aren't you inviting disaster?

古文：昔挚、畴之国也由大任，杞、缯由大姒，齐、许、申、吕由大姜，陈由大姬，是皆能内利亲亲者也。
现代文：从前挚、畴因为大任而得福，杞、缯因为大姒而得福，齐、许、申、吕因为大姜而得福，陈因为大姬而得福，这些都是能使自己获利而和睦亲族的例子。
English: Zengxin and Zhuo were blessed with great responsibility, Zou and Zhu were blessed with great responsibility, Qi, Xu, Shen and Lu were blessed with great responsibility, and Chen was blessed with great responsibility. These are all examples of reconciling relatives while making profits.

古文：昔鄢之亡也由仲任，密须由伯姞，郐由叔妘，聃由郑姬，息由陈妫，邓由楚曼，罗由季姬，卢由荆妫，是皆外利离亲者也。 
现代文：过去鄢因仲任而亡，密须因伯姞而亡，郐因叔妘而亡，聃因郑姬而亡，息因陈妫而亡，邓因楚曼而亡，罗因季姬而亡，卢因荆妫而亡，这些都是使外人得益而离弃亲族的例子。 
English: In the past,  died because of Zhong Ren, Misu died because of Bo Xuan,  died because of Shu Xuan,  died because of Zheng Ji, 息 died because of Chen Xi, Deng died because of Chu Man, Luo died because of Ji Ji, Lu died because of Jing Xi, these are all examples of abandoning relatives for the benefit of outsiders.

古文：王曰： 利何如而内，何如而外？ 
现代文：襄王问： 怎样才是使自己获利，怎样才是让外人得益呢？ 
English: Xiang Wang asked: What is the way to benefit oneself, and what is the way to benefit others?

古文：对曰： 尊贵，明贤，庸勋，长老，爱亲，礼新，亲旧。
现代文：富辰答道： 尊重贵族，表彰贤人，起用功臣，恭敬长者，友爱亲族，礼待宾客，亲近故旧。
English: Fuchen replied, "Respecting nobles, honoring sages, appointing meritorious officials, respecting elders, loving relatives, treating guests with courtesy, and being close to the ancients."

古文：然则民莫不审固其心力以役上令，官不易方，而财不匮竭，求无不至，动无不济。
现代文：这样，百姓没有不齐心竭力听从上面指挥的，官府不必变更常道而财用不致匮乏，要求没有达不到的，办事没有不成功的。
English: In this way, the people do not have to make concerted efforts to obey the command from above, the government does not have to change the normal way and the financial use does not lead to shortage, the requirements are not unattainable, and the work is not unsuccessful.

古文：百姓兆民，夫人奉利而归诸上，是利之内也。
现代文：平民百姓人人都将利益奉献给王室，这就是使自己获利。
English: The common people all donate their profits to the royal family, which is to make a profit for themselves.

古文：若七德离判，民乃携贰，各以利退，上求不暨，是其外利也。
现代文：如果以上七件事做得不好，民众就会怀有二心，大家都为自己谋利，国家的要求达不到，这就是让外人得益。
English: If the above seven things are not done well, the public will be ambivalent, everyone will seek their own interests, the country's requirements will not be met, and this is to let outsiders benefit.

古文：夫狄无列于王室，郑伯南也，王而卑之，是不尊贵也。
现代文：狄不是王室的封侯，而郑却位在男服，陛下却瞧不起他，这是不尊重贵族。
English: Di is not a royal vassal, but Zheng is in men's clothing, but His Majesty looks down on him, which is a lack of respect for the aristocracy.

古文：狄，犲狼之德也，郑未失周典，王而蔑之，是不明贤也。
现代文：狄人的所为是豺狼之德，而郑国没有违背周室的典制，陛下却蔑视它，这是不表彰贤人。
English: What Di did is the virtue of a jackal, but Zheng Guo did not violate the ceremonial system of Zhou, but His Majesty disdained it. This is not honoring a wise man.

古文：平、桓、庄、惠皆受郑劳，王而弃之，是不庸勋也。
现代文：平王、桓王、庄王、惠王都受过郑国的好处，陛下却离弃它，这是不起用功臣。
English: King Hei, King Kuan, King Zhuang, and King Hui all received benefits from Zheng, but His Majesty abandoned it. This is a useless meritorious subject.

古文：郑伯捷之齿长矣，王而弱之，是不长老也。狄，隗姓也，郑出自宣王，王而虐之，是不爱亲也。
现代文：郑文公年纪已经大了，陛下却把他作为年轻人那样来对待，这是不恭敬长者。狄是隗姓，郑却是宣王的后裔，陛下却苛待它，这是不友爱亲族。
English: Zheng Wengong is already old, but your majesty treats him like a young man, which is disrespectful to the elderly. Di is a surname, but Zheng is a descendant of King Xuan, but your majesty treats it harshly, which is unfriendly to relatives.

古文：夫礼，新不间旧，王以狄女间姜、任，非礼且弃旧也。
现代文：根据礼制，新的不可以取代旧的，陛下以狄人之女取代姜氏、任氏为王后，这不仅不符合礼制，而且是抛弃故旧的行为。
English: According to the etiquette, the new one cannot replace the old one. His Majesty replaced Jiang and Ren with Di's daughter as the queen. This is not only inconsistent with the etiquette, but also an act of abandoning the old ways.

古文：王一举而弃七德，臣故曰利外矣。
现代文：陛下的一个举措就使七德都丢弃，所以臣认为利为外人所得。
English: One of His Majesty's measures would cause all seven virtues to be discarded, so the vassal considered profit to be the income of outsiders.

古文：《书》有之曰： 必有忍也，若能有济也。 
现代文：《尚书》中说： 有所忍耐才能有所成功。 
English: "Shoshu" says: You can succeed if you have patience.

古文：王不忍小忿而弃郑，又登叔隗以阶狄。
现代文：陛下不能容忍小忿而离弃郑国，还要娶叔隗为后招引狄人。
English: His Majesty could not tolerate the small indignation of abandoning Zheng Guo. He also wanted to marry his uncle to entice Di.

古文：狄，封豕犲狼也，不可猒也。 
现代文：狄像野猪豺狼一样，是不会满足的。 
English: Di, like the boar and the wolf, will not be satisfied.

古文：王不听。
现代文：襄王不听。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：十八年，王黜狄后。
现代文：十八年，襄王废黜了狄后。
English: In 18 years, King Xiang deposed Empress Dowager Di.

古文：狄人来诛杀谭伯。
现代文：狄人兴师问罪，杀了大夫谭伯。
English: Di Ren Xing Shi pleaded guilty and killed Dr. Tan Bo.

古文：富辰曰： 昔吾骤谏王，王弗从，以及此难。
现代文：富辰说： 以前我屡次劝谏，陛下不听从，所以遭此祸难。
English: Fuchen said, "In the past, I have repeatedly advised you, but your majesty did not listen to me, so I suffered this misfortune.

古文：若我不出，主其以我为怼乎！ 
现代文：如果我不去抵御狄人，陛下可能要认为我有怨气了。 
English: If I don't stand up to Dickens, His Majesty may think I've lost my marbles.

古文：乃以其属死之。
现代文：于是率领自己的部属出战而死。
English: As a result, he led his followers out to fight against Di Zi, and as a result, he died in battle.

古文：初，惠后欲立王子带，故以其党启狄人。
现代文：原先，惠后想立自己的儿子叔带为王，所以叔带让他的党羽借襄王废黜狄后之机引来了狄人。
English: Originally, Empress Dowager Hui wanted to make her son, Emperor Juntao, the king, so Emperor Juntao let his followers use the opportunity of Emperor Xiang's dethronement of Empress Dowager Di to bring in the Di people.

古文：狄人遂入，周王乃出居于郑，晋文公纳之。
现代文：于是狄人攻入了周都，襄王逃到郑国住了下来，后来由晋文公接纳护送回国。
English: As a result, the Di people invaded the Zhou capital, and King Xiang fled to Zheng and stayed there. Later, he was accepted by Emperor Jinwen and escorted back to the country.

