古文：上章阉茂，一年。
现代文：起著雍涒滩三月，尽屠维作噩，凡一年有奇。
English: Standing on the shores of Yongkang Beach in March, and doing his best to make things better, every year is full of surprises.

古文：隐皇帝下乾祐三年春，正月，丁未，加凤翔节度使赵晖兼侍中。
现代文：后汉隐帝乾三年春季正月，丁未，凤翔节度使赵晖加官兼任侍中。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Emperor Qian of the Han Dynasty, Ding Wei and Feng Xiang made Zhao Xuan an additional official and an attendant.

古文：密州刺史王万敢请益兵以攻唐。诏以前沂州刺史郭琼为东路行营都部署，帅禁军及齐州兵赴之。
现代文：密州刺史王万敢请求增加兵力来进攻南唐；后汉隐帝下诏任命前沂州刺史郭琼为东路行营都部署，率领京城禁军以及齐州军队赶赴海州。
English: King Wanxiang of Mizhou asked for more troops to attack Southern Tang; Emperor Han Ying issued an edict appointing Guo Qiong, the former governor of Zhangzhou, as the commander of the Eastern Route, and he led the Beijing Imperial Army and the Qizhou Army to rush to Haizhou.

古文：郭威请勒兵北临契丹之境，诏止之。
现代文：郭威请求统率军队北上进逼契丹边境，后汉隐帝下诏制止。
English: Guo Wei requested to lead the army northward to force the Khitan border, after which Emperor Han Yin issued an edict to stop it.

古文：丙寅，遣使诣河中、凤翔收瘗战死及饿殍遗骸，时有僧已聚二十万矣。
现代文：丙寅，后汉隐帝派遣使者到河中、凤翔一带收集掩埋阵亡将士以及饿死百姓的遗骸，当时已有僧人聚集遗骸二十万具了。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong sent an envoy to the middle of the river and the Fengxiang area to collect the remains of buried soldiers and starving people. At that time, the monks had already collected 200,000 remains.

古文：唐主闻汉兵尽平三叛，始罢李金全北面行营招讨使。
现代文：南唐主听说后汉军队彻底平熄赵思绾、李守贞、王景崇的三镇叛乱，才撤销李金全的北面行营招讨使。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang only revoked Li Jinquan's northward campaigning envoy when he heard that the post-Han army had completely quelled the three-town rebellion led by Zhao Sijun, Li Shuzhen, and Wang Jingtong.

古文：唐清淮节度使刘彦贞多敛民财以赂权贵，权贵争誉之。在寿州积年，恐被代，欲以警急自固，妄奏称汉兵将大举南伐。
现代文：南唐清淮节度使刘彦贞大肆收括民财来贿赂当朝权贵，权贵争相称誉他；刘彦贞在寿州坐镇多年，恐怕被人取代，想用边境军情紧急来稳住自己的地位，谎报军情说后汉军队将要大举南下进犯。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty and the Qing and Huai dynasties made Liu Yanzhen collect people's money to bribe the dignitaries of the time, and the dignitaries competed to praise him; Liu Yanzhen has been sitting in Shuzhou for many years, I am afraid that he will be replaced, he wants to use the border military emergency to stabilize his position, and falsely report the military situation to say that the post-Han army will attack the south in a big way.

古文：二月，唐主以东都留守燕王弘冀为润、宣二州大都督，镇润州，宁国节度使周宗为东都留守。
现代文：二月，南唐主任命东都留守燕王李弘冀为润、宣二州大都督，坐镇润州；任命宁国节度使周宗为东都留守。
English: In February, the Lord of Southern Tang appointed Yan Wang Li Hongji, who had stayed behind in the eastern capital, as the governor of Run and Xuan Erzhou as the governor of Run, and appointed Ning Guo Jiedu to make Zhou Zong stay behind in the eastern capital.

古文：朝廷欲移易籓镇，因其请赴嘉庆节上寿，许之。
现代文：后汉朝廷想调换各镇节度使，适逢各镇请求进京赶赴嘉庆节祝贺皇上生日，就答应了他们。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the imperial court wanted to change the festival envoys of each town, and when the towns requested to rush to Beijing to celebrate the Emperor's birthday, they agreed to them.

古文：甲申，郭威行北边还。
现代文：甲申，郭威巡行北部边境返回。
English: Gaoshin, Guo Wei returned from the northern border.

古文：福州人或诣建州告唐永安留后查文徽，云吴越兵已弃城去，请文徽为帅。
现代文：福州人有的到建州报告南唐永安留后查文徽，说吴越军队已经弃城离去，请求查文徽当统帅。
English: Some people from Fuzhou came to Jianzhou to report that the Southern Tang Dynasty had left Yongan, and that the Wuyue army had abandoned the city. They asked Chawenhui to be the commander.

古文：文徽信之，遣剑州刺史陈诲将水军下闽江，文徽自以步骑继之。
现代文：查文徽相信了他，派遣剑州刺史陈诲带领水军沿闽江而下，自己率领步兵、骑兵为后继。
English: Zha Wenhui believed him and sent Jianzhou Jishi Chen Yi to lead the navy down the Li River, followed by himself leading the infantry and cavalry.

古文：会大雨，水涨，诲一夕行七百里，至城下，败福州兵，执其将马先进等。
现代文：碰上天下大雨，河水猛涨，陈诲一夜行船七百里，到了城下，击败福州军队，抓获将领马先进等人。
English: Encountered with heavy rain, the river water surged, Chen Qi sailed seven hundred miles overnight, arrived at the city, defeated the Fuzhou army, and captured the general Ma Fanguang and others.

古文：庚寅，文徽至福州，吴越知威武军吴程诈遣数百人出迎。
现代文：庚寅，查文徽到福州，吴越国知威武军吴程派遣数百人出城假装迎接。
English: Geng Yin, Cha Wenhui went to Fuzhou, Wu Yue Guozhi Wei Wu Cheng sent hundreds of troops out of the city to pretend to welcome them.

古文：诲曰： 闽人多诈，未可信也，宜立寨徐图。 
现代文：陈诲说： 闽人善于欺诈，不可轻信，应当安营扎寨从长计议。 
English: Chen Ji said: "If someone is good at deception, don't be gullible. You should make a long-term plan.

古文：文徽曰： 疑则变生，不若乘机据其城。 
现代文：查文徽说： 犹豫就会产生变故，不如乘机占据福州城。 
English: Zha Wenhui said: Hesitation will produce change, it is better to take the opportunity to occupy Fuzhou City.

古文：因引兵径进。
现代文：便带领军队一直前进。
English: He then led the army forward.

古文：诲整众鸣鼓，止于江湄。
现代文：陈诲整顿好部队才击鼓前进，在闽江边上停下来。
English: Only when the troops were well-disciplined and well-organized did they advance to the beat of drums and stop at the edge of the Li River.

古文：文徽不为备，程勒兵出击之，唐兵大败。文徽堕马，为福人所执，士卒死者万人。
现代文：查文徽不作防备，吴程领兵出击，南唐军队大败，查文徽从马上摔下来，被福州人抓获，士卒死亡万人。
English: Chawenhui did not take precautions, Wu Cheng led the troops to attack, the South Tang army was defeated, Chawenhui fell from his horse, was captured by Fuzhou people, and ten thousand soldiers died.

古文：诲全军归剑州。
现代文：陈诲却完整地将军队带回剑州。
English: Chen Yu, however, brought the army back to Jianzhou in its entirety.

古文：程送文徽于钱唐，吴越王弘亻叔献于五庙而释之。
现代文：吴程解送查文徽到钱唐，吴越王钱弘将查文徽作为战利品在祖宗五庙举行献俘礼，然后释放了他。
English: Wu Chengde sent Chawen Hui to Qiantang. Wu Yue Wang Qianhong held a dedication ceremony for Chawen Hui as a trophy in the Five Ancestral Temples, and then released him.

古文：丁亥，汝州奏防御使刘审交卒。
现代文：丁亥，汝州奏报防御使刘审交去世。
English: Dinghai, Ruzhou report defense caused Liu Xianjiao's death.

古文：吏民诣阙上书，以审交有仁政，乞留葬汝州，得奉事其丘垄，诏许之。
现代文：当地官吏百姓到朝廷上书，以刘审交生前有仁政的理由，恳求将其尸体留葬在汝州，以便能够侍奉他的坟墓，后汉隐帝下诏准许。
English: Local officials and citizens wrote to the imperial court, pleading that Liu Xianjia's body be buried in Ruzhou so that it could serve as his tomb, citing the benevolent government that Liu Xianjia led during his lifetime. Later, Emperor Han Ying granted permission.

古文：州人相与聚哭而葬之，以为立祠，岁时享之。
现代文：汝州百姓相互聚集在一起痛哭，安葬了刘审交，为他建立祠堂，按时举行祭祀。
English: The people of Ruzhou gathered together to weep bitterly, buried Liu Xiujiao, built an ancestral hall for him, and held a sacrifice on time.

古文：太师冯道曰： 吾尝为刘君僚佐，观其为政，无以逾人，非能减其租赋，除其徭役也，但推公廉慈爱之心以行之耳。
现代文：太师冯道说： 我曾经做过刘君的同僚，看他的为政，没有超过别人的地方，不能削减租赋，免除徭役，只是能推广公正廉洁慈善仁爱的心并且实行罢了。
English: Grandmaster Feng Dao said, "I was once a colleague of Liu Junlu, and I can see that his way of doing politics is no better than others. He can't reduce rents or exempt people from labor service, but he can promote the spirit of fairness, honesty, charity and benevolence and put it into practice.

古文：此亦众人所能为，但他人不为而刘君独为之，故汝人爱之如此。
现代文：这也是一般人所能做到的，只是别人不做而只有刘君一人去做了，所以汝州百姓如此爱戴他。
English: This is also something that ordinary people can do, but only Liu Jun did it when others wouldn't, which is why the people of Ruzhou love him so much.

古文：使天下二千石皆效其所为，何患得民不如刘君哉！ 
现代文：倘若天下各地方长官都能仿效刘君的作为，何患不像刘君那样获得民心呢！ 
English: If all the local governors in the world can emulate Liu Jun's actions, why not win the hearts of the people like Liu Jun!

古文：甲午，吴越丞相、昭化节度使、同平章事杜建徽卒。
现代文：甲午，吴越丞相、昭化节度使、同平章事杜建徽去世。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Wu Yuezheng, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Zhaohua Jiedu, and Tongping Zhangji Du Jianhui passed away.

古文：乙未，以前永兴节度使越匡赞为左骁卫上将军。
现代文：乙未，后汉隐帝任命前永兴节度使赵匡赞为左骁卫上将军。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Yin appointed the former Yongxing Jiedu to make Zhao Kuanzan the General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：三月，丙午，嘉庆节，鄴都留守高行周、天平节度使慕容彦超、泰宁节度使符彦卿、昭义节度使常思、安远节度使杨信、安国节度使薛怀让、成德节度使武行德、彰德节度使郭瑾、保大留后王饶皆入朝。
现代文：三月，丙午，是后汉隐帝的生日嘉庆节，邺都留守高行周、天平节度使慕容彦超、泰宁节度使符彦卿、昭义节度使常思、安远节度使杨信、安国节度使薛怀让、成德节度使武行德、彰德节度使郭谨、保大留后王饶，都进京入朝祝寿。
English: In March, the afternoon of the 3rd day of the month, it was the Jiaqing Festival, the birthday of Emperor Hou Han Yin. Gao Xing stayed in Beijing for Gao Xing Zhou, Mu Rong Yancha stayed in Beijing for Tianping Festival, Fu Yanqing stayed in Beijing for Taining Festival, Fu Yanqing stayed in Beijing for Shouyi Festival, Yang Xin stayed in Beijing for Anyuan Festival, Xue Huaijian stayed in Beijing for An Guo Festival, Chengde Festival stayed in Beijing for Wu Xing De, Guo Jian stayed in Beijing for Changde Festival, and Bao Dai stayed in Beijing for Wang Rao Festival.

古文：甲寅，诏营寝庙于高祖长陵、世祖原陵，以时致祭。
现代文：甲寅，后汉隐帝下诏在高祖西汉刘邦的长陵、世祖东汉刘秀的原陵营建寝庙，按时举行祭祀。
English: After Emperor Jiajing of the Later Han Dynasty issued an edict to build a mausoleum at the ancestral mausoleum of Liu Bang of the Western Han Dynasty and the ancestral mausoleum of Liu Xiu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, and the rituals were held on time.

古文：有司以费多，寝其事，以至国亡，二陵竟不沾一奠。
现代文：有关承办部门因为费用大，搁置了这件事，直到后汉灭亡，这两处陵墓始终没有享受过一次祭奠。
English: The relevant hosting department shelved the matter because of the high cost, and until the end of the Han Dynasty, these two mausoleums never enjoyed a single tribute.

古文：壬戌，徙高行周为天平节度使，符彦卿为平卢节度使。甲子，徙慕容彦超为泰宁节度使。
现代文：壬戌，后汉隐帝调任高行周为天平节度使，符彦卿为平卢节度使；甲子，调任慕容彦超为泰宁节度使。
English: After the Han Emperor Yingzong, Gao Xingzhou was appointed as the Tianping Festival Commissioner, Fu Yanqing was appointed as the Pinglu Festival Commissioner, and Gao Zi, Murong Hanchao was appointed as the Taining Festival Commissioner.

古文：永安节度使折从阮举族入朝。
现代文：永安节度使折从阮全家族进京入朝。
English: The Yongan Festival is the occasion for the whole Nguyen family to go to Beijing and the DPRK.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰朔，徙薛怀让为匡国节度使。庚午，徙折从阮为武胜节度使。壬申，徙杨信为保大节度使，徒镇国节度使刘词为安国节度使，永清节度使王令温为安远节度使。
现代文：夏季四月，戊辰朔，调任薛怀让为匡国节度使，庚午，调任折从阮为武胜节度使，壬申，调任杨信为保大节度使，调任镇国节度使刘词为安国节度使，永清节度使王令温为安远节度使。
English: In the summer of April, Wu Chenshuo transferred Xue Huaijan as the Kuangguo Festival envoy, Geng Bao transferred from Ruan to Wu Sheng Festival envoy, Jinshin transferred Yang Xin as the Baoda Festival envoy, Zhenguo Festival envoy Liu Zhi as the An Guo Festival envoy, Yongqing Festival envoy Wang Lingwen as the An Yuan Festival envoy.

古文：李守贞之乱，王饶潜与之通。守贞平，众谓饶必居散地。及入朝，厚结史弘肇，迁护国节度使，闻者骇之。
现代文：河中李守贞叛乱，王饶暗中与他勾结，李守贞叛乱被平息，众人以为王饶必定要被贬为冗散闲官；但待到进京入朝，他用重金结交史弘肇，竟升任为护国节度使，听说此事的人都大为惊骇。
English: In the middle of the river, Li Shouzhen rebelled, Wang Rao secretly colluded with him, Li Shouzhen's rebellion was quelled, and everyone thought that Wang Rao would definitely be relegated to a lazy official; but when he entered Beijing and the imperial court, he used heavy money to make friends with Shi Hongzhao, and was promoted to the post of national defense minister. Everyone who heard about this was shocked.

古文：杨邠求解枢密使，帝遣中使谕止之。
现代文：杨邠请求解除自己枢密使的职务，后汉隐帝派遣宫中使者告谕阻止他。
English: Yang Hui requested to be relieved of his duties as a privy envoy, after which Emperor Han Yin sent an envoy to the palace to stop him.

古文：宣徽北院使吴虔裕在旁曰： 枢密重地，难以久居，当使后来者迭为之，相公辞之是也。 
现代文：宣徽北院使吴虔裕在杨身旁说： 枢密院为政务重地，难以长久停留，应当让后来的人轮流担任，相公辞去枢密使的要求是对的。 
English: Wu Qianyu, an envoy of the Northern Yuan of the State Council of Hubei Province, said next to Yang: The Privy Council is an important place for government affairs, and it is difficult to stay there for a long time. It is necessary to let the successors take turns to serve. The request of the minister to resign from the Privy Council is right.

古文：帝闻之，不悦，辛巳，以虔裕为郑州防御使。
现代文：隐帝听说此话，很不高兴，辛巳，任命吴虔裕为郑州防御使。
English: When Emperor Yingdi heard this, he was very unhappy, and appointed Wu Qianyu as the Zhengzhou defense envoy.

古文：朝廷以契丹近入寇，横行河北，诸籓镇各自守，无扞御之者，议以郭威镇鄴都，使督诸将以备契丹。
现代文：后汉朝廷因为契丹军队近来入侵，横行黄河以北地区，诸位藩镇长官各保自身，没有出来抵抗的，便商议任命郭威出镇邺都，让他督率诸将来防备契丹军队。
English: After the Han Dynasty, because the Khitan army had recently invaded and rampaged through the area north of the Yellow River, all the clan and town chiefs protected themselves. If they did not come out to resist, they discussed the appointment of Guo Wei as the town and capital, and let him supervise and lead the future defense of the Khitan army.

古文：史弘肇欲威仍领枢密使，苏逢吉以为故事无之，弘肇曰： 领枢密使则可以便宜从事，诸军畏服，号令行矣。 
现代文：史弘肇想要郭威仍旧兼任枢密使之职，苏逢吉认为无此先例，史弘肇说： 郭威兼领枢密使就可以在外根据情况机断行事，各路军队因此畏惧服从，号令便畅行无阻了。 
English: Shi Hongzhao wanted Guo Wei to still serve concurrently as a privy councillor, Su Fengji thought that there was no precedent for this. Shi Hongzhao said: Guo Wei and leading the privy councillor can act outside according to the situation. All armies are therefore afraid to obey, and the order is unimpeded.

古文：帝卒从弘肇议。
现代文：隐帝最终听从了史弘肇的建议。
English: Emperor Ying finally listened to Shi Hongzhao's suggestion.

古文：弘肇怨逢吉异议，逢吉曰： 以内制外，顺也；今反以外制内，其可乎！ 
现代文：史弘肇怨恨苏逢吉的异议，苏逢吉便说： 用内朝官节制外朝官，是名正言顺的；如今反过来用外朝官来制约内朝官，难道可以吗？ 
English: Shi Hongzhao resented Su Fengji's dissent, and Su Fengji said: It is right and proper to use the inner court officials to restrain the outer court officials; now, on the other hand, is it possible to use the outer court officials to restrain the inner court officials?

古文：壬午，制以威为鄴都留守、天雄节度使，枢密使如故。
现代文：壬午，隐帝下制书任命郭威为邺都留守、天雄节度使、枢密使之职照旧。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Guo Wei was appointed by Emperor Yin to be the Keeper of the Seals, the Keeper of the Imperial Regalia, and the Keeper of the Privy Seal.

古文：仍诏河北，兵甲钱谷，但见郭威文书立皆禀应。
现代文：同时颁布诏书到黄河以北地区，所有军队、武器、钱财、粮草，只要见到郭威签署的文书立即都应接受命令负责提供。
English: At the same time, the edict was issued that in the area north of the Yellow River, all troops, weapons, money, grain and grass, as long as they see the document signed by Guo Wei, should immediately accept the order and be responsible for providing.

古文：明日，朝贵会饮于窦贞固之第，弘肇举大觞属威，厉声曰： 昨日廷议，一何同异！
现代文：第二天，朝廷权贵在窦贞固的宅第聚会宴饮，史弘肇举起大杯向郭威劝酒，厉声说： 昨日朝廷的议论，竟是何等的不同！
English: The next day, the imperial court dignitaries held a banquet at Dou Zhenggu's mansion. Shi Hongzhao raised a large cup to Guo Wei and said: "What a difference from yesterday's discussion at the imperial court!"

古文：今日为弟饮之。 
现代文：今日我与贤弟痛饮此杯。 
English: Today, I drink this cup with my wise brother.

古文：逢吉与杨邠亦举觞曰： 是国家之事，何足介意！ 
现代文：苏逢吉、杨也举杯说： 这都是为国家之事，何必介意！ 
English: Su Fengji and Yang also raised their glasses and said: This is all for the country, why should you mind!

古文：弘肇又厉声曰： 安定国家，在长枪大剑，安用毛锥！ 
现代文：史弘肇又厉声说： 安定国家，靠的是长枪大剑，哪里用得着毛笔啊！ 
English: Shi Hongzhao snapped again: A stable country depends on long guns and swords, what use is a brush!

古文：王章曰： 无毛锥，则财赋何从可出？ 
现代文：王章说： 没有毛笔，那钱财军赋又从何而来呢？ 
English: Wang Zhang said: If there is no brush, where will the money, wealth and military resources come from?

古文：自是，将相始有隙。
现代文：从此文臣武将之间开始有了矛盾。
English: From then on, there was a conflict between the princes and generals.

古文：癸未，罢永安军。
现代文：癸未，后汉撤销永安军。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty revoked the Yongan Army.

古文：壬辰，以左监门卫将军郭荣为贵州刺史、天雄牙内都指挥使。
现代文：壬辰，后汉隐帝任命左监门卫将军郭荣为贵州刺史、天雄牙内都指挥使。
English: In Imjin, after the Han Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong appointed Guo Rong, the general of the left guard of the gate, as the governor of Guizhou and the commander of Tianxiong.

古文：荣本姓柴，父守礼，郭威之妻兄也，威未有子时养以为子。
现代文：郭荣本姓柴，其父柴守礼，是郭威妻子的哥哥，郭威没有儿子时收养郭荣为子。
English: Guo Rong's real surname is Chai. His father, Chai Shouli, is the brother of Guo Wei's wife. When Guo Wei did not have a son, he adopted Guo Rong as his son.

古文：五月，己亥，以府州蕃汉马步都指挥使折德扆为本州团练使。
现代文：五月，已亥，后汉隐帝任命府州蕃汉马步都指挥使折德为府州团练使。
English: In May, already in the Heian period, Emperor Go-Han appointed the commander of the Fuzhou Shih-Han Horse and Bugle Corps, Oride, as the Fuzhou Regimental Training Officer.

古文：德扆，从阮之子也。
现代文：折德是折从阮的儿子。
English: Oritseth is the son of Oritseth Nguyen.

古文：庚子，郭威辞行，言于帝曰： 太后从先帝久，多历天下事，陛下富于春秋，有事宜禀其教而行之。
现代文：庚子，郭威辞别出行，向隐帝进言说： 太后随从先帝很久，经历许多天下之事，陛下年纪尚轻，有大事应当接受太后教导再行动。
English: Geng Zi, Guo Wei said goodbye to the trip and said to the Emperor: The empress dowager has followed the former emperor for a long time and has experienced many things in the world. Your Majesty is still young, and there are important things that should be taught by the empress dowager before taking action.

古文：亲近忠直，放远谗邪，善恶之间，所宜明审。
现代文：亲近忠诚正直的君子，远离谄谀邪恶的小人，善恶的界线，应当仔细分清楚。
English: Stay close to the loyal and honest gentleman, stay away from the wicked villain, and the line between good and evil should be carefully distinguished.

古文：苏逢吉、杨邠、史弘肇皆先帝旧臣，尽忠徇国，愿陛下推心任之，必无败失。
现代文：苏逢吉、杨、史弘肇都是先帝的元老旧臣，尽忠报国，希望陛下放心任用他们，必定不会坏事失误。
English: Su Fengji, Yang, and Shi Hongzhao are all veterans of the former emperor, and they are loyal to the country. I hope that His Majesty will appoint them with confidence and will not make any mistakes.

古文：至于疆场之事，臣愿竭其愚驽，庶不负驱策。 
现代文：至于边疆征战之事，臣下愿竭尽绵薄之力，或许可以不辜负陛下的委托。 
English: As for the frontier campaign, our vassals are willing to do their best, and may perhaps live up to His Majesty's commission.

古文：帝敛容谢之。
现代文：隐帝脸色严肃地告谢。
English: Emperor Inchi looked grave and thanked them.

古文：威至鄴都，以河北困弊，戒边将谨守疆场，严守备，无得出侵掠，契丹入寇，则坚壁清野以待之。
现代文：郭威到达邺都，鉴于黄河以北地区的困难凋弊，告诫边境上的将军谨慎守卫疆界，严密防备，不得外出侵扰抢掠，契丹军队进来侵犯，就采用坚壁清野的办法对付它。
English: Guo Wei arrived in Shandong, in view of the difficulties and hardships in the area north of the Yellow River, he warned the generals on the border to guard the border carefully and closely, not to go out to intrude and plunder, and if the Khitan army came to invade, he would use the method of strong walls and clear fields to deal with it.

古文：辛丑，敕： 防御、团练使，自非军期，无得专奏事，皆先申观察使斟酌以闻。 
现代文：辛丑，后汉隐帝下敕书命令： 各防御使、团练使，如果不是军务机要，不得擅自直接向朝廷进奏言事，都须先申报各地观察使斟酌后再来奏闻。 
English: Sin ugly, after the Han Emperor issued a written order: All defense envoys and regimental training envoys, if they are not required by the military machine, must not report directly to the imperial court without authorization. They must first report to the observation envoys in various regions after consideration.

古文：丙午，以皇弟山南西道节度使承勋为开封尹，加兼中书令，实未出阁。
现代文：丙午，隐帝任命皇弟山南西道节度使刘承勋为开封尹，加官兼任中书令，实际上刘承勋因年纪尚幼并未出就封职。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Emperor Yin appointed Liu Chengxun, the younger brother of the emperor, to the Shannan West Road Festival, and appointed him as the Kaifeng Yin, and the additional official concurrently served as the Zhongshirong. In fact, Liu Chengxun did not take up the appointment because of his young age.

古文：平卢节度使刘铢，贪虐恣横，朝廷欲征之，恐其拒命，因沂、密用兵于唐，遣前沂州刺史郭琼将兵屯青州。
现代文：平卢节度使刘铢，贪婪暴虐，恣意横行，后汉朝廷准备征召他回京，恐怕他抗拒命令，便乘在沂州、密州对南唐用兵的机会，派遗沂州刺史郭琼带领军队驻扎在青州。
English: The Pinglu Festival made Liu Xuan, greedy and tyrannical, wantonly rampant. The post-Han imperial court was preparing to conscript him back to Beijing. I am afraid that he would resist the order. He took the opportunity to use soldiers in Zhangzhou and Mizhou against Nantang, and sent the widow of the state secretary Guo Qiong to lead the army stationed in Qingzhou.

古文：铢不自安，置酒召琼，伏兵幕下，欲害之。琼知其谋，悉屏左右，从容如会，了无惧色，铢不敢发。
现代文：刘铢自感不安，就摆酒设宴召请郭琼，在府署埋伏军士，准备杀害他；郭琼知悉刘铢的阴谋，毅然屏退全部随从，从容赴会，毫无惧色，刘铢于是不敢下手。
English: Liu Bei felt uneasy, so he invited Guo Qiong to a banquet and ambushed the sergeant at the prefectural government office, preparing to kill him; Guo Qiong knew Liu Bei's plot and resolutely withdrew all his followers, went to the meeting calmly and without fear, so Liu Bei did not dare to attack.

古文：琼因谕以祸福，铢感服，诏至即行。
现代文：郭琼乘机说明利害祸福，刘铢被感化折服，等诏书一到，立即上路。
English: Guo Qiong took the opportunity to explain the advantages and disadvantages, and Liu Ye was impressed and convinced. As soon as the edict arrived, he immediately went on his way.

古文：庚戌，铢入朝。
现代文：庚戌，刘铢进京入朝。
English: Geng Xuan and Liu Bei enter Beijing and the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，以琼为颖州团练使。
现代文：辛亥，后汉隐帝任命郭琼为颍州团练使。
English: In Xinhai, after the Han Dynasty, Guo Qiong was appointed as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Regiment.

古文：癸丑，王章置酒会诸朝贵，酒酣，为手势令，史弘肇不闲其事，客省使阎晋卿坐次弘肇，屡教之。
现代文：癸丑，王章设宴聚会各位朝廷显贵，饮酒尽兴，用手势行酒令，史弘肇不熟悉酒令，客省使阎晋卿座位紧挨史弘肇，多次教他。
English: Wang Zhang held a banquet to celebrate the imperial dignitaries. They enjoyed drinking alcohol and ordered wine with gestures. Shi Hongzhao was not familiar with wine orders. The guest provincial envoy Yan Jinqing sat next to Shi Hongzhao and instructed him many times.

古文：苏逢吉戏之曰： 旁有姓阎人，何忧罚爵！ 
现代文：苏逢吉嘲弄史弘肇说： 身旁有姓阎的人，何必担心罚酒！ 
English: Su Fengji mocked Shi Hongzhao and said, "If there is a person with the surname Yan around, why worry about being fined for drinking!

古文：弘肇妻阎氏，本酒家倡也，意逢吉讥之，大怒，以丑语诟逢吉，逢吉不应。
现代文：史弘肇的妻子阎氏，原本是酒家娼妓，史弘肇以为苏逢吉在讥笑阎氏，勃然大怒，用脏话辱骂苏逢吉，苏逢吉不回嘴。
English: Shi Hongzhao's wife, Yan, was originally a tavern prostitute. Thinking that Su Fengji was mocking Yan, Shi Hongzhao flew into a rage and insulted Su Fengji with foul language. Su Fengji did not reply.

古文：弘肇欲殴之，逢吉起去。
现代文：史弘肇要揍他，苏逢吉起身离去。
English: Shi Hongzhao wanted to beat him, Su Fengji got up and left.

古文：弘肇索剑欲追之，杨邠泣止之曰： 苏公宰相，公若杀之，置天子何地，愿孰思之！ 
现代文：史弘肇寻找刀剑要追杀他，杨流着泪劝阻说： 苏公是当朝宰相，您若杀他，将把天子置于何地，望三思啊！ 
English: Shi Hongzhao looked for a sword to chase him, Yang dissuaded him with tears: Su Gong is the prime minister of the day, if you kill him, where will you put the son of heaven, think twice!

古文：弘肇即上马去，邠与之联镳，送至其第而还。
现代文：史弘肇即刻上马离去，杨也上马同他并驾齐驱，送到他的宅第而返回。
English: Shi Hongzhao immediately got on his horse and left. Yang also got on his horse and rode alongside him. They went to his house and returned.

古文：于是将相如水火矣。
现代文：从此文武将相之间的关系就像水火那样不相容了。
English: From then on, the relationship between the two was as incompatible as fire and water.

古文：帝使宣徽使王峻置酒和解之，不能得。
现代文：后汉隐帝派宣徽使王峻摆设酒宴调解将相关系，没能成功。
English: After Emperor Han Ying sent Xuan Hui to ask Wang Jun to arrange a banquet to mediate the relationship, it was not successful.

古文：逢吉欲求出镇以避之，既而中止，曰： 吾去朝廷，止烦史公一处分，吾齑粉矣！ 
现代文：苏逢吉打算请求出任藩镇来避开史弘肇，不久便放弃，说： 我若离开朝廷，只劳史公做个手脚，我便粉身碎骨了。 
English: Su Fengji planned to ask to be appointed as a hanzhen to avoid Shi Hongzhao, but soon gave up, saying: If I leave the imperial court and only work for Shi Gong, I will be crushed.

古文：王章亦忽忽不乐，欲求外官，杨、史固止之。
现代文：王章也闷闷不乐，打算求任外官，杨、史弘肇再三劝阻他。
English: Wang Zhang was also sullen and unhappy. He planned to apply for the post of foreign minister, but Yang and Shi Hongzhao repeatedly dissuaded him.

古文：闰月，宫中数有怪。癸巳，大风雨，发屋拔木，吹郑门扉起，十馀步而落。震死者六七人，水深平地尺馀。
现代文：闰月，后汉宫中多次出现怪事，癸巳，大风狂作，掀屋拔树，吹得京城西南的郑门门扇飞起，扬出十多步才落地，被震死的有六七人，平地水深一尺多。
English: During the leap month, there were many strange occurrences in the Palace of the Later Han Dynasty. Suddenly, the wind blew wildly, uprooting trees, blowing the Zhengmen door fan in the southwest of Beijing to fly up, and it took more than ten steps to land. Six or seven people were killed by the shock, and the water was more than a foot deep on the flat ground.

古文：帝召司天监赵延乂，问以禳祈之术，对曰： 臣之业在天文时日，禳祈非所习也。
现代文：后汉隐帝于是召来司天监赵延，询问祈求消灾免祸的办法，赵延回答说： 臣下的业务在天文历算方面，祭祀祈祷不是我所熟习的。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong then summoned the overseer of heaven, Zhao Yan, to inquire about the method of praying for disaster mitigation and prevention. Zhao Yan replied, "The business of my subjects is in the astronomical calendar, and I am not familiar with the ritual prayer.

古文：然王者欲弭灾异，莫如修德。 
现代文：然而统治天下的人想要消弭灾异，最好的办法不如修行德政。 
English: However, if the rulers of the world want to eliminate disasters, the best way is to practice moral government.

古文：延乂归，帝遣中使问： 如何为修德？ 
现代文：赵延回家，后汉隐帝又派宫中使者去问： 怎样才算是修行德政？ 
English: After Zhao Yan returned home, the Emperor of the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to the palace to ask: What does it mean to practice moral government?

古文：延乂对： 请读《贞观政要》而法之。 
现代文：赵延回答： 请读《贞观政要》而效法它。 
English: Zhao Yan replied: Please read "Zhenguan Zhengyao" and imitate it.

古文：六月，河决郑州。
现代文：六月，黄河在郑州决口。
English: In June, the Yellow River burst its banks in Zhengzhou.

古文：马希萼既败归，乃以书诱辰、溆州及梅山蛮，欲与共击湖南。
现代文：马希萼既已兵败逃归，于是写书信引诱辰州、溆州以及梅山蛮族，打算和他们共同进攻湖南。
English: After he had been defeated and fled back home, he wrote a letter to lure the barbarians from Chenzhou, Zhangzhou and Meishan, intending to attack Hunan together with them.

古文：蛮素闻长沙帑藏之富，大喜，争出兵赴之，遂攻益阳。
现代文：蛮人平素听说长沙国库很富有，非常高兴，争着出兵赶赴前往，随即攻打益阳。
English: The barbarians heard that the Changsha treasury was very rich, and they were very happy. They rushed to send troops to attack Yiyang.

古文：楚王希广遣指挥使陈璠拒之，战于淹溪，璠败死。
现代文：楚王马希广派遣指挥使陈抵抗，在淹溪交战，陈兵败而死。
English: King Ma Xiguang of Chu dispatched a commander to make Chen resist, and they fought in the flooded creek. Chen was defeated and died.

古文：秋，七月，唐归马先进等于吴越以易查文徽。
现代文：秋季七月，南唐归还马先进等战俘给吴越来交换查文徽。
English: In the autumn of July, the Southern Tang Dynasty returned Ma Qianfeng and other prisoners of war to Wu Yuelai in exchange for the Chawen emblem.

古文：马希萼又遣群蛮攻迪田，八月，戊戌，破之，杀其镇将张延嗣。
现代文：马希萼又调遗各蛮族部落进攻迪田，八月，戊戌，攻破迪田，杀死守将张延嗣。
English: Ma Xicai also dispatched barbarian tribes to attack Ditian, and in August, Wu Xi broke through Ditian and killed the guard Zhang Yanji.

古文：楚王希广遣指挥使黄处超救之，处超败死。
现代文：楚王马希广派遣指挥使黄处超援救迪田，黄处超兵败身死。
English: King Ma Xiguang of Chu dispatched a commander to send Huang Decheng Chao to rescue Ditian. Huang Decheng Chao died in the battle.

古文：潭人震恐，复遣牙内指挥使崔洪琏将兵七千屯玉潭。
现代文：潭州人震惊恐慌，又派遣牙内指挥使崔洪琏领兵七千驻扎在玉潭。
English: The people of Tanzhou were shocked and panicked, and sent the commander of the Inner Court to have Cui Hongya lead seven thousand soldiers stationed in Yutang.

古文：庚子，蜀主立其弟仕毅为夔王，仁贽为雅王，仁裕为彭王，仁操为嘉王。
现代文：庚子，后蜀主封立他的弟弟孟仁毅为夔王，孟仁贽为雅王，孟仁裕为彭王，孟仁操为嘉王。
English: Geng Zi, later the Lord of Shu, appointed his brother Meng Renyi as the King of Gong, Meng Renyi as the King of Yao, Meng Renyu as the King of Peng, and Meng Renyu as the King of Jia.

古文：己酉，立子玄喆为秦王，玄珏为褒王。
现代文：已酉，封立他的儿子孟玄为秦王，孟玄珏为褒王。
English: His son Meng Xuan was crowned King of Qin and Meng Xuanqin was crowned King of Bao.

古文：晋李太后在建州，卧病，无医药，惟与晋主仰天号泣，戟手骂杜重威、李守贞曰： 吾死不置汝！ 
现代文：后晋李太后在建州，生病卧床，没有医生药物，只能和后晋出帝石重贵仰天呼喊哭泣，挥手比划大骂杜重威、李守贞道： 我死都不放过你们！ 
English: After the Jin Dynasty, Empress Dowager Li was in Jianzhou. She was sick in bed, and there was no doctor or medicine. She could only shout and cry with the emperors and dignitaries who came out of the Later Jin Dynasty, waving and cursing Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen: I will never let you go!

古文：戊午，卒。
现代文：戊午，李太后去世。
English: In the afternoon, Empress Dowager Li passed away.

古文：周显德中，有自契丹来者云： 晋主及冯后尚无恙，其从者亡归及物故则过半矣。 
现代文：后周显德年间，有从契丹来的人说： 晋出帝和冯后还活着，但他的侍从逃亡回家和过世的却超过一半了。 
English: During the late Zhou Xiande's reign, a person who came from Khitan said: Emperor Jin and Empress Feng are still alive, but more than half of his attendants have fled home or passed away.

古文：马希萼表请别置进奏务于京师。
现代文：马希萼上表后汉朝廷请求在京城另外设置进奏务。
English: After Ma Xi's speech, the Han imperial court requested that an additional entry service be set up in Beijing.

古文：九月，辛巳，诏以湖南已有进奏务，不许。
现代文：九月，辛巳，后汉隐帝下诏书，因湖南在京城已设有进奏务，没有准许。
English: In September, shortly after the Han Emperor issued an edict, because Hunan had already set up a conscription service in Beijing, there was no permission.

古文：亦赐楚王希广诏，劝以敦睦。
现代文：同时也赐楚王马希广诏书，规劝马氏兄弟亲密和睦。
English: At the same time, he also gave the King of Chu, Ma Xiguang, an imperial edict to persuade the Ma brothers to be close and harmonious.

古文：马希萼以朝廷意佑楚王希广，怒，遣使称籓于唐，乞师攻楚。
现代文：马希萼以为后汉朝廷有意袒护楚王马希广，发怒，派遣使者向南唐称臣，请求出兵攻打楚王马希广。
English: Ma Xizhe thought that the later Han Dynasty intended to protect King Ma Xiguang of Chu, and became angry. He sent an envoy to South Tang to appeal to the emperor to send troops to attack King Ma Xiguang of Chu.

古文：唐加希萼同平章事，以鄂州今年租税赐之，命楚州刺史何敬洙将兵助希萼。
现代文：南唐加封马希萼为同平章事，将鄂州当年租税赏赐给他，命令楚州刺史何敬洙领兵援助马希萼。
English: Nantang added Ma Xichai as a peerage, gave him the tax reward of Ezhou that year, and ordered Chuzhou to send troops to aid Ma Xichai.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，希广遣使上表告急，言： 荆南、岭南、江南连谋，欲分湖南之地，乞发兵屯澧州，以扼江南、荆南援朗州之路。 
现代文：冬季，十月，丙午，马希广派遣使者向后汉朝廷上表告急，说：荆南高氏、岭南刘氏、江南李氏连兵谋划，准备瓜分湖南之地，乞求发兵屯驻澧州，用来把守江南、荆南支援朗州的道路。 
English: In the winter, in October, on the afternoon of the third day, Ma Xiguang sent an envoy to the court of the Han Dynasty to express his urgency, saying: The Jingnan Gao, Lingnan Liu, and Jiangnan Li armies are planning and preparing to divide the land of Hunan, and they are begging for troops to be stationed in Ganzhou to guard the south of the river and the roads of Jingnan to support Langzhou.

古文：丁未，以吴越王弘亻叔为诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：丁未，后汉隐帝任命吴越王钱弘为诸道兵马元帅。
English: After Emperor Ding Wei, Emperor Han Ying appointed Wu Yue Wang Qian Hong as the marshal of the armies and horses of all realms.

古文：楚王希广以朗州与山蛮入寇，诸将屡败，忧形于色。
现代文：楚王马希广因为朗州人与山蛮入侵，众将屡吃败仗，面有忧色。
English: King Ma Xiguang of Chu, because of the invasion of the Lanzhou people and the mountain barbarians, the generals were repeatedly defeated, and his face was gloomy.

古文：刘彦瑫言于希广曰： 朗州兵不满万，马不满千，都府精兵十万，何忧不胜！
现代文：刘彦对马希广说： 朗州军队不到一万，马匹不到一千，您有精兵十万，为什么担忧不能取胜！
English: Liu Yan said to Ma Xiguang: Lanzhou's army is less than ten thousand, horses are less than one thousand, you have one hundred thousand elite soldiers, why worry about not winning!

古文：愿假臣兵万馀人，战舰百五十艘，径入朗州缚取希萼，以解大王之忧。 
现代文：望给我军队一万余人，战舰一百五十艘，直接攻入朗州城捉拿马希萼，以解大王心头忧愁。 
English: He hoped to give me an army of more than ten thousand people and one hundred and fifty warships to directly invade the city of Lanzhou and capture Ma Xicai, so as to relieve the great king's sadness.

古文：王悦，以彦瑫为战棹都指挥使、朗州行营都统。
现代文：楚王听了很高兴，任命刘彦为战棹都指挥使、朗州行营都统。
English: King Chu was very pleased to hear this and appointed Liu Yan as the commander of the Warring States and the commander of the Langzhou Campaign.

古文：彦瑫入朗州境，父老争以牛酒犒军，曰： 百姓不愿从乱，望都府之兵久矣！ 
现代文：刘彦进入朗州地界，父老乡亲争着用牛、酒来犒劳军队，说： 我们百姓不愿意跟从乱党，盼望楚王的军队已很久了。 
English: When Liu Yan entered the territory of Langzhou, his father and fellow villagers fought to reward the army with cattle and wine, saying: Our people are not willing to follow the ruffian, and have been looking forward to King Chu's army for a long time.

古文：彦瑫厚赏之。战舰过，则运竹木以断其后。
现代文：刘彦重赏大家；战舰驶过以后，就运来毛竹木头来截断后路。
English: Liu Yan appreciated everyone; after the warship sailed past, he brought bamboo logs to cut off the back way.

古文：是日，马希萼遣朗兵及蛮兵六千、战舰百艘逆战于湄州。彦瑫乘风纵火以焚其舰，顷之，风回，反自焚。
现代文：这一天，马希萼调遣朗州军队和蛮族军队六千、战舰百艘在湄州迎战，刘彦乘着风势放火来焚烧朗州的战舰，一会儿，风向回转，反过来烧了自己的战舰。
English: On this day, Ma Xicai dispatched six thousand Langzhou troops and barbarian troops, and one hundred warships to fight in Meizhou. Liu Yan took advantage of the wind to set fire to burn the warships of Langzhou. For a while, the wind direction turned around and burned his own warships in turn.

古文：彦瑫还走，江路已断，士卒战及溺死者数千人。
现代文：刘彦调头逃跑，但水路已经截断，士兵战死的以及淹死的有数千人。
English: Liu Yan turned to flee, but the waterway had been cut off, and thousands of soldiers were killed in battle and drowned.

古文：希广闻之，涕泣不知所为。
现代文：马希广闻讯，哭得不知做什么是好。
English: Ma Xiguang heard the news, cried and did not know what to do.

古文：希广平日罕颁赐，至是，大出金帛以取悦于士卒。
现代文：马希广平时很少颁发赏赐，到这时，也拿出大量金钱绢帛来博取士兵的欢心。
English: Ma Xiguang rarely gave out rewards in normal times, but at this time, he also took out a large amount of money to win the favor of the soldiers.

古文：或告天策左司马希崇流言惑众，反状已明，请杀之。
现代文：有人告发天策左司马马希崇散布流言，扰乱人心，谋反的征状已经很明显，请求杀死他。
English: Some people accused Tianze Zuosima Ma Xitong of spreading rumors and disturbing people's hearts, and the signs of rebellion were already obvious, and asked to kill him.

古文：希广曰： 吾自害其弟，何以见先王于地下！ 
现代文：马希广说： 我亲手来杀害自己的兄弟，还有什么脸面去见九泉之下的先王！ 
English: Mahikang said: I have come with my own hands to kill my own brother, what other face is there to see the former king under the nine springs!

古文：马军指挥使张晖将兵自他道击朗州，至龙阳，闻彦瑫败，退屯益阳。
现代文：马军指挥使张晖领兵从别的路进攻朗州，到达龙阳，听说刘彦兵败，便后退屯驻益阳。
English: The commander of the horse army sent Zhang Ye to lead the troops to attack Langzhou from another road and arrived in Longyang. When he heard that Liu Yan was defeated, he retreated and settled in Yiyang.

古文：希萼又遣指挥使硃进忠等将兵三千急攻益阳，张晖绐其众曰： 我以麾下出贼后，汝辈留城中待我，相与合势击之。 
现代文：马希萼又调遣指挥使朱进忠等领兵三千急攻益阳，张晖欺骗部众说： 我带帐下的亲兵出城赶到贼军后面，你们留守城中等待我，然后一起合力攻击敌人。 
English: Ma Xicai also dispatched commanders to make Zhu Jinzhong and other leaders of three thousand soldiers attack Yiyang in a hurry. Zhang Ye deceived the people and said: I took my own soldiers out of the city and rushed to the rear of the thief army. You stay in the city to wait for me, and then work together to attack the enemy.

古文：既出，遂自竹头市遁归长沙。
现代文：张晖已出益阳，就从竹头市跑回长沙。
English: Zhang Ye had already left Yiyang and ran back to Changsha from the city of Zhuto.

古文：朗兵知城中无主，急击之，士卒九千馀人皆死。
现代文：朗州军队得知城中没有主帅，加紧攻击，守城九千多士兵全部战死。
English: When the Lanzhou army learned that there was no commander in the city, they stepped up their attack. All of the more than nine thousand soldiers defending the city died in the battle.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔归查文徽于唐，文徽得喑疾，以工部尚书致仕。
现代文：吴越王钱弘让查文徽返归南唐。查文徽患哑疾，以工部尚书之职退休。
English: King Qianhong of Wuyue allowed Chawenhui to return to Southern Tang. Chawenhui suffered from a mute disease and retired as a clerk in the Ministry of Industry.

古文：十一月，甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，甲子朔，出现日食。
English: In November, at the turn of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：蜀太师、中书令宋忠武王赵廷隐卒。
现代文：后蜀太师、中书令宋忠武王赵廷隐去世。
English: Later, Zhao Tingyin, the Grand Master of the Shu Dynasty and the King of Song Zhongwu, passed away.

古文：楚王希广遣其僚属孟骈说马希萼曰： 公忘父兄之仇，北面事唐，何异袁谭求救于曹公邪！ 
现代文：楚王马希广派遣他的幕僚孟骈劝说马希萼道： 您忘记父兄的仇敌，臣服南唐，与东汉末年的袁谭向曹操求救有什么不同呢！ 
English: King Ma Xiguang of Chu dispatched his chief of staff, Meng Yao, to persuade Ma Xiguang: You have forgotten the enemies of your father and brother, and submitted to the Southern Tang Dynasty. What is the difference between this and Yuan Tan asking Cao Cao for help at the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty?

古文：希萼将斩之，骈曰： 古者兵交，使在其间，骈若爱死，安肯此来！
现代文：马希萼将要斩他的头，孟骈说： 古代两军交战，使者可以来往其间。我孟骈倘若吝惜一死，岂肯到这里来！
English: Meng Yao was about to chop off his head. Meng Yao said, "In ancient times, two armies were at war, and envoys could travel between them. If I, Meng Yao, were willing to die, would I come here?"

古文：骈之言非私于潭人，实为公谋也。 
现代文：我的话并非出于潭州人的私利，实在是为您考虑啊。 
English: My words are not motivated by the selfish interests of the people of Tanzhou, but are really for your consideration.

古文：乃释之，使还报曰： 大义绝矣，非地下不相见也！ 
现代文：马希萼这才放了孟骈，让他返归回答说： 兄弟的情义已经断了，不到九泉之下不再相见！ 
English: It was only then that Ma Xicai released Meng Yao and let him return, replying: The brotherly feeling has been broken, and we will not see each other again for at least another nine years!

古文：硃进忠请希萼自将兵取潭州，辛未，希萼留其子光赞守朗州，悉发境内之兵趣长沙，自称顺天王。
现代文：朱进忠请求马希萼亲自领兵攻取潭州。辛未，马希萼留下他的儿子马光赞镇守朗州，调发境内全部军队直奔长沙，自称顺天王。
English: Zhu Jinzhong asked Ma Xicai to personally lead the troops to capture Tanzhou. Soon after, Ma Xicai left his son Ma Guangzan to guard Langzhou, and sent all the troops in the territory straight to Changsha, claiming to be Shun Tianwang.

古文：诏侍卫步军都指挥使、宁江节度使王殷将兵屯澶州以备契丹。
现代文：后汉隐帝下诏书命侍卫步军都指挥使、宁江节度使王殷领兵驻扎在澶州来防备契丹入侵。
English: Later, Emperor Han Yin issued an edict ordering all the guards and foot soldiers to be sent to the capital, and the Ningjiang Festival ordered Wang Yin to lead the troops stationed in Zhangzhou to prevent the Khitan invasion.

古文：殷，瀛州人也。
现代文：王殷是瀛州人。
English: Wang Yin is from Zhangzhou.

古文：朝廷议发兵，以安远节度使王令温为都部署，以救潭州，会内难作，不果。
现代文：后汉朝廷讨论出兵，任命安远节度使王令温为都部署，以援救潭州，正好遇上内乱发生，没有成行。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the imperial court discussed the dispatch of troops, appointed Anyuan Jiedu to deploy Wang Lingwen to the capital to rescue Tanzhou, just in case of civil unrest, but it did not take place.

古文：帝自即位以来，枢密使、右仆射、同平章事杨邠总机政，枢密使兼侍中郭威主征伐，归德节度使、侍卫亲军都指挥使兼中书令史弘肇典宿卫，三司使、同平章事王章掌财赋。
现代文：后汉隐帝从即位以来，枢密使、右仆射、同平章事杨总理机要政务，枢密使兼侍中郭威主持征战，归德节度使、侍卫亲军都指挥使兼中书令史弘肇典领京城警卫，三司使、同平章事王章掌管财政赋税。
English: Since the enthronement of Emperor Han, Prime Minister Yang has been entrusted with important government affairs by the Privy Envoy, the Right Footman, and the Coadjutor, Guo Wei, the Privy Envoy and Coadjutor, who presided over the expedition, the Returning Officer, the Commander of the Imperial Guards, the Coadjutor and Coadjutor, Shi Hongzhao, who led the guards of Beijing, and the Third Secretary, the Coadjutor, and the Coadjutor, Wang Zhang, who was in charge of finance and taxation.

古文：邠颇公忠，退朝，门无私谒，虽不却四方馈遗，有馀辄献之。
现代文：杨十分秉公忠心，退朝回家，门下没有私人拜会，虽然不拒绝四方的馈赠，但有多余的就进献皇上。
English: Yang Zhen, upholding justice and loyalty, retired to his home, and there was no private visitation under his door. Although he did not refuse the gifts from the four parties, he presented the surplus to the emperor.

古文：弘肇督察京城，道不拾遗。
现代文：史弘肇负责京城治安，路上丢了东西没有人捡。
English: Shi Hongzhao is responsible for the security of Beijing. If you lose something on the road, no one will pick it up.

古文：是时承契丹荡覆之馀，公私困竭，章捃摭遗利，吝于出纳，以实府库。
现代文：这时正好紧承契丹大乱中原之后，官府、百姓的财力困难拮据。
English: At this time, right after the Central Plains of the Khitan War, the government and the people were experiencing financial difficulties.

古文：属三叛连衡，宿兵累年而供馈不乏。及事平，赐予之外，尚有馀积，以是国家粗安。
现代文：王章搜集点滴余利，节约开支，以此充实国库，虽然跟着就有李守贞、王景崇、赵思绾的三镇叛乱互相勾结，却用兵多年而供应没有短缺；到了事态平息，除赏赐之外，还有积余，因此国家基本安定。
English: Wang Zhang collected surplus profits bit by bit and saved expenses to replenish the national treasury. Although the three-town rebellion of Li Shuzhen, Wang Jingzhong and Zhao Siyu colluded with each other, they used soldiers for many years and there was no shortage of supply. When the situation calmed down, there was a surplus in addition to rewards, so the country was basically stable.

古文：章聚敛刻急。
现代文：王章征集赋税苛刻严厉。
English: Wang Zhang was very strict in collecting taxes.

古文：旧制，田税每斛更输二升，谓之 雀鼠耗 ，章始令更输二斗，谓之 省耗 ；旧钱出入皆以八十为陌，章台令入者八十，出者七十七，谓之 省陌 ；有犯盐、麹、酒麹之禁，锱铢涓滴，罪皆死；由是百姓愁怨。
现代文：以前规定，田税每斛之外再交二升，叫做 雀鼠耗 ，王章开始下令再交二斗，称做 省耗 ；以前钱币的付出、收入都以八十文为 陌 ，王章开始下令收入的以八十文为 陌 ，付出的以七十七文为 陌 ，称做 省陌  有违反盐、矾、酒曲禁令的，即使只有一两一钱、一点一滴，也都定为死罪；百姓因此忧愁怨恨。
English: Previously, it was stipulated that in addition to the rice field tax, two liters were to be paid for each mu, which was called "squirrel consumption," and Wang Zhang began to order two more doos to be paid, which was called "conservation consumption." Previously, the payment and income of coins were both 80 mon, and Wang Zhang began to order the income to be 80 mon, and the payment to be 77 mon, which was called "conservation consumption consumption." If there was a violation of the ban on salt, gourd, and liquor, even if it was only one or two money, bit by bit, it was considered a capital offense; the people were therefore sad and resentful.

古文：章尤不喜文臣，尝曰： 此辈授之握算，不知纵横，何益于用！ 
现代文：王章特别不喜欢文官，曾经说： 这帮人交给他一把筹码，也不知道如何摆弄，有什么用处！ 
English: Wang Zhang particularly dislikes civil servants. He once said: "These people give him a bunch of chips, and they don't know how to play with them, what's the use!

古文：俸禄皆以不堪资军者给之，吏已高其估，章更增之。
现代文：文官的俸禄都以不能用于军事的供给，有关官吏已对文官俸禄超值估算，王章又再增加。
English: The salaries of civil servants are all based on supplies that cannot be used for military purposes. Relevant officials have estimated the excess value of civil servants' salaries, and the king's medals have been increased again.

古文：帝左右嬖倖浸用事，太后亲戚亦干预朝政，邠等屡裁抑之。
现代文：后汉隐帝的左右宠臣逐渐被任用，太后的亲戚也干预朝政，杨等屡次加以裁减抑制。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong's favorites on both the right and the left were gradually appointed, the empress dowager's relatives also intervened in court politics, and Yang and others repeatedly curtailed and suppressed them.

古文：太后有故人子求补军职，弘肇怒而斩之。
现代文：太后有个旧友的儿子要求补个军职，史弘肇发怒斩了他。
English: When the son of an old friend of the empress dowager asked to fill a military post, Shi Hongzhao angrily beheaded him.

古文：武德使李业，太后之弟也，高祖使掌内帑，帝即位，尤蒙宠任。
现代文：武德使李业，是太后的弟弟，后汉高祖让他掌管宫内财物，到了后汉隐帝即位，他特别受到宠幸信任。
English: Li Ye, the younger brother of the empress dowager, was appointed by Emperor Wu to be in charge of the palace's property. He was especially favored and trusted when Emperor Wu ascended the throne.

古文：会宣徽使阙，业意欲之，帝及太后亦讽执政；邠、弘肇以为内使迁补有次，不可以外戚超居，乃止。
现代文：适逢宣徽使空缺，李业心想补缺，后汉隐帝和太后也给执政官打了招呼；杨、史弘肇认为内朝使职的升迁递补有规定次序，不能因为外戚而越级担任，于是作罢。
English: Li Ye wanted to fill the vacancy caused by Xuan Hui, and Emperor Han Yin and Empress Dowager Cixi also sent greetings to the consul. Yang and Shi Hongzhao believed that there was a prescribed order for the promotion and transfer of officials in the Inner Court, and they could not be promoted because they were relatives, so they quit.

古文：内客省使阎晋卿次当为宣徽使，久而不补。枢密承旨聂文进、飞龙使后匡赞、翰林茶酒使郭允明皆有宠于帝，久不迁官，共怨执政。
现代文：内朝客省使阎晋卿按次序应当担任宣徽使，但迟迟没有递补；枢密承旨聂文进、飞龙使后匡赞、翰林茶酒使郭允明都得到后汉隐帝的宠爱，却长时间没有升官，因此共同怨恨执政官。
English: Yan Jinqing, the imperial envoy to the Inner Court and Hakka Province, was supposed to serve as the imperial envoy to proclaim the imperial coat of arms in order, but he did not submit it in a timely manner; the imperial envoy to the Inner Court and Hakka Province, Xing Wenjin, the imperial envoy to the Inner Court and Hakka Empire, Hou Kuang Zan, and the imperial envoy to the Inner Court and Hakka Empire, Guo Yunming, were all favored by the Emperor of the Later Han, but they were not promoted for a long time, so they all resented the consul.

古文：文进，并州人也。
现代文：聂文进是并州人。
English: Yan Wenjin is a native of Nianzhou.

古文：刘铢罢青州归，久奉朝请，未除官，常戟手于执政。
现代文：刘铢免职从青州归来，长期闲散无事，没有委派职务，故此经常用手对执政官指指戳戳怨恨他。
English: When Liu Ye returned from Qingzhou after being relieved of his duties, he had been idle for a long time and had not been assigned any duties. Therefore, he often poked and prodded the consul with his finger to spite him.

古文：帝初除三年丧，听乐，赐伶人锦袍、玉带。
现代文：隐帝刚解除高祖的三年之丧，就听音乐，赏赐优伶锦袍、玉带。
English: As soon as Emperor Yingzong lifted the three-year mourning period for Gao Zu, he listened to music and rewarded him with a fine brocade robe and a jade belt.

古文：伶人诣弘肇谢，弘肇怒曰： 士卒守边苦战，犹未有以赐之，汝曹何功而得此！ 
现代文：优伶到史弘肇处告谢，史弘肇大怒道： 将士守卫边疆殊死苦战尚且没有赏赐这些，你们这等人有什么功劳得到锦袍、玉带！ 
English: The superior officers went to Shihong Zhao's office to thank him, but Shihong Zhao became very angry and said, "The soldiers who guarded the border and fought to the death have not been awarded these things, so what merit do you people have to get a brocade robe and a jade belt!

古文：皆夺以还官。
现代文：随即全部没收还归官府。
English: All the confiscated items were then returned to the authorities.

古文：帝欲立所幸耿夫人为后，邠以为太速。夫人卒，帝欲以后礼葬之，邠复以为不可。
现代文：后汉隐帝想立所宠爱的耿夫人为皇后，杨认为太快；耿夫人去世，隐帝想用皇后之礼安葬，杨又认为不可。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Inti wanted to make his beloved Lady Geng the empress, which Yang thought was too fast; Lady Geng died, Emperor Inti wanted to be buried with the salute of the empress, which Yang also thought was impossible.

古文：帝年益壮，厌为大臣所制。
现代文：后汉隐帝年龄渐渐增大，讨厌被大臣所制约。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong's age gradually increased, and he disliked being restricted by ministers.

古文：邠、弘肇尝议事于帝前，帝曰： 审图之，勿令人有言！ 
现代文：杨、史弘肇曾在隐帝面前议论政事，隐帝说： 仔细考虑，不要让人有闲话！ 
English: Yang and Shi Hongzhao once discussed politics in front of Emperor Yingdi. Emperor Yingdi said: Think carefully, don't let people gossip!

古文：邠曰： 陛下但禁声，有臣等在。 
现代文：杨说： 陛下只管闭口不出声，有我们在。 
English: Yang said, "Your Majesty, just keep your mouth shut. We're here."

古文：帝积不能平，左右因乘间谮之于帝云： 邠等专恣，终当为乱。 
现代文：隐帝的积怨久不能平，左右宠臣就乘机向隐帝进谗言说： 杨等人专横跋扈肆无忌惮，最终定当犯上作乱。 
English: The hidden emperor's accumulated grudge could not be settled for a long time, and the right and left favorite ministers took the opportunity to slander the hidden emperor, saying: Yang and others were arrogant and unscrupulous, and eventually they would be guilty of creating a disturbance.

古文：帝信之。
现代文：隐帝听信了这话。
English: The emperor believed her.

古文：尝夜闻作坊锻声，疑有急兵，达旦不寐。
现代文：隐帝曾经夜里听到手工作坊打铁声响，怀疑有人在紧急赶制兵器，到天亮都没入睡。
English: Emperor Inti once heard the sound of a workshop hammering iron in the night, suspected that someone was rushing to make weapons, and did not fall asleep until dawn.

古文：司空、同平章事苏逢吉既与弘肇有隙，知李业等怨弘肇，屡以言激之。
现代文：司空、同平章事苏逢吉已与史弘肇有了隔阂，知道李业等人怨恨史弘肇，就多次用言语激他们。
English: Siku and Tongping Zhangji Su Fengji had already been estranged from Shi Hongzhao, and knowing that Li Ye and others resented Shi Hongzhao, he repeatedly provoked them with words.

古文：帝遂与业、文进、匡赞、允明谋诛邠等，议既定，入白太后。
现代文：隐帝于是和李业、聂文进、后匡赞、郭允明谋划诛杀杨等人，商议已定，入内禀告太后。
English: Emperor Inti then plotted with Li Ye, Gong Wenjin, Hou Kuanzan, and Guo Yunming to kill Yang and others, and it was decided to inform the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后曰： 兹事何可轻发！
现代文：太后说： 这事怎么可轻举妄动！
English: The empress dowager said: "How can this be done so carelessly!

古文：更宜与宰相议之。 
现代文：应该再同宰相商议。 
English: The Prime Minister should be consulted again.

古文：业时在旁，曰： 先帝尝言，朝廷大事不可谋及书生，懦怯误人。 
现代文：李业当时在旁边，说： 先帝曾经说过，朝廷大事不可同书生谋划，书生胆小怕事会误事害人。 
English: Li Ye, who was nearby at the time, said: The former emperor once said that the imperial court should not plan major events with scholars, and scholars should not be afraid that things will go wrong and harm people.

古文：太后复以为言，帝忿曰： 国家之事，非闺门所知！ 
现代文：太后又重复她刚才所说的话，隐帝于是生气地说： 国家大事，不是闺门女人所能知晓的！ 
English: The empress dowager repeated what she had just said, and Emperor Hentai angrily said, "National events are not something that a young lady can know about!"

古文：拂衣而出。
现代文：拂袖而出。
English: He stormed off.

古文：乙亥，业等以其谋告阎晋卿，晋卿恐事不成，诣弘肇第欲告之，弘肇以他故辞不见。
现代文：乙亥，李业等将他们的密谋告诉阎晋卿，阎晋卿恐怕事情不成，到史弘肇宅第想报告他，史弘肇因为别的事推辞不见。
English: Yi Hai, Li Ye and others told their conspiracy to Yan Jinlu. Yan Jinlu was afraid that things would not work out and wanted to go to Shi Hongzhao's house to report to him. However, Shi Hongzhao did not show up because of other reasons.

古文：丙子旦，邠等入朝，有甲士数十自广政殿出，杀邠、弘肇、章于东庑下。文进亟召宰相、朝臣班于崇元殿，宣云： 邠等谋反，已伏诛，与卿等同庆！ 
现代文：丙子早晨，杨等上朝，有几十名全副武装的武士从广政殿出来，在东面廊屋下杀死杨、史弘肇、王章，聂文进立刻召集宰相、朝臣在崇元殿按朝班排列，宣旨说： 杨等人谋划造反，已经伏罪处决，与诸位共同庆贺。 
English: In the morning of the third day, when Yang et al. went to court, dozens of fully armed warriors came out of the Guangzheng Hall and killed Yang, Shi Hongzhao, and Wang Zhang under the east porch. Yu Wenjin immediately summoned the prime minister and courtiers to line up in the morning shift at the Chongyuan Hall and issued a decree saying: "Yang et al. plotted a rebellion and have been executed in an ambush. Let's celebrate together."

古文：又召诸军将校至万岁殿庭，帝亲谕之，且曰： 邠等以稚子视朕，朕今始得为汝主，汝辈免横忧矣！ 
现代文：又召集各军将校到万岁殿庭中，隐帝亲自向他们宣布了这事，并且说： 杨等人把朕当作小孩子来看待，朕今日开始得为你们的君主，你们从此免除权臣专横的忧患了。 
English: He also summoned the army officers to the court of the Long Live the Emperor, and announced the matter to them in person, saying, "Yang and the others treat me like a child. Today, I have become your sovereign. From now on, you will be free from the tyrannical grief of the ministers of state."

古文：皆拜谢而退。
现代文：众人全都拜谢退下。
English: Everyone bowed and retreated.

古文：又召前节度使、刺史等升殿谕之，分遣使者帅骑收捕邠等亲戚、党与、傔从，尽杀之。
现代文：隐帝又召集在京前节度使、刺史等上殿宣布此事，分头派遗使者率领骑兵逮捕杨等人的亲属、党羽、随从，全部杀死。
English: Emperor Inchi also summoned the imperial envoy and the imperial historian to the palace in front of the capital to announce the matter, and dispatched an emissary to lead the cavalry to arrest Yang's relatives, party members and followers, and killed them all.

古文：弘肇待侍卫步军都指挥使王殷尤厚，邠等死，帝遣供奉官孟业赍密诏诣澶州及鄴都，令镇宁节度使李洪义杀殷，又令鄴都行营马军都指挥使郭崇威、步军都指挥使真定曹威杀郭威及监军、宣徽使王峻。
现代文：史弘肇对侍卫步军都指挥使王殷特别厚待，杨等死后，隐帝派遣供奉官孟业携带绝密诏书到澶州以及邺都，命令镇宁节度使李洪义杀死王殷，又命令邺都行营马军都指挥使郭崇威、步军都指挥使真定人曹威杀死郭威以及监军、宣徽使王峻。
English: Shi Hongzhao gave special treatment to Wang Yin, the commander of the bodyguards and marching troops. After the death of Yang Gang, the Hidden Emperor sent Meng Ye, the official of the imperial court, to carry the top-secret edict to Zhangzhou and Shandong. He ordered Zhenning Jiedu to have Li Hongyi kill Wang Yin. He also ordered Guo Chongwei, the commander of the horse army and the marching troops to go to Shandong and Zhending Cao Wei, the commander of the marching troops and the marching troops to kill Guo Wei, as well as Wang Jun, the overseer of the army and the herald of the imperial seal.

古文：洪义，太后之弟也。
现代文：李洪义是太后的弟弟。
English: Li Hongyi is the younger brother of the empress dowager.

古文：又急诏征天平军节度使高行周、平卢节度使符彦卿、永兴节度使郭从义、泰宁节度使慕容彦超、匡国节度使薛怀让、郑州防御使吴虔裕、陈州刺史李谷入朝。
现代文：又紧急下诏征调天平节度使高行周、平卢节度使符彦卿、永兴节度使郭从义、泰宁节度使慕容彦超、匡国节度使薛怀让、郑州防御使吴虔裕、陈州刺史李进京入朝。
English: He also issued an urgent edict to adjust the scales of Tianping Festival to Gao Xing Zhou, Pinglu Festival to Fu Yanqing, Yongxing Festival to Guo Zongyi, Taining Festival to Murong Yanchao, Kuangguo Festival to Xue Huai Zhan, Zhengzhou Defense Festival to Wu Qianyu, and Chenzhou Defense Festival to Li Jinjing.

古文：以苏逢吉权知枢密院事，前平卢节度使刘铢权知开封府，侍卫马军都指挥使李洪建权判侍卫同事，内侍省使阎晋卿权侍卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：任命苏逢吉临时主持枢密院事务，前平卢节度使刘铢临时主持开封府事务，侍卫马军都指挥使李洪建临时兼管侍卫司事务，内侍省使阎晋卿代理侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: Su Fengji was appointed to temporarily preside over the affairs of the Privy Council, the former Pinglu Festival made Liu Wei temporarily preside over the affairs of the Kaifeng Government, the commander of the Horse Guards and Horse Troops made Li Hongjian temporarily take charge of the affairs of the Horse Guards and Horse Troops, and the deputy commander of the Horse Guards and Horse Troops made Yan Jinqing, the envoy of the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：洪建，业之兄也。
现代文：李洪建是李业的哥哥。
English: Li Hongjian is the elder brother of Li Jing.

古文：时中外人情忧骇，苏逢吉虽恶弘肇，而不预李业等谋，闻变惊愕，私谓人曰： 事太匆匆，主上倘以一言见问，不至于此。 
现代文：当时朝廷内外人心惶惶，苏逢吉虽然厌恶史弘肇，但没有参预李业等人密谋，闻悉事变陡然一惊，私下里对人说： 事情干得太草率，皇上倘若有一语问我，绝不会到这个地步！ 
English: At that time, people inside and outside the imperial court were panicking. Although Su Fengji detested Shi Hongzhao, he did not participate in the conspiracy of Li Ye and others. When he heard about the sudden turn of events, he was surprised. Privately, he said to people: Things were done too hastily. If the emperor had asked me a question, it would never have come to this!

古文：业等命刘铢诛郭威、王峻之家，铢极其惨毒，婴孺无免者。
现代文：李业等命令刘铢诛杀郭威、王峻的家属，刘铢极其残忍，连婴儿小孩都没有幸免于难的。
English: Li Ye and others ordered Liu Ye to kill Guo Wei and Wang Jun's family members. Liu Ye was extremely cruel, and even babies and children did not survive.

古文：命李洪建诛王殷之家，洪建但使人守视，仍饮食之。
现代文：命令李洪建诛杀王殷的家属，李洪建只派人守卫监视，仍旧供应饮食。
English: He ordered Li Hongjian to kill Wang Yin's family members. Li Hongjian only sent guards to keep watch, but continued to provide food and drink.

古文：丁丑，使者至澶州，李洪义畏懦，虑王殷已知其事，不敢发，乃引孟业见殷。殷囚业，遣副使陈光穗以密诏示郭威。
现代文：丁丑，使者到达澶州，李洪义畏缩胆怯，顾虑王殷已经知道此事，不敢动手，于是带着孟业去见王殷；王殷囚禁孟业，派遗副使陈光穗把绝密诏书拿给郭威看。
English: Ding Yuxi, the envoy arrived in Zhangzhou, Li Hongyi cowered in fear, worried that Wang Yin already knew about the matter and did not dare to take action, so he took Meng Ye to see Wang Yin; Wang Yin imprisoned Meng Ye and sent his deputy to ask Chen Guanghui to show the top secret edict to Guo Wei.

古文：威召枢密吏魏仁浦，示以诏书曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：郭威召见枢密吏魏仁浦，把诏书拿给他看，说： 怎么办？ 
English: Guo Wei summoned the Privy Councilor Wei Rimpu, showed him the edict, and said, "What should we do?

古文：仁浦曰： 公，国之大臣，功名素著，加之握强兵，据重镇，一旦为群小所构，祸出非意，此非辞说所能解。
现代文：魏仁浦说： 您是国家的大臣，功勋名声素来卓著，加上掌握强兵，据守重镇，一旦被小人们所诬陷，灾祸出于不测，这不是用言词所能排解的。
English: Wei Rimpu said: You are the minister of the country, your reputation for merit has always been outstanding, coupled with the mastery of strong soldiers, according to the protection of important towns, once framed by small people, the disaster is due to accidents, this is not something that can be resolved with words.

古文：时事如此，不可坐而待死。 
现代文：事态已经如此，不可坐着等待。 
English: The situation is such that we cannot sit and wait.

古文：威乃召郭崇威、曹威及诸将，告以杨邠等冤死及有密诏之状，且曰： 吾与诸公，披荆棘，从先帝取天下，受托孤之任，竭力以卫国家，今诸公已死，吾何心独生！
现代文：郭威于是召集郭崇威、曹威以及众将，告知杨等人蒙冤屈死以及有绝密诏书的情况，并且说： 我与杨等人，披荆斩棘，跟随先帝夺取天下，接受托孤的重任，尽心竭力保卫国家，如今他们已死，我还有什么心思独自活着！
English: Guo Wei then summoned Guo Chong Wei, Cao Wei and the generals to inform them of the unjust death of Yang et al. and the situation of the top secret edict, and said: I and Yang et al. have made every effort to follow the former emperor to conquer the world, accept the heavy responsibility of being left behind, and do my best to defend the country. Now that they are dead, I have no intention of living alone!

古文：君辈当奉行诏书，取吾首以报天子，庶不相累。 
现代文：各位应当执行诏书指令，斩取我的脑袋来禀报天子，大概能不受牵累。 
English: You should carry out the edict of the imperial edict, cut off my head to report to the emperor, and you will probably not be involved.

古文：郭崇威等皆泣曰： 天子幼冲，此必左右群小所为，若使此辈得志，国家其得安乎！
现代文：郭崇威等都流着泪说： 天子年少，这必定是天子身边小人们所干的，倘若让这帮小人得志，国家岂能得到安宁！
English: Guo Chongwei and others all shed tears and said, "The Son of Heaven is too young, this must have been done by the small people around the Son of Heaven. If these small people are allowed to succeed, the country will not be able to find peace!"

古文：崇威愿从公入朝自诉，荡涤鼠辈以清朝廷，不可为单使所杀，受千载恶名。 
现代文：我郭崇威情愿跟从您进京入朝亲自申诉，扫除无能鼠辈来肃清朝廷污浊，切不可被一个使者所杀，蒙受千古恶名。 
English: I, Guo Chongwei, would like to follow you to Beijing to personally appeal to the DPRK and sweep away the incompetent rats to clean up the filth of the imperial court. I must not be killed by an envoy and receive a bad reputation for thousands of years.

古文：翰林天文赵修已谓郭威曰： 公徒死何益！
现代文：翰林天文赵修己对郭威说： 您白白送死有什么好处！
English: Hanlin astronomer Zhao Xiuqi said to Guo Wei: What is the benefit of sending you to death for nothing!

古文：不若顺众心，拥兵而南，此天启也。 
现代文：不如顺应众人之心，领兵南行，这是天赐良机啊。 
English: It is better to follow the hearts of the people and lead the troops south. This is a heaven-sent opportunity.

古文：郭威乃留其养子荣镇鄴都，命郭崇威将骑兵前驱，戊寅，自将大军继之。
现代文：郭威于是留下他的养子郭荣镇守邺都，命令郭崇威率骑兵前面开路，戊寅，自己带领大部队接着进发。
English: Guo Wei then left his adopted son Guo Rong Zhen to guard the capital, ordered Guo Chong Wei to lead the cavalry to open the road in front, and Wu Yin to lead the large force himself.

古文：慕容彦超方食，得诏，舍匕箸入朝。帝悉以军事委之。
现代文：慕容彦超正在吃饭，得到诏书，放下汤勺筷子就进京入朝；后汉隐帝把军事全都委托给了他。
English: Murong Yanchao was having dinner, received the imperial edict, put down his soup ladle and chopsticks, and entered the capital and the imperial court; Emperor Hou Han Ying entrusted all military affairs to him.

古文：己卯，吴虔裕入朝。
现代文：己卯，吴虔裕进京入朝。
English: At the same time, Wu Qianyu entered Beijing and the imperial court.

古文：帝闻郭威举兵南向，议发兵拒之。
现代文：隐帝闻知郭威领兵向南，商议发兵抵抗。
English: Emperor Wenzhi asked Guo Wei to lead the troops to the south, and discussed sending troops to resist.

古文：前开封尹侯益曰： 鄴都戍兵家属皆在京师，官军不可轻出，不若闭城以挫其锋，使其母妻登城招之，可不战而下也。 
现代文：前开封尹侯益说： 戍守邺都士兵的家属都在京师，官府军队不可轻易出去，不如紧闭城门来挫伤他们的锐气，让他们的父母妻子登上城楼招呼他们回来，可以不战而胜。 
English: Before opening the seal, Yin Houyi said: The families of the soldiers guarding the capital are all in the Beijing Division. The government troops should not go out easily. It is better to close the city gate to break their spirit, and let their parents and wives board the city tower to welcome them back. They can win without a fight.

古文：慕容彦超曰： 侯益衰老，为懦夫计耳。 
现代文：慕容彦超说： 侯益已经衰老，只会出胆小鬼的计策。 
English: Murong Yanchao said: Hou Yi has aged, he will only come up with a coward's strategy.

古文：帝乃遣益及阎晋卿、吴虔裕、前保大节度使张彦超将禁军趣澶州。
现代文：隐帝于是派遣侯益以及阎晋卿、吴虔裕、前保大节度使张彦超带领禁军奔赴澶州。
English: The Emperor then dispatched Hou Yi, Yan Jinqing, Wu Qianyu, and Maebao Daesong to have Zhang Yanchao lead the imperial army to Luzhou.

古文：是日，郭威已至澶州，李洪义纳之。王殷迎谒恸哭，以所部兵从郭威涉河。帝遣内养鸗脱觇郭威，威获之，以表置鸗脱衣领中，使归白帝曰： 臣昨得诏书，延颈俟死。
现代文：这一天，郭威已经到达澶州，李洪义迎纳郭威；王殷迎接拜见时痛哭，率领所统辖的军队跟随郭威过黄河，隐帝派遗宫中杂役脱暗中监视郭威，郭威抓获了他，把上奏的文表放在脱的衣领里，让他回去告诉隐帝说： 臣下昨日得到诏书，伸着脖子等死。
English: On this day, Guo Wei had already arrived in Zhangzhou. Li Hongyi welcomed Guo Wei; Wang Yin wept bitterly when he greeted Guo Wei. He led the army under his command to follow Guo Wei across the Yellow River. Emperor Guo Wei sent the palace attendants to secretly monitor Guo Wei. Guo Wei caught him and put the document he had recited in his collar. He asked him to go back and tell Emperor Guo Wei: "Your vassal received the imperial edict yesterday. He is craning his neck to die."

古文：郭崇威等不忍杀臣，云此皆陛下左右贪权无厌者谮臣耳，逼臣南行，诣阙请罪。
现代文：郭崇威等不忍心杀我，说这都是陛下身边贪图权势不知满足的人进谗言陷害我，便逼着我向南行进，到宫阙下请罪。
English: Guo Chongwei and others did not have the heart to kill me, saying that it was all the greedy, power-hungry and insatiable people around His Majesty who framed me, and forced me to travel south and plead guilty to the imperial court.

古文：臣求死不获，力不能制。
现代文：我求死不得，又无力量能控制他们。
English: I was desperate and powerless to control them.

古文：臣数日当至阙庭。
现代文：我数日之内必当到达宫阙大庭。
English: I should be arriving at the Imperial Palace within a few days.

古文：陛下若以臣为有罪，安敢逃刑！
现代文：陛下如果认为我有罪，岂敢逃避惩处！
English: Your Majesty, if you find me guilty, don't you dare escape punishment!

古文：若实有谮臣者，愿执付军前以快众心，臣敢不抚谕诸军，退归鄴都！ 
现代文：如果确实有进谗言的小人，希望抓交军前以大快人心，那么，我又岂敢不安抚晓喻各部，撤退回归邺都。 
English: If it is true that there are villains who are involved in gossiping, hoping to capture the front of the army with great pleasure, then, I would not dare to worry about the various departments, retreat and return to the capital.

古文：庚辰，郭威趣滑州。
现代文：庚辰，郭威赶赴滑州。
English: Geng Chen, Guo Wei rushed to Nanzhou.

古文：辛巳，义成节度使宋延渥迎降。
现代文：辛巳，义成节度使宋延渥出迎并投降了郭威。
English: Soon after, the Yicheng Festival made Song Yanwo welcome and surrender to Guo Wei.

古文：延渥，洛阳人，其妻晋高祖女永宁公主也。
现代文：宋延渥是洛阳人，他的妻子是后晋高祖女儿永宁公主。
English: Song Yanwo is from Luoyang, and his wife is Princess Yongning, the granddaughter of Emperor Jin Gao.

古文：郭威取滑州库物以劳将士，且谕之曰： 闻侯令公已督诸军自南来，今遇之，交战则非入朝之义，不战则为其所属。
现代文：郭威取出滑州仓库的财物来慰劳将士，并且告诉他们说： 听说侯令公已经督率各军从南面而来，如今遇上他们，交战就违背进京入朝的本意，不战就被他们所屠杀。
English: Guo Wei took out the belongings from the warehouse in Slanting to comfort the laborers, and told them: I heard that the lord of the manor had led the army from the south, and now they met them, the battle would go against the intention of entering Beijing and the North, and they would be slaughtered without a fight.

古文：吾欲全汝曹功名，不若奉行前诏，吾死不恨！ 
现代文：我想成全你们的功名，不如执行日前诏书，我死了也没有遗恨！ 
English: I want to complete your feats. It is better to carry out the edict of the day before yesterday. I will die with no regrets!

古文：皆曰： 国家负公，公不负国，所以万人争奋。如报私仇，侯益辈何能为乎！ 
现代文：众将士都说： 朝廷辜负了您，您没有辜负朝廷，因此万众奋勇争先，如同各报私仇一样，侯益一伙能有什么作为呢！ 
English: All the generals said, "The imperial court has failed you, you have not failed the imperial court. Therefore, all the generals fought bravely to be the first, as if they were taking revenge on each other. What can Hou Yi's group do?

古文：王峻徇于众曰： 我得公处分，俟克京城，听旬日剽掠。 
现代文：王峻向部众宣布说： 我已得郭公的决定，等到攻克京城，准许抢劫十天。 
English: Wang Jun announced to his subordinates: "I have received Guo Gong's decision. Wait until we conquer the capital and allow us to rob for ten days.

古文：众皆踊跃。
现代文：大家都欢腾雀跃。
English: Everyone was jumping and cheering.

古文：辛巳，鸗脱至大梁。
现代文：辛巳，脱到达京城大梁。
English: It's hard to get rid of the large girders in the capital.

古文：前此帝议自往澶州，闻郭威已至河上而止。
现代文：在此之前隐帝提议准备亲自前往澶州，听说郭威已到黄河边上而作罢。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Inti proposed to prepare to go to Ganzhou in person, but it was heard that Guo Wei had already gone to the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：帝甚有悔惧之色，私谓窦贞固曰： 属者亦太草草。 
现代文：隐帝颇有后悔恐惧的神色，私下对窦贞固说： 日前也太草率了。 
English: The Emperor had a look of regret and fear on his face, and privately said to Dou Zhengguo, "You are too hasty these days.

古文：李业等请倾府库以赐诸军，苏禹珪以为未可，业拜禹珪于帝前，曰： 相公且为天子勿惜府库！ 
现代文：李业等人请求清空仓库来赏赐各军，苏禹认为不可以，李业在隐帝面前叩拜苏禹，说： 相公暂且为天子考虑而不要吝惜仓库财物。 
English: Li Ye and others requested that the storehouse be emptied to reward the troops, but Su Yu thought it was not possible. Li Ye bowed to Su Yu in front of the Hidden Emperor and said, "For the time being, consider your father-in-law as the Son of Heaven, and do not begrudge the storehouse property.

古文：乃赐禁军人二十缗，下军半之，将士在北者给其家，仍使通家信以诱之。
现代文：于是赏赐禁军每人二十缗钱，其他军队减半，将士在北面郭威军队中的给他们的家，让眷属通家信来引诱他们。
English: So he rewarded each member of the Forbidden Army with twenty pieces of money, and the other armies were reduced by half. He sent soldiers from Guowei's army in the north to their homes, and had their families write letters to lure them.

古文：壬午，郭威军至封丘，人情忷惧。
现代文：壬午，郭威的军队到达封丘，人心惶惶。
English: In the morning, Guo Wei's army arrived at Fengqiu, and everyone was panicked.

古文：太后泣曰： 不用李涛之言，宜其亡也！ 
现代文：太后流泪说： 不听李涛的话，自该灭亡啊！ 
English: The empress dowager shed tears and said, "If you don't listen to Li Tao, you deserve to perish!"

古文：慕容彦超恃其骁勇，言于帝曰： 臣视北军犹蠛蠓耳，当为陛下生致其魁！ 
现代文：慕容彦超恃仗自己勇猛，对隐帝说道： 我看北方的军队犹如小虫罢了，必当为陛下活捉他们的魁首！ 
English: Murong Yanyan fought bravely, and said to Emperor Yin, "I see the northern army as nothing more than a small insect. I must capture their leader alive for Your Majesty!"

古文：退，见聂文进，问北来兵数及将校姓名，颇惧，曰： 是亦剧贼，未易轻也！ 
现代文：退朝，慕容彦超见到聂文进，询问北方来的军队数量和将校姓名，颇感恐惧，说： 这还是强贼劲敌，不可看轻他们啊！ 
English: Returning to the imperial court, Murong Yancha saw Gong Wenzhong, inquired about the number of troops from the north and the names of the officers, felt quite afraid, and said: This is still a strong enemy, do not underestimate them!

古文：帝复遣左神武统军袁、前威胜节度使刘重进等帅禁军与侯益等会屯赤冈，象先之子也。
现代文：隐帝又派遣左神武统军袁、前威胜节度使刘重进等率领禁军与侯益会合驻扎在赤冈。袁是袁象先的儿子。
English: The Hidden Emperor also sent Yuan, the leader of the Zuo Shenwu Unification Army, and Liu Chongjin, the leader of the Forbidden Army, to join with Hou Yi and stationed in Akaoka. Yuan was the son of Yuan Xiangxian.

古文：彦超以大军屯七里店。
现代文：慕容彦超率领大部队驻扎在七里店。
English: Murong Yanchao led a large force stationed in Shichili Store.

古文：癸未，南、北军遇于刘子陂。
现代文：癸未，南、北两方军队在刘子陂相遇。
English: Soon after, the armies of the north and south met at Liu Zibao.

古文：帝欲自出劳军，太后曰： 郭威吾家故旧，非死亡切身，何以至此！
现代文：隐帝准备亲自出去慰劳军队，太后说： 郭威是我家的旧臣，如果不是生死攸关，哪里会到这个地步！
English: Emperor Inti was preparing to go out in person to comfort the troops, and the Empress Dowager said: Guo Wei is an old vassal of my family, if it is not a matter of life and death, how can it come to this!

古文：但按兵守城，飞诏谕之，观其志趣，必有辞理，则君臣之礼尚全，慎勿轻出。 
现代文：只要按兵不动守在城中，飞传诏书告诉他，观察他的志向，必定有解说道理，那君臣大礼就可以保全，千万不要轻易出去。 
English: As long as you stay in the city as a soldier, fly the edict to tell him, observe his aspirations, there must be an explanation and reason, then the courtesy of the prince can be preserved, do not go out easily.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：隐帝不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：时扈从军甚盛，太后遣使戒聂文进曰： 大须在意！ 
现代文：当时扈从军队很多，太后派人告戒聂文进说： 须非常留意！ 
English: At that time, there were many emperors from the military. The empress dowager sent someone to warn Emperor Wenjin, saying, "You must be very careful!

古文：对曰： 有臣在，虽郭威百人，可擒也！ 
现代文：聂文进回答说： 有我在，即使一百个郭威，也可捉拿来！ 
English: Xing Wenjin replied, "With me, even if there are a hundred Guowei, I can catch them!"

古文：至暮，两军不战，帝还宫。
现代文：到傍晚，两军没有交战，隐帝回宫。
English: By the evening, the two armies were not at war, and the Emperor returned to the palace.

古文：慕容彦超大言曰： 陛下来日宫中无事，幸再出观臣破贼。
现代文：慕容彦超说大话道： 陛下明日若宫中无事，恭请再次出来观看臣下如何攻破贼军。
English: Murong Yancha said loudly, "Your Majesty, if there is no problem in the palace tomorrow, please come out again to watch how your vassals defeat the bandits."

古文：臣不必与之战，但叱散使归营耳！ 
现代文：我不必同他们交战，只须呼喝驱散他们即可使他们返归营地！ 
English: I don't have to fight them, just shout at them to disperse and send them back to camp!

古文：甲申，帝欲再出，太后力止之，不可。
现代文：甲申，后汉隐帝想再次出城，太后极力制止，不答应。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jiaxing wanted to go out of the city again, but Empress Dowager Cixi tried her best to stop him and did not agree.

古文：既陈，郭威戒其众曰： 吾来诛群小，非敢敌天子也，慎勿先动。 
现代文：已经摆好军阵，郭威训戒部众说： 我来诛讨这帮小人，不是敢与天子对抗，千万不要首先动手。 
English: With his army arrayed, Guo Wei exhorted his followers: "I've come to fight these villains. Don't dare to fight the Son of Heaven. Don't be the first to start."

古文：久之，慕容彦超引轻骑直前奋击，郭崇威与前博州刺史李荣帅骑兵拒之。
现代文：过了好久，慕容彦超带领轻骑兵径直前进猛烈攻击，郭崇威与前博州刺史李荣率领骑兵抵抗。
English: After a long time, Murong Yanchao led the light cavalry straight forward and attacked fiercely, Guo Chongwei and the former Boshou assassin Li Rong led the cavalry resistance.

古文：彦超马倒，几获之。
现代文：慕容彦超坐骑摔倒，差点被抓获。
English: Murong Yanchao fell off his horse and was almost caught.

古文：彦超引兵退，麾下死者百馀人，于是诸军夺气，稍稍降于北军。
现代文：慕容彦超带兵撤退，手下死亡一百多人，于是南面各军丧失士气，逐渐向北方军队投降。
English: Murong Yancha withdrew with his soldiers, and more than a hundred of his men died. As a result, the armies in the south lost their morale and gradually surrendered to the northern army.

古文：侯益、吴虔裕、张彦超、袁、刘重进皆潜往见郭威，威各遣还营，又谓宋延渥曰： 天子方危，公近亲，宜以牙兵往卫乘舆，且附奏陛下，愿乘间早幸臣营。 
现代文：侯益、吴虔裕、张彦超、袁、刘重进都暗中前往拜见郭威，郭威逐一遣返他们回营，又对宋延渥说： 天子正处危难，您是天子的亲近，应该带领牙帐卫兵前往保卫天子，并请附带启奏陛下，希望有空早日光临臣下军营。 
English: Hou Yi, Wu Qianyu, Zhang Yanchao, Yuan and Liu Chongjin all secretly went to visit Guo Wei. Guo Wei sent them back to the camp one by one. He also said to Song Yanwo: The Son of Heaven is in danger. You are close to the Son of Heaven. You should lead the guards to protect the Son of Heaven. And please include an introduction to His Majesty. I hope there will be an early sunrise at the camp.

古文：延渥未至御营，乱兵云扰，不敢进而还。
现代文：宋延渥没到天子营帐，乱兵纷扰，不敢前进而退回。
English: Song Yanwo did not go to Tianzi's camp, the soldiers were disturbed, they did not dare to advance and retreated.

古文：比暮，南军多归于北。
现代文：到了天黑，南面军队大多数投归到北面。
English: By nightfall, most of the southern army had fallen back to the north.

古文：慕容彦超与麾下十馀骑奔还兗州。
现代文：慕容彦超与手下十几名骑士逃跑返回兖州。
English: Murong Yanchao and more than a dozen of his knights ran away and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：是夕，帝独与三相及从官数十人宿于七里寨，馀皆逃溃。
现代文：当晚，隐帝只与窦贞固、苏逢吉、苏禹三位宰相以及随从官员数十人在七里寨住宿，其余人都逃跑溃散。
English: That night, Emperor Inti only stayed with three prime ministers, Dou Zhenggu, Su Fengji, and Su Yu, as well as dozens of officials accompanying him, in Qili Village. The rest fled and dispersed.

古文：乙酉旦，郭威望见天子旌旗在高阪上，下马免胄往从之，至则帝已去矣。
现代文：乙酉早晨，郭威望见天子的旌旗在高坡上，便下马脱去头盔前往跟随，到达后隐帝已经离去了。
English: In the early morning, Guo Weimang saw Tianzi's banner flying on the high slope. He dismounted and took off his helmet to follow. After arriving, the Emperor had already left.

古文：帝策马将还宫，至玄化门，刘铢在门上，问帝左右： 兵马何在？ 
现代文：隐帝扬鞭赶马准备回宫，到达大梁玄化门，刘铢在城门上，问隐帝周围的人： 兵马在何处？ 
English: Emperor Yin whipped his horse to prepare to return to the palace, and arrived at the Great Beam of the Gate of Genhua. Liu Ye was at the gate, and asked the people around Emperor Yin: Where are the soldiers and horses?

古文：因射左右。
现代文：就向隐帝身边人射箭。
English: He began to shoot arrows at the people around Emperor Inchi.

古文：帝回辔，西北至赵村，追兵已至，帝下马入民家，为乱兵所弑。
现代文：隐帝掉转马头，往西北到达赵村，追兵已经赶到，隐帝下马进入百姓家，被乱兵所杀。
English: Emperor Inti turned his horse around and rode northwest to Zhao Village. The pursuing soldiers had already arrived. Emperor Inti dismounted and entered the homes of the common people. He was killed by the soldiers.

古文：苏逢吉、阎晋卿、郭允明皆自杀。聂文进挺身走，军士追趕斩之。
现代文：苏逢吉、阎晋卿、郭允明都自杀；聂文进挺身逃跑，被军士追上斩杀。
English: Su Fengji, Yan Jinqing and Guo Yunming all committed suicide; Gong Wenjin ran away and was chased down and killed by the sergeant.

古文：李业奔陕州，後匡赞奔兗州。
现代文：李业逃奔陕州，后匡赞逃奔兖州。
English: Li Ye fled to Shaanxi, and then Kuang Zan fled to Ganzhou.

古文：郭威闻帝遇弑，号恸曰： 老夫之罪也！ 
现代文：郭威听说隐帝遇害，呼喊痛哭道： 是我老夫的罪过啊！ 
English: Guo Wei heard that Emperor Hidden was killed and cried out in anguish: It was my husband's fault!

古文：威至玄化门，刘铢雨射城外。
现代文：郭威到达玄化门，刘铢像雨点似地向城外射箭。
English: Guo Wei arrived at the Xuanhua Gate, and Liu Ye shot arrows out of the city like raindrops.

古文：威自迎春门入，归私第，遣前曹州防御使何福进将兵守明德门。
现代文：郭威从迎春门入城，回到私宅，派遗前曹州防御使何福进领兵把守明德门。
English: Guo Wei entered the city from the Yingchun Gate, returned to his private residence, and sent the former Caozhou defense to let He Fu lead the troops to guard the Mingde Gate.

古文：诸军大掠，通夕烟火四发。
现代文：各军大肆抢掠，整夜烟火四起。
English: The armies plundered and pillaged, and fireworks went off throughout the night.

古文：军士入前义成节度使白再荣之第，执再荣，尽掠其财，既而进曰： 某等昔尝趋走麾下，一旦无礼至此，何面目复见公！ 
现代文：军士进入前义成节度使白再荣的住宅，抓住白再荣，抢光财物，然后上前说： 我们从前曾在您手下奔走，今日无礼到这个地步，还有什么脸面再见您！ 
English: The sergeant-at-arms entered the residence of the former Yicheng Jiedu, grabbed Baizhe Rong, robbed the property, and then came forward and said: We used to run under your command, today we are so rude, what else is there to say goodbye to you!

古文：遂刎其首而去。
现代文：于是割下白再荣的头而离开。
English: So he cut off Bai Zairong's head and left.

古文：吏部侍郎张允，家赀以万计，而性吝，虽妻亦不之委，常自系众钥于衣下，行如环佩。
现代文：吏部侍郎张允，家产数以万计，但生性吝啬，即使是妻子也不肯放手，总是把全部钥匙系在自己衣服底下，走起路来丁当作响如同佩带玉环。
English: Zhang Yun, the steward of the personnel department, has a family income of tens of thousands, but he is naturally stingy. Even his wife does not want to let go. He always ties all the keys under his clothes. When he walks, it is as if he is wearing a jade ring.

古文：是夕，匿于佛殿藻井之上，登者浸多，板坏而坠，军士掠其衣，遂以冻卒。
现代文：这天晚上，他躲藏在佛堂顶棚板上，上去的人逐渐增多，顶板损坏而坠落，军士即抢走他身上的衣服，于是他因受冻而死。
English: That night, he hid on the ceiling board of the Buddhist temple. The number of people who went up gradually increased. The ceiling board was damaged and fell. The sergeant took away his clothes, and he died of frostbite.

古文：初，作坊使贾延徽有宠于帝，与魏仁浦为邻，欲并仁浦所居以自广，屡谮仁浦于帝，几至不测。
现代文：当初，作坊使贾延徽受到隐帝宠信，与魏仁浦是邻居，想吞并魏仁浦所住房屋来扩大自己宅第，屡次向隐帝说魏仁浦的坏话，几乎酿成杀身之祸。
English: At first, the workshop made Jia Yanhui a favorite of Emperor Yin. He was a neighbor of Wei Rimpu. He wanted to annex the house where Wei Rimpu lived to expand his mansion. He repeatedly spoke ill of Wei Rimpu to Emperor Yin, which almost led to his death.

古文：至是，有擒延徽以授仁浦者，仁浦谢曰： 因乱而报怨，吾所不为也！ 
现代文：到这个时候，有抓获贾延徽交给魏仁浦的，魏仁浦拒绝说： 乘乱而报私怨，是我所不做的！ 
English: By this time, Jia Yanhui had been captured and handed over to Wei Rimpu. Wei Rimpu refused, saying, "I will not take advantage of the turmoil to settle a personal grudge!"

古文：郭威闻之，待仁浦益厚。
现代文：郭威听说此事，对待魏仁浦越发优厚。
English: When Guo Wei heard about this, he treated Wei Rimpu more and more generously.

古文：右千牛卫大将军枣强赵凤曰： 郭侍中举兵，欲诛君侧之恶以安国家耳；而鼠辈敢尔，乃贼也，岂侍中意邪！ 
现代文：右千牛卫大将军枣强人赵凤说： 郭侍中起兵，只是要诛伐国君身边的恶人来安定国家罢了；然而底下无名鼠辈竟敢如此胡作非为，已成强盗，哪里是郭侍中的本意呀！ 
English: Zhao Feng, a right-wing strongman and commander of the Thousand Cattle Guards, said: Guo Shizhong raised an army, just to defeat the evil people around the sovereign to stabilize the country; however, the nameless rats below dared to behave so badly, they had become robbers, what was Guo Shizhong's original intention!

古文：执弓矢，踞胡床，坐于巷首，掠者至，辄射杀之，里中皆赖以全。
现代文：手持弓箭，危坐绳床，坐在里巷门口，抢掠者一到，就发箭射杀，同里的人家都依赖此而得以保全。
English: Holding a bow and arrow in hand, sitting on a rope bed, sitting at the door of the alley, as soon as the robbers arrive, they shoot arrows to kill, and the people in the same village rely on this to be preserved.

古文：丙戌，获刘铢、李洪建，囚之。
现代文：丙戌，抓获刘铢、李洪建，囚禁他们。
English: He arrested Liu Xuan and Li Hongjian and imprisoned them.

古文：铢谓其妻曰： 我死，汝且为人婢乎？ 
现代文：刘铢对他妻子说： 我死了，你将去做人家的奴婢吗？ 
English: Liu Yao said to his wife: "I am dead, will you become someone else's slave?

古文：妻曰： 以公所为，雅当然耳！ 
现代文：妻子说： 按您平日的所作所为，确实只该这样！ 
English: My wife said: "This is really the only way to behave according to your daily routine!"

古文：王殷、郭崇威言于郭威曰： 不止剽掠，今夕止有空城耳。 
现代文：王殷、郭崇威向郭威进言说： 不制止抢掠，今晚就只剩一座空城了。 
English: Wang Yin and Guo Chongwei said to Guo Wei: If we do not stop the looting, there will only be an empty city tonight.

古文：威乃命诸将分部禁止掠者，不从则斩之。至晡，乃定。
现代文：郭威于是命令众将约束所部禁止抢掠，不服从就斩首；到黄昏，才安定下来。
English: Guo Wei then ordered his subordinates to forbid looting, and to behead anyone who disobeyed. It was not until dusk that the situation calmed down.

古文：窦贞固、苏禹珪自七里寨逃归，郭威使人访求得之，寻复其位。
现代文：窦贞固、苏禹从七里寨逃跑归来，郭威派人寻访找到他们，不久官复原职。
English: When Dou Zhenggu and Su Yu returned from their escape from Qili Village, Guo Wei sent someone to look for them, and they were soon reinstated.

古文：贞固为相，值杨、史弄权，李业等作乱，但以凝重处其间，自全而已。
现代文：窦贞固为宰相时，正当杨、史弘肇滥用职权，李业等人发难作乱。他不过仅以谨慎稳重处于两者之间，自我保全罢了。
English: When Dou Zhenggu was prime minister, just as Yang and Shi Hongzhao abused their powers, Li Ye and others made trouble. However, he only cautiously and steadily stood between the two, just to protect himself.

古文：郭威命有司迁隐帝梓宫于西宫。
现代文：郭威命令有关部门将后汉隐帝的棺木迁到西宫。
English: Guo Wei ordered the relevant departments to move the coffin of Emperor Hou Hanyin to the West Palace.

古文：或请如魏高贵乡公故事，葬以公礼。威不许，曰： 仓猝之际，吾不能保卫乘舆，罪已大矣，况敢贬君乎！ 
现代文：有人请求比照三国时魏高贵乡公的旧例，用公礼安葬隐帝，郭威不允许，说： 急紧之时，我不能保卫好天子，罪责已够大了，何况再敢贬低国君呢！ 
English: Some people requested to follow the old example of the nobles of the Wei and Guo Dynasties in the Three Kingdoms, and use the public ceremony to bury the Emperor, but Guo Wei did not allow it, saying: In a time of urgency, I can not protect the good heavenly son, the guilt is big enough, let alone dare to belittle the sovereign!

古文：太师冯道帅百官谒见郭威，威见，犹拜之，道受拜如平时，徐曰： 侍中此行不易！ 
现代文：太师冯道率领百官拜见郭威，郭威见到冯道，仍行拜礼，冯道像平时一样接受拜礼，慢条斯理地说： 侍中这一路不容易啊！ 
English: Grandmaster Feng Dao led a hundred officials to meet Guo Wei. When Guo Wei met Feng Dao, he still bowed, and Feng Dao accepted the bow as usual, and said slowly and reasonably, "It's not easy to be an attendant!"

古文：丁亥，郭威帅百官诣明德门起居太后，且奏称： 军国事殷，请早立嗣君。 
现代文：丁亥，郭威率领百官到明德门向太后请安，并且进奏说： 军政事务繁多，请早立继位国君。 
English: Dinghai, Guo Wei led hundreds of officials to the Mingde Gate to offer greetings to the Empress Dowager, and said: There are many military and political affairs, please stand up early to succeed the sovereign.

古文：太后诰称： 郭允明弑逆，神器不可无主。河东节度使崇，忠武节度使信，皆高祖之弟；武宁节度使赟，开封尹勋，高祖之子。其令百官议择所宜。 
现代文：太后发诰令说： 郭允明大逆杀君，但君位不可一日无主；河东节度使刘崇，忠武节度使刘信，都是高祖的弟弟；武宁节度使刘，开封尹刘勋，是高祖的儿子，就让百官商议选择最合适的吧。 
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial edict, saying: Guo Yunming, the great rebel, killed the prince, but the prince's throne must not be without an owner for a day; Liu Chong, the ruler of Hedong, and Liu Xin, the ruler of Zhongwu, were Gao Zu's younger brothers; Liu, the ruler of Wu Ning, and Yin Liu Xun, the ruler of Kaifeng, were Gao Zu's sons, so let the hundreds of officials discuss and choose the most suitable one.

古文：赟，崇之子也，高祖爱之，养视如子。
现代文：刘是刘崇的儿子，后汉高祖喜爱他，收养视为亲生儿子。
English: Liu is the son of Liu Chong, the late Han Emperor Gaozu loved him and adopted him as his own son.

古文：郭威、王峻入见太后于万岁宫，请以勋为嗣。
现代文：郭威、王峻进入内宫在万岁宫谒见太后，请求让刘勋为继承人。
English: Guo Wei and Wang Jun entered the Inner Court to see the Empress Dowager in the Long Live the Empress Dowager, and requested that Liu Xun be made the heir.

古文：太后曰： 勋久赢疾不能起。 
现代文：太后说： 刘勋长期虚弱患病不能起床。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Liu Xun is chronically weak and cannot get out of bed.

古文：威出谕诸将，诸将请见之，太后令左右以卧榻举之示诸将，诸将乃信之。
现代文：郭威出去告知众将，众将请求面见刘勋，太后命令手下人用卧榻抬着刘勋给众将看，众将这才相信。
English: Guo Wei went out to inform the generals. The generals requested to meet Liu Xun. The empress ordered her subordinates to carry Liu Xun on a cot to show the generals. The generals believed it.

古文：于是郭威与峻议立赟。
现代文：于是郭威和王峻商议立刘继位。
English: As a result, Guo Wei and Wang Jun discussed the succession of Liu.

古文：己丑，郭威帅百官表请以赟承大统。
现代文：己丑，郭威率领百官上表请求让刘继承帝位。
English: Guo Wei led hundreds of officials to petition for Liu to succeed to the throne.

古文：太后诰所司，择日，备法驾迎赟即皇帝位。
现代文：太后诰令有关部门，选择日子，准备天子车马迎接刘就皇帝位。
English: The empress dowager ordered the relevant departments to choose a day and prepare a procession to welcome Liu as emperor.

古文：郭威奏遣太师冯道及枢密直学士王度、秘书监赵上交诣徐州奉迎。
现代文：郭威上奏派遣太师冯道以及枢密直学士王度、秘书监赵上交到徐州侍奉迎接。
English: Guo Wei sent Grand Master Feng Dao as well as Privy Direct Bachelor Wang Du and Secretary Supervisor Zhao Shangguo to Xuzhou to be greeted by attendants.

古文：郭威之讨三叛也，每见朝廷诏书，处分军事皆合机宜，问使者： 谁为此诏？ 
现代文：郭威领兵讨伐三镇叛乱时，常见朝廷诏书，处置军务都切合实际情况，便问使者道： 谁起草的这诏书？ 
English: When Guo Wei led the troops to fight against the Three Towns Rebellion, it was common for the imperial decree to be issued. The handling of military affairs was in line with the actual situation, so he asked the envoy: Who drafted this imperial decree?

古文：使者以翰林学士范质对。
现代文：使者回答是翰林学士范质。
English: The envoy replied that he was a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：威曰： 宰相器也。 
现代文：郭威说： 真是宰相的人材啊！ 
English: Guo Wei said: What a prime minister's talent!

古文：入城，访求得之，甚喜。
现代文：进入京城后，寻访找到范质，极为喜欢。
English: After entering the capital, I searched and found the norm, and I really like it.

古文：时大雪，威解所服紫袍衣之，令草太后诰令，迎新君仪注。
现代文：当时天下着大雪，郭威解下身上的紫袍给范质穿上，令他起草太后诰令，迎接新国君的礼仪规则。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily. Guo Weizhe put on the purple robe to dress the prince and asked him to draft the Empress Dowager's edict to meet the new sovereign's etiquette rules.

古文：苍黄之中，讨论撰定，皆得其宜。
现代文：匆忙之中，讨论写定，都很得体。
English: In the rush, the discussion was written down, and it was all very appropriate.

古文：初，隐帝遣供奉官押班阳曲张永德赐昭义节度使常思生辰物。永德，郭威之婿也，会杨邠等诛，密诏思杀永德。
现代文：当初，后汉隐帝派遗供奉官押班阳曲人张永德赐给昭义节度使常思生日的回赠礼物，张永德是郭威的女婿，遇上杨等人被诛杀，有绝密诏书命令常思杀死张永德。
English: At first, Emperor Hou Han Yin sent Zhang Yongde, a posthumous offering official, to give a birthday gift to Zhao Yi. Zhang Yongde was Guo Wei's son-in-law. When Yang and others were killed, there was a top secret edict ordering Zhao Yi to kill Zhang Yongde.

古文：思素闻郭威多奇异，囚永德以观变，及威克大梁，思乃释永德而谢之。
现代文：常思久闻郭威颇有奇才，便囚禁张永德以观察事变，及至郭威攻克大梁，常思就释放张永德而谢罪。
English: Chang Si had heard for a long time that Guo Wei was quite a genius, so he imprisoned Zhang Yongde to observe the incident, and when Guo Wei conquered the beam, Chang Si released Zhang Yongde and thanked the crime.

古文：庚寅，郭威帅百官上言： 比皇帝到阙，动涉浃旬，请太后临朝听政。 
现代文：庚寅，郭威率领百官进言： 等皇帝驾到宫中，行程需要十天，请求太后临朝听政。 
English: Geng Yin, Guo Wei led hundreds of officials to say: Wait for the emperor to drive to the palace, the journey will take ten days, request the Empress Dowager Lin to listen to politics.

古文：先是，马希萼遣蛮兵围玉潭，硃进忠引兵会之。崔洪琏兵败，奔还长沙。
现代文：在此之前，马希萼调遣蛮军围攻玉潭，朱进忠领兵会合；崔洪琏守军失败，奔回长沙。
English: Prior to this, Ma Xicai dispatched the barbarian army to besiege Yutan, Zhu Jinzhong led the meeting; Cui Hongyi's defenders failed and ran back to Changsha.

古文：希萼引兵继进，攻岳州，刺史王赟拒之，五日不克。
现代文：马希萼领兵继续前进，攻打岳州，刺史王抵抗，五天没有攻克。
English: Ma Xichal led the troops to continue to advance, attack Yuezhou, sting Shi Wang's resistance, and did not conquer for five days.

古文：希萼使人谓赟曰： 公非马氏之臣乎？
现代文：马希萼派人对王说： 您不是马家的臣子吗？
English: Ma Xichai sent a messenger to the king saying, "Aren't you a vassal of the Ma family?

古文：不事我，欲事异国乎？
现代文：不事奉我，还想事奉他国吗？
English: If you will not serve me, how can you serve your country?

古文：为人臣而怀贰心，岂不辱其先人？ 
现代文：做人家的臣子而内怀二心，岂不有辱自己的先人！ 
English: To be someone else's vassal with a double heart is to dishonor one's ancestors!

古文：赟曰： 亡父为先王将，六破淮南兵。
现代文：王说： 我父亲王环做先王的将军，六次击败淮南军队。
English: Wang said: My father, Wang Huan, was the general of the first king and defeated the Huainan army six times.

古文：今大王兄弟不相容，赟常恐淮南坐收其弊，一旦以遗体臣淮南，诚辱先人耳！
现代文：如今大王兄弟互不相容，我王常常害怕淮南坐收两败俱伤的好处，有朝一日让我臣服淮南，那才真是有辱先人英灵！
English: Nowadays, the brothers of the great king are incompatible with each other. My king is often afraid of Huainan's advantage of gaining both losses and injuries. One day, let me submit to Huainan, that would really humiliate the ancestors!

古文：大王苟能释憾罢兵，兄弟雍睦如初，赟敢不尽死以事大王兄弟，岂有二心乎？ 
现代文：大王如果能捐弃前嫌停止用兵，兄弟之间像当初那样融洽和睦，我王怎敢不拼死来事奉大王兄弟，哪有什么三心二意呢！ 
English: If the great king can abandon his previous reluctance to stop using soldiers, and the brothers are as harmonious and harmonious as they were in the beginning, how dare my king not fight to the death to serve the great king's brothers, what is there to hesitate about!

古文：希萼惭，引兵去。
现代文：马希萼感到惭愧，率领军队离去。
English: Ma Xicai felt ashamed and led the army away.

古文：辛卯，至湘阴，焚掠而过。
现代文：辛卯，马希萼军队到湘阴，焚烧抢掠而过。
English: Xinwu, Ma Xizhe's army went to Hunan, burned and plundered.

古文：至长沙，军于湘西，步兵及蛮兵军于岳麓，硃进忠自玉潭引兵会之。
现代文：到达长沙，马希萼领兵驻扎在湘西，步兵以及蛮军驻扎在岳麓，朱进忠从玉潭领兵来会合。
English: Arriving in Changsha, Ma Xichal led troops stationed in western Hunan, infantry and barbarian troops stationed in Yuelu, and Zhu Jintao led troops from Yutan to the meeting.

古文：马希广遣刘彦瑫召水军指挥使许可琼帅战舰五百艘屯城北津，属于南津，以马希崇为监军。又遣马军指挥使李彦温将骑兵屯驼口，扼湘阴路，步军指挥使韩礼将二千人屯杨柳桥，扼栅路。
现代文：马希广派遣刘彦召令水军指挥使许可琼率战舰五百艘屯驻城北渡口，战舰一直连到城南渡口，任命马希崇为监军；又派遣马军指挥使李彦温带领骑兵屯驻驼口，扼守湘阴的路，步军指挥使韩礼领二千人屯驻杨柳桥，扼守栅栏掐断通湘西的路。
English: Ma Xiguang sent Liu Yan to summon the commander of the naval forces to permit Qiong to lead five hundred warships to be stationed at the north of the city ferry, the warships were connected to the south of the city ferry, and Ma Xizong was appointed as the supervisor; he also sent the commander of the horse army to Li Yanwen to lead the cavalry to be stationed at the camel mouth to guard the road of Xiangyin, and the infantry commander to Han Li to lead two thousand people to be stationed at the Yang Liu Bridge to guard the fence and cut off the road to the west of Xiangyin.

古文：可琼，德勋之子也。
现代文：许可琼是许德勋的儿子。
English: Let's say Qiong is Xu Deshun's son.

古文：壬辰，太后始临朝，以王峻为枢密使，袁为宣徽南院使，王殷为侍卫马步军都指挥使，郭崇威为侍卫马军都指挥使，曹威为侍卫步军都指挥使，陈州刺史李谷权判三司。
现代文：壬辰，太后开始上朝，任命王峻为枢密使，袁为宣徽南院使，王殷为侍卫马步军都指挥使，郭崇威为侍卫马军都指挥使，曹威为侍卫步军都指挥使，陈州刺史李谷临时兼管三司。
English: When the empress dowager started to ascend to the throne, she appointed Wang Jun as the envoy of the Privy Council, Yuan as the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, Wang Yin as the envoy of the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards, Guo Chongwei as the envoy of the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards, Cao Wei as the envoy of the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards, Chen Zhou as the envoy of the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards, and Li Gu as the envoy of the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards.

古文：刘铢、李洪建及其党皆枭首于市，而赦其家。
现代文：刘铢、李洪建及其党徒都被在街市上斩首悬挂示众，而赦免了他们的家属。
English: Liu Bei, Li Hongjian and their followers were all beheaded and hanged in the streets, while their families were pardoned.

古文：郭威谓公卿曰： 刘铢屠吾家，吾复屠其家，怨仇反覆，庸有极乎！ 
现代文：郭威对朝廷大臣们说： 刘铢屠杀我的家属，我再屠杀他的家属，怨仇翻来复去，哪里有个头呢！ 
English: Guo Wei said to the ministers of the imperial court: Liu Bei slaughtered my family members, I slaughtered his family members, the grudge went back and forth, where is there a head!

古文：由是数家获免。
现代文：由此这几家获得赦免。
English: As a result, the families were pardoned.

古文：王殷屡为洪建请免死，郭威不许。
现代文：王殷屡次为李洪建请求免除死刑，郭威不允许。
English: Wang Yin repeatedly requested that Li Hongjian be exempted from the death penalty, but Guo Wei did not allow it.

古文：後匡赞至兗州，慕容彦超执而献之。
现代文：后匡赞到达兖州，慕容彦超抓住他献给朝廷。
English: After Kuang Zhan arrived in Zhangzhou, Murong Yanchao captured him and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：李业至陕州，其兄保义节度使洪信不敢匿于家。业怀金将奔晋阳，至绛州，盗杀之而取其金。
现代文：李业到达陕州，他的哥哥保义节度使李洪信不敢把他藏在家中；李业带着金子准备投奔晋阳，到达绛州，强贼杀死李业取走了他的金子。
English: Li Ye arrived in Shaanxi. His brother Baoyi's self-restraint made Li Hongxin not dare to hide him at home. Li Ye took the gold with him to Jinyang and arrived in Zhangzhou. The robbers killed Li Ye and took his gold.

古文：蜀施州刺史田行皋奔荆南。
现代文：后蜀施州刺史田行皋投奔荆南。
English: After Shu Shizhou, he went to Shitian, and then to the south of Jing.

古文：高保融曰： 彼贰于蜀，安肯尽忠于我！ 
现代文：高保融说： 他背叛蜀国，哪里会尽心忠于我呢！ 
English: Gao Baorong said, "If he betrays Shu, how can he be loyal to me?"

古文：执之，归于蜀，伏诛。
现代文：把他抓起来，送归给后蜀，伏法处死。
English: They arrested him, sent him back to Houchu, and executed him by hanging.

古文：镇州、刑州奏： 契丹主将数万骑入寇，攻内丘，五日不克，死伤其众。
现代文：镇州、邢州奏报： 契丹主率领数万骑兵入侵，攻打内丘，五天没有打下来，死伤很多。
English: Zhenzhou and Ganzhou report: The Khitan lord led tens of thousands of cavalry to invade and attack Neiqiu, but did not defeat it for five days, and there were many deaths and injuries.

古文：有戍兵五百叛应契丹，引契丹入城，屠之，又陷饶阳。 
现代文：有五百守兵叛变策应契丹，领契丹军队入城，屠杀居民，又攻陷饶阳。 
English: Five hundred guards mutinied in response to the Khitan, leading the Khitan army into the city, massacring the inhabitants and capturing Raoyang.

古文：太后敕郭威将大军击之，国事权委窦贞固、苏禹珪、王峻，军事委王殷。
现代文：太后敕令郭威率领大部队攻打契丹，国事暂时委交窦贞固、苏禹、王峻，军事委交王殷。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered Guo Wei to lead a large force to attack Khitan, the State Affairs Commission temporarily handed over Dou Zhenggu, Su Yu, Wang Jun, and the Military Commission handed over Wang Yin.

古文：十二月，甲午朔，郭威发大梁。
现代文：十二月，甲午朔，郭威从大梁出发。
English: In December, at the stroke of midnight, Guo Wei set out from Daliang.

古文：丁酉，以翰林学士、户部侍郎范质为枢密副使。
现代文：丁酉，任命翰林学士、户部侍郎范质为枢密副使。
English: Ding Rong, appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate, Hubei Chamberlain Norm quality as a Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：初，蛮酋彭师暠降于楚，楚人恶其犷直。楚王希广独怜之，以为强弩指挥使，领辰州刺史，师暠常欲为希广死。
现代文：当初，蛮族部落首领彭师向楚国投降，楚人讨厌他粗犷耿直，只有楚王马希广爱怜他，任命为强弩指挥使，兼领辰州刺史，彭师随时准备为马希广献身。
English: At first, the barbarian tribal leader, Peng Shih, surrendered to the State of Chu. The Chu people disliked his rough-and-tumble demeanor. Only the King of Chu, Mashi Guang, loved and pitied him. He was appointed as the commander of the Qiang and the leader of the history of Chenzhou. Peng Shih was ready to sacrifice his life for Mashi Guang.

古文：及硃进忠与蛮兵合七千馀人至长沙，营于江西，师暠登城望之，言于希广曰： 朗人骤胜而骄，杂以蛮兵，攻之易破也。
现代文：及至朱进忠与蛮军会合七千多人到达长沙，在湘江西岸扎营，彭师登城眺望敌军，对马希广说： 朗州人因突然取胜而骄傲，同蛮军混杂在一起，攻打它容易击破。
English: By the time Zhu Jinzhong and the barbarian army met, more than seven thousand people had arrived in Changsha and set up camp on the west bank of the Hunan River. Peng Shi went to the city to look at the enemy army and said to Ma Xiguang: The people of Lanzhou are proud of their sudden victory. They are mixed with the barbarian army, and it is easy to attack and defeat it.

古文：愿假臣步卒三千，自巴溪渡江，出岳麓之后，至水西，令许可琼以战舰渡江，腹背合击，必破之。
现代文：希望给臣下步兵三千，从巴溪渡过湘江，从岳麓的后面出去，绕到湘江西面，让许可琼用战舰横渡湘江，前后合击，必定击破敌人。
English: He hoped to give 3,000 foot soldiers to his vassals to cross the Hunan River from Bachi, go out from the back of Yuelu, go around to the west of the Hunan River, and allow Qiong to cross the Hunan River with a warship, and fight back and forth, and surely defeat the enemy.

古文：前军败，则其大军自不敢轻进矣。 
现代文：前锋军队失败，那么他的大队人马自然不敢轻易前进了。 
English: If the vanguard army fails, then his brigade will naturally not dare to advance easily.

古文：希广将从之。
现代文：马希广打算听从此计。
English: Ma Xiguang intends to follow this plan.

古文：时马希萼已遣间使以厚利啖许可琼，许分湖南而治，可琼有贰心，乃谓希广曰： 师暠与梅山诸蛮皆族类，安可信也！
现代文：当时，马希萼已经派遣密使用厚利引诱许可琼，答应和他瓜分湖南共同统治，许可琼有了二心，就对马希广说： 彭师与梅山各蛮都是同一族类，哪里可以轻信呢！
English: At that time, Ma Xicai had already dispatched a crane to seduce Qiong, promising to divide Hunan and jointly rule with him. When Qiong had second thoughts, he said to Ma Xiguang: Peng Shi and Meishan are all the same race, where can you be so gullible!

古文：可琼世为楚将，必不负大王，希萼竟何能为！ 
现代文：我许可琼世代为楚国将军，必定不背负大王，那马希萼究竟能有什么作为！ 
English: I allow Qiong's generation to be the general of the State of Chu, and I will certainly not carry the great king on my back. Then I wonder what I can do!

古文：希广乃止。
现代文：马希广于是取消彭师的计划。
English: Ma Xiguang then cancelled Peng Shi's plan.

古文：希萼寻以战舰四百馀艘泊江西。
现代文：马希萼不久率领战舰四百余艘停泊湘江西岸。
English: Ma Xicel soon led more than four hundred warships to anchor on the west bank of the Xiangjiang River.

古文：希广命诸将皆受可琼节度，日赐可琼银五百两，希广屡造其营计事。
现代文：马希广命令众将都接受许可琼的调度，每日赐给许可琼白银五百两，马希广多次到许可琼的营帐筹划军事。
English: Ma Xiguang ordered all generals to accept the dispatch of Zeng Qiong, and gave Zeng Qiong five hundred taels of silver every day. Ma Xiguang went to Zeng Qiong's camp many times to plan the military.

古文：可琼常闭垒，不使士卒知朗军进退。希广叹曰： 真将军也，吾何忧哉！ 
现代文：许可琼经常关闭营垒，不让士兵知道朗州军队进退情况，马希广感叹说： 真正的将军啊，我还有什么可忧虑的呢！ 
English: Allowing Qiong to close the camp frequently and not letting the soldiers know the status of the advance and retreat of the Langzhou army, Ma Xiguang sighed and said: A true general, what else do I have to worry about!

古文：可琼或夜乘单舸诈称巡江，与希萼会水西，约为内应。
现代文：许可琼有时夜晚乘坐单只小船假称巡视江面，同马希萼在湘水西岸会面，相约作为内应。
English: It was allowed that Qiong sometimes took a single small boat at night to pretend to inspect the river surface, and met with Ma Xicai on the west coast of Xiangshui, as a mutual agreement.

古文：一旦，彭师暠见可琼，瞋目叱之，拂衣入见希广曰： 可琼将叛国，人皆知之，请速除之，无贻后患。 
现代文：一天，彭师见到许可琼，瞪大眼珠叱斥他，拂袖而去进见马希广说： 许可琼将要叛国，一般人都知道，请迅速除掉他，不要贻留后患。 
English: One day, Master Peng saw Zheng Qiong, stared at him, scolded him, and went to see Ma Xiguang, saying: Zheng Qiong is about to commit treason, everyone knows that, please get rid of him quickly, don't linger behind.

古文：希广曰： 可琼，许侍中之子，岂有是邪！ 
现代文：马希广说： 可琼是侍中许德勋的儿子，岂能有这样的事呢！ 
English: Ma Xiguang said: But Qiong is the son of the chamberlain Xu Deshun, how could such a thing happen!

古文：师暠退，叹曰： 王仁而不断，败亡可翘足俟也！ 
现代文：彭师退下，叹息道： 楚王仁义而不果断，失败灭亡会立等可到啊！ 
English: Master Peng stepped back and sighed, "King Chu is benevolent but indecisive. Failure and death can come at any time!"

古文：潭州大雪，平地四尺，潭、朗两军久不得战。
现代文：潭州下起大雪，平地积雪四尺，潭州、朗州两军许久不能交战。
English: Heavy snow fell in Tanzhou, with four feet of snow on the flat ground. The two armies of Tanzhou and Langzhou could not fight for a long time.

古文：希广信巫觋及僧语，塑鬼于江上，举手以却朗兵，又作大像于高楼，手指水西，怒目视之，命众僧日夜诵经，希广自衣僧服膜拜求福。
现代文：马希广相信巫师以及僧侣的话，在江边上塑造鬼像，举着手来使朗州军队退兵，又在高楼上制作巨大鬼像，手指着湘江西岸，怒目而视，命令许多僧侣日夜诵念经文，马希广自己穿上僧侣服装向鬼像顶礼膜拜祈求赐福。
English: Ma Xiguang believed in the words of wizards and monks. He made a ghost statue on the river, raised his hands to make the Lanzhou army retreat, and made a huge ghost statue on a high-rise building. He pointed to the west bank of the Hunan River, glared at it, and ordered many monks to recite scriptures day and night. Ma Xiguang himself put on a monk's costume to pay homage to the ghost statue and pray for blessings.

古文：甲辰，朗州步军指挥使武陵何敬真等以蛮兵三千陈于杨柳桥，敬真望韩礼营旌旗纷错，曰： 彼众已惧，击之易破也。 
现代文：甲辰，朗州步军指挥使武陵人何敬真等领蛮军三千在杨柳桥列阵，何敬真望见韩礼营中旗帜纷乱，说： 对方兵众已经恐惧，攻打他容易击破。 
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the commander of the Langzhou Infantry Corps ordered the Wuling people He Jingzhen and others to lead the barbarian army of three thousand to line up at the Yangliu Bridge. He Jingzhen saw the flags in the Hanli camp in disorder and said: The other side's soldiers are already afraid, and it is easy to defeat him.

古文：朗人雷晖衣潭卒之服潜入礼寨，手剑击礼，不中，军中惊扰。敬真等乘其乱击之，礼军大溃，礼被创走，至家而卒。
现代文：朗州人雷晖穿上潭州士兵的衣服潜入韩礼营寨，手持长剑刺向韩礼，虽没刺中，但军营中已惊恐骚扰，何敬真等乘乱出击，韩礼军队大败，韩礼带伤逃跑，到家而去世。
English: Lei Wei, a man from Langzhou, put on the clothes of a soldier from Tanzhou and sneaked into the Hanli encampment. Holding a long sword, he stabbed Hanli. Although he did not get stabbed, he was harassed in fear in the camp. He Jingzhen and others made a surprise attack. Hanli's army was defeated, Hanli escaped with injuries, and died at home.

古文：于是朗兵水陆急攻长沙，步军指挥使吴宏、小门使杨涤相谓曰： 以死报国，此其时矣！ 
现代文：于是朗州军队从水陆两路猛攻长沙，步军指挥使吴宏、小门使杨涤相互勉励说： 以死报国，这是时候了！ 
English: As a result, the Langzhou army stormed Changsha from land and sea. Wu Hong, commander of the infantry, and Yang Jia, commander of the small gate, encouraged each other and said: It is time to die for the country!

古文：各引兵出战。
现代文：各自领兵出战。
English: They each led their troops into battle.

古文：宏出清泰门，战不利。涤出长乐，战自辰至午，朗兵小却。许可琼、刘彦瑫按兵不救。
现代文：吴宏从清泰门出，交战失利；杨涤从长乐门出，战斗从辰时持续到午时，朗州军队稍稍退却；但许可琼、刘彦按兵不去救援。
English: Wu Hong went out from the Qing Tai Gate and lost the battle; Yang Jia went out from the Changle Gate and the battle lasted from noon to noon. The Langzhou army retreated slightly, but allowed Qiong and Liu Yan to not rescue the soldiers.

古文：涤士卒饥疲，退就食。彭师暠战于城东北隅。
现代文：杨涤的士兵饥饿疲乏，撤退吃饭；彭师在城东北角战斗。
English: Yang Jia's soldiers, starving and exhausted, retreated to eat; Peng Shih fought in the northeast corner of the city.

古文：蛮兵自城东纵火，城上人招许可琼军使救城，可琼举全军降希萼，长沙遂陷。
现代文：蛮军从城东面放火，城上人招呼许可琼军队让他们救援城内，但许可琼带领全体部下投降马希萼，长沙于是沦陷。
English: The barbarian army set fire from the east of the city, and the people in the city called for permission to let Qiong's army rescue the city, but Qiong led all his subordinates to surrender to Ma Xicai, and Changsha fell.

古文：朗兵及蛮兵大掠三日，杀吏民，焚庐舍，自武穆王以来所营宫室，皆为灰烬，所积宝货，皆入蛮落。
现代文：朗州军队和蛮军大抢三天，砍杀官吏百姓，焚烧房屋建筑，从楚武穆王以来所营造的宫殿居室，全都化为灰烬，所积聚的金银财宝，全都落入蛮人部族。
English: The Lanzhou army and the barbarian army looted for three days, hacked to death officials and commoners, burned houses and buildings, and the palace rooms built since King Chu Wumu were all reduced to ashes. The accumulated gold, silver and treasure all fell to the barbarian tribe.

古文：李彦温望见城中火起，自驼口引兵救之，朗人已据城拒战。
现代文：李彦温望见城中起火，从驼口领兵来救援，朗州人已经占据城市作战抵抗。
English: Li Yanwen saw the fire in the city, and led the soldiers from the camel mouth to rescue. The people of Lanzhou have occupied the city to fight and resist.

古文：彦温攻清泰门，不克，与刘彦瑫各将千馀人奉文昭王及希广诸子趣袁州，遂奔唐。
现代文：李彦温部攻打清泰门，没有攻克，与刘彦各领千余人护送楚文昭王马希范和马希广的儿子们赶赴袁州，于是投奔南唐。
English: Li Yanwen attacked Qing Taimen, but failed to conquer it. He and Liu Yan led more than a thousand people to escort the sons of Chu Wenzhao King Ma Xifan and Ma Xiguang to Yuanzhou, and then went to South Tang.

古文：张晖降于希萼。
现代文：张晖向马希萼投降。
English: Zhang Ye surrendered to Ma Xicai.

古文：左司马希崇帅将吏诣希萼劝进。
现代文：左司马马希崇率领将官前往马希萼处劝即王位。
English: Zosima Mashi Chong led the generals to go to Mashi Cale's place to persuade him to take the throne.

古文：吴宏战，血满袖，见希萼曰： 不幸为许可琼所误，今日死，不愧先王矣！ 
现代文：吴宏作战鲜血沾满袍袖，看见马希萼说： 不幸被许可琼所耽误，今日虽死，也不愧对先王了。 
English: Wu Hong's robes and sleeves were stained with blood from the battle, and when he saw Ma Xicai, he said, "Unfortunately, I was delayed by Qiong. Although I died today, I am still worthy of the former king."

古文：彭师暠投槊于地，大呼请死。
现代文：彭师将长矛扔到地上，大喊求死。
English: Master Peng threw the spear to the ground and shouted for death.

古文：希萼叹曰： 铁石人也！ 
现代文：马希萼叹息说： 真是像铁石一样坚硬的人啊！ 
English: Ma Xicai sighed and said, "He really is as hard as a rock!"

古文：皆不杀。
现代文：都没杀。
English: He didn't kill anyone.

古文：乙巳，希崇迎希萼入府视事，闭城，分捕希广及掌书记李弘皋、弟弘节、都军判官唐昭胤及邓懿文、杨涤等，皆获之。
现代文：乙巳，马希崇迎接马希萼进入府第治理政事，关闭城门，分头搜捕马希广以及掌书记李弘、其弟李弘节、都军判官唐昭胤和邓懿文、杨涤等，全部抓获。
English: At this time, Ma Xizong welcomed Ma Xicai's entry into the government of the prefecture, closed the city gate, and separately searched and arrested Ma Xiguang, as well as the secretary Li Hong, his brother Li Hongjie, the magistrate of the capital, Tang Zhaoyan, and Deng Yuwen, Yang Jia, all of whom were captured.

古文：希萼谓希广曰： 承父兄之业，岂无长幼乎？ 
现代文：马希萼对马希广说： 继承父兄家业，难道没有长幼之分吗？ 
English: Ma Xicai said to Ma Xiguang: Inheriting the family business of his father and brother, isn't there a distinction between the eldest and the youngest?

古文：希广曰： 将吏见推，朝廷见命耳。 
现代文：马希广说： 我只是被将校官吏所推举，被朝廷天子所册命罢了。 
English: Ma Xiguang said, "I was only nominated by the officers and officials of the academy and appointed by the emperor of the imperial court.

古文：希萼皆囚之。
现代文：马希萼将他们全部囚禁。
English: Mahical would have them all locked up.

古文：丙午，希萼命内外巡检侍卫指挥使刘宾禁止焚掠。
现代文：丙午，马希萼命令内外巡检侍卫指挥使刘宾去禁止纵火抢掠。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Ma Xicai ordered the internal and external patrol guards to command Liu Bin to prohibit arson and looting.

古文：丁未，希萼自称天策上将军、武安、武平、静江、宁远等军节度使、楚王。
现代文：丁未，马希萼自称天策上将军，武安、武平、静江、宁远等军节度使、楚王。
English: Ding Wei, Ma Xicai claimed to be the general of the heavenly policy, and Wu'an, Wuping, Jingjiang, Ningyuan and other armies were sent by the king of Chu.

古文：以希崇为节度副使、判官府事，湖南要职，悉以朗人为之。
现代文：任命马希崇为节度副使，兼管军府事务；湖南的重要职务，全用朗州人来担任。
English: Ma Xizhong was appointed deputy envoy to the Qing Dynasty, concurrently in charge of military affairs; important positions in Hunan were all held by people from Lanzhou.

古文：脔食李弘皋、弘节、唐昭胤、杨涤，斩邓懿文于市。
现代文：将李弘、李弘节、唐昭胤、杨涤切成肉块处死，在闹市将邓懿文斩首。
English: Li Hong, Li Hongjie, Tang Zhaotian, and Yang Dairen were chopped up into pieces of meat and executed, and Deng Yuwen was beheaded in downtown.

古文：戊申，希萼谓将吏曰： 希广懦夫，为左右所制耳，吾欲生之，可乎？ 
现代文：戊申，马希萼对将校官吏说： 马希广是个懦夫，只是被左右小人所控制罢了。我想让他活着，行吗？ 
English: Wushin, Ma Xicai said to the officers and officials: Ma Xicang is a coward, but he is controlled by villains. I want him to live, okay?

古文：诸将皆不对。
现代文：众将官都不回答。
English: None of the generals answered.

古文：硃进忠尝为希广所答，对曰： 大王三年血战，始得长沙，一国不容二主，他日必悔之。 
现代文：朱进忠曾经被马希广鞭打过，回答说： 大王经过三年浴血苦战，方才取得长沙。一个国家不能容纳两个君主，如让马希广活的话，到时候必定会后悔。 
English: Zhu Jinzhong, who was once whipped by Ma Xiguang, replied: "The great king won Changsha after three years of bloody battles. A country cannot accommodate two monarchs. If you let Ma Xiguang live, you will surely regret it at the time."

古文：戊申，赐希广死。
现代文：戊申，马希萼便命马希广自杀。
English: Wushin, Ma Xicai then ordered Ma Xiguang to commit suicide.

古文：希广临刑，犹诵佛书，彭师暠葬之于浏阳门外。
现代文：马希广临刑之时，仍然口诵佛经，彭师把他葬在浏阳门外。
English: When Ma Xiguang was about to be executed, he was still reciting Buddhist scriptures. Master Peng buried him outside Liuyang Gate.

古文：武宁节度使赟留右都押牙巩延美、元从都教练使杨温守徐州，与冯道等西来，在道仗卫，皆如王者，左右呼万岁。
现代文：武宁节度使刘留下右都押牙巩廷美、元从都教练使杨温守卫徐州，与冯道等人向西而来，在路上的仪仗警卫，都按照王的规格，左右高呼万岁。
English: The Wu-Ning Festival made Liu leave the right capital to stay with Gong Tingmei, and the former coach from the capital made Yang Wen guard Xuzhou, and came west with Feng Dao and others. The guards of honor on the road all shouted "long live" in accordance with Wang's specifications.

古文：郭威至滑州。
现代文：郭威到达滑州，停留数日。
English: Guo Wei arrived in Slanzhou and stayed for a few days.

古文：留数日，赟遣使慰劳。诸将受命之际，相顾不拜，私相谓曰： 我辈屠陷京城，其罪大矣，若刘氏复立，我辈尚有种乎！ 
现代文：刘派遣使者慰劳，众将接受犒赏赐命时，相互环顾不下拜，私下又相互说： 我们攻陷京城，屠杀吏民，那罪行够大了；倘若刘氏再立为国君，我们还会有后代吗！ 
English: Liu sent emissaries to offer consolation, and when the people were about to receive their rewards and be given their lives, they looked around at each other without bowing down, and privately said to each other: We attacked the capital and massacred the officials and people, and that crime was great enough; if Liu were to be re-established as the sovereign, would we still have descendants!

古文：己酉，威闻之，即引兵行，趣澶州。
现代文：已酉，郭威听说这情况，立即领兵行进，赶赴澶州。
English: When Guo Wei heard about this, he immediately led the troops and rushed to Zhangzhou.

古文：辛亥，遣苏禹珪如宋州迎嗣君。
现代文：辛亥，太后派遣苏禹到宋州迎接准备继承君位的刘。
English: Xinhai, the empress dowager sent Su Yu to Songzhou to meet Liu, who was preparing to inherit the throne.

古文：楚王希萼以子光赞为武平留后，以何敬真为朗州牙内都指挥使，将兵戍之。
现代文：楚王马希萼任命儿子马光赞为武平留后，任命何敬真为朗州牙内都指挥使，领兵戍守。
English: After King Ma Xicai of Chu appointed his son Ma Guangzan to stay in Wuping, he appointed He Jingzhen as the commander and envoy of Lanzhou Inner Capital to lead the troops.

古文：希萼召拓跋恒，欲用之，恒称疾不起。
现代文：马希萼征召拓跋恒，准备任用他。拓跋恒称说有病不能起来。
English: Ma Xichai conscripted Tuoba Heng and prepared to appoint him. Tuoba Heng said that he was ill and could not get up.

古文：壬子，郭威渡河，馆于澶州。
现代文：壬子，郭威渡过黄河，寓居澶州驿馆。
English: Guo Wei crossed the Yellow River in Imzi and resided in Bozhou Yingguan.

古文：癸丑旦，将发，将士数千人忽大噪。威命闭门，将士逾垣登屋而入曰： 天子须侍中自为之，将士已与刘氏为仇，不可立也！ 
现代文：癸丑早晨，将要出发时，将士数千人忽然大声喧哗，郭威即下令关上房门，将士们便翻越墙头登上房顶而进入说： 天子必须侍中您自己来做，我们已经与刘氏结仇，不可再立刘氏为君！ 
English: In the ugly morning, when it was time to leave, thousands of soldiers suddenly made a loud noise. Guo Wei immediately ordered the door to be closed, and the soldiers climbed over the wall to the roof and entered, saying: "Son of Heaven, you must do it yourself. We have made an enemy of Mr. Liu, and we can no longer make Mr. Liu your master!"

古文：或裂黄旗以被威体，共扶抱之，呼万岁震地，因拥威南行。
现代文：有人撕裂黄旗披在郭威身上，共同扶抱起郭威，欢呼万岁，震天动地，趁势簇拥着郭威向南行进。
English: Some people tore the yellow flag and draped it on Guo Wei's body, hugged Guo Wei, cheered, shook the earth, and took advantage of the momentum to march south with Guo Wei.

古文：威乃上太后笺，请奉汉宗庙，事太后为母。
现代文：郭威于是向太后上奏笺，请求主持宗庙社稷，事奉太后作为母亲。
English: Guo Wei then appealed to the empress dowager, asking her to preside over the family temple and serve the empress dowager as a mother.

古文：丙辰，至韦城，下书抚谕大梁士民，以昨离河上，在道秋毫不犯，勿有怀疑。
现代文：丙辰，郭威到达韦城，发下文告安抚大梁百姓：于昨日离开黄河岸边，一路上秋毫无犯，大家不必担心疑虑。
English: Hunchin, Guo Wei arrived in Weicheng, issued the following appeal to appease the Dalian people: Yesterday, we left the shore of the Yellow River, and there was no crime along the way. Everyone should not worry about doubts.

古文：戊午，威至七里店，窦贞固帅百官出迎拜谒，因劝进。
现代文：戊午，郭威到达七里店，窦贞固率领文武百官出城迎接拜见，乘此劝即帝位。
English: In the afternoon, Guo Wei arrived at the Qili store, and Dou Zhenggu led hundreds of military and civilian officials out of the city to meet him, taking advantage of this to persuade him to become emperor.

古文：威营于皋门村。
现代文：郭威在皋门村宿营。
English: Guo Wei is camping in Qimen Village.

古文：武宁节度使赟已至宋州，王峻、王殷闻澶州军变，遣侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇威将七百骑往拒之，又遣前申州刺史马鐸将兵诣许州巡检。
现代文：武宁节度使刘已经到达宋州，王峻、王殷听说澶州军队哗变，就派遣侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇威带领七百骑兵前往阻击，又派遣前申州刺史马铎领兵到许州巡察。
English: According to the Wu Ning Festival, Liu had already arrived in Songzhou. When Wang Jun and Wang Yin heard that the Zhangzhou army had mutinied, they dispatched the commander of the Guards and Cavalry Corps, Guo Chongwei, to lead seven hundred cavalry to block the attack. They also dispatched the former Shenzhou commander, Zhi Maqi, to inspect Xuzhou.

古文：崇威忽至宋州，陈于府门外，赟大惊，阖门登楼诘之。
现代文：郭崇威却突然到达宋州，在府第门外排队列阵，刘大为惊恐，关闭府门登上门楼责问郭崇威。
English: However, Guo Chongwei suddenly arrived in Songzhou and queued up outside the gate of the prefecture. Liu Da was alarmed, closed the gate of the prefecture and went up to the gate to interrogate Guo Chongwei.

古文：对曰： 澶州军变，郭公虑陛下未察，故遣崇威来宿卫，无他也。 
现代文：郭崇威回答说： 澶州发生军队哗变，郭公顾虑陛下不知详情，故此派遣崇威前来警卫，没有别的意思。 
English: Guo Chongwei replied: An army mutiny occurred in Zhangzhou, Guo Gong was worried that His Majesty did not know the details, so he sent Chongwei to come as a guard, with no other intention.

古文：赟召崇威，崇威不敢进。
现代文：刘召见郭崇威不敢进去。
English: When Liu summoned Guo Chongwei, he did not dare to enter.

古文：冯道出与崇威语，崇威乃登楼，赟执崇威手而泣。
现代文：冯道出门和郭崇威面谈，郭崇威这才登上门楼，刘抓住郭崇威的手流泪。
English: Feng Dao went out to interview Guo Chongwei. Guo Chongwei then went up to the gate tower. Liu grabbed Guo Chongwei's hand and burst into tears.

古文：崇威以郭威意安谕之。
现代文：郭崇威转达郭威之意安慰他。
English: Guo Chongwei conveyed Guo Wei's intention to comfort him.

古文：少顷，崇威出，时护圣指挥使张令超帅部兵为赟宿卫，徐州判官董裔说赟曰： 观崇威视瞻举措，必有异谋。
现代文：一会儿，郭崇威出府第，当时护圣指挥使张令超率领所辖军队为刘警卫。徐州判官董裔劝说刘道： 观察郭崇威的眼色举止，必定有阴谋。
English: A moment later, Guo Chongwei left the capital. At that time, Zhang Lingchao, the commander of the Holy Protection Corps, sent Zhang Lingchao to lead the army under his jurisdiction to guard Liu. Xuzhou judge Dong Zi persuaded Liu: Observe Guo Chongwei's eyes and demeanor, there must be a conspiracy.

古文：道路皆言郭威已为帝，而陛下深入不止，祸其至哉！
现代文：路上都传说郭威已经称帝，而陛下还一路深入不停，灾祸将要降临啦！
English: On the road, it was rumored that Guo Wei had already been crowned emperor, and that his majesty was still working his way deeper and deeper, and that a disaster would befall him!

古文：请急召张令超，谕以祸福，使夜以兵动崇威，夺其兵。
现代文：请赶紧召见张令超，说明利害祸福，让他夜里领兵劫持郭崇威，夺取他的兵权。
English: Please urgently summon Zhang Lingchao, explain the stakes, let him lead an army to kidnap Guo Chongwei at night and seize his military power.

古文：明日，掠睢阳金帛，募士卒，北走晋阳。
现代文：明天，抢掠睢阳府库的金银绢帛，招募士兵，朝北奔赴晋阳。
English: Tomorrow, they will loot the gold and silver ingots of the Poyang Treasury, recruit soldiers, and head north to Jinyang.

古文：彼新定京邑，未暇追我，此策之上也！ 
现代文：郭威他刚刚在京城安顿，没有时间来追赶我们，这是上策啊！ 
English: Guo Wei, he has just settled in Beijing, has no time to catch up with us, this is the best strategy!

古文：赟犹豫未决。
现代文：刘犹豫没作决定。
English: Liu hesitated to make a decision.

古文：是夕，崇威密诱令超，令超帅众归之。
现代文：当晚，郭崇威秘密招诱张令超，张令超率领部众归附郭崇威。
English: That night, Guo Chongwei secretly invited Zhang Lingchao, and Zhang Lingchao led the leaders to follow Guo Chongwei.

古文：赟大惧。
现代文：刘非常害怕。
English: Liu was very scared.

古文：郭威遗赟书，云为诸军所迫，召冯道先归，留赵上交、王度奉侍。
现代文：郭威写书信给刘，说自己是被众军所逼迫；召冯道先回京城，留下赵上交、王度侍候。
English: Guo Wei wrote a letter to Liu, saying that he was being persecuted by the army; called Feng Dao back to Beijing first, leaving Zhao Shangjiao and Wang Du to wait.

古文：道辞行，赟曰： 寡人此来所恃者，以公三十年旧相，故无疑耳。
现代文：冯道告辞上路，刘说： 我这次前来所依靠的，是您这位三十年的老宰相，所以没有顾虑。
English: As Feng Dao bade farewell to his journey, Liu said: I have come to rely on you, the thirty-year-old prime minister, so I have no concerns.

古文：今崇威夺吾卫兵，事危矣，公何以为计？ 
现代文：如今郭崇威夺走我的卫兵，事情危险了，您有什么计策？ 
English: Now that Guo Chongwei has taken away my guards, the situation is dangerous. What are your plans?

古文：道默然。
现代文：冯道默默无语。
English: Feng Dao was speechless.

古文：客将贾贞数目道，欲杀之。
现代文：客将贾贞多次注视冯道，准备杀他。
English: The guest captain, Jia Zhen, repeatedly watched Feng Dao and prepared to kill him.

古文：赟曰： 汝辈勿草草，此无预冯公事。 
现代文：刘说： 你们不要草率鲁莽，这不关冯公的事。 
English: Liu said, "Don't be hasty and reckless. This is not Feng Gong's business.

古文：崇威迁赟于外馆，杀其腹心董裔、贾贞等数人。
现代文：郭崇威将刘迁居到府外驿馆，杀死刘的心腹董裔、贾贞等几人。
English: Guo Chongwei moved Liu to Shuguang outside the capital and killed Liu's confidant Dong Zi, Jia Zhen and several others.

古文：己未，太后诰，废赟为湘阴公。
现代文：己未，太后发布诰令，废黜刘为湘阴公。
English: Before long, the empress dowager issued a royal edict, dethroning Liu as Lord of Hunan.

古文：马鐸引兵入许州，刘信惶惑自杀。
现代文：马铎领兵进入许州，刘信惶惑不安而自杀。
English: Ma Jun led the troops into Huzhou, and Liu Xin was so confused and anxious that he committed suicide.

古文：庚申，太后诰，以侍中监国。
现代文：庚申，太后发布诰令，任命侍中郭威代理国政。
English: Goshun, the empress dowager issued a royal decree, appointing Guo Wei, an aide-de-camp, to take charge of state affairs.

古文：百官籓镇相继上表劝进。
现代文：文武百官和四方藩镇相继上表劝郭威即帝位。
English: Hundreds of civil and military officials and four provinces and towns successively went to the table to persuade Guo Wei to ascend to the throne.

古文：壬戌夜，监国营有步兵将校醉，扬言向者澶州骑兵扶立，今步兵亦欲扶立，监国斩之。
现代文：壬戌晚，郭威军营中有步兵将校喝醉酒，扬言说前日澶州骑兵扶立郭威为帝，今日步兵也要扶立郭威为帝，郭威将他斩首。
English: On the evening of the 13th, an infantry officer in Guowei's camp got drunk and threatened that the day before, the Zhangzhou cavalry had made Guowei emperor, and today the infantry would also make Guowei emperor, and Guowei would behead him.

古文：南汉主以宫人卢琼仙、黄琼芝为女侍中，朝服冠带，参决政事。
现代文：南汉主任命宫女卢琼仙、黄琼芝为女侍中，穿戴朝臣冠服，参预决策政事。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty appointed the palace maids, Lu Qiongxian and Huang Qiongzhi, as maids of honor. They wore the courtier's crown and took part in political decision-making.

古文：宗室勋旧，诛戮殆尽，惟宦官林延遇等用事。
现代文：国君宗室、元老旧臣差不多被斩尽杀绝，只有宦官林延遇等人当权。
English: The sovereign's family, elders and former vassals were almost completely exterminated, and only eunuchs such as Lin Yanyu and others remained in power.

