古文：刘穆之、王弘刘穆之，字道和，小字道民，东莞莒人，汉齐悼惠王肥后也，世居京口。
现代文：刘穆之，字道和，小字道民，东莞莒地人，汉齐悼惠王刘肥的后人。世代居住在京口。
English: Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi

古文：少好《书》、《传》，博览多通，为济阳江敳所知。
现代文：年青时喜好《书》、《传》，博览而精通群书，济阳江詔很了解他。
English: When he was young, he liked "Books" and "Biographies" and was well-read and well-versed in books. Jiyang Jianglu knew him very well.

古文：敳为建武将军、琅邪内史，以为府主簿。
现代文：江詔当时作建武将军、琅王牙内史，他让刘穆之作了府主簿。
English: At that time, Jiang Wei was the General Jianwu and the Inner Historian of Shao Wangya, and he asked Liu Muzhi to be the chief accountant of the government.

古文：初，穆之尝梦与高祖俱泛海，忽值大风，惊惧。俯视船下，见有二白龙夹舫。
现代文：起初，刘穆之曾梦见与高祖一起在海上航行，忽然遇上大风，又惊又怕，低头看船下，见有两条白龙，夹船而游。
English: At first, Liu Muzhi had a dream that he was sailing on the sea with Gao Zu. Suddenly, they encountered a strong wind. He was both surprised and afraid. He looked down and saw two white dragons swimming under the boat.

古文：既而至一山，峰崿耸秀，林树繁密，意甚悦之。
现代文：不久到了一座山，山峰耸立，树林茂密，心中很是高兴。
English: Soon I arrived at a mountain with towering peaks and thick forests, and I was very happy.

古文：及高祖克京城，问何无忌曰： 急须一府主簿，何由得之？ 
现代文：待高祖攻克京城，问何无忌： 我急需一名府主簿，你看谁合适呢？ 
English: Waiting for Gaozu to conquer the capital, why not ask: I urgently need a prefectural chief accountant, who do you think is suitable?

古文：无忌曰： 无过刘道民。 
现代文：无忌答： 没有比刘道民更合适的人了。 
English: No-holds-barred answer: There is no one more suitable than Liu Daomin.

古文：高祖曰： 吾亦识之。 
现代文：高祖说： 我也知道这个人。 
English: Gaozu said, "I also know this person."

古文：即驰信召焉。
现代文：马上派人叫穆之。
English: Immediately send someone to call Mu Zhi.

古文：时穆之闻京城有叫噪之声，晨起出陌头，属与信会。
现代文：当时刘穆之听到京城有叫闹声，早晨起来准备去看看，刚到路口，正好碰到了送信人。
English: At that time, Liu Muzhi heard a commotion in the capital, got up in the morning and prepared to go to see, just arrived at the intersection, just happened to meet the sender.

古文：穆之直视不言者久之。既而反室，坏布裳为绔，往见高祖。
现代文：穆之看着信，久久不发一词，然后回到自己的屋里，换下粗布衣服去见高祖。
English: Mu Zhi looked at the letter and didn't say a word for a long time. Then he went back to his house, changed out of his coarse clothes and went to see Gao Zu.

古文：高祖谓之曰： 我始举大义，方造艰难，须一军吏甚急，卿谓谁堪其选？ 
现代文：高祖对他说： 我的事业刚刚开始，正感到艰难，急需一名军吏，您看谁可担当此任？ 
English: Gaozu said to him: My career has just begun, I am feeling difficult, I urgently need a military official, who do you think can take on this position?

古文：穆之曰： 贵府始建，军吏实须其才，仓卒之际，当略无见逾者。 
现代文：穆之说： 贵府刚建，军吏实在需要一个有才之士，仓促之际，也许没有比我更合适的了。 
English: Mu Zhi said: Your capital has just been built, and the military officers really need a talented person. In a time of haste, perhaps there is no one more suitable than me.

古文：高祖笑曰： 卿能自屈，吾事济矣。 
现代文：高祖笑着说： 你能委屈自己，我的大事可以成功了。 
English: Gaozu said with a smile, "If you can wrong yourself, my great undertaking can succeed."

古文：即于坐受署。
现代文：于是当场任命穆之为府主簿。
English: He was hired on the spot.

古文：从平京邑，高祖始至，诸大处分，皆仓卒立定，并穆之所建也。
现代文：收复了京邑，高祖刚到，各类大的决定，都是仓促间和穆之商定的。
English: After the recapture of Beijing, Gao Zu had just arrived, and all kinds of major decisions were hastily agreed upon with him.

古文：遂委以腹心之任，动止咨焉；穆之亦竭节尽诚，无所遗隐。
现代文：高祖把穆之当作心腹，大小事情都向穆之请教。穆之也尽忠尽力，一无隐瞒遗漏。
English: Gaozhu regarded Mu Zhi as his confidant, and consulted Mu Zhi on all matters, large and small. Mu Zhi also did his best to be loyal, and did not hide anything.

古文：时晋纲宽弛，威禁不行，盛族豪右，负势陵纵，小民穷蹙，自立无所。
现代文：当时晋朝朝纲松弛，禁令无人遵守，权豪贵族，仗势横行，百姓穷困，无地存身。
English: At that time, the Jin Dynasty was slack, the ban was not observed by anyone, the powerful aristocrats were rampant, the people were poor and had no place to live.

古文：重以司马元显政令违舛，桓玄科条繁密。
现代文：更甚者是司马元显政令腐败，桓玄束缚百姓的科条繁密。
English: What's more, Sima Yuanxian's government was corrupt, and Kuan Xuan's restrictions on the people were onerous.

古文：穆之斟酌时宜，随方矫正，不盈旬日，风俗顿改。
现代文：穆之斟酌时机，加以改正，不到十余天，风气顿改。
English: Liu Muzhi based on the actual discussion of countermeasures, with the local characteristics to be corrected, less than ten days, customs change.

古文：迁尚书祠部郎，复为府主簿，记室录事参军，领堂邑太守。
现代文：于是穆之被提升为尚书祠部郎兼府主簿，记室录事参军，并出任堂邑太守。
English: As a result, Mu Zhi was promoted to Shangshu's chief priest and the chief bookkeeper of the capital, entered the army, and served as the governor of Dongyurou.

古文：以平桓玄功，封西华县五等子。
现代文：因为平桓玄有功，封为西华县五等子爵。
English: Because of his contribution to pacifying Kuan Xuan, he was given the title of the fifth-highest ranking official in Xihua County.

古文：义熙三年，扬州刺史王谧薨。高祖次应入辅，刘毅等不欲高祖入，议以中领军谢混为扬州。或欲令高祖于丹徒领州，以内事付尚书仆射孟昶。遣尚书右丞皮沈以二议咨高祖。
现代文：东晋义熙三年，扬州刺史王谧去世，按理高祖接任，但刘毅等人从中作梗，商量着让中领军谢混作扬州刺史，或想让高祖在丹徒州为官，把朝内事托付给尚书仆射孟昶，并派尚书右丞相皮沈以这两种意见征询高祖。
English: In the third year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Wang Zhi, Yangzhou scribe, died, and Gaozhu took over the post according to the principle, but Liu Yi and others interfered in the process. They discussed letting the middle leader Xie Ming become Yangzhou scribe, or wanted Gaozhu to be an official in Dantsu, entrusted the internal affairs of the dynasty to Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Mengqi, and sent Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Pi Shen to solicit Gaozhu with these two opinions.

古文：沈先见穆之，具说朝议。
现代文：皮沈先见刘穆之，向他转述了朝中大臣的意见。
English: Pi Shen saw Liu Muzhi for the first time and relayed the opinion of the Minister of the DPRK and China to him.

古文：穆之伪起如厕，即密疏白高祖曰： 皮沈始至，其言不可从。 
现代文：穆之起来假装上厕所，秘密对高祖说： 皮沈刚到，他说的意见不能听从。 
English: Mu Zhi got up and pretended to go to the toilet, secretly saying to Gao Zu: "Pi Shen has just arrived, I can't follow his advice."

古文：高祖既见沈，且令出外，呼穆之问曰： 卿云沈言不可从，其意何也？ 
现代文：高祖见到皮沈后，叫他到外面等候，叫来穆之问道： 你说皮沈的话不可听从，这是什么意思呢？ 
English: After Gao Zu saw Pi Shen, he told him to wait outside and called Mu Zhi to ask: What do you mean when you say that you can't listen to Pi Shen?

古文：穆之曰： 昔晋朝失政，非复一日，加以桓玄篡夺，天命已移。
现代文：穆之说： 晋朝政权已失，并非一天两天的事，加上发生桓玄篡位之事，天命皇权已不属晋朝。
English: Mu Zhi said: The Jin Dynasty has lost its political power, and this is not a matter of a day or two. In addition to the usurpation of the throne by Kan Xuan, the imperial power of destiny no longer belongs to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：公兴复皇祚，勋高万古。
现代文：您复兴了晋朝皇室，功高万世。
English: You have revived the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty, which is a great achievement.

古文：既有大功，便有大位。
现代文：既然立了大功，理应获得大位。
English: Since he has made great contributions, he deserves to be promoted to a higher position.

古文：位大勋高，非可持久。公今日形势，岂得居谦自弱，遂为守籓之将邪？
现代文：您现今的形势，怎么能够处于谦逊退让之地而削弱自己的力量，仅作个驻守边地的将领呢？
English: In your current situation, how can you be in a place of humble concession and weaken your strength, only to be a general stationed on the edge?

古文：刘、孟诸公，与公俱起布衣，共立大义，本欲匡主成勋，以取富贵耳。
现代文：刘毅、孟昶等人，与您都是从平民而起，共举大义，本来都是想扶助晋主建功立业，以获得富贵的。
English: Liu Yi, Meng Xuan and others, like you, are from the common people and share the great cause. Originally, they all wanted to help Jin Zhuang to build a career in order to get rich.

古文：事有前后，故一时推功，非为委体心服，宿定臣主之分也。
现代文：事情有先有后，所以一时论功行赏，并不是命中永远注定你们有臣主之分。
English: Things come and go, so it's not your destiny to be a vassal forever.

古文：力敌势均，终相吞咀。
现代文：势均力敌，最后还是要互相火并。
English: They are evenly matched and will eventually have to absorb each other.

古文：扬州根本所系，不可假人。
现代文：扬州是根本所在之地，不可以让位于他人。
English: Yangzhou is related to the foundation of the country and cannot be given to others.

古文：前者以授王谧，事出权道，岂是始终大计必宜若此而已哉！今若复以他授，便应受制于人。
现代文：以前让王谧作扬州刺史，是出于权宜之道，根本不是长久之计。现在若再把扬州交给别人，您一定会受别人抑制。
English: In the past, Wang Hui was allowed to write the history of Yangzhou for the sake of expediency, and it was not a long-term solution at all. If you hand Yangzhou over to others now, you will definitely be suppressed by others.

古文：一失权柄，无由可得。
现代文：一旦失去权柄，就再也没有办法得到它。
English: Once power is lost, there is no chance of regaining it.

古文：而公功高勋重，不可直置，疑畏交加，异端互起，将来之危难，可不熟念。
现代文：而您功高勋重，他人又不能控制领导您，对您怀疑耽心与害怕畏惧相交织，各种不测之事就都会发生。
English: And you are highly meritorious, others cannot control and lead you, suspicion and fear of you are intertwined, and all kinds of unforeseen things will happen.

古文：今朝议如此，宜相酬答，必云在我，厝辞又难。
现代文：将来会出现的问题，现在不能不考虑到。现在朝中大臣的建议已是这样，只能委婉回答。
English: Issues that may arise in the future must be taken into account now. The proposal of the DPRK and China ministers is already like this, and can only be answered euphemistically.

古文：唯应云 神州治本，宰辅崇要，兴丧所阶，宜加详择。
现代文：一定要说扬州刺史非我莫属，如此又难以直言，只有回答说 国家政治之本，宰辅位置十分重要，国家兴盛衰亡均在于宰辅，应好好考虑和挑选。
English: It must be said that the Yangzhou Vice Governor is indispensable, so it is difficult to speak frankly, only to answer that the foundation of national politics, the position of the Vice Governor is very important, the country's prosperity and decline are in the Vice Governor, should be well considered and selected.

古文：此事既大，非可悬论，便暂入朝，共尽同异。 
现代文：这件事十分重要，不能空谈，我暂时回朝中，与大家商量 。
English: This matter is very important and cannot be discussed in vain. I will temporarily return to the DPRK and China to discuss it with you.

古文：公至京，彼必不敢越公更授余人，明矣！ 
现代文：您一回京，他们一定不敢弃您而授位给别人。 
English: Once you are in the capital, they will not dare to abandon you and give the throne to someone else.

古文：高祖从其言，由是入辅。
现代文：高祖听从了穆之的话，于是作了宰辅。
English: Gao Zu listened to Mu Zhi's words and became his assistant.

古文：从征广固，还拒卢循，常居幕中画策，决断众事。
现代文：穆之跟随高祖征伐广固，抵抗卢循，常住在营帐中出谋划策，决定各种事情。
English: Mu Zhi followed Gao Zuo in conquering Guanggu, resisted Lu Zuo, and often lived in the camp to make suggestions and decide on various matters.

古文：刘毅等疾穆之见亲，每从容言其权重，高祖愈信仗之。
现代文：刘毅等人害怕刘穆之被高祖重用亲近，常常谈说穆之手中权力太大，高祖反而越发信任倚仗他。
English: Liu Yi and others were afraid that Liu Mu Zhi would be used by Gao Zu. They often said that Mu's power was too great, but Gao Zu trusted and relied on him more and more.

古文：穆之外所闻见，莫不大小必白，虽复闾里言谑，途陌细事，皆一二以闻。
现代文：穆之在外听到的看到的，事无巨细，均告诉高祖，即使是街谈巷语、笑话等小事，也都告诉高祖一些。
English: Mu Zhi told Gao Zu everything he heard and saw outside, no matter how big or small. Even small things such as street talk and jokes, he also told Gao Zu.

古文：高祖每得民间委密消息以示聪明，皆由穆之也。
现代文：高祖常得到民间的各种信息以显示他的敏锐，都是由于穆之的原因。
English: Gao Zu often gets all kinds of information from the people to show his acumen, all due to Mu Zhi's reasons.

古文：又爱好宾游，坐客恆满，布耳目以为视听，故朝野同异，穆之莫不必知。
现代文：穆之又喜欢宾客，家中坐客常满，安插耳目观察打听，所以朝廷内外各种观点，穆之没有不知道的。
English: Mu Zhi also liked guests. His house was always full of guests, so he would listen and observe. Therefore, there was nothing that Mu Zhi did not know about the various opinions inside and outside the court.

古文：虽复亲昵短长，皆陈奏无隐。
现代文：即使是亲近的人的行为，穆之也都陈奏给高祖而毫不隐瞒。
English: Even the actions of those close to him were recounted to Gao Zu without any concealment.

古文：人或讥之，穆之曰： 以公之明，将来会自闻达。我蒙公恩，义无隐讳，此张辽所以告关羽欲叛也。 
现代文：有的人讥笑他，他却说： 以公的明察秋毫，将来自己也会知道，我受公之恩，理应不加隐讳，这正如张辽之所以告发关羽想叛逃一样的道理。 
English: Some people scoffed at him, but he said, "By observing the public, I will know in the future that I should not hide the fact that I was favored by the public. This is the same reason why Zhang Liao told Guan Yu that he wanted to defect.

古文：高祖举止施为，穆之皆下节度。
现代文：高祖的行为举止，穆之都加以规范。
English: Gaozu's behavior and demeanor must be standardized.

古文：高祖书素拙，穆之曰： 此虽小事，然宣彼四远，愿公小复留意。 
现代文：高祖书法一向不高明，穆之说： 这虽是件小事，但字迹会被四处传开，愿您稍加留意。 
English: Gao Zu has never been good at calligraphy, Mu Zhi said: Although this is a small matter, but the handwriting will be spread everywhere, please pay attention.

古文：高祖既不能厝意，又禀分有在。
现代文：高祖既不能达到穆之希望写好字，又十分想改变这种状况。
English: Gaozu could not write well as Mu hoped, but he wanted to change this situation.

古文：穆之乃曰： 便纵笔为大字，一字径尺，无嫌。大既足有所包，且其势亦美。 
现代文：穆之于是说： 你只管挥笔写很大的字，一字一尺大，也不嫌弃，字大可以包容一些东西，有气势也是一种美。 
English: Mu Zhi then said: You can just wave your pen and write big words, one word is one foot tall, and you don't have to give it up. A big word can contain something, and it is a kind of beauty to have momentum.

古文：高祖从之，一纸不过六七字便满。
现代文：高祖听从了他，一张纸只六七个字就写满了。
English: Gaozu obeyed him, and a piece of paper was filled with only six or seven words.

古文：凡所荐达，不进不止，常云： 我虽不及荀令君之举善，然不举不善。 
现代文：凡穆之所推举的，高祖不接受，穆之就不甘休。穆之常说： 我虽然比不上荀令君推举好的，但我不推举不好的。 
English: Gaozu would not accept anything that Mu Zhi recommended, and Mu Zhi was not willing to give up. Mu Zhi often said, "Although I am not as good as Xie Lingjun in recommending good candidates, I do not recommend bad candidates."

古文：穆之与硃龄石并便尺牍，常于高祖坐与龄石答书。自旦至日中，穆之得百函，龄石得八十函，而穆之应对无废也。
现代文：穆之与朱龄石一起处理书信，曾给高祖写回信，从天亮到中午，穆之写了一百函，龄石写了八十函，并且穆之写的都没有废弃。
English: Together with Zhu Lingshi, Mu Zhi dealt with letters. He once wrote a reply to Gao Zu. From dawn to noon, Mu Zhi wrote one hundred letters, Lingshi wrote eighty letters, and none of Mu Zhi's letters were discarded.

古文：转中军太尉司马。八年，加丹阳尹。
现代文：穆之转为中军太尉司马，义熙八年，加封为丹阳尹。
English: Mu Zhi was transferred to the Chinese army as Lieutenant Sima, and in the eighth year of Yixi, he was given the additional title of Danyang Yin.

古文：高祖西讨刘毅，以诸葛长民监留府，总摄后事。高祖疑长民难独任，留穆之以辅之。
现代文：高祖西征讨伐刘毅，派诸葛长民留守府中，总管后方一切，高祖担心长民难以独当此任，把穆之留下帮助长民。
English: Gao Zu sent Zhuge Changmin to stay at the central government and be in charge of everything in the rear. Gao Zu was worried that it would be difficult for Changmin to do this alone, so he left Mu Zhi to help Changmin.

古文：加建威将军，置佐吏，配给实力。
现代文：加穆之为建威将军，设置佐吏，配给穆之实力。
English: He served as General Jianwei, set up assistant officials, and equipped them with strength.

古文：长民果有异谋，而犹豫不能发，乃屏人谓穆之曰： 悠悠之言，皆云太尉与我不平，何以至此？ 
现代文：长民果真有背叛高祖之野心，只是犹豫没能发动，于是私下偷偷对穆之说： 外面谣传，都说太尉与我不平等，什么原因才闹成这样？ 
English: Changmin did indeed have the ambition to betray Gao Zu, but he hesitated and failed to launch it, so he secretly said to Mu Zhi: Outside rumors say that the captain is not equal to me, what is the reason for this?

古文：穆之曰： 公溯流远伐，而以老母稚子委节下，若一毫不尽，岂容如此邪？ 意乃小安。
现代文：穆之说： 公逆流远征，而把老母幼子委托于你，如果不信任你，怎么会这样做呢？ 
English: Mu Zhi said, "If I entrust my mother and child to you while I go on an expedition against the tide of public opinion, how can I do so if I don't trust you?"

古文：高祖还，长民伏诛。
现代文：长民思想才稍稍稳定。高祖回来后，杀了长民。
English: After Gaozu returned, he killed Changmin.

古文：十年，进穆之前将军，给前军府年布万匹，钱三百万。
现代文：义熙十年，推举穆之为前将军。供给前军府一年一万匹布，钱三百万。
English: In the 10th year of Yixi, Mu Xitong was elected as a former general. He supplied the former military government with 10,000 pieces of cloth and 3 million yuan a year.

古文：十一年，高祖西伐司马休之，中军将军道怜知留任，而事无大小，一决穆之。
现代文：义熙十一年，高祖西征司马休之，中军将军道怜留守，但事无大小，都由穆之决定。
English: In the 11th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Gao Zu Xi was enlisted by Sima Qiu Zhi, and the Chinese army general Tao Rong stayed behind, but no matter how big or small, it was all decided by Mu Zhi.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，领选，将军、尹如故。
现代文：提升穆之为尚书右仆射，仍如昔日一样兼任前将军和丹阳尹。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu's right-hand man, and was also in charge of selecting talents. The position of the general, Danyang Yin, remained unchanged.

古文：十二年，高祖北伐，留世子为中军将军，监太尉留府，转穆之左仆射，领监军、中军二府军司，将军、尹、领选如故。
现代文：义熙十二年，高祖北伐，把儿子留下作中军将军，管理太尉留守府内，调穆之为左仆射，率领监军、中军二府军司，前将军、丹阳尹仍兼任。
English: In the 12th year of Yixi, Gaozu led the Northern Expedition, leaving his son Tong as the general of the Chinese army, leaving the managing captain to stay in the prefecture, transferring Mu to the left, leading the monitoring army, and the Chinese army to the second prefecture. The former general, Danyang Yin, still concurrently held the post.

古文：甲仗五十人，入殿。入居东城。
现代文：可带仪仗护卫队五十人，出入朝廷殿堂，并迁居到东城。
English: He was allowed to bring an honor guard of fifty people with him, enter and leave the Imperial Palace, and move to the eastern part of the city.

古文：穆之内总朝政，外供军旅，决断如流，事无拥滞。
现代文：刘穆之在内总理朝政，在外管理军旅事务，解决问题有条不紊，任何事情都不被耽误。
English: Liu Muzhi is the prime minister of the government, manages military affairs abroad, solves problems in an orderly manner, and does not delay anything.

古文：宾客辐輳，求诉百端，内外咨禀，盈阶满室，目览辞讼，手答笺书，耳行听受，口并酬应，不相参涉，皆悉赡举。
现代文：常常宾客盈门，求办名类事项，朝事军事里里外外来询问禀告的人满阶满室。刘穆之眼睛看公文，手写回信；耳听别人的汇报，口中同时回答，同时处理数事不妨碍，每一件都处理得很妥当。
English: Liu Mu's eyes read official documents, handwriting replies; ears listen to other people's reports, mouth answers at the same time, and it does not hurt to deal with several things at the same time, each one is handled very appropriately.

古文：又数客昵宾，言谈赏笑，引日亘时，未尝倦苦。
现代文：又与不少很熟悉的客人在一起畅谈说笑长达一日或数时辰，并不觉得困倦疲累。
English: I also spent a day or several hours chatting and laughing with many familiar guests, and I didn't feel sleepy or tired.

古文：裁有闲暇，自手写书，寻览篇章，校定坟籍。
现代文：只要有空闲时间，穆之就写写画画，翻阅文章，校定典籍。
English: As long as he has free time, Mu Zhi can write, draw, flip through articles, and proofread classics.

古文：性奢豪，食必方丈，旦辄为十人馔。
现代文：他性格豪放，吃饭一定要很大的地方，常常做十人吃的饭。
English: He has a boisterous personality, and he always has a big place to eat. He often cooks meals for ten people.

古文：穆之既好宾客，未尝独餐，每至食时，客止十人以还者，帐下依常下食，以此为常。
现代文：穆之喜欢宾客，从未一个人单独吃饭，每到吃饭之时，都会有十多位客人，营帐中按常规安排伙食，以此为正常之事。
English: Mu Zhi likes guests. He has never eaten alone. Whenever there is a meal, there will be more than ten guests. Meals are regularly arranged in the camp, which is normal.

古文：尝白高祖曰： 穆之家本贫贱，瞻生多阙。
现代文：他曾对高祖说： 穆之的家中本来贫贱，生活必需品都很缺乏。
English: He once said to Gao Zu: Mu Zhi's family was originally poor and lacked the necessities of life.

古文：自叨忝以来，虽每存约损，而朝夕所须，微为过丰。自此以外，一毫不以负公。 
现代文：自从我跟随您以来，虽然常常想节约省俭，但每天所需的，仍稍微多了一些，除此之外，我没有一丝一毫对不起您的地方。 
English: Since I have been with you, although I have often wanted to economize, I still need a little more every day, and besides, I do not feel sorry for you at all.

古文：十三年，疾笃，诏遣正直黄门郎问疾。
现代文：义熙十三年，穆之病转沉重，皇上降诏让正直黄门郎探问穆之病情。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yixi, Mu Zhi's illness turned serious, and the emperor issued an edict to have Zhicheng Huangmen Lang inquire into Mu Zhi's condition.

古文：十一月卒，时年五十八。
现代文：十一月穆之去世，享年五十八岁。
English: In November, Mu Zhi passed away at the age of 58.

古文：高祖在长安，闻问惊恸，哀惋者数日。
现代文：高祖此时在长安，听到此消息大吃一惊，悲痛异常，哀伤惋叹数日。
English: Gao Zu was in Chang'an at the time and was taken aback when he heard the news. He was extremely sad and grieved for several days.

古文：本欲顿驾关中，经略赵、魏。
现代文：高祖本想暂驻关中，经营赵、魏。
English: Gao Zu originally wanted to stay in Guanzhong temporarily to manage Zhao and Wei.

古文：穆之既卒，京邑任虚，乃驰还彭城，以司马徐羡之代管留任，而朝廷大事常决穆之者，并悉北谘。
现代文：穆之已去世，京都缺人，于是赶回彭城，让司马徐羡之代为留守管理。而朝廷中以前由穆之处理的事，一起汇报到北方高祖驻地，由高祖定夺。
English: Mu Zhi had passed away and there was a shortage of personnel in Kyoto, so he rushed back to Pengcheng and asked Sima Xu Qian to take over the management. And the matters previously handled by Mu Zhi in the imperial court were reported to the residence of Gao Zu in the north and decided by Gao Zu.

古文：穆之前军府文武二万人，以三千配羡之建威府，余悉配世子中军府。
现代文：穆之以前率领的前军府文武官兵二万人，三千人分配给徐羡之的建威府，其余的全都拨给儿子的中军府。
English: The former military headquarters led by Mu Zhi had 20,000 officers and men, 3,000 were assigned to the Jian Wei headquarters of Xu Zhi, and the rest were all assigned to the son's Central Military Headquarters.

古文：追赠穆之散骑常侍、卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：追赠穆之为散骑常侍、卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In addition, Mushin was presented with a knight-errant, a general of guards, a ceremonial headdress, and three offices.

古文：高祖又表天子曰： 臣闻崇贤旌善，王教所先；念功简劳，义深追远。故司勋秉策，在勤必书，德之休明，没而弥著。
现代文：高祖又表奏天子： 臣听说推举贤德表扬善流，是王教放在首位的，纪念提拔有功劳者，意义很大，因此管理功劳簿的，有什么样的功劳一定要记下来，人是否贤德，在他去世后反而更显示出来。
English: Gao Zu also played the role of the son of heaven: the minister heard that the promotion of virtue and the praise of the virtuous is the first priority of Wang Jiao, and the commemoration and promotion of those with merits is of great significance. Therefore, when managing the merit book, what kind of merits must be recorded, and whether a person is a virtuous person will be more apparent after his death.

古文：故尚书左仆射、前将军臣穆之，爰自布衣，协佐义始，内端谋猷，外勤庶政，密勿军国，心力俱尽。
现代文：已去世的尚书左仆射、前将军大臣刘穆之，起自贫穷百姓，辅佐政务以来，内出谋划策，外处理各种朝政杂务，无论军国大事，都是尽心尽力。
English: The deceased Shoshu Zuopucheng and the former general and minister Liu Muzhi, from the time they were poor people and assisted in government affairs, have been devoting themselves to planning and making suggestions internally and handling all kinds of government affairs externally, regardless of military and national affairs.

古文：及登庸朝右，尹司京畿，翼新王化，敷赞百揆。顷戎军远役，居中作捍，抚寄之勋，实洽朝野。
现代文：等他入殿之后，管理京畿，为使王化一新，千思百虑，率军队远征，穆之居中作出决定，他的功劳朝野尽知。
English: After he was admitted to the Imperial Palace, he managed Gyeonggi Province, and in order to make the king a new one, he thought about everything, led the army on an expedition, and made a decision in the middle of Mu's residence. His merits are known to all.

古文：方宣赞盛猷，缉隆圣世，志绩示究，远迩悼心。
现代文：正当他为国做出远大规划想使国家兴隆之时，竟不幸去世，人们都十分哀痛。
English: It is very sad that he passed away at a time when he was making ambitious plans for the country to make the country prosperous.

古文：皇恩褒述，班同三事，荣哀兼备，宠灵已厚。
现代文：皇上已降恩褒扬记述穆之的功劳，并追封三种头衔，既哀且荣，皇上的恩宠隆厚。
English: The emperor has deigned to praise and record Mu Zhi's merits, and to seal three titles, which is both sad and glorious, and the emperor's grace is generous.

古文：臣伏思寻，自义熙草创，艰患未弭，外虞既殷，内难弥结，时屯世故，靡岁暂宁。
现代文：臣心中寻思，从义熙开创，艰难灾患不尽，外患很多，内难相接，那段日子终于过去了，现在才得到一些安宁。
English: From the time of Yixi's founding, there have been endless hardships and disasters, many external problems, and internal difficulties. Those days have finally passed, and now we have gained some peace.

古文：岂臣以寡乏，负荷国重，实赖穆之匡翼之益。
现代文：这不是臣一个人能完成的，实在是依靠了穆之匡扶辅助。
English: This is not something that a vassal can accomplish alone, it really depends on Mu Zhi's assistance.

古文：谓宜加赠正司，追甄土宇，俾大赉所及，永秩于善人，忠正之烈，不泯于身后。
现代文：功劳看不见听不到，做的事情朝中并不知道的，多不可数。我之所以尽力十几年，才能有所成就，外出征伐，内辅朝政，幸而没有辜负皇上使命，如果没有穆之帮助，就不会把事情办得这么好。
English: There are innumerable merits that cannot be seen or heard, and things that the government does not know about. The reason why I have been doing my best for more than ten years in order to achieve something is that I went out to conquer and supported the government from within. Fortunately, I did not fail to live up to the emperor's mission. Without Mu Zhi's help, I would not have done things so well.

古文：臣契阔屯泰，旋观始终，金兰之分，义深情密。
现代文：穆之为人谦逊，一直坚守这种品德。常常谈到要封赏他，他就慨然谢绝，因此他功勋卓著，却未受到封赏，回忆往事令人伤怀。
English: He was a humble man and always adhered to this virtue. He often talked about awarding him, but he refused with indignation. Therefore, he was highly meritorious, but he was not awarded, and the memories of the past are sad.

古文：是以献其乃怀，布之朝听。 于是重赠侍中、司徒，封南昌县侯，食邑千五百户。
现代文：我认为应该给他加赠正司，追封领地，赠予丰厚的礼物，使好人能永得好处，忠正之人不会在死后被人们所忘记。因此，我把所想献出，让朝中上下皆知。 于是皇上再赠侍中、司徒之衔，封为南昌县侯，食邑一千五百户。
English: In my opinion, he should be rewarded with the title of chief steward, his territory should be recovered, and rich gifts should be given to him, so that good people can always benefit, and loyal people will not be forgotten after death. Therefore, I gave what I wanted to give, so that everyone in and out of the court would know about it. Therefore, the emperor gave him the title of chamberlain and steward, and he was named the lord of Nanchang County, with 1,500 households.

古文：高祖受禅，思佐命元勋，诏曰： 故侍中、司徒南昌侯刘穆之，深谋远猷，肇基王迹，勋造大业，诚实匪躬。今理运惟新，蕃屏并肇，感事怀人，实深忄妻悼。
现代文：高祖受禅称帝之后，回想起昔日助他的功臣，下诏书说： 已故侍中、司徒、南昌侯刘穆之，深谋远虑，为王业打下基础，功劳卓著，诚实勤劳，现在国运更新，国家安定发达，感事怀人，深感凄凉哀痛。
English: After Emperor Gao Zu was enthroned, he recalled the heroes who had helped him in the past, and the following imperial rescript said: The late attendant, scholar, and Nanchang lord Liu Mu Zhi, with deep foresight, laid the foundation for Wangye, with outstanding achievements, honesty and diligence, and now the national movement is renewed, the country is stable and developed, touching people, and deeply feeling desolate and sad.

古文：可进南康郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：可以加封他为南康郡公，食邑三千户。
English: He can be awarded the title of Nankang County official, with 3,000 households in the county.

古文：故左将军、青州刺史王镇恶，荆、郢之捷，克翦放命，北伐之勋，参迹方叔。
现代文：已故左将军、青州刺史王镇恶，在荆、郢大捷中，拼命尽力克敌，北伐功劳可比方叔。
English: The late General Zuo, the Qingzhou general Wang Zhenxiong, tried his best to defeat the enemy in the great victories of Jing and Qin. His contribution to the Northern Expedition can be compared to that of Uncle Fang.

古文：念勤惟绩，无忘厥心。可进龙阳县侯，增邑千五百户。 
现代文：想起他的功绩，心中一直不能忘怀，可以加封为龙阳县侯，增加享用一千五百户。 
English: When I think of his achievements, I can't forget them in my heart. He can be awarded the title of Longyang County governor, increasing the enjoyment of 1,500 households.

古文：谥穆之曰文宣公。
现代文：加穆之谥号为 文宣公 。
English: Kamu's posthumous name was Bunsenseong.

古文：太祖元嘉九年，配食高祖庙庭；二十五年四月，车驾行幸江宁，经穆之墓，诏曰： 故侍中、司徒、南康文宣公穆之，秉德佐命，翼亮景业，谋猷经远，元勋克茂，功铭鼎彝，义彰典策，故已嗣徽前哲，宣风后代者矣。
现代文：宋太祖元嘉九年，穆之在高祖庙享受香火。元嘉二十五年四月，文帝车驾来到江宁，经过穆之墓时，发布诏书说： 故侍中、司徒、南康文宣公穆之，全心全意辅佐高祖，帮助建成我朝大业，谋划深远，功劳卓著，功劳直可铭刻鼎彝，记于典策，以教化后人。最近出游，特来观看他的坟墓。
English: In the ninth year of the Song Emperor Yuanjia, Mu Zhi enjoyed incense at Gao Zu Temple. In April of the 25th year of the Yuanjia, when Emperor Wen drove to Jiangning and passed Mu Zhi's tomb, he issued an edict saying: Therefore, the attendant, the scholar, and the Southern Kangxi scholar, Mu Zhi, wholeheartedly assisted Gao Zu, helped to build the great cause of our dynasty, planned far-reaching, outstanding achievements, and the achievements can be engraved on the crown, recorded in the strategy to educate future generations. Recently, I traveled to see his tomb.

古文：近因游践，瞻其茔域，九原之想，情深悼叹。可致祭墓所，以申永怀。 
现代文：思想起来，真让人深深哀叹。可设置一个祭墓的地方，以表示我们对他永远的怀念。 
English: It's very sad to think about, but we could set up a place for a memorial grave to show that we will always remember him.

古文：穆之三子，长子虑之嗣，仕至员外散骑常侍卒。子邕嗣。
现代文：穆之有三个儿子，长子虑之继承了他的爵位，官至员外散骑常侍才去世，虑之的儿子刘邕继承爵位。
English: Mu Zhi had three sons. The eldest son, Qian Zhi, inherited his peerage. It was only after he died that officials and non-officials were allowed to ride horseback. Qian Zhi's son, Liu Yao, inherited the peerage.

古文：先是，郡县为封国者，内史、相并于国主称臣，去任便止。
现代文：从前郡县作为大臣的封地的，内史、相对受封者称臣，离任就不这么称呼了。
English: In the past, counties were the fiefdoms of ministers. Historically, those who received the title were called ministers, but they were no longer called that after they left office.

古文：至世祖孝建中，始革此制，为下官致敬。
现代文：到世祖孝建年间，才改革这一制度，改为下官向受封者致敬。
English: It was not until the reign of the founder of the sect, Takaakira, that this system was reformed, and it was changed to a lower-ranking official paying tribute to the recipient of the title.

古文：河东王歆之尝为南康相，素轻邕。
现代文：河东王歆之曾做过南康郡的相，可一向轻视瞧不起刘邕。
English: Wang Xizhi of Hedong once served as the governor of Nankang County, but he has always despised and looked down on Liu Xuan.

古文：后歆之与邕俱豫元会，并坐。邕性嗜酒，谓歆之曰： 卿昔尝见臣，今不能见劝一杯酒乎？ 
现代文：后来歆之与邕一起参加豫元会，坐在一起，刘邕生性酷好喝酒，他对歆之说： 你曾做过我的臣下，现在不能敬我一杯酒吗？ 
English: Later, Yu Zhi and Yu Zhi attended the Yuyuan Association and sat together. Liu Zhi Sheng was very fond of drinking alcohol. He said to Yu Zhi: You were once my vassal, can't you toast me with a glass of wine now?

古文：歆之因斅孙晧歌答之曰： 昔为汝作臣，今与汝比肩。既不劝汝酒，亦不愿汝年。 
现代文：于是歆之学孙浩唱歌回答他： 昔日作你臣下，今日与你平等，既不敬你酒，也不为你祝福。 
English: So Sun Hao, a disciple of Zou Zi, sang a song in reply to him: I was once your vassal, but today I am your equal. I neither revere your wine nor bless you.

古文：邕所至嗜食疮痂，以为味似鳆鱼。
现代文：刘邕有一食疮痂的怪癖，认为这种味道可与鱼媲美。
English: Liu Yao has a strange habit of eating scabies, believing that the taste is comparable to that of fish.

古文：尝诣孟灵休，灵休先患灸疮，疮痂落床上，因取食之。灵休大惊。答曰： 性之所嗜。 灵休疮痂未落者，悉褫取以饴邕。
现代文：曾拜访孟灵休，灵休患有痔疮，疮痂落在床上，邕取来吃掉，灵休大惊失色，刘邕回答说： 癖性喜食， 灵休疮痂没落掉的，都揭下给刘邕吃。
English: He once visited Meng Lingxiu. Lingxiu was suffering from hemorrhoids. Scabs fell on the bed and were picked up and eaten. Lingxiu was shocked and disgraced. Liu Yao replied, "I have an addiction to food. If the scabs have not fallen off, I will reveal them to Liu Yao to eat."

古文：邕既去，灵休与何勖书曰： 刘邕向顾见啖，遂举体流血。 
现代文：刘邕走后，灵休给何勖写信说： 刘邕吃了我身上的疮痂，使得全身流血。 
English: After Liu Bei left, Linghui wrote a letter to He Rong, saying: Liu Bei ate the sores on my body, causing my whole body to bleed.

古文：南康国吏二百许人，不问有罪无罪，递互与鞭，鞭疮痂常以给膳。
现代文：南康国有吏二百多人，不管有罪没罪，常互相鞭打，使身上结疮痂，以供刘邕吃。
English: More than two hundred state officials in Nankang, whether guilty or not, often whipped each other, leaving scars on their bodies for Liu Yao to eat.

古文：卒，子肜嗣。
现代文：刘邕死后，他的儿子刘肜继承爵位。
English: After Liu Hui's death, his son Liu Hui inherited the title.

古文：大明四年，坐刀砍妻，夺爵土，以弟彪绍封。
现代文：宋世祖大明四年，因刘肜用刀砍杀妻子，剥夺了封地，让刘肜的弟弟得了领地。
English: In the 4th year of the Song Dynasty, Liu Yao killed his wife with a knife and was deprived of his fief, leaving Liu Yao's younger brother with the territory.

古文：齐受禅，降为南康县侯，食邑千户。穆之中子式之字延叔，通《易》好士。累迁相国中兵参军，太子中舍人，黄门侍郎，宁朔将军、宣城淮南二郡太守。在任赃货狼藉，扬州刺史王弘遣从事检校。从事呼摄吏民，欲加辨覆。
现代文：穆之的第二个儿子刘式之，字延敬，精通《易经》而喜好贤士，历任相国中兵参军、太子中舍人、黄门侍郎、宁朔将军、宣城太守、淮南太守。在任之时贪污受贿严重，扬州刺史王弘派从事去查处，从事招来官吏百姓，想弄清这件事情。
English: Mu Zhi's second son, Liu Shizhi, whose family name was Yan Jing, was well versed in the I Ching and favored the wise men. He served as a soldier in the army of the neighboring country, prince of the prince, Huangmen waiter, Ningshuo general, Xuancheng governor and Huainan governor. When he was in office, he was seriously involved in corruption and bribery. Wang Hong, Yangzhou scribe, was sent to investigate and deal with the matter. He was engaged in recruiting officials and ordinary people to find out about the matter.

古文：式之召从事谓曰： 治所还白使君，刘式之于国家粗有微分，偷数百万钱何有，况不偷邪！
现代文：刘式之召见从事，对他说： 从我这里回去告诉王弘，刘式之对国家也有些功劳，就是偷数百万钱又算什么，更何况我还没有偷呢！
English: He said to him, "Go back from me and tell Wang Hong that Liu Shizhi has also done some service to the country. Stealing millions of money is nothing, and what's more, I haven't stolen it!

古文：吏民及文书章之互在。 
现代文：你从官吏百姓及账目文书中得不到什么。 
English: You don't get anything from civil servants and accountants.

古文：从事还具白弘，弘曰： 刘式之辩如此奔！ 
现代文：从事回去告诉了王弘，王弘说： 刘式之的辩白如此的粗莽！ 
English: Wang Hong said, "Liu Shikizhi's argument is so reckless!

古文：亦由此得停。
现代文：也因此没有再查下去。
English: That's why they didn't investigate further.

古文：还为太子右率，左卫将军，吴郡太守。
现代文：刘式之此后又作了太子右率、左卫将军、吴郡太守。
English: Liu Shih-chih later became the right-hand man of the prince, the left-hand man of the general, and the governor of Wu County.

古文：卒，追赠征虏将军。从征关、洛有功，封德阳县五等侯，谥曰恭侯。
现代文：死后，追赠为征虏将军，因为出征关、洛有功劳，封为德阳县五等侯，谥号为 恭侯 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Conscript General. He was awarded the title of the 5th Marquis of Deyang County, and his posthumous name was Gonghou.

古文：长子敳，世祖初，黄门侍郎。
现代文：式之的长子刘詔，在世祖初年，作了黄门侍郎。
English: Shiki's eldest son, Liu Ye, became a Yellow Gate chamberlain in the first year of the founder's reign.

古文：敳弟衍，大明末，以为黄门郎，出为豫章内史。
现代文：刘詔的弟弟刘衍，大明末年，作为黄门郎，出都做豫章内史。
English: Liu Yao's younger brother Liu Yan, in the last years of the Ming Dynasty, as Huangmen Lang, went to the capital to do the internal history of Yuzhang.

古文：晋安王子勋称伪号，以为中护军。事败伏诛。
现代文：晋安王子勋自立伪朝廷，让刘衍做中护军，事败后被杀。
English: Jinan Prince Xun stood up to the fake imperial court and let Liu Yan be the middle guard. He was killed after the defeat.

古文：衍弟瑀，字茂琳，少有才气，为太祖所知。
现代文：刘衍的弟弟刘王禹，字茂琳，年少有才气，被太祖知道了。
English: Liu Yan's younger brother, Liu Wang Yu, known as Maolin, was talented at a young age and was known by his great-grandfather.

古文：始与王浚为南徐州，以瑀补别驾从事史，为浚所遇。
现代文：始兴王浚为王南徐州，让刘王禹补做别驾从事史的官，被浚知遇。
English: Shi Xing Wang Jun was appointed as Wang Nan Xuzhou, and Liu Wang Yufu was appointed as the second-in-command in charge of history.

古文：瑀性陵物护前，不欲人居己上。
现代文：刘王禹生性争强好胜，不希望别人比自己强。
English: Liu Wangyusheng is competitive and eager to win. He does not want others to be better than him.

古文：时浚征北府行参军吴郡顾迈轻薄而有才能，浚待之甚厚，深言密事，皆与参之。
现代文：当时浚征北府行参军吴郡的顾迈为人轻狂而有才能，与浚交往甚深，许多秘密事情都要顾迈参与讨论。
English: At that time, Gu Mai of Wuxi County, who was enlisted in the Northern Expedition, was a frivolous and talented person. He had a deep relationship with Jun, and Gu Mai had to participate in the discussion of many secret matters.

古文：瑀乃折节事迈，深布情款，家内妇女间事，言语所不得至者，莫不倒写备说。迈以瑀与之款尽，深相感信。
现代文：刘王禹于是放下架子委屈求全巴结顾迈，表示对顾迈情深义重，除了家中妇女的事情外，其他的无话不谈。顾迈看到刘王禹对自己很是忠诚，于是对他万分信赖。
English: Liu Wang Yu then put down his pride and asked the whole bus to bow to Gu Mai, saying that he was deeply attached to Gu Mai, and that he would not talk about anything except the women in his family. Gu Mai saw that Liu Wang Yu was very loyal to himself, so he trusted him immensely.

古文：浚所言密事，悉以语瑀。
现代文：浚所谈的一些机密事情，顾迈全都告诉了刘王禹。
English: Gu Mai told Liu Wang Yu all of the confidential matters discussed in the dredging.

古文：瑀与迈共进射堂下，瑀忽顾左右索单衣帻，迈问其所以，瑀曰： 公以家人待卿，相与言无所隐，而卿于外宣泄，致使人无不知。
现代文：刘王禹与顾迈一起到了射堂之下，刘王禹忽然转头看望左右，索要单衣帽，顾迈问他为什么这样做，刘王禹说： 浚公像对待家中人一样待你，与你相处言谈没有隐瞒，可是你却把这些机密对外人泄密。
English: Liu Wang Yu and Gu Mai came to the shooting gallery together. Liu Wang Yu suddenly turned his head to look around and asked for a single coat and hat. Gu Mai asked him why he did this. Liu Wang Yu said: "Dong Gong treats you like a member of his family. He did not hide his conversations with you, but you leaked these secrets to outsiders."

古文：我是公吏，何得不启。 
现代文：我是浚公的下属，怎么能不把这些告诉浚公呢？ 
English: I am a subordinate of Dunguang, how can I not tell this to Dunguang?

古文：因而白之。浚大怒，启太祖徙迈广州。
现代文：因而把顾迈所言都讲了出来，浚大怒，禀告太祖把顾迈调到了广州。
English: As a result, he told everyone what Gu Mai had said, and he was so angry that he denounced his great-grandfather for transferring Gu Mai to Guangzhou.

古文：迈在广州，值萧简为乱，为之尽力，与简俱死。
现代文：顾迈在广州，正值萧简作乱，顾迈为他卖命，最后与萧简都死了。
English: Gu Mai was in Guangzhou at the time when Xiao Jian was creating chaos. Gu Mai worked for him until he and Xiao Jian both died.

古文：瑀迁从事中郎，领淮南太守。
现代文：刘王禹升官为从事中郎，并作淮南太守。
English: Liu Wang Yu ascended to the position of middle-ranking official and became the governor of Huainan Province.

古文：元嘉二十九年，出为宁远将军、益州刺史。
现代文：元嘉二十九年，刘王禹做了宁远将军、益州刺史。
English: In the 29th year of Yuan Jia, Liu Wang Yu became the general of Ningyuan and the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：元凶弑立，以为青州刺史。
现代文：元凶杀主自立，让他做青州刺史。
English: The former murderer stood up for himself, let him do the Qingzhou stabbing.

古文：瑀闻问，即起义遣军，并送资实于荆州。
现代文：刘王禹得知这个消息，立刻起义派遣军队，同时运送物资到荆州。
English: When Liu Wangyu learned of this news, he immediately dispatched troops and sent supplies to Jingzhou.

古文：世祖即位，召为御史中丞。
现代文：世祖继位后，召刘王禹为御史中丞。
English: After the ancestor succeeded to the throne, he called Liu Wangyu to be the vice-president of the imperial history.

古文：还至江陵，值南郡王义宣为逆，瑀陈其不可，言甚切至。义宣以为丞相左司马，俱至梁山。瑀犹乘其蜀中船舫，又有义宣故部曲潜于梁山洲外下投官军。
现代文：回到江陵，正值南郡王义宣想叛逆，刘王禹陈说不能这样干，话语十分恳切，于是义宣让他做丞相左司马，一起到梁山，刘王禹还乘了义宣蜀中的船，还有义宣从前的部属暗暗在梁山洲外投奔了官军。
English: Back in Jiangling, it was the time when Wang Yixuan of Nanshan County wanted to rebel. Liu Wang Yu Chen said that he could not do so, and his words were very sincere. Therefore, Yixuan asked him to be the left secretary of the prime minister, and they went to Liangshan together. Liu Wang Yu also took the boat of Yixuan Shu, and Yixuan's former subordinates secretly joined the official army outside Liangshanzhou.

古文：除司徒左长史。明年，迁御史中丞。
现代文：刘王禹做了司徒左长史，第二年，又升为御史中丞。
English: Liu Wangyu was promoted to the position of Senior Historian, and the following year, he was promoted to Junior Historian.

古文：瑀使气尚人，为宪司甚得志。弹王僧达云： 廕籍高华，人品冗末。 
现代文：刘王禹高傲，做宪司十分得意，弹劾王僧达说： 靠祖上立功做了大官，人品居于下流。 
English: Liu Wang Yu Gao Gao was very proud to be the constitutional secretary, and said to impeach Wang Sonta: He made a great official by relying on the merits of his ancestors, and his character was inferior.

古文：朝士莫不畏其笔端。
现代文：朝中大臣没有不怕他的笔锋的。
English: There is no minister in the North or the South who is not afraid of his pen.

古文：寻转右卫将军。
现代文：后又转做右卫将军。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：瑀愿为侍中，不得，谓所亲曰： 人仕宦不出当入，不入当出，安能长居户限上。 
现代文：刘王禹想做侍中，没做成，对他亲信的人说： 人做官不出为将必入为相，不入为相必出为将，怎么能长久居于户限之上。 
English: Liu Wangyu wanted to be a chamberlain, but couldn't make it. He said to his close confidants: "If you don't do your duty as an official, you'll end up as a commoner. If you don't do your duty as a commoner, you'll end up as a commoner. How can you stay above the household limit for so long?"

古文：因求益州。
现代文：因此要求到益州为刺史。
English: Therefore, he asked to come to Yishu to make history.

古文：世祖知其此意，许之。
现代文：世祖明白他的心意，同意了他的要求。
English: The patriarch understood his intention and agreed to his request.

古文：孝建三年，除辅国将军、益州刺史。既行，甚不得意。
现代文：孝建三年，做辅国将军、益州刺史，到任后，十分不得意。
English: For three years, Xiao Jian served as an auxiliary general and the governor of Yizhou Province. After taking office, he was very disappointed.

古文：至江陵，与颜竣书曰： 硃修之三世叛兵，一旦居荆州，青油幙下，作谢宣明面见向，使斋帅以长刀引吾下席。
现代文：至江陵，写信给颜竣说： 朱修之三世叛兵，一旦占据荆州，青油帐下，像谢宣明面见的样子，让斋师用长刀指着我下席，对于我来说又有什么呢？
English: He went to Gangneung and wrote to Yan Chun, saying, "Once the rebels of the third generation of Zhu Xiuzhi occupied Jingzhou, under the guise of Qing oil, like Xie Xuan's face, let the priest point a long knife at me, what is there for me?

古文：于吾何有，政恐匈奴轻汉耳。 
现代文：只不过耽心像匈奴轻视汉朝一样。 
English: It's just a preoccupation, just like the Huns despised the Han Dynasty.

古文：其年，坐夺人妻为妾，免官。
现代文：这一年，因犯夺人妻为妾的罪，罢免了官职。
English: In the same year, he was removed from office for the crime of taking his wife as a concubine.

古文：大明元年，起为东阳太守。
现代文：大明元年，又提拔为东阳太守。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of the governor of Dongyang.

古文：明年，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：第二年，调为吴兴太守。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to Wu Xing Taishu.

古文：侍中何偃尝案云： 参伍时望。 瑀大怒曰： 我于时望何参伍之有！ 
现代文：侍中何偃记录说： 经常想做武将 ，刘王禹大怒说： 我平时什么时候想做武将了？ 
English: The chamberlain He Yao recorded: I often want to be a military commander, Liu Wang Yu angrily said: When do I usually want to be a military commander?

古文：遂与偃绝。
现代文：于是与何偃绝交。
English: As a result, he broke off diplomatic relations with Ho.

古文：及为吏部尚书，意弥愤愤。
现代文：等他做了吏部尚书，心中越发气愤愤的。
English: When he was made an official, he became more and more angry.

古文：族叔秀之为丹阳尹，瑀又与亲故书曰： 吾家黑面阿秀，遂居刘安众处，朝廷不为多士。 
现代文：刘王禹的族叔刘秀之作丹阳尹，刘王禹又写信给亲朋故旧说： 我家黑脸阿秀，现在刘安众那里，朝廷中不多贤士。 
English: Liu Wangyu's uncle Liu Xiu wrote Danyang Yin, and Liu Wangyu also wrote to his relatives and friends, saying: My family's black-faced Ah Xiu, now Liu Anzhu, there are not many sages in the imperial court.

古文：其年，疽发背，何偃亦发背痈。
现代文：那一年他背上长疮，何偃背上也长疮。
English: That year, he developed sores on his back, as did many others.

古文：瑀疾已笃，闻偃亡，欢跃叫呼，于是亦卒。谥曰刚子。
现代文：刘王禹病十分沉重，听说何偃死去了，高兴得大叫大跳，于是他也死了，谥号为 刚子 。
English: Liu Wangyu was very ill. When he heard that He Xuan had died, he was so happy that he shouted and jumped. So he also died. His nickname was "Gang Zi."

古文：子卷，南徐州别驾。
现代文：刘王禹儿子刘卷，官为南徐州别驾。
English: Liu Wangyu's son, Liu Zhen, is an official from South Xuzhou.

古文：卷弟藏，尚书左丞。
现代文：刘卷的弟弟刘藏，为官尚书左丞。
English: Liu Zang, the younger brother of Liu Zhan, was the left-hand man of the official Shangshu.

古文：穆之少子贞之，中书黄门侍郎，太子右卫率。宁朔将军、江夏内史。卒官。
现代文：穆之最小的儿子刘贞之，做官为中书黄门侍郎、太子右卫率、宁朔将军、江夏内史，为官时去世。
English: Mu Zhi's youngest son, Liu Zhenzhi, who served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, the Prince of the Right Guard, the General of Ningshuo, and the History of Jiangxia, died while in office.

古文：子裒，始兴相，以赃货系东冶内。
现代文：他的儿子刘裒，作始兴相，因贪污在东冶坐牢。
English: His son, Liu Wei, the founder of Xingxiang, went to prison for corruption at Dongye.

古文：穆之女适济阳蔡祐，年老贫穷。世祖以祐子平南参军孙为始安太守。
现代文：穆之的女儿嫁给济阳蔡祐，年老时穷困，世祖让蔡祐的儿子平南参军蔡孙做了始安太守。
English: Mu Zhi's daughter married Jiyang Cai Yu. When he was old and poor, the ancestor asked Cai Yu's son Pingnan to join the army, and Cai Sun became the first governor of An.

