古文：阮步兵啸，闻数百步。
现代文：步兵校尉阮籍吹口哨，声音能传一两里远。
English: Infantry Captain Nguyen Quoc whistles, and the sound can be heard a mile or two away.

古文：苏门山中，忽有真人，樵伐者咸共传说。阮籍往观，见其人拥膝岩侧。籍登岭就之，箕踞相对。
现代文：砍柴的人都说苏门山里来了个得道的真人。阮籍知道后就去看，看见那个人抱膝坐在山岩上；于是就登山去见他，两人伸开腿对坐着。
English: The woodcutters said that there was a real person who had been enlightened in the Sumeng Mountains. When Nguyen Quoc found out, he went to see him. He saw the man sitting on a rock with his knees together. So he climbed the mountain to meet him, and the two of them sat facing each other with their legs stretched out.

古文：籍商略终古，上陈黄、农玄寂之道，下考三代盛德之美，以问之，仡然不应。
现代文：阮籍评论古代的事，往上述说黄帝，神农时代玄妙虚无的主张，往下考究夏、商、周三代深厚的美德，拿这些来问他，那人却一直仰着头不回答他。
English: Nguyn Quc was commenting on ancient matters. He asked him about the above-mentioned Huangdi, the mysterious and empty claims of the Shennong era, and the profound virtues of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, but the man kept his head down and did not answer him.

古文：复叙有为之教，栖神导气之术以观之，彼犹如前，凝瞩不转。
现代文：阮籍又另外说到儒家的德教主张，道家凝神导气的方法，来看他的反应，他还是像原先那样，目不转睛地凝视着。
English: Nguyn Quc also talked about Confucianism's moral teaching and Taoism's method of concentrating the mind to guide the breath. To see his reaction, he still stared intently as before.

古文：籍因对之长啸。
现代文：阮籍便对着他长长地吹了一个口哨儿。
English: Ruan Ji blew a long whistle at him.

古文：良久，乃笑曰： 可更作。 
现代文：过了好一会儿，他才笑着说： 可以再吹一次。 
English: After a while, he just smiled and said: I can play it again.

古文：籍复啸。
现代文：阮籍又吹了一次。
English: Nguyn Quc blew again.

古文：意尽，退，还半岭许，闻上然有声，如数部鼓吹，林谷传响。
现代文：待到意兴已尽，便退下来，约莫回到半山腰处，听到山顶上众音齐鸣，好像几部器乐合奏，树林山谷都传来回声。
English: He waited until the euphoria was over, then he retreated, returning to about mid-mountain, where he heard a chorus of voices on the top of the mountain, like several instrumental ensembles, with echoes coming from the woods and valleys.

古文：顾看，迺向人啸也。
现代文：阮籍回头一看，原来是刚才那个人在吹口哨儿。
English: Looking back, Nguyen Quoc saw that it was the man who had been whistling.

古文：嵇康游于汲郡山中，遇道士孙登，遂与之游。
现代文：嵇康到汲郡的山中游览，遇见道士孙登，便和他交谈。
English: On a trip to the mountains in Kyu County, Shikang met the Taoist priest Sunden and struck up a conversation with him.

古文：康临去，登曰： 君才则高矣，保身之道不足。 
现代文：嵇康临走时，孙登说： 您的才能已经非常高了，只是保身的方法还欠缺些。 
English: When Gong Kang was about to leave, Sun Deng said: Your talent is already very high, but you still lack the means to protect yourself.

古文：山公将去选曹，欲举嵇康；康与书告绝。
现代文：山涛将不再担任选曹郎职务，想推荐槛康代替，嵇康写信给他宣告绝交。
English: Shantao will no longer hold the post of Choen Cao Lang. He wanted to recommend Suan Kang as his replacement, and Suan Kang wrote to him to announce the severance of diplomatic relations.

古文：李廞是茂曾第五子，清贞有远操，而少羸病，不肯婚宦。
现代文：李廞是李茂曾的第五个儿子，李廞为人清正，品德高尚。因为从小就体弱多病，所以不肯成亲做官。
English: Li Lan is the fifth son of Li Maozeng. Li Lan is a man of integrity and high moral character. Because he was frail and sickly from an early age, he did not want to marry and become an official.

古文：居在临海，住兄侍中墓下。
现代文：他留在临海郡，暂住在他哥哥侍中的陵园里。
English: He stayed in Linhai County, temporarily living in the cemetery of his brother's attendant.

古文：既有高名，王丞相欲招礼之，故辟为府掾。
现代文：等到他声明远播的时候，丞相王导想聘请并礼待他，所以调来做相府的属官。
English: By the time his statement was broadcast, the prime minister, Wang Du, wanted to hire him and treat him with courtesy, so he was transferred to be a subordinate official of the cabinet of ministers.

古文：廞得笺命，笑曰： 茂弘乃复以一爵假人！ 
现代文：李廞得到王导的任命信时笑着说： 茂弘居然拿一个官爵来雇佣人。 
English: When Li Yan received Wang Du's letter of appointment, he smiled and said: Maohiro actually hired a peer.

古文：何骠骑弟以高情避世，而骠骑劝之令仕。
现代文：骠骑将军何充的弟弟因为情趣高尚而选择避世而居，何充劝导他，希望他出来做官。
English: The younger brother of the cavalry general He Zhen chose to live in seclusion because of his noble taste. He Zhen advised him and hoped that he would become an official.

古文：答曰： 予第五之名，何必减骠骑？ 
现代文：他回答说： 我的名望，什么时候比骠骑低！ 。
English: He answered, "When did my reputation become lower than a donkey's?"

古文：阮光禄在东山，萧然无事，常内足于怀。
现代文：光禄大夫阮裕隐居东山，清静无为，内心一直很自足。
English: Dr. Ruan Yu, the doctor of Guanglu, lived in seclusion in Dongshan. He was quiet and inactive, and his heart was always self-sufficient.

古文：有人以问王右军，右军曰： 此君近不惊宠辱，虽古之沉冥，何以过此？ 
现代文：有人因此问右军将军王羲之，羲之说： 这位先生近来不因荣辱而动心，就是古时的隐士，又怎么能超越这一点！ 
English: Someone therefore asked Wang Shanzhi, general of the Right Army, and Shanzhi said: This gentleman has not been moved by honor and disgrace recently, he is a hermit from ancient times, how can he surpass this!

古文：孔车骑少有嘉遁意，年四十余，始应安东命。
现代文：车骑将军孔愉年轻时有隐居的打算，到四十多岁，才接受安东将军的任命出来做官。
English: When he was young, the cavalry general Kong Yu had plans to live in seclusion. It was not until he was in his forties that he accepted the appointment of General Anton as an official.

古文：未仕宦时，常独寝，歌吹自箴诲，自称孔郎，游散名山。
现代文：在没有做官时，一直是独自住在山中，歌咏吹弹，告诫自己谨言慎行，自称孔郎，在名山大川漫游散心。
English: When he was not an official, he always lived alone in the mountains, singing and blowing bubbles, admonishing himself to be cautious, calling himself Kongro, and wandering in the famous mountains and rivers.

古文：百姓谓有道术，为生立庙。
现代文：百姓认为他有道术，给他立了个生庙。
English: The people thought that he had the power of Taoism and built a temple for him.

古文：今犹有孔郎庙。
现代文：现在还有孔郎庙。
English: Now there is also the Confucius Temple.

古文：南阳刘驎之，高率善史传，隐于阳岐。
现代文：南阳人刘驎之，高尚直率，历史知识很丰富，在阳歧村隐居。
English: Liu Xizhi, a native of Nanyang, is noble and straightforward, and has a wealth of historical knowledge. He lives in seclusion in Yanggui Village.

古文：于时符坚临江，荆州刺史桓冲将尽訏谟之益，徵为长史，遣人船往迎，赠贶甚厚。
现代文：当时，苻坚南侵已经逼近长江，荆州刺史桓冲想尽力实现宏图大略的效益，就聘刘驎之任长史，派人和船前去迎接他，赠送的礼物也很丰富。
English: At that time, Yu Jian's southward invasion was already approaching the Yangtze River, and Jingzhou Zishi Huanchong wanted to make every effort to achieve the benefits of the grand plan. He hired Liu Xuan's long-term appointment, sent people and ships to meet him, and the gifts were also rich.

古文：驎之闻命，便升舟，悉不受所饷，缘道以乞穷乏，比至上明亦尽。
现代文：刘驎之只好从命，就上船出发，但桓冲所送的礼物一点也没有收受，沿途拿来送给贫困的人，等走到上明，东西也送光了。
English: Liu Xizhi had no choice but to follow his orders and set out on the ship. However, he did not accept any of the gifts sent by Huan Chong. He took them along the way to give to the poor, and by the time he reached Shangming, he had run out of things.

古文：一见冲，因陈无用，翛然而退。
现代文：他一见到桓冲，便陈述自己没有才能，然后就启由自在地辞去职务。
English: As soon as he saw Kancho, he stated that he had no talent, and then freely resigned from his position.

古文：居阳岐积年，衣食有无常与村人共。
现代文：他在阳歧住了多年，衣食向来是和村人互通有无的。
English: He has lived in Yangfu for many years, and his food and clothing have always been shared with the villagers.

古文：值己匮乏，村人亦如之。
现代文：碰到自己短缺了，村人也同样帮助他。
English: When he found himself short of money, the villagers also helped him.

古文：甚厚，为乡闾所安。
现代文：他是乡邻深感满意的人。
English: He is a man who is well liked by his neighbours.

古文：南阳翟道渊与汝南周子南少相友，共隐于寻阳。
现代文：南阳人翟道渊和汝南人周子南从小就很友好，两人一道在寻阳县隐居。
English: Nanyang people Gong Daoyuan and Yunnan people Zhou Zinan have been very friendly since childhood. The two live together in seclusion in Xiangyang County.

古文：庾太尉说周以当世之务，周遂仕，翟秉志弥固。其后周诣翟，翟不与语。
现代文：太尉庾亮曾劝说周子南关心当代的国家大事，子南终于出来做官了；翟道渊却更加坚定了隐居的志向。后来周去看望翟，翟不和他说话。
English: Second Lieutenant Hao Liang had persuaded Zhou Zinan to care about contemporary national affairs, and Zinan finally came out to become an official; but Hao Daobuan was more determined to live in seclusion. Later, Zhou went to visit Hao, but Hao would not talk to him.

古文：孟万年及弟少孤，居武昌阳新县。
现代文：孟万年和他弟弟孟少孤，住在武昌郡阳新县。
English: Meng Wanyan and his brother Meng Shao Guo live in Yangxin County, Wuchang County.

古文：万年游宦，有盛名当世，少孤未尝出，京邑人士思欲见之，乃遣信报少孤，云 兄病笃 。
现代文：万年外出做官在当时享有盛名。孟少孤没有外出求过官，京都知名人士想见见他，便派信使给少孤报信说： 你哥哥病重。 
English: Meng Shao Kuo did not go out to seek a post, and prominent people in Kyoto wanted to see him, so they sent a messenger to Shao Kuo to say: "Your brother is seriously ill."

古文：狼狈至都。时贤见之者，莫不嗟重，因相谓曰： 少孤如此，万年可死。 
现代文：少孤急急忙忙地赶到京都，见到他的当代贤达，投有谁不赞叹、敬重他。于是他们评论说： 少孤既是这样，万年可以死而无憾了。 
English: Shōgoku hurried to Kyoto to see his contemporaries, who admired and respected him. They commented, "Since Shōgoku is like this, he can die with no regrets."

古文：康僧渊在豫章，去郭数十里，立精舍。旁连岭，带长川，芳林列于轩庭，清流激于堂宇。
现代文：康僧渊在豫章时，在离城几十里远的地方修建居所，旁边连着山岭，一条大河像衣带一样绕着它，繁花似锦的树林布置庭院，清清的流水在房前激起浪花。
English: When Kang Sangyuan was in Yuanzhang, he built his residence in a place dozens of miles away from the city. There are mountains next to it, and a large river surrounds it like a belt. The flower-like woods decorate the courtyard, and the clear running water stirs up waves in front of the house.

古文：乃闲居研讲，希心理味，庾公诸人多往看之。
现代文：康僧渊于是避人独居研究解释佛经，倾心义理旨趣。
English: Kang Sangyuan therefore avoided living alone, studied and interpreted Buddhist scriptures, and devoted himself to the principles of Buddhism.

古文：观其运用吐纳，风流转佳。加已处之怡然，亦有以自得，声名乃兴。
现代文：庚亮等人常常去看望他，看到他运用言谈的手法，风度更加美好，加以他心旷神治地对待这一切，也能够安闲自得，于是名声大了起来。
English: Geng Liang and others often went to visit him, and saw that he used the method of speech, his demeanor was more beautiful, and he treated all of this with an open mind and was able to relax, so his reputation grew.

古文：后不堪，遂出。
现代文：后来他忍受不了这种有名气的生活，便离开了那里。
English: Then he couldn't stand the celebrity life and left.

古文：戴安道既厉操东山，而其兄欲建式遏之功。
现代文：戴安道已经在东山隐居，他哥哥又想为国家建功立业。
English: Dian Dao has been living in seclusion in Dongshan, and his brother also wants to make contributions to the country.

古文：谢太傅曰： 卿兄弟志业，何其太殊？ 
现代文：太傅谢安对他哥哥说： 你们兄弟俩的志向。事业，怎么差异这么大呢？ 
English: Taifu Xie'an said to his brother: Your two brothers' ambitions. Career, how can there be such a big difference?

古文：戴曰： 下官 不堪其忧 ，家弟 不改其乐 。 
现代文：他哥哥回答说： 下官受不了那种忧愁，舍弟却改不了那种乐趣。 
English: His brother replied, "The second-in-command can't stand that kind of sadness, but his brother-in-law can't stand that kind of fun."

古文：许玄度隐在永兴南幽穴中，每致四方诸侯之遗。
现代文：许玄度在会稽郡永兴县南幽深的岩洞中隐居，常常引来各处王侯的馈赠。
English: Xu Xundu lived in seclusion in a deep cave in the south of Yongxing County, Heji County, and often attracted gifts from princes everywhere.

古文：或谓许曰： 尝闻箕山人，似不尔耳！ 
现代文：有人对许玄度说： 我曾听说过隐居箕山的人似乎并不是这样做的呀。 
English: Someone said to Xu Xundu: I have heard that people who live in seclusion in Shaoshan do not seem to do so.

古文：许曰： 筐篚苞苴，故当轻于天下之宝耳！ 
现代文：许玄度说： 我得到的礼物不过是竹筐装着的食物，这本来就比君位微薄呀。 
English: Xu Xundu said: "The gift I received was just food in a bamboo basket, which is actually less than a king's salary.

古文：范宣未尝入公门。
现代文：范宣不曾进过官署。
English: Fan Xuan has never been to a government office.

古文：韩康伯与同载，遂诱俱入郡。范便于车后趋下。
现代文：有一次韩康怕和他一起坐车，就想诱骗他一起进郡府，范宣便急忙从车后溜下跑了。
English: Once, Han Kang was afraid to ride in the car with him, so he tried to trick him into going to the county government together. Fan Xuan quickly slipped out of the back of the car and ran away.

古文：郗超每闻欲高尚隐退者，辄为办百万资，并为造立居宇。
现代文：郗超每逢听说要尊重隐退者的时候，就为他们筹措百万钱，并且给他们盖房子。
English: Whenever Gong Chao heard that the hermits should be respected, he raised a million dollars for them and built a house for them.

古文：在剡为戴公起宅，甚精整。
现代文：在会稽郡刻县给戴安道盖了房子，非常精致完备。
English: He built a house for Dian Dao in Kexian County, which is very exquisite and complete.

古文：戴始往旧居，与所亲书曰： 近至剡，如官舍。 
现代文：戴安道刚前去居住时，给亲友写信说： 最近到了剡地，就好像住进官邪一样。 
English: When Dian Dao first went to live there, he wrote a letter to his relatives and friends, saying: "Recently arrived in Handan, it's just like living in a dungeon.

古文：郗为傅约亦办百万资，傅隐事差互，故不果遗。
现代文：郗超也为傅约筹措了百万钱，后来傅约隐居一事错过了机会，所以馈赠没有成为事实。
English: Zou Chao also raised a million dollars for Fu You. Later, Fu You missed the opportunity to live in seclusion, so the gift did not become a reality.

古文：许掾好游山水，而体便登陟。
现代文：司徒椽许玄度喜欢游览山水，而且身体健壮敏捷，便于登高。
English: He likes to explore the landscape, and his strong and agile body makes it easy for him to climb high.

古文：时人云： 许非徒有胜情，实有济胜之具。 
现代文：当时的人说： 许玄度不只有高雅的情趣，而且确有便于游览胜境的好身体。 
English: People at the time said: Xu Xundu not only has an elegant taste, but also has a good body that is easy to visit the scenic spots.

古文：郗尚书与谢居士善。
现代文：尚书都恢和谢庆绪居士很友好。
English: Shang Shudu and Xie Qingxu are very friendly.

古文：常称： 谢庆绪识见虽不绝人，可以累心处都尽。 
现代文：常称赞说： 谢庆绪的见识虽然不比别人高明，但是能够劳心的事情一点也没有。 
English: Often praised said: Although Xie Qingxu's insight is not higher than others, there is nothing that can be worked on.

