古文：宋本纪下太宗明皇帝讳彧，字休景，小字荣期，文帝第十一子也。
现代文：太宗明皇帝名叫刘彧，字休景，小字荣期，是文帝的第十一个儿子。
English: Emperor Taizongming's name was Liu Bei, with the characters 休景 and 榮期. He was the eleventh son of Emperor Wen.

古文：元嘉十六年十月生。
现代文：元嘉十六年十月生。
English: He was born in October of the 16th year of Yuan Jia.

古文：二十五年，封淮阳王，二十九年改封湘东王。
现代文：二十五年，封为淮阳王，二十九年改封湘东王。
English: In 1925, he was named King of Huaiyang, and in 1929, he was renamed King of Shandong.

古文：孝武践阼，累迁镇军将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：孝武帝登基，逐步升任镇军将军、雍州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and was gradually promoted to the position of general of the town army, and became the ruler of Yongzhou.

古文：是岁入朝，时废帝疑畏诸父，以上付廷尉，明日将加祸害，上乃与腹心阮佃夫、李道儿等密谋。
现代文：这一年他进入了朝廷，当时废帝怀疑和畏惧各位叔伯，把明帝抓起来交给了廷尉，第二天将要加以杀害，明帝便与心腹阮佃夫、李道儿等人密谋。
English: That year, he entered the imperial court. At that time, the deposed emperor was suspicious and afraid of his uncles. He arrested Emperor Ming and handed him over to a court lieutenant. The next day, Emperor Ming was to be killed. Emperor Ming then conspired with his henchmen Nguyn Xuân Phúc and Li Duor.

古文：时废帝左右直合将军宗越、谭金、童太一等是夜并外宿，佃夫、道儿因结寿寂之等，十一月二十九日，弑废帝于后堂。
现代文：当时废帝身边的直阁将军宗越、谭金、童太一等人，这天夜里都住在了外面，阮佃夫、李道儿于是便密结寿寂之等人，于十一月二十九日，在后堂把废帝杀死。
English: At that time, General Zong Yue, Tan Jin, Tong Taitong and others who were close to the Emperor lived outside that night. Therefore, Nguyn Văn Phúc, Li Dao'er and others who were close to the Emperor killed the Emperor in the back hall on November 29.

古文：建安王休仁便称臣，奉引升西堂，登御坐。
现代文：建安王刘休仁随即称臣，拥戴和引导着明帝升入西堂，登上了御座。
English: Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, immediately praised the subject, supported and guided the Ming emperor to ascend to the West Hall, and ascended to the throne.

古文：事出仓卒，上失履，跣，犹着乌纱帽，休仁呼主衣以白纱代之。
现代文：由于事情办得仓促，皇上掉了鞋子，光着脚，还戴着乌纱帽，刘休仁叫主衣拿来白纱代替。
English: Due to the haste with which the matter was handled, the emperor had lost his shoes, was barefoot, and was still wearing a black wool cap. Liu Xuren asked his master to bring white wool instead.

古文：未即位，凡衆事悉称令书。
现代文：还没有即位，凡是各种事情都称为令书。
English: He has not yet ascended to the throne, and all kinds of things are called orders.

古文：己未，司徒豫章王子尚、山阴公主并赐死，宗越、谭金、童太一伏诛。
现代文：三十日，司徒豫章王刘子尚、山阴公主一并赐命自杀，宗越、谭金、童太一被处死。
English: On the 30th, Liu Zichang, the king of the Emperor Xuanzang, and Princess Shanyin both committed suicide, while Zong Yue, Tan Jin, and Tong Ta were all executed.

古文：十二月庚申朔，令书以东海王褘爲中书监、太尉，以晋安王子勋爲车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十二月初一，下令以东海王刘彧担任中书监、太尉，以晋安王刘子勋为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the first day of December, he ordered that the King of the East Sea, Liu Xi, be appointed as the Chinese librarian and captain, and the King of Jinan, Liu Zixun, be appointed as the chariot and cavalry general, and the head of the prefectural government and the three departments.

古文：癸亥，以建安王休仁爲司徒、尚书令、扬州刺史。
现代文：十九日，以建安王刘休仁为司徒、尚书令、扬州刺史。
English: On the 19th, Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, was appointed as the tutor, the secretary, and the historian of Yangzhou.

古文：乙丑，改封安陆王子绥爲江夏王。
现代文：二十一日，改封安陆王刘子绥为江夏王。
English: On the 21st, Liu Zixuan, the king of Anlu, was renamed the king of Jiangxia.

古文：泰始元年即大明九年也，魏和平六年。
现代文：泰始元年，即大明九年，魏朝和平六年。
English: It was the first year of the Tai Dynasty, that is, the ninth year of the Ming Dynasty, and the sixth year of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：冬十二月丙寅，皇帝即位于太极前殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：冬季的十二月十三日，明帝在太极前殿即位，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: On December 13th in winter, Emperor Ming ascended to the throne in the front hall of the Taiji Temple, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year.

古文：辛未，改封临贺王子産爲南平王，晋熙王子舆爲庐陵王。
现代文：十八日，改封临贺王刘子产为南平王，晋熙王刘子舆为庐陵王。
English: On the 18th, Linhe King Liu Zibang was renamed Nanping King, and Jinxi King Liu Zibou was renamed Fuling King.

古文：壬申，以王景文爲尚书仆射。
现代文：十九日，任命王景文为尚书仆射。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Wang Jingwen as his assistant.

古文：帝好读书，爱文义，在藩时撰江左以来文章志，又续卫瓘所注论语二卷。
现代文：二十二日，追尊生母沈婕妤为宣皇太后。二十五日，改太皇太后为崇宪皇太后，立皇后王氏。停止使用二铢钱。明帝喜欢读书，爱好文章，在做藩王时曾撰写《江左以来文章志》，又曾续写卫彧所注的《论语》二卷。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Ming's biological mother, Empress Shen Rong, was proclaimed Empress Dowager. On the 25th, Empress Dowager Wang was established, replacing Empress Dowager Zong Xian. The use of two-baht coins was discontinued. Emperor Ming loved to read and write, and when he was the king of the Han Dynasty, he wrote "Essay on the History of the Han Dynasty," and also continued to write two volumes of "Analects," which was annotated by Emperor Wei Zang.

古文：及即大位，旧臣才学之士多蒙引进。
现代文：在登上皇位以后，旧臣中的才学之士多被提拔任用。
English: After ascending the throne, most of the talented scholars among the former vassals were promoted and appointed.

古文：末年好鬼神，多忌讳，言语文书有祸败凶丧疑似之言应回避者，犯即加戮。
现代文：晚年爱好鬼神，有很多忌讳，言语文书中有祸败凶丧或疑似之言应当回避的地方，谁违犯了就加以杀害。
English: In his later years, he was fond of ghosts and gods, and had many taboos. He would kill anyone who violated the taboo against cursing, violence, or dubious words in verbal documents.

古文：改 騧 马字爲 马 边 瓜 ，以 騧 字似 祸 故也。
现代文：他让把 靬 字改为 马 边加 瓜 ，原因是 靬 字形状近似 祸 字。
English: He had the character  changed to 马 (horse) and 加 (melon) because the shape of  was similar to 祸 (calamity).

古文：尝以南苑借张永，云： 且给三百年，期尽更请。 
现代文：他曾把 南苑 借称为 张永 ，说： 暂且借用三百年，到期后再作更换。 
English: He once referred to Nanyuan as Zhang Yong, saying: Borrow it for three hundred years, and replace it when it expires.

古文：宣阳门谓之白门，上以白门不祥，讳之。
现代文： 宣阳门 又称做 白门 ，因为皇上认为 白门 不吉利，所以很忌讳。
English: Xuanyang Gate is also known as the White Gate, because the emperor believed that the White Gate was unlucky, so it was taboo.

古文：尚书右丞江谧尝误犯，上变色曰： 白汝家门！ 
现代文：尚书右丞江谧曾经误犯了一次，皇上脸色一变说： 白你的家门！ 
English: Shang Shuyuan Jiang Yao once made a mistake. The emperor's face changed and he said, "Your house is white!"

古文：路太后停尸漆床移出东宫，上幸宫见之，怒，免中庶子，以之坐死者数十人。
现代文：路太后死后停尸的黑漆棺材移出东宫，皇上去东宫时正好碰上，大怒，下令将长官中庶子免职，因此而处死的有几十人。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Lu, the black-lacquered coffin containing her body was moved out of the East Palace. When the emperor went to the East Palace, he happened to come across the coffin. Enraged, he ordered the removal of the illegitimate son of a senior official from his post. As a result, dozens of people were executed.

古文：内外常虑犯触，人不自保。
现代文：朝内外的人经常担心会犯忌讳，人人感到不能自保。
English: People at home and abroad often worry about breaking taboos, and everyone feels unable to protect themselves.

古文：移床修壁，先祭土神，使文士爲祝策，如大祭飨。
现代文：移床修壁，先祭土神，让文士撰写祝祷之辞，如同进行重大祭祀。
English: After moving the bed and repairing the wall, the earth god was first sacrificed, and the scribes were asked to write a prayer, as if they were performing a major ritual.

古文：阮佃夫、杨运长、王道隆皆擅威权，言爲诏敕，郡守令长一缺十除，内外混然，官以贿命，王、阮家富于公室。
现代文：阮佃夫、杨运长、王道隆都专权横行，他们的话就是圣旨，郡县长官缺一补十，朝内外一片混乱，依据贿赂任命官员，王、阮家里比侯王还富。
English: Nguyn Xuân Văn Thiệu, Yang Yun Quang, and Văn Đo Long all ruled with absolute power. Their words were sacred decrees. There was a shortage of one to ten county and prefectural governors. There was chaos inside and outside the country. Officials were appointed on the basis of bribery. The king and Nguyn family were richer than princes.

古文：中书舍人胡母颢专权，奏无不可。
现代文：中书舍人胡母颢专权，奏章无不获准。
English: Chinese calligraphers gave exclusive rights to Hu Muxuan, and all of his compositions were allowed to be performed.

古文：时人语曰： 禾绢闭眼诺，胡母大张橐。 
现代文：当时民间流传说： 禾绢闭眼全答应，胡母张大口袋盛。 
English: At that time, there was a folk legend: He closed his eyes and accepted everything, while his mother held out a large bag.

古文： 禾绢 谓上也。
现代文： 禾绢 就是指的皇上。
English: "He" means the emperor.

古文：及泰始、泰豫之际，左右失旨，往往有刳剒断截，禁中懔懔若践刀剑。
现代文：后来到了泰始、泰豫之际，身边的人如果不合自己的心意，往往被挖斩断截。宫中的人，十分恐惧，如踩刀剑。
English: Later, when it came to the time of Taizhi and Taiyuan, if the people around them did not meet their wishes, they were often dug up and cut off. The people in the palace were very afraid, as if they were stepping on swords.

古文：夜梦豫章太守刘愔反，遣就郡杀之。
现代文：一天夜里皇帝梦见豫章太守刘彧谋反，便派人到豫章郡去把他杀死。
English: One night, the emperor dreamed that Liu Xuan, the governor of Yuzhang, was plotting a rebellion, so he sent someone to Yuzhang County to kill him.

古文：军旅不息，府藏空虚，内外百官并断禄奉。
现代文：军事不息，府库空虚，朝廷内外的各级官员都断了薪水。
English: The military never rested, the treasury was empty, and officials at all levels, both inside and outside the imperial court, lost their salaries.

古文：在朝造官者皆市井佣贩之子。
现代文：在朝中能当上官的人都是些市井商贩的儿子。
English: The only people who can become high-ranking officials in the imperial court are the sons of merchants.

古文：而又令小黄门于殿内埋钱以爲私藏。
现代文：他又让小黄门在宫殿里埋钱币做为私藏。
English: He also let Xiao Huangmen bury coins in the palace for his own use.

古文：以蜜渍鱁鮧，一食数升，噉腊肉常至二百脔。
现代文：他用蜂蜜浸泡鱼肠酱，一次能吃好几升，吃腊肉常常多到二百片。
English: He soaks fish sausage sauce with honey, and can eat several liters at a time. He often eats up to 200 pieces of bacon.

古文：奢费过度，每所造制，必爲正御三十，副御、次副又各三十。
现代文：奢侈浪费过度，常常是制造一种东西，一定要正品三十，副品、次副品又各三十。
English: Excessive extravagance and waste, is often to make a thing, must be genuine thirty, by-products, by-products and thirty.

古文：须一物，辄造九十枚。
现代文：需要一种物品，就要造九十枚。
English: If you need one item, you have to make ninety of them.

古文：天下骚然，民不堪命。
现代文：天下骚乱，百姓负担沉重，痛苦不堪。
English: The world is in turmoil, and the people are burdened with unbearable pain.

古文：宋氏之业，自此衰矣。
现代文：宋氏的帝业，从此衰落了。
English: The imperial career of the Song dynasty has been in decline ever since.

古文：后废帝讳昱，字德融，明帝长子也。
现代文：后废帝名叫刘昱，字德融，是明帝的长子。
English: After the emperor was deposed, his name was Liu Xuan, and he was called De Rong, the eldest son of Emperor Ming.

古文：大明七年正月辛丑，生于卫尉府。
现代文：大明七年正月二十六日，生在尉卫府。
English: He was born on the 26th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Daming at the Yeongwapu.

古文：帝母陈氏，李道儿妾，明帝纳之，故人呼帝爲李氏子，帝亦自称李将军。
现代文：废帝的母亲陈氏，是李道儿的妾，明帝把她娶了过来，所以人们称废帝为李氏子，废帝也自称李将军。
English: Emperor Wu's mother, Chen, was the concubine of Li Daor. Emperor Ming married her, so people called Emperor Wu the son of Li, and Emperor Wu also called himself General Li.

古文：明帝诸子在孕，皆以周易筮之，即以所得卦爲小字，故帝小字慧震。
现代文：明帝的各个儿子在孕育时，都用《周易》占卜过，就用所得的卦名为小字，所以废帝的小字叫慧震。
English: All the sons of Emperor Ming used "Zhou Yi" for divination when they were conceived, and they used the obtained "Gua" as a small character. Therefore, the small character of Emperor Wudi is called "Hui Zhen."

古文：泰始二年，立爲皇太子。
现代文：泰始二年立为皇太子。
English: He became crown prince two years later.

古文：六年，出东宫。
现代文：泰始六年，离开东宫。
English: It's been six years since Tai first left Donggong.

古文：又制太子元正朝贺，服衮冕九章衣。
现代文：皇帝又下令太子元旦朝贺，穿衮冕九章衣。
English: The emperor also ordered the crown prince to wear a nine-pointed crown on New Year's Day.

古文：明帝崩，庚子，太子即皇帝位，大赦。尚书令袁粲、护军将军褚彦回共辅朝政，班剑依旧入殿。
现代文：明帝逝世，二月初六，太子即皇帝位，实行大赦，尚书令袁粲、护军将军褚彦回共同辅佐朝政，班剑依旧可以入殿。
English: After the death of Emperor Ming, on the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the crown prince became emperor, and a general amnesty was implemented. Yuan Shao and the general of the military escort, Yan Yan, were ordered to return to jointly assist the government, and Pan Jian could still enter the palace.

古文：六月乙巳，尊皇后曰皇太后，立皇后江氏。
现代文：六月十三日，尊皇后为皇太后，立皇后江氏。
English: On June 13, Empress Sonno became the empress dowager and established the Empress Jiang clan.

古文：秋七月戊辰，拜帝所生陈贵妃爲皇太妃。
现代文：秋季的七月初六，封废帝的生母陈贵妃为皇太妃。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Chen Guifei, the birth mother of the deposed emperor, became the crown princess.

古文：八月戊午，中书监、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司蔡兴宗薨。
现代文：八月二十七日，中书监、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司蔡兴宗逝世。
English: On August 27th, the middle school librarian, Dr. Sakoroku, Kaifu Yi and the third grade teacher, Cai Xingzong, passed away.

古文：冬十一月己亥，新除郢州刺史刘彦节爲尚书左仆射。
现代文：冬季的十一月己亥日，新任命的郢州刺史刘彦节为尚书左仆射。
English: In the winter of November, on the day of the year of the boar, the newly appointed Zhangzhou chief historian Liu Yan Jie was the left-hand man of Shang Shuxu.

古文：元徽元年春正月戊寅，大赦改元。
现代文：元徽元年春季的正月初一，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yuan Hui, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：诏自元年以前徙放者并听还本。
现代文：诏令自从元年以前流放的人一概允许返回本乡。
English: The edict allowed all those who had been exiled since before the first year of the year to return to their hometowns.

古文：魏人来聘。
现代文：魏国人前来聘问。
English: The Wei people came to ask questions.

古文：夏六月乙卯，寿阳大水。
现代文：夏季的六月初十，寿阳发生大水灾。
English: On the tenth day of the sixth month of summer, a great flood occurred in Shouyang.

古文：秋八月，都下旱。
现代文：秋季的八月，京城发生旱灾。
English: In the autumn of August, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：庚午，陈留王曹铣薨。
现代文：二十六日，陈留王曹铣去世。
English: On the 26th, Chen Liu Wang Cao Wei passed away.

古文：九月丁亥，立衡阳王嶷子伯玉爲南平王。
现代文：九月十四日，封衡阳王刘嶷的儿子刘伯玉为南平王。
English: On September 14th, Liu Bo-yu, the son of Liu Xuan, the King of Hengyang, became the King of Nanping.

古文：冬十二月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬季的十二月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of December in winter, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：乙巳，进桂阳王休范位太尉。
现代文：初三，晋升桂阳王刘休范的职位为太尉。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Guiyang King Liu Xiufan was promoted to the position of captain.

古文：癸亥，立前建安王世子伯融爲始安县王。
现代文：二十一日，封前建安王的世子刘伯融为始安县王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Liu Bolong, the heir of the former Jianan King, became the King of Shi'an County.

古文：二年夏五月壬午，江州刺史桂阳王休范举兵反。
现代文：二年夏季的五月十二日，江州刺史桂阳王刘休范起兵反叛。
English: On the 12th day of May in the summer of the second year, Liu Xiufan, the king of Guiyang in Jiangsu Province, rebelled.

古文：庚寅，内外戒严，中领军刘勉、右卫将军萧道成前锋南讨，出屯新亭；征北将军张永屯白下；前南兖州刺史沈怀明戍石头；卫将军袁粲、中军将军褚彦回入卫殿省。
现代文：二十日，京城内外实行戒严，中领军刘面力、右卫将军萧道成为前锋南下征讨，出兵屯驻在新亭；征北将军张永屯驻在白下；前南兖州刺史沈怀明守卫石头城；卫将军袁粲、中军将军褚彦回入京保卫皇宫。
English: On the 20th, martial law was imposed inside and outside Beijing. Liu Mianli, the leader of the central army, and Xiao Dao, the general of the right guard, became the vanguard of the southward campaign and stationed in Xinting; Zhang Yongtun, the general of the northward campaign, was stationed in Baixia; Shen Huiming, the former governor of southern Zhangzhou, guarded the Stone City; the general of the guard, Yuan Qi, and the general of the central army, Yan Yan, returned to Beijing to defend the imperial palace.

古文：壬辰，贼奄至，攻新亭垒，道成拒击，大破之。
现代文：二十二日，贼军忽然到来，攻击新亭垒，萧道成抗击敌军，把他们打得大败。
English: On the 22nd, the bandits suddenly arrived and attacked the new pavilion. They fought against the enemy and defeated them.

古文：越骑校尉张苟儿斩休范，贼党杜黑蠡、丁文豪分军向朱雀航，刘勉拒贼，败绩，死之。
现代文：越骑校尉张苟儿杀死了刘休范，奸贼的党羽杜黑蠡、丁文豪分兵转向朱雀航，刘面力抗击贼军，被击败，死在战场。
English: The Vietcong's cavalry captain Zhang Gou'er killed Liu Xiufan, the traitors' henchmen Du Heijie and Ding Wenhao's detachment turned to Zhu Zakhang, Liu was defeated and died on the battlefield.

古文：右将军王道隆奔走，遇害。
现代文：右将军王道隆逃走，被杀害。
English: Right General Wang Daolong fled and was killed.

古文：张永溃于白下，沈怀明自石头奔散。
现代文：张永在白下被击溃，沈怀明从石头城跑散。
English: Zhang Yong was defeated under the white flag, and Shen Huiming ran away from Stone Town.

古文：甲午，车骑典签茅恬开东府纳贼，贼入屯中堂，羽林监陈显达击，大破之。
现代文：二十四日，车骑典签茅恬打开东府的大门把贼军放入，贼军进去屯驻在中堂，羽林监孙显达攻击，把他们打得大败。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the chariot and cavalry warden Maojun opened the gate of Dongfu to let the thief army in. The thief army went in and stationed themselves in the central hall. The warden of the forest, Sun Xianda, attacked them and defeated them.

古文：丙申，张苟儿等又破贼，进平东府城，枭禽群贼。
现代文：二十六日，张苟儿等人又打败了敌军，进兵平了东府城，杀死与活捉了群贼。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Gou'er and others defeated the enemy army, entered the army, leveled Dongfu Town, and killed and captured a group of thieves.

古文：丁酉，大赦，解严。
现代文：二十七日，实行大赦，解除戒严。
English: On the 27th, an amnesty was implemented and martial law was lifted.

古文：荆州刺史沈攸之、南徐州刺史建平王景素、郢州刺史晋熙王燮、湘州刺史王僧虔、雍州刺史张兴世并举义兵赴建邺。
现代文：荆州刺史沈攸之、南徐州刺史建平王刘景素、郢州刺史晋熙王刘燮、湘州刺史王僧虔、雍州刺史张兴世一齐率领义兵前往建邺。
English: Jingzhou scholar Shen Youzhi, South Xuzhou scholar Jianping Wang Liu Jingsu, Zhangzhou scholar Jinxi Wang Liu Wei, Hunan scholar Wang Sangyan, and Yongzhou scholar Zhang Xingshi all led the volunteers to Jianye.

古文：六月癸卯，晋熙王燮遣军克寻阳，江州平。
现代文：六月初四，晋熙王刘燮派遣军队攻克寻阳，江州平定。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Jin Dynasty, King Liu Bei sent an army to conquer Xiangyang, and Jiangzhou was pacified.

古文：壬戌，改辅师将军还爲辅国。
现代文：二十三日，改辅师将军仍为辅国将军。
English: On the 23rd, the General of the Auxiliary Division was still the General of the Auxiliary Province.

古文：秋七月庚辰，立皇弟友爲邵陵王。
现代文：秋季的七月十一，封皇弟刘友为邵陵王。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month in autumn, Liu You, the younger brother of the emperor, was named King of Shao Ling.

古文：乙酉，南徐州刺史建平王景素进号征北将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十六日，南徐州刺史建平王刘景素晋升封号为征北将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 16th, Liu Jingsu, the king of Jianping in southern Xuzhou, was promoted to the title of General of the Northern Expedition and the title of General of the Northern Expedition.

古文：九月丁酉，以袁粲爲中书监，领司徒。
现代文：九月二十九日，任命袁粲为中书监，兼任司徒。
English: On September 29th, Yuan Qi was appointed as the book supervisor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and also served as the secretary.

古文：加护军将军褚彦回爲尚书令。
现代文：任命护军将军褚彦回为尚书令。
English: The appointment of the military escort general, Yan Yan, to the post of the commander-in-chief.

古文：冬十一月丙戌，帝加元服。
现代文：冬季的十一月十九日，后废帝加戴皇冠。
English: On the winter day of November 19th, the deposed emperor was crowned.

古文：十二月癸亥，立皇弟跻爲江夏王，赞爲武陵王。
现代文：十二月二十七日，封皇弟刘跻为江夏王，刘赞为武陵王。
English: On December 27th, Liu Zhan, the younger brother of Emperor Feng, became the King of Jiangxia, and Liu Zan became the King of Wuling.

古文：三年春三月己巳，都下大水。
现代文：三年春天的三月初四，京城大水成灾。
English: On the fourth day of March in the spring of the third year, the capital city was flooded.

古文：夏六月，魏人来聘。
现代文：夏季的六月，魏国人前来聘问。
English: In the summer of June, the Wei people came to ask questions.

古文：秋七月庚戌，以袁粲爲尚书令。
现代文：秋季的七月十七日，任命袁粲为尚书令。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Yuan Shao was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：九月丙辰，征西大将军河南王吐谷浑拾寅进号车骑大将军。
现代文：九月二十四日，征西大将军河南王吐谷浑拾寅晋升称号为车骑大将军。
English: On September 24th, the General of the Western Conquest, King of Henan, Tuya Hunshuying, was promoted to the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：四年夏六月乙亥，加萧道成尚书左仆射。
现代文：四年夏季的六月十七日，任命萧道成为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 17th of June in the summer of the fourth year, Xiao Dao was appointed as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man.

古文：秋七月戊子，建平王景素据京城反。
现代文：秋季的七月初一，建平王刘景素依据京城进行反叛。
English: On the first day of July in autumn, Liu Jingsu, the king of Jianping, rebelled against the capital.

古文：己丑，内外纂严。
现代文：初二，京城内外戒严。
English: On the second day of the new year, martial law was declared in and around Kyoto.

古文：遣骁骑将军任农夫、冠军将军黄回北讨，萧道成总统衆军。
现代文：派遣骁骑将军任农夫、冠军将军黄回向北讨伐，萧道成总率各路大军。
English: He sent his cavalry general to be a farmer, the champion general Huang Hui to fight in the north, and Xiao Daocheng to lead the army in all directions.

古文：始安王伯融、都乡侯伯猷并赐死。
现代文：始安王刘伯融、都乡侯刘伯猷一齐被赐命自杀。
English: Liu Bolong, the King of the First Anniversaries, and Liu Bolu, the Prince of the Capital Town, were both given the order to commit suicide.

古文：乙未，克京城，斩景素，同逆皆伏诛。
现代文：初八，攻克了京城，杀死刘景素，叛逆的同党全部被杀死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he conquered the capital and killed Liu Jingsu. All of his traitorous fellow party members were killed.

古文：八月丁卯，立皇弟翽爲南阳王，嵩爲新兴王，禧爲始建王。
现代文：八月初十，封皇弟刘为南阳王，刘嵩为新兴王，刘禧为始建王。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, Liu, the younger brother of the emperor, was crowned the king of Nanyang, Liu Song was crowned the emerging king, and Liu Xie was crowned the founding king.

古文：九月戊子，骁骑将军高道庆有罪，赐死。
现代文：九月初二，骁骑将军高道庆有罪，被赐命自杀。
English: On the second day of September, the general Gao Daoqing was found guilty and was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：己丑，车骑将军、扬州刺史安成王准进号骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：初三，车骑将军、扬州刺史安成王刘准晋升封号为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Liu Jun, General of Chariot and Cavalry, Yangzhou Zhishi Ancheng Wang, was promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry, and Kaifu Yi was promoted to the Third Division.

古文：冬十月辛酉，以王僧虔爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：冬季的十月初五，任命王僧虔为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, Wang Sangyan was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：五年夏四月甲戌，豫州刺史阮佃夫、步兵校尉申伯宗、朱幼谋废立，皆伏诛。
现代文：五年夏季的四月二十一日，豫州刺史阮佃夫、步兵校尉申伯宗、朱幼阴谋废立皇帝，都被处死。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, on April 21, the Yuzhou assassin Ruan Shifu, the infantry captain Shen Bozong, and Zhu Yu conspired to depose the emperor and were all executed.

古文：五月，地震。
现代文：五月，地震。
English: In May, there was an earthquake.

古文：六月甲戌，诛司徒左长史沈勃、散骑常侍杜幼文、游击将军孙超之、长水校尉杜叔文。
现代文：六月二十二日，处死司徒左长史沈勃、散骑常侍杜幼文、游击将军孙超之、长水校尉杜叔文。
English: On June 22nd, the following people were executed: Sittu Zuo Chang Shi Shen Bo, Sanzhiyang Zongzhu Du Yuwen, Guerrilla General Sun Chaozhi, and Changshui Captain Du Shuwen.

古文：七月戊子夜，帝遇弑于仁寿殿，时年十五。
现代文：七月初七夜，后废帝在仁寿殿被刺杀，当时年龄十五岁。
English: On the seventh night of early July, Emperor Houwu was assassinated in Renshou Palace, at the age of fifteen.

古文：己丑，皇太后令贬帝爲苍梧郡王，葬丹阳秣陵县郊坛西。
现代文：初八，皇太后命令贬废帝为苍梧郡王，埋葬在丹阳秣陵县郊外祭坛的西面。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the empress dowager ordered the dethroned emperor to be crowned the king of Gowon County and buried on the west side of the altar in the suburbs of Danyang and Fuling County.

古文：初帝之生夕，明帝梦人乘马，马无头及后足，有人曰： 太子也。 
现代文：起初，后废帝出生的那天夜里，明帝梦见有人骑马，而马没有头和后脚，有人说： 这是太子。 
English: At first, on the night of Emperor Houwu's birth, Emperor Ming dreamed that someone was riding a horse, but the horse had no head or hind legs. Someone said, "This is the crown prince."

古文：及在东宫,五六岁能缘漆帐竿，去地丈馀，如此者半食久乃下。
现代文：等进了东宫，五六岁就能爬上油漆的帐竿，离地一丈多高，这样呆上半顿饭的功夫才下来。
English: After entering the East Palace, five- or six-year-olds can climb up the painted pole, which is as high as one floor from the ground, so that the effort of staying for half a meal comes down.

古文：渐长，喜怒乖节，左右失旨者手加扑打，徒跣蹲踞。
现代文：渐渐长大了，喜怒反常，身边的人稍有不合心意的便加以抽打，光着脚板蹲下或坐着。
English: Gradually he grew up, his moods and anger were abnormal, he would lash out at anyone around him who displeased him, and he would squat or sit with bare feet.

古文：及嗣位，内畏太后，外惮大臣，犹未得肆志。
现代文：继承皇位以后，内部害怕皇后，外部害怕大臣，还没有能够放胆行事。
English: Since he succeeded to the throne, he has not been able to act boldly because he is afraid of the Empress internally and the ministers externally.

古文：自加元服，三年，好出入，单将左右，或十里、二十里，或入市里，遇慢骂则悦而受焉。
现代文：自从加戴了皇冠，元徽三年，喜欢出入宫中只带着身边的人，有时十里、二十里，有时进入街市，遇到有人随口辱骂，则高兴地接受。
English: In the three years since he put on the crown and the original emblem, he likes to go in and out of the palace with only the people around him, sometimes ten miles, twenty miles, sometimes into the street market, and when someone abuses him, he is happy to accept it.

古文：四年，无日不出，与左右解僧智、张五儿恒夜出开承明门，夕去晨反，晨出暮归，从者并执铤矛，行人男女及犬马牛驴逢无免者。
现代文：元徽四年，无日不外出，与身边的解僧智、张五儿总是夜间开承明门外出，夜里出去，清晨返回；早晨出去，晚上归来，随从的人都拿着铁矛，男女行人和狗马牛驴只要遇上他们没有能幸免的。
English: In the four years of the Yuan Dynasty, he never went out. He and his companions, He Xiangzhi and Zhang Wuer, always went out at night with the door open, went out at night and returned in the morning; they went out in the morning and returned in the evening. The followers all carried iron spears. Male and female pedestrians and dogs, horses, cows and donkeys could not escape if they encountered them.

古文：人间扰惧，昼日不开门，道无行人。
现代文：社会上的人们都很恐惧，白天不开门，路上没有行人。
English: People in society are afraid, they don't open their doors during the day, and there are no pedestrians on the road.

古文：尝着小裤，不服衣冠。
现代文：曾经只着一条小裤，不穿戴衣帽。
English: He once wore only a pair of shorts and no hat.

古文：有白棓数十，各有名号，钳凿锥锯，不离左右，爲击脑、槌阴、剖心之诛，日有数十。
现代文：有白色棍棒几十根，各有名号，钳凿锥锯，不离左右，用击脑、捶阴、剖心等方法杀人，每天都有几十个。
English: There are dozens of white cudgels, each with its own name, and dozens of machetes, chisels, cones, and saws, and dozens of methods of killing people every day, such as striking the head, gnawing the anus, and cutting the heart.

古文：常见卧尸流血，然后爲乐。
现代文：常常见到卧尸流血，然后才感到快乐。
English: It is common to see a corpse bleed to death before feeling happy.

古文：左右人见有嚬眉者，帝令其正立，以矛刺洞之。
现代文：身边的人见到后有皱眉的，废帝就命令他正直站立，用矛在他身上刺穿一个洞。
English: When the people around him frowned upon seeing him, the emperor ordered him to stand up straight and pierced a hole in his body with a spear.

古文：曜灵殿上养驴数十头，所自乘马，养于御床侧。
现代文：曜灵殿上养了几十头驴，自己所骑的马，养在御床的旁边。
English: Dozens of donkeys were kept at the Yoryoden, and the horse he rode was kept next to the imperial bed.

古文：与右卫翼辇营女子私通，每从之游，持数千钱爲酒肉之费。
现代文：他和右卫翼辇营中的女子私通，常常跟她一块出游，拿好几千钱作为酒肉费用。
English: He had an adulterous affair with a woman in the Right Wing camp, often traveling with her, and taking several thousand dollars as expenses for wine and meat.

古文：出逢婚姻葬送，辄与挽车小儿群聚饮酒，以爲欢适。
现代文：外出碰到结婚送葬的，就和赶车的伙计成群地聚在一起饮酒，求得快活。
English: When out and about, they meet people who are getting married or attending funerals, and they and the people who are driving them get together in groups to drink alcohol and have fun.

古文：阮佃夫腹心人张羊爲佃夫委信，佃夫败，叛走，复捕得，自于承明门以车轹杀之。
现代文：阮佃夫的心腹人张羊，受到阮佃夫的委任和信赖，阮佃夫失败后，他背叛逃走，又被捉住，废帝自己在承明门用车轮把他轧死。
English: Zhang Yang, a confidant of Nguyn Văn Thiệu, was appointed and trusted by Nguyn Văn Thiệu. After Nguyn Văn Thiệu's defeat, he betrayed and fled, was caught again, and the emperor himself killed him with a wheel at Trn Minh Gate.

古文：杀杜延载、杜幼文，躬运矛铤，手自脔割。
现代文：杀死杜延载、杜幼文，他亲自挥动铁矛，亲手分割他们的肉。
English: He killed Du Yanchao and Du Yuwen, and personally wielded an iron spear to cut their flesh with his own hands.

古文：察孙超有蒜气，剖腹视之。
现代文：他发觉孙超有蒜的气味，就剖开了他的肚子察看究竟。
English: He found that Sun Chao smelled of garlic, so he cut open his stomach to find out.

古文：执楯驰马，自往刺杜叔文于玄武北湖。
现代文：他拿着盾，骑着马，亲自前往玄武北湖将杜叔文刺死。
English: Holding a shield and riding a horse, he personally went to the Xuanwu North Lake to stab Du Shuwen to death.

古文：孝武帝二十八子，明帝杀其十六，馀皆帝杀之。
现代文：孝武帝有二十八个儿子，明帝杀死了其中的十六个，剩余的都是由废帝杀死的。
English: Emperor Xiaowu had 28 sons. Emperor Ming killed 16 of them, and the rest were killed by the deposed emperors.

古文：吴兴沈勃多宝货，往劫之，挥刀独前，左右未至，勃时居丧在庐，帝望见之，便投铤，不中；勃知不免，手搏帝耳，唾駡之曰： 汝罪踰桀、纣，屠戮无日！ 
现代文：吴兴人沈勃有很多宝物，废帝前去抢劫，他挥着刀独自走在前面，左右的人还没有赶到，沈勃当时在住室中守丧，废帝望见了他，便把铁矛投了过去，没有投中；沈勃知道不能逃脱，用手抓住废帝的耳朵，唾他的脸并且骂道： 你的罪孽超过夏桀、商纣，被杀的日子不远了！ 
English: Wu Xing's man, Shen Bo, had a lot of treasures. Emperor Wutu went to rob him. He waved his sword and walked alone in front of him. The people around him had not arrived yet. Emperor Wutu saw Shen Bo, who was attending a funeral in the room where he lived at the time. When Emperor Wutu saw him, he threw his iron spear at him, but missed. Knowing that he could not escape, Emperor Wutu grabbed Emperor Wutu's ear with his hand, spat in his face and cursed: "Your sins exceed those of Xia Yao and Shang Yao. The day when you are killed is not far away!"

古文：遂见害，帝自脔割。
现代文：随即被害。废帝亲自将他用刀割肉。
English: He was killed immediately. Emperor Wu personally cut his flesh with a knife.

古文：制露车一乘，施莑，乘以出入，从数十人，羽仪追之，恒不相及；又各虑祸，亦不敢追，但整部伍，别在一处瞻望而已。
现代文：废帝曾经制造了一辆没有帷盖的露车，上面加篷，乘坐出入，随从的几十人，仪仗队在后面追赶，总是追不上；又各自害怕遇祸，也不敢追上，只是整好队形，在另外的地方观望罢了。
English: The deposed emperor once made a trolley without a curtain, with a canopy on top, with dozens of people riding in and out, with the honor guard chasing behind, always unable to catch up; and each of them was afraid of getting into an accident, and did not dare to catch up, but just arranged the formation and watched in another place.

古文：凡诸鄙事，过目则能，锻银、裁衣、作帽，莫不精绝。
现代文：凡是各种粗鄙事情，他过目就会，锻银、裁衣、作帽，无不精绝。
English: He could see through all sorts of vulgar things, forging silver, cutting clothes, making hats, everything was perfect.

古文：未尝吹箎，执管便韵。
现代文：他没有吹过諶，却拿来一吹就成韵调。
English: He didn't play the gong, but when he played it, it became a rhyme.

古文：天性好杀，一日无事，辄惨惨不乐。
现代文：他天性好杀，一天没事，就闷闷不乐。
English: He's a killjoy by nature, and when he doesn't get his way, he sulks.

古文：内外忧惶，夕不及旦。
现代文：朝内外的人都很忧虑恐慌，朝不保夕。
English: People inside and outside the country are worried and panicked, and it's not safe in the morning and evening.

古文：领军将军萧道成与直合将军王敬则谋之。
现代文：领军将军萧道成和直阁将军王敬则一同谋划对付他。
English: The leading generals, Xiao Daocheng and Wang Jing, plotted against him.

古文：七月戊子，帝微行出北湖，单马先走，羽仪不及，左右张五儿马坠湖，帝怒，自驰骑刺马，屠割之。
现代文：七月初七，废帝化装出去到北湖，自己单马在前面走，仪仗队没有赶上，身旁张五儿的马落入湖中，废帝十分生气，自己骑马冲上去直刺张五儿的马，并把他用刀割死。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：与左右作羌胡伎爲乐。
现代文：他与身边的人表演羌胡伎取乐。
English: He and the people around him perform tricks for fun.

古文：又于蛮冈赌跳，因乘露车，无复卤簿，往青园尼寺。
现代文：又在蛮冈赛跳为赌，然后乘着露车，不再有仪仗队，便前往青园尼姑寺。
English: They also danced for a bet in the Mawangang race, and then rode a trolley, no longer with an honor guard, to the Qingyuan nunnery.

古文：晚至新安寺偷狗，就昙度道人煮之饮酒。
现代文：晚上到新安寺去偷狗，然后在昙度道人那里煮了狗肉饮酒。
English: In the evening, he went to Xin'an Temple to steal a dog, and then cooked dog meat and drank alcohol at the home of a Shandong Taoist.

古文：杨玉夫常得意，忽然见憎，遇辄切齿，曰： 明日当杀小子，取肝肺。 
现代文：杨玉夫平时非常得意，却忽然受到憎恶，废帝遇到了他就咬牙切齿，说道： 明天一定杀了你小子，取出你的肝肺。 
English: Yang Yufu was usually very proud, but suddenly he was hated. When the emperor met him, he gritted his teeth and said, "Tomorrow I will kill your son and take out your liver and lungs."

古文：是夜七夕，令玉夫伺织女度，报己，因与内人穿针讫，大醉，卧于仁寿殿东阿毡幄中。
现代文：这天夜晚是七夕，命令杨玉夫等待织女渡河，报告给自己，于是便和内人穿针完毕，喝得大醉，睡在仁寿殿东边的毡屋中。
English: This night was the seventh day of the seventh month. Yang Yufu ordered to wait for the weaver to cross the river and report to him. So he and his wife finished threading the needle, got very drunk, and slept in the straw hut on the east side of Renshou Hall.

古文：帝出入无禁，王敬则先结玉夫、陈奉伯、杨万年等合二十五人，其夕玉夫候帝眠熟，至乙夜，与万年同入毡幄内，取千牛刀杀之。
现代文：废帝出入没有禁卫，王敬则预先串通了杨玉夫、陈奉伯、杨万年等共二十五人，这天夜里，杨玉夫等废帝睡熟，到了二更的时候，与杨万年一同进入毡屋里边，取出了千牛刀把他杀死。
English: There was no guard at the emperor's entrance and exit. Wang Jing had previously colluded with Yang Yufu, Chen Fongbo, Yang Wannian and a total of twenty-five others. That night, Yang Yufu and other emperors were fast asleep. When it was two o'clock, they entered the room with Yang Wannian and took out the thousand-cattle knife to kill him.

