古文：大儒之效：武王崩，成王幼，周公屏成王而及武王以属天下，恶天下之倍周也。
现代文：大儒的作用是：周武王去世以后，由于成王还年幼，周公担心天下有人会背叛周朝，就拥护成王继承武王之位来统辖天下。
English: The role of the Great Confucius is: After the death of King Zhou Wu, since King Cheng was still young, Zhou Gong was worried that someone in the world would betray the Zhou Dynasty, so he supported King Cheng to inherit the throne of King Wu to rule the world.

古文：履天子之籍，听天下之断，偃然如固有之，而天下不称贪焉；杀管叔，虚殷国，而天下不称戾焉；兼制天下，立七十一国，姬姓独居五十三人，而天下不称偏焉。
现代文：周公登王位，处理天下大事心安理得，好像这本来就应该是他拥有的权力一样，但是天下的人并不认为周公事贪图王位。周公杀了管叔，把殷国都城变成了废墟，可是天下人并不觉得他残暴。周公控制天下，分封七十一个诸侯国，其中姬姓的占了五十三个，但天下的人并不认为他偏私。
English: Zhou Gong ascended the throne and dealt with the world's affairs with peace of mind, as if this should have been the power he possessed, but people around the world did not think that Zhou Gongji coveted the throne. Zhou Gong killed Uncle Guan and turned the capital city of Yin into ruins, but people around the world did not think he was cruel. Zhou Gong controlled the world and divided it into seventy-one principalities, of which fifty-three were surnamed Ji, but people around the world did not think he was selfish.

古文：教诲开导成王，使谕于道，而能掩迹于文、武。
现代文：周公教导成王，使他明白礼仪之道，使他能继承先辈的事业。
English: Zhou Gong taught Cheng Wang, so that he could understand the etiquette, so that he could inherit the cause of his ancestors.

古文：周公归周，反籍于成王，而天下不辍事周，然而周公北面而朝之。
现代文：周公把王位归还给成王，可是天下诸侯继续臣服于周，周公也回到臣位，朝拜成王。
English: Zhou Gong returned the throne to Cheng Wang, but the princes of the world continued to submit to Zhou, and Zhou Gong also returned to the throne and worshiped Cheng Wang.

古文：天子也者，不可以少当也，不可以假摄为也。
现代文：天子这个职位，不能由年幼的人来承担，也不能由他人代理去做。
English: The position of the Son of God cannot be assumed by a young person, nor can it be done by someone else.

古文：能则天下归之，不能则天下去之，是以周公屏成王而及武王以属天下，恶天下之离周也。
现代文：能胜任这一职位的人，天下人就会归顺他，反之，天下人就会背离他。所以，周公撇开成王，继承武王的事业而统治天下，这是深恐天下的人会背离周朝。
English: A person who is capable of holding this position will be obeyed by the people of the world, and vice versa, the people of the world will turn away from him. Therefore, Zhou Gong left King Chengwang aside and inherited the cause of King Wu to rule the world, which is deeply afraid that the people of the world will turn away from the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：成王冠，成人，周公归周反籍焉，明不灭主之义也。
现代文：成王到二十岁了，已经长大成年了，周公就把王位归还给成王，以表明他不灭掉嫡长子的礼义法度。
English: When Cheng Wang was twenty years old and had already grown up, Zhou Gong returned the throne to Cheng Wang to show that he would not destroy his eldest son's code of etiquette.

古文：周公无天下矣；乡有天下，今无天下，非擅也；成王乡无天下，今有天下，非夺也；变势次序节然也。
现代文：于是，周公就没有统治天下的权力了，过去拥有天下，现在没有了，这不是禅让；成王以前不能掌握天下，现在可以了，这不是篡夺；这是由于地位次序的变化的缘故啊。
English: As a result, Zhou Gong did not have the power to rule the world. He used to have the world, but now he does not. This is not a concession; he could not control the world before he became king, but now he can. This is not a usurpation; this is due to the change in the order of status.

古文：故以枝代主而非越也；以弟诛兄而非暴也君臣易位而非不顺也。
现代文：因此，所以周公以旁支的身份来代替嫡长子执政并不算超越本分，弟弟诛杀兄长也不算残暴，周公与成王调换了地位并不算不顺位。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong's replacement of his legitimate eldest son with a subordinate branch is not considered to be exceeding his duty, his younger brother's killing of his elder brother is not considered to be cruel, and Zhou Gong's change of status with Cheng Wang is not considered to be out of order.

古文：因天下之和，遂文、武之业，明主枝之义，抑亦变化矣，天下厌然犹一也。
现代文：依靠天下的安定，完成了文王和武王的功业，彰明了旁支和君权的大义，虽然有了这样的变化，可是天下仍安然如一。
English: Relying on the stability of the world, he completed the work of King Wen and King Wu, and clarified the great righteousness of the branches and the monarchy. Although there have been such changes, the world is still safe and sound.

古文：非圣人莫之能为，夫是之谓大儒之效。
现代文：除了圣人没有人能够做到这一点，这就是大儒的作用。
English: No one but a sage can do this, and this is the role of a great sage.

古文：秦昭王问孙卿子曰： 儒无益于人之国？ 
现代文：秦昭王问孙卿子道： 儒者对治理国家没有什么益处吧？ 
English: Qin Zhao Wang asked Sun Qingsi: Confucianism is of no benefit to the governance of the country, right?

古文：孙卿子曰： 儒者法先王，隆礼义，谨乎臣子而致贵其上者也。
现代文：孙卿子答道： 儒者效法先王，尊崇礼义，谨慎地做臣子，并使他们的君主尊贵。
English: Sun Ching Zi replied: Confucians should follow the example of the previous king, respect propriety, be cautious as a vassal, and make their monarch noble.

古文：人主用之，则势在本朝而宜；不用，则退编百姓而悫，必为顺下矣。
现代文：如果得到君主的任用，他们在朝廷内会做一个称职的臣子；如果无法得到任用，他们就会退居民间，在编入的户籍册中，做一个诚实、顺服的普通百姓。
English: If they are appointed by the monarch, they will be a competent courtier in the court; if they cannot be appointed, they will withdraw from the residents and become an honest and obedient commoner in the family register.

古文：虽穷困冻餧，必不以邪道为贪；无置锥之地，而明于持社稷之大义。
现代文：即使处境艰难，受冻挨饿，也不会用不正当手段来满足自己的欲望；即使贫穷得没有安身之处，也能深明维护国家的大义。
English: Even if they are in a difficult situation, freezing and starving, they will not use improper means to satisfy their desires; even if they are too poor to have a place to live, they will be able to defend the great justice of the country.

古文：呜呼而莫之能应，然而通乎财万物、养百姓之经纪。
现代文：虽然他的呼声没有谁响应，但是他通晓管理万物、养育百姓的纲纪。
English: Although no one responded to his call, he was well versed in the management of all things and the discipline of raising the people.

古文：势在人上，则王公之材也；在人下，则社稷之臣、国君之宝也。
现代文：如果地位在人之上，他们可以成为天子、诸侯；地位在人之下，他们也是国家的栋梁。
English: If their position is above the people, they can become heavenly sons and princes; if their position is below the people, they are also the pillars of the country.

古文：虽隐于穷阎漏屋，人莫不贵之，道诚存也。
现代文：即使隐居在穷巷陋屋，也没有人会不尊重他，因为他们确实身怀道术啊。
English: Even if he lived in seclusion in a shanty town, no one would disrespect him, because they do have Taoism in them.

古文： 仲尼将为司寇，沈犹氏不敢朝饮其羊，公慎氏出其妻，慎溃氏逾境而徙，鲁之粥牛马者不豫贾，必蚤正以待之也。
现代文：孔子就要担任鲁国司寇了，奸商沈氏知道了，卖羊时，他就不敢在早晨把羊喂饱饮足以欺骗买主，公慎氏也休弃了淫乱的妻子，平时奢侈浪费、胡作非为的慎溃氏也搬离了鲁国，甚至鲁国卖牛马的也不再漫天要价了，这是因为孔子以正道对待他们的缘故。
English: Confucius was about to become the governor of the State of Lu. When the profiteer, the Shen clan, found out about this, he did not dare to feed the sheep in the morning to make them drink enough to deceive the buyer. The Gongshen clan also abandoned their adulterous wife, and the Shenshu clan, who were usually extravagant and wasteful, moved away from the State of Lu. Even the cattle and horse sellers in the State of Lu no longer demanded exorbitant prices. This was because Confucius treated them in the right way.

古文：居于阙党，阙党之子弟罔不分，有亲者取多，孝弟以化之也。
现代文：孔子住在阙党的时候，阙党子弟将捕获的鱼兽进行分配，其中有父母的人就分得多一些。
English: When Confucius lived in the Kuomintang, the children of the Kuomintang distributed the fish and animals they caught, and those whose parents were in the Kuomintang shared more.

古文：儒者在本朝则美政，在下位则美俗，儒之为人下如是矣。 王曰： 然则其为人上何如？ 
现代文：这是因为孔子用孝悌教化了他们。儒者在朝廷中担任官职，就能使朝政完美；作为老百姓，就能使风俗优良。儒者做臣民时就像这样的啊。秦昭王问： 那么，儒者地位在人之上的时候，又是怎样的呢？ 
English: This is because Confucius educated them with filial piety. If a Confucian holds an official position in the imperial court, he can make the imperial government perfect; as a commoner, he can make the customs excellent. Confucians are like this when they are subjects. Qin Zhao Wang asked: So, what is the position of Confucians when they are above people?

古文：孙卿曰： 其为人上也，广大矣！
现代文：孙卿答道： 儒者在人之上，他们的作用就更大了！
English: Sun Ching replied: Confucians are superior to humans, so their role is even greater!

古文：志意定乎内，礼节修乎朝，法则度量正乎官，忠信爱利形乎下。
现代文：他们内心意志坚定，用礼义制度修治朝廷，用各种规章制度整顿官府，百姓之中，忠诚、信实、仁爱、利他的美德蔚然成风。
English: Their hearts were firm, and they used the etiquette system to govern the imperial court, and various rules and regulations to rectify the government. Among the common people, the virtues of loyalty, faithfulness, benevolence, and altruism became popular.

古文：行一不义、杀一无罪而得天下，不为也。
现代文：为了获得天下而做不合礼义的事情，错杀无罪的人，这样的事情，他们是一件也不会做的。
English: In order to gain the world and do things that are not polite, mistakenly killing innocent people, they will not do such a thing.

古文：此君义信乎人矣，通于四海，则天下应之如讙。
现代文：这种做君主的道义被人民接受，传遍四海，那么天下的人就会齐声响应他。
English: If this moral principle of being a monarch is accepted by the people and spread throughout the four seas, then the people of the world will respond to him in unison.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：则贵名白而天下治也。
现代文：就因为他尊贵的名声显赫，天下的人都很仰慕。
English: Just because of his illustrious reputation, people all over the world admire him.

古文：故近者歌讴而乐之，远者竭蹶而趋之，四海之内若一家，通达之属莫不从服。
现代文：所以，君主周围的人就会歌颂他、欢迎他；而远方的人，也会不辞辛劳去投奔他。这样，四海之内，如同一家一样，交通方便的地方，没有不服从的，这就是为人楷模。《诗经》说： 从西到东，从南到北，没有不归服的。 
English: Therefore, the people around the monarch will sing his praises and welcome him, and those who are far away will spare no effort to go to him. In this way, within the four seas, like a family, a place with convenient transportation, there is no disobedience, this is a role model. "The Book of Songs" says: From west to east, from south to north, there is no disobedience.

古文：夫其为人下也如彼，其为人上也如此，何谓其无益于人之国也？ 昭王曰： 善！ 
现代文：说的就是这种情况。他们处在人之下是那个样子，处在人之上是这个样子，怎么能说他们对于治理国家没有好处呢！ 昭王说： 讲的好！ 
English: That's what it says. That's how they are when they are below people, and that's how they are when they are above people. How can it be said that they are not good for governing the country! King Zhao said: That's good to say!

古文：先王之道，仁之隆也，比中而行之。
现代文：古代圣王之道，是 仁 的最高体现，是按照最适中的标准去实行的。
English: The way of the ancient sages is the highest embodiment of benevolence and is practiced according to the most appropriate standards.

古文：曷谓中？
现代文：什么叫做适中呢？
English: What is moderate?

古文：曰：礼义是也。
现代文：答道：就是礼义。
English: He replied, "That is the meaning of courtesy."

古文：道者，非天之道，非地之道，人之所以道也，君子之所道也。
现代文：这个 道 ，不是天之道，也不是地之道，而是人们应该遵循的法则，君子应遵循的法则。
English: This way is not the way of heaven, nor is it the way of earth, but it is the law that people should follow, the law that a gentleman should follow.

古文：君子之所谓贤者，非能遍能人之所能之谓也；君子之所谓知者，非能遍知人之所知之谓也；君子之所谓辩者，非能遍辩人之所辩之谓也；君子之所谓察者，非能遍察人之所察之谓也：有所止矣。
现代文：君子所说的贤能，并不是说能全面做到所有人所能做到的所有事情；君子所说的明智，并不是完全能知道别人所知道的一切；君子所说的分辨，并不是说能够完全分辨别人所能分辨的事物；君子所说的详察，并不是完全能够详察别人所详察的意思。君子的才能与知识是有限度的。
English: What a gentleman calls virtue is not the ability to do everything that everyone else can do; what a gentleman calls wisdom is not the ability to know everything that everyone else knows; what a gentleman calls discernment is not the ability to discern what everyone else can discern; what a gentleman calls scrutiny is not the ability to scrutinize what everyone else scrutinizes. A gentleman's ability and knowledge are limited.

古文：相高下，视墝肥，序五种，君子不如农人；通货财，相美恶，辩贵贱，君子不如贾人；设规矩，陈绳墨，便备用，君子不如工人；不恤是非然不然之情，以相荐撙，以相耻怍，君子不若惠施、邓析。
现代文：察看田地地势的高低，识别土质的贫瘠肥沃，安排五谷种植的顺序，君子不如农民；流通钱财货物、鉴定货物的优劣，争讨价格的高低，君子不如商人；设置圆规曲尺，陈设墨线，熟练运用工具，君子不如工人；不顾是非，对与不对的实际情况，互相贬抑、相互讥羞，君子不如惠施、邓析。
English: The gentleman is not as good as the farmer in inspecting the level of the field and terrain, identifying the barrenness and fertility of the soil, and arranging the order of grain planting; the gentleman is not as good as the merchant in circulating money and goods, appraising the merits and demerits of goods, and discussing the level of prices; the gentleman is not as good as the worker in setting the compass, setting the ink line, and skillfully using tools; regardless of right and wrong, the actual situation of right and wrong, mutual deprecation, mutual ridicule, the gentleman is not as good as Huishi and Deng Xie.

古文：若夫谲德而定次，量能而授官，使贤不肖皆得其位，能不能皆得其官，万物得其宜，事变得其应，慎、墨不得进其谈，惠施、邓析不敢窜其察，言必当理，事必当务，是然后君子之所长也。
现代文：至于比较德行来确定他的等级次序，衡量人的才能而授予官职，使贤者与不贤的各安其位，有才能的和没有才能的人都能得到相应的官职，万物都能得到恰当的利用，各种突发变化都得到相应的处理，慎到和墨翟也不能发表他们的议论，惠施、邓析不能渗透他们的诡辩，说话一定要合符理性，做事要有缓有急，这些就是君子所见长的。
English: As for comparing virtues to determine his rank order, measuring people's talents and awarding official positions, making the wise and the unwise secure in their positions, talented and untalented people can get the corresponding official positions, everything can be used appropriately, all kinds of sudden changes are dealt with accordingly, the prudent and the ignorant cannot publish their discussions, Hui Shi and Deng analysis cannot penetrate their sophistry, speech must be consistent with reason, and things must be done with urgency, these are what the gentleman sees.

古文：凡事行，有益于理者，立之；无益于理者，废之。
现代文：不管作什么事情，对于原则有好处，就做；反之，就不做，这就叫正确处理事情。
English: No matter what you do, if it is good for the principle, then do it; otherwise, don't do it. This is called handling things correctly.

古文：夫是之谓中事。凡知说，有益于理者，为之；无益于理者，舍之。夫是之谓中说。
现代文：知识学说，对于原则有好处的，就实行；反之，就舍弃，这就叫正确对待学说。
English: As for the theory of knowledge, if it is beneficial to the principle, it will be implemented; otherwise, it will be abandoned, which is called the correct treatment of the theory.

古文：事行失中，谓之奸事；知说失中，谓之奸道。
现代文：事情和行为不得当，就使奸邪的事；知识学说不得当，就是奸邪的学说。
English: When things and actions are improper, they lead to evil deeds; when knowledge and doctrines are improper, they lead to evil doctrines.

古文：奸事、奸道，治世之所弃，而乱世之所从服也。
现代文：奸邪的事与奸邪的学说，在安定的社会被人们抛弃的，但在混乱的社会却会有人遵从。
English: Treacherous deeds and treacherous doctrines are abandoned by people in a stable society, but they will be followed in a chaotic society.

古文：若夫充虚之相施易也，坚白、同异之分隔也，是聪耳之所不能听也，明目之所不能见也，辩士之所不能言也，虽有圣人之知，未能偻指也。
现代文：至于虚实的相互转化， 离坚白  合同异 的分析，即使是耳聪的人也听不明白，眼明的人也看不清楚，善辩的人也不能说清楚，即使有了圣人的智慧，也不能轻易说得清。
English: As for the mutual transformation of truth and falsehood, and the analysis of difference from solid white and solid white, even those who have ears cannot understand, those who have eyes cannot see clearly, those who are good at arguing cannot speak clearly, and even if they have the wisdom of a saint, they cannot easily speak clearly.

古文：不知无害为君子，知之无损为小人。
现代文：不懂得这些，并不妨碍他成为一个君子。懂得这些，也不能说他就不是一个小人。
English: Not to know these things does not prevent him from being a gentleman, and knowing them does not make him less of a scoundrel.

古文：工匠不知，无害为巧；君子不知，无害为治。
现代文：就如工匠，他不懂得这些，并不妨碍他成为能工巧匠；君子不懂得这些，也不妨碍治理国家大事。
English: Just like a craftsman, if he does not understand these things, it does not prevent him from becoming a skilled craftsman; if a gentleman does not understand these things, it does not prevent him from governing the affairs of state.

古文：王公好之则乱法，百姓好之则乱事。
现代文：天子诸侯喜好奸事、奸道，就会搞乱法度；老百姓喜好奸事、奸道，就会搞乱事情。
English: The sons of heaven and princes like treachery and treachery, they will mess up the law; the common people like treachery and treachery, they will mess up things.

古文：而狂惑戆陋之人，乃始率其群徒，辩其谈说，明其辟称，老身长子，不知恶也。
现代文：狂妄糊涂呆笨愚蠢的人，就开始带领他们的徒众，申辩他们的奇谈怪论，并用譬喻和引证来阐明，即使到了人老子大之时也不知厌恶。
English: Arrogant, ignorant, and stupid men begin to lead their flocks, to defend their fanciful theories, and to illustrate them with similes and quotations, which even grown-ups find distasteful.

古文：夫是之谓上愚，曾不如相鸡狗之可以为名也。
现代文：这就叫做最愚蠢的人，还不如鉴别鸡狗优劣的人可以因此获得名声。
English: This is called the stupidest person, but it is not as good as the person who identifies the pros and cons of chickens and dogs can get fame for it.

古文：《诗》曰： 为鬼为蜮，则不可得。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 你这样鬼头鬼脑？
English: "The Book of Songs" said: Are you such a fool?

古文：有靦面目，视人罔极。
现代文：无影无形看不清！你的面目这样丑陋，给人看也看不透。
English: No shadow, no shape, I can't see clearly! Your face is so ugly, people can't see through it.

古文：作此好歌，以极反侧。 
现代文：我作这支歌，就是要揭穿你的反复无常。 
English: I wrote this song to expose your fickleness.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：我欲贱而贵，愚而智，贫而富，可乎？
现代文：我想由卑贱变得高贵，由愚昧变得智慧，由贫困变得富有，可以吗？
English: I want to go from humble to noble, from ignorance to wisdom, from poverty to wealth, is that okay?

古文：曰：其唯学乎！
现代文：回答道：那只有通过学习吧！
English: He replied: That can only be done by studying!

古文：彼学者，行之，曰士也；敦慕焉，君子也；知之，圣人也。
现代文：那些学习的人，能遵行学到的东西，就可叫做士人；能勤奋努力的，就可叫做君子；能精通学到的东西，就是圣人。
English: Those who study, who can follow what they have learned, can be called scholars; those who can work hard can be called gentlemen; those who can master what they have learned are saints.

古文：上为圣人，下为士君子，孰禁我哉！
现代文：既然最高可以成为圣人，次等的可成为士人君子，那么谁能阻止我上进呢？
English: Since the highest can become a saint, and the lowest can become a scholar, then who can stop me from advancing?

古文：乡也，混然涂之人也，俄而并乎尧、禹，岂不贱而贵矣哉！
现代文：以前，还只是一个浑浑顿顿的普通人，突然间便可跟尧、禹齐名，这难道不是由卑贱变成高贵吗！
English: In the past, he was just an ordinary person, but all of a sudden, he can be as famous as Yu and Yu. Isn't this a change from being lowly to being noble?

古文：乡也，效门室之辨，混然曾不能决也，俄而原仁义，分是非，图回天下于掌上而辩黑白，岂不愚而知矣哉！
现代文：以前，竟不能区分户内与户外礼节的区别，突然就能追溯仁义的根源，分辨是非，处理天下大事就像分辨手掌上黑白颜色那么简单，这难道不是由愚昧变成明智吗？
English: Previously, it was impossible to distinguish the difference between indoor and outdoor etiquette. Suddenly, we can trace the roots of benevolence and righteousness, distinguish right from wrong, and deal with world events as simply as distinguishing black and white colors on the palm of the hand. Isn't this turning from ignorance to wisdom?

古文：乡也，胥靡之人，俄而治天下之大器举在此，岂不贫而富矣哉！
现代文：过去一无所有，顷刻间治理天下的大权全部到了他手中，这难道不是由贫穷变得富有了吗？
English: In the past, he had nothing. Suddenly, all the power to govern the world was in his hands. Wasn't it through poverty that he became rich?

古文：今有人于此，屑然藏千溢之宝，虽行貣而食，人谓之富矣。
现代文：如果有一个人，他贮藏了无数的金银财宝，即使靠行乞过活，人们也会说他富有。
English: If there is a man who has stored up countless gold and silver treasures, even if he lives by begging, people will say he is rich.

古文：彼宝也者，衣之不可衣也，食之不可食也，卖之不可偻售也，然而人谓之富，何也？
现代文：他的那种财宝，既不能够穿；也不能够吃；即使卖它也不能很快出售。但是人们却说他富有，为什么呢？
English: His kind of treasure cannot be worn; it cannot be eaten; even if it is sold, it cannot be sold quickly. But people say he is rich, why?

古文：岂不大富之器诚在此也？
现代文：这难道不是因为他这里确实有巨大的财富吗？
English: Isn't it because he really has a huge fortune here?

古文：是杅杅亦富人已，岂不贫而富矣哉！
现代文：这样看来，学识渊博也就成为富人了，这难道不是由贫困变得富有了吗？
English: In this way, everyone who is well-educated becomes rich. Isn't it true that poverty makes you rich?

古文：故君子无爵而贵，无禄而富，不言而信，不怒而威，穷处而荣，独居而乐，岂不至尊、至富、至重、至严之情举积此哉！
现代文：所以，虽然君子没有官位也高贵，没有俸禄也富有，不用说话也能取信于人，不用发怒也有威严，处境穷困依然荣耀，处境孤独仍然快乐，君子那些最高贵、最富有、最庄重、最严肃的实质都集中在这种学习之中了吗？
English: So, although a gentleman is noble without a rank, rich without a salary, trustworthy without words, dignified without anger, honorable in poverty, and happy in solitude, are the noblest, richest, most dignified, and most serious qualities of a gentleman concentrated in this kind of study?

古文：故曰：贵名不可以比周争也，不可以夸诞有也，不可以势重胁也，必将诚此然后就也。
现代文：所以说，尊贵的名声不能用拉帮结派的方式去争夺，不能靠自我吹嘘去占有，也不能靠权势地位的威胁去获得，必定要靠真正刻苦学习，然后才能得到。
English: Therefore, a noble reputation cannot be fought for by means of factionalism, cannot be possessed by self-aggrandizement, nor can it be obtained by the threat of a position of power. It must be obtained by truly diligent study.

古文：争之则失，让之则至，遵道则积，夸诞则虚。
现代文：如果一心一意去争夺，名声反而会失掉；如果谦让，反而会得到。遵循正确的原则行事就能保持尊贵的名声，虚夸欺诈就会得不到高贵的名声。
English: If you compete with all your heart, your reputation will be lost; if you concede, it will be gained; if you follow the correct principles, you can maintain a noble reputation; if you boast and cheat, you will not get a noble reputation.

古文：故君子务修其内而让之于外，务积德于身而处之以遵道。
现代文：所以，君子致力于自己内在的思想修养，在行为上要谦让，应当致力于自身美德的积聚，遵循正确的原则处理事物。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should devote himself to cultivating his inner thoughts, should be modest in his behavior, should be committed to the accumulation of his own virtues, and should follow the correct principles to deal with things.

古文：如是，则贵名起如日月，天下应之如雷霆。
现代文：这样，那么高贵的名声就会像日月那样显明，天下的人就会像雷霆那样轰轰烈烈的响应他。
English: In this way, such a noble reputation will be as obvious as the sun and the moon, and people around the world will respond to him as vigorously as the thunder.

古文：故曰：君子隐而显，微而明，辞让而胜。
现代文：所以说，即使君子隐居了，但名声仍然显著，地位虽然卑微，却荣耀显赫，即使谦让仍能胜过他人。
English: Therefore, even if a gentleman lives in seclusion, his reputation is still conspicuous. Although his status is low, his glory is outstanding. Even if he is humble, he can still surpass others.

古文：《诗》曰： 鹤鸣于九皋，声闻于天。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 仙鹤在沼泽里鸣叫，声音直冲云霄。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The cranes sing in the marshes, and their voices soar into the sky.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：鄙夫反是：比周而誉俞少，鄙争而名俞辱，烦劳以求安利，其身俞危。
现代文：粗鲁的人就与此相反，他们拉帮结伙，但党羽越来越少，用不正当的手段争夺名誉反而得到更为羞耻的名声，厌烦劳苦，希求安逸，而他自身更加危险。
English: The coarse man, on the other hand, makes alliances, but has fewer and fewer supporters; fights dishonestly for honor, but gains a more shameful reputation; is tired of toil, wants ease, and is himself more dangerous.

古文：《诗》曰： 民之无良，相怨一方，受爵不让，至于己斯亡。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 有些人不善良，总是怨恨别人，他只知道争取官位，而不懂得谦让，终于自取灭亡。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Some people are not kind and always resent others. They only know how to strive for official positions, but do not know how to be humble. In the end, they destroy themselves.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种人。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：故能小而事大，辟之是犹力之少而任重也，舍粹折无适也。
现代文：能力不大却要干大事，这就如同气力很小而偏要去挑重担一样，除了断骨折腰，再没有别的下场了。
English: To be able to do great things with little power is like being too weak to lift a heavy load without breaking your back.

古文：身不肖而诬贤，是犹伛伸而好升高也，指其顶者愈众。
现代文：自己本身不贤却吹嘘自己为贤人，这就如同一个身躯佝偻的人总想爬高一样，这样，指着他的头嘲笑他的人就更多了。
English: He who boasts of being wise, though he is not, is like the lame man who wants to be taller, and the number of those who make fun of him and point at his head increases.

古文：故明主谲德而序位，所以为不乱也；忠臣诚能然后敢受职，所以为不穷也。
现代文：所以，英明的君主根据人的德行安排官位，就是为了防止混乱；忠实的臣子确实有才能，然后才敢于接受职位，就是为了不使自己陷于困窘。
English: Therefore, the wise prince arranges the posts according to the virtue of the people, in order to prevent confusion; the loyal vassal indeed has talent, and then dares to accept the post, in order not to embarrass himself.

古文：分不乱于上，能不穷于下，治辩之极也。
现代文：君主安排官职不混乱，臣子按能力任职不会陷入窘境，这就是治国的最高境界了。
English: The monarch arranges official positions without confusion, and courtiers will not be in a predicament if they serve according to their abilities. This is the highest realm of governing the country.

古文：《诗》曰： 平平左右，亦是率从。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 君主左右的人都很能干，而且都很听从君上的命令。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The people around the monarch are very capable, and they are all obedient to your orders.

古文：是言上下之交不相乱也。
现代文：这就是说，上下的关系不会互相错乱了。
English: That is to say, the relationship between the top and the bottom will not be confused with each other.

古文：以从俗为善，以货财为宝，以养生为己至道，是民德也。
现代文：以依从习俗为妥善，以货物钱财为珍宝，以保养身体延续生命为自己的最高准则，这是普通老百姓的德行。
English: It is the virtue of ordinary people to follow customs as proper, to treasure goods and money, and to maintain the body and prolong life as their highest standard.

古文：行法至坚，不以私欲乱所闻，如是，则可谓劲士矣。
现代文：行为合乎法度，意志坚定，不因为个人的欲望扰乱所学到的东西，如果这样，就可以称为正直的人了。
English: If they act in accordance with the law, have a strong will, and do not disrupt what they have learned because of personal desires, then they can be called honest people.

古文：行法至坚，好修正其所闻以桥饰其情性，其言多当矣而未谕也，其行多当矣而未安也，其知虑多当矣而未周密也，上则能大其所隆，下则能开道不己若者，如是，则可谓笃厚君子矣。
现代文：行为合乎法度，意志坚定，喜欢改正自己所学到的东西，用来矫正自己原有的性情；他的言论多半是恰当的，但不完全晓谕明白；他的行为多半是恰当的，但还不完全妥当；所考虑的事多半是正确的，但还不周密；对上能够发扬自己所推祟道义，对下开导不如自己的人；这样，就可以叫做忠厚的君子了。
English: He is law-abiding, strong-willed, and likes to correct what he has learned and use it to correct his original disposition; his speech is mostly appropriate, but not completely clear; his behavior is mostly appropriate, but not completely appropriate; the things he considers are mostly correct, but not thorough; he can promote his own morality to others, and to those who are less enlightened than himself; so he can be called a loyal gentleman.

古文：修百王之法若辨白黑，应当时之变若数一二，行礼要节而安之，若生四枝，要时立功之巧若诏四时，平正和民之善，亿万之众而博若一人，如是，则可谓圣人矣。
现代文：修习历代帝王的法度，就如同分辨黑白一般，适应当时的变化，如同数一、二这样简单的数字那样轻松；遵行礼节，处之泰然，如同运动身体四肢一样行动自如；抓住时机，建立功勋的技巧，就如同通晓四季的变更一般；治理政事，安定百姓，把亿万人团结得像一个人，这样就可以称为圣人了。
English: To study the laws of emperors throughout the ages is like distinguishing between black and white; to adapt to the changes of the time is as easy as counting simple numbers such as one and two; to follow etiquette, to be calm, to move freely like moving the limbs of the body; to seize the opportunity, to establish the skills of merit, is like knowing the changes of the four seasons; to govern affairs, to stabilize the people, and to unite billions of people as one, so that you can be called a saint.

古文：井井兮其有理也，严严兮其能敬己也，分分兮其有终始也，猒猒兮其能长久也，乐乐兮其执道不殆也，炤炤兮其用知之明也，修修兮其用统类之行也，绥绥兮其有文章也，熙熙兮其乐人之臧也，隐隐兮其恐人之不当也，如是，则可谓圣人矣。
现代文：整整齐齐啊，凡事都那样有条有理。威风凛凛啊，他是那样受尊敬。
English: Neat and tidy, everything is so orderly. Dignified, he is so respected.

古文：此其道出乎一。
现代文：这样，就可以叫做圣人了，这是因为他的道产生于专一。
English: In this way, he can be called a saint, because his way is born of singleness.

古文：曷谓一？
现代文：什么叫做专一？
English: What is a singularity?

古文：曰：执神而固。
现代文：答：保持神明与稳固。
English: A: Remain firm and steadfast.

古文：曷谓神？
现代文：什么神明与稳固？
English: What gods are associated with stability?

古文：曰：尽善挟治之谓神，万物莫足以倾之之谓固。
现代文：答：以完备周全的方法治理国家就叫神明。任何事物都不能颠覆它就叫做稳固。
English: A: To govern the country in a complete and well-rounded way is called Shenming. Nothing can subvert it, and it is called stability.

古文：神固之谓圣人。
现代文：既神明，又牢固就可以叫做圣人。
English: Those who are both divine and firm can be called saints.

古文：圣人也者，道之管也：天下之道管是矣，百王之道一是矣。
现代文：所谓圣人就是道的总和。天下的道都集中在它这里了，历代帝王的道也都集中在这里。
English: The so-called sage is the sum total of the Tao. The Tao of the whole world is concentrated here, and the Tao of the emperors of all ages is also concentrated here.

古文：故《诗》《书》《礼》《乐》之道归是矣。
现代文：所以《诗经》、《尚书》、《礼经》、《乐经》的道也都归属在这里了。
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs," "Song of Songs," "Song of Songs," "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" also belong here.

古文：《诗》言是，其志也；《书》言是，其事也；《礼》言是，其行也；《乐》言是，其和也；《春秋》言是，其微也。
现代文：《诗经》中说的是圣人的意志；《书经》说的是圣人的政事；《礼经》说的是圣人的行为；《乐经》说的是圣人的协调；《春秋》说的是圣人的微言大义。
English: The "Book of Songs" speaks of the will of the saint; the "Book of Songs" speaks of the political affairs of the saint; the "Book of Rites" speaks of the actions of the saint; the "Book of Music" speaks of the coordination of the saint; the "Spring and Autumn" speaks of the fine words of the saint.

古文：故《风》之所以为不逐者，取是以节之也；《小雅》之所以为《小雅》者，取是而文之也；《大雅》之所以为《大雅》者，取是而光之也；《颂》之所以为至者，取是而通之也：天下之道毕是矣。
现代文：所以，《国风》之所以不是放荡的作品，是因为以此节制它的缘故；《小雅》之所以为小雅，是因为用它来美化的缘故；《大雅》之所以为大雅，是因为它来光大的缘故；《颂》之所以达到了诗的最高峰，是因为它精神来贯穿的缘故。
English: Therefore, the reason why "Kokufu" is not a dissolute work is because it is tempered by this; the reason why "Koya" is small and elegant is because it is used to beautify; the reason why "Daya" is great and elegant is because it is glorious; the reason why "Ode" has reached the highest peak of poetry is because it is permeated by spirit.

古文：乡是者臧，倍是者亡。乡是如不臧，倍是如不亡者，自古及今，未尝有也。
现代文：天下之道全都集中在这里，顺着它去做，就会得到昌盛，违背它去做，就会遭到灭亡，顺着它去做而得不到好昌盛，违背它去做而行不被灭亡，从古到今，还没有过这样的事情。
English: The ways of the world are all concentrated here. If you follow it, you will prosper. If you go against it, you will be destroyed. If you follow it, you will not prosper. If you go against it, you will not be destroyed. From ancient times to the present, there has never been anything like this.

古文：客有道曰： 孔子曰： 周公其盛乎！身贵而愈恭，家富而愈俭，胜敌而愈戒。  
现代文：有个客人说： 孔子说： 周公多么伟大啊，他地位高贵却更加谦恭有礼，他家庭富有却节俭有加，战胜了敌人却更加戒备。 
English: A guest said, "Confucius said, 'How great Zhou Gong is. He has a high position but is more humble and courteous. His family is rich but thrifty. He has defeated the enemy but is more alert.

古文：应之曰： 是殆非周公之行，非孔子之言也。
现代文：答道： 这恐怕不是周公的行为，也不是孔子的观点。 
English: Answer: I'm afraid this is not Zhou Gong's behavior, nor is it Confucius's view.

古文：武王崩，成王幼，周公屏成王而及武王，履天子之籍，负扆而坐，诸侯趋走堂下。
现代文：武王死后，成王年纪尚小，周公撇开成王，继承了武王的事业，他登上天子之位，背靠屏风而立，诸侯小心谨慎的急走到殿堂之下朝拜。
English: After the death of King Wu, King Cheng was still young. Zhou Gong left King Cheng aside and inherited King Wu's career. He ascended to the throne of the Son of Heaven, stood with his back against the screen, and the princes carefully and cautiously rushed to the hall to worship.

古文：当是时也，夫又谁为恭矣哉！
现代文：这个时候，他又对谁谦恭有礼呢！
English: At this time, to whom was he being courteous?

古文：兼制天下，立七十一国，姬姓独居五十三人焉，周之子孙苟不狂惑者，莫不为天下之显诸侯，孰谓周公俭哉！
现代文：确立了对天下的全面统治，分封了七十一个诸侯国，姬姓就有五十多个，周王室的子孙，只要不是愚蠢之极的，没有不成为显贵的诸侯的。谁又能说周公节俭呢？
English: He established an all-round rule over the world, and divided the land into seventy-one vassal states, of which more than fifty were surnamed Zhou. The descendants of the Zhou royal family, as long as they were not extremely stupid, could not fail to become illustrious vassals. Who can say that Zhou was frugal?

古文：武王之诛纣也，行之日以兵忌，东面而迎太岁，至汜而泛，至怀而坏，至共头而山隧。
现代文：武王出兵讨伐纣王，出兵那天恰逢兵忌之日，向东进兵，冲犯了太岁，兵到汜水又遇江水泛滥，到了怀城又遇城墙倒塌，到了共头山，又遇到山崩。
English: King Wu sent out troops to fight against King Gong. The day the troops were sent out coincided with the day of the soldier's death. The troops marched eastward and were too old. The soldiers encountered river flooding in Surabaya, the collapse of the city wall in Kaesong, and a landslide in Gwangtou Mountain.

古文：霍叔惧曰： 出三日而五灾至，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：武王的弟弟霍叔害怕，说： 出兵三天就遇到了五次灾难，恐怕讨伐的时机还不成熟吧？ 
English: King Wu's younger brother, Uncle Huo, was afraid and said, "In the three days since the soldiers were dispatched, we have encountered five disasters. I'm afraid the time for a crusade is not yet ripe, is it?

古文：周公曰： 刳比干而囚箕子，飞廉、恶来知政，夫又恶有不可焉？ 
现代文：周公却说： 纣王把王叔比干剖腹挖心，又囚禁王叔箕子，朝中由奸臣飞廉、恶来执政，这又有什么不可以呢！ 
English: Zhou Gong, however, said, "King Zhai cut open the belly of Wang Qigang and imprisoned Wang Qizhi, and in the middle of the court, the treacherous vassal Fei Lian, the evil one, came to rule. What is wrong with this?

古文：遂选马而进，朝食于戚，暮宿于百泉，厌旦于牧之野。
现代文：于是他挑选精兵继续前进，早晨在戚地吃饭，晚上在百泉宿营，第二天黎明时就逼近牧野。
English: So he selected his best soldiers and marched on. In the morning, they ate at a relative's place. In the evening, they camped at Baiquan. At dawn the next day, they approached Makino.

古文：鼓之而纣卒易乡，遂乘殷人而诛纣。
现代文：刚一开战，纣王的兵卒就倒戈相向，于是，周军借用商人的力量诛杀了纣王。
English: As soon as the war started, the soldiers of the king of Qi turned against each other, so the Zhou army borrowed the strength of the merchants to kill the king of Qi.

古文：盖杀者非周人，因殷人也。
现代文：所以，杀纣王的不是周军，而是商人。
English: Therefore, it was not the Zhou army that killed the king, but the merchants.

古文：故无首虏之获，无蹈难之赏。反而定三革，偃五兵，合天下，立声乐，于是《武》《象》起而《韶》《頀》废矣。
现代文：所以，周军将士没有斩获头颅和俘虏敌人，因此，也没有冲锋陷阵的赏赐，军队返回国后，就把盔甲和兵器收藏起来，统一了天下，设置了音乐，于是就用周乐《武》、《象》代替了原来的《韶》《护》之乐。
English: Therefore, the Zhou soldiers did not capture the heads and prisoners of the enemy, and therefore, there was no reward for the charge. After the army returned home, they collected the armor and weapons, unified the world, and set up the music. Therefore, they used the Zhou music "Wu" and "Elephant" to replace the original "Dragonfly" and "Guard" music.

古文：四海之内，莫不变心易虑以化顺之。
现代文：整个天下，没有不改变思想，而归顺周朝的。
English: There is no one in the whole world who will not change his mind and submit to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：故外阖不闭，跨天下而无蕲。
现代文：因此，家家不必关闭大门，走遍天下也没有界限了。
English: Therefore, everyone does not have to close the door, and there is no limit to travel around the world.

古文：当是时也，夫又谁为戒矣哉！ 
现代文：这时，还要戒备谁呢？
English: At this time, who should we be wary of?

古文：造父者，天下之善御者也，无舆马则无所见其能。羿者，天下之善射者也，无弓矢则无所见其巧。大儒者，善调一天下者也，无百里之地则无所见其功。
现代文：造父，是天下最擅长驾驶车马的人，但如果没有车马，就不能表现他的才能；后弈，是天下最擅长射箭的人，但如果没有弓箭，也就无法显示他高超的技艺；大儒这样的人，善于使天下百姓协调一致，但如果没有百里的国土就不能显示他的功用。
English: The founding father is the world's best at driving chariots and horses, but if there is no chariot and horse, he can't show his talent; the latter is the world's best at archery, but if there is no bow and arrow, he can't show his superb skills; a person like Daju is good at harmonizing the people of the world, but if there is no hundred miles of land, he can't show his function.

古文：舆固马选矣，而不能以至远一日而千里，则非造父也。弓调矢直矣，而不能射远中微，则非羿也。用百里之地，而不能以调一天下，制强暴，则非大儒也。
现代文：如果车子坚固，又有良马，可是凭靠这些却不能达到远处，日行千里，那么他就不是造父了；弓调好了，箭也很直，可是他却不能射中远处很小的目标，那他就不是后弈；治理百里之地，如果不能使百姓协调，统一天下，不能制服强暴的国家，这就不是大儒。
English: If the chariot is sturdy and the horse is good, but it is not able to travel thousands of miles a day, then he is not the father; if the bow is well-tuned and the arrow is straight, but he cannot hit a small target in the distance, then he is not a follower; if the land of a hundred miles cannot be governed, if the people cannot be coordinated and unified, and the violent country cannot be subdued, then he is not a great man.

古文：彼大儒者，虽隐于穷阎漏屋，无置锥之地，而王公不能与之争名；在一大夫之位，则一君不能独畜，一国不能独容，成名况乎诸侯，莫不愿得以为臣；用百里之地而千里之国莫能与之争胜，笞棰暴国，齐一天下，而莫能倾也。是大儒之征也。
现代文：那些大儒，即使隐居在偏僻的街巷、简陋不堪的房屋中，虽然自己贫穷的无立锥之地，可是王公大人却不能同他争夺名望；虽然他所管辖的仅百里见方的小国，但是拥有千里大国的人不能同他相匹敌；打击暴虐的国家，统一天下，没有什么能够动摇他，这就是大儒具备的特征。
English: Those great men, even if they live in seclusion in remote streets and alleys, in humble houses, although they are poor and have no foothold, but the prince cannot compete with him for fame; although he governs a small country only a hundred miles square, but people with thousands of miles cannot compete with him; nothing can shake him when fighting a tyrannical country and unifying the country, this is the characteristic of the great men.

古文：其言有类，其行有礼，其举事无悔，其持险应变曲当，与时迁徙，与世偃仰，千举万变，其道一也。是大儒之稽也。
现代文：他的言行合乎礼义，做事果断，处理危机，应付突发事件能够恰到好处；他能随着时代的变化而变化，不管外界怎样变化，他的道术是始终如一的，这就是大儒的典范。
English: His words and deeds are consistent with propriety, he is decisive in doing things, he can handle crises and deal with emergencies just right; he can change with the changes of the times, no matter how the outside world changes, his morality is consistent, this is the model of a great Confucian.

古文：其穷也，俗儒笑之；其通也，英杰化之，嵬琐逃之，邪说畏之，众人愧之。
现代文：他穷困失意时，庸俗的儒生都耻笑他；当他显达的时候，英雄豪杰都被他感化，不正派的人都会逃离他，坚持邪说的人都惧怕他；众人也都愧对他。
English: When he was down and out, the vulgar Confucianists laughed at him; when he became famous, the heroes and heroines were all influenced by him, the crooks all fled from him, and those who clung to evil theories were afraid of him; everyone was ashamed of him.

古文：通则一天下，穷则独立贵名，天不能死，地不能埋，桀、跖之世不能污，非大儒莫之能立，仲尼、子弓是也。
现代文：在他显达时，就官运享通，就能够统一天下，在他处于困境时，就能独树高声。上天不能使他死亡，大地也不能将他埋葬，即使夏桀、盗跖的时代也不能玷污他，如果不是大儒，就不能这样立身处世，而孔子、子弓就是这样的人。
English: When he is in power, he enjoys the power of government, he can unify the country, and when he is in a difficult situation, he can speak loudly. Heaven cannot let him die, the earth cannot bury him, even the era of Xialu and Guanzhong cannot tarnish him. If he is not a great scholar, he cannot live in the world like this, and Confucius and Ziyu are such people.

古文：故有俗人者，有俗儒者，有雅儒者，有大儒者。
现代文：所以，有庸俗的人，有庸俗的儒士，有高雅的儒士，有大儒。
English: Therefore, there are vulgar people, there are vulgar Confucians, there are elegant Confucians, and there are great Confucians.

古文：不学问，无正义，以富利为隆，是俗人者也。
现代文：不学习，不讲求正义，把追求财富为目标，这是是庸俗的人。
English: People who do not study, do not seek justice, and pursue wealth as their goal are vulgar.

古文：逢衣浅带，解果其冠，略法先王而足乱世术，缪学杂举，不知法后王而一制度，不知隆礼义而杀《诗》《书》；其衣冠行伪已同于世俗矣，然而不知恶者；其言议谈说已无异于墨子矣，然而明不能别；呼先王以欺愚者而求衣食焉，得委积足以掩其口，则扬扬如也；随其长子，事其便辟，举其上客，亻患然若终身之虏而不敢有他志：是俗儒者也。
现代文：穿着宽大的衣服并束着宽大的腰带，戴着中间高两旁低的帽子，粗略地效法古代圣王，这足以扰乱天下；杂举荒谬的学说，不知道把实践礼仪放在首要地位，把记诵《诗经》《尚书》放在次要地位；他们的衣冠、行为已经和世俗相同了，然而不知道厌恶自己；但还不知道厌弃它们；他们的言论，已经和墨子没有什么不同了，然而并不能明显的区分；他们靠吹捧先王欺骗愚蠢的人，从而获得衣食，得到一点积蓄足以糊口就得意洋洋；顺从显贵的人，侍奉他们的亲信小人，吹捧显贵者的座上客，心安理得的作他们的奴仆，而不敢有其他任何志向，这种人就是庸俗的儒士。
English: Wearing wide clothes and a wide belt, wearing a cap with a high middle and low sides, roughly imitating the ancient holy kings, which is enough to disturb the world; miscellaneous absurd doctrines, do not know to put the practical etiquette in the first place, and put the recitation of the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" in the second place; their crowns and behaviors have become the same as the world, but they do not know to loathe themselves; but they do not know to abandon them yet; their speech has become no different from ink, but it cannot be clearly distinguished; they get food and clothing by touting the former king to deceive the stupid,

古文：法后王，一制度，隆礼义而杀《诗》《书》；其言行已有大法矣，然而明不能齐法教之所不及，闻见之所未至，则知不能类也；知之曰知之，不知曰不知，内不自以诬，外不自以欺，以是尊贤畏法而不敢怠傲，是雅儒者也。
现代文：效法后代的帝王，统一制度，推崇礼仪而把《诗经》《尚书》降到次要位置，他的言行已经基本符合基本的法规的要求了，然而他的智慧还不能解决法度和教育没有涉及到的问题，以及见闻所没有达到的事物，即使有智慧还不能触类旁通；知道就说知道，不知道就说不知道，对内不欺骗自己，对外不欺骗别人，根据这种观念而尊重贤人，敬畏法度，不敢怠慢，这种人即为高雅的儒士。
English: His words and deeds have basically met the requirements of the basic laws and regulations. However, his wisdom cannot solve problems that are not related to laws and education, as well as things that have not been achieved by seeing and hearing. Even if he has wisdom, he cannot bypass the categories. If you know, say you know, if you don't know, say you don't know, don't deceive yourself internally, don't deceive others externally, respect sages according to this concept, fear laws, and don't dare to neglect. This kind of person is an elegant Confucian.

古文：法先王，统礼义，一制度；以浅持博，以古持今，以一持万，苟仁义之类也，虽在鸟兽之中，若别白黑；倚物怪变，所未尝闻也，所未尝见也，卒然起一方，则举统类而应之，无所儗；张法而度之，则晻然若合符节：是大儒者也。
现代文：效法古代的圣王，总括礼义，统一制度，根据不多的见闻把握很多的知识，根据古代的事情把握现代的事情，根据单一之事推知世间万事万物，如果是合乎仁义的事物，即使在鸟兽之中，也能如同辨别黑白那样把它辨认出来；奇特的事情，古怪的变化，从没有听过，也不曾见过，突然发生了，也能拿礼义来应对，而没有什么疑惑与惭愧，张扬法度来衡量它，就像符节一样完全相合，这就是大儒。
English: Following the example of the ancient holy kings, he comprehended the etiquette and unified the system, grasped a lot of knowledge based on a little knowledge, grasped modern things based on ancient things, inferred everything in the world based on a single thing. If it is a benevolent thing, even among birds and beasts, it can be recognized as if it were black and white; strange things, strange changes, never heard, never seen, suddenly happened, can also be dealt with by etiquette, but there is no doubt and shame, and it can be measured by law. It is completely consistent like a rhyme. This is the great scholar.

古文：故人主用俗人，则万乘之国亡；用俗儒，则万乘之国存；用雅儒，则千乘之国安；用大儒，则百里之地久，而后三年，天下为一，诸侯为臣，用万乘之国，则举错而定，一朝而伯。
现代文：所以，君主用庸俗的人执政，那么万乘之国也将被灭亡；任用庸俗的儒士执政，万乘大国也仅能保存；用高雅的儒士执政，千乘之国家就能保平安；任用大儒来执政，即使是百里之地的小国，就可以保持长久，三年之后就可以统一天下，各国诸侯都来称臣；如果任用大儒治理万乘大国，就会政令布施，国家安定，很快就可以名扬天下。
English: Therefore, if the monarch uses vulgar people to govern, then the country of Manchukuo will also be destroyed; if he appoints vulgar Confucians to govern, the country of Manchukuo can only be preserved; if he appoints elegant Confucians to govern, the country of Senjukuro can be kept safe; if he appoints great Confucians to govern, even if it is a small country with a hundred miles of land, it can be maintained for a long time, and after three years it can be unified, and the princes of all countries can praise it; if he appoints great Confucians to govern the great country of Manchukuo,

古文：不闻不若闻之，闻之不若见之，见之不若知之，知之不若行之。
现代文：不听不如听到，听到不如亲眼看到，看到不如知道，知道了不如亲自实践。
English: Hearing is not as good as listening, seeing is not as good as hearing, knowing is not as good as seeing, and practicing is not as good as knowing.

古文：学至于行之而止矣。
现代文：做到知行合一达到极致了。
English: To achieve the unity of wisdom and action is the ultimate.

古文：行之，明也；明之为圣人。
现代文：通过实践，就能明白事理，明白事理，就能成为圣人。
English: Through practice, you can understand the truth, understand the truth, and become a saint.

古文：圣人也者，本仁义，当是非，齐言行，不失豪厘，无它道焉，已乎行之矣。
现代文：圣人，把仁义作为根本，恰当的判断是非曲直，言行一致，丝毫不差，这并没有其他的窍门，就在于把学到的知识切实地付诸实践。
English: The sage regards benevolence and righteousness as the fundamental, appropriate judgment of right and wrong, words and deeds are consistent, and there is no difference. There is no other trick to this, but to put the learned knowledge into practice.

古文：故闻之而不见，虽博必谬；见之而不知，虽识必妄；知之而不行，虽敦必困。
现代文：所以听到而没有亲眼看到，即使听到的很多，也必定会出现错误，看见了却不知道，虽然记住了，也必有错误；知道了却不付诸实践，即使知识很多，也将会陷入困境。
English: Therefore, if you hear but do not see, even if you hear a lot, you are bound to make mistakes; if you see but do not know, even if you remember, you are bound to make mistakes; if you know but do not put it into practice, even if you have a lot of knowledge, you will be in trouble.

古文：不闻不见，则虽当，非仁也。其道百举而百陷也。
现代文：没有听见，也没有看见，即使做对了，也不是仁，把偶然当作根本方法来做事，这样做一百次就会失败一百次。
English: If you don't hear or see, even if you do it right, it's not benevolent. If you take chance as the fundamental method of doing things, you will fail a hundred times a hundred times.

古文：故人无师无法而知，则必为盗；勇，则必为贼；云能，则必为乱；察，则必为怪；辩，则必为诞。
现代文：所以，人如果没有老师的教导，不懂得法度，如果具有智慧，就会做出盗窃的事情；如果有勇气，就会抢劫；如果有才能，就必定会作乱；能够明察，就会发表奇谈怪论；如果善于辩驳，就一定会虚妄诡辩。
English: Therefore, if a person does not have the instruction of a teacher, he does not understand the law; if he has wisdom, he will commit theft; if he has courage, he will rob; if he has talent, he will surely make a mess; if he can see clearly, he will make strange talk; if he is good at arguing, he will surely make false arguments.

古文：人有师有法而知，则速通；勇，则速威；云能，则速成；察，则速尽；辩，则速论。
现代文：但有了老师的教导，如果懂得法度，具有智慧，就能很快显达；如果有勇气，就能很快变得威武；如果有才能，就能很快取得成功；如果能明察，就能很快通晓事理；如果善辩，就能很快判断是非。
English: But with the teacher's teaching, if you understand the law and have wisdom, you can quickly show up; if you have courage, you can quickly become powerful; if you have talent, you can quickly succeed; if you can see clearly, you can quickly understand the truth; if you are good at arguing, you can quickly judge right and wrong.

古文：故有师法者，人之大宝也；无师法者，人之大殃也。
现代文：所以，有老师的教导和有法度，就是人们最大的的财富；反之，没有老师的教导和没有法度，就会成为人们的灾祸。
English: Therefore, having a teacher's teaching and a legal system is people's greatest wealth; on the other hand, without a teacher's teaching and without a legal system, it will become people's disaster.

古文：人无师法，则隆性矣；有师法，则隆积矣。而师法者，所得乎情，非所受乎性，不足以独立而治。
现代文：没有老师的教导，不懂得法度，人就会任性而为；如果有老师教导，懂得法度，就会重视学习的积累；而老师的法度本身也是通过学习的积累得来的，不是先天具有的，它不能独立地治理自己。
English: Without the teacher's instruction and without understanding the Fa, people will be self-willed; if there is a teacher's instruction and they understand the Fa, they will attach importance to the accumulation of learning; and the teacher's Fa itself is also obtained through the accumulation of learning, it is not innate, and it cannot independently govern itself.

古文：性也者，吾所不能为也，然而可化也；情也者，非吾所有也，然而可为也。
现代文：本性，不是我们后天所能造成的，但是本性却可以加以改变；积累，不是我们先天所有的，却可以造就。
English: Nature is not something we can create a posteriori, but nature can be changed; accumulation is not something we have a priori, but it can be created.

古文：注错习俗，所以化性也；并一而不二，所以成积也。
现代文：风俗习惯可以改变人的思想，长久地受风俗习惯的影响，就会改变人的本性。只要专心致志，不三心二意，就能通于神明，与天地相参同了。
English: Customs and habits can change people's thoughts. If you are influenced by customs and habits for a long time, it will change your nature. As long as you are dedicated and not half-hearted, you will be able to understand the gods and become one with heaven and earth.

古文：习俗移志，安久移质。并一而不二则通于神明，参于天地矣。故积土而为山，积水而为海，旦暮积谓之岁，至高谓之天，至下谓之地，宇中六指谓之极，涂之人百姓积善而全尽谓之圣人。
现代文：所以，泥土堆积起来能成为高山，细流汇积起来能形成大海，一天一天的积累就叫做年，最高的地方是天，最低的地方是地，宇宙中上、下、东、西、南、北六个方向称为极，普通百姓积累善行，达到完美的程度就可以成为圣人。
English: Therefore, when dirt is piled up, it can become a mountain, and when a trickle of water is collected, it can form a sea. The accumulation of each day is called a year. The highest place is heaven, and the lowest place is earth. The six directions in the universe, up, down, east, west, south, and north, are called the poles. Ordinary people can accumulate good deeds and become saints when they reach perfection.

古文：彼求之而后得，为之而后成，积之而后高，尽之而后圣。
现代文：那些必须努力才能有所收获，不断实践才会成功，不断的积累才能提高，最终达到完美就能成为圣人。
English: Those who have to work hard to gain something, continue to practice to succeed, continue to accumulate to improve, and finally achieve perfection can become saints.

古文：故圣人也者，人之所积也。
现代文：所以，圣人就是普通人的善行日积月累的结果啊。
English: Therefore, a saint is the result of the accumulated good deeds of ordinary people.

古文：人积耨耕而为农夫，积斲削而为工匠，积反货而为商贾，积礼义而为君子。
现代文：人们积累锄草耕田的经验就成为农夫，积累起砍削的经验就成为木匠，积累贩卖货物的经验就成为商人，积累礼义的经验就成为君子。
English: People accumulate the experience of ploughing and become farmers, accumulate the experience of chopping and become carpenters, accumulate the experience of selling goods and become merchants, accumulate the experience of courtesy and become gentlemen.

古文：工匠之子莫不继事，而都国之民安习其服，居楚而楚，居越而越，居夏而夏，是非天性也，积靡使然也。
现代文：工匠的儿继承父业，城里的人安于他们的职业。楚国有楚国的风俗习惯，越国有越国的风俗习惯，中原地带有中原地带的风俗习惯。这些都不是先天的本性，而是后天积累、磨练的结果啊。
English: Craftsmen's children inherit their father's business, while people in the city are content with their occupation. The customs and habits of Chu belong to Chu, the customs and habits of Vietnam belong to Vietnam, and the customs and habits of the Central Plains belong to the Central Plains. These are not innate nature, but the result of accumulation and training.

古文：故人知谨注错，慎习俗，大积靡，则为君子矣。
现代文：所以，如果人们行为谨慎，认真地对待风俗习惯，坚强德行的修养和磨练，就能成为君子了；如果放纵性情，不努力学习，就会成为小人。
English: Therefore, if people behave prudently, treat customs and habits seriously, cultivate and hone strong virtues, they can become gentlemen; if they indulge their temper and do not study hard, they will become villains.

古文：纵情性而不足问学，则为小人矣；为君子则常安荣矣，为小人则常危辱矣；凡人莫不欲安荣而恶危辱，故唯君子为能得其所好，小人则日徼其所恶。
现代文：成为君子，就能经常安泰、荣耀；成为小人，就经常遇到危困、耻辱。没有人不希望安泰和荣耀和厌恶危困和耻辱的，但是，只有君子才能得到自己所喜好的，小人就只能每天招致他所厌恶的。
English: To be a gentleman is to be always safe and honored; to be a ruffian is to be always in danger and disgraced. No one wishes to be safe and honored, or to hate danger and disgraced; but only a gentleman can get what he likes, and a ruffian can only attract what he dislikes.

古文：《诗》曰： 维此良人，弗求弗迪；唯彼忍心，是顾是复。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 对于这么多贤良的人，并不招致他，任用他；对那些狠毒的人，你却照顾他、看重他。
English: The Book of Psalms says, "With so many good men you do not invite or appoint them, but with the wicked you give them care and attention.

古文：民之贪乱，宁为荼毒。 
现代文：人民想要反抗，难道甘愿受残害。 
English: If the people want to resist, are they willing to be brutalized?

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：人论：志不免于曲私而冀人之以己为公也，行不免于污漫而冀人之以己为修也，甚愚陋沟瞀而冀人之以己为知也，是众人也。
现代文：人的类别是：思想上总是偏私，却总希望别人认为他大公无私；行动肮脏卑鄙，却希望别人认为他有修养；自己浅陋又无知，却希望别人认为他聪明，这是一般人的想法。
English: People are divided into the following categories: they are always selfish in their thoughts, but they always want others to think that they are selfless; their actions are dirty and despicable, but they want others to think that they are cultured; they are shallow and ignorant, but they want others to think that they are smart. This is the thinking of the average person.

古文：志忍私，然后能公；行忍情性，然后能修；知而好问，然后能才；公修而才，可谓小儒矣。
现代文：思想上摒弃私心然后才能公正；行动战胜情欲，然后才能品德高尚；有智慧而又虚心好学，然后才能有才智，做到这些，可称为小儒了。
English: To be just, one must be selfless in thought; to be virtuous, one must be virtuous in action; to be intelligent, yet modest and studious, one must be intelligent.

古文：志安公，行安修，知通统类：如是则可谓大儒矣。
现代文：思想上安于公正，行动上安于善良，拥有智慧，又能通晓各类事务的法则，这样就可以称为大儒了。
English: To be just in thought and good in deed, to have wisdom, and to be able to understand the laws of all kinds of affairs, can be called a great scholar.

古文：大儒者，天子三公也；小儒者，诸侯、大夫、士也；众人者，工农商贾也。
现代文：大儒，可以担任天子身边的三公；小儒，可以担任诸侯的士大夫；一般民众，就只能做工匠、农民、商人了。
English: The great Confucius can serve as the three princes around the Son of Heaven; the lesser Confucius can serve as the statesman of the princes; the general public can only be craftsmen, farmers, and merchants.

古文：礼者，人主之所以为群臣寸尺寻丈检式也，人伦尽矣。
现代文：礼制，是君主衡量群臣等级优劣的标准，这样就把人的等类全包括在内了。
English: The system of etiquette is the standard by which the monarch measures the merits and demerits of the ranks of his subjects, and in this way, all classes of people are included.

古文：君子言有坛宇，行有防表，道有一隆。
现代文：君子的言论有界限，行为有标准，言行有所专重。
English: A gentleman's speech has boundaries, his behavior has standards, and his words and deeds have special emphasis.

古文：言政治之求，不下于安存；言志意之求，不下于士；言道德之求，不贰后王。
现代文：谈到政治的要求，要以国家安定和存在为标准；谈到志向的要求，要以做士为准则；谈到道德的要求，就要以不能背离当代帝王为准则。
English: When it comes to political requirements, it is necessary to take national stability and existence as the standard; when it comes to aspirational requirements, it is necessary to take being a gentleman as the standard; when it comes to moral requirements, it is necessary to take not deviating from the contemporary emperor as the standard.

古文：道过三代谓之荡，法二后王谓之不雅。
现代文：夏、商、周三代以前的道，太过遥远，就是放荡荒诞的了；法度背离了当代的帝王，就是不正确的了。
English: The way before Xia, Shang and the Third Dynasty is too far away, that is, it is debauchery and absurdity; if the law deviates from the contemporary emperor, it is incorrect.

古文：高之下之，小之巨之，不外是矣。是君子之所以骋志意于坛宇宫廷也。
现代文：自己的主张或高，或低，或大，或小，都不超出这些方面，君子发挥自己的思想，就是以此为界限。
English: No matter how high or low, big or small, one's own opinions do not go beyond these aspects. This is the limit for a gentleman to develop his thoughts.

古文：故诸侯问政不及安存，则不告也；匹夫问学不及为士，则不教也；百家之说不及后王，则不听也。
现代文：所以，诸侯询问政治问题，不涉及国家的安危存亡，就不告诉他；一般人来询问学习问题，如不涉及如何做士，就不教导他；诸子百家的学说，如不涉及当代帝王如何治理国家，就不去听信他。
English: Therefore, when princes inquire about politics, if it is not related to the safety and survival of the country, they will not tell him; when ordinary people inquire about learning, if it is not related to how to be a scholar, they will not teach him; if the doctrine of the sons of the hundred families is not related to how contemporary emperors govern the country, they will not listen to him.

古文：夫是之谓君子言有坛宇，行有防表也。
现代文：这就是君子说话有界限，行动有标准。
English: This is how a gentleman speaks with boundaries and acts with standards.

