古文：杜僧明周文育侯瑱侯安都欧阳頠黄法奭淳于量
现代文：陈武帝当时在高要，听说起事的消息，率领部众来征讨，大败他们，杀了杜天合，活捉杜僧明和周文育等人，全部释放了他们，并任命他们为一军的主帅。
English: Chen Wudi was in Gaoyao at the time, heard the news of the uprising, led the troops to fight, defeated them, killed Du Tianhe, captured Du Sengming and Zhou Wenyu alive, released them all, and appointed them as the commander of an army.

古文：章昭达吴明彻武帝征交址及讨元景仲，僧明、文育并有功。
现代文：陈武帝征讨交阝止和攻打元景仲时，杜僧明、周文育等人都立了战功。
English: When Emperor Chen Wudi led a campaign to end the war and attack Yuan Jingzhong, Du Sangming, Zhou Wenyu and others made great contributions to the war.

古文：侯景之乱，俱随武帝入援建邺。
现代文：侯景之乱时，他们都跟着陈武帝入朝救援建邺。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, they all followed Emperor Chen Wudi into the North to rescue Jianye.

古文：武帝于始兴破兰裕，僧明爲前锋，斩裕。
现代文：陈武帝在始兴击败兰裕时，杜僧明任先锋，斩了兰裕。
English: When Chen Wudi defeated Lan Yu in Shixing, Du Sengming served as the vanguard and defeated Lan Yu.

古文：又与蔡路养战于南野，僧明马被伤，武帝驰救之，以所乘马授僧明。
现代文：又和蔡路养在南野交战，杜僧明战马受伤，陈武帝驰往救援，将自己所乘坐的马匹给了杜僧明。
English: He also fought with Cai Luyang in Nan'an. Du Xiangming's horse was injured. Chen Wudi rushed to the rescue and gave Du Xiangming the horse he was riding.

古文：僧明上马复进，杀数十人，因而乘之，大败路养。
现代文：杜僧明骑上马又继续前进，连杀几十人，并乘势进击，大败蔡路养。
English: Du Sengming mounted his horse and continued to advance, killing dozens of people in quick succession, and took advantage of the situation to attack, defeating Cai Luyang.

古文：高州刺史李迁仕又据大臯，入灨石，以逼武帝。
现代文：高州刺史李迁仕又占领大皋，入侵氵赣石，以进逼陈武帝。
English: Gaozhou assassinated Li Qianshi and occupied Dalat, invaded Shanshi, and forced Emperor Chenwu into exile.

古文：武帝遣周文育爲前军，与僧明击走之。
现代文：陈武帝派周文育当前军，和杜僧明一起进攻李迁仕，将他打跑了。
English: Chen Wudi sent Zhou Wenyu to lead the army, and together with Du Sangming, they attacked Li Qianshi and chased him away.

古文：迁仕与甯都人刘孝尚并力将袭南康，陈武又令僧明与文育等拒之。相持连战百馀日，卒禽迁仕，送于武帝。
现代文：李迁仕和宁都人刘孝尚合力准备袭击南康，陈武帝又命令杜僧明和周文育等出兵迎敌，双方连续交战，相持一百多天，终于活捉了李迁仕，将他送交陈武帝。
English: Li Qian and Liu Xiaoshang of Ningdu worked together to prepare an attack on Nankang. Emperor Chen also ordered Du Sangming and Zhou Wenyu to send troops to meet the enemy. The two sides fought continuously for more than a hundred days, and finally captured Li Qian alive and sent him to Emperor Chen.

古文：及帝下南康，留僧明顿西昌，督安成、庐陵二郡军事。
现代文：当陈武帝攻下南康之后，留杜僧明驻军西昌，总督安成、庐陵二郡军事。
English: When Emperor Chen Wudi conquered Nankang, he left Du So Ming to garrison Xichang, with Governor Ancheng and the military of the two counties of Fuling.

古文：梁元帝承制，授新州刺史、临江县子。
现代文：梁元帝承制朝政，任命杜僧明为新州刺史、封临江县子。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan succeeds to the throne and appoints Du Sengming as the new prefect of Xinzhou and crowns Linjiang County.

古文：侯景遣于庆等寇南江，武帝顿豫章，命僧明爲前驱，所向克捷。
现代文：侯景派于庆等人进犯南江，陈武帝驻军豫章，命令杜僧明为前军，所战告捷。
English: Hou Jing sent Yu Qing and others to invade the Nanjiang River, Chen Wu stationed troops in Yuzhang, ordered Du Sangming to be the vanguard, and the battle was a success.

古文：武帝表僧明爲长史，仍随东讨。
现代文：陈武帝表奏朝廷委任杜僧明为长史，仍随军东征。
English: Emperor Chen Wudi said that it was a long time since the imperial court had appointed Du Sangming, and he still followed the army to the east.

古文：军至蔡洲，僧明率麾下烧贼水门大舰。
现代文：军队进至蔡洲，杜僧明率领部下火烧敌军的水门大舰。
English: The army came to Cai Zhou, and the monk Ming and his subordinates burned the camp gate and the big ship of the thief navy.

古文：及景平，除南兖州刺史，进爵爲侯，仍领晋陵太守。
现代文：侯景被讨平之后，他被任命为南兖州刺史，晋封爵位为侯，仍兼领晋陵太守。
English: After Houjing was subdued, he was appointed as the governor of Southern Luzhou Province, was conferred the title of marquis, and still served as the governor of Jinling.

古文：及荆州覆亡，武帝使僧明率吴明彻等随侯瑱西援，于江州病卒。
现代文：当荆州陷没时，陈武帝派杜僧明率领吴明彻等人随从侯王真西进救援，到江州时杜僧明病故。
English: When Jingzhou was besieged, Emperor Chen sent Du Sangming, led by Wu Mingche and others, to accompany Hou Wang Zhenxi to rescue. When he arrived in Jiangzhou, Du Sangming died of illness.

古文：赠散骑常侍，諡曰威。
现代文：追赠为散骑常侍，谥号为威。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of samurai horseman, and his posthumous nickname was "Ren."

古文：陈文帝即位，追赠开府仪同三司，配享武帝庙庭。
现代文：陈文帝即位后，又追赠开府仪同三司，配祭于陈武帝的祭庙中。
English: After Emperor Chen Wen ascended to the throne, he also posthumously presented the Kaifu Rite and the Three Degrees, which were enshrined in Emperor Chen Wu's temple.

古文：子晋嗣。
现代文：杜僧明的儿子杜晋继承他。
English: His son Du Jin succeeded to the title.

古文：周文育字景德，义兴阳羡人也。
现代文：周文育字景德，义兴阳羡人。
English: Zhou Wenyu's character Jingde, Yixingyang is envied by people.

古文：少孤贫，本居新安寿昌县，姓项氏，名猛奴。
现代文：他从小父亲去世，家中十分贫困，原居住在新安寿昌县，姓项，名猛奴。
English: When he was a child, his father died, and the family was poor. Originally, he lived in Shouchangbi, Xin'an County. His surname was Xiang and his given name was Mengsuo.

古文：年十一，能反复游水中数里，跳高六尺，与群儿聚戏，衆莫能及。
现代文：十一岁时，能来回在水中游几里路远，跳起六尺的高度，和孩子们一起玩耍，众人都难以比得上他。
English: At the age of eleven, he could swim several miles back and forth in the water, jump six feet high, and play with children.

古文：义兴人周荟爲寿昌浦口戍主，见而奇之，因召与语。
现代文：义兴人周荟当时任寿昌浦口的戍主，见了以后很感惊奇，就喊他过来说话。
English: Zhou Qi, a philanthropist who was the mayor of Shouchang Pukou at the time, was surprised to see him and called him over to talk.

古文：文育对曰： 母老家贫，兄弟姊并长大，困于赋役。 
现代文：周文育对周荟说： 我母亲年老，家中贫困，兄弟和姐姐都已长大，家里受困于赋税和徭役。 
English: Zhou Wenyu said to Zhou Qi: My mother is old, my family is poor, my brother and sister are all grown up, my family is suffering from taxes and corvee.

古文：荟哀之，乃随文育至家，就其母请文育养爲己子，母遂与之。
现代文：周荟听后，很替他难过，便跟随文育到他家去看望，并且向文育的母亲请求将文育给自己当养子，文育的母亲便答应给了他。
English: After listening to this, Zhou Qi felt very sorry for him, so he followed Wen Yu to his home to visit him, and asked Wen Yu's mother to adopt Wen Yu as her own son. Wen Yu's mother agreed.

古文：及荟秩满，与文育还都，见太子詹事周舍，请制名字，舍因爲立名爲文育，字景德。
现代文：当周荟任职期满后，他就带着文育回到都城，拜见了太子詹事周舍，请求给文育起个名字，周舍便给他起名为文育，字景德。
English: After Zhou Jun's term of office expired, he returned to the capital city with Wen Yue. He met with Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou She and asked her to give Wen Yue a name. Zhou She named him Wen Yue, with the character Jing De.

古文：命兄子弘让教之书计。
现代文：周荟并让哥哥的儿子弘让教给文育识字和计算。
English: Zhou also asked his brother's son, Hongzhang, to teach him how to write and calculate.

古文：弘让善隶书，写蔡邕劝学及古诗以遗之，文育不之省，谓弘让曰： 谁能学此，取富贵但有大槊耳。 
现代文：弘让擅写隶书，便写了蔡邕的《劝学》文和古诗来送给文育，文育不太懂，便对弘让说： 谁会学这些东西，谋取富贵只有用大槊吧！ 
English: Hongzhang was not good at writing, so he wrote Cai Xuan's "Persuasion" and ancient poetry to give to literature and education. He did not understand literature and education, so he said to Hongzhang: Who will learn these things? The only way to get rich is to use big money!

古文：弘让壮之，教之骑射，文育大悦。
现代文：周弘让认为文育气壮，便教给他骑马射箭的本领，文育大为高兴。
English: She admired his stature, taught him to ride a horse and shoot arrows, and was overjoyed.

古文：司州刺史陈庆之与荟同郡，素相善，啓荟爲前军军主。
现代文：司州刺史陈庆之和周荟是同郡人，一向关系很好，便上奏朝廷委任周荟当前军军主。
English: Chen Qingzhi, the governor of Shizhou, and Zhou Jun are from the same county and have always had a good relationship. Therefore, they reported to the imperial court to appoint Zhou Jun as the commander of the current army.

古文：庆之使荟将五百人往新蔡悬瓠慰劳白水蛮。
现代文：陈庆之让周荟带领五百人前往新蔡、悬瓠慰劳白水蛮人。
English: Chen Qingzhi let Zhou Qi lead five hundred people to Xin Cai, and suspended the labor of the white water barbarians.

古文：蛮谋执荟以入魏，事觉，荟与文育拒之。
现代文：白水蛮人打算抓住周荟然后归附魏国，事情被发觉，周荟和周文育领兵抗拒。
English: The Baishui barbarians planned to capture Zhou Qi and then annex Wei. The matter was discovered, and Zhou Qi and Zhou Wenyu refused to lead the troops.

古文：时贼徒甚盛，一日中战数十合，文育前锋陷阵，勇冠军中。
现代文：当时贼众人数很多，一天之中作战几十回，周文育在前面冲锋陷阵，勇冠全军。
English: At that time, there were a large number of thieves, fighting dozens of times a day, and Zhou Wenyu was at the front, leading the whole army.

古文：荟于阵战死，文育驰取其尸，贼不敢逼。
现代文：作战中，周荟死于阵上，周文育飞奔向前收取他的尸体，敌人不敢进逼。
English: Zhou Yuxuan died before the battle, Wen Yuxi's horse won the body, and the robber soldiers did not dare to face each other.

古文：及夕，各引去。
现代文：到天黑时，各自领兵离去。
English: By nightfall, both sides had withdrawn.

古文：文育身被九创，创愈，辞请还葬，庆之壮其节，厚加賵遗而遣之。
现代文：周文育身受九处创伤，伤愈之后，他告辞请求送周荟回去安葬。陈庆之很赞赏他的节操，厚加馈赠后送他回去。
English: Zhou Wenyu suffered nine traumas in his life. After he recovered from his injuries, he asked for permission to send Zhou Ye back to be buried. Chen Qingzhi appreciated his dedication and sent him back with a generous gift.

古文：葬讫，会卢安兴爲南江督护，啓文育同行。
现代文：安葬周荟之后，正值卢安兴出任南江督护，他请求朝廷让周文育和他同行。
English: After the burial of Zhou Qi, when Lu Anxing was appointed as the governor of the South River, he asked the court to let Zhou Wenyu accompany him.

古文：累征有功，除南海令。
现代文：文育屡次出征立功，被任命为南海县令。
English: He was appointed to Nanhai County magistrate for his contributions to literature and education.

古文：安兴死后，文育与杜僧明攻广州，爲陈武帝所败，帝赦之。
现代文：卢安兴死后，周文育和杜僧明攻打广州，被陈武帝击败，陈武帝赦免了他。
English: After Lu Anxing's death, Zhou Wenyu and Du Sangming attacked Guangzhou and were defeated by Emperor Chen Wudi, who pardoned him.

古文：后监州王劢以文育爲长流，深被委任。
现代文：后来监州王劢让文育任长流参军，深受信任。
English: Later, Jianzhou Wang Yao let the long line of scholars and educators join the army, and they were deeply trusted.

古文：劢被代，文育欲与劢俱下。
现代文：当王劢被人替换时，周文育打算和王劢一起北下。
English: When Wang Yao was replaced, Zhou Wenyu planned to go north with Wang Yao.

古文：至大庾岭，诣卜者，卜者曰： 君北下不过作令长，南入则爲公侯。 
现代文：到达大庾岭时，到一位占卜的人那里占卜，占卜的人对文育说： 您北下不过能当一名令、长，南入则可以当公侯。 
English: When he arrived in Dalatangling, he went to a fortuneteller for fortune-telling. The fortuneteller said to Wen Yu, "If you go to the north, you can only be a commander or a chief, but if you go to the south, you can be a prince."

古文：文育曰： 足钱便可，谁望公侯。 
现代文：周文育说： 有钱用就行，谁还想当公侯。 
English: He said bluntly: "All you need is enough money. Who wants to be a prince?

古文：卜人又曰： 君须臾当暴得银至二千两，若不见信，以此爲验。 
现代文：卜人又对他说： 您不一会就会突然得到二千两银子，如果不相信，请以这件事作为验证。 
English: Bu Ren also said to him, "You will suddenly get two thousand taels of silver in a short time. If you don't believe it, please take this incident as proof.

古文：其夕，宿逆旅，有贾人求与文育博，文育胜之，得银二千两。
现代文：当晚，他们住在旅舍里，有位商人请求和周文育赌博，周文育赢了他，得到二千两银子。
English: That night, at the lodging hotel, a businessman gambled with Wen Yue and beat him, winning two thousand taels of silver.

古文：旦辞劢，劢问其故，文育以告，劢乃遣之。
现代文：天亮时，周文育向王劢告辞，王劢问他是什么原因，文育将有关情况如实告诉了，王劢便送他走了。
English: At dawn, Zhou Wenyu said goodbye to Wang Qian. Wang Qian asked him what the reason was. Wenyu told the relevant situation truthfully, and Wang Qian sent him away.

古文：武帝闻其还，大喜，分麾下配焉。
现代文：陈霸先听说周文育又回来了，大喜，分出一部分人马交给他。
English: When Chen Baxian heard that Zhou Wenyu had returned, he was overjoyed and gave him a portion of the manpower.

古文：武帝之讨侯景，文育与杜僧明爲前军，克兰裕，援欧阳頠，皆有功。
现代文：陈霸先征讨侯景时，周文育和杜僧明为前军。他们战胜了兰裕，救援欧阳危页，都立有战功。
English: When Chen He led the first expedition against Houjing, Zhou Wenyu and Du Xiangming were the vanguard. They defeated Lan Yu, rescued Ouyang Guifang, and made great contributions to the war.

古文：武帝破蔡路养于南野，文育爲路养所围，四面数重，矢石雨下，所乘马死，文育右手搏战，左手解鞍，溃围而出。
现代文：陈霸先在南野与蔡路养交战，周文育被蔡路养所围困时，四面敌军重重包围，利箭飞石有如雨下，他所骑的马死去。周文育便用右手和敌人搏斗，左手解开马鞍，突围而出。
English: Chen Hao first fought with Cai Luyang in Nan'an. When Zhou Wenyu was besieged by Cai Luyang, he was surrounded by enemy forces on all sides. The sharp arrows and flying stones fell like rain, and the horse he was riding died. Zhou Wenyu fought with the enemy with his right hand, untied the saddle with his left hand, and broke out of the encirclement.

古文：与杜僧明等相得，并力复进，遂大败之。
现代文：他和杜僧明等相遇后，合力又齐头并进，于是大败敌军。
English: After he met with Du Sangming and others, they joined forces and marched side by side, thus defeating the enemy.

古文：武帝乃表文育爲府司马。
现代文：陈霸先上表请求任命周文育为府司马。
English: Chen Baxian first requested the appointment of Zhou Wenyu as prefectural secretary.

古文：李迁仕之据大臯，遣其将军杜平虏入灨石鱼梁作城。
现代文：李迁仕占领了大皋，派他的将军杜平虏进入氵赣石鱼梁建城垒。
English: Li Qian occupied Dafu and sent his general Du Pingru to build a fortress in Dafu.

古文：武帝命文育击之，平虏弃城走，文育据其城。
现代文：陈霸先命令周文育攻打他。杜平虏弃城逃跑，周文育占领了该城。
English: Chen Baxian ordered Zhou Wenyu to attack him. Du Pingru abandoned the city and fled, and Zhou Wenyu occupied the city.

古文：迁仕闻平虏败，留老弱于大臯，悉选精兵自将以攻文育。
现代文：李迁仕得知杜平虏战败，将老弱残兵留在大皋，全部挑选精兵亲自率领来攻打周文育。
English: When Li Qianxing learned of the defeat of Du Pingru, he left the old and weak remnants in Dalat, and personally led all the selected elite soldiers to attack Zhou Wenyu.

古文：文育与战，迁仕稍却，相持未解。
现代文：周文育和他作战，李迁仕略略后退，两军相持不下。
English: Zhou Wenyu fought with him, Li Qianshi slightly retreated, and the two armies could not stand each other.

古文：会武帝遣杜僧明来援，别破迁仕水军，迁仕衆溃，不敢过大臯，直走新淦。
现代文：正值陈霸先派杜僧明赶来救援，已另行击败李迁仕的水军，李迁仕军队大败逃散，他们不敢再去大皋，直跑到新淦。
English: At that time, Chen Paxian sent Du Xiangming to come to the rescue. He had already defeated Li Qianshi's navy. Li Qianshi's army was defeated and fled. They did not dare to go to Dalat again, and ran straight to Xinlu.

古文：梁元帝授文育义州刺史。
现代文：梁元帝任命周文育为义州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Zhou Wenyu as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：迁仕又与刘孝尚谋拒义军，武帝遣文育与侯安都、杜僧明、徐度、杜棱筑城于白口拒之。
现代文：李迁仕又和刘孝尚合谋对抗义军，陈霸先派周文育和侯安都、杜僧明、徐度、杜棱到白口修建城垒对抗。
English: Li Qian also conspired with Liu Xiaoshang to fight against the rebels. Chen Baxian sent Zhou Wenyu, Hou Andu, Du Sangming, Xu Du and Du Ren to Baikou to build a fortress to fight against the rebels.

古文：文育频出与战，遂禽迁仕。
现代文：周文育多次领兵出战，终于活捉了李迁仕。
English: Zhou Wenyu led his troops into battle several times, and finally captured Li Qianshi alive.

古文：武帝发自南康，遣文育将兵五千，开通江路。
现代文：陈霸先从南康出发，派周文育领兵五千，开通江路。
English: Chen Ba first set out from Nankang, sent Zhou Wenyu to lead five thousand soldiers, and opened the river road.

古文：侯景将王伯丑据豫章，文育击走之，遂据其城。
现代文：侯景的部将王伯酉鬼据守豫章，周文育攻打之后将他赶走了，于是占据了该城。
English: The riddles department took Wang Zhenpo to Zibo, defeated and drove him away, and then occupied the city of Yanza.

古文：累功封东迁县侯。
现代文：他因屡立战功被封为东迁县侯。
English: He was awarded the title of Dongqian County Governor for his repeated war exploits.

古文：武帝军至白茅湾，命文育与杜僧明常爲军锋。
现代文：陈霸先的军队到达白茅湾后，任命周文育和杜僧明为军队先锋。
English: After Chen Baxian's army arrived at Baimao Bay, Zhou Wenyu and Du Xiangming were appointed as the vanguard of the army.

古文：及至姑孰，与侯景将侯子鉴战，破之。
现代文：到达姑孰时，周文育等和侯景的部将侯子鉴交战，打败了他。
English: When they arrived at Guzheng, Zhou Wenyu and others fought with Hou Jing's minister, Hou Zi Jian, and defeated him.

古文：景平，改封南移县侯，累迁散骑常侍。
现代文：侯景被讨平后，周文育被改封为南移县侯，屡迁至散骑常侍。
English: After the subjugation of Houjing, Zhou Wenyu was changed to a county magistrate in the south, and repeatedly moved to Sanzhizhizhu.

古文：武帝诛王僧辩，令文育督衆军，会文帝于吴兴，围克杜龛。
现代文：陈霸先杀了王僧辩，命令周文育总督众军，和陈文帝在吴兴会合，围攻并战败杜龛。
English: Chen Ba first killed Wang Sangyan and ordered the army of Zhou Wenyu, the governor-general, to meet with Chen Wenyi in Wuxing to besiege and defeat Dujuan.

古文：又济江袭会稽太守张彪，得其郡城。
现代文：又渡江攻打会稽太守张彪，占领了他的郡城。
English: He also crossed the Yangtze River to attack Zhang Biao, the Grand Inquisitor, and captured Zhang Biao's county seat.

古文：及文帝爲彪所袭，文育时顿城北香岩寺，文帝夜往趋之。
现代文：当陈文帝受到张彪偷袭时，文育的军队驻扎在城北的香岩寺，文帝连夜跑到周文育那里。
English: When Chen Wendi was attacked by Zhang Biao, Wenyu's army was stationed in Xiangyan Temple in the north of the city, and Wendi ran to Zhou Wenyu overnight.

古文：彪又来攻，文育苦战，遂破平彪。
现代文：张彪又来进攻，周文育同他苦战一场，终于讨平张彪。
English: Zhang Biao attacked again, and Zhou Wenyu fought a hard battle with him, finally leveling Zhang Biao.

古文：武帝以侯瑱拥据江州，命文育讨之，仍除南豫州刺史，率兵袭盆城。
现代文：陈霸先因侯王真拥兵占领江州，命令文育攻打他。周文育仍任南豫州刺史，领兵攻打盆城。
English: Chen Baxian ordered Wenyu to attack Wang Zhen because he had supported Wang Zhen's troops in the occupation of Jiangzhou. Zhou Wenyu was still the governor of South Yuzhou and led the troops to attack Boncheng.

古文：未克，徐嗣徽引齐人度江，据芜湖，诏徵文育还都。
现代文：周文育还未攻下盆城，徐嗣徽又领着齐兵渡江，占据芜湖，朝廷诏令调周文育回都城。
English: Zhou Wenyu had not yet conquered Boncheng, Xu Shihui led the Qi army across the river and occupied Wuhu, and the imperial court ordered Zhou Wenyu to return to the capital.

古文：嗣徽等乃列舰于青墩至于七矶，以断文育归路。
现代文：徐嗣徽等便在青墩直到七矶排列战舰，以断绝周文育的退路。
English: Xu Shihui and others then lined up warships from Qingtao to Qi Jiao to cut off Zhou Wenyu's escape route.

古文：及夕，文育鼓噪而发，嗣徽等不能制。
现代文：当晚，周文育的军队大声喊叫着出发，徐嗣徽等人无法制止他们。
English: In the evening, the Education and Culture Army marched in, beating drums and shouting. Tsuguhi and others could not stop them.

古文：至旦，反攻嗣徽，嗣徽骁将鲍砰独以小舰殿，文育乘单舴艋，跳入砰舰，斩砰，仍牵其舰而还，贼衆大骇。
现代文：天亮时，周文育的军队反攻徐嗣徽，徐嗣徽部下骁将鲍砰独自乘坐一条小舰断后，周文育乘着一艘单舴艋船，跳进鲍砰的小舰中，斩了鲍砰，并牵着这条小舰回去，敌众大惊失色。
English: At dawn, Zhou Wenyu's army counter-attacked against Xu Shihui. After Xu Shihui's subordinates took Bao Tong alone in a small ship, Zhou Wenyu jumped into Bao Tong's small ship in a single-hulled boat, beheaded Bao Tong, and led the small ship back. The enemy was shocked.

古文：因留船芜湖，自丹阳步上。
现代文：于是他们将船留在芜湖，从丹阳步行而上。
English: So they left the boat in Wuhu and walked up from Danyang.

古文：时武帝拒嗣徽于白城，适与文育会。
现代文：当时陈霸先在白城抵挡徐嗣徽，正好和周文育会合。
English: At that time, Chen Badu first resisted Xu Shihui in Baicheng, and just happened to meet with Zhou Wenyu.

古文：将战，风急，武帝曰： 矢不逆风。 
现代文：将要交战时，风很大，陈霸先说： 箭不逆风。 
English: When they were about to fight, the wind was very strong. Chen Baizhen said, "The arrow does not go against the wind."

古文：文育曰： 事急矣，当决之,何用古法。 
现代文：周文育说： 事态紧急了，当立即决战，何必用古法。 
English: Zhou Wenyu said: The situation is urgent, why use the old method when the decisive battle should be fought immediately.

古文：抽槊上马而进，衆军随之，风亦寻转，杀伤数百人。
现代文：便抽槊上马前进，众军都紧紧跟随他，风向也很快的转了，他们杀死了几百人。
English: So he got on his horse and galloped off. The whole army followed him closely, and the wind changed direction very quickly. They killed hundreds of people.

古文：嗣徽等移营莫府山，文育徙顿对之。
现代文：徐嗣徽等人将营垒移到莫府山，周文育也将军队转移和敌军对峙。
English: Xu Shihui and others moved the camp to Mofushan, and Zhou Wenyu also moved the army to confront the enemy.

古文：频战功最，进爵寿昌县公，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：多次作战，周文育的战功最大，晋封他爵位为寿昌县公，并赐给鼓吹一部。
English: After many battles, Zhou Wenyu's war exploits were the greatest, and he was promoted to the rank of Shuchang County official, and was awarded a prize for his propaganda.

古文：及广州刺史萧勃举兵踰岭，诏文育督衆军讨之。
现代文：当广州刺史萧勃领兵越过南岭时，朝廷诏令周文育总督众军讨伐。
English: When the Cantonese general Xiao Bo led his troops across the Nanling, the imperial court ordered the governor Zhou Wenyu to lead the troops in a crusade.

古文：时新吴洞主余孝顷举兵应勃，遣其弟孝劢守郡城，自出豫章，据于石头。
现代文：这时新吴洞主余孝顷起兵响应萧勃，派他的弟弟余孝劢镇守郡城，自己从豫章出兵，占领了石头城。
English: At that time, it was reported that the main leader Kim Ryong-soo raised an army in response to Luo Bo, sent his younger brother Hao to stay in the county seat, and sent his own troops to occupy the county seat.

古文：勃使其子孜将兵与孝顷相会，又遣其别将欧阳頠顿军苦竹滩，傅泰据墌口城，以拒官军。
现代文：萧勃派他的儿子萧孜领兵和余孝顷会合，又另派将军欧阳危页驻守苦竹滩，傅泰据守土庶口城，以对抗官军。
English: Xiao Bo sent his son Xiao Ze to lead the troops to meet with Yu Xiaotang, and also sent another general, Ouyang Guizhe, to guard the Bitter Bamboo Beach, and Fu Tai to guard the nearby Hukou City, in order to oppose the government army.

古文：官军船少，孝顷有舴艋三百艘、舰百馀乘在上牢，文育遣军主焦僧度、羊柬潜军袭之，悉取而归，仍于豫章立栅。
现代文：当时官军船少，余孝顷有舴艋小舟三百艘，战舰一百多艘在上牢的地方，周文育派军主将焦僧度、羊柬带军队秘密地前往偷袭，全部将船缴获归来，于是仍在豫章设水栅。
English: There were few ships of the government and army. Xiao He had three hundred rafts and more than a hundred warships in prison. Ciao Zangdu, the commander of the education and culture dispatched army, secretly led the army to make a sneak attack, captured all these ships and returned them, and built a camp gate in the infirmary.

古文：时官军食尽，欲退还，文育不许。乃使人间行，遗周迪书，约爲兄弟，并陈利害。
现代文：这时官军粮食已尽，准备退回，周文育不答应，他派人走小道送信给周迪，和他相约结为兄弟，并陈说利害关系。
English: At this time, the government army had run out of grain and was preparing to withdraw, but Zhou Wenyu did not agree. He sent someone along the trail to send a letter to Zhou Di, to make an appointment with him as a brother, and to explain the interests.

古文：迪得书甚喜，许馈以粮。
现代文：周迪得到信以后很高兴，答应送给周文育粮食。
English: After Zhou Di received the letter, he was very happy and promised to send grain to Zhou Wenyu.

古文：于是文育分遣老小，乘故船舫沿流俱下，烧豫章所立栅，僞退，孝顷望之大喜，因不设备。
现代文：于是周文育先分送老小，乘坐原船沿江而下，烧掉在豫章所建起来的栅垒，假装退却。余孝顷望见以后，大喜，于是毫不戒备。
English: As a result, Zhou Wenyu sent Lao Xiao first, rode the original boat down the river, burned down the fence built in Yuzhang, and pretended to retreat. After seeing Yu Xiao, he was overjoyed, so he was not wary.

古文：文育由间道信宿达芊韶。
现代文：周文育从小道一夜抵达芊韶。
English: Zhou Wenyu arrived in Handan from the trail overnight.

古文：芊韶上流则欧阳頠、萧勃，下流则傅泰、馀孝顷，文育据其中间，筑城飨士，贼徒大骇。
现代文：芊韶的上游是欧阳危页、萧勃，下游是傅泰、余孝顷，周文育占据当中，筑城垒大宴将士，贼众大惊。
English: The upper reaches of the Yangtze River are Ouyang Jizhe and Xiao Bo, and the lower reaches are Fu Tai and Yu Xiao He. Zhou Wenyu occupies the middle, building fortresses and holding grand feasts. The thieves are shocked.

古文：欧阳頠乃退入泥溪，作城自守。
现代文：欧阳危页便退入泥溪，建城垒自防。
English: Ouyang Gu then retreated into the muddy creek, leaving Jiancheng to defend itself.

古文：文育遣严威将军周铁武与长史陆山才袭頠，禽之。
现代文：周文育派严威将军周铁武和长史陆山才袭击欧阳危页，抓住了他。
English: It was not until the generals Zhou Tiewu and Changshi Lushan of the Zhou Culture and Education faction attacked Ouyang Guishi that they caught him.

古文：于是盛陈兵甲，与頠乘舟而宴，以巡傅泰城下，因攻泰，克之。
现代文：于是，周文育大举陈设兵马甲仗，和欧阳危页一起乘着船饮宴，在傅泰据守的城下巡游，并进而攻打傅泰，攻下城池。
English: As a result, Zhou Wenyu made a big display of the war between the Terracotta Warriors and the Horse, and together with Ouyang Guizhe, they took a boat to have a banquet, cruised under the castle guarded by Fu Tai, and then attacked Fu Tai and captured the castle.

古文：萧勃在南康，闻之，衆皆股栗。
现代文：萧勃当时在南康，听到消息后，众人都两股战栗。
English: Xiao Bo was in Nankang at the time. After hearing the news, everyone was shocked.

古文：其将谭世远斩勃欲降，爲人所害。
现代文：萧勃的部将谭世远斩了萧勃准备归降，被人杀害。
English: Xiao Bo's subordinate, Tan Shiyuan, killed Xiao Bo as he was preparing to surrender.

古文：世远军主夏侯明彻持勃首以降。
现代文：谭世远的军主夏侯明彻带着萧勃的首级来归降。
English: The long-gone warlord Xia Houming, carrying a reed cushion, surrenders his head.

古文：萧孜、馀孝顷犹据石头，武帝遣侯安都助文育攻之，孜降文育，孝顷退走新吴，广州平。
现代文：萧孜、余孝顷仍占领着石头城，陈霸先派侯安都去协助周文育进攻，萧孜投降了周文育，余孝顷后退跑到新吴，广州被讨平。
English: Xiao Ze and Yu Xiao He still occupied Stone Town. Chen Bajuan sent Hou Andu to assist Zhou Wenyu's attack. Xiao Ze surrendered to Zhou Wenyu, Yu Xiao He retreated to Xinwu, and Guangzhou was leveled.

古文：文育还顿豫章，以功授开府仪同三司。
现代文：周文育回到豫章，因功而被授予开府仪同三司。
English: Zhou Wenyu returned to Yuanzhang and was awarded the Kaifu Rite and the Third Division for his service.

古文：王琳拥据上流，诏侯安都爲西道都督，文育爲南道都督，同会武昌。
现代文：王琳拥着重兵占据上游，朝廷诏令侯安都为西道都督，周文育为南道都督，一同在武昌会合。
English: Wang Lin and his army occupied the upper reaches, and the imperial court decreed that Hou Andu would be the governor of the West Province, and Zhou Wenyu would be the governor of the South Province, and they would meet in Wuchang.

古文：与琳战于沌口，爲琳所执，后得逃归，请罪，诏不问，复其官爵。
现代文：在沌口和王琳作战时，周文育被王琳捉住了，后来得以逃回，向朝廷请罪，朝廷下诏不追究，并恢复他的官爵。
English: While fighting Wang Lin in Chaokou, Zhou Wenyu was captured by Wang Lin. Later, he was able to escape, plead guilty to the court, the court ruled not to investigate, and restored his title.

古文：及周迪破馀孝顷，孝顷子公扬、弟孝劢犹据旧栅，扰动南土，武帝复遣文育及周迪、黄法奭等讨之。
现代文：当周迪打败余孝顷后，余孝顷的儿子公、弟弟余孝劢仍占据旧栅垒，在南面捣乱，陈霸先又派周文育和周迪、黄法氍等前往征讨。
English: After Zhou Di defeated Yu Xiaohua, Yu Xiaohua's son and younger brother, Yu Xiaohua, still occupied the old stockade and wreaked havoc in the south. Chen Baxian also sent Zhou Wenyu, Zhou Di, Huang Fahui and others to investigate.

古文：豫章内史熊昙朗亦率衆来会。
现代文：豫章内史熊昙朗也带领部众前来会合。
English: Yuzhang's internal historian Xiong Yulang also led the club members to come to the meeting.

古文：文育遣吴明彻爲水军，配周迪运粮，自率衆军入象牙江，筑城于金口。
现代文：周文育派吴明彻为水军，配合周迪运粮，自己率领众军进入象牙江，在金口建城。
English: Wu Mingche, a member of Zhou's Literature and Education faction, served as a naval officer. In cooperation with Zhou Di to transport grain, he led the army into the Ivory River and built a city in Jingu.

古文：公扬僞降，谋执文育，事觉，文育囚之送都，以其部曲分隶衆军。
现代文：余公假装投降，阴谋抓住周文育，事情被察觉，周文育将他囚禁起来送往京都，将他的部众分别交给各军管辖。
English: Yu Gong pretended to surrender, plotted to capture Zhou Wenyu, the plot was discovered, Zhou Wenyu imprisoned him and sent him to Kyoto, and placed his subordinates under the jurisdiction of each army.

古文：乃舍舟爲步军，进据三陂。
现代文：于是，他们放弃船只变为步兵，进占三陂。
English: As a result, they abandoned their ships and became infantry, occupying the three harbours.

古文：王琳遣将曹庆救孝劢，分遣主帅常衆爱与文育相拒，自帅所领攻周迪、吴明彻军。
现代文：王琳派将军曹庆来救余孝劢，又分别派遣主帅常众爱和周文育对抗，自己统率部队攻打周迪、吴明彻的军队。
English: Wang Lin sent the general Cao Qing to rescue Yu Xiaojuan, and separately sent the head coach Chang Zhongai and Zhou Wenyu to fight, leading his troops to attack the army of Zhou Di and Wu Mingche.

古文：迪等败，文育退据金口。
现代文：周迪等被打败，周文育退兵据守金口。
English: Zhou Di and others were defeated, and Zhou Wenyu retreated to defend Jingu.

古文：熊昙朗因其失利，谋害文育以应衆爱。
现代文：熊昙朗因为他打仗失利，便想谋害周文育以接应常众爱。
English: Xiong Yulang, because of his defeat in the war, wanted to murder Zhou Wenyu in order to win the people's love.

古文：文育监军孙白象颇知其事，劝令先之。
现代文：周文育的监军孙白象颇知这件事，劝周文育先下手杀掉熊昙朗。
English: Sun Baixiang, the overseer of Wenyan, was quite aware of this situation and advised him to attack first.

古文：文育曰： 不可。
现代文：周文育说： 不行。
English: Zhou Wenyu said: No.

古文：我旧兵少，客军多，若取昙朗，人皆惊惧，亡立至矣，不如推心抚之。 
现代文：我的旧兵人少，客军人多，如果杀了昙朗，人心都会惊慌，立即就会败亡了，不如推心安抚他。 
English: There are fewer of my old soldiers and more of the guest soldiers. If you kill Hao Lang, everyone will be alarmed and you will immediately be defeated. It is better to calm him down.

古文：初，周迪之败，弃船走，莫知所在。
现代文：早先，周迪被打败，弃船逃走，不知下落。
English: Earlier, Zhou Di was defeated, abandoned ship and fled, his whereabouts unknown.

古文：及得迪书，文育喜，齎示昙朗，昙朗害之于坐。
现代文：当收到周迪送来的信以后，周文育大喜，拿来给熊昙朗看，熊昙朗便在座中杀害了他。
English: After receiving the letter sent by Zhou Di, Zhou Wenyu was overjoyed and showed it to Xiong Rong. Xiong Rong then killed him in the audience.

古文：武帝闻之，即日举哀，赠侍中、司空，諡曰忠湣。
现代文：陈武帝听到这消息以后，即日为他举行哀礼，追赠为侍中、司空，谥为忠愍。
English: After Emperor Chen Wu heard this news, he held a memorial service for him on the same day, posthumously awarding him the titles of Chamberlain, Empress Dowager, and Loyal Empress.

古文：初文育之据三陂，有流星坠地，其声如雷，地陷方一丈，中有碎炭数斗。
现代文：起先周文育占据三陂的时候，有流星坠下地来，响声如雷，地陷下一丈见方，当中有碎炭几斗。
English: At the beginning, when Zhou Benyu occupied Sanlu, a meteor fell to the ground, the noise was thunderous, the ground fell to a height, and there were several buckets of charcoal.

古文：又军市中忽闻小儿啼，一市并惊，听之在土下，军人掘焉，得棺，长三尺，文育恶之。
现代文：又军镇中忽然听见小孩子的啼哭声，全镇都大惊，细听哭声来自地下，军队挖掘之后，找到一具棺材，长三尺，周文育很感到厌恶。
English: In addition, the whole town was shocked when they suddenly heard the wailing of a child in the military town. The cries came from underground. After the army excavated, they found a coffin that was three feet long. Zhou Wenyu was disgusted.

古文：俄而迪败，文育见杀。
现代文：不久周迪兵败，周文育被杀。
English: Soon after, Zhou Di was defeated and Wen Rong was killed.

古文：天嘉二年，有诏配享武帝庙庭。
现代文：天嘉二年，朝廷有诏书将周文育配祭于陈武帝的享庙中。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, the imperial court issued an edict to hold the Zhouwen Education Festival in Emperor Chen Wu's pleasure temple.

古文：子屻嗣，位晋陵、定远二郡太守。侯瑱字伯玉，巴西充国人也。
现代文：周文育的儿子周宝安继承了他。周文育本族的族兄周景曜，因为周文育而官至新安太守。侯瑱，字伯玉，是巴西充国人。
English: Zhou Bao'an, the son of Zhou Wenyu, succeeded him. Zhou Wenyu's elder brother, Zhou Jingyou, became the new Andean governor because of Zhou Wenyu. Hou Yu, also known as Bo Yu, was a native of Brazil.

古文：父弘远，累世爲西蜀酋豪。
现代文：父亲侯弘远，几世都是西蜀的豪强。
English: His father, Hou Hongyuan, was a great warrior of Xishu for several generations.

古文：蜀贼张文萼据白崖山，有衆万人，梁益州刺史鄱阳王萧范命弘远讨之，弘远战死。
现代文：西蜀的贼徒张文萼占据白崖山，有部众万人，梁益州刺史鄱阳王萧范命令弘远征讨，侯弘远战死于战场。
English: Zhang Wencai, a bandit from West Shuxu, occupied Baiya Mountain with a force of tens of thousands of men. Liang Yizhou assassinated Shiyang Wang Xiao Fan and ordered Hong Yuan to go on an expedition. Hou Hong Yuan died on the battlefield.

古文：瑱固请复雠，每战先锋，遂斩文萼，由是知名。
现代文：侯瑱坚决要求替父亲报仇，每次作战都当先锋，终于斩了文萼，从此远近知名。
English: Hou Yi resolutely demanded to avenge his father's death. He was the vanguard in every battle. Finally, he broke his vow and became famous far and wide.

古文：因事范，范委以将帅之任。
现代文：他便侍奉萧范，萧范委任他为将帅。
English: He served Xiao Fan, and Xiao Fan appointed him as the commander.

古文：山谷夷、獠不附者，并遣瑱征之。
现代文：山中的夷族、獠族不肯归附的，都派侯瑱征讨。
English: The mountain tribes of the barbarians and the Yao refused to be annexed, and sent their clansmen to fight against them.

古文：累功授轻车府中兵参军、晋康太守。
现代文：他因多次立功而被任命为轻车府中兵参军、晋康太守。
English: Due to his many meritorious deeds, he was awarded the post of light vehicle prefectural middle-ranking soldier, joined the army, and became the governor of Jinkang.

古文：范爲雍州刺史，瑱除冯翊太守。
现代文：萧范任雍州刺史时，侯瑱被任命为冯翊太守。
English: When Xiao Fan was appointed as Yongzhou's prefect, Hou Yi was appointed as the governor of Fengyuan.

古文：范迁镇合肥，瑱又随之。
现代文：萧范改为镇守合肥时，侯瑱又跟随他。
English: Xiao Fan moved to Hefei, and Hou Yi followed him.

古文：侯景围台城，范乃遣瑱辅其世子嗣入援都。
现代文：侯景包围台城后，萧范便派侯瑱辅佐他的世子萧嗣入京都救援。
English: After Houjing besieged Taicheng, Xiao Fan sent his son, Xiao Zhi, to Kyoto to help.

古文：及城陷，瑱、嗣同退还合肥。仍随范徙镇盆城。
现代文：当台城陷没后，侯瑱和萧嗣一起退回合肥，并随着萧范转去镇守盆城。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, Hou Yi and Xiao Zhi retired to Hefei together, and followed Xiao Fan to the garrison of Bincheng.

古文：俄而范及嗣皆卒，瑱领其衆，依于豫章太守庄铁。
现代文：不久，萧范和萧嗣都死去，侯瑱就率领了他的部众，去依靠豫章太守庄铁。
English: Soon after, Xiao Fan and Xiao Zi both died, and Hou Yi led his subordinates to rely on Yu Zhang, the governor of Zhuangdi.

古文：铁疑之，瑱惧不自安，诈引铁谋事，因刃之，据豫章之地。
现代文：庄铁对侯瑱有疑心，侯瑱惊恐不安，假装请庄铁商量事情，用刀杀了他，占了豫章。
English: Zhuang Tie was suspicious of Hou Qi, and Hou Qi was alarmed and uneasy. He pretended to ask Zhuang Tie to discuss the matter, and killed him with a knife, which accounted for Yu Zhang.

古文：后降于侯景将于庆。
现代文：后来侯瑱投降了侯景的部将于庆。
English: Later, Hou Yi surrendered and Hou Jing's subordinates celebrated.

古文：庆送瑱于景，景以瑱与己同姓，托爲宗族，待之甚厚。
现代文：于庆把侯瑱送到侯景那里，侯景因为侯瑱和自己同姓，就认为同宗族人，对待他很好。
English: Yu Qing sent Hou Yao to Hou Jing. Since Hou Jing had the same surname as himself, he considered Hou Yao to be a member of the same clan and treated him well.

古文：留其妻子及弟爲质，遣瑱随庆平蠡南诸郡。
现代文：侯景将侯瑱的妻子和弟弟留下当人质，派侯瑱跟随于庆去讨平蠡南各郡。
English: Hou Jing left Hou Yao's wife and younger brother as hostages, and sent Hou Yao to follow Yu Qing to pacify the counties in southern Anhui.

古文：及景败巴陵，景将宋子仙、任约等并爲西军所获，瑱乃诛景党与以应义师，景亦诛其弟及妻子。
现代文：当侯景在巴陵失败时，侯景的将领宋子仙、任约等都被西军俘虏，侯瑱便杀了侯景的同党以接应义军，侯景也杀了侯瑱的妻子和弟弟。
English: When Hou Jing failed in Baling, Hou Jing's generals, Song Zixian, Ren You and others were all captured by the Western army. Hou Yi then killed Hou Jing's comrades-in-arms in order to meet the rebels, and Hou Jing also killed Hou Yi's wife and brother.

古文：梁元帝授瑱南兖州刺史、郫县侯。
现代文：梁元帝任命侯瑱为南兖州刺史、郫县侯。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Hou Yi as the governor of Southern Luzhou and the governor of Luzhou County.

古文：仍随都督王僧辩讨景，恒爲前锋。
现代文：并随都督王僧辩讨伐侯景，每次都充当先锋。
English: And with the governor Wang Sofen to fight against Houjing, each time acting as a vanguard.

古文：既复台城，景奔吴郡，僧辩使瑱追景，大败之于吴松江。
现代文：收复了台城以后，侯景逃往吴郡，王僧辩派侯瑱追赶侯景，在吴松江将他打得大败。
English: After the recapture of Taicheng, Houjing fled to Wu County. Wang Sangye sent Houyi to chase after Houjing and defeated him in Wu Songjiang.

古文：以功除南豫州刺史，镇姑孰。
现代文：因功侯瑱被任命为南豫州刺史，镇守姑孰。
English: As a result of his meritorious service, Houyi was appointed as the governor of South Yuzhou and the town guard of Guzheng.

古文：及齐遣郭元建出濡须，僧辩遣瑱扞之，大败元建。
现代文：当齐国派郭元建从濡须出兵时，王僧辩派侯瑱去抵御，大败郭元建。
English: When the State of Qi sent Guo Yuanjian to send troops from Nusu, Wang Sangye sent Hou Yi to resist, and defeated Guo Yuanjian.

古文：魏攻荆州，王僧辩以瑱爲前军赴援，未至而魏克荆州。
现代文：魏进攻荆州时，王僧辩派侯瑱为前军前去救援，但还未到达而魏已攻克荆州。
English: When Wei attacked Jingzhou, Wang Sangye sent Hou Yi to go to the rescue for the former army, but he had not yet arrived and Wei had already conquered Jingzhou.

古文：瑱顿九江，因卫晋安王还都。
现代文：侯瑱镇守九江，并护卫晋安王回京都。
English: Hou Yi Zhen guarded Jiujiang and escorted King Jinan back to Kyoto.

古文：承制以瑱爲侍中、江州刺史，加都督，改封康乐县公。
现代文：晋安王承制，任命侯瑱为侍中、江州刺史，加都督，改封为康乐县公。
English: Jin'an Wang Zheng system, appointed Hou Yi as a chamberlain, Jiangzhou scribe, and governor of Kadu, and changed his title to Kangle County.

古文：及司徒陆法和据郢州，引齐兵来寇，乃使瑱西讨，未至而法和入齐。
现代文：当司徒陆法和占据郢州，领齐兵来侵犯时，又派侯瑱西征，还未到达而陆法和已经到齐国了。
English: When Sittu Lufa occupied Zhangzhou and led Qi soldiers to invade, he also sent Houyi to invade the West, and before he arrived, Lufa had already arrived in Qi.

古文：齐遣慕容恃德镇夏首，瑱攻之，恃德食尽请和，瑱还镇豫章。
现代文：齐派慕容恃德镇守夏首，侯瑱进攻他，慕容恃德粮尽而请和，侯瑱回来镇守豫章。
English: Qi sent Murong Baode to guard Xia Shou, Hou Yi attacked him, Murong Baode ran out of food and asked for peace, Hou Yi returned to guard Yuzhang.

古文：僧辩使其弟僧愔与瑱共讨萧勃，及陈武帝诛僧辩，僧愔阴欲图瑱而夺其军，瑱知之，尽收僧愔徒党，僧愔奔齐。
现代文：王僧辩派他的弟弟王僧忄音和侯瑱共同讨伐萧勃，当陈武帝杀了王僧辩后，王僧忄音阴谋杀死侯瑱以夺取他的部队。侯瑱知道了，抓了王僧忄音的全部党徒，王僧忄音逃到齐国。
English: Wang Soen sent his brother Wang Soen and Hou Yi to jointly fight against Xiao Bo. When Emperor Chen killed Wang Soen, Wang Soen murdered Hou Yi to capture his troops. Hou Yi found out and arrested all of Wang Soen's party members. Wang Soen fled to Qi.

古文：是时瑱据中流，甚强，又以本事王僧辩，虽外示臣节，未肯入朝。
现代文：当时侯瑱占据中游地区，实力强盛，又因他原先侍奉王僧辩，所以虽然对朝廷仍以臣子礼节自称，却不肯进朝去。
English: At that time, Hou Yi occupied the middle reaches of the region and was very powerful, and because he had previously served the king, he refused to go to the court, although he still claimed to be a courtier to the court.

古文：初，馀孝顷爲豫章太守，及瑱镇豫章，乃于新吴县别立城栅，与瑱相拒。
现代文：以前，余孝顷当豫章太守，当侯瑱镇守豫章时，余孝顷便在新吴县另外设立了防城的栅栏，和侯瑱对抗。
English: In the past, when Yu Xiaoha was the governor of Yuzhang and when Houyi Town was the governor of Yuzhang, Yu Xiaohao also set up a city defense fence in Xinwu County to confront Houyi.

古文：瑱留军人妻子于豫章，令从弟奫知后事，悉衆以攻孝顷，自夏迄冬弗能克。
现代文：侯瑱将军人的妻子留在豫章，让他的堂弟侯大渊在豫章处理留下的事务，带领全部人马攻打余孝顷，从夏天打到冬天还不能攻下。
English: Hou Yi left the wife of the general in Yuzhang, and let his cousin Hou Dayuan deal with the affairs left behind in Yuzhang. He led all the men and horses to attack Yu Xiaoha, and from summer to winter, they could not capture him.

古文：奫与其部下侯方儿不协，方儿下攻奫，虏瑱军府妓妾金玉，归于武帝。
现代文：侯大渊和他的部下侯方儿不和，侯方儿进攻侯大渊，收了侯瑱军府中的妓妾和金玉财宝前去归附陈武帝。
English: Hou Dayuan and his subordinate Hou Fang'er did not get along. Hou Fang'er attacked Hou Dayuan, took the prostitutes and concubines and the gold and jewels from Hou Yi's military headquarters, and went to attach them to Emperor Chen Wu.

古文：瑱既失根本，轻归豫章，豫章人拒之，乃趋盆城，就其将焦僧度。
现代文：侯瑱既已失去根本，轻骑回归豫章，豫章人拒绝让他入城，他便前往盆城，投到他的部将焦僧度那里。
English: Since Hou Yi had already lost his foundation, he lightly rode back to Yuzhang. The people of Yuzhang refused to let him enter the city, so he went to Bincheng and went to his subordinate, Jiao Zangdu.

古文：僧度劝瑱投齐，瑱以武帝有大量，必能容己，乃诣阙请罪，武帝复其爵位。
现代文：焦僧度劝侯瑱投奔齐国，侯瑱认为陈武帝有大器量，必定能够容纳自己，便到朝廷请罪，陈武帝恢复了他的爵位。
English: Jiao Zongdu advised Hou Yi to go to Qi. Hou Yi thought that Emperor Chen Wu had a great capacity and would certainly be able to contain himself, so he went to the imperial court to plead guilty. Emperor Chen Wu restored his title.

古文：永定二年，进位司空。
现代文：永定二年，晋位为司空。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was promoted to Siku.

古文：文帝即位，进授太尉。
现代文：文帝即位，又进任太尉。
English: Emperor Wen ascended the throne, and he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：王琳至栅口，又以瑱爲都督，侯安都等并隶焉。
现代文：王琳到栅口时，朝廷又任命侯瑱为都督，侯安都等都隶属于他。
English: When Wang Lin arrived at the gate, the imperial court appointed Hou Yi as the governor, and Hou Andu and others were subordinated to him.

古文：天嘉元年二月，王琳引合肥漅湖之衆，舳舻相次而下。
现代文：天嘉元年二月，王琳率领他在合肥、巢湖的部众，乘船依次而下。
English: In February of the first year of Tianjia, Wang Lin led his subordinates from Hefei and Chaohu to go down by boat one after another.

古文：瑱率军进兽槛洲。
现代文：侯瑱领军队进至兽槛洲。
English: Hou Yi led the army into the Beast's Threshold.

古文：明日合战，琳军少却。
现代文：第二天两军交战，王琳军队略略后退。
English: The next day, the two armies clashed, and Wang Lin's army retreated slightly.

古文：及夕，东北风吹其舟舰并坏。
现代文：晚上，东北风将王琳的船只全都刮坏了。
English: In the evening, the northeasterly wind blew Wang Lin's boats all to pieces.

古文：夜中有流星坠于贼营。
现代文：夜里有流星坠入敌人营垒中。
English: At night, meteors crashed into the enemy camp.

古文：及旦风静，琳入浦，以鹿角绕岸，不敢复出。
现代文：当天亮后风停了，王琳进到江边，用鹿角围在岸上，不敢再出战。
English: After the dawn of the day, the wind stopped, and Wang Lin went to the riverside and surrounded the shore with antlers. She did not dare to fight again.

古文：时西魏将史宁蹑其上流，瑱闻之，知琳不能持久，收军却据湖浦，以待其弊。
现代文：当时西魏的将领史宁占据上游地区，侯瑱得知后，知道王琳难以维持很久，便把军队收回据守湖边，等待对方自败。
English: At that time, Shining, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, occupied the upstream area. After Hou Yi learned of this, he knew that Wang Lin could not be maintained for a long time, so he withdrew the army and guarded the lake, waiting for the other side to self-defeat.

古文：及史宁至，围郢州，琳恐衆溃，乃率船东下，去芜湖十里而泊。
现代文：史宁到后，包围了郢州。王琳害怕众人溃散，便带领船只东下，在离芜湖十里的地方停泊。
English: After Xuning arrived, they surrounded Zhangzhou. Wang Lin was afraid that everyone would scatter, so she led the ship eastward and anchored ten miles away from Lugu Lake.

古文：明日，齐人遣兵助琳，瑱令军中晨炊蓐食，顿芜湖洲尾以待之。
现代文：第二天，齐人派兵援救王琳。侯瑱让军中烧早饭并在寝席上吃饭，船停在芜湖的洲尾等待王琳。
English: The next day, the Qi people sent soldiers to rescue Wang Lin. Hou Yi had the army cook breakfast and eat on the bed, and the boat stopped at the end of the lake to wait for Wang Lin.

古文：将战，有微风至自东南，衆军施拍纵火，定州刺史章昭达乘平虏大舰中江而进，琳军大败，脱走以免者十二三，琳因此入齐。
现代文：准备交战时，有微风从东南而来，众军施放火种，定州刺史章昭达乘坐平虏大舰从江中进击，王琳军队大败，逃走而幸免死亡的只有十分之二三，王琳因此跑到齐国去了。
English: When preparing for battle, there was a breeze coming from the southeast, the troops set fire, Dingzhou Zhi Zhang Zhoda attacked from the middle of the river on a large ship, Wang Lin's army was defeated, and only two-thirds of ten escaped death, so Wang Lin went to Qi.

古文：其年，诏以瑱爲都督五州诸军事，镇盆城。
现代文：当年，诏令侯瑱为都督五州诸军事，镇守盆城。
English: In that year, the imperial edict made Hou Yi the military governor of the five states and the town guard of Bincheng.

古文：周将贺若敦、独孤盛等来攻巴、湘，又以瑱爲西讨都督，大败盛军。
现代文：周将贺若敦、独孤盛等来攻巴、湘时，又任命侯瑱为西讨都督，大败独孤盛的军队。
English: When the Zhou generals He Ruodong, Du Guosheng and others came to attack Ba and Hunan, they also appointed Hou Yi as the governor of the West, and defeated Du Guosheng's army.

古文：以功授湘州刺史，改封零陵郡公。
现代文：他因功被任命为湘州刺史，改封零陵郡公。
English: He was awarded the title of Shishi of Hunan Province and the title of Ziling County Governor.

古文：及周获吴明彻，乃以量爲都督水陆诸军事、车骑将军、都督、南兖州刺史。
现代文：天嘉二年去世，追赠为大司马，谥为 壮肃 ，配享于陈武帝的庙中。他的儿子侯净藏继嗣，娶了陈文帝的女儿富阳公主。
English: Tian Jia died two years later and was posthumously awarded the title of Da Sima and the title of Zhuang Sui, which were shared in the temple of Emperor Chen Wu. His son, Hou Ching Zang Heir, married the daughter of Emperor Chen Wen, Princess Fuyang.

古文：十四年薨，赠司空。章昭达字伯通，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：章昭达字伯通，吴兴武康人。
English: Zhang Zhaoda is called Bertong, and Wu Xing is called Wukang.

古文：性倜傥，轻财尚气。
现代文：生性倜傥，轻财物重气节。
English: Inherently lazy, light on possessions, heavy on air.

古文：少时，遇相者谓曰： 卿容貌甚善，须小亏，则当富贵。 
现代文：年少时，遇到一个相面的对他说： 你的面相很好，要受些小亏损，就会得富贵。 
English: When he was young, he met a handsome man and said to him: Your face is very good, if you suffer some small losses, you will become rich.

古文：梁大同中，昭达爲东宫直后，因醉墯马，鬓角小伤，昭达喜之，相者曰： 未也。 
现代文：梁大同年间，昭达作东宫直后，因酒醉从马上摔下来，鬓角被擦破，昭达很高兴，可是相面人说： 还不能算。 
English: During the same year of Liang Da, Zhaoda fell off a horse due to drunkenness right after the East Palace, and his shin was scraped. Zhaoda was very happy, but the face-to-face person said: It can't be counted yet.

古文：侯景之乱，昭达率乡人援台，爲流矢所中，眇其一目。
现代文：后来侯景之乱昭达率领其乡人援救朝廷，被流矢射中，瞎了一只眼睛。
English: Later, Zhaoda, who led his villagers to rescue the imperial court, was shot by a stray arrow and was blinded in one eye.

古文：相者见之，曰： 卿相善矣，不久当富贵。 
现代文：相面人见了，对他说： 这下你的面相好了，不久就会富贵。 
English: When the man saw him, he said to him, "Now that you have become a good friend, you will soon be rich and famous."

古文：台城陷，昭达还乡里，与陈文帝游，因结君臣分。
现代文：台城被侯景攻陷后，昭达回到家乡，和陈文帝交游，结下日后君臣的情分。
English: After the fall of Taicheng by Houjing, Zhao Da returned to his hometown, met with Emperor Chen Wen, and established the future relationship of ruler and vassal.

古文：侯景平，文帝爲吴兴太守，昭达杖策来谒。
现代文：侯景被平定后，文帝作吴兴太守，昭达赶来谒见。
English: After Houjing was subdued, Emperor Wen made Wu Xing the governor-general, and Zhoda came to see him.

古文：文帝见之大喜，因委以将帅，恩宠超于侪等。
现代文：文帝见到他很高兴，便委任他为将帅，恩宠过于一般人。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased to see him, and appointed him as a general. His grace was beyond the ordinary.

古文：陈武帝谋讨王僧辩，令文帝还长城招聚兵衆，以备杜龛，频使昭达往京口禀承计画。
现代文：陈武帝谋划攻讨王僧辩，令文帝回长城招聚兵马，以防备杜龛，文帝屡次派昭达到京口武帝处禀陈计划。
English: Emperor Chen Wudi planned to attack Wang Sangye, and ordered Emperor Wen to return to the Great Wall to gather soldiers and horses to guard against cuckoos. Emperor Wen repeatedly sent Zhao to Emperor Wu's office in Beijing to discuss Chen's plan.

古文：僧辩诛后，杜龛遣其将杜泰来攻长城，昭达因从文帝进军吴兴以讨龛。
现代文：僧辩被杀后，杜龛派他的部将杜泰来攻长城，昭达于是跟随文帝进军吴兴讨伐杜龛。
English: After Sofen was killed, Dujuan sent his general Du Tai to attack the Great Wall, and Zhao Da followed Emperor Wen to march into Wuxing to fight Dujuan.

古文：龛平，又从讨张彪于会稽，克之。
现代文：平定杜龛后，又跟从文帝到会稽讨伐张彪，得胜。
English: After pacifying Cuckoo, he followed Emperor Wen to the imperial court to fight Zhang Biao, and won.

古文：累功除定州刺史。
现代文：因屡次战功被封为定州刺史。
English: Because of his repeated war exploits, he was awarded the title of Dingzhou Hero of History.

古文：时留异拥据东阳，武帝患之，乃使昭达爲长山令，居其心腹。
现代文：当时留异拥兵据东阳，武帝感到担心，于是派昭达为长山令，居于心腹之地。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was worried about the dissident soldiers who stayed in Dongyang, so he sent Zhoda to be the commander of the Changshan army, living in the place of his heart.

古文：天嘉元年，追论长城功，封欣乐县侯。寻随侯安都拒王琳，昭达乘平虏大舰，中流而进，先锋发拍，中贼舰。
现代文：天嘉元年，追论长城战功，封他为欣乐县侯，不久随侯安都抵御王琳，昭达乘平虏大舰，从江心挺进，先锋用拍攻击，打中敌舰。
English: In the first year of Tian Jia, after discussing the Great Wall's war exploits, he was appointed as the governor of Xinle County, and soon followed Hou Andu to resist Wang Lin. Zhao Da took the large ship and advanced from the center of the river. The vanguard attacked with clapping and hit the enemy ship.

古文：王琳平，昭达策勋第一。
现代文：平定王琳，昭达功劳第一。
English: Wang Lin was subdued, and Zhao Da's merit was the first.

古文：二年，除都督、郢州刺史。
现代文：二年，封都督、郢州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the governor of the capital and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：周迪据临川反，诏昭达便道征之。
现代文：周迪占据临川反叛，文帝下诏令昭达顺路讨伐他。
English: Zhou Di occupied Linchuan and rebelled, and Emperor Wen issued a decree ordering Zhao Da to go all the way to fight him.

古文：迪败走，征爲护军将军，改封邵武县侯。
现代文：周迪败逃，昭达被征召为护军将军，改封邵武县侯。
English: Zhou Di was defeated and fled, and Zhao Da was conscripted as a general of the escorting army, and was given the title of marquis of Shaowu County.

古文：四年，陈宝应纳周迪，共寇临川，又以昭达爲都督讨迪。
现代文：四年，陈宝应收容周迪，共同进犯临川，朝廷又以昭达为都督讨伐周迪。
English: In four years, Chen Bao was supposed to receive Zhou Di, and they jointly attacked Linchuan. The imperial court also used Zhao Da as the governor to fight Zhou Di.

古文：迪走，昭达乃踰岭讨陈宝应。
现代文：周迪败逃，昭达于是翻过东兴岭讨伐陈宝应。
English: Zhou Di was defeated and fled, so Zhao Da crossed the Dongxing Mountains to fight Chen Baoying.

古文：与战不利，因据上流爲筏，施拍其上，坏其水栅。
现代文：交战失利，于是占据上游造木筏，在上边设拍，击破陈宝应的水栅。
English: After losing the battle, they occupied the upstream to build rafts, set up paddles on the upper side, and broke Chen Baoying's water gate.

古文：又出兵攻其步军。
现代文：又出兵攻击他的步兵。
English: Troops were also dispatched to attack Chen Shizhe's army.

古文：方大合战，会文帝遣馀孝顷出自海道，适至，因并力乘之，遂定闽中，尽禽留异、宝应。
现代文：正在决战之际，陈文帝派余孝顷从海路赶到，并力战胜宝应，平定闽中，俘获留异、宝应。
English: At the time of the decisive battle, Emperor Chenwen sent Yu Xiaohe to arrive from the sea, and he defeated Baoying, pacified Yunnan, and captured Zhuoyi and Baoying.

古文：以功授镇军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：昭达因功被授予镇军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: For his service, Zhaoda was awarded the title of general of the town army, Kaifu ceremony and three divisions.

古文：初，文帝尝梦昭达升台铉，及旦，以梦告之。
现代文：起初，文帝曾梦见昭达官升宰辅，等天亮后，把这梦告诉昭达。
English: At first, Emperor Wen had a dream that Zhaoda had been promoted to the post of assistant to the emperor. After the dawn, he told Zhaoda about this dream.

古文：至是，侍宴酒酣，顾昭达曰： 卿忆梦不？
现代文：此时，宴会上酒酣之际，文帝问昭达说： 你还记得那个梦吗？
English: At this time, while drinking wine at the banquet, Emperor Wen asked Zhao Da: Do you still remember that dream?

古文：何以偿梦？ 
现代文：你怎么实现这梦呢？ 
English: What is the reward for this dream?

古文：昭达对曰： 当效犬马之用，以尽臣节，自馀无以奉偿。 
现代文：昭达回答说： 我只有效犬马之劳，以尽为臣的本分，除此而外没有什么可做的。 
English: Zhang Zhaoda replied, "I should do my best and devote myself to the etiquette of a courtier, and there is no way to repay the rest.

古文：寻出爲都督、江州刺史。
现代文：不久出京任都督、江州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed the governor of Beijing and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：废帝即位，改封邵陵郡公。
现代文：陈废帝即位，改封他为邵陵郡公。
English: Emperor Qianwu ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of Shao Ling County Governor.

古文：华皎之反，其移文并假以昭达爲辞，又频遣使招之，昭达尽执其使送都。
现代文：华皎反叛，其檄文中都用昭达为借口，又屡次派使者来笼络他，昭达都把他的使者扣下来送交京都。
English: When Hua Tuo rebelled, he used Zhaoda as an excuse in his obituary, and repeatedly sent emissaries to entice him. Zhaoda arrested his emissaries and sent them to Kyoto.

古文：秩满，征爲中抚大将军。
现代文：任期满后，被征为中抚大将军。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he was conscripted as the General of the Central Military Commission.

古文：宣帝即位，进号车骑大将军，以还朝迟留，爲有司所劾，降号车骑将军。
现代文：陈宣帝即位，晋号车骑大将军，因为还朝时滞留京中时间长了，被有关官员弹劾，降号为车骑将军。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of General of the Chariot and Cavalry of the Jin Dynasty. Because he stayed in Beijing for a long time, he was impeached by the relevant officials and his title was reduced to General of the Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：欧阳纥据岭南反，诏昭达都督衆军征之。
现代文：欧阳纥占据岭南造反，朝廷下诏令昭达率领众军征讨他。
English: Ouyang Zang occupied Lingnan and rebelled. The imperial court ordered Zhao Da to lead an army to subjugate him.

古文：纥闻昭达奄至，乃出顿洭口，聚沙石，盛以竹笼，置于水栅之外，用遏舟舰。
现代文：欧阳纥听说昭达突然兵到，就出兵驻扎在氵匡口，聚集沙石，用竹笼装上，沉在水栅外面，用来阻挡舰船。
English: Hearing of the sudden arrival of Zhaoda's soldiers, Ouyang Kun stationed troops at the mouth of the Yangtze River, gathered sand and stones, loaded them with bamboo cages, and sank them outside the water gate to block the ships.

古文：昭达居其上流，装舰造拍，以临贼栅。
现代文：昭达居于上游，建造舰船，置拍其上，逼近欧阳纥水栅。
English: Zhaoda lived upstream, built ships, and set up a camera on it, approaching Ouyang's water gate.

古文：又令人衔刀潜行水中，以斫竹笼，笼篾皆解。
现代文：又派人口衔刀从水中潜行，砍破竹笼，笼篾散开。
English: They also sent a person with a knife to sneak out of the water, cut the bamboo cage, and scattered the cages.

古文：因纵大舰突之，大败纥，禽之送都。
现代文：于是纵大舰突破水栅，大败欧阳纥，把他擒获送到京都。
English: As a result, the longitudinal large ship broke through the water grate, defeated Ouyang Xuan, and captured him and sent him to Kyoto.

古文：广州平，进位司空。
现代文：广州平定，昭达晋位为司空。
English: Guangzhou was pacified, and Zhao Da was promoted to the rank of Sikuo.

古文：太建二年，征江陵。
现代文：太建二年，征伐江陵。
English: In the second year of Tai Jian, the conquest of Jiangling was completed.

古文：时梁明帝与周军大蓄舟舰于青泥中，昭达分遣偏将钱道戢、程文季乘轻舟焚之。
现代文：当时梁明帝萧岿和周军在青泥聚集了大批舰船，昭达分派偏将钱道戢、程文季乘坐轻舟把它们焚毁。
English: At that time, Emperor Liang Ming's Xiao Wei and Zhou Jun gathered a large number of ships in Qingdi, and Zhao Da dispatched Qian Daojun and Cheng Wenzhi to burn them in a light boat.

古文：周又于峡口南岸筑垒，名安蜀城，于江上横引大索，编苇爲桥，以度军粮。
现代文：周人又在峡口南岸筑垒，取名安蜀城，在江上横拉大绳，编芦苇作桥，来运送军粮。
English: The Zhou people also built a fortification on the south bank of the mouth of the gorge, named it Anshu City, stretched a large rope across the river, and weaved reeds to make a bridge to transport military grain.

古文：昭达乃命军士爲长戟，施楼船上，仰割其索。
现代文：昭达命军士造长戟，在船上搭楼，站在上面用长戟仰割周军过江长绳，割断绳索，断绝了周军粮草。
English: Zhaoda ordered the sergeant to make a long raft, build a building on the boat, stand on it and use the long raft to cut the Zhou army's long rope across the river, cut the rope, and cut off the Zhou army's grain and grass.

古文：索断粮绝，因纵兵攻其城，降之。三年，于军中病薨，赠大将军。
现代文：于是纵兵进攻周城，使之投降。三年，在军中病死，被追赠大将军。
English: As a result, the soldiers attacked Zhoucheng and forced it to surrender. Three years later, he died of illness in the army and was posthumously awarded the rank of general.

古文：昭达性严刻，每奉命出征，必昼夜倍道；然其所克，必推功将帅。
现代文：昭达性情严厉苛刻，每次奉命出征，必定要昼夜兼行；然而打了胜仗，也必定归功于下级将帅。
English: Zhaoda had a stern and harsh disposition. Every time he was ordered to go to war, he had to go both day and night. However, if he won the war, it must be attributed to the junior general.

古文：厨膳饮食，并同群下，将士亦以此附之。
现代文：伙食也和下边将士一样，将士们因此也愿意跟从他。
English: He ate the same food as the soldiers below, so the soldiers were also willing to follow him.

古文：每饮会，必盛设女伎杂乐，备羌、胡之声，音律姿容，并一时之妙，虽临敌弗之废也。
现代文：每次举行宴会，必定要大事铺排女伎音乐，并有羌、胡乐曲，无论是音乐或舞女，在当时都属上乘，即使临敌作战也必备乐舞。
English: Whenever a banquet was held, it was essential to have a large display of female minstrel music, as well as music for the gong and flute. Whether it was music or dancing, it was of the highest quality at the time. Even when fighting against the enemy, music and dancing were essential.

古文：四年，配享文帝庙庭。
现代文：太建四年，在文帝庙庭中受配祭。
English: Tai Jian was four years old when he received the offering in the garden of the Emperor Wen's temple.

古文：子大宝，袭邵陵郡公，位丰州刺史。
现代文：儿子章大宝，袭封邵陵郡公，位至丰州刺史。
English: His son, Zhang Dabao, succeeded to the title of Sholing County Governor, and became the crown prince of Fuzhou.

古文：在州贪纵，百姓怨酷，后主乙太仆卿李晕代之，乃袭杀晕而反。
现代文：在州里贪婪胡为，百姓十分怨恨，后主让太仆李晕来代替他，他袭杀李晕造反。
English: In the state of greed and nonsense, the people are very resentful. The lord asked his servant Li Huan to replace him. He attacked and killed Li Huan and rebelled.

古文：寻被禽，枭首朱雀航，夷三族。
现代文：不久被抓获，悬首朱雀航，被诛灭三族。
English: He was soon caught, hanged, and the three clans were annihilated.

古文：吴明彻字通照，秦郡人也。
现代文：吴明彻，字通火召，秦郡人。
English: Wu Mingcher, a native of Qin County.

古文：父树，梁右军将军。
现代文：父亲吴树，在梁朝任右军将军。
English: His father, Wu Shu, was a general in the right wing army of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：明彻幼孤，性至孝。
现代文：吴明彻自幼父亲去世，他本性非常孝顺。
English: Since the death of his father when he was a child, Wu Mingcher has been very filial by nature.

古文：年十四，感坟茔未修，家贫无以取给，乃勤力耕种。
现代文：十四岁时，有感于父亲的坟墓尚未修建，家里又贫困难以拿出钱来，便勤于耕种。
English: At the age of fourteen, impressed by the fact that his father's grave had not yet been built and by the fact that his family was too poor to come up with the money, he devoted himself to farming.

古文：时天下亢旱，苗稼焦枯，明彻哀愤，每之田中号哭，仰天自诉。
现代文：当时天旱，禾苗枯焦，吴明彻非常伤心，每天到田里大哭，抬头向苍天诉说。
English: At that time, the weather was dry and the seedlings were scorched. Wu Mingche was very sad. Every day, he went to the field to cry and looked up to the sky.

古文：居数日，有自田还者，云苗已更生，明彻疑其紿己，及往如言，秋而大获，足充葬用。
现代文：过了几天，有人从田里回来，说庄稼已死而复生，吴明彻以为是骗他的，可是当去看过以后，才知道是真的。秋天时他家获得大丰收，足够给父亲营葬的费用。
English: A few days later, someone came back from the fields and said that the crops had come back to life. Wu Mingche thought he was being lied to, but when he went to see it, he knew it was true. In the autumn, his family had a bumper harvest, enough to pay for his father's funeral.

古文：时有伊氏者，善占墓，谓其兄曰： 君葬日，必有乘白马逐鹿者经坟，此是最小孝子大贵之征。 
现代文：这时有位姓伊的人，善于占卜墓地，他对吴明彻的哥哥说： 当你进行安葬时，必定有骑白马追鹿的人经过坟地，这是最小的那位孝子大贵的征兆。 
English: At this time, a man surnamed Yi, who was good at divining cemeteries, said to Wu Mingche's brother: When you carry out the burial, there must be a person riding a white horse chasing a deer passing through the cemetery. This is a sign that the smallest filial son is noble.

古文：至时果有应。
现代文：到营葬时，果然如此。
English: When it came to the funeral, it was true.

古文：明彻即树之小子也。
现代文：吴明彻正是吴树最小的儿子。
English: Wu Mingcher is the youngest son of Wu Shu.

古文：及侯景寇都，明彻有粟麦三千馀斛，而邻里饥餧，乃白诸兄曰： 今人不图久，奈何不与乡里共此。 
现代文：当侯景进犯都城时，吴明彻家里还有三千多斛粟麦，而周围乡村的人都正在忍饥挨饿。吴明彻便对他的哥哥们说： 如今的人难以说能活多久，何不拿出来和乡里人共同吃呢？ 
English: When Hou Jing invaded the capital, Wu Ming Che still had more than three thousand poppy seeds at home, while the people in the surrounding villages were starving. Wu Ming Che said to his brothers: It is difficult to say how long people can live today, why not take it out and eat it with the villagers?

古文：于是计口平分，同其丰俭，群盗闻而避焉，赖以存者甚衆。
现代文：于是，他们按各家人口平均分配，老少相同，群盗听说之后都不从这里经过，乡邻们赖以生存的人很多。
English: As a result, they were evenly distributed according to the population of each family, the same for old and young, the bandits did not pass from here after hearing about it, and there were many people who depended on the villagers for survival.

古文：陈武帝镇京口，深相要结，明彻乃诣武帝，帝爲之降阶，执手即席。
现代文：陈武帝镇守京口时，想和他深相交结往来。吴明彻便去拜访陈武帝，陈武帝降阶相迎，拉着手一同入席。
English: When Chen Wudi was in charge of the capital, he wanted to have a deep relationship with him. Wu Mingcher went to visit Chen Wudi, Chen Wudi came down to meet him, and they sat together holding hands.

古文：明彻亦微涉书史经传，就汝南周弘正学天文、孤虚、遁甲，略通其术，颇以英雄自许，武帝亦深奇之。
现代文：吴明彻也略读过一些书史经传，并向汝南人周弘正学过天文、卜时、遁甲等，略通其术，颇以英雄自居，陈武帝也觉得他很不一般。
English: Wu Mingcher also skimmed through some books of history and scriptures, and studied astronomy, divination, armour, etc. from Zhou Hongzheng, a man from the south of the Yunnan Province. He was a dab hand at it, and fancied himself a hero. Emperor Chen Wu also thought he was very unusual.

古文：及受禅，授安南将军，与侯安都、周文育将兵讨王琳。
现代文：当陈武帝受禅让之后，任命吴明彻为安南将军，和侯安都、周文育一起领兵讨伐王琳。
English: When Emperor Chen Wudi accepted Zen's surrender, he appointed Wu Mingche as General Annan, and together with Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu, he led an army to fight Wang Lin.

古文：及衆军败没，明彻自拔还都。
现代文：当众军大败时，吴明彻自己带领军队回到都城。
English: When the army suffered a crushing defeat, Wu Mingcher himself led the army back to the capital.

古文：文帝即位，以本官加右卫将军。
现代文：陈文帝即位，吴明彻以本官加封右卫将军。
English: Emperor Chen Wen ascended to the throne, and Wu Mingche was promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：及周迪反，诏以明彻爲江州刺史，领豫章太守，总衆军以讨迪。
现代文：周迪反叛时，朝廷诏令吴明彻任江州刺史，领豫章太守，总率各军讨伐周迪。
English: When Zhou Di rebelled, the imperial court decreed that Wu Mingche be appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, receive the title of Yuzhang Dazhu, and lead the army to fight Zhou Di.

古文：明彻雅性刚直，统内不甚和，文帝闻之，遣安成王顼代明彻，令以本号还朝。
现代文：吴明彻本性刚直，部众们不太和睦，文帝得知之后，派安成王顼去替代吴明彻，让他以本封号回朝廷。
English: Wu Mingche's nature was rigid, and his subordinates were not very harmonious. After Emperor Wen learned of this, he sent Ancheng Wangye to replace Wu Mingche and let him return to the imperial court with this title.

古文：天嘉五年，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：天嘉五年，改任吴兴太守。
English: In the fifth year of Tian Jia, he was appointed Wu Xing Taishou.

古文：及引辞之郡，帝谓曰： 吴兴虽郡，帝乡之重，故以相授。 
现代文：当到朝廷辞行赴郡任职时，文帝对他说： 吴兴虽是一郡，但因是帝室之乡，责任重大，所以委派你去。 
English: When he resigned from the imperial court to serve in the county, Emperor Wen said to him: Although Wu Xing is a county, it is the hometown of the imperial family, so the responsibility is great, so I will assign you to it.

古文：废帝即位，授领军将军，寻迁丹阳尹，仍诏以甲仗四十人出入殿省。
现代文：宣帝即位，任命他为领军将军，不久又改任丹阳尹，并诏令可以带护卫人员四十人出入宫殿。
English: Emperor Xuan came to the throne, appointed him as the leading general, and soon changed his name to Danyang Yin, and issued a decree that he could enter and leave the palace with forty guards.

古文：到仲举之矫令出宣帝也，毛喜知其诈，宣帝惧，遣喜与明彻筹焉。
现代文：到仲举假传圣旨，要将宣帝排挤出朝廷时，毛喜预先知道了这个阴谋，宣帝很害怕，就让毛喜去找吴明彻一起谋划。
English: When it came to mediating the false transmission of the imperial edict to oust Emperor Xuan from the imperial court, Mao Xi knew about this plot in advance. Emperor Xuan was very afraid, so he asked Mao Xi to go to Wu Ming Che to plan together.

古文：明彻曰： 嗣君谅闇，万机多阙，殿下亲实周、召，德冠伊、霍，愿留中深计，慎勿致疑。 
现代文：吴明彻说： 继任之君守丧期间，万事缺乏处理，殿下是朝廷的周公召公，德过于古代贤相伊、霍，请留在朝中详尽计议，千万不要招致怀疑。 
English: Wu Mingcher said, "During the funeral of the succeeding monarch, there was a lack of handling of everything. Your highness is the Zhou Gong Zhao of the imperial court, and your virtue surpasses that of the ancient sages, Yi and Huo. Please stay in the court to discuss in detail, and do not arouse suspicion.

古文：及湘州刺史华皎阴有异志，诏授明彻都督、湘州刺史，仍与征南大将军淳于量等讨皎。
现代文：当湘州刺史华皎阴谋叛乱时，朝廷诏令吴明彻任都督、湘州刺史，和征南大将军淳于量等共同讨伐华皎。
English: When the rebellion was plotted by the governor of Hunan Province, Wu Mingche, the governor of Hunan Province, and the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Jun Yuyao, the imperial court ordered them to jointly fight against the rebels.

古文：皎平，授开府仪同三司，进爵爲公。
现代文：华皎被讨平，吴明彻受封为开府仪同三司，晋爵位为公爵。
English: Hua Tuo was leveled, Wu Ming Che was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and was promoted to the rank of duke.

古文：太建五年，朝议北征，公卿互有异同，明彻决策请行。
现代文：太建五年，朝廷计议北伐，公卿们各有不同意见，吴明彻坚决请求北进。
English: In the fifth year of the Great Leap Forward, the imperial court planned the Northern Expedition, the nobles had different opinions, and Wu Mingcher firmly requested to go north.

古文：诏加侍中、都督征讨诸军事，总衆军十余万发都，缘江城镇，相续降款。
现代文：诏令加封他为侍中、都督征讨诸军事，总领军队十多万人从京都出发，沿江的城镇，相继归降。
English: The imperial edict added the title of samurai and viceroy to him, and he was conscripted into the military, leading an army of more than one hundred thousand people from Kyoto, and the towns along the river successively surrendered.

古文：军至秦郡，齐大将军尉破胡将兵爲援，破走之，秦郡降。
现代文：军队到秦郡时，齐国的大将军尉破胡领兵增援，被吴明彻的军队打跑了，秦郡归降南朝。
English: When the army arrived at Qin County, the general and lieutenant of Qi broke Hu to lead reinforcements, and was beaten by Wu Mingcher's army, and Qin County returned to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：宣帝以秦郡明彻旧邑，诏具太牢，令拜祠上冢，文武羽仪甚盛，乡里荣之。
现代文：宣帝因为秦郡是吴明彻的故乡，便传旨送来太牢的祭祀礼品，让他祭拜祖先祠堂和上坟。各种文武仪仗十分兴盛。乡里人都以此为荣。
English: Because Qin County is the hometown of Wu Mingche, Emperor Xuanzong sent a command to send a sacrifice gift to Taiye, so that he could worship the ancestral hall and the tomb. All kinds of cultural and military ceremonies are very prosperous. The villagers are proud of this.

古文：进克仁州。授征北大将军，进封南平郡公。
现代文：又进军并攻占仁州，朝廷任命吴明彻为征北大将军，晋封南平郡公。
English: He also marched into and occupied Renzhou, and the imperial court appointed Wu Mingche as the general of the Northern Expedition and promoted him to the post of Nanping County governor.

古文：进逼寿阳，齐遣王琳拒守，明彻乘夜攻之，中宵而溃。齐兵退据相国城及金城。
现代文：再进逼寿阳，齐国派王琳前来抵御防守，吴明彻乘天黑进攻，到半夜击溃了齐军，齐兵后退，占据相国城和金城。
English: Forcing Shouyang to advance further, the State of Qi sent Wang Lin to come forward to defend the defense, Wu Mingche took advantage of the darkness to attack, and defeated the Qi army by midnight. The Qi army retreated and occupied the cities of Shou and Jin.

古文：明彻令军中益修攻具，又遏肥水灌城，城中苦湿，多腹疾，手足皆肿，死者十六七。
现代文：吴明彻命令在军中增修攻城器具，又拦住肥水灌城，城中苦于水湿，许多人得了肠胃病，手脚都浮肿，死去的有十之六七。
English: Wu Mingcher ordered the army to increase the construction of siege equipment, and also to stop the fat water pouring into the city. The city suffered from water and humidity, many people suffered from gastrointestinal diseases, their hands and feet were swollen, and 67 out of 10 died.

古文：会齐遣大将皮景和率兵数十万来援，去寿春三十里，顿军不进。
现代文：正好齐国派大将皮景和率领几十万军队来救援，到离寿春三十里的地方，止步不前。
English: Just at that time, the State of Qi sent General Pigeon and led hundreds of thousands of troops to rescue, to a place 30 miles away from Shouchun, and stopped moving.

古文：诸将咸曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：诸将都问： 用什么计谋？ 
English: The generals all asked: What stratagem will be used?

古文：明彻曰： 兵贵在速，而彼结营不进，自挫其锋，吾知其不敢战明矣。 
现代文：吴明彻说： 兵贵神速，而对方结营不敢前进，自挫锋芒，我知道他不敢和我们作战，这还不是很清楚的吗？ 
English: Wu Mingcher said: I know that the enemy does not dare to fight because he is quick to use soldiers, but the enemy does not enter the camp, and he has lost his edge.

古文：于是躬擐甲胄，四面疾攻，城中震恐，一鼓而禽王琳等送建邺。
现代文：于是，吴明彻亲自穿上甲胄，在城四面猛烈进攻，城内非常惊慌，陈军一鼓作气活捉了王琳等送往建邺。
English: As a result, Wu Mingche personally put on armor and launched a fierce attack on all four sides of the city. The city was very panicked, and Chen's army captured Wang Lin and others and sent them to Jianye.

古文：景和惧而遁走。
现代文：皮景和惊惧而逃。
English: He fled the scene in fear.

古文：诏以爲车骑大将军、豫州刺史，增封并前三千五百户。
现代文：朝廷下诏任命吴明彻为车骑大将军、豫州刺史，增封的食邑连同以前的共有三千五百户。
English: Under the imperial edict, Wu Mingche was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Historian of Yuzhou. Together with the former, a total of 3,500 food towns were added.

古文：遣谒者萧淳就寿阳授策，明彻于城南设坛，士卒二十万，陈旗鼓戈甲，登坛拜受，成礼而退。
现代文：皇帝派中谒者萧淳到寿阳送来策文，吴明彻在城南设坛，有士兵二十万，他在坛前陈列旗鼓戈甲，登坛拜受策文和封号，成礼之后才退下。
English: The emperor sent the middle eunuch, Xiao Jun, to Shouyang to deliver the imperial edict. Wu Mingche set up an altar in the south of the city with 200,000 soldiers. He displayed banners, drums, and goggles in front of the altar, ascended the altar to receive the imperial edict and seal, and only retreated after making a bow.

古文：六年，自寿阳入朝，舆驾幸其第，赐锺磬一部。
现代文：六年，吴明彻从寿阳入朝，皇帝的车驾亲临他家，赐给钟磬一部。
English: Six years later, when Wu Mingche entered the imperial court from Shouyang, the emperor's chauffeur came to his house and gave him a piece of the bell.

古文：七年，进攻彭城，军至吕梁，又大破齐军。
现代文：七年，进攻彭城，军队到吕梁时，又大败齐军。
English: In the seventh year, when the army attacked Pengcheng and reached Luliang, it was defeated by the Qi army.

古文：八年，进位司空，给大都督鈇钺、龙麾。
现代文：八年，进位为司空，赐给他大都督的铁钺、龙麾。
English: In the eighth year, he was promoted to the position of Siku, and he was given the iron scepter and dragon scepter of the grand governor.

古文：寻授都督、南兖州刺史。
现代文：不久又任命他为都督、南兖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he appointed him as the governor of the city and the governor of Southern Luzhou.

古文：及周灭齐，宣帝将事徐、兖。
现代文：当周灭齐时陈宣帝准备对徐州、兖州进兵。
English: When Zhou was defeated, Chen Xuandi was preparing to march into Xuzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：九年，诏明彻北侵，令其世子慧觉摄行州事。
现代文：九年，诏令吴明彻北征，并让他的世子慧觉代管州事。
English: In the ninth year, the emperor ordered Wu Ming to go on the Northern Expedition, and let his heir Hui Jue take charge of state affairs.

古文：军至吕梁，周徐州总管梁士彦率衆拒战，明彻频破之。仍迮清水以灌其城，攻之甚急，环列舟舰于城下。
现代文：军队到吕梁，周的徐州总管梁士彦带领大家抵抗，吴明彻多次打败敌军，并拦截清河水以灌城，进攻得十分猛烈，在城下罗列战舰。
English: The army came to Luliang, and Zhou's Xuzhou governor, Liang Shihyan, led the resistance. Wu Mingche repeatedly defeated the enemy army, and intercepted the clear river water to flood the city. The attack was very fierce, and warships were lined up under the city.

古文：周遣上大将军王轨救之。
现代文：周朝派大将军王轨前来救援。
English: The Zhou Dynasty sent the general Wang Lu to come to the rescue.

古文：轨轻行自清水入淮口，横流竖木，以铁锁贯车轮，遏断船路。
现代文：王轨轻装急进，从清水进入淮河口，在横流中放置许多木头，用铁锁穿住车轮，阻断船行的水路。
English: Lightly loaded, Wang Rail enters Huaikou from Qingshui, erects a log horizontally in the water, and cuts through the wheel with an iron lock to block the ship's passage.

古文：诸将闻之甚恐，议欲破堰拔军，以舫载马。
现代文：众将听说后十分惊恐不安，商议要挖开河堰让军队撤退，用船运载马匹。
English: Hearing of this, the generals were very alarmed and uneasy. They discussed digging up the river weir to allow the troops to retreat, and transporting the horses by boat.

古文：马明戌裴子烈曰： 君若决堰下船，船必倾倒，岂可得乎？
现代文：马明戌、裴子烈说： 您如果挖开水坝下船，船就会倾倒，怎么能行呢？
English: Ma Mingyao and Pei Zilei said, "If you dig up the dam and get off the boat, the boat will capsize. How can you do that?

古文：不如前遣马出。 
现代文：不如先将马匹送出。 
English: Might as well send the horses out first.

古文：适会明彻苦背疾甚笃，知事不济，遂从之。
现代文：这时正好吴明彻背上有非常严重的疾病，他知道自己难以成功，便听从了他们。
English: It just so happened that Wu Mingcher had a very serious disease on his back, and he knew that he could not succeed, so he listened to them.

古文：乃遣萧摩诃帅马军数千前还，明彻仍自决其堰，乘水力以退军。
现代文：于是，吴明彻派萧摩诃带领几千马军先回，吴明彻自己挖掘大堰，然后乘着水力退军。
English: As a result, Wu Mingche sent Xiao Maqi to lead several thousand horse soldiers back first, Wu Mingche himself excavated the weir, and then withdrew by water.

古文：及至清口，水力微，舟舰并不得度，衆军皆溃。
现代文：到达清河口时，水力很小，舟舰都难以渡过，众军都溃散了。
English: When they reached the mouth of the Qing River, the water power was very small, the ships were difficult to cross, and the troops were scattered.

古文：明彻穷蹙，乃就执。
现代文：吴明彻已经无计可施，便被抓住了。
English: With nothing else to do, Wu Mingcher was caught.

古文：周封怀德郡公，位大将军。
现代文：周朝封他为怀德郡公，位为大将军。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, he was given the title of Duke of Wyde County and the rank of General.

古文：以忧遘疾，卒于长安，后故吏盗其柩归。
现代文：他因为忧愁过度而得病，死于长安。后来他的旧部下偷了他的灵柩运回南方。
English: He died in Chang'an after suffering from an illness brought on by excessive sorrow. Later, his former subordinates stole his coffin and took it back to the south.

古文：至德元年，诏追封邵陵侯，以其息慧觉嗣。
现代文：至德元年，朝廷下诏追封他为邵陵侯，让他的儿子慧觉继承他的爵位。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, the imperial court issued an edict to make him Shao Ling Hou and let his son Huizhe inherit his title.

