古文：王妙想成公智琼庞女褒女李真多班孟天台二女
现代文：王妙想成公智琼庞女褒女李真多班孟天台二女
English: Wang Miao wants to become a father-in-law, Qiong Pang's daughter-in-law, Li Zhenda's classmate, Meng Tiantai's second daughter

古文：王妙想
现代文：王妙想
English: Wang Miao Xiang

古文：王妙想，苍梧女道士也。
现代文：王妙想是苍梧女道士。
English: Wang Miao Xiang is a female Taoist.

古文：辟谷服气，住黄庭观边之水旁。
现代文：不吃五谷，驾驭气息，住在黄庭观旁的水边。
English: Do not eat grain, control the breath, live on the water's edge next to Huangting.

古文：朝谒精诚，想念丹府，由是感通。
现代文：她精诚朝拜，想念丹府，因此感通。
English: She sincerely worships, misses Danfu, and is therefore moved.

古文：每至月旦，常有光景云物之异，重嶂幽壑，人所罕到。妙想未尝言之于人。
现代文：每到月初一，常有奇异的光影云物和重嶂幽谷出现，人很少到那样的地方，妙想也不曾把她见到的情景告诉别人。
English: On the first day of every month, there are often strange lights, shadows, clouds, and deep valleys. People rarely go to such places, and Mei Xiang has never told others about the scene she saw.

古文：如是岁余，朔旦忽有音乐，遥在半空，虚徐不下，稍久散去。
现代文：如此一年多，有一个月初一的那天，忽然有音乐在遥远的半空中，虚幻轻漫而不下，时间稍长就散去了。
English: So for more than a year, on the first day of the first month of the month, suddenly there was music in the distant mid-air, the illusion was light and airy, but it didn't go down, and after a while it dissipated.

古文：又岁余，忽有灵香郁烈，祥云满庭，天乐之音，震动林壑，光烛坛殿，如十日之明。空中作金碧之色，烜爚乱眼，不可相视。
现代文：又过了一年多，忽然灵香浓郁而又强烈，祥云弥满庭院，天乐的声音震动山林深谷，光照坛殿，象十个太阳那么明亮，空中呈现金碧的颜色，令人眼花缭乱不敢看。
English: After more than a year, suddenly the spiritual fragrance was rich and strong, auspicious clouds filled the courtyard, the sound of heavenly music shook the mountains, forests and deep valleys, the light shone on the altar, as bright as ten suns, and the sky took on a golden-bluish color, dazzling and frightening to look at.

古文：须臾，千乘万骑，悬空而下，皆乘麒麟凤凰、龙鹤天马。
现代文：不一会儿，千乘万骑从悬空下来，都骑着麒麟、凤凰以及龙鹤、天马。
English: In a short time, thousands of riders came down from the sky, all riding the unicorns, phoenixes, cranes and heavenly horses.

古文：人物仪卫数千，人皆长丈余，持戈戟兵杖，旌幡幢盖。
现代文：仪仗队和护卫的有几千人，人都一丈多高，拿着戈戟兵杖，飘扬着旗幡伞盖。
English: There are several thousand people in the honor guard and escort, all of whom are as tall as they are long, holding Golang staffs and waving flags and umbrellas.

古文：良久，乃鹤盖凤车，导九龙之辇，下降坛前。
现代文：过了很久，才有鹤盖凤车引导着九龙辇车，下降到坛前。
English: It took a long time before the crane-covered phoenix chariot, guided by the nine-dragon chariot, descended to the altar.

古文：有一人羽衣宝冠，佩剑曳履，升殿而坐，身有五色光赫然，群仙拥从亦数百人。
现代文：有一个人穿着羽衣，戴着宝冠，佩着剑，拖着鞋，升殿坐下。他的身上赫然有五色光芒，簇拥随从的群仙也有几百人。
English: There was a man wearing a feathered robe, a crown, a sword, and slippers. He ascended to the throne and sat down. His body was radiant with the five colors of light, and he was surrounded by hundreds of attendant nymphs.

古文：妙想即往视谒。
现代文：妙想就去拜见。
English: I'd love to meet you.

古文：大仙谓妙想曰： 吾乃帝舜耳。
现代文：大仙对妙想说： 我就是舜帝。
English: The Great Immortal said to Myocho, "I am the Dragon Emperor."

古文：昔劳厌万国，养道此山。每欲诱教后进，使世人知道无不可教授者。
现代文：从前因理国劳倦，在这座山养生修道，总想诱导教化后进之人，使世人知道没有不可教化的人。
English: In the past, due to the fatigue of governing the country, the monks of this mountain always wanted to induce and educate the backward people, so that the world would know that there is no person who cannot be educated.

古文：且大道在于内，不在于外；道在身，不在他人。
现代文：而且大道在于内，不在于外；道在自身，不在他人。
English: Moreover, the road is inside, not outside; the road is in oneself, not in others.

古文：《玄经》所谓修之于身，其德乃具。此盖修之自己，证仙成真，非他人所能致也。
现代文：《玄经》所说的修之于身，他的道德就是具备了，这指的是修道在于自己，证仙成真不是他人所能办到的。
English: The "Hidden Scripture" says that if one cultivates oneself, one's morality will be possessed. This refers to the fact that one's self-cultivation lies in oneself, and it is not possible for others to prove one's immortality.

古文：吾睹地司奏，汝于此山三十余岁，始终如一，守道不邪，存念贞神，遵禀玄戒，汝亦至矣。
现代文：我看了地司的奏章，你在此山三十多年，始终如一，守德不邪，心想贞神，遵承道戒，你也心诚到极点了。
English: I read the cadastral record. You have been on this mountain for more than thirty years. You have been consistent, you have kept your morals, you have thought about chastity, you have followed the precepts, and you have been sincere to the extreme.

古文：若无所成证，此乃道之弃人也。
现代文：如果不能证仙成真，这就是天道弃人了。
English: If you can't prove the immortality of the soul, it's like the way of heaven has been abandoned.

古文：《玄经》云： 常善救物，而无弃物。 
现代文：《玄经》上说，常做善事，救助万物，便没有弃物。
English: "The Gemara" says that if you always do good deeds and help all things, there will be no waste.

古文：道之布惠周普，念物物皆欲成之，人人皆欲度之。
现代文：天道周全普遍地布下恩惠，是考虑到每个物都想使它成就，每个人都想把他度引。
English: The way of Heaven is to bestow grace universally, taking into account that everything wants to attain it, and everyone wants to be led by it.

古文：但是世人福果单微，道气浮浅，不能精专于道，既有所修，又不勤久，道气来应，而己中怠，是人自弃道，非道之弃人也。
现代文：只是世人福果单微，道气浮浅，不能精专于道。既有修行，又不勤奋持久，道气没有灵应，而自己心中已倦怠，这是人自己弃道，不是道弃人啊。
English: However, the people of the world have few and far between blessings and fruits, and their Taoism is shallow and shallow, and they are unable to concentrate on the Tao. Even though they have practiced, they are not diligent and persistent. Their Taoism has no spiritual response, and they are tired in their hearts. This is because they have abandoned the Tao, not the Tao has abandoned them.

古文：汝精诚一至，将以百生千生。望于所诚，不怠不退，深可悲悯。
现代文：你精诚一到，将会生百生千寄希望于所诚，不息不退，很值得同情。
English: Once you reach sincerity, you will place your hopes on sincerity for the rest of your life, and never give up, which is very commendable.

古文：吾昔遇太上老君，示以《道德真经》，理国理身，度人行教，此亦可以亘天地、塞圪坤、通九天、贯万物、为行化之要、修证之本，不可譬论而言也。
现代文：我从前遇到太上老君，他把《道德真经》拿给我看，治国治身，度引别人施行教化，这也可以用来联结天地、堵塞乾坤、沟通九天、贯穿万物，作为施行教化的要旨、修仙证果的根本，不可譬论而谈。
English: Once upon a time, I met a high priest. He showed me the "Moral Truth Sutra." It can be used to govern the country, govern the body, and guide others to carry out enlightenment. It can also be used to connect heaven and earth, block the universe, communicate with the nine heavens, and penetrate all things. As the essence of carrying out enlightenment and the foundation of cultivating the immortals, it cannot be discussed by way of example.

古文：吾常铭之于心，布之与物，弘化济俗，不敢斯须辄有怠替。至今禀奉师匠，终劫之宝也。
现代文：我常常把它铭记在心，传布于物，弘扬道义，救助世俗，不敢片刻松懈倦怠，至今禀承师训，当作终劫之宝。
English: I often keep it in mind, spread it to things, promote morality, save the world, and dare not relax for a moment, so far I have followed the teacher's teachings and regarded it as the treasure of doom.

古文：但世俗浮诈迷妄者多，嗤谦光之人，以为懦怯；轻退身之道，以为迂劣；笑绝圣弃智之旨，以为荒唐；鄙绝仁弃义之词，以为劲捷。
现代文：但世俗中浮诈迷妄的人多，讥笑谦和的人，把他当作怯懦；轻视退身之道，把它当作迂劣；嘲笑绝圣弃智的宗旨，把这看作荒唐；鄙视绝仁弃义的言词，以为劲捷。
English: But in the world there are many who are deceitful and deluded. They mock the meek, regarding them as cowardly; they despise the way of retreat, regarding it as devious; they ridicule the aim of absolute holiness and abandonment of wisdom, regarding it as absurd; they despise the words of absolute mercy and abandonment of righteousness, regarding them as vigorous.

古文：此盖迷俗之不知也。
现代文：是因为被俗念所迷却不知道啊。
English: It's because they're obsessed with popular notions, but they don't know it.

古文：玄圣之意，将欲还淳复朴、崇道黜邪。
现代文：玄圣的心意，将宴恢复淳朴，尊崇玄道，斥逐邪恶。
English: The intention of the mystic saint is to restore the banquet to simplicity, to honor the mystic path, and to repel evil.

古文：斜径既除，至道自显；淳朴已立，浇兢自祛。
现代文：邪恶除去以后，至道自然显现；淳朴确立以后，浮薄纷争的风气自退。
English: After the evil is eliminated, the true way will naturally appear; after it is established in a straightforward manner, the atmosphere of superficial disputes will subside.

古文：此则裁制之义无所施，兼爱之慈无所措，昭灼之圣无所用，机谲之智无所行。
现代文：这样，就使正义制裁没有地方施行，兼爱的慈心无处放矢，昭灼的圣明无处用，机敏之智无处行。
English: In this way, there will be no place for the enforcement of justice and sanctions, no place for the benevolence of love and compassion, no place for the sacredness of enlightenment, and no place for the cleverness of wisdom.

古文：天下混然，归乎大顺，此玄圣之大旨也。
现代文：天下混然一体趋奔归于大顺，这就是玄圣的最大愿望。
English: The whole world is rushing to return to Dashun as one, which is the greatest wish of Xuansheng.

古文：奈何世俗浮伪，人奔奢巧，帝王不得以静理，则万绪交驰矣；道化不得以坦行，则百家纷竞矣。
现代文：可惜世俗肤浅伪诈，人们趋奔奢侈和虚伪，帝王不能安心治国，就会万绪交驰；道化不能顺利施行，就会百家纷争。
English: It is a pity that the world is superficial and deceitful, and people tend towards luxury and hypocrisy. If the emperor cannot rule the country with peace of mind, there will be chaos; if clowning cannot be carried out smoothly, there will be disputes among hundreds of families.

古文：故曰：人之自迷，其日固久。
现代文：所以说这是人们自迷。
English: So it's a self-inflicted wound.

古文：若洗心洁己，独善其身，能以至道为师资，长生为归趣，亦难得其人也。
现代文：其时日本来很久了，如果洗心革面，独善其身，能用至道作师表，以长生为最终志趣，很难找到这样的人了。
English: At that time, Japan had been around for a long time. If you have a clean heart and a clean face, if you are good at what you do, if you can use the Tao as your teacher, and if you have eternal life as your ultimate goal, it is difficult to find such a person.

古文：吾以汝修学勤笃，暂来省视。
现代文：我因为你修学道术，辛勤诚恳，暂来察看。
English: Because of your hard work and sincerity in studying Daoism, I have come to take a look.

古文：尔天骨宿禀，复何疑乎？
现代文：你的仙骨早就具备了，还迟疑什么呢？
English: Your sacrum is already there, what are you hesitating for?

古文：汝必得之也。
现代文：你一定能得道啊。
English: You'll get your way.

古文：吾昔于民间，年尚冲幼，忽感太上大道君降于曲室之中，教以修身之道，理国之要，使吾瞑目安坐，冉冉乘空，至南方之国曰扬州。
现代文：我从前在民间，年纪还小，忽然感应太上道君，降临到我的曲室之中，教给我修身之道、治国的策略，让我闭目安坐，冉冉升空，到了南方之国叫作扬州。
English: I used to be in the folk, I was still young, I suddenly sensed the great Taoist Monk, he came to my music room, taught me the way of self-cultivation, the strategy of governing the country, let me close my eyes and sit down, soaring into the sky, to the southern country called Yangzhou.

古文：上直牛斗，下瞰淮泽，入十龙之门，泛昭回之河，瓠瓜之津，得水源号方山，四面各阔千里。中有玉城瑶阙，云九疑之山。
现代文：向上直达斗牛，向下俯瞰淮泽。进入十龙门，渡过昭回河、瓠瓜津，找到水源叫作方山，四面各宽千里，当中有玉城瑶宫，这里叫九嶷山。
English: Go straight up to the bullfight and look down over Huai Ze. Enter the Shilongmen, cross the Zhaohui River and Luguatun, and find a water source called Fangshan, with a width of thousands of miles on all sides. Among them is the Jade City Palace, here called Jiulong Mountain.

古文：山有九峰，峰有一水，九江分流其下，以注六合，周而复始，溯上于此，以灌天河，故九水源出此山也。
现代文：九嶷山有九座山峰，每峰有一河，九江分别流于其下，而注入六合，周而复始，逆流而上到这里，以灌天河。
English: There are nine peaks in the Nine Mountains, and each peak has a river. The Jiujiang River flows separately under it, and it is injected into the Liuhe, and the cycle repeats, and the countercurrent flows up to here to fill the Tianhe River.

古文：上下流注，周于四海，使我导九州、开八域，而归功此山。
现代文：所以九水从此山发源流出，上下流淌灌注，遍及四海，使我导九州开八域而归功此山。
English: Therefore, the nine waters flowed out from the source of this mountain, flowed up and down, and pervaded the four seas, making me lead Kyushu to open eight regions and give credit to this mountain.

古文：山有三宫，一名天帝宫，二名紫微宫，三名清源宫。
现代文：山有三宫，第一宫名叫天帝宫，第二宫名叫紫微宫，第三宫名叫清源宫。
English: The mountain has three palaces, the first palace is called the Heavenly Palace, the second palace is called the Purple Palace, and the third palace is called the Qingyuan Palace.

古文：吾以历数既往，归理此山，上居紫微，下镇于此。
现代文：我根据历数前去以后，回来治理此山，在上住在紫微宫，向下镇守在这里。
English: According to the lunar calendar, after I went there, I came back to govern this mountain. I lived in Ziwei Palace on the top, and I kept the town here on the bottom.

古文：常以久视无为之道，分命仙官，下教于人。
现代文：常久视无为之道，分别派遣仙官到下界去教化人。
English: Always seeing the way of doing nothing, they separately dispatched magicians to the lower realm to enlighten people.

古文：夫诸天上圣，高真大仙，悯劫历不常，代运流转，阴阳倚伏，生死推迁。
现代文：那诸天的上圣、高真、大仙，因为劫历不常、代运流转、阴阳倚伏、生死推移而生怜悯之心。
English: The supreme saint, supreme truth, and supreme immortal of all the heavens, because of the impermanence of the calamities, the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of the vicissitudes of life.

古文：俄尔之间，人及阳九百六之会，孜孜下教，此救于人，愈切于世人之求道也。
现代文：转眼之间，人就到了阳九百六的期限。勤勤恳恳地下世行教以救人，更加对世人求道感到迫切。
English: In the blink of an eye, people have reached the time limit of the nine hundred and sixth day of the month of Yang. They diligently and earnestly go down to the world to teach and save people, and they are even more anxious to seek the truth from the world.

古文：世人求道，若存若亡，系念存心，百万中无一人勤久者。
现代文：世人求道之心若有若无，系念存想在心的，百万人当中没有一人能勤修长久的。
English: Among the millions of people in the world, no one can diligently practice for a long time.

古文：天真悯俗，常在人间，隐景化形，随方开悟，而千万人中无一人可教者。
现代文：天上真仙怜悯俗人，常在人间隐影化形，随处使人开化觉悟，而千万人当中没有一个可教的人。
English: The celestial true immortals have compassion on the laity. They often appear in the human world as shadows, enlightening people everywhere, but there is not a single teachable person among the tens of millions of people.

古文：古有言曰： 修道如初，得道有余。 
现代文：古来有句话说： 修道如初，得道有余。 
English: Since ancient times, there has been a saying: If you are still a novice, you have learned more than enough.

古文：多是初勤中惰，前功并弃耳。
现代文：多数人是起始勤恳，中途怠惰，前功尽弃了。
English: Most people are diligent at the beginning, lazy in the middle, and give up their previous achievements.

古文：道岂负于人哉？
现代文：难道是天道对不起人吗？
English: Could it be that the heavens are punishing us?

古文：汝布宣我意，广令开晓也。
现代文：你传播宣扬我的意见，广泛地让人们明白。
English: You spread and promote my opinions and make them widely known.

古文：此山九峰者，皆有宫室，命真官主之。
现代文：此山九峰都有宫室，命真官主管它们。
English: The nine peaks of this mountain all have palace chambers, and the real estate agent is in charge of them.

古文：其下有宝玉五金、灵芝神草、三天所镇之药、太上所藏之经，或在石室洞台、云崖嵌谷。
现代文：下面有宝玉五金、灵芝神草、三天所保护的仙药，以及太上老君所收藏的经文。有的在石室洞台，有的在云崖峭谷。
English: Below are the precious jade hardware, Ganoderma lucidum, the three-day-protected elixir, and the scriptures collected by the empress dowager. Some are in the stone room cave, and some are in the cliff valley.

古文：故亦有灵司主掌，巨虬猛兽，螣蛇毒龙，以为备卫。
现代文：所以也有灵司主管，并让巨虬猛兽、螣蛇毒龙防备护卫。
English: Therefore, there is also a spiritual director, and let the huge beasts of prey, pythons and poisonous dragons guard the guards.

古文：一曰长安峰，二曰万年峰，三曰宗正峰，四曰大理峰，五曰天宝峰，六曰广得峰，七曰宜春峰，八曰宜城峰，九曰行化峰，下有宫阙，各为理所。
现代文：九座山峰是：第一峰叫作长安峰，第二峰叫作万年峰，第三峰叫作宗正峰，第四峰叫作大理峰，第五峰叫作天宝峰，第六峰叫作广得峰，第七峰叫作宜春峰，第八峰叫作宜城峰，第九峰叫作行化峰。下有宫阙，各作为治所。
English: The nine peaks are as follows: the first peak is called Chang'an Peak, the second peak is called Wanyan Peak, the third peak is called Zongzheng Peak, the fourth peak is called Dali Peak, the fifth peak is called Tianbao Peak, the sixth peak is called Guangde Peak, the seventh peak is called Yichun Peak, the eighth peak is called Yicheng Peak, and the ninth peak is called Xinghua Peak. There are palace mounds below, each serving as a castle.

古文：九水者，一曰银花水，二曰复淑水，三曰巢水，四曰许泉，五曰归水，六曰沙水，七曰金花水，八曰永安水，九曰晋水。
现代文：九水是：第一水叫作银花水，第二水叫作复淑水，第三水叫作巢水，第四水叫作许泉，第五水叫作归水，第六水叫作沙水，第七水叫作金花水，第八水叫作永安水，第九水叫作晋水。
English: The nine waters are as follows: the first water is called the Silver Flower Water, the second water is called the Foshu Water, the third water is called the Nest Water, the fourth water is called the Xu Spring, the fifth water is called the Return Water, the sixth water is called the Sand Water, the seventh water is called the Gold Flower Water, the eighth water is called the Yongan Water, and the ninth water is called the Jin Water.

古文：此九水支流四海，周灌无穷。
现代文：这九水支流四海，周围灌溉无穷。
English: This nine-water tributary flows to the four seas, and the irrigation around it is endless.

古文：山中异兽珍禽，无所不有，无毒螫鸷玃之物，可以度世，可以养生，可以修道，可以登真也。
现代文：山中珍禽异兽无所不有，没有毒螫鸷玃之物，可以在此度世，可以在此养生，可以在此修炼道术，可以在此成仙登真。
English: There are rare birds and animals everywhere in the mountains, and there are no poisonous snakes. You can die here, you can take care of your health here, you can practice alchemy here, and you can become immortal here.

古文：汝居山以来，未尝游览四表，拂衣尘外，遐眺空碧，俯睇岑峦，固不可得而知也。
现代文：你住在山上以来，不曾游览山的四外、脱离于尘世之外，远眺碧空，俯视山峦，本来不可能知道这些。
English: Since you have been living on the mountain, you have not visited the outside of the mountain, detached from the world, looking far into the blue sky, looking down at the mountains, it would be impossible to know these things.

古文：吾为汝导之，得不勉之、修之，伫驾景策空，然后倒景而研其本末也。 
现代文：我为你指点它，能不勉力修行吗？我等待你能驾影策空，然后反过来研究它的本末了。 
English: If I point it out to you, can you not make an effort to practice it? I'm waiting for you to cast a shadow, and then study its pros and cons in turn.

古文：于是命侍臣，以《道德》二经及驻景灵丸授之而去。
现代文：于是命侍臣把《道德》二经以及驻景灵丸传给妙想而去。
English: So he ordered his attendants to pass on the "Moral" sutra and the Jingling Maru to Myao.

古文：如是一年或三五年降于黄庭观。
现代文：此后一年或三五年，舜帝就降临黄庭观一次。
English: A year or three years after that, Emperor Xizong came to Huangting once.

古文：十年后，妙想白日升天。
现代文：十年后，妙想白日升天。
English: Ten years later, the idea became reality.

古文：兹山以舜修道之所，故曰道州营道县。
现代文：这座山因为是舜修道的地方，所以叫作道州营道县。
English: This mountain is called Doushu Yingdao County because it is a place where monks practice asceticism.

古文：成公智琼
现代文：成公智琼
English: by Chenggong Zhijiong

古文：魏济北郡从事椽弦超，字义起。
现代文：魏时，济北郡从事椽弦超，字义起，在嘉平年间有一天晚上独宿，梦见有个神女来侍从他。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Jibei County was engaged in the production of super-stringed musical instruments. One night during the Jiaping Dynasty, he was sleeping alone and dreamed that a goddess came to serve him.

古文：以嘉平中夕独宿，梦有神女来从之，自称天上玉女，东郡人，姓成公，字智琼，早失父母。
现代文：神女自称是天上玉女，东郡人，姓成公，字智琼，早年失去父母。
English: The goddess claimed to be a heavenly lady, a resident of Dong County, with the surname Chenggong and the Chinese character Zhiqiong. She lost her parents at an early age.

古文：上帝哀其孤苦，令得下嫁。
现代文：上天因为她孤苦无依而哀怜她，令她下界嫁人。
English: Heaven took pity on her because she was alone and destitute, and ordered her to marry someone from the lower realm.

古文：超当其梦也，精爽感悟，美其非常人之容，觉而钦想。
现代文：弦超正当做这个梦的时候，精神爽快，感觉灵悟，觉得神女的姿容不是平常人所能有的那么美，醒来的时候他就怀着敬意想念她。
English: When Zhenchao justifiably had this dream, his spirit was refreshed, he felt enlightened, and he felt that the goddess's appearance was not as beautiful as ordinary people could have. When he woke up, he missed her with respect.

古文：如此三四夕。
现代文：一连三四个晚上都是如此。
English: This happened for three or four nights in a row.

古文：一旦显然来，驾辎軿车，从八婢。
现代文：有一天，智琼真真切切地来了，驾着上有帷盖四周有帷幕的车子，随从八个婢女。
English: One day, Zhi Qiong really came, driving a car with a curtain around it, followed by eight maids.

古文：服罗绮之衣，姿颜容色，状若飞仙。
现代文：穿着罗绮制作的衣服，容颜姿色象飞仙的样子。
English: Dressed in clothes made by worms, she looks like a flying fairy.

古文：自言年七十，视之如十五六。
现代文：她自己说七十岁了，可是看起来就象十五六岁。
English: She says she's seventy, but she looks like she's fifteen or sixteen.

古文：车上有壶榼，清白琉璃，饮啗奇异，馔具醴酒，与超共饮食。
现代文：车上有盛放酒壶的盒子，洁白琉璃，有各种吃的喝的等奇异食品，还有餐具和美酒。来到以后，她就与弦超共饮共食。
English: In the car, there was a box with a wine jug, clear and white glass, all kinds of exotic foods such as food and drink, as well as tableware and fine wine. After arriving, she shared a meal with Zhenchao.

古文：谓超曰： 我天上玉女，见遣下嫁，故来从君。
现代文：她对弦超说： 我是天上的玉女，被遣下嫁，所以来依从您。
English: She said to Zhenchao, "I am a heavenly princess, sent down to marry, so I have come to obey you.

古文：盖宿时感运，宜为夫妇，不能有益，亦不能为损。
现代文：原因是前世时感运相通，应该做夫妇。我对您虽然不能有益，也不会造成损害。
English: The reason is that in my previous life, I felt that we had a common destiny and should be a couple. Although I cannot be beneficial to you, I will not cause any damage.

古文：然常可得驾轻车肥马，饮食常可得远味异膳，缯素可得充用不乏。
现代文：但却能使您经常能够驾轻车乘肥马，饮食经常可以得到远方的风味和奇异的食品，丝绸锦缎可以得到充足的使用而不缺乏。
English: But it can make you often be able to drive a light car to ride a fat horse, the diet can often get distant flavors and exotic foods, silk brocade can be fully used without shortage.

古文：然我神人，不能为君生子，亦无妒忌之性，不害君婚姻之义。 
现代文：然而我是神人，不能给您生孩子，也没有妒忌的性情，不妨害您的婚姻之事。 
English: However, I am a man of God, I cannot give you a child, and I do not have a jealous nature, so I do not want to harm your marriage.

古文：遂为夫妇。
现代文：于是，他们结为夫妇。
English: So they got married.

古文：赠诗一篇曰： 飘摇浮勃逢，敖曹云石滋。
现代文：智琼赠给弦超一首诗： 飘遥浮勃蓬，敖曹云石滋。
English: Zhi Qiong presented a poem to Zhenchao: "Floating far and wide, floating high and wide, floating high and wide, floating high and wide."

古文：芝英不须润，至德与时期。神仙岂虚降？
现代文：芝英不须润，至德与时期，神仙岂虚降？
English: The merry-go-round doesn't need to be kept in motion, virtue and the times, do the immortals really descend?

古文：应运来相之。
现代文：应运来相之。
English: It's just a matter of time.

古文：纳我荣五族，逆我致祸灾。 
现代文：纳我荣五族，逆我致祸灾。 
English: The Five Rong clans have taken advantage of me, and they have brought misfortune upon me.

古文：此其诗之大较，其文二百余言，不能悉举。
现代文：这是那首诗的大意。全文二百多字，不能全部列举。
English: This is the gist of the poem. The full text is more than two hundred words, and it is not possible to list them all.

古文：又著《易》七卷，有卦有象，以彖为属。
现代文：智琼又著阐发《易经》的书七卷，有卦有象，以彖为属。
English: Zhi Qiong also elaborated the seven volumes of the "I Ching" book, including the "Kua" and "Zhao," which belongs to the "Zhao."

古文：故其文言，既有义理，又可以占吉凶，犹杨子之《太玄》，薛氏之《中经》也。
现代文：所以从其文意来看，既有义理，又可以占卜吉凶，如同杨雄的《太玄经》和薛氏的《中经》。
English: Therefore, from the point of view of its meaning, it has both the meaning and the divination, just like Yang Xiong's "Tai Xuan Jing" and Xue's "Middle Classic."

古文：超皆能通其旨意，用之占候。
现代文：弦超对它的意旨都能通晓，运用它占卜。
English: Zhenchao can understand its meaning and use it for divination.

古文：经七八年，父母为超取妇之后，分日而燕，分夕而寝，夜来晨去，倏忽若飞，唯超见之，他人不见也。
现代文：经过七八年。弦超的父亲给弦超娶妻之后，他们就分日宴乐，分夕而共寝。智琼夜间来早晨去，迅捷如飞，只有弦超能看见她，别人都看不见她。
English: After seven or eight years, when Zheng Chao's father married Zheng Chao's wife, they spent the day feasting and the evening sleeping together. Zhi Qiong came at night and went in the morning, so fast that only Zheng Chao could see her, and no one else could see her.

古文：每超当有行来，智琼已严驾于门。百里不移两时，千里不过半日。
现代文：每当弦超要远行时，智琼就已经把车马行装安排得整整齐齐等在门前，走百里路不超过两个时辰，走千里路不超过半天。
English: Whenever Zhenchao had to travel far, Zhi Qiong would have the carriage and horses neatly arranged and waiting in front of the door. It would take no more than two hours to travel a hundred miles, and no more than half a day to travel a thousand miles.

古文：超后为济北王门下掾，文钦作乱，魏明帝东征，诸王见移于邺宫，宫属亦随监国西徙。
现代文：弦超后来做济北王的门下掾，那时文钦作乱，魏明帝东征，诸王被迁移到邺宫，各王宫的属吏也随着监国的王爷西迁。
English: Zhenchao later became a subordinate of the King of Jibei. At that time, Wenqin caused a riot, Wei Ming Emperor marched eastward, the kings were moved to the Imperial Palace, and the officials of the royal palaces also moved west with the prince supervising the country.

古文：邺下狭窄，四吏共一小屋。
现代文：邺下狭窄，四个吏员同位一间屋子。
English: It was cramped, with four clerks sharing one room.

古文：超独卧，智琼常得往来。同室之人，颇疑非常。
现代文：弦超独卧时，智琼照常能够往来，同室的人都怀疑弦超不正常。
English: When Zheng Chao was sleeping alone, Zhi Qiong was able to come and go as usual. Her roommates suspected that Zheng Chao was not normal.

古文：智琼止能隐其形，不能藏其声；且芬香之气，达于室宇，遂为伴吏所疑。
现代文：智琼只能把自己的身形隐匿起来，但是不能把声音也藏起来、而且芳香的气味，弥满屋室，终于被同室相伴的吏员所怀疑。
English: Zhi Qiong could only hide her shape, but she couldn't hide her voice, and the fragrant smell, which filled the room, was finally suspected by the clerk accompanying her.

古文：后超尝使至京师，空手入市。智琼给其五匣弱绯、五端絪贮。采色光泽，非邺市所有。
现代文：后来弦超曾经被派到京师去，他空手进入集市，智琼给他五匣弱红颜料、五块做褥子的麻布，而且彩色光泽，都不是邺城集市所有的。
English: Later, Zhenchao was sent to Beijing Division. He entered the bazaar empty-handed. Zhi Qiong gave him five boxes of weak red paint, five pieces of linen cloth to make braids, and the color luster was not all of the Lucheng bazaar.

古文：同房吏问意状，超性疏辞拙，遂具言之。
现代文：同房吏盘问他这是怎么回事，弦超性格疏朗，不善言辞，就详详细细地向他们说了。
English: His roommate interrogated him as to what was going on, and the super-narrow-minded and eloquent Zheng told them everything in detail.

古文：吏以白监国，委曲问之，亦恐天下有此妖幻。不咎责也。
现代文：同室小吏把这些情况向监国王爷报告了，监国向他讯问了事情的底细和原委，也恐怕天下有这种妖幻，就没有责怪他。
English: Fellow warders reported these circumstances to the sheriff, and the sheriff interrogated him about the details of the matter and the original commission. He did not blame him, fearing that there might be such illusions in the world.

古文：后夕归，玉女己求去，曰： 我神仙人也，虽与君交，不愿人知。
现代文：后来，弦超晚上回来，玉女自己请求离去，她说： 我是神仙，虽然与您结交，不愿让别人知道。
English: Later, when Zhenchao came back in the evening, the lady herself asked her to leave. She said, "I am a fairy godmother. Although I have made friends with you, I don't want others to know.

古文：而君性疏漏，我今本末已露，不复与君通接。
现代文：而您的性格粗而不细，我今天底细已经暴露，不能再与您通情接触了。
English: But your character is coarse and not fine, I have been exposed today, and I can no longer be in touch with you.

古文：积年交结，恩义不轻，一旦分别，岂不怆恨？
现代文：多年交往，结下情谊，恩义不轻，一旦分别，哪能不悲伤遗憾？
English: Many years of interaction, forged a friendship, gratitude is not light, once separated, which can not be sad regret?

古文：势不得不尔，各自努力矣。 
现代文：但情势如此，不得不这样啊，我们各自努力吧！ 
English: But the situation is like this, it has to be like this, let's do our best!

古文：呼侍御下酒啗，发簏，取织成裙衫两裆遗超，又赠诗一首，把臂告辞，涕零溜漓，肃然升车，去若飞流。
现代文：智琼唤侍御的人摆下酒饭，又打开柳条箱子，拿出织成的裙衫和两条裤子留给弦超。又赠诗一首，握着弦超的手臂告辞，眼泪流淌下来，然后表情严肃地登上车，象飞逝的流水一般离去了。
English: Zhi Qiong called on the attendants to set out the wine and rice, opened the wicker box, took out the knitted skirt and two pairs of trousers to leave for Zheng Chao. He also gave a poem, holding Zheng Chao's arm to say goodbye, tears flowed down, and then he boarded the car with a serious expression, and left like flowing water.

古文：超忧感积日，殆至委顿。
现代文：弦超多少天来忧伤感念，几乎到了萎靡不振的地步。
English: Over the past few days, I have been sad and sentimental, almost to the point of malaise.

古文：去后积五年，超奉郡使至洛，到济北鱼山下，陌上西行。遥望曲道头，有一马车，似智琼。
现代文：智琼去后五年，弦超奉郡里的差使到洛阳去，走到济北鱼山下，在小路上向西走，远远地望见曲洛道旁有一辆马车，认出是智琼，他就打马向前跑。
English: Five years after Zhi Qiong left, Zhenchao went to Luoyang on behalf of the county. He walked to the foot of the Fish Mountain in Jibei, walked west on the path, saw a carriage in the distance next to QuLuo Road, recognized Zhi Qiong, and rode his horse forward.

古文：驱驰前至，视之果是，遂披帷相见，悲喜交至，授绥同乘至洛，克复旧好。
现代文：到跟前一看果然是智琼，于是就掀起帷布相见，两个人悲喜交加，智琼让他上车拉住绳索，同车到洛阳。他们又重修旧好，到太康年间还在。
English: When he looked ahead, he saw that it was indeed Zhi Qiong, so he raised the curtain to see each other. The two were sad and happy. Zhi Qiong let him get on the car to pull the rope and go to Luoyang with the car. They restored the old friendship and were still in the Taikang years.

古文：至太康中犹在，但不日月往来。三月三日，五月五日，七月七日，九月九日，月旦十五。
现代文：但是并不天天往来，只在三月三日、五月五日、七月七日、九月九日和每月初一、十五见面。
English: But they don't see each other every day, only on March 3, May 5, July 7, September 9 and the first day and fifteenth of each month.

古文：每来，来辄经宿而去。
现代文：智琼每次到来，往往经宿而还。
English: Every time Zhi Qiong arrives, she often returns home after a stay.

古文：张茂先为之赋《神女》。其序曰： 世之言神仙者多矣，然未之或验。如弦氏之归，则近信而有征者。 
现代文：张茂先为她写了《神女赋》，其序文说： 世上谈论神仙的人很多，然而没有人验证它，如弦超之妻的到来，就是近于事实而有验证的例子。
English: Zhang Maoxian wrote "Goddess Fu" for her, the preface of which said: There are many people in the world who talk about gods and goddesses, but no one has verified it. For example, the arrival of Zhenchao's wife is an example that is close to the truth and has verification.

古文：甘露中，河济间往来京师者，颇说其事，闻之常以鬼魅之妖耳。
现代文：甘露年间，河济一带往来京城的人都传说这件事，听到的人常常认为智琼是鬼魅一类的妖孽。
English: During the years of the nectar of the nectar, people in and around Heji who traveled to and from the capital told stories about it. People who heard about it often thought that Zhi Qiong was a kind of ghost.

古文：及游东上，论者洋洋，异人同辞，犹以流俗小人，好传浮伪之事，直谓讹谣，未遑考核。
现代文：等到游历东方，谈论的人滔滔不绝，不同的人说的却都一样。还有人认为流俗小人好传虚浮伪诈之事，径直说是讹传的谣言，未及考核。
English: When they travel to the East, people talk about it incessantly, but different people say the same thing. There are also people who think that vulgar villains are good at spreading false and deceitful things, and they say that it is a rumor that has been passed down, and it has not passed the examination.

古文：会见济北刘长史，其人明察清信之士也。亲见义起，受其所言，读其文章，见其衣服赠遗之物，自非义起凡下陋才所能构合也。
现代文：及会见济北刘长史，他这个人是个明察有信之士，他亲自见过弦超，听弦超亲口说过，读过智琼的文章，见过那些衣服等智琼赠送的物件，自然不是弦超这种平凡低下、才疏学浅的人所能编造的。
English: and met with Liu Changshi in Jibei. He is a man of discernment and faith. He has personally met Zheng Chao, heard Zheng Chao speak in person, read articles by Zhi Qiong, and seen those clothes and other items presented by Zhi Qiong. Naturally, Zheng Chao is not something that such an ordinary, lowly, and uneducated person could fabricate.

古文：又推问左右知识之者，云： 当神女之来，咸闻香薰之气、言语之声。 此即非义起淫惑梦想明矣。
现代文：又推究查问左右知道这件事的人，他们说当神女来时，全都闻到了薰香的气味，听到了言语之声，这就明显地证明不是弦超因为梦想而造成的淫惑了。
English: They also investigated and questioned the people who knew about the matter, and they said that when the goddess came, they all smelled the scent of incense and heard the voice of speech, which clearly proved that it was not the dream that caused Zhengchao's seduction.

古文：又人见义起强甚，雨行大泽中而不沾濡，益怪之。
现代文：又有人见到弦超很强壮，在雨中行经大泽而不沾湿，就更加觉得奇怪。
English: Another person saw that the strings were very strong, and it was even more strange to walk through Osawa in the rain without getting wet.

古文：鬼魅之近人也，无不羸病损瘦。
现代文：鬼魅接近人，无不使人身体羸弱生病受损而消瘦。
English: Ghosts approach people, all of which make people physically weak, sick, damaged and emaciated.

古文：今义起平安无恙，而与神人饮燕寝处，纵情兼欲，岂不异哉！
现代文：如今弦超平安无恙，而与神人饮宴同寝相处，纵情恣欲，难道不奇异吗？
English: Isn't it strange that now that Zheng Chao is safe and sound, he sleeps with gods and goddesses, feasts with them, and indulges in all kinds of sexual desires?

古文：庞女
现代文：庞女
English: Pangnian

古文：庞女者，幼而不食，常慕清虚，每云： 我当升天，不愿住世。 
现代文：庞女小时候就不吃东西，总是仰慕清虚之道，经常说： 我应当升天，不愿意住在人世。 
English: When she was a child, Pang Niu did not eat anything. She always admired the way of purity and emptiness. She often said, "I should ascend to heaven, I do not want to live on earth."

古文：父母以为戏言耳。
现代文：她的父母把这话当作戏言而已。
English: Her parents thought it was a joke.

古文：因行经东武山下，忽见神仙飞空而来，自南向北，将逾千里。
现代文：因为出行经过东武山下，忽然看到神仙从空中飞腾而来，从南向北，将超过千里。
English: Because the trip passed under the mountains of Tobu, I suddenly saw the immortal flying from the sky, from south to north, it will be more than a thousand miles.

古文：女即端立，不敢前进。
现代文：庞女就端端正正地站着，不敢往前走。
English: Pang stood up straightly, not daring to move forward.

古文：仙人亦至山顶不散，即便化出金城玉楼、璚宫珠殿，弥满山顶。
现代文：仙人也到了山顶，他们并不散去，立即就变幻出金城玉阙、璚宫珠殿，弥满山顶。
English: When the hermits reached the top of the mountain, they did not disperse. They immediately transformed into the Golden City Jade Dragonfly and the Palace of the Dragonfly, filling the top of the mountain.

古文：有一人自山而下，身光五色，来至女前，召女升宫阙之内。众仙罗列，仪仗肃然。
现代文：有一个人从山上下来，身上发出仗十分恭敬。仙人对她说： 你有仙骨，还登记在册，应当成为天上上真。
English: A man came down from the mountain and bowed down with great reverence. The hermit said to her, "You have a sacred bone, and it is recorded in the register. You should become the highest in heaven."

古文：谓曰： 汝有骨箓，当为上真。太上命我授汝以灵宝赤书五篇真文，按而行之，飞升有期矣。昔阿丘曾皇妃，皆奉行于此，证位高真，可不勤耶？ 
现代文：太上老君命我传授给你灵宝赤书五篇真文，按照它修行，飞升就指日可期了。从前阿丘曾皇妃，都是遵奉这些宝书符箓进行修行，得以证位高真。你既然想飞升成仙，能不勤修苦炼吗？ 
English: I have passed on to you the Five True Texts of the Red Book of Spiritual Treasures, and if you practice in accordance with them, you will be able to fly higher in no time. In the past, Empress Achuzo practiced in accordance with the characters of these precious books, and achieved a high degree of truth. Since you want to fly into immortality, can you not practice hard?

古文：既受真文，群仙亦隐。
现代文：庞女接受真文后，群仙也都隐去。
English: After Pang Nien accepted the true text, the group of immortals also disappeared.

古文：十年之后，白日升天。
现代文：十年之后，庞女白日升天。
English: Ten years later, Pang Niu ascended to heaven.

古文：其所遇天真处东武山者，即今庚除化也。
现代文：她遇到天真的地方东武山，就是现在的庚除化这个地方。
English: She encountered a naive place, Dongwushan, which is now a place of gentrification.

古文：其后道士张方，亦居此山，于石室中栖止。
现代文：后来有个道士叫张方，也住在这座山，在石室中歇宿，常常有红毛老虎在室外来来往往。
English: Later, a Taoist named Zhang Fang also lived on this mountain, resting in a stone room. Red-haired tigers often came and went outside.

古文：常有赤虎来往室外，方不为惧，亦得道升天。庞女一本作逄字。
现代文：张方没有被老虎吓倒，也得道升天。庞女在别的版本中庞字写成逄字。
English: Zhang Fang was not intimidated by the tiger, and he also ascended to heaven. In other versions, Pang Nien wrote the word "Pang" as "."

古文：褒女
现代文：褒女
English: Reward

古文：褒女者，汉中人也。褒君之后，因以为姓。居汉、淝二水之间。
现代文：褒女是汉中人，因为是褒君的后代，就以褒为姓，住在汉水、淝水二水之间。
English: Bao Bao was born in Hanzhong, and because she was a descendant of Bao Jun, she took Bao as her surname and lived between Hanshui and Surabaya.

古文：幼而好道，冲静无营。
现代文：她小时候就好道，淡泊清静，到了盘发插笄的年龄后，常在浕水上学浣纱。
English: When she was a child, she was good-natured and quiet. When she was old enough to sew, she often went to school in Surabaya to learn embroidery.

古文：既笄，浣纱于浕水上，云雨晦冥，若有所感而孕。
现代文：有一天，忽然天地昏暗云集雨落，褒女似有所感而怀了孕。
English: One day, all of a sudden, the sky darkened, the clouds gathered and the rain fell. The maid of honor seemed to sense something and became pregnant.

古文：父母责之，忧患而疾。
现代文：她的父母责怪她，她忧愁痛苦，就生了病。
English: Her parents blamed her, she was sad and miserable, and she got sick.

古文：临终谓其母曰： 死后见葬，愿以牛车载送西山之上。 
现代文：临终时对她的父母说： 死后葬我的时候，希望你们用牛车送到西山上。 
English: On her deathbed, she said to her parents, "When you bury me after I die, I hope you will take me to the West Mountain by ox cart."

古文：言讫而终。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：父母置之车中，未及驾牛，其车自行，逾淝、汉二水，横流而渡，直上浕口平元山项。
现代文：她的父母把她的尸体装到车上，还没有来得及套上牛，那辆车就自己走了，越过汉水和淝水，横流而渡，径直登上了浕口平元山顶。
English: Her parents loaded her body onto a car, but before they could hitch up the cow, the car drove off on its own, crossing the Han River and the Surabaya River, crossing streams, and climbing straight to the top of the Hekou Pingyuan Mountain.

古文：平元即浕口化也。
现代文：平元山就是浕口化。
English: Pingyuan Mountain is the mouth of the river.

古文：家人追之，但见五云如盖，天乐骇空，幢节导从，见女升天而去。
现代文：家里的人追车时，只见五彩祥云如车盖，天乐惊空，旌旗仪仗前导后从，见到褒女升天而去。
English: When the people at home chased the car, they only saw the colorful auspicious clouds like the car cover, the heavenly music startled the sky, the ceremonial flag-raising ceremony, and saw the award go up to the sky.

古文：及视车中，空棺而已。
现代文：等到再看车中，只剩空棺而已。
English: When I looked in the car, there was nothing but an empty coffin.

古文：邑人立祠祭之，水旱祈祷俱验。
现代文：乡里人建立祠庙祭祀她，水灾旱灾时向她祈祷，都有灵验。
English: The villagers built a temple to worship her, and prayed to her during floods and droughts, all of which were effective.

古文：今浕口山顶有双辙迹犹存。
现代文：现在浕口山顶上车辙的痕迹还存在。
English: Traces of the ruts on the top of Mount Higuchi still exist today.

古文：其后陈世安亦于此山得道，白日升天。
现代文：其后张世安也在这座山得道，白日升天。
English: Later, Zhang Shian also became a monk in this mountain and ascended to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：李真多
现代文：李真多
English: Li Zhenda

古文：李真多，神仙李脱妹也。
现代文：李真多，是神仙李脱的妹妹。
English: Li Zhenda is the sister of the immortal Li De.

古文：脱居蜀金堂山龙桥峰下修道，蜀人历代见之。约其往来八百余年，因号曰李八百焉。
现代文：李脱在西蜀金堂山龙桥峰下修炼道术。蜀人历代都见到过他，大约他往来八百多年了，因此称他为李八百。
English: Li De practiced alchemy at the foot of Longqiao Peak of West Shu Jintang Mountain. The Shu people have seen him throughout the ages, and he has been around for more than 800 years, so they call him Li 800.

古文：初以周穆王时，居来广汉栖玄山，合九华丹成，云游五岳十洞，二百余年。
现代文：当初在周穆王时，来到广汉栖玄山上居住，炼制九华丹成功以后，云游五岳十洞二百多年。
English: At the time of King Zhou Mu, he came to Guanghan to live on Mount Jixuan. After the success of refining nine Chinese herbs, he traveled to five mountains and ten caves for more than two hundred years.

古文：于海上遇飞阳君，授水木之道，还归此山，炼药成。
现代文：在海上遇到飞阳君，教给他水木之道，也就回归此山。
English: He met Feiyangjun on the sea, taught him the way of water and wood, and returned to this mountain.

古文：又去数百年，或隐或显，游于市朝，又登龙桥峰，作九鼎金丹。丹成已八百年。
现代文：药炼成以后，又离去几百年。有时隐形，有时显现，游历于市朝之中。又登上龙桥峰，制作九鼎金丹，丹炼成已经八百年了。
English: After the medicine was refined, it took hundreds of years to leave. Sometimes it was invisible, sometimes it appeared, traveling among the city's dynasties. It also climbed Longqiao Peak to make Jiuding Jintan, which has been refined for eight hundred years.

古文：三于此山学道，故世人号此山为三学山，亦号为贤山，盖因八百为号。
现代文：他三次在此山修炼道术，所以世人称此山为三学山，也称为贤山，大概是因为李八百取的号。
English: He practiced alchemy three times on this mountain, so the world called this mountain Sankakuyama, also known as Xianshan, probably because of the number of Li Baopti.

古文：丹成试之，抹于崖石上，顽石化玉，光彩莹润。
现代文：丹炼成了要试一试它，李八百就把丹药抹在崖石上，顽石变成了美玉，光彩晶莹润洁。
English: Dan refined it into a must-try, and Li Yaobang smeared the herbal medicine on the cliff stone, and the stubborn stone turned into a beautiful stone with a crystal clear luster.

古文：试药处于今犹在。
现代文：试药处至今还存在。
English: The laboratory still exists today.

古文：人或凿崖取之，即风雷为变。
现代文：有的人凿崖取玉，则风雷为之变色。
English: Some people chisel the cliff to get the ball, but the wind and thunder change the color.

古文：真多随兄修道，居绵竹。
现代文：李真多随着哥哥修炼道术，住在绵竹中。
English: Li Zhenduo followed his brother in cultivating Taoism and lived in Mianzhu.

古文：今有真多古迹犹在。
现代文：现在真多古迹还在。
English: There are so many monuments still standing.

古文：亦如地肺得水而浮，真多幼挺仙姿，耽尚玄理。
现代文：她有时往来于浮山之侧，现在称作真多化，就是古代的浮山化，有如地肺到了水面就上浮。李真多小时候就生成仙姿，沉迷崇尚玄理。
English: She sometimes went to and from the side of the floating mountain, which is now called "Zhentanghua," that is, the ancient floating mountain, like the lungs of the earth floating up to the surface of the water. When Li Zhenda was a child, she took on the appearance of a fairy and was obsessed with the occult.

古文：八百授其朝元默贞之要，行之数百年，状如二十许人耳，神气庄肃，风骨英伟，异于弱女之态。人或见之，不敢正视。
现代文：李八百教给她朝元默贞的要诀，她修行了几百年，样子就象二十岁左右的人。神情端庄，气概严肃，风骨英武雄伟，不同于弱女之态，人们有时见到她，都不敢正眼去看。
English: Li Yaobao taught her the secret of being a virtuous woman. She had practiced for hundreds of years and looked like a twenty-year-old. Her demeanor was dignified, her spirit was serious, and her character was heroic and majestic. She was different from weak women. People would sometimes not dare to look her in the eye when they saw her.

古文：其后太上老君与玄古三师降而度之，授以飞升之道，先于八百白日升天。
现代文：其后太上老君与玄古三师降临度引她，教给她飞升之道，她就先于李八百而白日升天。
English: After that, the Grandmaster Lao Jun and Xuan Gu three division advent degree led her and taught her the way of soaring, and she ascended to heaven in broad daylight ahead of Li Yaobao.

古文：化侧有潭，其水常赤，乃古之神仙炼丹砂之泉。
现代文：真多化的旁边有潭，那里的水总是红色的，原来是古代的神仙炼丹砂的泉源。
English: There is a pool next to the real multiplex, where the water is always red, which was originally the source of the ancient fairy cinnamon.

古文：浮山亦名万安山，上有二师井，饮之愈疾。
现代文：浮山又名万安山，山上有二师井，饮井水可以治愈疾病。
English: Fushan is also known as Mount Wan'an. There are two wells on the mountain, and drinking well water can cure diseases.

古文：今以真多之名，故为真多化也。
现代文：现在用真多的名字，所以称为真多化。
English: It is now known as "real-multiplication" because it uses so many names.

古文：八百又于什邡仙居山，三月八日白日升天。
现代文：李八百又到什邡仙居山修炼，三月八日白日升天。
English: Li Yaoba also went to Shifang Xianju Mountain to cultivate, and ascended to heaven in broad daylight on March 8.

古文：班孟
现代文：班孟
English: Ban Meng

古文：班孟者，不知何许人也。或云女子也。
现代文：班孟，不知是哪里人，有人说她是女子。
English: Ban Meng, I don't know who she is. Some people say she is a woman.

古文：能飞行经日，又能坐空虚中与人语，又能入地中，初去时没足至胸，渐入，但余冠帻，良久而尽没不见。
现代文：她能在空中飞几天，又以坐在虚空之中与人说话，还能钻入地下。刚进去时，从脚开始埋没，一直到胸部埋没，都是渐渐地进入地下，只剩帽子头巾没有进去，过了很久，就全部没入而不见了。
English: She can fly in the air for several days, and talk to people by sitting in the void. She can also burrow into the ground. When she first went in, she was buried from her feet all the way to her chest. She gradually went underground. The only thing that didn't go in was her hat and headscarf. After a long time, they all disappeared.

古文：以指刺地，即成井可吸。
现代文：她用手指刺地，就能成井可以汲水。
English: If she pricks the ground with her finger, she can make a well and draw water.

古文：吹人屋上瓦，瓦飞入人家间。
现代文：吹人家屋子上的瓦，瓦就飞入人家家里。
English: Blow a shingle on someone's house, and the shingle flies into their house.

古文：桑果数千株，孟皆拔聚之成一，积如山；如此十余日，吹之各还其故处如常。
现代文：几千棵桑果树，班孟全部把它们抓出来聚拢成一堆，堆积得象山似的；这样放着十几天了，她吹一口气，这几千棵桑果树就各自回到原来的地方，象平常时一样。
English: Several thousand mulberry trees, Ban Meng all grabbed them out and gathered them into a pile, piled up like a mountain; thus left for ten days, she blew a breath, and these several thousand mulberry trees returned to their original places, as usual.

古文：又能含墨一口中，舒纸着前，嚼墨喷之，皆成文字，竟纸，各有意义。
现代文：又能在口中含一口墨，把纸放在面前舒展开，她嚼墨一喷，都成为文字，写满了纸，各有意义。
English: She can also hold a mouthful of ink in her mouth, put the paper in front of her and spread it out. When she chews the ink and sprays it, it all becomes words, written all over the paper, each with a meaning.

古文：服酒丹，年四百岁更少。
现代文：她食酒和丹药，年纪四百岁反而更年轻了。
English: She is four hundred years old, but looks younger.

古文：入大治山中。
现代文：后来进入大治山中。
English: Later, he entered Dajishanzhong.

古文：天台二女
现代文：天台二女
English: Tiantai 2nd daughter

古文：刘晨、阮肇，入天台采药，远不得返，经十三日饥。
现代文：刘晨和阮肇，进入天台山去采药，因为路远不能回家，已经饿了十三天了。
English: Liu Chen and Ruan Zhao entered Tiantai Mountain to collect medicine, because the road is too far to go home, they have been hungry for thirteen days.

古文：遥望山上有桃树子熟，遂跻险援葛至其下，啗数枚，饥止体充。
现代文：远远地望见山上有桃树，树上的桃子熟了，就跻身险境抓着葛藤到了桃树底下。
English: From far away, he saw a peach tree on the mountain. When the peaches on the tree were ripe, he reached the bottom of the peach tree, clutching Ge Dou.

古文：欲下山，以杯取水，见芜菁叶流下，甚鲜妍。
现代文：他们吃了几个桃子，觉得不饿了，身体充实了，想要下山。用杯取水时，看见有芜菁叶流下来，很鲜艳。
English: They ate a few peaches, felt not hungry, their bodies were full, and they wanted to go down the mountain. When they used a cup to get water, they saw some brightly colored cochineal leaves flowing down.

古文：复有一杯流下，有胡麻饭焉。
现代文：又有一个杯子流下来，里面还有胡麻饭。
English: Another cup came down with sesame rice in it.

古文：乃相谓曰： 此近人矣。 
现代文：于是两人互相安慰说： 这里离人家近了。 
English: So the two of them comforted each other and said, "It's close to home."

古文：遂渡山。出一大溪，溪边有二女子，色甚美，见二人持杯，便笑曰： 刘、阮二郎捉向杯来。 
现代文：就越过山，出现一条大溪，溪边有两个女子，姿色很美。她们看见二人拿着杯子，就笑着说： 刘、阮二位郎君拿回刚才的杯子来了。 
English: They went over the mountain, and there was a big stream, and on the edge of the stream there were two women, very beautiful, and when they saw the two of them holding a cup, they smiled and said, "Liu and Ruan have brought back the cup."

古文：刘、阮惊。
现代文：刘晨、阮肇都很惊讶。
English: Liu Chen and Ruan Zhao were both surprised.

古文：二女遂忻然如旧相识，曰： 来何晚耶？ 
现代文：两个女郎就高高兴兴地如旧相识一般，跟他们说： 怎么来晚了呢？ 
English: The two girls, as happy as if they were old acquaintances, said to them: "Why are you late?

古文：因邀还家。
现代文：便邀请刘晨、阮肇跟她们回家。
English: He invited Liu Chen and Ruan Zhao to go home with them.

古文：南东二璧各有绛罗帐，帐角悬铃，上有金银交错。
现代文：南边东边两壁各有大红色的罗织床帐，帐角上悬着金铃。上面有用金银雕嵌的综横交错的花纹图案交错。
English: On the south and east sides of the two walls, there are large red rope-woven bedspreads, with gold bells hanging on the corners of the bedspreads. The interlaced patterns of gold and silver carvings are interlaced on the bedspreads.

古文：各有数侍婢使令。
现代文：两个女郎各有几个侍奉的婢女使唤。
English: Each of the two girls has several servants.

古文：其馔有胡麻饭、山羊脯、牛肉，甚美。
现代文：吃的东西有胡麻饭、羊脯、牛肉，味道很美。
English: We ate sesame rice, mutton stew and beef stew, which was delicious.

古文：食毕行酒。
现代文：吃完饭又喝酒。
English: After eating and drinking.

古文：俄有群女持桃子，笑曰： 贺汝婿来。 
现代文：忽然有一群女子拿着桃子，笑着说： 祝贺你们女婿到来！ 
English: Suddenly, a group of women holding peaches smiled and said, "Congratulations on the arrival of your son-in-law!"

古文：酒酣作乐。
现代文：酒喝到尽兴时就奏乐。
English: When the wine is drunk to the full, the music is played.

古文：夜后各就一帐宿，婉态殊绝。
现代文：晚上，刘晨与阮肇各到一个女郎的床帐里去睡觉，女郎娇婉的情态特别美妙。
English: In the evening, Liu Chen and Ruan Zhao each went to sleep in a girl's bedspread. The girl's delicate mood was particularly wonderful.

古文：至十日求还，苦留半年，气候草木，常是春时，百鸟啼鸣，更怀乡。归思甚苦。
现代文：住了十天，两人请求回家，二女又苦苦留住了半年。从气候、草木情形看，当是春天的时节，百鸟啼鸣，使他们更怀乡思，思归更苦。
English: After staying for ten days, the two men asked to go home, and the two women struggled to stay for half a year. Judging from the climate and vegetation, when it was springtime, hundreds of birds were chirping, making them more homesick and homesick.

古文：女遂相送，指示还路。
现代文：女郎就送他们，指点回去的道路让他们看清。
English: The girl takes them there and shows them the way back.

古文：乡邑零落，已十世矣。
现代文：他们回乡以后，看到乡邑已经零落，才知道已经过了十代了。
English: When they returned to their hometowns, they saw that they had been fragmented, and only then did they realize that ten generations had passed.

