古文：师氏掌以媺诏王。
现代文：师氏负责以美善的道理告诉王。
English: The master was responsible for telling the king about the virtue of beauty.

古文：以三德教国子：一曰至德，以为道本；二曰敏德，以为行本；三曰孝德，以知逆恶。
现代文：用三德教育国子：一是中庸之德，用作道德的根本；二是及时行仁义之德，用作行为的根本；三是孝德，用以制止犯上和邪恶的事。
English: To educate the sons of the state with the three virtues: the first is the virtue of moderation, which is used as the foundation of morality; the second is the virtue of timely practice of benevolence and righteousness, which is used as the foundation of behavior; and the third is filial piety, which is used to prevent the perpetration of evil.

古文：教三行：一曰孝行，以亲父母；二曰友行，以尊贤良；三曰顺行，以事师长。
现代文：教国子三行：一是孝行，用以亲爱父母；二是善于交友之行，用以尊敬有德行而善良的人；三是敬顺之行，用以侍奉师长。
English: Teach the sons of the country the three virtues: first, the virtue of filial piety, which is used to love one's parents; second, the virtue of making friends, which is used to respect those who are virtuous and good; and third, the virtue of obedience, which is used to serve one's teachers.

古文：居虎门之左，司王朝，掌国中失之事，以教国子弟，凡国之贵游子弟学焉。
现代文：王临朝时师氏站在虎门外的左边，观察王处理朝政。掌握王国中符合礼和不符合礼的故事，用以教育国子弟。凡国中的贵游子弟也参加学习。
English: When the king came to the court, the teacher stood on the left side outside the gate, observing the king's handling of court politics. Master the stories of propriety and impropriety in the kingdom to educate the children of the country. The children of the nobles in the country also participated in the study.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客、会同、丧纪、军旅，王举则従，听治，亦如之。
现代文：凡有祭祀、接待宾客、会同、丧事、征伐之事，王如果亲自参加就随行。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, the reception of guests, a gathering, a funeral, or a campaign, the king accompanies if he personally participates.

古文：使其属帅四夷之隶，各以其兵服守王之门外。
现代文：王在野外处理朝政，师氏也像在国中那样观察王处理朝政。
English: Wang dealt with court politics in the field, and his master observed Wang dealing with court politics as he did in the middle of the country.

古文：且跸，朝在野外，则守内列。保氏掌谏王恶，而养国子以道。
现代文：使自已的下属率领四夷奴隶，各自拿着本族的兵器、穿着本族的服装守卫在王的库门外，并禁止行人靠近王宫。朝设在野外，就负责内线的守卫。保氏负责劝谏王的过失。用道艺来教养国子。
English: He had his subordinates lead the Siyi slaves, each holding their own weapons and wearing their own clothing, to stand guard outside the king's treasury gate, and prohibited pedestrians from approaching the royal palace. When the court was set up in the field, they were responsible for guarding the inner line. Baoji was responsible for persuading the king of his mistakes. He used Taoism to educate the sons of the country.

古文：乃教之六艺，一曰五礼，二曰六乐，三曰五射，四曰五驭，五曰六书，六曰九数。
现代文：教国子六艺：一是五礼，二是六乐，三是五射，四是五驭，五是六书，六是九数。
English: Teach the children of the country the six arts: one is the five rites, the second is the six music, the third is the five shooting, the fourth is the five driving, the fifth is the six books, and the sixth is the nine numbers.

古文：乃教之六仪，一曰祭祀之容，二曰宾客之容，三曰朝廷之容，四曰丧纪之容，五曰军旅之容，六曰车马之容。
现代文：教国子六种仪容：一是祭祀时的仪容，二是做宾客时的仪容，三是在朝廷上的仪容，四是丧事时的仪容，五是征伐时的仪容，六是驾车时的仪容。
English: There are six kinds of appearance: one is the appearance at the time of sacrifice, the second is the appearance when being a guest, the third is the appearance at the imperial court, the fourth is the appearance at the time of mourning, the fifth is the appearance at the time of conquest, and the sixth is the appearance when driving.

古文：凡祭礼、宾客、会同、丧纪、军旅，王举则従。
现代文：凡有举行祭祀、接待宾客、会同、丧事、征伐的事，王如果参加就随行。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, a reception of guests, a get-together, a funeral, or a campaign, the king accompanies the procession if he is present.

古文：听治，亦如之。使其属守王闱。
现代文：王在野外处理朝政，保氏也像在国中那样站在路门的左边观察王处理朝政。使下属守卫王的闱门。
English: The king dealt with court politics in the field, and Baoji stood on the left side of the gate to observe the king dealing with court politics, just as he did in the middle of the country. He ordered his subordinates to guard the king's gate.

古文：司谏掌纠万民之德而劝之朋友。正其行而强之道艺，巡问而观察之，以时书其德行道艺，辨其能而可任于国事者，以考乡里之治，以诏废置，以行赦宥。
现代文：司谏负责纠察万民的德行而鼓励他们在增进善道方面相互研讨，规正他们的品行而劝勉他们学习道艺，并到民间访问、观察，按时记录人们的德行和道艺，辨别其中有才能而可以担任国事的人。通过访问、观察以考察乡里的治理情况，以报告上级决定对乡里官吏的罢免或升迁，或对有罪者实行赦免。
English: The priest is responsible for inspecting the virtues of the people and encouraging them to study each other in the promotion of virtue, correcting their behavior and encouraging them to learn the arts, and visiting and observing the people, recording the people's virtues and arts on time, and identifying those who have the ability to serve in state affairs. Through visits and observations to examine the governance of the village, to report to superiors to decide on the dismissal or promotion of officials in the village, or to pardon the guilty.

古文：司救掌万民之邪恶过失而诛让之，以礼防禁而救之。
现代文：司救负责了解民众的邪恶和过失，而对之加以责罚，用礼来防禁、挽救他们。
English: The chief rescuer is responsible for understanding the evil and mistakes of the people, punishing them, and using etiquette to prevent and save them.

古文：凡民之有袤恶者，三让而罚，三罚而士加明刑，耻诸嘉石。
现代文：凡民有邪恶的，三次谴责不改而后加以挞罚，三次挞罚不改而后由司寇施加明刑，让他坐在嘉石上羞辱他，再交到司空那里罚服劳役。
English: If any citizen commits evil, he shall be reprimanded three times and then punished, and if he does not make amends after being reprimanded three times and then punished, he shall be made to sit on the Jiashan Rock and be humiliated, and then he shall be sent to Sikuang for punishment and forced labor.

古文：役诸司空，其有过失者，三让而罚，三罚而归于圜土。
现代文：那些有过失的，三次谴责不改而后加以挞罚，三次琏罚不改而后关进圜土。
English: Those who were at fault were reprimanded three times and then punished, and those who were reprimanded three times and then imprisoned.

古文：凡岁时有天患民病，则以节巡国中及郊野，而以王命施惠。
现代文：凡一年的四季有自然灾害而使民困病，就拿着旌节巡视国都中以及郊野，而用王的名义对灾民施行救济。
English: Whenever there is a natural disaster in the four seasons of the year that causes people to suffer from illness, they will take the Dragon Boat Festival to tour the capital and the countryside, and use the king's name to provide relief to the victims.

古文：调人掌司万民之难而谐和之。
现代文：调人负责对民众间的仇怨加以调解。
English: The mediator is responsible for mediating between the people.

古文：凡过而杀伤人者，以民成之。
现代文：凡因过失杀伤人的，就与乡里民众共同评断其是非。
English: Anyone who kills or injures someone through negligence will be judged jointly with the people of the village.

古文：鸟兽亦如之。
现代文：对于因过失杀伤他人畜禽的也这样处理。
English: The same shall apply to those who negligently kill other people's livestock and poultry.

古文：凡和难、父之仇辟诸海外，兄弟之仇辟诸千里之外，従父兄弟之仇不同国。君之仇眡父，师长之仇，眡兄弟，主友之仇，眡従父兄弟。
现代文：凡调解仇怨：如果是某人的杀父的仇人就让他躲避到海外去，杀害兄弟的仇人就让他躲避到千里之外去，杀害从父兄弟的仇人就让他不要居住在同一国；对于杀君的仇人比同杀父之仇，杀害师长的仇人比同杀害兄弟之仇，杀害主子或朋友的仇人比同杀害从父兄弟之仇。
English: For the reconciliation of enmity: if it is the enemy of a man who killed his father, let him flee abroad; if it is the enemy of a man who killed his brother, let him flee a thousand miles away; if it is the enemy of a man who killed his father's brother, let him not live in the same country; if it is the enemy of a man who killed his father, let him flee abroad; if it is the enemy of a man who killed his father's brother, let him flee a thousand miles away; if it is the enemy of a man who killed his father's brother, let him not live in the same country; if it is the enemy of a man who

古文：弗辟，则与之瑞节而以执之。
现代文：如果不肯躲避，王就授给调人瑞节而抓捕他治罪。
English: If he refused to evade, the king would have him arrested and punished.

古文：凡杀人有反杀者，使邦国交仇之。凡杀人而义者，不同国，令勿仇，仇之则死。
现代文：凡官吏依法诛杀有罪的人而被杀者的亲属有敢报复杀人的，就使天下各国都把他当作仇人加以捕杀。凡杀人而符合义理的，就使杀人者与被杀者之家不要同住在一国，劝令被杀者之家不要报仇，如果报仇就要判死罪。
English: If any official kills a guilty person in accordance with the law, and if any relative of the slain person dares to avenge the killing, all the nations of the world shall hunt him down and kill him as an enemy. If anyone is justified in killing, the murderer and the family of the slain person shall not live in the same country, and the family of the slain person shall be advised not to take revenge, and if they do, they shall be sentenced to death.

古文：凡有斗怒者，成之，不可成者，则书之。先动者，诛之。
现代文：凡有吵嘴打架的，就加以评断和解；不可和解的，就把双方的姓名和事端记录下来，先行报复的要加以惩罚。
English: If there is a quarrel or fight, it will be judged and reconciled; if it is irreconcilable, the names and incidents of both parties will be recorded, and those who retaliate first will be punished.

古文：媒氏掌万民之判。
现代文：媒氏掌管民众的婚姻。
English: A matchmaker presides over people's marriages.

古文：凡男女自成名以上，皆书年月日名焉。
现代文：凡男女自出生三月取名以上的，都要记录他们出生的年月日和姓名。
English: All men and women who have been given more than one name since their birth in March must record the date and name of their birth.

古文：令男三十而娶，女二十而嫁。
现代文：使男子年满三十而娶妻，女子年满二十而出嫁。
English: Let the man marry when he is thirty, and the woman when she is twenty.

古文：凡娶判妻入子者，皆书之。
现代文：凡娶再嫁妇为妻和接纳再嫁妇所带子女的，都要加以记录。
English: Every man that hath taken a wife, and hath children by her, and hath married her, and hath children by her, is to be put on record.

古文：仲春之月，令会男女，於是时也，奔者不禁。
现代文：仲春二月，令男女成婚。这个时候，如果有私奔的也不加禁止。
English: In February, men and women are allowed to marry. At this time, if there is an elopement, it is not prohibited.

古文：若无故而不用令者，罚之。
现代文：如果无故该嫁娶而不嫁娶的，就要处罚。
English: If a man should marry but does not do so without reason, he will be punished.

古文：司男女之无夫家者而会之，凡嫁子娶妻，入币纯帛无过五两。
现代文：了解男女过了婚龄尚未成婚的而帮助她们成婚。凡嫁女娶妻，送聘礼用缁帛，不超过五两。
English: Learn about men and women who have passed the age of marriage and have not yet married and help them get married.

古文：禁迁葬者与嫁殇者，男女之阴讼，听之于胜国之社。其附于刑者，归之于士。
现代文：禁止把生前没有夫妻名分的男女迁葬在一起，禁止对于殇死的男女再行嫁娶。凡因男女淫浃引起的争讼，在胜国的社坛听断；其中有触犯刑律的，交给司法官处置。
English: It is forbidden to move men and women who did not have the title of husband and wife to be buried together, and it is forbidden to remarry men and women who have died. All disputes arising from male and female fornication shall be heard in the social forum of the victorious country; among them, those who have violated the criminal law shall be handed over to the judicial officer for disposition.

