古文：隋侯燕昭王汉高后后汉章帝梁武帝火珠鲸鱼目珠池少城珠青泥珠
现代文：隋侯燕昭王汉高后后汉章帝梁武帝火珠鲸鱼目珠池少城珠青泥珠
English: Sui, Hou, Yan, Zhao, Wang, Han, Gao, Hou, Han, Zhang, Emperor, Liang, Wu, Emperor, fire bead, whale bead, eye bead, pool bead, small city bead, blue mud bead

古文：径寸珠宝珠水珠李勉李灌上清珠守船者严生张文珗卫庆鬻饼胡
现代文：径寸珠宝珠水珠李勉李灌上清珠守船者严生张文珗卫庆鬻饼胡
English: Diameter jewelry beads water beads Li Yan Li filled with clear beads ship keeper Yan Sheng Zhang Wenjun Weiqing dipped in cake Hu

古文：隋侯
现代文：隋侯
English: Sui and Qing dynasties

古文：隋侯行，见大蛇被伤而治之。
现代文：隋侯在路上行走，发现一条大蛇被伤，就为它治疗。
English: Sui Hou was walking on the road when he found a big snake injured and treated it.

古文：后衔珠以报。
现代文：这条蛇伤好之后，就用嘴衔来一颗珍珠报答他。
English: When the snake was healed, it rewarded him with a pearl from its beak.

古文：其珠径寸，纯白，夜有光明，如月之照。
现代文：这颗珍珠直径有一寸，纯白色，夜间发光，像月光一样。
English: This pearl is one inch in diameter, pure white, and glows at night, like moonlight.

古文：一名隋侯珠，一名明月珠
现代文：这颗珍珠一名隋侯珠，一名明月珠。
English: This pearl is a Sui Hou Pearl and a Ming Moon Pearl.

古文：燕昭王
现代文：燕昭王
English: Yan Zhao Wang

古文：燕昭王坐握日台，时有黑鸟白颈，集王之所。
现代文：燕昭王坐在握日台上，有一些白脖颈的黑色大鸟飞来，停落在王所。
English: Yan Zhao Wang was sitting on the sun platform. Some big black birds with white necks flew in and stopped at the king's place.

古文：衔洞光之珠，圆径一尺。
现代文：那鸟衔来一颗明澈发光的珍珠。
English: The bird brought a clear, shining pearl.

古文：此珠色黑如漆，而悬照于云日，百神不能隐其精灵。
现代文：珍珠圆径一尺，色黑如漆，把它悬挂于空中，各种鬼神都不能隐蔽其本来面目。
English: A pearl with a diameter of one foot, black as paint, hanging in the air, all kinds of ghosts and gods can not hide their true face.

古文：此珠出阴泉之底。
现代文：此珠出自阴泉之底。
English: This bead comes from the bottom of the netherworld.

古文：泉在寒山之北，圆水之中。
现代文：阴泉在寒山之北，圆水之中。
English: The gloomy spring is in the north of the cold mountain, in the middle of the round water.

古文：言波澜常圆转而流。
现代文：据说圆水里的水常常圆转而流。
English: It is said that water in round water often flows in circles.

古文：有黑蚌，飞翔而来去于五山。
现代文：圆水里有黑蚌，来往飞翔于五山之中。
English: There are egrets in the round water, and cranes fly back and forth among the five mountains.

古文：黄帝、务成子游寒山，得黑蚌在高坐之上，故知验矣。
现代文：黄帝、务成子游寒山的时候，曾在高坐之上得到过黑蚌，所以人们才知道黑蚌的灵验。
English: When Emperor Huangdi and Emperor Wucheng's son toured the frigid mountains, they had obtained black wolfberry on the high seat, so people only know the effectiveness of black wolfberry.

古文：昭王时，其国来献。
现代文：燕昭王时，那产黑蚌的方国来进献。
English: When Yan Zhao was king, Fang Guo, the country that produced black wolfberry, came to make an offering.

古文：王取宝璋水，洗其泥沙而叹曰： 悬日月已来。 
现代文：燕昭王取宝璋之水，将黑蚌洗净，叹道： 我将有可以悬挂的小太阳小月亮啦！ 
English: Yan Zhao Wang took the water from Baojun, washed the black dragonfly clean, and sighed: I will have a small sun and moon that I can hang!

古文：见黑蚌生珠，已八九千回。
现代文：发现黑蚌生珠，已经有八九千回了。
English: There have been 89,000 sightings of the black bead.

古文：此蚌千岁一生，珠渐轻细。
现代文：这种蚌一千年一生珠，它产的珠子渐渐减小。
English: This dragonfly lives for a thousand years, producing fewer and fewer beads.

古文：昭王常怀握此珠，当盛暑之月，体自轻凉。
现代文：燕昭王经常怀揣和把玩这颗珍珠，时值酷暑盛夏，体肤微有凉感。
English: Yan Zhao Wang often carries and plays with this pearl, when it is very hot in the summer, the body has a slight cool feeling.

古文：号曰销暑招凉珠焉。
现代文：故而名曰消暑招凉珠。
English: Therefore, it is also known as the "Cooling Bead."

古文：汉高后
现代文：汉高后
English: After Henkel

古文：汉高后时，下书求三寸珠。
现代文：汉高后时，下诏书征求直径够三寸的大珍珠。
English: After Henkel, the next imperial edict called for a large pearl with a diameter of three inches.

古文：仙人朱仲，在会稽市贩珠，乃献之。
现代文：有个名叫朱仲的仙人，在会稽那地方做珍珠买卖，就献上一颗。
English: A hermit named Zhu Zhong, who was engaged in pearl trading in the place where the meeting was held, offered one.

古文：赐金百斤。
现代文：汉高后赐给他黄金百斤。
English: Henkel later gave him 100 kilos of gold.

古文：鲁元公主私以金七百斤，从仲求珠。复献四寸者。
现代文：鲁元公主私下用七百斤黄金的代价，向朱仲谋求大珍珠，朱仲便献给她一个直径有四寸长的。
English: Princess Lu Yuan privately asked Zhu Zhong for a large pearl at the price of seven hundred catties of gold, and Zhu Zhong gave her one with a diameter of four inches.

古文：后汉章帝
现代文：后汉章帝
English: Emperor Zhang of the Later Han Dynasty

古文：后汉章帝元和元年，明珠出馆陶，大如李，有明耀。
现代文：后汉章帝元和元年，在馆陶发现了一颗明珠，像李子那么大，能发光。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Zhang Yuan and the first year, a pearl was found in the museum pottery. It was as big as a plum and could emit light.

古文：三年，明月珠出豫章海滨。大如鸡子，圆四寸八分。
现代文：元和三年，在豫章海滨发现一颗明月珠，像鸡蛋那么大，圆长四寸八分。
English: In the third year of Yuan and He, a bright moon bead was found on the coast of Yuzhang. It was as big as an egg, with a circumference of four inches and eight minutes.

古文：梁武帝
现代文：梁武帝
English: Emperor Liangwu

古文：梁大同中，骤雨殿前，有杂色宝珠。
现代文：梁大同年间，一场大暴雨夹着杂色珍珠落在殿前。
English: During the same year of Liang Da, a heavy rainstorm with mixed-colored pearls fell in front of the hall.

古文：梁武有喜色。
现代文：梁武帝非常高兴。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very happy.

古文：虞寄上《瑞雨颂》。
现代文：管理山泽的官便献上一首《瑞雨颂》。
English: The government official in charge of Yamazawa presented a song, "Ode to Rain."

古文：火珠
现代文：火珠
English: A ball of fire

古文：贞观初，林邑献火珠。
现代文：贞观初年，林邑献给皇上一颗火珠。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Lin Yip dedicated a pearl of fire to the emperor.

古文：状如水精。
现代文：火珠的样子很像水精。
English: The fireball looks very much like a water sprite.

古文：云：于罗刹国得。
现代文：说此珠是从罗刹国弄来的。
English: It is said that this bead was brought from the country of Racha.

古文：其人朱发黑身，兽牙鹰爪。
现代文：罗刹国的人，红头发，黑皮肤，齿如兽牙，手似鹰爪。
English: The people of Lhasa have red hair, dark skin, teeth like animal teeth, and hands like eagle claws.

古文：鲸鱼目
现代文：鲸鱼目
English: Cetaceans

古文：南海有珠，即鲸目瞳。
现代文：南海产有珍珠，就是鲸鱼的瞳仁儿。
English: The South Sea produces pearls, which are the eyes of whales.

古文：夜可以鉴，谓之夜光。
现代文：这种珍珠夜间可以照出人影，叫做夜光珠。
English: This kind of pearl can illuminate people's shadows at night and is called a noctilucent pearl.

古文：凡珠有龙珠，龙所吐也。蛇珠，蛇所吐也。
现代文：大凡珍珠有龙珠，是龙吐的；有蛇珠，是蛇吐的。
English: Great pearls have dragon beads, which are spit out by dragons, and snake beads, which are spit out by snakes.

古文：南海俗云： 蛇珠千枚，不及一玫瑰。 
现代文：南海有这样的俗语： 蛇珠上千枚，不如一玫瑰。 
English: There is a saying in the South China Sea: A thousand snake beads are not as good as one rose.

古文：言蛇珠贱也。玫瑰亦珠名。
现代文：这是说蛇珠不值钱。 玫瑰 也是一种珍珠的名称。
English: This means that snake beads are worthless. Rose is also the name of a type of pearl.

古文：越人俗云： 种千亩木奴，不如一龙珠。 
现代文：越人有这样的的俗语： 种千亩木奴，不如一颗龙珠。 
English: The people of Yue have a saying: A thousand mu of mulberry is not as good as a dragon bead.

古文：越俗以珠为上宝，生女谓之珠娘，生男名珠儿。
现代文：越人有以珠为上宝的习俗，生女孩叫 珠娘 ，生男孩就叫 珠儿 。
English: The Yue people have the custom of using beads as a treasure. A girl born is called a "bead girl" and a boy born is called a "bead boy."

古文：吴越间俗说： 明珠一斛，贵如玉者。 
现代文：吴越一带的俗语说： 明珠一斛，其价如玉。 
English: There is a saying in the Wuyue area: A pearl is worth its weight in gold.

古文：合浦有珠市。
现代文：合浦有专门买卖珍珠的集市。
English: In Hepu, there is a special market for buying and selling pearls.

古文：珠池
现代文：珠池
English: Zhuchi Lake

古文：廉州边海中有洲岛，岛上有大池，谓之珠池。
现代文：廉州边海里有一个岛屿，岛上有一个大池，叫做珠池。
English: There is an island in the sea off the coast of Lianzhou. There is a large pond on the island, called Zhuchi.

古文：每年刺史修贡，自监珠户入池采，以充贡赋。
现代文：每年刺史征收贡赋，都亲自监督采珠户到珠池中采来缴纳。
English: Every year, he personally supervises the pearling households to collect and pay the tribute.

古文：耆旧传云，太守贪则珠远去。
现代文：据老年人传说，如果太守贪婪，那么珍珠就会远离而去，难以采到。
English: According to the old people's legend, if the emperor is greedy, the pearl will be far away and difficult to find.

古文：皆采老蚌，剖而取珠。
现代文：采上来的都是老蚌，把蚌剖开从中取珠。
English: All of the pearls are from the old gourd, and pearls are taken from the gourd by cutting it open.

古文：池在海上，疑其底与海通，又池水极深，莫测也。
现代文：珠池在海边，人们都怀疑池底与海是相通的。但是池水极深，不可探测。
English: Pearl Pool is on the seashore, and people suspect that the bottom of the pool is connected to the sea. However, the water in the pool is extremely deep and cannot be detected.

古文：珠如豌豆大，常珠也，如弹丸者，亦时有得。径寸照室之珠，但有其说，不可遇也。
现代文：池中所产的珍珠，像豌豆那么大的，是普通的珍珠；像弹丸那么大的，也时常可能采到；直径一寸能照亮屋子的珍珠，却只有其说，不可遇到。
English: The pearls produced in the pool, as large as peas, are ordinary pearls; as large as projectiles, they can often be mined; a pearl with a diameter of one inch that can illuminate the house, but only it is said that it cannot be encountered.

古文：又取小蚌肉，贯之以篾，曝乾，谓之珠母。容桂率将脯烧之，以荐酒也。
现代文：另外，把小蚌的肉取出，用竹篾穿起来晒干，叫做珠母，容桂一带一般都用它炒菜下酒。
English: In addition, it is called mother-of-pearl to take out the meat of the small clam and dry it with a bamboo rake. It is generally used in the Yonggui area to stir-fry dishes and make wine.

古文：肉中有细珠，如粱粟，乃知珠池之蚌，随其大小，悉胎中有珠矣。
现代文：见到肉中有米粒大小的珍珠的蚌，便知它是产自珠池。珠池里的蚌无论大小，全都胎中有珠。
English: When you see a pearl oyster with a pearl the size of a grain of rice in its flesh, you know that it comes from the pearl pond. All the oysters in the pearl pond, regardless of their size, have pearls in their wombs.

古文：少城珠
现代文：少城珠
English: Shao Chengzhu

古文：蜀石笋街，夏中大雨，往往得杂色小珠。
现代文：蜀地的石笋街，夏季里大雨过后，往往拾到杂色小珍珠。
English: After heavy rain in the summer, small pearls of different colors are often found in Shiqiao Street in Shu.

古文：俗谓地当海眼，莫知其故。
现代文：一般人说这地方可能是海眼，但是谁也不清楚天上下珍珠的原因。
English: People say that this place may be the eye of the sea, but no one knows why the pearls are falling from the sky.

古文：蜀僧惠嶷曰： 前史说，蜀少城饰以金璧珠翠，桓温恶其太侈，焚之。
现代文：蜀僧惠嶷说： 据史书记载，蜀地的少城是用金璧珠翠装饰的，桓温嫌它太奢侈，就把它烧了。
English: Shu monk Hui Wei said: According to historical records, the small city in Shu was decorated with gold, pearls and jade. However, King Wen thought it was too extravagant and burned it.

古文：合在此地。
现代文：少城旧址应当就在此地。
English: This is where the former site of Shojo should be.

古文：合拾得小珠，时有孔者。 
现代文：所以能拾得小珠，并且时常有带眼儿的。 
English: That's why they can pick up small beads, and why they often have eyes.

古文：得非是乎？
现代文：莫非正象像说的这样吧？
English: Isn't it just like I said?

古文：青泥珠
现代文：青泥珠
English: Blue mud beads

古文：则天时，西国献毗娄博义天王下额骨及辟支佛舌，并清泥珠一枚。
现代文：武则天时，西蕃某国献给她毗娄博义天王的下颔骨和辟支佛的舌头，并有青泥珠一枚。
English: At the time of Wu Zetian, a certain country in Xicheng dedicated to her the lower jawbone of King Vishen Bo Yi and the tongue of the Buddha, as well as a jade bead.

古文：则天悬额及舌，以示百姓。
现代文：武则天把下颔骨和舌头悬挂起来让百姓看。
English: Wu Zetian hung his lower jawbone and tongue up for the people to see.

古文：颔大如胡床；舌青色，大如牛舌；珠类拇指，微青。
现代文：下颔骨很大，像一把小交椅；舌头是青色的，大如牛舌头；珠子像拇指那么大，微微发青。
English: The mandible is large, like a small chair; the tongue is blue, as big as a cow's tongue; the bead is as big as a thumb, slightly bluish.

古文：后不知贵，以施西明寺僧。
现代文：武则天不知青泥珠的珍贵，把它送给西明寺的和尚了。
English: Wu Zetian did not know the preciousness of the blue mud bead and gave it to the monk of Ximing Temple.

古文：布金刚额中。
现代文：和尚把这颗珠子装在金刚的脑门儿上。
English: The monk placed the bead on Kong's forehead.

古文：后有讲席，胡人来听讲，见珠纵视，目不暂舍。
现代文：后来和尚讲经，有一个前来听讲的胡人见了这颗珠子就目不转睛地看。
English: Later, when the monk was giving a sermon, a Hu man who had come to listen saw the bead and stared at it intently.

古文：如是积十余日，但于珠下谛视，而意不在讲，僧知其故，因问故欲买珠耶？
现代文：十几天里，他总在珠下凝视，心并不用在听讲上。和尚心里明白，于是向胡人道： 施主想要买这颗宝珠吗？ 
English: For a dozen days, he always gazed under the bead, and his mind did not need to be on listening to the lecture. The monk understood in his heart, so he asked Humankind: Does the donor want to buy this precious bead?

古文：胡云： 必若见卖，当致重价。 
现代文：胡人说： 如果一定能卖，我保证出重价。 
English: Hu said, "If I can definitely sell it, I promise to offer a high price."

古文：僧初索千贯，渐至万贯。胡悉不酬。
现代文：和尚最初的要价是一千贯，渐渐涨到一万贯，胡人全都答允。
English: The monk's initial asking price was 1,000 kroner, gradually rising to 10,000 kroner, and all the Hu people agreed.

古文：遂定至十万贯，卖之。
现代文：于是定到十万贯，成交。
English: As a result, the price was set at 100,000 kan, and the transaction was concluded.

古文：胡得珠，纳腿肉中，还西国。
现代文：胡人买到此珠之后，剖开腿上的肉，把珠子纳入其中，然后回国。
English: After Hu bought the bead, he cut open the meat on the leg, put the bead into it, and then returned to China.

古文：僧寻闻奏，则天敕求此胡。
现代文：和尚不久就把这事向武则天禀奏了。武则天下今寻找这个胡人。
English: The monk soon reported this to Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian and the whole world are now looking for this Hu person.

古文：数日得之，使者问珠所在，胡云，以吞入腹。
现代文：几天之后，使者找到了那胡人，问他宝珠在什么地方，他说已经把宝珠吞到肚子里了。
English: A few days later, the messenger found the fox and asked him where the bead was. He said he had swallowed it.

古文：使者欲刳其腹，胡不得已，于腿中取出。
现代文：使者要剖开他的肚子检验，他没办法，只好从腿肉中取出宝珠来。
English: The messenger had to cut open his stomach to examine it, and he had no choice but to extract the pearl from the meat of the leg.

古文：则天召问： 贵价市此，焉所用之？ 
现代文：武则天召见那胡人，问道： 你花重价买这珠子，要用它干什么呢？ 
English: Wu Zetian summoned the fox and asked, "You spent a lot of money to buy this bead, what are you going to do with it?

古文：胡云： 西国有青泥泊，多珠珍宝。
现代文：胡人说： 西蕃某国有个青泥泊，泊中有许多珍珠宝贝。
English: Hu said: There is a blue mud pond in a certain country in Xidi, and there are many precious pearls in the pond.

古文：但苦泥深不可得。
现代文：但是淤泥很深，无法将珍宝弄上来。
English: But the silt is too deep to bring the treasure up.

古文：若以此珠投泊中，泥悉成水，其宝可得。 
现代文：如果把这颗青泥珠投到泊中，淤泥就会变成水，那些宝贝便可以得到了。 
English: If you throw this blue mud bead into the pond, the mud will turn into water, and those treasures can be obtained.

古文：则天因宝持之。
现代文：武则天于是拿青泥珠当宝贝。
English: Wu Zetian then took the blue mud beads as a treasure.

古文：至玄宗时犹在。
现代文：直到唐玄宗时，这珠还在。
English: This bead remained until the time of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang.

古文：径寸珠
现代文：径寸珠
English: Beads with a diameter of

古文：近世有波斯胡人，至扶风逆旅，见方石在主人门外，盘桓数日。
现代文：近世有一个波斯胡人，来到扶风的客栈，见主人家门外有一块方形石头，就围着这块石头转绕了好几天。
English: In modern times, a Persian Hu man came to the inn of Fu Feng and saw a square stone outside the owner's door. He circled around this stone for several days.

古文：主人问其故。胡云： 我欲石捣帛。 
现代文：主人问胡人为什么这样，胡人说他要买这块石头捶衣裳。
English: The master asked the fox why this was so, and the fox said that he wanted to buy the stone to make clothes.

古文：因以钱二千求买。
现代文：于是他说他愿出两千钱买这块石头。
English: Then he said he would give two thousand dollars for the stone.

古文：主人得钱甚悦，以石与之。
现代文：主人很高兴，就把石头卖给胡人。
English: The owner was delighted and sold the stone to the Hu people.

古文：胡载石出，对众剖得径寸珠一枚。
现代文：胡人把石头运出来，当众敲碎石头，从中剖出一颗径寸的宝珠来。
English: The Hu people carried the stone out, broke the stone in public, and cut a precious bead with a diameter of one inch from it.

古文：以刀破臂腋，藏其内，便还本国。
现代文：胡人用刀将自己臂腋处剖开，将宝珠藏在里面，就起程回国。
English: Hu Man cut his arm open with a knife, hid the pearl inside, and left for home.

古文：随船泛海，行十余日，船忽欲没。
现代文：在海上行了十几天，船突然遇到沉没的危险。
English: After ten days at sea, the ship was suddenly in danger of sinking.

古文：舟人知是海神求宝，乃遍索之，无宝与神，因欲溺胡。
现代文：摆船人知道这是海神向船中人索要珍宝，就逐个问谁身上带有贵宝，没有问出什么，无宝送给海神，于是摆船人要把胡人扔下海去。
English: The boatman knew that this was the god of the sea demanding treasure from the people in the boat, and he asked each one who had precious treasure on their body. He did not ask what, but gave the god of the sea no treasure. So the boatman was going to throw the man into the sea.

古文：胡惧，剖腋取珠。
现代文：胡人恐惧，不得不剖开臂腋，把珠子献出来。
English: The goose was so afraid that it had to open its beak and give up the bead.

古文：舟人咒云： 若求此珠，当有所领。 
现代文：摆船人冲大海说道： 如果想要此珠，就探出什么东西来领取吧！ 
English: The boatswain rushed to the sea and said: "If you want this bead, find something to pick it up!"

古文：海神便出一手，其大多毛，捧珠而去。
现代文：海神便从水中伸出一只手来，手大而多毛，握着珠子没入水中。
English: The sea god then stretched out a hand from the water, a large and hairy hand, holding the beads and sinking into the water.

古文：宝珠
现代文：宝珠
English: The Pearl of Great Price

古文：咸阳岳寺后，有周武帝冠，其上缀冠珠，大如瑞梅，历代不以为宝。
现代文：咸阳的岳寺后面，有周武帝的帽子，那上面镶有一块珍珠，大如瑞梅。历代都没有把这颗珍珠当做宝贝。
English: At the back of Yue Temple in Xianyang, there is Emperor Zhou Wu's cap, on which there is a piece of pearl, as big as a rime. All previous dynasties did not treasure this pearl.

古文：天后时，有士人过寺，见珠，戏而取之。
现代文：武则天的时候，有一位士人经过岳寺，见到这颗珍珠，开玩笑似的把它取了下来。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian, a scholar passed by Yue Temple, saw the pearl, and jokingly took it down.

古文：天大热，至寺门易衣，以底裹珠，放金刚脚下。
现代文：天很热，走到寺门的时候换衣服，把珠子裹在脱下来的衣服里，放在金刚脚下。
English: It was very hot. When we reached the temple gate, we changed clothes, wrapped the beads in the clothes we had taken off, and placed them at Vajra's feet.

古文：因忘收之。
现代文：走的时候就忘记了带上它。
English: I forgot to take it with me when I left.

古文：翼日，便往扬州收债，途次陈留，宿于旅邸。夜闻胡斗宝，摄衣从而视之。因说冠上缀珠。
现代文：第二天他便去扬州收债。途中宿在陈留客栈，夜间听到胡人斗宝，他就拿着衣服出来看，于是就说了周武帝帽子上的那颗珠子的事。
English: The next day, he went to Yangzhou to collect debts. On the way, he stayed at the Chen Liu Inn. At night, when he heard Hu Ren Du Bao, he took his clothes out to look, and then he told the story of the bead on Emperor Zhou Wu's hat.

古文：诸胡大骇曰： 久知中国有此宝，方欲往求之。 
现代文：几位胡人大惊道： 早就听说中土有此宝贝，我们正要去弄呢！ 
English: Several Hu people were shocked and said: We have long heard that there is this treasure in the Middle Earth, and we are going to get it!

古文：士人言已遗之。
现代文：士人说已经遗失了。
English: The gentleman said it was lost.

古文：胡等叹恨。告云： 若能至此，当有金帛相答。
现代文：胡人都感到遗憾，说道： 如果你能把它弄到这儿来，我们一定重谢你。
English: "If you can get it here, we'd really appreciate it," Hu said, sounding regretful.

古文：今往扬州，所债几何？ 
现代文：你现在到扬州去，要收多少债？ 
English: If you go to Yangzhou now, how much debt will you have to collect?

古文：士人云： 五百千。 
现代文：士人说，要收五百千。
English: The gentleman said that he wanted to charge five hundred thousand.

古文：诸胡乃率五百千与之，令还取珠。
现代文：几位胡人便给了他五百千，让他回去取那珠子。
English: Several Hu people then gave him five hundred thousand to go back and retrieve the bead.

古文：士人至金刚脚下，珠犹尚存，持还见胡。
现代文：他回到金刚脚下，珍珠还放在那里，就带回来见胡人。
English: He went back to the feet of King Kong, where the pearl was still lying, and brought it back to see Wu Ren.

古文：胡等喜扌卞。
现代文：几位胡人高兴得直拍巴掌。
English: Several of the Hu people clapped their hands with joy.

古文：饮乐十余日，方始求市。因问士人，所求几何。
现代文：一连饮酒欢乐了十多天，胡人才谈到买珍珠的事，问他要卖多少钱。
English: After more than ten days of happy drinking, Hu Man talked about buying pearls and asked how much he wanted to sell them for.

古文：士人极口求一千缗。
现代文：他使了个大劲喊出一千缗。
English: He gave a mighty shout of a thousand cicadas.

古文：胡大笑云： 何辱此珠？ 
现代文：胡人大笑道： 你怎么污辱这颗宝珠？ 
English: Hu Ren laughed loudly, "How could you insult this precious pearl?

古文：与众定其价，作五万缗。
现代文：几个胡人一核计，定价为五万缗。
English: A core of several Hu people is priced at 50,000 baht.

古文：群胡合钱市之。
现代文：几个胡人凑钱买下这颗珠子。
English: Several Hu people pooled their money to buy the bead.

古文：及邀士人，同往海上，观珠之价。
现代文：又邀士人和他们一起到海上去一趟，看看此珠的真正价值。
English: They also invited scholars to go to sea with them to see the true value of this pearl.

古文：士人与之偕行东海上。
现代文：士人就和他们一起到了东海上。
English: The officer went with them to the East Sea.

古文：大胡以银铛煎醍醐，又以金瓶盛珠，於醍醐中重煎。
现代文：一胡人用银锅煎醍醐，又用金瓶盛着那颗珠子，放到醍醐里重煎。
English: A Hu person used a silver pan to fry the Daigo, and used a gold bottle to hold the bead, and placed it in the Daigo to re-fry it.

古文：甫七日，有二老人及徒党数百人，赍持宝物，来至胡所求赎。
现代文：刚刚煎了七天，就有两位老人领数百人，带着许多宝物，来到胡人处，想赎那珠子。
English: Just after it had been roasted for seven days, two old men, leading hundreds of people and carrying many treasures, came to Hu Ren and wanted to redeem the bead.

古文：故执不与。
现代文：胡人坚决不答应。
English: Hu Ren resolutely refused.

古文：后数日，复持诸宝山积。
现代文：过了几天，又带着宝贝来赎，还是不答应。
English: A few days later, I brought my baby to redeem it, but he still wouldn't agree.

古文：云，欲赎珠。
现代文：三十多天以后，那些人散去了。
English: After more than 30 days, those people dispersed.

古文：胡又不与。至三十余日，诸人散去。有二龙女，洁白端丽，投入珠瓶中，珠女合成膏。士人问： 所赎悉何人也？ 
现代文：有两位龙女，长得洁白端丽，投到盛珠子的瓶中，龙女和珍珠混合成膏。士人问： 那些要赎珍珠的都是些什么人？ 
English: There were two dragon maidens, beautiful and white, who were cast into a jar containing pearls. The dragon maidens were mixed with the pearls to make an ointment. The scholar asked: Who were the people who wanted to redeem the pearls?

古文：胡云： 此珠是大宝，合有二龙女卫护。
现代文：胡人说： 这珍珠是贵宝，必须有两个龙女卫护。
English: Hu said, "This pearl is a precious treasure. It must be guarded by two dragons.

古文：群龙惜女，故以诸宝来赎。
现代文：诸龙爱怜女儿，所以才用许多宝物来赎。
English: The dragons felt sorry for her, so they used many treasures to ransom her.

古文：我欲求度世，宁顾世间之富耶？ 
现代文：我所求的是超凡度世，难道还贪恋人间富贵吗？ 
English: What I seek is a transcendent life. Do I still yearn for earthly riches?

古文：因以膏涂足，步行水上，舍舟而去。
现代文：于是胡人用膏涂脚，离开船在水面上行走。
English: So the man anointed his feet with the ointment and left the boat to walk on the water.

古文：诸胡各言： 共买此珠，何为独专其利。
现代文：其他胡人纷纷说道： 我们共同买下这颗珠子，为什么你独占了好处？
English: Other Hu people said one after another: We jointly bought this bead, why did you monopolize the benefits?

古文：卿既往矣，我将安归？ 
现代文：你走了，我们怎么回去啊？ 
English: You're gone. How do we get back?

古文：胡令以所煎醍醐涂船，当得便风还家。
现代文：那涂了醍醐的胡人让他们用所煎醍醐涂船，说涂后可遇顺风还家。
English: The Hu people who painted the Daigo asked them to paint the boat with the fried Daigo, saying that after painting, they could return home if there was a favorable wind.

古文：皆如其言。
现代文：众人照办，果然如他所说。
English: The fate of all these people is the same as what Fang Anyu said.

古文：大胡竟不知所之。
现代文：不知他后来到哪里去了。
English: I don't know where he went after that.

古文：水珠
现代文：水珠
English: Water droplets

古文：大安国寺，睿宗为相王时旧邸也。
现代文：大安国寺，是唐睿宗做相王时的旧官邸。
English: Da'an National Temple was the former official residence of Tang Ruizong when he was the emperor.

古文：即尊位，乃建道场焉。
现代文：他登基以后，才在这里建了道场。
English: It was only after he ascended to the throne that a dojo was built here.

古文：王尝施一宝珠，令镇常住库。云，值亿万。
现代文：他曾向寺中施舍一颗宝珠，下令用它镇常住库，说它价值亿万。
English: He once donated a treasure bead to the temple, ordered it to be used as the town's permanent residence, and said it was worth hundreds of millions.

古文：寺僧纳之柜中，殊不为贵也。
现代文：寺里的和尚把宝珠放在柜子里，竟不认为怎么贵重。
English: The monk in the temple put the jewel in the cupboard, but he didn't think it was very valuable.

古文：开元十年，寺僧造功德，开柜阅宝物，将货之。
现代文：开元十年，寺里的和尚为敬神敬佛捐款，开柜看宝物，要把它卖掉。
English: In the 10th year of the first century, the monks in the temple made a donation for the worship of God and Buddha, opened the cabinet to see the treasure, and wanted to sell it.

古文：见函封曰： 此珠值亿万。 
现代文：见函封上写着： 此珠值亿万。 
English: On the envelope was written: This pearl is worth hundreds of millions.

古文：僧共开之，状如片石，赤色。夜则微光，光高数寸。
现代文：和尚们共同把函封打开，见珠子状如片石。赤色，夜间微微发光，光高几寸。
English: The monks opened the envelope together and saw a bead-like stone, red, glowing slightly at night, a few inches high.

古文：寺僧议曰： 此凡物耳，何得值亿万也？
现代文：和尚们议论道： 这是一个很普通的东西，怎么能值亿万呢？
English: The monks argued: This is a very ordinary thing, how can it be worth hundreds of millions?

古文：试卖之。 
现代文：卖一卖试试吧！ 
English: Try selling one at a time!

古文：于是市中令一僧监卖，且试其酬直。
现代文：于是就让一个和尚到市上去卖。试一试这颗珠子的价值。
English: So he asked a monk to go to the market and sell the bead, to see how much it was worth.

古文：居数日，贵人或有问者。及观之，则曰： 此凡石耳，瓦砾不殊，何妄索直！ 
现代文：过了几天，有钱人打听价钱，等到人家看了珠子，就说： 这是块普通的石头罢了，和瓦砾没什么两样，干嘛胡乱要价？ 
English: A few days later, the rich man inquired about the price, and when someone looked at the beads, he said: This is just an ordinary stone, no different from rubble, why do you want the price?

古文：皆嗤笑而去。
现代文：人们都嗤笑着离去。
English: People laughed and left.

古文：僧亦耻之。
现代文：和尚也觉得不太光彩。
English: Monk also felt that it was not very glorious.

古文：十日后，或有问者，知其夜光，或酬价数千。
现代文：十天之后，又有问的，知道此珠夜间有光，有的出价几千。
English: Ten days later, more people inquired, knowing that this bead glows at night, and some of them offered several thousand.

古文：价益重矣。
现代文：价格上涨了。
English: Prices have gone up.

古文：月余，有西域胡人，阅市求宝，见珠大喜。
现代文：一个月以后有一个西域的胡人，到市购买宝物，见到此珠便大喜。
English: A month later, a Hu man from the western region came to the city to purchase the treasure, and was overjoyed to see the bead.

古文：偕顶戴于首，胡人贵者也。
现代文：看穿衣打扮可知，此人是胡人中的富贵者。
English: Judging by his attire, this man is the richest of the Hu people.

古文：使译问曰： 珠价值几何？ 僧曰： 一亿万。 
现代文：胡人让翻译问道： 这珠子什么价？ 和尚说： 一亿万。 
English: Hu Ren asked the translator: What is the price of this bead? The monk said: One hundred million yuan.

古文：胡人抚弄迟回而去。
现代文：胡人摆弄了半天，恋恋不舍地离去。
English: Hu Ren fiddled with it for half a day, and reluctantly left.

古文：明日又至，译谓僧曰： 珠价诚值亿万，然胡客久，今有四千万求市，可乎？ 
现代文：第二天又来。翻译对和尚说： 珠价确实值亿万，但是这个胡人客居大唐很久了，现在只有四千万，可以吗？ 
English: The next day he came again. The interpreter said to the monk: "The pearl price is indeed worth hundreds of millions, but this Hu person has been staying in Datang for a long time, and now it is only forty million, is that okay?

古文：僧喜，与之谒寺主。
现代文：和尚挺高兴，领胡人去见寺主。
English: The monk was very happy and led Hu to meet the head of the temple.

古文：寺主许诺。
现代文：寺主答应胡人。
English: The head of the temple agreed to let Hu Ren leave.

古文：明日，纳钱四千万贯，市之而去。
现代文：第二天，胡人交出四千万贯钱，把珠子买去。
English: The next day, the Hu people handed over 40 million yuan to buy the beads.

古文：仍谓僧曰： 有亏珠价诚多，不贻责也。 
现代文：胡人还对和尚说： 我付的珠价实在是太少了，将留下埋怨的。 
English: Hu Ren also said to the monk: The pearl price I paid is really too little, and I will be left with a grudge.

古文：僧问胡从何而来？而此珠复何能也？
现代文：和尚问胡人从什么地方来，又问此珠有什么用。
English: The monk asked the Hu people where they came from, and asked what this bead was for.

古文：胡人曰： 吾大食国人也。
现代文：胡人说： 我是大食国的人。
English: Hu said, "I'm from a nation of big eaters.

古文：王贞观初通好，来贡此珠。
现代文：贞观初年与大唐通好，我国贡来此珠。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan's reign, he had a good relationship with Datang, and our country paid tribute to this pearl.

古文：后吾国常念之。
现代文：后来我国经常思念这颗珠子。
English: Later, our country often thought about this bead.

古文：募有得之者，当授相位。
现代文：征求能得到此珠的人，应授相位。
English: Those who can obtain this bead should be granted the phase.

古文：求之七八十岁，今幸得之。
现代文：征求了七八十年了，如今终于得到它了。
English: After 70 or 80 years of asking for it, we finally got it.

古文：此水珠也。
现代文：这是颗水珠啊。
English: It's a drop of water.

古文：每军行休时，掘地二尺，埋珠于其中，水泉立出，可给数千人，故军行常不乏水。
现代文：每当行军休息时，掘地二尺，把珠子埋进去，水泉立刻流出来。可供几千人饮用。所以行军总不缺水。
English: Whenever the marching troops take a break, they dig two feet into the ground, bury the beads, and water springs immediately flow out. It can be drunk by thousands of people. So the marching troops are never short of water.

古文：自亡珠后，行军每苦渴乏。 
现代文：自从没了这颗珠子，行军就愁没有水喝。 
English: Since the loss of this bead, the marchers have had no water to drink.

古文：僧不信。
现代文：和尚不信。
English: Monks don't believe it.

古文：胡人命掘土藏珠，有顷泉涌，其色清冷，流泛而出。
现代文：胡人让他掘地埋起珠子，不一会儿便泉水涌动，水色清冷，哗哗流淌。
English: Hu Ren asked him to dig up the ground and bury the beads, and soon the spring water was gushing, the water was clear and cold, and it flowed noisily.

古文：僧取饮之，方悟灵异。
现代文：和尚捧水尝了尝，才确信此珠灵异无比。
English: The monk held the water and tasted it before he was convinced that this pearl was incomparable.

古文：胡人乃持珠去，不知所之。
现代文：胡人就带着珠子离去，不知去了何处。
English: The goose took the beads with him and left, not knowing where he had gone.

古文：李勉
现代文：李勉
English: Comrade Li Tsuen

古文：司徒李勉，开元初，作尉浚仪。
现代文：司徒李勉，开元初年，作浚仪县尉。
English: Szu Li Tsun, the first year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, served as the county lieutenant of Jianyi.

古文：秩满，沿汴将游广陵。
现代文：期满，他坐船行汴水之上，要去广陵。
English: At the end of his term, he went to Guangling by boat on the Surabaya River.

古文：行及睢阳，忽有波斯胡老疾，杖策诣勉曰： 异乡子抱恙甚殆，思归江都。
现代文：走到睢阳，忽然遇上一位有病的波斯老胡人。老胡人来到船前说： 我是个异乡人，如今病得很危险，想回江都，想借光搭您的船可以吗？ 
English: When I went to Shenyang, I suddenly met a sick Persian old man. The old man came to the boat and said: I am a foreigner, now I am very sick, I want to go back to Jiangdu, can I borrow your boat?

古文：勉哀之，因命登舻，仍给饘粥。
现代文：李勉可怜他，就让他上了船。他还给老胡人粥吃。
English: Li Mian took pity on him and let him board the boat. He also gave the old man porridge to eat.

古文：胡人极怀惭愧，因曰： 我本王贵种也，商贩于此，已逾二十年。
现代文：老胡人十分感激，就说： 我本是王公贵族之后，做买卖来到这里，已经二十多年了。
English: Old Hu Man was very grateful and said, "I have been coming here to do business for more than twenty years after I was a prince and nobleman.

古文：家有三子，计必有求吾来者。 
现代文：我家里有三个儿子，估计一定会出来找我的。 
English: I have three sons at home, and I'm sure they'll come looking for me.

古文：不日，舟止泗上，其人疾亟，因屏人告勉曰： 吾国内顷亡传国宝珠，募能获者，世家公相。
现代文：不几天，船只停在泗水，老胡人的病情更重，就避别人对李勉说： 我们国内丢了传国的宝珠，征求能把宝珠找回来的人，即封公相禄位。
English: Within a few days, the ship stopped in Surabaya, and Lao Hu's condition became even more serious. He avoided others and said to Li Mian: Our country has lost the treasure of the nation, and we are looking for someone who can find the treasure, that is, to seal the position of the prime minister.

古文：吾衒其鉴而贪其位，因是去乡而来寻。近已得之，将归即富贵矣。
现代文：贪图高位，离乡出来寻找宝珠。最近已经找到，如果把珠子带回去，立即就富贵了。
English: Craving for a higher position, he left his hometown in search of a bead. He recently found it, and if he brings it back, he will immediately become rich.

古文：其珠价当百万，吾惧怀宝越乡，因剖肉而藏焉。
现代文：这颗宝珠价值百万。我怕揣着宝珠行经他乡不安全，就剖开身上的肉把宝珠藏在里面。
English: This bead is worth a million. I'm afraid that it's not safe to travel through another country with the bead, so I cut open the flesh on my body to hide the bead inside.

古文：不幸遇疾，今将死矣。
现代文：不幸得了病。现在要死了。
English: Unfortunately, I got sick. Now I'm going to die.

古文：感公恩义，敬以相奉。 
现代文：感激您的恩义，就把珠子送给你吧！ 
English: In gratitude for your kindness, let me give you the beads!

古文：即抽刀决股，珠出而绝。
现代文：说完，他抽刀剖开大腿，珠出人亡。
English: With that, he drew his knife and sliced open her thigh, killing her instantly.

古文：勉遂资其衣衾，瘗于淮上。
现代文：李勉就给他置办了装裹，葬他于淮水之滨。
English: Li Tsunwen then bought him a burial shroud and buried him on the shore of Huai Shui.

古文：掩坎之际，因密以珠含之而去。既抵维扬，寓目旗亭。
现代文：秘密地把宝珠放在胡人口中离开。到达扬州之后，住在目旗亭。
English: He secretly put the treasure ball in the Hu population and left. After arriving in Yangzhou, he lived in Meqi Pavilion.

古文：忽与群胡左右依随，因得言语相接。傍有胡雏，质貌肖逝者。
现代文：忽然间与许多胡人住到一处。旁边有一个年轻胡人，模样很像死去的那个胡人。
English: All of a sudden, he was living with a lot of Hoosiers, and next to him was a young Hoosier who looked a lot like the one who had died.

古文：勉即询访，果与逝者所述契会。
现代文：李勉就询访那小伙，果然与死胡人说的差不多。
English: Li Qian inquired about the young man, and as expected, he said almost the same thing as the man with the dead beard.

古文：勉即究问事迹，乃亡胡之子。
现代文：细一打听，他居然是已故胡人的儿子。
English: On closer inspection, he turned out to be the son of the late Hu.

古文：告瘗其所，胡雏号泣，发墓取而去。
现代文：李勉将埋葬那胡人的地点告诉年轻胡人，年轻胡人号泣一顿之后，掘开坟墓取遗骨而去。
English: Li Mian told the young Hu man where the Hu man was buried. After the young Hu man cried for a while, he dug up the grave and took the remains away.

古文：李灌
现代文：李灌
English: Li Guan

古文：李灌者，不知何许人。性孤静，常次洪州建昌县。
现代文：李灌，不知他是什么地方人，性情孤僻好静，常住洪州建昌县。
English: Li Guan, I don't know what kind of local people he is, his temperament is quiet and solitary, and he often lives in Hongzhou Jianchang County.

古文：倚舟于岸，岸有小蓬室，下有一病波斯。
现代文：他常年横舟岸边。岸上有小茅屋为家，邻中有一位生病的波斯人。
English: All year long he rowed along the shore, where he lived in a small thatched hut, next to a sick Persian man.

古文：灌悯其将尽，以汤粥给之。
现代文：李灌可怜这位波斯人将不久于人世，热汤热水地侍奉他。
English: Li Gan felt sorry for the Persian, who would not live long, and served him hot soup.

古文：数日而卒。
现代文：几天之后他就死了。
English: Xue Shaoyin recounted the story.

古文：临绝，指所卧黑毡曰： 中有一珠，可径寸，将酬其惠。 
现代文：临死时，他指着他所铺的黑毡说： 这里面有一颗珍珠，直径一寸，送给你作为报答。 
English: As he was about to die, he pointed to the black cocoon he had spread and said: "There is a pearl in it, one inch in diameter, given to you as a reward.

古文：及死，毡有微光溢耀。
现代文：等他死了，毡子有微光闪耀。
English: When he died, the braid glowed faintly.

古文：灌取视得珠。
现代文：李灌从中得到那珍珠。
English: Li Gan got the pearl from it.

古文：买棺葬之，密以珠内胡口中。
现代文：他买棺木将波斯人埋葬了，秘密地将珠子放在死胡人的口中，在墓边栽了一棵树当记号。
English: He bought a coffin to bury the Persian, secretly placed beads in the dead man's mouth, and planted a tree as a marker at the edge of the grave.

古文：其后十年，复过旧邑。
现代文：十年之后，又过旧邑。
English: Ten years later, I passed through the old town again.

古文：时杨凭为观察使，有外国符牒。
现代文：当时杨凭是这里的观察使，有外国的通牒。
English: At that time, Yang Biao was an observation envoy here, and there was a foreign ultimatum.

古文：以胡人死于建昌逆旅，其粥食之家，皆被梏讯经年。
现代文：因为胡人死在建昌的客栈里，那些曾向胡人施舍的人家，都被拷问了一年。
English: Because Hu Ren died in an inn in Jianchang, the families of those who had given alms to Hu Ren were all interrogated for a year.

古文：灌因问其罪，囚具言本末。
现代文：李灌就问这些人有什么罪，囚犯们详细地说了事情的始末。
English: Li Guan asked these people what crime they had committed, and the prisoners told him in detail how it had happened.

古文：灌告县寮，偕往郭墦伐树。
现代文：李灌把真相告诉了县僚，并领他们到了埋葬波斯人的地方。
English: Li Guan told the truth to the county officials and led them to the place where the Persians were buried.

古文：树已合拱矣。
现代文：他当年栽的小树已经很大。
English: The small tree he planted that year has grown into a large tree.

古文：发棺视死胡，貌如生，乃于口中探得一珠还之。其夕棹舟而去，不知所往。
现代文：打开棺材看那死胡人。死胡人的面容和活人一样。于是从死胡人口中取出宝珠，当天晚上乘船而去，不知去了哪里。
English: He opened the coffin to look at the dead man. The dead man's face was the same as the living man. So he took the pearl from the dead man's body and took a boat that night and went to I don't know where.

古文：又《尚书故实》载兵部员外郎李约，葬一商胡，得珠以含之。与此二事略同。
现代文：另外，《尚书故实》记载兵部员外郎李约，埋葬一个行商的胡人，也曾把珍珠放在死者口中，与这事大体相同。
English: In addition, "Shangshu Kojitsu" records that Li You, a member of the military department, buried a merchant Hu, and also put a pearl in the mouth of the dead, which is roughly the same thing.

古文：上清珠
现代文：上清珠
English: Shangqing Zhu

古文：肃宗为儿时，常为玄宗所器。
现代文：唐肃宗小时候，常受到唐玄宗的重视。
English: When Tang Su Zong was a child, he often received attention from Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：每坐于前，熟视其貌，谓武惠妃曰： 此儿甚有异相，他日亦吾家一有福天子。 
现代文：唐玄宗常常坐在肃宗面前，仔细地观察他的相貌，然后对武惠妃说： 这孩子的相貌与众不同，日后也是我家一个有福的天子。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong often sat in front of Su Zong, carefully observing his appearance, and then said to Wu Hui Fei: This child's appearance is unique, and he will also be a blessed son of heaven in my family in the future.

古文：因命取上清玉珠，以绛纱裹之，系于颈。
现代文：于是玄宗让人把自己的上清玉珠拿来。上清玉珠用紫纱包着。
English: Therefore, Xuanzong asked someone to bring his Shangqing jade bead. The Shangqing jade bead was wrapped in purple yarn.

古文：是开元中罽宾国所贡。
现代文：玄宗亲手把它系到肃宗的脖子上。这是开元年间罽宾国所进的贡品。
English: Xuanzong tied it to Su Zong's neck with his own hands. It was a tribute from the province of Yibin in the first year of the year.

古文：光明洁白，可照一室。
现代文：光明洁白，能把全屋照亮。
English: Bright and white, it can light up the whole house.

古文：视之则仙人玉女，云鹤绛节之形，摇动于其中。
现代文：仔细一看，则有仙子玉女、云鹤绛节的影象在里边摇动。
English: If you look closely, you can see the images of fairies and cranes swaying inside.

古文：及即位，宝库中往往有神光耀日。
现代文：等到肃宗即位以后，宝库中往往有神光闪耀。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Sozong, there was often divine light shining in the treasury.

古文：掌库者具以事告。帝曰： 岂非上清珠耶？ 
现代文：管库的人就向肃宗禀报了。肃宗说： 大概是上清珠吧？ 
English: The person in charge of the storehouse reported it to Su Zong. Su Zong said, "It's probably Shangqingzhu, right?"

古文：遂令出之。
现代文：于是令人把上清珠取出来。
English: As a result, the Upper Clear Pearl was taken out.

古文：绛纱犹在。
现代文：紫纱还在。
English: Zisha is still singing.

古文：因流泣。遍示近臣曰： 此我为儿时，明皇所赐也。 
现代文：于是肃宗热泪盈眶，让近臣们都来观看，说： 这是我小时候，明皇赐给我的。 
English: As a result, Sozong burst into tears and asked his close vassals to come and watch, saying, "This was given to me by Emperor Ming when I was a child.

古文：遂令贮之以翠玉函，置之于卧内。
现代文：于是命人把它珍藏在一个翠玉匣子里，放在自己的床榻前。
English: So he ordered someone to store it in a jade box and place it in front of his bed.

古文：四方忽有水旱兵革之灾，则虔恳祝之，无不应验也。
现代文：不管哪里突然间发生了水、旱或战乱之灾，肃宗就虔诚地向上清珠祈祷，没有不灵验的。
English: No matter where a sudden disaster of water, drought or war occurred, Su Zun piously prayed to the Pearl of Great Price, and nothing failed.

古文：守船者
现代文：守船者
English: The ship's keeper

古文：苏州华亭县，有陆四官庙。
现代文：苏州华亭县，有一座陆四官庙。
English: In Huating County, Suzhou, there is a Lu Shikang Temple.

古文：元和初，有盐船数十只于庙前。
现代文：元和初年，有几十只盐船停泊在庙前。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, there were dozens of salt ships moored in front of the temple.

古文：守船者夜中雨过，忽见庙前光明如火，乃窥之。见一物长数丈，大如屋梁，口弄一团火，或吞之。
现代文：夜半一场雨过，守船的忽然发现庙前光明如火，就偷偷地窥视，见一个长数丈大如屋梁的东西用口玩弄一团火。
English: After a rain in the middle of the night, the ship's keeper suddenly discovered that the front of the temple was bright as fire, so he secretly peered and saw a thing as tall as a roof beam playing with a fire with his mouth.

古文：船者不知何物，乃以竹篙遥掷之。
现代文：守船的不知这是何物，就把一根竹篙投过去。
English: The ship's guard, not knowing what it was, threw a bamboo pole over it.

古文：此物惊入草，光遗在地。
现代文：那东西受惊逃入草丛中，发光的东西留在原处。
English: The startled creature fled into the grass, leaving the glowing object where it was.

古文：前视之，乃一珠径寸，光耀射目。
现代文：上前一看，原来是一颗珍珠，直径一寸，光耀夺目。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a pearl with a diameter of one inch, shining dazzlingly.

古文：此人得之，恐光明为人所见，以衣裹之。
现代文：这个人得了宝珠，怕别人发现，就用衣服把宝珠包起来。
English: The man got the bead and, fearing that others would find it, he wrapped it in his clothes.

古文：光透出。
现代文：但是光亮仍然能透出来。
English: But the light still shines through.

古文：因思宝物怕秽，乃脱亵衣裹之，光遂不出。
现代文：想到宝物怕污秽，就脱下内衣来包它，果然包住了。
English: Thinking that the treasure was afraid of getting dirty, she took off her underwear to wrap it, and it was indeed wrapped.

古文：后无人知者。
现代文：以后没有人发现它。
English: No one has found it since.

古文：至扬州胡店卖之，获数千缗。
现代文：他拿到扬州胡人开的珍宝店里去卖，卖了好几千缗钱。
English: He took it to Yangzhou Hu Ren's treasure shop to sell it, and sold several thousand baht.

古文：问胡曰： 此何珠也？ 胡人不告而去。
现代文：他问胡人这是什么珠，胡人没有告诉他。
English: He asked the goose what kind of bead it was, but the goose did not tell him.

古文：严生
现代文：严生
English: Yan Sheng

古文：冯翊严生者，家于汉南，尝游岘山，得一物。
现代文：冯翊郡的严生，家在汉南，曾经在游岘山的时候得到一样东西。
English: Yan Sheng from Fenglu County, whose home is in Hannan, once got something while hiking in Lushan Mountain.

古文：其状若弹丸，色黑而大，有光，视之洁彻，若轻冰焉。
现代文：这东西状如弹丸，色黑，比弹丸大，发光，看上去光洁清彻，像冰块一样。
English: It was like a projectile, black, bigger than a projectile, glowing, and it looked smooth and clean, like ice.

古文：生持以示于人。
现代文：严生把它拿给人看，有人说这是一枚珍珠。
English: Yansheng showed it to people, and some said it was a pearl.

古文：或曰： 珠也。 生因以弹珠名之，常置于箱中。
现代文：严生就给它起名叫 弹珠 ，平常放到箱子里。
English: Yan Sheng named it "Pinball," and usually put it in a box.

古文：其后生游长安，乃于春明门逢一胡人，叩焉而言： 衣橐中有奇宝，愿有得一见。 
现代文：以后严生游长安，在春明门遇到一个胡人，那胡人拉住他说： 您身上带有奇宝，能让我看看吗？ 
English: Later, Yan Sheng traveled to Chang'an and met a Hu man at the Chunming Gate. The Hu man grabbed him and said, "You have a wonderful treasure on your body. Can you show it to me?

古文：生即以弹珠示之。
现代文：严生就把珠拿出来给他看。
English: Yan Sheng took out the bead and showed it to him.

古文：胡人捧之而喜曰： 此天下之奇货也，愿以三十万为价。 
现代文：胡人高兴地说： 这是天下的奇货呀，我愿意出三十万钱买它！ 
English: Hu Ren said happily, "This is a wonder of the world. I am willing to pay 300,000 yuan to buy it!"

古文：胡人曰： 我西国人。
现代文：严生说： 这宝贝有何用，能值这么多钱？ 胡人说： 我是西域人。
English: Yan Sheng said, "What is the use of this treasure, can it be worth so much money?" Hu said, "I am from the Western Regions.

古文：此乃吾国之至宝，国人谓之清水珠。
现代文：此珠是我国的至宝，国人叫它清水珠。
English: This pearl is the most precious treasure of our country. The people of our country call it the Clear Water Pearl.

古文：若置于浊水，泠然洞彻矣。
现代文：如果把它放到浑水里，水就会澄清。
English: If you put it in muddy water, the water will become clear.

古文：自亡此宝，且三岁，吾国之井泉尽浊，国人俱病。故此越海逾山，来中夏以求之。今果得于子矣。 
现代文：自从丢失此宝，将近三年了，我国的井泉全都浑浊了，国人都病了，所以才翻山过海来中国找它，现在果然从你这里找到了它。 
English: It's been almost three years since we lost this treasure. All the wells in our country are muddy and our people are sick. That's why we had to cross the mountains and the sea to China to find it. Now we've found it from you.

古文：胡人即命注浊水于缶，以珠投之。
现代文：胡人立即让人打来一盆浑水，把珠子扔进去。
English: Hu Ren immediately asked someone to fetch a basin of muddy water and throw the beads into it.

古文：俄而其水澹然清莹，纤毫可辨。
现代文：不大一会儿，水就变得清亮明彻，纤毫可辨。
English: In no time at all, the water became clear and crisp, barely discernible.

古文：生于是以珠与胡，获其价而去。
现代文：严生于是把珠子卖给胡人，获三十万而去。
English: As a result, Yan Sheng sold the beads to Hu Ren, received 300,000 yuan and left.

古文：张文珗
现代文：张文珗
English: Zhang Wenyi

古文：张文珗牧弘农日，捕获伐墓盗十余辈，中有一人，请间言事。
现代文：张文珗做弘农令的时候，曾捉到十多个盗墓贼。其中有一个要求单独和张文珗说话。
English: When Zhang Wenyu was the Hongnongling, he caught more than ten grave robbers. One of them asked to speak to Zhang Wenyu alone.

古文：公因屏吏独问。
现代文：张县令就让其他退下，单独审问。
English: Zhang County ordered the others to step down and be interrogated separately.

古文：对曰： 某愿以他事赎死。
现代文：那人说： 我愿意立功赎罪。
English: The man said, "I am willing to make merit to atone for my sins."

古文：卢氏县南山尧女冢，近亦曾闻人开发，获一大珠并玉碗，人亦不能计其直。
现代文：卢氏县南山尧帝女儿墓，最近听说被人盗了，盗去一颗大珍珠，还有一只玉碗，这两样东西都是无价之宝。
English: A large pearl and a jade bowl, both priceless treasures, were stolen from the tomb of Emperor Yongle's daughter in Nanshan, Lu County.

古文：余宝器极多，世莫之识也。 
现代文：还盗去许多其它宝物，都是当世少有人知的。 
English: They also stole many other treasures, which are little known today.

古文：公因遣吏按验，即冢果有开处。
现代文：张文珗于是就派人去查验，尧女墓果然被盗。
English: Zhang Wenyi then sent someone to investigate, and the woman's grave was indeed stolen.

古文：旋获其盗，考讯与前言无异。
现代文：张文珗很快便把盗墓者捕获归案，拷问的结果与前者说的完全一致。
English: Zhang Wenyu quickly arrested the grave robber, and the result of the interrogation was completely consistent with what the former said.

古文：及牵引其徒，称皆在商州冶务中。
现代文：等到让盗墓者供出他的同伙时，他说同伙都在商州的冶务中。
English: When he waited for the grave robber to provide his accomplices, he said that his accomplices were all in the metallurgical industry in Shangzhou.

古文：时商牧名卿也。
现代文：当时商州由一个名字叫卿的人掌管。
English: At that time, Shangzhou was under the control of a man named Sir.

古文：州移牒，公致书，皆怒而不遣。
现代文：张文珗派人带着公文和他的亲笔书信前去交涉，人家很生气，不肯把案犯和赃物送来。
English: Zhang Wenyi sent someone to negotiate with the official document and his personal letter. They were very angry and refused to send the criminal and the stolen goods.

古文：窃知者云，珠玉之器，皆入京师贵人家矣。
现代文：暗中知情的人说，那些珠玉之器，全都到了京城富贵之家了。
English: People with insider knowledge say that all of those precious objects have ended up in the homes of the rich and famous in Beijing.

古文：后自京东出，过卢氏，复问邑中，具如所说。
现代文：后来张文珗从京东出来，路过卢氏县，又向人们打听这事，人们也都这么说。
English: Later, when Zhang Wenyi came out of JD.com and passed through Lu County, he asked people about it, and people said the same thing.

古文：卫庆
现代文：卫庆
English: Wei Qing

古文：卫庆者，汝坟编户也。其居在温泉。
现代文：卫庆，是汝坟人。他的住处在温泉。
English: Wei Qing, is your gravedigger. His residence is in the hot springs.

古文：家世游堕，至庆，乃服田。
现代文：家世逐渐衰落，到了卫庆的时候，就沦为种田人了。
English: His family line gradually declined, and by the time of Weiqing, he was reduced to a farmer.

古文：尝戴月耕于村南古项城之下，倦憩荒陌。忽见白光焰焰，起于陇亩中，若流星。
现代文：有一次，他披星戴月在村南古项城下耕地，累了的时候停下来休息，忽然看见田地里白光闪闪，像流星一样。
English: On one occasion, he was working in the fields under the ancient city of Cangnan, wearing a crescent moon. When he was tired, he stopped to rest. Suddenly, he saw a white light flashing in the fields, like a meteor.

古文：庆掩而得之，遂藏诸怀。
现代文：他抓到那东西揣到怀里。
English: He caught it and cradled it in his arms.

古文：晓归视之，乃大珠也。
现代文：天亮回到家里取出来一看，原来是颗大珍珠。
English: When I got home at dawn and took it out, it turned out to be a large pearl.

古文：其径寸五分，莹无纤翳。
现代文：直径一寸五分，晶莹匀净，没有一点杂质。
English: With a diameter of one-fifth of an inch, it is crystal clear and uniform, without any impurities.

古文：乃裹以缣囊，缄以漆匣。
现代文：他用细绢把珠子包起来，装进一个漆匣子里。
English: He wrapped the beads in felt and put them in a lacquer box.

古文：曾示博物者。曰： 此合浦之宝也，得蓄之，纵未贵而当富矣。 
现代文：他曾把珠子拿给一个对宝物有研究的人看，那人说： 这是合浦那地方产的珍珠，拥有它，即使不做大官也会发大财的。 
English: He had shown the bead to a treasure hunter, who said: "This is a pearl from Pune. If you own it, you will make a fortune, even if you are not a high-ranking official."

古文：庆愈宝之，常置于卧内。
现代文：于是卫庆就更加珍视它，平常总把它放在卧室内。
English: As a result, Wei Qing treasured it even more and usually kept it in his bedroom.

古文：自是家产日滋，饭牛四百蹄，垦田二千亩，其余丝案他物称是。
现代文：从此，他的家产一天比一天增多。养牛一百多头，垦田两千多亩，其它物品也日见丰富，令人叫好。
English: Since then, his family's income has increased day by day, with more than a hundred head of cattle, more than two thousand mu of rice fields, and other goods have also become increasingly abundant, which is commendable.

古文：十年间，郁为富家翁。
现代文：十年的工夫，他就变成一个富翁。
English: In ten years' time, he became a rich man.

古文：至乾符末，庆忽疾，虽医巫并进，莫有征者。
现代文：到了乾符末年，卫庆忽然病了。虽然既求巫又求医，但是总不见好。
English: Towards the end of his life, Wei Qing suddenly fell ill. Although he sought both witchcraft and medical treatment, he did not get better.

古文：逾月，病且亟。
现代文：一个月之后，病得更重。
English: A month later, he became even more ill.

古文：忽闻枕前铿然有声，庆心动，使开匣。
现代文：有一天忽然听到枕头铿然有声，卫庆心里一动，急忙让人打开珠匣。
English: One day, he suddenly heard a loud noise coming from the pillow, and Wei Qing had a sudden impulse to have someone open the bead box.

古文：珠有璺若缕，色如墨矣。
现代文：一看，宝珠裂痕累累，色如墨黑。
English: At a glance, the bead is riddled with cracks and the color is inky black.

古文：数日而卒，珠亦亡去。自是家日削。
现代文：几天后他便死去，珠子也不翼而飞。从此，家境日衰。
English: He died a few days later, and the beads disappeared. From then on, the family went into decline.

古文：子复不肖，货鬻以供蒲酒之费，未释服，室已如悬磬矣。鬻饼胡
现代文：再加上他的子孙不肖，变卖家产换酒喝，还没脱下丧服，家里就一贫如洗了。鬻饼胡
English: Add to this the fact that his sons and grandsons were unsavoury, selling the family property to buy alcohol, and before they had even taken off their mourning clothes, the family was destitute.

古文：有举人在京城，邻居有鬻饼胡。
现代文：有一个举人住在京城里，邻居中有一个卖饼的胡人。
English: There was a nobleman who lived in the capital, and one of his neighbors was a goose that sold cakes.

古文：无妻。
现代文：胡人无妻。
English: A goose without a wife.

古文：数年，胡忽然病。
现代文：数年以后，胡人忽然病了。
English: A few years later, Hu Ren suddenly fell ill.

古文：生存问之，遗以汤药。
现代文：举人常去看他，并送些热水、草药给他。
English: People often visit him and bring him hot water and herbs.

古文：既而不愈。
现代文：但是他一直没好。
English: But he hasn't been well.

古文：临死告曰： 某在本国时大富，因乱，遂逃至此。
现代文：临死的时候他告诉举人说： 我在本国的时候很有钱，因为战乱就逃到这里来。
English: As he was about to die, he told the informant: "When I was in my home country, I was rich, so I fled here because of the war.

古文：本与一乡人约来相取，故久于此，不能别适。
现代文：本来和一个同乡约定一起来的，同乡到现在没到，所以我只能等在这里，不能到别处去。
English: Originally, I came with a fellow countryman, but he hasn't arrived yet, so I can only wait here, I can't go anywhere else.

古文：遇君哀念，无以奉答，其左臂中有珠，宝惜多年，今死无用矣，特此奉赠。
现代文：遇到您这样体恤我，我没有什么报答您，左胳膊皮下有颗珠子，珍惜了多年，如今死去也就用不着了，就送给您吧。
English: I have nothing to repay you for showing me such compassion. I have a bead under the skin of my left arm, which I have treasured for many years. Now I don't have to die, so I'll give it to you.

古文：死后乞为殡瘗。
现代文：我死后请把我埋葬。
English: When I die, please bury me.

古文：郎君得此，亦无用处。今人亦无别者。但知市肆之间，有西国胡客至者，即以问之，当大得价。 
现代文：您得此珠，也没啥用，此地人也再没有识货的，一旦听说有胡人到此，您就拿着珠子去问他，应该能卖个好价钱。 
English: It's no use for you to get this bead. The local people don't know anything about the goods. Once you hear that someone from Wu has come here, you should take the bead and ask him. You should be able to sell it for a good price.

古文：生许之。
现代文：举人同意了。
English: The judge agreed.

古文：既死，破其左臂，果得一珠。
现代文：胡人死了之后，举人剖开他的左胳膊，果然取出一颗珍珠。
English: After the goose died, someone cut open his left arm and pulled out a pearl.

古文：大如弹丸，不甚光泽。
现代文：珍珠大如弹丸，不怎么光泽。
English: The pearl is about the size of a marbles, not very shiny.

古文：生为营葬讫，将出市，无人问者。
现代文：举人把胡人埋葬之后，把珠子拿出去卖，根本没人问。
English: After everyone had buried the goose, they took the beads out and sold them, and no one asked about them.

古文：已经三岁。忽闻新有胡客到城，因以珠市之。
现代文：三年之后，忽听新近有胡人到来，举人就前去卖珠。
English: Three years later, when they heard that a Wu person had recently arrived, they all went to sell beads.

古文：胡见大惊曰： 郎君何得此宝珠？
现代文：那胡人见到珠子大吃一惊说： 您是怎么得到这宝珠的？
English: The Hu people were surprised to see the bead and said: How did you get this precious bead?

古文：此非近所有，请问得处。 
现代文：这不是此处所能有的，是从哪弄来的？ 
English: It's not available here. Where did it come from?

古文：生因说之。
现代文：举人于是将实情相告。
English: A whistleblower then came forward to reveal the truth.

古文：胡乃泣曰： 此是某乡人也。
现代文：胡人流泪说道： 那个人是我的同乡啊！
English: Hu Rong shed tears and said: That man is my fellow villager!

古文：本约同问此物，来时海上遇风，流转数国，故僣五六年。
现代文：我们本来约定同来寻这宝物，但是我在海上遇上大风，流转好几个国家，所以延误了五六年。
English: We had agreed to search for this treasure together, but I was delayed for five or six years because of the high winds at sea and travelling through several countries.

古文：到此方欲追寻，不意已死。 
现代文：到此之后刚要追寻，不料他已故去。 
English: After arriving here, they were about to track him down, but he had already passed away.

古文：遂求买之。
现代文：于是胡人提出了买珠的要求。
English: So the Hu people put forward a request to buy beads.

古文：生见珠不甚珍，但索五十万耳。
现代文：举人见珠子不太名贵，只要了五十万。
English: All things considered, the beads are not very valuable, only five hundred thousand.

古文：胡依价酬之。
现代文：胡人依价付钱。
English: Goats pay according to the price.

古文：生诘其所用之处。
现代文：举人问他此珠有何用。
English: He was asked what this bead was for.

古文：胡云： 汉人得法，取珠于海上，以油一石，煎二斗，其则削。
现代文：胡人说： 汉人能做一种法术，把珠子拿到海上去，用一石油煎它，煎二斗油之后，它就变成一把曲刀。
English: Hu said: The Chinese can do a kind of magic, take the bead to the sea, fry it with one oil, and after frying two buckets of oil, it will turn into a knife.

古文：以身入海不濡，龙神所畏，可以取宝。
现代文：拿着这把曲刀下海身上不湿，龙神害怕，可以获取珠宝。
English: If you go to sea with this knife, you will not get wet, you will not be afraid of dragons, and you can obtain jewels.

