古文：○徽宗四宣和元年春正月戊申朔，日下有五色云。
现代文：宣和元年春正月初一，太阳下出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Xuanhe, clouds of five colors appeared under the sun.

古文：壬子，进建安郡王枢为肃王，文安郡王杞为景王，并为太保。
现代文：初五，进建安郡王赵枢为肃王，文安郡王枷巳为景王，并为太保。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the king of Jianan County, Zhao Zu, was the king of Su, the king of Wen'an County, Yao Si, was the king of Jing, and the king of Taibo.

古文：乙卯，诏： 佛改号大觉金仙，余为仙人、大士。
现代文：初八，下诏： 佛改号大觉金仙，其余为仙人、大士。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: The Buddha's name was changed to Da Jue Jin Sen, and the others were Senren and Daishi.

古文：僧为德士，易服饰，称姓氏。
现代文：僧为德士，改易服饰，称姓氏。
English: Monks are to dress modestly, change their clothing, and change their surnames.

古文：寺为宫，院为观。 
现代文：寺为宫，院为观。 
English: The temple is the palace, and the courtyard is the audience.

古文：改女冠为女道，尼为女德。
现代文：改女冠为女道，尼为女德。
English: To change the crown of a woman to a woman's virtue, and vice to a woman's virtue.

古文：丁巳，金人使李善庆来，遣赵有开报聘，至登州而还。
现代文：初十，金军派遣李善庆来，我朝派赵有开回访金朝，到登州就回来了。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Chinese army sent Li Shanqing to visit the DPRK, and the DPRK sent Zhao Youkai to visit the DPRK, and he returned to Dangzhou.

古文：戊午，以余深为太宰兼门下侍郎，王黼为特进、少宰兼中书侍郎。
现代文：十一日，任命余深为太宰兼门下侍郎，王敞为特进、少宰兼中书侍郎。
English: On the 11th, Yu Sheng was appointed as Dazai and junior attendant, and Wang Bo was appointed as Tokujin, Shozai and junior attendant.

古文：乙丑，改湟州为乐州。
现代文：十八日，改惶州为乐州。
English: On the 18th, it was changed to Lezhou.

古文：癸酉，封子栋为温国公，侄有恭为永宁郡王。
现代文：二十六日，封儿子赵栋为温国公，侄赵有恭为永宁郡王。
English: On the 26th, Feng's son Zhao Dong became Wen Guogong, and his nephew Zhao Yougong became the king of Yongning County.

古文：乙亥，躬耕籍田。
现代文：二十八日，徽宗亲自耕农田，表示奉祀宗庙和劝农之意。
English: In the year of the Boar, the emperor himself cultivated the borrowed fields.

古文：罢裕民局。
现代文：罢除裕民局。
English: The Yu Min Bureau was dismissed.

古文：二月庚辰，改元。
现代文：二月初四，改元。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, the era name was changed.

古文：易宣和殿为保和殿。
现代文：改宣和殿为保和殿。
English: The Hall of Proclamation and Peace was renamed the Hall of Peace.

古文：戊戌，以邓洵武为少保。
现代文：二十二日，任命邓询武为少保。
English: On the 22nd, Deng Xuanwu was appointed as a junior guard.

古文：三月庚戌，蔡京等进安州所得商六鼎。
现代文：三月初四，蔡京等进献安州得到的商代六鼎。
English: On the fourth day of March, Cai Jing and others presented Anzhou with the sixth-largest trading volume.

古文：己未，以冯熙载为中书侍郎，范致虚为尚书左丞，翰林学士张邦昌为尚书右丞。
现代文：十三日，任命冯熙载为中书侍郎，范致虚为尚书左承，翰林学士张邦昌为尚书右承。
English: On the 13th, Feng Xizai was appointed as the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, Fan Zhihu as the left successor of Chinese calligraphy, and Hanlin Scholar Zhang Bangchang as the right successor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：诏天下知宫观道士与监司、郡县官以客礼相见。
现代文：下诏全国知宫观道士与监司、郡县官以客礼相见。
English: It is hereby decreed that all Zhigong Guan Daoists, supervisors, and county and prefectural officials across the country should meet each other with courtesy.

古文：童贯遣知熙州刘法出师攻统安城，夏人伏兵击之，法败殁，震武军受围。
现代文：童贯派遣熙州知州刘法出兵进攻统安城，夏军伏兵攻击，刘法失败战死，震武军被围困。
English: Tongran dispatched Liu Fa from Xizhou and Zhizhou to attack the city of Tong'an. Xia's army ambushed and attacked, Liu Fa was defeated and killed, and the shock troops were besieged.

古文：甲子，知登州宗泽坐建神霄宫不虔，除名编管。
现代文：十八日，登州知州宗泽因建造神霄宫不虔诚获罪，被除名编管。
English: On the 18th, Denshu Chishu Soze was found guilty of impiety for building Shinsyo-gu, and was removed from the editorial board.

古文：辛未，赐上舍生五十四人及第。
现代文：二十五日，赐上舍生五十四人及第。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, fifty-four sons and daughters were given up.

古文：甲戌，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：二十八日，皇后亲自养蚕。
English: On the 28th, the empress personally raised silkworms.

古文：夏四月丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, the sun is eclipsed.

古文：庚寅，童贯以鄜延、环庆兵大破夏人，平其三城。
现代文：十五日，童贯率领延、环庆军队大败夏军，平定三城。
English: On the 15th, Tongran led the Yan and Huanqing armies to defeat the Xia army and pacify the three cities.

古文：己亥，曲赦陕西、河东路。
现代文：二十四日，因特殊情况赦免陕西、河东路。
English: On the 24th, due to special circumstances, Shaanxi and Hedong Roads were pardoned.

古文：辛丑，进辅臣官一等。
现代文：二十六日，辅臣升官一级。
English: On the 26th, the assistant minister was promoted to the first grade.

古文：五月丙午朔，有物如龙形，见京师民家。
现代文：五月初一，有物像龙的形状，出现在京城百姓家里。
English: On the first day of May, something in the shape of a dragon appeared in the homes of people in the capital.

古文：丁未，诏德士并许入道学，依道士法。
现代文：初二，下诏德士都允许进人道学，依道士法。
English: In the second year of junior high school, the lower-ranking Taoist scholars are allowed to enter the humanities, according to the Taoist Law.

古文：丙辰，败夏人于震武。
现代文：十一日，在震武击败夏军。
English: On the 11th day, they defeated the Xia army in Shibu.

古文：壬申，班御制《九星二十八宿朝元冠服图》。
现代文：二十七日，颁布御制九星二十八宿朝元冠服卧。
English: On the 27th, the imperial system of nine stars and 28 quarters was promulgated.

古文：甲戌，虑囚。
现代文：二十九日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 29th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：是月，大水犯都城，西北有赤气亘天。
现代文：这个月，大水侵犯都城，西北方向有红气贯穿天空。
English: This month, high water invaded the capital city, and a red haze permeated the sky in the northwest.

古文：六月壬午，诏西边武臣为经略使者改用文臣。
现代文：六月初七，下诏西边武臣担任经略使的改用文臣。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the following edict changed the position of the western samurai to that of the civil servant.

古文：甲申，诏封庄周为微妙元通真君，列御寇为致虚观妙真君，仍行册命，配享混元皇帝。
现代文：初九，下诏封庄周为微妙元通真君，列御寇为致虚观妙真君，并且举行册封任命仪式，配享混元皇帝。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhuang Zhou was enthroned as the subtle Yuan Tong Zhen Jun, and the emperors and emperors were enthroned as the subtle Yuan Tong Zhen Jun, and the emperors and emperors were enthroned as the subtle Yuan Tong Zhen Jun, and the emperors and emperors were enthroned as the subtle Yuan Tong Zhen Jun.

古文：己亥，夏国遣使纳款，诏六路罢兵。
现代文：二十四日，夏国派遣使臣纳款归顺，下诏六路罢兵。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Xia Guo dispatched an envoy to force Na to surrender, and ordered a six-way strike.

古文：秋七月甲寅，以童贯为太傅。
现代文：秋七月初十，任命童贯为太傅。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Tong Rong was appointed as Taifu.

古文：八月戊寅，诏诸路未方田处并令方量，均定租课。
现代文：八月初四，下诏各路没有实行方田法的地方一律命令进行丈量，均定租课。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the year, all the places that did not implement the Fang Tian Law were ordered to carry out measurement and uniformly set the rent.

古文：丁酉，以神霄宫成，降德音于天下。
现代文：二十三日，因神霄宫修成向全国颁布德音文告。
English: On the 23rd, due to the completion of the construction of Shenxiao Palace, the Deyin Message was issued to the whole country.

古文：范致虚以母忧去位。
现代文：范致虚因遭母丧离职。
English: Fan Zhihu resigned due to the death of his mother.

古文：九月甲辰朔，燕蔡京于保和新殿。辛酉，大飨明堂。
现代文：九月初一，在保和新殿宴请蔡京。初八，大规模祭祀明堂。
English: On the first day of September, Cai Jing was invited to a banquet at Bao and Xinden. On the eighth day of the first month, a large-scale ritual was held at Myeongdong.

古文：癸亥，幸道德院观金芝，遂幸蔡京第。
现代文：二十日，到道德院观赏金芝，于是到蔡京府邸。
English: On the 20th, he went to the Moral Academy to watch Jin Zhi, and then went to Cai Jing's residence.

古文：丁卯，以淮康军节度使蔡攸为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十四日，任命淮康军节度使蔡枚为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 24th, Huai Kangjun, the military governor, appointed Cai Mei as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，以《绍述熙丰政事书》布告天下。
现代文：冬十月初一，把绍述熙丰政事书布告全国。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the announcement of the promulgation of the Shaoshu Xi Feng Political Affairs Book was made to the whole country.

古文：十一月癸丑，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十一月十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day of the 11th month, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：甲寅，飨太庙。
现代文：十二日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the twelfth day, the ritual was held at Taimiao.

古文：乙卯，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：十三日，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the 13th, the god Haotian was sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：甲子，诏东南诸路水灾，令监司、郡守悉心振救。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：东南各路发生水灾，命令监司、郡守尽心贩济救灾。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Floods occurred on all roads in the southeast, and the supervisors and county governors were ordered to do their best to help with disaster relief.

古文：戊辰，以淮甸旱，饥民失业，遣监察御史察访。
现代文：二十六日，因淮甸早灾，饥民失业，派遣监察御史视察访问。
English: On the 26th, due to the early disaster in Huai Tien and the unemployment of hungry people, the inspector was sent to inspect and visit.

古文：张邦昌为尚书左丞，翰林学士王安中为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命张邦昌为尚书左承，翰林学士王安中为尚书右承。
English: Zhang Bangchang was appointed as the left successor of Shangshu, and Hanlin Scholar Wang Anzhong as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：时朱勔以花石纲媚上，东南骚动，太学生邓肃进诗讽谏，诏放归田里。
现代文：当时韧刃用花石纲献媚皇上，东南骚扰震动，太学生邓肃进诗讽谏，被诏令遣回家乡。
English: At that time, Duan blade used the flower and stone group to flatter the emperor, the southeast was harassed and shocked, and the student Deng Sujin was sent home by imperial edict.

古文：十二月甲戌，诏京东东路盗贼窃发，令东、西路提刑督捕之。
现代文：十二月初二，下诏：京东东路盗贼暗暗地兴起，命令京东东、西路提刑官督促捕获他们。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the following edict was issued: The thieves of East Jingdong Road surreptitiously arose and ordered the criminal officers of East Jingdong Road and West Jingdong Road to urge their capture.

古文：辛卯，大雨雹。
现代文：十九日，大规模降冰雹。
English: On a bitterly cold day, large hailstones fell.

古文：丙申，帝数微行，正字曹辅上书极论之，编管郴州。
现代文：二十四日，徽宗数次便装出行，正字官曹辅上书极论此事，被编管郴州。
English: On the 24th, Huizong traveled several times in plain clothes. Cao Fu, the official of the orthography, wrote a letter to discuss the matter and was put in charge of Zhangzhou.

古文：是岁，京西饥，淮东大旱，遣官振济。
现代文：这一年，京西发生饥荒，淮东大早，派官进行贩济。
English: In the same year, a famine occurred in the west of Beijing, and the east of Huai sent officials to engage in economic trafficking.

古文：岚州黄河清。
现代文：岚州段黄河清澈见底。
English: The bottom of the Yellow River in Luzhou is crystal clear.

古文：升邢州为信德，陈州为淮宁，襄州为襄阳，庆州为庆阳，安州为德安，郓州为东平，赵州为庆源府；泸州为泸川，睦州为建德，岳州为岳阳，宁州为兴宁，宜州为庆远，光州为光山，均州为武当军。
现代文：升邢州为信德，陈州为淮宁，襄州为襄阳，庆州为庆阳，宁州为兴宁，宜州为庆远，光州为光山，均州为武当军。
English: Shengzhou is Shunde, Chenzhou is Huaining, Xiangzhou is Xiangyang, Gyeongzhou is Gyeongyang, Ningzhou is Xingning, Yizhou is Qingyuan, Gwangju is Gwangsan, and Jeonju is Wudangjun.

古文：二年春正月癸亥，追封蔡确为汝南郡王。
现代文：宣和二年春正月二十二日，追封蔡确为汝南郡王。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the second year of Xuanhe, Cai Zhengyi was posthumously crowned the king of Runan County.

古文：甲子，罢道学。
现代文：二十三日，罢除道学。
English: On the 23rd, he was expelled from the Taoist School.

古文：二月乙亥，遣赵良嗣使金国。
现代文：二月初四，派遣赵良嗣出使金国。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Zhao Liangzi was dispatched as an envoy to China.

古文：唐恪罢。
现代文：唐烙被罢免。
English: Tang Yao was removed from office.

古文：庚辰，以宁远军节度使梁子美为开府仪同三司。
现代文：初九，任命宁远军节度使梁子美为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Ningyuan Army appointed Liang Zimei as the head of the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：戊子，令所在赡给淮南流民，谕还之。
现代文：十七日，命令各地供给淮南流民饮食，劝谕他们回到家乡。
English: On the 17th, he ordered all regions to provide food and drink to the Huainan refugees, and advised them to return to their hometowns.

古文：甲午，诏别修《哲宗史》。
现代文：二十三日，下诏另外修撰哲宗史。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued to revise the history of the Tetsu sect.

古文：三月壬寅，赐上舍生二十一人及第。
现代文：三月初二，赐给上舍生二十一人及第。
English: On the second day of the third month, the twenty-first and last place was given to Shang Shosheng.

古文：乙卯，改熙河兰湟路为熙河兰廓路。
现代文：十五日，改熙河兰惶路为熙河兰廓路。
English: On the 15th, the Heihe Lanren Road was changed to the Heihe Lanku Road.

古文：夏四月丙子，诏江西、广东两界群盗啸聚，添置武臣提刑，路分都监各一员。
现代文：夏四月初六，下诏：江西、广东两路交界，群盗被号召起来，集合举事，命令添置武臣提刑、路分都监各一名。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: At the junction of the Jiangxi and Guangdong roads, the bandits were called up, gathered to take up the cause, and ordered to add one person each from the military tribune and the road inspector.

古文：五月庚子朔，以淑妃刘氏为贵妃。
现代文：五月初一，以淑妃刘氏为贵妃。
English: On the first day of May, Shu Fei Liu was made an honorary consort.

古文：己酉，日中有黑子。
现代文：初十，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：丁巳，祭地于方泽，降德音于诸路。
现代文：十八日，在方泽祭地，向各路颁降德音文告。
English: On the 18th, at the Fonze Festival Grounds, a proclamation was issued to all roads.

古文：布衣朱梦说上书论宦寺权太重，编管池州。
现代文：布衣朱梦说上书议论宦官权力太重，编管池州。
English: Clothed Zhu Meng said that the discussion on the eunuch's power was too heavy in the letter.

古文：戊辰，诏宗室有文行才术者，令大宗正司以闻。
现代文：二十九日，下诏宗室子弟中有文行才术者，命令大宗正司报告朝廷。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Zhao Zong's younger brother, who was a talented writer, ordered Daizong Zhengyi to report to the imperial court.

古文：六月癸酉，诏开封府振济饥民。
现代文：六月初四，下诏开封府贩济饥民。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th lunar month, the imperial edict was issued to open up the capital to the hungry.

古文：丁丑，太白昼见。
现代文：初八，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 30th, the too-white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：戊寅，蔡京致仕，仍朝朔望。
现代文：初九，蔡京退休，仍然逢一日、十五日朝见皇帝。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Cai Jing retired, but still went to see the emperor every morning and on the 15th day.

古文：辛巳，诏自今动改元丰法制，论以大不恭。
现代文：十二日，下诏：从今以后违反和抵制元丰法制，以大不恭罪论处。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: From now on, violating and resisting the Yuanfeng legal system will be punished with the crime of disloyalty.

古文：丙戌，诏三省、枢密院额外吏职，并从裁汰。
现代文：十七日，下诏： 三省、枢密院定额外的吏职，一律裁汰。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: The three provinces and the Privy Council shall appoint additional officials, and all of them shall be eliminated.

古文：及有妄言惑众、稽违诏令者，重论之。
现代文：那些妄言惑众，稽违诏令者，加重处理。 
English: Those who make false statements to mislead the public and violate the edict will be dealt with more severely.

古文：诏诸司总辖、提点之类，非元丰法并罢。
现代文：下诏： 各司总辖、提点之类，不是元丰法制规定的一律废除。 
English: The following edict: The provisions of the Yuanfeng legal system, such as the general jurisdiction of each division and the raising of points, shall not be abolished.

古文：丁亥，复寺院额。
现代文：十八日，恢复寺院定额。
English: On the 18th, the temple quota was restored.

古文：甲午，罢礼制局并修书五十八所。
现代文：二十五日，罢除礼制局并修书机构五十八所。
English: On the 25th, the Bureau of Etiquette was abolished and fifty-eight book-repairing institutions were abolished.

古文：秋七月壬子，罢文臣起复。
现代文：秋七月十四日，罢除文臣起复。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the dismissal of the civil servants was revoked.

古文：己未，罢医、算学。
现代文：二十一日，罢除医学、算学。
English: On the 21st, medicine and mathematics were abolished.

古文：丙寅，封子楒为英国公。
现代文：二十八日，封儿子赵憾为英国公。
English: On the 28th, Fong's son Zhao Sheng became an English prince.

古文：八月庚辰，诏减定医官额。
现代文：八月十二日，下诏减定医官名额。
English: On August 12, the next edict reduced the number of medical officers.

古文：乙未，诏监司所举守令非其人，或废法不举，令廉访使者劾之。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：监司所推举的守令不适合，或者废法不举，命令廉访使者弹勃他们。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: if the supervision order proposed by the supervisor was not suitable, or if the law was not repealed, the emissary of the anti-corruption investigation was ordered to fire them.

古文：九月壬寅，金人遣勃堇等来。
现代文：九月初四，金朝派遣勃荃等来。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of September, the Kim dynasty dispatched Bo Tsuen and others.

古文：乙巳，复德士为僧。
现代文：初七，恢复德士为僧。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, he was reinstated as a monk.

古文：辛亥，大飨明堂。
现代文：十三日，大规模祭祀明堂。
English: On the 13th, a large-scale ritual was held at Myodo.

古文：丙辰，遣马政使金国。
现代文：十八日，派遣马政出使金国。
English: On the 18th, Ma Zheng was dispatched as an envoy to China.

古文：癸亥，余深加少傅。
现代文：二十五日，余深加官少傅。
English: On the 25th, Yu Sheng was promoted to junior official.

古文：宴童贯第。
现代文：在童贯府邸宴饮。
English: Banquet and drinks at the Tongran Residence.

古文：冬十月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：以河东节度使梁师成为太尉。
现代文：任命河东节度使梁师成为太尉。
English: He appointed Hedong Jiedu to make Liang Shi a lieutenant.

古文：建德军青溪妖贼方腊反，命谭稹讨之。
现代文：建德军青溪妖贼方腊造反，命令谭棋率军讨伐。
English: The German army in Qingxi rebelled and ordered Tan Qi to lead the army in a crusade.

古文：十一月己亥，余深罢，仍少傅，授镇西军节度使、知福州。
现代文：十一月初二，余深被罢免，仍为少傅，授给他镇西军节度使的官衔，并为福州知州。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Yu Sheng was removed from his post, but he was still Shao Fu. He was given the official title of Zhen Xi Jun Jie Du Shi, and became Fuzhou Zhizhou.

古文：庚戌，以王黼为少保、太宰兼门下侍郎。
现代文：十三日，任命王敞为少保、太宰兼门下侍郎。
English: On the thirteenth day, Wang Chang was appointed as Shobo, Dazai and Jiro.

古文：己未，两浙都监蔡遵、颜坦击方腊，死之。
现代文：二十二日，两浙都监蔡遵、颜坦攻击方腊，被打死。
English: On the 22nd, two Zhejiang supervisors, Cai Zun and Yan Tan, attacked Fang La and were killed.

古文：十二月丁亥，改谭稹为两浙制置使，以童贯为江、淮、荆、浙宣抚使，讨方腊。
现代文：十二月二十一日，改谭棋为两浙置使，任命童贯为江、淮、荆、浙宣抚使，讨伐方腊。
English: On December 21st, Tangqi was changed into two Zhejing envoys, and Tongran was appointed as the envoy of Jiang, Huai, Jing, and Zhe Xuanfu to fight against Fangla.

古文：己丑，以少傅郑居中权领枢密院。
现代文：二十三日，任命少傅郑居中暂领枢密院。
English: On the 23rd, Zheng Juzhong was appointed as the provisional leader of the Privy Council.

古文：庚寅，诏访两浙民疾苦。
现代文：二十四日，下诏访问两浙百姓疾苦。
English: On the 24th, Xi Jinping paid a visit to the people of Zhejiang suffering from various ailments.

古文：是月，方腊陷建德，又陷歙州，东南将郭师中战死。陷杭州，知州赵霆遁，廉访使者赵约诟贼死。
现代文：这个月，方腊攻陷建德，又攻陷歙州，东南将领郭师中战死；方腊攻陷杭州，知州赵霆逃跑，廉访使者赵约辱骂盗贼被杀死。
English: This month, Fangla invaded and occupied Jiande, and invaded and occupied Zhangzhou, and the Southeastern General led the Guo Division and was killed in battle; Fangla invaded and occupied Hangzhou, Chizhou Zhao Ting fled, and the emissary of the ICAC, Zhao You, insulted the thieves and was killed.

古文：是岁，淮南旱。
现代文：这一年，淮南发生早灾。
English: This year, an early disaster occurred in Huainan.

古文：夏国、真腊入贡。
现代文：夏国、真腊来进贡。
English: Xia Guo and Zhenla came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月壬寅，邓洵武卒。
现代文：宣和三年春正月初六，邓询武去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Xuanhe, Deng Xuanwu passed away.

古文：戊午，以安康郡王栩为太保，进封济王；镇国公模为开府仪同三司，进封乐安郡王。
现代文：二十二日，任命安康郡王赵栩为太保，进封为济王；镇国公赵模为开府仪同三司，进封为乐安郡王。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed the king of Ankang County, Zhao Tuo, as Taibo, and the king of Jinfeng as Ji; the prince of Zhenguo County, Zhao Mo, as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the king of Le'an County.

古文：己未，诏淮南、江东、福建各权添置武臣提刑一员。
现代文：二十三日，下诏淮南、江东、福建各地暂时添置武臣提刑一名。
English: On the 23rd, Huainan, Jiangdong and Fujian provinces were ordered to temporarily add one person to the punishment list.

古文：辛酉，罢苏、杭州造作局及御前纲运。
现代文：二十五日，废罢苏州、杭州造作局及御前纲运。
English: On the 25th, the Suzhou and Hangzhou Construction Bureaus, as well as the Guzheng Program, were abolished.

古文：乙丑，罢西北兵更戌。
现代文：二十九日，废罢西北军队更戍法。
English: On the 29th, the Northwest Army Law was repealed.

古文：罢木石彩色等场务。
现代文：废罢木石彩色等场务。
English: Wastes, rubble, stones, and other colored materials.

古文：是月，方腊陷婺州，又陷衢州，守臣彭汝方死之。
现代文：这个月，方腊攻陷姿州，又攻陷瞥州，守臣彭汝方战死。
English: This month, Fangla invaded and occupied Zizhou, and also invaded and occupied Biezhou. The warlord Peng Rufang was killed in the battle.

古文：二月庚午，赵霆坐弃杭州，贬吉阳军。
现代文：二月初五，赵霆因放弃杭州获罪，贬滴吉阳军。
English: On the fifth day of February, Zhao Ting was found guilty of abandoning Hangzhou, and the Jiyang Army was defeated.

古文：罢方田。
现代文：罢除方田法。
English: Repeal of the Hota Law.

古文：甲戌，降诏招抚方腊。
现代文：初九，降诏招抚方腊。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the emperor abdicated and invited Fang La.

古文：乙酉，罢天下三舍及宗学、辟雍、诸路提举学事官。
现代文：二十日，罢除全国三舍及宗学、辟雍、各路提举学事官。
English: On the 20th, the national three houses and the patriarchal school, the Yong Dynasty, and the various roads were abolished.

古文：癸巳，赦天下。
现代文：二十八日，赦免全国。
English: On the 28th, the amnesty was extended to the whole country.

古文：是月，方腊陷处州。
现代文：这个月，方腊攻陷处州。
English: This month, Fangla captured Zhouzhou.

古文：淮南盗宋江等犯淮阳军，遣将讨捕，又犯京东、河北，入楚、海州界，命知州张叔夜招降之。
现代文：淮南盗贼宋江等进犯淮阳军，派遣将领讨捕，宋江又进犯京东、河北，进人楚州、海州境内，命令知州张叔夜招降宋江。
English: Song Jiang, the thief of Huainan, invaded the Huaiyang Army and dispatched generals to discuss the arrest. Song Jiang also invaded Jingdong and Hebei, entered the territory of Chuzhou and Haizhou, and ordered Zhang Shu of Zhizhou to recruit Song Jiang at night.

古文：三月丁未，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：三月十二日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On March 12th, he went to Shiei-den to take the entrance exam.

古文：庚申，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身六百三十人。
现代文：二十五日，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身六百三十人。
English: On the 25th, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was given the names of 630 new recruits and graduates.

古文：夏四月丙寅，贵妃刘氏薨。
现代文：夏四月初二，贵妃刘氏逝世。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Princess Liu passed away.

古文：甲戌，青溪令陈光以盗发县内弃城，伏诛。
现代文：初十，清溪县令陈光因盗贼在本县兴起，放弃县城，被处以死刑。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Chen Guang, the governor of Qingxi County, was sentenced to death for abandoning the county seat due to the rise of thieves in the county.

古文：庚寅，忠州防御使辛兴宗擒方腊于青溪。
现代文：二十六日，忠州防御使辛兴宗在青溪捕捉方腊。
English: On the 26th, the defense of Chungju made Xin Xingzong capture Fangla in Qingxi.

古文：诏二浙、江东被贼州县给复三年。
现代文：下诏二浙、江东遭受盗贼破坏州县免除三年租税。
English: According to the following edict, counties and prefectures in Zhejiang and Jiangdong that have been damaged by thieves will be exempted from paying taxes for three years.

古文：癸巳，汝州牛生麒麟。
现代文：二十九日，汝州牛生麒麟。
English: On the 29th, a cow-born unicorn was born in Ruzhou.

古文：五月戊戌，以郑居中领枢密院。
现代文：五月初五，任命郑居中领枢密院。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, Zheng Ju was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：己亥，诏杭、越、江宁守臣并带安抚使。
现代文：初六，下诏杭州、越州、江宁府守臣并带安抚使职衔。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he was awarded the title of Hangzhou, Yuezhou and Jiangning governor with the title of pacifier.

古文：甲辰，追册贵妃刘氏为皇后，谥曰明节。
现代文：十一日，追册贵妃刘氏为皇后，溢号为明节。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Princess Liu was registered as empress, and the overflow was the Ming Festival.

古文：改睦州、建德军为严州、遂安军，歙州为徽州。
现代文：改睦州建德军为严州遂安军，款州为徽州。
English: The German troops stationed in Mutsu Province were changed to Yan Province and Sui and An Provinces, and the Chinese troops were changed to Huizhou Province.

古文：丙午，金人再遣曷鲁等来。
现代文：十三日，金国再派易鲁等人来。
English: On the 13th, Kim Guo again sent Ilu and others.

古文：戊申，以兴宁军节度使刘宗元为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十五日，任命兴宁军节度使刘宗元为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 15th, the commander of the Xingning Army appointed Liu Zongyuan as the head of the three departments.

古文：癸亥，诏三省觉察台谏罔上背公者，取旨谴责。
现代文：三十日，下诏：三省发现台谏官欺同皇上、违背公论者，取旨谴责。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued: the three provinces found that the Taiwan eunuchs had deceived the emperor and violated public opinion, and issued an order to condemn them.

古文：陈过庭、张汝霖以乞罢御前使唤及岁进花果，为王黼所劾，并窜贬。
现代文：陈过庭、张汝霖因为请求罢除御前使唤及岁进花果，被王敞所弹勃，都遭贬默。
English: Chen Xiuyuan and Zhang Rulin were silenced because they requested the dismissal of the imperial envoy and the year-old flower and fruit, which was played by Wang Zhan.

古文：闰月丙寅，减诸州曹掾官。
现代文：闰五月初三，精减各州曹椽官。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, officials of the various states will be reduced.

古文：辛未，立医官额。
现代文：初八，确立医官名额。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, establish the number of medical officers.

古文：甲戌，复应奉司，命王黼及内侍梁师成领之。
现代文：十一日，恢复应奉司，命令王敞及宦官梁师成主管。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Zhan and the eunuch Liang Shicheng were ordered to resume their duties.

古文：戊寅，虑囚。
现代文：十五日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 25th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：六月，河决恩州清河埽。
现代文：六月，黄河在恩州清河塌决口。
English: In June, the Yellow River burst its banks in Qinghe, Enzhou.

古文：秋七月丁卯，振温、处等八州。
现代文：秋七月初五，贩济温州、处州等八州。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, the merchants from Wenzhou, Wenzhou and other eight provinces arrived.

古文：丁亥，废纯、滋等十二州。
现代文：二十五日，废除纯、滋等十二州。
English: On the 25th, twelve prefectures, including Chun and Jie, were abolished.

古文：戊子，童贯等俘方腊以献。
现代文：二十六日，童贯等俘虏方腊献给朝廷。
English: On the 26th, Tong Quan and other captives presented Fang La to the imperial court.

古文：是月，洛阳、京畿讹言有黑眚如人，或如犬，夜出掠小儿食之，二岁乃息。
现代文：这个月，洛阳、京瓷一带谣传有黑告像人，有的说像犬，夜晚出来劫掠小孩吃掉，二年才停止。
English: This month, there were rumors in Luoyang and the Kyocera area that there were black informers who looked like people, and some said they looked like dogs, who came out at night to rob and eat children, and only stopped after two years.

古文：八月甲辰，曲赦两浙、江东、福建、淮南路。
现代文：八月十二日，特赦两浙、江东、福建淮南路。
English: On August 12th, the two Zhejiang, Jiangdong and Fujian Huainan Roads were amnestied.

古文：乙巳，以童贯为太师，谭稹加节度。
现代文：十三日，任命童贯为太师，谭棋加官节度使。
English: On the 13th, Tong Quan was appointed grandmaster, and Tan Qi was promoted to the post of regent.

古文：丁未，祔明节皇后神主于别庙。丙辰，方腊伏诛。
现代文：十五日，在别庙附祭明节皇后神主。二十四日，方腊被处死。
English: On the fifteenth day, a memorial service was held for the empress deity of the Ming Festival at another temple. On the twenty-fourth day, Fang La was executed.

古文：九月丙寅，以王黼为少傅，郑居中为少师。
现代文：九月初五，任命王敞为少傅，郑居中为少师。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, Wang Chang was appointed as a young master, and Zheng Ju Zhong as a young teacher.

古文：庚午，进执政官一等。
现代文：初九，执政官升官一级。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, the consul was promoted to the first level.

古文：辛未，大飨明堂。
现代文：初十，大祀明堂。
English: On the tenth day of the new year, Daisuki Myodo will be closed.

古文：冬十月甲寅，诏自今赃吏狱具，论决勿货。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，下诏从今以后赃吏罪状清楚，论决勿贷。
English: On the 23rd day of winter in October, the following edict was issued: From now on, the offender's guilt is clear, and it must not be discussed.

古文：童贯复领陕西、两河宣抚。
现代文：童贯又领陕西、两河宣抚使。
English: Tong Quan also led Shaanxi and the two rivers as the envoy.

古文：十一月丁丑，冯熙载罢。
现代文：十一月十六日，冯熙载被罢免。
English: On November 16, Feng Xizai was dismissed.

古文：以张邦昌为中书侍郎，王安中为尚书左丞，翰林学士承旨李邦彦为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命张邦昌为中书侍郎，王安中为尚书左承，翰林学士承旨李邦彦为尚书右承。
English: Zhang Bangchang was appointed as the second-in-command of Chinese calligraphy, Wang Anru as the second-in-command of Chinese calligraphy, and Li Bangyan as the third-in-command of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：辛巳，封子桐为仪国公。
现代文：二十日，封儿子赵桐为仪国公。
English: On the 20th, Fong's son Zhao Tong became the Prince of Yi Province.

古文：壬午，张商英卒。
现代文：二十一日，张商英逝世。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Shangying passed away.

古文：十二月辛卯朔，日中有黑子。
现代文：十二月初一，太阳表面有黑点。
English: On the first day of December, a black spot appeared on the surface of the sun.

古文：壬子，进封广平郡王构为康王，乐安郡王模为祁王，并为太保。
现代文：二十二日，进封广平郡王赵构为康王，乐安郡王赵模为祁王，并为太保。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Jie, the king of Guangping County in Jinfeng, was named Kang Wang, and Zhao Miao, the king of Le'an County, was named Xing Wang and Tai Bao.

古文：是岁，诸路蝗。
现代文：这一年，各路出现蝗灾。
English: This year, there was a plague of locusts in every direction.

古文：四年春正月丁卯，以蔡攸为少保，梁师成为开府仪同三司。
现代文：宣和四年春正月初七，任命蔡枚为少保，梁师成为开府仪同三司。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first month of the fourth year of Xuanhe, Cai Mei was appointed as a minor protector, and Liang Shi became the chief of the three departments of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：癸酉，金人破辽中京，辽主北走。
现代文：十三日，金军攻破辽朝中京，辽主北逃。
English: On the 13th, the Chinese army broke through the Liao dynasty in Beijing, and the Liao ruler fled north.

古文：二月丙申，以旱祷于广圣宫，即日雨。
现代文：二月初七，因早灾在广圣宫祈祷，当日降雨。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month, due to the early disaster, it rained on the day of the prayer at the Guang Sheng Gong.

古文：癸卯，雨雹。
现代文：十四日，降冰雹。
English: On the 14th, hail fell.

古文：丙午，以吴国公植为开府仪同三司，进封信都郡王。
现代文：十七日，任命吴国公赵植为开府仪同三司，进封为信都郡王。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Zhi, the prince of the State of Wu, was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong and the king of Xindu County.

古文：三月辛酉，幸秘书省，遂幸太学，赐秘书少监翁彦深、王时雍、国子祭酒韦寿隆、司业权邦彦章服，馆职、学官、诸生恩锡有差。
现代文：三月初二，到秘书省，于是到太学，赐给秘书少监翁彦深和王时雍、国子祭酒韦寿隆、司业权邦彦带有图文标志的字服，馆职、学官、生员得到不等的恩赐。
English: On the second day of March, he went to the Ministry of Secretaries, and then went to Taixue. He gave the secretary the junior supervisors Weng Yanshen and Wang Shiyong, the son of the state, Wei Shulong, and the secretary, Guanquan Bangyan, a lettered uniform with a pictorial logo. The librarians, academic officials, and students received different gifts.

古文：丙子，辽人立燕王淳为帝。
现代文：十七日，辽朝立燕王耶律淳为帝。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the Liao Dynasty established the Yan King, Yerutun, as emperor.

古文：金人来约夹攻，命童贯为河北、河东路宣抚使，屯兵于边以应之，且招谕幽、燕。
现代文：金国来人相约夹攻辽朝，朝廷命令童贯为河北、河东路宣抚使，在边境屯兵响应，并且招谕幽燕。
English: The people of Jin Province agreed to attack the Liao Dynasty, and the imperial court ordered Tong Rong to serve as the envoy of Hebei and Hedong, to respond with troops stationed at the border, and to invite Yu Yan.

古文：夏四月丙午，诏置补完校正文籍局，录三馆书置宣和楼及太清楼、秘阁。
现代文：夏四月十八日，下诏设置补完校正文籍局，收集三馆书籍设置宣和殿及太清楼、秘阁。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, the next edict was issued to complete the correction of the Literature Bureau, collect the books of the three libraries, and set up the Xuanhe Hall, the Taiqing Building, and the Secret Cabinet.

古文：又令郡县访遗书。
现代文：又命令州县访求遗书。
English: He also ordered to visit the county to ask for a suicide note.

古文：五月壬戌，以高俅为开府仪同三司。
现代文：五月初五，任命高球为开府仪同三司。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Gaoqiu was appointed as the leader of the three departments of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：丁卯，封子柄为昌国公。
现代文：初十，封儿子赵柄为昌国公。
English: At the age of ten, his son Zhaohang became the Prince of Changguo.

古文：甲戌，嗣濮王仲御薨。
现代文：十七日，嗣攫王赵仲御逝世。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Zhongyou, the heir to the throne, died.

古文：乙亥，以蔡攸为河北、河东宣抚副使。
现代文：十八日，任命蔡枚为河北、河东宣抚副使。
English: On the 18th, Cai Mai was appointed as the deputy envoy of Hebei and Hedong.

古文：庚辰，以常德军节度使谭稹为太尉。
现代文：二十三日，任命常德军节度使谭棋为太尉。
English: On the 23rd, the commander of the Changde Army appointed Tan Qi as a second lieutenant.

古文：童贯至雄州，令都统制种师道等分道进兵。
现代文：童贯到达雄州，命令都统制种师道等分道进兵。
English: When Tongran arrived in Xiongzhou, he ordered the central government to set up a system of divisions for recruiting soldiers.

古文：癸未，辽人击败前军统制杨可世于兰沟甸。
现代文：二十六日，辽军在兰沟甸击败前军统制杨可世。
English: On the 26th, the Liao army defeated the former army commander Yang Kosei in Lan Goudian.

古文：乙酉，封开府仪同三司、江夏郡王仲爰为嗣濮王。
现代文：二十八日，封开府仪同三司、江夏郡王赵仲爱为嗣攫王。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Zhong'ai, the king of Jiangxia County and the third secretary of Fukai prefectural government, became the heir to the throne.

古文：丙戌，虑囚。
现代文：二十九日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 29th, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：杨可世与辽将萧干战于白沟，败绩。
现代文：杨可世与辽军将领萧在白沟交战，失败。
English: Yang Keshi and the Liao general Xiao fought in Baigou and failed.

古文：丁亥，辛兴宗败于范村。
现代文：三十日，辛兴宗在范村被辽军打败。
English: On the 30th, Xin Xingzong was defeated by the Liao army in Fan village.

古文：六月己丑，种师道退保雄州，辽人追击至城下。
现代文：六月初二，种师道退保雄州，辽军追到城下。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the Liao army chased the Liao army to the outskirts of the city.

古文：帝闻兵败，惧甚，遂诏班师。
现代文：徽宗听到兵败的消息很害怕，于是下诏班师。
English: When Huizong heard the news of the military defeat, he was very scared, so he resigned from his position.

古文：壬寅，以王黼为少师。
现代文：十五日，任命王敞为少师。
English: On the 15th, Wang Chang was appointed as a junior teacher.

古文：是月，辽燕王淳死，萧干等立其妻萧氏。
现代文：这个月，辽燕王耶律淳去世，萧等立他的妻子萧氏即位。
English: This month, Liao Yan's king, Ye Lu Chun, died, and Xiao waited for his wife, Xiao Si, to take the throne.

古文：秋七月己未，废贵妃崔氏为庶人。
现代文：秋七月初三，废贵妃崔氏为庶人。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, the former empress Cui became a commoner.

古文：壬午，王黼以耶律淳死，复命童贯、蔡攸治兵，以河阳三城节度使刘延庆为都统制。
现代文：二十六日，王敞因耶律淳去世，又命令童贯、蔡枚治兵，任命河阳三城节度使刘延庆为都统制。
English: On the 26th, Wang Zhan died because of Yelutong, and he also ordered Tong Quan and Cai Mai to govern the troops, and appointed Heyang Three Cities Festival to make Liu Yanqing the governor of the capital.

古文：甲申，种师道责授右卫将军致仕，和诜散官安置。
现代文：二十八日，种师道降为右卫将军退休，和洗降为散官安置。
English: On the 28th, Sameshido was demoted to the position of Ue no shogun and retired, and Washido was demoted to the position of Sankan.

古文：九月戊午，朝散郎宋昭上书谏北伐，王黼大恶之，诏除名勒停、广南编管。
现代文：九月初二，朝散郎宋昭上书劝谏北伐，王敞非常厌恶他，下诏削除名籍、勒令停职，广南编管。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Song Zhao, the son of the founder of the dynasty, sent a letter to Wang Zhan to persuade him to join the Northern Expedition. Wang Zhan was very disgusted with him, and issued an edict to remove his name from the register, suspend him from his post, and put him in charge of the Southern Expedition.

古文：己未，金人遣徒孤且乌歇等来议师期。
现代文：初三，金军派遣徒孤且乌歇等来商议军队会攻的日期。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Golden Army dispatched Kukai and Wuhe to discuss the date of the army's attack.

古文：辛酉，大飨明堂。
现代文：初五，大祭明堂。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, Daisai Myodo is held.

古文：己巳，高丽国王王俣薨，遣路允迪吊祭。
现代文：十三日，高丽国王王误逝世，派遣路允迪吊丧祭奠。
English: On the 13th, King Wang of Goryeo passed away, and Luyundi was sent to pay his respects.

古文：甲戌，遣赵良嗣报聘于金国。
现代文：十八日，派遣赵良嗣回访金国。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Liangzi was sent to pay a return visit to China.

古文：己卯，辽将郭药师以涿、易二州来降。
现代文：二十三日，辽将郭药师等以琢州、易州来投降。
English: On the 23rd, Liao sent Guo Yakushi and others to Takuzhou and Yizhou to surrender.

古文：冬十月庚寅，改燕京为燕山府，涿、易八州并赐名。
现代文：冬十月初五，改燕京为燕山府，琢、易八州都赐给名称。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, Yanjing was changed to Yanshan Prefecture, and the names of Taku and Yishan were given.

古文：癸巳，刘延庆与郭药师等统兵出雄州。
现代文：初八，刘延庆与郭药师等率军队出雄州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liu Yanqing and Guo Yakushi led the army to Xiongzhou.

古文：戊戌，曲赦所复州县。
现代文：十三日，因特殊情况赦免所收复的州县。
English: On the 13th, the states and counties that were restored due to special circumstances were pardoned.

古文：己亥，耶律淳妻萧氏上表称臣纳款。甲辰，师次涿州。
现代文：十四日，耶律淳妻萧氏上表称臣顺服，十九日，宋军驻扎琢州。
English: On the 14th, Ye Lu Jun's wife, Xiao, presented herself as a vassal, and on the 19th, the Song army was stationed in Takuzhou.

古文：己酉，郭药师与高世宣、杨可世等袭燕，萧干以兵入援，战于城中，药师等屡败，皆弃马缒城而出，死伤过半。
现代文：二十四日，郭药师与高世宣、杨可世等袭击燕京，萧率兵人援，双方战于城中，郭药师屡败，都放弃马匹，顺着绳子爬下城墙逃出，死伤过半。
English: On the 24th, Guo Yakshi, Gao Shixuan, Yang Keshi and others attacked Yanjing, but failed to lead soldiers to help. The two sides fought in the city. Guo Yakshi was repeatedly defeated. They all abandoned their horses and climbed down the city wall along the rope to escape. More than half of them were killed or injured.

古文：癸丑，以蔡攸为少傅、判燕山府。
现代文：二十八日，任命蔡枚为少傅、判燕山府。
English: On the 28th, Cai Mei was appointed to the position of Junior Master, and Yanshan Prefecture was established.

古文：甲寅，刘延庆自卢沟河烧营夜遁，众军遂溃，萧干追至涿水上乃还。
现代文：二十九日，刘延庆从卢沟河烧掉营寨，乘夜逃跑，众军于是溃败，萧追到琢水上才退回。
English: On the 29th, Liu Yanqing burned down the camp from the Lugou River and fled by night. The army was then routed, and only retreated after chasing Xiao to the top of the Taku River.

古文：十一月丙辰朔，行新玺。
现代文：十一月初一，皇上使用新印章。
English: On the first day of November, a new imperial seal was used.

古文：戊辰，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十三日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 13th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：己巳，飨太庙。
现代文：十四日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 14th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：庚午，祀昊天上帝于园丘，赦天下。
现代文：十五日，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the fifteenth day, the god Haotian was sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：东南官吏昨缘寇盗贬责者，并次第移放，上书邪上等人特与磨勘。
现代文：东南官吏前不久因寇盗被贬降者依次移放，上书邪等人中的上等人特按规定迁转。
English: The Southeastern officials who had been demoted for robbery and theft shortly before were transferred in turn, and the higher-ranking officials among those who had been sentenced to death were transferred in accordance with the regulations.

古文：戊寅，金人遣李靖等来许山前六州。
现代文：二十三日，金国派李靖等来答应给还山前六州。
English: On the 23rd, Kim Guo sent Li Jing and others to promise to return the Six Prefectures.

古文：以彰德军节度使郑详为太尉。
现代文：任命彰德军节度使郑详为太尉。
English: Zheng Yao, the commander of the Changde Army, was appointed as the first lieutenant.

古文：十二月丁亥，郭药师败萧干于永清县。
现代文：十二月初二，郭药师在永清县打败萧。
English: On December 2, Guo Yaoshi defeated Xiao in Yongqing County.

古文：戊子，遣赵良嗣报聘于金国。
现代文：初三，派遣赵良嗣回访金国。
English: On the third day of the first month, Zhao Liangzi was sent to pay a return visit to China.

古文：庚寅，以郭药师为武泰军节度使。
现代文：初五，任命郭药师为武泰军节度使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Guo Yakushi was appointed as the military envoy of the Thai army.

古文：辛卯，金人入燕，萧氏出奔。
现代文：初六，金军进人燕京，萧氏出逃。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Jin army entered Yanjing, and Xiao fled.

古文：壬辰，使来献捷。
现代文：初七，金国派使臣来献捷报。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the state of Kim sent an envoy to present the victory report.

古文：乙未，诏监司未经陛对，毋得之任。
现代文：初十，下诏监司没有经过回答皇上问题不得到任。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the next imperial edict supervisor did not answer the emperor's question and was not appointed.

古文：丙申，贬刘延庆为率府率、安置筠州。
现代文：十一日，贬刘延庆为率府率，安置箔州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Yanqing was demoted to head of the prefectural government and placed in Hualing County.

古文：壬寅，进封植为莘王。
现代文：十七日，进封赵植为苹王。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Zhi became the king of apples.

古文：五年春正月戊午，金人遣李靖来议所许六州代租钱。
现代文：宣和五年春正月初四，金国派遣李靖来商议允许给还山前六州的贷租钱。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the declaration of peace, Kim sent Li Jing to negotiate to allow the loan and rent money to be returned to the six prefectures.

古文：己未，遣赵良嗣报聘，求西京等州。
现代文：初五，派遣赵良嗣回访金国，请求给还西京等州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhao Liangzi was dispatched to return to China to request the return of Xijing and other provinces.

古文：辛酉，以王安中为庆远军节度使、河北河东燕山府路宣抚使、知燕山府。
现代文：初七，任命王安中为庆远军节度使和河北、河东、燕山府路宣抚使，燕山知府。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang Anzhong was appointed as the Qingyuan Army's festival envoy and Hebei, Hedong and Yanshan prefectural road envoy, Yanshan prefecture.

古文：甲申，录富弼后。
现代文：三十日，录用富弼后代。
English: On the 30th, the descendants of Fuxi were hired.

古文：二月乙酉朔，以李邦彦为尚书左丞，翰林学士赵野为尚书右丞。
现代文：二月初一，任命李邦彦为尚书左承，翰林学士赵野为尚书右承。
English: On the first day of February, Li Bangyan was appointed as the left successor of Shangshu, and Hanlin Scholar Zhao Ye as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：丙戌，金人以议未合，断桥梁，焚次舍。
现代文：初二，金国因议论不能与宋朝廷相符合，毁断桥梁，焚烧营舍。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, due to the argument that it could not be consistent with the Song Dynasty, Jin Guo destroyed the bridge and burned the camp.

古文：丁酉，进封雍国公朴为华原郡王，徐国公棣为高平郡王，并为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十三日，进封雍国公赵朴为华原郡王，徐国公赵棣为高平郡王，并为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Pak, the prince of Yong Guo, was crowned the king of Hua Yuan County, and Zhao Yao, the prince of Xu Guo, was crowned the king of Gaoping County. They also became the three officials of Kaifu County.

古文：三月乙卯，金人再遣宁术割等来。
现代文：三月初二，金国又派遣宁术割等人来。
English: On the second day of March, Jin Guo also sent Ning Zhiguo and others.

古文：己未，遣卢益报聘，皆如其约。
现代文：初六，派遣卢益回访金国，都答应了金国的条件。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Lu Yi was sent to pay a return visit to the People's Republic of China, and he agreed to the conditions of the People's Republic of China.

古文：夏四月癸巳，金人遣杨璞以誓书及燕京、涿、易、檀、顺、景、蓟州来归。
现代文：夏四月初十，金国派遣杨璞送来誓书，并把燕京、琢州、易州、檀州、顶州、景州、蓟州归还朝廷。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the summer, the State of Jin dispatched Yang Hui to bring the oath, and returned Yanjing, Tuozhou, Yizhou, Danzhou, Dingzhou, Jingzhou and Zhangzhou to the imperial court.

古文：庚子，童贯、蔡攸入燕，时燕之职官、富民、金帛、子女先为金人尽掠而去。
现代文：十七日，童贯、蔡枚进人燕山府，当时燕山府的职官、富民、金帛、子女已经先被金国全部劫掠一空。
English: On the 17th, Tong Quan and Cai Mei entered Yanshan Prefecture. At that time, the officials, rich people, gold ingots and children of Yanshan Prefecture had all been looted by Jin Guo.

古文：乙巳，童贯表奏抚定燕城。
现代文：二十二日，童贯上表奏报朝廷抚定燕京城。
English: On the twenty-second day, Tong Jun made a report to the imperial court, and Fuding Yanjing City was established.

古文：庚戌，曲赦河北、河东、燕云路。
现代文：二十七日，因特殊情况赦免河北、河东、燕、云路。
English: On the 27th, due to special circumstances, Hebei, Hedong, Yan and Yunlu were pardoned.

古文：是日班师。
现代文：这天，班师。
English: On this day, the class teacher.

古文：五月己未，以收复燕、云，赐王黼玉带。
现代文：五月初七，因收复燕云，赐给王敞玉带。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, because of the recovery of Yanyun, Wang Zhan was given a jade belt.

古文：庚申，以王黼为太傅，郑居中为太保，进宰执官二等。
现代文：初八，任命王敞为太傅，郑居中为太保，宰执官升官二级。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Zhan was appointed as Taifu, Zheng Juzhong was appointed as Taibo, and the vice-minister was promoted to the second level.

古文：辛酉，王黼总治三省事。
现代文：初九，王敞总管三省事务。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Wang Zhan became the general manager of the affairs of the three provinces.

古文：癸亥，童贯落节钺，进封徐、豫国公。
现代文：十一日，童贯被解除兵权，进封徐国公、豫国公。
English: On the 11th day, Tong Quan was relieved of his military powers, and Xu Guogong and Yu Guogong were enthroned.

古文：蔡攸为少师。
现代文：蔡枚为少师。
English: Cai Mei is a junior teacher.

古文：乙丑，诏正位三公立本班，带节钺若领他职者仍旧班，著为令。
现代文：十三日，下诏：正位三公立本班，带节钱若领他职者仍列旧班，著为令。
English: On the thirteenth day, the following edict was issued: the three public classes were to remain in their original positions, and those who took other positions in order to save money were to remain in their old positions.

古文：癸酉，祭地于方泽。
现代文：二十一日，在方泽祭地。
English: On the 21st, at the Fonze Festival Grounds.

古文：是月，金人许朔、武、蔚三州。
现代文：这个月，金国答应给还朔、武、蔚三州。
English: This month, Kim Guo promised to give back Shuang, Wu, and Wei three states.

古文：金主阿骨打殂，弟吴乞买立。
现代文：金主阿骨打逝世，弟吴乞买即位。
English: The gold owner, Ah Keng Du, died, and his brother, Wu Qibai, ascended to the throne.

古文：六月乙酉，郭药师加检校少傅。
现代文：六月初四，郭药师加官检校少傅。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Guo Yaoshi was promoted to the rank of junior master.

古文：丙戌，辽人张觉以平州来附。
现代文：初五，辽人张觉据平州来归附朝廷。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhang Jue, a native of Liao, came to Pingzhou to join the imperial court.

古文：己丑，仲爰薨。
现代文：初八，赵仲爱逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhao Zhongai passed away.

古文：乙未，诏今后内外宗室并不称姓。
现代文：十四日，诏令今后内外宗室一律不称姓。
English: On the 14th, it was decreed that in the future, the family name would no longer be used for both inside and outside the family.

古文：丁酉，以安国军节度使仲理为开府仪同三司，进封嗣濮王。
现代文：十六日，任命安国军节度使赵仲理为开府仪同三司，进封为嗣攫王。
English: On the 16th, the An Guo Jun Festival was appointed to make Zhao Zhongli the keeper of ceremonies and the third secretary, and he was appointed as the heir to the throne.

古文：己亥，虑囚。
现代文：十八日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 18th, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：戊申，郑居中卒。
现代文：二十七日，郑居中逝世。
English: On the 27th, Zheng Juzhong passed away.

古文：辛亥，以蔡攸领枢密院。
现代文：三十日，任命蔡枚领枢密院。
English: On the 30th, Tsai was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：秋七月戊午，以梁师成为少保。
现代文：秋七月初七，任命梁师成为少保。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and July, Liang Shi was appointed as a junior security guard.

古文：己未，童贯致仕。
现代文：初八，童贯退休。
English: At the age of eight, Tongrun retired.

古文：起复谭稹为河北、河东、燕山府路宣抚使。
现代文：又起用谭棋为河北、河东、燕山府路宣抚使。
English: In addition, Tan Qi was appointed as the envoy of Hebei, Hedong and Yanshan prefectures.

古文：庚午，太傅、楚国公王黼等上尊号曰继天兴道敷文成武睿明皇帝，不允。
现代文：十九日，太傅、楚国公王敞等敬上尊号为继天兴道敷文成武睿明皇帝，没有得到皇上允许。
English: On the 19th, Taifu, the Prince of Chu, and others were given the honorific title of Emperor Wu Ruiming, succeeding Tian Xingdao, without the emperor's permission.

古文：禁元祐学术。
现代文：严禁元学术。
English: It is strictly forbidden to be a former academic.

古文：八月辛巳朔，日当食不见。
现代文：八月初一，日食没有出现。
English: On the first day of August, there was no solar eclipse.

古文：辛丑，命王安中作《复燕云碑》。
现代文：二十一日，命令王安中作厦燕云律。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered Wang Anzhong to draw up the Xia Yanyun Rule.

古文：壬寅，太白昼见。
现代文：二十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：是月，萧干破景州、蓟州，寇掠燕山，郭药师败之。
现代文：这个月，萧干攻破景州、蓟州，寇掠燕山府，郭药师打败他。
English: This month, Xiao Gan broke through Jingzhou, Zhangzhou, and pillaged Yanshan Prefecture, and Guo Yakushi defeated him.

古文：干寻为其下所杀，传首京师。
现代文：萧不久被属下所杀，首级送到京师。
English: Xiao was soon killed by his subordinates, and his head was sent to the capital.

古文：九月辛酉，大飨明堂。
现代文：九月十一日，大祀明堂。
English: On September 11th, Daisuki Myodo will close.

古文：冬十月乙酉，雨木冰。
现代文：冬十月初六，降木冰。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the snow falls.

古文：壬寅，罢诸路提举常平之不职者。
现代文：二十三日，罢除各路提举常平官不称职者。
English: On the 23rd, the incompetent officials of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress were dismissed.

古文：十一月乙卯，以郑绅为太师。
现代文：十一月初六，任命郑绅为太师。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, Zheng Sheng was appointed Grand Master.

古文：丙寅，幸王黼第观芝。
现代文：十七日，到王敞府邸观赏芝草。
English: On the 17th, they went to Wang Changfu's residence to enjoy the turf grass.

古文：诸路漕臣坐上供钱物不足，贬秩者二十二人。
现代文：各路槽臣因上供钱物不足获罪，贬降者达二十二人。
English: Twenty-two officials were demoted after they were found guilty of failing to provide enough money and goods.

古文：丁卯，王安中、谭稹并加检校少傅，郭药师为太尉。
现代文：十八日，王安中、谭棋都加官检校少傅，郭药师加官为太尉。
English: On the 18th, Wang Anzhong and Tan Qi were both promoted to the rank of Junior Teacher, and Guo Yaoshi was promoted to the rank of First Lieutenant.

古文：华原郡王朴薨。
现代文：华原郡王赵朴逝世。
English: King of Hua Yuan County Zhao Pak passed away.

古文：壬申，王黼子弟亲属推恩有差。
现代文：二十三日，王敞子弟亲属给予不等的恩赏。
English: On the 23rd, relatives of Wang Bi's younger son gave him various rewards.

古文：是月，金人取平州，张觉走燕山，金人索之甚急，命王安中缢杀，函其首送之。
现代文：这个月，金军攻取平州，张觉逃到燕山，金军搜索很急，朝廷命令王安中编杀他，函其首级送给金国。
English: This month, the Chinese army captured Pingzhou, and Zhang Jue fled to Yanshan. The Chinese army was in a hurry to search for him. The imperial court ordered Wang Anzhong to kill him and send his head to China.

古文：十二月乙巳，金人遣高居庆等来贺正旦。
现代文：十二月二十六日，金国派遣高居庆等人来祝贺新春。
English: On December 26th, China sent Gao Juqing and others to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：戊申，以高平郡王棣为太保，进封徐王。
现代文：二十九日，任命高平郡王赵棣为太保，进封为徐王。
English: On the 29th, the king of Gaoping County, Zhao Jie, was appointed as Taibo, and the king of Jinfeng was named Xu Wang.

古文：是岁，秦凤旱，河北、京东、淮南饥，遣官振济。
现代文：这一年，秦凤发生早灾，河北、京东、淮南发生饥荒，派遣官员贩济。
English: In the same year, the Qin and Feng Dynasties were struck by an early disaster, and famine occurred in Hebei, Jingdong, and Huainan. Officials were dispatched to help.

古文：六年春正月乙卯，为金主辍朝。
现代文：宣和六年春正月初六，为金主辍朝。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 6th month of the 6th year of the 8th month of the 8th year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th month of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 17th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19

古文：戊午，置书艺所。
现代文：初九，设置书艺所。
English: At the beginning of the ninth grade, a calligraphy school was set up.

古文：癸亥，藏萧干首于太社。
现代文：十四日，把萧的头藏在大社。
English: On the 14th, he hid Xiao's head in a shrine.

古文：戊寅，遣连南夫吊祭金国。
现代文：二十九日，派遣连南夫到金国吊丧祭奠。
English: On the 29th, a company of Nanfu was dispatched to the funeral ceremony in Jin.

古文：二月丁亥，以冀国公咢为开府仪同三司，进封河间郡王；韶州防御使令荡为婺州观察使，封安定郡王。
现代文：二月初九，任命冀国公赵妖为开府仪同三司，进封为河间郡王；韶州防御使赵令荡为姿州观察使，封为安定郡王。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, Zhao You, the prince of Hebei Province, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and was given the title of the king of Kawama County; the defense of Zhangzhou made Zhao Lingwang the observer of Zizhou, and he was given the title of the king of Stable County.

古文：己亥，躬耕藉田。
现代文：二十一日，亲耕籍田，示以劝农。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he went to the family farm to persuade the farmers.

古文：丙午，诏自今非历台阁、寺监、监司、郡守、开封府曹官者，不得为郎官、卿、监，著为令。
现代文：二十八日，下诏： 从今以后没有担任过台阁、寺监、监司、郡守、开封府曹官者，不得担任郎官、卿监，著为令。 
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: From now on, those who have never served as a daikaku, temple overseer, supervisor, county governor, or Kaifeng prefectural officer are not allowed to serve as a vassal, lord supervisor, and this is an order.

古文：李邦彦以父忧去位。
现代文：李邦彦因遭父丧离位。
English: Li Bangyan abdicated due to the death of his father.

古文：三月己酉朔，以钱景臻为少师。
现代文：三月初一，任命钱景臻为少师。
English: On the first day of March, Qian Jingzhen was appointed as a junior teacher.

古文：金人来匄粮，不与。
现代文：金国来请求给予粮食，朝廷没答应。
English: Jin Guo came to ask for grain, but the imperial court did not agree.

古文：闰月辛巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：闰三月初四，皇后亲自养蚕。
English: On the fourth day of the third lunar month, the empress personally raised silkworms.

古文：庚子，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：二十三日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Shiei-den to make a plan to enter the priesthood.

古文：夏四月癸丑，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身八百五人。
现代文：夏四月初六，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身八百零五人。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Ministry of Ceremonies bestowed the title of "Distinguished Musician" to the 850 members of the orchestra.

古文：丁巳，李邦彦起复。
现代文：初十，李邦彦守丧期未满被朝廷起用。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Li Bangyan was appointed by the imperial court before the expiration of the mourning period.

古文：五月壬寅，虑囚。
现代文：五月二十六日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On May 26th, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：癸卯，金人遣使来告嗣位。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来报告金主吴乞买即位的消息。
English: On the 27th, the Kim dynasty dispatched an envoy to report the news of the enthronement of the money lord Wu Qimai.

古文：六月壬子，诏以收复燕、云以来，京东、两河之民困于调度，令京西、淮、浙、江、湖、四川、闽、广并纳免夫钱，期以两月纳足，违者从军法。
现代文：六月初七，下诏因收复燕云以来，京东、两河之民困于调度，命令京西、淮、浙、江、湖、四川、闽、广都缴纳免夫钱，限期两个月纳足，违犯者按军法处治。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 6th month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：秋七月戊子，遣许亢宗贺金国嗣位。
现代文：秋七月十三日，派遣许亢宗祝贺金国主即位。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Xu Yanzong was dispatched to congratulate the enthronement of the Lord of Jin.

古文：丁酉，诏：应系御笔断罪，不许诣尚书省陈诉改正。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：凡是皇上御笔批下定的罪案，不许到尚书省陈诉改正。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Any criminal case approved by the emperor was not allowed to go to Shangshu Province for prosecution and correction.

古文：壬寅，诏宗室、后妃戚里、宰执之家概敷免夫钱。
现代文：二十七日，下诏宗室、后妃戚里、宰执之家一律敷纳免夫钱。
English: On the 27th, the emperor decreed that the family of the emperor, the family of the empress, and the family of the vice-regent would all be exempted from paying taxes.

古文：甲辰，置玑衡所。
现代文：二十九日，设置现衡所。
English: On the 29th, the present weighing station was set up.

古文：八月乙卯，谭稹落太尉、罢宣抚使，童贯落致仕，领枢密院代之。
现代文：八月十一日，谭棋解除太尉职衔，罢除宣抚使，童贯受朝廷特命复出任职，领枢密院代替谭棋。
English: On August 11, Tan Gi was relieved of the rank of captain and removed from the post of the envoy. Tong Rong was specially ordered by the imperial court to return to his post, and the Privy Council replaced Tan Gi.

古文：丁巳，以溢机堡为安羌城。
现代文：十三日，以溢机堡建为安羌城。
English: On the 13th, the overflow fort was built as Anhui City.

古文：壬戌，以复燕、云，赦天下。
现代文：十八日，因收复燕云赦免全国。
English: On the 18th, the whole country was pardoned for the recovery of Yan Yun.

古文：九月乙亥，以白时中为特进、太宰兼门下侍郎，李邦彦为少宰兼中书侍郎。
现代文：九月初二，任命白时中为特进、太宰兼门下侍郎，李邦彦为少宰兼中书侍郎。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Bai Shizhong was appointed as the special envoy, Dazai and junior attendant, and Li Bangyan was appointed as the junior secretary and junior attendant.

古文：蔡攸落节钺。辛巳，大飨明堂。
现代文：解除蔡枚兵权。初八，大祀明堂。
English: Cai Haili's right to serve in the military was revoked. In the eighth year of junior high school, Dashi Myeongdong came to an end.

古文：丁亥，以赵野为尚书左丞，翰林学士承旨宇文粹中为尚书右丞，开封尹蔡懋同知枢密院。
现代文：十四日，任命赵野为尚书左承，翰林学士承旨宁文粹中为尚书右承，开封府尹蔡愈为同知枢密院。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Ye was appointed as the left successor of Shang Shu, Han Lin Baizhao as the right successor of Shang Shu, Ning Wenzhong as the right successor of Ning Wenzhong, and Yin Caiyu of Kaifeng as the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：庚寅，以金芝产于艮岳万寿峰，改名寿岳。
现代文：十七日，因金芝生于民岳万寿峰，改名为寿岳。
English: On the 17th, because Jin Zhi was born in Minyue Manshoufeng, it was renamed Shouyue.

古文：庚子，金人遣富谟弼等以遗留物来献。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣富漠弼等来献金主遗留物。
English: On the 27th, the State of Kim dispatched Fumo and other emissaries to donate the remains of the donor.

古文：冬十月庚午，诏有收藏习用苏、黄之文者，并令焚毁，犯者以大不恭论。
现代文：冬十月二十七日，下诏：有收藏学习使用苏轼、黄庭坚文章者，一律命令他们将其焚毁，违犯者以大不恭罪论处。
English: On the 27th day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Anyone who had a collection of Su Shi and Huang Ting Jian's articles for study and use was ordered to burn them, and violators were punished with the crime of being ungrateful.

古文：癸酉，诏内外官并以三年为任，治绩著闻者再任，永为式。
现代文：三十日，下诏内外官一律以三年为任期，治绩显著闻名者再任，永远作为准则。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict decreed that all officials at home and abroad would serve a three-year term, and that the reappointment of those with outstanding performance and fame would always be the norm.

古文：十一月丙子，王黼致仕。
现代文：十一月初三，王敞退休。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Wang Chang retired.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：乙酉，罢应奉司。
现代文：十二日，罢除应奉司。
English: On the 12th, the removal of Ying Fong Si began.

古文：丙戌，令尚书省置讲议局。
现代文：十三日，命令尚书省设置讲议司。
English: On the 13th, the Ministry of Education and Culture was ordered to set up a discussion division.

古文：壬辰，诏监司择县令有治绩者保奏，召赴都堂审察录用，毋过三人。
现代文：十九日，下诏： 监司选择有治绩的县令保举荐奏，召赴都堂审察录用，不超过三人。 
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Supervisors should select county magistrates with good performance, recommend them, and summon them to the capital for examination and appointment, with no more than three people.

古文：十二月甲辰朔，蔡京领讲议司。
现代文：十二月初一，蔡京统管讲议司。
English: On the first day of December, Cai Jing assumed overall control of the speech division.

古文：诏百官遵行元丰法制。
现代文：下诏百官遵守执行元丰法制。
English: Under the edict, all officials must abide by the implementation of the Yuanfeng legal system.

古文：丁未，诏内外侍从以上各举所知二人。
现代文：初四，下诏内外侍从官各自推举所知二人。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, two well-known candidates were elected to the posts of internal and external attendants.

古文：癸亥，蔡京落致仕，领三省事。
现代文：二十日，蔡京受朝廷特命复出任职，领管三省事务。
English: On the 20th, Cai Jing was specially ordered by the imperial court to return to office and take charge of the affairs of the three provinces.

古文：是岁，河北、山东盗起，命内侍梁方平讨之。
现代文：这一年，河北、山东盗贼兴起，命令宦官梁方平讨伐。
English: In that year, thieves from Hebei and Shandong rose up and ordered eunuch Liang Fangping to fight them.

古文：京师、河东、陕西地大震，两河、京东西、浙西水，环庆、邠宁、泾原流徙，令所在振恤。
现代文：京师、河东、陕西发生大规模地震，两河、京东西、浙西水灾，环庆、宁、径原流亡，命令所在各地贩济抚恤。
English: Large-scale earthquakes occurred in Beijing, Hedong, and Shaanxi, floods occurred in the two rivers, east and west of Beijing, and west of Zhejiang, people were exiled to Huanqing, Ning, and Chiwon, and the order was to sell relief shirts in various regions.

古文：夏国、高丽、于阗、罗殿入贡。
现代文：夏国、高丽、于闻、罗殿来进贡。
English: Xia Guo, Gao Li, Yu Wen and Luo Dian came to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月癸酉朔，诏赦两河、京西流民为盗者，仍给复一年。
现代文：宣和七年春正月初一，诏令赦免两河、京西流民为盗者，并且免除租税一年。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the Xuanhe Spring, the imperial edict pardoned the people of the two rivers and the west of Beijing who were thieves, and exempted them from taxes for one year.

古文：癸巳，诏罢诸路提举常平官属，有罪当黜者以名闻，仍令三省修已废之法。
现代文：二十一日，下诏罢除各路提举常平官属，有罪应当罢除者把名字报到朝廷；并且命令三省修治已废之法。
English: On the twenty-first day, he issued an edict to abolish the practice of nominating and promoting officials and subordinates from all walks of life, and to report the names of those who should be removed to the imperial court if they were guilty; he also ordered the three provinces to amend the laws that had been abolished.

古文：二月甲辰，复置铸钱监。
现代文：二月初二，重置铸钱监。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the mint supervisor was replaced.

古文：诏御史察赃吏。
现代文：下诏御史核察赃吏。
English: The following is an excerpt from the official history.

古文：己酉，雨木冰。
现代文：初七，降木冰。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, the snow falls.

古文：庚戌，诏京师运米五十万斛至燕山，令工部侍郎孟揆亲往措置。
现代文：初八，下诏京师运米五十万解至燕山府，命令工部侍郎孟京亲自前往处理。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the Beijing division to transport 500 thousand tons of rice to Yanshan Prefecture, and ordered the attendant of the work department, Meng Jing, to personally go and deal with it.

古文：己巳，进封广国公栻为南康郡王、福国公榛为平阳郡王，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十七日，进封广国公越试为南康郡王，福国公赵棒为平阳郡王，都为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 27th, Guangguo Gongyue was crowned the king of Nankang County in Jinfeng, and Fu Guo Gong Zhao Bo was crowned the king of Pingyang County, both of which were the third division of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：壬申，京东转运副使李孝昌言招安群盗张万仙等五万余人，诏补官犒赐有差。
现代文：三十日，京东转运副使李孝昌报告说招安群盗张万仙等五万余人，下诏补官搞赐不等。
English: On the 30th, Li Xiaochang, the vice-envoy of Jingdong Transportation, reported that more than 50,000 people, including Zhang Wansian, were recruited from the security group, and the number of officers recruited varied.

古文：三月癸酉朔，雨雹。
现代文：三月初一，降冰雹。
English: On the first day of March, hail fell.

古文：甲申，知海州钱伯言奏招降山东寇贾进等十万人，诏补官有差。
现代文：十二日，海州知州钱伯言上奏说招安山东寇盗贾进等十万人，下诏补官不等。
English: On the 12th, Chaizhou Chizhou Chamberlain made a speech saying that 100,000 people would be recruited from the eastern part of Anshan, and the number of officials would be increased.

古文：丙戌，以惠国公楧为开府仪同三司，进封建安郡王。
现代文：十四日，任命惠国公枷英为开府仪同三司，进封为建安郡王。
English: On the 14th, Hui Guo Gongyu Ying was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and was crowned as the king of Jian'an County.

古文：夏四月丙辰，降德音于京东、河北路。
现代文：夏四月十五日，向京东、河北路颁降德音文告。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, he issued a message to Jingdong and Hebei Road.

古文：庚申，蔡京复致仕。
现代文：十九日，蔡京再次退休。
English: On the 19th, Cai Jing retired again.

古文：复州县免行钱。
现代文：恢复州县免行钱。
English: Restore state and county toll-free tolls.

古文：戊辰，诏行元丰官制。
现代文：二十七日，下诏实行元丰官制。
English: On the 27th, the Yuanfeng official system was implemented.

古文：复尚书令之名，虚而勿授；三公但为阶官，毋领三省事。
现代文：恢复尚书令的名称，虚而不授；三公只作为阶官，不统领三省事务。
English: The name of Shang Shuling will be restored, but it will not be conferred; the three officials will only act as officials, and will not preside over the affairs of the three provinces.

古文：五月壬午，封子枞为润国公。
现代文：五月十一日，封儿子赵机为润国公。
English: On May 11th, Feng's son Zhao Ji became the Prince of Run.

古文：丁亥，诏诸路帅臣举将校有才略者、监司举守令有政绩者岁各三人。
现代文：十六日，下诏各路帅臣推举有才略的将校，监司推举有政绩的守令，每年各三人。
English: On the 16th, it was decreed that generals and ministers of all ranks should nominate talented officers, and supervisors should nominate officers with political achievements, three each year.

古文：六月辛丑朔，诏宗室复著姓。
现代文：六月初一，下诏宗室恢复称呼姓。
English: On the first day of June, the family name was restored.

古文：丙午，封童贯为广阳郡王。
现代文：初六，封童贯为广阳郡王。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, Fong Tong became the king of Guangyang County.

古文：戊申，诏臣僚辄与内侍来往者论罪。
现代文：初八，下诏臣僚擅自与宦官来往者，以罪论处。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, under the Emperor's edict, ministers who had unauthorized contact with eunuchs were punished as criminals.

古文：辛亥，虑囚。
现代文：十一日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 11th, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：己未，以蔡攸为太保。
现代文：十九日，任命蔡枚为太保。
English: On the 19th, Cai Mei was appointed as Taibo.

古文：癸亥，诏吏职杂流出身人，毋得陈请改换。
现代文：二十三日，下诏吏职杂流出身人，不得要求改换职掌。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that those who were born in the miscellaneous stream of officials were not allowed to request a change of job.

古文：乙丑，罢减六尚岁贡物。
现代文：二十五日，罢除减免殿中省六局每年进贡物品。
English: On the 25th, the annual tribute items of the six provincial bureaus were abolished.

古文：秋七月庚午朔，诏士庶毋以 天 、 王 、 君 、 圣 为名字，及以壬戌日辅臣焚香。
现代文：秋七月初一，下诏士庶不得用 天 、 王 、 君 、 圣 等字为名字，辅臣不得在壬戊这一天焚香。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh month of the autumn, the junior imperial officials were not allowed to use the words "tian," "wang," "jun" and "sheng" as their names, and the aides-de-camp were not allowed to burn incense on this day.

古文：甲戌，以河间郡王咢为太保，进封沂王。
现代文：初五，任命河间郡王赵妖为太保，进封为沂王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the king of Kawama County, Zhao You, was appointed Taibo, and he was crowned as the king of Shao.

古文：是月，河东义胜军叛。
现代文：这个月，河东义胜军叛乱。
English: This month, the Yixing Army of Hedong rebelled.

古文：熙河、河东路地震。
现代文：熙河、河东路发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Heihe and Hedong Road.

古文：九月辛巳，大飨明堂。
现代文：九月十三日，大祀明堂。
English: On September 13th, Daisuki Myodo will close.

古文：壬辰，金人以擒辽主，遣李孝和等来告庆。
现代文：二十四日，金国因擒获辽主派遣李孝和等来报告庆贺。
English: On the 24th, Kim Guo was sent by the Lord of Liao to send Li Xiaohe and others to report the celebration.

古文：是月，河东言粘罕至云中，诏童贯复宣抚。
现代文：这个月，河东报告说粘罕到达云中，下诏童贯复任宣抚使。
English: This month, Hedong reported that Mui Han had arrived in Yunzhong, and Tong Quan was reinstated as the envoy.

古文：有狐升御榻而坐。
现代文：有狐升御榻而坐。
English: There is a fox sitting on the couch.

古文：冬十月辛亥，赐曾布谥曰文肃。
现代文：冬十月十四日，赐曾布溢号为文肃。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, Zengbu was given the title of Bunsu.

古文：戊午，罢京畿和籴。
现代文：二十一日，罢除京瓷和来。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Kyocera and Rei were dismissed.

古文：十一月庚午，诏：无出身待制以上、年及三十通历任满十岁，乃许任子。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏：无出身待制官以上，年龄到三十岁连续任职满十年，才允许任子。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: no one should be allowed to be appointed until they are at least 30 years old and have served for 10 consecutive years.

古文：乙亥，遣使回庆金国。
现代文：初八，派遣使臣到金国庆贺。
English: On the first day of the eighth lunar month, he dispatched envoys to the country of Kim to celebrate.

古文：甲申，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十七日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 17th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：乙酉，飨太庙。
现代文：十八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：丙戌，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：十九日，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the 19th, the god Haotian was sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：庚寅，以保静军节度使种师道为河东、河北路制置使。
现代文：二十三日，任命保静军节度使种师道为河东、河北路制置使。
English: On the 23rd, Bao Jingjun was appointed as the commander of the military festival to set up and set up the roads in Hedong and Hebei Province.

古文：十二月乙巳，童贯自太原遁归京师。
现代文：十二月初八，童贯从太原逃回京城。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month, Tong Run fled from Taiyuan back to Beijing.

古文：己酉，中山奏金人斡离不、粘罕分两道入攻。
现代文：十二日，中山府奏报说金军斡离不、粘罕兵分两路侵略宋境。
English: On the 12th, Zhongshan Prefecture sent a report saying that the Kim army would not leave, and the soldiers would invade the Song territory in two ways.

古文：郭药师以燕山叛，北边诸郡皆陷。
现代文：郭药师据燕山反叛，北边各郡都被攻陷。
English: Guo Yaoshi rebelled against Yanshan, and all the counties in the north were conquered.

古文：又陷忻、代等州，围太原府。
现代文：又攻陷忻、代等州，围攻太原府。
English: They also invaded and besieged Taiyuan and other prefectures.

古文：太常少卿傅察奉使不屈，死之。
现代文：太常少卿傅察奉使不屈而死。
English: Too often, Shaoqing Fu Zhaobong died indomitably.

古文：丙辰，罢浙江诸路花石纲、延福宫、西城租课及内外制造局。
现代文：十九日，罢除浙江各路花石纲、延福宫、西城租课、内外制造局。
English: On the 19th, the Zhejiang Provincial Flower and Stone Program, Yanfu Palace, Xicheng Rent-A-Class, and the Domestic and Foreign Manufacturing Bureau were abolished.

古文：金兵犯中山府，詹度御之。
现代文：金军侵犯中山府，詹度抵抗金兵。
English: The gold army invaded Zhongshan Prefecture, and Zhandu resisted the gold soldiers.

古文：戊午，皇太子桓为开封牧。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子赵桓为开封牧。
English: On the twenty-first day, Crown Prince Zhao Huan left for Kaifeng.

古文：罢修蕃衍北宅，令诸皇子分居十位。
现代文：罢修蕃衍北宅，令各皇子分居十位。
English: He ordered the northern residence of Emperor Goryeo to be repaired, and ordered each prince to live separately in ten places.

古文：己未，下诏罪己。
现代文：二十二日，徽宗下诏罪己。
English: On the 22nd, Huizong issued an edict condemning himself.

古文：令中外直言极谏，郡邑率师勤王，募草泽异才有能出奇计及使疆外者。罢道官，罢大晟府、行幸局。西城及诸局所管缗钱，尽付有司。
现代文：命令内外官民直言极谏，郡县率军勤王；招募能出奇计和出使金国的隐逸异才；罢道官，罢大晨府和行幸局；西城所及各局所管络钱，全部交付给有关部门。
English: It ordered the officials and people at home and abroad to be extremely outspoken, the county and county-led troops to be diligent; the recruitment of hidden talents who can come up with miraculous plans and send money to the country; the strike officers, the strike headquarters and the good luck bureau; the West Town and the network money managed by the various bureaus, all to be handed over to the relevant departments.

古文：以保和殿大学士宇文虚中为河北、河东路宣谕使。
现代文：任命保和殿大学士宁文虚中为河北、河东路宣谕使。
English: Appointed the envoy of Hebei and Hedong Roads to Shining Literary and Virtual High School of Bohol University.

古文：庚申，诏内禅，皇太子即皇帝位。
现代文：二十三日，下诏内禅，皇太子即皇帝位。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Naizan decreed that the crown prince would become emperor.

古文：尊帝为教主道君太上皇帝，居于龙德宫。尊皇后为太上皇后。
现代文：尊徽宗为教主道君太上皇帝，居在龙德宫；尊皇后为太上皇后。
English: Emperor Daojun, the head priest of the Zunhu sect, lived in the Longde Palace; Empress Zun was the empress dowager.

古文：靖康元年正月己巳，诣亳州太清宫，行恭谢礼，遂幸镇江府。
现代文：靖康元年春正月初三，徽宗到达毫州太清宫，行恭谢礼，于是到镇江。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first month of the first month of the year of Jingkang, Huizong arrived at the Taiqing Palace in Wanzhou, made a courtesy call, and then went to Zhenjiang.

古文：四月己亥，还京师。
现代文：四月初三还京城。
English: He returned to Kyoto on the third day of the fourth lunar month.

古文：明年二月丁卯，金人胁帝北行。
现代文：第二年二月初七，金军挟徽宗北行。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the second month of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th

古文：绍兴五年四月甲子，崩于五国城，年五十有四。
现代文：绍兴五年四月二十一日，在金国五国城逝世，终年五十四岁。
English: Shaoxing died on April 21, 2005 at the age of fifty-four in the Five Kingdoms City of Jin Province.

古文：七年九月甲子，凶问至江南，遥上尊谥曰圣文仁德显孝皇帝，庙号徽宗。
现代文：绍兴七年九月初五，徽宗逝世消息传到江南，朝廷遥上溢号为圣文仁德显孝皇帝，庙号徽宗。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the 7th year of Shaoxing, the news of Huizong's death spread to the south of the Yangtze River. The imperial court called him Emperor Shengwenrendexianxiao, and his temple name was Huizong.

古文：十二年八月乙酉，梓宫还临安。
现代文：绍兴十二年八月二十五日，徽宗梓宫回到临安。
English: On August 25 of the 12th year of Shaoxing, Huizong Zi Gong returned to Lin'an.

古文：十月丙寅，权欑于永祐陵。
现代文：十月初七，暂时葬在永陵。
English: On October 7th, he was temporarily buried in Yongling.

古文：十二月丁卯，祔太庙第十一室。
现代文：十二月初九，在太庙第十一室附祭徽宗神主。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, in the 11th room of the Great Temple, there was an additional offering to the god of the Huizong sect.

古文：十三年正月己亥，加上尊谥曰体神合道骏烈逊功圣文仁德宪慈显孝皇帝。
现代文：绍兴十三年正月十一日，加上溢号为体神合道骏烈逊功圣文仁德宪慈显孝皇帝。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, with the addition of the exclamation mark, Emperor Wenren, De Guan, Cixi and Xian Xiao was crowned.

古文：赞曰：宋中叶之祸，章、蔡首恶，赵良嗣厉阶。
现代文：评论说：北宋后期的祸乱，章、蔡京是首恶分子，赵良嗣则开其祸端。
English: The commentary said: the calamity of the late Northern Song Dynasty, Zhang and Caijing were the chief villains, and Zhao Liangzi was the cause of the calamity.

古文：然哲宗之崩，徽宗未立，惇谓其轻佻不可以君于下。辽天祚之亡，张觉举平州来归，良嗣以为纳之失信于金，必启外侮。
现代文：然而哲宗去世，徽宗未立之际，章说徽宗不稳重，不可让他统治全国；辽天柞帝灭亡，张觉举平州归降朝廷，赵良嗣认为接纳张觉会失信于金，必将引起金国对宋的侵犯。
English: However, when Zhezong died and Huizong was not yet established, Zhang said that Huizong was unstable and could not be allowed to rule the whole country; Liao Tiankun died, Zhang Jue raised Pingzhou to surrender to the imperial court, and Zhao Liangzi believed that accepting Zhang Jue would be disloyal to Jin and would inevitably cause Jin to encroach on Song.

古文：使二人之计行，宋不立徽宗，不纳张觉，金虽强，何衅以伐宋哉？
现代文：假如这二人的计谋得实行，宋朝不立徽宗，不接纳张觉，金国虽然很强盛，但怎么会找到侵宋的借口呢？
English: If these two men's stratagem were to be put into practice, if the Song Dynasty did not establish the Huizong Sect and did not accept Zhang Jue, and if the Jin Dynasty was very powerful, how could it find an excuse to invade the Song Dynasty?

古文：以是知事变之来，虽小人亦能知之，而君子有所不能制也。
现代文：因此可知事变之由来，即使是小人也能知晓这个道理，然而君子却不能有所措施来控制局面的发展。
English: Hence the origin of precariousness. Even a villain can know this truth, but a gentleman cannot take measures to control the development of the situation.

古文：迹徽宗失国之由，非若晋惠之愚、孙皓之暴，亦非有曹、马之篡夺，特恃其私智小慧，用心一偏，疏斥正士，狎近奸谀。
现代文：探寻宋徽宗失去天下的原因，并不是因为像晋惠帝那样愚蠢，像孙赐那样残暴，也不是因为像三国时司马氏对曹氏政权的篡夺，只是因为依仗自己有点小聪明，用心向一边倒，疏远排斥正直人士，宠信亲近阿诀奉迎的奸债之徒。
English: Exploring the reasons why Song Huizong lost the world is not because he was as stupid as Emperor Jinhui, as cruel as Sun Zi, nor because of the usurpation of Cao's regime by the Three Kingdoms, but because he relied on himself to be a little clever, put his heart to one side, alienated and excluded honest people, and favored the treacherous debtors who were close to Ah Lai.

古文：于是蔡京以獧薄巧佞之资，济其骄奢淫佚之志。
现代文：于是蔡京凭借自己的偏狭卑劣、乖巧邪债的资质，满足了徽宗皇上骄奢淫逸的愿望。
English: As a result, Cai Jing satisfied Emperor Huizong's desire for luxury and luxury by virtue of his narrow-mindedness, meanness, and ability to repay evil debts.

古文：溺信虚无，崇饰游观，困竭民力。
现代文：迷信虚无的道教学说，崇尚游乐，大造景观，使民力凋敝困竭。
English: The superstitious Taoist doctrine of nothingness, advocating amusement, creating a large landscape, and exhausting the people's strength.

古文：君臣逸豫，相为诞谩，怠弃国政，日行无稽。
现代文：君臣都喜好享乐，相互影响，荒诞放纵，丢弃国家大事于不顾，每天都做那些荒唐的事情。
English: Princes and courtiers are fond of pleasure, influence each other, indulge in absurdity, discard national importance, and do those absurd things every day.

古文：及童贯用事，又佳兵勤远，稔祸速乱。
现代文：到童贯掌握兵权，又把优势兵力调得远离京师，直到祸端积累日久，全国迅速大乱。
English: By the time Tongran seized military power, he had shifted his superior forces away from the Beijing division, until the disaster accumulated for a long time, and the whole country was quickly in turmoil.

古文：他日国破身辱，遂与石晋重贵同科，岂得诿诸数哉？
现代文：后来国家败灭，其身受辱，于是和五代后晋石重贵走了同一条道路，难道能将责任推给天数吗？
English: Later, when the country was defeated and he suffered humiliation, he followed the same path as the five generations of Jinshi nobles. Is it possible to put the blame on the number of days?

古文：昔西周新造之邦，召公犹告武王以不作无益害有益，不贵异物贱用物，况宣、政之为宋，承熙、丰、绍圣椓丧之余，而徽宗又躬蹈二事之弊乎？
现代文：从前西周新建国的时候，召公还告诉过武王不要做无益的事来损害有益的事，不能把其他物品看得太重而轻视自己的常用物品，况且政和、宣和时期的宋朝，承继熙宁、元丰、绍圣时期的弊端丧乱，而徽宗又亲自重蹈上述二事之弊祸。
English: From the time of former Western Zhou's founding of a new country, Zogong also told King Wu not to do useless things to the detriment of useful things, not to regard other items as too important and despise his own commonly used items. Moreover, the Song Dynasty during the Political Peace and the Proclamation of Peace followed the drawbacks and turmoil of the Xining, Yuanfeng and Shaoshan periods, and Huizong personally repeated the above two evils.

古文：自古人君玩物而丧志，纵欲而败度，鲜不亡者，徽宗甚焉，故特著以为戒。
现代文：自古以来，凡是习于所好而丧失大志、放纵私欲、败坏法度的国君，很少有不亡国的，徽宗所作所为太过分了，所以特别写出来作为鉴戒。
English: Since ancient times, there have been few sovereigns who have not lost their country when they lost their ambition, indulged their selfish desires, and corrupted the law by following their own inclinations. Huizong's behavior was too excessive, so it was specially written out as a warning.

