古文：太史公曰：余每读《虞书》，至于君臣相敕，维是几安，而股肱不良，万事堕ī坏，未尝不流涕也。
现代文：太史公说： 我每读《尚书·虞书》，读到君臣互相告诫、劳勉，天下由此得到一些安宁，而股肱之臣不贤良，所有事业都毁坏的记载时，常常被感动得涕泪交流。
English: Taishikong said, "Every time I read the Shangshu and the YuShu, I am often moved to tears when I read that the monarchs and the ministers admonished each other and worked hard, and the world gained some peace from this, while the vassals of the vassals were not virtuous and all undertakings were destroyed.

古文：成王作颂，推己惩艾，悲彼家难，可不谓战战恐惧，善守善终哉？
现代文：周成王作《周颂》，推原自身所受的惩创，为国家所遭遇的祸难而悲痛，怎可说他不是小心谨慎，善守善终的帝王呢？
English: Zhou Cheng Wang wrote "Song of Zhou" to express his sorrow for the calamity that befell the country and the punishment he received. How could he not be a careful and prudent emperor?

古文：君子不为约则修德，满则弃礼，佚能思初，安能惟始，沐浴膏泽而歌咏勤苦，非大德谁能如斯！
现代文：在上位的君子若不为简约的政治，就会修治功德，自强不息，否则自满自足，就会废弃礼仪。安逸能不忘当初的劳苦，安逸能想到创始时的艰难，处身于安乐之中而歌颂勤苦，不是具有崇高道德的人谁能像这样啊！
English: If high-ranking gentlemen do not pursue a simple policy, they will cultivate merit and self-improvement, otherwise they will be complacent and self-sufficient, and they will abandon etiquette. At ease can not forget the initial labor, at ease can think of the difficulties at the time of founding, in the midst of ease and praise hard work, who can be like this if he is not a person with lofty morals!

古文：传曰 治定功成，礼乐乃兴 。
现代文：书上说 治定功成，礼乐乃兴 。
English: It is said in the book that "Ji Ding Gong Cheng" is a success, and "Li Le Niao Xing" is a success.

古文：海内人道益深，其德益至，所乐者益异。
现代文：天下治民的政策推行得愈是深入人心，帝王的品德约崇高，他所认为欢乐的事情就越不同于常人。
English: The more deeply the policy of governing the people under heaven is carried out, the more lofty the emperor's moral character is, and the more different from ordinary people are the things he considers joyous.

古文：满而不损则溢，盈而不持则倾。
现代文：水满了却不减少就会流出来，时机成熟了却不能把握就会跌倒。
English: When the water is full but does not decrease, it will flow out. When the time is ripe but cannot be grasped, it will fall.

古文：凡作乐者，所以节乐。
现代文：大凡作乐的原因，是为了节制欢乐。
English: The reason for making great music is to restrain joy.

古文：君子以谦退为礼，以损减为乐，乐其如此也。
现代文：使君子以谦虚退让为礼，以自损自减为乐，乐的作用就在于此啊！
English: This is the role of pleasure, to make the gentleman bow out with modesty and self-effacement, and to take pleasure in self-depreciation.

古文：以为州异国殊，情习不同，故博采风俗，协比声律，以补短移化，助流政教。
现代文：由于地域不同，性情习俗也不相同，所以要博采风俗，与声律相谐调，以此补充治道的缺陷，移风易俗，帮助政教的推行。
English: Since different regions have different temperaments and customs, it is necessary to draw on customs and harmonize them with vocal rhythms, so as to supplement the shortcomings of the governance, change customs, and help the implementation of politics and education.

古文：天子躬于明堂临观，而万民咸荡涤邪秽，斟酌饱满，以饰厥性。
现代文：天子亲临明堂观乐，而众百姓能受乐的感化而洗荡、涤除人性中的邪恶和污秽，采取健康、饱满的人性，以整饬其性情。
English: The Son of Heaven personally visits the Ming Hall to watch the music, and the people can be influenced by the music to wash themselves, purify the evil and filth in human nature, and adopt a healthy and full human nature to rectify their disposition.

古文：故云《雅》《颂》之音理而民正，嘄噭之声兴而士奋，郑卫之曲动而心淫。
现代文：所以说习正派、文雅的诵歌，民众就会持守正道，激烈呼号的音声兴起，战士就会振奋精神，郑、卫的歌曲使人心生邪念。
English: Therefore, it is said that the people will adhere to the righteous path if they chant songs in a decent and elegant manner, and the soldiers will be invigorated by the sound of fierce calls, and the songs of Zheng and Wei will make people have evil thoughts.

古文：及其调和谐合，鸟兽尽感，而况怀五常，含好恶，自然之势也？
现代文：等到乐与情性调谐和合，鸟兽都会为之动容，何况怀五常之性，含好恶之心的人？受乐的感染更是自然之势了。
English: When music and emotion are in harmony, birds and beasts will be moved by it. What's more, what about people who cherish the five elements and have likes and dislikes? It's even more natural to be affected by music.

古文：治道亏缺而郑音兴起，封君世辟，名显邻州，争以相高。
现代文：治国的方法有缺陷，而使郑国的音乐兴起，分封和世袭的君王，在临近周郡名声显扬，却争以郑音互比高低。
English: The method of governing the country is flawed, but the music of Zheng has made Zheng rise. The kings with separate fiefs and hereditary titles are famous in neighboring Zhou County, but they compete with each other in Zheng.

古文：自仲尼不能与齐优遂容于鲁，虽退正乐以诱世，作五章以刺时，犹莫之化。
现代文：自从孔子不能与齐国的俳优在鲁国并存，即使他退出鲁国政界，整理雅正的音乐以诱导世人，作《五章》的歌曲以讥刺时事，仍然没有办法感化世人。
English: Since Confucius could not co-exist with the haiku masters of Qi in Lu, even if he withdrew from the political world of Lu, arranged the music of Yazheng to induce the world, and composed the songs of "Five Chapters" to satirize current affairs, he still had no way to influence the world.

古文：陵迟以至六国，流沔沈佚，遂往不返，卒于丧身灭宗，并国于秦。
现代文：日复一日，慢慢延续到战国时期，诸侯封君仍流连沉湎与逸乐，遂至往而不能复返，终至于身死家亡，国土被秦国兼并。
English: Day after day, slowly extending into the Warring States period, the feudal lords and princes still lingered in depravity and pleasure, so that they could not return to the past, and eventually, as far as life and death, the land was annexed by Qin.

古文：秦二世尤以为娱。
现代文：秦二世更加喜好以音乐为娱乐。
English: Qin II preferred music as entertainment.

古文：丞相李斯进谏曰： 放弃《诗》《书》，极意声色，祖伊所以惧也；轻积细过，恣心长夜，纣所以亡也。 
现代文：丞相李斯谏说道： 放弃《诗》《书》所载的道理，沉溺于音声和女色，是引起殷代贤臣祖伊忧惧的原因；轻视细小过失的积累，在漫漫长夜放纵心意，这是殷纣王灭亡的原因。 
English: "Abandoning the principles contained in "Poetry" and "Books" and indulging in music and women are the reasons for the fear of Zhu Yi, a wise minister of the Yin Dynasty. Disregarding the accumulation of minor faults and indulging in a long night are the reasons for the demise of King Yin.

古文：赵高曰： 五帝、三王乐各殊名，示不相袭。
现代文：赵高说： 五帝、三王的乐曲各不相同，表明彼此不相沿袭。
English: Zhao Gao said: The music of the five emperors and three kings is different, indicating that they do not follow each other.

古文：上自朝廷，下至人民，得以接欢喜，合殷勤，非此和说不通，解泽不流，亦各一世之化，度时之乐，何必华山之騄耳而后行远乎？ 
现代文：而上自朝廷，下至百姓，得以同欢喜，共勤劳，非音乐上下的和顺欢悦不能相通，结节的恩泽不能流布，各自同样是一世的教化，超度时俗的音乐。难道一定要有产华山的騄耳骏马，然后才能远行吗？ 
English: On the other hand, from the imperial court to the common people, they can share joy and work hard together. Without music, the harmony and joy of the upper and lower classes cannot be communicated, and the blessings of the nodes cannot be spread. Each of them is also a once-in-a-lifetime enlightenment, a music that transcends the times and customs. Is it necessary to have the ear of a horse produced in the Huashan Mountains before traveling far?

古文：二世然之。
现代文：秦二世认为他说得对。
English: Qin II thought he was right.

古文：高祖过沛诗《三侯之章》，令小儿歌之。
现代文：汉高祖讨平淮南王黥布的叛乱，回兵路过沛郡时，作了《三侯之章》的诗歌，让小孩学着唱。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty was trying to quell the rebellion of the Huainan King Zhibu, and his troops were passing through Pei County, he composed the poem "Chapter of the Three Princes" for the children to learn to sing.

古文：高祖崩，令沛得以四时歌舞宗庙。
现代文：高祖逝世的时候，朝廷命令沛郡一年四季都要在祭祀宗庙的时候，以此诗为歌舞乐曲。
English: At the time of Gaozu's death, the imperial court ordered Pei County to use this poem as a song and dance piece all year round when worshiping the ancestral temple.

古文：孝惠、孝文、孝景无所增更，于乐府习常肄旧而已。
现代文：历孝惠、孝文、孝景帝在位时无所变更，乐府中不过是演习旧有乐曲罢了。
English: There was no change during the reigns of Emperor Xiaowen, Emperor Xiaowen and Emperor Xiaoqing, and the music was just a rehash of the old music.

古文：至今上即位，作《十九章》，令侍中李延年次序其声，拜为协律都尉。
现代文：今皇帝即位后，作《郊祀歌十九章》，命侍中李延年次第配曲，因封拜李为协律都尉官。
English: After the current emperor ascended to the throne, he composed "The 19th Chapter of the Suburban Worship Song" and arranged the music according to the order of Li Yannian, who was appointed to the post of lieutenant governor.

古文：通一经之士不能独知其辞，皆集会五经家，相与共讲习读之，乃能通知其意，多《尔雅》之文。
现代文：当时仅通晓一部经书的儒士们不能单独解释歌辞含意，必会集五经各名家，共同讲习、研读，才能贯通、明白其中的意思，歌辞中许多是出自《尔雅》的文字。
English: At that time, the Confucianists who were only familiar with one scripture could not explain the meaning of the lyrics alone. They would have to collect the famous Five Classics and study and study them together in order to penetrate and understand the meaning. Many of the lyrics were from "Lya."

古文：汉家常以正月上辛祠太一甘泉，以昏时夜祠，到明而终。常有流星经于祠坛上。
现代文：汉代朝廷常常在正月的第一个辛日在甘泉宫祭祀太一神，从黄昏开始夜祀，到黎明时结束，祭祀的时候常有流星划过祠坛的上空。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the imperial court would often hold a sacrifice to the god Taishin on the first day of the first month of the year. The evening service would begin at dusk and end at dawn. During the service, meteors would often streak across the altar.

古文：使僮男僮女七十人俱歌。
现代文：安排男女儿童共七十人一起歌唱。
English: A total of seventy boys and girls were arranged to sing together.

古文：春歌《青阳》，夏歌《朱明》，秋歌《西暤》，冬歌《玄冥》。
现代文：春季唱《青阳》歌，夏季唱《朱明》歌，秋天唱《西暤》歌，冬天唱《玄冥》歌。
English: In the spring, they sing the "Blue and Yellow" song, in the summer they sing the "Red and White" song, in the autumn they sing the "Pearl of the West" song, and in the winter they sing the "Dark and Light" song.

古文：世多有，故不论。
现代文：这些歌辞世间多有流传，所以不再记述。
English: Most of these sayings have been passed down through the ages, so they are no longer recorded.

古文：又尝得神马渥洼水中，复次以为《太一之歌》。
现代文：又曾在渥洼水中得神马，复配曲为《太一之歌》。
English: In addition, he once won a divine horse in Wodaechi, and the complex arrangement was "Taichi's Song."

古文：歌曲曰： 太一贡兮天马下，沾赤汗兮沫流赭。骋容与兮跇万里，今安匹兮龙为友。 
现代文：歌曲说： 太一神的恩赐啊，天马降临人间，汗流如血啊，嘴里流出褐色的唾液，从容驰骋啊，一跃过万里，谁能匹敌啊，龙是它的朋友 。
English: The song says: "O gift of the gods, the heavenly horse descends to the human world, sweats like blood, brown saliva flows from the mouth, gallops with ease, leaps over thousands of miles, who can match it, the dragon is its friend."

古文：后伐大宛得千里马，马名 蒲梢 ，次作以为歌。歌诗曰： 天马来兮从西极，经万里兮归有德。承灵威兮降外国，涉流沙兮四夷服。 
现代文：此后兵伐大宛得到千里马，名为蒲梢，次序其韵作成歌曲；歌词是： 天马来哟远自西极，经万里哟归于有德的帝王，承神灵之威哟收降外国，涉过流沙哟四夷臣服。 
English: After that, the soldiers of the Great Crusade obtained a thousand horses, named Pu Zhi, and the order of their rhyme was made into a song; the lyrics are: Heavenly horses came far from the West Pole, after thousands of miles, they returned to the virtuous emperor, under the influence of the divine spirit, they retreated to foreign countries, and waded through the quicksand, they submitted to the four barbarians.

古文：中尉汲黯进曰： 凡王者作乐，上以承祖宗，下以化兆民。
现代文：中尉汲黯进谏说： 大凡称王的人创作音乐，上以继承祖宗功业，下以感化亿万臣民。
English: Lt. Kuching Jinjun said, "Great kings create music to inherit their ancestors' achievements and to inspire hundreds of millions of their subjects.

古文：今陛下得马，诗以为歌，协于宗庙，先帝百姓岂能知其音邪？ 
现代文：如今陛下得到一匹马，又是作诗又是作歌，还要作为祭祖的郊祀歌，先帝和百姓怎么能理解这种音乐呢？ 
English: Now that His Majesty has been given a horse, he is writing poems and songs, and he also wants to use it as a suburban worship song for his ancestors. How can the former emperor and the people understand this kind of music?

古文：上默然不说。
现代文：皇上听了默默无言，心中不悦。
English: The Emperor listened in silence, not pleased.

古文：丞相公孙弘曰： 黯诽谤圣制，当族。 
现代文：丞相公孙弘说： 汲黯诽谤皇上的作品，应当处以灭族之刑 。
English: The prime minister, Sun Hong, said: "Those who slander the emperor's works should be punished with the death penalty.

古文：凡音之起，由人心生也。
现代文：大凡音的起始，是由人心产生的。
English: The beginning of the great banal sound is produced by the human heart.

古文：人心之动，物使之然也。
现代文：而人心的变动，是外物造成的。
English: But the changes in people's hearts are caused by external things.

古文：感于物而动，故形于声；声相应，故生变；变成方，谓之音；比音而乐之，及干戚羽旄，谓之乐也。
现代文：心有感于物而变动，由声表现出来；声与声相应和，才发生变化；按照一定的方法、规律变化，就叫做音律；随着音的节奏用乐器演奏之，再借助武器、旗帜来表演，就叫做乐了。
English: When the mind is affected by an object and changes, it is expressed by the voice; when the voice is harmonized with the voice, it changes; when it changes according to a certain method and law, it is called a musical rhythm; when it is played with a musical instrument according to the rhythm of the sound, and then performed with the help of weapons and flags, it is called music.

古文：乐者，音之所由生也，其本在人心感于物也。
现代文：所以说乐是由音产生的，它的根源是人心有感于物造成的。
English: Therefore, it is said that music is produced by sound, and its root is caused by the human heart being affected by things.

古文：是故其哀心感者，其声噍以杀；其乐心感者，其声啴以缓；其喜心感者，其声发以散；其怒心感者，其声粗以厉；其敬心感者，其声直以廉；其爱心感者，其声和以柔。
现代文：因此，被物所感而生哀痛心情时，其声急促而且由高而低，由强而弱；心生欢乐时，其声舒慢而宽缓；心生喜悦的时候，其声发扬而且轻散；心生愤怒时，其声粗猛严厉；心生敬意时，其声正直清亮；心生爱意时，其声柔和动听。
English: Therefore, when the mind is saddened by something, its voice is rapid and changes from high to low, from strong to weak; when the mind is happy, its voice is soft and gentle; when the mind is joyful, its voice is loud and light; when the mind is angry, its voice is rough and harsh; when the mind is respectful, its voice is honest and clear; when the mind is loving, its voice is soft and beautiful.

古文：六者非性也，感于物而后动，是故先王慎所以感之。
现代文：以上六种情况，不关性情，任谁都会如此，是感于物而发生的变化，所以先王对外物的影响格外慎重。
English: The above six situations, regardless of temperament, anyone will be so, are changes caused by things, so the first king is particularly cautious about the influence of external things.

古文：故礼以导其志，乐以和其声，政以壹其行，刑以防其奸。
现代文：因此说礼用以诱导人的意志，乐用以调和人的声音，政用来统一人的行动，刑用来防止奸乱。
English: Therefore, it is said that etiquette is used to induce people's will, pleasure is used to reconcile people's voices, politics is used to unify people's actions, and punishment is used to prevent adultery.

古文：礼乐刑政，其极一也，所以同民心而出治道也。
现代文：礼乐刑政，它们的终极目的是相同的，都是为统一民众的思想，而使出现天下大治的世道啊。
English: Ceremonial, musical and criminal politics, their ultimate goal is the same, both are for the unification of the people's thoughts, and the emergence of the world's great rule of the world.

古文：凡音者，生人心者也。
现代文：大凡是音，都是从人的内心中产生的。
English: All great sounds come from the human heart.

古文：情动于中，故形于声，声成文谓之音。
现代文：感情在心里震荡，表现为声，片片段段的声组合变化为有一定结构的整体称为音。
English: Emotions vibrate in the heart and are expressed as sound, and the change in the sound combination of the film fragment is a whole with a certain structure called sound.

古文：是故治世之音安以乐，其正和；乱世之音怨以怒，其正乖；亡国之音哀以思，其民困。
现代文：所以太平之世的音中充满安适与欢乐，其政治和谐；动荡之世的音里充满了怨恨与愤怒，其政治必是混乱；灭亡及濒于灭亡的国家其音充满哀和愁思，百姓困苦无望。
English: Therefore, the sound of a peaceful world is full of comfort and joy, and its politics is harmonious; the sound of a turbulent world is full of resentment and anger, and its politics must be chaotic; the sound of a dying and dying country is full of sadness and sorrow, and the people are poor and hopeless.

古文：声音之道，与正通矣。
现代文：声音的道理，是与政治相通的。
English: The principle of sound is connected with politics.

古文：宫为君，商为臣，角为民，征为事，羽为物。
现代文：五声中宫为君，商为臣，角为民，徵为事，羽为物。
English: In five voices, the middle palace is you, the merchant is the vassal, the corner is the people, the recruitment is the matter, and the feather is the thing.

古文：五者不乱，则无惉懘之音矣。
现代文：君、臣、民、事、物五者不乱，就不会有敝败不和的音声。
English: If the five elements of ruler, vassal, people, matter, and thing are not in disorder, there will be no sound of discord.

古文：宫乱则荒，其君骄；商乱则捶，其臣坏；角乱则忧，其民怨；征乱则哀，其事勤；羽乱则危，其财匮。
现代文：宫声乱则五声废弃，其国君必骄纵废政；商声乱则五声跳掷不谐调，其臣官事不理；角声乱五音谱成的乐曲基调忧愁，百姓必多怨愤；徵音乱则曲多哀伤，其国多事；羽声乱曲调倾危难唱，其国财用匮乏。
English: If the palace is in disarray, the five tones will be discarded, and the country's ruler will be arrogant and wasteful; if the merchant is in disarray, the five tones will be discordant, and the officials will ignore it; if the horn is in disarray, the five-tone music will be sad, and the people will be resentful; if the call is in disarray, the music will be sad, and the country will be troubled; if the feather is in disarray, the music will be dangerous and difficult to sing, and the country will be short of money.

古文：五者皆乱，迭相陵，谓之慢。
现代文：五声全部不准确，就是迭相侵陵，称为慢。
English: All five voices are inaccurate, that is, the phased invasion of the mausoleum is called slow.

古文：如此则国之灭亡无日矣。
现代文：这样国家的灭亡也就没有多少日子了。
English: In this way, the country's demise is not far off.

古文：郑卫之音，乱世之音也，比于慢矣。桑间濮上之音，亡国之音也，其政散，其民流，诬上行私而不可止。
现代文：郑国、卫国的音声，是乱世之音，可与慢音相比拟；桑间濮上的音声，是亡国之音，其国的政治放散，百姓流荡，臣子诬其君，在下位者不尊长上，公法废弃，私情流行而不可纠正。
English: The sound of Zheng Guo and the defense of the country is the sound of a chaotic world, which can be compared to a slow song; the sound on the mulberry reed is the sound of a ruined country, the country's politics are scattered, the people are wandering, the vassals are slandering their prince, the subordinates do not respect their superiors, public law is abandoned, and private feelings are popular and cannot be corrected.

古文：凡音者，生于人心者也；乐者，通于伦理者也。
现代文：大凡音律，都是从人的内心中形成的；乐，是与伦理相通的。
English: Great melodies are formed from the human heart; music is connected with ethics.

古文：是故知声而不知音者，禽兽是也；知音而不知乐者，众庶是也。
现代文：所以只知道声音而不知调和音律的，是禽兽；只知道音律而不知创作音乐的，是普通百姓。
English: Therefore, those who only know the sound but do not know how to harmonize are beasts; those who only know the rhythm but do not know how to create music are ordinary people.

古文：唯君子为能知乐。
现代文：唯有君子才懂得乐。
English: Only a gentleman knows how to have fun.

古文：是故审声以知音，审音以知乐，审乐以知政，而治道备矣。
现代文：所以详细审察声音以了解音律，审察音律以了解音乐，审察音乐以了解政治情况，这样治理天下的方法也就完备了。
English: Therefore, the detailed examination of the sound to understand the rhythm, the examination of the rhythm to understand the music, the examination of the music to understand the political situation, and the method of governing the world in this way are also complete.

古文：是故不知声者不可与言音，不知音者不可与言乐。知乐则几于礼矣。
现代文：因此不懂得声音的不足以与他谈论音律，不懂得音律的不足以与他谈论音乐，懂得音乐就近于明礼了。
English: Therefore, not knowing the sound is not enough to talk to him about the music, not knowing the music is not enough to talk to him about the music, knowing the music is close to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：礼乐皆得，谓之有德。德者得也。
现代文：礼乐的精义都能得之于心，称为有德，德就是获得的意思。
English: The essence of ceremonial music can be obtained from the heart, which is called having virtue, and virtue is the meaning of acquisition.

古文：是故乐之隆，非极音也；食飨之礼，非极味也。
现代文：所以说音乐的隆盛，不在于极尽音声的规模；宴享礼的隆盛，不在于肴馔的丰盛。
English: Therefore, the prosperity of music does not lie in the scale of the sound; the prosperity of the banquet does not lie in the abundance of the dishes.

古文：清庙之瑟，朱弦而疏越，一倡而三叹，有遗音者矣。
现代文：演奏《清庙》的瑟，外表是朱红色弦，下有二个通气孔，毫不起眼；演奏时一人唱三人咏叹，形式单调简单，然而于乐声之外寓意无穷。
English: In the performance of "Qingmiao," the outer appearance is vermilion-red strings, and there are two ventilation holes underneath, which is not at all inconspicuous; when performing, one person sings three arias, the form is monotonous and simple, but the meaning is endless outside of the music.

古文：大飨之礼，尚玄酒而俎腥鱼，大羹不和，有遗味者矣。
现代文：大飨的礼仪中崇尚玄酒，以生鱼为俎实，大羹用味道单一的咸肉汤，不具五味，然而，在实际的滋味之外另有滋味。
English: In the etiquette of the grand banquet, wine is advocated, raw fish is used as the filling, and the soup is a single-flavored salty broth, without five flavors, however, there is another taste in addition to the actual taste.

古文：是故先王之制礼乐也，非以极口腹耳目之欲也，将以教民平好恶而反人道之正也。
现代文：所以说古代圣王制定礼乐，不是为了满足口腹耳目的嗜欲，而是要以此教训百姓，使有正确的好恶之心，从而归于人道的正路上来。
English: Therefore, it is said that the ancient holy kings formulated ritual music, not to satisfy the appetites of the mouth, stomach and ears, but to teach the people in this way, to have the correct likes and dislikes, and thus to return to the right path of humanity.

古文：人生而静，天之性也；感于物而动，性之颂也。
现代文：人生来好静，这是上天赋予的本性；感知外物以后发生情感的变动，是本性的外在表现。
English: Life is calm, this is the nature given by heaven; emotional changes that occur after perceiving foreign objects are the external manifestation of nature.

古文：物至知知，然后好恶形焉。
现代文：外物来到身边后被心智感知，然后形成好恶之情。
English: When an external object comes around, it is perceived by the mind, and then likes and dislikes are formed.

古文：好恶无节于内，知诱于外，不能反己，天理灭矣。
现代文：好恶之情不节制于内，心智就会被外物诱惑，不能回归自己最初的心境，天理就要泯灭了。
English: If the likes and dislikes are not restrained within, the mind will be tempted by external things, unable to return to its original state of mind, and the heavenly law will be annihilated.

古文：夫物之感人无穷，而人之好恶无节，则是物至而人化物也。
现代文：外物给人的感受无穷无尽，而人的好恶之情没有节制，人就会就被身边的事物同化。
English: External things give people endless feelings, and if people's likes and dislikes are unrestrained, they will be assimilated by the things around them.

古文：人化物也者，灭天理而穷人欲者也。
现代文：人被外物同化，就会灭绝天理而穷尽人欲。
English: If a person is assimilated by a foreign object, it will destroy the heavenly principle and exhaust the human desire.

古文：于是有悖逆诈伪之心，有淫佚作乱之事。
现代文：于是就产生了狂悖、逆乱、欺诈、作假的念头，就会做出荒淫、佚乐、犯上作乱的事。
English: As a result, thoughts of rebellion, rebellion, deception, and deception arise, and they will commit acts of debauchery, debauchery, and rebellion.

古文：是故强者胁弱，众者暴寡，知者诈愚，勇者苦怯，疾病不养，老幼孤寡不得其所，此大乱之道也。
现代文：因此，强大者胁迫弱小，众多者施强暴于寡少，聪慧多智的欺诈愚昧无知，勇悍的使怯懦者困苦，疾病者得不到照顾，老人、幼童、孤儿、寡母得不到安置，这些是导致天下大乱的因素。
English: Therefore, the strong coerce the weak, the many oppress the few, the clever deceive the ignorant, the brave oppress the cowardly, the sick are not cared for, and the old, the young, the orphaned, and the widowed are not provided for. These are the factors that lead to chaos in the world.

古文：是故先王制礼乐，人为之节：衰麻哭泣，所以节丧纪也；钟鼓干戚，所以和安乐也；婚姻冠笄，所以别男女也；射乡食飨，所以正交接也。
现代文：所以，先王制礼作乐，人为的加以节制欲望：以披麻哭泣的礼仪制度，节制丧葬；钟鼓干戚等乐制，调和安乐；婚姻冠笄的制度，区别男女；乡射、大射、乡饮酒及其他宴客享食的礼节制度，端正人际间的交往关系。
English: Therefore, the pre-monarchical system of etiquette makes music and artificially restrains desires: the etiquette system of weeping in mourning, restrains funerals; the music system of gongs and drums, reconciles happiness; the system of marriage crowns, distinguishes between men and women; the etiquette system of town shooting, large shooting, town drinking and other banquet guests enjoying food, straightens interpersonal relationships.

古文：礼节民心，乐和民声，政以行之，刑以防之。
现代文：用礼节制民心，用乐调和民气，以政治推行之，刑罚防范之。
English: Use etiquette to control the people's hearts, use music to harmonize the people's mood, use politics to promote it, and use criminal punishment to prevent it.

古文：礼乐刑政四达而不悖，则王道备矣。
现代文：礼乐刑政四者都能发达而不相孛乱，帝王的治国之术也就完备了。
English: The four arts of etiquette, music, punishment, and politics could all be developed without conflict, and the emperor's art of governing the country was complete.

古文：乐者为同，礼者为异。
现代文：乐的特性是求同，礼的特征是求异。
English: The characteristic of music is to seek common ground, while the characteristic of etiquette is to seek differences.

古文：同则相亲，异则相敬。
现代文：求同使人们互相亲爱，求异则使人互相尊敬。
English: Seeking the same makes people love each other, but seeking differences makes people respect each other.

古文：乐胜则流，礼胜则离。合情饰貌者，礼乐之事也。
现代文：乐事太过不加节制，就会使人之间的尊卑界限混淆、流移不定；礼事太过不加节制，则使人们之间离心离德。
English: If the entertainment is too unrestrained, it will confuse and shift the boundaries of superiority and inferiority between people; if the ceremony is too unrestrained, it will alienate people from each other.

古文：礼义立，则贵贱等矣；乐文同，则上下和矣；好恶着，则贤不肖别矣；刑禁暴，爵举贤，则政均矣。
现代文：和合人情，使相亲爱，整饬行为、外貌，使尊卑有序，便是礼乐的功用了。礼的精义得以实现，那么高贵和低贱的等级就会明了；乐事得以统一，那么上下级的关系就会和顺，没有争斗；人们好恶分明，那么贤人与庸人自然区分开来；用刑罚禁止暴行，以爵赏推举贤能，政事就会彰显公正。
English: If the essence of etiquette can be realized, then the levels of nobility and lowliness will be clear; if music can be unified, then the relationship between superiors and subordinates will be harmonious and there will be no fighting; if people's likes and dislikes are clear, then the wise and the mediocre will be naturally distinguished; if violence is prohibited by punishment, and virtue is promoted by reward, then political affairs will be fair.

古文：仁以爱之，义以正之，如此则民治行矣。
现代文：以仁心关爱百姓，以义心纠正百姓的过失，这样就会天下大治了。
English: Caring for the people with a benevolent heart and correcting the people's mistakes with a righteous heart, this will lead to world peace.

古文：乐由中出，礼自外作。
现代文：乐是自人心中产生的，礼则是自外加于人的。
English: Pleasure is self-generated, while etiquette is self-imposed.

古文：乐由中出，故静；礼自外作，故文。
现代文：正因为乐自心出，所以它有静的特征；礼自外加于人身，其特征则是注重形式、外表。
English: Just because the music comes from the heart, it has the characteristics of stillness; the ritual is added to the person from the outside, and its characteristics are to pay attention to the form and appearance.

古文：大乐必易，大礼必简。
现代文：因而大乐的曲调、器具必甚简易，大礼必甚俭朴。
English: Therefore, the tunes and instruments of grand music must be very simple, and the grand ceremony must be very simple.

古文：乐至则无怨，礼至则不争。
现代文：乐事做得好了人心无怨，礼事做得好了则人无所争。
English: If the entertainment is well done, there will be no grudge, if the ceremony is well done, there will be no dispute.

古文：揖让而治天下者，礼乐之谓也。
现代文：所谓揖让而治天下，就是指的以礼乐治天下。
English: The so-called "give in and rule the world" refers to ruling the world with music.

古文：暴民不作，诸侯宾服，兵革不试，五刑不用，百姓无患，天子不怒，如此则乐达矣。
现代文：强暴之民不起而作乱，诸候对天子恭敬臣服，甲兵不起，刑罚不用，百姓无有忧患，天子没有怨怒，这样就是乐事发达了。
English: The violent people do not rise up and cause turmoil, the nations respect and submit to the heavenly son, the armored soldiers do not rise up, there is no need for punishment, the people have no sorrow, and the heavenly son has no anger. In this way, the fun is developed.

古文：合父子之亲，明长幼之序，以敬四海之内。
现代文：调合父子之间的亲情，申明长幼之间的次序，使四海之内互相敬爱。
English: To reconcile the affinity between father and son, to affirm the order between the eldest and youngest, to make the four seas love each other.

古文：天子如此，则礼行矣。
现代文：天子做到这些，算是礼事发达了。
English: If a child of God can do these things, it is considered to be a developed etiquette.

古文：大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节。
现代文：大乐与天地同样地和合万物，大礼与天地同样地节制万物。
English: Great music unites all things with heaven and earth in the same way, and great worship restrains all things with heaven and earth in the same way.

古文：和，故百物不失；节，故祀天祭地。
现代文：和合才使诸物生长不失；节制，才有了祭祀天地的不同仪式。
English: Harmony is what allows all things to grow without loss; temperance is what allows the different rituals of worshiping heaven and earth.

古文：明则有礼乐，幽则有鬼神，如此则四海之内合敬同爱矣。
现代文：人间有礼乐，阴司有鬼神，以此二者教民，就能做到普天之下互相敬爱了。
English: There is ritual music in the human world, and ghosts and gods in the netherworld. By teaching the people these two things, they will be able to love each other all over the world.

古文：礼者，殊事合敬者也；乐者，异文合爱者也。
现代文：礼，是要在各种场合下都作到互相尊敬；乐，则是不论采用何种形式都体现同样的爱心。
English: Rite is to show mutual respect in all occasions; music, no matter what form it takes, embodies the same love.

古文：礼乐之情同，故明王以相沿也。
现代文：礼乐这种合敬合爱之情永远相同，是以古代贤明帝王－代代因袭下来。
English: This feeling of reverence and love is always the same, and it has been inherited from ancient wise emperors from generation to generation.

古文：故事与时并，名与功偕。
现代文：使得礼乐之事与时代相附，盛名与功德相附。
English: so that the ritual music is linked to the times, and the fame is linked to the merits.

古文：故钟鼓管磬羽龠干戚，乐之器也；诎信俯仰级兆舒疾，乐之文也。
现代文：所以钟鼓管磬羽籥干戚，只是乐所用器具；屈伸俯仰聚散舒疾，是乐的表面形式。
English: Therefore, the gong, the drum, the flute, and the gong are only the instruments used for music; flexion, extension, pitching, concentration, and relaxation are the surface forms of music.

古文：簠ǔ簋ǐ俎豆制度文章，礼之器也；升降上下周旋裼袭，礼之文也。
现代文：而簠簋俎豆制度文章，是礼所用器具；升降上下周旋袒免，是礼的表面形式。
English: And the pea system article is the equipment used for the ceremony; the lifting and lowering of the upper and lower circumferential yoke is the surface form of the ceremony.

古文：故知礼乐之情者能作，识礼乐之文者能术。
现代文：知礼乐之情的才能制礼作乐，识得礼乐表面形式的只能记述修习先王所作不能自制。
English: The ability to know the feeling of ceremonial music can control ceremonial music, and the ability to know the surface form of ceremonial music can only describe the lack of self-control in practicing what the first king did.

古文：作者之谓圣，术者之谓明。
现代文：能自制作的称为圣，记述修习先王制作的称为明。
English: Those that can be made by oneself are called sacred, and those that are made by the previous king are called sacred.

古文：明圣者，术作之谓也。
现代文：谓明谓圣，就是能述能作的意思。
English: The word "sacred" means "able to be recited" or "able to be performed."

古文：乐者，天地之和也；礼者，天地之序也。
现代文：乐是模仿天地的和谐产生的；礼是模仿天地的有序性产生的。
English: Music is produced by imitating the harmony of heaven and earth; ritual is produced by imitating the orderliness of heaven and earth.

古文：和，故百物皆化；序，故群物皆别。
现代文：和谐，才能使万物都化育生长；有序，才使万物都有区别。
English: Harmony is what makes all things grow and develop; order is what makes all things different.

古文：乐由天作，礼以地制。
现代文：乐是按照天作成，礼是仿照地所制。
English: Music is made according to the heavens, and ritual is made according to the patterns of the earth.

古文：过制则乱，过作则暴。
现代文：所制过分了就会由于贵贱不分而生祸乱，所作过分则会因上下不和而生强暴。
English: If the system is overstrained, it will cause disasters due to the differences between the rich and the poor, and if it is overstrained, it will cause violence due to the discord between the upper and lower classes.

古文：明于天地，然后能兴礼乐也。
现代文：明白了天地的这些性质，然后才能制礼作乐。
English: Only when we understand these properties of heaven and earth can we make music.

古文：论伦无患，乐之情也；欣喜欢爱，乐之官也。
现代文：言与实和合不悖，是乐的主旨；欣喜欢爱，是乐的事迹。
English: Harmony between words and reality is the keynote of music; joy in love is the cause of music.

古文：中正无邪，礼之质也；庄敬恭顺，礼之制也。
现代文：而中正无邪曲，是礼的实质，庄严敬顺从则是礼的形制。
English: While neutral and innocent is the essence of etiquette, solemn and respectful obedience is the form of etiquette.

古文：若夫礼乐之施于金石，越于声音，用于宗庙社稷，事于山川鬼神，则此所以与民同也。
现代文：至于礼乐加于金石，度为乐曲，用于祭祀宗庙社稷和山川鬼神的形式，天子与众民都是一样的。
English: As for the ceremonial music added to the gold and stone, it is a music, used for the form of the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temples and shrines and the mountains and rivers ghosts, the heavenly son and all the people are the same.

古文：王者功成作乐，治定制礼。
现代文：功业成就了则制作乐，政治安定了就制定礼。
English: When the work is accomplished, music is made, and when the political situation is stable, a ceremony is held.

古文：其功大者其乐备，其治辨者其礼具。
现代文：武功大的所制乐更加完备，文治广的所作礼制也更为具体。
English: The music composed by Wu Gongda is more complete, and the etiquette made by Wenzhi Guang is also more specific.

古文：干戚之舞，非备乐也；亨孰而祀，非达礼也。五帝殊时，不相沿乐；三王异世，不相袭礼。
现代文：像舞动干戚那样的武乐，只歌颂武功，就不是完备的乐；礼重文，所以祭重气不重味，用烹熟的食物祭祀不是盛大的礼。五帝在位不同时，所作乐不相沿袭；三王不同世，也各自有礼，互不相同。
English: Martial music, like the dance of the kanzhi, is not complete music if it only praises martial skills; the ritual is heavy, so the sacrifice is not heavy, and the sacrifice with cooked food is not a grand ritual. When the five emperors were not on the throne, the music they made did not follow each other; the three kings had their own rituals in different ages, and they were different from each other.

古文：乐极则忧，礼粗则偏矣。
现代文：乐太过则废事，后必有忧患，礼太简则不易周全，往往有偏漏。
English: If the entertainment is too excessive, it will be a waste of time, and there will be sorrow afterwards. If the etiquette is too simple, it is not easy to be thorough, and there are often omissions.

古文：及夫敦乐而无忧，礼备而不偏者，其唯大圣乎？
现代文：至于乐敦厚而无有忧患，礼完备又没有偏漏的，岂不是唯有大圣人才能如此吗？
English: As for being happy without being sad, and having a complete and unbroken ritual, isn't that something only a great saint can do?

古文：天高地下，万物散殊，而礼制行也；流而不息，合同而化，而乐兴也。
现代文：天空高远，地面低下，万物分散又各不相同，仿照这些实行了礼制；万物流动，变化不息，相同者合，不同者化，仿照这些兴起了乐。
English: The sky is high and far away, the ground is low, all things are scattered and different, and the etiquette is implemented according to these examples; all things flow, change constantly, the same ones are combined, and the different ones are transformed, and according to these examples, music has arisen.

古文：春作夏长，仁也；秋敛冬藏，义也。
现代文：春天生，夏天长，化育万物，这就是仁；秋天收敛，冬天贮藏，敛藏决断，这就是义。
English: Spring born, summer long, nurturing all things, this is benevolence; autumn convergence, winter storage, storage decision, this is righteousness.

古文：仁近于乐，义近于礼。
现代文：乐能陶化万物，与仁相近，礼主决断，所以义与礼相近。
English: Music can potter all things, and is close to benevolence, and the celebrant is decisive, so righteousness is close to propriety.

古文：乐者敦和，率神而从天；礼者辨宜，居鬼而从地。
现代文：乐使人际关系敦厚和睦，尊神而服从于天；礼能分别宜贵宜贱，敬鬼而服从于地。
English: Music makes interpersonal relationships strong and harmonious, honors God and submits to heaven; etiquette can distinguish between high and low, honors the devil and submits to the earth.

古文：故圣人作乐以应天，作礼以配地。
现代文：所以圣人作乐以与天相应，制礼与地相应。
English: Therefore, the music of the saints corresponds to the heavens, and the ritual corresponds to the earth.

古文：礼乐明备，天地官矣。
现代文：礼乐详明而完备，天地也就各得其职了。
English: The liturgical music is detailed and complete, and heaven and earth each have their own function.

古文：天尊地卑，君臣定矣。
现代文：天尊贵，地卑贱，君臣之间的关系就像天地，其地位高下就确定了。
English: Heaven is noble, earth is lowly, the relationship between monarchs and ministers is like heaven and earth, and their status is determined.

古文：高卑已陈，贵贱位矣。
现代文：山泽高卑不同，布列在那里，公卿像山泽，其地位就有了贵贱之分。
English: Unlike the high and low of Yamazawa, Bure is there, and the nobles are like Yamazawa, and their status is divided into high and low.

古文：动静有常，大小大殊矣。
现代文：或动或静，都遵循一定的规律，大者静，小者动，万物的大小就可以区别了。
English: Whether moving or still, all follow a certain law. The big is still, the small is moving, and the size of all things can be distinguished.

古文：方以类聚，物以群分，则性命不同矣。
现代文：法术性行等无形体者以类相聚，不同的事物根据种类加以区分，那么他们的命运也就各不相同了。
English: When intangibles such as spells and sexes are grouped together according to kind, and different things are distinguished according to kind, then their fates will also be different.

古文：在天成象，在地成形，如此则体者天地之别也。
现代文：万物在天上出现征兆，在地下构成形体，如此说，礼就是天地差别的表现。
English: All things manifest signs in the heavens and form bodies in the earth, so to speak, and etiquette is a manifestation of the difference between heaven and earth.

古文：地气上隮，天气下降，阴阳相摩，天地相荡，鼓之以雷霆，奋之以风雨，动之以四时，暖之以日月，而百化兴焉，如此则乐者天地之和也。
现代文：地上的清气上升，天上的浊气下降，地气为阴，天气为阳，所以阴阳之气相促迫，天地之气相激荡，以雷霆相鼓动，以风雨相润泽，于是万物奋迅而出，并随四时而变动，再以日月的光泽相温暖，就变化生长起来了。如此说，乐就是天地万物间的和合和谐调。
English: The air of the earth rises, the air of the sky falls, the air of the earth rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the earth rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls, the air of the sky rises and falls

古文：化不时则不生，男女无别则乱登，此天地之情也。
现代文：天地化育不合时令，万物就不会生长；男女没有分别就会产生祸乱，这是天地的真实情况。
English: If heaven and earth do not grow in accordance with the times, all things will not grow; if men and women are not separated, there will be disasters. This is the true situation of heaven and earth.

古文：及夫礼乐之极乎天而蟠乎地，行乎阴阳而通乎鬼神，穷高极远而测深厚，乐着太始而礼居成物。
现代文：并且礼乐充斥于天地之间，连阴阳鬼神也与礼乐之事相关，高远至于日月星三辰，深厚如山川，礼乐都能穷尽其情。乐产生于万物始生的太始时期，而礼则产生于万物形成以后。
English: Moreover, ritual music abounds between heaven and earth, and even the yin and yang ghosts and gods are also related to ritual music. As far as the sun, moon and stars are concerned, as deep as mountains and rivers, ritual music can exhaust its feelings. Music originated in the primordial period of the birth of all things, while ritual music originated after the formation of all things.

古文：着不息者天也，着不动者地也。
现代文：生而不停息者是天，生而不动者是地。
English: He who is born and does not die is heaven, he who is born and does not move is earth.

古文：一动一静者，天地之间也。
现代文：有动有静，是天地间的万物。
English: There is movement and stillness in all things in heaven and earth.

古文：故圣人曰 礼云乐云 。
现代文：礼乐像天地，所以圣人才有以上关于礼乐的种种论述。
English: The liturgical music is like heaven and earth, so the saints have the above-mentioned discussions about the liturgical music.

古文：昔者舜作五弦之琴，以歌《南风》；夔始作乐，以赏诸侯。
现代文：舜曾经作五弦琴，用来歌唱《南风》的乐章；自夔开始作乐以赏赐诸侯。
English: Zou had once made a five-stringed fiddle, which was used to sing the music of "South Wind"; Zi Zou began to make music to reward the princes.

古文：故天子之为乐也，以赏诸侯之有德者也。
现代文：所以天子作乐，是为了赏赐那些有德行的诸侯的。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven made music in order to reward those virtuous princes.

古文：德盛而教尊，五谷时孰，然后赏之以乐。
现代文：德行隆盛而又教化尊显，五谷丰登，不失季节，然后赏给乐舞。
English: Virtue flourishes and enlightenment is exalted, wealth abounds, there is no loss of season, and then music and dance are rewarded.

古文：故其治民劳者，其舞行级远；其治民佚者，其舞行级短。故观其舞而知其德，闻其谥而知其行。
现代文：因此治化使民劳苦者，赏给的乐队人数少，行短，相互连缀的距离远；治化使民安佚的，赏给的乐队人数多，行长而缀距短，所以只要看诸侯的乐舞就能知道他德行的大小，听他的谥号就能知道他行为的善恶。
English: Therefore, for those who make the people work hard, the number of bands awarded is small, the lines are short, and the distance between them is far; for those who make the people peaceful, the number of bands awarded is large, the lines are long and the distance between them is short, so as long as you look at the music and dance of the lords, you can know the size of his virtue, and listen to his nickname, you can know the good and evil of his behavior.

古文：《大章》，章之也；《咸池》，备也；《韶》，继也；《夏》，大也；殷、周之乐尽也。
现代文：乐名《大章》，是表章尧德盛明的意思；乐名《咸池》，是说黄帝施德咸备，无有不及；乐名为《韶》，表示舜能绍继尧的功德；夏就是大，所以《夏》乐表示禹能光大尧舜的功德；殷乐《大濩》、周乐《大武》，也都是各自尽述其人事的。
English: The name of the music "Dazhang" is the meaning of the title "Daxing Shengming"; the name of the music "Hanchi" is to say that the Yellow Emperor Shide Shengbing, nothing less than; the name of the music "Ji" is to indicate the merits of the Emperor Shih; the summer is big, so the "Summer" music indicates the merits of the Emperor Shih; the Yin music "Daxing" and the Zhou music "Dawu" are also to fully describe their personnel affairs.

古文：天地之道，寒暑不时则疾，风雨不节则饥。
现代文：天地运行的规律，寒暑不按时而至就会产生疾病，风雨无节制就产生饥荒。
English: According to the law of the movement of heaven and earth, if the cold and heat do not arrive on time, diseases will occur, and if the wind and rain are unrestrained, famine will occur.

古文：教者，民之寒暑也，教不时则伤世。
现代文：政治、教化，犹如百姓的寒暑，教化不合时宜就会伤害世道。
English: Politics and indoctrination are like the cold and heat of the common people. If the indoctrination is not timely, it will harm the world.

古文：事者，民之风雨也，事不节则无功。
现代文：劳役工事，犹如老百姓的风雨，不加节制就会一事无成。
English: Labor service construction, just like the ups and downs of the common people, will achieve nothing without restraint.

古文：然则先王之为乐也，以法治也，善则行á象德矣。
现代文：这样古代圣王创作音乐，用来作为治化的象征。好的乐舞，其行长短就象征着治化之德的大小。
English: In this way, the ancient sages composed music as a symbol of curing, and the length of good music and dance symbolized the extent of the virtue of curing.

古文：夫豢豕为酒，非以为祸也；而狱讼益烦，则酒之流生祸也。是故先王因为酒礼，一献之礼，宾主百拜，终日饮酒而不得醉焉，此先王之所以备酒祸也。
现代文：养猪造酒，不是为了惹事生非，但有了酒肉以后，由于酗酒斗殴，刑狱诉讼的事更加繁多了，所以先王制定了饮酒的礼节制度，有献有酬，一献之间，宾主互拜不计其数，以致终日饮酒也不会醉倒，以此解决酒食造成的祸端。
English: Raising pigs to make wine was not intended to stir up trouble, but after the introduction of wine and meat, due to alcoholism and fights, prison proceedings became more and more complicated. Therefore, the first king established a drinking etiquette system. There was a dedication and a reward, and between each offering, countless guests worshipped each other, so that they would not get drunk all day long, thus solving the scourge caused by drinking and eating.

古文：故酒食者，所以合欢也。
现代文：有了酒礼才可以说：酒食，是用来合众而欢乐的。
English: It is only with the gift of wine that we can say: wine and food are used to celebrate and make merry.

古文：乐者，所以象德也；礼者，所以闭淫也。
现代文：乐是用来象征德行的，礼是用来防止行为过分的。
English: Pleasure is used to symbolize virtue, and etiquette is used to prevent excessive behavior.

古文：是故先王有大事，必有礼以哀之；有大福，必有礼以乐之：哀乐之分，皆以礼终。
现代文：所以古代圣王有死丧大事，必有相应的礼以表示哀痛之情；有祭祀等祈福喜庆大事，必有相应的礼以遂顺其欢乐的心情。哀痛、欢乐的程度，都视礼的规定为准。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, when a holy king died, there must have been a corresponding ceremony to express the feelings of grief; when there was a ritual to pray for good fortune or a festive event, there must have been a corresponding ceremony to express the joyous mood. The degree of grief and joy depended on the rules of the ceremony.

古文：乐也者，施也；礼也者，报也。
现代文：乐的性质是施予；礼的性质是报答。
English: The nature of pleasure is to bestow; the nature of courtesy is to repay.

古文：乐，乐其所自生；而礼，反其所自始。
现代文：乐的目的是为自己心中所生的情感而表示欢乐；而礼的目的是要追反其始祖的功绩加以祭祀。
English: The purpose of music is to express joy for the emotions born in one's heart, while the purpose of ritual is to worship the achievements of one's ancestors.

古文：乐章德，礼报情反始也。
现代文：乐的作用是张扬功德，礼却是要反映自身得民心的情况，并追思其原因。
English: The role of music is to promote merit, while the role of etiquette is to reflect on how one has won the hearts of the people and to reflect on the reasons for this.

古文：所谓大路者，天子之舆也；龙旗九旒，天子之旌也；青黑缘者，天子之葆龟也；从之以牛羊之群，则所以赠诸侯也。
现代文：礼主报，试看诸侯所有的那种称为大路的金玉车子，原是天子之车；图绘交龙、饰有九旒的旗子，原是天子之旗；青黑须髯，用于占卜的宝龟，原是天子之龟；还附带有成群的牛羊，所有这些都是天子回报来朝诸侯的礼品。
English: The master of the ceremony said, "Try the golden chariot called the Great Road, which is the chariot of the son of heaven, the dragon and the flag with nine ribs, which is the flag of the son of heaven, the tortoise, which is used for divination, which is the tortoise of the son of heaven, and the herds of cattle and sheep, all of which are gifts from the son of heaven to the princes."

古文：乐也者，情之不可变者也；礼也者，理之不可易者也。
现代文：乐歌颂的是人情中永恒不变的感情；礼表现的则是世事中不可移易的道理。
English: Music celebrates the eternal and unchanging feelings in human relationships; etiquette expresses the immutable truth in the world.

古文：乐统同，礼别异，礼乐之说贯乎人情矣。
现代文：乐在于表现人情中的共性部分，礼则是要区别人们之间的不同，礼乐相合就贯穿了人情的始终。
English: Music is to express the common part of human feelings, while etiquette is to distinguish the differences between people. The harmony of music and etiquette runs through the whole of human feelings.

古文：穷本知变，乐之情也；着诚去伪，礼之经也。
现代文：深得本源，又能随时而变，是乐的内容特征；彰明诚实，去除诈伪，是礼的精义所在。
English: Reaching deep into the original source and being able to change at any time are the content characteristics of music; highlighting honesty and eliminating fraud is the essence of etiquette.

古文：礼乐顺天地之诚，达神明之德，降兴上下之神，而凝是精粗之体，领父子君臣之节。
现代文：礼乐相合就能顺从天地的诚实之情，通达神明变化的美德，以感召上下神祗，成就一切事物，统领父子君臣的大节。
English: When the ritual music is combined, it can obey the honest feelings of heaven and earth, attain the virtue of the change of gods, achieve all things with the inspiration of the upper and lower gods, and rule the great festival of father and son.

古文：是故大人举礼乐，则天地将为昭焉。
现代文：所以，在上位的贤君明臣若能按礼乐行事，天地将为此而变得光明。
English: Therefore, if the high-ranking wise men and sages can act according to the ritual music, heaven and earth will become bright for this.

古文：天地欣合，阴阳相得，煦妪复育万物，然后草木茂，区萌达，羽翮奋，角觡生，蛰虫昭稣，羽者妪伏，毛者孕鬻，胎生者不殰而卵生者不殈，则乐之道归焉耳。
现代文：至于使天地之气欣然和合，阴阳相从不孛，熏陶母育万物，然后使草木茂盛，种子萌发，飞鸟奋飞，走兽生长，蜇虫复苏，披羽的孵化，带毛的生育，胎生者不死胎，卵生者不破卵。乐的全部功能就在于此了。
English: As for making the qi of heaven and earth happily harmonize, the yin and yang never degenerate, the mother earth nurtures all things, and then makes the plants flourish, the seeds germinate, the birds fly, the beasts grow, the aphids revive, the feathered hatch, the hairy birth, the fetus does not die, the ovum does not break the egg. The whole function of music lies in this.

古文：乐者，非谓黄钟大吕弦歌干扬也，乐之末节也，故童者舞之；布筵席，陈樽俎，列笾豆，以升降为礼者，礼之末节也，故有司掌之。
现代文：乐，不是指的黄钟大吕和弦歌舞蹈，这些只是乐的细枝末节，所以只命童子奏舞也就够了；布置筵席，陈列樽俎笾豆，进退拜揖，这些所谓的礼，也只是礼的细枝末节，命典礼的职役掌管也就够了。
English: Music, not referring to the yellow bell and the string song and dance, these are just the minutiae of music, so it is enough for the life boy to play the dance; the arrangement of the banquet, the display of the barrels of peas, the entry and exit of the worship, these so-called ceremonies, are also just the minutiae of the ceremony, and the officials in charge of the life ceremony are enough.

古文：乐师辩乎声诗，故北面而弦；宗祝辩乎宗庙之礼，故后尸；商祝辩乎丧礼，故后主人。
现代文：乐师熟习声诗，只让他在下首演奏；宗祝熟习宗庙祭礼，所以跟在尸的后面；商祝熟习丧礼，所以跟在丧主的后面。
English: The musician is familiar with vocal poetry, only let him play the next piece; the ancestor is familiar with the temple festival, so he follows behind the corpse; the negotiator is familiar with the funeral, so he follows behind the bereaved.

古文：是故德成而上，蓺成而下；行成而先，事成而后。
现代文：所以说是道德成有所成的居上位，技艺有所成的居下位；功行成就的在前，操办琐事的在后。
English: Therefore, it is said that the moral achievement ranks higher, and the skill achievement ranks lower; the merit achievement is at the front, and the trivial operation is at the back.

古文：是故先王有上有下，有先有后，然后可以有制于天下也。
现代文：因此古代圣王规定上下有别，先后有序，然后才制礼作乐，颁行于天下。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy king stipulated that there should be a distinction between the upper and the lower, and that there should be order in succession, and only then should the ritual music be made and promulgated to the world.

古文：乐者，圣人之所乐也，而可以善民心。
现代文：乐是圣人娱乐的一种方式，而它可以使民心向善。
English: Music is a form of entertainment for sages, and it can turn people's hearts to the good.

古文：其感人深，其风移俗易，故先王着其教焉。
现代文：乐对人感化很深，可以移风易俗，所以先王明令乐为教育的内容之一。
English: Music has a deep influence on people and can change customs, so the king made it clear that music is one of the contents of education.

古文：夫人有血气心知之性，而无哀乐喜怒之常，应感起物而动，然后心术形焉。
现代文：凡人都有血气心智等天性，却没有不变的喜怒哀乐等常情，人心受外物的感应而产生波动，然后其心术邪正才显现出来。
English: Ordinary people have blood, spirit, mind and other natural qualities, but they do not have unchanging emotions such as joy, anger and sorrow. The human heart is affected by external things and produces fluctuations, and then its mental evil is revealed.

古文：是故志微焦衰之音作，而民思忧；啴缓慢易繁文简节之音作，而民康乐；粗厉勐起奋末广贲ē之音作，而民刚毅；廉直经正庄诚之音作，而民肃敬；宽裕肉好顺成和动之音作，而民慈爱；流辟邪散狄成涤滥之音作，而民淫乱。
现代文：所以人君心志细小而笃好繁文缛节的，促迫而气韵微弱的乐声产生，其民多悲思忧愁；人君疏缓大度、不拘细行的，简易而有节制的乐声产生，治下的百姓也必享安乐；人君粗疏刚猛的，亢奋急疾而博大的乐声产生，其民气刚毅；人君廉正不阿的，庄重诚挚的乐声产生，其民气整肃，相互礼敬；人君宽裕厚重，谐和顺畅的乐声产生，其治下的百姓多慈爱亲睦；人君放纵淫邪不正派的，乐声也必猥滥琐屑，不能永久，其国百姓也多淫乱。
English: Therefore, if a ruler is petty-minded and fond of red tape and extravagance, he will encourage the production of music with weak rhyme, and his people will be sad and sorrowful; if a ruler is generous and easy-going, he will produce simple and restrained music, and the people under his rule will also enjoy peace and happiness; if a ruler is coarse and strong-willed, he will produce vigorous and vigorous music, and his people will be brave; if a ruler is honest and upright, he will produce solemn and sincere music, and his people will be neat and respectful; if a ruler is broad and thick, he will produce harmonious and smooth music, and the people

古文：是故先王本之情性，稽之度数，制之礼义，合生气之和，道五常之行，使之阳而不散，阴而不密，刚气不怒，柔气不慑，四畅交于中而发作于外，皆安其位而不相夺也。
现代文：因此先王以人的性情为本，制成乐。并以日月行度相考察，礼义制度相节制，使与调和的阴阳二气相符合，引导诱发人们合于礼义仁智信五常的行为，使性刚的人阳刚之气不散，性柔的人阴柔之性不密，刚而不暴怒，柔而不胆小畏惧，阴阳刚柔四者交融于心中表现于行动之外，各自相安不相陵夺。
English: Therefore, the Ancestor King based on people's temperament and made music. He examined the phases of the sun and the moon, moderated the system of etiquette and righteousness, made it consistent with the harmonized yin and yang, and guided and induced people to act in accordance with the five constants of etiquette, righteousness, benevolence, wisdom, and faith, so that the masculine spirit of the strong-willed people would not be dispersed, the feminine spirit of the soft-willed people would not be dense, the strong-willed people would not be furious, and the soft-willed people would not be afraid. The intermingling of the four

古文：然后立之学等，广其节奏，省其文采，以绳德厚也。
现代文：然后把制成的这种乐立于学官等机构，使相教授，并且扩大它的节奏，简省它的文采，以此检验人君德行的厚薄。
English: Then, the made-up Le Lian will be taught by institutions such as academics and officials, and its rhythm will be expanded, and its literary style will be simplified, in order to test the thickness of people's moral conduct.

古文：类小大之称，比终始之序，以象事行，使亲疏贵贱长幼男女之理皆形见于乐：故曰 乐观其深矣 。
现代文：以小大不同分类，制为乐器，与音律高低相称，与五音终始的次序相合，用来衡量人们行为的标准，使亲疏贵贱、长幼男女的关系都以音乐的形势表现出来。
English: It is classified into small and large, made into musical instruments, commensurate with the pitch of the rhythm, consistent with the final order of the five tones, and used to measure people's behavior, so that the relationship between relatives and relatives, the relationship between men and women, and the relationship between men and women are all expressed in the music situation.

古文：土敝则草木不长，水烦则鱼鳖不大，气衰则生物不育，世乱则礼废而乐淫。
现代文：所以古语说 音乐的观赏在于其深刻内涵了 。土壤瘠薄草木就不能生长，水域烦扰鱼鳖就难以长大，时气衰微有生命之物就不能繁育，世道丧乱则会礼制废弃，乐声淫靡。
English: Therefore, the ancients said that the appreciation of music lies in its profound connotation. The soil is too thin and the plants and trees cannot grow, the waters disturb the fishes and it is difficult to grow, the vitality is weak and the living things cannot breed, the world is in turmoil, the etiquette will be abandoned, and the music will be lascivious.

古文：是故其声哀而不庄，乐而不安，慢易以犯节，流湎以忘本。
现代文：所以，这时的乐声悲哀而不庄重，虽以乐为乐，实不能自安，散漫轻佻而失于节奏，流连沉湎而不能返璞归真。
English: Therefore, the music at this time is sad and not solemn, although it is fun for fun, it really can not be self-assured, scattered and frivolous and lost in rhythm, lingering and unable to return to reality.

古文：广则容奸，狭则思欲，感涤荡之气而灭平和之德，是以君子贱之也。
现代文：声太缓是蕴酿奸情，急则是思逞其欲，有损善良的气质，泯灭了平和的德行，因此君子卑视这样的乐声。
English: If the voice is too soft, it will breed treachery, if it is too harsh, it will encourage one's desires, impair one's good temperament, and extinguish one's peaceful virtue. Therefore, a gentleman despises such music.

古文：凡奸声感人而逆气应之，逆气成象而淫乐兴焉。
现代文：人的气质都有顺、逆两个方面，所感不同有不同表现。受奸邪不正派的乐声所感，逆气就反映出来，逆气造成恶果，又促使淫声邪乐产生。
English: People's temperament has both positive and negative aspects, and the difference in feelings has different manifestations. When the music of the wicked and wicked is felt, the negative spirit is reflected, the negative spirit causes evil results, and promotes the production of obscene evil music.

古文：正声感人而顺气应之，顺气成象而和乐兴焉。
现代文：受正派的乐声所感，顺气就反映出来，顺气造成影响，又促使和顺的乐声产生出来。
English: Being affected by the music of the righteous, the prosperity is reflected, the prosperity is influenced, and the harmonious music is promoted.

古文：倡和有应，回邪曲直各归其分，而万物之理以类相动也。
现代文：奸正与逆顺相互倡和呼应，使正邪曲直各得其所，而世间万物的道理也都与此一般是同类互相感应的。
English: The evil and the virtuous and the evil and the virtuous mutually promote and respond to each other, so that the righteous, the wicked, and the crooked each get their own place, and the principles of all things in the world are generally of the same kind and mutually responsive.

古文：是故君子反情以和其志，比类以成其行。
现代文：所以居上位的君子才约束情性，和顺心志，比拟善类以造就自己美善的德行情操。
English: Therefore, it is only the superior gentleman who restrains his emotions and conforms to his heart's desire, and compares the virtuous with the virtuous in order to create his virtuous moral sentiments.

古文：奸声乱色不留聪明，淫乐废礼不接于心术，惰慢邪辟之气不设于身体，使耳目鼻口心知百体皆由顺正，以行其义。
现代文：务使不正当的声色不入心田，以免迷惑自己的耳目聪明；淫乐秽礼不与心术相接触，怠惰、轻慢、邪辟的气质不加于身体，使耳、目、口、鼻、心知等身体的所有部分都按照 顺 、 正 二字的原则，执行各自的官能功用。
English: Make sure that the improper tone of voice does not enter the heart field, so as not to confuse one's ears and eyes with wisdom; the obscene music and obscene etiquette do not come into contact with the mind, and the lazy, frivolous, and perverse temperament are not added to the body, so that all parts of the body, such as the ears, eyes, mouth, nose, and mind, perform their respective functional functions in accordance with the principles of "shun" and "positive."

古文：然后发以声音，文以琴瑟，动以干戚，饰以羽旄，从以箫管，奋至德之光，动四气之和，以着万物之理。
现代文：然后以如此美善的身体、气质发为声音，再以琴瑟之声加以文饰美化，以干戚谐调其动作，以羽旄装饰其仪容，用箫管伴奏，奋发神明至极恩德的光耀，以推动四时阴阳和顺之气，著明万物生发的道理。
English: Then, with such a beautiful body and temperament as the sound, it is embellished with the sound of the harp, its movements are harmonized with the sound of the gong, its appearance is decorated with feathers, and it is accompanied by the gong, and it strives to bring out the glory of the gods to the very end, to promote the four o'clock yin and yang and auspiciousness, and to highlight the reason for the birth of all things.

古文：是故清明象天，广大象地，终始象四时，周旋象风雨；五色成文而不乱，八风从律而不奸，百度得数而有常；小大相成，终始相生，倡和清浊，代相为经。
现代文：因而这种音乐歌声朗朗，音色像天空一样清明；钟鼓铿锵，气魄像地一样广大；五音终始相接，如四时一样的循环不止；舞姿婆娑，进退往复如风雨一般地周旋。以致与它相配的五色也错综成文而不乱，八风随月律而至没有失误，昼夜得百刻之数，没有或长或短的差失，大小月相间而成岁，万物变化终始相生，清浊相应，迭为主次。
English: Therefore, this kind of music has a loud singing voice, the tone is as clear as the sky; the bell and drum are loud, and the spirit is as vast as the earth; the five tones are connected from the beginning to the end, and the cycle like the four o'clock does not stop; the dancing posture is pounding, and the advance and retreat are like the wind and rain. So much so that the five colors that match it are also intricately written and not chaotic. The eight winds follow the rhythm of the moon and there are no mistakes, the number of days and nights is a hundred hours, there is no difference between long and short, the phases of the moon are large and small, and

古文：故乐行而伦清，耳目聪明，血气和平，移风易俗，天下皆宁。
现代文：所以乐得以施行，就能使人沦类分明，不相混淆；耳聪目明，不为恶声恶色所乱；血气平和，强暴止息；风俗移易，归于淳朴，天下皆得乐享安宁。
English: Therefore, if happiness can be practiced, people can be clearly classified and not confused with each other; the ears and eyes are clear and not disturbed by evil voices and evil colors; the blood is peaceful and the violence is stopped; the customs are easy to move and belong to simplicity, and everyone in the world can enjoy peace.

古文：故曰 乐者乐也 。
现代文：所以说 乐就是欢乐的意思 。
English: Therefore, "Le" means "happiness."

古文：君子乐得其道，小人乐得其欲。
现代文：居上位的君子为从乐中得到正天下的道理而欢乐，士庶人等为从乐中满足了自己的私欲而欢乐。
English: The high-ranking gentlemen rejoiced in the fact that they could obtain the truth of the world from music, and the commoners rejoiced in the fact that they could satisfy their selfish desires from music.

古文：以道制欲，则乐而不乱；以欲忘道，则惑而不乐。
现代文：若以道德节制私欲，就能得到真正的欢乐而不会以乐乱性；若因私欲遗忘了道德，就会因真性惑乱得不到真正的快乐。
English: If you restrain your selfish desires with morality, you will be able to obtain true joy, but not joylessness; if you forget morality because of your selfish desires, you will not obtain true joy because of the confusion of your true nature.

古文：是故君子反情以和其志，广乐以成其教，乐行而民乡方，可以观德矣。
现代文：因此君子约束情性以使心志和顺，推广乐治以促成其教化。乐得以施行而百姓心向道德，就可由此以观察人君的道德了。
English: Therefore, a gentleman restrains his emotions in order to make his mind harmonious, and promotes happiness to promote his enlightenment. If happiness can be implemented and the people's hearts can be moralized, then the morality of the people can be observed.

古文：德者，性之端也；乐者，德之华也；金石丝竹，乐之器也。
现代文：道德是端正了的人性，乐是道德发于外产生的光华，金石丝竹则是奏乐用的器具。
English: Morality is upright human nature, music is the brilliance of morality emanating from the outside, and the golden stone silk bamboo is the instrument used to play music.

古文：诗，言其志也；歌，咏其声也；舞，动其容也：三者本乎心，然后乐气从之。是故情深而文明，气盛而化神，和顺积中而英华发外，唯乐不可以为伪。
现代文：诗是表述心志的，歌是对诗词声调的咏唱，舞则只改变歌者的容色。志、声、容三者都以心为根本，再由诗、歌、舞加以表现，所以情致深远而又文明，气势充盛而能变化神通，心志的善美化成的和顺之气积于心中，才有言词声音等英华发于身外，只有乐不可能做假骗人。
English: Poetry is the expression of the heart's aspiration. Song is the chanting of the tone of the poem. Dance only changes the appearance of the singer. Aspiration, voice, and attitude are all based on the heart, and are then expressed by poetry, song, and dance. Therefore, the emotion is profound and civilized, the momentum is rich and can change the magic, and the harmony of the kindness and beauty of the heart is accumulated in the heart. Only the words and sounds are born outside the body. Only music can not deceive people.

古文：乐者，心之动也；声者，乐之象也；文采节奏，声之饰也。
现代文：乐是心被外物感动产生的；声是乐的表象；曲折变化等文采、强弱停顿等节奏，是对声的文饰。
English: Music is the result of the heart being moved by external objects; sound is the representation of music; rhythm such as twists and turns, strong and weak pauses, etc. are the decoration of sound.

古文：君子动其本，乐其象，然后治其饰。
现代文：君子之心被作为外物的道德这个本原所感动，又为它的外部形象声而欢乐，然后下功夫对声加以文饰，这就产生了乐。
English: The heart of a gentleman is moved by the principle of morality as an external thing, and rejoices in its external image and sound, and then makes an effort to decorate the sound, which produces music.

古文：是故先鼓以警戒，三步以见方，再始以着往，复乱以饬归，奋疾而不拔，极幽而不隐。
现代文：所以《武》乐先击鼓以警众，然后三举步表示伐纣开始、军至孟津而归，重复开始部分用来显示往日征伐的情景，舞毕整饬队形，鸣铙而退。舞姿奋疾而不失节，气势坚毅而不可拔，乐声含意幽深而清晰明了。
English: Therefore, the "Wu" music first beats the drum with the police, then three steps indicate the beginning of the felling, the army returns to Mengjin, the repeated beginning is partly used to show the scene of the previous day's conquest, the dance completes the formation, and the bell sounds and retreats. The dance posture is struggling but not out of line, the momentum is strong and cannot be pulled out, and the music has a deep and clear meaning.

古文：独乐其志，不厌其道；备举其道，不私其欲。
现代文：可见《武》乐作者对伐纣的志意独乐于心，而又不厌弃实现此志意的道德方法；他将这些道德方法全都作到了，并不为私欲所动。
English: It can be seen that the composer of "Wu" is very pleased with the intention of felling strawberries, but does not abandon the moral methods to achieve this intention; he has done all these moral methods, and is not motivated by selfishness.

古文：是以情见而义立，乐终而德尊；君子以好善，小人以息过：故曰 生民之道，乐为大焉 。
现代文：因而乐中不但伐纣的情形历历可见，其以有道伐无道的义旨也表现出来，乐毕，武王之德更加尊显了；在上位的君子观后心慕武王更加好善，士庶人观后痛惩纣恶而改正自己的过失。所以说 治理百姓的方法，乐是最重要的 。
English: Therefore, in the music, not only can be seen the situation of the cutting and pillaging, but also its meaning of having a road and no road is also shown. In the music, the virtue of King Wu is more respected; the upper-ranking gentlemen are more virtuous after watching the king, and the commoners are punished and corrected their mistakes after watching the commoners. Therefore, the method of governing the people, music is the most important.

古文：君子曰：礼乐不可以斯须去身。
现代文：君子说：礼乐片刻不可以离身。
English: The gentleman said, "You can't leave the ritual music for a moment.

古文：致乐以治心，则易直子谅之心油然生矣。
现代文：追求用乐治理人心，和易、正直、亲爱、诚信的心地就会油然而生。
English: The pursuit of using music to govern the hearts of the people, and the hearts of peace, honesty, love, and integrity will come into being.

古文：易直子谅之心生则乐，乐则安，安则久，久则天，天则神。
现代文：和易、正直、亲爱、诚信的心地产生就会感到快乐，心中快乐身体就会安宁，安宁则乐寿，长寿就会使人像对天一样的信从，信极生畏，就会如奉神灵。
English: Peaceful, honest, dear, and honest hearts will produce happiness, happy hearts will produce peace of mind, peace of mind will produce a long life, and long life will make people believe in the same way as they believe in heaven, and if they are extremely fearful, they will be like worshipping gods.

古文：天则不言而信，神则不怒而威。致乐，以治心者也；致礼，以治躬者也。
现代文：以乐治心，就能如天一样不言不语，民自信从；如神一样从不发怒，民自敬畏，制乐是用来治理人心的；治礼，则是用来治身的。
English: With music to govern the heart, one can be as silent as the heavens, and the people can confidently obey; like the gods, one can never be angry, and the people can only fear. Music is used to govern the heart of the people; while etiquette is used to govern the body.

古文：治躬则庄敬，庄敬则严威。
现代文：治身则容貌庄重恭敬，庄重恭敬则生威严。
English: The appearance of the ruler is dignified and respectful, and the dignified and respectful is dignified.

古文：心中斯须不和不乐，而鄙诈之心入之矣；外貌斯须不庄不敬，而慢易之心入之矣。
现代文：心中片刻不和不乐，卑鄙欺诈之心就会乘虚而入；外貌片刻不庄不敬，轻慢简易之心就会乘虚而入。
English: If the heart is not happy for a moment, the mean and deceitful heart will take advantage of the void; if the appearance is not dignified and disrespectful for a moment, the contemptible and simple heart will take advantage of the void.

古文：故乐也者，动于内者也；礼也者，动于外者也。
现代文：所以乐是对内心起作用的；礼是对外貌起作用的。
English: So pleasure works on the inside; politeness works on the outside.

古文：乐极和，礼极顺。
现代文：乐极平和，礼极恭顺。
English: The music is extremely peaceful, and the etiquette is extremely respectful.

古文：内和而外顺，则民瞻其颜色而弗与争也，望其容貌而民不生易慢焉。
现代文：心中平和而又外貌恭顺，百姓瞻见其容颜面色就不会与他争竞，望见他的容貌就不会生简易怠慢之心。
English: He is peaceful at heart and courteous in appearance. When people see his appearance, they will not compete with him. When they see his appearance, they will not have a careless heart.

古文：德辉动乎内而民莫不承听，理发乎外而民莫不承顺，故曰 知礼乐之道，举而错之天下无难矣 。
现代文：乐产生的道德的光耀在心中起作用，百姓无不承奉听从；礼产生的容貌举止的从容入理在外表起作用，百姓无不承奉顺从，所以说 懂得礼乐的道理，把它举而用之于天下，不会遇到难事 。
English: The moral brilliance generated by music works in the heart, and the people all obey; the tolerance of appearance and behavior generated by etiquette works on the outside, and the people all obey. Therefore, it is said that it is not difficult to understand the principle of etiquette and use it in the world.

古文：乐也者，动于内者也；礼也者，动于外者也。
现代文：乐是在心中起作用的，礼则是对人的容貌举止起作用。
English: Pleasure works on the heart, while etiquette works on one's appearance and demeanor.

古文：故礼主其谦，乐主其盈。
现代文：所以说礼主谦抑，乐主盈满。
English: That is why it is said that the master of ceremonies is modest, while the master of music is exuberant.

古文：礼谦而进，以进为文；乐盈而反，以反为文。
现代文：礼主谦抑而须自勉力进取，以进取为美德；乐主盈满须自加抑制，以抑制为美德。
English: The master of ceremonies is modest and must strive to be progressive, with progress as a virtue; the master of music is exuberant and must restrain himself, with restraint as a virtue.

古文：礼谦而不进，则销；乐盈而不反，则放。
现代文：礼若一昧谦抑，不自勉力进取，礼就会消亡，难以实行下去；乐只一昧盈满，不知自加抑制，就会流于放纵。
English: If the etiquette is restrained and does not strive to advance, the etiquette will die out and it will be difficult to implement it; if the music is full and does not know how to restrain itself, it will flow into indulgence.

古文：故礼有报而乐有反。
现代文：所以礼尚往来，讲究报答；乐有反复，曲终而复奏。
English: Therefore, courtesy is still reciprocated, and rewards are paid attention to; the music is repeated, and the piece ends with a complex.

古文：礼得其报则乐，乐得其反则安。
现代文：行礼得到报答心里才有快乐，奏乐有反复，心中才得安宁。
English: Only when one's propriety is rewarded can one be happy, only when one's music is repeated can one have peace of mind.

古文：礼之报，乐之反，其义一也。
现代文：礼的报答，乐的反复，意义是相同的。
English: The meaning of the reciprocation of courtesy and the repetition of pleasure are the same.

古文：夫乐者乐也，人情之所不能免也。
现代文：乐就是快乐的意思，是人情不可缺少的。
English: "Le" means "happiness" and is essential to human nature.

古文：乐必发诸声音，形于动静，人道也。
现代文：心中快乐就会发出声音，在行动中表现出来，这是人之必然。
English: Happiness in the heart will make a sound and manifest itself in action, which is inevitable for human beings.

古文：声音动静，性术之变，尽于此矣。
现代文：人性情心术的变化全都表现在声音与行动之中。
English: The changes in human nature, emotions, and tactics are all expressed in the sounds and actions.

古文：故人不能无乐，乐不能无形。形而不为道，不能无乱。
现代文：所以，人不能没有快乐，快乐不能没有形迹，有形迹而不为它确定某种规范，不能不出乱子。
English: Therefore, people can't be without happiness, happiness can't be without signs, and if there are signs, they can't set a certain standard for it, and it can't be without disorder.

古文：先王恶其乱，故制《雅》《颂》之声以道之，使其声足以乐而不流，使其文足以纶而不息，使其曲直繁省廉肉节奏，足以感动人之善心而已矣，不使放心邪气得接焉，是先王立乐之方也。
现代文：先王讨厌出乱子，才制定了雅正、颂扬之类的音声作为诱导，使一般人的音声足以做到欢乐而不流漫放纵，使乐的美善足以维系不绝，使它的曲直繁简、表里节奏，足以感发人的善心而已。不使人的放纵之心，淫邪之气与音声接触，是先王立乐的基本方法。
English: The previous king did not like to make a mess, so he developed the sound of elegance and praise as an inducement, so that the voice of the average person is enough to be happy without flowing indulgence, so that the beauty of the music is enough to maintain, so that its melody is simple and simple, and the rhythm inside and outside is enough to arouse people's goodwill. It is the basic method of the previous king to establish music without letting people's indulgence and lustful spirit come into contact with sound.

古文：是故乐在宗庙之中，君臣上下同听之，则莫不和敬；在族长乡里之中，长幼同听之，则莫不和顺；在闺门之内，父子兄弟同听之，则莫不和亲。
现代文：所以乐在宗庙中施行，君臣上下一同听了，则无不和顺恭敬；在族长乡里之中施行，长幼一起听了，无不和睦顺从；在家中演奏，父子兄弟听了，无不和睦亲爱。
English: Therefore, music is performed in the ancestral temple, and when the monarchs and ministers listen together, there is no discord and respect; it is performed in the patriarchal village, and when the elders and children listen together, there is no discord and obedience; it is performed at home, and when the father and son brothers listen, there is no discord and love.

古文：故乐者，审一以定和，比物以饰节，节奏合以成文，所以合和父子君臣，附亲万民也，是先王立乐之方也。
现代文：所以乐就是详审人声，以确定调和之音，并与金石匏木等乐器相比类，以装饰音声的节奏，使节奏调合，成为优美的乐章，以此和合父子君臣，使万民亲附，这是先王制乐的基本道理和手法。
English: Therefore, music is to examine the human voice in detail to determine the sound of the harmony, and compare it with musical instruments such as the golden beech tree, to decorate the rhythm of the sound, to make the rhythm harmonize, to become a beautiful movement, and to harmonize the father and son with the monarch and the people. This is the basic principle and method of the first king's music.

古文：故听其《雅》《颂》之声，志意得广焉；执其干戚，习其俯仰诎信，容貌得庄焉；行其缀兆，要其节奏，行列得正焉，进退得齐焉。
现代文：所以听了雅正、颂扬之类的音声，志向、意气变得宽广了；手持干戚，演习俯仰屈伸等舞姿，容貌变得庄严了；若标明行列位置，求得舞步与音声的节奏相合，则舞者行列方正，进退整齐。
English: Therefore, after listening to the sound of elegance and praise, the aspiration and spirit become broad; holding the stem stick, practicing the dance posture such as bending and stretching, the appearance becomes solemn; if the position of the procession is marked and the dance step is matched with the rhythm of the sound, the dancer's procession is square and advances and retreats neatly.

古文：故乐者天地之齐，中和之纪，人情之所不能免也。
现代文：因此说乐就是天地的齐同，是求得心中和美的纪纲，是人情断不可缺少的。
English: Therefore, it is said that music is the unity of heaven and earth, is the discipline to obtain the heart and beauty, and is an indispensable part of human life.

古文：夫乐者，先王之所以饰喜也；军旅鈇钺者，先王之所以饰怒也。
现代文：乐是先王用来文饰喜乐的，军队武器则是先王用来文饰愤怒的。
English: The former king used music to depict joy, while the former king used military weapons to depict anger.

古文：故先王之喜怒皆得其齐矣。
现代文：所以先王喜怒不妄发，整齐有规。
English: Therefore, the former king did not indulge in fits of joy and anger, but kept a tidy and orderly schedule.

古文：喜则天下和之，怒则暴乱者畏之。先王之道礼乐可谓盛矣。
现代文：喜则天下和乐，怒则暴乱者生畏，先王可说是把礼乐发展到了极盛的地步。
English: The first king can be said to have developed ceremonial music to its peak.

古文：魏文侯问于子夏曰： 吾端冕而听古乐则唯恐卧，听郑卫之音则不知倦。
现代文：魏文侯问子夏说： 我身服兖冕，恭恭敬敬地听古乐，却唯恐睡着了觉，听郑卫之音就不知道疲倦。
English: Wei Wenhou asked Zi Xia: I am wearing a crown and listening to ancient music respectfully, but I am afraid of falling asleep, and I do not know tiredness when listening to Zheng Wei's voice.

古文：敢问古乐之如彼，何也？
现代文：请问古乐那样令人昏昏欲睡，原因何在？
English: What is the reason for the somnolence of classical music?

古文：新乐之如此，何也？ 
现代文：新乐这样令人乐不知疲，又是为何？ 
English: What is it about new music that makes it such an all-consuming pleasure?

古文：子夏答曰： 今夫古乐，进旅而退旅，和正以广，弦匏á笙簧合守拊鼓，始奏以文，止乱以武，治乱以相，讯疾以雅。
现代文：子夏回答说： 如今的古乐，齐进齐退，整齐划一，乐声谐和、雅正，而且气势宽广，弦匏笙簧一应管弦乐器都听拊鼓节制，以擂鼓开始，以鸣金铙结束，将终以相理其节奏，舞姿迅捷且又雅而不俗。
English: Zixia replied, "Today's ancient music advances and retreats in unison, and is uniform and orderly. The music is harmonious, elegant, and has a wide range of momentum. The strings, reeds, and orchestral instruments are all controlled by the gongs and drums. It begins with the gongs and drums, ends with the sounding of the cymbals, and ends with the corresponding rhythm. The dance is fast and elegant.

古文：君子于是语，于是道古，修身及家，平均天下：此古乐之发也。
现代文：君子由这些特征称说古乐，谈论制乐时所含深意，近与自己修身、理家、平治天下的事相联系。这是古乐所起作用。
English: It is because of these characteristics that nobles speak of ancient music, and talk about the deep meaning of music making, which is closely related to their self-cultivation, family management, and world peace. This is the role of ancient music.

古文：今夫新乐，进俯退俯，奸声以淫，溺而不止，及优侏儒，獶杂子女，不知父子。
现代文：如今的新乐，进退曲折，或俯或偻，但求变幻，不求整齐，乐声淫邪，沉溺不反，并有俳优侏儒，侧身其间，男女无别，不知有父子尊卑，如弥猴麕聚。
English: Today's new music, twists and turns, or ups and downs, but seeks change, not neatness, the music is lascivious, indulgent, and there are haiku dwarfs, sideways between them, there is no difference between men and women, I don't know if there is a father and son, such as monkeys together.

古文：乐终不可以语，不可以道古：此新乐之发也。
现代文：乐终之后无余味可寻，又不与古事相连，这是新乐的作用。
English: After the end of the music, there is nothing left to be found, and it is not connected with the past, which is the role of the new music.

古文：今君之所问者乐也，所好者音也。
现代文：现在您所问的是乐，所喜好的却是音。
English: Now you are asking about music, but what you like is sound.

古文：夫乐之与音，相近而不同。 
现代文：乐与音虽然相近，其实不同 。
English: Although music and sound are similar, they are actually different.

古文：文侯曰： 敢问如何？ 
现代文：文侯说道： 请问音与乐有何不同？ 
English: Wen Hou said: What is the difference between sound and music?

古文：子夏答曰： 夫古者天地顺而四时当，民有德而五谷昌，疾疢不作而无祆祥，此之谓大当。
现代文：子夏答道： 古时候天地顺行，四时有序，民有道德，五谷丰盛，疾病不生，又无凶兆，一切都适当其时，恰到好处，这就称为大当。
English: Zixia replied, "In ancient times, the heavens and the earth were aligned, the four seasons were in order, the people were moral, the grain was plentiful, there were no diseases, and there were no ominous signs. Everything was appropriate, timely, and just right. This is called DaDang.

古文：然后圣人作为父子君臣以为之纪纲，纪纲既正，天下大定，天下大定，然后正六律，和五声，弦歌《诗》《颂》，此之谓德音，德音之谓乐。
现代文：然后圣人制作了父子君臣之类的礼仪作为纪纲法度，纪纲既立，天下真正安定了，天下安定，然后端正六律，调和五声，将雅正的诗篇和颂扬之声谱入管弦，这就是德音，德音才叫做乐。
English: Then the sage made the etiquette of father and son as the rules of discipline. The rules of discipline were established, the world was truly stable, the world was stable, and then the six laws were corrected, the five voices were harmonized, and the elegant poems and praises were recorded into the orchestra. This is the German sound, and the German sound is called music.

古文：《诗》曰： 莫其德音，其德克明，克明克类，克长克君。
现代文：《诗经·大雅·皇矣》说： 肃静宁定的德音啊，其德行能光照四方，既能光照四方又能施惠同类，能为人之长又能为人之君。
English: "The Book of Poems, Elegance, and the Emperor" says: "O serene and tranquil virtue, your virtue can illuminate the four quarters, can both illuminate the four quarters and benefit the same kind, can be a long time and can be a prince.

古文：王此大邦，克顺克俾。俾于文王，其德靡悔。
现代文：如今做了大邦之王，能慈和服众能择善而从，与文王相比，德行毫不逊色。
English: Now that he has become the king of a great nation, he is able to be kind and obedient to everyone, and he can choose what is good and follow it. Compared with King Wen, his virtue is not inferior.

古文：既受帝祉，施于孙子。 
现代文：既受了上天的赐福，又施于其子子孙孙 。
English: He was blessed by the heavens, and he passed it on to his children and grandchildren.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：今君之所好者，其溺音与？ 
现代文：如今您所喜好的不是这种属于德音的乐，岂不是那种沉溺难反的溺音吗？ 
English: Isn't it the music of the German chord that you like now, isn't it the drowning chord that you can't resist?

古文：文侯曰： 敢问溺音者何从出也？ 
现代文：文侯说： 请问溺音是怎样产生的？ 
English: Wen Hou said: How did the drowning sound come about?

古文：子夏答曰： 郑音好滥淫志，宋音燕女溺志，卫音趣数烦志，齐音骜辟骄志，四者皆淫于色而害于德，是以祭祀不用也。
现代文：子夏说： 溺音有几种：郑音是由于好违礼法而浸淫人志产生的，宋音是由于耽于女色而志气丧失产生的，卫音是由于促速劳顿而使人心志烦劳产生的，齐音是由于傲慢邪僻使人心志骄纵产生的，这四者都沉溺于女色而损害德行，所以祭祀时不使用它们。
English: Zixia said, "There are several kinds of intoxication: Zhengyin is caused by good violation of etiquette and leaching of human aspirations, Songyin is caused by indulgence in female sexuality and loss of morale, Weiyin is caused by promoting speed and weariness and making people's minds wear out, Qiyin is caused by arrogance and eccentricity and making people's minds arrogant. These four are all indulged in female sexuality and damage virtue, so they are not used in sacrifices.

古文：《诗》曰： 肃雍和鸣，先祖是听。 
现代文：《诗经·周颂·有瞽》说： 肃雍相和而鸣的声音，才是先祖之所听 。
English: "Shijing, Zhouxiong, Yuxuan" said: The sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound of the sound.

古文：夫肃肃，敬也；雍雍，和也。
现代文：肃肃，是尊敬的意思；雍雍，是和谐的意思。
English: Solemnity means respect; harmony means harmony.

古文：夫敬以和，何事不行？
现代文：尊敬而又和谐，何事不能成功？
English: With respect and harmony, what can't succeed?

古文：为人君者，谨其所好恶而已矣。
现代文：作为百姓的君主，不过是要对自己好恶之心的流露谨慎一些罢了。
English: As the people's monarch, he just needs to be more careful about the expression of his likes and dislikes.

古文：君好之则臣为之，上行之则民从之。《诗》曰： 诱民孔易 ，此之谓也。
现代文：君主喜好，臣子就会去实行，上行则下效。古《诗》说： 诱导百姓，十人容易 ，就是这个意思。
English: The ancient "Poem" said: "It is easy to induce the people, ten people, that is the meaning.

古文：然后圣人作为鼗鼓椌楬埙篪，此六者，德音之音也。
现代文：既能谨其好恶，然后圣人又制作了鞉鼓柷敔埙箎，这六种乐器音色质素无华，是属于德音一类的音声。
English: Even though he was able to respect their likes and dislikes, the sage then made gongs and drums. These six musical instruments are of mediocre quality and belong to the category of German sounds.

古文：然后钟磬竽瑟以和之，干戚旄狄以舞之。
现代文：然后又制成钟磬竽瑟等华美的音声与它们相赞和就文质兼备了，再以干戚旄羽等舞动之。
English: Then, it was made into gorgeous sounds such as gongs, and they were praised and had the same cultural quality. Then, it was danced with dry strings, feathers and so on.

古文：此所以祭先王之庙也，所以献酬酳酢也，所以官序贵贱各得其宜也，此所以示后世有尊卑长幼序也。
现代文：这种乐被用来祭祀先王宗庙，用于主客之间的献酳酬酢，用于序明官职大小、身份贵贱，使各得其宜，不相孛乱，用来向后世表示有尊卑长幼的次序。
English: This kind of music was used to worship the ancestral temple of the former king, for the offering of gifts between the host and the guest, for the order of the size of the official post, the status of the noble and the lowly, so that each one is appropriate and does not disturb the other, and for the future generations to express the order of the superior and inferior.

古文：钟声铿，铿以立号，号以立横，横以立武。
现代文：钟声铿然，以此立为号令以警众，以号令的威严树立军士勇敢横充的气慨，有此横充的气慨则武事可立了。
English: The bell rang loudly, and this was used as a signal for the police to come out, and the majesty of the signal was used to build up the courage of the sergeant. With this kind of courage, martial arts can be established.

古文：君子听钟声则思武臣。
现代文：所以君子听钟声就会思念武臣。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman hears the bells, he will think of the samurai.

古文：石声硁，硁以立别，别以致死。
现代文：石类乐器声音硁直有力，硁直的音声用来辨别万物，万物有别，心怀节义者就会效死不顾了。
English: The sound of stone musical instruments is straight and powerful, and the straight sound is used to distinguish everything, everything is different, and those who are righteous will ignore it.

古文：君子听磬声则思死封疆之臣。
现代文：所以君子听磬声就会思念死守封疆的大臣。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman hears the sound of the gong, he will miss the minister who defends the fiefdom.

古文：丝声哀，哀以立廉，廉以立志。
现代文：丝弦乐的声音悲哀，悲哀可以树立廉直的作风，廉直可以使人树立志向。
English: The sound of silk and string music is sad. Sadness can establish an honest style, and honesty can make people aspire.

古文：君子听琴瑟之声则思志义之臣。
现代文：所以听琴瑟的声音就会思念有志重义的大臣。
English: Therefore, listening to the sound of the harp will make you miss the minister who has a strong will.

古文：竹声滥，滥以立会，会以聚众。
现代文：竹类乐器声音滥杂，滥杂使人产生会聚的意向，有会聚之心就能把众多的事物聚集起来。
English: Bamboo musical instruments sound promiscuous, promiscuous makes people have the intention of gathering, and a heart of gathering can gather many things.

古文：君子听竽笙箫管之声则思畜聚之臣。
现代文：所以君子听竽笙箫管的声音就会思念善于畜聚的大臣。
English: Therefore, a gentleman listening to the sound of the gong will miss a minister who is good at gathering animals.

古文：鼓鼙之声欢，欢以立动，动以进众。
现代文：鼓鼙声音喧嚣，听了就会意气感动，感动则使众人奋进。
English: The sound of the drums and cymbals is boisterous, and when you listen to it, you will be moved, and when you are moved, you will push forward.

古文：君子听鼓鼙之声则思将帅之臣。
现代文：所以君子听了鼓鼙的声音就会思念将帅之臣。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman hears the sound of the drum beating, he will miss his handsome vassal.

古文：君子之听音，非听其铿锵而已也，彼亦有所合之也。 
现代文：君子听音声，并不是徒然听它的铿铿锵锵而已，必与自己心志有所合，并促成相应心志的产生 。
English: When a gentleman listens to a voice, he is not just listening to its rattle in vain. It is bound to resonate with his heart's desire and lead to the emergence of a corresponding heart's desire.

古文：宾牟贾侍坐于孔子，孔子与之言，及乐，曰： 夫《武》之备戒之已久，何也？ 
现代文：宾牟贾陪孔子坐，孔子与他闲聊，说到乐，孔子问道： 《武》乐开始时击鼓警众，与别的乐相比，持续时间忒长，这有什么含意？ 
English: Binmuja sat with Confucius, and Confucius chatted with him. When it came to music, Confucius asked, "Police beating drums at the beginning of "Wu" music, compared to other music, the duration is very long. What is the meaning of this?"

古文：答曰： 病不得其众也。 
现代文：宾牟贾答道： 表示武王伐纣之初，耽心得不到众诸侯的拥护，迟迟不肯发动。 
English: Binmuja replied, "It means that at the beginning of King Wu's crusade, he was worried that he would not get the support of all the lords, and he was reluctant to launch it.

古文： 永叹之，淫液之，何也？ 
现代文： 其歌声反复咏叹，漫声长吟，是什么意思？ 
English: What is the meaning of its song, with its repeated sighs and long chanting?

古文：答曰： 恐不逮事也。 
现代文：答道： 那是心有疑虑，生恐事不成功的缘故。 
English: He replied, "That's because I have doubts in my heart and fear things won't work out."

古文： 发扬蹈厉之已蚤，何也？ 
现代文： 《武》舞一开始便发扬蹈厉，气势威猛，是什么意思？ 
English: What does it mean that the "Wu" dance is vigorous and powerful from the very beginning?

古文：答曰： 及时事也。 
现代文：答说： 表示时至则动，当机立断，不要错过了事机。 
English: A: It is said that time is of the essence, when the opportunity arises, make a decision, and do not miss the opportunity.

古文： 《武》坐致右宪左，何也？ 
现代文： 《武》舞坐的动作与他舞不同，是右腿单膝着地，那是什么意思？ 
English: The movements of the "Wu" sitting dance are different from those of his other dances. The right leg is on one knee. What does that mean?

古文：答曰： 非《武》坐也。 
现代文：答道： 这不是《武》舞原有的动作。 
English: Answer: This is not the original movement of the "Wu" dance.

古文： 声淫及商，何也？ 
现代文： 歌声淫靡，表现出有贪图商王政权的不正当目的，这是什么原因？ 
English: What is the reason for the lascivious singing, which shows the illegitimate purpose of coveting the power of merchants and kings?

古文：答曰： 非《武》音也。 
现代文：答道： 这不是《武》舞原有的曲调。 
English: Answer: This is not the original melody of the "Wu" dance.

古文：子曰： 若非《武》音，则何音也？ 
现代文：孔子说： 不是《武》舞原有的曲调，那是什么曲调？ 
English: Confucius said, "If it is not the original tune of the Wu Dance, what tune is it?

古文：答曰： 有司失其传也。
现代文：答道： 掌管《武》乐的机构已失其传说了。
English: A: The agency in charge of "Wu" Le has lost its legend.

古文：如非有司失其传，则武王之志荒矣。 
现代文：若非如此，就表示武王作乐时，心志已经荒耄昏愦了。 孔子道： 对，对。
English: If this is not the case, it means that when King Wu was making music, his mind was already desolate and confused.Confucius said: Yes, yes.

古文：子曰： 唯丘之闻诸苌弘，亦若吾子之言是也。 
现代文：我曾听苌弘说过，他的话与您所说一般无二。 
English: I once heard Takehiro say that his words are generally the same as what you said.

古文：宾牟贾起，免席而请曰： 夫《武》之备戒之已久，则既闻命矣。敢问迟之迟而又久，何也？ 
现代文：宾牟贾起身，立于坐席之下，请问道： 《武》乐击鼓警众，迟迟不肯开始，我所知仅限于此，承蒙您所说，苌弘也这样解释，知道的确是那样了。
English: Binmuja got up and stood under the seat. Please ask: "Wu" music drumming police, reluctant to start, my knowledge is limited to this, thanks to what you said, Zou Hong also explained this way, I know it's really like that.

古文：子曰： 居，吾语汝。
现代文：但我不明白的是，稍迟些就是了，为何竟拖得那样久？ 
English: But what I don't understand is, if it's going to be a bit later, why has it taken so long?

古文：夫乐者，象成者也。
现代文：孔子道： 您先请坐，我慢慢告诉你。
English: Confucius said, "Please sit down first, and I will tell you slowly.

古文：总干而山立，武王之事也；发扬蹈厉，太公之志也；武乱皆坐，周召之治也。且夫《武》，始而北出，再成而灭商，三成而南，四成而南国是疆，五成而分陕，周公左，召公右，六成复缀，以崇天子，夹振之而四伐，盛威于中国也。
现代文：乐是对已发生过的事的形象化再现，如《武》乐开始时，舞者手持盾牌，山立不动，象征当时武王的行事：命部下全副武装，只待诸侯响应，就要出击了；《武》舞一开始就发扬蹈厉，威猛异常，象征太公吕望指挥战斗，欲一举而灭商的决心；结束时，武事已毕，舞者单膝跪地，象征周公、召公战后治理国家归于安定。再者，《武》乐开始时，舞者自南而北，象征北出朝歌，曲奏第二遍，舞者的动作象征灭商时的殊死决斗，第三遍象征凯旋南归，第四遍象征南方诸国归入版图，第五遍象征分陕而治，周、召二公为左右二伯，周公居左，治陕以东，召公居右，治陕以西，第六遍舞者重又相缀成行，表示对天子的崇敬，天子与大将夹舞者而立，振动铎铃，以增士气，出兵四面讨伐，威势盛于中国。
English: The music is a visual representation of what has already happened. For example, at the beginning of the "Wu" music, the dancers held shields and stood on the hill, symbolizing the actions of King Wu at that time: his subordinates were fully armed, and they only had to wait for the response of the princes to attack; the "Wu" dance was vigorous and powerful at the beginning, symbolizing the determination of Taigong Lvang to command the battle and destroy the merchants at one stroke; at the end, when the battle was over, the dancers knelt on one knee, symbolizing Zhou Gong, calling the public to govern the country after the war. Moreover, when the "

古文：分夹而进，事蚤济也。
现代文：夹舞者分进出击，是为了战事早些成功。
English: The dancers move in and out of the attack in order to succeed earlier in the battle.

古文：久立于缀，以待诸侯之至也。
现代文：成行以后久立不动，是为了等待诸侯兵的到来。
English: After the procession, they stood still for a long time in order to wait for the arrival of the vassals.

古文：且夫女独未闻牧野之语乎？
现代文：你难道没有听说过武王在牧野誓师时说过的话吗？
English: Haven't you heard what King Wu said when he swore allegiance to Makino?

古文：武王克殷反商，未及下车，而封黄帝之后于蓟，封帝尧之后于祝，封帝舜之后于陈；下车而封夏后氏之后于杞，封殷之后于宋，封王子比干之墓，释箕子之囚，使之行商容而复其位。
现代文：武王克殷以后，恢复商初的政治，不及下车，就封黄帝的后人于蓟，封帝尧的后人在祝，封帝舜的后人在陈；下车后封夏禹的后人在杞，封殷汤的后人在宋，给殷代贤臣比干的坟墓添土，释放被纣王囚禁的贤臣箕子，使他检视商朝掌管礼乐的官员，有贤者就恢复原来的官位。
English: After King Wu Ke Yin resumed the politics of the early Shang Dynasty, he did not have time to get off the train, so he sealed the descendants of the Yellow Emperor in Yunnan, the descendants of the Emperor Yunnan in Zhuhai, and the descendants of the Emperor Yunnan in Chen; after getting off the train, the descendants of the Emperor Xiyu in Yunnan, and the descendants of the Emperor Yunnan in Song, added soil to the grave of the Yin Dynasty wise minister Bi Gan, released the wise minister Xizi who was imprisoned by the King of Yunnan, and made him inspect the officials in charge of the Shang Dynasty liturgy, and the wise man restored the original official

古文：庶民弛政，庶士倍禄。
现代文：废除殷纣王的苛政，增加士人俸禄。
English: Abolished the oppressive rule of King Yin Zhao and increased the salary of officials.

古文：济河而西，马散华山之阳而弗复乘；牛散桃林之野而不复服；车甲弢而藏之府库而弗复用；倒载干戈，苞之以虎皮；将率之士，使为诸侯，名之曰 建櫜 ：然后天下知武王之不复用兵也。
现代文：渡过黄河，西行入陕，把战马散于华山南坡，不再乘骑；把役牛分散于华山以东桃林地区的荒野之中，不再用以驼载战具军须；战车、衣甲收藏于府库，不再使用；倒载干戈等兵器，使刃向里，外面裹上虎皮，表示定能以武力止息兵事；有功将帅，建立为诸侯，使他们象櫜弓一样，把天下的战乱也从此櫜藏起来，不再发生，因称建立诸侯为 建櫜 。然后，天下知武王不再用兵了。
English: After crossing the Yellow River and heading west into Shaanxi Province, the war horses were scattered on the southern slope of Huashan Mountain, no longer to be ridden; the oxen were scattered in the wilderness of the Taolin region east of Huashan Mountain, no longer to be used to carry the war equipment; the chariots and armor were collected in the prefectural treasury, no longer to be used; the swords and other weapons were loaded backwards, with the blades facing inward and the outside wrapped in tiger skins, indicating that they would be able to stop the war by force; the meritorious generals were established as princes, so that they, like the bow and arrow, would

古文：散军而郊射，左射《狸首》，右射《驺虞》，而贯革之射息也；裨冕搢ì笏ù，而虎贲之士税剑也；祀乎明堂，而民知孝；朝觐，然后诸侯知所以臣；耕藉，然后诸侯知所以敬：五者天下之大教也。
现代文：遣散军队而行郊射求贤之礼，东郊射礼歌唱《狸首》的曲子，西郊射礼唱《驺虞》的曲子，军中那种旨在角力比武的贯穿革甲的射击停止了；使天下贤者人人穿着裨衣冕冠等礼服，衣带上插着笏板，勇武的士人就会解下长剑，弃武从文；天子于明堂中祭祀先祖，百姓就由此懂得了为人子者应该行孝；朝廷行朝觐之礼，使诸侯知道怎样做个贤臣；天子亲耕藉田，然后诸侯知道怎样敬奉先祖。以上五项是教化天下最重要的方法。
English: When the troops are dismissed, they will go to the countryside to perform the rite of shooting for wisdom. The eastern suburbs will sing the tune of "Bullhead" and the western suburbs will sing the tune of "Cowherd." In the army, the kind of shooting through the leather armor that aims to compete in martial arts has stopped. So that the wise men of the world will all wear ceremonial clothes such as the crown and crown, with a cutting board inserted on the belt, the brave men will untie the long sword and abandon martial arts. The heavenly son will sacrifice the ancestors in the Ming Hall, and the people will understand that the sons and daughters should be filial; the imperial court will perform

古文：食三老五更于太学，天子袒而割牲，执酱而馈，执爵而酳，冕而总干，所以教诸侯之悌也。
现代文：此外在太学奉养三老五更，天子亲自袒衣，切割牲肉，执酱请三老五更食肉，执爵请三老五更饮酒洗嗽，头戴冠冕、手执干盾，亲自舞蹈，使他们能欢乐快活，以此教化诸侯，尊长敬老，懂得悌道。
English: In addition, the Three Elders and Five Elders were raised in Taigaku. The Son of Heaven personally washed their clothes, cut the meat, and made the Three Elders and Five Elders eat meat. The Lord asked the Three Elders and Five Elders to drink alcohol, wash themselves, wear crowns on their heads, and hold shields in their hands. He also personally danced so that they could be happy. In this way, he educated the princes, respected the elders, and understood the way of discipline.

古文：若此，则周道四达，礼乐交通，则夫《武》之迟久，不亦宜乎？ 
现代文：这样，周朝的教化达于四方，礼乐相补相成，为了这些，《武》舞初的迟久，不是应该的吗？ 
English: In this way, the enlightenment of the Zhou Dynasty reached the four directions, and the ritual music complemented each other. For these reasons, the "Wu" dance was delayed at the beginning, isn't it right?

古文：子贡见师乙而问焉，曰： 赐闻声歌各有宜也，如赐者宜何歌也？ 
现代文：子贡见乐师乙问道： 我听说不同的声歌适合于不同禀赋的人，象我这样的人适合唱什么歌呢？ 
English: Zigong asked Musician B: I have heard that different vocal songs are suitable for people with different talents. What songs are suitable for people like me?

古文：师乙曰： 乙，贱工也，何足以问所宜。
现代文：师乙说： 我不过是个低贱的乐工，不配说谁适宜唱什么歌。
English: Teacher B said, "I'm just a lowly musician, and I'm not worthy to say who is suitable to sing what song.

古文：请诵其所闻，而吾子自执焉。
现代文：请允许我把我所知道的说出来，先生自己决定适合唱什么歌吧。
English: Let me tell you what I know, and you decide for yourself what song is appropriate.

古文：宽而静，柔而正者宜歌《颂》；广大而静，疏达而信者宜歌《大雅》；恭俭而好礼者宜歌《小雅》；正直清廉而谦者宜歌《风》；肆直而慈爱者宜歌《商》；温良而能断者宜歌《齐》。
现代文：为人宽大好静，柔顺而又正派的适合唱《颂》歌；心胸宽广而好静，疏脱、豁达而守信用的人适合唱《大雅》；恭敬、俭朴而又好礼的，适宜唱《小雅》；为人正直、清正廉洁而又谦虚的人，适于唱《风》；恣肆爽直又心慈友爱的，适宜唱《商》；温顺良善而能决断的，适合唱《齐》。
English: Those who are broad-minded and quiet, gentle and decent are suitable to sing "Ode"; those who are broad-minded and quiet, aloof, open-minded and trustworthy are suitable to sing "Grand Elegance"; those who are respectful, frugal and courteous are suitable to sing "Small Elegance"; those who are honest, clean and modest are suitable to sing "Wind"; those who are wantonly straightforward and kind-hearted are suitable to sing "Merchant"; those who are good-natured and decisive are suitable to sing "Qi."

古文：夫歌者，直己而陈德；动己而天地应焉，四时和焉，星辰理焉，万物育焉。
现代文：歌，是披露自己的心胸，陈述自己品德的；自己动于情感，真情流露，那么天地就会受感应，四时来相和，星辰不逆行，万物得以繁育生长。
English: A song is a disclosure of one's heart, a statement of one's character; if one is moved by emotion and reveals one's true feelings, then heaven and earth will be affected, the four seasons will be in harmony, the stars will not retrograde, and all things will be able to breed and grow.

古文：故《商》者，五帝之遗声也，商人志之，故谓之《商》；《齐》者，三代之遗声也，齐人志之，故谓之《齐》。
现代文：因此《商》这首歌，虽是五帝留传下来的，但商人记述下来，用以摅己心胸，陈己品德，所以叫做《商》歌；《齐》这首歌，是三代留传下来的，齐人记述下来，所以称为《齐》歌。
English: Therefore, although the song "Merchant" was passed down by the Five Emperors, it was recorded by a merchant who used it to cultivate his heart and improve his moral character, so it is called the "Merchant" song; the song "Qi" was passed down by three generations and recorded by Qi people, so it is called the "Qi" song.

古文：明乎《商》之诗者，临事而屡断；明乎《齐》之诗者，见利而让也。
现代文：真正懂得《商》这首诗歌含意的，临事屡屡决断；懂得《齐》这首诗歌含意的，见利能够让人。
English: If you truly understand the meaning of the poem "Merchant," you will be able to make the right decisions. If you understand the meaning of the poem "Qi," you will be able to make people see the benefits.

古文：临事而屡断，勇也；见利而让，义也。
现代文：临事屡断的，表现出了勇气；见利能让人的，表现了义气。
English: He showed courage when he repeatedly interrupted the incident; he showed loyalty when he saw that profit could be made.

古文：有勇有义，非歌孰能保此？
现代文：有勇有义，除了歌还有什么能使人保持这样的品格？
English: With courage and righteousness, what else but song can make a person maintain such a character?

古文：故歌者，上如抗，下如队，曲如折，止如藁木，居中矩，句中钩，累累乎殷如贯珠。
现代文：所以歌声高亢处，如人扛举而上，音低处如直坠而下，曲屈处如被弯折，静止处如同槁木，小曲如矩，大曲如钩，殷殷然如累珠落盘。
English: Therefore, in the high notes of a song, it is as if a person is carrying it up, in the low notes it is as if it is falling straight down, in the inflections it is as if it is being bent, in the rests it is as if it were a birch tree, in the minor tunes it is as if it were a moment, in the major tunes it is as if it were a hook, and in the high notes it is as if it were falling straight down.

古文：故歌之为言也，长言之也。
现代文：歌也是一种语言，是种长声调的语言。
English: Song is also a language, a language of long tones.

古文：说之，故言之；言之不足，故长言之；长言之不足，故嗟叹之；嗟叹之不足，故不知手之舞之足之蹈之。 
现代文：有可说的东西了，才言说出来；言语表达得不充分，才用长声的语言表达；仍不充分，才相续相和，反复吟唱；还不充分，就不知不觉的手舞足蹈起来了。 
English: When there is something to say, the words come out; when the words are not sufficiently expressed, they are expressed in a long-voiced language; when they are still insufficient, they are harmonized and chanted repeatedly; when they are still insufficient, hand-dancing and foot-dancing unconsciously begin.

古文：子贡问乐。
现代文：以上是子贡问乐。
English: The above is Zigong Qianle.

古文：凡音由于人心，天之与人有以相通，如景之象形，响之应声。
现代文：凡音都是由于人心产生的，天与人是有某种关联的，两者就象镜中的影子与物形那样相像，响与应声那样相应和。
English: All sounds are produced by the human heart, and heaven and man are somehow related. The two are like the shadow and the object in the mirror, and the resonance and the response correspond to each other.

古文：故为善者天报之以福，为恶者天与之以殃，其自然者也。
现代文：所以行善的人天就以福回报他，作恶的人天就使他遭祸殃，这是很自然的事。
English: Therefore, it is only natural that those who do good will be blessed by heaven, and those who do evil will be cursed by heaven.

古文：故舜弹五弦之琴，歌《南风》之诗而天下治；纣为朝歌北鄙之音，身死国亡。
现代文：所以舜弹奏五弦琴，歌唱《南风》的诗篇而天下得到治理；纣王歌唱朝歌地区北部边鄙的乐曲，落得个身死国亡。
English: Therefore, Gong played the five-stringed fiddle and sang the poem "South Wind" and the world was governed; Gong Wang sang the music of the northern edge of the morning song region and died a national death.

古文：舜之道何弘也？
现代文：舜的作为有什么弘大？
English: What is Hongdae's achievement?

古文：纣之道何隘也？
现代文：纣王的作为有什么狭隘之处呢？
English: What is so narrow about the actions of the king of snakes?

古文：夫《南风》之诗者生长之音也，舜乐好之，乐与天地同意，得万国之心，故天下治也。
现代文：原来《南风》的诗篇是生长性质的音乐，而舜喜乐爱好它，这种喜乐爱好与天地的意旨相同，得天下人的欢心，所以天下能治理得很好。
English: Originally, the poem of "The South Wind" was the music of growth, and the grasshopper loved it with joy. This love of joy was the same as the will of heaven and earth, and it pleased the people of the world, so the world could be well governed.

古文：夫朝歌者不时也，北者败也，鄙者陋也，纣乐好之，与万国殊心，诸侯不附，百姓不亲，天下畔之，故身死国亡。
现代文：而朝歌就是早晨的歌，是不时之歌，北就是败北，鄙就是鄙陋的意思，纣王喜爱这样的音乐，与天下人的心意不同，诸侯不肯顺附于他，老百姓不与他亲近，天下人都背叛他，所以才身死国亡。
English: The morning song is the song of the morning, it is the song of the times, north is the defeat of the north, mean is the mean, the king loves such music, different from the hearts of the people of the world, the princes do not want to follow him, the people are not close to him, the people of the world betray him, so he died and the country died.

古文：而卫灵公之时，将之晋，至于濮水之上舍。
现代文：而卫灵公在位的时候，有一次他将要去晋国，走到濮水流域，住在一个上等馆舍中。
English: And when Wei Ling Gong was on the throne, once he would go to Jin Province, go to the Surabaya watershed, and live in a high-class mansion.

古文：夜半时闻鼓琴声，问左右，皆对曰 不闻 。
现代文：半夜里突然听到抚琴的声音，问左右跟随的人，都回答说： 没有听到 。
English: In the middle of the night, he suddenly heard the sound of someone playing a harp. When he asked the people following him, they all replied, "I didn't hear it."

古文：乃召师涓曰： 吾闻鼓琴音，问左右，皆不闻。
现代文：于是召见乐师名叫涓的人，对他说道： 我听到了抚琴的声音，问身边的从人，都说没有听到。
English: And he called for the minstrel, whose name was Gershom, and said unto him, I heard the sound of the harp, but I asked the servants about it, and they said, We have not heard.

古文：其状似鬼神，为我听而写之。 师涓曰： 诺。 
现代文：这样子好像有了鬼神，你为我仔细听一听，把琴曲记下来。 师涓说： 好吧。 
English: It's as if there are ghosts and gods. Listen carefully and write down the melody for me. Shizuka said, "Okay."

古文：因端坐援琴，听而写之。
现代文：于是端坐下来，取出琴，一边听卫灵公叙述一边拨弄，随手记录下来。
English: So he sat down, took out the lute, played it while listening to Wei Linggong's narration, and recorded it.

古文：明日，曰： 臣得之矣，然未习也，请宿习之。 灵公曰： 可。 
现代文：第二天，说道： 臣已每句都记下了，但还没有串习，难以成曲，请允许再住一宿，熟习几遍。 灵公说： 可以。 
English: On the second day, he said, "The minister has already written down every sentence, but there has been no rehearsal, so it is difficult to complete the song. Please allow me to stay another night and rehearse several times." Ling Gong said, "Yes."

古文：因复宿。
现代文：于是又住一宿。
English: So we stayed another night.

古文：明日，报曰： 习矣。 
现代文：第二天说： 练习好了。 
English: The next day he said: "It's time to practice."

古文：即去之晋，见晋平公。
现代文：这才动身到晋国，见了晋平公。
English: It was only then that he set out for Jin Province and met with Emperor Jinpyeong.

古文：平公置酒于施惠之台。
现代文：平公在施惠之台摆酒筵招待他们。
English: Taira no Kimi invited them to the table of bounty with wine goblets.

古文：酒酣，灵公曰： 今者来，闻新声，请奏之。 平公曰： 可。 
现代文：饮酒饮到酣畅痛快的时候，卫灵公道： 我们这次来时，得了一首新曲子，请为您演奏以助酒兴。 平公道： 好极了。 
English: When drinking alcohol, Wei Ling Gongda said, "When we came here this time, we got a new piece of music. Please play it for us to help us enjoy the wine." Ping Gongda said, "It's great."

古文：即令师涓坐师旷旁，援琴鼓之。
现代文：即命师涓在晋国乐师旷的身边坐下来，取琴弹奏。
English: On the spur of the moment, Shisheng sat down next to the musician from Jin Province, Yan, and took up the harp to play.

古文：未终，师旷抚而止之曰： 此亡国之声也，不可遂。 
现代文：一曲没完，师旷甩袖制止说： 这是亡国之音，不要再奏了。 
English: When a piece was not finished, Shige stopped it and said, "This is the sound of a dying country. Don't play it again."

古文：平公曰： 何道出？ 
现代文：平公说： 为什么说出这种话来？ 
English: Heiko said, "Why would you say such a thing?

古文：师旷曰： 师延所作也。与纣为靡靡之乐，武王伐纣，师延东走，自投濮水之中，故闻此声必于濮水之上，先闻此声者国削。 
现代文：师旷道： 这是师延作的曲子，他为纣王作了这种靡靡之音，武王伐纣后，师延向东逃走，投濮水自杀，所以这首曲子必是得之于濮水之上，先听到此曲的国家就要削弱了。 
English: Shi Yu Dao: This is a piece composed by Shi Yan. He made this wailing sound for the King of Wu. After the King of Wu fell, Shi Yan fled to the east and committed suicide by throwing a stone into the water. Therefore, this piece must have originated in the water. The first country to hear this piece would be weakened.

古文：平公曰： 寡人所好者音也，愿遂闻之。 
现代文：平公说： 寡人所喜好的，就是听曲子这件事，但愿能够听完它。 
English: Heiko said, "Listening to a piece of music is something that few people like. I hope I can listen to it to the end.

古文：师涓鼓而终之。
现代文：这样师涓才把它演奏完毕。
English: In this way, the master marimba player finished playing it.

古文：平公曰： 音无此最悲乎？ 师旷曰： 有。 
现代文：平公道： 这是我听到过的最动人的曲子了，还有比这更动人的吗？ 师旷说： 有。 
English: Ping Gongdao: This is the most moving piece of music I have ever heard. Is there anything more moving than this? Shige said: Yes.

古文：平公曰： 可得闻乎？ 
现代文：平公说： 能让我们听一听吗？ 
English: Heiko said, "Could you give us a listen?"

古文：师旷曰： 君德义薄，不可以听之。 
现代文：师旷说： 必须修德行义深厚的才能听此曲，您还不能听。 
English: Shimei said, "In order to listen to this song, you must cultivate virtue and have a deep sense of righteousness. You can't listen yet.

古文：平公曰： 寡人所好者音也，愿闻之。 
现代文：平公说： 寡人所喜好的，只有听曲子一件事，但愿能听到它。 
English: Heiko said, "The only thing that some people like is listening to music. I wish I could hear it."

古文：师旷不得已，援琴而鼓之。一奏之，有玄鹤二八集乎廊门；再奏之，延颈而鸣，舒翼而舞。
现代文：师旷不得已，取琴弹奏起来，奏第一遍，有千载玄鹤十数只飞集堂下廊门之前；第二遍，这些玄鹤伸长脖子，呦呦鸣叫起来，还舒展翅膀，随琴声跳起舞来。
English: As a last resort, the master took up the harp and began to play. The first time he played, more than a dozen thousand-year-old cranes flew in front of the lower corridor door of the hall; the second time, these cranes stretched their necks, chirped, stretched their wings, and danced to the sound of the harp.

古文：平公大喜，起而为师旷寿。
现代文：平公大喜，起身为师旷祝酒。
English: Hirako was overjoyed and got up to make a toast to his mentor.

古文：反坐，问曰： 音无此最悲乎？ 师旷曰： 有。
现代文：回身落坐，问道： 再没有比这更动人的曲子了吗？ 师旷道： 有。
English: Turning around and sitting down, he asked, "Isn't there a more moving piece than this one?" Shihyido: Yes.

古文：昔者黄帝以大合鬼神，今君德义薄，不足以听之，听之将败。 
现代文：过去黄帝合祭鬼神时奏的曲子比这更动人，只是您德义太薄，不配听罢了，听了将有败亡之祸。 
English: In the past, the music played at the time of the Yellow Emperor's sacrifice to ghosts and gods was more moving than this, but your virtue is too thin, you don't deserve to listen to it. If you listen to it, you will be doomed to defeat.

古文：平公曰： 寡人老矣，所好者音也，愿遂闻之。 
现代文：平公说： 寡人这一大把年纪了，还在乎败亡吗？
English: Ping Gong said, "At this advanced age, do you still care about defeat?

古文：师旷不得已，援琴而鼓之。
现代文：我喜好的只有听曲，但愿能够听到它。 师旷没有办法，取琴弹奏起来。
English: The only thing I like is listening to music, and I wish I could hear it. There was nothing I could do, so I picked up the piano and started to play.

古文：一奏之，有白云从西北起；再奏之，大风至而雨随之，飞廊瓦，左右皆奔走。
现代文：奏了一遍，有白云从西北天际出现；又奏一遍，大风夹着暴雨，扑天盖地而至，直刮得廊瓦横飞，左右人都惊慌奔走。
English: It was played again, and white clouds appeared from the northwest sky; it was played again, and a gale, accompanied by torrential rain, swept the sky and the earth, blowing the corrugated roof tiles sideways, and people on both sides panicked and ran away.

古文：平公恐惧，伏于廊屋之间。
现代文：平公害怕起来，伏身躲在廊屋之间。
English: Terrified, Heiko hides between the galleries.

古文：晋国大旱，赤地三年。
现代文：晋国于是大旱三年，寸草不生。
English: As a result, there was a three-year drought in Jin Province, and not a single blade of grass grew.

古文：听者或吉或凶。
现代文：听乐曲或遇吉或遇凶。
English: Listening to music can bring good luck or bad luck.

古文：夫乐不可妄兴也。
现代文：乐曲是不能随意演奏的。
English: A piece of music cannot be played at will.

