古文：四年春，宋公使华元来聘。
现代文：十年春季，宋国国君派遣华元来鲁国聘问。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, the Emperor of Song dispatched Huayuan to Lu for an interview.

古文：三月壬申，郑伯坚卒。
现代文：三月壬申日，郑伯去世。
English: On March Jinshin Day, Zheng Bo passed away.

古文：杞伯来朝。
现代文：杞伯来鲁国朝见。
English: Prince Shokan came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：夏四月甲寅，臧孙许卒。
现代文：夏季四月甲寅日，臧孙许去世。
English: In the summer, on April Kato's day, his great-grandson, Xu, passed away.

古文：公如晋。
现代文：成公去晋国。
English: Lu Zhaogong went to Jin Province.

古文：葬郑襄公。
现代文：安葬郑襄公。
English: Zheng Xianggong was buried peacefully.

古文：秋，公至自晋。
现代文：秋季，成公从晋国回来。
English: In autumn, Chengong returned from Jin Province.

古文：冬，城郓。
现代文：冬季，在郓地筑城。
English: In winter, they build a city in the ploughed fields.

古文：郑伯伐许。
现代文：郑伯攻打许国。
English: Zheng Bo attacked Xu Province.

古文：四年春，宋华元来聘，通嗣君也。
现代文：四年春季，宋国的华元前来聘问，这是为继位的国君通好。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Hua Yuan of the Song Dynasty came to inquire, which was a good omen for the country's successor.

古文：杞伯来朝，归叔姬故也。
现代文：杞桓公来鲁国朝见，这是由于要将叔姬送回鲁国。
English: Prince Shokan came to see the Emperor of Lu because he wanted to send Shuki back to Lu.

古文：夏，公如晋，晋侯见公不敬。
现代文：夏季，鲁成公去到晋国。晋景公会见成公，不恭敬。
English: In the summer, Lu Chenggong went to Jin Province. Jin Jinggong met with Chenggong and did not respect him.

古文：季文子曰： 晋侯必不免。
现代文：季文子说： 晋景公一定不免于祸难。
English: Ji Wenzi said: "Jin Jing Gong will certainly not be spared from calamity.

古文：《诗》曰： 敬之敬之！天惟显思，命不易哉！ 
现代文：《诗》说： 谨慎又谨慎，上天光明普照，得到天命不容易啊！ 
English: "Poetry" says: Be cautious and prudent, the light of heaven shines everywhere, it is not easy to get the destiny!

古文：夫晋侯之命在诸侯矣，可不敬乎？ 
现代文：晋景公的命运决定于诸侯，可以不恭敬吗？ 
English: Jin Jinggong's fate is decided by the princes, can we not be respectful?

古文：秋，公至自晋，欲求成于楚而叛晋。
现代文：秋季，成公从晋国到达鲁国，想要向楚国要求友好而背叛晋国。
English: In the autumn, Chengong went from Jin to Lu, and wanted to ask for friendship from Chu, but betrayed Jin.

古文：季文子曰： 不可。
现代文：季文子说： 不行。
English: Ji Fumiko said, "No."

古文：晋虽无道，未可叛也。
现代文：晋国虽然无道，尚不能背叛。
English: Although Jin has no way out, it still cannot be betrayed.

古文：国大臣睦，而迩于我，诸侯听焉，未可以贰。
现代文：国家广大、群臣和睦，而且靠近我国，诸侯听他的命令，不能有二心。
English: The country is vast, the courtiers are harmonious, and it is close to our country. The lords listen to his orders and cannot have two hearts.

古文：史佚之《志》有之，曰： 非我族类，其心必异。 
现代文：史佚的《志》有这样的话： 不是我们同族，他的心思必然不同。 
English: Shi Yan's "Zhi" has this to say: If he is not of the same race as us, his thoughts are bound to be different.

古文：楚虽大，非吾族也，其肯字我乎？ 
现代文：楚国虽然土地广大，不是我们同族，难道肯爱我们吗？ 
English: Although the land of Chu is vast, they are not our fellow countrymen. Will they love us?

古文：公乃止。
现代文：成公就没有那样做。
English: Song Gongcai resigned.

古文：冬十一月，郑公孙申帅师疆许田，许人败诸展陂。
现代文：冬季，十一月，郑国的公孙申带兵去划定所得许国土田的疆界。
English: In the winter, in November, Gongsun Shen of Zheng took soldiers to delineate the boundaries of the land.

古文：郑伯伐许，取鉏任泠敦之田。
现代文：许国人在展陂打败了他们。郑伯进攻许国，占领了鉏任、冷敦的土田。
English: The people of Xu Province defeated them in Zhanjiang. Zheng Bo attacked Xu Province and occupied the Tsuchida of Zhenren and Lendun.

古文：晋栾书将中军，荀首佐之。士燮佐上军，以救许伐郑，取氾、祭。
现代文：晋将栾书率领中军，荀首作为副帅，士燮为上军副帅，救援许国，进攻郑国，占领了汜地、祭地。
English: Jin sent Zishu to lead the Chinese army, with Jian Shou as second-in-command, and Shi Yan as second-in-command of the upper army, to rescue Xu Province, attack Zheng Province, and occupy Zou and the sacred land.

古文：楚子反救郑，郑伯与许男讼焉。
现代文：楚国的子反救援郑国，郑襄公和许灵公在子反那里争论是非，皇戌代表郑襄公发言。
English: Zheng, Zheng Xiangong and Xu Lingong argued about the rights and wrongs of the rescue of Zheng, Zheng Xiangong and Xu Lingong, and the representative of the imperial edict, Zheng Xiangong, made a speech.

古文：皇戌摄郑伯之辞，子反不能决也，曰： 君若辱在寡君，寡君与其二三臣，共听两君之所欲，成其可知也。
现代文：子反不能判断，说： 您二位如果屈驾去问候寡君，寡君和他几个臣子共同听取两位君王的意见才可以判断出是非。
English: The son, however, could not judge, and said, "If you two stoop down to greet the prince, the prince and a few of his vassals will only be able to judge the rights and wrongs by listening to the opinions of the two kings.

古文：不然，侧不足以知二国之成。 
现代文：否则，侧不大了解两国之间的是非。 
English: Otherwise, there will be little understanding of the rights and wrongs between the two countries.

古文：晋赵婴通于赵庄姬。
现代文：晋国的赵婴和赵庄姬私通。
English: Zhao Ying in Jin Province and Zhao Zhuangji are having an affair.

