古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：水谷入于口，输于肠胃，其液别为五：天寒衣薄，则为溺与气；天热衣厚则为汗；悲哀气并则为泣；中热胃缓则为唾。
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：饮食物入口以后，又被输送到胃和肠，其化生的津液分为五种：如果在天气寒冷和衣服单薄时，津液就会化生为尿和气；天气炎热和衣服过厚时，津液就化生为汗；情绪悲哀，气并于上，津液出于目就化生为泪；中焦有热，胃体弛缓，津液出于口就化生为唾液。
English: Huang Di asked Qibo: "After drinking food, it is transported to the stomach and intestines, and the resulting liquid is divided into five types: if the weather is cold and the clothes are thin, the liquid will turn into urine and gas; if the weather is hot and the clothes are too thick, the liquid will turn into sweat; if the mood is sad and the gas is on, the liquid will turn into tears; if there is heat in the middle, the stomach will relax, and the liquid will turn into saliva.

古文：邪气内逆，则气为之闭塞而不行，不行则为水胀。
现代文：邪气侵入体内，则阳气闭塞而使津液不能流动，水气潴留而为水胀病。
English: When the evil gas invades the body, the yang gas is blocked and the fluid cannot flow, and the water vapor is retained, resulting in water distension disease.

古文：余知其然也，不知其何由生，愿闻其道。
现代文：我知道这些情况，但是不知道其化生的机理，想请你讲一下。
English: I am aware of these circumstances, but I do not know the mechanism of their transformation. I would like to ask you to explain.

古文：岐伯曰：水谷皆入于口，其味有五，各注其海。
现代文：岐伯说：饮食物都是由口进入人体，饮食物中有酸、苦、甘、辛、咸五味，分别注入相应的脏器及人体四海。
English: Qi Bo said: All food is taken into the human body through the mouth. There are five tastes in food: sour, bitter, sweet, spicy and salty, which are injected into the corresponding organs and the human body.

古文：津液各走其道，故三焦出气，以温肌肉，充皮肤，为其津，其流而不行者为液。
现代文：饮食物所化生的津液也分别沿着一定的道路输布，其中，由三焦气布散的饮食物中的精微物质，能够温润肌肉、充养皮肤，这就叫做 津 ；那些流注于脏腑、官窍，补益脑髓而不布散的，就叫做 液 。
English: The juice produced by drinking food is also separately distributed along a certain path. Among them, the fine substances in the food and drink dispersed by the tritium gas, which can warm the muscles and nourish the skin, are called juice; those that flow into the glands, glands, and supplement the brain without dispersion are called liquid.

古文：天暑衣厚则腠理开，故汗出，寒留于分肉之间，聚沫则为痛。
现代文：天气炎热和穿衣太厚，腠理开泄而出汗。如果又感受寒邪，寒邪就会留滞在分肉里面，使得津液凝聚成沫，挤压分肉，阻碍阳气流行就会产生疼痛。
English: If the weather is hot and the clothes are too thick, the body will leak and sweat. If you feel the cold again, the cold will stay in the meat, causing the juice to condense into foam, squeezing the meat, and hindering the yang qi epidemic will cause pain.

古文：天寒则腠理闭，气湿不行，水下留于膀胱，则为溺与气。
现代文：天气寒冷，汗孔闭塞不能出汗，阳气不化，水液不得蒸化宣行则向下输注到膀胱，就形成尿液和气。
English: The weather is cold, the sweat pores are blocked and cannot sweat, the yang gas does not evaporate, and the water and liquid cannot be evaporated. If it is injected down to the bladder, it will form urine and gas.

古文：五脏六腑，心为之主，耳为之听，目为之候，肺为之相，肝为之将，脾为之卫，肾为之主外。
现代文：五脏六腑中，心为君主，主宰其他脏器的活动，耳朵为君主探听消息，眼睛为君主观察物体，肺是君主的宰相，肝是君主的将军主谋虑，脾是君主的近卫守护宫廷，肾为君主的外派官员掌管着国家的形体。
English: Of the five viscera, the heart is the monarch and governs the activities of the other viscera, the ears are the monarch's means of listening to information, the eyes are the monarch's means of observing objects, the lungs are the monarch's prime minister, the liver is the monarch's general and strategist, the spleen is the monarch's bodyguard and guards the court, and the kidneys are the monarch's emissaries and govern the form of the state.

古文：故五脏六腑之津液，尽上渗于目。
现代文：所以，五脏六腑的津液都向上渗入眼睛。
English: Therefore, the visceral fluid seeps upward into the eyes.

古文：心悲气并则心系急，心系急则肺举，肺举则液上溢。
现代文：心里悲伤，就会使五脏六腑之气都并于心中，引起连心的脉络急紧，连心的脉络急紧就会使肺上抬，肺上抬就会使津液上溢。
English: Grief in the heart will make the five viscera and the six limbs of the qi flow into the heart, causing the arteries of the heart to constrict, the arteries of the heart to constrict will cause the lungs to rise, and the lungs to rise will cause the blood to overflow.

古文：夫心系与肺，不能常举，乍上乍下，故咳而泣出矣。
现代文：心之脉络急紧，而肺不能常久上抬，忽上忽下，因此引起咳嗽而且流眼泪。
English: The veins of the heart are in a hurry, and the lungs cannot be lifted up and down for a long time, thus causing coughing and tears.

古文：中热则胃中消谷，消谷则虫上下作，肠胃充郭，故胃缓，胃缓则气逆，故唾出。
现代文：中焦有热，就会使胃中谷物消化过快，谷物消化后，则肠中的寄生虫就会上下蠕动，而虫子蠕动纠缠就会使肠梗满，因此导致胃运动缓慢，胃运动缓慢就会使气上逆，因而唾液向上排出。
English: If the middle coke is hot, the cereal in the stomach will be digested too quickly. After the cereal is digested, the parasite in the intestine will creep up and down, and the worm's creeping entanglement will cause the intestine to be full, thus causing the stomach to move slowly. The slow movement of the stomach will cause the gas to rise, so the saliva will be discharged upward.

古文：五谷之津液，和合而为膏者，内渗入于骨空，补益脑髓，而下流于阴股。
现代文：饮食物所化生的津液，混合成脂膏样的部分，向内渗灌到骨腔中，并可以向上补益脑髓，向下流注到大腿内侧。
English: The juice produced by drinking food, mixed into a fat paste-like part, infiltrates into the bone cavity, and can replenish the brain marrow upward and flow down to the inner thigh.

古文：阴阳不和，则使液溢而下流于阴，髓液皆减而下，下过度则虚，虚故腰背痛而胫酸。
现代文：精属阴，气属阳，如阴阳不和，则阳气不能固摄，精液向下流溢，从阴窍外泄，从而使滋养骨髓的津液也随着向下溢出而减少，如果下溢过度，真阴虚损，就会出现腰背疼痛和足胫酸楚。
English: Essence is yin, and qi is yang. If yin and yang are not in harmony, then yang cannot be absorbed. Semen flows downwards and leaks from the yin and yang points, so that the fluid that nourishes the bone marrow also decreases with the downward overflow. If the underflow is excessive and the yin and yang are damaged, there will be back pain and foot tingling.

古文：阴阳气道不通，四海闭塞，三焦不泻，津液不化，水谷并行肠胃之中，别于回肠，留于下焦，不得渗膀胱，则下焦胀，水溢则为水胀。
现代文：阴阳气道阻滞不畅，四海闭塞不通，三焦不能疏泄，津液不能正常的布化到全身，饮食物相互混杂在肠胃中运行，积于大肠，水液停留在下焦，不能渗灌于膀胱，这样就会使下焦胀满，水流向外泛溢，就会发生水胀病。
English: Yin and yang airway blockage is not smooth, the four seas are blocked, the three coke can not be drained, the juice can not be normally spread to the whole body, the food and drink are mixed and run in the intestine and stomach, accumulated in the large intestine, the liquid stays in the lower coke, and can not permeate the bladder. This will make the lower coke swell, and the water flow will overflow to the outside, and the water swelling disease will occur.

古文：此津液五别之逆顺也。
现代文：这些就是津液分为五条通路运行的正常和异常的情况。
English: These are the normal and abnormal conditions for the operation of the five channels of the Tsushu.

