古文：存勖，克用长子也。
现代文：存勖是克用的长子。
English: Cunxu is the eldest son of Kegui.

古文：初，克用破孟方立于邢州，还军上党，置酒三垂岗，伶人奏《百年歌》，至于衰老之际，声甚悲，坐上皆凄怆。
现代文：起初，克用在邢州击败孟方立，回师上党，在三垂岗设宴，演戏的人奏《百年歌》，唱到衰老的部分声音很悲哀，弄得满座的人悲伤。
English: At first, Kening defeated Meng Fangli in Zhangzhou, returned to the party as a teacher, held a banquet in Sanzhuigang, the actors played the "Hundred-Year Song," and sang the aging part of the voice very sad, making the audience full of people sad.

古文：时存勖在侧，方五岁，克用慨然捋须，指而笑曰： 吾行老矣，此奇兒也，后二十年，其能代我战于此乎！ 
现代文：当时存勖年方五岁，在克用旁边坐，克用感慨的捋着须，指着存勖笑着说： 我们老了，这孩子很奇特，二十年后，他能代替我在此地作战么？ 
English: At that time, Cunxu Fang was five years old. He sat next to Cunxu. Cunxu scratched his mustache with emotion, pointed at Cunxu Fang and said with a smile: We are old, this child is very special. Twenty years later, will he be able to fight here instead of me?

古文：存勖年十一，从克用破王行瑜，遣献捷于京师，昭宗异其状貌，赐以鸂鶒卮、翡翠盘，而抚其背曰： 兒有奇表，后当富贵，无忘予家。 
现代文：存勖十一岁时跟随克用打败王行瑜，克用派他献捷报于京城，昭宗对存勖的相貌感到惊奇，赐给绘有双水鸟的圆形盛酒器、翡翠盘，摸着他的背说 ：这孩子形状奇异，后当富贵，不要忘了我们。 
English: When Cunxu was eleven years old, he followed Ganymede to defeat Wang Xingyu. Ganymede sent him to report his victory in Beijing. Zhaozong was surprised by Cunxu's appearance and gave him a round wine container and an emerald dish painted with a pair of water birds. Touching his back, he said, "This child has a strange shape. He will be rich later. Don't forget us."

古文：及长，善骑射，胆勇过人，稍习《春秋》，通大义，尤喜音声歌舞俳优之戏。
现代文：存勖长大了，善骑射，胆勇过人，稍学习《春秋》，就能了解《春秋》之大义，尤其喜欢音乐、歌舞和戏剧。
English: When Cunxu grew up, he was good at riding and shooting, and had great courage. With a little study of "Spring and Autumn," he could understand the great meaning of "Spring and Autumn." He especially liked music, song and dance, and drama.

古文：天祐五年正月，即王位于太原。
现代文：天祐五年正月，存勖在太原即晋王位。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Tenyu, Cunxu ascended the throne in Taiyuan.

古文：叔父克宁杀都虞候李存质，幸臣史敬镕告克宁谋叛。
现代文：叔父克宁杀都虞候李存质，他的宠幸大臣史敬告克宁谋叛。
English: His uncle, Kening, killed the governor of the capital, Li Cunxue, and his favorite minister, Shi Jing, accused Kening of plotting a rebellion.

古文：二月，执而戕之，且以先王之丧、叔父之难告周德威，德威自乱柳还军太原。
现代文：二月，捉住杀掉，并将先王之丧、叔父之难告诉周德威，德威为此从乱柳回师太原。
English: In February, he was caught and killed, and told Zhou Dewi about the death of the former king and the difficulties of his uncle. For this reason, Dewi returned to Taiyuan from Ranliu.

古文：梁夹城兵闻晋有大丧，德威军且去，因颇懈。
现代文：梁在夹城的将士听说晋有大丧事，周德威的军队退走了，就松懈起来。
English: When Liang's soldiers in the entangled city heard that Jin had a great funeral and that Zhou Dewei's army had retreated, they relaxed.

古文：王谓诸将曰： 梁人幸我大丧，谓我少而新立，无能为也，宜乘其怠击之。 
现代文：晋王对众将说 ：梁兵以为我有大丧事，认为我年少新立，无所作为，我想乘其怠惰发动进攻。 
English: Jin Wang said to the generals, "The Liang soldiers thought I was dead, that I was too young and too inexperienced, and I wanted to take advantage of their laziness to launch an attack.

古文：乃出兵趋上党，行至三重岗，叹曰： 此先王置酒处也！ 
现代文：于是进兵上党，行至三垂岗感叹的说 ：这是先王摆酒宴的地方啊！ 
English: So he marched into the ranks, marched to the three hanging posts, and said with a sigh, "This is the place where the former king held a wine banquet!"

古文：会天大雾昼暝，兵行雾中，攻其夹城，破之，梁军大败，凯旋告庙。
现代文：那天雾大得白天像晚上一样，雾中进军，攻破梁的夹城，把梁军打得大败，然后凯旋，祭告太庙。
English: On that day, the fog was so thick that it made the day look like night. The army marched into the fog, broke through the city between the beams, defeated the beam army, and then returned in triumph to the Imperial Temple.

古文：九月，蜀王王建、岐王李茂贞及杨崇本攻梁大安，晋亦遣周德威攻其晋州，败梁军于神山。
现代文：九月，蜀王王建、岐王李茂贞和杨崇本进攻梁的大安，晋派周德威攻打晋州，在神山打败梁军。
English: In September, Shu King Wang Jian, Qi King Li Maozhen and Yang Chongben attacked Liang Da'an. Jin sent Zhou Dewei to attack Jinzhou and defeated Liang's army in Kamiyama.

古文：六年，刘知俊叛梁，来乞师，王自将至阴地关，遣周德威攻晋州，败梁军于蒙阮。
现代文：天祐六年，刘知俊叛梁，来求援军，晋王亲自率军到阴地关，派周德威攻晋州，在蒙坑打败梁军。
English: In the sixth year of Tianyu, Liu Zhijun rebelled against Liang Yu and came to ask for reinforcements. Jin Wang personally led the army to Yinji Pass, sent Zhou Dewi to attack Jinzhou, and defeated Liang's army in Mengkeng.

古文：七年冬，梁遣王景仁攻赵，赵王王镕来乞师，诸将皆疑镕诈，未可出兵，王不听，乃救赵。
现代文：天祐七年冬，梁派王景仁攻赵，赵王王来求援军，诸将都怀疑王有诈，不赞成出兵，晋王不听，于是出兵救赵。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of Tianyu, Liang sent Wang Jingren to attack Zhao, and Zhao Wang Wang came to ask for reinforcements. All the generals suspected Wang of deception and did not approve of sending troops. Jin Wang did not listen, so he sent troops to rescue Zhao.

古文：八年正月，败梁军于柏乡，斩首二万级，获其将校三百人，马三千匹。
现代文：天祐八年正月，在柏乡大败梁军，斩首二万级，获得梁将校三百人，马三千匹。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Tianyu, he defeated Liang's army in Baixiang, decapitating 20,000 ranks, gaining 300 Liang officers and 3,000 horses.

古文：进攻邢州，不下，留兵围之，去，攻魏。
现代文：进攻邢州不下，留兵围困，去攻魏。
English: We can't attack Zhangzhou, so we have to besiege it and attack Wei.

古文：别遣周德威徇梁夏津、高唐，攻博州，破东武、朝城，遂击黎阳、临河、淇门，掠新乡、共城。
现代文：另派周德威绕过梁的夏津、高唐，进攻博州，连连攻下东武、朝城，又进攻黎阳、临河、淇门，抢掠新乡、共城。
English: He also sent Zhou Dewei to bypass Liang's Xiajin and Gaotang and attack Bozhou. He successively conquered Dongwu and Chaocheng, attacked Liyang, Linhe and Qimen, and plundered Xinxiang and Gongcheng.

古文：燕王刘守光闻晋攻梁深入，乃大治兵，声言助晋，王患之，乃旋师。
现代文：燕王刘守光听到晋兵深入攻梁的军情，就大规模聚集军队，声言帮助晋王，晋王感到危险，立即回师。
English: Yan King Liu Shuguang heard the military situation of Jin soldiers deeply attacking Liang, he gathered a large-scale army and claimed to help Jin Wang. Jin Wang felt dangerous and immediately returned to the division.

古文：七月，会赵王王镕于承天军。
现代文：七月，在承天军会见赵王王。刘守光在燕称帝。
English: In July, he met with Zhao Wangwang in Chengdu. Liu Shouguang proclaimed himself emperor in Yan.

古文：刘守光称帝于燕。九年正月，遣周德威会镇、定以攻燕，守光求救于梁，梁军攻赵，屠枣强，李存审击走之。
现代文：天祐九年正月，派周德威会合镇、定军攻燕，守光求救于梁，梁军攻赵，在枣强进行大屠杀，被李存审击走。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Tianyu, he sent Zhou Dewei to rally the town and Ding's army to attack Yan, Shuguang to seek help from Liang, Liang's army to attack Zhao, and to carry out a massacre in Zaoqiang, which was repulsed by Li Cunxin.

古文：八月，硃友谦以河中叛于梁来降，梁遣康怀英讨友谦，友谦复臣于梁，而亦阴附于晋。
现代文：八月，朱友谦以河中地叛梁来降晋，梁派康怀英讨伐，友谦又归于梁，但背地里归附晋。
English: In August, Zhu Youqian tried to overthrow Liang in the middle of the river, but Liang sent Kang Huaiying to fight against him, and Zhu Youqian surrendered to Liang, but secretly surrendered to Jin.

古文：十年十月，刘守光请降，王如幽州，守光背约不降，攻破之。
现代文：天祐十年十月，刘守光请求投降，晋王到幽州，刘守光背约不降，晋兵攻破幽州。
English: In October of the tenth year of Tianyu, Liu Shouguang requested surrender, Jin Wang went to Yuzhou, Liu Shouguang reneged on the agreement not to surrender, and Jin soldiers broke through Yuzhou.

古文：十一年，杀燕王刘守光于太原，用其父仁恭于雁门。
现代文：天祐十一年，在太原杀燕王刘守光，剖其父仁恭的心送到雁门祭先王墓。
English: In the eleventh year of Tenyu, Liu Shuguang, the king of Yan, was killed in Taiyuan, and the heart of his father, Renkong, was sent to the tomb of the first king in the Wild Goose Gate Festival.

古文：于是赵王王镕、北平王王处直奉册推王为尚书令，始建行台。
现代文：于是赵王王、北平王王处直奉册推晋王为尚书令，始建行台。
English: Therefore, the King of Zhao and the King of Beiping directly obeyed the written order of the King of Jin and began to build the platform.

古文：七月，攻梁邢州，战于张公桥，晋军大败。
现代文：七月，进攻梁的邢州，在张公桥激战，晋军大败。
English: In July, they attacked Liang's Zhangzhou and fought a fierce battle at Zhanggong Bridge. The Jin army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：十二年，魏州军乱，贺德伦以魏、博二州叛于梁来附。
现代文：天祐十二年，魏州军内乱，贺德伦以魏、博二州叛梁附晋。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianyu, the civil war of the Wei State Army, He Delun took Wei and Bo two states to rebel against Liang and Jin.

古文：王入魏州，行至永济，诛其乱首张彦，以其兵五百自卫，号帐前银枪军。
现代文：晋王到魏州，行至永济杀乱军为首者张彦，用降兵五百为卫士，号帐前银枪军。
English: Jin Wang went to Weizhou and went to Yongji to kill Zhang Yan, who was the leader of the rebel army. He used 500 soldiers as guards and called them the Silver Gun Army.

古文：六月，王兼领魏博节度使。取德州。
现代文：六月，晋王兼任魏博节度使，攻取德州。
English: In June, Jin Wang also served as Wei Bo's envoy to the Qing Dynasty and conquered Texas.

古文：七月，取澶州。
现代文：七月，夺取澶州。
English: In July, it captured Zhangzhou.

古文：刘鄩军于洹水，王率百骑觇其营，遇鄩伏兵围之数重，决围而出，亡七八骑。
现代文：刘寻阝驻军洹水，晋王率百骑观营，遇刘寻阝伏兵重重包围，晋王突围而出，丢失七八骑。
English: Liu Huanqian stationed troops in Lishui, Jin Wang led a hundred horsemen to watch the camp. When Liu Huanqian's ambush was surrounded, Jin Wang broke out of the encirclement and lost seven or eight horsemen.

古文：八月，梁复取澶州，晋军与鄩对垒于莘，晋军数挑战，鄩闭壁不出。
现代文：八月，梁军夺回澶州，晋军与刘寻阝在莘县对峙，晋军挑战，刘寻阝不肯出战。
English: In August, Liang's army recaptured Bozhou, and the Jin army confronted Liu Huan in Bozhou County. The Jin army challenged Liu Huan, but Liu Huan refused to fight.

古文：十三年正月，王留李存审于莘，声言西归。
现代文：天祐十三年正月，晋王留李存审守莘县，声言西归。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of Tenyu, the Jin king, Li Cunxun, stayed in Shixian and declared that he would return to the west.

古文：鄩闻晋王且去，即引兵击魏，攻城东。
现代文：刘寻阝听说晋王已去，立即引兵攻魏的城东。
English: When Liu Huanqian heard that the Jin king had left, he immediately led an army to attack the eastern part of Wei.

古文：王行至贝州，返击鄩，大败之，追至于故元城，又败之，鄩走黎阳。
现代文：晋王行至贝州，又返回把刘寻阝打得大败。追至故元城，又战败刘寻阝，刘寻阝退到黎阳。
English: Jin Wang went to Beizhou, and returned to beat Liu Xingyao badly. He chased him to the former Yuancheng, defeated Liu Xingyao again, and Liu Xingyao retreated to Liyang.

古文：三月，攻梁卫州，降其刺史米昭；克磁州，杀其刺史靳昭。
现代文：三月，攻梁的卫州，刺史米昭被迫降晋；攻克磁州，刺史靳昭被杀。
English: In March, in the attack on Weizhou, Zhang Shimi Zhao was forced to be demoted to Jin; in the attack on Magnetized Prefecture, Zhang Shijiazhuang was killed.

古文：四月，克洺州。
现代文：四月，攻克氵名州。
English: In April, he conquered Nagano Prefecture.

古文：八月，围邢州，降其节度使阎宝。
现代文：八月，围邢州，节度使阎宝降晋。
English: In August, the siege of Bozhou and the festival made Yan Bao be demoted to Jin.

古文：梁张筠弃相州、戴思远弃沧州而逃，遂取二州，而贝州人杀梁守将张源德，以城降。
现代文：吓得张筠弃相州、戴思远弃沧州而逃，晋取得这二州，贝州人杀梁守将张源德以城降晋。
English: Frightened, Zhang Qu abandoned Xiangzhou and Dai Siyuan abandoned Cangzhou and fled, and Jin gained these two states. The people of Beizhou killed Liang Shou and demoted Zhang Yuande to Jin.

古文：契丹寇蔚州，执振武节度使李嗣本。
现代文：契丹进犯蔚州，虏去振武节度使李嗣本。
English: Khitan invaded Ulshu, and Li Shih-pen was taken captive to Zhenwu.

古文：十四年，契丹寇新州，遂寇幽州，李嗣源击走之。
现代文：天祐十四年，契丹进犯新州，又犯幽州，被李嗣源击走。
English: In the 14th year of Tianyu, the Khitan invaded Xinzhou and Yuzhou, and were driven away by Li Siyuan.

古文：冬，梁谢彦章军于杨刘。
现代文：冬天，梁谢彦章驻军杨刘。
English: In winter, Liang Xieyan Zhang garrisoned Yang Liu.

古文：十二月，攻杨刘，王自负刍以堙堑，遂破之。
现代文：十二月，晋军攻杨刘，晋王亲自拿苇和士兵一起堵塞壕沟，终于攻破杨刘城。
English: In December, the Jin army attacked Yang Liu, and the Jin king personally took the plough and blocked the trench with the soldiers, finally breaking through Yang Liu City.

古文：十五年正月，梁、晋相距于杨刘，彦章决河水以隔晋军。
现代文：天祐十五年正月，梁晋在杨刘对峙，彦章决河水以阻隔晋军。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of Tianyu, Liang Jin confronted Yang Liu, and Yan Zhang cut the river to block the Jin army.

古文：六月，渡水击彦章，破其四寨。
现代文：六月，晋军渡河进攻彦章，攻破四寨。
English: In June, the Jin army crossed the river to attack Hikosho and broke through Shizhai.

古文：八月，大阅于魏，合卢龙、横海、昭义、安国及镇、定之兵十万、马万匹，军于麻家渡。
现代文：八月，到魏州检阅军队，会合卢龙、横海、昭义、安国和镇、定之兵十万，马万匹，驻屯麻家渡。
English: In August, he went to Weizhou to review the army, and met with Lulong, Henghai, Zhao Yi, An Guo and Zhen, with a total of 100,000 soldiers and 10,000 horses stationed in Majiadu.

古文：谢彦章军于行台。
现代文：谢彦章驻军行台。
English: Xie Yanzhang's march to the garrison.

古文：十二月，进军临濮，梁军追之，战于胡柳，晋军大败，周德威死之。
现代文：十二月，进军临濮，梁军追赶，胡柳一战，晋军大败，周德威战死。
English: In December, he marched into Linyi, Liang's army chased him, Hu Liu fought a battle, Jin's army was defeated, and Zhou Dewei died in battle.

古文：梁军暮休于土山，晋军复击，大败之，遂军德胜，为夹寨。
现代文：梁军夜宿土山，晋军袭击，大败梁军，于是造夹寨驻军德胜。
English: Liang's army stayed at night in Tsuchiyama, Jin's army attacked and defeated Liang's army, so the garrison was built in De Sheng.

古文：十六年正月，王兼领卢龙军节度使。
现代文：天祐十六年正月，晋王兼任卢龙军节度使。
English: In the first month of the 16th year of Tenyu, Jin Wang also served as the Lulong Army's festival envoy.

古文：梁王瓚攻德胜南城，不克。
现代文：梁王瓒率军攻德胜南城，未攻破。
English: Liang Wangtao led the army to attack and defeat Nancheng, but failed to break through.

古文：十月，广德胜北城。
现代文：十月，扩大德胜北城。
English: In October, the expansion of Desheng North City began.

古文：十二月，败梁军于河南。
现代文：十二月，在河的南边击败梁军。
English: In December, Liang's army was defeated on the south side of the river.

古文：十七年，硃友谦袭同州，梁遣刘鄩击友谦，李存审败梁军于同州。
现代文：天祐十七年，朱友谦袭击同州，梁派刘寻阝进攻朱友谦，李存审在同州大败梁军。
English: In the 17th year of Tianyu, Zhu Youqian attacked Tongzhou, Liang sent Liu Huan to attack Zhu Youqian, and Li Cunxin defeated Liang's army in Tongzhou.

古文：十八年正月，魏州僧传真献唐受命宝一。
现代文：天祐十八年正月，魏州和尚传真献唐受命宝一件。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of Tenyu, Wei Zhou and Shang Fax presented a treasure to Tang.

古文：赵将张文礼弑其君镕，文礼来请命。
现代文：赵将张文礼弑其君王，文礼来晋请求归附。
English: Zhao appointed Zhang Wenli as his regent, and Wenli came to Jin to ask for annexation.

古文：二月，以文礼为镇州兵马留后。
现代文：二月，任文礼为镇州兵马留后。
English: In February, Ren Wenli left for the Zhenzhou Terracotta Army.

古文：三月，河中节度使硃友谦、昭义军节度使李嗣昭、横海军节度使李存审、义武军节度使王处直、安国军节度使李嗣源、镇州兵马留后张文礼、领天平军节度使阎宝，大同军节度使李存璋、振武军节度使李存进、匡国军节度使硃令德，请王即皇帝位，王三辞，友谦等三请，王曰： 予当思之。 
现代文：三月，河中节度使朱友谦、昭义军节度使李嗣昭、横海军节度使李存审、义武军节度使王处直、安国军节度使李嗣源、镇州兵马留后张文礼、领天平军节度使阎宝、大同军节度使李存璋、振武军节度使李存进、匡国军节度使朱令德，请求晋王即帝位，晋王谦让三次，友谦等再三请求，晋王才说 ：让我好好考虑一下。 
English: In March, the Mid-Heaven Festival was held by Zhu Youqian, the Shao Uyghur Army Festival was held by Li Shizhao, the Horizontal Navy Festival was held by Li Cunxuan, the Uyghur Army Festival was held by Wang Shanzhong, the An Guo Army Festival was held by Li Shiyuan, the Zhenzhou Army Festival was held by Zhang Wenli, the Tianping Army Festival was held by Yan Bao, the Datong Army Festival was held by Li Cunxuan, the Zhenwu Army Festival was held by Li Cunjin, and the Kuangguo Army Festival was held by Zhu Lingde. They

古文：八月，遣赵王王镕故将符习及阎宝、史建瑭等攻张文礼于镇州。建瑭取赵州。
现代文：八月，派赵王王故将符习及阎宝、史建瑭等率兵到镇州攻张文礼。建瑭取赵州。
English: In August, Zhao Wang Wang sent Fuxi, Yan Bao, Shi Jianqi and other generals to Zhenzhou to attack Zhang Wenli. Jianqi won Zhaozhou.

古文：张文礼卒，其子处瑾闭城拒守。
现代文：张文礼死，其子处谨闭城拒敌。
English: After Zhang Wenli's death, his son closed the city to the enemy.

古文：九月，建瑭战死。
现代文：九月，建瑭战死。
English: In September, Jian Chen died in battle.

古文：十月，梁戴思远攻德胜北城，李嗣源败之于戚城。
现代文：十月，梁戴思远进攻德胜北城，李嗣源在戚城击败梁军。
English: In October, Liang Dai Siyuan attacked Desheng Beicheng, and Li Siyuan defeated Liang's army in Qicheng.

古文：王处直叛附于契丹，其子都幽处直以来附。
现代文：王处直叛晋归附契丹，其子王都把处直幽禁起来然后来归附。
English: King Duan Zhi rebelled against Jin and became a vassal of Khitan, and his sons all put Duan Zhi under house arrest and then became vassals.

古文：十二月，契丹寇涿州，遂寇定州。
现代文：十二月，契丹进犯涿州，又进犯定州。
English: In December, the Khitan invaded Zhangzhou and Dingzhou.

古文：十九年正月，败契丹于新城、望都，追奔至于涿州。
现代文：天祐十九年正月，在新城、望都击败契丹，一直追到幽州。
English: In the first month of the 19th year of Tenyu, he defeated Khitan in Xincheng and Bodu and chased them all the way to Yuzhou.

古文：三月，阎宝败于镇州，以李嗣昭代之。
现代文：三月，阎宝在镇州兵败，由李嗣昭取代他。
English: In March, Yan Bao was defeated in Zhenzhou and replaced by Li Shizhao.

古文：四月，嗣昭战死，以李存进代之。
现代文：四月，嗣昭战死，由李存进取代。
English: In April, Tsuneaki died in battle and was replaced by Li Cunjin.

古文：八月，梁取卫州。
现代文：八月，梁取卫州。
English: In August, Liang took over Weizhou.

古文：九月，存进败镇人于东垣，存进战死。
现代文：九月，李存进在东垣击败镇州兵，存进激战身死。
English: In September, Li Cunjin defeated the town's state soldiers in Donggaki. Cunjin was killed in the fierce battle.

古文：十月，李存审克镇州。
现代文：十月，李存审攻克镇州。
English: In October, Li Cunxin conquered Zhenzhou.

古文：王兼领成德军节度使。
现代文：晋王兼任成德军节度使。
English: Jin Wang also served as the German army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：同光元年春三月，李继韬以潞州叛附于梁。
现代文：同光元年三月，李继韬以潞州叛晋归附于梁。
English: In March of the same year, Li Jizhen was annexed to Liang as a result of the rebellion in Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月己巳，皇帝即位，大赦，改元，国号唐。
现代文：四月一日，晋王李存勖即帝位，大赦天下，改元同光，国号唐。
English: On April 1, Li Cunxu, the king of Jin, ascended to the throne, and the country was amnestied. The name of the country was changed to Tang.

古文：行台左丞相豆卢革为门下侍郎，右丞相卢程为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事；中门使郭崇韬、昭义监军张居翰为枢密使。
现代文：任行台左丞相豆卢革为门下侍郎，右丞相卢程为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事；中门使郭崇韬、昭义监军张居翰为枢密使。
English: Gongdai's left secretary Zu Lu Ge was appointed as a subordinate attendant, right secretary Lu Cheng was appointed as a subordinate attendant to the middle secretary, and the same middle secretary was appointed as a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordin

古文：以魏州为东京，太原为西京，镇州为北都。
现代文：以魏州为东京，太原为西京，镇州为北都。
English: With Weizhou as Tokyo, Taiyuan as West Beijing, and Zhenzhou as the northern capital.

古文：闰月，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：曾祖执宜、祖妣崔氏皆谥曰昭烈，庙号懿祖；祖国昌、祖妣秦氏皆谥曰文景，庙号献祖；考谥曰武，庙号太祖。
现代文：闰四月，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：曾祖执宜、祖妣崔氏都谥曰昭，庙号懿祖；祖国昌、祖妣秦氏都谥曰文景，庙号献祖；考谥曰武，庙号太祖。
English: In leap April, the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of

古文：立庙于太原，自唐高祖、太宗、懿宗、昭宗为七庙。
现代文：立庙于太原，自唐高祖、太宗、懿宗、昭宗为七庙。
English: The temple was founded in Taiyuan, and there have been seven temples since the Tang Dynasty, including Gaozu, Taizong, Shizong, and Zhaozong.

古文：壬寅，李嗣源取郓州。
现代文：四月二十八日，李嗣源夺取郓州。
English: On April 28, Li Siyuan captured Zhangzhou.

古文：九月戊辰，李嗣源及王彦章战于递坊，败之。冬十月壬申，如郓州以袭梁。
现代文：卢程罢相。八月，梁军攻下泽州，守将裴约败死。九月二十七日，李嗣源在递坊打败王彦章。十月二日，庄宗到郓州袭击梁军。
English: In August, Liang's army captured Zezhou, and defeated and killed the guard general Pei You. On September 27, Li Siyuan defeated Wang Yanzhang at Difang. On October 2, Zhuang Zong attacked Liang's army in Zhangzhou.

古文：甲戌，取中都。
现代文：四日，攻占中都。
English: On the fourth day, the capital was captured.

古文：丁丑，取曹州。己卯，灭梁。
现代文：七日，夺取曹州，九日，灭梁。
English: On the seventh day, the capture of Caozhou, on the ninth day, the destruction of Liang.

古文：敬翔自杀。
现代文：敬翔自杀。
English: Keisho committed suicide.

古文：丙戌，贬郑珏为莱州司户参军，萧顷登州司户参军；杀李振、赵岩、张汉杰、硃珪，灭其族。
现代文：十六日，贬郑珏为莱州司户参军，萧顷为登州司户参军；杀李振、赵岩、张汉杰、朱皀，灭其族。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Rong joined the army as the governor of Laizhou, and Xiao Hao joined the army as the governor of Dengzhou; they killed Li Zhen, Zhao Yan, Zhang Hanjie, and Zhu Xi, and exterminated their families.

古文：己丑，德音降死罪囚，流已下原之。
现代文：十九日，下诏为死罪囚犯减刑，流刑以下宽免。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued to commute the sentences of death-row prisoners, and to pardon those sentenced to exile or less.

古文：十一月乙巳，复北都为镇州，太原为北都。
现代文：十一月五日，恢复北都原名为镇州，以太原为北都。
English: On November 5th, the original name of the northern capital was restored as Zhenzhou, and the original name of the northern capital was Ether.

古文：丙辰，复汴州为宣武军。
现代文：复称汴州为宣武军。
English: The plural name of Bozhou is Xuanwu Army.

古文：丁巳，尚书左丞赵光胤为中书侍郎，礼部侍郎韦说：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，任尚书左丞赵光胤为中书侍郎，礼部侍郎韦说同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Guangyan, who was appointed to the left of Shang Shuxu, became the attendant of the middle school, and Wei, the attendant of the etiquette department, said that he would go to the lower level of the middle school.

古文：戊午，新罗国王金朴英遣使者来。
现代文：十八日，新罗国王金朴英派使者来。
English: On the 18th, the King of Silla, Jin Pak Ying, sent an envoy.

古文：辛酉，复永平军为西都。
现代文：二十一日，恢复永平军为西都。
English: On the 21st, Yongping Army was restored as the western capital.

古文：甲子，如洛京。
现代文：二十四日，往洛京。
English: On the 24th, he went to Loking.

古文：十二月庚午朔，至自汴州。
现代文：十二月一日，从汴州回京。
English: On December 1, he returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou.

古文：辛巳，李继韬伏诛。
现代文：十二日，处死李继韬。
English: On the 12th, Li Jizhe was executed.

古文：继韬之弟继达杀其兄继俦于潞州。
现代文：继韬弟继达在潞州杀其兄继俦。二十三日，在伊阙打猎。
English: On the 23rd, Jida, the younger brother of Jida, killed his older brother, Jida, in Luzhou, and went hunting in Yili.

古文：壬辰，畋于伊阙。二年春正月，河南尹张全义及诸镇进暖殿物。
现代文：同光二年正月，河南尹张全义以及诸镇进贡暖殿物资。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Guang Dynasty, Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi and the towns paid tribute to warm the materials.

古文：己酉，求唐宦者。
现代文：十日，下令要唐朝原来逃走的宦官回宫。
English: On the 10th, he ordered the eunuchs who had fled to the Tang Dynasty to return to the palace.

古文：庚戌，新罗国王金朴英及其泉州范节度使王逢规皆遣使者来。
现代文：十一日，新罗国王金朴英及其泉州节度使王逢规都派使者来。
English: On the 11th day, the King of Silla, Jin Puying, and his Quanzhou Festival envoy, Wang Fengbo, both sent envoys.

古文：乙卯，渤海国王大諲譔使大禹谟来。
现代文：十六日，渤海国王大讠巽派使者大禹谟来。
English: On the 16th, King Dagon of the Bohai Kingdom sent an envoy to Yu Yu.

古文：庚申，如河阳。
现代文：二十一日，到河阳迎接皇太后。
English: On the 21st, he went to Kawayo to meet the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛酉，至自河阳。
现代文：二十二日，从河阳回到京城。
English: On the 22nd, he returned to Beijing from Kheyang.

古文：丁卯，七庙神主至自太原，祔于太庙。
现代文：二十八日，把七庙神主从太原迁来安置到太庙里。
English: On the 28th, the seven temple deities were moved from Taiyuan and placed in the temple.

古文：朝献于太微宫。
现代文：早晨在太微宫祭祀献礼。
English: In the morning, there will be a ritual offering at Taichung Palace.

古文：戊辰，享于太庙。
现代文：二十九日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 29th, the ritual was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：二月己巳朔，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：二月一日，在南郊祭天，颁布大赦令。
English: On February 1, in the southern suburb of Saitian, an amnesty order was issued.

古文：癸酉，各臣上尊号曰昭文睿武光孝皇帝。
现代文：五日，群臣上尊号曰昭文睿武光孝皇帝。
English: On the fifth day, the group of courtiers received the title of Emperor Shōmonryō Takemitsu.

古文：戊寅，幸李嗣源第。
现代文：十日，到李嗣源家。
English: On the 10th, he went to the home of Li Siyuan.

古文：癸未，立刘氏为皇后。
现代文：十五日，立刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 15th, the Liu clan was made empress.

古文：三月己酉，党项来。
现代文：三月十一日，党项派使者来。
English: On March 11, the party sent an envoy.

古文：庚戌，赐从平汴州及入洛南郊立仗军士等功臣。
现代文：十二日，赏赐跟随皇帝攻占汴州及进入洛阳南郊立仗军士等功臣。
English: On the 12th, the meritorious soldiers who followed the emperor to conquer Zhangzhou and entered the southern suburb of Luoyang were awarded.

古文：庚申，工部郎中李涂为检视诸陵使。
现代文：二十二日，任工部郎中李涂为检视诸陵使。
English: On the 22nd, Li Tuo, an official of the Ministry of Works, was sent to inspect the tombs.

古文：潞州将杨立反。
现代文：潞州守将杨立谋反。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Yang Li, plotted a rebellion.

古文：夏五月壬寅，教坊使陈俊为景州刺史，内园栽接使储德源为宪州刺史。
现代文：五月五日，任命教坊使陈俊为景州刺史，内园栽接使储德源为宪州刺史。
English: On May 5th, Chen Jun, the Minister of Education, was appointed as the historian of Jingzhou, and Naiyuan, the Minister of Reserves and Resources, was appointed as the historian of Genshou.

古文：丙辰，渤海国王大湮撰遣使者来。
现代文：十九日，渤海国王大讠巽派使者来。
English: On the 19th, King Dagu of Bohai sent an envoy.

古文：丙寅，李嗣源克潞州。
现代文：二十九日，李嗣源攻克潞州。
English: On the 29th, Li Siyuan invaded Ganzhou.

古文：六月丙子，杨立伏诛。己丑，封回纥王仁美为英义可汗。
现代文：六月九日，斩杨立。二十二日，封回纥王仁美为英义可汗。
English: On June 9th, Yang Li was beheaded, and on the 22nd, Wang Renmei was enthroned as Yingyi Khan.

古文：秋七月己酉，如雷山赛天神。
现代文：七月十二日，到雷山举行赛天神活动。
English: On July 12th, the "Sai Tenjin" event was held in Leshan.

古文：八月，大雨霖，河溢。
现代文：八月，大雨淋淋，黄河水流出。
English: In August, it rained heavily, causing the Yellow River to overflow.

古文：冬十月癸未，左熊威军将赵晖妻一产三男子。
现代文：九月十六日，把水放在城门上，以祈祷消除灾异。
English: On September 16th, water was placed on the gate of the city to pray for the elimination of disasters.

古文：十一月癸卯，畋于伊阙。
现代文：十八日，驾临郭崇韬家。
English: On the 18th, he arrived at Guo Chongyao's home.

古文：丙午，至自伊阙。
现代文：二十日，黑水派使者来。十一月九日，到伊阙游猎，十二日才回京。
English: On the 20th, Blackwater sent an envoy. On November 9th, they went on a hunting trip to Ili, and only returned to Beijing on the 12th.

古文：丁巳，回鹘使都督安千想来。
现代文：二十三日，回鹘使者都督安千想来。
English: On the 23rd, the emissary of Hui Xuan, Tudou Anqian, wanted to come.

古文：十二月庚午，及皇后幸张全义第。
现代文：十二月六日，皇帝与皇后驾临张全义家。
English: On December 6, the emperor and empress drove to Zhang Quanyi's home.

古文：三年春正月庚子，如东京，毁即位坛为鞠场。
现代文：同光三年一月七日，往东京，毁掉即位坛变为打鞠场。
English: On January 7 of the same year, he went to Tokyo and destroyed the enthronement altar to turn it into a ball court.

古文：二月己巳，聚鞠于新场。
现代文：二月六日，聚众在新场打鞠。
English: On February 6th, a crowd gathered at the new site to play marbles.

古文：乙亥，射雁于王莽河。
现代文：十二日，在王莽河射雁。
English: On the 12th, shooting geese in Wang Manghe.

古文：辛巳，突厥浑解楼、渤海国王大諲撰皆遣使者来。
现代文：十八日，突厥浑解楼、渤海国王大讠巽派使者来。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Turk, Hunlo, and the king of the Bohai Kingdom, Dagu, sent envoys.

古文：庚寅，射雁于北郊。
现代文：在北郊射雁。二十二日，在郭泊射鸭。二十七日，在北郊射雁。
English: Shooting geese in the northern suburbs. On the 22nd, shooting ducks in Guopo. On the 27th, shooting geese in the northern suburbs.

古文：三月乙未，寒食望祭于西郊。
现代文：三月三日，寒食节，在西郊望祭。
English: On March 3rd, the cold food festival, the festival was held in the western suburbs.

古文：庚申，至自东京。
现代文：二十八日，从东京回京。
English: On the 28th, I returned to Tokyo from Tokyo.

古文：辛酉，改东京为鄴都，以洛京为东都。
现代文：二十九日，改东京为邺都，以洛阳为东都。
English: On the 29th, the capital was changed to Tokyo and the eastern capital to Luoyang.

古文：夏四月乙亥，及皇后幸郭崇韬、硃汉宾第。
现代文：四月十三日，与皇后驾临郭崇韬、朱汉宾家。
English: On April 13, he drove with the empress to the home of Guo Chongzhen and Zhu Hanbin.

古文：旱。
现代文：旱灾。
English: Drought.

古文：庚寅，赵光胤薨。
现代文：二十八日，赵光胤去世。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Guangyin passed away.

古文：五月丁酉，后太妃薨，废朝五日。
现代文：五月六日，皇太妃死，五日不上朝。
English: On the 6th of May, the Empress Dowager died, and on the 5th she did not attend the Imperial Court.

古文：己酉，黑水、女真皆遣使者来。
现代文：十八日，黑水、女真都派使者来。
English: On the 18th, Kurosui and Nyoshin both sent envoys.

古文：六月辛未，宗正卿李纾为昭宗、少帝改卜园陵使。
现代文：六月十日，命宗正卿李纾为昭宗、少帝改卜园陵使。
English: On June 10th, Li Jie, the Right Reverend of Myeongjong Seongguk, was appointed as the gardener of Shojong, the young emperor's tomb.

古文：括马。
现代文：搜刮战马。
English: Scrounging for folk horses.

古文：秋七月壬寅，皇太后崩。
现代文：七月十一日，皇太后死。
English: On July 11, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：八月癸未，杀河南县令罗贯。
现代文：八月二十三日，杀河南县令罗贯。
English: On August 23rd, Luo Ran of Henan County was killed.

古文：九月庚子，魏王继岌为西川四面行营都统，郭崇韬为招讨使以伐蜀。
现代文：九月十日，任命魏王继岌为西川四面行营都统，郭崇韬为招讨使讨伐后蜀。
English: On September 10th, Wei Wangji was appointed as the leader of the four-sided campaign in the West River, and Guo Chongyi was appointed as the leader of the campaign in the West River.

古文：自六月雨至于是月。
现代文：从六月到九月阴雨连绵。
English: From June to September it is rainy and cloudy.

古文：丁巳，射雁于尖山。
现代文：二十七日，在尖山射雁。
English: On the 27th, they shot geese in Jianshan.

古文：冬十月壬午，奚、吐浑、突厥皆遣使者来。
现代文：十月二十三日，奚、吐浑、突厥都派使者来。
English: On October 23rd, envoys from Tonga, Tuvalu, and Turkey were sent.

古文：戊子，葬贞简太后于坤陵。
现代文：二十九日，葬贞简太后于坤陵。
English: On the 28th, Empress Dowager Zhengjian was buried in Kunling.

古文：十一月丁未，高丽遣使者来。
现代文：十一月十八日，高丽派使者来。
English: On November 18, Goryeo sent an envoy.

古文：己酉，蜀王衍降。
现代文：二十日，后蜀王衍投降。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Shu surrendered.

古文：郭崇韬杀王宗弼及其弟宗渥、宗训，灭其族。
现代文：郭崇韬杀王宗弼及其弟宗渥、宗训，灭其族。
English: Guo Chongzhen killed Wang Zongxuan and his brothers Zongwu and Zongxun, exterminating their tribe.

古文：十二月己卯，畋于白沙。
现代文：十二月二十日，在白沙游猎，二十四日才回京。
English: On December 20th, he went hunting in Baisha, and only returned to Beijing on the 24th.

古文：癸未，至自白沙。闰月辛亥，封弟存美为邕王，存霸永王，存礼薛王，存渥申王，存乂睦王，存确通王，存纪雅王。
现代文：闰十二月二十三日，封弟弟存美为邕王，存霸为永王，存礼为薛王，存渥为申王，存繧为睦王，存确为通王，存纪为雅王。
English: On the 23rd day of the intercalary December, his younger brother Cunmei was crowned the king of Shanshan, Cunba was crowned the king of Yong, Cun Li was crowned the king of Xue, Cun Wo was crowned the king of Shen, Cun Ya was crowned the king of Mutu, Cun Ji was crowned the king of Tong, and Cun Ji was crowned the king of Ya.

古文：四年春正月壬戌，降死罪以下囚。
现代文：同光四年正月五日，下诏为死罪以下的犯人减刑。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the same year, the following edict was issued to commute the sentences of prisoners with less than capital crimes.

古文：甲子，魏王继岌杀郭崇韬及其三子于蜀。
现代文：七日，魏王继岌在蜀杀郭崇韬及其二子。
English: On the seventh day, Wei Wangji killed Guo Chongyao and his two sons in Shu.

古文：戊寅，契丹使梅老鞋里来。
现代文：二十一日，契丹使者梅老鞋里来。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Khitan emissary Mei Lao Shoe came.

古文：庚辰，杀其弟睦王存乂及河中让国军节度使李继麟，灭其族。
现代文：二十三日，杀弟睦王存繧及河中护国军节度使李继麟，灭其族。
English: On the 23rd, the murder of his younger brother, Mutsu Wang Cunxu, and the festival of the National Protection Army in the middle of the river caused Li Jilin to exterminate his tribe.

古文：乙酉，沙州曹义金遣使者来。
现代文：二十八日，沙州曹义金派使者来。
English: On the 28th, Cao Yijin of Shazhou sent an envoy.

古文：丙戌，回鹘阿咄欲遣使者来。
现代文：二十九日，回鹘阿咄欲派使者来。
English: On the 29th, Hu Jia sent an envoy.

古文：丁亥，杀李继麟之将史武、薛敬容、周唐殷、杨师太、王景、来仁、白奉国，皆灭其族。
现代文：三十日，杀李继麟部将史武、薛敬容、周唐殷、杨师太、王景、来仁、白奉国，都灭其族。
English: On the 30th, Li Jilin's troops killed Shi Wu, Xue Jing Rong, Zhou Tang Yin, Yang Shidai, Wang Jing, Lai Ren, and Bai Feng Guo, and exterminated their families.

古文：二月己丑，宣徽南院使李绍宏为枢密使。
现代文：二月二日，任宣徽南院使李绍宏为枢密使。
English: On February 2, the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui appointed Li Shaohong as a privy envoy.

古文：癸巳，鄴都军将赵在礼反于贝州。
现代文：六日，邺都军将赵在礼在贝州谋反。
English: On the 6th day of the month, the Qidu army led by Zhao Zaili rebelled in Bishu.

古文：甲午，畋于冷泉。
现代文：七日，在冷泉游猎。
English: Seven days of hunting in the cold springs.

古文：赵在礼陷鄴都，武宁军节度使李绍荣讨之。
现代文：赵在礼攻陷邺都，派武宁军节度使李绍荣去讨伐。
English: Zhao attacked and captured Shantou in the ceremony, and sent the Wu Ning Army to send Li Shaorong to the crusade.

古文：邢州军将赵太反，东北面招讨使李绍真讨之。
现代文：邢州军将赵太谋反，派东北面招讨使李绍真去讨伐。
English: The Bozhou army plotted against Zhao Tai and sent an envoy to the northeast to persuade Li Shaozhen to go on a crusade.

古文：甲辰，成德军节度使李嗣源讨赵在礼。
现代文：十七日，又派成德军节度使李嗣源讨伐赵在礼。
English: On the seventeenth day, the German army was sent to the festival to make Li Siyuan fight Zhao Zaili.

古文：三月，赵太伏诛。
现代文：三月，处死赵太。
English: In March, Zhao Ta was executed.

古文：李嗣源反。
现代文：李嗣源反叛。
English: Li Sigen rebelled.

古文：博州守将翟建自称刺史。
现代文：博州守将翟建自称刺史。
English: The governor of Bozhou, Zou Jian, claims to be a history-maker.

古文：甲子，杀王衍，灭其族。
现代文：八日，杀王衍，灭其族。
English: On the eighth day, kill Wangyan and exterminate his tribe.

古文：乙丑，如汴州。
现代文：九日，往汴州。
English: On the 9th, to Zhangzhou.

古文：壬申，次荥泽。
现代文：十六日，到达荥泽。
English: On the 16th, they arrived in Heze.

古文：龙骧指挥军使姚彦温以前锋军叛降于李嗣源。
现代文：龙骧指挥军使姚彦温以前锋军叛降归附李嗣源。
English: The commanding army of Longzheng ordered Yao Yanwen to surrender to Li Shiyuan after the vanguard army rebelled.

古文：嗣源入于汴州。
现代文：嗣源拥军入汴州。
English: Sogen led the army into Bozhou.

古文：甲戌，至自万胜。
现代文：十八日，皇帝从万胜镇返回洛京。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned to Beijing from Wansheng.

古文：从马直指挥使郭从谦反。
现代文：从马直指挥使郭从谦谋反。
English: From Ma Zhi's command, Guo Congxian plotted a rebellion.

古文：夏四月丁亥朔，皇帝崩。
现代文：四月一日，皇帝死。
English: On April 1, the emperor died.

