古文：董卓字仲颖，陇西临洮人也。
现代文：董卓字仲颖，是甘肃临洮人。
English: Dong Zhuo Zi Zhongying is from Linyi, Gansu Province.

古文：少好侠，尝游羌中，尽与诸豪帅相结。
现代文：年少时就喜好游侠，曾经到西北少数民族羌族生活的地区游历，与很多当地豪杰首领结交。
English: When he was young, he liked to be a ranger. He once traveled to the area where the Northwest ethnic minority Yi people live, and made friends with many local heroic leaders.

古文：后归耕於野，而豪帅有来从之者，卓与俱还，杀耕牛与相宴乐。
现代文：后来游历结束，回到家乡务农，那些曾和他交好的豪杰首领有过来看望他的，董卓都会邀请他们一起回家，还将自己耕地的牛杀掉来招待客人。
English: Later, after the end of the trip, he returned to his hometown to work in agriculture. Those great leaders who had been friends with him had come to visit him, and Dong Zhuo would invite them to go home together. He also slaughtered the cattle of his own farmland to entertain guests.

古文：诸豪帅感其意，归相敛，得杂畜千馀头以赠卓。
现代文：那些人被董卓的豪爽义气感动，等到回去之后，收集了牛马羊等各类牲畜一千多头赠送给董卓。
English: Those people were moved by Dong Zhuo's heroic spirit of loyalty. After returning home, they collected more than a thousand heads of cattle, horses, sheep and other types of livestock and presented them to Dong Zhuo.

古文：汉桓帝末，以六郡良家子为羽林郎。
现代文：东汉桓帝末年，朝廷下令选拔汉阳、陇西、安定、北地、上郡、西河等六个郡的良家子弟担任羽林郎。
English: In the last years of Emperor Kuan of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the imperial court ordered the selection of the children of good families from six counties including Hanyang, Shaanxi, Dingdian, Hubei, Shanggun, and Xihe to serve as Ulin Lang.

古文：卓有才武，旅力少比，双带两鞬，左右驰射，为军司马。
现代文：因为董卓有才气又勇武，力大过人，能够背两只箭袋在纵马急驰中左右开弓，被选中担任军司马，是军中负责掌管行军之事的。
English: Because Dong Zhuo was talented, brave, and powerful, he was able to carry two quivers on his back and open the bow left and right during the gallop. He was chosen to be the steward of the army and was in charge of marching in the army.

古文：从中郎将张奂征并州有功，拜郎中，赐缣九千匹，卓悉以分与吏士。
现代文：后来跟随中郎将张奂征讨并州，立下战功，被授予郎中之职，并赏赐了细绢九千匹，董卓将这些赏赐都分给了与他一同征战的将士们。
English: Later, he followed the middle brother in conquering and annexing Zhangye Province, and was awarded the post of middle brother, and was rewarded with nine thousand egrets. Dong Zhuo distributed these rewards to the soldiers who fought with him.

古文：迁广武令，蜀郡北部都尉，西域戊己校尉，免。
现代文：后来，被提升至广武令，还担任过蜀郡北部都尉、主管西域诸民族事务的西域戊己校尉，后来被免职了。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of Guangwu, and also served as the Northern Lieutenant of Shu County and the Western Wuyi Lieutenant in charge of the affairs of the Western Regions and Nationalities, and was later dismissed.

古文：徵拜并州刺史、河东太守，迁中郎将。
现代文：后来还担任过并州刺史、河东太守，又回到京师担任过中郎将的官职。
English: Later, he also served as the governor of the annexed prefecture and the governor of Hedong, and returned to Beijing to serve as the vice-commander.

古文：讨黄巾，军败抵罪。
现代文：在率军讨伐黄巾军的时候，战败失利，被罚免职以抵罪。
English: When he led the army to fight against the Yellow Turban Army, he lost the battle and was punished and dismissed to atone for the crime.

古文：韩遂等起凉州，复为中郎将，西拒遂。
现代文：西北的韩遂等人在凉州起事作乱，朝廷又重新任命他为中郎将，朝廷派他率兵平叛，西北的战事才被平定。
English: Han Sui and others in the northwest rioted in Liangzhou, and the imperial court reappointed him as middle-ranking general. The imperial court sent him to lead the troops to quell the rebellion, and the war in the northwest was finally pacified.

古文：于望垣硖北，为羌、胡数万人所围，粮食乏绝。
现代文：董卓率军到达望垣硖以北地区的时候，被羌族与胡人的数万兵马包围，粮食匮乏即将断绝。
English: When the army led by Dong Zhuo arrived in the area north of Wangaki, it was surrounded by tens of thousands of soldiers and horses of the Yi and Hu people, and the food shortage was about to be broken.

古文：卓伪欲捕鱼，堰其还道当所渡水为池，使水渟满数十里，默从堰下过其军而决堰。
现代文：董卓假装想要捕鱼，将军队要取道回去的水道修建水坝堵住，让数十里的水面高涨，然后董卓让军队悄悄从水坝下经过，然后凿开水坝。
English: Dong Zhuo pretended that he wanted to fish, dammed up the waterway that the army was going to take to go back, and let the water surface of dozens of miles rise. Then Dong Zhuo let the army quietly pass under the dam, and then chiseled the dam.

古文：比羌、胡闻知追逐，水已深，不得渡。
现代文：等到羌族、胡人的人马得知消息想要追赶的时候，水已经很深，没有办法渡过。
English: By the time the horses of the Yao and Hu people learned the news and wanted to catch up, the water was already very deep and there was no way to cross.

古文：时六军上陇西，五军败绩，卓独全众而还，屯住扶风。
现代文：当时一共有六支军队前往陇西讨伐韩遂，其中五支军队都战败失利，只有董卓率领的那一队能完整地撤退回来，驻扎在扶风郡。
English: At that time, a total of six armies went to Shaanxi to fight Han Sui, of which five armies were defeated. Only the one led by Dong Zhuo was able to withdraw completely and was stationed in Fufeng County.

古文：拜前将军，封斄乡侯，徵为并州牧。
现代文：后来朝廷授予他前将军的官职，被封为斄乡侯，担任并州牧。
English: Later, the imperial court granted him the official position of a former general, and he was made the lord of the township, and also served as a prefect.

古文：灵帝崩，少帝即位。
现代文：灵帝刘宏驾崩，少帝刘辩登基为帝。
English: The spiritual emperor Liu Hong passed away, and the young emperor Liu Fen ascended to the throne.

古文：大将军何进与司隶校尉袁绍谋诛诸阉官，太后不从。
现代文：大将军何进和司隶校尉袁绍密谋要除掉朝中的宦官，太后没有同意他们的计划。
English: General He Jin and Sili Lieutenant Yuan Shao plotted to get rid of the eunuchs in the court, but the Empress Dowager did not agree to their plan.

古文：进乃召卓使将兵诣京师，并密令上书曰： 中常侍张让等窃幸乘宠，浊乱海内。
现代文：何进就召见董卓，让他率领军队来到京都，并让他秘密给皇上上书说： 宫中的中常侍张让等人侥幸得到陛下的宠信，就扰乱朝政，危害天下。
English: He summoned Dong Zhuo, asked him to lead the army to Kyoto, and asked him to secretly send a letter to the emperor saying: The palace's middle-ranking attendant Zhang Zhan and others, who were lucky enough to receive His Majesty's favor, disrupted the imperial government and harmed the world.

古文：昔赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，以逐君侧之恶。
现代文：从前晋国大臣赵鞅曾率领晋阳的兵马进入京城，除掉君主身边的佞臣荀寅和七吉射等奸恶小人。
English: Former Jin minister Zhao Wei once led the soldiers and horses of Jinyang into the capital to get rid of the villainous villains around the monarch, such as the vassals Yu Yin and Qi Jisha.

古文：臣辄鸣钟鼓如洛阳，即讨让等。 
现代文：现在我也想要敲响战鼓率军前往洛阳，除掉陛下身边的张让等奸臣。 
English: Now I also want to sound the war drum and lead the army to Luoyang to get rid of the traitors around His Majesty, such as Zhang Zhan.

古文：欲以胁迫太后。
现代文：何进是想要借董卓的威势来胁迫太后同意他们的计划。
English: He Jin wanted to use the power of Dong Zhuo to coerce the Empress Dowager to agree to their plan.

古文：卓未至，进败。中常侍段珪等劫帝走小平津。
现代文：但董卓的军队还没有开到京师，何进就已经失败被张让等人所杀。然后中常侍段珪又劫持少帝逃到黄河岸边的小平津渡口。
English: However, Dong Zhuo's army had not yet reached the capital, and was defeated and killed by Zhang Zhan and others. Then, the middle-ranking attendant, Duan Yu, kidnapped the young emperor and fled to the Xiaopingjin Ferry Port on the shore of the Yellow River.

古文：卓遂将其众迎帝于北芒，还宫。
现代文：董卓于是率其部众在到洛阳北郊的北邙山迎接少帝回宫。
English: Therefore, Dong Zhuo and his subordinates went to Beilun Mountain in the northern suburb of Luoyang to welcome the young emperor back to the palace.

古文：时进弟车骑将军苗为进众所杀，进、苗部曲无所属，皆诣卓。
现代文：当时何进的弟弟车骑将军何苗又在战乱中因为被怀疑勾结张让等被何进的部下杀害，所以何进、何苗的的部队没有了将领，他们的部队都归入了董卓的部队。
English: At that time, He Jin's younger brother, the cavalry general He Miao, was also killed by He Jin's subordinates during the war because he was suspected of colluding with Zhang Zhang, so He Jin and He Miao's troops had no generals, and their troops were all included in Dong Zhuo's troops.

古文：卓又使吕布杀执金吾丁原，并其众，故京都兵权唯在卓。
现代文：董卓又派吕布杀掉负责保卫京师的执金吾丁原，把其军队也收编在自己手下，所以京都的兵权都掌握在董卓手中。
English: Dong Zhuo also sent Lü Bu to kill U Ding Yuan, the regent in charge of the defense of Kyoto, and gathered his army under his command, so the military power of Kyoto was in the hands of Dong Zhuo.

古文：先是，进遣骑都尉太山鲍信所在募兵，適至，信谓绍曰： 卓拥强兵，有异志，今不早图，将为所制；及其初至疲劳，袭之可禽也。 
现代文：之前，大将军何进派遣骑都尉太山鲍信到外地招募士兵，这时他正好回到洛阳，看到洛阳的形势，就告诉袁绍说： 董卓拥有的兵力强盛，但有谋朝篡位的企图，现在如果不早除掉他，以后都会受他牵制。
English: Previously, the great general He Jin had sent the cavalry captain Taishan Baoxin to the field to recruit soldiers. At that time, he happened to return to Luoyang. Seeing the situation in Luoyang, he told Yuan Shao: Dong Zhuo has a strong military force, but there is an attempt to usurp the throne. If you do not get rid of him now, you will be held back by him in the future.

古文：绍畏卓，不敢发，信遂还乡里。
现代文：我们应该趁他刚到京师，军队疲惫，只要我们偷袭，一定可以将他擒获。 
English: We should take advantage of the fact that he has just arrived in Beijing, the army is tired, and as long as we make a surprise attack, we can definitely capture him.

古文：於是以久不雨，策免司空刘弘而卓代之，俄迁太尉，假节钺虎贲。遂废帝为弘农王。
现代文：但袁绍畏惧董卓的势力，不敢发兵，鲍信就辞官回乡了。这时京师已经很久没有下雨，董卓趁机上奏，认为是朝臣的罪过，请求免去司空刘弘的职位，由自己接替他的职位，不久他就被提升为太尉，掌管总领军队的权利和调动各路兵马的符节。
English: However, Yuan Shao was afraid of Dong Zhuo's power and did not dare to send troops, so Bao Xin resigned and returned to his hometown. At this time, it had not rained in Beijing for a long time. Dong Zhuo took the opportunity to play up what he considered to be a courtier's sin, requesting to be relieved of Liu Hong's post and to take over his post himself. Soon he was promoted to the rank of captain, in charge of the power of the commander-in-chief of the army and the mobilization of soldiers and horses.

古文：寻又杀王及何太后。
现代文：董卓掌握了国家的军政大权，就废掉了少帝，改封弘农王。
English: When Dong Zhuo gained control of the country's military and political power, he abolished the title of "Young Emperor" and changed it to "King of Farmers."

古文：立灵帝少子陈留王，是为献帝。
现代文：不久又将弘农王与何太后杀害。他扶持灵帝的小儿子陈留王登基，就是汉献帝。
English: Soon after, he killed King Hongnong and Empress Dowager He. He supported Emperor Lingdi's youngest son Chen Liu Wang to ascend to the throne, that is, Emperor Han Jian.

古文：卓迁相国，封郿侯，赞拜不名，剑履上殿。
现代文：董卓借献帝之名将自己提升为相国，封为郿侯，享有上奏时只称官职不称姓名的权利，还可以穿鞋上殿。
English: By borrowing the name of Emperor Xian, Dong Zhuo promoted himself to the status of a peer of the state and a vassal of the state. He enjoyed the right to wear only his official title and not his name when he performed at the palace, and he could also wear shoes to enter the palace.

古文：又封卓母为池阳君，置家令、丞。
现代文：献帝还下诏封董卓的母亲为池阳君，并设置家令、家丞的官职。
English: The emperor's dedication also decreed that Dong Zhuo's mother was Ikeyangjun, and set up the official positions of family order and family secretary.

古文：卓既率精兵来，適值帝室大乱，得专废立，据有武库甲兵，国家珍宝，威震天下。
现代文：董卓率领精锐部队到达的时候，正好遇上皇室不稳定，所以可以趁机掌握帝王的废立大权，掌握国家的武器装备与精锐部队，占有各类奇珍异宝，威势之大，震动天下。
English: When Dong Zhuo led the elite troops to arrive, it just happened that the royal family was unstable, so he could take advantage of the opportunity to master the emperor's power to abolish the monarchy, master the country's weapons and equipment and elite troops, occupy all kinds of treasures, powerful, and shake the world.

古文：卓性残忍不仁，遂以严刑胁众，睚眦之隙必报，人不自保。
现代文：而董卓生性残暴毫无仁慈之心，以严酷的刑罚来胁迫众人，哪怕只有一点点恩怨也一定要报复，使得朝廷内外的文武官员都如履薄冰，人人自危。
English: However, Dong Zhuosheng's brutality was merciless, and he used harsh punishments to coerce everyone. Even if there was only a little grudge, he had to take revenge. This made the civil and military officials both inside and outside the imperial court tread on thin ice, and everyone was at risk.

古文：尝遣军到阳城，时適二月社，民各在其社下，悉就断其男子头，驾其车牛，载其妇女财物，以所断头系车辕轴，连轸而还洛，云攻贼大获，称万岁。
现代文：董卓曾经派遣军队到阳城，刚好遇上当地百姓在举行庙会祭祀，百姓都在热闹祭祀的时候，下令将其中的男子都抓起来斩首，然后架着抢掠过来的百姓的牛车，载着妇女和百姓的财物，将斩下来的头颅挂在车辕上，驱赶着牛车一辆接一辆地返回洛阳，报告说是征讨贼人大获全胜，大呼万岁。
English: Dong Zhuo once sent an army to Yangcheng, and just happened to meet the local people holding a temple festival. When the people were busy with the festival, he ordered the men among them to be arrested and beheaded. Then he set up the cattle cars of the people who had been robbed, carrying women and people's belongings, hung the severed heads on the carriages, and drove the cattle cars one by one back to Luoyang. The report said that the recruitment of thieves was a complete success. Long live.

古文：入开阳城门，焚烧其头，以妇女与甲兵为婢妾。
现代文：等到回到洛阳城，进入开阳城门后，将首级都焚烧掉，将劫掠来的妇女分给士兵们成为仆婢或妾室。
English: When they returned to Luoyang City and entered the gate of Kaiyang City, they burned the severed heads and divided the plundered women among the soldiers to become maids or concubines.

古文：至于奸乱宫人公主。其凶逆如此。
现代文：董卓甚至于到宫中奸淫宫中嫔妃和公主，他的凶残暴劣到了这种无法无天的地步。
English: Dong Zhuo even went to the palace to fornicate with the palace concubines and princesses, and his cruelty and brutality reached such a lawless level.

古文：初，卓信任尚书周毖，城门校尉伍琼等，用其所举韩馥、刘岱、孔伷、张咨、张邈等出宰州郡。
现代文：当初，董卓霸占朝政时，信任尚书周毖和掌管洛阳城门的校尉伍琼等人，还任用他们所举荐的韩馥、刘岱、孔伷、张咨、张邈等人，让他们主管州或郡的事务。
English: At the beginning, when Dong Zhuo Ba occupied the imperial government, he trusted Shang Shu Zhou Jun and Wu Qiong, the captain in charge of the Luoyang city gate, and appointed Han Qi, Liu Qi, Kong Qi, Zhang Zhe and Zhang Qi, who were recommended by them, to be in charge of state or county affairs.

古文：而馥等至官，皆合兵将以讨卓。
现代文：但韩馥等人到地方任职后，都联合各自兵马想要讨伐董卓。
English: However, after Han Zheng and others were appointed to local posts, they all joined their respective troops and horses to fight against Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓闻之，以为毖、琼等通情卖己，皆斩之。
现代文：董卓听闻这件事，认为是周毖和伍琼与他们相互勾结出卖自己，将他们都斩杀了。
English: When Dong Zhuo heard about this, he thought that Zhou Qi and Wu Qiong had colluded with them to betray him and killed them all.

古文：河内太守王匡，遣泰山兵屯河阳津，将以图卓。
现代文：河内太守王匡，派驻扎在泰山的军队开拔到河阳境内的黄河渡口并驻扎在那里，准备发兵洛阳讨伐董卓。
English: The governor of Hanoi, Wang Kuang, dispatched troops stationed in Mount Tai to the Yellow River crossing in the territory of Hebei and stationed there, preparing to send troops to Luoyang to fight Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓遣疑兵若将於平阴渡者，潜遣锐众从小平北渡，绕击其后，大破之津北，死者略尽。
现代文：董卓派了一支疑兵到平阴境内的黄河渡口，假装从这里渡河，暗中派遣精锐部队从小平渡口渡过黄河，绕到王匡军队的背后发起进攻，在河阳渡口北边打败了王匡的军队，几乎令他的军队全军覆没。
English: Dong Zhuo sent a group of suspected soldiers to the Huanghe Ferry Port in Pingyin, pretended to cross the river from here, secretly sent elite troops to cross the Yellow River from the Xiaoping Ferry Port, went around the back of Wang Kuang's army to launch an attack, defeated Wang Kuang's army on the north side of the Heyang Ferry Port, and almost destroyed his entire army.

古文：卓以山东豪杰并起，恐惧不宁。
现代文：董卓因为看到崤山以东的英雄豪杰都纷纷起兵讨伐他，心中恐惧，觉得在洛阳不安心。
English: Because Dong Zhuo saw that the heroes and heroines east of Lushan had all raised an army to fight him, he was afraid in his heart and felt uneasy in Luoyang.

古文：初平元年二月，乃徙天子都长安。
现代文：所以在初平元年二月，董卓挟持少帝将都城迁到长安。
English: Therefore, in February of the first year of the Heian period, Dong Zhuo held the young emperor hostage and moved the capital to Chang'an.

古文：焚烧洛阳宫室，悉发掘陵墓，取宝物。
现代文：还烧毁了洛阳城中的宫殿，将各种陵墓都挖掘开，盗走墓中的各种宝物。
English: They also burned down the palace in Luoyang, dug up all kinds of mausoleums, and stole all kinds of treasures from the tombs.

古文：卓至西京，为太师，号曰尚父。
现代文：董卓到了长安，身居太师之位，号称 尚父 。
English: When Dong Zhuo arrived in Chang'an, he lived in the position of grand master, and was known as Shang father.

古文：乘青盖金华车，爪画两轓，时人号曰竿摩车。
现代文：出入乘坐皇太子专用的青盖金华车，此车以金花装饰，车盖弓头为龙爪形，有两个车厢，极为豪华高贵，当时的人称之为 竿摩车 。
English: The crown prince rode in and out of the Qinggai Jinhua Car, which was specially used by the crown prince. This car was decorated with gold flowers, the bow of the cover was dragon claw-shaped, and had two carriages. It was extremely luxurious and noble. People at the time called it the "pole-motor car."

古文：卓弟旻为左将军，封鄠侯；兄子璜为侍中中军校尉典兵；宗族内外并列朝廷。
现代文：董卓的弟弟董旻当时任左将军的职位，被封为鄠侯；董卓兄长的儿子董璜担任侍中、中军校尉典兵两个重要职务；家族中的亲戚都在朝廷中有任职。
English: At that time, Dong Zhuo's younger brother, Dong Hao, held the position of General of the Left and was given the title of vassal lord; Dong Zhuo's elder brother's son, Dong Hao Rong, held the two important positions of chamberlain and lieutenant of the Chinese People's Army; relatives in the family all held positions in the imperial court.

古文：公卿见卓，谒拜车下，卓不为礼。
现代文：朝中文武百官见到董卓，都需要下车拜见，但董卓都不回礼。
English: When hundreds of Chinese military officers saw Dong Zhuo in the morning, they all needed to get off the train to meet him, but Dong Zhuo did not return their salutes.

古文：召呼三台尚书以下自诣卓府启事。筑郿坞，高与长安城埒，积谷为三十年储。
现代文：他还传召尚书、御史、符节三台尚书以下的官员到他府中商议朝政；他修建了私人城池，名叫 郿坞 ，高度与长安城城墙一样，他在城中积藏的劫掠而来的粮食足够三十年的食用。
English: He also summoned Shangshu, Mishi, and Fu Jie, three officials below Shangshu, to his palace to discuss imperial politics; he built a private castle, called the Dockyard, the height of which was the same as the city wall of Chang'an, and the looted grain he accumulated in the city was enough to eat for thirty years.

古文：云事成，雄据天下，不成，守此足以毕老。
现代文：他还说，等到大业成功，就可以坐拥天下，如果大业不成功，靠着这些累积的财宝也足够安养天年了。
English: He also said that when the great cause is successful, it will be able to hold the world. If the great cause is not successful, these accumulated treasures will be enough to maintain the world.

古文：尝至郿坞，公卿已下祖道於横门外。
现代文：曾有一次他离开长安前往郿坞，朝中官员在长安城门处为他设宴践行。
English: Once, when he left Chang'an to go to Shu dock, officials from the DPRK and China held a banquet for him at the gate of Chang'an City.

古文：卓豫施帐幔饮。
现代文：董卓事先让人在那里设置了帐篷帷幔，与众臣畅饮。
English: In advance, Dong Zhuo had people set up tent curtains there and had a good drink with his ministers.

古文：诱降北地反者数百人，於坐中先断其舌，或斩手足，或凿眼，或镬煮之，未死，偃转杯案间，会者皆战栗亡失匕箸，而卓饮食自若。
现代文：然后下令将在北地郡诱降的叛变的士兵百姓数百人押上来，当着文武官员的面下令将他们的舌头斩断，然后有的斩断手脚，有的将眼睛剜掉，有的放进锅里蒸煮，那些受刑之后还没有死去的人，在桌案下哀嚎挣扎，在场的官员都非常惊恐以至于手中的筷子都拿不稳，但董卓却依然饮酒自乐，面不改色。
English: He then ordered that hundreds of mutinous soldiers and civilians who had been lured into surrendering in Beidai County be brought to him. In the presence of civil and military officials, he ordered that their tongues be cut off, and then some of them had their hands and feet cut off, some had their eyes gouged out, and some were boiled in a pot. Those who had not died after being tortured were wailing and struggling under the table. The officials present were so terrified that they could not hold their chopsticks steady, but Dong Zhuo was still enjoying drinking and his face did not change color.

古文：太史望气，言当有大臣戮死者。
现代文：掌管天文和历法的太史官观察天象，上奏说应该要有大臣要被董卓杀害了。
English: The Grand Historian, in charge of astronomy and calendars, observed the celestial phenomenon and reported that there should be a minister to be killed by Dong Zhuo.

古文：故太尉张温时为卫尉，素不善卓，卓心怨之，因天有变，欲以塞咎，使人言温与袁术交关，遂笞杀之。
现代文：曾经担任太尉的张温这时担任卫尉，向来都不喜欢董卓，董卓心中对他很是厌恨，刚好遇上天象有异，董卓想要找借口掩饰自己的过错，就派人散布谣言说张温和袁绍互相勾结，于是少帝就下令将他用鞭刑杀死了。
English: Zhang Wen, who had once been a captain, was now a guard lieutenant. He had never liked Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo hated him very much. Just as the two met, Dong Zhuo wanted to find an excuse to cover up his mistake, so he sent someone to spread the rumor that Zhang Wen and Yuan Shao were colluding with each other. So the young emperor ordered him to be whipped to death.

古文：法令苛酷，爱憎淫刑，更相被诬，冤死者千数。
现代文：这时的国家，律法严苛残酷，过分使用酷刑，百姓朝臣都被诬陷，因为这些被冤杀的有数千人。
English: At this time, the country, the law is harsh and cruel, the use of torture is excessive, the people and courtiers are all framed, because there are thousands of people who have been unjustly killed.

古文：百姓嗷嗷，道路以目。
现代文：天下百姓哀怨不断，在路上都互相用眼神示意。
English: People around the world continue to mourn. On the road, they all make eye contact with each other.

古文：悉椎破铜人、钟虡，及坏五铢钱。更铸为小钱，大五分，无文章，肉好无轮郭，不磨鑢。
现代文：董卓还将宫中的铜人和悬挂的钟磬全部打坏，还改变五铢钱的流通制度，另外铸了五分小钱，上面没有花纹和文字，周边和中间的孔洞也无轮廓，不加磨冶加工。
English: Dong Zhuo also destroyed all the bronze figures in the palace and the hanging bells. He also changed the circulation system of the five-baht coin. In addition, he minted a five-cent coin, which had no pattern and writing on it, and the holes around and in the middle had no outline and were not polished.

古文：于是货轻而物贵，谷一斛至数十万。
现代文：结果造成货币贬值，物价上涨，一斛谷的价格涨到数十万钱。
English: As a result, the currency depreciated, prices rose, and the price of a bowl of rice rose to hundreds of thousands of yuan.

古文：自是后钱货不行。
现代文：从这以后商业开始凋敝。
English: From then on, business began to decline.

古文：三年四月，司徒王允、尚书仆射士孙瑞、卓将吕布共谋诛卓。
现代文：献帝初平三年四月，司徒王允、尚书仆射士孙瑞和董卓部下吕布一起谋划要诛杀董卓。
English: In April of the third year of Emperor Xianping's reign, the tutor Wang Yun, the scholar-servant Archer Sun Rui, and Dong Zhuo's subordinate Lü Bu plotted together to kill Dong Zhuo.

古文：是时，天子有疾新愈，大会未央殿。
现代文：这时候，献帝的病恰好治愈，在未央殿会见百官。
English: At this time, Emperor Xian's illness just happened to be cured, and he met with hundreds of officials at Weiyang Palace.

古文：布使同郡骑都尉李肃等，将亲兵十馀人，伪著卫士服守掖门。
现代文：吕布派他的同乡，骑都尉李肃带领十几个亲信士兵，装扮成宫中守卫的样子守在宫门处。
English: Lü Bu sent his countryman, cavalry captain Li Su, to lead a dozen trusted soldiers, dressed as palace guards, to stand guard at the palace gate.

古文：布怀诏书。
现代文：吕布手中藏着诛杀董卓的诏书。
English: Lü Bu hid the edict to kill Dong Zhuo in his hands.

古文：卓至，肃等格卓。
现代文：董卓到的时候，李肃等人冲上前去阻拦要击杀董卓。
English: When Dong Zhuo arrived, Li Su and others rushed forward to block and kill him.

古文：卓惊呼布所在。
现代文：董卓受惊大呼吕布在哪里。
English: Dong Zhuo was shocked and shouted loudly, "Where is Lü Bu?"

古文：布曰 有诏 ，遂杀卓，夷三族。
现代文：吕布大喊： 这里有皇上要诛杀董卓的诏书 ，就将董卓杀死，灭掉三族。
English: Lü Bu shouted: Here is the Emperor's edict to kill Dong Zhuo, so kill Dong Zhuo and exterminate the three tribes.

古文：主簿田景前趋卓尸，布又杀之；凡所杀三人，馀莫敢动。
现代文：朝中主簿田景冲上前扑向董卓的尸首，吕布也将他一起诛杀；一连杀掉董卓的亲信三人，其余的人都不敢再有动作。
English: Tian Jing, the head of the Central Military Commission, rushed forward to attack Dong Zhuo's corpse, and Lü Bu also killed him together. He killed three of Dong Zhuo's close confidants in succession, and the rest of the people dared not make any more moves.

古文：长安士庶咸相庆贺，诸阿附卓者皆下狱死。
现代文：董卓已死，长安城里的官吏百姓都争相庆祝，那些攀附董卓的人都被判下狱处以死刑。
English: Dong Zhuo was dead, and the officials and people in Chang'an City all rushed to celebrate. Those who clung to Dong Zhuo were all sentenced to death.

古文：初，卓女婿中郎将牛辅典兵别屯陕，分遣校尉李傕、郭汜、张济略陈留、颍川诸县。
现代文：当初，董卓的女婿、中郎将牛辅率军驻守在陕县一带，又分别派遣手下的校尉李傕、郭汜、张济等人侵占陈留、颍川等县。
English: At first, Dong Zhuo's son-in-law and second-in-command, Niu Fu, stationed troops led by Niu Fu in the area of Shaanxi County, and separately dispatched his lieutenants, Li Jun, Guo Jun, Zhang Ji, and others to occupy Chenliu, Beichuan, and other counties.

古文：卓死，吕布使李肃至陕，欲以诏命诛辅。
现代文：董卓死后，吕布派李肃到陕县，想要凭借皇帝的诏书诛杀牛辅。
English: After the death of Dong Zhuo, Lvbu sent Li Su to Shaanxi to kill Niu Fu with the emperor's edict.

古文：辅等逆与肃战，肃败走弘农，布诛肃。
现代文：牛辅等率军与李肃正面交战，李肃大败，退到弘农郡，吕布下令将李肃杀掉。
English: The army led by Niu Fu and others fought head-on with Li Su. Li Su was defeated and retreated to Hongnong County. Lv Bu ordered Li Su to be killed.

古文：其后辅营兵有夜叛出者，营中惊，辅以为皆叛，乃取金宝，独与素所厚攴胡赤儿等五六人相随。
现代文：在这之后牛辅军中有士兵半夜叛逃出军营，军营都被惊动了，牛辅以为部下人都要反叛，就带着金银财宝，只带上素来亲厚的攴胡赤儿等五六人一起离开。
English: After this, some soldiers of Niu Fu's army defected from the military camp in the middle of the night. The military camp was alarmed. Niu Fu thought that his subordinates were all going to rebel, so he took gold, silver and treasure, and left with only five or six people such as Shao Hu Chiaer, who had always been friendly.

古文：逾城北渡河，赤儿等利其金宝，斩首送长安。
现代文：翻越城墙后又向北渡过黄河，但手下的攴胡赤儿等人贪图他手中的金银财宝，将他斩首后将首级送往长安。
English: After climbing over the city wall, he crossed the Yellow River to the north, but his subordinates, such as Gonghu Chiar and others, coveted the gold and silver treasures in his hands, beheaded him and sent his head to Chang'an.

古文：比傕等还，辅已败，众无所依，欲各散归。
现代文：等到李傕得到消息赶回来，牛辅已经被杀，部队没有首领，都打算散伙各自回乡。
English: By the time Li Yao got the news and rushed back, Niu Fu had already been killed, the troops had no leader, and they all planned to disperse and return to their hometowns.

古文：既无赦书，而闻长安中欲尽诛凉州人，忧恐不知所为。
现代文：但又想到朝廷并没有赦免他们的诏书，又听说长安城中的官员想要将所有凉州人都杀掉，都忧心恐惧不知道该怎么办。
English: But when they remembered that the imperial court had not issued a decree to pardon them, and heard that officials in Chang'an City wanted to kill all the people of Liangzhou, they were worried and afraid and did not know what to do.

古文：用贾诩策，遂将其众而西，所在收兵，比至长安，众十馀万。
现代文：最后他们采用了贾诩的计策，率领各队人马向西奔向长安，沿途都在招兵买马，等到到达长安的时候，已经聚集了十多万人。
English: In the end, they adopted Jia Wei's strategy and led all the teams to rush west to Chang'an, recruiting soldiers along the way. By the time they reached Chang'an, they had gathered more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：与卓故部曲樊稠、李蒙、王方等合围长安城。
现代文：他们和董卓以前的部下樊稠、李蒙、王方等合兵围攻长安城。
English: They and Dong Zhuo's former subordinates Zeng Cong, Li Meng, Wang Fang and other soldiers besieged Chang'an City.

古文：十日城陷，与布战城中，布败走。
现代文：十天后长安城被攻陷，又和吕布在城中交战，吕布战败撤走。
English: Ten days later, Chang'an City was captured and Lvbu fought in the city. Lvbu was defeated and withdrew.

古文：傕等放兵略长安老少，杀之悉尽，死者狼籍。
现代文：李傕等人纵容手下兵士在长安城中对男女老少大肆掳掠杀戮，一时间长安城中横尸遍地。
English: Li Yu and others allowed their soldiers to loot and kill men, women, and children in Chang'an City. For a time, corpses were strewn all over Chang'an City.

古文：诛杀卓者，尸王允于市。
现代文：同时大肆捕杀诛杀董卓的人，司徒王允也被杀害，将尸首丢在街头。
English: At the same time, the person who killed Dong Zhuo was also killed, and Wang Yun was also killed, and his body was thrown into the street.

古文：葬卓于郿，大风暴雨震卓墓，水流入藏，漂其棺椁。
现代文：他们将董卓葬在郿地，后来出现大风暴雨震撼的董卓的坟墓，雨水流入墓穴，将董卓的棺椁冲了出来。
English: They buried Dong Zhuo in a ploughed field. Later, there was a big storm that shook Dong Zhuo's grave. Rainwater flowed into the tomb and washed out Dong Zhuo's coffin.

古文：傕为车骑将军、池阳侯，领司隶校尉、假节。
现代文：攻占了长安，李傕担任了车骑将军、池阳侯，兼任司隶校尉，持符节统领全国兵马。
English: After the capture of Chang'an, Li Xi served as the cavalry general and the lord of Chiyang, concurrently serving as the sub-lieutenant of Sili, and leading the national soldiers and horses with the banner.

古文：汜为后将军、美阳侯。
现代文：郭汜担任后将军，为美阳侯。
English: Guo Jian served as post-general, and was the crown prince of Miyang.

古文：稠为右将军、万年侯。
现代文：樊稠担任右将军，被封为万年侯。
English: He served as the right general and was given the title of prince for life.

古文：傕、汜、稠擅朝政。
现代文：李傕、郭汜、樊稠等人挟持天子，掌控了朝政。
English: Li Yu, Guo Yu, Gao Chou and others held the emperor hostage and took control of the imperial government.

古文：济为骠骑将军、平阳侯，屯弘农。
现代文：张济成为骠骑将军，被封为平阳侯，军队驻扎在弘农。
English: Zhang Jie became the general of the imperial cavalry, was named the governor of Pingyang, and the army was stationed in Gongnong.

古文：是岁，韩遂、马腾等降，率众诣长安。
现代文：这一年，西北的韩遂、马腾等率部投降，带领部署来到长安。
English: This year, the northwestern Han Sui, Ma Teng and other leaders surrendered and led the deployment to Chang'an.

古文：以遂为镇西将军，遣还凉州。
现代文：朝廷就封韩遂为镇西将军，派他率军回凉州驻守。
English: The imperial court made Han Sui the general of Zhenxi and sent him to lead the army back to Liangzhou.

古文：腾征西将军，屯郿。
现代文：任命马腾为征西将军，驻军在郿县。
English: He appointed Ma Teng as the general to conquer the west, and the garrison was set up in Jixian.

古文：侍中马宇与谏议大夫种邵、左中郎将刘范等谋，欲使腾袭长安，己为内应，以诛傕等。
现代文：朝中侍中马宇和谏议大夫种邵、右中郎将刘范等人暗中策划，想要让马腾率部偷袭长安，他们在朝中作为内应，希望能诛杀李傕等叛贼。
English: Ma Yu, the middle attendant of the imperial court, Zeng Shao, the doctor of the imperial court, and Yu Zhong Lang secretly planned Liu Fan and others, and wanted to let Ma Teng lead the sneak attack on Chang'an. They acted as a secret agent in the imperial court, hoping to kill Li Qian and other traitors.

古文：腾引兵至长平观，宇等谋泄，出奔槐里。
现代文：马腾率军到离长安只有五十里的长平观时，马宇等人的计划败露，他们逃到槐里。
English: When Ma Teng led his army to Changping, only fifty miles from Chang'an, Ma Yu's and others' plan failed, and they fled to Toru.

古文：稠击腾，腾败走，还凉州；又攻槐里，宇等皆死。
现代文：樊稠率军迎击马腾，马腾战败撤退，率部回到凉州；樊稠又率军攻打槐里，马宇等人都被杀了。
English: Xing Cong led the army to meet Ma Teng, Ma Teng was defeated and retreated, and the leading unit returned to Liangzhou; Xing Cong also led the army to attack Baoli, and Ma Yu and others were killed.

古文：时三辅民尚数十万户，傕等放兵劫略，攻剽城邑，人民饥困，二年间相啖食略尽。
现代文：当时长安城周围的三辅地区还有数十万户百姓，但李傕等人纵容手下兵士大肆抢劫掠夺，侵占郡县，百姓饥饿困苦，两年之内就出现了人相食的惨象，以至于这里人烟灭绝。
English: At that time, there were still hundreds of thousands of people in the Sanfu area around Chang'an City, but Li Gan and others condoned their soldiers to rob and plunder, occupy counties and counties, and the people were starving and suffering. Within two years, the tragedy of cannibalism occurred, so that the people here were extinct.

古文：诸将争权，遂杀稠，并其众。
现代文：李傕等人相互争夺权势，李傕杀掉了樊稠，收编了他的部众。
English: Li Yao and others competed for power with each other. Li Yao killed Gong Zhou and gathered his subordinates.

古文：汜与傕转相疑，战斗长安中。
现代文：郭汜和李傕又相互猜忌，后来在长安城中拼杀。
English: Guo Wei and Li Wei were suspicious of each other, and later fought in Chang'an City.

古文：傕质天子於营，烧宫殿城门，略官寺，尽收乘舆服御物置其家。
现代文：李傕将天子挟持在他的军营中，烧毁了各式宫殿城门，掠夺了宫中的库藏，将抢来的车辇和其他服饰与宫中金银财宝都收在自己家中。
English: Li Hongzhi held Tianzi hostage in his military camp, burned down all kinds of palace gates, plundered the palace treasury, and kept the stolen carriages and other costumes and the palace's gold and silver treasures in his home.

古文：傕使公卿诣汜请和，汜皆执之。
现代文：李傕又派朝臣到郭汜那里请求讲和，郭汜将派过去的官员都收押起来。
English: Li Gan also sent courtiers to Guo Gan to plead for peace, and Guo Gan sent all the former officials to be detained.

古文：相攻击连月，死者万数。
现代文：两人互相争斗长达几个月，因此而死的人超过一万。
English: The two fought each other for months, resulting in more than 10,000 deaths.

古文：傕将杨奉与傕军吏宋果等谋杀傕，事泄，遂将兵叛傕。
现代文：李傕的部下将领杨奉和军吏宋果等人谋划杀掉李傕，事情败露，就干脆率兵反叛了李傕离开。
English: The general Yang Bong and the military official Song Guo, who were subordinates of Li Qiye, plotted to kill Li Qiye. When the plot failed, they led their soldiers to rebel against Li Qiye and leave.

古文：傕众叛，稍衰弱。
现代文：李傕部下叛变，威势渐渐衰弱。
English: Li Xuan's subordinates mutinied, and his power gradually weakened.

古文：张济自陕和解之，天子乃得出，至新丰、霸陵间。
现代文：张济这时也从驻扎的弘农来到长安从中调解，献帝这才被李傕放出来，匆匆来到新丰和霸陵间。
English: At this time, Zhang Jie also came to Chang'an from Hongnong, where he was stationed, to mediate. It was only when Emperor Xian was released by Li Qian that he hurriedly came to Xinfeng and Hariming.

古文：郭汜复欲胁天子还都郿。
现代文：郭汜又想要挟持天子到郿县，并迁都到这里。
English: Guo Gan also wanted to hold Tianzi hostage in Jixian and move the capital here.

古文：天子奔奉营，奉击汜破之。
现代文：献帝听说之后，就逃向杨奉的军营，杨奉率军攻打郭汜并取得了胜利。
English: After hearing of Emperor Xian's death, he fled to Yang Bong's camp. Yang Bong led the army to attack Guo Gan and won the victory.

古文：汜走南山，奉及将军董承以天子还洛阳。
现代文：郭汜率部退到南山一带，杨奉和将军董承护送天子回到洛阳。
English: Guo Gan led his troops to retreat to the Nanshan area, while Yang Bong and General Dong Cheng escorted Tianzi back to Luoyang.

古文：傕、汜悔遣天子，复相与和，追及天子於弘农之曹阳。
现代文：李傕和郭汜此时又后悔放走献帝，又联合起来，往弘农郡的曹阳一带追赶献帝的车队。
English: At this time, Li Qian and Guo Qian regretted letting Xian Di go, and united again to chase Xian Di's convoy to the Caoyang area of Hongnong County.

古文：奉急招河东故白波帅韩暹、胡才、李乐等合，与傕、汜大战。
现代文：杨奉匆忙间与河东的白波军将领韩暹、胡才、李乐等人合兵与李傕郭汜大战。
English: In a hurry, Yang Bong joined forces with Han Siam, Hu Cai, Li Le and other generals of the Baipo Army in the east of the river to fight against Li Shiguo.

古文：奉兵败，傕等纵兵杀公卿百官，略宫人入弘农。
现代文：杨奉战败，李傕等让手下将士杀害文武百官，抢掠后宫嫔妃退回弘农。
English: Yang Bong was defeated, and Li Xi and others let their subordinates kill hundreds of military and civilian officials, loot the harem, and return to Hongnong.

古文：天子走陕，北渡河，失辎重，步行，唯皇后贵人从。
现代文：献帝逃往陕县，又向北渡过黄河，但因失去了车马被服等物资，只好步行，只有皇后与贵人跟随。
English: Emperor Xian fled to Shaanxi and crossed the Yellow River to the north, but he had to walk because he had lost his chariot, horses, clothing and other supplies. Only the empress and the nobles followed him.

古文：至大阳，止人家屋中。
现代文：一直走到大阳县，才找到一处人家住下来。
English: He walked all the way to Dayang County before finding a place to live.

古文：奉、暹等遂以天子都安邑，御乘牛车。
现代文：杨奉、韩暹等人找到献帝，然后护送献帝以安邑为都城先住下来，出入的车子也只是牛车。
English: Yang Bong, Han Siem and others found Emperor Xian, and then escorted Emperor Xian to live in the capital city of Anyi. The cars going in and out were just cattle cars.

古文：太尉杨彪、太仆韩融近臣从者十馀人。
现代文：身边只有太尉杨彪、太仆韩融和亲信随从十几人。
English: The only people around him were the captain Yang Biao, the manservant Han Rong, and a dozen or so of his closest followers.

古文：以暹为征东、才为征西、乐征北将军，并与奉、承持政。
现代文：后来，献帝分别任命韩暹、胡才、李乐三人为征东、征西、征北将军，让他们和杨奉、董承共同主持朝政。
English: Later, Emperor Xian designated Han Siem, Hu Cai, and Li Le as the three generals to conquer the East, West, and North respectively, allowing them to jointly preside over the imperial government with Yang Bong and Dong Cheng.

古文：遣融至弘农，与傕、汜等连和，还所略宫人公卿百官，及乘舆车马数乘。
现代文：然后派遣太仆韩融到弘农郡，和李傕、郭汜等人谈判交好，才得以要回被劫掠过去的后宫嫔妃和文物朝臣，还有几辆献帝的轿辇车马。
English: He then dispatched his manservant Han Rong to Hongnong County to negotiate and make friends with Li Yu, Guo Yu and others, so that he could return the harem concubines and cultural relics courtiers that had been looted in the past, as well as several carriages and horses that had been offered to the emperor.

古文：是时蝗虫起，岁旱无谷，从官食枣菜。
现代文：这时候发生了蝗灾，又长久不下雨，粮食几乎没有收成，超沉闷只好到野外摘些枣子挖些野菜来充饥。
English: At this time, there was a locust plague, and it did not rain for a long time, and there was almost no harvest of grain, so I had to go out to pick some dates and dig up some vegetables to satisfy my hunger.

古文：诸将不能相率，上下乱，粮食尽。
现代文：但军队粮食也断了供应，将领们无法控制骚动不满的士兵，军中乱成一团毫无纪律，这时粮食又已经吃光了。
English: But the army's food supply was also cut off, the generals could not control the agitation of dissatisfied soldiers, and there was no discipline in the army, and then the food was gone.

古文：奉、暹、承乃以天子还洛阳。
现代文：杨奉、韩暹、董承等人决定护送献帝前往洛阳。
English: Yang Bong, Han Siem, Dong Cheng and others decided to escort the emperor to Luoyang.

古文：出箕关，下轵道，张杨以食迎道路，拜大司马。
现代文：出了箕关，途经轵道时，晋侯张杨带着食物在路上迎接，献帝封他为大司马。
English: After leaving Shaoguan, when passing through the Shaoguan Road, Zhang Yang, the prince of Jin, greeted him on the road with food and offered him the title of grand steed.

古文：语在杨传。
现代文：这件事在《张杨传》中有记载。
English: This incident is recorded in "Zhang Yang Biography."

古文：天子入洛阳，宫室烧尽，街陌荒芜，百官披荆棘，依丘墙间。
现代文：献帝回到洛阳，但洛阳宫殿已经被烧毁损坏，街市上人烟稀少长满荒草，官员们亲自砍去荆棘荒草，在残垣废墟中倚靠休息。
English: Emperor Xian returned to Luoyang, but the Luoyang Palace had already been burned and damaged, the streets were sparsely populated and overgrown with weeds, the officials personally cut the thorns and weeds, and rested in the ruins of the ruins.

古文：州郡各拥兵自卫，莫有至者。
现代文：这时候各路州郡都各自掌握着军队以自保，没有来洛阳朝见的。
English: At this time, each county and prefecture had its own army for self-protection, and did not come to Luoyang to see the emperor.

古文：饥穷稍甚，尚书郎以下，自出樵采，或饥死墙壁间。
现代文：等到饥饿困苦越来越严重，尚书郎一下的官员只好每天自行到郊外找野菜或野果充饥，有一些还饿死在废墟断墙之间。
English: When the hunger and hardship became more and more serious, the officials under Shang Shulong had to go out to the suburbs every day to find vegetables or wild fruits to satisfy their hunger. Some of them starved to death among the ruins and broken walls.

古文：太祖乃迎天子都许。
现代文：这时候，太祖曹操迎献帝到许县作为临时都城。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather Cao Cao went to Xu County as a temporary capital to welcome the emperor.

古文：暹、奉不能奉王法，各出奔，寇徐、扬间，为刘备所杀。
现代文：韩暹、杨奉不能遵守朝廷礼法，各自率部离开，侵扰徐州、扬州一带，后来被刘备诛杀。
English: Han Siem and Yang Bong could not abide by the imperial court etiquette, so they left with their respective leaders and invaded the areas of Xuzhou and Yangzhou. They were later killed by Liu Bei.

古文：董承从太祖岁馀，诛。
现代文：董承跟随太祖一年多，后来也因罪被杀。
English: Dong Cheng followed the great-grandfather for more than a year, and was later also killed for his crime.

古文：建安二年，遣谒者仆射裴茂率关西诸将诛傕，夷三族。
现代文：建安二，朝廷派谒者仆射裴茂率领关西各路兵马讨伐李傕，取得胜利，夷灭李傕三族。
English: On the second day of Jian'an, the imperial court dispatched soldiers and horses from all over the Kansai region to fight against Li Qiye, and they achieved victory, exterminating Li Qiye's three tribes.

古文：汜为其将五习所袭，死于郿。
现代文：郭汜被他的部下五习偷袭，死在郿县。
English: Guo Wei was attacked by his subordinate Wu Xi and died in Shixian County.

古文：济饥饿，至南阳寇略，为穰人所杀，从子绣摄其众。
现代文：张济应为军中粮草不足，到南阳郡侵犯劫掠，被穰县的百姓联合杀死，他的侄子张绣收编了他的部队。
English: Zhang Jiyin, because of the shortage of grain and grass in the army, went to Nanyang County to invade and plunder, and was jointly killed by the people of Handan County. His nephew Zhang Xiu organized his troops.

古文：才、乐留河东，才为怨家所杀，乐病死。
现代文：胡才、李乐二人留在河东，胡才被仇家所杀，李乐又因病而死。
English: Hu Cai and Li Le both stayed in Hedong. Hu Cai was killed by an enemy, and Li Le died of illness.

古文：遂、腾自还凉州，更相寇，后腾入为卫尉，子超领其部曲。
现代文：在西北的韩遂、马腾率军回到凉州之后，更加视对方为仇敌，后来马腾入朝担任卫尉，他的儿子马超统领他的部下。
English: After Han Sui in the northwest and Ma Teng led the army back to Liangzhou, they regarded each other as enemies. Later, Ma Teng entered the imperial court as a lieutenant, and his son Ma Chao led his men.

古文：十六年，超与关中诸将及遂等反，太祖征破之。
现代文：建安十六年，马超和韩遂还有关中的一些将领举兵反叛，太祖曹操出军征讨，大获全胜。
English: In the 16th year of Jian'an, Ma Chao and Han were also concerned about some generals who raised an army to rebel, and Cao Cao, the great-grandfather, went out to fight and won a great victory.

古文：语在武纪。
现代文：这件事在《武帝纪》中有记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：遂奔金城，为其将所杀。
现代文：韩遂战败逃往金城，被他的部下所杀。
English: Han was defeated and fled to Jincheng, where he was killed by his subordinates.

古文：超据汉阳，腾坐夷三族。
现代文：马超退军占据汉阳，但马腾因为马超的叛逆罪被牵连，被灭了三族。
English: Ma Chao withdrew and occupied Hanyang, but Ma Teng was implicated for Ma Chao's treason, and the three tribes were exterminated.

古文：赵衢等举义兵讨超，超走汉中从张鲁，后奔刘备，死于蜀。
现代文：后来赵衢等人发动义兵讨伐马超，马超逃往汉中投奔张鲁，后来又投奔刘备，最后死在了蜀地。
English: Later, Zhao Wei and others launched a volunteer army to fight Ma Chao. Ma Chao fled to Hanzhong and went to Zhang Lu, and later to Liu Bei, and finally died in Shu Di.

古文：袁绍字本初，汝南汝阳人也。
现代文：袁绍字本初，是汝南汝阳县人。
English: Yuan Shao was originally from Ruyang County, south of Yunnan.

古文：高祖父安，为汉司徒。
现代文：他的高祖父袁安，曾担任过东汉章帝的司徒。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Yuan An, once served as the tutor of the Eastern Han Emperor Zhang Di.

古文：自安以下四世居三公位，由是势倾天下。
现代文：从袁安之后，又接连四代都有人在朝中担任三公的高位，所以袁家势力威震天下。
English: After Yuan An, there were four successive generations of people who held the high positions of the three princes in the dynasty, so the influence of the Yuan family dominated the world.

古文：绍有姿貌威容，能折节下士，士多附之，太祖少与交焉。
现代文：袁绍面容威严，身材魁梧，由于能降低自己的身份结交天下士人，所以很多人都愿意投靠他，太祖曹操年少的时候也曾与他有过交往。
English: Yuan Shao had a majestic face and a huge body. Because he could lower his status and make friends with the world's scholars, many people were willing to rely on him. The great-grandfather Cao Cao also had dealings with him when he was young.

古文：以大将军掾为侍御史，稍迁中军校尉，至司隶。
现代文：后来袁绍进入官场，以大将军属官的身份担任侍御史，不久就被提升为中军校尉，后来又担任了司隶校尉。
English: Later, Yuan Shao entered the official world and served as an attendant historian as a subordinate officer of the general. He was soon promoted to the rank of lieutenant in the Chinese army, and later he served as a sergeant.

古文：灵帝崩，太后兄大将军何进与绍谋诛诸阉官，太后不从。
现代文：灵帝驾崩之后，太后的兄长大将军何进和袁绍密谋要诛杀宫中的宦官，太后不同意他们的计划。
English: After Emperor Ling died, the empress dowager's elder brother, General He Jin, and Yuan Shao conspired to kill the eunuchs in the palace. The empress dowager did not agree to their plan.

古文：乃召董卓，欲以胁太后。
现代文：何进就联络董卓让他带兵入京，想要以此来胁迫太后。
English: Whenever he entered the capital, he would contact Dong Zhuo and ask him to bring troops to Beijing, hoping to use this to coerce the empress dowager.

古文：常侍、黄门闻之，皆诣进谢，唯所错置。
现代文：朝中的常侍、黄门等宦官听说后，到何进的府中请罪，说只要留住性命，其余任由大将军处置。
English: After hearing of this, eunuchs such as Huangmen, the constant attendant of the emperor, went to He Jin's palace to plead guilty, saying that as long as they could save their lives, the rest would be left to the general.

古文：时绍劝进便可於此决之，至于再三，而进不许。
现代文：当时袁绍劝说何进趁机在府中处决了这些宦官，劝说了好几次，但何进都没有同意。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao persuaded He Jin to take advantage of the opportunity to execute these eunuchs in the capital, and persuaded him several times, but He Jin did not agree.

古文：令绍使洛阳方略武吏，检司诸宦者。
现代文：他让袁绍派洛阳城中一些有智谋的军职官员，密切注意并检查宦官们的行动。
English: He asked Yuan Shao to send some clever military officials in Luoyang City to pay close attention to and check the eunuchs' actions.

古文：又令绍弟虎贲中郎将术选温厚虎贲二百人，当入禁中，代持兵黄门陛守门户。
现代文：又下令让袁绍的弟弟虎贲中郎将袁术选出二百名温和宽厚的士兵，到宫中取代原来那些手持兵器把守宫门的护卫。
English: He also ordered Yuan Shao's younger brother, Tigress Chung Lang, to select two hundred gentle soldiers from Yuan Shuxiong to go to the palace to replace the guards who had been guarding the palace gate with weapons.

古文：中常侍段珪等矫太后命，召进入议，遂杀之，宫中乱。
现代文：中常侍段珪等人假传太后的命令，让何进入宫商议事情，趁机将他杀掉，宫中随之大乱。
English: The middle-ranking attendant, Duan Yu, and others falsely transmitted the empress dowager's order to let Ho enter the palace to discuss the matter, taking the opportunity to kill him, and a great disturbance ensued in the palace.

古文：术将虎贲烧南宫嘉德殿青琐门，欲以迫出珪等。
现代文：袁术率领虎贲军烧掉南宫嘉德殿的青琐门，想要以此逼迫段珪等人出来。
English: Yuan Shou led the Tiger Army to burn down the Qingzo Gate of the South Palace, hoping to force Duan Yu and others to come out.

古文：珪等不出，劫帝及帝弟陈留王走小平津。
现代文：但这些宦官不仅没有出来，还劫持了少帝刘辩和他的弟弟陈留王刘协逃往黄河边的小平津渡口。
English: However, these eunuchs not only did not come out, but also kidnapped the young emperor Liu Fen and his brother Chen Liu Wang Liu Xie and fled to the Xiaopingjin Ferry Port on the Yellow River.

古文：绍既斩宦者所署司隶校尉许相，遂勒兵捕诸阉人，无少长皆杀之。
现代文：洛阳城中，袁绍斩杀了宦官任命的司隶校尉许相，又下令士兵在宫中搜捕宦官，无论年龄大小，一律斩杀。
English: In Luoyang City, Yuan Shao killed the eunuch-appointed Sili Captain Xu Xiang, and ordered the soldiers to search for eunuchs in the palace, regardless of age, and kill them all.

古文：或有无须而误死者，至自发露形体而后得免。
现代文：也有的人只是因为没有胡子像宦官而一同被杀，以至于有人要脱下衣服证明自己不是宦官才免除一死。
English: Others were killed just because they did not have a beard like a eunuch, so that some had to take off their clothes to prove that they were not eunuchs in order to avoid death.

古文：宦者或有行善自守而犹见及。其滥如此。
现代文：宦官中也有些时常行善坚持操守的，也一同被杀，这些士兵的滥杀到了这种残酷的地步。
English: Some of the eunuchs, who had always done good and kept the law, were also put to death with the soldiers, whose indiscriminate killing reached such a degree of cruelty.

古文：死者二千馀人。
现代文：在这件事中被杀害的有两千多人。
English: More than 2,000 people were killed in the incident.

古文：急追珪等，珪等悉赴河死。
现代文：袁绍得知宦官们劫持少帝的消息，立刻出兵追赶，段珪等人最后被逼无奈，都投河自尽。
English: When Yuan Shao learned that the eunuchs had kidnapped the young emperor, he immediately sent troops to chase them. Duan Yu and the others were finally forced to commit suicide by throwing themselves into the river.

古文：帝得还宫。
现代文：少帝刘辩才得以返回宫中。
English: The young emperor Liu Yan was able to return to the palace.

古文：董卓呼绍，议欲废帝，立陈留王。
现代文：后来董卓来找袁绍，想跟袁绍商议废掉少帝刘辩，改立陈留王刘协为皇帝。
English: Later, Dong Zhuo came to Yuan Shao and wanted to discuss with Yuan Shao the abolition of the young emperor Liu Dian and the replacement of Chen Liu Wang with Liu Xie as emperor.

古文：是时绍叔父隗为太傅，绍伪许之，曰： 此大事，出当与太傅议。 
现代文：这时候袁绍的叔父袁隗担任太傅，袁绍假装同意他董卓的提议，说： 这么大的事，应该和太傅商量一下。 
English: At this time, Yuan Shao's uncle, Yuan Shao, was acting as Tai Fu, and Yuan Shao pretended to agree with his proposal of Dong Zhuo, saying: Such a big thing should be discussed with Tai Fu.

古文：卓曰： 刘氏种不足复遗。 绍不应，横刀长揖而去。
现代文：董卓说： 刘氏家族的后代不值得再延续下去了。 
English: Dong Zhuo said: The descendants of the Liu family are not worth continuing.

古文：绍既出，遂亡奔冀州。
现代文：袁绍没有回答，抽出佩刀做了个揖就离开了。袁绍出来后，就立刻奔向冀州。
English: Yuan Shao did not answer, but drew his saber, made a crossbow and left. After Yuan Shao came out, he immediately ran to Jizhou.

古文：侍中周毖、城门校尉伍琼、议郎何颙等，皆名士也，卓信之，而阴为绍，乃说卓曰： 夫废立大事，非常人所及。
现代文：朝中大臣如侍中周毖、城门校尉伍琼、议郎何颙等人都是当时的名士，董卓对他们很信赖，但他们内心都偏向袁绍，就劝说董卓说： 帝王的废立是大事，不是一般人可以参与的。
English: The ministers of the two Koreas, such as the chamberlain Zhou Qi, the captain of the city gate Wu Qiong, and the negotiator He Qi, were all famous people at that time. Dong Zhuo trusted them very much, but their hearts were biased towards Yuan Shao. He persuaded Dong Zhuo to say: The dethronement of the emperor is a big deal, not something that ordinary people can participate in.

古文：绍不达大体，恐惧故出奔，非有他志也。
现代文：袁绍不懂得从大局考虑，心中担忧恐惧，所以才出逃奔向冀州，不是想要背叛您。
English: Yuan Shao did not know how to consider the overall situation, and was worried and afraid in his heart. That is why he ran away to Jizhou. He did not want to betray you.

古文：今购之急，势必为变。
现代文：现在如果对他追捕太急，他反而会真的叛变。
English: Now, if you go after him too hard, he'll actually defect.

古文：袁氏树恩四世，门世故吏遍於天下，若收豪杰以聚徒众，英雄因之而起，则山东非公之有也。
现代文：袁绍的家庭四代以来都广施恩泽，门生弟子和由他们举荐的官员遍布天下，要是他聚集英雄豪杰和您作对，天下英雄也趁机揭竿而起，那么崤山以东的大片土地就不在您的掌控之下了。
English: For four generations, Yuan Shao's family has been widely benevolent. His disciples and officials recommended by them are all over the world. If he gathers heroes and heroes to oppose you, and the world's heroes also take the opportunity to rise up, then the vast land east of Lushan will not be under your control.

古文：不如赦之，拜一郡守，则绍喜于免罪，必无患矣。 
现代文：不如赦免了，让他担任一郡的郡守，那袁绍就会因为免于获罪而高兴，那就不会有什么祸患了。 
English: It would be better to pardon him and let him serve as the county governor of a county, then Yuan Shao would be happy because he would not be convicted, and then there would be no disaster.

古文：卓以为然，乃拜绍勃海太守，封邟乡侯。
现代文：董卓认为说得很有道理，就授予袁绍渤海太守的职位，封为邟乡侯。
English: Dong Zhuo thought it was very reasonable, so he awarded Yuan Shao the position of the governor of the Bohai Sea and named him the mayor of Shao.

古文：绍遂以勃海起兵，将以诛卓。
现代文：袁绍就在渤海举兵反叛，要讨伐诛杀董卓。
English: Yuan Shao raised an army and rebelled in the Bohai Sea to fight and kill Dong Zhuo.

古文：语在武纪。
现代文：这件事在《武帝纪》中有所记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：绍自号车骑将军，主盟，与冀州牧韩馥立幽州牧刘虞为帝，遣使奉章诣虞，虞不敢受。
现代文：袁绍自号为车骑将军，还担任各路讨伐董卓的兵马的盟主，并和冀州牧韩馥商议想要立幽州牧刘虞为皇帝，派使者捧着诏书拜访刘虞，但刘虞不敢接受。
English: Yuan Shao called himself the general of chariots and cavalry, and also served as the commander of soldiers and horses to fight against Dong Zhuo, and negotiated with Jizhou herdsman Han Zheng to establish Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu as emperor. He sent an envoy with an edict to visit Liu Yu, but Liu Yu did not dare to accept it.

古文：后馥军安平，为公孙瓒所败。
现代文：韩馥的军队驻扎在安平，后来被公孙瓒打败。
English: Han Xuan's army was stationed in Anping and was later defeated by Gongsun Xuan.

古文：瓒遂引兵入冀州，以讨卓为名，内欲袭馥。
现代文：公孙瓒率军进入冀州城，表面上是要讨伐董卓，实际上是想要袭击韩馥。
English: Gongsun Rong led the army into Jizhou City, ostensibly to fight Dong Zhuo, but actually to attack Han Rong.

古文：馥怀不自安。
现代文：韩馥心中不安。
English: Han Yan felt uneasy in his heart.

古文：会卓西入关，绍还军延津，因馥惶遽，使陈留高幹、颍川荀谌等说馥曰： 公孙瓒乘胜来向南，而诸郡应之，袁车骑引军东向，此其意不可知，窃为将军危之。 
现代文：适逢董卓挟持献帝退回关西，袁绍领兵往东驻扎在延津，听说韩馥因为公孙瓒的消息而忧心恐惧，就派部下陈留人高干和颍川人荀谌等人劝说韩馥说： 公孙瓒趁着胜利的威势挥师向南，沿途各郡都响应他，袁车骑将军率军向东进发，他的意图无法预料，但我们认为您的处境很危急。 
English: When Dong Zhuo returned to Kansai with Emperor Xian, Yuan Shao led his troops eastward and stationed them in Yanjin. Hearing that Han Xuan was worried and fearful because of the news of Gongsun Yao, he sent his subordinates Chen Liu Ren Gao Gan and Lu Chuan Ren Yao and others to persuade Han Xuan and said: Gongsun Yao took advantage of the power of victory to wave his division to the south, and all counties along the way responded to him. General Yuan Che Jie led the army to the east. His intention could not be predicted, but we think your situation is very critical.

古文：馥曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：韩馥说： 那又该怎么办呢？ 
English: Han Zheng said: Then what should we do?

古文：谌曰： 公孙提燕、代之卒，其锋不可当。
现代文：荀谌说： 公孙瓒统领燕州、代州的部众，其势不可挡。
English: Zou said: The influence of Gongsun Zou's leadership of Yanzhou and Daizhou is unstoppable.

古文：袁氏一时之杰，必不为将军下。
现代文：袁绍又是一代英雄豪杰，一定不愿意地位在您之下。
English: Yuan Shao is also a generation of heroic heroes, and he certainly does not want to be inferior to you.

古文：夫冀州，天下之重资也，若两雄并力，兵交於城下，危亡可立而待也。
现代文：冀州，是争夺天下的人一定要争的重要之地，如果公孙瓒和袁绍两军联合攻打冀州，那冀州的危亡就是眼前的事了。
English: Jizhou is an important place that must be fought for by those who compete for the world. If Gongsun Rong and Yuan Shao's two armies jointly attack Jizhou, then the death of Jizhou is imminent.

古文：夫袁氏，将军之旧，且同盟也，当今为将军计，莫若举冀州以让袁氏。
现代文：袁绍，是将军您的旧交，现在又是和您共同讨伐董卓的盟友，现在为将军您考虑，不如将冀州让给袁绍。
English: Yuan Shao is your old friend, and now he is your ally in the fight against Dong Zhuo. Now that you are thinking about the general, it is better to give Jizhou to Yuan Shao.

古文：袁氏得冀州，则瓒不能与之争，必厚德将军。
现代文：袁绍掌握了冀州，那公孙瓒也无力与他抗争，袁绍也会感念您献城的事情而厚待您。
English: Yuan Shao has mastered Jizhou, but Sun Yat-sen is powerless to fight him. Yuan Shao will also be impressed by your dedication of the city and treat you well.

古文：冀州入於亲交，是将军有让贤之名，而身安於泰山也。
现代文：将冀州交付给亲近可靠的盟友，也让您有了让贤的美名，以后也可以确保自己平安无事了。
English: Handing over Jizhou to a close and reliable ally has also given you a good reputation as a diplomat, and you can also ensure that you are safe and sound in the future.

古文：愿将军勿疑！ 
现代文：希望将军您不要在犹疑了！ 
English: I hope you are not hesitating, General!

古文：馥素恇怯，因然其计。
现代文：韩馥素来性格胆小怯懦，就听从了荀谌的计策。
English: Han Xuan, who had always been timid and cowardly, listened to Yao's strategy.

古文：馥长史耿武、别驾闵纯、治中李历谏馥曰： 冀州虽鄙，带甲百万，谷支十年。
现代文：但韩馥手下的长史耿武、别驾闵纯、治中李历等官员劝谏韩馥说： 冀州这个地方虽然偏远，但城中可以上战场的男丁有百万之众，储存的粮食可以供应十年。
English: However, officials such as Changshi Gengwu, Biejie Yuchun, and Zhizhong Li Liguo, who were under the command of Han Qi, persuaded him to say: Although this place in Jizhou is remote, there are millions of men in the city who can go to the battlefield, and the stored grain can supply ten years.

古文：袁绍孤客穷车，仰我鼻息，譬如婴儿在股掌之上，绝其哺乳，立可饿杀。
现代文：袁绍独自率领疲弱穷困的军队来到这里，应该是他依赖我们，就好像将婴儿放在手掌之上，断绝他的奶水，顷刻间就能将他饿死。
English: Yuan Shao alone led a weak and impoverished army to come here. It should be that he relies on us, just like putting a baby on the palm of his hand, cutting off his milk, and starving him to death in an instant.

古文：奈何乃欲以州与之？ 
现代文：为什么将军您要将冀州拱手让给他呢？ 
English: General, why do you want to hand over Jizhou to him?

古文：馥曰： 吾，袁氏故吏，且才不如本初，度德而让，古人所贵，诸君独何病焉！ 
现代文：韩馥说： 我从前曾在袁家做过属官，况且我的才能比不上袁绍，我衡量自己的德行和才能，将冀州让给更贤能的人，是自古以来的人都看重的，你们为什么要责难我呢？ 
English: Han Zheng said: I once served as a subordinate official in the Yuan family, moreover, my talent is not as good as that of Yuan Shao. I measure my virtue and talent and give Jizhou to a more capable person, which has been valued by people since ancient times. Why do you blame me?

古文：从事赵浮、程奂请以兵拒之，馥又不听。
现代文：从事赵浮、程奂等人请求发兵抗击袁绍，韩馥也没有听从。
English: At the request of Zhao Fu, Cheng Yu and others to send troops to fight against Yuan Shao, Han Yu did not listen.

古文：乃让绍，绍遂领冀州牧。
现代文：最终还是将冀州让给了袁绍，袁绍就以勃海太守的身份兼任冀州牧。
English: In the end, Jizhou was ceded to Yuan Shao, and Yuan Shao concurrently served as the governor of Jizhou as the governor of Bohai.

古文：从事沮授说绍曰： 将军弱冠登朝，则播名海内；值废立之际，则忠义奋发。
现代文：袁绍的部下从事沮授劝说袁绍： 将军您在弱冠的年纪就入朝为官，名扬天下；又遇上奸臣想要废掉帝王另立新君，您就凭着刚强正直的品格一马当先主持公道。
English: Yuan Shao's subordinates were engaged in discouraging and persuading Yuan Shao: General, you entered the imperial court at the age of a weak crown and became famous all over the world; and when treacherous vassals wanted to abolish the emperor and set up a new prince, you took the lead in upholding justice with your strong and upright character.

古文：单骑出奔，则董卓怀怖；济河而北，则勃海稽首。
现代文：您独自一人冲出洛阳，使董卓内心恐惧不安；您渡过黄河向北而去，渤海郡的百姓都期盼您的到来。
English: You rushed out of Luoyang alone, making Dong Zhuo's heart fearful and uneasy; you crossed the Yellow River to the north, and the people of Bohai County are looking forward to your arrival.

古文：振一郡之卒，撮冀州之众，威震河朔，名重天下。
现代文：您率领渤海郡的部众，又聚集冀州的军队，声势威震黄河以北的地区，名声广播天下。
English: You have led the people of Bohai County and gathered the army of Jizhou, making a powerful impact on the areas north of the Yellow River, and your fame has been broadcast to the world.

古文：虽黄巾猾乱，黑山跋扈，举军东向，则青州可定；还讨黑山，则张燕可灭；回众北首，则公孙必丧；震胁戎狄，则匈奴必从。
现代文：现在虽然黄巾军四处作乱，黑山一带盗匪猖獗，但如果您率军向东征讨，那青州的黄巾军一定会被平定；回军讨伐黑山的贼寇，那以张燕为首的盗贼也能被消灭；率军向北边的幽州、燕州进发，那公孙瓒一定会覆灭；用武力威慑少数民族部落，匈奴也一定会向您称臣。
English: Now, although the Yellow Turban Army is making trouble everywhere and bandits are rampant in the area of Montenegro, if you lead your army to the east to fight, the Yellow Turban Army in Qingzhou will definitely be quelled; the returning army will fight the bandits in Montenegro, and the bandits led by Zhang Yan can also be eliminated; if you lead your army to the north of Yuzhou and Yanzhou, then Gongsunye will definitely be destroyed; if you use force to deter ethnic minority tribes, the Xiongnu will certainly praise you.

古文：横大河之北，合四州之地，收英雄之才，拥百万之众，迎大驾於西京，复宗庙於洛邑，号令天下，以讨未复，以此争锋，谁能敌之？
现代文：到时候您的势力就能扩大到黄河两岸，合并四州的势力，招揽天下英雄志士，统率百万的军队，将天子和朝臣从长安迎接回来，在洛阳重新修建祭祀宗庙，然后您再以朝廷的名义号令天下，出军讨伐不肯归附的乱臣贼子，依靠这样的威势，天下还有谁是您的对手呢？
English: At that time, your power will be able to expand to both sides of the Yellow River, merge the power of the four states, recruit heroes and patriots around the world, command a million troops, welcome the emperor and courtiers back from Chang'an, and rebuild the sacrificial ancestral temple in Luoyang. Then, in the name of the imperial court, you will order the world to go to war against the ruffian thieves who refuse to join. Relying on such power, who else in the world is your opponent?

古文：比及数年，此功不难。 
现代文：只需要几年的时间，这样的功业是不难完成的。 
English: It only takes a few years, and such a feat is not difficult to accomplish.

古文：绍喜曰： 此吾心也。 
现代文：袁绍很高兴地说： 这就是我心中所想。 
English: Yuan Shao happily said, "This is what I thought in my heart."

古文：即表授为监军、奋威将军。
现代文：就立刻下令任命沮授为监军和奋威将军。
English: He immediately ordered the appointment of De Zhuang as the supervisor of the army and the leader of General Fenwei.

古文：卓遣执金吾胡母班、将作大匠吴脩赍诏书喻绍，绍使河内太守王匡杀之。
现代文：董卓派遣朝中的执金吾胡母班、将作大匠吴修带着诏书告知袁绍，袁绍让河内太守王匡杀了他们。
English: Dong Zhuo dispatched Wu Xiu, the mother of King Wuhu, the ruler of the dynasty, to inform Yuan Shao with an edict that Yuan Shao had ordered the governor of Hanoi, Wang Kuang, to kill them.

古文：卓闻绍得关东，乃悉诛绍宗族太傅隗等。
现代文：董卓得知袁绍已占据了关东地区，就下令将袁氏宗族的人包括太傅袁隗全都杀掉了。
English: When Dong Zhuo learned that Yuan Shao had occupied the Kanto region, he ordered that all members of the Yuan clan, including the Tai Fu Yuan Xuan, be killed.

古文：当是时，豪侠多附绍，皆思为之报。
现代文：这时候，天下英雄豪杰大多归附袁绍，都想着为袁绍报仇。
English: At this time, most of the world's heroes and heroines were attached to Yuan Shao, and they all wanted to take revenge for Yuan Shao.

古文：州郡蜂起，莫不假其名。
现代文：起兵讨伐董卓的州郡，都是借着袁绍的名义。
English: The states and counties that raised armies to fight against Dong Zhuo did so in the name of Yuan Shao.

古文：馥怀惧，从绍索去，往依张邈。
现代文：韩馥心中恐惧，就向袁绍请求离开，他离开后就去依附了陈留太守张邈。
English: With fear in his heart, Han Zheng asked Yuan Shao to leave. After he left, he went to cling to Chen Liu Taishou Zhang Zheng.

古文：后绍遣使诣邈，有所计议，与邈耳语。
现代文：后来袁绍派使者到张邈这里商量事情，使者和张邈小声讨论。
English: Later, Yuan Shao sent an envoy to Zhang Ye to discuss the matter, and the envoy and Zhang Ye discussed in a low voice.

古文：馥在坐上，谓见图构，无何起至溷自杀。
现代文：韩馥坐在位置上，以为是袁绍派人来和张邈商议要杀掉他，不久就起身到厕所中自杀了。
English: Han Wei, who was sitting in his seat, thought that Yuan Shao had sent someone to negotiate with Zhang Ye to kill him, and soon got up and committed suicide in the toilet.

古文：初，天子之立非绍意，及在河东，绍遣颍川郭图使焉。
现代文：当初，立陈留王刘协为皇帝并不是袁绍的想法，但等到献帝和百官出逃到安邑，袁绍还派遣手下颍川人郭图前去朝拜。
English: At first, it was not Yuan Shao's idea to make Chen Liu Wang Liu Xie the emperor, but when Emperor Xian and hundreds of officials fled to Anyi, Yuan Shao also sent his subordinate Guo Tu, a native of Zhangchuan, to pay homage.

古文：图还说绍迎天子都邺，绍不从。
现代文：郭图回来之后劝说袁绍将献帝迎接到邺城，袁绍没有听从他的意见。
English: After Guo Tu returned, he persuaded Yuan Shao to welcome Emperor Xian to Handan, but Yuan Shao did not listen to his advice.

古文：会太祖迎天子都许，收河南地，关中皆附，绍悔。
现代文：等到太祖曹操将献帝迎到许县，收复黄河以南地区，关中各郡县都表示归附，袁绍才后悔。
English: Yuan Shao did not regret until the great-grandfather Cao Cao welcomed the emperor to Xu County and recovered the area south of the Yellow River, and all counties in Guanzhong expressed their affiliation.

古文：欲令太祖徙天子都鄄城以自密近，太祖拒之。
现代文：他想要让曹操将天子送到鄄城，方便自己接近天子，但太祖拒绝了他的要求。
English: He wanted Cao Cao to send Tian Zi to Lucheng, so that he could be closer to Tian Zi, but Taizu refused his request.

古文：天子以绍为太尉，转为大将军，封邺侯，绍让侯不受。
现代文：后来献帝任命袁绍为太尉，后又转任大将军封为邺侯，袁绍推辞了封侯的诏书没有接受。
English: Later, Emperor Xian designated Yuan Shao as the first lieutenant, and later he was transferred to the position of general and made a prefect. Yuan Shao refused to accept the prefect's edict.

古文：顷之，击破瓒于易京，并其众。
现代文：不久，袁绍在易京打败了公孙瓒，收编了他手下的军队。
English: Soon after, Yuan Shao defeated Gongsun Yao in Yijing and reorganized his army.

古文：出长子谭为青州，沮授谏绍： 必为祸始。 
现代文：然后派自己的长子袁谭到青州担任刺史，沮授劝阻袁绍说： 这一定会是祸患的开端。 
English: Then he sent his eldest son, Yuan Tan, to Qingzhou to serve as a historian, and discouraged Yuan Shao by saying: This must be the beginning of the disaster.

古文：绍不听，曰： 孤欲令诸儿各据一州也。 
现代文：袁绍没有听从他的意见，说： 我只是想要我的儿子们都拥有一个州。 
English: Yuan Shao did not listen to his advice and said: I just want my sons to have a state.

古文：又以中子熙为幽州，甥高幹为并州。
现代文：接着又让自己的次子袁熙担任幽州刺史，将外甥高干任命为并州刺史。
English: Next, he appointed his second son, Yuan Xi, as the governor of Yuzhou, and his nephew, Gao Gan, as the governor of Jianzhou.

古文：众数十万，以审配、逢纪统军事，田丰、荀谌、许攸为谋主，颜良、文丑为将率，简精卒十万，骑万匹，将攻许。
现代文：此时袁绍手下数十万兵士，他任命审配、逢纪统管军中事宜，又以田丰、荀谌、许攸为谋士之首，颜良、文丑为军中大将，精选精锐士兵十万，骑兵万人，准备出兵攻打许县。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao had hundreds of thousands of soldiers under his command. He appointed the adjudication and discipline to manage the affairs of the middle army. He also appointed Tian Feng, Zang and Xu You as the head of the advisers, Yan Liang and Wenyu as the generals of the middle army, selected 100,000 elite soldiers and 10,000 cavalry, and prepared to send troops to attack Xu County.

古文：先是，太祖遣刘备诣徐州拒袁术。
现代文：之前，太祖曹操曾派刘备率军到徐州抵抗袁术。
English: Previously, the great-grandfather Cao Cao had sent Liu Bei and his army to Xuzhou to resist Yuan Shu.

古文：术死，备杀刺史车胄，引军屯沛。
现代文：但刘备还没到，袁术就死了，刘备就出军突袭并杀死了曹操任命的徐州刺史车胄，然后带领军队驻扎在沛县。
English: But before Liu Bei arrived, Yuan Shou died, and Liu Bei went out to raid and kill Xuzhou Zhishi Chejun, who was appointed by Cao Cao, and then led the army to be stationed in Peixian.

古文：绍遣骑佐之。
现代文：袁绍派了一支骑兵来帮助刘备。
English: Yuan Shao sent a cavalry to help Liu Bei.

古文：太祖遣刘岱、王忠击之，不克。
现代文：太祖曹操派刘岱、王忠带兵攻打刘备，但没有成功。
English: The great-grandfather Cao Cao sent Liu Bei and Wang Zhong to attack Liu Bei, but they were unsuccessful.

古文：建安五年，太祖自东征备。
现代文：建安五年，太祖曹操亲自率军征讨刘备。
English: In the 5th year of Jianan, the great-grandfather Cao Cao personally led the army to recruit Liu Bei.

古文：田丰说绍袭太祖后，绍辞以子疾，不许，丰举杖击地曰： 夫遭难遇之机，而以婴儿之病失其会，惜哉！ 
现代文：谋士田丰劝说袁绍偷袭曹军后方，但袁绍因为自己儿子生病拒绝了他的建议，田丰用手杖敲地说： 现在遇上这种天赐良机，但却因为婴儿生病而错失了行动的机会，痛惜啊！ 
English: Counselor Tian Feng persuaded Yuan Shao to secretly attack the rear of Cao's army, but Yuan Shao rejected his suggestion because his son was sick. Tian Feng knocked with a cane and said: Now we have this God-given opportunity, but because the baby is sick, we missed the opportunity to act. What a pity!

古文：太祖至，击破备；备奔绍。
现代文：太祖曹操率军到沛县，打败了刘备，刘备逃走投奔了袁绍。
English: The great-grandfather Cao Cao led the army to Peixian, defeated Liu Bei, and Liu Bei fled to Yuan Shao.

古文：绍进军黎阳，遣颜良攻刘延于白马。
现代文：袁绍率军向黎阳进发，派部将颜良在白马县攻打曹操的东太守刘延。
English: Yuan Shao led the army towards Liyang, and sent Yan Liang to attack Cao Cao's eastern governor Liu Yan in Baima County.

古文：沮授又谏绍： 良性促狭，虽骁勇不可独任。 
现代文：沮授又劝谏说： 颜良性情急躁不稳定，虽然骁勇善战，但不适合独自执行军事任务。 
English: Frustrated, the instructor also advised him: "You have a good temperament, you are impatient and unstable. Although you are brave and good at fighting, you are not suitable for carrying out military tasks alone.

古文：绍不听。
现代文：袁绍又没有听从他的建议。
English: Yuan Shao did not listen to his suggestion.

古文：太祖救延，与良战，破斩良。
现代文：曹操得知消息，赶来援救刘延，和颜良交战，取得了胜利并斩杀了颜良。
English: Cao Cao learned the news, came to the rescue of Liu Yan, fought with Yan Liang, won the victory and killed Yan Liang.

古文：绍渡河，壁延津南，使刘备、文丑挑战。
现代文：袁绍率军渡过黄河，在延津以南的地区修建军事壁垒，派出刘备和文丑率军向曹军挑战。
English: Yuan Shao led the army across the Yellow River, built military barriers in the area south of Yanjin, and sent Liu Bei and Wenyu to challenge Cao's army.

古文：太祖击破之，斩丑，再战，禽绍大将。
现代文：曹操出兵打败了袁绍的军队，斩杀了文丑，再次交战的时候擒获了袁绍的手下大将。
English: Cao Cao sent troops to defeat Yuan Shao's army, killed Wen Jiu, and captured Yuan Shao's general when they fought again.

古文：绍军大震。
现代文：消息传回，袁军震惊。
English: Yuan Jun was shocked when the news came back.

古文：太祖还官渡。
现代文：曹操率军退回官渡。
English: Cao Cao led the army back to Guandu.

古文：沮授又曰： 北兵数众而果劲不及南，南谷虚少而货财不及北；南利在於急战，北利在於缓搏。
现代文：沮授又对袁绍说： 我们这边军队人数多但论作战勇猛比不上曹军，而曹操那边军饷短缺，物资供应比不上我们；对曹军来说，最有利的办法是速战速决，但对于我们来说，延长交战时间才是最有利的。
English: Dejected, he also said to Yuan Shao: Our side has a large number of troops, but in terms of fighting bravery, it is not as good as Cao's army, while Cao Cao's side has a shortage of military pay, and the supply of materials is not as good as ours; for Cao's army, the most advantageous way is to fight quickly, but for us, it is most advantageous to extend the time of engagement.

古文：宜徐持久，旷以日月。 绍不从。
现代文：所以我们应该与曹军对峙相持，持续数月，曹军一定因为粮草不济而失利。 
English: Therefore, we should stand face to face with Cao Jun for several months. Cao Jun will surely lose because of the poor harvest.

古文：连营稍前，逼官渡，合战，太祖军不利，复壁。
现代文：袁绍又没有听从他的建议。指挥大军渐渐往前移动，进逼官渡，与曹军交战，曹军失利，退回营地坚守。
English: Yuan Shao did not listen to his advice. The commanding army gradually moved forward, forced Guandu, and fought with Cao's army. Cao's army was defeated and returned to the camp to stand firm.

古文：绍为高橹，起土山，射营中，营中皆蒙楯，众大惧。
现代文：袁绍下令在阵前修筑多座望敌楼，并堆砌土山，让弓箭手从土山上往曹操军营中射箭，曹军营中的士兵出入都用盾牌遮挡住自己，曹军士兵都很恐惧。
English: Yuan Shao ordered the construction of a number of watchtowers before the battle, and piled up mounds of earth, so that archers could shoot arrows from the mounds into Cao Cao's camp. The soldiers in Cao's camp used shields to cover themselves when they went in and out, and Cao's soldiers were very afraid.

古文：太祖乃为发石车，击绍楼，皆破，绍众号曰霹雳车。
现代文：曹操就命人制造了一种能发射石头的车，用它攻击袁绍的哨楼，将它们都摧毁，袁绍军中都称这种车为 霹雳车 。
English: Cao Cao ordered someone to build a vehicle that could launch stones, and used it to attack Yuan Shao's sentry posts, destroying them all. Yuan Shao's army called this vehicle the "chariot."

古文：绍为地道，欲袭太祖营。
现代文：袁绍又下令挖掘地道，想要偷袭曹军的营地。
English: Yuan Shao also ordered the digging of tunnels in an attempt to raid Cao's camp.

古文：太祖辄於内为长堑以拒之，又遣奇兵袭击绍运车，大破之，尽焚其谷。
现代文：曹操就派人在军营周围挖了一条长长的深沟来抵御袁军，同时派出一支奇兵从后方突袭袁军运输粮草的车队，大获全胜，将获得的粮食全部都烧毁。
English: Cao Cao sent someone to dig a long, deep trench around the camp to fend off Yuan's army, and at the same time sent a strange soldier to raid Yuan's convoy transporting grain and grass from the rear, and won a complete victory, and all the grain obtained was burned.

古文：太祖与绍相持日久，百姓疲乏，多叛应绍，军食乏。
现代文：太祖曹操和袁绍两军对峙很久，百姓们也疲惫困乏，很多都叛离去依附袁绍，就连军中的粮饷也渐渐匮乏。
English: The confrontation between Cao Cao and Yuan Shao lasted for a long time. The people were tired and weary. Many of them defected to follow Yuan Shao. Even the army was running out of food.

古文：会绍遣淳于琼等将兵万馀人北迎运车，沮授说绍： 可遣将蒋奇别为支军於表，以断曹公之钞。 
现代文：适逢袁绍派淳于琼率领一万多人北上接应运送粮饷的车队，沮授劝袁绍说： 可以派遣将领蒋奇另外率领一队人马配合淳于琼的行动，以防止曹军的偷袭。 
English: At the right time, Yuan Shao sent Shun Yu Qiong to lead more than ten thousand people to the north to meet the convoy transporting grain and straw, and advised Yuan Shao: You can send General Jiang Qi to lead another team to cooperate with Shun Yu Qiong's actions to prevent the sneak attack of Cao's army.

古文：绍复不从。
现代文：袁绍仍然没有采纳他的建议。
English: Yuan Shao still did not accept his suggestion.

古文：琼宿乌巢，去绍军四十里。
现代文：淳于琼率军回来，在乌巢修整，距离袁军军营只有四十里。
English: Chun Yu Qiong returned with his army and repaired in Wuzhong, only forty miles away from Yuan's army camp.

古文：太祖乃留曹洪守，自将步骑五千候夜潜往攻琼。
现代文：太祖曹操闻讯，就留下曹洪在军营驻守，自己率领五千精锐步兵骑兵趁着夜色出军偷袭淳于琼。
English: When Cao Cao's great-grandfather heard the news, he left Cao Hong stationed in the military camp, and took advantage of the darkness to lead five thousand elite infantry and cavalry to attack Chunyu Qiong.

古文：绍遣骑救之，败走。
现代文：袁绍得到消息，派骑兵前去支援，但也战败。
English: Yuan Shao received the news and sent cavalry to help, but they were also defeated.

古文：破琼等，悉斩之。
现代文：曹军一举打败淳于琼的队伍，将领和士兵都被斩杀。
English: Cao Jun's army defeated Jun Yu Qiong's army in one fell swoop, and the generals and soldiers were all killed.

古文：太祖还，未至营，绍将高览、张郃等率其众降。
现代文：太祖得胜回营，还没有回到营地，袁绍手下将领高览、张郃等人就已经带手下人马前来归降。
English: The great-grandfather returned to the camp victorious, but before he returned to the camp, Yuan Shao's generals Gao Zhan, Zhang Ye and others had already brought their men and horses to surrender.

古文：绍众大溃，绍与谭单骑退渡河。
现代文：袁绍军队溃散，袁绍和长子袁谭只带着少数人马且战且退，直到渡过黄河，才得以逃脱。
English: Yuan Shao's army broke up, and Yuan Shao and his eldest son Yuan Tan retreated with only a few men until they crossed the Yellow River and were able to escape.

古文：馀众伪降，尽坑之。
现代文：剩下的袁军都被曹军俘虏，最后都被活埋了。
English: The rest of Yuan's army was captured by Cao's army and eventually buried alive.

古文：沮授不及绍渡，为人所执，诣太祖，太祖厚待之。
现代文：沮授没有来得及随袁绍渡过黄河，被曹军抓获，将他押到曹操面前，太祖对他很优待。
English: Dejected, he did not have time to cross the Yellow River with Yuan Shao. Cao Cao's army captured him and brought him before Cao Cao. The great-grandfather treated him very well.

古文：后谋还袁氏，见杀。
现代文：后来沮授还想离开去追随袁绍，被曹操杀了。
English: Later, the frustrated professor also wanted to leave to follow Yuan Shao, and was killed by Cao Cao.

古文：初，绍之南也，田丰说绍曰： 曹公善用兵，变化无方，众虽少，未可轻也，不如以久持之。
现代文：当初，袁绍率军南下的时候，谋士田丰就对袁绍说： 曹操擅长用兵，在军事上善于变化，虽然部众比较少，但也不能看轻他，不如长长远打算和他对峙。
English: At the beginning, when Yuan Shao led his army to the south, the adviser Tian Feng said to Yuan Shao: Cao Cao is good at using soldiers and is good at military changes. Although he has a relatively small number of followers, he should not be taken lightly. It is better to have a long-term plan to confront him.

古文：将军据山河之固，拥四州之众，外结英雄，内脩农战，然后简其精锐，分为奇兵，乘虚迭出，以扰河南，救右则击其左，救左则击其右，使敌疲於奔命，民不得安业；我未劳而彼已困，不及二年，可坐克也。
现代文：将军您倚靠着险要的山河地势，统率四个州的军队和百姓，应该广为结交天下英雄豪杰，同时发展农业，操练兵马，然后挑选精锐士兵，编成几支奇兵队伍，乘着曹军没有防备的时候轮流出击，骚扰河南地区，如果曹军救援右边就转而攻打左边，救援左边就转向攻打右边，使曹军不断奔走，越来越疲乏，百姓不得安宁；那我军还没有正式出军敌军就已经疲惫不堪，用不上两年，我们就可以拱手取得胜利了。
English: General, you are relying on the precarious mountain and river terrain, leading the army and people of four states, you should widely make friends with the world's heroes, at the same time develop agriculture, train soldiers and horses, and then select elite soldiers, make up several teams of extraordinary soldiers, take advantage of Cao's unprepared time to attack and harass the Henan region. If Cao's army rescues the right side, it will turn to attack the left side, and if it rescues the left side, it will turn to attack the right side, so that Cao's army is constantly running, getting more and more tired, and the people are not calm; that our army

古文：今释庙胜之策，而决成败於一战，若不如志，悔无及也。 
现代文：现在将军您放着深思熟虑的制胜策略不用，却要全军出击，想要一战定胜负，如果不能取胜，到时候后悔也来不及了。 
English: Now, General, you don't have to come up with a well-thought-out strategy to win, but you have to attack with the whole army. If you want to win a decisive battle, if you can't win, then it's too late to regret it.

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍没有采纳他的建议。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：丰恳谏，绍怒甚，以为沮众，械系之。绍军既败，或谓丰曰： 君必见重。 
现代文：田丰多次劝谏，袁绍大怒，认为田丰是在拉低军中士气，下令将他戴上手铐脚镣收押起来。后来袁军打败，有人对田丰说： 您说的话是对的，以后一定会被重用的。 
English: Tian Feng repeatedly urged him, Yuan Shao was furious, believing that Tian Feng was trying to lower the morale of the army, and ordered him to be put in handcuffs and shackles. Later, when Yuan's army was defeated, someone said to Tian Feng: What you said is right, it will definitely be reused in the future.

古文：丰曰： 若军有利，吾必全，今军败，吾其死矣。 
现代文：田丰说： 如果战斗胜利了，我一定能活命，但现在失利而回，我是一定要死的了。 
English: Tian Feng said, "If the battle is won, I will definitely be able to live, but now that I have lost, I am sure to die."

古文：绍还，谓左右曰： 吾不用田丰言，果为所笑。 
现代文：果然，袁绍回到邺城，对左右侍从说： 我没有采纳田丰的建议，现在一定会被他耻笑。 
English: Sure enough, Yuan Shao returned to Lucheng and said to his attendants: I did not accept Tian Feng's suggestion, and now I will surely be ridiculed by him.

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：就下令将田丰杀了。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：绍外宽雅，有局度，忧喜不形于色，而内多忌害，皆此类也。
现代文：袁绍看起来宽容文雅有气度，喜怒都不在脸上表现出来，但内心却很容易猜忌，田丰的事就是这样。
English: Yuan Shao seems to be tolerant, elegant and dignified, and neither joy nor anger is shown on his face, but it is easy to suspect in his heart. This is the case with Tian Feng.

古文：冀州城邑多叛，绍复击定之。
现代文：官渡之战袁绍大败后，冀州很多城邑都举兵反叛，袁绍又一一出兵将他们平定。
English: After Yuan Shao's great defeat in the Battle of Guandu, many cities and towns in Jizhou revolted, and Yuan Shao sent troops one after another to quell them.

古文：自军败后发病，七年，忧死。
现代文：但官渡战败的打击还是让他病倒，建安七年，忧愤而死。
English: However, the blow of the defeat of Guandu still made him fall ill. Jianan was seven years old and died of grief and anger.

古文：绍爱少子尚，貌美，欲以为后而未显。
现代文：袁绍生前很喜欢小儿子袁尚，袁尚外表俊美，袁绍想让他做自己的继承人但一直没有表现出来。
English: Before his death, Yuan Shao was very fond of his youngest son, Yuan Shang. Yuan Shang was handsome, and Yuan Shao wanted him to be his heir, but he never showed it.

古文：审配、逢纪与辛评、郭图争权，配、纪与尚比，评、图与谭比。
现代文：他的部将谋臣审配、逢纪与辛评、郭图一直在争夺权势，审配和逢纪拥护袁尚，辛评和郭图则拥护他的长子袁谭。
English: His subordinates have been competing for power among themselves, with Feng Ji and Xin Cao and Guo Tu supporting Yuan Shang, and Xin Cao and Guo Tu supporting his eldest son Yuan Tan.

古文：众以谭长，欲立之。
现代文：其他人也因为袁谭年长，认为应该由他来继承袁绍的位置。
English: Others also think that because Yuan Tan is old, he should inherit Yuan Shao's position.

古文：配等恐谭立而评等为己害，缘绍素意，乃奉尚代绍位。
现代文：审配等人担心袁谭继位后辛评等人会谋害自己，就顺着袁绍平时的意思，就尊奉袁尚接替袁绍的位置。
English: The matchmakers and others were worried that after Yuan Tan's succession, Xin Ji and others would conspire to kill themselves, so they followed Yuan Shao's usual intention and honored Yuan Shang to take over Yuan Shao's position.

古文：谭至，不得立，自号车骑将军。
现代文：等到袁谭从外地回到邺城，已经不能继位，就自号为车骑将军。
English: When Yuan Tan returned to Lucheng from abroad and could no longer succeed to the throne, he called himself the General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：由是谭、尚有隙。
现代文：从此以后袁谭和袁尚两兄弟就有了嫌隙。
English: Since then, the two brothers, Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang, have had a rift.

古文：太祖北征谭、尚。
现代文：太祖曹操挥师北上征讨两人。
English: The great-grandfather Cao Cao sent an army to the north to collect two people.

古文：谭军黎阳，尚少与谭兵，而使逢纪从谭。
现代文：袁谭的军队驻扎在黎阳，但袁尚只调派了很少的兵力给袁谭，还派亲近部将逢纪跟随着袁谭的部队随时监督。
English: Yuan Tan's army was stationed in Liyang, but Yuan Shang sent only a small number of troops to Yuan Tan. He also sent his close aide Feng Ji to supervise Yuan Tan's troops at all times.

古文：谭求益兵，配等议不与。
现代文：袁谭向袁尚请求增加支援，审配等人经过商议后没有答应。
English: Yuan Tan asked Yuan Shang for more support, but the reviewers and others did not agree after discussion.

古文：谭怒，杀纪。
现代文：袁谭大怒，杀掉了逢纪。
English: Yuan Tan flew into a rage and killed Feng Ji.

古文：太祖渡河攻谭，谭告急於尚。
现代文：太祖率军渡过黄河攻打袁谭，袁谭再次向袁尚告急请求救援。
English: Taizu led the army across the Yellow River to attack Yuan Tan, and Yuan Tan once again asked Yuan Shang for help.

古文：尚欲分兵益谭，恐谭遂夺其众，乃使审配守邺，尚自将兵助谭，与太祖相拒於黎阳。
现代文：袁尚想要给袁谭增加支援，但又担心袁谭会控制派去的军队增加自己的实力，就让审配留守邺城，他自己亲自率军前去黎阳支援袁谭，和太祖军队在黎阳对峙。
English: Yuan Shang wanted to increase support to Yuan Tan, but he was worried that Yuan Tan would control the troops sent to increase his strength, so he let the adjudicators stay in Lucheng. He personally led the army to Liyang to support Yuan Tan, and confronted Taizu's army in Liyang.

古文：自九月至二月，大战城尚败退，入城守。
现代文：自建安七年九月至建安八年二月，两军交战，袁尚大败，只好退入城中坚守。
English: From September of the seventh year of Jianan to February of the eighth year of Jianan, the two armies fought, Yuan Shang was defeated, and had to retreat into the city to hold out.

古文：太祖将围之，乃夜遁。追至邺，收其麦，拔阴安，引军还许。
现代文：得知太祖想派兵包围黎阳城，袁军连夜逃跑，太祖率军追赶到邺城，将沿途的小麦都洗劫了，并攻占了阴安县，才收兵返回许都。
English: Learning that Taizu wanted to send troops to encircle the city of Liyang, Yuan's army fled overnight, and Taizu led the troops to chase them to Licheng, plundered the wheat along the way, and captured Yin'an County, before collecting the troops and returning to Xudu.

古文：太祖南征荆州，军至西平，谭、尚遂举兵相攻，谭败奔平原。
现代文：后来太祖又率军征讨荆州刘表，大军行进到西平，袁谭和袁尚就开始兄弟之间内斗，袁谭失利，逃往平原县。
English: Later, the great-grandfather also led the army to conquer Jingzhou Liu table, the army marched to Xiping, Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang began infighting between brothers, Yuan Tan lost and fled to Pingyuan County.

古文：尚攻之急，谭遣辛毗诣太祖请救。
现代文：袁尚仍然持续进攻，袁谭只好派部下辛评的弟弟辛毗到太祖曹操那里请求援兵。
English: Yuan Shang still continued to attack, and Yuan Tan had no choice but to send his brother Xin Pi, who was severely criticized by his subordinates, to the great-grandfather Cao Cao to request reinforcements.

古文：太祖乃还救谭，十月至黎阳。
现代文：太祖曹操就调转部队往北救援袁谭，十月的时候到了黎阳。
English: The great-grandfather Cao Cao dispatched troops to the north to rescue Yuan Tan, and arrived in Liyang in October.

古文：尚闻太祖北，释平原还邺。
现代文：袁尚得知太祖率军往北，就放弃攻打平原县返回邺城。
English: When Yuan Shang learned that Taizu was leading his army north, he gave up attacking Pingyuan County and returned to Fucheng.

古文：其将吕旷、吕翔叛尚归太祖，谭复阴刻将军印假旷、翔。
现代文：袁尚的手下吕旷、吕翔背叛了他转而归附太祖曹操，袁谭又私自刻了大将军的印鉴征召了他们。
English: Yuan Shang's men Lü Kui and Lü Xiang betrayed him and turned to the great ancestor Cao Cao. Yuan Tan personally engraved the seal of the great general and conscripted them.

古文：太祖知谭诈，与结婚以安之，乃引军还。
现代文：太祖知道袁谭心性狡诈，就让自己的儿子娶了他的女儿，两人结成亲家以安抚袁谭，才率军回河南。
English: The great-grandfather knew that Yuan Tan's heart was cunning, so he let his son marry his daughter, and the two became relatives to appease Yuan Tan, before leading the army back to Henan.

古文：尚使审配、苏由守邺，复攻谭平原。
现代文：袁尚听说曹操退兵，就派审配、苏由留守邺城，自己再次率军到平原县攻打袁谭。
English: When Yuan Shang heard of Cao Cao's retreat, he sent his adjutant, Su Yu, to stay in Lucheng, and once again led his army to Pingyuan County to attack Yuan Tan.

古文：太祖进军将攻邺，到洹水，去邺五十里，由欲为内应，谋泄，与配战城中，败，出奔太祖。
现代文：太祖就出兵直接攻打邺城，到了洹水驻扎，距离邺城只有五十里，留守的苏由想作为曹操的内应，但计划败露，和审配在城中交战，苏由失利，逃奔出城到太祖曹操的军营中。
English: Taizu sent out troops to directly attack Lucheng, and stationed them in Lushui, only fifty miles away from Lucheng. The remaining Su Yu wanted to serve as Cao Cao's inner response, but the plan failed, and they fought in the city. Su Yu lost and fled the city to Taizu Cao's military camp.

古文：太祖遂进攻之，为地道，配亦於内作堑以当之。
现代文：太祖下令开始攻城，想要挖掘地道偷偷潜入城中，但审配命士兵挖掘深沟来阻挡曹军。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the siege of the city to begin. He wanted to dig a tunnel to sneak into the city, but the judge ordered the soldiers to dig a deep ditch to block Cao's army.

古文：配将冯礼开突门，内太祖兵三百馀人，配觉之，从城上以大石击突中栅门，栅门闭，入者皆没。
现代文：审配的部将冯礼打开城门，让三百多曹军进城，但被审配察觉，就从城墙上让人推下大石块砸向突破的中栅门，栅门被关闭，进入城中的曹军全部被杀了。
English: The adjudicating officer, Feng Li, opened the gate and let more than three hundred Cao's troops enter the city. However, when the adjudicating officer became aware of this, he had people push large stones down from the city wall and throw them at the broken middle gate. The gate was closed, and all of Cao's troops entering the city were killed.

古文：太祖遂围之，为堑，周四十里，初令浅，示若可越。
现代文：太祖就下令将邺城包围，在周围挖掘了一条长达四十里的壕沟，刚开始的时候挖得很浅，好像可以越过去。
English: The great-grandfather ordered to encircle Lucheng and dug a forty-mile-long trench around it. At the beginning, it was dug very shallow, as if it could be crossed.

古文：配望而笑之，不出争利。
现代文：审配在城中一边看着曹军挖掘一边发笑，没有派兵前去阻挠。
English: The judge laughed as he watched Cao's troops digging in the middle of the city, and did not send troops to obstruct them.

古文：太祖一夜掘之，广深二丈，决漳水以灌之。
现代文：没想到一夜之间，曹军挖的深沟宽和深已经各有两丈，然后太祖下令掘开漳河堤坝，将水引入灌满壕沟，导致城中的人无法出去。
English: Unexpectedly, overnight, the width and depth of the deep ditch dug by Cao Jun had increased by two meters, and then the great-grandfather ordered to excavate the Lugu River dike and fill the trench with water, resulting in the people in the city being unable to get out.

古文：自五月至八月，城中饿死者过半。
现代文：从五月到八月，短短几个月的时间，城中已经有超过一半的人饿死。
English: From May to August, just a few months, more than half of the people in the city have starved to death.

古文：尚闻邺急，将兵万馀人还救之，依西山来，东至阳平亭，去邺十七里，临滏水。
现代文：袁尚听闻邺城情况危急，急忙率领一万多人马赶回援救邺城，沿着西山回来，回到邺城东边的阳平亭，距离邺城只有七十里，旁边就是滏水。
English: Yuan Shang heard that the situation in Lucheng was critical, and he hurriedly led more than ten thousand people to rush back to rescue Lucheng. They returned along the West Mountain and returned to Yangpingting on the east side of Lucheng. It was only seventy miles away from Lucheng, and next to it was Surabaya.

古文：举火以示城中，城中亦举火相应。
现代文：袁尚让士兵举起火把与城中联络，城中守军也举火把回应。
English: Yuan Shang asked the soldiers to hold up torches to communicate with the city, and the defenders of the city also responded by holding up torches.

古文：配出兵城北，欲与尚对决围。
现代文：审配率军从城中杀出，想要和袁尚配合夹击曹军。
English: He led his army out of the city and wanted to fight against Cao's army together with Yuan Shang.

古文：太祖逆击之，败还，尚亦破走，依曲漳为营，太祖遂围之。
现代文：太祖得知消息，率军迎击，但战败而回，但袁尚也被另一支曹军打败撤退，到曲漳安营扎寨，太祖就率军将他包围了。
English: When Taizu learned the news, he led an army to meet the attack, but was defeated and returned, but Yuan Shang was also defeated and retreated by another Cao army, and encamped in Quyuan. Taizu led an army to surround him.

古文：未合，尚惧，遣阴夔、陈琳乞降，不听。
现代文：还没有形成合围之势，袁尚就已经惧怕，派出阴夔和陈琳到曹营请降，但曹操没有接受。
English: Even before the encirclement was formed, Yuan Shang was already afraid and sent Yin Qi and Chen Lin to Cao Ying to ask for a surrender, but Cao Cao did not accept.

古文：尚还走滥口，进复围之急，其将马延等临陈降，众大溃，尚奔中山。
现代文：袁尚就率部逃到滥口，曹军更加紧包围他，袁尚的部下马延等人阵前投降，军中大乱，袁尚又逃往中山。
English: Yuan Shang led his troops to escape to Madukou, Cao's troops surrounded him more tightly, Yuan Shang's subordinates, Ma Yan and others, surrendered before the battle, there was a great disturbance in the army, and Yuan Shang fled to Zhongshan.

古文：尽收其辎重，得尚印绶、节钺及衣物，以示其家，城中崩沮。
现代文：曹军将袁尚军队的物资全部收缴，还得到了袁尚的印信节钺及财物，曹军将这些都送到邺城给袁尚家人和守城将士看，城中将士全都溃散。
English: Cao Jun's army confiscated all the materials of Yuan Shang's army, and also got Yuan Shang's seal and property. Cao Jun sent all of these to Lucheng to show to Yuan Shang's family and the soldiers guarding the city. The soldiers in the city were all dispersed.

古文：配兄子荣守东门，夜开门内太祖兵，与配战城中，生禽配。
现代文：审配兄长的儿子审荣把守东门，乘着夜色将城门打开放入曹军将士，曹军入城后与审配指挥的守军在城中交战，最后活捉了审配。
English: Qiu Rong, the elder brother's son, guarded the east gate, and took advantage of the darkness to open the gate and let in Cao Jun's soldiers. After Cao Jun entered the city, he fought with the defending army commanded by Qiu Rong in the city, and finally captured Qiu Rong alive.

古文：配声气壮烈，终无挠辞，见者莫不叹息。遂斩之。
现代文：但审配被擒后正气凛然，没有一句屈服的话，看到的人都为之感慨。
English: However, after being arrested, the matchmaker was in high spirits and did not utter a single word of submission. Everyone who saw it was moved by it.

古文：高幹以并州降，复以幹为刺史。
现代文：最后曹操下令杀了他。袁绍的外甥高幹以并州刺史的身份投降曹操，曹操接受了他的投降并让他担任并州刺史。
English: In the end, Cao Cao gave the order to kill him. Yuan Shao's nephew Gao Gan surrendered to Cao Cao as the governor of the annexed province. Cao Cao accepted his surrender and made him the governor of the annexed province.

古文：太祖之围邺也，谭略取甘陵、安平、勃海、河间，攻尚於中山。
现代文：在太祖曹操率军包围邺城的时候，袁谭趁机占据了甘陵、勃海、安平、河间等广大地方，又带兵攻打逃到中山的袁尚。
English: When the great-grandfather Cao Cao led an army to encircle Lucheng, Yuan Tan took advantage of the opportunity to occupy wide areas such as Ganling, Bohai, Anping, and Hema, and also led troops to attack Yuan Shang, who fled to Zhongshan.

古文：尚走故安从熙，谭悉收其众。
现代文：袁尚又逃到故安投靠堂兄袁熙，袁谭将袁尚的部众悉数收编。
English: Yuan Shang also fled to Gao'an to take refuge with his cousin Yuan Xi, and Yuan Tan gathered together all of Yuan Shang's followers.

古文：太祖将讨之，谭乃拔平原，并南皮，自屯龙凑。
现代文：太祖曹操打算前去攻打他，袁谭听说后就立刻率兵离开平原县，退到南皮，在黄河边的龙凑驻扎。
English: Cao Cao's great-grandfather planned to attack him, and Yuan Tan immediately left Pingyuan County and retreated to Nanpi and stationed in Longqin by the Yellow River.

古文：十二月，太祖军其门，谭不出，夜遁奔南皮，临清河而屯。
现代文：十二月间，太祖曹操率军开到袁谭军营附近，袁谭不敢出兵，连夜带着兵马退回南皮，靠着清河安营扎寨。
English: In December, the great-grandfather Cao Cao led the army to the vicinity of Yuan Tan's military camp. Yuan Tan did not dare to send troops, and returned to Nanpi with soldiers and horses overnight, and camped by the Qinghe River.

古文：十年正月，攻拔之，斩谭及图等。
现代文：建安十年正月，曹军军攻占袁谭军营，将袁谭和谋士郭图等人都斩杀了。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of Jian'an, Cao Jun's army captured Yuan Tan's military camp and killed Yuan Tan and his adviser Guo Tu.

古文：熙、尚为其将焦触、张南所攻，奔辽西乌丸。
现代文：袁熙和袁尚也被部下焦触、张南袭击，逃到辽西投奔乌桓丸。
English: Yuan Xi and Yuan Shang were also scorched by their subordinates and attacked by Zhang Nan, and fled to the west of Liao to join Wu Huan Maru.

古文：触自号幽州刺史，驱率诸郡太守令长，背袁向曹。
现代文：焦触这时就自封为幽州刺史，胁迫各州郡的太守县令都背叛袁氏依附曹操。
English: At this time, Jiao Tang self-appointed himself as Yuzhou stabbing history, and coerced the governors of each state and county to betray Yuan's attachment to Cao Cao.

古文：陈兵数万，杀白马盟，令曰： 违命者斩！ 
现代文：焦触将他的数万军队布置好后，就杀白马盟约立誓，并对众太守县令说： 违背命令的斩！ 
English: After setting up his tens of thousands of troops, Jiao Tou swore an oath to kill the White Horse Alliance, and said to all the governors of counties: "Behead those who disobey orders!"

古文：众莫敢语，各以次歃。
现代文：在场的人都不敢有异议，就依次饮酒以示诚意。
English: No one present dared to object, and they all drank in turn to show their sincerity.

古文：至别驾韩珩，曰： 吾受袁公父子厚恩，今其破亡，智不能救，勇不能死，於义阙矣；若乃北面於曹氏，所弗能为也。 
现代文：轮到别驾韩珩的时候，他说： 我深受袁氏父子恩情，现在他们败灭，我既不能为他们出谋划策，在军事上也没有能为他们战死，在道义上已经说不通，如果还要我投靠曹操，我是做不到的。 
English: When it was his turn to leave, Han Zheng said, "I am deeply indebted to Yuan's father and son. Now that they have been defeated, I can neither give them advice, nor can I fight and die for them militarily. Morally, it is no longer possible. If I still want to rely on Cao Cao, I can't do it.

古文：一坐为珩失色。
现代文：在场的人都因为他的话变了脸色。
English: Everyone present turned pale at his words.

古文：触曰： 夫兴大事，当立大义，事之济否，不待一人，可卒珩志，以励事君。 
现代文：焦触说： 我们要做一件关乎国家百姓的是，应该树立仁义道德，但事情成不成功，也不在乎依靠多一个人，我们应该成全韩珩的心志，以鼓励那些忠心侍奉主上的人。 
English: Jiao Tou said: What we want to do is a matter of concern to the people of the country, we should establish a benevolence and righteousness morality, but whether it is successful or not, we do not care to rely on more than one person, we should fulfill Han Xuan's ambition to encourage those who faithfully serve the Lord.

古文：高幹叛，执上党太守，举兵守壶口关。
现代文：不久，高幹举兵造反，抓获了上党太守，并派兵控制了壶口关抵御曹军。
English: Soon after, Gao Jian raised an army to rebel, captured Shang Dang Taimou, and sent troops to control Hukou Pass to resist Cao's army.

古文：遣乐进、李典击之，未拔。
现代文：曹操派乐进、李典带兵前去攻打，但没有能攻克。
English: Cao Cao sent Le Jin and Li Dian to attack, but they failed.

古文：十一年，太祖征幹。
现代文：建安十一年，曹操亲自率军征讨高幹。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianan, Cao Cao personally led the army to recruit high-ranking cadres.

古文：幹乃留其将夏昭、邓升守城，自诣匈奴单于求救，不得，独与数骑亡，欲南奔荆州，上洛都尉捕斩之。
现代文：高幹令其部将夏昭、邓升守城，自己到匈奴向匈奴单于请求支援，单于没有答应，高幹只好带着几个亲近骑兵逃往，想要往南去投靠荆州刘表，但在路上被上洛都尉捉住杀掉了。
English: Gao Gan ordered his subordinates Xia Zhao and Deng Sheng to defend the city. He went to the Xiongnu to ask the Xiongnu for support, but the Xiongnu did not agree. Gao Gan had no choice but to flee with several close cavalrymen. He wanted to go south to support Jingzhou Liu Biao, but he was caught and killed by Shangluo Duifeng on the way.

古文：十二年，太祖至辽西击乌丸。尚、熙与乌丸逆军战，败走奔辽东，公孙康诱斩之，送其首。
现代文：建安十二年，太祖率军前往辽西征讨乌丸，袁熙、袁尚兄弟与乌丸联合迎战曹军，最后战败，兄弟俩逃往辽东想投奔辽东太守公孙康，但公孙康诱捕并斩杀了二人，将他们的首级送到了曹操那里。
English: In the 12th year of Jian'an, Taizu led an army to western Liaoning to conquer Wuyuan. Yuan Xi and Yuan Shang brothers and Wuyuan jointly fought against Cao's army. Finally, they were defeated. The two brothers fled to eastern Liaoning to join the governor of eastern Liaoning, Gongsun Kang, but Gongsun Kang trapped and killed the two and sent their heads to Cao Cao.

古文：太祖高韩珩节，屡辟不至，卒於家。
现代文：太祖对韩珩忠贞不二的气节很赞赏，多次征召他做官，但韩珩每次都推辞，最后死在自己家里。
English: The great-grandfather was very appreciative of Han Xuan's loyalty, and repeatedly called him to be an official, but Han Xuan refused every time, and finally died in his own home.

古文：袁术字公路，司空逢子，绍之从弟也。
现代文：袁术字公路，是司空袁逢的儿子，袁绍的堂弟。
English: Yuan Shuzi Highway is the son of Siku Yuan Feng, the cousin of Yuan Shao.

古文：以侠气闻。
现代文：年少时就因为侠义之气为人所知。
English: At a young age, he was known for his chivalry.

古文：举孝廉，除郎中，历职内外，后为折冲校尉、虎贲中郎将。
现代文：后来被推举为孝廉，担任郎中，先后在朝廷内外担任过多种官职，后来升迁到折冲校尉、虎贲中郎将。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of filial piety, served as a junior vassal, and successively held a variety of official positions both inside and outside the imperial court. Later, he was promoted to the rank of Orichon school lieutenant and Togakushi middle vassal.

古文：董卓之将废帝，以术为后将军；术亦畏卓之祸，出奔南阳。
现代文：当时董卓想要废掉少帝刘辩，让袁术担任后将军；但袁术担心董卓做的事会危害到自己，就逃出洛阳跑到了南阳。
English: At that time, Dong Zhuo wanted to abolish the young emperor Liu Dian and let Yuan Shuxi serve as the next general; but Yuan Shuxi was worried that what Dong Zhuo did would harm himself, so he fled Luoyang and went to Nanyang.

古文：会长沙太守孙坚杀南阳太守张咨，术得据其郡。
现代文：刚好遇上长沙太守孙坚杀掉南阳太守张咨，袁术就趁机占据了南阳。
English: Just as Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, killed Zhang Zi, the governor of Nanyang, Yuan Shuxu seized the opportunity to occupy Nanyang.

古文：南阳户口数百万，而术奢淫肆欲，徵敛无度，百姓苦之。
现代文：南阳郡有人口数百万，但袁术骄奢淫逸，大肆征收税赋，当地百姓苦不堪言。
English: Nanyang County has a population of millions, but Yuan Shuxiong is arrogant, extravagant, and recklessly collects taxes. The local people are miserable.

古文：既与绍有隙，又与刘表不平而北连公孙瓒；绍与瓒不和而南连刘表。
现代文：袁术和袁绍有矛盾，又和荆州的刘表不和，就和在北边的公孙瓒联合；袁绍和公孙瓒有矛盾，就往南和刘表结成同盟。
English: Yuan Shou had a conflict with Yuan Shao, and he was at odds with Liu Biao in Jingzhou, so he allied with Gongsun Yao in the north; Yuan Shao had a conflict with Gongsun Yao, so he allied with Liu Biao in the south.

古文：其兄弟携贰，舍近交远如此。
现代文：这两兄弟各有谋算，舍近交远竟然到了如此地步。
English: The two brothers each have their own plans, but despite their close friendship, it has come to this.

古文：引军入陈留，太祖与绍合击，大破术军。
现代文：袁术率军到陈留，太祖曹操和袁绍联合进攻，大败袁术军队。
English: Yuan Shou led his army to Chenliu. Grandfather Cao Cao and Yuan Shao jointly attacked and defeated Yuan Shou's army.

古文：术以馀众奔九江，杀扬州刺史陈温，领其州。
现代文：袁术带着剩下的队伍逃往九江，杀了扬州刺史陈温，占据了扬州。
English: Yuan Shu fled to Jiujiang with the rest of the team, killed the Yangzhou assassin Chen Wen, and occupied Yangzhou.

古文：以张勋、桥蕤等为大将军。
现代文：又将张勋、桥蕤等人任命为大将军。
English: He also appointed Zhang Xun, Qiao Yao and others as grand generals.

古文：李傕入长安，欲结术为援，以术为左将军，封阳翟侯，假节，遣太傅马日磾因循行拜授。
现代文：李傕领兵进入洛阳控制了朝政，想要拉拢袁术为外援，授予袁术左将军的职位，封为阳翟侯，授予符节，又派太傅马日銸到各地给受封的将军侯爵举行拜授仪式。
English: Li Qian led the troops into Luoyang and controlled the imperial government. He wanted to win over Yuan Shuxiong for foreign aid, granted Yuan Shuzo the position of general, named him Yang Shuzhou, granted him runes, and sent Taifu Mazhixuan to all parts of the country to hold an investiture ceremony for the named general and marquis.

古文：术夺日磾节，拘留不遣。
现代文：袁术抢了马日銸所携的军中符节，将他囚禁起来，不让他回洛阳。
English: Yuan Shou robbed Ma Rijuan of the military insignia he was carrying, imprisoned him, and did not allow him to return to Luoyang.

古文：时沛相下邳陈珪，故太尉球弟子也。
现代文：当时的沛阳下邳人陈珪，是已故太尉陈球的侄子。
English: At that time, the Peiyang subordinate, Chen Yao, was the nephew of the late First Lieutenant Chen Kuo.

古文：术与珪俱公族子孙，少共交游，书与珪曰： 昔秦失其政，天下群雄争而取之，兼智勇者卒受其归。
现代文：袁术和陈珪同为公侯贵族子弟，年少时就关系很好，袁术对陈珪说： 从前秦王朝亡国失天下，天下英雄豪杰群起争夺政权，最后只有智勇双全的人才能取得胜利。
English: Yuan Shou and Chen Zhe are both sons of princes and aristocrats, and they had a good relationship when they were young. Yuan Shou said to Chen Zhe: Since the former Qin Dynasty lost the country, the world's heroes and heroes gathered to compete for power. In the end, only those who are both wise and brave can win.

古文：今世事纷扰，复有瓦解之势矣，诚英乂有为之时也。
现代文：现在天下不安定，刘氏江山有瓦解的征兆，显然又到了天下豪杰做一番事业的时候。
English: Now that the world is unstable, and the Liu dynasty is showing signs of disintegration, it is clearly time for the world's heroes to do their best.

古文：与足下旧交，岂肯左右之乎？
现代文：我和你是多年的好友，难道你不肯帮助我吗？
English: I've been friends with you for years. Aren't you going to help me?

古文：若集大事，子实为吾心膂。 
现代文：如果要做一件争夺天下的事，你实在是我最信任的人了。 
English: If I'm going to do something for the world, you're the person I trust the most.

古文：珪中子应时在下邳，术并胁质应，图必致珪。
现代文：陈珪的第二个儿子这时候在下邳，袁术威胁要挟持陈应做人质，想着一定要陈珪帮他。
English: Chen Yao's second son was under arrest at the time, and Yuan Shu threatened to hold Chen Yao hostage, thinking that Chen Yao must help him.

古文：珪答书曰： 昔秦末世，肆暴恣情，虐流天下，毒被生民，下不堪命，故遂土崩。
现代文：陈珪回信说： 从前秦王朝危亡之际，暴虐无道，用严刑峻法统治天下，百姓深受其害，苦不堪言，百姓忍无可忍起义反抗，所以导致秦朝土崩瓦解。
English: Chen Wei replied in a letter: From the time of the death of the former Qin Dynasty, the tyranny was ruthless and ruled the world with severe punishments. The people suffered from it, and the suffering was unbearable. The people could not bear to resist the uprising, which led to the collapse of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今虽季世，未有亡秦苛暴之乱也。
现代文：现在刘氏的统治虽然也衰微，但并没有秦朝灭亡之前的那种严苛暴政。
English: Although Liu's reign is now waning, it does not have the harsh tyranny that preceded the fall of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：曹将军神武应期，兴复典刑，将拨平凶慝，清定海内，信有徵矣。
现代文：现在曹操将军英明神武，顺应天势，努力恢复混乱的朝纲，即将能铲除残暴的叛贼，恢复天下的安定，现在已经有明显的征兆了。
English: Now, General Cao Cao is acting wisely and skillfully, conforming to the trend of the times and striving to restore the chaotic imperial system. There are already clear signs that he will be able to eradicate the brutal traitors and restore stability to the world.

古文：以为足下当戮力同心，匡翼汉室，而阴谋不轨，以身试祸，岂不痛哉！
现代文：我原本以为您会与天下英雄豪杰齐心协力铲除奸邪，匡扶汉室，但你却背地里图谋不轨，将自己推入灾祸之中，岂不是让人痛心吗！
English: I originally thought that you would work together with the world's heroes and heroines to eradicate the evil of treason and support the Han dynasty, but you are secretly plotting, pushing yourself into disaster, isn't it heartbreaking!

古文：若迷而知反，尚可以免。
现代文：如果您能迷途知返，尚且可以免去你的罪过。
English: If you can get lost and find your way back, you can still be absolved of your sins.

古文：吾备旧知，故陈至情，虽逆于耳，骨肉之惠也。
现代文：我和您有多年交往，所以才将心里话告诉您，虽然听起来会让您不舒服，但都是因为我对您想骨肉兄弟一样的情义。
English: I've been in a relationship with you for many years, so I'm telling you my heartfelt words, although it may sound uncomfortable for you, but it's all because I want to be like a brother to you.

古文：欲吾营私阿附，有犯死不能也。 
现代文：如果您想要我结党营私，攀附反贼，我哪怕是死也不会做的。 
English: If you want me to ally myself with the anti-thieves, I won't do it even if I die.

古文：兴平二年冬，天子败於曹阳。
现代文：献帝兴平二年冬，献帝在曹阳被李傕和郭汜叛军打败。
English: In the winter of the second year of Emperor Xingping's reign, Emperor Xian was defeated in Caoyang by Li Yu and Guo Yu's rebels.

古文：术会群下谓曰： 今刘氏微弱，海内鼎沸。
现代文：袁术召集部下开会说： 现在刘氏家族的势力渐渐衰弱，天下形势不稳定。
English: Yuan Shou called a meeting of his subordinates and said: Now the power of the Liu family is gradually weakening, and the situation in the world is unstable.

古文：吾家四世公辅，百姓所归，欲应天顺民，於诸君意如何？ 
现代文：我袁氏家族四代以来都是朝中重臣，百姓都愿意依附我，我现在想要顺应天意民心，各位怎么看呢？ 
English: I, the Yuan family, have been the chief minister of the imperial court for four generations. The people are willing to follow me. Now I want to follow the will of Heaven and the people. What do you think?

古文：众莫敢对。
现代文：众人没有敢回应的。
English: People didn't dare to respond.

古文：主簿阎象进曰： 昔周自后稷至于文王，积德累功，三分天下有其二，犹服事殷。
现代文：只有主簿阎象上前说道： 从前周朝从后稷到周文王，累世积累功德，三分天下可以说有他们的两分，但他们还是向殷商称臣。
English: Only the main book, Yan Xiang, came forward and said: From the previous Zhou Dynasty, from Houyi to King Zhou Wen, they have accumulated merits over the years, and it can be said that they have two points in the three-point world, but they still bow to Yin Shang.

古文：明公虽奕世克昌，未若有周之盛，汉室虽微，未若殷纣之暴也。 
现代文：明公您虽然累世高官厚禄，但还没有姬氏家族那样昌盛，刘氏家族虽然衰微，但并没有像商纣王那样残暴。 
English: Ming Gong, although you have been a high-ranking official for many generations, you have not been as prosperous as the Ji family, and although the Liu family has declined, it has not been as cruel as the merchant Wang.

古文：术嘿然不悦。
现代文：袁术听了这番话，没有说话，但心中很不高兴。
English: Yuan Shu did not say anything when he heard this, but he was very unhappy.

古文：用河内张炯之符命，遂僣号以九江太守为淮南尹。
现代文：不久之后，他凭借河内人张鮍为他占卜的命数登基做了皇帝。称帝之后，任命九江太守为淮南尹。
English: Not long after, he made himself emperor with the help of Hanoi's Zhang Xuan, who had divined his fate. After he was proclaimed emperor, he appointed Huainan Yin as the governor of Jiujiang.

古文：置公卿，祠南北郊。
现代文：安排朝臣官职，还在城南城北修建了皇帝祭天所用的祭坛。
English: In addition, an altar for the emperor to offer sacrifices to heaven was built in the south of the city and the north of the city.

古文：荒侈滋甚，后宫数百皆服绮縠，馀粱肉，而士卒冻馁。
现代文：生活上骄奢淫逸，并且越来越过分，他后宫中有数百嫔妃，全部都穿绫罗绸缎，精致的食物源源不断，但军中的士兵却饥寒交迫。
English: He lived a luxurious and increasingly extravagant life. He had hundreds of concubines in his harem, all dressed in silk and satin. There was an endless supply of fine food, but the soldiers in the army were starving.

古文：江淮间空尽，人民相食。
现代文：这样的统治导致江淮一带人烟断绝，甚至出现了人吃人的惨象。
English: This kind of rule led to the complete depopulation of the area around the Yangtze River and Huai River, and even led to the tragedy of cannibalism.

古文：术前为吕布所破，后为太祖所败，奔其部曲雷薄、陈兰于灊山，复为所拒，忧惧不知所出。
现代文：后来袁术在混战中先是被吕布打败，后来又被曹操率军击退，他只好投奔占据飅山的旧部雷薄和陈兰，但这两人拒绝接纳他。袁术忧心恐惧不知道该投奔谁。
English: Later, Yuan Shou was first defeated by Lv Bu and then repulsed by Cao Cao and his army in the melee. He had no choice but to run to the old ministry of Lei Bo and Chen Lan, who occupied Shaoshan, but the two refused to accept him. Yuan Shou was worried and afraid and did not know who to run to.

古文：将归帝号於绍，欲至青州从袁谭，发病道死。
现代文：后来他想将皇帝的称号转给袁绍，然后想到青州投靠侄子袁谭，但在路上就发病身亡。
English: Later, he wanted to transfer the title of emperor to Yuan Shao, and then thought of Qingzhou to rely on his nephew Yuan Tan, but he fell ill and died on the way.

古文：妻子依术故吏庐江太守刘勋，孙策破勋，复见收视。
现代文：袁术死后，他的妻子儿女依附于他的旧部庐江太守刘勋，后来孙策又打败了刘勋，他们又被孙权带走。
English: After Yuan Shuxu's death, his wife and children clung to Liu Xun, the grand marshal of the Li River, his former subordinate. Later, Sun Ce defeated Liu Xun, and they were taken away by Sun Quan.

古文：术女入孙权宫，子耀拜郎中，耀女又配於权子奋。
现代文：袁术的女儿被选入孙权的后宫，他的儿子袁耀被授予郎中的职位，袁耀的女儿又嫁给了孙权的儿子孙奋。
English: Yuan Shu's daughter was chosen to be in Sun Quan's harem, his son Yuan Yao was given the position of son-in-law, and Yuan Yao's daughter Meng married Sun Quan's son Sun Fen.

古文：刘表字景升，山阳高平人也。
现代文：刘表字景升，是山阳高平人。
English: Liu table character Jing Sheng, is Sanyang Gaoping people.

古文：少知名，号八俊。
现代文：年少时就很有名，是汉末名士 八俊 之一。
English: He was very famous when he was young, and was one of the Eight Outstanding Young Men at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：长八尺馀，姿貌甚伟。
现代文：他身高八尺左右，仪表堂堂。
English: He is about eight feet tall and has a distinguished appearance.

古文：以大将军掾为北军中候。
现代文：入朝为官后以大将军随员的身份担任北军中候。
English: After entering the imperial court as an official, he served as a general's attendant in the Northern Army.

古文：灵帝崩，代王叡为荆州刺史。
现代文：灵帝驾崩后，取代王叡担任荆州刺史。
English: After the death of Emperor Lingdi, he replaced Wang Ei as the Jingzhou chief historian.

古文：是时山东兵起，表亦合兵军襄阳。
现代文：这时候崤山以东一带地区纷纷起兵讨伐董卓，刘表也将几路兵马集结驻扎襄阳。
English: At this time, the areas east of Lushan rallied to fight against Dong Zhuo, and Liu Biao also gathered several armies and horses and stationed them in Xiangyang.

古文：袁术之在南阳也，与孙坚合从，欲袭夺表州，使坚攻表。
现代文：袁术这时候在南阳担任太守，和长沙太守孙坚联合，想要突袭夺取刘表所在的荆州，让孙坚进攻刘表。
English: At this time, Yuan Shuxu was acting as the governor of Nanyang, and allied with Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, to raid and seize Jingzhou, where Liu Biao was located, and let Sun Jian attack Liu Biao.

古文：坚为流矢所中死，军败，术遂不能胜表。
现代文：孙坚在战乱中被流箭射中身亡，战斗也失利，袁术就没有能战胜刘表。
English: Sun Jian was shot dead by a stray arrow during the war, and the battle was also a failure. Yuan Shu was not able to defeat Liu Biao.

古文：李傕、郭汜入长安，欲连表为援，乃以表为镇南将军、荆州牧，封成武侯，假节。
现代文：李傕、郭汜等人率军攻入长安后，想联合刘表为外援，就任命刘表为镇南将军、荆州牧，封为成武侯，还授予符节。
English: After Li Yu, Guo Wei and others led the army into Chang'an, if they wanted to join Liu Biao for foreign aid, they would appoint Liu Biao as Zhenan General, Jingzhou Moo, and Chengwu Hou, and also grant him the Festival of the Rune.

古文：天子都许，表虽遣使贡献，然北与袁绍相结。
现代文：后来献帝被曹操迎到许县，刘表虽然也派遣使者进献礼物，但还是暗中与北边的袁绍有联络。
English: Later, Emperor Xian was welcomed to Xu County by Cao Cao. Although Liu Bei also sent an envoy to present gifts, he still secretly had contact with Yuan Shao in the north.

古文：治中邓羲谏表，表不听，羲辞疾而退，终表之世。
现代文：治中邓羲劝谏刘表不应这样，刘表没有采纳，邓曦就以生病为由辞官离开了刘表，再也没有在刘表手下为官，一直到刘表去世。
English: In the middle of the reign, Deng Xi advised Liu Biao not to do so. Liu Biao did not accept, and Deng Xi resigned from Liu Biao on the grounds of illness. He never served under Liu Biao again until Liu Biao's death.

古文：张济引兵入荆州界，攻穰城，为流矢所中死。
现代文：董卓部将张济率军进入荆州地界，在攻打穰城的时候因被流箭射中身亡。
English: Dong Zhuobe led Zhang Jie's army into the Jingzhou territory, and was shot dead by a stray arrow while attacking Lucheng.

古文：荆州官属皆贺，表曰： 济以穷来，主人无礼，至于交锋，此非牧意，牧受吊，不受贺也。 
现代文：荆州的官员闻讯都高兴地庆祝，但刘表说： 张济攻打荆州是因为走投无路，是我们做主人的没有能以礼相待，才导致两军交战，这不是我这个荆州牧的本意，我只接受大家的祭奠，不接受祝贺。 
English: Officials in Jingzhou were happy to celebrate when they heard the news, but Liu Table said: Zhang Ji attacked and attacked Jingzhou because he was cornered. It was our failure to treat each other with courtesy that led to the two armies fighting. This is not my intention as a herdsman in Jingzhou. I only accept everyone's tribute and do not accept congratulations.

古文：使人纳其众；众闻之喜，遂服从。
现代文：就派人收编张济的队伍；张济军中听闻这个消息都很欣喜，都归降了刘表。
English: He sent someone to recruit Zhang Ji's team; Zhang Ji's army was very happy to hear this news, and they all surrendered to Liu Biao.

古文：长沙太守张羡叛表，表围之连年不下。
现代文：长沙太守张羡背叛刘表，刘表率军包围长沙，攻打了几年都没有能攻克。
English: Changsha's governor Zhang Qian betrayed Liu Biao, and Liu Biao led an army to encircle Changsha. They fought for several years but were unable to conquer it.

古文：羡病死，长沙复立其子怿，表遂攻并怿，南收零、桂，北据汉川，地方数千里，带甲十馀万。
现代文：后来张羡病死，长沙官员又立张羡的儿子张怿为长沙太守，刘表就趁机攻打张怿并打败了他，占据了长沙地区，又乘胜进军西南，收取了零陵、桂林等地，往北又占据汉川，拥有地盘数千里，兵马十几万。
English: Later, Zhang Qian died of illness, and Changsha officials also appointed Zhang Qian's son Zhang Jun as the governor of Changsha. Liu Biao took the opportunity to attack Zhang Jun and defeated him, occupied the Changsha region, and took advantage of the victory to march into the southwest, taking over Zero Ling, Guilin and other places, and occupied Hanchuan to the north, with thousands of miles of territory and more than 100,000 soldiers and horses.

古文：太祖与袁绍方相持于官渡，绍遣人求助，表许之而不至，亦不佐太祖，欲保江汉间，观天下变。
现代文：太祖曹操和袁绍在官渡相持对峙，袁绍派人向刘表求助，刘表表明上答应但却没有出兵，也没有帮助曹操，只想要保存自己的势力，占据江汉之间的地盘，观察天下形势的变化。
English: The great-grandfather Cao Cao and Yuan Shao confronted each other at Guandu. Yuan Shao sent people to Liu Biao for help. Liu Biao said that he agreed, but did not send troops or help Cao Cao. He only wanted to preserve his own power, occupy the space between the Han Dynasty and the Chinese Empire, and observe the changes in the world situation.

古文：从事中郎韩嵩、别驾刘先说表曰： 豪杰并争，两雄相持，天下之重，在於将军。
现代文：从事中郎韩嵩和别驾刘先劝说刘表： 现在天下英雄群起争夺天下，曹操和袁绍两军相持不下，所以匡护汉室，重振社稷的重任，都系在将军您的身上。
English: Han Song, who was engaged in the middle, and Liu Xian, who was not, persuaded Liu Bei: Now that the world's heroes are flocking to compete for the world, Cao Cao and Yuan Shao's two armies cannot stand against each other. Therefore, the important task of protecting the Han Dynasty and revitalizing the society is on your shoulders as a general.

古文：将军若欲有为，起乘其弊可也；若不然，固将择所从。
现代文：将军您如果想要成就一番作为，可以乘着现在二人相争的机会寻找建功立业的时机；如果不行动，也应该在二人中选一人依附。
English: General, if you want to achieve the best performance, you can take advantage of the current opportunity for the two to compete to find opportunities for achievement; if you do not act, you should also choose one of the two to rely on.

古文：将军拥十万之众，安坐而观望。
现代文：将军您拥有数万人马，怎么能不行动而只是观望形势呢？
English: General, you have tens of thousands of soldiers, how can you not act and just watch the situation?

古文：夫见贤而不能助，请和而不得，此两怨必集於将军，将军不得中立矣。
现代文：但如果看到贤能的人不去帮助，答应了别人的事又没有完成，那日后两方的怨恨一定都集中在将军身上，将军是不能保持中立的。
English: But if you see that a man of virtue does not help, promises something to someone else and does not fulfill it, the resentment of both sides after that day will certainly be concentrated on the general. The general cannot remain neutral.

古文：夫以曹公之明哲，天下贤俊皆归之，其势必举袁绍。
现代文：曹操是有雄才大略的人，天下贤能之人大多都依附他，他打败袁绍的一定的。
English: Cao Cao was a man of great talent, and most of the world's capable people depended on him. He was certain to defeat Yuan Shao.

古文：然后称兵以向江汉，恐将军不能御也。
现代文：等到他打败袁绍再出兵攻打江汉，恐怕将军您是无法抵抗的。
English: I'm afraid you won't be able to resist until he defeats Yuan Shao and then sends troops to attack Jianghan.

古文：故为将军计者，不若举州以附曹公，曹公必重德将军；长享福祚，垂之后嗣，此万全之策也。 
现代文：所以现在为将军您着想，不如献出荆州投靠曹操，曹操一定会以更大的仁德来回报您，那您就可以一直享受荣华富贵，也能将财富和爵位一直传给子孙后代，这对您来说才是万全之策啊。 
English: So now, for the sake of the general, it is better to offer Jingzhou to Cao Cao. Cao Cao will surely reward you with greater benevolence. Then you can always enjoy the glory and wealth, and you can pass on the wealth and title to future generations. This is the best solution for you.

古文：表大将蒯越亦劝表，表狐疑，乃遣嵩诣太祖以观虚实。
现代文：刘表手下的大将蒯越也这样劝告他，但刘表心中还有疑虑，就派遣韩嵩到太祖曹操那里观察情况。
English: Liu Biao's general Zou Yue also advised him in this way, but Liu Biao still had doubts in his heart and sent Han Song to Cao Cao to observe the situation.

古文：嵩还，深陈太祖威德，说表遣子入质。
现代文：韩嵩回来之后，极力述说曹操的深恩厚德，劝说刘表送儿子刘琮到许都作为人质。
English: After Han Song returned, he tried his best to describe Cao Cao's deep benevolence and persuade Liu Biao to send his son Liu Xuan to Xuadu as a hostage.

古文：表疑嵩反为太祖说，大怒，欲杀嵩，考杀随嵩行者，知嵩无他意，乃止。
现代文：刘表怀疑韩嵩是在为曹操游说自己，心中大怒，想要杀了韩嵩，又让人严刑拷打跟随韩嵩出使的人，直到将人打死，也没有问出韩嵩私通曹操的消息，这才确定韩嵩并没有险恶的用意，才没有杀了他。
English: Liu Biao suspected that Han Song was lobbying for Cao Cao himself. He was furious and wanted to kill Han Song. He also had people severely torture the people who followed Han Song's envoys until they were killed. He also did not ask about Han Song's illicit relationship with Cao Cao. This confirmed that Han Song did not have sinister intentions, so he did not kill him.

古文：表虽外貌儒雅，而心多疑忌，皆此类也。
现代文：刘表虽然外表看起来儒雅随和，但内心多疑好猜忌，这次韩嵩的事件就是这样。
English: Although Liu Biao looks elegant and easy-going on the outside, he is suspicious and suspicious on the inside. This incident with Han Song is just like that.

古文：刘备奔表，表厚待之，然不能用。
现代文：刘备在徐州被曹操打败，就想投靠刘表，刘表给予他优厚的待遇，但并没有重用。
English: Liu Bei was defeated by Cao Cao in Xuzhou, so he wanted to rely on Liu Biao. Liu Biao gave him generous treatment, but did not reuse.

古文：建安十三年，太祖征表，未至，表病死。
现代文：建安十三年，太祖曹操率军讨伐刘表，但军队还没有到荆州，刘表就已经病死。
English: In the 13th year of Jianan, the great-grandfather Cao Cao led the army to fight Liu Biao, but the army had not yet arrived in Jingzhou, and Liu Biao had already died of illness.

古文：初，表及妻爱少子琮，欲以为后，而蔡瑁、张允为之支党，乃出长子琦为江夏太守，众遂奉琮为嗣。
现代文：当初，刘表和他的妻子非常宠爱小儿子刘琮，想让他作为自己的继承人，刘表的部将蔡瑁、张允也拥立刘琮，就将长子刘琦派到江夏担任太守，刘表死后，众人就拥立刘琮继位。
English: At first, Liu Biao and his wife were very fond of their youngest son, Liu Hui, and wanted him to be their heir. Liu Biao's generals, Cai Hui and Zhang Yun, also supported Liu Hui, so they sent their eldest son, Liu Hui, to Jiangxia to serve as governor-general. After Liu Biao's death, everyone supported Liu Hui's succession.

古文：琦与琮遂为雠隙。
现代文：刘琦和刘琮两兄弟就结下了仇怨。
English: The two brothers, Liu Hui and Liu Hui, began to have a grudge.

古文：越、嵩及东曹掾傅巽等说琮归太祖，琮曰： 今与诸君据全楚之地，守先君之业，以观天下，何为不可乎？ 
现代文：后来大将军蒯越、从事中郎韩嵩和东曹掾傅巽等人劝说刘琮归附曹操，刘琮说： 现在我与各位占据着楚国的地盘，守着先父留下的基业，观察天下的形势，有什么不好呢？ 
English: Later, the great general Zou Yue, the middlemen Han Song and Dong Cao Cao Fu Han, and others persuaded Liu Bei to join Cao Cao. Liu Bei said: Now that I and all of you occupy the territory of Chu, guard the inheritance left by my father, and observe the situation of the world, what is wrong with it?

古文：巽对曰： 逆顺有大体，强弱有定势。
现代文：傅巽回答说： 反对与归顺要看谁更符合天下大义，力量的强弱也会随着形势变化而变化。
English: Fu Rong replied, "Opposition and submission depend on who is more in line with the great principles of the world, and the strength and weakness of forces will also change with changes in the situation.

古文：以人臣而拒人主，逆也；以新造之楚而御国家，其势弗当也。
现代文：现在我们身为臣子，却抵抗天子，这是大逆行为；依靠刚兴盛起来的土地来抵御国家的军队，一定是没有办法抵抗的。
English: Now we, as courtiers, are resisting the Son of Heaven, which is a great act of rebellion; relying on the newly flourishing land to resist the national army, there must be no way to resist.

古文：以刘备而敌曹公，又弗当也。
现代文：况且我们凭借刘备来抵御曹操的军队，也是抵挡不了的。
English: Moreover, we rely on Liu Bei to resist Cao Cao's army, which is also irresistible.

古文：三者皆短，欲以抗王兵之锋，必亡之道也。将军自料何与刘备？ 琮曰： 吾不若也。 
现代文：这三者都是我们的短处，我们处于这样的劣势却还想和国家的军队相抗衡，是一定会灭亡的。将军您认为自己和刘备谁更厉害呢？ 刘琮说： 我比不上刘备。 
English: These three are our weaknesses. If we are at such a disadvantage and still want to compete with the national army, we will surely perish. General, who do you think is more powerful than Liu Bei? Liu Bei said: I am not as good as Liu Bei.

古文：巽曰： 诚以刘备不足御曹公乎，则虽保楚之地，不足以自存也；诚以刘备足御曹公乎，则备不为将军下也。愿将军勿疑。 
现代文：傅巽说： 假如刘备也不能抵御曹操大军，那么您的广大土地就算能保住，也不足以让您继续担任荆州牧享受富贵的；假如刘备能成功抗击曹军，那以刘备的才能志向，一定不会甘心在您之下。希望将军不要再有疑虑了。 
English: Fu Yao said: If Liu Bei can't resist Cao Cao's army, then even if your vast land can be preserved, it won't be enough for you to continue to enjoy the riches as Jingzhou herdsman; if Liu Bei can successfully resist Cao's army, then with Liu Bei's talent ambition, it will not be willing to be under you. I hope the general will not have any more doubts.

古文：太祖军到襄阳，琮举州降。
现代文：刘琮听从了傅巽的话，等到曹操大军来到襄阳，刘琮就带领整个荆州的官吏军队和百姓归降了朝廷。
English: Liu Bei listened to Fu Xi's words. When Cao Cao's army arrived in Xiangyang, Liu Bei led the entire army of officials and people of Jingzhou to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：备走奔夏口。
现代文：刘备没有了倚靠，只好逃奔到夏口。
English: With no one to rely on, Liu Bei had no choice but to flee to Xiakou.

古文：太祖以琮为青州刺史、封列侯。
现代文：曹操以朝廷的名义任命刘琮为青州刺史，封为列侯。
English: Cao Cao, in the name of the imperial court, appointed Liu Ye as the governor of Qingzhou and made him a vassal lord.

古文：蒯越等侯者十五人。
现代文：从大将军蒯越以下被封侯的有十五人。
English: Fifteen people were given the title of feudal lord, from the great general Hao Yue on down.

古文：越为光禄勋；嵩，大鸿胪；羲，侍中；先，尚书令；其馀多至大官。
现代文：又提升蒯越为光禄大夫，韩嵩为大鸿胪，邓羲为侍中，刘先为尚书令。其他许多人也都当了大官。
English: In addition, Gong Yue was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, Han Song was promoted to Dahong Jun, Deng Jun was promoted to Chamberlain, Liu Xian was promoted to Senior Secretary, and many others were promoted to high-ranking officials.

古文：评曰：董卓狼戾贼忍，暴虐不仁，自书契已来，殆未之有也。
现代文：评曰：董卓凶残狠毒，残暴无道，自从有记载的历史，大概还没有像他这样的。
English: The review said: "Dong Zhuo is ferocious, cruel and ruthless. Since recorded history, there has probably never been anyone like him.

古文：袁术奢淫放肆，荣不终己，自取之也。
现代文：袁术骄奢淫逸，奢侈放诞，最后没能延续富贵，都是自己咎由自取。
English: Yuan Shuxu's arrogance, extravagance and debauchery, and finally his failure to maintain his wealth, are all his own fault.

古文：袁绍、刘表，咸有威容、器观，知名当世。
现代文：袁绍、刘表，都是容貌威严，相貌堂堂又有才能，在当时都是知名的人物。
English: Yuan Shao and Liu Biao were both dignified, handsome and talented, and were well-known figures at the time.

古文：表跨蹈汉南，绍鹰扬河朔，然皆外宽内忌，好谋无决，有才而不能用，闻善而不能纳，废嫡立庶，舍礼崇爱，至于后嗣颠蹙，社稷倾覆，非不幸也。
现代文：刘表势力横跨汉南，袁绍在河朔地区大展拳脚，但都是外表宽和内心好猜忌，有谋划但犹豫不决，身边有贤人却不能重用，得到好的谏言却不能采纳，都因为宠爱幼子而舍弃嫡长子，让庶子作为继承人，抛掉礼法，凭自己的喜好做事，以至于继嗣的后人做事忙乱急迫，丧失手中的势力，这不是因为运气不好。
English: Liu Biao's influence spread across Hannan, Yuan Shao's in the Hexuo region, but both were outwardly broad and inwardly suspicious, had plans but hesitated, had sages around them but could not reuse them, received good advice but could not adopt it, abandoned their eldest son because they loved their youngest son, let their illegitimate son be the heir, abandoned etiquette, and did things according to their own preferences, so that the heir's descendants did things in a hurry and lost their power. This was not because of bad luck.

古文：昔项羽背范增之谋，以丧其王业；绍之杀田丰，乃甚於羽远矣！
现代文：从前项羽没有听从范增的谋划，失掉了大好的局势；而袁绍杀掉谋士田丰，又比项羽做的事更严重了！
English: Previously, Xiang Yu did not listen to Fan Zeng's plan and lost a great situation; and Yuan Shao killed the strategist Tian Feng, which was more serious than what Xiang Yu did!

