古文：韩暨字公至，南阳堵阳人也。
现代文：韩暨，字公至，南阳郡堵阳县人。
English: Han Ji, Zi Gong Zi, Nanyang County, Duyang County.

古文：同县豪右陈茂，谮暨父兄，畿至大辟。
现代文：同县的豪门大族陈茂，诬陷韩暨的父亲兄长，几乎导致他们被判死刑。
English: Chen Mao, a member of a wealthy family from the same county, framed Han Ji's father and brother, which almost led to them being sentenced to death.

古文：暨阳不以为言，庸赁积资，阴结死士，遂追呼寻禽茂，以首祭父墓，由是显名。
现代文：韩暨表面上没有说什么，但受人雇佣积累资财，暗中结交死士，就喊着搜寻并擒获陈茂，将他的首级拿到父亲的墓前祭扫，因此就出了名。
English: Han Ji didn't say anything on the surface, but he was hired to accumulate wealth and secretly befriended the dead man. He shouted to search for and capture Chen Mao, and took his head to his father's grave for a ceremonial sweeping, so he became famous.

古文：举孝廉，司空辟，皆不就。
现代文：他被推举为孝廉，被司空征召，他都没有赴任。
English: He was elected as a filial piety and was called up by the Air Force, but he did not take up the post.

古文：乃变名姓，隐居避乱鲁阳山中。
现代文：还改名换姓，隐居在鲁阳山中躲避祸乱。
English: He also changed his name and lived in seclusion in the Luyang Mountains to avoid misfortune.

古文：山民合党，欲行寇掠。
现代文：山中的百姓聚集成党羽，打算前去劫掠。
English: The people in the mountains gathered into a party, intending to go on a looting spree.

古文：暨散家财以供牛酒，请其渠帅，为陈安危。
现代文：韩暨用自己的家财供买来牛酒，延请他们的首领，向他陈述安危的利害关系。
English: Han Ji used his family's money to buy beef and wine, and invited their leader to tell him about the dangerous situation.

古文：山民化之，终不为害。
现代文：山民被感化，最终也没有作乱。
English: The mountain people were influenced and eventually did not riot.

古文：避袁术命召，徙居山都之山。
现代文：韩暨为了避开袁术的征召，迁居到山都县的山中。
English: In order to avoid Yuan Shu's conscription, Han Cum moved to the mountains of Shandu County.

古文：荆州牧刘表礼辟，遂遁逃，南居孱陵界，所在见敬爱，而表深恨之。
现代文：荆州牧刘表以礼征召，韩暨就逃走了，往南居住在孱陵县界内，在的地方都受到敬爱，但刘表心中对他很怨恨。
English: Han Ji fled when Liu Biao, the governor of Jingzhou, was called up for military service. He went south to live within the borders of Fuling County. He was loved everywhere, but Liu Biao held a grudge against him.

古文：暨惧，应命，除宜城长。
现代文：韩暨害怕，就接受任命，担任除宜城的县长。
English: Afraid, Han Ji accepted the appointment and served as the governor of the county except for Yicheng.

古文：太祖平荆州，辟为丞相士曹属。
现代文：太祖平定荆州后，征召担任丞相士曹属。
English: After the great-grandfather Pingding Jingzhou, he was conscripted to serve as the prime minister Cao Zhen.

古文：后选乐陵太守，徙监冶谒者。
现代文：后来被选为乐陵太守，转任监冶谒者。
English: Later, he was selected as the governor of Le Ling and transferred to the post of supervisor of metallurgy.

古文：旧时冶作马排，每一熟石用马百匹；更作人排，又费功力；暨乃因长流为水排，计其利益，三倍於前。
现代文：过去铸造用马力转动的鼓风器具，又改为依靠人力人力制作，但耗时耗力；韩暨就顺着水流制造了靠水流推动的器具，计算效率，比之前快了三倍。
English: In the past, the foundry used horsepower to rotate the blower, but it was changed to rely on human labor to produce, but it took time and effort; Hanji followed the water flow to produce a device driven by the water flow, and the calculation efficiency was three times faster than before.

古文：在职七年，器用充实。
现代文：韩暨在任职上七年，乐陵的物资器具都很充足。
English: In Han Ji's first seven years in office, the materials and equipment in Le Ling were all sufficient.

古文：制书褒叹，就加司金都尉，班亚九卿。
现代文：太祖就下令嘉奖，加授他为司金都尉，地位仅次于九卿。
English: The great-grandfather ordered a reward, and he was awarded the rank of lieutenant-governor, second only to the nine nobles.

古文：文帝践阼，封宜城亭侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，韩暨被封为宜城亭侯。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Han Ji was given the title of Prince of Yicheng.

古文：黄初七年，迁太常，进封南乡亭侯，邑二百户。
现代文：黄初七年，又被提升为太常，晋封南乡亭侯，食邑二百户
English: In the seventh year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, he was promoted to Taizhong again, and was given the title of Nanxiang Tinghou, with more than 200 households in the food village

古文：时新都洛阳，制度未备，而宗庙主祏皆在邺都。
现代文：当时刚迁都洛阳，各种制度还没有完善，而且宗庙中的祖先牌位，都还在邺城。
English: At that time, the capital had just moved to Luoyang, various systems had not yet been perfected, and the ancestor plaques in the ancestral temple were still in Lucheng.

古文：暨奏请迎邺四庙神主，建立洛阳庙，四时蒸尝，亲奉粢盛。
现代文：韩暨上奏请求奉迎迎接邺城四庙中的先祖牌位，并修建洛阳庙，一年四时的祭祀，可以亲自奉上祭品。
English: Hanjin and Shangso requested to welcome the ancestors of the four temples in Fucheng, and to build Luoyang Temple. It is a four-hour ritual every year, and you can personally present the offerings.

古文：崇明正礼，废去淫祀，多所匡正。
现代文：尊崇修正礼法，废除不合礼制的祭祀，大多都被纠正过来。
English: The reverence for the revised etiquette and the abolition of inappropriate rituals have mostly been rectified.

古文：在官八年，以疾逊位。
现代文：韩暨在官位上八年，因为生病退位。
English: Han Ji, who had been in office for eight years, abdicated due to illness.

古文：景初二年春，诏曰： 太中大夫韩暨，澡身浴德，志节高絜，年逾八十，守道弥固，可谓纯笃，老而益劭者也。
现代文：景初二年春天，明帝诏令说： 太中大夫韩暨，修持操行，推崇仁德，志向节操高尚，已经将近八十岁，坚守的道义更加稳固，可以说是淳朴笃实，年纪大却更加自强啊。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Jingchu era, Emperor Ming decreed: "Grandmaster Han Ji, who practices virtue, promotes benevolence, and has noble aspirations, is nearly eighty years old, and his adherence to morality is more stable. It can be said that he is simple and honest, but he is more self-reliant when he is older."

古文：其以暨为司徒。 
现代文：现在任命他为司徒。 
English: Now appoint him as a magistrate.

古文：夏四月薨，遗令敛以时服，葬为土藏。谥曰恭侯。
现代文：同年四月，韩暨去世，临终前嘱咐家人用平时的衣服入殓，用土下葬。谥号为恭侯。
English: In April of the same year, Han Ji passed away. Before his death, he instructed his family members to wrap him in his usual clothes and bury him in the ground. His posthumous name was Gonghou.

古文：子肇嗣。
现代文：他的儿子韩肇承袭爵位。
English: His son Sima Zhao succeeded to the throne.

古文：肇薨，子邦嗣。
现代文：韩肇去世后，儿子韩邦继承。
English: After Han Zhao's death, his son Han Bangsong succeeded him.

古文：崔林字德儒，清河东武城人也。
现代文：崔林，字德儒，清河郡东武城人。
English: Cui Lin, also known as De Ru, is from Dongwu City, Qinghe County.

古文：少时晚成，宗族莫知，惟从兄琰异之。
现代文：年纪比较大时才有成就，族中的人都不了解他，只有堂兄崔琰认为他有奇才。
English: He achieved success only when he was older. No one in his family knew him, and only his cousin, Cui Wei, thought he was a genius.

古文：太祖定冀州，召除邬长，贫无车马，单步之官。
现代文：太祖平定冀州，征召崔林为邬县县长，崔林贫困，没有车马，就步行赴任。
English: The great ancestor pacified Jizhou and conscripted Cui Lin to be the county governor of Handan County. Cui Lin was poor and did not have a car or horse, so he walked to the post.

古文：太祖征壶关，问长吏德政最者，并州刺史张陟以林对，於是擢为冀州主簿，徙署别驾、丞相掾属。
现代文：太祖征讨壶关，询问长吏中谁最有德政，并州刺史张陟回答说是崔林，于是太祖提升崔林为冀州主簿，又调任署别驾、丞相掾属。
English: The great-great-grandfather inquired about Juguan, asked who among the officials was the most virtuous, and the state chief historian Zhang Ye answered that it was Cui Lin, so the great-great-grandfather promoted Cui Lin to the main book of Jizhou, and transferred the appointment of the department to Beigai, and the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：魏国既建，稍迁御史中丞。
现代文：魏国建立后，崔林渐渐升任御史中丞。
English: After the establishment of the State of Wei, Cui Lin gradually rose to the position of goshi chujo.

古文：文帝践阼，拜尚书，出为幽州刺史。
现代文：文帝登基后，崔林担任尚书，又出京担任幽州刺史。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Cui Lin served as Shangshu, and also went to Beijing to serve as Yuzhou Shishi.

古文：北中郎将吴质统河北军事，涿郡太守王雄谓林别驾曰： 吴中郎将，上所亲重，国之贵臣也。
现代文：北中郎将吴质统管河北地区的军事，涿郡太守王雄对崔林的别驾说： 吴中郎将，是陛下亲近倚重的，国家的重臣。
English: Northern Vice Admiral Wu Chung-ling will be in charge of the military in the Hebei region, and Wang Xiong, the governor of Min County, said to Cui Lin's farewell: Wu Chung-ling is a close and important national dignitary.

古文：仗节统事，州郡莫不奉笺致敬，而崔使君初不与相闻。
现代文：持符节主管军事，各州郡没有不奉上书信表示敬重的，但崔使君从一开始就不联络他。
English: He was in charge of the military during the Chinese New Year, and every prefecture and county showed their respect by sending him a letter, but Cui Shijun did not contact him from the very beginning.

古文：若以边塞不脩斩卿，使君宁能护卿邪？ 
现代文：如果他因为边境事务没有得到整治而斩杀您，使君怎么能护住您呢？ 
English: If he kills you because border affairs are not rectified, how can you protect you?

古文：别驾具以白林，林曰： 刺史视去此州如脱屣，宁当相累邪？
现代文：崔林的别驾将这些话详细地告诉曹霖，曹霖说： 我将辞去刺史的官职看得和脱去鞋子一样，怎么会牵连你呢？
English: Cui Lin's escort told Cao Lin these words in detail. Cao Lin said, "I will regard my resignation from the post of chief historian as the same as taking off my shoes. How could I implicate you?"

古文：此州与胡虏接，宜镇之以静，扰之则动其逆心，特为国家生北顾忧，以此为寄。 
现代文：这个州和少数民族相连，应该用平静的方式来镇抚，扰动他们就会触动他们反叛的想法，这样就为国家生出要顾虑北面的忧患，所以才这样维系。 
English: The state is connected to the minority ethnic groups and should be pacified in a peaceful manner. Disturbing them will trigger their rebellious thoughts, which will create troubles for the country to worry about in the north, which is why it is maintained in this way.

古文：在官一期，寇窃寝息；犹以不事上司，左迁河间太守，清论多为林怨也。
现代文：崔林在位期间，贼寇的侵扰都停息了；但吴质仍然以他不侍奉上级的罪名，将他降职为河间太守，但舆论大多都为崔林不平。
English: During the reign of Cui Lin, the intrusion of thieves and robbers stopped; however, Wu Qian still accused him of not serving his superiors and demoted him to the position of the governor of Hebei Province, but most of the public opinion was against Cui Lin.

古文：迁大鸿胪。
现代文：崔林升任大鸿胪。
English: Cui Lin was promoted to Da Hongzhu.

古文：龟兹王遣侍子来朝，朝廷嘉其远至，褒赏其王甚厚。
现代文：龟兹王派侍子来朝见，朝廷赞赏他们远道而来，赏赐了很贵重的礼物。
English: King Kamezi sent his attendants to see the emperor, and the imperial court appreciated their coming all the way from afar and rewarded them with a very valuable gift.

古文：馀国各遣子来朝，间使连属，林恐所遣或非真的，权取疏属贾胡，因通使命，利得印绶，而道路护送，所损滋多。
现代文：其他国家也自己派世子来朝见，使节来往接连不断，崔林担心派来的世子前来朝见，不是他们真正的目的，只是想要暂时获得魏朝的力量抵御胡人，才互通使节，得到利益和印信绶带，而朝廷上路上护送使者，所耗费的更多。
English: Other countries also sent their own emissaries to the imperial court, and the envoys kept coming and going. Cui Lin was worried that the emissaries sent to the imperial court were not their real purpose, but only wanted to temporarily gain the strength of the Wei Dynasty to resist the Hu people. Only then did they exchange envoys, get benefits and seal the umbilical cord, while the imperial court spent more on escorting the envoys on the road.

古文：劳所养之民，资无益之事，为夷狄所笑，此曩时之所患也。
现代文：劳动国家的百姓，做很多无益的事，被外族人嘲笑，这是过去担忧的事情。
English: In the past, it was a matter of concern that the people of a laboring country would do a lot of useless things and be ridiculed by foreigners.

古文：乃移书敦煌喻指，并录前世待遇诸国丰约故事，使有恒常。
现代文：就写信到敦煌郡，并在信中记录了前代对待各国或丰富、或简薄的旧例，让这样的事有一定的规定。
English: He wrote to Dunhuang County and recorded in the letter the old example of the previous generation's treatment of countries, which was either rich or simple, so that there would be certain rules for such a thing.

古文：明帝即位，赐爵关内侯，转光禄勋、司隶校尉。
现代文：明帝登基后，赐封崔林的爵位为关内侯，又转任光禄勋、司隶校尉。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he gave Choe Lin the title of Guan Nei Hou, and he was also transferred to the post of Guanglu Hun and Sili Lieutenant.

古文：属郡皆罢非法除过员吏。
现代文：下属的州郡都罢免了违法的官员、整顿有过失的官员。
English: All the subordinate prefectures and counties have dismissed the officials who violated the law and rectified the negligent officials.

古文：林为政推诚，简存大体，是以去后每辄见思。
现代文：崔林处理政事推崇诚信，简略但识大体，所以他离开后经常思念他。
English: Cui Lin dealt with political affairs and advocated honesty, brevity but knowledge in general, so he often missed him after he left.

古文：散骑常侍刘劭作考课论，制下百僚。
现代文：散骑常侍刘劭制定考课论，制度规定所有官员都包括在内。
English: Liu Wei, the imperial equestrian, formulated the examination theory, and the system stipulated that all officials were included.

古文：林议曰： 案周官考课，其文备矣，自康王以下，遂以陵迟，此即考课之法存乎其人也。
现代文：崔林议论说： 查阅《周官》中考核官员的制度，他的条文很详尽，从周康王以后，就渐渐地凋敝了，这就是为什么考核官员的制度是依据人来看的。
English: Cui Lin commented: "Checking the system of assessing officials in "Zhou Guan," his provisions are very detailed. Since King Zhou Kang, it has gradually faded away. That is why the system of assessing officials is based on people.

古文：及汉之季，其失岂在乎佐吏之职不密哉？
现代文：到了汉朝末年，制度的过失难道是在于官员的职守不够严密吗？
English: Towards the end of the Han Dynasty, was it the fault of the system that officials' duties were not strict enough?

古文：方今军旅，或猥或卒，备之以科条，申之以内外，增减无常，固难一矣。
现代文：现在的军队，有的鄙陋有的战力不足，准备好条文律令，在内外部反复申明，但是人数的增减没有定数，本来就很难一致。
English: The current army, some of which are despicable and some of which are understrength, has prepared regulations and rules, and has repeatedly affirmed them both internally and externally. However, the increase and decrease in the number of personnel is not fixed, and it is difficult to be consistent.

古文：且万目不张举其纲，众毛不整振其领。
现代文：况且众人抓不住重点时，就要列举出重点内容，头发不整齐时，就在整理衣领。
English: Moreover, when everyone cannot grasp the key points, it is necessary to list the key contents, and when the hair is not neat, it is necessary to sort out the collar.

古文：皋陶仕虞，伊尹臣殷，不仁者远。
现代文：皋陶在虞舜部下为官，伊尹身为殷朝的臣子，不仁德的人都会远离。
English: Juntao was an official under Yu Xi, and Yi Yin was a vassal of the Yin Dynasty. Those who are not benevolent will stay away.

古文：五帝三王未必如一，而各以治乱。
现代文：三皇五帝的治理不一定是一样的，各自会出现清明或混乱的情况。
English: The governance of the three emperors and five emperors is not necessarily the same, and each will have a clear or chaotic situation.

古文：易曰： 易简，而天下之理得矣。
现代文：《易经》上说 换成简明的制度，天下间的事理就能明白了。 
English: According to the I Ching, if we change to a concise system, we will be able to understand the world's affairs.

古文：太祖随宜设辟，以遗来今，不患不法古也。
现代文：太祖根据实际情况制定法度，流传到今天，不担心自己没有效法古人。
English: Taizu made laws according to the actual situation and passed them down to this day. He did not worry that he did not follow the example of the ancients.

古文：以为今之制度，不为疏阔，惟在守一勿失而已。
现代文：我认为现在的制度，不应是粗略不周密的，只是在于坚持执行不要放弃。
English: In my opinion, the current system should not be rough and imprecise, but only insist on implementation and not give up.

古文：若朝臣能任仲山甫之重，式是百辟，则孰敢不肃？ 
现代文：如果朝臣们能承担仲山甫那样的重任，就算有一百条律令，谁敢不忠于职守呢？ 
English: If the courtiers can bear the heavy responsibility like Zhongshan Fu, even if there are a hundred laws and regulations, who would dare to be disloyal to their duties?

古文：景初元年，司徒、司空并缺，散骑侍郎孟康荐林曰： 夫宰相者，天下之所瞻效，诚宜得秉忠履正本德仗义之士，足为海内所师表者。
现代文：景初元年，司徒、司空的职位都空缺，散骑常侍孟康举荐崔林说： 宰相，是天下人都仰望效仿的，实在应该是秉持忠义、行为正直、品德高尚，行事公正，足以成为天下表率的人来担任。
English: At the beginning of the 1st year of Jing, the positions of Sito and Sikuo were all vacant, and Meng Kang, the strolling attendant, recommended Cui Lin and said: Prime Minister, is what the world looks up to and emulates, it should really be a person who upholds loyalty, acts honestly, has high moral character, and acts fairly, enough to become a role model for the world.

古文：窃见司隶校尉崔林，禀自然之正性，体高雅之弘量。
现代文：我私下观察司隶校尉崔林，秉持自然的正直性情，践行高雅的气量。
English: Privately, I observed Sili Captain Cui Lin, upholding the natural honest temperament and practicing the elegant temperament.

古文：论其所长以比古人，忠直不回则史鱼之俦，清俭守约则季文之匹也。
现代文：将他的长处和古人比较，他的忠直不屈就是史鱼这样的同类，他的清净节俭保持德行，能跟季文相比。
English: Comparing his strengths with the ancients, his loyalty and indomitability is the same as that of Shi Yu, and his cleanliness and frugality maintain virtue, which can be compared with Ji Wen.

古文：牧守州郡，所在而治，及为外司，万里肃齐，诚台辅之妙器，衮职之良才也。 
现代文：在州郡担任掌管，所在的地方都治理得很好，等到他主管一个部门，辖区内安定整饬，实在是能担任台辅的人才，能做三公的贤良啊。 
English: He was in charge of the state and county, and the places where he was were well governed. When he was in charge of a department, and the area under his jurisdiction was stable and orderly, he was really a talented person who could serve as a Taiwanese assistant, and he was a virtuous person who could be one of the three princes.

古文：后年遂为司空，封安阳亭侯，邑六百户。
现代文：第二年崔林就被任命为司空，又封为安阳亭侯，食邑六百户。
English: In the second year, Cui Lin was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force, and was also named the Anyang Pavilion, with 600 households.

古文：三公封列侯，自林始也。
现代文：所以以三公身份被封为列侯的事例，是从崔林开始的。
English: Therefore, the case of being appointed as a vassal lord with the status of the three princes began with Cui Lin.

古文：顷之，又进封安阳乡侯。
现代文：不久，又被晋升为安阳乡侯。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the position of Anyang Township Mayor.

古文：鲁相上言： 汉旧立孔子庙，褒成侯岁时奉祠，辟雍行礼，必祭先师，王家出谷，春秋祭祀。
现代文：鲁国国相上书说： 从前汉朝设立孔子庙，褒成侯每年都会有祭祀，学校要举办仪式，一定先祭祀先师，又王室提供谷物，春秋两季都会有祭扫。
English: Lu Guo Guo Xiang wrote: Confucius Temple was set up in the former Han Dynasty. There will be a sacrifice every year for the Confucius, the school will hold a ceremony, the teacher must be sacrificed first, and the royal family will provide grain. There will be a festival sweep in spring and autumn.

古文：今宗圣侯奉嗣，未有命祭之礼，宜给牲牢，长吏奉祀，尊为贵神。 制三府议，博士傅祗以春秋传言立在祀典，则孔子是也。
现代文：现在宗圣侯延续孔子的后代，没有祭祀的利益，应该提供祭祀的牲口，派长官前去供奉祭扫，尊奉孔子为贵神。 明帝让司徒、司空、司马三府商议这件事，博士傅祗认为，按照《春秋传》上所说享受祭祀的礼仪的要求，孔子是符合条件的。
English: The descendants of Confucius, who are now the descendants of Zong Sheng Hou, do not have the benefit of sacrifice, so they should provide sacrificial animals, send officials to offer sacrifices, and worship Confucius as a noble god. Emperor Ming asked the three prefectures of Sittu, Siku, and Sima to discuss this matter. Dr. Fu Xi believed that according to the requirements of enjoying the ritual of sacrifice mentioned in "Spring and Autumn Biography," Confucius was eligible.

古文：宗圣適足继绝世，章盛德耳。
现代文：宗圣侯想要充分地延续已经断绝的世系，是为了彰显孔子盛大的德行罢了。
English: Zong Sheng Hou wanted to fully continue the lineage that had been cut off, in order to highlight the great virtue of Confucius.

古文：至於显立言，崇明德，则宜如鲁相所上。
现代文：至于使孔子的学说得以弘扬，美好的德行得到推崇，那就一个个向鲁国国相所上奏的那样。
English: As for the promotion of the teachings of Confucius and the promotion of good moral conduct, it is the same as what was done to the princes of the Lu Kingdom.

古文：林议以为 宗圣侯亦以王命祀，不为未有命也。
现代文：崔林的意见认为 宗圣侯也是按照王命祭祀的，不能说没有王命。
English: Cui Lin's opinion is that Zong Sheng Hou was also sacrificed according to the king's order, and it cannot be said that there is no king's order.

古文：周武王封黄帝、尧、舜之后，及立三恪，禹、汤之世，不列于时，复特命他官祭也。
现代文：周武王加封黄帝、尧、舜的后代，等到确立了封前代三王朝的子孙，给以王侯名号，到了大禹、商汤的的时代，在当时没有确立这样的制度，又特地命令其他官员前去祭祀。
English: King Zhou Wu added the titles of the descendants of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Zhou and Emperor Zhao, and waited until the descendants of the previous three dynasties were established, giving them the title of prince. In the era of Dayu and Shangtang, such a system was not established at that time, and other officials were specially ordered to go to the sacrifice.

古文：今周公已上，达於三皇，忽焉不祀，而其礼经亦存其言。
现代文：现在从周公往上，一直到三皇，都忽略了没有祭祀，但祭祀的礼节在《周礼》中有记载。
English: Nowadays, from Zhou Gong (Emperor Zhou) all the way up to the Third Emperor, no sacrifices are omitted, but the etiquette of sacrifices is recorded in the "Zhou Ritual."

古文：今独祀孔子者，以世近故也。
现代文：现在只祭祀孔子，是因为他的时代比较近。
English: Now, only Confucius is worshipped, because his era is relatively recent.

古文：以大夫之后，特受无疆之祀，礼过古帝，义逾汤、武，可谓崇明报德矣，无复重祀於非族也。 
现代文：孔子以大夫的身份，却享受没有穷尽的祭祀，礼节超过的古代帝王，在道义上也超过了商汤、周武王，可以说是尊崇身份，报答恩惠了，不需要再让不是他后代的人来祭祀了。 
English: As a doctor, Confucius enjoyed an inexhaustible supply of sacrifices. He surpassed the ancient emperors in etiquette, and also surpassed Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu in morality. It can be said that his status was respected and his favors were repaid. There was no need for people who were not his descendants to make sacrifices.

古文：明帝又分林邑，封一子列侯。
现代文：明帝又将崔林的食邑分出来，封他的一个儿子为列侯。
English: Emperor Ming also separated the food towns of Cui Lin and made one of his sons a vassal lord.

古文：正始五年薨，谥曰孝侯。
现代文：正始五年崔林去世，谥号为孝侯。
English: At the beginning of the fifth year, Cui Lin died, and his posthumous name was Xiaohou.

古文：子述嗣。
现代文：他的儿子崔述承袭爵位。
English: His son, Uwenshu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：高柔字文惠，陈留圉人也。
现代文：高柔，字文惠，陈留郡圉县人。
English: Gao Rong, also known as Wen Hui, is a native of Chenlu County.

古文：父靖，为蜀郡都尉。
现代文：父亲高靖，是蜀郡的都尉。
English: His father, Gao Jing, was the captain of Shu County.

古文：柔留乡里，谓邑中曰： 今者英雄并起，陈留四战之地也。
现代文：高柔留在家乡，对同乡人说： 现在天下英雄都在起兵，陈留郡是四面交战会波及的地方。
English: Gao Rong stayed in his hometown and said to his fellow villagers: "Nowadays, heroes all over the world are raising an army. Chenliu County is a place that will be affected by the war on all sides.

古文：曹将军虽据兖州，本有四方之图，未得安坐守也。
现代文：曹将军虽然占据了衮州，但他本来就有图谋天下的野心，不能安坐坚守的。
English: Although General Cao occupied Zhangzhou, he originally had the ambition of plotting the world, and could not sit still.

古文：而张府君先得志於陈留，吾恐变乘间作也，欲与诸君避之。 
现代文：而太守张邈先在陈留得到了好处，我担心变故将要发生了，想要和各位一同出去躲避。 
English: However, Zhang Xuanxian, the grand marshal, benefited from Chen's stay. I was worried that something was going to happen and wanted to go out with everyone to avoid it.

古文：众人皆以张邈与太祖善，柔又年少，不然其言。
现代文：大家都认为张邈和太祖关系好，高柔年纪又小，不相信他的话。
English: Everyone thought that Zhang Ye had a good relationship with his grandfather, and that Gao Rong was too young to believe his words.

古文：柔从兄幹，袁绍甥也，在河北呼柔，柔举宗从之。
现代文：高柔的堂兄高幹，是袁绍的外甥，在河北地区召唤高柔，高柔带领族人前去跟随。
English: Gao Jiao's cousin Gao Gan, the nephew of Yuan Shao, summoned Gao Jiao in Hebei, and Gao Jiao led the tribesmen to follow him.

古文：会靖卒於西州，时道路艰涩，兵寇纵横，而柔冒艰险诣蜀迎丧，辛苦荼毒，无所不尝，三年乃还。
现代文：正赶上高靖在西州去世，当时路途艰险难走，路上又有乱兵和贼寇横行霸道，而高柔冒着艰险到蜀地去迎父亲尸骨回乡，一路上辛酸毒害，没有不遇到的，三年之后才得以回来。
English: It was just in time for Gao Jing to die in Xizhou. At that time, the road was arduous and perilous, and there were rampaging soldiers and bandits on the road, and Gao Rong risked the hardships to go to Shudi to welcome his father's body back to his hometown. Along the way, he encountered bitterness and poison, and was only able to return three years later.

古文：太祖平袁氏，以柔为县长。
现代文：太祖平定袁氏，让高柔担任县长。
English: The great-grandfather pacified the Yuan clan and let Gao Rong serve as the county governor.

古文：县中素闻其名，奸吏数人，皆自引去。
现代文：县中的人向来都听说高柔的大名，有几个奸诈的吏役，都自己离开了。
English: People in the county have always heard of the daimyo of Goryeo, and several treacherous officials have left on their own.

古文：柔教曰： 昔邴吉临政，吏尝有非，犹尚容之。
现代文：高柔教导说： 从前邴吉处理政事，官吏们曾经有过失，尚且包容他们。
English: Gao Ju said, "In the past, the government affairs were handled by Xingji, and the officials made mistakes, but they tolerated them.

古文：况此诸吏，於吾未有失乎！
现代文：更何况这几位吏役，对我没有什么过失呢！
English: What's more, these officials have done nothing wrong to me!

古文：其召复之。 
现代文：还是将他们召回来吧。 
English: Let's call them back.

古文：咸还，皆自励，咸为佳吏。
现代文：几个吏役都回来了，都勉励自己，后来都成了很好吏役。
English: Several officials came back, encouraged themselves, and later became good officials.

古文：高幹既降，顷之以并州叛。
现代文：高幹投降之后，不久又依靠并州反叛。
English: After Gao Jian's surrender, he soon resorted to annexation and rebelled.

古文：柔自归太祖，太祖欲因事诛之，以为刺奸令史。
现代文：高柔自己归附太祖，太祖想要借事情杀掉他，就任命他为刺奸令史。
English: Gao Rong ascribed himself to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather wanted to use the incident to kill him, so he appointed him as the assassin.

古文：处法允当，狱无留滞，辟为丞相仓曹属。
现代文：高柔执法公正适当，案件没有滞留，太祖又征召他为丞相仓曹属。
English: Gao Rong's law enforcement was fair and appropriate, and the case was not delayed. Grandfather also conscripted him as the prime minister of Cang Cao.

古文：太祖欲遣锺繇等讨张鲁，柔谏，以为今猥遣大兵，西有韩遂、马超，谓为己举，将相扇动作逆，宜先招集三辅，三辅苟平，汉中可传檄而定也。
现代文：太祖想要派钟繇征讨张鲁，高柔劝谏，认为现在突然派遣大臣，西面有韩遂、马超，他们会认为是要对自己行动，将会互相扇动反叛，应该先招揽三辅地区，如果这里平定了，汉中地区也就能只需要传檄文就能平定了。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to send Zhong Xuan to recruit Zhang Lu and Gao Rong to persuade Zhu Rong, and thought that if he suddenly sent ministers, such as Han Sui and Ma Chao to the west, they would think that he wanted to act against himself, and they would incite each other to rebel. He should first recruit the Sanfu area. If this area was pacified, the Hanzhong area could also be pacified with only the transmission of Xuanwen.

古文：繇入关，遂、超等果反。
现代文：钟繇进入函谷关后，韩遂、马超等人果然反叛了。
English: After Jonghyun entered Hangeul Pass, Han Sui, Ma Chao and others rebelled.

古文：魏国初建，为尚书郎。
现代文：魏国建立之初，高柔被任命为尚书郎，转任丞相理曹掾。
English: When the State of Wei was first established, Xu Xi was Shang Shuro.

古文：转拜丞相理曹掾，令曰： 夫治定之化，以礼为首。
现代文：太祖下令说： 治理安定国家的教化，应该将礼放在首位。
English: The great-grandfather ordered: "In order to govern a stable country and educate people, we should put courtesy first.

古文：拨乱之政，以刑为先。
现代文：平定动乱的政策，应该以刑罚为先。
English: The policy of pacifying the turmoil should be based on punishment first.

古文：是以舜流四凶族，皋陶作士。汉祖除秦苛法，萧何定律。
现代文：所以舜帝舜流放四个凶族，任命皋陶为卿士；汉高祖废除秦朝严苛的律法，由萧何制定刑律。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qian expelled four barbarian tribes and appointed Juntao as a noble; Emperor Gaozu abolished the harsh laws of the Qin Dynasty, and Xiao He formulated the criminal law.

古文：掾清识平当，明于宪典，勉恤之哉！ 
现代文：丞相理曹掾高柔有高见卓识，处事公平得当，对宪法刑典很熟悉，要努力啊！ 
English: Vice-Minister of Justice Li Cao Wei Gao Rong is highly insightful, handles things fairly and appropriately, and is very familiar with the Constitutional Criminal Code. We must work hard!

古文：鼓吹宋金等在合肥亡逃。
现代文：负责仪仗乐队的宋金等人在合肥逃跑。
English: Song Jin, who was in charge of the ceremonial band, and others fled in Hefei.

古文：旧法，军征士亡，考竟其妻子。
现代文：按照旧时律法，大军出征而士兵逃跑，要鞭打拷问他的妻子孩子。
English: According to the old law, if a large army went out and a soldier ran away, his wife and children were to be whipped and interrogated.

古文：太祖患犹不息，更重其刑。
现代文：太祖担心逃跑的事不能制止，又加重了刑罚。
English: Fearing that the escape could not be stopped, the great-grandfather increased the punishment.

古文：金有母妻及二弟皆给官，主者奏尽杀之。柔启曰： 士卒亡军，诚在可疾，然窃闻其中时有悔者。
现代文：宋金有母亲妻子两人和两个弟弟，都被抓到官府，主管的官员上奏要将他们都杀了、高柔陈述说： 士兵逃出军队，实在很可恨，但我私下认为其中经常有后悔的。
English: Song Jin has a mother, two wives and two younger brothers, all of whom have been arrested by the government. The officials in charge have demanded that they all be killed. Gao Rong said: "It is really hateful for soldiers to escape from the army, but I secretly think that they often regret it.

古文：愚谓乃宜贷其妻子，一可使贼中不信，二可使诱其还心。
现代文：我的愚见认为应该宽恕他们的妻子孩子，一方面可以让逃兵在逃跑过程中心中不安，另一方面也可以诱导他回来的想法。
English: My foolish idea that their wives and children should be pardoned, on the one hand, can make the deserter feel uneasy in the middle of the escape process, on the other hand, it can also induce him to come back.

古文：正如前科，固已绝其意望，而猥复重之，柔恐自今在军之士，见一人亡逃，诛将及己，亦且相随而走，不可复得杀也。
现代文：像之前的刑罚，本来已经断绝了他们回来的念头，却还要家中，我担心现在在军中的士兵，看到一个人逃跑，诛杀的刑罚会牵连到自己，也会跟着一起逃走，也就不能杀掉他们了。
English: Like the previous punishment, which had already cut off their desire to return, but they still want to go home, I am worried that soldiers who are currently in the army will see a person escape, and the punishment of killing will involve themselves, and they will also escape together, and they will not be able to kill them.

古文：此重刑非所以止亡，乃所以益走耳。 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：这样的重刑不是能制止逃跑的办法，只是会让士兵跑得更多。 太祖说： 好。 
English: Such a severe punishment is not a way to stop the escape, but will only make the soldiers run more.

古文：即止不杀金母、弟，蒙活者甚众。
现代文：立即停止下令，没有杀掉宋金的母亲、弟弟，蒙受不杀而活下来的人很多。
English: An immediate stop was ordered, but Song Jin's mother and younger brother were not killed. Many people survived without being killed.

古文：迁为颍川太守，复还为法曹掾。
现代文：高柔调任颍川太守，又回朝担任法曹掾。
English: He was transferred to Gaoju to serve as the governor of Beichuan, and then returned to the imperial court to serve as the legal adviser to the emperor.

古文：时置校事卢洪、赵达等，使察群下，柔谏曰： 设官分职，各有所司。
现代文：当时设置了卢洪、赵达等人做为校事，让他们监察官员，高柔劝谏说： 设置官职，分派职位，各自有所主管的。
English: At that time, Lu Hong, Zhao Da and others were set up as school affairs, let them supervise officials, and Gao Rong advised them to: set up official positions, assign positions, and supervise each other.

古文：今置校事，既非居上信下之旨。又达等数以憎爱擅作威福，宜检治之。 
现代文：现在设置校事，既不是上级官员相信下属的要义，还有赵达等人多次以自己的喜恶擅自作威作福，应该查验并惩处他们。 
English: Now that school affairs have been set up, it is not the superior officials who believe in the subordinates' essentials, but also Zhao Da and others who have repeatedly used their own likes and dislikes to arrogantly do good. They should be investigated and punished.

古文：太祖曰： 卿知达等，恐不如吾也。
现代文：太祖说： 您了解赵达等人的程度，恐怕比不上我啊。
English: Grandfather said, "I'm afraid you don't know Zhao Da and the others as well as I do.

古文：要能刺举而辨众事，使贤人君子为之，则不能也。
现代文：要能够检举并辨明官员们使事情，派贤能高尚的人来做这件事，那就做不到了。
English: To be able to denounce and identify the officials who are doing this, to have people of integrity doing this, that's not going to do it.

古文：昔叔孙通用群盗，良有以也。 
现代文：以前叔孙通任用很多盗贼，实在是有原因的。 
English: There's a reason why Uncle Sun Tong used to employ a lot of thieves.

古文：达等后奸利发，太祖杀之以谢於柔。
现代文：赵达等人后来非法谋取利益的事情泄露，太祖将他们杀了，向高柔道歉。
English: Zhao Da and others later divulged the illegal profit-seeking, and Taizu killed them and apologized to Gao Rong.

古文：文帝践阼，以柔为治书侍御史，赐爵关内侯，转加治书执法。
现代文：文帝登基后，让高柔担任治书侍御史，赐封爵位为关内侯，转而加官治书执法。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he made Gao Rong serve as the magistrate in charge of book-keeping, bestowed a peerage on him as the Guanai governor, and transferred him to the post of magistrate in charge of book-keeping.

古文：民间数有诽谤妖言，帝疾之，有妖言辄杀，而赏告者。
现代文：民间多次出现诋毁或迷惑人的言论，文帝很厌恶，出现传播妖异邪说的人就杀掉，并且奖赏上告的人。
English: The Emperor Wen was disgusted by the many slanderous or misleading remarks made by the common people. He killed those who spread strange and evil sayings, and rewarded those who appealed.

古文：柔上疏曰： 今妖言者必戮，告之者辄赏。
现代文：高柔上疏说： 现在传播妖异邪说的人一定被杀掉，上告的人就奖赏。
English: Gao Rong Shang Zuo said, "Nowadays, those who spread the demonic and heretical theories must be killed, and those who appeal will be rewarded.

古文：既使过误无反善之路，又将开凶狡之群相诬罔之渐，诚非所以息奸省讼，缉熙治道也。
现代文：既使得犯了错误的人没有重回善道的道路，又将会开启凶狠狡诈的人互相诬陷的风气，实在不是能依靠这个来平息奸邪，减少诉讼，成为光明的治理方法啊。
English: Not only will it make it impossible for those who have made mistakes to return to the path of righteousness, but it will also open up a culture of vicious and cunning people framing each other. It is really not possible to rely on this to quell evil, reduce lawsuits, and become a bright governance method.

古文：昔周公作诰，称殷之祖宗，咸不顾小人之怨。
现代文：过去周公制作诰命，称赞殷朝的先祖，都不顾小人的怨言。
English: In the past, Zhou Gong worked hard, praised the ancestors of the Yin Dynasty, and ignored the complaints of the villains.

古文：在汉太宗，亦除妖言诽谤之令。
现代文：在汉朝时，太宗刘盈也废除了惩罚妖异邪说和诋毁行为的条令。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Emperor Taizong Liu Ying also abolished the regulations for punishing witchcraft and defamation.

古文：臣愚以为宜除妖谤赏告之法，以隆天父养物之仁。 
现代文：臣愚见认为应该废除惩罚诽谤谣言、奖赏告发的法令以彰显上天滋养万物的仁德。 
English: In order to highlight the benevolence of heaven that nurtures all things, he thought that the laws that punish slander and rumor and reward whistleblowing should be abolished.

古文：帝不即从，而相诬告者滋甚。
现代文：文帝没有立即听从他的建议，而互相诬告的人越来越多。
English: Emperor Wen did not immediately follow his advice, and more and more people are making false accusations against each other.

古文：帝乃下诏： 敢以诽谤相告者，以所告者罪罪之。 
现代文：文帝才颁布诏令说： 胆敢有诬陷上告的，用他上告的人的罪名来惩治。 
English: It was only then that Emperor Wen issued a decree saying, "If anyone dares to make a false accusation, he shall be punished according to the crime of the person he has accused."

古文：於是遂绝。
现代文：于是这样的情况才断绝了。
English: This situation has now come to an end.

古文：校事刘慈等，自黄初初数年之间，举吏民奸罪以万数，柔皆请惩虚实；其馀小小挂法者，不过罚金。
现代文：校事刘兹等人，从黄初初年几年之间，检举了官吏百姓中有邪恶罪行的，有上万人，高柔都请求明确真是情况；剩下的违法比较轻的人，也只是处以罚金。
English: School official Liu Zi and others, from the first few years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, have reported tens of thousands of evil crimes committed by officials and ordinary people, and colleges and universities have requested to clarify the true situation; the remaining people with relatively minor violations are only fined.

古文：四年，迁为廷尉。
现代文：黄初四年，高柔升迁为廷尉。
English: In the fourth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Gao Rong was promoted to court lieutenant.

古文：魏初，三公无事，又希与朝政。
现代文：魏国初年，三公没有什么事务，也很少参与朝政。
English: In the first year of the Wei dynasty, the three princes did not have any affairs, and rarely participated in imperial politics.

古文：柔上疏曰： 天地以四时成功，元首以辅弼兴治；成汤仗阿衡之佐，文、武凭旦、望之力，逮至汉初，萧、曹之俦并以元勋代作心膂，此皆明王圣主任臣於上，贤相良辅股肱於下也。
现代文：高柔上疏说： 天地因为有四季才能有所收获，国家元首因为大臣的辅佐而振兴政治；成汤仰仗伊尹的辅佐，周文王、周武王凭借周公、姜子牙的力量，等到了汉朝初年，萧何、曹参等人都因为是建国元勋而成为高祖、惠帝的重臣，这些都是圣贤的君主在上任用贤臣，好的宰相大臣在下辅佐啊。
English: Gao Rong Shang Su said: Heaven and earth can reap something because of the four seasons, the head of state revitalizes politics because of the minister's assistant; Cheng Tong relies on the assistant of Yi Yin, King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu wait for the first year of the Han Dynasty with the strength of Zhou Gong and Jiang Ziga, Xiao He, Cao San and others have become the senior vassals of Gao Zu and Hui Di because they are the founding fathers of the country. These are the wise and virtuous monarchs appointing wise and virtuous vassals, and the good prime minister minister is the next assistant.

古文：今公辅之臣，皆国之栋梁，民所具瞻，而置之三事，不使知政，遂各偃息养高，鲜有进纳，诚非朝廷崇用大臣之义，大臣献可替否之谓也。
现代文：现在国家的三公，都是国家的栋梁之臣，都是百姓仰望的，但现在却将政事放在旁边，不让他们了解政务，所以他们才各自修养闲居，很少有进谏献言，实在不是朝廷任用大臣的要义啊，或者大臣可以建言献策的情况啊。
English: At present, the three princes of the country are the pillars of the country, and they are looked up to by the people, but now they put politics aside and do not allow them to understand government affairs. Therefore, they only cultivate themselves and stay idle. They rarely make suggestions. This is really not the essence of the appointment of ministers by the imperial court, or the situation in which the minister can make suggestions.

古文：古者刑政有疑，辄议於槐棘之下。
现代文：古代对于刑律政策有疑问，就在听讼的地方商议。
English: In ancient times, if there was any doubt about criminal law policy, it was discussed at the place of hearing.

古文：自今之后，朝有疑议及刑狱大事，宜数以咨访三公。
现代文：从现在以后，朝廷中有疑难问题或者刑律案件等大事，应多次询问三公。
English: From now on, when there is a difficult question or a criminal case in the imperial court, the three princes should be asked many times.

古文：三公朝朔望之日，又可特延入，讲论得失，博尽事情，庶有裨起天听，弘益大化。 
现代文：三公在每月初一、十五朝见的时间，也可以特地请入朝中，议论国家政事的得失，广泛地讲清事实，应该会对陛下治理有益，弘扬国家的教化。 
English: When the three princes meet in the morning on the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month, they can also be specially invited to the middle of the country to discuss the gains and losses of national politics and clarify the facts extensively. This should be beneficial to His Majesty's governance and promote the enlightenment of the country.

古文：帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：文帝赞许并采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：帝以宿嫌，欲枉法诛治书执法鲍勋，而柔固执不从诏命。
现代文：文帝因为过去的嫌隙，想要冤枉并诛杀治书执法鲍勋，而高柔坚持没有从命。
English: Because of a past grudge, Emperor Wen wanted to wrongly accuse and kill the law enforcer Bao Xun, but Gao Rong insisted that he did not follow his orders.

古文：帝怒甚，遂召柔诣台；遣使者承指至廷尉考竟勋，勋死乃遣柔还寺。
现代文：文帝大怒，将高柔召到尚书台；并派使者带着自己的旨意到廷尉拷问鲍勋至死，鲍勋死后才让高柔回到廷尉。
English: Emperor Wen was furious and summoned Gao Rong to Shang Shudai; he also sent an envoy with his own will to the courtier to torture Bao Xun to death. After Bao Xun's death, Gao Rong was allowed to return to the courtier.

古文：明帝即位，封柔延寿亭侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，赐封高柔为延寿亭侯。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Gao Rong was given the title of Enju Ting.

古文：时博士执经，柔上疏曰： 臣闻遵道重学，圣人洪训；褒文崇儒，帝者明义。
现代文：当时博士在执经讲学，高柔上疏说： 臣听说遵循先王之道、重视学术，是圣人远大的教诲；嘉奖文章，推崇儒学，是帝王知悉的道理。
English: At that time, the doctor was giving a lecture on the teachings of Confucianism, and he said: "I have heard that following the way of the former king and attaching importance to scholarship are the lofty teachings of the sage; the article of commendation and the promotion of Confucianism are the principles that the emperor knows.

古文：昔汉末陵迟，礼乐崩坏，雄战虎争，以战陈为务，遂使儒林之群，幽隐而不显。
现代文：过去汉朝末年，礼仪乐章都崩坏了，各方势力交战不止，将作战阵法看做重要事务，所以使得儒生学士们，都潜藏起来没有显名。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, the etiquette movements had all collapsed, and the forces of all sides were constantly at war, and the battle array method was regarded as an important matter, so the Confucian bachelors were hidden and did not become famous.

古文：太祖初兴，愍其如此，在於拨乱之际，并使郡县立教学之官。
现代文：太祖刚兴盛时，感慨这样的事情，在平定战乱的时候，还让各郡县设立教学的官吏。
English: When Taizu was just beginning to prosper, he was moved by such things, and when the war was over, he also allowed each county to set up teaching officials.

古文：高祖即位，遂阐其业，兴复辟雍，州立课试，於是天下之士，复闻庠序之教，亲俎豆之礼焉。
现代文：高祖登基后，就进一步实行这样的方式，兴建学校，州郡设立考核制度，于是天下间的士人，重新得以接受学校的教化，能亲近祭祀的礼节。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he further implemented this method by building schools and establishing an assessment system for prefectures and counties. As a result, the world's scholars were once again able to accept the enlightenment of schools and become familiar with the etiquette of sacrifice.

古文：陛下临政，允迪叡哲，敷弘大猷，光济先轨，虽夏启之承基，周成之继业，诚无以加也。
现代文：到了陛下亲政，认真遵循先王的圣明训导，传播弘扬大道，发扬先王的法度，即使是夏启继承基业，周成王延续大统，实在也不能超过您。
English: When it comes to your majesty's personal governance, conscientiously following the sage teachings of the former king, spreading and promoting the road, and carrying forward the laws of the former king, even if Xiaqi inherits the inheritance and Zhou Cheng Wang continues the great tradition, it really can't surpass you.

古文：然今博士皆经明行脩，一国清选，而使迁除限不过长，惧非所以崇显儒术，帅励怠惰也。
现代文：但现在的博士都是经学渊博，德行美善，是国家挑选出来的人才，但是他们的升迁任命都没有超过县长的职位，我担心这不是推崇显扬儒学，勉励懈怠懒惰之人的办法。
English: But today's doctors are all well-educated, virtuous and good, and are talents selected by the state, but their promotion and appointment have not exceeded the position of county governor. I am afraid that this is not a way to promote Confucianism and encourage lazy people.

古文：孔子称 举善而教不能则劝 ，故楚礼申公，学士锐精，汉隆卓茂，搢绅竞慕。
现代文：孔子说 选拔好的来教导，不够好的就劝导 ，所以楚国礼待申公，士人学子锐意进取，汉朝推崇卓茂，官员绅士都争相仰慕。
English: Confucius said, "Select a good one to teach, and a not-so-good one to persuade." Therefore, the state of Chu treats Shen Gong with courtesy, scholars and students are determined to forge ahead, the Han Dynasty promotes Zhuo Mao, and officials and gentlemen all admire each other.

古文：臣以为博士者，道之渊薮，六艺所宗，宜随学行优劣，待以不次之位。
现代文：臣认为博士，是道义集中的，是将六艺看做宗旨的，应该依据他们的学问品行高低，授予他们不同的职位。
English: In the opinion of the minister, the doctor is morally concentrated, and regards the six arts as the purpose. They should be awarded different positions according to their academic performance.

古文：敦崇道教，以劝学者，於化为弘。 
现代文：推崇道义教化，以勉励求学的人，对教化也有发扬的作用。 
English: People who promote moral education and encourage students to study have a positive effect on education.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：明帝采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：后大兴殿舍，百姓劳役；广采众女，充盈后宫；后宫皇子连夭，继嗣未育。
现代文：后来明帝大修宫殿，征发百姓劳役；广泛地采选秀女，充实后宫；后宫中的皇子接连夭折，继承人没有能诞育。
English: Later, Emperor Ming overhauled the palace, conscripted the common people into labor service; extensively selected beautiful women to enrich the harem; the princes in the harem died young one after another, and no heirs could be born.

古文：柔上疏曰： 二虏狡猾，潜自讲肄，谋动干戈，未图束手；宜畜养将士，缮治甲兵，以逸待之。
现代文：高柔上疏说： 吴国、蜀国两个敌寇狡猾，暗中自己潜心学习，计划着要挑起战事，没有想着要停手；我们应该扶植培养士兵，整顿武器铠甲，用准备好的状态来等待他们的行动。
English: Gao Ju Shang Zuo said: The two enemy invaders of Wu and Shu were cunning and secretly studied hard. They planned to start a war, but did not think about stopping. We should support and train soldiers, rectify weapons and armor, and wait for their actions with a prepared state.

古文：而顷兴造殿舍，上下劳扰；若使吴、蜀知人虚实，通谋并势，复俱送死，甚不易也。
现代文：但最近大修宫殿，上下的人都辛劳烦忧；如果让吴国、蜀国的人知道我们的情况，联合谋划，合兵进攻，一起前来死战，对我们来说是很不容易对付的。
English: But recently, the palace has been overhauled, and people up and down have been working hard and worrying; if we let the people of Wu and Shu know our situation, jointly plan, attack together, and come to fight to the death together, it will be very difficult for us to deal with.

古文：昔汉文惜十家之资，不营小台之娱；去病虑匈奴之害，不遑治第之事。
现代文：从前汉文帝爱惜十户人家这样小的财物，不修建小台阁来娱乐；霍去病忧虑匈奴的祸患，没有闲暇来考虑修建府邸的事。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty cherished such small belongings as ten households, and did not build small pavilions for entertainment; he was worried about illness and the scourge of the Xiongnu, and had no leisure time to consider building a mansion.

古文：况今所损者非惟百金之费，所忧者非徒北狄之患乎？
现代文：更何况现在所损耗的不只是一百金的费用，所忧虑的不只是北面夷狄的祸患呢？
English: What's more, what is being lost now is not just the cost of a hundred gold coins, and what is worried about is not just the scourge of the northern barbarians?

古文：可粗成见所营立，以充朝宴之仪。
现代文：可以简略地修缮已经建成的宫殿，以做为举办朝会和宴席的地方。
English: The palace, which has already been built, can be briefly renovated to serve as a venue for imperial meetings and banquets.

古文：乞罢作者，使得就农。
现代文：臣请求停止修建工人的工作，让他们得以回家从事农业。
English: The minister requested that the work of the construction workers be stopped so that they could return home and engage in agriculture.

古文：二方平定，复可徐兴。
现代文：等到吴、蜀两国平定之后，再慢慢地修建。
English: Wait until the two countries of Wu and Shu are pacified, and then slowly build.

古文：昔轩辕以二十五子，传祚弥远；周室以姬国四十，历年滋多。
现代文：过去轩辕氏有二十五各儿子，皇位得以流传得很长久；周王室因为有四十个姬姓诸侯国，周朝所经历的时间更多。
English: In the past, the Xuanzang clan had twenty-five sons, and the imperial throne was able to be passed down for a long time; the Zhou dynasty experienced more time because the Zhou royal family had forty dynasties.

古文：陛下聪达，穷理尽性，而顷皇子连多夭逝，熊罴之祥又未感应。
现代文：陛下聪慧明达，能看清事物的理性，但最近皇子接连夭折了很多，生育儿子的吉兆又没有出现感应。
English: His Majesty is intelligent and astute, and can see the rationality of things, but recently many princes have died in quick succession, and there has been no sign of a son being born.

古文：群下之心，莫不悒戚。
现代文：朝臣们的心情，没有不抑郁哀戚的。
English: The mood of the courtiers is nothing short of depressed and mournful.

古文：周礼，天子后妃以下百二十人，嫔嫱之仪，既以盛矣。
现代文：按照《周礼》，天子的后妃以下有一百二十人，而宫中女官的人数，也已经很多了。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," there are one hundred and twenty empresses under the emperor, and the number of maids of honor in the palace has also increased.

古文：窃闻后庭之数，或复过之，圣嗣不昌，殆能由此。
现代文：臣私下听说后宫的嫔妃数量，也许还超过这个数，陛下的后嗣不兴盛，大概是因为这个情况。
English: Privately, the minister heard that the number of concubines in the harem may even exceed this number, and that His Majesty's heirs are not flourishing, probably because of this situation.

古文：臣愚以为可妙简淑媛，以备内官之数，其馀尽遣还家。
现代文：臣的愚见认为可以精选娴静温雅的女子，以充实后宫的人数，其他的全都遣送回家。
English: The minister foolishly thought that he could handpick quiet, elegant women to fill the harem, and send everyone else home.

古文：且以育精养神，专静为宝。
现代文：使陛下得以修养精神，将沉静不浮躁做为法宝。
English: So that His Majesty can cultivate his spirit and regard calmness and impetuousness as a magic weapon.

古文：如此，则螽斯之徵，可庶而致矣。 
现代文：这样，那子嗣繁盛的征兆，不久之后就会出现了。 
English: Thus, the sign of the prosperity of the seed will soon appear.

古文：帝报曰： 知卿忠允，乃心王室，辄克昌言；他复以闻。 
现代文：明帝回复说： 我知道您是忠诚公允的，心系王室，经常表达很好的意见；其他的事已经知道了。 
English: Emperor Ming replied: I know that you are loyal and fair, that you care about the royal family, and that you often express good opinions; the rest is already known.

古文：时猎法甚峻。
现代文：当时关于狩猎的律法很严峻。
English: At the time, hunting laws were strict.

古文：宜阳典农刘龟窃於禁内射兔，其功曹张京诣校事言之。
现代文：宜阳典农刘龟偷偷在禁区内射猎兔子，他的功曹张京到校事那里将这件事告诉他。
English: Liu Turtle, a farmer from Yiyang, secretly shot a rabbit in the restricted area. His hero Zhang Jing went to the school to tell him about it.

古文：帝匿京名，收龟付狱。
现代文：明帝隐瞒张京的名字，将刘龟收押投入大牢。
English: Emperor Ming concealed Zhang Jing's name and sent Liu Kame to prison.

古文：柔表请告者名，帝大怒曰： 刘龟当死，乃敢猎吾禁地。
现代文：高柔上表请求告知上告者的名字，明帝大怒说： 刘龟应该处死，他胆敢在我的禁地中射猎。
English: Gao Rong requested to know the name of the petitioner on the table, and Emperor Ming said angrily: Liu Turtle should be put to death, he dared to shoot in my forbidden land.

古文：送龟廷尉，廷尉便当考掠，何复请告者主名，吾岂妄收龟邪？ 
现代文：将刘龟送到廷尉，廷尉就应该拷问他，为什么还要知道上告人的名字，我难道会胡乱收押刘龟吗？ 
English: If Liu Kamei is sent to the imperial lieutenant, the imperial lieutenant should interrogate him. Why does he need to know the name of the petitioner? Will I arbitrarily detain Liu Kamei?

古文：柔曰： 廷尉，天下之平也，安得以至尊喜怒而毁法乎？ 
现代文：高柔说： 廷尉，是天下最公平的地方，怎么能因为陛下的喜怒而毁坏法令呢？ 
English: Gao Rong said, "Lieutenant, this is the fairest place in the world. How can you destroy the law because of your majesty's emotions?

古文：重复为奏，辞指深切。
现代文：他反复上奏，言辞深刻恳切。
English: He played it over and over, his words deep and earnest.

古文：帝意寤，乃下京名。
现代文：明帝的想法才醒悟过来，才将张京的名字告诉。
English: It was only when he came to his senses that he revealed Zhang Jing's name.

古文：即还讯，各当其罪。
现代文：高柔立即回去审问，各自承担自己的罪名。
English: Gao Rong immediately went back to interrogate, and they each took their own responsibility.

古文：时制，吏遭大丧者，百日后皆给役。
现代文：当时的法制，吏役遇到家中有大丧的，一百天之后都要接受役使。
English: According to the legal system at that time, if an official encountered a bereaved family member, he or she had to accept the official's service after 100 days.

古文：有司徒吏解弘遭父丧，后有军事，受敕当行，以疾病为辞。
现代文：有个司徒吏叫解弘的父亲去世，后来国家有军事行动，他收到命令应该前往，他以自己生病为由推辞了。
English: A probation officer told him that his father had died, and then there was a military operation in the country, and he received an order to go, but he refused, saying that he was ill.

古文：诏怒曰： 汝非曾、闵，何言毁邪？ 
现代文：明帝大怒，诏令说： 你不是曾参和闵损，为什么要说自己生病？ 
English: Emperor Ming was furious and issued a decree saying: You once participated in a war, why did you say you were ill?

古文：促收考竟。
现代文：然后催促着收押他并拷打至死。
English: They then urged him to be detained and tortured to death.

古文：柔见弘信甚羸劣，奏陈其事，宜加宽贷。
现代文：高柔看到解弘实在是很羸弱，就上奏陈述这个事实，认为应该加以宽恕。
English: Gao Rong saw that Xie Hong was really very weak, and went on to state this fact, believing that he should be forgiven.

古文：帝乃诏曰： 孝哉弘也！其原之。 
现代文：明帝才下诏说： 解弘真是孝顺啊！还是原谅他吧。 
English: Emperor Ming only issued an edict saying: "Xie Hong is really a filial son! You should still forgive him."

古文：初，公孙渊兄晃，为叔父恭任内侍，先渊未反，数陈其变。
现代文：当初，公孙渊的兄长公孙晃，为他的叔父公孙恭到朝中侍奉，之前公孙渊还没有反叛，就几次向明帝陈述公孙渊有叛变的想法。
English: At the beginning, Gongsun Yuan's elder brother Gongsun Akira served his uncle Gongsun Gong in the imperial court. Gongsun Yuan had not rebelled before, so he told Emperor Ming several times that Gongsun Yuan was planning to rebel.

古文：及渊谋逆，帝不忍巿斩，欲就狱杀之。
现代文：等到公孙渊谋反，明帝不忍心将公孙晃在集市上斩首，想要在大牢中杀了他。
English: When Gongsun Yuan plotted a rebellion, Emperor Ming could not bear to decapitate Gongsun Gao in the marketplace and wanted to kill him in the dungeon.

古文：柔上疏曰： 书称 用罪伐厥死，用德彰厥善 ，此王制之明典也。
现代文：高柔上疏说： 《尚书》中说 用刑罚来惩罚罪行，用德行来彰显善举 ，这是国家制度的明正法典。
English: Gao Ju Shang Zuo said: "In the Shang Shu, it is said that crimes should be punished with punishments, and good deeds should be highlighted with virtues, which is a clear code of the national system.

古文：晃及妻子，叛逆之类，诚应枭县，勿使遗育。
现代文：公孙晃和他的妻子孩子，和叛贼是亲戚，实在应该斩首，不要让他们留下，反而出现祸患。
English: Gongsun Ao and his wife and children, who are related to the traitors, should really be beheaded. Don't let them stay, and instead, a disaster will occur.

古文：而臣窃闻晃先数自归，陈渊祸萌，虽为凶族，原心可恕。
现代文：而臣私下听说公孙晃之前有好几次自己归顺，陈述公孙渊反叛的祸患征召萌发，虽然是叛贼的同族，但根据他的心意，还是可以宽恕的。
English: However, the vassal had heard in private that Gongsun Akira had submitted several times before, stating that the evil of Gongsun Yuan's rebellion had sprouted, and although he was a fellow traitor, he could still be forgiven according to his heart.

古文：夫仲尼亮司马牛之忧，祁奚明叔向之过，在昔之美义也。
现代文：仲尼解决了司马牛的忧虑，祁奚懂得叔向的过失，在过去是美好的仁义。
English: Zhongni solved Sima Niu's worries, and Zou understood Uncle Xiang's mistake, which was a wonderful benevolence in the past.

古文：臣以为晃信有言，宜贷其死；苟自无言，便当巿斩。
现代文：臣认为公孙晃如果真的有这样的话，应该宽恕他的死罪；如果没有这样的话，就应该在市集上斩首。
English: The vassal thought that if Gongsun Aro really had such a case, his capital crime should be pardoned; if not, he should be beheaded at the market.

古文：今进不赦其命，退不彰其罪，闭著囹圄，使自引分，四方观国，或疑此举也。 
现代文：现在既不赦免他的死罪，又不表明他的罪行，将他关押在牢狱之中，让他自己引咎自杀，那天下各国，有的就会质疑这样的举动。 
English: If he is not pardoned for his capital crime, if his crime is not revealed, if he is kept in prison, and if he commits suicide by his own fault, then some countries in the world will question such a move.

古文：帝不听，竟遣使赍金屑饮晃及其妻子，赐以棺、衣，殡敛於宅
现代文：明帝没有听从，最后派人给公孙晃和他妻子孩子送去了黄金粉末，让他们吞服自杀，赐给他们棺木、寿衣，在自己家中入殓下葬。
English: Emperor Ming disobeyed, and finally sent someone to send gold powder to Gongsun Aro and his wife and children, so that they would commit suicide, give them a coffin and a shroud, and bury them in their own home.

古文：是时，杀禁地鹿者身死，财产没官，有能觉告者厚加赏赐。
现代文：当时的法律，射杀禁地的鹿的人要被处死，他的财产也没收入官府中，如果有能发觉并上告的，多加赏赐。
English: According to the law at the time, anyone who shot a deer in a prohibited area was to be executed, and his property was not received by the government. If anyone could find out and appeal, they would be rewarded.

古文：柔上疏曰： 圣王之御世，莫不以广农为务，俭用为资。
现代文：高柔上疏说： 圣明的帝王治理天下，没有不将推广农桑作为要事，节俭用度，积累财富的。
English: Gao Jiu Shang Zuo said: The emperor of the holy light governs the world, and there is no one who does not take the promotion of agricultural mulberry as an important matter, use it sparingly, and accumulate wealth.

古文：夫农广则谷积，用俭则财畜，畜财积谷而有忧患之虞者，未之有也。
现代文：农桑得以推广发展，那粮食就能积累，用度节俭，那财富就能积聚，财富积聚粮食季节，这样还有出现灾祸的担忧的，没有过这样的情况。
English: If the agricultural mulberry can be promoted and developed, then the grain can be accumulated, and if the grain can be used sparingly, then the wealth can be accumulated, and the wealth can be accumulated during the grain season. If there is fear of disaster, there has never been such a situation.

古文：古者，一夫不耕，或为之饥；一妇不织，或为之寒。
现代文：自古以来，一个农夫不耕作，就有人因此挨饿;一个妇女不织布，就有人因此受寒。
English: Since time immemorial, if a farmer does not plough, someone will starve; if a woman does not weave, someone will freeze.

古文：中间已来，百姓供给众役，亲田者既减，加顷复有猎禁，群鹿犯暴，残食生苗，处处为害，所伤不赀。
现代文：最近以来，百姓要先解决劳役的事情，能亲自耕种的已经很少了，再加上现在又有狩猎的禁令，群鹿侵扰残害，损害禾苗，到处形成灾害，所损伤的不计其数。
English: Since recently, the people have to solve the labor service issue first, and there are very few people who can cultivate by themselves. In addition, there is now a ban on hunting, the deer invade and damage, damage the seedlings, and cause disasters everywhere, and the damage is countless.

古文：民虽障防，力不能御。
现代文：百姓虽然树立屏障来预防，但他们的力量不足以抵挡。
English: Although the people set up a barrier to prevent it, their strength is not enough to resist.

古文：至如荥阳左右，周数百里，岁略不收，元元之命，实可矜伤。
现代文：以至于荥阳周围几百里，年岁不好，收获很少，百姓的性命，实在是令人怜悯感伤。
English: So that there are hundreds of miles around Fenyang, the years are not good, the harvest is small, and the lives of the people are really pitiful and sentimental.

古文：方今天下生财者甚少，而麋鹿之损者甚多。
现代文：现在天下生产财富的人很少，但群鹿损害的财富很多。
English: Nowadays, there are few people in the world who produce wealth, but there is a lot of wealth that is damaged by deer.

古文：卒有兵戎之役，凶年之灾，将无以待之。
现代文：如若突然有军事行动，又有荒年的灾害，将会没有办法解决了。
English: If there is a sudden military action, and there are disasters in a bad year, there will be no way to solve it.

古文：惟陛下览先圣之所念，愍稼穑之艰难，宽放民间，使得捕鹿，遂除其禁，则众庶久济，莫不悦豫矣。 
现代文：希望陛下思考现代帝王们所考虑的，体恤耕种劳作的艰难，放宽民间百姓的禁令，让他们可以捕猎群鹿，就消除了禁地，那百姓们有了长久的生计，那就没有吧欢欣雀跃的。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will think about what modern emperors have considered, sympathize with the hardships of farming and labor, relax the ban on the common people, allow them to hunt deer, and eliminate the forbidden land. If the people have a long-term livelihood, then there will be no joy.

古文：顷之，护军营士窦礼近出不还。
现代文：不久，护军营士窦礼出营后没有回来。
English: Soon after, camp guard Dou Li left the camp and did not return.

古文：营以为亡，表言逐捕，没其妻盈及男女为官奴婢。
现代文：军中认为他是逃跑了，上表认为应该派人追捕，将他的妻子盈氏和家中男女收入官府中做奴婢。
English: The army thought that he had run away, and the upper table thought that someone should be sent to hunt him down and take his wife, Ying, and all the men and women in the family to work as servants in the government.

古文：盈连至州府，称冤自讼，莫有省者。
现代文：盈氏连续到州府中，诉说冤屈为自己诉讼，但没有过问。
English: Ms. Ying went to the prefectural government in succession, complaining that the grievance was her own lawsuit, but she was not questioned.

古文：乃辞诣廷尉。
现代文：盈氏就到廷尉上告。
English: Ms. Ying went to appeal to a court official.

古文：柔问曰： 汝何以知夫不亡？ 
现代文：高柔问说： 你怎么知道你的丈夫不是逃跑？ 
English: Gaurav asked: How do you know your husband is not running away?

古文：盈垂泣对曰： 夫少单特，养一老妪为母，事甚恭谨，又哀儿女，抚视不离，非是轻狡不顾室家者也。 
现代文：盈流着泪回答说： 我的丈夫年少时就很孤单，奉养一位老妇人，将她看做自己的母亲，侍奉非常恭敬谨慎，又爱护子女，抚养照看没有离开过，不是轻佻狡诈不顾及家人的人。 
English: With tears streaming down her face, Ying replied, "My husband was very lonely when he was young. He took care of an old woman and regarded her as his mother. He served her with great respect and care, and he loved his children. He never left to take care of them. He is not a man who is frivolous and cunning and does not care about his family.

古文：柔重问曰： 汝夫不与人有怨雠乎？ 
现代文：高柔又问说： 你的涨肚没有和人有仇怨吗？ 
English: Goju asked again, "Doesn't your bloated belly have any grudge against anyone?"

古文：对曰： 夫良善，与人无雠。 
现代文：她回答说： 我的丈夫善良忠厚，没有和人结仇。 
English: She answered, My husband is a good and faithful man; he will have no quarrel with anyone.

古文：又曰： 汝夫不与人交钱财乎？ 对曰： 尝出钱与同营士焦子文，求不得。 
现代文：高柔又问： 你的丈夫没有和人有钱财来往吗？ 盈回答说： 他曾经借钱给同营军士焦子文，没能把钱要回来。 
English: Gao Rong also asked, "Didn't your husband have any dealings with people with money?" Ying replied, "He once lent money to his comrade-in-arms, Sergeant Jiao Ziwen, but couldn't get it back.

古文：时子文適坐小事系狱，柔乃见子文，问所坐。
现代文：当时焦子文刚好因为犯了小罪被关押在狱中，高柔就去见焦子文，问他犯下的罪行。
English: At that time, Jiao Ziwen happened to be detained in prison for committing a minor crime. Gao Rong went to see Jiao Ziwen and asked him about the crime he had committed.

古文：言次，曰： 汝颇曾举人钱不？ 子文曰： 自以单贫，初不敢举人钱物也。 
现代文：焦子文说完后，高柔说： 你曾经向人借钱吗？ 焦子文说： 因为自己孤贫，所以起初不敢向人借钱。 
English: After Jiaoziwen finished speaking, Gaolu said: Have you ever borrowed money from someone? Jiaoziwen said: Because he was poor, he did not dare to borrow money from others at first.

古文：柔察子文色动，遂曰： 汝昔举窦礼钱，何言不邪？ 
现代文：高柔观察焦子文脸色变化，就说： 你过去借了窦礼的钱，为什么说没有？ 
English: Gao Rong observed the change in Jiao Ziwen's face and said: You borrowed Dou Li's money in the past, why did you say no?

古文：子文怪知事露，应对不次。
现代文：焦子文对事情泄露感到惊讶，回答的话乱七八糟。
English: Jiao Ziwen was surprised by the leak of the matter, and his answer was a mess.

古文：柔曰： 汝已杀礼，便宜早服。 
现代文：高柔说： 你已经杀了窦礼，现在应该早点认罪。 
English: Gao Rong said: You have already killed Dou Li, now you should have pleaded guilty earlier.

古文：子文於是叩头，具首杀礼本末，埋藏处所。
现代文：焦子文就磕了头，然后将杀害窦礼的始末都交代清楚，还有掩埋的地方。
English: Jiao Ziwen shook his head, and then explained the details of Dou Li's murder, as well as where to bury him.

古文：柔便遣吏卒，承子文辞往掘礼，即得其尸。
现代文：高柔就派遣吏役士卒，根据焦子文的话前去挖掘窦礼的尸首，随即就找到了他的尸首。
English: Gao Rong sent officers and men to dig up Dou Li's body according to Jiaoziwen's words, and they found his body immediately.

古文：诏书复盈母子为平民。
现代文：明帝下诏回复盈母子的平民身份。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict to restore the civilian status of Ying's mother and son.

古文：班下天下，以礼为戒。
现代文：并颁发天下，将窦礼的事情做为训诫。
English: and issued to the whole world, and made the matter of Dou Li into an admonition.

古文：在官二十三年，转为太常，旬日迁司空，后徙司徒。
现代文：高柔在在廷尉官位上二十三年，然后转任为太常，十天后被提升为司空，后来又转为司徒。
English: Gao Rong held the rank of courtier for 23 years, and then he was transferred to the position of grand chamberlain. Ten days later, he was promoted to the position of steward, and later he was transferred to the position of steward.

古文：太傅司马宣王奏免曹爽，皇太后诏召柔假节行大将军事，据爽营。
现代文：太傅司马宣王上奏请求罢免曹爽，皇太后下诏令高柔持符节行使大将军的职权，统管曹爽的军营。
English: Grand Master Sima Xuan Wang appealed to the emperor to remove Cao Shuang, and the empress dowager issued an imperial edict to Gao Ju to hold a festival to exercise the powers of a general and take charge of Cao Shuang's military camp.

古文：太傅谓柔曰： 君为周勃矣。 
现代文：太傅对高柔说： 你成为高柔了。 
English: Taifu said to Gao Rong: You have become Gao Rong.

古文：爽诛，进封万岁乡侯。
现代文：曹爽被诛杀，高柔晋封为万岁乡侯。
English: Cao Shuang was beaten to death, and Gao Rong was awarded the title of Long Live the Villager.

古文：高贵乡公即位，进封安国侯，转为太尉。
现代文：高贵乡公曹髦即位后，又封为安国侯，转任太尉。
English: After the enthronement of the noble Xiang Gong Cao Xiang, he was also named the Marquis of An and transferred to the rank of captain.

古文：常道乡公即位，增邑并前四千，前后封二子亭侯。
现代文：常道乡公曹奂登基，增加高柔的食邑，连带之前的一共四千户，先后封他的两个儿子为亭侯。
English: Tsundo Township's Lord Cao Pi ascended to the throne, increased the number of Gao Ju's food villages, bringing the total to 4,000 households, and successively appointed his two sons as pavilion lords.

古文：景元四年，年九十薨，谥曰元侯。
现代文：景元四年，高柔在九十岁时去世，谥号为元侯。
English: In the fourth year of Jingyuan, Gao Rong died at the age of ninety, and his nickname was Geng Hou.

古文：孙浑嗣。
现代文：他的孙子高浑承袭爵位。
English: His grandson, Gohun, inherited the title.

古文：咸熙中，开建五等，以柔等著勋前朝，改封浑昌陆子。
现代文：咸熙年间，朝廷开始设立公侯伯子男五等爵位制度，因为高柔等人在前朝功勋卓著，改封高浑为昌陆子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianxi, the imperial court began to establish a five-class peerage system for princes and noblemen, because Gao Rong and others had distinguished themselves in the previous dynasty, and Gao Hun was changed to Chang Lu Zi.

古文：孙礼字德达，涿郡容城人也。
现代文：孙礼，字德达，涿郡容城县人。
English: Sun Li, also known as De Da, was from Yongcheng County, Gansu Province.

古文：太祖平幽州，召为司空军谋掾。
现代文：太祖平定幽州后，征召孙礼为司空军谋掾。
English: After Yuzhou was pacified by Taizu, Sun Li was conscripted into the Air Force to seek revenge.

古文：初丧乱时，礼与母相失，同郡马台求得礼母，礼推家财尽以与台。
现代文：当初动乱之时，孙礼和母亲走失，同郡人马台找到了孙礼的母亲，孙礼便把家财全部给了马台。
English: At the time of the initial turmoil, Sun Li and his mother went missing. Ma Tai, a fellow county resident, found Sun Li's mother, and Sun Li gave Ma Tai all of the family's wealth.

古文：台后坐法当死，礼私导令逾狱自首，既而曰： 臣无逃亡之义。 
现代文：后来马台因为犯法应当被处死，孙礼暗中教导马台，让他逃狱出去承认罪责，最后说： 臣没有逃跑的想法。 
English: Later, Ma Tai was to be executed for breaking the law. Sun Li secretly instructed Ma Tai to escape from prison and confess his guilt, and finally said, "The minister has no intention of escaping."

古文：径诣刺奸主簿温恢。
现代文：马台径直去见刺奸主簿温恢。
English: Ma Tai went straight to see the assassin Wen Wei.

古文：恢嘉之，具白太祖，各减死一等。
现代文：温恢赏识他们的行为，将情况详细地告诉太祖，最后得以减罪一级，免除死罪。
English: Appreciating their behavior, Wen Weiwei told Taizu about the situation in detail, and was finally able to reduce the crime by one level, and was exempted from the death penalty.

古文：后除河间郡丞，稍迁荥阳都尉。
现代文：后来孙礼做了河间郡的郡丞，渐渐升任到荥阳都尉。
English: Later, Sun Li became the county magistrate of Kawama County, and gradually rose to the position of the governor of Shenyang.

古文：鲁山中贼数百人，保固险阻，为民作害；乃徙礼为鲁相。
现代文：鲁山中有几百贼寇，守着险要的地势，为害百姓；朝廷就调任孙礼为鲁相。
English: There are several hundred bandits in the Lushan Mountains, guarding the precarious terrain and harming the people; the imperial court transferred Sun Li as Lushan.

古文：礼至官，出俸谷，发吏民，募首级，招纳降附，使还为间，应时平泰。
现代文：孙礼到官上任后，拿出自己的俸禄粮食，征发吏役百姓，悬赏贼寇的首级，并招揽想要投降或依附的人，让他们回去做为间谍查探情况，不久之后就平定了贼寇。
English: After Sun Li took office, he took out his own salary and grain, solicited officials to serve the people, offered a reward for the head of the bandit, and invited those who wanted to surrender or cling to them to go back and investigate the situation as a spy. Soon after, he quelled the bandit.

古文：历山阳、平原、平昌、琅邪太守。
现代文：孙礼曾担任过山阳、平原、平昌、琅邪各郡太守。
English: Sun Li once served as the governor of Shanyang, Pingyuan, Pyeongchang and Suye counties.

古文：从大司马曹休征吴於夹石，礼谏以为不可深入，不从而败。
现代文：后来跟随大司马曹休在夹石征讨吴军，孙礼劝谏，认为大军不能深入，曹休没有听从，最后战败而回。
English: Later, he followed the commander-in-chief, Ma Cao Xiu, to conquer the Wu army in Heishi, and Sun Li advised him that the large army could not go deep, but Cao Xiu did not listen, and finally returned defeated.

古文：迁阳平太守，入为尚书。
现代文：孙礼被调任为阳平太守，后来入朝担任尚书。
English: Sun Li was transferred to Yangping Daju, and later entered the imperial court as Shangshu.

古文：明帝方修宫室，而节气不和，天下少谷。
现代文：明帝正在修建宫殿，但那年风雨不合，全国粮食收成很少。
English: Emperor Ming was building a palace, but that year was a stormy one, and the national grain harvest was small.

古文：礼固争，罢役，诏曰： 敬纳谠言，促遣民作。 
现代文：孙礼极力争取要免去百姓的劳役，明帝下诏说： 采纳正直的言论，迅速派百姓回去耕作。 
English: Sun Li tried his best to get rid of the people's labor service, and Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: "Adopt honest words and quickly send the people back to farming."

古文：时李惠监作，复奏留一月，有所成讫。
现代文：当时李惠监管宫殿的修建，又上奏请求将百姓再多留一个月，要将宫殿修建完成。
English: At that time, Li Hui was supervising the construction of the palace, and he requested that the people stay one more month to complete the construction of the palace.

古文：礼径至作所，不复重奏，称诏罢民，帝奇其意而不责也。
现代文：孙礼径直到宫殿修建的地方，没有再上奏，直接说明帝已经下诏放百姓回去，明帝认为他的想法很奇特，没有责罚他。
English: Sun Li's path to the place where the palace was built was not played again, directly indicating that the emperor had issued an edict to let the people go back. Emperor Ming thought his idea was very strange and did not punish him.

古文：帝猎於大石山，虎趋乘舆，礼便投鞭下马，欲奋剑斫虎，诏令礼上马。
现代文：明帝在大石山狩猎，有老虎跑到明帝的车驾旁边，孙礼就扔掉鞭子并下马，想要拿剑砍杀老虎，明帝命令孙礼上马。
English: Emperor Ming was hunting in the Daishi Mountains. A tiger ran alongside Emperor Ming's chariot. Sun Li threw away his whip and dismounted. He wanted to kill the tiger with his sword. Emperor Ming ordered Sun Li to mount his horse.

古文：明帝临崩之时，以曹爽为大将军，宜得良佐，於床下受遗诏，拜礼大将军长史，加散骑常侍。
现代文：明帝将要驾崩的时候，任命曹爽为大将军，应该还要有良臣辅佐他，就让曹爽在床下接受遗诏，要让孙礼担任大将军长史，加官散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Ming was about to pass away, he appointed Cao Shuang as the grand general. If there were to be good ministers to assist him, he would have Cao Shuang receive the last will and testament under his bed, and he would have Sun Li serve as the grand general's chief historian, as well as the official horseback riding attendant.

古文：礼亮直不挠，爽弗便也，以为扬州刺史，加伏波将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：孙礼诚实正直不肯服从，曹爽认为孙礼在身边自己行事不便，就任命他为扬州刺史，加官伏波将军，并赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: Honest and upright, Sun Li refused to obey. Cao Shuang thought it was inconvenient for Sun Li to act on his own when he was around, so he appointed Sun Li as Yangzhou chief historian, promoted him to general of Fubao, and gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：吴大将全琮帅数万众来侵寇，时州兵休使，在者无几。
现代文：吴国大将全琮带领数万人马前来侵扰，当时扬州的士兵在修养，在职的没有多少。
English: The general of the State of Wu, Quanzhang, led tens of thousands of horses to invade. At that time, the soldiers of Yangzhou were in training, and there were not many on duty.

古文：礼躬勒卫兵御之，战於芍陂，自旦及暮，将士死伤过半。
现代文：孙礼亲自率领卫兵抵御吴军，两方在芍陂交战，从早上到傍晚，孙礼的将士死伤了大半。
English: Sun Li personally led the guards to resist the Wu army, and the two sides fought in Shao. From morning to evening, most of Sun Li's soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：礼犯蹈白刃，马被数创，手秉枹鼓，奋不顾身，贼众乃退。
现代文：孙礼在刀光剑影中冲出，座下的马也受了好几处伤吗，孙礼手拿着战鼓，不顾自身地奋战，贼军才撤退。
English: Sun Li rushed out in the shadow of the sword, and the horse under his seat also suffered several injuries. Sun Li held a war drum in his hand and fought regardless of himself, and the thief army retreated.

古文：诏书慰劳，赐绢七百匹。
现代文：朝廷颁发诏书慰劳将士们，并赏赐了七百匹绢。
English: The Imperial Court issued an Imperial Rescript to console the soldiers and rewarded them with seven hundred yakitori.

古文：礼为死事者设祀哭临，哀号发心，皆以绢付亡者家，无以入身。
现代文：孙礼为战死的将士安排祭祀，并集中众人到灵前吊唁，孙礼的痛哭都是发自内心，将朝廷赏赐的绢都分给死者的家属，没有留给自己。
English: Sun Li arranged a sacrifice for the soldiers who died in the war, and gathered everyone to offer condolences before the funeral. Sun Li's tears were from the heart, and he distributed all the money awarded by the court to the families of the deceased, and did not keep it for himself.

古文：徵拜少府，出为荆州刺史，迁冀州牧。
现代文：朝廷征召孙礼，授命为少府，又出京担任荆州刺史，升任为冀州牧。
English: The imperial court conscripted Sun Li and appointed him as a minor prefect, and he also went to Beijing to serve as the chief historian of Jingzhou and was promoted to the position of the chief herdsman of Jizhou.

古文：太傅司马宣王谓礼曰： 今清河、平原争界八年，更二刺史，靡能决之；虞、芮待文王而了，宜善令分明。 
现代文：太傅司马宣王对孙礼说： 现在清河、平原两郡争抢边界已经八年了，换了两任刺史，都没有能解决这件事；殷末虞国和芮国争夺地盘，等待周文王来决断，所以也应该有好的政令，以划分明确。 
English: King Ma Xuan said to Sun Li: It has been eight years since the two counties of Qinghe and Pingyuan have been competing for the border. Two successive rulers have not been able to resolve this issue. Yin and Yu countries are competing for territory, waiting for King Zhou Wen to make a decision. Therefore, there should also be a good decree to make the division clear.

古文：礼曰： 讼者据墟墓为验，听者以先老为正，而老者不可加以榎楚，又墟墓或迁就高敞，或徙避仇雠。
现代文：孙礼说： 诉讼的人依据荒废的坟墓作为证据，听诉讼的人将年老长者的话看做证据，但年老的人不能加以刑罚，还有荒废的坟墓，或许是因为墓地迁到了高而宽敞的地方，或许是为了躲避仇家。
English: Sun Li said: The litigants rely on the abandoned graves as evidence, the litigants regard the words of the elderly as evidence, but the elderly cannot be punished, and there are abandoned graves, perhaps because the cemetery has moved to a high and spacious place, perhaps to avoid enemies.

古文：如今所闻，虽皋陶犹将为难。
现代文：现在所得知的情况，即使是皋陶也将很为难。
English: Now that we know the situation, it will be very difficult even for Jintao.

古文：若欲使必也无讼，当以烈祖初封平原时图决之。
现代文：如果想要解决这件事，应该用开创基业的祖先最初划分平原郡时的地图来裁决。
English: If this matter is to be resolved, it should be adjudicated using the map of Plains County as originally drawn by our founding fathers.

古文：何必推古问故，以益辞讼？
现代文：又何必推问过去的势力，来增加诉讼的证据呢？
English: And why is it necessary to add to the evidence of the proceedings by referring to the forces of the past?

古文：昔成王以桐叶戏叔虞，周公便以封之。
现代文：从前周成王用桐叶和叔虞开玩笑，周公就把唐封给了叔虞。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Cheng Wang joked with Tongye and Shuyu, and Zhou Gong gave the Tang Dynasty to Shuyu.

古文：今图藏在天府，便可於坐上断也，岂待到州乎？ 
现代文：现在地图收在朝廷的府库中，就可以在座位上决断了，难道要等到到州府里吗？ 
English: Now that the map is in the imperial treasury, it can be decided on the seat. Do we have to wait until we get to the state capital?

古文：宣王曰： 是也。
现代文：司马宣王说： 说的没错。
English: Sima Xuanwang said: That's right.

古文：当别下图。 礼到，案图宜属平原。
现代文：应该根据地图来区别。 孙礼到了府库中，查验地图，有争议的地方应该归属平原郡。
English: It should be distinguished according to the map. Sun Li went to the prefectural treasury to check the map, and the disputed place should belong to Pingyuan County.

古文：而曹爽信清河言，下书云： 图不可用，当参异同。 
现代文：但曹爽相信的清河郡的言论，就发下文书说： 这个地图不能用，应该参考不同的说法。 
English: However, Cao Shuang believed Qinghe County's remarks and issued a document saying: This map cannot be used, you should refer to a different version.

古文：礼上疏曰： 管仲霸者之佐，其器又小，犹能夺伯氏骈邑，使没齿无怨言。
现代文：孙礼上疏说： 管仲做为霸主的辅佐，他的气量也很小，尚且能夺取他兄长的骈邑封地，让他兄长一直没有怨言。
English: Sun Li said solemnly: As an assistant to the overlord, Guanzhong was also small in stature, yet he was able to seize his brother's fiefdom, so that his brother never complained.

古文：臣受牧伯之任，奉圣朝明图，验地著之界，界实以王翁河为限；而鄃以马丹候为验，诈以鸣犊河为界。
现代文：臣领受冀州牧的职位，尊奉圣朝明确的地图，查验两地的分界，分界确实是以以王翁河为界限;而鄃县将马丹候做为凭证，谎称是以鸣犊河为界限。
English: The vassal accepted the position of the pastor of Jizhou, revered the clear map of the Holy Dynasty, and checked the demarcation of the two places. The demarcation was indeed based on the Wang Weng River as the boundary; while the county of Handan used the horse-drawn carriage as a proof and falsely claimed that the Mingyuan River was the boundary.

古文：假虚讼诉，疑误台阁。
现代文：用虚假的诉讼证词，使得台阁疑虑误解。
English: Using false testimony in the lawsuit, the cabinet misinterpreted the doubts.

古文：窃闻众口铄金，浮石沈木，三人成巿虎，慈母投其杼。
现代文：臣私下听说众人所说的话能熔化金属，能胡言乱语颠倒是非，三个人说集市上有老虎，大家就会相信，让传闻动摇大家本来相信的事情。
English: Privately, the minister heard that what people say can melt metal, and can turn nonsense into truth. If three people say that there is a tiger in the market, everyone will believe, and let the rumor shake the things that everyone originally believed.

古文：今二郡争界八年，一朝决之者，缘有解书图画，可得寻案擿校也。
现代文：现在清河、平原两个郡争夺地界八年，很快就能断决，原因就在于有解释分析的文字和明确的地图，可以拿来查验核对。
English: Now that the two counties of Qinghe and Pingyuan have been competing for the land boundary for eight years, it will soon be decided, because there are explanatory and analytical texts and clear maps that can be used to check and check.

古文：平原在两河，向东上，其间有爵堤，爵堤在高唐西南，所争地在高唐西北，相去二十馀里，可谓长叹息流涕者也。
现代文：平原郡处在两条河之间，往东面向上，中间有爵盽，爵盽在高唐西南，而争抢的地方再高唐西北，两地之间距离有二十多里，真可以说是让人感慨流泪啊。
English: Plains County is located between two rivers, eastward and upward, in the middle there is Jiaozuo, Jiaozuo is in the southwest of Gaotang, and the place of competition is in the northwest of Gaotang. The distance between the two places is more than twenty miles, which can really be said to make people feel emotional and shed tears.

古文：案解与图奏而鄃不受诏，此臣软弱不胜其任，臣亦何颜尸禄素餐。 
现代文：查验分析后在根据地图的情况上奏，但鄃县不接受诏令，这是我行事软弱不能胜任职务，我还有什么颜面白白占据着职位享受俸禄呢。 
English: After examination and analysis, I played the situation according to the map, but the county did not accept the edict. This was because I was weak and unable to perform my duties, and I had no right to occupy the position and enjoy the salary.

古文：辄束带著履，驾车待放。
现代文：就系好腰带穿好鞋子，驾着车等待放还归家。
English: He just put on his belt and shoes and drove his car to wait for his return home.

古文：爽见礼奏，大怒。劾礼怨望，结刑五岁。
现代文：曹爽看了孙礼的奏章，大怒，上奏弹劾孙礼心怀怨怼，被判五年徒刑。
English: Cao Shuang read Sun Li's report and was so angry that he went to impeach Sun Li with a grudge and was sentenced to five years in prison.

古文：在家期年，众人多以为言，除城门校尉。
现代文：孙礼在家中一年，有很多人为他说话，他又担任了城门校尉。
English: Sun Li was at home for a year, many people spoke to him, and he served as the captain of the city gate.

古文：时匈奴王刘靖部众强盛，而鲜卑数寇边，乃以礼为并州刺史，加振武将军，使持节，护匈奴中郎将。
现代文：当时匈奴王刘靖部队强大，而鲜卑又多次进犯边界，朝廷就任命孙礼为并州刺史，加官振武将军，让他持符节，行使护匈奴中郎将的职权。
English: At that time, the Hun King Liu Jing's troops were strong, but the Xianbei repeatedly attacked the border. The imperial court appointed Sun Li to be the governor of the province, and promoted General Zhenwu to hold the rank of general and exercise the power of protecting the Huns.

古文：往见太傅司马宣王，有忿色而无言。
现代文：孙礼前去拜见太傅司马宣王，脸上有怒色但没有说话。
English: Sun Li went to see the Grand Master Sima Xuan Wang, his face was angry, but he did not speak.

古文：宣王曰： 卿得并州，少邪？
现代文：司马宣王说： 您已经得到了并州，少那？
English: Sima Xuanwang said: You have already obtained the annexation of the state, is that not enough?

古文：恚理分界失分乎？
现代文：愤怒的原因是之前划分两郡界限的事情不妥当吗？
English: Is the anger due to the fact that the previous demarcation of the border between the two counties was inappropriate?

古文：今当远别，何不欢也！ 
现代文：现在就要离别远行，为什么不高兴呢？ 
English: Now it's time to say goodbye and travel far away. Why aren't you happy?

古文：礼曰： 何明公言之乖细也！
现代文：孙礼说： 为什么明公您说得如此乖巧细小！
English: Sun Li said, "Why did you say it so nicely, Ming Gong?

古文：礼虽不德，岂以官位往事为意邪？
现代文：我虽然德行不够，怎么会在意官位和过往的事呢？
English: Although I am not virtuous enough, why should I care about my official position and the past?

古文：本谓明公齐踪伊、吕，匡辅魏室，上报明帝之讬，下建万世之勋。
现代文：本来我认为明公您能追随伊尹、吕尚的踪迹，匡正辅佐魏氏，对上能回报明帝的嘱托，对下也能建立流传万世的功勋。
English: Originally, I thought that Ming Gong You could follow the footsteps of Yi Yin and Lü Shang, and Kuang Zheng could help Su Wei. On the other hand, you could return the Ming Emperor's entrustment, and on the other hand, you could establish a world-renowned merit.

古文：今社稷将危，天下凶凶，此礼之所以不悦也。 因涕泣横流。
现代文：现在国家倾危，天下动荡不安，这是我不高兴的原因。 随后就涕泪横流。
English: Now the country is in danger, the world is in turmoil, and this is the reason for my unhappiness.

古文：宣王曰： 且止，忍不可忍。 
现代文：司马宣王说： 先不要哭了，要忍受不能忍受的事情。 
English: Sima Xuan Wang said: First of all, don't cry, you have to endure the unbearable.

古文：爽诛后，入为司隶校尉，凡临七郡五州，皆有威信。
现代文：曹爽被诛杀后，孙礼入朝担任司隶校尉，一共去到过七个郡五个州，在这些地方都很有威信。
English: After Cao Shuang was assassinated, Sun Li entered the imperial court as a lieutenant of Sili. He went to a total of seven counties and five prefectures, and was highly respected in these places.

古文：迁司空，封大利亭侯，邑一百户。
现代文：后来被提升为司空，又赐封大利亭侯的爵位，食邑一百户。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Siku, and was also given the title of Feudal Prince of Italy, with a hundred households.

古文：礼与卢毓同郡时辈，而情好不睦。
现代文：孙礼和卢毓是同一个郡的同辈人，但性情和喜好都不合。
English: Sun Li and Lu Wei are contemporaries from the same county, but their temperaments and preferences do not match.

古文：为人虽互有长短，然名位略齐云。
现代文：两人的为人各有优劣，但声名和官位都大概相同。
English: Both men have their own strengths and weaknesses, but their reputations and official positions are roughly the same.

古文：嘉平二年薨，谥曰景侯。
现代文：孙礼在嘉平二年去世，谥号为景侯。
English: Sun Li died in the second year of Jiaping. His posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：孙元嗣。
现代文：他的孙子孙元承袭爵位。
English: His grandson Yuan inherited the title.

古文：王观字伟台，东郡廪丘人也。
现代文：王观，字伟台，东郡廪丘县人。
English: Wang Guan, also known as Wei Tai, was from Dong County, Mengqiu County.

古文：少孤贫励志，太祖召为丞相文学掾，出为高唐、阳泉、酂、任令，所在称治。
现代文：年少是孤弱贫困但志向远大，太祖征召他为文学掾，后来出京担任高唐、阳泉、赞阝、任等县的县令，所在的地方百姓都称赞他的治理。
English: At a young age, he was lonely, weak, and poor, but he had high aspirations. The great-grandfather recruited him as a literary official, and later he went to Beijing to serve as the county magistrate of Gaotang, Yangquan, Zanzhou, and Ren counties. The local people all praised his governance.

古文：文帝践阼，入为尚书郎、廷尉监，出为南阳、涿郡太守。
现代文：文帝登基后，他入朝担任尚书郎、廷尉监，出京担任南阳、涿郡太守。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he entered the imperial court as Shang Shuro (尚書郎) and court inspector, and left the capital as Nanyang (南阳) and Shigun (郡) governor.

古文：涿北接鲜卑，数有寇盗，观令边民十家已上，屯居，筑京候。
现代文：涿郡北面和鲜卑接壤，多次有贼寇抢劫，王观下令边境的百姓，十家以上住在一个地方，并修筑好瞭望台。
English: The north side of Min County borders Xianbei, and there have been many robberies by bandits. Wang Guan ordered the people on the border to have more than ten families living in one place, and to build a good lookout.

古文：时或有不愿者，观乃假遣朝吏，使归助子弟，不与期会，但敕事讫各还。
现代文：当时有一些不愿意的人，王观就派郡吏前去帮助他们，没有规定完成的期限，只命令他们完成事务就各自回去。
English: At that time, there were some unwilling people. Wang Guan sent county officials to help them. He did not set a deadline for completion, but only ordered them to complete the work and go back separately.

古文：於是吏民相率不督自劝，旬日之中，一时俱成。
现代文：于是吏役百姓互相不需要监督，都自我勉励，十天之内，要做的事情就都完成了。
English: As a result, the officials and the people did not need to supervise each other, they all encouraged themselves, and within ten days, everything that needed to be done was done.

古文：守御有备，寇钞以息。
现代文：因为郡中防守和抵御都有准备，敌寇的掠夺就停息了。
English: Because the defense and resistance in the county were prepared, the plundering of the enemy bandits stopped.

古文：明帝即位，下诏书使郡县条为剧、中、平者。
现代文：明帝登基后，颁下诏书要依据各郡县事务的多少把它们分成剧、中、平三等。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, the imperial edict was issued according to the number of county affairs to be divided into three levels, namely, county affairs, middle-level affairs, and ordinary affairs.

古文：主者欲言郡为中平，观教曰： 此郡滨近外虏，数有寇害，云何不为剧邪？ 
现代文：负责这件事的人想把涿郡列为中等或者平等，王观训导说： 这个郡，边界靠近外族，多次出现侵扰祸害，为什么不是剧等呢？ 
English: The person in charge of this matter wants to classify Handan County as medium or equal, Wang Guanxun said: This county, the border is close to foreigners, there have been many times of plague, why not dramas and so on?

古文：主者曰： 若郡为外剧，恐於明府有任子。 
现代文：负责的人说： 如果列为剧等，我担心您要派自己的儿子去做人质。 
English: The person in charge said: If it is listed as a drama, I am worried that you will send your son to be a hostage.

古文：观曰： 夫君者，所以为民也。
现代文：王观说： 做为主事官员，都是为了百姓。
English: Wang Guan said: Being a principal official is all for the people.

古文：今郡在外剧，则於役条当有降差。
现代文：现在将涿郡列为外剧郡，那在劳役上应该有所减少。
English: Now it is listed as a foreign opera county, which should be reduced in terms of labor service.

古文：岂可为太守之私而负一郡之民乎？ 
现代文：怎么能为了太守一个人的好处而辜负了一郡的百姓呢？ 
English: How can you betray the people of a county for the sake of protecting the interests of one person?

古文：遂言为外剧郡，后送任子诣邺。
现代文：就上奏将涿郡列为外剧郡，后来王观将自己的儿子做为人质送往邺城。
English: Wang Guan later sent his son to Lucheng as a hostage.

古文：时观但有一子而又幼弱。
现代文：当时王观只有一个儿子，又很幼小。
English: At that time, Wang Guan only had one son, who was very young.

古文：其公心如此。
现代文：他的为公无私的心到这种程度。
English: That's how selfless he is.

古文：观治身清素，帅下以俭，僚属承风，莫不自励。
现代文：王观修身很清淡素净，自己很节俭做为下属的表率，他的部下学习他的作风，没有不勉励自己的。
English: Wang Guanzhong's body is very light and simple. He is very frugal as a model for his subordinates. His subordinates learn from his style and encourage themselves.

古文：明帝幸许昌，召观为治书侍御史，典行台狱。
现代文：明帝驾临许昌，征召王观担任治书侍御史，主管行台狱。
English: Emperor Ming came to Xu Chang and summoned Wang Gu to serve as the secretary of history and the director of Xingtai Prison.

古文：时多有仓卒喜怒，而观不阿意顺指。
现代文：当时明帝经常有突然的举动，并且喜怒无常，但王观没有阿谀奉承，顺着明帝的旨意。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming often made sudden moves and was moody, but Wang Guo did not flatter him and followed Emperor Ming's will.

古文：太尉司马宣王请观为从事中郎，迁为尚书，出为河南尹，徙少府。
现代文：太尉司马宣王请求任命王观为从事中郎，升任尚书，又出京担任河南尹，转任少府。
English: Captain Sima Xuanwang requested that Wang Guan be appointed as a middle-ranking official, and he was promoted to Shangshu. He also went to Beijing to serve as Henan Yin, and was transferred to the position of Shaofu.

古文：大将军曹爽使材官张达斫家屋材，及诸私用之物，观闻知，皆录夺以没官。
现代文：大将军曹爽派材官张达削减国家修建房屋的木材，还有各种个人使用的物品，王观得知后，将这些物品都记录并收回，没入官府中。
English: Major General Cao Shuang sent Zhang Da, a timber official, to cut down the timber of the houses built by the state, as well as various items for personal use. After Wang Guan learned about it, he recorded and recovered these items, and they were not included in the government office.

古文：少府统三尚方御府内藏玩弄之宝，爽等奢放，多有干求，惮观守法，乃徙为太仆。
现代文：少府的职责是主管三尚方御府内所收藏的宝物，曹爽等人奢侈放诞，经常想求取，又忌惮王观奉公守法，就调任王观为太仆。
English: The duty of the young prefect was to be in charge of the treasures collected by the three court nobles in the palace. Cao Shuang and others indulged in extravagance, often wanted to obtain, and feared Wang Guo's adherence to the law, so Wang Guo was transferred to be a servant.

古文：司马宣王诛爽，使观行中领军，据爽弟羲营，赐爵关内侯，复为尚书，加驸马都尉。
现代文：司马宣王诛杀曹爽后，让王观行使中领军的职权，占据曹爽弟弟曹羲的军营，并赐封爵位为关内侯，又让他担任尚书，加官驸马都尉。
English: After Sima Xuan Wangqi killed Cao Shuang, he allowed Wang Guan to exercise the authority of leading the army, occupy the military camp of Cao Shuang's brother Cao Pi, and give him the title of Guan Nei Hou, and let him serve as Shang Shu, and add the post of Ma Duifeng.

古文：高贵乡公即位，封中乡亭侯。
现代文：高贵乡公曹髦登基后，他被封为中乡亭侯。
English: After the enthronement of the noble township prince, he was named Zhongxiang Tinghou.

古文：顷之，加光禄大夫，转为右仆射。
现代文：不久，加官光禄大夫，转任右仆射。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of doctor of Guanglu, and transferred to the post of right-hand man.

古文：常道乡公即位，进封阳乡侯，增邑千户，并前二千五百户。
现代文：常道乡公曹奂登基后，晋升他的爵位为阳乡侯，增加食邑一千户，连带之前的一共两千五百户。
English: After the enthronement of Tsongdao Township Lord Cao Pi, he was promoted to the rank of Yang Township Lord, and the number of food villages increased by 1,000, bringing the total to 2,500.

古文：迁司空，固辞，不许，遣使即第拜授。
现代文：后来朝廷向提升王观为司空，他坚决推辞，皇上没有答应，并派使者到他府上去授予官职。
English: Later, when the imperial court proposed to promote Wang Guan to the post of Siku, he firmly refused. The emperor did not agree and sent an envoy to his palace to confer the official post.

古文：就官数日，上送印绶，辄自舆归里舍。
现代文：王观到官上任几天，皇上送来印信绶带，他随即就自己驾车返回家中。
English: A few days after Wang Guan took office, the emperor sent him a stamped letter and ribbon, and he immediately drove back home by himself.

古文：薨于家，遗令藏足容棺，不设明器，不封不树。
现代文：王观在家中去世，临终前令家里人只准备一口棺材就可以，不需要陪葬器物，不堆封土不种树。
English: Wang Guan died at home. Before his death, he asked his family members to prepare only one coffin. There was no need for accompanying funeral objects, no mounds of soil to be sealed and no trees to be planted.

古文：谥曰肃侯。
现代文：谥号为肃侯。
English: His posthumous name was Soho.

古文：子悝嗣。
现代文：他的儿子王悝承袭爵位。
English: His son, Wang Hui, succeeded to the title.

古文：咸熙中，开建五等，以观著勋前朝，改封悝胶东子。
现代文：咸熙年间，朝廷开始设立公侯伯子男五等爵位制度，因为王观在前朝功勋卓著，改封王悝为胶东子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianxi, the imperial court began to establish a five-class peerage system for the sons of princes, because Wang Guan had distinguished himself in the previous dynasty, and changed the title of Wang Xi to Jiaodongzi.

古文：评曰：韩暨处以静居行化，出以任职流称；崔林简朴知能；高柔明於法理；孙礼刚断伉厉；王观清劲贞白：咸克致公辅。
现代文：评曰：韩暨以安静闲居修行教化自处，入朝为官以恪尽职守著称；崔林简单质朴，能赏识人才；高柔明知法令事理；孙礼刚毅果决又正直严厉；王观清正刚直又公正廉洁；他们都能做到三公、宰辅。
English: The review said: Han Ji was self-educated with quiet and idle practice, and was famous for his dedication to duty when he entered the imperial court; Cui Lin was simple and straightforward and could appreciate talent; Gao Ju knew the laws and regulations; Sun Li was resolute and honest; Wang Guoqing was upright and fair; they could all achieve the three kingdoms and become vice-premiers.

古文：及暨年过八十，起家就列；柔保官二十年，元老终位：比之徐邈、常林，於兹为疚矣。
现代文：韩暨年过八十，还从家中被起用在朝为官；高柔在司徒的职位上二十年，以朝廷元老的身份退位：但对比徐邈、常林，还是有不如之处的。
English: Han Ji, who is over 80 years old, was also appointed from his family to serve as an official in the imperial court; Gao Ju, who has been in the position of Sito for 20 years, abdicated as an imperial court elder: but compared to Xu Xi and Changlin, there is still something inferior.

