古文：白虎汉景帝种僮封邵亭长严猛袁双吴道宗牧牛儿师道宣谢允郑袭刘广雅易拔萧泰黄乾酋耳兽虎塔傅黄中郴州佐史巴人峡口道士
现代文：白虎汉景帝种僮封邵亭长严猛袁双吴道宗牧牛儿师道宣谢允郑袭刘广雅易拔萧泰黄乾酋耳兽虎塔傅黄中郴州佐史巴人峡口道士
English: The White Tiger, the Han Emperor Jing, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger, the White Tiger

古文：白虎
现代文：白虎
English: The White Tiger

古文：秦昭襄王时，白虎为害，自秦蜀巴汉患之。
现代文：秦昭襄王的时候，有一只白虎成为公害。秦、蜀、巴、汉各地都怕它。
English: When Qin Zhaoxiang was king, a white tiger became a public nuisance. People throughout Qin, Shu, Ba and Han were afraid of it.

古文：昭王乃重募国中有能杀虎者，邑万家，金帛如之。
现代文：昭襄王就重赏招募国中有本事杀虎的人。凡能杀死这只白虎的，食邑万户，金帛要多少有多少。
English: King Zhaoxiang offered a reward to anyone in the country who could kill the tiger. Anyone who could kill the white tiger would be rewarded with as much gold as he or she wanted.

古文：于是夷朐肕廖仲药、何射虎、秦精等，乃作白竹弩，如高楼上射白虎，中头三矢。
现代文：于是夷人廖仲药、何射虎、秦精等，就用白竹子做了弓弩，爬到高楼上射那白虎。白虎头上中了三箭。
English: Therefore, the barbarians, including Liao Zhongyue, He Shaohu, and Qin Jing, made a bow and arrow with white bamboo, climbed to a high building, and shot the white tiger. Three arrows hit the white tiger's head.

古文：白虎常从群虎，瞋恚，尽搏杀群虎，大吼而死。
现代文：白虎平常跟随着一群虎，现在它极其愤怒，把一群虎都搏杀了，自己也大叫着死去。
English: The white tiger usually follows a group of tigers, but now it is extremely angry, has killed a group of tigers in a fight, and is screaming for its own death.

古文：昭王嘉之曰： 虎历四郡，害千二百人，一朝患除，功莫大焉。 
现代文：昭襄王赞赏地说： 这只虎经历四个郡，害了一千二百人，今天一下子除掉这个大患，没有比这个更大的功劳了。 
English: Zhao Xiangwang said with appreciation: "This tiger has gone through four counties and harmed twelve hundred people. There is no greater achievement than to get rid of this big disease at once today.

古文：欲如约，且嫌其夷人，乃刻石为盟约。复夷人顷田不租；十妻不井；伤人不论；杀人不死；秦犯夷，输黄金一两。夷犯秦。输清酒一壶。
现代文：他想要按约行事，又嫌这几个人是夷人，就刻石订立盟约：夷人种田不满一顷的不用交租；妻小不足十人的不算做一井；伤了人的不处分；杀了人的不犯死罪；秦人冒犯了夷人，赔黄金一两；夷人冒犯秦人，赔清酒一壶。
English: He wanted to act according to the agreement, and suspected that these few people were barbarians, so he carved a covenant on the stone: barbarians do not have to pay rent for less than one hectare of farmland; wives less than ten people do not count as one well; injured people are not punished; killed people do not commit capital crimes; Qin people offended barbarians, pay one or two gold; barbarians offended Qin people, pay one jug of clear wine.

古文：夷人安之。
现代文：于是夷人就安定了。
English: As a result, the barbarians were stabilized.

古文：汉景帝
现代文：汉景帝
English: Emperor Han Jing

古文：汉景帝好游猎。
现代文：汉景帝喜欢打猎。
English: Emperor Han Jing liked to hunt.

古文：见虎不能得之，乃为珍馔，祭所见之虎。
现代文：他发现一只虎却不能猎得，就准备了许多好吃的东西祭祀那只虎。
English: When he found a tiger that he couldn't catch, he prepared a lot of delicious food to sacrifice to the tiger.

古文：帝乃梦虎曰： 汝祭我，欲得我牙皮耶？
现代文：汉景帝就做了一个梦，梦见那只虎对他说： 你祭我，目的就是想要得到我的牙和皮。
English: Han Jingdi had a dream, in which he saw the tiger saying to him, "You sacrificed me in order to get my teeth and skin.

古文：我自杀，从汝取之。 
现代文：我自杀，从你所愿，你来取吧。 
English: I'll kill myself. You take what you want from me.

古文：明日，帝入山，果见此虎死在祭所。
现代文：第二天，汉景帝进山，果然在祭虎那个地方有那只虎。
English: The next day, Emperor Han Jing entered the mountain, and sure enough, there was the tiger in the place where the tiger was enshrined.

古文：乃命剥取皮牙，余肉复为虎。
现代文：于是他就让人剥了虎皮，拔了虎牙。剩下的虎肉又变成一只虎。
English: So he had someone peel off the tiger's skin and pull out the tiger's teeth. The remaining tiger meat turned into a tiger.

古文：种僮
现代文：种僮
English: seeds of worms

古文：种僮为畿令。
现代文：种僮在京郊做县令。
English: In the suburbs of Kyoto, seeds are planted according to prefectural orders.

古文：常有虎害人。
现代文：附近虎害人。
English: A tiger killed a man nearby.

古文：僮令设槛，得二虎。
现代文：种僮让人做了一个捉野兽的笼子，捉到了两只虎。
English: The breeder had a cage made to catch wild animals, and two tigers were caught.

古文：僮曰： 害人者低头。 
现代文：种僮对两只虎说： 害人的把头低下！ 
English: The seed egret said to the two tigers: Keep your heads down!

古文：一虎低头，僮取一虎放之。
现代文：其中一只虎低下头去。种僮就把另一只虎放了。
English: One of the tigers lowered its head, and the stallion released the other tiger.

古文：自是猛兽皆出境，吏目之为神君。
现代文：从此，本地的猛兽都转移到外地去了。在吏属的心目中，种僮简直是神仙。
English: Since then, the local beasts of prey have all moved to other places. In the eyes of the local officials, the storks are like gods.

古文：封邵
现代文：封邵
English: Feng Shao

古文：汉中有虎生角。
现代文：汉中有一只老虎长了角。
English: A tiger in Hanzhong has grown horns.

古文：道家云，虎千岁则牙蜕而角生。
现代文：道家说，老虎活到一千岁就掉牙而长角。
English: Taoists say that if a tiger lives to be a thousand years old, it will lose its teeth and grow horns.

古文：汉宣城郡守封邵，一日忽化为虎，食郡民。
现代文：汉宣城的郡守封邵，有一天忽然变化一只猛虎，吃郡里的百姓。
English: The county governor of Han Xuancheng, Feng Shao, one day suddenly changed into a fierce tiger, eating the people in the county.

古文：民呼曰 封使君 。
现代文：百姓叫他 封使君 。
English: The people called him "Fengzhi Jun."

古文：因去不复来，故时人语曰： 无作封使君，生不治民死食民。 
现代文：于是他一去不再回来。所以当时的人说： 不要作封使君，活着的时候不治理百姓，死了的时候吃百姓。 
English: So he went away and never came back. Therefore, the people of that time said, "Do not be a vassal, do not rule over the people while you are alive, and eat the people when you are dead."

古文：亭长
现代文：亭长
English: The head of the pavilion

古文：长沙有民曾作槛捕虎。
现代文：长沙的一个百姓曾经做了一个捉野兽的笼子捉虎。
English: A citizen of Changsha once made a cage to catch a tiger.

古文：忽见一亭长，赤帻大冠，在槛中。
现代文：有一天他去一看，笼子里有一位亭长，红头巾大高帽，很威武。
English: One day he went to have a look, and inside the cage was a keeper with a red turban and a tall hat. He was very powerful.

古文：因问其故，亭长怒曰： 昨被县召，误入此中耳。 
现代文：于是他就问是怎么回事。亭长生气地说： 别提了，昨天县大老爷找我，我不知怎么走到这里来了！ 
English: So he asked what was going on. The mayor angrily said, "Don't mention it, the county grand master called me yesterday, I don't know how I got here!"

古文：于是出之。
现代文：于是就把亭长放出来了。
English: So they let the manager out.

古文：乃化为虎而去。
现代文：亭长却变成一只老虎跑掉了。
English: The innkeeper turned into a tiger and ran away.

古文：严猛
现代文：严猛
English: Strictly

古文：晋时，会稽严猛妇出采薪，为虎所害。
现代文：晋朝时，会稽人严猛的妻子出去打柴，被老虎害死。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, the wife of a strict inspector went out to collect firewood and was killed by a tiger.

古文：此后猛行至蒿中，忽见妇云： 君今日行，必遭不善。我当相免也。 
现代文：此后某一天，严猛走到蒿草之中，忽然看到了他的妻子。妻子对他说： 你今天走路，一定能遇上不幸的事，我得给你免除。 
English: After that, one day, Yan Meng walked into the thicket and suddenly saw his wife. His wife said to him, "If you walk today, you are sure to meet with misfortune. I have to give you an exemption."

古文：既而俱前。
现代文：然后他们就一块往前走。
English: Then they walked on together.

古文：忽逢一虎，跳梁向猛，妇举手指麾，状如遮护。
现代文：忽然碰上一只老虎，老虎跳跃着奔向严猛。妻子举起手来不停地挥动，样子象遮护。
English: Suddenly, he ran into a tiger. The tiger jumped and ran towards Yan Meng. His wife raised her hand and kept waving it, looking like a shield.

古文：须臾，有一胡人荷戟而过，妇因指之，虎即击胡。猛方获免。
现代文：不多时，有一个胡人扛着戟打此走过，妻子就指向胡人，虎也就去袭击胡人，严猛这才获免。
English: Not infrequently, a hu-man carrying a club would walk by, and the wife would point to the hu-man, and the tiger would attack the hu-man. Only then was Yan Meng spared.

古文：袁双
现代文：袁双
English: Yuan Shuang

古文：晋孝武太元五年，谯郡谯县袁双家贫客作。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元五年，谯郡谯县的袁双，因家穷而雇给别人家做事。
English: In the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, Yuan Shuang from Jixian County was hired to work for someone else's family because his family was poor.

古文：暮还家，道逢一女。
现代文：有一天晚上往家走，在路上遇到一位女子。
English: One evening, walking home, I met a woman on the road.

古文：年十五六，姿容端正。即与双为妇。
现代文：这女子十五六岁，姿容端正，就给袁双做了媳妇。
English: The girl was fifteen or sixteen years old, with a neat figure, and she became Yuan Shuang's daughter-in-law.

古文：五六年后，家资甚丰。
现代文：五六年后，袁双家的资财就挺多了。
English: Five or six years later, the Yuan Shuang family's assets have increased quite a lot.

古文：又生二男。
现代文：又生了两个男孩。
English: She gave birth to two more boys.

古文：至十岁，家乃巨富。
现代文：等到了十年，袁双家就是巨富了。
English: After waiting for ten years, Yuan Shuangjia became very rich.

古文：后里有新死者，葬后，此女逃往至墓所，乃解衣脱钏挂树，便变形作虎。发冢，曳棺出墓外，取死人食之。食饱后，还变作人。
现代文：后来，乡里有新近死的人，埋了以后，这女人就跑到墓地去，脱下衣服首饰挂到树上，摇身一变变成一只虎，扒开坟丘，拽出棺材，吃里边的死人。吃饱之后，仍然变成人。
English: Later, there was a newly dead person in the village. After burying him, the woman ran to the cemetery, took off her clothes and jewelry, hung them on the tree, and turned into a tiger. She opened the grave mound, pulled out the coffin, and ate the dead person inside. After eating enough, she still turned into a person.

古文：有见之者，窃语其婿： 卿妇非人，恐将相害。 
现代文：有人看到了，就偷偷地对袁双说： 你媳妇不是人，恐怕以后会害你！ 
English: When someone saw this, they secretly said to Yuan Shuanglu: "Your daughter-in-law is not human, I'm afraid she will harm you in the future!"

古文：双闻之不信。
现代文：袁双听了不信。
English: Yuan Shuang listened in disbelief.

古文：经时，复有死者，辄复如此。
现代文：又过了一些时候，又有人死，就又去吃。
English: Some time later, someone else died, so they went to eat again.

古文：后将其婿共看之，述知其实。后乃越县趋墟，还食死人。
现代文：后来就有人把袁双弄去一块看。袁双才知所说的是事实，她就远离州县趋向废墟，仍然吃死人。
English: Later, someone took Yuan Shuang to see it together. Yuan Shuang only knew that what she said was the truth. She was far away from the county, heading towards the ruins, still eating the dead.

古文：吴道宗
现代文：吴道宗
English: Wu Daozong

古文：晋义熙四年，东阳郡太末县吴道宗少失父，与母居，未娶妇。
现代文：晋朝义熙四年，东阳郡太末县有一个叫吴道宗的人，他从小失去父亲，和母亲住在一起，还没有娶上媳妇。
English: In the fourth year of the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Wu Daozong in Taimatsu County, Dongyang County. He lost his father when he was a child, lived with his mother, and had not yet married his daughter-in-law.

古文：一日，道宗他适，邻人闻屋中窣磕之声，窥不见其母，但有乌斑虎在屋中。
现代文：有一天，吴道宗到别处去了，邻居有人听到他家有窣窣窸窸磕磕碰碰的声音，偷偷往里一看，没看到他的母亲，只看见一只乌斑虎在屋里。
English: One day, when Wu Daozong went to another place, a neighbor heard the sound of banging in his house and secretly looked inside. He did not see his mother, but only saw a black-spotted tiger in the house.

古文：邻人恐虎食道宗母，遂鸣鼓会里人共救之。
现代文：邻人怕虎吃了吴道宗的母亲，就敲鼓召集乡里人一块来救她。
English: Neighbors feared that the tiger had eaten Wu Daozong's mother, so they beat drums to gather villagers together to rescue her.

古文：围宅突进，不见有虎，但见其母。
现代文：包围了住宅，突然进屋，都不见有虎，只见到他的母亲。
English: They surrounded the house and suddenly entered the house. There was no tiger in sight, only his mother.

古文：语如平常，不解其意。
现代文：他母亲说话的神态与平常一样，不知道大家为什么进来。
English: His mother spoke with her usual air of not knowing why everyone was there.

古文：儿还，母语之曰： 宿罪见谴，当有变化事。 
现代文：吴道宗回来之后，母亲对他说： 我素常的过错受到责备，当有变化的事情发生。 
English: After Wu Daozong's return, his mother said to him, "I used to be blamed for my mistakes, but things have changed.

古文：后一月，忽失母。
现代文：一个月以后，他的母亲忽然失踪了。
English: A month later, his mother suddenly disappeared.

古文：县界内虎灾屡起，皆云乌斑虎。百姓患之。
现代文：全县界内屡屡发生虎害人的事，都说是一只乌斑虎干的，百姓都怕它。
English: There have been many incidents of tigers harming people in the county. It is said that a black-spotted tiger did it, and the people are afraid of it.

古文：众共格之。伤数人。
现代文：许多人一起去袭击它，反被它伤了好几个人。
English: Many people went to attack it, but it injured several people.

古文：后人射虎，箭带膺，并戟刺中其腹，然不能即死。
现代文：后来有人用箭射它，射中了它的胸，并且用戟刺中了它的肚子，但是不能立即就死。
English: He was later shot with an arrow in the chest and stabbed in the stomach with a crossbow, but did not die immediately.

古文：经数日后，虎还其家，不能复人形，伏床上而死。
现代文：过了几天之后，这只虎回到吴道宗家，已经不能恢复人形，趴在床上死了。
English: A few days later, the tiger returned to Wu Dao's family. Unable to restore the doll, it died on the bed.

古文：其儿号泣，葬之如母。
现代文：吴道宗号哭悲痛，象对待母亲一样埋葬了它。
English: Wu Daozong cried with grief and buried it like he did with his mother.

古文：牧牛儿
现代文：牧牛儿
English: Cattle grazing

古文：晋复阳县里民家儿常牧牛。
现代文：晋朝复阳县一个乡间百姓家的男孩经常牧牛。
English: A boy from a rural peasant family in Foyang County in the Jin Dynasty often herded cattle.

古文：牛忽舐此儿，舐处肉悉白。
现代文：有一天牛忽然舔这个孩子，舔的地方肉全变白。
English: One day, the cow suddenly licked the child, and the licked area turned white.

古文：儿俄而死，其家葬此儿，杀牛以供宾客。
现代文：那孩子不久就死了。这家埋葬孩子的时候，把牛杀了给宾客们做菜吃。
English: The child died soon after, and the family killed a cow to cook for the guests while they buried the child.

古文：凡食此牛肉，男女二十余人，悉变作虎。
现代文：吃到牛肉的一共有男男女女二十多人，全都变成了老虎。
English: A total of more than 20 men, women and children who ate the beef all turned into tigers.

古文：师道宣
现代文：师道宣
English: Teacher Dao Xuan

古文：晋太元元年，江夏郡安陆县师道宣，年二十二，少未了了。
现代文：晋朝太元元年，江夏郡安陆县有一人叫师道宣，二十二岁，小时候并未怎么聪明。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Anlu County, Jiangxia County, there was a person named Shi Daoxuan, 22 years old, who was not very smart when he was a child.

古文：后忽发狂，变为虎，食人不可纪。
现代文：后来他突然发狂，变成一只猛虎，吃人无数。
English: Then he suddenly went mad and turned into a ferocious tiger, devouring countless people.

古文：后有一女子树上采桑，虎取食之。
现代文：后来有一位女子在树上采桑，他把她吃了。
English: Later, a woman was picking mulberries from a tree, and he ate her.

古文：竟，乃藏其钗钏于山石间。
现代文：然后，他把她的钗钏之类东西藏在山石间。
English: He then hid her skeleton and other items among the rocks.

古文：后复人形，知而取之。
现代文：后来他又恢复了人形，他还记得那女子的东西，就去取回。
English: He later recovered the doll, and when he remembered the woman's belongings, he went to retrieve them.

古文：经年还家，复为人。
现代文：过了一年，他回到家里，又开始过人的生活。
English: A year later, he returned home and resumed his normal life.

古文：遂出仕，官为殿中令史。
现代文：于是他当了官，官为殿中令史。
English: As a result, he became an official, and the official became the history of the palace.

古文：夜共人语，忽道天地变怪之事。道宣自云： 吾尝得病发狂，遂化作虎啖人。 
现代文：一夜他和别人一起说话，忽然说到天地变怪的事，他自己说，他曾经得病发狂，就变成了一只猛虎，吃了不少人。
English: One night he was talking with someone else, and suddenly he started talking about strange things happening in heaven and earth. He said that he had been sick and gone mad, and had turned into a ferocious tiger that had eaten many people.

古文：言其姓名。
现代文：他说了他们的姓名。
English: He said their names.

古文：同坐人或坐人，或有食其父子兄弟者。于是号哭，捉送赴官，遂饿死建康狱中。
现代文：同座人中，有的人就是被他吃了父亲，或儿子，或哥哥，或弟弟，或姐妹等亲人的，于是就号泣，就把他捉起来送到官府。于是他就饿死在建康的狱中。
English: Some of his fellow diners cried out that he had eaten their fathers, sons, brothers, brothers, sisters, and other relatives, so he was arrested and taken to the government office. He then starved to death in Jiankang prison.

古文：谢允
现代文：谢允
English: by Xie Yun

古文：历阳谢允字道通，少为贼所掠，为奴于蒋凤家。
现代文：历阳人谢允，字道通，小时候被贼人掳去，在蒋凤家做奴仆。
English: Liyang man Xie Yun, a wordsmith, was abducted by thieves as a child and worked as a slave in the Jiang Feng family.

古文：常于山中见阱中虎饥，因出之。
现代文：他曾经在山中见到陷阱里的一只老虎饿得很厉害，就把虎弄出来放了。
English: He once saw a tiger in a trap in the mountains that was very hungry, so he got the tiger out and set it free.

古文：后诣具自白，令长不为申理，考讯无不至。
现代文：后来他到县里去自己说明情况，要求回家，县令不给他申理，还不择手段地拷问他。
English: Later, he went to the county to explain the situation himself and asked to go home. The county government refused to give him a hearing and tortured him by any means.

古文：允夜梦人曰： 此中易入难出，汝自有慈惠，当相拯拔。 
现代文：他做了一个梦，梦见一个人对他说： 这地方进来容易出去难，你对我有恩，我得把你救出去。 
English: He had a dream in which a man said to him: "This place is easy to get into and hard to get out of. You've done me a favour. I've got to get you out."

古文：觉，见一少年，通身黄衣，遥在栅外与允语。
现代文：梦醒，他看到一位年轻人。这位年轻人全身穿黄色衣服，远远地站在栅栏外边和他说话。
English: Waking from a dream, he saw a young man, dressed all in yellow, standing far outside the fence, talking to him.

古文：狱吏以告令长，令长由是不敢诬辱。
现代文：狱吏把这事告诉了县令，县令从此不敢诬辱他了。
English: The warden told the county magistrate about this, and the county magistrate no longer dared to slander him.

古文：即还。乃上武当山。
现代文：回到家乡之后，他就上了武当山。
English: After returning to his hometown, he climbed Wudang Mountain.

古文：时唐公亮闻而愍之，给以资履。
现代文：当时唐亮听说了他的遭遇，很同情他，给他一些资助。
English: At that time, Tang Liang heard about what happened to him, sympathized with him, and gave him some funding.

古文：遂于襄阳见道士曰： 吾师戴先生者，成人君子，尝言有志者与之俱来。
现代文：于是他在襄阳见到了一位道士，道士说： 我师父戴先生，是个成全人的君子，曾经说有个有志气的人和他一块来，大概就是你吧？ 
English: So he met a Taoist in Xiangyang. The Taoist said, "My master, Mr. Zhuang Dai, is a gentleman who is a perfected person. He once said that there was a person with ambition who came with him. It was probably you, right?"

古文：得非尔耶？ 随入山，斋三日，进见之，乃昔日所梦人也。
现代文：他跟着道士进山，斋戒三天，进去见戴先生，原来就是以前梦里的那个人。
English: He followed the Taoist into the mountains, fasted for three days, and went in to see Mr. Dai, who turned out to be the man in his dream.

古文：问允欲见黄衣童否，赐以神药三丸，服之不饥渴。
现代文：戴先生问谢允想不想见见那位黄衣童子，把三丸神药赐给他，吃了之后不饥不渴，没有一点别的需求了。
English: Mr. Dai asked Xie Yun if he wanted to see the boy in yellow, and gave him the three pills of magic potion. After eating, he was not hungry or thirsty, and had no other needs.

古文：无所思欲。
现代文：戴先生也没有在这里长期逗留。
English: Mr Dai didn't stay long either.

古文：先生亦无常处。时有祥光紫气荫其上，芬馥之气遍于山谷。
现代文：那时有祥光紫气照耀在那里，芬芳之气遍于山谷。
English: At that time, the auspicious purple light shone there, and the fragrant air spread throughout the valley.

古文：郑袭
现代文：郑袭
English: Zheng Wei

古文：荥阳郑袭，晋太康中，为太守门下驺。忽如狂，奄失其所。
现代文：荥阳人郑袭，晋朝太康年中，是太守门下的喂马人，忽然就如痴如狂，不知哪儿去了。
English: Zheng Qi, a native of Shenyang, was a horse-feeder under Taishou during the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty. Suddenly, he went mad. I don't know where he went.

古文：经日寻得。
现代文：过了一天才找到。
English: It took a day to find him.

古文：裸身呼吟，肤血淋漓。
现代文：只见他裸着身大呼小叫，满身血肉模糊。
English: I only saw him naked, shouting and screaming, covered in blood and flesh.

古文：问其故。社公令其作虎，以斑皮衣之。
现代文：问他是怎么回事，他说，土地神让他做老虎，把有斑纹的皮穿到他身上。
English: When I asked him what was going on, he said that the earth god had made him into a tiger and put the striped skin on him.

古文：辞以执鞭之士，不堪号跃。神怒，还使剥皮。
现代文：他经受不住虎的吼叫和跳跃，向一位拿鞭子的人士诉苦，神便大怒，让人剥了他的皮然后放还。
English: He could not stand the roaring and jumping of the tiger, complained to a person with a whip, and the god was so angry that he was skinned and then released.

古文：皮已着肉，疮毁惨痛。
现代文：那皮已经附着到肉上，这一剥，伤口惨痛。
English: The skin was already attached to the flesh, and the wound was excruciating.

古文：旬日乃差。
现代文：十天之后，伤才渐渐好起来。
English: After ten days, the injury gradually got better.

古文：刘广雅
现代文：刘广雅
English: Liu Guangya

古文：彭城刘广雅，以太元元年，为京府佐。
现代文：彭城人刘广雅，太元元年的时候，是京府佐。
English: Liu Guangya, a native of Pengcheng, was a vice-governor of Beijing in the first year of the Taiyuan era.

古文：被使还，路经竹里亭。
现代文：他被派出去办完事情回来，路经竹里亭。
English: He was sent out to do things and came back, passing through the bamboo pavilion.

古文：多虎。
现代文：竹里亭老虎很多。
English: There are many tigers in Takuritei.

古文：刘防卫甚至，牛马系于前，手戟布于地。
现代文：刘广雅防卫得很严密，把牛马拴在前面，把戟密密摆在四周。
English: Liu Guangya's defense was very tight. He put the ox and horse in front, and placed the horses around them.

古文：中宵，与士庶同睡。
现代文：夜半，他和手下人一起睡下。
English: In the middle of the night, he falls asleep with his men.

古文：虎乘间跳入，独取刘而去。
现代文：老虎趁此机会跳进来，唯独把刘广雅叼走了。
English: The tiger took advantage of this opportunity to jump in, only to drag Liu Guangya away.

古文：易拔
现代文：易拔
English: Easy to pull up

古文：晋时，豫章郡吏易拔，义熙中，受番还家，违遁不返，郡遣追。
现代文：晋朝的时候，豫章郡郡吏易拔，义熙年中，得到一次探家的机会，到期没有回来，郡守就派人去追他快回来。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, the county officials of Yuzhang County, Yibat and Yixi, got a chance to explore the family, but did not return when due, and the county governor sent someone to chase him and come back quickly.

古文：见拔言语如常，亦为设食。
现代文：被派的人见到易拔，易拨说话很正常，也为他准备饭。
English: The person who was sent saw that Yi Bao and Yi Zhao were speaking normally, and they also prepared a meal for him.

古文：使者催令束妆，拔因语曰： 女看我面。 
现代文：被派的人催易拔穿衣束带准备上路的时候，易拔就说： 你看看我的脸。 
English: When the dispatched person urged Yi Bao to take off his clothes and prepare for the journey, Yi Bao said: "Look at my face.

古文：乃见眼目角张，身有黄斑色。
现代文：被派的人这才看到，易拔的眼角张开了，身上有黄色斑纹。
English: It was only then that the person who had been sent saw that the corners of his eyes were wide open and that he had yellow markings on his body.

古文：便竖一足，径出门去。
现代文：易拔便竖起一只脚，径直走出门去。
English: Yi Bu then put up one foot and walked straight out the door.

古文：家先依山为居。
现代文：他家原先就靠山而居。
English: His family used to live close to the mountain.

古文：至麓，即变成三足大虎。
现代文：他跑到山根底下，就变成了一只三条腿的大老虎。
English: He ran to the bottom of the mountain and turned into a three-legged tiger.

古文：竖一足，即成其尾也。
现代文：那竖起的一只脚，变成了虎的尾巴。
English: That raised foot turned into a tiger's tail.

古文：萧泰
现代文：萧泰
English: Xiao Tai

古文：梁衡山侯萧泰为雍州刺史，镇襄阳。
现代文：南北朝梁衡山侯萧泰是雍州刺史，镇守襄阳。
English: Xiao Tai, a member of the Liang Hengshan clan of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, was a prominent figure in the history of Yongzhou and the town guard of Xiangyang.

古文：时虎甚暴，村门设槛。
现代文：当时老虎特别凶暴，村门设有捕捉野兽的笼子。
English: At that time, tigers were particularly ferocious, and cages were set up at the village gate to capture the beasts.

古文：机发，村人炬火烛之，见一老道士自陈云： 从村丐乞还，误落槛里。 
现代文：笼子的机关发动了，村民们举着灯笼火把跑来一看，见笼子里有一个老道士。老道士自己陈述说，是到一个村里乞讨回来，不小心误走进笼子里的。
English: The mechanism of the cage was activated, and the villagers, holding lanterns and torches, ran to take a look and saw an old Taoist in the cage. The old Taoist himself stated that he had come back to a village to beg and accidentally walked into the cage.

古文：共开之。
现代文：人们一起把笼子打开。
English: People open the cage together.

古文：出槛即成虎，奔驰而去。
现代文：那老道出来就变成一只虎，奔驰而去。
English: When the old man came out, he turned into a tiger and ran away.

古文：黄乾
现代文：黄乾
English: Huang Qian

古文：梁末，始兴人黄乾有妹小珠，聘同县人李肃。
现代文：南北朝梁末，始兴人黄乾有个妹妹叫小珠。小珠与同县的李肃订了婚。
English: At the end of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Huang Qian, a person from Shixing, had a younger sister named Xiao Zhu. Xiao Zhu was engaged to Li Su Maru from the same county.

古文：小妹共嫂入山采木实，过神庙，而小珠在庙恋慕不肯归。
现代文：小珠和嫂子一块上山采野果，路过神庙，小珠就在庙前恋恋不舍。
English: Xiao Zhu and her sister-in-law went up the mountain together to pick wild fruits, passing by the temple, Xiao Zhu fell in love in front of the temple.

古文：及将还，复独走上庙，见人即入草中。
现代文：等到要回来的时候，她又独自跑到庙上，见到人就往草里钻。
English: When it was time to return, she ran to the temple alone again, and when she saw people, she drilled into the grass.

古文：乾妻来告肃，肃以为更有他意。
现代文：黄乾的妻子来告诉李肃。李肃以为小珠另有意于别人。
English: Huang Qian's wife came to tell Li Su. Li Su thought Xiao Zhu was interested in someone else.

古文：肃被县召，将一伴夜还。值风雨。见庙屋有火，二人向火炙衣。
现代文：李肃被县里召去，夜里和一位伙伴往回走，遇上风雨，见庙里有火，两个人就对着火烤衣服。
English: Li Su was summoned by the county, and he and a partner walked back at night. They encountered wind and rain, saw a fire in the temple, and the two of them toasted their clothes on the fire.

古文：见神床上有衣。
现代文：二人发现神床上有衣服。
English: They found clothes on the hearth.

古文：少间，闻外有行声，二人惶怖，入神床屏风后。
现代文：不一会儿，听到外边有走路的声音。两个人害怕，躲到神床屏风后面。
English: After a while, they heard the sound of someone walking outside. Two people were afraid and hid behind the screen of the Shinto shrine.

古文：须臾，见一虎振尾奋迅，直至火边，自脱牙爪，卷其皮，置床上，着衣向火坐。
现代文：片刻，只见一只老虎振尾阔步走到火边，自己脱掉牙和爪，把皮卷起来放到床上，穿上衣服对着火坐下。
English: After a while, I saw a tiger strut to the edge of the fire, take off his teeth and claws, roll up his skin and put it on the bed, put on his clothes and sit down in front of the fire.

古文：肃看乃小珠也，肃径出抱之。
现代文：李肃一看那竟是小珠，就跑过去把她抱住。
English: When Li Sui saw that it was actually a small bead, he ran over and hugged her.

古文：与语不应。
现代文：跟她说话，她不答应。
English: Talk to her, she won't say yes.

古文：明日将归，送向乾家。
现代文：天亮以后，把她带回来，送到黄乾家。
English: After dawn, bring her back and take her to Huang Qian's home.

古文：乃闭置一室，掷生肉则接食之。
现代文：黄乾就把她关进一个屋里。扔生肉给她，她就接过去吃。
English: Huang Qian locked her in a room. He threw raw meat to her, and she took it and ate it.

古文：其恒看守，少日又成虎。
现代文：她家长期看守着她。不几天，她又变成虎。
English: Her family kept an eye on her for a long time. A few days later, she turned into a tiger again.

古文：郡县检验，村人乃将弓弩上舍，即发屋射杀之。
现代文：郡县都来检验过。村里人就把弓弩拿到房子顶上，扒开房盖射死了她。
English: The villagers took their crossbows to the roof of the house, ripped open the roof and shot her dead.

古文：明日有虎暴，百姓白日闭门。
现代文：第二天就有虎来侵犯，大白天百姓就得关门。
English: The next day, a tiger came to invade, and people had to close their doors in broad daylight.

古文：太守熊基表闻之。
现代文：这是太守熊基表奏的。
English: This was played by Taishou Kumaki.

古文：酋耳兽
现代文：酋耳兽
English: The Great Horned Owl

古文：唐天后中，涪州武龙界多虎暴。
现代文：唐朝武则天时，涪州武龙县界内虎暴为患。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, there was a tiger outbreak in Wulong County, Zhangzhou.

古文：有一兽似虎而绝大，日正午逐一虎，直入人家噬杀之，亦不食。
现代文：有一个野兽象虎但是特别大，一天正午追一只虎，直追到人家，把虎咬死，也不吃。
English: There was a beast like a tiger, but very big. One day at noon, it chased a tiger straight to someone's house. It bit the tiger to death and refused to eat it.

古文：由是县界不复有虎矣。
现代文：从此以后，这县界内不再有虎了。
English: Since then, there have been no more tigers in the county.

古文：录奏，检瑞图，乃酋耳。
现代文：从表奏中把这兽的样子抄录下来，到《瑞图》中一查，这兽原来是酋耳兽。
English: I copied down the appearance of the beast from the transcription and checked it in "Reitu." The beast turned out to be a big-eared animal.

古文：不食生物，有虎暴则杀之也。
现代文：它不吃生物，有虎行暴就把虎咬死。
English: It does not eat living creatures. If a tiger is violent, it will bite the tiger to death.

古文：虎塔
现代文：虎塔
English: Tiger Tower

古文：唐天后中，成王千里将一虎子来宫中养。
现代文：唐朝武则天的时候，成王从千里之外把一只虎崽运到宫中来喂养。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzetian of the Tang Dynasty, King Chenghuang brought a tiger cub from thousands of miles away to the palace to feed it.

古文：损一宫人。遂令生饿数日而死。
现代文：因为它伤了一个宫女，就下令先饿它几天结果它饿死了。
English: Because it had injured a lady-in-waiting, it was ordered to starve for a few days, and as a result it starved to death.

古文：天后令葬之，其上起塔，设千人供，勒碑，号为 虎塔 。
现代文：武则天令人把它埋葬了，坟墓之上建了塔，设了千人供，刻了碑，名叫虎塔。
English: Wu Zetian had it buried, built a tower on top of the grave, set up a thousand offerings, and carved a monument, called Tiger Tower.

古文：至今犹在。
现代文：这塔现在还有。
English: The tower still stands.

古文：傅黄中
现代文：傅黄中
English: Fu Huangzhong

古文：唐傅黄中为越州诸暨县令。有部人饮大醉，夜中山行，临崖而睡。
现代文：唐朝傅黄中是越州诸暨县县令，他有一个部下喝酒喝得大醉，夜里在山中行走，靠悬崖睡着了。
English: Fu Huangzhong of the Tang Dynasty was the county magistrate of Zhuji County, Yue Province. One of his subordinates drank too much alcohol, walked in the mountains at night, and fell asleep on a cliff.

古文：忽有虎临其上而嗅之，虎须入醉人鼻中，遂喷嚏声震。虎遂惊跃，便落崖。腰胯不遂，为人所得。
现代文：忽然有一只老虎靠近他，从上边用鼻子嗅他的脸，虎须伸进他的鼻孔里，他就打了一个喷嚏，一声大震，老虎吓了一跳，掉到了山崖下，摔坏了腰胯，被人捉住。
English: Suddenly, a tiger approached him and sniffed his face from above. The tiger's whiskers reached into his nostrils. He sneezed and there was a loud bang. The tiger was startled and fell down the cliff, breaking his lower jaw. He was caught.

古文：郴州佐史
现代文：郴州佐史
English: Chenzhou Sashi

古文：唐长安年中，郴州佐史因病而为虎。
现代文：唐朝长安年中，彬州佐史因病变成了虎，要吃他的嫂子。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an year of the Tang Dynasty, Binzhou Sashi became a tiger due to illness and wanted to eat his sister-in-law.

古文：将啖其嫂，村人擒获，乃佐史也。虽形未全改，而尾实虎矣。
现代文：村里人捉住一看，原来是他。虽然形状还没有完全改变，但是尾巴已经确实是虎尾巴了。
English: When the villagers caught a glimpse, it turned out to be him. Although the shape had not completely changed, the tail was indeed a tiger's tail.

古文：因系树数十日，还复为人。
现代文：于是人们把他绑到树上，一直绑了几十天，他才恢复人形。
English: So they tied him to a tree and kept him there for dozens of days, until he regained his human form.

古文：长史崔玄简亲问其故。
现代文：长史崔玄简亲自问他是怎么回事。
English: Chief Secretary Cui Xuanjian personally asked him what was going on.

古文：佐史云： 初被一虎引见一妇人，盛服。
现代文：他说： 最初我被一只虎引见给一位妇人。
English: He said: "I was first introduced to a woman by a tiger.

古文：诸虎恒参集，各令取当日之食。
现代文：这位妇人穿戴整齐，服饰华丽。
English: The woman is immaculately groomed and well-dressed.

古文：时某新预虎列，质未全，不能别觅他人，将取嫂以供，遂为所擒。
现代文：许多虎都参拜她，妇人令他们各自准备好当天的吃食，当时我新加入老虎的行列，虎性未全，不能觅获别人，就想把嫂子弄给老虎们吃。
English: Many tigers came to pay homage to her, and the woman made each of them prepare the food for the day. At that time, I had just joined the ranks of the tigers. I was not a complete tiger and could not find anyone else, so I wanted to get my sister-in-law for the tigers to eat.

古文：今虽作虎不得，尚能其声耳。 
现代文：于是就被捉住了。现在我虽然不能做老虎，但是还能发出虎的声音。 
English: So I was caught. Now I can't be a tiger, but I can make tiger noises.

古文：简令试之，史乃作虎声，震骇左右，檐瓦振落。
现代文：崔玄简让他试一下，他发出一声虎啸，左右震惊，房上的瓦都被震落。
English: Cui Xuanjian asked him to try it, and he let out a roar, shocking both sides, and the tiles on the house were shaken off.

古文：巴人
现代文：巴人
English: Bajin

古文：巴人好群伐树木作板。
现代文：巴人喜欢成群结伙地伐树加工木板。
English: The Ba people like to cut down trees in groups to make wooden boards.

古文：开元初，巴人百余辈自褒中随山伐木，至太白庙。
现代文：开元年初，一百多位巴人从褒中出发随着山势伐木，一直来到太白庙。
English: At the beginning of the year, more than a hundred Ba people set out from Baozhong along with the mountain logging and came all the way to the Taibai Temple.

古文：庙前松树百余株，各大数十围。
现代文：庙前有松树一百多棵，每棵都有几十围粗。
English: There are more than a hundred pine trees in front of the temple, each of which has a circumference of dozens.

古文：群巴喜曰： 天赞也。 
现代文：这群巴人高兴地说： 这真是天助啊！ 
English: This group of Pakistanis said happily: This is really a godsend!

古文：止而伐之。
现代文：他们便住下来开始伐木。
English: They settled down and started logging.

古文：已倒二十余株，有老人戴帽拄杖至其所，谓巴曰： 此神树，何故伐之？ 
现代文：已经伐倒了二十多棵，有一位戴着帽子拄着拐杖的老人来到这里，对巴人说： 这是神树，为什么要伐呢？ 
English: More than twenty trees have already been felled. An old man wearing a cap and walking with a cane came here and said to Baba: "This is a sacred tree, why cut it down?

古文：群巴初不辍作。
现代文：巴人们并不停止。
English: The drummers don't stop.

古文：老人曰； 我是太白神。已倒者休，乞君未倒者，无宜作意。 
现代文：老人说： 我是太白神，已经伐倒的就算了，没伐倒的，希望你们不要伐了。 
English: The old man said, "I'm too white, so I don't care if you cut it down. If you don't cut it down, I hope you don't cut it down."

古文：巴等不止。
现代文：巴人们仍不停止。
English: The drummers still don't stop.

古文：老人曰： 君若不止，必当俱死。
现代文：老人说： 你们不停止，一定都死，没好处啊！ 
English: The old man said, "If you don't stop, you'll all die. It's no good!"

古文：无益也。 又不止。老人乃登山呼： 斑子 。
现代文：巴人们还是不止。老人便登上山坡喊： 斑子！ 
English: The old man climbed up the hillside and shouted: "Maboko!

古文：倏尔有虎数头，相继而至，噬巴殆尽，唯五六人获免。
现代文：一时间有几只老虎相继而来，把这些巴人全都咬死，只有六七人得免。
English: At one time, several tigers came one after another, biting all these Ba people to death. Only six or seven people were spared.

古文：神谓之曰： 以汝好心，因不令杀，宜速去也。 
现代文：神对他们说： 因为你们心是好的，就不让虎杀你们了。
English: God said to them, "Because your hearts are good, you will not let the tigers kill you.

古文：其倒树至天宝末尚存。
现代文：你们应该马上离开这里！ 那些倒树到天宝年末还有。
English: You should get out of here right now! Those fallen trees will still be there at the end of the year.

古文：有诏修理内殿，杨国忠令人至山所，宣敕取树，作板以用焉。神竟与之。
现代文：皇上有诏修理内殿，杨国忠令人来到这里，宣读皇帝的诏书取树，做板子用，神竟给了他。
English: The emperor had issued an edict to repair the inner hall, and Yang Guozhong ordered Yu to come here, read out the emperor's edict, take the tree and use it as a board, but God gave it to him.

古文：峡口道士
现代文：峡口道士
English: Kyokuchi Daishi

古文：开元中，峡口多虎，往来舟船皆被伤害。
现代文：开元年间，峡口老虎很多，来往船只上的人总要受到虎的伤害。
English: During the first year of the year, there were a lot of tigers in the gorge, and people on ships coming and going were always injured by tigers.

古文：自后但是有船将下峡之时，即预一人充饲虎，方举船无患。
现代文：自此以后只要是有船只要从峡口通过，就要预备一个人喂老虎。这样才能无患。
English: Since then, as long as there is a boat passing through the mouth of the gorge, it is necessary to prepare a person to feed the tiger. In this way, there is no danger.

古文：不然，则船中被害者众矣。
现代文：不然，船上受害的人就更多了。
English: Otherwise, there would have been more victims on board.

古文：自此成例。
现代文：从此形成惯例。
English: Since then, it has become common practice.

古文：船留二人上岸饲虎。
现代文：每船留两个人上岸喂虎。
English: Two people from each boat go ashore to feed the tigers.

古文：经数日，其后有一船，内皆豪强。数内有二人单穷，被众推出，令上岸饲虎。
现代文：过了几日，有一只船上坐的全是豪强之士，只有两人是穷汉，大家便把这二人推出来，让他们上岸喂虎。
English: A few days later, there was a boat full of brave men, but only two poor men, so they pushed them out and let them go ashore to feed the tigers.

古文：其人自度力不能拒，乃为出船，而谓诸人曰： 某贫穷，合为诸公代死。
现代文：其中有一个人自己估计躲不过去，就走出船来，对大家说： 我很穷，应当替大家去死。
English: And one of them, when he saw that he could not escape, went forth, and said unto them, I am poor, and must needs die for you all.

古文：然人各有分定，苟不便为其所害，某别有恳诚，诸公能允许否？ 
现代文：但是人各有自己的命运，如果我没有被虎吃掉，我就有另外的要求，不知大家能不能答应我？ 
English: But everyone has their own destiny. If I am not eaten by the tiger, I will have another request. I wonder if everyone can agree with me?

古文：众人闻其语言甚切，为之怆然。而问曰： 尔有何事？ 
现代文：大家听他说得很恳切，也都感到悲怆，就问他说： 你有什么事？ 
English: When they heard him speak so earnestly, they were all grieved and said to him, "What ails you?

古文：其人曰： 某今便上岸，寻其虎踪，当自别有计较。但恳为某留船滩下，至日午时，若不来，即任船去也。 
现代文：那人说： 我现在就上岸去，主动去找那老虎，找到以后自然要有些计较，我只求大家把船留在滩下等我一下，到了中午我还没回来大家再走。 
English: The man said, "I'll go ashore right now and take the initiative to look for the tiger. After I find it, I'll naturally have to take some precautions. I just ask everyone to leave the boat under the beach and wait for me. If I'm not back by noon, everyone should leave.

古文：众人曰； 我等如今便泊船滩下，不止住今日午时，兼为尔留宿。俟明日若不来，船即去也。 
现代文：大伙说： 我们现在就把船停到滩下去，不仅等你到晌午，还要再等一宿，到明天你还不回来，船才开。 
English: They said, "We will now moor the boat on the beach, and not only wait for you until noon, but also wait for another night. If you do not return by tomorrow, the boat will not sail."

古文：言讫，船乃下滩。
现代文：说完，船就来到滩下。
English: With that, the boat came to rest under the beach.

古文：其人乃执一长柯斧，便上岸，入山寻虎。
现代文：那人就带上一把长把斧上了岸，进山寻找老虎。
English: The man went ashore with a long axe and went into the mountains to look for tigers.

古文：并不见有人踪，但见虎迹亦已。
现代文：山上并没有人的踪迹，只有老虎的脚印。
English: There were no human footprints on the mountain, only those of tigers.

古文：林木深邃，其人乃见一路，虎踪甚稠，乃更寻之。
现代文：林木森森，那人寻得一条小路，虎的脚印甚多，就向前寻去。
English: Through the tangle of trees, the man found a path with many tiger footprints, and went on searching.

古文：至一山隘，泥极甚，虎踪转多。
现代文：来到一个山隘，污泥很深，虎踪更多。
English: We came to a mountain pass where the mud was very deep and there were more tiger tracks.

古文：更行半里，即见一大石室，又有一石床，见一道士在石床上而熟寐，架上有一张虎皮。
现代文：又走了半里，就看到一个石室，石室里有一张石床，石床上睡着一位道士。架子上有一张虎皮。
English: After walking another half-mile, I saw a stone room. There was a stone bed in the stone room. A Taoist monk was sleeping on the stone bed. There was a tiger skin on the shelf.

古文：其人意是变虎之所，乃蹑足，于架上取皮，执斧衣皮而立。
现代文：那人想这便是老虎变化的地方。于是他就蹑手蹑脚地把虎皮从架上取下来，穿上虎皮拿着斧子站在那里。
English: The man thought that this was the place where the tiger had changed, so he crept up and took the tiger skin off the shelf, put it on and stood there holding the axe.

古文：道士忽惊觉，已失架上虎皮。乃曰： 吾合食汝，汝何窃吾皮？ 
现代文：道士忽然惊醒，见架上的虎皮已经丢失，就说： 我应当吃你，你怎么偷我的皮？ 
English: The moralist suddenly woke up, saw that the tiger skin on the shelf had been lost, and said: I should eat you, how did you steal my skin?

古文：其人曰： 我合食尔，尔何反有是言？ 
现代文：那人说： 我应当吃你，你怎么反而说这样的话？ 
English: The man said, "I should eat you, why do you say such a thing?

古文：二人争竞，移时不已。
现代文：二人争持不下。
English: The two couldn't keep up.

古文：道士词屈，乃曰： 吾有罪于上帝，被谪在此为虎。
现代文：道士理亏，就说： 我有罪于上天，被贬在这里当虎，应该吃一千人。
English: The moralist, at a loss for words, said: I have sinned against heaven, I have been reduced to a tiger here, I should eat a thousand people.

古文：若不归，吾必须别更为虎，又食一千人矣。
现代文：我已经吃了九百九十九人，只差你一个了。我很不幸，被你把皮偷了去。如果不还我虎皮，我还要另外做一次老虎，还要吃一千人。
English: I have eaten nine hundred and ninety-nine people, and you are the only one left. I am very unlucky that you stole my skin. If you don't give me back my tiger skin, I will become a tiger again and eat a thousand people.

古文：今有一计，吾与汝俱获两全。可乎？ 
现代文：我有一计，我们两个可以两全其美，可以吗？ 
English: I have a plan. The two of us can have the best of both worlds, okay?

古文：其人曰： 可也。 
现代文：那人说： 可以。 
English: The man said, "Yes."

古文：道士曰： 汝今但执皮还船中，剪发及须鬓少许，剪指爪甲，兼头面脚手及身上，各沥少血二三升，以故衣三两事裹之。
现代文：道士说： 你现在只管拿着皮回船上去，剪掉一些头发、胡须、指甲什么的，还有头、脸、手、脚、以及全身，各都稍微滴一点血，用几件旧衣服包上。
English: The Taoist said, "All you have to do now is take the skin and go back to the boat, cut off some hair, whiskers, nails, and so on, as well as the head, face, hands, feet, and the whole body, each with a little drop of blood, and wrap it with a few old clothes.

古文：待吾到岸上，汝可抛皮与吾，吾取披已，化为虎。
现代文：等我到了岸上，你可以把皮扔给我，我拿起皮披上，变成虎，你再把那东西扔给我，我把它吃了，就等于吃了你。 
English: When I get to the shore, you can throw me the skin of a whale. I'll pick it up, put it on and turn into a tiger. Then you can throw that thing to me. If I eat it, it's the same as eating you.

古文：即将此物抛与，吾取而食之，即与汝无异也。 其人遂披皮执斧而归。
现代文：那人便披着虎皮拿着斧子回到船上。船上的人都很惊讶，那人便详细述说前后过程。
English: The man then returned to the boat wearing a tiger skin and carrying an axe. The people on board were very surprised, and the man described the process in detail.

古文：船中诸人惊讶，而备述其由。
现代文：就在船上按道士说的准备了一切。
English: They prepared everything on the boat according to what the priest said.

古文：遂于船中，依虎所教待之。
现代文：将近天明，道士已经来到岸上。
English: It's almost dawn, and the Taoist monk has come ashore.

古文：迟明，道士已在岸上，遂抛皮与之。道士取皮衣振迅，俄变成虎，哮吼跳踯。
现代文：那人于是就把皮扔给他。他把皮往身上一穿，一振作，就变成一只虎，又是吼叫又是跳跃。
English: The man threw the skin to him, and as soon as he put it on, he became a tiger, roaring and jumping.

古文：又抛衣与虎，乃啮食而去。自后更不闻有虎伤人。
现代文：那人又把旧衣服扔给老虎，老虎就把旧衣服吃了，掉头回山而去，从此后再没听说这里有老虎伤人。
English: The man threw the old clothes to the tiger, and the tiger ate the old clothes, turned around and went back to the mountain. Since then, no one has heard of tigers hurting people here.

古文：众言食人数足，自当归天去矣。
现代文：大伙说它吃人的数已经足了，自然应当回到天上去了。
English: Everyone said that it had eaten enough people and should naturally go back to the sky.

