古文：卓茂字子康，南阳宛人也。
现代文：◆卓茂传卓茂字子康，南阳郡宛人。
English: ◆Zhuo Maozhuan Zhuo Maozhuang Zikang, the addressee of Nanyang County.

古文：父祖皆至郡守。
现代文：父亲祖父都官至郡守。
English: His father and grandfather rose from city officials to county governors.

古文：茂，元帝时学于长安，事博士江生，习《诗》、《礼》及历算。究极师法，称为通儒。
现代文：卓茂，元帝时学于长安，师事博士江翁，学习《诗》、《礼》及历算，穷尽老师学术，被称为通儒。
English: Zhuo Mao, who studied in Chang'an during the Yuan Dynasty, and Jiang Weng, who studied "Poetry," "Rite" and "Calculation" and exhausted his academic potential as a teacher, were known as Tong Ru.

古文：性宽仁恭爱。
现代文：性宽仁恭爱。
English: Love is benevolent and kind.

古文：乡党故旧，虽行能与茂不同，而皆爱慕欣欣焉。
现代文：乡党故旧，虽行为才能与卓茂不同，对他都爱慕欣与交往。
English: Township party old-fashioned, although the ability to act is different from Zhuo Mao, they all admire and interact with him.

古文：初辟丞相府史，事孔光，光称为长者。
现代文：起初被征召为丞相府吏，从孔光，孔光称他为长者。
English: At first, he was conscripted as an official of the prime minister's office, from Kong Guang, Kong Guang called him an elder.

古文：时尝出行，有人认其马。
现代文：曾出行，有人相认他的马。
English: He was travelling and someone recognised his horse.

古文：茂问曰： 子亡马几何时？ 
现代文：卓茂问道 ：你的马丢了多久？ 
English: Zhuo Mao asked: How long has your horse been lost?

古文：对曰： 月余日矣。 
现代文：那人答道 ：丢了一个多月了。 
English: The man replied, "I lost it more than a month ago."

古文：茂有马数年，心知其谬，嘿解与之，挽车而去，顾曰： 若非公马，幸至丞相府归我。 
现代文：卓茂的马跟他已有数年，明知他认错了，却坦然解下马给了他，自己挽车而去，回头对那人道： 如果此马不是你丢的马，希望你把它送到丞相府还给我。 
English: Zhuo Mao's horse had been with him for several years. He knew he had made a mistake, but he calmly untied the horse and gave it to him. He backed away and turned to the man: "If this horse is not the one you lost, I hope you will return it to me at the prime minister's office."

古文：他日，马主别得亡者，乃诸府送马，叩头谢之。
现代文：后来，马主寻到了自己丢失的马，于是把卓茂的马送到丞相府归还他，叩头表示道歉。
English: Later, the owner found his lost horse, so he sent Zhuo Mao's horse to the prime minister's office to return it to him, and bowed his head in apology.

古文：茂性不好争如此。
现代文：卓茂的与人无争就这样。
English: That's how Zhuo Mao was able to get along with others.

古文：后以儒术举为侍郎，给事黄门，迁密令。
现代文：后来以儒术被推举为侍郎，供职黄门，迁密县县令。
English: Later, he was elected as a chamberlain with Confucianism, served Huangmen, and became the county magistrate of Qianmi County.

古文：劳心谆谆，视人如子，举善而教，口无恶言，吏人亲爱而不忍欺之。
现代文：劳心尽职谆谆恳切，视民如子，举善政以教人，口无恶言，官吏民众亲爱而不忍心欺他。
English: He is diligent in fulfilling his duties and earnest, regards the people as his children, carries out good governance to teach people, has no bad words, and officials are dear to the people and can't bear to deceive him.

古文：人尝有言部享长受其米肉遗者，茂辟左右问之曰： 亭长为从汝求乎？为汝有事嘱之而受乎？
现代文：有人曾说卓茂下面的亭长曾接受他的米与肉的赠送。卓茂避开手下人问他说 ：亭长是遵从你的要求呢，还是因为你有事嘱咐于他而接受的呢？
English: It was once said that a chief steward under Zhuo Mao once accepted a gift of rice and meat from him. Zhuo Mao avoided his subordinates and asked him, "Did the chief steward comply with your request, or did he accept it because you ordered him to do something?"

古文：将平居自以恩意遗之乎？ 人曰： 往遗之耳。 
现代文：或者是你自己平常感到他对你有恩而送他的？ 那人说 ：是我自己送他的。 
English: Or did you give it to him out of your usual feeling that he owed you something? The man said: I gave it to him myself.

古文：茂曰： 遗之而受，何故言邪？ 
现代文：卓茂说： 你送他他接受，为什么又说出来呢？ 
English: Zhuo Mao said, "If you send it to him, he will accept it, so why say it again?"

古文：人曰： 窃闻贤明之君，使人不畏吏，吏不取人。
现代文：那人说 ：我听说贤明之君能使人不害怕官吏，官吏也不取人财物。
English: The man said: I have heard that a wise ruler can make people not afraid of officials, and officials do not take people's property.

古文：今我畏吏，是以遗之，吏既卒受，故来言耳。 
现代文：我现在害怕官吏，才送他东西，亭长既已接受，我所以来说呢。 
English: I'm afraid of officials now, that's why I sent him something, and since the chief steward accepted it, that's why I said it.

古文：茂曰： 汝为敝人矣。
现代文：卓茂说： 你是一个不懂事理的人啊。
English: Zhuo Mao said: You are an unreasonable person.

古文：凡人所以贵于禽兽者，以有仁爱，知相敬事也。
现代文：人之所以贵于禽兽，是因为有仁爱，知道互相尊敬往来。
English: The reason why people are more valuable than animals is because they have benevolence and love, and know how to respect each other.

古文：今邻里长老尚致馈遗，此乃人道所以相亲，况吏与民乎？
现代文：现在邻里长老尚且赠送食物，这是人道之所以相亲，何况是官吏与民众呢？
English: Now the neighborhood elders are still giving away food, which is the reason why humanity is a match, let alone the officials and the people?

古文：吏顾不当乘威力强请求耳。
现代文：官吏只是不应当以自己的威力向百姓强行索取罢了。
English: Officials just shouldn't use their power to forcibly extort money from the people.

古文：凡人之生，群居杂处，故有经纪礼义以相交接。
现代文：人生在世，群居杂处，所以有经纪礼义以互相交接往来。
English: People live in the world and live in groups, so there is a brokerage etiquette to pass each other.

古文：汝浊不欲修之，宁能高飞远走，不在人间邪？
现代文：你独不想修好人际关系，难道还能远走高飞，不在人间生活吗？
English: If you don't want to repair interpersonal relationships, can you still go far away and not live on earth?

古文：亭长素善吏，岁时遗之，礼也。 人曰： 苟如此，律何故禁之？ 
现代文：亭长向来是个好官，过年送点东西，合礼。 那人说： 既这样，法律上为什么要禁止呢？ 
English: The steward has always been a good official, sending something for the New Year, and the man said: Even so, why should it be prohibited by law?

古文：茂笑曰： 律设大法，礼顺人情。
现代文：卓茂笑道 ：法律设置的是大法，礼顺的是人情。
English: Zhuo Mao said with a smile, "What the law sets up is the great law, and what is polite is human feelings."

古文：今我以礼教汝，汝必无怨恶；以律治汝，何所措其手足乎？
现代文：现在我以礼来教你，你必无怨恶，如以法律来惩治你，你也会措手顿足啊！
English: Now I teach you with courtesy, you will have no grudge, if I punish you with the law, you will be ready!

古文：一门之内，小者可论，大者可杀也。
现代文：一门之内，小的可以讨论，大的可得杀头啊。
English: Within a group, the small ones can be discussed, the big ones have to be killed.

古文：且归念之！ 
现代文：你回去想想吧。 
English: You go back and think about it.

古文：于是人纳其训，吏怀其恩。
现代文：于是百姓接受他的教诲，官吏们缅怀他的恩德。
English: As a result, the people accepted his teachings, and the officials remembered his kindness.

古文：初，茂到县，有所废置，吏人笑之，邻城闻者皆蚩其不能。
现代文：起初，卓茂到县，对政令有所废置，官吏们笑话他，邻城听到的都鄙视他无能。
English: At first, Zhuo Mao went to the county to cancel the decree, the officials laughed at him, and the neighboring cities despised his incompetence.

古文：河南郡为置守令，茂不能嫌，理事自若。
现代文：河南郡为此设置了一位守令，卓茂不嫌此事，仍与过去一样处理政务。
English: Henan County set up a watchman for this purpose. Zhuo Mao did not like this and continued to handle government affairs as in the past.

古文：数年，教化大行，道不拾遗。
现代文：几年后，教化大行，路不拾遗。
English: A few years later, the indoctrination campaign was in full swing.

古文：平帝时，天下大蝗，河南二十余县皆被其灾，独不入密县界。
现代文：平帝时，天下发生大蝗灾，河南二十多县都遭了蝗灾，惟独不进入密县县界。
English: In the time of Emperor Ping, a great locust plague occurred in the world. More than 20 counties in Henan suffered locust plagues, but they did not enter the county borders.

古文：督邮言之，太守不信，自出案行，见乃服焉。
现代文：督邮上报，太守不信，亲自到县考察，看到真实情况才服。
English: When the postmaster reported the situation, the governor did not believe it and went to the county to investigate in person. He was convinced only after seeing the true situation.

古文：是时，王莽秉政，置大司农六部丞，劝课农桑。迁茂为京部丞，密人老少皆涕泣随送。
现代文：这时王莽秉政，设置大司农六部丞，劝导考核农桑，迁卓茂为京部丞，密县的百姓不论老少都哭泣相送。
English: At this time, Wang Mang adhered to the policy, set up the chief secretary of the sixth department of agriculture, advised the assessment of the agricultural mulberry, and transferred Zhuo Mao to the Beijing department of agriculture, and the people of Mi County, regardless of age, all cried and sent them away.

古文：及莽居摄，以病免归郡，常为门下掾祭酒，不肯作职吏。
现代文：到王莽居摄时，以病免归郡，常为门下掾祭酒，不肯作职吏。
English: At the time of Wang Mangju's death, he was exempted from returning to the county due to illness. He often served as a sacrificial wine for his disciples and refused to work as an official.

古文：更始立，以茂为侍中祭酒，从至长安，知更始政乱，以年老乞骸骨归。
现代文：更始立，以卓茂为侍中祭酒，跟至长安，知道更始政乱，以年老请求辞职回家。
English: Starting from scratch, with Zhuo Mao as the master of ceremonies, followed by Chang'an, knowing the political turmoil at the beginning of the year, he asked to resign and go home.

古文：时，光武初即位，先访求茂，茂诣河阳谒见。
现代文：这时光武初即位，先去访求卓茂，卓茂到河阳谒见。
English: At this time, when Emperor Wu first ascended to the throne, he first went to visit Zhuo Mao, and Zhuo Mao went to Kheyang to meet him.

古文：乃下诏曰 前密令卓茂，束身自修，执节淳固，诚能为人所不能为。
现代文：光武下诏书说 ：前密县令卓茂，约束修养自身，执节敦厚稳固，能做别人不能做到的事情。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Guangwu said, "Former Mi County Commander Zhuo Mao is the best. He is self-disciplined and disciplined, and can do things that others cannot do.

古文：棽卒，子嗣。，子隆嗣。永元十五年，隆卒，无子，国除。初，茂与同县孔休、陈留蔡勋、安众刘宣、楚国龚胜、上党鲍宣六人同志，不仕王莽时，并名重当时。
现代文：起初，卓茂与同县孔休、陈留人蔡勋、安众人刘宣、楚国人龚胜、上党人鲍宣六人同志，不仕王莽时，并名盛当时。
English: At first, Zhuo Mao and six comrades from the same county, Kong Xiu, Chen Liu Ren, Cai Xun, An Ren Liu Xuan, Chu Guo Ren Sheng, Shang Party member Bao Xuan, were not Wang Muxi, and were famous at that time.

古文：休字子泉，哀帝初，守新都令。
现代文：孔休字子泉，哀帝初，守新都县令。
English: Kongxiu Ziquan, the first to mourn the death of the emperor, became the governor of Xindu County.

古文：后王莽秉权，休去官归家。
现代文：后来王莽秉权，孔休去官归家。
English: Later, Wang Mang upheld power, and Kong Xiu retired from his post and returned home.

古文：及莽篡位，遣使赍玄纁、束帛，请为国师，遂欧血托病，杜门自绝。
现代文：等到王莽篡位，遣使带着玄纟熏、帛，请他为国师，孔休呕血托病，杜门自绝。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the throne, he sent an envoy with Xuanzang and Zhu to ask him to be the national teacher, and Dumen committed suicide.

古文：光武即位，求休、勋子孙，赐谷以旌显之。
现代文：光武即位，求孔休、蔡勋子孙，赐谷以旌显。
English: When Guangwu ascended the throne, he asked Kong Xiu and Cai Xun to be his sons and grandsons, and gave the valley to Juxian.

古文：刘宣字子高，安众侯崇之从弟，知王莽当篡，乃变名姓，抱经书隐避林薮。
现代文：刘宣字子高，安众侯刘崇的堂弟，知王莽必将篡位，就改名换姓，抱着经书隐避在深山中。
English: Liu Xuan, a cousin of Liu Chong, Prince of Anzhu, knew that Wang Mang would usurp the throne, so he changed his name and hid in the mountains with his scriptures.

古文：勋事在玄孙邕传。
现代文：建武初才出山，光武以刘宣袭封安侯。
English: Jianwu went to the mountain for the first time, and Guangwu used Liu Xuan to attack Fang'an.

古文：论曰：建武之初，雄豪方扰，虓呼者连响，婴城者相望，斯固倥偬不暇给之日。
现代文：擢拔龚胜子龚赐为上谷太守。史官评论道：建武之初，群雄方在扰攘，啸呼者连响，据城自保者相望，这正是日促事多不暇给足之时。
English: The historian commented, "At the beginning of the construction of the castle, there was a lot of noise and commotion caused by the opposing forces. There was a lot of shouting, and the defenders of the city looked at each other. This was a time when there was a lot of things to do.

古文：卓茂断断小宰，无它庸能，时已七十余矣，而首加聘命，优辞重礼，其与周、燕之君表闾立馆何异哉？
现代文：卓茂以一名小小的县令，并无其他奇能，而且已经七十多岁，而能首加聘命，接受优词重礼，这与周武王封比干表商容和燕昭王为郭隗筑宫而师事的事有什么区别呢？
English: Zhuo Mao is a small county magistrate, has no other miraculous powers, and is already more than seventy years old, but he can give the first appointment and receive the highest praise. What is the difference between this and King Zhouwu's appointment of Shang Rong and Yan Zhao's construction of the palace for Guo Yu?

古文：于是蕴愤归道之宾，越关阻，捐宗族，以排金门者众矣。
现代文：于是那些蕴藏义愤希望归于正道的宾客们，越关山险阻，捐弃宗族，以排闼金门绣户者就多了。
English: As a result, those guests who harbor righteous indignation and hope to return to the right path have become more and more dangerous, abandoning their families and abandoning Kinmen embroiderers.

古文：夫厚性宽中近于仁，犯而不校邻于恕，率斯道也，怨悔曷其至乎！
现代文：厚性宽中近于仁，犯而不报近于恕，能做到这点，还会有人怨恨吗！
English: The thickness of the broad middle is close to benevolence, and the crime without reporting is close to forgiveness. If this can be done, will there be resentment?

古文：鲁恭字仲康，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：鲁恭传，鲁恭字仲康，扶风平陵人。
English: Lu Gongzhuan, Lu Gongzhi Zhongkang, Fu Feng Pingling people.

古文：其先出于鲁顷公，为楚所灭，迁于下邑，因氏焉。
现代文：其先祖出于鲁顷公，被楚所灭，迁于下邑，因而以鲁作为宗族姓氏。
English: His ancestors were descended from the Rua clan, which was destroyed by the Chu and moved to a lower town, so the clan took the Ru as its surname.

古文：世吏二千石，哀、平间，自鲁而徙。
现代文：世代为二千石，哀平年间，自鲁而迁徙。
English: The generation was 2,000 koku, and they migrated from Lvov during the Yaping years.

古文：祖父匡，王莽时，为羲和，有权数，号曰 智囊 。
现代文：祖父鲁匡，王莽时，为掌管四时的官吏，有权数，号称 智囊 。
English: Lu Kuang's grandfather, Wang Mangshi, was the official in charge of the Four Dynasties, and he had a lot of power. He was known as the "brain."

古文：父某。建武初，为武陵太守，卒官。
现代文：父鲁某，建武初，为武陵太守，卒于官。
English: Lu's father, who was the governor of Wuling at the beginning of the Jianwu era, died in office.

古文：时恭年十二，弟丕七岁，昼夜号踊不绝声，郡中赙赠无所受，乃归服丧，礼过成人，乡里奇之。
现代文：当时鲁恭才十二岁，其弟鲁丕才七岁，兄弟日夜号哭跳跃不绝于声，郡中赠送的丧仪财物都不接受，于是回家服丧，礼节比成人还要周到，乡里深感奇异。
English: At that time, Lu Qiong was only twelve years old, and his brother Lu Yao was only seven years old. The brothers cried and jumped incessantly day and night, and did not accept the funeral ceremony and property presented by the county. So they went home to pay their respects. The etiquette was more thoughtful than that of adults, and the village was deeply surprised.

古文：十五，与母及丕俱居太学，习《鲁诗》，闭户讲诵，绝人间事，兄弟俱为诸儒所称，学士争归之。
现代文：十五岁，与母亲及弟鲁丕都居太学，习《鲁诗》，闭门讲诵，不理外面的事，兄弟都为诸儒所称赞，学士争着归附他们。
English: At the age of fifteen, together with his mother and his brother Lu Xun, he lived in Taigaku, studied "Lu Shi," lectured behind closed doors, and ignored the outside world. The brothers were praised by the Confucianists, and the bachelor fought to join them.

古文：太尉赵憙慕其志，每岁时遣子问以酒粮，皆辞不受。
现代文：太尉赵慕其志，逢年过节都派儿子去询问缺不缺酒或粮食，都辞而不受。
English: Captain Zhao Muxizhi sent his son to inquire whether there was a shortage of wine or grain during the holidays every year.

古文：恭怜丕小，欲先就其名，托疾不仕。
现代文：鲁恭因怜鲁丕年小，想让他先成就其名，假说有病不出仕。
English: Lu Qiong, feeling sorry for Lu Xun's young age, wanted him to fulfill his name first, and said that he would not serve if he was ill.

古文：郡数以礼请，谢不肯应，母强遣之，恭不得已而西，因留新丰教授。
现代文：郡里几次以礼相请，鲁恭谢不肯应，母亲强迫遣他外出，鲁恭不得已向西而去，因留在新丰任教授。
English: County several times with courtesy to invite each other, Lu Qunxie refused to answer, his mother forced him to go out, Lu Qunxie had to go west, because he stayed in Xinfeng as a professor.

古文：建初初，丕举方正，恭始为郡吏。
现代文：建初初年，鲁丕举为方正，鲁恭才开始担任郡吏。
English: In the first year of Jianchu, Lu Qian was promoted to the position of Fangzheng, and Lu Qiong began to serve as a county official.

古文：太傅赵憙闻而辟之。
现代文：太傅赵听到消息把他召出来任职。
English: When Father Zhao heard the news, he was summoned to take up the post.

古文：肃宗集诸儒于白虎观，恭特以经明得召，与其议。
现代文：肃宗集合许多儒者在白虎观，鲁恭特以明经奉召，参与讨论。
English: Su Zong gathered many Confucians in the White Tiger View, and Lu Gongte participated in the discussion with a clear call.

古文：憙复举恭直言，特诏公车，拜中牟令。
现代文：赵又举荐鲁恭直言，待诏于公车，拜中牟令。
English: Zhao also recommended that Lu Qiong speak frankly, wait for the official in the bus, and pray for the order.

古文：恭专以德化为理，不任刑罚，讼人许伯等争田，累守令不能决，恭为平理曲直，皆退而自责，辍耕相让。
现代文：鲁恭专门以德化为理，不尚刑罚。诉讼人许伯等争田产，历任守令不能裁决，鲁恭为他们评论理之曲直，结果都退而自责，辍耕以田相让。
English: The litigants, such as Xu Bo, were competing for farmland, and the successive officials could not make a ruling. Lu Qiong commented on the reasonableness for them. As a result, they all retreated and blamed themselves, and gave up farming.

古文：亭长从人借牛而不肯还之，牛主讼于恭。
现代文：亭长从人借了别人的牛不肯归还，牛主人讼于鲁恭。
English: The innkeeper borrowed someone else's cow and refused to return it. The owner of the cow sued Lukong.

古文：恭召亭长，敕令归牛者再三，犹不从。
现代文：恭召亭长，令他把牛还给主人，再三催促，还是不肯还牛。
English: He summoned the innkeeper and ordered him to return the cow to the owner. After repeated urging, he still refused to return the cow.

古文：恭叹曰： 是教化不行也。 
现代文：鲁恭叹道： 这是教化行不通啊。 
English: Lu Qian sighed: This is indoctrination does not work.

古文：欲解印绶去。
现代文：准备辞职而去。
English: He was ready to resign and leave.

古文：掾史涕泣共留之，亭长乃惭悔，还牛，诣狱受罪，薛贳不问。
现代文：掾史们哭泣共相挽留，亭长深感愧悔，把牛还了，亲到监狱受罪，鲁恭宽贷不问。
English: The storytellers wept and held each other, the chief of the pavilion was deeply remorseful, returned the cow, went to prison for the crime, and did not ask Lu Qiong about the loan.

古文：于是吏人信服。
现代文：于是官吏百姓都信服。
English: As a result, the officials and the people were convinced.

古文：建初七年，郡国螟伤稼，犬牙缘界，不入中牟。
现代文：建初七年，郡国螟虫为灾，伤害庄稼，县界犬牙交错，而螟虫不入中牟。
English: In the first seven years of the year, the county aphids were a disaster, harming crops, the county boundaries were intertwined, and the aphids did not enter Zhongmou.

古文：河南尹袁安闻之，疑其不实，使仁恕掾肥亲往廉之。
现代文：河南尹袁安听说，怀疑不是事实，派仁恕掾肥亲前往察看。
English: When Henan Yin Yuan'an heard that the suspicion was not true, he sent his relatives to investigate.

古文：恭随行阡陌，俱坐桑下，有雉过，止其傍。傍有童儿，亲曰： 儿何不捕之？ 
现代文：鲁恭跟随在阡陌之间行走，都坐在桑树下，有野鸡飞过，停在旁边，刚好旁边有个童儿，肥亲对童儿说： 你为什么不捉住野鸡？ 
English: Lu Qiong followed, walking between the reeds. They were all sitting under a mulberry tree. A pheasant flew by and stopped next to them. There was a child right next to them. The fat relative said to the child, "Why didn't you catch the pheasant?"

古文：儿言： 雉方将雏。 
现代文：童儿说： 这只野鸡正在孵小野鸡哩。 
English: The child said, "This pheasant is hatching baby pheasants."

古文：亲瞿然而起，与恭诀曰： 所以来者，欲察君之政迹耳。
现代文：肥亲惊动而起，与鲁恭作别道： 我到这里来，本是考察你的政迹。
English: Shocked, Huizhong broke up with Lu Qiong, saying, "I came here to study your political record.

古文：今虫不犯境，此一异也；化及鸟兽，此二异也；竖子有仁心，此三异也。
现代文：今螟虫不犯中牟，这是一奇；德化及于鸟兽，这是二奇；连小孩都有仁心，这是三奇。
English: Now, it is a miracle that maggots do not commit crimes; it is a miracle that virtue extends to birds and beasts; it is a miracle that even children have benevolence; it is a miracle.

古文：久留，徒扰贤者耳。 
现代文：我久留在此，只能打扰贤者。 
English: I've been here a long time, and I can only disturb the wise.

古文：还府，具以状白安。
现代文：回到府里，向府尹袁安如实作了报告。
English: Returning to the prefectural government, he truthfully reported to the prefectural governor, Yin Yuan'an.

古文：是岁，嘉禾生恭便坐廷中，安因上书言状，帝异之。
现代文：这年，特别茁壮的禾苗生长在鲁恭住宅侧室廷中，袁安因而上书说明情况，帝感到奇怪。
English: This year, particularly vigorous seedlings were growing in the courtroom next to the Rugong residence, and Yuan An wrote a letter to explain the situation. The emperor was surprised.

古文：会诏百官举贤良方正，恭荐中牟名士王方，帝即征方诣公车，礼之与公卿所举同，方致位侍中。
现代文：正好下令百官荐举贤良方正，鲁恭荐举中牟名士王方，帝即征召王方到公车，与公卿所举的贤良方正待以同样的礼仪，王方做了侍中的官。
English: It was just right to order that the hundred officials recommend the appointment of the virtuous Fang Zheng, and Lu Qiong recommend the appointment of the famous Wang Fang, and the emperor summoned Wang Fang to the bus, and treated the virtuous Fang Zheng appointed by the nobles with the same etiquette, and Wang Fang was made an attendant.

古文：恭在事三年，州举尤异，会遭母丧去官，吏人思之。
现代文：鲁恭在事三年，州举尤为优异，恰逢母丧辞官，官吏百姓都思念他。
English: During his three years in office, Lu Qiong was particularly outstanding in the prefectural election. It coincided with his mother's funeral, and officials and people all missed him.

古文：后拜侍御史。
现代文：后来拜为侍御史。
English: He later became a courtier.

古文：和帝初立，议遣车骑将军窦宪与征西将军耿秉击匈奴，恭上疏谏曰：陛下亲劳圣思，日昊不食，忧在军役，诚欲以安定北垂，为人除患，定万世之计也。
现代文：和帝初立，准备派遣车骑将军窦宪与征西将军耿秉进击匈奴，鲁恭上书谏道：陛下亲劳圣体，日昃不食，忧于军役，是想安定北部边陲，为人民除患，定万世之计。
English: At the beginning of the Warring States period, he prepared to send the cavalry and cavalry general Dou Xian and the general of the Western Expedition Geng Bing to attack the Xiongnu, and Lu Gong wrote: His Majesty personally labors for the Holy Body, does not eat during the day, and is worried about military service. He wanted to stabilize the northern borderlands, eliminate suffering for the people, and establish a plan for the ages.

古文：臣伏独思之，未见其便。
现代文：而臣暗自思忖，认为未见其便。
English: However, the vassal secretly thought to himself that it was not convenient.

古文：社稷之计，万人之命，在于一举。
现代文：社稷之计，万人之命，在于一举。
English: The fate of society, and the lives of millions of people, depend on a single move.

古文：数年以来，秋稼不熟，人食不足，仓库空虚，国无畜积。
现代文：数年以来，秋稼歉收，人食不足，仓库空虚，国无蓄积。
English: For several years, the autumn harvest has been poor, people are short of food, warehouses are empty, and the country has no reserves.

古文：会新遭大忧，人怀恐惧。
现代文：恰逢章帝崩驾，人怀恐惧。
English: It coincided with the death of Emperor Zhang, and people were filled with fear.

古文：陛下躬大圣之德，履至孝之行，尽谅阴三年，听于冢宰。
现代文：陛下躬行大圣之德，履至孝之行，应尽三年居丧之礼，听于冢宰。
English: His majesty, in the spirit of great virtue and filial piety, should perform the funeral rites for three years and listen to the eulogy.

古文：百姓阙然，三时不闻警跸之音，莫不怀思皇皇，若有求而不得。
现代文：百姓忧伤，三时听不到警跸之音，莫不怀思惶惶，像有求而不得。
English: The people are sad, they can't hear the police siren at three o'clock, they can't help but panic, it's like they can't help but ask for something.

古文：今乃以盛春之月，兴发军役，扰动天下，以事戎夷，诚非所以垂恩中国，改元正时，由内及外也。
现代文：今就以盛春之月，兴发军役，扰乱天下，与夷狄相持，这不是垂恩中国，改元正时，由内及外的举措。
English: Now, in the month of the Spring Festival, to promote military service, to disturb the world, and to stand with the barbarians, this is not a measure to show gratitude to China, to change the yuan at the right time, from inside and outside.

古文：万民者，天之所生。
现代文：万民，是天之所生。
English: All people are born of heaven.

古文：天爱其所生，犹父母爱其子。
现代文：天爱其所生，就像父母爱自己的儿子一样。
English: God loves his children as a father loves his son.

古文：一物有不得其所者，则天气为之桀错，况于人乎？
现代文：有一物不得其所，天气还为之舛错，何况是人呢？
English: There is one thing that is out of place, the weather is also wrong for it, what about people?

古文：故爱人者必有天报。
现代文：所以爱人者必有天报。
English: Therefore, those who love others must have the heavenly message.

古文：昔太王重人命而去邠，故获上天之祐。
现代文：以前太王古公因爱惜人命而去，所以获得上天的保佑。
English: In the past, King Taowang Guogong went because he cherished human life, so he was blessed by heaven.

古文：夫戎狄者，四方之异气也。
现代文：夷狄，是四方的异气。
English: "Idi" is a character trait of Shifang.

古文：蹲夷踞肆，与鸟兽无别。
现代文：平坐踞傲放肆无礼，与鸟兽没有分别。
English: They are arrogant, impudent and rude, and are no different from birds and beasts.

古文：若杂居中国，则错乱天气，污辱善人，是以圣王之制，羁縻不绝而已。
现代文：如杂居中国，则错乱天气，污辱好人，所以圣王之制，对他们只是羁縻不绝而已。
English: If they live in China, the weather will be chaotic, and good people will be insulted, so the holy king's system will only be a constant threat to them.

古文：今边境无事，宜当修仁行义，尚于无为，令家给人足，安业乐产。
现代文：今边境无事，应当修仁行义，崇尚无为，令家给人足，安业乐产。
English: Now that there is no problem at the border, we should cultivate benevolence, practice righteousness, advocate inaction, make the family give people enough, and have a safe career and a happy life.

古文：夫人道乂于下，则阴阳和于上，祥风时雨，覆被远方，夷狄重译而至矣。
现代文：人道安定于下，则阴阳和顺于上，祥风时雨，覆被远方，那么夷狄就会通过重重翻译来进贡。
English: If humanity is stable below, then yin and yang and harmony are above, if the wind is auspicious and the rain is rainy, and if it is covered by the distance, then the Yidi will pay tribute through multiple translations.

古文：《易》曰： 有孕盈缶，终来有它吉。 言甘雨满我之缶，诚来有我而吉已。
现代文：《易经》上说： 有了孚信再加积累，就如雨水充满了瓦缶，其结果还有其他吉庆。 是说甘雨充满了我的瓦缶，有诚信，则有人来归附因而吉利。
English: "I Ching" said: With the Fuxin and the accumulation, it is as if the rainwater is filled with earthenware jars, and the result is other auspicious things. That is to say, the sweet rain is filled with my earthenware jars, and if there is good faith, then there are people who come to join, so it is auspicious.

古文：夫以德胜人者昌，以力胜人者亡。
现代文：以德胜人者昌盛，以力胜人者灭亡。
English: He who conquers others by virtue prospers, but he who conquers others by force comes to ruin.

古文：今匈奴为鲜卑所杀，远臧于史侯河西，去塞数千里，而欲乘其虚耗，利其微弱，是非义之所出也。
现代文：今匈奴为鲜卑所败，远藏于史侯河西，离边塞数千里，而想乘其虚耗、微弱攻打它，这不是出于道义。
English: Now the Huns, defeated by their inferiority, are hiding far away in the west of the Shuh River, thousands of miles away from the frontier fortress, and want to take advantage of its futility and weakness to attack it. This is not out of morality.

古文：前太仆祭肜远出塞外，卒不见一胡而兵已困矣。
现代文：前太仆祭彤远出塞外，最终见不到一个胡兵而自己已困顿了。
English: The former servant of the emperor went far away from the capital, and finally did not see a single Hu soldier, and he was in a quandary.

古文：自山之难，不绝如綖，都护陷没，士卒死者如积，迄今被其辜毒。
现代文：白山的灾难，不绝如缕，都护陈睦陷没，士卒死者如积，至今还受其辜毒。
English: The disasters of Baishan have been incessant, and Duopu Chenmugu has been buried, and the dead soldiers have piled up. They are still suffering from its poison.

古文：孤寡哀思之心未弭，仁者念之，以为累息，奈何复欲袭其迹，不顾患难乎？
现代文：孤寡哀思之心没有消失，仁者念之，以为屏息，怎么又想承袭其迹，不顾患难呢？
English: The lonely and sorrowful heart has not disappeared. The benevolent person reads it and thinks that he is holding his breath. How can he want to inherit its traces, regardless of the hardships?

古文：今始征发，而大司农调度不足，使者在道，分部督趣，上下相迫，民间之急亦已甚矣。
现代文：现在开始征发，而大司农调度不足，使者在道，分部督促，上下相迫，百姓的窘急也很严重了。
English: Now the requisitioning and dispatching has begun, but the chief secretary for agriculture has insufficient scheduling, the messenger is on the road, the branch is supervising, the top and bottom are pressing, and the people's predicament is also very serious.

古文：三辅、并、凉少雨，麦根枯焦，牛死日甚，此其不合天心之效也。
现代文：三辅、并州、凉州少雨，麦根枯焦，牛死日甚一日，这是不合天心之效验哩。
English: Sanfu, Nianzhou, and Liangzhou have little rain, the wheat roots are withered and charred, and the cattle die every other day. This is not a test of God's will.

古文：群僚百姓，咸曰不可，陛下独奈何以一人之计，弃万人之命，不恤其言乎？
现代文：群僚百姓，都说不能这样，陛下怎么独以一人之计，弃万人之命，不体恤百姓的声音呢？
English: Colleagues and the people all said that this could not be done. How could His Majesty act alone, abandoning the lives of tens of thousands of people, without considering the voice of the people?

古文：上观天心，下察人志，足以知事之得失。
现代文：上观天心，下察人志，足以知事之得失。
English: It is enough for the governor to look up at the heart of heaven and look down at human beings.

古文：臣恐中国不为中国，岂徒匈奴而已哉！
现代文：臣恐这样下去中国不成为中国了，岂只有匈奴不成为匈奴吗！
English: If this continues, China will not become China, and only the Huns will not become Huns!

古文：惟陛下留圣恩，休罢士卒，以顺天心。
现代文：请陛下留圣恩，休罢士卒，以顺天心。
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to keep the grace of God, take a leave of absence, and rise in accordance with God's will.

古文：书奏，不从。
现代文：书奏上去，帝不从。
English: When the calligraphy is played, the emperor does not follow.

古文：每政事有益于人，恭辄言其便，无所隐讳。
现代文：每次讨论政事只要有益于人，鲁恭总是直言其便，无所隐讳。
English: Whenever discussing political affairs, as long as it is beneficial to people, Lukong always speaks his mind and does not hide anything.

古文：其后拜为《鲁诗》博士，由是家法学者日盛。
现代文：其后拜为《鲁诗》博士，从此家法学者日盛。
English: After that, he became a doctor of "Lu Shi," and since then, he has been a scholar of law.

古文：迁侍中，数召宴见，问以得失，赏赐恩礼宠异焉。
现代文：迁为侍中，数次召宴会见，问以得失，赏赐和恩礼宠爱异于常人。
English: He was transferred to the position of an attendant, invited to banquets several times, asked about his gains and losses, and received gifts and favors. His favoritism was different from that of ordinary people.

古文：迁乐安相。
现代文：后迁千乘王刘宠的相。
English: This is the face of Liu Zhao, the later Qiancheng Emperor.

古文：是时，东州多盗贼，群辈攻劫，诸郡患之。
现代文：这时东州多盗贼，结辈攻劫，诸郡都以此为患。
English: At this time, there were many thieves in Dongzhou, and the counties were plagued by robberies.

古文：恭到，重购赏，开恩信，其渠帅张汉等率支党降，恭上以汉补博昌尉，其余遂自相捕击，尽破平之，州郡以安。
现代文：鲁恭到后，以重金收买赏赐，广布恩信，其大帅张汉等率领其枝党投降，鲁恭以他为汉补博昌尉，其余于是自相捕击，全部平定，州郡得以安宁。
English: After Lu Qiong arrived, he bought the reward with heavy money. Guang Bu Enxin, his general Zhang Han, and others led his branch party to surrender. Lu Qiong took him as Han Zhi Bochang's lieutenant, and the rest then attacked each other. All of them were subdued, and the county was peaceful.

古文：永元九年，征拜议郎。
现代文：永元九年，征召拜为议郎。
English: In the ninth year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year.

古文：八月，饮酎，斋会章台，诏使小黄门特引恭前。
现代文：八月，饮纯浓酒，斋会于章台，诏令小黄门引鲁恭向前。
English: In August, drinking pure strong liquor, the feast was held in Zhangdai, and Xiao Huangmen led Lu Gong forward.

古文：其夜拜侍中，敕使陪乘，劳问甚渥。
现代文：当夜拜为侍中，命使者陪乘，慰劳抚问优厚。
English: That night, he was the attendant, accompanying the messenger of life, and consoling and caressing the star.

古文：冬，迁光禄勋，选举清平，京师贵戚莫能枉其正。
现代文：冬，迁光禄勋，选举清正公平，京师贵戚没人能歪曲他的正直。
English: Winter, the transfer of the honor, the election is fair and just, and no one can distort his honesty.

古文：十三年，代吕盖为司徒。
现代文：永元十三年，代吕盖为司徒。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Yonggen era, he became a disciple of Lugei.

古文：十五年，从巡狩南阳，除子抚为郎中，赐驸马从驾。
现代文：十五年，从帝巡狩南阳，任其子鲁抚为郎中，赐副马从驾。
English: In the fifteenth year, from the imperial inspection to Nanyang, he allowed his son Lu Fuzhi to be his son-in-law, and gave him a second horse to drive.

古文：时弟丕亦为侍中。
现代文：这时弟鲁丕也做了侍中。
English: At this time, his younger brother Lu Wei also became a chamberlain.

古文：兄弟父子并列朝廷。
现代文：兄弟父子并列朝廷。
English: The brothers and father and son both rose to the highest ranks in the imperial court.

古文：后坐事策免。
现代文：后因族弟事被策书免官。
English: Later, he was removed from his post by the council due to his actions as a disciple.

古文：殇帝即位，以恭为长乐卫尉。
现代文：殇帝即位，以鲁恭为长乐卫尉。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, with Lu Qiong as the Changle Guards Lieutenant.

古文：永初元年，复代梁鲔为司徒。
现代文：永初元年，复代梁鲔为司徒。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongzheng era, the reincarnation of Liang Kun as a disciple.

古文：初，和帝末，下令麦秋得案验薄刑，而州郡好以苛察为政，因此遂盛夏断狱。
现代文：起初，和帝末年，下令麦秋季节得以查讯证实减轻刑罚，而州郡则喜欢以苛酷为政，因此就在盛夏季节断狱判决。
English: At first, and at the end of the imperial era, it was decreed that the wheat and autumn season could be investigated and confirmed to reduce the penalty, while the state and county liked to be harsh, so the sentence was cut off in the middle of the summer season.

古文：恭上疏谏曰：臣伏见诏书，敬若天时，忧念万民，为崇和气，罪非殊死，且勿案验。
现代文：鲁恭上疏谏道：臣见到诏书，敬顺天时，以万民为念，为崇尚和气，罪非必死，暂且不查讯证实。
English: Lu Qiong Shang Shao said: "When a minister sees the imperial edict, he will respect the heavenly time, think of all the people, and advocate harmony. If he does not investigate and confirm it, he will not die."

古文：进柔良，退贪残，奉时令。
现代文：进柔良，退贪残，顺时令来行事。
English: Strive for gentleness, reject greed, and act in accordance with the times.

古文：所以助仁德，顺昊天，致和气，利黎民者也。
现代文：这样有助于仁德，顺昊天，致和气，利黎民百姓。
English: This is conducive to benevolence, prosperity, harmony and benefit the people.

古文：旧制至立秋乃行薄刑，自永元十五年以来，改用孟夏，而刺史、太守不深惟忧民息事之原，进良退残之化，因以盛夏征召农人，拘对考验，连滞无已。
现代文：旧的制度规定到了立秋就行使薄刑，自永元十五年以来，改用孟夏，而刺史、太守不深思忧民息事的原则，进贤良退贪残的教化，而以盛夏征召农人，拘捕对证考验，案词相互牵连，案情迟迟不决。
English: The old system provided for the execution of light punishment at the beginning of autumn. Since the fifteenth year of Yongyuan, it has been changed to Mengxia, but the history and the emperor do not think deeply about the principle of worrying about the people and calming things, and the enlightenment of the virtuous and the greedy, but the farmers are recruited at the height of summer, the arrest is a test of the evidence, the case texts are intertwined, and the case is delayed.

古文：司隶典司京师，四方是则，而近于春月分行诸部，托言劳来贫人，而无隐恻之实，烦扰郡县，廉考非急，逮捕一人，罪延十数，上逆时气，下伤农业。
现代文：司隶校尉典领京师，以各方为准则，而近来在春天分行各部，假托言词把穷人传来，没有怜悯下面的实情，烦扰郡县，考究那些非急办不可的人，而且逮捕一人，词之所及罪延十数，上逆时气，下伤农业。
English: The Beijing Division, led by the Lieutenant of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the Division of the

古文：案《易》气月《姤》用事。经曰： 后以施令诰四方。 
现代文：按《易经》五月《女后卦》用事，《女后卦》上说： 天下有风，君主施令以理四方。 
English: According to the "I Ching" in May, "The Dowager Empress" is in charge, "The Dowager Empress" said: There is wind in the world, and the monarch gives orders to the four directions.

古文：言君以夏至之日，施命令止四方行者，所以助微阴也。
现代文：是说君主以夏至之日，发布命令止四方行者，以助微阴的发生。
English: It is said that on the day of the summer solstice, the monarch issued an order to stop the four-way walkers to help the occurrence of micro-shade.

古文：行者尚止之，况于逮召考掠，夺其时哉！
现代文：行者尚且要停止，何况逮捕考掠，夺天时呢？
English: Even if the practitioners want to stop, how about arresting them for looting and pillaging?

古文：比年水旱伤稼，人饥流冗。
现代文：近年水灾旱灾伤了农业，人民饥饿流散。
English: In recent years, floods and droughts have damaged agriculture, and people have been displaced by hunger.

古文：今始夏，百谷权舆，阳气胎养之时。
现代文：今夏天才开始，百谷起始，万物含胎发育之时。
English: This summer has just begun, the beginning of the hundred valleys, the time when all things are developing.

古文：自三月以来，阴寒不暖，物当化变而不被和气。
现代文：自三月以来，阴寒欠暖，生物应当化变而不受和气。
English: Since March, the weather has been cold and gloomy, and living things have been unable to adapt to the change.

古文：《月令》： 孟夏断薄刑，出轻系。
现代文：《月令》 ：孟夏断薄刑，释放轻犯者。
English: "The Monthly": Meng Xia cuts short sentences, releases minor offenders.

古文：行秋令则苦雨数来，五谷不熟。 
现代文：行秋令则苦雨频来，五谷不熟。 
English: The autumn rains are frequent, and the weather is not familiar.

古文：又曰： 仲夏挺重囚，益其食。
现代文：又说： 仲夏宽重囚，增其食。
English: He also said, "In the middle of summer, prisoners should be given more food.

古文：行秋令则草木零落，人伤于疫。 
现代文：行秋令则草木零落，人伤于疫病。 
English: During the autumn, plants and trees are scattered, and people are injured by epidemics.

古文：夫断薄刑者，谓其轻罪已正，不欲令久系，故时断之也。
现代文：所以要断薄刑，是因为罪轻而且悔改了，不应让他久系监狱，所以及时决断。
English: Therefore, the sentence should be cut short, because the crime is light and he has repented, and he should not be kept in prison for a long time, so it should be decided in time.

古文：臣愚以为今孟夏之制，可从此令，其决狱案考，皆以立秋为断，以顺时节，育成万物，则天地以和，刑罚以清矣。
现代文：臣愚以为现今孟夏的制度，可按此令执行，其决狱审判，都以立秋为断，这就顺乎时节，育成万物，那么天地以和，刑罚以清了。
English: The courtier thought that the current Mengxia system could be carried out according to this order, and that the prison sentence would be decided at the beginning of autumn, which would be in accordance with the season and nurture all things, so that heaven and earth would be at peace and the punishment would be clear.

古文：初，肃宗时，断狱皆以冬至之前，自后论者互多驳异。
现代文：起初，肃宗时，断狱都以冬至之前，后来的议论者互相驳斥。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, it was believed that the prisoners would be released before the winter solstice, but later commentators refuted each other.

古文：邓太后诏公卿以下会议，恭议奏曰：夫阴阳之气，相扶而行，发动用事，各有时节。
现代文：邓太后诏令公卿以下开会讨论，鲁恭议奏说：阴阳之气，相扶而行，发动用事，各有时节。
English: Empress Dowager Deng ordered the court nobles to hold a meeting to discuss, and Lu Qiong made a speech: Yin and yang, support each other, initiate affairs, each has its own time.

古文：若不当其时，则物随而伤。
现代文：如果不合于时节，那么物随着受伤害。
English: If it's out of season, it's going to hurt.

古文：王者虽质文不同，而兹道无变，四时之政，行之若一。
现代文：王者虽质地文采不同，但这个道理却没有变化，四时之政，实行起来都如同一样。
English: Although the king is different in texture and style, this principle has not changed. The four-hour rule is implemented in the same way.

古文：《月令》，周世所造，而所据皆夏之时也，其变者为正朔、服色、牺牲、徽号、器械而已。
现代文：《月令》，这是周朝制定的，而依据的都是夏朝的时间，变化的只有正朔、服色、祭祀所用的牲畜、徽号、器械罢了。
English: The "lunar calendar," which was established by the Zhou Dynasty, is based on the time of the Summer Dynasty. The only changes are in the Gregorian calendar, the color of clothing, the livestock used in the rituals, the emblem, and the instruments.

古文：故曰： 殷因于夏礼，周因于殷礼，所损益可知也。 
现代文：所以说： 殷因袭了夏礼，周因袭了殷礼，其增删损益是可知的。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: Yin is the cause of the summer festival, and Zhou is the cause of the summer festival, and its increase, decrease, gain and loss are knowable.

古文：《易》曰： 潜龙勿用。 
现代文：《易》经上说 ：象征潜伏的龙，不用为好。 
English: "Yi" scripture says: symbolizing the lurking dragon, it is not necessary.

古文：言十一月、十二月阳气潜臧，未得用事。
现代文：说的是十一月、十二月阳气潜藏，未便用事。
English: It is said that in November and December, the yang qi is latent, and it is not convenient to do anything.

古文：虽煦嘘万物，养其根荄，而犹盛阴在上，地冻水冰，阳气否隔，闭而成冬。
现代文：虽然和风吹煦万物，使根部得到保养，但还是盛阴在上，地面冰冻水面结冰，阳气被阻隔，闭而成冬。
English: Although the wind blows everything, so that the roots are maintained, it is still overcast, the ground is frozen, the water surface is frozen, the yang is blocked, and it is closed in winter.

古文：故曰： 履霜坚冰，阴始凝也。驯致其道，至坚冰也。 
现代文：所以又说： 行走在有霜的地面上就知坚冰的时节快到了，阴气开始凝结，顺着下去，自然就会凝成坚冰了。 
English: Therefore, he also said: If you walk on the frosty ground, you will know that the season of hard ice is approaching. The cold air begins to condense, and as it goes down, it will naturally condense into hard ice.

古文：言五月微阴始起，至十一月坚冰至也。
现代文：说的就是五月微阴始起，至十一月坚冰形成。
English: That is to say, from the beginning of May, when it is slightly cloudy, to November, when hard ice begins to form.

古文：夫王者之作，因时为法。
现代文：王者所作，是以时节为法度。
English: For the king's decree stands fast for ever and ever.

古文：孝章皇帝深惟古人之道，助三正之微，定律著令，冀承天心，顺物性命，以致时雍。
现代文：孝章皇帝深思古人之道，助子丑寅阳气之微弱，制定法律法令，希望上承天心，下顺物命，以达到与时节和谐。
English: Emperor Xiaozhang thought deeply about the way of the ancients, the feebleness of the helpers, and formulated laws and decrees, hoping to inherit the heart of heaven and the life of things, so as to achieve harmony with the seasons.

古文：然从变改以来，年岁不熟，谷价常贵，人不宁安。
现代文：然而从变改以来的实际看，年岁不丰，谷价常贵，人心不安。
English: However, judging from the reality since the change, the years are not prosperous, grain prices are expensive, and people are uneasy.

古文：小吏不与国同心者，率入十一月得死罪贼，不问曲直，便即格杀，虽有疑罪，不复谳正。
现代文：郡县小吏不与国家同心者，相率以十一月得处决犯死罪的囚犯，不问是非曲直，就问斩格杀，虽有的案情可疑，也不复审纠正。
English: If the county magistrate is not in sympathy with the state, the prisoners who have committed capital crimes will be executed in November at the same rate. They will not ask about the rights and wrongs, but will ask about beheading. Although some cases are suspicious, they will not review and correct them.

古文：一夫吁嗟，王道为亏，况于众乎？
现代文：有一个人嗟叹鸣冤，王道就理亏了，况很多人是这样呢？
English: If there is one person who laments and laments, the royal road is unjustified, and what's more, many people are like this?

古文：《易》十一月 君子以议狱缓死 。
现代文：《易》十一月 君子对于有疑义的案犯应复审暂缓死刑 。
English: "Yi" November Nobles should review and suspend the death penalty for suspects.

古文：可令疑罪使详其法，大辟之科，尽冬月乃断。
现代文：可令有疑义的案犯详按此法，死刑科目，等到冬月完了才断。
English: Suspected criminals may be sentenced to death in accordance with this law, and the sentence will not be carried out until the winter months are over.

古文：其立春在十二月中者，勿以报囚如故事。
现代文：立春在十二月中旬的，不要奏请报决仍像从前一样办。
English: If the first day of spring is in the middle of December, do not submit a request for a report, but continue to operate as before.

古文：后卒施行。
现代文：后来得到施行。
English: It was later enforced.

古文：恭再在公位，选辟高第，至列卿郡守者数十人。
现代文：鲁恭在公卿位置，选拔任命高级官吏，任列卿郡守者数十人。
English: In the position of court noble, Lu Gong selected and appointed high-ranking officials, and appointed dozens of county governors.

古文：而其耆旧大姓，或不蒙荐举，至有怨望者。
现代文：而有的耆老大姓，或未蒙荐举，颇怀怨恨。
English: On the other hand, some of the senior leaders of the Kuomintang, who were not recommended for promotion, harbored a lot of resentment.

古文：恭闻之，曰： 学之不讲，是否忧也。
现代文：鲁恭听到后，说： 学问之不讲习，是我的忧患。
English: After hearing this, Lu Qiong said, "It is my sorrow that I do not study.

古文：诸生不有乡举者乎？ 
现代文：诸生不是有乡里可荐举吗？ 
English: Don't all sentient beings have villages to recommend?

古文：永初二年，诏公卿举儒术笃学者，大将军邓骘举丕，再迁，复为侍中、左中郎将，再为三老。五年，年七十五，卒于官。
现代文：于是抱怨者也无话可说了。鲁恭性谦让，奏议依据经典，虽自己有所补益，然而始终不显示自己，所以不以刚直著称。三年，以老病策书罢归。六年，八十一岁时，在家去世。
English: As a result, the complainants had nothing to say. He was a courteous and humble person, and his petition was based on the classics. Although he made some contributions, he never showed himself, so he was not known for his integrity. Three years later, he retired due to an old illness. Six years later, at the age of 81, he died at home.

古文：魏霸字乔卿，济阴句阳人也。
现代文：◆魏霸传魏霸字乔卿，济阴句阳人。
English: ◆Wei Ba Chuan Wei Ba Zi Qiao Xing, Jiyin Zi Yang Ren.

古文：世有礼义。
现代文：世代有礼义。
English: Generations are polite.

古文：霸少丧亲，兄弟同居，州里慕其雍和。
现代文：魏霸从小丧亲，兄弟同居，州里爱慕他们兄弟的和睦。
English: Wei Ba has been bereaved since childhood, brothers live together, and the state admires the harmony of their brothers.

古文：建初中，举孝廉，八迁，和帝时为巨鹿太守。
现代文：建初年间，举为孝廉，八次迁官，到和帝时为钜鹿太守。
English: During the first year of construction, he was promoted to the position of filial piety, and was transferred eight times. When he became emperor, he was appointed as the governor of the Yangtze River Delta.

古文：以简朴宽恕为政。
现代文：以简朴宽恕为政。
English: A policy of simple forgiveness.

古文：掾史有过，霸先诲其失，不改者乃罢之。
现代文：掾史有了过失，魏霸先批评其错误，不改的才罢其职。
English: When Zou Shi made a mistake, Wei Ba first criticized his mistake. If he did not change, he would resign from his post.

古文：吏或相毁诉，霸辄称它吏之长，终不及人短，言者怀惭，谮讼遂息。
现代文：官吏有的互相毁诉，魏霸总是表彰官吏的长处，始终不言及人家的短处，于是毁诉者感到惭愧，说坏话进行诬告之风平息。
English: Officials sometimes destroy each other's complaints. Wei Ba always commends the strengths of officials, and never mentions the shortcomings of others. As a result, those who destroy complaints feel ashamed, and the bad-mouthing and false accusations have subsided.

古文：永元十六年，征拜将作大匠。
现代文：永元十六年，征拜为掌管修建宫室的官吏。
English: In the 16th year of the Yonggen era, officials in charge of building the palace were recruited.

古文：明年，和帝崩，典作顺陵。
现代文：第二年，和帝崩驾，魏霸主管顺陵建造。
English: The following year, with the emperor's death, Wei Ba was put in charge of the construction of Shunling.

古文：时盛冬地冻，中使督促，数罚县吏以厉霸。
现代文：当时是严冬地冻，宫廷派出的使者督促得紧，数次处罚县吏以激励魏霸。
English: At that time, it was a bitterly cold winter, and the emissaries sent by the court urged him hard, punishing the county officials several times to encourage Wei Bao.

古文：霸抚循而已，初不切责，而反劳之曰： 令诸卿被辱，大匠过也。 
现代文：魏霸只是安抚而已，并不切责下面的人，而且还慰劳他们说： 现在诸位被侮辱，是我大匠的过错。 
English: Wei Ba was only placating, and did not blame the people below, but also consoled them saying: Now you are insulted, it is the fault of my master.

古文：吏皆怀恩，力作倍功。
现代文：官吏们怀恩，无不尽力以加快工程进度。
English: Officials are keen to do all they can to speed up the project.

古文：延平元年，代尹勤为太常。
现代文：延平元年，代尹勤为太常。
English: In the first year of the Yanping era, Yin Qin became the acting emperor.

古文：明年，以病致仕，为光禄大夫。
现代文：第二年，以病辞官，为光禄大夫。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the post of medical officer and became the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：永初五年，拜长乐卫尉，以病乞身，复为光禄大夫，卒于官。
现代文：永初五年，拜长乐卫尉，以病乞身，复为光禄大夫，卒于官。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongchu era, Bai Changle, a guard lieutenant, died of illness and was reinstated as a doctor of Guanglu, and died in office.

古文：刘宽字文饶，弘农华阴人也。
现代文：◆刘宽传刘宽字文饶，弘农华阴人。
English: ◆Liu Kuan passed down Liu Kuan's characters and literature, and was a farmer and a yin person.

古文：父崎，顺帝时为司徒。
现代文：父刘崎，顺帝时为司徒。
English: His father, Liu Qi, was a disciple of Emperor Shun.

古文：宽尝行，有人失牛者，乃就宽车中认之。
现代文：刘宽曾外出，有人失了牛，就在刘宽的车中找了一条牛说是他的。
English: Liu Guang once went out, someone lost a cow, so he looked for a cow in Liu Guang's car and said it was his.

古文：宽无所言，下驾步归。
现代文：刘宽不作辩解，下车步行回家。
English: Liu Guang did not make any excuses and got off the bus to walk home.

古文：有顷，认者得牛而送还，叩头谢曰： 惭负长者，随所刑罪。 
现代文：不久，认牛的人找到了自己失去的牛而送还刘宽的牛，叩头谢罪说； 愧对长者，愿接受你对我的处罚。 
English: Not long after, the person who recognized the cow found his lost cow and returned the cow to Liu Guang. He bowed down and said, "I am ashamed of the elders, and I am willing to accept your punishment of me."

古文：宽曰： 物有相类，事容脱误，幸劳见归，何为谢之？ 
现代文：刘宽说： 物有类似，事情容许有失误，麻烦你送回来了，拿什么来感谢你呢？ 
English: Liu Kuan said, "Things are similar, mistakes are allowed, please send it back, what can I thank you for?"

古文：州里服其不校。
现代文：州里的人心服他宽宏大量不与人计较的精神。
English: The people of the state are in awe of his generous and selfless spirit.

古文：桓帝时，大将军辟，五迁司徒长史。
现代文：桓帝时，大将军梁冀征他，五次迁为司徒长史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kuan, he was conscripted by the great general Liang Jie and was transferred five times to the position of the chief historian.

古文：时、京师地震，特见询问。
现代文：时京师地震，特接见询问于他。
English: At the time of the earthquake in Beijing, a special meeting was held to inquire about him.

古文：再迁，出为东海相。
现代文：再迁，出京为东海王刘臻之相。
English: Relocating again, moving out of Beijing is the phase of the East Sea King Liu Zhen.

古文：延熹八年，征拜尚书令，迁南阳太守。
现代文：延熹八年，征拜为尚书令，迁南阳太守。
English: Eight years later, it was requisitioned by Shang Shuling and transferred to Nanyang Daju.

古文：典历三郡，温仁多恕，虽在仓卒，未尝疾言遽色。
现代文：掌管三郡，温仁多恕，虽在仓卒急迫时，也未尝疾言急色。
English: In charge of the three counties, Wen Rintao, although in a hurry, did not hesitate to speak out.

古文：常以为 齐之以刑，民免而无耻。 
现代文：常以为 以刑罚治理百姓，百姓虽不犯刑罚但难免有无耻的行为 。
English: It is often thought that the people should be governed by punishment, but although the people do not commit punishments, they will inevitably engage in shameless behavior.

古文：吏人有过，但用蒲鞭罚之，示辱而已，终不加苦。
现代文：官吏百姓有过，只用草鞭打几下，以示侮辱而已，不使皮肉受苦。
English: Officials and commoners have had only a few strokes of the cane as a sign of insult, but they did not make their flesh suffer.

古文：事有功善，推之自下。
现代文：事有功绩，归之于下面。
English: If something is meritorious, it belongs to below.

古文：灾异或见，引躬克责。
现代文：灾异出现，自己引身担当责任。
English: In the event of a natural disaster, you must take responsibility for yourself.

古文：每行县止息亭传，辄引学官祭酒及处士诸生执经对讲。
现代文：每到县中亭传旅舍，一停下来，就招引学官祭酒及处士诸生手执经书对讲。
English: Every time I go to the county's Zhongting Chuan Hostel, as soon as I stop, I will invite scholars and officials to the festival to drink wine and officials to hold sermons.

古文：见父老慰以农里之言，少年勉以孝悌之训。
现代文：看到父老慰以农里之言，见到少年就勉以孝悌之训。
English: When they see a father, they comfort him with the words of a farmer, and when they see a boy, they urge him with the words of filial piety.

古文：人感德兴行，日有所化。
现代文：人们感于德就兴于行，教化日见普及。
English: People are motivated to practice virtue, and enlightenment is becoming more and more popular.

古文：灵帝初，征拜太中大夫，传讲华光殿。
现代文：灵帝初，征拜为太中大夫，侍讲华光殿。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Ling's reign, he was recruited to serve as the Grand Physician and attendant to the Hua Guang Palace.

古文：迁侍中，赐衣一袭。
现代文：迁侍中，赐衣一套。
English: A set of clothes is given to a retiring samurai.

古文：转屯骑校尉，迁宗正，转光禄勋。
现代文：转为屯骑校尉，迁宗正，转光禄勋。
English: He was promoted to the rank of cadet, transferred to the position of patriarch, and became a laureate.

古文：熹平五年，代许训为太尉。
现代文：熹平五年，代许训为太尉。
English: In the fifth year of Xingping, he was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：灵帝颇好学艺，每引见宽，常令讲经。
现代文：灵帝很喜爱学艺，每引见刘宽，常令他讲经。
English: Lingdi was very fond of learning. Whenever he saw Liu Guang, he would often make him recite scriptures.

古文：宽尝于坐被酒睡伏。
现代文：刘宽曾在座位上被酒所加而睡伏。
English: Liu Guang had fallen asleep in his seat, overcome by alcohol.

古文：帝问： 太尉醉邪？ 
现代文：帝问道 ：太尉醉了吗？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Is the captain drunk?"

古文：宽仰对曰： 臣不敢醉，但任重责大，忧心如醉。 
现代文：刘宽仰头回答说： 臣不敢醉，但任务重责任大，忧心如醉了。 
English: Liu Guang raised his head and replied: "A minister does not dare to get drunk, but the task is heavy and the responsibility is great, and the anxiety is like being drunk.

古文：帝重其言。
现代文：帝重视他的话。
English: The emperor heeded his words.

古文：宽简略嗜酒，不好盥浴，京师以为谚。
现代文：刘宽简略喜喝酒，不喜爱洗手洗澡，京师成了谚语。
English: Liu Guangyan slightly likes to drink, does not like to wash his hands and take a bath, the Beijing teacher has become a proverb.

古文：尝坐客，遣苍头市酒，迂久，大醉而还。
现代文：曾与客同坐，派老仆上市购酒，很久，老仆大醉而回。
English: He once sat with a guest and sent an old servant to the market to buy wine. After a long time, the old servant came back very drunk.

古文：客不堪之，骂曰： 畜产。 
现代文：客人不堪，骂道： 畜牲。 
English: Unable to bear the guests, he scolded them: "You animals."

古文：宽须臾遣人视奴，疑必自杀。
现代文：刘宽很快派人去看望老仆，怀疑他必将自杀。
English: Liu Guang soon sent someone to visit the old servant, suspecting that he would commit suicide.

古文：顾左右曰： 此人也，骂言畜产，辱熟甚焉！
现代文：对左右说： 这个人，骂他是畜牲，侮辱还有比这更甚的吗？
English: To the right and to the left: Is there a greater insult than to call this man a brute?

古文：故吾惧其死也。 
现代文：所以我怕他自杀哩。 
English: That's why I'm afraid he'll commit suicide.

古文：夫人欲试宽令恚，伺当朝会，装严已讫，使侍婢奉肉羹，翻污朝衣。
现代文：夫人想试试让刘宽发一次怒，等举行朝会，装束完后，特使侍婢端着肉羹装着不小心泼到刘宽身上，朝服也泼脏了。
English: His wife wanted to try to make Liu Kuan lose his temper once, so they held a court meeting. After the attire was finished, the envoy's maidservant accidentally spilled meat soup on Liu Kuan's body, and the court dress was also dirty.

古文：婢遽收之，宽神色不异，乃徐言曰： 羹烂汝手？ 
现代文：侍婢急收，刘宽毫无怒色，神色不变，慢慢对侍婢说 ：羹汤伤了你的手没有？ 
English: The maidservants and maidservants hurriedly gathered. Liu Kuan was not angry at all and his expression did not change. He slowly said to the maidservants and maidservants, "Did the soup hurt your hand?"

古文：其性度如此。
现代文：他的性情大度就是这样。
English: That's how generous his nature is.

古文：海内称为长者。
现代文：海内都称他为长者。
English: People at home and abroad call him the Elder.

古文：后以日食策免。
现代文：后因日蚀免职。
English: He was later relieved of his duties due to the solar eclipse.

古文：拜卫尉。
现代文：又拜卫尉。
English: The guard captain saluted again.

古文：光和二年，复代段颎为太尉。
现代文：光和二年，再代段赹为太尉。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the rank of taifu.

古文：在职三年，以日变免。
现代文：在职三年，以日变免。
English: Three years on the job, day-to-day.

古文：又拜永乐少府，迁光禄勋。以先策黄巾逆谋，以事上闻，封逯乡侯六百户。
现代文：又拜永乐少府，迁光禄勋，以预知黄巾逆谋，以此事上奏，封逮乡侯六百户。
English: He also paid homage to Yongle Shophu, transferred Guang Rukun, and used his foreknowledge of the Yellow Turban to plot against him. He used this as a pretext to confiscate 600 rural households.

古文：中平二年卒，时年六十六。
现代文：中平二年去世，时六十六岁。
English: Zhongping died two years later, at the age of 66.

古文：子松嗣，官至宗正。
现代文：子刘松嗣位，官到宗正。
English: His son Liu Song succeeded to the throne, and the official came to be called Zongzheng.

