古文：后宫神武明皇后娄氏，讳昭君，赠司徒内干之女也。
现代文：神武明皇后娄氏，名叫昭君，是赠司徒娄内干的女儿。
English: Jinwu Ming's Empress Zou, named Zhaojun, was the daughter of Zhengtu Zou's maternal uncle.

古文：少明悟，强族多聘之，并不肯行。
现代文：年轻时美丽聪明，有势力的家族有很多要聘娶她，都不肯答应。
English: When she was young, she was beautiful and clever, and many powerful families wanted to hire and marry her, but she would not agree.

古文：及见神武于城上执役，惊曰： 此真吾夫也。 乃使婢通意，又数致私财，使以聘己，父母不得已而许焉。
现代文：等看见神武在城劳役，惊讶地说： 这真正是我的丈夫啊 于是派婢女向他表达心意，又几次送给他自己个人的钱财，让他用来聘娶自己，父母不得已就许了逭门婚事。
English: When they saw Shenwu working as a laborer in the city, they were surprised and said, "This is really my husband." So they sent their maidservant to express their feelings to him, and several times gave him their own personal money to let him use it to hire himself, and their parents had no choice but to have an arranged marriage.

古文：神武既有澄清之志，倾产以结英豪，密谋秘策，后恒参预。及拜渤海王妃，阃闱之事悉决焉。
现代文：神武既有肃清天下混乱局面的志向，拿出全部家产来结交英雄豪杰，暗地裹谋划秘密的计策，明皇后一直都参预了乙等到拜封为渤海王妃，内宫的事都由她决断。
English: Since Shenwu had the ambition to clean up the chaotic situation in the world, took out all the family property to make friends with heroes and heroes, and secretly planned secret strategies, the Ming Empress has always been involved in the preparation of B until she was crowned as the Empress of Erhai, and the affairs of the Inner Court were decided by her.

古文：后高明严断，雅遵俭约，往来外舍，侍从不过十人。
现代文：皇后高洁聪明严厉果断：向来遵循节俭，到自己亲戚家往来，侍从不超过十人。
English: Mr. Zou is shrewd and strict. He has always paid attention to diligence, thrift and economy. There are only ten domestic and foreign attendants.

古文：性宽厚，不妒忌，神武姬侍，咸加恩待。
现代文：性情宽厚没有妒忌心，神武的姬妾侍女，都加以恩惠对待。
English: Generous and without jealousy, all the concubines and maidservants of the divine warriors treated them with favor.

古文：神武尝将西讨出师，后夜孪生一男一女，左右以危急，请追告神武。
现代文：神武曾经要出兵西去讨伐，皇后在夜裹生下一男一女双胞胎，身边的人因情况危急；请求追上去告诉神武。
English: Gao Huan had been preparing to go to the Western Expedition. That night, Ms. Zou gave birth to twins, a boy and a girl. When the attendants saw that the situation was critical, they requested that Gao Huan be brought back.

古文：后弗听曰： 王出统大兵，何得以我故轻离军幕。
现代文：皇后不答应说：十王出外统领大军，怎么能因我的缘故而轻易摊开军营。
English: The queen did not agree and said, "How can the ten kings go abroad to lead a large army, and how can they easily set up a military camp because of me?"

古文：死生命也，来复何为！ 
现代文：死生是命中注定的，来了又有什么用。
English: Life and death are predestined, what's the use of coming.

古文：神武闻之，嗟叹良久。
现代文：神武听说后感叹了很久。
English: After Gao Huan knew, he sighed for a long time.

古文：沙苑败后，侯景屡言请精骑二万，必能取之。
现代文：沙苑战败后，侯景多次进言请求给他精锐骑兵二万，一定能够夺取胜利。
English: After the defeat of Sha Yuan's soldiers, Hou Jing repeatedly said, "Please give him twenty thousand elite soldiers, he will surely win."

古文：神武悦，以告于后。
现代文：神武高兴，把这事告诉了皇后。
English: Gao Huan was very happy and told Mr. Zou.

古文：后曰： 若如其言，岂有还理，得獭失景，亦有何利。 
现代文：皇后说： 要是像这样的话，难道还有回来的道理，得到了宇文黑獭而失去了侯景；又有什么好处。
English: The empress said, "If it is like this, is there any reason to come back? If you get the black pheasant and lose your husband, what good is it?"

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是中止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：神武逼于茹茹，欲娶其女而未决。
现代文：神武被茹茹逼迫，打算娶他们的女子而未能决定下来。
English: Jinwu was forced by Zhu Ru to marry their daughter, but he could not make up his mind.

古文：后曰： 国家大计，愿不疑也。 及茹茹公主至，后避正室处之。神武愧而拜谢焉，曰： 彼将有觉，愿绝勿顾。 
现代文：皇后说： 国家大计，希望不要疑虑 等茹茹公主来到，皇后避开正室住下来：神武惭愧表示感谢说： 她将会明白过来，希望断绝不再去。 
English: The Empress said, "The state's grand plan, I hope you don't have any misgivings." When Princess Ru Ru Ru arrived, the Empress avoided her lawful wife and stayed at home. Shyly expressing her gratitude, Shen Wu said, "She will come to understand, and I hope she will never go again."

古文：慈爱诸子，不异己出，躬自纺绩，人赐一袍一袴。
现代文：对儿子们都慈祥地爱护，同自己生的没有两样，亲自纺纱织布，每人赠给一件袍子一件裤子。
English: She lovingly cared for her sons as if they were her own, spinning and weaving cloth herself and giving each of them a robe and a pair of trousers.

古文：手缝戎服，以帅左右。
现代文：亲手缝制军服，给身边的人作出表率。
English: He sewed military uniforms with his own hands and led the maids of honor to make them together.

古文：弟昭，以功名自达，其余亲属，未尝为请爵位。
现代文：弟弟娄堕，因功名使自己显达，其余亲属，不曾为他们请求爵位。
English: His younger brother, 堕落, rose to prominence due to his achievements, but the rest of his relatives never asked for a peerage for them.

古文：每言有材当用，义不以私乱公。
现代文：常说有才干就会被任用，道理上不能以私乱公。
English: It is often said that if you have talent, you will be appointed. In principle, you cannot be appointed for personal reasons.

古文：文襄嗣位，进为太妃。
现代文：文襄继承王位，被进封为太妃。
English: After Emperor Wenxiang succeeded to the throne, she was promoted to the rank of crown princess.

古文：文宣将受魏禅，后固执不许，帝所以中止。
现代文：塞宣将要接受秀蝈禅让，皇后坚持不答应，皇帝于是中止。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was ready to accept the throne of Emperor Wei, but Mr. Zou strongly disagreed, so Emperor Wenzhong stopped.

古文：天保初，尊为皇太后，宫曰宣训。
现代文：型呈初年，尊封为皇太后，宫名叫宣量喧。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, she was given the title of empress dowager, and the palace name was changed to Xuanxun.

古文：济南即位，尊为太皇太后。
现代文：辽直至登皇帝位，尊封为太皇太后。
English: After the enthronement of the King of Jinan, she was also given the title of Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：尚书令杨愔等受遗诏辅政，疏忌诸王。
现代文：尚书令锤等人接受遣韶辅佐朝政，疏远猜忌各王。
English: Shang Shulinghammer and others accepted the post of envoy and assistant to the imperial court, alienating the kings.

古文：太皇太后密与孝昭及诸大将定策诛之，下令废立。
现代文：太皇太后秘密和孝昭帝以及各大将定下计策杀了他们，下令废立皇帝。
English: The empress dowager secretly plotted with Emperor Xiaozhao and the generals to kill them and abolish the emperor.

古文：孝昭即位，复为皇太后。
现代文：孝昭登帝位，又封为皇太后。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozhao, the Min clan became empress dowager again.

古文：孝昭帝崩，太后又下诏立武成帝。
现代文：耋堕童崩逝，太后又下诏书立武成帝。
English: After the fallen child passed away, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict to establish Emperor Wu.

古文：大宁二年春，太后寝疾，衣忽自举，用巫媪言改姓石氏。
现代文：大宁二年春广太后患病，衣服忽然自己飘了起来，听巫婆的话改姓为互压。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Danying Emperor, the Empress Dowager Guangxuan fell ill, her clothes suddenly floated up on their own, and she changed her surname to "mutual pressure" according to the witch's words.

古文：四月辛丑，崩于北宫，时年六十二。
现代文：四月辛丑，在韭直崩逝，当时年纪六十二岁。
English: On the second day of April, he died in Hokugu, at the age of 62.

古文：五月甲申，合葬义平陵。
现代文：五月甲申，在义平陵合葬。
English: On May 15, they were buried together in the Yiping Mausoleum.

古文：太后凡孕六男二女，皆感梦：孕文襄则梦一断龙；孕文宣则梦大龙，首尾属天地，张口动目，势状惊人；孕孝昭则梦蠕龙于地；孕武成则梦龙浴于海；孕魏二后并梦月入怀；孕襄城、博陵二王梦鼠入衣下。
现代文：太后一共怀过六男二女，都有梦的感应：怀文襄帝时就梦见一条断了的龙；怀文宣时就梦见大龙，头尾连接天地，张开口眼睛转动，样子惊人；怀耋坜时梦见蠕龙在地上；怀武成时就梦见龙在海中洗浴；怀垫二后都梦见月亮进入怀内；怀塞继、埋医二王梦见老鼠钻入衣服下边。
English: The empress dowager had a total of six sons and two daughters, all of whom were affected by dreams: when she was pregnant with Emperor Wenxiang, she dreamed of a broken dragon; when she was pregnant with Emperor Wenxuan, she dreamed of a great dragon, with its head and tail connecting heaven and earth, opening its mouth and rolling its eyes, looking amazing; when she was pregnant with Empress Dowager Zhou, she dreamed of a creeping dragon on the ground; when she was pregnant with Emperor Wucheng, she dreamed of a dragon bathing in the sea; when she was pregnant with Empress Dowager Zhou, she dreamed of the moon entering her womb; when she was pregnant with

古文：后未崩，有童谣曰 九龙母死不作孝 。
现代文：皇后未崩逝时，有童谣说 九龙的母亲死后不挂孝 。
English: When the queen was still alive, there was a nursery rhyme that said that the mother of Kowloon would not be held in high esteem after her death.

古文：及后崩，武成不改服，绯袍如故。
现代文：等到皇后崩逝，亘递不换衣服，像往常一样穿红色衣袍。
English: When the empress dowager died, Emperor Wu Chengdu did not change his mourning clothes, he still wore a big red robe, as usual.

古文：未几，登三台，置酒作乐。
现代文：不久，登上三台，设置酒宴奏起音乐。
English: Before long, they were on three stages, setting up a banquet and playing music.

古文：帝女进白袍，帝怒，投诸台下。
现代文：皇帝的女儿送上白色衣袍，皇帝发怒，扔到了台下。
English: When the emperor's daughter presented him with a white robe, the emperor was so angry that he threw it off the stage.

古文：和士开请止乐，帝大怒，挞之。
现代文：和士开请求停止奏乐，皇帝大怒，鞭打了和迩。
English: When He Shikai asked for the music to be stopped, the emperor flew into a rage and whipped He Jiao.

古文：帝于昆季次实九，盖其征验也。
现代文：皇帝在兄弟中排行第九，造就应验了童谣。
English: The emperor ranked ninth among the brothers, making the nursery rhyme come true.

古文：文襄敬皇后元氏，魏孝静帝之姊也。
现代文：主塞敬皇后五压，是魏孝静帝的姐姐。
English: Empress Jiejing is the sister of Emperor Wei Xiao Jing.

古文：孝武帝时，封冯翊公主而归于文襄。
现代文：耋武童时，封为冯翊公主并嫁给了文襄帝。
English: When she was a boy, she was given the title of Princess Fengyao and married Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：容德兼美，曲尽和敬。
现代文：五压容貌品德都很美，竭尽和顺恭敬。
English: All five of them are beautiful in appearance and moral character, and they are very kind and respectful.

古文：初生河间王孝琬，时文襄为世子，三日而孝静帝幸世子第，赠锦彩及布帛万匹。
现代文：当初生下河间王高孝垄，遣时文襄帝是世子，三天后耋静帝来到世子的住宅，赠给彩色丝绸及布帛一万匹。
English: At first, Kawama Wang Gao Xiaoreng was born, and Emperor Wenxiang was the heir. Three days later, Emperor Jing came to the heir's residence and presented 10,000 pieces of colored silk and cloth.

古文：世子辞，求通受诸贵礼遗，于是十屋皆满。
现代文：世子推辞，请求普遍接受各贵族赠送礼物，于是十间屋子都装满了。
English: The heir rejected the offer and asked for a general acceptance of gifts from aristocrats, so all ten rooms were filled.

古文：次生两公主。
现代文：接着生了两位公主。
English: Then two princesses were born.

古文：文宣受禅，尊为文襄皇后，居静德宫。
现代文：文宣接受撺让，尊封为文襄帝皇后，住在馥德宫。
English: Wen Xuan accepted the offer and was given the title of Empress of Emperor Wenxiang. She lived in the Summer Palace.

古文：及天保六年，文宣渐致昏狂，乃移居于高阳之宅，而取其府库，曰： 吾兄昔奸我妇，我今须报。 
现代文：到了天保六年，文宣渐渐变得昏昧狂乱，于是把她迁居到高阳的住宅，并夺取了她家的府库，说： 我哥哥以前奸淫了我的妻子，我现在要报复。 
English: In the sixth year of the Tenpo era, Wen Xuan gradually became dizzy and delirious, so he moved her to a house in Gaoyang and seized her family's treasury, saying, "My brother raped my wife before, now I want to take revenge."

古文：乃淫于后。
现代文：于是和皇后淫乱。
English: So he had an affair with the queen.

古文：其高氏女妇无亲疏，皆使左右乱交之于前。
现代文：他们高氏的妇女无论关系亲疏，都让身边的人在自己面前乱交。
English: They Gao's women, regardless of whether they are related or not, all let the people around them have promiscuity in front of them.

古文：以葛为，令魏安德主骑上，使人推引之，又命胡人苦辱之。
现代文：用葛麻做成粗绳，命令魏安德主骑上去，让人推引，又命令胡人极度侮辱她。
English: She made a thick rope out of sesame seeds and ordered Wei Anding's master to ride up and let someone push her, and ordered Hu Ren to insult her severely.

古文：帝又自呈露，以示群下。
现代文：皇帝又亲自裸露，显示给下人看。
English: The emperor also stripped himself naked and showed it to his subordinates.

古文：武平中，后崩，祔葬义平陵。
现代文：武平年间，皇后崩逝，拊葬在义平陵。
English: During the Wuping era, the empress passed away and was buried in the Yiping Mausoleum.

古文：文宣皇后李氏，讳祖娥，赵郡李希宗女也。
现代文：文宣皇后李氏，名叫祖娥，是趟郡李希宗的女儿。
English: Wen Xuan's Empress Li, named Zu'e, was the daughter of Wai County's Li Xizong.

古文：容德甚美。
现代文：容貌品德很美。
English: She was very beautiful, both in appearance and in character.

古文：初为太原公夫人。
现代文：起初是太原公夫人。
English: At first, it was Princess Taihara.

古文：及帝将建中宫，高隆之、高德正言汉妇人不可为天下母，宜更择美配。
现代文：等到文宣帝将要确定中宫的皇后，高隆之、高德正说汉族的妇女不能成为天下之母，应该另选美好的配偶。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan was about to determine the empress of the Middle Court, Gao Longzhi and Gao Dezheng said that Han women could not become the mother of the world, and they should choose another beautiful spouse.

古文：杨愔固请依汉、魏故事，不改元妃。
现代文：杨情坚持请求依照漠、魏旧例，不要改变元妃。
English: However, Yang firmly requested Emperor Wenzhong not to change the status of Yuanpai's wife in accordance with the practice since Han and Wei Dynasties.

古文：而德正犹固请废后而立段昭仪，欲以结勋贵之援，帝竟不从而立后焉。
现代文：可是高德正还是坚持请求废掉皇后而立段昭仪，想以此交结功臣权贵而得到他们支持，皇帝终究没有听从而立了皇后。
English: However, Gao De was still insisting on requesting the abolition of the empress and the establishment of Duan Zhao Yi, hoping to get the support of the heroes and nobles in this way. The emperor eventually did not listen and established the empress.

古文：帝好捶挞嫔御，乃至有杀戮者，唯后独蒙礼敬。
现代文：皇帝喜欢鞭打姬妾，甚至有的被杀掉，衹有皇后独自受到礼遇和敬重。
English: The emperor liked to whip his concubines, and some were even killed, but the empress alone was treated with courtesy and respect.

古文：天保十年，改为可贺敦皇后。
现代文：天保十年，改为可贺敦皇后。
English: Ten years later, she was renamed Empress Koga.

古文：孝昭即位，降居昭信宫，号昭信皇后。
现代文：孝昭登皇帝位，搬出住在昭信宫，封号昭信皇后。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi, Empress Wensun moved to the palace of Emperor Zhaoxin and took the name Empress Zhaoxin.

古文：武成践祚，逼后淫乱，云： 若不许，我当杀尔儿。 
现代文：武成继承皇位，逼迫皇后淫乱，说： 如果不答应，我会杀了你的儿子。 
English: Wu Cheng succeeded to the throne and forced the empress to commit adultery, saying, "If you do not agree, I will kill your son."

古文：后惧，从之。
现代文：皇后害怕，顺从了他。
English: Queen Wenxuan panicked and had to obey.

古文：后有娠，太原王绍德至阁，不得见，愠曰： 儿岂不知耶，姊姊腹大，故不见儿。 
现代文：后来有了身孕，太原王高绍德到了门口，不能见面，生气地说： 儿子难道不知道吗，妈妈的肚子大了，所以不肯见儿子。 
English: Later, when she became pregnant, the King of Taiyuan, Gao Shao De, arrived at the door, unable to meet her, and angrily said, "Doesn't my son know that my mother's stomach is big, so she doesn't want to see her son.

古文：后闻之，大惭，由是生女不举。
现代文：皇后听说后，十分惭愧，因此生下个女孩没让她活下来。
English: When the queen heard of this, she was so ashamed that she gave birth to a girl, but she did not let her live.

古文：帝横刀诟曰： 尔杀我女，我何不杀尔儿！ 
现代文：武成帝横拿着刀骂道： 你杀了我的女儿，我为什么不杀你的儿子! 
English: Wu Chengdi held his sword sideways and cursed, "You killed my daughter, why shouldn't I kill your son!"

古文：对后前筑杀绍德。
现代文：当着皇后的面砍杀了高绍德。
English: He publicly hacked Sauder to death in front of the queen.

古文：后大哭，帝愈怒，裸后乱挝挞之，号天不已。
现代文：皇后大哭。武成帝更加愤怒，脱光皇后的衣服乱打一气，皇后哭喊不止。
English: The Empress was crying inconsolably, and Emperor Wucheng was even more angry. He stripped off the Empress's clothes and beat her mercilessly, until she was screaming at the top of her lungs.

古文：盛以绢囊，流血淋漉，投诸渠水，良久乃苏，犊车载送妙胜尼寺。
现代文：用绢织的袋子装上皇后，流血淋濉，扔到渠水裹，很久才苏醒过来，用犊车装着送到妙胜尼寺。
English: The queen was loaded into a woven sack, drained of blood, thrown into a ditch and wrapped in water. It took a long time for her to wake up, and she was taken to Myoseni Temple in a cart.

古文：后性爱佛法，因此为尼。
现代文：皇后生性喜爱佛法，从此成为尼姑。
English: The empress had a natural affinity for Buddhism and became a nun.

古文：齐亡入关。
现代文：齐国灭亡时进入关中。
English: He entered Guanzhong at the time of the fall of Qi.

古文：隋时得还赵郡。
现代文：隋代时得以回到趟郡。
English: He was able to return to Wuzhong County during the Sui Dynasty.

古文：孝昭皇后元氏，开府元蛮女也。
现代文：耋蟹皇后元氏，是开府五蛮的女儿。
English: The queen of crabs, Genji, is the daughter of Kaifu Goban.

古文：初为常山王妃。
现代文：起初是常山王妃。
English: At first, it was Princess Tsuneyama.

古文：天保末，赐姓步六孤。
现代文：天宝末年，赐姓为步六孤。
English: At the end of Tenpo's life, he was given the surname of Bu Liugou.

古文：孝昭即位，立为皇后。
现代文：孝昭登皇帝位，立为皇后。
English: Xiao Zhao ascended to the throne and became empress.

古文：帝崩，梓宫之邺。
现代文：皇帝崩逝，棺椁送到整继。
English: The emperor passed away, and the coffin was sent to the rectification.

古文：始渡汾桥，武成闻后有奇药，追索之不得，使阉人就车顿辱。
现代文：开始渡过没丞桥时，亘递听说皇后有珍奇的药物，追上来索要没有得到，派太监走近车子揪住头顿地进行侮辱。
English: At the beginning of crossing the Mianzhong Bridge, Watanabe heard that the empress had a rare drug, caught up to ask for it and did not get it, and sent a eunuch to approach the car to hold his head and insult him.

古文：降居顺成宫。
现代文：贬抑住在顺成宫。
English: They live in Shuncheng Palace.

古文：武成既杀乐陵王，元被閟隔，不得与家相知。
现代文：武成已经杀了乐陵王，元氏被关起来隔绝，不能和家裹人互通音讯。
English: Emperor Wucheng put the queen into a bag made of straw and threw her into the gutter, covered in blood. It took her a long time to wake up.

古文：宫闱内忽有飞语，帝令检推，得后父兄书信，元蛮由是坐免官。
现代文：内宫忽然有流言，皇帝命令调查追究，得到皇后父亲和哥哥的书信，元蛮因此获罪被免除官职。
English: Suddenly, there was a rumor in the inner palace. The emperor ordered an investigation and received letters from the queen's father and brother. As a result, Yuan Ban was convicted and removed from office.

古文：后以齐亡入周氏宫中。
现代文：皇后在齐国灭亡后进入周国宫中。
English: The empress entered the Zhou court after the fall of Qi.

古文：隋文帝作相，放还山东。
现代文：隋文帝作丞相时，放出回到山东。
English: When Sui Wen Di became chancellor, he was sent back to Shandong.

古文：武成皇后胡氏，安定胡延之女。
现代文：武成皇后胡氏，是安定胡延之的女儿。
English: Empress Wu Cheng of the Hu clan is the daughter of the stable Hu Yan.

古文：其母范阳卢道约女，初怀孕，有胡僧诣门曰： 此宅瓠芦中有月 ，既而生后。
现代文：她的母亲是范阳卢道约的女儿，当初怀孕时，有胡人和尚到门上说 这家的葫芦裹有月亮 不久生了皇后。
English: Her mother was the daughter of Fan Yang Lu Daoyao. When she was pregnant, a goose and a monk came to the door and said that the family's gourd was wrapped in the moon. Soon after, the queen was born.

古文：天保初，选为长广王妃。
现代文：天保初年，被选为长广王妃。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, she was selected as the queen of Changguang.

古文：产后主日，号鸣于产帐上。
现代文：生下后主那天，有猫头鹰在产房的帐子上呜叫。
English: On the day after she gave birth, an owl wailed on the curtain of the delivery room.

古文：武成崩，尊为皇太后，陆媪及和士开密谋杀赵郡王睿，出娄定远、高文遥为刺史。
现代文：武成崩逝，尊封为皇太后，陆媪同和士盼秘密策划杀掉赵郡王高教，逐出娄定远、高文遥担任刺史。
English: After the death of Wu Cheng, who was revered as the empress dowager, Lu Yutong and Shipan secretly plotted to kill Zhao Gu Wang Gao Jiao, expel Gong Dingyuan, and Gao Wenyao served as the assassin.

古文：和、陆谄事太后，无所不至。
现代文：和士开、陆媪谄媚事奉太后，没有不做到的。
English: Kazuchika and Lu Hao desperately try to please the Empress Dowager Hu, and they really go to great lengths.

古文：初武成时，后与诸阉人亵狎。
现代文：起初武成时，皇后和太监们亲近戏谪。
English: At the beginning of Wu Cheng, the empress and the eunuchs were close to each other.

古文：武成宠幸和士开，每与后握槊，因此与后奸通。
现代文：武成宠爱和士开，常和皇后玩握槊的博戏，因此铷皇后通奸。
English: Wu Cheng was fond of Wuxi Kai, and often played the game of holding the scepter with the empress. Therefore, the sceptered empress committed adultery.

古文：自武成崩后，数出诣佛寺，又与沙门昙献通。
现代文：自从武成崩逝后，几次出宫到佛寺裹，又同和尚昙献私通。
English: After the death of Wu Cheng, he went out of the palace to the Buddhist temple several times, and had sexual intercourse with a monk.

古文：布金钱于献席下，又挂宝装胡床于献屋壁，武成平生之所御也。
现代文：把金钱铺在昙献的席位下，又在昙献的墙壁上挂上宝装胡床，这些是武成生前用遇的。
English: Spreading money under the seat of the offering, and hanging a richly decorated wooden bed on the walls of the offering, these were used by Takeshige during his lifetime.

古文：乃置百僧于内殿，托以听讲，日夜与昙献寝处。
现代文：于是在内殿安置上百个和尚，以听讲经为藉日，日夜和昙献睡在一起。
English: As a result, hundreds of monks were placed in the inner hall to listen to sermons and sleep with the offerings day and night.

古文：以献为昭玄统。
现代文：任命昙献为昭玄统。
English: He was appointed as the successor of Shogun Akihito.

古文：僧徒遥指太后以弄昙献，乃至谓之为太上者。
现代文：和尚们远远指着太后戏弄昙献，甚至称他是太上皇。
English: Monks often joked about the empress dowager and Xuan Xuan from a distance, and even jokingly called him the emperor's son.

古文：帝闻太后不谨而未之信，后朝太后，见二少尼，悦而召之，乃男子也，于是昙献事亦发，皆伏法，并杀元、山、王三郡君，皆太后之所昵也。
现代文：皇帝听说太后不检点但不相信，后来朝见太后，看到两个少年尼姑、喜欢而召幸他们才知是男人。因此昙献的事也被发现，都被处死，并杀掉五、山、王三个郡君，都是太后所亲近的。
English: The emperor heard that the empress dowager was indiscreet, but he did not believe it. Later, when he met the empress dowager, he saw two young nuns, and he liked them, but it was only by luck that they knew they were men. Therefore, the matter of the sacrificial offering was also discovered, and they were all executed, and the three county princes, Wu, Shan, and Wang, were killed. They were all close to the empress dowager.

古文：帝自晋阳奉太后还邺，至紫陌，卒遇大风。舍人魏僧伽明风角，奏言即时当有暴逆事。帝诈云邺中有急，弯弓緾槊，驰入南城，令邓长颙幽太后北宫，仍有敕内外诸亲一不得与太后相见。
现代文：皇帝从晋阳带着太后回邺城，到了紫陌，突然遇上大风，舍入魏僧伽通晓占卜风向拟定吉凶的方法，上奏说这时会有突发作乱的事：皇帝假装说邺城中有急事，拉开弓缠上长矛，奔驰进入南城，命令邓长颐把太后幽禁在北宫，一再有韶令内外各亲戚一律不得和太后相见。
English: The emperor took the empress dowager back to Lucheng from Jinyang. When he arrived at Zhimo, he suddenly encountered a strong wind. He called in the Wei monks to consult the divination wind to work out the methods of good and evil. He said that there would be sudden disturbances at this time. The emperor pretended to say that there was an emergency in Lucheng, opened his bow, wrapped it around a spear, and galloped into Nancheng. He ordered Deng Changyu to imprison the empress dowager in the North Palace. He repeatedly ordered all relatives inside and outside the country not to meet the empress dowager.

古文：久之，帝复迎太后。
现代文：很久以后，皇帝又迎回太后。
English: After a long time, the emperor welcomed the empress dowager back.

古文：太后初闻使者至，大惊，虑有不测。
现代文：太后开始听到使者来了，十分惊慌，担心有不测的事。
English: When the Empress Dowager Hu heard that the messenger had just arrived, she was very surprised and feared that a great disaster would befall.

古文：每太后设食，帝亦不敢尝。
现代文：每次太后摆下食物，皇帝也不敢吃。
English: Whenever the empress dowager sent food, the emperor did not dare to taste it.

古文：周使元伟来聘，作《述行赋》，叙郑庄公克段而迁姜氏，文虽不工，当时深以为愧。
现代文：周国使者元伟前来访问，撰作《述行赋》叙说郑庄公击败共叔段而迁走母亲姜氏，文词虽然不工整，皇帝当时感到十分惭愧。
English: Zhou's emissary, Yuan Wei, came to visit and wrote "The Story of Zhuang Fu," which recounts that Zheng Zhuang defeated his uncle and moved his mother, Jiang. Although the text was not perfect, the emperor felt very ashamed at the time.

古文：齐亡入周，恣行奸秽。
现代文：变量灭亡后进入旦迩，肆意淫乱。
English: After the death of the variable, it enters the cocoon and indulges in debauchery.

古文：隋开皇中殂。
现代文：膛伐题皇年间死去。
English: He died during the reign of the emperor.

古文：后主皇后斛律氏，左丞相光之女也。
现代文：后主皇后斛律氏，左丞相斛律光的女儿。
English: She was the daughter of the future Empress Min Ritsu and the Minister of the Left, Min Ritsu.

古文：初为皇太子妃。
现代文：起初是皇太子妃。
English: At first it was the Crown Princess.

古文：后主受禅，立为皇后。
现代文：后主接受禅让，立为皇后。
English: Afterward, the lord accepted Zen's resignation and made her the empress.

古文：武平三年正月生女，帝欲悦光，诈称生男，为之大赦。
现代文：武平三年正月生了个女儿，皇帝想取悦斛律光，假装说生了个男孩，为此大赦天下。
English: Wu Ping gave birth to a daughter in the first month of the third year of the reign of Wu Ping. The emperor wanted to please the emperor and pretended to give birth to a boy, for which he was pardoned by the whole world.

古文：光诛，后废在别宫，后令为尼。
现代文：斛律光被杀后，皇后被废住在别的宫殿，后来下令做尼姑。
English: After the murder of Peliguang, the empress was banished to live in another palace, and later ordered to become a nun.

古文：齐灭，嫁为开府元仁妻。
现代文：齐国灭亡后，出嫁成为开府元仁的妻子。
English: After the fall of Qi, she married and became the wife of Kaifu Motohito.

古文：后主皇后胡氏，陇东王长仁女也。
现代文：后主皇后胡氏，陇束王元长仁的女儿。
English: Empress Dowager Hu, the daughter of Emperor Yuancheng.

古文：胡太后失母仪之道，深以为愧，欲求悦后主，故饰后于宫中，令帝见之。
现代文：胡太后失去母亲仪范的正道，深深感到惭愧，想要取悦后主，所以在宫中打扮皇后，让皇帝看到她。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu lost the righteous path of her mother's etiquette, felt deeply ashamed, and wanted to please the Empress, so she dressed up the empress in the palace and let the emperor see her.

古文：帝果悦，立为弘德夫人，进左昭仪，大被宠爱。
现代文：皇帝果然喜欢，立为弘德夫人，进封左昭仪，非常受宠爱。
English: The emperor really liked her, and she was appointed as Lady Hongde and given the posthumous name Zuo Zhaoyi. She was very much loved.

古文：斛律后废，陆媪欲以穆夫人代之，太后不许。
现代文：斛律皇后被废，陆媪想让穆夫人取代，太后不答应。
English: The Empress Dowager was dethroned, and Lu Ye wanted Lady Mu to replace her, but the Empress Dowager did not agree.

古文：祖孝征请立胡昭仪，遂登为皇后。
现代文：祖孝征请求立胡昭仪，于是登位为皇后。
English: Zou Xiao Zheng asked for the appointment of Hu Zhaoyi, and she was enthroned as empress.

古文：陆媪既非劝立，又意在穆夫人，其后于太后前作色而言曰： 何物亲侄女，作如此语言！ 
现代文：陆媪既不是劝立，又意在穆夫人，后来在太后面前变了脸色说卜 什么东西使亲侄女说出像这样的话! 
English: Lu Yao was not trying to persuade, but to please Lady Mu. Later, he changed his face in front of the empress dowager and said, "What made my niece say such a thing!"

古文：太后问有何言，曰： 不可道。 
现代文：太后问有什么话，说： 不能说 坚持间她才说： 她告诉大家说。
English: The Empress Dowager asked if there was anything she could say, and said, "I can't say." She insisted, and then said, "I'll tell everyone."

古文：固问之，乃曰： 语大家云，太后行多非法，不可以训。 太后大怒，唤后出，立剃其发，送令还家。
现代文：太后的行为很多不合法，不可以作为准则 太后十分愤怒，把皇后叫出来，立刻剃掉她的头发送走让她回家。
English: The Empress Dowager was furious, called the Empress out, immediately shaved her head and sent her home.

古文：帝思之，每致物以通意。后与斛律废后俱召入内，数日而邺不守。后亦改嫁。
现代文：皇帝思念她，常常送去东西表达心意，后来和斛律废后都被召回内宫，几天后邺城失守后来也改了嫁。
English: The emperor missed her and often sent things to her to express his feelings. Later, after the abolition of the imperial edict, she and the emperor were both recalled to the inner palace. A few days later, the emperor lost control of Lucheng and later married another woman.

古文：后主皇后穆氏，名邪利，本斛律后从婢也。
现代文：后主皇后穆氏，名口吐邪利，本来是斛律后随从的婢女。
English: Queen Mu, who later became the head of the family, was originally a servant girl who followed Yao Rui.

古文：母名轻霄，本穆子伦婢也，转入侍中宋钦道家，奸私而生后，莫知氏族，或云后即钦道女子也。
现代文：母亲名叫轻霄，本是穆子伦的婢女，转到侍中宋钦道家裹，与人私通后生下了皇后，不知她的姓氏宗族，有人说皇后就是宋钦道的女儿。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Kai. The queen of the queen of Qi, Mu, was named Zari, and was originally a servant girl of the queen of Balochistan. Her mother's name was Qiao Xiao, and she was originally a servant girl of Mu Zilun. Later, she was transferred to the family of the middle servant, Song Qinduo, and had an affair with a man and gave birth to Mu. It is not known what her surname was. Some people say that she was the daughter of Song Qinduo.

古文：小字黄花，后字舍利。
现代文：小名叫黄花，后来叫舍利。
English: Mu's small character, Huanghua, was later changed to Sheli.

古文：钦道妇妒，黥轻霄面为 宋 字。
现代文：宋钦道妻子妒忌厂在轻置的脸上刻上 宋 字。
English: Song Qin Dao's wife Jealousy Factory engraved "Song" on his careless face.

古文：钦道伏诛，黄花因此入宫，有幸于后主，宫内称为舍利太监。
现代文：宋钦道被处死，董萑因此被送入宫中，受到登主的宠爱，宫内称为舍利太监。
English: Song Qin Dao was put to death, and as a result, Dong Xi was sent to the palace, where he was favored by the emperor and known as the eunuch of Shaeli.

古文：女侍中陆太姬知其宠，养以为女，荐为弘德夫人。
现代文：女侍中陆太姬知道她受宠，当女儿抚养她，举荐为弘德夫人。
English: The lady-in-waiting, Zhonglu Taiki, knew that the emperor liked her, so she adopted her as her own daughter and recommended her to the emperor. She was given the title of Lady Hongde.

古文：武平元年六月，生皇子恒。
现代文：武平元年六月，生下皇子高恒。
English: In June of the first year of Wuping, she gave birth to Prince Gao Heng.

古文：于时后主未有储嗣，陆阴结待，以监抚之任不可无主，时皇后斛律氏，丞相光之女也，虑其怀恨，先令母养之，立为皇太子。
现代文：当时后主没有继位人，陆太姬私下结交等待，以监护抚养的责任不可以没有继位的君主，当时皇后斛律氏是丞相斛律光的女儿，担心她怀着仇恨，先让母亲抚养，立为皇太子。
English: At that time, there was no successor to the throne. Lu Taiki made a secret friendship with the emperor and waited for him. The responsibility of guardianship and upbringing could not be a monarch without a successor. At that time, Empress Yao Rude was the daughter of the prime minister Yao Rude, and she was worried that she would hate her and let her mother raise her first and set her up as the crown prince.

古文：陆以国姓之重，穆、陆相对，又奏赐姓穆氏。
现代文：陆太姬以国姓的重要，穆、陆声音相对，上奏赐姓穆氏。
English: Later, Prince Heng was made crown prince. Lu Taiji thought that the important surname of the country, Zhong Mu, was different from Lu, so she asked for the surname of Huanghua, Mu.

古文：胡庶人之废也，陆有助焉，胡遂立为皇后，大赦。
现代文：胡庶人被废掉，也有陆太姬的帮助，所以就被立为皇后，大赦天下。
English: Hu the commoner was abolished, with the help of Lu Taiji, so she was made empress, and the world was at her mercy.

古文：初，有折冲将军元正烈于邺城东水中得玺以献，文曰 天王后玺 ，盖石氏所作。
现代文：起初，有折冲将军元正烈在邺城束面的水中得到印玺献上，文字是 天王后玺 大概是石氏制作的。
English: At the beginning, there was a general, Yuan Zhengrong, who received a seal in the water of Shicheng Bundan and presented it to the emperor. The words "Tenno Houran" were probably made by Shi.

古文：诏书颁告，以为穆后之瑞焉。
现代文：诏书通告，认为是穆后的吉兆。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an imperial edict announcing that this was in response to Empress Shomu's auspiciousness.

古文：武成时，为胡后造真珠裙袴，所费不可称计，被火所烧。
现代文：武成时，曾为胡后制作珍珠裙裤，所花费的不可计算，被火烧掉了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wucheng, a pearl skirt and trousers were made for the Empress Dowager. The cost was incalculable, and they were destroyed by fire.

古文：后主既立穆皇后，复为营之。
现代文：后主立了穆皇后以后，又为她制作。
English: Later, after the Lord established Empress Mu, it was made for her again.

古文：属周武遭太后丧，诏侍中薛孤、康买等为吊使，又遣商胡赍锦彩三万匹与使同往，欲市真珠为皇后造七宝车，周人不与交易，然而竟造焉。
现代文：正值周武帝遇上太后的丧事，下诏书侍中薛孤、康买等人为吊唁的使者，又派经商的胡人带着彩色锦缎三万匹和吊唁的使者一同前往，想购买珍珠为皇后制造七实车，周国人不肯和他们交易，然而终究造了出来。
English: It was the time when Emperor Zhou Wu met the funeral of the empress dowager. He issued an edict appointing the attendants, including Xue Guo and Kang Bai, as messengers of condolence. He also sent the merchant Hu with 30,000 colored brocade horses to go with the messengers of condolence. They wanted to buy pearls to make seven solid cars for the empress. The people of Zhou did not want to trade with them, but they eventually made them.

古文：先是童谣曰： 黄华势欲落，清觞满杯酌。 
现代文：这之前童谣说： 黄花势欲落，清觞满杯酌。 
English: Before this, the nursery rhyme said: The yellow flowers are in full bloom, and the honeysuckle is in full bloom.

古文：言黄花不久也，后主自立穆后以后，昏饮无度，故云清觞满杯酌。
现代文：说黄花不长久了，后主自从立了穆后以后，昏昧饮酒没有节制，所以说清觞满杯酌。
English: It is said that the yellow flower does not last long, and since the late lord established the late queen, there has been no restraint in drinking, so it is said that the clear gourd is full of drinking.

古文：陆息骆提婆诏改姓为穆，陆太姬，皆以皇后故也。
现代文：陆的子女骆提婆被下诏书改姓为穆，陆号为太姬，都是因为皇后的缘故。
English: Lu's child, Luo Dibin, was issued a decree to change her surname to Mu and her Lu number to Taiki, all because of the queen.

古文：后既以陆为母，提婆为家，更不采轻霄。
现代文：皇后既然以陆太姬为母，提婆为家，更加不理睬轻霄。
English: Since Empress Mu regarded Lu Taichi as her mother, she regarded Loti's home as her own, and she ignored her own mother.

古文：轻霄后自疗面，欲求见，太后、陆媪使禁掌之，竟不得见。
现代文：轻霄后来治好了被刺字的脸，想要求见，太后、陆媪派人把她关着控制起来，终究不能见面。
English: After Qiao Xiao had cured her tattooed face, she wanted to ask for a meeting, but the Empress Dowager and Lu Yao sent someone to lock her up and control her, so they couldn't meet after all.

