古文：起上章敦牂，尽屠维单阏，凡十年。
现代文：起上章敦牂，尽屠维单阏，一共十年。
English: A total of ten years have passed since the establishment of Zhang Dunluo and Tu Wei Shanluo.

古文：春，正月，庚辰朔，赦天下。
现代文：唐宣宗大中四年春季，正月，庚辰朔，唐宣宗宣告大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Tang Xuan Zong University, the first month of the year, Geng Chen Shuo, Tang Xuan Zong declared a general amnesty.

古文：二月，以秦州隶凤翔。
现代文：二月，唐朝廷将秦州隶属于凤翔。
English: In February, the Tang court subordinated Qinzhou to Fengxiang.

古文：夏，四月，庚戌，以中书侍郎、同平章事马植为天平节度使。
现代文：夏季四月，庚戌，唐宣宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事马植为天平节度使。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Zhongshushizhiro and Tongping Zhang Shima Zhi as Tianping Festival envoys.

古文：上之立也，左军中尉马元贽有力焉，由是恩遇冠诸宦者，植与之叙宗姓。
现代文：唐宣宗被立为皇帝，宦官左神策军中尉马元贽出了大力，于是唐宣宗对他的恩遇超过其他宦官。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was made emperor, and the eunuch Zuoshensha's lieutenant Ma Yuanxuan made great efforts, so Tang Xuan Zong treated him better than other eunuchs.

古文：上赐元贽宝带，元贽以遗植，植服之以朝，上见而识之。植变色，不敢隐。
现代文：马植与马元贽攀亲，叙为马姓宗族，唐直宗赐给马元贽金宝腰带，马元贽转赠给马植，马植系上宝带上朝，被唐宣宗看见并认出，马植当即脸上变色，不敢隐瞒。
English: Ma Zhi and Ma Yuanzhang became relatives, and were classified as the Ma family. Tang Zhi Zong gave Ma Yuanzhang a golden treasure belt, and Ma Yuanzhang gave it to Ma Zhi. Ma Zhi tied the treasure belt to the emperor, and was seen and recognized by Tang Xuan Zong. Ma Zhi immediately changed the color of his face and did not dare to hide it.

古文：明日。罢相，收植亲吏董侔，下御史台鞫之，尽得植与元贽交通之状，再贬常州刺史。
现代文：第二天，唐宣宗罢马植宰相官位，收捕马植的亲信胥吏董侔，送交御史台加以审问，将马植与马元贽内外交通的情状全部查清，于是再贬马植为常州刺史。
English: The next day, Tang Xuanzong dismissed Ma Zhe from the post of prime minister, arrested Ma Zhe's close confidant Dong Zhe, and sent him to the Imperial History Research Station for interrogation. The situation of Ma Zhe's and Ma Yuan Zhe's internal and external communications were all clarified, and then Ma Zhe was relegated to Changzhou's history.

古文：六月，戊申，兵部侍郎、同平章事魏扶薨。
现代文：六月，戊申，兵部侍郎、同平章事魏扶去世。
English: In June, Boshin, the attendant of the military department, Tongping Zhang, and Wei Fu passed away.

古文：以户部尚书、判度支崔龟从同平章事。
现代文：唐宣宗任命户部尚书、判度支崔龟从为同平章事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed the head of the household, Shang Shu, and the procurator of the court, Cui Gui, to be co-equal lords.

古文：秋，八月，以白敏中判延资库。
现代文：秋季，八月，唐宣宗任白敏中领掌延资库。
English: In the autumn, in August, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Bai Minzhong to take charge of the extension fund.

古文：卢龙节度使周纟林薨，军中表请以押牙兼马步都知兵马使张允伸为留后。九月，丁酉，从之。
现代文：卢龙节度使周去世，卢龙藩镇军中向朝廷上表请求任押牙兼马步都知兵马使张允伸为留后，九月，丁酉，唐宣宗表示同意。
English: The Lulong Festival caused Zhou's death. After Zhang Yunshen, a town marshal of Lulong, petitioned the imperial court for the appointment of Zhang Yunshen, an aide-de-camp of Zhang Yunshen, in September, Ding Xi and Tang Xuan Zong agreed.

古文：党项为边患，发诸道兵讨之，连年无功，戍馈不已，右补阙孔温裕上疏切谏。上怒，贬柳州司马。
现代文：党项族成为唐朝的边境祸患，朝廷调发诸道兵攻讨，连年未获成功，而戌边的给养却输送不已；右补阙孔温裕向唐宣宗上疏进行谏阻，词语痛切，唐宣宗发怒，将孔温裕贬为柳州司马。
English: The Dangxiang people became a border disaster for the Tang Dynasty. The imperial court dispatched various Taoist soldiers to attack them, but they were not successful for several years, while the supply of the Lijiang side was delivered incessantly. The Right Auxiliary Minister Kong Wenyu resisted Tang Xuan Zong Shangzo, and the words were bitter. Tang Xuan Zong was angry and relegated Kong Wenyu to Liuzhou Sima.

古文：温裕，戣之兄子也。
现代文：孔温裕是孔哥哥的儿子。
English: Kong Wenyu is the son of Kong's elder brother.

古文：吐蕃论恐热遣僧莽罗蔺真将兵于鸡项关南造桥，以击尚婢婢，军于白土岭。
现代文：吐蕃酋领论恐热派遣僧人莽罗蔺真统兵于鸡项关以南造桥，用以攻击尚婢婢部，在白土岭屯驻军队。
English: On the subject of fear and heat, the chief of Tubo dispatched the monk Meng Luo and the general troops to build a bridge to the south of Jixiangguan, which was used to attack Shang and garrison the troops in Baidu Ridge.

古文：婢婢遣其将尚鐸罗榻藏将兵据临蕃军以拒之，不利，复遣磨离罴子、烛卢巩力将兵据氂牛峡以拒之。
现代文：尚婢婢派遣其部将尚铎罗榻藏统兵据守临蕃军，以抗拒论恐热军，接战不利，尚婢婢又派遣磨离罴子、烛卢巩力统率军队据守牛峡以抗拒论恐热的进攻。
English: Shang Hanzhong sent his subordinate Shang Zhi Luo Tat Tibetan soldiers to defend the Linyi army to resist the attack of the heat-fearing army, which was unfavorable for the battle. Shang Hanzhong also dispatched the army led by Miao Li Zi and Zeng Lu Gong Li to defend the Ni Gorge to resist the attack of the heat-fearing army.

古文：巩力请 按兵拒险，勿与战，以奇兵绝其粮道，使进不得战，退不得还，不过旬月，其众必溃。 
现代文：烛卢巩力请求 按兵不动，据守险要，不与敌军接战，而出奇兵断绝敌军的粮道，使论恐热进不能作战，退又不得回还，不过几个月，敌军必然溃败。 
English: Candle Lu Gongli requested that the soldiers should not move, according to the defense plan, not to fight with the enemy army, to break the enemy army's food supply, so that the enemy army could not fight, retreat and not return, but in a few months, the enemy army would inevitably be defeated.

古文：罴子不从。
现代文：磨离罴子不加理会。
English: They don't pay any attention to the chisel.

古文：巩力曰： 吾宁为不用之人，不为败军之将。 
现代文：烛卢巩力说： 我宁愿成为不被任用的人，也不愿成为败军之将。 
English: Candle Lu Gongli said: I would rather be the person who is not appointed than the general of the defeated army.

古文：称疾，归鄯州。
现代文：于是宣称有疾病，回到鄯州。
English: He then claimed to be ill and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：罴子逆战，败死。
现代文：磨离罴子率领军队与论恐热军逆战，大败而死。
English: He led the army to fight against the Ondo-Khwarezmian army, but was defeated and died.

古文：婢婢粮乏，留拓跋怀光守鄯州，帅部落三千馀人就水草于甘州西。
现代文：尚婢婢由于部众缺乏粮草，留下拓跋怀光据守鄯州，率领部落三千余人逐水草来到甘州西部地区。
English: Due to the lack of grain and grass for his followers, Shang Yibing left Tuoba Huai Guang to defend Ganzhou and led more than 3,000 people of the tribe to the western part of Ganzhou step by step.

古文：恐热闻婢婢弃鄯州，自将轻骑五千追之。至瓜州，闻怀光守鄯州，遂大掠河西鄯、廓等八州，杀其丁壮，劓刖其羸老及妇人，以槊贯婴儿为戏，焚其室庐，五千里间，赤地殆尽。
现代文：论恐热听说尚婢婢放弃鄯州，亲自统率轻骑五千人追赶，追至瓜州，听说拓跋怀光据守鄯州，于是命令部下在河西鄯州、廓州等八州地方大肆杀掠，将青壮年男子杀死，将老弱者以及妇女的鼻子和膝盖骨割去，用长矛刺婴儿作为游戏，焚烧居民的住房，使河西五千里之内，一片赤红。
English: On the subject of fear and heat, it was heard that Shang abandoned Zhangzhou, and personally led five thousand people on horseback to chase them to Guazhou. It was also heard that Tuoba Huai Guang was holding Zhangzhou, so he ordered his subordinates to kill and plunder wildly in eight regions such as Zhangzhou and Guozhou in Hexi, killing young and strong men, cutting off the noses and kneecaps of the old and weak as well as women, stabbing babies with spears as a game, and burning the houses of residents, so that within five thousand miles of Hexi, everything was red.

古文：冬，十月，辛未，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎令狐綯同平章事。
现代文：烧了个精光。冬季，十月，辛未，唐宣宗任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎令狐为同平章事。
English: In the winter, October, Xinwei, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate Zong Zi, and Hyobu Chamberlain Ling Xue as Tong Ping Shang Ji.

古文：十一月，壬寅，以翰林学士刘彖为京西招讨党项行营宣慰使。
现代文：十一月，壬寅，唐宣宗任命翰林学士刘为京西招讨党项行营宣慰使。
English: In November, Jinyin, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Liu, a scholar of Hanlin, as an envoy to Beijing and Xi to solicit the party.

古文：以卢龙留后张允伸为节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗任命卢龙留后旨允伸为节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Lu Long to be the envoy to the festival.

古文：十二月，以凤翔节度使李业、河东节度使李试着兼招讨党项使。
现代文：十二月，唐宣宗任命凤翔节度使李业、河东节度使李拭一并兼任招讨党项吏。
English: In December, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Fengxiang Jiedu to Li Ye, and Hedong Jiedu to Li Wu, both of whom also served as party officials.

古文：吏部侍郎孔温业白执政求外官，白敏中谓同列曰： 我辈须自点检，孔吏部不肯居朝廷矣。 
现代文：吏部侍郎孔温业向执政宰相请求到地方上任外官，白敏中对同列宰相说： 我们这些当朝宰相应该检点一些，孔吏部不肯居于朝廷为官了。 
English: Kong Wenye, the steward of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, asked the ruling prime minister to come to the region to take up the post of foreign minister. Bai Minzhong said to the same prime minister: We, who were prime ministers at the time, should be more careful. Kong Wenye did not want to live in the imperial court as an official.

古文：温业，戣之弟子也。
现代文：孔温业是孔弟弟的儿子。
English: Kong Wenye is the son of Kong's younger brother.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中五年
现代文：大中五年春季，正月，壬戌，唐天德军向朝廷奏称代理沙州刺史张义潮派遣使者来归降。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the middle school, in the first month of the year, Tang Tian's German army reported to the imperial court that Zhang Yichao, the agent of Shazhou, sent an envoy to surrender.

古文：春，二月，壬戌，天德军奏摄沙州刺史张义潮遣使来降。义潮，沙州人也，时吐蕃大乱，义潮阴结豪杰，谋自拔归唐。一旦，帅众被甲噪于州门，唐人皆应之，吐番守将惊走，义潮遂摄州事，奉表来降。
现代文：张义潮是沙州人，时值吐蕃内部发生大变乱，张义潮暗中连结沙州豪杰之士，谋划以自己的力量攻拔沙州，归降唐朝；一天早晨，张义潮率领部众全副武装在州门前喧噪鼓动，原属唐朝的汉族人全都响应，吐蕃族的守将惊慌失措逃走，于是张义潮摄领沙州军政事务，向唐朝上表归降。
English: Zhang Yichao was a native of Shazhou. At the time of the great turmoil in Tubo, Zhang Yichao secretly linked the heroes of Shazhou and planned to use his own strength to attack Shazhou and return to the Tang Dynasty. One morning, Zhang Yichao led all the armed forces in a noisy agitation in front of the state gate. The Han people who were originally part of the Tang Dynasty all responded, and the defenders of the Tubo people panicked and fled. Therefore, Zhang Yichao took charge of the military and political affairs of Shazhou and surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：以义潮为沙州防御使。
现代文：唐宣宗任命张义潮为沙州防御使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Zhang Yichao as the defense envoy of Shazhou.

古文：以兵部侍郎裴休为盐铁转运使。
现代文：唐宣宗任命兵部侍郎裴休为盐铁转运使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Pei Xiu, an attendant of the military department, as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：休，肃之子也。
现代文：裴休是裴肃的儿子。
English: Pei Xiu is the son of Pei Su.

古文：自太和以来，岁运江、淮米不过四十万斛，吏卒侵盗、沉没，舟达渭仓者什不三四，大堕刘晏之法。休穷究其弊，立漕法十条，岁运米至渭仓者百二十万斛。
现代文：自从唐文宗太和年间以来，每年漕运到京师的江、淮地区的大米不过四十万斛，由于路上遭受官吏和士卒的偷盗侵吞以及船沉没于河底，运米船到达谓仓的不到十分之三四，使刘晏创立的漕运之法遭到极大的破坏，裴休坚决追究漕运过程中的弊端，制定漕运法规十条，使每年通过漕运输送至渭仓的江、淮大米达到一百二十万斛。
English: Since the time of Emperor Taizu of the Tang Dynasty, only 400,000 cormorants of rice had been transported by boat to the Jiang and Huai regions of Beijing. Due to the theft and misappropriation of officials and soldiers on the way and the ship sinking to the bottom of the river, the rice transport ship reached less than three-fourths of the warehouse, so that the method of rowing transport founded by Liu Bei was greatly damaged. Peixiu resolutely investigated the drawbacks in the rowing transport process and formulated ten regulations for rowing transport, so that the rice transported by boat to the Jiang and Huai warehouses reached 1.2 million cormorants each year.

古文：上颇知党项之反由边帅利其羊马，数欺夺之，或妄诛杀，党项不胜愤怨，故反。
现代文：唐宣宗很清楚党项族的反叛是由于唐边镇将帅贪图党项族的羊、马，经常欺侮党项人，夺取他们的羊、马，有的竟妄加诛杀，党项族人民不胜愤怒和怨恨，所以被迫造反。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very clear that the rebellion of the Dangxiang people was due to the fact that the Tang Town Marshal coveted the sheep and horses of the Dangxiang people, often bullied the Dangxiang people, seized their sheep and horses, and some even killed them. The anger and resentment of the Dangxiang people were overwhelming, so they were forced to rebel.

古文：乃以右谏议大夫李福为夏绥节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗为此任命右谏议大夫李福为夏绥节度使。
English: To this end, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Li Fu, the doctor of the Right Division of the State Council, as the chief envoy of the Xiali Festival.

古文：自是继选儒臣以代边帅之贪暴者，行日复面加戒励，党项由是遂安。
现代文：此后继续选任文臣来替代边镇贪暴的将帅，临行前唐宣宗还要当面告诫和勉励戌边的文臣，于是党项的叛乱得以安定。
English: After that, he continued to appoint civil servants to replace the corrupt generals of the border town. Before leaving, Tang Xuan Zong also warned and encouraged the civil servants of the border in person, so the rebellion of the party was stabilized.

古文：福，石之弟也。
现代文：李福是李石的弟弟。
English: Li Fu is the younger brother of Li Shi.

古文：上以南山、平夏党项久未平，颇厌用兵。
现代文：南山、平夏党项部族的叛乱许久不能平息，唐宣宗不愿动用军队进行征讨。
English: The rebellions of the Nanshan and Pingxia clique tribes could not be quelled for a long time, and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang did not want to use the army to fight them.

古文：崔铉建议，宜遣大臣镇抚。
现代文：崔铉建议，应该派遣朝中大臣去进行镇压招抚，方能有成效。
English: Choe Ryong suggested that the Minister of the DPRK and the ROK should be dispatched to suppress and appease North Korea in order to be effective.

古文：三月，以白敏中为司空、同平章事，充招讨党项行营都统、制置等使，南北两路供军使兼邠宁节度使。
现代文：三月，唐宣宗任命白敏中为司空、同平章事，充任招讨党项行营都统、制置等使，南北两路供军使兼宁节度使。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Bai Minzhong as the Secretary of the General Office of the Air Force and the General Office of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and he served as the envoy to invite the party to carry out the campaign in the capital, the envoy to establish the system, the envoy to supply troops to the north and south, and the envoy to the Ning Festival.

古文：敏中请用裴度故事，择廷臣为将佐，许之。
现代文：白敏中请求依照裴度过去的做法，选择朝廷的大臣为部下将佐，唐宣宗表示同意。
English: Bai Minzhong requested that, in accordance with Pei Du's past practice, a minister of the imperial court be selected as a subordinate general, and Tang Xuan Zong agreed.

古文：夏，四月，以左谏议大夫孙景商为左庶子，充邠宁行军司马；知制诰蒋伸为右庶子，充节度副使。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐宣宗任命左谏议大夫孙景商为左庶子，充任宁行军司马；又任命知制诰蒋伸为右庶子，充任宁节度副使。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Sun Jingshang, the doctor of the left legion, as the left son-in-law, and appointed him as the Sima of the Ning marching army; he also appointed Zhi Yao Jiang Sheng as the right son-in-law, and appointed him as the vice-envoy of the Ning Festival.

古文：伸，系之弟也。
现代文：蒋伸是蒋系的弟弟。
English: Jiang Shin is the younger brother of the Chiang family.

古文：初，上令白敏中为万寿公主选佳婿，敏中荐郑颢。时颢已昏卢氏，行至郑州，堂帖追还，颢甚衔之，由是数毁敏中于上。
现代文：起初，唐宣宗命令白敏中为女儿万寿公主选择佳婿，白敏中选中并推荐郑颢；当时郑颢已经与卢氏女订婚，走到郑州时，被宰相府的堂贴追回，为此郑颢对白敏中很不满意，经常在唐宣宗面前诋毁白敏中。
English: At first, Tang Xuan Zong ordered Bai Minzhong to choose a son-in-law for his daughter, Princess Wan Shou, and Bai Minzhong selected and recommended Zheng Qi. At that time, Zheng Qi was already engaged to the daughter of Lu, and when he went to Zhengzhou, he was chased back by the courtiers of the Prime Minister's Office. For this reason, Zheng Qi was very dissatisfied with Bai Minzhong and often slandered Bai Minzhong in front of Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：敏中将赴镇，言于上曰： 郑颢不乐尚主，怨臣入骨髓。
现代文：白敏中将赶赴边镇，对唐宣言说： 郑颢不愿意娶公主，对我怨恨入于骨髓。
English: Vice Admiral Bai Min rushed to the border town and declared to Tang: Zheng Yao did not want to marry the princess, and his hatred for me was ingrained in his bones.

古文：臣在政府，无如臣何；今臣出外，颢必中伤，臣死无日矣！ 
现代文：我在政事堂掌政，他不能对我有什么奈何；今我要出朝，郑颢必定趁机恶语中伤，我恐怕死期不远了！ 
English: I'm in charge of the government at the State Council, he can't do anything to me; now I'm leaving the government, Zheng Wei will surely take the opportunity to slander me, I'm afraid my death is not far away!

古文：上曰： 朕知之久矣，卿何言之晚邪！ 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 朕早就知道了，您为什么这么晚才提醒我！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "I already knew, why did you remind me so late!

古文：命左右于禁中取小柽函以授敏中曰： 此皆郑郎谮卿之书也。朕若信之，岂任卿以至今日！ 
现代文：于是命左、右近侍从宫禁中取出一个红柳木盒子，交给白敏中说： 这里面都是郑郎谮毁您的书信，朕如果相信，哪里能重用您到今天呢！ 
English: Therefore, he ordered the left and right attendants to take out a red willow box from the palace, and handed it to Bai Min, saying, "This is where Zheng Lang destroyed your letters. If I believe this, where can I reuse you today?"

古文：敏中归，置柽函于佛前，焚香事之。
现代文：白敏中回到家中，将红柳木盒子放到佛象前，烧香下拜，供若神明。
English: Bai Minzhong returned home, put the red willow wooden box in front of the Buddha elephant, burned incense and bowed down to offer it to the young god.

古文：敏中军于宁州，壬子，定远城使史元破堂项九千馀帐于三交谷，敏中奏党项平。
现代文：白敏中驻军于宁州，壬子，定远城使史元于三交谷击破党项族九千余帐，白敏中奏告朝廷称党项已平定。
English: Bai Minzhong garrisoned troops in Ningzhou, Renzi, Dingyuan City, and sent Shi Yuan to Sanjia Valley to break more than nine thousand accounts of the party and clan. Bai Minzhong reported to the court that the party and clan had been settled.

古文：辛未，诏： 平夏党项，已就安贴。南山党项，闻出山者迫于饥寒，犹行钞掠，平夏不容，穷无所归。宜委李福存谕，于银、夏境内授以闲田。
现代文：辛未，唐宣宗颁下诏令： 平夏党项部族现在已经安定帖服了，听说南山党项部族有些出山的帐落，由于饥寒交迫，仍然在进行抢掠，而为平夏党项部所不容，穷困得无路可走，没有归处；应该请李福向南山党项部存抚告谕，在银州、夏州境内授给他们一些闲置的田地。
English: Xinwei, Tang Xuan Zong issued an edict: the Pingxia Party clan was now stable and prosperous. It was heard that some of the Nanshan Party clan's outposts in the mountains were still looting due to hunger and cold, which was unacceptable to the Pingxia Party clan. They were so poor that they had nowhere to go and no place to return to. Li Fu should be asked to deposit a notice with the Nanshan Party clan to grant them some idle fields in Yinzhou and Xiazhou.

古文：如能革心向化，则抚如赤子，从前为恶，一切不问，或有抑屈，听于本镇投牒自诉。
现代文：如果他们能洗心革面，听从教化，而不再剽掠，就应该象赤子一样抚慰他们；从前他们作恶多端，现在一切不加追究，如果有的帐落有冤屈，可让他们自己随时到所在军镇向主管官吏投牒中诉。
English: If they can purify their hearts and minds, listen to edification, and no longer plunder, they should be comforted like babies; in the past, they did a lot of evil, and now they are not held accountable for anything. If there are any accounts that have grievances, they can let themselves go to their military towns at any time to appeal to the competent officials.

古文：若再犯疆场，或复入山林，不受教令，则诛讨无赦。
现代文：如果再敢侵犯我边疆牧场，或者重新逃入山林之中，不受我大唐王朝的教令，就对他们进行诛讨，决不赦免。
English: If they dare to encroach on my frontier pastures again, or escape into the mountains and forests again, without receiving my edict from the Great Tang Dynasty, they will be dealt with harshly and will never be pardoned.

古文：将吏有功者甄奖，死伤者优恤。灵、夏、邠、鄜四道百姓，给复三年，邻道量免租税。
现代文：我边镇将领有功劳的人在经过甄别后给予奖赏，战死、受伤的人给予优厚的抚恤，凡是灵州、夏州、州、州四道的百姓，给予免征赋税三年的优待，相邻的道根据具体情况适当地减一些租税。
English: Our border town will reward those who have meritorious achievements after screening, and give generous pensions to those who died in battle or were injured. All the people in Lingzhou, Xiazhou, Zhoushan and Zhoushan four provinces will be given preferential treatment of tax exemption for three years, and the adjacent provinces will reduce some taxes according to the specific situation.

古文：向由边将贪鄙，致其怨叛，自今当更择廉良抚之。
现代文：过去由于边镇将帅贪暴卑鄙，致使党项族怨愤而叛乱，自今以后应当更慎重地选择廉洁、品行优良的将吏来安抚党项部族。
English: In the past, because the border town generals were greedy, violent and despicable, which caused the resentment and rebellion of the party and clan, from now on, it should be more prudent to choose honest and virtuous generals to appease the party and clan.

古文：若复致侵叛，当先罪边将，后讨寇虏。 
现代文：如果党项族再侵扰边疆发动叛乱，应当先问边镇将吏的罪，然后再征讨叛乱的族人。 
English: If the Kuomintang and Kuomintang clans invade the border areas again and launch a rebellion, they should first question the border town officials about their crimes, and then conscript the rebellious clansmen.

古文：吐蕃论恐热残虐，所部多叛。拓跋怀光使人说诱之，其众或散归部落，或降于怀光。
现代文：吐蕃酋领论恐热残忍暴虐，所率部众大多叛亡；拓跋怀光派人去游说引诱其部众，使论恐热的部众或者从部落中从散居出去，或者投降拓跋怀光。
English: The chief of the Tubo tribe led his followers to commit treason because of their fear of heat and cruelty; Tuoba Huai Guang sent people to persuade and entice his followers, so that the followers of the theory of fear of heat either dispersed from the tribe or surrendered.

古文：恐热势孤，乃扬言于众曰： 吾今入朝于唐，借兵五十万来诛不服者，然后以渭州为国城，请唐册我为赞普，谁敢不从！ 
现代文：论恐热的势力越来越孤单，于是向其部众扬言说： 我今天要朝拜大唐，向唐朝借兵五十万人来诛讨不服从我的人，然后将渭州当作国都，请大唐皇帝册封我为吐蕃赞普，谁敢不服从我！ 
English: He became more and more lonely, so he threatened his subordinates: "Today, I will pay homage to the Great Tang Dynasty, borrow five hundred thousand soldiers from the Tang Dynasty to punish those who disobey me, then make Zhangzhou the capital of the country, and ask the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty to anoint me as the King of Tibet. Who dares to disobey me!

古文：五月，恐热入朝，上遣左丞李景让就礼宾院问所欲。
现代文：五月，论恐热来到长安朝见大唐皇帝，唐宣宗派遣左丞李景让到礼宾院问论恐热有什么要求。
English: In May, he came to Chang'an to see the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty, and Tang Xuan Zong sent his left-hand man Li Jingzhan to the Protocol House to ask him what he wanted.

古文：恐热气色骄倨，语言荒诞，求为河渭节度使。上不许，召对三殿，如常日胡客，劳赐遣还。
现代文：论恐热趾高气扬，骄横傲慢，出言不逊，语句荒诞，请求唐宣宗任命他为河渭节度使；唐宣宗没有允许，将论恐热召到三殿问对，就象对待一般的胡人宾客，稍事慰劳，赐给一些东西后即让他回去。
English: On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand, On the other hand,

古文：恐热怏怏而去，复归落门川，聚其旧众，欲为边患。
现代文：论恐热没有达到目的，怏怏不乐而去，回到落门川，聚集他原先的部众，企图作乱，成为唐朝的边患。
English: On the fear of heat did not achieve the goal, Zou was not happy and left, returned to the Lomon River, gathered his original followers, attempted to make trouble, and became a peripheral problem of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：会久雨，乏食，众稍散，才有三百馀人，奔于廓州。
现代文：正遇上久雨时节，缺乏粮食，其部众逐渐散去，仅剩下三百余人，投奔廓州。
English: It was the rainy season, there was a shortage of grain, and his followers gradually dispersed, leaving only more than three hundred people, who fled to Guozhou.

古文：六月，立皇子润为鄂王。
现代文：六月，唐宣宗立皇子李润为鄂王。
English: In June, Tang Emperor Xuan Zong's son, Prince Li Run, became the King of Hubei.

古文：进士孙樵上言： 百姓男耕女织，不自温饱，而群僧安坐华屋，美衣精馔，率以十户不能养一僧。
现代文：进士孙樵向唐宣宗上言： 老晨姓男耕女织，辛勤劳动却不能使自己获得温饱，而一大群不劳而获的佛教僧侣却安然自得地坐在华丽的房间里，身穿华美的衣裳，吃精美的饭菜，大概十户农家也养不起一个僧侣。
English: Confucian scholar Sun Yat-sen said to Tang Xuan Zong: "Old men with the surnames of "male" and "female" work hard, but they can't make their own food and clothing. Meanwhile, a large group of Buddhist monks who don't have to work for a living sit comfortably in gorgeous rooms, wear gorgeous clothes, and eat exquisite meals. About ten farming families can't afford to support a single monk.

古文：武宗愤其然，发十七万僧，是天下一百七十万户始得苏息也。陛下即位以来，修复废寺，天下斧斤之声至今不绝，度僧几复其旧矣。
现代文：武宗对僧侣不劳而食，蠹耗国家感到愤慨，勒令十七万僧侣蓄发还俗，使得天下一百七十万农户得以喘息复苏，而陛下即位以来，即下令修复被废的佛教庙，以致到今天天下修复庙宇的斧头刀锯之声仍不绝于耳，重新剃度的僧尼几乎恢复到以前的数目。
English: Emperor Wuzong was indignant that the monks were living off the state and consuming the country's resources. He ordered 170,000 monks to return to the secular life, which made it possible for the world's 1.7 million farmers to recover. Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he ordered the restoration of abandoned Buddhist temples. To this day, the sound of axes and saws repairing temples is still heard around the world, and the number of monks and nuns who have been re-shaved has almost returned to the previous number.

古文：陛下纵不能如武宗除积弊，奈何兴之于已废乎！
现代文：您即使不能象武宗那样革除僧侣蠹国的积弊，又为什么要使已废除的积弊重新复兴呢！
English: Even if you can't get rid of the accumulated evils of the monks and the country, why do you want to revive the abolished accumulated evils!

古文：日者陛下欲修国东门，谏官上言，遽为罢役。
现代文：近日您想修缮长安城东门，谏官上言劝阻，您立即就罢除这项工役。
English: Recently, you wanted to repair the east gate of Chang'an City, and the eunuch advised you not to do so. You should immediately dismiss this construction worker.

古文：今所复之寺，岂若东门之急乎？
现代文：而目前所恢复的寺庙，岂能比修复东门更加急迫？
English: But could the restoration of the current temple be more urgent than the restoration of the East Gate?

古文：所役之功，岂右东门之劳乎？
现代文：所花费的工役，岂能比修缮东门更少？
English: Couldn't the labor cost be less than that of repairing the east gate?

古文：愿早降明诏，僧未复者勿复，寺未修者勿修，庶几百姓犹得以息肩也。 
现代文：希望您尽早降下圣明的诏书，命令凡僧尼还没有恢复身份的不准再予恢复，寺庙还未修复的也不准再作，或许劳苦的百姓为此仍然可以获得喘息的机会。 
English: I hope that you will issue the edict of the Holy Light as soon as possible, ordering that all monks and nuns who have not yet restored their status are not allowed to be restored, and that temples that have not yet been repaired are not allowed to be rebuilt. Perhaps the hard-working people can still get a respite for this.

古文：秋，七月，中书门下奏： 陛下崇奉释氏，群下莫不奔走，恐财力有所不逮，因之生事扰人，望委所在长吏量加撙节。
现代文：秋季，七月，中书门下奏称： 陛下您崇奉佛教，使下面的人莫不为之奔走，恐怕国家的财力无法承受，且因为推奉佛教而引发事端，骚扰人民，希望陛下能命令掌管佛事的有关官吏，对修建寺庙的费用适当地加以节约。
English: In the autumn, in July, a message was sent from the gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters, saying: Your Majesty, you worship Buddhism, so that the people below will have to run for it. I am afraid that the country's financial resources can not afford it, and because of the promotion of Buddhism, it will cause trouble and harass the people. I hope that Your Majesty can order the relevant officials in charge of Buddhism to properly save the cost of building a temple.

古文：所度僧亦委选择有行业者，若容凶粗之人，则更非敬道也。
现代文：对所剃度的僧侣也让有关部门加以选择，让有道行通佛性的人出家，如果容纳凶残粗野的人入佛门，当然就不是敬奉佛法了。
English: The relevant departments are also allowed to choose the ordained monks, and those who have the virtue of practicing Buddhism are allowed to become monks. If cruel and brutal people are allowed to enter the Buddhist gate, of course, it is not to worship Buddhism.

古文：乡村佛舍，请罢兵日修。 
现代文：乡村间的小佛舍，请等到收复河、湟罢兵后再修。 
English: For the small Buddhist houses in the villages, please wait until the river is restored and the troops are withdrawn before repairing them.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐宣宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八月，白敏中奏，南山党项亦请降。
现代文：八月、白敏中奏告朝廷称南山党项请求投降唐朝。
English: In August, Bai Min sent a report to the imperial court saying that the Nanshan faction requested to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：时用兵岁久，国用颇乏，诏并赦南山党项，使之安业。
现代文：当时用兵的时间已经很久，国家各项用度的费用相当困乏，唐宣宗颁下诏书，命令对南山党项部族一并赦免，使他们能安居乐业。
English: At that time, it had been a long time since the soldiers had been used, and the expenses of the country's various uses were quite poor. Tang Xuanzong issued an edict ordering the amnesty of the Nanshan Party and clan, so that they could live and work in peace.

古文：冬，十月，乙卯，中书门下奏： 今边事已息，而州府诸寺尚未毕功，望且令成之。
现代文：冬季十月，乙卯，中书门下政事堂向唐宣宗上奏： 如今边境上的事已经平息，而地方州府所要修复的诸寺庙还没有完工，希望这时下令让州府完成此项工程。
English: In the winter of October, the Chinese government made a report to Tang Xuan Zong: Now that the border situation has calmed down, and the temples to be restored by the local state government have not yet been completed, it is hoped that the state government will be ordered to complete this project.

古文：其大县远于州府者，听置一寺，其乡村毋得更置佛舍。 
现代文：如果大县离州府较远者，可以建置一座寺庙，而乡村就不得再建置佛舍了。 
English: If a large county is further away from the prefecture, a temple can be built, but a village is not allowed to build a Buddhist house.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐宣宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊辰，以户部侍郎魏谟同平章事，仍判户部。
现代文：戊辰，唐宣宗任命户部侍郎魏为同平章事，仍然负责户部事务。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Wei, the steward of the household, to the position of Tongping, and he was still responsible for the affairs of the household.

古文：时上春秋已高，未立太子，群臣莫敢言。
现代文：当时唐宣宗年事已高，还未立皇太子，群臣没有谁敢提这件事。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong was very old and had not yet appointed a crown prince, so none of the courtiers dared to mention this matter.

古文：谟入谢，因言： 今海内无事，惟未建储副，使正人辅导，臣窃以为忧。 
现代文：魏入朝向宣宗谢恩，趁机上言： 现在海内已经无事，只是至今还没有建立储君，使正人君子加以辅导，我心里对此深感忧虑。 
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Wei thanked Emperor Xuanzong and took the opportunity to say, "There is nothing wrong with the country now, but we have not yet established a crown prince to be guided by an upright gentleman. I am deeply worried about this."

古文：且泣。
现代文：说着就流下眼泪。
English: She burst into tears as she spoke.

古文：时人重之。
现代文：当时人对魏敢说别人不敢说的话而特别敬重。
English: At that time, people held Wei in high esteem for daring to say what others were afraid to say.

古文：蓬、果群盗依阻鸡山，寇掠三川。以果州刺史王贽弘充三川行营都知兵马使，以讨之。
现代文：蓬州、果州的群盗以鸡山为根据地，侵扰掠夺东川、西川、山南西道等三川地区；唐宣宗任命果州刺史王贽弘充当三川行营都知兵马使进行讨伐。
English: The bandits of Pengzhou and Guozhou used Jishan as a base to invade and plunder the East River, West River, Shannan West Road and other areas of the Three Rivers; Tang Xuan Zong appointed Guozhou Jishi Wang Jihong to serve as the messenger of the Sichuan Campaign.

古文：制以党项既平，罢白敏中教统，但以司空、平章事充邠宁节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗颁下制书，以党项的叛乱既已平定，罢除白敏中的招讨党项行营都统的职务，只以司空、平章事的名义充任宁节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict, saying that since the rebellion had been put down, Bai Minshong was removed from the post of inviting the party to the capital, and he was only appointed as the Ning Festival envoy in the name of Siku and Ping Zhangji.

古文：张义潮发兵略定其旁瓜、伊、西、甘、肃、兰、鄯、河、岷、廓十州，遣其兄义泽奉十一州图籍入见，于是河、湟之地尽入于唐。
现代文：张义潮调发军队大致平定沙州近旁的瓜、伊、西、甘、肃、兰、鄯、河、岷、廓十州之地，派遣他的兄长张义泽奉十一州地图名籍入朝见唐宣宗，于是河、湟之地全部归入唐朝版图。
English: Zhang Yichao dispatched troops to roughly pacify the ten states of Gua, Yi, Xi, Gansu, Su, Lan, Qu, He, Qu and Guo near Shazhou, and sent his brother Zhang Yize to visit the Tang Emperor Xuan Zong in the name of the eleven-state map. As a result, all of He and Qu were included in the Tang Dynasty territory map.

古文：十一月，置归义军于沙州，以义潮为节度使、十一州观察使，又以义潮判官曹义金为归义军长史。
现代文：十一月，唐宣宗置归义军于沙州，任命张义潮为归义军节度使、十一州观察使；又任命张义潮的判官曹义金为归义军长史。
English: In November, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Zhang Yichao as the festival envoy and the eleven-state observation envoy of the returning allied forces in Shazhou. He also appointed Cao Yijin, the judge of Zhang Yichao, as the chief historian of the returning allied forces.

古文：以中书侍郎、同平章事崔龟从同平章事，充宣武节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事崔龟从为同平章事衔，充任宣武节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Zhongshushijiro and Tongping Zhangji Cui Jian as Tongping Zhangji and appointed him as the Xuanwu Jiedu envoy.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中六年
现代文：右羽林统军张直方因为外出游猎，数日不回来宿卫宫城，玩忽职守，被贬为左骁卫将军。大中六年
English: Zhang Naifang of the Right Feather Forest United Army neglected his duty and was demoted to General of the Left Feather Forest Guard because he went out hunting and did not return to the Palace Guard for several days.

古文：春，二月，王贽弘讨鸡山贼，平之。
现代文：春季，二月，王贽弘讨伐鸡山盗贼，将贼寇平定。
English: In the spring, in February, Wang Yuhong fought against the thieves of Jiaojishan and subdued them.

古文：是时，山南西道节度使封敖奏巴南妖贼言辞悖慢，上怒甚。
现代文：这时，山南西道节度使封敖向唐宣宗上奏，称巴南的妖贼出言不逊，言辞傲慢，唐宣宗怒气冲天。
English: At this time, the Shannan West Road Festival made Fong Yao appeal to Tang Xuan Zong, saying that the bandits in Banan were insolent and arrogant, and Tang Xuan Zong was furious.

古文：崔铉曰： 此皆陛下赤子，迫于饥寒，盗弄陛下兵于溪谷间，不足辱大军，但遣一使者可平矣。 
现代文：崔铉说： 这些人都是陛下的赤子，由于饥寒交迫，于谷之间抢夺并戏弄您的军队，其实并不足以辱没您强大的军队，只要派遣一个使者就可以平定他们。 
English: Cui Yao said, "These people are your majesty's babies. Due to hunger and cold, they rob and tease your army in the valley. In fact, it is not enough to humiliate your powerful army. As long as you send a messenger, you can pacify them.

古文：乃遣京兆少尹刘潼诣果州招谕之。
现代文：于是派遣京兆少尹刘潼到果州去招抚劝谕。
English: Therefore, he sent Jingzhao Shao Yin Liu Wei to Guozhou to solicit advice.

古文：潼上言请不发兵攻讨，且曰： 今以日月之明烛愚迷之众，使之稽颡归命，其势甚易。
现代文：刘潼向唐宣宗上言，请求不要调发军队去攻讨，并且说： 今天我用太阳和月亮的光明去照亮那群愚昧迷惑之众的心，让他们向您叩头归命，做到这一点十分容易。
English: Liu Ye appealed to Tang Xuan Zong, asking him not to send troops to attack, and said: Today, I will use the light of the sun and the moon to illuminate the hearts of those foolish and deluded people, and make them bow to you. It is very easy to do this.

古文：所虑者，武臣耻不战之功，议者责欲速之效耳。 
现代文：所忧虑的是，武臣们对不战之功感到耻辱，议论者追求速成的功效。 
English: What is worrisome is that the warriors are ashamed of their non-combat achievements, and the commentators are pursuing quick results.

古文：潼至山中，盗弯弓待之，潼屏左右直前曰： 我面受诏赦汝罪，使汝复为平人。
现代文：刘潼来到山中，贼盗弯着弓接待他，刘潼屏去左右随从独自走上前说： 我已经面受皇帝的诏敕，赦免你们的罪，使你们重新做平民百姓。
English: Liu Xuan came to the mountains. Thieves and robbers bowed down to receive him. Liu Yuping went to the right and left, followed by a follower, and stepped forward alone to say: "I have accepted the emperor's edict, forgive your sins, and make you a common people again."

古文：闻汝木弓射二百步，今我去汝十步，汝真欲反者，可射我！ 
现代文：听说你们的木弓能射二百步，现在我距你们只有十步，你们如果真想造反，可以射死我！ 
English: I have heard that your wooden bows can shoot 200 paces. Now I am only ten paces away from you. If you really want to rebel, you can shoot me dead!

古文：贼皆投弓列拜，请降。
现代文：贼众全都将弓箭抛在一边，排成列队向刘潼拜谢，请求投降。
English: All the thieves put their bows and arrows aside and lined up to bow to Liu Bei and ask him to surrender.

古文：潼归馆，而王贽弘与中使似先义逸引兵已至山下，竟击灭之。
现代文：刘潼回到馆舍，王贽弘与宦官使者似先义逸率领军队已来到山下，竟然袭击已投降的人，将他们消灭。
English: When Liu Bei returned to the palace, Wang Binghong and the eunuch envoy Shixian Yiyi led an army to the foot of the mountain, and attacked the people who had already surrendered, destroying them.

古文：三月，敕先赐右卫大将军郑光鄠县及云阳庄并免税役。
现代文：三月，唐宣宗下敕令原先赐给右卫大将军郑光县以及云阳的庄园一并免除税役。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to exempt the manors of Zhengguang County and Yunyang, which were originally given to the right guard general, from tax.

古文：中书门下奏，以为： 税役之法，天下皆同。
现代文：为此中书门下上奏，认为： 收取税役的法规，天下都应相同。
English: For this reason, Zhong Shumen made a public appeal, saying: The laws and regulations for collecting taxes should be the same all over the world.

古文：陛下屡发德音，欲使中外画一，今独免郑光，似稍乖前意。
现代文：您屡次发布德音，希望使中外法令齐整划一，今天唯独先除郑光的税役，似乎与前面的意思稍有悖离。
English: You have repeatedly issued your edict, hoping to make Chinese and foreign laws and regulations uniform. Today, you only removed Zheng Guang's tax officials first, which seems to be slightly at odds with the previous meaning.

古文：事虽至细，系体则多。 
现代文：虽然这是一件很细微的事，但牵涉的问题却很多。 
English: Although it's a very small thing, there are a lot of issues involved.

古文：敕曰： 朕以郑光元舅之尊贵，欲优异令免征税，初不细思。
现代文：唐宣宗为此下敕宣称： 朕以为郑光皇帝元舅的尊贵身份，企图给他优异的待遇，免征租税，起初没有细加思考。
English: For this reason, Tang Xuanzong made the following declaration: I thought that I would take advantage of the noble status of Emperor Zheng Guang's uncle and try to give him excellent treatment and exemption from taxation. At first, I did not give it much thought.

古文：况亲戚之间，人所难议，卿等苟非爱我，岂进嘉言！
现代文：况且亲戚之间，正是人们难以议论的，你们如果不是热爱我，岂能向我进如此好的意见！
English: Moreover, between relatives, it is difficult for people to discuss, if you do not love me, how can you give me such a good opinion!

古文：庶事能尽如斯，天下何忧不理！
现代文：其他一般性事务如果都能这样，天下何忧不能治理！
English: If all other general affairs could be like this, there would be no worries in the world!

古文：有始有卒，当共守之，并依所奏。 
现代文：有始有终，君臣应当共同遵守。按照你们所奏请的去办。 
English: Since there is a beginning and an end, lords and gentlemen should jointly abide by it. Do as you are requested.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，以邠宁节度使白敏中为西川节度使。
现代文：夏季四月，甲辰，唐宣宗任命宁节度使白敏中为西川节度使。
English: In the summer of April, Jia Chen, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Ning Jiedu to make Bai Minzhong the Nishikawa Jiedu envoy.

古文：湖南奏，团练副使冯少端讨衡州贼帅邓裴，平之。
现代文：湖南奏告朝廷，团练副使冯少端讨伐衡州贼帅邓裴，将他们讨平。
English: Hunan sent a report to the imperial court, and the deputy commander of the group, Feng Shaofang, fought against Deng Pei, the leader of the Hengzhou bandits, and leveled them.

古文：党项复扰边，上欲择可为邠宁帅者而难其人，从容与翰林学士、中书舍人须昌毕諴论边事，諴援古据今，具陈方略。
现代文：党项部族又侵扰边，唐宣宗想选择可充任宁统帅的人，而难以找到合适者，便从容地与翰林学士、中书舍人须昌人毕议论边境之事，毕援古据今，向唐宣宗陈述征讨党项的一整套方略。
English: As the party and clan were encroaching on each other, Tang Xuan Zong wanted to choose someone who could serve as the commander of Ning, but it was difficult to find the right person, so he calmly discussed the border issue with Hanlin, a scholar, and Suchang, a Chinese scholar. Bi Yuan Gu now presented Tang Xuan Zong with a whole set of strategies for soliciting party items.

古文：上悦曰： 吾方择帅，不意颇、牧近在禁廷。
现代文：唐宣宗欢喜地说： 朕正要选择统帅，想不到廉颇、李牧就近在朕禁廷。
English: Tang Xuan Zong said with joy: I am about to choose a commander-in-chief, I can't imagine how corrupt Li Mu is, he is so close to my imperial court.

古文：卿其为朕行乎！ 
现代文：您愿意为朕出征边镇吗？ 
English: Are you willing to go to the border town for me?

古文：諴欣然奉命。
现代文：毕欣然表示愿奏命前往。
English: Bi gladly expressed his willingness to go.

古文：上欲重其资履，六月，壬申，先以諴为刑部侍郎，癸酉，乃除邠宁节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗企图加重毕的官资履历，六月，壬申，先任命毕为刑部侍郎，癸酉，再任命毕为宁节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang attempted to enhance Bi's official qualifications, and in June, Jinshin, Bi was first appointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and then appointed as the Ning Festival envoy.

古文：雍王氵美薨，追谥靖怀太子。
现代文：雍王李去世，被追谥为靖怀太子。
English: Yong Wang Li died and was pursued as Prince Jing Huai.

古文：河东节度使李业纵吏民侵掠杂虏，又妄杀降者，由是北边扰动。
现代文：河东节度使李业放纵所部吏民侵犯和掠夺杂居的各族胡人，又随意乱杀投降的胡人，于是北部边境出现动乱。
English: The Hedong Festival made Li Ye indulge the officials and people of the department to invade and plunder the mixed Hu people of all ethnic groups, and arbitrarily kill the Hu people who surrendered, so there was turmoil on the northern border.

古文：闰月，庚子，以太子少师卢钧为河东节度使。
现代文：闰七月，庚子，唐宣宗任命太子少师卢钧为河东节度使。
English: In leap July, Emperor Gaozhi and Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed the prince's apprentice, Lu Wei, as the envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：业内有所恃，人莫敢言，魏谟独请贬黜。上不许，但徙义成节度使。
现代文：李业因为在宫内有所依侍，人们不敢说他的罪过，唯独魏暮请唐宣宗将李业贬黜罢官；唐宣宗没有允许，只是将李业徙为义成节度使。
English: Because Li Ye had a following in the imperial court, people dared not speak of his sins. However, Wei Wei invited Tang Xuan Zong to demote Li Ye and remove him from his post; Tang Xuan Zong did not allow this, but sent Li Ye as an envoy to the Yicheng Festival.

古文：卢钧奏度支郎中韦宙为副使。
现代文：卢钧向唐宣宗奏请度支郎中韦宙为河东节度副使。
English: Lu Xun asked Emperor Xuan Zong of Tang to invite Du Shiro, Zhong Wei and Cao Cao to be deputy envoys of the Eastern Song Festival.

古文：宙遍诣塞下，悉召酋长，谕以祸福，禁唐民毋得入虏境侵掠，犯者必死，杂虏由是遂安。
现代文：韦宙走遍塞下，将诸杂胡酋长全部召来，向他们告谕以祸福，又禁止唐朝民众，要他们不得进故胡人地境侵占掠夺，有犯者必处死，诸杂居胡人部落由此安定下来。
English: Wei Xiu traveled all over the country and summoned all the heterogeneous Hu chiefs, telling them of their misfortunes and blessings. He also forbade the Tang Dynasty people not to invade, occupy and plunder the former Hu territory, and those who did so would be executed. As a result, the heterogeneous Hu tribes settled down.

古文：掌书记李璋杖一牙职，明日，牙将百馀人诉于钧，钧杖其为首者，摘戍外镇，馀皆罚之，曰： 边镇百馀人，无故横诉，不可不抑。 
现代文：掌书记李璋用棍杖打一名牙职小官，第二天，牙将一百余人来向卢钧申诉，卢钧用棍杖打其中为首者，将他贬谪于外镇戌守，其余的人都受到了处罚，卢钧说： 边镇一百余人，无故强横地申诉，不能不予抑制。 
English: The next day, more than a hundred people came to Lu Wei to appeal. Lu Wei beat the first one with a cane and sent him to a township, while the rest were punished. Lu Wei said, "More than a hundred people in a border town have appealed arbitrarily without reason, and we must restrain them."

古文：璋，绛之子也。
现代文：李璋是李绛的儿子。
English: Li Yao is the son of Li Yao.

古文：八月，甲子，以礼部尚书裴休同平章事。
现代文：八月，甲子，唐宣宗任命礼部尚书裴休为同平章事。
English: In August, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Shangshu Peihui of the Ministry of Rites as Tongping Zhangji.

古文：獠寇昌、资二州。
现代文：獠族人侵掠昌州、资州之地。
English: The Yi people invaded and plundered Changzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：冬，十月，邠宁节度使毕諴奏招谕党项皆降。
现代文：冬季，十月，节度使毕奏告唐宣宗，称招抚告谕党项叛乱部众，已使他们全部归降。
English: In the winter, in October, the festival made Bi report to Tang Xuan Zong, saying that the invitation to report to the party's rebellious members had made them all surrender.

古文：骁卫将军张直方坐以小过屡杀奴婢，贬恩州司户。
现代文：骁卫将军张直方多次以小过失杀死奴婢，被贬官徙任恩州司户。
English: Zhang Naofang, the general of the National Guard, repeatedly killed slaves and maids for minor offenses, and was demoted to the position of the governor of Enshu.

古文：十一月，立宪宗子惴为棣王。
现代文：十一月，唐宣宗立唐宪宗的儿子李惴为棣王。
English: In November, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty made Li Jie, the son of Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty, the king of Jiuyuan.

古文：十二月，中书门下奏： 度僧不精，则戒法堕坏；造寺无节，则损费过多，请自今诸州准元敕许置寺外，有胜地灵迹许修复，繁会之县许置一院。
现代文：十二月，中书门下上奏： 剃度僧尼不精，就会使佛教的戒法堕坏；建造寺庙没有节制，就会耗损费用过多。请求自今以后，诸州在原先所颁布的诏敕所允许设置的寺庙之外，在有名胜灵迹的地方许予修复寺庙，人烟车马繁盛的县准许设置一所寺院。
English: In December, the following was read out at the door of the Chinese Academy of Sciences: "If monks and nuns are not diligent, the precepts of Buddhism will be corrupted; if the construction of temples is not controlled, the cost will be excessive. Request that from now on, in addition to the temples permitted by the edict originally issued, the states will be allowed to repair temples in places with famous attractions, and counties with prosperous people, vehicles and horses will be allowed to set up a temple.

古文：从之。宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中七年
现代文：严禁私自剃度僧侣、尼姑；如果官府剃度僧侣、尼姑有缺额，可以选择合格的人补上，但仍要申报祠部发给度牒。远游寻找师傅的僧侣，必须有本州颁发的公文，以便到达目的地时，由当地官府对照验正。 唐宣表示同意。大中七年
English: It is strictly forbidden to shave monks and nuns without permission; if the government has a shortage of shaved monks and nuns, it can choose a qualified person to fill it, but it must still be reported to the ancestral hall to issue a certificate. Monks who travel far away to find a teacher must have a document issued by the state so that when they arrive at their destination, the local government can verify it. Tang Xuan agreed.

古文：春，正月，戊申，上祀圆丘；赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，戊申，唐宣宗举行祀圜丘典礼，大赦天下。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, in Boshin, Tang Xuan Zong held a ceremony of worshiping the sacred mountain, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，敕： 自今法司处罪，用常行杖。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙寅，唐宣宗颁布诏敕： 自今以后司法衙门处以刑罚，用经常行用的杖刑。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict: From now on, the judicial gate would be punished with a regular cane.

古文：杖脊一，折法杖十；杖臀一，折笞五。
现代文：用棍仗打脊背一下，依法规折算为用棍杖打臀部十下；用棍杖打臀部一下，折算为用鞭挞五下。
English: According to the law, a blow to the back with a club is equivalent to ten blows to the buttocks with a cane; a blow to the buttocks with a cane is equivalent to five lashes with a whip.

古文：使吏用法有常准。 
现代文：这样可以使官吏用刑有一定的标准。 
English: In this way, officials can be held to a certain standard in their use of punishment.

古文：冬，十二月，左补阙赵璘请罢来年元会，止御宣政。
现代文：冬季，十二月，左补阙赵请求罢除明年元旦大朝会典礼，让唐宣宗只到宣政殿见朝臣。
English: In winter, in December, Zuo Bu Zhao requested the cancellation of the New Year's Day Grand Council ceremony, so that Tang Xuan Zong could only meet with courtiers at the Xuan Zheng Palace.

古文：上以问宰相，对曰： 元会大礼，不可罢。
现代文：唐宣宗就此问于宰相，宰相们回答说： 元旦朝会大礼，不可以罢废。
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked the prime ministers about this, and the prime ministers replied: The New Year's Day imperial meeting is a grand ceremony, and it cannot be cancelled.

古文：况天下无事。 
现代文：况且现在天下无事。 
English: Besides, there's nothing going on right now.

古文：上曰： 近华州奏有贼光火劫下邽，关中少雪，皆朕之忧，何谓无事！
现代文：唐宣宗说： 最近华州奏称有盗贼无所忌惮，在光天化日之下抢劫下城，关中地区下雪太少，这都是朕的忧虑，怎么能说无事！
English: Tang Xuanzong said, "Recently, Huazhou reported that there were unscrupulous thieves who robbed the downtown area in broad daylight, and there was too little snow in the Guanzhong area. These are all my worries. How can I say there is nothing wrong!

古文：虽宣政亦不可御也。 
现代文：即使是让我到宣政殿举行典礼，也是不可以的。 
English: Even if I were to hold the ceremony at the Palace of Proclamation, it would not be allowed.

古文：上事郑太后甚谨，不居别宫，朝夕奉养。
现代文：唐宣宗服侍郑太后甚为谨慎，不让她居住于别宫，以便自己能朝夕奉养。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang served Empress Dowager Zheng very carefully and did not allow her to live in another palace so that he could take care of her in the morning and evening.

古文：舅郑光历平卢、河中节度使。入朝，上与之论为政，光应对鄙浅，上不悦，留为右羽林统军，使奉朝请。
现代文：舅舅郑光历官平卢节度使和河中节度使，唐宣宗与他议论为政之道，郑光应对时表现得鄙陋浅薄，唐宣宗很不高兴，留郑光于朝廷任佑羽林统军，使他便于奉朝请示。
English: Zheng Guang's uncle Zheng Guang had been appointed as the envoy of Pinglu Festival and the envoy of Hezhong Festival. Tang Xuan Zong discussed the way of politics with him. When Zheng Guang responded, he showed himself to be mean and shallow. Tang Xuan Zong was very unhappy. He kept Zheng Guang in the imperial court as the envoy of Yulin to unify the army, so that he could easily ask for instructions from the imperial court.

古文：太后数言其贫，上辄厚赐金帛，终不复任以民宫。
现代文：郑太后几次向唐宣宗说郑光贫穷，唐宣宗即厚厚地赐给郑光金帛，而始终不再委任他以为治民之官。
English: Empress Dowager Zheng told Tang Xuan Zong several times that Zheng Guang was poor, and Tang Xuan Zong generously gave Zheng Guang the golden scepter, but never appointed him as an official to govern the people.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中八年
现代文：度支奏告唐宣宗： 自河、湟地区得到平定，每年天下所收纳的钱有九百二十五万余缗，其中五百五十万余缗是租税，八十二万余缗是专卖酒的税钱，二百七十八万余缗是盐利。 大中八年
English: He reported to Tang Xuan Zong: The Sichuan and Yunnan regions have been pacified, and the amount of money collected by the government each year is more than 9.25 million baht, of which more than 5.5 million baht is tax, more than 820,000 baht is tax on the sale of alcohol, and more than 2.78 million baht is salt.

古文：春，正月丙戌朔，日有食之。罢元会。
现代文：春季，正月，丙戌朔，出现日食，罢除元旦大朝会。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the new moon, the appearance of a solar eclipse, the cancellation of the New Year's Day Grand Council.

古文：上自即位以来，治弑宪宗之党，宦官、外戚乃至东宫官属，诛窜甚众。
现代文：唐宣宗自从即皇帝位以来，整治弑唐宪宗的逆党，宦官、外戚以至东宫的官属，很多人受牵连，被诛杀的和被流放的人很多。
English: Since Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, many people, including eunuchs, maternal relatives, and even officials of the Eastern Court, have been implicated, and many people have been killed and exiled.

古文：虑人情不安，丙申，诏： 长庆之初，乱臣贼子，顷搜擿馀党，流窜已尽，其馀族从疏远者，一切不问。 
现代文：由于怕造成人心不安，丙申，唐宣宗颁布诏书宣称： 长庆初年的乱臣贼郭，前一段时间搜捕其余党，已经全部依罪流放，其余与罪犯较疏远的亲族，一概不予追究。 
English: For fear of causing unrest in the hearts of the people, Emperor Xuan Zong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict declaring: "The rebels of the first year of Changqing, who raided the remaining party, have all been exiled according to their crimes, and the remaining relatives who are more distant from the criminals will not be investigated at all.

古文：二月，中书门下奏拾遗、补阙缺员，请更增补。
现代文：二月，中书门下政事堂奏告唐宣宗，称拾遗、补阙官员缺额，请求再增补一些。
English: In February, the Political Affairs Office under the Chinese Academy of Sciences sent a report to Tang Xuanzong, saying that it was necessary to find and fill the vacancies of officials, and requested to add some more.

古文：上曰： 谏官要在举职，不必人多，如张道符、牛丛、赵璘辈数人，使朕日闻所不闻足矣。 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 谏官关键在于能称职，不必要人很多，如张道符、牛丛、赵这样几个人，使朕每天能知道许多朕所无法知道的事，这样就足够了。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: The key to being a eunuch is to be competent. There are many unnecessary people, such as Zhang Daofu, Niu Cong and Zhao, so that I can know many things that I cannot know every day. This is enough.

古文：丛，僧孺之子也。
现代文：牛丛是牛僧孺的儿子。
English: Niu Cong is the son of Niu Xianglu.

古文：久之，丛自司勋员外郎出为睦州刺史，入谢，上赐之紫。
现代文：一段时间之后，牛丛自司勋员外郎出任睦州刺史，入朝向唐宣宗谢恩，唐宣宗赐给他紫衣。
English: After a period of time, Gyu-gusu's son-in-law, who was a member of the Imperial Family, served as the governor of Mutsu Province. When he entered the court, he thanked Tang Xuan Zong and Tang Xuan Zong gave him a purple robe.

古文：丛既谢，前言曰： 臣所服绯，刺史所借也。 
现代文：牛丛谢恩之后，走上前进言说： 我现在穿的绯衣，是刺史的凭借。 
English: After thanking the ox thicket, he walked forward and said, "The long robe I'm wearing now is by virtue of my gnawing history.

古文：上遽曰： 且赐绯。 
现代文：唐宣宗立即说： 那就再赐给您一件绯衣吧。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong immediately said, "Then let me give you another robe."

古文：上重惜服章，有司常具绯、紫衣数袭从行，以备赏赐，或半岁不用其一，故当时以绯、紫为荣。
现代文：唐宣宗重视和珍惜代表官吏身份和地位的官服，有关部门经常预备绯衣、紫衣好几套跟从着唐宣宗，以备随时赏赐给官吏，但有时半年也不用其中一件，所以当时人均以穿绯衣、紫衣为荣耀。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty valued and treasured the official uniforms that represented the official's identity and status. The relevant departments often prepared several sets of navy blue and purple uniforms to follow Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, so that they could be awarded to officials at any time. However, sometimes they did not use one of them for half a year. Therefore, at that time, everyone wore navy blue and purple uniforms for glory.

古文：上重翰林学士，至于迁官，必校岁月，以为不可以官爵私近臣也。
现代文：唐宣宗信重翰林学士，但翰林学士升迁官位时，唐宣宗必定要查对他们任官的年月，看是否任期届满，有足够的资历升迁新位，认为不可以随意将官爵私下赏赐给近密的臣下。
English: Tang Xuan Zong believed in the importance of Hanlin Bachelors, but when Hanlin Bachelors were promoted, Tang Xuan Zong must check the years of their service to see if the term had expired and they had sufficient qualifications to be promoted to a new position. He believed that it was not permissible to privately award the title of nobility to close subjects at will.

古文：秋，九月，丙戌，以右散骑常侍高少逸为陕虢观察使。
现代文：秋季九月，丙戌，唐宣宗任命右散骑常侍高少逸为陕虢观察使。
English: In the autumn of September, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Gao Shaoyi, a right-hand rider, as the Shaanxi observation envoy.

古文：有敕使过硖石，怒饼黑，鞭驿吏见血。少逸封其饼以进。敕使还，上责之曰： 深山中如此食岂易得！ 
现代文：有一位宦官敕使路过硖石县，对驿馆供给他食用的饼太黑感到愤怒，用鞭抽打驿吏，使驿使流血；高少逸将那块饼封于盒送交朝廷，当这位宦官敕使还朝时，唐宣宗斥责他说： 在深山中这样的食物，又岂能是容易得到的！ 
English: There was a eunuch envoy passing through Shishi County. He was angry that the bread provided to him by the eunuch hall was too dark. He beat the eunuch with a whip, causing the envoy to bleed. Gao Shaoyi sealed the piece of bread in a box and sent it to the imperial court. When the eunuch envoy was still in the imperial court, Tang Xuan Zong scolded him, saying, "How can such food be easily obtained in the deep mountains!

古文：谪配恭陵。
现代文：即将他降职发配去守恭陵。
English: that he would be demoted and assigned to guard the Yongle Mausoleum.

古文：立皇子洽为怀王，汭为昭王，汶为康王。
现代文：唐宣宗立皇子李洽为怀王，李为昭王，李汶为康王。
English: Tang Xuan Zongli's son, Li Cha, became King Huai, Li Zhao, and Li Wen, King Kang.

古文：上猎于苑北，遇樵夫，问其县，曰： 泾阳人也。  令为谁？ 
现代文：唐宣宗出苑城之北游猎，遇到一位樵夫，问他是哪个县的人，椎夫回答： 泾阳县人。 又问： 县令是谁？ 
English: When Tang Xuan Zong went hunting in the north of Yuancheng, he met a woodcutter and asked him what county he was from. Shiifu replied, "I'm from Poyang County." He also asked, "Who is the county magistrate?"

古文：曰： 李行言。 
现代文：回答说： 李行言。 
English: He replied: "Li Xingyan."

古文： 为政何如？ 
现代文：唐宣宗再问： 李行言在县为政情况怎么样？ 
English: Tang Xuanzong asked again: How is Li Xingyan doing in county politics?

古文：曰： 性执。
现代文：樵夫回答说： 李行言性格固执。
English: The widower replied: Li Xingyan's personality is stubborn.

古文：有强盗数人，军家索之，竟不与，尽杀之。 
现代文：有几个强盗关押在县监狱，宦官领掌的北司禁军来县府要人，李行言就是不放人，硬是将这几个强盗全部处死了。 
English: There were several robbers detained in the county prison. The eunuch-in-charge of the Beiji Forbidden Army came to the county government to arrest important people. Li Xingyan would not let anyone go, but executed all of these robbers.

古文：上归，帖其名于寝殿之柱。
现代文：唐宣宗回宫后，将李行言的名字行事写在一个帖子上，挂于自己寝殿中的柱子上。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong returned to the palace, he wrote Li Xingyan's name on a post and hung it on a pillar in his bedroom.

古文：冬，十月，行言除海州刺史，入谢。
现代文：冬季，十月，李行言被任命为海州刺史，入朝向唐宣宗谢恩时，唐宣宗赐给他金紫衣裳。
English: In winter, in October, Li Xingyan was appointed as the governor of Haizhou, and when he entered the court to thank Tang Xuan Zong, Tang Xuan Zong gave him gold and purple clothes.

古文：上赐之金紫，问曰： 卿知所以衣紫乎？ 对曰： 不知。 
现代文：并问李行言说： 你知道为什么赐给你紫衣吗？ 李行言回答说： 不知道。 
English: He asked Li Xingyan, "Do you know why I gave you the purple robe?" Li Xingyan replied, "I don't know.

古文：上命取殿柱之贴示之。
现代文：唐宣宗即命左右取来挂于寝殿柱子上的帖文，给李行言看。
English: Tang Xuan Zong immediately ordered to take the posts hanging on the pillars of the sleeping hall and show them to Li Xingyan.

古文：上以甘露之变，惟李训、郑注当死，自馀王涯、贾餗等无罪，诏皆雪其冤。
现代文：唐宣宗认为甘露之变，唯有李训、郑注应当处死，其余王涯、贾等人无罪，颁布诏书昭雪他们的冤枉。
English: Tang Xuan Zong believed that only Li Xun and Zheng Zhu should be put to death, while Wang Ya and Jia were not guilty, and issued an edict to clarify their wrongdoing.

古文：上召翰林学士韦澳，托以论诗，屏左右与之语曰： 近日外间谓内侍权势何如？ 
现代文：唐宣宗召来翰林学士韦澳，假借讨论诗文，屏去左右近侍对韦澳说： 近日禁宫外对内侍宦官的权势有哪些说法？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong summoned Hanlin Scholar Wei Ao, under the pretext of discussing poetry, and the attendants on the left and right of the screen said to Wei Ao: Recently, what are the opinions outside the Forbidden City about the power of the eunuchs?

古文：对曰： 陛下威断，非前朝之比。 
现代文：韦澳回答说： 都说陛下对宦官的处置威严果断，不是前朝皇帝可以相比的。 
English: Wei Ao replied, "It is said that His Majesty's treatment of eunuchs is so dignified and decisive that it cannot be compared to that of the previous emperor.

古文：上闭目摇首曰： 全未，全未！
现代文：唐宣宗闭上眼睛摇摇头说： 都不是这么回事，都不是这么回事！
English: Tang Xuan Zong closed his eyes, shook his head and said, "It's not like that, it's not like that!"

古文：尚畏之在。
现代文：朕对宦官还有畏惧呢。
English: I'm still afraid of eunuchs.

古文：卿谓策将安在！ 
现代文：你看有什么良策能对付宦官呢？ 
English: What do you think is the best way to deal with eunuchs?

古文：对曰： 若与外廷议之，恐有太和之变，不若就其中择有才识者与之谋。 
现代文：韦澳回答说： 如果与宫廷之外的宰相大臣谋议诛除宦官，恐怕会有象太和年间那样的变故，还不如就在宦官当中选择一些有才识的人，与他们来谋议。 
English: Wei Ao replied, "If you were to discuss the removal of eunuchs with a prime minister from outside the court, I'm afraid there would be the same problems as in the Taewa era. It would be better to select some talented people among the eunuchs and discuss it with them.

古文：上曰： 此乃末策。朕已试之矣，自衣黄、衣绿至衣绯，皆感恩，才衣紫则相与为一矣！ 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 这是末策，朕已试行过，当朕提拔他们，让他们穿上黄色衣裳、绿色衣裳，以至绯衣时，他们都感恩戴德，一旦赐给他们紫衣时，他们便与为首作恶的宦官抱成一团，不再听朕的话了！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: "This is the last resort. I have already tried it. When I promoted them, let them wear yellow clothes, green clothes, and even a white robe, they were all grateful. Once I gave them a purple robe, they embraced the eunuch who was the first to commit evil, and no longer listened to my words!

古文：上又尝与令狐綯谋尽诛宦官，恐滥及无辜，密奏曰： 但有罪勿舍，有阙勿补，自然渐耗，至于尽矣。 
现代文：唐宣宗又曾经与令狐密谋，企图将宦官全部诛杀干净，令狐恐怕会滥杀无辜，秘密地奏告唐宣宗说： 只要对有罪的宦官不予放过，宦官有缺不邓补充，就会自然而然地慢慢消耗，最后死光，用不着您的操劳忧虑了。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong had also conspired with Ling Fox in an attempt to kill all the eunuchs. Ling Fox was afraid that he would kill innocent people indiscriminately, and secretly reported to Tang Xuan Zong that: "As long as the guilty eunuchs are not released, and the eunuchs are not replenished, they will naturally be slowly consumed, and finally die, so there is no need for you to worry.

古文：宦者窃见其奏，由是益与朝士相恶，南北司如水火矣。
现代文：有宦官偷偷地看到了令狐的奏状，于是更加与外朝士大夫过不去，使南衙朝官与北司宦官势如水火。
English: Some eunuchs secretly saw Linghu's report, which made it even more difficult for them to get along with the foreign court officials, and the situation between the southern court officials and the northern court officials was like fire and water.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中九年春，正月，甲申，成德军奏节度使王元逵薨，军中立其子节度副使绍鼎。癸卯，以绍鼎为成德留后。
现代文：大中九年春季，正月，甲申，唐成德军奏告朝廷称节度使王元逵去世，军中立王元逵的儿子节度副使王绍鼎主掌军政，癸卯，唐宣宗任命王绍鼎为成德军留后。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Great Middle Ages, in the first month of Jiaxing, Tang Chengde's army reported to the imperial court that Wang Yuanzhang had been killed by Jiedu, and that Wang Yuanzhang's son, Wang Shao Ding, the deputy envoy of Jiedu, was in charge of military affairs. However, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Wang Shao Ding as the successor of Chengde's army.

古文：二月，以醴泉令李君奭为怀州刺史。
现代文：二月，唐宣宗任命醴泉县令李君为怀州刺史。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Li Jun, the governor of Jiuquan County, as the prefect of Waizhou.

古文：初，上校猎渭上，有父老以十数，聚于佛祠。上问之，对曰： 醴泉百姓也。县令李君奭有异政，考满当罢，诣府乞留，故此祈佛，冀谐所愿耳。 
现代文：起初，唐宣宗于渭上游猎，看见十几位父老聚集在一个佛祠前，唐宣宗上前讯问其缘故，父老们回答说： 我们是醴泉县百姓，县令李君有优异的政绩，任期届满当罢官，我们到官府乞求他留任，为此而祈祷于佛祠，希望都能如我们所愿。 
English: At first, Tang Xuan Zong went on a hunting trip in Shaoshan and saw more than a dozen elders gathered in front of a Buddhist shrine. Tang Xuan Zong came forward to inquire about the reason, and the elders replied: We are the people of Shaoshan County. Li Jun, the county magistrate, has outstanding political achievements. When his term of office expires, he should be dismissed. We went to the government office to beg him to stay in office. For this reason, we prayed at the Buddhist shrine, hoping that everything would be as we wished.

古文：及怀州刺史阙，上手笔除君奭，宰相莫之测。
现代文：后来怀州刺史空缺，唐宣宗亲手写诏敕任命李君，宰相们对李君的升迁摸不到头脑。
English: Later, when there was a vacancy in the history of Huizhou, Tang Xuan Zong personally wrote an edict to appoint Li Jun. The prime ministers couldn't make up their minds about Li Jun's promotion.

古文：君奭入谢，上以此奖厉，众始知之。
现代文：李君入朝向唐宣宗谢恩，唐宣宗才以所得于父老之言来奖励李君，众人这才明白了李君超升的缘故。
English: When Li Jun entered the court, he thanked Tang Xuan Zong. Tang Xuan Zong rewarded Li Jun with what he had received from his father. This was the reason for Li Jun's promotion.

古文：三月，诏邠宁节度使毕諴还邠州。
现代文：三月，唐宣宗颁下诏书令宁节度使毕还治州。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering Ning Jiedu to return to govern the state.

古文：先是，以河、湟初附，党项未平，移邠宁军于宁州。至是，南山、平夏、党项皆安，威、盐、武三州军食足，故令还理所。
现代文：起先，由于河、湟地区刚归附朝廷，党项部族的叛乱还未平息，于是移宁军于宁州，到这时，南山党项和平夏党项部族都已安定下来，威州、盐州、武州三州的军粮充足，所以命令毕归还州洽所。
English: At first, since the He and Min regions had just been annexed to the imperial court and the rebellion of the party tribes had not yet subsided, the Ming army was moved to Ningzhou. By this time, the Nanshan party tribes and the Pingxia party tribes had settled down, and the military food in the three states of Weizhou, Yanzhou and Wuzhou was sufficient, so the order was given to return them to the state trade office.

古文：夏，闰四月，诏以 州县差役不均，自今每县据人贫富及役轻重作差科簿，送刺史检署讫，锁于令厅，每有役事委令，据簿轮差。 
现代文：夏季，闰四月，唐宣宗颁布诏令，认为： 州县对民户调发的差役不平均，自今以后每县官府根据人的贫富情况，以及差役的轻重制作差科簿，送交州刺史检查签署完毕后，再收藏于县令衙署存档，每有派役之事委交县令时，即依据差科簿来定当差的人。 
English: In the summer of leap April, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict, stating that: Since there is no uniformity in the dispatch of errand-runners from state and county to private households, henceforth, the government of each county will make a book of errand-runners according to the wealth and poverty of the people and the importance of the errand-runners. After the book is sent to the state to be checked and signed, it will be stored in the archive of the county government office. When the dispatching committee submits the county government order, the person to be sent will be determined according to the book of errand-runners.

古文：五月，丙寅，以王绍鼎为成德节度使。
现代文：五月，丙寅，唐宣宗任命王绍鼎为成德节度使。
English: In May, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Wang Shao Ding as the chief envoy of the Chengde Festival.

古文：上聪察强记，宫中厮役给洒扫者，皆能识其姓名，才性所任，呼召使令，无差误者。
现代文：唐宣宗聪敏明察并且记忆力强，对宫禁中当差扫地身份低贱的厮役，也都能知道他们的姓名，并熟悉这些人的性格及特长，所以召呼他们干活，从不会叫错人，出现差误。
English: Tang Xuanzong was keenly observant and had a strong memory. He knew the names of all the low-ranking courtiers who were sent to sweep the palace and was familiar with their personalities and strengths. Therefore, when he called them to work, he would never call the wrong person and make a mistake.

古文：天下奏狱吏卒姓名，一览皆记之。
现代文：天下各个地方官府奏告于朝廷的狱吏小卒的姓名，唐宣宗也一看便都记得。
English: Every local government in the world reported to the imperial court the names of the jailer's footmen, and Tang Xuan Zong could remember them all at a glance.

古文：度支奏渍污帛，误书 渍 为 清 ，枢密承旨孙隐中谓上不之见，辄足成之，及中书复入，上怒，推按擅改章奏者罚谪之。
现代文：有一次度支给唐宣宗上的奏文中有渍污帛一句，渍字被误写为清字，枢密承指孙隐中以为唐宣宗不一定看到了这个错字，即将错字改正，然后送交中书门下，奏状经宰相府官员签署后再送入宫禁，唐宣宗发现奏状被改，大为愤怒，加以追究，将擅自修改章奏的人处罚降职。
English: On one occasion, Tang Xuanzong was given a copy of a misspelled document containing a sentence with a smudge mark. The misspelled word was mistakenly written as a clear word. Sun Yingzhong, the privy councilor, thought that Tang Xuanzong might not have seen the misspelled word. He was going to correct the misspelled word and then send it to Zhongshu. The document was signed by an official from the Prime Minister's Office and then sent to the palace. Tang Xuanzong found out that the document had been altered and was very angry. He investigated the matter and punished and demoted those who had altered the document without authorization.

古文：上密令翰林学士韦澳纂次诸州境土风物及诸利害为一书，自写而上之，虽子弟不知也，号曰《处分语》。
现代文：唐宣宗密令翰林学士韦澳将各州境内的风俗名物以及各种利害关系次第编纂成为一本书，韦澳自己写完后即交给唐宣宗，就连自己的子弟也不知道这件事，书名为《处分语》。
English: Tang Xuan Zong secretly ordered the scholar Wei Ao to compile the customs and specialties of each state as well as various interests into a book. After Wei Ao finished writing, he immediately handed it to Tang Xuan Zong. Even his own children did not know about it. The book is called "Disposition Language."

古文：他日，邓州刺史薛弘宗入谢，出，谓澳曰： 上处分本州事惊人。 
现代文：有一天，邓州刺史薛弘宗入宫向唐宣宗拜谢后出朝，对韦澳说： 皇上对邓州的事务了如指掌，处置和分析令人惊讶。 
English: One day, Xue Hongzong, the prince of Dangzhou, went to Tang Xuanzong to offer thanks after entering the palace, and said to Wei Ao: The emperor knows the affairs of Dangzhou like the back of his hand, and his handling and analysis are surprising.

古文：澳询之，皆《处分语》中事也。
现代文：韦澳询问其中之事，都是《处分语》中所写的事。
English: Among the things that Wei Ao inquired about, all of them were things written in the "Sentence."

古文：澳在翰林，上或遣中使宣旨草诏。事有不可者，澳辄曰： 兹事须降御札，方敢施行。 
现代文：韦澳在翰林院，唐宣宗有时派宦官中使向韦澳传宣旨意，令他据以草写诏书；有些事韦澳认为处置不当，即对传旨的宦官说： 此事必须皇上亲笔写下字据，我才敢据以草诏。 
English: Wei Ao was in the Hanlin Academy. The Tang Xuan Zong sometimes sent eunuchs to preach the will to Wei Ao and ordered him to write the imperial edict. There were some things that Wei Ao considered to be improper, that is, he said to the eunuch who transmitted the will: This matter must be written by the emperor himself, before I dare to write the imperial edict.

古文：淹留至旦，上疏论之，上多从之。
现代文：于是拖延至第二天天亮，再上疏向唐宣宗论说；唐宣宗一般都能听从韦澳的意见。
English: Therefore, he delayed until the dawn of the next day, and then argued with Tang Xuan Zong; Tang Xuan Zong was generally able to listen to Wei Ao's opinion.

古文：秋，七月，浙东军乱，逐观察使李讷。
现代文：秋季，七月，浙东发生军乱，驱逐观察使李讷。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a military conflict in eastern Zhejiang, and Li Ne was sent to observe the expulsion.

古文：讷，逊之弟子也，性卞急，遇将士不以礼，故乱作。
现代文：李讷是李逊弟弟的儿子，性情急躁，对部下将士不以礼相待，因此引起军乱。
English: Li Ne was the son of Li Xun's younger brother. He was quick-tempered and did not treat his subordinates with courtesy, which led to a mutiny.

古文：淮南饥，民多流亡，节度使杜悰荒于游宴，政事不治。
现代文：淮南发生饥荒，人民大多流亡他乡，节度使杜游宴过多，不理政事。
English: A famine occurred in Huainan, and most of the people fled to other villages. The festival made Du You banquet too much, and he did not attend to political affairs.

古文：上闻之，甲午，以门下侍郎、同平章事崔铉同平章事，充淮南节度使。丁酉，以悰为太子太傅、分司。
现代文：唐宣宗得知了这些情况，甲午，任命门下侍郎、同平章事崔铉挂同平章事衔，充任淮南节度使；丁酉，唐宣宗任杜为太子太傅、分司东都，为闲官。
English: Tang Xuan Zong learned of these circumstances, and in the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st

古文：九月，乙亥，贬李讷为朗州刺史，监军王宗景杖四十，配恭陵。
现代文：九月，乙亥，唐宣宗下令将浙东观察使李讷贬为朗州刺史，监军王宗景受杖刑四十下，发配去守恭陵。
English: In September, Yihai, Tang Xuan Zong ordered the East Zhejiang Observer Li Ne to be relegated to the status of a historian of Lanzhou, and the overseer of the army, Wang Zongjing, was sentenced to forty strokes of the cane and sent to guard Gong Ling.

古文：仍诏 自今戎臣失律，并坐监军。 
现代文：并颁下诏书： 自今以后凡镇守一方的武臣违法乱纪，监军也要一同判罪。 
English: And issued an edict: From now on, if any vassal of the garrison side violates the law and discipline, the supervising troops should also be convicted together.

古文：以礼部侍郎沈询为浙东观察使。
现代文：唐宣宗另外任命礼部侍郎沈询为浙东观察使。
English: In addition, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed the etiquette attendant Shen Ying as the East Zhejiang Observation Envoy.

古文：询，传师之子也。
现代文：沈询是沈传师的儿子。
English: Shen Ying is the son of Shen Chuanshi.

古文：冬，十一月，以吏部侍郎柳仲郢为兵部侍郎，充盐铁转运使。
现代文：冬季，十一月，唐宣宗任命吏部侍郎柳仲郢为兵部侍郎，充当盐铁转运使。
English: In winter, in November, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed the attendant of the cadre department, Liu Zhongyao, as the attendant of the military department to act as the transfer agent of salt and iron.

古文：有闾阎医工刘集因缘交通禁中，上敕盐铁补场官。
现代文：有一位在闾巷自由行医的医生刘集通过关系交接宫庭，唐宣宗下敕任命刘集为盐铁补场官。
English: Liu Ji, a doctor who practiced medicine freely in Shao Xiang, was appointed to the palace by Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：仲郢上言： 医工术精，宜补医官。若委务铜盐，何以课其殿最！
现代文：柳仲郢向唐宣宗上言： 医工刘集医术精明，应该补为医官；如果让他管理铜盐事务，怎么来考课他的政绩，论优劣！
English: Liu Zhongyao appealed to Tang Xuanzong: Liu Ji, a medical worker, is shrewd in medicine and should be appointed as a medical officer; if he is allowed to manage the copper and salt affairs, how can his political performance be examined, and what are the advantages and disadvantages!

古文：且场官贱品，非特敕所宜亲，臣未敢奉诏！ 
现代文：况且场官是品秩低贱的小官，本不是陛下的特别敕令所应该亲任的，我不敢奉陛下的诏命。 
English: Moreover, field officers are low-ranking minor officials, and they are not supposed to personally carry out His Majesty's special edict. I do not dare to carry out His Majesty's edict.

古文：上遽批： 刘集宜赐绢百匹，遣之。 
现代文：唐宣宗立即批道： 刘集应赐给他绢一百匹，让他回去。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong immediately criticized: Liu Ji should give him a hundred yakitori and let him go back.

古文：他日，见仲郢，劳之曰： 卿论刘集事甚佳。 
现代文：几天后，唐宣宗见到柳仲郢，慰劳他说： 你所议论刘集的事好极了。 
English: A few days later, Tang Xuan Zong met Liu Zhongyao and consoled him, saying, "What you said about Liu Ji is great.

古文：上尝若不能食，召医工梁新诊脉，治之数日，良已。
现代文：唐宣宗曾经为不能吃东西而困扰，召医工梁新来把脉诊治，治疗了几天，病情好转。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was once troubled by not being able to eat. He called in medical worker Liang Xin to diagnose and treat his pulse. After a few days of treatment, his condition improved.

古文：新因自陈求官，上不许，但敕盐铁使月给钱三十缗而已。
现代文：梁新为此自己开口向唐宣宗要求赏一个官位，唐宣宗不予准许，只是下敕命令盐铁使每月给梁新三千缗钱而已。
English: For this reason, Liang Xin himself opened his mouth to Tang Xuan Zong to ask him to reward him with an official post. Tang Xuan Zong did not grant permission, but ordered Yan Tie Zong to give Liang Xin 3,000 baht per month.

古文：右威卫大将军康季荣前为泾原节度使，擅用官钱二万缗，事觉，季荣请以家财偿之。
现代文：右威卫大将军康季荣先前为泾原节度使，曾擅自动用官府二百万缗钱，事被察觉，康季荣请求用自己的家财抵偿。
English: It was discovered that Kang Jirong, the Right Division of Wei Wei General, had previously used two million baht of government money without authorization as the prime minister's envoy. Kang Jirong requested to use his own family money to compensate.

古文：上以季荣有开河、湟功，许之。
现代文：唐宣宗以康季荣有开辟河、湟地区的战功，表示允许。
English: Tang Xuan Zong expressed his approval of Kang Ji Rong's military exploits in opening up the Hebei and Fujian regions.

古文：给事中封还敕书，谏官亦上言。十二月，庚辰，贬季荣夔州长史。
现代文：给事中封还诏敕，谏官也向唐宣宗上言劝谏，十二月，庚辰，康季荣被贬官任夔州长史。
English: The emperor also issued an imperial edict on the matter, and the eunuchs also appealed to Tang Xuanzong for advice. In December, Kang Jirong was demoted from the position of official to that of prefectural governor.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中十年
现代文：江西观察使郑祗德因为自己的儿子的郑颢娶公主为妻，位望通显，一再要求得到一个散官的头衔，甲午，唐宣宗调郑祗德为太子宾客、分司东都，任闲职。大中十年
English: Jiangxi observation made Zheng Hongde because of his son Zheng Xuan married a princess as his wife, his prestige was obvious, and he repeatedly asked for a title of a sanshan. In the afternoon, Tang Xuan Zong transferred Zheng Hongde to be the prince's guest, sub-director of Dongdu, and held a sinecure. Ten years of high school

古文：春，正月，丁巳，以御史大夫郑朗为工部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：春季正月，丁已，唐宣宗任命御史大夫郑朗为工部尚书，同平章事。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty had already appointed Grand Historian Zheng Lang as an official of the Ministry of Works.

古文：上命裴休极言时事，休请早建太子，上曰： 若建太子，则朕遂为闲人。 
现代文：唐宣宗让裴休极尽所言，议论当大事，裴休请求唐宣宗尽早立皇太子，唐宣宗说： 如果立皇太子，那朕就将成为闲人了。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong let Pei Xiu make the most of what he said and discuss important matters. Pei Xiu asked Tang Xuan Zong to set up a crown prince as soon as possible. Tang Xuan Zong said: If I set up a crown prince, then I will become a layman.

古文：休不敢复言。
现代文：裴休不敢再说了。
English: Pei Xiu did not dare to say any more.

古文：二月，丙戌，休以疾辞位，不许。
现代文：二月，丙戌，裴休以有病要求辞去官位，唐宣宗不允许。
English: In February, he and Pei Xiu resigned from their posts due to illness, but Tang Xuan Zong did not allow it.

古文：三月，辛亥，诏以 回鹘有功于国，世为婚姻，称臣奉贡，北边无警。
现代文：三月，辛亥，唐宣宗颁布诏书，以 回鹘曾有功于我大唐，世代与皇室通婚姻，向我大唐皇帝称臣并奉献贡物，使我北部边境无须警戒。
English: In March, Xinhai, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict, in which he said, "You have been of great service to my Great Tang Dynasty, you have intermarried with the imperial family for generations, you have been a loyal subject to my Great Tang Emperor and have offered tribute to him, so there is no need for me to guard the northern border."

古文：会昌中虏廷丧乱，可汗奔亡，属奸臣当轴，遽加殄灭。
现代文：会昌年间回鹘王廷丧乱，可汗四外奔亡，当时正值奸臣李德裕掌握大唐中枢朝政，于是对回鹘残部加以歼灭。
English: During the reign of Huichang, the Uighur royal court was in turmoil, and the khans fled abroad and died. At that time, the treacherous vassal Li Deyu was in control of the central government of the Great Tang Dynasty, so he annihilated the remnants of the Uighurs.

古文：近有降者云，已厖历今为可汗，尚寓安西，俟其归复牙帐，当加册命。 
现代文：近来有归降我朝的回鹘人说，已历现在已为回鹘可汗，目前寓居于安西地区，等到他收复并回到原先回鹘王廷所在的牙帐时，朕将正式册命他为回鹘国可汗。 
English: Recently, an Uighur who has returned to our country said that he has been an Uighur khan for a long time and currently lives in the Anxi region. When he regains and returns to the dental office where the Uighur royal court was originally located, I will officially appoint him as the khan of the Uighur country.

古文：上以京兆久不理，夏，五月，丁卯，以翰林学士、工部侍郎韦澳为京兆尹。
现代文：唐宣宗因为京兆地方很久得不到治理，夏季，五月，丁卯，任命翰林学士、工部侍郎韦澳为京兆尹。
English: Because the Jingzhao region had not been governed for a long time, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Wei Ao, a scholar of Hanlin and a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, as the Jingzhao Yin in the summer, in May, Dingwu.

古文：澳为人公直，既视事，豪贵敛手。
现代文：韦澳为人公正爽直，既到京兆府上任办公，豪猾贵戚均有所收敛，不敢为非做歹。
English: Wei Ao is a fair and straightforward person. Since he took office in Beijing and Shandong Province, his noble relatives have been restrained and do not dare to do evil.

古文：郑光庄吏恣横，为闾里患，积年租税不入，澳执而械之。
现代文：国舅郑光庄国的庄吏骄横无比，多年的租税不交官府，韦澳将他逮捕并锁了起来。
English: Wei Ao arrested and locked up his uncle, Zheng Guangzhuang, an extremely arrogant and haughty official who had not paid taxes to the government for many years.

古文：上于延英问澳，澳具奏其状。上曰： 卿何以处之？ 
现代文：唐宣宗于延英殿问韦澳，韦澳将逮捕郑光庄吏的原委全部向唐宣宗陈奏，唐宣宗说： 你怎么处置他呢？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked Wei Ao at the Yan Ying Palace. Wei Ao told Tang Xuan Zong that he would arrest all of Zheng Guang's officials. Tang Xuan Zong said, "What will you do with him?"

古文：澳曰： 欲置于法。 
现代文：韦澳回答说： 将依照法律处置。 
English: Wei Ao replied: I will be dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：上曰： 郑光甚爱之，何如？ 
现代文：唐宣宗又说： 郑光特别喜爱这位庄吏，怎么办呀？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong also said: Zheng Guang is particularly fond of this official, what should we do?

古文：对曰： 陛下自内庭用臣为京兆，欲以清畿甸之积弊，若郑光庄吏积年为蠹，得宽重辟，是陛下之法独行于贫户耳，臣未敢奉诏。 
现代文：韦澳回答说； 陛下从宫禁内庭的翰林院任用我为京兆尹，希望我清扫京畿地区多年的积弊；如果郑光的庄吏多年为蠹害，却能得到宽大免于刑事处分，那么陛下所制定的法律，看来只是用来约束贫困户，我实在是不敢奉陛下的诏命再去办事了。 
English: Wei Ao replied: His Majesty appointed me from the Hanlin Court of the Inner Court of the Imperial Palace to be the Jing Zhaoyun, hoping that I would clean up the accumulated evils of the Gyeonggi region for many years; if the dignitaries of Zheng Guang have been harmed for many years, but can get leniency from criminal sanctions, then the laws enacted by His Majesty seem only to be used to restrain poor households, I really dare not follow His Majesty's edict to do business again.

古文：上曰： 诚如此。但郑光带我不置，卿与痛杖，贷其死，可乎？ 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 你说的确实全合乎道理，但联舅舅郑光的面子朕不能不顾；你可以用棍杖狠狠地处罚庄吏，但免他一死，行吗？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "What you said is indeed completely reasonable, but I cannot ignore the face of my uncle Zheng Guang. You can punish the official severely with a cane, but can you spare his life?

古文：对曰： 臣不敢不奉诏，愿听臣且系之，俟征足及释之。 
现代文：韦澳回答说： 我不敢不听从陛下的当面诏告，请求陛下让我关押那个骄横的庄吏，等到他租税交足之后再释放他。 
English: Wei Ao replied: I dare not disobey your majesty's face-to-face edict and ask your majesty to let me detain the arrogant official and release him after he has paid his taxes in full.

古文：上曰： 灼然可。朕为郑光故挠卿法，殊以为愧。 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 你的话灼然可行，朕为母舅郑光的缘故阻挠你依法行事，的确是惭愧呀。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "Your words are very feasible. I am ashamed to prevent you from acting in accordance with the law for the sake of my maternal uncle Zheng Guang.

古文：澳归府，即杖之。督租数百斛足，乃以吏归光。
现代文：韦澳回到京兆府，即重杖庄吏；督促他交满数百斛租税后，才将他交还郑光。
English: Wei Ao returned to Jingzhao Prefecture, that is, a heavy-duty official; after urging him to pay hundreds of baht in taxes, he was returned to Zheng Guang.

古文：六月，戊寅，以中书侍郎、同平章事裴休同平章事，充宣武节度使。
现代文：六月，戊寅，唐宣宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事裴休挂同平章事衔，出任宣武节度使。
English: In June, Wu Yin, the Tang Emperor Xuan Zong, appointed Zhongshu Jirong and Tongping Zhangji Pei Xiu with the title of Tongping Zhang and served as the Xuanwu Festival Envoy.

古文：司农卿韦廑欲求夏州节度使，有术士知之，诣廑门曰： 吾善醮星辰，求官无不如意。 
现代文：司农卿韦企图求夏州节度使官位，有一个术士知道了韦的心事，即登韦家门造访，说： 我善于占星术，为人求官没有不如愿的。 
English: Wei, the Secretary of Agriculture, tried to get an official position at the festival in Xiazhou. A sorcerer who knew Wei's heart visited Deng Wei's home and said, "I am good at astrology. There is nothing worse than seeking an official position.

古文：廑信之，夜，设醮具于庭。
现代文：韦相信了术士的话，夜晚，于庭院摆设好占星用的用具。
English: Wei believed the words of the sorcerer, and at night, he set up astrology tools in the courtyard.

古文：术士曰： 请公自书官阶一通。 
现代文：术士说； 请您自己在纸上写上您想求得的官阶。 
English: The sorcerer said, "Please write down on a piece of paper the rank you wish to attain.

古文：既得之，仰天大呼曰： 韦廑有异志，令我祭天。 
现代文：术士得到韦手写的求官字条后，即对着天空大声呼喊： 韦有异志，让我为他祭天。 
English: After the sorcerer got Wei's handwritten application note, he shouted loudly to the sky: Wei has a dream, let me sacrifice heaven for him.

古文：廑举家拜泣曰： 愿山人赐百口之命！ 
现代文：韦惊恐万状，举家向术士拜求并哭泣，说； 希望山人赐给百口之家活命之路！ 
English: Wei was terrified, and the whole family begged and cried to the sorcerer, saying, "I hope the mountain people will give the hundred-member family a way to live!"

古文：家之货财珍玩尽与之。
现代文：家中的财产珍玩全部给术士。
English: All of the family's precious possessions were given to the sorcerer.

古文：逻者怪术士服鲜衣，执以为盗。术士急，乃曰： 韦廑令我祭天，我欲告之，彼以家财求我耳。 
现代文：巡逻闾巷的军吏对术士穿一身新衣服感到奇怪，以为是他盗贼加以逮捕；术士窘急，于是招供说： 韦让我为他祭天，我要告发他，他即以家财求我闭嘴。 
English: The military officer patrolling the alley was surprised to see the sorcerer wearing a new suit and thought he was a thief and arrested him. The sorcerer was distressed, so he confessed: "Wei asked me to make a sacrifice for him, I want to denounce him, he asked me to shut up with his family wealth.

古文：事上闻，秋，九月，上召廑面诘之，具知其冤，谓宰相曰： 韦廑城南甲族，为奸人所诬，勿使狱吏辱之。 
现代文：此事上报唐宣宗。秋季，九月，唐宣宗将韦召来当面审问，知道了韦的全部冤情，便对宰相说： 韦出身于京城之南最大的望族，被奸人所诬谄，不要让狱吏任意污辱了他。 
English: The matter was reported to Tang Xuan Zong. In the autumn and September, Tang Xuan Zong summoned Wei to face-to-face interrogation. Knowing all of Wei's grievances, he said to the prime minister: Wei was born in the south of Beijing, the largest respected family, and was falsely accused by a traitor. Don't let the prison officials humiliate him arbitrarily.

古文：立以术士付京兆，杖死，贬廑永州司马。
现代文：立即将术士送交京兆府治罪，杖刑打死，韦被贬为永州司马。
English: The sorcerer was immediately sent to Jingzhao Prefecture to be punished, and was beaten to death with a cane. Wei was relegated to Yongzhou Sima.

古文：户部侍郎、判户部、附马都尉郑颢营求作相甚切。
现代文：户部侍郎、判户部、驸马都尉郑颢急切地钻营权位，企图当宰相。
English: The head of the household, the head of the household, the judge of the household, and the captain of the horse, Zheng Qi, eagerly drilled the position of power and attempted to become the prime minister.

古文：其父祗德闻之，与书曰： 闻汝已判户部，是吾必死之年；又闻欲求宰相，是吾必死之日也。 
现代文：郑颢的父亲郑祗德给郑颢写信说： 听说你已掌判户部事务，这可是我必死之年；又听说你企图求得宰相职，这更是我必死之日呀！ 
English: Zheng Yu's father, Zheng Yu De, wrote to Zheng Yu: "I heard that you have taken charge of the household affairs, this is the year of my death; I also heard that you are trying to get the post of prime minister, this is the day of my death!

古文：颢惧，累表辞剧务。
现代文：郑颢收信后深感畏惧，多次向唐宣宗上表请求辞去繁重的政务。
English: After receiving the letter, Zheng Rong was deeply afraid and repeatedly asked Tang Xuan Zong to resign from the heavy government affairs.

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，以颢为秘书监。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙酉，唐宣宗任命郑颢为秘书监。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Zheng Yao as secretary.

古文：上遣使诣安西镇抚回鹘，使者至灵武，会回鹘可汉遣使入贡。十一月，辛亥，册拜为嗢禄登里罗汩没密施合俱录毘伽怀建可汗，以卫尉少卿王端章充使。
现代文：唐宣宗派遣使者到安西去镇抚回鹘部族，使者来到灵武，正值回鹘可汗派遣使臣入唐朝朝贡，十一月，辛亥，唐宣宗册拜回鹘可汗为禄登里罗汩没密施合俱录毗伽怀建可汗，使命卫尉少卿王端章充当册封使者。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to Anxi to subdue the Hui and Qiang tribes. The envoy came to Lingwu just as Hui Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty. In November, Xinhai, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty named Hui Qiang Khan as Luodeng Lirongmizhigubo Bijia Huaijian Khan, and appointed Wang Duanzhang, a guard lieutenant, as the envoy.

古文：吏部尚书李景让上言： 穆宗乃陛下兄，敬宗、文宗、武宗乃兄之子，陛下拜兄尚可，拜侄可乎！
现代文：吏部尚书李景让向唐景宗上言： 穆宗是陛下的兄长。敬宗、文宗、武宗是陛下兄长的儿子，陛下敬拜兄长还说得过去，敬拜自己的侄子怎么说得过去呢！
English: Li Jingzang, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, wrote to Tang Jingzong: Mu Zong is your majesty's elder brother. Keizong, Wenzong and Wuzong are the sons of your majesty's elder brother. Your majesty can worship your elder brother, but how can you worship your nephew?

古文：是使陛下不得亲事七庙也，宜迁四主出太庙，还代宗以下入庙。 
现代文：为要让陛下不必亲自去敬拜七庙，所以应该将穆宗、敬宗、文宗、武宗四位神主移出太庙，而将唐代宗以下各宗移入太庙。 
English: In order for His Majesty not to have to go to worship the seven temples in person, the four deities of Mu Zong, Keizong, Wenzong and Bu Zong should be moved out of the Great Temple, and the deities of the Tang Dynasty Sect and below should be moved into the Great Temple.

古文：诏百官议其事，不决而止。时人以是薄景让。
现代文：唐宣宗诏命朝廷百官讨论这件事，众口不一，无法裁决，最后不了了之，当时人对李景让逢迎宣宗的这种作法表示鄙薄。
English: Tang Xuan Zong issued an edict ordering hundreds of court officials to discuss the matter. They were unable to reach a decision due to conflicting opinions, and the matter was eventually dropped. At the time, people expressed disdain for Li Jing's letting Feng Ying Xuan Zong do this.

古文：敕 于灵感、会善二寺置戒坛，诸僧、尼应填阙者委长老僧选择，给公赁，赴两坛受戒，两京各选大德十人主其事。
现代文：唐宣宗颁下诏敕： 在灵感、会善二座寺庙设置戒坛，应该填补空缺的僧侣和尼姑交由长老僧来进行选择，官府发给证书，让他们赴灵感、会善两坛受佛教戒律，两京长安、洛阳各选出能持戒行的大德和尚十人主持受戒之事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict: to set up the ordination altar in the two temples of inspiration and virtue, the monks and nuns who should fill the vacancies should be selected by the elders, and the government should issue a certificate to let them go to the inspiration and virtue two altars to receive the Buddhist precepts, and the two capitals of Chang'an and Luoyang should each elect ten great monks and nuns who can uphold the precepts to preside over the ordination.

古文：有不堪者罢之，堪者给牒，遣归本州。
现代文：有不堪受戒的就罢除他的僧尼身份，能接受佛教戒律的不发给度牒，让他们回归本州。
English: For those who cannot accept the precepts, their status as monks and nuns will be revoked, and those who can accept the Buddhist precepts will not be given an ultimatum, and they will be allowed to return to Honshu.

古文：不见戒坛公牒，毋得私容。
现代文：各地寺院若不见灵感、会善二寺发给的公家度牒，不得私容任何僧、尼。
English: If the temples in various regions do not find inspiration, they must not tolerate any monks and nuns in violation of the official edict issued by the Huizhen two temples.

古文：仍先选旧僧、尼，旧僧、尼无堪者，乃选外人。 
现代文：要先选择旧僧侣和尼姑，旧僧侣、尼姑没有合适者，再选择外人。 
English: We must first select former monks and nuns, and if there are no suitable former monks and nuns, then select outsiders.

古文：壬辰，以户部侍郎、判户部崔慎由为工部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：壬辰，唐宣宗任命户部侍郎、判户部崔慎由为工部尚书、同平章事。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Choi Shin Yeh, the head of the Household Division, as the official secretary of the Ministry of Works.

古文：上每命相，左右无知者。
现代文：唐宣宗每次任命宰相，左右人没有谁能预先知道。
English: Every time Tang Xuan Zong appointed a prime minister, no one could know in advance.

古文：前此一日，令枢密宣旨于学士院，以兵部侍郎、判度支萧鄴同平章事。
现代文：前一日，唐宣宗命令枢密使于翰林学士院宣旨，任命兵部侍郎、判度支萧邺为同平章事。
English: On the previous day, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang ordered the imperial envoy to issue a decree at the Hanlin Academy, appointing the attendant of the military department and the judge Xiao Wei to the same rank.

古文：枢密使王归长、马公儒覆奏： 鄴所判度支应罢否？ 
现代文：枢密使王归长、马公儒当即复奏于唐宣宗，问道： 萧邺所任判度支是否应该罢除？ 
English: The confidential envoys Wang Guichang and Ma Gongru immediately reported to Tang Xuanzong, asking: Should the Judiciary Branch appointed by Xiao Gan be removed?

古文：上以为归长等佑之，即手书慎由名及新命付学士院，仍云 落判户部事 。
现代文：唐宣宗认为宦官王归长等人是想于内廷助萧邺一把，当即手写崔慎由的名字及新的使命交付翰林学士院，然后说道： 不再判户部事。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong thought that the eunuch Wang Guichang and others wanted to help Xiao Yao in the Inner Court, and immediately hand-wrote Cui Shanyu's name and new mission to Hanlin Academy, and then said: No longer judge household affairs.

古文：鄴，明之八世孙也。
现代文：萧邺是南朝梁贞阳侯萧渊阳的八世孙。
English: Xiao Zhen is the eighth generation grandson of the Southern Dynasty Liang Zhenyang Hou Xiao Yuanyang.

古文：内园使李敬寔遇郑郎不避马，郎奏之。上责敬寔，对曰： 供奉官例不避。 
现代文：宦官内园使李敬在路上遇到宰相郑朗，不躲避郑朗的马，郑朗奏告唐宣宗，唐宣宗责备李敬，李敬回答说： 供奉皇帝的宦官按惯例可以不避宰相的马。 
English: The eunuch's inner garden caused Li Jing to meet the prime minister Zheng Lang on the road, and he did not avoid Zheng Lang's horse. Zheng Lang reported to Tang Xuan Zong, Tang Xuan Zong reproached Li Jing, and Li Jing replied: The eunuch who serves the emperor can not avoid the prime minister's horse according to the usual practice.

古文：上曰： 汝衔敕命，横绝可也，岂得私出而不避宰相乎！ 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 如果你奉朕的敕命办公事，骄横也还可以；岂能私自了宫而不躲避宰相的马呢！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "If you are doing your duty by my command, you can still be arrogant. Couldn't you leave the palace without dodging the prime minister's horse?

古文：命剥色，配南牙。
现代文：于是命令李敬脱去有标志其内官身份地位颜色的衣服，发配到南衙服役。
English: So he ordered Li Jing to take off the clothes with the color that marked his status as an internal affairs officer, and sent him to serve in Nanlu.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中十一年春，正月，丙午，以御史中丞兼尚书右丞夏侯孜为户部侍郎、判户部事。
现代文：大中十一年春季，正月，丙午，唐宣宗任命御史中丞兼尚书右丞夏侯孜为户部侍郎、判户部事。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of high school, on the first day of the month, in the afternoon of the third day, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Mishi Chujo and Shoshu Yu Jie Xia Houzi as the attendant of the household department and the judge of the household department.

古文：先是，判户部有缺，京兆尹韦澳奏事，上欲以澳补之。
现代文：先前，判户部一职有缺，京兆尹韦澳上朝向唐宣宗奏事，唐宣宗想让韦澳补任判户部一官。
English: Previously, there was a vacancy in the position of household judge, and Emperor Jingzhao sent Yin Wei Ao to Tang Xuan Zong to make a report. Tang Xuan Zong wanted Wei Ao to fill the position of household judge.

古文：辞曰： 臣比年心力衰耗，难以处繁剧，屡就陛下乞小镇，圣恩未许。 
现代文：韦澳推辞说： 我这些年精神和身体都衰老消耗过度，实在难以再处置繁杂艰巨的事务，多次向陛下乞求去主管一个小镇，而一直没有获得陛下的恩准。 
English: Wei Ao said, "I am too old and worn out mentally and physically these years, and it is really difficult to deal with complicated and arduous affairs. I have repeatedly begged Your Majesty to take charge of a small town, but I have not received Your Majesty's approval.

古文：上不悦。
现代文：唐宣宗听后很不高兴。
English: Wenzong was not happy with Chen Yigang's words.

古文：及归，其甥柳玼之。澳曰： 主上不与宰辅佥议，私欲用我，人必谓我以他歧得之，何以自明！
现代文：韦澳回到家中，外甥柳怕韦澳说错了话，深感忧虑，韦澳说； 皇上不与宰辅官商议，私下里想任用我，人们必定会说我通过其他关系得官，这怎么能够说得清楚！
English: When Wei Ao returned home, his nephew Liu was afraid that Wei Ao had said the wrong thing, and was deeply worried, Wei Ao said; the emperor did not consult with the vice-premiers, and secretly wanted to appoint me, people must say that I got the post through other relationships, how can this be made clear!

古文：且尔知时事浸不佳乎？
现代文：你知道当今的政治越来越糟吗？
English: You know how politics is getting worse and worse these days?

古文：由吾曹贪名位所致耳。 
现代文：这都是由于我们这些当的贪图名位所引起的呀。 
English: It's all caused by those of us who are greedy for fame.

古文：丙辰，以澳为河阳节度使。
现代文：丙辰唐宣宗任命韦澳为河阳节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Wei Ao as the chief envoy of the Heyang Festival.

古文：玼仲郢之子也。
现代文：柳柳仲郢的儿子。
English: He is the son of Liu Liu Zhongyao.

古文：上欲幸华清宫，谏官论之甚切，上为之止。
现代文：唐宣宗想去华清宫，谏官们极力上言加以劝阻，为此唐宣宗放弃了去华清宫游玩的想法。
English: Tang Xuan Zong wanted to go to Huaqing Palace, and the eunuchs tried their best to dissuade him. Therefore, Tang Xuan Zong abandoned the idea of visiting Huaqing Palace.

古文：上乐闻规谏，凡谏官论事、门下封驳，苟合于理，多屈意从之；得大臣章疏，必焚香盥手而读之。
现代文：唐宣宗喜欢听规谏之言，凡是谏官们论事、门下省封驳，只要合乎情理，大都能虚心接受，表示听从。得到重臣所奏上的章疏，必烧香洗手然后阅读。
English: Tang Xuan Zong liked to listen to the words of rules and regulations. Whenever eunuchs discussed matters and subordinate provinces blocked them, as long as it was reasonable, most could humbly accept and obey. If you get the chapters played by the chief minister, you must burn incense, wash your hands and then read.

古文：二月，辛巳，以门下侍郎、同平章事魏谟同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：二月，辛巳，唐宣宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事魏暮挂同平章事衔，充任西川节度使。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Tongping Zhangjiwei, a servant of his disciple, with the title of Tongping Zhangjiwei, to serve as the Nishikawa Setsudoshi.

古文：谟为相，议事于上前，它相或委曲规讽，谟独正言无所避。上每叹曰： 谟绰有祖风，我心重之 。
现代文：魏暮为宰相，在唐宣宗面前议政事时，其他宰相多不敢直言，有时不过委曲婉转地规劝几句，唯独魏暮敢直言无所避讳，唐宣宗每次听到魏暮的直言规讽之后，总是赞叹说： 魏暮有其先祖魏徽的遗风，我从心里敬重他。 
English: As Wei Gou was the prime minister, when discussing political affairs in front of Tang Xuan Zong, other prime ministers mostly dared not to speak out, sometimes only a few words of euphemistic exhortation. Only Wei Gou dared to speak out. Tang Xuan Zong always said with admiration after hearing Wei Gou's outspoken criticism: Wei Gou has the legacy of his ancestor Wei Hui, I respect him from the bottom of my heart.

古文：然竟以刚直为令狐綯所忌而出之。
现代文：然而，竟因为刚直不阿而为令狐所忌，被挤出朝廷外任节度使。
English: However, he was actually shunned by the foxes for not being forthright, and was forced out of the imperial court as an extra-minister of ceremonies.

古文：岭南溪洞蛮屡为侵盗。夏，四月，壬申，以右千牛大将军宋涯为安南、邕管宣慰使。
现代文：岭南地区的溪洞蛮人屡次侵盗；夏季，四月，壬申，唐宣宗任命右千牛大将军宋涯为安南、邕管宣慰使。
English: The Xidong barbarians in the Lingnan region repeatedly invaded and plundered; in the summer, in April, in Jinshin, Tang Xuan Zong appointed the Right Qian Niu General Song Lai as Annan and Xuan Guan Xuan comfort envoy.

古文：五月，乙巳，以涯为安南经略使。
现代文：五月，乙巳，又任命宋涯为安南经略使。
English: In May, Song Lai was also appointed as Annan's special envoy.

古文：容州军乱，逐经略使王球。
现代文：容州发生军乱，驱逐经略使王球。
English: A military conflict broke out in Yeongju, and the warlord Wang Quan was expelled.

古文：六月，癸巳，以涯为容管经略使。
现代文：六月，癸巳，唐宣宗任命宋涯为容管经略使。
English: In June, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Song Lai as the vice-minister of finance.

古文：甲午，立皇子灌为卫王，澭为广王。
现代文：甲午，唐宣宗立皇子李灌为卫王，李为广王。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Tang Xuan Zongli's son Li Guan became the king of Wei, and Li became the king of Guang.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，以兵部侍郎、判度支萧鄴同平章事，仍判度支。
现代文：秋季七月，庚子，唐宣宗任命兵部侍郎、判度支萧邺为同平章事，依旧掌判度支。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Gaozhi and Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Xiao Yao, the attendant of the military department and the judge, to be the co-equal magistrate, and he was still in charge of the judge.

古文：教坊祝汉贞，滑稽敏给，上或指物使之口占，摹咏有如宿构，由是宠冠诸优。
现代文：宫廷教坊里有一个优人名祝汉贞，为人滑稽敏捷，唐宣宗有时随意指着某一物件，让祝汉贞当场表演口戏，祝汉贞即照着唐宣宗所指物编造故事笑话，口若悬河，就象早已编造好了一样，使听者捧腹大笑，于是得到唐宗的喜爱，受宠超过其他各位伎优。
English: There was a talented person named Zhu Han Zhen in the palace's teaching hall. She was funny and quick-witted. Emperor Tang Xuan Zong would sometimes point at an object at random and ask Zhu Han Zhen to perform oral play on the spot. Zhu Han Zhen would then make up a story joke according to the object pointed out by Emperor Tang Xuan Zong. Her mouth would be full of water, as if she had already made it up. This made the listeners laugh out loud. As a result, she was loved by Emperor Tang Zong and favored more than other talented people.

古文：一日，在上前抵掌诙谐，颇及外事。上正色谓之曰： 我畜养尔曹，正供戏笑耳，岂得辄预朝政邪！ 
现代文：一天，祝汉贞又在唐宣宗面前拍着手掌表演诙谐戏，所说口戏涉及到许多外朝政事，唐宣宗马上正色训斥祝汉贞： 我养你们这群优人，只是要你演戏以供我嬉笑休息罢了，你岂得随意干预朝政呢！ 
English: One day, Zhu Hanzhen again clapped her hands in front of Tang Xuanzong to perform a witty play. The spoken play involved many foreign political affairs. Tang Xuanzong immediately reprimanded Zhu Hanzhen: I raise you fine people, I just want you to act for me to laugh and rest. How dare you interfere in the affairs of the court!

古文：自是疏之。
现代文：从此以后即对祝汉贞疏远。
English: I've been estranged from him ever since.

古文：会其子坐赃，杖死，流汉贞于天德军。
现代文：正值祝汉贞的儿子因贪赃判杖刑被乱棍打死，唐宣宗即将祝汉贞流放于天德军。
English: It was the time when Zhu Hanzhen's son was beaten to death with a club for corruption, and Tang Xuanzong was about to exile Zhu Hanzhen to Tiande Army.

古文：乐工罗程，善琵琶，自武宗朝已得幸。上素晓音律，尤有宠。
现代文：宫廷乐工罗程，善于弹奏琵琶，自唐武宗朝已得到宠幸；唐宣宗平素通晓音律，对罗程更加宠爱。
English: The court musician Luo Cheng, who was good at playing the lute, had been favored since the Tang Wusong Dynasty; the Tang Xuan Zong was familiar with musical rhythms and loved Luo Cheng even more.

古文：程恃恩暴横，以睚眦杀人，系京兆狱。
现代文：罗程依恃皇帝的恩宠暴虐专横，有人对他瞪一眼，就将人杀死，因此被京兆府逮捕入狱。
English: Luo Cheng, by the grace of the emperor, was tyrannical and domineering. If someone glanced at him, he would kill the person. As a result, Luo was arrested and imprisoned by the Beijing Zhao Prefecture.

古文：诸乐工欲为之请，因上幸后苑奏乐，乃设虚坐，置琵琶，而罗拜于庭，且泣。
现代文：宫廷诸乐工想请求唐宣宗赦罗程，待唐宣宗到后苑听音乐演奏时，为罗程设一虚坐，放上罗程的琵琶，并一起跪拜于庭前，哭泣不已。
English: The court musicians wanted to ask Tang Xuan Zong to pardon Luo Cheng. When Tang Xuan Zong came to the backyard to listen to the music performance, they set up a false seat for Luo Cheng, put Luo Cheng's lute, and kneeled together in front of the court, weeping.

古文：上问其故，对曰： 罗程负陛下，万死，然臣等惜其天下绝艺，不复得奉宴游矣！ 
现代文：唐宣宗问诸乐工为何哭泣，乐工们回答说： 罗程辜负了陛下的恩情，罪该万死，但我们可惜罗程的琵琶演奏是天下无双的绝艺，恐怕以后在陛下的宴会和游乐中，再也听不到这样精美的表演了。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked the musicians why they were crying, and the musicians replied: Luo Cheng Nang betrayed the grace of His Majesty. The crime deserves death, but we are sorry that Luo Cheng's pipa playing is a unique art in the world. I am afraid that we will never hear such a beautiful performance again at His Majesty's banquets and amusements.

古文：上曰： 汝曹所惜者罗程艺，朕所惜者高祖、太宗法。 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 你们可惜的是罗程的琵琶演奏技艺，朕所珍惜的是高祖、太宗留下的法律。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: What you deplore is Luo Cheng's pipa playing skill, what I cherish is the law left by Gao Zu and Taizong.

古文：竟杖杀之。
现代文：最后，罗程被判处杖刑，被乱棍打死。
English: In the end, Luo Cheng was sentenced to the cane and beaten to death.

古文：八月，成德节度使王绍鼎薨。
现代文：八月，成德节度使王绍鼎去世。
English: In August, the Chengde Festival caused the death of Wang Shao Ding.

古文：绍鼎沉湎无度，好登楼弹射人以为乐，众欲逐之。会病薨，军中立其弟节度副命名绍懿。
现代文：王绍鼎沈缅于酒色，狂饮无度，喜欢登楼台用弓弹射楼下路人，作为娱乐，部下兵众企图驱逐他；正好王绍鼎得病死，成德军立他的弟弟节度副使王绍懿主掌军政。
English: Wang Shao Ding was a heavy drinker. He liked to go up to the balcony and shoot down passers-by with a bow and arrow. As entertainment, his subordinate soldiers tried to expel him. Wang Shao Ding died of illness, and the German army put his brother, the deputy envoy Wang Shao Jun, in charge of military affairs.

古文：戊寅，以绍懿为成德留后。
现代文：戊寅，唐宣宗任命王绍懿为成德留后。
English: Wu Yin, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Wang Shaoqi as Chengde's successor.

古文：九月，辛酉，以太子太师卢钧同平章事，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：九月，辛酉，唐宣宗任命太子太师卢钧以同平章事衔，充任山南西道节度使。
English: In September, Emperor Hsinchu and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Prince and Grand Master Lu Wei to the title of Tongpingzhang, and he served as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：冬，十月，己巳，以秦成防御使李承勋为泾原节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，己巳，唐宣宗任命秦成防御使李承勋为泾原节度使。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Qincheng Defense Minister Li Chengxun as the commander of the Shenyuan Festival.

古文：承勋，光弼之孙也。
现代文：李承勋是李光弼的孙子。
English: Li Chengxun is the grandson of Li Guangyao.

古文：先是，吐蕃酉长尚延心以河、渭二州部落来降，拜武卫将军。承勋利其羊马之富，诱之入凤林关，居秦州之西。
现代文：先前，吐蕃酋长尚延心率河州、谓州两州的部落归降唐朝，被任为武卫将军；李承勋贪图尚延心部众的羊马财富，将尚延心引诱至凤林关，居住到秦州以西地区。
English: Previously, the chief of Tubo, Shang Yanxin, led the tribes of Hezhou and Zhouzhou to surrender to the Tang Dynasty and was appointed as the general of Wuwei; Li Chengxun coveted the sheep and horse wealth of Shang Yanxin's followers, lured Shang Yanxin to Fenglin Pass, and lived in the west of Qinzhou.

古文：承勋与诸将谋执延心，诬云谋叛，尽掠其财，徙其众于荒远。延心知之，因承勋军宴，坐中谓承勋曰： 河、渭二州，土旷人稀，因以饥疫。
现代文：李承勋与部下诸将又谋划逮捕尚延心，诬称他谋叛，将他的财产全部抢来，并将他的部众迁徙于荒凉的边外地区；尚延心知道李承勋的阴谋，有一次参加李承勋的军宴，于坐席之中对李承勋说； 河州、渭州两州之地，土地空旷，人烟稀少，因此常闹饥荒瘟疫。
English: Li Chengxun and his subordinate generals also plotted to arrest Shang Yanxin, falsely accusing him of plotting treason, robbing him of all his property, and relocating his subordinates to desolate outlying areas; Shang Yanxin knew Li Chengxun's plot, once attended Li Chengxun's military banquet, and said to Li Chengxun in the middle of the table: In the two states of Hezhou and Zhangzhou, the land is empty and sparsely populated, so there is often famine and plague.

古文：唐人多内徙三川，吐蕃皆远遁于叠宕之西，二千里间，寂无人烟。
现代文：唐朝人多向内地平凉川、蔚如川、落门川这三川地区迁徙，吐蕃人也都远远地逃遁于叠宕以西地区，致使二千里地间，寂静而无人烟。
English: The people of the Tang Dynasty mostly migrated inland to the Sanchuan region, including the Pingliang River, Uirugawa River, and Lomon River, and the Tubo people also fled far away to the west of the stacked mountains, resulting in two thousand miles of land, silent and uninhabited.

古文：延心欲入见天子，请尽帅部众分徙内地，为唐百姓，使西边永无扬尘之警，其功亦不愧于张义潮矣。 
现代文：尚延心我想入朝廷去见大唐天子，请求率领部众分别迁徙于内地，成为唐朝的百姓，使唐朝的西部边境永远不再出现战马扬尘的警报，这样的功劳也许不会亚于张义潮吧。 
English: I still long to go to the imperial court to see the Great Tang Emperor, and ask him to lead his followers to migrate to the inland and become the people of the Tang Dynasty, so that the western border of the Tang Dynasty will never again be alarmed by the dust of war horses. Such a merit may not be inferior to Zhang Yichao.

古文：承勋欲自有其功，犹豫未许。延心复曰： 延心既入朝，落部内徙，但惜秦州无所复恃耳。 
现代文：李承勋企图将此功劳归于自己，犹豫不决，未给尚延心以许诺，尚延心又说： 我既然准备入朝廷，将部落迁徙到内地，只是可惜秦州不再有所依恃了。 
English: Li Chengxun tried to take the credit for this achievement to himself, hesitated, and did not make a promise to Shang Yanxin. Shang Yanxin also said: Since I am preparing to enter the imperial court and migrate the tribe to the mainland, it is just a pity that Qinzhou no longer has a foothold.

古文：承勋与诸将相顾默然。
现代文：李承勋听后与部下诸将面面相觑，无话可说。
English: After hearing this, Li Chengxun and his subordinate generals looked at each other, speechless.

古文：明日，诸将言于承勋曰： 明公首开营田，置使府，拥万兵，仰给度支，将士无战守之劳，有耕市之利。
现代文：第二天，诸将向李承勋上言说： 您首先在秦州开置营田，设置防御使府，拥有军队万人，由朝廷度支发给军饷，我们将士没有作战守御的劳苦，却能收到耕垦交易的厚利。
English: On the next day, they all addressed Li Chengxun, saying: You first set up a camp in Qinzhou, set up a defense embassy, have an army of ten thousand people, and are paid by the imperial court to the military. Our soldiers do not have the labor of fighting and defending, but they can receive the profits of plowing and trading.

古文：若从延心之谋，则西陲无事，朝廷必罢使府，省戍兵，还以秦州隶凤翔，吾属无所复望矣。 
现代文：如果听从尚延心的谋议，就会使西部边陲无战事，朝廷必定要罢除防御使府，裁省戍边军队，将秦州归还凤翔镇领辖，我们就再也没有什么希望了。 
English: If we were to listen to Shang Lianxin's advice, there would be no war on the western border. The imperial court would have to dismiss the defense envoys, reduce the provincial border troops, and return Qinzhou to the jurisdiction of Fengxiang Town. We would have no hope.

古文：承勋以为然，即奏延心为河、渭都游奕使，使统其众居之。
现代文：李承勋认为说得有理，即向唐宣宗上奏，请求任命尚延心为河、谓两州都游弈使，让他统率其部众居住于这两州地方。
English: Li Chengxun thought that this was reasonable, so he appealed to Tang Xuan Zong and requested the appointment of Shang Yanxin as a river, that is, an envoy to both states, and let him lead his followers to live in the two states.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事郑朗以疾辞位。壬申，以朗为太子太师。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事郑朗因患疾病要求辞去相位；壬申，唐宣宗任命郑朗为太子太师。
English: Zheng Lang, the attendant of Zhongshu and Tongping Zhangji, asked to resign from the position due to illness; in Jinshin, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Zheng Lang as the prince's teacher.

古文：上晚节颇好神仙，遣中使迎道士轩辕集于罗浮山。
现代文：唐宣宗晚年很迷信神仙道教，派遣宦官充当使者到罗浮山迎接道士轩辕集。
English: In his later years, Tang Xuanzong was very superstitious about Taoism and sent eunuchs to act as emissaries to Mount Luo to meet the Taoist priest Xuan Xuan.

古文：王端章册立回鹘可汗，道为黑车子所塞，不至而还。
现代文：王端章被派往安西册立回鹘可汗，因道路被黑车子所堵塞，没有到达目的地而返回。
English: Wang Duanzhang was sent to Anxi to set up a Hui Khan, but because the road was blocked by a black car, he did not reach his destination and returned.

古文：辛卯，贬端章贺州司马。
现代文：辛卯，唐宣宗将王端章贬为贺州司马。
English: However, Tang Xuan Zong demoted Wang Duanzhang to Hezhou Sima.

古文：十一月，壬寅，以成德军留后王绍懿为节度使。
现代文：十一月，壬寅，唐宣宗任命成德军留后王绍懿为节度使。
English: In November, in Ren'in, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Wang Shaoqi, who had remained behind in the German army, as the festival envoy.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中十二年春，正月，以康王傅、分司王式为安南都护、经略使。
现代文：十二月，萧邺被罢去判度支的职务。大中十二年春季，正月，唐宣宗任命康王傅、分司东都王式为安南都护、经略使。
English: In the spring of the 12th year of the Great Middle School, the first month of the year, Tang Xuanzong appointed Kang Wangfu, the sub-director of Dongduo Wangshi, as Annan tutelary and economic envoy.

古文：式有才略，至交趾，树芀木为栅，可支数十年。
现代文：王式有雄才大略，到达交趾，用棘树木扎栅寨，其牢固可以支持数十年。
English: The royal style has a majestic outline, reaches the intersecting points, and uses the thorns of trees to build a fence, which can be firmly supported for decades.

古文：深堑其外，泄城中水，堑外植竹，寇不能冒。
现代文：栅寨外掘深壕堑，可将城中的水排泄出去，壕堑外种植竹子，使贼寇不能冒犯。
English: Dig a deep trench outside the fence, and the water in the city can be drained out. Bamboo can be planted outside the trench, so that thieves and robbers can not offend.

古文：选教士卒甚锐。
现代文：又精选并教练士兵，使军队勇锐无比。
English: He also selected and trained soldiers, making the army very brave.

古文：顷之，南蛮大至，屯锦田步，去交趾半日程。
现代文：不久。
English: Soon.

古文：式意思安闲，遣译逾之，中其要害，蛮一夕引去，遣人谢曰： 我自执叛獠耳，非为寇也。 
现代文：南诏蛮军来侵，距离交趾只有半天的路程；王式意态安闲，派遣翻译往南诏军中，告谕唐军早已作好防御准备，于蛮军不利，南诏蛮军闻讯后在一个夜间即退走，并派人向王式道谢说： 我们是来追捕叛乱的獠族人的，并不是要侵寇唐朝境土。 
English: When the Nanzhao barbarian army invaded, it was only half a day's journey away from Jiaozuo. Wang Xi was in a relaxed mood and sent an interpreter to the Nanzhao army to tell them that the Tang army had already made defensive preparations and was unfavorable to the barbarian army. After hearing the news, the Nanzhao barbarian army retreated in the night and sent a person to thank Wang Xi and say: We came to hunt down the rebellious Yi people, not to invade the territory of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：安南都校罗行恭，久专府政，麾下精兵二千，都护中军才羸兵数百。式至，杖其背，黜于边徼。
现代文：安南都护府的都将罗行恭，专制府政已很久，麾下有精兵二千人，都护府的中军才有弱兵几百人；王式来到安南，用棍杖打罗行恭的背，以处罚他的专横，并将他罢黜到边境地方。
English: Luo Xingxiong, the governor of the Annan Capital Protectorate, has been in power for a long time. He has 2,000 elite soldiers under his command, while the Chinese troops of the Capital Protectorate only have a few hundred weak soldiers. The king came to Annan, hit Luo Xingxiong's back with a stick to punish his arrogance, and sent him to the border area.

古文：初，户部侍郎、判度支刘彖为翰林学士，上器重之。
现代文：起初，户部侍郎、判度支刘为翰林学士，唐宣宗对他十分器重。
English: At first, the head of the household and the judge Liu Zhizhi was a scholar of Hanlin, and Tang Xuan Zong was very important to him.

古文：时为河东节度使。手诏征入朝，彖奏发河东，外人始知之。
现代文：这时刘任河东节度使，被唐宣宗以手诏征召回朝廷，刘向唐宣宗上奏，告知已从河东出发，朝外百官才知道这件事。
English: At this time, Liu, who was an envoy of the Hedong Festival, was summoned back to the imperial court by Tang Xuan Zong with a handshake. Liu reported to Tang Xuan Zong and informed him that he had set out from Hedong. Only a hundred officials outside the imperial court knew about this.

古文：戊午，以彖同平章事。
现代文：戊午，唐宣宗任命刘为同平章事。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Liu as Tongping.

古文：彖，仁轨之五世孙也。
现代文：刘是刘仁轨第五世孙。
English: Liu is the fifth-generation grandson of Liu Renlu.

古文：彖与崔慎由议政于上前，慎由曰： 惟当甄别品流，上酬万一。 
现代文：刘与崔慎由唐宣宗面前议论政事，崔慎由说； 应该甄别百官的等级辈份，皇上据此赐与职位。 
English: Liu and Cui Sheng discussed political affairs in front of Tang Xuan Zong, and Cui Sheng Yu said; It is necessary to screen the hierarchical ranks of officials, and the emperor granted positions accordingly.

古文：彖曰： 昔王夷甫祖尚浮华，妄分流品，致中原丘虚。
现代文：刘说： 西晋时王夷甫祖尚浮华，妄将官员分为清浊流品，结果演成大祸，使中原地区变成了废丘。
English: Liu said: In the Western Jin Dynasty, Wang Yifu's ancestor was vain, and he arbitrarily divided officials into high-ranking and low-ranking ones. The result was a great disaster, turning the Central Plains into a wasteland.

古文：今盛明之朝，当循名责实，使百官各称其职；而遽以品流为先，臣未知致理之日。 
现代文：今天是明君在位，盛明之朝，应当根据实际才能任命官职，使百官能各称其职；如果为政以甄别百官的品流为先务，我不知道哪一天才能使国家得到治理，安享太平！ 
English: Today, the Ming Emperor is on the throne. In the Ming Dynasty, officials should be appointed according to their actual abilities, so that all officials can perform their duties. If the government takes the screening of the moral character of all officials as a priority, I don't know when the country can be governed and enjoy peace!

古文：慎由无以对。
现代文：崔慎由无言以对。
English: Cui Shen was speechless.

古文：轩辕集至长安，上召入禁中，问曰： 长生可学乎？ 
现代文：道士轩辕集来到长安，唐宣宗将他召入宫禁中，问道： 长生不死可以学得到吗？ 
English: When the Taoist priest Xuan Zhi Ji came to Chang'an, Tang Xuan Zong called him into the palace and asked: Can immortality be learned?

古文：对曰： 王者屏欲而崇德，则自然受天遐福，何处更求长生？ 
现代文：轩辕集回答说： 为帝王的人只要屏弃欲念，崇尚道德，就自然会有长命延年的福气，哪里还有什么地方能求得长生不死呢！ 
English: Xuan Zhi Ji replied: As long as people who are emperors abandon their desires and uphold morality, they will naturally have the blessing of long life and longevity. Where else can they seek immortality?

古文：留数月，坚求还山，乃遣之。
现代文：留居宫禁几个月后，轩辕集坚决要求返回罗浮山，唐宣宗于是放他回去。
English: A few months after he was banned from staying in the palace, Xuan Zhiji insisted on returning to Luofu Mountain, so Tang Xuan Zong let him go back.

古文：二月，甲子朔，罢公卿朝拜光陵及忌日行香，悉移宫人于诸陵。
现代文：二月，甲子朔，唐宣宗罢除公卿大臣朝拜唐穆宗光陵的礼仪，以及唐穆宗忌日到其陵墓起居行香之礼，又命令将全部宫人移居于诸皇帝的陵墓前居住，朝夕供奉。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty revoked the etiquette of court nobles and ministers paying homage to the mausoleum of Emperor Muzong of the Tang Dynasty, as well as the etiquette of visiting the mausoleum of Emperor Muzong of the Tang Dynasty on the day of his death, and ordered all courtiers to move to live in front of the mausoleums of emperors, and to worship in the morning and evening.

古文：戊辰，以中书侍郎、同平章事崔慎由为东川节度使。
现代文：戊辰，唐宣宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事崔慎由为东川节度使。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Zhongshu Jirong and Tongping Zhangji Cui Shanyu as Dongchuan Festival envoys.

古文：上欲御楼肆赦，令狐綯曰： 御楼所费甚广，事须有名，且赦不可数。 
现代文：唐宣宗想登丹凤楼宽赦罪犯，令狐说： 登楼大赦，军士庶民都要有恩给，费用太大，而且做这样一件影响巨大的事，应该有正当的名份；何况大赦的事不可多。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong wanted to go to the Danfeng Tower to pardon criminals. Ling Xiu said: "To go to the tower for amnesty, the common people must be grateful, the cost is too high, and to do such a thing with great influence, there should be a legitimate name; moreover, there are not many amnesties.

古文：上不悦，曰： 遣朕于何得名！ 
现代文：唐宣宗听后很不高兴，说： 对于朕来讲，登楼大赦以什么名份为最合适！ 
English: Tang Xuanzong was very unhappy after listening, saying: For me, what is the most appropriate name for the amnesty?

古文：慎由曰： 陛下未建储宫，四海属望。
现代文：崔慎由说： 陛下至今还没有建立储宫，安排皇位继承人是四海之内广大臣民所日夜盼望的事。
English: Cui Shinyu said: His Majesty has not yet built a storage palace, and arranging the heir to the throne is a matter of hope for the people's government of Guangdian in the four seas.

古文：若举此礼，虽郊祀亦可，况于御楼！ 
现代文：如果举行册立皇太子的典礼，就是举行郊祀典礼也可以，更何况于登楼大赦呢！ 
English: If a ceremony is held to register the crown prince, it is also possible to hold a suburban ceremony, not to mention the general amnesty!

古文：时上饵方士药，已觉躁渴，而外人未知，疑忌方深，闻之，俯首不复言。
现代文：当时唐宣宗吃方士所炼的丹药，内心已感觉燥热饥渴，而外人并不知道，唐宣宗对臣下的猜忌疑虑已经很深重，听到崔慎由的话，低头不再说话。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong ate the herbal medicine made by the herbalist, and his heart already felt hot and thirsty, but outsiders did not know that Tang Xuan Zong's suspicions and doubts about his subjects were already very deep. When he heard Cui Shanyu's words, he bowed his head and stopped talking.

古文：旬日，慎由罢相。
现代文：几天后，崔慎由即被罢除宰相位。
English: A few days later, Choi Shin Yew was ousted as prime minister.

古文：勃海王彝震卒。
现代文：勃海王李彝震去世。
English: Bo Hai King Li Yucheng passed away.

古文：癸未，立其弟虔晃为勃海王。
现代文：癸未，唐宣宗立彝震的弟弟李虔晃为勃海王。
English: At that time, Li Qianhao, the younger brother of Tang Xuan Zong's son Zhen Zhen, became the king of Bohai.

古文：夏，四月，以右街使、附马都尉刘异为邠宁节度使。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐宣宗任命右街使、驸马都尉刘异为宁节度使。
English: In the summer, in April, Tang Xuan Zong appointed the Right Street Envoy and the Horse Captain Liu Yi as the Ning Festival Envoy.

古文：异尚安平公主，上妹也。
现代文：刘异所娶安平公主，是唐宣宗的妹妹。
English: Liu Yi married Princess Anping, the younger sister of Emperor Tang Xuanzong.

古文：庚子，岭南都将王令寰作乱，囚节度使杨发。
现代文：庚子，岭南都将王令环发动叛乱，将节度使杨发囚禁。
English: Geng Zi and Lingnan launched a rebellion against Wang Linghuan and imprisoned Yang Fa.

古文：发，苏州人也。
现代文：杨发是苏州人。
English: Yang Fa is from Suzhou.

古文：戊申，以兵部侍郎、盐铁转运使夏侯孜同平章事。
现代文：戊申，唐宣宗任命兵部侍郎、盐铁转运使夏侯孜为同平章事。
English: In addition, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed the attendant of the military department and the commander of the salt and iron transportation to be the same rank.

古文：五月，丙寅，工部尚书、同平章事刘彖薨。
现代文：五月，丙寅，工部尚书、同平章事刘去世。
English: In May, Cui Yin, Shang Shu and Tong Ping Zhang of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce passed away.

古文：彖病笃，犹手疏论事，上皆惜之。
现代文：刘病重之时，仍然给唐宣宗手写疏奏议论政事，唐宣宗对他的死深感痛惜。
English: When Liu was gravely ill, he still wrote to Tang Xuanzong to discuss political affairs. Tang Xuanzong deeply regretted his death.

古文：以右金吾大将军李燧为岭南节度使，已命中使赐之节，给事中萧亻放封还制书。上方奏乐，不暇别召中使，使优人追之，节及燧门而返。
现代文：唐宣宗将任命右金吾大将军李燧为岭南节度使，已经命令宦官中使赐给李燧岭南节度使的符节，但所颁诏书被给事中萧封驳退还；当时唐宣宗正在奏乐游玩，没有闲暇再召宦官中使执行任务，即派遣身边的一名伎优去追回符节，结果，岭南节度使的符节在刚送到李燧的家门口时被追回。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty had ordered the eunuch middle envoy to give the rune festival to the eunuch middle envoy to the Lingnan Festival, but the issued edict was rejected and returned; at that time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty was playing music and did not have time to recall the eunuch middle envoy to carry out the task, that is, to send one of the eunuchs around him to recover the rune festival. As a result, the rune festival of the eunuch middle envoy to the Lingnan Festival was recovered when it was just delivered to the front door of Li Xi's home.

古文：亻放，俛之从父弟也。
现代文：萧是萧的堂弟。
English: Xiao is Xiao's cousin.

古文：辛巳，以泾原节度使李承勋为岭南节度使，发邻道兵讨乱者，平之。
现代文：辛已，唐宣宗任命泾源节度使李承勋为岭南节度使，调发与岭南相邻的数道军队，征讨王令环的叛乱，最后将岭南平定。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Xuan Yuan to be the envoy to Lingnan, and dispatched several armies to fight the rebellion of Wang Linghuan, and finally subdued Lingnan.

古文：是日，湖南军乱，都将石载顺等逐观察使韩悰，杀都押牙王桂直。
现代文：这一天，湖南又发生军乱，都将石载顺等人将湖南观察使韩驱逐出境，杀死都押牙王桂直。
English: On this day, there was another military conflict in Hunan. Shi Jishun and others expelled Han from Hunan and killed King Guizhong of Doushi.

古文：琮待将士不以礼，故及于难。
现代文：韩不以礼对待部下将士，所以遭此动乱。
English: Han did not treat his subordinate soldiers with courtesy, so he suffered this turmoil.

古文：六月，丙申，江西军乱，都将毛鹤逐观察使郑宪。
现代文：六月，丙申，江西发生军乱，都将毛鹤将江西观察使郑宪驱逐出境。
English: In June, a military conflict broke out in Bishen, Jiangxi Province, and Mao Zedong ordered Zheng Xian, the leader of the Jiangxi Observer Corps, to leave the country.

古文：初，安南都护李涿为政贪暴，强市蛮中马牛，一头止与盐一斗。又杀蛮酋杜存诚。
现代文：起初，安南都护府都护李涿为政贪鄙暴虐，强迫蛮人将马牛卖给他，一头马或一头牛只给盐一斗，又杀死蛮人酋长杜存诚。
English: At first, Annan tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutelary tutel

古文：群蛮怨怒，导南诏侵盗边境。
现代文：广大蛮人怨恨愤怒，于是勾结南诏王国的军队侵犯唐朝边境。
English: The majority of savages were resentful and angry, so they colluded with the army of the Nanzhao Kingdom to invade the border of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：峰州有林西原，旧有防冬兵六千，其旁七绾洞蛮，其酋长曰李由独，常助中国戍守，输租赋。
现代文：安南都护府所辖峰州有林西原，原有防冬兵六千人，在林西原旁边有七绾洞蛮，有酋长名叫李由独，经常协助中国戍守边境，并向唐朝州县地方官输纳租赋。
English: Fengzhou, which is under the jurisdiction of the Annam Capital Protection Prefecture, has Linxi Plain, and the original winter soldiers number six thousand. Next to Linxi Plain, there are seven caves. There is a chief named Li Yudou, who often assists China in guarding the border, and pays rent to the local officials of Tang Chaozhou County.

古文：知峰州者言于涿，请罢戍兵，专委由独防遏。
现代文：掌峰州行政的地方官向李涿上言，请求罢去林西原防冬的六千戍兵，把戍守边境防止蛮寇的责任委交给李由独。
English: The local official in charge of the administration of Fengzhou appealed to Li Yudu, requesting that the six thousand soldiers guarding the winter in Linxiyuan be removed, and that the responsibility committee for guarding the border and preventing barbarian invaders be handed over to Li Yudu.

古文：于是由独势孤，不能自立，南诏拓东节度使以书诱之，以甥妻其子，补拓东押牙，由独遂帅其众臣于南诏。
现代文：李由独由于势力孤单，不能自立，南诏王国的拓东节度使给李由独写信，劝诱他叛唐，并将外甥女嫁给李由独的儿子，补任李由独为南诏王国的拓东押牙，李由独于是率领其部众向南诏王称称臣。
English: As Li Yudu was powerless and unable to stand on his own, Tuodong Jiedu of the Nanzhao Kingdom sent a letter to Li Yudu to persuade him to defect to the Tang Dynasty. He also married his niece to Li Yudu's son, and appointed Li Yudu as Tuodong Jiedu of the Nanzhao Kingdom. Li Yudu then led his subordinates to offer praise to the Nanzhao King.

古文：自是安南始有蛮患。是月，蛮寇安南。
现代文：从此以后安南开始有了蛮患；这一月，南诏蛮军侵寇安南。
English: From then on, Annan began to be plagued by barbarians; this month, the Nanzhao barbarian army invaded Annan.

古文：秋，七月，丙寅，宣州都将康全泰作乱，逐观察使郑薰。薰奔扬州。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙寅，宣州都将康全泰发动叛乱，将宣州观察使郑薰驱逐出境；郑熏逃奔到扬州。
English: In the autumn, in July, both Hsin Yin and Xuan Zhou launched a rebellion against Kang Quan Tai, and expelled Zheng Huan from Xuan Zhou; Zheng Huan fled to Yangzhou.

古文：丁卯，右补阙内供奉张潜上疏，以为： 籓府代移之际，皆奏仓库蓄积之数，以羡馀多为课绩，朝廷亦因而甄奖。
现代文：丁卯，右补阙内供奉张潜向唐宣宗上疏，认为： 藩镇使府每当主政官按期调任它官的时候，都得向朝廷奏告使府仓库所蓄积的钱粮数目，将规定数额之外的余额多作为吏部考课的治绩，朝廷也以此来进行甄别奖励。
English: Ding Wu, the right-hand compiler of the Inner Canon of Zhang Qian to Tang Xuan Zong Shang Shu, believed that: Whenever the chief political officer of the province and town was transferred to another official on schedule, he had to report to the court the amount of money and grain accumulated in the warehouse of the envoy, and the balance beyond the specified amount was mostly used as the performance of the cadre examination, and the court also used this to screen and reward.

古文：窃惟籓府财赋，所出有常，苟非赋敛过差，及停废将士，减削衣粮，则羡馀何从而致！
现代文：我想藩镇使府的财赋，所出有常数，如果不是对所管下的民众聚敛过多，以及停废所部将士的军饷，减扣士兵的衣，那朝廷所定税额之外的余额从什么地方而来！
English: I think that there is a constant amount of money coming out of the financial endowment of the hanzhong and township governments, and if it is not due to the fact that they collect too much from the people under their control, as well as the fact that the military pay of the officers of the government departments has been abolished, and the clothing of the soldiers has been deducted, then where does the balance come from in addition to the amount of tax set by the court!

古文：比来南方诸镇数有不宁，皆此故也。
现代文：近来南方几个藩镇常有不安宁，都是这个缘故。
English: This is the reason why there has been a lot of unrest in several southern towns recently.

古文：一朝有变，所蓄之财悉遭剽掠。又发兵致讨，费用百倍，然则朝廷竟有何利！
现代文：一旦发生变故，使府仓库所积蓄的财富全部遭到抢劫，而朝廷又调发军队去讨伐，所需费用更是使府仓库所畜财物的百倍，这们来看对朝廷又有什么利益！
English: In the event of a disaster, all the wealth accumulated in the government warehouse would be looted, and the court would send troops to fight. The cost required would be a hundred times that of the livestock and property in the government warehouse. What benefit would this be to the court!

古文：乞自今籓府长吏，不增赋敛，不减粮赐，独节游宴，省浮费，能致羡馀者，然后赏之。 
现代文：希望自今以后，凡藩镇使府主政官吏，不必增加对管内民众的赋敛，不准减少所税将士的赐粮，并且节制府帅长官的游宴之费，省下一切浮华费用，能这样在朝廷现定的赋税数额之外而有余额，当然可以得到奖赏。 
English: It is hoped that from now on, all the leading government officials of the provinces and towns will not need to increase the subsidies to the people within their jurisdiction, will not be allowed to reduce the amount of tax paid, and will control the cost of the governor's banquet and save all the flashy expenses. If they can have a surplus in addition to the amount of tax currently set by the court, they can of course be rewarded.

古文：上嘉纳之。容管奏都虞候来正谋叛，经略使宋涯捕斩之。
现代文：唐宣宗对张潜的疏奏表示同意，并对他的建议加以采纳。容管军奏告朝廷，都虞候来正阴谋策动叛乱，被经略使宋涯拘捕并斩首。
English: Tang Xuan Zong agreed to Zhang Xuan's suggestion and his suggestion was adopted. Rong Guan Jun reported to the imperial court that the warlords were plotting to instigate a rebellion, and he was arrested and beheaded by the warlord Song Ya.

古文：初，忠武军精兵皆以黄冒首，号黄头军。
现代文：起初，忠武军的精兵都头戴黄帽，号称黄头军。
English: At first, the elite soldiers of the Loyalist Army all wore yellow hats, and were known as the Yellow Army.

古文：李承勋以百人定岭南，宋涯使麾下效其服装，亦定容州。
现代文：李承勋率黄头军一百人平定岭南，宋涯让麾下精兵仿效忠武黄头军的服装，也平定了容州。
English: Li Chengxun led a hundred soldiers of the Yellow Army to pacify Lingnan, and Song Lai let his elite soldiers imitate the clothing of the loyal Yellow Army, and also pacified Yongzhou.

古文：安南有恶民，屡为乱，闻之，惊曰： 黄头军度海来袭我矣！ 
现代文：安南有一群顽固刁民，屡次发动叛乱，听说宋涯率黄头军平定了容州，惊慌失措地呼喊： 黄头军渡海来袭击我们了！ 
English: Annan had a group of stubborn peasants who repeatedly launched rebellions. When he heard that Song Ya and the Yellow Army had pacified Yongzhou, he panicked and shouted: The Yellow Army has crossed the sea to attack us!

古文：相与夜围交趾城，鼓噪： 愿送都护北归，我须此城御黄头军。 
现代文：于是一同在夜晚围住交趾城，大声说： 我们愿送都护回到北方去，这座城须留给我们抵御黄头军。 
English: So they surrounded the city of Koji at night and shouted: "We are willing to send the capital guard back to the north. This city must be left for us to defend against the Yellow Army."

古文：王式方食，或劝出避之。
现代文：安南都护王式正在吃饭，有人劝他出城躲避一下。
English: Annan was having dinner, and someone advised him to leave the city for a while.

古文：式曰： 吾足一动，则城溃矣。 
现代文：王式说： 我的脚只要一动，交趾城就要被攻破了。 
English: The king said, "If I so much as move my foot, the city of Koto will be breached."

古文：徐食毕，擐甲，率左右登城，建大将旗，坐而责之，敌者反走。明日，悉捕诛之。
现代文：他慢慢地将饭吃完，然后披甲，率左右将佐登上城楼，将大将旗挂好，坐在帅椅上怒声责备城下叛民全部逮捕，一齐处死。
English: He slowly finished his meal, then put on his armor, led his troops up to the castle tower, hung up the general's flag, sat on a handsome chair and angrily accused all the rebels under the castle of being arrested and executed together.

古文：有杜守澄者，自齐、梁以来拥众据溪洞，不可制。
现代文：有一个叫杜守澄的人，其家族自南朝齐、梁以来拥宗族部众占据溪洞，官府不能制服。
English: There is a man named Du Shoucheng, whose family has been occupying Xidong since the Southern Qi and Liang dynasties, and the government cannot subdue him.

古文：式离间其亲党，守澄走死。
现代文：王式采取离间杜氏宗族亲党的办法，使杜守澄逃走并被打死。
English: Wang Shi took the method of creating a rift between the Du clan and the pro-Party members, causing Du Shoucheng to flee and be killed.

古文：安南饥乱相继，六年无上供，军中犒赏。式始修贡赋，飨将士。
现代文：安南地区由于饥荒和变乱相继，有六年时间没有向京师供输钱帛，都护府军中也没有犒赏，王式开始修复贡赋，犒赏将士，使客内安宁。
English: Due to successive famines and upheavals, the Annan region did not provide money to the Beijing division for six years, and there was no reward for the troops of the Capital Protectorate. The king began to repair the tribute, reward the soldiers, and make the guests calm.

古文：占城、真腊皆复通使。
现代文：占城国、真腊国也都重新派来使者与唐朝通使。
English: Zhancheng and Jinla also sent new envoys and envoys from the Tang Dynasty.

古文：淮南节度使崔铉奏已出兵讨宣州贼。八月，甲午，以铉兼宣歙观察使。
现代文：淮南节度使崔铉奏告朝廷，声称已经派出军队去征讨宣州叛贼；八月，甲午，唐宣宗命崔铉兼任宣歙观察使。
English: The Huainan Festival made Cui Yong report to the imperial court, claiming that he had sent troops to recruit traitors in Xuanzhou; in August, the afternoon of the 1st day of the 8th month, Cui Yong also served as Xuanzhou observation envoy.

古文：己亥，以宋州刺史温璋为宣州团练使。
现代文：己亥，又任命宋州刺史温璋为宣州团练使。
English: Ji Hai also appointed Song Zhi Shi Wenqi as the Xuanzhou group training envoy.

古文：璋，造之子也。
现代文：温璋是温造的儿子。
English: Wen Xuan is the son of Wen Zou.

古文：河南、北、淮南大水，徐、泗水深五丈，漂没数万家。
现代文：河南、河北、淮南地区发生大水灾，徐州、泗州地方的洪水深达五丈，有数万户人家被漂没于洪水中。
English: Major floods occurred in Henan, Hebei and Huainan regions, and the floods in Xuzhou and Zhangzhou regions were as deep as five meters. Tens of thousands of households were submerged in the floods.

古文：冬，十月，建州刺史于延陵入辞，上曰： 建州去京师几何？ 
现代文：冬季，十月，建州刺史于延陵入朝向唐宣宗辞行，唐宣宗说： 建州距离京师有多远？ 
English: In winter, in October, Jianzhou stabbed history in Yanling into the direction of Tang Xuan Zong. Tang Xuan Zong said: How far is Jianzhou from Beijing?

古文：对曰： 八千里。 
现代文：于延陵回答说： 八千里。 
English: Yu Yanling replied, "Eight thousand li."

古文：上曰： 卿到彼为政善恶，朕皆知之，勿谓其远。
现代文：唐宣宗说： 你到建州后为政的善恶，朕都知道，不要以为距朝廷太远就胡作非为！
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: I know all about the good and evil of politics after you founded the state. Don't think that you can do anything wrong if you are too far away from the imperial court!

古文：此阶前则万里也，卿知之乎？ 
现代文：万里之遥就象在这台阶之前一样，你知道吗？ 
English: A million miles away is the same as before this step, you know?

古文：延陵悸慑失绪，上抚而遣之。
现代文：于延陵被吓得惊恐失措，应对错乱，唐宣宗抚慰他并让他出宫。
English: Yu Yanling was scared and panicked, and in response to the chaos, Tang Xuan Zong comforted him and let him leave the palace.

古文：到官，竟以不职贬复州司马。
现代文：于廷陵到建州刺史任，最后因为不称职而被贬为复州司马。
English: From Tingling to Jianzhou, he held the post of secretary of state, and was finally demoted to the post of secretary of state of Fuzhou because of his incompetence.

古文：令狐綯拟李远杭州刺史，上曰： 吾闻远诗云： 长日惟消一局棋 ，安能理人！ 
现代文：令狐想任用李远为杭州刺史，唐宣宗说： 我听说李远写过这么一句诗： 长日唯消一局棋 ，这样一个棋迷怎么能处理好人事！ 
English: When the fox wanted to appoint Li Yuan to write the history of Hangzhou, Tang Xuanzong said: I heard that Li Yuan had written such a poem: Long days can only kill one game of chess, how can such a chess fan handle personnel!

古文：綯曰： 诗人托此为高兴耳，未必实然。 
现代文：令狐说： 诗人写诗，假托下棋以尽其兴致，以为高兴罢了，李远未必当真如此。 
English: Ling Fox said: Poets write poems and pretend to play chess to their heart's content, thinking that they are happy. Li is far from being serious.

古文：上曰： 且令往试观之。 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 可暂且让李远任杭州刺史，试一试看吧。 
English: Tang Xuanzong said: Let Li Yuanren write the history of Hangzhou for the time being. Let's try it.

古文：上诏刺史毋得外徙，必令至京师，面察其能否，然后除之。
现代文：唐宣宗颁布诏令，命令各州刺史不得外调到他处做官，必须先到京师长安朝见皇帝，由皇帝当面考察其能否胜任政务，然后再委任官职。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued a decree, ordering that officials of all states should not be transferred to other places. They must first go to Beijing to meet the emperor, and the emperor should personally investigate whether they are competent in government affairs, and then appoint them to official positions.

古文：令狐綯尝徙其故人为邻州刺史，便道之官。
现代文：令狐曾经将其故旧迁任邻州刺史，未到京师就顺路赶到任所上任。
English: Linghu once transferred his old post to the neighboring state of Zhishi, and before arriving in Beijing, he rushed to the post to take office.

古文：上见其谢上表，以问綯，对曰： 以其道近，省送迎耳。 
现代文：唐宣宗见到这位刺史所上的谢恩表文，就其不到京师朝见皇帝一事询问令狐，令狐回答说： 因为所迁州治任所较远，所以不来长安，以省去迎送的礼节。 
English: When Tang Xuan Zong saw the letter of thanks from the historian, he asked Ling Fox about his not being able to see the emperor in Beijing. Ling Fox replied, "Because the provincial government office I moved to is far away, I will not come to Chang'an, so as to save the courtesy of greeting."

古文：上曰： 朕以刺史多非其人，为百姓害，故欲一一见之，访问其所施设，知其优劣以行黜陟。
现代文：唐宣宗说： 朕以天下各州刺史大多用非其人，成为百姓的蠹害，所以想一一召见，当面询问他们上任后的施政方略，以知道他们的优劣，便于对他们进行升降黜陟。
English: Tang Xuanzong said: "I think that most of the states in the world have been using non-persons and have become the scourge of the people. Therefore, I would like to call them one by one and ask them face to face about their policies after taking office, so as to know their strengths and weaknesses and facilitate their promotion and demotion."

古文：而诏命既行，直废格不用，宰相可畏有权！ 
现代文：然而，我的诏令既已颁发，你却废弃搁置不用，看来宰相有权真可畏！ 
English: However, since my edict has already been issued, but you have discarded and shelved it, it seems that the prime minister's power is really formidable!

古文：时方寒，綯汗透重裘。
现代文：当时天气还很寒冷，令狐竟吓得汗流浃背，连几层衣服都湿透了。
English: At that time, the weather was still very cold, and the fox was so scared that he was sweating profusely, soaking through several layers of clothing.

古文：上临朝，接对群臣如宾客，虽左右近习，未尝见其有惰容。
现代文：唐宣宗临朝听政视事时，接待问对群臣犹如对待宾客，就是他的左右近侍，也不曾见过他有倦意。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong was in the imperial court to listen to the government and supervise affairs, he received and treated the courtiers as if they were guests, that is, his right and left attendants. I have never seen him tired.

古文：每宰相奏事，旁无一人立者，威严不可仰视。
现代文：每次宰相奏对政事时，近旁没有一人站立，其威严的神态令人不敢仰视。
English: Every time the prime minister spoke about politics, there was no one standing next to him, and his dignified demeanor was awe-inspiring.

古文：奏事毕，忽怡然曰： 可以闲语矣。 
现代文：宰相奏事完毕后，唐宣宗忽然会怡然放松地说： 我们可以谈些闲话了！ 
English: After the prime minister finished his speech, Tang Xuan Zong suddenly relaxed and said: We can talk about gossip!

古文：因问闾阎细事，或谈宫中游宴，无所不至。
现代文：接着就问宰相们街道闾巷的细微事，有时谈论宫禁中游宴的事，凡琐絮之事无所不谈。
English: Next, he asked the prime ministers about the minutiae of the streets and alleys, and sometimes talked about the banquet in the middle of the palace ban, and talked about all the trifles.

古文：一刻许，复整容曰： 卿辈善为之，朕常恐卿辈负朕，后日不复得再相见。 
现代文：谈了一刻钟左右，唐宣宗又收起面孔，训诫宰相们说： 你们这几人应当好自为之，朕经常忧虑你们会辜负朕，使以后不再能相见。 
English: After talking for about a quarter of an hour, Tang Xuan Zong pulled back his face and admonished the prime ministers, saying, "You two should behave yourselves. I am often worried that you will fail me, so that we will no longer be able to see each other in the future.

古文：乃起入宫。
现代文：说完后即自御座起身回宫。
English: After saying that, he got up from the throne and returned to the palace.

古文：令狐綯谓人曰： 吾十年秉政，最承恩遇；然每延英奏事，未尝不汗沾衣也！ 
现代文：令狐对人说： 我当了十年宰相，操掌政柄，最得皇上的恩遇；但每次在延英殿与皇上奏对政事，没有不汗流沾衣的！ 
English: The fox said to the man: I have been the prime minister for ten years, I have been in charge of the government, and I have received the most favors from the emperor; but every time I play politics with the emperor at Yan Ying Dian, there is no one who does not sweat!

古文：初，山南东道节度使徐商，以封疆险阔，素多盗贼，选精兵数百人别置营训练，号捕盗将。
现代文：起初，山南东道节度使徐商因为所管辖的疆域峻险广阔，平素就多有盗贼出没，于是挑选精兵数百人另外编成营队进行训练，号称捕盗将。
English: At first, Shannan's hosting of the festival caused Xu Shang to select hundreds of elite soldiers to form a separate battalion for training, because the territory under his jurisdiction was vast and dangerous, and there were usually many thieves. He was known as the thief-catcher.

古文：及湖南逐帅，诏商讨之。
现代文：当湖南发生驱逐主帅的军乱时，唐宣宗颁发诏书命令徐商率军队去镇压。
English: When a mutiny occurred in Hunan to expel the commander-in-chief, Tang Xuan Zong issued an edict ordering Xu Shang to lead the army to suppress it.

古文：南遣捕盗将二百人讨平之。
现代文：徐商奉诏派遣捕盗将二百人即将湖南叛乱的军队平灭。
English: Xu Shang issued an edict to dispatch 200 soldiers to quell the Hunan rebel army.

古文：崔铉奏克宣州，斩康全泰及其党四百馀人。
现代文：崔铉奏告朝廷，宣称已攻克宣州城，斩叛将康全泰及其党羽四百余人。
English: Cui Yu sent a report to the imperial court, claiming that he had conquered Xuanzhou City, and that Kang Quan Tai and more than four hundred of his followers had rebelled.

古文：上以光禄卿韦宙父丹有惠政于江西，以宙为江西观察使，发邻道兵以讨毛鹤。
现代文：唐宣宗因为光禄卿韦宙的父亲韦丹在江西主政时曾有良好的政绩，任命韦宙为江西观察使，并调发与江西相邻道的军队，以讨伐毛鹤。
English: Because Wei Zhou's father, Wei Dan, had a good political record when he was in charge of Jiangxi, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Wei Zhou as the Jiangxi observation envoy, and dispatched the troops of the provinces adjacent to Jiangxi to fight against Mao He.

古文：崔铉以宣州已平，辞宣歙观察使。
现代文：崔铉以宣州已经平定，请求辞去宣歙观察使的职务。
English: Cui Rongyi has already subdued Xuanzhou and requested to resign from the post of Xuancheng Observer.

古文：十一月，戊寅，以温璋为宣歙观察使。
现代文：十一月，戊寅，唐宣宗任命温璋为宣歙观察使。
English: In November, Wu Yin and Tang Xuan Zong appointed Wen Qi as Xuan Qi's observation envoy.

古文：兵部侍部、判户部蒋伸从容言于上曰： 近日官颇易得，人思侥幸。 
现代文：兵部侍郎、判户部蒋伸从容地向唐宣宗上言： 近日来官位得来似乎很容易，人们都存有侥幸心理。 
English: Jiang Shin, the attendant of the military department and the judge of the household department, calmly appealed to Tang Xuan Zong: In recent days, it seems that it is very easy to get an official position, and people all have a sense of luck.

古文：上惊曰： 如此，则乱矣！ 
现代文：唐宣宗大为惊奇地说： 如果是这样，就乱了！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very surprised and said, "If this is the case, there will be chaos!"

古文：对曰： 乱则未乱，但侥幸者多，乱亦非难。 
现代文：蒋伸接着说： 乱倒还不至于；但心存侥幸的人太多，要乱倒是不难。 
English: Jiang Shin went on to say, "It's not too late to make a mess, but there are too many people who think they can get away with it, so it's not hard to make a mess.

古文：上称叹再三。
现代文：唐宣宗对蒋伸的上言倍加称叹。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was even more impressed with Jiang Shin's last words.

古文：伸三起，上三留之，曰： 异日不复得独对卿矣。 
现代文：蒋伸起身要走，唐宣宗再三留住他，说： 别的时间就不再能单独与你谈论政事了。 
English: Jiang stood up to leave, but Tang Xuan Zong repeatedly detained him, saying, "Otherwise, I will no longer be able to talk to you alone about political affairs."

古文：伸不谕。十二月，甲寅，以伸同平章事。
现代文：十二月，甲寅，唐宣宗任命蒋伸为同平章事，充任宰相。
English: In December, Emperor Gao Yin and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Jiang Sheng as Tongping Zhengji and appointed him as prime minister.

古文：韦宙奏克洪州，斩毛鹤及其党五百馀人。
现代文：韦宙向朝廷奏告攻克洪州，斩叛军都将毛鹤及其党羽五百余人。
English: Wei Zhou appealed to the imperial court to attack Ke Hongzhou, and the rebel army killed Mao He and more than five hundred of his followers.

古文：宙过襄州，徐商遣都将韩季友帅捕盗将从行。
现代文：韦宙路过襄州时，徐商派遣都将韩季友率领捕盗将随韦宙赴任讨贼。
English: When Wei Zhou was passing through Xiangzhou, Xu Shang sent Han Jiyu to lead the anti-theft team to accompany Wei Zhou to investigate the thieves.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝下大中十三年
现代文：韦宙等至江州，韩季友请求乘夜率其部众由陆路小道先行，至第二天天亮即赶到兴州城下，城里人毫不知觉，于是当天即将毛鹤叛军讨平。韦宙奏请朝廷留下捕盗将二百人于江西，以韩季友任都虞候。大中十三年
English: Wei Zhou waited until Jiangzhou, and Han Jiyu requested that he take the night rate of his subordinates from the overland trail ahead, and arrived at the foot of the city of Xingzhou at dawn the next day. The people in the city did not know anything, so the Mao He rebels were about to be leveled that day. Wei Zhou asked the court to leave two hundred thieves in Jiangxi and wait for Han Jiyu to be appointed as the capital.

古文：春，正月，戊午朔，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，戊午朔，唐宣宗宣布大赦天下。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Wu Wu Shuo, Tang Xuan Zong announced a general amnesty.

古文：三月，割河东云、蔚、朔三州隶大同军。
现代文：三月，唐朝廷将河东所辖云州、蔚州、朔州三州之地割归大同军领辖。
English: In March, the Tang Dynasty ceded the three provinces of Yunnan, Ulsan, and Shuozhou, which were under the jurisdiction of Hedong, to the jurisdiction of the Datong Army.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯，以校书郎于琮为左拾遗内供奉。
现代文：夏季四月，辛卯，唐宣宗任命校书郎于琮为左拾遣内供奉。
English: In the summer of April, Xinwu, Tang Xuan Zong appointed the school scribe Yu Yao as Zuo Zhi Yuan's successor.

古文：初，上欲以悰尚永福公主，既而中寝。宰相请其故，上曰： 朕近与此女子会食，对朕辄折匕箸。
现代文：起初，唐宣宗想让于琮娶永福公主，后又将婚事搁置下来，宰相问其中缘故，唐宣宗说： 朕近日与这个女儿在一起吃饭，当朕的面她就把筷子折断。
English: At first, Tang Xuan Zong wanted to let Yu Yao marry Princess Yongfu, but later put the marriage on hold. When the prime minister asked the reason, Tang Xuan Zong said: "I recently had dinner with this daughter, and she broke her chopsticks in front of me.

古文：性情如是，岂可为士大夫妻！ 
现代文：她性情这样坏，怎么可以做士大夫的妻子！ 
English: She has such a bad temper, how can she be a doctor's wife!

古文：乃更命悰尚广德公主。
现代文：于是命于琮改娶广德公主。
English: Therefore, it was ordered to marry Princess Guangde.

古文：二公主皆上女。
现代文：二位公主都是唐宣宗的亲生女儿。
English: Both princesses are Tang Xuan Zong's biological daughters.

古文：琮，敖之子也。
现代文：于琮是于敖的儿子。
English: Yu Yao is the son of Yu Yao.

古文：武宁节度使康季荣不恤士卒，士卒噪而逐之。
现代文：武宁节度使康季荣不体恤部下士卒，士卒们起而喧噪，将康季荣驱逐出境。
English: The celebration of the National Day of the People's Republic of China made Kang Jirong disrespect the subordinate officers and men, and the officers got up and made a lot of noise, and expelled Kang Jirong from the country.

古文：上以左金吾大将军田牟尝镇徐州，有能名，复以为武宁节度使，一方遂安。
现代文：唐宣宗以左金吾大将军田牟曾经镇守过徐州，被人们称赞有才干，于是再任田牟为武宁节度使，徐州一方于是安定下来。
English: Tang Xuan Zong left Kingu's general, Tian Mou, to defend Xuzhou, and was praised for his ability. Tian Mou was then reappointed as the military governor of Wu Ning, and the Xuzhou side then settled down.

古文：贬季荣于岭南。
现代文：康季荣被贬到岭南。
English: Kang Jirong was demoted to Lingnan.

古文：六月，癸巳，封宪宗子惕为彭王。
现代文：六月，癸巳，唐宣宗封唐宪宗的儿子李惕为彭王。
English: In June, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty named Li Tie, the son of Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty, as the King of Peng.

古文：初，上长子郓王温，无宠，居十六宅，馀子皆居禁中。
现代文：起初，唐宣宗的长子郓王李温不为父亲喜爱，居住于十六宅，而唐宣宗的其他儿子都居住于宫中。
English: At first, the eldest son of Tang Xuan Zong, King Gong Li Wen, was not liked by his father and lived in the 16th house, while the other sons of Tang Xuan Zong lived in the palace.

古文：夔王滋，第三子也，上爱之，欲以为嗣，为其非次，故久不建东宫。
现代文：夔王李滋，是唐宣宗第三个儿子，倍受父亲宠爱，唐宣宗想以他为皇嗣；因为李滋上有兄长，依照礼轮不到他当皇太子，所以唐宣宗久久不建东宫。
English: King Li Zhi, the third son of Tang Xuan Zong, was greatly favored by his father. Tang Xuan Zong wanted to make him the heir to the throne. Since Li Zi had an older brother, he was not eligible to become the crown prince according to the ritual, so Tang Xuan Zong did not build the East Palace for a long time.

古文：上饵医官李玄伯、道士虞紫芝、山人王乐药，疽发于背。
现代文：唐宣宗吃了医官李玄伯、道士虞紫芝、山人王乐所炼的丹药，背上长起毒疮。
English: Tang Xuanzong ate the herbal medicine made by the medical officer Li Xuanbo, the Taoist priest Yu Zizhi, and the mountain man Wang Le, and developed poisonous sores on his back.

古文：八月，疽甚，宰相及朝臣皆不得见，上密以夔王属枢密使王归长、马公儒、宣徽南院使王居方，使立之。
现代文：八月，毒疮发作，唐宣宗卧病不起，宰相和朝士都不得见。唐宣宗密将夔王李滋托付给宦官枢密使王归长、马公儒、宣徽南院使王居方，让他们出来立李滋继承皇位。
English: In August, a poisonous sore occurred, Tang Xuan Zong was bedridden with illness, and neither the prime minister nor the chancellor could be seen. Tang Xuan Zong secretly entrusted Li Zi, the king of Zhai, to the eunuchs Wang Guichang, Ma Gongru, and Wang Kuifang, the envoys of the Southern Yuan of Xuan Hui, and asked them to come out and set up Li Zi to succeed to the throne.

古文：三人及右军中尉王茂玄，皆上平日所厚也。
现代文：三人和右神策军中尉王茂玄都是唐宣宗平日所信重的人。
English: The three men and Wang Maoxuan, a lieutenant of the Right Divine Providence Army, were all people who believed in Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：独左军中尉王宗实素不同心，三人相与谋，出宗实为淮南监军。宗实已受敕于宣化门外，将自银台门出。左军副使亓元实谓宗实曰： 圣人不豫逾月，中尉止隔门起居，今日除改，未可辨也。
现代文：唯有左神策军中尉王宗实素来就不与他们同心，王归长等三人密谋，将王宗实挤出禁廷，外任淮南监军；王宗实已于宣化门外接受出任淮南监军的敕令，将由银台门出禁宫，左神策军副使亓元实对王宗实说： 皇上卧病不起已一个多月了，中尉您只是隔着门问皇上的起居；今日改任你为淮南监军的诏敕，真假未可分辨。
English: Only Wang Zongshi, the lieutenant of Zuo Sheng's army, had not always been of the same mind with them. Wang Guichang and three others conspired to push Wang Zongshi out of the imperial court and take the position of Huainan supervisor; Wang Zongshi had accepted the imperial order to serve as Huainan supervisor outside the Xuanhua Gate and would leave the imperial palace through the Yintai Gate. The deputy envoy of Zuo Sheng's army, Xuan Yuanshi, said to Wang Zongshi: The emperor has been ill for more than a month. Lieutenant, you just asked the emperor's whereabouts through the door; today, you

古文：何不见圣人而出！ 
现代文：为什么不见到皇上之后再出来呢！ 
English: Why don't you come out again after seeing the Emperor!

古文：宗实感寤，复入，诸门已踵故事增人守捉矣。
现代文：王宗实恍然大悟，再入禁宫，禁宫诸门已按旧规矩增人把守。
English: Wang Zongshi suddenly realized that after re-entering the Forbidden City, the gates of the Forbidden City had been guarded by more people according to the old rules.

古文：亓元实翼导宗实直至寝殿，上已崩，东首环泣矣。
现代文：亓元实引导王宗实直走到唐宣宗的寝殿，唐宣宗已经驾崩，周围的人正都在失声痛哭。
English: He guided Wang Zongshi straight to Tang Xuan Zong's bed chamber. Tang Xuan Zong had already passed away, and the people around him were crying uncontrollably.

古文：宗实叱归长等，责以矫诏，皆捧足乞命。
现代文：王宗实大骂王归长等人，斥责他们假造皇帝的诏命；王归长等人皆跪下乞求饶命。
English: Wang Zonshi scolded Wang Guichang and others, accusing them of forging the emperor's edict; Wang Guichang and others all knelt down and begged for their lives.

古文：乃遣宣徽北院使齐元简迎郓王。壬辰，下诏立郓王为皇太子，权句当军国政事，仍更名漼。
现代文：王宗实于是派遣宣徽北院使齐元简去十六宅迎接郓王李温，壬辰，王宗实等以唐宣宗的名义颁布诏书，立郓王为皇太子，暂时掌管军事，并改名为李。
English: Wang Zongshi then dispatched Qi Yuanjian, an envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, to the Sixteen Mansions to welcome the King of Xuanxi, Li Wen. Im Chen, Wang Zongshi, and others issued an edict in the name of the Emperor of Tang, establishing the King of Xuanxi as the crown prince, temporarily in charge of the military, and changing his name to Li.

古文：收归长、公儒、居方，皆杀之。
现代文：将王归长、马公儒、王居方收捕，全部杀死。
English: They arrested Wang Guichang, Ma Gongru and Wang Ju and killed them all.

古文：癸巳，宣遗制，以令狐綯摄冢宰。
现代文：癸巳，宣布唐宣宗的遗诏，以令狐摄冢宰，主持后事。
English: At this time, Tang Xuan Zong's last will and testament was announced, and the fox was appointed to take charge and preside over subsequent events.

古文：宣宗性明察沉断，用法无私，从谏如流，重惜官赏，恭谨节俭，惠爱民物，故大中之政，讫于唐亡，人思咏之，谓之小太宗。
现代文：唐宣宗聪明细致，沉着果断，用法不徇私情，能虚心纳谏，从谏如流，不轻易将官位赏人，谦恭谨慎，生活节俭，爱护百姓的财物，所以大中年间的政治较清明，一直到唐朝灭亡，都有人思念歌咏，称唐宣宗为小太宗。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was intelligent and meticulous, calm and decisive, his usage was not selfish, and he was able to humbly accept criticism. He was like a stream of water, he did not easily reward people with official positions, he was humble and prudent, he lived frugally, and he loved the people's property. Therefore, his politics were relatively clear during his college and middle school years. Until the fall of the Tang Dynasty, people thought of him as a poet and called Tang Xuan Zong as Xiaotai Zong.

古文：丙申，懿宗即位。
现代文：丙申，唐懿宗即皇帝位。
English: According to Yi Shen, Tang Xizong became the emperor.

古文：癸卯，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：癸卯，唐懿宗尊皇太后为太皇太后。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager of the Tang Dynasty was the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：以王宗实为骠骑上将军。
现代文：任命王宗实为骠骑上将军。
English: Appointed Wang Zongshi as the commander-in-chief.

古文：李玄伯、虞紫芝、王乐皆伏诛。
现代文：给唐宣宗吃丹药的李玄伯、虞紫芝、王乐都被处死。
English: Li Xuanbo, Gu Zizhi, and Wang Le, who gave the elixir to Tang Xuanzong, were all executed.

古文：九月，追尊上母晁昭容为元昭皇太后。
现代文：九月，唐懿宗追尊自己的母亲晁昭容为元昭皇太后。
English: In September, Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty conferred the title of Empress Dowager of Yuan Zhao on his own mother, Zou Zhaorong.

古文：加魏博节度使何弘敬兼中书令，幽州节度使张允伸同平章事。
现代文：唐懿宗下令加魏博节度使何弘敬兼中书令，幽州节度使张允仲加同平章事衔。
English: Tang Yanzong ordered to add the Wei Bo Festival to make He Hongjing and Zhong Shuling, and the Yuzhou Festival to make Zhang Yunzhong and Tong Pingzhang.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，赦天下。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛卯，唐懿宗宣告大赦天下。
English: In winter, October, Xinwu, Tang Yanzong proclaimed a general amnesty.

古文：十一月，戊午，以门下侍郎、同平章事萧鄴同平章事，充荆南节度使。
现代文：十一月，戊午，唐懿宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事萧邺以同平章事衔，出任荆南节度使。
English: In the afternoon of November, Emperor Wuzong of Tang appointed Xiao Jie, a subordinate attendant and Tongping Zhi, as Tongping Zhi, and he served as Jingnan Festival Envoy.

古文：十二月，甲申，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杜审权同平章事。
现代文：十二月，甲申，唐懿宗任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杜审权为同平章事。
English: In December, Jiashen, Tang Yanzong appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate Zongzhi, Hyobu Chamberlain Du Jianquan as Tongping Shanzhi.

古文：审权，元颖之弟孙也。
现代文：杜审权是杜元颖弟弟的儿子。
English: Du Xuanquan is the son of Du Yuanying's younger brother.

古文：浙东贼帅裘甫攻陷象山，官军屡败，明州城门昼闭，进逼剡县，有众百人，浙东骚动。
现代文：浙江盗贼首领裘甫率众攻陷象山县，官军屡次被裘甫贼众击败，明州的城门白天都紧紧关闭，裘甫率众进副剡县，所部贼众有一百人，使浙东地区一片骚动。
English: Qiu Fu, the leader of the bandits in Zhejiang, led his bandits to attack and capture Xiangshan County. The government army was repeatedly defeated by Qiu Fu's bandits. The gates of Mingzhou were tightly closed during the day. Qiu Fu led his bandits into Fuxi County. There were one hundred bandits under his command, causing turmoil in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：观察使郑祗德遣讨击副使刘勍、副将范居植将兵三百，合台州军共讨之。
现代文：浙东观察使郑祗德派遣讨击副使刘、副将范居植率兵三百，会合台州军共同讨伐裘甫贼众。
English: The East Zhejiang Observer sent Vice-Envoy Liu and Vice-General Fan Ju with 300 soldiers to fight against the Qufu bandits. They joined the Taizhou Army to jointly fight the Qufu bandits.

古文：司空、门下侍郎、同平章事令狐綯执政岁久，忌胜己者，中外侧目，其子氵高颇招权受贿。
现代文：司空、门下侍郎、同平章事令狐任宰相执掌朝政多年，对才能胜过自己的人猜忌排挤，受到朝里朝外人士的怨恨，令狐的儿子令狐延揽权力，接受贿赂。
English: Siku, his manservant, and Tongping Zhang appointed the fox as prime minister and presided over the government of the dynasty for many years. They were suspicious of those whose talents were superior to their own and pushed them out. They were resented by people inside and outside the dynasty. The son of the fox, the fox, extended his power and accepted bribes.

古文：宣宗既崩，言事者竞攻其短。丁酉，以綯同平章事，充河中节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗己崩驾，在唐懿宗面前言事的人竞相对令狐的短处加以攻击，丁酉，唐懿宗令令狐以同平章事衔，出任河中节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang has passed away, and those who spoke in front of Emperor Xuanzong competed to attack the shortcomings of the fox. Ding Yao, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the fox to take the title of Tongpingzhang and serve as the festival envoy in the middle of the river.

古文：以前荆南节度使、同平章事白敏中守司徒、兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命前荆南节度使、同平章事衔的白敏中为守司徒、兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: He appointed Bai Minzhong, who was Jingnan's former festival envoy and held the title of Tongping chapter, as the guardian of the temple, as well as the servant of his disciple and Tongping chapter.

古文：初，韦皋在西川，开青溪道以通群蛮，使由蜀入贡。
现代文：起初，韦皋在西川主持军政时，开辟青溪道以通南诏诸蛮族人，让他们通过新开道路由蜀地向朝廷入贡。
English: At first, when Wei Zheng presided over the military government in Xichuan, he opened the Qingxi Road to pass the barbarians from the south, and let them pay tribute to the imperial court through the newly opened road from Shu.

古文：又选群蛮子弟聚之成都，教以书数，欲以慰悦羁縻之。业成则去，复以他子弟继之。如是五十年，群蛮子弟学于成都者殆以千数，军府颇厌于禀给。
现代文：韦皋又选南诏诸蛮族人的子弟聚居于成都，教他们读书计数，企图以慰抚和欢悦来约束他们，群蛮子弟学成后即回去，其他子弟继续再来成都留学，这样前后五十年过去了，南诏群蛮子弟留学于成都的几乎有上千人，西川军府对供应留学生资粮已厌烦。
English: Wei Jun also selected the children of the barbarians from Nanzhao to live in Chengdu, taught them to read and count, and tried to restrain them with consolation and joy. The barbarian children went back as soon as they had completed their studies, and the other children continued to come to Chengdu to study. Fifty years have passed. There are almost a thousand Nanzhao barbarian children studying in Chengdu. The West River Military Government is tired of supplying grain to international students.

古文：又，蛮使入贡，利于赐与，所从傔人浸多，杜悰为西川节度使，奏请节减其数，诏从之。
现代文：另外，南诏蛮人的使者向朝廷入贡时，贪图朝廷丰厚的赏赐，所带的随员私仆日渐增多，杜为西川节度使，向唐宣宗奏请减少南诏使者所带仆从的数目，唐宣宗下诏同意了杜的奏请。
English: In addition, when the emissaries of the Nanzhao barbarians paid tribute to the imperial court, they were greedy for the rich rewards of the imperial court, and the number of attendants and servants they brought with them was increasing day by day. Du, as the envoy of the West River Festival, asked Tang Xuan Zong to reduce the number of servants brought by the Nanzhao emissaries. Tang Xuan Zong agreed to Du's request.

古文：南诏丰祐怒，其贺冬使者留表付巂州而还。
现代文：南诏国王丰对此极感愤怒，他派往长安向唐朝皇帝贺冬的使者将贺表留下交付给州就回到南诏去了。
English: King Feng of Nanzhao was very angry about this. He sent an emissary to Chang'an to present the congratulatory letter to Emperor He Dong of the Tang Dynasty. He left the letter and returned to Nanzhao.

古文：又索习学子弟，移牒不逊，自是入贡不时，颇扰边境。
现代文：丰又向杜索回留学成都的子弟，送交给杜的牒文也出言不逊，从此以后不按时向唐朝入贡，还时常侵扰唐朝边境。
English: Feng also sent Du So's son, who was studying in Chengdu, back to Du So, and the ultimatum sent to Du was also harsh. From then on, he did not pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty on time, and often invaded the border of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：会宣宗崩，遣中使告哀，时南诏丰祐适卒，子酋龙立，怒曰： 我国亦有丧，朝廷不吊祭。
现代文：正值唐宣宗崩驾，唐懿宗派遣宦官充当使者往南诏王国告哀，当时南诏国王丰恰巧也去世，丰的儿子酋龙继位，愤怒地说： 我国也有国丧，唐朝廷为什么不派使来吊祭。
English: At the time of the death of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Emperor Jianzong of Tang Dynasty sent eunuchs as envoys to Nanzhao Kingdom to offer condolences. At that time, King Feng of Nanzhao also passed away, and Feng's son, Hailong, succeeded to the throne. He said angrily, "Our country also has a national funeral. Why doesn't the Tang Dynasty send an envoy to offer a funeral sacrifice?"

古文：又诏书乃赐故王。 
现代文：另外，唐皇帝颁下的诏书还仍然赐给已故的国王，真不象话。 
English: In addition, the imperial edict issued by Emperor Tang is still given to the late king, which is really not appropriate.

古文：遂置使者于外馆，礼遇甚薄。
现代文：于是将唐朝使者安置于外面的旅馆，对他的礼遇很薄。
English: As a result, the emissary of the Tang Dynasty was placed in a hotel outside, and he received very little courtesy.

古文：使者还，具以状闻。
现代文：使者回到朝廷，将情况全部向唐懿宗汇报。
English: The envoy returned to the imperial court and reported the entire situation to Tang Xizong.

古文：上以酋龙不遣使来告丧，又名近玄宗讳，遂不行册礼。
现代文：唐懿宗以酋龙不派遣使者入朝告丧，而且酋龙的名字与唐玄宗李隆基的讳字近音，于是也不给酋龙行册封为南诏国王的册礼。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty did not send an envoy to the Imperial Court to announce the funeral, and the name of the dragon was close to the name of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Li Longji. Therefore, Emperor Taizong did not confer the title of King of Nanzhao on the dragon.

古文：酋龙乃自称皇帝，国号大礼，改元建极，遣兵陷播州。
现代文：酋龙也就自称皇帝，国号为大礼，改年号为建极，并派遣军队攻陷唐朝的播州。
English: Chief Long also claimed to be the emperor, changed the country name to Dari and the year name to Jian Gu, and sent troops to invade Banzhou in the Tang Dynasty.

