古文：黄帝曰：夫自古通天者，生之本，本于阴阳。
现代文：黄帝说：自古以来，都以通于天气为生命的根本，而这个根本不外天之阴阳。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: Since ancient times, people have taken the weather as the basis of life, and this is not the yin and yang of heaven.

古文：天地之间，六合之内，其气九州、九窍、五脏十二节，皆通乎天气。
现代文：天地之间，六合之内，大如九州之域，小如人的九窍、五脏、十二节，都与天气相通。
English: Between heaven and earth, within six degrees of the equator, as large as the Kyushu region, as small as a person's nine acupoints, five internal organs, and twelve joints, all are connected to the weather.

古文：其生五，其气三，数犯此者，则邪气伤人，此寿命之本也。
现代文：天气衍生五行，阴阳之气又依盛衰消长而各分为三。如果经常违背阴阳五行的变化规律，那麽邪气就会伤害人体。因此，适应这个规律是寿命得以延续的根本。
English: The five elements are derived from the weather, and the yin and yang elements are divided into three according to their waxing and waning. If you often violate the law of change of the yin and yang elements, then the evil spirit will harm the human body. Therefore, adapting to this law is fundamental to the continuation of life.

古文：苍天之气，清静则志意治，顺之则阳气固，虽有贼邪，弗能害也，此因时之序。
现代文：苍天之气清净，人的精神就相应地调畅平和，顺应天气的变化，就会阳气固密，虽有贼风邪气，也不能加害于人，这是适应时序阴阳变化的结果。
English: The air of heaven is pure, and the spirit of man is correspondingly smooth and peaceful. According to the changes in the weather, the yang will be solid. Although there are thieves and evil spirits, they cannot harm people. This is the result of adapting to the changes in the timing of yin and yang.

古文：故圣人抟精神，服天气而通神明。
现代文：所以圣人能够专心致志，顺应天气，而通达阴阳变化之理。
English: Therefore, sages are able to concentrate, adapt to the weather, and understand the principle of yin and yang changes.

古文：失之则内闭九窍，外壅肌肉，卫气散解，此谓自伤，气之削也。
现代文：如果违逆了适应天气的原则，就会内使九窍不通，外使肌肉塞，卫气涣散不固，这是由于人们不能适应自然变化所致，称为自伤，阳气会因此而受到削弱。
English: If you violate the principle of adapting to the weather, you will not know what to do inside, the muscles will be blocked outside, and the qi will not be firm. This is because people can not adapt to natural changes, called self-injury, and the yang qi will be weakened.

古文：阳气者，若天与日，失其所，则折寿而不彰。
现代文：人身的阳气，如像天上的太阳一样重要，假若阳气失去了正常的位次而不能发挥其重要作用，人就会减损寿命或夭折，生命机能亦暗弱不足。
English: The yang qi of the human body is as important as the sun in the sky. If the yang qi loses its normal position and cannot play its important role, people will lose their life expectancy or die prematurely, and their vital functions will be weak.

古文：故天运当以日光明。是故阳因而上，卫外者也。
现代文：所以天体的正常运行，是因太阳的光明普照而显现出来，而人的阳气也应在上在外，并起到保护身体，抵御外邪的作用。
English: Therefore, the normal operation of the celestial body is manifested by the bright shining of the sun, and the yang of the person should also be on the outside, and play the role of protecting the body and resisting external evil.

古文：因于寒，欲如运枢，起居如惊，神气乃浮。
现代文：由于寒，阳气应如门轴在门臼中运转一样活动于体内。若起居猝急，扰动阳气，则易使神气外越。
English: Due to the cold, the yang qi should be active in the body like the spindle in the door. If the yang qi is disturbed by sudden movement, it is easy to make the divine energy go out.

古文：因于暑，汗，烦则喘喝，静则多言，体若燔炭，汗出而散。
现代文：因于暑，则汗多烦躁，喝喝而喘，安静时多言多语。若身体发高热，则像碳火烧灼一样，一经出汗，热邪就能散去。
English: Because of the heat, sweat is more irritable, drink and breathe, and talk more when quiet. If the body is very hot, it is like a carbon fire. Once sweating, the heat can be dissipated.

古文：因于湿，首如裹，湿热不攘，大筋緛短，小筋驰长。緛短为拘，驰长为痿。
现代文：因于湿，头部像有物蒙裹一样沉重。若湿热相兼而不得排除，则伤害大小诸筋，而出现短缩或弛纵，短缩的造成拘挛，弛纵的造成痿弱。
English: Due to the humidity, the head is as heavy as if it were covered with something. If it is hot and humid and cannot be eliminated, it will damage the large and small sinews, resulting in shortening or relaxation. Shortening causes stiffness, relaxation causes weakness.

古文：因于气，为肿，四维相代，阳气乃竭。
现代文：由于风，可致浮肿。以上四种邪气维系缠绵不离，相互更代伤人，就会使阳气倾竭。
English: Because of the wind, it can cause puffiness. If the above four kinds of evil qi are kept entangled and hurt each other, the yang qi will be exhausted.

古文：阳气者，烦劳则张，精绝，辟积于夏，使人煎厥；目盲不可以视，耳闭不可以听，溃溃乎若坏都，汩汩乎不可止。
现代文：在人体烦劳过度时，阳气就会亢盛而外张，使阴精逐渐耗竭。如此多次重复，阳愈盛而阴愈亏，到夏季暑热之时，便易使人发生煎厥病，发作的时候眼睛昏蒙看不见东西，耳朵闭塞听不到声音，混乱之时就像都城崩毁，急流奔泻一样不可收拾。
English: When the human body is overworked, the yang qi will bloom and expand, causing the yin essence to be gradually depleted. Repeating this many times, the more the sun rises, the worse the shade becomes, and when the summer is hot, it is easy to cause people to suffer from meningitis. When it occurs, the eyes are blinded and can't see anything, the ears are blocked and can't hear sound, and when it is chaotic, it is like the capital city is collapsing and the rapids are rushing.

古文：阳气者，大怒则形气绝而血菀于上，使人薄厥。
现代文：人的阳气，在大怒时就会上逆，血随气生而淤积于上，与身体其他部位阻隔不通，使人发生薄厥。
English: A person's yang qi will be reversed when he is very angry. Blood congeals with the qi and cannot be separated from other parts of the body, causing a person to faint.

古文：有伤于筋，纵，其若不容。
现代文：若伤及诸筋，使筋弛纵不收，而不能随意运动。
English: If you injure the tendons, the muscles will not relax, and you will not be able to exercise at will.

古文：汗出偏沮，使人偏枯。
现代文：经常半身出汗，可以演变为半身不遂。
English: Frequent sweating on one side of the body, which can develop into sweating on the other side.

古文：汗出见湿，乃生痤疿。
现代文：出汗的时候，遇到湿邪阻遏就容易发生小的疮疮和痱子。
English: When sweating, small sores and lice are likely to occur when dampness is inhibited.

古文：膏粱之变，足生大丁，受如持虚。
现代文：人的营养吃得太富足，太精细，太肥美，足以让身体长出许多疔疮来，患病很容易，就像以空的容器接收东西一样。
English: People's nutrition is too rich, too fine, too fat, enough to make the body grow a lot of acne, and it is easy to get sick, just like receiving things with an empty container.

古文：劳汗当风，寒薄为皶，郁乃痤。
现代文：在劳动出汗时遇到风寒之邪，迫聚于皮腠形成粉刺，郁积化热而成疮疖。
English: When sweating at work, encountering the evil of wind and cold, it gathers in the skin folds to form acne, accumulates and heats up to form sores.

古文：阳气者，精则养神，柔则养筋。
现代文：人的阳气，既能养神而使精神慧爽，又能养筋而使诸筋柔韧。
English: A person's yang qi can not only nourish the spirit and make the spirit bright, but also nourish the sinews and make the sinews flexible.

古文：开阖不得，寒气从之，乃生大偻。
现代文：汗孔的开闭调节失常，寒气就会随之侵入，损伤阳气，以致筋失所养，造成身体俯曲不伸。
English: If the opening and closing of the sweat pores is not properly regulated, the cold air will invade and damage the yang air, resulting in muscle loss, causing the body to bend and not stretch.

古文：陷脉为瘘，留连肉腠，俞气化薄，传为善畏，及为惊骇。
现代文：寒气深陷脉中，留连肉腠之间，气血不通而郁积，久而成为疮瘘。
English: The cold air is deeply trapped in the veins, lingering between the flesh and gills, the qi and blood do not pass and accumulate, and become sores for a long time.

古文：营气不从，逆于肉理，乃生痈肿。
现代文：从腧穴侵入的寒气内传而迫及五脏，损伤神志，就会出现恐惧和惊骇的症象。
English: The cold air from the pit invades the internal organs and damages the mind, resulting in symptoms of fear and shock.

古文：魄汗未尽，形弱而气烁，穴俞以闭，发为风疟。
现代文：由于寒气的稽留，营气不能顺利地运行，阻逆于肌肉之间，就会发生痈肿。汗出未止的时候，形体与阳气都受到一定的消弱，若风寒内侵，俞穴闭阻，就会发生风疟。
English: Due to the retention of cold air, the camp gas can not run smoothly, the resistance between the muscles, there will be abscess. When the sweat is not stopped, the body and the yang are weakened to a certain extent, if the wind cold intrusion, the anus obstruction, there will be wind malaria.

古文：故风者，百病之始也，清静则肉腠闭拒，虽有大风苛毒，弗之能害，此因时之序也。
现代文：风是引起各种疾病的起始原因，而只要人体保持精神的安定和劳逸适度等养生的原则，那麽，肌肉腠理就会密闭而有抗拒外邪的能力，虽有大风苛毒的侵染，也不能伤害，这正是循着时序的变化规律保养生气的结果。
English: Wind is the initial cause of various diseases, and as long as the human body maintains the principle of health care such as mental stability and moderate work and rest, then the muscle barrier will be closed and have the ability to resist external evil. Although there is a strong wind, it can not hurt. This is the result of maintaining vitality according to the law of change of time sequence.

古文：故病久则传化，上下不并，良医弗为。
现代文：病久不愈，邪留体内，则会内传并进一步演变，到了上下不通、阴阳阻隔的时候，虽有良医，也无能为力了。
English: If the disease does not go away for a long time, and the evil remains in the body, it will be transmitted internally and further evolved. When the upper and lower organs are not connected, and yin and yang are blocked, even if there is a good doctor, there is nothing that can be done.

古文：故阳畜积病死，而阳气当隔。
现代文：所以阳气蓄积，郁阻不通时，也会致死。
English: Therefore, the accumulation of yang qi, when the depression does not pass, will also cause death.

古文：隔者当泻，不亟正治，粗乃败之。
现代文：对于这种阳气蓄积，阻隔不通者，应采用通泻的方法治疗，如不迅速正确施治，而被粗疏的医生所误，就会导致死亡。
English: For this kind of yang gas accumulation, if the barrier does not pass, it should be treated by the method of diarrhea. If it is not treated quickly and correctly, and if it is mistaken by a rough doctor, it will lead to death.

古文：故阳气者，一日而主外。平旦人气生，日中而阳气隆，日西而阳气已虚，气门乃闭。
现代文：人身的阳气，白天主司体表：清晨的时候，阳气开始活跃，并趋向于外，中午时，阳气达到最旺盛的阶段，太阳偏西时，体表的阳气逐渐虚少，汗孔也开始闭合。
English: The yang of the human body, the body surface of the day god: in the early morning, the yang begins to be active and tends to the outside, at noon, the yang reaches the most vigorous stage, when the sun is westward, the yang of the body surface gradually decreases, and the sweat pores also begin to close.

古文：是故暮而收拒，无扰筋骨，无见雾露，反此三时，形乃困薄。
现代文：所以到了晚上，阳气收敛拒守于内，这时不要扰动筋骨，也不要接近雾露。如果违反了一天之内这三个时间的阳气活动规律，形体被邪气侵扰则困乏而衰薄。
English: Therefore, in the evening, the yang converges and refuses to stay inside. At this time, do not disturb the muscles and bones, and do not approach the dew. If you violate the yang activity rule of these three hours within one day, the body will be disturbed by the evil gas and will be tired and weak.

古文：岐伯曰：阴者，藏精而起亟也，阳者，卫外而为固也。
现代文：歧伯说：阴是藏精于内部不断地扶持阳气的；阳是卫护于外使体表固密的。
English: Disper said: Yin is the hidden essence that constantly supports yang within; yang is the protection that makes the body surface firm.

古文：阴不胜其阳，则脉流薄疾，并乃狂。
现代文：如果阴不胜阳，阳气亢盛，就使血脉流动迫促，若再受热邪，阳气更盛就会发为狂症。
English: If yin does not prevail over yang, and yang prevails, the blood flow will be forced. If it is affected by the heat evil again, the yang will become more prevalent, and it will develop into mania.

古文：阳不胜其阴，则五脏气争，九窍不通。
现代文：如果阳不胜阴，阴气亢盛，就会使五脏之气不调，以致九窍不通。
English: If yang does not prevail over yin, and if yin prevails, it will cause the five internal organs to be out of balance, so that the nine organs will not know what to do.

古文：是以圣人陈阴阳，筋脉和同，骨髓坚固，气血皆从。
现代文：所以圣人使阴阳平衡，无所片胜，从而达到筋脉调和，骨髓坚固，血气畅顺。
English: Therefore, the sage balanced yin and yang, and everything was perfect, so that the muscle pulse was harmonized, the bone marrow was strong, and the blood qi was smooth.

古文：如是则内外调和，邪不能害，耳目聪明，气立如故。
现代文：这样，则会内外调和，邪气不能侵害，耳目聪明，气机正常运行。
English: In this way, the inside and outside will be reconciled, the evil gas can not be infringed, the ears and eyes are smart, and the gas engine will run normally.

古文：风客淫气，精乃亡，邪伤肝也。
现代文：风邪侵犯人体，伤及阳气，并逐步侵入内脏，阴精也就日渐消亡，这是由于邪气伤肝所致。
English: Wind evil invades the human body, injures the yang qi, and gradually invades the internal organs, and the yin essence gradually disappears. This is due to the evil qi injuring the liver.

古文：因而饱食，筋脉横解，肠澼为痔。
现代文：若饮食过饱，阻碍升降之机，会发生筋脉弛纵、肠澼及疥疮等病症。
English: If the diet is too rich, hindering the lifting mechanism, diseases such as myofascial spasm, intestinal cramps and scabies will occur.

古文：因而大饮，则气逆。
现代文：若饮酒过量，会造成气机上逆。
English: If you drink too much alcohol, it will cause your blood pressure to rise.

古文：因而强力，肾气乃伤，高骨乃坏。
现代文：若过度用力，会损伤肾气，腰部脊骨也会受到损伤。
English: If excessive force is used, the kidney gas will be damaged, and the lumbar spine will also be damaged.

古文：凡阴阳之要，阳密乃固，两者不和，若春无秋，若冬无夏。
现代文：大凡阴阳的关键，以阳气的致密最为重要。阳气致密，阴气就能固守于内。阴阳二者不协调，就像一年之中，只有春天而没有秋天，只有冬天而没有夏天一样。
English: The key to the great yin and yang is the density of yang, which is the most important. If yang is dense, yin can stick to it. Yin and yang are incongruous, just as in a year, there is only spring and no autumn, only winter and no summer.

古文：因而和之，是谓圣度。
现代文：因此，阴阳的协调配合，相互为用，是维持正常生理状态的最高标准。
English: Therefore, the coordination of yin and yang is the highest standard for maintaining a normal physiological state.

古文：故阳强不能密，阴气乃绝。
现代文：所以阳气亢盛，不能固密，阴气就会竭绝。
English: Therefore, the yang qi is in full bloom, it cannot be solid, and the yin qi will be exhausted.

古文：阴平阳秘，精神乃治；阴阳离决，精气乃绝。
现代文：阴气和平，阳气固密，人的精神才会正常。如果阴阳分离决绝，人的精气就会随之而竭绝。
English: Yin is peaceful, yang is solid, and the human spirit will be normal. If yin and yang are separated, the human spirit will be exhausted.

古文：因于露风，乃生寒热。
现代文：由于雾露风寒之邪的侵犯，就会发生寒热。
English: Due to the encroachment of the evil of fog, dew, wind and cold, cold and fever will occur.

古文：是以春伤于风，邪气留连，乃为洞泄。
现代文：春天伤于风邪，留而不去，会发生急骤的泄泻。
English: In the spring, if you catch a cold and don't get rid of it, you'll have sudden diarrhea.

古文：夏伤于暑，秋为痎疟。
现代文：夏天伤于暑邪，到秋天会发生疟疾病。
English: In the summer, injuries are caused by the heat, and in the autumn, malaria occurs.

古文：秋伤于湿，上逆而咳，发为痿厥。
现代文：秋天伤于湿邪，邪气上逆，会发生咳嗽，并且可能发展为痿厥病。
English: Autumn is affected by dampness, and vice versa, coughing will occur, and it may develop into rickets.

古文：冬伤于寒，春必温病。
现代文：冬天伤于寒气，到来年的春天，就要发生温病。
English: In winter, you will be hurt by the cold, and in the spring of the next year, you will have a fever.

古文：四时之气，更伤五脏。
现代文：四时的邪气，交替伤害人的五脏。
English: At four o'clock, the evil spirit alternately harms people's five internal organs.

古文：阴之所生，本在五味；阴之五宫，伤在五味。
现代文：阴精的产生，来源于饮食五味。储藏阴精的五脏，也会因五味而受伤。
English: The production of yin essence comes from eating five flavors. The five internal organs that store yin essence will also be injured due to five flavors.

古文：是故味过于酸，肝气以津，脾气乃绝。
现代文：过食酸味，会使肝气淫溢而亢盛，从而导致脾气的衰竭。
English: If you eat too much sour food, your liver will become inflamed and bloated, leading to a loss of temper.

古文：味过于咸，大骨气劳，短肌，心气抑。
现代文：过食咸味，会使骨骼损伤，肌肉短缩，心气抑郁。
English: Eating too much salty food will cause bone damage, muscle shortening, and depression.

古文：味过于甘，心气喘满，色黑，肾气不衡。
现代文：过食甜味，会使心气满闷，气逆作喘，颜面发黑，肾气失于平衡。
English: If you eat too much sweet, your heart will be stuffy, your qi will be out of balance, your face will turn black, and your kidney qi will be out of balance.

古文：味过于苦，脾气不濡，胃气乃厚。
现代文：过食苦味，会使脾气过燥而不濡润，从而使胃气滞。
English: The bitter taste of overeating will make the temper too dry and not moist, thus making the stomach stagnant.

古文：味过于辛，筋脉沮弛，精神乃央。
现代文：过食辛味，会使筋脉败坏，发生弛纵，精神受损。
English: Overindulgence in pungent food will cause the sinews to deteriorate, relaxation to occur and the spirit to be damaged.

古文：是故谨和五味，骨正筋柔，气血以流，腠理以密，如是则骨气以精。
现代文：因此谨慎地调和五味，会使骨骼强健，筋脉柔和，气血通畅，腠理致密，这样，骨气就精强有力。
English: Therefore, carefully adjusting the five tastes will make the bones strong, the sinews soft, the qi and blood smooth, and the body dense. In this way, the spirit is strong and powerful.

古文：谨道如法，长有天命。
现代文：所以重视养生之道，并且依照正确的方法加以实行，就会长期保有天赋的生命力。
English: Therefore, attaching importance to the way of health, and implementing it in accordance with the correct method, will preserve the vitality of the talent for a long time.

