古文：建武中，诸王皆在京师，竞修名誉，招游士。
现代文：原文东汉建武年间，诸王子都居住在京师，他们竞相在士大夫中培植树立自己的声誉，并招揽许多四方游士。
English: During the Jianwu period of the Eastern Han Dynasty, princes all lived in Beijing. They competed to cultivate and establish their reputation among scholars, and recruited many wanderers from the four directions.

古文：马援谓吕种曰： 国家诸子并壮，而旧防未立，若多通宾客，则大狱起矣。
现代文：伏波将军马援为此告诉自己的司马吕种说道： 国家的各个王子现在都已长大成人，而以往诸如诸王子不得常住京师、不许交结宾客等法规制度未能存在并执行。如果他们再这样的多结宾客，则要有大批的人坐监牢了。
English: For this reason, Fubo General Ma Yuan told Sima Lucheng: All the princes of the country have now grown up to adulthood, and in the past, legal systems such as princes not being allowed to live in Beijing permanently and not being allowed to have guests did not exist and were not enforced. If they had such a large number of guests, there would be a large number of people in prison.

古文：卿曹戒慎之。 
现代文：你们千万要相互告诫呀！ 
English: You must warn each other!

古文：后果有告诸王宾客生乱，帝诏捕宾客，更相牵引，死者以数千。
现代文：后来果然发生了有人上告诸王宾客生乱的事情，光武帝诏令搜捕诸王宾客，又相互牵连的越来越多，为此而死的人数以千计。
English: Later, someone filed a complaint against the king's guests for creating a disturbance. Emperor Guangwu issued an edict to search for and arrest the king's guests, and more and more people were implicated, and thousands of people died as a result.

古文：种亦与祸，叹曰： 马将军神人也。 
现代文：吕种也被牵连在其中而蒙受了灾难，他感叹地说： 马将军真是神人！ 
English: Lyu Zeng, who was also involved and suffered a disaster, said with a sigh: "General Ma is truly a man of God!

古文：援又尝谓梁松、窦固曰： 凡人为贵，当可使贱，如卿等当不可复贱。居高坚自持，勉思鄙言。 
现代文：马援又曾经告诉光武帝的两个女婿梁松、窦固说： 一般的平凡人得到富贵，应当可以重回到贫贱的生活中去，而你们当不可重蹈贫贱，居高位的人要有坚强的自控能力，请你们好好地思考一下我这粗浅的言论吧。 
English: Ma Yuan also once told Emperor Guangwu's two sons-in-law, Liang Song and Dou Gu, "Ordinary people should be able to return to a poor life when they get rich, but you should not be poor again. People in high positions should have strong self-control. Please think about my coarse remarks."

古文：松后果以贵满致灾，固亦几不免。
现代文：梁松以后果然因为自满于地位显贵，犯诽谤罪而死于狱中，窦固也受兄牵连而几乎不能幸免。
English: Liang Song later died in prison because he was complacent with his prominent position and committed defamation. Dou Gu was also implicated by his brother and could hardly be spared.

