古文：颜回，鲁人，字子渊，少孔子三十岁。
现代文：颜回，鲁国人，字子渊，比孔子小三十岁。
English: Yan Hui, a native of Lu, was thirty years younger than Confucius.

古文：年二十九而发白，三十一早死。
现代文：二十九岁时头发就白了，三十一岁早早就死了。
English: At the age of twenty-nine, his hair turned white, and he died early at the age of thirty-one.

古文：孔子曰： 自吾有回，门人日益亲。 
现代文：孔子说： 自从我有了颜回这个学生，我的弟子们关系日益亲密。 
English: Confucius said, "Ever since I became a disciple, my disciples have become closer and closer.

古文：回以德行著名，孔子称其仁焉。
现代文：颜回以品德操守高尚闻名，孔子称赞他仁爱。
English: Yan Hui was known for his high moral character, and Confucius praised his benevolence.

古文：宰予，字子我，鲁人，有口才，以言语著名。
现代文：宰予，字子我，鲁国人，有口才，以能言善辩著名。
English: Say, "I am a man of Lu, a man of eloquence, famous for my eloquence.

古文：事齐为临淄大夫，与田常为乱，夷其三族。
现代文：他在齐国做官，为临淄大夫，因与田常一起犯上作乱，被夷灭了三族。
English: He worked as an official in the state of Qi, as a doctor in Linyi, and because he and Tian Chang committed a riot together, three tribes were destroyed.

古文：孔子耻之，曰： 不在利病，其在宰予。 
现代文：孔子以此为耻，说： 这样的结果，不在于有什么利弊，而在于宰予参与了这件事。 
English: Confucius was ashamed of this and said, "This result is not due to any advantages or disadvantages, but to the fact that Zayou was involved in this matter.

古文：端木赐，字子贡，卫人。
现代文：端木赐，字子贡，卫国人。
English: Taegaki-no-chie, Kazuko-no-kuni, Defender of the Fatherland.

古文：少孔子三十一岁。有口才，著名。
现代文：比孔子小三十一岁，有口才，很著名。
English: Thirty-one years younger than Confucius, he is eloquent and famous.

古文：孔子每诎其辩。
现代文：孔子经常阻止他的能言善辩。
English: Confucius often discouraged his ability to speak eloquently.

古文：家富累钱千金，常结驷连骑，以造原宪。
现代文：他的家庭非常富有，常驾着马车或骑着马，去看望原宪。
English: His family was very wealthy, and he often drove a carriage or rode a horse to visit Yuan Xian.

古文：宪居蒿庐蓬户之中，与之言先王之义。
现代文：原宪居住在茅草屋中，与子贡谈论古代先王治国的道理。
English: Hara Ken lives in a thatched hut and talks with Zigong about how the ancient kings ruled the country.

古文：原宪衣弊衣冠，并日蔬食，衍然有自得之志。
现代文：原宪穿着破旧的衣服，两天才能吃一天的饭，但仍然很快乐，有自己的志向。
English: He wears worn-out clothes and can only eat one meal a day for two days, but he is still happy and has his own aspirations.

古文：子贡曰： 甚矣，子如何之病也。 
现代文：子贡说： 太过分了，你怎么会病成这样？ 
English: Zigong said, "It's too much. How did you get sick like this?"

古文：原宪曰： 吾闻无财者谓之贫，学道不能行者谓之病。
现代文：原宪说： 我听说没有钱财叫做贫，学道而不能身体力行叫做病。我是贫，不是病。 
English: Yuan Xian said: I have heard that not having money is called poverty, and not being able to practice the Dharma is called illness. I am poor, not ill.

古文：吾贫也，非病也。 子贡惭，终身耻其言之过。子贡行贩，与时转货。
现代文：子贡听了原宪的话感到很惭愧，终身都为说过这样错误的话而羞愧。子贡贩卖货物，能及时转手获利。
English: Zigong felt very ashamed after listening to the words of the original constitution, and he was ashamed of saying such wrong words for the rest of his life. Zigong sold goods and was able to make a profit in time.

古文：历相鲁卫而终齐。
现代文：曾担任鲁国、卫国的宰相，后来死在齐国。
English: He once served as the prime minister of the State of Lu and the State of Wei, and later died in the State of Qi.

古文：冉求，字子有，仲弓之宗族。
现代文：冉求，字子有，和冉雍是同族。
English: Ranqiu, the characters are, and Ran Yong is the same race.

古文：少孔子二十九岁。
现代文：比孔子小二十九岁。
English: Twenty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：有才艺，以政事著名。
现代文：有才艺，以会处理政事著名。
English: Talented, famous for his ability to deal with politics.

古文：仕为季氏宰，进则理其官职，退则受教圣师，为性多谦退。
现代文：曾为季孙氏的家臣。做官时就处理政务，不做官时就在孔子门下学习。为人性情多谦逊退让。
English: He was once a retainer of the Ji Sun clan. When he was an official, he dealt with government affairs, and when he was not an official, he studied under Confucius. He was humble and yielding.

古文：故子曰： 求也退，故进之。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 冉求做事退缩，所以我要鼓励他。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "If a man is reluctant to do something, I should encourage him.

古文：仲由，弁人，字子路，一字季路。
现代文：仲由，弁地人，字子路，一字季路。
English: Nakayuki, a native of Bento, a character named Road, and a character named Seasonal Road.

古文：少孔子九岁。
现代文：比孔子小九岁。
English: He is nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：有勇力才艺，以政事著名。
现代文：有勇力才艺，以政事著名。
English: He was a man of great courage and talent, and was famous for his political activities.

古文：为人果烈而刚直，性鄙而不达于变通。
现代文：为人果烈而刚直，性格粗放而不善于变通。
English: He is a resolute and upright person, with an expansive personality, but he is not good at flexibility.

古文：仕卫为大夫，蒯瞆与其子辄争国，子路遂死辄难。
现代文：在卫国担任大夫的官职，正赶上蒯瞆与他的儿子蒯辄争夺国君之位，子路为保护蒯辄而死。
English: Zilu, who held the official post of doctor in the imperial guard, was just in time to see Yao and his son Yao compete for the position of the sovereign, and died to protect Yao.

古文：孔子痛之，曰： 吾自有由，而恶言不入于耳。 
现代文：孔子非常悲痛，说： 自从我有了子路，那些恶意中伤的话再也传不到我耳朵里了。 
English: Confucius was very sad and said, "Since I have a son, those malicious and slanderous words can no longer reach my ears.

古文：卜商，卫人，字子夏。
现代文：卜商，卫国人，字子夏。
English: Bu merchants, defenders of the country, characters Xia.

古文：少孔子四十四岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十四岁。
English: He was forty-four years younger than Confucius.

古文：习于《诗》，能通其义，以文学著名。
现代文：他学习《诗经》，能理解其意，以文学著称。
English: He studied the "Book of Songs" and was able to understand its meaning. He was famous for his literature.

古文：为人性不弘，好论精微，时人无以尚之。
现代文：为人胸襟不够宏大，好论证精微的事情，当时没有人能超过他。
English: He wasn't big-hearted enough to argue the finer points, and no one could get the better of him at the time.

古文：尝返卫，见读史志者云： 晋师伐秦，三豕渡河。 
现代文：他曾经返回卫国，见一个读史书的人说： 晋师伐秦，三豕渡河。 
English: He once returned to the old country and saw a person reading a history book saying: "The Jin Dynasty defeated the Qin Dynasty, and the Three Kingdoms crossed the river.

古文：子夏曰： 非也，己亥耳。 
现代文：子夏说： 不对，不是三豕，是己亥。 
English: Zixia said, "No, it's not the three cormorants, it's the boar.

古文：读史志曰： 问诸晋史，果曰己亥。 
现代文：读史书的人说： 请教晋国的史官，果然是己亥。 
English: People who read history books said: "If you ask the historian of Jin, it will be your own fault."

古文：于是卫以子夏为圣。
现代文：于是卫国的人都把子夏当做圣人。
English: As a result, the defenders of the country regarded Zixia as a saint.

古文：孔子卒后，教于西河之上，魏文侯师事之，而谘国政焉。
现代文：孔子去世以后，子夏在魏国西河讲学，魏文侯把他当做老师，向他咨询治理国家的方法。
English: After the death of Confucius, Zixia lectured in Xihe, Wei, and Wei Wenhou took him as a teacher and consulted him on how to govern the country.

古文：曾参，南武城人，字子舆。
现代文：曾参，鲁国南武城人，字子舆。
English: Zeng San, a native of Nan Wucheng in the State of Lu, and Zizi Miao.

古文：少孔子四十六岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十六岁。
English: He is 46 years younger than Confucius.

古文：志存孝道，故孔子因之以作《孝经》。
现代文：以孝道为志向，所以孔子因他而作《孝经》。
English: With filial piety as his aspiration, Confucius wrote "The Book of Filial Piety" because of him.

古文：齐尝聘，欲与为卿，而不就。曰： 吾父母老，食人之禄则忧人之事，故吾不忍远亲而为人役。 
现代文：齐国曾聘请他，想让他为卿，他不去，说： 我父母已年老，拿人家的俸禄就要替人家操心，所以我不忍心远离亲人而受别人差遣。 
English: Qi Guo had once hired him and wanted to make him a lord, but he refused to go, saying: My parents are old, and I have to worry about other people's salaries, so I can't bear to be away from my relatives and be sent by others.

古文：参后母遇之无恩，而供养不衰。
现代文：他的后母对他很不好，但他仍供养她孝敬她。
English: His stepmother treated him badly, but he still provided for her and cherished her.

古文：及其妻以藜烝不熟，因出之。
现代文：他的妻子因藜羹没有蒸熟，曾参为此要休她。
English: His wife wanted to divorce him because the bean soup was not steamed well.

古文：人曰： 非七出也。 
现代文：有人说： 你妻子没有犯七出的条款啊！ 
English: Some people said, "Your wife didn't violate the seven prohibitions!"

古文：参曰： 藜蒸小物耳，吾欲使熟，而不用吾命，况大事乎？ 
现代文：曾参说： 蒸藜羹是小事，我让她蒸熟她却不听我的话，何况是大事呢？ 
English: Zeng Zeng said, "Steaming bean soup is a small matter. I asked her to steam it, but she didn't listen to me. How much more is it a big deal?"

古文：遂出之，终身不取妻。
现代文：于是就休了妻子，终身不再娶妻。
English: So he divorced his wife and never remarried.

古文：其子元请焉，告其子曰： 高宗以后妻杀孝己，尹吉甫以后妻放伯奇。
现代文：他的儿子曾元劝他再娶，他对儿子说： 殷高宗武丁因为后妻杀死了儿子孝己，尹吉甫因为后妻而放逐了儿子伯奇。
English: His son once advised him to remarry, and he said to his son: "Ying Gao Zongwuding killed his son Xiaoji because of his second wife, and Yin Jifu exiled his son Boqi because of his second wife.

古文：吾上不及高宗，中不比吉甫，庸知其得免于非乎？ 
现代文：我上不及高宗贤能，中不比尹吉甫能干，怎知能避免不做错事呢？ 
English: I am not as capable as Gao Zong, and I am not as capable as Yin Jifu. How can I avoid doing something wrong?

古文：澹台灭明，武城人，字子羽。
现代文：澹台灭明，武城人，字子羽。
English: Xingtai Zhiming, is a Wucheng people, character Zi Yu.

古文：少孔子四十九岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十九岁。
English: Forty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：有君子之姿。
现代文：他有君子的姿容。
English: He has the appearance of a gentleman.

古文：孔子尝以容貌望其才，其才不充孔子之望。
现代文：孔子曾因他的容貌而期望他的才能可以和容貌相称，可是他的才能没能达到孔子的期望。
English: Because of his appearance, Confucius had expected his talent to be commensurate with his appearance, but his talent failed to meet Confucius' expectations.

古文：然其为人，公正无私，以取与去就，以诺为名。
现代文：然而他的为人公正无私，以获取与给予来选择去就，以重信用知名。
English: However, he is a fair and selfless person, choosing to get and give, and is known for his trustworthiness.

古文：仕鲁为大夫也。
现代文：在鲁国做官，官为大夫。
English: In the State of Lu, officials were doctors.

古文：高柴，齐人，高氏之别族，字子羔。
现代文：高柴，齐国人，属高氏家族的分支，字子羔。
English: Gao Chai, a native of Qi, belongs to a branch of the Gao family, the Zi Lam.

古文：少孔子四十岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十岁。
English: Forty years younger than Confucius.

古文：长不过六尺，状貌甚恶。
现代文：他身高不到六尺，相貌很丑。
English: He was less than six feet tall and very ugly.

古文：为人笃孝而有法正。
现代文：为人特别注重孝道而又遵守礼仪法度。
English: They pay special attention to filial piety and observe the etiquette laws.

古文：少居鲁，见知名于孔子之门。
现代文：小的时候居住在鲁国，在孔子的弟子中有一定名声。
English: When he was a child, he lived in the State of Lu and had a certain reputation among the disciples of Confucius.

古文：仕为武城宰。
现代文：官为武城宰。
English: His official position was Takeshiro no kami.

古文：宓不齐，鲁人，字子贱。
现代文：宓不齐，鲁国人，字子贱。
English: 不齐, Lu Guo Ren,字子 pharma.

古文：少孔子四十九岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十九岁。
English: Forty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：仕为单父宰，有才智，仁爱，百姓不忍欺。
现代文：担任单父宰，有才智，有仁爱，连百姓都不忍欺骗他。
English: As a single father, he is talented and benevolent, and even the common people cannot bear to deceive him.

古文：孔子大之。
现代文：孔子很赞美他。
English: Confucius praised him highly.

古文：南宫韬，鲁人，字子容。
现代文：南宫韬，鲁国人，字子容。
English: Nan Gongjun, a native of Lu, is depicted with the Chinese character "Chu Rong."

古文：以智自将，世清不废，世浊不污。
现代文：能以自己的聪明才智保全自己，世道清平会有所作为，世道污浊也不会同流合污。
English: If you can preserve yourself with your own cleverness and talent, you will make a difference in the world, and the world's filth will not flow together.

古文：孔子以兄子妻之。
现代文：孔子把自己哥哥的女儿嫁给了他。
English: Confucius married his brother's daughter to him.

古文：公析哀，齐人，字季沉。
现代文：公析哀，齐国人，字季沉。
English: The public mourns, the people of Qi are saddened.

古文：鄙天下多仕于大夫家者，是故未尝屈节人臣。
现代文：鄙视天下很多人到大夫家去做家臣，因此他没有屈节去做别人的家臣。
English: He despised the fact that many people in the world went to the doctor's house to be a vassal, so he had no qualms about being someone else's vassal.

古文：孔子特叹贵之。
现代文：孔子特别赞赏他。
English: Confucius especially appreciated him.

古文：曾点，曾参父，字子皙。
现代文：曾点，曾参的父亲，字子皙。
English: Zeng Dang, Zeng Zang's father, Zizi Zang.

古文：疾时礼教不行，欲修之，孔子善焉。
现代文：他痛心于当时不施行礼教，想改变这种情况。
English: He was saddened by the lack of proper etiquette at the time and wanted to change that.

古文：《论语》所谓 浴乎沂，风乎舞雩 ，之下。
现代文：孔子很赞同他的想法，就像赞同他在《论语》中所说的 在沂水沐浴，在舞雩乘凉 一样。
English: Confucius very much agreed with his thoughts, just as he agreed with what he said in the Analects about bathing in salty water and enjoying the coolness in dancing.

古文：漆雕开，蔡人，字子若。
现代文：漆雕开，蔡国人，字子若。
English: The lacquer carving is open, Cai Guojin, the characters are young.

古文：少孔子十一岁。
现代文：比孔子小十一岁。
English: He is eleven years younger than Confucius.

古文：习《尚书》，不乐仕。
现代文：他研习《尚书》，不愿做官。
English: He studied "Shang Shu" and did not want to be an official.

古文：孔子曰： 子之齿可以仕矣，时将过。 
现代文：孔子说： 按你的年龄可以做官了，不然就错过时机了。 
English: Confucius said: According to your age, you can become an official, otherwise you will miss the opportunity.

古文：子若报其书曰： 吾斯之未能信。 
现代文：子若给孔子回信说： 我对您的话还不太明白。 
English: The boy wrote back to Confucius, "I don't quite understand what you're saying.

古文：孔子悦焉。
现代文：孔子很高兴。
English: Confucius was delighted.

古文：颜刻，鲁人，字子骄。
现代文：颜刻，鲁国人，字子骄。
English: Yan engraving, Lu people, proud characters.

古文：少孔子五十岁。
现代文：比孔子小五十岁。
English: Fifty years younger than Confucius.

古文：孔子适卫，子骄为仆。
现代文：孔子到卫国去，子骄为仆从。
English: Confucius went to defend the country, and his son became his servant.

古文：卫灵公与夫人南子同车出，而令宦者雍渠参乘，使孔子为次乘。
现代文：卫灵公和夫人南子同车出游，让宦官雍渠陪乘，让孔子乘坐后面的车陪着。
English: Wei Ling Gong and his wife Nan Zi travel in the same car, accompanied by the eunuch Yong Qu, and accompanied by Confucius in the car behind.

古文：游过市，孔子耻之。
现代文：游览经过闹市，孔子感到很耻辱。
English: When the tour passed through the downtown area, Confucius felt very humiliated.

古文：颜刻曰： 夫子何耻之？ 
现代文：颜刻说： 先生为何感到耻辱呢？ 
English: Yan Ke said: Why does the teacher feel humiliated?

古文：孔子曰： 《诗》云： 觏尔新婚，以慰我心。  
现代文：孔子说： 《诗经》说： 遇到你们新婚，你们美满我欢欣。  
English: Confucius said, "The Book of Songs says, 'When I met you newlyweds, I was filled with joy.

古文：乃叹曰： 吾未见好德如好色者也。 
现代文：又叹息说： 我没有见到喜好美好品德如同喜欢美色一样的人啊！ 
English: He also sighed and said, "I haven't seen anyone who likes beauty as much as I like beauty!"

古文：梁鳣，齐人，字叔鱼。
现代文：梁鳣，齐国人，字叔鱼。
English: Liang Jun, a native of Qi, is a fisherman.

古文：少孔子三十九岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十九岁。
English: Thirty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：年三十未有子，欲出其妻。
现代文：到了三十岁还没有儿子，想要休了他的妻子。
English: At the age of thirty, without a son, he wanted to divorce his wife.

古文：商瞿谓曰： 子未也。
现代文：商瞿对他说： 你不要这样做。
English: The merchant said to him, "Don't do that.

古文：昔吾年三十八无子，吾母为吾更取室。夫子使吾之齐，母欲请留吾。
现代文：从前我三十八岁还没有儿子，我母亲为我又娶了一房妻子，先生派我到齐国去，母亲请求让我留下来。
English: Once upon a time, I was thirty-eight years old and had no son. My mother married another wife for me. My husband sent me to Qi Province. My mother asked me to stay.

古文：夫子曰： 无忧也，瞿过四十，当有五丈夫。 
现代文：先生说： 不要担忧，商瞿过了四十岁，会有五个儿子。 
English: The teacher said, "Don't worry, after you are forty, you will have five sons."

古文：今果然。
现代文：现在果然如此。
English: This is now the case.

古文：吾恐子自晚生耳，未必妻之过。 
现代文：我恐怕你的子女晚生，未必是你妻子的过错。 
English: I'm afraid it's not necessarily your wife's fault that your children are late.

古文：从之，二年而有子。
现代文：梁鳣听从了商瞿的话，过了两年就有了儿子。
English: Liang Yao listened to the words of the negotiator and had a son two years later.

古文：琴牢，卫人，字子开，一字张。
现代文：琴牢，卫国人，字子开，一字张。
English: Qin Du, the defender of the country, the characters open, a word sheet.

古文：与宗鲁友，闻宗鲁死，欲往吊焉。
现代文：和宗鲁是好朋友，听到宗鲁死了，想去悼念他。
English: He was good friends with Zonglu, and when he heard that Zonglu had died, he wanted to go and mourn him.

古文：孔子弗许，曰： 非义也。 
现代文：孔子不让他去，说： 这不合乎义。 
English: Confucius refused to let him go, saying, "It is not right."

