古文：蓝珪、康履，初皆为康王府都监、入内东头供奉官，尝从康王使金人行营。
现代文：蓝珪、康履，起初都是康王府都监、入内东头供奉官，曾经跟从康王出使到金人军营。
English: Lan Lan and Kang Lui were originally the inspectors of King Kang's capital and the officials who went to the east to offer their services. They once followed King Kang's envoys to the Jinren military camp.

古文：及开元帅府，并主管机宜文字。
现代文：等到设元帅府后，他们一起主管机宜文字。
English: After the establishment of the marshal's office, they were in charge of writing together.

古文：朝廷遣人趣师入援，履等请王留相州，王叱之而行。
现代文：朝廷派人催元帅府发兵救援京城，康履等请康王留在相州，康王大声呵斥他们后出发。
English: The imperial court sent someone to urge the marshal's office to send troops to rescue the capital. Kanglu and others asked King Kang to stay in Sangju. King Kang loudly rebuked them and then set off.

古文：既即位，二人俱恃恩用事，履尤妄作威福，大将如刘光世等多曲意事之。
现代文：康王即位后，蓝珪、康履依仗受恩宠而弄权，康履更是作威作福，大将如刘光世等多屈己迎合他。
English: After the enthronement of King Kang, Lan Xuan and Kang Loo gained power by relying on the favor of the king. Kang Loo was more of a tyrant than a blessing, and generals such as Liu Guangshi often bowed down to him.

古文：帝知之，诏内侍不许与统兵官相见，违者停官编隶。
现代文：高宗知道后，下诏内侍不许与统兵官相见，违犯者罢官，编入隶籍。
English: After Gao Zong learned of this, he issued an edict forbidding the palace attendants to meet with the general officer, and those who violated the edict were dismissed from their posts and transferred to subordinate ranks.

古文：履终无所忌惮，与内侍曾择凌忽诸将，或踞坐洗足，立诸将于左右，声喏甚至马前，故疾之者众。
现代文：康履始终无所忌惮，与内侍曾择凌辱和怠慢众将，或者骄横地坐着让众将给洗脚，或者让众将站在左右两旁，在军前喝斥他们，因此，恨他的人很多。
English: Kanglu has always been unscrupulous. He and his attendants have abused and neglected the generals, or arrogantly sat and let the generals wash their feet, or let the generals stand on the right and left sides and scold them in front of the army. Therefore, there are many people who hate him.

古文：俄迁内侍省押班、金州观察使。
现代文：不久康履升为内侍省押班、金州观察使。
English: Soon after, Kang Lu was promoted to the escort of the Ministry of the Interior and the observation envoy of Jinzhou.

古文：帝在扬州，金兵卒至，帝驰马出门，百官不戒备，从行者惟履等五六人。
现代文：皇上在扬州，金兵突然到来，皇上骑马出城门，百官没有准备，跟随的只有康履等五六人。
English: The emperor was in Yangzhou, the golden soldiers suddenly arrived, the emperor rode out of the city gate, the officials were unprepared, and only five or six people, such as Kanglu, followed.

古文：自是履等益自衒，愈有轻外朝心。
现代文：从此康履等更是自认为有保驾之功，愈来愈有轻视朝官的意图。
English: Since then, Kanglu and others have been thinking of themselves as having the ability to keep the ship afloat, and they have more and more intentions to despise the imperial officials.

古文：及幸浙，道吴江，其党竞以射鸭为乐。
现代文：皇上到浙东，经过吴江，康履及其党羽竞相以射鸭取乐。
English: When the emperor went to eastern Zhejiang and passed through the Wujiang River, Kanglu and his followers competed in shooting ducks for fun.

古文：比至杭州，江下观潮，中官供帐，赫然遮道。
现代文：到杭州后，又去钱塘江观看海潮，宦官的帐篷，公然安置在路上。
English: After arriving in Hangzhou, he went to the Qiantang River to watch the tides. The eunuch's tent was openly placed on the road.

古文：统制苗傅等切齿曰： 此辈使天子至此，犹敢尔邪？ 傅幕客王世修亦疾中官恣横，以告武功大夫刘正彦，正彦曰： 会当共除之。 王渊跻枢筦，正彦以为由宦者所荐，愈不平，谋遂决。
现代文：统制苗傅等咬牙切齿地说 ：这些人使皇上落到如此地步，还敢胡作非为？ 苗傅的幕僚王世修也痛恨宦官恣意骄横，就把这事告诉武功大夫刘正彦，刘正彦说 ：我们正该一起除掉他们。 王渊升为枢密使，刘正彦认为是宦官推荐的，更不满，就决定谋反。
English: Miao Fu's chief of staff, Wang Shixiu, also detested the eunuch's high-handedness and arrogance, so he told this to Liu Zhengyan, a martial arts doctor. Liu Zhengyan said, "We should get rid of them all together." Wang Yuan was promoted to the position of privy envoy, which Liu Zhengyan believed was recommended by the eunuch. Even more dissatisfied, he decided to rebel.

古文：伏兵斩渊，遣兵围履家，分捕中官，凡无须者皆杀之。
现代文：刘正彦等设伏兵杀了王渊，派兵包围康履家，分别捕杀宦官，凡没长胡须的人都杀掉。
English: Liu Zhengyan and others set up an ambush to kill Wang Yuan, sent soldiers to surround the Kanglu family, separately captured and killed eunuchs, and killed anyone who did not have a long beard.

古文：履驰入白帝，傅等至，厉声曰： 陛下信任中官，凡中官所主者皆得美官。
现代文：康履奔到宫中禀告皇上，苗傅等赶到，厉声说： 陛下信任宦官，凡是宦官推举的人都得到美官。
English: Kang Lu rushed to the palace to inform the emperor. Miao Fu and others arrived and said in a strong voice: "Your Majesty trusts eunuchs. All those who are chosen by eunuchs are given high positions.

古文：王渊遇贼不战，交康履得枢密。
现代文：王渊遇敌不战，与康履交结而任枢密使。
English: Wang Yuan did not fight in the face of the enemy, and was appointed as a privy envoy after meeting with Kang Lu.

古文：中官在外者已诛，更乞康履、蓝珪、曾择等诛之，以谢三军。 帝不忍，除傅等官以安之。
现代文：宦官在宫外的都已被杀，请杀康履、蓝珪、曾择等，以谢三军。 皇上不忍心，就提升苗傅等的官职来安抚他们。
English: The eunuchs outside the palace have all been killed, please kill Kanglu, Lanluo, Zengcai, etc. to thank the three armies. The emperor could not bear it, so he promoted Miao Fu and other officials to appease them.

古文：傅等曰： 欲迁官，第须控两匹马与内侍，何必至此！ 帝问百官： 策安出？ 主管浙西机宜文字时希孟曰： 中官之为患，至此极矣。
现代文：苗傅等说： 想升官，只需控制两匹马和内侍，何必至此！ 皇上问百官怎么办？主管浙西机宜文字时希孟说 ：宦官为患已极，不除掉他们，天下的祸患就会不止。 
English: Miao Fu and others said: If you want to be promoted, you only need to control two horses and a chambermaid, why do you have to do this! The emperor asked what to do with a hundred officials? When he was in charge of the Zhejiang West Jingyi script, Xi Meng said: Eunuchs are extremely troublesome, and if you don't get rid of them, the world's woes will continue.

古文：不除之，天下之患未已。 军器监叶宗谔言： 陛下何惜一康履，不以慰三军？ 帝不得已，遣人执履至，履望帝呼曰： 大家何独杀臣？ 遂以付傅，即腰斩之。
现代文：军器监叶宗谔说 ：陛下为什么吝惜一个康履，不杀他以慰抚三军？ 皇上不得已，派人抓来康履，康履望着皇上大呼 ：陛下为什么只杀我？ 皇上就把康履交给苗傅，苗傅立即砍下他的头。
English: Ye Zonglu, the inspector of military equipment, said, "Why did your majesty spare a Kanglu and not kill him to appease the three armies? The emperor had no choice but to send someone to capture Kanglu. Kanglu looked at the emperor and shouted, "Why did your majesty only kill me?" The emperor then handed Kanglu to Miao Fu, who immediately cut off his head.

古文：枭其首。帝幸睿圣宫，傅等留内侍十五人奉左右。
现代文：皇上到睿圣宫，苗傅等留下内侍十五人侍奉皇上。
English: The emperor arrived at the Imperial Palace, leaving behind 15 attendants to serve the emperor.

古文：寻捕珪、择等，皆编置远州；择，昭州，行一程，追还斩之。
现代文：不久又逮捕蓝珪、曾择等，都被编置到远地；曾择被编置到昭州，走了一程，被追回后斩杀。
English: Soon after, Lan Lan, Zeng Zheng and others were arrested and taken to a distant place; Zeng Zheng was taken to Zhaozhou, walked for a while, and was chased back and killed.

古文：傅等诛，赠履官，谥荣节，召珪等还。
现代文：苗傅等被杀后，皇上赠给康履官职，谥号 荣节 ，召蓝珪等回京。
English: After Miao Fu and others were killed, the emperor presented Kang with an official post, the posthumous name Rong Jie, and summoned Lan Yu and others back to Beijing.

古文：中书舍人季陵言： 中官复召，其党与相贺，气焰益张，中外切齿。 不报。
现代文：中书舍人季陵说 ：宦官被重新召回，他们的党羽互相庆贺，气焰更嚣张，朝内外都痛恨。 
English: Ji Ling, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, said: "The eunuchs have been recalled, their party members are celebrating with each other, their arrogance is even greater, and they are hated both at home and abroad.

古文：珪至，自武功大夫擢内侍省押班。
现代文：皇上没答复。蓝珪回朝后，由武功大夫升为内侍省押班。
English: The emperor did not reply. After Lan Xuan returned to the imperial court, he was promoted from a martial arts doctor to an attendant of the imperial household.

古文：慈宁宫建，命提点事务，寻升内侍省都知。
现代文：建慈宁宫，皇上命令他为提点事务，不久升为内侍省都知。
English: He built the Cining Palace, and the emperor ordered him to take charge of certain affairs, and he was soon promoted to the position of Naishi no sho (Minister of the Imperial Household) Tochi.

古文：及迎太后，命充都大主管。
现代文：迎太后时，皇上任命他为都大主管。
English: When welcoming the empress dowager, the emperor appointed him as the head of the capital university.

古文：太后既还宫，珪奏应干补授恩，乞听慈宁宫施行。
现代文：太后还宫后，蓝珪上奏应推恩，请求在慈宁宫施行。
English: After the empress dowager returned to the palace, the Blue Kite was performed at the request of the Cining Palace.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允许。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：珪初与履同进，而骄横不及履，故幸以寿终。
现代文：蓝珪开始和康履一起进升，但不如康履骄横，所以有幸寿终。
English: The Blue Heron began to advance together with the Kanglu, but it was not as arrogant as the Kanglu, so it had a happy life.

古文：有安石者，与同姓，为内侍省副都知，至景福殿使、湖州观察使。
现代文：有个名叫安石的人，与蓝珪同姓，任内侍省副都知，官至景福殿使、湖州观察使。
English: There was a man named Anshi, who had the same surname as Lan Xuan, and was appointed as the Vice Governor of Inner Mongolia, the Vice Governor of Gyeongbokgung Province, the Vice Governor of Gyeongbokgung Province, and the Vice Governor of Huzhou Province.

古文：卒，赠保宁军节度使，谥良恪。
现代文：去世后赠官为保宁军节度使，谥号 良恪 。
English: After his death, his posthumous title was given to the military governor of Boryeong Province, and his posthumous name was Ryokaku.

古文：渡江后，中官赠谥自安石始。
现代文：宋南渡后，宦官赠谥号是从蓝安石开始的。
English: After the arrival of Song Nanshan, the eunuchs began to receive the title of eunuchs from Lan Anshi.

古文：又有与履同姓者名谞，为内侍省押班，亦亲幸用事，与知阁门事蓝公佐善，每邀公佐至其直舍，必纵饮大醉，薄莫乃归，尝漏泄禁中语。
现代文：又有与康履同姓，名叫的人，任内侍省押班，也因受宠专权，同知门事蓝公佐友好，常邀蓝公佐到他值班的处所，定要狂饮大醉，傍晚才回来，曾泄漏宫廷秘密。
English: There was also a person with the same surname and name as Kang Lu, who was assigned to the duty shift of the Ministry of the Imperial Household, and also because of the exclusive right to be favored, he was friendly with the gatekeeper, Lan Guanzo. He often invited Lan Guanzo to the place where he was on duty. He was sure to get drunk and come back in the evening. He once leaked palace secrets.

古文：中书舍人高文虎请改为安置，台谏复言其奸诡，乞自今不以赦移，虽特旨亦许执奏，帝用其言，德谦遂坐废斥以死。
现代文：刘光远被弹劾，康与内侍陈永锡接受他的贿赂，极力营救他。言官弹劾他们，皇上下诏让陈永锡去管祠观，康送交吏部处理。后来康官至均州观察使。去世后赠为保信军节度使，谥号 忠定 。
English: Liu Guangyuan was impeached, Kang and his chamberlain Chen Yongxi accepted his bribe and tried their best to rescue him. The speaker impeached them, the emperor ordered Chen Yongxi to go to the shrine, and Kang was sent to the cadre department. Later, Kang went to Junzhou as an observation envoy. After his death, he was presented as a festival envoy of the Hoxin Army, and his nickname was Zhongding.

古文：关礼，高宗朝宦者。
现代文：关礼是高宗朝的宦官。
English: Guanli was a eunuch of the Gaozong Dynasty.

古文：淳熙末，积官至亲卫大夫、保信军承宣使。
现代文：淳熙末年，官至亲卫大夫、保信军承宣使。
English: At the end of Atsuhiro's life, he was promoted to the official rank of doctor of the Imperial Guards, and became the envoy of the Hoshinkin Army.

古文：孝宗颇亲信之，后命提举重华宫。
现代文：孝宗十分倚重他，后来任命他为提举重华宫。
English: He was highly regarded by Emperor Xiaozong, who later appointed him to head the Chonghua Palace.

古文：孝宗崩，光宗疾，不能执丧，枢密赵汝愚等请建储以安人心，光宗御批又有 念欲退闲 语，丞相留正惧，纳禄去，人心愈摇。
现代文：孝宗去世，光宗有病不能主持丧礼，枢密赵汝愚等请求立太子以安定人心，光宗御批又有 想要退位 的话，丞相留正恐惧，辞官，人心更不稳定。
English: Xiaozong died, Guangzong was ill and unable to preside over the funeral, the privy councilor Zhao Rugu and others requested the crown prince to stabilize the people's hearts, Guangzong was approved and wanted to abdicate, the prime minister was afraid to remain in office, and the people's hearts were even more unstable.

古文：汝愚遣戚里韩侂胄因内侍张宗尹以禅位之议奏，太皇太后曰： 此岂可易言！ 明日，汝愚再遣侂胄附宗尹以奏，未获命而侂胄退，与礼遇，礼知其意，问之，侂胄不以告。
现代文：赵汝愚派皇亲韩胄借助内侍张宗尹把让光宗禅位的建议上奏，太皇太后说： 这话怎能轻易就说！ 第二天，赵汝愚又派韩胄和张宗尹一起上奏，没得到什么诏旨，韩胄就退了回来，同关礼相遇，关礼知道他的意图，就问他，韩胄不告诉关礼。
English: The next day, Zhao Rugu sent Han Zheng, a relative of the emperor, with the help of the chamberlain Zhang Zongyin, to play the suggestion of letting Guangzong Zen, and the great empress dowager said: How can this be said easily! The next day, Zhao Rugu sent Han Zheng and Zhang Zongyin to play together, and did not get any imperial decree, Han Zheng returned and met Guan Li. Guan Li knew his intention and asked him, but Han Zheng would not tell Guan Li.

古文：礼指天自誓不言，侂胄遂白其事，礼即入宫，泣告太后以时事可忧之状，且曰： 留丞相已去，所恃者赵知院耳。
现代文：关礼指天发誓说他不外传，韩胄就把这事告诉他，关礼立即入宫，哭着把时事令人忧虑的情形禀告了太后，并说： 留丞相已走，所依赖的就是赵知院。
English: Guanli swore to the heavens that he would not spread the news, and Han Zheng told him about it. Guanli immediately entered the palace and, crying, told the empress dowager about the worrying situation of the current affairs, and said: The Minister of Foreign Affairs has left, and it is Zhao Zhiyin that he relies on.

古文：今欲定大计而无太皇太后之命，亦将去矣。 太后惊曰： 知院，同姓也，事体与他人异。 礼曰： 知院未去，恃有太后耳。
现代文：现在想立太子而无太皇太后的诏命，他也将离开了。 太后吃惊地说： 知院，是宗室同姓，他和别人不一样。 关礼说： 知院没离开，是因为有太后在。
English: Now he wants to establish a crown prince, but without the empress dowager's imperial decree, he will also leave. The empress dowager was surprised and said, "Chiin, who is from the same family, is different from others." Guan Li said, "Chiin did not leave because the empress dowager is here."

古文：今有请不许，计无所出，亦惟有去而已。
现代文：现在他有请求而太后不许，没别的办法，他也只有离开了。
English: Now that his request had been refused by the Queen Mother, he had no choice but to leave.

古文：知院去，天下将若何？ 太后悟，遂命礼传旨侂胄以谕汝愚，约明日太后垂帘上其事。
现代文：知院离开，天下将怎么办？ 太后醒悟，就命令关礼传旨给韩胄让他告诉赵汝愚，约定明天太后垂帘听政，让他上奏这件事。
English: When the empress dowager came to her senses, she ordered Guan Li to send a message to Han Zheng, telling him to tell Zhao Ruwu that the empress dowager would listen to the government tomorrow, and that he should report the matter.

古文：又明日，嘉王入行禫祭，汝愚即帘前进呈御批，太后遂命王即皇帝位。
现代文：又过了一天，嘉王入宫举行除去丧服的祭礼，赵汝愚向太后进呈光宗的御批，太后就诏命嘉王即皇帝位。
English: A day later, when King Jia entered the palace, a ceremony was held to remove the mourning clothes. Zhao Rugu presented Emperor Guangzong's approval to the empress dowager, and the empress dowager ordered King Jia to become emperor.

古文：寻除礼入内内侍省都知，又差兼重华、慈福宫承受，充提举皇城司，迁中侍大夫。
现代文：不久，关礼被任命为入内内侍省都知，又派他兼任重华、慈福宫承受，提举皇城司，升为中侍大夫。
English: Soon after, Guan Li was appointed to join the Imperial Household Agency, and he was also assigned to take charge of Chonghua and Cifu Palace. He was also promoted to the position of Imperial City Manager and promoted to the position of Middle Attendant Doctor.

古文：礼不以功自居，乞致仕，不许；乞免推恩，又不许。
现代文：关礼不以功自居，请求辞官，皇上不许；他又请求免去推恩，皇上又不允许。
English: Guan Li did not regard himself as a meritorious person. He asked to be relieved of his post, but the emperor did not allow it. He also asked to be exempted from the courtesy title, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：南渡后，内侍可称者惟邵成章与礼云。
现代文：宋南渡后，内侍中可以赞扬的只有邵成章和关礼。
English: After Song Nan's arrival, only Shao Chengzhang and Guanli could be praised among the chambermaids.

古文：董宋臣，理宗朝宦者。
现代文：董宋臣，是理宗朝宦官。
English: Dong Songchen was a eunuch of the Rissong Dynasty.

古文：淳祐中，以睿思殿祗候特转横行官。
现代文：淳中，他由睿思殿祗候特转为横行官。
English: During his junior high school years, he was transferred from a student at Rize Hall to a riot officer.

古文：宝祐三年，兼干办佑圣观。
现代文：宝三年，兼任干办佑圣观。
English: For three years, he also served as a cadre of Yu Shengkun.

古文：侍御史洪天锡劾之，不报，天锡坐左迁大理少卿。
现代文：侍御史洪天锡弹劾他，皇上没做答复，洪天锡获罪，降为大理少卿。
English: The attendant Shi Hong Tianxi impeached him, but the emperor did not reply. Hong Tianxi was found guilty and demoted to Dali Shaoqing.

古文：开庆初，大元兵驻江上，京师大震。
现代文：开庆初年，大元兵驻屯江上，京城恐慌。
English: In the first year of the celebration, Taiyuan soldiers were stationed on the Tunjiang River, causing panic in the capital.

古文：宋臣赞帝迁幸宁海军，签判文天祥上疏乞诛宋臣，又不报。
现代文：董宋臣赞成皇上迁到宁海军，签判文天祥上疏请求杀董宋臣，皇上又没答复。
English: Dong Songchen approved of the emperor's move to the Ning navy and signed the sentence. Wen Tianxiang Shangsu requested to kill Dong Songchen, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：景定四年，自保康军承宣使除入内内侍省押班，寻兼主管太庙、往来国信所，同提点内军器库、翰林院、编修敕令所、都大提举诸司，提点显应观，主管景献太子府事。
现代文：景定四年，董宋臣由保康军承宣使升为入内内侍省押班，不久又兼任主管太庙、往来国信所，同提点内军器库、翰林院、编修敕令所、都大提举诸司，提点显应观，主管景献太子府事。
English: In the fourth year of Jingding, Dong Songchen was promoted from the propaganda envoy of the Hokang Army to the escort of the Ministry of the Imperial Household, and soon he also served as the head of the Imperial Temple, the Communications Office, the Military Arsenal, the Hanlin Academy, the Editing and Editing Office, and the Capital University. He was also in charge of the Prince's Office.

古文：会天祥以著作佐郎兼献景府教授，义不与宋臣联事，上书求去，天祥出知瑞州。
现代文：恰好文天祥以著作佐郎的身份兼景献府教授，讲求大义不与董宋臣共事，上书请求离开，文天祥就出京任瑞州知州。
English: It just so happened that when Wen Tianxiang, in his capacity as the author of "Saro" and professor of "Jing Xianfu," pleaded with Dong Songcheng not to work with him, and sent a letter requesting him to leave, Wen Tianxiang left Beijing to take up the post of "Ruizhou Chizhou."

古文：言者论宋臣不置，帝曲为谕解庇之。
现代文：言者论奏不该用董宋臣，皇上曲意替他解脱，庇护他。
English: The speaker should not have used Dong Song Chen, the emperor's music was intended to liberate him and protect him.

古文：秘书少监汤汉上封事，亦言： 宋臣十余年来声焰薰灼，其力能去台谏、排大臣，至结凶渠以致大祸。
现代文：秘书少监汤汉上疏，也说 ：董宋臣十余年来气焰嚣张，他的权势能去除台谏，排挤大臣，甚至勾结敌人招致大祸。
English: Tong Han Shang Zuo, secretary of the juvenile detention center, also said: "Dong Song Chen has been arrogant for more than ten years. His power can remove Taiwan's shackles, oust ministers, and even collude with enemies to cause a catastrophe.

古文：中外惶惑切齿，而陛下方为之辨明，大臣方为之和解，此过计也。
现代文：中外人士惶恐且怨恨，而陛下还替他申辩，大臣还替他排解，这是不对的。
English: It is not right that people in China and abroad are fearful and resentful, while His Majesty still defends him and the minister still tries to sort things out for him.

古文：愿收还押班等除命，不胜宗社之幸。 疏入，帝亦不之省。
现代文：希望陛下收回对他押班等的任命，这才是社稷的大幸事。 这封上疏献上，皇上也不去考察董宋臣的作为。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will revoke the appointment of him as an overseer, which is a great blessing for society. In this letter, the Emperor does not go to investigate the deeds of Dong Songchen.

古文：六月，命主管御前马院及酒库。
现代文：六月，任命董宋臣主管御前马院及酒库。
English: In June, he appointed Dong Songchen to be in charge of the imperial stables and the wine warehouse.

古文：既卒，帝犹命特转节度使，其见宠爱如此。
现代文：董宋臣去世后，皇上还下令特转他为节度使，足见皇上对他的宠爱。
English: After the death of Dong Songcheng, the emperor also ordered that he be specially transferred to be the festival envoy, which shows the emperor's fondness for him.

