古文：令狐德棻崔行功边仁表辛郁尹君裴玄本长孙玄同王福畤许敬宗高崔嵬元晋赵谦光沈佺期崔日用裴谈李镇恶卢广松寿封抱一尹神童
现代文：令狐德棻崔行功边仁表辛郁尹君裴玄本长孙玄同王福畤许敬宗高崔嵬元晋赵谦光沈佺期崔日用裴谈李镇恶卢广松寿封抱一尹神童
English: 令狐德崔行功邊仁表辛郁尹君裴玄本長孙玄同王福徐敬宗高崔元晋赵謙光沈期崔日用裴谈李镇惡卢广松寿封抱一尹神童

古文：令狐德棻
现代文：令狐德棻
English: 令狐德

古文：唐赵元楷与令狐德棻从驾至陕。
现代文：唐朝时，赵元楷和令狐德棻陪同皇帝出巡到陕。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Yuankai and Ling Fuxedong accompanied the emperor on a tour to Shaanxi.

古文：元楷召德棻河边观砥柱，德棻不去，遂独行。
现代文：赵元楷召呼令狐德棻一块儿去黄河边观看位于河中间急流处的砥柱石，令狐德棻没有去。
English: Zhao Yuankai called the fox Decheng to go to the Yellow River to see the whetstone in the middle of the river rapids, but the fox Decheng did not go.

古文：及还，德棻曰：砥柱共公作何语。
现代文：待到赵元楷回来后，令狐德棻问他：砥柱石跟你都说了些什么啊？
English: After waiting for Zhao Yuankai to return, Ling Dejun asked him: What did the pillar stone say to you?

古文：答曰：砥柱附参承公。
现代文：赵元楷回答说：砥柱石让我给你捎个信，他愿意参见侍奉你。
English: Zhao Yuankai replied, "Let the pillar stone give you a letter. He is willing to serve you."

古文：德棻应声曰：石不能言，物或凭焉。
现代文：令狐德棻应声说：石头不会说话，可捎来什么信物作凭证吗？
English: Ling Deyu echoed, "Stone cannot speak. Can you bring me any evidence to prove it?"

古文：时群公以为佳对。
现代文：当时跟随皇上同去的其他官员们，认为这是很幽默的对答。
English: Other officials who accompanied the emperor at the time thought this was a very humorous reply.

古文：崔行功
现代文：崔行功
English: Cui Xingong

古文：唐崔行功与敬播相逐。
现代文：唐朝人崔行功与敬播，互相竞争着戏谑对方。
English: The people of the Tang Dynasty, Cui Xinggong and Jingbai, competed with each other and teased each other.

古文：播带榈木霸刀子，行功问播云：此是何木。
现代文：敬播佩带一把榈木把佩刀，崔行功问：这刀把是什么木头的？
English: Wearing a palm tree handle saber, Cui Xingong asked: What kind of wood is this handle?

古文：播对曰：是栟榈木。
现代文：敬播回答说是棕榈木的。
English: The broadcaster replied that it was made of palm wood.

古文：行功曰：唯问刀子，不问佩人。
现代文：崔行功说：我只问刀子，谁问你这个佩带刀子的人了呢？
English: Cui Xinggong said, "I only ask about the knife. Who asked about you, the one with the knife?"

古文：边仁表
现代文：边仁表
English: Henin's Table

古文：唐四门助教弘绰与弟子边仁表论议。
现代文：唐朝人四门学馆的助教弘绰，跟学生边仁表辩论。
English: Hong Cao, a teaching assistant at the Tang Dynasty Four-Door School, debates with a student over a table.

古文：弘绰义理将屈，乃高声大怒。
现代文：弘绰眼看就要理屈词穷了，于是就高声发火地喊。
English: Seeing this, Hong Chi was at a loss for words, so he shouted loudly and angrily.

古文：表遂报曰：先生闻义即怒，岂曰弘，是事皆弘。
现代文：边仁表立即回报说：先生听到道理就发火，怎么能叫 弘 呢？
English: Benjen immediately replied: "When you hear the truth, you get angry. How can you call me Hiroshi?"

古文：弘又报云：我姓即曰弘。
现代文：弘绰也回敬道：我的姓即是弘，不论在什么事情上都 弘 。
English: Hongqiao also replied respectfully: My surname is Hong, no matter what the matter is, it is Hong.

古文：边又应声曰：先生虽曰弘，义终不绰。
现代文：边仁表又马上回报说：先生虽然姓弘，但是道理终归不宽绰！
English: Bianren watch immediately replied: Although Mr. surnamed Hong, but the truth is not lenient!

古文：座下大笑，弘竟被屈而归。
现代文：在座的学生听了后都大笑不止，弘绰被说得理屈词穷地走了。
English: After listening to the students present, they all laughed and laughed, and Hongzhao went away exhausted after being talked about.

古文：辛郁
现代文：辛郁
English: Spicy

古文：唐辛郁，管城人也，旧名太公。
现代文：唐朝人辛郁，管城人，从前名叫太公。
English: Tang Dynasty people are melancholy, city administrators, formerly called Taigong.

古文：弱冠，遭太宗于行所。问何人，曰：辛太公。
现代文：刚刚到二十岁的年龄，在皇上的行宫附近遇到了唐太宗。唐太宗问：你叫什么名字？辛郁回答说：我叫辛太公。
English: When he was just twenty years old, he met Emperor Taizong of Tang near the imperial palace. Emperor Taizong asked: What is your name? Xin Yu replied: My name is Xin Taigong.

古文：太宗曰：何如旧太公。
现代文：唐太宗说：跟旧太公比如何？
English: Tang Taizong said: How does it compare to the old Taigong?

古文：郁曰：旧太公，八十始遇文王。
现代文：辛郁回答说：旧太公，年八十得遇周文王。
English: Xin Yu replied, "The old grand duke met King Zhou Wen in his eighties.

古文：臣今适年十八，已遇陛下。过之远矣。
现代文：我今年才十八岁，就遇见了皇上，比旧太公强远去了。
English: I was only eighteen years old this year when I met the Emperor, and I am far stronger than the old Grand Duke.

古文：太宗悦，命直中书。
现代文：唐太宗听了非常高兴，让人将辛郁安置在中书省。
English: Tang Taizong was very happy to hear this, and let people place Xinpu in the Chinese Literature Department.

古文：尹君
现代文：尹君
English: Yin Jun

古文：唐杨纂。华阴人也，累迁雍州长史，吏部尚书。
现代文：唐朝杨纂，华阴人，为官连续升迁雍州长史、吏部尚书。
English: The Tang dynasty Yang codified, Hua Yin people, for the official consecutive promotion Yong governor history, cadre department Shang Shu.

古文：纂之在雍州，司法参军尹君尝任坊州司户。
现代文：杨纂任雍州长史时，属下有个主管刑法的参军叫尹君，曾一度任坊州主管民户的官吏。
English: When Yang Zuo was governor of Yongshi, one of his subordinates, Yin Jun, who was in charge of criminal law, joined the army. He was once an official in charge of households in Fangzhou.

古文：省符科杜若，尹君判申曰：坊州本无杜若，天下共知。
现代文：当时，尚书省下达命令让坊册征收杜若税，尹君在这份命令上签署意见说：坊州原本就不出产杜若，天下人都知道。
English: At that time, the Ministry of Education and Culture issued an order for Fangzhuang to levy duwah tax, and Yin Jun signed an opinion on this order, saying: Fangzhou originally did not produce duwah, the whole world knows.

古文：省符忽有此科，应由读谢眺诗误。
现代文：尚书省下达的命令里忽然征收这门税，是由读晋朝人谢眺的诗造成的误会。
English: The sudden levy of this tax in the order issued by the Ministry of Education and Culture was a misunderstanding caused by a poem read by a person from the Jin Dynasty.

古文：华省曹郎如此判事，不畏二十八宿向下笑人。
现代文：尚书省的官吏们这样决断事情，不怕上天的二十八宿耻笑吗？
English: Are the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture, who make such decisions, not afraid of Heaven's twenty-eight mansions of shame?

古文：由是知名。
现代文：尹君由于这件事而闻名。
English: Yin Jun is famous for this.

古文：及雍州司法时，有胡盗金城坊者。
现代文：尹君任雍州司法参军主管刑法时，有胡人偷盗金城店铺。
English: When Yin Jun was in charge of criminal law of the Yongzhou Judicial Joining Forces, there were Hu people stealing Jincheng stores.

古文：纂判：京城诸胡尽禁问。
现代文：杨纂批示说：将京城所有的胡人都监禁起来加以审问。
English: Yang Guanzhong ordered that all the Hu people in Beijing should be arrested and interrogated.

古文：尹君不同之曰：贼出万端，诈伪非一。
现代文：尹君不同意杨纂的这个批示，另外批示说：盗贼出自各种各样的人，而且他们奸诈善于伪装也各自不一样。
English: Yin Jun did not agree with this order of Yang Zuo. Another order said: Thieves come from all kinds of people, and their cunning and good at disguise are also different.

古文：亦有胡着汉帽，汉着胡靴。
现代文：也有的胡人戴着汉人的帽子，也有汉人穿胡人的靴子。
English: Some Hu people also wear Han hats, and some Han people wear Hu people's boots.

古文：亦须汉里兼求，不可胡中直觅。
现代文：因此也须要到汉人里查找盗贼，不可以只在胡人中查找。
English: Therefore, it is also necessary to look for thieves among the Han people, and it is not possible to look for them only among the Hu people.

古文：请西市胡禁，余请不问。
现代文：我请求将西市商业区的胡人监禁起来，其余的胡人不要再监禁审问了。
English: I request that the Hu people in the Xicheng business district be imprisoned, and that the remaining Hu people no longer be imprisoned and interrogated.

古文：纂怒不同判。遽命笔，复沉吟少选，乃判曰：纂输一筹，余依。
现代文：杨纂看到尹君跟自己判处的不一样，非常生气，立即拿起笔来想驳回尹君的判处，又沉吟了一会儿，于是下笔批示道：杨纂输给你一筹，依你的判处，西市以外的胡人不予监禁审问。
English: Seeing that Yin Jun's sentence was different from his own, Yang Kun was very angry. He immediately picked up a pen to reject Yin Jun's sentence. He pondered for a while, and then wrote: Yang Kun has given you one point. According to your sentence, Hu people outside of West City will not be imprisoned and interrogated.

古文：太宗闻而笑曰：朕用杨纂，闻义伏输一筹，朕伏得几筹。
现代文：唐太宗听说这件事后，笑着说：我任用的杨纂，听说他深明大义自认服输一筹，我服输几筹？
English: After Tang Taizong heard about this, he smiled and said: My appointed Yang Kun, I heard that he was deeply righteous and admitted to losing a bit, how much did I lose?

古文：裴玄本
现代文：裴玄本
English: Bae Hyun-bum

古文：唐裴玄本好谐谑，为户部郎中。
现代文：唐朝人裴玄本喜爱开玩笑，任户部郎中。
English: Pei Xuanbon, a Tang Dynasty person, liked to joke and was appointed as a junior member of the household department.

古文：时左仆射房玄龄疾甚，省郎将问疾。玄本戏曰：仆射病，可须问之。既甚矣，何须问也。
现代文：在左仆射房玄龄病重时，省署内的郎中们准备去探病，裴玄本戏谑地说：房仆射患病有必要去探问，既然病得很重了，为什么还要去探问他病得轻重呢？
English: When the left manservant, Shozo Genroi, was seriously ill, his subordinates in the provincial office were preparing to go and check on him. Pei Genbon said jokingly, "It is necessary to check on Shozo when he is ill. Since he is seriously ill, why should we also check on him to see how serious his illness is?"

古文：有泄其言者。
现代文：有人将裴玄本的这句话传给了房玄龄。
English: Someone passed this sentence from Pei Xuanpeng to Fang Xuanling.

古文：既而随例看玄龄，玄龄笑曰：裴郎中来，玄龄不死也。
现代文：等到裴玄本跟从大家一块儿去探望房玄龄时，房玄龄笑着说：裴郎中来看我了，我看来不会死的了。
English: When Pei Xuanpeng went to visit Fang Xuanling together with everyone else, Fang Xuanling smiled and said: "Pei Langzhong has come to see me, it looks like I won't die."

古文：长孙玄同
现代文：长孙玄同
English: The eldest grandson, Xuan Tong

古文：唐长孙玄同幼有讥辩，坐中每剧谈，无不欢笑。
现代文：唐朝人长孙玄同，小时候就有讥讽善辩的才能，只要有他坐在那儿畅谈说笑，没有人不欢喜大笑的。
English: The eldest son of the Tang Dynasty, Xuan Tong, had a talent for sarcasm and wit when he was a child. As long as he was sitting there chatting and laughing, no one would not be happy to laugh.

古文：永徽中，在京会宴。
现代文：唐高宗永徽年间，一次，长孙玄同参加京城里的宴会。
English: During the Yonghui reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty, his eldest grandson Xuanzang once attended a banquet in Beijing.

古文：众因语论及民间事，一人云：醴泉县去京不远，百姓遂行盅毒。
现代文：席间，大家谈论到民间的一些事情。有人说：醴泉县离京城不太远，那里的百姓历来实行培育一种害人的毒虫。
English: During the banquet, everyone talked about some things of the people. Someone said: Shiquan County is not far from the capital, and the people there have always practiced cultivating a harmful poisonous insect.

古文：此邑须远配流，岂得令在侧近。
现代文：这个县应当将他们全体发配到边远的地方去，怎么能让这些刁民呆在京城的近前呢？
English: This county should send them all to faraway places. How can they let these people stay so close to the capital?

古文：一人乃云：若令配流处还有百姓，此人复行盅毒，岂不还更损人。
现代文：另一个人说：如果被流放的地方也有百姓，被流放去的人到那里后依然实行盅术，难道不是更加害人了吗？
English: Another person said, "If there are people in the exiled place, and the exiled people still practice witchcraft when they get there, isn't that even more harmful?"

古文：其人云：若如此，欲令何处安置。
现代文：前面那个人说：如果是这样，想把他们安置在哪里呢？
English: The man in front of him said, "If that's the case, where do you want to put them?"

古文：玄同即云：若令玄同安置，必令得所。诸人大喜，同即问之。
现代文：长孙玄同应声说：如果让我安置，一定能将这些人安排个他们应该去的地方。
English: The eldest grandson, Xuan Tong, said in response: "If I am allowed to resettle, I will definitely be able to arrange these people to a place where they should go.

古文：答云：但行盅毒人，并送与莫离支作食手。
现代文：在坐的人都非常高兴，异口同声地问他安置在什么地方？长孙玄同回答说：如果这些人实行盅术害人，就将他们全部送到莫离支那儿作杀手。
English: Everyone present was very happy. They all asked him in unison, "Where will they be placed?" The eldest grandson, Xuan Tong, replied, "If these people practice witchcraft and harm people, we will send them all to Moliangzhi to be killers."

古文：众皆欢笑。
现代文：在场的人听了后，都欢笑不止。
English: After listening to it, everyone present couldn't stop laughing.

古文：贞观中，尝在诸公主席，众莫能当。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，一次，长孙玄同主持一个有许多朝官参加的会议。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, the eldest grandson, Xuanzong, once presided over a meeting attended by many imperial officials.

古文：高密公主乃云：我段家儿郎，亦有人物。
现代文：所有与会的人，谁也抵挡不了他的谈锋。高密公主说：我们段家男孩中，也有人才。
English: Of all the attendees, no one could resist his conversation. Princess Gaomi said, "Among the boys in our family, there are also some talents.

古文：走令唤取段恪来，令对玄同。
现代文：说完，派人去召呼段恪来参加这个会议，让段恪来对付长孙玄同。
English: Having said that, send someone to summon Duan Jia to attend this meeting, and let Duan Jia deal with the eldest grandson Xuan Tong.

古文：段恪虽微有辞，其容仪短小。
现代文：段恪虽然也有些善辩的才能，但是他长的身材矮小。
English: Although Duan Ke also has some debating skills, he is short in stature.

古文：召至，始入门，玄同即云：为日已暗。
现代文：段恪应召而来，刚一进门，长孙玄同就说：天已经黑了。
English: Duan Ke came to answer the call, and as soon as he entered the door, his eldest grandson Xuan Tong said: "It's already dark.

古文：公主等并大惊怪云：日始是斋时，何为道暗，玄同乃指段恪，若不日暗，何得短人行。
现代文：高密公主等人都大吃一惊，说：现在正是正午，为什么说天黑了呢？长孙玄同指着段恪说：如果不是天黑了，怎么能短人行呢？
English: Princess Gaomi and the others were taken aback and said, "It's noon now, why do you say it's dark?" The eldest grandchild, Xuan Tong, pointed at Duan Ke and said, "If it's not dark, how can you have a short walk?"

古文：坐中大笑。
现代文：满屋人都哄堂大笑。
English: The whole house burst into laughter.

古文：段恪面大赤，更无以答。
现代文：段恪立时闹个大红脸，更无话对答了。
English: Duan Ke stood up with a big red face, even more speechless.

古文：玄同初上，府中设食。
现代文：长孙玄同刚任官职时，官府里设宴聚餐。
English: When his eldest grandson, Xuan Tong, was newly appointed to a government post, a banquet was held in the government office.

古文：其仓曹是吴人，言音多带其声，唤粉粥为粪粥。
现代文：府中有个主管库房的官员是江南吴郡人，说话还带着江南的家乡口音，叫粉粥为粪粥。
English: An official in charge of the treasury in the prefectural government is a native of Wu County in the south of the Yangtze River. He also speaks with the accent of his hometown in the south of the Yangtze River and calls congee "feces congee."

古文：时肴馔毕陈，蒸炙俱下。仓曹曰：何不先将粪粥来。
现代文：当所有的菜都上齐了，这位仓曹说：为什么不先将粪粥端上来？
English: When all the dishes were served, this Cang Cao said, "Why don't you serve the dung congee first?"

古文：举坐咸笑之。
现代文：在座的人都取笑这位仓曹。
English: Everyone present made fun of this Cang Cao.

古文：玄同曰：仓曹乃是公侯之子孙，必复其始，诸君何为笑也。
现代文：长孙玄同说：这位仓曹也是公侯的子孙，一定是他的先人就这样讲话啊！
English: The eldest grandson, Xuan Tong, said, "This Cang Cao is also a descendant of a prince. His ancestors must have spoken like this!"

古文：坐中复大笑。
现代文：大家为什么取笑人家呢？
English: Why do people make fun of others?

古文：玄同任荆王友，所司差摄祭官祠社。
现代文：在座的人又都哈哈大笑。长孙玄同担任荆王的近臣时，他被临时指派代理掌管祭祀的主管祠庙、社坛。
English: When the eldest grandson Xuan Tong served as a close vassal of King Jing, he was temporarily assigned to act as the person in charge of the sacrificial rituals of the temple and shrine.

古文：于坛所清斋，玄同在幕内坐。有犬来，遗粪秽于墙上。
现代文：一次，在社坛里做祭祀前的洁身静心准备时，长孙玄同坐在帐幕里面，来了一条狗，往坛墙上撒尿。
English: Once, when the eldest grandson, Xuan Tong, was sitting inside the tent preparing for the purification ritual before the sacrifice, a dog came and urinated on the altar wall.

古文：玄同乃取支床砖，自击之。
现代文：长孙玄同俯身拾起一块垫床的砖头，向狗打去。
English: The eldest grandson, Xuan Tong, bent down and picked up a brick from the bedding and hit the dog.

古文：傍人怪其率，问曰：何为自彻支床砖打狗。
现代文：旁边有人看见他打狗，认为他轻率，于洁身静心不利，问：你为什么私自用支床的砖打狗？
English: Someone nearby saw him beating a dog and thought that he was imprudent and not conducive to chastity and meditation. He asked, "Why did you beat a dog with bricks from your bed?"

古文：玄同曰：可不闻，苟利社稷，专之亦可。
现代文：长孙玄同说：你听说过吗？只要有利于国家，专之也可以啊！
English: The eldest grandson Xuan Tong said: Have you heard of it? As long as it is beneficial to the country, it can also be used exclusively!

古文：王福畤
现代文：王福畤
English: Wang Fuxuan

古文：唐王福畤名行温恭，累授齐泽二州，世以才学称。
现代文：唐朝人王福畤，以品行温和恭顺而闻名，连续被任命为齐、泽二州的长史，以才学得到世人的称道与赞许。
English: King Fugu of the Tang Dynasty, known for his gentle and obedient behavior, was successively appointed to the long history of Qi and Ze two states, and was praised and praised by the world for his talent.

古文：子勔、据、勃，俱以文笔著天下。
现代文：王福畤的儿子王勔、王剧、王勃，都因为写一手好文章而名传天下。
English: Wang Fuchen's sons, Wang Yao, Wang Pei, and Wang Bo, are all famous for writing good articles.

古文：福畤与韩琬父有旧。
现代文：王福畤跟韩琬的父亲是老朋友。
English: Wang Fuxi and Han Yu's father are old friends.

古文：福畤及婚崔氏，生子勃。
现代文：王福畤跟崔家的女儿结婚后，生了儿子王勃。
English: After Wang Fuchen married the daughter of the Cui family, she gave birth to a son, Wang Bo.

古文：尝致书韩父曰：勔、据、勃文章并清俊，近小者欲似不恶。
现代文：一次，王福畤写信给韩琬的父亲，说：王勔、王剧、王勃，三个孩子写的文章，词赋都清新俊逸。最小的王勃，好象也不错。
English: On one occasion, Wang Fuxi wrote to Han Xuanwu's father, saying: "Wang Xuanwu, Wang Xuanwu, Wang Bo, the articles written by the three children, the words are all fresh and beautiful. The youngest, Wang Bo, also seems to be good.

古文：韩复书曰：王武子有马癖，明公有誉儿癖，王氏之癖，无乃多乎？
现代文：韩琬的父亲回信给王福畤说：王武子有爱马的癖好，你有夸奖儿子的癖好。你们王家人的癖好，恐怕是太多了吧。
English: Han Yan's father wrote back to Wang Fuxi, saying, "Wang Wuzi has a penchant for horses, and you have a penchant for praising your son. I'm afraid your Wang family has too many penchants."

古文：要当见文章，方可定耳。
现代文：我需要见到你的儿子们的文章后，才能够确认他们写的文章是好是坏。
English: I need to see your sons' articles before I can say whether they are good or bad.

古文：福畤乃致诸子文章，韩与名人阅之曰：生子若是，信亦可夸。
现代文：王福畤收到信后，就将三个儿子的文章寄给韩琬琬的父亲看。韩琬的父亲和一些知名人士，读了王福畤三个儿子的文章后，说，生的孩子都象王福畤三个儿子这样，确实是应该夸奖的啊！
English: After Wang Fuxi received the letter, he sent the article of the three sons to Han Yu's father. Han Yu's father and some famous people, after reading the article of Wang Fuxi's three sons, said that the children born are like Wang Fuxi's three sons, which is really commendable!

古文：许敬宗
现代文：许敬宗
English: Xu Jingzong

古文：唐吏部侍郎杨思玄恃外戚之贵，待选流多不以礼，而排斥之。
现代文：唐朝人吏部侍郎杨思玄，仗恃他是皇家的外姓亲戚，对待等待分配官职的官员很不尊重，而且排挤轻慢这些人。
English: Yang Sigen, the steward of the Tang Dynasty's Personnel Department, who was a relative of the imperial family, treated the officials who were waiting for the allocation of official positions with great disrespect and pushed them aside.

古文：为选人夏侯彪之所讼，御史中丞郎余庆弹奏免。
现代文：被待分配的官员夏侯彪举告，御史中丞郎余庆上书要求免去杨思玄的吏部侍郎职务。
English: Xia Hou Biao, an official who was to be assigned, reported that Gu Shizhong Rong Rong Yu Qing had sent a letter requesting that Yang Sigen be relieved of his position as an attendant of the cadre department.

古文：中书令许敬宗曰：固知杨吏部之败也。
现代文：中书令许敬宗得知这件事，说：我早就知道杨思玄要失败的。
English: When Xu Jingzong, the second-ranked official, learned of this, he said, "I already knew that Yang Sixuan was going to fail.

古文：或问之，宗曰：一彪一狼，共着一羊，不败何待。
现代文：有人问他怎么知道的？许敬宗回答说：一彪一狼，共同对付一只羊不失败才怪呢。
English: Someone asked him how he knew? Xu Jingzong replied, "It's strange that a wolf and a lamb can fight together and not fail."

古文：敬宗性轻傲，见人多忘之。
现代文：许敬宗为人性情轻狂傲慢，参见过他的人多数他都不记得谁是谁。
English: Xu Jingzong's personality is frivolous and arrogant. Most people who have seen him do not remember who he is.

古文：或谓其不聪，曰：卿自难记，若遇何刘沈谢，暗中摸索著，亦可识。
现代文：有人说许敬宗耳聋，可能是听不着。许敬宗说；你的名字本来就难记。如果遇到的是河流沉榭，我在河里摸索着，也许可以知道谁是谁来。
English: Some people say that Xu Jingzong is deaf and may not be able to hear. Xu Jingzong said, "Your name is hard to remember. If I encounter a river that is sinking and I am groping in the river, I may be able to know who is who."

古文：高崔嵬
现代文：高崔嵬
English: Gao Cuiqi

古文：唐散乐高崔嵬善弄痴，太宗命给使捺头向水下，良久出而笑之。
现代文：唐朝时，在宫中作百戏的艺人高崔嵬擅长假装痴傻逗趣调笑。一次，高崔嵬又装痴时，唐太宗让侍从将他的脑袋按入水中。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Gao Cui Rong, an entertainer who performed all kinds of plays in the palace, was good at pretending to be stupid. Once, when Gao Cui Rong was pretending to be stupid, Emperor Taizong had a servant push his head into the water.

古文：帝问，曰：见屈原云， 我逢楚怀王无道，乃沉汨罗水。
现代文：过了好长时间才松手，高崔嵬从水中抬起头来冲着唐太宗笑。唐太宗问：你笑什么？高崔嵬回答说：我在水中见到屈原大夫了。
English: After a long time, Gao Cui Ye lifted his head out of the water and smiled at Tang Taizong. Tang Taizong asked, "What are you smiling about?" Gao Cui Ye replied, "I saw Dr. Qu Yuan in the water."

古文：汝逢圣明主，何为来。帝大笑，赐物百段。
现代文：他问臣： 我遇到楚怀王这个无道昏君，才自沉汨罗江，你遇到的是圣明的皇上，为什么也到水中来了呢？ 唐太宗听了大笑，赏赐给高崔嵬布帛等一百段。
English: He asked his vassal: "I encountered King Chu Huai, a senseless and feeble prince, and only then did I immerse myself in the Luo River. You encountered the Emperor Shenming, why did you also come to the water?" Tang Taizong heard the loud laughter and rewarded Gao Cui with a hundred pieces of cloth.

古文：元晋
现代文：元晋
English: Yuan Jin

古文：唐曹怀舜，金乡人。
现代文：唐朝人曹怀舜，是金乡人。
English: Cao Huaiya, a Tang Dynasty citizen, was from Jinxiang.

古文：父维叔死王事，赠云麾将军。
现代文：他的父亲曹继叔是死在公事上，死后被追认为云麾将军。
English: His father, Cao Jixu, died in the line of duty and was posthumously recognized as General Yun Rong.

古文：怀舜襁褓授游击将军，历内外文武官。
现代文：曹怀舜还在母亲怀中吃奶时，就被授予游击将军的官职。长大成人后，连续担任了京城和外地的许多文、武官职。
English: While still nursing in his mother's arms, Cao Huaiqi was awarded the official post of guerrilla general. After he became an adult, he successively held many civil and military officer posts in Beijing and other places.

古文：则天云：怀舜久历文资，而屈于武职。
现代文：武则天皇后一次说：曹怀舜有很长时间的担任文职官员的资历，现在让他担任武职是有点屈用了他。
English: The Empress Dowager Wu Zetian once said: Cao Huaiqi has served as a civil official for a long time, and it is a bit of a concession to let him serve as a military official.

古文：自左鹰扬卫郎将拜右玉钤卫将军。
现代文：这样吧，将他从左鹰扬卫郎将升任右玉钤卫将军。
English: So, he will be promoted from the left eagle, Yang Weiro, to the right eagle, Yu Yu Wei.

古文：有宋州司马曹元本·父名乞伯。
现代文：有个宋州司马叫曹元本，他的父亲叫曹乞伯。
English: There is a Songzhou Sima named Cao Yuanben, and his father is called Cao Qibao.

古文：明汲县丞元晋，好谈，多警策。
现代文：当时，汲县县丞元晋，好谈笑，多警言妙语。
English: At that time, the leader of the Ku County, Yuan Jin, was good at talking and joking, and used many cautionary and witty sayings.

古文：或问元晋，元本，怀舜从叔。
现代文：有人问元晋：曹元本是曹怀舜的堂叔吗？
English: Someone asked Yuan Jin: Is Cao Yuanben a cousin of Cao Huaiyao?

古文：元晋应声答曰：虽则同堂，俱非本族。
现代文：元晋应声回答说：虽然他们是同堂本家，却不是一个宗族的人。
English: Yuan Jin replied in response: Although they are from the same family, they are not from the same clan.

古文：人怪而问之，晋曰：元本乞伯子，怀舜继叔儿，以此知矣。
现代文：问的人感到奇怪，问：为什么？元晋说：曹元本乞伯子，曹怀舜继叔儿，由此得知他们不是同一宗族的人啊！
English: The questioner was puzzled and asked, "Why?" Yuan Jin said, "Cao Yuan was the beggar's son, Cao Huai's step-uncle. From this, we know that they are not from the same clan!"

古文：赵谦光
现代文：赵谦光
English: Zhao Qianguang

古文：唐诸郎中，不自即员外郎拜者，谓之土山头果毅。言便拜崇品，有似长征兵士，便授边远果毅。
现代文：唐朝时，各位郎中有不是从员外郎升任上来的人，被戏谑地称为：从边远荒凉地方来的府兵统领，是说这样的人没有任过高品位的官职，就象经过长期征战的士兵，一下就被授任统领府兵的果毅一样。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, those who were promoted from the ranks of non-local officials were jokingly referred to as "army commanders from remote and desolate places," which meant that such people had not held high-ranking official positions, just like soldiers who had been fighting for a long time and were suddenly given the courage to lead the army.

古文：赵谦光自彭州司马入为大理正，迁户部郎中。
现代文：赵谦光从鼓州掌管军队的司马直接升任大理正卿，后又改户部郎中。
English: Zhao Qianguang was directly promoted to Dali Zhengqing from Sima, who was in charge of the army in Gushu, and later became a junior member of the household department.

古文：户部员外贺遂涉咏曰：员外由来美，郎中望不优。
现代文：户部员外郎贺遂波浪写诗讽刺他说：员外由来美，郎中望不优。
English: A member of the household department, Wai Rong He, wrote a sarcastic poem, saying, "Beauty comes from outside, but it's not good to be a member of the household department."

古文：宁知粉署里，翻作土山头。
现代文：宁知粉署里，翻作土山头。
English: Ningzhi Powder Plant, turned into a mound.

古文：赵谦光答诗曰：锦帐随情设，金炉任意薰。
现代文：赵元谦的答诗说：锦帐随情设，金炉任意薰。
English: Zhao Yuanqian's answer poem said: "Treasures are created according to circumstances, and gold furnaces are ignited at will."

古文：唯愁员外置，不应列星文。
现代文：唯愁员外置，不应列星文。
English: It should not be listed as a star article.

古文：人以为奇句。
现代文：人们都认为赵谦光的这一首答诗，是少有的佳句。
English: People all think that this answer poem of Zhao Qianguang is a rare good poem.

古文：沈佺期
现代文：沈佺期
English: The sinking period

古文：唐沈佺期以罪谪，遇恩复官秩，而未还朱衣。
现代文：唐朝人沈佺期，因为获罪皇上被贬降到蛮荒边远的岭南。
English: The Tang Dynasty was in its twilight years, and the emperor was demoted to the wild and remote Lingnan because he was found guilty.

古文：因内宴，群臣皆歌回波乐词起舞，由是多求迁擢。
现代文：后来遇到皇上开恩解除对他的处罚，又将他召回京城恢复了原来的官位，却没有归还给他代表官位的朱衣朝服。一次，中宗皇帝在宫内摆宴宴请文武百官。
English: Later, when he met the emperor, he was relieved of his punishment, and he was called back to the capital to resume his original official position, but he did not return the vermilion imperial robe that represented his official position. Once, Emperor Zhongzong held a banquet in the palace for hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：佺期词曰：回波尔时佺期，流向岭外生归。
现代文：席间，文武官员们都边舞边唱《佺波词》。多数人唱词的内容请求皇上提升自己，沈佺期唱的歌词与众不同。沈佺期歌词是：回波尔时佺期，流向岭外生归。
English: During the banquet, the civil and military officials all danced and sang "The Song of the Wave." Most of them sang the content of the song to request the emperor to improve himself, and the lyrics sung during the period of Shen Ying were different from others. The lyrics of the period of Shen Ying were: During the period of Huibol, flow to the outside of the ridge and return.

古文：身名已蒙齿录，袍笏未复牙绯。
现代文：身名已蒙齿录，袍笏未复牙绯。
English: His name has been recorded with his teeth, but his robe has not been replaced with braces.

古文：中宗即以绯鱼袋赐之。崔日用
现代文：中宗皇帝听了沈佺期所唱的回波歌后，立即赏赐给他代表官级品位的绯鱼袋。崔日用
English: After Emperor Zhongzong listened to the echoing song sung by Shen Ye, he immediately gave him a carp bag representing the official grade.

古文：崔日用为御史中丞，赐紫。
现代文：唐朝人崔日用官任御史中丞，赏赐给他标志三品以上官位的紫色朝服。
English: Cui Riji, a Tang Dynasty official, was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History, and was given a purple imperial robe with the insignia of three or more court ranks.

古文：是时佩鱼须有特恩。
现代文：当时，佩带标志官位等级的鱼袋，必须有皇上的特殊恩准。
English: At that time, to wear a fish bag with the official rank symbol, it was necessary to have the emperor's special approval.

古文：亦因宴会，命群臣撰词。
现代文：于是，在一次宫内的宴会上，皇上让文武大臣撰写词赋以助酒兴。
English: As a result, at a banquet in the palace, the emperor asked the minister of literature and armed forces to write a poem to help with the drinking.

古文：日用曰：台中鼠子直须谙，信足跳梁上壁龛。
现代文：崔日用趁着这个机会，写了一首歌进献皇上。歌词是这样的：台中鼠子直须谙，信足跳梁上壁龛。
English: Cui Rinyi took advantage of this opportunity to write a song to present to the emperor. The lyrics are as follows: The rat in the middle of the stage has a straight beak, and the believer jumps onto the beam and climbs up the wall.

古文：倚翻灯脂污张五，还来啮带报韩三。
现代文：倚翻灯脂污张五，还来啮带报韩三。
English: Reclining over the lamp grease smeared five, also came to the umbilical cord reported Han three.

古文：莫浪语，直王相。
现代文：莫浪语，直王相。
English: Don't speak like a tramp, speak like a king.

古文：大家必苦赐金龟，卖却猫儿相赏。
现代文：大家必苦赐金龟，卖却猫儿相赏。
English: Everyone must give the golden turtle, but sell the cat for mutual appreciation.

古文：中宗以金鱼赐之。裴谈
现代文：于是，唐中宗赏赐给沈佺期佩金鱼袋。裴谈
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty rewarded him with a goldfish bag.

古文：唐中宗朝，御史大夫裴谈崇释氏。
现代文：唐中宗在位时，御史大夫裴谈信奉佛教。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Zhongzong, Grand Historian Pei Tong believed in Buddhism.

古文：妻悍妒，谈畏之如严君。
现代文：他的妻子性情暴躁妒忌心强，裴谈象惧怕父母一样地惧怕她。
English: His wife is hot-tempered and jealous, and Baidang is afraid of her like he is afraid of his parents.

古文：时韦庶人颇袭武后之风，中宗渐畏之。
现代文：当时，唐中宗的皇后韦后，很是承袭了武则天的专断拔扈的作风，唐中宗渐渐也惧怕她。
English: At that time, Empress Wei, the empress of the Tang Dynasty, was very much the inheritor of Wu Zetian's style of arbitrarily withdrawing troops, and the Tang Dynasty gradually feared her.

古文：内宴，玄唱《回波词》，有优人词曰：回波尔时栲栳，怕妇也是大好。
现代文：一次，宫里设宴招待文武百官。宴席上，人们面北向皇上、皇后献唱《回波词》。有一个宫内艺人唱道：回波尔时栲栳，怕妻也是大好。
English: On one occasion, a banquet was held in the palace to invite hundreds of civil and military officials. At the banquet, people faced north to sing "Echoes" to the emperor and empress. An artist in the palace sang: "When returning to Bol, it is good to be afraid of one's wife."

古文：外边秪有裴谈，内里无过李老。
现代文：外边秪有裴谈，内里无过李老。
English: On the outside, there is talk of Pei; on the inside, there is nothing but Li Lao.

古文：韦后意色自得，以束帛赐之。李镇恶
现代文：韦皇后听了后神色很是得意，赏赐给这位唱《回波词》的艺人捆成一束的五疋帛。李镇恶
English: After listening, Empress Wei looked very pleased and rewarded the artist who sang "Echoes" with a bundle of five bunches of bamboo shoots.

古文：唐李镇恶，即赵公峤之父。
现代文：唐朝人李镇恶，是赵国公李峤的儿子。
English: Li Zhenyong of the Tang Dynasty was the son of Zhao Guogong Li Yao.

古文：选授梓子州郪县令，与友人书云：州带子号，县带郪名。
现代文：李镇恶被任命为梓州郪县县令，他在寄给朋友的信中写道：我所隶属的州带子号，我所管辖的县带郪名。
English: Li Zhenxun was appointed as the county magistrate of Zizhou Zhixian County. In a letter to a friend, he wrote: "The county I belong to is called Zizhou, and the county I administer is called Zhixian.

古文：由来不属老夫，并是妇儿官职。
现代文：这两个地方从来都不属于我啊，都是儿子、夫人的官职啊！
English: These two places have never belonged to me, they are the official positions of my son and my wife!

古文：卢广
现代文：卢广
English: Lu Guang

古文：唐殿中内供奉卢广持法细密，虽亲效贵势，无所回避。
现代文：唐朝宫中内供奉卢广尊守法度很细致慎密，就是亲朋好友、达官贵戚，也一点不留情面。
English: The worship of Lu Guangzong in the palace of the Tang Dynasty was very careful and meticulous. Even relatives, friends, and dignitaries were not spared.

古文：举止闲雅，必翔而后集。
现代文：卢广为人举止闲雅大方，遇事必须很好地观察思索然后决定如何对待。
English: Lu Guang's demeanor is casual and generous. In case of trouble, you must observe and think well and then decide how to deal with it.

古文：尝于景龙观，监官行香。
现代文：一次，卢广在景龙道观监察、管理行香礼佛的仪式。
English: On one occasion, Lu Guang supervised and managed the incense ceremony at Jinglong Taoist Temple.

古文：右台诸御史亦预焉。
现代文：宪台的各位御史也参预这件事。
English: The members of the Constitutional Court also participated in this matter.

古文：台中先号右台为高丽僧，时有一胡僧徙倚于前庭。
现代文：宫中事先定下来，宪台的行香僧人是位高丽僧。当时，有一位西北少数民族的僧人徘徊在前院里。
English: The palace had decided in advance that the incense-carrying monk of Gendai would be a Korean monk. At that time, a monk from the Northwest Minority wandered in the front yard.

古文：右台侍御史黄守礼指之曰：何胡僧而至此。
现代文：宪台侍御史黄守礼指着这位胡僧说：为什么让胡僧到这来？
English: The steward of the gendarmerie, Shi Huang Shouli, pointed to the monk and said: "Why did you let the monk come here?

古文：广徐谓之曰：亦有高丽僧，何独怪胡僧为。
现代文：卢广沉静地说：不是也有高丽僧吗？为什么唯独责怪有胡僧呢？
English: Lu Guang said quietly, "Isn't there also a Korean monk? Why only blame the Korean monk?

古文：一时欢笑。
现代文：在场的人听了哈哈大笑。
English: Those present burst into laughter.

古文：广与李畬俱非善射者。
现代文：卢广跟李畬一样，不太会射箭。
English: Lu Guang, like Li Yao, is not very good at archery.

古文：尝三元礼射，广畬虽引满射，俱不及垛而坠。
现代文：一次，祭庆三元，在乐曲的伴奏下，举行礼射活动。卢广与李畬虽然都将弓拉得满满的，但是箭射出去后，都没有达到箭靶就中途落在地上。
English: On one occasion, a ceremonial archery event was held in celebration of the three yuan coin, accompanied by music. Although Lu Guang and Li Qian both drew their bows full, after the arrows were shot, they did not reach the target and fell to the ground halfway.

古文：互言其工拙，畬戏曰：畬与卢箭俱三十步。
现代文：李畬戏谑地说：我与卢广射的一样，都是三十步。
English: Li Yu said playfully: I am the same as Lu Guangsha, both are thirty paces.

古文：左右不晓。
现代文：左右的人们，都不明白他的话是什么意思。
English: People on both sides didn't understand what he meant.

古文：畬曰：畬箭去垛三十步，卢箭去身三十步。
现代文：李畬解释说：我射的箭离箭靶三十步，卢广射的箭离他三十步。
English: Li Yao explained: The arrow I shot was thirty paces away from the target, and the arrow Lu Guang shot was thirty paces away from him.

古文：欢笑久之。松寿
现代文：所有在场的人听了后，欢心大笑，久久不能停止。松寿
English: After listening, all the people present laughed with joy and couldn't stop for a long time.

古文：唐韦庆本女选为妃，诣朝堂欲谢。
现代文：唐朝人韦庆本的女儿被选中成为皇帝的妃子，到朝廷中想表示谢意。
English: The daughter of Wei Qingben, a Tang Dynasty person, was chosen to become the emperor's concubine, and she wanted to show her gratitude to the court.

古文：而庆本两耳先卷，朝士多呼为卷耳。
现代文：韦庆本的两只耳朵生下来就卷卷，朝中的许多官员都称他为卷耳。
English: Wei Qingben's two ears were curled when he was born, and many officials in the imperial court called him curled ear.

古文：时长安公松寿，见庆本而贺之。因曰：仆固知足下女得妃。
现代文：当时，长安公松寿看见韦庆本上前祝贺，借机戏谑地说：我早就知道您的女儿会成为皇妃的。
English: At that time, Chang'an Gongsong Shou saw Wei Qingben coming forward to congratulate, and took the opportunity to playfully say: I already knew that your daughter would become the Empress.

古文：庆本曰：何以知之。
现代文：韦庆本问：你怎么知道的？
English: Wei Qingben asked: How did you know?

古文：松寿乃自摸其耳而卷之曰：卷耳后妃之德。
现代文：松寿伸手摸着韦庆本的耳朵说卷耳朵是能生皇妃女儿的德象啊！
English: Song Shou reached out and touched Wei Qingben's ear, saying that the curled ear is the virtuous elephant that can give birth to the princess's daughter!

古文：封抱一
现代文：封抱一
English: Embrace one

古文：唐封包一任益州九陇尉，与同列戏白打赌钱。
现代文：唐朝人封抱一在益州任九陇尉，跟同事戏说闲话并以钱为赌。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, a man named Fong Bao was appointed as a nine-year-old lieutenant in Yizhou. He gossiped with his colleagues and gambled with money.

古文：座下数百钱，输已略尽，便欲敛手。
现代文：他身边带着的几百文钱，已经输得差不多了，便想停下来不再赌了。
English: He had a few hundred yuan with him, and he had almost lost it, so he wanted to stop gambling.

古文：傍人谓之曰：何不更戏。
现代文：旁边有人说：为什么不再戏说赌下去？
English: Someone nearby said, "Why don't you stop joking about gambling?

古文：觅钱回取之。
现代文：找钱把输的钱赢回来。
English: Find money to win back lost money.

古文：抱一乃举手摸钱曰：同赐也，何敢望问。
现代文：封抱一乃举起手摸着钱袋说：同给啊！怎么敢希望赢回来。
English: The first one to embrace the seal raised his hand, felt the money bag and said, "Give it to me! How dare you hope to win it back."

古文：山东人谓尽为赐，故言赐也。
现代文：山东人说：尽为赐，因此，封抱一说：赐。
English: The people of Shandong Province said, "Everything is a gift," so Fubo said, "Give me."

古文：尹神童
现代文：尹神童
English: Yin Sheng Tong

古文：唐尹神童每说，伯乐令其子执《马经》画样以求马，经年无有似者。
现代文：唐朝有个尹神童，经常讲一个伯乐让他儿子寻求良马的故事。这个故事是这样的：伯乐让他儿子带着《马经》上说的良马特点的画像，去寻找良马。
English: There was a Yin child prodigy in the Tang Dynasty who often told the story of how Bo Le asked his son to look for a good horse. The story goes like this: Bo Le asked his son to look for a good horse with a picture of the characteristics of a good horse mentioned in the Horse Sutra.

古文：归以告父，更令求之。出见大虾蟆，谓父曰：得一马，略与相同，而不能具。
现代文：这次，伯乐的儿子从家里走出来看见一只大蛤蟆，返回家中对伯乐说：孩儿寻找到一匹良马，跟《马经》上画的良马大致一样，但是不能将它买回来。
English: This time, Bo Le's son came out of the house and saw a large donkey. When he returned home, he said to Bo Le: "My son, you have found a good horse, much like the good horse depicted in the Horse Sutra, but you cannot buy it back.

古文：伯乐曰：何也。
现代文：伯乐问：为什么呢？
English: Bo Le asked: Why?

古文：对曰：其隆颅跌目脊郁缩，但蹄不如累趋耳。
现代文：伯乐儿子回答说：这匹马的头颅隆起，双目突出，脊背直而有纹理。但是蹄子不象良马那样连续奔驰。
English: Bo Le's son replied, "This horse's head is raised, its eyes are prominent, its back is straight and has texture, but its hooves do not gallop continuously like a good horse.

古文：伯乐曰：此马好跳踯，不堪也。
现代文：伯乐听了后，说：这匹马好蹦跳，不能胜任良马的美称啊！
English: After listening to him, Bo Le said, "This horse is good at jumping, but not good enough to be called a good horse!"

古文：子笑乃止。
现代文：伯乐儿子笑了，于是停止寻找良马。
English: Bo Le's son smiled and stopped looking for a good horse.

