古文：竹叙竹类涕竹棘竹筻簕竹菡苰竹慈竹筋竹百叶竹桃枝竹瘿竹
现代文：竹叙竹类涕竹棘竹筻簕竹菡苰竹慈竹筋竹百叶竹桃枝竹瘿竹
English: bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem bamboo stem

古文：罗浮竹童子寺竹竹花竹箹竹实
现代文：罗浮竹童子寺竹竹花竹箹竹实
English: Luo Fu Bamboo Children's Temple Bamboo Bamboo Flowers Bamboo Hoop Bamboo Solid

古文：五谷雨稻雨粟雨麦雕葫雨谷摇枝粟凤冠粟绕明豆延精麦紫沉麻
现代文：五谷雨稻雨粟雨麦雕葫雨谷摇枝粟凤冠粟绕明豆延精麦紫沉麻
English: Five cereals, rice, corn, poppy, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar, poplar

古文：雨五谷野粟石壳芋雀芋甘蔗
现代文：雨五谷野粟石壳芋雀芋甘蔗
English: Yugotani millet stone shell yam taro sugar cane

古文：茶荈叙茶获神茗飨茗获报消食茶
现代文：茶荈叙茶获神茗飨茗获报消食茶
English: The tea ceremony was praised, and the consumption of tea was reported.

古文：竹
现代文：竹
English: Bamboo

古文：叙竹类
现代文：叙竹类
English: Syrian Bamboo

古文：《竹谱》：竹类有三十九。
现代文：《竹谱》上说，竹子有三十九类。
English: According to "Bamboo Spectrum," there are thirty-nine types of bamboo.

古文：涕竹
现代文：涕竹
English: Bamboo shoots

古文：南方荒中有涕竹，长数百丈，围三丈六尺，厚八九寸。可以为船。
现代文：南方大荒之中有一种竹子叫 涕竹 ，高数百丈，围长三丈六尺，厚八九寸，可以用来做船。
English: There is a kind of bamboo in the southern wastelands called 涕竹, which is hundreds of feet tall, three feet six inches in circumference, and eighty-nine inches thick, and can be used to make boats.

古文：其笋甚美，煮食之，可止疮疠。棘竹
现代文：它的笋味道很美，煮着吃，可以治恶疮。棘竹
English: Its gourd taste is very beautiful, boiled and eaten, can cure scabies.

古文：棘竹一名笆竹，节皆有刺，数十茎为丛。
现代文：棘竹又一名叫 笆竹 ，节上都有刺，几十棵为一丛。
English: Another name for the thorny bamboo is the thorny bamboo, there are thorns on the nodes, dozens of trees in a cluster.

古文：南夷种以为城，猝不可攻。
现代文：南方少数民族种棘竹当城墙，一时间还很难攻下。
English: The southern ethnic minorities use thorny bamboo as a city wall, which is difficult to capture for a while.

古文：或自崩根出，大如酒瓮，纵横相承，状如缲车。
现代文：有的棘竹因为土石崩塌自己露出根来，根大像酒瓮，纵横交错，互相盘结，样子很像缲车。
English: Some thorny bamboo because of the collapse of the earth and stone exposed their roots, the roots are large like wine lees, criss-crossed, intertwined, looking very much like a carriage.

古文：食之，下人发。
现代文：人吃了它会掉头发。
English: If you eat it, your hair will fall out.

古文：筻簕竹
现代文：筻簕竹
English: 竹

古文：筻簕竹，皮薄而空多，大者径不逾二寸，皮上有粗涩文，可为错子。
现代文：筻簕竹，皮薄而空多，大的直径也超不过二寸，皮上有粗涩的花纹，可用来做错子。
English: Bamboo shoots, the skin is thin and hollow, the large diameter is more than two inches, the skin has a coarse pattern, can be used to make misshapen.

古文：错甲，利胜于铁。
现代文：用这样的错子错甲壳一类坚硬的东西，它的锋利胜过铁错。
English: With this kind of error, the error of the carapace is a kind of hard thing, its sharpness is better than that of the iron error.

古文：若钝，以浆水浇之，还复快利
现代文：如果钝了，把它用浆水浇一下，它就又恢复先前的锋利了。
English: If it is blunt, douse it with a little water and it will regain its former sharpness.

古文：菡苰竹
现代文：菡苰竹
English: 竹

古文：菡苰竹，大如脚指，腹中白幕拦隔，状如湿面。将成而筒皮未落，辄有细虫啮处，成赤迹，似绣画可爱。
现代文：菡苰竹，大小如同脚趾，腹中由白幕拦隔着，样子像湿面，将要长成而筒皮未落的时候，总是有细虫咬啮的地方，形成红色的痕迹，像锦绣和图画那样可爱。
English: Eucalyptus, the size of a toe, the abdomen separated by a white curtain, looks like a wet surface. When it is about to grow and the tube skin has not fallen off, there is always a place where small insects bite, forming red marks. It is as lovely as brocade and pictures.

古文：慈竹
现代文：慈竹
English: Tsz Chuk

古文：慈竹，夏月经雨，滴汁下地，生蓐，似鹿角，色白。
现代文：慈竹，夏季雨后，它的汁液滴到地上，便长出一种草垫子一样的东西，像鹿角，白色。
English: Cizhu, after the summer rain, its sap drips to the ground, it grows a grass mat-like thing, like antlers, white.

古文：食之，已痢。
现代文：人吃了这种东西，可以止痢疾。
English: If people eat this kind of thing, they can stop dysentery.

古文：筋竹
现代文：筋竹
English: Sujitake

古文：筋竹，南方以为矛。
现代文：筋竹，南方用它做矛。
English: The South uses it to make spears.

古文：笋未成竹时，堪为弩弦。
现代文：这种竹的笋未长成竹的时候，能用来做弩弦。
English: The bamboo shoots can be used to make cymbals when they are not fully grown.

古文：百叶竹
现代文：百叶竹
English: Bamboo blinds

古文：百叶竹，一枝百叶。
现代文：百叶竹，一个枝上有一百片叶子。
English: Bamboo with a hundred leaves on each branch.

古文：有毒。
现代文：有毒。
English: It is poisonous.

古文：桃枝竹
现代文：桃枝竹
English: Peach Branch Bamboo

古文：东官郡，汉顺帝时属南海，西接高凉郡，又以其地为司监都尉。
现代文：东官郡，汉顺帝的时候属于南海，西边与高凉郡相接。又把司监都尉设在那里。
English: Dongguan County, when Han Shun was emperor, belonged to the South China Sea, and the west side was connected to Gaoliang County. The superintendent was also located there.

古文：东有芜地，西接临大海。
现代文：东面有荒芜之地，西面接临大海。
English: In the east there is barren land, in the west there is the sea.

古文：有长洲，多桃枝竹，缘岸而生。
现代文：海中有一个长洲，洲上多有桃枝竹，缘着海岸而生。
English: There is a long shoal in the sea, on which there are mostly peach-branch bamboo, which grow along the coast.

古文：瘿竹
现代文：瘿竹
English: 竹

古文：东洛胜境有三溪，张文规有庄近溪。
现代文：三溪是东洛的名胜之地，张文规有一处庄院临近三溪。
English: Sanxi is a famous scenic spot in Dongluo. Zhang Wenzhou has a manor house near Sanxi.

古文：忽有竹一竿生瘿，大如李。
现代文：忽然有一天一枝竹上生出一个肿瘤。
English: Suddenly, one day, a tumor appeared on a bamboo branch.

古文：罗浮竹
现代文：肿瘤有李子那么大。罗浮竹
English: The tumour was the size of a plum.

古文：唐贞元中，有盐户犯禁，逃于罗浮山。深入第十三岭，遇巨竹万千竿，连直岩谷。
现代文：唐贞元年间，有一个盐户犯了禁，逃进罗浮山，深入到第十三岭，遇见巨竹万千竿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, a salt farmer broke the ban, fled into the Luofu Mountain, went deep into the Thirteenth Ridge, and encountered a huge bamboo pole.

古文：竹围皆二丈余，有三十九节，二丈许。
现代文：这些巨竹直上岩谷，耸入云霄。竹围都在两丈以上。每竿竹都有三十九节，每一节两丈左右。
English: These giant bamboo shoot straight up the rocky valley, soaring into the sky. The circumference of the bamboo is more than two meters. Each bamboo pole has thirty-nine knots, and each knot is about two meters high.

古文：逃者遂取竹一竿，破以为蔑。
现代文：于是逃者就砍了一竿，把它做成竹篾。
English: So the fugitive cut down a pole and made it into a bamboo pole.

古文：会赦宥，遂挈以归。
现代文：赶上皇帝赦免罪犯，他便带着这些竹篾回家。
English: When the emperor pardoned the criminals, he took these bamboo shoots home.

古文：有人得一蔑，奇之，献于太守李复。
现代文：有一个人从他手中得到一根竹篾，认为出奇，就把它献给太守李复。
English: One person received a bamboo pole from him and thought it was amazing, so he dedicated it to Emperor Li Fu.

古文：乃图而纪之。
现代文：李复就画图纪念它。
English: Li Fu painted a picture to commemorate it.

古文：予尝览《竹谱》曰： 云丘帝竹，一节为船。 
现代文：我曾经看到《竹谱》上说： 云丘帝竹一节就能做一条船。 
English: I once saw the "Bamboo Spectrum" saying: Yunqiu can make a boat with a single section of bamboo.

古文：又何伟哉！
现代文：那竹又是多么雄伟高大啊！
English: How majestic and tall that bamboo is!

古文：南海以竹为甑者，类见之矣，皆罗浮之竹也。
现代文：南海用竹子做蒸锅，这是人们所都见过的，那就是罗浮山的竹子啊。
English: Nankai uses bamboo to make a steamer, which is something that people have all seen, that is, bamboo from Mt. Luo.

古文：童子寺竹
现代文：童子寺竹
English: Doji Temple Bamboo

古文：唐李卫公言：北都唯童子寺有竹一窠，才长数尺。
现代文：唐李卫公说，北都只有童子寺有一棵竹子，仅仅几尺高。
English: Tang Li Weigong said that only Doji Temple in Beijing has a bamboo tree, only a few feet high.

古文：相传其寺纲维，每日报竹平安。
现代文：相传那寺中管事的和尚，每天都要报告竹子平安。
English: According to legend, the monk in charge of the temple had to report on the safety of the bamboo every day.

古文：竹花
现代文：竹花
English: Bamboo flowers

古文：《山海经》曰：竹生花，其年便枯。
现代文：《山海经》上说，竹子开花的那年便枯死。
English: According to the "Song of the Mountains and the Sea," the bamboo withers and dies the year it blooms.

古文：竹六十年易根，易根必花，结实而枯死。
现代文：竹子六十年换一次根，换根就必然开花。开花结实之后便枯死。
English: Bamboo changes its roots once every sixty years. When the roots are changed, it will inevitably bloom. After blooming and fruiting, it will wither and die.

古文：实落复生，六年而成町。
现代文：子实落后复生，六年之后便连片成林。
English: After six years, the cuttings regrew and became a forest.

古文：子作穗，似小麦。
现代文：子实是穗的，象小麦穗。
English: The seed is like the ear of wheat.

古文：竹箹
现代文：竹箹
English: Bamboo shoots

古文：竹复死曰箹。
现代文：竹子复死叫作 箹 。
English: The bamboo that comes back to life is called a bamboo shoot.

古文：六十年一易根，易根则结实枯死。
现代文：竹子六十年一换根，换根就结实枯死。
English: Once the bamboo has changed its roots for sixty years, it will wither and die.

古文：竹实
现代文：竹实
English: Bamboo Solid

古文：唐天复甲子岁，自陇而西，迨于褒梁之境，数千里内亢阳，民多流散。
现代文：唐朝天复年甲子岁，自陇往西，一直到褒、梁之境，数千里内阳光炽烈，久旱不雨，百姓大多都流离四散。
English: It was the year of the reincarnation of the Tang Dynasty, and the sun shone brightly for thousands of miles from Yunnan to the west, all the way to Bao and Liang Provinces. There was no rain for a long time, and most of the people were scattered.

古文：自冬经春，饥民啖食草木，至有骨肉相食者甚多。
现代文：从冬到春，从春到夏，饥饿的人民只能吃草木，甚至有许多骨肉相食的。
English: From winter to spring, from spring to summer, the hungry people can only eat grass and trees, and there are even many cannibals.

古文：是年，忽山中竹无巨细，皆放花结子。
现代文：这年，忽然间山里的竹子不分大小，全都开花结籽。
English: This year, all of a sudden, all the bamboo in the mountains, regardless of size, blossomed and sprouted seeds.

古文：饥民采之，舂米而食，珍于粳糯。
现代文：饥民们便采集它舂米充饥，比稻米还珍贵。
English: Hungry people collect it as sticky rice to satisfy their hunger. It is even more precious than rice.

古文：其子粗，颜色红纤，与今红粳不殊，其味尤更馨香。
现代文：竹子所结的籽，较粗，颜色略红，与如今的红稻米没有不同，它的味道还更香。
English: The seeds of bamboo, coarser and slightly red in color, are no different from today's red rice, and its taste is even more fragrant.

古文：数州之民，皆挈累入山，就食之。
现代文：几个州的饥民，全都拥进山里，就近吃它。
English: Hungry people from several states all flocked to the mountains to eat it.

古文：至于溪山之内，居人如市，人力及者，竞置囤廪而贮之。
现代文：来到溪山之中，居人有如闹市。力所能及的人们，竟抢着设置仓房囤子之类贮存竹籽。
English: When you come to the middle of the stream, the residents are like a bustling city. People who can afford it are rushing to set up warehouses to store bamboo seeds.

古文：家有羡粮者不少者，又取与荤茹血肉而同食者，呕哕。
现代文：家里有不少余粮的，并且把竹籽和其它荤腥菜肴一起吃的，吃了以后便呕吐不止，气不顺。
English: There is a lot of surplus food at home, and bamboo seeds are eaten together with other savory dishes. After eating, they vomit more and more, and their qi is not smooth.

古文：如其中毒，十死其九。
现代文：这样中毒的，十有九死。
English: Nine out of ten people who are poisoned in this way die.

古文：其竹，自此千蹊万谷，并皆立枯。
现代文：那些竹子，从此以后，无论千溪万谷，全都立刻就枯死。
English: Those bamboos, from then on, no matter how many times they sprouted, all immediately withered and died.

古文：十年之后，复产此君。
现代文：十年之后才又生此君。
English: Ten years later, he was born again.

古文：可谓百万圆颅，活之于贞筠之下。
现代文：可以说是千万颗头颅，存亡系于竹子这位真君子。
English: It can be said that there are tens of thousands of heads, and their survival depends on Bamboo, the true gentleman.

古文：五谷
现代文：五谷
English: Gotani

古文：雨稻
现代文：雨稻
English: Rainy rice

古文：夏禹时，天雨稻。
现代文：夏禹那时候，天就像下雨那样往地上下稻子。
English: At the time of Xia Yu, the sky was like rain and rice was falling to the ground.

古文：古诗云： 安得天雨稻，饲我天下民。 
现代文：古诗说： 怎么样能让老天下一场稻子雨，让天下的老百姓吃上饱饭。 
English: The ancient poem said: How can we make the world a rain of rice, so that the people of the world can eat a full meal.

古文：雨粟
现代文：雨粟
English: Raindrops

古文：吕后三年，秦中天雨粟。雨麦
现代文：吕后三年的时候，秦中一带从天上往下下谷子。雨麦
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Lv, the area around the middle of Qin was covered with grain from the sky.

古文：汉武帝时，广阳县雨麦。
现代文：汉武帝的时候，广阳县下过一场麦子雨。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, there was a rain of wheat in Guangyang County.

古文：雕葫
现代文：雕葫
English: 雕

古文：太液池边，皆是雕葫紫萚、绿节蒲丛之类。
现代文：太液池边，全都长满雕葫、紫萚、绿节、蒲丛什么的。
English: On the edge of the pond, they are all covered with carvings, purple ferns, green knots, bushes and so on.

古文：又多紫龟绿鳖。池边多平沙，沙上鹈鹕鸆。
现代文：有米的菰，长安人叫它是 雕葫 ；没有打开叶子的葭芦，叫做 紫萚 ；有头的菰，又叫做 绿节 。池中到处都是凫于水上的幼禽。
English: The people of Chang'an call the cormorant with rice the carved cormorant; the gourd without open leaves is called the purple cormorant; the cormorant with a head is also called the green cormorant. The pond is full of baby birds playing in the water.

古文：鸿鶃，动辄成群。
现代文：又有许多龟鳖之类。池边是大片大片的沙滩，沙滩上各种鸟雀成群结队。
English: There are also many turtle doves and the like. There is a large sandy beach by the pool, and various birds and finches flock to the beach.

古文：雨谷
现代文：雨谷
English: Utena

古文：汉宣帝时，江淮饥馑，人相食。
现代文：汉宣帝的时候，江淮一带遇上荒年，饥民遍野，人吃人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, the area around the Yangtze River and Huai River experienced a year of famine, with starving people everywhere and people eating each other.

古文：天雨谷三日。
现代文：一连下了三天谷子雨。
English: It rained for three days in a row.

古文：寻魏地奏，亡谷二千顷。
现代文：不久，魏地向朝庭禀奏，说他们那里丢失了两千顷谷子。
English: Not long after, Wei Di lied to the imperial court, saying that they had lost two thousand hectares of grain.

古文：摇枝粟
现代文：摇枝粟
English: Cornflower

古文：宣帝地节元年，乐浪之东，有背明之国人至，贡方物。
现代文：宣帝地节元年，有一个地处乐浪之东的背明国的人来到京师贡献土产。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's Birthday, there was a person from the country of Saeming, which is located to the east of Le Lang, who came to Beijing to contribute to local production.

古文：言其乡土在扶桑之东，见日出于西方。
现代文：这人说他的国家在扶桑之东，看见太阳从西方升起。
English: The man said that his country was east of Fusang and he saw the sun rise from the west.

古文：其国昏昏恒开。宜五谷，名日融泽，方三千里。
现代文：说他们国家总是昏昏然不暗不明的，但是国门关口总是开着的。说他们的国家适于种五谷，名叫 日融泽 ，方圆三千里。
English: They say that their country is always dim and unclear, but the national gate is always open. They say that their country is suitable for growing grain, called Niyuzu, with a radius of three thousand miles.

古文：五谷皆良，食者延年，清腹一粒。历年不饥。
现代文：说他们国家的五谷都很好，吃了可以延年益寿，空肚子吃一粒，一年不知道饿。
English: They say that the food in their country is very good. If you eat walnuts, you can prolong your life. If you eat one on an empty stomach, you won't feel hungry for a year.

古文：有摇枝粟，言其枝长而弱，无风常摇，食之益髓。
现代文：说他们国家有一种摇枝粟，它的枝很长但是很弱，没有风也总是在摇动。
English: They said that in their country there is a kind of swaying poppy, its branches are long but very weak, and without wind it is always swaying.

古文：凤冠粟凤冠粟，似凤鸟之冠。
现代文：吃了这种摇枝粟对骨髓有好处。凤冠粟 凤冠粟 ，像凤凰的头冠。
English: It's good for the bone marrow to eat this kind of millet.Phoenix crown millet Phoenix crown millet, like a phoenix's crown.

古文：食者多力。
现代文：吃了凤冠粟的人长力气。
English: People who eat ginseng grow strong.

古文：有游龙粟，枝叶屈曲，如游龙。
现代文：还有一种 游龙粟 ，枝叶弯弯曲曲，像游动的龙。
English: There is also a kind of swimming dragon poppy, with its branches and leaves twisting and bending like a swimming dragon.

古文：有琼膏，色白如银。
现代文：有色如白银样的琼膏。
English: It's a silver-coloured ointment.

古文：食此二粟，令人骨轻。
现代文：吃了这两种谷米，能使人的骨头变轻。
English: Eating these two types of grains can lighten a person's bones.

古文：绕明豆
现代文：绕明豆
English: Wrapped around azuki beans

古文：绕明豆。言其茎弱。自相萦缠。
现代文：绕明豆，它的茎很柔弱，自己互相缠绕。
English: Around the bean, its stems are very tender, twisting themselves around each other.

古文：有挟剑豆。言荚形似人挟剑。而横斜生。
现代文：有一种豆叫 挟剑豆 ，它的荚就像人挟着的剑，横斜着长。
English: There is a kind of bean called 挟剑豆, its beak is like a sword held by a person, obliquely long.

古文：有倾篱豆。言见日则叶垂覆地。
现代文：还有一种豆叫 倾篱豆 ，见了阳光就垂下叶子把地盖上。
English: There is also a kind of bean called "tilting hedgerow bean." When it sees the sun, it hangs down its leaves to cover the ground.

古文：食者不老不疾。
现代文：吃了这种豆的人不衰老不生病。
English: People who eat these beans do not age or get sick.

古文：延精麦
现代文：延精麦
English: Long-grain wheat

古文：延精麦，言延寿益气。
现代文：延精麦，可以延寿益气，使人精力充沛。
English: Long-fermented wheat can prolong life and improve qi, making people full of energy.

古文：有昆和麦，调畅六腑。
现代文：有一种 昆和麦 ，能调畅人的六腑。
English: There is a kind of cucumber and wheat that can regulate a person's sex drive.

古文：有轻心麦，食者体轻。
现代文：还有一种 轻心麦 ，吃了它可以使体重变轻。
English: There is also a kind of light hearted wheat, eating it can make the weight lighter.

古文：有淳和麦，面以酿酒，一醉累月，食之凌冬不寒。
现代文：又有 淳和麦 ，用它的面酿酒，人喝了一醉一个来月。吃了淳和麦的人冬天不知冷。
English: There is also junmai, which is used to make wine, and people get drunk for a month. People who eat junmai do not feel cold in winter.

古文：有含露麦，粝中有露，甘如饴。
现代文：还有一种 含露麦 ，粉中含露，糖一般香甜。
English: There is also a kind of wheat with dew, the powder contains dew, and the sugar is generally sweet.

古文：紫沉麻
现代文：紫沉麻
English: Purple sessile hemp

古文：紫沉麻，其实不浮。
现代文：紫沉麻，它的种子不能在水上漂浮。
English: Purple agate, its seeds can't float on water.

古文：有云水麻，实冷而光，宜为油泽。
现代文：有一种 云水麻 ，种子阴冷而有光泽，适于做有油性带光泽的东西。
English: There is a kind of cloud water hemp, the seeds are cold and shiny, suitable for making oily and shiny things.

古文：有光通麻，食者行不待烛，则巨胜也。
现代文：还有一种 光通麻 ，吃了这种麻籽的人，走路不用依靠蜡烛。光通麻就是胡麻。
English: There is also a kind of translucent hemp, people who eat this hemp seed do not have to rely on candles to walk.

古文：食之延寿，后天而死。
现代文：吃了胡麻延年益寿，长生不老。
English: If you eat sesame seeds, your life will be prolonged and you will live forever.

古文：雨五谷
现代文：雨五谷
English: Umegaya

古文：吴桓王时，金陵雨五谷于贫民家，富民家则不雨。
现代文：吴桓王的时候，在金陵下了一场五谷雨，专下到穷人家，富人家不下。
English: During the reign of King Wu Huan, a rain of grain rained down on Jinling. It fell exclusively on the homes of the poor, but not on the homes of the rich.

古文：野粟石壳
现代文：野粟石壳
English: Hornbeam shell

古文：宋高祖之初，当晋末饥馑之后。
现代文：宋高祖刚即位的时候，正是晋末大饥荒之后。
English: When Song Gaozu had just ascended the throne, it was just after the Great Famine in the late Jin Dynasty.

古文：既即位，而江表二千余里，野粟生焉。
现代文：可是他即位不久，江南一带两千余里到处长出野谷子。
English: However, soon after he ascended to the throne, more than two thousand miles around the southern part of the Yangtze River were covered with wild yam.

古文：又淮南诸山石壳生，石上生壳也。
现代文：另外，淮南一带的山上长出石壳来。
English: In addition, stone shells are growing on the mountains around Huainan.

古文：袁安云，石壳药名，穗之尤小者是也。
现代文：袁安说， 石壳 是药名，穗子比野谷穗还小的就是石壳。
English: Yuan An said, the stone shell is the name of the medicine, and the spikelet is smaller than the spikelet.

古文：芋
现代文：芋
English: Potato

古文：天芋，生终南山中，叶如荷而厚。
现代文：天芋，生长在终南山中，叶子像荷但是比荷叶要厚。
English: Tianmao, grown in the southern mountains, the leaves are like lotus but thicker than lotus leaves.

古文：雀芋
现代文：雀芋
English: Sparrow potatoes

古文：走兽遇之僵。
现代文：雀芋，样子像雀头，放到干燥的地方反而显得湿，放到潮湿的地方，反而显得干。无论飞鸟走兽，一触上它便必死无疑。
English: The taro looks like a sparrow's head, but when placed in a dry place it appears wet, and when placed in a wet place it appears dry. No matter whether it is a bird or a beast, it will undoubtedly die if it is touched.

古文：甘蔗
现代文：甘蔗
English: Sugar cane

古文：南方山有柑樜之林。
现代文：南方山中有甘蔗林。
English: There are sugar cane forests in the Nanfang Mountains.

古文：其高百丈，围三尺八寸。
现代文：甘蔗高一百丈，围长三尺八寸。
English: The sugar cane is a hundred feet tall with a circumference of three feet eight inches.

古文：促节多汁，甜如蜜。
现代文：一节一节都不长，但是液汁很多。液汁蜜一样甜。
English: The segments are not long, but they have a lot of juice, and the juice is as sweet as honey.

古文：作啮其汁，令人涌泽。
现代文：吮吸它的液汁，使人肤色滋润有光泽。
English: Sucking its juice makes the skin moisturized and shiny.

古文：可以节蛔虫。
现代文：可以节制蛔虫。
English: Tapeworms can be controlled.

古文：人腹中蛔虫，其状如蚓。
现代文：人肚子里的蛔虫，样子像蚯蚓。
English: The tapeworm in the human stomach looks like a centipede.

古文：此消谷虫也。
现代文：这是消化粮食的虫子。
English: It's a food-digesting worm.

古文：多则伤人，少则谷不消。
现代文：多了就伤人，少了粮食就难消化。
English: If there is too much, it will hurt people, and if there is not enough food, it will be difficult to digest.

古文：是甘蔗能灭多益少。
现代文：这甘蔗能使多的减少少的增多。
English: This cane can make more decrease less increase.

古文：凡蔗亦然。
现代文：所有甘蔗也这样。
English: So is all sugar cane.

古文：茶荈
现代文：茶荈
English: Tea caddy

古文：叙茶
现代文：叙茶
English: Making tea

古文：茶之名器益众。
现代文：茶的名越来越多。
English: There are more and more names for tea.

古文：剑南有蒙顶石花，或小方，或散芽，号为第一；湖州有顾渚之紫笋，东川神泉、昌明；硖州有碧涧、明月、芳蕊、茱萸簝；福州有方山之生芽；夔州有香山。江陵有楠木；湖南有衡山；岳州有浥湖之含膏；常州有义兴紫笋；婺州有来白；睦州有鸠坑；洪州有西山白露；寿州有霍山黄芽；蕲州有蕲门团黄。浮梁商贾不在焉。
现代文：剑南有 蒙顶石花 ，有的是 小方 ，有的是 散芽 ，号称天下第一；湖州有顾渚的 紫笋 、东川的 神泉 和 昌明 ；硖州有 碧涧 、 明月 、 方蕊 、 茱萸簝 ；福州有方山的 生芽 ，夔州有 香山 ；江陵有 楠木 ；湖南有 衡山 ；岳州有浥湖的 含膏 ；常州有义兴的 紫笋 ；婺州有 来白 ；睦州有 鸠坑 ；洪州有西山的 白露 ；寿州有霍山的 黄芽 ；蕲州有蕲门的 团黄 茶商们就不呆在盛产茶叶的浮梁了。
English: In Jiannan, there are topped stone flowers, some are small square, some are scatter buds, known as the world's first; Huzhou has Guzhu's Ziyang, Dongchuan's Divine Spring and Changming; Zhangzhou has Baguio, Mingyue, Fangrui, Zhuji; Fuzhou has Fangshan's germination buds, Zhangzhou has Fragrant Mountain; Jiangling has Nanmu; Hunan has Hengshan; Yuezhou has Lugu Lake's ointment; Changzhou has Yixing's Ziyang; Zhangzhou has Lai Bai; Mengzhou has Shenkeng; Hongzhou

古文：获神茗
现代文：获神茗
English: Ho Sheng Yao

古文：《神异记》曰，余姚人虞茫，入山采茗，遇一道士，牵三百青羊，饮瀑布水。
现代文：《神异记》上说，余姚人虞茫进山采茶，遇见一位道士，牵着三百头青羊，正在一个瀑布下给羊饮水。
English: According to "Divergent," Yuyao people went into the mountains to collect tea, met a Taoist, led three hundred sheep, and were giving the sheep water under a waterfall.

古文：曰： 吾丹丘子也。
现代文：他对虞茫说： 我是丹丘子。
English: He said to Yu Hua, "I am Deng Qiu Zi.

古文：闻子善茗饮，常思惠。
现代文：听说你善于喝茶，总想给你点好处。
English: I've heard that you're good at drinking tea, so I've always wanted to do you a favour.

古文：山中有大茗，可以相给。祈子他日有瓯檥之余，必相遗也。 因立茶祠。
现代文：山里有一棵大茶树，可以供你采茶，希望你日后日子富足了，也一定要对它有所馈赠。于是虞茫就建了一座 茶祠 。
English: There is a big tea tree in the mountain, which can be used for you to collect tea. I hope that you will be rich in the future, and you must also give a gift to it. So Yuhuang built a tea shrine.

古文：后常与人往山，获大茗焉。
现代文：后来他常领人进山，果然找到一棵大茶树。
English: Later, he often led people into the mountains and found a large tea tree.

古文：飨茗获报
现代文：飨茗获报
English: reported

古文：刘敬叔《异苑》曰，剡县陈婺妻，少与二子寡居，好饮茶茗。
现代文：刘敬叔在《异苑》里说，剡县陈婺的妻子，年轻的时候领着两个孩子寡居。她喜欢喝茶。
English: Liu Jingshu said in "Heterogeneous Garden" that the wife of Chen Yao of Handan County was widowed with two children when she was young. She liked to drink tea.

古文：以宅中有古冢，每饮，先辄祀之。
现代文：因为宅子里有一座古墓，她每次喝茶都要先到墓前祭祀一番。
English: Because there is an ancient tomb in the house, every time she drinks tea, she has to go to the grave first.

古文：二子恚之曰： 冢何知？徒以劳祀。 
现代文：两个孩子生气地说： 一个破坟丘怎么能知道有人祭祀，这不是白费劲嘛！ 
English: Two children said angrily: How can a broken grave mound know that someone is offering a sacrifice? This is not a wasted effort!

古文：欲掘去之。
现代文：两个孩子想要把古墓掘开弄平。
English: Two children try to smooth out the excavation of an ancient tomb.

古文：母苦禁而止。
现代文：他们的母亲苦苦地劝阻才没掘平。
English: Their mother struggled to dissuade them from digging.

古文：及夜，母梦一人曰： 吾止此冢三百余年，母二子恒欲见毁，赖相保护，又飨吾嘉茗，虽泉壤朽骨，岂忘翳桑之报？ 
现代文：到夜里，母亲做了一个梦，一人对她说： 我的坟在这三百年了，你的两个孩子常常要毁掉它，全靠你保护了它，又给我好茶喝，虽然身体烂在地下，但是哪能忘桑荫之德呢？ 
English: In the night, her mother had a dream. A man said to her, "My grave has been here for three hundred years. Your two children often want to destroy it. It's all up to you to protect it, and give me good tea to drink. Although my body is rotting in the ground, how can I forget the virtue of mulberry shade?"

古文：及晓，于庭内获钱十万。
现代文：到天亮，她在院子里拾到铜钱十万。
English: By dawn, she had found 100,000 coppers in the courtyard.

古文：似久埋者，唯贯新。
现代文：这些钱似乎在地下埋了很久了，唯独穿钱的绳是新的。
English: The money seems to have been buried for a long time, but the rope is new.

古文：母告二子。
现代文：她告诉了两个孩子。
English: She told her two children.

古文：二子惭之。
现代文：两个孩子很是惭愧。
English: The two children are very ashamed.

古文：从是祷酹愈至。
现代文：从此，她祷告祭奠得更周到了。
English: Since then, her prayers and offerings have become more thoughtful.

古文：消食茶
现代文：消食茶
English: Diet tea from

古文：唐有人授舒州牧。
现代文：唐时有一个人被授予舒州太守。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, one person was awarded the title of Shuzhou Taishou.

古文：李德裕谓之曰，到彼郡日，天柱峰茶，可惠三数角。
现代文：李德裕对他说，到了舒州郡之后，弄到天柱峰上的茶，要他送三两角来。
English: Li Deyu told him that after arriving in Shuzhou County, he would get tea on Tianzhu Peak and asked him to send three or two dimes.

古文：其人献之数十斤。
现代文：结果那人到任以后给他送来好几十斤。
English: As a result, the man sent him dozens of jin after he took office.

古文：李不受，退还。
现代文：李德裕没有接受，退了回去。
English: Li Deyu did not accept and retreated back.

古文：明年罢郡。
现代文：第二年罢了郡。
English: The next year, it was all over.

古文：用意精求，获数角，投之。
现代文：那人用心寻找，弄到几角，便投到李德裕家来。
English: The man searched diligently, got a few corners, and then came to Li Deyu's house.

古文：德裕悦之而受。
现代文：李德裕高兴地收下了。
English: Li Deyu gladly accepted.

古文：曰： 此茶可以消酒食毒。 
现代文：他说，这茶可以消除酒食里的毒物。
English: He said that the tea can eliminate the poison in alcohol and food.

古文：乃命烹一瓯，沃于肉食内，以银合闭之。
现代文：于是就让人烹茶一小盆，浇在肉食内，用银器盖严。
English: So they had someone prepare a small pot of tea, pour it into the meat, and cover it tightly with silverware.

古文：诘旦开视，其肉已化为水矣。
现代文：次日早晨一看，那盆里的肉已经化成水了。
English: When I looked the next morning, the meat in the basin had turned into water.

古文：众伏其广识也。
现代文：众人都叹服李德裕知识渊博。
English: Everyone was impressed by Li Deyu's profound knowledge.

