古文：张慎言，字金铭，阳城人。
现代文：张慎言，字金铭，阳城人。
English: Zhang Shengyan, Zi Jinming, Yangcheng people.

古文：祖升，河南参政。
现代文：祖父张升做过河南参政。
English: Zhang Sheng's grandfather was a politician in Henan Province.

古文：慎言举万历三十八年进士。
现代文：慎言考中万历三十八年进士。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination in the 38th year of the Wanli calendar.

古文：除寿张知县，有能声。调繁曹县，出库银籴粟备振，连值荒岁，民赖以济。
现代文：初任寿张知县，就以才干过人出了名，后来调到繁曹县以后，他拿出库银收购稻米准备赈灾，后来连续几年繁曹县收成不佳，百姓靠这些米才渡过难关。
English: When he was first appointed to Shou Zhangzhi County, he became famous for his outstanding talent. Later, after being transferred to Fancao County, he took out the treasury money to purchase rice in preparation for disaster relief. Later, the harvest in Fancao County was poor for several years in a row, and the people relied on these rice to get through the difficulties.

古文：泰昌时，擢御史。
现代文：泰昌年间，慎言升任御史。
English: During the reign of Yasuchika, Shingon was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：逾月，熹宗即位。
现代文：过一个月，熹宗即了位。
English: A month later, Shizong was enthroned.

古文：时方会议三案，慎言言： 皇祖召谕百工，不究张差党与，所以全父子之情；然必摘发奸谋，所以明君臣之义。
现代文：当时朝廷正在集中讨论 三案 ，慎言上书说： 皇祖神宗皇帝召集群臣百官，告诉大家不要追查张差的同伙，这是为了保全父子之间的情义；但是务必揭发他们的阴谋，是为了显示君臣之间的大义。
English: At that time, the imperial court was intensively discussing the three cases, and Emperor Shenzong wrote: Emperor Shenzong called together hundreds of officials to tell everyone not to investigate Zhang Chia's associates, in order to preserve the relationship between father and son; but to expose their conspiracy, in order to show the great justice between monarchs and ministers.

古文：至先皇践阼，蛊惑之计方行，药饵之奸旋发。崔文升投凉剂于积惫之余，李可灼进红丸于大渐之际，法当骈首，恩反赐金。
现代文：到先皇帝光宗即位后，这边正在煽风点火，那边立即实施了药饵的奸计，先是由崔文升趁先皇帝寒积无力的情况下投了泻药，然后由李可灼在先皇帝性命垂危之际进献红丸。按理对他们应依法分尸，朝廷却赏给金银以示恩奖。
English: After Emperor Guangzong ascended the throne, this side was fanning the flames, and that side immediately carried out the treacherous scheme of drugging. First, Cui Wensheng took advantage of the emperor's cold and weak condition to inject laxatives, and then Li Keqiao presented red pills to the former emperor when his life was in danger. They should have been legally dismembered, but the court rewarded them with gold and silver as a token of gratitude.

古文：谁秉国成，一至此极！
现代文：是谁在掌握国家政权，竟然弄到这步田地？
English: Who is in control of the state power, and how did they get to this point?

古文：若夫鼎湖再泣，宗庙之鼎鬯为重，则先帝之簪履为轻。
现代文：至于鼎湖掉两次眼泪，力陈宗庙祭祀应看作大事，就把先皇帝的性命当成小事，实在不像话。
English: As for the two tears shed by Dinghu, the power of Chen Zong Temple should be regarded as a major event, and it is really ridiculous to regard the life of the former emperor as a trifle.

古文：虽神庙郑妃且先徙以为望，选侍不即移宫，计将安待。 
现代文：另外就是神宗的郑贵妃尚且先搬出正宫树立朝廷的威望，选侍不马上移宫，打算怎么样呢？ 
English: In addition, Princess Zheng Guifei of the Shenzong still moved out of the main palace first to establish the prestige of the imperial court, and the selection of attendants did not immediately move to the palace. What is the plan?

古文：无何，贾继春以请安选侍被谴，慎言抗疏救之。
现代文：不久，贾继春因为请求另外安置选侍受到贬官处分，慎言上书抗言论救。
English: Not long after, Jia Jichun was punished with demotion because of his request for another placement of the election of an attendant, and he was advised to write a letter of protest to save his speech.

古文：帝怒，夺俸二年。
现代文：熹宗恼了，扣发他两年俸禄。
English: Enzong was annoyed and withheld his salary for two years.

古文：天启初，出督畿辅屯田，言： 天津、静海、兴济间，沃野万顷，可垦为田。
现代文：天启初年，慎言外出管理京城郊区屯田，他上书说： 天津、静海、兴济一带沃野万顷，都可以开垦成良田。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, Shen Yan said that he would go out to manage the military camps in the suburbs of Beijing. He submitted a letter saying: Tianjin, Jinghai, and Xingji can reclaim tens of thousands of hectares of fertile fields.

古文：近同知卢观象垦田三千余亩，其沟洫庐舍之制，种植疏浚之方，犁然具备，可仿而行。 
现代文：近年来同知卢观象开垦了三千多亩，他所规划的沟洫、房舍布局方法和种植、引水灌溉方法都现成地摆着，可以依照推行。 
English: In recent years, Tongzhi Lu Guanxiang has reclaimed more than 3,000 mu. The ravines, house layout methods and planting, water diversion and irrigation methods he planned are all ready-made and can be implemented accordingly.

古文：因列上官种、佃种、民种、军种、屯种五法。
现代文：进而慎言又列出官种、佃种、民种、军种、屯种五种办法。
English: In addition, Shenyan also listed five methods, including the official type, the puppet type, the folk type, the military type and the camp type.

古文：又言： 广宁失守，辽人转徙入关者不下百万。
现代文：又说，广宁失守后辽东人民辗转迁移，入关来的人不下一百万。
English: He also said that after the loss of Guangning, the people of Liaodong were relocated, and more than one million people entered the customs.

古文：宜招集津门，以无家之众，垦不耕之田便。 
现代文：应该把他们召集到津门来，用这些无家可归的人们耕种这未曾开垦的土地。
English: They should be called to Tsumon, and these homeless people should be used to cultivate this uncultivated land.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：朝廷下诏同意了。
English: He complied.

古文：尝疏荐赵南星，劾冯铨，铨大恨。
现代文：慎言曾经上书推荐赵南星，弹劾冯铨，冯铨极为恼恨。
English: Shen Yan once wrote a letter recommending Zhao Nansing to impeach Feng Qi, which made Feng Qi extremely angry.

古文：五年三月，慎言假归，铨属曹钦程论劾，诬盗曹县库银三千，遂下抚按征脏，编戍肃州。
现代文：五年三月，慎言请假回去后，冯铨嘱咐曹钦程上书弹劾他，诬陷他盗取了繁曹县的三千库银，于是朝廷下令抚按官追赃，慎言被编排到肃州充了军。
English: In March of the fifth year, after Shenyan went back on leave, Feng Yu instructed Cao Qincheng to write a letter to impeach him, accusing him of stealing three thousand cu m of silver from Fan Cao County. Therefore, the imperial court ordered officials to pursue Shenyan, and Shenyan was ordered to Suizhou to fill the army.

古文：庄烈帝即位，赦免。崇祯元年起故官。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后赦免了慎言，崇祯元年起复他官任原职。
English: After Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, he pardoned Shen Yan, and from the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was reinstated to his original post.

古文：会当京察，请先治媚珰者附逆之罪，其他始付考功，报可。
现代文：当时恰好要考核京官，慎言上书请先惩办追随阉党的人的附逆之罪，再把其他人交付考功，庄烈帝批示同意了。
English: At that time, the Beijing officials were to be evaluated, and Emperor Zhuang agreed to the request to punish those who followed the Kuomintang for the crime of treason first, and then submit the others to the examination of merits.

古文：旋擢太仆少卿，历太常卿、刑部右侍郎。
现代文：慎言不久升任太仆少卿，又先后做太常卿、刑部右侍郎。
English: Shingon was soon promoted to the position of Taichu Shokei (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice), and successively became Taichu Chokei (Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice) and Gyobu Ujihiro (Assistant Secretary of the Ministry of Justice).

古文：谳耿如杞狱，不称旨，并尚书韩继思下吏，寻落职归。久之，召为工部右侍郎。
现代文：在审理耿如杞一案时没能让庄烈帝满意，慎言和尚书韩继恩一道被打入监牢，不久他被罢官还乡去了。很久以后，朝廷又召他回朝当工部右侍郎。
English: When he was unable to satisfy Emperor Zhuang Rong in the trial of the case of Geng Ruxuan, Shingon monk Han Jiong was sent to prison with him. Soon after, he was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown. After a long time, the imperial court called him back to the imperial court to serve as the right hand man of the Ministry of Works.

古文：国用不支，廷议开采、鼓铸、屯田、盐法诸事。慎言屡疏陈奏，悉根本计。
现代文：当时国家财用不足，朝廷讨论要开采金银，铸造货币，开展屯田，改革盐法等，慎言屡次上书评论，所谈到的都是国家的根本大计。
English: At that time, the state's financial resources were insufficient, and the imperial court was discussing the mining of gold and silver, the minting of money, the development of farmlands, the reform of the salt law, etc. Shingon repeatedly submitted a written comment, and all that was talked about was the country's fundamental plan.

古文：大学士杨嗣昌议改府州县佐为练备、练总，慎言以更制事大，历陈八议，其后卒不能行。
现代文：大学士杨嗣昌主张改府州县佐为练备、练总，慎言认为改革制度一事关系重大，前后奏进八篇论议，后来这一改革终于没能实施开来。
English: Yang Shichang, a university scholar, advocated changing the prefectural and county governors to the training and general training. Shen Yan believed that the reform of the system was of great importance. Eight discussions were carried out, and later this reform was finally unable to be implemented.

古文：由左侍郎迁南京户部尚书，七疏引疾，不允。就改吏部尚书，掌右都御史事。
现代文：慎言以后由左侍郎升为南京户部尚书，他七次称病辞谢，朝廷都不允许，并就此让他改任吏部尚书，掌管右都御史的事务。
English: After Shingon, he was promoted from the left attendant to the Nanjing household secretary. He called in sick seven times, which was not allowed by the imperial court, and he was changed to the clerk's secretary, in charge of the affairs of the right capital.

古文：十七年三月，京师陷。
现代文：十七年三月，京师失陷。
English: In March of the seventeenth year of Chongzhen, the capital fell.

古文：五月，福王即位南京，命慎言理部事。
现代文：五月，福王在南京即位，让慎言办理吏部事务。
English: In May, King Fu ascended to the throne in Nanjing, leaving Shenyan to handle the affairs of the personnel department.

古文：上中兴十议：曰节镇，曰亲藩，曰开屯，曰叛逆，曰伪命，曰褒恤，曰功赏，曰起废，曰惩贪，曰漕税。
现代文：慎言上书讲了中兴十议，分别是：节制兵镇，亲近藩王，开辟屯田，惩治叛逆，驱除伪官，表彰烈士，论功行赏，起用废籍，严惩贪污，清理漕税。
English: Shen Yan said in the letter that the ten proposals of ZTE were as follows: moderation of military towns, closeness to the king of the domain, opening up of military camps, punishment of rebellion, expulsion of pseudo-officials, commendation of martyrs, discussion of merits and rewards, use of abandoned citizens, severe punishment of corruption, and clean up of tax evasion.

古文：皆嘉纳。
现代文：福王都高兴地采纳了。
English: All of them happily accepted.

古文：时大起废籍，慎言荐吴甡、郑三俊。
现代文：当时朝廷大力起用废籍，慎言推荐了吴生生、郑三俊。
English: At that time, the imperial court vigorously promoted the use of abandoned citizens, and cautiously recommended Wu Shengsheng and Zheng Sanjun.

古文：命甡陛见，三俊不许，大学士高弘图所拟也。
现代文：朝廷命令吴生生觐见，三俊不许，这道命令是由大学士高弘图起草的。
English: Wu Sheng Sheng was ordered by the imperial court to see Sanjun, but Sanjun was not allowed to see Wu Sheng Sheng Sheng. This order was drafted by the university scholar Gao Hongtu.

古文：勋臣刘孔昭，赵之龙等一日朝罢，群诟于廷，指慎言及甡为奸邪，叱咤彻殿陛。
现代文：勋臣刘孔昭、赵之龙等人一天在罢朝以后在朝堂上聚众吵闹，把慎言和吴生生指斥为奸邪，他们喊叫的声音响彻殿堂。
English: On the day after the Emperor's death, Liu Kongzhao, Zhao Zhulong and others gathered a noisy crowd in the morning hall, denouncing Shen Yan and Wu Sheng Sheng as traitors. The sound of their shouts echoed throughout the hall.

古文：给事中罗万象言： 慎言平生具在，甡素有清望，安得指为奸邪？ 
现代文：给事中罗万象说 ：慎言平生经历明白无余，吴生生一贯出名地清廉公正，怎么能把他俩指为奸邪呢？ 
English: To the matter, Luo Vanzhong said: Shenyan's life experience is very clear, Wu Shensheng has always been famously clean and fair, how can he accuse them of treason?

古文：孔昭等伏地痛哭，谓慎言举用文臣，不及武臣，嚣争不已。
现代文：孔昭等人爬在地上痛哭，说慎言推荐使用文臣，没推荐武臣，继续吵闹不停。
English: Kong Zhao and others crawled on the ground and cried bitterly, saying that Shingon recommended the use of Wencheng, did not recommend Wucheng, and continued to make a lot of noise.

古文：又疏劾慎言，极诋三俊。且谓： 慎言当迎立时，阻难怀二心。
现代文：又上书弹劾慎言，极力攻击三俊，并且说 ：慎言在大家迎立陛下时阻拦此事，阴怀二心。
English: He also wrote a letter to impeach Shingon, strongly attacking Sanjun, and said: "Shingon was double-minded in blocking this when everyone was welcoming His Majesty.

古文：乞寝牲陛见命，且议慎言欺蔽罪。 
现代文：请停下让吴生生觐见的诏命，并讨论处理慎言蒙骗陛下的罪过！ 
English: Please stop the edict for Wu Sheng Sheng to see and discuss how to deal with the crime of deceiving His Majesty!

古文：慎言疏辨，因乞休。
现代文：慎言上书为自己辩护，并请求离任。
English: Shen Yan wrote a letter to defend himself and asked to leave his post.

古文：万象又言： 首膺封爵者，四镇也。新改京营，又加二镇衔，何尝不用武。
现代文：万象又说道： 首先受到封爵的是四镇大将，最近改革京营后又给两镇大将加了官衔，何尝不是重用武臣呢？
English: Bansho also said: The first to receive a knighthood was the four-town general, and recently, after the reform of the Beijing camp, the two-town general was given an official title, why is it not a heavy-duty warrior?

古文：年来封疆之法，先帝多宽武臣，武臣报先帝者安在？
现代文：近年来选用封疆大臣的办法，先帝往往对武臣宽大，武臣报效先帝的在哪里呀？
English: In recent years, the method of selecting the minister of the fiefdom has been used, and the former emperor is often generous to the vassal. Where is the vassal's reward for serving the former emperor?

古文：祖制以票拟归阁臣，参驳归言官，不闻委勋臣以纠劾也。
现代文：祖宗的规矩把起草诏书的权力交给阁臣，把参与驳议的权力交给言官，没听说过给勋臣以检举的权力。
English: The rules of the ancestors gave the power to draft the edict to the cabinet minister, the power to participate in the refutation to the speaker, and the power to report to the honored minister.

古文：使勋臣得兼纠劾，文臣可胜逐哉！ 
现代文：假使让勋臣兼领检举权，文臣能不被赶尽吗？ 
English: If we allow the honorable minister to also receive the right to prosecute, can the civil minister not be driven out?

古文：史可法奏： 慎言疏荐无不当。
现代文：史可法进言道 ：慎言的上书和推荐无不恰当。
English: Schofax's advice: There's nothing inappropriate about a discreetly worded letter and recommendation.

古文：诸臣痛哭喧呼，灭绝法纪，恐骄弁悍卒益轻朝廷。 
现代文：那些大臣痛哭喧闹，灭绝法纪，倘若对他们让步，恐怕今后骄兵悍将会更加轻视朝廷。 
English: If those ministers make concessions to them, I am afraid that they will despise the imperial court even more.

古文：御史王孙蕃言： 用人，吏部职掌。
现代文：御史王孙蕃说 ：用人是吏部的职权。
English: Chief Historian Wang Sun Rong said: "Employing people is the authority of the cadre department.

古文：奈何廷辱冢宰。 
现代文：那帮人怎么能在朝堂之上欺负吏部尚书呢？ 
English: How could that group of people bully Shoshu, the head clerk, on the top floor of the Imperial Palace?

古文：弘图等亦以不能戢和文武，各疏乞休，不允。
现代文：弘图等人也因为不能协和文武，分别上书请求离职，福王不答应。
English: Hongtu and others also separately petitioned for resignation because they could not reconcile literature and martial arts, but Fu Wang did not agree.

古文：甡既不出，慎言乞休得请，加太子太保，荫一子。
现代文：吴生生既已受阻难以出仕，慎言请求离休得到批准，朝廷给他加官太子太保，荫封他一个儿子为官。
English: Since Wu Shengsheng had already been prevented from serving, his request for retirement was approved, and the court gave him the post of Crown Prince Taibo and appointed one of his sons to the post.

古文：山西尽陷于贼，慎言无家可归，流寓芜湖、宣城间。
现代文：当时山西全部沦失在贼寇手里，慎言无家可归，就流落在芜湖、宣城一带。
English: At that time, all of Shanxi was lost in the hands of thieves and robbers, and they were homeless, and they were scattered around Wuhu and Xuancheng.

古文：国亡后，疽发于背，戒勿药，卒，年六十九。
现代文：南京覆亡后，他背上长出疽疮，谢绝用药，死掉了，终年六十九岁。
English: After the fall of Nanjing, he developed gangrene on his back, refused medication, and died at the age of sixty-nine.

古文：慎言少丧二亲，鞠于祖母。
现代文：慎言从小死了父母，由祖母抚养成人。
English: Shingon's parents died when he was a child, and he was raised by his grandmother.

古文：及为御史，讣闻，引义乞归，执丧三年以报。
现代文：等到他当御史时祖母的丧报传来，他按照给父母守丧的道理告假回乡，为祖母守了三年丧礼，报答她的养育之恩。
English: When news of his grandmother's death reached him when he was crown prince, he took a leave of absence to return to his hometown in accordance with the principle of mourning his parents. He held a three-year funeral for his grandmother to repay her for raising him.

古文：子履旋，举崇祯十五年乡试。
现代文：慎言的儿子履旋考中崇祯十五年乡试。
English: Shingon's son, Sunghyun, a 15-year-old junior high school student, aced his hometown exam.

古文：贼陷阳城，投崖死。
现代文：贼寇打下阳城时，他投崖自尽了。
English: When the bandits attacked Yangcheng, he committed suicide by jumping off a cliff.

古文：事闻，赠御史。
现代文：事情给朝廷知道后，朝廷追赠他为御史。
English: After the matter was brought to the attention of the Imperial Court, the Court posthumously awarded him the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：徐石麒，字宝摩，嘉兴人。
现代文：徐石麒，字宝摩，嘉兴人。
English: Xu Shijuan, Zi Baomao, Jiaxing people.

古文：天启二年进士。
现代文：天启二年进士。
English: Entered the priesthood in the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：授工部营缮主事，筦节慎库。
现代文：初任工部营缮主事，管理节慎仓。
English: At the beginning, he was in charge of the renovation of the construction department and managed the storage section.

古文：魏忠贤兼领惜薪司，所需悉从库发，石麒辄持故事格之。
现代文：魏忠贤当时兼领惜薪司，所需都由节慎仓支出，石麒总是按常规拒绝他的不合理要求。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian was also in charge of the salary department, and all the necessary expenses were paid by the prudent warehouse. Shi Yao always refused his unreasonable demands as usual.

古文：其党噪于庭，不为动。
现代文：魏忠贤的党羽们在院子里跟他吵闹，石麒也不为所动。
English: Wei Zhongxian's henchmen quarreled with him in the courtyard, but Shi Yan remained unmoved.

古文：御史黄尊素坐忤忠贤下诏狱，石麒为尽力。
现代文：御史黄尊素因为触犯忠贤被逮入皇家监狱，石麒为营救他尽心尽力。
English: Goshihwang Sonseok was arrested and sent to the royal prison for offending Chunghyun, and Shihyun did his best to rescue him.

古文：忠贤怒，执新城侯王升子下狱，令诬贿石麒，捕系其家人，勒完脏而削其籍。
现代文：忠贤恼了，把新城侯王升的儿子抓进监狱，让他假称贿赂过石麒，然后抓了石麒的家人，勒索罢赃物后把石麒剥夺了官籍。
English: Annoyed, Zhongxian arrested the son of Wang Sheng, the lord of Xincheng, and put him in prison. He made him pretend to have bribed Shijie. Then he arrested Shijie's family members, and stripped Shijie of his official status after extorting the stolen goods.

古文：崇祯三年，起南京礼部主事，就迁考功郎中。
现代文：崇祯三年，朝廷起用石麒为南京礼部主事，马上就升用为考功郎中。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial court appointed Shijie as the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, and he was immediately promoted to the rank of meritorious student.

古文：八年佐尚书郑三俊京察，澄汰至公。
现代文：八年他协助尚书郑三俊进行考察百官，裁减得极为公正。
English: In eight years, he assisted Shangshu Zheng Sanjun to inspect a hundred officials, and the reduction was extremely fair.

古文：历尚宝卿、应天府丞。
现代文：之后他历任尚宝卿、应天府丞。
English: After that, he successively held the posts of Shangbaoqing and Yingtianfuzheng.

古文：十一年春入贺。三俊时为刑部尚书，议侯恂狱不中，得罪。石麒疏救，释之。
现代文：十一年春天石麒进京朝贺，三俊当时担任刑部尚书，因为讨论侯恂的案子不符合上意，正被问罪，石麒上书营救，庄烈帝释放了三俊。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Heian period, Shih Hsiang entered Beijing for the morning prayer. At that time, Sanjun was in charge of the criminal investigation department. Because the discussion of Hou Yi's case was not in accordance with the wishes of the emperor, he was being questioned about his guilt. Shih Hsiang wrote a letter to rescue him, and Emperor Zhuangliu released Sanjun.

古文：石麒官南京十余年，至是始入为左通政，累迁光禄卿、通政使。
现代文：石麒在南京做官十多年，到现在才进京当上左通政，历次升任光禄卿、通政使。
English: Ishizaki has been an official in Nanjing for more than ten years, and only now has he entered Beijing to become the top left-wing politician, and has been promoted to the posts of Minister of the People's Liberation Army and Minister of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：十五年擢刑部右侍郎，谳吏部尚书李日宣等狱。帝曰： 枚卜大典，日宣称诩徇私。 
现代文：十五年升任刑部右侍郎，审理吏部尚书李日宣等人的案子时，庄烈帝说 ：拜相这样的大事，日宣竟然自我吹嘘、徇私舞弊！ 
English: Fifteen years later, when he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department and tried the case of Li Nissen and others in the Criminal Investigation Department, Zhuang Ledei said, "In such an important matter as paying homage to the emperor, Nissen actually boasted about himself and committed selfish fraud!

古文：石麒予轻比，贬二秩。
现代文：石麒给予轻判，把他贬官两级。
English: Shi Hao was given a light sentence and demoted two levels.

古文：先是，会推阁臣，日宣一再推，因及副都御史房可壮、工部右侍郎宋玫、大理寺卿张三谟，石麒与焉。
现代文：原来朝廷公选阁臣，日宣一推又推，才推荐出副都御史房可北、工部右侍郎宋玫、大理寺卿张三谟，石麒也在名单中。
English: Originally, the imperial court publicly elected cabinet ministers, and the Japanese government pushed and pushed, only to recommend the vice-governor Kehoku, Song Mei, the right-hand man of the Ministry of Industry, and Zhang Sanmu, the head of the Dali Temple. Shizhao was also on the list.

古文：召对便殿，石麒独不赴。
现代文：庄烈帝召见他们到便殿问话时，只有石麒没有去。
English: When Emperor Zhuangde summoned them to the toilet hall for questioning, only Shi Yao did not go.

古文：及是帝怒，戍日宣及吏科都给事中章正宸、河南道御史张煊，夺可壮、玫、三谟及谳狱左侍郎惠世扬官。
现代文：到这个时候庄烈帝恼火了，把日宣及吏科都给事中章正宸、河南道御史张煊等充了军，把可仕、宋玫、三谟及审理此案的左侍郎惠世扬罢了官。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhuang was angry, and he filled the ranks of the Japanese envoys and officials with Zhang Zhengyi and Zhang Ye, the governor of Henan Province, and dismissed Kishi, Song Mei, Sanmu, and Zuozhirang Hui Shiyang, who was in charge of the case.

古文：石麒代世扬掌部事，旋进左。
现代文：石麒接替世扬掌管了刑部事务，不久晋职为左侍郎。
English: Ishizaki took over the affairs of the Criminal Investigation Department from Seyang, and was soon promoted to the position of Left Attendant.

古文：当是时，帝以威刑驭下，法官引律，大抵深文附会，予重比。
现代文：那个时候，庄烈帝正用严刑驾御臣下，法官援引法律，大都深文附会予以重判。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhuang was punishing his vassals with severe punishments, and the judges invoked the law, and most of them were given heavy sentences.

古文：石麒奉命清狱，推明律意，校正今断狱之不合于律者十余章，先以白同官。以次审理十三司囚，多宽减。
现代文：石麒奉命清查官司时，就讲究律令本意，校正当时断案不合律令的十多条，先告诉了同事，然后依次审理十三司的囚徒，大多有所放宽、减刑。
English: When Shi Hao was ordered to investigate the legal proceedings, he paid attention to the original intention of the legal order, corrected more than ten articles that did not conform to the legal order at that time, first told his colleagues, and then tried the prisoners of the 13 divisions in turn, most of which were relaxed and reduced.

古文：然廉公，一时大法赫然，无敢幸免者。
现代文：但是他廉明公正，一时间国法声威大振，无人敢存幸免的心理了。
English: However, he was honest and fair, and for a time, the prestige of the country and the law soared, and no one dared to have the mentality of being spared.

古文：兵部尚书陈新甲下狱，朝士多营救。
现代文：兵部尚书陈新甲关进监狱后，朝臣中有很多人营救。
English: After Chen Xinjia, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, went to prison, many courtiers came to his rescue.

古文：石麒持之曰： 人臣无境外交。未有身在朝廷，不告君父而专擅便宜者。
现代文：石麒反对说： 人臣没有国境之外的结交，没有身在朝廷，办事时不报告君父而一意便宜行事的道理。
English: Shi Hao objected, saying: A courtier has no contacts outside the country, has not been to the imperial court, and does not report to the emperor when doing business, but is determined to act cheaply.

古文：新甲私款辱国，当失陷城寨律，斩。 
现代文：新甲私自议和，有辱国格，罪行相当于失陷城寨的条款，应予斩首。 
English: A new clause stipulates that those who engage in personal disputes, humiliate the national character, and commit crimes equivalent to the fall of a walled city should be beheaded.

古文：帝曰： 未中，可覆拟。 
现代文：庄烈帝说 ：这样判不合乎法律，可以另行判决。 
English: Zhuo Ledei said: such a judgment is not in accordance with the law, and a separate judgment can be made.

古文：乃论新甲陷边城四，陷腹城七十二，陷亲藩七，从来未有之奇祸。
现代文：石麒于是议论说新甲丢失了四座边城，七十二座内地城镇，使七处藩王沦灭，这是自古以来不曾有过的奇祸。
English: Shi Hao then argued that Xinjia lost four border cities, seventy-two inland towns, and seven lords of the domain, which was a miracle that had never happened since ancient times.

古文：当临敌缺乏，不依期进兵策应，因而失误军机者斩。
现代文：他的罪行相当于临敌畏战，不按期进兵策应，因而失误军机的条款，应予斩首。
English: He should be beheaded for his crime, which is tantamount to threatening the enemy with war, failing to enter the army on schedule, and thus violating the terms of the military aircraft.

古文：奏上，新甲弃市，新甲党皆大恨。
现代文：石麒的奏议交上后，新甲被斩首街头，新甲的党羽都对石麒极为恼恨。
English: After Shi Jia's report was submitted, Xin Jia was beheaded in the street, and the party members of Xin Jia were extremely angry with Shi Jia.

古文：石麒寻擢本部尚书。
现代文：石麒不久升任本部尚书。
English: Ishizaki was soon promoted to head office secretary.

古文：中官王裕民坐刘元斌党，元斌纵军淫掠，伏诛，裕民以欺隐不举下狱。
现代文：宦官王裕民因为和刘元斌是同伙，元斌纵容部下奸淫、抢劫被处死，裕民因为欺骗主上不加检举被关进监狱。
English: The eunuch Wang Yumin was executed because he was an accomplice of Liu Yuanbin, and Yuanbin connived with his subordinates to commit rape and robbery, and Yumin was put in prison for deceiving his master without being prosecuted.

古文：帝欲杀之，初令三法司同鞫，后专付刑部，石麒议戍烟瘴。
现代文：庄烈帝想杀他，开始命令三法司共同审理，后来专门交给了刑部。
English: Zhuang Rongdi wanted to kill him and began to order the three legal departments to jointly try him, and later specifically handed him over to the criminal department.

古文：奏成，署院寺名以进。帝怒其失出，召诘都御史刘宗周，对曰： 此狱非臣谳。 
现代文：石麒决定把他充军到烟瘴地面去，奏议写完后一并署上了按察院、大理寺的官员交了上去。庄烈帝恼这个判决判得太轻，召都御史刘宗周来质问，宗周回答说 ：这个案子不是我审的。 
English: Shi Yan decided to conscript him to the Yantian ground. After writing the report, he signed it and handed it to the officials of the Court of Appeals and Dali Temple. The Emperor was angry that the sentence was too light, and summoned Liu Zong Zhou, the prefectural governor, to question him. Zong Zhou replied, "I am not the judge of this case."

古文：徐曰： 臣虽不与闻，然阅谳同，已曲尽情事。
现代文：慢慢地又说 ：我虽然没参加审问，但看过审讯记录，这个判决已经很周到地考虑了整个事实。
English: He added slowly: "Although I did not attend the trial, I have read the trial transcript, and this verdict has very carefully considered the entire facts.

古文：刑官所执者法耳。法如是止，石麒非私裕民也。 
现代文：刑官所掌握的尺度是法令，法令只到此为止，石麒并不是偏向裕民。 
English: The measure that the criminal law officer grasps is the law, and the law only goes so far. Shi Yan is not biased towards the wealthy.

古文：帝曰： 此奴欺罔实甚，卿等焉知？ 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 这个奴才欺君罔上实在过分，你们哪里知道呢？ 
English: Zhuo Ledei said, "This lackey has gone too far in deceiving the emperor. How do you know?

古文：令石麒改谳词，弃之市。
现代文：于是命令石麒修改了狱词，把裕民斩首街头。
English: So he ordered Shi Hao to amend the prison terms and decapitate Yu Min in the street.

古文：无何，宗周以救姜埰，熊开元获严谴，佥都御史金光辰救之，夺职。
现代文：不久宗周因为搭救姜土采、熊开元被重贬，佥都御史金光辰搭救宗周被夺了官。
English: Soon after, Zong Zhou was demoted again for rescuing Jiang Tuo Zi and Xiong Kai Yuan, and the official position was taken away from Jin Guangcheng, the governor of Shandong Province, for rescuing Zong Zhou.

古文：石麒再疏留，不纳。
现代文：石麒两次上书请留用宗周，庄烈帝不听。
English: Shi Yan twice sent a letter asking Zong Zhou to stay on, but Emperor Zhuang did not listen.

古文：玘、开元既下诏狱，移刑部定罪。石麒据原词拟开元赎徒，埰谪戍，不复鞫讯。
现代文：姜土采、开元关进皇家监狱后，移交刑部定罪，石麒根据原来的审讯记录判处开元赎徒，姜土采充军，没有再进行拷讯。
English: After Jiang Tuo Zhao and Kai Yuan were imprisoned in the royal prison, they were transferred to the criminal department for conviction. Shi Hao sentenced Kai Yuan's ransom, Jiang Tuo Zhao to the army, according to the original trial record, and did not torture them again.

古文：帝责对状，石麒援故事对。
现代文：庄烈帝责成他上书解释，石麒便援引惯例做了回答。
English: Zhuge Liang ordered him to submit a written explanation, and Shijie replied by citing the usual practice.

古文：帝大怒，除司官三人名，石麒落职闲住。
现代文：庄烈帝大为恼火，把法司官员给除名三个，石麒被落职闲住。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was very angry and removed three officials from the legal department, and Shijun was left idle.

古文：福王监国，召拜右都御史，未任，改吏部尚书。
现代文：福王监国后召拜石麒为右都御史，尚未上任，就改任为吏部尚书。
English: After Fu Wang became the supervisor of the country, he summoned Baishizhao to be the governor of the right capital, and before he took office, he was reappointed as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：奏陈省庶官、慎破格、行久任、重名器、严起废、明保举、交堂廉七事。
现代文：石麒进言论说了裁减百官，慎行破格，任官要久，重视等级名分，严格起用废籍，公开地进行保举，鼓励朝臣廉洁互助等七件事。
English: In his speech, Shi Haojin said seven things, including reducing the number of officials, breaking the standard of prudence, requiring long-term officials, attaching importance to rank and title, strictly using the waste register, publicly carrying out the promotion, and encouraging the integrity and mutual assistance of courtiers.

古文：时方考选，与都御史刘宗周矢公甄别，以年例出御史黄耳鼎、给事中陆朗于外。
现代文：当时正在进行考选，石麒与都御史刘宗周发誓公正地进行甄别，根据年例决定把御史黄耳鼎、给事中陆郎调出外任。
English: At that time, the examination was in progress. Shi Zheng and Liu Zongzhou, the governor of the capital, vowed to conduct a fair screening, and according to the annual decision, Huang Erding, the governor of the capital, and Lu Lang, the governor of the capital, were transferred to outside positions.

古文：朗贿奄入得留用，石麒发其罪。
现代文：陆郎贿赂宦官得到留用，石麒揭发了他的罪证。
English: Lu Lang bribed the eunuch to be retained, and Shi Zheng revealed his incriminating evidence.

古文：朗恚，诋石麒，石麒称疾乞休。
现代文：陆郎恼恨了，大力攻击石麒，石麒上书称病，请求离休。
English: Enraged, Lu Lang attacked Shi Yao vigorously. Shi Yao wrote a letter saying that he was ill and requested a leave of absence.

古文：耳鼎亦两疏劾石麒，并言其枉杀陈新甲。
现代文：耳鼎也两次上书弹劾石麒，并且说他屈死了陈新甲。
English: Erding also wrote twice to impeach Shijun, and said that he had succumbed to Chen Xinjia.

古文：石麒疏辩，求去益力。
现代文：石麒又上书辩解，更加坚决地请求离任。
English: Shi Hao also wrote a letter to defend himself, and more resolutely requested to leave his post.

古文：马士英拟严旨，福王不许，命驰驿归。
现代文：马士英起草了一道严厉的诏书，福王不答应，命令石麒乘坐官方车马返回家乡。
English: Ma Shih-ying drafted a stern edict, but Fu Wang did not agree and ordered Shi Hao to return to his hometown in an official carriage.

古文：石麒刚方清介，扼于权奸，悒悒不得志。
现代文：石麒为人刚正、清廉，被掌权的奸臣遏制，在位时郁郁不得志。
English: Ishizaki was an upright and honest man. He was restrained by the treacherous vassals in power, and was depressed when he was on the throne.

古文：士英挟定策功，将图封，石麒议格之。
现代文：士英倚仗迎立福王的功劳谋取封爵，石麒拒绝了他。
English: Shi Ying relied on the merits of King Fu to seek a knighthood, but Shi Yu refused him.

古文：中官田成辈纳贿请嘱，石麒悉拒不应。
现代文：宦官田成等纳取贿赂，为他人求情，石麒都拒不答应。
English: Eunuchs such as Tanari accepted bribes and pleaded for others, but Sekiguchi refused to comply.

古文：由是中外皆怨，构之去。
现代文：由此朝廷内外都有人怨恨他，到头来把他排挤走了。
English: As a result, people inside and outside the court resented him, and he was eventually pushed out.

古文：去后以登极恩，加太子太保。
现代文：石麒走后，朝廷因为福王登基的恩典，给他加官太子太保。
English: After Ishizaki's departure, the Imperial Court gave him the additional title of Crown Prince and Protector because of the grace of the enthronement of King Fu.

古文：明年，南都亡。
现代文：第二年，南都沦亡了。
English: The following year, Nanto fell.

古文：石麒时居郡城外，城将破，石麒曰： 吾大臣也，城亡与亡！ 
现代文：当时石麒住在郡城外边，城即将被打下时，他说 ：我是朝廷大臣，应当城亡身亡！ 
English: At that time, Ishizaki lived outside the county seat, and when the city was about to be defeated, he said, "I am a minister of the Imperial Court, I should die in the city!"

古文：复入居城中，以闰月二十六日朝服自缢死，年六十有八。
现代文：又住到城中去，在这年闰月二十六日那天身穿朝服上吊自尽了，终年六十八岁。
English: He went to live in the city again, and on the 26th day of the leap month of this year, he hanged himself in his imperial robes. He was 68 years old.

古文：解学龙，字石帆，扬州兴化人。
现代文：解学龙，字石帆，扬州兴化人。
English: De-schooling dragon, word stone sail, Yangzhou Xinghua people.

古文：万历四十一年进士。
现代文：万历四十一年进士。
English: Forty-one years of service.

古文：历金华、东昌二府推官。
现代文：先后做过金华、东昌二府推官。
English: He successively served as the governor of Jinhua and Dongchang.

古文：天启二年，擢刑科给事中。
现代文：天启二年，学龙升任刑科给事中。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, Xue Long was promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：辽东难民多渡海聚登州，招练副使刘国缙请帑金十万振之，多所干没。
现代文：辽东难民很多人渡海过来聚集在登州，招练副使刘国缙申请了十万国库银赈济难民，多所侵吞。
English: Many refugees from Liaodong came across the sea and gathered in Danzhou. Liu Guozhen, the vice envoy for recruitment, applied for 100,000 yuan from the national treasury to help the refugees, and many of them were swallowed up.

古文：学龙三疏发其弊，国缙遂获谴。
现代文：学龙三次上书揭发他的罪证，国缙于是受到贬官。
English: Xue Long wrote three times to expose his crimes, and the governor was demoted.

古文：王纪忤魏忠贤削籍，学龙言： 纪亮节弘猷，召置廊庙，必能表正百僚，裁决大务。 
现代文：王纪因触犯魏忠贤被剥夺官籍，学龙说： 王纪高风亮节，胸怀大略，召他入朝做官一定能为人表率，端正百官，裁决国家大事。 
English: Wang Ji was stripped of his official status for offending Wei Zhongxian. Xu Long said: Wang Ji is high-spirited and bright, with a broad mind. Inviting him to the imperial court to serve as an official will surely set an example for others, correct a hundred officials, and adjudicate national affairs.

古文：失忠贤意，不报。
现代文：因为不合忠贤的意思，朝廷没有回答他。
English: The imperial court did not answer him because it did not agree with what he meant.

古文：已，劾川、贵旧总督张我续贪淫漏网，新总督杨述中缩朒卸责，帝不罪。
现代文：过后，学龙弹劾川、贵旧总督张我续贪婪不法，逍遥法外，新总督杨述中缩手缩脚，推卸责任，熹宗也没有治他们的罪。
English: After that, Xu Long impeached Chuan and Gui old governor Zhang I, who were greedy, illegal and unpunished. The new governor Yang Shu shrank his hands and feet, shirked responsibility, and Shanzong did not punish them.

古文：学龙通晓政务。上言：
现代文：学龙通晓政务，曾经上过一篇奏议说：
English: He is well-versed in government affairs and once submitted a report saying:

古文：辽左额兵旧九万四千有奇，几饷四十余万。
现代文： 辽左编制内的兵力原先是九万四千多人，每年用饷四十多万两银子。
English: The number of soldiers in Liao Zuo's army was originally more than ninety-four thousand, with an annual expenditure of more than four hundred thousand taels of silver.

古文：今关上兵止十余万，月饷乃二十二万。
现代文：现在山海关上有十多万兵力，每月的银饷竟用二十二万两。
English: At present, there are more than one hundred thousand troops at the Shanhaiguan Customs, and the monthly amount of silver ingots is as high as 220,000 taels.

古文：辽兵尽溃，关门宜募新兵。
现代文：辽东的兵力现在尽行溃散，关门口想必又要召募新兵。
English: The forces of Liaodong are now dispersed as much as possible, and new soldiers must be recruited at the gate.

古文：蓟镇旧有额兵，乃亦给厚糈召募。
现代文：蓟镇原本有部队编员，竟然也拨出大量粮食给他招募新营。
English: Shanzhen originally had a troop commander, and even allocated a large amount of grain to him to recruit a new battalion.

古文：旧兵以其饷厚，悉窜入新营，而旧额又如故，漏卮可胜言。
现代文：老兵因为这边粮饷充足，就都偷偷溜进新营来，而原有名额还是那么多，中间的漏洞实在讲不完。
English: Because there was plenty of food and money on this side, the old soldiers sneaked into the new camp, but there were still so many vacancies, and there were so many loopholes in the middle.

古文：国初，文职五千四百有奇，武职二万八千有奇。
现代文：开国之初，国家文职人员五千四百多，武职人员二万八千多人。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were more than 5,400 civil servants and more than 28,000 military personnel.

古文：神祖时，文增至一万六千余，武增至八万二千余矣。
现代文：神宗时，文职人员增加到一万六千多人，武职人员增加到八万二千多人了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinzong, the number of civil servants increased to more than 16,000 and the number of military personnel increased to more than 82,000.

古文：今不知又增几倍。
现代文：到现在不知又增加了几倍。
English: To this day, I don't know how many times it has increased.

古文：诚度冗者汰之，岁可得饷数十万。
现代文：假如真地能考虑把冗员裁减下来，每年可以获得几十万饷银。
English: If they can really consider cutting redundancies, they can earn hundreds of thousands of baht a year.

古文：裁冗吏，核旷卒，俾卫所应袭子弟袭职而不给俸，又可得数十万。
现代文：裁汰多余的将校，核查军队中的缺额，让卫所应该袭职的年轻人袭职而不用支付官俸，三下里又可以省出几十万来。
English: Cut redundant officers, check the shortage in the army, and let the young people who should take over the guard post take over the post without paying the official salary, and you can save hundreds of thousands in three steps.

古文：京边米一石，民输则非一石也。
现代文： 京边用米一石，民输运来时可不是一石。
English: One stone of rice is used in Kyoto, but it is not one stone when it is transported by people.

古文：以民之费与国之收衷之，国之一，民之三。
现代文：把百姓的支出和国家的收入对照来看，国家收入一石，百姓要支出三石。
English: Comparing the people's expenditure with the state's income, the state's income is one stone, while the people have to spend three stones.

古文：关饷一斛银四钱，以易钱则好米值钱百，恶米止三四十钱，又其下腐臭不可食。
现代文：山海关的粮饷一斛米值四钱银子，用它来兑换铜钱时好米值一百个铜钱，差米只三四个铜钱，再差的腐烂得没法食用。
English: According to the grain basket of the Shanhaiguan Customs, a stalk of rice is worth four silver coins. When it is used to exchange copper coins, good rice is worth one hundred copper coins, bad rice is only worth three or four copper coins, and bad rice is so rotten that it cannot be eaten.

古文：以国之费与兵之食衷之，兵之一，国之三。
现代文：把国家的支出和部队实际吃到口中的对照来看，军队里吃到一斛，国家要支出三斛。
English: If we compare the state's expenditure with what the troops actually eat, we will see that the army eats a loaf of bread while the state spends three loaves.

古文：总计之，民费其六，而兵食其一。
现代文：总的算来，百姓支出六成，部队才吃到一成。
English: On the whole, the people spent 60 per cent of the money, while the troops only got 10 per cent.

古文：况小民作奸欺漕卒，漕卒欺官司，官司欺天子，展转相欺，米已化为糠粃沙土；兼湿热蒸变，食不可咽，是又化有用之六，为无用之一矣。
现代文：况且还有小百姓做假欺瞒漕运士兵，漕运士兵欺瞒官府，官府又欺瞒天子，这样子一再欺瞒，到头来收到的米都变成了糠秕、沙土；加上天气湿热，米都变了质，食不可咽，这样又把有用的六成化为完全无用的一成了。
English: Moreover, there were also common people who pretended to be rowing soldiers to deceive the rowing soldiers, the rowing soldiers deceived the government, and the government deceived the emperor. In this way, they repeatedly deceived, and in the end, the rice they received turned into straw and sand. Coupled with the hot and humid weather, the rice changed in quality and was inedible, thus turning the useful 60% into a completely useless 100%.

古文：臣以为莫如修屯政，屯政修则地辟而民有乐土，粟积而人有固志。
现代文：我认为解决军饷不如办理屯田，屯田开办后土地得到了耕种，百姓也有了乐土，粮米有了积贮，人心也就坚固了。
English: In my opinion, it is better to resolve the issue of war booty than to manage the military cantonment. After the establishment of the military cantonment, the land has been cultivated, the people have a happy land, grain and rice have been accumulated, and the people's hearts have been strengthened.

古文：昔吴璘守天水，纵横凿渠，绵亘不绝，名曰 地网 ，敌骑不能逞。
现代文：过去吴王守天水时，在那里纵横开挖沟渠，绵延不断，取名叫 地网 ，敌人的骑兵无法逞威风。
English: In the past, when the King of Wu guarded Tianshui, trenches were dug vertically and horizontally there, stretching continuously, called the ground net, the enemy's cavalry could not show off.

古文：今仿其制，沟涂之界，各树土所宜木，小可获薪果之饶，大可得抗扼之利，敌虽强，何施乎。
现代文：现在假若仿效他的办法，在河渠之上、道路边分别栽种适宜的树木，那么往小处说来能有很多燃柴、水果，往大处说来能得到拒敌防守的地利，敌人即使强大，面对这样的局势能怎么样施展呢？ 
English: Now, if we were to follow his example and plant suitable trees separately on the canal and on the roadside, then, on a small scale, we could have a lot of firewood and fruit, and on a large scale, we could get a position to resist the enemy's defense. Even if the enemy is strong, what can we do in the face of this situation?

古文：帝亟下所司，而议竟中格。稍进右给事中。
现代文：熹宗马上把他这篇奏议交给有关部门讨论，而奏议最终竟被中止搁置，学龙稍得提升，担任了右给事中。
English: Shanzong immediately submitted his petition to the relevant departments for discussion, but the petition was eventually suspended and shelved, and Xuelong was slightly promoted and served as the right-hand person.

古文：五年九月，御史智铤劾学龙及编修侯恪为东林鹰犬，遂削籍。
现代文：五年九月，御史智铤弹劾学龙和编修侯恪是东林党的鹰犬，熹宗就把他给罢了官。
English: In September of the fifth year, the historian Zhisheng impeached the scholar Long and the editor Shuhou, who was the hawk dog of the Donglin Party, and Shanzong gave him the post.

古文：崇祯元年起历户科都给事中。
现代文：崇祯元年学龙起复，做过户科都给事中。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, the school resumed, and those who had done household science were all in trouble.

古文：以民贫盗起，请大清吏治。
现代文：因为百姓贫困，土匪横行，他上书请求大力整顿吏治。
English: Because of the poverty of the people and the rampant banditry, he petitioned for a vigorous rectification of the bureaucracy.

古文：寻劾蓟抚王应豸克饷激变，又上足饷十六事。
现代文：不久他弹劾蓟镇巡抚王应豸克扣军饷引发了事变，又递上了有关充实粮饷的十六条意见。
English: Soon after, his impeachment of Wang Yingke, the governor of Handan Town, for withholding military pay caused an incident, and he also submitted 16 opinions on the replenishment of grain reserves.

古文：帝皆采纳。
现代文：庄烈帝都采纳了。
English: All of them were adopted by Emperor Zhuang.

古文：迁太常少卿、太仆卿。
现代文：学龙先后升任太常少卿、太仆卿。
English: Xue Long was successively promoted to the posts of Taizhang Shaoqing and Taizhongqing.

古文：五年改右佥都御史，巡抚江西。
现代文：五年改任右佥都御史，巡抚江西。
English: Five years later, he was reappointed to the post of Ueshiba Miyoshi, the governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：疏言： 臣所部州县七十八，而坐逋赋降罚者至九十人。
现代文：期间他上书说 ：我所辖属的州县只有七十八个，可是因为民赋欠收而被贬官、惩罚的官员却达九十人。
English: During this period, he wrote: "There are only seventy-eight prefectures and counties under my jurisdiction, but there are ninety officials who have been demoted or punished because of the poor harvest.

古文：由数岁之逋责于一岁，数人之逋责于一人，故终无及额之日也。
现代文：因此把几年的拖欠责成一并交清，几个人的拖欠责成给一个人交，所以永远没有达到指标的那一天。
English: Therefore, the arrears of several years were paid together, and the arrears of several people were paid to one person, so the target was never reached.

古文：请别新旧，酌多寡，立带征之法。 
现代文：请求区别新旧欠赋，考虑欠额多少，制定带征的办法。 
English: The request is to distinguish between the new and old arrears, consider the amount of arrears, and formulate a method of levying.

古文：可之。
现代文：朝廷同意了。
English: The Imperial Court approved.

古文：四方盗贼蜂起，江西独无重兵，学龙以为言，诏增置千人。
现代文：当时各地盗贼蜂起，江西都没有重兵防守，学龙对此向上做了报告，朝廷诏令在江西增设一千人。
English: At that time, thieves were rising up all over the country, and there was no heavy military defense in Jiangxi. Xuelong made a report to his superiors about this, and the imperial court ordered an additional one thousand people to be stationed in Jiangxi.

古文：讨平都昌、萍乡诸盗，合闽兵击破封山妖贼张普薇等，贼遂殄灭。
现代文：学龙讨伐、平定过都昌、萍乡等地的盗贼，联合福建部队打败了封山一带的妖贼张普薇等人的贼兵，江西的盗贼于是被歼灭净尽了。
English: Xue Long fought and subdued the bandits in Duchang, Pingxiang and other places, and the joint Fujian troops defeated the bandits of Zhang Puwei and other bandits in the Fengshan area. The bandits in Jiangxi were then wiped out.

古文：十二年冬，擢南京兵部右侍郎。
现代文：十二年冬季，学龙升任南京兵部右侍郎。
English: In the winter of the 12th year, Xuelong was promoted to the post of the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：明年春，将解任，遵例荐举属吏，并及迁谪官黄道周。
现代文：第二年春天他即将解除原任时按照惯例推荐自己的僚属，并且牵涉到被贬了官的黄道周。
English: In the spring of the next year, when he was about to be relieved of his post, he recommended his colleagues in accordance with the usual practice, and involved the demoted official's zodiac week.

古文：帝怒，征下狱，责其党庇行私，廷杖八十，削其籍，移入诏狱，竟坐遣戍。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，把他收捕入狱，批评他结党行私，相互包庇，把他廷杖了八十大棍，剥夺了官籍，后来转移进皇家监狱，最后因此被处充军去了。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was angry, arrested him and put him in prison. He criticized him for being partisan and covering up for each other. He was punished with eighty strokes of the imperial cane, deprived of his official status, and later transferred to the royal prison. Finally, he was exiled for this reason.

古文：十五年秋，道周召还，半道请释学龙，不听。
现代文：十五年秋天，道周应召还朝，半路上请求释放学龙，庄烈帝不听。
English: In the autumn of the fifteenth year, Tao Zhou was summoned to the morning, and halfway through he asked for the release of the school dragon. Zhuang Rong did not listen.

古文：十七年五月，福王立于南京，召拜兵部左侍郎。
现代文：十七年五月，福王在南京即位，召拜学龙为兵部左侍郎。
English: In May 17th, when King Fu ascended to the throne in Nanjing, he summoned Xue Long to be his left-hand attendant.

古文：十月擢刑部尚书。
现代文：十月升为刑部尚书。
English: In October, he was promoted to Shosho of the Penal Department.

古文：时方治从贼之狱，仿唐制六等定罪。
现代文：当时朝廷正在查处大臣降从贼寇的案子，按照唐朝的规定分六等给这些人定罪。
English: At that time, the imperial court was investigating and handling the case of the ministers who had surrendered to the bandits. According to the regulations of the Tang Dynasty, these people were convicted according to six levels.

古文：学龙议定，以十二月上之：
现代文：这个名单由学龙拟定后在十二月里交了上去：
English: The list was drawn up by academics and submitted in December:

古文：其一等应磔者：吏部员外郎宋企郊，举人牛金星，平阳知府张嶙然，太仆少卿曹钦程，御史李振声、喻上猷，山西提学参议黎志升，陕西左布政使陆之祺，兵科给事中高翔汉，潼关道佥事杨王休，翰林院检讨刘世芳十一人也。
现代文：第一等应予绞死的有：吏部员外郎宋企郊，举人牛金星，平阳知府张嶙然，太仆少卿曹钦程，御史李振声、喻上猷，山西提学参议黎志升，陕西左布政使陆之祺，兵科给事中高翔汉，潼关道佥事杨王休，翰林院检讨刘世芳共十一个人。
English: The first class of those who should be hanged are: the clerk's son-in-law Song Qijuan, the person who raised the cow Venus, the governor of Pingyang Zhang Yulan, the servant Cao Qincheng, the historian Li Zhenxuan, the scholar Yu Shangqian, the scholar-councillor of Shanxi Province Li Zhisheng, the political envoy of Shaanxi Province Zuo Bu Lu Zhijuan, the scholar-in-arms Gao Xianghan, the scholar-in-arms Yang Wangxu, and the scholar-in-arms Liu Shifang. There are a total of eleven people.

古文：二等应斩秋决者：刑科给事中光时亨，河南提学佥事巩焴，庶吉士周锺，兵部主事方允昌四人也。
现代文：第二等应斩首等候秋季执行的有：刑科给事中光时亨，河南提学佥事巩火育，庶吉士周钟，兵部主事方允昌共四个人。
English: The second group to be beheaded and await execution in the autumn are: four people in total: the criminal investigation department has given the case to Zhongguang Shihheng, Henan has given the case to Gong Huiyu, Zhou Zhong, the son-in-law of Guizhi, and Fang Yunchang, the head of the military department.

古文：三等应绞拟赎者：翰林修撰兼户、兵二科都给事中陈名复，户科给事中杨枝起、廖国遴，襄阳知府王承曾，天津兵备副使原毓宗，庶吉士何胤光，少詹事项煜七人也。
现代文：第三等应处绞刑打算赎罪的有：翰林修撰兼户、兵二部都给事中陈名夏，户科给事中杨枝起、廖国遴，襄阳知府王承曾，天津兵备副使原毓宗，庶吉士何胤光，少詹士项煜，共七个人。
English: The third class, who should be hanged to atone for their sins, included: Chen Mingxia, who was also a member of the Hanlin Shuxin household and the second division of soldiers, Yang Zhiqi, who was also a member of the household science department, Liao Guoshuan, who was also a member of the household science department, Wang Chengzen, who was the governor of Xiangyang Province, Yuan Shizong, who was the deputy military commander of Tianjin, He Yanguang, who was also a member of the second division of soldiers, and Xiao Janzhi, who was a member of the second division of soldiers, a total of seven people.

古文：四等应戍拟赎者：礼部主事王孙蕙，翰林院检讨梁兆阳，大理寺正钱位坤，总督侍郎侯恂，山西副使王秉鉴，御史陈羽白、裴希度、张懋爵，礼部郎中刘大巩，吏部员外郎郭万象，给事中申芝芳、金汝砺，举人吴达，修撰扬廷鉴及黄继祖十五人也。
现代文：第四等应处充军打算赎罪的有：礼部主事王孙蕙，翰林院检讨梁兆阳，大理寺正钱位坤，总督侍郎侯恂，山西副使王秉鉴，御史陈羽白、裴希度、张懋爵，礼部郎中刘大巩，吏部员外郎郭万象，给事中申芝芳、金汝砺，举人吴达，修撰杨廷鉴及黄继祖共十五个人。
English: The fourth-ranking officials to whom the army should be dispatched to atone for their sins were: Wang Sun Ying, the head of the Ministry of Rites, Liang Zhaoyang, the inspector of the Hanlin Academy, Zheng Qian Yikun of Dali Temple, the governor's attendant Hou Yi, the deputy envoy of Shanxi Wang Bing Jian, the imperial historian Chen Yubai, Pe Xidu, Zhang Xizhe, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Rites Liu Dagong, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Rites Guo Wanzhong, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs Shen Zhifang, Jin R

古文：其已奉旨录用者：兵部尚书张缙彦，给事中时敏，谕德卫胤文、韩四维，御史苏京，行取知县黄国琦、施凤仪，兵部郎中张正声，内阁中书舍人顾大成及姜荃林等十人也。
现代文：第五等应处徒刑打算赎罪的有：通政司参议宋学显，谕德方拱乾，工部主事缪沅，给事中吕兆龙、傅振铎，进士吴刚思，检讨方以智、傅鼎铨，庶吉士张家玉及沈元龙共十人。
English: The fifth class of those who should be sentenced to imprisonment to atone for their sins are: Song Xuexian, the councillor of the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, Gong Qian, the leader of the German side, Miao Wei, the leader of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Lu Zhaolong, Fu Zhenyao, and Wu Gangsi, who were involved in the case, and I Zhi, Fu Dingyao, and Zhang Jiayu and Shen Yuanlong, who were involved in the review. There were a total of ten people.

古文：得旨： 周锺等不当缓决，陈名夏等未蔽厥辜，侯恂、宋学显、吴刚思、方以智、潘同春等拟罪未合。
现代文：第六等应处廷杖打算赎罪的有：工部员外郎潘同春，礼部员外郎吴泰来，主事张琦，行人王于曜，行取知县周寿明，进士徐家麟及向列星、李枫八人。名单递上后得到批复说 ：周钟等人不应当缓期处决，陈名夏等人没有受到贼寇玷污，侯恂、宋学显、吴刚思、方以智、潘同春等量刑不当。
English: The sixth eight people who should be executed with the imperial scepter to atone for their sins are: Work Department member Wai Lang Pan Tong Chun, Ministry of Ceremonies member Wai Lang Wu Tai Lai, leader Zhang Xing, pedestrians Wang Yu You, Xing Tori Zhixian Zhou Shou Ming, Jin Shi Xu Jia Lin, and Xiang Lixing and Li Feng. After the list was submitted, it was approved and replied that: Zhou Zhong and others should not be executed with a reprieve, Chen Mingxia and others were not tainted by the bandits, and Hou Yi, Song Xu Xian, Wu Gang Si, Fang Yizhi, Pan

古文：新榜进士尽污伪命，不当复玷班联。 
现代文：新榜进士都被伪命玷污过，不应当再让他们来玷污朝班。 
English: The new generation of cadres have all been tarnished by false lives, and they should no longer be allowed to tarnish the morning shift.

古文：令再议。
现代文：命令学龙再做议定。
English: Order the dragon to come to an agreement.

古文：惟方拱乾结纳马、阮，特旨免其罪。
现代文：只有方拱乾结纳马士英、阮大铖，福王特颁圣旨赦免了他的罪过。
English: Only Fang Gongqian confessed his sins to Ma Shiying and Ruan Daju, and was pardoned by the special decree of King Fu.

古文：明年正月，学龙奉诏拟周锺、光时亨等各加一等，潘同春诸臣皆侯补小臣，受伪无据，仍执前律。
现代文：第二年正月，学龙奉命改判周钟、光时亨等人分别罪加一等，潘同春等人都是候补的小官，没有接受伪命的证据，仍然维持原判。
English: In the first month of the second year, Xu Long was ordered to re-sentence Zhou Zhonglu, Guang Shiheng and others to one grade of crime, respectively, and Pan Tongchun and others were alternate minor officials. They did not accept the evidence of false life, but still maintained the original sentence.

古文：当是时，马、阮必欲杀周锺。
现代文：当时马士英、阮大铖一心要杀周钟。
English: At that time, Ma Shih-ying and Nguyn Đc were bent on killing Zhou Zhong.

古文：学龙欲缓其死，谋之次辅王铎，乘士英注籍上之，且请停刑。
现代文：学龙想判他缓期执行，就跟次辅王铎商议，趁士英请假时递上判决书，并且请求停止用刑。
English: Xue Long wanted to give him a suspended sentence, so he consulted with Second Assistant Wang Yao, took advantage of Shi Ying's leave of absence to submit the verdict, and requested that the sentence be suspended.

古文：铎即拟俞旨，褒以详慎平允。
现代文：王铎就起草了同意的诏书，赞扬学龙的量刑详慎平允。
English: Wang Yao drafted an edict of approval, praising Xue Long's sentencing as detailed, prudent and equitable.

古文：士英闻之大怒，然事已无及。
现代文：士英听说后大为恼火，但想改也来不及了。
English: Shi Ying was very angry after hearing this, but it was too late to change his mind.

古文：大铖暨其党张捷、杨维垣声言欲劾学龙，学龙引疾。
现代文：大铖和他们的同伙张捷、杨维垣声称要弹劾学龙，学龙上书称病告退。
English: Dazhao and their accomplices Zhang Jie and Yang Vigaki claimed that they wanted to impeach Xue Long. Xue Long wrote a letter saying that he was ill and resigned.

古文：命未下，保国公朱国弼、御史张孙振等诋其曲庇行私，遂削籍。
现代文：诏令还没下来，保国公朱国弼、御史张孙振等人攻击学龙曲意庇护罪人，徇私舞弊，朝廷就把学龙给剥夺了官籍。
English: Before the edict was issued, Zhu Guozhen, the Prince of Guo, and Zhang Sun Zhen, the Grand Historian, and others attacked Xue Long for sheltering criminals and committing selfish frauds, and the imperial court stripped Xue Long of his official status.

古文：城破，衣冠步至武定桥投水死。时又有钦天监博士陈于阶、国子生吴可箕、武举黄金玺、布衣陈士达，并死焉。
现代文：大铖杀掉周钟、时亨就传旨把第二等判为斩首的人派往云南金齿充军，第三等判为绞刑的发往广西边卫充军，第四等以下全部落职为民，永不叙用。不过学龙所拟定的名单也有很多人漏网，他所定为一等的罪犯们都跟随贼寇西行去了，实际上未曾予以处死。学龙回去后不久，南都就失守了。
English: When Dafu killed Zhou Zhong, Shi Heng sent an order to send the second-class people who were sentenced to beheading to the Yunnan Gold Tooth Army, the third-class people who were sentenced to hanging to the Guangxi Border Guard Army, and all the fourth-class and below were dismissed as citizens and would never be enlisted. However, many people on the list drawn up by Xu Long were leaked. The criminals he designated as first-class went with the thief Koxi, but they were never actually executed. Soon after Xu Long returned, Nandu was lost.

古文：左懋第，字萝石，莱阳人。
现代文：学龙在很久以后才死于家中。左懋第，字萝石，莱阳人。
English: He died at home a long time later. Zuo Xingdi, Zhe Luo Shi, Lai Yang Ren.

古文：崇祯四年进士。
现代文：崇祯四年进士。
English: He was promoted to a priest four years later.

古文：授韩城知县，有异政。
现代文：初任韩城知县，成绩突出。
English: He was the first mayor of Hancheng County, and his achievements are outstanding.

古文：遭父丧，三年不入内寝，事母尽孝。
现代文：在为父亲守丧期间，他三年内不曾入过内室，服侍母亲极尽孝心。
English: During the mourning period for his father, he did not enter the inner room for three years, serving his mother with the utmost filial piety.

古文：十二年，擢户科给事中。
现代文：十二年懋第升任户科给事中。
English: Twelve years later, he was promoted to the position of household science.

古文：疏陈四弊，谓民困、兵弱、臣工委顿、国计虚耗也。
现代文：他上书讲述了国家的四种弊病，分别是百姓贫困、兵力虚弱、群臣萎靡不振、国家财政空乏。
English: In his letter, he described the four ills of the country, namely, the poverty of the people, the weakness of the army, the malaise of the ministers, and the depletion of the national finances.

古文：又陈贵粟之策，令天下赎罪者尽输粟，盐筴复开中之旧，令输粟边塞充军食。
现代文：又讲述了提高米价的办法，让天下赎罪的人家都出米赎罪，用盐制度恢复开中的老办法，让边塞的用户出粮充军粮。
English: He also described the method of raising the price of rice, so that all the people in the world would come up with rice to atone for their sins, the old method of using the salt system to restore the middle of the harvest, and letting the users of the border fortress contribute grain to replenish the military grain.

古文：彗星见，诏停刑，懋第请马上速传。又请严禁将士剽掠，有司朘削。
现代文：有一天彗星出现，朝廷下令停用刑罚，懋第请马上向四方传布诏书，又请求严禁将士剽掠，官府剥削百姓。
English: One day, a comet appeared, and the imperial court ordered the suspension of the punishment. The emperor requested the emperor to immediately issue an edict to the four quarters, and also requested a strict ban on the plundering of soldiers and the exploitation of the people by the government.

古文：请散米钱，振辇下饥民，收养婴孩。
现代文：他还请求散发铜钱、开仓赈济都城的饥民，收养婴儿。
English: He also asked for the distribution of copper coins, the opening of warehouses to feed the hungry in the capital, and the adoption of babies.

古文：明年正月，剿饷罢征，亦请马上速行，恐远方吏不知，先已征，民不沾实惠。
现代文：第二年正月，剿饷停征，懋第也请求赶快传达这个指示，唯恐远方的官吏不知道，在头前已经征收，百姓得不到实惠。
English: In the first month of the second year, the government suspended the levy, and the government also requested that this instruction be conveyed as soon as possible, lest the distant officials did not know that it had been levied in advance, and the people would not receive real benefits.

古文：帝并采纳。
现代文：庄烈帝都采纳了他的意见。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang accepted his opinion.

古文：三月，大风霾。
现代文：三月，京师刮起大风，天色阴霾。
English: In March, there was a strong wind in Beijing, and the sky was overcast.

古文：帝布袍斋居，祷之不止。
现代文：庄烈帝身穿布袍斋居，不停地对天祈祷。
English: Emperor Zhuang was dressed in a robe and lived in seclusion, constantly praying to heaven.

古文：懋第言： 去秋星变，朝停刑而夕即灭。
现代文：懋第进言道： 去年冬天发生星变，早上下令停行刑罚晚上星变就立刻消失了。
English: Xindi said, "Last winter, there was a star change. In the morning, the punishment was ordered to be suspended. In the evening, the star change immediately disappeared.

古文：今者不然，岂陛下有其文未修其实乎？
现代文：现在却不然，难道是因为陛下仅仅有其空文没有实行吗？
English: It is not the case now, is it because His Majesty did not put it into practice?

古文：臣敢以实进。
现代文：我斗胆如实讲一讲。
English: I dare to tell it like it is.

古文：练饷之加，原非得已。乃明旨减兵以省饷，天下共知之，而饷犹未省，何也？
现代文：朝廷增收练饷原本出于迫不得已，以后朝廷明文规定裁减军队，节减军饷开支，天下都知道此事，可是练饷并没减征，是什么原因呢？
English: Originally, the imperial court's increase in revenue and conscription was out of necessity. Later, the imperial court explicitly stipulated the reduction of the army and the reduction of military expenditure. The whole world knows about this, but the imperial court did not reduce conscription. What is the reason for this?

古文：请自今因兵征饷，预使天下知应加之数，官吏无所逞其奸，以信陛下之明诏。
现代文：从今以后请根据军队人数征收兵饷，预先让天下百姓知道应加的数目，使下边的官吏没办法弄虚作假，以便维持陛下诏书的威信。
English: From now on, please levy soldier's pay according to the number of troops, and let the people of the world know in advance the amount to be added, so that the lower officials can not cheat and deceive, so as to maintain the prestige of His Majesty's edict.

古文：而刑狱则以睿虑之疑信，定诸囚之死生，诸疑于心与疑信半者，悉从轻典。
现代文：过去朝廷办案总是根据您个人的怀疑和信任来决定囚徒的死和生，希望今后陛下对那些您个人心中怀疑或疑信参半者都从轻发落。
English: In the past, the Imperial Court's handling of cases was always based on your personal doubts and trust to determine the prisoner's life and death. I hope that in the future, Your Majesty will treat lightly those who have doubts or mixed doubts in your personal heart.

古文：岂停刑可止彗，解网不可以返风乎？
现代文：难道停用刑罚可以让彗星消失，解除网罗就不可以让风返回去吗？
English: Could it be that suspending the punishment would make the comet disappear, and releasing the snare would not allow the wind to return?

古文：且陛下屡沛大恩，四方死者犹枕藉，盗贼未见衰止，何也？
现代文：另外陛下屡次给百姓施行大恩，各地百姓仍然死尸相连，盗贼没见减灭，这是为什么呢？
English: In addition, His Majesty has repeatedly granted great favors to the people, and the dead bodies of the people in various regions are still connected, and the thieves have not seen a decrease. Why is this?

古文：由蠲停者止一二。存留之赋，有司迫考成，催征未敢缓，是以莫救于凶荒。
现代文：因为各项赋税中得到减免的只那么一两种，剩下的还有不少，官府迫于考察成绩的需要，对各项赋税的催征不敢拖延，所以没办法解救百姓的苦难和饥荒。
English: Because only one or two types of taxes have been reduced or exempted, and there are many others remaining, the government is forced by the need to examine the results, and does not dare to delay the collection of various taxes, so there is no way to relieve the suffering and famine of the people.

古文：请于极荒州县，下诏速停，有司息讼，专以救荒为务。 帝曰： 然。 
现代文：我请求对极度灾荒的州县，赶快下诏停止征收各种赋税，让官府停止对百姓的起诉，专门把解救百姓的饥荒当成大事来抓。 庄烈帝说 ：是应该这样。 
English: I request that the prefectures and counties that have suffered extreme natural disasters and famine should immediately issue an edict to stop levying all kinds of taxes, let the government stop prosecuting the people, and specifically treat the famine relief of the people as a major event. Zhuo Ledei said: It should be like this.

古文：于是上灾七十五州县新、旧、练三饷并停。中灾六十八州县止征练饷，下灾二十八州县秋成督征。
现代文：于是上等灾害的七十五个州县新、旧、练三饷一并停征，中等灾害的六十八个州县规定只征练饷，下等灾害的二十八个州县拖延到秋收后催征。
English: As a result, in the 75 states and counties with the highest level of disaster, the new, old, and practice taxes were suspended together, in the 68 states and counties with the medium level of disaster, only the practice taxes were collected, and in the 28 states and counties with the lowest level of disaster, the collection was delayed until after the autumn harvest.

古文：十四年督催漕运，道中驰疏言： 臣自静海抵临清，见人民饥死者三，疫死者三，为盗者四。
现代文：十四年懋第外出负责督办漕运，赴任途中飞章进言说： 我从静海走到临清，一路上看到百姓饥饿而死的有十分之三，病疫而死的十分之三，做了盗贼的十分之四。
English: In his 14th year, he was in charge of supervising the transportation of goods. On his way to the post, Feizhang said: "I walked from Jinghai to Linqing. Along the way, I saw that three-tenths of the people died of hunger, three-tenths died of disease, and four-tenths were thieves.

古文：米石银二十四两，人死取以食，惟圣明垂念。 
现代文：米一石值二十四两白银，人死后活人拿他来吃了充饥，希望陛下为下边的小百姓来考虑考虑吧！ 
English: A kilo of rice is worth 242 silver. After death, the living use it to satisfy their hunger. I hope His Majesty will consider this for the sake of the people down below.

古文：又言： 臣自鱼台至南阳，流寇杀戮，村市为墟。
现代文：又上书讲 ：我从鱼台到南阳，一路上看到流寇杀人放火，乡村、城市都化作一片废墟。
English: He also wrote: "I went from Yutai to Nanyang, and along the way I saw bandits killing people and setting fires, and villages and cities were reduced to rubble.

古文：其他饥疫死者，尸积水涯，河为不流，振捄安可不速。 
现代文：其他饿死病死的百姓，尸体堆在河边，使河水都不能流淌了，对百姓的赈济怎么可以不立即进行呢？ 
English: Other people died of starvation and disease, and their bodies were piled up by the river, so that the water could not flow. How could the relief of the people not be carried out immediately?

古文：已又陈安民息盗之策，请核荒田，察逋户，予以有生之乐，鼓其耕种之心。
现代文：过后他又陈述了安抚百姓消除贼寇的策略，请求丈量荒田，清查逃亡户口，给流民以生存的喜乐，鼓励他们耕种的心思。
English: Afterward, he also stated the strategy of appeasing the people and eliminating the bandits, requesting the measurement of wasteland, the investigation of fugitive accounts, giving the displaced people the joy of survival, and encouraging them to cultivate.

古文：又言： 臣有事河干一载，每进父老问疾苦，皆言练饷之害。
现代文：懋第又上书讲 ：我在运河沿岸办事一年，经常召见父老乡亲询问他们的疾苦，都说到练饷的害处。
English: He also wrote: I worked along the canal for a year. I often called my father and fellow villagers to inquire about their ailments, and they all mentioned the harm of practicing gongs.

古文：三年来，农怨于野，商叹于途。如此重派，所练何兵？
现代文：三年来，农民在田野里抱怨，商旅在路途上叫苦，这么重的摊派，所训练的又是怎样的部队呢？
English: Over the past three years, farmers have been complaining in the fields, business travelers have been complaining on the road, and what kind of troops have been trained for such a heavy apportionment?

古文：兵在何所？
现代文：部队在哪里呢？
English: Where are the troops?

古文：剿贼御边，效安在？
现代文：剿灭盗贼，守卫边疆，效果体现在哪里呢？
English: What is the effect of wiping out thieves and guarding the border?

古文：奈何使众心瓦解，一至此极乎！ 
现代文：干什么使民心瓦解到这般境地呢？ 
English: What has caused the collapse of the people's will to such an extent?

古文：又言： 臣去冬抵宿迁，见督漕臣史可法，言山东米石二十两，而河南乃至百五十两，漕储多逋。
现代文：又讲 ：我去年冬天到宿迁碰到漕臣史可法，他讲到山东一石米值二十两银，而河南竟贵到一百五十两，漕运储备很有欠缺。
English: He also said: Last winter, when I was in Suqian, I met Cao Zhen Shi Kofa. He said that in Shandong, one kilo of rice was worth 22 silver, while in Henan, it was as high as 150. Therefore, there was a shortage of transportation reserves.

古文：朝议不收折色，需本色。
现代文：朝廷的意见不收折算的钱物，要收取实物田赋。
English: The opinion of the imperial court is not to collect the money and goods of the conversion, but to collect the in-kind rice fields.

古文：今淮、凤间麦大熟，如收两地折色，易麦转输，岂不大利。
现代文：现在淮州、凤阳一带小麦丰收，如果收取山东、河南的钱物换成小麦转运，岂不是非常有利的事？
English: At present, there is a bumper wheat harvest in the areas of HuaiZhou and FengYang. Wouldn't it be very beneficial to receive money and goods from Shandong and Henan in exchange for wheat transshipment?

古文：昔刘晏有转易之法。
现代文：过去刘晏制定过转易的办法。
English: In the past, Liu Wei has worked out the method of transfer.

古文：今岁河北大稔，山东东、兖二郡亦有收。
现代文：今年黄河以北大丰收，山东东昌、兖州二府也好收成。
English: This year, there was a bumper harvest north of the Yellow River. Shandong's Dongchang and Zhangzhou's two prefectures also had good harvests.

古文：诚出内帑二三十万，分发所司，及时收籴，于国计便。 
现代文：假如拿出国库银二三十万两拨给那里的有关部门及时收购，对于国家财政是有利的。 
English: If we take out 2.3 million yuan from the treasury and allocate it to the relevant departments there for timely acquisition, it will be beneficial to the national finance.

古文：帝即命议行。
现代文：庄烈帝立即命令讨论实施。
English: Zhuge Liang immediately ordered to discuss the implementation.

古文：屡迁刑科左给事中。
现代文：懋第几经升迁，做了刑科左给事中。
English: After several promotions, he was promoted to the middle of the criminal department.

古文：十六年秋，出察江防。
现代文：十六年秋天，懋第外出视察长江防线。
English: In the autumn of the 16th year, Xingdi went out to inspect the Yangtze River defense line.

古文：明年五月，福王立，进兵科都给事中，旋擢右佥都御史，巡抚应天、徽州诸府。
现代文：第二年五月，福王即位，任用他为兵科都给事中，不久提升为右佥都御史，巡抚应天、徽州等府。
English: In May of the following year, King Fu ascended to the throne. He was appointed as the military commander of the capital, and was soon promoted to the governor of Yingtian, Huizhou and other provinces.

古文：时大清兵连破李自成，朝议遣使通好，而难其人。
现代文：当时大清兵接连打败李自成，朝廷决定派遣使节跟大清和好，难于选择这样的人选。
English: At that time, the Qing soldiers defeated Li Zicheng one after another, and the imperial court decided to send an envoy to make peace with the Qing Dynasty. It is difficult to choose such a candidate.

古文：懋第母陈殁于燕，懋第欲因是返柩葬，请行。
现代文：懋第的母亲陈氏死于河北，懋第想借此机会安葬母亲，便主动要求前往。
English: Xingdi's mother, Chen, died in Hebei Province. Xingdi wanted to take this opportunity to bury her mother, so he volunteered to go.

古文：乃拜懋第兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，与左都督陈弘范、太仆少卿马绍愉偕，而令懋第经理河北，联络关东诸军。
现代文：朝廷于是任用懋第为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，与左都督陈弘范、太仆少卿马绍愉一起去，同时让懋第经营黄河以北，联络关东各部队。
English: The imperial court then appointed Xingdi as the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the military governor of the capital, together with the left-hand governor Chen Hongfan and the servant of the young minister Ma Shao Yu, and at the same time let Xingdi operate north of the Yellow River and liaise with the troops in Guandong.

古文：马绍愉者，故兵部郎官也，尝为陈新甲通款事至义州而还。
现代文：马绍愉原来是兵部的郎官，过去曾经为陈新甲议和一事出使到义州而回。
English: Marshall Yu was originally a steward of the military department. In the past, he had been sent to Yizhou for Chen Xinjia and returned.

古文：新甲既诛，绍愉以督战致衄，为懋第劾罢。
现代文：新甲被处死以后，绍愉因为督战而导致失败被懋第弹劾罢官。
English: After Xinjia was put to death, Shao Yu was impeached and dismissed from his post because of his failure to supervise the war.

古文：及是绍愉已起官郎中，乃进为少卿，副懋第。
现代文：到这时绍愉已经起任郎中，朝廷就此提升他为少卿，给懋第当副职。
English: By this time, Shou Yu had already been appointed as a junior vassal, and the imperial court thus promoted him to Shaoqing, giving Xing Di the vice-position.

古文：懋第言： 臣此行致祭先帝后梓宫，访东宫二王踪迹。
现代文：懋第上书说 ：我这次出使要祭奠先帝、先后的灵柩，查访东宫二王的踪迹。
English: The letter said, "I am on this mission to pay my respects to the former emperor and the coffins of the past emperors, and to investigate the whereabouts of the two kings of the Eastern Court.

古文：臣既充使臣，势不能兼理封疆。
现代文：我既然当了使臣，势必不能兼领封疆事宜。
English: Since I have become an envoy, it is inevitable that I will not be able to both lead and seal matters.

古文：且绍愉臣所劾罢，不当复与臣共事。
现代文：并且绍愉是被我弹劾罢掉的官，不该再让他和我共事。
English: Moreover, Shao Yu, the official I impeached and removed from office, should no longer be allowed to work with me.

古文：必用臣经理，则乞命弘范同绍愉出使，而假臣一旅，偕山东抚臣收拾山东以待，不敢复言北行。
现代文：一定要用我经营黄河以北的话，就请让弘范和绍愉出使，给我一支队伍，我和山东抚臣一道收拾山东等候命令，不敢再说北行的事了。
English: If you must use me to operate north of the Yellow River, then please let Hong Fan and Shao Yun send an envoy, give me a team, and I will work with Shandong Fuxin to clean up Shandong and wait for orders. I dare not talk about going north.

古文：如用臣与弘范北行，则去臣经理，但衔命而往，而罢绍愉勿遣。 
现代文：如果用我和弘范北行，就拿掉我经理的官衔，只让我奉命前去就是了，请停下对绍愉的派遣吧！ 
English: If you use me and Hong Fan to go north, you will take away my manager's title, and just let me go as ordered. Please stop dispatching to Shao You!

古文：阁部议止绍愉，改命原任蓟督王永吉。
现代文：阁部讨论停派绍愉，改派原蓟镇总督王永吉。
English: The cabinet discussed suspending the appointment of Shaoyu and reassigning the former governor of Handan, Wang Yongji.

古文：王令仍遵前谕。
现代文：福王传令仍旧照原先的指示办理。
English: Fuwang's orders are still being carried out according to the original instructions.

古文：懋第濒行言： 臣此行，生死未卜。
现代文：懋第临行之前上书说 ：我这次出使生死难料。
English: Prior to his departure, Kendi wrote in a letter: "I am uncertain of my life and death on this mission.

古文：请以辞阙之身，效一言。
现代文：请让我以告别京城的身份说一句话吧。
English: Please allow me to say a few words as I bid farewell to Kyoto.

古文：愿陛下以先帝仇耻为心，瞻高皇之弓剑，则思成祖列圣之陵寝何存；抚江上之残黎，则念河北、山东之赤子谁恤。
现代文：我希望陛下把先帝的深仇大耻记在心上，看到高皇帝的弓箭时，就想想看成祖以下各位圣主的陵墓今在何方；招抚长江沿线残存的黎民时，就想想看黄河以北、山东的赤子谁来抚恤？
English: I hope that Your Majesty will keep in mind the deep hatred and great shame of the former emperor. When you see the bow and arrow of Emperor Gao, think about where the mausoleums of the holy lords below the ancestors are now. When you are courting the remaining Li people along the Yangtze River, think about who will raise the baby of Shandong, north of the Yellow River.

古文：更望时时整顿士马，必能渡河而战，始能扼河而守；必能扼河而守，始能画江而安。 
现代文：更希望朝廷时时整顿兵马，一定要能渡过黄河作战才能把住黄河防卫；一定要能把住黄河防卫，才能划江而安呢。 
English: Moreover, it is hoped that the imperial court will constantly rectify the soldiers and horses, and must be able to cross the Yellow River to fight in order to hold the Yellow River defense; it must be able to hold the Yellow River defense in order to row the river and be safe.

古文：众韪其言。
现代文：大家都同意他的话。
English: Everyone agreed with him.

古文：王令赍白金十万两、币帛数万匹，以兵三千人护行。
现代文：福王命令给他白银十万两，布帛几万匹，派兵三千人为他护行。
English: King Fu ordered to give him 100,000 taels of silver, tens of thousands of cloths, and 3,000 soldiers to escort him.

古文：八月，舟渡淮。
现代文：八月，他乘船渡过淮河。
English: In August, he took a boat across the Huai River.

古文：十月朔，次张家湾，本朝传令止许百人从行。
现代文：十月初一驻张家湾，本朝传令给他只许一百人跟着他来。
English: At the beginning of October, when he was stationed in Zhangjiagang, he received a telegram from the emperor ordering him to bring only a hundred men with him.

古文：懋第衰纟至入都门，至则馆之鸿胪寺。
现代文：懋第身穿孝服进入都城，来后我朝让他住在鸿胪寺。
English: He entered the capital in filial piety, and I let him stay at Hongye Temple in the morning.

古文：请祭告诸陵及改葬先帝，不可，则陈太牢于旅所，哭而奠之。
现代文：他请求祭告各皇陵并改葬先帝，没得到批准，就把祭品摆在住所里，哭并且祭奠了他们。
English: He requested that the imperial tombs be consecrated and that the former emperor be reburied. When he did not receive approval, he placed the offerings in his residence, wept and consecrated them.

古文：即以是月二十有八日遣还出都。
现代文：然后就在这个月二十八日那天被遣送出都城。
English: Then, on the 28th of this month, he was deported from the capital.

古文：弘范乃请身赴江南招诸将刘泽清等降附，而留懋第等勿遣。
现代文：可是弘范向我朝请求让他亲自到江南招刘泽清等大将降附，留下懋第等不要放回。
English: However, Hong Fan asked me in the morning to let him personally go to the south of the Yangtze River to recruit Liu Zeching and other generals to join him, and not to let Xingdi and others go back.

古文：于是自沧州追还懋第，改馆太医院。
现代文：于是我朝从沧州追回了懋第，让他改住在太医院里。
English: So in the morning, I brought Xingdi back from Cangzhou and let him stay in the hospital.

古文：顺治二年六月，闻南京失守，恸哭。
现代文：顺治二年六月，他听说南京失守，悲恸地哭了。
English: In June of the second year of Shunzhi, he heard that Nanjing was lost, and wept with grief.

古文：其从弟懋泰先为吏部员外郎，降贼，后归本朝授官矣，来谒懋第。
现代文：他的弟弟懋泰以前做过吏部员外郎，投降过贼寇，后来投降本朝做了官，来探望懋第。
English: His younger brother, Kuang Tai, had previously served as a clerk's assistant, surrendered to the bandits, and later surrendered to the imperial court and became an official, and came to visit Kuang Di.

古文：懋第曰： 此非吾弟也。 
现代文：懋第说 ：这种人不是我弟弟。 
English: Xingdi said, "This kind of person is not my brother."

古文：叱出之。
现代文：把他给喝斥出去了。
English: Booed him out.

古文：至闰月十二日，与从行兵部司务陈用极，游击王一斌，都司张良佐、刘统、王廷佐俱以不降诛，而绍愉获免。
现代文：到闰月十二日，懋第和随行的兵部司务陈用极，游击王一斌，都司张良佐、刘统、王廷佐都因为不投降被处死了，而绍愉得以免死。
English: On the twelfth day of the leap month, Xingdi and the accompanying military department secretary Chen Yinggi, the guerrilla Wang Yibin, the governor Zhang Liangzuo, Liu Tong, and Wang Tingzuo were all executed for not surrendering, while Shaoyu was spared death.

