古文：太史公曰：余读功令，至於广厉学官之路，未尝不废书而叹也。曰：嗟乎！夫周室衰而关雎作，幽厉微而礼乐坏，诸侯恣行，政由彊国。
现代文：太史公说：我阅读朝廷考选学官的法规，读到广开勉励学官兴办教育之路时，总是禁不住放下书本而慨叹，说道：唉，周王室衰微了，讽刺时政的《关雎》诗就出现了；周厉王、周幽王的统治衰败了，礼崩乐坏，诸侯便恣意横行，政令全由势力强大的国家发布。
English: Taishikong said, "When I read the regulations of the imperial court on the examination and selection of academicians, and when I read about the wide-open encouragement of academicians to establish education, I always can't help but put down the book and sigh, saying: Alas, the Zhou royal family declined, and the satirical contemporary politics poem "Guan Yu" appeared; the reign of King Zhou Li and King Zhou Yu declined, and the etiquette was bad, the princes were arbitrary, and the decrees were all issued by powerful countries.

古文：故孔子闵王路废而邪道兴，於是论次诗书，修起礼乐。
现代文：所以孔子担忧王道废弛邪道兴起，于是编定《诗》《书》，整理礼仪音乐。
English: Therefore, Confucius was worried about the rise of the wasteful and evil royal ways, so he compiled "Poetry" and "Books" and arranged the ceremonial music.

古文：適齐闻韶，三月不知肉味。
现代文：他到齐国听到了美妙的《韶》乐，便沉迷不已，三个月品尝不出肉的美味。
English: When he came to Qi Province, he heard the wonderful music of "Qing" and became obsessed with it. He couldn't taste the delicious meat for three months.

古文：自卫返鲁，然後乐正，雅颂各得其所。
现代文：他从卫国返回鲁国之后，开始校正音乐，使《雅》《颂》乐歌各归其位，有条不紊。
English: After he returned to Lu from the Great Patriotic War, he began to correct the music, so that the "Ya" and "Ode" songs were all in their proper places, in an orderly manner.

古文：世以混浊莫能用，是以仲尼干七十馀君无所遇，曰 苟有用我者，期月而已矣 。
现代文：由于世道混乱污浊，无人起用他，因此孔子周游列国向七十几位国君求官都得不到知遇。他感慨地说： 要是有人肯用我，只需一年就可以治理好国政了。 
English: Due to the chaos and filth of the world, no one wanted to employ him, so Confucius travelled around the countries to ask more than seventy sovereigns for positions, but none of them were interested. He said with emotion: "If someone were willing to employ me, I would be able to govern the country well in just one year."

古文：西狩获麟，曰 吾道穷矣 。故因史记作春秋，以当王法，其辞微而指博，後世学者多录焉。
现代文：鲁国西郊有人猎获了麒麟，孔子闻知后哀叹 我的理想不能实现了 ，于是他借助鲁国已有的历史记录撰写《春秋》，用它来表现天子的王法，其文辞精约深隐而寓意丰富博大，后代学者很多人都学习传录它。
English: In the western suburb of Lu someone hunted down a unicorn, Confucius heard about it and lamented that my ideal could not be realized, so he used the existing historical records of Lu to write "Spring and Autumn," using it to express the King's Law of the Son of Heaven. Its wording is subtle, profound and rich in meaning, and many future generations of scholars are learning to record it.

古文：自孔子卒後，七十子之徒散游诸侯，大者为师傅卿相，小者友教士大夫，或隐而不见。
现代文：自孔子逝世后，他的七十余名好学生纷纷四散去交游诸侯，成就大的当了诸侯国君的老师和卿相，成就小的结交、教导士大夫，有的则隐居不仕。
English: Since the death of Confucius, more than seventy of his good students have scattered to visit various provinces. Some have achieved great success as teachers and courtiers of princes and princes, others have made small achievements in making friends and teaching scholars, and some have lived in seclusion.

古文：故子路居卫，子张居陈，澹台子羽居楚，子夏居西河，子贡终於齐。
现代文：所以子路在卫国做官，子张在陈国做官，澹台子羽住在楚国，子夏在西河教授，子贡终老于齐。
English: Therefore, Zilu was an official in the State of Wei, Zizhang was an official in the State of Chen, Xingtai Zi Yu lived in the State of Chu, Zixia was a professor in the State of Xihe, and Zigong eventually became a peer.

古文：如田子方、段干木、吴起、禽滑釐之属，皆受业於子夏之伦，为王者师。
现代文：像田子方、段干木、吴起、禽滑釐这些人，都曾受业于子夏之辈，然后当了诸侯国君的老师。
English: Such people as Tian Zi Fang, Duan Gan Mu, Wu Qi, and Ying Niu Lang, were all trained by Zixia's generation, and then became the teachers of the princes.

古文：是时独魏文侯好学。後陵迟以至于始皇，天下并争於战国，懦术既绌焉，然齐鲁之间，学者独不废也。
现代文：那时只有魏文侯最虚心求教于儒学，后来儒学渐趋衰颓直到在秦始皇手中遭受灭顶之灾。战国时期天下群雄并争，儒学已经收到了排挤，但是在齐国和鲁国一带，学习研究它的人独独不曾废弃。
English: At that time, only Wei Wenhou was the most modest to seek education in Confucianism. Later, Confucianism gradually declined until it suffered the ultimate disaster at the hands of Qin Shihuang. During the Warring States period, the world was competing with each other. Confucianism had already been ousted, but in the areas of Qi and Lu, the people who studied and studied it were not abandoned.

古文：於威、宣之际，孟子、荀卿之列，咸遵夫子之业而润色之，以学显於当世。
现代文：在齐威王、齐宣王当政时期，孟子、荀子等人，都继承了孔子的事业而发扬光大，凭自己的学说显名于当世。
English: During the reign of King Qiwei and King Qi Xuan, Mencius, Xunzi and others all inherited the cause of Confucius and carried it forward, and became famous in the world with their own theories.

古文：及至秦之季世，焚诗书，坑术士，六艺从此缺焉。
现代文：到了秦朝末年，秦始皇焚烧《诗》《书》，坑杀儒生，儒家典籍六艺从此残缺。
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, the First Emperor of Qin burned "Poetry" and "Books" and killed Confucian scholars. Six Confucian classics were no longer extant.

古文：陈涉之王也，而鲁诸儒持孔氏之礼器往归陈王。
现代文：陈涉起事反秦，自立为王，鲁地的儒生们携带孔子家传的礼器去投奔他。
English: Chen became involved in anti-Qin affairs and established himself as king. The Confucian students in Ludi carried the ceremonial objects handed down from the Confucius family to him.

古文：於是孔甲为陈涉博士，卒与涉俱死。
现代文：于是孔甲当了陈涉的博士，最终和他一同死了。
English: As a result, Kong Jia became a famous doctor and eventually died with him.

古文：陈涉起匹夫，驱瓦合適戍，旬月以王楚，不满半岁竟灭亡，其事至微浅，然而缙绅先生之徒负孔子礼器往委质为臣者，何也？
现代文：陈涉起步于普通百姓，驱使一群戍边的乌合之众，一个月内就在楚地称了王，而不到半年竟又复归灭亡。他的事业十分微小浅薄，可是士大夫们却背负着孔子的礼器去追随归顺向他称臣，为什么呢？
English: Chen Tang started with ordinary people, drove a group of fringe rabble-rousers, and within a month he was proclaimed king in Chu, and less than half a year he returned to ruin. His cause is very small and shallow, but the scholars are carrying the ceremonial tools of Confucius to follow and submit to him. Why?

古文：以秦焚其业，积怨而发愤于陈王也。
现代文：因为秦王朝焚毁了他们的书籍学业，积下了仇怨，这迫使他们投奔陈王来发泄满腔的愤懑。
English: Because the Qin Dynasty burned their books and studies, they accumulated hatred, which forced them to go to Chen Wang to vent their anger.

古文：及高皇帝诛项籍，举兵围鲁，鲁中诸儒尚讲诵习礼乐，弦歌之音不绝，岂非圣人之遗化，好礼乐之国哉？
现代文：到高祖皇帝杀死项籍，率兵包围了鲁国，鲁国中的儒生们仍在讲诵经书演习礼乐，弦歌之声不绝于耳，这难道不是古代圣人遗留的风范，难道不是一个深爱礼乐的国家吗？
English: Emperor Gaozhu killed Xiangzhi and led his troops to encircle Lu. The Confucians in Lu are still chanting scriptures, practicing liturgical music, and listening to the sound of stringed music. Isn't this the style left by ancient saints? Isn't this a country that deeply loves liturgical music?

古文：故孔子在陈，曰 归与归与！
现代文：所以孔子出游到陈国后，说： 回去吧！
English: Therefore, after Confucius traveled to Chen Guo, he said: Go back!

古文：吾党之小子狂简，斐然成章，不知所以裁之 。
现代文：回去吧，我们乡里的青年人志向高远，文采熠熠如锦绣，我不知怎么教导他们才好。 
English: Let's go back, the young people in our village have high aspirations, and their literature is exquisite. I don't know how to teach them.

古文：夫齐鲁之间於文学，自古以来，其天性也。
现代文：齐鲁一带重视爱好文化仪典，自古以来就是如此，这已成为自然风尚。
English: Since ancient times, the Qilu region has attached great importance to cultural ceremonies, which has become a natural trend.

古文：故汉兴，然後诸儒始得脩其经艺，讲习大射乡饮之礼。
现代文：汉朝建立后，儒生们开始获得重新研究经学的机会，又讲授演习起了大射和乡饮的礼仪。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, Confucian scholars began to get the opportunity to re-study the classics, and they also taught the etiquette of the great shooting and drinking in the village.

古文：叔孙通作汉礼仪，因为太常，诸生弟子共定者，咸为选首，於是喟然叹兴於学。
现代文：叔孙通制定汉廷礼仪后，做了太常官，和他一同制定礼仪的儒生弟子们，也都被选为朝官，于是人们喟然感叹，对儒学产生了兴趣。
English: After his uncle Sun Tong formulated the Han Dynasty etiquette, he became the first-ranking official, and his Confucian disciples, who formulated the etiquette together with him, were also elected as imperial officials, so people were surprised and interested in Confucianism.

古文：然尚有干戈，平定四海，亦未暇遑庠序之事也。
现代文：但是，当时天下战乱尚未止息，皇上忙于平定四海，还无暇顾及兴办学校之事。
English: However, at that time, the world war had not yet ended, and the emperor was busy pacifying the four seas and had no time to attend to the establishment of a school.

古文：孝惠、吕后时，公卿皆武力有功之臣。
现代文：孝惠帝、吕后当政时，公卿大臣都是武艺高强战功卓著的人。
English: When Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Lu were in power, the noble ministers were all men of high martial arts and outstanding war achievements.

古文：孝文时颇徵用，然孝文帝本好刑名之言。
现代文：孝文帝时略微起用儒生为官，但是孝文帝原本只爱刑名学说。
English: Emperor Xiaowen slightly appointed Confucian scholars as officials, but Emperor Xiaowen was originally only fond of the theory of punishment.

古文：及至孝景，不任儒者，而窦太后又好黄老之术，故诸博士具官待问，未有进者。
现代文：等到孝景帝当政，不用儒生，而且窦太后又喜好道家思想，因此列位博士官职只是备员待诏，徒有其名，儒生无人进身受到重用。
English: By the time Emperor Xiaojing came to power, Confucianism was no longer needed, and Empress Dowager Dou was fond of Taoist thought. As a result, the doctorate was just a title, and Confucianists did not have to work hard for it.

古文：及今上即位，赵绾、王臧之属明儒学，而上亦乡之，於是招方正贤良文学之士。
现代文：直到当今皇上即位，赵绾、王臧等人深明儒学，而皇上也心向往之，于是朝廷下令举荐品德贤良方正而且通晓经学的文士学者。
English: Up until the current emperor's ascension to the throne, Zhao Zheng, Wang Zheng and others were well versed in Confucianism, and the emperor also yearned for it, so the court ordered the recommendation of scholars who were virtuous, virtuous and knowledgeable in scripture.

古文：自是之後，言诗於鲁则申培公，於齐则辕固生，於燕则韩太傅。
现代文：从此以后，讲《诗》的在鲁地有申培公，在齐地有辕因生，在燕地则有韩太傅。
English: Since then, "Poetry" has been recited by Shen Peiguo in Ludi, Zou Yinsheng in Qi, and Han Taifu in Yan.

古文：言尚书自济南伏生。
现代文：讲《尚书》的有济南伏生。
English: Jinan Fusheng will speak about "Shangshu."

古文：言礼自鲁高堂生。
现代文：讲《礼》的有鲁地高堂生。
English: "Rei" is narrated by a high school pupil from Ludi.

古文：言易自菑川田生。
现代文：讲《春秋》的在齐鲁两地有胡毋生，在赵地有董仲舒。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is narrated by Hu Neosheng in Qilu and Dong Zhongshu in Zhao.

古文：言春秋於齐鲁自胡毋生，於赵自董仲舒。及窦太后崩，武安侯田蚡为丞相，绌黄老、刑名百家之言，延文学儒者数百人，而公孙弘以春秋白衣为天子三公，封以平津侯。
现代文：到窦太后去世，武安侯田蚡做了丞相，他废弃道家，刑名家等百家学说，延请治经学的儒生数百人入朝为官，而公孙弘竟以精通《春秋》步步高升，从一介平民荣居天子左右的三公尊位，封为平津侯。
English: By the time Empress Dowager Dou died, Wu'an Hou Tien Pi had become chancellor. He abandoned hundreds of schools of thought, including Taoism and Confucianism, and invited hundreds of Confucian scholars to join the imperial court. Gongsun Hong, with his mastery of "Spring and Autumn," rose from a commoner to the rank of the three great princes, and was given the title of Prince of Pingjin.

古文：天下之学士靡然乡风矣。
现代文：从此，天下学子莫不心驰神往，潜心钻研儒学了。
English: Since then, students all over the world have been fascinated by and devoted themselves to studying Confucianism.

古文：公孙弘为学官，悼道之郁滞，乃请曰： 丞相御史言：制曰 盖闻导民以礼，风之以乐。
现代文：公孙弘曾拜为博士，他害怕儒学被阻滞得不到传扬，当了丞相后就上奏请求说： 丞相御史启禀皇上：陛下曾下令说 听说为政者应该用礼仪教导百姓，用音乐感化他们。
English: He was afraid that Confucianism would be blocked and would not be able to spread. When he became the prime minister, he made a request to the emperor, saying, "Your Majesty has ordered that politicians should teach the people with etiquette and inspire them with music.

古文：婚姻者，居屋之大伦也。
现代文：婚姻之事，乃是夫妇间最重要的伦理关系。
English: Marriage is the most important ethical relationship between husband and wife.

古文：今礼废乐崩，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：如今礼乐被破坏废弃了，我深感忧虑。
English: Now that the ritual music has been destroyed and abandoned, I am deeply worried.

古文：故详延天下方正博闻之士，咸登诸朝。
现代文：所以大力延请天下品德方正学识广博的人都来入朝做官。
English: Therefore, we strongly invite the world's most moral, upright, learned and broad-minded people to come to the DPRK to work as officials.

古文：其令礼官劝学，讲议洽闻兴礼，以为天下先。
现代文：我下令礼官勤奋学习，讲论儒术，要学识渊博，复兴礼乐，以此作为天下人的表率。
English: I ordered the etiquette officials to study diligently, to lecture on Confucianism, to be knowledgeable, and to revive etiquette as an example for the people of the world.

古文：太常议，与博士弟子，崇乡里之化，以广贤材焉 。
现代文：又命太常商议，给博士配置弟子员生，使民间都崇尚教化，来开拓培养贤才的道路 。
English: It was also ordered to consult frequently, to assign disciples and students to the doctor, to make the people advocate enlightenment, and to open up the road of cultivating talents.

古文：谨与太常臧、博士平等议曰：闻三代之道，乡里有教，夏曰校，殷曰序，周曰庠。
现代文：根据陛下旨意。臣与太常孔臧、博士平等认真商议决定：听说夏、商、周三代的治国之道，是乡里之间都有教育的场所，夏代称校、殷代称序，周代称庠。
English: In accordance with His Majesty's will, the minister and the chief of the imperial household, Kong Zheng, and the doctor discussed and decided on an equal footing: It is said that the way of governing the country in the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties is a place of education between the villages, and the Xia dynasty is called the school, the Yin dynasty is called the order, and the Zhou dynasty is called the order.

古文：其劝善也，显之朝廷；其惩恶也，加之刑罚。
现代文：他们勉励为善者，就让他在朝中显达扬名；惩治作恶者，就施以刑罪。
English: They encourage a good man and make him famous; they punish an evil man and bring him to trial.

古文：故教化之行也，建首善自京师始，由内及外。
现代文：所以教化的实施，要首先从京城开始树立榜样，再从京城推广到地方。
English: Therefore, the implementation of indoctrination should first start from the capital to set an example, and then spread from the capital to the local areas.

古文：今陛下昭至德，开大明，配天地，本人伦，劝学脩礼，崇化厉贤，以风四方，太平之原也。
现代文：如今陛下已经明示无上的恩德，放射出日月般的光辉，它符合天地之大道，是以整饬人伦为根本，鼓励术学，讲究礼仪，崇尚教化，奖励贤良，以此使海内四方从风向善，这正是实现太平之治的本原啊！
English: Now His Majesty has manifested the supreme virtue of benevolence, radiating the brilliance of the sun and moon, which is in line with the road of heaven and earth, taking the rectification of human relations as the fundamental, encouraging the study of tactics, paying attention to etiquette, advocating enlightenment, and rewarding the virtuous, so as to make the four sides of the sea from the wind to the good, which is exactly the origin of the realization of the rule of peace!

古文：古者政教未洽，不备其礼，请因旧官而兴焉。
现代文：古代的政治教化不协和，礼仪不完备，现在请求借助原有的官职来兴盛它。
English: The ancient political education was not harmonious, and the etiquette was not complete. Now, it is requested to use the original official position to flourish it.

古文：为博士官置弟子五十人，复其身。
现代文：请为博士官配置弟子五十人，免除他们的赋税徭役。
English: Please assign fifty disciples to doctoral officers and exempt them from paying taxes.

古文：太常择民年十八已上，仪状端正者，补博士弟子。
现代文：让太常从百姓中挑选十八岁以上仪表端正的人，补充博士弟子。
English: Let him too often select from among the people those who are eighteen years of age or older and have a neat appearance to supplement the doctoral students.

古文：郡国县道邑有好文学，敬长上，肃政教，顺乡里，出入不悖所闻者，令相长丞上属所二千石，二千石谨察可者，当与计偕，诣太常，得受业如弟子。
现代文：郡国、县、道、邑中有喜好经学，尊敬长上，严守政教，友爱乡邻，出入言行皆不违背所学教诲的人，县令、侯国相、县长、县丞要向上级郡守和诸侯王国相举荐，经其认真察看合格者，应与上计吏同赴京师太常处，接受和博士弟子相同的教育。
English: If there is anyone in the county, state, county, province, or town who likes to study the classics, respects his superiors, strictly observes politics and religion, loves his hometown and neighbors, and does not violate the teachings he has learned in his words and deeds, the county magistrate, the provincial minister of state, the county governor, and the county magistrate should recommend him to the higher-level county governor and the kingdom of princes. After careful examination, those who are qualified should go to the Beijing Normal School with the higher-ranking officials and receive the same education as the doctoral students.

古文：一岁皆辄试，能通一艺以上，补文学掌故缺；其高弟可以为郎中者，太常籍奏。
现代文：他们学满一年都要考试，能够精通一种经书以上的人，补充文学掌故的缺官；其中成绩好名次高的可以任用为郎中，由太常造册上奏。
English: They have to take an exam after one year of study, and can be proficient in more than one kind of scripture, supplementing the shortage of literary scholars; among them, those with good grades and high rankings can be appointed as lanzhong, and those who are too often make a record and play it.

古文：即有秀才异等，辄以名闻。
现代文：若是特别优异出众的，可直接将其姓名向上呈报。
English: If they are particularly outstanding, their names can be reported directly to the higher-ups.

古文：其不事学若下材及不能通一艺，辄罢之，而请诸不称者罚。
现代文：那些不努力学习才能低下者，和不能通晓一种经学的人，就要罢斥，并惩罚举荐他们的不称职的官吏。
English: Those who do not study hard and whose ability is low, and those who cannot master a subject, should be ousted and the incompetent officials who recommended them should be punished.

古文：臣谨案诏书律令下者，明天人分际，通古今之义，文章尔雅，训辞深厚，恩施甚美。
现代文：臣认真领会陛下所下达的诏书和律令，它们阐明了天道和人道关系，贯通了自古及今的治国义理，文章雅正、教诲之辞含义深刻丰富，它恩德无量将深深造福于社稷百姓。
English: The imperial rescript and the ritsuryo issued by His Majesty will be carefully understood by the ministers. They have clarified the relationship between heaven and humanity, and have penetrated the principles of governing the country from ancient times to the present. The articles are elegant and the words of instruction are profound and rich in meaning. It will benefit the people of the society immeasurably.

古文：小吏浅闻，不能究宣，无以明布谕下。
现代文：但是小官吏们见识浅陋，不能透彻地讲解诏书律令，无法明白地将陛下的旨意传布晓喻天下。
English: However, the petty officials had a shallow understanding and could not thoroughly explain the edicts and decrees, and could not clearly spread His Majesty's will to the world.

古文：治礼次治掌故，以文学礼义为官，迁留滞。
现代文：而治礼、掌故之职，是由懂经学礼仪的人担当的，他们的升迁很缓慢造成了人才积压。
English: However, the post of etiquette and etiquette is held by people who understand the etiquette of learning, and their promotion is very slow, resulting in a talent backlog.

古文：请选择其秩比二百石以上，及吏百石通一艺以上，补左右内史、大行卒史；比百石已下，补郡太守卒史：皆各二人，边郡一人。
现代文：因此请求挑选其中官秩比同二百石以上的人，和百石以上能通晓一种经学的小吏，升补左右内史、大行卒史；挑选比同百石以下的人补郡太守卒史：各郡定员二人，边郡定员一人。
English: Therefore, it is requested to select those with an official rank of 200 koku or more, and those with an official rank of 100 koku or more who can understand a kind of learning, to supplement the internal history of the left and right and the graduation history of the great line; select those with an official rank of 100 koku or less to supplement the graduation history of the county magistrate: two members of each county and one member of the border county.

古文：先用诵多者，若不足，乃择掌故补中二千石属，文学掌故补郡属，备员。
现代文：优先选用熟知经书能大量讲诵的人，若人数不够，就选用掌故补中二千石的属吏，选用文学掌故补郡国的属吏，将人员备齐。
English: Priority will be given to those who are familiar with the scriptures and can recite a large number of sutras. If the number of people is not enough, the officials of the 2,000-koku middle school will be selected, and the officials of the county government will be selected, and the personnel will be prepared.

古文：请著功令。
现代文：请把这些记入考选学官的法规。
English: Please include this in the regulations for the examination of candidates for the post of academician.

古文：佗如律令。 
现代文：其它仍依照律令。 
English: Others are still in accordance with the law.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇上批示说： 准奏。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：自此以来，则公卿大夫士吏斌斌多文学之士矣。
现代文：从此以后，公卿大夫和一般士吏中就有很多文质彬彬的经学儒生了。
English: Since then, there have been many literate Confucian scholars among court nobles and general officials.

古文：申公者，鲁人也。
现代文：申公，是鲁国人。
English: Shen Gong is a native of Lu.

古文：高祖过鲁，申公以弟子从师入见高祖于鲁南宫。
现代文：高祖经过鲁国，申公以弟子身分跟随老师到鲁国南宫去拜见他。
English: Gaozu passed through the State of Lu, and Shen Gong, as a disciple, followed his teacher to the South Palace of the State of Lu to visit him.

古文：吕太后时，申公游学长安，与刘郢同师。
现代文：吕太后时期，申公到长安交游求学，和刘郢同在老师浮丘伯门下受业。
English: During the time of Empress Dowager Lv, Shen Gong traveled to Chang'an to study, and he and Liu Ye both studied under the teacher Fuyu Qubo.

古文：已而郢为楚王，令申公傅其太子戊。
现代文：毕业后刘郢封为楚王，便让申公当他的太子刘戊的老师。
English: After graduation, Liu Yufeng became the King of Chu, and he asked Shen Gong to be the teacher of his prince Liu Wu.

古文：戊不好学，疾申公。及王郢卒，戊立为楚王，胥靡申公。
现代文：刘戊不好学习，憎恨申公，等到楚王刘郢去世，刘戊立为楚王，就把申公禁锢起来。
English: Liu Wu was not good at studying and hated Shen Gong. When King of Chu Liu Bei died and Liu Wu became King of Chu, he imprisoned Shen Gong.

古文：申公耻之，归鲁，退居家教，终身不出门，复谢绝宾客，独王命召之乃往。
现代文：申公感到耻辱，便回到鲁地，在家中教书，终身不出家门，又谢绝一切宾客，唯有鲁恭王刘余招请他才前往。
English: Feeling humiliated, Shen Gong returned to Ludi, taught at home, never left home, and declined all guests. Only Liu Yu, the king of Lugong, invited him to visit.

古文：弟子自远方至受业者百馀人。
现代文：从远方慕名而来向他求学的弟子有百余人。
English: More than a hundred disciples came from far and wide to learn from him.

古文：申公独以诗经为训以教，无传，疑者则阙不传。
现代文：申公教授《诗经》，只讲解词义，而无阐发经义的著述，凡有疑惑处，便阙而存之，不强作传授。
English: Professor Shen Gong's "Book of Songs" only explains the meaning of the words, but does not explain the meaning of the text. If there is any doubt, it should be noted and not forcefully taught.

古文：兰陵王臧既受诗，以事孝景帝为太子少傅，免去。
现代文：兰陵人王臧向申公学《诗》之后，用它事孝景皇帝，当了太子少傅，后免官离朝。
English: After learning "Poetry" from Shen Gong, the Lanling people's Wang Qiang used it to deal with the Emperor Xiaoqing, became the young prince, and left the court after being dismissed.

古文：今上初即位，臧乃上书宿卫上，累迁，一岁中为郎中令。
现代文：当今皇上刚即位，王臧就上书请求入宫为皇上值宿警卫。他不断得到升迁，一年里就做到了郎中令。
English: Right after the current emperor ascended the throne, Wang Xuan wrote to request that he be allowed to enter the palace to serve as the emperor's guard on duty. He was constantly promoted, and within a year, he became the second-in-command.

古文：及代赵绾亦尝受诗申公，绾为御史大夫。
现代文：而代国人赵绾也曾向申公学习《诗经》，他当了御史大夫。
English: On the other hand, Zhao Qi, a local citizen, also learned "The Book of Songs" from Shen Gong, and he became a goshi daibu.

古文：绾、臧请天子，欲立明堂以朝诸侯，不能就其事，乃言师申公。
现代文：赵绾、王臧请示天子，想建造明堂用来召集诸侯举行朝会。他们不能说服皇上同意此事，就举荐老师申公。
English: Zhao Zhen and Wang Zhen asked Tian Zi to build a Ming Hall to be used to convene the princes to hold a court meeting. They could not convince the emperor to agree to this, so they recommended the teacher to petition the emperor.

古文：於是天子使使束帛加璧安车驷马迎申公，弟子二人乘轺传从。
现代文：于是皇上派遣使臣携带贵重的礼物束帛和玉璧，驾着驷马安车去迎请申公，赵绾、王臧二位弟子则乘坐着普通的驿车随行。
English: As a result, the emperor sent an envoy carrying valuable gifts of bundles of enamel and jade, and drove a horse-drawn carriage to welcome Shen Gong, while Zhao Wei and Wang Wei's two disciples accompanied him in an ordinary carriage.

古文：至，见天子。
现代文：申公来到京师，拜见天子。
English: Shen Gong came to Beijing to visit the emperor.

古文：天子问治乱之事，申公时已八十馀，老，对曰： 为治者不在多言，顾力行何如耳。 
现代文：天子向他询问社稷安危之事，申公当时已年高八十多岁，年纪很大了，他回答说： 当政的人不必多说话，只看尽力把事做得如何罢了。 
English: The emperor asked him about the safety and security of the society. At that time, Shen Gong was more than eighty years old, very old. He replied: The people in power don't need to talk much, they just need to do their best.

古文：是时天子方好文词，见申公对，默然。
现代文：这时天子正喜好文词夸饰，见申公如此答对，默然不乐。
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven was fond of boasting in prose and poetry. Seeing Shen Gong's correct answer, he was silently unhappy.

古文：然已招致，则以为太中大夫，舍鲁邸，议明堂事。
现代文：但是已经把申公招到朝中，就让他做了太中大夫，住在鲁邸，商议修建明堂的事宜。
English: However, he had already invited Shen Gong to the Imperial Court, so he made him the Grand Physician, lived in the Lu residence, and discussed the construction of the Ming Hall.

古文：太皇窦太后好老子言，不说儒术，得赵绾、王臧之过以让上，上因废明堂事，尽下赵绾、王臧吏，後皆自杀。
现代文：太皇窦太后喜好老子学说，不喜欢儒术，她找出赵绾、王臧的过失来责备皇上，皇上因此停止商议建造明堂的事，把赵绾、王臧都交付法官论罪，后二人皆自杀。
English: Empress Dowager Dou liked Laozi's teachings and disliked Confucianism. She found fault with Zhao Qi and Wang Qi to reproach the emperor. As a result, the emperor stopped discussing the construction of the Ming Hall and handed Zhao Qi and Wang Qi over to the judge to be tried. The latter two both committed suicide.

古文：申公亦疾免以归，数年卒。
现代文：申公也以病免官返回鲁国，数年后逝世。
English: Shen Gong was also removed from office due to illness and returned to Lu. He died a few years later.

古文：弟子为博士者十馀人：孔安国至临淮太守，周霸至胶西内史，夏宽至城阳内史，砀鲁赐至东海太守，兰陵缪生至长沙内史，徐偃为胶西中尉，邹人阙门庆忌为胶东内史。
现代文：申公弟子中拜为博士者有十几人：孔安国官至临淮太守，周霸官至胶西内史，夏宽官至城阳内史，砀鲁赐官至东海太守，兰陵人缪生官至长沙内史，徐偃官至胶西中尉，邹人阙门庆忌官至胶东内史。
English: Among the disciples of Shen Gong, there are more than a dozen people who are doctorate holders: Kong An official to Lin Huai governor, Zhou Ba official to Jiaosi internal history, Xia Guang official to Chengyang internal history, Jialu Ji official to Donghai governor, Lanling person Miao Sheng official to Changsha internal history, Xu Yiguan official to Jiaosi lieutenant, and Xiang people Yimen Qingyi official to Jiaodong internal history.

古文：其治官民皆有廉节，称其好学。
现代文：他们管理官吏和百姓都廉洁有节操，人们称赞他们好学。
English: They manage officials and people to be honest and upright, and people praise them for their eagerness to learn.

古文：学官弟子行虽不备，而至於大夫、郎中、掌故以百数。
现代文：其他的学官弟子，品行虽不完美，但是官至大夫、郎中和掌故的人也有百余。
English: Other scholar-official disciples, although their behavior is not perfect, but there are more than a hundred people who are officials, doctors, junior and senior officials.

古文：言诗虽殊，多本於申公。
现代文：他们讲解《诗经》虽然有所不同。但是大多都依循申公的见解。
English: Although their interpretation of the "Book of Songs" is different, most of them follow the opinion of Shengong.

古文：清河王太傅辕固生者，齐人也。
现代文：清河王刘承的太傅辕固生，是齐国人。
English: Liu Cheng, King of the Qing Dynasty, was a native of Qi.

古文：以治诗，孝景时为博士。
现代文：因为研究《诗经》，孝景帝时拜为博士。
English: Because of his study of the "Book of Songs," Emperor Xiao Jing was awarded a doctorate.

古文：与黄生争论景帝前。
现代文：他和黄生在景帝面前争论。
English: He and Huang Sheng argued in front of Emperor Jing.

古文：黄生曰： 汤武非受命，乃弑也。 
现代文：黄生说： 汤王、武王并不是秉承天命继位天子，而是弑君篡位。 
English: Huang Sheng said: Tang Wang and Wu Wang did not succeed to the throne of heaven by adhering to the destiny of heaven, but by usurping the throne.

古文：辕固生曰： 不然。
现代文：辕固生反驳说： 不对。
English: Gong Gusheng retorted: "That's not right."

古文：夫桀纣虐乱，天下之心皆归汤武，汤武与天下之心而诛桀纣，桀纣之民不为之使而归汤武，汤武不得已而立，非受命为何？ 
现代文：那夏桀、殷纣暴虐昏乱，天下人的心都归顺商汤、周武，商汤、周武赞同天下人的心愿而杀死桀、纣，桀、纣的百姓不肯为他们效命而心向汤、武，汤、武迫不得已才立为天子，这不是秉承天命又是什么？ 
English: In that chaotic and turbulent time, the hearts of the people of the world all went to Shang Tang and Zhou Wu. Shang Tang and Zhou Wu agreed with the wishes of the people of the world and killed Zou, Zou, Zou, Zou. The people of Zou, Zou, Zou, Zou did not want to serve their orders, but their hearts went to Tang, Wu, Tang, Wu, and they were forced to stand up for the Son of Heaven. Is this not upholding the Mandate of Heaven?

古文：黄生曰： 冠虽敝，必加於首；履虽新，必关於足。
现代文：黄生说： 帽子虽然破旧，但是一定戴在头上；鞋虽然新，但是必定穿在脚下。
English: Huang Sheng said: Although the hat is worn out, it must be worn on the head; although the shoes are new, they must be worn under the feet.

古文：何者，上下之分也。
现代文：为什么呢？这正是上下有别的道理。
English: Why? It's just that there's another reason for the ups and downs.

古文：今桀纣虽失道，然君上也；汤武虽圣，臣下也。
现代文：桀、纣虽然无道，但是身为君主而在上位；汤、武虽然圣明，却是身为臣子而居下位。
English: Although there is no way out for Zou and Zou, they are in the upper ranks as monarchs; although Tang and Wu are saints, they are in the lower ranks as courtiers.

古文：夫主有失行，臣下不能正言匡过以尊天子，反因过而诛之，代立践南面，非弑而何也？ 
现代文：君主有了过错，臣子不能直言劝谏纠正它来保持天子的尊严，反而借其有过而诛杀君主，取代他自登南面称王之位，这不是弑君篡位又是什么？ 
English: If the monarch makes a mistake, the vassal cannot directly advise him to correct it to maintain the dignity of the emperor. Instead, he uses the mistake to kill the monarch and replace him since he ascended to the throne of the south. This is not usurpation by the king, but what is it?

古文：辕固生曰： 必若所云，是高帝代秦即天子之位，非邪？ 
现代文：辕固生答道： 如果非按你的说法来断是非，那么这高皇帝取代秦朝即天子之位，也不对吗？ 
English: Gong Gusheng replied, "If you don't judge right from wrong according to what you say, then isn't it right for this high emperor to replace the Qin Dynasty, that is, the position of the Son of Heaven?

古文：於是景帝曰： 食肉不食马肝，不为不知味；言学者无言汤武受命，不为愚。 
现代文：于是景帝说： 吃肉不吃马肝，不算不知肉的美味；谈学问的人不谈汤、武是否受天命继位，不算愚笨。 
English: Then Emperor Jing said, "If you eat meat but don't eat horse liver, it's not because you don't know the deliciousness of meat; if you talk about learning but don't talk about whether soup and martial arts are ordained by heaven, it's not because you're stupid."

古文：遂罢。
现代文：于是争论止息。
English: So the argument died down.

古文：是後学者莫敢明受命放杀者。
现代文：此后学者再无人胆敢争辩汤、武是受天命而立还是放逐桀纣篡夺君权的问题了。
English: Since then, no scholar has dared to debate the question of whether Tang and Wu were ordained by heaven or whether they were exiled to usurp royal power.

古文：窦太后好老子书，召辕固生问老子书。
现代文：窦太后喜欢《老子》这本书，召来辕固生问他读此书的体会。
English: Empress Dowager Dou liked the book "Lao Zi" and summoned Gong Gusheng to ask him about his experience of reading the book.

古文：固曰： 此是家人言耳。 
现代文：辕固生说： 这不过是普通人的言论罢了。 
English: Zou Gusheng said: This is just the speech of an ordinary person.

古文：太后怒曰： 安得司空城旦书乎？ 
现代文：窦太后恼怒道： 它怎么能比得上管制犯人似的儒家诗书呢！ 
English: Empress Dowager Dou said angrily, "How can it be compared to a Confucian poetry book that is controlled like a prisoner!"

古文：乃使固入圈刺豕。
现代文：于是让辕固入兽圈刺杀野猪。
English: So let the storks go into the animal enclosure and kill the wild boar.

古文：景帝知太后怒而固直言无罪，乃假固利兵，下圈刺豕，正中其心，一刺，豕应手而倒。
现代文：景帝知道太后发怒了而辕固直言并无罪过，就借给他锋利的兵器。他下到兽圈内去刺杀野猪，正中其心，一刺，野猪便应手倒地。
English: Emperor Jing knew that the empress dowager was angry and that there was nothing wrong with his blunt speech, so he lent him a sharp weapon. He went down to the animal enclosure to kill the wild boar. He hit it right in the heart, and the boar fell to the ground with a single stab.

古文：太后默然，无以复罪，罢之。
现代文：太后默不作声，没理由再治他的罪，只得作罢。
English: The empress dowager remained silent. There was no reason to punish him again, so he had to stop.

古文：居顷之，景帝以固为廉直，拜为清河王太傅。
现代文：过不久，景帝认为辕固廉洁正直，拜他为清河王刘承的太傅。
English: Not long after, Emperor Jing believed that Gong Guo was honest and virtuous, and worshiped him as the Taifu of Liu Cheng, the King of Qinghe.

古文：久之，病免。
现代文：过了很长时间，他因病免官。
English: After a long time, he was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：今上初即位，复以贤良徵固。
现代文：当今皇上刚即位，又以品德贤良征召辕固入朝。
English: Today's emperor has just ascended the throne, and he has been conscripted into the imperial court with virtue and virtue.

古文：诸谀儒多疾毁固，曰 固老 ，罢归之。
现代文：那些喜好阿谀逢迎的儒生们多有嫉妒诋毁辕固之语，说 辕固老了 ，于是他被罢官遣归。
English: Those Confucians who liked the old man were jealous and slandered him, saying that he was old, so he was dismissed and repatriated.

古文：时固已九十馀矣。
现代文：这时辕固已经九十多岁了。
English: At this time, Yan Guo was already more than ninety years old.

古文：固之徵也，薛人公孙弘亦徵，侧目而视固。
现代文：他被征召时，薛邑人公孙弘也被征召，却不敢正视辕固。
English: When he was conscripted, Sun Hong, a native of Xueyup, was also conscripted, but he did not dare to face the enemy.

古文：固曰： 公孙子，务正学以言，无曲学以阿世！ 
现代文：辕固对他说： 公孙先生，务必以正直的学问论事，不要用邪曲之说去迎合世俗。 
English: Hao Gu said to him: Mr. Gongsun, be sure to discuss things with honest knowledge, and do not use evil words to cater to the world.

古文：自是之後，齐言诗皆本辕固生也。
现代文：自此之后，齐人讲《诗经》都依据辕固生的见解。
English: Since then, Qi people have said that the "Song of Songs" is based on the views of Gong Gusheng.

古文：诸齐人以诗显贵，皆固之弟子也。
现代文：一些齐人因研究《诗经》有成绩而仕途显贵，他们都是辕固的弟子。
English: Some Qi people have made a distinguished career due to their achievements in studying the "Book of Songs." They are all steadfast disciples.

古文：韩生者，燕人也。
现代文：韩生，是燕郡人。
English: Hanson is a native of Yan County.

古文：孝文帝时为博士，景帝时为常山王太傅。
现代文：孝文帝时当博士，景帝时任常山王刘舜的太傅。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was a doctor at the time, and Emperor Jing was the Taifu of King Liu Ye of Changshan at the time.

古文：韩生推诗之意而为内外传数万言，其语颇与齐鲁间殊，然其归一也。
现代文：韩生推究《诗》的旨意而撰述了《内传》《外传》达几万字，书中的用语和齐、鲁两地颇为不同，但是旨归是一致的。
English: Han Sheng deduced the intention of "Poetry" and wrote "Inside Story" and "Outside Story" amounting to tens of thousands of words. The language in the book is quite different from Qi and Lu, but the purpose is the same.

古文：淮南贲生受之。
现代文：淮南贲生受业于他。
English: Huainan Xinsheng was apprenticed to him.

古文：自是之後，而燕赵间言诗者由韩生。
现代文：自此之后，燕赵一带讲《诗》的人都因循韩生的见解。
English: Since then, people who recite "Poetry" around Yan Zhao have followed Hansheng's opinion.

古文：韩生孙商为今上博士。
现代文：韩生的孙子韩商是当今皇上委任的博士。
English: Han Sang's grandson, Han Shang, is now a doctor appointed by the emperor.

古文：伏生者，济南人也。
现代文：伏生，是济南郡人。
English: Fuse, a native of Jinan County.

古文：故为秦博士。
现代文：先前做过秦朝博士。
English: He previously worked as a Qin Dynasty doctor.

古文：孝文帝时，欲求能治尚书者，天下无有，乃闻伏生能治，欲召之。
现代文：孝文帝时，他想找到能研究《尚书》的人，遍寻天下不得，后听说伏生会讲授，就打算召用他。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaowen, he wanted to find someone who could study "Shangshu" and searched the world. Later, when he heard that Fusheng would give a lecture, he planned to call him.

古文：是时伏生年九十馀，老，不能行，於是乃诏太常使掌故朝错往受之。
现代文：当时伏生已年寿九十余岁，人很老了，不能行走，于是文帝就下令太常派掌故晁错前往伏生处向他学习。
English: At that time, Fusheng was more than ninety years old. He was very old and could not walk. So Emperor Wen ordered him to go to Fusheng's place to learn from him.

古文：秦时焚书，伏生壁藏之。
现代文：秦朝焚烧儒书时，伏生把《尚书》藏在墙壁里。
English: When the Qin Dynasty was burning Confucian books, Fuseon hid the Shangshu in the walls.

古文：其後兵大起，流亡，汉定，伏生求其书，亡数十篇，独得二十九篇，即以教于齐鲁之间。
现代文：后来战乱大起，伏生出走流亡，汉朝平定天下后，他返回寻找所藏的《尚书》，已丢失了几十篇，只得到二十九篇，于是他就在齐鲁一带教授残存的《尚书》。
English: Later, after the outbreak of war, Fuxiong went into exile, and after the Han Dynasty was pacified, he returned to search for the "Shangshu" he had hidden. He had lost dozens of "Shangshu" and only got 29, so he taught the remaining "Shangshu" in the Qilu area.

古文：学者由是颇能言尚书，诸山东大师无不涉尚书以教矣。
现代文：自此学者们都很会讲解《尚书》，殽山以东诸位著名学者无不涉猎《尚书》来教授学生了。
English: Since then, scholars have been very good at explaining "Shangshu," and famous scholars east of Lushan have all dabbled in "Shangshu" to teach students.

古文：伏生教济南张生及欧阳生，欧阳生教千乘兒宽。
现代文：伏生教济南人张生和欧阳生，欧阳生教千乘人宽。
English: Zhang Sheng and Ouyang Sheng, both from Jinan, teach Fusheng, and Ouyang Sheng teaches Qianren.

古文：兒宽既通尚书，以文学应郡举，诣博士受业，受业孔安国。
现代文：宽精通《尚书》之后，凭借经学方面的成绩参加郡中选举，前往博士官门下学习，从师于孔安国。
English: After mastering "Shang Shu," Kuan participated in the county middle school election by virtue of his academic achievements, went to study under a doctoral officer, and apprenticed to Kong An Guo.

古文：兒宽贫无资用，常为弟子都养，及时时间行佣赁，以给衣食。
现代文：兒宽家贫没有资财，时常当学生们的厨工，还经常偷偷外出做工挣钱，来供给自己的衣食之需。
English: Erhuang's family is poor and has no resources. He often works as a cook for the students, and often secretly goes out to work to earn money to provide for his own food and clothing needs.

古文：行常带经，止息则诵习之。
现代文：他外出时常常看经书、休息时就朗读温习它。
English: When he goes out, he often reads the Bible, and when he rests, he reads aloud and studies it.

古文：以试第次，补廷尉史。
现代文：依照考试成绩的名次，他补了延尉史的缺官。
English: According to the ranking of the examination results, he made up for the vacancy of Enshi.

古文：是时张汤方乡学，以为奏谳掾，以古法议决疑大狱，而爱幸宽。
现代文：当时张汤正爱好儒学，就让兒宽做自己的掾吏，负责呈报案情。兒宽根据经义古法论事判决疑难大案，因而张汤很宠用他。
English: At that time, Zhang Tang was fond of Confucianism, so he asked Ikuan to be his clerk, responsible for reporting the case. Ikuan judged the difficult case according to the ancient law, so Zhang Tang was very fond of him.

古文：宽为人温良，有廉智，自持，而善著书、书奏，敏於文，口不能发明也。
现代文：兒宽为人温和善良，有廉洁的操守和聪敏的智慧，能把握自己的言行，而且擅长著书、起草奏章，文思敏捷，但是口拙不会阐述。
English: He is gentle and kind, has a clean ethics and a keen intelligence, can control his words and deeds, and is good at writing books and composing musical scores. He is quick-witted, but he is not articulate.

古文：汤以为长者，数称誉之。
现代文：张汤认为他是忠厚之人，多次赞扬他。
English: Zhang Tang thought he was a loyal person and praised him many times.

古文：及汤为御史大夫，以兒宽为掾，荐之天子。
现代文：等到张汤当了御史大夫，就让兒宽当掾吏，向天子举荐他。
English: When Zhang Tang became the imperial historian, he asked Erhuang to be the magistrate and recommended him to the emperor.

古文：天子见问，说之。
现代文：天子召见询问兒宽后，很喜欢他。
English: After the heavenly son summoned and inquired about the son, he liked him very much.

古文：张汤死後六年，兒宽位至御史大夫。
现代文：张汤死后六年，兒宽便官至御史大夫，在职九年去世。
English: Six years after Zhang Tang's death, Ikuan was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian, and died in office nine years later.

古文：九年而以官卒。宽在三公位，以和良承意从容得久，然无有所匡谏；於官，官属易之，不为尽力。
现代文：兒宽位列三公，由于性情谦和驯良，能顺从皇上之意，善于调解纠纷，而得以官运久长，但是他没有匡正劝谏过皇上的过失。居官期间，属下的官员轻视他，不为他尽力。
English: Because of his humble and docile nature, he was able to obey the emperor's wishes and was good at mediating disputes, he was able to stay in office for a long time. However, he did not correct the emperor's mistakes. While he was in office, his subordinate officials despised him and did not do their best for him.

古文：张生亦为博士。
现代文：张生也当了博士官。
English: Zhang Sheng also became a doctoral officer.

古文：而伏生孙以治尚书徵，不能明也。
现代文：而伏生的孙子也因研究《尚书》被征召，但是他并不能阐明《尚书》的经义。
English: Fuse's grandson was also conscripted to study the Shangshu, but he could not explain the meaning of the Shangshu.

古文：自此之後，鲁周霸、孔安国，雒阳贾嘉，颇能言尚书事。
现代文：从此以后，鲁人周霸、孔安国，洛阳人贾嘉，都很会讲授《尚书》的内容。
English: Since then, Lu people Zhou Ba, Kong An Guo, Luoyang people Jia Jia, are all able to teach the content of "Shang Shu."

古文：孔氏有古文尚书，而安国以今文读之，因以起其家。
现代文：孔家有用先秦古文撰写的《尚书》，而孔安国用时下隶书字体把它们重新摹写讲读，因此就兴起了他自己的学术流派。
English: Confucius used the "Shang Shu" written in pre-Qin Dynasty ancient texts, while Kong An Guo re-copied and read them in the current script, thus giving rise to his own academic school.

古文：逸书得十馀篇，盖尚书滋多於是矣。
现代文：孔安国得到了《尚书》中失传的十几篇，《尚书》大概从这时起逐渐增多篇目了。
English: Kong An Guo obtained more than a dozen lost articles from "Shang Shu," and the number of articles in "Shang Shu" has gradually increased since then.

古文：诸学者多言礼，而鲁高堂生最本。
现代文：许多学者都解说《礼经》，而鲁郡人高堂生的见解是最切近本义的。
English: Many scholars have expounded on the "Book of Rites," but the views of Lu County's Ren Gao Tongsheng are the closest to the original meaning.

古文：礼固自孔子时而其经不具，及至秦焚书，书散亡益多，於今独有士礼，高堂生能言之。
现代文：《礼经》本来自孔子时起就不完整，到了秦始皇焚书后，此书散失的篇目更多，今日只有《士礼》存，高堂生能讲解它。
English: The "Book of Etiquette" was incomplete when it came from Confucius, and after Qin Shihuang burned the book, more chapters of this book were lost. Today, only "Ji Li" survives, and high school students can explain it.

古文：而鲁徐生善为容。
现代文：鲁国徐生善于演习礼仪。
English: Lu Xusheng is good at practicing etiquette.

古文：孝文帝时，徐生以容为礼官大夫。
现代文：孝文帝时期，徐生以此出任礼官大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Xu Sheng served as a doctor of etiquette.

古文：传子至孙延、徐襄。
现代文：他传习礼仪于儿子至孙子徐延、徐襄。
English: He taught the etiquette to his son and grandson, Xu Yan and Xu Xiang.

古文：襄，其天姿善为容，不能通礼经；延颇能，未善也。
现代文：徐襄，天性便善于演习礼仪，但是不能通晓《礼经》；徐延很通晓《礼经》，却不善于演习礼节仪式。
English: Xu Xiang, by nature, is good at practicing etiquette, but he is not familiar with the Book of Etiquette; Xu Yan is familiar with the Book of Etiquette, but he is not good at practicing etiquette.

古文：襄以容为汉礼官大夫，至广陵内史。
现代文：徐襄以擅长演习礼节仪式当了汉王朝的礼官大夫，官至广陵内史。
English: Xu Xiang excelled in the practice of etiquette and became the etiquette doctor of the Han Dynasty, rising to the rank of Guangling Inner History.

古文：延及徐氏弟子公户满意、桓生、单次，皆尝为汉礼官大夫。
现代文：徐延及徐家弟子公户满意、桓生、单次，都曾出任汉朝的礼官大夫。
English: Xu Yan and the disciples of the Xu family have served as doctors of etiquette in the Han Dynasty.

古文：而瑕丘萧奋以礼为淮阳太守。
现代文：而瑕丘人萧奋以通晓《礼经》当了淮阳太守。
English: However, Xiao Fen, a native of Keqiu, became the ruler of Huaiyang with his knowledge of the Book of Rites.

古文：是後能言礼为容者，由徐氏焉。
现代文：此后能够讲解《礼经》并演习礼节仪式的人，都出自徐氏一家。
English: Since then, all the people who can explain the "Li Jing" and practice the etiquette ceremony are from the Xu family.

古文：自鲁商瞿受易孔子，孔子卒，商瞿传易，六世至齐人田何，字子庄，而汉兴。
现代文：自从鲁国商瞿从师孔子学习《易经》，孔子死后，商瞿便教授《易经》，历经六代而传至齐郡人田何，田何字子庄，而后汉朝建立。
English: Since the Lu merchants learned the "I Ching" from their teacher Confucius, and after the death of Confucius, the merchants taught the "I Ching," which was passed down through six generations to Tianhe, Tianhe Zi Zhuang, Qi County, and then established by the Han Dynasty.

古文：田何传东武人王同子仲，子仲传菑川人杨何。
现代文：田何传授于东武人王同字子仲，子仲传授给菑川人杨何。
English: Tian He was taught to Dongwu Ren Wang Tong Zi Zhong, and Zi Zhong was taught to Yang He, a native of Beichuan.

古文：何以易，元光元年徵，官至中大夫。
现代文：杨何因通晓《易经》，于元光元年被朝廷征召，官至中大夫。
English: Yang He was called up by the imperial court in the first year of the Yuanming Dynasty because of his knowledge of the I Ching. He rose to the rank of junior doctor.

古文：齐人即墨成以易至城阳相。
现代文：齐人即墨成因通晓《易经》官至城阳国相。
English: Qi Rongcheng became the Minister of the State of Chengyang due to his knowledge of the "I Ching."

古文：广川人孟但以易为太子门大夫。
现代文：广川人孟但因通晓《易经》当了太子门大夫。
English: Meng Dan, a native of Guangchuan, became the prince's doctor because of his knowledge of the I Ching.

古文：鲁人周霸，莒人衡胡，临菑人主父偃，皆以易至二千石。
现代文：鲁人周霸。莒人衡胡，临菑人主父偃，都是因通晓《易经》官至二千石。
English: Lu's Zhouba, Han's Henghu, and Linyi's Master and Father Zou were all promoted to officials of up to 2,000 koku due to their knowledge of the I Ching.

古文：然要言易者本於杨何之家。
现代文：但是对《易经》能讲授得精当的，是源自于杨何一家的学说。
English: However, the theory that the I Ching can be taught properly comes from the Yang He family.

古文：董仲舒，广川人也。
现代文：董仲舒，是广川郡人。
English: Dong Zhongshu is from Guangchuan County.

古文：以治春秋，孝景时为博士。
现代文：因研究《春秋》，孝景帝时曾拜为博士。
English: Due to his research on Spring and Autumn, he was given a doctorate by Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：下帷讲诵，弟子传以久次相受业，或莫见其面，盖三年董仲舒不观於舍园，其精如此。
现代文：他居家教书，上门求学的人很多，不能一一亲授，弟子之间便依学辈先后辗转相传，有的人甚至没见过他的面。董仲舒足不出户，三年间不曾到屋旁的园圃观赏，他治学心志专一到了如此程度。
English: He teaches at home, and many people come to his house to study. It is not possible to teach one by one in person, and his disciples are passed down from one generation to the next. Some people have not even met him. Dong Zhongshu does not leave the house, and has not visited the garden next to the house for three years. His dedication to studying has reached such a level.

古文：进退容止，非礼不行，学士皆师尊之。
现代文：他出入时的仪容举止，无一不合乎礼仪的矩度，学生们师法、敬重他。
English: His appearance and demeanour when he enters and leaves the classroom are all in keeping with proper etiquette, and the students respect and revere him.

古文：今上即位，为江都相。
现代文：当今皇上即位后，他出任江都国相。
English: After the current Emperor ascended to the throne, he served as the Minister of State of Jiangsu Province.

古文：以春秋灾异之变推阴阳所以错行，故求雨闭诸阳，纵诸阴，其止雨反是。
现代文：他依据《春秋》记载的自然灾害和特异现象的变化来推求阴阳之道交替运行的原因，因而求雨时关闭种种阳气，放出种种阴气，止雨时的方法与此相反。
English: Based on the changes of natural disasters and special phenomena recorded in "Spring and Autumn," he deduced the reasons for the alternating operation of yin and yang, thus closing all kinds of yang and releasing all kinds of yin when seeking rain, and the opposite method when stopping rain.

古文：行之一国，未尝不得所欲。
现代文：这种做法在江都国实行，无不实现了预期的效果。
English: This approach has been implemented in Jiangdu Province and has achieved the expected results.

古文：中废为中大夫，居舍，著灾异之记。
现代文：后来他被贬为中大夫，居家写作了《灾异之记》。
English: Later, he was demoted to junior doctor, and wrote "Tale of Disaster" at home.

古文：是时辽东高庙灾，主父偃疾之，取其书奏之天子。
现代文：这时辽东高帝庙发生火灾，主父偃嫉妒他，就窃取了他的书上奏天子。
English: At this time, a fire broke out in the Liaodong Emperor Gao Temple, and the head priest Zou was jealous of him, so he stole his book on playing the son of heaven.

古文：天子召诸生示其书，有刺讥。
现代文：天子召集众儒生把书拿给他们看，儒生们认为其中含有指责讥讽朝政之意。
English: Tianzi gathered all the Confucian scholars to show them the book. The Confucian scholars thought that it contained the meaning of criticizing and ridiculing the imperial government.

古文：董仲舒弟子吕步舒不知其师书，以为下愚。於是下董仲舒吏，当死，诏赦之。
现代文：董仲舒的学生吕步舒不知道这是自己老师的著作，认为它愚蠢至极，于是把董仲舒交法官论罪，判处死刑，但是皇上降诏赦免了他。
English: Lu Buxu, a student of Dong Zhongshu, did not know that this was his teacher's work, and thought it was extremely stupid. Therefore, he convicted Dong Zhongshu to the judge and sentenced him to death, but the emperor pardoned him.

古文：於是董仲舒竟不敢复言灾异。
现代文：于是董仲舒始终不敢再讲论灾异之说。
English: As a result, Dong Zhongshu never dared to talk about the disaster again.

古文：董仲舒为人廉直。
现代文：董仲舒为人廉洁正直。
English: Dong Zhongshu is a man of integrity and honesty.

古文：是时方外攘四夷，公孙弘治春秋不如董仲舒，而弘希世用事，位至公卿。
现代文：这一时期朝廷正用兵向外排除四方边境内外少数民族的侵扰，公孙弘研究《春秋》成就不及董仲舒，但是他行事善于迎合世俗，因此能身居高位做了公卿大臣。
English: During this period, the imperial court was using soldiers to exclude the intrusion of ethnic minorities from inside and outside the four borders. Gongsun Hong's research on "Spring and Autumn" was less successful than that of Dong Zhongshu, but he was good at pandering to the world, so he was able to hold a high position as a noble minister.

古文：董仲舒以弘为从谀。
现代文：董仲舒认为公孙弘为人阿谀逢迎。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that Gongsun Hong is a great-grandfather.

古文：弘疾之，乃言上曰： 独董仲舒可使相缪西王。 
现代文：公孙弘憎恨他，就对皇上说： 只有董仲舒可以担当胶西王的国相。 
English: Gongsun Hong hated him and said to the emperor: Only Dong Zhongshu can be the minister of state of King Jiaosi.

古文：胶西王素闻董仲舒有行，亦善待之。
现代文：胶西王为人狠毒暴戾，但是一向听说董仲舒有美德，也很好地礼遇他。
English: Jiaoxi Wang was a cruel and violent man, but he had always heard that Dong Zhongshu was virtuous and treated him with courtesy.

古文：董仲舒恐久获罪，疾免居家。
现代文：董仲舒害怕居官日久会惹祸上身，就称病辞官回家。
English: Dong Zhongshu was afraid that the resident official would cause trouble for him in the long run, so he called the sick officer to go home.

古文：至卒，终不治产业，以脩学著书为事。
现代文：直至逝世，他始终不曾营治私产，而一心以研究学问写作论著为本职。
English: Until his death, he had never been involved in the management of private property, but had devoted himself to his profession as a scholar and writer.

古文：故汉兴至于五世之间，唯董仲舒名为明於春秋，其传公羊氏也。
现代文：所以自汉朝开国以来历经五朝，期间只有董仲舒对《春秋》最为精通，名望甚高，他师承传授的是《春秋》公羊学。
English: Therefore, since the founding of the Han Dynasty, there have been five dynasties, during which only Dong Zhongshu was most proficient in "Spring and Autumn," and his reputation was very high.

古文：胡毋生，齐人也。
现代文：胡毋生，是齐郡人。
English: He is a native of Qi County.

古文：孝景时为博士，以老归教授。
现代文：孝景帝时拜为博士，后因年老返归故里讲授《春秋》。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing was a doctor at the time, but he returned to his hometown to teach "Spring and Autumn" due to old age.

古文：齐之言春秋者多受胡毋生，公孙弘亦颇受焉。
现代文：齐地讲论《春秋》的人很多受教于胡毋生，公孙弘也受过他的教诲。
English: Many of the people who spoke about "Spring and Autumn" were taught by Hu Ye Sheng, and Gongsun Hong also received his teachings.

古文：瑕丘江生为穀梁春秋。
现代文：瑕丘人江生研究《春秋》谷粱学。
English: Kogaoka's Jiang Sheng studies "Spring and Autumn" by Gu Xi Xue.

古文：自公孙弘得用，尝集比其义，卒用董仲舒。
现代文：自从公孙弘受到重用，他曾收集比较了谷粱学和公羊学的经义，最后采用了董仲舒所传授的公羊氏的学说。
English: Since Gongsunhong came to be heavily used, he had collected and compared the sutras of the Gu Xi School and the Ram School, and finally adopted the teachings of the Ram Clan taught by Dong Zhongshu.

古文：仲舒弟子遂者：兰陵褚大，广川殷忠，温吕步舒。
现代文：董仲舒的弟子中有成就的人是：兰陵人褚大，广川人殷忠，温人吕步舒。
English: Among the disciples of Dong Zhongshu, the people who have made achievements are: Lanling people Shida, Guangchuan people Yinzhong, and Wen people Lvbu Shu.

古文：褚大至梁相。
现代文：褚大官至粱王国相。
English: From 大官 to 王国相.

古文：步舒至长史，持节使决淮南狱，於诸侯擅专断，不报，以春秋之义正之，天子皆以为是。
现代文：吕步舒官至长史，手持符节出使去决断淮南王刘安谋反的罪案，对诸侯王敢于自行裁决，而不加请示。他根据《春秋》经义公正断案，天子都认为很对。
English: Lvbu Shu, an official with a long history, sent an envoy to solve the crime of Huainan King Liu An's rebellion, and dared to make his own ruling on the princes without any request. According to "Spring and Autumn," he judged the case fairly and impartially, and the emperor thought it was right.

古文：弟子通者，至於命大夫；为郎、谒者、掌故者以百数。
现代文：弟子中官运通达的，做到了大夫之职；谒者、掌故的则有百余人。
English: There are more than a hundred disciples who have achieved success and fulfilled their duties as doctors, and more than a hundred who are deaf and mute.

古文：而董仲舒子及孙皆以学至大官。
现代文：而董仲舒的儿子和孙子也都因精通儒学做了高官。
English: And Dong Zhongshu's son and grandson also became high-ranking officials thanks to their proficiency in Confucianism.

