古文：凡是人，皆须爱。天同覆，地同载。
现代文：凡是人，就应该给予关心和爱护，因为大家都是天地所生。
English: All human beings should be given care and love, because we are all born of heaven and earth.

古文：行高者，名自高。
现代文：德行高尚者，名望自然会高。
English: A person of high moral character will naturally have a high reputation.

古文：人所重，非貌高。
现代文：大家所敬重的是他的德行，不是外表容貌。
English: People respected him for his virtues, not his appearance.

古文：才大者，望自大。人所服，非言大。
现代文：有才能的人，声望自然不凡，人们内心真正信服的，是有真才德的，而不是自说大话的人。
English: Talented people naturally have an extraordinary reputation, and people are truly convinced in their hearts that they are true talents, not self-promoters.

古文：己有能，勿自私。
现代文：自己有能力，就可以服务大众，不要自私自利，舍不得付出。
English: If you have the ability, you can serve the public, don't be selfish and reluctant to pay.

古文：人所能，勿轻訾。
现代文：别人有能力，应当学习欣赏赞叹，而不要嫉妒、毁谤。
English: We should learn to appreciate and admire the abilities of others, instead of envying and slandering.

古文：勿谄富，勿骄贫。
现代文：不要去讨好巴结富有的人，也不要对穷人骄横无礼。
English: Don't pander to the rich, and don't patronize the poor.

古文：勿厌故，勿喜新。
现代文：不要光取悦新交的朋友，而厌弃过去的朋友。
English: Don't try to please your new friends by shunning your old ones.

古文：人不闲，勿事搅。人不安，勿话扰。
现代文：对于正在忙碌的人，不要用事情去打扰他；当别人心情不好或身心欠安的时候，不要用言语干扰他。
English: For a person who is busy, don't bother him with things; when others are in a bad mood or physically and mentally ill, don't disturb him with words.

古文：人有短，切莫揭。人有私，切莫说。
现代文：别人有缺点，不要当面揭穿他；对于他人的隐私，切忌到处宣扬。
English: If someone has a shortcoming, don't expose it to their face; if it's someone else's private life, don't broadcast it.

古文：道人善，即是善。
现代文：赞美他人的善行就是行善。
English: To praise the good deeds of others is to do good.

古文：人知之，愈思勉。
现代文：当对方听到你的称赞之后，必定会更加勉励行善。
English: When the other party hears your praise, they will surely be more motivated to do good.

古文：扬人恶，即是恶。
现代文：张扬他人的过失或缺点，就是做坏事。
English: To publicize the faults or shortcomings of others is to do evil.

古文：疾之甚，祸且作。
现代文：如果指责批评太过分了，还会给自己招来灾祸。
English: If the accusations and criticisms go too far, they will bring disaster to themselves.

古文：善相劝，德皆建。过不规，道两亏。
现代文：朋友之间应该用仁义道德互相规过劝善，这样双方的修养都会有提高。如果对别人的过不规劝，自己和对方的品德都会有缺失。
English: Friends should use benevolence, righteousness and morality to restrain and persuade each other to do good, so that the cultivation of both sides will be improved. If you do not dissuade others, you and the other person's character will be lacking.

古文：凡取与，贵分晓。与宜多，取宜少。
现代文：财物的取得与给予，一定要分辨清楚明白，宁可多给别人，自己少拿一些。
English: The acquisition and giving of property must be clearly distinguished, and it is better to give more to others and take less for oneself.

古文：将加人，先问己。己不欲，即速已。
现代文：与人和睦相处。事情要加到别人身上之前，先要反省问问自己：换作是我，愿不愿意，如果连自己都不喜欢，就不要勉强别人。
English: Get along well with others. Before taking things out on others, first reflect and ask yourself: if it were me, would I like it or not? If you don't like it, don't force it on others.

古文：恩欲报，怨欲忘。报怨短，报恩长。待婢仆，身贵端。
现代文：受人恩惠要时时想著报答，别人有对不起自己的事，应该宽大为怀把它忘掉，怨恨不平的事不要停留太久，过去就算了；至于别人对我们的恩德，要感恩在心，常记不忘，常思报答。
English: Those who are favored by others should always think about repaying them. If others have something that they don't like about themselves, they should be generous and forget about it. Don't linger too long on grudges and grievances, and let it be in the past. As for the kindness of others to us, we should be grateful in our hearts, always remember, and always think about repaying them.

古文：虽贵端，慈而宽。势服人，心不然。
现代文：如果仗势强逼别人服从，对方难免口服心不服。
English: If the situation forces others to obey, the other party will inevitably be dissatisfied with oral persuasion.

古文：理服人，方无言。
现代文：唯有以理服人，别人才会心悦诚服，没有怨言。
English: Only by convincing people with reason, others will be sincerely convinced, without complaint.

