古文：王及善，洺州邯郸人也。父君愕。
现代文：王及善，洺州邯郸人。父王君愕。
English: Wang Yizhen, a native of Zhangzhou. Father Wang Jun was stunned.

古文：隋大业末，并州人王君廓掠邯郸，君愕往说君廓曰： 方今万乘失御，英雄竞起，诚宜抚纳遗氓，保全形胜，按甲以观时变，拥众而归真主，此富贵可图也。
现代文：隋朝大业末，并州人王君廓掠夺邯郸，君愕去劝说王君廓道： 当今国家失去控制，英雄竞起，此时实在应该安抚接纳流亡的农民，保全形势利便。按甲以观时变，拥众而归真主，这样就富贵可图。
English: At the end of the great cause of the Sui Dynasty, and the people of the state, Wang Junku, plundered the land, and the king was astonished to persuade Wang Junku to say: Today's country has lost control, and heroes are competing. At this time, it is really necessary to appease the peasants who have accepted exile, and preserve the situation and convenience. According to A, watch the time change, and follow the masses to God, so you can be rich and valuable.

古文：今足下居无尺土之地，守无兼旬之粮，恣行残忍，所过攘敚，窃为足下寒心矣。 
现代文：今足下居无尺土之地，守无兼旬之粮，却恣行残忍，所过之处抢夺骚扰，窃为足下寒心。 
English: Now I live in a land without a foot of soil under my feet, guarding food that is both abundant and in season, but I act cruelly at will, robbing and harassing wherever I go, stealing the coldness under my feet.

古文：君廓曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：王君廓问 ：有什么计谋？ 
English: Wang Junku asked: What is the strategy?

古文：君愕为陈井陉之险，可先往据之。君廓从其言，乃屯井陉山。
现代文：王君愕认为控制井陉山的险要，可先行占据，王君廓从其言，就屯兵井陉山。
English: Wang Junpeng thought that the key to controlling Jinshushan could be occupied first, and Wang Junku followed his advice and sent troops to Jinshushan.

古文：岁余，会义师入定关中，乃与君廓率所部万余人来降，拜大将军。频以战功封新兴县公，累迁左武卫将军。
现代文：一年多，当义师入定关中的时候，他与王君廓率部万人来降，拜为大将军接连立战功，被封为新兴县公，升迁左武卫将军。
English: More than a year later, when Yishi entered Dingguanzhong, he and Wang Junku led tens of thousands of people to come down to worship the great general successively, and was named a new county official and promoted to General Zuowei.

古文：从太宗征辽东，兼领左屯营兵马。与高丽战于驻跸山，君愕先锋陷阵，力战而死。
现代文：王君愕从太宗征辽东，兼领左屯营兵马，与高丽战于驻跸山，王君愕冲锋陷阵，力战而死。
English: Wang Junpeng led troops and horses from Taizong to conquer Liaodong, and also led troops and horses from Zuotun Camp to fight against Goryeo in Shaoshan. Wang Junpeng was trapped in the front and died in the battle.

古文：太宗深痛悼之，赠左卫大将军、幽州都督、邢国公。
现代文：享年八十二岁。废朝三天哀悼，追赠益州大都督，谥号为贞，陪葬乾陵。
English: He died at the age of eighty-two. He was mourned for three days by the former emperor, posthumously given the title of grand governor of Yizhou, his posthumous name was Zhen, and he was buried with Qianling.

古文：赐东园秘器，陪葬昭陵。杜景俭，冀州武邑人也。
现代文：杜景俭，冀州武邑人。
English: Du Jingjian, a native of Wuyi, Jizhou.

古文：少举明经，累除殿中侍御史。
现代文：少年时应试中明经举，任殿中侍御史。
English: When he was a boy, he took the Ming Bible exam and was appointed as a palace attendant.

古文：出为益州录事参军。
现代文：出朝任益州录事参军。
English: He entered the imperial court and joined the army in Yizhou.

古文：时隆州司马房嗣业除益州司马，除书未到，即欲视事，又鞭笞僚吏，将以示威，景俭谓曰： 公虽受命为此州司马，而州司未受命也。
现代文：当时，隆州司马房嗣业调任益州司马，任职令未到，房嗣业就要视事，又鞭打僚吏，想以此来显示自己的威风，杜景俭对他说 ：公虽然受命担任此州司马，但州司还未接到命令。
English: At that time, Longzhou Sima Fang Siye was transferred to Yizhou Sima. Before the appointment order arrived, Fang Siye had to attend to the matter, and he also whipped his colleagues in order to show his authority. Du Jing Jian said to him: Although the prince was ordered to serve as this state Sima, the state secretary has not yet received the order.

古文：何藉数日之禄，而不待九重之旨，即欲视事，不亦急耶？ 
现代文：为什么为了这数日之禄，连九重之旨也等不得，就慌忙火急地视事，这不太过于心急了吗？ 
English: Why, for the sake of a few days' grace, can't even wait for the nine-fold decree to be issued, rushing to see things urgently, isn't this too anxious?

古文：嗣业益怒。景俭又曰： 公今持咫尺之制，真伪未知，即欲揽一州之权，谁敢相保？
现代文：房嗣业更加恼怒，杜景俭又说： 公现在凭咫尺之制书，真伪未知，就想揽一州之权，哪个能担保你真假呢？
English: Fong Heye was even more angry, and Du Jing Rong said: "Nowadays, the public wants to seize the power of a state by virtue of the book production, the authenticity of which is unknown. Which one can guarantee that you are true and false?

古文：扬州之祸，非此类耶。 
现代文：扬州之祸，不是这一样的情况吗！ 
English: Isn't this the same as the Yangzhou disaster?

古文：乃叱左右各令罢散，嗣业惭赧而止。
现代文：说完喝斥左右散去，房嗣业羞愧而止。
English: After saying that, the cheers dispersed, and Fong He Rong stopped in shame.

古文：俄有制除嗣业荆州司马，竟不如志，人吏为之语曰： 录事意，与天通，益州司马折威风。 
现代文：不久，又有命令房嗣业任荆州司马，竟未如志。益州的僚吏为这件事赞杜景俭说 ：录事的心意与天通，益州司马折威风。 
English: Soon after, he was ordered to appoint Fong He He as Jingzhou Sima, but it did not work out as he had hoped. Yizhou's colleagues praised him for this, saying: "The intention of the record is divine, and Yizhou's Sima is majestic."

古文：景俭由是稍知名。
现代文：杜景俭由此渐渐知名。
English: As a result, Du Jingjian gradually became famous.

古文：入为司宾主簿，转司刑丞。
现代文：后入朝任司宾主簿，转调司刑丞。
English: After entering the imperial court, he served as the chief clerk of the court, and later as the chief clerk of the court.

古文：天授中，与徐有功、来俊臣、侯思止专理制狱，时人称云： 遇徐、杜者必生，遇来、侯者必死。 
现代文：天授年中，杜景俭与徐有功、来俊臣、侯思止专门处理案件，当时人们传扬说： 遇徐、杜必生，遇来、侯必死。 
English: In the middle of the year of Tianju, Du Jingjian, Xu Yinggong, Lai Junchen and Hou Sizhong were specially assigned to deal with the case. At that time, people spread the saying: If you meet Xu, Du will be born, if you meet Hou, Hou will die.

古文：则天尝以季秋内出梨花一枝示宰臣曰： 是何祥也？ 
现代文：他又迁任洛州司马，不久又调任凤阁侍郎，行宰相职权。武则天曾因秋季院内长出梨花一枝而问宰相 ：这是什么吉祥之兆？ 
English: He was also transferred to the post of Lozhou Sima, and soon he was transferred to the post of Fengge attendant to perform the duties of the prime minister. Wu Zetian once asked the prime minister, "What is this auspicious sign?" because of a pear blossom sprouting in the autumn in the hospital.

古文：诸宰臣曰： 陛下德及草木，故能秋木再花，虽周文德及行苇，无以过也。 
现代文：诸宰相答道 ：陛下的恩德连草木都得到了，所以能够秋木再花，即使周文王德及行苇，也不能超过。 
English: The prime ministers replied, "Your majesty's nder has obtained even the grass and trees, so it can re-flower the autumn trees, even if Zhou Wenwangde and Xingyao, it cannot exceed."

古文：景俭独曰： 谨按《洪范五行传》： 阴阳不相夺伦，渎之即为灾。 
现代文：杜景俭独说： 按《洪范五行传》： 阴阳不能混乱，违反了就会有灾。 
English: Du Jing Jian Du said: According to "Hong Fan Wuxing Biography": Yin and yang cannot be confused, and there will be disasters if they are violated.

古文：又《春秋》云： 冬无愆阳，夏无伏阴，春无凄风，秋无苦雨。 
现代文：《春秋》也讲 ：冬无过甚的阳气，夏无过甚的阴气，春天无凄风，秋天无苦雨。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" also says: There is no excessive yang in winter, no excessive yin in summer, no terrible wind in spring, and no bitter rain in autumn.

古文：今已秋矣，草木黄落，而忽生此花，渎阴阳也。
现代文：今已到了秋天，草木落，但是忽然生出此花，混乱阴阳。
English: Now it is autumn, the grass and trees have fallen, but suddenly this flower has sprung up, confusing yin and yang.

古文：臣虑陛下布教施令，有亏礼典。又臣等忝为宰臣，助天理物，理而不和，臣之罪也。 
现代文：臣考虑陛下布政施令，是否有亏于礼典；兼之臣等虽列名宰臣，本应依据天理来理顺万物，却理而不能顺，这是臣的罪过。 
English: It is the fault of the vassal to consider whether His Majesty's administration of the government is not in accordance with the rite; and although the vassal and others are listed as vice-vassals, they are supposed to rationalize everything according to the principles of heaven, but they cannot do so.

古文：于是再拜谢罪，则天曰： 卿真宰相也！ 
现代文：因此二拜而谢罪，武则天道： 卿真宰相也！ 
English: Therefore, it is a sin to worship twice and thank twice. Wu Zetian said: Sir, the Prime Minister is also the Prime Minister!

古文：延载初，为凤阁侍郎周允元奏景俭党于李昭德，左迁溱州刺史。
现代文：延载初年，杜景俭被凤阁侍郎周允元检举说他是李昭德的党羽，降职调秦州刺史。
English: In the first year of the extension, Du Jingjian was reported by Fengge waiter Zhou Yunyuan that he was a party member of Li Zhaode, demoted and transferred to Qinzhou.

古文：圣历二年，复拜凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。时契丹入寇，河北诸州多陷贼中。
现代文：后又任司刑卿。圣历二年，又任内阁侍郎，行宰相职权。当时，契丹入侵，河北各州多攻陷。
English: In the 2nd year of the lunar calendar, he also served as a cabinet secretary and held the position of prime minister. At that time, the Khitan invaded, and most of the provinces in Hebei were conquered.

古文：及事定，河内王武懿宗将尽论其罪。
现代文：等到事已平定，河内王武懿宗将要判罪。
English: By the time the matter has been settled, Hanoi's King Muxinsong will be convicted.

古文：岁余，转秋官尚书。
现代文：杜景俭认为都是形势逼迫，非出本心，请全部予以宽宥。
English: Du Jingjian believed that all of them were forced by the situation and did not come from the heart. Please forgive them all.

古文：坐漏泄禁中语，左授司刑少卿，出为并州长史。
现代文：武则天竟听从了杜景俭的意见。一年多，杜景俭调任秋官尚书，因漏泄机密，贬到并州任长史。
English: Wu Zetian actually listened to Du Jingjian's opinion. For more than a year, Du Jingjian was transferred to the position of the autumn official Shangshu, and because of the leakage of secrets, he was demoted to the position of the prefectural governor.

古文：道病卒，赠相州刺史。
现代文：在途中病逝，追赠相州刺史。
English: He died of illness on the way and was posthumously awarded the Sangju sashimi.

古文：子澄，颇以文藻著名，官至巩县尉。硃敬则，字少连，毫州永城人也。
现代文：朱敬则，字少连，是亳州永城人。
English: Zhu Jingzhe, also known as Shaolin, is from Yongcheng, Zhangzhou.

古文：代以孝义称，自周至唐，三代旌表，门标六阙，州党美之。
现代文：他家祖辈均以孝义被世人称扬，从北周到唐朝，三代旌表，地方上都赞美。
English: The ancestors of his family have been praised by the world for their filial piety. From the Northern Zhou Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty, the three generations of Yuans watch have been praised by the local people.

古文：敬则倜傥重节义，早以辞学知名。
现代文：朱敬则潇洒倜傥，很重节义，年轻时就以辞赋知名。
English: Zhu Jing, on the other hand, is a dashing young man with a strong sense of justice. He was famous for his rhetoric when he was young.

古文：与三从兄同居，财产无异。
现代文：他与其堂兄弟同住，财产不分。
English: He lives with his cousins and they share everything.

古文：又与左史江融、左仆射魏元忠特相友善。
现代文：又与左史江融、左仆射魏元忠特别友好。
English: He is also particularly friendly with Zuo Shi Jiang Rong and Zuo Min Zha Wei Yuan Zhong.

古文：咸亨中，高宗闻而召见，与语甚奇之，将加擢用，为中书舍人李敬玄所毁，乃授洹水尉。
现代文：咸亨年中，高宗听到朱敬则的美名就召见他，与他交谈，很看重他，将要提拔任用，但被中书舍人李敬玄所贬毁，只授了洹水县尉。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, Gaozong heard of Zhu Jingze's reputation and summoned him to talk with him. He thought highly of him and wanted to promote and appoint him, but he was belittled by Li Jingxuan, a scholar of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and was only awarded the title of Surabaya County Lieutenant.

古文：长寿中，累除右补阙。
现代文：长寿年中，朱敬则长时任右补阙。
English: In the middle of his long life, Zhu Jing was appointed to the post of the Right Auxiliary Bishop for a long time.

古文：伏愿览秦、汉之得失，考时事之合宜，审糟粕之可遗，觉蘧庐之须毁。
现代文：因武则天临朝称帝，改唐为周，天下颇多流言异议，到长寿年便渐渐地宁静下来，为了绝灭告密罗织他人罪名这一类的情况，他上疏，讲了秦不知因时制宜之变所遭的祸；也讲汉高祖在天下平定后重诗书、定礼仪和因时而变的好处。
English: In order to eliminate the situation of accusing others of crimes, he spoke about the misfortune that Qin suffered due to the change of the time system; he also spoke about the benefits of Han Gao Zu after the world was pacified, such as the importance of poetry books, the establishment of etiquette, and the change of time.

古文：见机而作，岂劳终日乎？陛下必不可偃蹇太平，徘徊中路。伏愿改法制，立章程，下恬愉之辞，流旷荡之泽，去萋菲之牙角，顿奸险之锋芒，窒罗织之源，扫朋党之迹，使天下苍生坦然大悦，岂不乐哉！
现代文：然后请求改法制，立章程，让百姓安逸受到恩惠，去谗言者的巧言，挫奸险者的锋芒，根除罗织陷害之源，扫除朋党为奸，使天下苍生坦然大悦。
English: Then he asked for the legal system to be reformed, a constitution to be established, so that the people could receive favors with ease, the clever words of the slanderers to be eliminated, the sharp edges of the traitors to be thwarted, the source of the conspiracy to be eradicated, the cronies to be eliminated, and all beings in the world to be calm and happy.

古文：则天甚善之。
现代文：武则天看了认为很好。
English: Wu Zetian looked at it and thought it was good.

古文：长安三年，累迁正谏大夫，寻同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：长安三年，朱敬则调任正谏大夫，代理宰相之职。
English: In the third year of Chang'an, Zhu Jing was transferred to the post of Zhengyi doctor and acting prime minister.

古文：时御史大夫魏元忠、凤阁舍人张说为张易之兄弟所诬构，将陷重辟，诸宰相无敢言者，敬则独抗疏申理曰： 元忠、张说素称忠正，而所坐无名。
现代文：当时，御史大夫魏元忠、凤阁舍人张说被张易之兄弟陷害，将要受到重刑，宰相们不敢直言，只有朱敬则抗疏申理说 ：元忠、张说一向忠正，加在他们头上的罪无根据。
English: At that time, the chief secretary Wei Yuanzhong and Fengge's subordinate Zhang said that they had been framed by Zhang Yi's brother and would be severely punished. The prime ministers did not dare to speak out, only Zhu Jing said: Yuanzhong and Zhang said that they had always been loyal, and the crime imposed on them was unfounded.

古文：若令得罪，岂不失天下之望也？ 
现代文：如果这样处以重刑，岂不失天下之望？ 
English: If such a heavy sentence is imposed, won't the world lose hope?

古文：乃得减死。
现代文：这样二人得免死刑。
English: The two were spared the death penalty.

古文：四年，以老疾请罢知政事，许之，累转冬官侍郎，仍依旧兼修国史。
现代文：四年，他以年老多病辞宰相职务，批准了，又调任冬官侍郎，依旧兼修国史。
English: Four years later, he resigned from the post of prime minister due to old age and illness, which was approved, and he was transferred to the post of winter official, still studying national history.

古文：张易之、昌宗尝命画工图写武三思及纳言李峤、凤阁侍郎苏味道、夏官侍郎李迥秀、麟台少监王绍宗等十八人形像，号为《高士图》，每引敬则预其事，固辞不就，其高洁守正如此。
现代文：张易之、张昌宗曾经命画工画武三思和纳言李峤、凤阁侍郎苏味道、夏官侍郎李迥秀、麟台少监王绍宗等十八人肖像，号称为高士图，他们每拉朱敬则参与，朱都固辞不就。高洁守正达到如此境界。
English: Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong once ordered the painting of 18 portraits, including Wu Sansi and Nagon Li Qian, Fengge waiter Su Ji, Xia official waiter Li Qianxiu, and Lintai minor overseer Wang Shao Zong. They were called Gao Shi Tu. They participated in every Zhu Jing, and Zhu Du was adamant. Gao Jie Shou is reaching such a state.

古文：神龙元年，出为郑州刺史，寻以老致仕。
现代文：神龙元年，朱敬则调出朝廷到郑州任刺史。不久告老还乡。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, Zhu Jing was transferred from the imperial court to Zhengzhou to serve as a historian. He soon returned to his hometown.

古文：二年，侍御史冉祖雍素与敬则不协，乃诬奏云与王同皎亲善，贬授庐州刺史。
现代文：第二年，因侍御史冉祖雍一向与朱敬则不和，便诬告说他与王同皎亲善，贬为卢州刺史。
English: In the second year, because the attendant historian Ran Zuyong had always been at odds with Zhu Jianzhe, he falsely accused him of being friendly with Wang Tongyao, and was relegated to the status of Luzhou scribe.

古文：经数月，洎代到，还乡里，无淮南一物，唯有所乘马一匹，诸子侄步从而归。
现代文：经数月，等继任者到来，他便还乡。还乡时，身边无淮南一物，只有乘马一匹，他的子侄都步行跟随归乡。
English: After several months, when his successor arrived, he returned to his hometown. When he returned to his hometown, there was nothing from Huainan around him, only a horse, and his nephews and nieces all followed him on foot.

古文：敬则重然诺，善与人交，每拯人急难，不求其报。
现代文：朱敬则重然诺，善与人交，每救人急难，不求其报答。
English: Zhu Jing, on the other hand, made a solemn promise that he would be good at making friends and would not ask for any reward for rescuing anyone in distress.

古文：又尝与三从兄同居四十余年，财产无异。
现代文：他与他的堂兄弟同居四十多年，财产不分彼此。
English: He has lived with his cousins for more than 40 years, and they share everything.

古文：雅有知人之鉴，凡在品论者，后皆如其言。
现代文：他很能识才知人，凡是他品评的人，后来都如他所评论的。
English: He was a great judge of talent, and everyone he reviewed turned out to be just like the person he was reviewing.

古文：欲以此时开四赐之祚，垂万代之封，必有通车三川以窥周室，介马汾、濕而逐翼侯。
现代文：景云三年五月，在家中去世，享年七十五岁。朱敬则曾经搜集魏、晋以来群臣成败之事，著述了《十代兴亡论》。
English: Jingyun passed away at the age of seventy-five in his home in May of the third year of the eighth lunar month. Zhu Jing, on the other hand, had collected the stories of the success and failure of his vassals since the Wei and Jin dynasties, and wrote "Ten Generations of Success and Failure."

古文：而王司徒屡请于当时，曹元首又勤于宗室，皆不知时也。当时贤者是之。
现代文：又以前代文士所论的废五等封爵的文章，又据秦之得失，认为还可折衷，又写了五等论来评封爵之事。当时的贤者认为他的意见很对。
English: He also wrote an article on the waste of the fifth-class knighthood, which was discussed by the previous generation of scribes, and according to Qin Zhi's gains and losses, he thought that there could be a compromise, and he also wrote a fifth-class theory to evaluate the knighthood. The wise men at that time thought that his opinion was very right.

古文：敬则知政事时，每以用人为先。
现代文：朱敬则任宰相时，每以用人为先。
English: When Zhu Jing was appointed prime minister, he always put the people first.

古文：桂州蛮叛，荐裴怀古；凤阁舍人缺，荐魏知古；右史缺，荐张思敬。则天以为知人。
现代文：桂州蛮叛，他荐裴怀古；凤阁舍人缺，他荐魏知古；右史缺，他荐张思敬，武则天认为他知人识才。
English: Guizhou rebels, he recommended Pei Huaigu; Fengge is short of manpower, he recommended Wei Zhigu; Right History is short of manpower, he recommended Zhang Siqing; Wu Zetian thought he knew people.

古文：睿宗即位，尝谓侍臣曰： 神龙已来，李多祚、王同皎并复旧官，韦月将、燕钦融咸有褒赠，不知更有何人，尚抱冤抑？ 
现代文：睿宗即位，曾对侍臣说： 神龙年以来，李多祚、王同皎恢复原官，韦月将、燕钦融都有褒赠，不晓得现在还有什么人还含有冤曲的。 
English: When Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, he once said to his attendants: Since the Year of the Dragon, Li Duoqi and Wang Tongqi have been restored to their original positions, and Wei Yue Zheng and Yan Qin Rong have received awards. I don't know who still has grievances.

古文：吏部尚书刘幽求对曰： 故郑州刺史硃敬则，往在则天朝任正谏大夫、知政事，忠贞义烈，为天下所推。
现代文：吏部尚书高幽求回答说 ：原郑州刺史朱敬则，过去在武则天时任正谏大夫，主持政事，忠贞义烈，为天下人所推崇。
English: Shangshu Gaoyu replied: Zhu Jingzhe, the former ruler of Zhengzhou, used to be Zheng Zetian's doctor, presided over government affairs, was loyal and virtuous, and was respected by the people of the world.

古文：神龙时，被宗楚客、冉祖雍等诬构，左授庐州刺史。
现代文：神龙年时，被宗楚客、冉祖雍等诬陷，贬授卢州刺史。
English: In the Year of the Dragon, he was slandered by Zong Chuk, Ran Zuyong, and others, and was demoted to the rank of Luzhou scribe.

古文：长安年中，尝谓臣云： 相王必膺期受命，当须尽节事之。 
现代文：长安年中，他曾对我说： 相王一定会承运受命，我们应当尽节侍奉。 
English: In the middle of the Chang'an Festival, he once said to me, "King Si will definitely receive the order to carry the carriage, and we should serve him faithfully."

古文：及韦氏篡逆干纪，臣遂见危赴难，翼戴兴历，虽则天诱其事，亦是敬则先启之心。
现代文：到韦庶人篡权干扰朝政，臣于是见危赴难，希望有今天的振兴，虽然是武则天造成，也与朱敬则先开启我的思想分不开。
English: A commoner in Wei usurped power and interfered with the government of the dynasty, so the minister saw the danger and hoped for today's revitalization. Although it was caused by Wu Zetian, it was also inseparable from Zhu Jingzhe who first opened my mind.

古文：今陛下龙兴宝位，凶党就戮，敬则尚衔冤泉壤，未蒙昭雪。
现代文：现在陛下龙兴宝位，凶党就戮，但朱敬则还含冤九泉。未蒙昭雪。 
English: Now that His Majesty Long Xing is in the throne, the evil party will be killed, but Zhu Jing still has grievances.

古文：况复事符先觉，诚即可嘉。 睿宗然之，赠敬则秘书监，谥曰元。杨再思，郑州原武人也。少举明经，授玄武尉。
现代文：睿宗同意刘幽求的话，追赠朱敬则秘书监，谥号为元。杨再思，郑州原武人，少年时参加明经科考试中举，授玄武县尉。
English: Ruizong agreed to Liu Yuzhu's request, and later presented Zhu Jing with the post of secretary-supervisor, with the posthumous name of Yuan. Yang Zaisi, the original warrior of Zhengzhou, took part in the middle school examination of the Ming Dynasty when he was a boy, and was awarded the title of Xuanwu County Lieutenant.

古文：充使诣京师，止于客舍。
现代文：他被派遣到京师出差，住在客舍。
English: He was sent on a business trip to Beijing and lived in a guest house.

古文：会盗窃其囊装，再思邂逅遇之，盗者伏罪，再思谓曰： 足下当苦贫匮，至此无行。
现代文：小偷偷窃他的包袱，刚好被杨再思碰见，小偷当面认罪，杨再思对他说： 足下肯定是贫困之极，才有此行。
English: The thief stole his luggage and was just met by Yang Zaisi. The thief confessed in front of him. Yang Zaisi said to him, "It must be extremely poor down there to make this trip."

古文：速去勿作声，恐为他人所擒。
现代文：你快点离开不要做声，小心被他人捉住。
English: You leave quickly, don't make a sound, and be careful not to be caught by others.

古文：幸留公文，余财尽以相遗。 
现代文：留下公文，余财全部送给你。 
English: I'll leave a letter and give you the rest of the money.

古文：盗者斋去，再思初不言其事，假贷以归。
现代文：小偷打发走后，他也不讲这件事，借钱返回。
English: After the thief was sent away, he did not talk about it and borrowed money to return.

古文：累迁天官员外郎，历左右肃政台御史大夫。
现代文：后升任天官员外郎，先后任左右肃政台御史大夫。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of vice-chairman of the Heavenly Officials, and successively to the position of vice-chairman of the Political Bureau.

古文：延载初，守鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。证圣初，转凤阁侍郎，依前同平章事，兼太子右庶子。
现代文：延载初年，任鸾台侍郎，代理宰相。证圣初年，调任凤阁侍郎，依旧代理宰相，兼任太子右庶子。
English: In the first year of the extension, he was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai, acting prime minister. In the first year of the consecration, he was transferred to the attendant of Fengge, still acting prime minister, and also served as the prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：寻迁内史，自弘农县男累封至郑国公。
现代文：不久，迁任内史，从弘农县男晋封至郑国公。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the position of Inner Historian, and was promoted from Hongnong County to Zheng Guogong.

古文：再思自历事三主，知政十余年，未尝有所荐达。
现代文：杨再思在朝廷任职经历了三主，管理政事十余年，从来没有推举人助人发展的事。
English: Yang Zhaisi has served three masters in the imperial court, managed government affairs for more than ten years, and has never promoted the development of others.

古文：为人巧佞邪媚，能得人主微旨，主意所不欲，必因而毁之，主意所欲，必因而誉之。
现代文：他为人巧佞邪媚，能体会主上的细微心意，皇上心中不想的，他一定抨击毁坏，皇上心中所希望的，他一定称扬赞誉。
English: He is skillful and charming, and can appreciate the subtle thoughts of the Lord. What the emperor does not want in his heart, he must attack and destroy, and what the emperor wants in his heart, he must praise and praise.

古文：然恭慎畏忌，未尝忤物。
现代文：但是他待人恭、处事慎，谨小慎微从未违忤他人。
English: But he treats people respectfully, is prudent and cautious, and never disobeys others.

古文：或谓再思曰： 公名高位重，何为屈折如此？ 
现代文：有人问杨再思 ：您名高位重，为什么卑躬曲膝如此呢？ 
English: Someone asked Yang Zaisi: You are famous and high-ranking, why do you grovel like this?

古文：再思曰： 世路艰难，直者受祸。
现代文：再思答道 ：世路艰难，直者受祸。
English: On second thought, he replied, "Life is difficult, and those who are upright will suffer misfortune."

古文：苟不如此，何以全其身哉！ 
现代文：如果我不这样，何以全其身？ 
English: If I don't, why bother?

古文：长安末，昌宗既为法司所鞫，司刑少卿桓彦范断解其职。
现代文：长安末年，昌宗已被法司拘留受审，司刑少卿判决解除昌宗的职务。
English: At the end of the Chang'an era, Changzong was detained and tried by the Department of Justice, and the Secretary of the Department of Justice decided to relieve Changzong of his duties.

古文：昌宗俄又抗表称冤，则天意将申理昌宗，廷问宰臣曰： 昌宗于国有功否？ 
现代文：昌宗不久又上表申冤，武则天本意想申理宗昌的案件，在大廷之上问宰相道 ：昌宗对国家有功没有？ 
English: Soon after, Changzong went to the court to plead his case. Wu Zetian, who originally wanted to hear Changzong's case, asked the prime minister in the courtroom: Did Changzong do any good for the country?

古文：再思对曰： 昌宗往因合练神丹，圣躬服之有效，此实莫大之功。 
现代文：杨再思回答道： 昌宗过去因合炼神丹，陛下服用很有效，这实在是没有什么能比得了的功劳。 
English: Yang Zaisi replied: In the past, Changzong used to synthesize Shintan, and His Majesty took it very effectively. There is really nothing that can be compared to this achievement.

古文：则天甚悦，昌宗竟以复职。
现代文：武则天听了很合心意，恢复了昌宗的官职。
English: Wu Zetian listened to his heart's desire and restored the official position of Changzong.

古文：时人贵彦范而贱再思也。
现代文：世人看重桓彦范，看贱杨再思。
English: The world values Kuan Yan Fan, but thinks twice about despicable Yang Chong.

古文：时左补阙戴令言作《两脚野狐赋》以讥刺之，再思闻之甚怒，出令言为长社令，朝士尤加嗤笑。
现代文：当时左补阙戴令言做两脚野狐赋来讥讽他。他知道了很是恼火，贬戴令言到长社去做县令，朝中官员更加嗤笑他。
English: At that time, Zuo Shu mocked him by saying that he was a two-legged wild fox. He knew that he was very angry, and he went to Chosha to be a county magistrate, and officials in the DPRK and China laughed at him even more.

古文：再思为御史大夫时，张易之兄司礼少卿同休尝奏请公卿大臣宴于司礼寺，预其会者皆尽醉极欢。
现代文：杨再思做御史大夫时，张易之之兄司礼少卿张同休曾上奏请公卿大夫到司礼寺参加宴会，参加的人皆尽醉极欢。
English: When Yang Zaisi was the imperial historian, Zhang Yi's brother, Zhang Tongxu, the Sirei Shaoqing, invited the noble doctor to the Sirei Temple to attend a banquet. All the participants were very drunk and very happy.

古文：同休戏曰： 杨内史面似高丽。 
现代文：张同休戏弄杨再思说 ：杨内史面似高丽人。 
English: Zhang Tonghui teased Yang Zaisi and said: Yang Nai's face looks like a Korean.

古文：再思欣然，请剪纸自贴于巾，却披紫袍，为高丽舞，萦头舒手，举动合节，满座嗤笑。
现代文：杨再思欣然，并剪纸贴在巾上，披着紫袍，跳起高丽舞来，摇头摆手，举动合着节拍，满座嗤笑。
English: Yang Zai Si was delighted, and he cut paper and put it on his handkerchief. Dressed in a purple robe, he danced a Korean dance, waved his head, moved in time with the beat, and was laughed at by the entire audience.

古文：又易之弟昌宗以姿貌见宠幸，再思又谀之曰： 人言六郎面似莲花；再思以为莲花似六郎，非六郎似莲花也。 
现代文：还有一次，张易之的弟弟张昌宗以姿貌讨得武则天的宠爱，杨再思又奉承说： 别人说六郎面似莲花，我看是莲花似六郎，哪里是六郎似莲花！ 
English: On another occasion, Zhang Yizhi's younger brother, Zhang Changzong, won Wu Zetian's favor with his appearance. Yang Zaisi also flattered him, saying, "Others say that Rokuro's face looks like a lotus flower, but I think the lotus flower looks like Rokuro. Where is Rokuro like a lotus flower?"

古文：其倾巧取媚也如此。
现代文：他倾巧取媚达到如此的地步。
English: He's a master of seduction to get to this point.

古文：长安四年，以本官检校京兆府长史，又迁检校扬州大都督府长史。
现代文：长安四年，杨再思以他原有官职又检校京兆府长史，又迁任扬州大都督府长史。
English: In the fourth year of the Chang'an era, Yang Zhaisi took his original official position and became the governor of Beijing-Shanghai Prefecture, and was also transferred to the post of governor of Yangzhou.

古文：中宗即位，拜户部尚书，兼中书令，转侍中，以宫僚封郑国公，赐实封三百户。
现代文：中宗即位，拜户部尚书，兼中书令，后转任侍中，以太子属官封郑国公，赐实封三百户。
English: When Emperor Zhongzong ascended to the throne, he was given the official title of Zheng Guogong, and 300 households were given the official title.

古文：又为册顺天皇后使，赐物五百段，鞍马称是。
现代文：又册令顺天皇后使，赐五色绸缎五百段。
English: In addition, an order was issued to the empress dowager to grant five hundred pieces of five-colored silk brocade.

古文：时武三思将诬杀王同皎，再思与吏部尚书李峤、刑部尚书韦巨源并受制考按其狱，竟不能发明其枉，致同皎至死，众冤之。
现代文：当时武三思将诬杀王同皎，杨再思与吏部尚书李峤、刑部尚书韦巨源一同受旨审理此案。竟然不能发现王同皎所受之冤屈，致使王同皎处死。
English: At that time, Wu Sanshi falsely accused Wang Tonglu of murder, and Yang Zaisi was ordered to try the case together with the head of the criminal investigation department, Shangshu Liqi, and the head of the criminal investigation department, Shangshu Wei Jiuyuan. However, they could not find out the grievances Wang Tonglu suffered, resulting in Wang Tonglu's death.

古文：再思俄复为中书令、吏部尚书。
现代文：众人都认为此案有冤。杨再思不久又任中书令、堆积吏部尚书。
English: Everyone thought that this case was unjust. Yang Zaisi was soon appointed as the middle secretary and piled up the clerical department's records.

古文：景龙三年，迁尚书右仆射，加光禄大夫。
现代文：景龙三年，迁任尚书左仆射，加光禄大夫。
English: In the third year of Jinglong, he was transferred to the position of Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, Jia Guanglu's doctor.

古文：其年薨，赠特进、并州大都督，陪葬乾陵，谥曰恭。
现代文：就在同一年，杨再思去世。赠特进之职和并州大都督，陪葬乾陵，谥号恭。
English: In the same year, Yang Zhaisi passed away. He was given the post of special promotion and the post of provincial governor, and was buried with Qianling.

古文：李怀远，邢州柏仁人也。
现代文：李怀远，邢州柏仁人。
English: Li Huaiyuan, from Bailin, Zhangzhou.

古文：早孤贫好学，善属文。
现代文：幼年就成了孤儿，虽贫穷，但好学不倦，善做文。
English: He was orphaned at a young age. Although he was poor, he was a tireless learner and a good writer.

古文：有宗人欲以高廕相假者，怀远竟拒之，退而叹曰： 因人之势，高士不为；假廕求官，岂吾本志？ 
现代文：有同族人想要他附于有地位的人家，以求发展，李怀远竟拒绝，随后叹道 ：凭靠他人势力，高士不为；借庇护求官，怎么能是我的志向呢？ 
English: Some of his compatriots wanted him to attach himself to a family with status in order to develop, but Li Huaiyuan refused, and later lamented: "Relying on the power of others, a high-ranking official can't do it; how can it be my ambition to seek an official position through shelter?"

古文：未几，应四科举擢第，累除司礼少卿。出为邢州刺史，以其本乡，固辞不就，改授冀州刺史。
现代文：没过多久，他应四科考试中举，任司礼少卿，后外调任邢州刺史，因为是他的家乡，所以坚决辞谢不就，又改授冀州刺史。
English: It didn't take long for him to be promoted in the middle of the four-subject examination, and he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Rites and Decrees, and later he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou Historian. Because he was from his hometown, he resolutely refused to resign, and was re-assigned to the post of Jizhou Historian.

古文：俄历扬、益等州大都督府长史，未行，又授同州刺史。
现代文：不久，又曾先后任扬州、益州大都督府长史，后又任同州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed governor of Yangzhou and Yizhou, and later he was appointed governor of the same province.

古文：在职以清简称。
现代文：李怀远在任期间以清廉简朴受到世人称扬。
English: During his term of office, Li Huaiyuan was praised by the world for his honesty and simplicity.

古文：入为太子左庶子，兼太子宾客，历迁右散骑常侍、春官侍郎。
现代文：后入宫任太子左庶子，兼太子宾客，后迁任右散骑常侍、春官侍郎。
English: After entering the palace, he was appointed as the Prince's left illegitimate child, and also the Prince's guest, and later he was transferred to the position of the right horseback riding attendant, and the attendant of the crown prince.

古文：大足年，迁鸾台侍郎，寻同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：大足年间，升任鸾台侍郎，代理宰相职务。
English: During the Dashu era, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of Xingtai and assumed the position of acting prime minister.

古文：岁余，加银青光禄大夫，拜秋官尚书，兼检校太子左庶子，赐爵平乡县男。
现代文：一年多，加银青光禄大夫之荣誉职，拜任秋官尚书、兼检校太子左庶子，赐爵平乡县男。
English: For more than a year, he was promoted to the honorary post of Qingguanglu doctor, appointed to the post of autumn official Shangshu, concurrently the prince's left illegitimate child, and given the title of peer of Pingxiang County.

古文：长安四年，以老辞职，听解秋官尚书，正除太子左庶子，寻授太子宾客。
现代文：长安四年，年老辞职，免去秋官尚书，任太子左庶子，不久又授太子宾客职务。
English: In the fourth year of Chang'an, he resigned at an old age, was relieved of the post of the autumn official, and was appointed the prince's left illegitimate son. Soon after, he was given the position of the prince's guest.

古文：神龙初，除左散骑常侍、兵部尚书、同中书门下三品，加金紫光禄大夫，进封赵郡公，特赐实封三百户。
现代文：神龙初年，他任左散骑常侍、兵部尚书、代宰相，加金紫光禄大夫，晋封赵郡公，赐实封三百户。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, he was appointed as the left rider of the horse, the leader of the military department, the deputy prime minister, the doctor of the gold and purple light, the promotion of Zhao County, and the granting of three hundred households.

古文：俄以疾请致仕，许之。中宗将幸京师，又令以本官知东都留守。
现代文：不久，因病请求告老回乡，中宗将到京师，又令他以原来的官职任东都留守。
English: Soon, due to illness, he asked to return to his hometown. Zhong Zong was going to study in Beijing, but he was forced to stay in Dongdu with his original official position.

古文：怀远虽久居荣位，而弥尚简率，园林宅室，无所改作。
现代文：李怀远虽然久居高位，但仍然崇尚简朴率直，他的园林住宅，没有改建。
English: Although Li Huaiyuan has been in a high position for a long time, he still advocates simplicity and straightforwardness. His garden house has not been rebuilt.

古文：常乘款段马，左仆射豆卢钦望谓曰： 公荣贵如此，何不买骏马乘之？ 
现代文：他常常骑着一匹行走缓慢的马，左仆射豆卢钦望对他说： 公荣贵如此，何不买骏马乘坐？ 
English: He often rode a slow-moving horse, and his left-hand man Lu Qinwang said to him, "Since you are so honorable, why don't you buy a donkey to ride?"

古文：答曰： 此马幸免惊蹶，无假别求。 
现代文：他答道： 这匹马稳，可以免去惊蹶，不想另外再买。 
English: He replied, "This horse is stable, I don't want to buy another one.

古文：闻者莫不叹美。
现代文：闻者没有谁不感叹赞美他的朴素的。
English: There is no one who does not admire his simplicity.

古文：神龙二年八月卒，中宗特赐锦被以充敛，辍朝一日，亲为文以祭之，赠侍中，谥曰成。
现代文：神龙二年八月，李怀远去世。中宗特别赐给他锦被来充当安葬用，并且停一日上朝，还亲自写吊文来祭奠，赠侍中，谥号为成。
English: In August of the second year of the Dragon God, Li Huaiyuan passed away. Zhongzong specially gave him a brocade quilt to be used for burial, and stopped one day in the morning, and also personally wrote a message to pay tribute, and presented it to the attendant, and the nickname was completed.

古文：子景伯。景伯，景龙中为给事中，又迁谏议大夫。
现代文：李怀远有子李景伯，在景龙中任给事中，又迁任谏议大夫。
English: Li Huaiyuan had a son, Li Jingbo, who was transferred to the position of doctor of consultation during the reign of King Long.

古文：中宗尝宴侍臣及朝集使，酒酣，令各为《回波辞》。
现代文：中宗曾宴请侍臣和朝集使，酒正浓时，令每个人做《回波辞》。
English: Zhongzong once invited courtiers and imperial envoys to a banquet. When the wine was strong, he ordered everyone to recite the "Echoes."

古文：众皆为诌佞之辞，及自要荣位。
现代文：大家多写的阿谀逢迎之辞，和自己要求得好职位。
English: Many of you have written welcoming speeches, and you have asked for good positions.

古文：次至景伯，曰： 回波尔时酒卮，微臣职在箴规。侍宴既过三爵，喧哗窃恐非仪。 
现代文：轮到李景伯，他道： 回波尔时酒卮，微臣职在箴规，侍宴既三爵，喧窃恐非议。 
English: When it was Li Jingbo's turn, he said: When returning to the Pole, the wine is drunk, the Weixin position is in the precepts, the banquet is the third baron, and the noise is afraid of criticism.

古文：中宗不悦，中书令萧至忠称之曰： 此真谏官也。 
现代文：中宗很不高兴，中书令萧至忠称赞他说： 这才是真正的谏官。 
English: Zhongzong was very unhappy. Xiao Zhizhong, the commander of the Chinese army, praised him and said, "This is a true eunuch."

古文：景云中，累迁右散骑常侍，寻以老疾致仕。
现代文：景云中，迁任右散骑常侍，不久以年老多病退休。
English: In the middle of the Jingyun period, he was transferred to the post of the right rider, and soon retired due to old age and illness.

古文：开元中卒。
现代文：开元年中，去世。
English: He passed away in the middle of the first year of the new year.

古文：子彭年。
现代文：有子李彭年。
English: Li Pengnian has a son.

古文：彭年有吏才，工于剖析，当时称之。
现代文：李彭年有吏才，工于剖析事理，为世人称赞。
English: Li Pengnian was praised by the world for his talent as an official and his ability to analyze matters.

古文：开元中，历考功员外郎、知举，又迁中书舍人、给事中、兵部侍郎。
现代文：开元年中曾任考功员外郎，知举，后又迁任中书舍人、给事中、兵部侍郎。
English: In the middle of the first year of the year, he was appointed as an examiner of meritorious service, Zhifu, and later he was transferred to the position of the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the military department.

古文：天宝初，又为吏部侍郎，与右相李林甫善。
现代文：天宝初年，又任吏部侍郎，他与右相李林甫相好。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was also appointed as the secretary of the cadre department. He was friendly with the Minister of the Right Li Linfu.

古文：慕山东著姓为婚姻，引就清列，以大其门。典铨管七年，后以赃污为御史中丞宋浑所劾，长流领南临贺郡。
现代文：李彭年慕与山东名门大姓结亲，提高名望。主管铨选举官事务七年，后因贪污被御史中丞宋浑弹劾长期流放岭南临贺郡。
English: Li Pengnian, who was in charge of the election official's affairs for seven years, was impeached and exiled to Lingnan Linhe County for a long time due to corruption.

古文：累月，浑及弟恕又以赃下狱，诏浑流岭南高要郡，恕流南康郡。天宝十二载，起彭年为济阴太守，又迁冯翊太守，入为中书舍人、给事中、吏部侍郎。
现代文：过了几个月，宋浑和他的弟弟宋恕也因贪污下狱，后宋浑流放岭南高要郡，宋恕流放南康郡，天宝十二年，起用李彭年任济阳太守，又迁任冯翊太守，后入朝任中书舍人、给事中、吏部侍郎。
English: A few months later, Song Hun and his brother Song Shou were also sent to prison for corruption. Later, Song Hun was exiled to Lingnan Gaoyou County, Song Shou was exiled to Nankang County, Li Pengnian was appointed as the governor of Jiyang in the 12th year of Tianbao, he was transferred to the governor of Fengyuan, and later he was appointed to the court as the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the administrative department.

古文：十五载，玄宗幸蜀，贼陷西京。彭年没于贼，胁授伪官，忧愤忽忽不得志，与韦斌相次而卒。
现代文：十五年，玄宗到四川，西京被攻陷，李彭年被俘，胁迫授了伪官职，他忧愤忽忽不得志，与韦斌差不多的时间先后去世。
English: In the fifteenth year, Xuanzong went to Sichuan, West Beijing was invaded, Li Peng was captured and given a pseudo-official post under duress. He was frustrated and frustrated, and died at about the same time as Wei Bin.

古文：及克复两京，优制赠彭年为礼部尚书。
现代文：到收复两京，追赠李彭年为礼部尚书。
English: After the recovery of the two capitals, Li Peng was posthumously awarded the Book of Rites.

古文：豆卢钦望，京兆万年人也。
现代文：豆卢钦望，是京兆万年人。
English: Doulu Qinwang is a Beijing billion-year-old man.

古文：曾祖通，隋相州刺史、南陈郡公。
现代文：曾祖父豆卢通是隋相州刺史，封为南陈郡公。
English: His great-grandfather, Dou Lutong, was a historian of Sui and Xiang states, and was awarded the title of Southern Chen County Grand Duke.

古文：祖宽，即隋文帝之甥也。
现代文：祖父豆卢宽，是隋文帝的外甥。
English: His grandfather, Dou Lukang, was a nephew of the Sui Emperor.

古文：大业末，为梁泉令。
现代文：隋大业末年，任梁泉令。
English: In the last years of Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as Liang Quanling.

古文：及高祖定关中，宽与郡守萧瑀率豪右赴京师，由是累授殿中监，仍诏其子怀让尚万春公主。
现代文：到唐高祖平定关中，豆卢宽与郡守萧王禹率领豪绅大族奔赴京师，由此他被任命为殿中监，并招其子豆卢怀让为尚春公主的驸马。
English: When it came to Tang Gaozhu Pingdingguan, Dou Lu Kuan and the county governor, Xiao Wang Yu, led the powerful gentry to Beijing. As a result, he was appointed as the palace superintendent and recruited his son, Dou Lu Huajang, to be the groom of Princess Shangchun.

古文：高祖以宽曾祖苌魏太和中例称单姓，至是改宽为卢氏。
现代文：唐高祖以豆卢宽的曾祖父豆卢苌魏在太和年中例称单姓，从此改为卢氏。
English: The great-grandfather of Tang Gao Zu with the name of Doulu Guang, Doulu Zhenwei, used to have a single surname in the Taichung era, but changed it to Lu.

古文：贞观中，历迁礼部尚书、左卫大将军，封芮国公。
现代文：贞观年间，历任礼部尚书、左卫大将军，封芮国公。
English: During Zhenguan's reign, successive heads of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, the General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards, and the Prince of the State were enthroned.

古文：永徽元年卒，赠特进、并州都督，陪葬昭陵，谥曰定。
现代文：永徽元年去世。赠特进荣誉职、并州都督，陪葬昭陵，谥号定。
English: He died in the first year of Yonghui. He was given the honorary post of special promotion, and the state governor, accompanied the funeral of Zhaoling, and his posthumous name was determined.

古文：又复其姓为豆卢氏。
现代文：又恢复原姓豆卢。
English: He also restored his original surname, Doulu.

古文：父仁业，高宗时为左卫将军。
现代文：豆卢钦望的父亲豆卢仁业，唐高宗时为左卫将军。
English: The father of Doulu Qinwang, Doulu Renye, was a general of the Left Division during the reign of Tang Gao Zong.

古文：钦望，则天时累迁司宾卿。
现代文：豆卢钦望，在武则天时累任司宾卿。
English: Doulu Qinwang, who served as the chief secretary to Emperor Wuzetian.

古文：长寿二年，代宗秦客为内史。
现代文：长寿二年，代宗楚客任内史。
English: After two years of long life, the acting head of the dynasty, Chu Kyak, resigned.

古文：时李昭德亦为内史，执权用事，钦望与同时宰相韦巨源、陆元方、苏味道、杜景俭等并委曲从之。
现代文：当时李昭德也是内史，专权用事，豆卢钦望与宰相韦巨源、陆元方、苏味道、杜景俭等都委曲顺从。
English: At that time, Li Zhaode was also an internal historian, with an exclusive power, and Zhu Lu Qinwang and the prime ministers Wei Jiuyuan, Lu Yuanfang, Su Zhi, Du Jingjian, etc. were all obedient.

古文：证圣元年，昭德坐事，左迁涪陵尉，则天以钦望等不能执正，又为司刑少卿皇甫文备奏钦望附会昭德，罔上附下，乃左迁钦望为赵州刺史，韦巨源自右丞为鄜州刺史，陆元方自秋官侍郎为绥州刺史，苏味道自凤阁侍郎为集州刺史。
现代文：证圣元年，李昭德犯错贬职任涪陵尉，武则天因豆卢钦望等人不能坚守正道，再加上司刑少卿皇甫文备上奏说豆卢钦望附会李昭德，蒙上附下，于是贬他为赵州刺史，韦巨源从右丞相降为州刺史，陆元方从秋官侍郎降为绥州刺史，苏味道从凤阁侍郎降为集州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jian Sheng, Li Zhaode made a mistake and was demoted to the position of Huling Lieutenant, Wu Zetian was unable to adhere to the right path because of Zhu Luqinwang and others. In addition, Li Zhaode, who was attached to Zhu Luqinwang, was attached to the Sentencing Minor Secretary Wang Fuwen, so he was demoted to Zhao Zhou, Wei Jiuyuan was demoted from the Minister of the Right to the Zhou, Lu Yuanfang was demoted from the Qiu official to the Zhou, and Su Yi was demoted from the Fengge waiter to the Zhou.

古文：其年，钦望入为司礼卿，迁秋官尚书，封芮国公。
现代文：那年，豆卢钦望又入朝为司礼卿，升任秋官尚书，封芮国公。
English: That year, Doulu Qinwang again entered the imperial court as the Lord of the Ceremonies, was promoted to the position of the Autumn Official, and was given the title of Prince of the State.

古文：出为河北道宣劳使。
现代文：后出京任河北道宣劳使。
English: After that, he went to Beijing to serve as the Hebei Provincial Propaganda and Labor Envoy.

古文：俄而庐陵王复为皇太子，以钦望为皇太子宫尹。
现代文：不久，庐陵王又恢复皇太子，任豆卢钦望为皇太子宫尹。
English: Soon after, the King of Fuling reinstated the crown prince, Ren Doulu Qinwang as crown prince Wugu Yin.

古文：圣历二年，拜文昌右相、同凤阁鸾台三品，寻授太子宾客，停知政事。
现代文：圣历二年，他任命为文昌右相，代宰相职务，不久又授太子宾客，免去宰相职务。
English: In the second year of the sacred calendar, he appointed Wenchang as the minister of the right and the acting prime minister. Soon after, he conferred the crown prince guest and dismissed the prime minister.

古文：中宗即位，以钦望宫僚旧臣，拜尚书左仆射、知军国重事，兼检校安国相王府长史，兼中书令、知兵部事、监修国史。
现代文：中宗即位，以豆卢钦望为宫僚旧臣，拜任尚书左仆射，管军国重事，兼检校安国相王府长史，兼中书令，主管兵部事务，监修国史。
English: When Emperor Zhongzong ascended to the throne, he appointed Doulu Qinwang as his old courtier. He was appointed as Shangshu Zuopuzha, in charge of the military affairs of the state, concurrently the inspector of schools, the minister of state security, the governor of Wangfujing, and the secretary of the Central Military Commission, in charge of the military affairs, and the supervisor of the national history.

古文：钦望作相两朝，前后十余年，张易之兄弟及武三思父子皆专权骄纵，图为逆乱。钦望独谨其身，不能有所匡正，以此获讥于代。
现代文：豆卢钦望两朝任宰相，前后十多年，张易之兄弟和武三思父子专权骄纵，谋图叛乱，豆卢钦望自己能独善其身，不能对不轨行为有所匡正，因此被当世人们讥笑。
English: Duluqin hoped to be the prime minister of two dynasties. For more than ten years, Zhang Yi's brother and Wusan Si's father and son were arrogant and arrogant, and plotted rebellion. Duluqin hoped that he could be self-righteous and could not rectify the misconduct, so he was ridiculed by the people of the world.

古文：神龙二年，拜开府仪。
现代文：神龙二年，任开府仪同三司，为文散官第一等。
English: In the second year of the Dragon Dynasty, he was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and was the first class of Wenshan official.

古文：景龙三年五月，表请乞骸，不许。
现代文：景龙三年五月，上表请归乡养老，未批准。
English: In May of the third year of Jinglong, the above table was not approved.

古文：十一月卒，年八十余。
现代文：同年十一月去世。享年八十余岁。
English: He passed away in November of the same year, at the age of 80.

古文：赠司空、并州大都督，谥曰元，赐东园秘器，陪葬乾陵。
现代文：追赠司空、并州大都督，谥号元。赐东园秘器，陪葬乾陵。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Siku, the title of State Grand Governor, and the posthumous name of Yuan. He was given the East Garden's secret utensils, and he was buried with the Qianling Tomb.

