古文：叶向高，字进卿，福清人。
现代文：叶向高，字进卿，福清人。
English: Ye Xianggao, Zha Jinqing, Fu Qingren.

古文：父朝荣，养利知州。
现代文：父亲叶朝荣，做过养利知州。
English: His father, Ye Chaorong, was a farmer in Lichizhou.

古文：向高甫妊，母避倭难，生道旁败厕中。
现代文：刚怀上叶向高那会儿，他母亲逃避倭寇，在道路旁的一个破厕所中把他生了下来。
English: His mother gave birth to him in a broken toilet on the side of the road while she was pregnant with Ye Xianggao to escape the Japanese invasion.

古文：数濒死，辄有神相之。
现代文：几次差一点死了，幸亏有神明帮助他。
English: Several times he almost died, but fortunately the gods helped him.

古文：举万历十一年进士，授庶吉士，进编修。
现代文：考中万历十一年进士，授职庶吉士，提升为编修。
English: In the 11th year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and was given the title of shangzhi, and was promoted to the position of editor.

古文：迁南京国子司业，改左中允，仍视司业事。
现代文：调任南京国子监司业，改任左中允，仍然负责司业的事务。
English: He was transferred to the post of the State Children's Supervisor of Nanjing, and was reassigned to the post of Zuozhongyong, still responsible for the affairs of the department.

古文：二十六年，召为左庶子，充皇长子侍班官。
现代文：万历二十六年征召任命为左庶子，充任皇太子的侍班官。
English: In the 26th year of Wanli, he was conscripted and appointed as the second son, serving as the crown prince's equerry.

古文：矿税横行，向高上疏，引东汉西邸聚钱事为鉴，不报。
现代文：当时盛行征收矿税，叶向高上疏，援引东汉西官府聚积钱财的事例作为借鉴，没有批复。
English: At that time, the mining tax was widely levied, and the leaves were piled high and high, citing the example of the East Han and West government agencies accumulating money and wealth as a reference, but there was no reply.

古文：寻擢南京礼部右侍郎。
现代文：不久提拔为南京礼部右侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：久之，改吏部。
现代文：很久之后，改任吏部右侍郎。
English: After a long time, he was reassigned to the position of the right hand man of the administrative department.

古文：再陈矿税之害，又请罢辽东税监高淮，语皆切至。
现代文：再次陈述矿税的危害，又请求罢免辽东税监高淮，言辞都很恳切。
English: They again stated the harm of the mineral tax, and also requested the removal of Liaodong Tax Supervisor Gao Huai. The words were very earnest.

古文：妖书狱兴，移书沈一贯力谏。
现代文：妖书一案兴起，他写信给沈一贯极力规劝。
English: When the Yanshu case arose, he wrote to Shen Zeng to strongly dissuade him.

古文：一贯不悦，以故滞南京九年。
现代文：沈一贯不高兴，因为这个原因在南京呆了九年。
English: Shen was always unhappy, and stayed in Nanjing for nine years for this reason.

古文：后一贯罢，沈鲤亦去，朱赓独当国。
现代文：后来沈一贯被罢免，沈鲤也离职了，朱赓专权。
English: Later, Shen was consistently removed from office, and Shen Yao also left office, leaving Zhu Yao with absolute power.

古文：帝命增阁臣。
现代文：皇帝命令增加阁臣。
English: The emperor ordered to increase the number of cabinet ministers.

古文：三十五年五月，擢向高礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，与王锡爵、于慎行、李廷机并命。
现代文：万历三十五年五月提拔叶向高为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，跟王锡爵、于慎行、李廷机一起接受任命。
English: In May of the 35th year of Wanli, Ye Xianggao was promoted to be a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Dongge University. He was appointed together with Wang Xizhe, Yu Shengxing and Li Tingji.

古文：十一月，向高入朝，慎行已先卒，锡爵坚辞不出。
现代文：十一月，叶向高进入朝廷，于慎行已经死了，王锡爵坚决推辞不出来任职。
English: In November, Ye Xianggao entered the imperial court, Yu Shengxing had already died, and Wang Xizhe resolutely refused to take office.

古文：明年，首辅赓亦卒，次辅廷机以人言久杜门，向高遂独相。
现代文：第二年，首辅朱赓也死了，次辅李廷机因为人言而长期闭门不出，于是叶向高就成为唯一的宰相。
English: In the second year, the first assistant Zhu Xi also died, and the second assistant Li Tingji closed his door for a long time because of rumors, so Ye Xianggao became the only prime minister.

古文：当是时，帝在位日久，倦勤，朝事多废弛，大僚或空署，士大夫推择迁转之命往往不下，上下乖隔甚。
现代文：那个时候，皇帝在位已有很长时间了，懒于上朝，国家大事无人过问，有些重要的官职都空缺着，士大夫的任命往往又不下达，君臣之间很有隔膜。
English: At that time, the emperor had been on the throne for a long time, he was lazy compared to the previous emperor, no one paid attention to national affairs, some important official positions were vacant, the appointment of senior officials was often not issued, and there was a wide gap between the emperor and his ministers.

古文：廷臣部党势渐成，而中官榷税、开矿，大为民害。
现代文：廷臣们逐渐形成各种帮派，而宦官征税、开矿，极大地危害了民众。
English: The courtiers gradually formed various gangs, while the eunuchs levied taxes and opened mines, greatly endangering the people.

古文：帝又宠郑贵妃，福王不肯之国。
现代文：皇帝又宠幸郑贵妃，福王不肯回自己的封国。
English: The emperor also favored Zheng Guifei, and King Fu refused to return to his fiefdom.

古文：向高用宿望居相位，忧国奉公，每事执争效忠荩。
现代文：叶向高因为德高望重而成为宰相，忧国忧民，一心为公，每逢主持政事都很尽忠效力。
English: Ye Xianggao became prime minister because of his high moral standards. He was concerned about the country and the people, devoted to the public, and was very loyal and effective whenever he presided over government affairs.

古文：帝心重向高，体貌优厚，然其言大抵格不用，所救正十二三而已。
现代文：皇帝很看重叶向高，表面上对他态度很好，但他提的意见却不大采用，十条意见只能接受二、三条而已。
English: The emperor held Ye Xianggao in high esteem and treated him well on the surface, but his opinions were not widely accepted. He could only accept two or three of the ten opinions.

古文：东宫辍讲者五年，廷臣屡请不得命。
现代文：东宫太子停止讲学有五年了，廷臣多次请求恢复都没回音。
English: It has been five years since the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court stopped lecturing, and there has been no response to his many requests to resume.

古文：三十七年二月，向高择吉以请，亦不报。
现代文：万历三十七年二月，叶向高选择吉日向皇帝请求，皇帝也不答复他。
English: In February of the 37th year of Wanli, Ye Xianggao asked the emperor to choose a good day, but the emperor did not answer him.

古文：自是岁春秋必恳请，帝皆不纳。
现代文：从此之后每年春、秋两季都要诚恳地提出请求，皇帝都不接受。
English: From then on, every spring and autumn, he had to make a sincere request, but the emperor would not accept it.

古文：贵妃王氏，太子生母也，薨四日不发丧。
现代文：贵妃王氏，是太子的生母，死了四天还不发丧。
English: Guifei Wang, the prince's birth mother, died four days before the funeral.

古文：向高以为言，乃发丧。
现代文：叶向高提意见，这才发丧。
English: It was only after I raised my concerns with Gao that I lost my temper.

古文：而礼官上其仪注，稽五日不行。
现代文：但是礼官呈上礼仪制度后，拖延五天都不举行。
English: However, after the etiquette officer presented the etiquette system, the five-day delay did not take place.

古文：向高复争之，疏乃下。
现代文：叶向高又向皇帝争取，奏疏才转发下来。
English: Ye Xianggao also tried to win the emperor's favor, but the letter was only sent after much delay.

古文：福王府第成，工部以之国请，向高拟旨上。帝不发，改明春。
现代文：福王的府第建成，工部请求皇帝让福王回封国，叶向高拟旨交上去，皇帝不发表圣旨，改在次年春天让福王回封国。
English: When King Fu's residence was completed, the Ministry of Works requested the emperor to allow King Fu to return to the country, and Ye Xianggao submitted his will to the emperor. The emperor did not publish his will, but instead allowed King Fu to return to the country in the spring of the following year.

古文：及期迫，向高请先饬仪卫舟车，帝不纳。
现代文：等到日期临近，叶向高请求先整顿仪卫、舟车，皇上不予采纳。
English: When the date approached, Ye Xianggao requested that the ceremonial guards and floats be put in order first, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：四十一年春，廷臣交章请，复谕改明春。
现代文：万历四十一年春天，廷臣交相上疏请求，皇帝又宣布改在第二年春天。
English: In the spring of the 41st year of the Wanli calendar, courtiers made a request for a delay, and the emperor announced that it would be changed to the spring of the following year.

古文：已，忽传旨，庄田非四万顷不行，廷臣大骇。
现代文：不久，忽然传旨，福王的庄田没有四万顷就不回国，廷臣非常吃惊。
English: Soon, suddenly, a message was sent that King Fukuda would not return to Japan without 40,000 hectares of farmland. The courtiers were very surprised.

古文：向高因进曰： 田四万顷，必不能足，之国且无日，明旨又不信于天下矣。
现代文：叶向高于是进言说： 四万顷庄田，一定满足不了他的愿望，回封国将遥遥无期，皇上的圣旨将要失信于天下了。
English: Ye Xiangguo said, "A 40,000-hectare manor will not satisfy his wishes. The return of the country will be far away, and the emperor's sacred will will be discredited in the world."

古文：且王疏引祖制，而祖制无有是事。
现代文：况且福王的奏疏援引祖宗的制度，而祖宗的制度没有这样的事情。
English: Moreover, King Fook's syllabus invoked the ancestral system, while the ancestral system had no such thing.

古文：曩惟世宗时景王有之。
现代文：先前只有世宗的时候景王出现过这种情况。
English: Previously, only King Sejong had experienced such a situation.

古文：景王久不之国，皇考在裕邸，危疑不安，此何可效也？ 
现代文：景王长期不回封国，皇父在裕邸，危险怀疑不能安定。怎么能够效法他呢？ 
English: King Jing did not return to the country for a long time, the emperor's father was in a wealthy residence, and the danger and suspicion could not be stabilized. How can we imitate him?

古文：帝报曰： 庄田自有成例，且今大分已定，何猜？ 
现代文：皇帝回答说： 赏赐庄田自然有现成的例子，况且现在皇太子与各皇子的关系已经确定，还有什么怀疑的？ 
English: The emperor replied, "Of course, there are ready-made examples of how to reward Shoda. Moreover, now that the relationship between the crown prince and each prince has been determined, what doubts remain?

古文：向高因疏谢，言： 皇考时，名位虽未正，然讲读不辍，情意通。
现代文：叶向高于是上疏道歉，说： 皇父的时候，皇太子的名位虽然还没有确立，但是讲读不停止，皇帝父子之间的情意是相通的。
English: Ye apologized to Takahisa Joso, saying, "When I was the emperor's father, the position of crown prince was not yet established, but I never stopped reading about it. The feelings between the emperor and his son are the same.

古文：今东宫辍讲八年，且不奉天颜久，而福王一日两见，以故不能无疑。惟坚守明春期，而无以庄田藉口，天下疑自释。 
现代文：现在东宫停止讲学已有八年了，况且长时间不能和皇上见面，而福王一天两次和皇上见面，所以不能没有怀疑，只有坚决遵守明年春天返国的日期，不要拿庄田作为借口，人民的怀疑就会得到澄清。 
English: Now it has been eight years since the East Palace stopped lecturing, and moreover, it has not been possible to meet with the emperor for a long time, while King Fu met with the emperor twice a day, so there can be no doubt. Only by resolutely observing the date of returning to China next spring, and not using Shoda as an excuse, will the people's doubts be clarified.

古文：帝报福王无一日两见事。
现代文：皇帝回答福王没有一天两次见面的事实。
English: The emperor replied that the fact that they didn't meet twice a day was because of King Fu.

古文：向高有裁断，善处大事。
现代文：叶向高有裁决判断能力，善于处理大事。
English: Ye Xianggao has the ability to make decisions and is good at handling major events.

古文：锦衣百户王曰乾者，京师奸人也，与孔学、赵宗舜、赵思圣等相讦告。刑官谳未竟，曰乾乃入皇城放炮上疏。
现代文：锦衣百户王曰乾是京师的奸人，跟孔学、赵宗舜、赵思圣等人相互攻击告发，刑官还没有来得及审判定罪，王曰乾就进入皇城放炮上疏。
English: King Qian of the hundred households in brocade was the traitor of the Beijing division, and he and Confucius, Zhao Zongyao, Zhao Shisheng and others attacked and accused each other. The criminal judge had not yet had time to judge and convict, and King Qian entered the imperial city to fire cannons.

古文：刑官大惊，将拟曰乾死罪。
现代文：刑官大为震惊，将要拟定王曰乾的死罪。
English: The magistrate was very shocked and was going to draft a death sentence for Wang Zaiqian.

古文：曰乾遂讦奏郑妃内侍姜严山与学等及妖人王三诏用厌胜术诅咒皇太后、皇太子死，拥立福王。
现代文：王曰乾于是上疏攻击郑贵妃的内侍姜严山跟孔学以及妖邪的王三诏用巫术诅咒皇太后、皇太子死，拥立福王。
English: Wang Caiqian then attacked Zheng Guifei's servants Jiang Yanshan and Confucius, as well as the evil Wang Sanzhao, who used sorcery to curse the death of the empress dowager and the crown prince, and supported King Fu.

古文：帝震怒，绕殿行半日，曰： 此大变事，宰相何无言？ 
现代文：皇帝感到震惊和愤怒，绕着宫殿走了半天，说： 这种大事变，宰相为什么不说话？ 
English: The emperor was shocked and angry. He walked around the palace for half a day, saying, "Such a big change, why didn't the prime minister speak up?

古文：内侍即跪上向高奏。
现代文：内侍立即跪着呈上叶向高的奏疏。
English: The chambermaid immediately kneeled and gave a high-pitched rendition.

古文：奏言： 此事大类往年妖书，然妖书匿名难诘，今两造具在，一讯即情得。
现代文：奏疏说： 这事跟往年的妖书有些类似，然而妖书是匿名的，难以查询，现在原告、被告都在，一经审讯就可以得出实情。
English: Sonoso said, "This case is somewhat similar to the case of the ghost story in previous years. However, the ghost story is anonymous and difficult to investigate. Now that both the plaintiff and the defendant are present, the truth can be found out after the trial.

古文：陛下当静处之，稍张皇，则中外大扰。
现代文：陛下应当以不变应万变，皇上若稍有惊慌，那么朝廷内外就会大乱。
English: His Majesty should respond to change with constancy. If the Emperor panics, there will be chaos inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：至其词牵引贵妃、福王，尤可痛恨。
现代文：至于他的言词牵连到贵妃、福王，实在是叫人痛恨之极。
English: As for his words implicating Guifei and King Fufu, it is truly abhorrent.

古文：臣与九卿所见皆同，敢以闻。 
现代文：我跟九卿的意见是一样的，冒昧地向皇上报告。 
English: I am of the same opinion as the Nine Lords, and have the temerity to report to the Emperor.

古文：帝读竟太息曰： 吾父子兄弟全矣。 
现代文：皇帝读完后叹息说： 我父子兄弟的名誉能够保全了。 
English: After reading it, the emperor sighed and said, "The honor of my father and brother can now be preserved."

古文：明日，向高又言： 曰乾疏不宜发。
现代文：第二天，叶向高又说： 王曰乾的奏疏不应该下发。
English: The next day, Ye Xianggao also said: Wang Zaiqian's hair should not be cut short.

古文：发则上惊圣母，下惊东宫，贵妃、福王皆不安。
现代文：如果发表出去，对上会惊动圣母，对下会惊动太子，贵妃、福王都会感到不安。
English: If it were to be published, the Virgin Mary would be alarmed, the crown prince would be alarmed, and the empress and the king would be worried.

古文：宜留中，而别谕法司治诸奸人罪，且速定明春之国期，以息群喙，则天下帖然无事。 
现代文：应该扣留在禁中，而另外传令司法部门，追究各奸人的罪责，并且赶快确定明年春天福王回国的日期，来平息众人的议论，如果这样做，那么天下就会安然无事了。 
English: He should be detained in custody, and the judicial department should be summoned to investigate the culpability of the traitors, and the date of Fu Wang's return to China next spring should be determined as soon as possible to calm the people's discussion. If this is done, then the world will be safe.

古文：帝尽用其言，太子、福王得相安。
现代文：皇帝完全采纳他的意见，太子、福王得以相安无事。
English: The emperor fully adopted his opinion, and the crown prince and King Fu were able to live in peace.

古文：贵妃终不欲福王之国，言明年冬太后七十寿，王宜留庆贺。
现代文：贵妃最终不想让福王回他的封国，说明年冬天太后七十大寿，福王应留在京城庆贺。
English: In the end, Guifei did not want to let Fu Wang return to his fiefdom, which meant that Fu Wang should stay in Beijing to celebrate the 70th birthday of the empress dowager next winter.

古文：帝令内阁宣谕。
现代文：皇帝命令内阁宣布诏书。
English: The emperor ordered the cabinet to issue an imperial edict.

古文：向高留上谕弗宣，请今冬预行庆寿礼，如期之国。
现代文：叶向高扣留皇上的诏书不宣读，请求今年冬天提前为太后举行寿礼，而让福王如期回封国。
English: Ye Xianggao detained the emperor's edict without reading it, and requested that the birthday ceremony for the empress dowager be held ahead of schedule this winter, and that King Fu should return to the country as scheduled.

古文：帝遣中使至向高私邸，必欲下前谕。
现代文：皇帝派太监到叶向高的私人住处，一定要他宣布诏书。
English: The emperor sent an eunuch to Ye Xianggao's private residence to make sure he announced the edict.

古文：向高言： 外廷喧传陛下欲假贺寿名留福王，约千人伏阙请。
现代文：叶向高说： 外廷纷纷传言皇上想利用贺寿的名义挽留福王，邀请一千多人跪在宫门前请求。
English: Ye Xianggao said: There are rumors in the outer court that the emperor wants to use the name of He Shou to retain Fu Wang, inviting more than a thousand people to kneel in front of the palace gate and make a request.

古文：今果有此谕，人情益疑駴，将信王曰乾妖言，朝端必不静。
现代文：现在宣读这道诏书，人心更加怀疑、吃惊，将要相信王曰乾的妖言，朝廷一定不会安宁。
English: Now that this edict has been read out, the people's hearts are even more suspicious and surprised, and they will believe the king's evil words, and the imperial court will certainly not be at peace.

古文：圣母闻之，亦必不乐。
现代文：圣母听到了，也一定不会快乐的。
English: When Our Lady hears this, she will not be happy.

古文：且潞王圣母爱子，亦居外藩，何忄卷忄卷福王为？ 
现代文：况且潞王也是圣母的爱子，也居在外地，为什么只对福王那么爱恋呢？ 
English: Moreover, the King of Sheba was also the beloved son of the Virgin Mary, and he also lived in a foreign land. Why did he only have such a great love for King Fufu?

古文：因封还手谕。
现代文：于是归还了皇帝那道诏书。
English: So he returned the imperial edict to the emperor.

古文：帝不得已从之，福王乃之国。
现代文：皇帝不得已听从了他，福王这才回到封国。
English: The emperor had no choice but to listen to him, and it was only then that Fu Wang returned to his fiefdom.

古文：向高尝上疏言： 今天下必乱必危之道，盖有数端，而灾伤寇盗物怪人妖不与焉。廊庙空虚，一也。
现代文：叶向高曾上疏说： 当今天下酿成危害动乱的根源，大概有几种，但还不包括天灾人祸、寇匪强盗、物怪人妖。朝廷人才匮乏，是第一点。
English: Ye Xianggao once said: There are probably several causes of harmful turmoil today, but they do not include natural and man-made disasters, bandits and robbers, and monsters. The first point is the lack of talent in the imperial court.

古文：上下否隔，二也。
现代文：君臣之间闭塞隔膜，是第二点。
English: The second point is the closing of the gap between the government and the people.

古文：士大夫好胜喜争，三也。
现代文：官员们好胜喜欢争斗，是第三点。
English: The third point is that officials like to win and fight.

古文：多藏厚积，必有悖出之衅，四也。
现代文：多多的贮藏，大量的积累，必有狂悖的事端出现，是第四点。
English: The fourth point is that if there is a lot of stockpiling, a lot of accumulation, there will be a lot of accidents.

古文：风声气习日趋日下，莫可挽回，五也。
现代文：道德风气一天比一天败坏，没有办法挽救，是第五点。
English: The moral atmosphere is deteriorating day by day, and there is no way to save it, is the fifth point.

古文：非陛下奋然振作，简任老成，布列朝署，取积年废弛政事一举新之，恐宗社之忧，不在敌国外患，而即在庙堂之上也。 
现代文：假若陛下不奋然振作，选用一些老成持重的大臣，充实朝廷官署，将多年来废弛的政事一举革新的话，我担心国家的危亡，不在于外敌的侵略，而就在于朝廷内部啊。 
English: If His Majesty does not cheer up, select some long-serving and important ministers, enrich the Imperial Household Agency, and revolutionize the political affairs that have been neglected for many years, I fear that the country's peril lies not in the aggression of foreign enemies, but within the Imperial Court.

古文：其言绝痛切。
现代文：言词十分痛切。
English: The words are very poignant.

古文：帝知其忠爱，不能行。
现代文：皇帝心知他的忠诚却不能实行它。
English: The emperor knew his loyalty but could not practice it.

古文：初，向高入阁。
现代文：当初，叶向高进入内阁。
English: Initially, Ye Xianggao entered the cabinet.

古文：未几，陈用人理财策，力请补缺官，罢矿税。
现代文：不久，陈奏选用人才、治理财政的计策，极力请求填补空缺的官职，罢免矿税。
English: Soon, Chen Soo used talent selection and financial management strategies to strongly request that vacant posts be filled and that the mining tax be removed.

古文：见帝不能从，乃陈上下乖离之病。
现代文：发现皇帝不能依从他，于是陈奏君臣之间关系紧张的弊病。
English: Finding that the emperor could not obey him, Chen played on the ills of strained relations between monarch and vassal.

古文：两疏乞罢，帝不允。
现代文：两次上疏乞求辞职，皇帝不答应。
English: Twice Shangsu begged to resign, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：向高自独相，即请增阁臣，帝不听。
现代文：叶向高自从成为唯一的宰相，就请求增加阁臣，皇帝不听。
English: Since Ye Xianggao became the only prime minister, he asked for more cabinet ministers, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：及吏部尚书孙丕扬以荐贤不用求去，向高特疏请留，亦不报，遂引疾。
现代文：等到吏部尚书孙丕扬因为举荐贤能不被任用而请求离职，叶向高特地上疏请求留用他，皇帝也不答复，叶向高于是称病不出。
English: When the chief of staff, Shangshu Sun Jianyang, requested to leave his post because the recommended person could not be appointed, Ye Xiang Gao sent a special request to the emperor to retain him, but the emperor did not reply. Ye Xiang Gao said that he was sick and could not work.

古文：屡谕，乃出视事。
现代文：皇帝多次下诏，于是出来管理事务。
English: The emperor repeatedly issued edicts, and then came out to manage affairs.

古文：已，又言： 臣屡求去，辄蒙恩谕留。
现代文：不久，又说： 我多次请求辞职，都承皇上恩典挽留。
English: Soon, he added: "I have asked to resign many times, but have been allowed to stay by the grace of the emperor.

古文：顾臣不在一身去留，而在国家治乱。
现代文：皇帝不应当只关心我一个人的去留，而应当更关心国家的治乱。
English: The emperor should not only be concerned about my going and staying alone, but should be more concerned about the governance of the country.

古文：今天下所在灾伤死亡，畿辅、中州、齐鲁流移载道，加中外空虚，人才俱尽。
现代文：当今国家到处都是灾荒死亡，畿辅、中原、齐、鲁的流民塞满了道路，加上内外空虚，人才都没有任用。
English: Today, the country is full of disaster and death. The roads are clogged with displaced people from Kieffo, Zhongyuan, Qi and Lu. In addition to the emptiness inside and outside the country, there is no appointment of talent.

古文：罪不在他人，臣何可不去。
现代文：罪责不在别人身上，我怎能不辞职。
English: How can I not resign when the blame is not on others.

古文：且陛下用臣，则当行其言。
现代文：况且陛下任用我，就应当实行我的建议。
English: Moreover, since Your Majesty has appointed me, you should carry out my suggestion.

古文：今章奏不发，大僚不补，起废不行，臣微诚不能上达，留何益？
现代文：现在奏章不下发，大官不补任，选举任免制度得不到实行，我微薄的忠诚不能报答皇上，即使留任又有什么益处。
English: At present, the imperial rescript is not issued, high-ranking officials are not replaced, the election appointment and removal system cannot be implemented, my meager loyalty cannot be repaid to the emperor, and even if I remain in office, what good will it do?

古文：诚用臣言，不徒縻臣身，臣溘先朝露，有余幸矣。 帝不省。
现代文：皇上果真能采纳我的意见，而不只是让我徒占虚位，我的生命即使像朝露那样消失得快，我也三生有幸。 皇帝还不觉醒。
English: If the emperor can really accept my opinion, and not just let me occupy an empty seat, even if my life disappears as quickly as the morning dew, I am lucky to have three lives. The emperor has not awakened.

古文：京师大水，四方多奏水旱。
现代文：京师发大水，全国很多地方报告水旱灾害。
English: Large amounts of water have been released in Beijing, and many places across the country have reported floods and droughts.

古文：向高又言： 自阁臣至九卿台省，曹署皆空，南都九卿亦止存其二。
现代文：叶向高又说： 从阁臣到九卿台省，官府衙门都空无其人，南京九卿也只有二人。
English: Ye Xianggao also said: From the cabinet minister to the nine nobles of Taiwan Province, there is no one in the government office, and there are only two nobles in Nanjing.

古文：天下方面大吏，去秋至今，未尝用一人。
现代文：国家的方面大吏，从去年秋天到现在，还不曾任用一个人。
English: From last autumn until now, not a single person has been appointed as the country's top official.

古文：陛下万事不理，以为天下长如此，臣恐祸端一发，不可收也。 
现代文：陛下什么事情都不管，国家长此下去，我担心一旦发生变故，将不可收拾啊。 
English: Your Majesty doesn't care about anything. The country will go on like this, and I'm afraid that if something happens, it will be impossible to clean up.

古文：帝亦不省。
现代文：皇帝还是不觉醒。
English: The emperor did not do any self-reflection.

古文：四十年春，向高以历代帝王享国四十年以上者，自三代迄今止十君，劝帝力行新政。
现代文：万历四十年春天，叶向高以为历代帝王中，在位达四十年以上，从三代以来直到当时只有十人，规劝皇帝大力推行新政。
English: In the spring of the 40th year of Wanli, Ye Xianggao, who was believed to be the longest-reigning emperor in history with more than 40 years on the throne, and there were only ten people from three generations until then, urged the emperor to vigorously implement the New Deal.

古文：因复以用人行政请，亦不报。
现代文：于是又请求皇帝选用人才。皇帝也不答复。
English: He then asked the emperor to choose a talented person. The emperor did not reply.

古文：向高志不行，无月不求去，帝辄优旨勉留。
现代文：叶向高的意图得不到实行，没有一个月不要求辞职的。皇帝每次都降旨勉励挽留他。
English: Ye Xianggao's intention could not be carried out, and there was not a month when he did not ask for his resignation. Every time, the emperor issued an order to try to retain him.

古文：向高复言： 臣进退可置不问，而百僚必不可尽空，台谏必不可尽废，诸方巡按必不可不代。
现代文：叶向高又说： 我的去留可以置之不理，但百官一定不能都让位子空着，台谏一定不能都废除了，各方的巡抚一定不能不让人代替。
English: Ye Xianggao also said: My departure and stay can be ignored, but the hundred officials must not all leave their seats empty, the platform must not all be abolished, and the governors of all parties must not be replaced.

古文：中外离心，辇毂肘腋间，怨声愤盈，祸机不测，而陛下务与臣下隔绝。帷幄不得关其忠，六曹不得举其职，举天下无一可信之人，而自以为神明之妙用，臣恐自古圣帝明王无此法也。 
现代文：朝廷内外离心，宫城之内怨声载道，祸害无法预测，而陛下一定要与臣属隔绝，幕僚不能尽忠效力，六部的官员不能各负其责，整个国家没有一个可以信任的人，而自以为有神机妙算，我恐怕自古以来圣明的帝王没有用这种方法治理国家的。 
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court are at loggerheads, there are rumblings in the palace, calamities cannot be predicted, and His Majesty must be isolated from his subjects, the staff cannot be loyal and effective, the officials of the six departments cannot bear their own responsibilities, the entire country has no one who can be trusted, and they think they have a divine plan. I am afraid that since ancient times, the holy emperors have not used this method to govern the country.

古文：先是，向高疾，阁中无人，章奏就其家拟旨者一月。
现代文：在这之前，叶向高得病了，内阁中没有人，在叶向高家中草拟奏章诏书达一月之久。
English: Prior to this, Ye Xianggao had fallen ill, there was no one in the cabinet, and it had been a month since Ye Xianggao had drafted the imperial rescript in his home.

古文：及是，向高坚卧益久，即家拟旨如前，论者以为非体，向高亦自言其非，坚乞去。
现代文：到了现在，叶向高卧床的时间更长，仍像先前一样在家中拟旨。有人认为这不成体统，叶向高也自以为不妥当，坚决乞求辞职。
English: Now, Ye Xianggao has been in bed for a longer period of time and is still drafting the will at home as before. Some people think this is unseemly, Ye Xianggao also thinks it is inappropriate, and firmly begs for resignation.

古文：帝卒不命他相，遣鸿胪官慰留。
现代文：皇帝最终不任命其他人为宰相，派遣鸿胪官去安慰挽留他。
English: In the end, the emperor did not appoint anyone else as prime minister, but sent a eunuch to comfort and retain him.

古文：至帝万寿节，始起视事。
现代文：到皇帝万寿节时，才开始出来做事。
English: It was not until the Emperor's Birthday that they began to work.

古文：其后，向高主癸丑会试，章奏皆送闱中，尤异事云。
现代文：在这之后，叶向高主持癸丑的会试，奏章都被送到考场上，真是一件奇怪的事情。
English: After this, Ye Xianggao presided over the audition of Gong Yuxuan, and the scores were all sent to the examination hall, which was really a strange thing.

古文：帝考选科道七十余人，命久不下。
现代文：皇帝考核选拔了科道官员七十多人，任命长时间不下达。
English: The emperor's assessment selected more than seventy officials of science and technology, and the appointment was not issued for a long time.

古文：向高恳请数十疏，越二年乃下。
现代文：叶向高几十次上疏恳切请求。过了两年才下达。
English: Ye made dozens of earnest requests to the high school. It took two years before they were granted.

古文：言官既多，攻击纷起。
现代文：言官增多之后，攻击也就纷纷出现。
English: As the number of officials has increased, so have the attacks.

古文：帝心厌之，章悉留中。
现代文：皇上心里讨厌它，奏章全都被扣留而不下发。
English: The emperor hated it in his heart, and all the music was withheld and not released.

古文：向高请尽付所司，定其去留。
现代文：叶向高请求把他们交给有关部门，确定他们的去留。
English: Ye Xianggao requested that they be handed over to the relevant departments to determine their whereabouts.

古文：因言： 大臣者，小臣之纲。
现代文：于是说： 大臣是小臣的纲领。
English: He then said: "A minister is a junior minister's program."

古文：今六卿止赵焕一人，而都御史十年不补，弹压无人，人心何由戢？ 
现代文：当今六卿只有赵焕一人，而都御史十年没有补充新人，没有人来弹劾监督，人心怎么能安定呢？ 
English: Today, there is only one Zhao Huan in the Six Lords, but in the past ten years, there has been no new person added to the Metropolitan Government, and there is no one to impeach and supervise. How can people's hearts be stable?

古文：帝但责言官妄言，而大僚迄不补。
现代文：皇帝只是责备言官胡说，而大官却一直不去补充，叶向高请求增加阁臣，奏章达一百多份。
English: The emperor only reproached the spokesman for speaking nonsense, but the high-ranking official did not replenish. Ye Xianggao requested to increase the number of cabinet ministers, and more than a hundred copies of the report were made.

古文：向高请增置阁臣，章至百余上，帝始用方从哲、吴道南。
现代文：皇帝才任用了方从哲、吴道南。
English: The emperor only appointed Fang Congzhe and Wu Daonan.

古文：向高疏谢，因引退，优诏不允。
现代文：叶向高上疏称谢，于是请求辞职，皇帝下诏不答应。
English: Ye expressed his gratitude to Gao Shangsuo, and then asked for his resignation, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：四十二年二月，皇太后崩。
现代文：万历四十二年二月，皇太后驾崩。
English: In February of the 42nd year of Wanli, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：三月，福王之国。
现代文：三月，福王回封国。
English: In March, Fu Wang returned to the country.

古文：向高乞归益数，章十余上。
现代文：叶向高乞求离职更加频繁，奏章写了十几道。
English: Ye Gao begged Gao to resign more frequently, and wrote more than a dozen songs.

古文：至八月，允其去。
现代文：到了八月，皇帝同意他离职。
English: In August, the emperor agreed to his resignation.

古文：向高以三载考绩，进太子太保、文渊阁大学士；叙延绥战功，加少保兼太子太保，改户部尚书、武英殿；一品三载满，加少傅兼太子太傅，改吏部尚书、建极殿。
现代文：叶向高因为三年考绩，提升为太子太保、文渊阁大学士；记录延绥的战功，加封少保兼太子太保，改任户部尚书，进武英殿；一品官三年期满，加封少傅兼太子太傅，改任吏部尚书，进建极殿。
English: Ye Xianggao was promoted to the rank of prince's bodyguard and scholar of Wenyuan Pavilion for his three-year performance appraisal; for his record of war service, he was promoted to the rank of minor bodyguard and prince's bodyguard, and was assigned to the household of Shangshu, and then to the palace of Wuying; for his three-year performance appraisal, he was promoted to the rank of minor bodyguard and prince's bodyguard, and was assigned to the household of Shangshu, and then to the palace of Ji; for his three-year performance appraisal, he was promoted to the rank of minor bodyguard and prince's bodyguard, and

古文：至是，命加少师兼太子太师，赐白金百，彩币四，表里大红坐蟒一袭，遣行人护归。
现代文：到这时，皇帝下令加封少师兼太子太师，赏赐白金百两，彩帛四件，表里大红坐蟒一件，派遣行人护送他回家。
English: At this time, the emperor ordered the young master and the prince to be rewarded with a reward of two hundred taels of platinum, four pieces of colored enamel, and one piece of red enamel, and sent pedestrians to escort him home.

古文：向高在相位，务调剂群情，辑和异同。
现代文：叶向高当宰相期间，务求调剂各大臣的感情，安抚不同的意见。
English: During Ye Xianggao's tenure as prime minister, he sought to adjust the feelings of various ministers and appease different opinions.

古文：然其时党论已大起，御史郑继芳力攻给事中王元翰，左右两人者相角。
现代文：然而当时党论已十分兴盛，御史郑继芳极力攻击给事中王元翰，拥护他们二人的人分成二派互相争斗。
English: However, at that time, the party theory was already very prosperous, and the official Zheng Jifang vigorously attacked Wang Yuanhan, who was in the middle of the matter. The people who supported the two of them were divided into two factions and fought each other.

古文：向高请尽下诸疏，敕部院评曲直，罪其论议颠倒者一二人，以警其余，帝不报。
现代文：叶向高请求将他们的奏疏下发，下诏令部院评定是非曲直，处罚议论颠倒的一、二人，来警告其他的人，皇帝不理睬。
English: The emperor ignored Ye Xianggao's request to issue a decree ordering the imperial court to evaluate the rights and wrongs, punish one or two people who had been involved in the discussion, and warn others.

古文：诸臣既无所见得失，益树党相攻。
现代文：各臣看到这样做并没有什么害处，就更加拉帮结派相互攻击。
English: Seeing that there was no harm in doing so, the ministers began to form gangs to attack each other.

古文：未几，又争李三才之事，党势乃成。
现代文：不久，又争论李三才事件，于是形成了帮派的势力。
English: Soon, they argued about the Li Sancai incident and formed a gang.

古文：无锡顾宪成家居，讲学东林书院，朝士争慕与游。
现代文：无锡顾宪成在家闲居，在东林书院讲学，朝臣羡慕他，争相跟他交游。
English: Wuxi Gu Xiancheng idled at home and lectured at Donglin College. Courtiers envied him and tried to make friends with him.

古文：三才被攻，宪成贻书向高暨尚书孙丕扬，讼其贤。
现代文：李三才被攻击，顾宪成写信给叶向高和尚书孙丕扬，辩白他的贤能。
English: After Li Sancai was attacked, Gu Xiancheng wrote a letter to Ye Xianggao monk Shusun Xiangyang, defending his virtue.

古文：会辛亥京察，攻三才者刘国缙以他过挂察典，乔应甲亦用年例出外，其党大哗。
现代文：正好辛亥年京官考察，攻击李三才的刘国缙因为其他过错登记在考核的名册上，乔应甲也因为年例被派往外地，他们的同党大哗。
English: Just as Beijing officials inspected in Xinhai, Liu Guozhen, who attacked Li Sancai, was registered on the assessment roster because of other faults, Qiao Yingjia was also sent to other places because of the annual event, and their fellow party members were in an uproar.

古文：向高以大体持之，察典得无挠，而两党之争遂不可解。
现代文：叶向高从大局出发，主持这件事，考核官吏的大典得以没有扰乱。而两个派系的争斗由此愈演愈烈。
English: Ye Xianggao started from the overall situation and presided over this matter, and the examination of officials was not disturbed. And the struggle between the two factions intensified.

古文：及后，齐、楚、浙党人攻东林殆尽。
现代文：到后来，齐、楚、浙三大派系不遗余力地攻击东林党。
English: Later, the three major factions of Qi, Chu and Zhejiang spared no effort to attack the Donglin Party.

古文：浸寻至天启时，王绍徽等撰所谓《东林点将录》，令魏忠贤按氏名逐朝士。
现代文：逐渐到了天启年间，王绍徽等撰写所谓《东林点将录》，让魏忠贤按姓名驱逐朝臣。
English: Gradually, in the year of the apocalypse, Wang Shaohui and others wrote the so-called "East Forest Point Record" and let Wei Zhongxian expel courtiers by name.

古文：以向高尝右东林，指目为党魁云。
现代文：因为叶向高曾保护东林党人，被点名为东林党党魁。
English: Because Ye Xianggao had protected the Donglin Party members, he was named the leader of the Donglin Party.

古文：向高归六年，光宗立，特诏召还。
现代文：叶向高离职六年，光宗即位，特别下诏召回他。
English: Six years after Ye Xianggao left office, Guangzong ascended to the throne, and he was recalled with a special edict.

古文：未几，熹宗立，复赐敕趣之。
现代文：不久，熹宗即位，又下诏催促他回京。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and issued an edict urging him to return to Beijing.

古文：屡辞，不得命。
现代文：叶向高多次推辞，都没有获准。
English: Ye Xianggao repeatedly declined, but was not allowed to perform.

古文：天启元年十月还朝，复为首辅。
现代文：天启元年十月回到朝廷，再次成为首辅。
English: Emperor Tenchi returned to the imperial court in October of the first year of the Heian period, and once again became the first assistant.

古文：言： 臣事皇祖八年，章奏必发臣拟。
现代文：说： 我服务皇帝祖父八年，奏章都由我草拟。
English: He said, "I served my grandfather the emperor for eight years, and I wrote all the musical scores.

古文：即上意所欲行，亦遣中使传谕。
现代文：即使是皇上想实行它，也派遣中使宣布。
English: Even if the emperor wanted to implement it, he would send an envoy to announce it.

古文：事有不可，臣力争，皇祖多曲听，不欲中出一旨。
现代文：如有不同意的事情，我都极力争取，皇上的祖父也多半能听从，不想让宫中拟旨。
English: If there is something I don't agree with, I do my best to fight for it, and the emperor's grandfather is mostly able to obey, not wanting the palace to draft a will.

古文：陛下虚怀恭己，信任辅臣，然间有宣传滋疑议。
现代文：陛下虚怀若谷，谦逊有礼，信任首辅，然而，偶尔也有因流传而滋生的疑义。
English: His Majesty is modest, humble and courteous, he trusts his superiors and subordinates, however, occasionally there are doubts that arise due to rumours.

古文：宜慎重纶音，凡事令臣等拟上。 
现代文：应当慎重地对待诏书，所有的事情都命令我等草拟上报。 
English: The edict should be treated with caution. We are ordered to wait for the drafting of the report on all matters.

古文：帝优旨报闻。
现代文：皇帝高兴地答应了。
English: Yeongjong replied in an appreciative tone, "I understand.

古文：旋纳向高请，发帑金二百万，为东西用兵之需。
现代文：不久皇帝采纳叶向高的请求，发放国库银二百万两，作为东西方战争的急需。
English: Soon, the emperor accepted Ye Xianggao's request and issued two million taels of treasury silver as an urgent need for the East-West war.

古文：熹宗初政，群贤满朝，天下欣欣望治。
现代文：熹宗执政之初，满朝廷臣都是贤能英才，全国人民都高兴地希望国家得到治理。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Taizong's reign, all the courtiers of the imperial court were capable and talented, and the people of the whole country were happy to hope that the country would be governed.

古文：然帝本冲年，不能辨忠佞。
现代文：然而皇帝本来就很年轻，不能够辨别忠臣和奸臣。
English: However, the emperor was too young to be able to distinguish between loyal and treacherous vassals.

古文：魏忠贤、客氏渐窃威福，构杀太监王安，以次逐吏部尚书周嘉谟及言官倪思辉等。
现代文：魏忠贤、客氏逐渐窃取了国家大权，阴谋杀害太监王安，逐渐赶走了吏部尚书周嘉谟和言官倪思辉等人。
English: Wei Zhongxian and the Hakka gradually stole the power of the state, plotted to kill the eunuch Wang An, and gradually drove away the officials Shangshu Zhou Jia Mu and the speaker Ni Sihui.

古文：大学士刘一燝亦力求去。
现代文：大学士刘一燝也极力请求离职。
English: Liu Yijun, a university scholar, also strongly requested to resign.

古文：向高言： 客氏出复入，而一燝顾命大臣不得比保姆，致使人揣摩于奥穾不可知之地，其渐当防。 
现代文：叶向高说： 客氏出宫又进宫，而顾命大臣刘一燝还赶不上一个保姆，致使大臣们在深不可测之地无法揣摩，这样的倾向应当防止。 
English: Ye Xianggao said: The Prince of Hakka has been in and out of the palace, and the Minister of State for the People's Republic of China, Liu Yijun, has not been able to keep up with a nanny, so that the ministers cannot fathom the unfathomable, and such a tendency should be prevented.

古文：忠贤见向高疏刺己，恨甚。
现代文：魏忠贤看到叶向高的奏疏指责自己，十分怀恨叶向高。
English: When Wei Zhongxian saw Ye Xianggao's poor performance, he blamed himself and held a grudge against Ye Xianggao.

古文：既而刑部尚书王纪削籍，礼部尚书孙慎行、都御史邹元标先后被攻致仕去。
现代文：不久刑部尚书王纪被剥夺官籍，礼部尚书孙慎行、都御史邹元标先后被攻击离职。
English: Soon after, the head of the criminal department, Shangshu Wang Ji, was stripped of his official registration, and the head of the ceremonial department, Shangshu Sun Shengxing, and the governor of the capital, Shi Yuanbiao, were attacked and left their posts.

古文：向高争不得，因请与元标同罢。
现代文：叶向高争论没有结果，于是请求跟邹元标一起罢免。
English: Ye Xianggao's argument did not yield any results, so the request was dismissed together with Xuan Yuanbiao.

古文：帝不听，而忠贤益恨向高。
现代文：皇帝不接受，魏忠贤更加怀恨叶向高了。
English: The emperor did not accept it, and Wei Zhongxian became even more resentful of Ye Xianggao.

古文：向高为人光明忠厚，有德量，好扶植善类。
现代文：叶向高为人光明磊落，品性端正有抱负，喜欢扶持培养好人。
English: Ye Xianggao is a bright and honest person. He is honest and ambitious, and likes to support and train good people.

古文：再入相，事冲主，不能謇直如神宗时，然犹数有匡救。
现代文：第二次当宰相，事奉年幼的皇上，不能像神宗时忠诚直谏，但还是有多次纠正。
English: His second time as prime minister, serving the young emperor, he could not be as loyal and straightforward as he had been when he was shinzong, but he was still corrected many times.

古文：给事中章允儒请减上供袍服。
现代文：给事中章允儒请求减少上供的袍服。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Yunru asked for a reduction in the number of robes offered.

古文：奄人激帝怒，命廷杖。
现代文：太监激皇帝发怒，命令廷杖章允儒。
English: The eunuch angered the emperor and ordered the imperial scepter to be given to Zhang Yunru.

古文：向高论救者再，乃夺俸一年。
现代文：叶向高两次上疏营救，于是剥夺章允儒俸禄一年。
English: Ye Xianggao was rescued twice from the upper school, so Zhang Yunru was deprived of his salary for one year.

古文：御史帅众指斥宫禁，奄人请帝出之外，以向高救免。
现代文：御史率众指责宫廷事务，太监请求皇帝把他派往外地，因为叶向高的营救而得以幸免。
English: The imperial historian led the crowd in denouncing the affairs of the court. The eunuch asked the emperor to send him abroad, but he was spared because of Ye Xianggao's rescue.

古文：给事中傅櫆救王纪，将贬谪，亦以向高言仅夺俸。
现代文：给事中傅魁营救王纪，皇上将要把他贬职流放，也因为叶向高替他说话，只是剥夺了他的俸禄。
English: In the matter of Fu Quei rescuing Wang Ji, the emperor was going to demote him to exile, and because Ye Xiang Gao spoke for him, he only deprived him of his salary.

古文：纪既罢去，御史吴甡、王祚昌荐之，部议以故官召。
现代文：王纪被罢免后，御史吴牲、王祚昌举荐他，部议用原官职召回他。
English: After Wang Ji was removed from office, Gu Shi Wushu and Wang Qichang recommended him, and the ministerial meeting recalled him to his original post.

古文：忠贤怒，将重谴文选郎，向高亦救免。
现代文：魏忠贤很不高兴，准备重罚文选郎，叶向高也营救，使他得以幸免。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very unhappy and prepared to severely punish Wen Xuan Lang. Ye Xianggao also came to his rescue, and he was spared.

古文：给事中陈良训疏讥权奄，忠贤摘其疏中 国运将终 语，命下诏狱，穷治主使。
现代文：给事中陈良训上疏指责有权势的太监，魏忠贤摘取奏疏中 国家命运将要终结 的话，命令将他下狱，穷追教唆之人。
English: In the case of Chen Liangxun, he accused the powerful eunuchs, and Wei Zhongxian extracted the words "the country's fate will end" from the playbook, ordered him to be jailed, and pursued the instigators.

古文：向高以去就争，乃夺俸而止。
现代文：叶向高以辞职相争，于是只剥夺陈良训的俸禄而已。
English: Ye Xianggao disputed the resignation, so he only deprived Chen Liangxun of his salary.

古文：熊廷弼、王化贞论死，言官劝帝速决。
现代文：熊廷弼、王化贞获罪当死。言官劝皇帝尽快处决他们。
English: Xiong Tingyao and Wang Huazhen were sentenced to death. The magistrate advised the emperor to execute them as soon as possible.

古文：向高请俟法司覆奏，帝从之。
现代文：叶向高请求等司法部门复核之后再决定。
English: Ye Xianggao requested the judicial department to review the case before making a decision.

古文：有请括天下布政司、府、州、县库藏尽输京师者，向高言： 郡邑藏已竭，藩库稍余。
现代文：皇帝同意了。有人请求将全国各省、府、州、县的仓库储蓄全都搜刮运到京师，叶向高说： 省城的库藏都已穷尽了，封王的仓库里还稍有富余。
English: The emperor agreed. Someone requested that all the warehouse savings of all the provinces, prefectures, states and counties in the country be scavenged and transported to Beijing. Ye Xianggao said: The treasuries of the provinces and cities have been exhausted, and there is still a little surplus in the warehouse of the emperor.

古文：倘尽括之，猝有如山东白莲教之乱，何以应之？ 
现代文：倘若全都搜刮尽了，突然出现像山东白莲教叛乱一类的事变，拿什么去对付呢？ 
English: If all the resources are exhausted, and an incident such as the White Lotus Rebellion in Shandong suddenly occurs, what should we do?

古文：帝皆不纳。
现代文：皇帝都不接受。
English: The emperor did not accept it.

古文：忠贤既默恨向高，而其时朝士与忠贤抗者率倚向高。忠贤乃时毛举细故，责向高以困之。
现代文：魏忠贤既然已经怀恨叶向高，而当时朝臣跟魏忠贤对抗的都依靠叶向高，魏忠贤于是总是故意拿一些小事，责备叶向高，使他为难。
English: Since Wei Zhongxian already held a grudge against Ye Xianggao, and at that time the courtiers who opposed Wei Zhongxian all relied on Ye Xianggao, Wei Zhongxian always deliberately took some small things and blamed Ye Xianggao, making him difficult.

古文：向高数求去。
现代文：叶向高多次要求辞职。
English: Ye Xianggao repeatedly demanded his resignation.

古文：四年四月，给事中傅櫆劾左光斗、魏大中交通汪文言，招权纳贿，命下文言诏狱。
现代文：天启四年四月，给事中傅魁弹劾左光斗、魏大中勾结汪文言，利用职权接受贿赂，皇帝下诏命令将汪文言下狱。
English: In April of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, Fu Kui impeached Zuo Guangdou, and Wei Dazhong colluded with Wang Wenyan, taking advantage of his powers to accept bribes. The emperor ordered Wang Wenyan to be jailed.

古文：向高言： 文言内阁办事，实臣具题。
现代文：叶向高说： 汪文言在内阁办事，实际是我提名的。
English: Ye Xianggao said, "Wang Wenyin is in the cabinet, but I actually nominated him.

古文：光斗等交文言事暧昧，臣用文言显然。
现代文：左光斗等人勾结汪文言的事情不明不白，我任用汪文言却是清楚的。
English: The fact that Zuo Guangdou and others colluded with Wang Wenyan is unclear, but my appointment of Wang Wenyan is clear.

古文：乞陛下止罪臣，而稍宽其他，以消缙绅之祸。 
现代文：乞求陛下只处罚我一人，而宽免其他人，来消除官员们的灾祸。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to punish only me and spare the others, so as to eliminate the scourge of officials.

古文：因力求速罢。
现代文：于是叶向高极力要求尽快罢免自己。
English: As a result, Ye Xianggao strongly demanded that the company remove him as soon as possible.

古文：当是时，忠贤欲大逞，惮众正盈朝，伺隙动。
现代文：在当时，魏忠贤想独揽大权，害怕那些在朝的正人君子，等候时机下手。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian wanted to monopolize power, afraid of those upright gentlemen in the government, waiting for the opportunity to attack.

古文：得櫆疏喜甚，欲藉是罗织东林，终惮向高旧臣，并光斗等不罪，止罪文言。
现代文：得到傅魁的奏疏十分高兴，想借此罗织东林党人的罪名，最终忌惮叶向高等旧臣，连同左光斗等人都没有定罪，只处罚汪文言一人。
English: He was very happy to get Fu Kui's report, and wanted to use this to weave the Donglin Party members' crimes. In the end, he did not convict the high-ranking former minister, together with Zuo Guangdou, and only punished Wang Wenyan.

古文：然东林祸自此起。
现代文：然而东林党的灾难从此开始了。
English: However, the disaster of the Donglin Party began from here.

古文：至六月，杨涟上疏劾忠贤二十四大罪。
现代文：到了六月，杨涟上疏弹劾魏忠贤的二十四大罪状。
English: In June, Yang Xuanxiang impeached Wei Zhongxian on 24 counts.

古文：向高谓事且决裂，深以为非。
现代文：叶向高认为事情到了决裂的份上，是极不应该的。
English: Ye Xianggao thinks that things have reached a breaking point, which is extremely inappropriate.

古文：廷臣相继抗章至数十上，或劝向高下其事，可决胜也。
现代文：廷臣先后上疏数十次，有人劝叶向高颁布这事，可以击败魏忠贤。
English: Tingchen successively went to the dungeon dozens of times, and someone advised Ye Xianggao to announce this, so that he could defeat Wei Zhongxian.

古文：向高念忠贤未易除，阁臣从中挽回，犹冀无大祸。
现代文：叶向高考虑到魏忠贤并不能轻易除掉，阁臣从中斡旋，还有希望不至酿成大祸。
English: Ye Xianggao took into account that Wei Zhongxian could not be easily eliminated, the cabinet minister mediated between them, and there was hope that it would not lead to a catastrophe.

古文：乃具奏称忠贤勤劳。朝廷宠待厚，盛满难居，宜解事权，听归私第，保全终始。
现代文：于是上疏称颂魏忠贤勤劳，朝廷太宠爱他，盛名之下难免招致非议，应该解除他的权力，让他回老家，保全他的始终。
English: As a result, Shangxu praised Wei Zhongxian for his hard work, saying that the imperial court was too fond of him, and his reputation would inevitably attract criticism. He should be relieved of his power, let him return to his hometown, and protect him forever.

古文：忠贤不悦，矫帝旨叙己功勤，累百余言。
现代文：魏忠贤不高兴，假传圣旨为自己表功，累计一百多字。
English: Wei Zhongxian was not happy. He falsified the sacred edict to show his merit, accumulating more than a hundred words.

古文：向高骇曰： 此非奄人所能，必有代为草者。 
现代文：叶向高吃惊地说： 这不是太监所能够干的，一定是有人代替他起草的。 
English: Surprised, Ye Xianggao said, "This is not something the eunuch institute can do, someone must have drafted it for him."

古文：探之，则徐大化也。
现代文：侦察后得知，此人就是徐大化。
English: After reconnaissance, it was learned that this person was Xu Dahua.

古文：忠贤虽愤，犹以外廷势盛，未敢加害。
现代文：魏忠贤虽然气愤，但因为外廷势力还很强大，并不敢加害叶向高。
English: Although Wei Zhongxian was angry, he did not dare to harm Ye Xianggao because the influence of the Outer Court was still strong.

古文：其党有导以兴大狱者，忠贤意遂决。
现代文：他的党徒中有人劝导他制造大案，魏忠贤这才下定决心。
English: Wei Zhongxian made up his mind only after some of his party members urged him to fabricate a big case.

古文：于是工部郎中万燝以劾忠贤廷杖，向高力救，不从，死杖下。
现代文：在这之后，工部郎中万燝因弹劾魏忠贤而遭受廷杖刑罚，叶向高极力营救，无效，万燝死于棍下。
English: After this, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Works, Wan Xuan, was punished with a cane for impeaching Wei Zhongxian. Ye Xianggao tried his best to save him, but to no avail. Wan Xuan died under the cane.

古文：无何，御史林汝翥亦以忤奄命廷杖。
现代文：不久，御史林汝翥也因为冒犯太监而遭廷杖。
English: Before long, Mishilin Rong was also caned for offending the eunuch.

古文：汝翥惧，投遵化巡抚所。
现代文：林汝翥很害怕，投奔遵化巡抚驻所。
English: Lin Ruxuan was very scared and rushed to the Zunhua governor's residence.

古文：或言汝翥向高甥也，群奄围其邸大噪。
现代文：有人说林汝翥是叶向高的外甥，众太监包围叶向高的住宅大声喧闹。
English: Some people said that Lin Ruxuan was Ye Xianggao's nephew. The eunuchs surrounded Ye Xianggao's house and made a lot of noise.

古文：向高以时事不可为，乞归已二十余疏，至是请益力。
现代文：叶向高认为自己对国家的时事已无能为力，乞求离职已达二十多次，到这时请求离职更加坚决。
English: Ye Xianggao thought that he was no longer able to do anything about the current affairs of the country. He had begged for resignation more than 20 times. At this time, his request for resignation was more resolute.

古文：乃命加太傅，遣行人护归，所给赐视彝典有加。
现代文：皇帝于是命令加封叶向高为太傅，派行人护送他回家，赏赐给他的财物比按常法赐予的还要多。
English: The emperor then ordered to seal Ye Xianggao as a taifu, send pedestrians to escort him home, and reward him with more possessions than those given according to the usual law.

古文：寻听辞太傅，有司月给米五石，舆夫八。
现代文：不久皇上听任他辞去太傅，有关单位每月给他五石米，八个轿夫。
English: Not long after, the emperor allowed him to resign from the position of taifu, and the relevant units gave him five koku of rice and eight sedan chairs every month.

古文：向高既罢去，韩爌、朱国祯相继为首辅，未久皆罢。
现代文：叶向高被罢免后，韩爌、朱国祯相继成为首辅，没多久都被罢免了。
English: After Ye Xianggao was dismissed, Han Zheng and Zhu Guojun successively became the first assistant, and were soon dismissed.

古文：居政府者皆小人，清流无所依倚。
现代文：占据要职的都是些小人，清高的士大夫们无所倚靠。
English: Those who occupy important positions are all villains, and high-ranking officials have nothing to rely on.

古文：忠贤首诬杀涟，光斗等次第戮辱，贬削朝士之异己者，善类为一空云。
现代文：魏忠贤首先诬陷杀死了杨涟，然后是左光斗等人一个一个地被杀害、侮辱，贬除朝廷中的异己分子，好人都被赶走了。
English: Wei Zhongxian first framed and killed Yang Hui, then Zuo Guangdou and others were killed and insulted one by one, disparaging the dissidents in the imperial court, and the good people were driven away.

古文：熹宗崩，向高亦以是月卒，年六十有九。
现代文：熹宗去世，叶向高也在当月去世，终年六十九岁。
English: Ye Xianggao also died that month, at the age of sixty-nine.

古文：崇祯初，赠太师，谥文忠。
现代文：崇祯初年，追赠为太师，谥号文忠。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Wenzhong.

古文：刘一燝，字季晦，南昌人。
现代文：刘一燝，字季晦，江西南昌人。
English: Liu Yixuan, the character Ji Yue, is from Changren, Southwest Jiangsu Province.

古文：父曰材，嘉靖中进士，陕西左布政使。
现代文：父亲名字为刘材，嘉靖年间中进士，为陕西左布政使。
English: His father's name was Liu Zai, a junior high school student during the Jiajing era, and a political envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：万历十六年，一燝与兄一焜、一煜并举于乡。
现代文：万历十六年，刘一燝与哥哥一火昆、一煜同时中了乡试。
English: In the 16th year of Wanli, Liu Yijun and his brother Yigong and Yao Yijun passed the township examination at the same time.

古文：越七年，又与一煜并举进士。改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：七年后，刘一燝与一煜一同中了进士，刘一燝改为庶吉士，授职检讨。
English: Seven years later, Liu Yijie was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar" together with Liu Yijie. Liu Yijie was changed to "Junior Scholar" and the awarding of the post was reviewed.

古文：一焜为考功郎，掌京察。
现代文：刘一火昆为考功郎，掌管京察。
English: Liu Yikhu Kun is a meritorious examiner and is in charge of the Beijing Examination.

古文：大学士沈一贯欲庇其私人钱梦皋、钟兆斗等，属一燝为请。
现代文：大学士沈一贯庇护自己人钱梦皋、钟兆斗等，嘱咐刘一燝从中救请。
English: Shen, a university scholar, has always protected his people, such as Qianmengtuo and Zhongzhaodu, and asked Liu Yijun to help them.

古文：一燝谢不可，梦皋等竟以中旨留，由是忤一贯意。
现代文：刘一燝辞谢了，钱梦皋等竟然被上面留下，由此得罪了沈一贯。
English: Liu Yikang resigned, Qian Mengyao and others were left behind, which offended Shen Gangxuan.

古文：寻历祭酒，詹事，掌翰林院事。
现代文：不久，他担任过祭酒、詹事，掌管翰林院。
English: Soon, he served as a sacrificial wine, Zhanji, in charge of the Hanlin Institute.

古文：四十五年春，京察，党人用事，谋逐孙承宗、缪昌期等，一燝力保持得免。
现代文：四十五年京官考察，东林党人执掌朝政，想把孙承宗、缪昌期赶走。刘一燝全力保护使两人幸免。
English: In the 45th year of Beijing officials' inspection, the Donglin Party members took control of the imperial government and wanted to drive away Sun Chengzong and Miao Changdi. Liu Yijun did his best to protect the two and spared them.

古文：故事，掌院无满岁不迁者，一景居四年，始迁礼部右侍郎，教习庶吉士。
现代文：按过去的惯例，掌管翰林院的没有满了一年而不升职的，刘一燝当了四年才升任礼部右侍郎，教习庶吉士。
English: According to past practice, if the person in charge of the Hanlin Academy did not complete one year without promotion, Liu Yijie was promoted to the right hand man of the ceremony department and the assistant teacher of the ceremony department after four years.

古文：光宗即位，擢礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参预机务，偕何宗彦、韩爌并命。
现代文：光宗即位，提为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参预要事，与何宗彦、韩爌等一同任命。
English: When Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University. He participated in important events and was appointed together with Emperor He and Emperor Han.

古文：时内阁止方从哲一人。
现代文：当时内阁只有方从哲一人。
English: At that time, only Fang Congzhe was in the cabinet.

古文：万历末年，神宗欲用史继偕、沈纮。
现代文：万历末年，神宗欲重用史继偕、沈翭。
English: In the last years of the Wanli era, Shenzong wanted to re-use Shi Jixuan and Shen Jixuan.

古文：两人方在籍，帝命召之。
现代文：两人正在乡籍休息，皇上命令召见他们。
English: The two were resting at their homestead when the emperor ordered that they be summoned.

古文：未及至，帝复命宗彦、一燝、爌。
现代文：还没有到，皇上又任命何宗彦、刘一燝、韩爌。
English: Before they arrived, the emperor also appointed He Zongyan, Liu Yixuan, and Han Xuan.

古文：明日，复命朱国祚及旧辅叶向高。
现代文：第二天又任命朱国祚及旧辅臣叶向高。
English: The next day, Zhu Guozhen and his former assistant Ye Xianggao were also appointed.

古文：而宗彦、国祚、向高亦皆在籍，惟一燝、爌入直。
现代文：宗彦、国祚、向高也都在乡下休息，唯有刘一燝、韩爌入朝皇帝。
English: Munehiko, Kunimoto, and Kogaoka also rested in the countryside, but only Liu Ikko and Han Kunimoto became emperors.

古文：甫拜命，帝已得疾，一燝偕诸臣召见乾清宫。
现代文：刚刚接到命令，皇上就生了病，刘一燝带领各位大臣在乾清宫接受召见。
English: Just after receiving the order, the emperor fell ill, and Liu Yibing led the ministers to be summoned to Qianqing Palace.

古文：明日九月朔，帝崩。
现代文：第二年九月朔，皇上去世。
English: In September of the following year, the Emperor died.

古文：诸臣入临毕，一燝诘群奄： 皇长子当柩前即位，今不在，何也？ 
现代文：诸大臣看过皇上后，刘一燝诘问宦官： 皇长子应在灵柩前即位，今天却没有看见他，为什么？ 
English: After the ministers had seen the emperor, Liu Yijun asked the eunuchs: The eldest son of the emperor should be enthroned in front of the coffin, but today they did not see him, why?

古文：群奄东西走，不对。东宫伴读王安前曰： 为李选侍所匿耳。 
现代文：众宦官支支吾吾。东宫伴读王安走上前说： 被李选侍藏起来了。 
English: The eunuchs looked at each other. Wang An, an attendant of the East Palace, stepped forward and said, "It was hidden by Li Xuan.

古文：一燝大声言： 谁敢匿新天子者？ 
现代文：刘一燝大声说： 谁敢把新天子藏起来？ 
English: Liu Yixuan said loudly: Who dares to hide the new heavenly son?

古文：安曰： 徐之，公等慎勿退。 
现代文：王安说： 慢点，诸位大人不要退下。 
English: Wang An said, "Slow down, all of you adults, don't retreat.

古文：遂趋入白选侍。
现代文：于是，王安跑进去告诉李选侍。
English: As a result, Wang An ran in and told Li to choose a groom.

古文：选侍颔之，复中悔，挽皇长子裾。
现代文：李选侍同意了，中途又反悔，拉着皇长子的衣襟。
English: Li Xuanwu agreed, but half-way backtracked and tugged at the eldest son's collar.

古文：安直前拥抱，疾趋出。
现代文：王安急忙上前拥抱皇长子快步出来。
English: Wang An hurried forward to embrace the eldest son and quickly stepped out.

古文：一燝见之，急趋前呼万岁，捧皇长子左手，英国公张惟贤捧右手，掖升辇。
现代文：刘一燝看到了，急忙前趋口呼万岁，捧着皇长子的左手，英国公张惟贤捧着右手，扶持他坐上辇车。
English: Liu Yixuan saw this and hurried forward, shouting "long live!" and holding the left hand of the emperor's eldest son, and the right hand of the British official Zhang Weixian, to help him get on the carriage.

古文：及门，宫中厉声呼： 哥儿却还！ 
现代文：到了门边，宫中传来喊声： 哥儿回来！ 
English: When they reached the door, a shout came from the palace: "Brother, come back!"

古文：使使追蹑者三辈。
现代文：李选侍叫人追赶上来。
English: Li Xuan called for someone to catch up.

古文：一燝傍辇疾行，翼升文华殿，先即东宫位，群臣叩头呼万岁。
现代文：刘一燝在车旁快步行车，行至文华殿，先即皇太子位，群臣叩头高呼万岁。
English: Liu Yixuan quickly walked beside the car and went to the Wenhua Palace. First, he was crowned crown prince, and the courtiers bowed their heads and shouted "long live."

古文：事稍定，选侍犹趋还乾清。
现代文：事情稍稍安定，李选侍还是回到乾清宫。
English: When things were a little more stable, Li Xingzhu still returned to the Qianqing Palace.

古文：时选侍居乾清。
现代文：当时李选侍居于乾清宫。
English: At that time, Li Xuan was an attendant at the Qianqing Palace.

古文：一燝曰： 乾清不可居，殿下宜暂居慈庆。 
现代文：刘一燝说： 乾清宫不能住，殿下应当暂时居住到慈庆宫。 
English: Liu Yixuan said, "You can't live in the Qianqing Palace. Your highness should temporarily live in the Cixing Palace."

古文：皇长子心惮选侍，然之。
现代文：皇长子害怕李选侍，同意了。
English: The eldest son of the emperor was afraid of Li's choice and agreed.

古文：一燝语安曰： 主上冲年，无母后。
现代文：刘一燝又对王安说： 皇上年幼，没有母亲。
English: Liu Yixuan also said to Wang An: The emperor is young and has no mother.

古文：外庭有事，吾受过；宫中起居，公等不得辞责。 
现代文：外廷有事，我将担当；宫中的饮食起居，你不得推卸责任。 
English: If there's a problem outside the court, I'll take care of it; if you're in charge of the food and drink in the palace, you can't shirk your responsibility.

古文：明日，周嘉谟及左光斗疏请移宫。
现代文：第二天，周嘉谟及左光斗上疏请求移宫。
English: The next day, Zhou Jia Mu and Zuo Guangdou Shang So requested to move the palace.

古文：时首辅从哲徘徊其间，已，又欲缓移宫。
现代文：当时首辅方从哲徘徊不能决定，不久，又想暂缓移宫。
English: At that time, the chief aide was wandering from Zhe unable to decide, and soon wanted to postpone moving the palace.

古文：一燝曰： 本朝故事，仁圣，嫡母也，移慈庆；慈圣，生母也，移慈宁。
现代文：刘一燝说： 本朝的规矩，仁圣太后是嫡母，移慈庆宫，慈圣，是生母，移慈宁宫。
English: Liu Yixuan said: According to the rules of this dynasty, the Empress Dowager Ren Sheng is the legitimate mother and should be moved to Cixing Palace, while the Holy Mother is the biological mother and should be moved to Cining Palace.

古文：今何日，可姑缓耶？ 
现代文：今天是什么日子，可以暂缓？ 
English: What day is it today, can we hold off?

古文：初五日，偕同官请即日降旨，踔立宫门以俟。
现代文：初五日刘一燝率领同僚请求即日降圣旨，并在宫门等候。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu Yibin led his colleagues to request that the imperial edict be lowered that day, and waited at the palace gate.

古文：选侍不得已，移哕鸾宫，天子复还乾清，事始大定。
现代文：李选侍不得已，移到仁寿殿。天子又回到乾清宫，事情才定。
English: As a last resort, Li Zhanmei moved to Renshou Palace. Tianzi returned to the Qianqing Palace, and the matter was settled.

古文：帝既践阼，从哲被劾在告，一燝遂当国，与爌相得甚欢。
现代文：皇上既已登基，方从哲正被弹劾，刘一燝遂执掌朝政，与韩爌相处甚好。
English: The emperor had already ascended to the throne, Fang Congzhezheng was impeached, Liu Yijun then took charge of the imperial government, and got along very well with Han Zheng.

古文：念内廷惟王安力卫新天子，乃引与共事。
现代文：又念内廷惟王安全力保卫新天子，于是刘一燝大力重用他。
English: He also thought that the emperor of the Inner Court would protect the new emperor, so Liu Yixuan made great efforts to use him.

古文：安亦倾心向之。
现代文：王安倾心帮助他。
English: Wang An was eager to help him.

古文：所奏请，无不从。
现代文：刘一燝所奏请的，王安没有不听从的。
English: Wang An did not disobey Liu Yixuan's request.

古文：发内帑，抑近侍，搜遗逸，旧德宿齿布满九列，中外欣欣望治焉。
现代文：发内库银币，抑制小人，搜罗遗逸人才，有德行、名望的人得到任用，朝廷内外感到高兴，希望国家能得到很好治理。
English: With the issuance of treasury silver coins, the suppression of villains, the collection of lost talents, and the appointment of people with virtue and fame, both inside and outside the court are happy, and hope that the country can be well governed.

古文：明年，天启改元，沈阳失。
现代文：第二年，改年号为天启，沈阳失陷。
English: In the second year, the name of the year was changed to Tianqi, and Shenyang fell.

古文：廷臣多请复用熊廷弼。
现代文：很多廷臣都请求再次起用熊廷弼。
English: Many courtiers have requested that Xiong Tingyu be reinstated.

古文：一燝亦言： 廷弼守辽一载，残疆宴然，不知何故翦除。
现代文：刘一燝也说： 熊廷弼守辽东一年，已经残破的边疆安然无事，不知道为什么要解除他的职务。
English: Liu Yixuan also said: Xiong Tingyu has been in charge of Liaodong for one year, and the borderlands that have been destroyed are safe and sound. I don't know why he was relieved of his duties.

古文：及下廷议，又皆畏惧，不敢异同。
现代文：等到交给朝廷讨论，廷臣们又都很畏惧，不敢表示不同的意见。
English: When the matter was brought to the Imperial Court for discussion, the courtiers were too afraid to express a different opinion.

古文：嗣后军国大事，陛下当毅然主持，赖诸臣洗心涤虑，悉破雷同附和，其忧国奉公。 
现代文：此后的国家大事，陛下应该毅然主持，下令各臣深思熟虑，拿出自己独立的意见，一扫雷同附和的意见，共同无私地为国担忧。 
English: After that, His Majesty should resolutely preside over the national events, order the ministers to think deeply, come up with their own independent opinions, clear the mines with the concurring opinions, and selflessly worry about the country together.

古文：帝优旨褒答。
现代文：皇帝传旨表扬他。
English: Emperor Taizong replied with a mild edict and praised him.

古文：寻有诏尽谪前排廷弼者姚宗文等官。
现代文：不久下诏将以前排斥熊廷弼的姚宗文等臣子全都贬谪。
English: Soon after, the emperor decreed that all the courtiers, including Yao Zongwen, who had previously rejected Xiong Tingyao, were to be dethroned.

古文：言路多怨一燝。
现代文：很多言官怨恨刘一燝。
English: Many officials hold a grudge against Liu Yikang.

古文：一燝尝言： 任天下事者，惟六官。
现代文：刘一燝曾说： 担任国家大事的，只有六官。
English: Liu Yixuan once said: There are only six officials who are in charge of national affairs.

古文：言路张，则六官无实政。
现代文：言路势力强大了，则六官没有实政。
English: If the influence of rhetoric is strong, then the six officials have no real politics.

古文：善治天下者，俾六官任事，言路得绳其愆，言官陈事，政府得裁其是，则天下治。 
现代文：善于治理国家的君主，使六官负责实事，言路纠正他们的过失，言官报告事情，政府裁决事情的是非，那么国家就会得到治理。 
English: The monarch who is good at governing the country will make the six officials responsible for the facts, correct their mistakes through words and deeds, the spokesman will report the matter, and the government will decide whether the matter is right or wrong, then the country will be governed.

古文：于是一切条奏悉下部议，有不经者，诏格之。
现代文：于是所有的条奏全部交给各部讨论，如有不合原则的，下诏纠正它。
English: As a result, all regulations were submitted to all ministries for discussion. If there is anything inconsistent with the principle, it will be corrected at the next meeting.

古文：初，选侍将移宫，其内竖李进忠、刘朝、田诏等盗内府秘藏，过乾清门仆，金宝堕地。
现代文：当初，李选侍准备移宫，她在宫中的宦官李进忠、刘朝、田诏等人盗窃内府的秘藏，经过乾清门时跌倒了，金银财宝撒了一地。
English: At first, Li Xuanzhu was preparing to move to the palace. Her eunuchs in the palace, Li Jinzhong, Liu Chao, Tian Zhao and others, stole the treasures of the inner palace. When she passed the Qianqing Gate, she fell down, scattering gold and silver treasures all over the ground.

古文：帝怒，悉下法司，案治甚急。
现代文：皇帝发火了，将他们全都交给司法部门，案子追查得很急迫。
English: The emperor was outraged and turned them all over to the judicial authorities, and the case was pursued with great urgency.

古文：群奄惧，构蜚语，言帝薄先朝妃嫔，致选侍移宫日，跣足投井，以摇惑外廷。
现代文：众太监很害怕，散布流言蜚语，说皇帝薄待先朝的妃嫔，导致在李选侍移宫那天，妃嫔赤着脚投井自尽，想以此来迷惑动摇外廷。
English: The eunuchs were very afraid, and spread rumors that the emperor had mistreated the concubines of the previous dynasty, which led to the concubines committing suicide by throwing themselves into a well barefoot on the day of Li Xuan's transfer to the palace, hoping to confuse and shake the court.

古文：御史贾继春遂上安选侍书。
现代文：御史贾继春于是上书安抚李选侍。
English: Therefore, the Emperor Jia Jichun sent a letter to appease Li Xuan.

古文：刑部尚书黄克缵、给事中李春晔、御史王业浩辈张大其辞，欲脱盗奄罪。
现代文：刑部尚书黄克缵、给事中李春晔、御史王业治一帮人大造声势，想开脱盗窃的太监的罪责。
English: A group of people, including Huang Kegui of the Criminal Investigation Department, Li Chunhui and Wang Yechi of the Criminal Investigation Department, made a lot of noise and wanted to find the eunuch guilty of theft.

古文：帝恶继春妄言，且疑其有党，将严谴之。
现代文：皇帝讨厌贾继春毫无根据的胡说，并且怀疑他还有同党，准备严厉地处罚他。
English: The emperor disliked Jia Jichun's groundless nonsense and suspected that he had accomplices and was ready to punish him severely.

古文：一燝谓天子新即位，辄疑臣下朋党，异时奸人乘间，士大夫必受其祸。
现代文：刘一燝以为皇上刚刚即位，就怀疑臣子拉帮结派，将来奸人乘机加以利用，士大夫一定会遭受他们的灾祸。
English: Liu Yixuan thought that the emperor had just ascended to the throne, and suspected that the courtiers were pulling a gang to form a faction. In the future, the traitors would take the opportunity to take advantage of it, and the scholar-officials would certainly suffer their disaster.

古文：乃具疏开帝意，为继春解，而反覆言朋党无实。
现代文：于是上疏开导皇帝，为贾继春辩解，并且反复说朋党势力实际上并不存在。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozong defended Jia Jichun and repeatedly said that the power of the crony party did not actually exist.

古文：继春得削籍去。
现代文：贾继春得以削夺官籍离职。
English: Jia Jichun was able to reduce his official status and leave office.

古文：御史张慎言、高弘图疏救继春，帝欲并罪，亦以一燝言而止。
现代文：御史张慎言、高弘图上疏营救贾继春，皇帝想把他们一起治罪，也因为刘一燝说话而得以幸免。
English: The emperor wanted to punish them together, but Liu Yixuan was spared because of his speech.

古文：帝憾选侍甚，必欲诛盗奄。
现代文：皇帝很不满意李选侍，一定要杀死偷盗的太监。
English: The emperor was very dissatisfied with Li's choice of attendants, and was determined to kill the thieving eunuch.

古文：王安为司礼，亦恶之。
现代文：王安为司礼，也讨厌他们。
English: Wang An, a priest, also hates them.

古文：诸奄百方救，卒不得。
现代文：各太监百般营救，最终都失败了。
English: The eunuchs tried all sorts of ways to rescue him, but in the end they all failed.

古文：久而帝渐忘前事，安亦为魏忠贤排死，诸奄乃厚贿忠贤为地，而上疏辨冤。
现代文：时间长了，皇帝渐渐把以前的事给忘了，王安也被魏忠贤排挤致死，各太监于是重礼贿赂魏忠贤作为靠山，又上疏辩冤。
English: As time went on, the emperor gradually forgot what had happened before. Wang An was also ousted to death by Wei Zhongxian. The eunuchs then bribed Wei Zhongxian as a patron, and then went on to slander and defame him.

古文：帝果免朝、诏死，下其疏法司。
现代文：皇帝果然免除刘朝、田诏的死罪，将奏疏交给司法部门。
English: The emperor did indeed absolve Liu and Tian Zhao of the death penalty and handed the case over to the judicial department.

古文：一燝执奏，诏等议诛久，无可雪，疏直下部，前无此制。
现代文：刘一燝坚持进言，以为田诏等人经部议处死已有很久时间了，不能为他们平反昭雪，奏疏直接交给司法部门，这是史无前例的。
English: Liu Yixuan insisted that it had been a long time since Tian Zhao and others had been sentenced to death by the Ministry of Economic Affairs, and it was not possible to rehabilitate them, and the case was directly handed over to the judicial department, which was unprecedented.

古文：帝不得已，下其疏于阁。
现代文：皇帝不得已，将奏疏交给内阁。
English: As a last resort, the emperor handed the report to the cabinet.

古文：一燝复言： 此疏外不由通政司，内不由会极门，例不当拟旨，谨封还原疏。 
现代文：刘一燝又说： 这奏疏外不经过通政司，内不经由会极门，按规矩不应当拟旨，臣谨封还原疏。 
English: Liu Yixuan also said: This reshuffle does not go through the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and does not go through the Supreme People's Assembly, according to the rules, it should not be drafted, and the minister should restore the original reshuffle.

古文：由是忠贤辈大恨，朝等亦竟免死，益任用。
现代文：从此魏忠贤那帮人对刘一燝非常不满，刘朝等人也竟然免除死罪，反而得到任用。
English: From then on, Wei Zhongxian's gang was very dissatisfied with Liu Yixuan, and Liu Chaozhou and others were even exempted from the death penalty, but were appointed instead.

古文：定陵工成，忠贤欲以为功。
现代文：定陵工程完工后，魏忠贤想把它作为自己的功劳。
English: After the Dingling project was completed, Wei Zhongxian wanted to take credit for it.

古文：一燝援故事，内臣非司礼掌印及提督陵工不得滥荫，止拟加恩三等。
现代文：刘一燝援引先例，内臣不是司礼掌印和提督陵工不能够随便荫封，只拟旨加恩三等。
English: Liu Yixuan cited the precedent that the vassal is not the priest's palm print and the admiral's mausoleum worker can not be arbitrarily sealed, but only the third-class seal.

古文：诸言官论客氏被谪者，一燝皆疏救，又请出客氏于外。
现代文：因追究客氏而被贬谪的各言官，刘一燝都上疏营救，又请求皇帝将客氏迁往宫外。
English: Liu Yixuan went to the rescue of the officials who had been demoted for investigating the Kake clan, and also asked the emperor to move the Kake clan outside the palace.

古文：及言官交章论沈纮，纮疑一燝主之，与忠贤、客氏等比，而齮一燝。
现代文：等到言官交相上书议论沈翭，沈翭怀疑刘一燝是主谋，跟魏忠贤、客氏等人相勾结，陷害刘一燝。
English: When the officials wrote to each other to discuss Shen Yi, Shen Yi suspected that Liu Yikai was the mastermind, and colluded with Wei Zhongxian, Hakka and others to frame Liu Yikai.

古文：一燝持大体，不徇言路意。言路颇怨。
现代文：刘一燝从大局出发，不徇从言官的意思，言官颇有怨言。
English: Liu Yijun started from the overall situation, not from the meaning of the spokesman, and the spokesman had a lot of complaints.

古文：又密窥魏、客等渐用事，一燝势孤，是年四月，候补御史刘重庆遂力诋一燝不可用。
现代文：又秘密侦探得知魏忠贤、客氏等人逐渐掌管大权，刘一燝势孤力单，这一年四月，候补御史刘重庆于是极力诋毁刘一燝不能任用。
English: In addition, secret detectives learned that Wei Zhongxian, Hakka and others were gradually taking control of power, and Liu Yibing was all alone. In April of this year, Liu Chongqing, the alternate governor, tried his best to discredit Liu Yibing and said that he could not be appointed.

古文：帝怒谪重庆。
现代文：皇帝很愤怒，贬谪刘重庆。
English: The emperor was very angry and belittled Liu Chongqing.

古文：一燝再论救，不听。
现代文：刘一燝再次上书营救，皇帝不听。
English: Liu Yixuan wrote again for help, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：而职方郎中余大成、御史安伸、给事中韦蕃、霍维华交章劾一燝。帝不问。
现代文：而职方郎中余大成，御史安伸，给事韦蕃、霍维华轮流上书弹劾刘一燝，皇帝不理。
English: However, the Emperor did not pay any attention to the fact that the officials, Yu Dacheng and Gu Shi Anxin, and Wei Wei and Huo Weihua took turns to write a letter to impeach Liu Yikun.

古文：既而维华外转，其同官孙杰疑一燝属嘉谟为之，上疏力攻一燝。
现代文：不久霍维华被调往外地，他的同事孙杰怀疑是刘一燝叫周嘉谟干的，上疏极力攻击刘一燝。
English: Soon after, Huo Weihua was transferred to another city. His colleague Sun Jie suspected that Liu Yixuan had ordered Zhou Jia Mo to do it. Shang So attacked Liu Yixuan.

古文：一燝疏辨求罢。
现代文：刘一燝上疏辩白，请求辞职。
English: Liu Yijun made a feeble excuse and asked for resignation.

古文：帝已慰留，给事中侯震旸、御史陈九畴复劾之，并刺其结纳王安。
现代文：皇帝已经安慰挽留他，给事中侯震、御史陈九畴再次弹劾他，并指责他勾结王安。
English: The emperor had already consoled and retained him, but in the middle of the matter, Hou Zhen and Gu Shi Chen Jiu Zang again impeached him and accused him of colluding with Wang An.

古文：于是一燝四疏乞归，忠贤从中主之，传旨允其去。
现代文：于是刘一燝四次上疏请求解职回家，魏忠贤在暗中操纵，传旨同意他离职。
English: As a result, Liu Yixuan went home four times to ask for dismissal, and Wei Zhongxian secretly manipulated and agreed to his resignation.

古文：先是，从哲去，帝数称一燝为首辅，一燝不敢当，虚位俟叶向高。
现代文：在这之前，方从哲离职，皇帝几次推举刘一燝为首辅，刘一燝不敢担当，空留首辅的位子等待叶向高。
English: Prior to this, after the departure of Fang from Zhe, the emperor several times elected Liu Yixuan as the first assistant, but Liu Yixuan did not dare to take charge, leaving the position of the first assistant vacant and waiting for Ye Xianggao.

古文：及向高至，入谗言，谓一燝尼己。
现代文：到叶向高到来后，有谗言说刘一燝阻止他任职。
English: After Ye Xianggao arrived, there were rumors that Liu Yikang prevented him from taking office.

古文：至是，知其无他，力称一燝有翼卫功，不可去。
现代文：到这时，知道他没有别的用心，极力称赞刘一燝有保卫国家的功劳，不应该离职。
English: At this time, knowing that he had no other intention, he strongly praised Liu Yikang for his contribution to the defense of the country and should not leave office.

古文：帝复慰留，一燝坚卧不起。
现代文：皇帝又一次安慰挽留他，刘一燝坚决卧床不肯起来。
English: The emperor once again consoled him to stay, and Liu Yijun resolutely refused to get out of bed.

古文：二年三月，疏十二上，乃令乘传归。
现代文：天启二年三月，十二次上疏，皇帝于是命令让刘一燝乘驿车回家。
English: In March of the second year of the Apocalypse, the 12th Shang Dynasty, the emperor then ordered Liu Yikang to take a carriage home.

古文：既归，兵部尚书张鹤鸣兴奸细杜茂、刘一巘狱，欲指一〈山献〉为一燝族，株连之。
现代文：回家后，兵部尚书张鹤鸣制造奸细杜茂、刘一山献的官司，想利用刘一山献是刘一燝的同族人，来株连刘一燝。
English: After returning home, Shangshu Zhang Zhenming of the Ministry of Military Affairs fabricated a lawsuit brought by the spies Du Mao and Liu Yishan. He wanted to take advantage of Liu Yishan, who was a compatriot of Liu Yixuan, to recruit Liu Yixuan.

古文：刑部尚书王纪不可，遂被斥去，而一燝得白。
现代文：刑部尚书王纪不同意，于是王纪被排斥离职，而刘一燝得以保全。
English: Wang Ji, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, did not agree, so Wang Ji was ousted from his post, while Liu Yixing was spared.

古文：鹤鸣，一燝向所推毂者也。
现代文：张鹤鸣，一向为刘一燝所推举。
English: Zhang Zhenming has always been selected by Liu Yixuan.

古文：已而忠贤大炽，矫旨责一燝误用廷弼，削官，追夺诰命，勒令养马。
现代文：不久魏忠贤势力大盛，假传圣旨指责刘一燝误用熊廷弼，剥夺刘一燝的官衔，剥夺皇帝对他的封赠，勒令他养马。
English: Soon, Wei Zhongxian's power was at its peak. He accused Liu Yikang of misusing the imperial seal, deprived Liu Yikang of his official title, deprived the emperor of his seal, and ordered him to raise horses.

古文：崇祯改元，诏复官，遣官存问。
现代文：崇祯元年，下诏恢复刘一燝的官衔，派遣官员慰问他。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, the emperor restored Liu Yixuan's official title and sent officials to console him.

古文：韩爌，字象云，蒲州人。
现代文：韩爌爌，字象云，蒲州人。
English: Han Yu, the character of the cloud, the Puzhou people.

古文：万历二十年进士。选庶吉士。
现代文：万历二十年进士，选拔为庶吉士。
English: After 20 years of hard work, he was promoted to the rank of officer, and was selected as a junior officer.

古文：进编修，历少詹事，充东宫讲官。
现代文：提升编修，任职少詹事，充当东宫讲官。
English: He was promoted to the position of editor-in-chief, served as a junior official, and acted as a lecturer at the East Palace.

古文：四十五年，擢礼部右侍郎，协理詹事府。
现代文：四十五年，提拔为礼部右侍郎，协助代理詹事府。
English: In 1945, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and assisted in the establishment of Zhan Shifu.

古文：久之，命教习庶吉士。
现代文：很久之后，被任命为庶吉士教习。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as a teacher of the second grade.

古文：泰昌元年八月，光宗嗣位，拜礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：泰昌元年八月，光宗皇帝即位，授职为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: In August of the first year of Taichang, Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Dongge University, participating in important affairs.

古文：未几，光宗疾大渐，与方从哲、刘一燝同受顾命。
现代文：不久，光宗皇帝病危，韩爌跟方从哲、刘一燝一起接受皇帝的遗诏。
English: Soon, Emperor Guangzong was critically ill, and Han Zheng, together with Fang Congzhe and Liu Yixuan, accepted the emperor's will.

古文：时宫府危疑，爌竭诚翼卫，中外倚以为重。
现代文：这时宫府形势危急，韩爌竭诚辅助、保卫国家，朝廷内外都看重而依靠他。
English: At this time, the situation of the Imperial Household Agency was critical. Han Zheng devoted himself to assisting and defending the country. Both inside and outside the Imperial Court valued and relied on him.

古文：大帅李如柏、如桢兄弟有罪，当逮治，中旨宽之。
现代文：大帅李如柏、李如桢兄弟有罪，应当逮捕治罪，宦官传旨宽免他们。
English: The grand marshals Li Rubei and Li Rugao were guilty and should be arrested and punished, but the eunuchs passed down an order to pardon them.

古文：爌与一燝执奏，逮如律。
现代文：韩爌和刘一燝执奏，按照法律逮捕了他们。
English: Han Zheng and Liu Yijuan were arrested in accordance with the law.

古文：以登极恩，加太子太保、户部尚书、文渊阁大学士。
现代文：因为辅佐皇帝登位有功，加封韩爌为太子太保、户部尚书、文渊阁大学士。
English: Because of his meritorious service in assisting the emperor's ascension to the throne, Han Zheng was awarded the titles of Crown Prince and Grand Prince, Household Secretary, and Scholar of Wenyu Academy.

古文：从哲去，一燝当国，爌协心佐理。
现代文：方从哲离职后，刘一燝主持政务，韩爌尽心尽力地辅佐他。
English: After Fang Zongzhe left office, Liu Yixuan presided over government affairs, and Han Xuan supported him wholeheartedly.

古文：天启元年正月，两人以帝为皇孙时，未尝出阁读书，请于十二日即开经筵，自后日讲不辍，从之。
现代文：天启元年，韩爌和刘一燝二人以为皇帝在当皇孙子的时候，未曾出阁读书，请求皇帝从十二日起开讲经筵，以后每天讲筵不要停止，皇帝接受了。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Han Zheng and Liu Yixuan thought that the emperor had never been out to study when he was the grandson of the emperor. They asked the emperor to begin to lecture on the sutras from the 12th day of the month, and to continue to lecture on the sutras every day. The emperor accepted.

古文：辽阳失，都城震惊。
现代文：辽阳失陷，京师震惊。
English: Liaoyang fell and Beijing was shocked.

古文：大婚礼成，加少保、吏部尚书、武英殿大学士，荫一子尚宝司丞。
现代文：韩爌、刘一燝认为官风苟且、轻浮，草拟御札勉励百官，共图实效，皇帝采纳了。
English: Han Zheng and Liu Yixuan thought that the official style was stiff and frivolous, and drafted the imperial edict to encourage officials, and the emperor adopted it.

古文：未几，以贵州平苗功，加少傅、太子太傅、建极殿大学士。
现代文：廷臣以为兵饷十分匮乏，联合上书请求发放国库银两，韩爌、刘一燝也这样认为。
English: The courtiers thought that there was a great shortage of soldiers and enlisted men, and jointly petitioned for the issuance of two silver coins from the national treasury. Han Zheng and Liu Yikang also thought so.

古文：帝封乳母客氏为奉圣夫人，大婚成，当出外，仍留之宫中。
现代文：下诏发放百万两国库银。韩爌主持皇帝结婚典礼完成后，加封为少傅、太子太傅、建极殿大学士。皇帝封奶妈客氏为奉圣夫人，皇上成婚后，客氏当搬出宫外，皇上仍把她留在宫中。
English: After the completion of the wedding ceremony presided over by Han Zheng, he was awarded the titles of Shao Fu, Taifu of the Crown Prince, and Jian Ji Dian University Scholar. The emperor awarded the title of Bong Sheng Lady to Kaji, the mother of the emperor. After the emperor got married, Kaji was supposed to move out of the palace, but the emperor still kept her in the palace.

古文：御史毕佐周切谏，六科、十三道复连署争，皆不纳。
现代文：御史毕佐周恳切地规劝，六科、十三道又接连上书争论，皇帝都不采纳。
English: Bishop Bi Zuo earnestly exhorted Zhou, and the emperor did not accept the argument that the six disciplines and the thirteen disciplines were submitted one after another.

古文：爌、一燝引祖制为言，乃命俟梓宫发引，择日出宫。
现代文：韩爌、刘一燝援引祖宗的制度给皇帝提意见，皇帝于是命令客氏等待先皇灵柩发丧后，选择日期出宫。
English: Han Xuan and Liu Yikang cited the ancestor system to make suggestions to the emperor. The emperor then ordered the Kake clan to wait for the funeral of the former emperor's coffin and choose a date to leave the palace.

古文：二年四月，礼部尚书孙慎行劾方从哲用李可灼红丸药，罪同弑逆，廷议纷然。
现代文：天启二年四月，礼部尚书孙慎行弹劾方从哲用李可灼进献红药丸，跟弑君、叛逆同罪，廷议纷乱，没有统一的意见。
English: In April of the second year of the Apocalypse, the impeachment party led by Sun Sheng of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies took the red pill from the philosopher Li Keqiang, which was the same crime as traitor and rebellion. The court was in turmoil, and there was no unified opinion.

古文：一燝已去位，爌特疏白其事，曰：
现代文：刘一燝已经离职，韩爌特别上疏辩白这事，奏疏说：
English: Liu Yixuan has already left the post, and Han Zheng has been particularly outspoken about this, saying:

古文：先帝以去年八月朔践阼。
现代文： 先帝在去年八月初一日登帝位。
English: The former emperor ascended the throne on the first day of August last year.

古文：臣及一燝以二十四日入阁。
现代文：我和刘一燝在二十四日入内阁。
English: Liu Yikang and I joined the cabinet on the 24th.

古文：适鸿胪寺官李可灼云有仙丹欲进。
现代文：正好碰上鸿胪寺官李可灼说有仙丹想进献给皇上。
English: Li Kegui, an official of Hongye Temple, happened to be there and said that there was a mandala he wanted to dedicate to the emperor.

古文：从哲愕然，出所具问安揭，有 进药十分宜慎 语。臣等深以为然，即谕之去。
现代文：方从哲很惊讶，拿出他所写的问安的条奏，上面有 进献应十分谨慎 的话，我等认为这样做是很对的，就传谕让李可灼离开了。
English: Fang Congzhe was very surprised. He took out the greeting he had written, which said, "You should be very careful when making an offering." We thought this was the right thing to do, so we told Li Keqiao to leave.

古文：二十七日召见群臣，先帝自言不用药已二十余日。
现代文：二十七日先帝召见群臣，先帝自己说不用药已经有二十多天了。
English: On the 27th, the former emperor summoned his ministers, and the former emperor himself said that he had not used medicine for more than 20 days.

古文：至二十九日遇两内臣，言帝疾已大渐，有鸿胪寺官李可灼来思善门进药。
现代文：到二十九日遇见两个内臣，说皇帝已病危，曾有鸿胪寺官李可灼来思善门进药。
English: On the 29th, he met two courtiers who said that the emperor was critically ill, and that Li Keguang, an official of Hongyu Temple, had come to Shishanmen to administer medicine.

古文：从哲及臣等皆言彼称仙丹，便不敢信。
现代文：方从哲和我等都说，他自称有仙丹，我臣不敢相信他。
English: Fang Congzhe and I both said that he claimed to have immortality, and I couldn't believe him.

古文：是日仍召见。
现代文：这天仍然召见群臣。
English: On this day, ministers were still summoned.

古文：诸臣问安毕，先帝即顾皇上，命臣等辅佐为尧、舜。
现代文：各臣行礼问安之后，先帝就回头看皇上，命令我等辅佐皇上，使他成为像尧、舜一样圣明的君主。
English: After the courtiers saluted and asked for his greetings, the former emperor looked back at the emperor and ordered us to wait to assist the emperor, so that he could become a monarch as sacred as the skull and crossbones.

古文：又语及寿宫，臣等以先帝山陵封，则云： 是朕寿宫。 
现代文：又说到寿宫，我等以先帝的陵墓作答，先帝就说： 是朕的寿宫。 
English: When it came to the mausoleum, we answered with the mausoleum of the former emperor, and the former emperor said: It is my mausoleum.

古文：因问有鸿胪官进药。
现代文：于是问起有关鸿胪官进药的事情。
English: So I asked him about the matter of Hongyuan officials injecting drugs.

古文：从哲奏云： 李可灼自谓仙丹，臣等未敢信。 
现代文：方从哲报告说： 李可灼自称有仙丹，我等不敢相信。 
English: Fang Congzhe reported: Li Keqiang claimed to have immortality. I couldn't believe it.

古文：先帝即命传宣。
现代文：先帝立即命令传旨宣李可灼进宫。
English: The former emperor immediately ordered that Xuan Li be allowed to enter the palace.

古文：臣等出，移时可灼至，同入诊视，言病源及治法甚合。
现代文：我等出宫，过一会儿李可灼到，跟他一起进去诊探先帝的病情，说病源和治疗的都很合理。
English: After waiting for me to leave the palace, Li Keguang arrived a short while later and went in with him to examine the emperor's condition, saying that the source of the disease and the treatment were very reasonable.

古文：先帝喜，命速进。
现代文：先帝很高兴，命令赶快进药。
English: The late emperor was delighted and ordered the medicine to be administered immediately.

古文：臣等复出，令与诸医商榷。一燝语臣，其乡两人用此，损益参半。
现代文：我等又一次出来，命令跟宫医商量，刘一燝告诉我说，他的二个同乡服用这种药，好坏各占一半。
English: When I came out again and ordered to discuss with the doctor, Liu Yijun told me that two of his fellow villagers were taking this medicine, and they were equally good and bad.

古文：诸臣相视，实未敢明言宜否。
现代文：各臣你看我，我望你，实在不敢明确表示是否合适。
English: Ministers, look at me, I'm looking at you, I really don't dare to say whether it's appropriate or not.

古文：须臾，先帝趣和药，臣等复同入。
现代文：过了一会儿，先帝催促赶快调和药丸，我等又一起进宫。
English: After a while, the Emperor urged me to quickly adjust the pills, and we waited to enter the palace together.

古文：可灼调以进，先帝喜曰： 忠臣，忠臣。 
现代文：李可灼调好药送给先帝服用，先帝高兴地说： 忠臣，忠臣。 
English: Li Keqiao mixed the medicine and gave it to the former emperor to take. The former emperor said happily: "Loyal subject, loyal subject."

古文：臣等出，少顷，中使传圣体服药后暖润舒畅，思进饮膳，诸臣欢跃而退。
现代文：我等出宫，片刻之后，宦官传谕说先帝服药后，身体暖润舒畅，想要进膳，各臣欢呼雀跃，然后告退了。
English: I waited to leave the palace, and after a while, the eunuchs announced that after taking the medicine, the former emperor's body was warm and comfortable, and he wanted to have dinner. The ministers cheered and then left.

古文：比申末，可灼出云： 圣上恐药力不继，欲再进一丸。 
现代文：等到了申时快结束时，李可灼出来说： 先帝担心药力接不上，想再服用一丸。 
English: At the end of the consultation, Li Keqiang came out and said, "The late emperor was worried that the strength of the medicine was not enough, and he wanted to take another pill."

古文：诸医言不宜骤。
现代文：各宫医说用药不宜太迅猛。
English: All the gynaecologists say that the medication should not be used too quickly.

古文：乃传趣益急，因再进讫。
现代文：而宫中传旨催促更加急迫，于是进献了第二丸药。
English: But the urging from the Imperial Court was more urgent, so a second pill was presented.

古文：臣等问再服复何状，答言平善如初。
现代文：我等询问第二次服用药丸是什么情形。回答说像当初一样平稳。这是当天的事情。
English: We asked how the second pill was and he said it was as smooth as the first. That was that day.

古文：此本日情事也。
现代文：第二天，我等上朝，而先帝已在卯时去世了，真叫人痛心啊！
English: The next day, I waited until morning, and the former emperor had already passed away at dusk. It was heartbreaking!

古文：方先帝召见群臣时，被衮凭几，俨然顾命。
现代文： 当先帝召见群臣时，先帝身披帝王的礼服，靠着几案，俨然是发布遗诏的样子。
English: When the former emperor summoned his ministers, the former emperor, dressed in the emperor's ceremonial robes and leaning on several cases, appeared to be issuing a will.

古文：皇上焦颜侍侧，臣等环跪彷徨，操药而前，吁天以祷。臣子际此，憾不身代。
现代文：皇上脸色焦虑，在一旁侍立，我等跪在先帝的周围，心意仿徨，拿着药上前，呼天祈祷，为臣的到了这种地步，遗憾不能代替。
English: The emperor looked anxious and stood by, while we knelt around the former emperor, mind wandering, holding the medicine in front of us, crying out to the heavens in prayer. For a vassal to get to this point, there is no substitute for regret.

古文：凡今所谓宜慎宜止者，岂不虑于心，实未出于口，抑且不以萌诸心。
现代文：凡是今天所谓应该慎重应该停止的事情，当时难道就没有考虑，实际没有说出口，抑或是内心没有萌发这种不祥的念头。
English: All the things that today are said to be prudent and should be stopped, were they not considered at the time, were they not actually expressed, or did such ominous thoughts not germinate in their hearts.

古文：念先帝临御虽止旬月，恩膏实被九垓。
现代文：怀念先帝驭政虽然只有一周月，他的恩惠实际上已经泽被宇内。
English: Although it has only been a week since the former emperor's death, his benevolence has actually been felt throughout the world.

古文：为臣子者宜何如颂扬，何如纪述。
现代文：作为臣子的应该去考虑怎样颂扬、怎样记述。
English: As a courtier, you should consider how to praise and how to record.

古文：乃礼臣忠愤之激谈，与远迩惊疑之纷议，不知谓当时若何情景，而进药始末实止如此。
现代文：而礼臣出于忠诚义愤的偏激的谈论，和远近惊疑的纷纷扬扬的传闻，都不知道当时的情景是怎样的，而进药的始末实际上就是上面我说的那些。
English: However, the courtiers' biased talk out of loyalty and righteous indignation, and the rumors that were spread far and wide out of surprise, did not know what the situation was at that time, and the beginning and end of the medicine were actually the ones I mentioned above.

古文：若不据实详剖，直举非命之凶称，加诸考终之令主，恐先帝在天之灵不无恫怨，皇上终天之念何以为怀。
现代文：如果不依据实际情况详加剖析，就径直列举种种罪名，强加于先帝临终前接遗诏的各位大臣身上，恐怕先帝的在天之灵不会没有怨言，皇上临终的念头何以安抚？
English: If you don't make a detailed analysis based on the actual situation, and just list all kinds of crimes and impose them on the ministers who received the last will and testament of the former emperor before his death, I'm afraid that the spirit of the former emperor will not be without complaints in heaven. How can the emperor's dying thoughts be appeased?

古文：乞涣发纶音，布告中外，俾议法者勿以小疑成大疑，编摹者勿以信史为谤史。
现代文：乞求公开发布皇帝的诏书，向朝廷内外布告，使商议礼法的人不要让很小的疑惑变成很大的怀疑，编定史书的人不要让信史成为毁谤的历史。 
English: They begged that the emperor's edict be publicly released and announced to the imperial court and beyond, so that those who discuss etiquette should not let a small doubt turn into a great doubt, and those who compile history books should not let the history of belief become the history of slander.

古文：文震孟建言获谴，论救甚力。
现代文：文震孟因建议而遭贬谪，韩爌大力上疏营救。
English: Wen Zhen Meng was scorned for his suggestion, and Han Zheng vigorously came to the rescue.

古文：三年，以山东平妖贼功，加少师、太子太师。
现代文：天启三年因平定山东妖贼有功，加封韩爌为少师、太子太师。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, he was awarded the title of "Junior Teacher" and "Principal Teacher" for his achievements in subduing the evil spirits in Shandong.

古文：时叶向高当国，爌次之。
现代文：这时叶向高主持政事，韩爌其次。
English: At this time, Ye Xianggao presided over government affairs, and Han Xuan followed.

古文：及杨涟劾魏忠贤二十四大罪，忠贤颇惧，求援于爌。
现代文：等到杨涟弹劾魏忠贤的二十四条大罪状，魏忠贤很害怕，向韩爌求救。
English: When Yang Jie impeached Wei Zhongxian for 24 major crimes, Wei Zhongxian was very scared and asked Han Jie for help.

古文：爌不应，忠贤深衔之。
现代文：韩爌不理他，魏忠贤恨他入骨。
English: Han Xuan ignored him, and Wei Zhongxian hated him to his bones.

古文：既向高罢，爌为首辅，每事持正，为善类所倚。
现代文：叶向高被罢免后，韩爌成为首辅，每件事都主持正义，正人君子都依靠他。
English: After Ye Xianggao was ousted, Han Zheng became the chief aide. He presided over justice in every matter, and all upright people relied on him.

古文：然向高有智术，笼络群奄，爌惟廉直自持，势不能敌。
现代文：然而叶向高有智谋，有手段，笼络众太监，韩爌只能自己保持廉洁正直，势力抵不过众太监。
English: However, Ye Xianggao had the wisdom and means to win over the eunuchs, while Han Xuan could only keep himself clean and honest. His power was no match for the eunuchs.

古文：而同官魏广微又深结忠贤，遍引邪党。
现代文：而同事魏广微又极力巴结魏忠贤，到处招引奸邪的党徒。
English: However, his colleague Wei Guangwei also tried his best to placate Wei Zhongxian and lure evil Party members everywhere.

古文：其冬，忠贤假会推事逐赵南星、高攀龙，爌急率朱国祯等上言： 陛下一日去两大臣，臣民失望。
现代文：这年冬天，魏忠贤利用会推官员事驱逐赵南星、高攀龙，韩爌急忙率领朱国祯等上书说： 陛下一天赶走两个大臣，臣民都很失望。
English: In the winter of that year, Wei Zhongxian expelled Zhao Nansing and Gao Panglong with the help of officials from the Communist Party of China, and Han Zheng hurriedly led Zhu Guozhen and others to write a letter saying, "Your Majesty has driven away two ministers in one day, and your subjects are very disappointed.

古文：且中旨径宣，不复到阁，而攀龙一疏，经臣等拟上者，又复更易，大骇听闻，有伤国体。 
现代文：况且中旨直接宣布，不再经过内阁，而高攀龙的一道奏疏，经过我们报告上去后，又有人随意篡改，这真是骇人听闻的事，对国家政体有害无利。 
English: Moreover, the central principle was announced directly, no longer through the cabinet, but through a high-ranking report, and after our report went up, some people arbitrarily tampered with it. This is a truly appalling thing, harmful to the national political system.

古文：忠贤益不悦，传旨切责。
现代文：魏忠贤更加不高兴，传旨对韩爌痛加责备。
English: Wei Zhongxian was even more displeased, and sent a letter of reprimand to Han Xuan.

古文：未几，又逐杨涟、左光斗、陈于廷，朝政大变，忠贤势益张。
现代文：不久，又驱逐杨涟、左光斗、陈于廷，朝廷政局发生大变化，魏忠贤势力更加嚣张了。
English: Soon after, Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou, and Chen Yuting were also expelled. The political situation in the imperial court underwent a major change, and the Wei Zhongxian forces became more arrogant.

古文：故事，阁中秉笔止首辅一人。
现代文：按过去的惯例，内阁中执笔的只有首辅一个人。
English: According to past practice, only the first and second lieutenants are allowed to write in the cabinet.

古文：广微欲分其柄，嘱忠贤传旨，谕爌同寅协恭，而责次辅毋伴食。爌惶惧，即抗疏乞休。
现代文：魏广微想分享这个权力，嘱托魏忠贤传旨，告诉韩爌与其他阁臣同具敬畏之心共同协力办事，责令次辅不要无所作为，韩爌感到惶恐害怕，立即上疏乞求退休，大意说： 我不行，只是聊以充数，过错一天天增多。
English: Wei Guangwei wanted to share this power, asked Wei Zhongxian to pass on the will, told Han Zheng to work together with other cabinet ministers with a sense of awe, and ordered the second assistant not to do nothing. Han Zheng felt panic and fear, and immediately begged for retirement, saying: I can't do it, I'm just talking to make up for it, and my mistakes are increasing day by day.

古文：略言： 臣备位纶扉，咎愆日积。如诘戎宜先营卫，而观兵禁掖，无能纾宵旰忧。
现代文：如查问军事应先建立保卫，而敌人在我们眼皮底下炫耀能力，我没有武力替皇帝解除早晚的忧虑。
English: If the inquiry is that the military should first establish a defense, and the enemy is showing off its capabilities under our eyes, I do not have the power to relieve the emperor's worries sooner or later.

古文：忠直尚稽召还，而榜掠朝堂，无能回震霆怒。
现代文：忠诚正直的人尚待召还，而朝堂之上拷打之声四起，我没有能力挽回皇帝的雷霆之怒。
English: Loyal and honest people are yet to be recalled, and the sounds of torture are heard all over the palace. I have no ability to save the emperor's thunderous anger.

古文：后先诸臣之罢斥，谕旨中出之纷更，不能先时深念，有调剂之方，又不能临事执持，为封还之戆。
现代文：各臣先后遭罢免排斥，圣旨诏书由宫中传得混乱无辜，我没有能够深思熟虑，预先想出调解的办法，事到临头，又不能正确处理，只是愚蠢的封还了事。
English: The ministers were successively ousted and ostracized, and the imperial edict was circulated from the palace in a confused and innocent manner. I was not able to think deeply and come up with a way to mediate in advance, and when the time came, I could not handle it correctly, but stupidly sealed the matter.

古文：皆臣罪之大者。
现代文：这些都是我的过错里面较大的。
English: All of this is largely my fault.

古文：皇上释此不问，责臣以协恭，责同官以协赞。
现代文：皇上不过问这些事，却拿不融洽恭敬来责备我，拿不融洽辅助来责备我的同事。
English: The Emperor does not merely ask about these things, but reproaches me with a lack of harmony and respect, and reproaches my colleagues with a lack of harmony and support.

古文：同官奉诏以从事，臣欲补过无由矣。
现代文：同事按诏书行事，我想弥补过失也没有机会了。
English: My colleagues acted in accordance with the edict, and I had no chance to make up for my mistake.

古文：乞亟褫臣官，为佐理溺职之戒。 
现代文：乞求皇上赶快剥夺我的官职，作为辅佐皇帝处理政务的大臣玩忽职守的警戒。 
English: I begged the emperor to quickly deprive me of my official position, as a minister assisting the emperor in handling government affairs, to be on the alert for dereliction of duty.

古文：得旨： 卿亲承顾命，当竭忠尽职。
现代文：得圣旨说： 你身为顾命大臣，理当竭忠尽职。
English: The imperial edict said, "As a minister who cares about people's lives, you should be devoted to your duties.

古文：乃归非于上，退有后言。
现代文：却把过失推给上司，给自己留下后路。
English: However, he put the blame on his boss, leaving himself a way out.

古文：今复悻悻求去，可驰驿还籍。 
现代文：现在又很不情愿地要求辞职，可以派驿车送你回原籍。 
English: Now they are reluctantly asking you to resign. They can send a car to take you back to your home country.

古文：诸辅臣请如故事，加以体貌，不报。
现代文：各辅臣按惯例向皇帝求情，想让皇帝好言劝慰韩爌，皇帝没有回音。
English: According to the usual practice, all the aides-de-camp appealed to the emperor, hoping that the emperor would have a kind word to console Han Zheng, but the emperor did not respond.

古文：爌疏谢，有 左右前后务近端良，重纶綍以重仕途，肃纪纲以肃朝宁 语。
现代文：韩爌上疏辞谢，奏疏中有 皇帝前后左右务必接近端正贤良的人，严格录用标准来加强为官之道，严肃纲纪来整顿朝廷秩序 的话。
English: Han Xuan made a brief speech, in which he said that before and after the emperor, it is necessary to be close to the upright and virtuous people, strict recruitment standards to strengthen the official way, and serious discipline to rectify the order of the imperial court.

古文：忠贤及其党益恨。
现代文：魏忠贤和他的同党更加怀恨他。
English: Wei Zhongxian and his fellow party members hated him even more.

古文：爌去，朱国祯为首辅。
现代文：韩爌离职后，朱国祯成为首辅。
English: After Han Wei left office, Zhu Guozhen became the first assistant.

古文：李蕃攻去之，顾秉谦代其位。公卿庶僚，皆忠贤私人矣。
现代文：李蕃攻击他，使朱国祯离职，顾秉谦代替他成为首辅，公卿百官都成为魏忠贤的私党了。
English: Li Yu attacked him and made Zhu Guozhen leave office, Gu Bingqian replaced him as chief aide, and hundreds of nobles and officials became Wei Zhongxian's private party.

古文：五年七月，逆党李鲁生劾爌，削籍除名。
现代文：天启五年七月，逆党李鲁生弹劾韩爌，将韩爌除名，剥夺官籍。
English: In July of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, the traitor Li Lousheng impeached Han Qi, removed Han Qi's name from the official list, and deprived him of his official status.

古文：又假他事坐赃二千，毙其家人于狱。
现代文：又利用其他事件判他窝藏赃款二千两，将他的家人杀死在狱中。
English: He also took advantage of other incidents to be convicted of hiding 2,000 taels of stolen money, and killed his family members in prison.

古文：爌鬻田宅，贷亲故以偿，乃栖止先墓上。
现代文：韩爌卖掉田地房屋，向亲戚朋友贷款来偿还赃款，于是栖息在祖先的坟墓上面。
English: Han Yu sold his farmhouse, borrowed money from relatives and friends to repay the stolen money, and lived on top of his ancestor's grave.

古文：庄烈帝登极，复故官。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，恢复韩爌的原官职。
English: Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne and restored Han Zheng to his former official position.

古文：崇祯元年，言者争请召用，为逆党杨维垣等所扼，但赐敕存问，官其一子。
现代文：崇祯元年，有些人争相请求皇上征召任用韩爌，被逆党杨维垣等人压制了，只是赐圣旨慰问他，让他的一个儿子做官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, some people vied with each other to ask the emperor to conscript and appoint Han Zheng, but they were suppressed by Yang Weigaki and others of the rebel party. He was only given a sacred edict to console him and let one of his sons serve as an official.

古文：至五月，始遣行人召之。
现代文：到了五月，才派遣行人召用韩爌。
English: It was not until May that pedestrians were dispatched to call for the use of the Han River.

古文：十二月还朝，复为首辅。
现代文：十二月回到朝廷，重新当首辅。
English: In December, he returned to the Imperial Court and resumed his position as First Assistant.

古文：帝御文华后殿阅章奏，召爌等，谕以拟旨务消异同，开诚和衷，期于至当。
现代文：皇帝在文华后殿批阅奏章，召见韩爌等人，告诉他们草拟圣旨务求消除不同的意见，开诚布公，互相团结，希望做到最好。
English: The emperor approved the reading of the musical score in the back hall of the Palace of Literature, summoned Han Zheng and others, and told them to draft the will in order to eliminate different opinions, be open and honest, unite with each other, and hope to do the best.

古文：爌等顿首谢，退言： 上所谕甚善，而密勿政机，诸臣参互拟议，不必显言分合。
现代文：韩爌等人叩头称谢，退出来说： 皇上所说的非常好，而机密政务，各臣讨论拟旨，不必在外廷明确表示分歧意见。
English: Han Zheng and the others bowed their heads in gratitude and withdrew, saying, "What the emperor said is very good, but it is a confidential government matter, and since the ministers are discussing the draft, there is no need to clearly express differences of opinion outside the court."

古文：至臣等晨夕入直，势不能报谢宾客。
现代文：至于我们早晚进入宫中，势必不能报答宾客。
English: As for us entering the palace sooner or later, we will not be able to repay the guests.

古文：商政事者，宜相见于朝房，而一切禁私邸交际。 
现代文：商量政事的人，应该在朝房相见，而禁止在私人府第交谈国事。 
English: Those who discuss political affairs should meet at the Imperial Household Agency, and it is forbidden to discuss state affairs in private residences.

古文：帝即谕百僚遵行。
现代文：皇帝立即下诏让百官遵守执行。
English: The emperor immediately issued an edict for the officials to comply with the order.

古文：二年正月，大学士刘鸿训以张庆臻敕书事被重谴，爌疏救，不听。
现代文：崇祯二年正月，大学士刘鸿训因为张庆臻敕书的事情被重罚，韩爌上疏营救，皇帝不听。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Liu Hongxun, a university scholar, was severely punished because of the matter of Zhang Qingzhen's book. Han Xuan went to rescue him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：温体仁讦钱谦益，御史任赞化亦疏讦体仁。
现代文：温体仁攻击钱谦益，御史任赞化也上疏攻击温体仁。
English: Warm Bodies attacked Qian Qian, and Gu Shi Ren Zanhua also attacked Warm Bodies.

古文：帝召见廷臣，体仁力诋赞化及御史毛羽健为谦益死党。
现代文：皇帝召见廷臣，温体仁极力诋毁任赞化和御史毛羽健是钱谦益的死党。
English: The emperor summoned courtiers, and Wen Tianzhen tried his best to discredit Ren Zhanhua and Mishi Mao Yu Jian as the dead party of Qian Qianyi.

古文：帝怒，切责赞化。
现代文：皇帝很愤怒，痛切责备任赞化。
English: The emperor was furious and severely reprimanded Ren Zhanhua.

古文：爌请宽赞化以安体仁。
现代文：韩爌请求宽免任赞化，安抚温体仁。
English: Han Zheng asked for clemency and to appease Wen Tianzhen.

古文：帝因谓： 进言者不忧国而植党，自名东林，于朝事何补？ 
现代文：皇上于是说： 提意见的人不为国担忧却培植私党，自命名为东林，对朝廷事务有什么补益？ 
English: The emperor then said, "The person who made the suggestion is not worried about the country, but cultivates a private party and calls himself Donglin. What is the benefit to the affairs of the imperial court?

古文：爌退，具揭言： 人臣不可以党事君，人君亦不可以党疑臣。
现代文：韩爌退回，他的上奏说： 臣子不可以拿结党拉派来服务皇帝，皇帝也不可以拿结党拉派来怀疑臣子。
English: Han Xuan retreated and said in his report: A courtier may not be sent to serve the emperor with a party affiliation, nor may the emperor be sent to suspect a courtier with a party affiliation.

古文：但当论其才品臧否，职业修废，而黜陟之。
现代文：只看他才能品性的好坏，是否有职业修养，以此来决定他的升迁或降贬。
English: He will be promoted or demoted according to his talent, good or bad character, and professional accomplishment.

古文：若戈矛妄起于朝堂，畛域横分于宫府，非国之福也。 
现代文：如果朝廷纷争，宫府拉帮结派，只会对国家有百害而无一利。 
English: If the imperial court disputes, and the palace government pulls the gangs together, it will only bring harm to the country, but no benefit.

古文：又率同官力救赞化，不纳。
现代文：又率领同事极力营救任赞化，皇帝不采纳。
English: He also led his colleagues in an effort to rescue Ren Zhanhua, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：皇长子生，请尽蠲天下积逋，报可。
现代文：皇太子降世，韩爌请求将全国拖欠的租赋一概免除，皇帝同意了。
English: When the crown prince was born, Han Zheng requested that all the rent arrears in the country be waived, and the emperor agreed.

古文：时大治忠贤党，爌与李标、钱龙锡主之。
现代文：这时大规模惩处魏忠贤的党徒，由韩爌和李标、钱龙锡主持。
English: At this time, the large-scale punishment of Wei Zhongxian's party members was presided over by Han Zheng, Li Bian and Qian Longxi.

古文：列上二百六十二人，罪分六等，名曰 钦定逆案 ，颁行天下。
现代文：列上二百六十二人，按罪行的轻重分为六等，名叫： 钦定逆案 ，向全国颁布发行。
English: The list of 262 people, divided into six classes according to the severity of the crime, is called the "Kinjin Reverse Case" and is issued to the whole country.

古文：言者争击吏部尚书王永光，南京礼部主事王永吉言之尤力。
现代文：谈论者争相攻击吏部尚书王永光，其中以南京礼部主事王永吉最为卖力。
English: Commentators are vying to attack Wang Yongguang, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, of which Wang Yongji, the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, is doing the most.

古文：帝怒，将罪之。
现代文：皇帝很不高兴，将要处罚他。
English: The emperor was furious and punished him.

古文：爌等言永吉不宥，永光必不安，乃止夺俸一年。
现代文：韩爌等人说王永吉得不到宽恕，王永光一定不会安宁，于是只剥夺王永吉的俸禄一年。
English: Han Yu and others said that Wang Yongji would not be forgiven and Wang Yongguang would not be at peace, so they only deprived Wang Yongji of his salary for one year.

古文：工部尚书张凤翔奏厂、库积弊。帝怒，召对廷臣诘责。
现代文：工部尚书张凤翔报告厂、库原来的陋习，皇帝发脾气，召见廷臣当面询问责备。
English: Zhang Fengxiang, a senior official of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, reported the original bad habits of the factory and the warehouse. The emperor lost his temper and summoned the courtiers to inquire and reprimand in person.

古文：巡视科道王都、高赉明二人力辨，帝命锦衣官执之，爌、标、龙锡并救解。
现代文：巡视科道王都、高赉明二人极力辩白，皇帝命令锦衣官逮捕他们，韩爌、李标、钱龙锡一起营救他们。
English: The two inspectors, Wangdu of Science and Technology and Gao Zhiming, tried their best to defend themselves. The emperor ordered the brocade officer to arrest them, and Han Zheng, Li Bian and Qian Longxi to rescue them together.

古文：而是日永光以羽健疏劾，请帝究主使者。
现代文：而这天王永光因为毛羽健上疏弹劾他，请求皇帝追究主使的人。
English: However, this King Yongguang impeached him because of Mao Yu Jian Shangso and asked the emperor to investigate the person who sent him.

古文：爌退，申救都等，因言永光不宜请究言官。
现代文：韩爌退朝，再三营救王都等人，并且说王永光不应该请求皇帝追究言官。
English: Han Zheng retreated, repeatedly rescued Wang Du and others, and said that Wang Yongguang should not ask the emperor to investigate the spokesman.

古文：帝不纳，然羽健卒获免。
现代文：皇帝不接受，然而毛羽健最终得以幸免。
English: The emperor did not accept it, but Mao Yu Jian was eventually spared.

古文：初，熊廷弼既死，传首九边，尸不得归葬。
现代文：当初，熊廷弼死后，他的首级被送往九边示众，他的尸体不能运回埋葬。
English: At first, after Xiong Tingyao's death, his head was sent to Jiuyuan for public display, and his body could not be returned for burial.

古文：至是，其子诣阙疏请。
现代文：到现在，他儿子到宫前上疏请求收葬。
English: To this day, his son goes to the Imperial Household Agency to ask for permission to bury him.

古文：爌等因言： 廷弼之死，由逆奄欲杀杨涟、魏大中，诬以行贿，因尽杀涟等，复悬坐廷弼赃银十七万，刑及妻孥，冤之甚者。 
现代文：韩爌等人于是说： 熊廷弼之死，是由于叛逆太监想杀害杨涟、魏大中，诬陷他行贿，于是将杨涟等人全都杀死，又平白无故地栽赃熊廷弼银十七万两，连他的妻儿家人都受到处罚，实在是天大的冤枉。 
English: Han Yu and others then said: Xiong Tingyu's death was due to the fact that the traitorous eunuch wanted to kill Yang Yu and Wei Datong, framed him for bribery, and then killed all of Yang Yu and others, and planted 170,000 taels of silver on Xiong Tingyu without any reason. Even his wife and children were punished, which was really a huge injustice.

古文：帝乃许收葬。
现代文：皇帝于是允许熊廷弼的儿子去收尸埋葬。
English: The emperor then allowed Xiong Tingyao's son to collect the body and bury it.

古文：时辽事急，朝议汰各镇兵。
现代文：当时辽东战局危急，朝廷议论裁减各镇的兵员。
English: At that time, the war situation in Liaodong was critical, and the imperial court discussed reducing the number of soldiers in each town.

古文：又以兵科给事中刘懋疏，议裁驿卒。
现代文：又因为兵科给事中徐懋的奏疏，讨论裁减驿卒。
English: In addition, because the military science department gave a poor report in the middle of the matter, the discussion on reducing the number of cadres has come to an end.

古文：帝以问爌，爌言： 汰兵止当清占冒及增设冗兵尔。
现代文：皇帝征求韩爌的意见，韩爌说： 减裁兵员只应当清除那些滥冒和新增的冗员。
English: The emperor asked Han Zheng for his opinion. Han Zheng said: The reduction of soldiers should only eliminate those who abuse and increase redundancy.

古文：冲地额兵不可汰也。
现代文：军事要地符合兵额的士兵不可以裁减。
English: The number of soldiers who meet the military quota cannot be reduced.

古文：驿传疲累，当责按臣核减，以苏民困，其所节省，仍还之民。 
现代文：驿站的士兵很辛苦，应当责令巡按核实裁减，以解除人民的困苦，裁减兵员所节省下来的费用仍然交还给人民。 
English: The soldiers at the garrison are working very hard. They should be ordered to reduce the number of patrols according to verification, so as to relieve the hardships of the people. The expenses saved by reducing the number of soldiers should still be returned to the people.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇帝认为是这样。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：御史高捷、史褷以罪免，永光力引之。都御史曹于汴持不可，永光再疏争。
现代文：御史高捷、史翲被免除罪行，王永光极力引用他们，都御史曹于汴坚持不同意。王永光再次上疏争取。
English: Wang Yongguang quoted them as much as he could, but the Grand Historian Cao Yuxuan insisted that he did not agree. Wang Yongguang once again fought for Shangzhu.

古文：爌言，故事当听都察院咨用。
现代文：韩爌说，按惯例应听取都御史的意见任用。
English: Han Wei said that, according to the usual practice, the opinion of the Metropolitan Historian should be listened to before appointment.

古文：帝方眷永光，不从。
现代文：皇帝正在宠幸王永光，不接受他的意见。
English: The emperor is favoring Wang Yongguang and does not accept his opinion.

古文：九月，以将行庆典，请停秋决，亦不从。
现代文：九月将要举行庆祝典礼，因为这个缘故，韩爌请求皇帝停止秋季审判，皇帝也不听。
English: In September, there will be a celebration ceremony, because of this, Han Zheng asked the emperor to stop the autumn trial, and the emperor did not listen.

古文：时逆案虽定，永光及袁弘勋、捷、褷辈日为翻案计。
现代文：这时 逆案 虽然已经确定，王永光和袁弘勋、高捷、史翲这帮人每天都在密谋翻案的事情。
English: At this time, the reverse case Although it has been determined that Wang Yongguang and Yuan Hongxun, Gao Jie, Shi Jie, these people are plotting to overturn the case every day.

古文：至十月，大清兵入畿甸，都城戒严。
现代文：到了十月，大清兵进入京城附近，都城戒严。
English: In October, the Qing soldiers entered the vicinity of Beijing, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：初，袁崇焕入朝，尝与钱龙锡语边事。
现代文：当初，袁崇焕上朝，曾跟钱龙锡谈论边防事务。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Chonghuan talked with Qian Longxi about border defense affairs.

古文：龙锡，东林党魁也，永光等谋因崇焕兴大狱，可尽倾东林。
现代文：钱龙锡是东林党首领，王永光等人阴谋利用袁崇焕制造大案，可以将东林党一网打尽。
English: Qian Longxi is the leader of the Donglin Party, and Wang Yongguang and others conspire to use Yuan Chonghuan to create a big case, which can completely defeat the Donglin Party.

古文：倡言大清兵之入，由崇焕杀毛文龙所致。
现代文：王永光带头说大清兵的进攻，是由于袁崇焕杀害毛文龙导致的。
English: Wang Yongguang took the lead in saying that the attack of the Qing soldiers was caused by Yuan Chonghuan's killing of Mao Wenlong.

古文：捷遂首攻龙锡，逐之。
现代文：高捷于是带头攻击钱龙锡，驱逐他。
English: Gao Jie then took the lead in attacking Qian Longxi and expelling him.

古文：明年正月，中书舍人加尚宝卿原抱奇故由输赀进，亦劾爌主款误国，招寇欺君，郡邑残破，宗社阽危，不能设一策，拔一人，坐视成败，以人国侥幸，宜与龙锡并斥。
现代文：第二年正月，中书舍人加封尚宝卿，原抱奇原来是由捐款买官进入朝廷的，也弹劾韩爌主政误国，招敌欺君，毁坏省城，国家濒临危亡，不能想出一个计策、选拔一个人才，坐视国家的成败，把国家命运寄托在偶然出现的机会上，应该和钱龙锡一起排斥。
English: In the first month of the second year, the people of the Chinese Academy of Letters conferred the title of Shang Baoqing, who was originally surprised to enter the imperial court through donations. They also impeached Han Zheng for misruling the country, inviting enemies and deceiving the king, destroying provinces and cities, and the country was on the verge of death. They could not come up with a strategy and select a talent, sat back and watched the country's success or failure, and pinned the country's fate on chance opportunities. They should be excluded along with Qian Longxi.

古文：其言主款者，以爌，崇焕座主也。
现代文：他所说的主和者是因为韩爌是袁崇焕的座主。
English: He said the lord and master because Han Zheng was the lord of Yuan Chonghuang.

古文：帝重去爌，贬抱奇秩。
现代文：皇帝重视韩爌，降了原抱奇的官级。
English: The emperor attached great importance to Han Zheng and lowered his official rank.

古文：无何，左庶子丁进以迁擢愆期怨爌，亦劾之，而工部主事李逢申劾疏继上。
现代文：不久，左庶子丁进因为提升延误了日期怨恨韩爌，也弹劾他，而工部主事李逢申跟着上疏弹劾韩爌。
English: Soon after, Ding Jin, the left illegitimate son, resented Han Qi for delaying the date of promotion and also impeached him, while Li Feng Shen, the head of the Ministry of Industry, followed Shang Zuo in impeaching Han Qi.

古文：爌即三疏引疾。
现代文：韩爌三次上疏称病。
English: Han Zheng suffered from illness three times.

古文：诏赐白金彩币，驰驿遣行人护归，悉如彝典。
现代文：下诏赐给他白金、彩色丝织品，乘驿车派遣行人护送他回家，全部都如常法一样。
English: The emperor gave him platinum and colored silk, and dispatched pedestrians to escort him home in a carriage, all of which were the same as usual.

古文：进、逢申并爌会试所举士也。
现代文：丁进和李逢申都是韩爌主持考试时选拔的官员。
English: Both Ding Jin and Li Fangshen were officials selected by Han Yu when he presided over the examination.

古文：爌先后作相，老成慎重。引正人，抑邪党，天下称其贤，独尝庇王永光云。
现代文：韩爌先后二次当宰相，老成持重，引用正直的人，压制邪党，全国人民都称颂他的英明，唯独曾经庇护王永光。
English: Han Zheng became the prime minister for the second time in a row. He had a strong sense of duty, cited honest people, and suppressed evil parties. The people of the whole country praised his wisdom, except that he once sheltered Wang Yongguang.

古文：十七年春，李自成陷蒲州，迫爌出见，不从。
现代文：崇祯十七年春天，李自成攻陷蒲州，逼韩爌出来相见，韩爌不理睬。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng attacked and occupied Puzhou, forcing Han Zheng to come out to meet him, but Han Zheng ignored him.

古文：贼执其孙以胁。
现代文：农民军抓住他的孙子威胁他。
English: The peasant army grabbed his grandson and threatened him.

古文：广止一孙，乃出见，贼释其孙。
现代文：韩爌只有一个孙子，于是出来相见，农民军释放了他的孙子。
English: Han Zheng had only one grandson, so he came out to meet him, and the peasant army released his grandson.

古文：爌归，愤郁而卒，年八十矣。
现代文：韩爌回到家里，气愤忧郁而死，年纪八十岁了。
English: Han Zheng returned home, angry and depressed, and died at the age of eighty.

古文：朱国祚，字兆隆，秀水人。
现代文：朱国祚，字兆隆，秀水人。
English: Zhu Guozhen, Zi Zhaolong, Xiushui Ren.

古文：万历十一年进士第一。授修撰。
现代文：万历十一年中进士第一，授职修撰。
English: In the eleventh year of the Wanli era, it was the first to admit students and the first to award positions.

古文：进洗马，为皇长子侍班官，寻进谕德。
现代文：进为洗马，为皇长子侍班官，不久，升谕德。
English: He was promoted to horse washer and attendant to the emperor's eldest son, and was soon promoted to the imperial secretary.

古文：日本陷朝鲜，石星惑沈惟敬言，力主封贡。
现代文：日本攻陷朝鲜，石星被沈惟敬的话所蛊惑，力主封贡。
English: When Japan invaded Korea, Shi Xing was bewitched by Shen Weijing's words and paid tribute.

古文：国祚面诘星： 此我乡曲无赖，因缘为奸利耳，公独不计辱国乎？ 
现代文：朱国祚当面责问石星： 这是乡党小人无赖，为获奸利之计，您为何独独不考虑国家的荣辱呢？ 
English: Zhu Guozhen directly asked Shi Xing: This is a villainous villain of the township party. In order to gain profit, why do you not consider the honor and disgrace of the country?

古文：星不能用。
现代文：石星不采纳他的建议。
English: Shi Xing did not accept his suggestion.

古文：二十六年，超擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：万历二十六年朱国祚被破格提为礼部右侍郎。
English: In the 26th year of Wanli, Zhu Guozhen was promoted to the post of the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：湖广税监陈奉横甚。国祚贻书巡按御史曹楷，令发其状。
现代文：湖广税监陈奉横行霸道，朱国祚写信给巡按御史曹楷，命令揭发陈奉的罪行。
English: Hukang tax inspector Chen Bong behaved in a domineering manner. Zhu Guozhen wrote to inspector Cao Kai, ordering him to expose Chen Bong's crimes.

古文：帝怒，几逮楷，奉亦因此撤去。
现代文：皇上发了脾气，几乎将曹楷逮捕，陈奉也因此被撤走。
English: The emperor lost his temper and almost had Cao Kai arrested, and Chen Bong was also removed as a result.

古文：尚书余继登卒，国祚摄部事。
现代文：尚书余继登死后，朱国祚管理礼部事宜。
English: After the death of Shang Shuyue, Zhu Guozhen took over the management of the ceremonial affairs.

古文：时皇长子储位未定，冠婚逾期，国祚屡疏谏。
现代文：当时皇长子储位未定，冠礼、婚期过了期限，朱国祚屡屡上奏劝谏。
English: At that time, the position of the eldest son of the emperor was undecided, the coronation ceremony and the wedding period had passed the deadline, and Zhu Guozhen repeatedly appealed to the emperor.

古文：戚臣郑国泰请先冠婚，后册立。
现代文：外戚之臣郑国泰请求先举行冠礼、婚礼，后册立。
English: Zheng Guotai, a vassal of his maternal relative, requested that the coronation and wedding be held first, and then the establishment be registered.

古文：国祚抗疏言： 本朝外戚不得与政事。
现代文：朱国祚表示反对，上疏说： 本朝，外戚不能参与政事。
English: Zhu Guozhen objected, Shang Zuo said: This morning, the maternal relative cannot participate in political affairs.

古文：册立大典，非国泰所宜言。
现代文：册立大典，不是郑国泰所应当说的。
English: To set up a grand ceremony is not what Zheng Guotai should have said.

古文：况先册立，后冠婚，其仪仗、冠服之制，祝醮、敕戒之辞，升降、坐立之位，朝贺拜舞之节，因名制分，因分制礼，甚严且辨。
现代文：况且先册立，后举行冠礼、婚礼，其仪仗、冠服的制度、祝醮、敕戒的辞令，升降、坐立的位次，朝贺、拜舞的礼节，因名分加以区别，因区别制定礼节，很严明且易辨。
English: Moreover, the etiquette of first registering and then holding the crowning ceremony and wedding ceremony, its ceremonial war, the system of crown and robe, the words of congratulation and exhortation, the ranks of promotion and demotion, sitting and standing, morning greetings, and dances, are distinguished by name, and the etiquette is formulated according to the difference, which is very strict and easy to distinguish.

古文：一失其序，名分大乖。
现代文：一旦失掉顺序，名分将大乱。
English: Once the order is lost, the results will be chaotic.

古文：违累朝祖制，背皇上明纶，犯天下清议，皆此言也。 
现代文：违背累朝祖宗的制度。皇上的明伦，为天下所议论，都是这个话。 
English: The Emperor's edict, which is the talk of the world, is this.

古文：又言： 册立之事，理不可缓。
现代文：又说： 册立之事，按理不可推迟。
English: He also said: "Registration cannot reasonably be delayed.

古文：初谓小臣激聒，故迟之。
现代文：起初说小臣激变，所以推迟。
English: At first, it was said that there would be a drastic change of ministers, so it was postponed.

古文：后群臣勿言，则曰待嫡。
现代文：后群臣没说什么，又说等到嫡长子。
English: Afterward, the ministers didn't say anything, and said wait until the eldest son is born.

古文：及中官久无所出，则曰皇长子体弱，须其强。今又待两宫落成矣。
现代文：等到中宫很久都没有生出，于是说皇长子体弱，必须待他身体好之后，现在又等待两宫落成。
English: After waiting for a long time for the birth of the second palace, it was said that the emperor's eldest son was weak and had to be taken care of, and now they are waiting for the completion of the two palaces.

古文：自三殿灾，朝廷大政令率御文华殿。
现代文：自从三殿发生火灾，朝廷大政令都出自文华殿。
English: Ever since the fire broke out in the Third Hall, all major imperial decrees have come from the Palace of Literature.

古文：三礼之行，在殿不在宫。
现代文：三礼的仪式，在殿不在宫中。
English: The ceremony of the three prostrations takes place in the hall, not in the palace.

古文：顷岁趣办珠宝，户部所进，视陛下大婚数倍之。
现代文：每岁办理珠宝，户部所进已超过皇上大婚的数倍。
English: Jewelry is handled every year, and the income of households has increased several times more than the emperor's big wedding.

古文：远近疑陛下借珠宝之未备，以迟典礼。
现代文：远近之人怀疑陛下借口珠宝没有齐备是要推迟典礼。
English: People near and far suspected that His Majesty's excuse for not having the jewels ready was to postpone the ceremony.

古文：且诏旨采办珠宝，额二千四百万，而天下赋税之额乃止四百万。即不充国用，不给边需，犹当六年乃足。
现代文：而且皇上下诏采办珠宝限额二千四百万，天下的赋税每年定额才有四百万，即使不充国用，不给边境军需，六年以后才能收齐。
English: Moreover, the emperor decreed that the limit for the purchase of jewelry was twenty-four million, and the annual quota of taxation in the world was only four million. Even if it was not used for state purposes and was not given to the border military, it would take six years to collect it.

古文：必待取盈而后举大礼，几无时矣。 
现代文：若一定要等到定额后再举行大礼，几乎没有时间了。 
English: If you have to wait until after the quota to hold a grand ceremony, there is almost no time.

古文：已，又言： 太祖、成祖、仁宗，即位初，即建储贰。
现代文：不久，又说： 太祖、成祖、仁宗，即位初期就立了储君。
English: Not long after, he also said: Taizu, Chengzu, and Ninsong all had crown princes at the beginning of their reigns.

古文：宣宗、英宗册为皇太子时，止二岁，宪宗、孝宗止六岁，陛下亦以六岁。
现代文：宣宗、英宗册封为皇太子时，只有二岁，宪宗、孝宗仅有六岁，陛下也是六岁。
English: When Xuan Zong and Ying Zong were enthroned as crown princes, they were only two years old, while Xianzong and Xiaozong were only six years old, and His Majesty was also six years old.

古文：未闻年十九而不册立者。 
现代文：没有听说过十九岁了还没有被册封的。 
English: Haven't heard of a nineteen-year-old who hasn't been canonized.

古文：国祚摄尚书近二年，争国本至数十疏，储位卒定。
现代文：朱国祚任尚书二年，为立皇太子一事上了数十道奏疏，储位终于定下。
English: After two years of Zhu Guozhen's tenure, dozens of records were recorded for the establishment of the crown prince, and the storage position was finally determined.

古文：陕西狄道山崩，其南涌小山五，国祚请修省。
现代文：陕西狄道发生山崩，南部涌出五座小山，朱国祚请求修心、反省。
English: A landslide occurred in Di Dao, Shaanxi Province, and five small hills emerged in the south. Zhu Guozhen requested that people should cultivate their minds and reflect.

古文：社稷坛枯树生烟，复陈安人心、收人望、通下情、清滥狱四事。
现代文：社稷坛的枯树冒烟，他又上陈安定人心、恢复百姓希望、上下沟通、清理滥定冤狱四件事。
English: The dead tree at the altar of the Great Hall of the People emitted smoke, and he went on to do four things: stabilize the hearts of the people, restore the hope of the people, communicate between the upper and lower levels, and clean up the wrongful imprisonment.

古文：云南巡抚陈用宾进土物，国祚劾之。
现代文：云南巡抚陈用宾进贡土产，朱国祚弹劾他。
English: Chen Yibin, the governor of Yunnan, paid tribute to local products, and Zhu Guozhen impeached him.

古文：寻转左侍郎，改吏部。
现代文：不久，他转任左侍郎，改任吏部。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the Left Attendant, and then to the Correspondence Department.

古文：御史汤兆京劾其纵酒逾检，帝不问，国祚遂引疾归。
现代文：御史汤兆京弹劾他纵酒逾制，皇上不过问，朱国祚称病回乡。
English: He was impeached by Tang Zhaojing, the Grand Historian, for excessive drinking, but the emperor did not question him, and Zhu Guozhen claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：光宗即位，以国祚尝侍潜邸，特旨拜礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入阁参机务。
现代文：光宗即位，因为朱国祚曾在府邸侍奉，特下圣旨拜他为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入内阁参与机密要务。
English: Emperor Guangzong ascended the throne, because Zhu Guozhong had served in the palace, and it was specially ordered that he be made a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University, and that he join the cabinet to participate in confidential affairs.

古文：天启元年六月还朝。
现代文：天启元年六月，朱国祚回到朝廷。
English: In June of the following year, Zhu Guozhen returned to the imperial court.

古文：寻加太子太保，进文渊阁。
现代文：不久，他又被加封为太子太保，进文渊阁。
English: He was soon given the title of Crown Prince Taibo and entered Bunyukaku Palace.

古文：国祚素行清慎，事持大体，称长者。
现代文：朱国祚平素清正廉洁，凡事坚持以国家为重，被人称为长者。
English: Zhu Guoxuan was pure, upright and incorruptible. He insisted on putting the country first in all things. He was known as an elder.

古文：明年会试，故事，总裁止用内阁一人，是科用何宗彦及国祚，有讥其中旨特用者。
现代文：第二年会试，按旧制，总裁只用内阁一人，这一科用何宗彦及朱国祚，有人讥讽他是因为迎合皇帝旨意而受到特别任用的。
English: In the second year of the examination, according to the old system, the president only used one cabinet member. This department used He Zongyan and Zhu Guozhen. Some people ridiculed him for being specially appointed to meet the emperor's will.

古文：国祚既竣事，即求罢，优诏不允。
现代文：朱国祚完成有关事宜之后，便请求罢免，皇上下诏不允许。
English: After Zhu Guozhen completed the relevant matters, he requested to be dismissed, which was not allowed by the Emperor's edict.

古文：都御史邹元标侍经筵而踬，帝遣中使问状。
现代文：都御史邹元标侍讲经筵时被绊倒，皇帝派遣宦官询问有关情形。
English: The Emperor sent an eunuch to inquire about the situation after the Imperial Governor, Shi Yuanbiao, tripped while giving a sermon.

古文：国祚进曰： 元标在先朝直言受杖，故步履犹艰。 
现代文：朱国祚进言说： 邹元标在先朝时因直言被廷杖，所以步履艰难。 
English: Zhu Guozhen said, "During the previous reign, Xuan Yuanbei was punished by the court for his outspokenness, so it was difficult for him to walk.

古文：帝为之改容。
现代文：皇上深为之感动。
English: The Emperor was deeply moved.

古文：刑部尚书王纪为魏忠贤所逐，国祚合疏救，复具私揭争之。
现代文：刑部尚书王纪被魏忠贤所放逐，朱国祚与人合作上疏申救，又单独上奏为他争辩。
English: Shangshu Wang Ji of the Department of Criminal Law was exiled by Wei Zhongxian, and Zhu Guozhen did not cooperate with others to help him, and he was the only one to argue for him.

古文：纪为礼部侍郎时，尝以事忤国祚者也。
现代文：王纪做礼部侍郎时，曾因某事与朱国祚抵触。
English: When Wang Ji was a waiter in the etiquette department, he once had a conflict with Zhu Guozhen because of something.

古文：三年，进少保、太子太保、户部尚书，改武英殿。
现代文：天启三年朱国祚晋封为少保、太子太保、户部尚书，改武英殿。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, Zhu Guozhong was promoted to Shao Bao, Prince Taibo, and head of the household, changing his name to Wuying.

古文：十三疏乞休，诏加少傅兼太子太傅，乘传归。
现代文：上了十三道奏折乞求退休，皇上下诏加封他为少傅兼太子太傅，乘着驿车归家。
English: After thirteen recitations, he begged to retire, and the emperor gave him the title of Shōfu and Taifu, and he returned home in a carriage.

古文：明年卒。赠太傅，谥文恪。
现代文：第二年，朱国祚逝世，赠为太傅，谥号文恪。
English: The following year, Zhu Guozhen passed away and was given the title of Taifu and the posthumous name of Wenke.

古文：从子大启，文选郎中，终刑部左侍郎。
现代文：侄子大启，文选郎中，死于刑部左侍郎任上。
English: His nephew, Daiki, died in the middle of the selection of writers and was appointed as the left-hand man of the penal department.

