古文：哥舒翰章仇兼琼杨慎矜江南吴生朱岘女杜万韦自东马燧
现代文：哥舒翰章仇兼琼杨慎矜江南吴生朱岘女杜万韦自东马燧
English: Du Wanwei, the daughter of Du Wanwei from East Malang

古文：哥舒翰
现代文：哥舒翰
English: Goshukhan

古文：哥舒翰少时，有志气，长安交游豪侠，宅新书坊。
现代文：唐代名将哥舒翰少年时代就很有志气，在京城长安结交了很多豪杰志士。
English: As a young boy, the famous Tang Dynasty general Goshukhan was very ambitious, and he made friends with many heroes in the capital Chang'an.

古文：有爱妾，曰裴六娘者，容范旷代，宅于崇仁，舒翰常悦之。
现代文：他家住在新昌坊，有个爱妾叫裴六娘，容貌出众，家住崇仁里。舒翰十分宠爱裴六娘。
English: His family lived in Xinchangfang, and he had a beloved concubine named Pei Lijun, who was outstanding in appearance, and lived in Chongrenli. Shu Han was very fond of Pei Lijun.

古文：居无何，舒翰有故，游近畿，数月方回。及至，妾已病死，舒翰甚悼之。
现代文：后来，哥舒翰因公事到京郊巡视，几个月后才回来，回来后，裴六娘已病死，舒翰十分悲痛，就来到她的住所。
English: Later, his brother Shuhan went on a business trip to the outskirts of Beijing, and only returned a few months later. After returning, Pei's sixth daughter had died of illness, and Shuhan was very sad and came to her residence.

古文：既而日暮，因宿其舍。
现代文：当时裴六娘还没有埋葬，停尸在堂屋里。
English: At that time, Pei's sixth daughter had not yet been buried, and her body was still in the hall.

古文：尚未葬，殡于堂奥，既无他室，舒翰曰：平生之爱，存没何间？
现代文：哥舒翰来后没有别的屋子可住，就说：裴六娘是我最亲爱的人，她不论是活是死在我都没什么顾忌。
English: Brother Shuhan had no other house to live in after he came, so he said, "Pei Six's daughter is my dearest person. Whether she is alive or dead, I have no scruples.

古文：独宿繐帐中。
现代文：因此就在停尸的堂屋里住下，独自睡在床帐中。
English: So she took up residence in the morgue, sleeping alone in a bed sheet.

古文：夜半后，庭月皓然，舒翰悲叹不寐。忽见门屏间有一物，倾首而窥。进退逡巡。入庭中，乃夜叉也。
现代文：夜深人静时，哥舒翰看窗外皎洁的月光，觉悲伤凄凉不能入睡，忽然看见外面大门和影壁墙之间有一个东西在探头探脑，左右徘徊，然后进到院子里，再仔细一看，原来是个夜叉。
English: In the dead of night, Goshukhan looked out of the window at the bright moonlight, feeling sad and desolate and unable to sleep. Suddenly, he saw a thing between the outer gate and the shadow wall probing, wandering left and right, and then entering the yard. A closer look revealed that it was a night fork.

古文：长丈许，著豹皮裩，锯牙披发。
现代文：这夜叉有一丈多高，穿着豹皮裤，披散着长发，牙像锯齿，接着又有三个鬼跟着进来。
English: The nightingale was very tall, wearing leopard skin trousers, long hair hanging loose, teeth like serrated teeth, and then three more ghosts followed.

古文：更有三鬼相继进，及拽朱索，舞于月下。相与言曰：床上贵人奈何？
现代文：他们一起扯着红色的绳子在月光下跳舞，边跳边说：床上的贵人怎么样了？
English: Together they pulled on the red rope and danced in the moonlight, saying as they danced: "What happened to the noble man in the bed?

古文：又曰：寝矣。
现代文：其中一个说：已经睡了。
English: One of them said: "I've fallen asleep."

古文：便升阶，入殡所拆发。舁榇于月中，破而取其尸，糜割肢体，环坐共食之。血流于庭，衣物狼藉。
现代文：说罢，他们就走上庭院的台阶进入停尸的堂屋打开棺材盖，把棺材抬到外面月光下，把尸体取出来切割后围坐着吃起来，尸体的血流在院子里，死者的尸衣撕扯得扔了一地。
English: With that, they walked up the steps of the courtyard, entered the morgue, opened the coffin lid, carried the coffin outside into the moonlight, took out the corpse, cut it, sat around it and ate it. The corpse's blood flowed in the courtyard, and the dead man's shroud was torn and thrown to the ground.

古文：舒翰恐怖，且痛之，自分曰：向叫我作贵人，我今击之，必无苦。遂潜取帐外竿，忽于暗中掷出，大叫击鬼。
现代文：哥舒翰越看越怕，也十分痛心，暗想这些鬼怪刚才称我为贵人，我现在如果打他们，大概不会有什么了不起，就偷偷抄起帐外一根竿子使劲扔出去，同时大叫打鬼呀！
English: The more he looked at it, the more afraid he was, and he was also very distressed. He thought to himself that these ghosts had just called me an honorable person, and if I beat them now, it probably wouldn't be a big deal. So he secretly picked up a pole from outside the tent and threw it out, shouting "Beat the ghosts!"

古文：鬼大骇走，舒翰乘势逐之西北隅，逾垣而去。
现代文：果然，鬼怪们吓得四散而逃。舒翰趁势追到院子西北角，鬼怪纷纷翻墙而逃。
English: Sure enough, the ghosts scattered in fear and fled. Shuhan took advantage of the situation to chase them to the northwest corner of the yard, and the ghosts scaled the wall and fled.

古文：有一鬼最后，不得上，舒翰击中流血，乃得去。
现代文：有一个鬼跑在最后，没来得及上墙，被舒翰打中，这鬼勉强爬上墙，地上留下了血迹。
English: A ghost ran at the end, but missed the wall and was hit by Shuhan. The ghost barely climbed the wall, leaving blood on the ground.

古文：家人闻变乱，起来救之，舒翰具道其事。将收余骸，及至堂，殡所俨然如故，而啖处亦无所见。
现代文：这时家里人听见外面闹哄哄地，就跑出来救助，哥舒翰就说了刚才的事，大家七手八脚收拾被夜叉撕碎的尸体，刚要搬进堂屋，却见里面的棺廓完好无损，尸上被鬼撕咬过的地方也毫无痕迹。
English: At this time, when the family heard the commotion outside, they ran out to help, and Brother Shuhan told them what had just happened. Everyone gathered around the body, which had been torn to pieces by the nightingale. They were just about to move into the hall, when they saw that the inside of the coffin was intact, and there was no trace of the place where the ghost had torn and bitten the body.

古文：舒翰恍忽，以为梦中，验其墙有血，其上有迹，竟不知其然。
现代文：哥舒翰恍恍惚以为是作了一场梦，但验看墙上有夜叉留下的血，院里也有鬼走过的痕迹，谁也弄不明白是怎么回事。
English: Goshukhan vaguely thought that he had had a dream, but when he checked, there was blood on the wall left by the night fork, and there were also traces of ghosts in the yard. No one could figure out what was going on.

古文：后数年，舒翰显达。
现代文：几年之后，哥舒翰却官居显位，成了大将军。
English: A few years later, however, Goshukhan rose to prominence and became a general.

古文：章仇兼琼
现代文：章仇兼琼
English: Zhang Quian Qiong

古文：章仇兼琼镇蜀日，佛寺设大会。百戏在庭，有十岁童儿舞于竿杪，忽有一物，状如鵰鹗，掠之而去。
现代文：章仇兼琼镇守蜀中时，有一次寺院里举行盛大的庙会，庙院里正在演杂技，一个十岁的小演员正在竹竿顶上作各对惊险的动作。
English: When Zhang Qiu and Qiong Zhen were in charge of Shu Middle School, there was once a grand temple fair held in the temple. In the temple, acrobatics were being performed, and a ten-year-old child actor was performing each pair of thrilling movements on the top of a bamboo pole.

古文：群众大骇，因罢乐。后数日，其父母见在高塔之上，梯而取之，而神形如痴。
现代文：这时，空中突然飞来一个像鹰鵰的大鸟将竹竿上的小演员掠去，人们大惊，杂技表演也只好停了。几天后，那孩子的父母发现孩子在高塔顶上，树梯爬上去把孩子取下来。
English: At this time, a large bird like a falcon suddenly flew into the air and snatched the little actor on the bamboo pole. People were shocked, and the acrobatic performance had to stop. A few days later, the child's parents found the child on the top of the tower, climbed up the ladder and took the child down.

古文：久之方语云，见如壁画飞天夜叉者，将入塔中，日饲里实饮食之味，亦不知其所自。
现代文：孩子变得又呆又痴，过了好久才能说话。据孩子说，他当时看见有一个像壁画上的飞天夜叉的怪物，突然把他掠到塔里，每天怪物还用果子食物喂他，也不知是从哪里来的。
English: According to the child, he then saw a monster resembling the flying nightingale on the mural, and suddenly he was taken to the tower. The monster also fed him with fruit food every day, and he didn't know where it came from.

古文：旬日，方精神如初。
现代文：过了十多天，孩子才恢复了正常。
English: It took more than ten days for the child to return to normal.

古文：杨慎矜
现代文：杨慎矜
English: by Yang Shengkun

古文：开元中，杨慎矜为御史中丞。
现代文：唐代开元年间，杨慎矜任御史中丞。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Shengkun was appointed to the post of Vice President of History.

古文：一日，将入朝，家童开其外门，既启锁，其门噤不可解。慎矜且惊且异。
现代文：一天，他准备上朝，家童去给他开大门，门锁打开后，门却怎么也打不开，慎矜又惊讶又奇怪。
English: One day, when he was getting ready to leave for the morning, his family's child went to open the gate for him. After unlocking the gate, the door could not be opened in any way. He was cautious, surprised, and puzzled.

古文：洎天将晚，其导从吏自外见慎矜门有夜叉，长丈余，状极异，立于宇下，以左右手噤其门。
现代文：一直等到天亮后，他的导从官来催他上朝，看见大门外有一只夜叉，有一丈多高，而且又怪又丑，站在大门的廊宇下，伸出两只手从外面拽住了门扇。
English: He waited until after dawn, when his guide came to urge him to get up, and saw outside the gate a nightingale, a great height, and strange and ugly, standing under the porch of the gate, stretching out two hands and pulling the door from the outside.

古文：火吻电眸，盼顾左右。从吏见之，俱惊栗四去。
现代文：这夜叉红嘴如血目光似电，不断地左顾右盼，导从官和侍卫们看见了夜叉，吓得四处逃散。
English: This night fork red mouth like blood eyes like electricity, constantly looking left and right, guide officers and guards saw the night fork, scared to flee everywhere.

古文：久而衢中舆马人物稍多，其夜叉方南向而去，行者见之，咸辟易仆地。
现代文：过了半天，街上车马行人渐渐多了，那夜叉才向南而去。行人们见到夜叉，有的赶快躲藏，有的吓得顿时仆倒在地。
English: After half a day, the number of pedestrians and vehicles on the street gradually increased, and that night the fork moved south. When pedestrians saw the fork, some quickly hid, and some were so scared that they immediately fell to the ground.

古文：慎矜闻其事，惧甚。
现代文：杨慎矜后来听说这些情况，心里更为恐惧。
English: When Yang Shengyao heard about the situation later, he was even more frightened.

古文：后月余，遂为李林甫所诬，弟兄皆诛死。
现代文：一个多月后，他就被奸相李林甫诬陷，兄弟们同被处死。
English: More than a month later, he was framed by the traitor Li Linfu, and the brothers were executed together.

古文：江南吴生
现代文：江南吴生
English: Wusheng, Jiangnan Province

古文：有吴生者，江南人。尝游会稽，娶一刘氏为卒。
现代文：江南有位吴生曾宦游于会稽，娶了一个姓刘的女子为妻。
English: In southern Jiangsu Province, a man named Wu Sheng once visited the auditorium and married a woman surnamed Liu.

古文：后数年，吴生宰县于雁门郡，与刘氏偕之官。
现代文：几年后，吴生被任命为雁门郡的某县县令，便带着妻子刘氏同去上任。
English: A few years later, Wu Sheng was appointed as a county magistrate in Yanmen County, and he took his wife Liu to take office.

古文：刘氏初以柔婉闻，凡数年。其后忽旷烈自恃不可禁，往往有逆意者，即发怒。殴其婢仆，或啮其肌血且甚，而怒不可解。
现代文：刘氏刚嫁给吴生时是位十分贤淑柔顺的女子，但不知为什么几年后变得十分暴躁怪戾，稍不如意就大怒，殴打仆人婢女，甚至用牙齿把仆人咬得鲜血直流仍不解气。
English: When Liu was first married to Wu Sheng, she was a very virtuous and gentle woman, but I don't know why she became very grumpy and eccentric a few years later. When things didn't go her way, she would fly into a rage, beat up the servants and maids, and even bite the servants with her teeth until they bled profusely.

古文：吴生始知刘氏悍戾，心稍外之。
现代文：吴生见刘氏这样凶悍，就渐渐有所厌恶。
English: When Wu Sheng saw Mr. Liu being so fierce, he gradually became disgusted.

古文：尝一日，吴与雁门部将数辈，猎于野，获狐兔甚多，致庖舍下。明日，吴生出，刘氏即潜入庖舍，取狐兔生啖之。
现代文：有一天，吴生和雁门郡的几位军官到野外打猎，猎得不少狐狸兔子放在厨房里，第二天吴生外出，刘氏就偷偷钻进厨房，抓起狐兔就生啃活吞地吃光了。
English: One day, Wu Sheng and several officers from Ganmen County went hunting in the field. They hunted a lot of foxes and rabbits and put them in the kitchen. The next day, when Wu Sheng went out, Mr. Liu sneaked into the kitchen, grabbed the foxes and rabbits and devoured them alive.

古文：且尽，吴生归，因诘狐兔所在，而刘氏俯然不语。
现代文：吴生回来问猎来的野物哪去了，刘氏只是低头不语。
English: When Wu Sheng returned and asked where the wild animals he had hunted had gone, Mr. Liu just bowed his head and said nothing.

古文：吴生怒，讯其婢，婢曰：刘氏食之尽矣。生始疑刘氏为他怪。
现代文：吴生很生气，就问丫环，丫环说都让刘氏吃光了，吴生这才开始怀疑刘氏是妖怪。
English: Wu Sheng was very angry and asked the maidservant. The maidservant said that she had let Mr. Liu eat it all. It was only then that Wu Sheng began to suspect that Mr. Liu was a monster.

古文：旬余，有县吏，以一鹿献，吴生命致于庭。已而吴生始言将远适，既出门，即匿身潜伺之。
现代文：十多天后，有位县里的官员献给吴生一头鹿，吴生让放在院子里，然后对刘氏谎称自己要出远门，出门后就躲在僻静处偷看，只见刘氏散发露臂，眼睛瞪得像铜铃，和平时大不相同。
English: More than ten days later, a county official dedicated a deer to Wu Sheng, Wu Sheng let it be placed in the yard, and then lied to Mr. Liu that he wanted to go out. After going out, he hid in a secluded place to peep. I only saw Mr. Liu's bare arms and eyes staring like copper bells, which was very different from usual.

古文：吴生大惧，仆地不能起。
现代文：她扑向庭院，左手扯起鹿，右手掏出鹿的内脏就大吃起来。
English: She rushed to the courtyard, picked up the deer with her left hand, pulled out the deer's entrails with her right hand and ate them.

古文：久之，乃召吏卒十数辈，持兵仗而入。
现代文：见此情景，吴生吓得顿时瘫倒在地上站不起来了。过了半天，吴生召来了十几名官员和士兵，拿着刀枪冲进庭院。
English: Seeing this scene, Wu Sheng was so scared that he suddenly collapsed on the ground and could not stand up. Half a day later, Wu Sheng summoned more than a dozen officials and soldiers and rushed into the courtyard with a knife and gun.

古文：刘氏见吴生来，尽去襦袖，挺然立庭，乃一夜叉耳。
现代文：刘氏见吴生来了，干脆脱去了衣裳直挺挺地站在那里，原来是个母夜叉。
English: When Mr. Liu saw Wu was born, he simply took off his clothes and stood up straight. It turned out to be a hen.

古文：目若电光，齿如戟刃，筋骨盘蹙，身尽青色，吏卒俱战栗不敢近。而夜叉四顾，若有所惧。
现代文：只见她眼睛一开一闭像闪电，牙齿像戟的尖刃，身上筋骨棱嶒，全身青紫色。这时那些官吏士兵都吓得不敢靠前，但看那夜叉却四处观望着，好像也有点怕什么东西。
English: I saw her eyes open and close like lightning, her teeth like the sharp blade of a crossbow, her body full of sinews and bones, and her whole body purple. At this time, those officials and soldiers were too scared to come forward, but they watched the night fork and looked around, as if they were also a little afraid of something.

古文：仅食顷，忽东向而走，其势甚疾。竟不如所在。
现代文：僵持了一顿饭工夫，夜叉突然向东走去，脚步十分急促，不知去了哪里。
English: After a meal, Yasha suddenly walked to the east, walking very fast, not knowing where he was going.

古文：朱岘女
现代文：朱岘女
English: Zhu Xunmei

古文：武陵郡有浮屠祠，其高数百寻。
现代文：武陵郡有座佛塔祠，塔高近百丈，俯瞰着下面的大江。
English: There is a pagoda shrine in Wuling County. The tower is nearly a hundred meters high, overlooking the river below.

古文：下瞰大江，每江水泛扬，则浮屠势若摇动，故里人不敢登其上者。
现代文：每当江水暴涨时，佛塔也像在晃动。所以当地人不敢登上塔顶。
English: Whenever the river surges, the pagoda seems to shake, so locals are afraid to climb to the top.

古文：有贾人朱岘，家极赡，有一女，无何失所在。
现代文：有一个很富有的商人朱岘，他的女儿无缘无故就丢失了，全家到处寻找，十多天也不知在什么地方。
English: There was a very rich merchant, Zhu Xi, whose daughter was lost for no reason. The whole family searched everywhere, and for more than ten days they did not know where she was.

古文：其家寻之，仅旬余，莫穷其适。一日，天雨霁，郡民望见浮屠之颠，若有人立者，隐然纹缬衣，郡民且以为他怪。
现代文：有一天雨过天晴时，有人看见塔顶上好像站着个人，从下面看，塔上的人也像穿的是花绸衣，人们以为是个什么怪物。
English: One day, when the rain had passed, someone saw what looked like a man standing on the top of the tower. From below, the man on the tower also looked like he was wearing a silk robe. People thought he was some kind of monster.

古文：岘闻之，即往观焉。望其衣装，甚类其女，即命人登其上而取之。
现代文：朱岘听说后也跑到塔下看，看那人的衣装很像丢失的女儿，就叫人登上塔顶去接，一看果然是女儿。
English: After hearing the news, Zhu Xi also ran to look under the tower. Seeing that the man's costume was very similar to that of his lost daughter, he asked someone to go up to the top of the tower to pick her up. At first glance, she was indeed his daughter.

古文：果见女也，岘惊讯其事，女曰：某向者独处，有夜叉长丈余，甚诡异，自屋上跃而下，入某之室，谓某曰： 无惧我也。
现代文：回家后，朱岘惊恐地问女儿是怎么回事。女儿说那天她正一个人玩，忽然有一个奇形怪状一丈多高的夜叉从房上跃下来进了屋，对她说：别怕我。
English: After returning home, Zhu Rong asked his daughter in horror what had happened. The daughter said that she was playing alone that day, when suddenly a strangely shaped and tall nightingale jumped down from the room and entered the house, saying to her: "Don't be afraid of me."

古文：即揽衣驰去，至浮屠上。
现代文：接着夜叉就用自己衣服裹上她飞奔而去，一直把她弄上塔顶。
English: Then the nightingale wrapped her in her own clothes and flew away, taking her all the way to the top of the tower.

古文：既而兀兀然，若甚醉者。
现代文：她一直觉得昏昏沉沉像喝醉了酒，几天后渐渐清醒了，心里也更加害怕。
English: She always felt dizzy and like she was drunk, but after a few days she gradually woke up and felt more afraid.

古文：凡数日，方稍寤，因惧且甚。
现代文：那夜叉每天一大早到塔底下的村庄里去弄来食物给她吃。
English: Early every morning, the nightingale went to the village below the tower to fetch food for her.

古文：其夜叉率以将晓则下浮屠，行里中，取食饮某。一日，夜叉方去，某下视之，见其行里中，会遇一白衣，夜叉见，辟易退远百步，不敢窃视。
现代文：这天夜叉刚走，她就从塔顶往下看，见夜叉在村子里走路时遇见一个穿白衣的人，夜叉吓得立刻退避于百步以外，不敢偷看那白衣人。晚上夜叉回到塔里，她就问夜叉为什么怕那白衣人，夜叉说：那个白衣人从小就不吃牛肉，所以我不敢接近他。
English: That day, as soon as the nightingale left, she looked down from the top of the tower and saw that the nightingale, while walking in the village, met a man dressed in white. Frightened, the nightingale immediately retreated a hundred paces away, not daring to peek at the man in white. When the nightingale returned to the tower in the evening, she asked the nightingale why he was afraid of the man in white. The nightingale said, "That man in white never ate beef when he was a child, so I don't dare to approach him."

古文：明日，夜叉去而祝曰： 某愿不以太牢为食。
现代文：问这是什么原因，夜叉说：牛是种地的，是人们生活的根本，人不吃牛肉，上天就保祐他，所以我不敢接近他。
English: Asked what the reason for this was, Yasha said: Cows are farmed animals and are fundamental to people's lives. If you don't eat beef, the heavens will protect you, so I don't dare to approach him.

古文：凡三祝。其夜叉忽自郡中来，至浮屠下，望某而语曰： 何为有异志而弃我乎？
现代文：朱岘的女儿暗想，我是个人，现在离开了父母和一个鬼怪在一起，多么可悲啊！第二天夜叉走后她就暗暗祝祷说：我也发誓不吃牛肉，老天保祐我吧！这样默念了三次，那夜叉忽然从郡里回到塔下向她喊道：你为什么对我变了心要抛弃我呢？
English: Zhu Yao's daughter thought to herself, "I am a human being, and now I have left my parents to be with a ghost. How sad!" The next day, after the nightingale left, she secretly said a prayer: "I also swear not to eat beef. God save me!" After three times of such meditation, the nightingale suddenly returned from the county to the tower and shouted to her: "Why have you changed your mind about me and want to abandon me?"

古文：使我终不得近子矣。从此别去。
现代文：今后我也不敢接近你了，从今我就离开你了！
English: In the future, I won't dare to get close to you. From now on, I'm leaving you!

古文：词毕，即东向走，而竟不知其所往。
现代文：夜叉说完，就向东走了，不知去了哪里。
English: When Yasha had finished speaking, he walked off to the east, and I don't know where he went.

古文：某喜甚，由浮屠中得以归。
现代文：朱岘的女儿心中大喜，才终于逃离了夜叉回到家里。
English: Zhu Yao's daughter was overjoyed when she finally escaped the Night Fork and returned home.

古文：杜万
现代文：杜万
English: Douvan

古文：杜万员外，其兄为岭南县尉，将至任，妻遇毒瘴，数日卒。
现代文：杜万员外的哥哥是岭南县尉，刚要去上任，他妻子遇上毒瘴得了热病，几天就死了。
English: His brother, who is not a Duwan member, is a lieutenant of Lingnan County. Just before he was to take office, his wife met a drug lord, fell ill with fever, and died a few days later.

古文：时盛夏，无殡敛。权以苇席裹束，瘗于绝岩之侧。
现代文：当时正是盛夏，一时找不到棺材盛殓，暂时用一领苇席把她卷了起来停放在一个悬崖的边上。
English: It was midsummer, and for a moment the coffin could not be found, so she was temporarily rolled up with a blanket and parked on the edge of a cliff.

古文：某到官，拘于吏事，不复重殓。
现代文：杜万的哥哥上任后由于事务繁忙，没来得及重新去埋葬妻子。
English: Due to his busy schedule after taking office, Duwan's brother did not have time to bury his wife again.

古文：及北归，方至岩所，欲收妻骸骨。
现代文：后来他又回北方时路过那悬崖，就上去想收取妻子的骨骸。
English: Later, when he passed the cliff on his way back north, he went up to collect his wife's remains.

古文：及观坎穴，但苇尚存。
现代文：到了岩畔一看，就只剩了苇席。
English: When we arrived at the edge of the cliff, there was only one table left.

古文：某叹其至深而为所取，悲感久之。
现代文：他因妻子被别人所取而深深地慨叹，心里难过了很久。
English: He deeply lamented the fact that his wife had been taken by someone else, and he felt sad for a long time.

古文：会上岩有一径，某试寻。行百余步，至石窟中，其妻裸露，容貌狰狞，不可复识。
现代文：然后他找到一条小道，走了一百多步，试着找妻子的尸骨，来到一个石洞里，果然找到了。但妻子浑身精光面貌狰狞，根本认不出来是他妻子。
English: Then he found a path, walked more than a hundred steps, tried to find his wife's bones, came to a stone cave, and found them, but his wife was so emaciated and haggard that he couldn't even recognize her.

古文：怀中抱一子，子旁亦有一子，状类罗刹。
现代文：她怀中抱着一个小孩，小孩旁还有一个小孩，都像夜叉。
English: A child in her arms, a child beside the child, both like nightingales.

古文：极呼方寤，妇人口不能言，以手画地，书云：我顷重生，为夜叉所得。今此二子，即我所生。
现代文：杜某喊了半天，妻子才醒来，但嘴里不会说话，只是用手在地上画字说：我当初已经再生了，被夜叉捉来，这两个孩子就是夜叉和我生的。
English: Du shouted for half a day before his wife woke up, but she couldn't speak, she just wrote on the ground with her hands, saying: "I was already reborn, I was captured by the Yasha, and these two children were born to the Yasha and me.

古文：书之悲涕。
现代文：一面写一面哭。
English: Writing and crying at the same time.

古文：顷之，亦能言，谓云：君急去，夜叉倘至，必当杀君。
现代文：过了很久以后，也能说话了，她说：你快去吧，夜叉回来后定会杀了你。
English: After a long time, she was able to speak. She said, "Go quickly, the nightingale will surely kill you when it comes back."

古文：某问：汝能去否？曰：能去。便起抱小儿，随某至船所。
现代文：杜某问妻能不能跟他走，妻说能，就抱上那一个孩子随杜某上了船。
English: Du Mou asked his wife if she could go with him. When his wife said yes, she hugged the child and went on the boat with Du Mou.

古文：便发，夜叉寻抱大儿至岸，望船呼叫，以儿相示。
现代文：船开以后，突然看那个公夜叉抱着大儿子赶到岸边，望着船大声号叫，并把手中的孩子举在手上示意。
English: After the boat left, I suddenly saw the night watchman rushing to the shore with his eldest son in his arms, shouting loudly as he looked at the boat and gesturing with the child in his arms.

古文：船行既远，乃擘其儿作数十片，方去。
现代文：看着船走远了，那夜叉气得把抱着的孩子撕成几十片才走了。
English: Watching the boat go away, that night I was so angry that I tore the child I was holding into dozens of pieces before I left.

古文：妇人手中之子，状如罗刹，解人语。大历中，母子并存。
现代文：杜某的妻子手里抱的那个小孩，形状也像夜叉，但能懂得人话，一直到大历年时，她们母子还都活着。
English: The child that Du's wife held in her arms was also shaped like a nightingale, but it could understand human speech, and both mother and son were still alive until the New Year.

古文：韦自东
现代文：韦自东
English: Wei Zidong

古文：贞元中，有韦自东者，义烈之士也。
现代文：唐代德宗贞元年间，有一个性格刚毅讲究义气的人名叫韦自东。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wei Zidong who had a strong character and was particular about righteousness.

古文：尝游太白山，栖止段将军庄，段亦素知其壮勇者。
现代文：曾游历太白山，住在段将军的庄园里，段将军也素来知道韦自东的为人。
English: He had traveled to Taibai Mountain and lived in the manor of General Duan, who also knew Wei Zhidong as a person.

古文：一日，与自东眺望山谷，见一径甚微，若旧有行迹。
现代文：有一天，段和韦眺望远山，见有一条小路，好像有人走过的足迹。
English: One day, Duan and Wei were looking at the mountains in the distance. They saw a path, which looked like someone's footprints.

古文：自东问主人曰：此何诣也？段将军曰：昔有二僧，居此山顶，殿宇宏壮，林泉甚佳。盖唐开元中，万回师弟子之所建也。似驱役鬼工，非人力所能及。
现代文：韦自东问段将军这条小路通往什么地方，段将军说：从前有两个和尚住在这个山顶，山上有一座庙，庙里的殿宇很宏伟，附近的山林泉水也很好，这庙是唐开元年间万回大师的弟子建造的，真是鬼斧神工，不是几人所能建得了的。
English: Wei Zidong asked General Duan where this path led to. General Duan said, "Once upon a time, there were two monks who lived on the top of this mountain. There was a temple on the mountain. The temple was very grand, and the nearby mountain and forest springs were also very good. This temple was built by a disciple of Master Wanfei in the first year of the Tang Dynasty. It was truly a miracle, and not just a few people could have built it.

古文：或问樵者说，其僧为怪物所食，今绝踪二三年矣。
现代文：据打柴的人说，那两个和尚后来被怪物吃掉，已经有两三年不见和尚的踪影。
English: According to the woodcutter, the two monks were later eaten by a monster, and there has been no trace of the monks for two or three years.

古文：又闻人说，有二夜叉于此山，亦无人敢窥焉。
现代文：又听人说有两个夜叉住在山上，所以谁也不敢到山上去了。
English: It was also said that there were two nightingales living on the mountain, so no one dared to go there.

古文：自东怒曰：余操心在平侵暴，夜叉何颣，而敢噬人？
现代文：韦自东一听非常生气的说：我向来就愿干铲除强暴抱打不平的事，夜叉是什么东西，竟敢吃人。
English: Upon hearing this, Wei Zidong became very angry and said, "I have always been willing to eradicate violence and injustice. What is the Yasha that dares to eat people?

古文：今夕，必挈夜叉首，至于门下。
现代文：你等着，今天晚上我一定把夜叉的头砍来扔在你的门外！
English: Just you wait, tonight I will surely cut off the head of the nightingale and throw it outside your door!

古文：将军止曰：暴虎凭河，死尔无悔？
现代文：段将军拦阻说：空手斗虎徒步过河都是鲁莽人干的事，冒险丧命，难道你不后悔吗？
English: General Duan stopped him and said, "Crossing the river on foot while fighting a tiger with bare hands is something only reckless people do. You risked your life. Don't you regret it?

古文：自东不顾，仗剑备衣而往，势不可遏。
现代文：韦自东表示死而无悔，整好衣服手持宝剑势不可挡地直奔山上而去。
English: Wei Zidong said that he had no regrets, straightened his clothes and went straight up the mountain with a sword in his hand.

古文：将军悄然曰：韦生当其咎耳。
现代文：段将军暗想：韦生是自讨苦吃了。
English: General Duan thought to himself: Wei Sheng is making trouble for himself.

古文：自东扪萝蹑石，至精舍，悄寂无人。睹二僧房，大敞其户，履锡俱全，衾枕俨然，而尘埃凝积其上。
现代文：韦自东攀着山上的滕萝脚蹬着石缝上了山，进入寺庙中，不见一个人影，又见两个和尚的住处大敞着门，鞋子和传经用的锡杖都在，床上也有被褥枕头，但上面蒙着很厚的尘土。
English: Wei Zidong climbed up the mountain on the foot of the mountain with the stone, entered the temple, and did not see a single person. He also saw the residence of two monks with the door wide open, the shoes and the scepter used to pass down the sutras were all there, and there was also a pillow on the bed, but it was covered with thick dust.

古文：又见佛堂内，细草茸茸，似有巨物偃寝之处。四壁多挂野彘玄熊之颣，或庖炙之余，亦有锅镬薪。
现代文：又见佛堂里长满了小草，草上有大兽睡卧的痕迹，佛堂的墙上挂了很多野猪黑熊之类，也有些是烧熟吃剩的肉，还有锅灶和柴禾。
English: He also saw that the Buddhist hall was covered with grass, and there were traces of large animals sleeping in the grass. On the wall of the Buddhist hall hung many wild boars, black bears, and the like, and also some cooked and leftover meat, as well as cooking pots and firewood.

古文：自东乃知樵者之言不谬耳。度其夜叉未至，遂拔柏树，径大如碗，去枝叶，为大杖。扃其户，以石佛拒之。
现代文：韦自东才知道砍柴人说有怪物的话是对的，心想夜叉还没回来，就拔了一棵碗口粗的柏树，去掉枝叶作成一根大棍，把大门捶好，又用一个石佛堵在门口。
English: Wei Zidong only knew that it was right to chop wood and say that there was a monster. Thinking that Yasha had not yet returned, he pulled out a thick-mouthed cypress tree, removed the branches and leaves to make a big stick, bolted the gate, and blocked the door with a stone Buddha.

古文：是夜，月白如昼。夜未分，夜叉挈鹿而至，怒其扃鐍，大叫，以首触户，折其石佛，而踣于地。自东以柏树挝其脑，再举而死之。拽之入室，又阖其扉。
现代文：这天夜里月明如昼，半夜时那夜叉扛着一只鹿回来，见门锁着就发怒的吼叫起来，用头撞门，并撞断了石佛跌倒在地上，韦自东趁机抡起大棍朝夜叉头上打下去，打了两棍就打死了，然后把死夜叉拖进佛堂，又把门关上。
English: On this night, the moon was as bright as day. At midnight, the nightingale came back carrying a deer. Seeing the door locked, it roared angrily, hit the door with its head, and broke the stone Buddha. It fell to the ground. Wei Zidong took the opportunity to pick up a big stick and hit the head of the nightingale. He hit two sticks and killed it. Then he dragged the dead nightingale into the Buddhist hall and closed the door.

古文：顷之，复有夜叉继至，似怒前归者不接己，亦哮吼，触其扉，复踣于户阈，又挝之，亦死。
现代文：不一会儿，另一个夜叉也回来了，好像为前面回来的夜叉不迎接他而恼怒，也大声吼叫起来，用头撞门，摔倒在门坎上，韦自东又用棍子猛打，也打死了。
English: In a short while, another nightingale also came back, as if annoyed that the nightingale that came back before him did not greet him. He also shouted loudly, banged his head on the door, fell down on the lintel, and Wei Zhidong hit him hard with a stick, killing him as well.

古文：自东知雌雄已殒，应无侪类，遂掩关烹鹿而食。
现代文：自东看雌雄两只夜叉都死了，估计不会再有夜叉的同类，就关上门煮鹿肉吃。
English: Looking from the east, both male and female nightjars are dead. It is estimated that there will be no more nightjars of the same kind, so they close the door and cook venison to eat.

古文：及明，断二夜叉首，挈余鹿而示段，段大骇曰：真周处之俦矣。
现代文：天亮后，他割下两只夜叉的头，拿着吃剩的鹿肉回来给段将军看，段将军大惊地说：你真比得上传说中除掉三害的那位英雄周处了！
English: After dawn, he cut off the heads of two nightcrawlers and came back with the leftover venison to show General Duan, who said in surprise: You are really comparable to the hero who eliminated the three evils in the legend!

古文：乃烹鹿饮酒尽欢，远近观者如堵。
现代文：然后就煮了鹿肉一起喝酒尽欢，远近来了很多的人围观死夜叉的头。
English: Then they cooked venison and drank wine to celebrate. Many people came from far and wide to see the head of the ghoul.

古文：有道士出于稠人中，揖自东曰：某有衷恳，欲披告于长者，可乎？
现代文：这时人群中走出一个道士，向韦自东施礼说：贫道有件心事想向您倾诉一下，不知行不行？
English: At this time, a Taoist came out of the crowd and bowed to Wei Zidong and said: "Poor Tao, I have something on my mind that I would like to talk to you about. I don't know if it's okay.

古文：自东曰：某一生济人之急，何为不可？
现代文：韦自东说：我一生专门救人急难，你尽管说吗。
English: Wei Zidong said, "I have dedicated my life to rescuing people in distress. Would you mind telling me?

古文：道士曰：某栖心道门，恳志灵药，非一朝一夕耳。
现代文：道士说：我一直诚心修道，并专心炼制仙丹灵药。
English: The moralist said, "I have always been a sincere practitioner, and I have been concentrating on the refinement of Xiandan elixir.

古文：三二年前，神仙为吾配合龙虎丹一炉，据其洞而修之，有日矣。今灵药将成，而数有妖魔入洞，就炉击触，药几废散。
现代文：两三年前，一位神仙为我配合了一炉龙虎金丹，我在山洞里全力以赴地炼这炉灵药，眼看就要炼成，没想到妖魔几次来我洞中捣乱，砸我的丹炉，药丹也差点报废。
English: Two or three years ago, a deity provided me with a furnace of dragon, tiger, and jujube. I did my best in the cave to refine this furnace of elixir, and it was about to be refined. I didn't expect that the demon would come to my cave several times to make trouble, smash my furnace, and the jujube would almost be scrapped.

古文：思得刚烈之士，仗剑卫之。灵药倘成，当有分惠。
现代文：我希望找一位勇武刚烈的人拿着刀剑保护我，如果我的仙丹能炼成，我会分给他的。
English: I hope to find a brave and strong man with a sword to protect me. If I can refine my immortelle, I will give it to him.

古文：未知能一行否？
现代文：不知你能不能随我去呢？
English: I wonder if you can come with me?

古文：自东踊跃曰：乃平生所愿也。
现代文：自东兴高采烈地说：这是我平生最大的愿望了！
English: Zidong said gleefully, "This is the greatest wish of my life!"

古文：遂仗剑从道士而去。
现代文：然后就带着宝剑跟道士走了。
English: Then he took the sword and left with the priest.

古文：济险蹑峻，当太白之高峰，将半，有一石洞，可百余步，即道士烧丹之室，唯弟子一人。
现代文：他们走了很多险路，来到太白山的高峰，峰的半腰有一个石洞进洞百余步就是道士炼丹的屋子，只有一个弟子在里面。
English: They walked a lot of dangerous roads and came to the peak of Taibai Mountain. Halfway up the peak, there was a stone cave. A hundred paces into the cave was the house of the Taoist priest, Lingdan. There was only one disciple inside.

古文：道士约曰：明晨五更初，请君仗剑，当洞门而立。见有怪物，但以剑击之。
现代文：道士对韦自东说：明天早晨五更时分，请你手持宝剑站在洞口，如果看见有怪物你就用剑砍杀它。
English: The Taoist priest said to Wei Zidong, "Tomorrow morning at five o'clock, please stand at the entrance of the cave with a sword in your hand. If you see a monster, use the sword to kill it."

古文：自东曰：谨奉教。
现代文：自东说：我记住了。
English: Zidong said, "I have memorized it."

古文：久立烛于洞门外，以伺之。俄顷，果有巨虺长数丈，金目雪牙，毒气氤郁，将欲入洞。自东以剑击之，似中其首，俄顷若轻务而化去。
现代文：自东在洞口点了一支蜡，躲在一旁等着，不一会儿果然有条几丈长的大蛇，金目白牙，裹着浓重的毒雾来到洞口，将要进洞时，自东挥剑猛砍，好像砍中了蛇头，大蛇化成一股轻雾而去。
English: From the east, he lit a piece of wax at the mouth of the cave, hid and waited, and in a short time there was indeed a several-meter-long snake, with gold eyes and white teeth, wrapped in a thick, poisonous fog, which came to the mouth of the cave. When he was about to enter the cave, he swung his sword from the east and slashed, as if he had hit the snake's head, and the snake turned into a light mist and left.

古文：食顷，有一女子，颜色绝丽，执芰荷之花，缓步而至。自东又以剑拂之，若云气而灭。
现代文：约一顿饭工夫，洞口又来了个美貌妇人，手里拿着一束荷花慢慢走来，自东又砍了一剑，那女子化成一片云又消失了。
English: About an hour into the meal, a beautiful woman came to the mouth of the cave again, slowly walking with a bunch of lotus flowers in her hand. She also cut a sword from the east, and the woman turned into a cloud and disappeared.

古文：食顷，将欲曙，有道士，乘云驾鹤，导从甚严，劳自东曰：妖魔已尽，吾弟子丹将成矣，吾当来为证也。
现代文：又过了一阵天要亮了，只见一个道士骑着仙鹤驾着云带着很多侍从自空中而来，对自东说：妖魔已经除尽，我弟子炼的丹就要成功了，我特地来验一验他的丹炼成没炼成。
English: After a while, it was about to dawn, only to see a Taoist monk riding a crane and driving a cloud with many attendants coming from the sky. He said to Zidong, "The demons have been eliminated, my disciple's cultivation of Dan is about to succeed. I have come specially to check whether his cultivation of Dan has been successful or not."

古文：盘旋候明而入，语自东曰：喜汝道士丹成，今为诗一首，汝可继和。
现代文：骑鹤的道士在空中游来游去，一直到天亮后进到洞中，对自东说：我弟子的丹炼成了，我很高兴，我现在作一首诗，希望你也和一首。
English: The Taoist monk on the crane swam around in the air until he entered the cave after dawn and said to Zidong, "My disciple's Dan has been refined. I am very happy. I am now writing a poem, and I hope you will write one too."

古文：诗曰：三秋稽頼叩真灵，龙虎交时金液成。
现代文：说着就念了四句诗：三伏稽頼叩真灵，龙虎交时金液成。
English: As he spoke, he recited four lines of poetry: "Three prostrations, three invocations, strike at the true spirit; when dragons and tigers meet, gold becomes liquid."

古文：绛雪既凝身可度，蓬壶顶上彩云生。
现代文：绛雪既凝身可度，蓬壶顶上彩云生。
English: The snow has settled and can be shoveled, and the clouds have formed on the top of the pot.

古文：自东详诗意曰：此道士之师。遂释剑而礼之。
现代文：韦自东听骑鹤道士念完诗，心想他一定是炼丹道士的师傅，就收起宝剑向他行礼。
English: Wei Zidong listened to the riding crane Taoist recite the poem, and thought that he must be the master of the purifying crane Taoist, so he put away his sword and saluted him.

古文：俄而突入，药鼎爆烈，更无遗在。
现代文：那道士却突然冲进洞里，接着就听见炼丹炉轰隆一声爆炸，炼丹道士失声痛哭。
English: However, the Taoist suddenly rushed into the cave, and then he heard the loud explosion of the distillation furnace, and the distillation Taoist lost his voice and cried bitterly.

古文：道士恸哭，自东悔恨自咎而已。
现代文：韦自东这才知道上了当，骑鹤道士也是妖怪变的，心中非常悔恨惭愧。
English: It was only then that Wei Zidong realized that he had been tricked. Riding the crane, the Taoist priest had also turned into a monster. He felt very remorseful and ashamed.

古文：二人因以泉涤其鼎器而饮之。
现代文：自东和道士用泉水洗净了炼丹的锅鼎，喝了些泉水就下山了。
English: Since the East and Taoist with spring water washed the pot of pureed dan, drank some spring water and went down the mountain.

古文：自东后更有少容，而适南岳，莫知所止。
现代文：从此以后，自东面容更显得年轻了。后来韦自东去了南岳衡山，谁也不知道他在什么地方。
English: Later, Wei Zidong went to Nanyue Hengshan, and no one knew where he was.

古文：今段将军庄尚有夜叉骷髅见在，道士亦莫知所之。
现代文：到现在，段将军的庄园里还有那两只夜叉的头骨，道士却不知道去了哪里。
English: To this day, General Duan's estate still contains the skulls of the two night hares, but the Taoist monk does not know where they are.

古文：马燧
现代文：马燧
English: Ma Xuan

古文：马燧贫贱时，寓游北京，谒府主，不见而返。
现代文：马燧没有发迹成器时，曾到北京去找进身的门路。他去求见府台，府台不见他，扫兴而归。
English: When Ma Ying did not succeed, he went to Beijing to find a way to enter. He went to see the prefectural government, the prefectural government did not see him, and he returned disappointed.

古文：寄居于园吏，吏曰：莫欲谒护戎否？
现代文：后来他寄居在一个管园林的园吏那儿，园吏问他：你是不是想求见护戎官啊？
English: Later, he stayed with a gardener who was in charge of the garden. The gardener asked him: "Are you trying to see the escort officer?"

古文：若谒，即须先言，当为其歧路耳。
现代文：如果想见他你先跟我说，以免走错了门找不到他。
English: If you want to see him, tell me first, so you don't go to the wrong door and miss him.

古文：护戎讳数字而甚切，君当在意，若犯之，无逃其死也。
现代文：护戎官对一些字非常忌讳，你一定要注意，不然犯了他的忌，他非杀你不可。
English: Some words are taboo for the guardian. You must be careful, otherwise, if you violate his taboo, he will kill you.

古文：然若幸惬之，则所益与诸人不同。
现代文：但是如果你能讨得他的喜欢，你就会得到别的人给予不了的好处。
English: But if you can get him to like you, you'll get a benefit that no one else can give.

古文：慎忽暗投也，某乃护戎先乳母子，得以详悉，而辄赞君子焉。
现代文：我劝你不要再乱找门路了，我是护戎官的前奶娘的儿子，我会把他的详情告诉你，来帮助你这个有才能的人。
English: I would advise you to stop beating about the bush. I am the son of the ex-nanny of the constable, and I will give you his particulars to help you with this talented man.

古文：燧信与疑半。明晨，入谒护戎，果犯其讳，庭叱而去。
现代文：马燧对园吏的话半信半疑，第二天早晨，就冒然去求见护戎官，果然犯了护戎官所忌讳的字，大声训叱了马燧一顿，马燧吓坏了灰溜溜地跑回来。
English: The stallion half-believed and half-doubted the gardener's words. The next morning, he ventured to go to see the escort officer. He actually broke the guard officer's taboo word and scolded the stallion loudly. The stallion was scared and ran back ashen-faced.

古文：畏惧之色见于面，园吏曰：是必忤护戎耳。燧问计求脱，园吏曰：君子戾我，而悽惶如是，然败则死，不得渎我也。
现代文：园吏说：看样子你是触犯了护戎官了吧？马燧就向园吏讨主意帮自己开脱，园吏说：先生你不信任我，才落得这样狼狈的下场。我可以帮你一把，但是不成功，就算你被处死，也别怪我。
English: The gardener said, "Looks like you've offended the guardian, doesn't it?" The horse asked the gardener for advice to help him exonerate himself. The gardener said, "Sir, you don't trust me, that's why you ended up in such a mess. I can help you, but if it doesn't work out, don't blame me if you're executed."

古文：遂匿燧于粪车中，载出郭而逃。
现代文：于是把马燧藏在粪车里运出城去让他逃走。
English: So they hid the foal in a garbage truck and drove it out of the city to let it escape.

古文：于时护戎果索燧，一报不获，散铁骑者，每门十人。
现代文：这时护戎果然到处捉拿马燧，没有抓到，就派了一些骑兵，每个城门都搜寻追捕。
English: At this time, the guards did indeed catch the horse mackerel everywhere. If they did not catch it, they sent some cavalry to search and chase it at every gate.

古文：燧狼狈窜六十余里，日暮，度不出境，求蔽于逃民败室之中。尚未安，闻车马螔贲欠声，人相议曰：能更三二十里否？
现代文：马燧逃窜了六十多里，估计自己逃不出境，天黑时就钻进一家主人逃荒扔下的破房子里，还没安顿下来，就听见外面传来车马的隆隆声，还能听见外面人们喊道，再往前追二三十里吧！
English: The horse and mule fled more than sixty miles, estimating that they could not escape, and when it was dark, they got into a broken house that had been abandoned by the owner to escape the wilderness. Before they had settled down, they heard the rumble of horses and carts outside, and they could also hear people outside shouting, "Chase them another twenty or thirty miles!"

古文：果护戎之使也。
现代文：果然是护戎的追兵。
English: As expected, it was the pursuing troops of the escorting troops.

古文：俄闻车马势渐远，稍安焉。
现代文：听着车马声渐渐远去，马燧心才稍稍安定了一些。
English: Listening to the sound of the horses and carriages gradually moving away, the horse's mind became a little more stable.

古文：未复常息，又闻有窸窣人行声，燧危栗次。忽于户牖，见一女人，衣布衣，身形绝长，手携一袱曰：马燧在此否？
现代文：不一会又听到外面有人的脚步声，马燧的心又吊了起来，忽然从窗口看见一个女人，身穿布衣，身材极高，手里拿着个布包袱，问道：马燧在这里吗？
English: A moment later he heard the sound of footsteps outside, and his heart sank again. Suddenly, from the window, he saw a woman, dressed in a cloth, very tall, holding a cloth bag in her hand. She asked, "Is the foal here?"

古文：燧默然，不敢对。
现代文：马燧不敢说话，没有应声。
English: The horse didn't dare to speak, there was no response.

古文：又曰：大惊怕否？
现代文：那女人又说：吓坏了是不是？
English: The woman added: "Terrified, aren't you?

古文：胡二姊知君在此，故来安慰，无生忧疑也。
现代文：胡二姐知道你在这里，特地来安慰你，请千万不要多心吧。
English: Sister Hu knows that you are here and has come specially to comfort you. Please don't take this the wrong way.

古文：燧乃应诺而出。
现代文：马燧这才应声出来。
English: That's when the horse whinnied.

古文：胡二姊曰：大厄，然已过，尚有余恐矣。
现代文：胡二姐又说：你的大难已过，还有点小灾。
English: Hu Erjie also said: Your great disaster has passed, and there is still a small disaster.

古文：君固馁，我食汝。
现代文：你饿了吧？我给你送饭来了。
English: Are you hungry? I brought you some food.

古文：乃解所携袱，有熟肉一瓯，胡饼一个，燧食甚饱。
现代文：说着就解开手里的布包，是一碗熟肉。一个烧饼。
English: As he spoke, he unzipped the cloth bag in his hand. It was a bowl of cooked meat. A burnt cake.

古文：却令于旧处，更不可动。胡二姊以灰数斗，放与燧前地上，横布一道。仍授之言曰：今夜半，有异物相恐劫，辄不可动。
现代文：马燧吃饭后，胡二姐让他不要动还站在原地，拿来几斗灰土放在马燧面前的地上，还用灰在他面前横着撒了一道，然后警告说：今天夜里可能有怪物来劫你，你千万不要动。
English: After the horse had eaten, Hu Erjie told him not to move and to stay where he was. She brought several buckets of ashes and placed them on the ground in front of the horse. She also scattered the ashes in front of him, and then warned him: "Tonight, there may be monsters coming to rob you. You must not move."

古文：过此厄后，勋贵无双。
现代文：等你过了这场小灾，以后就会大富大贵了。
English: By the time you get over this little disaster, you'll be rich and famous.

古文：言毕而去。
现代文：胡二姐说完就走了。
English: Sister Hu finished speaking and left.

古文：夜半，有物闪闪照人，渐进户牖间。见一物，长丈余，乃夜叉也。赤发猬奋，全身锋铄，臂曲瘿木，甲驾兽爪，衣豹皮裤，携短兵，直入室来。
现代文：半夜时，果然有个怪物光闪照人，渐渐来到窗前，这怪物一丈多高，红头发像刺猬似地直竖着，金色的身子闪着光，臂上的肌肉像木头疙瘩，指甲像野兽的利爪，穿着豹皮裤，手执短刀，直奔屋里来，原来是一只夜叉。
English: In the middle of the night, there really was a shining monster that gradually came to the window. This monster was as tall as a man, with red hair that stood straight up like a hedgehog, a golden body that shone, muscles on its arms like woodlice, and nails like the sharp claws of a beast. Wearing leopard skin trousers and holding a knife, it ran straight into the house. It turned out to be a nightingale.

古文：狞目电燮，吐火喷血，跳躅哮吼，铁石消铄。燧之惴栗，殆丧魂亡精矣。
现代文：这夜叉眼睛一开一合像电光，嘴里吐火喷血，又跳又吼，就是铁石心的人也会吓破脑袋，马燧一看，早就吓得魂飞魄散了。
English: This night fork's eyes opened and closed like lightning, its mouth spewed fire and blood, and it jumped and roared. Even a person with a heart of stone would be scared out of his wits. At the sight of the horsefly, it was already scared out of its wits.

古文：然此物终不敢越胡二姊所布之灰。
现代文：然而这只夜叉不管怎么狂吼乱跳，也不敢越过胡二姐撒的那道灰。
English: However, no matter how wildly the nightingale screamed and jumped, it did not dare to cross the path of ash scattered by Sister Hu.

古文：久之，物乃撤一门扉，藉而熟寝。
现代文：那夜叉折腾了半天，后来摘下一扇门，躺在上面睡着了。
English: That night, Yasha tossed and turned for half a day, then took down a door, lay down on it and fell asleep.

古文：俄又闻车马来声，有人相谓曰：此乃逃人室，不妨马生匿于此乎？
现代文：不一会儿，又听见车马声，有人在屋外说：这是逃荒人扔下的破屋子，姓马的会不会藏在这里呢？
English: A short while later, they heard the sound of horses and carts again. Someone outside the house said, "This is a ruined house that was abandoned by a man fleeing the wasteland. Could someone with the surname Ma be hiding here?"

古文：时数人持兵器，下马入来。冲啼夜叉，夜叉奋起，大吼数声，裂人马啖食，血肉殆尽。
现代文：接着几个人下了马手持兵器进了屋，一看见夜叉就吓得大叫起来，夜叉被惊醒，一跃而起，大吼几声，抓住人和马，连撕带咬，吃了个精光。
English: Next, several people dismounted and entered the house, weapons in hand. As soon as they saw the nightingale, they screamed in fright. The nightingale was startled awake, leapt up, roared a few times, grabbed the man and the horse, tore and bit them, and ate the lot.

古文：夜叉食既饱，徐步而出。
现代文：夜叉吃饱后，慢慢走出屋去。
English: When Yasha had eaten his fill, he slowly walked out of the room.

古文：四更，东方月上，燧觉寂静，乃出而去，见人马骨肉狼藉，乃获免。
现代文：这时已是四更天，东方升起了月亮，马燧听听再也没有什么动静，就出了屋门，见外面人马的骨肉扔得到处都是，撒腿就跑。
English: By this time it was already late in the afternoon, the moon had risen in the east, and when the stallion heard that there was no more movement, he went out of the door. When he saw that the bones and flesh of people and horses had been thrown everywhere outside, he ran away.

古文：后立大勋，官爵穹崇。
现代文：后来马燧果然立了大功，得到了很高的官位。
English: Later, Ma Yan really made a great achievement and got a high official rank.

古文：询访胡二姊之由，竟不能得。思报不获，乃每春秋祠飨，别置胡二姊一座，列于庙左
现代文：他到处寻访当年救他的胡二姐，却一直找不到，想要报答她也无法报答，只好每到春秋祭祠神灵时，单独给胡二姐设一桌供品，放在庙旁，以表感恩之情。
English: He searched everywhere for Hu Erjie, who had saved him that year, but he could not find her. He wanted to repay her, but he could not, so he had to set up a table of offerings for Hu Erjie alone every time he went to the Spring and Autumn Festival for the deities, and put it next to the temple to show his gratitude.

