古文：凡敌人远来气锐，利于速战；我深沟高垒，安守勿应，以待其敝。
现代文：凡是敌人从远道而来且士气锐盛，是以采取速战速决为有利；对于这种进攻之敌，我军应当凭恃深沟高垒，实施固守防御而不急于出兵应战，以等待敌人疲惫不堪之隙。
English: Whenever the enemy comes from far away and morale is high, it is advantageous to take quick action and make a quick decision; for this kind of attacking enemy, our army should rely on digging deep ditches and high walls, and carry out persistent defense without rushing to send troops to fight, so as to wait for the enemy to be exhausted.

古文：若彼以事挠我求战，亦不可动。
现代文：倘若敌人制造事端来挑动我出战，也不可为其阴谋所扰而随意出动。
English: If the enemy creates an incident to provoke me to go to war, I must not be disturbed by his plot and go at will.

古文：法曰： 安则静。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 实施坚守防御的部队，应像木石置于平地那样静止不动。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: "Forces engaged in defensive operations should remain as still as if they were placed on level ground."

古文：三国，蜀将诸葛亮率众十余万出斜谷，垒于渭水之南。
现代文：三国时期，蜀国丞相诸葛亮率军十万从斜谷出兵进攻魏国，而扎营于渭水之南。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, led an army of 100,000 soldiers from the valley to attack Wei, and camped in the south of Surabaya.

古文：魏遣大将司马懿拒之，诸将欲往渭北以待之，懿曰： 百姓积聚皆在渭南，此必争之地也。 
现代文：魏国派遣大将司马懿率兵进行抵抗，其部将都主张部队前往渭水之北设阵以等待诸葛亮军队，司马懿却说： 百姓和军资都在渭水之南，这里是必争不弃之地。 
English: Wei dispatched the general Sima Qian to lead the troops to resist. His subordinates all advocated that the troops go to the north of Surabaya to set up a position to wait for Zhuge Liang's army, but Sima Qian said: The people and military resources are in the south of Surabaya. This is a place that must not be abandoned.

古文：遂率军而济，背水为垒。
现代文：于是督率魏军渡过渭水，且背靠渭水而扎营布阵。
English: As a result, the commander-in-chief led the Wei army across Surabaya, and set up camp with his back to Surabaya.

古文：因谓诸将曰： 亮若勇者，当出武功，依山而东。
现代文：司马懿因此而对部将说： 诸葛亮如果是一个有勇气的人，当会北出武功，依托山地而向东扩展。
English: Sima Yao therefore said to his subordinate: "If Zhuge Liang is a courageous person, he should take martial arts to the north and rely on the mountains to expand to the east.

古文：若西上五丈原，则诸军无事矣。 
现代文：如果他要向西而上五丈原的话，我军就平安无事了。 
English: If he wants to go west to the Wuzhen Plain, our army will be safe.

古文：亮果上五丈原。会有长星坠亮之垒，懿知其必败。
现代文：此时恰值一颗流星陨落于诸葛亮营垒的方向，司马懿据此推知诸葛亮一定要失败。
English: At this time, a meteor fell in the direction of Zhuge Liang's camp, and Sima Yi deduced that Zhuge Liang must fail.

古文：时魏王以亮率军远入，利在急战，每命懿持重，以俟其变。
现代文：是时，魏明帝根据诸葛亮率军远道而来利于速战的情况，一再命令司马懿要慎重战事，以等待蜀军内部的变化。
English: At that time, according to the situation that Zhuge Liang led the army to come from far away and was conducive to a quick war, Wei Mingdi repeatedly ordered Sima Qian to be cautious in the war to wait for changes within the Shu army.

古文：亮数挑战，懿不出，因遗懿以巾帼妇人之饰。懿终不出。
现代文：诸葛亮多次挑战，司马懿都不应战。诸葛亮为此又派人给司马懿送去女人用的头巾和发饰，但司马懿始终坚守壁垒而不为其所动。
English: Zhuge Liang challenged him many times, but Sima Yi did not respond. Zhuge Liang sent someone to send Sima Yi a woman's headscarf and hair ornament, but Sima Yi always stood firm and did not budge.

古文：懿弟子孚书问军事，懿复曰； 亮志大而不见机，多谋少决，好兵而无权，虽持兵十万，已堕吾画中，破之必矣。 
现代文：司马懿之弟司马孚写信询问战事情况，司马懿回信说： 诸葛亮志向远大但不善于选择时机，多于谋划但缺少决断，喜好用兵但不懂权变。因此，他虽然拥有十万大军，但却落入我的谋划之中，打败他是毫无疑问的。 
English: Sima Fu, Sima Yao's brother, wrote to inquire about the situation of the war. Sima Yao wrote back: Zhuge Liang is ambitious but not good at choosing the right time, more than planning but lacks determination, likes to use soldiers but does not understand coups. Therefore, although he has a hundred thousand-strong army, he has fallen into my plan and there is no doubt that he will be defeated.

古文：与之对垒百余日，会亮病卒，诸将烧营遁走，百姓奔告，懿出兵追之。
现代文：司马懿与诸葛亮就这样相持一百多天后，赶上诸葛亮病死于军中，蜀军将领烧掉营垒而逃走，当地百姓跑来报告消息，司马懿便亲自率兵随后追赶。
English: After more than a hundred days of Sima Qian and Zhuge Liang holding each other in this way, Zhuge Liang died of illness in the army, the Shu generals burned down the camp and fled, the local people came to report the news, and Sima Qian personally led the soldiers to chase them.

古文：亮长史杨仪反旗鸣鼓，若将向懿者。
现代文：诸葛亮的长史杨仪见魏军追来，便调转旗帜、擂动战鼓，摆出一副反击魏军的样子。
English: When Zhuge Liang's Long Shi Yang Yi saw the Wei army chasing him, he turned the flag and beat the war drum, posing as a counterattack against the Wei army.

古文：懿以归师不之迫，于是杨仪结阵而去。经日，行其营垒，观其遗事，获其图书、粮食甚众。
现代文：司马懿认为对于撤退回归本国的敌军，不能过分逼迫它，于是杨仪才得以率领蜀军结阵有序地退走了，过了一天，司马懿率军进至蜀军驻过的营地，观察诸葛亮留下的各种遗迹，搜缴到蜀军的作战地图、军事文书和很多粮食。
English: Sima Yi believed that the enemy forces retreating back to their home country could not be persecuted too much, so Yang Yi was able to lead the Shu army to retreat in an orderly manner. After a day, Sima Yi led the army into the camp where the Shu army was stationed, observed various relics left by Zhuge Liang, and collected battle maps, military documents and a lot of grain from the Shu army.

古文：懿审其必死，曰： 天才奇才也！ 
现代文：司马懿据此而断定诸葛亮一定死了，十分感慨地说： 诸葛亮真是天下奇才啊！ 
English: Based on this, Sima Ye concluded that Zhuge Liang must have died, and said with great emotion: Zhuge Liang is truly a world-class genius!

古文：辛毗以为尚未可知。懿曰： 军家所重，军书密计、兵马粮食，今皆弃之，岂有人损其五脏而可以生乎？
现代文：部将辛毗以为诸葛亮究竟死活还不清楚，但司马懿却非常肯定地说： 军事家们所最重视的，便是作战文书、军事密计和兵马粮草，而今蜀军竟把这些重要东西都丢弃在这里。难道能有已损坏了五脏六腑还可以存活的人吗？
English: It is not clear whether Zhuge Liang is alive or dead, but Sima Yi said with certainty: The most important things for military men are war documents, military plans, and soldiers' and horses' food and fodder, and now the Shu Army has thrown all these important things away here. Is it possible that there are people who have damaged their internal organs and can still survive?

古文：宜急追之。 
现代文：我们现在应当赶快追击他们。 
English: We should go after them now.

古文：关中多蒺藜，懿使军士三千人着软材平底木履前行，蒺藜着履，然后马步俱进。
现代文：关中地区生长很多蒺藜，为便于部队途经此地而能顺利前进，司马懿使令二千士兵都脚穿平底软木鞋走在前边，让带刺的蒺藜都扎在士兵的软木鞋底上，使步骑兵大队得以随后顺利跟进。
English: Many thistles grow in the Guanzhong area. In order to facilitate the smooth advance of the troops passing through this place, Sima Yu ordered the two thousand soldiers to walk in front wearing flat-bottomed cork shoes, and let the thorny thistles be stuck on the soles of the soldiers' cork shoes, so that the infantry cavalry brigade could follow smoothly.

古文：追到赤岸，乃知亮已死。
现代文：魏军追到赤岸地界时，才知道诸葛亮确实死了。
English: When the Wei army chased it to the Chakang land boundary, they learned that Zhuge Liang had indeed died.

古文：时百姓为之谚曰： 死诸葛能走生仲达。 
现代文：当时，老百姓编了句谚语，说： 死的诸葛亮吓跑了活的司马懿。 
English: At that time, the common people made up a proverb, saying: The dead Zhuge Liang scared away the living Sima Yao.

古文：懿笑曰： 吾能料生，不能料死故也。 
现代文：司马懿听后，笑着说道： 这是由于我只能预料活诸葛亮的行事，而不能预料他死后行事的缘故啊！ 
English: After listening, Sima Yao said with a smile: This is because I can only expect Zhuge Liang's actions while he is alive, but I cannot expect his actions after his death!

