古文：一曰：凡人主必审分，然後治可以至，奸伪邪辟之涂可以息，恶气苛疾无自至。
现代文：审分凡是君主，一定要明察君臣的职分，然后国家的安定才可以实现，奸诈邪僻的渠道才可以堵塞，浊气恶疫才无法出现。
English: When judging, the monarch must always examine the duties of the monarchs and ministers, and then the stability of the country can be achieved, the channels of treachery and wickedness can be blocked, and the evil plague cannot appear.

古文：夫治身与治国，一理之术也。
现代文：修养自身与治理国家，其方法道理是一样的。
English: Cultivating oneself and governing the country have the same methods and principles.

古文：今以众地者，公作则迟，有所匿其力也；分地则速，无所匿迟也。
现代文：现在用许多人耕种土地，共同耕作就缓慢，这是因为人们有办法藏匿自己的力气，分开耕作就迅速，这是因为人们无法藏匿力气，无法缓慢耕作。
English: Nowadays, many people are employed in cultivating the land, and joint cultivation is slow because people have the means to hide their strength. Separate cultivation is fast because people can't hide their strength and can't cultivate slowly.

古文：主亦有地，臣主同地，则臣有所匿其邪矣，主无所避其累矣。
现代文：君主治理国家也像种地一样，臣子和君主共同治理，臣子就有办法藏匿自己的阴私，君主就无法避开负累了。
English: The monarch's governance of the country is also like farming. The vassal and the monarch govern together. The vassal has a way to hide his selfishness, and the monarch cannot avoid the burden.

古文：凡为善难，任善易。
现代文：凡是亲自去做善事就困难，任用别人做善事就容易。
English: It is always difficult to personally do good deeds, but it is easy to appoint others to do good deeds.

古文：奚以知之？
现代文：凭什么知道是这样？
English: How do you know that?

古文：人与骥俱走，则人不胜骥矣；居於车上而任骥，则骥不胜人矣。
现代文：人与千里马一块跑，那么人不能胜过千里马，人坐在车上驾驭千里马，那么千里马就不能胜过人了。
English: If a man and a steed run together, then the man cannot beat the steed. If a man sits in a carriage and drives the steed, then the steed cannot beat the man.

古文：人主好治人官之事，则是与骥俱走也，必多所不及矣。
现代文：君主喜欢处理官吏职权范围内的事，那么这就是与千里马一块跑啊，一定在很多方面都赶不上。
English: The monarch likes to deal with matters within the remit of officials, so this is like running with a very fast horse. In many respects, he will not be able to keep up.

古文：夫人主亦有居车，无去车，则众善皆尽力竭能矣，谄谀诐贼巧佞之人无所窜其奸矣，坚穷廉直忠敦之士毕竞劝骋骛矣。
现代文：君主也必须像驾车的人一样坐在车上，不要离开车子，那么所有做善事的人就都会尽心竭力了，阿谀奉承、邪恶奸巧的人就无法藏匿其奸了，刚强睿智、忠诚谆朴的人就会争相努力去奔走效劳了。
English: The monarch must also sit in the car like the driver, and must not leave the car. Then all those who do good deeds will do their best, those who are flattering, evil and treacherous will not be able to hide their treachery, and those who are strong, wise, loyal and simple will strive to run and serve.

古文：人主之车，所以乘物也。
现代文：君主的车子，是用来载物的。
English: The monarch's car is used to carry things.

古文：察乘物之理，则四极可有。不知乘物，而自怙恃，夺其智能，多其教诏，而好自以，若此则百官恫扰，少长相越，万邪并起。权威分移，不可以卒，不可以教，此亡国之风也。
现代文：明察了载物的道理，那么四方边远之地都可以占有，不懂得载物的道理，仗仕恃自己的能力，夸耀自己的才智，教令下得很多，好凭自己的意图行事，这样，各级官吏就都恐惧骚乱，长幼失序，各种邪恶一起出现，权成分散下移，不可取善终，不可以施教，这是亡国的风俗啊。
English: Having clearly observed the principle of carrying goods, then remote places in all directions can be occupied. If you don't understand the principle of carrying goods, you must rely on your own ability and boast of your own intelligence. Many orders are issued so that you can act according to your own intentions. In this way, officials at all levels are afraid of riots, parents and children are out of order, all kinds of evil appear together, and the power component is dispersed. You can't choose a good ending, and you can't teach. This is the custom of a ruined country.

古文：王良之所以使马者，约审之以控其辔，而四马莫敢不尽力。
现代文：王良驾马的方法是，明察驾马的要领，握住马缰绳，因而四匹马没有敢不用尽力气的。
English: Wang Liang's method of driving a horse is to clearly observe the essentials of driving a horse and hold the horse's reins, so that the four horses do not dare not to exert themselves.

古文：有道之主，其所以使群臣者亦有辔。
现代文：有道术的君主，他驾驭臣子们也有 缰绳 。
English: A monarch who has the virtue of morality has the reins to control his courtiers.

古文：其辔何如？
现代文：那 缰绳 是什么？
English: What's with the reins?

古文：正名审分，是治之辔已。
现代文：辨正名称，明察职分，这就是治理臣子们的 缰绳 。
English: Distinguish the correct name, clearly see the position, this is the reins of governing the courtiers.

古文：故按其实而审其名，以求其情；听其言而察其类，无使方悖。
现代文：所以，依照实际审察名称，以便求得真情，听到言论要考察其所行之事，不要让它们彼此悖逆。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the actual examination of the name, in order to seek the truth, listen to the words to examine their actions, and do not let them contradict each other.

古文：夫名多不当其实，而事多不当其用者，故人主不可以不审名分也。
现代文：名称有很多不符合实际，所行之事有很多不切合实用的，所以君主不可不辩明名分。
English: There are many names that do not correspond to reality, and there are many things that are not practical, so the monarch must make a clear distinction.

古文：不审名分，是恶壅而愈塞也。
现代文：不辨明名分，这就是厌恶壅闭反而更加阻塞啊。
English: Not distinguishing the name, this is the aversion to confinement, but more obstruction.

古文：壅塞之任，不在臣下，在於人主。
现代文：阻塞的责任，不在臣子，在于君主。
English: The responsibility for obstruction does not lie with the vassal, but with the sovereign.

古文：尧、舜之臣不独义，汤、禹之臣不独忠，得其数也；桀、纣之臣不独鄙，幽、厉之臣不独辟，失其理也。
现代文：尧、舜的臣子并不全仁义，汤、禹的臣子并不是全都忠诚，他们能称王天下，是因为驾驭臣子得法啊！桀，纣的臣子并不全鄙陋，幽王、厉王的臣子并不全邪僻，他们亡国灭身，是因为驾驭臣子的方法不对啊。
English: The vassals of Yao and Shun are not all benevolent and righteous, and the vassals of Tang and Yu are not all loyal. They can be called kings of the world because they control their vassals to obtain the law! The vassals of Yao and Shun are not all despicable, and the vassals of Yu and Li are not all perverse. They lost their country and their lives because their methods of controlling their vassals were wrong.

古文：今有人於此，求牛则名马，求马则名牛，所求必不得矣，而因用威怒，有司必诽怨矣，牛马必扰乱矣。
现代文：假如有这样一个人，想要牛却说马的名字，想要马却说牛的名字，那么他所要的一定不能得到，而他却因此生气发威风，主管人虽一定会责备怨恨他，牛马一定会受到扰乱。
English: If there is such a person, if he wants a cow but says the name of a horse, if he wants a horse but says the name of a cow, then what he wants must not be obtained, but he is angry and arrogant because of it, although the supervisor will certainly blame and resent him, the cow and horse will definitely be disturbed.

古文：百官，众有司也；万物，群牛马也。
现代文：百官就如同众多的主管人员一样，万物就如同众多的牛马一样。
English: The officials are like so many overseers, and all things are like so many cattle and horses.

古文：不正其名，不分其职，而数用刑罚，乱莫大焉。
现代文：不辨正他们的名称，不区别他们的职分，却频繁地使用刑罚，惑乱没有比这更大的了。
English: There is no greater deception than to make frequent use of punishments without distinguishing their names or positions.

古文：夫说以智通，而实以过悗；誉以高贤，而充以卑下；赞以洁白，而随以污德；任以公法，而处以贪枉；用以勇敢，而堙以罢怯。
现代文：称道一个人明智通达，实际上这人却愚蠢胡涂，称赞一个人高尚贤德，实际卜这人却很卑下，赞誉一个人品德高浩，这人紧跟着表露的却是污秽品德；委任一个人掌公法，这人做起事来却贪赃枉法，由于外表勇敢任用一个人，而他内心却疲弱怯懦。
English: Praising a man for his wisdom, when in fact he is a fool; praising a man for his virtue, when in fact he is a scoundrel; praising a man for his virtue, when in reality he is a scoundrel; praising a man for his virtue, when in fact he is a scoundrel; appointing a man to administer public justice, when in fact he is a scoundrel; appointing a man for his outward bravery, when in reality he is weak and cowardly.

古文：此五者，皆以牛为马、以马为牛，名不正也。
现代文：这五种情况，都是以牛为马、以马为牛，都是名分不正啊。
English: In these five cases, it's all a case of the ox for the horse and the horse for the ox, and it's all unfair.

古文：故名不正，则人主忧劳勤苦，而官职烦乱悖逆矣。
现代文：所以，名分不正，那么君主就忧愁劳苦，百官就混乱乖逆了。
English: Therefore, if the name is not right, then the monarch will be sad and laborious, and the officials will be confused and rebellious.

古文：国之亡也，名之伤也，从此生矣。
现代文：国家被灭亡，名声受损害，就由此产生出来了。
English: Countries have been destroyed and reputations tarnished as a result.

古文：白之顾益黑，求之愈不得者，其此义邪！
现代文：想要白，反倒更加黑了，想得到，却越发不能得到，大概都是这个道理吧！
English: If you want white, it turns out to be darker, if you want it, you can't get it, that's probably the reason!

古文：故至治之务，在於正名。
现代文：所以国家大治需要做的事情，在于辨正名分。
English: Therefore, what needs to be done for the country's great reformation is to determine the rightful place.

古文：名正则人主不忧劳矣，不忧劳则不伤其耳目之主。
现代文：名分辨正了，那么君主就不受忧愁劳苦了。不受忧愁劳苦，那么就不会损伤耳目的天性了。
English: If the name recognition is correct, then the monarch will not suffer from sadness. If it does not suffer from sadness, then it will not damage the nature of the ears and eyes.

古文：问而不诏，知而不为，和而不矜，成而不处，止者不行，行者不止，因刑而任之，不制於物，无肯为使，清静以公，神通乎六合，德耀乎海外，意观乎无穷，誉流乎无止。
现代文：多询问，却不专断地下指示。虽然知道怎样做，却不亲自去做。和谐万物，却不自夸。
English: Ask many questions, but do not dictate underground instructions. Although they know how to do it, they do not do it themselves. Harmonize all things, but do not boast.

古文：此之谓定性於大湫，命之曰无有。
现代文：事情完成了，却不居功，静止的东西不让它运动，运动的东西不让它静止。
English: Things are done, but no credit is given, things at rest do not let it move, things in motion do not let it stand still.

古文：故得道忘人，乃大得人也，夫其非道也？
现代文：依照事物的特点加以使用，不为外物所制约，不肯被外物役使。
English: According to the characteristics of things to be used, not restricted by foreign objects, do not want to be used by foreign objects.

古文：知德忘知，乃大得知也，夫其非德也？至知不几，静乃明几也。
现代文：清静而公正，精神流传到天地四方，品德照耀到四海之外，思想永远不衰，美名流传不止。
English: Peaceful and fair, the spirit spreads to the four corners of the world, the character shines beyond the four seas, the thought never fades, and the reputation is passed on.

古文：夫其不明也，大明不小事，假乃理事也，夫其不假也？
现代文：特别聪明的人不做小事，大事才去做，那怎么能不算伟大呢？
English: Especially clever people don't do small things, they only do big things, so how can that not be considered great?

古文：莫人不能，全乃备能也，夫其不全也？
现代文：修真得道的人无所能，但人们全都归附他，于是就无所不能了，那怎么能不算完美之人呢？
English: A true cultivator can do nothing, but people all adhere to him, so he can do everything. How can he not be considered a perfect person?

古文：是故於全乎去能，於假乎去事，於知乎去几，所知者妙矣。若此则能顺其天，意气得游乎寂寞之宇矣，形性得安乎自然之所矣。
现代文：因此，有了众人效力就无需事事都能做，做了大事就无需做小事，被人了解了就无需外表机敏，这样，所知道的就很微妙了，像这样，那就能顺应天性，意气就可以在空廓寂静的宇宙中遨游了，形体就可以在自然的境界里获得安适了。
English: Therefore, with the effectiveness of all people, there is no need to do everything, to do big things, there is no need to do small things, to be understood, there is no need to be outwardly astute, so that what is known is very subtle, like this, it can conform to nature, the spirit can travel in the void of the silent universe, and the body can be comfortable in the natural realm.

古文：全乎万物而不宰，泽被天下而莫知其所自姓，虽不备五者，其好之者是也。
现代文：包容万物却不去主宰，恩泽覆盖天下却没有谁知道从哪里开始的。这样，即使不具备上面说的五种情况，也可以说是爱好这些了。
English: To embrace all things without dominating them, to cover the world with blessings without anyone knowing where to begin. In this way, even if you do not have the five conditions mentioned above, you can say that these are hobbies.

古文：二曰：得道者必静，静者无知，知乃无知，可以言君道也。
现代文：君守得道的人一定平静，平静的人什么都不知道，知道就像不知道一样，这样就可以跟他谈论当君主的原则了。
English: A calm man knows nothing, and knows just as little as he does not know, so you can talk to him about the principles of being a monarch.

古文：故曰中欲不出谓之扃，外欲不入谓之闭。
现代文：所以说，内心的欲望不显露出来叫做封锁，外面的欲望不进入内心叫做关闭。
English: Therefore, when the inner desire does not reveal itself, it is called a blockade, and when the outer desire does not enter the inner heart, it is called a closure.

古文：既扃而又闭，天之用密。
现代文：既封锁又关闭，天性由此得以密藏。
English: Both sealed and closed, nature is thereby kept secret.

古文：有准不以平，有绳不以正，天之大静。
现代文：有水准仪也不用它测平，有墨绳也不用它测直，天性因此非常清静。
English: If you have a spirit level, you don't have to use it for leveling, and if you have an ink cord, you don't have to use it for straightening, so the nature is very quiet.

古文：既静而又宁，可以为天下正。
现代文：既清静又安宁，就可以当天下的主宰了。
English: It is both quiet and peaceful, so you can dominate the day.

古文：身以盛心，心以盛智，智乎深藏，而实莫得窥乎！
现代文：身体是用来保藏心的，心是用来保藏智慧的。智慧被深深保藏着，因而实情就不能窥见到啦。
English: The body is for the preservation of the mind, and the mind is for the preservation of wisdom, and wisdom is so deeply preserved that it cannot be seen.

古文：《鸿范》曰： 惟天阴骘下民。 
现代文：《鸿范》上说： 只有上天庇护人民并让人民安定。 
English: "Hong Fan" said: Only God can protect the people and keep the people stable.

古文：阴之者，所以发之也。
现代文：庇护人民，是为了让人民繁衍生息。
English: To shelter the people is to allow the people to flourish.

古文：故曰不出於户而知天下，不窥於牖而知天道。
现代文：所以说，不出门就能知道天下事，不从窗户向外望就能知道天的运行规律。
English: Therefore, you can know the things of the world without going out, and you can know the laws of the heavens without looking out of the window.

古文：其出弥远者，其知弥少。故博闻之人、强识之士阙矣，事耳目、深思虑之务败矣，坚白之察、无厚之辩外矣。
现代文：那些出去越远的人，他们知道的就越少所以，见闻广博，记忆力强的，他们的智慧就欠缺了，致力于耳聪目明、深思熟虑的，他们的智慧就毁坏了，考察 坚白 、论辩 无厚 的，他们的智慧就抛弃了。
English: Those who travel further and further know less and less, so those who are well-informed and have a good memory are deficient in wisdom, those who are dedicated, bright-eyed, and thoughtful are ruined in wisdom, and those who are hard-headed and argumentative are abandoned in wisdom.

古文：不出者，所以出之也；不为者，所以为之也。
现代文：不出门，正是为了达到出门的效果，不做事，正是为了实现做事的目的。
English: Not going out is precisely to achieve the effect of going out, and not doing things is precisely to achieve the purpose of doing things.

古文：此之谓以阳召阳、以阴召阴。
现代文：这就叫做用阴气召来阳气、用阳气召来阴气。
English: This is called using yin to invoke yang, and yang to invoke yin.

古文：东海之极，水至而反；夏热之下，化而为寒。
现代文：东海那样远，水流到那里还会回来，过了夏天的炎热以后，就会慢慢变得寒冷。
English: As far away as the East China Sea is, the water flow will come back there, and after the summer heat, it will slowly become cold.

古文：故曰天无形，而万物以成；至精无象，而万物以化；大圣无事，而千官尽能。
现代文：所以说，广漠的上天虽无形，可是万物靠了它能生成，最精微的元气虽无影，可是万物靠了它能化育，非常圣明的人虽不做事，可是所有官吏都把才能使出来。
English: Therefore, although the vast heaven is formless, all things can be generated by it; although the subtlest vitality is shadowless, all things can be nurtured by it; although very holy people do not do things, all officials use their talents.

古文：此乃谓不教之教，无言之诏。
现代文：这就叫做不进行教化的教化，不说话的诏告。
English: This is called indoctrination without indoctrination, edict without speech.

古文：故有以知君之狂也，以其言之当也；有以知君之惑也，以其言之得也。
现代文：所以，有办法知道君主狂妄，那就是根据他说的话恰当；有办法知道君主昏惑，那就是根据他说的话得体。
English: Therefore, there is a way to know that the monarch is arrogant, that is, according to what he said is appropriate; there is a way to know that the monarch is confused, that is, according to what he said is appropriate.

古文：君也者，以无当为当，以无得为得者也。
现代文：所谓君主，就是以不求恰当为恰当、以不求得体为得体的人啊。
English: The so-called monarch is a person who does not seek appropriateness for appropriateness, and does not seek propriety for propriety.

古文：当与得不在於君，而在於臣。
现代文：恰当与得体不属于君主的范围，而属于臣子的范围。
English: Propriety and propriety do not belong to the realm of the sovereign, but to that of the vassal.

古文：故善为君者无识，其次无事。
现代文：所以善于当君主的人不担当任何官职，其次是不做具体的事情。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at being a monarch does not hold any official position, and secondly, does not do specific things.

古文：有识则有不备矣，有事则有不恢矣。
现代文：担当官职就会有不能完备的情况，做具体事情就会有不能周全的情况。
English: If you are in charge of an official post, there will be incomplete situations, and if you do specific things, there will be incomplete situations.

古文：不备不恢，此官之所以疑，而邪之所从来也。
现代文：不完备不周全，这是官吏之所以产生疑惑，邪僻之所以出现的原因。
English: Incomplete and incomplete, this is the reason why officials have doubts, and the reason why deviants have appeared.

古文：今之为车者，数官然後成。
现代文：现在制造车子的，要经过许多有关部门然后才能造成。
English: To make a car now, you have to go through a lot of relevant departments before you can make it.

古文：夫国岂特为车哉？
现代文：治理国家难道只像造车子吗？
English: Is governing a country just like building a car?

古文：众智众能之所持也，不可以一物一方安车也。
现代文：国家是靠众人的智慧和才能来维护的，不可以用一件事情一种方法使它安定下来。
English: A country is maintained by the wisdom and talent of many people. It cannot be stabilized by one thing and one method.

古文：夫一能应万，无方而出之务者，唯有道者能之。
现代文：能以不变应万变，没有方法却能做成事情的，只有有道之人才能这样。
English: Only a virtuous person can respond to change with constancy, and accomplish things without methods.

古文：鲁鄙人遗宋元王闭，元王号令於国，有巧者皆来解闭。
现代文：有个鲁国边鄙地区的人送给宋元王一个连环结，宋元王在国内传下号令，让灵巧的人都来解绳结。
English: A man from a remote area of the State of Lu gave a link knot to King Songyuan, and King Songyuan sent out a signal to the whole country, asking those with dexterity to untie the knot.

古文：人莫之能解。
现代文：没有人能解开。
English: No one can solve it.

古文：儿说之弟子请往解之，乃能解其一，不能解其一，且曰： 非可解而我不能解也，固不可解也。 
现代文：儿说的学生请求去解绳结，只能解开其中的一个，不能解开另一个，并且说： 不是可以解开而我不能解开，这个绳结本来就不能解开。 
English: The pupil asked to untie the knot, but could only untie one of the knots, and could not untie the other, and said, "If it is not possible to untie and I cannot untie, then this knot cannot be untied."

古文：问之鲁鄙人，鄙人曰： 然，固不可解也，我为之而知其不可解也。
现代文：向鲁国边鄙地区的人询问一下，他说， 是的，这个蝇结本来不能解开，我打的这连环结，因而知道它不能解开。
English: Ask anyone in the backwoods of Russia, and they'll say, "Yes, this fly knot wasn't supposed to be untieable, and I tied it so I knew it wasn't untieable."

古文：今不为而知其不可解也，是巧於我。 
现代文：现在这人没有打这连环结，却知道它不能解开，这就是比我巧啊。 
English: Now this man has not tied the knot, but he knows that it cannot be untied, and that is cleverer than I am.

古文：故如儿说之弟子者，以 不解 解之也。
现代文：所以像儿说的学生这样的八，是用 不可以解开 的回答解决了绳结的削题。
English: Therefore, eight students like the one mentioned by the child solved the problem of cutting the rope knot with the answer that it could not be untied.

古文：郑大师文终日鼓瑟而兴，再拜其瑟前曰： 我效於子，效於不穷也。 
现代文：郑国的太师文弹瑟弹了一整天，而后站起来。在瑟前拜了两拜说： 我学习你，学习你的音律变化无穷。 
English: The grand master of Zhengzhou, Wen Piao Su, played for a whole day, and then stood up. He bowed twice before Su and said: I learn from you, and there are endless changes in learning your music.

古文：故若大师文者，以其兽者先之，所以中之也。
现代文：所以像太师文这样的人，先让自己的心如兽类一样冥然无知，所以才能掌握弹瑟的规律。
English: Therefore, a person like Taishi Wen must first let his heart be as ignorant as a beast, so that he can master the rules of playing.

古文：故思虑自心伤也，智差自亡也，奋能自殃，其有处自狂也。
现代文：所以，思虑就会使自己受到损伤，智巧就会使自己遭到灭亡，自夸逞能就会使自己遭殃，担当职务就会使自己狂妄。
English: Therefore, to be thoughtful is to injure oneself, to be clever is to ruin oneself, to boast is to ruin oneself, and to be in charge is to be arrogant.

古文：故至神逍遥倏忽，而不见其容；至圣变习移俗，而莫知其所从；离世别群，而无不同；君民孤寡，而不可障壅。
现代文：所以神妙至极就能逍遥自得，转瞬即逝，但人们却看不到它的形体，圣明至极就能移风易俗，但人们却不知道是跟随着什么改变的，超群出世，但没有不和谐的，治理人民，称孤道寡，而不受阻塞壅闭。
English: Therefore, the wisest can be at ease, fleeting, but people can't see its shape, the most holy can change customs, but people don't know what to change with, the best come into the world, but there is no disharmony, govern the people, say that they are lonely, and are not blocked.

古文：此则奸邪之情得，而险陂谗慝谄谀巧佞之人无由入。
现代文：这样，奸邪的实情就能了解，阴险邪僻，善进谗言，阿谀奉承、机巧虚诈的人就无法靠近了。
English: In this way, the truth of treachery can be understood, and those who are insidious and devious, good at persuasion, flattery, and cunning can not get close.

古文：凡奸邪险陂之人，必有因也。
现代文：凡是奸邪险恶的人，一定要有所凭借。
English: Anyone who is treacherous and sinister must have something to rely on.

古文：何因哉？
现代文：凭借什么呢？
English: On the strength of what?

古文：因主之为。
现代文：就是凭借君主的亲自做事。
English: That is, by virtue of the monarch personally doing things.

古文：人主好以己为，则守职者舍职而阿主之为矣。
现代文：君主喜欢亲自做事，那么担当官职的人就会放弃自己的职责去曲从君主所做的事了。
English: The monarch likes to do things himself, so those in charge of official duties will give up their duties to do what the monarch does.

古文：阿主之为，有过则主无以责之，则人主日侵，而人臣日得。
现代文：曲从君主所做的事，有了过错，君主也就无法责备他，这样，君主就会一天天受损害，臣子就会一天天得志。
English: If there is a fault in what the sovereign has done, the sovereign cannot blame him. In this way, the sovereign will be damaged day by day, and the vassal will be rewarded day by day.

古文：是宜动者静，宜静者动也。
现代文：这样就是该运动的却安静，该安静的却运动。
English: In this way, the movement is quiet, but the quiet is the movement.

古文：尊之为卑，卑之为尊，从此生矣。此国之所以衰，而敌之所以攻之者也。
现代文：尊贵的变为卑下的，卑下的变为尊贵的，这种现像就由此产生了这就是国家所以衰弱、敌国所以进犯的原因啊。
English: The noble becomes lowly, the lowly becomes noble, and this phenomenon is the result. This is the reason why the country is weak, and why the enemy country is attacking.

古文：奚仲作车，苍颉作书，后稷作稼，皋陶作刑，昆吾作陶，夏鲧作城。
现代文：奚仲创造了车子，苍颉创造了文字，后稷发明了种庄稼，皋陶制定了刑法，昆吾创造了陶器，夏鲧发明了筑城。
English: Xizhong created the car, Heron created the written language, Houyi invented the seed crops, Juntao established the criminal law, Kunwu created the pottery, and Xiaqi invented the city-building.

古文：此六人者，所作当矣，然而非主道者。
现代文：这六个人，他们所创造的东西都是适宜的，然而却不是君主所应做的。
English: These six people, what they've created is appropriate, but it's not what a monarch should be doing.

古文：故曰作者忧，因者平。
现代文：所以说，创造的人忙乱，靠别人创造的人平静。
English: Therefore, he who creates is in a hurry, but he who is created by others is calm.

古文：惟彼君道，得命之情，故任天下而不强，此之谓全人。
现代文：只有掌握了当君主的原则，才能了解性命的真情，所以驾驭天下而不感到费力，这样的人就叫做完人。
English: Only when you have mastered the principle of being a monarch can you understand the true meaning of life, so you can control the world without feeling any effort. Such a person is called a perfect person.

古文：三曰：凡官者，以治为任，以乱为罪。
现代文：任数凡是任用官吏，把治理得好看成能胜任，把治理得混乱看成有罪。
English: All those who appoint officials regard good governance as competent, and chaos in governance as sinful.

古文：今乱而无责，则乱愈长矣。
现代文：现在治理得混乱却不加责备，那么混乱就更加厉害了。
English: Now that the administration is in disarray with no one to blame, the disarray is even worse.

古文：人主好暴示能，以好唱自奋，人臣以不争持位，以听从取容，是君代有司为有司也，是臣得後随以进其业。
现代文：君主以好炫耀来显示自己的才能，以好做先导来自夸，臣手以不劝谏君主来保持寺官职，以曲意听从来求得收容，这样就是君主代替主管官吏当主管官吏，这样就是臣子得以跟随着干那些保持官职、曲意求容的事情。
English: Monarchs show off their talents by being good at showing off, boast by being good at leading others, retainers maintain their position as temple officials by not persuading the monarch, and never seek to be accepted by listening to music. In this way, the monarch replaces the officials in charge to be the officials in charge, and retainers are able to follow those things that maintain their position and seek to be accepted.

古文：君臣不定，耳虽闻不可以听，目虽见不可以视，心虽知不可以举，势使之也。
现代文：君臣的正常关系不确定，耳朵即使能听也无法听清，眼睛即使能看也无法看清，内心即使知道也无法选取，这是情势使他这样的。
English: The situation has made it so that the normal relationship between a prince and a minister is uncertain, the ear cannot hear clearly even if it can hear, the eye cannot see clearly even if it can see, and the heart cannot choose even if it knows.

古文：凡耳之闻也藉於静，目之见也藉於昭，心之知也藉於理。
现代文：耳朵能听见是凭借着寂静，眼睛能看见是凭借着光明，内心能知道是凭借着义理。
English: The ear can hear by virtue of silence, the eye can see by virtue of light, and the heart can know by virtue of righteousness.

古文：君臣易操，则上之三官者废矣。
现代文：君臣如果交换了各自的职守，那么上面说的三种器官的功用就被废弃了。
English: If the sovereign and the vassal exchanged their respective duties, then the functions of the three organs mentioned above would be abandoned.

古文：亡国之主，其耳非不可以闻也，其目非不可以见也，其心非不可以知也，君臣扰乱，上下不分别，虽闻曷闻？
现代文：亡国的君主，他的耳朵不是不可以听到，他的眼睛不是不可以看到，他的内心不是不可队知道，君臣的职分混乱，上下不加分别，即使听到，又能真正听到什，即使看到，又能真正看到什么？
English: The monarch of a ruined country, is it not impossible for his ears to hear, for his eyes to see, and for his heart to know? The duties of a monarch and a minister are confused, and there is no distinction between the top and the bottom. Even if you hear, what can you really hear? Even if you see, what can you really see?

古文：虽见曷见？虽知曷知？
现代文：即使知道，又能真正知到什么？
English: And even if they did, what would they really know?

古文：驰骋而因耳矣，此愚者之所不至也。
现代文：要达到随心所故无所不至的境界，就得有所凭借啊。这是愚蠢君主的智慧所不能达到的。
English: If you want to achieve the state of being able to do whatever you want, you have to have something to rely on. This is something that the wisdom of a foolish monarch cannot achieve.

古文：不至则不知，不知则不信。
现代文：不能达到就不能知道，不能知道就不相信这种情况。
English: If you can't reach it, you can't know it, and if you can't know it, you can't believe it.

古文：无骨者不可令知冰。
现代文：没有骨髂的虫子春生秋死，不可能让它知道有冰雪。
English: Without the cochlea, it is impossible for the insect to know that there is snow and ice.

古文：有土之君，能察此言也，则灾无由至矣。
现代文：拥有疆土的君主，能明察这些话，那么灾祸就无法到来了。
English: If the sovereign, who owns the territory, can see these words clearly, then the disaster will not come.

古文：且夫耳目知巧固不足恃，惟修其数行其理为可。
现代文：再说，耳目智巧，本来就不足以依靠，只有讲求驾驭臣下的方法，按照义理行事才可以依靠。
English: Moreover, being clever and clever is not enough to rely on in the first place. You can only rely on the method of seeking to control your subjects and acting in accordance with the principles of justice.

古文：韩昭厘侯视所以祠庙之牲，其豕小，昭厘侯令官更之。
现代文：韩昭厘侯察看用来祭祀宗庙的牺牲，那猪很小，昭厘侯让官员用大猪替换小猪。
English: Han Zhaoli watched the sacrifice used to worship the ancestral temple. The pig was very small, and Zhaoli asked the officials to replace the piglet with a large pig.

古文：官以是豕来也，昭厘侯曰： 是非向者之豕邪？ 
现代文：那官员又把这头猪拿了来，昭厘侯说； 这不是刚才的猪吗？ 
English: The official brought the pig again, and Zhao Lihong said, "Isn't this the pig from before?"

古文：官无以对。
现代文：那官员无话回答。
English: The official did not answer.

古文：命吏罪之。
现代文：昭厘侯就命令官吏治他的罪。
English: Shao Lihou ordered officials to punish him for his crime.

古文：从者曰： 君王何以知之？ 
现代文：昭厘侯的侍从说： 君王您根据什么知道的？ 
English: Zhao Lihou's attendant said: How do you know that, Your Majesty?

古文：君曰： 吾以其耳也。 
现代文：昭厘侯说： 我是根据猪的耳朵识别出来的。 
English: Zhao Lihou said: I was identified by the pig's ear.

古文：申不害闻之，曰： 何以知其聋？以其耳之聪也；何以知其盲？
现代文：申不害听到了这件事，说： 根据什么知道他聋，根据他的听觉好，根据什么知道他瞎？
English: Hearing this, Shin said, "On what basis do you know that he is deaf, on what basis do you know that his hearing is good, on what basis do you know that he is blind?"

古文：以其目之明也；何以知其狂？
现代文：根据他的视力好，根据什么知道他狂？
English: If his eyesight is good, how do you know he's crazy?

古文：以其言之当也。
现代文：根据他的话得当。
English: Take him at his word.

古文：故曰去听无以闻则聪，去视无以见则明，去智无以知则公。
现代文：所以说，去掉听觉无法听见了，那么听觉就灵敏了，去掉视觉无法看见了，那么目光就敏锐了；去掉智慧无法去知道了，那么内心就公正无私了。
English: Therefore, if you can't hear without hearing, then your hearing is sensitive; if you can't see without sight, then your eyesight is sharp; if you can't know without wisdom, then your heart is fair and selfless.

古文：去三者不任则治，三者任则乱。 
现代文：去掉这三种东西不使用，就治理得好，使用这三种东西，就治理得乱。 
English: If you get rid of these three things and do not use them, you will have good governance, but if you use these three things, you will have chaotic governance.

古文：以此言耳目心智之不足恃也。
现代文：以此说明耳只心智不足阻依靠。
English: This shows that the ear is not enough for the mind to rely on.

古文：耳目心智，其所以知识甚阙，其所以闻见甚浅。
现代文：耳目心智，它们所能了解认识的东西很贫乏，它们所能听到见到的东西很浮浅。
English: The ear, the eye, and the mind, what they can understand and know is very poor, and what they can hear and see is very shallow.

古文：以浅阙博居天下，安殊俗，治万民，其说固不行。
现代文：凭着浮浅贫乏的知识占有广博的天下，使不同习俗的地区安定，治理全国人民，这种主张必定行不通。
English: The idea of occupying the vast world, stabilizing regions with different customs, and governing the people of the whole country on the basis of shallow and poor knowledge is bound to fail.

古文：十里之间，而耳不能闻；帷墙之外，而目不能见；三亩之宫，而心不能知。
现代文：十里远的范围，耳朵就不能听到，帷幕墙壁的外面，眼睛就不能看见，三亩大的宫室里的情况，心就不能知道。
English: Ten miles away, the ear cannot hear; outside the curtain wall, the eye cannot see; inside the three-acre palace, the heart cannot know.

古文：其以东至开梧，南抚多婴页，西服寿靡，北怀儋耳，若之何哉？
现代文：凭着这些，往东到开梧国，往南安抚多婴页国，往西让寿靡国归服，往北让儋耳国归依，那又该怎么办呢？
English: With these, what should we do if we want to go east to Kaiwu Province, go south to pacify the many-tentacled country, go west to subdue Shumai Province, and go north to convert Er County?

古文：故君人者，不可不察此言也。
现代文：所以当君主的，不可不明察这些话啊。
English: Therefore, when you are a monarch, you must not ignore these words.

古文：治乱安危存亡，其道固无二也。
现代文：治乱安危存亡，本来就没有另外的道理。
English: There is no other reason for surviving the turmoil.

古文：故至智弃智，至仁忘仁，至德不德。
现代文：所以，最大的聪明是丢掉聪明，最大的仁慈是忘掉仁慈，最高的道德是不要道德。
English: Therefore, the greatest wisdom is to discard wisdom, the greatest kindness is to forget kindness, and the highest morality is to have no morality.

古文：无言无思，静以待时，时至而应，心暇者胜。
现代文：不说话，不思虑，清静地等待时机，时机到来再行动，内心闲暇的人就能取胜。
English: Do not speak, do not think, quietly wait for the opportunity, the opportunity comes and then act, the person with leisure in his heart can win.

古文：凡应之理，清净公素，而正始卒。
现代文：几是行动，其准则是，清静无为，公正质朴，自始至终都端正。
English: Some of them are action, the principle of which is that it is quiet and inactive, just and simple, and it is correct from beginning to end.

古文：焉此治纪，无唱有和，无先有随。
现代文：这样来整顿纲纪，就能做到虽然没有人倡导，但却有人应和，虽然没有人带头，但却有人跟随。
English: In order to rectify the discipline in this way, it can be done that although no one advocates, but someone responds, although no one takes the lead, but someone follows.

古文：古之王者，其所为少，其所因多。因者，君术也；为者，臣道也。
现代文：古代称王的人。他们所做的事很少，所凭借的却很多善用凭借，是当君主的方法，亲自做事，是当臣子的准则。
English: In ancient times, people called themselves kings. They did very few things, but relied on a lot of good use. Relying on others is the way to be a monarch, and doing things yourself is the standard for being a courtier.

古文：为则扰矣，因则静矣。
现代文：亲自去做就会忙乱，善用凭借就会清静。
English: If you do it yourself, you will be busy, but if you make good use of it, you will be calm.

古文：因冬为寒，因夏为暑，君奚东哉？
现代文：顺应冬天而带来寒冷，顺应夏天而带来炎热，君主还要做什么事呢？
English: What is the prince to do, when the winter brings cold, and the summer brings heat?

古文：故曰君道无知无为，而贤於有知有为，则得之矣。
现代文：所以说，当君主的原则是无知无为，却胜过有知有为。
English: Therefore, the principle of being a monarch is ignorance and inaction, but it is better than knowledge and action.

古文：有司请事於齐桓公，桓公曰： 以告仲父。 
现代文：这样就算掌握了当君主的方法了。主管官吏向齐桓公请示事情，恒公说； 把这事情告诉忡父去。 
English: In this way, he even mastered the method of being a monarch. The officials in charge asked Qi Huan for instructions, Heng Gong said; Tell this matter to your father.

古文：有司又请，公曰： 告仲父。 
现代文：主管官吏又请示事情，桓公说： 告诉仲父去。 
English: The official in charge asked for further instructions, and Kanko said, "Tell Chucho to go."

古文：若是三。
现代文：这种情况连续了三次。
English: This happened three times in a row.

古文：习者曰： 一则仲父，二则仲父，易哉为君！ 
现代文：桓公的近臣说； 第一次请示，说让去找仲父，第二次请示，又说让去找仲父。这样看来，当君主太容易啦！ 
English: A close retainer of Prince Kan said, "The first time I asked permission, I was told to go to my stepfather. The second time I asked permission, I was told to go to my stepfather. It seems that being a monarch is too easy!"

古文：桓公曰： 吾未得仲父则难，已得仲父之後，曷为其不易也？ 
现代文：桓公说； 我没有得到仲父时很难，已经得到仲父之后，为什么不容易呢？ 
English: "It was difficult when I didn't get a matchmaker, so why shouldn't it be easy now that I have one?" said Prince Kan.

古文：桓公得管子，事犹大易，又况於得道术乎？
现代文：桓公得到管仲，做事情尚且非常容易，更何况得到道术呢？
English: With Guanzhong, it is very easy for King Kan to do things, and what's more, to obtain Taoism?

古文：孔子穷乎陈、蔡之间，藜羹不斟，七日不尝粒。
现代文：孔子被困在陈国，蔡国之间，只能吃些没有米粒的野菜，七天没有吃到粮食。
English: Confucius was trapped between Chen Guo and Cai Guo. He could only eat vegetables without rice grains, and did not eat any grain for seven days.

古文：昼寝。
现代文：孔子白天躺着睡觉。
English: Confucius slept lying down during the day.

古文：颜回索米，得而爨之，几熟，孔子望见颜回攫其甑中而食之。
现代文：颜回讨米，讨到米后烧火做饭，饭快熟了，孔子望见颜回抓取锅里的饭吃。
English: Yan Hui gathers the rice. After gathering the rice, he cooks it on the fire. The meal is almost ready. Confucius wants to see Yan Hui grab the rice from the pot and eat it.

古文：选间，食熟，谒孔子而进食。孔子佯为不见之。孔子起曰： 今者梦见先君，食洁而後馈。 颜回对曰： 不可。
现代文：过了一会儿，饭做熟了，颜回谒见孔子并且献上饭食，孔于假装没有看见颜回抓饭吃，起身说： 今天我梦见了先君，把饭食弄干净了然后去祭祀先君 颜回回答说； 不行。
English: After a while, when the meal was ready, Yan Hui met Confucius and presented the food. Kong Yu pretended not to see Yan Hui grabbing the food and got up and said, "Today I had a dream about my forefather. I cleaned up the food and then went to sacrifice my forefather." Yan Hui replied, "No."

古文：向者煤炱入甑中，弃食不祥，回攫而饭之。 
现代文：刚才烟尘掉到钢锅，扔掉沾着烟尘的食物不吉利，我抓出来吃了。 
English: Just now, the soot fell onto the steel pan. It's unlucky to throw away food that's covered in soot, so I grabbed it and ate it.

古文：孔子叹曰： 所信者目也，而目犹不可信；所恃者心也，而心犹不足恃。
现代文：孔子叹息着说： 所相信的是眼睛，可是眼睛看到的还是不可以相信，所依靠的是心，可是心里揣度的还是不足以依靠。
English: Confucius sighed and said: What is believed is the eye, but what is seen by the eye cannot be believed. What is relied on is the heart, but what is guessed in the heart is not enough to rely on.

古文：弟子记之：知人固不易矣。 
现代文：学生们记住：了解人本来就不容易呀。 
English: Students, remember: getting to know people isn't always easy.

古文：故知非难也，孔子之所以知人难也。
现代文：所以，有所知并不难，掌握知人之术就难了。
English: Therefore, it is not difficult to know something, but it is difficult to master the art of acquaintance.

古文：四曰：人之意苟善，虽不知，可以为长。
现代文：勿躬人的心意如果好，即使不懂得什么，也可以当君长。
English: If you have a good heart, you can be a ruler even if you don't know anything.

古文：故李子曰： 非狗不得兔，兔化而狗，则不为兔。 
现代文：所以李悝说： 没有狗就不能捕获兔，兔如果变得和狗一样，那就无兔可捕了。 
English: So Li Yao said, "Without a dog, you can't catch a rabbit. If a rabbit becomes like a dog, then there's no rabbit to catch."

古文：人君而好为人官，有似於此。
现代文：君主如果喜欢做臣子该做的事，就与此相似了。
English: If a monarch likes to do what a vassal should do, it is similar to this.

古文：其臣蔽之，人时禁之；君自蔽，则莫之敢禁。
现代文：臣子蒙蔽君主，别人还能不断加以制止，君主自己蒙蔽自己，那就没有人敢于制止了。
English: If courtiers deceive the sovereign, others can always stop them, but if the sovereign deceives himself, no one will dare to stop him.

古文：夫自为人官，自蔽之精者也。
现代文：君主自己做臣子该做的事，这是最严重的自己蒙蔽自己的行为。
English: The monarch himself does what a vassal should do. This is the most serious act of self-deception.

古文：祓篲日用而不藏於箧，故用则衰，动则暗，作则倦。
现代文：扫帚每天要使用，因而不把它藏在箱子里。所以，君主思虑臣子职权范围内的事，心志就会衰竭，亲自去做臣子职权范圈内的事，就会昏昧，亲自去做臣子该做的事，就会疲惫。
English: The broom must be used every day, so it should not be hidden in a box. Therefore, if the monarch thinks about the things within the scope of the duties of the vassal, his heart will be exhausted, if he personally does the things within the scope of the duties of the vassal, he will be confused, and if he personally does the things that the vassal should do, he will be tired.

古文：衰、暗、倦，三者非君道也。
现代文：衰竭、昏昧、疲惫，这三种情况，不是当君主应该实行的准则。
English: Exhaustion, drowsiness, weariness, these three things are not the norm for a monarch.

古文：大桡作甲子，黔如作虏首，容成作历，羲和作占日，尚仪作占月，后益作占岁，胡曹作衣，夷羿作弓，祝融作市，仪狄作酒，高元作室，虞姁作舟，伯益作井，赤冀作臼，乘雅作驾，寒哀作御，王冰作服牛，史皇作图，巫彭作医，巫咸作筮。
现代文：大桡创造了六十甲子记日，黔如创造了虏首计算法，容成创造了历法，羲和创造了计算日子的方法，尚仪创造了计算月分的方法，后益创造了计算年分的方法，胡曹创造了衣服，夷羿创造了弓，祝融创造了市肆，仪狄创造了酒，高元创造了房屋，虞姁创造了船，伯益创造了井，赤冀创造了舂米的臼，乘雅创造了用马架车，寒哀创造了架车的技术，王亥创造了驾牛的方法，史皇创造了绘画，巫彭创造了医术，巫成创造了占卜术。
English: Daju created the 60 Kojiki days, Ru Ru Ru created the method of calculating the crane, Rongcheng created the calendar, Xinghe created the method of calculating the day, Shang Yi created the method of calculating the month, Houyi created the method of calculating the year, Hu Cao created the clothes, Yixuan created the bow, Zhu Rong created the market, Yidi created the wine, Gao Yuan created the house, Yu Yu created the boat, Bo Yi created the well, Red Ji created the mill of glutinous rice, Xingya created the horse-drawn carriage, Cangmo created the technology of the carriage, Wang Hai created the method of driving cattle

古文：此二十官者，圣人之所以治天下也。
现代文：这二十位官员，正是圣人用来治理天下的依靠。
English: These twenty officials are the very ones that sages rely on to govern the world.

古文：圣王不能二十官之事，然而使二十官尽其巧，毕其能，圣王在上故也。
现代文：圣贤的君王不能自己做二十位官员做的事，然而却能让二十位官员全部献出技艺和才能，这是因为圣贤君王居上位的缘故。
English: The sage-king cannot do by himself what twenty officials can do, but he can make the twenty officials give all their skills and talents, because the sage-king is superior.

古文：圣王之所不能也，所以能之也；所不知也，所以知之也。
现代文：圣贤君王有所不能，因此才有所能，有所不知，因此才有所知。
English: The sages and kings were unable to do certain things, and therefore they were able to do certain things, and they did not know certain things, and therefore they knew certain things.

古文：养其神、修其德而化矣，岂必劳形愁弊耳目哉？
现代文：修养自己的精神品德，自然就能化育万物了，哪里一定要使自身劳苦忧虑、把耳朵眼睛搞得疲惫不堪呢？
English: Cultivating one's own spiritual character will naturally be able to transform and nurture all things, where must one make oneself work hard and worry, and make one's ears and eyes tired?

古文：是故圣王之德，融乎若日之始出，极烛六合，而无所穷屈；昭乎若日之光，变化万物，而无所不行；神合乎太一，生无所屈，而意不可障；精通乎鬼神，深微玄妙。而莫见其形。
现代文：因此，圣贤君王的品德，光灿灿地就像月亮刚出来，普遍地照耀天地四方，没有照不到的地方，明亮亮地就像太阳的光芒，能化育万物，没有做不到的事情，精神与道符合，生命不受挫折，因而心志不可阻挡；精气与鬼神相通，深微玄妙，没有人能看出其形体来。
English: Therefore, the virtue of the sage-kings shines brightly like the newly-emerged moon, shines universally in the four directions of heaven and earth, there is no place that cannot be illuminated, brightly like the sun's light, can transform all things, there is nothing that cannot be done, the spirit is in line with the way, life is not frustrated, and therefore the mind is unstoppable; the spirit is in communication with ghosts and gods, deep and subtle, no one can see its form.

古文：今日南面，百邪自正，而天下皆反其情，黔首毕乐其志，安育其性，而莫为不成。
现代文：这样，一旦君主南面而冶，各种邪曲的事自然会得到匡正，天下的人都恢复自己的本性，老百姓都从内心感到高兴、安心培育自己的善性，因而做什么事就没有不成功的。
English: In this way, once the monarch is overthrown, all kinds of evil things will naturally be rectified, people all over the world will restore their own nature, and the common people will feel happy from the bottom of their hearts and cultivate their good nature with peace of mind, so there will be no failure in doing anything.

古文：故善为君者，矜服性命之情，而百官已治矣，黔首已亲矣，名号已章矣。
现代文：所以，善于当君主的人，谨慎地保持住真情本性，因而各种官吏就能治理了，老百姓就能亲附了，名声就显赫了。
English: Therefore, those who are good at being monarchs carefully maintain their true nature, so that all kinds of officials can govern, the common people can be attached, and the reputation is prominent.

古文：管子复於桓公曰： 垦田大邑，辟土艺粟，尽地力之利，臣不若宁速。请置以为大田。
现代文：管子向桓公禀报说； 开垦田地，扩大城邑，开辟土地，种植谷物，充分利用地力，我不如宁速，请让他当大田。
English: Guanzi reported to Huan Gongyi: "Open up the fields, expand the cities, open up the land, plant grain, make full use of the land, I am not as fast as Ning, please let him be a large field."

古文：登降辞让，进退闲习，臣不若隰朋，请置以为大行。
现代文：迎接宾客，熟悉升降、辞让，进退等各种礼仪，我不如隰朋，请让他当大行。
English: I am not as good as my friend at greeting guests, and I am familiar with various etiquettes such as promotion, demotion, resignation, advancement and retirement. Please let him take the lead.

古文：蚤入晏出，犯君颜色，进谏必忠，不辟死亡，不重贵富，臣不如东郭牙，请置以为大谏臣。
现代文：早人朝，晚退朝，敢于触怒国君，忠心谏诤，不躲避死亡，不看重富贵，我不如东郭牙，请让他当大谏臣。
English: Early in the morning, late in the morning, dare to anger the sovereign, loyal, do not avoid death, do not value wealth, I am not as good as Dong Guo Ya, please let him be a senior vassal.

古文：平原广城，车不结轨，士不旋踵，鼓之，三军之士视死如归，臣不若王子城父，请置以为大司马。
现代文：在广阔的原野上作战，战车整齐行进而不错乱，士兵不退却，一击鼓进军，三军的士兵都视死如归，我不如王子城父，请让他当大司马。
English: Fighting on a vast plain, chariots marching in an orderly manner without disorder, soldiers not retreating, marching to the beat of a drum, soldiers of the three armies are as good as dead, I am not as good as the prince's father, please let him be the grand steed.

古文：决狱折中，不杀不辜，不诬无罪，臣不若弦章，请置以为大理。
现代文：断案恰当，不杀无辜的人，不冤屈没有罪的人，我不如弦章，请让他当大理。
English: The decision of the case is appropriate, do not kill innocent people, do not complain to people who are not guilty, I am not as good as the chord, please let him be the reason.

古文：君若欲治国强兵，则五子者足矣；君欲霸王，则夷吾在此。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：您如果想治国强兵，那么这五个人就足够了，您要想成就霸王之业，那么有我在这里。 桓公说： 好。 
English: If you want to govern the country and strengthen the army, then these five people are enough, and if you want to achieve the cause of overpowering the king, then I am here.

古文：令五子皆任其事，以受令於管子。
现代文：就让五个人都担任了那些官职，接受管子的命令。
English: They put all five of them in those positions, taking orders from the tube.

古文：十年，九合诸侯，一匡天下，皆夷吾与五子之能也。
现代文：过了十年，桓公多次盟会诸侯，使天下完全得到匡正，这些都是靠了管杰吾和五个人的才能啊。
English: After ten years, Emperor Kan made many alliances with princes, so that the world was completely rectified. These were all thanks to the talent of Guan Jiewu and the five people.

古文：管子，人臣也，不任己之不能，而以尽五子之能，况於人主乎？
现代文：管子是臣子，他不担当自己不能做的事情，而让五个人把自己的才能都献出来，更何况君主呢？
English: The pipe is a vassal, he does not take responsibility for what he cannot do, and let five people give their talents, let alone the monarch?

古文：人主知能不能之可以君民也，则幽诡愚险之言无不职矣，百官有司之事毕力竭智矣。
现代文：君主如果知道自己能做什么与不能做什幺是可以治理人民的，那么隐蔽许伪欺骗危险的言论就没有不能识别的了，各种官吏对自己主管的事情就会尽心竭力了。
English: If the monarch knew what he could and could not do, he could govern the people. Then there would be no speech that could not be recognized as hidden, deceitful, and dangerous. All kinds of officials would do their best for the things they are in charge of.

古文：五帝三王之君民也，下固不过毕力竭智也。
现代文：五帝三王治理人民时，在下位的本来不过是尽心竭力罢了。
English: When the five emperors and three kings governed the people, the lower ranks were just trying their best.

古文：夫君人而知无恃其能勇力诚信，则近之矣。
现代文：治理人民如果懂得不要依仗自己的才能、勇武、有力、诚实、守信，那就接近于君道了。
English: If you know not to rely on your own talent, bravery, strength, honesty, and trustworthiness to govern the people, then you are close to the way of a monarch.

古文：凡君也者，处平静，任德化，以听其要。
现代文：凡是当君主的，应该处于平静之中，使用道德去教化人民，治理根本的东西。
English: Anyone who is a monarch should be at peace, use morality to educate the people, and govern the fundamental things.

古文：若此则形性弥羸，而耳目愈精；百官慎职，而莫敢愉綖；人事其事，以充其名。
现代文：这样，从外表到内心就会更加宽实，就会越发耳聪目明，各种官吏就会谨慎地对待职守，没有敢于苟且懈怠的，就能人人做好自己应做的事情，切合自己的名声。
English: In this way, from the outside to the inside, people will be more open-minded, more open-minded, and officials of all kinds will treat their duties with caution. If they do not dare to slack off, everyone will be able to do what they should do and live up to their reputation.

古文：名实相保，之谓知道。
现代文：名声和实际相符，述就叫做懂得了道。
English: When one's reputation matches reality, it is said that one has learned the way.

古文：五曰：明君者，非遍见万物也，明於人主之所执也。
现代文：知度能明察的君主，不是普遍地明察万事万物，而是明察君主所应掌握的东西。
English: A monarch who is able to discern with his intellect does not generally discern all things, but he does discern what a monarch should possess.

古文：有术之主者，非一自行之也，知百官之要也。
现代文：有道术的君主，不是一切都亲自去做，而是要明瞭治理百官的根本。
English: A monarch with ethics does not have to do everything himself, but must clearly understand the fundamentals of governing officials.

古文：知百官之要，故事省而国治也。
现代文：明瞭冶理百官的根本，所以事情少而国家太平。
English: He knows the fundamentals of government, so there are few problems and the country is at peace.

古文：明於人主之所执，故权专而奸止。
现代文：明察君主所应掌握的东西，因而大权蚀揽，奸邪止息。
English: He saw clearly what the monarch should possess, and thus the usurpation of great power and the end of treachery.

古文：奸止则说者不来，而情谕矣。
现代文：奸邪止息，那么游说的不来，而真情也能了解了。
English: If the treachery ceases, then the lobbying will stop, and the true feelings can be understood.

古文：情者不饰，而事实见矣。
现代文：真情不加虚饰，而事实也能显现了。
English: The true feelings are not embellished, and the facts can be revealed.

古文：此谓之至治。
现代文：这就叫做最完美的政治。
English: This is called the most perfect politics.

古文：至治之世，其民不好空言虚辞，不好淫学流说。
现代文：政冶最完美的社会，人民不好说空话假话，不好流言邪说。
English: Politics is the most perfect society, the people are not good at saying empty words and lies, and they are not good at gossiping.

古文：贤不肖各反其质，行其情，不雕其素，蒙厚纯朴，以事其上。
现代文：贤德的与不贤德的各自都恢复其本来面目，依照真情行事，对自己的本性不加雕饰，保持敦厚纯朴的品行，以此来侍奉自己的君主。
English: Both the virtuous and the unvirtuous restore their original appearance, act according to their true feelings, do not add ornaments to their nature, and maintain a dignified and simple demeanor in order to serve their monarch.

古文：若此则工拙愚智勇惧可得以故易官，易官则各当其任矣。
现代文：这样，对灵巧的，拙笨的、愚蠢的、聪明的，勇敢的、怯懦的，就都可以因此而变动他们的官职。变动了官职，他们各自就能胜任自己的职务了。
English: Thus the skilful, the clumsy, the stupid, the clever, the brave, and the cowardly may thereby change their office, and by changing their office they may each be able to fulfil their office.

古文：故有职者安其职，不听其议；无职者责其实，以验其辞。
现代文：所以，对有职位的人就要求他们安于职位，不听他们的议论，对没有职位的人就要求他们的实际行动，用以检验他们的言论。
English: Therefore, for those who have positions, they are required to be satisfied with their positions and not listen to their arguments, and for those who do not have positions, they are required to take actual actions to test their statements.

古文：此二者审，则无用之言不入於朝矣。
现代文：这两种情况都明察了，那么无用之言就不能进入朝廷了。
English: Both of these situations are clearly seen, so useless words can not enter the imperial court.

古文：君服性命之情，去爱恶之心，用虚无为本，以听有用之言，谓之朝。
现代文：君主依照天性行事，去掉爱惜之心，以虚无为根本，来听取有用之言，这就叫做听朝。
English: The sovereign acts in accordance with his nature, removes the heart of love and pity, and takes nothingness as the basis to listen to useful words. This is called listening to the emperor.

古文：凡朝也者，相与召理义也，相与植法则也。
现代文：凡是听朝，都是君臣共同招致理义，共同确立法度。
English: In all cases of listening to the emperor, it is the monarchs and their subjects who jointly invite the truth, and jointly establish the legal system.

古文：上服性命之情，则理义之士至矣，法则之用植矣，枉辟邪挠之人退矣，贪得伪诈之曹远矣。
现代文：君主依照天性行事，那么讲求理义的人就会到来了，法度的效用就会确立了，乖僻邪曲之人就会退去了，贪婪诈伪之徒就会远离了。
English: If the sovereign acts according to his nature, then the reasonable will come, the usefulness of the law will be established, the perverse will retreat, and the greedy and deceitful will stay away.

古文：故治天下之要，存乎除奸；除奸之要，存乎治官；治官之要，存乎治道；治道之要，存乎知性命。
现代文：所以，治理天下的关键在于除掉奸邪，除掉奸邪的关键在于治理官吏，治理官吏的关键在于研习道术，研习道术的关键在于懂得天性。
English: Therefore, the key to governing the world lies in getting rid of the evil of treachery, the key to getting rid of the evil of treachery lies in governing officials, the key to governing officials lies in studying Taoism, and the key to studying Taoism lies in understanding nature.

古文：故子华子曰： 厚而不博，敬守一事，正性是喜。
现代文：所以子华子说： 君主应该求深入而不求广博，谨慎地守住根本，喜爱正性。
English: Therefore, Zihua Zi said: The monarch should seek depth rather than breadth, cautiously keep the fundamentals, and love the positive.

古文：群众不周，而务成一能。
现代文：与众人不相同，而要致力于学得驾驭臣下的能力。
English: Be different from everyone else, and be committed to learning how to control your subordinates.

古文：尽能既成，四夷乃平。唯彼天符，不周而周。
现代文：完全学到了这种能力，四方就会平定只有那些符合天道的人，不求相同却能达到相同。
English: Having fully learned this ability, the four directions will pacify only those who are in line with the heavenly way, do not seek the same but can achieve the same.

古文：此神农之所以长，而尧舜之所以章也。 
现代文：这就是神农之所以兴盛，尧、舜之所以名声卓著的原因。 
English: This is the reason why Shennong thrives, and why Zou and Zou are famous.

古文：人主自智而愚人，自巧而拙人，若此。则愚拙者请矣，巧智者诏矣。
现代文：君主认为自己聪明却认为别人愚蠢，认为自己灵巧却认为别人笨拙，这样，那么愚蠢笨拙的人就请求指示了，灵巧聪明的人就要发布指示了。
English: The prince who thinks he is clever thinks others are stupid, who thinks he is clever thinks others are clumsy, so the stupid and clumsy ask for instructions and the clever and clever give them.

古文：诏多则请者愈多矣，请者愈多，且无不请也。
现代文：发布的指示越多，那么请求指示的就越多。请求指示的越多，就将无事不请求指示。
English: The more instructions issued, the more instructions will be requested, and the more instructions will be requested, the more instructions will be requested.

古文：主虽巧智，未无不知也。
现代文：君主即使灵巧聪明，也不能无所不知。
English: Even if a ruler is clever and clever, he cannot know everything.

古文：以未无不知，应无不请，其道固穷。
现代文：凭着不能无所不知，应付无所不请，道术必定会穷尽。
English: By virtue of not being able to know everything and deal with everything, Taoism will surely be exhausted.

古文：为人主而数穷於其下，将何以君人乎？
现代文：当君主却经常被臣下弄得道术穷尽，又将怎样治理人民昵？
English: How will the monarch govern the people when he is constantly outmaneuvered by his subjects?

古文：穷而不知其穷，其患又将反以自多，是之谓重塞之主，无存国矣。
现代文：穷尽了却不知道自己穷尽了，又将犯自高自大的错误。这就叫做受到双重阻塞。受到双重阻塞的君主，就不能保佳国家了。
English: He who is exhausted, but does not know that he is exhausted, will make the mistake of arrogance. This is called being double-blocked. A monarch who is double-blocked will not be able to protect the country.

古文：故有道之主，因而不为，责而不诏，去想去意，静虚以待，不伐之言，不夺之事，督名审实，官使自司，以不知为道，以柰何为实。
现代文：所以有道术的君主，依靠臣子做事，自己却布亲自去做。要求臣子做事有成效，自己却不发布指示。去掉想像，去掉猜度，清静地等待时机。不代替臣子讲话，不抢夺臣子的事情做。审察名分和实际，官府之事让臣子自已管理。以不求知为根本，把询问臣子怎么办作为宝物。
English: Therefore, a monarch who has Taoism relies on his vassals to do things, but does not do them himself. He asks his vassals to do things effectively, but does not issue instructions himself. Eliminate imagination, remove guesswork, and wait for the opportunity quietly. Do not speak in place of the vassal, do not rob the vassal. Examine the name and reality, and let the vassal manage the affairs of the government. Do not seek knowledge as a fundamental, and ask the vassal what to do as a treasure.

古文：尧曰： 若何而为及日月之所烛？ 
现代文：比如尧说； 怎样做才能像日月那样普照人间？ 
English: For example, Zou said; How can I shine like the sun and moon?

古文：舜曰： 若何而服四荒之外？ 
现代文：舜说； 怎样做才能使四方边远之处归服？ 
English: What can be done to win over remote areas in all directions?

古文：禹曰： 若何而治青北，化九阳、奇怪之所际？
现代文：禹说； 怎样做才能治服青丘国，使九阳山、奇肱国受到教化？ 
English: Yu said, "What should we do in order to subdue Qingqiu and enlighten Jiuyangshan and Qixi?"

古文：赵襄子之时，以任登为中牟令。
现代文：赵襄子当改之时，用任登当中牟令。
English: When Zhao Xiangzi was to be reformed, he was appointed to be a middle-ranking official.

古文：上计，言於襄子曰： 中牟有士曰胆胥己，请见之。 
现代文：他在上呈全年的帐簿时，向襄子推荐道： 中牟有个人叫胆胥己，请您召见他。 
English: When he was presenting the annual account book, he recommended to Xiangzi: There is a person in Zhongmou called Zhen Xuan Zi, please summon him.

古文：襄子见而以为中大夫。
现代文：襄子召见胆胥己以后让他当中大夫。
English: After Xiangzi summoned his courage, he made him the middle doctor.

古文：相国曰： 意者君耳而未之目邪！
现代文：相国说； 我料想您对这个人只是耳闻，尚未亲眼见到其为人如何吧!
English: Said the other country: I suppose you have only heard of this man, and have not seen for yourself what he is like!

古文：为中大夫，若此其易也？
现代文：当中大夫，竟是这样容易吗？
English: Is it really so easy to escape, doctor?

古文：非晋国之故。 
现代文：这不是晋国的成法。 
English: This is not the law of Jin.

古文：襄子曰： 吾举登也，已耳而目之矣。
现代文：襄子说： 我提拔任登时，已经耳闻并且亲眼花缭乱见到他的情况了。
English: Xiangzi said: When I promoted Ren Deng, I had already heard about him and saw his situation with my own eyes.

古文：登所举，吾又耳而目之，是耳目人终无已也。 
现代文：任登所举荐的人，我如果还要耳闻并且亲眼见到这人的实际情况，这样，用耳朵听、用眼睛观察人就始终没有完了。 
English: If I have to listen to the person recommended by Ren Deng and see the actual situation of this person with my own eyes, then listening with my ears and observing people with my eyes will never be complete.

古文：遂不复问，而以为中大夫。
现代文：于是就不再询问，而让胆胥己当了中大夫。
English: So they stopped asking, and let the coward become a junior doctor.

古文：襄子何为？
现代文：襄子还需做什么呢？
English: What else does Xiangzi need to do?

古文：任人，则贤者毕力。
现代文：他只是任用人，那么贤德的人就把力量全部献出来了。
English: He is only an appointee, so the virtuous man has given all his strength.

古文：人主之患，必在任人而不能用之，用之而与不知者议之也。
现代文：君主的弊病，一定是委任人官职却不让他做事，或者让他做事却与不了解他的人议论他。
English: The malady of a monarch must be to appoint a man to an office and not let him do his work, or to let him do his work and talk about him to people who do not know him.

古文：绝江者托於船，致远者托於骥，霸王者托於贤。
现代文：横渡长江的人靠的是船，到远处去的人靠的是千里马，成就王霸之业的人靠的是贤人。
English: Those who cross the Yangtze River rely on boats, those who go far away rely on horses, and those who achieve the cause of Wangba rely on sages.

古文：伊尹、吕尚、管夷吾、百里奚，此霸王者之船骥也。
现代文：伊尹，吕尚、管夷吾、百里奚，这些人就是成就王霸之业的人的船和千里马啊。
English: Yi Yin, Lushang, Guan Yiwu, Bai Li Yao, these people are the ships and horses of those who have achieved the cause of the king.

古文：释父兄与子弟，非疏之也；任庖人钓者与仇人仆虏，非阿之也。
现代文：不任用父兄与子弟，并不是疏远他们；任用厨师、钓鱼的人与仇人、奴仆，并不是偏爱他们。
English: Not to employ a father, a brother, or a child, is not to alienate them; to employ a cook, a fisherman, an enemy, a servant, is not to favour them.

古文：持社稷立功名之道，不得不然也。
现代文：保住国家、建立功名的原则要求君主不得不这样啊。
English: The principle of preserving the country and building a reputation requires the monarch to do so.

古文：犹大匠之为宫室也，量小大而知材木矣，訾功丈而知人数矣。
现代文：这就如同卓越的工匠建筑官室一样，测量一下官室的大小就知道需要的术材了，估量一下工程的大小尺寸就知道需要的人数了。
English: This is just like an excellent craftsman building an office, measuring the size of the office to know the required equipment, and estimating the size of the project to know the required number of people.

古文：故小臣、吕尚听，而天下知殷、周之王也；管夷吾、百里奚听，而天下知齐、秦之霸也。
现代文：所以小臣伊尹、吕尚被重用，天下人就知道殷，周要成就王业了，管夷吾、百里奚被重用，天下人就知道齐、秦要成就霸业了。
English: Therefore, the minor ministers Yi Yin and Lushan were reused, and the whole world knew that Yin and Zhou wanted to achieve the king's career. Guan Yiwu and Baili Yao were reused, and the whole world knew that Qi and Qin wanted to achieve the overlord's career.

古文：岂特骥远哉？
现代文：他们岂只是船和千里马啊？
English: Are they just boats and horses?

古文：夫成王霸者固有人，亡国者亦有人。
现代文：成就王业霸业的当然要有人，亡国的也要有人。
English: Of course, there must be someone to achieve the king's hegemony, and there must also be someone to destroy the country.

古文：桀用羊辛，纣用恶来，宋用唐鞅，齐用苏秦，而天下知其亡。
现代文：桀重用干辛，纣重用恶来，宋国重用唐鞅，齐国重用苏秦。因而天下人就知道他们要灭亡了。
English: The Song Dynasty made heavy use of the Tang Dynasty, and the Qi Dynasty made heavy use of the Qin Dynasty. As a result, people around the world knew that they were about to perish.

古文：非其人而欲有功，譬之若夏至之日而欲夜之长也，射鱼指天而欲发之当也。
现代文：不任用贤人却想要建立功业，这就好像在夏至这一天却想让夜长，射鱼时冲着天却想射中一样。
English: Not appointing sages but wanting to establish merit is like wanting the night to be long on the day of the summer solstice, or shooting fish into the sky but wanting to hit it.

古文：舜、禹犹若困。而况俗主乎？
现代文：舜、禹对此尚且办不到，更何况平庸的君主呢？
English: Yu and Yu are still unable to do this, let alone a mediocre monarch?

古文：六曰：失之乎数，求之乎信，疑；失之乎势，求之乎国，危。
现代文：慎势失去了驾驭臣下的方法，要求人们诚信，这是胡涂的。失去了君主的权势，仗恃着享有国家，这是危险的。
English: Prudence has lost the means of controlling her subjects, and it is folly to ask people to be honest. It is dangerous to lose the power of the monarchy and to enjoy the country by means of it.

古文：吞舟之鱼，陆处则不胜蝼蚁。
现代文：能吞下船的大鱼，居于陆地就不能胜过蝼蛄蚂蚁。
English: The big fish that can swallow a ship is no better than a grasshopper ant on land.

古文：权钧则不能相使，势等则不能相并，治乱齐则不能相正。
现代文：权力相同就不能役使对方，势力相等就不能兼并对方，冶乱相同就不能匡正对方。
English: The same power cannot serve the other side, the same force cannot annex the other side, and the same disturbance cannot rectify the other side.

古文：故小大、轻重、少多、治乱，不可不察，此祸福之门也。
现代文：所以对大小、轻重，多少、治乱等情况，不可不审察清楚，这是通向祸福的门径。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to examine the situation of size, weight, quantity, and control of chaos, which is the doorway to misfortune and good fortune.

古文：凡冠带之国，舟车之所通，不用象、译、狄鞮，方三千里。
现代文：凡是戴帽子束带子的文明国家，车船所能达到的地方，不用像、译、狄鞮等官员做翻译的地方，有三千里见方。
English: In any civilized country where people wear hats and ties, there are thousands of miles between any place that can be reached by car or boat, and any place that does not need an official such as a translator, interpreter, or interpreter.

古文：古之王者，择天下之中而立国，择国之中而立宫，择宫之中而立庙。
现代文：古代称王的人，选择天下的正中来建立京畿，选择京畿的正中来建立官廷，选择宫廷的正中来建立祖庙。
English: In ancient times, those who claimed to be kings chose the center of the world to establish the Gyeonggi Province, the center of the Gyeonggi Province to establish the court, and the center of the court to establish the ancestral temple.

古文：天下之地，方千里以为国，所以极治任也。
现代文：在普天下，只把千里见方的地方作为京畿，是为了更好地担起治理国家的担子。
English: In order to better shoulder the burden of governing the country, Gyeonggi is the only place in the whole world that is a thousand miles square.

古文：非不能大也，其大不若小，其多不若少。
现代文：京畿并不是不能扩大，但是大了不如小了好，多了不如少了好。
English: Gyeonggi is not impossible to expand, but bigger is better than smaller, more is better than less.

古文：众封建，非以私贤也，所以便势全威，所以博义。
现代文：多分封诸侯国，不是因为偏爱贤德之人，而是为了有利于权势，保全住威严，是为了使道义扩大。
English: Perhaps the vassal states were sealed, not because of preference for virtuous people, but in order to benefit the power, to preserve the majesty, in order to expand morality.

古文：义博利则无敌，无敌者安。
现代文：道义扩大了，那就没有人与之为敌了。没有人与之为敌的人就安全。
English: If morality is expanded, then no one will be an enemy of it. No one who is an enemy of it will be safe.

古文：故观於上世，其封建众者，其福长，其名彰。
现代文：所以对上世考察一下，那些分封诸侯国多的人，他们的福分就长久，他们的名声就显赫。
English: Therefore, if we look at the last world, those who were given the most provinces and principalities will have long-lasting good fortune, and their reputation will be prominent.

古文：神农十七世有天下，与天下同之也。
现代文：神农享有天下十七世，是与天下人共同享有啊。
English: Shennong enjoys the seventeenth generation of the world, and enjoys it together with the people of the world.

古文：王者之封建也，弥近弥大，弥远弥小。
现代文：称王的人分封诸侯国，越近的就越大，越远的就越小。
English: The king-maker divides up the provinces, the nearer the larger, the further away the smaller.

古文：海上有十里之诸侯。
现代文：边远之处有十里大的诸侯国。
English: In remote places, there are ten-mile-wide vassal states.

古文：以大使小，以重使轻，以众使寡，此王者之所以家以完也。
现代文：用大的诸侯国役使小的诸侯国，用权势重的诸侯国役使权势轻的诸侯国，用人多的诸侯国役使人少的诸侯国，这就是称王的人能保全天下的原因。
English: The reason why those who claim to be kings are able to preserve the world is that they use great vassals to make small vassals, powerful vassals to make less powerful vassals, and numerous vassals to make fewer vassals.

古文：故曰以滕、费则劳，以邹、鲁则逸，以宋、郑则犹倍日而驰也，以齐、楚则举而加纲旃而已矣。
现代文：所以说，用滕、费役使别国就费力，用邹、鲁役使别国就省力，用宋、郑役使别国就加倍容易，用齐、楚役使别国就等于把纲纪加在它们身上罢了。
English: Therefore, using Teng and Feiyu to make other countries work harder, using Zhai and Lu to make other countries save effort, using Song and Zheng to make other countries twice as easy, and using Qi and Chu to make other countries equal to imposing discipline on them.

古文：所用弥大，所欲弥易。
现代文：所使用的诸侯国越大，实现自己的愿望就越容易。
English: The larger the vassal state used, the easier it is to realize one's wishes.

古文：汤其无郼，武其无岐，贤虽十全，不能成功。
现代文：汤如果没有郼，武王如果没有岐，他们的贤德即使达到十全十美的程度，也不能成就功业。
English: If the soup does not have gourd, and the warrior king does not have reed, even if their virtue reaches a perfect level, they will not be able to accomplish the work.

古文：汤、武之贤。而犹藉知乎势，又况不及汤、武者乎？
现代文：凭着汤、武王那样的贤德，尚且需要借助于权势，更何况赶不上汤、武王的人呢？
English: With the virtues of Tang and Wu Wang, it is still necessary to rely on power, let alone those who can't keep up with Tang and Wu Wang?

古文：故以大畜小吉，以小畜大灭，以重使轻从，以轻使重凶。
现代文：所以，用大的诸侯国役使小的诸侯国就吉祥，用小的诸侯国役使大的诸侯国就会灭亡，用权势重的诸侯国役使权势轻的诸侯国就顺从，用权势轻酌诸侯国役使权势重的诸侯国就不吉祥。
English: Therefore, it is auspicious to use a great vassal to make a small vassal succeed, to use a small vassal to make a great vassal fail, to use a powerful vassal to make a weak vassal submit, and to use a weak vassal to make a strong vassal fail.

古文：自此观之，夫欲定一世，安黔首之命，功名著乎盘盂，铭篆著乎壶鉴，其势不厌尊，其实不厌多。
现代文：由此看来，想要使一世平定，使百姓安定使功名刻铸在盘盂上，铭刻在壶鉴上，这样的人，他们对权势尊贵从不满足，他们对实力雄厚从不满足。
English: From this perspective, people who want to pacify the world, keep the people stable, and make their achievements engraved on the table, engraved on the jug, are never satisfied with their power and dignity, and they are never satisfied with their strength.

古文：多实尊势，贤士制之，以遇乱世，王犹尚少。
现代文：有雄厚的实力，有尊贵的权势，有贤德之人辅佐，凭着这些，遇上乱世，至少也能成就王业。
English: With solid strength, dignified authority, and virtuous people to assist, with these, in the event of a chaotic world, at least the king's career can be achieved.

古文：天下之民穷矣苦矣。
现代文：天下的人民很贫穷很困苦了。
English: The people of the world are very poor and needy.

古文：民之穷苦弥甚，王者之弥易。
现代文：人民的贫穷田苦越厉害，称王的人成就王业就越容易。
English: The greater the poverty and suffering of the people, the easier it will be for those who claim to be kings to achieve their royal destiny.

古文：凡王也者，穷苦之救也。
现代文：凡是称王的，都是挽牧人民的贫穷困苦啊。
English: Everyone who praises the king is a shepherd of the people's poverty and hardships.

古文：水用舟，陆用车，涂用輴，沙用鸠，山用樏，因其势也者令行。
现代文：水里使用船，陆上使用车，泥泞路上使用輴，沙土路上使用鸩，山路上使用樏，这是为了顺应不同的形势。
English: Boats are used in the water, cars are used on land, ploughs are used on muddy roads, ploughs are used on sandy roads, and ploughs are used on mountain roads, in order to adapt to different situations.

古文：位尊者其教受，威立者其奸止，此畜人之道也。
现代文：能因势利导的，命令就能执行。地位尊贵的，教化就能被接受，威严树立的，奸邪就能制止。这就是治理人的原则。
English: If it can be guided by snobbery, the order can be executed. If the status is noble, the enlightenment can be accepted, and if the majesty is established, the treachery can be stopped. This is the principle of governing people.

古文：故以万乘令乎千乘易，以千乘令乎一家易，以一家令乎一人易。
现代文：所以，用拥有万辆兵车的国家对拥有千辆兵车的国家发号施令就容易，用拥有千辆兵车的国家对大夫之家发号施令就容易，用大夫之家对一人发号施令就容易。
English: Therefore, it is easy for a country with ten thousand chariots to dictate to a country with a thousand chariots, for a country with a thousand chariots to dictate to a doctor's house, and for a doctor's house to dictate to a person.

古文：尝识及此，虽尧、舜不能。
现代文：如果认识到达一点，即使尧、舜都不能改变它。
English: If knowledge reaches a certain point, no amount of chanting can change it.

古文：诸侯不欲臣於人，而不得已。
现代文：诸侯都不想臣服于人，可是却不得不这样。
English: The princes did not want to submit to the people, but they had to.

古文：其势不便，则奚以易臣？
现代文：君王的地位如果不利，那么怎能轻易地使之臣服呢？
English: If the position of the prince is unfavorable, how can he be easily subdued?

古文：权轻重，审大小，多建封，所以便其势也。
现代文：称王的人权衡轻重，审察大小，多立诸侯，是为了使自己的地位有利。
English: The human rights of the king are weighed, the size is examined, and more princes are established in order to make their position advantageous.

古文：王也者，势也。
现代文：所谓称王，凭借的是权势。
English: The so-called king, by virtue of the power.

古文：王也者，势无敌也。
现代文：所谓称王，是权势无人与之抗衡。
English: The so-called king, is the power of no one to compete with.

古文：势有敌则王者废矣。
现代文：权势有人抗衡，那么称王的人就被废弃了。
English: Where there is a counterweight to power, the kingmaker is discarded.

古文：有知小之愈於大、少之贤於多者，则知无敌矣。
现代文：有知道小可以超过大少可以胜过多的人，就知道怎样才能无人与之抗衡了。
English: He who knows that a little can be more than a great deal, and a little can be more than a great deal, knows how it is that no one can resist him.

古文：知无敌则似类嫌疑之道远矣。
现代文：知道怎样才能无人与之抗衡，那么比拟僭越的事就会远远离开了。
English: If you know how to make no one compete with you, then the comparison will be far away.

古文：故先王之法，立天子不使诸侯疑焉，立诸侯不使大夫疑焉。立适子不使庶孽疑焉。
现代文：所以先王的法度是，立天子不让诸侯僭越，立诸侯不让大夫僭越，立嫡子不让庶子僭越。
English: Therefore, the law of the former king was to set up a heavenly son to prevent the lords from overstepping, to set up lords to prevent the doctors from overstepping, and to set up a legitimate son to prevent the illegitimate son from overstepping.

古文：疑生争，争生乱。
现代文：僭越就会产生争夺，争夺就会产生混乱。
English: The more there is, the more there will be contention, and the more there will be, the more there will be confusion.

古文：是故诸侯失位则天下乱，大夫无等则朝廷乱，妻妾不分则家室乱，适孽无别则宗族乱。
现代文：因此，诸侯丧失了爵位，那么天下就会混乱，大夫没有等级，那么朝廷就会混乱；妻妾不加区分，那么家庭就会混乱，嫡子庶子没有区别，那么宗族就会混乱。
English: Therefore, if lords lost their titles, the world would be in chaos; if doctors had no ranks, the imperial court would be in chaos; if wives and concubines were not distinguished, the family would be in chaos; if legitimate children and illegitimate children were not distinguished, the clan would be in chaos.

古文：慎子曰： 今一兔走，百人逐之，非一兔足为百人分也，由未定。
现代文：慎子说： 如果有一只兔子跑，就会有上百人追赶它，并不是一只兔子足以被上百份，是由于兔子的归属没有确定。
English: Shinko said, "If there is a rabbit running, there will be hundreds of people chasing it. It is not that one rabbit is enough to be chased by hundreds of people. It is because the ownership of the rabbit is not certain.

古文：由未定，尧且屈力，而况众人乎？
现代文：归属没有确定，尧尚且台竭力追赶，更何况一般人呢？
English: The attribution has not been determined, and Taiwan is still struggling to catch up, let alone the general public?

古文：积兔满市，行者不顾，非不欲兔也，分已定矣。
现代文：兔子摆满市，走路的人看都不看，并不是不想要兔子，是由于归属已经确定了。
English: Rabbits are all over the city, and people walking by don't even look at them. It's not that they don't want rabbits, it's because their ownership has already been determined.

古文：分已定，人虽鄙，不争。 
现代文：归属已经确定，人即使鄙陋，也不争夺。 
English: Belonging has already been determined, and people do not compete, even if they are despicable.

古文：故治天下及国，在乎定分而已矣。
现代文：所以治理天下及国家，只在于确定职分罢了。
English: Therefore, the governance of the world and the country is only to determine the position.

古文：庄王围宋九月，康王围宋五月，声王围宋十月。
现代文：楚庄王围困宋国九个月，楚康王围困宋国五个月，楚声王围困宋国十个月。
English: The King of Chuzhuang besieged Song for nine months, the King of Chu Kang besieged Song for five months, and the King of Chu Son besieged Song for ten months.

古文：楚三围宋矣，而不能亡。
现代文：楚国围困过宋国三次，却不能灰亡它。
English: Chu besieged Song three times, but failed to destroy it.

古文：非不可亡也，以宋攻楚，奚时止矣？
现代文：并不是不可取灭亡，拿一个像宋国一样无德的国家去攻打宋国，什么时候才能结束昵？
English: It is not invincible. If you take a country with no virtue, like Song, and attack Song, when will it end?

古文：凡功之立也，贤不肖强弱治乱异也。
现代文：凡是功业的建立，都是因为贤与不肖、强与弱，治与乱不相同啊。
English: The establishment of all works is due to the difference between the virtuous and the vicious, the strong and the weak, and the rule and the chaos.

古文：齐简公有臣曰诸御鞅，谏於简公曰： 陈成常与宰予，之二臣者，甚相憎也。
现代文：齐简公有个臣子叫诸御鞅，他向简公进谏说； 陈常与宰予，这两个臣子彼此非常仇恨。
English: Qi Jian Gong had a vassal called Zhu Oyu, he said to Jian Gong, Chen Chang and Zayou, these two vassals hated each other very much.

古文：臣恐其相攻也。
现代文：我担心他们互相攻打。
English: I'm worried they're going to fight each other.

古文：相攻唯固，则危上矣。
现代文：他们一味固执地要互相攻打，就会危害到君王。
English: If they persist in attacking each other, they will endanger the king.

古文：愿君之去一人也。 
现代文：希望您罢免一个人。 
English: I would like you to dismiss one person.

古文：简公曰： 非而细人所能识也。 
现代文：简公说 这不是你这样的浅陋之人所能知道的。 
English: It's not for shallow people like you to know, said Jane.

古文：居无几何，陈成常果攻宰予於庭，即简公於庙。
现代文：过了没多久，陈常果然在朝廷上攻打宰予，在宗庙里追上了简公。
English: Not long after, Chen Chang attacked Zha You in the imperial court and caught up with Jian Gong in the ancestral temple.

古文：简公喟焉太息曰： 余不能用鞅之言，以至此患也。 
现代文：简公长叹着说， 我不能采纳诸御鞅的意见，以至于遭到这样的祸患。 
English: Princess Jane sighed and said, I can't accept the opinion of the princes and suffer such a calamity.

古文：失其数，无其势，虽悔无听鞅也，与无悔同。
现代文：失去了驾驭臣下的方法，丧失了君主的权势，虽然后悔没有听从诸御鞅的话，与不后悔的结果是一样的。
English: He lost the ability to control his subjects and the power of the monarchy, although he regretted not listening to his ministers, the result was the same as if he had not regretted.

古文：是不知恃可恃，而恃不恃也。
现代文：这就是不知道依靠可以依靠的东西，却依靠不可依靠的东西。
English: This is not knowing what you can rely on, but relying on things that cannot be relied on.

古文：周鼎著象，为其理之通也。
现代文：周鼎上刻铸物像，是为了让事理贯通。
English: Zhou Ding engraved a cast statue on it, in order to get things across.

古文：理通，君道也。
现代文：事理贯通，这是当君主应该掌握的原则啊。
English: This is a principle that a monarch should master.

古文：七曰：听群众人议以治国，国危无日矣。
现代文：不二听从众人的议论来治理国家，国家很快就会遭到危险。
English: If you listen to everyone's opinions to govern the country, the country will soon be in danger.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：根据什么知道会是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：老耽贵柔，孔子贵仁，墨翟贵廉，关尹贵清，子列子贵虚，陈骈贵齐，阳生贵己，孙膑贵势，王廖贵先，儿良贵後。
现代文：老耽祟尚柔，孔子崇尚仁，墨翟崇尚廉，关尹崇尚清，列子崇尚虚，陈骈崇尚齐，阳生崇尚己，孙膑崇尚势，王廖崇尚先，儿良崇尚后。
English: Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence, Confucius advocated benevolence.

古文：有金鼓，所以一耳；必同法令，所以一心也；智者不得巧，愚者不得拙，所以一众也；勇者不得先，惧者不得後，所以一力也。
现代文：军队里设置锣鼓，是为了用来统一士兵的听闻，法令一律，是为了用来统一人们的思想；聪明的人不得灵巧，愚蠢的人不得笨拙，是为了甩来统一众人的智力，勇敢的人不得抢先，胆怯的人不得落后，是为了用来统一大家的力量。
English: Drums and cymbals are set up in the army in order to unify the soldiers' hearing, and laws are uniform in order to unify people's thoughts; clever people should not be dexterous, stupid people should not be clumsy, in order to unify everyone's intelligence, brave people should not be ahead, and timid people should not be behind, in order to unify everyone's strength.

古文：故一则治，异则乱；一则安，异则危；夫能齐万不同，愚智工拙皆尽力竭能，如出乎一穴者，其唯圣人矣乎！
现代文：所以，统一就治理得好，不统一就冶理得不好；统一就平安，不统一就危险。能够使众多不同的事物齐同，使愚蠢聪明灵巧笨拙的人都能用尽力气和才能，就像由一个起点出发一样的，大概只有圣人吧!
English: Therefore, unity makes for good government, disunity makes for bad government; unity makes for peace, disunity makes for danger; and only a saint can make so many different things come together, so that the stupid, the clever, the dexterous, and the clumsy can all use their energy and ability as if they were starting from the same point.

古文：无术之智，不教之能，而恃强速贯习，不足以成也。
现代文：没有驾驭臣下方法的智谋，不经过教化而具有的才能，依仗强力、敏捷，贯通、熟习，是不足以实现这些的
English: Wit without mastery of the methods of a vassal, ability without instruction, strength, agility, penetration, and familiarity are not enough to achieve these

古文：八曰：天地阴阳不革，而成万物不同。
现代文：执一天地阴阳不改变规律，生成的万物却各不相同。
English: The yin and yang do not change their regularity, but all things that are created are different.

古文：目不失其明，而见白黑之殊。耳不失其听，而闻清浊之声。
现代文：眼睛不丧失视力，就能分辨出黑自的差别，耳朵不丧失听力，就能听出清浊不同的乐音。
English: The eye, without loss of vision, can distinguish the difference between black and white, and the ear, without loss of hearing, can hear the clear and different musical sounds.

古文：王者执一，而为万物正。
现代文：称王的人掌握住根本，就能成为万物的主宰。
English: Those who have mastered the fundamentals can become the masters of all things.

古文：军必有将，所以一之也；国必有君，所以一之也；天下必有天子，所以一之也；天子必执一，所以抟之也。
现代文：军队一定要有将帅，这是为了用来统一军队的行动，国家一定要有君主，这是为了用来统一全国的行动，天下一定要有天子，这是为了用来统一天下的行动，天子一定要掌握住根本，这是为了使权力集中。
English: The army must have a commander-in-chief, this is in order to unify the actions of the army, the country must have a monarch, this is in order to unify the actions of the whole country, the world must have a heavenly son, this is in order to unify the actions of the world, the heavenly son must grasp the fundamental, this is in order to concentrate power.

古文：一则治，两则乱。
现代文：统一就能治理好天下，不统一就会造成天下大乱。
English: Unification can govern the world well, and non-unification will cause chaos in the world.

古文：今御骊马者，使四人人操一策，则不可以出於门闾者，不一也。
现代文：譬如并排驾驭四匹马，让四个人每人拿一根马鞭，那就连街门都出不去，这是因为行动不统一啊。
English: For example, if you drive four horses side by side and let four people take a whip each, then you can't even get out of the street door, because the action is not uniform.

古文：楚王问为国於詹子，詹子对曰： 何闻为身，不闻为国。 
现代文：楚王向詹何问如何治理国家，詹何回答说： 我只听说过如何修养自身，没有听说过如何治理国家。 
English: When King Chu asked Zhan He how to govern the country, Zhan He replied, "I have only heard about how to cultivate myself, but not about how to govern the country."

古文：詹子岂以国可无为哉？
现代文：詹何难道认为国家可以不要治理吗？
English: Does Zhan He really think that a country can do without governance?

古文：以为为国之本，在於为身。
现代文：他是认为冶理国家的根本在于修养自身。
English: He believes that the foundation of a rational country lies in cultivating itself.

古文：身为而家为，家为而国为，国为而天下为。
现代文：自身修养好了，家庭就能治理好。家庭治理好了，国家就能治理好。国家治理好了，天下就能治理好。
English: If you cultivate yourself well, you can govern your family well. If you govern your family well, you can govern your country well. If you govern your country well, you can govern the world well.

古文：故曰以身为家，以家为国，以国为天下。
现代文：所以说，靠自身的修养来治理家庭，靠家庭的洽理来治理国家，靠国家的冶理米冶理天下。
English: Therefore, rely on your own cultivation to govern the family, rely on the family to govern the country, and rely on the country to govern the world.

古文：此四者，异位同本。
现代文：这四种情况，所处的地位虽不一样，可根本却是相同的。
English: These four situations, although they occupy different positions, are fundamentally the same.

古文：故圣人之事，广之则极宇宙，穷日月，约之则无出乎身者也。
现代文：所以圣人所做的事情，往大处说可以大到天地四方、日月所能照到之处，往简要处说没有离得开修养自身的。
English: Therefore, what the saint has done, broadly speaking, can be said to be as large as the four directions of heaven and earth, and as far as the sun and moon can shine.

古文：慈亲不能传於子，忠臣不能入於君，唯有其材者为近之。
现代文：慈父慈母不一定能把好品德传给儿子，忠臣的意见不一定能被君主听取，只有修养自身的儿子和君主才接近于做到这一点。
English: A loving father and mother may not be able to pass on good morals to their sons, and the opinions of loyal subjects may not necessarily be heard by the monarch. Only by cultivating their own sons and monarchs can they come close to achieving this.

古文：田骈以道术说齐，齐王应之曰： 寡人所有者，齐国也，愿闻齐国之政。 
现代文：田骈以道术劝说齐王，齐壬回答他说： 我所拥有的只是齐国，希望听听如何治理齐国的政事 。
English: Tian Xuan tried to persuade the king of Qi with the help of Taoism. The Qiren replied to him, "All I have is the state of Qi. I would like to hear how to govern the state affairs of Qi."

古文：田骈对曰： 臣之言，无政而可以得政。
现代文：田骈回答说； 我说的虽然没有政事，但可以由此推知政事。
English: Tian Yao replied: Although I said that there was no political affair, it can be inferred from this that there was a political affair.

古文：譬之若林木，无材而可以得材。
现代文：这就好像树木一样，本身虽不是木材，但可以由此得到木材。
English: It's like trees, they're not wood, but you can get wood from them.

古文：愿王之自取齐国之政也。 
现代文：希望您从我的话中自己选取治理齐国政事的道理。 
English: I hope that you will draw from my words your own understanding of how to manage the affairs of state.

古文：骈犹浅言之也，博言之，岂独齐国之政哉？
现代文：田骈还是就浅显的方面说的，就广博的方面而言，岂只是治理齐国前政事是如此呢？
English: Did Tian Xuan just say this in a superficial way, or in a broad sense, was it just the case of governing Qi's former political affairs?

古文：变化应来而皆有章，因性任物而莫不宜当，彭祖以寿，三代以昌，五帝以昭，神农以鸿。
现代文：万物的变化应和，都是有规律的，根据其本性来使用万物，就没有什么不恰当合适的，彭祖因此而长寿，三代因此而昌盛，五帝因此而卓著，神农因此而兴盛。
English: The changes of all things correspond to each other and are regular. There is nothing inappropriate in using all things according to their nature. Therefore, Peng Zu lived a long life, three generations prospered, five emperors excelled, and Shennong prospered.

古文：吴起谓商文曰： 事君果有命矣夫！ 
现代文：吴起对商文说： 侍奉君主真是靠命运吧! 
English: Wu Qi said to Shangwen: Serving the monarch is really a matter of fate!

古文：商文曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：商文说。 您说的是什么意思？ 
English: Shangwen said. What do you mean by that?

古文：吴起曰： 治四境之内，成训教，变习俗，使君臣有义，父子有序，子与我孰贤？ 
现代文：吴起说； 治理全国，完成教化，改变习俗，使君臣之间有道义，父子之间有次序，您跟我比哪一个强些？ 
English: Wu Qi said: Which one of you is better than me in governing the whole country, completing the enlightenment, changing the customs, so that there is morality between princes and ministers, and order between father and son?

古文：商文曰： 吾不若子。 
现代文：商文说： 我不如您。 
English: Shangwen said: I am not as good as you.

古文：曰： 今日置质为臣，其主安重；今日释玺辞官，其主安轻。
现代文：吴起说： 一旦献身君主当臣子，君主的地位就尊贵，一旦交出印玺辞去官职，君主的地位就轻微。
English: Wu Qi said, "Once you dedicate yourself to the monarch as a courtier, the position of the monarch is noble. Once you hand over the seal and resign from the official post, the position of the monarch is light.

古文：子与我孰贤？ 商文曰： 吾不若子。 
现代文：在这方面您跟我比哪一个强些？ 商文说： 我不如您。 
English: In this respect, which one of you is better than me? Shangwen said: I am not as good as you.

古文：曰： 士马成列，马与人敌，人在马前，援桴一鼓，使三军之士乐死若生，子与我孰贤？ 
现代文：吴起说： 兵士战马已经排成行列，战马与人相匹敢，人在马的前面将要发起进攻，拿起鼓槌一击鼓，让三军的兵士视死如归，在这方面您跟我比哪一个强些？ 
English: Wu Qi said, "The soldiers' war horses have already lined up, the war horses dare to compete with people, the people will launch an attack in front of the horses, pick up the drumsticks and beat the drums, so that the soldiers of the three armies will be as good as dead. In this respect, which one are you and I better than?

古文：商文曰： 吾不若子。 
现代文：商文说： 我不如您。 
English: Shangwen said: I am not as good as you.

古文：吴起曰： 三者子皆不吾若也，位则在吾上，命也夫事君！ 商文曰： 善。
现代文：吴起说。 这三样您都不如我，职位却在我之上，侍奉君主真是靠命运啊! 商文说： 好。
English: Wu Qi said, "You are not as good as me in these three things, but you have a higher position than me, so serving the monarch really depends on fate!" Shangwen said, "Good."

古文：子问我，我亦问子。
现代文：您问我，我也问问您。
English: If you ask me, I will ask you.

古文：世，变主少群臣相疑，黔首不定，属之子乎，属之我乎？ 吴起默然不对，少选，曰： 与子。 
现代文：世道改变，君主年少，臣子们疑虑重重，百姓们很不安定，遇到这种情况，把政权托付给您呢，还是托付给我呢？ 吴起沉默不语，过了一会儿，说。 托付给您。 
English: The world has changed, the monarch is young, the courtiers are full of doubts, and the people are very unstable. Faced with this situation, do you entrust the regime to you, or do you entrust it to me? Wu Qi was silent, and after a while, he said. Entrusted to you.

古文：商文曰： 是吾所以加於子之上已！ 
现代文：商文说； 这就是我的职位在您之上的原因啊。 
English: That's why my position is above yours, Shangwen said.

古文：吴起见其所以长，而不见其所以短；知其所以贤，而不知其所以不肖。
现代文：吴起看到了自己的长处，却看不到自己的短处，知道自己的优点，却不知道自己的缺点。
English: Wu Qi saw his strengths, but did not see his weaknesses, knew his strengths, but did not know his weaknesses.

古文：故胜於西河，而困於王错，倾造大难，身不得死焉。
现代文：所以他能在西河打胜仗，但却被王错弄得处境困难，不久就遇到大难，自身不得善终。
English: Therefore, he was able to win the battle of the West River, but he was put in a difficult situation by the king's mistake, and soon he encountered a great difficulty, and he did not have a happy ending.

古文：夫吴胜於齐，而不胜於越。
现代文：吴国战胜了齐国，却不能胜过越国。
English: Wu defeated Qi, but could not defeat Yue.

古文：齐胜於宋，而不胜於燕。
现代文：齐国战胜了宋国，却不能战胜燕国。
English: Qi defeated Song, but could not defeat Yan.

古文：故凡能全国完身者，其唯知长短赢绌之化邪！
现代文：所以凡是能保全国家和自身不被灭亡的，大概只有知道长短伸屈的变化才能敢到吧！
English: Therefore, anyone who can protect the country and themselves from being destroyed can probably only dare to do so if they know the changes in the length, width and curvature.

