古文：赵神德贾嘉隐欧阳询高士廉裴略刘行敏窦昉狄仁杰杨茂直左右台御史杜文范御史里行张元一吉顼朱随侯李详
现代文：赵神德贾嘉隐欧阳询高士廉裴略刘行敏窦昉狄仁杰杨茂直左右台御史杜文范御史里行张元一吉顼朱随侯李详
English: Zhao Shende, Jia Jiayin, Ouyang Enquiry, Gao Shi, Lian Pei, Liu Xing, Min Dou, Di Ren Jie, Yang Maozhi, Left and Right, Taishi, Du Wen, Fan, Li Xing, Zhang Yuan, Yi Ji, Zhu Zui Hou, Li Zui

古文：赵神德
现代文：赵神德
English: Zhao Shinde

古文：唐初，梁宝好嘲戏，曾因公行至贝州，憩客馆中，闲问贝州佐史，云：此州有赵神德，甚能嘲。
现代文：唐朝初期，有个叫梁宝的喜好嘲戏。有一回因公事去到贝州，在客馆中休息，闲来无事，便问贝州左史：听说贝州有个叫赵神德的人，很能嘲讽？
English: In the early days of the Tang Dynasty, there was a comedian named Liang Bao. Once, when he was on a business trip to Bozhou, he was resting in a guest house. He had nothing better to do, so he asked Bozhou Zuo Shi: I heard that there was a man in Bozhou named Zhao Shinde, who was very good at mockery?

古文：即令召之。
现代文：于是就让人将赵叫来。
English: So someone called Zhao Cang.

古文：宝颜甚黑，厅上凭案以待。
现代文：梁宝脸特别黑，便在大厅上依着几案等待着。
English: Liang Bao's face was very dark, so he waited in the hall with a few cases.

古文：须臾神德入，两眼俱赤，至阶前，梁宝即云：赵神德，天上既无云，闪电何以无准则？
现代文：不一会儿，赵神德进来，这个人两只眼睛通红，刚走到台阶前，梁宝就说道：赵神德，天上已经没有云彩了，闪电怎么能没有准则呢？
English: After a while, Zhao Shinde came in. The man's two eyes were red. As soon as he came to the steps, Liang Bao said: Zhao Shinde, there is no cloud in the sky, how can lightning have no standard?

古文：答曰：向者入门来，案后唯见一挺墨。
现代文：赵神德答道：奔你来的人一进门，就见几案后边竖着一锭墨。
English: Zhao Shinde replied: As soon as the person you are running to enters the door, you will see a pile of ink behind several cases.

古文：宝又云：官里料朱砂，半眼供一国。
现代文：梁宝又道：当官的食料钱换成了朱砂，半只眼睛的就可以供足一国的官员了。
English: Liang Bao also said: the food money of officials has been exchanged for cinnabar, and those with half an eye can provide enough for a country's officials.

古文：又答云：磨公小拇指，涂得太社北。
现代文：赵神德又答道：磨公小拇指，涂得太社北了。
English: Zhao Shinde also replied, "Mao Gong's little thumb is painted too far north.

古文：宝更无以对，愧谢遗之。
现代文：梁宝再无言以对，面带愧色地道谢后将赵神德送走。
English: Liang Bao was speechless, thanking him with a shame-faced expression before sending Zhao Shinde away.

古文：贾嘉隐
现代文：贾嘉隐
English: Jia Jiayin

古文：唐贾嘉隐年七岁，以神童召见。
现代文：唐朝的贾嘉隐七岁时，朝廷因他是神童而召见他。
English: When the Tang Dynasty's Jia Jiayin was seven years old, the imperial court summoned him because he was a child prodigy.

古文：长孙无忌、徐世绩，于朝堂立语。
现代文：当时，长孙无忌和徐世绩站在朝堂与他对话。
English: At that time, the eldest grandson and Xu Shijie stood in the hall and talked with him.

古文：徐戏之曰：吾所倚者何树？
现代文：徐世绩戏言道：吾所依的是什么树？
English: Xu Shibei jokingly said: What tree do I rely on?

古文：曰：松树。
现代文：贾嘉隐道：松树。
English: Jia Jia's Hidden Path: Pine Tree.

古文：徐曰：此槐也，何得言松？
现代文：徐世绩道：这是槐树，怎么能说是松树呢？
English: Xu Shijie said: This is a eucalyptus tree, how can it be called a pine tree?

古文：嘉隐曰：以公配木，何得非松邪？
现代文：贾嘉隐道：以公配木，怎能说不是松呢？
English: Jia Jiaying: How can it be said that it is not a pine tree?

古文：长孙复问之：吾所倚何树？
现代文：长孙再问道：我所依靠的是什么树？
English: The eldest grandson then asked: What tree do I rely on?

古文：曰：槐树。
现代文：贾嘉隐道：槐树。
English: Jia Jiaying Road: Elm tree.

古文：长孙曰：汝不复矫邪？
现代文：长孙道：你不再更正了？
English: The eldest grandson said, "Are you no longer correcting?

古文：嘉隐曰：何烦矫对，但取其鬼对木耳。
现代文：贾嘉隐道：哪里用得着再更正。只要取来一个鬼对上木就可以了。
English: Jia Jiaying: Where do you need to correct it again? Just take a ghost to the upper tree.

古文：年十一二，贞观年被举，虽有俊辩，仪容丑陋。
现代文：贾嘉隐到了十一二岁时，于贞观年间被铨选入举，他虽有才智和善辩，可是相貌丑陋。
English: When Jia Jiayin was eleven or twelve years old, he was selected for enlistment in the Zhenguan year. Although he was talented and eloquent, he was ugly.

古文：尝在朝堂取进止，朝堂官退朝并出，俱来就看。
现代文：曾召他进朝堂请皇上决定其去留。当时朝堂官员们退朝后一齐来看他。
English: He had called him into the Imperial Palace to ask the Emperor to decide whether he should stay. At that time, officials from the Imperial Palace came to see him together after he had left the Imperial Palace.

古文：余人未语，英国公李绩，先即诸宰贵云：此小儿恰似獠面，何得聪明？
现代文：还没等别人说话，英国公李绩抢先道：这小孩的脸长的象獠面一样，怎么能够聪明呢？
English: Before anyone else could speak, the British ambassador jumped in: How can this child, with a face as long as a ploughshare, be so clever?

古文：诸人未报，贾嘉隐即应声答之曰：胡头尚为宰相，獠面何废聪明。
现代文：其他人还没答话，贾嘉隐就应声道：葫芦脑袋还能做宰相呢，獠面怎么就该失去聪明啊？
English: Before the others could answer, Jia Jiayin chimed in: A gourd-head can still be prime minister, how can a gourd-face not be smart?

古文：举朝人皆大笑。
现代文：满朝官员都大笑。
English: Officials all over the country burst out laughing.

古文：欧阳询
现代文：欧阳询
English: Ouyang Enquiry

古文：唐宋国公萧瑀不解射，九月九日赐射，瑀箭俱不着垛，一无所获。
现代文：唐朝的宋国公萧瑀不懂得射箭，九月九日皇上带群臣去射猎，萧瑀的箭全部落空，一无所获。
English: Xiao Yao, the prince of the Song Dynasty of the Tang Dynasty, did not know how to shoot arrows. On September 9, the emperor took a group of ministers to go hunting. Xiao Yao's arrows all failed and nothing was gained.

古文：欧阳询咏之曰：急风吹缓箭，弱手驭强弓。
现代文：欧阳询咏诗道：急风吹缓箭，弱手驭强弓。
English: Ouyang Qianqian's poem: A swift wind blows a slow arrow, a weak hand bows a strong bow.

古文：欲高翻复下，应西还更东。
现代文：欲高翻复下，应西还更东。
English: If you want to go up and down, you should go west and east.

古文：十回俱着地，两手并擎空。
现代文：十回俱着地，两手并擎空。
English: Ten times he landed on the ground, hands in the air.

古文：借问谁为此，乃应是宋公。
现代文：借问谁为此，乃应是宋公。
English: I would like to ask who is responsible for this, but it should be Song Gong.

古文：高士廉
现代文：高士廉
English: Gao Shillian

古文：唐高士廉掌选，其人齿高。
现代文：唐朝时，有一回高士廉主持铨选，他的门牙突出。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a time when Gao Shillian presided over an election, and his front teeth protruded.

古文：有选人，自云解嘲谑。士廉时著木履，令嘲之。
现代文：有个选人自己说很善解嘲，高士廉当时穿的是木制拖鞋，就叫他嘲戏。
English: One of the selectors said that he was very good at telling jokes. Gao Shillian was wearing wooden slippers at the time, so he asked him to make a joke.

古文：应声云：刺鼻何曾嚏，踏面不知嗔，高生两个齿，自谓得胜人。
现代文：选人应声道：刺激了鼻子不用张嘴打喷嚏，踩在脸上也不生怒，那都是因为你两颗很突出的牙齿，还自鸣得意说自己是得胜者。
English: The contestant replied, "When your nose is irritated, you don't have to open your mouth to sneeze, and when you step on your face, you don't get angry. It's all because of your two protruding teeth. You're also smugly saying that you're the winner."

古文：士廉笑而引之。
现代文：高士廉笑而领受。
English: Gao Shili accepted it with a smile.

古文：裴略
现代文：裴略
English: Pei Liang

古文：唐初，裴略宿卫考满，兵部试判，为错一字落第。
现代文：唐初，裴略宿卫考满，由兵部判其试卷。只因错了一个字而落榜。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Pei Yao passed the residential guard examination, and his examination paper was judged by the military department. He was only dropped from the list because he made a mistake in one word.

古文：此人即向仆射温彦博处披诉。
现代文：于是他向仆射温彦博开诚相诉。
English: As a result, he openly complained to his subordinate, Atsushi Atsuhikobo.

古文：彦博当时共杜如晦坐，不理其诉。
现代文：温彦博当时正好与杜如晦坐在一起说话，没有理睬他。
English: At that time, Wen Yanbo happened to be sitting and talking with Du Rugao, and ignored him.

古文：此人即云：少小以来，自许明辩，至于通传言语，堪作通事舍人，并解作文章，兼能嘲戏。
现代文：可他讲道：从小以来，就觉自己很聪明善辩，还能通传语言，可以胜任通事舍人一职。并懂得写文章，又善于嘲戏。
English: But he preaches: Since childhood, he has felt that he is very clever and eloquent, can also pass on the language, can be competent in everything, and knows how to write articles, and is good at mockery.

古文：彦博始回意共语，时厅前有竹，彦博即令嘲竹。
现代文：温彦博这时才注意到他的话，正巧厅前有竹，就叫他嘲讽嘲讽竹子。
English: It was only then that Wen Yanbo noticed his words. Just as there was a bamboo in front of the hall, he asked him to mock the bamboo.

古文：此人应声嘲曰：竹，风吹青肃肃。凌冬叶不凋，经春子不熟。
现代文：裴略答应后道：竹子，风吹青枝发出肃肃之声，严冬叶子不凋落，过了春季籽不熟。
English: After Peiliu agreed, he said: Bamboo, the wind blows the green branches to emit a solemn sound, the leaves do not fall in the winter, and the seeds are not ripe after the spring.

古文：虚心未能待国士，皮上何须生节目。
现代文：虚心不做栋梁材，皮上何须节与目？
English: If you don't want to be a joist, why do you have knots and eyes on your skin?

古文：彦博大喜，即云：既解通传言语，可传语与厅前屏墙。
现代文：彦博听后大喜，道：既然你明白通传语言，你可以到屏风那边试试。
English: Hikohiro was overjoyed after listening. He said, "Since you understand the common language, you can try it on the other side of the screen."

古文：此人走至屏墙，大声语曰：方今圣上聪明，辟四门以待士，君是何物，久在此妨贤路？
现代文：裴略走到屏风墙外，大声喊道：方今圣上聪明，敞开四门而等待贤士，你是何物，长久地竖在这里妨碍贤人的去路！
English: Peiliu stepped outside the screen wall and shouted loudly, "Fang is so wise now, opening the four doors and waiting for the wise men, what are you, standing here for a long time blocking the wise men's way!

古文：既推倒。
现代文：于是把屏风推倒。
English: So he pushed the screen down.

古文：彦博云：此意著博。
现代文：温彦博道：此话合我意。
English: Atsuhiko Hiromichi: That's what I meant.

古文：此人云：非但著膊，亦乃着肚。
现代文：裴略道：非但著博，亦乃着肚。
English: Pei Liao Dao: Not only is he a great writer, he's also a great actor.

古文：当为杜如晦在坐，有此言。
现代文：当时杜如晦在坐。听了此言，温彦博、杜如晦都大欢大笑。
English: At that time, Du Rugao was sitting. After listening to this speech, Wen Yanbo and Du Rugao both laughed loudly.

古文：彦博、如晦俱大欢笑，即令送吏部与官。
现代文：于是将他送吏部授官。
English: As a result, he was sent to the Records Department for promotion.

古文：刘行敏
现代文：刘行敏
English: Liu Xingmin

古文：唐有人姓崔，饮酒归犯夜，被武侯执缚，五更初，犹未解。
现代文：唐朝时有个姓崔的人，因饮酒夜归犯纪，被武侯抓住綑绑起来，只到五更天，还没有给他松绑。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Cui, who was punished for drinking alcohol at night. He was caught and tied up by the Wuhou, and was not released until five days later.

古文：长安令刘行敏，鼓声动向朝，至街首逢之，始与解缚。
现代文：当时长安令刘行敏听到鼓声正去上朝，走到街头恰好碰上，才给他松了绑。
English: At that time, Liu Xingmin, the Chang'an commander, heard the sound of the drum as he was going to the Shang Dynasty, walked to the street and happened to bump into him, before he loosened his tie.

古文：因咏之曰：崔生犯夜行，武侯正严更，袱头拳下落，高髻掌中擎，杖迹胸前出，绳文腕后生，愁人不惜夜，随意晓参横。
现代文：于是他咏了首诗道：崔生犯夜行，武侯正严更。袱头拳下落，高髻掌中擎。杖迹胸前出，绳文腕后生。愁人不惜夜，随意晓参横。
English: So he wrote a poem: Cui Sheng committed nocturnal wandering, Wuhou Zhengyang was more strict. Shoulder-to-shoulder fists fell, high-pitched palms were in the middle of the head. Stick marks were in the front of the chest, rope marks were in the back of the arm. The dreamer did not spare the night, and was willing to participate.

古文：武陵公杨文瓘，任户部侍郎，以能饮，令宴蕃客浑王，遂错与延陀儿宴，行敏咏曰：武陵敬爱客，终宴不知疲，遣共浑王饮，错宴延陀儿。
现代文：武陵公杨文瓘任户部侍郎，很能喝酒，要设宴请蕃属地来的客人浑王，可是竟错请了延陀儿。刘行敏咏诗道：武陵敬爱客，终宴不知疲。遣共浑王饮，错宴延陀儿。
English: Wuling Prince Yang Wenyi was a waiter of the household department, he was very good at drinking, he wanted to set up a banquet to invite guests from his territory, but he invited Yandar by mistake. Liu Xingmin wrote: Wuling respects guests, the final banquet is tireless. The Jurchen Communist Party drinks Hunwang, the wrong banquet is Yandar.

古文：始被鸿胪识，终蒙御史知。
现代文：始被鸿胪识，终蒙御史知。
English: It was first known by the Hungarians, and later by the Mongols.

古文：精神既如此，长叹伤何为。
现代文：精神既如此，长叹伤何为。
English: If the spirit is like this, what is a long sigh?

古文：李叔慎、贺兰僧伽，面甚黑；杜善贤为长安令，亦黑；行敏咏之曰：叔慎骑乌马，僧伽把漆弓，唤取长安令，共猎北山熊。
现代文：李叔慎、贺兰僧伽两人脸很黑，杜善贤当时任长安令，脸也黑。刘行敏咏诗道：叔慎骑乌马，僧伽把漆弓，唤取长安令，共猎北山熊。
English: Li Shuxian and Helan Sangha both had very dark faces, and Du Shanxian, who was the Chang'an prefect at the time, also had a dark face. Liu Xingmin recited a poem: Shuxian rode a horse, the Sangha used a lacquer bow, summoned the Chang'an prefect, and hunted the Beishan bear together.

古文：窦昉
现代文：窦昉
English: Dou Xuan

古文：唐许子儒旧任奉礼郎，永徽中，造国子学，子儒经祀，当设有阶级，后不得阶。
现代文：唐朝人许子儒原来任奉礼郎，永徽年间，进为国子监学士，做儒学经典学问，当设有品级，后来不能得升掌事之位。
English: Xu Ziru of the Tang Dynasty was originally appointed as a servant, and during the Yonghui Dynasty, he was promoted to the National Son Supervision Bachelor, doing Confucian classics, when there was a grade, and later he could not be promoted to the position of the chief.

古文：窦昉咏之曰：不能专习礼，虚心强觅阶。
现代文：窦昉写诗讽刺他：不能专习礼仪，虚着胆儿也去强试。
English: Dou Qi wrote a poem to satirize him: unable to study etiquette, he had the audacity to try.

古文：一年辞爵弁，半岁履麻鞋。瓦恶频蒙虢，墙虚屡被杈。映树便侧睡。过匮即放乖。岁暮良功毕。言是越朋侪。
现代文：一年只好离那爵位远远的，多半年还只能穿着麻鞋，没瓦遮自然多挨难，墙浮虚很怕人推倒，在大树一边睡，过了机会再放船，到年尾了功夫才做完，说是超过了同辈。
English: One year he had to be far away from the title, for more than half a year he could only walk in muddy shoes, without a shovel he naturally suffered more hardship, the wall was very fragile and afraid of being knocked down, he slept on the side of a big tree, he missed the opportunity to launch the boat, and he finished the hard work by the end of the year, saying that he was ahead of his peers.

古文：今日纶言降。方知愚计。
现代文：今日听了最好的主意，方知自己多愚蠢了。
English: Today I listened to the best idea and realized how stupid I am.

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：唐狄仁杰倜傥不羁，尝授司农员外郎，每判事，多为正充卿同异。
现代文：唐朝人狄仁杰性格倜傥而不受拘束，曾授与他司农员外郎。
English: Di Renjie, a Tang Dynasty person, had a shy and unconstrained personality. He was once awarded the title of farmer's son.

古文：仁杰不平之，乃判曰：员外郎有同侧室，正员卿位擅嫡妻。此难曲事女君，终是不蒙颜色。
现代文：每次审理案件，员外郎多是只能随声附和正官的裁决，狄仁杰认为太不公平，于是分辩道：员外郎如同侧室，正员官位居正房，这实在太难侍候女主人了，怎么干也得不到一点儿笑脸。
English: Every time a case is heard, the official can only agree with the official's ruling. Di Renjie thought it was too unfair, so he argued: the official is like a side room, and the official is in the main room. It's really too difficult to serve the hostess, and you can't get a smiley face.

古文：正员颇亦惭悚。
现代文：听到他的话正员官也很有惭、惧之色。
English: Hearing his words, the official was also very ashamed and scared.

古文：时王及善、豆卢钦望，拜左右相。
现代文：当时王及善、豆卢颇得钦望，二人拜为左右相。
English: At that time, Wang Jizhen and Doulu were quite admired, and the two were worshiped as the left and right phases.

古文：仁杰以才望时议归之，颇冀此命。
现代文：狄仁杰的才能和名气是人们所公认的，对于他们的执政抱有很大希望。
English: People are aware of the talent and reputation of Di Renjie and have high hopes for their governance.

古文：每戏王豆卢，略无屈色。
现代文：每次戏弄王、豆卢二人，都理真气壮。
English: Every time the two tease Wang and Doulu, they are really energetic.

古文：王豆卢俱善长行，既拜，谓时宰曰：某无材行，滥有此授。
现代文：王、豆卢二人都很善长长行这种赌博游戏，他们拜相之后，对朝中的官员们说：我们没有材行，担任此职太不适当。
English: Wang and Doulu are both very good at this kind of gambling game. After they paid homage to the prime minister, they said to the officials of the DPRK and China: "We have no talent, it is too inappropriate to hold this position."

古文：狄谓曰：公二人并能长行，何谓无材行。
现代文：狄仁杰说：你们二人都很擅长长行，怎么能说没有材行？
English: Di Renjie said: You are both very good at long-distance travel, how can you say there is no talent?

古文：或曰左相事，云适已白右相。
现代文：有人说到左相的事，其实已经关联到右相。
English: Some people say that the left phase is actually related to the right phase.

古文：狄谓曰：不审唤为右相，合呼为有相。
现代文：狄仁杰说：不慎称为右相，合称为有相。
English: Di Renjie said: inadvertently called the right phase, collectively known as the phase.

古文：王豆卢问故，狄曰：公不闻，聪明儿不如有相子，公二人可谓有相子也。
现代文：王、豆卢问原因，狄仁杰说：你们没听说吗？聪明儿不如有相子，你们二人可以说是有相子。
English: Wang and Doulu asked why, and Di Renjie said: "Haven't you heard? It's better for a clever person to have a partner. You two can say that you have a partner."

古文：二公强笑，意亦悒悒。
现代文：二人勉强笑了笑，表现出悒悒不安的样子。
English: The two of them forced a smile, showing signs of unease.

古文：杨茂直
现代文：杨茂直
English: Yang Maozhi

古文：唐杨茂直任拾遗。
现代文：唐代人杨茂直任拾遗。
English: Yang Maozhi, a Tang Dynasty scholar, was in charge of collecting the relics.

古文：有补阙姓王，精九经。不练时事。
现代文：有个补阙姓王，他精通九经，但对时事不够练达。
English: There is a completer surnamed Wang, he is proficient in the Nine Classics, but he is not proficient enough in current affairs.

古文：每自言明三教。
现代文：每每自言深明三教。
English: Every one of them professes to understand the Three Teachings.

古文：时有僧名道儒，妖讹，则天捕逐甚急。所在题云：访僧道儒。
现代文：当时有个僧人名叫道儒，兴妖作怪，武则天下敕要急速捕捉，各处都写着：查访僧道儒的通告。
English: At that time, there was a monk named Daoju, who was creating monsters, and the whole world wanted to catch him quickly. Everywhere was written: "Announcement to visit the monk Daoju."

古文：茂直与薛兼金戏谓曰：敕捕僧道儒，足下何以安闲？
现代文：杨茂直与薛兼金戏言道：敕捕僧道儒，你为何还这么安闲？
English: Yang Maozhi and Xue Jian Jinjing said: "You are a monk, why are you still so relaxed?

古文：云：何关吾事？
现代文：那个补阙道：这关系我什么事？
English: That fill-in-the-blank: what does it matter to me?

古文：茂直曰：足下明三教，僧则佛教，道则老教，何不关吾事？
现代文：杨茂直道：你深明三教啊，僧就是佛教，道就是老教，怎么能说与你无关呢？
English: Yang Maozhong: You are well aware of the three religions. The monk is Buddhism and the Tao is the old religion. How can you say that it has nothing to do with you?

古文：乃惊惧，兴寝不安，遂不敢归，寓于曹局数宿。
现代文：那人一听十分恐慌，起居不安，更不敢回家，便在官署里住了好几天。
English: Upon hearing this, the man panicked, was uneasy about living, and even more afraid to return home, so he lived in the government office for several days.

古文：祈左右侦其事意，复共诳之，忧惧不已，遇人但云：实不明三教事。
现代文：他求左右侦探事态动向，这些人回来都以假话诳骗他，于是更加忧惧，遇人就说：我实在不明白三教啊！
English: He asked the detectives to tell him what was going on. They all lied to him when they came back, so he was even more worried. Whenever he met someone, he would say, "I really don't understand the Three Teachings!"

古文：茂直等方宽慰云：别访人，非三教也。
现代文：直到此时杨茂直等人才宽慰他说：查访的是个僧人，他叫道儒，不是三教。
English: It was only at this time that Yang Maozhi and others were able to comfort him, saying, "The visitor was a monk, and his name was Daoju, not Sanjiao.

古文：乃敢出。
现代文：他这才敢出来。
English: He dared to come out.

古文：左右台御史
现代文：左右台御史
English: History of the Left and Right Divisions

古文：唐孝和朝，左右台御史，有迁南省仍内供奉者三，墨敕授者五，台讥之为五墨三仍。
现代文：唐代孝和时期，御史台的左右台御史中，有三人转调尚书省可仍为内供奉的三人，有五人是得到皇上的墨敕而升的官，因而台中人戏言是：五墨三仍。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's filial piety period, among the imperial histories of the left and right sides of the imperial histories, there were three people who were transferred to Shangshu Province and could still be worshipped within the three people, and five people were officials who were promoted by the emperor's ink, so the Taichung people joked: Five ink and three are still.

古文：左台呼右台为高丽僧，言随汉僧赴斋，不咒愿叹呗，但饮食受親而已。
现代文：左台的御史们称右台御史为高丽僧，说他们是随同汉僧来赴斋，不祈祷念经，只是吃喝罢了，讽刺右台的御史官在京城无事可做，可俸禄与他们一样照拿不误。
English: The historians on the left called the historians on the right the Koryo monks, saying that they accompanied the Han monks to the temple, did not pray or recite scriptures, but only ate and drank. The satirical historians on the right had nothing to do in the capital, but they could take the salary as they did.

古文：自右台授左台，号为出蕃；自左台授右台，号为没蕃。
现代文：如果由右台调转到左台，称作出蕃，自左台调转右台，称作没蕃。
English: If it is transferred from the right station to the left station, it is said to be made, and if it is transferred from the left station to the right station, it is said to be not made.

古文：每相遇，必相嘲谑不已也。
现代文：每次相遇，定要互相嘲讽一番。
English: Every time we meet, we must make fun of each other.

古文：杜文范
现代文：杜文范
English: Du Wenfan

古文：唐杜文范，襄阳人也。
现代文：唐代的杜文范，是襄阳人，做长安尉时去应试而入选，被授与监察御史。
English: Du Wenfan of the Tang Dynasty was from Xiangyang. When he was a Chang'an lieutenant, he went to take the examination and was selected. He was awarded the title of Inspector of History.

古文：自长安尉应举，擢第，拜监察御史，选殿中，授刑部员外，以承务郎特授西台舍人。先时与高上智俱任殿中，为侍御史张由古、宋之顺所排蹙，与上智迁员外。
现代文：后转迁殿中侍御史，再授刑部员外，并由承务郎特授中书舍人之要职。先前，他与高上智一起在殿院任职时，受到殿中侍御史张由古、宋之顺的排挤和踩压。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of palace attendant-historian, and then he was promoted to a member of the Penal Department, and he was given the important position of junior high school teacher by his successor. Previously, when he served in the palace together with Gao Shangzhi, he was ousted and suppressed by palace attendant-historians Zhang Yugu and Song Zhishun.

古文：既五旬，由古、之顺方入省。
现代文：后来他与高上智一起升迁为刑部员外，五个月过去了，张由古和宋之顺才迁转入省。
English: Later, he and Gao Shangzhi were promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department. Five months later, Zhang Yugu and Song Zhishun were transferred to the province.

古文：文范众中谓之曰：张宋二侍御，俱是俊才。
现代文：有一次，杜文范在众中面对他们说：张、宋二位侍御，你们都是俊才啊！
English: Once, Du Wenfan faced them in the crowd and said: Zhang and Song, you two attendants, you are all talented!

古文：由古问之；答曰：若非俊才，那得五十日骑土牛，趁及殿中？
现代文：张由古问这是何意，杜文范回答说：若不是俊才，哪能骑了五十天老牛，才赶到殿中？
English: Zhang Yugu asked what this meant, and Du Wenfan replied: "If you are not a talented person, how can you ride a fifty-day-old ox to get to the palace?

古文：举众欢笑。
现代文：所有人都大笑。
English: Everyone burst out laughing.

古文：御史里行
现代文：御史里行
English: A Journey Through History

古文：武后初称周，恐下心未安，乃令人自举供奉官，正员外多置里行。
现代文：武则天刚刚改唐国号为周时，怕下属群僚人心不安服，就下令让各官署可自行选任供奉官，正员之外还可设置里行。
English: When Wu Zetian had just changed the name of Tang to Zhou, fearing that his subordinates would not be convinced, he ordered that each government office could elect its own officials, and that officials could be appointed in addition to regular employees.

古文：有御史台令史，将入台，值里行御史数人，聚立门内。令史不下驴冲过。诸御史大怒，将杖之。
现代文：有一个御史台的令史，骑一头驴要进入台署，恰遇上几个里行御史站在门里，令史没下驴冲了过去，御史们大怒，要对他进行杖责。
English: There was a storyteller, riding a donkey to enter the station, just happened to meet several reporters standing in the door. The reporter did not get off the donkey and rushed over. The reporters were furious and wanted to punish him with a cane.

古文：令史云：今日之过，实在此驴。乞先数之，然后受罚。
现代文：令史道：今天的过错，实在是由于这头驴，请允许我先数落一下这驴，然后再受罚。
English: Ling Shi Dao: Today's mistake is really due to this donkey. Please allow me to count the donkeys first, and then I will be punished.

古文：许之。谓驴曰：汝技艺可知，精神机钝，何物驴畜，敢于御史里行。
现代文：御史们同意，于是令史对驴子数落道：你有什么能耐，连机灵迟缓都不知道，你算个什么驴子，竟敢在御史里行！
English: The historians agreed, so let history settle the number of donkeys: You don't know what ability you have, even if you are slow-witted, what a donkey you are, how dare you go in the history!

古文：于是御史羞惭而止。
现代文：于是御史们深感羞惭而不再惩罚他了。
English: As a result, the magistrates were too ashamed to punish him.

古文：张元一
现代文：张元一
English: Zhang Yuanyi

古文：周则天朝，蕃人上封事，多加官赏，有为右台御史者。
现代文：在武则天执政的周朝，对于蕃属地要求加封的人，多都给予加赏，一般都加右台御史衔。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, which was ruled by Wuzetian, most of the people who asked for the sealing of their territories were rewarded, and they were generally given the title of U-Tai.

古文：因则天尝问郎中张元一曰：在外有何可笑事。
现代文：有一次，武则天曾问郎中张元一道：外边有什么可笑的新鲜事？
English: On one occasion, Wu Zetian once asked Zhang Yuan, one of his vassals: What ridiculous new things are out there?

古文：元一曰：朱前疑着绿，狄仁杰著朱。
现代文：张元一道：朱前疑穿绿，狄仁杰穿红。
English: Zhang Yuan together: Zhu Qianqian wore green, Di Renjie wore red.

古文：阎知微骑马，马吉甫骑驴。
现代文：阎知微骑马，马吉甫骑驴。
English: Yan Zhiwei riding a horse, Ma Jifu riding a donkey.

古文：将名作姓李千里，将姓作名吴栖梧。
现代文：有个人要把他的名作为姓叫李千里，又有一个人要把他的姓作为名字叫吴栖梧。
English: One person wanted to use his name as a surname called Li Qianli, and another person wanted to use his surname as a name called Wu Qianwu.

古文：左台胡御史，右台御史胡。
现代文：左台有个胡御史，右台有个御史胡。
English: On the left-hand side there is a goose, and on the right-hand side there is a goose.

古文：胡御史胡元礼也，御史胡蕃人为御史者，寻改他官。
现代文：胡御史即胡元礼，御史胡是指蕃人作了御史官，不久改任他官。
English: The term "Goshi-hu" refers to a person who became a goshi-kan and was soon reassigned to another post.

古文：周革命，举人贝州赵廓，眇小，起家监察御史。时人谓之台秽。李昭德詈之为中霜谷束。
现代文：武则天改唐为周后，有个贝州的举人叫赵廓，身材极小，一开始被授为监察御史，当时人们称他为台秽，李昭德骂他是被霜打了的谷束。
English: After Wu Zetian changed Tang to Zhou, there was a Baizhou envoy named Zhao Guo, who was very small in stature. At the beginning, he was awarded the title of inspector-general of history. At that time, people called him Taizhu, and Li Zhaode scolded him for being a frost-beaten grain bundle.

古文：元一目为枭坐鹰架。
现代文：张元一称作枭坐鹰架。
English: Zhang Yuanyi is known as the eagle sitting on the eagle.

古文：时同州鲁孔丘为拾遗，有武夫气，时人谓之外军主帅。元一目为鹙入凤池。
现代文：当时同州人鲁孔丘任拾遗，很有武夫气概，人们都叫他外军主帅，张元一称是鹙入凤池。
English: At that time, Lu Kongqiu, a native of the same prefecture, was in charge of collecting relics. He was very martial. People called him the foreign military commander. Zhang Yuan was known as the commander of Fengchi.

古文：苏味道才学识度，物望攸归；王方庆体质鄙陋，言词鲁钝，智不逾俗，才不出凡，俱为凤阁侍郎。
现代文：苏味道有才学有见地而又大度，众望所归。王方庆身材瘦弱难看，语言粗鲁迟钝，智不超俗，才不出众。但两人都任凤阁侍郎。
English: Wang Fangqing is thin and ugly, his language is rude and dull, his intelligence is not extraordinary, so he is not outstanding. However, both of them are Fengge's waiters.

古文：或问元一曰：苏王孰贤？
现代文：有人问张元一：苏味道、王方庆谁是贤才？
English: Someone asked Zhang Yuanyi: Su Ding, Wang Fangqing, who is the wise man?

古文：答曰：苏九月得霜鹰，王十月被冻蝇。
现代文：张元一道：苏九月得霜鹰，王十月被冻蝇。
English: Zhang Yuan together: Su got frost eagle in September, Wang was frozen fly in October.

古文：或问其故，答曰：得霜鹰俊捷，被冻蝇顽怯。
现代文：有人问这是何意，张元一答道：得霜鹰即才高敏捷，被冻蝇则愚顽怯懦。
English: When asked what he meant by this, Zhang Yuan replied, "To catch a frost eagle is to be highly agile, but to be caught by a frost fly is to be stupid and cowardly."

古文：时人伏能体物也。
现代文：当时的人都佩服他能具体地描绘事物。
English: People at the time admired his ability to describe things concretely.

古文：契丹贼孙万荣之寇幽，河内王武懿宗为元帅，引兵至赵州。闻贼骆务整，从北数千骑来，王乃弃兵甲，南走荆州，军资器械，遗于道路。
现代文：契丹人孙万荣侵犯幽州、河内王武懿宗为元帅，领兵御敌，行至赵州，听说敌方骆务整率数千骑兵从北杀来，河内王则弃兵甲而跑，向南逃往荆州。军资器械，扔了一道。
English: Sun Wan Rong, a Khitan, invaded Yuzhou, and the king of Hanoi, Wu Bingzong, became a marshal, led the troops against the enemy, and went to Zhaozhou. He heard that the enemy killed thousands of cavalrymen from the north, and the king of Hanoi abandoned his armor and fled south to Jingzhou. He threw away the military equipment.

古文：闻贼已退，方更向前。
现代文：后来听说敌人退走了，才又向前进发。
English: Later, when they heard that the enemy had retreated, they started to advance again.

古文：军回至都，置酒高会。
现代文：可是军队回到京都，却赐席设宴，给予很高的接待。
English: However, when the troops returned to Kyoto, they were given seats at a banquet and given a great reception.

古文：元一于御前嘲懿宗曰：长弓短度箭，蜀马临阶骗，去贼七百里，隈墙独自战。甲杖忽抛却。骑猪正南掾。
现代文：当着武则天的面，张元一竟嘲讽武懿宗道：握的是长弓，射出的是近箭，本来是匹很小蜀马，也要找个台阶才能骑上去。敌人已经远去七百里之遥，你绕着城墙自己跟自己作战，把兵器全都抛掉，你却骑着猪南逃。
English: In front of Wu Zetian, Zhang Yuan ridiculed Wu Zetian's religious way: he held a long bow and shot a near arrow. Originally, it was a very small horse, and you had to find a step to ride it. The enemy was already seven hundred miles away. You fought with yourself around the city wall, threw away all your weapons, but you fled on horseback.

古文：上曰：懿宗有马，何因骑猪？
现代文：武则天道：懿宗有马，为什么要骑猪呢？
English: Wu Zetian said, "My family has horses, so why ride a pig?"

古文：对曰：骑猪夹豕走也。
现代文：张元一道：骑猪就是夹着豕而去了。
English: Zhang Yuan: Riding a pig is like riding a donkey.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：武则天大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：懿宗曰：元一宿构，不是卒词。
现代文：武懿宗道：这是张元一早已构思好的，不是即兴而作。
English: Wusong Zongdao: This was something that Zhang Yuanyi had already conceived, and it was not improvised.

古文：上曰：尔付韵与之。懿宗曰：请以菶韵。
现代文：武则道：你可以随便给他一个韵。武懿宗道：那就请用菶韵。
English: Wu Zetian: You can give him any rhyme you like. Wu Zetian: Then please use a gong rhyme.

古文：元一应声曰：里头极草草，掠鬓不菶菶。未见桃花面皮，漫作杏子眼孔。
现代文：张元一随即咏道：瞅你的脑袋，里头极为草率，外边的鬓须也不茂盛，没长桃花一般的脸皮，更别说杏子一样的眼睛了。
English: Zhang Yuanyi immediately said, "Cut your head, the inside is extremely sloppy, the outer whiskers are not lush, there is no long peach blossom-like skin, let alone apricot-like eyes."

古文：则天大悦，王极有惭色。
现代文：武则天听后心里十分高兴，而武懿宗却脸有羞愧之色。
English: After listening to Wu Zetian, he was very happy in his heart, but Wu Xizong's face was ashamed.

古文：懿宗形貌短丑，故曰长弓短度箭。
现代文：武懿宗个子矮而相貌丑。因此前面有：长弓短度箭的诗句。
English: Wu Xizong was short and ugly. Therefore, there is a poem in front of him: "Long bow, short arrow."

古文：周静乐县主，河内王懿宗妹，懿妹短丑。
现代文：静乐县主是武懿宗的妹妹，也生得矮而丑。
English: The lord of Jingle County is the younger sister of Wu Yanzong, who was also born short and ugly.

古文：武氏最长，时号大哥。
现代文：武则天年龄最大，因而当时都称她大哥。
English: Wu Zetian was the oldest, so everyone called her big brother at that time.

古文：县主与则天并马行。命元一咏曰：马带桃花锦，裙衔绿草罗。定知帏帽底，仪容似大哥。
现代文：有一次，静乐县主与武则天骑马并行，命张元一咏诗，元一咏道：马身上佩带着桃花一样鲜艳的锦带，身穿绿草般的罗裙，准知道在那遮挡的帏帽下面，是一副象大哥一样美丽的面容。
English: Once upon a time, the lord of Jingle County and Wu Zetian rode a horse side by side. Zhang Yuan wrote a poem for him, and Yuan wrote a poem for him. On the horse, he wore a bright brocade belt like a peach blossom, and he was wearing a grass-like skirt. He must have known that under the shielding felt hat, he had a face as beautiful as his elder brother.

古文：则天大笑，县主极惭。
现代文：则天听后大笑，县主却感到十分羞愧。
English: On the other hand, the heavens laughed after listening, but the county head felt very ashamed.

古文：纳言娄师德长大而黑，一足蹇，元一目为行辙方相，亦号为卫灵公，言防灵柩方相也。
现代文：纳言娄师德身大而肤黑，并且一只脚是跛子，张元一嘲笑他是行辙方相，也称他为卫灵公，意思是防卫灵柩的方相。
English: Zhang Yuan laughed at the tall, dark-skinned, cripple-footed Najan, calling him "Wei Ling Gong," which means "defending the coffin."

古文：天官侍郎吉顼长大，好昂头行，视高而望远，目为望柳骆驼。
现代文：吏部侍郎吉顼身材高大，好扬着头走路，总是像在望着高远的地方，张元一戏称他是望柳骆驼。
English: The tall waiter of the cadre department, Yoshitaka, walks with his head held high, always as if he is looking far and wide. Zhang Yuan once described him as a gazelle camel.

古文：殿中侍御史元本竦髆伛身，黑而且瘦，目为岭南考典。
现代文：殿中侍御史元本竦是个伛偻身子，而且又黑又瘦，被戏称为岭南考典。
English: The palace attendant and historian, Motomoto Shiori, was a short man, dark and thin, and was jokingly referred to as the "Rainbow of Lingnan."

古文：驾部郎中朱前疑粗黑肥短，身体垢腻，目为光禄掌膳。
现代文：驾部司的郎中朱前疑身材短粗而肤黑，而且身上很脏，被戏称为光禄寺掌勺的厨子。
English: The driver's brother-in-law, Zhu Qianqian, was short and thick, dark-skinned, and dirty, and was nicknamed the cook of Guanglu Temple.

古文：东方虬身长衫短，骨面粗眉，目为外军校尉。
现代文：东方虬身体高大而衣裳短小，脸很瘦眉毛却很粗，被称为外军校尉。
English: With his tall body and short clothes, his thin face and thick eyebrows, he was known as the Foreign Military Lieutenant.

古文：唐波若矮短，目为郁屈蜀马。
现代文：唐波若身材短小，被称为郁屈蜀马。
English: If Tangbo is short in stature, he is called Ikuku Shuma.

古文：目李昭德卒岁胡孙。
现代文：称李昭德为卒岁胡孙。
English: He called Li Zhaode his great-grandson.

古文：修文学士马吉甫眇一目，为端箭师。
现代文：修文学士马吉甫一只眼睛，被称为端箭师。
English: Ma Jifu, a scholar of spiritual cultivation, had only one eye, and was known as a crossbow master.

古文：郎中长儒子视望阳，目为呷醋汉。
现代文：郎中长儒子眼睛有些望天儿，被称为呷醋汉。
English: His son-in-law, the elder Confucius, was known as "the vinegar man" because of his ethereal eyes.

古文：汜水令苏征举止轻薄，目为失孔老鼠。
现代文：汜水县令苏征举止轻薄，被称为失孔老鼠。
English: Ershui County ordered Su Zheng to behave in a frivolous manner, known as a lost mouse.

古文：吉顼
现代文：吉顼
English: Jilin Province

古文：周张元一腹粗而脚短，项缩而眼跌，吉顼目为逆流虾蟆。
现代文：周朝有个人叫张元一，他的长相是腰粗而脚短，缩脖，眼睛向外鼓，吉顼戏称他是逆水虾蟆。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was a man named Zhang Yuanyi. His appearance was thick-waisted and short-legged, with a shrunken neck and bulging eyes. Ji Yan jokingly called him a shrimp.

古文：朱随侯
现代文：朱随侯
English: Zhu Ronghou

古文：周韶州曲江令朱随侯，女夫李逖，游客尔朱九，并姿相少媚。广州人号为三樵。
现代文：周朝时的韶州曲江县令朱随侯，他的女婿李逖及游客尔朱九，三人的体貌不佳，广州人把他们叫做三樵。
English: Zhu Zhu, the governor of Qujiang County of Zhangzhou at the time of the Zhou Dynasty, his son-in-law Li Yu and the tourist Er Zhu Jiu, the three of them were not good-looking, and the people of Guangzhou called them the three brothers.

古文：人歌之曰：奉敕追三樵，随侯傍道走，回头语李郎，唤取尔朱九。
现代文：人们编了首歌谣：奉敕追三樵，随侯傍道走，回头语李郎，唤取尔朱九。
English: People made up songs and ballads: Bongju chased Sanju, followed Hou's side of the road, turned back to Li Lang, and summoned Er Zhu nine.

古文：张鷟目随侯臛乱土枭。
现代文：张鹙却把他们称作臛乱土枭。
English: Zhang Ye, however, called them "unruly and chaotic."

古文：李详
现代文：李详
English: Li Zhe

古文：周李详，河内人。
现代文：周朝的李详，是河内州人氏。
English: The Zhou dynasty's Li Zhe is from the Hà Ni canton.

古文：气侠刚劲。初为梓州监示尉。
现代文：性侠而刚直，最初曾任梓州监示尉。
English: He was a chivalrous and upright man, and was initially appointed as the superintendent of Zizhou.

古文：主书考日，刺史问平已否？
现代文：在进行官员考课的那天，刺史问大家公平吗？
English: On the day of the official examination, is it fair to ask everyone?

古文：详独曰：不平。
现代文：唯独李详说：不公平。
English: But Li Zhao said: "It's not fair."

古文：刺史曰：不平，君把笔书考。
现代文：刺史说：不公平，那就请你执笔给大家写评语。
English: Sashishi said, "It's not fair, so please write a review for everyone."

古文：详曰：请考使君。
现代文：李详说：那我就要给刺史大人书写考核鉴定了。
English: Li Jie said: Then I'll have to write a written assessment for adults.

古文：即下笔曰：祛断大事，好勾小稽；自隐不清，疑人总浊。
现代文：随即下笔写道：不抓大事，好管些小事；自己隐讳不清正，反而总怀疑别人有污浊。
English: He immediately wrote down: Don't pay attention to big things, but take care of small things; don't be honest with yourself, but always suspect others of being dirty.

古文：考中下。
现代文：考第为中下。
English: The exam is for middle and lower grades.

古文：刺史默然而罢。
现代文：刺史也只好默然作罢。
English: The stabbing story had to be quietly abandoned.

