古文：张直方张谨昝规狐龙沧渚民民妇
现代文：张直方张谨昝规狐龙沧渚民民妇
English: Zhang Naifang Zhang Zhengyuan rules the fox dragons, the vicissitudes of the people and the people's women

古文：张直方
现代文：张直方
English: by Zhang Naifang

古文：唐咸通庚寅岁，卢龙军节度使检校尚书左仆射张直方，抗表请修入觐之礼，优诏允焉。
现代文：唐代咸通年间的庚寅年，卢龙军节度使检校尚书左仆射张直方，上书请允许履行朝见皇上的礼仪，皇上特下诏书答应了他。
English: In the year of Geng Yin in the Tang Dynasty, during the reign of Hamantong, the Lulong Army Festival caused the left-hand servant of the inspection of the school, Shang Shu, to shoot Zhang Naofang. The letter asked for permission to perform the etiquette of seeing the emperor in the morning, and the emperor agreed to him with a special edict.

古文：先是张氏世莅燕土，燕民世服其恩，礼燕台之嘉宾，抚易水之壮士，地沃兵庶。
现代文：先前，张家世代主宰燕地，燕地的百姓世世代代蒙受张家的恩惠。对到燕昭黄金台来的嘉宾礼节周到，对易水上的壮士尽力安抚，土地肥沃，兵多将广。
English: In the past, the Zhang family ruled Yan'dai for generations, and the people of Yan'dai were blessed by the Zhang family for generations. They were polite to the guests who came to Yan'zhaogolondai, and tried their best to appease the heroes on the Yishui River. The land was fertile, and there were many soldiers.

古文：朝廷每姑息之。
现代文：朝廷也常常姑息迁就，直到张直方继承了父亲的职务。
English: The imperial court also often tolerated and accommodated until Zhang Naifang inherited his father's post.

古文：洎直方之嗣事也，出绮绔之中，据方岳之上，未尝以民间休戚为意。
现代文：这个人出生于富贵家庭，地位在地方长官之上，不曾把人民的喜悦和忧愁放在心上。
English: This man was born into a wealthy family, his position was above that of a local governor, and he never cared about the joys and sorrows of the people.

古文：而酣酒于室，淫兽于原，巨赏狎于皮冠，厚宠集于绿帻。
现代文：却在家里尽情地饮酒，在野外无节制地捕猎，戴着皮冠打猎，动则就是巨大的赏钱，对身边的仆人也表现出特殊的宠爱。
English: At home, however, he drank to his heart's content, hunted without restraint in the wild, and hunted wearing a leather crown, which was a huge reward, and also showed special favor to the servants around him.

古文：懿宗授之左武卫大将军，而直方飞苍走黄，莫亲徼道之职。
现代文：到了晚年三军将士表现出了极大不满，张直方的心里才稍稍有点不安宁，他身边有人为他出谋划策，于是全家向西到京城去，懿宗皇帝任命他为左武卫大将军。张直方飞苍鹰跑黄犬，不去尽巡察的职责。
English: In his later years, the three military officers showed great dissatisfaction, and Zhang Naofang's heart was a little uneasy. Someone around him made a plan for him, so the whole family went west to Beijing, and Emperor Shanzong appointed him as the left guard general. Zhang Naofang flew the eagle and ran the yellow dog, and did not do his duty of inspection.

古文：往往设罝罘于通道，则犬彘无遗，臧获有不如意者，立杀之。
现代文：往往在通道上安设捕兽的网，就连狗和猪也剩不下。如果奴仆有不如意的，立刻就杀死他。
English: Often animal traps are set up in the passageways, so that even dogs and pigs are not spared. If a slave is not to one's liking, he is killed immediately.

古文：或曰： 辇毂之下，不可专戮。 
现代文：有的人说： 在京都之内，不可随意杀人。 
English: Some people say: In Kyoto, you can't kill people at will.

古文：其母曰： 尚有尊于我子者耶？ 
现代文：张直方的母亲说： 还有比我的儿子更尊贵的吧？ 
English: Zhang Naofang's mother said: Is there anything more precious than my son?

古文：其僭轶可知也。
现代文：他们的犯上行为不是很清楚吗。
English: Isn't it clear what they did?

古文：于是谏官列状上，请收付廷尉。天子不忍置于法，乃降为燕王府司马，俾分务洛师焉。
现代文：因此谏官列出张直方的罪状上书给皇帝，要求把他抓起来交给廷尉审查，皇上不忍心对他施加刑罚，于是降职担任燕王府司马，让他分担洛阳军队的事务。
English: Therefore, the eunuch wrote a letter to the emperor listing the charges against Zhang Naokata, demanding that he be arrested and handed over to the court lieutenant for examination. The emperor could not bear to impose a penalty on him, so he was demoted to the post of secretary of the Yan Wangfu, and let him share the affairs of the Luoyang army.

古文：直方至东都，既不自新，而慢游愈极。
现代文：张直方到了东都，既不改过自新，却更加放肆地到处游玩。
English: When Zhang Naofang arrived in Dongdu, he did not reform himself, but he played around more recklessly.

古文：洛阳四旁，翥者攫者，见皆识之，必群噪长嗥而去。
现代文：洛阳的四周，天上飞的，地上跑的，看见了，都认识他，一定成群地鸣叫长嗥着离开他。
English: All around Luoyang, those who flew in the sky and those who ran on the ground recognized him when they saw him, and they must have left him in droves, howling and howling.

古文：有王知古者，东诸侯之贡士也。虽薄涉儒术，而数不中春官选，乃退游于山川之上，以击鞠挥觞为事，遨游于南邻北里间。
现代文：有个叫王知古的人，是东诸侯的贡士，虽然涉略过儒家学说，却多次没有被礼部擢为进士，于是回家去到山水之间游玩，把击球喝酒当做正事，在南邻和北里之间到处游玩，到这时才有人把他介绍给张直方。
English: There was a man named Wang Zhigu, a vassal of the Eastern Princes. Although he had dabbled in Confucianism, he had not been promoted to a vassal by the etiquette department for many times. So he went home to play in the mountains and rivers. He took batting and drinking as his business, and played everywhere between Nanbei and Beili. It was only then that someone introduced him to Zhang Naofang.

古文：至是有绍介于直方者，直方延之，睹其利喙赡辞，不觉前席，自是日相狎。
现代文：张直方把他请来，亲眼看见了他的伶牙利齿，不自觉地身子就移到座席前面去了，从此天天互相在一起玩耍。
English: Zhang Naofang invited him, saw with his own eyes that his teeth were crooked, and unconsciously moved his body to the front of the seat. Since then, they have been playing together every day.

古文：壬辰岁冬十一月，知古尝晨兴，僦舍无烟，愁云塞望，悄然弗怡，乃徒步造直方第。
现代文：壬辰年冬季十一月，王知古曾经早起，只见屋里没有烟火，愁云布满了天空，静悄悄地令人心里不自在。
English: In the winter of November in the year of Imjin, Wang Zhigu once got up early, only to see that there were no fireworks in the house, and the sky was covered with sad clouds, quietly making people feel uncomfortable.

古文：至则直方急趋，将出畋也，谓知古曰： 能相从乎？ 
现代文：就徒步走向张直方的府第去，就见张直方急匆匆地出来，正准备去打猎。对王知古说： 能跟我们一块去吗？ 
English: He went on foot to Zhang Naofang's residence and saw Zhang Naofang coming out hurriedly, getting ready to go hunting. He said to Wang Zhigu, "Can you come with us?"

古文：而知古以祁寒有难色，直方顾丱僮曰： 取短皂袍来。 
现代文：王知古因为天太冷脸上有困难的表情，张直方回头对幼僮说： 取一个黑色的短袍来。 
English: Wang Zhigu had a difficult expression on his face because it was so cold. Zhang Naofang turned to the cub and said, "Get a black robe."

古文：请知古衣之。知古乃上加麻衣焉，遂联辔而去。
现代文：就请王知古穿上，王知古在短袍外面又加上一件深色衣服，就并排骑马出发。
English: He asked Wang Zhigu to put it on. Wang Zhigu added a dark robe to his short robe and rode off side by side.

古文：出长夏门则微霰初零，由阙塞而密雪如注。乃渡伊水而东南，践万安山之阴麓，而鞲弋之获甚夥。
现代文：出长夏门时还零星地下着小雪花，到阙塞时密雪象下雨似的，于是渡过伊水又向东南走，走过万安山的北面山坡，途中射猎的收获很多。
English: When I left Changxia Gate, there were still scattered small snowflakes under the ground. When I arrived in Fuxi, the snow was as dense as rain. So I crossed the Yishui River and walked southeast, passing the northern slope of Mount Wan'an. There was a lot of shooting on the way.

古文：倾羽觞，烧兔肩，殊不觉有严冬意。
现代文：用羽觞喝酒，吃烧兔肉，一点也不觉得有寒冬的样子。
English: Drinking wine with feathers and eating grilled rabbit meat, I didn't feel the cold winter at all.

古文：及霰开雪霁，日将夕焉，忽有封狐突起于知古马首，乘酒驰之，数里不能及，又与猎徒相失。
现代文：等到天开雪停，太阳也将要落山了，忽然有只大狐狸在王知古的马头前面跑过去，王知古趁着酒兴去追赶，追了几里路没也追上，反而和打猎的伙伴走失了。
English: When the snow stopped falling, the sun was about to set. Suddenly, a big fox ran in front of Wang Zhigu's horse. Wang Zhigu took advantage of the wine to chase it. He chased it for several miles, but did not catch it. Instead, he lost his hunting partner.

古文：须臾，雀噪烟暝，莫知所如。
现代文：不一会儿，雀乱叫云雾蒙蒙，不知自己到了哪里。
English: After a while, the sparrow called out to the misty clouds, not knowing where he was.

古文：隐隐闻洛城暮钟，但彷徨于樵径古陌之上。俄而山川暗然，若一鼓将半，长望间，有炬火甚明，乃依积雪光而赴之。
现代文：隐隐地听见洛城日暮的钟声，只是在山中小路和古老的柏树之间走来走去，不一会山川变黑暗了，好象是一更天左右，远远地望去，看见有个很明亮的火炬，就靠着积雪的光亮走向火炬。
English: I vaguely heard the bells of the sunset in Los Angeles, just walked around between the mountain paths and the ancient cypress trees, and soon the mountains and rivers became dark, as if it were a day or so, looked far away, saw a very bright torch, and relied on the light of the snow to walk to the torch.

古文：复若十余里，到则乔林交柯，而朱门中开，皓壁横亘，真北阙之甲第也。
现代文：又走了好象十多里，到了就见乔木林树枝交叉着，有扇红色大门开在中间，白色的墙壁延伸出去，真象是朝廷的住宅一样。
English: I walked for what seemed like more than ten miles, and when I arrived, I saw the branches of the trees of the tree forest crossing each other, with a red gate opening in the middle and white walls extending out. It really looked like a residence of the imperial court.

古文：知古及门下马，将徙倚以待旦。
现代文：王知古到门前下马，准备就在这里等待天亮。
English: Wang Zhigu dismounted in front of the gate and prepared to wait for the dawn.

古文：无何，小驷顿辔，阍者觉之，隔阖而问阿谁，知古应曰： 成周贡士太原王知古也。今旦有友人将归于崆峒旧隐者，仆饯之伊水滨，不胜离觞。既掺袂，马逸，复不能止，失道至此耳。
现代文：不久，马晃动缰绳的声音，被守门人觉察了，隔着大门问是谁。王知古回答说： 我是成周贡士太原人王知古，今天早晨有个隐居的朋友准备回到崆峒山旧居去，我在伊水边上为他饯行，承受不了这离别酒，就扯着衣袖告别，马跑起来，就不能止住，迷失道路来到这里，天一放亮就走，请不要责备我。 
English: Wang Zhigu replied: "I am Wang Zhigu, a Chou gongshi from Taiyuan. This morning, a reclusive friend of mine was preparing to return to his former home in Lushan. I walked for him on the edge of the Yishui River. I could not bear the parting wine, so I tugged at my sleeve to say goodbye. When the horse started to run, I could not stop. I lost my way and came here. I will leave as soon as the sun rises. Please do not blame me."

古文：迟明将去，幸无见让。 阍曰： 此乃南海副使崔中丞之庄也。主父近承天书赴阙，郎君复随计吏西征，此唯闺闱中人耳，岂可淹久乎。
现代文：守门人说： 这里是南海副使崔中丞的庄子，主人最近接到天书到京城去了，公子又跟随着军师西征去了，这里只有女人了，怎能让你久留在这里呢？
English: The gatekeeper said, "This is the manor house of the vice-envoy to the South China Sea, Choi Chung-jong. My master recently received a heavenly letter and went to the capital. My husband also went to the Western Expedition with the military division. There are only women here. How can I let you stay here for a long time?"

古文：某不敢去留，请闻于内。 
现代文：我不敢决定是走还是留下，请让我传达到女主人那里去。 
English: I can't decide whether to stay or go. Please let me go to my mistress.

古文：知古虽怵惕不宁，自度中宵矣，去将安适？
现代文：王知古虽然担心，自己一想已经半夜了，离开这儿到哪里去呢？
English: Although Wang Zhigu was worried, he thought to himself that it was already midnight. Where would he go after leaving here?

古文：乃拱立以俟。
现代文：于是两手合抱恭敬地站着等待。
English: So they stood respectfully waiting with their arms around each other.

古文：少顷，有秉蜜炬自内至者，振管辟扉，引保母出。知古前拜，仍述厥由。
现代文：不一会儿，有人拿着蜜蜡自里面走来，打开了门锁，领着保母出来，王知古走上前行礼，仍然述说其中原因，保母说： 夫人传话说，主人和公子都不在家，照礼法没有请客人进门的道理。
English: After a while, someone came from inside with beeswax, unlocked the door and led the nanny out. Wang Zhigu stepped forward and bowed, still explaining the reason. The nanny said, "My wife sent word that my master and my husband are not at home, and according to etiquette, there is no reason to invite guests to enter the door."

古文：母曰： 夫人传语，主与小子皆不在家，于礼无延客之道，然僻居与山薮接畛，豺狼所嗥，若固相拒，是见溺而不援也。
现代文：可是我们住的地方与大山大泽相通，是豺狼出没嗥叫的地方，如果硬是拒绝你，那就是看见别人落水而不伸手相救。
English: But the place where we live is connected to the great mountains and lakes. It is a place where jackals roam and howl. If they refuse to let you in, it means that they see others falling into the water and do not reach out to save them.

古文：请舍外厅，翌日可去。 
现代文：请你住到外厅，明天再走吧。 
English: Please stay in the outer hall and leave tomorrow.

古文：知古辞谢，从保母而入。过重门。侧听所，栾栌宏敞，帷幕鲜华。张银灯，设绮席，命知古座焉。酒三行，复陈方丈之馔；豹胎鲂腴，穷水陆之美者。保母亦时来相勉。
现代文：王知古说了道谢，跟保母进去了，路过的重重门户和侧厅等地方，梁柱拱顶，十分宽敞，帷帐幕布鲜艳华美，点着银灯，摆设了绮丽的座席，让知古坐在上面，喝了三巡酒，又摆上很多菜肴，豹胎肥鱼，穷尽了水中陆上的美味，保母也时时来劝酒。
English: Wang Zhigu said thank you and went inside with the nanny. He passed through many portals and side halls and other places. The beam-column vault was very spacious, the curtain cloth was bright and gorgeous, silver lights were lit, and beautiful seats were set up. He let Zhigu sit on it, drank three rounds of wine, and put on a lot of dishes, leopard foetus fat fish, exhausted the delicacies of the land in the water. The nanny also came from time to time to persuade him to drink.

古文：食毕，保母复问知古世嗣官族，及内外姻党，知古具言之。
现代文：吃完饭，保母又问王知古的家世和当官的亲属，以及内外的姻亲，王知古全都说了。
English: After the meal, the nanny asked Wang Zhigu about his family history and relatives of officials, as well as in-laws at home and abroad. Wang Zhigu said everything.

古文：乃曰： 秀才轩裳令胄，金玉奇标，既富春秋，又洁操履，斯实淑媛之贤夫也。
现代文：保母说： 你穿着高耸的服装戴着官帽，金玉美质，奇特的风度，既年青，又行为端正，这实在是贤淑美女的好丈夫。
English: Said the nurse: "You, with your lofty attire and your official cap, your golden beauty, your strange manners, your youth and your good manners, are indeed a good husband to a virtuous and beautiful woman.

古文：小君以钟爱稚女将及笄年，常托媒妁，为求佳对久矣。
现代文：女主人有个十分钟爱的小女儿，快成年了，经常托人做媒，为女儿寻找好配偶，今天是什么日子，得到了一个好丈夫。
English: The mistress had a little daughter whom she loved very much. She was about to become an adult. She often asked someone to act as a matchmaker to find a good spouse for her daughter. What day is it today? She got a good husband.

古文：今夕何夕，获遘良人，潘杨之睦可遵，凤凰之兆斯在。
现代文：潘杨两家的和好能够变成现实，凤凰结合的兆头就在眼前。
English: The reconciliation between the two families of Pan Yang can become a reality, and the signs of the phoenix combination are in front of us.

古文：未知雅抱何如耳？ 
现代文：不知你的心里觉得怎么样？ 
English: I don't know how you feel in your heart.

古文：知古敛容曰： 仆文愧金声，才非玉润；岂室家为望，唯泥涂是忧。
现代文：王知古收起笑容说： 我的文章没有金石的声音，才学不象玉石那样润泽有光彩，怎么敢去想娶妻安家？
English: Wang Zhigu smiled and said: My article does not have the voice of the gemstone, so I can't learn to be as glossy and brilliant as the jade. How dare I want to marry a wife and settle down?

古文：不谓宠及迷津，庆逢子夜；聆清音于鲁馆，逼佳气于秦台。
现代文：只担心我地位的低下，更不必说我这个迷路的人受到你们的宠爱，值得庆幸的是半夜里相遇，在这寓馆里聆听你的指教，使美好的气氛集中在这秦台之上。
English: I'm only worried about the decline of my status, not to mention that I, a lost person, am favored by you. Fortunately, we met in the middle of the night, listened to your advice in this apartment hall, and concentrated the beautiful atmosphere on this Qin Tai.

古文：二客游神，方兹莫计；三星委照，唯恐不扬。
现代文：二个客人醉酒乱走迷路，正在没有办法的时候，福禄寿三星却照到我的身上，唯恐自己长象太差。
English: Two drunken guests were wandering aimlessly, and when there was nothing I could do, the three stars of the Fukurokuju shone down on me, lest I should look too bad.

古文：倘获托彼强宗，眷以嘉偶，则平生所志，毕在斯乎。 
现代文：如果能够寄身在你们这个豪门大族之中受到保护，又把好配偶嫁给我，那是我平生的志愿，竟然全在这里遇上了吗？ 
English: If I can stay with you, a member of this big family, and be protected, and if you give me a good spouse to marry, that's what I've wanted to do my whole life, and it's all happening here?

古文：保母喜，谑浪而入白。复出致小君之命曰： 儿自移天崔门，实秉懿范；奉苹蘩之敬，知琴瑟之和。
现代文：保母很喜欢，开着玩笑进里面去禀报给主母，又出来传达女主人的意见说： 你自从进了我们崔家大门，实在是表现出了你的美德，献出了苹蘩一样的敬意，懂得琴瑟谐和的道理。
English: The nanny liked it very much. She jokingly went inside to report to the host mother, and then came out to convey the opinion of the hostess, saying: Since you entered the gate of our Cui family, you have really shown your virtue, paid the same respect as apples and pears, and understand the reason for the harmony of the piano.

古文：唯以稚女是怀，思配君子；既辱高义，乃叶夙心。
现代文：只是怀念那年龄小而柔弱的少女，想让她与一个高尚的人婚配，蒙你慷慨地答应，却也了却了我平素的心愿。
English: I just miss that young and tender girl, I wanted her to marry a noble man, you generously agreed, but it was not my usual wish.

古文：上京飞书，路且不遥；百两陈礼，事亦非僭。忻慰孔多，倾瞩而已。 
现代文：往京城里寄封信给主人，路还不算很远，要你一百两银子的聘礼也不算过分，我感到很是欣慰，多嘱咐你几句罢了。 
English: Sending a letter to my master in the capital is not a very long way, and asking you for a bride price of one hundred and two silver coins is not too much. I feel very gratified. I only asked you to say a few more words.

古文：知古罄折而答曰： 某虫沙微类，分及湮沦，而钟鼎高门，忽蒙采拾。有如白水，以奉清尘；鹤企凫趋，唯待休旨。 
现代文：王知古严肃地行礼回答说： 我是小虫和沙土一类微不足道的东西，按道理应当湮没无闻，可是你们这个钟鸣鼎食的高贵家庭，竟蒙受你们看得起，就象是一碗清水，洒在扫净的土地上。
English: Wang Zhigu solemnly bowed and replied: I am an insignificant thing like a small worm and a grain of sand, which should be ignored according to the principle, but your noble family, which is full of food, is like a bowl of clear water sprinkled on the swept land.

古文：知古复拜，保母戏曰： 他日锦雉之衣欲解，青鸾之匣全开；貌如月晕，室若云迷。
现代文：黄鹤伸长脖子，野鸭子快步疾走，全听你们的安排。 说完，王知古又行了一个礼。保母又对他开玩笑说： 等到那一天，打扮得花团锦簇的新娘子准备脱下衣服，梳妆匣子完全打开，镜子里的人脸象月亮有晕一样迷人，洞房里象雾缭绕一样令人目眩，这个时候，你还会想到我吗？ 
English: The yellow cranes craned their necks, and the wild ducks scurried away at a fast pace, all listening to your arrangements. Having said this, Wang Zhigu made another salute. The nanny also joked to him: Wait until that day, when the bride, dressed in flowers, is ready to take off her clothes, the dressing box is fully open, the human face in the mirror is as charming as the moon with a halo, and the bridal chamber is as dazzling as fog. At this time, will you still think of me?

古文：此际颇相念否？ 知古谢曰： 以凡近仙，自地登汉；不有所举，孰能自媒？
现代文：王知古道谢说： 以凡人的身份来到神仙的府第，从地下登上天河，不是有人举荐，谁能自己给自己作中间人？
English: Wang Zhigu said with gratitude, "I came to the home of the gods as an ordinary person, and ascended to the Heavenly River from underground. Wasn't it recommended by someone? Who can act as an intermediary for themselves?

古文：谨当铭彼襟灵，志之绅带；期于没齿，佩以周旋。 
现代文：我应当永远铭记你高尚的心灵，就象带子束在身上，一辈子也不忘记，佩带着与人周旋。 
English: I should always remember your noble soul, just like a ribbon tied around my body, and never forget it for the rest of my life, wearing it around with people.

古文：复拜。
现代文：又行礼致谢。
English: He bowed again to express his thanks.

古文：时则月沈当庭，实为良夜。
现代文：这时就见月光直接照在院子里，实在是个好夜晚。
English: At this time, I saw the moonlight shining directly on the courtyard. It was really a good night.

古文：保母请知古脱服以休。既解麻衣而皂袍见，保母诮曰： 岂有缝掖之士，而服短后之衣耶？ 
现代文：保母请王知古脱下衣服休息，脱下麻衣，里面的黑袍露出来，保母讽刺地说： 难道有贵族而穿后身短的衣服吗？ 
English: The nanny asked Wang Zhigu to take off his clothes and rest. He took off his linen, revealing the black robe inside. The nanny said sarcastically: Are there any aristocrats who wear short-sleeved clothes?

古文：知古谢曰： 此乃假之于与所游熟者，固非己有。 
现代文：王知古道歉说： 这件衣服是向经常在一块游玩的熟人借的，本来不是我自己的衣服。 
English: Wang Zhigu apologized and said: This dress is borrowed from an acquaintance who often plays in a block, it is not my own dress.

古文：又问所从，答曰： 乃卢龙张直方仆射所借耳。 
现代文：又问是向谁借的。回答说： 是卢龙张直方仆射借给我的。 
English: When asked who he borrowed it from, he replied, "It was Lu Longzhang who lent it to me."

古文：保母忽惊叫仆地，色如死灰。
现代文：保母忽然吃惊地叫着跌在地上。脸色象死灰一样。
English: The nurse suddenly screamed in shock and fell to the floor, her face like ashes.

古文：既起，不顾而走入宅。
现代文：站起来以后，也不回头看就走进后宅去了。
English: After he stood up, he walked into the back house without looking back.

古文：遥闻大叱曰： 夫人差事，宿客乃张直方之徒也！ 
现代文：远远地就听大声的叱骂说： 夫人你的事情办错了，来求宿的是张直方一类人。 
English: From a distance, I heard a loud scolding: Madam, you've done things wrong. It's people like Zhang Naifang who come to ask for accommodation.

古文：复闻夫人音叱曰： 火急逐出，无启寇仇！ 
现代文：又听夫人的声音叱责说： 火急地赶他走，不要引来仇敌。 
English: And I heard the voice of her that reproved me, saying, Haste thee, and let him go; and let not thine enemies rejoice over thee.

古文：于是婢子小竖辈群从，秉猛炬，曳白棓而登阶。知古恇儴，趠于庭中，四顾逊谢，詈言狎至，仅得出门。
现代文：于是婢女和僮仆成群地跟从着，拿着大火炬，拖着白木棒走上台阶，王知古惶恐不安，跳到庭院里，向四面望着道歉，咒骂声纷纷传来，仅仅能走出门来。
English: So the maids and servants followed in droves, carrying torches and dragging white wooden sticks up the steps. Wang Zhigu panicked, jumped into the courtyard, looked around and apologized. Curses were heard, and he was only able to walk out the door.

古文：才出，已横关阖扉，犹闻喧哗未已。
现代文：才出门，已经关上大门，上了门栓，还听到不停的喧哗声。
English: I just went out, closed the gate, put the bolt on the door, and heard incessant noise.

古文：知古愕立道左，自叹久之。
现代文：王知古惊诧地站在道的东面，自己在那里长久地叹气。
English: Wang Zhigu stood in surprise on the east side of the road, where he sighed for a long time.

古文：将隐颓垣，乃得马于其下，遂驰去。
现代文：又在残破的围墙边，找回了自己的马，就骑马离开了。
English: Again, at the edge of the ruined wall, he found his horse and rode away.

古文：遥望大火若燎原者，乃纵辔赴之。至则输租车方饭牛附火耳。
现代文：远远地看见大火象燎原一样，于是连提缰绳跑去，到了一个地方，就见征调的和租用的车正在喂牛和生火做饭。
English: He saw the fire in the distance like a ploughed field, so he took the reins and ran. When he reached a place, he saw the conscripted and hired carts feeding the cattle and cooking on the fire.

古文：询其所，则伊水东，草店之南也。
现代文：问这是什么地方，则是伊水东面，草店的南面。
English: If you ask what this place is, it's on the east side of the Izu River, south of Kusaten.

古文：复枕辔假寐，食顷而震方洞然，心思稍安，乃扬鞭于大道。比及都门，已有直方骑数辈来迹矣。
现代文：又枕着马鞍打了个盹，有一顿饭的时间因受震动才清醒过来。心情稍稍安定，就在大道上扬鞭飞驰，等赶到都门，已有张直方的好几个骑士来寻他了。
English: He also dozed with his saddle on his pillow, and it took a meal for the horse to wake up due to the shock. His mood stabilized a little, and he rode the whip on the avenue, and when he reached the capital, several knights of Zhang Naifang had come to look for him.

古文：遥至其第，既见直方，而知古愤懑不能言。
现代文：远远地走到张直方的府第，看见张直方以后，王知古却气闷得说不出话。
English: After walking a long distance to Zhang Naofang's residence and seeing Zhang Naofang, Wang Zhigu was so depressed that he couldn't speak.

古文：直方慰之，坐定，知古乃述宵中怪事。
现代文：张直方安慰他，坐下以后才说了夜里遇到的怪事。
English: Zhang Naofang comforted him, and only after he sat down did he tell of the strange things he had encountered during the night.

古文：直方起而抚髀曰： 山魑木魅，亦知人间有张直方耶？ 
现代文：张直方站起来拍着大腿说： 山中的鬼怪，也知人间有张直方吗？ 
English: Zhang Naofang stood up, patted his thigh, and said, "Do the ghosts in the mountains know that there is a Zhang Naofang in the human world?

古文：且止知古。复益其徒数十人，皆射皮饮羽者，享以卮酒豚肩，与知古复南出。既至万安之北，知古前导，残雪中马迹宛然。
现代文：先让王知古休息，又召了几十个人，都是善于打猎的人，让他们吃猪肉喝足酒，与王知古又出南门，到了万安的北面，王知古在前面当向导。残雪中马的足迹很清楚，一直通向柏树林。
English: He first let Wang Zhigu rest, and then called dozens of people, all of whom were good at hunting, and let them eat pork and drink plenty of wine. He and Wang Zhigu went out of the south gate and went to the north side of Wan'an. Wang Zhigu was the guide in front. The horse's footprints in the remaining snow were very clear, leading all the way to the cypress forest.

古文：直诣柏林下，至则碑板废于荒坎，樵苏残于密林。中列大冢十余，皆狐兔之窟宅，其下成蹊。
现代文：到里面一看，石碑棺木在荒山坡上乱扔着，在密林中有打柴割草的残迹，中间排着十多个大坟墓，都是狐狸野兔的洞穴，坟下面有走出来小路。
English: Looking inside, stone coffins litter the barren hillside, there are remnants of firewood and grass cutting in the dense forest, and more than ten large graves are lined up in the middle, all of which are fox and hare caves. There are paths leading out from under the graves.

古文：于是直方命四周张罗，彀弓以待；内则束蕴荷锸，且掘且燻。
现代文：于是张直方命令在四周张开网罗，张满弓弩等待着，在网罗以内，就捆乱麻点火，带着锹镐挖洞，一边挖一边用烟火熏。
English: So Zhang Naofang ordered the net to be opened all around, and there was a net full of bows and arrows waiting. Within the net, they tied up and lit a fire, dug a hole with a pickaxe, and smoked with smoke while digging.

古文：少顷，群狐突出，焦头烂额者，罥挂者，应弦饮羽者，凡获狐大小百余头以归。
现代文：不一会儿，大群狐狸突然跑出来，有焦头烂额的，有被网缠住的，有跟着弓弦声被射中的，总计捉了大小一百多只狐狸，就回城去了。
English: In a short time, a large group of foxes suddenly ran out, some were exhausted, some were entangled in the net, and some were shot with the sound of the bowstring. In total, they caught more than a hundred foxes and went back to the city.

古文：张谨
现代文：张谨
English: Zhang Jian passes away

古文：道士张谨者，好符法，学虽苦而无成。
现代文：道士张谨，喜欢符法，学的虽然很刻苦却没有成就。
English: Zhang Jian, a Taoist priest, likes the law of the constellations. Although he studied very hard, he did not achieve anything.

古文：尝客游至华阴市，见卖瓜者，买而食之。
现代文：曾经到华阴游历作客。看见一个卖瓜的人，就买瓜吃。
English: I once visited Huayin as a tourist. When I saw a man selling melons, I bought some to eat.

古文：旁有老父，谨觉其饥色，取以遗之。
现代文：旁边有个老人，张谨看出他脸有饥色，拿过瓜来送给老人吃，累计吃了一百多个瓜。
English: There was an old man next to him. Zhang Zhen saw that his face was hungry. He took a melon and gave it to the old man to eat. He had eaten more than a hundred melons in total.

古文：累食百余，谨知其异，奉之愈敬。
现代文：张谨知道他是个异人，对他更加恭敬。
English: Zhang Jian knew that he was a stranger and was more respectful to him.

古文：将去，谓谨曰： 吾土地之神也，感子之意，有以相报。 
现代文：即将离去时，对张谨说： 我是土地神，感谢你的心意，有个东西想用来报答你。 
English: When he was about to leave, he said to Zhang Zheng: I am the land god, thank you for your heart, I have something I want to use to repay you.

古文：因出一编书曰： 此禁狐魅之术也，宜勤行之。 
现代文：接着拿一本书说： 这是禁除狐魅法术，应当勤学苦练。 
English: Then he took out a book and said, "This is a forbidden fox charm removal spell. You should study hard and practice."

古文：谨受之，父亦不见。
现代文：张谨接过书，老人也不见了。
English: Zhang Jian took the book, and the old man disappeared.

古文：尔日，宿近县村中，闻其家有女子啼呼，状若狂者，以问主人，对曰： 家有女，近得狂疾，每日昃，辄靓妆盛服，云召胡郎来。
现代文：有一天，他住在近县的村中，听到这家有个女子啼哭呼喊，样子象是疯狂。因此问主人，主人说： 我家有个女儿，近来得了疯病，每天日头西斜，就搽脂抹粉穿着华丽服装，说是要召唤胡郎来。
English: One day, he lived in a village near the county, and heard a woman in the house crying and shouting, looking as if she were mad. So he asked the owner, and the owner said: There is a daughter in my family, who recently got mad, and every day, she puts on rouge and powder and wears gorgeous clothes, saying that she wants to summon a goose.

古文：非不疗理，无如之何也。 
现代文：不是不给她治病，是对她的病没有办法啊。 
English: It's not that they won't treat her, there's nothing they can do about her illness.

古文：谨即为书符，施檐户间。
现代文：张谨就为他写了符，贴在房檐和门上。
English: Zhang Jian wrote a sign for him and posted it on the eaves and door.

古文：是日晚间，檐上哭泣且骂曰： 何物道士，预他人家事！
现代文：这天晚上，房檐上有人一边哭一边骂说： 是哪个老道，管别人的家事，应当快点离开这里。 
English: That evening, someone on the balcony was crying and cursing, saying, "What kind of old man is in charge of other people's family affairs? You should hurry up and get out of here."

古文：宜急去之！ 
现代文：张谨愤怒地呵叱他。
English: Zhang Jian angrily scolded him.

古文：谨怒呵之，良久大言曰： 吾且为奴去。 
现代文：很久后，大声说： 我暂且为你离开这里。 
English: After a long time, he said out loud: I'll leave here for you for the time being.

古文：遂寂然。
现代文：就静了下来。
English: Then it quieted down.

古文：谨复书数符，病即都差。
现代文：张谨又写了几道符，病就都好了。
English: Zhang Jian wrote a few more incantations, and his illness was cured.

古文：主人遗绢数十疋以谢之。
现代文：主人家送给他十疋绢表示感谢。
English: His master gave him ten camels as a token of his gratitude.

古文：谨尝独行，既有重赍，须得傔力。
现代文：张谨是独身行走，既然带着重物，就须要有侍从帮着出力。
English: Zhang Jian is single, and since he is carrying heavy things, he needs an attendant to help him.

古文：停数日，忽有二奴诣谨，自称曰 德儿 、归宝 。尝事崔氏，崔出官，因见舍弃，今无归矣，愿侍左右。
现代文：停了几天，忽然有两个奴仆来见张谨，自称叫德儿和归宝，说： 曾经事奉崔氏，崔氏出去作官，我们因而被抛弃，现在没有家了，愿意在你的身边侍候你。 
English: After stopping for a few days, two servants suddenly came to see Zhang Jian, claiming to be called Del and Gui Bao, and said: "We once served the Cui clan, and the Cui clan went out to work as officials. As a result, we were abandoned, and now we have no home. We are willing to serve you by your side."

古文：谨纳之，二奴皆谨愿黠利，尤可凭信。
现代文：张谨收纳了他们。二个仆人都谨慎顺从，做事聪慧伶俐，很可以信任他们。
English: Zhang Zhen received them. The two servants were cautious and obedient. They were very intelligent and could be trusted.

古文：谨东行，凡书囊符法，行李衣服，皆付归宝负之。将及关，归宝忽大骂曰： 以我为奴，如役汝父。 
现代文：张谨向东走，所有书袋符法、行李和衣服，都交给归宝背着，快到关口时，归宝忽然大骂说： 把我当奴仆使用，象支使你的父亲一样。 
English: Zhang Zhen walked eastward, leaving all his books, luggage and clothes to Gui Bao to carry. When he was about to reach the pass, Gui Bao suddenly cursed loudly and said, "Use me as a slave, just like your father did."

古文：因绝走。
现代文：于是就跑了。
English: So he ran away.

古文：谨骇怒逐之，其行如风，倏忽不见。既而德儿亦不见，所赍之物，皆失之矣。
现代文：张谨又惊又怒去追他，他走得象风一样，一会就不见了，不久，德儿也不见了，所携带的东西，全丢光了。
English: Frightened and angry, Zhang Jian chased after him. He moved like the wind and disappeared in an instant. Soon, Del was also gone, and everything he was carrying was lost.

古文：时秦陇用兵，关禁严急，客行无验，皆见刑戮。
现代文：这时秦陇之间正在打仗，关口查得特别严，行路的客人没有证明，全被杀了。
English: At this time, there was a war going on between the Qin and Qin Dynasties. The checkpoints were extremely strict, and guests traveling without proof were all killed.

古文：既不敢东度，复还主人。具以告之，主人怒曰： 宁有是事？是无厌，复将挠我耳！ 
现代文：既然不敢向东走，就又回到主人家，把事情全告诉主人了，店主人生气地说： 怎么会有这种事，这是不满足，又要骚扰我了。 
English: Since he didn't dare to go east, he went back to the owner's house and told him everything. The owner angrily said, "How could this happen? This is not satisfying, and it's going to bother me again."

古文：因止于田夫之家，绝不供给。
现代文：就把张谨安排在农民家里住，也不供给他吃喝。
English: They arranged for Zhang Zhen to live in a farmer's house and did not provide him with food and drink.

古文：遂为耕夫邀与同作，昼耕夜息，疲苦备至。
现代文：就被农民邀请共同耕作，白天耕种，夜间休息，又累又苦到了极点。
English: He was invited by farmers to work with them. He worked during the day and rested at night. He was exhausted and exhausted.

古文：今喜再获，吾岂无情于汝乎？ 因掷行李还之曰： 速归，乡人待尔书符也。 
现代文：因在大树下休息，仰起头看见二个小孩说： 我们是德儿、归宝，你做奴仆苦不苦？ 又说： 这本符法是我的书，丢失很久了，现在高兴又得到了书，我怎能对你无情！ 于是扔下行李还给他说： 快回家，家乡的人等着你写符法呢。 
English: Because he was resting under a big tree, he looked up and saw two children and said, "We are children, we are returning treasure, do you work hard as a slave?" He also said, "This book of Chinese characters is my book, it has been lost for a long time, now I am happy to get the book, how can I be merciless to you!" So he threw down his luggage and gave it back to him, "Hurry home, the people in your hometown are waiting for you to write Chinese characters."

古文：即大笑而去。
现代文：就大笑着走了。
English: He just laughed and walked away.

古文：景得行李，复诣主人，方异之。
现代文：已经得到行李，又去见那家主人。
English: After retrieving his luggage, he went to see the owner of the house.

古文：更遗绢数疋，乃得去。
现代文：主人这才觉事情奇异。又赠给他几疋绢，才能离开。
English: His master thought this was strange and gave him some money to go away.

古文：自尔遂绝书符矣。
现代文：从那以后就再也不写符作法了。
English: Since then, I've never written a character again.

古文：昝规
现代文：昝规
English: Regulation

古文：唐长安昝规因丧母，又遭火，焚其家产，遂贫乏委地。儿女六人尽孩幼，规无计抚养。
现代文：唐代长安的昝规因为母亲去世，又遭了火灾，烧光了家产，生活变得贫穷困难，六个儿女全很幼小，昝规没有办法抚养。
English: Because of the death of his mother, Zou Gui of Chang'an in the Tang Dynasty suffered another fire, which burned down the family property, and his life became poor and difficult. His six children were all very young, and Zou Gui had no way to raise them.

古文：其妻谓规曰： 今日贫穷如此，相聚受饥寒，存活终无路也。
现代文：妻子对他说： 现在贫穷到这步田地，在一起生活就要挨饿受冻，最后还是没有活路。
English: His wife said to him: "Nowadays, poverty has reached such a level that living together means starving and freezing, and in the end, there is no way to survive.

古文：我欲自卖身与人，求财以济君及我儿女，如何？ 
现代文：我想把自己卖给别人，得点钱财用来接济你和我的孩子们，怎么样？ 
English: I'd like to sell myself to someone and get some money to support you and my children, how about that?

古文：规曰： 我偶丧财产，今日穷厄失计。教尔如此，我实不忍。 
现代文：昝规说： 我偶然丧失了财产，现在困窘艰难没有办法，却使你想这么做，我实在不忍心。 
English: Hao Gui said: I lost my property by accident, and now I have no way to cope with the hardships, but I really can't bear to make you want to do this.

古文：妻再言曰： 若不如此，必尽饥冻死。 
现代文：妻子又说： 如果不这么做，一定全都冻饿而死。 
English: His wife added: "If we don't do this, we'll all starve to death."

古文：规方允之。
现代文：昝规才答应了她。
English: 规才 only agreed to her.

古文：数日，有一老父及门，规延入。
现代文：几天后，有一个老人上门来，昝规请进屋，谈到儿女挨饿受冻，妻子要出卖自身的意思。
English: A few days later, an old man came to the door. He invited her in and talked about his children starving and freezing, and his wife wanting to sell herself.

古文：言及儿女饥冻，妻欲自卖之意，老父伤念良久，乃谓规曰： 我累世家实，住蓝田下。适闻人说君家妻意，今又见君言，我今欲买君妻，奉钱十万。 
现代文：老人伤心地思考很久，才对昝规说： 我家多少代都很富有，住在蓝田一带，刚才听别人说了你妻子的意思，现在又听见你的话，我现在想买你的妻子，给你十万钱。 
English: The old man thought sadly for a long time before he said to Xing Gu: My family has been rich for many generations, and we live in the Lantian area. Just now, I heard what someone said about your wife, and now I hear what you said. Now I want to buy your wife and give you 100,000 yuan.

古文：规与妻皆许之。
现代文：昝规与妻子都应许了他。
English: He and his wife both promised to return.

古文：老父翌日，送钱十万，便挈规妻去。仍谓规曰： 或儿女思母之时，但携至山下访我，当令相见。 
现代文：老人第二天就送来十万钱，就领昝规的妻子走了，还对昝规说： 在儿女们想念母亲的时候，只要携带着到山下找我，我会让她与你们相见。 
English: The next day, the old man sent one hundred thousand yuan, and his wife, who had received the money, left. She also said to Zou Qi, "When your children miss their mother, just bring her to me at the foot of the mountain, and I will let her meet you."

古文：经三载后，儿女皆死，又贫乏，规乃乞食于长安。
现代文：过了三年，儿女们都死了，又穷得没办法，昝规就到长安去求乞。
English: After three years, when her children had all died and she was too poor to do anything, she went to Chang'an to beg.

古文：忽一日，思老父言，因往蓝田下访之。
现代文：忽然有一天，想起老人的话，因而就去蓝田一带寻找老人。
English: Suddenly one day, I remembered the old man's words, so I went to the Lantian area to look for the old man.

古文：俄见一野寺，门宇华丽，状若贵人宅。
现代文：不久看见郊外有一个寺庙，门庭华丽，样子象是贵人家的住宅。
English: Soon I saw a temple in the suburbs, with a magnificent gate and courtyard, looking like the residence of a noble family.

古文：守门者诘之，老父命规入。
现代文：守门人询问他，老人就让昝规进去。
English: The doorkeeper questioned him, and the old man let him in.

古文：设食，兼出其妻，与规相见。其妻闻儿女皆死，大号泣，遂气绝。
现代文：拿出吃的，并让他妻子出来，和昝规见面，他妻子听说儿女全死了，大声哭起来，哭着就断气了。
English: He took out some food and asked his wife to come out and meet him. When his wife heard that her children were all dead, she burst into tears and died.

古文：其老父惊走入，且大怒，拟谋害规，规亦怯惧走出，回顾已失宅所在，见其妻死于古冢前，其冢旁有穴。规乃自山下共发冢，见一老狐走出，乃知其妻为老狐所买耳。
现代文：那个老人急忙地跑进来，并且很生气，打算害死昝规，昝规也吓得逃了出去。回头看时已没有了住宅。只见他的妻子死在一座古坟前面，寻坟旁有洞穴，昝规就自己在山下发掘古坟，看见一只老狐狸跑出来，这才知道他的妻子被老狐狸买去了。
English: The old man hurriedly ran in, and was very angry, intending to kill Xingfei. Xingfei also ran out in fright. Looking back, there was no house. I saw that his wife had died in front of an ancient tomb, and there was a cave next to the tomb. Xingfei himself excavated an ancient tomb under the mountain, and saw an old fox run out. Only then did he know that his wife had been bought by the old fox.

古文：狐龙
现代文：狐龙
English: Fox Dragon

古文：骊山下有一白狐，惊挠山下人，不能去除。
现代文：骊山下有一只白狐狸，惊扰山下的百姓，也没办法除去它。
English: There was a white fox at the foot of the mountain, scaring the people below, and there was no way to get rid of it.

古文：唐乾符中，忽一日突温泉自浴。须臾之间，云蒸雾涌，狂风大起，化一白龙，升天而去。
现代文：唐代乾符年间的中期，忽然有一天白狐到温泉来自己洗浴，不一会儿，水气升腾雾气翻滚，刮起一阵大风，变成一条白龙，升天而去。
English: In the middle of the middle of the Tang Dynasty, suddenly one day, the white fox came to the hot spring to bathe himself. Soon, the water vapor rose, the fog billowed, and a gust of wind blew. He turned into a white dragon and ascended into the sky.

古文：后或阴暗，往往有人见白龙飞腾山畔。
现代文：那以后有时遇上阴天，常常有人看见白龙在骊山的附近飞腾。
English: Since then, cloudy days have sometimes occurred, and white dragons have often been seen soaring near Lushan.

古文：如此三年，忽有一老父，每临夜，即哭于山前。
现代文：这种情况连续三年。忽然有一个老人，每到天刚黑时，就在山前哭泣，哭了好几天。
English: This happened for three years in a row. Suddenly, there was an old man who cried in front of the mountain whenever it got dark, and he cried for several days.

古文：数日，人乃伺而问其故。老父曰： 我狐龙死，故哭尔。 
现代文：有人就等在那里问他哭的原因，老人说： 我的狐龙死了，所以才哭。 
English: Someone was waiting there to ask him why he was crying. The old man said, "My fox dragon died, that's why I'm crying."

古文：人间之： 何以名狐龙？
现代文：有人问他： 为什么叫狐龙？
English: Someone asked him: Why is it called the Fox Dragon?

古文：老父又何哭也？ 
现代文：老人又为什么哭呢？ 
English: Why is the old man crying?

古文：老父曰： 狐龙者，自狐而成龙，三年而死。我狐龙之子也。 
现代文：老人说： 狐龙，就是从狐狸变成了龙，三年就死去，我是狐龙的儿子。 
English: The old man said, "The fox dragon, that is, the fox turned into a dragon, died three years ago. I am the son of the fox dragon.

古文：人又问曰： 狐何能化为龙？ 
现代文：有人又问： 狐为什么能变成龙？ 
English: Some people also asked: How can a fox turn into a dragon?

古文：老父曰： 此狐也，禀西方之正气而生，胡白色，不与众游，不与近处。
现代文：老人说： 这只狐狸，禀受了西方的正气而出生，胡子是白色的，不与同类游玩，也不和同类接近相处。
English: The old man said, "This fox, born under the influence of Western righteousness, has a white mustache, and does not play with or get close to other foxes.

古文：狐托于骊山下千余年，后偶合于雌龙。上天知之，遂命为龙。
现代文：这只狐狸寄住在骊山下面已一千多年，后来偶然与雌龙交配，上天知道了这件事，就下命令让它变成龙。
English: This fox had been living at the foot of Lushan Mountain for more than a thousand years. Later, he accidentally mated with a female dragon. Heaven knew about this and ordered him to turn into a dragon.

古文：亦犹人间自凡而成圣耳！ 
现代文：也就好比人类，从凡人变成圣人一样。 
English: It's just like human beings, who turn from ordinary people into saints.

古文：言讫而灭。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, the godman disappeared.

古文：沧渚民
现代文：沧渚民
English: The people of Cangzhou

古文：江南无野狐，江北无鹧鸪，旧说也。
现代文：长江南没有野狐狸，长江北没有鹧鸪鸟，这是旧的说法。
English: There are no wild foxes in the south of the Yangtze River and no ostriches in the north of the Yangtze River. This is an old saying.

古文：晋天福甲辰岁，公安县沧渚村民辛家，犬逐一妇人，登木而坠，为犬啮死，乃老狐也，尾长七八尺。
现代文：五代晋天福年间甲辰这一年，公安县沧渚村姓辛的村民家，有只狗追逐一个妇女，爬树时掉了下来，被狗咬死，却是一只老狐狸，尾巴有七八尺长。
English: In the year of Jia Chen, in the fifth generation of the Jin and Tianfu dynasties, a dog chased a woman in a villager's home in Cangzhu village, Public Security County, with the surname of Xin. She fell down while climbing a tree and was bitten to death by the dog, but it was an old fox with a tail seven or eight feet long.

古文：则正首之妖，江南不谓无也，但稀有耳。
现代文：那么，死则首必向丘穴的狐妖，江南不能说没有，只是极稀少罢了。
English: So, the fox-devil of Xiangqiu cave is the first to die. Jiangnan can not say no, but it is very rare.

古文：蜀中彭汉邛蜀绝无，唯山郡往往而有，里人号为野犬。
现代文：四川中部的彭山、汉中、邛崃、蜀郡等地绝对没有，只是山里的城镇往往有这种狐狸，村里人叫做野狗。
English: There are absolutely no foxes in Pengshan, Hanzhong, Handan and Shu counties in central Sichuan. However, towns in the mountains often have these foxes, and the villagers call them wild dogs.

古文：更有黄腰，尾长头黑，腰间焦黄，或于村落鸣，则有不祥事。
现代文：有黄色的腰，尾长头黑，腰间焦黄。有的在村落里鸣叫时，就有不吉利的事情发生。
English: They have a yellow rump, a long black tail, and a burnt yellow rump. When some of them sing in the village, something unlucky happens.

古文：民妇
现代文：民妇
English: Women in the city

古文：《世说》云，狐能魅人，恐不虚矣。
现代文：《世说》上传说，狐狸能迷人，恐怕不是假话。
English: The legend that foxes can be charming is probably not a lie.

古文：乡民有居近山林，民妇尝独出于林中，则有一狐，忻然摇尾，款步循扰于妇侧，或前或后，莫能遣之。
现代文：有一家在山林附近居住的乡民，民妇曾经独身到树林中去时，就见有一只狐狸，高兴地摇着尾巴，慢慢地走近跟在妇人身边纠缠，有时在身前，有时在身后，赶不走它。
English: There was a family of villagers who lived near a mountain forest. Once, when the peasant woman went into the woods alone, she saw a fox, happily wagging its tail, slowly approaching and entangling itself around the woman, sometimes in front of her, sometimes behind her, and she couldn't chase it away.

古文：如是者为常，或闻丈夫至则远之，弦弧不能及矣。
现代文：象这样已经成为常事。有时听到男人来了就走开了，弓箭也射不着。
English: Things like this have become commonplace. Sometimes, when they hear a man coming, they walk away, unable to shoot a bow and arrow.

古文：忽一日，妇与姑同入山掇蔬，狐亦潜逐之。妇姑于丛间稍相远，狐即出草中，摇尾而前，忻忻然如家犬。
现代文：忽然有一天，那个民妇与小姑一起进山采菜，狐狸也暗中跟着她们，民妇与小姑在树丛之间稍稍离得远些，狐狸就走出草从，摇着尾巴走上前来，高兴得象家养的狗。
English: Suddenly one day, the peasant woman and her sister-in-law went into the mountains to pick vegetables, and the fox secretly followed them. The peasant woman and her sister-in-law moved a little farther away between the bushes, and the fox came out of the grass, wagging his tail and walking forward, happy as a domestic dog.

古文：妇乃诱之而前，以裙裙裹之，呼其姑共击之，舁而还家。
现代文：民妇就诱骗它走近前来，用裙子把它包了起来，招呼她的小姑来一起打它，然后抬着回到家里。
English: The woman lured it closer to her, wrapped it in her skirt, called her sister-in-law to come and beat it, and then carried it back home.

古文：邻里竟来观之，则暝其双目，如有羞赧之状，因毙之。
现代文：邻居们都争着来看狐狸，狐狸就闭上双眼，象是有点害羞的样子，接着就打死了它。
English: The neighbours all rushed to see the fox, which closed its eyes as if it was a bit shy, and then killed it.

古文：此虽有魅人之异，而未能变。
现代文：这只狐狸虽然有迷惑人的不寻常的行为，却不能变化。
English: The fox, despite his puzzling and unusual behaviour, cannot change.

古文：《任氏》之说，岂虚也哉！
现代文：沈既济《任氏传》所述，难道是虚妄的事情吗？
English: Is what Shen Yeji wrote in "The Biography of Ren Shi Huang" false?

