古文：彦回幼有清誉。
现代文：褚彦回幼年时期就有高洁的声誉。
English: He had a reputation for cleanliness since he was a child.

古文：宋元嘉末，魏军逼瓜步，百姓咸负担而立。
现代文：宋朝元嘉末年，魏军逼近瓜步，百姓都整好东西，准备逃走。
English: In the last years of the Song Dynasty, when the Wei army was closing in, the people were getting their things in order and preparing to flee.

古文：时父湛之爲丹阳尹，使其子弟并着芒屩，于斋前习行。
现代文：当时他的父亲褚湛之做丹阳尹，让他的子弟都穿着草鞋，在斋房前练习走路。
English: At that time, his father, Zou Zhan (湛) as Danyang Yin, made his sons wear straw sandals and practice walking in front of the hut.

古文：或讥之，湛之曰： 安不忘危也。 
现代文：有人讥笑他，褚湛之说： 这是安不忘危。 
English: Some people mocked him, and Zou Tianzhi said, "This is not forgetting danger.

古文：彦回时年十馀，甚有惭色。
现代文：褚彦回当时年龄十几岁，很觉得惭愧。
English: At the time, Yan Yanhui was a teenager and felt very ashamed.

古文：湛之有一牛，至所爱，无故堕听事前井，湛之率左右躬自营救之，郡中喧扰，彦回下帘不视也。
现代文：褚湛之有一头牛，是他最喜欢的，无故地掉在了堂屋前面的井里，褚湛之率左右众人亲自营救，郡中非常喧闹，褚彦回放下门帘不看。
English: Yan Zhan had a cow that was his favorite. It fell into the well in front of his house for no reason. Yan Zhan led many people to rescue it himself. The county was very noisy. Yan Yan put down the door curtain and did not look back.

古文：又有门生盗其衣，彦回遇见，谓曰： 可密藏之，勿使人见。 
现代文：又有一个仆役偷了他的衣服，褚彦回遇见了，对他说： 可以严密地把它藏起来，不要让别人看见。 
English: Another servant stole his clothes. When he met him again, he said to him, "You can hide it well, so that no one else can see it."

古文：此门生惭而去，不敢复还，后贵乃归罪，待之如初。
现代文：这个仆役很惭愧地走了，不敢再回来，后来褚彦回富贵了，那个人又回来谢罪，褚彦回待他和起初一样。
English: The servant went away very ashamed and did not dare to come back. Later, Yan Yan became rich again, and the man came back to apologize. Yan Yan treated him the same way as before.

古文：尚宋文帝女南郡献公主，拜驸马都尉，除着作佐郎，累迁秘书丞。
现代文：褚彦回与宋文帝的女儿南郡献公主结婚，被任命为驸马都尉，授职著作佐郎，逐渐调任秘书丞。
English: Yan Yan Hui married Song Emperor's daughter, Nanshun Xian Princess, and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse Guards, with the official title of "Saro" (佐郎), and was gradually transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：湛之卒，彦回悉推财与弟澄，唯取书数千卷。
现代文：褚湛之死后，褚彦回把财产全部推给弟弟褚澄，只取书几千卷。
English: After the death of Yu Tan, Yan Yan returned all of his property to his brother Yu Cheng, taking only a few thousand volumes.

古文：湛之有两厨宝物，在彦回所生郭氏间，嫡母吴郡主求之，郭欲不与，彦回曰： 但令彦回在，何患无物。 
现代文：褚湛之有两厨宝物，在褚彦回的生母郭氏那里，他的嫡母吴郡主去要，郭氏企图不给，褚彦回说： 只要彦回在，怎么还怕没有钱？ 
English: There are two kitchen treasures in Yan Tan. His legitimate mother, Princess Wu, went to Guo Hui's birth mother, Guo Hui, to ask for them. Guo Hui tried not to give them to her. Yan Hui replied, "As long as Yan Hui is here, how can I be afraid of not having money?"

古文：犹不许，彦回流涕固请，乃从之。
现代文：郭氏还是不给，褚彦回流着眼泪坚持请求，才答应他了。
English: Mr. Guo still refused to give it, and Yan Yan insisted on his request with tears streaming down his face, before he agreed.

古文：袭爵都乡侯，历位尚书吏部郎。
现代文：后来承袭了都乡侯的爵位，曾担任尚书吏部郎。
English: Later, he succeeded to the title of the Marquis of Miyakonojo, and served as the secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：景和中，山阴公主淫恣，窥见彦回悦之，以白帝。帝召彦回西上合宿十日，公主夜就之，备见逼迫，彦回整身而立，从夕至晓，不爲移志。
现代文：景和时期，山阴公主淫荡放肆，窥见了褚彦回，很喜欢他，就告诉了前废帝，废帝就召褚彦回到西上阁住宿十天，公主就在夜间去那里找他，用尽各种办法逼迫，褚彦回严肃地站在那里，从晚上直到早晨，不为她动摇心志。
English: According to the scene and time, Princess San'in was lascivious and debauched. She caught a glimpse of Zou Yanfu and liked him very much, so she told the former emperor. The former emperor invited Zou Yanfu to return to West Shanggak to stay for ten days. The princess went there at night to look for him and used all kinds of methods to persecute him. Zou Yanfu stood there solemnly from evening until morning, not wavering for her.

古文：公主谓曰： 君须髯如戟，何无丈夫意？ 彦回曰： 回虽不敏，何敢首爲乱阶。 
现代文：公主对他说： 您的胡须像戟矛，为什么却没有丈夫意气？ 褚彦回说： 彦回虽然不聪慧，怎么敢带头进行淫乱？ 
English: The princess said to him, "Your whiskers are like spears, but why don't you have the spirit of a husband?" Yan Yan replied, "Although Yan Yan is not clever, how dare he take the lead in committing adultery?

古文：宋明帝即位，累迁吏部尚书。
现代文：宋明帝即位，逐步升迁为吏部尚书。
English: When Emperor Song Ming ascended to the throne, he was gradually promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：有人求官，密袖中将一饼金，因求请间，出金示之，曰： 人无知者。 
现代文：有人找他求官，秘密地在袖子里藏了一块金子，请求他在闲暇的时候单独谈话，拿出金子来给他看，说： 别人都不知道。 
English: Someone asked him to run for office, secretly hid a piece of gold in his sleeve, asked him to talk alone in his spare time, took out the gold and showed it to him, saying: "No one else knows."

古文：彦回曰： 卿自应得官，无假此物。
现代文：褚彦回说： 您自己应该得官，用不着这种东西。
English: Shuhiko replied: You should be in office yourself, you don't need this kind of thing.

古文：若必见与，不得不相啓。 
现代文：如果一定要送我，那就不得不上报了。 
English: If they had to send me, it would have to be in the newspaper.

古文：此人大惧，收金而去。
现代文：这个人非常害怕，收起金子走了。
English: The man was very scared, took the gold and ran away.

古文：彦回叙其事，而不言其名，时人莫之知也。
现代文：褚彦回向别人说起这件事，而不说他的名字，当时的人都不知道他。
English: Yan Yan did not mention his name when he told others about the incident. People at the time did not know who he was.

古文：帝之在蕃，与彦回以风素相善，至是深相委仗，陈事皆见从。
现代文：明帝在地方任职的时候，与褚彦回因为风格同一向友好，到现在则对他深深地委任和信赖，提出什么事情一概听从。
English: When Emperor Ming was in local office, he was always friendly with Yan Yan because they shared the same style. Up to now, he has been deeply entrusted and trusted by him, and he always listens to anything he proposes.

古文：改封雩都伯，历侍中，领尚书，右卫将军。
现代文：改封他为雩都伯，曾任侍中，兼尚书、右卫将军。
English: He was given the title of Shidu Bo, and served as a chamberlain, imperial secretary, and general of the right guard.

古文：彦回美仪貌，善容止，俯仰进退，咸有风则。
现代文：褚彦回仪表很美，讲究举止，俯仰进退，都很有风度。
English: Yan Yan Hui's appearance is very beautiful, he is particular about his manners, and he has a lot of grace when he bends forward and backward.

古文：每朝会，百僚远国使，莫不延首目送之。
现代文：每当朝会，百官和远国的使节，无不翘首目送他。
English: Whenever there was a meeting of the Imperial Court, hundreds of officials and envoys from far away countries would send him off first.

古文：明帝尝叹曰： 褚彦回能迟行缓步，便得宰相矣。 
现代文：明帝曾经慨叹说： 褚彦回能迟缓行步，就可以当宰相了。 
English: Emperor Ming once lamented: "If Yan Yan can walk slowly, he can be prime minister."

古文：时人以方何平叔。
现代文：当时的人把他比作何平叔。
English: People at the time compared him to Uncle He Ping.

古文：尝聚袁粲舍，初秋凉夕，风月甚美，彦回援琴奏别鹄之曲，宫商既调，风神谐畅。
现代文：他们曾经聚集在袁粲家中，初秋的一个凉爽的晚上，风月很美，褚彦回拿来琴，奏起了《别鹤》的曲子，音调准确，气韵流畅。
English: They once gathered at Yuan Xuan's home. On a cool evening in early autumn, when the weather was beautiful, Xuan Xuan took out his lute and played the melody of "The Parting Crane." The tone was precise and the melody was smooth.

古文：王彧、谢庄并在粲坐，抚节而叹曰： 以无累之神，合有道之器，宫商暂离，不可得已。 
现代文：王、谢庄都在袁粲的座席上，击着拍子叹息说： 以没有牵累的精神，配上具有韵律的乐器，乐调暂时离开，也不会立刻停止。 
English: Wang and Xie Zhuang are both sitting on Yuan Qi's seat, beating the beat and sighing, saying: With the spirit of no entanglement, coupled with musical instruments with rhythms, the music will temporarily leave, but will not immediately stop.

古文：时伧人常珍奇与薛安都爲逆，降叛非一。
现代文：当时的鄙贱人常珍奇和薛安都叛乱，投降来、叛变去不止一次。
English: At that time, the despicable people Chang Zhenqi and Xue An both rebelled, surrendered, and mutinied more than once.

古文：后又求降，明帝加以重位。
现代文：后来又请求投降，明帝给予他很重要的职位。
English: Later, he asked to surrender, and Emperor Ming gave him a very important position.

古文：彦回谓全其首领，于事已弘，不足大加宠异。帝不从。
现代文：褚彦回说保全他的脑袋，就已经算是宽宏，不值得大加特殊的恩宠。明帝不听。
English: Yan Yan replied that the preservation of his head was already considered magnanimous and did not deserve much special grace. Emperor Ming did not listen.

古文：珍奇寻又叛。
现代文：常珍奇不久又叛变。
English: Chang Zhenqi soon mutinied.

古文：彦回后爲吴兴太守，帝寝疾危殆，驰使召之，欲托后事。
现代文：褚彦回后来担任吴兴太守，明帝卧病危险，派遣使者驰马去召他，想托付后事。
English: Yan Yan Hui later served as Wu Xing's eunuch, when Emperor Ming was dangerously ill, he sent an envoy on horseback to summon him, intending to entrust him with the succession.

古文：及至召入，帝坐帐中流涕曰： 吾近危笃，故召卿，欲使着黄罗裸。 
现代文：等到召进来，明帝坐在帐中流着眼泪说： 我近来病危，所以召见卿，想让你穿黄罗裙。 
English: When he was called in, Emperor Ming was sitting in his study with tears streaming down his face and said, "I've been very ill recently, so I've called you here to ask you to wear the yellow and red skirt.

古文：指床头大函曰： 文书皆函内置，此函不得复开。 
现代文：他指着床头上的大匣子说： 文书都在匣子里边装着，这个匣子不能再打开。 
English: He pointed to a large box at the head of the bed and said: "The paperwork is all in the box, and this box can no longer be opened.

古文：彦回亦悲不自胜。
现代文：褚彦回也悲伤得不能自制。
English: Shuhiko was so sad that he couldn't control himself.

古文：黄罗裸，乳母服也。
现代文：黄罗裙，是他乳母的衣服。
English: The yellow dress was his nanny's.

古文：帝虽小间，犹怀身后虑。
现代文：明帝即使在小时候，就怀着对身后的考虑。
English: Even as a child, Emperor Ming acted with consideration for those behind him.

古文：建安王休仁，人才令美，物情宗向，帝与彦回谋诛之，彦回以爲不可。
现代文：建安王刘休仁，人才优秀，众人尊崇，明帝找褚彦回谋划把他杀掉，褚彦回认为不可以这样。
English: Liu Xuren, the king of Jianan, was an outstanding man, respected by everyone. Emperor Ming asked Yan Yan to plot to kill him, but Yan Yan thought that this was unacceptable.

古文：帝怒曰： 卿痴不足与议事。 
现代文：明帝发怒说： 卿呆痴，不值得跟你讨论事情。 
English: Emperor Ming said angrily: Sir, you are stupid, it is not worth discussing things with you.

古文：彦回惧而奉旨。
现代文：褚彦回恐惧而遵奉了他的意旨。
English: Tsuchihiko was afraid and did as he asked.

古文：复爲吏部尚书，卫尉卿，尚书右仆射。以母老疾，晨昏须养，辞卫尉，不许。
现代文：又做了吏部尚书、卫尉卿、尚书右仆射，因为母亲年老有病，早晚需要奉养，所以要求辞去卫尉卿，没有准许。
English: He also held the posts of secretary, lieutenant and second-in-command of the palace guards. Because his mother was old and ill and needed to be cared for sooner or later, he asked to resign as lieutenant and was not allowed to do so.

古文：明帝崩，遗诏以爲中书令、护军将军，与尚书令袁粲受顾命，辅幼主。
现代文：明帝去世，遗诏让他担任中书令、护军将军，他与尚书令袁粲一同受到顾命，辅佐幼主。
English: After the death of Emperor Ming, he was appointed by imperial edict to serve as the General of the Middle Shire and the General of the Protectorate. Together with the General of the Middle Shire, Yuan Shao, he was appointed to assist the young lord.

古文：粲等虽同见托，而意在彦回。
现代文：袁粲等人虽然同被托付，而主要用意则在褚彦回。
English: Although Yuan Qi and others were also entrusted, the main intention was to go back to Yan Yan.

古文：彦回同心理事，务弘俭约，百姓赖之。
现代文：褚彦回与他们同心处理政事，务求节省简约，百姓十分信赖。
English: The people have great trust in Yan Yan, who has worked with them to handle government affairs in a conciliatory manner, seeking to be economical and simple.

古文：既而王道隆、阮佃夫用事，奸赂公行，彦回不能禁也。
现代文：不久王道隆、阮佃夫掌权，贿赂公行，褚彦回已经不能禁止了。
English: Soon after Wang Daolong and Nguyn Xuân Phúc took power, bribery in the public sector could no longer be prohibited.

古文：遭所生丧，毁顿不复可识，期年不盥栉，唯泣泪处乃见其本质焉。
现代文：遭到了生母的丧事，他过度哀伤很快身体消瘦不能辨认，他整整一年没有洗澡梳头，只有在哭泣流泪的时候才可以见到他本来的形貌。
English: After the death of his birth mother, he was so grief-stricken that he quickly became unrecognizably thin. He didn't bathe or comb his hair for an entire year, and his true form was only revealed when he was in tears.

古文：诏断哭，禁吊客。
现代文：诏令截止哭泣，禁止客人吊丧。
English: The Emperor decreed that weeping should be stopped, and guests were forbidden to mourn.

古文：葬毕，起爲中军将军，本官如故。
现代文：葬罢以后，起用为中军将军，本来的职务不变。
English: After the funeral, he was appointed as a general of the Chinese army, and his original position remained unchanged.

古文：元徽二年，桂阳王休范反，彦回与卫将军袁粲入卫宫省，镇集衆心。
现代文：元徽二年，桂阳王刘休范造反，褚彦回与卫将军袁粲入内保卫皇宫，镇定凝聚大众的人心。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Xuan, King of Guiyang rebelled, and Yuan Xuan, General of the Imperial Guards, entered the palace to defend it, calmly uniting the hearts of the people.

古文：彦回初爲丹阳，与从弟照同载，道逢齐高帝，彦回举手指高帝车谓照曰： 此非常人也。 
现代文：褚彦回起初做丹阳尹，曾经和他的弟弟褚癤同坐一辆车子，路上遇到齐高帝，褚彦回举手指着高帝的车子对褚癤说： 这不是一个平常的人。 
English: At the beginning, Yan Yan Hui was Danyang Yin. He once rode in a car with his brother Yan Quan. On the way, they met Qi Gao Di. Yan Yan Hui pointed to Gao Di's car and said to Yan: "This is not an ordinary person."

古文：出爲吴兴，高帝饷物别，彦回又语人曰： 此人才貌非常，将来不可测也。 
现代文：后来出任吴兴太守，高帝赠物告别，褚彦回又对别人说： 这个人才貌不凡，将来不可预料。 
English: Later, he served as the governor of Wu Xing, and Emperor Gao gave him a gift to say goodbye. Yan Yanhui said to others: This man has extraordinary talent, and the future is unpredictable.

古文：及顾命之际，引高帝豫焉。
现代文：等到顾命期间，引拔高帝参与掌权。
English: While waiting for the order to be carried out, Gao Di was invited to take part in the taking of power.

古文：高帝既平桂阳，迁中领军，领南兖州，高帝固让，与彦回及卫军袁粲书陈情，彦回、粲答书不从，高帝乃受命。
现代文：高帝平定了桂阳，调任中领军，兼任南兖州刺史，高帝坚持推让，给褚彦回和卫军袁粲上书陈述自己的心情，褚彦回、袁粲不答应，高帝才接受了命令。
English: Gao Di leveled Guiyang, transferred to be the leader of the central army, and concurrently served as the leader of the southern Luzhou. Gao Di insisted on making concessions, and sent a letter to Yan Yanhui and the guard Yuan Shun to state his feelings. Yan Yanhui and Yuan Shun did not agree, and Gao Di accepted the order.

古文：其年加彦回尚书令、侍中，给班剑二十人，固让令。
现代文：这一年任命褚彦回为尚书令、侍中，配给仪仗二十人，他坚持辞让。
English: In the same year, Yan Yan was appointed to the posts of Shang Shuling and Waizhong, and was assigned to 20 people for ceremonial duties, but he insisted on resigning.

古文：三年，进爵爲侯。
现代文：元徽三年，晋升爵位为侯。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the peerage as a marquis.

古文：服阕，改授中书监，侍中、护军如故，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：服丧期满，改授他为中书监，侍中、护军职务依旧，配给乐队一支。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was reclassified as a middle school librarian, and his duties as an attendant and escort remained the same. He was assigned to a band.

古文：时淮北属，江南无复鳆鱼，或有间关得至者，一枚直数千钱。
现代文：当时淮水属于北朝，江南不再有鳆鱼，偶尔有人辗转得到的，一条值几千钱。
English: At that time, Huai Shui belonged to the Northern Dynasty, and there were no longer any catfish in the south of the Yangtze River. Occasionally, someone would steal one, and it would be worth several thousand yuan.

古文：人有饷彦回鳆鱼三十枚，彦回时虽贵，而贫薄过甚，门生有献计卖之，云可得十万钱。
现代文：有人赠给褚彦回鳆鱼三十条，褚彦回当时虽然高贵，但是过于贫穷，有的仆人献计把它卖掉，说可以得到十万钱。
English: Someone gave him thirty eels. At that time, although he was noble, he was too poor. Some servants offered to sell it, saying that they could get one hundred thousand dollars.

古文：彦回变色曰： 我谓此是食物，非曰财货，且不知堪卖钱，聊尔受之。
现代文：褚彦回脸色一变说： 我觉得这是食物，不是财货，而且不知道可以卖钱，姑且接受。
English: "I think it's food, not goods, and I don't know if I can sell it for money, but I'll take it," he said.

古文：虽复俭乏，宁可卖饷取钱也。 
现代文：虽然家中节俭困乏，怎么可以卖掉赠送的东西换钱呢？ 
English: Although the family is not very thrifty, how can they sell the gifts for money?

古文：悉与亲游噉之，少日便尽。
现代文：结果全部给了亲朋去吃，不几天便吃完了。
English: As a result, all of it was given to relatives and friends to eat, and it was all eaten within a few days.

古文：明年，嫡母吴郡公主薨，毁瘠骨立。
现代文：第二年，嫡母吴郡公主去世，哀伤过甚，极为消瘦。
English: The following year, her legitimate mother, Princess Wu County, passed away. She was very sad and extremely thin.

古文：葬毕，诏摄职，固辞，又以期祭礼及，表解职，并不许。
现代文：葬罢，诏令他代职，坚持推辞，又因为周年祭礼来到，上表解职，都没有准许。
English: There was no permission to cancel the funeral, to order him to stand in for him, to insist on his resignation, or to dismiss him from his post because the anniversary celebration was coming.

古文：苍梧暴虐稍甚，齐高帝与彦回及袁粲言世事，粲曰： 主上幼年，微过易改，伊、霍之事，非季世所行，纵使功成，亦终无全地。 
现代文：苍梧王的暴虐逐渐加剧，齐高帝与褚彦回及袁粲谈论时事，袁粲说： 主上年幼，微小的过失容易改正，伊尹、霍光的做法，不是衰世所能做的，纵使成功了，也终于没有完整的土地。 
English: The tyranny of King Cangwu gradually intensified, and Emperor Qigong and Yan Yan returned to Yuan Shao to discuss current affairs. Yuan Shao said: The Lord is young, and minor mistakes are easy to correct. The practices of Yi Yin and Huo Guang cannot be done by the declining generation. Even if they succeed, they will not have a complete land.

古文：彦回默然，归心高帝。
现代文：褚彦回默不作声，倾心于高帝。
English: Yan Yan remained silent and devoted himself to Gao Di.

古文：及废苍梧，群公集议，袁粲、刘彦节既不受任，彦回曰： 非萧公无以了此。 
现代文：等到苍梧王被废除，公卿们在一起商议，袁粲、刘彦节都不肯接受委任，褚彦回说： 除了萧公没人能了结此事。 
English: When King Cangwu was abolished and the nobles were discussing together, Yuan Qi and Liu Yanshi both refused to accept the appointment. Yu Yanshi replied, "No one can settle this matter except Xiao Gong."

古文：手取事授高帝。
现代文：手取用物交给高帝。
English: Hand-picked items were handed over to Gao Di.

古文：高帝曰： 相与不肯，我安得辞。 
现代文：高帝说： 大家都不肯，我怎么能再推辞！ 
English: Gaudi said: Everyone refused, how could I refuse again!

古文：事乃定。
现代文：事情才安定下来。
English: Things are just settling down.

古文：顺帝立，改号卫将军、开府仪同三司，侍中如故，甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：顺帝登基，改称褚彦回为卫将军、开府仪同三司，侍中职务依旧，卫士五十人入殿。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, and changed his title from Shuhankhu to Wei Shogun, Kaifu Yi to Sanji, the position of chamberlain remained the same, and fifty guardsmen entered the palace.

古文：及袁粲怀贰，曰： 褚公眼睛多白，所谓白虹贯日，亡宋者终此人也。 
现代文：等到袁粲怀了叛逆之心，说： 褚公眼睛中白色很多，就是所谓白虹贯日，灭亡宋朝的最终是这个人。 
English: When Yuan Xuan harbored a rebellious heart, he said: "There is a lot of white in the eyes of the Yonggong, that is, the so-called white rainbow throughout the day. It is ultimately this person who will bring about the downfall of the Song Dynasty."

古文：他日，粲谓彦回曰： 国家所倚，唯公与刘丹阳及粲耳，愿各自勉，无使竹帛所笑。 
现代文：后来有一天，袁粲对褚彦回说： 国家所依赖的，只有您和刘丹阳及袁粲罢了，希望各人自勉，不要让竹帛所写的史书笑话我们。 
English: One day later, Yuan Qi replied to Yan Yan: The country relies only on you, Liu Danyang and Yuan Qi. I hope everyone will be self-disciplined and not let the history books written by Zhu Xi make fun of us.

古文：彦回曰： 愿以鄙心寄公之腹则可矣。 
现代文：褚彦回说： 希望把我的心放到您的肚子里就可以了。 
English: Takehiko replied, "I hope it's okay to put my heart in your stomach."

古文：然竟不能贞固。
现代文：然而终于不能坚贞固守。
English: In the end, however, it was not possible to remain steadfast.

古文：及高帝辅政，王俭议加黄钺，任遐曰： 此大事，应报褚公。 
现代文：到了高帝辅政，王俭提议为高帝加黄钺，任遐说： 这是大事，应该报告褚公。 
English: When it came to Emperor Gao's ancillary government, Wang Jian proposed adding Huang Qi to Emperor Gao, and Ren Qi said: This is a big deal, it should be reported to Emperor Gao.

古文：帝曰： 褚脱不与，卿将何计？ 
现代文：高帝说： 褚公如果不给，您将怎么办？ 
English: Gao Di said, "What will you do if Zheng Gong doesn't give it to you?

古文：遐曰： 彦回保妻子，爱性命，非有奇才异节，遐能制之。 
现代文：任遐说： 褚彦回保护妻子，爱惜生命，并没有奇才异节，我能制服他。 
English: Ren Zheng said: Yan Yan protects his wife and cherishes his life. There is no magic, I can subdue him.

古文：果无违异。
现代文：果然褚彦回没有反对。
English: As expected, there was no objection.

古文：及沈攸之事起，高帝召彦回谋议，彦回曰： 西夏衅难，事必无成，公当先备其内耳。 
现代文：后来沈攸之事件发生，高帝召褚彦回谋划，褚彦回说： 西夏发难，事情必定不会成功，您应当首先防备内部。 
English: Later, Shen Yu's incident occurred, and Emperor Gao called Yan Yan back to plan. Yan Yan replied, "When the Western Xia is in trouble, things will definitely not succeed. You should first prepare internally.

古文：高帝密爲其备。
现代文：高帝秘密地进行了防备。
English: Gao Di secretly made preparations.

古文：事平，进中书监、司空。
现代文：事情平定，晋升为中书监、司空。
English: The matter was settled, and he was promoted to the position of the Central Library Supervisor and Secretary.

古文：齐台建，彦回白高帝，引何曾自魏司徒爲晋丞相，求爲齐官。
现代文：齐台建立，褚彦回告诉高帝，引用何曾由魏朝的司徒任晋朝的丞相为例，请求做齐官。
English: After the establishment of Qidai, Yan Yan told Gao Di in return, citing the example of He, who had been appointed as the prime minister of the Jin Dynasty by the Wei Dynasty's Stu, and requested to be the Qidai official.

古文：高帝谦而不许。
现代文：高帝很谦虚但没有准许。
English: Gao Di was very modest but did not allow it.

古文：建元元年，进位司徒，侍中、中书监如故，改封南康郡公。
现代文：建元元年，晋升职位为司徒，侍中、中书监职务依旧，改封为南康郡公。
English: In the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：彦回让司徒，乃与仆射王俭书，欲依蔡谟事例。
现代文：褚彦回辞让司徒，便给仆射王俭写信，想依照蔡谟的事例。
English: When Yan Yan replied that he would give the speech to Szeto, he wrote a letter to his servant, Wang Jian, and wanted to follow the example of Zaimu.

古文：俭以非所宜言，劝彦回受命。
现代文：王俭认为不应该这样说，劝褚彦回接受任命。
English: Wang Jian did not think it was appropriate to say so, and advised Yan Yan to accept the appointment.

古文：终不就。
现代文：但终于没有就任。
English: But in the end he did not take office.

古文：寻加尚书令。
现代文：不久任命为尚书令。
English: He was soon appointed to Shang Shuling.

古文：二年，重申前命爲司徒，又固让。
现代文：建元二年，重申前次的命令为司徒，又坚持推让。
English: In the second year of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he reiterated that the previous order was a stooge, and insisted on making concessions.

古文：魏军动，高帝欲发王公以下无官者从军，彦回谏以爲无益实用，空致扰动，上乃止。
现代文：魏军出动，高帝打算发动王公以下无官的人去从军，褚彦回上谏认为对实用没有好处，空致扰动，皇上才停下来了。
English: The Wei army was dispatched, and Emperor Gao planned to send non-official people below the prince to join the army. Yan Yan thought that it was not good for practical use to return to the emperor. The sky caused disturbance, and the emperor stopped.

古文：三年七月，帝亲尝酎，盛暑欲夜出，彦回与左仆射王俭谏，以爲 自汉宣帝以来，不夜入庙，所以诫非常。
现代文：建元三年七月，高帝亲尝醇酒，盛夏的时候想夜间出去，褚彦回与左仆射王俭进行劝谏，认为： 从汉宣帝以来，不在夜间进入宗庙，用以防备异常事情的发生。
English: In July of the third year of Jianyuan, Emperor Gao tasted alcohol and wanted to go out at night in the height of summer. Yan Yanhui consulted with his left-hand man, Shaowang Jian, and concluded: Since Emperor Xuan of Han, do not enter the ancestral temple at night to prevent abnormal things from happening.

古文：人君之重，所宜克慎 。
现代文：君主极为重要，是应该谨慎行事的。 
English: The monarch is extremely important and should be handled with care.

古文：从之。
现代文：高帝听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时朝廷机事，彦回多与议谋，每见从纳，礼遇甚重。
现代文：当时朝廷的机要事情，褚彦回大多参与谋议，常常被采纳，很受礼遇。
English: At that time, Yan Yan mostly participated in the deliberation of important matters of the imperial court, and was often adopted and treated very politely.

古文：上大宴集，酒后谓朝臣曰： 卿等并宋时公卿，亦当不言我应得天子。 
现代文：有一次皇上大开宴席，酒后对朝臣说： 卿等都是宋朝时的公卿，怕也没有料到我应该得到天子。 
English: Once, the emperor held a grand banquet, and after drinking, he said to his courtiers, "Your highnesses were all court nobles during the Song Dynasty, and I'm afraid you didn't expect that I should receive the heavenly son.

古文：王俭等未及答，彦回敛板曰： 陛下不得言臣不早识龙顔。 
现代文：王俭等人还没来得及回答，褚彦回拿着手板说： 陛下不能说臣没有早识龙颜。 
English: Wang Jian and others did not have time to answer, and Yan Yan took the hand board back and said: Your Majesty cannot say that the minister did not have the foresight of a dragon.

古文：上笑曰： 吾有愧文叔，知公爲朱佑久矣。 
现代文：皇上笑着说： 我有愧于文叔，知道您是朱祜已经很久了。 
English: The emperor smiled and said, "I am ashamed of Uncle Wen. I have known that you are Zhu Xi for a long time.

古文：彦回善弹琵琶，齐武帝在东宫宴集，赐以金镂柄银柱琵琶。
现代文：褚彦回善于弹奏琵琶，齐武帝在东宫举行宴会，赐给他金缕柄银柱琵琶。
English: In response, Emperor Qiwu held a banquet in the East Palace and gave him a gold-handled silver-columned lute.

古文：性和雅，有器度，不妄举动。
现代文：他性格温和典雅，有度量，不乱作举动。
English: His character is gentle and elegant, he is measured and does not act in a disorderly manner.

古文：宅尝失火，烟爓甚逼，左右惊扰，彦回神色怡然，索舆徐去。
现代文：他的宅院中曾经失火，烟气和火焰逼人，左右的人惊慌纷乱，褚彦回神色安然，找了一辆车子慢慢离去。
English: There had been a fire in his courtyard, the smoke and flames were overwhelming, and people on both sides were panicking. Yan Yan looked calm and found a car to slowly leave.

古文：然世颇以名节讥之，于时百姓语曰： 可怜石头城，甯爲袁粲死，不作彦回生。 
现代文：然而世人却常常以名节非议他，当时百姓俗语说： 可怜石头城，宁为袁粲死，不作彦回生。 
English: However, the world has often criticized him for his fame. At that time, the people said, "Poor stone city, I would rather die for Yuan Xuan than live for him."

古文：高帝崩，遗诏以爲录尚书事。
现代文：高帝逝世，遗诏任命褚彦回为录尚书事。
English: After the death of Emperor Gao, Emperor Gao's last will and testament appointed Yan Yan to be the recorder of the imperial records.

古文：江左以来，无单拜录者，有司疑立优策。
现代文：江东建都以来，没有单独任命为录尚书事的，有关部门怀疑应该立下优文还是策书。
English: Since the construction of the capital of Jiangdong, there has not been a separate appointment to record books, and the relevant departments doubt whether it is necessary to establish a good book or a book.

古文：尚书令王俭议，以爲 见居本官，别拜录，应有策书，而旧事不载。
现代文：尚书令王俭提议，认为 现居本官，另外任命为录尚书事，应该有策书，而过去的史书不载。
English: Wang Jian, the Registrar-General, proposed that the current registrar, who was also appointed to record the records of the Registrar-General, should have a record book, while the past history books were not recorded.

古文：中朝以来，三公王侯，则优策并设；官品第二，策而不优。
现代文：中叶以来，三公王侯，则策书优文并设；官品第二，用策书而不用优文。
English: Since the middle of the 19th century, the three princes and princes have also set up the policy book and the excellent article; the official product is the second, and the policy book is used instead of the excellent article.

古文：优者褒美，策者兼明委寄。
现代文：优，就是赞美；策，则兼以说明委寄。
English: "优" means "praise"; "策" means "strategy" and is also used to describe the committee's letter.

古文：尚书职居天官，政化之本，故尚书令品虽第三，拜必有策。
现代文：尚书职务居于天官，是政治教化的根本，所以尚书令品级虽然第三，任命必定有策书。
English: The post of Shangshu resides in the heavenly official and is the foundation of political education. Therefore, although the grade of Shangshu is the third, the appointment must have a strategy.

古文：录尚书品秩不见，而总任弥重，前代多与本官同拜，故不别有策。
现代文：录尚书品级不见记载，而总领的职守更重，前代大多和本官同时任命，所以不再另外有策书。
English: There is no record of the rank of the record keeper, but the duties of the head keeper are more important. Most of the previous generations were appointed at the same time as this official, so there are no other records.

古文：即事缘情，不容均之凡僚，宜有策书，用申隆寄。
现代文：根据事实推论情理，不能够等同于一般官员，应该有策书，用以表明隆重。
English: Based on facts and reasoning, they cannot be equated with ordinary officials, and there should be a policy book to show solemnity.

古文：既异王侯，不假优文 。
现代文：既然不同于王侯，也就用不着优文了 。
English: Since it is different from the prince, there is no need for a fine article.

古文：从之。
现代文：于是就听从了他的说法。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：寻增彦回班剑三十人，五日一朝。
现代文：很快增加褚彦回的仪仗为三十人，五天上朝一次。
English: He soon increased the number of participants to thirty, and held a ceremonial battle once every five days.

古文：顷之寝疾。
现代文：不久褚彦回生病卧床。
English: Soon after, Yan Yan fell ill again and was confined to bed.

古文：彦回少时尝笃病，梦人以卜蓍一具与之，遂差其一，至是年四十八矣，岁初便寝疾。
现代文：褚彦回少年时候曾经病得很重，梦见有人把一套算命的卜蓍送给他，随后就发现少了其中一个，到现在已经四十八岁了，年初就卧病。
English: When he was a boy, Yan Yanhui was very ill. He dreamed that someone had given him a set of fortune-telling omens. Later, he found out that one of them was missing. Now he is forty-eight years old, and he was bedridden at the beginning of the year.

古文：而太白荧惑相系犯上将，彦回虑不起，表逊位。
现代文：而太白星和荧惑星相继侵犯上将星，褚彦回担心不能再起来，上表请求退职。
English: But too white star and fluorescent planet successively encroached on the general star, and Yan Yan was worried that he could not get up again, and requested retirement from the above table.

古文：武帝不许，乃改授司空、骠骑将军，侍中、录尚书事如故。
现代文：武帝不准许，于是改任他为司空、骠骑将军，侍中、录尚书事职位依旧。
English: Emperor Wu did not allow him to do so, so he was reassigned to the positions of Sikyong, General of Cavalry, Chamberlain, and Recorder.

古文：薨年四十八，家无馀财，负责数十万，诏给东园秘器。
现代文：去世的时候年龄四十八岁，家中没有余财，欠债数十万，诏令赐给东园的秘密宝器。
English: At the time of his death, he was forty-eight years old, his family had no spare money, owed hundreds of thousands in debt, and the secret treasure given to Dongyuan by the edict was lost.

古文：时司空掾属以彦回未拜，疑应爲吏敬以不？王俭议： 依礼，妇在涂，闻夫家丧，改服而入。
现代文：当时司空的佐官因为褚彦回没有上任，怀疑是否应该对他使用属官的礼节，王俭论证说： 依照《礼》，新娘在出嫁的路上，听到丈夫家有了丧事，改服而入。
English: At that time, the aide-de-camp of the Chief of the General Staff, Wang Jian, doubted whether he should use the etiquette of a subordinate officer because Yan Yanhui did not take office. Wang Jian reasoned that: According to the "Rite," the bride, on her way to get married, heard that her husband's family had a funeral and changed her clothes.

古文：今掾属虽未服勤，而吏节禀于天朝，宜申礼敬。 
现代文：现在佐官虽然没有随同工作，但是属吏的礼节是由天朝规定的，应该表示以礼相敬。 
English: Now, although the adjutants do not work with them, the etiquette of subordinate officers is stipulated by the Heavenly Court, and should be expressed with courtesy.

古文：司徒府史又以彦回既解职，而未恭后授，府应上服以不？
现代文：司徒府的官吏又因为褚彦回已经解职，而没有接受新的任命，府中的佐官是否应该为他服丧呢？
English: Since the officials of the Shuto-fu did not accept the new appointment because they had been relieved of their duties, should the adjutants of the Shuto-fu pay their respects to him?

古文：俭又议： 依中朝士孙德祖从乐陵迁爲陈留，未入境，卒，乐陵郡吏依见君之礼，陈留迎吏依 聚女有吉日，齎衰吊 。
现代文：王俭又论证说： 依照本朝中叶士孙德祖从乐陵调任到陈留，还没有入境，去世了，乐陵郡的官吏依照晋见太守的礼节，陈留迎接的官吏依照 娶女有吉日，以齐衰吊丧 。
English: Wang Jian also argued that: According to the fact that Sun Dezu was transferred from Leling to Chenliu in the middle of this dynasty, he had not yet entered the country and passed away, the officials of Leling County followed the etiquette of the Emperor of Jin Dynasty, and the officials who greeted Chenliu followed the "marry a woman on a auspicious day" and mourned together.

古文：司徒府宜依居官制服。 
现代文：司徒府应该依照所居的官位来定丧服。 
English: The governor's office should determine the funeral attire according to the official position.

古文：又诏赠太宰，侍中、录尚书、公如故，增班剑爲六十人，葬送礼悉依宋太保王弘故事，諡曰文简。
现代文：又诏令赠他为太宰，侍中、录尚书、南康郡公依旧不变，增加仪仗为六十人，送葬的礼仪完全依照宋朝太保王弘的旧例，谥号为文简。
English: In addition, the imperial edict gave him the title of Dazai, and the titles of chamberlain, record keeper, and Nankang County magistrate remained unchanged. The number of honor guards was increased to 60. The funeral etiquette was completely in accordance with the old example of Taibo Wanghong in the Song Dynasty, and his posthumous name was Wen Jian.

古文：先是庶姓三公，车需车未有定格，王俭议官品第一，皆加幢络，自彦回始也。
现代文：在此以前，庶姓的三公，丧车没有固定的规格，王俭建议官品第一，都加旗帜和网络，就是从褚彦回开始的。
English: Prior to this, there was no fixed specification for the funeral car of the three princes with common names. Wang Jian suggested that the official product should be the first, with flags and nets, which was the beginning of Yan Yanhui.

古文：蒙子玠。玠字温理，九岁而孤，爲叔父骠骑从事中郎随所养。
现代文：又诏令褚彦回的妻子、宋朝已故巴西主的墓道暂时开启，应该追赠为南康郡公夫人。褚玠字温理，九岁就成为孤儿，为叔父骠骑中郎褚随所抚养。
English: He also decreed that the graveyard of the wife of Yan Yan Hui, the deceased Brazilian lord of the Song Dynasty, should be opened temporarily, and she should be posthumously presented as the wife of Nankang County. Yan Zi Wen Li, who became an orphan at the age of nine, was raised by his uncle.

古文：早有令誉，先达多以才器许之。
现代文：很早就有美好的声誉，先辈贤达大多以他的才干对他加以称许。
English: He had a good reputation in his early years, and his predecessors thought he was a talented person and promoted him.

古文：及长，美风仪，善占对，博学能属文，词义典实，不尚淫靡。
现代文：长大以后，仪表风度很美，善于应口对答，博学能写文章，词义典雅充实，不崇尚淫靡。
English: When they grow up, they will have a beautiful appearance and demeanor, be good at answering questions, be well-read and able to write articles, have a rich and elegant vocabulary, and do not advocate lewdness.

古文：陈天嘉中，兼通直散骑常侍聘齐，还迁中书侍郎。
现代文：陈朝天嘉年间，兼通直散骑常侍出使齐国，回来以后调任中书侍郎。
English: During the reign of Chen Zhaotian Jia, he also served as an envoy to the State of Qi, and was transferred to the post of the middle secretary after his return.

古文：太建中，山阴县多豪猾，前后令皆以赃汙免，宣帝谓中书舍人蔡景历曰： 稽阴大邑，久无良宰，卿文士之内，试思其人。 
现代文：太建时期，山阴县有很多奸猾的土豪，前后县令都因为贪赃受贿免官，宣帝对中书舍人蔡景历说： 会稽的山阴是个大镇，很久没有好县官，您可以在文士之内，考虑一下合适的人选。 
English: During the Taijian period, there were many treacherous local strongmen in Shanyin County. The county magistrates were dismissed because of corruption. Emperor Xuan said to Cai Jingli, a Chinese scholar: Shanyin is a big town, and there has not been a good county magistrate for a long time. You can consider suitable candidates among the scribes.

古文：景历进玠，帝曰： 甚善，卿言与朕意同。 
现代文：蔡景历推荐褚玠，宣帝说： 很好，您的话与朕的意思相同。 
English: Cai Jingli recommended, Xuan Di said: Very good, your words have the same meaning as mine.

古文：乃除山阴令。
现代文：于是就任命他为山阴令。
English: Therefore, he was appointed to the position of Sangin Ryo.

古文：县人张次的、王休达等与诸猾吏贿赂通奸，全丁大户类多隐没。
现代文：县中人张次的、王休达等和各个狡猾官吏贿赂勾结，成年男子和大户大多隐瞒起来。
English: Zhang Zi, Wang Xueda and others in the county colluded with various cunning officials to bribe, and most of the adult men and large households concealed it.

古文：玠锁次的等，具状啓台，宣帝手敕慰劳，并遣使助玠搜括，所出军人八百余户。
现代文：褚玠监禁了张次的等人，如实上报给朝廷，宣帝亲手写诏书进行慰劳，并且派遣使者帮助褚玠搜索检查，查出了军人八百多户。
English: He imprisoned Zhang Zi and others, truthfully reported to the imperial court, and Emperor Xuan personally wrote an edict for consolation, and sent an envoy to help him search and inspect, and found more than 800 military households.

古文：时舍人曹义达爲宣帝所宠，县人陈信家富，谄事义达，信父显文恃势横暴。
现代文：当时舍人曹义达被宣帝所宠爱，县中人陈信家里富有，献媚巴结曹义达，陈信的父亲陈显文仗势横行。
English: At that time, Cao Yida was favored by Emperor Xuan, Chen Xin, a man from the county, whose family was rich, fawned over Cao Yida, and Chen Xianwen, Chen Xin's father, was rampant.

古文：玠乃遣使执显文，鞭之一百，于是吏人股栗。
现代文：褚玠便派人逮捕了陈显文，鞭打一百，于是吏人两腿战栗。
English: He then sent someone to arrest Chen Xianwen and whipped him a hundred times, so the official's legs trembled.

古文：信后因义达谮玠，竟坐免官。
现代文：陈信后来通过曹义达说褚玠的坏话，褚玠竟然因此而被免官。
English: Chen Xin was later framed by Cao Yida and was removed from office for the crime of implication.

古文：玠在任岁馀，守禄俸而已，去官之日，不堪自致，因留县境种蔬菜以自给。
现代文：褚玠在任一年多，只是守着自己的俸禄而已，离职那天，他无力自己回京，于是便留在县境以内种蔬菜自给。
English: On the day of his departure, he was unable to return to Beijing on his own, so he stayed in the county to grow vegetables for self-sufficiency.

古文：或以玠非百里才，玠曰： 吾委输课最，不后列城，除残去暴，奸吏局蹐。
现代文：有人认为褚玠不是县令之才，褚玠说： 我运输纳税，不落在各城后面，除恶去暴，奸吏惧怕。
English: Some people think that he is not a county magistrate. He said: I transport and pay taxes, I do not fall behind the cities, I eliminate evil and violence, and I am afraid of traitors.

古文：若谓其不能自润脂膏，则如来命，以爲不达从政，吾未服也。 
现代文：如果是指我不会搜刮钱财，那么不算说错，如果是认为我不了解从政，那我是不服气的。 
English: If it means that I won't scrounge money, then I'm not wrong. If it means that I don't understand politics, then I'm not convinced.

古文：时人以爲信然。
现代文：当时的人认为他说得很对。
English: People at the time thought he was absolutely right.

古文：皇太子知玠无还装，手书赐粟米二百斛，于是还都。
现代文：皇太子知道褚玠没有回京的行装，便手书赐给粟米二百斛，于是才回到了京城。
English: The crown prince knew that Zou had not returned to the capital, so he personally gave Zou two hundred mu of corn, and Zou returned to the capital.

古文：后累迁御史中丞。
现代文：后来逐步升迁为御史中丞。
English: Later, he was gradually promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：玠刚毅有胆决，善骑射。
现代文：褚玠刚毅有胆量，敢决断，善于骑马射箭。
English: Gong Gangyi has courage, dares to make decisions, and is good at riding and archery.

古文：尝从司空侯安都于徐州出猎，遇猛兽，玠射之，载发皆中口入腹，俄而兽毙。
现代文：曾经随着司空侯安都在徐州出去打猎，遇到了猛兽，褚玠拿弓箭向它射击，所发的箭都是射入口中进入腹内，不一会野兽就死了。
English: Once, with Sikuo Hou'an, they all went out hunting in Xuzhou, encountered a fierce beast, took a bow and arrow to shoot at it, and the arrows fired were shot into the mouth and entered the abdomen, and the beast died soon after.

古文：及爲御史中丞，甚有直绳之称。卒于官，皇太子亲制志铭，以表惟旧。
现代文：等他做了御史中丞，很有直绳的称号，死在官任上，皇太子亲自撰写志铭，以表示旧时的友谊。
English: When he died in office, the crown prince personally wrote his epitaph to express his old friendship.

古文：至德二年，赠秘书监。
现代文：至德二年，赠他为秘书监。
English: Two years later, he was given the title of secretary superintendent.

古文：所制章奏杂文二百馀篇，皆切事理，由是见重于世。
现代文：他所撰写的章奏、杂文二百多篇，都切合事理，因此被世人所重视。
English: The more than two hundred chapters and essays he has written are all relevant, and are therefore valued by the world.

