古文：二十六日鸡再鸣鸡叫第二遍，具饭。
现代文：二十六日鸡叫第二遍备饭。
English: On the 26th, the rooster crowed for the second time to prepare the meal.

古文：平明，随江西岸行。
现代文：天亮时，顺着江的西岸行。
English: At dawn, follow the west bank of the river.

古文：四里余，南至岔路，有溪自西峡来，东与银龙江合，数十家下绾溪口。
现代文：四里多，往南来到岔路，有溪水自西峡中流来，在东边与银龙江合流，数十户人家在下边扼住溪口。
English: For more than four miles, southward to Kushiro, there is a stream flowing from the middle of the West Gorge, merging with the Yinlong River on the east side, with dozens of households choking the stream mouth on the lower side.

古文：乃下涉其溪，缘南山之北，于是江东折于下，路东折于上。
现代文：于是下涉这条溪水，沿南山的北面走，在这里江水在下方折向东，路在上面折向东。
English: So I waded down this stream and walked along the north side of Nanshan, where the river water turned east below and the road turned east above.

古文：东向上者一里余，盘北突之坡而东，于是江南折于下，路亦南折于上。
现代文：向东上走一里多，往东绕过北突的山坡，在这里江水在下方折转向南，路也在上面向南折。
English: Walk eastward for more than a mile, eastward around the hillside of Beidutsu, where the river water turns south below, and the road turns south above.

古文：南折处，又有峡自东来入，正与东折之江对，或以为永平之界，今仅止此，其南折之峡，已属顺宁矣。
现代文：往南折转的地方，又有条峡谷自东方前来注入江中，正好与向东折的江流相对，有人以为永平县的辖地今天仅到此地为止，那条向南折的峡谷，已属于顺宁府了。
English: Where the river turns south, there is another canyon flowing into the river from the east, just opposite the eastward flow of the river. Some people think that the jurisdiction of Yongping County is only up to here today, and that canyon turning south already belongs to Shuning Prefecture.

古文：循江西岭南向渐下，四里，稍折西南，下缘江岸，已复南折，二里余，出峡，峡乃稍开，始见田塍，有两三家倚西坡，是为稻场。
现代文：沿着江西的山岭向南渐渐下走，四里，略折向西南，下山沿江岸走。随即再折向南，二里多，走出峡谷，峡谷于是稍稍开阔些，开始见到田地，有两三家人背靠西面的山坡，这里是稻场。
English: Along the mountains of Jiangxi, gradually walk down to the south, four miles, slightly turn to the southwest, walk down the mountain along the river bank. Then turn south again, two miles, out of the canyon, the canyon is then slightly wider, and you begin to see fields. There are two or three families with their backs to the western slope. Here is a rice field.

古文：山行至是，始有稻畦，故以为名。
现代文：在山中走到这里，开始有稻田，所以用 稻 起名。
English: When you walk up here in the mountains, rice paddies begin to appear, which is why it was named after rice.

古文：其江之东南坡间，亦有居庐，其下亦环畦塍，亦稻场之属。
现代文：银龙江东南的山坡上，也有居民的房屋，坡下也有田埂环绕的稻田，也是稻场的属地。
English: On the hillside southeast of the Yinlong River, there are also houses of residents, and there are also rice fields surrounded by rice paddies below the slope, which is also the territory of the rice field.

古文：江流其间直南去，与澜沧江合。
现代文：江水流经其间一直往南流去，与澜沧江会合。
English: The river flows through it all the way to the south, meeting with the Lancang River.

古文：路由西坡村右，即西南缘坡上，一里，至岭头，正隔江与东坡之庐对，于是缘峡西入，遂与江别。
现代文：路由西坡上的村庄右边马上向西南沿山坡上爬，一里，到达岭头，正好隔江与东坡上的房屋相对，于是沿着山峡向西进去，终于与江流分手。
English: From the right side of the village on the west slope, the road immediately climbs up the hillside to the southwest, one mile, reaching the ridge, just across the river from the houses on the east slope, and then along the mountain gorge to the west, finally breaking up with the river flow.

古文：其峡自西脊东下，循北崖平坡入之。
现代文：这条山峡从西面的山脊向东下伸，沿北面山崖上的平坡进峡。
English: This canyon stretches from the ridge in the west down to the east, entering the canyon along the flat slope on the cliff in the north.

古文：四里，降度峡南，循南崖悬跻而上，乃西南盘折二里余，逾北突之冈。
现代文：四里，下走越到峡南，沿南面的山崖悬空上登，于是向西南曲折走二里多，越过北突的山冈。
English: Four miles, down to the south of the canyon, along the cliffs in the south to climb up into the sky, and then more than two miles to the southwest, over the mountains in the north.

古文：循南坡而西，二里，有坑北下，横陟之。
现代文：沿南面的山坡往西行，二里，有个坑谷往北下坠，横向越过它。
English: Two miles west along the southern slope of the mountain, a ravine drops off to the north and crosses it laterally.

古文：又西二里，乃凌其东南度脊。
现代文：又往西二里，于是登上那往东南延伸的山脊。
English: Another two miles to the west, then up the ridge that extends to the southeast.

古文：此脊之东，水下稻场南峡中，西南水下炉塘而南。
现代文：这条山脊的东面，水向下流入稻场南边的峡中，西南一面的水下流到炉塘。
English: On the east side of this ridge, the water flows down into the gorge on the south side of the rice field, and on the southwest side, the water flows down to the furnace pond.

古文：从脊上，即西望崇山高穹，上耸圆顶者，为宝台山；其北崖复突而平坠者，为登山问道；其南垂纡绕而拖峡者，为炉塘所依。
现代文：从脊上往南，就望见西方有座山高大弯隆，上边耸立着圆顶的地方，是宝台山；它北边山崖再向前突而后平缓下坠的地方，是登山的捷径；它的南垂曲折环绕而延伸着峡谷的地方，是炉塘依托之处。
English: From the ridge to the south, there is a view of a high mountain in the west. The place where the dome stands on the top is Baotai Mountain; the place where the cliff on its north side juts forward and then gently falls down is a shortcut for mountaineering; the place where its south slope twists and turns around and extends the canyon is where the furnace pond is supported.

古文：余初拟打算从间道行，至是屡询樵牧，皆言间道稍捷而多岐，中无行人，莫可询问，不若从炉塘道，稍迂而路辟，以炭驼驼木炭的马帮相接，不乏行人也。
现代文：我最初打算从捷径走；到了这里，多次询间樵夫牧人，都说捷径稍近些但是岔道很多，途中没有行人，无人可询问，不如从去炉塘的路走，稍绕点路但道路宽阔，因为途中有驮木炭的马帮前后相连，行人不少。
English: At first I planned to take the shortcut; when I got here, I asked the woodcutter and herdsman several times, and they all said that the shortcut was a little closer but there were many side roads, there were no pedestrians on the way, no one could ask, it would be better to go from the road to the furnace pond, a little detour but the road was wide, because there were horse gangs connected back and forth on the way, and there were many pedestrians.

古文：其岐即从脊间分，脊西近峡南下，其中居庐甚殷，是为旧炉塘。
现代文：那岔道就从山脊上分开，从山脊西边近处的峡谷中往南下走，峡中居民房屋非常多，这里是旧炉塘。
English: The causeway splits from the ridge and heads south from the canyon near the western edge of the ridge. There are many residential buildings in the canyon, and this is the old furnace pond.

古文：由其北度峡上，即间道也；由其东随峡南下，炉塘道也。
现代文：由它北边越过峡谷上走，就是捷径了；由它东边顺着峡谷往南下走，是去炉塘的路。
English: It is a shortcut to go over the canyon from its northern side; it is the way to the furnace pond to go south along the canyon from its eastern side.

古文：余乃南下坡，一里，至峡底。
现代文：我于是向南下坡，一里，到了峡底。
English: So I went south downhill, one mile, to the bottom of the gorge.

古文：半里，度小桥，随涧西岸南行。
现代文：半里，走过小桥，顺山涧的西岸往南行。
English: Half a mile, walk over the small bridge, go south along the west coast of the mountain.

古文：其涧甚狭，中止通水道一缕，两旁时环畦如桮棬盛酒的杯子。
现代文：这条山涧非常窄，中间只通着一线水道，两旁不时环成如杯子钵盂一样大的稻田。
English: This mountain ridge is very narrow, with only a waterway running through the middle, and rice paddies as big as a cup of rice are interspersed from time to time on both sides.

古文：四里，稍上，陟西崖而下，半里，始有一旁峡自西北来，南涉之。
现代文：四里，稍上走，登上西边的山崖往下走，半里，旁边才有一条峡谷从西北方来，往南涉过峡谷。
English: Four miles, walk up a little, climb the cliff on the west side and walk down, half a mile, there is a canyon next to it from the northwest, wading through the canyon to the south.

古文：又沿西崖渐上，五里，盘西崖而逾其南嘴，乃见其峡甚深，峡底炉烟板屋，扰扰于内，东南嵌于峡口者，下厂；西北缀于峡坳者，上厂也；缘峡口之外，南向随流下者，往顺宁之大道也。
现代文：又沿着西面的山崖渐渐上登，五里，绕过西面的山崖后越过它南边的山嘴，就见这里的峡谷非常深，峡底的炉烟和木板屋，在峡内纷纷扰扰，在东南镶嵌在峡口的地方，是下厂；在西北点缀在峡坳间的，是上厂；沿峡口之外，向南顺流下走的，是去顺宁府的大道。
English: After five miles, after going around the western cliff and passing over the southern promontory, you can see that the canyon here is very deep. The furnace smoke and wooden houses at the bottom of the canyon are disturbing the canyon. In the southeast, where they are embedded in the canyon mouth, it is the lower factory; in the northwest, dotted between the canyons, it is the upper factory; outside the canyon mouth, going south along the river, it is the road to Shuningfu.

古文：余从岭上西转，见左崖有窍，卑口竖喉，其坠深黑，即挖矿之旧穴也。
现代文：我从岭上向西转，见左边山崖上有个洞穴，洞口地势低洼，喉管状的洞直竖着，洞深陷漆黑，这就是挖矿的旧矿井了。
English: I turned to the west from the ridge and saw a cave on the cliff on the left. The entrance to the cave is low-lying, the tube-shaped hole is upright, and the hole is deep and dark. This is an old mine for mining.

古文：从其上西行二里，越下厂，抵上厂，而坑又中间之，分两岐来，一自东北，一自西北，而炉舍踞其中。
现代文：从它上方往西行二里，越过下厂，抵达上厂，可坑谷又在中间隔开了它们，分为两条岔路而来，一条来自东北，一条来自西北，而炉子房屋盘踞在两条路之间。
English: From above it, they went west for two miles, passed the lower factory, and arrived at the upper factory, but the pit valley separated them in the middle, divided into two branch roads, one from the northeast, one from the northwest, and the furnace house was sandwiched between the two roads.

古文：所出皆红铜，客商来贩者四集。肆多卖浆市肉者，余以将登宝台，仍斋食于肆。由西峡溯流入，一里，居庐乃尽。
现代文：店铺中有很多卖酒卖肉的，我因为即将去登宝台山，仍然在饭店中吃了素食。由西峡逆流进峡，一里，居民房屋这才完了。
English: There were a lot of shops selling alcohol and meat, and I still ate vegetarian food in a restaurant because I was about to go to Mount Dengpo. From the West Gorge, the river flows back into the gorge for one mile, and that's when the residents' houses were finished.

古文：随峡北转，峡甚深仄，而止通一水，得无他迷，然山雨倾注，如纳大麓吞没山脚，不免淋漓。
现代文：顺峡谷往北转，峡谷十分深邃狭窄，但只通着一条涧水，得以不再迷路，然而山间大雨倾盆如注，如大舜进入大麓遇上的大风暴雨一样，不免浑身雨水淋漓。
English: Along the canyon to the north, the canyon is very deep and narrow, but only a narrow waterway leads to it, so you can no longer get lost. However, the heavy rain in the mountains is pouring down like a shower, like the big storm rain that Da Lat encountered when entering Dalou, the whole body is inevitably drenched in rain.

古文：三里，渐上，又二里，上愈峻。
现代文：三里，渐渐上走，又二里，上登愈加陡峻。
English: Three miles, gradually going up, and another two miles, climbing steeper and steeper.

古文：见路有挑大根如三斗盎者，以杖贯其中，执而问之，曰： 芭蕉根也。以饷猪。 
现代文：见路上有人挑着大树根如像能装三斗的瓦瓮一样粗的，用手杖穿在树根中，拉住他打听，说： 是芭蕉根。用来喂猪。 
English: On the way, he saw someone picking up a large tree root, as thick as a corrugated roofing sheet that could hold three buckets, and using a cane to pierce the root. He stopped him to inquire, saying, "It's a plantain root. It's used to feed pigs."

古文：峻上二里，果见芭蕉蔽崖，有掘而偃者，即挖根处也。
现代文：登陡峻的山路行三里，果然见芭蕉树遮蔽了山崖，有被挖倒的，就是挖树根的地方了。
English: After climbing a steep mountain road for three miles, I saw that the banana tree had covered the cliff, and the place where it was dug down was the place where the tree roots were dug out.

古文：其处树箐深窅，山高路僻，幸有炭驼俱从此赴厂为指迷。
现代文：此处树林山著幽深沓渺，山高路僻，幸好有驮炭的马帮为我指点迷途。
English: Here, the woods and mountains are deep and misty, the mountains are high and the roads are remote. Fortunately, there are horses with charcoal to show me the way.

古文：又上二里，乃登其脊。
现代文：又上走二里，就登上了山脊。
English: After walking another two miles, they reached the ridge.

古文：有路自东北径脊而来者，乃随脊向西南去。
现代文：有条路从东北沿山脊一直前来，于是顺着山脊向西南而去。
English: A road came along the ridge from the northeast, so I followed the ridge to the southwest.

古文：从之行脊上二里，乃西南下。
现代文：从这条路在山脊上行二里，才向西南下山。
English: From here the path climbs two miles up the ridge before descending south-west.

古文：见路左有峡西北出，路遂分为两岐，而所望宝台圆顶，似在西南隔峰，乃误下从峡西南。
现代文：见路左边有条峡谷从西北出来，路于是分为两条岔路，而所望的宝台山的圆顶，似乎在西南方隔着山峰，就错下山从峡中往西南走。
English: Seeing a canyon on the left side of the road coming out of the northwest, the road was divided into two fork roads. The dome of Mount Baotai, which I was looking at, seemed to be in the southwest across the peak. I mistakenly went down the mountain from the canyon to the southwest.

古文：一里余，渡峡中支涧，缘之西北转。
现代文：一里多，渡过峡中分支的山涧，沿着山涧向西北转。
English: For more than a mile, we crossed the ridge of the branch in the middle of the gorge and turned northwest along the ridge.

古文：一里，盘北突之嘴，复西南入峡中。
现代文：一里，绕过北突的山嘴，再往西南走入峡中。
English: One mile, bypassing the northern tip of the mountain, and then walking southwest into the gorge.

古文：溯涧二里，路渐湮没不见，见涧北有烧山者，遥呼而问之，始知为误。
现代文：溯山涧行二里，路渐渐湮没了，见到涧北有烧山的人，远远呼叫着向他问路，才知道走错了。
English: After two miles of hiking, the road gradually disappeared. I saw a man burning a mountain in the north of Handan and called out to him from far away to ask him the way. Only then did I know that I had made a mistake.

古文：然不知山在何所，路当何从，惟闻随水一语，即奉为指南。
现代文：但是不知宝台山在什么地方，路应当从哪里走，只听见顺水走一句话，就奉为指南。
English: However, I did not know where Baotai Mountain was and where the road should go from. I only heard a sentence about walking along the water, which served as a guide.

古文：复东北还盘嘴处，涧乃北转，遂缘坡北向下。
现代文：又向东北返回到绕过山嘴的地方，山涧于是向北转，就沿着山坡向北下走。
English: Then I returned to the northeast, where I went around the mountain's mouth. The hawthorn then turned north, and I walked down the slope to the north.

古文：二里，有一岐自东南来合，即前分岐西北之正道也。
现代文：二里，有一条岔道自东南前来会合，就是先前分岔往西北走的正道了。
English: For two miles, there is a fork coming from the southeast to meet, which is the right road that previously branched off to the northwest.

古文：盖宝台正在西南所误之峡，其南即度脊之自东西突者，此宝台东隅之来脉也，而其路未开，皆深崖峭壑，为烧炭之窟，以烘炉塘所用；峡中之流，从其西北向流，绕北崖而西出，至西北隅，始与竹沥砦南来之路合，故登山之道，必自西北向东南，而其东不能竟达也。
现代文：原来宝台山正是在西南方走错路的峡谷之处，它南边就是延伸而过的山脊自东向西突的地方，此地是宝台山东隅延来的山脉，可路还未开通，全是幽深的山崖陡峭的壑谷，是烧木炭的场所，木炭用来供给炉塘使用；峡中的流水，从它西边向北流，绕过北边的山崖往西流出去，到了西北角，才与竹沥寨往南来的路会合，所以登山的路，必定要从西北走向东南，而从它的东边是不能直接到达的。
English: Originally, Mount Baotai is exactly the place of the canyon where the crabs took the wrong path in the southwest. Its south side is the place where the ridge extending from east to west juts out. This place is the mountains extending from the eastern corner of Mount Baotai, but the road has not yet been opened. It is all deep cliffs and steep valleys. It is a place for burning charcoal, and the charcoal is used to supply the furnace pond. The flowing water in the gorge flows from its west side to the north, bypassing the northern cliff and flowing westward. It is only at the northwest corner that it meets the southbound road of the bamboo village.

古文：循东崖又北一里，复随涧西转，循北崖西行二里，始望见前峡稍开，有村聚倚南山之坡。
现代文：沿着东面的山崖又往北一里，再顺着山涧往西转，沿北面的山崖向西行二里，才望见前方的峡谷稍微开阔起来，有村落紧靠南山的山坡。
English: Follow the cliffs to the east for another mile to the north, then follow the ridge to the west, and follow the cliffs to the north for two miles to the west, until you can see the canyon ahead slightly open up, with villages close to the slope of Nanshan.

古文：乃西下一里，度涧桥，缘其南崖西上，又一里余而抵其村，是为阿牯寨，乃宝台门户也。
现代文：于是向西下山一里，越过山涧上的桥，沿山涧南面的山崖往西上登，又是一里多后到达这个村庄，这是阿枯寨，是宝台山的门户。
English: So I went down the mountain one mile to the west, crossed the bridge on the ridge, climbed westward along the cliff on the south side of the ridge, and reached the village after more than a mile. This is the Akut village, the gateway to Mount Baotai.

古文：由寨后南向登山，三里，至慧光寺。
现代文：由寨子后边向南登山，三里，来到慧光寺。
English: From the back of the stockade, climb south for three miles to Huiguang Temple.

古文：其寺西向，前临一峡，隔峡又有山环之而北，而终不见宝台。
现代文：这座寺院向西，前方面临一条峡谷，隔着峡谷又有山环绕着它往北延去，但始终看不见宝台山。
English: The temple faces west, with a canyon in front of it, and mountains stretching northward across the canyon, but Mount Baotai is always out of sight.

古文：盖宝台之顶，高穹于此寺东南，而其正寺又在台顶之南，尚当从西南峡中盘入也。
现代文：原来宝台山的山顶，高高弯隆在此寺的东南方，而山中的正寺又在台顶的南面，还应当从西南的峡中回绕着进去。
English: Originally, the peak of Mt. Baotai, with its high, curved ridge, was in the southeast of this temple, while the main temple in the mountain was on the south side of the peak, and should have been entered from the southwest gorge.

古文：宝台大寺，为立禅师所建，三年前，立师东游请藏，久离此山。
现代文：宝台大寺，是立禅师所建，三年前，立禅师东游去请佛经，离开此山很久了。
English: Baotai Grand Temple was built by Zen Master Ritsu. Three years ago, Zen Master Ritsu traveled east to consult Buddhist scriptures. It has been a long time since he left this mountain.

古文：余至省，即闻此山之盛，比自元谋至姚安途中，乃闻其烬于火，又闻其再建再毁，余以为被灾久矣，至是始知其灾于腊月也，计其时余已过姚安矣，不知何以传闻之在先也？
现代文：我到省城时，就听说过此山的盛况，等到在从元谋到姚安的途中，却听说它被火烧了，又听说它再次建起再度被毁，我以为遭火灾是很久前的事了，到了此地才知那场火灾是在腊月中，算起来那时我已过了姚安府了，不知为何传闻在先呢？
English: When I arrived at the provincial capital, I heard about the grandeur of this mountain. When I was on my way from Yuanmou to Yao'an, I heard that it had been burned by fire, and that it had been rebuilt and destroyed again. I thought that the fire had happened a long time ago. When I got here, I learned that the fire was in the middle of Laos. At that time, I had already passed Yao'an. I don't know why the rumor came first.

古文：自大寺灾后，名流多栖托慧光。
现代文：自从大寺火灾后，名僧大多宿居慧光寺。
English: Since the fire at the main temple, most of the famous monks have been staying at Eiko-ji Temple.

古文：余至，日犹下午，僧固留，遂止寺中。
现代文：我到时，时间还是下午，僧人坚决挽留，便住在寺中。
English: When I arrived, it was still in the afternoon, but the monks decided to stay and live in the temple.

古文：二十七日饭于慧光寺，即南上五里，登其西度之坳。
现代文：二十七日在慧光寺吃了饭，立即往南上登五里，登上那向西延伸的山坳。
English: On the 27th day, I had a meal at Eiko-ji Temple, and immediately went five miles south to climb the mountains that stretch westward.

古文：此坳乃宝台之西支，下而度此者，其坳西余支，即北转而环于慧光之前。
现代文：这个山坳是宝台山西边的支脉，向下延伸过此地形成的，那山坳西面余下的支脉，马上转向北环绕在慧光寺之前。
English: This ridge is a branch of the west side of Baotai Mountain, extending down through the ridge formed here. The remaining branch of the west side of the ridge immediately turns north and surrounds Huiguang Temple.

古文：逾坳南，见南山前矗，与坳东横亘之顶，排闼两重，复成东西深峡。
现代文：越到山坳南边，就见南山矗立在前方，与山坳东面横亘的山顶，门扇样排列为两重，再形成东西向的深峡。
English: Going further to the southern side of the ridge, you can see the Nanshan standing in front, and the east side of the ridge stretching across the top of the mountain, the doors are arranged in two layers, and then form a deep gorge to the east and west.

古文：南山之高，与北顶并，皆自东而西，夹重峡于中而下不见底，距澜沧于外而南为之堑。
现代文：南山的高处，与北面的山顶相等，都是自东往西延伸，夹着重重峡谷在山中而下面深不见底，把澜沧江挡在外面在南边形成天堑。
English: The height of Nanshan is equal to the top of the mountain in the north, extending from east to west, with a heavy canyon in the middle of the mountain and a bottomless depth below, blocking the Lancang River outside and forming a geyser in the south.

古文：盖南山自炉塘西南，转而西向，溯澜沧北岸而西行，为宝台南郛之大城，于是西距澜沧之水，东包沙木河之流，渡江坡顶而北尽于沙河入澜沧处，此南山外郛之形也。
现代文：南山从炉塘的西南，转而向西，溯澜沧江的北岸往西延伸，成为宝台山南面的外围，于是西边挡住澜沧江水，东边围住沙木河水，延伸过江坡顶，然后在北边沙木河流入澜沧江的地方到了尽头，这是南山外围状山脉的地形。
English: Nanshan extends from the southwest of the furnace pond to the west, and the north bank of the Lancang River extends to the west, becoming the southern periphery of Baotai Mountain. Therefore, the west side blocks the Lancang River water, the east side surrounds the sand and wood river water, extends over the top of the river slope, and then ends at the place where the sand and wood river enters the Lancang River in the north. This is the terrain of the Nanshan peripheral mountains.

古文：宝台自炉塘西南亦转而西向，大脊中悬，南面与南山对夹而为宝台，西面与西度北转之支，对夹而为慧光，此宝台中踞之势也。
现代文：宝台山从炉塘的西南也转向西，大山脊悬在中央，南面与南山对面相夹成为宝台山，西面与西边延伸来转向北的支脉，对面相夹成为慧光寺，这是宝台山盘踞在中央的地势。
English: Baotai Mountain also turns to the west from the southwest of the furnace pond. The large ridge hangs in the center, the south side and the opposite side of Nanshan are sandwiched to become Baotai Mountain, the west side and the west side extend to turn to the north branch, and the opposite side is sandwiched to become Huiguang Temple. This is the topography of Baotai Mountain in the center.

古文：其内水两重，皆西转而北出，其外大水逆兜，独南流而东绕，此诸流包络之分也。
现代文：山内水分为两重，都是由西转向北流出去，山外大江逆向围过来，单独往南流后向东绕去，这是诸条水流围绕环流的分布形势。
English: The water in the mountain is divided into two layers. The water flows from the west to the north and flows out. The large rivers outside the mountain are surrounded in the opposite direction and flow southward separately and then go around to the east. This is the distribution situation of various water currents around the circulation.

古文：至是始得其真面目，其山如环钩，其水如交臂。
现代文：到这里才见到它的真面目，这里的山如环状的钩子，这里的水如手臂交叉。
English: It's only here that you see it for what it really is, here the mountains are like looping hooks, here the water is like crossed arms.

古文：山脉自罗均为钩之根把，博南丁当关为钩干之中，正外与钩端相对，而江坡顶即钩端将尽处，宝台山乃钩曲之转折处也。
现代文：山脉从罗均山起是钩子根部的把手，博南山丁当关是钩子主干的中段，正好与外边钩子的尖端相对，而江坡顶就是钩子尖端将完之处，宝台山是钩子弯曲的转折处。
English: The mountain range from Mount Luojun is the handle of the root of the hook, Bonan Mountain Dingdang Pass is the middle section of the main trunk of the hook, just opposite the tip of the outer hook, and the top of the river slope is where the tip of the hook will end, Baotai Mountain is the turning point of the hook.

古文：澜沧江来自云龙州为右臂，东南抱而循山之外麓，抵山东垂尽处而后去。
现代文：澜沧江来自云龙州，是右臂，向东南环抱，沿着山外围的山麓，流抵山东垂的尽头处而后流去。
English: The Lancang River comes from Yongzhou, is the right arm, wraps around to the southeast, flows along the foothills of the mountain periphery, reaches the end of the eastern slope of the mountain and flows back.

古文：沙木河源从南山东峡为左臂，西北抱而循山之内坞，抵山西垂尽处而后出。
现代文：沙木河源自南山东面的峡谷，是左臂，向西北环抱，沿着山中的山坞，流抵山西垂的尽头处然后流出去。
English: The Shamu River originates from the canyon on the east side of the Nanshan Mountain. It is a left-arm stream, wrapping around to the northwest, flowing along the dock in the mountain, reaching the end of the mountain's west slope and then flowing out.

古文：两水一内一外，一去一来，一顺一逆，环于山麓，而山之南支又中界之，自北自南，自东自西，复自南而北，为宝台之护，此又山水交潆之概也。
现代文：两条水流一条在内一条在外，一条流去一条流来，一条顺流一条逆流，环绕在山麓，而山南边的支脉又在中间隔开了它们，从北面从南面，自东方自西方，再由南往北，成为宝台山的护卫，这又是山水交错潇绕的大概情形了。
English: Two streams, one flowing inward and one flowing outward, one flowing outward and one flowing inward, one flowing upstream and one flowing in the opposite direction, encircle the foot of the mountain, while the branch on the southern side of the mountain separates them in the middle. From north to south, from east to west, and from south to north, they become the escort of Baotai Mountain. This is the approximate situation of the intertwined landscape.

古文：从坳南，于是东转，下临南峡，上倚北崖，东向行山脊之南，两降两上，三里，东至万佛堂。
现代文：从山坳南边于是向东转，下边面临南边的峡谷，上面紧靠北面的山崖，向东行走在山脊的南面，两次下走两次上登，三里，往东来到万佛堂。
English: From the south side of the ridge, he turned to the east. The lower side faced the south side of the canyon, and the upper side was close to the north cliff. He walked eastward on the south side of the ridge, walked down twice and climbed up twice, three miles, and went east to the Great Buddha Hall.

古文：此即大寺之前院也，踞宝台南突之端，其门西向，而堂陛俱南辟，前临深峡之南，则南山如屏，高穹如面墙。其上多木莲花，树极高大，花开如莲，有黄白蓝紫诸色，瓣凡二十片，每二月则未叶而花，三月则花落而叶生矣。
现代文：这就是宝台大寺的前院，盘踞在宝台南突之处的尖端，寺门向西，但殿堂台阶全都开向南，前方下临深峡的南面，就见南山如像屏风，高大弯隆如同面对墙壁，山上有许多木莲花，树极高大，开的花如像莲花，有黄、白、蓝、紫各种颜色，花瓣共二十片，每年二月未长叶便开花，三月份花落后就长树叶了。
English: This is the front yard of the Baotai Grand Temple. It is located at the tip of the southernmost point of Baotai. The temple gate faces west, but the steps of the hall all open to the south. In front of it, on the south side of the deep gorge, you can see the Nanshan like a screen, tall and curved as if facing a wall. There are many wood lotus flowers on the mountain, the trees are very tall, and the flowers are like lotus flowers, with yellow, white, blue and purple colors, and a total of twenty petals. Every February, the flowers bloom before the leaves grow, and the leaves grow after the flowers in March.

古文：绝顶有涌石塔，高二丈，云自地涌出，乃石笋也。
现代文：绝顶有座涌石塔，高二丈，说是从地下涌出的，原来是石笋。
English: At the very top, there is a two-storey stone tower, which is said to have sprung up from the ground. It was originally a stone coffin.

古文：其南坳间，又有一陕西老僧结茅二十年，其地当南山奥阻，曾无至者，自万佛堂望之，平眺可达，而下陟深峡，上跻层崖，竟日一整天而后能往返焉。
现代文：它南边的山坳间，又有一个陕西老和尚建了茅屋达二十年，那地方企当南山幽深险阻之处，从无人到，从万佛堂远望它，以为可以步行到达，可是下走跋涉深峡，上登层层悬崖，要一整天然后才能往返。
English: In the foothills to the south of it, there is another old Shaanxi monk who has built a thatched cottage for twenty years. That place is a remote and dangerous place on Nanshan Mountain, and no one has ever been there. He looked at it from the Great Buddha Hall and thought he could reach it on foot, but it took him a whole day to walk down the deep gorge and climb up the cliff.

古文：由万佛堂后北上不半里，即大寺故址。
现代文：由万佛堂后往北上走不到半里，就是宝台大寺的旧址。
English: Less than half a mile north of the Great Buddha Hall is the old site of Baotai Temple.

古文：寺创于崇祯初元，其先亦丛蔽之区，立禅师寻山见之，为焚两指，募开丛林，规模宏敞，正殿亦南向，八角层甍，高十余丈，址盘数亩。
现代文：寺院创建于崇祯元年，那之前也是丛林密蔽的地方，立禅师找山见到这里，为此烧了两个手指，募化开创了寺院，规模宏大宽敞，正殿也是向南，一层层的八角屋脊，高十多丈，基址的地盘有数亩。
English: The temple was founded in the first year of the Chongzhen era. Prior to that, it was also a place covered by dense jungle. When the Zen master Li Shanzhan saw it here, he burned two fingers to make it happen. It was He who founded the temple. The scale is grand and spacious. The main hall is also facing south. The octagonal roof is more than ten stories high. The site of the foundation is several acres.

古文：其脉自东北圆穹之顶，层跌而下，状若连珠，而殿紧倚之，第其前横深峡，既不开洋，而殿址已崇，西支下伏，右乏护砂，水复从泄，觉地虽幽閟而实鲜关锁，此其所未尽善者。
现代文：这里的山脉从东北方圆形弯隆的山顶，层层跌落下来，样子好似连成串的珠子，而殿宇紧靠着山，只是寺前横着深峡，既不开阔，而且殿址太高，西面的支脉在下方低伏着，右边缺乏环护的龙砂，水又从此外泄，觉得地方虽然幽僻隐秘可实际上缺少锁闭的门户，这是它未能尽善尽美之处。
English: The mountains here have tumbled down from the rounded, sloping mountaintop in the northeast, looking like a string of beads, while the temple is close to the mountain. However, there is a deep gorge in front of the temple, which is not wide, and the temple site is too high. The western branch lies low below. The right side lacks the dragon sand that surrounds it, and water leaks from the other side. I feel that although the place is secluded and secret, it actually lacks a locked portal. This is where it fails to be perfect.

古文：或谓病在前山崇逼，余谓不然，山外大江虽来绕，而天此障之则旷，山内深峡虽近环，而无此夹之则泄，虽前压如面墙，而宇内大刹，如少林之面少室，灵岩之面岱宗，皆突兀当前，而开拓弥远，此吾所谓病不在前之太逼，而在右之少疏也。
现代文：有人认为毛病在于前面的山高大近逼，我认为不是这样，山外的大江虽然流来围绕，但如没有此山障蔽着它则太空旷，山内的深峡虽在近处环绕，可如没有此山夹住它水流就会外泄，虽然压在前方如同面对墙壁，但天下的名山大寺，如少林寺面对少室山，灵岩寺面对泰山，都是突兀的高山挡在前方，可眼界开拓得更远。这就是我认为毛病不在于前方太逼近，而在于右边稍微空阔了些的原因。
English: Some people think that the fault lies in the height of the mountain in front of them, but I don't think so. Although the rivers outside the mountain flow around it, if it is not covered by this mountain barrier, it is vast. Although the deep gorge inside the mountain is surrounded nearby, if it is not clamped by this mountain, the water flow will leak out. Although it is pressed in front as if it were facing a wall, the world's famous mountain temples, such as Shaolin Temple facing Shomuroyama and Lingyan Temple facing Mount Tai, are obtrusive mountains in front, but they can open their horizons further. This is why I think the problem is not that the

古文：初余自慧光寺来，其僧翠峰谓余曰： 僧少待一同衣，当即追随后尘。 
现代文：起初我从慧光寺来时，寺中僧人翠峰告诉我说： 和尚我等一位同伴，一会就追随您的后尘。 
English: At first, when I came from Weguang Temple, the monk of the temple, Cui Feng, told me: Monk, I am waiting for a companion, and I will follow your footsteps in a moment.

古文：比至万佛堂，翠峰果同一僧至，乃川僧一苇，自京师参访至此，能讲演宗旨。
现代文：等到了万佛堂时，翠峰果然同一位僧人来到，是四川和尚一苇从京城参拜访问到此，能讲演佛法的大意。
English: When he arrived at the Great Buddha Hall, Cui Feng did indeed come with a monk. It was a Sichuan monk who had come from Beijing to visit and worship here. He was able to explain the essence of Buddhism.

古文：闻此有了凡师，亦川僧，淹贯内典，自立师行后，住静东峡，为此山名宿，故同翠峰来访之。
现代文：听说此山有位了凡禅师，也是四川和尚，精通佛经，自从立禅师走后，住在东面峡中静修，是此山的著名高僧，所以同翠峰来拜访他。
English: I heard that there is a famous Zen master on this mountain, who is also a Sichuanese monk, well versed in Buddhist scriptures. Since the Zen master left, he has been living and meditating in the Dongmen Gorge. He is a famous high priest of this mountain, so I came to visit him with Cui Feng.

古文：时了凡因殿毁，募闪太史约庵，先铸铜佛于旧基，以为兴复之倡，暂从静室中移栖万佛前楼，余遂与一苇同谒之。
现代文：此时了凡因为殿宇被毁，募化闪太史约庵先在旧基址上铸铜佛，作为复兴的首倡，暂时从静室中搬来住在万佛堂的前楼，我于是与一苇一同去拜见他。
English: At this time, because of the destruction of the temple, Sheng Taishi Yoan first collected money to cast a bronze Buddha on the old foundation site. As the first initiative of revival, he temporarily moved from the quiet room to live in the front building of the Buddha Hall, so I went to see him with a group.

古文：了凡即曳杖前引，至大寺基，观所模佛胎，遂从基左循北崖复东向行。
现代文：了凡当即拖着手杖在前领路，来到大寺的基址观看铸铜佛的胎模，于是从基址左侧沿着北面的山崖再向东行。
English: He immediately dragged his cane to the front of the leading road, came to the base of the great temple to see the cast bronze Buddha's foetus, and then walked from the left side of the base along the northern cliff to the east.

古文：盘磴陟坡，路极幽峭，两过小静室，两升降，南下小峡，深木古柯，藤交竹丛，五里而得了凡静室。
现代文：绕着石瞪登坡，路上极为幽静陡峭，两次路过小静室，上下各两次，往南走下小峡谷，谷中深树古木，藤条交缠，翠竹成丛，五里后找到了凡的静室。
English: Climbing uphill around the stones, the road is extremely quiet and steep, passing the small quiet room twice, up and down twice each, going south down the small canyon, deep trees in the valley, ancient trees, rattan intertwined, green bamboo clumps, five miles later I found the ordinary quiet room.

古文：室南向，与大殿基东西并列，第此处东入已深，其前南山并夹如故，而右砂层叠，不比大殿基之西旷矣。
现代文：静室向南，与大殿的基址东西并列，只是此处向东进来得太深，它前方南山并排相夹如大寺一样，但右边的龙砂层层叠叠，不像大殿殿基的西边那样空旷了。
English: The seclusion room faces south, and is aligned with the foundation of the main hall from east to west. However, it is too deep to enter here from the east. In front of it, the Nanshan Mountains are sandwiched side by side like a large temple, but the layer of dragon sand on the right is superimposed, unlike the west side of the foundation of the main hall, which is empty.

古文：其脉自直北圆穹之顶中垂而下，至室前稍坳，前复小起圆阜，下临深峡之北。
现代文：这里的山脉从正北圆形弯隆的山顶位于当中垂下来，到静室前稍稍凹下去，前方又隆起圆形的小土丘，下临深峡的北边。
English: The mountain range here slopes down from the circular, craggy peak in the middle just to the north, dips slightly before reaching the seclusion room, and small rounded mounds rise up in front of it, descending to the north of the deep gorge.

古文：而室则正临其坳处，横结三楹，幽敞两备，此宝台奥境也。
现代文：而静室则正面临着那下凹之处，横着建了三间房，幽静宽敞两者都具备，此地是宝台山的深秘之境。
English: The quiet room, on the other hand, is facing the lower concave. Three rooms have been built next to each other, both of which are quiet and spacious. This place is the deep secret of Mount Baotai.

古文：一苇与了凡以同乡故，欲住静山中，了凡与之为禅语。
现代文：一苇与了凡因为是同乡的缘故，想住在山中静修，了凡与他互相讲说佛理。
English: One day, because he was a fellow villager, he and Ban wanted to live in the mountains and meditate. Ban and Ban talked about Buddhism with each other.

古文：余旁参之，觉凡公禅学宏贯，而心境未融，苇公参悟精勤，而宗旨未彻，然山穷水尽中亦不易得也。
现代文：我在旁边评判他们，觉得了凡公对佛学通晓广博，可心境未能融会贯通，一苇公探究领悟得精当觉悟，但大意未能透彻，不过在山穷水尽之中也是不易见到的了。
English: I judged them on the side, and felt that they all knew a lot about Buddhism, but their minds could not be integrated and penetrated. Once they had explored and understood, they were keenly aware, but the gist was not thorough, but it was not easy to see in the middle of the mountain.

古文：了凡命其徒具斋，始进面饼，继设蔬饭。
现代文：了凡叫他徒弟准备斋饭，开始时呈上面饼，继而摆上蔬菜米饭。
English: He then asked his apprentice to prepare a meal, starting with bread, followed by vegetables and rice.

古文：饭后雨大至，半晌方止。
现代文：饭后大雨来临，半晌才停。
English: After the meal, heavy rain came, and the hailstorm only stopped for a while.

古文：下午乃行。
现代文：下午才动身。
English: We didn't leave until the afternoon.

古文：仍过寺基，共十五里，还宿慧光寺。
现代文：仍旧走过大寺寺基，共十五里，回来住在慧光寺。
English: He still walked through the foundation of the great temple, a total of fifteen miles, and came back to live in Eiko-ji Temple.

古文：二十八日平明，饭而行。
现代文：二十八日天亮，吃饭后上路。
English: At dawn on the 28th, after dinner, we set off.

古文：三里，北下至阿牯寨。
现代文：三里，往北下到阿枯寨。
English: Three miles to the north, to the village of Akuzha.

古文：由其西下又二里，越东来涧，缘北山之南崖，西北上一里余，盘其西垂而北，其下即阿牯北西二涧合而北流之峡也。
现代文：由这里又向西下走二里，越过东来的山涧，沿北山南面的山崖，向西北上登一里多，绕着北山的西垂处往北走，山下就是阿枯寨北面、西面两条山涧合流后往北流的峡谷。
English: From here, walk two miles to the west, cross the mountains to the east, walk along the cliff on the south side of the North Mountain, climb more than a mile to the northwest, and walk north around the west slope of the North Mountain. Below the mountain is the canyon of the northward flow after the confluence of the two mountains on the north and west sides of Akwuzhai.

古文：二里，越西突之坡，仍循东坡西北行。
现代文：二里，越过向西突的山坡，仍旧沿着东面的山坡往西北行。
English: After two miles, we crossed the hillside that juts out to the west, and continued to follow the eastern hillside to the northwest.

古文：六里，坠悬坡而下，一里及涧。
现代文：六里，从高悬的山坡上下坠，一里后到达山涧。
English: Six miles, falling down from the high-hanging mountainside, one mile later reaching the foothills.

古文：仍随涧东岸北行，望见峡北有山横亘于前，路直望之而趋。
现代文：仍顺着山涧东岸往北行，望见峡谷北面有山横亘在前方，路笔直，望着路向前走。
English: I still followed the east coast of the mountains to the north, and I could see the mountains on the north side of the canyon in front of me. The road was straight, and I walked forward.

古文：五里，有一二家倚东山下，其前始傍水为田。
现代文：五里，有一两家人靠在东山下，村前开始傍着涧水垦为田地。
English: Five miles away, one or two families lived at the foot of the east mountain, and the fields began to grow in front of the village next to the stream.

古文：又北二里，直低北山下，有峡自东而西，中有一水沿北山而西注。
现代文：又往北二里，直达北山下，有峡谷自东延向西，峡中有一条溪水沿着北山往西流注。
English: Another two miles north, straight to the bottom of the North Mountain, there is a canyon stretching from east to west, and in the canyon there is a stream flowing west along the North Mountain.

古文：此即旧炉塘西来之道，阿牯寨之涧南来，此与之合，是为三汊溪，旧炉塘指答者，谓间道捷而难询，正指此也。
现代文：这就是从旧炉塘往西来的路，阿枯寨的涧水往南流来，此条溪水与它合流，这就是三汉溪，在旧炉塘指路的人，说是近路便捷但是难问路，正是指此地。
English: This is the way from the old furnace pond to the west, the muddy water of the Akan village flows south, and this stream merges with it. This is the Sanhan Creek. The person who showed the way in the old furnace pond said that it was a short and convenient way, but it was difficult to ask the way. It was this place that he was referring to.

古文：于是其峡转为东西，夹水合而西去，路北涉之，循北崖西行。
现代文：在这里山峡变成东西两条，相夹的流水合流后向西流去，路向北涉过溪水，沿北面的山崖往西行。
English: Here, the mountain gorge becomes two lines, east and west. After the confluence of the clamped flowing water, it flows to the west. The road wades through the stream to the north and travels west along the northern cliff.

古文：三里，西降而出峡口，其西乃开南北大峡。
现代文：三里，向西下走出了峡口，峡口西边于是敞开成南北向的大峡谷。
English: Three miles to the west, I walked out of the gorge, and the west side of the gorge opened up into a north-south canyon.

古文：盖南自宝台南峡来，从南山北转，而界澜沧于外者，为此坞西山；从西坳北转，而挟慧光寺于内者，为此坞东山，东山为三汊溪西出而界断，宝台中脉止。
现代文：从宝台山南面峡谷往南来，从南山向北转，而后把澜沧江隔在外的山，是这个山坞的西山；从西面的山坳往北转，把慧光寺夹在内的，是这个山坞的东山，东山被向西流出的三汉溪隔断，宝台山的山脉到了溪水北岸从中间断了。
English: Going south from the canyon on the south side of Mount Paotai, turning north from Nanshan, and then separating the Lancang River, is the west mountain of this dock; turning north from the mountains on the west, including the Huiguang Temple, is the east mountain of this dock. The east mountain is separated by the Sanhan Creek flowing to the west, and the mountains of Mount Paotai are cut off from the middle to the north bank of the stream.

古文：至其北，又旧炉塘北脊之支，分派西突，与西山对峡，而北峡中坞大开，陂陀杂沓，底不甚平，南峡与三汊溪水合流北去，是为沙木河上流。
现代文：还有旧炉塘北面山脊的支脉，分支向西突，与西山对峙成峡，而北面峡中山坞十分开阔，山坡杂沓，坞底不怎么平坦，南边的峡谷与三汉溪水合流后往北流去，这就是沙木河的上游。
English: There is also a tributary of the ridge on the north side of the old furnace pond, branching to the west and confronting the West Mountain into a canyon, while the dock in the north side of the canyon is very open, the slope is mixed, the dock bottom is not very flat, the canyon on the south side merges with the water of the Sanhan Creek and flows northward, which is the upstream of the Shamu River.

古文：峡中田塍，高下盘错，居庐东西对峙，是名竹沥砦。
现代文：峡中的田地，上下回绕错杂，居民房屋东西对峙，这里名叫竹沥寨。
English: The fields in the gorge are jumbled up and down, and the residents' houses face each other from east to west. This place is called Bamboo Pitch.

古文：路挟东山北转，行东村之上而北三里，坞中水直啮东山之麓。
现代文：路紧靠东山往北转，行走在东面山村的上方往北三里，山坞中的溪水直接冲刷着东山的山麓。
English: The road turns north close to Dongshan, walking three miles north above the mountain village on the east side. The stream in the dock washes the foot of Dongshan directly.

古文：路缘崖蹑其上，又北二里，逾马鞍岭。
现代文：路沿着山崖登到山上，又向北二里，越过马鞍岭。
English: The road climbs along the cliff to the mountain, and then heads north for two miles, crossing Ma On Shan.

古文：此岭乃东山西突之嘴，水曲而西环其麓，路直而北逾其坳，此竹沥砦之门户也。
现代文：这座山岭是东山向西突的山嘴，溪水弯向西环绕着山麓，路一直往北越过山坳，这个山坳是竹沥寨的门户。
English: This ridge is a promontory jutting from east to west. The bend of the stream surrounds the foot of the mountain to the west. The road continues north over the ridge, which is the gateway to the bamboo village.

古文：北下二里，始为平川，水与路俱去险就夷。
现代文：向北下山二里，开始变为平川，溪水与道路都离开险阻走上坦途。
English: Two miles to the north down the mountain, it began to turn into a flat river. Both the stream and the road left the dangerous obstacles and took a smooth path.

古文：北行溪东三里，有村倚东山下，曰狗街子，倚四山曰阿夷村。
现代文：在溪东岸往北行三里，有个村庄紧靠在东山下，叫做狗街子，紧靠西山的叫做阿夷村。
English: Three miles to the north on the east bank of the stream, there is a village close to the east mountain, called the Dog Street, and the one close to the west mountain is called Ai Village.

古文：东山乃搏南大脊西盘，西山乃宝台南山北转者也。
现代文：东山是博南山的大山脊向西盘绕之处，西山是宝台山的南山往北转的山。
English: Dongshan is the place where the great ridge of Bonan Mountain coils to the west, and Xishan is the mountain where Nanshan of Baotai Mountain turns to the north.

古文：其山平展而北，又四里，而沙木河驿之西坡，自丁当关西突于川之北，与西界山凑，川中水自沙潭，亦逼西山之麓而北。
现代文：这里的山平缓地向北伸展而去，又走四里，沙木河释西边的山坡，自丁当关向西前突在平川的北边，与西面一列山凑拢，平川中的流水从沙潭也是逼近西山的山麓往北流。
English: The hills here stretch gently to the north, and after another four miles, the Shamui River clears the western slope, and since Dingdangguan, it protrudes to the west on the north side of the Pingchuan River, converging with a line of mountains on the west side. The flowing water in the Pingchuan River flows northward from Shatan, which is also close to the foothills of the West Mountain.

古文：路乃涉水，缘西崖之上行。
现代文：路于是涉过溪水，沿西面的山崖上走。
English: The road then waded through the stream and went up the mountain cliff along the west side.

古文：又三里，北下及溪，有桥跨溪，东来者，是为沙木河驿大道。
现代文：又是三里，向北下到溪边，有座桥跨在溪上，从东边来的路，是去沙木河释的大道。
English: It's another three miles north to the creek. There's a bridge over the creek, and the road from the east is the main road to Shamu Ho-sih.

古文：其桥有亭上覆，曰凤鸣桥。
现代文：这座桥上盖有亭子，叫做凤鸣桥。
English: There is a pavilion on the bridge, called Fengming Bridge.

古文：余南来路，经桥西，不逾桥也。
现代文：我走的是从南边来的路，经过桥西头，不过桥。
English: I took the road coming from the south, passing the west end of the bridge, but the bridge.

古文：饭于桥西。
现代文：在桥西吃了饭。
English: I had dinner in the west of the bridge.

古文：随西山大路北行三里，盘西山北突之嘴，于是北坞稍开，田塍交布，其下溪流贯直北去，透北峡，入澜沧。
现代文：顺着西山的大路往北行三里，绕过西山向北突的山嘴，在这里北面的山坞略变开阔了些，田亩交错密布，山坞下方溪流径直向北流贯而去，穿过北面的峡谷，流入澜沧江。
English: I followed the main road of Xishan for three miles to the north, bypassing the mountain mouth of Xishan to the north, where the dock on the north side became slightly wider, the fields were interlaced, and the stream below the dock flowed northward, passing through the canyon on the north side and flowing into the Lancang River.

古文：路盘嘴西行又一里，为湾子村，数家倚南山北麓，当北突之腋，故曰湾子。
现代文：路绕着山嘴往西又行一里，是湾子村。几家人背靠南山的北麓，位于北突山嘴的侧边，所以叫做湾子。
English: The road goes west for another mile around the mountain's mouth and comes to Wan Zi Village. Several families live at the northern foot of the Nanshan Mountain, on the side of the Beitu Mountain's mouth, which is why it is called Wan Zi.

古文：由其西循峡南入，一里，峡穷。
现代文：由村西沿着峡谷向南进去，一里，峡谷完了。
English: From the west of the village along the canyon to the south, one mile, the canyon is complete.

古文：复遵峡西之山，曲折西向上跻，三里，陟岭脊，此即宝台南山北转至此者。
现代文：再沿着峡西的山，曲折向西上登，三里，登上岭脊，这就是宝台山的南山向北转到此地的山脊。
English: Then along the mountain west of the gorge, zigzag westward, climb three miles, climb the ridge, which is the ridge of the south mountain of Baotai Mountain turning north to this place.

古文：王、何二贼不直南下，而东由澜沧桥，固欲截其东援大路，亦以与瓦窑相近也，盖瓦窑、曹涧皆二贼之窟也。
现代文：坐在岭上往东望，东面就是博南山从南面环绕而来的山。远望北方，峡口低伏在中央，就是沙木河往北注入澜沧江，而此条支脉往北在此地到了尽头的地方；它外面另有高峰耸起，横卧耸峙在五十里外的，叫瓦窑山，是永平县北境与云龙州分界之处，是从前王磐盘踞造反的地方。
English: Sitting on the ridge, looking to the east, the east is the mountain surrounded by the Bonan Mountain from the south. Looking far to the north, the mouth of the gorge is low in the center, which is the place where the Shamu River flows into the Lancang River to the north, and this branch reaches the end here; it has another peak outside, lying fifty miles away, called Wayao Mountain, which is the dividing point between the northern border of Yongping County and Yunnan Province, and is the place of rebellion from the former king Pan Pan.

古文：西望则重崖层峡，其下逼簇，不知澜沧之流已嵌其底也。
现代文：眺望西边，就见重重山崖层层峡谷，峡下方狭窄簇拥，不知澜沧江的江流已嵌在峡底了。
English: Looking to the west, one can see mountains and cliffs stacked in canyons. Below, the canyons are narrow and crowded. It is hard to believe that the Lancang River is embedded in the bottom of the canyon.

古文：由脊而南，有庵横跨坳中，题曰普济庵，有僧施茶于此，是即所谓江坡顶也。
现代文：由山脊上往南行，有座寺庵横跨在山坳中，匾额题写为普济庵，有和尚在此施舍茶水，这里就是所谓的江坡顶了。
English: From the ridge to the south, there is a temple and hermitage straddling the mountainside, inscribed as Puji'an, where a monk gives out tea. This is the so-called top of the river slope.

古文：《一统志》谓赵州白厓睑又作 敛 、 脸 等，在唐代为一种政区设置，后世则存其说法，但含义并不指一种政区，而是指一片平坝地区，似在 甸 字相近礼社江，至楚雄定边县合澜沧，入元江府，为元江。
现代文：到了它的南边，朝西俯瞰峡底，一线浑浊的流水绕向东南流去，嵌在下方非常深，隔着江流，危崖高险陡峻，上边截断云雾而下面浸泡着江流的山，就是罗崛山了。澜沧江从吐蕃的磋和哥甸往南流，经过丽江府兰州的西面，大理府云龙州的东面，流到此山之下，又向东南流经顺宁府云州的东面，往南下流过威远、车里，称为挝龙江，流入交趾到海中。《一统志》认为，赵州白崖睑的礼社江，流到楚雄府的定边县汇合澜沧江，流入元江府称为元江。
English: To the south of it, looking westward over the bottom of the canyon, a line of turbid flowing water flows around to the southeast, embedded very deep below, across the river flow, dangerous cliffs high and steep, the top cut off the clouds and below soaked with the river flow, is Luo Jue Mountain. The Lancang River flows south from Tuyu and Godian, through the west of Lanzhou, Lijiang, and the east of Yunlongzhou, Dali, and flows under this mountain. It also flows southeast through the east of Yunzhou, Shuning, and flows southward through Weiyuan, Cheli, called the Lao Longjiang, and flows into the sea.

古文：余按，澜沧至定边县西所合者，乃蒙化漾濞、阳江二水，非礼社也；礼社至定边县东所合者，乃楚雄马龙、禄丰二水，非澜沧也。
现代文：我考察，澜沧江流到定边县西境所汇合的江，是蒙化府的漾滇江、阳江两条江水，不是礼社江；礼社江流到定边县东境所汇合的，是楚雄府马龙、禄丰的两条河水，不是澜沧江。
English: According to my investigation, the confluence of the Lancang River flowing to the western border of Dingbian County is the two rivers of Minjiang and Yangjiang in Monhua Prefecture, not the Reisha River; the confluence of the Reisha River flowing to the eastern border of Dingbian County is the two rivers of Malong and Lufeng in Chuxiong Prefecture, not the Lancang River.

古文：然则澜沧、礼社虽同经定边，已有东西之分，同下至景东，东西鄙分流愈远。
现代文：既然这样，那么澜沧江、礼社江虽然同样流经定边县，已分在东西两面，一同下流到景东，分流在东、西边远地区相隔就更远了。
English: Since this is the case, although the Lancang River and the Reisha River also flow through Dingbian County, they have been divided into east and west sides, flowing down to Jingdong together, and the branches are further apart in the remote areas of the east and west.

古文：李中谿著《大理志》，定澜沧为黑水，另具图说，于顺宁以下，即不能详。
现代文：李中谿著的《大理志》，认定澜沧江是黑水，另外备有图说，在顺宁府以下，就不能详尽说明。
English: Li Zhongshuo's "Dalishi" identified the Lancang River as black water, and also provided a diagram saying that below Shuningfu, it could not be explained in detail.

古文：今技铁锁桥东有碑，亦乡绅所著，止云自顺宁、车里入南海，其未尝东入元江，可知也。
现代文：今天根据铁锁桥东有的碑文，也是本乡士绅所著，只说是从顺宁、车里流入南海，可知它未曾往东流入元江了。
English: Today, according to the inscription on the east side of the Iron Lock Bridge, which was also written by a local gentleman, it only says that it flows into the South China Sea from Shuning and Chaoli, but it has never flowed east into the Yuanjiang River.

古文：由岭南行一里，即曲折下，其势甚陡。
现代文：由岭上往南行一里，立即曲曲折折下山，山势十分陡峻。
English: From the ridge to the south for one mile, immediately winding down the mountain, the mountain is very steep.

古文：回望铁桥嵌北崖下甚近，而或迎之，或背之，为 之 字下者，三里而及江岸。
现代文：回头望去，铁锁桥深嵌在北边山崖下方非常近，但有时迎面对着它，有时背对着它，成 之 字形下延，三里后到达江岸。
English: Looking back, the iron lock bridge is deeply embedded under the northern cliff, very close, but sometimes facing it, sometimes turning its back, forming a zigzag downward, reaching the riverbank after three miles.

古文：即挨东崖下溯江北行，又一里而至铁锁桥之东。
现代文：马上靠着东面的山崖下溯江往北行，又走一里后来到铁锁桥的东头。
English: I immediately followed the cliff to the east and followed the river to the north. After walking another mile, I reached the east end of the iron lock bridge.

古文：先临流设关，巩同 拱 石为门，内倚东崖，建武侯祠及税局。
现代文：首先临江流设了城关，用石块筑成拱门，里面紧靠东面的山崖，建了武侯祠及税局。
English: First of all, the city gate was set up along the Linjiang River, and an archway was built with stones. Inside, close to the eastern cliff, the Wuhou Shrine and the Tax Bureau were built.

古文：桥之西，巩关亦如之，内倚西崖，建楼台并祀创桥者。
现代文：桥的西头，拱门筑成的城关也如桥东一样，里侧紧靠西边的山崖，建有楼台并祭祀建桥的人。
English: At the west end of the bridge, the gate built by the arch is also the same as the east of the bridge. On the inside, close to the western cliff, there is a platform built and the people who built the bridge are worshipped.

古文：巩关俱在桥南，其北皆崖石巉削，无路可援。
现代文：拱门的城关都在桥的南边，桥的北边全是高险陡削的石崖，无路可攀。
English: The gates of the arch are on the south side of the bridge, and the north side of the bridge is all high-risk steep stone cliffs, with no way to climb.

古文：盖东西两界山，在桥北者皆夹石，倒压江面，在桥南者皆削土，骈立江旁，故取道俱南就土崖，作 之 字上下，而桥则架于其北土石相接处。
现代文：原来东西两面的山，在桥北的全是夹立的石崖，倒压在江面上，在桥南的都是陡削的土山，并排矗立在江旁，所以道路都是就着南边的土山崖延伸，作 之 字形上下，而桥就架在路北边土石相连接的地方。
English: Originally, the mountains on both sides of the east and west, in the north of the bridge are all stone cliffs, which are reversed on the river surface, and in the south of the bridge are steeply cut earthen hills, which stand side by side on the river, so the roads are extended along the south side of the earthen cliff, making a zigzag up and down, and the bridge is built on the north side of the road where the earth and stone are connected.

古文：其桥阔于北盘江上铁锁桥，而长则杀之长度要短一些。
现代文：这座桥比北盘江上的铁锁桥宽，但长度却比它短些。
English: The bridge is wider than the Lock Bridge on the Beipan River, but shorter in length.

古文：桥下流皆浑浊，但北盘有奔沸之形，淜湃同澎湃之势，似浅；此则浑然逝，渊然寂，其深莫测，不可以其狭束而与北盘共拟相提并论也。
现代文：桥下的流水都是浑浊的，但北盘江有奔流沸腾的姿态，汹涌澎湃的气势，江水似乎很浅；这里却浑浑的样子流逝着，渊深寂静，水深不可测，不能因为它狭窄紧束便把它与北盘江来一同相比。
English: The flowing water under the bridge is turbid, but the Beipan River has a rushing and boiling attitude, a turbulent and surging momentum, and the river water seems to be very shallow; here, however, it flows in a turbid manner, the abyss is silent, and the water depth is unfathomable. It cannot be compared with the Beipan River because of its narrow and tight bundles.

古文：此桥始于武侯南征，故首祀之，然其时犹架木以渡，而后有用竹索用铁柱维舟者，柱犹尚存。
现代文：北盘江桥横在纵向铁链上的链子，全是在木板下；这座桥则下边既有托着的铁链，上面又有高高的绷子，位于中间架在两面山崖两头的柱子之间，到了桥中心，又有倾斜下坠的铁链拉紧桥身，如织布机织布一样经线纬线交织，综提起经线一样。
English: The chains on the longitudinal iron chain of the Beipanjiang Bridge are all under the wooden board; this bridge has both a supported iron chain on the lower side and a high bandage on the top. It is located in the middle between the pillars on both sides of the cliff. When it reaches the center of the bridge, there is also a tilted chain that falls down and tightens the bridge body. Like a loom weaving, the warp and woof are intertwined, and the warp and woof are the same.

古文：或以为胡敬德，或以为国初镇抚华岳。而胡未之至，华为是。
现代文：此桥始建于武侯诸葛亮南征之时，所以首先祭祀他，不过那时还是架木桥渡江，而后来有用竹绳用铁柱系在船上渡江的，柱子仍然还保存着。
English: This bridge was first built at the time of the Southern Expedition of Wuhou Zhuge Liang, so it was first dedicated to him. However, at that time, a wooden bridge was still built to cross the river, and later, iron pillars were used to cross the river on boats with bamboo ropes. The pillars are still preserved.

古文：然兰津之歌，汉明帝时已著闻，而不始于武侯也。
现代文：不过提及兰津的歌谣，汉明帝时已经著名传闻，而不是开始于武侯之时了。
English: However, when it comes to Lanzin's ballad, it was already a famous rumor during the reign of Emperor Han Ming, and did not start at the time of Wuhou.

古文：万历丙午，顺宁土酋猛廷瑞叛，阻兵烧毁。
现代文：万历丙午年，顺宁府的土人首领猛廷瑞反叛，为阻击官兵烧毁了桥。
English: In the year of Wanli Heung, the native leader of Shuning Prefecture, Meng Tingrui, rebelled and burned the bridge to block the officers and soldiers.

古文：崇祯戊辰，云龙叛贼王磐又烧毁。
现代文：崇祯戊辰年崇祯元年，云龙州的叛贼王磐再次烧毁桥。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the traitor Wang Pan of Yunnan again burned the bridge.

古文：四十年间，二次被毁，今己巳复建，委千户一员守卫，固知迤西咽喉，千百载不能改也。
现代文：四十年之间，两次被毁，今天的桥是己巳年重建的，委派了一个千户守卫，本来就知道这是逛西的咽喉，千百年不能改变。
English: In the space of forty years, it was destroyed twice. Today's bridge was rebuilt last year, and a thousand guards were appointed. It was already known that this was the throat of westerners, and it could not be changed for thousands of years.

古文：余时过桥急，不及入叩桥东武侯祠，犹登桥西台间之阁，以西崖尤峻，为罗岷之麓也。
现代文：我这时急于过桥，来不及进桥东的武侯祠去叩拜，但仍然登上桥西平台上的楼阁，是因为西面的山崖格外陡峻，是罗眠山的山麓。
English: At this time, I was in a hurry to cross the bridge and did not have time to enter the Wuhou Ancestral Hall on the east side of the bridge to worship. However, I still boarded the pavilion on the west platform of the bridge because the cliff on the west side is extremely steep and is the foot of the Romye Mountain.

古文：按永昌重时鱼。
现代文：于是出了拱门城关，沿着罗眠山的山崖，向南顺江流上走。
English: So I went out of the arch gate, along the cliffs of the Romye Mountain, and walked upstream to the South Shun River.

古文：具鱼似鲭鱼状而甚肥，出此江，亦出此时。
现代文：五里，到了平坡铺，数十家人夹住罗眠山的东麓居住，下临澜沧江，到此处止上走的路还算平坦，所以用乡平坡 来起名，从此地起便上登陡峻的坡路了。
English: Five miles away, at Pingpopu, dozens of families live between the eastern foot of Mount Luominshan and the lower reaches of the Lancang River. The road up to this point is still fairly flat, so it is named after the township Pingpo, and from here it climbs up a steep slope.

古文：谓之时者，惟三月尽四月初一时耳，然是时江涨后已不能得。二十九日鸡再鸣，具餐。
现代文：此时天色还可走路，但挑担的僧人再往前走很辛苦，便住下来。二十九日鸡叫第二遍，备饭。
English: At this time, it was still possible to walk, but it was very difficult for the monks to walk further, so they stayed. On the 29th, the rooster crowed for the second time, and the meal was prepared.

古文：平明行，即曲折南上。
现代文：天亮上路，马上向南曲折上走。
English: I hit the road at dawn and immediately headed south on a winding road.

古文：二里余，转而西，其山复土尽而石，于是沧江东南从大峡去，路随小峡西向入。
现代文：二里多，转向西，这里土山完后又变成石山，在此地澜沧江往东南从大峡中流去，路顺着小峡向西进去。
English: For more than two miles, turn to the west. Here, after completing the dirt hill, it turns into a stone hill. Here, the Lancang River flows southeast from the middle of the Grand Canyon, and the road follows the canyon to the west.

古文：西一里，石崖矗夹，有水自夹中坠，先从左崖栈木横空度，即北向。叠磴夹缝间，或西或北，曲折上跻甚峻。
现代文：往西一里，石崖聂立夹峙，有水流自夹谷中下坠，先从左边石崖上的木栈道横在空中越过去，立即向北走上夹缝间重叠的石瞪，有时向西有时向北，曲折上登，非常陡峻。
English: One mile to the west, the stone cliff stands in a pincer, with water flowing down from the middle of the valley. First, from the left side of the cliff, the wooden boardwalk crosses the sky and immediately goes north to the overlapping stone gap between the cracks, sometimes to the west and sometimes to the north, zigzagging up, very steep.

古文：两崖夹石如劈，中垂一霤，水捣石而下，蹬倚壁而上，人若破壁扪天，水若争道跃颡，两不相逊者。
现代文：两旁夹立的石崖如像刀劈出来的样子，中间垂着一个洞穴，水捣着岩石流下去，石蹬紧靠石壁上登，人就像破开石壁专摸天，水好像为了争道跃过山门，两者互相不退让。
English: The stone cliffs on both sides look like they were cut out with a knife. A cave hangs in the middle. Water trickles down the rock, the stalagmites cling to the stone walls and climb up. People seem to break through the stone walls to touch the sky, and the water seems to jump over the mountain gate to fight for the road. The two do not concede to each other.

古文：夹中古木参霄，虬枝卷曲悬磴，水声石色，冷人心骨，不复知有攀陟之苦，亦不知为驱驰之道也，上二里，有庵夹道，有道者居之，即所谓山达关也。
现代文：夹谷中古木参夫，屈曲的树枝悬在石瞪上；水声石色，使人心骨俱冷，不再知有攀登跋涉的辛苦，也不知是要快步赶路的险道了。上登二里，有座寺庵夹住道路，有道士居住在庵中，就是所谓的山达关了。
English: In the middle of the valley, there is an ancient tree, the bent branches of which hang over the rocks; the sound of the water is stone-colored, making people's hearts cold, and they no longer know the hard work of climbing and trekking, nor do they know the dangerous path of speeding up the road. Two miles up, there is a temple and hermitage clinging to the road, and there are Taoists living in the hermitage, which is the so-called Shandaguan.

古文：由其后又西上，路分为二，一渡水循南崖，一直上循北崖，共一里余而合，遂凌石峡上。
现代文：由庵后又往西上走，路分为两条，一条渡过溪水沿南面的山崖走，一条沿北面的山崖一直上登，共一里多后会合，于是登到石峡的上方。
English: After leaving the hermitage, we walked westward. The path was divided into two, one across the stream and along the cliff on the south side, and one along the cliff on the north side all the way up, a total of more than a mile later, and then climbed to the top of the stone gorge.

古文：余以为山脊矣，其内犹然平峡，水淙淙由峡中来，至是坠峡石东下，其外甚峻，其内甚平。
现代文：我以为是山脊了，它以内仍然有条平坦的山峡，水流涂涂地由峡中流来来到这里向东坠下石峡中，它的外侧非常险峻，它的里面十分平坦。
English: I thought it was a ridge, it still has a flat canyon inside, the water flows smoothly from the middle of the canyon and comes here to fall east into the stone canyon, its outside is very steep, its inside is very flat.

古文：登其峻处，回望东山之上，露出层峰，直东而近者，乃狗街子、沙木河驿后诸脊，所谓博南丁当也；东南而远者，宝台圆穹之顶也。
现代文：登上那险峻之处，回头望去，东山之上，露出层层山峰，正东方近处的山峰，是狗街子、沙木河释后面诸处的山脊，就是所谓的博南山丁当关了；东南方远处的山峰，是宝台山圆形弯隆的山顶。
English: After climbing to the precipitous place, looking back, on the east side of the mountain, there are layers of peaks. The peaks near the east are the Dog Street and the ridges behind the Shamu River, which are the so-called Bonan Mountains. The peaks in the far southeast are the rounded rounded peaks of Mount Baotai.

古文：内平处亦有两三家当峡而居。
现代文：里面平坦的地方也有两三家人在峡中居住。
English: There are also two or three families living in the gorge in the flat area inside.

古文：循之西入，坞底成畦，路随涧北。
现代文：沿着山峡往西深入，坞底辟成田地，路顺着涧水北岸走。
English: Go west along the mountain gorge, and walk along the northern shore of Surabaya.

古文：二里，涉涧而南，盘南峰之腋而西。
现代文：二里，涉到涧南，绕着南峰的侧边往西行。
English: Two miles, wading to the south of Longyan, around the side of the south peak to the west.

古文：一里，透峡西出，则其内平洼一围，下坠如城，四山回合于其上，底圆整如镜，得良畴数千亩，村庐错落，鸡犬桑麻，但有灵气。
现代文：一里，向西穿出峡谷，就见那里面一圈平坦的洼地，下陷得如同城池，四面的山在它的上方回绕合拢，底部浑圆平整如像镜子，有良田数千亩，村庄房屋错落其间，鸡犬桑麻都有灵气。
English: One mile to the west, out of the canyon, you will see a circle of flat depressions there, sinking down like a castle, the mountains on all sides close around it, the bottom is round and flat like a mirror, there are thousands of acres of good fields, village houses are scattered in the middle, and chicken, dog, and mulberry all have reiki.

古文：不意危崖绝蹬之上，芙蓉蒂里，又现此世界也，是为水寨。
现代文：意料不到在这危崖绝瞪之上，芙蓉花蒂似的山崖里边，又呈现出此等样的世界，这里是水寨。
English: Unexpectedly, on top of this precipitous cliff, inside the cliff like a fleur-de-lis, there is a similar world, here is a water village.

古文：先是闻其名，余以为将越山而下，至是而知平洼中环，山顶之水，交注洼中，惟山达关一线坠空为水口，武陵桃源，王官盘谷，皆所不及矣。
现代文：这之前听说过它的名字，我以为将要翻过山在山下，到此时才知是环绕在山中的平坦洼地，山顶的水，纵横交错流注在洼地中，只有山达关一线宽的地方坠空而下成为水口，武陵的桃源，王官的盘谷，都有所不及了。
English: I had heard its name before. I thought I was going to go over the mountain and under the mountain. At this time, I learned that it was a flat depression surrounded by the mountain. The water at the top of the mountain flowed crisscrossed and poured into the depression. Only the place where the Shanda Pass was one line wide fell down into the air and became a water outlet. The peach source of Wuling and the valley of Wangan were not far behind.

古文：此当为入滇第一胜，以在路旁，人反不觉也。
现代文：这应当是进入云南后的第一胜境，因为是在路旁，人们反而不能察觉了。
English: This should be the first victory after entering Yunnan, because it is on the side of the road, but people cannot notice it.

古文：循洼东稍南上，有庐夹道，是为水寨铺，按《志》有阿章寨，岂即此耶？
现代文：沿着洼地东边稍向南上走，有房屋夹住道路，这是水寨铺，根据志书有处阿章寨，莫非就是此地了吗？
English: Walking along the eastern edge of the depression a little to the south, there are houses sandwiching the road. This is a water village shop. According to the book of records, there is a place called Azhangzhai. Isn't this the place?

古文：又南随峡坡东行二里，逾一东坡之脊，脊两旁有两三家，脊南水犹东南下澜沧，仍非大脊也。
现代文：又往南顺着峡旁的山坡向东行二里，越过东面山坡上的一条山脊，山脊两旁有两三户人家，山脊南面的水仍是向东南流下澜沧江，仍然不是大山脊。
English: I also went south along the slope next to the gorge for two miles to the east, crossing a ridge on the eastern slope. There were two or three houses on both sides of the ridge, and the water on the south side of the ridge was still flowing southeast down the Lancang River, still not a big ridge.

古文：过脊南，东南二面，山皆下伏，于是东望宝台，知澜沧挟其南去，南瞻澜沧西岸，群峰杂沓。
现代文：过到山脊南面，东、南两面，山全在下方低伏着，在这里望东方的宝台山，知道澜沧江傍着它的南麓流去，南望澜沧江的西岸，群峰杂沓。
English: Passing to the south of the ridge, on the east and south sides, the mountains are all lying low below. Here, look at Mount Baotai in the east, know that the Lancang River flows along its southern foot, and look south to the west coast of the Lancang River, the peaks are mixed.

