古文：晋羊舌肸聘于周，发币于大夫及单靖公。
现代文：晋国的叔向出使周室，向朝廷的大夫分送礼物，单靖公也收到一份。
English: Jin's uncle sent an envoy to Zhou's court to distribute gifts to the court's doctors, and Shan Jing also received a gift.

古文：靖公享之，俭而敬；宾礼赠饯，视其上而从之；燕无私，送不过郊；语说《昊天有成命》。
现代文：单靖公宴请叔向，俭朴而恭敬；捂待餽赠的规格，都按自己的长官所为而仿行；宴席上不拉私人交情，送行不出城郊；席间只谈论《昊天有成命》这首诗。
English: At the Sanying banquet, the guests were simple and respectful; the standards of hospitality and gifts were modeled after the actions of their superiors; no personal friendships were made at the banquet, and the send-off did not go to the outskirts of the city; only the poem "How many days have a successful life" was discussed between the tables.

古文：单之老送叔向，叔向告之曰： 异哉！
现代文：单氏的家臣送叔向时，叔向对他说： 奇怪啊！
English: When one of Shan's vassals was giving his uncle a send-off, his uncle said to him: "How strange!

古文：吾闻之曰： 一姓不再兴。 
现代文：我听人说： 一姓的统治不会兴盛第二次。 
English: I have heard it said that the rule of one family will not flourish a second time.

古文：今周其兴乎！
现代文：如今周大概要兴盛了！
English: Now Zhou Dazhou is booming!

古文：其有单子也。
现代文：因为有单公这样的人。
English: Because there are people like Shan Gong.

古文：昔史佚有言曰： 动莫若敬，居莫若俭，德莫若让，事莫若咨。 
现代文：过去史官尹佚曾说过： 举动以恭敬为最，治家以俭朴为最，品德以谦让为最，处事以多问为最。 
English: In the past, the historian Yin Xi once said: the most important behavior is to be respectful, the most important housekeeping is to be frugal, the most important virtue is to be humble, and the most important work is to ask more questions.

古文：单子之贶我，礼也，皆有焉。
现代文：单公待我以礼，这些都做到了。
English: All of this was achieved simply by treating me with courtesy.

古文：夫宫室不崇，器无彤镂，俭也；身耸除洁，外内齐给，敬也；宴好享赐，不逾其上，让也；宾之礼事，放上而动，咨也。
现代文：他的房屋不高大，器物不华丽，是俭朴；行为谨慎小心，内外整洁齐备，是恭敬；宴饮和餽赠都不超过上官的规格，是谦让；宴请的礼仪都仿照上官所为而施行，是多问。
English: His house is not tall and large, his utensils are not magnificent, he is frugal; his behavior is prudent and careful, his inside and outside are neat and complete, he is respectful; his banquets and gifts do not exceed the specifications of the superior officer, he is humble; the etiquette of the banquet is modeled on the actions of the superior officer, he is more demanding.

古文：如是而加之以无私，重之以不淆，能避怨矣。
现代文：像这样，再加上不拉私人交情，不附和众人送出城郊，就能避免招致怨恨。
English: This, combined with the fact that they did not pull in personal friends and did not send people out of the suburbs with them, made it possible to avoid causing resentment.

古文：居俭动敬，德让事咨，而能避怨，以为卿佐，其有不兴乎！
现代文：治家俭朴而举动恭敬，品德谦让而处事多问，并能避免招致怨恨，用这样的大夫来辅佐朝政，还能不兴盛吗！
English: If you can manage your household in a frugal and respectful manner, if your moral character is humble and you ask more questions, and if you can avoid causing resentment, if you can use such a doctor to assist the government, can you not prosper?

古文： 且其语说《昊天有成命》，《颂》之盛德也。
现代文： 他所谈论的《昊天有成命》，是弘扬德行的《颂》诗。
English: The "How many days have a successful life" he is talking about is the "Ode" poem that promotes virtue.

古文：其诗曰： 昊天有成命，二后受之，成王不敢康。
现代文：诗中说：昊天有成命，二后受之。成王不敢康，夙夜基命宥密。
English: It says in the poem: "On any given day, there will be a success, followed by two failures. The success king will not dare to do well, and the foundation of life will be kept secret day and night."

古文：夙夜基命宥密，於，缉熙！亶厥心肆其靖之。 
现代文：于，缉熙！亶厥心肆其靖之。
English: At that time, my dear, the hearts of the Jurchens were stirred to pacification.

古文：是道成王之德也。
现代文：这是闸述成就主业的德行。
English: This is the virtue of achieving one's main business through storytelling.

古文：成王能明文昭，能定武烈者也。
现代文：所谓成就王业，就是能发扬文德、奠定武功。
English: The so-called achievement king career is to be able to promote morality and lay the foundation of martial arts.

古文：夫道成命者而称昊天，翼其上也。
现代文：阐述成命而尊称上天为昊天，是尊敬它至高无上。
English: To say that it is one's duty to respect Heaven is to respect it supremely.

古文：二后受之，让于德也。
现代文：文、武两王能够接受天命，是向有德行者谦让的缘故。
English: The reason why King Wen and King Wu were able to accept the Mandate of Heaven was because they were humble to the virtuous practitioners.

古文：成王不敢康，敬百姓也。
现代文：既成就王业而不敢享乐，是示敬于百姓。
English: It is a sign of respect to the common people that he dares not enjoy himself, even though he has accomplished his royal duty.

古文：夙夜，恭也。
现代文：夙夜，表示谦恭。
English: Day and night, to show courtesy.

古文：基，始也。
现代文：基，表示始。
English: Base, indicating the beginning.

古文：命，信也。
现代文：命，表示信。
English: life, a letter of protest.

古文：宥，宽也。
现代文：宥，是宽的意思。
English: Yu means wide.

古文：密，宁也。
现代文：密，是宁的意思。
English: 密, is the meaning of Ning.

古文：缉，明也。
现代文：缉，是明。
English: Wanted, yes.

古文：熙，广也。
现代文：熙，是厂。
English: Hee, it's the factory.

古文：亶，厚也。
现代文：亶，是厚。
English: , is thick.

古文：肆，固也。
现代文：肆，是固。
English: It's solid.

古文：靖，和也。
现代文：靖，是和。
English: Jing, yes and.

古文：其始也，翼上德让，而敬百姓；其中也，恭俭信宽。帅归于宁；其终也，广厚其心，以固和之。
现代文：诗的开始是说先王尊敬上天、谦让有德，并敬百姓；中间说他们谦恭俭朴，诚信宽厚，归根到底是为了安抚民众；结尾说他们加深自己的德行，来维护安靖的局面。
English: The poem begins by saying that the former kings respected heaven, had the virtue of modesty, and respected the people; in the middle, it says that they were modest and frugal, honest and generous, and in the final analysis, it was to appease the people; in the end, it says that they deepened their virtue to maintain a peaceful situation.

古文：始于德让，中于信宽，终于固和，故曰成。单子俭敬让咨，以应成德。单若不兴，子孙必蕃，后世不忘。 《诗》曰： 其类维何？
现代文：单公俭朴恭敬、谦让多问，与先王的美德相当。单公这一代若不兴盛，其子孙必定蕃衍，后世不会忘记。 《诗经》上说： 其类维何？
English: Sankong's frugality, simplicity, deference, modesty, and many questions are comparable to the virtues of the previous king. If Sankong's generation does not prosper, his descendants will certainly perish, and posterity will not forget. "The Book of Songs" said: What is its type?

古文：室家之壶。
现代文：室家之壶。
English: Muroka's kettle is boiling.

古文：君子万年，永锡祚胤。 
现代文：君子万年，永锡祚胤。 
English: A gentleman for a thousand years, Yongxi Jieyin.

古文：类也者，不忝前哲之谓也。
现代文：所谓类，是说不辱前贤。所谓壶，是比喻德行广被民众。
English: The so-called "class" refers to not humiliating the former sages. The so-called "pot" is a metaphor for the virtue widely practiced by the people.

古文：万年也者，令闻不忘之谓也。胤也者，子孙蕃育之谓也。
现代文：所谓万年，是说美名永远传扬。所谓胤，是指子孙生息繁衍。
English: The so-called "ten thousand years" refers to the eternal propagation of a good name, and the so-called "seed" refers to the generation of descendants.

古文：单子朝夕不忘成王之德，可谓不忝前哲矣。膺保明德，以佐王室，可谓广裕民人矣。
现代文：单公朝夕不忘成就王业的美德，可算是不辱前贤了；保有正大的德行，用以辅佐王室，可算是厂被民众了。
English: A single prince who never forgets the virtue of accomplishing the king's business day and night can be regarded as not humiliating the predecessors; maintaining a positive virtue to assist the royal family can be regarded as a factory by the people.

古文：若能类善物，以混厚民人者，必有章誉蕃育之祚，则单子必当之矣，单若有阙，必兹君之子孙实续之，不出于他矣。 
现代文：像这样能学习前人的嘉言懿行，使民众敦厚淳朴，必定有声名显赫、子孙昌盛的福祉，单公一定会得到的。即使单公得不到，那他的子孙后代必定会得到，而不会是他人。 
English: In this way, if he can learn the virtuous words and deeds of his predecessors and make the people humble and simple, he will surely have a prestigious reputation and the welfare of his children and grandchildren will be prosperous, and he will certainly get it. Even if he does not get it, his children and grandchildren will certainly get it, and not others.

