古文：谢良佐字显道，寿春上蔡人。
现代文：谢良佐，字显道，寿春上蔡县人。
English: Xie Liangzuo, Zhi Xian Dao, Shuchun Shang Cai County people.

古文：与游酢、吕大临、杨时在程门，号 四先生 。
现代文：与游酢、吕大临、杨时拜师在程颐门下，号称 四先生 。
English: With Yu Zui, Lv Dajin and Yang Shibai under the tutelage of Cheng Yu, he was known as Mr. Four.

古文：登进士第。
现代文：考中录为进士第。
English: The middle school entrance examination is the first step to becoming a teacher.

古文：建中靖国初，官京师，召对，忤旨去。
现代文：建中靖国初年，在京师任官，被召入对，违背圣旨而离职。
English: In the first year of the construction of the Yasukuni Shrine, he served as an official in the capital, was summoned to court, and left office in violation of the holy will.

古文：监西京竹木场，坐口语系诏狱，废为民。
现代文：担任西京竹木场监，因口语招致狱事，诏令废为民。
English: He served as the superintendent of the Saikyo Bamboo and Wood Yard. He was sent to prison for using colloquial language, and the edict was repealed.

古文：良佐记问该赡，对人称引前史，至不差一字。
现代文：谢良佐记问对答准确详细，和人谈话引用前代史文，以致不差一个字。
English: Xie Liangzuo recorded the questions and answers accurately and in detail, and quoted the previous historical texts in conversation with others, so that he did not miss a word.

古文：事有未彻，则颡有泚。
现代文：事有未清楚的，则额上流汗。
English: If something is unclear, the forehead sweats.

古文：与程颐别一年，复来见，问其所进，曰： 但去得一 矜 字尔。 颐喜，谓朱光庭曰： 是子力学，切问而近思者也。 所著《论语说》行于世。
现代文：与程颐分别一年，又来拜见，问他有什么进步，说： 只是去掉了一个 矜 字。 程颐很高兴，对朱光庭说： 这个学子发奋学习，好问而近思。 所写的著作有《论语说》行于世。
English: After a year's separation from Cheng Yao, he came to see him again, asked him what progress he had made, and said, "I only removed one  character." Cheng Yao was very happy and said to Zhu Guangting, "This student is eager to learn, easy to ask questions, and thoughtful.

古文：游酢字定夫，建州建阳人。
现代文：尹火享，字彦明，一字德充，世代都是洛阳人。
English: Yin Huo Jian, the character Yan Ming, and the character Dezhong, all belong to the Luoyang generation.

古文：与兄醇以文行知名，所交皆天下士。程颐见之京师，谓其资可以进道。
现代文：曾祖父尹仲宣七个儿子，而其中两个儿子有名气。长子尹源，字子渐，是称为河内先生；次子朱洙，字师鲁，是称为河南先生。
English: The great-grandfather, Yin Zhongxuan, had seven sons, and two of his sons were famous. The eldest son, Yin Yuan, known as Zizian, was called Mr. Hanoi; the second son, Zhu Xi, known as Shilu, was called Mr. Henan.

古文：程颢兴扶沟学，招使肄业，尽弃其学而学焉。
现代文：尹源生儿子尹林，官至虞部员外郎。尹林生儿子尹火享。
English: Yin Yuan's son, Yin Lin, was the second son of a high-ranking official and member of the State Affairs Commission. Yin Lin's son, Yin Huo Jie, was the third son.

古文：第进士，调萧山尉。近臣荐其贤，召为太学录。
现代文：少年时，以程颐为老师，曾经应试科举，打开策论文题看到有要求诛杀元诸臣的议论，尹火享说 ：噫，难道可以争禄利吗？ 
English: When he was a boy, he took Cheng Yu as his teacher, and when he had to take an exam, he opened the essay topic and saw the discussion that there was a requirement to kill former ministers. Yin Huoqiang said: "Well, is it possible to compete for profits?

古文：迁博士，以奉亲不便，求知河清县。
现代文：没有对答就出来了，告诉程颐说： 尹火享不再来应付进士的科举考试了。 程颐说 ：你有母亲在世。 
English: Without answering, he came out and told Cheng Yu: "Yin Huo Jian is no longer here to deal with the entrance examination for cadets." Cheng Yu said: "Your mother is still alive.

古文：范纯仁守颍昌府，辟府教授。纯仁入相，复为博士。
现代文：尹火享回来告诉他的母亲陈氏，母亲听后说： 我知道你以善作为人生的根本，而知道你不是以禄利作为人生的根本。 程颐听后说 ：贤惠的母亲！ 
English: After hearing this, his mother said, "I know that you take goodness as the foundation of your life, but I know that you don't take Luo Li as the foundation of your life." After listening to this, Cheng Hui said, "Mother of virtue!

古文：签书齐州、泉州判官。
现代文：于是尹火享终身不再参加科举。
English: As a result, Yin Huoying will no longer participate in the exam for life.

古文：晚得监察御史，历知汉阳军、和舒濠三州而卒。
现代文：尹火享从师于学，与河南张绎同时，张绎以识见很高而著称，尹火享以言行笃实而闻名。
English: Yin Huo-cheng was a teacher and a scholar, and at the same time as Henan Zhangyuan, Zhangyuan was famous for his high insight, and Yin Huo-cheng was famous for his words and deeds.

古文：张绎字思叔，河南寿安人。家甚微，年长未知学，佣力于市，出闻邑官传呼声，心慕之，问人曰： 何以得此？ 人曰： 此读书所致尔。 即发愤力学，遂以文名。
现代文：程颐死了以后，尹火享聚集学生在洛阳教授，不是吊丧、看病期间，从来足不出门，士大夫们为此崇敬他为一代宗师。靖康初年，种师道荐举尹火享的德行可备作劝讲，召他到京师，他不想留下任职，赐号 和靖处士 。
English: After Cheng Yu's death, Yin Huo-cheng gathered students to teach in Luoyang, and never left home during the period of mourning or medical treatment. For this reason, the scholars and doctors revered him as a generation of guru. In the first year of Jing Kang, the teacher recommended that the virtue of Yin Huo-cheng could be used as a persuasion, and called him to the Beijing division. He did not want to stay in office, and gave him the name and title of Jing.

古文：预乡里计偕，谓科举之习不足为，尝游僧舍，见僧道楷，将祝发从之。时周行己官河南，警之曰： 何为舍圣人之学而学佛？异日程先生归，可师也。 会程颐还自涪，乃往受业，颐赏其颖悟。
现代文：户部尚书梅执礼、御史中丞吕好问、户部侍郎邵溥、中书舍人胡安国一齐奏道 ：河南布衣尹火享学识穷极根本，德行全部中和，言行可为师以供效法，度量器识可以担当大任，近年招揽的名士没有能够胜过他的。
English: Hombu Shangshumei officiated, Goshi Chujo Lyu Haoqian, Hombu waiter Shao Jun, and middle school librarian Juan Guo all gave a speech: Henan Buyi Yin Hui enjoys the most fundamental knowledge, all virtues are neutralized, words and deeds can be used as a teacher for imitation, and knowledge of measuring instruments can play a big role. In recent years, famous people have not been able to surpass him.

古文：读《孟子》 志士不忘在沟壑，勇士不忘丧其元 ，慨然若有得。
现代文：朝廷特地召他来，而又命他以处士的身分回归，使尹火享身怀治国韬略，不为时代所用，不符合陛下侧席求贤、礼贤下士的用意。希望特别加以识别、擢升，以慰藉士大夫们的愿望。 没有得到回答。
English: The Imperial Court specially summoned him, and ordered him to return as an officer, so that Yin Hui would enjoy himself with a strategy for governing the country, not for the times, not in line with the intention of His Majesty's side seat to seek out and reward good officers. He hoped to be specially identified and promoted to comfort the wishes of the officers and doctors. No answer was received.

古文：未及仕而卒。颐尝言 吾晚得二士 ，谓绎与尹焞也。苏昞字季明，武功人。
现代文：第二年，金人攻陷洛阳，尹火享全家被害，尹火享昏死而后又苏醒，门人抬着他把他放到山谷中才得以幸免一死。
English: In the second year, the Jin people invaded Luoyang, and Yin Huo's whole family was killed. Yin Huo passed out and then woke up. The doormen carried him and put him in the valley before he could avoid death.

古文：始学于张载，而事二程卒业。
现代文：刘豫命伪帅赵斌以礼节聘请尹火享，不从，就以兵卒恐吓他。
English: Liu Yu ordered the pseudo-commander Zhao Bin to hire Yin Fuchen with courtesy. If he did not comply, he would threaten him with pawns.

古文：元祐末，吕大中荐之，起布衣为太常博士。
现代文：尹火享从商州逃奔到蜀，到阆中，从程颐的门人吕稽中那里得到程颐《易传》十卦，又在他的女婿那里得到了全本，既而接受了它。
English: Yin Huo-hong fled from Shangzhou to Shu, to Shanzhong, where he obtained Cheng Yao's "I Chuan" Shenga from Cheng Yao's disciple Lu Jizhong, and from his son-in-law, where he obtained the entire book, and accepted it.

古文：坐元符上书入邪籍，编管饶州，卒。尹焞字彦明，一字德充，世为洛人。
现代文：绍兴四年，在涪州安顿下来。涪州，程颐读《易》的地方，辟建三畏斋以居住，那一带的人都不认识他。
English: After four years in Shaoxing, he settled down in Ganzhou. In Ganzhou, the place where Cheng Yu read Yi, he built a monastery to live. People in that area did not know him.

古文：绍兴四年，止于涪。涪，颐读《易》地也，辟三畏斋以居，邦人不识其面。侍读范冲举焞自代，授左宣教郎，充崇政殿说书，以疾辞。范冲奏给五百金为行资，遣漕臣奉诏至涪亲遣。六年，始就道，作文祭颐而后行。
现代文：侍读范冲推举尹火享代替自己，授命左宣教郎，充任崇政殿说书，以疾病推辞。范冲上奏给他五百两金银作为到朝廷的旅行资费，派遣漕臣拿着诏令到达涪州亲自去迎接他。绍兴六年，才开始上路，做文祭祀程颐而后才行。
English: The attendant Fan Chong recommended Yin Huo Jian to replace him, and ordered him to become a missionary to the left. He was appointed to deliver a message to the Su Zheng Palace, but resigned due to illness. Fan Chong reported to him five hundred and two gold and silver as travel expenses to the imperial court, and sent Cao Jian with a decree to arrive in Zhangzhou to meet him in person. It took six years for Shaoxing to start on the road, and it was only after he had made the literary sacrifice that he could go.

古文：先是，崇宁以来，禁锢元祐学术，高宗渡江，始召杨时置从班，召胡安国居给舍，范冲、朱震俱在讲席，荐焞甚力。
现代文：先前，崇宁以来，禁锢元的学术，高宗渡江以后，才开始召杨时设置从班，召胡安国居住给舍，范冲、朱震都在讲席，竭力推荐尹火享。
English: Previously, since Chongning, Gaozong Wujiang, a scholar who had been imprisoned, only began to call Yang Shi to set up a class and call Huang Guo to live in the house. Fan Chong and Zhu Zhen were in the lecture hall, and they tried their best to recommend Yin Hui.

古文：既召，而左司谏公辅上疏攻程氏之学，乞加屏绝。
现代文：已经召尹火享，而左司谏陈公辅上疏文攻击程氏的学问，请求加以屏退断绝。
English: Yin Huo-cheng has already been summoned, and the Left Party Secretary Chen Gong-fu has written an attack on Cheng's learning, requesting that it be blocked and cut off.

古文：焞至九江，上奏曰： 臣僚上言，程颐之学惑乱天下。
现代文：尹火享到九江，又上奏说 ：有的僚属上书说，程颐的学问造成天下人的思想混乱、迷惑。
English: When Yin Huo reached Jiujiang, he made another report: "Some of my colleagues have written to say that the teachings of Cheng Xuan have caused confusion and bewilderment in the minds of people around the world.

古文：焞实师颐垂二十年，学之既专，自信甚笃。
现代文：尹火享的确师事程颐有二十年，学业之专，自信很是笃实。
English: Yin Huo Jian has been a teacher for 20 years. He is an expert in his studies, and his self-confidence is very solid.

古文：使焞滥列经筵，其所敷绎，不过闻于师者。
现代文：使尹火享滥竽充数列于经筵之位，所做的学问、议论，不过都是从老师那里得来的。
English: All the learning and discussions that Yin Hu enjoyed were obtained from his teachers.

古文：舍其所学，是欺君父，加以疾病衰耗，不能支持。 遂留不进。
现代文：舍弃这样的学问，是欺骗皇上，加上疾病衰耗，体力不能支持。 于是停留不进。
English: To abandon such learning is to deceive the emperor, and with the decline of the disease, the physical strength can not be supported.

古文：胡安国奉祠居衡阳，上书言： 欲使学者蹈中庸，师孔、孟，而禁不从程颐之学，是入室而不由户。 
现代文：胡安国奉祠职居衡阳，上书说： 想使学者行中庸之教，师法孔、孟之学，而禁止不从程颐的学说，是进入房间而不从房门口通过。 
English: Hu'an Guo, who lived in Hengyang and served as a priest, wrote: "If you want scholars to practice the teachings of the Middle Way and teach the teachings of Confucius and Mencius, but forbid them from following the teachings of Cheng Xuan, then you are entering a room without passing through the door.

古文：朱震引疾告去，时赵鼎去位，张浚独相，于是召安国，俾以内祠兼侍读，而上章荐焞，言其拒刘豫之节，且谓其所学所养有大过人者，乞令江州守臣疾速津送至国门。
现代文：朱震因疾病告辞而去，当时赵鼎已离职去位，张浚独自担任丞相，于是召任胡安国，令他以内祠兼任侍读，而上奏章推荐尹火享，告诉他拒绝刘豫之类的变节行为，又称道他的所学所养都有大大地超过别人的地方，请求令江州守臣迅速用船渡送到国门。
English: Zhu Zhen resigned due to illness. At that time, Zhao Ding had left office and was dethroned, Zhang Jun served as chancellor alone, so he was called to Hu'an Guo, and he was made to serve as an attendant in the inner shrine, and the last chapter recommended Yin Huo Jian, telling him to refuse Liu Yu's act of defection, and also said that his education and upbringing were greatly superior to others, and requested that Jiangzhou Shouchen be quickly sent to Guomen by ferry.

古文：复以疾辞，上曰： 焞可谓恬退矣。 诏以秘书郎兼说书，趣起之，焞始入见就职。
现代文：他又以疾病推辞，皇上说 ：尹火享可谓恬然隐士了。 诏任他为秘书郎兼说书，催他接受任命，尹火享才开始入见就职。
English: He also declined the appointment on the grounds of illness, and the emperor said: "Yin Huo-cheng has become a recluse." The emperor appointed him as secretary and advisor, and urged him to accept the appointment, and only then did Yin Huo-cheng begin to assume his duties.

古文：八年，除秘书少监，未几，力辞求去。
现代文：绍兴八年，担任秘书少监，不久，竭力辞职请求离任。
English: In Shaoxing for eight years, he served as a secretary and junior inspector, and soon, he tried his best to resign and asked to leave his post.

古文：上语参知政事刘大中曰： 焞未论所学渊源，足为后进矜式，班列得老成人，亦是朝廷气象。 乃以焞直徽猷阁，主管万寿观，留侍经筵。
现代文：高宗皇上告诉参知政事刘大中说 ：尹火享没有论说他的学问渊源，足可以为后进效法的模式，得老成持重之人，也是朝廷的新气象。 于是任命尹火享直徽猷阁，主管万寿观，留侍经筵。
English: Emperor Gaozong told Liu Da, the political advisor to the prefectural governor: "Yin Huo Jian did not discuss the source of his learning, he is enough of a model for the backward to emulate, he has become an important person, and he is also a new phenomenon in the imperial court. Therefore, he appointed Yin Huo Jian Zhi Gu, the head of the view of longevity, to remain the attendant of the sutras.

古文：资善堂翊善朱震疾亟，荐焞自代。
现代文：资善堂翊善官朱震疾病急切，举荐尹火享代替自己。
English: Zhu Zhen, an official of Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall of the Shishan Hall

古文：辅臣入奏，上惨然曰： 杨时物故，胡安国与震又亡，朕痛惜之。 赵鼎曰： 尹焞学问渊源，可以继震。 上指奏牍曰： 震亦荐焞代资善之职，但焞微聩，恐教儿费力尔。 除太常少卿，仍兼说书。
现代文：辅臣入朝奏上，高宗皇帝悲怆地说： 杨时已去世，胡安国与朱震又死了，我为此感到十分痛惜。 赵鼎说： 尹火享的学问渊源，可以承继朱震。 皇上指着奏牍说 ：朱震也举荐尹火享代替他的资善堂的职务，但尹火享的耳朵有些聋，恐怕教授小孩有些费力。 任命他担任太常少卿，仍然兼职说书。
English: The Emperor Gaozong said sadly, "Yang Shi has passed away, and Juan Guo and Zhu Zhen have also died, and I feel very sorry about this." Zhao Ding said, "Yin Huo Jian's source of learning can succeed Zhu Zhen." The Emperor pointed to the calligraphy and said, "Zhu Zhen also recommended Yin Huo Jian to replace him in the position of Shishentang, but Yin Huo Jian's ears are a little deaf, so I'm afraid it's a little difficult for him to teach children." He appointed him as a too-frequent junior minister, but he still worked part-time as a storyt

古文：未几，称疾在告，除权礼部侍郎兼侍讲。
现代文：不久，称有疾病要求告退，暂任礼部侍郎兼侍讲。
English: Soon after, he was asked to step down due to illness, and was temporarily appointed as an attendant and speaker of the ceremonial department.

古文：时金人遣张通古、萧哲来议和，焞上疏曰：
现代文：当时金人派遣张通古、萧哲来议和，尹火享上奏疏说：
English: At that time, the Jin people sent Zhang Tonggu and Xiao Zhe to discuss peace, and Yin Huoying said:

古文：臣伏见本朝有辽、金之祸，亘古未闻，中国无人，致其猾乱。
现代文： 我暗中预测本朝有辽、金的祸患，这是从古代以来所没有听说过的，中国缺乏人才，以致奸猾之徒作乱。
English: I secretly predict that this dynasty will suffer the scourge of Liao and Jin, which has not been heard of since ancient times. China lacks talent, so that treacherous people will make trouble.

古文：昨者城下之战，诡诈百出，二帝北狩，皇族播迁，宗社之危，已绝而续。
现代文：以前城下之战，诡计诈谋百出，宋徽宗、钦宗二皇帝去北方狩猎，皇族播传迁徙，宗社国家的危险，先已断绝而今又继续。
English: In the past, the war under the castle, full of trickery and deception, the emperors Song Huizong and Qin Zong II went to the north to hunt, the royal family propagated and migrated, and the danger of the Soshe country had been cut off, but now it continues.

古文：陛下即位以来十有二年，虽中原未复，仇敌未殄，然而赖祖宗德泽之厚，陛下勤抚之至，亿兆之心无有离异。
现代文：陛下即位以来已有十二年，虽然中原没有恢复，仇敌没有消灭，然而依靠祖宗深厚的德泽，陛下勤奋地抚慰、关心民众，可谓无微不至，亿兆民众之心没有离心离德的。
English: It has been twelve years since His Majesty ascended the throne. Although the Central Plains have not recovered and the enemy has not been eliminated, His Majesty has diligently comforted and cared for the people, relying on the profound virtue of his ancestors. It can be described as meticulous, and the hearts of hundreds of trillions of people have not been centrifuged.

古文：前年徽宗皇帝、宁德皇后崩问遽来，莫究不豫之状，天下之人痛心疾首，而陛下方且屈意降志，以迎奉梓宫、请问讳日为事。
现代文：前年徽宗皇帝、宁德皇后死信息突然而来，没法去探究他们不快乐的情状，天下的人都痛心疾首，而陛下方且屈意降志，以迎奉梓宫、请问死亡日期，料理后事。
English: The year before last, the news of the death of Emperor Huizong and Empress Ningde came out of the blue, and it was impossible to investigate their unhappy state of affairs. People all over the world were heartbroken, and His Majesty's government resigned itself to welcoming the Zi Gong, asking for the date of death, and preparing for the aftermath.

古文：今又为此议，则人心日去，祖宗积累之业，陛下十二年勤抚之功，当决于此矣。
现代文：现在又为此议，则人心已一天天地疏远，祖宗积累之业，陛下执政十二年的勤奋安抚之功，都当决定于这之中了。
English: Now that it is being discussed again, the hearts of the people have been alienated day by day, and the accumulated achievements of our ancestors, and the diligent pacification of His Majesty's twelve years in power, should all be decided in this.

古文：不识陛下亦尝深谋而熟虑乎，抑在廷之臣不以告也？
现代文：不知陛下也曾为此而深谋远虑了否？还不知在朝廷的大臣是否以此相告？
English: I don't know if His Majesty had also thought about this? I don't know if the ministers in the Imperial Court reported this?

古文：《礼》曰： 父母之仇不共戴天，兄弟之仇不反兵。 今陛下信仇敌之谲诈，而觊其肯和以纾目前之急，岂不失不共戴天、不反兵之义乎？
现代文： 《礼记》上说： 父母之仇不共戴天，兄弟之仇不回兵。 现在陛下相信仇敌的阴谋诡计，而希望他们肯和议以缓和目前军事紧急的状况，难道不是有失于不共戴天，不回兵的道义吗？
English: "The Book of Rites" says: "The enmity of parents is not worthy of heaven, the enmity of brothers is not worthy of returning soldiers. Now that His Majesty believes in the machinations of the enemy and hopes that they will be willing to negotiate to ease the current military emergency, isn't there a loss of the moral right not to be worthy of heaven and not to return soldiers?

古文：又况使人之来，以诏谕为名，以割地为要，今以不戴天之仇与之和，臣切为陛下痛惜之。
现代文：又况且派遣来的使者，以诏令谕旨的名义，以割地为主要目的，现在以不共戴天之仇与他们讲和，我急切地为陛下之举感到痛惜、伤心。
English: Moreover, the envoys who were sent, in the name of the edict of the emperor, with the main purpose of cutting the land, are now making peace with them with the vengeance of heaven. I urgently feel sorry and sad for His Majesty's action.

古文：或以金国内乱，惧我袭己，故为甘言以缓王师。
现代文：或者是因为金国内乱，害怕我们偷袭他，所以说好话以作为缓延我宋大兵压境之计。
English: Or maybe it's because Kim is in a state of internal turmoil and is afraid that we'll attack him by surprise, so he's saying nice things as a tactic to delay the invasion of his country by our Song Dynasty soldiers.

古文：倘或果然，尤当鼓士卒之心，雪社稷之耻，尚何和之为务？
现代文：假如果然是这样，尤其应当鼓舞我士卒之心，雪社稷之耻，哪里还有什么谈和的事情呢？ 
English: If this is the case, it should especially encourage the hearts of our soldiers. It is a shame for the Korean People's Army. Where is there anything to talk about peace?

古文：又移书秦桧言：
现代文：又写书信给秦桧说：
English: He also wrote a letter to Qin Yu saying:

古文：今北使在廷，天下忧愤，若和议一成，彼日益强，我日益怠，侵寻朘削，天下有被发左衽之忧。
现代文： 今北使在朝廷，天下人为之忧虑愤怒，假若和议一成，他日他们更强，我们日益困怠，侵略寻衅剥削，天下有成为金人奴隶的忧虑。
English: Now the North is at the imperial court, the whole world is worried and angry. If the peace talks are successful, they will be stronger the next day. We are becoming increasingly lazy, aggressive, provocative and exploitative. The whole world is worried about becoming a slave of the Kim people.

古文：比者，窃闻主上以父兄未返，降志辱身于九重之中有年矣，然亦自是未闻金人悔过，还二帝于沙漠。
现代文：近来，听说陛下以父亲徽宗、兄弟钦宗没有回返，降志辱身于九重之中已有一些年代了，然而，还是没有听说金人悔改过错，送还二帝于沙漠。
English: Recently, I heard that His Majesty had not returned with his father Huizong and brother Qinzong, and had been humiliated and humiliated for several years. However, I still did not hear that the Jin people had repented and sent the two emperors back to the desert.

古文：继之梓宫崩问不详，天下之人痛恨切骨，金人狼虎贪噬之性，不言可见。
现代文：接着梓宫崩问不详，天下之人为此切齿痛恨，金人如狼似虎贪婪吞噬的本性，不说即可见到。
English: Then, Zi Gong collapsed without a trace. People all over the world hated him bitterly for this. The wolf-like nature of Jinren could be seen.

古文：天下方将以此望于相公，觊有以革其已然，岂意为之已。
现代文：天下刚刚将以厚望寄托于相公，希望能够革除原来已有的妥协之议，难道你的意思是还要比已有的妥协之议更进一步吗？
English: The world has just pinned high hopes on the public-private partnership, hoping to eliminate the original compromise proposal. Do you mean to go further than the existing compromise proposal?

古文：甚乎。今之上策，莫如自治。
现代文： 现在的上策，不如自治。
English: The current best policy is not as good as autonomy.

古文：自治之要，内则进君子而远小人，外则赏当功而罚当罪，使主上孝弟通于神明，道德成于安强，勿以小智孑义而图大功，不胜幸甚。
现代文：自治的要点，内部则要进推君子，远逐小人。外部则要奖赏有功的，惩罚有罪过的，使皇上的孝悌通晓于神明，道德成于安逸强盛，不要以小聪明、小恩小惠而图取大功，则不胜感到很荣幸。 
English: As for the key points of self-governance, internally it is necessary to promote gentlemen and drive out villains. Externally, it is necessary to reward meritorious people and punish guilty ones, so that the emperor's filial piety is familiar with the gods, and morality becomes strong and prosperous. It is a great honor not to seek great achievements with small wisdom and small favors.

古文：疏及书皆不报，于是焞固辞新命。
现代文：所上奏疏及书信都没有得到回答，于是尹火享力求辞去新的任命。
English: Neither the petition nor the letter received a reply, so Yin Huo-hong tried to resign from the new appointment.

古文：九年，以徽猷阁待制提举万寿观兼侍讲，又辞，且奏言：
现代文：绍兴九年，尹火享以徽猷阁待制提举万寿观兼侍讲，又推辞，又上奏疏说：
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, Yin Huoying, with the support of Huiyang Pavilion, raised the concept of longevity and attended the lecture, but also declined, and then said:

古文：臣职在劝讲，蔑有发明，期月之间，病告相继，坐窃厚禄，无补圣聪。
现代文： 我的职责虽在劝讲，很少有什么新的发明，数月之间，疾病一个接一个，坐得优厚的俸禄，无补于圣上对我的赏识。
English: Although my duty is to persuade, I rarely come up with any new inventions, and months of illness, one after another, and a generous salary do not add to His Holiness's appreciation of me.

古文：先圣有言： 陈力就列，不能者止。 此当去者一也。
现代文：先圣先师们曾经说过 ：陈明其力班列于宫殿之中，不能够胜任的就理应辞职。 
English: The first saints and sages once said: Chen Ming's team is listed in the palace, and those who are not competent should resign.

古文：臣起自草茅，误膺召用，守道之语，形于训词，而臣贪恋宠荣，遂移素守，使朝廷非常不次之举，获怀利苟得之人。此当去者二也。
现代文：这是应当离职而去的第一点原因。我起自贫寒之家，误被召用，守道的言论，表现于训词，而我贪恋宠爱荣誉，改变了平素志向，使朝廷非常重要的举动，得到了怀利苟且之人，这是应当离职而去的第二点原因。
English: This is the first reason why I should leave office. I started from a poor family, I was mistakenly called, and my words of keeping the way were expressed in the precepts, while I coveted and loved honor, changed my usual aspirations, and made the court a very important move, and got a person who was diligent. This is the second reason why I should leave office.

古文：比尝不量分守，言及国事，识见迂陋，已验于今，迹其庸愚，岂堪时用。
现代文：近来我曾不衡量分守，言论涉及国事，识见迂腐浅陋，用现在的状况来检验，已显出庸俗愚笨的痕迹，岂能合于时用。
English: Recently, I did not measure the score, the speech involved national affairs, I saw the pedantry and shallowness, and tested it with the current situation, it has shown traces of vulgarity and stupidity, can it be suitable for the times.

古文：此当去者三也。
现代文：这是应当离职而去的第三点原因。
English: This is the third reason why you should leave your job.

古文：臣自擢春官，未尝供职，以疾乞去，更获超迁，有何功劳，得以祗受。
现代文：我自从擢升为春官，未曾上任供职，因疾病请求去职，反而获得非常的迁升，有什么功劳，得以这样的受用？
English: Since I was promoted to the position of Spring Official, I have not been in office for a long time. Due to illness, I requested to leave the post, but instead I received a very high promotion. What is the merit of being able to be used in this way?

古文：此当去者四也。
现代文：这是应当离职而去的第四点原因。
English: This is the fourth reason why you should leave your job.

古文：国朝典法，揆之礼经，年至七十，皆当致仕。
现代文：按照本朝的法律典制，推测于礼经的规定，年龄到了七十岁，都应当辞官归居。
English: According to the legal system of this dynasty, presumably in accordance with the provisions of the ritual, when they reach the age of seventy, they should resign and return home.

古文：今臣年齿已及，加以疾病，血气既衰，戒之在得。
现代文：现在我年龄已经到了，加上疾病，血气既已衰竭，不应再有所得。
English: Now that I'm old and sick, my energy is exhausted and I shouldn't have any more.

古文：此当去者五也。
现代文：这是应当离职而去的第五点原因。
English: This is the fifth reason why you should leave your job.

古文：臣闻圣君有从欲之仁，匹夫有莫夺之志，今臣有五当去之义，无一可留之理，乞检会累奏，放归田里。
现代文：我听说圣明的君主有崇尚仁义的欲望，匹夫有不能夺走的志向，现在我有五点当离职而去的理由，没有一点可以留任的道理，希望审查检核我多次的奏议，放还回归乡里而居。 
English: I have heard that the sovereign of the Holy Light has the desire to advocate benevolence and righteousness, and the peacock has the aspiration that cannot be taken away. Now I have five reasons to leave the post, and there is no reason to stay in the post. I hope that my repeated proposals will be reviewed and examined, and I will be allowed to return to the countryside.

古文：疏上，以焞提举江州太平观。
现代文：奏疏上后，以尹火享提举江州太平观。
English: After the recitation, Jiangzhou Taiping Guan was mentioned with Yin Huijian.

古文：引年告老，转一官致仕。
现代文：过一年告老还乡，转迁一官辞职归居。
English: After a year, he returned to his hometown. One official who had been transferred resigned and returned home.

古文：焞自入经筵，即乞休致，朝廷以礼留之；浚、鼎既去，秦桧当国，见焞议和疏及与桧书已不乐，至是，得求去之疏，遂不复留。
现代文：尹火享自从升入经筵，即请求休养辞官，朝廷以礼相待留任他；张浚、赵鼎既已去职，秦桧在朝中当权，看到尹火享有关议和的疏奏与送给秦桧的书信，已有不乐之色，到这时，得到尹火享请求离职而归的上疏，于是不再留用他。
English: When Yin Huo-cheng was promoted to the post of Secretary of the Central Military Commission, he requested to take a rest and recuperate, and the imperial court treated him with courtesy and kept him in his post. Zhang Jun and Zhao Ding had already left their posts, and Qin Yu was in power in the central government. Seeing Yin Huo-cheng's absence from the peace talks and his letter to Qin Yu, he was already unhappy. At this time, he received Yin Huo-cheng's request to leave his post and return to Shang Zuo, so he was no longer retained.

古文：十二年，卒。
现代文：绍兴十二年，死了。
English: In the twelfth year, King Mu passed away.

古文：当是时，学于程颐之门者固多君子，然求质直弘毅、实体力行若焞者盖鲜。
现代文：正是这一时期，曾从学于程颐门下的本有很多君子之人，然而，寻求性情直爽、弘毅、身体力行像尹火享这样的人大概很少。
English: It was during this period that there were many gentlemen who had studied under Cheng Yu. However, there were probably few people who sought to be straightforward, courageous, and physically active like Yin Huo Jian.

古文：颐尝以 鲁 许之，且曰： 我死，而不失其正者尹氏子也。 其言行见于《涪陵记善录》为详，有《论语解》及《门人问答》传于世。
现代文：程颐曾以 鲁 应允他，又说： 我死后，能保持而不失掉我的学问的正统的人，是尹氏之儿子。 尹火享的言行记载以《涪陵记善录》一书中为详，有著作《论语解》和《门人回答》传存于世。
English: Cheng Hui once answered him with "Lu" and said, "After my death, the person who can maintain the orthodoxy of my learning without losing it is the son of Yin Shi. The words and deeds of Yin Hui are recorded in detail in the book "Burying Records," and the works "On the Interpretation of Language" and "Answer from the Gate" have been passed down to the world.

古文：杨时字中立，南剑将乐人。
现代文：杨时，字中立，南剑州将乐县人。
English: Yang Shi, the word is neutral, a native of South Jianzhou Zhao Le County.

古文：幼颖异，能属文，稍长，潜心经史。
现代文：幼年时特别聪明，能做文章，稍长大以后，潜心于经典史书。
English: When he was a child, he was particularly clever and could write articles. When he was a little older, he concentrated on classic history books.

古文：熙宁九年，中进士第。
现代文：熙宁九年，考中进士第。
English: In the ninth year of the Heian period, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：时河南程颢与弟颐讲孔、孟绝学于熙、丰之际，河、洛之士翕然师之。
现代文：当时河南人程颢与弟弟程颐讲授孔子、孟子绝学于熙宁、元丰之际，河、洛一带的士大夫们全部拜他们为师。
English: At that time, when the Henan people Cheng Yao and his brother Cheng Yao lectured on Confucius and Mencius in Xining and Yuanfeng, all the scholars in the He and Luo areas worshiped them as teachers.

古文：时调官不赴，以师礼见颢于颍昌，相得甚欢。
现代文：杨时调任官职不去上任，以学生拜见老师的礼仪在颍昌谒见程颢，师生相处很是快乐。
English: When Yang was transferred to an official post, he did not go to take up the post. He met Cheng Yao with the etiquette of a student meeting a teacher in Wuchang, and the teachers and students were very happy to get along.

古文：其归也，颢目送之曰： 吾道南矣。 四年而颢死，时闻之，设位哭寝门，而以书赴告同学者。
现代文：到他回家的时候，程颢目送他时，自言自语地说： 我的道学思想已南传了。 四年以后，程颢死了，杨时知道后，设灵位，哭祭于寝门，而又用书信转告他的同学们。
English: When he got home, Cheng Yaome saw him off and said to himself, "My thoughts on Taoism have been transmitted to the south." Four years later, Cheng Yaome died, and after Yang Shi knew about it, he set up a shrine, made a wailing offering at his bedroom door, and sent a letter to his classmates.

古文：至是，又见程颐于洛，时盖年四十矣。
现代文：到这时，又在洛阳拜见程颐，杨时当时大概已有四十岁了。
English: By this time, he was in Luoyang to visit Cheng Yao, who was about forty years old at the time.

古文：一日见颐，颐偶瞑坐，时与游酢侍立不去，颐既觉，则门外雪深一尺矣。
现代文：有一天去见程颐，程颐偶然闭目休息而坐，杨时与游酢侍奉站立门外，一直没有离开。程颐睡觉醒后，门外下雪已深至一尺了。
English: One day, when he went to see Cheng Yao, Cheng Yao happened to close his eyes and sit down to rest. Yang Shi and You Zui stood outside the door and never left. After Cheng Yao went to sleep and woke up, the snow outside the door was already a foot deep.

古文：关西张载尝著《西铭》，二程深推服之，时疑其近于兼爱，与其师颐辨论往复，闻理一分殊之说，始豁然无疑。
现代文：关西张载曾经写作《西铭》，二程很推崇它，杨时怀疑它近于兼爱之论，与他的老师程颐多次辩论，听到理一分殊之说后，才豁然开朗，没有疑问。
English: Kansai Zhang Zai once wrote "Ximing," which was highly praised by Er Cheng. Yang Shi suspected that it was close to the theory of dual love, and had many debates with his teacher Cheng Yao. After hearing the theory of one point, he suddenly became cheerful, no doubt.

古文：杜门不仕者十年，久之，历知浏阳、余杭、萧山三县，皆有惠政，民思之不忘。
现代文：杜绝做官，闭门读书有十年，好久以后，杨时才历任浏阳、余杭、萧山县知县，都有好的政绩，民众思念他始终不忘。
English: He stopped being an official and studying behind closed doors for ten years. After a long time, Yang Shicun successively held the posts of Liuyang, Yuhang, Xiaoshan and Zhixian. He had good political achievements, and the people never forgot him.

古文：张舜民在谏垣，荐之，得荆州教授。
现代文：张舜民在谏司，推荐他，得荆州教授职。
English: Zhang Yimin was a professor in Jingzhou and recommended him.

古文：时安于州县，未尝求闻达，而德望日重，四方之士不远千里从之游，号曰龟山先生。
现代文：杨时安心于州县任上，未曾寻求闻达显贵，而日趋德高望重，四方各地的士大夫们不远千里都来与他从游交往，号称 龟山先生 。
English: Yang Shi was at ease in the position of prefectural governor. He did not seek fame or prominence, but he was increasingly respected for his virtue. Scholars and doctors from all over the country came thousands of miles to interact with him, known as Mr. Kameyama.

古文：时天下多故，有言于蔡京者，以为事至此必败，宜引旧德老成置诸左右，庶几犹可及，时宰是之。
现代文：当时天下多变故，有的人跟蔡京说，认为国家事已至此，必然失败，应该引荐德高年老的人置之于左右，或许还差不多，当时的宰相认为此话有理。
English: At that time, the world was very changeable, so some people said to Cai Jing that they thought that the country had come to this, it would inevitably fail, and it should be recommended that people with high moral standards should be placed on the right and left. Perhaps it was similar. The prime minister at the time thought this was reasonable.

古文：会有使高丽者，国主问龟山安在，使回以闻。
现代文：正逢有使节去高丽，皇上问龟山先生在哪里，使者回话告诉他。
English: When an envoy was on his way to Korea, the emperor asked where Mr. Kameyama was, and the envoy told him.

古文：召为秘书郎，迁著作郎。
现代文：杨时因此被召任为秘书郎、迁任著作郎。
English: As a result, Yang Shi was called to be a secretary and moved to be a writer.

古文：及面对，奏曰：
现代文：到面陈朝对，上奏说：
English: Chen Chao said to him face to face, and the prelude said:

古文：尧、舜曰 允执厥中 ，孟子曰 汤执中 ，《洪范》曰 皇建其有极 ，历世圣人由斯道也。
现代文： 尧、舜说 诚实，执于中 ，孟子说： 商汤执中 ，《洪范》上说： 君主建立的原则是至高无上的 ，各代圣人都是遵循这个道义。
English: Zou, Zou said: Honesty, adherence to the middle, Mencius said: Shang Tang adhered to the middle, "Hong Fan" said: The principle established by the monarch is supreme, and all generations of saints follow this morality.

古文：熙宁之初，大臣文六艺之言以行其私，祖宗之法纷更殆尽。
现代文：熙宁之初，大臣著文说六艺之言以行其私，祖宗之法纷纷更革殆尽。
English: At the beginning of Xianning, the minister wrote that the words of the six arts should be practiced, and the laws of the ancestors should be improved one after another.

古文：元祐继之，尽复祖宗之旧，熙宁之法一切废革。
现代文：元继熙宁年号以后，全部恢复祖宗的旧法，而熙宁年间新立的一切法规又全部废革。
English: After the year of the Yuan following the Xining, all the old laws of the ancestors were restored, and all the newly established laws and regulations during the Xining period were completely abolished.

古文：至绍圣、崇宁抑又甚焉，凡元祐之政事著在令甲，皆焚之以灭其迹。
现代文：至绍圣、崇宁年间又更加厉害了，凡是元年间的政事法令写入律令的，都焚烧了以灭其迹。
English: During the reigns of Shosheng and Chongning, it became even more severe. All the political laws and decrees written into the ritsuryo during the Yuan Dynasty were burned to erase their traces.

古文：自是分为二党，缙绅之祸至今未殄。
现代文：从此以后，官吏们之间所结成怨愤、祸害甚至现在还未消灭。
English: Since then, the bitterness and mischief between officials have not been eliminated even now.

古文：臣愿明诏有司，条具祖宗之法，著为纲目，有宜于今者举而行之，当损益者损益之，元祐、熙、丰姑置勿问，一趋于中而已。
现代文：我愿明白地诏令有司，条奏具上祖宗的法令，著为纲目，有适宜于现在的就选择举荐出来加以推行，应当修改减损增益的，就减损或增益，不论元、熙宁或元丰年间的，都暂时放置不问，一切趋于中而已。 
English: I would like to clearly decree that the laws and decrees of the ancestors of the previous generation should be written down and implemented, and that if there is a suitable choice for now, it should be recommended and implemented. If the loss and gain should be modified, the loss or gain, whether in the Yuan, Xianning or Yuanfeng years, should be temporarily left unquestioned, and everything should be in the middle.

古文：朝廷方图燕云，虚内事外，时遂陈时政之弊，且谓： 燕云之师宜退守内地，以省转输之劳，募边民为弓弩手，以杀常胜军之势。 又言： 都城居四达之衢，无高山巨浸以为阻卫，士人怀异心，缓急不可倚仗。 执政不能用。
现代文：朝廷刚想图谋攻取燕州、云州等地，内地空虚，外部兵重，杨时于是陈述时政的弊端，又说： 燕州、云州的军队应当退守内地，以减省转送运输的劳苦，募集边民担任弓弩手，以形成攻杀常胜军的形势。 又说 ：都城位于四通八达的冲要之地，没有高山大河以为阻隔防卫，士人心怀异心，一旦遭遇急变就不可依仗。 宰相执政不能用。
English: The imperial court had just planned to attack Yanzhou, Yunnan and other places, the inland was empty, and there were heavy foreign troops. Yang Shi then stated the drawbacks of the current government, and said: The armies of Yanzhou and Yunnan should retreat to the inland to save the labor of transportation, and recruit the border people to serve as archers to form a situation of attacking and killing the victorious army. He also said: The capital city is located in the middle of nowhere, there is no high mountain river to block the defense, the hearts of the soldiers harbor dissent, and once it encounters a sudden change, it cannot be relied on. The prime minister cannot be used to govern.

古文：登对，力陈君臣警戒，正在无虞之时，乞为《宣和会计录》，以周知天下财物出入之数。
现代文：登朝入对，力陈君臣应当示警严戒于没有忧虑的时候，请求设置《宣和会计录》，以告知天下财物支出与收入的数字。
English: If you ascend to the throne, urge Chen Junchen to be alert and strictly warn that when there is no anxiety, you should request the establishment of the "Proclamation and Accounting Record" to inform the world of the figures of expenditure and income of property.

古文：徽宗首肯之。
现代文：宋徽宗点头肯定了他的意见。
English: Song Huizong nodded and affirmed his opinion.

古文：除迩英殿说书。
现代文：杨时任命为迩英殿说书。
English: Yang Shi was appointed as the narrator of the Fu Ying Palace.

古文：闻金人入攻，谓执政曰： 今日事势如积薪已然，当自奋励，以竦动观听。
现代文：听说金人入攻，对宰相执政说： 今天的事之大势如堆积的柴草已燃烧，应当自己努力奋斗，观察动静。
English: Hearing that the Jin people had invaded, he said to the prime minister in power: The great momentum of today's events is like a pile of firewood that has been burned. You should work hard and observe the movement.

古文：若示以怯懦之形，委靡不振，则事去矣。
现代文：假若显示出怯懦的情形，萎靡不振，那么天下大势就无可挽回了。
English: If it shows cowardice and weakness, the world situation will be irreversible.

古文：昔汲黯在朝，淮南寝谋。
现代文：过去汲黯在朝主事，淮南王就停止策划阴谋。
English: In the past, the imperial court was in charge, and King Huainan stopped plotting conspiracies.

古文：论黯之才，未必能过公孙弘辈也，特其直气可以镇压奸雄之心尔。
现代文：以汲黯的才能而论，未必能超过公孙弘辈之类，只是其特别的正直气概可以镇压奸雄的邪心。
English: As far as his talent is concerned, he may not be able to surpass the likes of Gongsun Hongzai, but his special honesty can suppress the evil heart of the villain.

古文：朝廷威望弗振，使奸雄一以弘辈视之，则无复可为也。
现代文：朝廷威望不振，就会使奸雄们都把朝廷大臣当作公孙弘辈，那么国家就会无所作为。
English: If the prestige of the imperial court is not strong, it will cause the villains to regard the ministers of the imperial court as grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and then the state will do nothing.

古文：要害之地，当严为守备，比至都城，尚何及哉？
现代文：要害的地方，应当严加防守备战，否则敌军到了都城，还来得及吗？
English: The key areas should be strictly defended and prepared for battle. Otherwise, when the enemy army reaches the capital, will it be too late?

古文：近边州军宜坚壁清野，勿与之战，使之自困。
现代文：靠近边境的州军县地应当坚壁清野，不要与他们作战，使他们自己成为困兽。
English: The prefectures and counties close to the border should be strong and clear, and not fight with them, so that they themselves become a beast of burden.

古文：若攻战略地，当遣援兵追袭，使之腹背受敌，则可以制胜矣。 且谓： 今日之事，当以收人心为先。
现代文：假若攻城略地，应当派遣援兵追剿袭击，使它们腹背受敌，那么就可以取得对敌人的胜利。 又说 ：今天的事情，应当以收取人心为先务。
English: If, when attacking a city or place, reinforcements should be sent in pursuit of the attack, and they should be made to suffer at the enemy's hands, then victory over the enemy can be achieved.He also said: Today's business should be to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：人心不附，虽有高城深池、坚甲利兵，不足恃也。
现代文：人心不依附，虽然有高的城墙、深的护城河，坚甲利兵，还是不足以依靠。
English: People's hearts are not attached to it. Although it has high walls, a deep moat, and well-armed soldiers, it is still not enough to rely on.

古文：免夫之役，毒被海内，西城聚敛，东南花石，其害尤甚。
现代文：免夫之役，毒害扩展于海内全国，西城的聚敛，东南花石纲的搜刮，它们所造成的祸害特别厉害。
English: The campaign to get rid of the husband, the spread of the poison throughout the whole country, the gathering of the western locusts, and the scavenging of the southeastern flowers and stones, the scourge caused by them is particularly severe.

古文：前此盖尝罢之，诏墨未干，而花石供奉之舟已衔尾矣。
现代文：以前大概曾经罢免过，所下诏令的墨迹还没有干，而东南运送花石纲的船队已首尾相接到京城了。
English: There had probably been a recall before, the ink of the issued edict was not yet dry, and the fleet of ships transporting the flowers and stones from the southeast had already arrived in the capital.

古文：今虽复申前令，而祸根不除，人谁信之？
现代文：现在虽然又重申从前罢免的诏令，然而祸根不除，还有谁人相信朝廷呢？
English: Now, although the previously revoked edict has been reiterated, the evil has not been eradicated. Who still trusts the imperial court?

古文：欲致人和，去此三者，正今日之先务也。 
现代文：想致人和，罢去这三条，正是今天的当急之务。 
English: If you want to reach out to people, these three points are today's top priority.

古文：金人围京城，勤王之兵四集，而莫相统一。
现代文：原金兵围攻京城，各地勤王的军队四方来聚集，而没有谁相互统一。
English: The original gold soldiers besieged the capital, and the king-loving troops from all over the country gathered in all directions, but no one unified with each other.

古文：时言： 唐九节度之师不立统帅，虽李、郭之善用兵，犹不免败衄。
现代文：杨时说 ：唐代九个节度使的军队不设立统帅，虽当时大将李光弼、郭子仪等善于用兵，最后还是不免失败。
English: Yang Shi said: The armies of the nine Tang Dynasty emperors did not have a commander-in-chief. Although the generals Li Guangyao and Guo Ziyi were good at using soldiers at that time, they eventually failed.

古文：今诸路乌合之众，臣谓当立统帅，一号令，示纪律，而后士卒始用命。 又言： 童贯为三路大帅，敌人侵疆，弃军而归，孥戮之有余罪，朝廷置之不问，故梁方平、何灌皆相继而遁。
现代文：现在各路乌合之众，我认为应当设立统帅，统一号令，告示纪律，而后士卒始用命行动。 又说： 童贯身为三路的将帅，敌人侵城略地，他弃军而逃回，他被杀掉罪行还有余，朝廷相反却置之不问其罪，故梁方平、何灌都相继逃遁。
English: Now that the rabble is gathering from all directions, I think it is necessary to set up a commander-in-chief, issue unified orders and announce discipline, and then the soldiers will begin to act according to their orders. He also said: Tong Guan was a three-way commander-in-chief, the enemy invaded the city, he abandoned the army and fled back, he was killed and his crime was more than enough, but the court, on the contrary, did not question his crime, so Liang Fangping and He Guan all fled one after another.

古文：当正典刑，以为臣子不忠之戒。
现代文：应当正法受刑，以作为臣子不忠诚的惩戒。
English: He should be punished according to the law as a punishment for the disloyalty of a vassal.

古文：童贯握兵二十余年，覆军杀将，驯至今日，比闻防城仍用阉人，覆车之辙，不可复蹈。 疏上，除右谏议大夫兼侍讲。
现代文：童贯掌握兵权二十多年，兵败将死，驯至今天，近来听说防守城邑仍然用宦官，前面覆车之借鉴，不可重蹈覆辙。 奏疏上后，任命他担任右谏议大夫兼侍讲。
English: Tong Quan held military power for more than 20 years. He was on the brink of defeat, and he has been tamed to this day. Recently, it was heard that eunuchs were still used to defend cities, and the example of covering the front of the car should not be repeated. After the report was narrowed down, he was appointed to serve as the right-hand doctor and assistant speaker.

古文：敌兵初退，议者欲割三镇以讲和，时极言其不可，曰： 河朔为朝廷重地，而三镇又河朔之要藩也。
现代文：敌兵刚刚退却，议和的人就想割让三镇与敌讲和，杨时特别陈述不可这样做，说： 河朔为朝廷的重要地区，而三镇又是河朔的重要屏障。
English: As soon as the enemy soldiers retreated, the peace negotiators wanted to cede the three towns to the enemy for peace talks. Yang Shi made a special statement that this should not be done, saying: Heshuo is an important area for the imperial court, and the three towns are an important barrier for Heshuo.

古文：自周世宗迄太祖、太宗，百战而后得之，一旦弃之北庭，使敌骑疾驱，贯吾腹心，不数日可至京城。
现代文：从周世宗到宋太祖、宋太宗，打了上百次战役才夺回了这块地方，一旦把它丢弃给北方的小朝廷，使敌人骑马任意驰驱，通贯我腹心地区，不几天就可到达京城。
English: From Zhou Shizong to Song Taizu and Song Taizong, it took hundreds of battles to recapture this place. Once it was abandoned to the small court in the north, the enemy rode on horseback and drove at will, passing through the area of my confidant, and could reach the capital in a few days.

古文：今闻三镇之民以死拒之，三镇拒其前，吾以重兵蹑其后，尚可为也。
现代文：现在听说三镇的民众以死相抵抗，三镇拒敌于前，我们以重兵跟随其后，还可有所作为。
English: Now I hear that the people of the three towns resisted to the death, the three towns refused to advance, we followed them with heavy troops, and we can still make a difference.

古文：若种师道、刘光世皆一时名将，始至而未用，乞召问方略。 疏上，钦宗诏出师，而议者多持两端，时抗疏曰： 闻金人驻磁、相，破大名，劫虏驱掠，无有纪极，誓墨未干，而背不旋踵，吾虽欲专守和议，不可得也。
现代文：如种师道、刘光世都是一时名将，刚刚达到而没有用，请求召他们入朝询问破敌的办法。 奏疏上后，钦宗诏令出兵，而参加议论的人多持两端，模棱两可，杨时抗疏说 ：听说金人驻守磁州、相州，攻破大名，抢劫掳掠，没有法纪，混乱到了极点，发誓议和的墨迹还没有干，而马上又不信守诺言，翻脸即不认账，我们虽然想去信守和议，是不可能的。
English: For example, Liu Guangxu and Liu Shidao were both famous generals at the time, and it was useless to ask them to go to the DPRK to inquire about how to defeat the enemy. After the report was issued, Emperor Qin issued an edict to send troops, and the people who participated in the discussion mostly held both ends, ambiguous, Yang Shiguo said: I heard that the Jin people were stationed in the magnetic state and the relative state, broke through the daimyo, robbed and plundered, there was no law and order, and the confusion reached the extreme, the ink of the sworn discussion was not dry, and immediately they did not keep their promises, and

古文：夫越数千里之远，犯人国都，危道也。
现代文：金兵越走几千里远，进犯别人的国都，是危险的手段。
English: Invading other people's capitals thousands of miles away is a dangerous strategy.

古文：彼见勤王之师四面而集，亦惧而归，非爱我而不攻。
现代文：他们知道勤王的军队四面而来，也因此害怕而返回，并不是爱护我朝而不进攻。
English: They knew that the king's loyal troops were coming from all directions, so they were afraid and returned. It was not that they loved My kingdom and did not attack.

古文：朝廷割三镇二十州之地与之，是欲助寇而自攻也。
现代文：朝廷割让三镇二十州的地方给予他们，是想帮助金寇而自己攻击自己。
English: The imperial court ceded three towns and twenty counties to them in order to help the Golden Robber, but they attacked themselves.

古文：闻肃王初与之约，及河而返，今挟之以往，此败盟之大者。
现代文：听说肃王初次与之相约，到河东而返，今挟之以往，这是败坏盟约的主要问题。
English: It is said that Su Wang first made an appointment with him and returned to the east of the river, and this is the main problem that has spoiled the agreement.

古文：臣窃谓朝廷宜以肃王为问，责其败盟，必得肃王而后已。 时太原围闭数月，而姚古拥兵逗留不进，时上疏乞诛古以肃军政，拔偏裨之可将者代之。
现代文：我自己认为，朝廷应该责问肃王，指责其败盟的原因，一定得到肃王而后已。 当时太原被围攻几个月，而姚古拥兵观望，逗留不进，杨时上奏疏请求诛杀姚古以严肃军政纪律，选拔偏将和裨将中可以代替其职务的替代他。
English: In my own opinion, the imperial court should have questioned Su Wang and accused him of being the reason for the defeat of the alliance, which must have been followed by Su Wang. At that time, Taiyuan was besieged for several months, and Yao Gu watched the soldiers and did not go in. Yang Shigang made a formal request to kill Yao Gu and replace him with a serious military and political discipline, selecting a partial general and a general who could replace his position.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有得到回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：李纲之罢，太学生伏阙上书，乞留纲与种师道，军民集者数十万，朝廷欲防禁之。
现代文：李纲被罢免之后，太学生跪伏于宫廷前上书，请求留任李纲与种师道，军民集合在一起有几十万人，朝廷想防备禁止他们集中。
English: After Li Gang was ousted, the students knelt in front of the court and submitted a letter, requesting that Li Gang remain in office and teach the way. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians gathered together, and the court wanted to prevent them from gathering.

古文：吴敏乞用时以靖太学，时得召对，言： 诸生伏阙纷纷，忠于朝廷，非有他意，但择老成有行谊者，为之长贰，则将自定。 钦宗曰： 无逾于卿。 遂以时兼国子祭酒。
现代文：吴敏请求用杨时以平息太学，杨时得召论对，说 ：各位太学生纷纷俯伏于宫阙之前，是忠于朝廷，并没有其他的用意，只要选择老成持重而有行谊的人担任将帅、副官，那么这件事就会自然平息。 钦宗皇帝说 ：没有谁比你说的更有道理。 于是任命杨时兼任国子祭酒。
English: Wu Min requested that Yang Shih be used to quell the taigaku, and Yang Shih had to call for a discussion, saying, "All of you taigakus have prostrated themselves before the palace gate, you are loyal to the imperial court, and there is no other intention, as long as you choose someone who is experienced and has friendships to serve as commander and adjutant, then the matter will naturally subside." Emperor Qinzong said, "No one has more reason than you have said." He then appointed Yang Shih to also serve as the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：首言： 三省政事所出，六曹分治，各有攸司。
现代文：他首先奏道 ：三省是负责国家政事的机构，六曹分别治理，各自设机构。
English: First of all, he said that the three provinces are the institutions responsible for national political affairs, and the six provinces are governed separately and have their own institutions.

古文：今乃别辟官属，新进少年，未必贤于六曹长贰。 又言：
现代文：现在就别辟官衙，新进少年，未必比六曹的长官、副职贤能。 又说：
English: Don't give up your posts just yet, the new young men are not necessarily more capable than the chiefs and deputies of the Six Immortals.

古文：蔡京用事二十余年，蠹国害民，几危宗社，人所切齿，而论其罪者，莫知其所本也。
现代文： 蔡京担任宰相职务二十多年，祸国害民，几乎危及国家，人们切齿痛恨，而论说他的罪行的人，没有谁知道他是什么原因造成的。
English: Cai Jing held the post of prime minister for more than 20 years. He was a scourge to the country, harmed the people, and almost endangered the country. People hated him bitterly, and no one who talked about his crimes knew what caused him.

古文：盖京以继述神宗为名，实挟王安石以图身利，故推尊安石，加以王爵，配飨孔子庙庭。
现代文：大概蔡京以继承神宗时的治国之策为名，实挟持王安石的名义以图谋自己的私利，故推崇王安石，加以王爵，配享孔子庙庭。
English: It is likely that Cai Jing, in the name of inheriting the policy of governing the country at the time of Shenzong, actually held Wang Anshi hostage in the name of seeking his own selfish interests, so he respected Wang Anshi, gave him a peerage, and enjoyed the Confucius Temple Garden.

古文：今日之祸，实安石有以启之。
现代文：今天的祸害，其实是自王安石开始的。
English: Today's scourge actually began with Wang Anshi.

古文：谨按安石挟管、商之术，饬六艺以文奸言，变乱祖宗法度。
现代文： 谨按王安石挟管子、商鞅之手段，整饬六艺以文意强奸圣贤之言，变乱祖宗的法度。
English: I respectfully follow Wang An's means of stone-piercing pipes and negotiations to rectify the six arts of raping the words of sages with literary meaning and changing the laws of the ancestors.

古文：当时司马光已言其为害当见于数十年之后，今日之事，若合符契。
现代文：当时司马光已说其为害当可见于数十年之后，今天的事情，正合乎他的预测。
English: At that time, Sima Guang had said that its harm should be seen decades later, and today's events are in line with his prediction.

古文：其著为邪说以涂学者耳目，而败坏其心术者，不可缕数，姑即一二事明之。
现代文：他所写的邪说之文以糊涂学者们的耳目，为此而败坏心术的人，不可胜数，暂即列举一二事来阐明它。
English: There are innumerable people whose minds have been corrupted by the heresies he has written for the eyes and ears of ignorant scholars. Let us briefly enumerate one or two things to illustrate this.

古文：昔神宗尝称美汉文惜百金以罢露台，安石乃言： 陛下若能以尧、舜之道治天下，虽竭天下以自奉不为过，守财之言非正理。 曾不知尧、舜茅茨土阶。
现代文： 过去神宗曾经称赞欣赏汉文帝怜惜百金以罢免修筑露台之事，王安石于是说 ：陛下若能够用尧、舜的道义来治理天下，虽竭泽天下以自奉使用也不为过，守节财用的言论并非正理。 曾不知尧、舜住茅茨、建土阶，大禹说： 克俭于家。 
English: In the past, Shenzong had praised and appreciated the fact that Emperor Hanwen spared hundreds of gold to dismiss the construction of the terrace, and Wang Anshi then said: If His Majesty can use the morality of  and  to govern the world, although he can use the world to serve himself, it is not too much, and the speech of keeping the money is not correct.

古文：禹曰： 克俭于家 ，则竭天下以自奉者，必非尧、舜之道。
现代文：那么，竭泽天下以自奉使用的人，一定不是尧、舜的道义。
English: Then, those who are trying to use the world to serve themselves must not have a good moral.

古文：其后王黼以应奉花石之事，竭天下之力，号为享上，实安石有以倡之也。
现代文：这以后王黼以应奉花石纲的事情，竭泽天下的财力，号称为了皇帝的享受，实际上是王安石就开始倡导了。
English: After this, Wang Xuan exhausted the world's financial resources with the matter of Fenghuaxi, claiming to be for the emperor's enjoyment. In fact, it was Wang Anshi who began to advocate.

古文：其释《凫鹥》守成之诗，于末章则谓： 以道守成者，役使群众，泰而不为骄，宰制万物，费而不为侈，孰弊弊然以爱为事。 《诗》之所言，正谓能持盈则神祇祖考安乐之，而无后艰尔。
现代文：他所解释的《凫翳》守成的诗，在末章就称： 以道义来守成的人，役使群众，泰然处之而不认为骄横，主宰定制万物，花费不认为奢侈，何必过分地克俭以爱惜为事。 《诗》经上所说的，正是说的能持守盈余就会使神癨祖考而因此安乐，而后没有艰难的忧虑。
English: In the last chapter of the poem on the preservation of wealth in the Tao Te Ching, which he was explaining, it says: Those who preserve wealth with morality serve the masses, treat it with equanimity and do not think of it as arrogance, dominate and customize all things, do not think of spending as a luxury, why should they be excessively frugal and cherish it.

古文：自古释之者，未有泰而不为骄、费而不为侈之说也。
现代文：自古解释这段话的人，没有泰然处之而不为骄，花费而不为奢侈的说法。
English: People who have interpreted this passage since ancient times have not dealt with it calmly without being proud, spending without being extravagant.

古文：安石独倡为此说，以启人主之侈心。
现代文：王安石独自倡导这种说法，以开启皇上向往奢侈的心事。
English: Wang Anshi was the sole advocate of this theory, in order to open up the emperor's yearning for luxury.

古文：后蔡京辈轻费妄用，以侈靡为事。
现代文：后来蔡京之流轻费妄用铺张，以奢侈浪费为乐事。
English: Later, Cai Jing and his ilk made extravagant use of extravagance and enjoyed extravagant waste.

古文：安石邪说之害如此。
现代文：是王安石的邪说之害，如此以致祸害至今。
English: It is the harm of Wang Anshi's heresy, so much so that the harm has continued to this day.

古文：伏望追夺王爵，明诏中外，毁去配享之像，使邪说淫辞不为学者之惑。
现代文： 我希望能追削夺去王安石封爵的称号，明白地诏示中外，毁去他配享孔孟庙庭的肖像，使邪说妄议、淫辟怪论不能迷惑学者。 
English: I hope that the title of Wang Anshi's knighthood can be chased and taken away, and that it can be clearly announced to China and the world, and that the portrait of him enjoying the temple garden of Confucius and Mencius can be destroyed, so that scholars can not be confused by evil talk and obscene and bizarre theories.

古文：疏上，安石遂降从祀之列。
现代文：奏疏上后，王安石于是被降为从祀之列。
English: After the memorial service, Wang Anshi was demoted from the ranks of worshippers.

古文：士之习王氏学取科第者，已数十年，不复知其非，忽闻以为邪说，议论纷然。
现代文：士人学习王安石的学问以考试科举取第的事情，已有几十年，不再知道他的过错，忽然听说王安石的学说是邪说，议论纷纷。
English: For decades, scholars have been studying Wang Anshi's learning and taking the first place in the examination. They no longer know his fault. Suddenly, they heard that Wang Anshi's learning was a heresy, and there was a lot of discussion.

古文：谏官冯澥力主王氏，上疏诋时。
现代文：谏官冯解力主王安石的学说，上奏疏诋毁、指责杨时。
English: Wang Anshi, the eunuch Feng Leili's master, slandered and accused Yang Si.

古文：会学官中有纷争者，有旨学官并罢，时亦罢祭酒。
现代文：正逢学官中有争议的人，有圣旨令学官一齐罢免，杨时也被罢去国子祭酒。
English: At the same time, there was a controversial person among the scholars, and there was a sacred order to dismiss the scholars all together. Yang Shi was also dismissed from the Guozi Festival.

古文：时又言： 元祐党籍中，惟司马光一人独褒显，而未及吕公著、韩维、范纯仁、吕大防、安焘辈。
现代文：杨时又说： 元的党籍中，惟有司马光一人独自被褒扬而显名，而没有涉及吕公著、韩维、范纯仁、吕大防、安焘等人。
English: Yang Si also said: Among the former party members, only Sima Guang was praised and made famous by himself, and did not involve Lv Gong Zhu, Han Wei, Fan Chunren, Lv Dabao, An Qi and others.

古文：建中初言官陈瓘已褒赠，而未及邹浩。 于是元祐诸臣皆次第牵复。
现代文：建中靖国年初，言官谏臣陈馞已褒扬赠赐，而没有涉及邹浩。 于是元年间各位大臣都依次接连恢复其名位。
English: At the beginning of the year of the establishment of the Yasukuni Shrine, the gonkan and retainer Chen Qi had already praised and bestowed the gift, but did not involve Hao Hao. As a result, during the first year of the year, the ministers successively resumed their positions.

古文：寻四上章乞罢谏省，除给事中，辞，乞致仕，除徽猷阁直学士、提举嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：不久，杨时四次上奏章请求罢除谏省，任命为给事中，推辞，请求辞官归居，任命为徽猷阁直学士、提举嵩山崇福宫。
English: Soon after, Yang Shih wrote four times to request the dismissal of Handan Province, was appointed to the middle of the matter, resigned, requested the official to return to his residence, was appointed as a direct bachelor of Huiyang Pavilion, and was promoted to Songshan Chongfu Palace.

古文：时力辞直学士之命，改除徽猷阁待制、提举崇福宫。
现代文：杨时力辞直学士的任命，改命为徽猷阁待制、提举崇福宫。
English: Yang Shili resigned from the appointment of the direct bachelor, changed his name to Huiyangge, and promoted Chongfu Palace.

古文：陛辞，犹上书乞选将练兵，为战守之备。
现代文：向陛下辞别时，还上书请求选将练兵，作为战守的准备。
English: When he said goodbye to His Majesty, he also sent a letter requesting the selection of a drill sergeant as a preparation for the war.

古文：高宗即位，除工部侍郎。
现代文：高宗即位，杨时担任工部侍郎。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and Yang Shi served as the chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：陛对言： 自古圣贤之君，未有不以典学为务。 除兼侍读。
现代文：与陛下论对说道： 自古圣贤的君王，没有不以典籍圣贤之学为务。 受命兼任侍读。
English: In response to His Majesty, he said, "Since ancient times, the kings of the sages have not neglected the study of the classics of the sages.

古文：乞修《建炎会计录》，乞恤勤王之兵，乞宽假言者。
现代文：请求修编《建炎会计录》，请求恤勉勤王的军队，请求宽恕敢于发表言论的人。
English: Ask for the revision of the "Record of the Construction of the Flame," ask for the army of the diligent king, and ask for forgiveness for those who dare to speak out.

古文：连章丐外，以龙图阁直学士提举杭州洞霄宫。
现代文：杨时连续上章请求外任，以龙图阁直学士职提举杭州洞霄宫。
English: In the previous chapter, Yang Shiji continuously asked for an external appointment to promote Hangzhou Dongxiao Palace to the post of Longtu Ge direct bachelor.

古文：已而告老，以本官致仕，优游林泉，以著书讲学为事。
现代文：以后告老，以本官辞职家居。优游于山林名胜之地，以著书讲学为务。
English: In the future, when I grow old, I will retire to my own home. I will travel to places of scenic beauty in the mountains and forests, and my priority will be to write books and give lectures.

古文：卒年八十三，谥文靖。
现代文：卒年八十三岁，谥号 文靖 。
English: He died at the age of 83, and his posthumous name was Wenjing.

古文：时在东郡，所交皆天下士，先达陈瓘、邹浩皆以师礼事时。
现代文：杨时在东郡，所交接的都是天下的名士。先贤显达之士陈馞、邹浩都以老师的礼仪事奉杨时。
English: When Yang Si was in Dong County, all the people he met were famous people from all over the world. The sages and illustrious men Chen Zi and Zi Hao both served Yang Si with the etiquette of a teacher.

古文：暨渡江，东南学者推时为程氏正宗。
现代文：宋室南渡长江以后，东南的学者都推举杨时为程氏的学问正统传人。
English: After Song Muronan's crossing of the Yangtze River, scholars in Southeast Asia all nominated Yang Shih as the legitimate successor of Cheng's learning.

古文：与胡安国往来讲论尤多。
现代文：与胡安国往来讲述议论学问的时候尤其多。
English: His interactions with Juan Guo were mostly about academic discussions.

古文：时浮沉州县四十有七年，晚居谏省，仅九十日，凡所论列皆切于世道，而其大者，则辟王氏经学，排靖康和议，使邪说不作。
现代文：杨时浮沉于地方州县有四十七年，晚年居任谏省，仅九十天，凡所论说列举的都切中时弊世道，而其中大的，则是分析王安石的经学，力排靖康年间的和议，使邪说不能发挥作用。
English: Yang spent 47 years in local prefectures and counties. In his later years, he lived in Handan Province for only 90 days. All of the theories listed are relevant to the current world, and the most important one is to analyze Wang Anshi's study of scripture, and forcefully eliminate the wars between the Jing and Kang dynasties, so that the evil theories can not play a role.

古文：一于忠厚而不正直，则流入于懦。 其议论醇正类此。
现代文：凡是绍兴初年崇尚元时的学术的人，而其中朱熹、张木式的学问之所以能够得到程氏的正统之传，而其源委脉络相承都是出于杨时。杨时的儿子杨迪，努力学习，晓通经典，也曾经以程颐为老师。
English: All the scholars in Shaoxing in the early years of the Yuan Dynasty, including Zhu Xi and Zhang Mu, were able to obtain the orthodox transmission of Cheng's learning, and its source and context were inherited from Yang Xi. Yang Xi's son Yang Di, who studied hard and knew the classics, also had Cheng Xi as a teacher.

古文：朱熹谓： 龟山倡道东南，士之游其门者甚众，然潜思力行、任重诣极如仲素，一人而已。 绍兴中卒，学者称之曰豫章先生，淳祐间谥文质。李侗字愿中，南剑州剑浦人。
现代文：李侗，字愿中，南剑州剑浦县人。
English: Li Wei, middle of the word "wish," comes from Jianpu County, South Jianzhou.

古文：年二十四，闻郡人罗从彦得河、洛之学，遂以书谒之，其略曰：
现代文：二十四岁那年，听说本郡人罗从彦学得了河、洛之学，于是以书信拜谒他，其中大致说：
English: When he was twenty-four years old, he heard that Luo Congyan, a resident of our county, had learned the study of rivers and rivers from Yan, so he wrote a letter to pay homage to him, in which he said roughly:

古文：侗闻之，天下有三本焉，父生之，师教之，君治之，阙其一则本不立。
现代文： 李侗听说，天下有三个根本，父亲生养儿子，老师教授学生，君主治理国家，缺其中之一则根本就不能树立。
English: Li Wei heard that there are three fundamentals in the world: fathers give birth to and raise sons, teachers teach students, and monarchs govern the country. Without one of them, it is impossible to establish a monarchy.

古文：古之圣贤莫不有师，其肄业之勤惰，涉道之浅深，求益之先后，若存若亡，其详不可得而考。
现代文：古代的圣贤没有谁没有老师，他们学习的勤奋与懒惰，涉及道学的浅显与深邃，求取得益的先与后，是存还是亡，其详细情况不可能去考查。
English: None of the ancient sages had no teacher. It is impossible to investigate the details of their study, including their diligence and laziness, the shallowness and profundity of their ethics, whether they sought profit first and last, and whether they lived or died.

古文：惟洙、泗之间，七十二弟子之徒，议论问答，具在方册，有足稽焉，是得夫子而益明矣。
现代文：惟有洙水、泗水之间，孔子的七十二弟子之中的贤徒，议论问答，全部记录在简册上，有足够的根据可以稽查，是因为凭借孔夫子而愈益明了。
English: However, the discussion, questions, and answers of the sages among the seventy-two disciples of Confucius were all recorded in the booklet. There is sufficient evidence to check, because it is more clear with the help of Confucius.

古文：孟氏之后，道失其传，枝分派别，自立门户，天下真儒不复见于世。
现代文：孟子以后，儒道失掉了传承，分成了各个派别，自立门户，天下真儒再没有见闻于世。
English: After Mencius, Confucianism lost its heritage, and was divided into various sects, independent portals, and true Confucianism was never seen again in the world.

古文：其聚徒成群，所以相传授者，句读文义而已尔，谓之熄焉可也。
现代文：其聚徒讲学成群的人，他们所相传教授的，只是做些句读、解释文字而已，谓之熄灭、失传是可以了。
English: Its congregants are lecturing crowds of people, and what they pass on and teach is just doing some reading and explaining of the text, which means that it can be extinguished and lost.

古文：其惟先生服膺龟山先生之讲席有年矣，况尝及伊川先生之门，得不传之道于千五百年之后，性明而修，行完而洁，扩之以广大，体之以仁恕，精深微妙，各极其至，汉、唐诸儒无近似者。
现代文： 惟有先生衷心信服龟山先生的讲席已有一年多了，况且曾经从学于伊川先生之门，得到没有传承的孔孟之道于一千五百年之后，性情明而修，行为完而洁，扩其道以广大，体验其道以仁恕，精深微妙，各终其极致，汉朝、唐代的各位儒生没有与之相近似的。
English: However, it has been more than a year since Mr. Kameyama's lecture, and he sincerely believed in Mr. Kameyama's lecture. Moreover, he had learned from Mr. Ikawa's door, and obtained the Confucian and Mencius way, which had not been passed down, after 1500 years. His disposition was clear and cultivated, his behavior was perfect and pure, he expanded his way to be broad, and he experienced his way to be merciful, refined and subtle, and each end was the ultimate. All Confucians in the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty were not similar to him.

古文：至于不言而饮人以和，与人并立而使人化，如春风发物，盖亦莫知其所以然也。
现代文：至于不发表自己的意见而以谦感人，和别人一起就能感化别人，如春风吹发万物，大概也没有谁知道其所以然。
English: As for not expressing one's own opinion and moving people with modesty, together with others, one can influence others, like the spring breeze blowing everything, probably no one knows the reason.

古文：凡读圣贤之书，粗有识见者，孰不愿得授经门下，以质所疑，至于异论之人，固当置而勿论也。
现代文：凡是读圣贤之书的人、粗有见识的，谁不希望能够得到你传授的经典，以询问疑难，至于有不同意见的人，本应当放置一旁而不议论他。
English: Whoever reads the books of the sages, who is well-informed, and who does not wish to be given the scriptures that you have taught in order to ask questions, and who has different opinions, should have been left aside and not discussed.

古文：侗之愚鄙，徒以习举子业，不得服役于门下，而今日拳拳欲求教者，以谓所求有大于利禄也。
现代文： 李侗愚笨、鄙陋，仅仅是学习科考举子之业，不能够从学于您的门下，而今天诚恳地想来求教，是因为所寻求的东西大于利禄。
English: Li Qian is stupid and despicable. It is just a child's career to study science and examination. I cannot learn from you, but I sincerely want to seek advice today because what I am seeking is greater than Li Luo.

古文：抑侗闻之，道可以治心，犹食之充饱，衣之御寒也。
现代文：李侗还听说，道可以治心，就像吃了食物使人肚腹饱满，就像穿衣服而可以抵御寒流。
English: Li Yao also heard that the Tao can cure the mind, just as eating food can make one's stomach full, just as wearing clothes can ward off the cold.

古文：人有迫于饥寒之患者，皇皇焉为衣食之谋，造次颠沛，未始忘也。
现代文：人有迫于饥饿、寒冷的忧虑，因此，忙碌地谋取衣食，造次颠沛，始终没有忘记。
English: People are forced to worry about hunger and cold, so they are busy looking for food and clothing, and they have never forgotten.

古文：至于心之不治，有没世不知虑，岂爱心不若口体哉，弗思甚矣。
现代文：至于心之不治，如面临末世的危险而不知道去忧虑，岂不是爱心不如爱口与身体吗？我为此百思而不得其解。
English: As for the incurable disease of the heart, if we face the danger of the end of the world and do not know how to worry, is not love of the heart not as good as love of the mouth and body? I am puzzled and puzzled.

古文：侗不量资质之陋，徒以祖父以儒学起家，不忍坠箕裘之业，孜孜矻矻为利禄之学，虽知真儒有作，闻风而起，固不若先生亲炙之得于动静语默之间，目击而意全也。
现代文： 李侗没有考虑自己的天资浅陋，仅是以祖父的儒学起家，不忍心于坠入箕裘之业，忙忙碌碌地追求利禄之学，虽知道真儒有所作为，闻风而起，本不如先生亲自动手所得于动静语默之间，亲眼看见而意思周全。
English: Li Yao did not consider his own natural resources shallow, but only started with his grandfather's Confucianism. He could not bear to fall into the industry of comedy, and busily pursued the study of Li Lu. Although he knew that true Confucianism had made a difference and was inspired by the wind, it was not as good as what his teacher had personally gained from the movement and silence. He saw with his own eyes and was well-meaning.

古文：今生二十有四岁，茫乎未有所止，烛理未明而是非无以辨，宅心不广而喜怒易以摇，操履不完而悔吝多，精神不充而智巧袭，拣焉而不净，守焉而不敷，朝夕恐惧，不啻如饥寒切身者求充饥御寒之具也。
现代文：现在我已有二十四岁，茫然间而又没有停止学习，显明的道理没有弄清而是非无以辨别，宅心不广而喜怒情绪容易变化，行为不完美而悔吝很多，精神不充实而智巧袭用，选择了而不干净，遵守了而不足够，从早到晚恐惧忧虑，就像忍饥挨饿受冻的人寻求充饥御寒的器具。
English: Now that I am twenty-four years old, I am at a loss and have not stopped learning, the obvious truth has not been clarified but cannot be distinguished, the heart is not broad and the emotions are easy to change, the behavior is not perfect and there are many regrets, the spirit is not full but cleverly used, the choice is not clean, the observance is not enough, and the fear and worry from morning to night are like starving and freezing people seeking equipment to satisfy hunger and cold.

古文：不然，安敢以不肖之身为先生之累哉。
现代文：不然的话，哪里敢以不肖的身份来成为先生的拖累负担呢。 
English: Otherwise, how can you dare to be a burden on your husband with a shady identity?

古文：从之累年，授《春秋》、《中庸》、《语》、《孟》之说。
现代文：李侗跟随罗从彦多年，被教授《春秋》、《中庸》、《论语》、《孟子》的学说。
English: Li Jun followed Luo Congyan for many years and was taught the doctrines of "Spring and Autumn," "Middle Way," "Analects" and "Mencius."

古文：从彦好静坐，侗退入室中，亦静坐。
现代文：从彦喜欢静坐，李侗退入宫中也静坐。
English: Tsuchihiko likes to meditate, and so does Riho when she retires to the palace.

古文：从彦令静中看喜怒哀乐未发前气象，而求所谓 中 者，久之，而于天下之理该摄洞贯，以次融释，各有条序，从彦亟称许焉。
现代文：罗从彦告诉他从静中看喜怒哀乐的情感未发生之前的气象，而从中寻求所谓 中 ，好久以后，而于天下之理洞贯通达，依次融会释然，各有条序，罗从彦对此特别赞许。
English: Luo Congyan told him to look at the emotions of joy, anger, and sorrow from the calm before the weather occurred, and to seek the so-called middle, after a long time, and to penetrate the world's logical hole, and to be relieved in turn, each in an orderly manner, Luo Congyan particularly praised this.

古文：既而退居山田，谢绝世故余四十年，食饮或不充，而怡然自适。
现代文：李侗而后退居山田乡里，谢绝世俗之故达四十年，饮食有时不能充饥，仍怡然自得其乐。
English: Li Yan retreated to live in Yamada Township. He had renounced the world for forty years. Eating and drinking sometimes could not satisfy his hunger, but he still enjoyed himself.

古文：事亲孝谨，仲兄性刚多忤，侗事之得其欢心。
现代文：事奉亲人，恭敬孝悌，兄长个性刚烈多忤，李侗待他很好，得其欢心。
English: He served his relatives, respected the filial piety of his brothers and sisters, and had a strong-willed personality. Li Yao treated him well and won his favor.

古文：闺门内外，夷愉肃穆，若无人声，而众事自理。
现代文：闺门内外愉悦肃穆，若没有人的声音，而众事自有秩序。
English: Pleasant and solemn inside and outside the boudoir, if there is no human voice, and everything has its own order.

古文：亲戚有贫不能婚嫁者，则为经理振助之。
现代文：亲戚中有贫穷的而不能结婚嫁娶的，就为他们帮忙而赈济之。
English: If any of his relatives are poor and cannot afford to get married, he should help them and provide for them.

古文：与乡人处，饮食言笑，终日油油如也。
现代文：与乡人相处，吃喝言笑，每天快乐，自然和睦。
English: Get along with the villagers, eat, drink, talk and laugh, be happy every day, and naturally live in harmony.

古文：其接后学，答问不倦，虽随人浅深施教，而必自反身自得始。
现代文：李侗所接受的后学诸生，答问不倦，虽按照学生的深浅施教，而一定从反省自己开始。
English: The post-study sentient beings accepted by Li Kun never tire of answering questions. Although they teach according to the students' depth and breadth, they must begin with self-reflection.

古文：故其言曰： 学问之道不在多言，但默坐澄心，体认天理。
现代文：所以按他的话说 ：学问之道不在多讲，而只是默坐澄心，体认天理。
English: Therefore, according to his words: the way of learning is not to talk too much, but only to meditate, clarify the mind, and recognize the divine.

古文：若是，虽一毫私欲之发，亦退听矣。 又曰： 学者之病，在于未有洒然冰解冻释处。
现代文：如果是这样，虽然有一毫私欲之发生，也能退而恭听了。 又说： 学者的毛病，在于没有使人豁然领悟地方。
English: If this is the case, even if there is the slightest occurrence of selfishness, it is possible to step back and listen.Also said: The problem with scholars is that there is no place for people to suddenly understand.

古文：如孔门诸子，群居终日，交相切磨，又得夫子为之依归，日用之间观感而化者多矣。
现代文：如孔子门下的各位学生，群居终日，互相切磋讨论，又能够依靠孔夫子为指导，故日用平常之间通过观感而开化的人很多。
English: For example, all the students under Confucius live in groups all day long, discuss with each other, and can rely on Confucius as a guide. Therefore, there are many people who are enlightened through seeing and feeling in everyday life.

古文：恐于融释而不脱落处，非言说所及也。 又曰： 读书者知其所言莫非吾事，而即吾身以求之，则凡圣贤所至而吾所未至者，皆可勉而进矣。
现代文：恐怕融会贯通的领悟，不是讲解所能够达到的。 又说 ：读书的人知其所说的没有成为我自己的东西，即自己努力去寻求它，则凡圣贤所至而我所不能达到的，都可受勉励而努力求索。
English: I am afraid that a comprehensive understanding is not something that can be achieved by exposition. He also said: "If a reader knows that what he says has not become my own, that is, if he makes an effort to seek it, then he can be encouraged to make an effort to seek whatever the sages have reached and I cannot reach."

古文：若直求之文字，以资诵说，其不为玩物丧志者几希。 又曰： 讲学切在深潜缜密，然后气味深长，蹊径不差。
现代文：假如直接求之于文字，以作为诵说之资，不成为玩物丧志的人就很少了。 又说 ：讲学之要在于深沉缜密，然后气味深长，途径不差。
English: If we were to look directly to the written word as the basis for recitation and discourse, there would be very few people who would not be disheartened. He also said: The essence of lecturing lies in depth and precision, and then the flavor is deep and long, and the approach is not bad.

古文：若概以理一，而不察其分之殊，此学者所以流于疑似乱真之说而不自知也。 尝以黄庭坚之称濂溪周茂叔 胸中酒落，如光风霁月 ，为善形容有道者气象，尝讽诵之，而顾谓学者存此于胸中，庶几遇事廓然，而义理少进矣。
现代文：假如概以理一，而不能辨察其本质之区别，这就是学者之所以流于疑惑模糊的真伪之说而自己还不能知晓的原因。 曾经以黄庭坚称濂溪周茂叔 胸中洒落，其开阔的胸襟、坦白的心地，如雨过天晴时风清月明的景象。 作为善于形容有道的气象，曾经常诵读，同时反复要求学者存此于胸中，希望遇事洒脱、明了，这样义理就会不断有长进。
English: If one starts with the theory, but cannot discern the difference of its essence, this is the reason why scholars are lost in doubtful and vague truth and falsehood and cannot know for themselves. Huang Ting once insisted that Zhou Maoshu of Qixi had a shining heart, and his open mind and frank heart were like the scene of the wind and the moon shining brightly when it rained and the sky was clear. As a meteorologist who was good at describing the weather, he often recited and repeatedly asked scholars to keep this in their hearts, hoping to be free and clear in the face of things, so that the theory would continue to grow.

古文：其语《中庸》曰： 圣门之传是书，其所以开悟后学无遗策矣。
现代文：他在讲《中庸》时说 ：圣贤的门下所传的是书，其所以开启觉悟后学不是没有更多的对策。
English: When talking about the "Middle Way," he said: What is taught by the sages is a book, so there are more countermeasures to learning after enlightenment.

古文：然所谓 喜怒哀乐未发谓之中 者，又一篇之指要也。
现代文：然而其中所谓 喜怒哀乐未发的称之中 的，又是其中一篇的主要的意思。
English: However, among the so-called "emotions and sorrows" that have not yet occurred, it is the main meaning of one of them.

古文：若徒记诵而已，则亦奚以为哉？
现代文：假如仅仅只是记诵而已，那么，为何要这样呢？
English: If it's just memorization, then why do it?

古文：必也体之于身，实见是理，若颜子之叹，卓然若有所见，而不违乎心目之间，然后扩充而往，无所不通，则庶乎其可以言《中庸》矣。 其语《春秋》曰： 《春秋》一事各是发明一例，如观山水，徙步而形势不同，不可拘以一法。
现代文：一定要亲自体验，才能实在地明白这个道理，假如像颜子之叹，显然是若有所见，而没有违背于心想目见的道理，然后扩充过去的知识，力求无所不通，那么就差不多可以说《中庸》了。 他在讲《春秋》时说 ：《春秋》中一事各是说明白一个例证，如观赏山水，随步移位观察而形势不同，不可以拘泥于一种方法。
English: In order to really understand this principle, you must experience it for yourself. If, like a sigh, you clearly see something, but do not violate the principle of seeing with the mind, and then expand the knowledge of the past and strive to be omniscient, then you can almost say "moderate." He said when talking about "Spring and Autumn": In "Spring and Autumn," each thing is clearly explained by an example, such as viewing the landscape, observing with the step shift and the situation is different, you can not stick to one method.

古文：然所以难言者，盖以常人之心推测圣人，未到圣人洒然处，岂能无失耶？ 
现代文：然而所以难说明的，大概是以常人之心推测圣人的心事，没有到圣人的那种洒脱的境界，岂能没有失误呢？ 
English: However, what is so difficult to explain is that it is probably impossible to guess the saint's thoughts from an ordinary person's heart, without reaching the saint's free and easy state, can there be no mistake?

古文：侗既闲居，若无意当世，而伤时忧国，论事感激动人。
现代文：李侗闲居以后，好似无意于当世之事，然而伤感时空，忧虑国家，议论事情感激之情动人，溢于言表。
English: After Li Yao's idleness, it seems that he has no intention of dealing with current affairs. However, he feels sad about time and space, worries about the country, and talks about things with a moving sense of gratitude, which is more than words can express.

古文：尝曰： 今日三纲不振，义利不分。
现代文：曾经说： 现在三纲不振，义利不分。
English: He once said, "Nowadays, the three programs are sluggish, and there is no distinction between righteousness and benefit."

古文：三纲不振，故人心邪僻，不堪任用，是致上下之气间隔，而中国日衰。
现代文：三纲不振，故人心邪僻，不可任用，这就使上下之气隔离有隙，而致中国日益衰微。
English: The three levels are not vigorous, the old man's heart is perverse, and he cannot be appointed, which makes the separation of the upper and lower qi have gaps, resulting in China's increasing decline.

古文：义利不分，故自王安石用事，陷溺人心，至今不自知觉。
现代文：义利不分，故自王安石治政用事开始，陷溺人心，至今人们还没有自我觉察到。
English: There is no distinction between righteousness and benefit, so since Wang Anshi began to govern the country, he has ensnared the hearts of the people, and so far people have not been self-aware.

古文：人趋利而不知义，则主势日孤，人主当于此留意，不然，则是所谓 虽有粟，吾得而食诸 也。 
现代文：人趋利而不知义，那么皇上的势力就会日益孤立，君主当于这方面留意，不然的话，就是所谓 虽有粟米，我能吃得到吗？  
English: People seek profit without knowing the meaning, so the emperor's power will become increasingly isolated. The monarch should pay attention to this aspect, otherwise, it is the so-called "even though there is corn, can I eat it?"

古文：是时吏部员外郎朱松与侗为同门友，雅重侗，遣子熹从学，熹卒得其传。
现代文：这个时候，吏部员外郎朱松与李桐同为门生故友，很看重李侗，遣送自己的儿子朱熹跟随他学习，朱熹最终得到了他的全部传承。
English: At this time, Zhu Song, the second son of the cadre, and Li Tonglu were old friends and disciples. They valued Li Yao very much, and sent their son Zhu Yao to study with him. Zhu Yao eventually received all of his inheritance.

古文：沙县邓迪尝谓松曰： 愿中如冰壶秋月，莹彻无瑕，非吾曹所及。 松以谓知言。
现代文：沙县邓迪曾经对朱松说 ：李愿中如冰壶秋月，莹亮清澈，光洁无瑕，不是我们所能达到的。 朱松以为这是知情的言论。
English: Dundee, Shaxian County, once said to Zhu Song: Li Zhanzhong is like a curling autumn moon, bright and clear, clean and flawless, not what we can achieve. Zhu Song thought this was an informed statement.

古文：而熹亦称同： 姿禀劲特，气节豪迈，而充养完粹，无复圭角，精纯之气达于面目，色温言厉，神定气和，语默动静，端详闲泰，自然之中若有成法。
现代文：而朱熹也称赞李侗： 姿态脱俗，禀赋超凡，气节豪迈，修养完美，没有抵触之处，精纯之气表现于面目之间，看起来和蔼可亲，语言严厉，神气坚定，心平气和，言语默然，动静言行，端详闲适，处之泰然，自然之中含有成法准则。
English: However, Zhu Xi also praised Li Xi: His demeanor is out of the ordinary, his endowment is extraordinary, his temperament is heroic, his cultivation is perfect, there is no contradiction, his refined spirit is shown between his faces, he looks amiable, his language is stern, his spirit is firm, his heart is peaceful, his speech is silent, his words and deeds are dynamic, his manners are detailed and leisurely, and his demeanor is calm, and his nature contains the principles of law-making.

古文：平日恂恂，于事若无甚可否，及其酬酢事变，断以义理，则有截然不可犯者。 又谓自从侗学，辞去复来，则所闻益超绝。
现代文：平常时日诚实恭敬，对于事情似乎无甚可否，到其应酬事物，判断变化，断以义理，则有截然不可冒犯的样子。 又称，自从跟随李侗学习，归去复来，则所听说的更为超凡绝伦。
English: In ordinary times, honesty and respect seem to have little to do with things, but when it comes to entertainment, judging changes, and breaking with righteousness, there is a completely non-offensive appearance.It is also said that since following Li Xi's study and returning, what he has heard is even more extraordinary.

古文：其上达不已如此。
现代文：他所达到的境界，还不仅仅是人们对他所称赞的那样。
English: What he has achieved is not only what people have praised him for.

古文：侗子友直、信甫皆举进士，试吏旁郡，更请迎养。
现代文：李侗的儿子李友直、李信甫都参加科举考为进士，在靠近家乡的州县担任官吏，更替请求迎养他们的父亲。
English: Li Yao's sons, Li Youzhi and Li Xinfu, both participated in the entrance examination for cadets, served as officials in counties and prefectures near their hometown, and asked their father to take care of them.

古文：归道武夷，会闽帅汪应辰以书币来迎，侗往见之，至之日疾作，遂卒，年七十有一。
现代文：归道武夷，正逢福建将帅汪应辰用书来迎接他，李侗前往见他，到的那一天疾病发作，于是死了，卒年七十一岁。
English: Returning to Wuyi, just as the Fujian general Shuai Wang Yingchen greeted him with a book, Li Xi went to see him. On the day he arrived, he fell ill and died at the age of seventy-one.

古文：信甫仕至监察御史，出知衢州，擢广东、江东宪，以特立不容于朝云。
现代文：李信甫任官至监察御史，出任衢州知州，擢升为广东、江东宪司，因为格调超群，有不容于朝的说法。
English: Li Xinfu served as an official to supervise imperial history, served as the governor of Bozhou and Zhizhou, and was promoted to the constitutional secretary of Guangdong and Jiangdong. Because of his superior style, there is a saying that he is not acceptable to the government.

