古文：王敬弘、何尚之
现代文：王敬弘，琅玡临沂人。
English: Wang Jinghong, the star of the show.

古文：王敬弘，琅邪临沂人也。与高祖讳同，故称字。
现代文：因为他和高祖的名相同，所以以字称呼。曾祖王訥，晋骠骑将军。
English: Because he and Gao Zu have the same name, they are referred to by their surnames: Zengzu Wang Yao, Jin Yao Jie Zheng.

古文：曾祖暠，晋骠骑将军。祖胡之，司州刺史。
现代文：祖父王胡之，司州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Wang Huzhi, was a member of the State Council.

古文：父茂之，晋陵太守。
现代文：父亲王茂之，晋陵太守。
English: His father, Wang Maozhi, was the governor of Jinling.

古文：敬弘少有清尚，起家本国左常侍，卫军参军。
现代文：敬弘年轻时就有清淳的美誉，始任本国左常侍、卫军参军。
English: When he was young, Takahiro had a reputation for being pure and honest. He became the country's first Left-Handed Attendant and joined the Imperial Guard.

古文：性恬静，乐山水，为天门太守。
现代文：性情恬淡宁静，喜欢游览山水。任天门太守。
English: Light and quiet temperament, likes to visit the mountains and rivers. Appointed as the head of Tianmen.

古文：敬弘妻，桓玄姊也。
现代文：王敬弘的妻子是桓玄的姐姐。
English: Wang Jinghong's wife is Kuan Xuan's sister.

古文：敬弘之郡，玄时为荆州，遣信要令过。
现代文：敬弘到郡县去时，其时桓玄镇荆州，桓玄送信给敬弘请他到府上拜访。
English: When Takahiro went to the county, there was Huan Xuan in Jingzhou, and Huan Xuan sent a message to Takahiro asking him to visit the prefecture.

古文：敬弘至巴陵，谓人曰： 灵宝见要，正当欲与其姊集聚耳，我不能为桓氏赘婿。 
现代文：王敬弘到了巴陵，对人说： 桓玄邀请我，只是要和他姐姐相聚罢了，我不做桓家的入赘女婿。 
English: When Wang Jinghong arrived at Baling, he said to the people, "Huan Xuan only invited me to get together with his sister. I will not be the son-in-law of the Huan family.

古文：乃遣别船送妻往江陵。
现代文：于是他派另一条船将妻子送到江陵。
English: So he sent another boat to take his wife to Gangneung.

古文：妻在桓氏，弥年不迎。
现代文：妻子住在娘家，王敬弘几年也没有去接她。
English: Wang Jinghong did not pick up his wife, who was staying at her daughter's house, for several years.

古文：山郡无事，恣其游适，累日不回，意甚好之。
现代文：郡里无事，便尽情游山玩水，往往一连数日不归，心情非常高兴。
English: If there's nothing going on in the county, they'll go hiking and play in the water to their heart's content, often not returning for days on end, feeling very happy.

古文：转桓伟安西长史、南平太守。
现代文：转任桓伟的安西长史、南平太守。
English: Anxi Changshi and Nanping Taishu, who were transferred to Kanwei.

古文：去官，居作唐县界。
现代文：后辞去官职，住在作唐县境内。
English: After that, he resigned from his post and lived in Sako-Tang County.

古文：玄辅政及篡位，屡召不下。
现代文：桓玄辅佐国政及后来篡位屡次征召他，他都不答应。
English: He did not agree to be conscripted repeatedly by Kwan Hyun Suk, the regent and later usurper of the throne.

古文：高祖以为车骑从事中郎，徐州治中从事史，征西将军道规咨议参军。
现代文：高祖任命他为车骑从事中郎、徐州治中从事史、征西将军道规的咨议参军。
English: Gao Zu appointed him to join the army as a middle-ranking official in charge of chariot and cavalry, a middle-ranking official in charge of history in charge of Xuzhou, and a general in charge of the military regulations in charge of the Western Expedition.

古文：时府主簿宗协亦有高趣，道规并以事外相期。
现代文：当时主簿宗协有高远的志趣，道规常常一并邀请宗协、王敬弘二人。
English: At that time, the main book of the Soka Gakkai had a lofty ambition, and the regulations often invited the Soka Gakkai and Wang Jinghong together.

古文：尝共酣饮致醉，敬弘因醉失礼，为外司所白，道规即更引还，重申初宴。召为中书侍郎，始携家累自作唐还京邑。
现代文：有一次他们饮酒大醉，敬弘醉后失礼，道规就又让他回来重新开宴。敬弘被召为中书侍郎，才携带家眷从作唐回到京城。
English: On one occasion, they got very drunk, and after getting drunk, they were rude to him, so the rules of etiquette required him to come back and reopen the banquet. It was only when he was called to serve as a waiter that he was able to bring his family back to the capital from Sakotan.

古文：久之，转黄门侍郎，不拜。仍除太尉从事中郎，出为吴兴太守。旧居余杭县，悦是举也。
现代文：一段时间后，转任黄门侍郎，没有接受，仍被任命为太尉从事中郎，出朝任吴兴太守，过去他住在余杭县时就想着这一职务。
English: After a period of time, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, but he did not accept it, and he was still appointed as a captain to engage in the middle, and he was appointed to the position of Wu Xing, when he lived in Yuhang County in the past, he thought about this position.

古文：寻征为侍中。
现代文：不久他又被征召为侍中。
English: Soon after, he was called up as a chamberlain.

古文：高祖西讨司马休之，敬弘奉使慰劳，通事令史潘尚于道疾病，敬弘单船送还都，存亡不测，有司奏免官，诏可。
现代文：高祖西讨司马休之，敬弘任使节慰问军队，通事令史潘尚在半道上生了病，敬弘用一条船送他回京城，生死不明，有关当局奏请朝廷免去敬弘的官职，被批准。
English: Gao Zuxi summoned Sima Xiu, and Keihong was appointed as an envoy to offer condolences to the army. As a result, Sipan Shang fell ill halfway through the journey, and Keihong sent him back to the capital on a boat. His life and death are unknown. The relevant authorities petitioned the imperial court to remove Keihong from his official post, which was approved.

古文：未及释朝服，值赦复官。
现代文：他还没有脱去朝服，恰逢大赦而复职。
English: He had not yet taken off his royal robes, and his reinstatement coincided with the general amnesty.

古文：宋国初建，为度支尚书，迁太常。
现代文：宋初建时他任度支尚书，调任太常。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was appointed to the post of imperial secretary.

古文：高祖受命，补宣训卫尉，加散骑常侍。
现代文：高祖登基，敬弘补任宣训卫尉，加散骑常侍。
English: Gaozu ascended to the throne, and Takahiro was appointed as the second lieutenant of the imperial proclamation and discipline, as well as a samurai.

古文：永初三年，转吏部尚书，常侍如故。
现代文：永初二年转任吏部尚书，常侍之职不变。
English: In the second year of the Yongchu era, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu, but his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：敬弘每被除召，即便祗奉，既到宜退，旋复解官，高祖嘉其志，不苟违也。
现代文：敬弘每次被征召，即使是祗奉一类的官职，上任后如又要退任，他立即解去官职，高祖赞赏他的志趣。
English: Every time Takahiro was called up, even if it was for an official position such as the post of eunuch, if he wanted to retire after taking office, he would immediately be dismissed from his official position. Gaozu appreciated his ambition.

古文：复除庐陵王师，加散骑常侍，自陈无德，不可师范令王，固让不拜。又除秘书监，金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍，本州中正，又不就。
现代文：又被任命为庐陵王的老师，加散骑常侍，他自称无德才不配做王侯的老师，坚决辞谢不接受，又被任命为秘书监、金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍、本州中正，又未接受。
English: He was also appointed as the teacher of the King of Fuling, and the attendant of the dismounted cavalry. He claimed that he had no virtue and was not worthy of being the prince's teacher, and he resolutely refused to accept his resignation. He was also appointed as the supervisor of the secretary, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and the attendant of the dismounted cavalry, and the vice-governor of Honshu, but he did not accept it.

古文：太祖即位，又以为散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，领江夏王师。
现代文：太祖即位，又让他任散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫，领江夏王师。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, he also appointed him as a knight-errant, a doctor of the Golden Purple Light, and the governor of the Xia Wang River.

