古文：秦、楚攻魏，围皮氏。
现代文：秦国、楚国进攻魏国，围困皮氏。
English: Qin and Chu attacked Wei and besieged Pi.

古文：为魏谓楚王曰： 秦、楚胜魏，魏王之恐也见亡矣，必舍与秦，王何不倍秦而与魏王?
现代文：有人替魏国对楚王说： 秦国、楚国将要打败魏国，魏王害怕魏国被灭掉，一定归附秦国，大王为什么不背叛秦国而同魏王讲和呢？
English: Someone said to King Chu on behalf of the State of Wei: The State of Qin and the State of Chu are going to defeat the State of Wei. The King of Wei is afraid that the State of Wei will be destroyed and will definitely join the State of Qin. Why doesn't the Great King betray the State of Qin and make peace with the King of Wei?

古文：魏王喜，必内太子。
现代文：魏王高兴了，一定会把太子送来楚国做人质。
English: The Wei king was so pleased that he was sure to send the prince to Chu as a hostage.

古文：秦恐失楚，必效城地于王，王虽复与之攻魏可也。 楚王曰： 善。 
现代文：秦国害怕失去与楚国的联合，一定会向大王献上城邑和土地，大王即使再同秦国攻打魏国也还是可以的。 楚王说： 好。 
English: Qin was afraid of losing its alliance with Chu, so it would surely offer cities and land to the great king. Even if the great king attacked Wei with Qin, it would still be okay. King Chu said, "Okay."

古文：乃倍秦而与魏，魏内太子于楚。
现代文：于是就背叛秦国而同魏国讲和，魏国就把太子送到楚国做人质。
English: So he betrayed Qin and made peace with Wei, who sent the prince to Chu as a hostage.

古文：秦恐，许楚城地，欲与之复攻魏。
现代文：秦国感到恐慌，答应给楚国城邑和土地，想同楚国再次攻打魏国。
English: Panic-stricken, Qin promised to give Chu cities and land, and wanted to attack Wei again with Chu.

古文：樗里疾怒，欲与魏攻楚，恐魏之以太子在楚不肯也。
现代文：樗里疾大怒，想同魏国攻打楚国，又担心魏国会因为太子被扣在楚国而不肯出兵。
English: He was furious and wanted to attack Chu with Wei, but was worried that Wei would not send troops because the crown prince was detained in Chu.

古文：为疾谓楚王曰： 外臣疾使臣谒之，曰： 敝邑之王欲效城地，而为魏太子之尚在楚也，是以未敢。
现代文：有人为樗里疾对楚王说： 外臣樗里疾派臣下拜见您说： 敝邑的国君想献上城邑和土地，因为魏国太子还在楚国，所以没敢。
English: Someone said to the King of Chu, "Foreign Minister Qilian sent his vassals to see you, saying, 'The sovereign of the Kingdom of Wei wants to offer cities and land, but he does not dare because the Wei Crown Prince is still in the Kingdom of Chu.

古文：王出魏质，臣请效之，而复固秦、楚之交，以疾攻魏。 楚王曰： 诺。 
现代文：大王放出魏国的人质，臣下请求献上城邑和土地，恢复原来的秦、楚邦交，来加紧进攻魏国。 楚王说： 好吧。 
English: The great king released the hostages of Wei, and his vassals asked him to donate cities and land, restore the original Qin and Chu diplomatic relations, and step up the attack on Wei.

古文：乃出魏太子。
现代文：于是放回了魏国太子。
English: So the crown prince of Wei was released.

古文：秦因合魏攻楚。
现代文：秦国于是就联合魏国进攻楚国。
English: Qin then allied with Wei to attack Chu.

