古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：愿闻卫气之行，出入之合，何如？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：我想听你谈一谈卫气在人体是如何运行的，什么时候出于体表，什么时候进入体内，又是在什么地方会合的呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qi Bo, "I would like to hear you talk about how the qi circulates in the human body, when does it come out of the body, when does it enter the body, and where does it meet?"

古文：岐伯曰：岁有十二月，日有十二辰，子午为经，卯酉为纬。
现代文：岐伯说：一年有十二个月，一天有十二个时辰，都可以用十二地支表示，其中子位居正北方，午位居正南方，连接南北的竖线为经；卯位居正东方，酉位居正西方，连接东西的横线为纬。
English: Qibo said: There are twelve months in a year and twelve hours in a day, which can all be expressed by the twelve localities. Among them, the son is located in the north, the noon is located in the south, and the vertical line connecting the north and south is the longitude; the u is located in the east, the z is located in the west, and the horizontal line connecting the east and west is the latitude.

古文：天周二十八宿，而一面七星，四七二十八星。
现代文：天空一周有二十八星宿，分为东西南北四个方位，每一方位各有七个星宿，四方共计二十八个星宿。
English: There are twenty-eight constellations in the sky, divided into four directions, east, west, north and south, with seven constellations in each direction and a total of twenty-eight constellations in the four directions.

古文：房昴为纬，虚张为经。
现代文：东方的房宿与西方的昴宿为纬，北方的虚宿与南方的张宿为经。
English: The houses in the east are at the same latitude as those in the west, and the empty houses in the north are at the same longitude as those in the south.

古文：是故房至毕为阳，昴至心为阴。阳主昼，阴主夜。故卫气之行，一日一夜五十周于身，昼日行于阳二十五周，夜行于阴二十五周，周于五脏。
现代文：太阳从东方的房宿沿黄道经过南方到达西方的毕宿，时间是卯、辰、巳、午、未、申六个时辰，这六个时辰是白天，属阳；太阳从西方的昴宿，沿黄道经过北方到达东方的心宿，时间是酉、戌、亥、子、丑、寅六个时辰，这六个时辰是夜晚，属阴。阳主白昼，阴主黑夜。一昼夜中，卫气在体内运行五十个周次，白天行于阳分二十五个周次，夜间行于阴分二十五个周次，并周行于五脏之中。
English: The sun travels from its home in the east along the ecliptic through the south to its final resting place in the west. The time is six o'clock in the morning, noon, afternoon, evening and night. These six hours are daytime and belong to the sun. The sun travels from its home in the west along the ecliptic through the north to its final resting place in the east. The time is six hours in the morning, afternoon, evening, evening and night. These six hours are night and belong to the yin. The yang dominates the daytime and the yin dominates the night. In the middle of the day and night, the yin and yang circulate in the body for fifty

古文：是故平旦阴尽，阳气出于目，目张则气上行于头，循项下足太阳，循背下至小趾之端；其散者，别于目锐眦，下手太阳，下至手小指之间外侧；其散者，别于目锐眦，下足少阳，注小趾次趾之间。
现代文：所以，平旦之时，卫气在阴分的循行过程结束，卫气从眼睛进入阳分，眼睛也就睁开了，然后卫气从目内眦上行于头部，沿项后足太阳膀胱经的通路下行，再沿背部向下行，到达足小趾外侧端；另有分支，从目外眦而出，沿手太阳小肠经下行，至手小指外侧端；另一条分支，也从目外眦而出，沿足少阳胆经下行注入足小趾与第四趾之间。
English: Therefore, on an ordinary day, the process of following the yin and yang points is completed. The qi enters the yang and yang points from the eyes, and the eyes are opened. The qi then travels from the inner eyelid to the top of the head, down along the path of the solar bladder in the hind foot, and then down along the back to the outer side of the little toe; another branch, from the outer eyelid, travels down along the solar small intestine in the hand to the outer side of the little finger; another branch, also from the outer eyelid, travels down along the little yang and yang between the little toe and the fourth to

古文：以上循手少阳之分侧，下至小指之间；别者以上至耳前，合于颔脉，注足阳明，以下行至跗上，入五趾之间；其散者，从耳下下手阳明，入大指之间，入掌中。
现代文：卫气在上部还有分支，循手少阳三焦经所过的部位向下行，到手小指与无名指之间；从手少阳别行的分支，上行至耳的前方，会合于颔部的经脉，注入足阳明胃经，向下行至足背，散入足五趾之间；还有另一条散行的分支，从耳部下方，沿手阳明大肠经下行，入于手大指和食指之间，再进入手掌中间。
English: In the upper part, there is also a branch of the Wei qi, which follows the part of the Shao Yang San Jiao and goes down to the area between the little finger and the ring finger; from the Shao Yang and other branches, it goes up to the front of the ear, meets the meridians of the crotch, infuses the foot Yang Ming stomach meridians, goes down to the sole of the foot, and spreads between the five toes; there is another branch of the branch, from the bottom of the ear, along the hand Yang Ming large intestine meridians and goes down, enters between the thumb and index finger, and then enters the middle of the palm.

古文：其至于足也，入足心，出内踝，下行阴分，复合于目。
现代文：其中运行到足部的卫气，进入足心，出于内踝，再入足少阴肾经，由足少阴肾经经行于阴分，沿着从足少阴肾经分出的阴脉向上行，又会合到眼睛的目内眦，交会于足太阳膀胱经。
English: Among them, the qi flows to the foot, enters the center of the foot, goes out of the inner ankle, then enters the foot-less-yin-kidney meridian, goes from the foot-less-yin-kidney meridian to the yin point, goes up along the yin vein from the foot-less-yin-kidney meridian, and meets the eye's inner eyelid, and meets the foot-sun-bladder meridian.

古文：故为一周。
现代文：这就是卫气运行一周的顺序。
English: This is the order of the week in which the geyser runs.

古文：是故，日行一舍，人气行一周与十分身之八；日行二舍，人气行三周于身与十分身之六；日行三舍，人气行于身五周与十分身之四；日行四舍，人气行于身七周与十分身之二；日行五舍，人气行于身九周；日行六舍，人气行于身十周与十分身之八；日行七舍，人气行于身十二周在身与十分身之六；日行十四舍，人气二十五周于身有奇分与十分身之二，阳尽于阴，阴受气矣。
现代文：所以，太阳运行一星宿的时间称为一舍，卫气循行人体一周又十分之八弱；日行二舍，卫气循行三周又十分之六；日行三舍，卫气循行五周又十分之四；日行四舍，气循行七周又十分之二；日行五舍，卫气循行九周；日行六舍，卫气循行十周又十分之八；日行七舍，卫气循行十二周又十分之六；日行十四舍，卫气循行人体二十五周而又有余数十分之二周，到此太阳运行周天的二分之一，由白天进入夜间，卫气也由阳分进入阴分。
English: Therefore, the time of the sun's movement of one star is called one house, one week and eight tenths of the human body following the air; two houses, three weeks and six tenths of the human body following the air; three houses, five weeks and four tenths of the human body following the air; four houses, seven weeks and two tenths of the human body following the air; five houses, nine weeks; six houses, ten weeks and eight tenths of the human body following the air; seven houses, twelve weeks and six tenths of the human body following the air; fourteen houses, twenty-five weeks of the human body following the air and two tenths of the human body following the air

古文：其始入于阴，常从足少阴注于肾，肾注于心，心注于肺，肺注于肝，肝注于脾，脾复注于肾为周。
现代文：刚刚进入阴分时，通常是由足少阴肾经传注于肾脏，由肾脏注入心脏，由心脏注入肺脏，由肺脏注入肝脏，由肝脏注入脾脏，由脾脏再传注到肾脏而成为一周。
English: At the time of just entering the yin, it is usually a week from the foot to the yin kidney to the kidney, from the kidney to the heart, from the heart to the lungs, from the lungs to the liver, from the liver to the spleen, and from the spleen to the kidney.

古文：是故夜行一舍，人气行于阴脏一周与十分脏之八，亦如阳行之二十五周，而复合于目。
现代文：所以，夜间太阳运行一舍的时间，卫气循行五脏也是一周又十分之八弱，与白天在阳分运行一样，一夜共运行二十五周，出于目内眦而进入阳分。
English: Therefore, when the sun runs smoothly at night, it takes one week and eight-tenths of a day for the air to circulate through the five viscera. Just as it runs during the day at the solstice, it runs for a total of twenty-five weeks at night, and enters the solstice due to the internal pressure of the eyes.

古文：阴阳一日一夜，合有奇分十分身之四，与十分脏之二，是故人之所以卧起之时有早晏者，奇分不尽故也。
现代文：卫气昼行阳分，夜行阴分，一昼一夜共有余数十分之二周身和十分之二周脏。因此，平时人们入睡和起床的时间，有时早些，有时晚些，都是余数造成的。
English: According to the principle of yin and yang, there are two tenths of the body and two tenths of the dirt in the day and night. Therefore, the time when people fall asleep and get up in normal times, sometimes earlier, sometimes later, is caused by the surplus.

古文：黄帝曰：卫气之在于身也，上下往来不以期，候气而刺之，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：卫气在人体内，上下往来运行，没有停止的时候，怎样候察其气行情况而进行针刺呢？
English: Huang Di said: When the qi circulates up and down in the human body and does not stop, how can we wait for the qi to circulate and carry out acupuncture?

古文：伯高曰：分有多少，日有长短，春秋冬夏，各有分理，然后常以平旦为纪，以夜尽为始。
现代文：伯高说：根据太阳运行的位置，在夏至日和冬至日，用日晷确定日影的最长和最短，这样就可以知道春夏秋冬四季，各有不同的日照时间规律，然后恒常以平旦为昼与夜的分界，夜尽而昼始。
English: Bogao said: According to the position of the sun's movement, on the summer solstice and the winter solstice, use the sundial to determine the longest and shortest sunshade. In this way, you can know that the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter each have different sunshine time patterns, and then always use the weekday as the boundary between day and night. Night ends and day begins.

古文：是故一日一夜，水下百刻，二十五刻者，半日之度也，常如是毋已，日入而止，随日之长短，各以为纪而刺之。
现代文：以铜壶滴漏来计时，一昼夜漏壶水下一百刻，所以二十五刻恰是半个白天的度数，经常如此不已，日入则白昼终止。依随白昼的长短不同，分别取作标准，以候察气行阴阳的情况，而后刺治。
English: The time is measured by the drip of a copper kettle, and the leakage of water from the kettle is one hundred kicks a day and night, so twenty-five kicks is exactly the degree of half a day, often so constant, and the sunsets are the end of the day. Depending on the length of the day, the standards are taken separately, to wait for the observation of the situation of yin and yang, and then prick.

古文：谨候其时，病可与期；失时反候者，百病不治。
现代文：如能谨慎地候察其气行时机而加以针刺，则疾病的痊愈可以指日而待；如果失掉了气行时机而且违背了岁气运行规律，就会各种疾病都难以治愈。
English: If you can carefully wait for the timing of the wind to pass and then apply acupuncture, the recovery of the disease can be expected; if you lose the timing of the wind and violate the laws of the wind, all kinds of diseases will be difficult to cure.

古文：故曰： 刺实者，刺其来也；刺虚者，刺其去也。 
现代文：所以说： 针刺实证，要在其气来至之时刺而泻之；针刺虚证，要在其气离去之时刺而补之。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: the positive evidence of acupuncture should be pricked and drained when its qi comes; the false evidence of acupuncture should be pricked and replenished when its qi leaves.

古文：此言气存亡之时，以候虚实而刺之。
现代文：这就是说，要候察气的盛衰虚实而后加以针刺。
English: That is to say, it is necessary to wait for the rise and fall of qi and then prick it.

古文：是故谨候气之所在而刺之，是谓逢时。
现代文：所以，谨慎候察气的所在而进行刺治，这就叫做把握住了时机。
English: Therefore, it is called seizing the opportunity to carefully observe the location of the qi and carry out the treatment.

古文：在于三阳，必候其气在于阳而刺之；病在于三阴，必候其气在阴分而刺之。
现代文：病在三阳经的，一定要候伺其气在阳分的时候刺治；病在三阴经的，一定要候伺其气在阴分的时候刺治。
English: If the disease is in Sanyangjing, it must wait for its qi to be stabbed at the time of yang; if the disease is in Sanyangjing, it must wait for its qi to be stabbed at the time of yin.

古文：水下一刻，人气在太阳；水下二刻，人气在少阳；水下三刻，人气在阳明；水下四刻，人气在阴分。
现代文：漏壶水下一刻的时间，卫气行于手足太阳经；水下二刻，卫气行于手足少阳经；水下三刻，卫气行于手足阳明经；水下四刻，卫气行于足少阴肾经。
English: During the first hour of a leaking pot of water, the sacred spirit is in the solar sutra of the hands and feet; during the second hour under water, the sacred spirit is in the Shao Yang sutra of the hands and feet; during the third hour under water, the sacred spirit is in the Yang Ming sutra of the hands and feet; during the fourth hour under water, the sacred spirit is in the Shao Yin kidney sutra of the feet and feet.

古文：水下五刻，人气在太阳；水下六刻，人气在少阳；水下七刻，人气在阳明；水下八刻，人气在阴分。
现代文：漏壶水下五刻，卫气又出阳分行于手足太阳经；水下六刻，卫气行于手足少阳经；水下七刻，卫气行于手足阳明经；水下八刻，卫气行于足少阴肾经。
English: A leaking pot: Underwater for five minutes, the spirit of piety and sunrise branch out to the solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for six minutes, the spirit of piety and sunrise branch out to the solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for seven minutes, the spirit of piety and sunrise branch out to the solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for eight minutes, the spirit of piety and sunrise branch out to the solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for eight minutes, the spirit of piety and sunrise branch out to the solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for seven minutes, the spirit of piety and sunrise

古文：水下九刻，人气在太阳；水下十刻，人气在少阳；水下十一刻，人气在阳明；水下十二刻，人气在阴分。
现代文：漏壶水下九刻，卫气又出阳分行于手足太阳经；水下十刻，卫气行于手足少阳经；水下十一刻，卫气行于手足阳明经；水下十二刻，卫气行于足少阳肾经。
English: Underwater, at nine o'clock, the yin and yang of the yin and yang of the yin and yang of the hands and feet; underwater, at ten o'clock, the yin and yang of the hands and feet; underwater, at eleven o'clock, the yin and yang of the hands and feet; underwater, at twelve o'clock, the yin and yang of the feet and legs.

古文：水下十三刻，人气在太阳；水下十四刻，人气在少阳；水下十五刻，人气在阳明；水下十六刻，人气在阴分。
现代文：漏壶水下十三刻，卫气又出阳分行于手足太阳经；水下十四刻，卫气行于手足少阳经；水下十五刻，卫气行于手足阳明经；水下十六刻，卫气行于足少阴肾经。
English: Leaking jugUnderwater for 13 minutes, the spirit of the rite of Spring is in the solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for 14 minutes, the spirit of the rite of Spring is in the minor solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for 15 minutes, the spirit of Spring is in the major solar sutra of the hands and feet; underwater for 16 minutes, the spirit of Spring is in the minor solar sutra of the feet and feet.

古文：水下十七刻，人气在太阳；水下十八刻，人气在少阳；水下十九刻，人气在阳明；水下二十刻，人气在阴分。
现代文：漏壶水下十七刻，卫气又出阳分行于手足太阳经；水下十八刻，卫气行于手足少阳经；水下十九刻，卫气行于手足阳明经，水下二十刻，卫气行于足少阴肾经。
English: Underwater, at 17 o'clock, the solar meridian is divided into the solar meridian of the hands and feet; underwater, at 18 o'clock, the solar meridian is divided into the solar meridian of the hands and feet; underwater, at 19 o'clock, the solar meridian is divided into the solar meridian of the hands and feet; and underwater, at 20 o'clock, the solar meridian is divided into the solar meridian of the feet and feet and the solar meridian of the hands and feet.

古文：水下二十一刻，人气在太阳；水下二十二刻，人气在少阳；水下二十三刻，人气在阳明；水下二十四刻，人气在阴分。
现代文：漏壶水下二十一刻，卫气又出阳分行于手足太阳经；水下二十二刻，卫气行于手足少阳经；水下二十三刻，卫气行于手足阳明经；水下二十四刻，卫气行于足少阴肾经。
English: A leaking pot: Underwater for twenty-one minutes, the energy of the sun rises and branches into the solar sutra for the hands and feet; underwater for twenty-two minutes, the energy of the sun rises and branches into the solar sutra for the hands and feet; underwater for twenty-three minutes, the energy of the sun rises and branches into the solar sutra for the hands and feet; underwater for twenty-three minutes, the energy of the sun rises and branches into the solar sutra for the hands and feet; underwater for twenty-three minutes, the energy of the sun rises and branches into the solar sutra for the hands and feet; underwater for twenty-four minutes,

古文：水下二十五刻，人气在太阳，此半日之度也。
现代文：漏壶水下二十五刻，卫气行于手足太阳经，这是半个白昼中卫气运行的度数。
English: A leaking pot under water for twenty-five minutes, and the air of the spirit moves through the hands and feet like the sun. This is the number of degrees in which the air of the spirit moves in half a day.

古文：从房至毕一十四舍，水下五十刻。日行半度，回行一舍，水下三刻与七分刻之四。
现代文：从房宿到毕宿运转十四舍，经过整个白天，漏壶水下五十刻，太阳运行半个周天；从昴宿到心宿，也是运转十四舍，经过整个黑夜，漏壶水下五十刻，又运行半个周天。
English: From the lodging to the afterlife, fourteen houses run, through the whole day, the leaking pot is under water for fifty minutes, the sun runs for half a day; from the afterlife to the heart, it is also the operation of fourteen houses, through the whole night, the leaking pot is under water for fifty minutes, and it runs for half a day.

古文：大要曰： 常以日之加于宿上也，人气在太阳，是故日行一舍，人气行三阳行与阴分，常如是无已。 
现代文：一昼夜合计水下一百刻，太阳运行二十八舍，整整一个周天。太阳每运行一星宿，漏壶水下三又七分之四刻。《大要》说： 通常是每当太阳行到下一个星宿开始的时间，卫气也恰好运行到手足太阳经。所以，太阳每运行完一个星宿的时间，卫气刚好循行完太阳经、少阳经、阳明经三个阳经还有阴分，卫气就是这样一直周期运行而不停止。 
English: In a day and night, the total time under water is one hundred hours, and the sun moves twenty-eight houses, a full day. For each star the sun moves, the leakage of the pot is three and seven quarters of an hour under water. "Summary" said: Usually, whenever the sun travels to the beginning of the next star, the geomagnetic field also runs exactly to the hands and feet of the solar eclipse. Therefore, every time the sun runs through a star, the geomagnetic field just follows the solar eclipse, the lesser solar eclipse, and the solar eclipse with three solar eclipses and negative points. The geomagnetic field has been running

古文：天与地同纪，纷纷𤽉𤽉，终而复始，一日一夜水下百刻而尽矣。
现代文：天与地同其纲纪，纷纷繁繁，终而复始，一昼一夜之间漏水下百刻，卫气在体内运行完毕五十周次。
English: Heaven and earth are the same discipline, they are complex and endlessly repeated. One day and one night, the water leaks for a hundred hours, and the qi in the body runs for fifty weeks.

