古文：郑伟杨纂段永王士良崔彦穆令狐整司马裔裴果刘志
现代文：郑伟字子直，是荣阳开封人，小名叫作合提，魏将作大匠郑浑的第十一代孙。
English: Zheng Wei Zizi Zhi, is a Rongyang Kaifeng person, his nickname is Zuo He Ti, Wei will be the eleventh generation grandson of the great craftsman Zheng Hun.

古文：祖思明，少勇悍，仕魏至直阁将军，赠济州刺史。父先护，亦以武勇闻。
现代文：他祖父郑思明，年轻时勇猛强悍，在魏任官至直合将军，死后赠济州刺史。他父亲先护，也以武勇闻名。
English: His grandfather, Zheng Siming, was brave and strong when he was young. He served as an official in Wei and was promoted to the rank of General Zhihe. After his death, he bequeathed the history of Jeju. His father, Xianku, was also famous for his bravery.

古文：起家员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：初仕任员外散骑侍郎。
English: He was exiled by the imperial court and left home to work as an errand boy.

古文：魏孝庄帝在藩，先护早自结托。
现代文：魏孝庄帝还是藩王时，先护早就自行结交依托。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang was still the king of the domain, Xiangu had already made friends with Yito on his own.

古文：及即位，历通直散骑常侍、平南将军、广州刺史，赐平昌县侯。
现代文：到孝庄帝登上皇位，先护先后担任通直散骑常侍、平南将军、广州刺史，赐予平昌县侯。
English: By the time Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended the throne, Xianbao had successively served as Tsunzhi Sanzhi, Pingnan General, Guangzhou Sashi, and was given the title of Pyeongchang County Marquis.

古文：元颢入洛，以御捍之功，累迁都督二豫郢雍四州诸军、征东将军、豫州刺史，兼尚书右仆射，进爵郡公。
现代文：元颢攻进洛阳，先护以防御有功，多次晋升而为都督二豫郢雍四州诸军事；征束将军、豫州刺史，兼任尚书右仆射，爵位进为郡公。
English: Yuan Shao invaded Luoyang, first protected and defended it, and was promoted many times to become the military governor of the four states of Yunnan, Yongyang and Shizhou. He was also a conscript general and the governor of Yunnan Province. He also served as Shangshu's right-hand man, and was promoted to the rank of county magistrate.

古文：寻入为车骑将军、左卫将军。
现代文：不久进入朝廷任车骑将军、左卫将军。
English: He soon entered the imperial court as chariot and cavalry general and general of the left guard.

古文：及尔朱死，徐州刺史尔朱仲远拥兵将入洛，诏先护以本官假骠骑将军、大都督，率所部与行台杨昱及都督贺拔胜同讨之。
现代文：当尔朱荣死的时候，徐州刺史尔朱仲远拥兵准备进入洛阳，韶令先护以本官代理骠骑将军、大都督，率领所部军队与行台杨昱和都督贺拔胜合兵讨伐尔朱仲远。
English: When Er Zhu Rong died, the Xuzhou army of supporters of Er Zhu Zhongyuan was preparing to enter Luoyang. He ordered the first guard to act as the cavalry general and the grand governor, and led the army of the headquarters to fight with Yang Hui and the governor He Baxing to fight against Er Zhu Zhongyuan.

古文：胜于阵降仲远，又闻京师不守，众遂溃。
现代文：贺拔胜在交战中向尔朱仲远投降，又听说京城被攻破，全军溃散。
English: He Bi Sheng surrendered to Er Zhu Zhongyuan during the battle. He also heard that the capital had been breached and the entire army had been dispersed.

古文：先护奔梁。
现代文：先护逃跑到梁。
English: The first escort fled to Liang.

古文：寻自梁归，为仲远所害。
现代文：不久从梁回来，被尔朱仲远杀害。
English: Shortly after returning from Liang, he was killed by Er Zhu Zhongyuan.

古文：魏孝武初，赠使持节、都督、青齐兖豫四州刺史。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，追赠使持节、都督、青齐兖豫四州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he posthumously conferred the titles of Jichijie, Dudu and Qingqi on the four states of Yunnan.

古文：伟少倜傥有大志，每以功名自许，善骑射，胆力过人。
现代文：郑伟少年时便倜傥而有大志，总是以功名自许，擅长骑马射箭，胆量和气力都超过平常人。
English: As a young boy, Zheng Wei was impulsive and ambitious. He always praised himself for his achievements. He was good at horseback riding and archery, and his courage and strength exceeded that of ordinary people.

古文：尔朱氏灭后，自梁归魏。
现代文：尔朱氏被灭之后，郑伟从梁回归魏朝。
English: After the destruction of the Erju clan, Zheng Wei returned from Liang to the Wei Dynasty.

古文：起家通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：初仕任通直散骑侍郎。
English: He was first appointed as Tsuchina Sanshiro.

古文：及孝武西迁，伟亦归乡里，不求仕进。
现代文：孝武帝西迁，郑伟回到家乡，不追求官位。
English: Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, Zheng Wei returned to his hometown and did not pursue an official position.

古文：大统三年，河内公独孤信既复洛阳，伟乃谓其亲族曰： 今嗣主中兴鼎业，据有崤、函。
现代文：大统三年，河内公独孤信收复了洛阳，郑伟于是对他的家族亲戚说： 现在继位的皇上中兴朝廷大业，控制了崤、函。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, Hanoi regained Luoyang, and Zheng Wei said to his relatives, "The Emperor, who is now succeeding to the throne, has greatly advanced the cause of the imperial court, and has taken control of Ho and Huan.

古文：河内公亲董众军，克复瀍、洛，率土之内，孰不延首望风。
现代文：河内公亲自指挥各路军队，收复了泸、洛地区，天下之人，谁不是伸着脖子盼望。
English: The Lord of Hanoi personally commanded the armies of all directions and recovered the Lop Nur and Lop Nur regions. No one in the world is not stretching his neck in hope.

古文：况吾等世荷朝恩，家传忠义，诚宜以此时效臣子之节，成富贵之资。
现代文：何况我们家族世世代代都受到朝廷的恩典，有着忠义传统，现在正应当效臣子之节，用以成就家族富贵的资本。
English: Moreover, our family has been favored by the imperial court for generations and has a tradition of loyalty. Now it is time to follow the example of the festival of courtiers and use it to make the family rich.

古文：岂可碌碌为懦夫之事也！ 于是与宗人荣业，纠合州里，建义于陈留。
现代文：我们怎么能碌碌无为而做懦夫呢! 于是和同宗人郑荣业一起，召集家乡一带的人们，在陈留举义。
English: How can we do nothing and be cowards! So, together with a member of the same family, Zheng Rongye, we gathered people from around our hometown to pray for justice in Chenluo.

古文：信宿间，众有万余人。
现代文：短时间之内，队伍便达到了一万多人。
English: Within a short time, the team reached more than ten thousand people.

古文：遂攻拔梁州，擒东魏刺史鹿永吉及镇城令狐德，并获陈留郡守赵季和。
现代文：郑伟率军攻克了梁州，活捉东魏刺史鹿永吉和镇城令狐德，还捉到了陈留郡守赵季和。
English: Zheng Wei led the army to conquer Liangzhou, and captured the East Wei prince Lu Yongji and the town of Lingfude alive. He also captured the Chenliu county governor Zhao Jihe.

古文：乃率众来附。
现代文：于是率领队伍归附孝武帝。
English: As a result, he led the team to attach to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：因是梁、陈之间，相次降款。
现代文：因此梁、陈一带，相继都归附了。
English: Therefore, the Liang and Chen areas were successively annexed.

古文：伟驰入朝，太祖与语叹美之。
现代文：郑伟快速入京朝见，太祖与其谈话而深深地称赞他。
English: Zheng Wei quickly entered Beijing to see the emperor, and the great-grandfather spoke with him and praised him deeply.

古文：拜龙骧将军、北徐州刺史，封武阳县伯，邑六百户。
现代文：任命为龙骧将军、北徐州刺史，被封为武阳县伯，食邑六百户。
English: He was appointed as the general of Longyuan and the chief historian of North Xuzhou, and was awarded the title of Count of Wuyang County, with more than 600 households in his hometown.

古文：从战河桥及解玉壁围，伟常先锋陷阵。
现代文：参加河桥战役和解除玉壁之围，郑伟经常是率先冲锋陷阵。
English: Participating in the Battle of the River Bridge and lifting the siege of the Jade Wall, Zheng Wei was often the first to charge into battle.

古文：侯景归款，太祖命伟率所部应接之。
现代文：侯景来归附时，太祖命郑伟率领所部军队前往接应。
English: When Hou Jing came to annex, Zheng Wei led the troops of the headquarters to meet him.

古文：及景后叛，伟亦全军而还。
现代文：后来当侯景反叛之时，郑伟能够全军退还。
English: Later, when Hou Jing rebelled, Zheng Wei was able to return the entire army.

古文：录前后功，除中军将军、荥阳郡守，加散骑常侍、大都督，进爵襄城郡公，邑二千户，加车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：根据前后所立功勋，任为中军将军、荣阳郡守，加散骑常侍、大都督，进爵襄城郡公，食邑二干户，加车骑大将军，迁任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: According to the merits established before and after, he was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, the head of Rongyang County, the additional cavalry attendant, the grand governor, the knighted Xiangcheng County official, the two households of the food village, the additional cavalry general, the transferred cavalry general, the opening ceremony and the three departments.

古文：魏恭帝二年，进位大将军，除江陵防主、都督十五州诸军事。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，进位大将军，任命为江陵防主、都督十五州诸军事。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the rank of general and appointed as the chief of defense of Jiangling and the military governor of the 15 states.

古文：伟性粗犷，不遵法度，睚眦之间，便行杀戮。
现代文：郑伟生性粗犷，不遵守法纪，一点小小的怨怒，就随便杀人。
English: Zheng Wei is rude by nature, does not abide by laws and regulations, and kills people at random with a little bit of grudge.

古文：朝廷以其有立义之效，每优容之。
现代文：朝廷因为他有举义的功勋，多次加以宽容。
English: The imperial court tolerated him many times because of his meritorious service.

古文：及在江陵，乃专戮副防主杞宾王，坐除名。
现代文：当他在江陵防主位上时，居然专权杀死副防主杞宾王，因此获罪被免官。
English: When he was in charge of the defense of Gangneung, he had the absolute right to kill the deputy defense chief, Zou Bin Wang, for which he was convicted and removed from office.

古文：保定元年，诏复官爵，仍除宜州刺史。
现代文：保定元年，诏书下令恢复官爵，任命为宜州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, the imperial edict ordered the restoration of the title of nobility, and he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：天和六年，转华州刺史。
现代文：天和六年，转任华州刺史。
English: Ten and six years later, he was transferred to the post of Huazhou chief historian.

古文：伟前后莅职，皆以威猛为治，吏民莫敢犯禁，盗贼亦为之休止。
现代文：郑伟前后担任官职，治理时都以威猛为政，官吏和百姓都不敢触犯禁令，盗贼也都不敢胡作非为。
English: Both before and after Zheng Wei assumed official positions, he ruled with authority. Officials and ordinary people did not dare to violate the ban, and thieves did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：虽无仁政，然颇以此见称。
现代文：虽然在职没有仁政，但是因为这些政绩也颇为当时人称赞。
English: Although there was no benevolent government when he was in office, people at the time praised him for these achievements.

古文：其年卒于州，时年五十七。
现代文：这一年在华州去世，终年五十七岁。
English: He died in Washington the same year, aged fifty-seven.

古文：赠本官，加少傅、都督司豫洛相冀五州诸军事、司州刺史。
现代文：赠本官，加少傅、都督司豫洛相冀五州诸军事、司州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title, and promoted to the rank of Junior Lieutenant, Governor of the Province of Liaoning, Military Governor of the Five Provinces, and Secretary of the State Council.

古文：谥曰肃。
现代文：谧号为肃。
English: His posthumous name is Su.

古文：伟性吃，少时尝逐鹿于野，失之，遇牧竖而问焉。
现代文：郑伟天生口吃，年轻时曾经在野外追猎奔鹿，鹿不见了，遇上放牧的儿童而询问。
English: Zheng Wei was born with a stutter. When he was young, he used to chase a running deer in the wild. The deer disappeared, and he met a herding child and asked him about it.

古文：牧竖答之，其言亦吃。
现代文：牧童回答时，说话也是结结巴巴。
English: The herd boy also stammered when he answered.

古文：伟怒，谓其效己，遂射杀之。
现代文：郑伟大怒，认为是学自己说话，竟将牧童射杀。
English: Zheng was so angry that he shot the shepherd boy, thinking that he was learning to speak for himself.

古文：其忍暴如此。
现代文：他的残忍暴虐可以此为例。
English: His ruthless brutality is a case in point.

古文：子大士嗣。
现代文：其子大士嗣位。
English: His son succeeded him as daishi.

古文：伟族人顶字宁伯，少有干用。
现代文：郑售族人堑垣字壑值，年轻时就有能力才干。
English: Zheng Xuan people have the ability to be talented when they are young.

古文：起家员外散骑侍郎，稍迁行台左丞、阳城陈留二郡守。
现代文：开始担任官职是员外散骑侍郎，逐渐升任行台左丞、阳城陈留二郡守。
English: He started his career as a non-commissioned officer, and gradually rose to the positions of Gangdai Sajo and Yangcheng Chenrui County Governor.

古文：与伟同谋立义。
现代文：他与郑伟共同谋划建立义军。
English: He and Zheng Wei jointly planned to establish a rebel army.

古文：后随伟入朝，赐爵魏昌县伯，除太府少卿。
现代文：此后跟随郑伟入朝廷，被赐魏昌县伯爵位，任命为太府少卿。
English: After that, he followed Zheng Wei into the imperial court, was given the title of Count of Weichang County, and was appointed Taifu Shaoqing.

古文：出为扶风郡守，复为太府少卿，转卫尉少卿。
现代文：派出京城担任扶风郡守，又回朝任太府少卿，转任卫尉少卿。
English: He was sent to Kyoto to serve as the governor of Fufeng County, and returned to the imperial court as the Taifu Shōkei, and then as the Wei Shōkei.

古文：历职内外，并有恪勤之称。
现代文：所担任的内外各官职，都得到恪守职任勤勉政务的称誉。
English: All of the government posts he has held, both at home and abroad, have been praised for their dedication to duty and diligence in government affairs.

古文：寻卒官。
现代文：不久在其职位上去世。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：赠仪同三司、豫州刺史。
现代文：获赠仪同三司、豫州刺史。
English: The award ceremony was held together with the Third Division and Yuzhou stabbing history.

古文：子常，字子元。
现代文：郑顶子郑常，宇子元。
English: Zheng Dingzi Zheng Chang, Uzi Yuan.

古文：颇涉学，有当官誉。
现代文：读了不少书，人们赞誉他有担任官职的能力。
English: He read a lot of books, and people praised him for his ability to hold office.

古文：历抚军将军、通直散骑常侍、司皮下大夫，迁信东徐南兖三州刺史。
现代文：先后担任抚军将军、通直散骑常侍、司皮下大夫，调任信东徐南兖三州刺史。
English: He successively served as a general of the army, a regular attendant of the cavalry, and a doctor under the skin, and was transferred to Shandong, Xunan, and Sanshou.

古文：以立义及累战功，授上开府、仪同大将军，赐爵饶阳侯。
现代文：由于举义和多次立有战功，授予上开府、仪同大将军，赐予饶阳侯爵位。
English: He was awarded the title of Shangkaifu and the title of General of Iitong due to his loyalty to the emperor and his distinguished war service. He was also given the title of Marquis of Raoyang.

古文：卒，赠本官，加郢鄯陕三州诸军事、郢州刺史。
现代文：去世，获赠本官，加郢鄯陕三州诸军事、郢州刺史。
English: After his death, he was awarded the title of "Honorary Officer" and was added to the military records of the three states of Shaanxi and Shanxi, as well as the military records of Zhangzhou.

古文：子神符。
现代文：其子郑神符。
English: His son Zheng Shenfu.

古文：杨纂，广宁人也。
现代文：杨纂，是广宁人。
English: Yang Kodo is from Guangning.

古文：父安仁，魏北道都督、朔州镇将。
现代文：他父亲杨安仁，任魏北道都督、朔州镇将。
English: His father, Yang Anren, was the governor of North Wei Province and the general of Shuozhou Town.

古文：纂少习军旅，慷慨有志略，尤工骑射，勇力兼人。
现代文：杨纂从小学习军事，为人慷慨志向很高，特别擅长骑马射箭，勇力超群。
English: Yang Cong has been studying military affairs since he was a child. He has high aspirations to be a generous person. He is particularly good at horse riding and archery, and is extremely courageous.

古文：年二十，从齐神武起兵于信都，以军功稍迁安西将军、武州刺史。
现代文：二十岁时，随从齐神武帝在信都起兵，以军功逐渐升迁为安西将军、武州刺史。
English: At the age of twenty, he joined the army of Emperor Qishen Wudi in Xindu, and was gradually promoted to General of Anxi and Governor of Wuzhou based on his military exploits.

古文：自以功高赏薄，志怀怨愤，每叹曰： 大丈夫富贵何必故乡。
现代文：他自己认为功高而所得赏赐太少，心中怨愤，经常叹息道： 大丈夫求富贵何必在故乡。
English: He himself thought that his merits were great, but the rewards he received were too little. He was resentful in his heart and often sighed, "It's okay, why should a man seek riches in his hometown?"

古文：若以妻子挠怀，岂不沮人雄志！ 大统初，乃间行归款。
现代文：如果留恋于妻子儿女，岂不是丧失了雄心大志! 大统初年，秘密来归附。
English: If you are attached to your wife and children, haven't you lost your ambition? In the first year of the Great Recession, the secret was out.

古文：太祖执纂手曰： 人所贵者忠义也，所惧者危亡也，其能不惮危亡蹈兹忠义者，今方见之于卿耳。 即授征南将军、大都督，封永兴县侯，邑八百户，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：太祖握住杨纂的手说： 世人所珍视的是忠义，所害怕的是危亡，而能够不惧怕危亡奔赴忠义的人，今日所见到的就是你。 当即授予征南将军、大都督，封为永兴县侯，食邑八百户，加通直散骑常侍。
English: The great-grandfather took hold of Yang Zuo's hand and said, "What the world treasures is loyalty, what it fears is danger, and what we have seen today is you, a person who can rush to loyalty without fear of danger. " He was immediately awarded the title of "Southern General," "Grand Governor," "Mayor of Yongxing County," "Eight hundred households of food villages," and "Frequent attendant."

古文：从太祖解洛阳围，经河桥、邙山之战，纂每先登，军中咸推其敢勇。
现代文：随从太祖解救洛阳之围，参加河桥、邙山战役，杨纂每次冲锋在前，军中将士都推赞他果敢英勇。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to relieve the siege of Luoyang, and participated in the Battle of Hechiao and Lushan. Yang Zuo was at the forefront of every charge, and the lieutenant generals praised his courage and bravery.

古文：累迁使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，进爵为公，增邑通前一千户。
现代文：多次升迁为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，进爵为公，食邑增至一千户。
English: It has been promoted many times, and the number of households has increased to one thousand.

古文：赐姓莫胡卢氏。
现代文：赐姓莫胡卢氏。
English: He was given the surname Mohulu.

古文：俄授岐州刺史。
现代文：不久授任岐州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the historian of Qizhou.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵宋熙郡公。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，进爵为宋熙郡公。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and Song Xi Guo was ennobled.

古文：保定元年，进位大将军，改封陇东郡公，除陇州刺史。
现代文：保定元年，进位大将军，改封爵位为陇东郡公，任为陇州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was promoted to the rank of general, and his title was changed to the lord of Shandong County, and he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：三年，从随公杨忠东伐，至并州而还。
现代文：三年，随从随公杨忠束伐，到并州而还。
English: Three years later, Yang Zhongzhuo, a follower of his father-in-law, went to annex the state and returned.

古文：天和六年，进授柱国大将军，转华州刺史。
现代文：天和六年，进授柱国大将军，转任华州刺史。
English: At the age of six, he was promoted to the post of general of Zhu Guoda, and transferred to the post of governor of Huazhou.

古文：纂性质朴，又不识文字，前后莅职，但推诚信而已。
现代文：杨纂性情质朴，又不认识文字，先后任职都被推为真诚守信。
English: With a simple disposition and no knowledge of the written language, Yang Kun was promoted to positions of trust and sincerity.

古文：吏以其忠恕，颇亦怀之。
现代文：僚吏因为他忠恕，都颇为怀念。
English: Colleagues remember him fondly for his loyalty.

古文：寻卒于州，时年六十七。
现代文：不久在州去世，终年六十七岁。
English: He died in the state shortly afterwards, aged 67.

古文：子睿嗣。
现代文：其子圭睦嗣爵。
English: His son, Kei Mutsu, became heir to the throne.

古文：位至上柱国、渔阳郡公。
现代文：位至上柱国、渔阳郡公。
English: He was the highest-ranking official in Shangzhu Province and Yuyang County.

古文：段永字永宾，其先辽西石城人，晋幽州刺史匹磾之后也。
现代文：段永字永宾，原籍是辽西石城，是晋幽州刺史段匹弹的后代。
English: Duan Yongzhi Yongbin, originally from Shicheng, West Liaoning Province, is a descendant of Duan Pingpiao, a member of the Jinyuzhou Clan.

古文：曾祖愄，仕魏，黄龙镇将，因徙高陆之河阳焉。
现代文：他曾祖父段恨，在魏任官，为黄龙镇将，因此迁徙定居高陆的河阳。
English: His grandfather, Duan Huan, served as an official in Wei and was the commander of Huanglong Town, so he migrated and settled in the highland of Heyang.

古文：永幼有志操，闾里称之。
现代文：段永从小有志向操守，被乡亲们所称赞。
English: Duan Yong was praised by the villagers for his ambition and integrity since childhood.

古文：魏正光末，六镇扰乱，遂携老幼，避地中山。
现代文：魏正光末年，六镇动乱，于是携带老幼，往中山避难。
English: At the end of Wei Zhengguang's life, six towns were in turmoil, so he took his children and grandchildren and fled to Zhongshan.

古文：后赴洛阳。
现代文：后来到洛阳。
English: Later he went to Luoyang.

古文：拜殿中将军，稍迁平东将军，封沃阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：任为殿中将军，逐渐升为平束将军，封沃阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was appointed as the general of the palace, and gradually rose to the general of Hirazuka. He was given the title of Count of Woyang County, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：青州人崔社客举兵反，永讨平之。
现代文：青州人崔社客举兵反叛，段永讨伐平定。
English: Cui Shake, a resident of Qingzhou, raised an army and rebelled, and Duan Yong was defeated and subdued.

古文：进爵为侯，除左光禄大夫。
现代文：进爵为侯。委任左光禄大夫。
English: He was raised to the peerage as a marquis. He was appointed Sakoroku doctor.

古文：时有贼魁元伯生，率数百骑，西自崤、潼，东至巩、洛，屠陷坞壁，所在为患。
现代文：当时有盗贼魁首元伯生，率领数百骑兵，西自崤、潼地区，束至巩、洛地区，攻陷坞壁加以屠杀，成为该地区的祸患。
English: At that time, the leader of the bandits, Yuan Boseong, led hundreds of cavalrymen to attack and slaughter the dock walls in the West Zhili and Handan regions, and in the Bund, Gong and Luo regions, becoming a scourge in the region.

古文：魏孝武遣京畿大都督匹娄昭讨之，昭请以五千人行。
现代文：魏孝武帝派遣京畿大都督匹娄昭讨伐，匹娄昭请求率五千军队前往。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu dispatched the governor of Gyeonggi Province to join the crusade, and requested 5,000 troops to go.

古文：永进曰： 此贼既无城栅，唯以寇抄为资，安则蚁聚，穷则鸟散，取之在速，不在众也。
现代文：段永进言说： 此贼没有城池营栅，衹靠抢劫财物供给，安定时便如蚂蚁聚集，窘急时便作惊鸟飞散，攻取在于迅速，不在于人多。
English: Duan Yongjin said: This thief does not have a city wall. He relies on robbery to supply goods. When the situation is stable, he gathers like ants. When there is a crisis, he scatters like a bird. The attack is quick, not because there are many people.

古文：若星驰电发，出其不虞，精骑五百，自足平殄。
现代文：如果星驰电发，出其不备，出动五百精骑，就可殄灭。
English: If the star-chaser generates electricity, if it is not prepared, it can be annihilated by dispatching five hundred horsemen.

古文：若征兵而后往，彼必远窜，虽有大众，无所用之。 帝然其计，于是命永代昭，以五百骑讨之。
现代文：如果征集军队再去，他们必然远远逃窜，虽然有大队兵马，也没有用处。 孝武帝赞同他的计策，于是命段永代替匹娄昭，率五百骑兵讨伐。
English: If the army were to be called up again, they would inevitably flee far away, and although there was a large army of soldiers and horses, it was of no use. Emperor Xiaowu agreed with his strategy, and so Shifen Yong took the place of Pi Ying Zhao and led five hundred cavalrymen to fight.

古文：永觇知所在，倍道兼进，遂破平之。
现代文：段永侦察到贼所在之处，倍道兼进，将其击破平定。
English: Duan Yong detected the location of the thief, double-crossed and defeated it.

古文：帝西迁，永时不及从。
现代文：帝西迁，段永当时未来得及相从。
English: When the imperial court moved to the west, Duan Yong did not have time to follow.

古文：大统初，乃结宗人，潜谋归款。密与都督赵业等袭斩西中郎将慕容显和，传首京师。以功别封昌平县子，邑三百户，除北徐州刺史。从擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，并有战功。
现代文：秘密与都督赵业等袭击斩杀西中郎将慕容显和，将其首级送往京师。以功别封昌平县子，食邑三百户，任为北徐州刺史。参与擒获窦泰，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，都立有战功。
English: Secrecy and the attack of the governor Zhao Ye and others decapitated Murong Xianhe, the West Middle Lord, and sent his head to the Beijing division. With the achievement, he was awarded the fief of Changping County, 300 households of food villages, and was appointed as the history of North Xuzhou. He participated in the capture of Dou Tai, the recovery of Hongnong, and the defeat of Shayuan, all of which had military merit.

古文：进爵为公。
现代文：进爵为公。
English: Emperor Taibu promoted him to Duke.

古文：河桥之役，永力战先登，授南汾州刺史。
现代文：河桥战役，段永力战先登，授予南汾州刺史。
English: In the Battle of Heqiao, Duan Yongli was the first to enter the battlefield, and was awarded the South Luzhou History Medal.

古文：累迁大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐姓尔绵氏。
现代文：多次升迁为大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐姓尔绵氏。
English: He was promoted many times to Grand Governor, General of Chariot and Cavalry, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, General of Cavalry, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies, Master of Ceremonies.

古文：魏废帝元年，授恒州刺史。
现代文：魏废帝元年，授任恒州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the chief historian of Hengzhou.

古文：于时朝贵多其部人，谒永之日，冠盖盈路。
现代文：当时朝中权贵很多是其部下，谒见段永之曰，冠盖塞满道路。
English: At that time, many of the powerful and noble in the dynasty were his subordinates. According to Duan Yongzhi, the crown covered the road.

古文：当时荣之。
现代文：当时人都认为段永荣耀。
English: At that time, everyone thought it was the glory of Duan Yong.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵广城郡公，转文州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，进爵为广城郡公，转任文州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, was ennobled as the Guangcheng County magistrate, and transferred to the post of Wenzhou magistrate.

古文：入为工部中大夫，迁军司马。
现代文：入朝担任工部中大夫，调任军司马。
English: He entered the imperial court as a junior doctor in the engineering department and was transferred to the post of military secretary.

古文：保定四年，拜大将军。
现代文：惺室四年，升任大将军。
English: After four years of Baoding, Liang Tai was promoted to general.

古文：永历任内外，所在颇有声称。
现代文：段永历任内外各职，所任职都得到称誉。
English: Duan Yong has held various positions at home and abroad, and all of his posts have been praised.

古文：轻财好士，朝野以此重焉。
现代文：不看重财物而与贤能之人交好，朝野为此而敬重他。
English: Asano respected him for befriending a man of virtue, regardless of his wealth.

古文：前后累增凡三千九百户。
现代文：前后多次增封食邑总计三千九百户。
English: A total of 3,900 households have been added to the number of food villages.

古文：天和四年，授小司寇。
现代文：天和四年，授任小司寇。
English: At the age of four, he was awarded the post of Junior Divisional Inspector.

古文：寻为右二军总管，率兵北道讲武。
现代文：不久任右二军总管，率领军队出北路训练。
English: He soon became the commander-in-chief of the Second Army on the right and led the army out of the North Road for training.

古文：遇疾，卒于贺葛城，年六十八。
现代文：患病，在贺葛城去世，终年六十八岁。
English: He fell ill and died in Hege, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：丧还，高祖亲临。
现代文：棺柩运回之时，高祖亲自临吊。
English: When the coffin was transported back, Gaozu himself was present at the hanging.

古文：赠使持节、柱国大将军、同华等五州刺史，谥曰基。
现代文：获赠使持节、柱国大将军、同华等五州刺史，谧号为基。
English: His posthumous name is based on the names of the five states in which he was awarded the title of Jichisai, Jikoku Daisho, and Tonghua.

古文：子岌嗣，官至仪同三司、兵部下大夫。
现代文：其子段岌嗣爵，官至仪同三司、领兵部大夫。
English: His son was given the title of heir to the throne, and rose through the ranks to become the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency and the head of the General Staff.

古文：王士良字君明，其先太原晋阳人也。后因晋乱，避地凉州。
现代文：王士良字君明，原籍是太原晋阳。后来因为晋乱，避难于凉州。
English: Wang Shiliang Zi Junming, originally from Taiyuan Jinyang, later took refuge in Liangzhou due to the Jinyang Rebellion.

古文：魏太武平沮渠氏，曾祖景仁归魏，为炖煌镇将。
现代文：魏太武帝平定沮渠氏，他曾祖父王景仁归附魏，任为炖煌镇将。
English: Emperor Taivu of the Wei Dynasty subdued the Deshu clan, and his great-grandfather, Wang Jingren, was annexed to the Wei Dynasty and appointed as the commander of the town of Yanhuang.

古文：祖公礼，平城镇司马，因家于代。
现代文：他祖父王公礼，任平城镇司马，于是定居于代。
English: His grandfather, Wang Gongli, was appointed Sima of Pingcheng Town, and settled in Dangdai.

古文：父延，兰陵郡守。
现代文：他父亲王延，任兰陵郡守。
English: His father, Wang Yan, was Lanling County Governor.

古文：士良少修谨，不妄交游。
现代文：王士良自小修身谨慎，不随便结交朋友。
English: Wang Shiliang has been self-disciplined and cautious since childhood, and does not make friends casually.

古文：魏建明初，尔朱仲远启为府参军事。
现代文：魏建明初年，尔朱仲远奏请任为府参军事。
English: In the first year of Wei Jianming, Er Zhu Zhongyuan was appointed as the prefectural military.

古文：历大行台郎中、谏议大夫，封石门县男，邑二百户。后与纥豆陵步藩交战，军败，为步藩所擒，遂居河右。
现代文：历任大行台郎中、谏议大夫，封石门县男，食邑二百户后来与纥豆陵步藩交战，兵败，被步藩擒获，因而在河右居住。
English: He was a member of the Daegyo Taira clan, a doctor of consultation, a man of Fushimen County, and a member of 200 households in Shoku village. Later, he fought against the Shodoryo clan, was defeated, and captured by the Shodoryo clan, so he lived in Kawazu.

古文：伪行台纥豆陵伊利钦其才，擢授右丞，妻以孙女。
现代文：伪行台纥豆陵伊利钦佩他的才能，提拔委任为右丞，将孙女嫁给他为妻。
English: Yili, the pseudo-conductor, admired his talent, promoted and appointed him as the right-hand man, and married his granddaughter to him as his wife.

古文：士良既为姻好，便得尽言，遂晓以祸福，伊利等并即归附。
现代文：王士良既然成了其婚姻亲好，便可以尽心而进言，于是分析祸福前程，伊利等人都很快归附。
English: Since Wang Shiliang has become his marriage partner, he can speak his mind, so he analyzes the future of misfortune and fortune, and Yili and others quickly agree.

古文：朝廷嘉之。
现代文：朝廷对此加以嘉奖。
English: The Imperial Court rewarded him for this.

古文：太昌初，进爵晋阳县子，邑四百户。
现代文：太昌初年，进爵为晋阳县子，食邑四百产。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was knighted as the son of Jinyang County, and produced 400 dishes.

古文：寻进爵琅邪县侯，授太中大夫、右将军，出为殷州车骑府司马。
现代文：不久进爵为琅邪县侯，授予太中大夫、右将军，出京城担任殷州车骑府司马。
English: He was soon ennobled as the Marquis of Suizhe County, awarded the title of Taizhong Doctor and the Right General, and went to Beijing to serve as the Sima of Yinzhou Chariot and Cavalry Prefecture.

古文：东魏徙邺之后，置京畿府，专典兵马。
现代文：束魏迁都邺之后，设立京畿府，专门管理军队。
English: After Shu and Wei moved the capital, Gyeonggi Prefecture was established to specifically manage the military.

古文：时齐文襄为大都督，以士良为司马，领外兵参军。
现代文：当时齐文襄为大都督，任命王士良为司马，领外兵参军。
English: At that time, Qi Wenxiang was the grand governor, appointed Wang Shiliang as Sima, and led foreign soldiers to join the army.

古文：寻迁长史，加安西将军，徙封符垒县侯，增邑七百户。
现代文：不久迁任长史，加安西将军，改封符垒县侯爵位，增加食邑七百户。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Changshi and Gaanxi General, and was given the title of Marquis of Fuxi County, increasing the number of food villages to 700.

古文：武定初，除行台左中兵郎中，又转大将军府属、从事中郎，仍摄外兵事。
现代文：武定初年，任为行台左中兵郎中，又转任大将军府属、从事中郎，依然摄外兵事。
English: In the first year of Wuding, he was appointed as a middle-ranking soldier of the Left Division of the General Staff, and then transferred to the General Staff and engaged in middle-ranking soldier, still photographing foreign soldiers.

古文：王思政镇颍川，齐文襄率众攻之。
现代文：王思政镇守颖，齐文襄率军攻打。
English: Wang Shizheng guarded Ying Town, while Qi Wenxiang led the army to attack.

古文：授士良大行台右丞，加镇西将军，增邑一千户，进爵为公，令辅其弟演于并州居守。
现代文：授予王士良大行台右丞，加镇西将军，增加食邑一千户，进爵为公，令他辅助其弟弟高演居守并州。
English: He awarded Wang Shiliang the grand title of Taiwu-jo (大行台右丞) and the title of Jiazhenxi-zheng (加镇西将军), increased the number of counties by a thousand, made him a peer, and ordered him to assist his younger brother Gao Enzhuang in his residence and annex the state.

古文：齐文宣即位，入为给事黄门侍郎，领中书舍人，仍总知并州兵马事，加征西将军，别封新丰县子，邑三百户。
现代文：齐文宣帝即位，入朝为给事黄门侍郎，领中书舍人，依然总知并州兵马事务，加征西将军号，别封新丰县子，食邑三百户。
English: When Emperor Qianwen ascended to the throne, he entered the imperial court as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, the leader of the middle school students, still in charge of the military and horse affairs of the unified state, the general of the Western Expedition, the son of Xinfeng County, and the 300 households of the food village.

古文：俄除骠骑将军、尚书吏部郎中。
现代文：不久任为骠骑将军、尚书吏部郎中。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Shoryo Shogun (general of horseback cavalry) and the junior vice-minister of the Shoshu Rikibu (Ministry of Education).

古文：齐文宣自晋阳赴邺宫，复士良为尚书左丞，统留后事。
现代文：齐文宣帝自晋阳赴邺宫，复任王士良为尚书左丞，总管留后事务。
English: Emperor Qimwen Xuan went to the Summer Palace from Jinyang, and reinstated Wang Shiliang as Shang Shul Zuo Jiao, the head of the post-retirement affairs.

古文：仍迁御史中丞，转七兵尚书。
现代文：随后迁任御史中丞，转任七兵尚书。
English: Subsequently, he was transferred to the post of Goshi Chujo, and then to the post of Shichibyo Shoshu.

古文：未几，入为侍中，转殿中尚书。
现代文：不久，调入为侍中，转任殿中尚书。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, and then to the position of palace secretary.

古文：顷之，复为侍中，除吏部尚书。
现代文：很快，再任为侍中，又任为吏部尚书。
English: Soon, he was reappointed as a chamberlain, and also appointed as a clerk.

古文：士良顿首固让，文宣不许。
现代文：王士良顿首坚持辞让，文宣帝不准许。
English: Wang Shiliang insisted on resigning, but Emperor Wenxuan did not allow it.

古文：久之，还为侍中，又摄度支、五兵二曹尚书。
现代文：一段时间后，还为侍中，又领摄度支、五兵二曹尚书。
English: After a period of time, he was also a chamberlain, and also led the camera detachment, five soldiers and two Cao Shangshu.

古文：士良少孤，事继母梁氏以孝闻。
现代文：王士良年少时成为孤儿，侍奉继母梁氏以孝顺闻名。
English: Wang Shiliang became an orphan at a young age and served his stepmother, Liang, who was known for her filial piety.

古文：及卒，居丧合礼。
现代文：梁氏去世居丧符合礼节。
English: Liang's funeral is in line with etiquette.

古文：文宣寻起令视事，士良屡表陈诚，再三不许，方应命。
现代文：文宣帝不久令他复职管理事务，王士良多次上表陈述诚意，再三不允许，方应命。
English: Emperor Wenzhong soon reinstated him in the management of affairs. Wang Shiliang repeatedly stated his sincerity on the table and repeatedly did not allow it. Fang complied with the order.

古文：文宣见其毁瘠，乃许之。
现代文：文宣帝见他因居丧过哀身体极度瘦弱，造才同意。
English: Emperor Wenzhong saw that he was extremely thin and weak due to his mourning, so he agreed.

古文：因此卧疾历年，文宣每自临视。
现代文：因此卧病多年，文宣帝经常亲自探视。
English: As a result, he was bedridden for many years, and Emperor Wenxuan often visited him in person.

古文：疾愈，除沧州刺史。
现代文：疾病痊愈，任为沧州刺史。
English: After recovering from his illness, he was appointed as the chief historian of Cangzhou.

古文：干明初，征还邺，授仪同三司。
现代文：干明初年，征回邺都，授予仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Ganming, the capital of Xingtu was reclaimed, and the three divisions of the ceremony were awarded.

古文：孝昭即位，遣三道使搜扬人物。
现代文：孝昭帝即位，派遣三路使者检视褒扬人物。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao ascended to the throne, and sent three emissaries to inspect the praiseworthy figures.

古文：士良与尚书令赵郡王高叡、太常卿崔昂分行郡国，但有一介之善者，无不以闻。
现代文：王士良与尚书令赵郡王高教、太常卿崔昂分别巡视郡国，衹要有一些善行的人，无不呈报朝廷。
English: Wang Shiliang and Shang Shuling of Zhao County, Wang Gao Jiao and Tai Changqing Cui Ang separately inspected the county. If there are some good-doers, they must report to the imperial court.

古文：齐武成初，除太子少傅、少师，复除侍中，转太常卿，寻加开府仪同三司，出为豫州道行台，豫州刺史。
现代文：齐武成初年，任为太子少傅、少师，复任为侍中，转任太常卿，不久加开府仪同三司，出京城为豫州道行台，豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Qi Wucheng, he was appointed as the prince's young master and young teacher, reappointed as a chamberlain, transferred to the Tai Changqing, and soon added the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and went to Beijing to be the Yuzhou Daogongdae, and to write the history of Yuzhou.

古文：保定四年，晋公护东伐，权景宣以山南兵围豫州，士良举城降。
现代文：保定四年，晋公宇文护率军束伐，权景宣以山南的兵马围攻豫州，王士良举城归降。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, Jin Gongyu Wen Rong led the army to attack, Quan Jingxuan besieged Yuzhou with soldiers and horses from Shannan, and Wang Shiliang surrendered the city.

古文：授大将军、小司徒，赐爵广昌郡公。
现代文：授任大将军、小司徒，赐封广昌郡公爵位。
English: He was awarded the rank of general, the title of minor statesman, and the title of Duke of Guangchang County.

古文：寻除荆州总管，行荆州刺史。
现代文：不久委任为型业总管，行回议刺史职务。
English: He was soon appointed as the general manager of the mold industry, and went back to his position as a historian.

古文：复入为小司徒。
现代文：又入朝为小司徒。
English: He also entered the imperial court as a minor scholar.

古文：俄除鄜州刺史，转金州总管、七州诸军事、金州刺史。
现代文：不久委任为鄘州刺史，转任金州总管、七州诸军事、金州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and then the chief administrator of Jinzhou, the commander of the military of the seven states, and the chief historian of Jinzhou.

古文：建德六年，授并州刺史。
现代文：建德六年，委任并州刺史。
English: Jiande for six years, appointed and appointed by the state.

古文：士良去乡既久，忽临本州，耆旧故人，犹有存者。
现代文：王士皇离乡已经很长时间，忽然回家乡任职，高龄故旧，尚有不少人在世。
English: Wang Shihuang has been away from home for a long time, suddenly returned home to serve, old age, there are still many people alive.

古文：远近咸以为荣。
现代文：远近的人都以之为荣。
English: People near and far are proud of it.

古文：加授上大将军。
现代文：加授上大将军号。
English: He was also awarded the title of General.

古文：以老疾乞骸骨，优诏许之。
现代文：因为年老有病自请退职，皇帝下诏褒美嘉奖予以批准。
English: Because of his old age and illness, he volunteered to retire, and the emperor issued an edict to reward and commend him.

古文：隋开皇元年卒，时年八十二。
现代文：隋朝开皇元年去世，终年八十二岁。
English: He died in the first year of the Sui Dynasty, at the age of 82.

古文：子德衡，大象末，仪同大将军。
现代文：其子王德衡，大象末年，任仪同大将军。
English: His son, Wang Deheng, an elephant in his later years, became a general.

古文：崔彦穆字彦穆，清河东武城人也，魏司空、安阳侯林之九世孙。
现代文：鲎彦撞字童垄，是翅东武城人，为魏司空、昼堡惬崖叠的第九代孙。
English: Yan Yan is a native of Wuzhong Wucheng, the ninth generation descendant of Wei Siku, the founder of Heibok.

古文：曾祖顗，魏平东府谘议。
现代文：他曾祖父鲎题，任魏平东府谘议。
English: He was once his grandfather's adviser, serving as an adviser to Weiping Dongfu.

古文：祖蔚，遭从兄司徒浩之难，南奔江左。
现代文：他祖父崔菌，受堂兄司徒崔造大案牵连，向南逃奔到昼辽东。
English: His grandfather, Cui Ye, was implicated in the big case of his cousin, Sittu Cui Zuo, and fled south to the east of Liaodong Province.

古文：仕宋为给事黄门侍郎，汝南、义阳二郡守。
现代文：在塞任给事黄门侍郎，汝南、义阳二郡守。
English: He was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain and the governor of two counties, Yunnan and Yiyang.

古文：延兴初，复归于魏，拜颍川郡守，因家焉。
现代文：延兴初年，回归于魏，委任为颖川郡守，于是在此定居。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he returned to Wei and was appointed governor of Yingchuan County, so he settled here.

古文：后终于郢州刺史。
现代文：后来在郢州刺史任上去世。
English: Later, he died in the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：父稚，笃志经史，不以世事婴心。
现代文：他父亲崔稚，专心致志于经史典籍，不关心世事。
English: His father, Cui Zhuang, was devoted to the classics and did not care about worldly affairs.

古文：起家秘书郎，稍迁永昌郡守。
现代文：开始担任官职为秘书郎，逐渐迁任永昌郡守。
English: He began his career as a secretary and was gradually transferred to the position of Yongchang County Governor.

古文：隋开皇初，以献后外曾祖，追赠上开府仪同三司、新州刺史。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，因为是献后的外曾祖，追赠上开府仪同三司、新州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Emperor Kai of the Sui Dynasty, because he was the great-great-grandfather of the present emperor, he was posthumously presented with the Kaifu ceremony, Tong San Shi, and Xinzhou sashimi.

古文：彦穆幼明悟，神彩卓然。
现代文：崔彦穆自幼聪慧，神辨卓尔不凡。
English: Cui Yanmu has been clever since he was a child, and his ability to discern spirits is extraordinary.

古文：年十五，与河间邢子才、京兆韦孝宽俱入中书学，偏相友爱。
现代文：十五岁时，与河间邢子才、京兆韦孝宽一起进入中书学习，相互很友好。
English: At the age of fifteen, he entered the study of Chinese literature together with Kawama Shanzicai and Jing Zhaowei Takahiro, and they were very friendly with each other.

古文：伏膺儒业，为时辈所称。
现代文：倾心于儒学，为当时人所称赞。
English: His devotion to Confucianism was praised by people at the time.

古文：魏吏部尚书陇西李神隽有知人之鉴，见而叹曰： 王佐才也。 
现代文：魏吏部尚书陇西李神俊善于鉴别人才，见到崔彦穆而赞叹说： 是辅佐帝王的人才。 
English: Li Shenjun, the head of the General Staff of the Wei Dynasty, was good at judging other people's talents. When he saw Cui Yanmu, he said with admiration, "He is a talent to assist the emperor."

古文：永安末，除司徒府参军事，转记室，迁大司马从事中郎。
现代文：永安末年，任为司徒府参军事，改任记室，迁任大司马从事中郎。
English: At the end of the Yongan era, he was appointed as a military officer of Szeto Prefecture, changed his post to a secretary, and was transferred to the post of major secretary to work as a middle-ranking official.

古文：魏孝武西迁，彦穆时不得从。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁时，崔彦穆来不及随从。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved west, Cui Yanmu was too late to accompany him.

古文：大统三年，乃与兄彦珍于成皋举义，因攻拔荥阳，擒东魏郡守苏淑。
现代文：大统三年，与其兄崔彦珍在成皋举义，攻占了荣阳，擒获东魏郡守苏淑。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, he and his brother, Cui Yanzhen, conquered Rongyang and captured Su Shu, the governor of the East Wei County.

古文：仍与乡郡王元洪威攻颍川，斩其刺史李景。
现代文：于是与乡郡王元洪威攻打颖，斩杀其刺史李景遣。
English: Therefore, he attacked Ying with Wang Yuan Hongwei of the township and killed his assassin, Li Jingyuan.

古文：孝武嘉之，拜镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫、荥阳郡守。
现代文：孝武帝给予嘉奖，授任镇束将军、金紫光禄大夫、荣阳郡守。
English: Emperor Xiaowu gave him awards and appointed him as the general of Zhenzuk, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and the governor of Rongyang County.

古文：四年，兼行右民郎中、颍川邑中正，赐爵千乘县侯。
现代文：四年，兼任右民郎中、颖川邑中正，赐给千乘县侯爵位。
English: In four years, he served concurrently as U-Minro Junior High School and Yingchuan-eup Junior High School, and was given the title of Marquis of Senjo County.

古文：十四年，加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、司农卿。
现代文：十四年，加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、司农卿。
English: In the 14th year, he was promoted to the position of Jizhi Jie, the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the attendant of horseback riding, and the secretary of agriculture.

古文：时军国草创，众务殷繁，太祖乃诏彦穆入幕府，兼掌文翰。
现代文：当时军国初创，各种事务繁多复杂，太祖于是征调崔彦穆入幕府任职，兼管文件信札。
English: At that time, the military state was in its infancy, and various matters were numerous and complex. The great-grandfather then conscripted Choi Yan-mu to serve in the shogunate, where he was also in charge of documents and letters.

古文：及于谨江陵，彦穆以本官从平之。
现代文：于谨征伐江陵，崔彦穆以本身官职的身份随从参加平定江陵之战。
English: In the honorable conquest of Gangneung, Cui Yanmu accompanied and participated in the battle to pacify Gangneung in his official capacity.

古文：世宗初，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，俄拜安州总管、十一州诸军事、安州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，不久任为安州总管、十一州诸军事、安州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was promoted to General of Cavalry, Kefu Yi and Three Departments, and soon he was appointed as the head of Anzhou, the military of eleven states, and the historian of Anzhou.

古文：入为御正中大夫。
现代文：召入朝廷任御正中大夫。
English: He was called to the Imperial Court to serve as a junior high school teacher.

古文：陈氏请敦邻好，诏彦穆使焉。
现代文：陈朝要求结为友好邻邦，诏令崔彦穆为使臣。
English: The Chen dynasty demanded to become a friendly neighbor, and ordered Cui Yanmu to be an envoy.

古文：彦穆风韵闲旷，器度方雅，善玄言，解谈谑，甚为江陵所称。
现代文：崔彦穆风韵悠闲放达，气度文雅方正，善于玄言，能够谈笑戏谑，甚为江南人士所夸赞。
English: Cui Yanmu's demeanor is laid-back, his demeanor is elegant and upright, he is good at gags, and he can talk and joke, which is highly praised by people in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：转民部中大夫，进爵为公。
现代文：转任民部中大夫，进爵为公。
English: He was transferred to the post of junior doctor in the Ministry of People's Affairs and was given a peerage.

古文：天和三年，复为使主，聘于齐。
现代文：天和三年，又担任正使，出使齐朝。
English: He served as the chief envoy for three years, and was sent to Qi Dynasty.

古文：使还，除金州总管、七州诸军事、金州刺史，进位大将军。
现代文：出使归来，委任为金州总管、七州诸军事、金州刺史，升为大将军。
English: After returning from the mission, he was appointed as the General Manager of Jinzhou, the Military Commander of the Seven Provinces, and the Historian of Jinzhou, and was promoted to General.

古文：寻征拜小司徒。
现代文：不久征入朝廷任小司徒。
English: He was soon drafted into the Imperial Court to serve as an apprentice.

古文：大象二年，宣帝崩，隋文帝辅政，三方兵起。
现代文：左象二年，宣壶逝世，堕塞壶辅助朝政，三处地方起兵。
English: In the second year of Zuo Zhao, Xuan Jiu passed away, Zang Jie Jiu assisted the imperial government, and three local armies were raised.

古文：以彦穆为行军总管，率兵与襄州总管王谊讨司马消难。
现代文：任命崔彦穆为行军总管，率领军队与塞业总管王谊征讨司马消难。
English: He appointed Cui Yanmu as the general manager of the march and led the army to fight with the general manager of the industry, Wang Yi, to eliminate the difficulties.

古文：军次荆州，彦穆疑荆州总管独孤永业有异志，遂收而戮之。
现代文：军队到达趔业，崔彦穆怀疑荆州总管独孤永业有反叛之心，于是捕获诛杀。
English: When the army arrived at Suye, Cui Yanmu suspected that Duolongyongye, the general manager of Jingzhou, had a rebellious heart, so he captured and killed him.

古文：及事平，隋文帝征王谊入朝，即以彦穆为襄州总管、六州诸军事、襄州刺史，加授上大将军，进爵东郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：叛乱平定后，隋文帝征召王谊入朝，随即任命崔彦穆为襄州总管、六州诸军事、襄州刺史，加授上大将军，进爵为柬郡公，食邑二千户。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, Emperor Sui Wen summoned Wang Jiu to the imperial court, and immediately appointed Cui Yanmu as the general manager of Xiangzhou, the military of six states, and the historian of Xiangzhou, and awarded him the title of senior general. He was knighted as the county magistrate of Cambodia and served two thousand households.

古文：顷之，永业家自理得雪，彦穆坐除名。
现代文：不久，独孤永业家人申诉而得昭雪，崔彦穆因此获罪被免职。
English: Soon after, the family members of Duolong Yongye filed a complaint, and the case was resolved. Cui Yanmu was convicted and removed from office.

古文：寻复官爵。
现代文：不久恢复官职爵位。
English: Shortly afterwards, his official title and rank were restored.

古文：隋开皇元年，卒。
现代文：隋朝开皇元年，去世。
English: He died in the first year of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：子君绰嗣。
现代文：其子崔君绰继嗣。
English: His son Cui Junyou became his successor.

古文：君绰性夷简，博览经史，有父风。
现代文：崔君绰性情干易质朴，博览经史典籍，有其父的风范。
English: Cui Junpiao's temperament is easy-going and simple, he is well-versed in historical classics, and has his father's demeanor.

古文：大象末，丞相府宾曹参军。
现代文：大象末年，任丞相府宾曹参军。
English: In the last years of the elephant's life, the prime minister of the government, Pin Cao, joined the army.

古文：君绰弟君肃，解巾为道王侍读。
现代文：崔君绰弟弟崔君肃，开始任职为道王侍读。
English: Cui Junsu, the younger brother of Cui Junsu, began to serve as the king's attendant.

古文：大象末，颍川郡守。
现代文：大象末年，任颖川郡守。
English: At the end of his life, he was appointed the governor of Yingchuan County.

古文：令狐整字延保，炖煌人也，本名延，世为西土冠冕。
现代文：令狐整字延保，是炖煌人，本名延，世代为西北地区的大姓望族。
English: Linghu Zheiji Yanbo, is a brilliant person, his real name is Yan, and he has been a member of a prestigious family in the northwest for generations.

古文：曾祖嗣、祖诏安，并官至郡守，咸为良二千石。
现代文：他曾祖父令狐嗣、祖父令狐诏安，都官至郡守，都是优秀的郡守。
English: He was the grandfather of Emperor Xizhe, the grandfather of Emperor Xizhao, the governor of the capital, and the governor of the county, all of whom were excellent governors.

古文：父虬，早以名德着闻，仕历瓜州司马、炖煌郡守、郢州刺史，封长城县子。
现代文：他父亲令狐虬，很早便以名德而著称，做官历任瓜州司马、炖煌郡守、郢州刺史，封为长城县子爵位。
English: His father, Ling Xuxuan, was famous for his fame and virtue very early on. He served as Guazhou Sima, Gonghuang County Governor, and Zhangzhou Sashihi, and was awarded the viscount of Great Wall County.

古文：大统末，卒于家。
现代文：大统末年，在家中去世。
English: He died at home in the final years of the Great Reunification.

古文：太祖伤悼之，遣使者监护丧事，又敕乡人为营坟垄。
现代文：太祖为之伤感哀悼，派遣使者监管丧事，又下令其家乡为他营造坟墓。
English: The great-grandfather sent an envoy to oversee the funeral and ordered his hometown to build a tomb for him.

古文：赠龙骧将军、瓜州刺史。
现代文：获赠龙骧将军、瓜州刺史。
English: He was awarded the Dragon Kite General and the Guazhou Sashimi.

古文：整幼聪敏，沉深有识量。
现代文：令狐整白幼聪敏，深沉而有见识气量。
English: The fox is bright, intelligent, deep and insightful.

古文：学艺骑射，并为河右所推。
现代文：学习骑射等技艺，都为黄河以西的人所推赞。
English: People west of the Yellow River highly recommend learning horseback archery and other skills.

古文：刺史魏东阳王元荣辟整为主簿，加荡寇将军。
现代文：刺史魏束阳王元荣征召令狐整为主簿，加荡寇将军。
English: Wang Yuan Rong, the general of the Wei and Yang dynasties, was conscripted to be the main book of the fox rectification and the general of the swinging kangaroo.

古文：整进趋详雅，对扬辩畅，谒见之际，州府倾目。
现代文：令狐整举动安详温雅，对辩时语言流畅，每当谒晃，州府中官吏都注目于他。
English: He has a calm and gentle demeanor, and his speech is fluent during debates. Whenever he speaks, officials in the prefectural government pay attention to him.

古文：荣器整德望，尝谓僚属曰： 令狐延保西州令望，方城重器，岂州郡之职所可絷维。
现代文：元荣器重令狐整的品德名望，曾经对僚属说： 令狐延保是西州具有美好名声的人物，能任大事的地方长官，岂是州郡职务的人才。
English: Yuan Rongqi said to his colleagues: "Ling Xianbo is a person with a good reputation in Xizhou. If he can be appointed as a major local governor, then he is a talented person for state and county positions."

古文：但一日千里，必基武步，寡人当委以庶务，书诺而已。 顷之，魏孝武西迁，河右扰乱，荣仗整防扞，州境获宁。
现代文：不过一日千里，也必从半步起始，我将委托其各种政务，书写同意便行了。 不久，魏孝武帝西迁，黄河以西地区动乱，五茔依靠令狐整加以防御，州境获得安宁。
English: However, a journey of a thousand miles begins with half a step. I will entrust various government affairs to him, and written consent will be given. Soon, Wei Xiaowu Emperor moved to the west, the region west of the Yellow River was in turmoil, Wuzhen relied on Lingfucheng to defend it, and the state border was tranquil.

古文：及邓彦窃瓜州，拒不受代，整与开府张穆等密应使者申徽，执彦送京师。
现代文：邓彦窃居瓜州，拒不接受取代，令狐整与开府张穆等人秘密接应使者申徽，擒获邓彦押送京师。
English: Deng Yan secretly stayed in Guazhou and refused to accept the replacement. He ordered Fucheng and Zhang Mu, the governor of Kaifu, to secretly receive the envoy Shen Hui. Deng Yan was caught escorting the Beijing division.

古文：太祖嘉其忠节，表为都督。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他的忠心气节，委任其为都督。
English: The great-grandfather commended his loyalty and appointed him as the governor.

古文：寻而城民张保又杀刺史成庆，与凉州刺史宇文仲和构逆，规据河西。
现代文：不久城民张保又刺杀刺史成庆，与凉州刺史宇文仲和反叛，企图占据河西地区。
English: Not long after, Zhang Bao, a citizen of the city, assassinated and killed Cheng Qing, the assassin of Liangzhou, and Yu Wenzhong, the assassin of Liangzhou, and rebelled in an attempt to occupy the Hexi region.

古文：晋昌人吕兴等复害郡守郭肆，以郡应保。初，保等将图为乱，虑整守义不从，既杀成庆，因欲及整。
现代文：晋昌人吕兴等又害死郡守郭肆，据郡响应张保当初，张保等人阴谋为乱，担心令狐整守义不从，杀了成庆之后，又想杀令狐整。
English: According to the county's response to Zhang Bao, at the beginning, Zhang Bao and others made a mess of the conspiracy, worried that he would not be able to keep the fox, and after killing Chengqing, he also wanted to kill the fox.

古文：以整人之望也，复恐其下叛之，遂不敢害。
现代文：因为令狐整为人所敬重，又担心其部下不服而反叛，所以不敢加害。
English: Because he was respected and feared that his subordinates would rebel against him, he did not dare to harm them.

古文：虽外加礼敬，内甚忌整。
现代文：虽然表面上礼敬，心中却十分忌恨令狐整。
English: Although they are polite on the surface, their hearts are full of loathing.

古文：整亦伪若亲附，而密欲图之。
现代文：令狐整也假装与其亲近，暗中则谋划将其除去。
English: Ling Fuxin also pretended to be close to it, but secretly plotted to remove it.

古文：阴令所亲说保曰： 君与仲和结为唇齿，今东军渐逼凉州，彼势孤危，恐不能敌。
现代文：私下令亲信劝张保说： 您与宇文仲和结为唇齿之盟，而现在东军逐渐逼近凉州，他的形势孤危，恐怕无力抵挡。
English: I ordered my relatives to persuade Zhang Bao to say: You and Yu Wenzhong have formed a close alliance, and now the Eastern Army is gradually approaching Liangzhou. His situation is desperate, and I am afraid he is powerless to resist.

古文：若或摧衄，则祸及此土。
现代文：如若他失败，就必祸及此地。
English: If he fails, it will be bad for this place.

古文：宜分遣锐师，星言救援。
现代文：应该派遣精锐军队，快速救援。
English: Elite troops should be dispatched for a quick rescue.

古文：二州合势，则东军可图。
现代文：二州合为一势，就有可能阻挡东军。
English: If the two states join forces, it will be possible to block the Eastern Army.

古文：然后保境息人，计之上者。 保然之，而未知所任。
现代文：然后保境息民，是最好的计策。 张保认为有道理，但不知由谁来担任此重职。
English: Zhang Bao thinks it makes sense, but he doesn't know who will take on this important position.

古文：整又令说保曰： 历观成败，在于任使。
现代文：令狐整又令此人劝张保说： 看一看历来的成败，都在于用人。
English: Let the fox tidy and let this person persuade Zhang Bao to say: Look at the success or failure of the past, are in the employment of people.

古文：所择不善，旋致倾危。
现代文：所选择的人若无能，顷刻就会失败。
English: If the person chosen is incompetent, he will fail in no time.

古文：令狐延保兼资文武，才堪统御，若使为将，蔑不济矣。 保纳其计，具以整父兄等并在城中，弗之疑也，遂令整行。
现代文：令狐延保文武全才，有统帅能力，如若任命他为将，没有不成功的道理。 张保采纳了这一建议，认为令狐整父兄等亲人都在城内，不怀疑他有阴谋，于是令令狐整率军出征。
English: Zhang Bao accepted this suggestion, believing that Lingfujian's relatives, including his father and brother, were in the city and did not suspect him of having a plot, so he ordered Lingfujian to lead the army to war.

古文：整至玉门郡，召集豪杰，说保罪逆，驰还袭之。
现代文：令狐整军至玉门郡，召集豪杰，告知张保的罪逆，还军奔袭。
English: Let the fox rectify the army to Yumen County, convene the heroes, inform Zhang Bao of the crime of rebellion, and return the army to attack.

古文：先定晋昌，斩吕兴。
现代文：无攻占晋昌，杀死吕兴。
English: He failed to capture Jinchang and killed Lv Xing.

古文：进军击保。
现代文：进军攻击张保。
English: March to attack Zhang Bao.

古文：州人素服整威名，并弃保来附。
现代文：该州人们向来钦服令狐整的威名，都背弃张保而归附令狐整。
English: The people of the state have always admired the prestige of Ling Fucheng, and have turned their backs on Zhang Bao and attached themselves to Ling Fucheng.

古文：保遂奔吐谷浑。
现代文：张保于是逃奔吐谷浑。
English: Zhang Bao then fled to Tugu Hun.

古文：众议推整为刺史。
现代文：大家议论推举令狐整为刺史。
English: Everyone's talk about the nomination has made the fox a history.

古文：整曰： 本以张保肆逆，毒害无辜，阖州之人，俱陷不义。
现代文：令狐整说： 本意是因为张保倒行逆施，毒害无辜，使全州的人都陷于不义之中。
English: Ling Fuxin said: The intention was to poison the innocent and make the people of the whole state trapped in injustice because of Zhang Bao's perfidy.

古文：今者同心戮力，务在除凶，若其自相推荐，复恐效尤致祸。 于是乃推波斯使主张道义行州事。
现代文：现在大家同心合力，目的是要除去凶顽，如若白相推荐，恐怕又要如原来一样致祸。 于是推举波斯使主张道义主持州务。
English: Now, all of them are working together to remove the villain, who, if he were to be recommended, would probably bring about the same calamity as before, so they elected a Persian envoy to preside over the state affairs.

古文：具以状闻。
现代文：将这些情况都向朝廷禀报。
English: He reported all of this to the imperial court.

古文：诏以申徽为刺史。
现代文：诏书令申徽为刺史。
English: The imperial edict decreed that the application of the emblem was history.

古文：征整赴阙，授寿昌郡守，封武县男，邑二百户。
现代文：征召令狐整入京城，授予寿昌郡守，封爵位为襄武县男，食邑二百产。
English: He was conscripted into the capital, awarded the title of Shuchang County Governor, knighted as the man of Xiangwu County, and made 200 products.

古文：太祖谓整曰： 卿少怀英略，早建殊勋，今者官位，未足酬赏。
现代文：太祖对令狐整说： 卿年轻而心有英略，这么早就建立了特殊的功勋，现在的官位，不足以作为酬赏。
English: The great-grandfather said to Ling Xuchang: You are young and clever, you have established special merits so early, the current official position is not enough as a reward.

古文：方当与卿共平天下，同取富贵。 遂立为瓜州义首。
现代文：我想与卿共同平定天下，共取富贵。 于是立之为瓜州义首。
English: I want to work with him to pacify the world and share the wealth, so I set up the Guazhou Benevolent Association.

古文：仍除持节、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍、大都督。
现代文：并委任为持节、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍、大都督。
English: He was also appointed as Mochizeki, Fushun Shogun, Tsuchida Sanzhiyori, and Grand Governor.

古文：整以国难未宁，常愿举宗效力。
现代文：令狐整以国家有难未得安宁，经常表示愿意举宗效力。
English: Letting the country have a hard-won peace, he often expressed his willingness to be effective.

古文：遂率乡亲二千余人入朝，随军征讨。
现代文：于是率领乡亲二千余人入朝，随从军队征讨。
English: As a result, he led more than two thousand people from his hometown to the imperial court and followed the army to collect taxes.

古文：整善于抚驭，躬同丰约，是以人众并忘羁旅，尽其力用。
现代文：令狐整善于安抚和管理，与众人同甘共苦，所以大家都不顾及征战劳苦，全力以赴。
English: Lingering foxes are good at pacifying and managing, and they share the joys and sorrows with everyone, so everyone does not care about the war effort, and go all out.

古文：迁使持节、车骑将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：迁任使持节、车骑将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: The envoys to hold the festival, the chariot and cavalry generals, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the horseback riding attendants were transferred.

古文：太祖常从容谓整曰： 卿远祖立忠而去，卿今立忠而来，可谓积善余庆，世济其美者也。 整远祖汉建威将军迈，不为王莽屈，其子称避地河右。
现代文：太祖经常亲切地对令狐整说： 卿远祖立忠义而去，卿现在也立忠义而来，可以说是积善余庆，世代成就其美德。 令狐整远祖汉代建威将军令狐迈，不愿意向王莽屈服，其子令狐称遂至河西地区避难。
English: The great-grandfather often said affectionately to Ling Fuxing: "Your distant ancestor set up loyalty and left, and now your distant ancestor has also set up loyalty and come, which can be said to be the accumulation of good deeds, and the generation has achieved its virtues." Ling Fuxing's distant ancestor, General Jian Wei of the Han Dynasty, was unwilling to yield to Wang Mang, and his son, Ling Fuxing, fled to the Hexi region.

古文：故太祖称之云。
现代文：所以太祖如此说。
English: That's why the great-grandfather said that.

古文：寻除骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
现代文：不久任为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
English: He was soon appointed to be the commander of the imperial cavalry, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three offices, and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：太祖又谓整曰： 卿勋同娄、项，义等骨肉，立身敦雅，可以范人。 遂赐姓宇文氏，并赐名整焉。宗人二百余户，并列属籍。
现代文：太祖又对令狐整说： 卿的功劳可比娄、项，义节等同骨肉，立身敦雅，可成为他人的模范。 于是赐姓字文氏，并赐名为整宗族二百多户，全都列入户籍。
English: The great-great-grandfather also said to Ling Fucheng: "The merits of the lord can be compared to the merits of the emperor, and the virtuous deeds are equivalent to the bones and flesh, and the uprightness and elegance can become a model for others." So he gave the surname of the word Wen, and gave the name of the whole family to more than 200 households, all of which were included in the household registration.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜司宪中大夫。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，任为司宪中大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne and was appointed as the Sisian Middle Doctor.

古文：处法平允，为当时所称。
现代文：处理法律事务公平公正，为当时人所称赞。
English: He was praised at the time for his fair and impartial handling of legal affairs.

古文：进爵彭阳县公，增邑一千户。
现代文：进爵为彭阳县公，增封食邑一千户。
English: He was given the title of Pengyang County Governor, and the number of counties and townships was increased by one thousand.

古文：初，梁兴州刺史席固以州来附，太祖以固为丰州刺史。
现代文：当初，梁朝兴州刺史席固以该州归附，太祖委任席固为丰州刺史。
English: At first, Liang Chao's seat of the Xing State Historian was firmly attached to the state, and his great-grandfather's seat of the appointed historian was firmly attached to the Toyosu State Historian.

古文：固莅职既久，犹习梁法，凡所施为，多亏治典。
现代文：席固到州任职很长时间，还是习用梁朝法令，所有的措施，很多都不符合治典。
English: Xi Gu has been in the state for a long time, and still uses the Liang Dynasty law. All measures, many of them are not in line with the code.

古文：朝议密欲代之，而难其选。
现代文：朝廷慎密商议要将其替换，但很难找到合适的人选。
English: The imperial court is in close consultation to replace him, but it is difficult to find a suitable candidate.

古文：遂令整权镇丰州，委以代固之略。
现代文：于是令令狐整暂时镇守丰州，委托其策谋取代席固。
English: As a result, Lingling Foxtail temporarily governed Fuzhou, entrusting him with the strategy to replace Shigu.

古文：整广布威恩，倾身抚接，数月之间，化洽州府。
现代文：令狐整广布威恩，倾力安抚接纳，数月时间，教化普沾州府。
English: Let the fox rectify the wide bouyant, strive to appease and accept, and take several months to educate the provincial government.

古文：于是除整丰州刺史，以固为湖州。
现代文：于是委任令狐整为丰州刺史，委任席固为湖史。
English: As a result, the appointment of the fox as the history of Fengzhou and the appointment of the seat as the history of the lake.

古文：丰州旧治，不居人民，赋役参集，劳逸不均。
现代文：丰州原来的治所，比较偏僻，不是地方中心，赋税劳役参差，劳逸不均。
English: The original administrative center of Fengzhou is relatively remote and not a regional center. Taxes, labor and service are uneven, and work-life balance is uneven.

古文：整请移治武当，诏可其奏。
现代文：令狐整请求将州治所迁往武当，得到诏书批准。
English: Ling Fuxin's request to move the prefectural government office to Wudang was approved by imperial edict.

古文：奖励抚导，迁者如归，旬月之间，城府周备。
现代文：鼓励安抚训导民众，迁者如归，很短的时间，新州城已经完备。
English: Encourage and pacify the people, train and guide them, and the displaced will return home. In a very short time, Xinzhou City has been completed.

古文：固之迁也，其部曲多愿留为整左右，整谕以朝制，弗之许也，流涕而去。
现代文：席固迁走时，他的部下很多都愿意留在令狐整身边，令狐整向他们告知朝廷制度，不同意留下，都流涕离去。
English: When Shi Gu moved away, many of his subordinates were willing to stay with Ling Fucheng. Ling Fucheng told them about the imperial court system, but they did not agree to stay and left.

古文：及整秩满代至，民吏恋之，老幼送整，远近毕集，数日停留，方得出界。
现代文：当令狐整任期满而继任刺史到来时，民众和州吏依依不舍，扶老携幼相送，远近之人都集中而来，数日停留，方能走出州境。
English: When Lingering Fox's full term of office expired and the successor to Sashihime arrived, the people and state officials were reluctant to leave the state, helping the elderly with their children, and people from far and near gathered and stayed for a few days before leaving the state.

古文：其得人心如此。
现代文：他就是如此得人心。
English: That's how popular he is.

古文：拜御正中大夫，出为中华郡守，转同州司会，迁始州刺史。
现代文：授任御正中大夫，出朝任中华郡守，转任同州司会，改任始州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Imperial Senior Junior High School Teacher, became the governor of Zhonghua County, the secretary of the same prefecture, and the first prefect of the same prefecture.

古文：整雅识情伪，尤明政术，恭谨廉慎，常惧盈满，故历居内外，所在见称。
现代文：令狐整善于分辨真伪，特别擅长行政之术，勤于政务廉洁谨慎，时刻注意不要过分，所以多次任内外官职，都留下好名声。
English: Ling Xuguo was good at distinguishing between truth and falsehood, especially good at administrative skills, diligent in government affairs, clean and prudent, and always careful not to overdo it. Therefore, he served as an official at home and abroad for many times, leaving a good reputation.

古文：天和六年，进位大将军，增邑通前二千一百户。
现代文：天和六年，晋升大将军，食邑增加至二千一百户。
English: Ten and six years later, he was promoted to the rank of general, and the number of households increased to 2,100.

古文：晋公护之初执政也，欲委整以腹心。
现代文：登公室塞盏刚开始掌握大权时，想以全皿整为亲信。
English: When Sejanin, who had just entered the public office, began to hold power, he wanted to be a close confidant with everything under his belt.

古文：整辞不敢当，颇迕其意，护以此疏之。
现代文：令狐整表示承当不起而加以推辞，非常不顺其心意，宇文护因此而疏远他。
English: Ling Xuchang said that he could not afford to do so and declined, which was very much against his wishes. As a result, Wu Wenguo distanced himself from him.

古文：及护诛，附会者咸伏法，而整独保全。
现代文：宇文护被治罪诛杀，附会者都被治罪，而令狐整却得以保全。
English: Uwen Rong was punished and killed, and the attendants were all punished, but the fox was saved.

古文：时人称其先觉。
现代文：当时人都称赞他有先见之明。
English: At the time, he was hailed as a visionary.

古文：建德二年卒，时年六十一。
现代文：建德二年去世，终年六十一岁。
English: Jian De died two years later, at the age of 61.

古文：赠本官，加鄜宜豳盐四州诸军事、鄜州刺史，谥曰襄。
现代文：获赠本官，加郦宜豳盐四州诸军事、鄘州刺史，谧号为襄。
English: He was awarded the title, and his posthumous name was Jang.

古文：子熙嗣。
现代文：其子令狐熙继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Fox Hee.

古文：熙字长熙。
现代文：令狐熙字长熙。
English: The character 狐熙 was changed to 長熙.

古文：性方雅，有度量，虽在私室，容止俨然。
现代文：性情雅正，有度量，就是在家中，容貌举止也很庄重。
English: The temperament is elegant and measured, even at home, the appearance and demeanor are also very solemn.

古文：非一时贤俊，未尝与之游处。
现代文：如若不是当时才德出众的人，未曾与之来往。
English: If he was not a man of outstanding talent at that time, he had never been in contact with him.

古文：善骑射，解音律，涉群书，尤明三礼。
现代文：善于骑马射箭，懂得音乐，博览群书，对《三礼》特别精通。
English: He is good at horseback riding and archery, understands music, is well-read, and is particularly proficient in the "Three Rites."

古文：累迁居职任，并有能名。
现代文：多次担任各种官职，都以才能出名。
English: He has served in various official positions many times, and is known for his talent.

古文：大象中，位至吏部中大夫、仪同大将军。
现代文：大象年间，任职至吏部中人夫、仪同大将军。
English: During the Year of the Elephant, he was promoted to the position of General of the General Staff.

古文：整弟休，幼聪敏，有文武材。
现代文：令狐整弟弟令狐休，自幼聪敏，文武才能兼备。
English: Ling Fuxi's younger brother, Ling Fuxiu, has been intelligent since childhood, and has both literary and military talents.

古文：起家太学生。
现代文：开始为太学生。
English: He started out as a music student.

古文：后与整同起兵逐张保，授都督。
现代文：其后与令狐整共同起兵赶走张保，授予都督。
English: After that, he and Ling Xucheng jointly raised an army to drive away Zhang Bao and awarded him the title of governor-general.

古文：累迁大都督、乐安郡守。
现代文：数次迁升为大都督、乐安郡守。
English: He was promoted several times to become the grand governor and the governor of Le'an County.

古文：入为中外府乐曹参军。
现代文：入朝任中外府乐曹参军。
English: Entered the imperial court and joined the army as the Chugai-fu Le Cao.

古文：时诸功臣多为本州刺史，晋公护谓整曰： 以公勋望，应得本州，但朝廷藉公委任，无容远出。然公门之内，须有衣锦之荣。 乃以休为炖煌郡守。
现代文：当时的功臣多任本州刺史，晋公宇文护对令狐整说： 以公的功勋名望，应该任本州刺史，但是朝廷要依藉公的才干，不容远出不过公的家族中，要有人获衣锦还乡的荣光。 于是任命令狐休为炖煌郡守。
English: At that time, many heroes and heroines were appointed as Honshu history, and Jin Gong Yu Wengu said to Ling Fuxing: "With public merits and reputation, you should be appointed as Honshu history, but the imperial court should rely on public talents, and it is not allowed to go far, but in the public family, someone should receive the glory of returning to the hometown.

古文：在郡十余年，甚有政绩。
现代文：令狐休任郡守十余年，政绩很好。
English: It has been more than ten years since Linghu retired from the post of county governor, and his political performance is very good.

古文：进位仪同三司，迁合州刺史。
现代文：进位仪同三司，调任合州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the same position as Sanji and transferred to Hezhou Shishi.

古文：寻卒官。
现代文：不久在任上去世。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：司马裔字遵胤，河内温人也，晋宣帝弟太常馗之后。
现代文：司马裔字遵胤，是河内温人，晋宣帝的弟弟太常司马馗的后代。
English: Sima Zi Zunyin was a native of Hanoi and a descendant of Emperor Jinxuan's younger brother, Emperor Sima Ju.

古文：曾祖楚之，属宋武帝诛晋氏戚属，避难归魏。
现代文：他曾祖父司马楚之，适逢宋武帝诛杀晋朝皇族亲戚，避难归附魏朝。
English: He was once the grandfather of Sima Chu, who fled to the Wei Dynasty when Emperor Song Wudi killed the imperial relatives of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：位至使持节、侍中、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、朔州刺史，封琅邪王。
现代文：官至使持节、侍中、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、朔州刺史，封为琅邪王。
English: He was awarded the title of "King of Evil" by officials such as Jijisai, Jizhong, Zhenxi Grand General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Shuozhou Zhishi.

古文：裔少孤，有志操，州郡辟召，并不应命。
现代文：司马裔年少便成孤儿，有志向节操，州郡征召他任职，都没有接受。
English: Sima was orphaned at a young age and aspired to be a statesman. When the state and county conscripted him, he was not accepted.

古文：起家司徒府参军事。
现代文：开始担任官职为司徒府参军事。
English: He began his career as a military officer in the Shuto government.

古文：后以军功，授中坚将军、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：后来以军功，被授予中坚将军、员外散骑常侍。
English: Later, for his military service, he was awarded the title of "Middle-ranking General" and "Outsider Free-rider Regular Attendant."

古文：及魏孝武西迁，裔时在邺，潜归乡里，志在立功。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁之时，司马裔正在邺，秘密回归乡里，志在立功。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, the Sima people were in their infancy and secretly returned to the countryside, determined to make a contribution.

古文：大统三年，大军复弘农，乃于温城起义，遣使送款。
现代文：大统三年，大军收复弘农，司马裔于是在温越起义，派遣使者来联系归附。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, the army recovered Hongnong, and the Sima people then revolted in Wen Yue and sent an envoy to contact and return it.

古文：与东魏将高永洛、王陵等昼夜交战。众寡不敌，义徒死伤过半。
现代文：与束魏将领高永渔、王陵等日夜交战众寡不敌，随从起义的徒众死伤过半。
English: The day and night battles with the Wei generals Gao Yongyu and Wang Ling were few and far between, and more than half of the followers of the uprising were killed or injured.

古文：及大军东征，裔率所部从战河桥，又别攻怀县，获其将吴辅叔。
现代文：当大军束征时，司马裔率领所部参加迎面战役，又另外攻打坏昼，擒获其将呈盐扭。
English: When the large army was conscripted, the Sima descendants led the headquarters to participate in the head-on battle, and also attacked the bad day, and the capture would be a salt twist.

古文：自此频与东魏交战，每有克获。
现代文：自此之后常与东魏交战每次都能取胜并有所掳获。
English: Since then, it has often been at war with the East and West, and has always been able to win and capture.

古文：六年，授河内郡守。
现代文：六年，被授予河内郡守。
English: Six years later, he was awarded the title of county governor of Hanoi.

古文：寻加持节、平东将军、北徐州刺史。
现代文：不久加持节、平束将军、北徐州刺史。
English: Soon, the blessing festival, the general of Pingzhu, and the history of North Xuzhou.

古文：八年，率其义众入朝。
现代文：八年，率领所部义众入朝。
English: In the eighth year, he led the righteous people of Shobu to enter the imperial court.

古文：太祖嘉之，特蒙赏劳。
现代文：一一嘉奖他，受到特殊的奖赏和犒劳。
English: He was commended one by one and received special awards and rewards.

古文：顷之，河内有四千余家归附，并裔之乡旧，乃授前将军、太中大夫，领河内郡守，令安集流民。
现代文：不久，河内有四千余家前来归附，都是司马裔的同乡和故旧，于是授予司马裔前将军、太中大夫，领河内郡守，令他安集流民。
English: Soon, more than four thousand families in Hanoi came to annex themselves, all of whom were Sima-descended countrymen and old-timers. Therefore, the former general and mid-ranking doctor of Sima-descended was awarded the title of county governor of Hanoi, and he was ordered to collect the displaced people in An.

古文：十三年，攻拔东魏平齐、柳泉、蓼坞三城，获其镇将李熙之。
现代文：十三年，攻占束魏的平齐、柳泉、蓼坞三座城池，擒获其镇将李熙之。
English: In the thirteenth year, he conquered the three cities of Pingqi, Liuquan, and Shuwei in Shuwei, and captured the town commander Li Xizhi.

古文：加授都督。
现代文：加授都督。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of governor-general.

古文：十五年，太祖令山东立义诸将等能率众入关者，并加重赏。
现代文：十五年，太祖下令山东起义的各位将领能够率众入关的，全都加以重赏。
English: In the fifteenth year, Emperor Taizu ordered the generals of the Shandong Uprising to reward all those who could lead the masses into the pass.

古文：裔领户千室先至，太祖欲以封裔。
现代文：司马裔率领一千户先到，太祖准备以此封赏司马裔。
English: The Sima descendants arrived first, leading a thousand families, and Taizu prepared to reward the Sima descendants with this.

古文：裔固辞曰： 立义之士，辞乡里，捐亲戚，远归皇化者，皆是诚心内发，岂裔能率之乎。
现代文：司马裔坚决推辞说： 立义之士，告别乡里，离开亲戚，远道前来归附皇上的德政和教化，都是诚心诚意的，岂是我有能力率领他们。
English: Sima's descendants emphatically rebutted, saying, "Righteous men, bid farewell to the countryside, leave your relatives, and come all the way to join the emperor's moral government and enlightenment. They are all sincere and sincere. Am I not capable of leading them?"

古文：今以封裔，便是卖义士以求荣，非所愿也。 太祖善而从之。
现代文：如若将他们封给我，就是出卖义士而求荣，违背了我的原本心意。 太祖认为很对而赞成。
English: If they were to be given to me, it would be betraying the righteous and seeking glory, and it would go against my original intention.

古文：授帅都督，拜其妻元为襄城郡公主。
现代文：授予帅都督，其妻元赐封为襄城郡公主。
English: He was awarded the title of Shuai Duotu, and his wife Yuan was awarded the title of Xiangcheng County Princess.

古文：十六年，大军东伐，裔请为前锋。
现代文：十六年，大军柬伐，司马裔请求担任前锋。
English: Sixteen years later, when the Cambodian army was on the march, Sima asked to play as a striker.

古文：遂入建州，破东魏将刘雅兴，拔其五城。
现代文：于是进入建州，打败束魏将领刘雅兴，攻占了具五座城池。
English: So he entered Jianzhou, defeated the Wei general Liu Yaxing, and captured five cities.

古文：魏废帝元年，征裔，令以本兵镇汉中。
现代文：魏废帝元年，征召司马裔，令其率所部镇守汉中。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the Sima people were conscripted and ordered to lead the headquarters of the Han Middle Kingdom.

古文：除白马城主，带华阳郡守，加授抚军将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：委任为白马城主，带华阳郡守，加抚军将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as the lord of Baima Castle, with Huayang County Governor, General of the Qafo Army, Grand Governor, and Tsunzhi Sanzhixi as his personal attendant.

古文：二年，转镇宋熙郡。
现代文：二年，转任镇守宋熙郡。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of town guard of Songxi County.

古文：寻率所部兵从尉迟迥伐蜀，与叱罗协破叛兵赵雄杰于槐林，平邓朏于梓潼。
现代文：不久率所部军队随从尉迟迥征伐蜀地，与叱罗协攻破叛兵赵雄杰于槐林，在梓潼平定邓肋。
English: He soon led the army of the headquarters to follow the sub-lieutenant Zhixuan to conquer the land of Shu, and defeated the rebel soldier Zhao Xiongjie in Yulin and settled Dengli in Zizhou.

古文：以功赐爵龙门县子，行蒲州刺史。
现代文：以功勋赐封龙门县子爵位，兼摄蒲州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Viscount of Longmen County for his meritorious service, and was also awarded the title of "Photographer of the History of Puzhou."

古文：寻行新城郡事。
现代文：不久兼摄新城郡政务。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed to the government of Sincheng County.

古文：魏恭帝元年，授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、本郡中正。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、本郡中正。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei of the Qing Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Jizhi Jie, the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, the attendant of horseback riding, and the middle-ranking official of the county.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，除巴州刺史，进使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵琅邪县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，任为巴州刺史，晋升使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为琅邪县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Xiaohui ascended to the throne and was appointed as the scribe of Bazhou. He was promoted to envoy, cavalry general, and the three departments of Kaifu ceremony. He was ennobled as the governor of Ziyang County and 500 households in Shiyang.

古文：保定二年，入为御伯中大夫，增邑通前一千五百户。
现代文：保定二年，入朝担任御伯中大夫，食邑增加至一千五百户。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he entered the imperial court as an imperial doctor, and the number of restaurants increased to 1,500.

古文：四年，转御正中大夫，进爵为公。
现代文：四年，转任御正中大夫，进爵为公大军束讨，司马裔率领义兵与少师龌!
English: In four years, he was transferred to the post of Imperial Senior Middle School Doctor, was knighted as a member of the Imperial General Staff, and led the Sima-descended volunteers against the Shao Shizhao!

古文：大军东讨，裔率义兵与少师杨摽守轵关，即授怀州刺史、东道慰劳大使。五年，转始州刺史。
现代文：防守蛆迩，当即授予垣州刺史、束道慰劳大使。五年，转任始州刺吏。
English: He was awarded the Defense Badge, and was immediately awarded the title of Gakishu Sashishi, Sokudo Consolation Ambassador. In five years, he was transferred to the position of Shishu Sashiri.

古文：天和初，信州蛮酋冉令贤等反，连结二千余里。
现代文：左扣初年，值业蛮族酋长生佥置等人反叛，连结二干余里。
English: In the first year of the left turn, the barbarian chiefs on duty rebelled, and the two lines were connected.

古文：裔随上庸公陆腾讨之。
现代文：到区奁随从上庐公陆誊征讨。
English: To the district  follow from the upper  public  land  levy.

古文：裔自开州道入，先遣使宣示祸福。
现代文：丑星奁从盟州道进军，先派遣使者宣示祸福。
English: Ugly Star Dragonfly marched from Mengzhou Road, and first sent an envoy to proclaim good and evil.

古文：蛮酋冉三公等三十余城皆来降附。
现代文：蛮族酋长生三公等三十余城前来投降归附。
English: The barbarian chieftains, including San Gong, came to more than 30 cities to surrender and annex.

古文：进次双城，蛮酋向宝胜等率其种落，据险自固。
现代文：军队前进到双越，蛮族酋长囱宣塍等率领其部落族人，据险固守。
English: The army advanced to Shuangyue, and the barbarian chieftain, Chuang Xuanqian, led his tribesmen and held fast.

古文：向天王之徒，为其外援。
现代文：向天王等人，为其外援。
English: To the Heavenly King and others, for their foreign aid.

古文：裔昼夜攻围，腹背受敌。
现代文：司马裔曰以继夜攻打，腹背受敌。
English: The Sima people said that they attacked at night, and were defeated by the enemy.

古文：自春至秋，五十余战。
现代文：从春季到秋季，进行了五十余次战斗。
English: From spring to autumn, more than fifty battles were fought.

古文：宝胜粮仗俱竭，力屈乃降。
现代文：向宝胜粮食兵器都已耗尽，无力再战而投降。
English: Xiang Baosheng's grain and weapons were exhausted, and he was unable to fight again and surrendered.

古文：时尚有笼东一城未下，寻亦拔之。
现代文：此时还有笼束一城没有攻下，不久也攻占了。
English: At this time, there was still one castle that was not captured, but it was soon captured.

古文：又获贼帅冉西梨、向天王等。
现代文：又擒获贼帅冉西梨、向天王等。
English: Also captured were the handsome thieves Ran Xili and Xiang Tianwang.

古文：出师再期，群蛮率服。
现代文：出师二年，蛮族都屈服于司马裔。
English: Two years after starting the apprenticeship, the barbarians had all succumbed to the Sima people.

古文：拜信州刺史。五年，迁潼州刺史。
现代文：任为信州刺史五年，改任潼州刺史。
English: He was appointed as Shinshu Sashishi for five years, and then changed his position to Shinshu Sashishi.

古文：六年，征拜大将军，除西宁州刺史。
现代文：六年，征召任为大将军，委任为西宁州刺史。
English: Six years later, he was conscripted as a general and appointed as the governor of Xining.

古文：未及之部，卒于京师。
现代文：未来得及到任，在京城去世，
English: He died in the capital before he could take office.

古文：裔性清约，不事生业，所得俸禄，并散之亲戚，身死之日，家无余财。
现代文：旦昼童性情清廉俭朴，不谋求财物，所得的俸禄，都送给了亲戚，去世的时候，家中没有什么财产。
English: As a child of the day, his disposition was simple and frugal, and he did not seek wealth. He gave all his salary to his relatives, and when he died, there was little property in the family.

古文：宅宇卑陋，丧庭无所，有诏为起祠堂焉。
现代文：所居住的房舍低矮简陋，灵堂都无处安置，韶令为之建立祠堂。
English: The houses they lived in were low-slung and simple, and there was nowhere to place a church, so they were ordered to build an ancestral hall.

古文：赠大将军，加怀邵汾晋四州刺史。
现代文：获赠大将军，加坛邵逊置四州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of general, and the Shouson Altar was set up to commemorate the history of the four states.

古文：谥曰定。
现代文：谧号为宣。
English: The nickname is final.

古文：子侃嗣。
现代文：其子墨偈继嗣。
English: His son Muge succeeded him.

古文：侃字道迁，少敢勇，未弱冠，便从戎旅。
现代文：司马儡字道迁，自小果敢有勇气，未成年，便参与军队生涯。
English: Sima Jiu, who was nicknamed "Dao Qian," had the courage to participate in the army since he was a minor.

古文：保定四年，随少师杨摽东征。
现代文：保定四年，随从少师杨揦束征。
English: After four years in Baoding, he became a follower of Young Master Yang Jiu Shu Zong.

古文：与齐人交战，摽为敌所擒，侃力战得免。
现代文：在与齐人作战时，杨捌被俘，司马儡力战而脱身。
English: When fighting against the Qi people, Yang Jie was captured, while Sima Jiu fought his way out.

古文：天和二年，授右侍上士，加都督，进大都督。
现代文：五扭二年，授予右侍上士，加都督，进为大都督。
English: In 1952, he was awarded the title of Right Attendant Staff Sergeant, the title of Kadotoku, and promoted to the rank of Daitotoku.

古文：从大军攻晋州，以功授使持节、车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：随从大军攻打晋州，以功劳而被授予使持节、车骑将军、仪同三司。
English: He followed the great army to attack Jinzhou, and was awarded the title of Envoy, General of Cavalry and Cavalry, and the Third Division of the Order of the Garter.

古文：又从平并、邺，除乐安郡守。
现代文：又参加平定并、邺的战役，委任为乐安郡守。
English: He also took part in the campaigns to pacify Goryeo and Shandong, and was appointed governor of Le'an County.

古文：后更论晋州及平齐勋，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。迁兖州刺史。
现代文：后来再评定攻取晋州和平查的功勋，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司迁任直丛刺史。
English: Later, the merits of conquering Jinzhou and peaceful investigation were re-evaluated, and the general, the Kaifu ceremony, and the three departments were transferred to Zhouzhuang.

古文：未之部而卒。
现代文：未到任而去世。
English: He died before taking office.

古文：赠本官，加豫州刺史，谥曰惠。
现代文：获赠本官，加豫丛刺史谧号为惠。
English: He was awarded this title, and was given the posthumous title of Jiancangzishi.

古文：子运嗣。
现代文：其子司马运继嗣。
English: His son Sima Yun succeeded him.

古文：裴果字戎昭，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：韭墨字卢周，是回墓盐喜人。
English: Lu Zhou, the ink-stained character, is a welcome return to the tomb.

古文：祖思贤，魏青州刺史。
现代文：他祖父裴思宣，任魏直业刺史。
English: His grandfather, Pei Si Xuan, was appointed as Wei Zhi Ye's secretary.

古文：父遵，齐州刺史。
现代文：他父亲墓遵，任变业刺史
English: Following in his father's footsteps, he changed his career path

古文：果少慷慨，有志略。
现代文：基里年轻时性情慷慨，有志向谋略。
English: When he was young, Kiri was generous and ambitious.

古文：魏太昌初，起家前将军、干河军主，除阳平郡丞。
现代文：魏太昌初年，入仕为前将军、干河军主，被委任为阳平郡丞。
English: In the first year of Wei Taichang, he entered the service as a former general and commander of the Ganhe army, and was appointed as Yangping County Commissioner.

古文：太祖曾使并州，与果相遇。
现代文：左担曾经出使并州，与裴果相遇。
English: Zuodan was once sent to annex the state, and met with Peiguo.

古文：果知非常人，密托附焉。
现代文：裴果知左担不是平常人，暗地向其投附。
English: Pei Guo knew that the left-hander was not an ordinary person, and secretly attached himself to him.

古文：永安末，盗贼蜂起。
现代文：永安末年，盗贼蜂起。
English: At the end of Yongan, the thieves revolted.

古文：果从军征讨，乘黄骢马，衣青袍，每先登陷阵，时人号为 黄骢年少 。
现代文：王鳄随从军队征讨，骑的是黄聪马，穿的是青衣袍，经常冲锋在前，当时人称他为 黄骢年少 。
English: Wang Gao followed the army to fight. He rode a Huangcong horse and wore a blue robe. He often charged forward. At that time, people called him the "young Huangcong."

古文：永熙中，授河北郡守。
现代文：永熙年问授予河北郡守。
English: He was awarded the title of county governor of Hebei Province at the request of Emperor Yongxian.

古文：及齐神武败于沙苑，果乃率其宗党归阙。
现代文：当查捏遮在业苞战败时，基果就率领其族人归附朝廷。
English: When Cao Jizhong was defeated at the Battle of Yancheng, Guigo led his people to join the imperial court.

古文：太祖嘉之，赐田宅、奴婢、牛马、衣服、什物等。
现代文：左担对他加以嘉奖，赏赐给田宅、奴婢、牛马、衣服、什物等。
English: The left-hand bearer rewards him with a farmhouse, male and female slaves, cattle, horses, clothes, and other things.

古文：从战河桥，解玉壁围，并摧锋奋击，所向披靡。
现代文：随从参加河桥战役，解救玉壁之围，都是破敌奋击，所向披靡。
English: The followers who participated in the Battle of the River Bridge and relieved the siege of the Jade Wall all fought hard to defeat the enemy and were all victorious.

古文：大统九年，又从战邙山，于太祖前挺身陷阵，生擒东魏都督贺娄乌兰。
现代文：大统九年，又随从参加邙山战役，在太祖身前挺身陷阵，生擒束魏都督贺娄乌兰。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Reunification, he also followed the Lushan Campaign, stood up in front of the great-grandfather and was trapped in the battle, and the Wei governor, He Jiuulan, was born.

古文：勇冠当时，人莫不叹服。
现代文：勇冠当时，人人叹服。
English: At the time of the victory, everyone was in awe.

古文：以此太祖愈亲待之，补帐内都督，迁平东将军。
现代文：因此太祖对他愈加亲近善待，补帐内都督，迁任平束将军。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather treated him more and more kindly, made him the governor of the capital, and transferred him to the post of General Hiratsuka.

古文：后从开府杨忠平随郡、安陆，以功加大都督，除正平郡守。
现代文：后来随从开府杨忠平定随郡、安陆，以功劳加大都督，任为正平郡守。
English: Later, Yang Zhongping, a follower of Kaifu, settled in Sui County and Anlu, and was promoted to the governor of the capital and appointed as the governor of Zhengping County.

古文：正平，果本郡也。
现代文：正平，是裴果的家乡。
English: Zhengping is Peiguo's hometown.

古文：以威猛为政，百姓畏之，盗贼亦为之屏息。
现代文：裴果施政威猛，百姓有所畏惧，盗贼也因此屏息。
English: Pei Guo wields power with great authority, the people are somewhat afraid, and the thieves are therefore holding their breath.

古文：迁使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、司农卿。
现代文：升任使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、司农卿。
English: He was promoted to Envoy of the Empress Dowager, General of the Horse and Carriage, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Ordinary Attendant of the Horse and Carriage, and Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：又从大将军尉迟迥伐蜀。
现代文：又随从大将军尉迟迥征伐蜀地。
English: He also accompanied the general and lieutenant to conquer Shu.

古文：果率所部为前军，开剑阁，破李庆保，降杨干运，皆有功。
现代文：裴果率领所部军队为前锋，攻破剑阁，击败李庆保，收降杨干运，都立下功劳。
English: Pei Guo led the army of the headquarters as a striker, broke through Jiange, defeated Li Qingbao, and defeated Yang Gangyun, all of which made great achievements.

古文：魏废帝三年，授龙州刺史，封冠军县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏废帝三年，授予龙州刺史，封为冠军县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Three years after the fall of the Wei Dynasty, Longzhou was awarded the title of "Champion County," with 500 households.

古文：俄而州民张道、李祏驱率百姓，围逼州城。
现代文：不久州民张道、李佑率领百姓，围攻州城。
English: Soon, Zhang Dao and Li You, the citizens of the state, led the people to besiege the state capital.

古文：时粮仗皆阙，兵士又寡，果设方略以拒之，贼便退走。
现代文：当时粮食和兵器都很缺乏，士兵又少，裴果设定计谋进行抗击，贼寇退走。
English: At that time, there was a shortage of food and weapons, and there were few soldiers. Pei Guo set up a plan to fight back, and the bandits retreated.

古文：于是出兵追击，累战破之。
现代文：于是率军追击，多次接战打败贼寇。
English: As a result, he led the army to pursue and repeatedly engage in battle to defeat the bandits.

古文：旬月之间，州境清晏。
现代文：旬月之间，州境之内得以太平。
English: Between the months of October and November, peace prevailed within the state.

古文：转陵州刺史。
现代文：转任陵州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Lingzhou magistrate.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，除隆州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，委任为隆州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaozhong ascended to the throne and was appointed as Longzhou prefect.

古文：加使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公，增邑一千户。
现代文：加使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公，增封食邑一千户。
English: With the addition of Jichijijijie, the grand marshal of the imperial cavalry, the grand marshal of the imperial household, and the three officials of the Imperial Household Agency, the number of households receiving the title of nobility increased by one thousand.

古文：武成末，转眉州刺史。
现代文：武成末年，转任眉州刺史。
English: At the end of his life, Wucheng was transferred to the post of Meizhou magistrate.

古文：保定五年，授复州刺史。
现代文：保定五年，授任复州刺史。
English: Baoding for five years, awarded the title of Fuzhou stabbing history.

古文：果性严猛，能断决，每抑挫豪右，申理屈滞，历牧数州，号为称职。
现代文：裴果性情威严猛烈，处理事情很果断，经常抑制挫折世家大户，为人洗冤申屈，做遇数州刺史，都很称职。
English: Baiguo's temperament is dignified and fierce, he deals with things very decisively, often suppresses the setbacks of large families, clears people's grievances, and is very competent in dealing with the history of several states.

古文：天和二年，卒于位。
现代文：天和二年，在职任上去世。
English: He died in office two years ago.

古文：赠本官，加绛晋建三州刺史。
现代文：获赠本宫，加绛晋建三州刺史。
English: He was given this palace as a gift, and went on to make history by building three states in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：谥曰质。
现代文：谧号为质。
English: 号 is called quality.

古文：子孝仁嗣。
现代文：其子裴孝仁继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Bae Takahito.

古文：孝仁幼聪敏，涉猎经史，有誉于时。
现代文：裴孝仁自幼聪敏，广泛阅读经史，当时声誉很好。
English: Since he was a child, Pei Hsiao-Ren was intelligent and read widely in history. At that time, his reputation was very good.

古文：起家舍人上士。
现代文：初任舍人上士。
English: He was the first staff sergeant to be appointed to the position.

古文：累迁大都督、仪同三司。
现代文：多次迁升为大都督、仪同三司。
English: He was promoted many times to the position of grand governor and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：出为长宁镇将。
现代文：出朝任长宁镇将。
English: Entered the imperial court as the general of Changning Town.

古文：扞御齐人，甚有威边之略。
现代文：防御齐人，很有威服边境的谋略。
English: The defense is solid, and the strategy of conquering the border is very impressive.

古文：建德末，迁建州刺史，转谯州刺史。
现代文：建德末年，调任建州刺史，转任谯州刺史。
English: In the last years of the Jiande era, he was transferred to the position of Jianzhou chief historian, and then to the position of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：大象末，又迁亳州刺史。
现代文：大象末年，又迁任毫州刺史。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, he was transferred to the position of miller in Wuzhou.

古文：郑伟等之以梁州归款，时刘志亦以广州来附。志，弘农华阴人，本名思，汉太尉宽之十世孙也。
现代文：郑伟等人以梁州归附，此时刘志亦以广州归型尽，是至蝗茎堕入，本名墨，选太尉型宽第十代孙。
English: Zheng Wei and others ascribed to Liangzhou, at this time Liu Zhi also ascribed to Guangzhou, is a descendant of the locusts, his real name is Mo, the 10th generation grandson of Taifang Kuan.

古文：高祖隆，宋武帝平姚泓，以宗室首望，召拜冯翊郡守。
现代文：他高祖父刘隆，塞逮查平定挑迅，因竖尴是宗室首望，召任为面翊郡守。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Liu Long, was appointed as the county magistrate of Mianye County.

古文：后属赫连氏入寇，避地河洛，因家于汝颍。
现代文：后来遭逢赫塑入侵，避难于回络地方，所以定居于汝颖。
English: Later, they were invaded by Feng Hepzuo and took refuge in Huiluo, so they settled in Yuying.

古文：祖善，魏安中，举秀才，拜中书博士。
现代文：他祖父刘善，魏天安年间，举秀才，任为中书博士。
English: His grandfather Liu Shan, during the Wei and Tian'an dynasties, was a great scholar and was appointed Doctor of Chinese Literature.

古文：后至弘农郡守、北雍州刺史。
现代文：后来官至弘农郡守、北雍州刺史。
English: Later, he became the governor of Hongnong County and the governor of North Yongzhou.

古文：父瑰，汝南郡守，赠徐州刺史。
现代文：他父亲刘瓖，任汝南郡守，获赠徐州刺史。
English: His father, Liu Wei, the governor of Runan County, was awarded the Xuzhou Medal of Honor.

古文：志少好学，博涉群书，植性方重，兼有武略。
现代文：窒尽从小喜好学习，博览群书，生性端方持重，兼有军事谋略。
English: He was fond of studying from an early age, read a lot of books, and was a military strategist.

古文：魏正光中，以明经征拜国子助教，除行台郎中。
现代文：魏正光年间，以明经征召任为国子助教，委任为行台郎中。
English: During the reign of Wei Zhengguang, he was appointed as an assistant professor of Kuniko and appointed as a middle school teacher of Gangtai.

古文：永安初，加宣威将军、给事中。
现代文：永安初年，加宣威将军、给事中。
English: In the first year of Yongan, General Ga Xuanwei was in the middle of a matter.

古文：二年，转东中郎府司马、征虏将军。
现代文：二年，转任东中郎府司马、征虏将军。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of East Chūguro prefectural governor and general of conscription.

古文：永熙二年，除安北将军、银青光禄大夫、广州别驾。
现代文：丞毖二年，任为安北将军、银青光禄大夫、庐业别驾。
English: In the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was appointed as the general of Anbei, the doctor of Yinqingguanglu, and the leader of Xingye.

古文：三年，齐神武举兵入洛，魏孝武西迁。
现代文：三年，齐神武起兵进入盗腥，魏耋逗适西迁。
English: In the third year, Qi Shenwu raised an army to invade Guizhou, and Wei Zheng moved westward.

古文：志据城不从东魏，潜遣间使，奉表长安。
现代文：型尽占据州城不归附塞垫，秘密派遣使者，归附长安政权。
English: To occupy the prefecture-level city as much as possible, not to attach a cushion, to secretly send an envoy, and to attach the Chang'an regime.

古文：魏孝武嘉之，授大统三年，太祖遣领军将军独孤信复洛阳。志纠合义徒，举广州归国。
现代文：魏孝武帝很赞赏他，授予卢丛长史、塞越锤守。后来齐神武帝派遣军队围攻，塞监力竭城池陷落，他秘密逃脱得免于难。左面三年，越旦派遣领军将军独巫值收复渔千刘尽集合义徒，以卢业归附国家。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu appreciated him very much and awarded him the Long History of Lu Cong and the Hammer Guard of Xie Yue. Later, Emperor Qi Shenwu sent an army to besiege and supervise the fall of the city, and he secretly escaped from danger. Three years later, Vietnam sent a leading army general to gather the righteous to recover the fishery and return the fishery to the country.

古文：拜大丞相府墨曹参军，封华阴县男，邑二百户。
现代文：任为大丞相府墨曹参军，封为华阴县男，食邑二百户。
English: He was appointed as the grand chancellor Fu Miao Cao to join the army, and was given the title of the man of Huayin County, with 200 households in his hometown.

古文：加大都督、抚军将军，转中外府属，迁国子祭酒。
现代文：加大都督、抚军将军，转任中外府属，迁任国子祭酒。
English: He was promoted to the governor of the capital and the general of the army, transferred to the subordinate of the central and foreign prefectures, and transferred to the position of the son of the country.

古文：世宗出牧宜州，太祖以志为幕府司录。
现代文：世塞到宣州任职，左塑以型尽为幕府司录。
English: Shisei Shose went to Xuanzhou to work, and Zuo Shuo became the Shogun's secretary.

古文：世宗雅爱儒学，特钦重之，事无大小，咸委于志。
现代文：世塞喜好儒学，对塑毖十分钦重，大小事情，都委任型尽处理。
English: The world likes Confucianism, admires Shuxuan very much, and deals with all matters, large and small, in an authoritative manner.

古文：志亦忠恕谨慎，甚得匡赞之体。
现代文：塑毖亦忠恕谨慎，匡正辅助世宗很得体。
English: The molding is also faithful and careful, and it is very appropriate for Sejong to help with the rectification.

古文：太祖嘉之，尝谓之曰： 卿之所为，每会吾志。 于是遂赐名志焉。
现代文：主狙对他加以嘉奖，曾经对他说： 卿所做的事，都很合我的心意。 于是赐名为志。
English: His master wanted to reward him, and once said to him, "What you have done is very much to my liking," so he gave him the name Zhi.

古文：仍于宜州赐田宅，令徙居之。
现代文：并在宣业赐给田宅，令其徙居于此。
English: He also gave him a farmhouse in Xuanye and ordered him to move there.

古文：世宗迁莅岐州，又令志以本官翊从。
现代文：世宗调任岐丛，又令塑瘗以本官身份护卫随从到任。
English: Sejong was transferred to the position of Gi Cong, and Shuxiong was assigned to the position of escort in his official capacity.

古文：及世宗即位，除右金紫光禄大夫、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵武乡县公，增邑通前一千户，仍赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：世宗即位，委任为右金紫光禄大夫、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵为武乡县公，食邑增加至一千户，并赐姓宇文氏。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was appointed as the right gold, purple, and light lotus doctor, the general of chariots and cavalry, and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette. He was ennobled as the county magistrate of Wuxiang County, the number of food villages was increased to one thousand, and he was given the surname Uwen.

古文：高祖时为鲁公，诏又以志为其府司马。
现代文：直担当时为昼公，诏书令壁烬为鲁公府司马。
English: At that time, the direct supervisor was the noon official, and the edict ordered the wall ember to be the secretary of the Lukongfu.

古文：高祖嗣位，进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，拜刑部中大夫。
现代文：直担登基，进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，任为刑部中大夫。
English: He was enthroned as the direct heir to the throne, promoted to the general of the imperial cavalry, appointed to the three departments of the Imperial Household Agency, and appointed as the middle doctor of the Penal Department.

古文：志执法平允，甚得时誉。
现代文：刘志执法公正平允，得到当时人的赞誉。
English: Liu Zhi was fair and even-handed in enforcing the law, and was praised by people at the time.

古文：莲芍界内，数有群盗攻劫行旅，郡县不能制。
现代文：在莲芍境内，经常有强盗打劫来往行人，郡县无力禁绝。
English: In the territory of Lianye, there are often robbers robbing pedestrians, and the county is powerless to stop them.

古文：乃以志为延寿郡守以督之。
现代文：于是任刘志为延寿郡守以督察。
English: As a result, Liu Zhi was appointed as the inspector of Yeonsu County.

古文：志示以恩信，群盗相率请罪。
现代文：刘尽示以恩信，群盗相继请罪。
English: Liu Duan expressed his gratitude, and the group of thieves pleaded guilty one after another.

古文：志表陈其状，诏并免之。
现代文：刘志上表呈报此事，颁诏全都免罪。
English: Liu Zhi reported the matter to the authorities, and all of them were exonerated.

古文：自是郡界肃清，寇盗屏息。
现代文：从此郡界安宁，不再出现寇盗。
English: Since then, the county has been peaceful and there have been no more robberies.

古文：迁使持节、成州诸军事、成州刺史。
现代文：迁任使持节、成州诸军事、成州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the Chengdu Military Region, the Chengdu Military History Museum and the Chengdu History Museum.

古文：政存宽恕，民吏爱之。
现代文：为政宽恕，百姓州吏敬爱他。
English: Forgiven for politics, the people and state officials loved him.

古文：天和五年卒。
现代文：天和五年去世。
English: He died five years ago.

古文：赠大将军、扬州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠大将军、扬州刺史，谧号为文。
English: He was posthumously awarded the rank of general and the title of Yangzhou chief historian. His nickname was Wen.

古文：子子明嗣。
现代文：其子刘子明继嗣。
English: His son Liu Ziming became his successor.

古文：子明弘雅有父风。
现代文：刘子明高雅有其父之风范。
English: Liu Ziming is as elegant as his father.

古文：历官右侍上士、大都督、绛州别驾。
现代文：历任右侍上士、大都督、绛州别驾。
English: The successors of the Right Attendant Staff Sergeant, the Grand Governor, and the Governor of Bozhou.

古文：隋文帝践极，除行台郎中、顺阳郡守。
现代文：隋文帝登基，任为行台郎中、顺阳郡守。
English: Emperor Sui Wen ascended to the throne and was appointed as the second son of Emperor Xingtai and the governor of Shunyang County.

古文：子明弟子陵，司右中士、帅都督、凉州别驾。
现代文：刘子明弟弟刘子陵，任司右中士、帅都督、凉州别驾。
English: Liu Ziming, the younger brother of Liu Ziming, was appointed as the right sergeant of the division, the handsome governor, and the leader of Liangzhou.

古文：隋开皇初，拜姑臧郡守。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，委任为姑臧郡守。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed governor of Gushan County.

古文：寻加仪同三司。
现代文：不久加仪同三司。
English: He was soon promoted to the Third Division.

古文：历卫州蔚州长史、幽州总管府长史。
现代文：历任卫州蔚州长史、幽州总管府司马、朔州总管府长史。
English: The history of successive governors of Weizhou, Yuzhou, and Shuozhou.

古文：史臣曰：昔阳货外叛，庶其窃邑，而春秋讥之；韩信背项，陈平归汉，而史迁美之。
现代文：史臣曰：以前阳货外叛，庶其窃据城邑，《春秋》加以讥讽；韩信背叛项羽，陈平归附汉朝，而司马遥加以赞美。
English: Shichen said, "In the past, Yang Jia was a traitor, and his underlings stole cities and towns, and "Spring and Autumn" ridiculed them; Han Xin betrayed Xiang Yu, Chen Ping was annexed to the Han Dynasty, and Sima Yao praised him.

古文：盖以运属既安，君道已着，则徇利忘德者，罪也；时逢扰攘，臣礼未备，则转祸为福者，可也。
现代文：大凡时运的归属已经安稳，为君之道已经明示，那么不惜身家以求权益而忘掉德义者，就有罪于世；时世遭逢动荡。而为臣之礼不完备，那么能转祸为福者，就可以被认可。
English: The attribution of great worldly fortune has been stable, and the way of the king has been made clear, so those who forget virtue and righteousness while sacrificing wealth to seek rights and interests will be guilty in the world; the times are turbulent. And the courtesy of the vassal is not complete, so those who can turn misfortune into blessing can be recognized.

古文：郑伟、崔彦穆等之在山东，并以不羁之才，邅回于燕雀，终能翻然豹变，自致龟组，其知机之士欤。
现代文：郑伟、崔彦穆等人在山东，都以其不可拘限的高远才行，周旋于燕雀之间，终于能如豹文那样发生显著变化，白致龟绶以任高职，是有预见之士。
English: Zheng Wei, Cui Yanmu and others in Shandong, all with their unrestrained high-mindedness, circled between the sparrows, finally able to make significant changes like the leopard, and the white-haired turtle to hold high positions, are foresighted people.

古文：王士良之仕于齐，班职上卿，出为牧伯，而临危苟免，失忠与义，其背叛之徒欤。
现代文：王士良在齐朝，任职上卿，外任为牧伯高官，但是面临危险却苟且保命，失去忠诚和义节，实是背叛之徒。
English: Wang Shiliang held the position of Shangqing in the Qi Dynasty, and was appointed as a high-ranking official of Muibo in the outside world. However, in the face of danger, he carefully preserved his life, lost his loyalty and righteousness, and was actually a traitor.

古文：令狐整器干确然，雅望重于河右，处州里则勋着方隅，升朝廷则绩宣中外。
现代文：令狐整度量才干让人信服，在河右地区甚有名望。在家乡其功勋昭著各方，在朝廷其功绩名扬中外。
English: He is well-known and respected in the Hawaian region for his convincing talent in measuring and rectifying foxes. His merits are well-known in his hometown, and his achievements are well-known at home and abroad.

古文：而畏避权宠，克保终吉。
现代文：他能避开权势之人，终于能够自保。
English: He's able to avoid powerful people, he's finally able to protect himself.

古文：不如是，亦何以立韪名、取高位乎。
现代文：如若不是这样，又怎么能树立名望、取得高位呢。
English: If this is not the case, how can one establish a reputation and obtain a high position?

