古文：苏秦为赵合从，说楚威王曰： 楚，天下之强国也。大王，天下之贤王也。
现代文：苏秦为赵国进行合纵联盟去游说楚威王，说： 楚国是天下强国，大王是天下的贤主。
English: Su Qin carried out a long-distance alliance for Zhao to lobby King Chu Wei, saying: Chu is the world's strongest country, and the great king is the world's wise man.

古文：楚地西有黔中，巫郡，东有夏州、海阳，南有洞庭、苍梧，北有汾、陉之塞、郇阳。地方五千里，带甲百万，车千乘，骑万匹。粟支十年，此霸王之资也。
现代文：楚国西有黔中、巫郡，东有夏州、海阳，南有洞庭、苍梧，北有汾径、郇阳，全国土地方圆里，战士百万，战车千辆，战马万匹，粮食可供十年，这是建立霸业的资本。
English: In the west of Chu, there are Fuzhong and Wushun; in the east, there are Xiazhou and Haiyang; in the south, there are Dongting and Cangwu; in the north, there are Fucheng and Fuxiang; in the whole country, there are a million soldiers, a thousand chariots, a million horses, and grain for ten years. This is the capital for establishing hegemony.

古文：夫以楚之强与大王之贤，天下莫能当也。
现代文：凭楚国的强大，大王的贤能，天下无人能够抵挡。
English: With the power of Chu and the wisdom of the great king, no one in the world can resist.

古文：今乃欲西面而事秦，则诸侯莫不南面而朝于章台之下矣。
现代文：可现在您却打算听命于秦国，那么诸侯必不会入朝楚国的章台了。
English: But now you are planning to obey the orders of Qin, then the princes will certainly not enter the capital of Chu.

古文：秦之所害于天下莫如楚，楚强则秦弱，楚弱则秦强，此其势不两立。
现代文：秦国最引以为忧的莫过于楚国，楚国强盛则秦国削弱，楚国衰弱则秦国强大，楚、秦两国势不两立。
English: Qin's biggest worry is Chu. If Chu is strong, Qin is weak. If Chu is weak, Qin is strong. Chu and Qin are two different countries.

古文：故为王至计，莫如从亲以孤秦。
现代文：所以为大王考虑，不如六国结成合纵联盟来孤立秦国。
English: Therefore, for the sake of the great king, it is better for the six countries to form a vertical alliance to isolate Qin.

古文：大王不从亲，秦必起两军：一军出武关；一军下黔中。
现代文：大王如果不组织六国合纵联盟，秦国必然会从两路进军，一路出武关，一路下汉中。
English: If the great king did not organize the six-nation vertical alliance, Qin would inevitably march in from two directions, all the way out of Wuguan, and all the way down to Han.

古文：若此，则鄢、郢动矣。
现代文：这样，楚都鄢、郢必然会引起震动。
English: In this way, it will inevitably cause vibration.

古文：臣闻治之其未乱，为之其未有也；患至而后忧之，则无及已。
现代文：我听说： 平定天下，在它还未混乱时就要着手；做一件事在未开始时就要做好准备。 祸患临头，然后才去发愁，那就来不及了。
English: I have heard it said: To put the world to rights, begin before it is out of order; to do a thing, prepare before it is begun; to worry about a calamity before it occurs, is too late.

古文：故愿大王早计之。
现代文：所以，我希望大王及早谋划。
English: Therefore, I hope the king will make plans as soon as possible.

古文： 大王诚能听臣，臣请令山东之国，奉四时之献，以承大王之明制，委社稷宗庙，练士厉兵，在大王之所用之。
现代文：您若真能听取我的意见，我可以让山东各国四时都来进贡，奉行大王诏令，将国家、宗庙都委托给楚国，还训练士兵，任大王使用。
English: If you can really listen to my opinion, I can let the Shandong countries come to pay tribute at all hours, follow the great king's edict, entrust the country and ancestral temple to Chu, and train soldiers to be used by the great king.

古文：大王诚能听臣之愚计，则韩、魏、齐、燕、赵、卫之妙音美人，必充后宫矣。
现代文：大王如果真的能听取我的建议，我可以让崤山以东的各国一年四季都来朝贡，来奉行大王的诏令，将国家和宗庙都委托给楚国，训练士兵，来供大王使用。
English: If the great king can really listen to my suggestion, I can let the countries east of Shaoshan pay tribute all year round to carry out the great king's edict, entrust the country and ancestral temple to Chu, and train soldiers for the great king to use.

古文：赵、代良马囊他，必实于外厩。故从合则楚王，横成则秦帝。
现代文：如果大王真的能听从我的愚计，那么，韩、魏、齐、燕、赵、卫各国的歌女和美人必定会充满您的后宫，越国、代郡的良马、骆驼一定会充满您的马厩。
English: If the great king can really listen to my foolish scheme, then the songstresses and beauties of Han, Wei, Qi, Yan, Zhao and Wei countries will surely fill your harem, and the good horses and camels of Yue and Dai counties will surely fill your stables.

古文：今释霸王之业，而有事人之名，臣窃为大王不取也。
现代文：所以说，实现了合纵联盟，楚国就能称王；实现了连横联盟，秦国就会称帝。现在您放弃称王、称霸的大业，反而落个 侍奉别人 的恶名，我私下实在认为大王不该这样做啊。
English: Now you want to give up the work of being king and hegemon, and get the bad name of serving others. I privately think that this approach is not advisable for a great king.

古文：夫秦，虎狼之国也，有吞天下之心。秦，天下之仇雠也。
现代文：秦国是如同老虎豺狼一样地贪婪的国家，并且有吞并崤山以东六国的野心，秦国是各个诸侯共同的仇敌。
English: Qin was as greedy as a tiger and a wolf, and had ambitions to annex the six countries east of Mount Lushan. Qin was the common enemy of all the princes.

古文：横人皆欲割诸侯之地以事秦，此所谓养仇而奉雠者也。
现代文：主张连横的人却想以割让诸侯的土地去侍奉秦国，这就是所谓的奉养仇敌的做法啊！
English: However, those who advocate succession want to serve the Qin state by ceding the land of the princes. This is the so-called practice of nurturing the enemy!

古文：夫为人臣而割其主之地，以外交强虎狼之秦，以侵天下，卒有秦患，不顾其祸。
现代文：身为人臣却要主张割让主人的土地，来结交虎狼一样的秦国并使它强大起来，来侵略天下各国，最终遭受到秦国带来的祸患，但根本不顾自身将要遭受的灾祸。
English: As a vassal, he should advocate the cession of his master's land, to make friends with the tiger-wolf-like Qin State and make it strong, to invade all countries in the world, and finally suffer the calamity brought by Qin State, but he did not care at all about the calamity he would suffer.

古文：夫外挟强秦之威，以内劫其主，以求割地，大逆不忠，无过此者。
现代文：至于对外依靠强秦的威势，对内胁迫自己的国君，来割让自己国家的土地，大逆不道不忠不义，没有比这种人更厉害的了。
English: As for relying on the might of the strong Qin to the outside world, and coercing his own sovereign to cut off his own country's land to the inside, there is nothing more powerful than this kind of person.

古文：故从亲，则诸侯割地以事楚；横合，则楚割地以事秦。
现代文：所以说，实现合纵联盟，那么各个诸侯国就会割让土地来侍奉楚国；实现连横联盟，楚国就得割让土地来侍奉秦国。
English: Therefore, to achieve a vertical union, each vassal state would cede land to serve the state of Chu; to achieve a vertical union, the state of Chu would have to cede land to serve the state of Qin.

古文：此两策者，相去远矣，有亿兆之数。
现代文：合纵与连横这两种谋略，所达到的结果相距真是太远了，真有亿兆倍那么多。
English: These two strategies of combining vertical and horizontal, the results achieved are really far apart, really a billion trillion times as much.

古文：两者大王何居焉?
现代文：对于这两个谋略，大王如何取舍呢？
English: How does the great king choose between these two strategies?

古文：故弊邑赵王，使臣效愚计，奉明约，在大王命之。 
现代文：因此，敝国的国君赵王特派我来献上这个愚计，想共同遵守合纵盟约，如何取舍全在大王的决定。 
English: Therefore, Zhao Wang, the sovereign of the Min Kingdom, specially sent me to present this foolish scheme, wanting to jointly abide by the alliance and covenant, and how to give up everything to the great king's decision.

古文：楚王曰： 寡人之国，西与秦接境，秦有举巴蜀、并汉中之心。秦，虎狼之国，不可亲也。
现代文：楚王说： 我的国家，西边与秦国相接，秦国有夺取巴蜀，吞并汉中的野心，秦国贪狠暴戾如同虎狼，不可能和它友好。
English: King Chu said: My country, the west side is adjacent to the Qin State, the Qin State has the ambition to seize Bashu and annex Han China, the Qin State is greedy and violent like a tiger and wolf, it is impossible to be friendly with it.

古文：而韩、魏迫于秦患，不可与深谋，恐反人以入于秦，故谋未发而国已危矣。
现代文：而韩、魏两国迫于秦国的威胁，又不能和他们深入地谋划合作，如果和他们深谋，恐怕他们反会投入秦国的怀抱。
English: On the other hand, Han and Wei were forced by the threat of Qin to not be able to plan in-depth cooperation with them. If they did, I'm afraid they would fall into the arms of Qin.

古文：寡人自料，以楚当秦，未见胜焉。
现代文：这样，计谋还没有付诸实行，楚国就会大祸临头。
English: In this way, the strategy has not yet been put into practice, and a great disaster will befall Chu.

古文：内与群臣谋，不足恃也。寡人卧不安席，食不甘昧，心摇摇而悬旌，而无所终薄。
现代文：我自己考虑，单凭楚国来对抗秦国，未必能够取得胜利；与群臣的谋划，也没法依靠，我寝食难安，心神不定，好像风中旗子飘荡不定，终无所托。
English: I thought to myself that relying solely on the state of Chu to fight against the state of Qin would not necessarily be able to achieve victory; I could not rely on the planning of the ministers. I had a hard time sleeping and eating, and my mind was uncertain, as if the flag was waving in the wind, and there was nothing to rely on.

古文：今君欲一天下，安诸侯，存危国，寡人谨奉社稷以从。 
现代文：现在您想统一天下，安定诸侯拯救危国，我完全同意参加合纵联盟。 
English: Now that you want to unify the country, stabilize the princes and save the endangered country, I fully agree to participate in the alliance.

