古文：王建，字光图，许州舞阳人也。
现代文：王建，字光图，许州舞阳县人。
English: Wang Jian, Zhiguangtu, a native of Huizhou's Wuyang County.

古文：隆眉广颡，状貌伟然。
现代文：眉额凸出，额头很宽，相貌奇伟。
English: The brow is prominent, the forehead is broad, and the face is magnificent.

古文：少无赖，以屠牛、盗驴、贩私盐为事，里人谓之 贼王八 。
现代文：年轻时是个无赖，以宰牛、盗驴、贩卖私盐为业，乡里人叫他 贼王八 。
English: When he was young, he was a scoundrel. He made a living by slaughtering cattle, stealing donkeys, and selling stolen salt. The villagers called him the Thief King.

古文：后为忠武军卒，稍迁队将。
现代文：后来在忠武军当兵，逐渐升为队将。
English: Later, he served in the Loyalist Army and gradually rose to the rank of captain.

古文：黄巢陷长安，僖宗在蜀，忠武军将鹿晏弘以兵八千属杨复光讨贼，巢败走，复光以其兵为八都，都将千人，建与晏弘皆为一都头。
现代文：黄巢攻陷长安，唐僖宗在蜀，忠武军将领鹿虽弘率兵八千人归属杨复光讨伐贼军，黄巢败逃，杨复光把他的军队组成八都，每都率领一千人，王建和鹿晏弘都是都头。
English: Huang Chao captured Chang'an, Tang Xizong was in Shu, and the loyal army's general Degu Yinghong led eight thousand soldiers to belong to Yang Fuguang to fight the thief army. Huang Chao was defeated and fled, Yang Fuguang formed his army into eight capitals, each led by one thousand people, Wang Jian and Degu Yinghong were the capitals.

古文：复光死，晏弘率八都西迎僖宗于蜀，所过剽略。行至兴元，逐节度使牛丛，自称留后。
现代文：杨复光死，鹿晏弘率八都西行至蜀，迎接唐僖宗，所到之处，抢劫掠夺，到达兴元府时，赶跑节度使牛丛，自称留后。
English: After the death of Yang Fuguang, Lu Shihong led the eight capitals westward to Shu to meet Tang Xizong. Wherever he went, he robbed and plundered. When he arrived at Xingyuanfu, he ran away from the festival to the cattle thicket, claiming to stay behind.

古文：僖宗即以晏弘为节度使，晏弘以建等八都头皆领属州刺史。
现代文：唐僖宗就任鹿晏弘为节度使，鹿晏弘任王建等八个都头焉所属州的刺史。
English: Tang Xizong appointed Lu Xunhong as the festival envoy, and Lu Xunhong appointed Wang Jian as the chief historian of the eight prefectures.

古文：已而晏弘拥众东归，陷陈、许，建与晋晖、韩建、张造、李师泰等各率一都，西奔于蜀。
现代文：不久鹿晏弘率众兵束归，攻陷陈、许二州，王建和晋晖、韩建、张造、李师泰等人各自率领一都，西奔到蜀。
English: Soon after, Lu Jianhong led all the soldiers to return, and Chen and Xu captured two provinces, while Wang Jian and Jinshun, Han Jian, Zhang Zong, Li Shitai and others each led one capital and went west to Shu.

古文：僖宗得之大喜，号 随驾五都 ，以属十军观军容使田令孜，令孜以建等为养子。
现代文：唐僖宗得到他们非常高兴，号称 随驾五都 ，把他们归属十军观军容使田令孜，田令孜把王建等人作为养子。
English: Tang Xizong was very pleased to have them, and claimed that he would accompany him to the five capitals, assigning them to Tian Lingzi, the commander of the Ten Armies. Tian Lingzi adopted Wang Jian and others as foster children.

古文：僖宗还长安，使建与晋晖等将神策军宿卫。
现代文：唐僖宗回到长安，让王建和晋晖等人率领神策军宿卫。
English: Tang Yanzong returned to Chang'an, leaving Wang Jian and Jinyao and others to lead the Shen Zhe Army and the night watchmen.

古文：光启元年，河王重荣与令孜争盐池，重荣召晋兵犯京师，僖宗幸凤翔。
现代文：光启元年，河中府王重荣与田令孜争夺盥池，王重荣召晋兵进犯京师，唐僖宗到凤翔府避难。
English: In the first year of the Guangqi era, Wang Chung Rong and Tian Lingzi of the Central Prefecture of Sichuan Province fought for the control of Dianchi Lake. Wang Chung Rong called on Jin soldiers to invade Beijing, and Tang Yizong took refuge in Fengxiang Prefecture.

古文：二年三月，移幸兴元，以建为清道使，负玉玺以从。
现代文：二年三月，转到兴元府，任王建为清道使，背着玉玺随行。
English: In March of the second year, he was transferred to Xingyuanfu, and Wang Jian was appointed as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and he accompanied the procession with the imperial scepter on his back.

古文：行至当涂驿，李昌符焚栈道，栈道几断，建控僖宗马，冒烟焰中过，宿坂下，僖宗枕建膝寝，既觉，涕泣，解御衣赐之。
现代文：走到当涂驿时，李昌符焚毁栈道，栈道眼看要断，王建拉着唐僖宗的马，冒着火焰浓烟冲遇，住在山坡下，唐僖宗靠着王建的膝头睡觉，醒来后，感慨哭泣，脱下御衣赐给他。
English: When they came to Dangtuo, Li Changfu burned the footpath, and the footpath looked as if it would be cut off. Wang Jian pulled the horse of Tang Yuzong, and they met with flames and thick smoke. They lived at the bottom of the hill. Tang Yuzong slept on Wang Jian's lap, and when he woke up, he was crying with emotion. He took off his robe and gave it to him.

古文：僖宗已至兴元，令孜以谓天子播越，由己致之，惧且得罪，西川节度使陈敬瑄，令孜同母弟也，令孜因求为西川监军，杨复恭代为军容使。
现代文：唐僖宗到达兴元府后，田令孜认为天子流亡，是由自己造成的，惧怕获罪，西川节度使陈敬管，是田令孜的同母弟弟，田令孜因而请求任西川监军，杨复恭代任军容使。
English: After Tang Xizong arrived at Xingyuanfu, Tian Lingzi believed that the exile of the Son of Heaven was caused by himself, fearing to be punished. Nishikawa Seto sent Chen Jingguan, who was Tian Lingzi's younger brother by the same mother. As a result, Tian Lingzi requested to be appointed as the inspector of the Nishikawa army, and Yang Fuguo was appointed as the deputy military envoy.

古文：复恭出建为壁州刺史，建乃招集亡命及溪洞夷落，有众八千，以攻阆州，执其刺史杨行迁。又攻利州，利州刺史王珙弃城走。
现代文：杨复恭命王建出任壁州刺史，王建于是招集亡命之徒和溪洞夷人部落，有八千人，攻打阗州，抓获闽州刺史杨行迁，又攻打利州，利州刺史王珙弃城逃跑。
English: Yang Fuxiong ordered Wang Jian to serve as the governor of Bishu, and Wang Jian then summoned the outlaws and the Qidong barbarian tribe, with eight thousand people, to attack Bishu, capture the governor of Bishu, Yang Xiangyuan, and attack Lishu. The governor of Lishu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：敬瑄患之，以问令孜，令孜曰： 王八吾兒也，以一介召之，可置麾下。 
现代文：陈敬管对此担忧，问计于田令孜，田令孜说： 王八是我的养子，派个人去召他，就可安置在你手下。 
English: Chen Jing Guan was worried about this and asked Tian Ling Ze about it. Tian Ling Ze said: Wang Ba is my adopted son. If you send someone to summon him, he can be placed under your command.

古文：乃使人招建。
现代文：于是派人招王建。
English: So they sent someone to recruit Wang Jian.

古文：东川顾彦朗与建有旧，建闻令孜召己，大喜，因至梓州，谓彦朗曰： 十军阿父召我，我欲至成都见陈公，以求一镇。 
现代文：东川顾彦朗和王建有旧交，王建听说田令孜召自己，非常高兴，因而到梓州，对颅彦朗说： 十军阿爸召我，我想到成都见陈公，以便求得一镇。 
English: Dongchuan Gu Yanlang and Wang Jian have an old friendship. Wang Jian was very happy when he heard that Tian Lingzi had summoned him, so he went to Zizhou and said to the cranial Yan Lang: Dad of the Ten Armies has summoned me. I want to go to Chengdu to see Chen Gong in order to obtain a town.

古文：即以其家属托彦朗，选精兵二千，驰之成都。
现代文：就把家属交托给顾彦朗，挑选精兵两干人，快马赶到成都。
English: He entrusted his family members to Gu Yanlang, selected two elite soldiers, and hurried to Chengdu.

古文：行至鹿头关，敬瑄悔召建，使人止之。
现代文：到达鹿头关时，陈敬殖后悔召王建，派人去阻止他。
English: When arriving at Deer Head Pass, Chen Jinglian regretted calling Wang Jian and sent someone to stop him.

古文：建大怒，击破鹿头关，取汉州。
现代文：王建大怒，攻破鹿头关，夺取汉州。
English: Wang Jian flew into a rage, broke through Shuto Pass, and captured Hanzhou.

古文：彦朗闻之，出兵助建，军于学射。
现代文：顾彦朗获知后，出兵援助王建，驻扎在学射山。
English: After Gu Yanlang learned of this, he sent troops to aid Wang Jian and stationed them in Xueyashan.

古文：敬瑄遣将句惟立逆建，建击败之，遂攻彭州。
现代文：陈敬管派将领句惟立迎战王建，王建打败句惟立，于是进攻彭川。
English: Chen Jing Guan sent the general Guo Weili to meet Wang Jian, and Wang Jian defeated Guo Weili, and then attacked Pengchuan.

古文：敬瑄遣眉州刺史山行章将兵五万屯新繁，建又击败之，虏获万余人，横尸四十里。
现代文：陈敬琼派眉州刺史山行章率兵五万人屯驻新繁，王建又打败他们，俘虏一万多人，横尸四十里。
English: Chen Jingqiong sent Meizhou Zhishan Xingzhang and fifty thousand soldiers to Xinxiang, Wang Jian defeated them, captured more than ten thousand people, and left forty miles of corpses.

古文：敬瑄发兵七万益行章，与建相持濛阳、新都百余日。
现代文：陈敬琼出兵七万人增援山行章，和王建在蒙阳、新都相持一百多天。
English: Chen Jingqiong sent seventy thousand soldiers to reinforce Shan Xingzhang, and Wang Jian held out in Mengyang and Xindu for more than a hundred days.

古文：昭宗遣左谏议大夫李洵为两川宣谕和协使，诏彦朗等罢兵。
现代文：唐昭宗派左谏议大夫李洵任两川宣谕和协使，诏令顾彦朗等人罢兵休战。
English: The Tang Zhaozhou Sect's Zuo Jianli Doctor Li Jian was appointed as the peace envoy for the two rivers, and he ordered Gu Yanlang and others to call a truce.

古文：彦朗请以大臣镇蜀，因为建求旌节。
现代文：颅彦朗请求以大臣镇守蜀，并且替王建请求节度使职。
English: Kakehiko-ro requested to be appointed as the minister of defense of Shu, and also requested to be appointed to the post of regent in place of Wang Jian.

古文：文德元年六月，以宰相韦昭度为西川节度使。
现代文：文德元年六月，朝廷任宰相韦昭度焉西川节度使。
English: In June 1861, the Imperial Court appointed Prime Minister Wei Zhaodu as the envoy of the Nishikawa Shogunate.

古文：分邛、蜀、黎、雅为永平军，拜建节度使。
现代文：分邛、蜀、黎、雅四州为永平军，拜王建为永平军节度使。
English: The four prefectures of Fenglan, Shu, Li and Ya were the Yongping Army, and Bai Wangjian was the Yongping Army's commander.

古文：敬瑄不受代，昭宗即命昭度将彦朗等兵讨之。
现代文：陈敬琦不接受被人代任的命令，唐昭宗就命令韦昭度率颅彦朗等人的军队讨伐他。
English: Chen Jingyao did not accept the order to be replaced by someone else, so Tang Zhaozong ordered Wei Zhaodou to lead the army of Guan Yanlang and others to fight against him.

古文：昭宗以建为招讨牙内都指挥使。
现代文：唐昭宗任王建焉招讨牙内都指挥使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang appointed Wang Jianyan as the commander of the imperial envoys.

古文：久之，不克，建谓昭度曰： 公以数万之众，困两川之人，而师久无功，奈何？
现代文：过了很久，不能攻克，王建对韦昭度说： 你率领几万兵众，使两川人民受累，而军队久无战功，怎么办呢？
English: After a long time, unable to conquer, Wang Jian said to Wei Zhaodu: You have led tens of thousands of soldiers, burdened the people of the two rivers, and the army has no war merit for a long time, what should you do?

古文：且唐室多故，东方诸镇，兵接都畿，公当归相天子，静中原以固根本，此蛮夷之国，不足以留公。 
现代文：而且唐室多变故，东方各镇，军队进逼京城地区，你应当回去辅助天子，安定中原，巩固根本，这里是蛮夷地区，不值得让你逗留！ 
English: Moreover, because the Tang dynasty was changeable, the eastern towns and the army entered and forced the Beijing area, you should go back to assist the heavenly son, stabilize the Central Plains, and consolidate the foundation. This is a barbarian area, and it is not worth letting you stay!

古文：昭度迟疑未决，建遣军士擒昭度亲吏于军门，脔而食之，建入白曰： 军士饥，须此为食尔！ 
现代文：韦昭度正迟疑不决，王建派士兵把韦昭度亲信的官吏抓到军营门前，割成肉块吃掉，王建过来陈述说： 士兵不过是饿了，需要以此为食罢了！ 
English: Wei Zhaodu was hesitating. Wang Jian sent soldiers to catch Wei Zhaodu's trusted officials in front of the barracks, cut them into pieces of meat and eat them. Wang Jian came over and said: The soldiers are just hungry and need to eat this!

古文：昭度大恐，即留符节与建而东。
现代文：韦昭度十分恐惧，就留下符节给王建而束去。
English: Wei Zhaodu was very afraid, so he left the talisman to Wang Jian and bundled him away.

古文：昭度已去，建即以兵扼剑门，两川由是阻绝。
现代文：韦昭度离去后，王建就派兵扼守剑门，两川从此同中原隔绝。
English: After Wei Zhaodu left, Wang Jian sent soldiers to guard Jianmen, and the two rivers were cut off from the Central Plains.

古文：山行章屯广都，建击败之，行章走眉州，以州降建。
现代文：山行章屯驻在广都，王建打败他，山行章逃跑到眉州，献出眉州向王建投降。
English: Shan Xingzhang was stationed in Guangdong. Wang Jian defeated him. Shan Xingzhang fled to Meizhou and surrendered Meizhou to Wang Jian.

古文：建引兵攻成都，而资、简、戎、茂、嘉、邛诸州皆杀刺史降建。
现代文：王建率兵攻打成都，而资、简、戎、茂、嘉、邛等州人都杀掉刺史向王建投降。
English: Wang Jian led the troops to attack Chengdu, and the statesmen such as Zi, Jian, Rong, Mao, Jia and Zou all killed the assassin and surrendered to Wang Jian.

古文：建攻成都甚急，田令孜登城呼建曰： 老夫与公相厚，何嫌而至此！ 
现代文：王建攻打成都十分猛烈，田令孜登城呼叫王建说： 老夫我对你很好，为什么怨恨我到了这个地步！ 
English: Wang Jian's attack on Chengdu was very fierce. Tian Lingzi went to the city to call Wang Jian and said: "Old man, I am very good to you, why do you resent me to this extent!

古文：建曰： 军容父子之恩，心何可忘！
现代文：王建说： 军容使与我有父子之恩，心里怎能忘记！
English: Wang Jian said, "How can I forget the kindness of my father and son to me?

古文：然兵讨不受代者，天子命也。 
现代文：但我们的军队讨伐不接受替任的人，这是天子的命令。 
English: But it is the order of the Son of Heaven that our army should fight against those who do not accept the replacement.

古文：令孜夜入建军，以节度观察牌印授建。
现代文：田令孜晚上进入王建军中，把节度观察牌印交给王建。
English: In the evening, Tian Lingzi entered Wang Jianjun's army and handed over the festival observation plaques to Wang Jian.

古文：明日，敬瑄开门迎建。
现代文：第二天，陈敬管打开城门迎接王建。
English: The next day, Chen Jingguan opened the city gate to welcome Wang Jianrong.

古文：建将入城，以张勍为都虞候，戒其军士曰： 吾以张勍为虞候矣，汝等无犯其令，幸勍执而见我，我尚活汝，使其杀而后白，吾亦不能诘也。 
现代文：王建将要入城时，任张勃为都虞候，警告他的士兵说： 我任张勃焉虞候了，你们不要冒犯他的命令，如果张勃抓你们来见我，我还能让你们活，如果他对你们先斩后奏，我也不能责怪他。 
English: When Wang Jian was about to enter the city, he allowed Zhang Bo to wait for him and warned his soldiers: "I have allowed Zhang Bo to wait for me. Don't disobey his orders. If Zhang Bo catches you and brings you to see me, I can still let you live. If he kills you first, I can't blame him."

古文：建入城，军士剽略，勍杀百人而止。
现代文：王建进城，士兵们抢劫掠夺，张勃杀了一百人纔停止。
English: Wang Jian entered the city, the soldiers looted and plundered, Zhang Bo killed a hundred people and stopped.

古文：后建迁敬瑄于雅州，使人杀之；复以令孜为监军，既而亦杀之。
现代文：后来王建把陈敬管迁到雅州，派人杀了他；又任田令孜焉监军，不久把他也杀了。
English: Later, Wang Jian transferred Chen Jingguan to Yazhou and sent someone to kill him; he also appointed Tian Lingzhi to supervise the troops and soon killed him.

古文：大顺二年十月，唐以建为检校司徒、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使知节度事、管内观察处置云南八国招抚等使。
现代文：大顺二年十月，唐任王建为检校司徒、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使知节度事、管内观察处置、云南八国招抚等使。
English: In October of the second year of Daxun, Tang Ren Wang Jian became the inspector of the school, Chengdu Yin, deputy ambassador of Jianan West River Festival to know the festival schedule, observe and dispose within the jurisdiction, Yunnan eight countries and other envoys.

古文：东川顾彦朗卒，其弟彦晖立。
现代文：柬川顾彦朗死，他的弟弟顾彦晖继立。
English: After the death of Kamikawa Guihan Lang, his younger brother Guihan Jie succeeded him.

古文：唐遣宦者宗道弼赐彦晖东川旌节，绵州刺史常厚执道弼以攻梓州，建遣李简、王宗涤等讨厚。
现代文：唐派宦官亲道弼赐给顾彦晖东川旌节，绵州刺史常厚抓获宗道弼，攻打梓州，王建派李简、王宗涤等人讨伐常厚。
English: The eunuchs of the Tang Dynasty sent their eunuchs to the Dongchuan Festival, and the eunuchs of Mianzhou Province captured the eunuchs of Zong Province and attacked Zizhou. Wang Jian sent Li Jian and Wang Zongjia to fight against Zong Province.

古文：自彦朗死，建欲图并东川而未有以发，及李简等讨厚，戒曰： 兵已破厚，彦晖必出犒师，即与俱来，无烦吾再举也。 
现代文：自从顾彦朗死后，王建图谋吞并束川而没有机会动手，到李简等人讨伐常厚时，告诫说： 军队攻破常厚后，顾彦晖必定出来犒劳军队，然后就和他一起回来，不要麻烦我再次出兵。 
English: Since Gu Yanlang's death, Wang Jian has been plotting to annex Sokcheon but has not had a chance to do so. When Li Jian and others went to fight against Changtho, he warned: After the army defeats Changtho, Gu Yanlong will surely come out to work for the army, and then come back with him. Don't bother me to send troops again.

古文：简等击厚，败之钟阳，厚走还绵州，以唐旌节还道弼而出之。
现代文：李简等人攻打常厚，在锺阳打败他，常厚逃回绵州，把唐的旌节交还宗道弼并放他出来。
English: Li Jian and others attacked Chang Hou, defeated him in Fenyang, and Chang Hou fled back to Mianzhou, handing Tang's Jiejie back to Zong Daojun and releasing him.

古文：彦晖已得节，辞疾不出犒军。
现代文：颅彦晖得到旌节后，推辞说有病不出来犒劳军队。
English: After being awarded the Medal of Honor, Kakehiko resigned, saying that he was too ill to serve in the army.

古文：乾宁二年，建遣王宗涤攻之。
现代文：干宁二年，王建派王宗涤攻打他。
English: In the second year of Han Ning, Wang Jian sent Wang Zongjia to attack him.

古文：十二月，宗涤败彦晖于楸林，斩其将罗璋，遂围梓州。
现代文：十二月，王宗涤在楸林打败颅彦晖，斩了他的将领罗璋，于是包围梓州。
English: In December, Wang Zongya defeated Jian Yanqi in Yulin, beheaded his general Luo Yao, and then surrounded Zizhou.

古文：三年五月，昭宗遣宦者袁易简诏建罢兵，建收兵还成都。
现代文：三年五月，唐昭宗派宦官袁易简诏令王建罢兵休战，王建收兵回到成都。
English: In May of the third year, the eunuch Yuan Yi Jian of the Tang Zhaozhou sect ordered Wang Jian to strike a truce, and Wang Jian gathered his troops and returned to Chengdu.

古文：黔南节度使王肇以其地降于建。
现代文：黔南节度使王肇献出他的土地向王建投降。
English: The Southern Song Festival made Wang Zhao offer his land to surrender to Wang Jian.

古文：四年，宗涤复攻东川，别遣王宗侃、宗阮等出峡，取渝、泸州。
现代文：四年，王宗涤又进攻束川，王建另派王宗侃、王宗阮等人出峡，攻取渝、泸二州。
English: In the fourth year, Wang Zongya attacked Sokchuan again, and Wang Jian sent Wang Zongkan, Wang Zong Ruan and others out of the gorge to capture Yulong and Yunnan.

古文：五月，建自将攻东川，昭宗遣谏议大夫李洵、判官韦庄宣谕两川，诏建罢兵。
现代文：五月，王建亲自率兵攻打束川，唐昭宗派谏议大夫李洵、判官韦庄宣谕两川，诏令王建罢兵休战。
English: In May, Wang Jian personally led an army to attack Sokchuan, and the Tang Zhaozong sect led the doctor Li Yan and the judge Wei Zhuang to proclaim the two rivers, and ordered Wang Jian to strike a truce.

古文：建不奉诏，乃责授建南州刺史，以郯王为凤翔节度使，李茂贞代建为西川节度使。
现代文：王建不接受诏命，于是责授王建为南州刺史，任郯王焉凤翔节度使，李茂贞代王建任西川节度使。
English: Wang Jian did not accept the imperial order, so he ordered Wang Jian to be appointed as the Nanzhou scribe, Wang Yanfengxiang as the Nanzhou scribe, and Li Maozhen as the Nishikawa scribe.

古文：茂贞拒命，乃复建官爵。
现代文：李茂贞拒不受命，这纔恢复王建的官爵。
English: When Li Maozhen refused to accept the order, Wang Jian's title was restored.

古文：冬十月，建攻破梓州，彦晖自杀。
现代文：冬十月，王建攻破梓州，顾彦晖自杀。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Jian defeated Zizhou, and Gu Yanzhong committed suicide.

古文：彦晖将顾彦瑶顾城已危，谓诸将吏曰： 事公当生死以之！ 
现代文：此前，顾彦晖的将领顾彦瑶见城已危在旦夕，对将吏们说： 事奉颅公应当生死相随！ 
English: Previously, Gu Yanqi's general Gu Yanqi saw that the city was in imminent danger, and said to the generals: "Serving the emperor should be a matter of life and death!"

古文：指其所佩宾铁剑曰： 事急而有叛者，当齿此剑！ 
现代文：指着他佩带的铵铁剑说： 事情危急之下反叛的人，应当被这把剑杀掉！ 
English: Pointing to the iron sword he was carrying, he said, "Those who rebel when things are in danger should be killed with this sword!"

古文：及城将破，彦瑶与彦晖召集将吏饮酒，遂与之俱死。
现代文：到城快要被攻破时，顾彦瑶和顾彦晖召集将吏们饮酒，于是和他们一同死去。
English: When the city was about to be breached, Gu Yanyu and Gu Yanyu gathered the officials to drink, and then died with them.

古文：建以王宗涤为东川留后，唐即以宗涤为节度使，于是并有两川之地。
现代文：王建任王宗涤为束川留后，唐就任王宗涤为节度使，于是全部占据了两川地方。
English: After Wang Jian was appointed by Wang Zongdai to stay in Sokchuan, Tang appointed Wang Zongdai to be the festival envoy, so they all occupied the two rivers.

古文：是时，凤翔李茂贞兼据梁、洋、秦、陇，数以兵侵建。
现代文：这时，凤翔李茂贞同时占据梁、洋、秦、陇四州，多次率兵侵犯王建。
English: At this time, Fengxiang Li Maozhen occupied the four states of Liang, Yang, Qin, and Qi at the same time, and repeatedly led troops to invade Wang Jian.

古文：天复元年，梁太祖兵诛宦者，宦者韩全诲等劫天子幸凤翔，梁兵围之，茂贞闭城拒守经年，力窘，求与梁和。
现代文：天复元年，梁太祖的军队诛杀宦官，宦官韩全诲等人劫持天子到凤翔，后梁兵包围凤翔，李茂贞闭城抗守一年多，势窘力困，请求舆后梁讲和。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Liang Taizu's army killed the eunuch, eunuch Han Quanzhang and others kidnapped Tianzi to Fengxiang, after which Liang's soldiers surrounded Fengxiang, Li Maozhen closed the city for more than a year to resist, the situation was embarrassing, and he asked the eunuch Liang to make peace.

古文：建间遣人聘茂贞，许以出兵为援，劝其坚壁勿和。
现代文：王建乘机派人通好李茂贞，答应出兵援助，劝他坚守不要讲和。
English: Wang Jian took advantage of the opportunity to send someone to talk to Li Maozhen, promised to send troops to help, and advised him not to make peace.

古文：遣王宗涤将兵五万，声言迎驾，以攻兴元，执其节度使李继业，而武定节度使拓拔思敬遂以其地降于建，于是并有山南西道。
现代文：又派王宗涤率兵五万，声称迎接皇帝，攻打兴元府，抓获节度使李继业，武定节度使拓拔思敬于是献出他的地盘向王建投降，这样，王建兼并了整个山南西道。
English: He also sent Wang Zong and fifty thousand soldiers, claiming to welcome the emperor, to attack Xingyuanfu, to capture Jiedu to make Li Jiye, and to capture Wuding Jiedu to make Tuoba Shijing, and then offered his territory to surrender to Wang Jian. In this way, Wang Jian annexed the entire West Shannan Road.

古文：是时，荆南成汭死，襄州赵匡凝遣其弟匡明袭据之，建乘其间，攻下夔、施、忠、万四州。
现代文：这时，剂南成油死，襄州赵匡凝派他的弟弟趟匡明袭占荆南，王建乘这个机会，攻克夔、施、忠、万四州。
English: At this time, Yangzhou Zhao Kuangge sent his younger brother, Guanming, to invade Jingnan, and Wang Jian seized the opportunity to conquer Min, Shih, Zhong and Wanzhou.

古文：三年八月，唐封建蜀王。
现代文：三年八月，唐封王建为蜀王。
English: In August of the third year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Jian became the King of Shu.

古文：四年，唐迁都洛阳，改元天祐，建与唐隔绝而不知，故仍称天复。
现代文：四年，唐迁都洛阳，改年号为天佑，王建和唐隔绝而不知道，因此仍称天复这个年号。
English: In the fourth year, the Tang Dynasty moved its capital to Luoyang and changed the year name to Tianyou. Wang Jian was cut off from the Tang Dynasty and did not know it, so he still called the year Tianfu.

古文：六年，又取归州，于是并有三峡。
现代文：六年，又攻取归州，于是吞并了整个三峡。
English: Six years later, it invaded Gushu and annexed the entire Three Gorges.

古文：七年，梁灭唐，遣使者谕建，建拒而不纳。
现代文：七年，后梁消灭唐，派使臣招降王建，王建拒不接受。
English: In the seventh year, after Liang eliminated Tang, he sent envoys to invite Wang Jian to surrender, but Wang Jian refused to accept.

古文：建因驰檄四方，会兵讨梁，四方知其非诚实，皆不应。
现代文：王建进而驰马传檄四方，会兵讨伐后梁，各地知道他没有诚意，都不响应。
English: Wang Jian then rode his horse to the four directions and gathered soldiers to fight against Houliang. All regions knew that he was not sincere and did not respond.

古文：是岁正月，巨人见青城山。
现代文：这年正月，巨人出现在青城山。
English: In the first month of this year, a giant appeared on Mount Qingcheng.

古文：六月，凤凰见万岁县，黄龙见嘉阳江，而诸州皆言甘露、白鹿、白雀、龟、龙之瑞。
现代文：六月，凤凰出现在万岁县，黄龙出现在嘉阳江，而各州都称说有甘露、白鹿、白雀、龟、龙的吉兆。
English: In June, the phoenix appeared in Wanlian County, the yellow dragon appeared in Jiayang River, and all the states claimed to have the auspicious signs of nectar, white deer, white finch, turtle and dragon.

古文：秋九月己亥，建乃即皇帝位。
现代文：秋九月己亥日，王建登上皇帝位。
English: On the day of autumn and September, Wang Jian ascended to the throne.

古文：封其诸子为王，以王宗佶为中书令，韦庄为左散骑常侍判中书门下事，唐袭为枢密使，郑骞为御史中丞，张格、王锴皆为翰林学士，周博雅为成都尹。
现代文：封他的儿子们焉王，任王宗佶为中书令，韦庄为左散骑常侍、判中书门下事，唐袭焉枢密使，郑骞焉御史中丞，张格、王错都为翰林学士，周博雅为成都尹。
English: He appointed his sons Yan Wang, Ren Wang Zongqi as the Chinese scholar, Wei Zhuang as the left rider and judge of the Chinese scholar, Tang Zhaoyan as the imperial envoy, Zheng Xuan as the middle-ranking official, Zhang Ge and Wang Zuo as the Hanlin scholar, and Zhou Boya as the Chengdu Yin.

古文：蜀恃险而富，当唐之末，士人多欲依建以避乱。
现代文：蜀仗恃天险而又富有，当唐末时，士人多想依附王建躲避战乱。
English: Shu fought against natural dangers and was rich. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, most scholars wanted to cling to Wang Jian to avoid war.

古文：建虽起盗贼，而为人多智诈，善待士，故其僭号，所用皆唐名臣世族；庄，见素之孙；格，浚之子也。
现代文：王建虽然出身盗贼，但为人足智多谋善于欺诈，善于安抚士人，因此他越位称帝，任用的都是唐的名臣世族：如韦庄，是韦见素的孙子；张格，是张浚的儿子。
English: Although Wang Jian was born a thief, he was resourceful, good at deception, and good at appeasing scholars. As a result, he was promoted to the position of emperor, and was appointed by all of Tang's famous vassals: for example, Wei Zhuang, the grandson of Wei Mingsu, and Zhang Ge, the son of Zhang Jun.

古文：建谓左右曰： 吾为神策军将时，宿卫禁中，见天子夜召学士，出入无间，恩礼亲厚如寮友，非将相可比也。 
现代文：王建对手下人说： 我做神策军将领时，在宫中宿卫，见天子晚上召见学士，随便进出，恩礼亲厚就像对幕僚朋友一样，他们得到的礼遇不是将相们能比的。 
English: Wang Jian said to his opponent: "When I was a general of the Shenzhao Army, I was a night watchman in the palace. I saw the emperor summoning a scholar in the evening, and I went in and out at will. The courtesy and kindness were the same as for staff members and friends. The courtesy they received was incomparable.

古文：故建待格等恩礼尤异，其余宋玭等百余人，并见信用。
现代文：因此王建待张格等人的礼遇尤其不同一般，其余宋砒等一百多人，一并受到信任重用。
English: Therefore, Wang Jian treated Zhang Ge and other people with special courtesy, and the remaining more than 100 people, including Song Tao, were trusted and reused.

古文：武成元年正月，祀天南郊，大赦，改元，以王宗佶为太师。
现代文：武成元年正月，王建在南郊祭天，实行大赦，改换年号，任王宗佶为太师。
English: In the first month of the first year of Wucheng, Wang Jian held a divine service in the southern suburbs, implemented an amnesty, changed the year, and appointed Wang Zongyao as the grand master.

古文：宗佶本姓甘氏，建为忠武军卒时掠得之，养以为子，后以军功累迁武信军节度使。
现代文：王宗佶原姓甘，王建在忠武军当兵时掳掠到他，收养为儿子，后来因军功逐渐升迁至武信军节度使。
English: Wang Zongyu's original family name was Gan. Wang Jian was abducted by the Loyalist army when he was a soldier, and was adopted as his son. Later, due to his military service, he was gradually promoted to the military festival envoy of the Loyalist army.

古文：后建所生子元懿等稍长，宗佶以养子心不自安，与郑骞等谋，求为大司马，总六军，开元帅府，凡军事便宜行而后闻。
现代文：王建的亲生儿子王元懿等人逐渐长大后，王宗佶因为是养子心里感到不安，和郑骞等人商计，请求任命自己为大司马，总管六军，设置元帅府，授权凡是军中事务根据情况处置后纔上报。
English: After Wang Jian's biological son Wang Yuanqi and others gradually grew up, Wang Zongqi felt uneasy in his heart because he was an adopted son, and discussed with Zheng Qi and others, requesting to appoint himself as the grand steward, the head of the six armies, set up a marshal's office, and authorize all affairs in the army to be handled according to the situation and then reported.

古文：建以宗佶创业功多，优容之。
现代文：王建因王宗佶创业功劳大，对他很宽容。
English: Wang Jian is very tolerant of Wang Zongyao because of his great achievements in entrepreneurship.

古文：唐袭本以舞僮见幸于建，宗佶尤易之，后为枢密使，犹名呼袭，袭虽内恨，而外奉宗佶愈谨。
现代文：唐袭原本作为舞僮受到王建宠爱，王宗佶尤其看不起他，后来唐袭作了枢密使，王宗佶还直呼他姓名。唐袭虽然心中怨恨，但表面对王宗佶更加恭谨。
English: Tang Hei was originally favored by Wang Jian as a dancer, and Wang Zonglu especially despised him. Later, Tang Hei became a confidential envoy, and Wang Zonglu called him by his first name. Although Tang Hei was resentful in his heart, he was more respectful to Wang Zonglu on the surface.

古文：建闻之，怒曰： 宗佶名呼我枢密使，是将反也。 
现代文：王建知道后，发怒说： 王宗佶对我的枢密使直呼姓名，是要造反了。 
English: When Wang Jian found out, he became angry and said, "Wang Zongyao called my confidential envoy by his first name, and he is going to rebel.

古文：宗佶求大司马，章三上，建以问袭，袭因激怒建曰： 宗佶功臣，其威望可以服人心，陛下宜即与之。 
现代文：王宗佶请求任大司马，多次上奏，王建就此事向唐袭征询意见，唐袭借机激怒王建说： 王宗佶是功臣，他的威望能够让人心顺服，陛下应当立即任命他。 
English: Wang Zongyao requested to be appointed as the grand steward and appealed several times. Wang Jian first asked Tang He for advice on this matter. Tang He took the opportunity to infuriate Wang Jian and said: Wang Zongyao is a meritorious subject, his prestige can make people obedient, and His Majesty should appoint him immediately.

古文：建心益疑。
现代文：王建心中更加生疑。
English: Wang Jian became even more suspicious.

古文：宗佶入奏事，自请不已，建叱卫士扑杀之，并赐骞死。
现代文：王宗佶进来奏报事情，不断替自己请求，王建叱令卫士击杀他，并赐郑骞自杀。
English: Wang Zonglu came in to report the matter and kept asking for himself. Wang Jian scolded the guards to kill him and ordered Zheng Yu to commit suicide.

古文：六月，以遂王宗懿为皇太子。
现代文：六月，立遂王王宗懿为皇太子。
English: In June, King Wang Zongxuan was crowned crown prince.

古文：建加尊号英武睿圣皇帝。
现代文：王建加封尊号为英武睿圣皇帝。
English: Wang Jianjia was given the title of Holy Emperor.

古文：七月，驺虞见武定。二年，颁《永昌历》。
现代文：七月，武定县出现鹃虞兽。二年，颁布《永昌历》。
English: In July, the Yingyu beast appeared in Wuding County. Two years later, the "Yongchang Calendar" was promulgated.

古文：广都嘉禾合穗。
现代文：广都县稻子两株合生一穗。
English: In Guandu County, two rice plants grew into one spike.

古文：三年八月，有龙五十见洵阳水中。
现代文：三年八月，洵阳县水中出现五十条龙。十月，壁州出现麒麟。
English: In August of the third year, fifty dragons appeared in the water of Fenyang County. In October, a unicorn appeared in Bishu.

古文：十月，麟见壁州。十二月，大赦，改明年为永平元年。
现代文：十二月，实行大赦，改第二年为永平元年。
English: In December, an amnesty was implemented, and the second year was changed to the first year of Yongping.

古文：岐王李茂贞自为梁所围，而山南入于蜀，地狭势孤，遂与建和，以其子娶建女，因求山南故地。
现代文：岐王李茂贞自从被后梁兵包围，而山南归入蜀，土地狭小势力孤弱，于是和王建言和，让他的儿子娶王建的女儿，借机请求把山南旧地还给他。
English: Since the king of Qi, Li Maozhen, was surrounded by the soldiers of Houliang, and Shannan fell to Shu, the land was narrow and the forces were weak, so he made peace with Wang Jian, let his son marry Wang Jian's daughter, and took the opportunity to request that the old land of Shannan be returned to him.

古文：建怒，不与，以王宗侃为北路都统，宗佑、宗贺、唐袭为三面招讨使以攻岐。
现代文：王建发怒，不给他，任王宗侃为北路都统，王宗佑、王宗贺、唐袭为三面招讨使，攻打岐国。
English: Wang Jian flew into a rage and refused to give it to him. He appointed Wang Zongkan as the Northern Capital, and Wang Zongyou, Wang Zonghe, and Tang Gao as three-sided envoys to attack Qi.

古文：战于青泥，宗侃败绩，退保西县，为茂贞兵所围。
现代文：两军战于青泥，王宗侃败逃，退保西县，被李茂贞军包围。
English: The two armies fought in Qingde, Wang Zong Kan lost and fled, and was surrounded by Li Maozhen's army.

古文：建自将击之，岐兵败，解去，建至兴元而还。
现代文：王建亲自率兵攻打他们，岐兵被打败，解围离去，王建追到兴元返回。
English: Wang Jian personally led the troops to attack them. The soldiers of Qi were defeated, the siege was lifted and they left. Wang Jian chased them to Xingyuan and returned.

古文：加尊号曰英武睿圣光孝皇帝。
现代文：加封尊号为英武睿圣光孝皇帝。
English: He was given the honorary title of Emperor Yingwu Rui and Emperor Sheng Guangxiao.

古文：二年，又加号曰英武睿圣神功文德光孝皇帝。
现代文：二年，又加封尊号为英武睿圣神功文德光孝皇帝。
English: Two years later, he was given the title of Emperor Yongwu Rui Shengwen Deguang Guangxiao.

古文：初，田令孜之为监军也，盗唐传国玺入于蜀而埋之，二月，尚食使欧阳柔治令孜故第，穿地而得之，以献。
现代文：当初，田令孜任监军时，盗得唐的传国印玺入蜀，埋藏起来，二月，尚食使欧阳柔整修田令孜的旧宅，挖地得到传国印玺，将它进献。
English: At first, when Tian Lingzi was in charge of supervising the army, he stole Tang's imperial seal into Shu and buried it. In February, Shang Shuxi had Ouyang Rong renovate Tian Lingzi's old house, dig up the imperial seal and present it to the emperor.

古文：五月，梁遣光禄卿卢玭来聘，推建为兄，其印文曰 大梁入蜀之印 。
现代文：五月，后梁派光禄卿卢砒前来通好，尊推王建为兄，他的印章刻着 大梁入蜀之印 。
English: In May, Hou Liang sent Lu Xun, the lord of Guanglu, to communicate with Wang Jian, who was his elder brother. His seal was engraved with the seal of Daliang into Shu.

古文：宰相张格曰： 唐故事，奉使四夷，其印曰 大唐入某国之印 ，今梁已兄事陛下，奈何卑我如夷狄？ 
现代文：宰相张格说： 唐的惯例，奉命出使四夷，印章叫 大唐入某国之印 ，如今梁已把陛下当兄事奉，怎么像对夷狄一样地看不起我们？ 
English: Zhang Ge, the prime minister, said: According to the custom of Tang, I was ordered to send four emissaries to the Yi, and the seal was called the seal of the entry of the Great Tang into a certain country. Now that Liang has served His Majesty as a brother, how can he look down on us as he did on the Yi Di?

古文：建怒，欲杀梁使者，格曰： 此梁有司之过尔，不可以绝两国之欢。 
现代文：王建发怒，想杀掉后梁的使臣张格说： 这是梁官府的过失罢了，不能因此断绝两国的友好关系。 
English: Wang Jian flew into a rage and wanted to kill Zhang Ge, Liang's envoy, saying, "This is the fault of Liang's government, and we cannot break off the friendly relations between the two countries.

古文：已而梁太祖崩，建遣将作监李纮吊之，遂刻其印文曰 大蜀入梁之印 。
现代文：不久梁太祖死，王建派将作监李弦去吊丧，将他的印章刻作 大蜀入梁之印 。
English: Soon after the death of Liang Taizu, Wang Jian sent Li Zhen, the prison warden, to the funeral and engraved his seal as the Great Shu into Liang's seal.

古文：剑州木连理。
现代文：剑州树木连枝生长。
English: The trees in Jianzhou are sprouting.

古文：六月，麟见文州。
现代文：六月，文州出现麒麟。
English: In June, Kirin appeared in Wenzhou.

古文：十二月，黄龙见富义江。
现代文：十二月，富义江出现黄龙。
English: In December, a yellow dragon appeared in the Fuyi River.

古文：三年正月，麟见永泰。
现代文：三年正月，永泰出现麒麟。
English: In the first month of the third year, Yongtai appeared Kirin.

古文：五月，驺虞见壁山，有二鹿随之。
现代文：五月，壁山出现鹌虞兽，两只鹿跟着它。
English: In May, a yakitori beast appeared on the mountain, and two deer followed it.

古文：秋七月，皇太子元膺杀太子少保唐袭。
现代文：秋七月，皇太子王元膺杀掉太子少保唐袭。
English: In autumn and July, the crown prince Wang Yuanxuan killed the prince Shobo Tang attack.

古文：元膺，建次子也，初名宗懿，后更名宗坦，建得铜牌子于什仿，有文二十余字，建以为符谶，因取之以名诸子，故又更曰元膺。
现代文：王元膺，是王建的次子，原名王宗懿，后来改名王宗坦，王建在什仿得到铜牌子，上面刻有二十多个宇，王建认为是符谶，因而用它来给儿子们取名，因此又改名叫王元膺。
English: Wang Yuan Rong, the second son of Wang Jian, was originally named Wang Zong Rong, and later changed his name to Wang Zontan. Wang Jian got a bronze plate in Shifang, with more than twenty stars engraved on it. Wang Jian thought it was a charm, so he used it to name his sons, and therefore changed his name to Wang Yuan Rong.

古文：元膺为人犭叚喙齲齿，多材艺，能射钱中孔，尝自抱画球掷马上，驰而射之，无不中。
现代文：王元膺长得嘴像猎嘴，牙齿焉虫蛀，多才多艺，能射中钱中小孔，曾自抱彩球抛到马上，飞驰射球，无不射中。
English: Wang Yuanzhang's mouth looks like a beak, his teeth are worm-eaten, he is multi-talented, he can shoot holes in money, he once held a paintball and threw it at a horse, he shot the ball at high speed and hit everything.

古文：年十七，为皇太子，判六军，创天武神机营，开永和府，置官属。
现代文：十七岁，做皇太子，判六军事，创立天武神机营，设置永和府，配置属官。
English: At the age of seventeen, he was crown prince, issued six military decrees, founded the Tenmu Shinji Camp, set up the Yonghe Prefecture, and assigned subordinate officials.

古文：建以元膺年少任重，以记事戒之，令 一切学朕所为，则可以保国 。
现代文：王建因王元膺年轻任重，用自己记的言行大事告诚他，要他 一切学我做的，就可以保住国家 。
English: Wang Jian, because of Wang Yuanxuan's young age, told him with his own words and deeds that he should learn everything I did, so that he could save the country.

古文：又命道士广成先生杜光庭为之师。
现代文：又命令道士广成先生杜光庭做他的老师。
English: He also ordered Taoist priest Guangcheng Mr. Du Guangting to be his teacher.

古文：唐袭，建之嬖也，元膺易之，屡谑于朝，建惧其交恶，乃罢袭枢密使，出为兴元节度使。
现代文：唐袭，是王建宠信的人，王元膺看不起他，多次在朝廷上嘻辱他，王建怕他们关系恶化，于是罢免唐袭的枢密使职位，让他出任兴元节度使。
English: Tang Gao was Wang Jian's favorite person. Wang Yuanzhang despised him and repeatedly insulted him in the imperial court. Wang Jian feared that their relationship would deteriorate, so he dismissed Tang Gao's position as a privy envoy and made him an envoy to the Xingyuan Festival.

古文：已而袭罢归，元膺廷疏其过失，建益不悦。
现代文：不久唐袭罢任回来，王元膺在朝廷上敷落他的过失，王建更加不高兴。
English: Wang Jian was even more displeased when, shortly after Tang Hei's return from exile, Wang Yuanzhang laid the blame for his misdeeds on the imperial court.

古文：是月七夕，元膺召诸王大臣置酒，而集王宗翰、枢密使潘峭、翰林学士毛文锡不至，元膺怒曰： 集王不来，峭与文锡教之耳！ 
现代文：这月七夕，王元膺设酒召各位王公大臣，而集王王宗翰、枢密使潘峭、翰林学士毛文锡役来，王元膺发怒说： 集王役来，是潘峭和毛文锡唆使的！ 
English: On the evening of the seventh day of the same month, Wang Yuanxuan invited all the princes and ministers to a banquet, and invited Wang Wangzonghan, Privy Councilor Pan Qiao, and Hanlin Scholar Mao Wensi. Wang Yuanxuan said angrily, "It was Pan Qiao and Mao Wensi who instigated the gathering of the princes and ministers!

古文：明日，元膺白建峭及文锡离间语。
现代文：第二天，王元膺在王建面前说潘峭和毛文锡挑拨离间。
English: The next day, Wang Yuanzhang said in front of Wang Jian that Pan Qiao and Mao Wensi were sowing discord.

古文：建怒，将罪之。
现代文：王建发怒，将要对他们治罪。
English: Wang Jian is furious and is going to punish them.

古文：元膺出而袭入，建以问之，袭曰： 太子谋作乱，欲召诸将、诸王以兵锢之，然后举事尔！ 
现代文：王元膺出去后唐袭进来，王建就此事征询唐袭的意见，唐袭说： 太子图谋作乱，想召各位将领、王公来用武力囚禁他们，然后生事作乱。 
English: After Wang Yuanzhang left, the Tang Dynasty attacked. Wang Jianlu consulted the Tang Dynasty on this matter. The Tang Dynasty said, "The prince is plotting to create a disturbance. He wants to call the generals and princes to use force to imprison them, and then create a disturbance."

古文：建疑之，袭请召营兵入卫。
现代文：王建疑心，唐袭请求召营兵进官护卫。
English: Wang Jian was suspicious, and requested that a battalion of soldiers be called in to escort him.

古文：元膺初不为备，闻袭召兵，以为诛己，乃与伶人安悉香、军将喻全殊率天武兵自卫，遣人擒峭及文锡而笞之，幽于其家；召大将徐瑶、常谦率兵出拒袭，与袭战神武门，袭中流矢，坠马死。
现代文：王元膺本来没有准备，听说唐袭召兵，认为是诛杀自己，于是和艺人安悉香、将领喻全殊率天武兵自卫，派人抓获潘峭和毛文锡，鞭打他们，把他们囚禁在家中；召大将徐瑶、常谦率兵出来抵抗唐袭，和唐袭在神武门交战，唐袭被飞箭射中，从马上摔下而死。
English: Wang Yuanzhang was unprepared. He heard that the Tang Dynasty was attacking and calling up soldiers, and thought that he was fighting and killing himself. Therefore, he defended himself with the artist Ansi Xiang and the general Yu Quanzhu leading the Tianwu soldiers. He sent people to capture Pan Qiao and Mao Wensi, whipped them, and imprisoned them at home. He called up the generals Xu Wei and Chang Qian to lead the soldiers to resist the Tang Dynasty attack, and fought with the Tang Dynasty attack at the Shenwu Gate. The Tang Dynasty attack was shot by flying arrows and fell off his horse and died.

古文：建遣王宗贺以兵讨之，元膺兵败皆溃去，元膺匿跃龙池槛中。
现代文：王建派王宗贺率兵讨伐王元膺，王元膺兵败，士兵演逃离去。
English: Wang Jian sent Wang Zonghe and his soldiers to fight against Wang Yuanzhang. Wang Yuanzhang was defeated and his soldiers fled.

古文：明日，出而丐食，蜀人识之，以告，建遣宗翰招谕之，宗翰未至，为卫兵所杀。
现代文：王元膺藏在跃龙池栏杆下，第二天，出来要饭，蜀人认出了他，报告了王建，王建派王宗翰招引开导他，王宗输还没到，王元膺已被卫兵杀死。
English: Wang Yuanzhang hid under the railing of the Yue Long Pond. The next day, he came out to ask for food. The Shu people recognized him and reported to Wang Jian. Wang Jian sent Wang Zonghan to entice and enlighten him. Wang Zongfang had not yet arrived, and Wang Yuanzhang had already been killed by the guards.

古文：建乃立其幼子郑王宗衍为太子。
现代文：王建于是立幼子郑王王宗衍为太子。
English: Wang Jian then appointed his young son Zheng Wang Wang Zongyan as crown prince.

古文：白龙见邛州江。
现代文：邛州江中出现白龙。
English: A white dragon appears in the Luzhou River.

古文：四年，荆南高季昌侵蜀巫山，遣嘉王宗寿败之于瞿唐。
现代文：四年，剂南高季昌侵犯蜀的巫山，王建派嘉王王宗寿在瞿唐打败他。
English: In the fourth year, the agent Nan Gao Jichang invaded Wushan in Shu, and Wang Jian sent Ji Wang Wang Zongshou to defeat him in Shantang.

古文：八月，杀黔南节度使王宗训。
现代文：八月，杀死黔南节度使王宗训。
English: In August, Wang Zongxun was responsible for the killing of the Southern Song Festival.

古文：冬，南蛮攻掠界上，建遣夔王宗范击败之于大渡河。
现代文：冬，南蛮攻打掠夺边界，王建派夔王王宗范在大渡河打败他们。
English: In winter, the Nanban attacked and plundered the border, and Wang Jian sent Wang Zongfan to defeat them in the Dadu River.

古文：麟见昌州。
现代文：昌州出现麒麟。
English: A unicorn appears in Changzhou.

古文：五年，起寿昌殿于龙兴宫，画建像于壁；又起扶天阁，画诸功臣像。
现代文：五年，在龙兴宫建寿昌殿，在殿壁上画王建像；又建扶天合，画各位功臣像。
English: In five years, the Shuchang Hall was built in the Longxing Palace, and the statue of Wang Jian was painted on the wall of the hall; the Fu Tianhe Hall was also built, and the statues of all the heroes were painted.

古文：十一月，大火，焚其宫室。
现代文：十一月，大火，王建的宫室焚毁。
English: In November, a fire destroyed Wang Jian's palace.

古文：遣王宗俦等攻岐，取其秦、凤、阶、成四州，至大散关。
现代文：王建派王宗俦等人攻打岐国，取得秦、凤、阶、成四州，到达大散关。
English: Wang Jian sent Wang Zonglu and others to attack Qi Province, and obtained the four provinces of Qin, Feng, Jia and Cheng, and reached the great Sankuan.

古文：梁叛将刘知俊在岐，于是特以其族来。
现代文：后梁的叛将刘知俊在岐国，于是特地率领他的家族前来。
English: Liu Zhijun, the traitor of Houliang, was in Qi Province, so he specially led his family to come.

古文：通正元年，遣王宗绾等率兵十二万出大散关攻岐，取陇州。
现代文：通正元年，王建派王宗绾等人率兵十二万出大散关攻打岐国，夺取陇州。
English: In the first year of the Tongzheng era, Wang Jian sent Wang Zongqi and others to lead 120,000 soldiers to attack Daki Province and capture Ganzhou.

古文：八月，起文思殿，以清资五品正员官购群书以实之，以内枢密使毛文锡为文思殿大学士。
现代文：八月，建文思殿，派清资五品正员官收购群书充实该殿，任内枢密使毛文锡为文思殿大学士。
English: In August, the Wensi Palace was built, and the Qing Dynasty sent five official officials to purchase books to enrich the palace. Mao Wensi was appointed as the inner privy councilor and became a scholar of the Wensi Palace.

古文：黄龙见大昌池。十月，大赦。
现代文：大昌池出现黄龙。十月，实行大赦。
English: In October, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：改明年元曰天汉，国号汉。
现代文：改第二年年号叫天漠，国号漠。
English: In the second year after the change, the era name was changed to "Tianmao" and the country name to "Mao."

古文：天汉元年，杀刘知俊。
现代文：天汉元年，杀掉刘知俊。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, he killed Liu Zhijun.

古文：十二月，大赦，改明年元曰光天，复国号蜀。
现代文：十二月，实行大赦，改第二年年号叫光天，恢复国号蜀。
English: In December, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name of the second year was changed to Guangtian, and the country name Shu was restored.

古文：光天元年六月，建卒，年七十二。
现代文：光天元年六月，王建死，时年七十二岁。
English: Wang Jian died at the age of seventy-two in June of Guangtian Year One.

古文：建晚年多内宠，贤妃徐氏与妹淑妃，皆以色进，专房用事，交结宦者唐文扆等干与外政。
现代文：王建晚年宫内有很多宠妃，贤妃徐氏和她的妹妹淑妃，都靠美色进宫，专宠当权，勾结宦官唐文康等干预朝政。
English: In the later years of Wang Jian's life, there were many favorite concubines in the imperial court. The virtuous concubine Xu and her sister Shu Fei both entered the imperial court by virtue of their beauty, enjoyed exclusive power, and colluded with eunuchs such as Tang Wenkang to interfere in imperial politics.

古文：建年老昏耄，文扆判六军，事无大小，皆决文扆。
现代文：王建年老昏乱，唐文康判六军事，事情无论大小，都取决于他。
English: Wang Jian is old and dizzy, Tang Wenkang was sentenced to six years of military service. No matter how big or small the matter is, it all depends on him.

古文：及建疾，以兵入宿卫，谋尽去建故将。
现代文：到王建患病时，率兵进宫宿卫，图谋全部除掉王建的旧将。
English: When Wang Jian fell ill, he led his soldiers to the palace guards and plotted to eliminate all of Wang Jian's old generals.

古文：故将闻建疾，皆不得入见，久之，宗弼等排闼入，言文扆欲为变，乃杀之。
现代文：旧将们听说王建患病，却都不能进见，遇了很久，王宗弼等人只好推门而入，说唐文康想作乱，于是杀了他。
English: The old generals heard that Wang Jian was ill, but they could not see him. After a long time, Wang Zongyao and others had no choice but to push through the door, saying that Tang Wenkang wanted to make trouble, so they killed him.

古文：建因以老将大臣多许昌故人，必不为太子用，思择人未得而疾亟，乃以宦者宋光嗣为枢密使判六军而建卒。
现代文：王建因老将大臣多是许昌的老朋友，必定不会受到太子重用，想选择适当的人辅佐太子，未成，而身已病危，于是任宦官宋光嗣焉枢密使、剡六军事。
English: As most of the veteran ministers were old friends of Xu Chang, Wang Jian would certainly not be used by the crown prince. He did not succeed in choosing the right person to assist the crown prince, and his body was in critical condition, so he appointed eunuch Song Guangzhi as a confidential envoy, and appointed him to the Sixth Military Region.

古文：太子立，去 宗 名衍。
现代文：王建死去太子登位，去掉 宗 宇，单名衍。
English: After Wang Jian's death, the crown prince ascended to the throne, removing Zong Yu and replacing him with a prince with a single name.

古文：衍字化源。
现代文：王衍字化源。
English: Wang Yanzhi is the source.

古文：建十一子，曰卫王宗仁，简王元膺，赵王宗纪，豳王宗辂，韩王宗智，莒王宗特，信王宗杰，鲁王宗鼎，兴王宗泽，薛王宗平。
现代文：王建有十一个儿子，他们是卫王王宗仁，筒王王元膺，赵王王宗纪，豳王王宗辖，韩王王宗智，莒王王宗特，信王王宗杰，鲁王王宗鼎，兴王王宗泽，薛王王宗平。
English: Wang Jian had eleven sons. They were Wei Wang Zongren, Zhi Wang Wang Yuanzhang, Zhao Wang Zongji, Han Wang Zongzai, Han Wang Zongzhi, Zang Wang Zonte, Xin Wang Zongjie, Lu King Zongding, Xing King Zongze, Xue King Zongping.

古文：而郑王宗衍最幼，其母徐贤妃也，以母宠得立为皇太子，开崇贤府，置官属，后更曰天策府。
现代文：而郑王王宗衍最小，他的母亲是徐贤妃，因母亲受到恩宠而得以立为太子，开崇贤府，设置属官，后来改名叫天策府。
English: However, Zheng Wang Zongyan was the youngest. His mother was Xu Xianfei. Because of his mother's grace, he was able to become the crown prince, establish Chongxianfu, set up subordinate officials, and later changed his name to Tianchaofu.

古文：衍为人方颐大口，垂手过膝，顾目见耳，颇知学问，能为浮艳之辞。
现代文：王衍方下巴大嘴，垂手遇膝，能看见自己耳朵，很有学问，能写浮艳的文辞。
English: Wang Yanfang has a big mouth, drooping hands and knees, can see his own ears, is very learned, and can write flashy words.

古文：元膺死，建以豳王宗辂貌类己，而信王宗杰于诸子最材贤，欲于两人择立之。
现代文：王元膺死后，王建因豳王王宗辖长得像自己，而信王王宗杰在儿子们中最有贤才，想在他们两人中选一个立焉太子。
English: After the death of Wang Yuanxuan, Wang Jian wanted to choose a crown prince from the two of them because Wang Zongji looked like him, while Wang Zongjie was the most talented of the sons.

古文：而徐妃专宠，建老昏耄，妃与宦者唐文扆教相者上言衍相最贵，又讽宰相张格赞成之，衍由是得为太子。
现代文：而徐妃专宠，王建年老昏乱，徐妃和宦官唐文康唆使看相的人上奏说王衍长相最高贵，又暗示宰相张格赞成他们王衍因此得以做太子。
English: But Xu Fei's special favorite, Wang Jian, was old and confused, and Xu Fei and the eunuch Tang Wenkang instigated the looker to report that Wang Yan's appearance was the most noble, and also implied that the prime minister Zhang Ge approved of them, so Wang Yan was able to become the prince.

古文：建卒，衍立，谥建曰神武圣文孝德明惠皇帝，庙号高祖，陵曰永陵。
现代文：王建死，王衍登位，给王建加上谧号神武圣文孝德明惠皇帝，庙号高祖，陵墓名永陵。
English: Wang Jian died, Wang Yan ascended the throne, and Wang Jian was given the title of Shenwu Shengwen Xiaodong Minghui Emperor, the temple name Gao Zu, and the mausoleum name Yongling.

古文：建正室周氏号昭圣皇后，后建数日而卒，衍因尊其母徐氏为皇太后，后妹淑妃为皇太妃。
现代文：王建的正妻周氏叫昭圣皇后，晚王建几天死，王衍因而尊崇他的母亲徐氏焉皇太后，太后的妹妹淑妃为皇太妃。
English: Wang Jian's legal wife, Zhou, was called the Empress Zhaosheng. When Wang Jian died a few days later, Wang Yan revered his mother, Xu Shiyan, as the empress dowager, and the empress dowager's sister, Shu Fei, as the empress dowager.

古文：太后、太妃以教令卖官，自刺史以下，每一官阙，必数人并争，而入钱多者得之；通都大邑起邸店，以夺民利。
现代文：太后、太妃用教令卖官，从刺史以下，每一个官额缺，必会有几人同来争，而交钱多的人得到官位；又在京都大邑建旅舍，夺取百姓的利益。
English: The empress dowager and the empress dowager used the edict to sell officials. For every shortage of officials, several people would compete with each other, and the one who paid more money would get the official position. They also built hostels in Kyoto's large towns to seize the interests of the people.

古文：衍年少荒淫，委其政于宦者宋光嗣、光葆、景润澄、王承休、欧阳晃、田鲁俦等；以韩昭、潘在迎、顾在珣、严旭等为狎客；起宣华苑，有重光、太清、延昌、会真之殿，清和、迎仙之宫，降真、蓬莱、丹霞之亭，飞鸾之阁，瑞兽之门；又作怡神亭，与诸狎客、妇人日夜酣饮其中。
现代文：王衍年轻荒淫，把政事交给宦官宋光嗣、宋光葆、景润澄、王承休、欧阳晃、田鲁俦等人；让韩昭、潘在迎、顾在殉、严旭等作陪他游乐的狎客；建宣华苑，其中有重光殿、太清殿、延昌殿、会真殿、清和官、迎仙宫、降真亭、蓬莱亭、丹霞亭、飞鸾合，瑞兽门；又建怡神亭，和狎客、妇人在其中日夜畅饮。
English: Wang Yan was young and naughty, and entrusted the affairs of state to eunuchs Song Guangzhi, Song Guangyao, Jing Runcheng, Wang Chengxu, Ouyang Ao, Tian Lucheng and others; he allowed Han Zhao, Pan Zaiying, Gu Zaijie, Yan Xu and others to accompany him as guests; he built Xuanhua Garden, which included Chongguang Hall, Taiqing Hall, Yanchang Hall, Huizhen Hall, Qinghe Hall, Yingxian Palace, Guozhen Pavilion, Penglai Pavilion, Danxia Pavilion, Fei Yinghe, and Rui Zhoumen; he also built Yixin

古文：尝以九日宴宣华苑，嘉王宗寿以社稷为言，言发泣涕。
现代文：曾于重阳节在宣华苑设宴，嘉王王宗寿要他以国家为重，话一出口就哭泣起来。
English: He once held a banquet at Xuanhua Garden on the Double Ninth Festival. When King Jia Wang Zongshou asked him to put the country first, he burst into tears.

古文：韩昭等曰： 嘉王酒悲尔！ 
现代文：韩昭等人说； 嘉王发酒疯了！ 
English: Han Zhao and others said, "Jia Wang has gone mad from drinking!"

古文：诸狎客共以慢言谑嘲之，坐上喧然。
现代文：狎客们都以不恭的言语戏谴嘲笑他，座上宾客焉之哗然。
English: The diners all mocked him with irreverent jokes, and there was uproar among the guests.

古文：衍不能省也。
现代文：但王衍不能醒悟。
English: But Wang Yan could not wake up.

古文：蜀人富而喜遨，当王氏晚年，俗竞为小帽，仅覆其顶，俯首即堕，谓之 危脑帽 。
现代文：蜀人富裕而喜好游玩，王氏王朝末年，民间竞相戴小帽子，仅能盖住头顶，低头就掉下来，称焉 危脑帽 。
English: The people of Shu were rich and liked to travel. At the end of the Wang Dynasty, the people competed to wear small hats that could only cover the top of the head, and the head would fall down, which was considered dangerous.

古文：衍以为不祥，禁之。
现代文：王衍认为不吉祥，禁止戴这种帽子。
English: Wang Yan considered it unlucky and forbade wearing such a hat.

古文：而衍好戴大帽，每微服出游民间，民间以大帽识之，因令国中皆戴大帽。
现代文：而王衍喜欢戴大帽子，每次着便服到民间游玩，民间百姓凭大帽子就能认出他，因而下令国中都戴大帽子。
English: Wang Yan, on the other hand, likes to wear a big hat. Every time he wears casual clothes to visit the people, the people can recognize him with a big hat, so he ordered the whole country to wear a big hat.

古文：又好裹尖巾，其状如锥。
现代文：又喜好裹尖头巾，形状像锥子。
English: He also likes to wear a pointed headscarf, shaped like a cone.

古文：而后宫皆戴金莲花冠，衣道士服，酒酣免冠，其髻髽然，更施硃粉，号 醉妆 ，国中之人皆效之。
现代文：而后宫妇女都戴金莲花帽，穿道士的衣服，酒酣耳热脱下帽子，发髻梳在头顶两旁，再抹上朱粉，号称 醉妆 ，国中的人都仿效她们。
English: The women of the harem, on the other hand, wear golden lotus flower hats and Taoist robes. They take off their hats when it is hot, comb their hair on both sides of the head, and apply vermilion powder, which is known as "drunken makeup." People all over the country emulate them.

古文：尝与太后、太妃游青城山，宫人衣服，皆画云霞，飘然望之若仙。
现代文：王衍曾和太后、太妃游青城山，宫人衣服都画上云霞，望见她们飘飘若仙。
English: Wang Yan used to travel to Qingcheng Mountain with the Empress Dowager and Toffee. The clothes of the courtiers were all painted with clouds, and they looked as if they were floating in the clouds.

古文：衍自作《甘州曲》，述其仙状，上下山谷，衍常自歌，而使宫人皆和之。
现代文：王术自作《甘州曲》，描述她们神仙一样的风姿，在山谷中走上走下时，王衍常常自歌自唱，而且让宫人们都与他和唱。
English: Wang Shu composed the "Ganzhou Song" himself, describing their fairy-like appearance. When walking up and down in the valley, Wang Yan often sang to himself, and let the palace people sing with him.

古文：衍立之明年，改元乾德。
现代文：王衍登位的第二年，改年号为干德。
English: In the second year of Wang Yan's ascension to the throne, the year name was changed to Gan De.

古文：乾德元年正月，祀天南郊，大赦，加尊号为圣德明孝皇帝。
现代文：干德元年正月，在南郊祭天，实行大赦，加封尊号焉圣德明孝皇帝。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Kangde era, in the southern suburb of the Tian Festival, an amnesty was implemented, and the title of the Holy Emperor Mingxiao was added.

古文：二年冬，北巡，至于西县，旌旗戈甲，连亘百余里。
现代文：第二年冬天，去北面巡视，到达西县，旌旗戈甲，连绵一百多里。
English: In the winter of the second year, he went to the north to inspect, and arrived at Xixian County, Qiqiao Jia, stretching for more than a hundred miles.

古文：其还也，自阆州浮江而上，龙舟画舸，昭耀江水，所在供亿，人不堪命。
现代文：回来时，从板州沿江而上，龙舟彩船，照耀江水，所到之地命人大量供给财物，人们不堪重负。
English: When he came back, he sailed up the river from Panzhou on a dragon boat, shining on the river water. He ordered people to supply a large amount of goods to the places he visited, and people were overwhelmed.

古文：三年正月，还成都。
现代文：三年正月，回到成都。
English: In the first month of the third year, he returned to Chengdu.

古文：五年，起上清宫，塑王子晋像，尊以为圣祖至道玉宸皇帝，又塑建及衍像，侍立于其左右；又于正殿塑玄元皇帝及唐诸帝，备法驾而朝之。
现代文：五年，建上清官，塑王子晋的像，尊崇为圣祖至道玉宸皇帝，又塑王建和王衍的像，立在王子晋像的左右，又在正殿塑玄元皇帝和唐朝各位皇帝的像，准备车马前去朝奉。
English: In the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, the statue of Prince Jin, revered as the holy ancestor of the Jade Emperor, was built, and the statues of Wang Jian and Wang Yan, standing on the right and left of the Prince Jin statue, and the statues of Emperor Xuan Yuan and the emperors of the Tang Dynasty were built in the main hall, preparing the chariots and horses to go to the imperial court.

古文：六年，以王承休为天雄节度使。
现代文：六年，任王承休为天雄军节度使。
English: In the sixth year, Wang Chengyu was appointed as the military envoy of the Tianxiong Army.

古文：天雄军，秦州也。
现代文：天雄军，就是秦州。
English: Tianxiong's army is Qinzhou.

古文：承休以宦者得幸，为宣徽使，承休妻严氏，有绝色，衍通之。
现代文：王承休作为宦官得到宠幸，任宣徽使，王承休的妻子严氏，是绝色佳人，王衍和她私通。
English: As a eunuch, Wang Chengxiu was favored and appointed as the envoy to proclaim the imperial seal. Wang Chengxiu's wife Yanji was a beautiful woman, and Wang Yan had an affair with her.

古文：是时，唐庄宗灭梁，蜀人皆惧。
现代文：这时，唐庄宗消灭后梁，蜀人都很恐惧。
English: At this time, after Tangzhuangzong annihilated Liang, Shu people were very afraid.

古文：庄宗遣李严聘蜀，衍与俱朝上清，而蜀都士庶，帘帷珠翠，夹道不绝。
现代文：唐庄宗派李严访蜀，王衍和他一起去上清官朝奉，而蜀都士人百姓，车帘挂满珠宝，沿途夹道围观。
English: The Tangzhuang sect sent Li Yan to visit Shu, Wang Yan went with him to the Shang and Qing dynasties, and the people of Shu, with their car curtains covered with jewels, watched along the way.

古文：严见其人物富盛，而衍骄淫，归乃献策伐蜀。
现代文：李严见蜀地人物富盛，而王衍骄奢淫逸，回去后就献计伐蜀。
English: Li Yan saw that the people of Shu were prosperous, while Wang Yan was arrogant, extravagant and lascivious. After returning home, he made a plan to cut down Shu.

古文：明年，唐魏王继岌、郭崇韬伐蜀。
现代文：第二年，后唐魏王李继岌、郭崇韬伐蜀。
English: In the second year, the post-Tang and Wei kings, Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi, attacked Shu.

古文：是岁，衍改元曰咸康。
现代文：这年，王衍改年号为咸康。
English: This year, Wang Yan changed his name to Xian Kang.

古文：衍自立，岁常猎于子来山。
现代文：王衍自从登位以来，每年常在子来山打猎。
English: Since ascending to the throne, Wang Yan has often come to the mountains to hunt every year.

古文：是岁，又幸彭州阳平化、汉州三学山。
现代文：这年，又到彭州阳平化、汉州三学山打猎。
English: This year, he also went to Yangpinghua in Pengzhou and Sanyue Mountain in Hanzhou to hunt.

古文：以王承休妻严氏故，十月，幸秦州，群臣切谏，衍不听。
现代文：因王承休妻子严氏的绿故，十月，到秦州，群臣急切谏阻，王衍不听。
English: Due to Wang Chengyu's wife Yan Shi's illness, he went to Qinzhou in October. The courtiers were eager to oppose him, but Wang Yan would not listen.

古文：行至梓潼，大风发屋拔木，太史曰： 此贪狼风也，当有败军杀将者。 
现代文：到达梓潼，大风刮起房屋树木，太史官说： 这是贪狼风，会有败军杀将的事。 
English: Arriving in Zizhou, the wind blew up houses and trees, and the chief historian said: This is a voracious wind, and there will be a defeat.

古文：衍不省。
现代文：王衍不醒悟。
English: Wang Yan did not wake up.

古文：衍至绵谷而唐师入其境，衍惧，遽还。
现代文：王衍到达绵谷，而后唐军已进入他的境土，王衍害怕，于是返回。
English: Wang Yan arrived in Mian Valley, and then the Tang army had entered his territory. Wang Yan was afraid, so he returned.

古文：唐师所至，州县皆迎降。
现代文：后唐军所到之地，州县都迎接投降。
English: After the Tang army arrived at the place, the prefectures and counties all welcomed the surrender.

古文：衍留王宗弼守绵谷，遣王宗勋、宗俨、宗昱率兵以拒唐师。
现代文：王衍留下王宗弼把守绵谷，派王宗勋、王宗俨、王宗昱率兵抵抗后唐军。
English: Wang Yan left Wang Zonglu in charge of guarding Mian Valley, and sent Wang Zongxun, Wang Zonglu, and Wang Zonglu to lead the troops to resist the Tang army.

古文：宗勋等至三泉，望风退走。
现代文：王宗勋等人到达三泉，望风而逃。
English: Wang Zongxun and others arrived at Sanquan and fled to the wind.

古文：衍诏宗弼诛宗勋等，宗弼反与宗勋等合谋，送款于唐师。
现代文：王衍诏令王宗弼杀掉王宗勋等人，王宗弼反而和王宗勋等人合谋，送降书给后唐军。
English: Wang Yan ordered Wang Zongxun to kill Wang Zongxun and others, but Wang Zongxun conspired with Wang Zongxun and others to send a letter of surrender to the post-Tang army.

古文：衍自绵谷还成都，百官及后宫迎谒七里亭，衍杂宫人作回鹘队以入。
现代文：王衍从绵谷返回成都，百官和后官妇人在七里亭迎兄，王衍夹在后宫妇人中组成回鹊队回到宫中。
English: Wang Yan returned to Chengdu from Mian Valley. Hundreds of officials and their wives greeted him at Qili Pavilion. Wang Yan was among the women of the imperial court who formed a retinue to return to the palace.

古文：明日，御文明殿，与其群臣相对涕泣。
现代文：第二天，到文明殿，和群臣相对哭泣。
English: The next day, I went to the Palace of Civilisation and wept in front of the ministers.

古文：而宗弼亦自绵谷驰归，登太玄门，收成都尹韩昭、宦者宋光嗣、景润澄、欧阳晃等杀之，函首送于继岌。
现代文：而王宗弼也从绵谷飞驰而返，登上太玄门，抓获成都尹韩昭，宦官宋光嗣、景润澄、欧阳晃等人并杀掉，把他们的头装在匣子中送给李继岌。
English: Wang Zongqi also returned from Mian Valley at high speed and boarded the Taiyuan Gate, captured and killed Chengdu Yin Han Zhao, eunuchs Song Guangzhi, Jing Runcheng, Ouyang Ao and others, and sent their heads in a box to Li Jizhe.

古文：衍即上表乞降，宗弼迁衍于天启宫。
现代文：王衍随即上表请求投降，王宗弼把王衍迁到天启宫。
English: Wang Yan immediately submitted a request to surrender, and Wang Zongxuan moved Wang Yan to Tianqi Palace.

古文：魏王继岌至成都，衍君臣面缚舆榇，出降于七里亭。
现代文：魏王李继岌到达成都，王衍君臣自相捆绑并带着棺材，到七里亭投降。
English: Wei King Li Jie arrived in Chengdu, and Wang Yan's princes and ministers tied themselves together and took coffins to Shili Ting to surrender.

古文：庄宗召衍入洛，赐衍诏曰： 固当列土而封，必不薄人于险，三辰在上，一言不欺！ 
现代文：唐庄宗召王衍到洛阳，赐给王衍的诏书中说： 固然应当分块土地赐封给你，一定不会在险困中逼迫你们，日、月、星辰在上，一句话也不骗你！ 
English: Tangzhuangzong summoned Wangyan to Luoyang, and said in the edict given to Wangyan: Of course, a piece of land should be given to you, I will certainly not persecute you in danger, the sun, moon and stars are above, I will not lie to you!

古文：衍捧诏忻然就道，率其宗族及伪宰相王锴、张格、瘐传素、许寂、翰林学士李旻等，及诸将佐家族数千人以东。
现代文：王衍手捧诏书高兴地上路，率领他的宗族和伪宰相王错、张格、庾传素、许寂，翰林学士李曼等人，以及各位将领僚佐的家族几千人柬去。
English: Holding the imperial edict in his hand, Wang Yan was happy to set out on the road, leading his clan and the pseudo-chancellors Wang Guo, Zhang Ge, Qian Chuansu, Xu Zhak, Hanlin Scholar Li Man and others, as well as the families of generals and assistant generals, to thousands of people.

古文：同光四年四月，行至秦川驿，庄宗用伶人景进计，遣宦者向延嗣诛其族。
现代文：同光四年四月，到达秦川驿，唐庄宗用艺人景进的计策，派宦官向延嗣诛杀王衍的家族。
English: In April of the same year, when he arrived in Qinchuan, Tang Zhuozong used the strategy of the artist Jingjin to send eunuchs to Yanji to kill Wangyan's family.

古文：衍母徐氏临刑呼曰： 吾兒以一国迎降，反以为戮，信义俱弃，吾知其祸不旋踵矣！ 
现代文：王衍的母亲徐氏临刑时呼叫说： 我儿子拿一个国家投降，反而被杀死，信义都不要了，我知道灾祸不久就要来了！ 
English: Wang Yan's mother, Ms. Xu, cried out at the time of her son's execution: "My son took a country to surrender, but was killed instead. I don't want any faith or righteousness. I know the disaster is coming soon!"

古文：衍妾刘氏，鬒发如云而有色，行刑者将免之，刘氏曰： 家国丧亡，义不受辱！ 
现代文：王衍的妾刘氏，黑发如云又美貌，执刑的人想放过她，刘氏说： 家破国亡，义当不受耻辱。 
English: Wang Yan's concubine Liu, dark-haired and beautiful, the executioners wanted to let her go, Liu said: "The family has ruined the country, and the righteous should not be humiliated."

古文：遂就死。
现代文：于是就刑而死。
English: He was killed.

古文：宗弼，本姓魏，名弘夫，建录为养子。
现代文：王宗弼，原姓魏，名叫弘夫，王建收他为养子。
English: Wang Zonglu, originally surnamed Wei, was named Hongfu, and Wang Jian adopted him as his adopted son.

古文：建攻顾彦晖，宗弼常以建语泄之彦晖者，彦晖败，建待之如初。
现代文：王建攻打顾彦晖时，王宗弼曾把王建的话泄露给颅彦晖，颅彦晖被打败，王建像原来一样对待他。
English: When Wang Jian was attacking Gu Yanqi, Wang Zongqi once leaked Wang Jian's words to Cranium Yanqi. Cranium Yanqi was defeated, and Wang Jian treated him as before.

古文：建病且卒，宗弼守太师兼中书令、判六军，辅政。
现代文：王建快要病死时，王宗弼任太师兼中书令、判六军事，辅佐国政。
English: When Wang Jian was about to die of illness, Wang Zonglu was appointed Grand Master and General Secretary of the Central Military Commission, and assisted in state affairs.

古文：衍已降，宗弼以蜀珍宝奉魏王及郭崇韬，求为西川节度使，魏王曰： 此我家物也，何用献为？ 
现代文：王衍投降后，王宗弼把蜀中珍宝奉送给魏王和郭崇韬，请求任西川节度使，魏王说： 这是我家的东西，哪用你进献？ 
English: After Wang Yan's surrender, Wang Zonglu presented the treasures of Shu to Wei Wang and Guo Chonglu, and requested to be appointed as the envoy of the West River Festival. Wei Wang said: This is my family's things, what will you use for the donation?

古文：居数日，为崇韬所杀。
现代文：过了几天，被郭崇韬杀死。
English: A few days later, he was killed by Guo Chongyao.

古文：宗寿，许州民家子也。
现代文：王宗寿，许州百姓家的儿子。
English: Wang Zongshou, the son of a peasant family in Xuzhou.

古文：建以同姓，录之为子。
现代文：王建因他和自己同姓，收他作养子。
English: Wang Jian adopted him because he had the same surname as himself.

古文：宗寿好学，工琴奕，为人恬退，喜道家之术，事建时为镇江军节度使。
现代文：王宗寿好学，擅长弹琴下棋，为人淡泊谦让，喜好道家方术，在王建时任镇江军节度使。
English: Wang Zongshu was eager to learn, good at playing the piano and playing chess. He was an easy-going and humble person, fond of Taoist techniques, and served as the Zhenjiang Army's festival envoy at the time of Wang Jian.

古文：衍既立，宗寿为太子太保奉朝请，以炼丹养气自娱。
现代文：王衍登位后，王宗寿任太子太保、奉朝请，以炼丹养气为乐。
English: After Wang Yan ascended to the throne, Wang Zongshou was appointed as the prince's eunuch and was invited to the imperial court, where he enjoyed making puerh dan to keep his spirits up.

古文：衍为淫乱，独宗寿常切谏之，后为武信军节度使。
现代文：王衍淫乱，只有王宗画常常直切劝谏，后来任武信军节度使。
English: Wang Yan was promiscuous, only Wang Zongya often directly advised him, and later served as the military commander of the Wuxin Army.

古文：唐师伐蜀，所在迎降，魏王尝以书招之，独宗寿不降。
现代文：后唐军伐蜀，所到之地迎接投降，魏王曾写信招降他们，只有王宗寿不投降。
English: After the Tang army besieged Shu, the place they arrived at welcomed the surrender. The Wei king had written a letter to invite them to surrender, but only Wang Zongshou did not surrender.

古文：闻衍已衔璧，大恸，从衍东迁，至岐阳，以赂赂守者，得入见衍，衍泣下沾襟，曰： 早从王言，岂有今日！ 
现代文：听说王衍已投降，大声痛哭，随王衍东迁，到岐阳时，贿赂看守的人，得以见到王衍，王衍眼泪打湿了衣襟，说： 早听你的话，哪有今天！ 
English: Hearing that Wang Yan had surrendered, he cried loudly and bitterly. When he moved east with Wang Yan and arrived in Qiyang, he bribed the guards to be able to see Wang Yan. Wang Yan wet his collar with tears and said, "I listened to you earlier, but today!

古文：衍死，宗寿走渑池，闻庄宗遇弑，亡入熊耳山。
现代文：王衍死后，王宗寿逃到渑池，听说唐庄宗被杀，便逃进熊耳山。
English: After Wang Yan's death, Wang Zongshou fled to Dianchi. When he heard that Tang Zhuozong had been killed, he fled to Mount Xiong'er.

古文：天成二年，出诣京师，上书求衍宗族葬之。明宗嘉其忠，以为保义军行军司马，封衍顺正公，许以诸侯礼葬之。
现代文：天成二年，出山到京师，上书请求得到王衍宗族的尸骨安葬唐明宗赞赏他的忠诚，任为保义军行军司马，封王衍为顺正公，答应按诸侯的礼仪安葬他。
English: In the second year of Tiancheng, he went to Beijing and wrote a letter to request that the bones of Wang Yan's clan be buried. Tang Mingzong appreciated his loyalty, appointed him as the commander of the Guoying Army, named Wang Yan as Shun Zheng, and promised to bury him according to the etiquette of the princes.

古文：宗寿得王氏十八丧，葬之长安南三赵村。
现代文：王宗寿得到王氏家族十八具尸骨，安葬在长安南三赵村。
English: Wang Zongshou obtained eighteen skeletons of the Wang family and buried them in Sanzhao Village, south of Chang'an.

古文：呜呼，自秦、汉以来，学者多言祥瑞，虽有善辨之士，不能祛其惑也。
现代文：唉，自从秦、汉以来，学者们就常谈吉祥的征兆，即使有明辨是非的人，也不破除这种迷信。
English: Alas, since the Qin and Han dynasties, scholars have often talked about auspicious signs. Even if there are people who can distinguish right from wrong, they will not break this superstition.

古文：予读《蜀书》，至于龟、龙、麟、凤、驺虞之类世所谓王者之嘉瑞，莫不毕出于其国，异哉！然考王氏之所以兴亡成败者，可以知之矣。
现代文：我读《蜀书》，读到龟、龙、麒麟、凤凰、骋虞之类世人所谓称帝称王者的吉祥征兆，无不出现在他们的国家中，奇怪啊：但考察了王氏兴亡成败的原因后，就可以懂得了。
English: When I read the Book of Shu, I read that the turtles, dragons, unicorns, phoenixes, and dragonflies, the so-called auspicious signs of the world's so-called emperors and kings, all appear in their countries. It's strange: but after examining the reasons for the success or failure of the Wang clan, you can understand.

古文：或以为一王氏不足以当之，则视时天下治乱，可以知之矣。
现代文：或许有人认为一个王氏还不能够说明问题，那么观察一下当时天下的治乱，就可以明白了。
English: Perhaps some people think that a Mr. Wang is not able to explain the problem, then observe the chaos in the world at that time, you can understand.

古文：龙之为物也，以不见为神，以升云行天为得志。
现代文：龙作为一种物，以不出现为神奇，以升云行天焉得志。
English: As a kind of thing, dragons are magical in that they do not appear, and they are successful in ascending to the clouds.

古文：今偃然暴露其形，是不神也；不上于天而下见于水中，是失职也。
现代文：如今心安理得地暴露出它的形体，这就不神奇了；不升上天空而下落到水中，逭就失其原位。
English: It's no wonder that it now reveals its shape with peace of mind; without rising into the sky and falling into the water, the dragonfly loses its original position.

古文：然其一何多欤，可以为妖矣！
现代文：而又出现得那么多，简直可以兴妖作怪了！
English: And there are so many of them that it's almost possible to create a monster!

古文：凤凰，鸟之远人者也。
现代文：凤凰，是鸟类中远离人世的。
English: The phoenix is the most remote of all birds.

古文：昔舜治天下，政成而民悦，命夔作乐，乐声和，鸟兽闻之皆鼓舞。
现代文：过去虞舜治理天下，政治成功而百姓喜悦，命令夔奏乐，乐声应和，乌兽听了都跳起舞来。
English: In the past, the magistrate ruled the world, the people were happy with the political success, the magistrate ordered the music to be played, the music was harmonious, and the wild beasts danced when they heard the music.

古文：当是之时，凤凰适至，舜之史因并记以为美，后世因以凤来为有道之应。
现代文：在这个时候，凤凰恰好到来，虞舜的史官因而一并记下作为美谈，后世因而把凤凰到来作为天下有道的征兆。
English: At this time, the phoenix just happened to arrive, and the historians of the era recorded it as a beautiful story, and later generations took the arrival of the phoenix as a sign of the world.

古文：其后凤凰数至，或出于庸君缪政之时，或出于危亡大乱之际，是果为瑞哉？
现代文：后来凤凰多次到来，有的出现在昏君败政的时代，有的出现在危亡大乱的时候，这果真是吉祥的征兆吗？
English: Later, the phoenix came many times, some appeared in the era of the emperor's defeat, some appeared in the time of danger and chaos, is this really an auspicious sign?

古文：麟，兽之远人者也。
现代文：麒麟，是兽类中远离人世的。
English: The unicorn is the furthest away from the human world among animals.

古文：昔鲁哀公出猎，得之而不识，盖索而获之，非其自出也。
现代文：过去鲁哀公外出打猎，得到麒麟却不认识，大概是搜索后纔获得的，不是它自己出现的。
English: In the past, Rui Gong went out hunting and got a unicorn, but he didn't recognize it. It was probably obtained after a search, and it didn't appear on its own.

古文：故孔子书于《春秋》曰 西狩获麟 者，讥之也。 西狩 ，非其远也； 获麟 ，恶其尽取也。
现代文：因此孔子记载在《春秋》上，说的是 去西面打猎得到麒麟 ，是讥讽他的话。 去西面打猎 ，是批评他走得太远； 得到麒麟 ，表示讨厌他尽敷猎取。
English: Therefore, Confucius recorded in "Spring and Autumn" that he said that he went to the west to hunt and get the unicorn, which was a mockery of him; he went to the west to hunt and criticized him for going too far; he got the unicorn and said that he hated him for hunting as much as possible.

古文：狩必书地，而哀公驰骋所涉地多，不可遍以名举，故书 西 以包众地，谓其举国之西皆至也。
现代文：记载打猎必定要写上地名，而鲁哀公驰骋经过的地方太多，不能一一写出地名，因此用 西 字概括众多的地方，说他整个国家的西部都走遍了。
English: To record hunting, it is necessary to write the names of the places, but Lu Yeguang passed through too many places to write the names of the places one by one, so he summarized the many places with Western characters, saying that he had traveled all over the western part of the country.

古文：麟，人罕识之兽也，以见公之穷山竭泽而尽取，至于不识之兽，皆搜索而获之，故曰 讥之也 。
现代文：麒麟，是人们很少见遇的野兽，可见鲁哀公穷山竭泽尽敷猎取，以至于不认识的野兽，都搜索而获得了，因此说是 讥讽他 。
English: The unicorn is a beast that people rarely meet, and it can be seen that Lu Aigong made every effort to hunt it down, so that unknown beasts were searched for and obtained, so it was said to be a mockery of him.

古文：圣人已没，而异端之说兴，乃以麟为王者之瑞，而附以符命、谶纬诡怪之言。
现代文：圣人死后，异端邪说产生，就把腆麟作为帝王的吉祥征兆，而用符命、谶纬等诡秘神怪的话来附会。
English: After the saint's death, a heresy arose, taking the unicorn as an auspicious sign of the emperor, and using the words of mysterious gods and monsters such as life and death.

古文：凤尝出于舜，以为瑞，犹有说也，及其后出于乱世，则可以知其非瑞矣。
现代文：凤凰曾经出现在虞舜时候，认为吉祥，还有点道理，到以后出现在乱世，就可以知道它不是吉祥的征兆了。
English: The phoenix once appeared at the time of the yuletide, which was considered auspicious, and there is some reason for this. Later, when it appears in the chaotic world, it can be known that it is not an auspicious sign.

古文：若麟者，前有治世如尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、周公之世，未尝一出，其一出而当乱世，然则孰知其为瑞哉？
现代文：至于麒麟，以前有天下大治的尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、周公的时代，却不曾出现过一次，一出现就正当乱世，既然如此，那谁知道它是吉祥的征兆呢？
English: As for the unicorn, in the past, there were times when the world was ruled by Shun, Gan, Yu, Tang, Wen, Wu, and Zhou, but it never appeared once. As soon as it appeared, it justified the chaos of the world. In that case, who knows if it is an auspicious sign?

古文：龟，玄物也，污泥川泽，不可胜数，其死而贵于卜官者，用适有宜尔。
现代文：龟，是黑色的东西，污泥川泽中，敷都敷不完，死后受到占卜的人的看重，恰好有用罢了。
English: The turtle is a black thing, in the sludge of the river, it can't be laid endlessly. After death, it is valued by people who are diviners, and it just happens to be useful.

古文：而《戴氏礼》以其在宫沼为王者难致之瑞，《戴礼》杂出于诸家，其失亦以多矣。
现代文：而《戴氏礼记》认为它在宫廷池泽中是帝王难以招来的吉祥物，然而《戴礼记》杂出于各家，它的错误也已很多了。
English: However, the "Diary of Dai" considers it to be a mascot that is difficult for the emperor to invite in the palace pond. However, the "Diary of Dai" is mixed from various families, and it has a lot of mistakes.

古文：驺虞，吾不知其何物也。《诗》曰： 吁嗟乎驺虞！ 
现代文：胸虞，我不知道它是什么东西。《诗经》说： 唉呀胸虞！ 
English: Chest pain, I don't know what it is. "Song of Songs" says: Alas, chest pain!

古文：贾谊以谓驺者，文王之囿；虞，虞官也。
现代文：贾谊认为胸这种东西，是周文王的园林；虞，是园林管理官。
English: Jia Yi thought that the chest was the garden of King Zhouwen; Yu was the garden manager.

古文：当谊之时，其说如此，然则以之为兽者，其出于近世之说乎？
现代文：当页谊的时代，说法就如此，那么把它当成野兽，这种说法大概出在近代吧？
English: When the era of friendship, the saying is so, then treat it as a beast, this saying is probably in modern times, right?

古文：夫破人之惑者，难与争于笃信之时，待其有所疑焉，然后从而攻之可也。
现代文：破除人们的迷信，难以在他们深信不疑的时候和他们争辩，等他们产生怀疑的时候，随之攻破就行了。
English: To break people's superstitions, it is difficult to argue with them when they are convinced, and when they have doubts, it is enough to break them.

古文：麟、凤、龟、龙，王者之瑞，而出于五代之际，又皆萃于蜀，此虽好为祥瑞之说者亦可疑也。
现代文：麒麟、凤凰、龟、龙，这些帝王吉祥的征兆，出现在五代的时候，又都集中在蜀，这就使得即使喜好吉祥之说的人也感到可疑。
English: The unicorn, the phoenix, the turtle, and the dragon, these auspicious signs of the emperor, appeared in the five generations, and were concentrated in Shu, which makes even those who like to say that they are auspicious feel suspicious.

古文：因其可疑者而攻之，庶几惑者有以思焉。
现代文：藉着这可疑之处攻破它，大概可以使迷信者对此事进行深刻反省吧。
English: Breaking it down by this dubious point would probably cause the superstitious to reflect deeply on the matter.

