古文：凡兵，不攻无过之城，不杀无罪之人。
现代文：凡是用兵，不要进攻无过的国家，不要杀害无辜的人民。
English: When you go to war, don't attack innocent countries and don't kill innocent people.

古文：夫杀人之父兄，利人之货财，臣妾人之子女，此皆盗也。
现代文：杀害人家的父兄，掠夺人家的财物，奴役人家的子女，这些都是强盗的行为。
English: To kill one's father and brother, to plunder one's property, to enslave one's children, these are the acts of a robber.

古文：故兵者，所以诛暴乱禁不义也。
现代文：战争的目的是平定暴乱，制止不久行为。
English: The purpose of the war was to quell the riots and stop the rioting.

古文：兵之所加者，农不离其田业，贾不离其肆宅，士大夫不离其官府，由其武议在于一人，故兵不血刃而天下亲焉。
现代文：对于被讨伐的国家，要使农民不离开他们的土地，商人不离开他们的店铺，官吏不离开他们的机关，因为用兵的目的，只在于惩罚祸首一人，所以能不必经过流血战斗就可得到天下的拥护。
English: In the case of countries that are being attacked, it is necessary to ensure that farmers do not leave their land, merchants do not leave their shops, and officials do not leave their offices. Because the purpose of using troops is only to punish the culprit, it is possible to gain the support of the world without having to go through a bloody battle.

古文：万乘农战，千乘救守，百乘事养。
现代文：万乘之国实行农战结合，千乘之国要能自救自守，百乘之国要能自给自足。
English: The country of the Ten Thousand Impregnable Impregnable should carry out the combination of agricultural warfare, the country of the Thousand Impregnable Impregnable Impregnable should be able to save and defend itself, and the country of the Hundred Impregnable Impregnable Impregnable Impregnable Impregnable should be able to be self-sufficient.

古文：农战不外索权，救守不外索助，事养不外索资。
现代文：农战结合，足食足兵的国家，战守之权操之在己而不仰仗他人；能自救自守的国家，就可不向外国乞求援助；能自给自足的国家，就可不向别邦乞求资财。
English: In combination with the agrarian war, a country that can feed its soldiers should have the power to defend itself and not rely on others; a country that can save and defend itself should not beg for foreign aid; a country that can be self-sufficient should not beg for money from other countries.

古文：夫出不足战，入不足守者，治之以市。
现代文：如果进不足以战胜敌人，退不足以进行固守的，就应该用发展集市贸易的办法来解决。
English: If advancing is not enough to defeat the enemy and retreating is not enough to defend oneself, it should be solved by developing bazaar trade.

古文：市者，所以战守也。
现代文：发展集市贸易，是增加税收、供给军费的好办法。
English: The development of bazaar trade is a good way to increase taxes and supply military spending.

古文：万乘无千乘之助，必有百乘之市。
现代文：万乘之国虽然不象千乘之国那样求助于人，但必须象百乘之国那样，发展贸易，增加收入。
English: Although the country of the Mahayana does not resort to people like the country of the Mahayana, it must, like the country of the Mahayana, develop trade and increase income.

古文：凡诛者，所以明武也。
现代文：杀戮，是用来整肃军威的。
English: Killing is used to restore the military's prestige.

古文：杀一人而三军震者，杀之；一人而万人喜者，之。
现代文：杀一人能使全军震动的，就杀掉他。杀一人能使万人高兴的，就杀掉他。
English: He who kills a man and stirs up the whole army, let him be killed; and he who kills a man and satisfies the whole nation, let him be killed.

古文：杀之贵大，赏之贵小。
现代文：需要杀人时，应该以地位高的人作典型，实行奖赏时应该以地位低的人做榜样。
English: When it is necessary to kill, a high-ranking person should be used as a model, and a low-ranking person should be used as an example when a reward is given.

古文：当杀而虽贵重必杀之，是刑上究也；赏及牛童马圉者，是赏下流也。
现代文：应该杀的虽然官高势大，也一定要杀，这就是 刑上究 的原则；奖赏及于下属的牛童马倌，这就是 赏下流 的原则。
English: It is the principle of investigation before punishment that those who should be killed must be killed, even if they are high-ranking officials with great power. It is the principle of rewarding those who are low-born, even if they are subordinates.

古文：夫能刑上究、赏下流，此将之武也，故人主重将。
现代文：能够做到 刑上究 ， 赏下流 ，这是将帅威武严肃的表现。
English: To be able to achieve "punishment on investigation" and "rewarding lewdness," this is a serious performance of being handsome and powerful.

古文：夫将，提鼓挥桴，临难决战。
现代文：所以君主应该尊重将帅的职权。
English: Therefore, the monarch should respect the authority of the commander-in-chief.

古文：接兵角刃，鼓之而当，则赏功立名；鼓之而不当，则身死国亡。
现代文：将帅击鼓指挥军队，使其在危难情况下与敌决战，当两军短兵相接的时候，如果指挥得当，就会建立功名，如果指挥不当，就会身死亡。
English: The commander-in-chief beats the drum to command the army so that it can fight a decisive battle with the enemy in a critical situation. When the two armies are in close contact, if the command is proper, it will build a reputation, and if the command is improper, it will die.

古文：是存亡安危，在于桴端，奈何无重将也。
现代文：由此看来，国家的存亡安危，在于将帅的指挥是否得当，这怎能不使人重视将帅的作用呢？
English: From this point of view, the survival and security of the country depends on whether the commander-in-chief's command is appropriate. How can this not make people pay attention to the role of the commander-in-chief?

古文：夫提鼓挥桴，接兵角刃，居以武事成功者，臣以为非难也。古人曰： 无蒙冲而攻，无渠答而守，是谓无善之军。 
现代文：击鼓指挥军队，与敌人进行格斗，君主要取得军事上的胜利，我以为并不是困难的事。古人说： 没有 蒙冲 去进攻，没有 渠答 去防守，这是装备不完善的军队 。
English: I did not think it was difficult to beat the drum, command the army, fight with the enemy, and achieve military victory for the prince. The ancients said: There is no rush to attack, there is no way to defend, this is an imperfectly equipped army.

古文：视无见，听无闻，由国无市也。
现代文：以致影响了视力，影响了听力，这是由于国家没有管好市场，以致供给缺乏的原故。
English: This has affected their eyesight and hearing. This is due to the fact that the state has not managed the market well, resulting in a lack of supply.

古文：夫市也者，百货之官也。市贱卖贵，以限士人。人食粟一斗，马食三斗，人有饥色，马有瘠形，何也？
现代文：市场，应对百货进行管理，用贱买贵卖的办法，以限制士民操纵物价，每人每天不过吃粮食一斗，每马每天不过吃饲料三斗，而弄得士卒饥饿，马匹瘦弱，这是为什么呢？
English: The market should be managed by department stores, and the price should be manipulated by the method of buying cheap and selling dear, so as to restrict the people. Each person should only eat one bucket of grain per day, and each horse should only eat three buckets of feed per day, but the people are starving and the horses are thin. Why is this?

古文：市有所出，而官无主也。
现代文：这是由于市场虽有各种物品，而无人管理的原故。
English: This is due to the fact that although there are various items in the market, there is no one to manage it.

古文：夫提天下之节制，而无百货之官，无谓其能战也。
现代文：要知道统率天下的军队，而没有对百货进行有效的管理，那是不能顺利进行作战的。
English: To know that leading the world's army, but without the effective management of department stores, it is not possible to carry out the battle smoothly.

古文：起兵，直使甲冑生虮者，必为吾所效用也。
现代文：进行战争，能使军队坚持长期作战的，必然是官兵不得不为我效力的原故。
English: The reason why the army is able to sustain a long-term war is that the officers and soldiers are forced to work for me.

古文：鸷鸟逐雀，有袭人之怀，入人之室者，非出生，后有惮也。
现代文：譬如凶猛的鸟追逐小雀，有时竟使小雀窜入人们的怀中，闯进人家的室内，这并不是它愿意舍生就死，而是怕后面的凶鸟追上来了。
English: For example, a ferocious bird chases a little sparrow, and sometimes it actually causes the little sparrow to fly into people's arms and break into people's homes. This is not because it is willing to die, but because it is afraid of the vicious bird coming up behind it.

古文：太公望年七十，屠牛朝歌，卖食盟津，过七年余而主不听，人人狂夫也。
现代文：太公望到了七十岁，还在朝歌宰牛为业，在盟津卖食品谋生。年过七十，还没有得到君主的任用，许多人都说他是放荡不拘的人。
English: At the age of seventy, Taigongwang was still slaughtering cattle in Chaoga and selling food in Mengjin to make a living. At the age of seventy, he had not yet been appointed by the monarch, and many people said that he was a libertine.

古文：及遇文王，则提三万之众，一战而天下定。
现代文：及至遇见了周文王，却能统帅三万之众，一战而平定天下。
English: Until he met King Zhou Wen, he was able to command thirty thousand people and pacify the world in one battle.

古文：非武议，安得此合也。
现代文：如果他没有高深的谋略，哪能得到这样的重用呢。
English: If he does not have a profound strategy, how can he get such heavy use?

古文：故曰： 良马有策，远道可致；贤士有合，大道可明。 
现代文：所以常言说，良马得到鞭策就可以日行十里。贤士得到重用，就可使政治昌明。
English: Therefore, it is often said that a good horse can travel ten miles a day if it is whipped, and a wise man can make politics bright if he is used.

古文：武王伐纣，师渡盟津，右旄左钺，死士三百，战士三万。
现代文：武王伐纣，统帅军队在盟津渡河，他右手执白旄，左手执黄钺，指挥敢死之士三百人，士卒三万人同商军作战。
English: King Wuchang, commander of the army, crossed the river in Mengjin. He held the white scepter in his right hand and the yellow scepter in his left hand. He commanded three hundred brave men and thirty thousand soldiers to fight against the merchant army.

古文：纣之陈亿万，飞廉、恶来，身先戟斧，陈开百里。
现代文：这时商纣的军队有几十万，而又有飞廉恶来这些勇将，身先士卒，不避戟斧，阵势绵延百里不断。
English: At this time, the merchants' army had hundreds of thousands of soldiers, and these brave soldiers came from far and wide, leading the way, not shying away from the axe, and the formation stretched for hundreds of miles.

古文：武王不罢市民，兵不血刃，而商诛纣。
现代文：但武王并没有使士卒疲劳，也没有经过激烈的战斗，就打败了商军，诛灭了纣王。
English: However, King Wu did not let his soldiers get tired, nor did he go through a fierce battle, so he defeated the merchant army and annihilated the warlord.

古文：无祥异也，人事修不修而然也。
现代文：这不是由于什么吉凶灾祥预兆，而是由于人善与不善的必然结果。
English: This is not due to any auspicious omen, but due to the inevitable result of human goodness and badness.

古文：今世将考孤虚，占咸池，合龟兆，视吉凶，观星辰风云之变，欲以成胜立功，臣以为难。
现代文：如今一般庸将，只知道考究时辰判定方位，求神问卜推测吉凶，以及观察星辰风云的变化来推断战争的胜败，想用这些方法来致胜立功，我以为是很难做到的。
English: Nowadays, the average mediocre general only knows to study the time to determine the position, ask the gods to speculate on the fortunes, and observe the changes of the stars to deduce the victory or defeat of the war. I thought it would be difficult to use these methods to achieve victory.

古文：夫将者，上不制于天，下不制于地，中不制于人。
现代文：做将帅的人，必须上不受天时的限制，下不受地形的限制，中不受人为的限制。
English: To be a general, one must be free from the constraints of time and space above, free from the constraints of terrain below, and free from artificial constraints in the middle.

古文：故兵者，凶器也；争者，逆德也。将者，死官也。故不得已而用之。
现代文：武器，是杀人的凶器，战争，是暴力的行动，将帅，是掌握生杀的官吏，所以只在不得已的情况下才能使用它。
English: A weapon is a murderous weapon, war is an act of violence, a general is an official who has the power of life and death at his disposal, so he can only use it in the last resort.

古文：无天于上，无地于下，无主于后，无敌于前。
现代文：指导战争，要做到上不受天时的影响，下不受地形的限制，后面不受君主的制约，前不受敌人的阻抗。
English: To direct a war, it is necessary to make sure that the top is not affected by the weather, the bottom is not restricted by the terrain, the back is not restricted by the monarch, and the front is not hindered by the enemy.

古文：一人之兵，如狼如虎，如风如雨，如雷如霆，震震冥冥，天下皆惊。
现代文：万众一心的军队，行动起来就象虎狼般的勇猛，风雨般的急骤，雷电般的突然，声势浩大，行动莫测，使天下惊惧。
English: The united army, when it moves, is as fierce as a tiger or a wolf, as sudden as a storm, as sudden as a thunderbolt, as powerful as thunder and lightning, and as unpredictable as the world.

古文：胜兵似水。夫水，至柔弱者也，然所触，丘陵必为之崩，无异也，性专而触诚也。
现代文：胜利的军队象水一样，水看来是最柔弱的，但它所冲击的地方，山陵也会崩塌，这不是别的原因，而是由于水总是流向一个方向，不断冲刷的结果。
English: A victorious army is like water. Water seems to be the weakest, but where it strikes, mountains crumble. This is not for any other reason, but because water always flows in one direction, the result of constant scouring.

古文：今以莫邪之利，犀兕之坚，三军之众，有所奇正，则天下莫当其战矣。
现代文：现在用莫邪那样锋利的武器，犀牛皮制成的坚固铠甲，装备起来的大量军队，再加上奇正的灵活运用，天下就没有任何力量可以同他抗衡了。
English: Now, with his uncanny weaponry, sturdy armor made from rhinoceros hide, massive army of equipment, and uncanny dexterity, there is no force in the world that can stand against him.

古文：故曰：举贤用能，不时日而事利；明法审令，不占筮而获吉；贵功养劳，不祷祠而得福。
现代文：所以说，只要任用贤能，不须选择吉日良辰事情也会顺利；只要法令严明，不须求神问卜也会获得吉祥；只要奖励战功优厚抚恤，不须祈祷也会得福。
English: Therefore, as long as the appointment of virtuous, do not have to choose the auspicious day and hour things will go well; as long as the laws are strict, do not have to ask God will also be auspicious; as long as the award for meritorious service and generous pension, do not have to pray will also be blessed.

古文：又曰：天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
现代文：又说，天时有利不如地形有利，地形有利不如人心和睦。
English: It is also said that the favorable weather is not as good as the favorable terrain, and the favorable terrain is not as good as the harmony of the people.

古文：古之圣人，谨人事而已。
现代文：古代的圣人，不过是重视人的作用罢了。
English: The ancient sages only valued the role of man.

古文：吴起与秦战，舍不平陇亩，朴樕盖之，以蔽霜露。
现代文：吴起与秦军作战，就睡在不加平整的田埂上，只用树枝掩盖以遮蔽霜露。
English: When Wu started to fight against the Qin army, he slept on the uneven rice paddies, using only tree branches to cover himself from the frost.

古文：如此何也？
现代文：为什么这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：不自高人故也。
现代文：这是因为他不自视高人一等的原故。
English: This is because he does not consider himself superior.

古文：乞人之死不索尊，竭人之力不责礼。
现代文：凡是要求人家为你效死，就不能要求人家对你必恭必敬；要求人家竭尽全力，就不能讲究那些繁文缛节。
English: If you ask people to die for you, you can't ask them to be respectful; if you ask them to do their best, you can't pay attention to those red tape.

古文：故古者，甲冑之士不拜，示人无已烦也。
现代文：所以古时候穿戴盔甲的将士不行跪拜之礼，这是表示不愿因自己而增加别人的麻烦。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, soldiers wearing armor could not kneel, which meant that they did not want to cause trouble for others.

古文：夫烦人而欲乞其死、竭其力，自古至今未尝闻矣。
现代文：给别人增添很多麻烦，而又要求人家为你效死尽力，是从古至今，没有听说过的。
English: To add a lot of trouble to others, while asking them to work hard for you, is unheard of from ancient times to the present.

古文：将受命之日忘其家，张军宿野忘其亲，援而鼓忘其身。
现代文：将帅奉命出征的时候，就忘掉自己的家庭，带领军队到达战场的时候，就忘掉自己的亲属，临阵指挥的时候，就忘掉自己的安危。
English: When a general is ordered to go to war, he forgets his family; when he leads an army to the battlefield, he forgets his relatives; when he is in charge of the front, he forgets his own safety.

古文：吴起临战，左右进剑。
现代文：从前吴起临战的时候，左右的人把宝剑呈送给他。
English: Once upon a time, when Wu was about to go to war, people around him presented him with a sword.

古文：起曰： 将专主旗鼓尔，临难决疑，挥兵指刃，此将事也。
现代文：吴起说： 将帅的主要职责是发号施令。在危难的情况下，做出决断，以指挥军队去作战，这才是将帅的职责，直接拿起兵器与敌人格斗，不是将帅的职责。 
English: Wu Qi said: The main duty of a general officer is to issue orders. In a critical situation, it is the duty of a general officer to make a decision and command the army to fight. It is not the duty of a general officer to directly pick up weapons and fight the enemy.

古文：一剑之任，非将事也。 
现代文：三军整队行军，日行三十里，三天走九十里。
English: The three armies marched in formation, covering thirty miles a day and ninety miles in three days.

古文：三军成行，一舍而后成三舍，三舍之余，如决川源。
现代文：军行九十里以后，就要象决开江河一样势不可当地前进。
English: After marching ninety miles, we must advance with the same momentum as if we were breaking open a river.

古文：望敌在前，因其所长而用之。敌白者垩之，赤者赭之。
现代文：与敌人接近时，应根据敌人特点来对付他，如果敌人使用白色标记，我也用白色标记来欺骗它，敌人用红色标记，我也用红色标记迷惑它。
English: When approaching the enemy, you should deal with him according to the characteristics of the enemy. If the enemy uses a white mark, I will also use a white mark to deceive him. If the enemy uses a red mark, I will also use a red mark to confuse him.

古文：吴起与秦战，未合，一夫不胜其勇，前获双首而还。
现代文：吴起与秦军作战，两军尚未交锋，有一人自恃其勇，独自冲向前去，斩获敌人两个首级回来。
English: Wuqi was fighting against the Qin army. The two armies had not yet clashed. One of them took courage and rushed forward on his own, returning with two heads of the enemy.

古文：吴起立斩之。
现代文：吴起要立刻杀他。
English: Wu Qi wanted to kill him immediately.

古文：军吏谏曰： 此材士也，不可斩。 
现代文：军吏请求说： 这是个有本领的人，不可杀掉。 
English: And the officers entreated them, saying, "This man is a mighty man; do not kill him."

古文：起曰： 材士则是也，非吾令也。 
现代文：吴起说： 他诚然是有本领的，但他违背了我的命令。 
English: Wu Qi said, "It is true that he is competent, but he violated my order.

古文：斩之。
现代文：结果还是把他杀了。
English: Just kill him.

