古文：元行钦，本幽州刘守光之爱将。
现代文：元行钦，本业是幽州刘守光的爱将。
English: Yuan Xingqin is the favorite player of Yuzhou Liu Shouguang.

古文：守光之夺父位也，令行钦攻大恩山，又令杀诸兄弟。
现代文：刘守光夺取父亲职位时，命令元行钦攻打大恩山，又命令他杀掉各位兄弟。
English: When Liu Shouguang seized his father's position, he ordered Yuan Xingqin to attack Dainshan, and ordered him to kill the brothers.

古文：天祐九年，周德威攻围山州，守光困蹙，令行钦于山北募兵，以应契丹。
现代文：天九年，周德威围攻幽州，刘守光很困窘，命令元行钦到山北招募士兵，应付契丹。
English: Ten years ago, Zhou Dewei besieged Yuzhou, and Liu Shouguang was embarrassed and ordered Yuan Xingqin to go to Shandong to recruit soldiers to deal with the Khitan.

古文：时明宗为将，攻行钦于山北，与之接战，矢及明宗马鞍，既而以势迫来降。
现代文：这时明宗还是将军，在山北攻打元行钦，和他交战，元行钦射中了明宗的马鞍，后来因形势所迫来投降。
English: At this time, Mingzong was still a general. He attacked Yuan Xingqin in Shannbei and fought with him. Yuan Xingqin shot Mingzong's saddle, and later surrendered due to the situation.

古文：明宗怜其有勇，奏隶为假子，后因从征讨，恩礼特隆。
现代文：明宗爱他勇敢，上奏收为义子，以后跟从征战，恩礼特别优厚。
English: The Ming dynasty loved him for his bravery. He was adopted as a son-in-law, and later followed him into battle. The reward was particularly generous.

古文：常临敌擒生，必有所获，名闻军中。
现代文：常常冲入敌阵活捉敌人，必定有所擒获，名闻军中。
English: He often rushed into the enemy lines to capture the enemy alive, and he must have captured something. He is famous in the army.

古文：庄宗东定赵、魏，选骁健置之麾下，因索行钦，庄宗不得已而遣之。
现代文：庄宗往东平定赵州、魏州，选骁勇健壮士兵收在身边，点名要元行钦，明宗不得已而送去。
English: Zhuang Zong went east to pacify Zhaozhou and Weizhou. He gathered a number of brave and robust soldiers around him and called for Yuan Xingqin. Ming Zong had no choice but to send him away.

古文：时有散指挥都头，名为散员，命行钦为都部署，赐姓，名绍荣。
现代文：当时有散指挥都头，称为散员，任命元行钦为都部署，赐姓李，名叫绍荣。
English: At that time, there was a commander of the capital, known as the commander, who appointed Yuan Xingqin to be deployed for the capital, and gave him the surname Li, named Shaorong.

古文：庄宗好战，勇于大敌，或临阵有急兵，行钦必横身解斗翼卫之。
现代文：庄宗好战，勇于面对强大敌人，有时临阵有紧急情况，元行钦必定横身保护庄宗。
English: Zhuangzong is warlike, brave in the face of powerful enemies, sometimes there is an emergency, Yuan Xingqin must protect Zhuangzong.

古文：庄宗营于德胜也，与汴军战于潘张，王师不利，诸军奔乱。
现代文：庄宗扎营在德胜时，在潘张与梁军交战，战事失利，各军乱奔。
English: When Zhuangzong was encamped in Desheng, he fought with Liang's army in Pan Zhang. The battle was a failure, and the armies ran amok.

古文：庄宗得三四骑而旋，中野为汴军数百骑攒槊攻之，事将不测，行钦识其帜，急驰一骑，奋剑断二矛，斩一级，汴军乃解围，翼庄宗还宫。
现代文：庄宗带三四名骑兵回来，在野地里被几百名梁军骑兵持矛攻击，情势非常危急，元行钦认出庄宗旗帜，赶紧骑马去救，奋起刀剑斩断二矛，杀死一人，梁军才撤除包围，他保护庄宗还宫。
English: Zhuangzong returned with three or four cavalrymen. In the field, he was attacked by several hundred Liang cavalrymen with spears. The situation was very critical. Yuan Xingqin recognized Zhuangzong's flag, quickly rode to the rescue, raised his sword to cut off two spears and killed one person. Liang's army was only removed and surrounded when he protected Zhuangzong and returned to the palace.

古文：庄宗因流涕言曰： 富贵与卿共之。 
现代文：庄宗流着泪说： 要和你共享富贵。 
English: Zhuang Zong shed tears and said: I want to share my wealth with you.

古文：自是宠冠诸将，官至检校太傅、忻州刺史。
现代文：从此元行钦比其他各将更受宠爱，官至检校太傅、忻州刺史。
English: From then on, Yuan Xingqin was favored more than other generals, and he was promoted to the posts of school inspector and governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：及庄宗平梁，授武宁军节度使。
现代文：庄宗平定梁朝后，授武宁军节度使。
English: After Zhuangzong subdued the Liang Dynasty, he was given the post of military attaché to the Ning Dynasty.

古文：尝因内宴群臣，使相预会，行钦官为保傅，当地褥下坐。
现代文：庄宗曾在宫内设宴招待群臣，节度使丞相等都到了，元行钦的官职为保傅，只能在地毯上坐着。
English: Zhuangzong once held a banquet in the palace to invite the courtiers, and the ceremonial envoys and ministers all arrived. Yuan Xingqin's official position was the guardian, and he could only sit on the carpet.

古文：酒酣乐作，庄宗叙生平战阵之事，因左右顾视，曰： 绍荣安在？ 
现代文：酒酣奏乐，庄宗叙述生平战阵之事，向左右两边看着说： 绍荣在哪里？ 
English: While drinking wine and playing music, Zhuang Zong recounted the events of his life, looked to the left and right and said: Where is Shaorong?

古文：所司奏云： 有敕，使相预会，绍荣散官，殿上无位。 
现代文：主管官员说： 有敕令，节度使丞相到会，绍荣是散官，殿上没有他的位置。 
English: The official in charge said, "There is a royal decree, and the Emperor has been summoned by the Emperor to attend the meeting. Shao Rong is a low-ranking official, and there is no place for him in the palace."

古文：庄宗彻会不怿。
现代文：庄宗散会很不高兴。
English: Zhuang Zongsan was very unhappy.

古文：翌日，以行钦为同平章事，由是不宴百官于内殿，但宴武臣而已，
现代文：第二天，任元行钦为同平章事，从此不在内殿宴请百官，只设宴招待武官。
English: The next day, Ren Yuan Xingqin was made a peer, and henceforth, he would not hold a banquet for hundreds of officials in the inner hall, but would only hold a banquet for military attachés.

古文：三年，行钦丧妇。
现代文：同光三年，元行钦死了夫人。
English: Three years later, his wife, Yuan Xingqin, died.

古文：庄宗有所爱宫人生皇子者，刘皇后心忌之，会行钦入侍，庄宗劳之曰： 绍荣丧妇复娶耶！
现代文：庄宗有一个生了皇子的受宠宫女，刘皇后心里忌妒她，碰上元行钦入宫随侍，庄宗安慰他说： 绍荣丧妻后又娶妻没有？
English: Zhuangzong had a beloved concubine who gave birth to a prince. Empress Liu was jealous of her. When he met Yuan Xingqin, the attendant to the imperial court, Zhuangzong consoled him by saying, "Didn't Shaorong remarry after his wife's death?

古文：吾给尔婚财。 
现代文：我给你结婚的财物。 
English: I'll give you your wedding stuff.

古文：皇后指所忌宫人谓庄宗曰： 皇帝怜绍荣，可使为妇。 
现代文：皇后指着她忌妒的宫女对庄宗说： 皇帝爱怜绍荣的话，可以让她做绍荣的夫人。 
English: The empress pointed to her jealous concubine and said to Zhuangzong, "If the emperor loves and pities Xiao Rong, he can let her be his wife."

古文：庄宗难违所请，微许之。
现代文：庄宗难以不依从她的请求，勉强答应了。
English: It was difficult for Zhuangzong not to comply with her request, and he reluctantly agreed.

古文：皇后即命绍荣谢之，未退，肩舆已出。
现代文：皇后立即命绍荣道谢，绍荣人还没退下，花轿就已出宫了。
English: The empress immediately ordered Shao Rong to thank her. Before Shao Rong could step down, the carriage left the palace.

古文：庄宗心不怿，佯不豫者累日，业已遣去，无如之何。
现代文：庄宗心中不乐，连着几天假装不舒服，然而宠妃已经嫁出去了，也无可奈何。
English: Zhuangzong was unhappy in his heart and pretended to be unwell for several days in a row. However, his beloved had already married, and there was nothing he could do.

古文：及贝州军乱，赵在礼入魏州，庄宗方择将，皇后曰： 小事不劳大将，促绍荣指挥可也。 
现代文：贝州军作乱时，赵在礼进入魏州，庄宗正在挑选将军，皇后说： 小事情不必有劳大将，催促绍荣指挥就可以了。 
English: When the Beizhou army was in turmoil, Zhao entered Weizhou with great ceremony. Zhuangzong was in the process of selecting a general. The empress said, "Small things do not require great effort. It is enough to urge Shaorong to take command."

古文：乃以行钦为鄴都行营招抚使，领骑二千进讨。
现代文：于是任元行钦为邺都行营招抚使，领二千骑兵进讨。
English: As a result, Yuan Xingqin was appointed as the envoy of the Xingdu Xingyuan encampment, and led two thousand cavalry into the discussion.

古文：洎至鄴城，攻之不能下，退保于澶州。
现代文：来到了邺城，不能攻下，退兵到澶州。
English: He came to Zhangcheng, couldn't capture it, and withdrew to Zhangzhou.

古文：未几，诸道之师稍集，复进军于鄴城之南。
现代文：没多久，各路军队渐渐集合，又进军到邺城之南。
English: Before long, the various armies gradually gathered and marched to the south of Lucheng.

古文：及明宗为帅，领军至鄴，行钦来谒于军中，拜起之际，误呼万岁者再，明宗惊骇，遏之方止。
现代文：当明宗为帅，领军队赶到邺城时，元行钦来军中进见，下拜起身之际，误呼几声万岁，明宗很是惊骇，阻拦后才止住。
English: When Mingzong was the best and led the army to Licheng, Yuan Xingqin came to the army to inspect it, and when he bowed down and got up, he mistakenly called out a few long lives. Mingzong was very shocked, and only stopped after he was blocked.

古文：既而明宗营于城西，行钦营于城南。
现代文：随后明宗在城西扎营，元行钦在城南扎营。
English: Subsequently, Mingzong camped in the west of the city, and Yuan Xingqin camped in the south of the city.

古文：三月八日夜，明宗为乱军所迫，惟行钦之军不动，按甲以自固。
现代文：三月八日夜里，明宗被乱军逼迫，只有元行钦的部队不动，按兵自守。
English: On the night of March 8th, Mingzong was persecuted by the rebel army, only Yuan Xingqin's troops did not move and defended themselves.

古文：明宗密令张虔钊至行钦营，戒之曰： 且坚壁勿动，计会同杀乱军，莫错疑误。 
现代文：明宗密令张虔钊到元行钦的营地，告诫他说： 暂且坚壁不动，等候会合诛杀乱军，不要疑误。 
English: Ming Zong Mi ordered Zhang Qianqian to go to Yuan Xingqin's camp and warned him: "For the time being, do not move the wall, wait for the meeting to fight and kill the ruffians, do not make a mistake.

古文：行钦不听，将步骑万人弃甲而退。
现代文：元行钦不听，带步兵骑兵万人丢弃盔甲而退。
English: Yuan Xingqin did not listen, and withdrew with tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry, discarding their armor.

古文：自知失策，且保卫州，因诬奏明宗曰： 镇师已入贼军，终不为国使。 
现代文：自知失策，暂且保住卫州，并诬告明宗说 ：镇州统帅已投降贼军，终于不为国效劳。 
English: Aware of his blunder, he temporarily held on to Weizhou, and falsely accused Mingzong, saying that the commander of Zhenzhou had surrendered to the invaders and would no longer serve the country.

古文：明宗既劫出鄴城，令人走马上章，申理其事，言： 臣且于近郡听进止。 
现代文：明宗逃出邺城后，令人骑马报告，申诉此事，说： 我暂且在附近的郡城听候命令进退。 
English: After Mingzong escaped from Lucheng, he sent a report on horseback to complain about the matter, saying: I am temporarily in the nearby county town to await orders to retreat.

古文：庄宗览奏释然曰： 吾知绍荣妄矣。 
现代文：庄宗看了奏章后放心地说 ：我知道绍荣错了。 
English: After reading the score, Zhuo Zong said with confidence: I know that Shaorong is wrong.

古文：因令白从训与明宗子继璟至军前，欲令见明宗，行钦絷继璟于路。
现代文：因而令白从训和明宗的儿子李继王景前往军前，想让他们拜会明宗，元行钦在半路截住李继王景。
English: Therefore, Ling Bai sent Li Ji Wangjing, the son of Xun He and Ming Zong, to the front of the army to invite Ming Zong, and Yuan Xingqin intercepted Li Ji Wangjing in the middle of the road.

古文：明宗凡奏军机，拘留不达，故旬日之间，音驿断绝。
现代文：明宗上奏的军机都被拘留不能送达，所以十几天内，音讯断绝。
English: All the military aircraft of the Ming Dynasty were detained and could not be delivered, so within ten days, the news was cut off.

古文：及庄宗出成皋，知明宗在黎阳，复令继璟渡河召明宗，行钦即杀之，仍劝班师。
现代文：到庄宗出成皋时，知道明宗在黎阳，又令李继王景渡黄河召见明宗，元行钦立即杀掉李继王景，仍劝庄宗回师。
English: When Zhuangzong became emperor, knowing that Mingzong was in Liyang, he ordered Li Ji Wang Jing to cross the Yellow River to summon Mingzong. Yuan Xingqin immediately killed Li Ji Wang Jing and still advised Zhuangzong to return to his master.

古文：四月一日，庄宗既崩，行钦引皇后、存渥，得七百骑出师子门，将之河中就存霸，沿路部下解散，从者数骑而已。
现代文：四月一日，庄宗去世，元行钦带着皇后、李存渥，还有七百名骑兵出师子门，准备去河中依靠李存霸，沿路部下走散，随从的只有几人。
English: On April 1, Zhuangzong died, and Yuan Xingqin took the empress, Li Cunwu, and seven hundred cavalrymen out of the gate, ready to go to the river to rely on Li Cunha. His subordinates scattered along the road, with only a few followers.

古文：四日，至平陆县界，为百姓所擒，县令裴进折其足，槛车以献。
现代文：四日，到平陆县界，被百姓擒获，县令裴进折断他的脚，用囚车送到京城。
English: On the fourth day, he was caught by the people at the Pinglu County border. County magistrate Pei Jin broke his leg and sent him to Beijing by prison van.

古文：明宗即位，诏削夺行钦在位官爵，斩于洛阳。
现代文：明宗即位，下诏削夺元行钦在任官爵，在洛阳处死。
English: Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, Emperor Zhao cut off Emperor Yuan, Emperor Xing was made an official peer, and Emperor Mingzong died in Luoyang.

古文：夏鲁奇，字邦杰，青州人也。
现代文：夏鲁奇，字邦杰，青州人。
English: Sharuchi, also known as Bangjie, is a native of Qingzhou.

古文：初事宣武军为军校，与主将不协，遂归于庄宗，以为护卫指挥使。
现代文：起初在宣武军当军校，与主将合不来，便投奔庄宗，任护卫指挥使。
English: At first, when he was a military school in the Xuanwu Army, he could not get along with the commander-in-chief, so he joined Zhuangzong and served as an escort commander.

古文：从周德威攻幽州，燕将有单廷珪、元行钦，时称骁勇，鲁奇与之斗，两不能解，将十皆释兵纵观。
现代文：跟从周德威攻打幽州，燕将有单廷王圭、元行钦，当时号称骁勇，夏鲁奇和他们交手，双方不能解脱，将士们都放下武器观看。
English: Following Zhou Dewei's attack on Yuzhou, Yan will have Shanting Wang Gui and Yuan Xingqin, known at the time as Zhaoyong, and Xialuqi will fight with them. Both sides cannot be relieved, and the soldiers all put down their weapons to watch.

古文：幽州平，鲁奇功居多。
现代文：幽州平定，夏鲁奇立的功劳较多。
English: Yuzhou was pacified, and Sharuqi Liang deserves more credit.

古文：梁将刘鄩在洹水，庄宗深入致师，鄩设伏于魏县西南葭芦中。
现代文：梁将刘寻阝在洹水时，庄宗带兵深入，刘寻阝在魏县西南芦苇中设下埋伏。
English: When Liang sent Liu Huanqian to Surabaya, Zhuang Zong led his troops deeper, and Liu Huanqian set up an ambush in the southwest of Wei County.

古文：庄宗不满千骑，汴人伏兵万余，大噪而起，围庄宗数重。鲁奇与王门关、乌德兒等奋命决战，自午至申，俄而李存审兵至方解。
现代文：庄宗的骑兵不到一千，梁军伏兵有一万多，大喊杀出，把庄宗围了好几层，夏鲁奇和王门关、乌德儿等人奋命决战，从中午战到下午，后来李存审带兵赶到才解围。
English: Zhuangzong's cavalry was less than a thousand, and Liang's army ambushed more than ten thousand soldiers. They shouted and killed, and surrounded Zhuangzong for several floors. Xialuqi and Wangmenguan, Uder and others fought a decisive battle from noon to afternoon. Later, Li Cunxi led the soldiers to break the siege.

古文：鲁奇持枪携剑，独卫庄宗，手杀百余人。
现代文：夏鲁奇持枪握剑，独自保卫庄宗，杀死一百多敌兵。
English: Holding a gun and a sword, Sharuchi single-handedly defended Zhuangzong, killing more than a hundred enemy soldiers.

古文：及彦章败，庭隐为庄宗所获，将以就戮，大将夏鲁奇奏曰： 此矬也，其材可用。 
现代文：乌德儿等人被俘虏，夏鲁奇遍体鳞伤，从此庄宗特别爱惜他，任磁州刺史。中都之战，梁军大败，夏鲁奇见到王彦章，认得他，单独骑马追赶他，用枪将要刺中他的脖子，王彦章对他说 ：你不是我的故人吗？ 
English: Uder and the others were captured, and Sharuch was wounded all over his body. From then on, the Zhuangzong took special care of him and allowed him to write history. The battle of Zhongdu, the great defeat of Liang's army, Sharuch saw Wang Yanzhang, recognized him, chased him alone on horseback, and was about to stab him in the neck with a gun. Wang Yanzhang said to him, "Aren't you my deceased?"

古文：遂释之。
现代文：于是抓获王彦章献上。
English: As a result, Wang Hanzhang was captured and presented to the emperor.

古文：梁平，授郑州防御使。
现代文：庄宗赞赏他，赐千匹绢。平定梁朝后，授郑州防御使。
English: Zhuang Zong appreciated him and gave him a thousand horses. After the Liang Dynasty was pacified, he was awarded the Zhengzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：四年，授河阳节度使。
现代文：同光四年，授河阳节度使。
English: In the same year, he was awarded the title of Heyang Jieduo Envoy.

古文：天成初，移镇许州，加同平章事。
现代文：天成初年，移镇许州，加同平章事。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he moved to Xuzhou and was awarded the Tongping Medal.

古文：鲁奇性忠义，尤通吏道，抚民有术。
现代文：夏鲁奇秉性忠义，尤其精通为官之道，安抚百姓很有办法。
English: Charuqi is loyal by nature, especially proficient in the way of being an official, and has a good way to appease the people.

古文：及移镇许田，孟州之民，万众遮道，断登卧辙，五日不发。
现代文：他移镇许田时，孟州的人民几万人拦在路上，拉住马镫躺在路上不让他走，五天不能离开。
English: When he moved to the town of Xutian, tens of thousands of people in Mengzhou stopped him on the road, pulled his horse's bridle and lay on the road to prevent him from leaving, and he was unable to leave for five days.

古文：父老诣阙请留，明宗令中使谕之，方得离州。
现代文：当地父老到朝廷请求留下夏鲁奇，明宗令中使讲清道理，才得以离开孟州。
English: Local patriarchs went to the imperial court to request that Charuqi be allowed to stay, and it was only after the Emperor Mingzong issued an order clarifying the truth that he was able to leave Mengzhou.

古文：明宗讨荆南，鲁奇为副招讨使，顷之，移镇遂州。
现代文：明宗讨伐荆南时，夏鲁奇为副招讨使，没多久，移镇遂州。
English: During the Ming Dynasty's campaign against Jingnan, Sharuchi was the deputy envoy, and soon after, he moved to Suizhou.

古文：奉使于蜀，及与王衍相见，陈使者之礼，因于笏记中具述庄宗兴复之功，其警句云： 才过汶水，缚王彦章于马前；旋及夷门，斩硃友贞于楼上。 
现代文：同光年中，任客省使，奉命出使到蜀地，与王衍相见时，行使者的礼节。在笏记中详细叙述庄宗复兴唐朝之功，其中的警句说： 才过汶水，就在马前抓住王彦章；刚到夷门，在楼上杀了朱友贞。 
English: At the same time, in the middle of the year, an envoy from Hakka Province was sent to Shu, and when he met Wang Yan, he exercised the etiquette of the person. Zhuangzong's contribution to the revival of the Tang Dynasty was described in detail in the Records of the Grand Historian. One of the epigrams said: Just after crossing the Wenshui River, he grabbed Wang Yanzhang in front of the horse; just after arriving at Yimen, he killed Zhu Youzhen upstairs.

古文：严复声韵清亮，蜀人听之愕然。
现代文：李严的声音又清楚又嘹亮，蜀人听了很惊愕。
English: Li Yan's voice was clear and bright, and Shu people were very surprised to hear it.

古文：时蜀伪枢密使宋光嗣召严曲宴，因以近事讯于严。
现代文：这时蜀地伪枢密使宋光嗣招待李严赴宴，询问李严近来的事情。
English: At this time, the Shu pseudo-privy envoy Song Guangzhi invited Li Yan to a banquet and inquired about Li Yan's recent affairs.

古文：严对曰： 吾皇前年四月即位于鄴宫，当月下郓州。十月四日，亲统万骑破贼中都，乘胜鼓行，遂诛汴孽，伪梁尚有兵三十万，谋臣猛将，解甲倒戈。
现代文：李严回答说 ：我们皇帝前年四月在邺宫即位，当月下郓州，十月四日，亲自率一万骑兵在中都破敌，乘胜进军，遂消灭汴州之敌，伪梁还有三十万兵，谋臣猛将，纷纷解甲倒戈。
English: Li Yan replied, "Our emperor ascended to the throne in April of the previous year in the Palace of the Grand Dragon. In the same month, he ascended to the State of the Grand Dragon. On October 4, he personally led ten thousand cavalrymen to defeat the enemy in Zhongdu, marched into the army with victory, and then eliminated the enemy in the State of the Grand Dragon.

古文：西尽甘、凉，东渐海外，南逾闽、浙，北极幽陵。
现代文：西到甘州、凉州，东到海外，南到闽、浙，北到幽陵。
English: West to Ganzhou and Liangzhou, east to overseas, south to Handan and Zhejiang, and north to Yuling.

古文：牧伯侯王，称籓不暇，家财入贡，府实上供。
现代文：牧伯侯王都赶紧向我们皇帝称藩臣，把家财贡献上来，把府库交纳上来。
English: All the chief lords hastened to call themselves vassals of our emperor, to contribute their family wealth, and to pay taxes to the imperial treasury.

古文：吴国本朝旧臣，岐下先皇元老，遣子入侍，述职称籓。
现代文：吴国是本朝旧臣，岐下是先皇元老，派儿子到朝廷侍奉，述职称藩。
English: Wu was an old vassal of this dynasty, and Qishan was a former emperor and elder statesman, who sent his son to serve at the imperial court, where he was given the title of Han.

古文：淮、海之君，卑辞厚贡，湖湘、荆楚，杭越、瓯闽，异货奇珍，府无虚月。
现代文：淮、海之君，言辞谦卑贡礼厚重，湖湘、荆楚、杭越、瓯闽，奇珍异宝，无月不送到朝廷府库。
English: Huai and Haizokun, the words of humility and tribute are heavy, and Hunan, Jingchu, Hangyue, and Handan are rare treasures, and they will never be sent to the imperial treasury.

古文：吾皇以德怀来，以威款附。
现代文：我们皇帝以道德使四方归附，以威力使四方顺服。
English: We emperors use morality to win the adherence of the four parties, and use power to make the four parties obey.

古文：顺则涵之以恩泽，逆则问之以干戈，四海车书，大同非晚。 
现代文：如顺服就以恩泽对待，如叛逆就以干戈讨伐。四海之内车同轨、书同文的大统一时代不会太远了。 
English: If you are obedient, you will be treated with grace, if you are rebellious, you will be beaten with clubs. The era of great unification in which the four seas are on the same track and the same book is written will not be too far away.

古文：光嗣曰： 余所未知，惟岐下宋公，我之姻好，洞见其心，反覆多端，专谋跋扈，大不足信也。
现代文：宋光嗣说： 我还不知道这些，只有岐下宋公是我的姻亲，我很了解他，反复无常，专横跋扈，十分不可相信。
English: Song Guangzhi said, "I still don't know all of this. Only Song Gong of Qixia is my relative by marriage. I know him very well. He is capricious, domineering, and very hard to believe.

古文：似闻契丹部族，近日稍强，大国可无虑乎？ 
现代文：好像听说契丹部族，近来稍稍强盛，贵国对此会不会担心呢？ 
English: I seem to have heard that the Khitan tribe has recently become a little more powerful. Is your country worried about this?

古文：严曰： 子言契丹之强盛，孰若伪梁？ 
现代文：李严说： 您说契丹的强盛，和伪梁相比怎么样？ 
English: Li Yan said: How do you compare the prosperity of Khitan with that of pseudo-Liang?

古文：曰： 比梁差劣也。 
现代文：宋光嗣说： 和梁比就差多了。 
English: Song Guangzhi said: It is much worse than Liangbi.

古文：严曰： 吾国视契丹如蚤虱耳，以其无害，不足爬搔。
现代文：李严说 ：我国把契丹看作跳蚤虱子一般，因它没多大伤害，用不着抓搔。
English: Li Yan said: China regards Qidan as a flea louse, because it does not do much harm and does not need to be caught.

古文：吾良将劲兵布天下，彼不劳一郡之兵，一校之众，则悬首槀街，尽为奴掳。
现代文：我们的良将强兵布满天下，对付他们不用动一郡之兵、一校之众，就能在街上挂上他们的头，全部俘虏过来。
English: Our good generals and strong soldiers have spread all over the world. To deal with them, we don't need to move a county's soldiers or a school's people, we can hang their heads in the street and capture them all.

古文：但以天生四夷，当置度外，不在九州之本，未欲穷兵黩武也。 
现代文：但是天下既然有四方夷族，就应置之度外，不在九州的本土上，所以不想穷兵黩武讨伐他们。 
English: However, since there are Shifang barbarians in the world, it should be put aside, not on the mainland of Kyushu, so I don't want to fight them.

古文：光嗣闻辩对，畏而奇之。
现代文：宋光嗣听了这番话，对他又畏惧又佩服。
English: When Song Guangzhi heard these words, he both feared and admired him.

古文：时王衍失政，严知其可取，使还具奏，故平蜀之谋，始于严。
现代文：这时王衍政事混乱，李严知道蜀地可以攻取，出使回朝后详细报告情况，所以说平定蜀地的计划是从李严开始的。
English: At this time, Wang Yan's political affairs were in disarray. Li Yan knew that Shu could be conquered, and sent an envoy back to the court to report the situation in detail. Therefore, the plan to pacify Shu began with Li Yan.

古文：郭崇韬起军之日，以严为三川招抚使，严与先锋使康延孝将兵五千，先驱阁道，或驰以词说，或威以兵锋，大军未及，所在降下。
现代文：郭崇韬发兵那天，任李严为三川招抚使，李严与先锋使康延孝带五千士兵，率先走上阁道，有时用书信传告，有时用军威胁迫，大军还没到，沿途已有很多地方投降。
English: On the day of Guo Chongyi's dispatch of troops, Li Yan was appointed as Mikawa's envoy, Li Yan and the vanguard sent Kang Yanxiao with five thousand soldiers, and they took the lead in marching to the pavilion road. Sometimes they used letters to announce, sometimes they used military threats to force. The large army had not yet arrived, and many places along the way had already surrendered.

古文：延孝在汉州，王衍与书曰： 可请李司空先来，余即举城纳款。 
现代文：康延孝在汉州，王衍写信给他说 ：可以请李司空先来，我会立即献城。 
English: When Kang Yanxiao was in Hanzhou, Wang Yan wrote to him, "You can ask Li Siku to come first, and I will immediately surrender the city."

古文：众咸以讨蜀之谋始于严，衍以甘言，将诱而杀之，欲不令往。
现代文：大家都认为讨伐蜀地的计划是由李严提出，王衍一定是用好话诱使李严去然后杀他，劝他不要去。
English: Everyone thought that the plan to invade Shu was proposed by Li Yan. Wang Yan must have used kind words to entice Li Yan to go and then kill him to persuade him not to go.

古文：严闻之喜，即驰骑入益州，衍见严于母前，以母、妻为托。
现代文：李严听了后却很高兴，立即骑马入益州，王衍在他母亲跟前会见李严，把母亲、妻子托付给李严。
English: After listening to Li Yan, he was very happy. He immediately rode into Yizhou. Wang Yan met Li Yan in front of his mother and entrusted his mother and wife to Li Yan.

古文：即日，引蜀使欧阳彬迎谒魏王继岌。
现代文：这一天，李严领着蜀国使者欧阳彬迎见魏王李继岌。
English: On this day, Li Yan led the Shu emissary Ouyang Bin to meet the Wei king Li Jizhe.

古文：蜀平班师，会明宗即位，迁泗州防御使兼客省使。
现代文：蜀地平定后回师，遇上明宗即位，任李严为泗州防御使兼客省使。
English: When the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Li Yan was appointed as the defense envoy of Zhangzhou and the guest provincial envoy.

古文：长兴初，安重诲谋欲控制两川，严乃求为西川兵马都监，庶效方略。
现代文：长兴初年，安重诲谋划想控制东西两川，李严便请求任西川兵马都监，以便为实施谋略先做准备。
English: In the first year of Changxing, An Chongzhen's plan to control the east and west of the two rivers was successful, and Li Yan requested to be appointed as the military governor of the West River in order to prepare for the implementation of the plan.

古文：孟知祥觉之，既至，执而害之。
现代文：孟知祥察觉出来了，李严刚到，就被抓住杀害了。
English: Meng Zhixiang noticed that Li Yan had just arrived when he was caught and killed.

古文：赠太保。
现代文：朝廷追赠为太保。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the title of Taiho.

古文：严之母，贤明妇人。
现代文：李严的母亲是个贤明的妇女。
English: Li Yan's mother was a wise woman.

古文：初，严将赴蜀，母曰： 汝前启破蜀之谋，今又入蜀，将死报蜀人矣！
现代文：起初，李严将要去蜀地，母亲说 ：你以前提出灭蜀的计划，今天又要去蜀地，将会以死报应蜀人呀！
English: At first, Li Yan was going to go to Shudi. His mother said, "You proposed a plan to destroy Shudi before, and today you are going to Shudi. You will repay the people of Shudi with your death!"

古文：与汝永诀。 
现代文：这次要和你永别了。 
English: This time it's goodbye forever.

古文：既而果如其言。
现代文：不久果然被她说中。
English: She was soon smitten.

