古文：朱瑞，字元龙，代郡桑干人。
现代文：朱瑞，字元龙，代郡桑乾人。
English: Zhu Rui, Zi Yuanlong, and the deputy county head, Sang Kianren.

古文：祖就，字祖成，卒于沛县令。
现代文：祖朱就，字祖成，卒于沛县令。
English: Zu Zhu Rong, also known as Zu Cheng, died in Peixian County.

古文：父惠，字僧生，行太原太守，卒。
现代文：父朱惠，字僧生，行太原太守，卒于任上。
English: His father, Zhu Hui, a monk, became the Taiyuan governor-general, but died in office.

古文：永安中，瑞贵达，就赠平东将军、齐州刺史，惠赠使持节、冠军将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：永安年间，朱瑞贵达，朱就被赠为平东将军、齐州刺史，朱惠赠使持节、冠军将军、恒州刺史。
English: During the Yong'an era, Zhu Rui was awarded the title of General of Pingdong Province, the title of General of Qizhou Province, and Zhu Hui was awarded the title of General of Champion, the title of General of Champion, and the title of General of Hengzhou Province.

古文：瑞长厚质直，敬爱人士。
现代文：朱瑞厚道质朴正直，敬爱人士。
English: Zhu Rui is kind, simple and honest, and is a beloved person.

古文：孝昌末，尔朱荣引为其府户曹参军，又为大行台郎中，甚为荣所亲任。
现代文：孝昌末年，尔朱荣引荐他为其府户曹参军，又任大行台郎中，很是被尔朱荣所亲近信任。
English: In the last years of Xiaochang's life, he was recommended by Er Zhurong to join the army of his prefectural family Cao, and he was also a member of the Taihang Taira clan. He was very close to and trusted by Er Zhurong.

古文：建义初，除黄门侍郎，仍中书舍人。
现代文：建义初年，除任黄门侍郎，仍为中书舍人。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, in addition to serving as a Yellow Gate attendant, he was still a junior high school student.

古文：荣恐朝廷事意有所不知，故居之门下，为腹心之寄。
现代文：尔朱荣担心朝廷的事情他有所不知，所以让朱瑞居门下省职，作为他的心腹安插朝廷。
English: Le Zhu Rong was worried that he didn't know anything about the imperial court, so he let Zhu Rui serve as his subordinate and installed him as his confidant.

古文：录前后勋，封阳邑县开国公，食邑一千户。
现代文：朝廷录朱瑞前后所立功勋，封为阴邑县开国公，食邑一千户。
English: The Imperial Court recorded the merits established by Zhu Rui before and after, and he was named the founding father of Yin County, with more than a thousand households in the county.

古文：未几，又除散骑常侍、安南将军，黄门如故。
现代文：没多久，又除授散骑常侍、安南将军，黄门职仍旧。
English: Not long after, in addition to conferring the Distinguished Cavalryman, General Annan, Huangmen still remains.

古文：丁父忧，去官。
现代文：服父丧，去官。
English: After his father's death, he left the government.

古文：诏起复任，除青州大中正，及元颢内逼，瑞启劝北幸，乃从驾于河阳，除侍中、征南将军、兼吏部尚书，改封北海郡开国公，增邑一千户。
现代文：诏书征起复任，除授青州大中正。等到元颢内逼，朱瑞劝皇上北逃，于是从驾河阳，除授侍中、征南将军，兼任吏部尚书，改封北海郡开国公，增加食邑一千户。
English: Zhu Rui persuaded the emperor to flee to the north when he was forced to do so by the Yuan Dynasty. Therefore, he went to Heyang, and in addition to conferring the title of "Junior Chamberlain" and "Southern General," he also held the title of "Senior Clerk" and was awarded the title of "Founder of the State" of Beihai County, increasing the number of households by one thousand.

古文：庄帝还洛，加卫将军、左光禄大夫，又改封乐陵郡开国公，仍侍中。
现代文：庄帝还归洛阳，加授卫将军、左光禄大夫，又改封乐陵郡开国公，仍为侍中。
English: Emperor Zhuang also returned to Luoyang, was awarded the title of General of the Imperial Guards and Doctor of the Left Hand, and was also given the title of the founding father of Leling County. He was still an attendant.

古文：瑞虽为尔朱荣所委，而善处朝廷之间，庄帝亦赏遇之，曾谓侍臣曰： 为人臣当须忠实，至如朱元龙者，朕待之亦不异余人。 
现代文：朱瑞虽然被尔朱荣所委托，但他善于处理各种关系，庄帝也很赏识优待他，庄帝曾经对侍臣说： 作为人臣应当忠实，至如朱元龙，朕对待他不比别人差。 
English: Although Zhu Rui was entrusted by Zhu Rong, he was good at handling all kinds of relationships. Zhuangdi also appreciated and treated him well. Zhuangdi once said to his vassal: As a vassal, you should be faithful, so like Zhu Yuanlong, I treat him no worse than others.

古文：瑞启乞三从之内并属沧州乐陵郡，诏许之，仍转沧州大中正。
现代文：朱瑞启奏请求三从之内都属沧州乐陵郡所有，帝诏同意他的请求。仍转沧州大中正。
English: Zhu Rui requested that the three schools be transferred to Cangzhou Leling County, and the emperor agreed to his request. He still transferred to Cangzhou Da Zhongzheng.

古文：瑞始以青州乐陵有朱氏，意欲归之，故求为青州中正；又以沧州乐陵亦有朱氏，而心好河北，遂乞移属焉。
现代文：朱瑞开始以青州乐陵有朱氏，便想投靠他，所以请求任青州中正；又因沧州乐陵郡也有朱氏，而朱瑞心好河北，于是请求移任沧州。
English: Zhu Rui began to think that there was a Zhu clan in Leling County, Qingzhou, and he wanted to join him, so he asked to be appointed as the Vice-governor of Qingzhou; and because there was also a Zhu clan in Leling County, Cangzhou, and Zhu Rui was fond of Hebei, he asked to be transferred to Cangzhou.

古文：寻加车骑将军。
现代文：不久朝廷加授车骑将军。
English: Soon after, the imperial court gave him the rank of chariot and cavalry general.

古文：尔朱荣死，瑞与世隆俱北走。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，朱瑞与尔朱世隆都北逃而去。
English: After the death of Lr Zhu Rong, Zhu Rui and Lr Zhu Shilong both fled north.

古文：既而以庄帝待之素厚，且见世隆等并无雄才，终当败丧，于路乃还。
现代文：既而因庄帝待他一向很好，而且见尔朱世隆等人都无雄才大略，终当败丧，走到半路又回来了。
English: Not only because Emperor Zhuang had always treated him well, but also because he saw that Zhu Shilong and others had no great talent, he was eventually defeated and came back halfway.

古文：帝大悦，执其手曰： 社稷忠臣，当须如此。 
现代文：庄帝大为高兴，拉着他的手说： 社稷忠臣，就应当这样。 
English: Zhuang Di was very happy and took him by the hand and said, "This is how it should be, loyal servant of the society."

古文：累迁中军将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：尔朱天光拥众关右，皇帝想招纳他，于是以朱瑞兼任尚书左仆射为西道大行台前去慰劳。
English: Zhu Tianguang's supporters were on the right, and the emperor wanted to recruit him, so Zhu Rui, who also served as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, went to the West Road Grand Canal to console them.

古文：与瑞同遇害。
现代文：朱瑞既到长安，正逢尔朱兆入洛，又还归京师。
English: Zhu Rui arrived in Chang'an, just as Zhu Zhao entered Luo, and also returned to Beijing.

古文：太昌初，赠沧州刺史。
现代文：都督斛斯椿先与朱瑞有隔阂，屡屡在尔朱世隆面前说他坏话。
English: The local governor, 斯椿先, had a rift with Zhu Rui, repeatedly bad-mouthing him in front of 爾朱世隆.

古文：腾弟庆宾，卒于光禄大夫。子清，武定末，齐王开府中兵参军。
现代文：尔朱世隆天性多疑，而且因朱瑞先前违逆于他，更加忿恨，普泰元年七月，把他杀了，时年四十九岁。
English: In July of the first year of Putai, when he was forty-nine years old, he killed Zhu Shilong, who was suspicious by nature and was even more angry because Zhu Rui had previously disobeyed him.

古文：叱列延庆，代西部人也，世为酋帅。
现代文：太昌初年，朝廷赠他为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史，谥称恭穆。叱列延庆，代州西部人，祖上世世为酋帅。
English: In the first year of Taichang, the imperial court presented him with the Festival of Envoys, the Horse-riding General, the Kaifu Rites and the Three Departments, and the History of Qingzhou, nicknamed "Gongmu." He was from Yanqing in the western part of Daizhou, and his ancestor was a chieftain.

古文：曾祖鍮石，世祖末从驾至瓜步，赐爵临江伯。
现代文：曾祖叱列石，世祖末年跟随帝驾到瓜步，赐爵临江伯。
English: Zengzu scolded the row of stones, the last years of his life he followed the emperor to Guapu, and was given the title of Linjiang Bo.

古文：父亿弥，袭祖爵，高祖时越骑校尉。
现代文：父叱列亿弥，袭承祖爵，高祖时为越骑校尉。
English: His father was a millionaire, inheriting the ancestral title, and Gao Zu was a Vietcong cavalry captain.

古文：延庆少便弓马，有胆力。
现代文：延庆少年时即娴熟弓马，有胆力。
English: As a young boy in Yanqing, he was good at archery and horsemanship, and had courage.

古文：正光末，除直后，隶大都督李崇北伐。
现代文：正光末年，除授直后，隶从大都督李崇北伐。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, after he was stripped of his title, he joined the Northern Expedition under the command of the Grand Duke Li Chong.

古文：后随尔朱荣入洛，仍从荣讨葛荣于相州。
现代文：后来随尔朱荣入洛，又跟随尔朱荣到相州讨伐葛荣。
English: Later, he followed Er Zhu Rong to Luo, and followed Er Zhu Rong to Sangzhou to fight Ge Rong.

古文：延庆，世隆姊婿也，荣亲遇之。
现代文：延庆，是尔朱世隆姐姐的丈夫，尔朱荣很亲近地对待他。
English: Yanqing is the husband of Er Zhu Shilong's sister, and Er Zhu Rong is very close to him.

古文：葛荣既擒，除使持节、抚军将军、光禄大夫、假镇东将军、都督、西部第一领民酋长，封永宁县开国伯，食邑五百户。
现代文：葛荣被擒之后，朝廷除授他为使持节、抚军将军、光禄大夫、假镇东将军、都督、西部第一领民酋长，封永宁县开国伯，食邑五百户。
English: After Ge Rong was arrested, the imperial court awarded him the titles of envoy, general of the army, doctor of Guanglu, general of Fuzhen East, governor of the capital, chief of the first territorial people in the west, founding prefect of Yongning County, and 500 households in food villages.

古文：永安二年，以本将军除恆州刺史。
现代文：永安二年，以本将军除授恒州刺史。
English: In the second year of Yong'an, this general was awarded the title of "Hengzhou History."

古文：普泰初，世隆得志，特见委重，迁散骑常侍、车骑将军、仪同三司，又进骠骑大将军、开府，余如故。
现代文：普泰初年，尔朱世隆得志，特别委以重任，迁任他为散骑常侍、车骑将军、仪同三司，又进骠骑大将军、开府，其余官职仍旧。
English: In the first year of Putai, Er Shilong De Zhi was specially appointed to a very important position. He was transferred to the position of strolling equerry, chariot and cavalry general, and the three departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies. He was also promoted to the position of cavalry general and the head of the provincial government. The rest of his official positions remained the same.

古文：寻除都督恆云燕朔四州诸军事、大都督、兼尚书左仆射、山东行台，北海郡开国公，邑五百户。
现代文：不久又除授都督恒、云、燕、朔四州诸军事，大都督，兼尚书左仆射，太行山东行台，北海郡开国公，食邑五百户。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of military governor of the four states of Heng, Yun, Yan and Shuo, the title of grand governor, and the titles of Shang, Shizuo, Zuo, Taihang, Shandong, Xingtai, Beihai County, and 500 households of food villages.

古文：时幽州刺史刘灵助以庄帝幽崩，遂举兵唱义，诸州豪右咸相结附。
现代文：当时，幽州刺史刘灵助因庄帝幽崩，于是举兵倡义，诸州豪右都竞相巴结附迎。
English: At that time, Liu Lingsu, a statesman from Yuzhou, proposed to raise an army because Emperor Zhuang was dead, and all the states rushed to support him.

古文：灵助进屯于定州之安固。世隆白前废帝，以延庆与大都督侯渊于定州相会，以讨灵助。
现代文：刘灵助进军屯驻定州的安固，尔朱世隆报告了前废帝，让延庆与大都侯渊在定州会师，以讨伐刘灵助。
English: Liu Lingzu marched into Anggu, which was stationed in Dingzhou, and Zhu Shilong reported to the former deposed emperor that Yanqing and the great capital Houyuan should join forces in Dingzhou to fight against Liu Lingzu.

古文：渊谓延庆曰： 灵助善于卜占，百姓信惑，所在响应，未易可图，若万一战有利钝，则大事去矣。
现代文：侯渊对延庆说： 灵助善于卜算，百姓都被他们迷惑，纷纷响应，不易图取，假如万一战斗失利，大势就去了。
English: Houyuan said to Yanqing: Lingzuo is good at divination, the people are all confused by them, they respond one after another, it is not easy to win, if the battle is lost, the general trend will go.

古文：未若还师西入，据关拒险，以待其变。 
现代文：不如还师西入，据关凭险，以待其变。 
English: It would be better to return the division to the west, according to the customs certificate, and wait for it to change.

古文：延庆曰： 刘灵助，庸人也。
现代文：延庆说： 刘灵助，常人也。
English: Yanqing said, "Liu Lingsu is also an ordinary person.

古文：天道深远，岂其所识？
现代文：天道深远，哪是他所能认识的？
English: Heaven's path is far-reaching, what can he know?

古文：大兵一临，彼皆恃其妖术，坐看符厌，宁肯戮力致死，与吾争胜负哉。
现代文：大兵一到，他们都依靠其妖术，坐看符验，哪肯戮力拚死一战，与我们争胜负呢？
English: As soon as the soldiers arrive, they all rely on their magic and sit and watch the test. Who will fight to the death to win the battle with us?

古文：如吾计者，政欲出营城外，诡言西归，灵助闻之，必信而自宽，潜军往袭，可一往而擒。 
现代文：依我之计，正要出城池之外，诡称西归，刘灵助听说，必然信了且会放松警惕，我军偷偷前去偷袭，便可一举擒获他们。 
English: According to my plan, just as we were about to leave the city, Liu Lingzhu heard that our troops were going to sneak out of the city and call themselves the West Returners. Liu Lingzhu must have believed it and relaxed his vigilance. If our troops sneaked out and attacked, they could capture them in one fell swoop.

古文：渊从之，乃出顿城西，声云将还。
现代文：侯渊听从了他的意见，于是出军驻扎城西，声称准备回军。
English: Houyuan listened to his advice, so he went out and stationed in the west of the city, claiming that he was preparing to return to the army.

古文：简精骑一千夜发，诘朝造灵助垒，战于城北，遂破擒之。
现代文：选择精干骑兵一千人乘夜出发，一大早赶到刘灵助营垒边，战于城北，于是打败擒获了他们。
English: He chose a thousand elite cavalrymen and set out at night. Early in the morning, they arrived at Liu Ling's camp, fought in the north of the city, and defeated and captured them.

古文：仍兼尚书左仆射，为恆云燕朔四州行台。
现代文：仍兼尚书左仆射，为恒、云、燕、朔四州行台。
English: He is still a scholar and a left-handed archer, and plays the four states of Heng, Yun, Yan, and Shuo.

古文：又除使持节、侍中、都督恆云燕朔定五州诸军事、定州刺史，余如故。
现代文：又除授使持节，侍中，都督恒、云、燕、朔、定五州诸军事，定州刺史，其余官职仍旧。
English: In addition to conferring the title of Jizhi, the five military provinces of Dandong, Yunnan, Yan, Shuang, and Dingzhou, as well as the remaining official posts remain unchanged.

古文：与尔朱兆等拒义旗于韩陵，战败，延庆与尔朱仲远走渡石济。
现代文：又与尔朱兆等人在韩陵迎战义军，战败，延庆与尔朱仲远逃渡石济。
English: In addition, together with Er Zhu Zhao and others, they fought against the rebels in Hanling and were defeated. Yanqing and Er Zhu Zhongyuan fled to Shijie.

古文：延庆兄子平，武定末，仪同三司、右卫将军、廮陶县开国侯。
现代文：仲远南窜，延庆北降齐献武王。王与他一起入洛阳，又跟从王到并州。后赴洛阳，出帝任命他为中军大都督。
English: Zhongyuan went to Nan'an, Yanqing went to the north to offer tribute to King Wu. Wang went with him to Luoyang, and then followed Wang to Bianzhou. Later, he went to Luoyang, and when he became emperor, he was appointed as the Grand Governor of the Chinese Army.

古文：斛斯椿，字法寿，广牧富昌人也。
现代文：延庆既是尔朱亲昵之人，又党附权佞之人，出帝西逃，齐献武王入洛阳，以罪诛杀了他。斛斯椿，字法寿，广牧富昌人。
English: 斯椿,字法寿,广牧富昌人.

古文：父敦，肃宗时为左牧令，时河西贼起，牧民不安，椿乃将家投尔朱荣，荣以椿兼其都督府铠曹参军。
现代文：父亲斛斯敦，肃宗时任左牧令。当时黄河以西敌人叛乱，牧民惶恐不安，斛斯椿于是率领家人投奔尔朱荣，尔朱荣任命他为其都督府铠曹参军。
English: At that time, the enemy rebelled west of the Yellow River, and the herdsmen were frightened and uneasy. So, Su Shiqin led his family members to join Bener Zhu Rong, who appointed him to join the army of his governor-general, Su Cao.

古文：从荣征伐有功，表授厉威将军。
现代文：斛斯春跟随尔朱荣征战有功，尔朱荣上表皇帝命他为厉威将军。
English: Gongsuchun followed Lzhu Rong in the war and achieved great success. Lzhu Rong was appointed by the emperor to be the general of Liwei.

古文：稍迁中散大夫，署外兵事。
现代文：后迁升中散大夫，代理对外战事。
English: Later, he was promoted to Dr. Zhongshan, acting for foreign affairs.

古文：椿性佞巧，甚得荣心，军之密谋，颇亦关预。
现代文：斛斯椿性情谄佞乖巧，很得尔朱荣的欢心，荣军中密谋，椿经常参与。
English: He is good-natured, enjoys Zhu Rong's favor, keeps military secrets, and often participates in negotiations.

古文：及肃宗崩，椿从荣入洛。
现代文：等到肃宗逝世，斛斯椿跟随尔朱荣来到洛阳。
English: After Su Zong's death, Gao Shizhun followed Le Zhu Rong to Luoyang.

古文：庄帝初，封阳曲县开国公，食邑千户，迁散骑常侍、平北将军司马，寻除尔朱荣大将军府司马。
现代文：庄帝初年，封为阳曲县开国公，食邑一千户，迁任散骑常侍、平北将军司马，不久升任尔朱荣大将军府司马。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was given the title of the founding father of Yangqu County, with a thousand households in the food village, and was transferred to the position of straggler, the general of the North, and soon he was promoted to the general of the Zhu Rong.

古文：从平葛荣，以功除上党太守。
现代文：随荣平定葛荣之乱，因功升任上党太守。
English: With Rong's success in quelling the Ge Rong Rebellion, he was promoted to the post of the party's supreme commander.

古文：及元颢入洛，椿随荣奉迎庄帝，遂从攻颢。
现代文：等到元颢到洛阳，斛斯椿随从尔朱荣奉迎庄帝，便跟随攻打元颢。
English: When Yuan Shao arrived in Luoyang, Jiu Shizhong followed Zhu Rongbong to meet Zhuangdi, and then followed him to attack Yuan Shao.

古文：颢败，迁安北将军、建州刺史，改封深泽县，转镇东将军、徐州刺史，又转征东将军、东徐州刺史。
现代文：元颢失败，升任安北将军、建州刺史，改封深泽县，转任镇东将军、徐州刺史，又转为征东将军、东徐州刺史。
English: After the failure of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Anbei General, Jianzhou Chief Historian, transferred to Shenze County, transferred to Zhendong General, Xuzhou Chief Historian, and transferred to Zhengdong General, Dongxuzhou Chief Historian.

古文：及尔朱荣死，椿甚忧惧。
现代文：等到尔朱荣死，斛斯春十分忧闷惧怕。
English: After Er Zhu Rong's death, Gong Shichun was very sad and afraid.

古文：时萧衍以汝南王悦为魏主，资其士马，次于境上。
现代文：当时萧衍以汝南王元悦为魏主，资助他士卒马匹，进驻魏国边境。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan took Runan King Yuan Yue as the ruler of Wei, funded his soldiers and horses, and stationed them at the border of Wei.

古文：椿闻大喜，遂率所部弃州归悦，悦授椿使持节、侍中、大将军、领军将军、领左右、尚书左仆射、司空公，封灵丘郡开国公，邑万户，又为大行台前驱都督。
现代文：斛斯椿听说，大为高兴，便率领部下放弃州城，归顺元悦，元悦授他为使持节、侍中、大将军、领军将军、领左右、尚书左仆射、司空公，封灵丘郡开国公，食邑一万户，又任大行台前驱都督。
English: Hearing of this, Gong Shizhun was very happy and led his subordinates to abandon the state capital and surrender to Shun Yuan Yue. Yuan Yue awarded him the titles of envoy, chamberlain, general, general leading the army, leader of the left and right, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the right, official of the left, official of the right

古文：会尔朱兆入洛，椿复率所部背悦归兆。
现代文：正逢尔朱兆到洛阳，斛斯椿又率领部属背悦归兆。
English: Just as Er Zhu Zhao arrived in Luoyang, Zou Shizhong led his troops to the scene of the battle.

古文：尔朱世隆之立前废帝也，椿参其谋，以定策功，拜侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、京畿北面大都督，改封城阳郡开国公，增邑五百户，并前一千五百户，寻加开府。
现代文：尔朱世隆拥立前废帝，斛斯椿参与此事，因决策之功，朝廷拜他为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、京畿北面大都督，改封城阳郡开国公，增加食邑五百户，加上前面所封一共一千五百户，不久加授开府，当时斛斯椿父亲敦先在秀容，忽然有传闻说敦已死了。
English: Zhu Shilong supported the establishment of the former deposed emperor, and Gong Shizhong participated in this matter. Due to his decision-making achievements, the imperial court worshiped him as the chamberlain, the cavalry general, the three departments of etiquette, and the grand governor of the northern part of Gyeonggi Province. He was awarded the title of the founding father of Seongyang County, increased the number of 500 households, and added a total of 1,500 households previously awarded. Soon, he was awarded the title of Kaifu. At that time, Gong Shizhong's father, Dong Shizhong, was first in show. Suddenly, there was a rumor

古文：时椿父敦先在秀容，忽有传敦死问，请减己阶以赠之，自襄城将军超赠车骑将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：斛斯椿请求朝廷减低自己官阶以赠其父，于是朝廷自襄威将军超阶赠予斛斯敦车骑将军、恒州刺史。
English: Gong Shizhun requested the imperial court to reduce his official rank to give his father a higher one, so the imperial court gave the superior rank from General Xiang Wei to General Xystun and General Hengzhou.

古文：寻知其父犹在，诏复椿官，仍除其父为车骑将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：不久又获悉他的父亲仍然健在，皇帝下诏复椿官爵，又除授其父为车骑将军、扬州刺史。
English: Soon after, he learned that his father was still alive, and the emperor issued an edict to reinstate him as a peer, and conferred the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry on his father, Yangzhou Jishi.

古文：世隆之厚椿也如此。
现代文：世隆厚待斛斯椿由此可见。
English: The world's high regard for 斯椿 can be seen from this.

古文：椿与尔朱度律、仲远等北拒齐献武王，次阳平。
现代文：斛斯椿与尔朱度律、仲达等人率军北抵齐献武王，驻军阳平。
English: The northern army, led by Ye Shizhun, Er Zhu Duru, Zhongda and others, arrived in the north to pay homage to King Wu, and the Yangping garrison followed.

古文：会尔朱兆与度律等相疑，遁还，语在《兆传》。
现代文：正逢尔朱兆与度律等人相互猜疑，逃回来了，语在《尔朱兆传》中。
English: It was at this time that Er Shuzhao and Doru suspected each other and fled back, as recounted in "Er Shuzhao's Biography."

古文：椿后复与度律等同拒义旗，败于韩陵。
现代文：斛斯椿后又与尔朱度律等同抗义军，败于韩陵。
English: Later, he and Lzhu Dulu fought against the rebels and were defeated by Han Ling.

古文：椿谓都督贾显智等曰： 若不先执尔朱，我等死无类矣。 
现代文：斛斯椿对都督贾显智等人说： 如不先杀尔朱，我等死无类了。 
English: Gao Shizhun said to the governor Jia Xianzhi and others, "If we don't kill Er Zhu first, there will be no way for us to survive.

古文：遂与显智等夜于桑下盟约，倍道兼行。
现代文：于是与显智等人夜晚在桑树之下结盟，日夜兼行。
English: He then made a pact with Jia Xianzhi and others under a mulberry tree in the evening, and marched into Luoyang.

古文：椿入北中城，收尔朱部曲尽杀之，令长孙稚、贾显智等率数百骑袭尔朱世隆、彦伯兄弟，斩于阊阖门外。
现代文：斛斯椿进入北中城，收捕尔朱部属尽数斩杀，命令长孙稚、贾显智等率领数百名骑兵袭击尔朱世隆、尔朱彦伯兄弟，斩于阊阖门外。
English: Gong Shizhun entered the north-central city, arrested and killed as many as possible of the Zhu clan, and ordered the eldest grandson, Jia Xianzhi, and others to lead hundreds of cavalry to attack the brothers of Zhu Shilong and Zhu Yanbo, and behead them outside the city gate.

古文：椿入洛，悬世隆兄弟首于其门树。
现代文：斛斯椿入洛阳，把尔朱世隆兄弟的头颅挂在自家门前的树上。
English: He went to Luoyang and hung the heads of the Zhu Shilong brothers on a tree in front of his house.

古文：椿父出见，谓椿曰： 汝与尔朱约为兄弟，今何忍悬其头于家门，宁不愧负天地乎！ 
现代文：他的父亲出门看见了，对斛斯椿说： 你与尔朱拜为兄弟，今天怎么能忍心把他的头挂在自家门口，你这样做难道不感到愧对天地吗？ 
English: When his father saw him leaving the house, he said to the donkey, "You are brothers with Jeroboam. How can you bear to hang his head on the doorstep of your house today? Don't you feel ashamed before heaven and earth?

古文：椿乃传世隆等首，并囚度律、天光，送于齐献武王。
现代文：斛斯椿于是把世隆的头，加上被囚禁的尔朱度律、尔朱天光，一起送到齐献武王那里。
English: Therefore, Ye Shizhun sent Shilong's head to King Qi Xianwu, together with the heads of the imprisoned Er Zhu Duru and Er Zhu Tianguang.

古文：出帝拜椿侍中、仪同开府。
现代文：出帝拜授斛斯椿侍中、仪同开府。
English: In the middle of the imperial ceremony to confer the title of "Lady of the Camellia," the ceremony to open the palace began.

古文：初，献武王之入洛，顿于邙山，尔朱仲远帐下都督桥宁、张子期自滑台而至。
现代文：当初，献武王到洛阳途中，在祁山停留，尔朱仲远军中都督桥宁、张子期从滑台前来。
English: At first, King Xianwu stopped at Shaoshan on his way to Luoyang, and Zhu Zhongyuan's generals Qiaoning and Zhang Ziqi came from the slide.

古文：献武王责宁等曰： 汝事仲远，擅其荣利，盟契百重，许同生死。
现代文：献武王责备桥宁等人说： 你们侍奉仲远，享受荣利，与他盟誓百重，同生共死。
English: King Xianwu scolded Qiao Ning and the others, saying, "You have served each other for a long time, enjoyed honor and profit, made a solemn oath with him, and lived and died together.

古文：前仲远自徐为逆，汝为戎首，今仲远南走，汝复背之。
现代文：从前仲远在徐叛逆，你们同为贼首，而今仲远南逃，你们又背叛他。
English: Once upon a time, Chuan Yuan rebelled against Xu, and you two were the ringleaders. But now Chuan Yuan has fled south, and you have betrayed him.

古文：于臣节则不忠，论事人则无信。
现代文：于臣节则不忠，论事人则无信。
English: On the day of the vassal, he is disloyal, on the day of the critic, he is untrustworthy.

古文：犬马尚识恩养，汝今犬马之不如！ 
现代文：犬马还识恩养，你们今天连犬马都不如！ 
English: Dogs and horses still know how to be grateful. Today, you are not even as good as dogs and horses!

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：于是斩杀。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：椿自以数为反覆，见宁等之死，意常不安。
现代文：斛斯椿觉得自己屡次反复，看见桥宁等人死去，心中常常不安。
English: Gong Shizhun felt that he was repeatedly seeing the death of Xiaoning and others, and was often uneasy in his heart.

古文：遂密构间，劝出帝置阁内都督部曲，又增武直人数，自直阁已下员别数百，皆选天下轻剽者以充之。
现代文：便秘密地谋划，劝说出帝设置门合内都督部曲，又增加禁卫军人数，自直门合以下，增员数百，皆选拔天下勇健剽悍者充任。
English: They plotted in secret, persuading the emperor to set up a governor's office in the inner gate, and increasing the number of guards, from the straight gate to the following, adding hundreds of members, all of whom selected the world's bravest warriors to fill the role.

古文：又说帝数出游幸，号令部曲，别为行陈，椿自约勒，指麾其间。
现代文：又劝说出皇帝屡出游玩，号令部属，演习战阵，斛斯椿亲自发号施令，阵前指挥。
English: They also persuaded him to say that the emperor often went out to play, ordered his subordinates to practice battle formations, and personally issued orders and commanded before the battle.

古文：从此以后，军谋朝政，一决于椿。
现代文：从此以后，军事谋划、政治决策，全都听斛斯椿决策。
English: From then on, military affairs were decided by him.

古文：又劝帝征兵，诡称南讨，将以伐齐献武王，帝从之。
现代文：椿又劝说出帝征兵，欺骗说向南讨伐，实是准备讨伐齐献武王，出帝答应了。
English: Tsubaki also persuaded the emperor to conscript soldiers, deceiving him that he was going to fight in the south, when in fact he was preparing to fight and offer himself to the king, and the emperor agreed.

古文：遂陈兵城西，北接邙山，南至洛水，帝诘旦戎服与椿临阅焉。献武王以椿乱政，欲诛之。
现代文：于是斛斯椿陈兵城西，北接邙山，南到洛水，出帝一大早身着戎装，与斛斯椿一起临军检阅，献武王以斛斯椿扰乱朝政，打算诛杀他。
English: Therefore, Emperor Jingzhuan Chen sent soldiers to the west of the city, to the north of Lushan, and to the south of Luoshui. Early in the morning, dressed in military uniform, he and Emperor Jingzhuan inspected the troops together. Emperor Qianwu used Emperor Jingzhuan to disrupt the government and planned to kill him.

古文：椿谮说既行，因此遂相恐动。
现代文：斛斯椿谎言成真，到这时便蠢蠢欲动。
English: When a lie becomes the truth, it's time to move on.

古文：出帝勒兵河桥，令椿为前军，营于邙山北。
现代文：出帝统兵驻河桥，命令斛斯椿为先头部队，驻扎在邙山北面。
English: The Imperial General Headquarters was stationed in Heqiao, and ordered the Shisqin to be the leading unit, stationed in the north of Lushan.

古文：寻遣椿率步骑数千镇虎牢。
现代文：不久又派斛斯椿率步骑兵数千人镇守虎牢关。
English: Soon after, he sent thousands of infantry and cavalrymen led by Jinshchun to guard the pass.

古文：椿弟豫州刺史元寿与都督贾显智守滑台，献武王令相州刺史窦泰击破之。
现代文：斛斯椿弟弟豫州刺史元寿与都督贾显智镇守滑台，献武王命令相州刺史窦泰攻打击破他们。
English: His younger brother, Yu Zhou stabbed Yuan Shou and the governor, Jia Xianzhi, guarded the slide, and the king ordered Xiang Zhou stabbed Dou Tai to attack and break them.

古文：椿惧己不免，复启出帝，假说游声以劫胁。
现代文：斛斯椿害怕自己难以幸免，又启奏出帝，假说游击以威胁敌人。
English: Gong Shizhun was afraid that he would not be spared, and he played the role of emperor, pretending to be a guerrilla and threatening the enemy.

古文：帝信之，遂入关，椿亦西走长安。
现代文：出帝相信了他的话，于是入关，椿也向西逃往长安。
English: Emperor Dezong believed his words, so he entered the customs, and Tsubaki also fled westward to Chang'an.

古文：椿狡猾多事，好乱乐祸，于时败国，朝野莫不仇疾之。
现代文：斛斯椿狡猾好事，喜乱乐祸，干预时政败坏国家，朝野上下没人不痛恨他。
English: He is cunning and good at things, enjoys chaos and mischief, intervenes in corrupt countries, and no one in or out of power doesn't hate him.

古文：元寿寻为部下所杀。
现代文：斛斯元寿不久被部下所杀。
English: He was soon killed by his subordinates.

古文：贾显度，中山无极人。
现代文：贾显度，中山无极人。
English: Jia visibility, Zhongshan Wuji people.

古文：父道监，沃野镇长史。
现代文：父贾道监，任沃野镇长史。
English: His father, Jia, was the superintendent of roads and the mayor of the town of Wuye.

古文：显度形貌伟壮，有志气。
现代文：显度形貌伟壮，有志气。
English: Visibility, form and appearance are magnificent, and there is ambition.

古文：初为别将，防守薄骨律镇。
现代文：开始为别将，防守薄骨律镇。
English: He started as a second-string defenseman for Shankou Ritsu.

古文：正光末，北镇扰乱，为贼攻围。
现代文：正光末年，北镇边民扰乱，贾显度被敌人所攻围。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, the people of Beizhen were disturbed, and Jia Xindu was besieged by the enemy.

古文：显度拒守多时，以贼势转炽，不可久立，乃率镇民浮河而下。
现代文：贾显度坚守多时，因敌人越来越强大，不可久立，于是率领镇民渡河而下。
English: Jia Xindu persisted for a long time, because the enemy was getting stronger and stronger and could not stand for long, so he led the townspeople to cross the river.

古文：既达秀容，为尔朱荣所留。
现代文：既达秀容，被尔朱荣所留。
English: He had already achieved a handsome appearance, but was left behind by Er Zhu Rong.

古文：寻表授直阁将军、左中郎将。
现代文：不久尔朱荣上表授为直将军、左中郎将。
English: Soon after, Zhu Rong was awarded the title of General Zhi and General Zuochung.

古文：建义初，除汲郡太守，假平东将军。
现代文：建义初年，除授汲郡太守，假平东将军。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, in addition to conferring the title of county governor, the fake Pingdong general emerged.

古文：随尔朱荣破葛荣，又除抚军将军、光禄大夫、都督，封石艾县开国公，邑一千户。
现代文：跟随尔朱荣击破葛荣，又除抚军将军、光禄大夫、都督，封石艾县开国公，食邑一千户。
English: After Er Zhurong defeated Ge Rong, he also removed the general of the Fuzhou army, the doctor of Guanglu, the governor of the capital, the founder of Shiai County, and a thousand households of the food village.

古文：从上党王天穆破邢杲。
现代文：跟随上党元天穆打败邢杲。
English: He followed Tianmu, the founder of the party, to defeat Zou.

古文：值元颢入洛，仍与天穆渡河赴行宫于河内。
现代文：正逢元颢入洛阳，于是就与元天穆渡过黄河奔赴河内行宫。
English: Just as Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, he and Yuan Tianmu crossed the Yellow River and rushed to Hanoi to visit the palace.

古文：颢平，以本将军除广州刺史、假镇南将军，转南兗州刺史。
现代文：元颢被平，他以本将军除广州刺史、假镇南将军，转任南兖州刺史。
English: When Yuan Shao was defeated, he took this general as his successor in addition to the general of Guangzhou and the general of Fuzhen South, and transferred to the general of South Luzhou.

古文：尔朱荣之死也，显度情不自安，南奔萧衍，衍厚待之。
现代文：尔朱荣被处死，贾显度惶恐不安，南奔萧衍，萧衍待他很好。
English: Le Zhu Rong was put to death, Jia Xindu was terrified and anxious, Nanben Xiao Yan, Xiao Yan treated him very well.

古文：普泰初，还朝，授卫大将军、仪同三司、左光禄大夫，又行济州事。
现代文：普泰初年，显度还朝，授卫大将军、仪同三司、左光禄大夫，又行济州事。
English: In the first year of Putai, when he was still a young man, he was awarded the title of General of the Imperial Guard, the title of Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the title of Doctor of the Order of the Eastern Star, and he also went to Jeju.

古文：复随尔朱度律等北拒义旗，败于韩陵，与斛斯椿及弟显智等率众先据河桥，诛尔朱氏。
现代文：又随尔朱度律等北抗义旗，败于韩陵，与斛斯椿及弟显智等率部先占据河桥，诛杀尔朱氏。
English: In addition, following the Northern Anti-Yiqi Banner led by Er Zhu Duru and others, he was defeated by Han Ling, and he and his brother Xian Zhi and others took the lead to occupy Heqiao and kill Er Zhu.

古文：其先荆州蛮酋，被迁于代。父兴，平城镇长史、归义侯。普泰中，子鹄贵显，乃赠征虏将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：出帝初年，除尚书左仆射，不久加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、定州大中正。不久，以本官行徐州刺史、东道大行台。永熙三年五月，转任雍州刺史、西道大行台。死于关中。樊子鹄，代郡平城人。其先人为荆州蛮人酋帅，被迁往代郡。父樊兴，为平城镇长史，归义侯。普泰年间，子鹄显贵，其父被赠为征虏将军、荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of the emperor's enthronement, in addition to Shangshu Zuofu Jiao, he was soon given the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Dingzhou Da Zhongzheng. Soon after, he served as the governor of Xuzhou Jishi and the host of the Grand March. In May of the third year of Yongxi, he was transferred to the position of Yongzhou Jishi and the West Road Jishi. He died in Guanzhong. Zang Zixuan, a resident of Pingcheng, Dai County. His ancestors were the chiefs of the Jingzhou barbarians and were moved to Dai County.

古文：子鹄值北镇扰乱，南至并州，尔朱荣引为都督府仓曹参军。
现代文：樊子鹄在北镇动乱时，南至并州，尔朱荣引荐他为都督府仓曹参军。
English: At the time of the turmoil in the North Town, when the South Town was annexed by the State, Er Zhu Rong recommended him to join the army as the governor of Cang Cao.

古文：孝昌三年冬，荣使子鹄诣京师。
现代文：孝昌三年冬，尔朱荣派子鹄到京城。
English: In the winter of the third year of Xiaochang, Er Zhu Rong sent Zixuan to Beijing.

古文：灵太后见之，问荣兵势，子鹄应对称旨，太后嘉之。
现代文：灵太后接见他，询问尔朱荣兵势，子鹄应对称旨，太后很是嘉许。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling received him, inquired about the military situation of Er Zhu Rong, and praised the son's response. The Empress Dowager was very appreciative.

古文：除直斋，封南和县开国子，邑三百户，令还赴荣。
现代文：除授直斋，封南和县开国子，食邑三百户，令他回到尔朱荣处。
English: In addition to the award of Zhizhai, the opening of the country in Nanhe County and the establishment of three hundred households in the food village made him return to Lezhurong.

古文：荣以为行台郎中，行上党郡。
现代文：尔朱荣任他为行台郎中，行职上党郡。
English: Er Zhu Rong appointed him as a member of the Gangtai Clan, and he became a member of the Gangtai Clan.

古文：及荣向洛，以为假节、假平南将军、都督河东正平军事、行唐州事。
现代文：等到尔朱荣挥军向洛，任他为假节、假平南将军、都督河东正平军事、行唐州事。
English: Wait until Le Zhurong waves the army to Luo, let him be a false festival, a false Pingnan general, the military governor of Hedong Zhengping, and carry out the affairs of Tang Prefecture.

古文：刺史崔元珍闭门拒守，子鹄攻克之。
现代文：刺史崔元珍闭门拒守，樊子鹄攻克下来。
English: Xizhi Cui Yuanzhen closed the door and refused to defend, and Shanzi Yao won the battle.

古文：建义初，拜平北将军、晋州刺史，封永安县开国伯，食邑千户，又兼尚书行台。
现代文：建义初年，拜平北将军、晋州刺史、封永安县开国伯，食邑一千户，又兼尚书行台。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Baiping Beizheng, Jinzhou Zhishi, Feng Yongan County Kai Guobiao, a thousand households in food villages, and Shang Shuyangdai.

古文：治有威信，山胡率服。
现代文：治州有威信，山胡纷纷服治。
English: There is prestige in governing a prefecture, and the mountains and valleys are governed one after another.

古文：元颢入洛，薛修义及降蜀陈双炽等受颢处分，率众攻州城。
现代文：元颢军入洛阳，薛修义及降蜀陈双炽等人受元颢调遣，率领部队攻打州城。
English: Yuan Shao's army entered Luoyang, and Xue Xiuyi and Chen Shuangtao, who had been transferred from Shu, led the troops to attack the state capital.

古文：子鹄出与战，大破之，又破修义等于土门。以功拜抚军将军。
现代文：樊子鹄出城接战，大破敌人，又在土门大败薛修义等。以功拜授抚军将军。
English: Xun Zixuan went out of the city to join the battle, defeated the enemy, and defeated Xue Xiuyi in the mud gate. He was awarded the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：寻征授都官尚书、西荆州大中正。
现代文：不久授都官尚书、西荆州大中正。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Shangshu and became a junior high school teacher at West Jingzhou University.

古文：后兼右仆射，为行台，督贾智等讨吕文欣于东徐州，平之。
现代文：后来兼右仆射，为行台，督领贾智等在东徐州讨伐吕文欣，平定他们。
English: Later, concurrently with his right-hand man Shuai, for Xingtai, the governor Jia Zhi and others fought against Lu Wenxin in East Xuzhou and pacified them.

古文：还，除车骑将军、左光禄大夫，进封南阳郡开国公，增户六百，尚书如故，仍假骠骑大将军，率所部为都督。时尔朱荣在晋阳，京师之事，子鹄颇预委寄，故在台阁，征官不解。
现代文：还朝后，除授车骑将军、左光禄大夫，进封南阳郡开国公，增加食邑六百户，尚书职仍旧，仍假骠骑大将军，率所部为都督，当时尔朱荣在晋阳，京师事情，子鹄参与颇多，故在台，征官不解。
English: Also, after the Ming Dynasty, in addition to the granting of the chariot and cavalry general, Dr. Zuo Guanglu, he entered the founding of Nanyang County, increasing the food villages by 600 households. Although he was still a clerk, he was still a fake cavalry general, and the head of the headquarters was the governor. At that time, Le Zhu Rong was in Jinyang, Beijing Division, and his son was involved in a lot of things. Therefore, he was in Taiwan, and the recruitment was puzzling.

古文：后出除散骑常侍、本将军、殷州刺史。
现代文：后来出除散骑常侍、本将军、殷州刺史。
English: Later, the errant cavalryman, the general, and the Yinzhou assassin were expelled.

古文：属岁旱俭，子鹄恐民流亡，乃勒有粟之家分贷贫者，并遣人牛易力，多种二麦，州内以此获安。
现代文：那年遭受干旱，收成大减，子鹄担心百姓流亡，于是强令有粮之家分粮贷给贫困人家，并派人牛易力，多种冬麦，州内因此比较安定。
English: Suffering from drought that year, the harvest was greatly reduced, and Zi Xuan was worried about the people's exile, so he forced the grain house to distribute grain loans to poor people's homes, and sent people to buy cattle and rice, and a variety of winter wheat, so the state was relatively stable.

古文：及尔朱荣之死，世隆等遣书招子鹄，欲与同趣京师，子鹄不从。
现代文：等到尔朱荣死后，尔朱世隆等遣书召樊子鹄，要与他同到京师，子鹄不从。
English: After the death of Er Zhurong, Er Zhu Shilong and others sent a letter to call Zou Ziqi to go to Beijing with him, but Zou Ziqi did not follow.

古文：以母在晋阳，启求移镇河南，庄帝嘉之。
现代文：因母在晋阳，上启请求移镇河南。
English: Because his mother was in Jinyang, Shangqi requested to move to Henan.

古文：除车骑大将军、豫州刺史、假骠骑大将军、都督二豫郢三州诸军事、兼尚书右仆射、二豫郢颍四州行台。
现代文：庄帝称赞他的行为，除任他为车骑大将军，豫州刺史，假骠骑大将军，都督二豫、郢三州诸军事，兼尚书右仆射，二豫、郢、颍四州行台。
English: Emperor Zhuang praised his actions, and appointed him as the general of chariot and cavalry, the historian of Yuzhou, the general of fake cavalry and cavalry, the military governor of two and three states of Yunnan, the right-hand man of Shangshu, and the governor of two, three and four states of Yunnan.

古文：子鹄到相州，又敕赉绢五百匹。
现代文：樊子鹄到相州，帝又赐赏绢五百匹。
English: When the mule train arrived in Sangju, the emperor rewarded 500 mule trains.

古文：行达汲郡，闻尔朱兆入洛，乃渡河见仲远，仲远遣镇汲郡。
现代文：行达汲郡，听说尔朱兆入洛阳，于是渡黄河见尔朱仲远，仲远派他镇守汲郡。
English: He went to Dacui County and heard that Er Zhu Zhao had entered Luoyang, so he crossed the Yellow River to see Er Zhu Zhongyuan, and Zhongyuan sent him to be the town guard of Dacui County.

古文：兆征子鹄赴洛，既见，责以乖异之意，夺其部众，将还晋阳。
现代文：尔朱兆征子鹄赴洛，既见，责备他不同心同德，夺其部下，命还晋阳。
English: Zhu Zhaoxie's son went to Luo, and when he saw him, he reproached him for not having the same heart and morals, for taking away his subordinates, and his life was returned to Jinyang.

古文：及纥豆陵步籓起，以子鹄为都督，征发粮仗。
现代文：等到纥豆陵步藩起兵，命樊子鹄为都督，征发粮草器仗。
English: Wait until the troops of the Peasling and Bu domains are raised, and the life of the son of a mule becomes the governor of the capital, and the collection and distribution of grain and grass equipment begins.

古文：元晔以为侍中、御史中尉、中军大都督，随晔向洛。
现代文：元晔任命他为侍中、御史中尉、中军大都督，子鹄随元晔向洛阳。
English: Yuan Shao appointed him as a chamberlain, lieutenant of imperial history, and grand governor of the Chinese army, and his son followed Yuan Shao to Luoyang.

古文：普泰初，仍除旧任。
现代文：普泰初年，仍除旧任。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was still removed from his former post.

古文：及赵脩延叛于荆州，诏子鹄通三鵶道而还。
现代文：及赵修延在荆州反叛，帝诏樊子鹄经三亚鸟道还京。
English: and Zhao Xiuyan rebelled in Jingzhou, and Emperor Xuanzang returned to Beijing via Sanya Bird Road.

古文：遭母忧去职，前废帝闻其在洛无宅，凶费不周，赉绢四百匹、粟五百石，以本官起之。
现代文：服母丧去职，前废帝听说他在洛阳没有房宅，治丧费用不周，赏给他绢四百匹、粟五百石，以本官起用他。
English: When the Empress Dowager passed away, the former emperor heard that he had no house in Luoyang, and that the funeral expenses were inadequate. He was rewarded with four hundred horses and five hundred koku of millet, and he was appointed to his post.

古文：太昌初，兼尚书左仆射、东南道大行台，总大都督杜德等追讨尔朱仲远。
现代文：太昌初年，兼任尚书左仆射、东南道大行台，总领大都督杜德等追讨尔朱仲远。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he also served as Shangshu Zuopuzha, Southeast Daogangdai, and the leader of the grand governor Dude to pursue Zhu Zhongyuan.

古文：仲远已奔萧衍，收其兵马甲仗。
现代文：仲远已投奔萧衍，他们收其兵马甲仗。
English: Nakayama has gone over to Xiao Yan, and they have won the battle of the soldiers and horses.

古文：时萧衍遣元树入寇，陷据谯城。
现代文：当时萧衍派元树入寇，攻陷占据谯城。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan sent Yuan Shu to invade and occupy Lucheng.

古文：诏子鹄与德讨之。
现代文：帝下诏让樊子鹄与元德讨伐他。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let Zizixuan and Yuan De fight him.

古文：树屯兵梁国，欲来逆战，见子鹄军盛，夜退还谯。
现代文：元树屯兵梁国，想来迎战，见到樊子鹄兵势强盛，夜晚退回谯城。
English: Yuanshu stationed soldiers in Liangguo, wanted to come to meet the battle, saw the strong army of Nanzihai, and returned to Fucheng at night.

古文：子鹄引兵追蹑，树又背城为陈。
现代文：樊子鹄带兵追击，元树又倚城摆阵迎战。
English: Xun Zixu led the soldiers to pursue, and Yuan Shu took up the battle again.

古文：子鹄勒兵直趣城下，纵骑冲突，树众大败，奔入城门，城门隘塞，多自杀害。
现代文：子鹄统兵直趋城下，纵马冲突，元树人马大溃，奔入城门，城门十分狭小，敌人多被挤踏而死。
English: Zixu's soldiers marched straight down to the city, there was a conflict between horses and mules, the people of Yuanshu were routed, and they rushed into the city gate. The city gate was very narrow, and most of the enemies were trampled to death.

古文：于是斩千余级，获马数百匹，大收铠仗，遂围城。
现代文：这样斩敌千余首级，获得马匹数百，铠甲器仗无数，随后便把城池围了起来。
English: In this way, he cut off the heads of more than a thousand enemies, gained hundreds of horses and countless armored vehicles, and then surrounded the city.

古文：加仪同三司。
现代文：朝廷加授他为仪同三司。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of gido sanji.

古文：树勒兵出战，辄被摧衄，遂不敢出，自守而已。
现代文：元树统兵出战，就被痛打一顿，于是再不敢出城，自守城池而已。
English: When Yuan Shu's soldiers went out to fight, they were badly beaten, so they didn't dare to leave the city again, and just defended the city.

古文：子鹄恐萧衍遣救，乃分兵击衍苞州、然州、宕州、大涧、蒙县等五城，并望风逃散。
现代文：子鹄担心萧衍派人相救，于是分兵打击萧衍的苞州、然州、宕州、大涧、蒙县等五城，守军全都望风逃散。
English: Zixuan was worried that Xiao Yan would send someone to rescue him, so the detachment attacked Xiao Yan's five cities including Zhangzhou, Ranzhou, Gaozhou, Dalian and Mengxian, and the defenders all fled.

古文：树既无外援，计无所出，子鹄又令人说之，树遂请率众归南，以地还国。
现代文：元树既无外援，计无所出，子鹄又派人劝说他，元树于是请求率众归南，抢来的地盘归还皇魏。
English: Since there was no foreign aid for Motoki, there was nothing he could do. Zi Xi sent someone to persuade him. Motoki then requested that he lead the people back to the south and return the stolen land to the Emperor Wei.

古文：子鹄等许之，共结盟约。
现代文：子鹄等人答应了，共结盟约。
English: Zixuan and the others agreed, and they formed an alliance.

古文：及树众半出，子鹄中击，破之，擒树及衍谯州刺史朱文开，俘馘甚多。
现代文：等到元树军有一半出城，子鹄拦腰打击，破之，擒捉元树以及萧衍谯州刺史朱文开，俘敌很多。
English: By the time half of Yuan Shu's army had left the city, Zi Yan had stopped the attack, broken it, captured Yuan Shu and Xiao Yan's provincial governor Zhu Wenkai, and captured a lot of enemies.

古文：班师，出帝赉马匹。
现代文：回师，出帝赐给马匹。
English: Returned to his master, the emperor gave him horses.

古文：迁吏部尚书，转尚书右仆射，寻加骠骑大将军、开府，典选。
现代文：迁任吏部尚书，转任尚书右仆射。不久加授骠骑大将军、开府，掌管选举。
English: He was transferred to the position of the secretary, Shoshu, and then to the position of Shoshu's right-hand man, Sho. Soon after, he was given the title of grand general of cavalry, opened a government, and was in charge of elections.

古文：初，青州人耿翔聚众反，亡奔萧衍，衍资其兵，偷据胶州。
现代文：当初，青州人耿翔聚众造反，逃到萧衍那里，萧衍给他兵马，让他偷据胶州。
English: At first, Geng Xiang from Qingzhou gathered a crowd to rebel and fled to Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan gave him soldiers and horses and let him steal Jiaozhou.

古文：除子鹄使持节、侍中、青胶大使，督济州刺史蔡俊讨之。
现代文：帝除樊子鹄为使持节，侍中，青、胶大使，督领济州刺史蔡隽讨伐耿翔。
English: On the occasion of the Emperor's removal from Jeju, the middle-ranking samurai, the high-ranking young samurai, and the ambassador to Korea, the governor of Jeju Province, Cai Ye, led a crusade against Geng Xiang.

古文：师达青州，翔拔城奔走。
现代文：军至青州，耿翔拔城奔走。
English: The army reached Qingzhou, and Geng Xiang left the city.

古文：在军遇病，诏遣医给药。
现代文：子鹄在军染病，帝诏派医生给药疗治。
English: Zi Yao fell ill in the army, and the emperor sent a doctor to treat him with medicine.

古文：仍除兗州刺史，余官如故，便道之州。
现代文：又除授兖州刺史，余官仍旧，抄近道至州。
English: In addition to awarding the Shanzhou stabbing history, the remaining officials are still taking a shortcut to the state.

古文：子鹄先遣腹心缘历民间，采察得失。
现代文：子鹄先派心腹深察民间，查验为政得失。
English: His son and predecessor sent a close confidant to scrutinize the people, and the inspection was a political gain and loss.

古文：及入境，太山太守彭穆参候失仪，子鹄责让穆，并数其罪状，穆皆引伏，于是州内震悚。
现代文：入境，太山太守彭穆被查出失职，子鹄开罪彭穆，数其罪状，彭穆都一一伏受，于是州内震惊。
English: After entering the territory, Taishan Taishu Peng Mu was found to be derelict in duty, his son was found guilty of Peng Mu, and several of his charges, Peng Mu was beaten up one by one, so the state was shocked.

古文：及出帝入关，子鹄据城为逆。
现代文：等出帝入关，子鹄据城叛逆。
English: As soon as the emperor entered the pass, Zixu rebelled against the city.

古文：南青州刺史大野拔、徐州人刘粹各率众就子鹄。
现代文：南青州刺史大野拔、徐州人刘粹各自统军归投子鹄。
English: Nan Qingzhou's Zhishi Dangnobba and Xuzhou's Liu Zi led their respective armies back to the capital.

古文：天平初，遣仪同三司娄昭等率众讨之。
现代文：天平初年，帝派仪同三司娄昭等人率军讨伐。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, Teipai Yi led the army in a crusade with Sanji Shuchao and others.

古文：子鹄先使前胶州刺史严思达镇东平郡，昭攻陷之，仍引兵围子鹄。
现代文：子鹄先使前胶州刺史严思达镇守东平郡，娄昭攻下了，又继续围攻樊子鹄。
English: Zixu first sent the former Jiaozhou Jishi Yan Sida Town to defend Dongping County, Zizhao captured it, and continued to besiege Zixu.

古文：城久不拔，昭以水灌城。
现代文：城久攻不下，娄昭引水灌城。
English: Unable to capture the city for a long time, Zhao Zhao brought water to flood the city.

古文：静帝欲招慰下之，遣散骑常侍陆琛、兼黄门郎张景征赍玺书劳子鹄而入，野拔因与相见，左右斩子鹄以降。
现代文：静帝想招慰子鹄投降，派散骑常侍陆琛、兼黄门郎张景征备玺书劳慰樊子鹄，而大野拔也一起前去与使者相见，左右斩杀子鹄投降朝廷。
English: Emperor Jing wanted to persuade Zixuan to surrender, so he sent his cavalry, including his regular attendant Lu Zixuan and Huangmen Lang Zhang Jian, to solicit Zixuan's assistance, while Ohno Ba also went to meet the envoy and killed Zixuan to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：贺拔胜，字破胡，神武尖山人。
现代文：贺拔胜，字破胡，神武尖山人。
English: He Baxing, Zha Bahu, Shenwu Jianshan Ren.

古文：祖尔逗，选充北防，家于武川。
现代文：祖贺拔尔逗，被选拔充实北防，定居武川。
English: An ancestor of He Bale, he was selected to strengthen the northern defense and settled in Takekawa.

古文：以窥觇蠕蠕，兼有战功，显祖赐爵龙城男，为本镇军主。
现代文：因窥觇柔然，加上有战功，显祖赐其为龙城男，为本镇军主。
English: Because of his gentleness, coupled with his war exploits, he was given the title of the man of Longcheng and the military leader of the town.

古文：父度拔，袭爵。
现代文：父贺拔度拔，袭爵。
English: His father, He Badu Badu, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：正光末，沃野人破落汗拔陵聚众反，度拔与三子、乡中豪勇援怀朔镇，杀贼王卫可瑰。
现代文：正光末年，沃野人破落汗拔陵聚众造反，度拔与三个儿子、乡中豪勇一起支援怀朔镇，杀贼王卫可环。
English: At the end of the Zhengguang era, the Wa wildlings broke into a sweat and gathered to rebel. Du Ba, together with his three sons and the local heroes, supported the town of Waishuo and killed the thief Wang Wei.

古文：度拔寻为贼所害。孝昌中，追赠安远将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：度拔不久即为敌贼杀害，孝昌年间，朝廷追赠他为安远将军、肆州刺史。
English: Duba was soon killed by the enemy, and during the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of General Anyuan and Wuzhou Historian.

古文：度拔之死也，胜与兄弟俱奔恆州刺史广阳王渊。
现代文：度拔死后，贺拔胜与兄弟一起投奔恒州刺史广阳王元渊。
English: After Du Bi's death, He Bi Sheng and his brothers went to Hengzhou to assassinate Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan.

古文：胜便弓马，有武干，渊厚待之，表为强弩将军，充帐内军主。
现代文：胜长于弓马，有武才，元渊很优厚地对待他，上表授他为强弩将军，充任帐内军主。
English: He excelled in archery and horsemanship and had military talent. Yuan Yuan treated him very generously. He was awarded the title of "strong general" and served as the commander of the army.

古文：恆州陷，归尔朱荣，转积射将军，为别将，又兼都督。
现代文：恒州陷落后，归尔朱荣，转任积射将军，为别将，又兼都督。
English: After the fall of Hengzhou, he returned to Zhu Rong and was transferred to the position of general of the reserve, as well as the governor.

古文：及荣入洛，以预义之勋，封易阳县开国伯，邑四百户，除直阁将军，寻加通直散骑常侍、平南将军、光禄大夫，进号安南将军。
现代文：等到尔朱荣进入洛阳，以其参预大义之勋，封为易阳县开国伯，食邑四百户，除授直将军，不久加授通直散骑常侍、平南将军、光禄大夫，进号安南将军。
English: When Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, he was awarded the title of Founding Father of Yiyang County and 400 households in the county were provided with food, in addition to being awarded the title of General Zhi, he was soon awarded the titles of General Zhi, General Pingnan, Doctor Guanglu, and General Annan.

古文：寻除抚军将军，为大都督，出井陉，镇中山。
现代文：不久除授抚军将军，为大都督，出井陉，镇中山。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to General of the General Staff, and became the grand governor of the capital city, Dejima, and the town of Nakayama.

古文：元颢入洛，胜从东路率骑三百赴行宫于河梁。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，贺拔胜从东路率领三百骑兵赴行宫于河梁。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, He Basheng led three hundred cavalry from the East Road to march to the palace in He Liang.

古文：荣命胜与尔朱兆先渡，破擒颢息冠受及颢大都督陈思保。
现代文：尔朱荣命贺拔胜与尔朱兆先渡黄河，贺拔胜打败并擒获了元颢子冠受及大都督陈思保。
English: Le Zhu Rong ordered He Baxing and Le Zhu Zhao to cross the Yellow River first. He Baxing defeated and captured Yuan Zizi Guanju and Daduo Chen Si Bao.

古文：庄帝还宫，以功增邑六百户，复加通直散骑常侍、征北将军、金紫光禄大夫、武卫将军，改封真定县开国公。
现代文：庄帝还宫，以功增其食邑六百户，又加通直散骑常侍、征北将军、金紫光禄大夫、武卫将军，改封真定县开国公。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace and increased his food villages by six hundred households, and also added the direct horseback riding attendant, the general of the Northern Expedition, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and the general of Wuwei, and changed the fief of Jinding County to the founding of the country.

古文：寻除卫将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久除授卫将军，加散骑常侍。
English: He was soon given the title of General of the Guard, and given the rank of General of the Horse.

古文：尔朱荣之死也，胜与田怙等奔走荣第。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，贺拔胜与田怙等人奔走荣家宅第。
English: After the death of Le Zhu Rong, He Baxing and Tian Yao and others rushed to the Rong family home.

古文：于时宫殿之门未加严防，怙等议即攻门。胜止之曰： 天子既行大事，必当更有奇谋，吾等众旅不多，何可轻尔？但得出城，更为他计。 
现代文：当时宫殿之门未加严防，田怙等人商议攻打宫门，贺拔胜制止说： 天子既然行如此大事，肯定会有奇谋，我等部属不多，怎能轻举妄动，只要能出城，我们可另想别的办法。 
English: At that time, the gate of the palace was not strictly guarded. Tian Xuan and others discussed attacking the palace gate. He Ba Sheng stopped them and said: "Since the Son of Heaven has done such a great thing, there will surely be a plot. We do not have many subordinates, how can we act rashly? As long as we can leave the city, we can think of other ways.

古文：怙乃止，及世隆夜走，胜遂不从，庄帝甚嘉之。
现代文：田怙也就停下了。等到尔朱世隆夜逃，贺拔胜不跟随他，庄帝很是嘉许。
English: Tian Xuan also stopped. When Er Zhu Shilong fled in the night, He Baxian did not follow him, Zhuangdi was very appreciative.

古文：仲远逼东郡，诏胜以本官假骠骑大将军，为东征都督，率众会郑先护以讨之。
现代文：仲远逼东都，帝诏贺拔胜以本官假骠骑大将军为东征都督，率众会结郑先护讨伐仲远。
English: When Chuan Yuan forced his way into the Eastern Capital, Emperor He Baxian made his own official, a fake cavalry general, the governor of the Eastern Capital, and led the people in forming the Zhengxian Association to defend and fight against Chuan Yuan.

古文：为先护所疑，置之营外，人马未得休息。
现代文：贺拔胜被先护所怀疑，置之营外，人马未得休息。
English: Suspected by Zheng Xianbao, even though they were outside the military camp, they were unable to rest.

古文：俄而仲远兵至，胜与交战不利，乃降之。
现代文：不一会仲远兵到，贺拔胜与之交战，不利，于是就投降了。
English: Not long after, the soldiers from Zhongyuan arrived, and He Bi Sheng fought with them, which was unfavorable, so he surrendered.

古文：普泰初，除右卫将军，进号车骑大将军、右光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：普泰初年，除右卫将军，进号车骑大将军、右光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Putai, in addition to the General of the Right Division, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the Doctor of the Right Division, and the Third Division of the General of the Right Division were promoted.

古文：共尔朱仲远、度律北拒义旗，相与奔退，事在《尔朱兆传》。
现代文：与尔朱仲远、尔朱度律北抗义旗，又一起奔逃，事在《尔朱兆传》。
English: He ran away with Lzhu Zhongyuan and Lzhu DuLu north against the banner of righteousness in "The Biography of Lzhu Zhongyuan."

古文：后俱败于韩陵，胜因降齐献武王。
现代文：后来又一起败于韩陵，贺拔胜因此降归齐献武王。
English: Later, he was defeated by Han Ling again, and He Bi Sheng was demoted to Qi Xianwu.

古文：太昌初，拜领军将军，余官如故，又除侍中。
现代文：太昌初年，拜授领军将军，余官如故，又除授侍中。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was awarded the title of general leading the army.

古文：出帝既纳斛斯椿等谗间之说，将谋齐献武王，以胜弟岳拥众关西，仍欲广为势援，除胜使持节、侍中、都督三荆二郢南襄南雍七州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史。
现代文：出帝既纳斛斯椿等人谗谄离间的话，准备图谋齐献武王，让贺拔胜弟弟贺拔岳拥兵关西，以求广为势援，除授贺拔胜使持节，侍中，都督三荆二郢、南襄、南雍七州诸军事，骠骑大将军，开府仪同三司，荆州刺史。
English: When Naruse Tsubaki and others were separated from the emperor, they prepared to conspire to jointly offer King Wu, let He Baxian's younger brother, He Baxian, lead the troops to Kansai, and seek wide support. In addition to awarding He Baxian, the emperor also sent the military commanders from seven states, including Jing, Nanzhong, and Nanyong, as well as the general of the cavalry, the grand marshal of Kaifu, and the three officials, and the historian of Jingzhou.

古文：胜将图襄阳，攻萧衍下迮戍，克之，擒其戍主尹道玩、戍副库峨。
现代文：贺拔胜准备图取襄阳，攻萧衍下迮戍，拿下来了，擒获其戍主尹道玩、戍副库峨。
English: He Ba Sheng prepared a plan to take Xiangyang, attacked Xiaoyan's lower castle, took it down, and captured its lord, Yin Daowan, and his deputy, Kuaga.

古文：又使人诱动蛮王问道期，道期率种起义。
现代文：又派人诱动蛮王问道期，道期率蛮人起义。
English: He also sent someone to entice the barbarian king to ask for a truce, and the truce led the barbarians to revolt.

古文：衍雍州刺史萧续遣军击道期，为道期所败，汉南大骇。
现代文：萧衍雍州刺史萧续派军攻击道期，被道期打败，汉南一带大为惊骇。
English: Xiao Yan, the governor of Yongzhou, sent troops to attack the Dao Dynasty, but they were defeated by the Dao Dynasty. The area around Hannan was greatly alarmed.

古文：胜又遣军攻均口，擒衍将庄思延，又攻冯翊、安定、沔阳、酂阳城，并平之。
现代文：贺拔胜又派军队攻打均口，擒获萧衍将庄思延，又攻打冯翊、安定、沔阳、赞阝阳城，都平定下来。
English: He Baisheng also sent troops to attack Jiankou, and Xiao Yan was defeated by Zhuang Siyan, and also attacked Fengye, Ding'an, Fenyang, and Zhanfenyang, all of which were settled down.

古文：续遣将柳仲礼于谷城拒守，胜攻之不克，乃班师。
现代文：萧续派将柳仲礼在谷城坚守，贺拔胜攻之不克，于是回师。
English: Xiao Heng faction kept Liu Zhongli in Gucheng, but He Bi won the battle, so he returned to his division.

古文：沔北荡为丘墟矣。
现代文：沔北一带尽被荡为丘墟了。
English: The whole of northern Shandong has been reduced to rubble.

古文：衍书敕续云： 贺拔胜北间骁将，汝宜慎之，勿与争锋。 
现代文：萧衍书敕萧续说： 贺拔胜是北方猛将，你应谨慎，不要与他争锋。 
English: Xiao Yanshu said: He Baxing is a northern strongman, you should be careful not to compete with him.

古文：其见惮如此。
现代文：其害怕如此。
English: Emperor-in-waiting Wang Feng has come to such a pass.

古文：进爵琅邪郡公。
现代文：晋爵琅笽郡公。
English: He was raised to the peerage as the Duke of Shishigun.

古文：出帝末，诏胜统众北赴京师。
现代文：出帝末年，帝诏贺拔胜统军北赴京城。
English: In the last years of his reign, Emperor Hirohito sent a congratulatory message to the victorious unified army, which marched north to the capital.

古文：军次汝水，出帝入关。
现代文：军到汝水，出帝入关。
English: When the army comes to your waters, they leave the emperor and enter the customs.

古文：后岳部下收岳尸葬于雍州北石安原。
现代文：贺拔胜率所部想从武关赴长安。走到析阳，听说齐献武王平定潼关，擒获毛鸿宾，贺拔胜害怕了，又逃往荆州，城中人闭门不纳。
English: He Baxing wanted to go to Chang'an from Wuguan. When he got to Seiyang, he heard that Qi Xianwu had conquered Wuguan and gained Mao Hongbin. He Baxing was afraid and fled to Jingzhou. People in the city closed their doors and would not accept him.

古文：六月，赠大将军、太保、录尚书事，都督、刺史、开国并如故。侯莫陈悦，代郡人也。
现代文：当时齐献武王已派行台侯景、大都督高敖曹讨伐他了，贺拔胜战败，为流矢击中，于是率领左右亲近五百人奔投萧衍。第二年，从小路投奔宝炬。
English: At that time, King Qi Xianwu had already dispatched Tai Hou Jing and the great governor Gao Bing Cao to fight against him. He was defeated and hit by a stray arrow, so he led nearly five hundred people to rush to Xiao Yan. The next year, he rushed to the torch from a small road.

古文：父婆罗门，为驼牛都尉，故悦长于河西。
现代文：贺拔胜好行小伎俩，志大胆薄，奔忙南北，最终无所成就，以致死于敌贼之中。侯莫陈悦，代郡人。
English: He Baxing was good at performing small tricks, had a weak will, rushed north and south, and ultimately achieved nothing, so that he died among the enemy. Hou Mo Chen Yue, a representative of the county.

古文：好田猎，便骑射。
现代文：父侯莫陈婆罗门，任驼牛都尉，所以悦在河西长大。
English: His father, Mo Chen Brahmin, was a camel captain, so Yue grew up in Hexi.

古文：会牧子逆乱，遂归尔朱荣，荣引为都督府长流参军，稍迁大都督。
现代文：他爱好打猎，善于骑射。逢牧子叛逆，于是归尔朱荣，荣引荐他为都督府长流参军，渐迁大都督。
English: He was fond of hunting and good at riding and shooting. When the herdsmen rebelled, he returned to Zhu Rong. Rong recommended him to join the army as the head of the prefectural government, and gradually became the grand governor.

古文：庄帝初，除征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，封柏人县开国侯，邑五百户。
现代文：庄帝初年，除任征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，封鯢人县开国侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, in addition to being appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu, and the founding lord of Fengtian County, there were 500 households in the food village.

古文：尔朱天光之讨关西，荣以悦为天光右厢大都督，本官如故。
现代文：尔朱天光征讨关西，尔朱荣任命侯莫陈悦为天光的右厢大都督，本官仍旧。
English: Er Zhu Tian Guangzheng discussed Kansai, Er Zhu Rong appointed Hou Mo Chen Yue as the right wing governor of Tian Guang. I am still the top official.

古文：西伐克获，皆与天光、贺拔岳略同劳效。
现代文：征西大获全胜，他与尔朱天光、贺拔胜立下的汗马功劳不相上下。
English: The West Conquest won a complete victory, and he is on a par with the hard work of Er Zhu Tianguo and He Baxing.

古文：以本将军除鄯州刺史，余如故。
现代文：侯莫陈悦以本将军除授鄯州刺史，余官仍旧。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue still holds this post, in addition to being awarded the title of General of the People's Republic of China.

古文：尔朱荣死后，亦随天光下陇。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，也随尔朱天光下陇。
English: After the death of Lr Zhu Rong, he also followed Lr Zhu Tianguang in abdicating.

古文：元晔立，除车骑大将军、渭州刺史，进爵为公，改封白水郡，增邑五百户。
现代文：元晔登基，除授其为车骑大将军、渭州刺史，晋爵为公，改封白水郡，增加食邑五百户。
English: When Yuan Shao ascended to the throne, he was awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Historian of Zhangzhou, and Duke of Jin. He changed the county's name to Baishui County and increased the number of counties by 500 households.

古文：及天光向洛，使悦行华州事。
现代文：等到尔朱天光挥军向洛阳，派侯莫陈悦行华州事。
English: Wait until Le Zhu Tianguang waves the army to Luoyang and sends Hou Mo Chen Yue to march on Huazhou.

古文：普泰中，除骠骑大将军、仪同三司、秦州刺史。
现代文：普泰年间，除授骠骑大将军、仪同三司、秦州刺史。
English: During the Putai era, he held the posts of General of Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and Secretary of State of Qin Province.

古文：天光之东出，将抗义旗，悦与岳下陇以应齐献武王，至雍州，会尔朱覆败。
现代文：尔朱天光东出洛阳，准备抵抗义军，侯莫陈悦与贺拔岳出陇响应齐献武王，到雍州，逢尔朱天光彻底覆灭。
English: Zhu Tianguang went east from Luoyang to prepare to resist the rebels. Hou Mo, Chen Yue and He Batyue came out of the cocoon in response to the joint dedication of King Wu. In Yongzhou, Zhu Tianguang was completely destroyed.

古文：永熙初，加开府、都督陇右诸军事，仍秦州刺史。
现代文：永熙初年，朝廷加授他为开府，都督陇右诸军事，仍为秦州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, the imperial court awarded him the title of Kaifu, the military governor of the capital, and he is still the history of Qinzhou.

古文：永熙三年正月，岳召悦共讨灵州。
现代文：永熙三年正月，贺拔岳召集侯莫陈悦一起讨伐灵州。
English: In the first month of the third year of Yongxi, He Batyue called Hou Mo Chen Yue together to fight against Lingzhou.

古文：悦诱岳斩之，岳左右奔散，悦遣人安慰云： 我别禀意旨，止在一人，诸君勿怖。 
现代文：悦诱来贺拔岳把他杀了，贺拔岳部下四处奔散，侯莫陈悦派人安慰他们说： 我别秉旨意，只杀一人，请你们不要担忧恐惧。 
English: Yue lured He Batyue to kill him, and He Batyue's subordinates scattered everywhere. Hou Mo Chen Yue sent people to comfort them and said, "Don't do as I want, just kill one person. Please don't worry or be afraid."

古文：众皆畏服，无敢拒违。
现代文：众人都内心害怕地服了他，没人再敢拒绝违抗。
English: Everyone obeyed him with fear in their hearts, and no one dared to refuse to disobey.

古文：悦心犹豫，不即抚纳，乃还入陇，止永洛城。
现代文：侯莫陈悦心存犹豫，没有及时抚慰接纳他们，于是还军入陇，停军洛水城。
English: He was very hesitant in his heart, and did not immediately appease and accept, but still returned to Shunde and stationed in Shuiluo City.

古文：岳之所部，聚于平凉，规还图悦，遣追夏州刺史宇文黑獭。
现代文：贺拔岳的部下，都聚集在平凉，打算回军图取侯莫陈悦，派人追赶夏州刺史宇文黑獭。
English: The subordinates of He Batyue all gathered in Pingliang, intending to return to the army to take Hou Mo Chen Yue, and sent people to chase down Xiazhou Sashi Yuwen Hei.

古文：黑獭至，遂总岳部众并家口入高平城，以自安固，乃勒众入陇征悦。
现代文：黑獭到后，便汇聚贺拔岳部队加上家小进入高平城，固守自安。黑獭统众进入陇川征讨侯莫陈悦。
English: After the arrival of the Black Egrets, they gathered the troops of He Baturan together with the junior high school students and entered Gaoping City, adhering to the principle of self-sufficiency. The Black Egrets led the people to enter Luochuan to conquer Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：悦闻之，弃城，南据山水之险，设陈候战。
现代文：悦听说，放弃城池，南据山水之险，摆阵待战。
English: Yue had heard that they should abandon the city and go south to avoid the dangers of the mountains and rivers, and prepare for battle.

古文：黑獭至，遥望见悦，欲待明日决斗。
现代文：黑獭部队到，远远望见悦，想等到第二天决战。
English: The Black Snipe troops arrived, looked pleased to see them from afar, and wanted to wait until the next day for the decisive battle.

古文：悦先召南秦州刺史李景和，其夜，景和遣人诣黑獭，密许翻降。
现代文：悦先召来南秦州刺史李景和，这天夜里，景和派人到黑獭那里，秘密同意届时翻降。
English: Yue first summoned Li Jinghe, the governor of Southern Qin, and that night, he sent someone to Heihe to secretly agree to surrender at that time.

古文：至暮，景和乃勒其所部使上驴驼，云： 仪同有教，欲还秦州，守以拒贼 ，令军人严备。
现代文：到傍晚，景和统领自己的部队上了骆驼，说： 仪同侯莫陈悦有教，打算还军秦州，守城迎敌。 命令军人严加戒备。
English: In the late afternoon, Jinghe led his troops onto camels and said, "I, Hou Mo Chen Yue, have learned a lesson, and I intend to return the army to Qinzhou and defend the city against the enemy." He ordered soldiers to be on high alert.

古文：景和复绐悦帐下云： 仪同欲还秦州，汝等何不装办？ 
现代文：景和又欺骗悦部下说： 仪同欲还军秦州，你们为什么迟迟不收拾行装？ 
English: Jinghe also deceived Yuezhou's subordinates, saying: "Yi Tongyou returned the army to Qinzhou, why did you delay in packing up and moving?

古文：众谓为实，以次相惊，人情惶惑，不可复止，皆散走而趣秦州。
现代文：大家都说是真的，依次相惊，人情惶惑，军乱不能制止，都奔散逃往秦州。
English: Everyone said that it was true. They were surprised one after another, people were confused, the military conflict could not be stopped, and they all fled to Qinzhou.

古文：景和先驱至城，据门以慰辑之。
现代文：景和先行到城，等在城门慰抚他们。
English: King He preceded them to the city and waited at the city gate to comfort them.

古文：悦部众离散，猜畏傍人，不听左右近己，与其二弟并兒及谋杀岳者八九人弃军并走。
现代文：侯莫陈悦部队离散，自己又猜忌害怕左右近僚，不听他们的话，与其两个弟弟及儿子加上谋杀贺拔岳的八九个人弃军逃走。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue's troops were scattered, and he was suspicious of and afraid of his right and left colleagues. He did not listen to them, and he, his two younger brothers and his son, along with the eighty-nine people who murdered He Baturake, abandoned the army and fled.

古文：数日之中，盘回往来，不知所趣。
现代文：数日之中，盘回往来，不知到哪里好。
English: In the course of a few days, there was a lot of back and forth, and I didn't know where to go.

古文：左右劝向灵州，而悦不决，言下陇之后，恐有人所见。
现代文：左右人劝他到灵州，而悦迟疑不决，说出陇之后，恐怕有人看到他了。
English: People around him advised him to go to Lingshou, but Yue hesitated and hesitated, and after uttering a cry, I'm afraid someone saw him.

古文：乃于中山令从者悉步，自乘一骡，欲向灵州。
现代文：于是在山中令跟随的人都徒步行走，自己乘坐一匹骡子，想去灵州。
English: Therefore, everyone who followed the order in the mountains walked on foot and took a mule to go to Lingzhou.

古文：中路，追骑将及，望见之，遂缢死野中，弟、息、部下悉见擒杀，唯先谋杀岳者悦中兵参军豆卢光走至灵州，后奔晋阳。
现代文：走了一半，追赶的人快到了，悦看见他们，于是在荒野中自缢而死，弟、儿子以及部下都被擒杀，只有先前谋杀贺拔岳的侯莫陈悦的中兵参军豆卢光逃到了灵州，后到晋阳。
English: Halfway through the journey, the pursuers were about to arrive. Yue saw them, so he hanged himself in the wilderness. His brother, son and subordinates were all killed. Only the soldier who had previously murdered Hou Mo Chen Yue fled to Lingzhou and later to Jinyang.

古文：悦自杀岳后，神情恍惚，不复如常，恆言： 我仅睡即梦见岳语： 我兄欲何处去，随我不相置。  
现代文：悦自从杀了贺拔岳之后，神情恍惚，不再跟平常一样，常说： 我只要睡觉就梦见贺拔岳问我 兄想到何处去 ，随我不移。 
English: Ever since she killed He Batur, Yue has been in a daze, no longer acting as usual. She often says, "I only need to sleep to dream about He Batur and ask my brother where he wants to go. I will go wherever he wants to go."

古文：因此弥不自安，而致败灭。
现代文：因此更加日日不得安宁，终至自灭。
English: As a result, they often do not feel at ease until they fail and die.

古文：侯渊，神武尖山人也。机警有胆略。
现代文：侯渊，神武尖山人。机警有胆略。
English: Houyuan, a native of the Shenwu Jianshan Mountains. He is alert and daring.

古文：肃宗末年，六镇饥乱，渊随杜洛周南寇。
现代文：肃宗末年，六镇饥荒变乱，侯渊随杜洛周南侵。
English: In the last years of Su Zong's reign, famine in six towns led to chaos, and Hou Yuan followed Du Luo to invade the south.

古文：后与妻兄念贤背洛周归尔朱荣。
现代文：后来与妻兄念贤背叛洛周归投尔朱荣。
English: Later, he and his brother-in-law, Nian Xian, betrayed Luo Zhou and returned to Zhu Rong.

古文：路中遇寇，身披苫褐，荣赐其衣帽，厚待之，以渊为中军副都督。
现代文：路上遇上强盗，他被抢得只剩下苫袄，尔朱荣赐给他衣帽，优厚地对待他，任他为中军副都督。
English: Encountering a robber on the road, he was robbed and left with nothing but a donkey. Er Zhu Rong gave him a cap and coat, treated him generously, and made him the vice-governor of the Chinese army.

古文：常从征伐，屡有战功。
现代文：经常跟从征伐，屡屡立下战功。
English: He often followed the conquests and repeatedly achieved great military feats.

古文：孝庄即位，除领左右，封厌次县开国子，邑四百户。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，除任他为领左右、封厌次县开国子，食邑四百户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the leader of the left and right, and the opening of the country in the next county, with 400 households in the food village.

古文：后从荣讨葛荣于滏口，战功尤多。
现代文：后来跟从尔朱荣在滏口讨伐葛荣，战功尤多。
English: Later, he followed Zhu Rong to fight Ge Rong in Hekou, and achieved much success in the war.

古文：荣启渊为骠骑将军、燕州刺史。
现代文：尔朱荣启奏侯渊为骠骑将军、燕州刺史。
English: Le Zhu Rong played Hou Yuan as a cavalry general and Yan Zhou as a historian.

古文：时葛荣别帅韩楼、郝长等有众数万，屯据蓟城，尔朱荣令渊与贺拔胜讨之。
现代文：当时葛荣别帅韩楼、郝长等拥军数万，屯据蓟城，尔朱荣令侯渊与贺拔胜讨伐他们。
English: At that time, Ge Rongbe, Han Lou, Zou Chang and tens of thousands of supporting troops were stationed in Zoucheng, and Zhu Rong ordered Hou Yuan and He Bascheng to fight them.

古文：会元颢入洛，荣征胜南赴大军，留渊独镇中山。
现代文：逢元颢攻入洛阳，尔朱荣征召贺拔胜南赴大军，留下侯渊独镇中山。
English: When Yuan Shao invaded Luoyang, Er Zhurong conscripted He Baxing to go south to the great army, leaving Houyuan Duzhen Zhongshan behind.

古文：及庄帝还宫，荣令渊进讨韩楼，配卒甚少。
现代文：等到庄帝还宫，尔朱荣令侯渊进讨韩楼，配给兵卒很少。
English: By the time Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, Er Zhu Rong had ordered Hou Yuan to attack Han Lou, and the soldiers were poorly supplied.

古文：或以为言，荣曰： 侯渊临机设变，是其所长，若总大众，未必能用。
现代文：有人有看法，尔朱荣说： 侯渊临机设变，是他的长处，如总领大队人马，未必能用。
English: Some people have the opinion that Le Zhu Rong said: Houyuan's ability to make changes on the fly is his strength, such as the leader of a large group of people, but he may not be able to use it.

古文：今击此贼，故当不足定也。 
现代文：今天打击此贼，所以不给他太多军马。 
English: We're going after the thief today, so don't give him too many horses.

古文：止给骑七百。
现代文：只给骑兵七百。
English: Therefore, he was only given seven hundred soldiers.

古文：渊遂广张军声，多设供具，亲率数百骑，深入楼境，欲执行人以问虚实。
现代文：侯渊于是广张军声，多设供具，亲自率领数百名骑兵，深入韩楼境内，想抓个行人问其虚实。
English: Houyuan then widely spread the rumor, set up more supplies, personally led hundreds of cavalry, deep into the territory of Hanlu, and wanted to catch a pedestrian to ask if it was true.

古文：去蓟百余里，值贼帅陈周马步万余，渊遂潜伏以乘其背，大破之，虏其卒五千余人。
现代文：离蓟一百多里，正逢敌帅陈周马步兵一万多人，侯渊于是潜伏在路上袭击敌人后部，大破敌人，俘虏五千多名敌人。
English: More than a hundred miles away from Handan, just as the enemy commander Chen Zhouma encountered more than ten thousand infantrymen, Houyuan lurked on the road to attack the rear of the enemy, defeated the enemy, and captured more than five thousand enemies.

古文：寻还其马仗，纵令入城。
现代文：很快就还其马匹兵器，让他们入城。
English: They were soon given back their horse-drawn weapons and allowed to enter the city.

古文：左右谏曰： 既获贼众，何为复资遣之也？ 
现代文：左右劝道： 既然抓到了敌人，为什么又要还给他们器杖放掉他们呢？ 
English: He said, "Since we have captured the enemy, why should we give them back their tools and let them go?"

古文：渊曰： 我兵既少，不可力战，事须为计以离隙之。 
现代文：侯渊说： 我们兵力既少，不可力战，而应该设计离间敌人。 
English: Houyuan said: Since we have few troops, we cannot fight, but we should devise an enemy to drive a wedge.

古文：渊度其已至，遂率骑夜进，昧旦，叩其城门。
现代文：侯渊估计敌人已进城了，便率骑夜集，天麻麻亮，叩其城门。
English: Houyuan estimated that the enemy had already entered the city, so he rode to the city gate at dusk.

古文：韩楼果疑降卒为渊内应，遂遁走，追擒之。
现代文：韩楼果然怀疑降卒为侯渊内应，于是逃走，追擒之。
English: Han Lou indeed suspected Hou Yuanyin of being the one to abdicate, so he ran away and chased after him.

古文：以勋进爵为侯，增邑八百户。
现代文：侯渊因功晋爵为侯，增加食邑八百户。
English: Hou Yuan was promoted to the peerage for his achievements, increasing the number of households in the county by 800.

古文：寻诏渊以本将军为平州刺史、大都督，仍镇范阳。
现代文：不久帝诏以渊为本将军任平州刺史、大都督，仍然镇守范阳。
English: Soon after, the emperor made Yuan the general and appointed him as the governor of Pingzhou and the governor of Fanyang. He was still the town guard of Fanyang.

古文：及尔朱荣之死也，范阳太守卢文伟诱渊出猎，闭门拒之。
现代文：等到尔朱荣死后，范阳太守卢文伟诱骗侯渊出猎，侯渊闭门拒之。
English: After Le Zhu Rong's death, Fan Yang Taishu Lu Wenwei tricked Houyuan into going hunting, and Houyuan closed the door on him.

古文：渊率部曲屯于郡南，为荣举哀，勒兵南向。
现代文：侯渊率领部下屯据郡南，为尔朱荣举哀，统兵向南。
English: Houyuan led his subordinates to the south of the county to mourn for Er Zhu Rong and led the troops to the south.

古文：庄帝使东莱王贵平为大使，慰劳燕蓟。
现代文：庄帝派东莱王贵平为大使，慰劳燕、蓟。
English: Emperor Zhuang sent Donglai King Guiping as an ambassador to comfort Laoyan and Zou.

古文：渊乃诈降，贵平信之，遂执贵平自随。
现代文：侯渊于是诈称投降，贵平相信了他。于是侯渊绑缚贵平。
English: Houyuan then pretended to surrender, and Guiping believed him. So Houyuan tied up Guiping.

古文：进至中山，行台仆射魏兰根邀击之，为渊所败。
现代文：进军至中山，行台仆射魏兰根拦截，被侯渊打败。
English: They marched to Zhongshan, where they were intercepted by Wei Langen, who was defeated by Hou Yuan.

古文：会元晔立，渊欲归之。
现代文：正逢元晔被立为帝，侯渊想投靠他。
English: It was the time when Yuan Shikai was enthroned as emperor, and Hou Yuan wanted to serve him.

古文：常山太守甄楷屯据井陉，渊又击破之。
现代文：常山太守甄楷屯据井陉，侯渊又打败了他们。
English: Zhenkai, the governor of Changshan, was defeated by Houyuan.

古文：晔乃授渊骠骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史、左军大都督、渔阳郡开国公，邑一千户。
现代文：元晔于是授侯渊为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史、左军大都督、渔阳郡开国公，食邑一千户。
English: Therefore, Yuan Shao awarded Houyuan with the titles of General of Horse Cavalry, General of Ceremonies, General of the Three Departments, Governor of Dingzhou, Grand Governor of the Left Army, and Founder of Yuyang County, with 1,000 households.

古文：前废帝立，仍加开府，余如故。
现代文：前废帝登基，仍加开府，余官仍旧。
English: The former deposed emperor ascended to the throne, but the government was still set up, and the remaining officials remained the same.

古文：幽州刺史刘灵助举义兵，屯于安国城，渊与叱列延庆等破擒之。
现代文：幽州刺史刘灵助举义兵，屯驻安国城，侯渊与叱列延庆等人打败了他们，擒获刘灵助。
English: Liu Lingsu, a scholar from Yuzhou, raised a volunteer army and stationed it in An Guocheng. Houyuan and Yanqing, who were in the vanguard, defeated them and captured Liu Lingsu.

古文：后随尔朱兆拒义旗于广阿，兆既败走，渊降齐献武王，后从王破尔朱于韩陵。
现代文：后来随尔朱兆在广阿抵抗义军，尔朱兆军败后逃走，侯渊归降齐献武王，后跟随齐献武王在韩陵破尔朱氏。
English: Later, he followed Zhu Zhao to resist the rebels in Guang'a. After the defeat of Zhu Zhao's army, he fled. Houyuan surrendered to Qi Xianwu, and then followed Qi Xianwu to defeat the Zhu clan in Hanling.

古文：永熙初，除齐州刺史，余如故。
现代文：永熙初年，除任齐州刺史，余官仍旧。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, in addition to being appointed as the first secretary of the State Council of Qi Province, he still held other posts.

古文：出帝末，渊与兗州刺史樊子鹄、青州刺史东莱王贵平密信往来，以相连结，又遣间使通诚于献武王。
现代文：出帝末年，侯渊与兖州刺史樊子鹄、青州刺史东莱王贵平密信往来，相互连结，又派伺机行事的使者向齐献武王表达忠心。
English: In the last years of his reign, Houyuan had a close correspondence with and established a mutual connection with Ziziguan, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Guiping, the governor of Donglai, the governor of Qingzhou, and sent envoys to Qi Xianwu to express his loyalty.

古文：及出帝入关，复怀顾望。
现代文：等到出帝入关，侯渊仍在犹豫观望。
English: Waiting for the departure of the emperor, Hou Yuan was still hesitating and waiting.

古文：汝阳王暹既除齐州刺史，次于城西，渊拥部据城，不时迎纳。
现代文：汝阳王元暹既除齐州刺史，军驻城西，侯渊拥军据城，不予迎接。
English: In addition to the history of Qizhou, Ruyang Wang Yuan Siam, the army stationed in the west of the city, Houyuan supported the army in the city, will not be welcomed.

古文：民刘桃符等潜引暹入据四城，渊争门不克，率骑出奔，妻兒部曲为暹所虏。
现代文：百姓刘桃符等偷偷地把元暹引入齐州西城，侯渊与他争夺城门没有成功，率领骑兵出逃，妻儿部下被暹所虏。
English: Liu Taofu, a commoner, secretly introduced Yuan Siam to the western city of Qizhou. Houyuan unsuccessfully fought him for the city gate, led the cavalry to flee, and his wives and children were captured by Siam.

古文：行达广里，会承制以渊行青州事。
现代文：行达广里，逢承帝旨以侯渊行使青州事。
English: He traveled as far as Guangli, and carried out the Qingzhou affairs with Houyuan according to Emperor Fengsheng's order.

古文：齐献武王又遗渊书曰： 卿勿以部曲轻少，难于东迈。
现代文：齐献武王又给他写信说： 卿不要认为部下很少，难于东进。
English: King Qi Xianwu also wrote to him, saying, "Sir, don't think that because your subordinates are few, it is difficult to march eastward.

古文：齐人浇薄，唯利是从。齐州城民尚能迎汝阳王，青州之人岂不能开门待卿也？
现代文：齐人风气浮薄，惟利是从，齐州城民且能迎汝阳王，青州之人还不能开门迎接你吗？
English: Qizhou people's morals are superficial, but their interests are consistent. Qizhou citizens can welcome the King of the Sun, but people in Qingzhou can't open the door to welcome you?

古文：但当勉之。 
现代文：你尽管前去。 
English: You go right ahead.

古文：渊乃复还，暹始归其部曲。
现代文：侯渊于是又回来了，元暹归还了他的部下。
English: Houyuan then returned, and Yuan Sie returned his men.

古文：而贵平自以斛斯椿党，亦不受代。
现代文：而贵平自认为是斛斯椿同党，不同意接受代替。
English: However, Yuan Guiping considered himself to be a member of the Jinshchun Party and did not allow him to take his place.

古文：渊进袭高阳郡，克之，置部曲家累于城中，身率轻骑游掠于外。
现代文：侯渊进军袭击高阳郡，攻克城池，把部下家小安置在城中，身率轻骑在外游击抢掠。
English: Houyuan marched to attack Gaoyang County, conquered the city, placed his subordinates in the city, and rode lightly outside to attack and loot.

古文：贵平使其长子率众攻高阳，南青州刺史茹怀朗遣兵助之。
现代文：贵平让他长子率众攻高阳，南青州刺史茹怀朗派兵协助。
English: Guiping let his eldest son lead the crowd to attack Gaoyang, and South Qingzhou sent Ru Huilang to assist.

古文：时青州城人馈粮者首尾相继，渊亲率骑夜趣青州，诈馈粮人曰： 台军已至，杀戮都尽，我是世子下人，今已走还城，汝何为复去也？ 
现代文：当时青州城百姓送粮的首尾相接。侯渊率骑兵夜奔青州，诈骗送粮的人说： 朝廷大军已至，见人都杀光，我是世子下人，今天都走了，你们为什么还不逃命去？ 
English: At that time, the people of Qingzhou City were sending grain back and forth. Hou Yuan and his cavalry raced to Qingzhou at night. The fraudulent grain deliverers said: The imperial army has arrived, and everyone has been killed. I am a commoner, and everyone has left today. Why don't you run for your lives?

古文：人信其言，弃粮奔走。
现代文：人们相信了他的话，弃粮奔走。
English: People believed his words and ran away, abandoning their grain.

古文：比晓，复谓行人曰： 台军昨夜已至高阳，我是前锋，今始到此，颇知侯公竟在何处？ 
现代文：天亮后，又对行人说： 朝廷大军昨晚已到高阳，我是前锋部队，今始到此，很想知道侯公竟在何处？ 
English: After dawn, he also said to the passers-by: "The imperial army arrived in Gaoyang last night. I am a vanguard unit. I have just arrived here. I would like to know where the lord of the manor is."

古文：城人凶惧，遂执贵平出降。
现代文：城中百姓都害怕了，抓住贵平出城投降。
English: The people in the city were scared, grabbed Guiping and marched out of the city to surrender.

古文：渊自惟反覆，虑不获安，遂斩贵平，传首京师，欲明不同于斛斯椿也。
现代文：侯渊自思反复无常，担心不会安全，于是斩了贵平，传首京城，想表明他与斛斯椿不同。
English: Hou Yuan considered himself to be capricious and feared that he would not be safe, so he beheaded Guiping and sent his head to the capital, wanting to show that he was different from Gong Shizhuan.

古文：及子鹄平，诏以封延之为青州刺史。
现代文：等到樊子鹄之乱平定了，帝诏任封延之为青州刺史。
English: After the subjugation of Shanzi County, the imperial court issued an imperial edict to extend the title to Qingzhou.

古文：渊既不获州任，情又恐惧，行达广川，遂劫光州库兵反。
现代文：侯渊既不能得到州职，心中又生恐惧，行达广川，便劫持光州库军反叛。
English: Since Houyuan could not get a state post, fear arose in his heart, and he went to Guangchuan, where he hijacked the Gwangju Kuomintang army to rebel.

古文：遣骑诣平原，执前胶州刺史贾璐。
现代文：派骑兵到平原抓住前胶州刺史贾璐。
English: Send the cavalry to the plains to catch the former Jiaozhou stinger Jiaqi.

古文：夜袭青州南郭，劫前廷尉卿崔光韶，以惑人情，攻掠郡县。
现代文：夜袭青州南廓，劫持前廷尉崔光韶，以惑人情。攻掠郡县。
English: They attacked the southern part of Qingzhou at night and kidnapped the former imperial lieutenant Cui Guangya to mislead people. They attacked and plundered counties.

古文：其部下督帅叛拒之，渊率骑奔萧衍，途中亡散，行达南青州南境，为卖浆者斩之，传首京师，家口配没。
现代文：他的部下督帅背叛抵抗他，侯渊率领骑兵投奔萧衍，中途部下纷纷离散而去，行到南青州南境，被卖酒的人杀了，传首京师，家小配斩。
English: His subordinate superintendent betrayed and resisted him. Hou Yuan led the cavalry to rush to Xiao Yan. Halfway there, his subordinates dispersed and went to the southern border of South Qingzhou. They were killed by the liquor sellers, the head of the Beijing division was beheaded, and the minor members of the family were beheaded.

