古文：秦以关中之地，日夜东猎六国，百有余年，悉禽灭之。
现代文：秦国凭着关中的地理优势，不断地向东攻袭六国，经过一百多年，把六个国家全部消灭了。
English: With the geographical advantage of Guanzhong, Qin constantly attacked the six countries to the east. After more than a hundred years, the six countries were all eliminated.

古文：虽云得地利，善为兵，故百战百胜，以予考之，实六国自有以致之也。
现代文：虽然说有地势上的优势，并且善于用兵，因此百战百胜。但根据我的考察，实际上六国也有导致灭亡的内部原因。
English: Although it is said that there are advantages in terms of terrain and that they are good at using soldiers, so they win every battle, according to my investigation, in fact, the six countries also have internal causes that lead to their demise.

古文：韩、燕弱小，置不足论。
现代文：韩国、燕国弱小，暂且放在一边，不作讨论。
English: Korea and Yan Guo are small and weak, so they will be put aside for the time being and will not be discussed.

古文：彼四国者，魏以惠王而衰，齐以闵王而衰，楚以怀王而衰，赵以孝成王而衰，皆本于好兵贪地之故。
现代文：其他四个国家，魏国在魏惠王时衰亡，齐国在齐闵王时衰亡，楚国在楚怀王时衰亡，赵国在赵孝成王时衰亡，根本原因都是好用战争侵占土地的缘故。
English: The other four countries, Wei fell during the reign of King Wei Hui, Qi fell during the reign of King Qi Jun, Chu fell during the reign of King Chu Hui, and Zhao fell during the reign of King Zhao Xiaocheng, all of which were caused by the use of war to occupy land.

古文：魏承文侯、武侯之后，表里山河，大于三晋，诸侯莫能与之争。
现代文：魏国承继魏文侯、魏武侯之后，以大山黄河作为屏障，在三晋中最为强大，各诸侯没有能跟它相争的。
English: After Wei Wenhou and Wei Wuhou, Wei Guocheng used the great mountain Yellow River as a barrier. It was the most powerful of the three Jin dynasties, and none of the states could compete with it.

古文：而惠王数伐韩、赵，志吞邯郸，挫败于齐，军覆子死，卒之为秦所困，国日以蹙，失河西七百里，去安邑而都大梁，数世不振，讫于殄国。
现代文：而魏惠王多次攻伐韩国、赵国，想要吞并邯郸，结果被齐国挫败，军队覆没，太子身亡，最后被秦国所困扰，国势日益紧迫不安，失去了黄河以西七百里的土地，离开安邑而在大梁建都，几代不能振兴，终于国家灭亡了。
English: However, King Wei Hui repeatedly attacked Korea and Zhao and tried to annex Yunnan. As a result, he was defeated by Qi, the army was destroyed, the prince died, and finally he was troubled by Qin. The national situation became increasingly urgent and insecure. He lost seven hundred miles of land west of the Yellow River. He left Anyi and built the capital in Daliang. Several generations could not revitalize the country, and finally the country perished.

古文：闵王承威、宣之后，山东之建国莫强焉。
现代文：齐闵王承接齐威王、齐宣王之后，崤山以东的诸侯国没有比它强大的。
English: After King Qishan succeeded King Qiwei and King Qi Xuan, there was no more powerful vassal state east of Mount Lushan.

古文：而狃于伐宋之利，南侵楚，西侵三晋，欲并二周为天子，遂为燕所屠。
现代文：可是齐闵王贪图攻伐宋国的利益，向南侵犯楚国，向西进攻韩、魏、赵，想吞并东周、西周的土地成为天子，结果遭到燕国的屠戮。
English: However, King Qizong coveted the interests of the Song Dynasty, invaded Chu to the south, attacked Han, Wei, and Zhao to the west, and wanted to annex the land of East Zhou and West Zhou to become the son of heaven. As a result, he was slaughtered by Yan.

古文：虽赖田单之力，得复亡城，子孙沮气，孑孑自保，终堕秦计，束手为虏。
现代文：虽然依仗田单的力量，能够收复失去的城池，但齐的子孙沮丧不振，孤零零只求自保，最终中了秦国的计谋，束手就擒。
English: Although relying on the strength of Tian Shan, he was able to recover the lost city, but Qi's descendants were depressed and lonely and only sought self-preservation. In the end, they fell for the Qin State's trickery and went to bed.

古文：怀王贪商於六百里，受诈张仪，失其名都，丧其甲士，不能取偿，身遭囚辱以死。
现代文：楚怀王贪图商於的六百里土地，遭到张仪的欺诈，失去了著名的都城，散失了军队士卒，却不能取得这些土地，自己遭到囚禁侮辱而死。
English: King Chu Huai coveted the six hundred miles of land that the merchants had taken, was cheated by Zhang Yi, lost the famous capital city, scattered the soldiers, but could not acquire these lands, and was himself imprisoned and humiliated and died.

古文：赵以上党之地，代韩受兵，利令智昏，轻用民死，同日坑于长平者过四十万，几于社稷为墟，幸不即亡，终以不免。
现代文：赵国因为想得到韩国的上党之地，替韩国接受了战争，利益使理智混乱，轻率地使人民死于战场，结果一日间在长平被秦军坑杀的人超过了四十万，国家几乎成了废墟，幸而没有马上灭亡，最终还是不能幸免。
English: Zhao Guo accepted the war on behalf of South Korea because he wanted to get South Korea's place at the top of the party. The interests confused the reason and rashly caused the people to die on the battlefield. As a result, more than 400,000 people were killed by the Qin army in Changping in one day. The country was almost in ruins. Fortunately, it did not perish immediately, but in the end it could not be spared.

古文：此四国之君，苟为保境睦邻，畏天自守，秦虽强大，岂能加我哉！
现代文：这四个国家的君主，如果能够保护疆域，和邻国友好往来，敬畏天命，自守家园，那么秦国虽然强大，又能对他们怎么样呢！
English: If the monarchs of these four countries can protect their borders, maintain friendly relations with their neighbors, fear the fate of heaven, and protect their homeland, then what can Qin, although powerful, do to them?

