古文：皇后六宫位号，汉、魏以来，因袭增置，世不同矣。
现代文：六宫的职位称号，自汉、魏以来，有沿袭有增设，各代都不相同。
English: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, the title of the position of the Six Palaces has been inherited and added, and it is different for each generation.

古文：建元元年，有司奏置贵嫔、夫人、贵人为三夫人，修华、修仪、修容、淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、婕妤、容华、充华为九嫔，美人、中才人、才人为散职。
现代文：建元元年，有关官员奏请设贵嫔、夫人、贵人为三夫人，设修华、修仪、修容、淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、婕妤、容华、充华为九嫔，美人、中才人、才人为散职。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the relevant officials made a request to set the noblewoman, the wife, and the noblewoman as the three wives, and set the beauty, the ceremony, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the

古文：永明元年，有司奏贵妃、淑妃并加金章紫绶，佩于窴玉。
现代文：永明元年，有关官员奏请给贵妃、淑妃都加赐金印章和紫绶带，佩戴于资玉。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the relevant officials requested that Guifei and Shuifei be given gold seals and purple ribbons, which were worn on zidama.

古文：淑妃旧拟九棘，以淑为温恭之称，妃为亚后之名，进同贵妃，以比三司。
现代文：淑妃旧制相当于九卿，淑解作温良谦恭的意思，妃是仅次于后的意思，进则等同于贵妃，相当于三公。
English: Shufei in the old system was equivalent to Jiuqing. Shufei means gentle and courteous, Fei means second only to the latter, and Jin is equivalent to Guifei, which is equivalent to San Gong.

古文：夫人之号，不殊蕃国。
现代文：夫人的称号，与藩国没有差别。
English: There is no difference between the title of the wife and that of the lord of the domain.

古文：降淑媛以比九卿。
现代文：降低淑媛级别，使等同于九卿。
English: Decrease the rank of Lady Sukhime to be equal to that of the nine nobles.

古文：七年，复置昭容，位在九嫔。
现代文：七年，又设昭容，位在九嫔行列。
English: Seven years later, Zhaorong was also set up, and was in the ranks of the Nine Dynasties.

古文：建元三年，太子宫置三内职，良娣比开国侯，保林比五等侯，才人比驸马都尉。
现代文：建元三年，太子宫设三个内职，良娣相当于开国侯，保林相当于五等侯，才人相当于驸马都尉。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, there were three posts in the Prince and Princess's palace. Liang Jian was equivalent to the founding prince, Bao Lin was equivalent to the fifth prince, and Cai Ren was equivalent to the captain of the imperial horse.

古文：宣孝陈皇后，讳道正，临淮东阳人，魏司徒陈矫後。
现代文：宣孝陈皇后名道正，是临淮东阳人，魏司徒陈矫的后代。
English: Empress Chen Xuanxiao was a virtuous woman. She was a descendant of Chen Jiao, who was from Linyi, Huai, Dongyang and Wei.

古文：父肇之，郡孝廉。
现代文：父名肇之，是郡裹的孝廉。
English: His father's name is Zhao Zhi, and he is a filial son of the county.

古文：后少家贫，勤织作。家人矜其劳，或止之，后终不改。
现代文：皇后小时家里穷，她辛勤地纺织，家裹人怜惜她太劳累，有人劝阻她，皇后始终未改变。
English: When the Empress was a child, her family was poor. She worked hard at weaving. Her family felt sorry for her because she was so tired. Someone tried to dissuade her, but the Empress never changed.

古文：嫁于宣帝，庶生衡阳元王道度、始安贞王道生，后生太祖。
现代文：嫁给宣帝。宣帝的妾生了衡阳元王道度、始安贞王道生，皇后生了太祖。
English: She married Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan's concubine gave birth to Hengyang Yuan Wang Daodu and Shi'an Zhen Wang Daodu, and the empress gave birth to Taizu.

古文：太祖年二岁，乳人乏乳，后梦人以两瓯麻粥与之，觉而乳大出，异而说之。
现代文：太祖两岁时，乳母缺乳，皇后梦见有人送给她两瓯麻粥吃，醒来乳汁大出，皇后因此感到奇异而喜欢太祖。
English: When the great-grandfather was two years old, the nanny was short of milk. The queen dreamed that someone gave her two nettle porridge to eat, and woke up with a large amount of milk. The queen felt strange and liked the great-grandfather.

古文：宣帝从仕在外，后常留家治事教子孙。
现代文：宣帝在外地任职，皇后常留在家裹治理家务教育子孙。
English: Emperor Xuan served abroad, and the empress often stayed at home to supervise household chores and educate her children and grandchildren.

古文：有相者谓后曰： 夫人有贵子而不见也。 
现代文：有相命的对皇后说： 夫人，你有个贵子，你还没看出来吗? 
English: A courtier said to the queen, "Madam, you have a son. Don't you see it yet?

古文：后叹曰： 我三儿谁当应之！ 
现代文：皇后慨叹说： 我有三个儿子，谁是呢。 
English: The Empress sighed and said, "I have three sons. Who are they?"

古文：呼太祖小字曰： 正应是汝耳。 
现代文：相命的叫着太祖的乳名说： 正应在你身上。 
English: They called out their great-grandfather's nickname in unison and said, "It's right for you."

古文：宣帝殂后，后亲自执勤，婢使有过误，恕不问也。
现代文：宣帝死后，皇后亲自持家，奴婢有过错，原谅而不责问。
English: After Emperor Xuan's death, the empress personally took charge of the household, forgave her servants when they did something wrong, and did not reprimand them.

古文：太祖虽从官，而家业本贫，为建康令时，高宗等冬月犹无缣纩，而奉膳甚厚。后每撤去兼肉，曰： 于我过足矣。 
现代文：太祖尽管做了官，但家裹原本贫穷，做建康令的时候，高宗等人到了冬天还没有好一点的寒衣，但是供奉皇后的东西很丰厚，皇后总是衹留一份肉食，说： 我已经足够了。 
English: Although the great-grandfather was an official, the family was originally poor. When the Jiankang Order was issued, Gaozong and others did not have a better winter coat in winter, but the things dedicated to the queen were very rich. The queen always kept a piece of meat and said, "I have enough."

古文：殂于县舍，年七十三。
现代文：她死于县裹的官舍，终年七十三岁。
English: She died in a government house in the county at the age of seventy-three.

古文：升明三年，追赠竟陵公国太夫人，蜜印，画青绶，祠以太牢；建元元年，追尊孝皇后。
现代文：升明二年，追赠为竟陵公国太夫人，赐蜜印，画青绶，用太牢祭奠。纭元年，追尊为孝皇后。
English: In the second year after her ascension to the throne, she was posthumously awarded the title of Dowager Empress of the Principality of Goryeong. She was given a honeysuckle, painted with lilies of the valley, and held a memorial service in a dungeon. In the first year of the Heian period, she was posthumously named Empress Takahito.

古文：赠外祖父肇之金紫光禄大夫，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：追赠外祖父肇之为金紫光禄大夫，谧号敬侯。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor by his maternal grandfather Zhao, and his posthumous name was Jin Hou.

古文：后母胡氏为永昌县靖君。
现代文：追赠皇后的母亲支呕为永昌县靖君。
English: The mother of the posthumous queen is Yongchang County's Yasukimi.

古文：高昭刘皇后，讳智容，广陵人也。
现代文：高昭刘皇后名智容，广陵人。
English: Empress Gao Zhao Liu is famous for her wit, and is from Guangling.

古文：祖玄之，父寿之，并员外郎。
现代文：祖父名玄之，父亲名寿之，都是员外郎。
English: His grandfather, Liu Xuanzhi, and his father, Liu Shouzhi, were both foreign diplomats.

古文：后母桓氏梦吞玉胜生后，时有紫光满室，以告寿之，寿之曰： 恨非是男。 
现代文：皇后的母亲桓氏梦中吞下了玉制的发饰遂生了皇后，当时满室紫光，她把这情况告诉寿之，寿之说： 可惜不是男孩。 
English: The empress's mother, Huan, swallowed the imperial hair ornament in a dream and gave birth to the empress. At that time, the room was full of purple light. She told this to Shou Zhi. Shou Zhi said, "Unfortunately, it's not a boy."

古文：桓曰： 虽女，亦足兴家矣。 
现代文：桓氏说： 虽然是女儿，也足以使家族兴旺了。 
English: Mr. Huan said: Although she is a daughter, she is enough to make the family prosper.

古文：后母寝卧，家人常见上如有云气焉。
现代文：皇后每当睡觉时，家里人常常看见她上方有云气。
English: The family would often see a cloud above the Queen when she was asleep.

古文：年十余岁，归太祖，严正有礼法，家庭肃然。宋泰豫元年殂，年五十。
现代文：十多岁嫁给太祖，为人严正守礼法，家庭上上下下治理得有条不紊。宋泰豫元年死，终年五十岁。
English: She married her great-grandfather when she was more than ten years old. She was a person who strictly observed the etiquette, and the family was governed in an orderly manner. Song Taiyuan died in the first year of the year and was fifty years old.

古文：归葬宣帝墓侧，今泰安陵也。
现代文：葬在宣帝墓旁边，就是现在的泰安陵。
English: He was buried next to the tomb of Emperor Xuan, which is now the Tai'an Mausoleum.

古文：门生王清与墓工始下锸，有白兔跳起，寻之不得，及坟成，兔还栖其上。
现代文：门生王清和墓工刚掘土，有只白兔跳起来跑了，寻觅不见，等到坟墓筑成，白兔又回到坟上栖息。
English: Wang Qing's protégé and the gravedigger had just started digging. A white rabbit jumped up and ran away. They couldn't find it. When the grave was completed, the white rabbit returned to the grave to roost.

古文：升明二年，赠竟陵公国夫人；三年，赠齐国妃；印绶如太妃。
现代文：升明二年，追赠为竞陵公国夫人。三年，追赠为齐国妃，印绶与太妃相同。
English: Two years after ascending the throne, she was posthumously awarded the title of the wife of the Duke of Jingling. Three years later, she was posthumously awarded the title of the Empress of Qi, and her seal was the same as that of the Empress of Tao.

古文：建元元年，尊谥昭皇后。
现代文：建元元年，谧号尊为昭皇后。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, her posthumous name became the Empress Zhao.

古文：三年，赠后父金紫光禄大夫，母桓氏上虞都乡君；寿之子兴道司徒属，文蔚豫章内史，义徽光禄大夫，义伦通直郎。
现代文：三年，追赠皇后的父亲为金紫光禄大夫，追赠她母亲桓氏为上虞都乡君；寿之的儿子兴道为司徒属官，塞菌为遂童内史，盖邀为光禄大夫，盏俭为通直郎。
English: In three years, the father of the posthumous queen was Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, the father of the posthumous queen was Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, the father of the posthumous queen was her mother, Mr. Huan, was Shangyu Duxiangjun; the son of Mr. Toshizhi, Xingdao, was a subordinate official of Stu, Mr. Sai Ye, was Sui Tong Nai Shi, Mr. Gai Ying, was Dr. Guanglu, and Mr. Jian Jian, was Tong Naorong.

古文：武穆裴皇后，讳惠昭，河东闻喜人也。祖朴之，给事中。
现代文：武穆裴皇后名惠昭，是河东闻喜人。祖父名基之，任给事中。
English: Wu Mu Pei's empress, named Hui Zhao, was a prominent figure in eastern China. Her grandfather, named Ji Zhou, was appointed to the position.

古文：父玑之，左军参军。
现代文：父亲名璎烫，任左军参军。
English: His father, Naosuke, joined the army as a member of the Left Army.

古文：后少与豫章王妃庾氏为娣姒，庾氏勤女工，奉事太祖、昭后恭谨不倦，后不能及，故不为舅姑所重，世祖家好亦薄焉。
现代文：皇后年轻时与豫章王的妃子庾氏是妯娌，庾区勤于女工，侍奉太祖和昭后恭敬而不懈怠，皇后比不上她，因此不被公婆看重，世祖家庭和美，也轻视她。
English: When the empress was young, she was a concubine of King Yuanzhang of the Min clan. In Min, women worked diligently and served the great-grandfather and the empress dowager respectfully and tirelessly. The empress was not as good as her, so she was not valued by her in-laws. The family and beauty of the great-grandfather also despised her.

古文：性刚严，竟陵王子良妃袁氏布衣时有过，后加训罚。
现代文：皇后性情刚毅严厉，竟陵王子皇的妃子袁氏原先为平民时曾犯了过失，皇后予以训斥责罚。
English: The empress had a tough and stern disposition. She reprimanded and punished Yuan Shih, the concubine of Emperor Lingzhu, who had committed a mistake when he was a commoner.

古文：升明三年，为齐世子妃。
现代文：升明三年，封为齐世子妃。
English: Three years after ascending the throne, she was given the title of Empress Dowager Qi.

古文：建元元年，为皇太子妃。
现代文：建元元年，封皇太子妃。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, she was given the title of crown princess.

古文：三年，后薨。
现代文：三年，皇后死。
English: Three years later, the empress died.

古文：谥穆妃，葬休安陵。
现代文：谧号穆妃，葬在休安陵。
English: Her posthumous name was Mu Fei, and she was buried in the Shu'an Mausoleum.

古文：世祖即位，追尊皇后。
现代文：世祖即位，追尊她为皇后。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and she became the empress.

古文：赠玑之金紫光禄大夫，后母檀氏余杭广昌乡元君。
现代文：追赠玑之为金紫光禄大夫，皇后的母亲檀氏为余杭广昌乡元君。
English: Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu and the queen's mother, Ms. Dang, were posthumously awarded the title of "Yuhang Guangchangxiang Yuanjun."

古文：旧显阳、昭阳殿，太后、皇后所居也。
现代文：原来的显阳殿和昭阳殿，是太后、皇后居住的地方。
English: The original Xianyang Hall and Zhaoyang Hall are where the empress dowager and empress lived.

古文：永明中无太后、皇后，羊贵嫔居昭阳殿西，范贵妃居昭阳殿东，宠姬荀昭华居凤华柏殿。
现代文：永明年间没有太后、皇后，羊贵嫔住在昭阳殿西边，范贵妃住在昭阳殿束边，宠爱的姬妾荀昭华住在凤华柏殿。
English: There was no empress dowager or empress for a long time. Yang Guifei lived on the west side of the Zhao Yang Palace, Fan Guifei lived on the north side of the Zhao Yang Palace, and her favorite concubine Zou Zhao Hua lived on the north side of the Feng Huabao Palace.

古文：宫内御所居寿昌画殿南阁，置白鹭鼓吹二部，乾光殿东西头，置钟磬两厢，皆宴乐处也。
现代文：宫内皇帝的寝所在寿昌画殿南阁，设置白鹭鼓吹两部；干光殿东西两头，设钟磬乐器在两厢：都是宴游享乐的地方。
English: The emperor's bed in the palace is located in the South Pavilion of the Shouchang Painting Hall, with two parts of the egret trumpet; the East and West ends of the Dry Light Hall, with bell and gong musical instruments in two rooms: both are places of pleasure.

古文：上数游幸诸苑囿，载宫人从後车。宫内深隐，不闻端门鼓漏声，置钟于景阳楼上，宫人闻钟声，早起装饰。至今此钟唯应五鼓及三鼓也。
现代文：皇上多次到那些园中游玩，让宫女们坐车随后跟着，因宫裹幽深，听不到端门报时的鼓漏声，就在景阳楼上设钟，宫女们听到钟声，就早早起来梳妆打扮，至今这个钟还是衹按时报五鼓和三更鼓。
English: The Emperor made many trips to these gardens, letting his ladies-in-waiting ride in the car and then following behind. As the palace was shrouded in darkness, they couldn't hear the sound of the drums announcing the time, so they set up a bell on the Jingyang Building. When the ladies-in-waiting heard the bell, they got up early to dress up. To this day, this bell still chimes the five drums and three more drums according to the time.

古文：车驾数幸琅邪城，宫人常从，早发至湖北埭，鸡始鸣。
现代文：皇上多次乘车到琅邪城，宫女常常随从，赶早出发到湖的北埭，鸡才啼岛。
English: The emperor took the car to Shanyi City many times, and his concubine often accompanied him. They set off early to the northern part of the lake, and finally arrived at Shanyi Island.

古文：吴郡韩兰英，妇人有文辞。
现代文：吴郡的韩兰英，虽是妇人却有文才。
English: Han Lanying from Wuxi County is a woman with literary talent.

古文：宋孝武世，献《中兴赋》，被赏入宫。
现代文：宋孝武世的时候，进献《中兴赋》，受赏赐进宫。
English: When Song Xiaowu was alive, he presented "Zhongxingfu" to the emperor and was rewarded with entry into the imperial palace.

古文：宋明帝世，用为宫中职僚。
现代文：宋明帝时，被任以宫中的职位。
English: During the reign of Emperor Song Ming, he was appointed to a position in the imperial court.

古文：世祖以为博士，教六宫书学，以其年老多识，呼为 韩公 。
现代文：世狙任她为博士，教导宫中妃嫔的书法，因她年老见识广，被人称为 韩公 。
English: The world wanted her to be a doctor, to teach calligraphy to the concubines in the palace. Because of her old age and broad knowledge, she was called Han Gong.

古文：文安王皇后，讳宝明，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：文安王皇后名宝明，琅邪临沂人。
English: The empress of King Wen'an was named Bao Ming, and the people of Linyi followed her.

古文：祖韶之，吴兴太守，父晔之，太宰祭酒。
现代文：祖父名韶之，是吴兴太守。父亲名坠之，任太宰祭酒。
English: His grandfather was Wu Xing Taishu, and his father was Dazai Shoshu.

古文：宋世，太祖为文惠太子纳后，桂阳贼至，太祖在新亭，传言已没，宅复为人所抄掠，文惠太子、竟陵王子良奉穆后、庾妃及后挺身送后兄昺之家，事平乃出。
现代文：宋代，太祖为文惠太子娶了皇后。桂阳的贼兵来时，太祖在新亭，谣传他已经死了，家宅又被贼人劫掠，文惠太子和竟陵王子良出来把穆后、庾妃以及皇后送到皇后的兄长呙之的家裹，乱事平定才出来。
English: In the Song Dynasty, the great-grandfather married the empress for Prince Wen Hui. When the Guiyang bandits came, the great-grandfather was in Xingting. It was rumored that he was dead, and his house was robbed by the bandits. Prince Wen Hui and Prince Gong Ling Liang came out and sent the Queen Mother, the Empress Dowager, and the Empress to the home of the empress's brother, the Empress Dowager, and the turmoil was settled.

古文：建元元年，为南郡王妃。
现代文：建元元年，封为南郡王妃。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, she was given the title of Queen of Nan County.

古文：四年，为皇太子妃，无宠。
现代文：四年，封为皇太子妃，不受宠爱。
English: Four years later, she was crowned crown princess, but she was not loved.

古文：太子为宫人制新丽衣裳及首饰，而后床帷陈设故旧，钗镊十余枚。
现代文：太子为宫人制办时新衣裙和首饰，但是皇后的床帐帷幕等陈设依然是旧的，首饰仅十余件。
English: The prince's new dress and jewelry were made for the palace, but the queen's bed curtain and other furnishings are still old, and there are only more than ten pieces of jewelry.

古文：永明十一年，为皇太孙太妃。
现代文：永明十一年，封为皇太孙太妃。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Yongming, she was given the title of Empress Dowager Granddaughter.

古文：郁林即位，尊为皇太后，称宣德宫。
现代文：郁林王即位时，尊封她为皇太后，称宣疆宣。
English: When King Yulin ascended the throne, he appointed her as empress dowager, calling her Xuanjia Xuan.

古文：赠后父金紫光禄大夫，母桓氏丰安县君。
现代文：追赠皇后的父亲为金紫光禄大夫，母亲旦臣为丰安县君。
English: The father of the posthumous queen was Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, and her mother, Dang Zhen, was from Feng'an County.

古文：其年十二月，备法驾谒太庙，高宗即位，出居鄱阳王故第，为宣德宫。
现代文：当年十二月，备法驾拜谒太庙。即位后，出宫住在塑压旺的旧居，称为宣德宫。
English: In December of that year, he made preparations to pay homage at the Jingtai Temple. After his enthronement, he left the palace to live in his oppressively beautiful former residence, known as the Xuande Palace.

古文：永元三年，梁王定京邑，迎后入宫称制，至禅位。
现代文：三年，凿王平定京城，迎接皇后进宫执政，直到禅位。
English: In three years, the king conquered the capital, welcomed the empress into the palace, and ruled until Zen.

古文：天监十一年，薨，年五十八。
现代文：天监十一年死。终年五十八岁。
English: The overseer of heaven died eleven years ago. He was fifty-eight years old.

古文：葬崇安陵。
现代文：葬在崇安陵。
English: He was buried in the Chong'an Mausoleum.

古文：谥曰安后。兄晃义兴太守。
现代文：谧号为安后，兄王晃任义兴太守。
English: His posthumous name was Ango, and his older brother, Wang Jiao, was appointed Yixing's regent.

古文：郁林王何妃，名婧英，庐江灊人，抚军将军戢之女也。
现代文：郁林王何妃名婧英，庐江满地人，是抚军将军何戢的女儿。
English: Yulin King Hefei's name was Heying, a Manchurian from the Li River, and she was the daughter of the general of the Fuzhou army, He Yao.

古文：永明二年，纳为南郡王妃。
现代文：永明二年，做了南郡王的妃子。
English: In the second year of Yongming, she became the concubine of the king of Nan County.

古文：十一年，为皇太孙妃。
现代文：十一年，封为皇太孙妃。
English: Eleven years later, she was named the granddaughter of the emperor.

古文：郁林王即位，为皇后。
现代文：郁林王即位，封她为皇后。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne and made her his queen.

古文：嫡母刘氏为高昌县都乡君，所生母宋氏，为余杭广昌乡君。
现代文：嫡母刘氏封为高昌县都乡君，亲生母亲宋氏，封为余杭广昌乡君。
English: His legitimate mother, Liu, was given the title of Duxiangjun of Gaochang County, and his biological mother, Song, was given the title of Yuhang Guangchangxiangjun.

古文：将拜，镜在床无故堕地。
现代文：将受封时，镜子在床上无缘无故地掉到地下。
English: When he was about to be crowned, the mirror on his bed fell to the ground for no reason.

古文：其冬，与太后同日谒太庙。
现代文：当年冬的一天，与太后同去拜谒太庙。
English: That winter, on the same day as the empress dowager, I went to the Imperial Temple to worship.

古文：后禀性淫乱，为妃时，便与外人奸通。
现代文：皇后本性淫乱，做妃子时就与宫外人通奸。
English: The empress was naturally promiscuous, and when she was a concubine, she committed adultery with a man from outside the palace.

古文：在后宫，复通帝左右杨珉之，与同寝处如伉俪。
现代文：在后宫又与皇帝近臣杨珉之私通，同居同处如夫妻一样。
English: In the harem, he had a love affair with the emperor's close retainer Yang Xizhi, and they lived together like a husband and wife.

古文：珉之又与帝相爱亵，故帝恣之。
现代文：珉之又与皇帝关系暧昧，所以皇帝也听之任之。
English: He also had an ambiguous relationship with the emperor, so the emperor let him do as he pleased.

古文：迎后亲戚入宫，赏赐人百数十万。
现代文：她迎接亲属进宫，每人赏赐一百几十万。
English: She welcomed her relatives into the palace and rewarded each of them with one hundred thousand yuan.

古文：以世祖耀灵殿处后家属。
现代文：把世祖的耀灵殿给皇后的亲属住。
English: The ancestral Yoringe-den was given to the queen's relatives to live in.

古文：帝被废，后贬为王妃。
现代文：皇帝被废，皇后也被贬为王妃。
English: The emperor was deposed, and the empress was reduced to a princess.

古文：海陵王王妃，名韶明，琅邪临沂人，太常慈女也。
现代文：海陵王王起名韶明，是琅邪临沂人，是太常王莲的女儿。
English: Hailing from Linyi, Hailing Wang Wang is the daughter of King Lin.

古文：永明八年，纳为临汝公夫人。
现代文：丞塱八年，做了堕达盆的夫人。
English: In the eighth year of the Joseon Dynasty, she became the wife of a traitor.

古文：郁林即位，为新安王妃。
现代文：郁拯王即位，封为新童王妃。
English: King Ikuzo ascends the throne and is crowned the new crown prince.

古文：延兴元年，为皇后。
现代文：至缨元年，封为皇后。
English: She was crowned empress in 1861.

古文：其年，降为海陵王妃。
现代文：当年，降为迤壁王妃。
English: In that year, she was demoted to the rank of Shibei no himemiko.

古文：明敬刘皇后，讳惠端，彭城人，光禄大夫道弘孙也。
现代文：明敬刘皇后名惠端，彭城人，是光禄大夫道弘的孙女。
English: Ming Jing Liu Empress Ming Hui Duan, a native of Pengcheng, is the granddaughter of Guanglu Daifu Daohong.

古文：太祖为高宗纳之。
现代文：太祖为高宗娶了她。
English: The great-grandfather married her for Gaozong.

古文：建元三年，除西昌侯夫人。
现代文：建元三年，封为西昌侯夫人。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, she was given the title of Lady of Xichang.

古文：永明七年，卒，葬江乘县张山。
现代文：死于永明七年，葬在江乘县的张山。
English: He died in the seventh year of Yongming and was buried in Zhangshan, Jiangren County.

古文：延兴元年，赠宣城王妃；高宗即位，追尊为敬皇后。
现代文：延兴元年，追赠为宣城王妃。高宗即位，追赠为敬皇后。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, she was posthumously awarded the title of Princess of Xuancheng. After Emperor Gaozong's accession to the throne, she was posthumously awarded the title of Empress.

古文：赠父通直郎景猷金紫光禄大夫，母王氏平阳乡君。
现代文：追赠她父亲通直郎景猷为金紫光禄大夫，追赠她母亲王氏为平阳乡君。
English: Her father, Tong Naorong Jingyao, was posthumously awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and her mother, Wang, was posthumously awarded the title of Pingyang Township.

古文：永泰元年，高宗崩，改葬，祔于兴安陵。
现代文：永泰元年，高宗去世，皇后改葬，随皇帝葬在兴安陵。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Gaozong died, the empress was reburied, and was buried with the emperor in the Xing'an Mausoleum.

古文：东昏褚皇后，名令璩，河南阳翟人，太常澄女也。
现代文：东昏褚皇后名令璩，河南阳翟人，是太常继的女儿。
English: She is the daughter of Emperor Taizong of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and Empress Meiling of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：建武二年，纳为皇太子妃。
现代文：建武二年，做了皇太子妃。
English: In the second year of the Kenmu era, she became the crown princess.

古文：明年，谒敬后庙。
现代文：第二年，拜敬皇后庙。
English: In the second year, the worship of the Empress's temple began.

古文：东昏即位，为皇后。
现代文：柬昏侯即位，封为皇后。
English: Camilla ascends the throne and is crowned Queen.

古文：帝宠潘妃，后不被遇。
现代文：皇帝宠爱荡蛆，皇后得不到宠幸。
English: The emperor favors the ripples, the queen does not get favored.

古文：黄淑仪生太子诵，东昏废，并为庶人。
现代文：董邀堡生了太子盖谪，塞昼堡被废，她也与之一起贬为平民。
English: Dong Zhaibao gave birth to Prince Gaige, Sai Rongbao was abolished, and she was also reduced to a commoner.

古文：和帝王皇后，名蕣华，琅邪临沂人，太尉俭孙也。
现代文：和帝王皇后名蕣华，琅邪临沂人，是太尉王俭的孙女。
English: She was the granddaughter of the imperial lieutenant Wang Jian.

古文：初为随王妃。
现代文：起初为随王妃。
English: At first, it was the crown princess.

古文：中兴元年，为皇后。
现代文：中兴元年封为皇后。
English: Zhongxing was crowned empress in the first year of the year.

古文：帝禅位，后降为妃。
现代文：皇帝让位后，她也由皇后被降为妃。
English: She was also demoted from empress to princess after the emperor abdicated.

古文：史臣曰：后妃之德，著自风谣，义起闺房，而道化天下。
现代文：史臣曰：称颂后妃之德，始自《诗经》之《国风》，虽然守礼持正是在闺房裹，却能教化天下。
English: Shichen said: "The praise of the virtue of the empress dowager began with the "national style" of the "Song of Songs." Although the observance of etiquette is wrapped in the boudoir, it can enlighten the world.

古文：缲盆献种，罔非耕织，佩管晨兴，与子同事，可以光熙阃业，作俪公侯。
现代文：缫丝献种，无不是为了鼓励耕织，身佩钥匙早早起床，和丈夫一起管理家务，可以光大妇德，并且带动公侯。
English: The silk donation is not only to encourage farming and weaving, to get up early with a key, and to manage the housework with her husband, so that she can be a virtuous woman and drive the prince.

古文：孝、昭二后，并有贤明之训，不得母临万国。
现代文：孝昭两位皇后都有贤明的规训，没能及早做上国母。
English: Both Empresses Xiao Zhao and Xiao Zhao had a wise discipline, and were not able to become the mother of the country as early as possible.

古文：宝命方昌，椒庭虚位，有妇人焉，空慕周兴，祯符显瑞，徒萃徽名。若使掖作同休，阴教远燮，则马、邓风流，复存乎此。
现代文：等到国运昌盛时，宫内位置空缺。有妇人凭空仰慕周代的兴盛，瑞符示祥，也祇是空留美名如若后宫和睦同心，妇人的影响也教化很远，那么马、邓那样的繁荣又出现在这时了。
English: By the time of the prosperity of the National Games, the position in the palace was vacant. There was a woman who admired the prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty out of thin air, and the auspicious symbol was auspicious, but it was just an empty reputation. If the harem was harmonious and united, and the influence of women was far away, then the prosperity like Ma and Deng would appear at this time again.

古文：太祖创命，宫禁贬约，毁宋明之紫极，革前代之逾奢，衣不文绣，色无红采，永巷贫空，有同素室。
现代文：太祖始创国家，皇宫少了禁约，毁弃宋代升明时的宫殿，革除前代奢侈的风气，穿的衣服不绣花纹，不使用红红绿绿的色彩，后宫没有什么装饰，如同平常人家。
English: When the great ancestors founded the country, the imperial palace was less forbidden, the palaces of the Song Dynasty were abandoned, the extravagant customs of the previous generation were eliminated, the clothes worn were not embroidered, the red-red-green-green colors were not used, and the harem was not decorated, as usual.

古文：世祖嗣位，运藉休平，寿昌前兴，凤华晚构，香柏文柽，花梁绣柱，雕金镂宝，颇用房帷，赵瑟《吴趋》，承闲奏曲，岁费傍恩，足使充牣，事由私蓄，无损国储。
现代文：世祖继位，承祖荫国运平安，于是寿昌画殿兴建在前，凤华柏殿构筑在后，用上芳香的柏木和有彩纹的樫木，彩饰大梁和立柱，雕刻金银寅器，多用帷幕。闲时用趟地的瑟奏上一曲《吴趋行》，每年岁贡充足，而办事的花费是皇宫的积蓄，没有减损国库。
English: The ancestor succeeded to the throne, and the state of the country was safe under the shadow of the ancestor. Therefore, the Shuchang Painting Hall was built in the front, and the Fenghua Bamboo Hall was built in the back. They used aromatic cypress trees and colored birch trees, decorated beams and columns, carved gold and silver tiger utensils, and used curtains. In their spare time, they played the first song "Wu Xiang Xing" with the "Wu Xiang Xing." The annual tribute was sufficient, and the cost of doing business was the savings of the imperial palace, without impairing the national treasury.

古文：高宗仗数矫情，外行俭陋，内奉宫业，曾莫云改。
现代文：高宗掩盖真情，外表俭约简朴，在宫内却另行一套，从不改易。
English: Gao Zong conceals his true feelings and is frugal and simple on the outside, but inside the palace he is a different person and never changes.

古文：东昏丧道，侈风大扇，销糜海内，以赡浮饰，哲妇倾城，同符殷、夏。
现代文：东昏失德，奢侈的风气大行，影响全国，到处充满浮华的装饰，多智的女人能倾倒全城，与殷、夏两朝情况相同。唉!
English: The East has lost its virtue, the extravagant fashion is rampant, affecting the whole country, everywhere is full of flashy decoration, a wise woman can dump the whole city, the same as the Yin and Xia dynasties. Alas!

古文：呜呼！所以垂戒于方来也。赞曰：宣武孝则，识有先知。
现代文：这些记述是为了给后人留下警戒。赞曰：宣帝威武，孝皇后品行为典范，她见识长远。
English: These descriptions are intended to leave a warning for future generations. Praise: Xuan Di is mighty, Xiao Qiong's behavior is exemplary, she sees the long-term.

古文：高昭诞武，世载母仪。
现代文：高昭刘皇后生下武帝，母仪天下。
English: Empress Gao Zhao Liu gave birth to Emperor Wu, and her mother became the ruler of the world.

古文：裴穆储阃，位亦从隳。
现代文：武穆裴皇后妇德稍欠缺，地位也不高。
English: Empress Wu Mu Pei is somewhat lacking in womanly virtue, and her status is not high.

古文：明敬典册，配在宗枝。
现代文：明敬皇后着于典册，载于宗谱。
English: It was written by Empress Mingjing and is included in the genealogy.

古文：秋宫亦遽，轩景前亏。
现代文：秋天宫裹变化急遽，轩合景色提前衰败。
English: The autumn palace wraps are changing rapidly, and the bustling scenery is decaying ahead of schedule.

古文：文安废主，百忧已离。
现代文：文安皇后被废，遭到许多忧患。
English: When Empress Wen'an was deposed, she suffered a lot of troubles.

古文：中兴秉制，揖让弘规。
现代文：中兴那年王皇后受册封，不久和帝便拱手让出大位。
English: In the year of ZTE's founding, Queen Wang was canonized, and Emperor He soon abdicated the throne.

