古文：史宁字永和，建康氏人也。
现代文：史宁字永和，是建康表氏人。
English: Sning, whose family name was Yonghe, was a member of the Jiankang family.

古文：曾祖豫，仕沮渠氏为临松令。
现代文：曾祖史豫，在匈奴沮渠氏部落作官，担任临松令。
English: Zengzu Shiyu was an official in the Xiongnu Deshuqiu tribe and served as Lin Song's deputy.

古文：魏平凉州，祖灌随例迁于抚宁镇，因家焉。
现代文：魏平定凉州，祖父史灌依照条例迁移到抚宁镇，因而在那裹安家。
English: Wei Ping Ding Liangzhou, grandfather Shi Guan moved to Fuxing Town in accordance with the regulations, and thus settled down there.

古文：父遵，初为征虏府铠曹参军。属杜洛周构逆，六镇自相屠陷，遵遂率乡里二千家奔恒州。
现代文：父亲史遵，起初任征虏府钟曹参匀，遇上杜洛周叛乱，六镇官兵自相残杀攻陷，史遵于是率领乡里二千人家奔往恒州。
English: His father, Shizun, was initially assigned to the Conscription Headquarters of Zhong Cao, but when he encountered the Dulozhou Rebellion, the officers and soldiers of the six towns killed each other and fell, Shizun led the two thousand people in the village to go to Hengzhou.

古文：其后恒州为贼所败，遵复归洛阳。
现代文：此后恒州被贼人攻破，史遵又回到洛阳。
English: After that, Hengzhou was invaded by thieves, and Shizun returned to Luoyang.

古文：拜楼烦郡守。
现代文：朝廷授任他为楼烦郡守。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the county governor of Louduan County.

古文：及宁着勋，追赠散骑常侍、征西大将军、凉州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：等到史宁功勋显著，朝廷追赠史遵为散骑常侍、征西大将军、凉州刺史，谧号叫贞。
English: When Shi Ning's meritorious service became apparent, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of stallion, general of the Western Expedition, and prince of Liangzhou, with the posthumous name Zhen.

古文：宁少以军功，拜别将。
现代文：史宁年少时凭藉军功，官拜别将。
English: When he was young, Suning rose through the ranks thanks to his military service.

古文：迁直阁将军、都督，宿卫禁中。
现代文：升任直合将军、都督，值宿守卫宫廷。
English: He was promoted to the post of Zhihe general and governor, and was on duty guarding the palace.

古文：寻加持节、征东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：不久加授持节、征束将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of General of the Conscription and the Gold, Purple and Silver Star.

古文：贺拔胜为荆州刺史，宁以本官为胜军司，率步骑一千，随胜之部。
现代文：贺拔胜做荆州刺史时，史宁以本官职衔任贺拔胜军司，率领步军骑兵一千人，跟随贺拔胜到达衙署。
English: When He Biasheng made the history of Jingzhou, Shi Ning took his official title as He Biasheng's military commander, led a thousand infantry and cavalry, and followed He Biasheng to the station.

古文：值荆蛮骚动，三鸦路绝，宁先驱平之。
现代文：碰上荆蛮骚乱，三鹦道路不通，史空作为先锋予以扫平。
English: When there was a violent riot in Jing, the Three Parrots Road was impassable, and Shih Kuo, as a pioneer, swept it away.

古文：因抚慰蛮左，翕然降附，遂税得马一千五百匹供军。
现代文：于是抚慰蛮人，蛮人欣悦投降归附，结果征得一千五百匹马以供军用。
English: So he appeased the barbarians, and the barbarians gladly surrendered to him. As a result, he received fifteen hundred horses for military use.

古文：寻除南郢州刺史。
现代文：不久史宁被任命为南郢州刺史。
English: Soon after, Shining was appointed as the chief historian of Southern Luzhou.

古文：及胜为大行台，表宁为大都督。
现代文：等到贺拔胜做大行台，表奏史宁为大都督。
English: Wait until He Bi Sheng makes a big move and appoints Shining as the grand governor.

古文：率步骑一万攻梁下溠戍，破之，封武平县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：史宁率领步军骑兵一万攻打梁下湲戍，攻破了它，被封为武平县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Suning led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Liangzhizhong, defeated it, and was awarded the title of Wuping County and 500 households of food villages.

古文：又攻拔梁齐兴镇等九城，获户二万而还。
现代文：又攻占了梁齐兴堕等九座城池，获取民户二万而还。
English: It also captured nine cities and towns, including Liangqixingpu, and gained 20,000 private households.

古文：未及论功，属魏孝武西迁，东魏遣侯景率众寇荆州，宁随胜奔梁。
现代文：没来得及评定功劳，适逢魏孝武帝向西迁移，东魏派侯景率军入侵荆州，史宁跟随贺拔胜奔往梁朝。
English: He did not have time to evaluate the merit, which coincided with the westward migration of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, the invasion of Jingzhou by the East Wei army led by Hou Jing, and Shining following He Baxing to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：梁武帝引宁至香磴前，谓之曰： 观卿风表，终至富贵，我当使卿衣锦还。 宁答曰： 臣世荷魏恩，位为列将，天长丧乱，本朝倾覆，不能北面逆贼，幸得息肩有道。
现代文：梁武帝引着史宁到香磴跟前，对他说： 观看你的风度仪表，最终会获得富贵，我当使你衣锦还乡。 史宁回答道： 臣世代蒙受魏的恩典，在位担任列将，老天滋长丧乱，本朝遭到颠覆，我不能向北面迎击贼人，幸而能有地方栖身。
English: Emperor Liangwu led Shi Ning to Shangyu and said to him, "Look at your demeanor and appearance, you will eventually become rich, I should make you return to your hometown." Shi Ning replied, "The vassal generation received the grace of Wei, served as generals during the reign, the heavens grew turbulent, this dynasty was overthrown, I can't face the thieves to the north, fortunately I can have a place to live.

古文：傥如明诏，欣幸实多。 因涕泣横流，梁武为之动容。
现代文：倘如您所说，我感到欣喜庆幸的实在太多。 于是伤心哭泣泪水横流，梁武帝为之动容。
English: As you said, I felt too much joy and happiness, so I cried with sadness and tears, and Emperor Liang Wu was moved.

古文：在梁二年，胜乃与宁密图归计。
现代文：在梁留了二年，贺拔胜于是与史宁秘密商量回归的计策。
English: After staying in Liang for two years, He Baxian then secretly discussed with Shi Ning the strategy of returning.

古文：宁曰： 朱异既为梁主所信任，请往见之。 胜然其言。
现代文：史宁说： 朱异既然被梁主所信任，就请让我去见见他。 贺拔胜认为他说的对。
English: Shining said, "Since Zhu Yiyi is trusted by Master Liang, please let me go to see him." He Baxing thought he was right.

古文：宁乃见异，申以投分之言，微托思归之意，辞气雅至。
现代文：史宁于是见到朱异，向他申说志趣相投的话语，微微寄托想要归国的意图，措辞语气温文尔雅。
English: Shi Ning then saw Zhu Yiyi, and told him words of like-mindedness, with the intention of wanting to return to China, and the wording was mild and elegant.

古文：异亦嗟挹，谓宁曰： 桑梓之思，其可忘怀？
现代文：朱异也嗟叹忧伤，对史宁说： 对故土的思念，怎么能够忘怀呢?
English: Zhu Yi also sighed with sadness and said to Shi Ning, "How can I forget about my hometown?

古文：当为奏闻，必望遂所请耳。 未几，梁主果许胜等归。
现代文：我当为你们上奏使梁主知道，希望一定能满足你们的请求。 不久，梁主果然准许贺拔胜等归去。
English: I should report to Master Liang for you to know that I hope to be able to satisfy your request. Soon, Master Liang will indeed allow He Baxing and others to return.

古文：大统二年，宁自梁归阙，进爵为侯，增邑三百户。
现代文：大统二年，史宁自梁归朝，被晋爵为侯，增加食邑三百户。
English: In the second year of unification, Shi Ning returned to the imperial court from Liang and was promoted to marquis, increasing the number of food villages by 300.

古文：久之，迁车骑将军、行泾州事。
现代文：过了很久，史宁升任车骑将军，掌管泾州事务。
English: After a long time, Shi Ning was promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry, in charge of Zhangzhou affairs.

古文：时贼帅莫折后炽寇掠居民，宁率州兵与行原州事李贤讨破之。
现代文：当时贼帅莫折后炽入侵掠夺居民，史宁率领州兵与掌管原州事务的李贤讨伐并打败了莫折后炽。
English: At that time, the thief-commander Mo Rong Hui invaded and plundered the residents. Shi Ning led the National Guard to fight against Li Xian, who was in charge of the original state affairs, and defeated Mo Rong Hui.

古文：转通直散骑常侍、东义州刺史。
现代文：史宁转升通直散骑常侍、东义州刺史。
English: Suning was promoted to the position of a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry, and became the governor of the Eastern Yizhou Province.

古文：东魏亦以故胡梨苟为东义州刺史。
现代文：束魏也任命胡梨苟为束义州刺史。
English: Sok Wei also appointed Hu Liguo as Sok Yizhou chief historian.

古文：宁仅得入州，梨苟亦至，宁迎击，破之，斩其洛安郡守冯善道。
现代文：史宁刚刚进入束义州，梨苟也到了，史宁迎击，打败了梨苟，斩了对方的洛安郡守冯善道。
English: Shining had just entered Sokay Prefecture, and Liguo had also arrived. Shining counterattacked, defeated Liguo, and killed Lu'an County Governor Feng Shandong.

古文：州既邻接疆埸，百姓流移，宁留心抚慰，咸来复业。
现代文：束义州因为邻近边境，百姓流亡迁移，史宁留心抚慰，百姓都回来恢复旧业。
English: Because of the proximity of the border, the people of Sokay Prefecture emigrated, and Shi Ning consoled them. The people all came back to resume their old businesses.

古文：十二年，转凉州刺史。
现代文：十二年，史宁改任凉州刺史。
English: In the twelfth year, Shi Ning was appointed as the leader of Liangzhou.

古文：宁未至而前刺史宇文仲和据州作乱。
现代文：史宁未到而前刺史宇文仲和占据州城作乱。
English: Shi Ning did not arrive, and the front stabbed Shi Yu Wenzhong and occupied the state capital to make trouble.

古文：诏遣独孤信率兵与宁讨之，宁先至凉州，为陈祸福，城中吏民皆相率降附。
现代文：朝廷下韶派独孤信率兵与史宁讨伐仲和，史宁先到凉州，向吏民陈说祸福，城中吏民都相继投降归附。
English: The imperial court sent Du Guoxin to lead the soldiers to fight and make peace with Shining. Shining first went to Liangzhou and told the officials and people about the misfortunes and blessings. The officials and people in the city surrendered one after another.

古文：仲和仍据城不下，寻亦克之。
现代文：仲和仍然据守城池不降，不久也被攻克。
English: Nakahe still held on to the castle and did not surrender, and was soon defeated.

古文：加车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督、凉西凉二州诸军事、散骑常侍、凉州刺史。
现代文：朝廷加封史宁为车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督、凉西凉二州诸军事、散骑常侍、凉州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Shining as the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, the grand governor, the military officers of the two states of Liangxi and Liangzhou, the attendant of horseback riding, and the historian of Liangzhou.

古文：十五年，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，进爵为公。
现代文：十五年，朝廷升任史宁为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中，提升爵位为公。
English: In the fifteenth year, the imperial court promoted Shining to General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and awarded him the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：十六年，宕昌叛羌獠甘作乱，逐其王弥定而自立，并连结傍乞铁匆及郑五丑等，诏宁率军与宇文贵、豆卢宁等讨之。
现代文：十六年，宕昌叛逆的羌人獠甘作乱，撵走他们的君王弥定自立为王，并且联合傍乞铁忽及郑五丑等人，朝廷下诏令史宁率军与宇文贵、豆卢宁等讨伐獠甘。
English: In the 16th year of the Joseon Dynasty, the rebellious Han people of Gan made a riot, drove away their king, Yading, and established themselves as the king. They also allied with the Baekje Emperor and Zheng Wugou, and the imperial court ordered Shi Ning to lead the army to fight against Gan with Uwen Gui and Dou Luning.

古文：宁别击獠甘，而山路险阻，纔通单骑，獠甘已分其党立栅守险。
现代文：史宁侧击獠甘，但山路险阻，衹能单骑通过，獠甘已经分派他的党羽筑立寨栅把守险要之地。
English: Shining's side hit Gan Gan, but the mountain road was dangerous, and Gan could ride through alone. Gan Gan had already assigned his party to build a fence to protect the dangerous place.

古文：宁进兵攻之，遂破其栅。
现代文：史宁进兵攻打，打破了敌兵的寨栅。
English: Sning marched in to attack and broke the enemy's fortification.

古文：獠甘率三万人逆战，宁复大破之，追奔至宕昌。
现代文：獠甘率领三万人迎战，史宁又将他打得大败，追击他直到宕昌。
English: Gongan led 30,000 men into battle, but Shining defeated him and pursued him until the Battle of Tangchang.

古文：獠甘将百骑走投生羌巩廉玉。
现代文：獠甘带领百余骑兵逃命投奔生羌巩廉玉。
English: Gan Gan led more than a hundred cavalrymen to run for their lives and capture Gong Lianyu.

古文：弥定遂得复位。
现代文：弥定于是得以复位。
English: As a result, Misei was able to be reinstated.

古文：宁以未获獠甘，密欲图之，乃扬声欲还。
现代文：史宁因为未能抓获獠甘，暗地裹想图谋他，就扬言说要班师。
English: Because Suning failed to capture Gongan, he secretly thought of plotting against him and threatened to have him punished.

古文：獠甘闻之，复招引叛羌，依山起栅，欲攻弥定。
现代文：獠甘听到后，又招引叛逆的羌人依傍山岭建起寨栅，想攻打弥定。
English: After hearing this, Gan Gan invited the rebellious Han people to build a wall along the mountainside in order to attack Miding.

古文：宁谓诸将曰： 此羌入吾术中，当进兵擒之耳。 诸将思归，咸曰： 生羌聚散无常，依据山谷，今若追讨，恐引日无成。
现代文：史宁对众将说： 这些羌人中了我的计策，应当进兵擒住他们。 众将想着回去，都说： 生羌聚散无常，依据山谷，现在如若追击，恐怕耗费时难以成功。
English: Shuning said to the generals, "My strategy is working among these eunuchs, we should march in and capture them," and the generals, thinking about going back, all said, "Growing eunuchs gather and scatter impermanently, according to the valley, now it's like a pursuit, I'm afraid it will take time and be difficult to succeed."

古文：且弥定还得守蕃，将军功已立矣。
现代文：况且弥定重新得以掌管宕昌，将军的功劳已经立下了。
English: In addition, Yading was able to regain control of Tangchang, and the general's achievement has been established.

古文：獠甘势弱，弥定足能制之。以此还师，策之上者。 宁曰： 一日纵敌，数世之患，岂可舍将灭之寇，更烦再举。
现代文：獠甘势力弱小，弥定完全能够控制他，因此班师回去，是上策。 史宁说： 一放纵敌人，留下数世的祸患，难道可以舍弃将要灭亡的贼寇，还要麻烦再次举兵吗?
English: Gan Gan's forces are weak, and Miding is fully able to control him, so it is the best policy for the team to go back. Shining said: If you indulge the enemy and leave behind the scourge of several lifetimes, can you abandon the thieves and robbers who will perish, and still have the trouble of raising an army again?

古文：人臣之礼，知无不为。
现代文：作为臣子的礼节是，知道了没有不做的。
English: As a courtier's etiquette is, if you know something, don't do it.

古文：以此诸君不足与计事也。
现代文：因此诸位不足以一同计议大事。
English: Therefore, it is not enough for you to discuss important matters together.

古文：如更沮众，宁岂不能斩诸君邪！ 遂进军，獠甘众亦至，与战，大破之，生获獠甘，徇而斩之。
现代文：如果还要阻止众人，我史宁难道不能斩掉你们吗? 于是进军，獠甘的部众也赶到了，史宁与他们交战，将他们打得大败，生擒了獠甘，巡行示众斩了他。
English: If I have to stop the people, can't I, Shining, behead you all? So I marched in, and Shingan's men also arrived. Shining fought with them, defeated them, captured Shingan alive, and paraded him for the people to be beheaded.

古文：并执巩廉玉送阙。
现代文：同时抓住了巩廉玉送往朝廷。
English: At the same time, Gong Lianyu was captured and sent to the imperial court.

古文：所得军实，悉分赏将士，宁无私焉。
现代文：所获得的军用财物，全都分赏给将士，史宁没有私取。
English: The military property acquired was all distributed to the soldiers, and Shi Ning did not take it for himself.

古文：师还，诏宁率所部镇河阳。
现代文：军队回还，朝廷下诏让史宁镇守河阳。
English: The army turned back, and the imperial court issued an edict to let Shining guard Kheyang.

古文：宁先在凉州，戎夷服其威惠，迁镇之后，边民并思慕之。
现代文：史宁起先在凉州，戎夷钦服他的威猛恩惠，他迁移镇守他方之后，边地百姓都思念追慕他。
English: At first, Suning was in Liangzhou. The Yongyi people admired his mighty grace. After he moved to the other side of the town, the local people missed and admired him.

古文：魏废帝元年，复除凉甘瓜三州诸军事、凉州刺史。
现代文：魏废帝元年，复任凉甘瓜三州诸军事、凉州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was reinstated as the military commander of the Liangguagua three states and the military commander of Liangzhou.

古文：初茹茹与魏和亲，后更离叛。
现代文：起初茹茹国与魏议和结为姻亲，后来又离心背叛。
English: At first, Zhu Rugao and Wei made peace and became in-laws, but later they betrayed each other.

古文：寻为突厥所破，杀其主阿那瑰。
现代文：不久被突厥打败，杀掉了茹茹君主阿那瓖。
English: They were soon defeated by the Turks, who killed the Rurulan monarch Anaxagoras.

古文：部落逃逸者，仍奉瑰之子孙，抄掠河右。
现代文：茹茹部落逃散的人，仍然拥奉阿那瓖的子孙，抄袭掠夺河西。
English: The people who fled from the Zhu Ru tribe still worship the descendants of Anaxagoras, copying and plundering Hexi.

古文：宁率兵邀击，获瑰子孙二人，并其种落酋长。
现代文：史宁率兵阻截打击，抓获了阿那瓖的子孙二人，连同他们种族部落的酋长。
English: Suning's troops intercepted the attack and captured two of Anaxagoras's descendants, along with the chief of their ethnic tribe.

古文：自是每战破之，前后获数万人。
现代文：自此每次交战都打败敌方，前后共俘获数万人。
English: Since then, the enemy has been defeated in every engagement and tens of thousands of people have been captured.

古文：进爵安政郡公。
现代文：朝廷提升史宁的爵号为安政郡公。
English: The imperial court promoted Shi Ning's title to Anzheng County.

古文：三年，吐谷浑通使于齐，宁击获之，就拜大将军。
现代文：二年，吐谷浑与齐互通使节，史宁攻击抓获了吐谷浑的使臣，随即被封为大将军。
English: Two years later, when Shining attacked and captured the envoy of Tuyuhun and Qi, he was immediately made a general.

古文：宁后遣使诣太祖请事，太祖即以所服冠履衣被及弓箭甲矛等赐宁。
现代文：史宁后来派使者谒见太祖请示事情，太祖就把自己所用的帽子鞋子衣服被褥及弓箭甲胄长矛等赐给史宁。
English: Later, Suning sent an emissary to the great-grandfather to inquire about the matter, and the great-grandfather gave Suning the hat, shoes, clothes, bedding, bow and arrow, armor, spear, etc. that he had used.

古文：谓其使人曰： 为我谢凉州，孤解衣以衣公，推心以委公，公其善始令终，无损功名也。 时突厥木汗可汗假道凉州，将袭吐浑，太祖令宁率骑随之。
现代文：对史宁的使者说： 替我感谢史公，我解下衣服来给他穿，真心地委托他，他可要善始善终，不要损坏功名。 当时突厥木汗可汗从凉州借路，将要袭击吐浑，太祖命令史宁率领骑兵跟随他们。
English: He said to Shi Ning's messenger, "Thank Shi Gong for me. I took off my clothes to dress him, and sincerely entrusted him to make a good beginning and a good end, and not to damage his reputation. At that time, the Turk Mokhan Khan took the road from Liangzhou and was going to attack Tugun. The great-grandfather ordered Shi Ning to lead the cavalry to follow them.

古文：军至番禾，吐浑已觉，奔于南山。
现代文：军队到达番禾，吐浑已经发觉，奔向南山。
English: When the army arrived at Pangyo, they had already discovered Tuban and rushed to Nanshan.

古文：木汗将分兵追之，令俱会于青海。
现代文：木汗打算分兵追赶，下令在青海一齐会师。
English: Mokhan planned to send a detachment of soldiers to chase after them, and ordered them to join forces in Aomi.

古文：宁谓木汗曰： 树敦、贺真二城，是吐浑巢穴。
现代文：史宁对木汗说： 树盏、昼远二城，是吐运的巢穴。
English: Sning said to Mukhan, "Tree tent, two cities far away in the daytime, is the nest of the dragonfly.

古文：今若拔其本根，余种自然离散，此上策也。 木汗从之，即分为两军。
现代文：现在如果攻占他的老巢，其余的吐浑人自然离散，这是上策 木汗听从了他的建议，就分为两支人马。
English: Now, if his lair is captured, the rest of the Tuhun people will naturally disperse. This is the best strategy. Mookhan listened to his advice and was divided into two groups.

古文：木汗从北道向贺真，宁趣树敦。
现代文：木汗从北路赶往贺真，史宁赶往树敦。
English: Mukhan rushed from the North Road to Hezhen, and Shining rushed to Shudong.

古文：浑娑周国王率众逆战，宁击斩之。
现代文：吐浑娑周国王率众迎战，史宁攻击斩了他。
English: King Tu Hun Rong of Zhou led the crowd to fight, and Shi Ning attacked and killed him.

古文：踰山履险，遂至树敦。
现代文：翻越山岭身处险地，终于到了树敦。
English: After crossing the mountains and finding ourselves in a precarious situation, we finally arrived at Shudong.

古文：敦是浑之旧都，多诸珍藏。
现代文：树敦是吐浑的旧都城，藏有很多奇珍异宝。
English: Shudong is the old capital city of Tuhun and has many rare treasures.

古文：而浑主先已奔贺真，留其征南王及数千人固守。
现代文：而吐浑君主事先已经奔往贺真，留下征南王及数千人固守。
English: But the monarch of Tuhun had already rushed to Hezhen in advance, leaving the king of the Southern Expedition and thousands of people behind.

古文：宁进兵攻之，退，浑人果开门逐之，因回兵奋击，门未及阖，宁兵遂得入。
现代文：史宁进兵攻打，又退兵，吐浑人果然开门追赶，史宁回兵奋勇攻击，城门没来得及关上。史宁的军兵于是进入城中。
English: Shining marched in to attack and then withdrew, the Tuhuns opened the gate and chased after him, Shining returned to attack, but the gate was not closed in time. Shining's soldiers then entered the city.

古文：生获其征南王，俘虏男女、财宝，尽归诸突厥。
现代文：生擒了吐浑征南王，俘虏的男女、财宝，全都送给了突厥。
English: The Southern King, Tuhunze, was captured alive, and all the captives, men, women, and treasure, were given to the Turks.

古文：浑贺罗拔王依险为栅，周回五十余里，欲塞宁路。
现代文：吐浑贺罗拔王依据险要地带扎下寨栅，四周环绕五十多里，想堵塞史宁的道路。
English: According to the critical zone, the king of Tuban, Luo Bao, wanted to block the road of Shining by setting up a fence and encircling more than fifty miles.

古文：宁攻其栅，破之，俘斩万计，获杂畜数万头。
现代文：史宁攻打他的寨栅，攻破了，俘虏斩首数以万计，获取各种牲畜几万头。
English: Suning attacked and breached his stockade, beheading tens of thousands of captives and capturing tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：木汗亦破贺真，虏浑主妻子，大获珍物。
现代文：木汗也攻破了贺真，俘虏了吐浑君主的妻子儿女，获取大量珍珠实物。
English: Mokhan also defeated He Zhen, captured the wives and children of the Tu Hun monarch, and obtained a large number of real pearls.

古文：宁还军于青海，与木汗会。
现代文：史宁回军到达青海，与木汗会师。
English: Shi Ning's returning army arrived in Qinghai and joined forces with Mu Han.

古文：木汗握宁手，叹其勇决，并遗所乘良马，令宁于帐前乘之，木汗亲自步送。
现代文：木汗握住吏宁的手，赞叹他勇敢果决，并赠送自己所乘的良马，让史宁在帐前乘坐，木汗亲自步行相送。
English: Mu Khan held the hand of Li Ning, praised his brave and decisive, and presented the good horse he was riding, let Shi Ning ride in front of the tent, and Mu Khan himself walked to see him off.

古文：突厥以宁所图必破，皆畏惮之，咸曰： 此中国神智人也。 
现代文：突厥因史宁所图谋的一定能攻克，都畏惧他，都说： 这是中原的神智之人。 
English: Because of Shining's plan, the Turks were sure that they would be able to defeat him. They all feared him and said, "This is the wise man of Central Plains."

古文：及将班师，木汗又遗宁奴婢一百口、马五百匹、羊一万口。
现代文：等到史宁将要班师，木汗又赠送史宁奴婢一百人、马五百匹、羊一万只。
English: When Shining was about to become a squad leader, Mukhan gave Shining one hundred male and female slaves, five hundred horses and ten thousand sheep.

古文：宁乃还州。
现代文：史宁于是回到凉州。
English: So Sning returned to Liangzhou.

古文：寻被征入朝，属太祖崩，宁悲恸不已，乃请赴陵所尽哀，并告行师克捷。
现代文：不久，他被征召入朝，遇上太祖驾崩，史宁悲恸不已，于是请求到太祖陵墓去竭尽哀思，并向太祖报告行军克敌的捷讯。
English: Soon after, he was drafted into the imperial court. When he encountered the death of his great-grandfather, Shi Ning was overwhelmed with grief. He therefore asked to go to the great-grandfather's mausoleum to mourn, and to report to his great-grandfather the news that the army had defeated the enemy.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜小司徒，出为荆襄淅郢等五十二州及江陵镇防诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，史宁官拜小司徒，出任荆、塞、逝、郢等五十二州及堰镇防诸军事、型业刺史。
English: When Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, Shining was appointed as an official to pay homage to Xiao Shitou, and served as the commander of the 52 prefectures and towns of Jing, Jie, Shou and Shun, preventing them from entering the military and shaping history.

古文：宁有识画，谙兵权，临敌指撝，皆如其策，甚得当时之誉。
现代文：史宁有识见谋略，熟悉用兵权变，临敌指挥，都像他策划的那样，很得当时人的称誉。
English: Sning's insight and strategy, familiarity with military coups, and command of the enemy, all as he planned, were highly praised by people at the time.

古文：及在荆州，颇自奢纵贪浊，不修法度。
现代文：等到在回业，史宁很是奢靡放纵贪婪昏浊，不修法度。
English: By the time he returned to work, Shi Ning was very extravagant, greedy and reckless, and did not abide by the law.

古文：尝出，有人诉州佐曲法，宁还付被讼者治之。
现代文：曾经外出，有人状告州佐歪曲法律，史宁还是把案子交付被告的州佐去处治。
English: Once outside, someone sued Shousa for distorting the law, but Shining handed the case over to the defendant, Shousa, to handle.

古文：自是有事者不复敢言，声名大损于西州。
现代文：自此有事情的人不再敢说话，史宁的名声在西州大大损坏。
English: Since then, people who have affairs no longer dare to speak out, and Shining's reputation in Xizhou has been greatly damaged.

古文：保定三年，卒于州。
现代文：保宣三年，史空在型业去世，谧号叫型。
English: In the third year of Huan Xuan, Shi Kuang died in the type industry, and his nickname was type.

古文：谥曰烈。子雄嗣。
现代文：他的儿子史雄继承爵禄。
English: His son, Shi Xiong, inherited the peerage.

古文：雄字世武。
现代文：吏雄字世武。
English: Li Xiong became known as Shibu.

古文：少勇敢，膂力过人，便弓马，有算略。
现代文：年少勇敢，膂力过人，擅长骑马射箭，有谋略。
English: Young and brave, overpowering, good at riding and archery, with a strategy.

古文：年十四，从宁于牵屯山奉迎太祖。
现代文：十四岁时，跟随：史窒在童工山奉迎太祖。
English: At the age of fourteen, he followed: Shi Yan in the child labor mountain to worship the great ancestor.

古文：仍从校猎，弓无虚发。
现代文：接着跟从左担打猎，箭无虚发。
English: Next, he hunted from the left shoulder, and his arrows were flawless.

古文：太祖叹异之。
现代文：塞祖表示赞叹惊异。
English: Saizou expressed surprise and admiration.

古文：寻尚太祖女永富公主。
现代文：不久娶太祖女儿永富公主为妻。
English: He soon married Princess Nagatomi, the daughter of his great-grandfather.

古文：除使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，累迁驾部中大夫、大驭中大夫。
现代文：授任使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，屡次升迁为驾部中大夫、大驭中大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Envoy, General of Horse Cavalry, and the title of Kaifu Yi with three divisions, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of driving department middle doctor, and the position of driving department middle doctor.

古文：从柱国、枹罕公辛威镇金城，遂卒于军，时年二十四。
现代文：史雄跟从柱国、袍罕公辛威镇守金城，结果死在军中，当时年龄二十四岁。
English: Shi Xiong followed Zhu Guo and Bao Han Gong to Xinwei Town to defend Jincheng. As a result, he died in the army at the age of 24.

古文：雄弟祥，以父勋赐爵武遂县公。
现代文：史雄弟弟史祥，凭藉父亲的功勋受赐爵号武遂县公。
English: Shi Xiong's younger brother, Shi Xiang, was given the title of Wu Sui County Governor by virtue of his father's merits.

古文：祥弟云，亦以父勋赐爵武平县公，历位司织下大夫，仪同大将军。
现代文：史祥弟弟史云，也凭藉父亲功勋受赐爵号武平县公，历任司织下大夫，仪同大将军。
English: Shi Xiang's younger brother, Shi Yun, was also given the title of Wuping County official due to his father's meritorious service, and successively served as a doctor and a general.

古文：云弟威，亦以父勋赐爵武当县公。
现代文：史云弟弟史威，也凭藉父亲功勋受赐爵号武当县公。
English: Shi Yun's younger brother, Shi Wei, was also given the title of Wudang County official thanks to his father's merits.

古文：陆腾字显圣，代人也。
现代文：陆腾字显圣，是代人。
English: Lu Tengzhe is a representative.

古文：高祖俟，魏征西大将军、东平王。
现代文：高祖陆俟，是魏征西大将军、束平王。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Lu Xun, was a general of the Western Wei Dynasty and the king of Sokping.

古文：祖弥，夏州刺史。
现代文：祖父陆弥，是夏州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Lu Ya, was a member of the Xiazhou Clan.

古文：父旭，性雅澹，好老易纬候之学，撰五星要诀及两仪真图，颇得其指要，太和中，征拜中书博士，稍迁散骑常侍。
现代文：父亲陆旭，性情雅淡，喜好《老子》、《易经》纬书的学说，撰有《五星要诀》及《两仪真图》，很能抓住《老子》、《易经》纬书学说的要义。太和年间，陆旭被征召任命为中书博士，逐渐升任散骑常侍。
English: His father, Lu Xu, had a gentle disposition and liked the teachings of "Lao Zi" and "I Ching" books. He wrote "Five-Star Essentials" and "The True Image of the Two Rites," and was able to grasp the essence of the teachings of "Lao Zi" and "I Ching" books. During the Taiwa era, Lu Xu was conscripted and appointed as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, and gradually rose to the position of a samurai.

古文：知天下将乱，遂隐于太行山。
现代文：知道天下将要动乱，于是隐居在太行山。
English: Knowing that the world would be in turmoil, he went into seclusion on Mount Taihang.

古文：孝庄即位，屡征不起。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，陆旭屡次受到微召不出山。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, and Lu Xu was repeatedly summoned to the mountain.

古文：后赠并汾恒肆四州刺史。
现代文：后来被追赠为并、汾、恒、肆四州刺史。
English: Later, it was posthumously donated to the four prefectures of Anhui, Shandong, Henan and Shandong.

古文：腾少慷慨有大节，解巾员外散骑侍郎、司徒府中兵参军。
现代文：陆腾年少时慷慨有大节，出任员外散骑侍郎、司徒府中兵参军。
English: When Lu Teng was young, he generously had a grand feast, served as a non-commissioned officer horseback rider and attendant, and joined the army as a soldier from Szufu.

古文：尔朱荣入洛，以腾为通直散骑侍郎、帐内都督。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛，用陆腾担任通直散骑侍郎、帐内都督。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Luo, and used Lu Teng to serve as Tsunzhi Sanzhi Jiro, the governor of the account.

古文：从平葛荣，以功赐爵清河县伯。
现代文：跟从大军平定葛荣，因功受赐爵号为清河县伯。
English: He followed the great army to subdue Ge Rong and was given the title of Qinghe County because of his merits.

古文：普泰初，迁朱衣直合。
现代文：普泰初年，陆腾升任朱衣直合。
English: In the first year of Putai, Lu Teng was promoted to Zhu Yi Zonghe.

古文：尚安平主，即东莱王贵平女也。
现代文：娶安干公主，即是东莱王贵平的女儿。
English: He married Princess Angan, who was the daughter of King Guiping of Donglai.

古文：魏孝武幸贵平第,见腾，与语悦之，谓贵平曰： 阿翁真得好婿。 即擢为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：魏孝武帝来到贵平家中，看见陆腾，与他交谈感到愉悦，对贵平说： 阿翁真是得到了好女婿。 就提升陆腾为通直散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu came to Guiping's home, saw Lu Teng, and was pleased to talk with him. He said to Guiping, "Awong really got a good son-in-law," and promoted Lu Teng to the position of a regular attendant.

古文：及孝武西迁，腾时使青州，遂没于邺。
现代文：等到孝亘造西迁垦塞时，陆誊当时出使壹业，结果陷没在邺。
English: When it came time for Xiaowu to move to the west, Lu Yao sent an envoy, but he ended up being trapped in Yunnan.

古文：东魏兴和初，征拜征西将军，领阳城郡守。
现代文：东魏兴和初年，朝廷征召任命陆腾为征西将军，兼任阳城郡守。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Wei Xinghe, the imperial court conscripted and appointed Lu Teng as the general of the Western Expedition, and also served as the governor of Yangcheng County.

古文：大统九年，大军东讨，以腾所据冲要，遂先攻之。
现代文：大统九年，大军束讨，因为陆腾所据守的是军事要地，于是首先攻打他。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Reunification, a large army attacked Lu Teng first because he was defending a military site.

古文：时兵威甚盛，长史麻休劝腾降，不许，拒守经月余，城陷被执。
现代文：当时军队的威势相当强盛，长史麻休劝陆腾投降，陆腾不答应，拒守了一个多月，城池失陷被擒住了。
English: At that time, the army's power was quite strong. Changshi Maqiu advised Lu Teng to surrender, but Lu Teng did not agree and refused to defend for more than a month. The fall of the city was arrested.

古文：太祖释而礼之，问其东间消息，腾盛陈东州人物，又叙述时事，辞理抑扬。
现代文：太祖放了他并且礼待他，问他束魏的消息，陆腾赞美束州的人物，又叙述时事，言辞语意抑扬顿挫。
English: The great-grandfather released him and treated him with courtesy. He asked him about the news of Sokchow. Lu Teng praised the people of Sokchow and described current events. His words were full of meaning.

古文：太祖笑曰： 卿真不背本也。 
现代文：太祖笑着说： 你真是不忘本呀! 
English: The great-grandfather smiled and said: You really don't forget your books!

古文：即拜帐内大都督。
现代文：就任命他为帐内大都督。
English: He was immediately appointed as the grand governor of the account.

古文：未几，除太子庶子，迁武卫将军。
现代文：不久，封他为太子庶子，升任武卫将军。
English: Soon after, he was appointed the Prince's illegitimate son and promoted to General Wuwei.

古文：既为太祖所知，愿立功效，不求内职，太祖嘉之。
现代文：陆膛既然受到立担的知遇之恩，便愿意立功效力，不求在朝廷内任职，太祖表示赞许。
English: The great-great-grandfather expressed his approval of the fact that since Lu Ropao had been blessed with the opportunity to serve as an official, he was willing to perform meritorious service rather than seek a position in the imperial court.

古文：十三年，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十三年，陆腾官拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the thirteenth year, Lu Tengguan was promoted to the general of the cavalry and the three divisions of the ceremony.

古文：魏废帝元年，安康贼黄众宝等作乱，连结汉中，众数万，攻围东梁州。
现代文：魏废帝元年，安康贼人黄众实等作乱，联合汉中，部众数万，攻打包围柬梁州。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Huang Zongshi, an Ankang thief, and others rioted and, together with tens of thousands of Han Chinese, attacked and besieged Liangzhou, Cambodia.

古文：城中粮尽，诏腾率军自子午谷以援之。
现代文：城中粮尽，朝廷下诏令陆腾率军从子午谷出发去救援东梁州。
English: When the city ran out of food, the imperial court ordered Lu Teng and his army to set out from Zihu Valley to rescue Dongliang Prefecture.

古文：腾乃星言就道，至便与战，大破之。
现代文：陆腾于是星夜上路，到了便与贼人交战，将贼打得大败。
English: Lu Teng then set out on the road in the starry night. When he arrived, he fought with the thief and defeated the thief.

古文：军还，拜龙州刺史，太祖谓腾曰： 今欲通江路，直出南，卿宜善思经略。 
现代文：军队班师，陆腾被任命为龙州刺史。
English: An army sergeant major, Lu Teng was appointed as the chief historian of Longzhou.

古文：腾曰： 必望临机制变，未敢预陈。 太祖曰： 此是卿取柱国之日，卿其勉之。 即解所服金带赐之。
现代文：太祖对陆腾说： 现今要通过江油路，直接走出南秦，你应好好思虑筹划。 陆腾说： 我一定会根据情况掌握时机灵活应付，不敢预先陈述己见。 太祖说： 这是你获取柱国封号的日子，你还是要勉力去做。 就解下所佩的金带赐给陆腾。
English: The great-grandfather said to Lu Teng: "Nowadays, if you want to go through the Jiangyu Road and go directly out of South Qin, you should carefully consider and plan." Lu Teng said: "I will definitely grasp the opportunity to deal with it flexibly according to the situation, and dare not state my own opinion in advance." The great-grandfather said: "This is the day you get the pillar country seal number, you still have to do your best." He untied the gold belt he was wearing and gave it to Lu Teng.

古文：州民李广嗣、李武等凭据岩险，以为堡壁，招集不逞之徒，攻劫郡县，历政不能治。
现代文：州民李广嗣、李武等凭藉占据险要的山势，作为堡垒，招集不法分子，攻打劫掠郡县，历任政府官员不能治住他们。
English: State residents Li Guangzhi, Li Wu, and others, by virtue of occupying a precarious mountain situation, used it as a fortress to recruit illegal elements to attack and plunder counties. Successive government officials could not control them.

古文：腾密令多造飞梯，身率麾下，夜往掩袭，未明，四面俱上，遂破之，执广嗣等于鼓下。
现代文：陆腾秘密命令多造飞梯，亲自率领部下，趁夜去袭击他们，天没亮，将士从四面爬上岩壁，终于打败了贼众，将李广嗣等人拘捕到军中行刑之处。
English: Lu Teng secretly ordered the construction of more flying ladders, personally led his subordinates, took advantage of the night to attack them, after dawn, the soldiers climbed the rock wall from all sides, finally defeated the thieves, and arrested Li Guangzhi and others to the place of execution in the army.

古文：其党有任公忻者，更聚徒众，围逼州城。
现代文：广嗣的党羽有一个叫任公忻的，又聚集徒众，包围逼近州城。
English: Guangzhi's party wing had one called Ren Gongye, and they gathered followers and encircled and approached the state capital.

古文：乃语腾曰： 但免广嗣及武，即散兵请罪。 腾谓将士曰： 吾若不杀广嗣等，可谓隳军实而长寇雠，事之不可者也。
现代文：于是对陆腾说： 衹要赦免广嗣及李武等人，就解散士兵向你请罪。 陆腾对将士说： 我如果不杀广嗣等，可说是毁坏胜利果实，而增长敌人的气焰，这事不可行。
English: So he said to Lu Teng: "If you want to pardon Guang Ci and Li Wu Cai and others, then disband the soldiers and plead guilty to you." Lu Teng said to the soldiers: "If I do not kill Guang Ci and others, I can say that I will destroy the fruits of victory and increase the enemy's pride, but this is not feasible.

古文：公忻竖子，乃敢要人！ 即斩广嗣及武，以首示之。
现代文：公忻小人，竟然敢索取人! 就斩了广嗣及李武，以他们的首级示众。
English: The villain, who dared to extort people, beheaded Guangzhi and Li Wu to show the public their severed heads.

古文：贼徒沮气，于是出兵奋击，尽获之。
现代文：贼徒沮丧气馁，于是陆腾出兵奋击，全部抓获了他们。
English: The bandits were frustrated and discouraged, so Lu unleashed his troops and captured them all.

古文：魏恭帝三年，拜骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，转江州刺史，爵上庸县公，邑二千户。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，陆腾被封为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，改任江州刺史，爵号为上庸县公，食邑二千户。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, Lu Teng was appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Yi Tong, and was reappointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, with the title of Shangyong County and 2,000 households in food villages.

古文：陵州木笼獠恃险麤犷，每行抄劫，诏腾讨之。
现代文：陵州木笼僚凭恃险地粗野放纵，经常抄略劫夺，朝廷韶令陆腾讨伐木笼僚。
English: The lumberjacks in Lingshou indulged in reckless and vulgar indulgence, often stealing and robbing, and the court ordered Lu Teng to punish the lumberjacks.

古文：獠既因山为城，攻之未可拔。
现代文：木笼僚已经依山作为城堡，攻打它不能拔除。
English: The wooden cage has been built against the mountain as a castle, and it cannot be removed by attacking it.

古文：腾遂于城下多设声乐及诸杂伎，示无战心。
现代文：陆腾就在城下多设声乐及各种杂伎，表示没有作战的意思。
English: Lu Teng set up more vocal music and all kinds of acrobatics under the castle, indicating that there was no intention of fighting.

古文：诸贼果弃其兵仗，或携妻子临城观乐。
现代文：众贼人果然丢下兵器，有的携着妻儿凭临城墙观听声乐。
English: All the thieves did indeed throw down their weapons, and some took their wives and children to the city wall to watch and listen to the vocal music.

古文：腾知其无备，密令众军俱上，诸贼惶惧，不知所为。
现代文：陆腾知道贼人没有防备，暗中下令众军一齐上城，众贼人惊惶失措，不知怎么办。
English: Lu Teng knew that the thieves were unprepared, and secretly ordered all the troops to go to the city together. The thieves were panicked and did not know what to do.

古文：遂纵兵讨击，尽破之，斩首一万级，俘获五千人。
现代文：于是坠誊纵放士兵攻击贼人，彻底打败了贼人，斩首一万级，俘获五千人。
English: As a result, the soldiers attacked the thieves, completely defeated the thieves, beheaded ten thousand, and captured five thousand.

古文：世宗初，陵、眉、戎、江、资、邛、新、遂八州夷夏及合州民张瑜兄弟并反，众数万人，攻破郡县。
现代文：世宗初年，陵、眉、戎、江、资、印、新、遂八州夷人汉人及合州的百姓张瑜兄弟一同造反，徒众数万人，攻破郡县。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Ling, Mei, Rong, Jiang, Zi, Ying, Xin, Sui, the eight states of the barbarian Han people and the people of Hezhou, the Zhang Yu brothers, rebelled together, and tens of thousands of people were defeated in counties and counties.

古文：腾率兵讨之。
现代文：陆腾率领军队讨伐他们。
English: Lu Teng led an army to fight them.

古文：转潼州刺史。
现代文：转任潼州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：武成元年，诏征腾入朝，世宗面敕之曰： 益州险远，非亲勿居，故令齐公作镇。
现代文：武成元年，朝廷下诏召他入朝，世宗当面命令他说： 益州险恶遥远，不是亲族不宜居住在那裹，故而命令齐公镇守。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng's reign, the imperial court issued an edict summoning him to the imperial court, and Shizong ordered him in person: "Yizhou is dangerous and far away, and it is not suitable for relatives to live there. Therefore, he ordered Qigong Town to be guarded.

古文：卿之武略，已着遐迩，兵马镇防，皆当委卿统摄。 于是徙隆州刺史，随宪入蜀。
现代文：你的军事才略，已经远近闻名，兵马镇守防卫，都要委托你来统辖。 于是调陆腾任隆州刺史，跟随宇文宪进入蜀地。
English: Your military talent has been known far and wide, and you have been entrusted with the command of the soldiers and horses guarding the defense of the town. Therefore, he transferred Lu Teng as the governor of Longzhou and followed Uwen Xian into Shu.

古文：及赵公招代宪，复请留之。
现代文：等到赵公宇文招代替宇文宪，又请求陆腾留驻在那里。
English: When Zhao Gong replaced Yuwen Xian with Yuwen Zha, he also asked Lu Teng to stay there.

古文：保定元年，迁隆州总管，领刺史。
现代文：保定元年，陆腾升任隆州总管，兼任刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, Lu Teng was promoted to the post of the general manager of Longzhou, and also served as the chief historian.

古文：二年，资州盘石民反，杀郡守，据险自守，州军不能制。
现代文：二年，资州槃石百姓造反，杀掉郡守，占据险要之地自行固守，州中军兵不能制伏他们。
English: In the second year, the people of Zhishan in Zhizhou rebelled, killed the county governor, occupied the critical place and defended themselves. The soldiers in Zhizhou could not subdue them.

古文：腾率军讨击，尽破斩之。
现代文：陆腾率军讨伐，彻底打败斩除了他们。
English: Lu Teng led a large army to attack and annihilate them all.

古文：而蛮、獠兵及所在蜂起，山路险阻，难得掩袭。
现代文：而蛮、僚贼兵及所在地区的贼兵成群起来造反，山路险恶而有阻碍，难以乘敌不备袭击敌人。
English: However, the barbarians, their fellow bandits and bandits in the region rebelled in droves. The mountain roads were treacherous and obstructed, making it difficult to attack the enemy unprepared.

古文：腾遂量山川形势，随便开道。
现代文：陆腾于是估量山川地势，怎么方便就怎么开辟道路。
English: Lu Teng then estimated the terrain of the mountains and rivers, and opened the road as convenient as possible.

古文：蛮獠畏威，承风请服。
现代文：蛮僚畏惧陆腾的威势，接受劝化而降。
English: Fierce men fear his power and yield to him.

古文：所开之路，多得古铭，并是诸葛亮、桓温旧道。
现代文：陆腾所开辟的道路，多遇得古时的碑铭，都是诸葛亮、桓温旧时所走的道路。
English: When the road was opened, many ancient inscribed stones were unearthed. This was originally the old road traveled by Zhuge Liang and Huan Wen.

古文：是年，铁山獠抄断内江路，使驿不通。
现代文：这一年，铁山僚抄截、阻断去往内江的路途，使驿路不能通行。
English: In that year, the Iron Mountain Dam cut off the road of the Neijiang River, making it impassable.

古文：腾乃进军讨之。
现代文：陆腾于是进军讨伐。
English: Lu Teng then went on a crusade.

古文：欲至铁山，乃伪还师。
现代文：想赶到铁山，却伪装班师回去。
English: He wanted to get to the Iron Mountain, but disguised as a teacher to go back.

古文：贼不以为虞，遂不守备。
现代文：贼人不感到忧虑，便不加防守戒备。
English: If the thief is not worried, he will not be on the defensive.

古文：腾出其不意击之，应时奔溃。
现代文：陆腾出其不意袭击贼人，一交战贼便奔逃溃散。
English: The land released its surprise attack on the bandits, and the bandits ran away and dispersed.

古文：一日下其三城，斩其魁帅，俘获三千人，招纳降附者三万户。
现代文：一攻下贼人的三座城池，斩掉了贼人的统帅，俘获三千人，招抚接纳投降归附的人有三万户。
English: They attacked three cities of the bandits at once, cut off the general of the bandits, captured three thousand people, and persuaded thirty thousand households to accept surrender and annexation.

古文：帝以腾母在齐，未令东讨。
现代文：皇帝因为陆腾的母亲在齐，没有令他东讨齐朝。
English: Because Lu Teng's mother was still alive, the emperor did not allow him to go to the East.

古文：适有其亲属自东还朝者，晋公护令伪告腾云： 齐为无道，已诛公家，母兄并从涂炭。 盖欲发其怒也。
现代文：适逢坠炉有亲属从东边回朝，置公室王盏上奏命令他用假话告诉陆腾说： 齐朝残忍无道，已经诛戮了你家，你的母亲兄长都被杀害了。 这是想激发陆腾的愤怒。
English: At the time of the collapse of the furnace, some relatives returned to the imperial court from the east, and the official Wang Zhen ordered him to tell Lu Teng with a lie, saying: Qi Dynasty is cruel and ruthless, it has killed your family, your mother and brothers have all been killed.

古文：腾乃发哀泣血，志在复雠。
现代文：陆腾于是悲痛哀悼泪尽血出，矢志要复仇。
English: Lu Teng then shed tears of grief and sorrow, and vowed to take revenge.

古文：四年，齐公宪与晋公护东征，请腾为副。
现代文：四年，齐公宇文宪与晋公室文护束征，请陆腾作为助手。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, Qi Gongxin and Jin Gongyou sent troops to the east, and applied for Lu Teng to be his deputy.

古文：赵公招时在蜀，复留之。
现代文：赵公宇文招当时在蜀，又留住坠胆。
English: At that time, Zhao Gongyu Wenzhu was in Shu, and he retained his confidence.

古文：晋公护与招书曰： 今朝廷令齐公扫荡河、洛，欲与此人同行。
现代文：置公宇文护写信给圭塞翅说： 现在朝廷命令齐公扫荡河、洛，齐公想和陆腾一同去。
English: In a letter to Guisepyeong, 置公宇文護 wrote: Now that the imperial court has ordered Qi Gong to sweep the river and Luo, Qi Gong wants to go with Lu Teng.

古文：汝彼无事，且宜借吾也。 于是命腾驰传入朝，副宪东讨。
现代文：你那边太平无事，姑且借给我一用。 于是趟公命令陆腾乘驿站车马疾行入朝，辅助宇文宪东讨。
English: Your side is peaceful and tranquil, so let me borrow it for a while. Therefore, the magistrate ordered Lu Teng to ride a horse-drawn carriage to rush into the North to assist Uwen Xian's eastward discussion.

古文：五年，拜司宪中大夫。
现代文：五年，朝廷授任陆腾为司宪中大夫。
English: In the fifth year, the imperial court appointed Lu Teng as a constitutional doctor.

古文：天和初，信州蛮、蜑据江峡反叛，连结二千余里，自称王侯，杀刺史守令等。
现代文：天和初年，信州蛮、蛋占据长江山峡反叛，连结二千多里范围的徒众，自称王侯，杀掉刺史郡守县令等。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, Shinshu barbarians and eggs occupied the Yangtze River Gorge and rebelled, linking more than two thousand miles of followers, claiming to be princes, killing the county governor of Zhishi County and so on.

古文：又诏腾率军讨之。腾乃先趣益州，进骁勇之士，兼具楼船，沿外江而下。
现代文：朝廷又下诏命令陆腾率军讨伐，陆腾于是先往益蛆，选用骁勇的士兵，兼备楼船，沿外江而下。
English: The imperial court also issued an edict ordering Lu Teng to lead the army to fight, and Lu Teng went to Yixian first, selected brave soldiers, and equipped with a barge to go down along the Outer River.

古文：军至汤口，分道奋击，所向摧破。
现代文：军队到达汤口，分路奋勇进击，所到之处都被摧毁击破。
English: The army arrived at Tanggu, made a detour and made a valiant advance. Everywhere they went, they were destroyed and broken.

古文：乃筑京观以旌武功。
现代文：于是收集敌人尸首，筑成高冢，用以旌扬武功。
English: So they collected the dead bodies of their enemies and built stilts to celebrate their military prowess.

古文：语在蛮传。
现代文：此事记录在《蛮传》裹。
English: This event is recorded in the "Wild Tales" series.

古文：涪陵郡守蔺休祖又据楚、向、临、容、开、信等州，地方二千余里，阻兵为乱。
现代文：涪陵郡守蔺休祖又占据楚、向、临、容、开、信等州，区域有二千多里，拥兵叛乱。
English: The founder of Fuling County, Shou Yuxiu, occupied Chu, Xiang, Lin, Yong, Kai, Xin and other prefectures, with an area of more than two thousand li, and supported the soldiers' rebellion.

古文：复诏腾讨之。
现代文：朝廷又下诏命令陆腾讨伐。
English: The imperial court also issued an imperial edict ordering Lu Teng to fight.

古文：初与大战，斩首二千余级，俘获千余人。
现代文：起初与休祖大战，斩杀敌方二千多人，俘获一千多人。
English: At the beginning of the war with Xiu Zu, more than two thousand enemy were killed and more than one thousand were captured.

古文：当时虽摧其锋，而贼众既多，自夏及秋，无日不战，师老粮尽，遂停军集市，更思方略。
现代文：当时虽然摧损敌人的锋芒，但因为贼众很多，从夏到秋，没有一不战，军队疲劳军粮用尽，于是停军在集市，进一步思考军事对策。
English: At that time, although the enemy's cutting edge was destroyed, but because there were many thieves, from summer to autumn, there was no war, the army was tired and the army food was exhausted, so the army stopped at the market to further think about military countermeasures.

古文：贼见腾不出，四面竞前。
现代文：贼人见陆腾不出战，从四面争着向前。
English: Thieves do not fight when they see land, they scramble forward from all sides.

古文：腾乃激励其众，士皆争奋，复攻拔其鱼令城，大获粮储，以充军实。
现代文：堕堕于是激励手下众兵，众兵都争先奋战，又攻占了贼人的鱼令城，获得大量粮食储备，用来充当军用物资。
English: He then inspired the soldiers under his command, and the soldiers all rushed to fight. They also captured the Thief's Fishing Town and obtained a large amount of grain reserves, which were used as military supplies.

古文：又破铜盘等七栅，前后斩获四千人，并船舰等。
现代文：又打破铜盘等七个寨栅，前后杀死俘获四千人，连同船只等。
English: He also broke seven stockades, including the copper plate, and killed and captured four thousand people, along with ships and so on.

古文：又筑临州、集市二城，以镇遏之。
现代文：又构筑堕业、堡童两座城池，用来镇守、遏制敌人。
English: In addition, two castles were built to guard the town and contain the enemy.

古文：腾自在龙州，至是前后破平诸贼，凡赏得奴婢八百口，马牛称是。
现代文：陆腾自己住在垄业，至此前后打败平定众贼，共获得朝廷赏赐的奴婢八百人，马牛数目与奴婢数目相当。
English: Lu Teng himself lived in Luoyang, until he defeated the bandits and won a total of eight hundred slaves and maidservants awarded by the court. The number of horses and cattle was equivalent to the number of slaves and maidservants.

古文：于是巴蜀悉定，诏令树碑纪绩焉。
现代文：于是巴蜀都得以平定，诏令树立碑铭记录下陆腾的功绩。
English: As a result, all of Bashu was pacified, and a decree was issued to erect a monument to record Lu Teng's exploits.

古文：四年，迁江陵总管。
现代文：四年，陆腾升任江陵总管。
English: In the fourth year of Tianhe, Lu Teng was promoted to be the general manager of Gangneung.

古文：陈遣其将章昭达率众五万、船舰二千围江陵。
现代文：陈朝派遣其将领章昭达率领士兵五万、船舰二千围攻江陵。
English: The Chen Dynasty sent its general Zhang Zhaoda to besiege Jiangling with 50,000 soldiers and 2,000 ships.

古文：卫王直闻有陈寇，遣大将军赵誾、李迁哲等率步骑赴之，并受腾节度。
现代文：卫王室塞直听说有迷人入侵，派遣大将军赵闾、李迁哲等率领步军骑兵赴援，都受陆腾节制调度。
English: The palace guards heard that there was a charming invasion, and dispatched the cavalry of the infantry army led by the generals Zhao Yu and Li Qian Zhe to help, all of which were subject to Lu Tengjie's scheduling.

古文：时迁哲等守外城，陈将程文季、雷道勤夜来掩袭，迁哲等惊乱，不能抗御。
现代文：当时垦等防守外城，速将程文季、雷道勤趁黑夜来偷袭，垦等惊慌混乱，不能抵御。
English: At that time, Li Qizhe and others were guarding the outer city. Chen sent Cheng Wenzhi and Lei Daoqin to attack secretly at night. Li Qizhe and others panicked and could not resist.

古文：腾夜遣开门，出甲士奋击，大破之。
现代文：陆腾夜间派人打开城门，出兵奋击，大败敌军。
English: Lu Teng sent people to open the city gate at night, sent troops to fight, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：陈人奔溃，道勤中流矢而毙，虏获二百余人。
现代文：陈人奔逃溃散，道勤被乱飞的箭射中而死，陈人被俘虏了二百多人。
English: Chen people ran away and scattered. Dao Qin was shot dead by a flying arrow. More than 200 Chen people were captured.

古文：陈人又决龙川宁邦堤，引水灌江陵城。
现代文：睫人又挖开垄业空翅堡，引水淹灌丝建继。
English: Lash people also dug up the empty wing fort of the ridge industry, diverted water and flooded the silk to build a continuation.

古文：腾亲率将士战于西堤，破之，斩首数千级，陈人乃遁。
现代文：堕腾亲自率领将士在西堤与陈人交战，打败了速人，杀死对方数千人，陈人方才逃遁。
English: Pudong Teng personally led the generals to fight against Chen Ren in the West Bank, defeated Hayato, killed thousands of the other side, and Chen Ren Ren fled.

古文：六年，进位柱国，进爵上庸郡公，增邑通前三千五百户。
现代文：六年，巡被提升为柱国，晋爵为上庸郡公，食邑增至三千五百户。
English: In six years, the patrol was promoted to pillar country, the promotion was Shangyong County, and the food villages increased to 3,500 households.

古文：建德二年，征拜大司空，寻出为泾州总管。
现代文：建德二年，坠腾受征召入朝被封为大司空，不久出任迳州总管。
English: In the second year of Jiande, he was appointed as the chief secretary of the Air Force, and soon he was appointed as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou.

古文：宣政元年冬，薨于京师。赠本官加并汾等五州刺史，重赠大后丞。
现代文：宣玺元年冬天，在京师去世朝廷追赠他本官追加并、汾等五州刺史。重赠他为大后丞。
English: In the winter of the first year of Xuanwu's reign, after the death of his teacher in Beijing, the imperial court posthumously awarded him his own post, as well as the title of Grand Empress Dowager of the Five Provinces.

古文：谥曰定。
现代文：谧号叫定。
English: The nickname is final.

古文：子玄嗣。
现代文：他的儿子陆玄继承父禄。
English: His son, Lu Xuan, succeeded him.

古文：玄字士鉴，腾入关时，年始七岁。
现代文：陆玄字士鉴，陆腾入关时，年龄才七岁。
English: Lu Xuan Zi Jian, Lu Teng was only seven years old when he entered the pass.

古文：仕齐为奉朝请，历成平县令。
现代文：在齐朝做官担任奉朝请，历任成千县县令。
English: In the Qi Dynasty, he served as an official at the request of the Qing Dynasty, and successively served as the county magistrate of Chengqian County.

古文：齐平，高祖见玄，特加劳勉，即拜地官府都上士。
现代文：齐被平定后，高祖见到陆玄，特意加以慰劳劝勉，就任命他为地官府都上士。
English: After Qi was subdued, Gaozu saw Lu Xuan, consoled him, and appointed him as the top sergeant of the prefectural government.

古文：大象末，为隋文相府内兵参军。
现代文：大象末年，任隋文相府内兵参军。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, he was appointed as the Sui and Wen minister of the prefectural soldiers to join the army.

古文：玄弟融，字士倾，最知名，少历显职。
现代文：陆玄弟弟陆融，字士倾，最为知名，年少时就历任显要的官职。
English: In the winter of the first year of Xuan Zheng's reign, he died in Beijing and was posthumously awarded the title of Taifeng, and his posthumous name was Ding.

古文：大象中，位至大将军、定陵县公。
现代文：大象年中，官至大将军、定陵县公。
English: In the Year of the Elephant, the highest-ranking official is the general and the head of Dingling County.

古文：贺若敦，代人也。
现代文：贺若敦，是代人。
English: Haro Atsushi is the representative.

古文：父统，为东魏颍州长史。
现代文：其父贺若统，任束魏颖州长史。
English: His father, He Ruotong, was appointed governor of Wei Ying.

古文：大统年，执刺史田迅以州降。
现代文：大统三年，拘捕刺史田迅率领州入归降。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, the arresting assassin, Shi Tianxun, led the state to surrender.

古文：至长安，魏文帝谓统曰： 卿自颍川从我，何日能忘。 即拜右卫将军、散骑常侍、兖州刺史，赐爵当亭县公。
现代文：到达长安，魏文帝对贺若统说： 你从颖川来归顺我，我什么时候能忘记呢? 就任命他为右卫将军、散骑常侍、兖州刺史，赐爵为当亭县公。
English: Arriving in Chang'an, Emperor Wei Wen said to He Raotong: You came from Yingchuan to surrender to me, when can I forget? He appointed him as the right guard general, horseback riding attendant, Zhangzhou historian, and knighted him as the governor of Dangting County.

古文：寻除北雍州刺史。
现代文：不久任命他为北雍州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of North Yongzhou.

古文：卒，赠侍中、燕朔恒三州刺史、司空公，谥曰哀。
现代文：去世后，朝廷追赠他为侍中、燕朔恒三州刺史、司空公，谧号叫塞。
English: After his death, the imperial court posthumously bestowed upon him the titles of chamberlain, Yangshuo, Hengshan, Sanzhou, and Sikuo. His posthumous name was Zheng.

古文：敦少有气干，善骑射。
现代文：贺若敦年少即有气魄才干，擅长骑马射箭。
English: At a young age, He Ruodong is full of courage and talent, and is good at horse riding and archery.

古文：统之谋执迅也，虑事不果，又以累弱既多，难以自拔，沉吟者久之。
现代文：贺若统谋划拘捕田迅，担心事情没有结果，又因积久衰弱严重，难以挣脱困境，沉吟了很久。
English: He Rongtong planned to arrest Tian Xun, worried that the matter had no result, and because of the long-term weakness, it was difficult to break out of the predicament, and he pondered for a long time.

古文：敦时年十七,乃进策曰： 大人往事葛荣，已为将帅；后入尔朱，礼遇犹重。
现代文：当时贺若敦年龄十七，就进献策略说： 父亲大人以往侍奉葛荣，已做将帅；后来跟随尔朱氏，受到的礼遇更重。
English: At that time, He Ruodong, who was 17 years old, said about the donation strategy: My father had served Ge Rong in the past and had been a general; later, he followed the Er Zhu clan and received more courtesy.

古文：韩陵之役，屈节高欢，既非故人，又无功效，今日委任，无异于前者，正以天下未定，方藉英雄之力。
现代文：韩陵一仗，投降高欢，既不是旧友，又没有功效，今委任，与以前受封没有差异，正因天下没有平定，方才借重英雄的力量。
English: Han Ling fought one battle and surrendered to Gao Huan. They are neither old friends nor effective. The appointment now is no different from the previous appointment. It is precisely because the world is not stable that we have to rely on the strength of heroes.

古文：一旦清平，岂有兼容之理。
现代文：一旦天下清平，难道有容纳你的道理吗?
English: Once the world is at peace, is there any reason to accommodate you?

古文：以敦愚计，恐将来有危亡之忧。
现代文：按照我的愚蠢想法，恐怕将来有危亡的担忧。
English: According to my stupid idea, I'm afraid there will be a fear of death in the future.

古文：愿思全身远害，不得有所顾念也。 统乃流涕从之，遂定谋归太祖。
现代文：希望考虑保全自身远离祸害，不能有什么顾虑了。 贺若统于是流泪听从了他的建议，终于定了计谋归顺太祖。
English: Hoping to think about how to protect himself from the evil, he could not have any concerns. Therefore, He Ruotong listened to his advice with tears, and finally decided on a strategy to obey the great ancestor.

古文：时群盗蜂起，各据山谷。
现代文：当时贼盗蜂起，各自占据山谷。
English: At that time, the bandits rose up and occupied the valley.

古文：大龟山贼张世显潜来袭统，敦挺身赴战，手斩七八人，贼乃退走。
现代文：大龟山贼人张世显秘密地赶来袭击贺若统，贺若敦挺身而出去与贼人交战，亲手斩掉七八个贼人，贼人才退走。
English: Zhang Shixian, the thief of the Great Turtle Mountain, secretly came to attack He Ruodong. He Ruodong stood up and went out to fight with the thieves, personally cut off seven or eight thieves, and the thieves retreated.

古文：统大悦，谓左右僚属曰： 我少从军旅，战阵非一，如此儿年时胆略者，未见其人。
现代文：贺若统大为高兴，对左右的官吏说： 我年少从军打仗，经过的战阵不止一次了，像这个孩儿有胆有略的，还没有见到遇。
English: He Ruo Tong was overjoyed and said to the officials around him: "I joined the army at a young age and fought in battles more than once. I have never met a child as courageous as this one.

古文：非唯成我门户，亦当为国名将。 明年，从河内独孤信于洛阳，被围。
现代文：不仅能光耀我的门户，也应当会成为国家的名将。 次年，贺若敦跟从河内公独孤信在洛阳被围。
English: He can not only shine my portal, but should also become a national star. The following year, He Ruodong was besieged in Luoyang after he followed the principle of independence from Hanoi.

古文：敦弯弓三石，箭不虚发。
现代文：贺若敦使用三石硬弓，箭无虚发。
English: Horoadon used a three-stone bow, and his arrows were flawless.

古文：信大奇之，乃言于太祖。
现代文：独孤信大为惊奇，就告诉太祖。
English: Duoluxin was very surprised and told his grandfather.

古文：太祖异之，引置麾下，授都督，封安陵县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：太祖感到非同一般，调他到自己部下，任命他为都督，封为安陵县伯，食邑四百户。
English: The great-grandfather felt unusual, transferred him to his subordinates, appointed him as the governor of the capital, and made him the mayor of Anling County, with 400 households.

古文：尝从太祖校猎于甘泉宫，时围人不齐，兽多逃逸，太祖大怒，人皆股战。
现代文：贺若敦曾经跟随太祖在甘泉宫射猎，当时包围野兽的人不齐，野兽多逃跑了，太祖大怒，众人都两腿战栗。
English: He Ruodong once went hunting with his great-grandfather at Ganquan Palace. At that time, the people surrounding the beast were uneven, and many of the beasts ran away. The great-grandfather was furious, and everyone was trembling in their boots.

古文：围内唯有一鹿，俄亦突围而走。
现代文：围圈内仅有一只鹿，很快也突破包围逃去。
English: There was only one deer in the enclosure, but it soon broke through the encirclement and fled.

古文：敦跃马驰之，鹿上东山，敦弃马步逐至山半，便掣之而下。
现代文：贺若敦策马追赶，鹿跑上东山，贺若敦丢下战马徒步追逐到半山腰，便捉住它走下山来。
English: He Ruodong chased the horse, the deer ran up the East Mountain, He Ruodong left the horse and chased it on foot to the mid-mountain, then caught it and walked down the mountain.

古文：太祖大悦，诸将因得免责。
现代文：太祖非常高兴，众将因而得以免受责罚。
English: The patriarch was overjoyed, and the generals were thus spared punishment.

古文：累迁太子庶子、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍、大都督、车骑大将军、散骑常侍、仪同三司，进爵广乡县侯。
现代文：屡经升造为太子庶子、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍、大都督、车骑大将军、散骑常侍、仪同三司，晋爵为广乡县侯。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of Prince's illegitimate son, General of Foot Guards, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry, General of Cavalry.

古文：敦既有武艺，太祖恒欲以将帅任之。
现代文：贺若敦既然有武艺，太祖便常想用他来担任将帅。
English: Since Heraodun had martial arts, Taizu often wanted to use him as a general.

古文：魏废帝二年，拜右卫将军，俄加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公。
现代文：魏废帝二年。任命他为右卫将军，不久加封骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋为公爵。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's dethronement, he was appointed General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, and was soon promoted to General of the Cavalry, Kefu Yi and the Three Departments, and promoted to Duke.

古文：时岷蜀初开，民情尚梗。
现代文：当时岷蜀刚刚开辟，民情尚且强硬。
English: At that time, Lushu had just been opened up, and the people's sentiment was still strong.

古文：巴西人谯淹据南梁州，与梁西江州刺史王开业共为表里，扇动群蛮。
现代文：巴西人谯淹占据南梁州，与梁西江州刺史王开业共相呼应，煽动众蛮民。
English: Brazilians flooded into and occupied South Liangzhou, echoing the opening of Jishi Wang in West Liangjiang, inciting the barbarians.

古文：太祖令敦率军讨之。
现代文：太祖命令贺若敦率领军队讨伐谯淹。
English: The great-grandfather ordered He Ruodong to lead the army to fight against flooding.

古文：山路艰险，人迹罕至。
现代文：山路艰险，人迹罕至。
English: The mountain road is difficult and dangerous, and there are few people on the trail.

古文：敦身先将士，攀木缘崖，倍道兼行，乘其不意。
现代文：贺若敦身先士卒，攀住树木爬上悬崖，一行两日的路程，乘谯淹不注意。
English: He Ruodun led the way, clinging to trees to climb the cliff, a two-day journey, taking the raft and not paying attention.

古文：又遣仪同扶猛破其别帅向镇侯于白帝。
现代文：又派遣仪同扶猛在白帝打败谯淹的分支部队将帅向镇侯。
English: In addition, he dispatched Yi and Fu Meng, the branch troops that defeated Yu Yan in Bai Di, to the township.

古文：淹乃与开业并其党泉玉成、侯造等率众七千，口累三万，自垫江而下，就梁王琳。
现代文：谯淹于是与王开业及其党徒泉玉成、侯造等率领众兵七千，百姓三万，从垫辽顺流而下，投靠凿王壁。
English: Therefore, Xuan Duan, together with Wang Kaige and his followers, Quan Yucheng, Hou Zuo, and others, led 7,000 soldiers and 30,000 people down the river from Mat Liao to build the King's Wall.

古文：敦邀击，破之。
现代文：贺若敦拦截打击，击败了他们。
English: He Ruodong intercepted the blow and defeated them.

古文：淹复依山立栅，南引蛮帅向白彪为援。
现代文：谯淹又依傍山岭建立营栅，向南引蛮帅向白彪作为救援部队。
English: He also set up a camp next to the mountains, and led the barbarians south to Bai Biao as a rescue force.

古文：敦设反间，离其党与，因其懈怠，复破之。斩淹，尽俘其众。
现代文：贺若敦设下反问计，离间谯淹的党徒，趁着敌人懈怠，又打败了敌人杀了谯淹，全部俘获了敌众。
English: He Ruodong set up a countermeasure, and the party members who were separated from the enemy took advantage of the enemy's slackness, defeated the enemy, killed the enemy, and captured all the enemy.

古文：进爵武都公，增邑通前一千七百户，拜典祀中大夫。
现代文：朝廷提升贺若敦为武都公，食邑增至一千七百户，授任典祀中大夫。
English: The imperial court promoted He Ruodong to the military governor of the capital, the food villages increased to 1,700 households, and he was appointed ceremonial junior doctor.

古文：寻出为金州都督、七州诸军事、金州刺史。
现代文：不久贺若敦出任金州都督、七州诸军事、金蛆刺史。
English: Soon after, He Ruodong became the governor of Jinzhou, the military of the seven states, and the history of Jinzhou.

古文：向白彪又与蛮帅向五子等聚众为寇，围逼信州。
现代文：向白彪又与蛮帅向五子等聚众为寇，围逼值州。
English: Xiang Bai Biao and the other five sons of the great general Xiang Wuzi gathered a crowd to invade and besiege the state.

古文：诏敦与开府田弘赴救，未至而城已陷。
现代文：朝廷诏令贺羞蓝与开府旦弘赶去救援，未到达城池已经失陷。
English: The imperial court ordered He Shilan and Kaifu Tanhong to rush to the rescue, but the castle had already fallen before they arrived.

古文：进与白彪等战，破之，俘斩二千人。
现代文：贺若敦进兵与白彪等交战，击败了对方，俘获斩杀二千人。
English: He Ruodong marched into battle with Bai Biao and others, defeated the other side, captured and killed two thousand people.

古文：仍进军追讨，遂平信州。
现代文：接着进军追击，终于平定信州。
English: Then they marched in pursuit and finally subdued Shinshu.

古文：是岁，荆州蛮帅文子荣自号仁州刺史，拥逼土人，据沮漳为逆。
现代文：这一年，荆州蛮帅文子荣自称为仁丛刺史，胁迫土人，占据沮漳叛逆。
English: In this year, Jingzhou's handsome Wen Zirong claimed to be a benevolent history, coerced the natives, and occupied the depressed and rebellious.

古文：复令敦与开府潘招讨之，擒子荣，并虏其众。
现代文：朝廷又命令贺若敦与开府遥超讨伐塞王凿，擒住了子荣，并且俘虏了他手下的贼众。
English: The imperial court also ordered He Ruodong and Kaifu to go far and beyond in the crusade against King Ce, capture Zirong, and capture the thieves under his command.

古文：武成元年，入为军司马。
现代文：基感元年，贺羞蓝入朝担任军司马。
English: In the first year of Ji Kan, He Shilan entered the imperial court to serve as the secretary of the army.

古文：自江陵平后，巴、湘之地并内属，每遣梁人守之。
现代文：自从江陆被平定后，旦、湘之地都归顺朝廷，朝廷常派梁人守卫。
English: Since the Jianglu River was subdued, the Dan and Hunan regions have been subordinated to the imperial court, and the imperial court has often sent Liang people to guard them.

古文：至是陈将侯瑱、侯安都等围逼湘州，遏绝粮援。
现代文：到了这时陈将侯填、侯安都等围逼湘州，阻止断绝了粮食救援。
English: By this time, Chen had encircled Houyan and Hou'an and forced them to besiege Hunan, preventing them from cutting off food aid.

古文：乃令敦率步骑六千，度江赴救。
现代文：朝廷于是命令贺若敦率领步兵骑兵六千人，渡过长江去救援。
English: The imperial court then ordered He Ruodong to lead six thousand infantry and cavalry to cross the Yangtze River for rescue.

古文：瑱等以敦孤军深入，规欲取之。
现代文：侯填等因为贺若敦孤军深入，谋划想要攻取贺若敦。
English: Because Heraodong's lone army was deeply entrenched, Houfill and others plotted to capture Heraodong.

古文：敦每设奇伏，连战破瑱，乘胜径进，遂次湘州。
现代文：贺若敦每每设立奇兵伏击，接连战败侯填，乘胜径直前进，最后驻扎在湘州。
English: He Ruodong set up a surprise ambush every time, defeated Houfu successively, advanced straight ahead with victory, and finally stationed in Xiangzhou.

古文：因此轻敌，不以为虞。
现代文：因此轻视敌人，不把敌人放在心上。
English: Therefore, despise the enemy, do not put the enemy in mind.

古文：俄而霖雨不已，秋水泛溢，陈人济师，江路遂断。
现代文：不久大雨连下不止，秋水泛溢，陈人军队过江，江路于是被阻断。
English: Soon, the heavy rain continued to fall, the autumn water overflowed, the Chen people's army crossed the river, and the river road was blocked.

古文：粮援既绝，人怀危惧。
现代文：粮草既已断绝，将士便心怀恐惧。
English: Once the grain and grass had been cut off, the generals fled in fear.

古文：敦于是分兵抄掠，以充资费。
现代文：贺若敦于是分兵抄掠，用来充当军队的物资费用。
English: Therefore, Herodong pillaged the detachment and used it to pay for the army's material expenses.

古文：恐瑱等知其粮少，乃于营内多为土聚，覆之以米，集诸营军士，人各持囊，遣官司部分，若欲给粮者。
现代文：害怕侯填等知道他粮少，就在军营内多设置土堆，在上面盖上白米，集中各营军士，每人拿着布袋，派官吏分粮，好像是要给士兵粮食似的。
English: Fearing that he would be short of food, they set up more mounds in the camp, covered them with white rice, gathered the soldiers of each battalion, each with a cloth bag, and sent officials to distribute the grain, as if they wanted to give the soldiers grain.

古文：因召侧近村民，阳有所访问，令于营外遥见，随即遣之。
现代文：于是招来附近村民，表面上要问村民什么，使村民在营外远处见到分粮，随即就把村民打发走了。
English: As a result, nearby villagers were summoned, ostensibly to ask the villagers what to do, so that the villagers saw the distribution of grain in the distance outside the camp, and then sent the villagers away.

古文：瑱等闻之，良以为实。
现代文：侯琐等听到消息后，果然认为是实情。
English: After hearing the news, Hou Zuo and others believed that it was true.

古文：乃据守要险，欲旷日以老敦师。
现代文：就据守在险要之处，想拖延日子来使贺若敦的军队疲弱。
English: He wanted to stall for time in order to weaken Horatio's army.

古文：敦又增修营垒，造庐舍，示以持久。
现代文：贺若敦又增修军营堡垒，建造房舍，向敌人显示要持久下去。
English: He Ruodong also increased the construction of military camps and fortresses, built buildings, and showed the enemy that he would continue to last.

古文：湘、罗之间，遂废农业。
现代文：湘、罗之间，于是农业遭到荒废。
English: Between Hunan and Luo, agriculture was devastated.

古文：瑱等无如之何。
现代文：侯填等无可奈何。
English: There is no choice but to fill the seats.

古文：初，土人亟乘轻船，载米粟及笼鸡鸭以饷瑱军。
现代文：起初，土人屡次乘着轻快的船只，载着米粟及用笼装鸡鸭来款待侯琐的军队。
English: At the beginning, the natives repeatedly entertained the troops of Houzo by means of fast-moving boats, carrying rice poppies and with caged chickens and ducks.

古文：敦患之，乃伪为土人，装船伏甲士于中。
现代文：贺若敦对此担忧，就伪装成土人，装载着士兵埋伏在船中。
English: Worried about this, He Ruodong disguised himself as a native and ambushed the ship with soldiers.

古文：瑱兵人望见，谓饷船之至，逆来争取。
现代文：侯填的士兵望见了，认为是送粮饷的船到了，迎上来争着取粮。
English: When the soldiers of Houfui saw it, they thought it was the arrival of a ship carrying grain, and they scrambled to get the grain.

古文：敦甲士出而擒之。
现代文：贺若敦的士兵从船中跳出擒住了敌兵。
English: The soldiers of Herodong jumped out of the boat and choked the enemy soldiers.

古文：敦军数有叛人乘马投瑱者，辄纳之。
现代文：贺若敦军中屡次有叛变的人乘马投奔侯琐，侯填就接纳他们。
English: Repeatedly, there were mutineers in Horoadun's army who rode horses to Hosho, and Hosho accepted them.

古文：敦又别取一马，牵以趣船，令船中逆以鞭鞭之。
现代文：贺若敦又另取一匹马，牵着它往船上赶去，命令船中人迎上来用马鞭抽打它。
English: He also took another horse, led it to the boat, and ordered the people on the boat to come and beat it with a horsewhip.

古文：如是者再三，马便畏船不上。
现代文：像这样试了多次，马便害怕船不敢上了。
English: After many attempts like this, the horse was afraid of the boat and did not dare to get on.

古文：后伏兵于江岸，遣人以招瑱军，诈称投附。
现代文：后来埋伏士兵在江岸边，派人去招侯填的军队，假称要投降归附。
English: Later, the ambushed soldiers on the riverbank sent someone to invite the waiting army, pretending to surrender.

古文：瑱便遣兵迎接，竞来牵马。
现代文：侯填便派兵迎接，争着来牵马。
English: The lord of the manor sent soldiers to meet them, and they fought to lead the horse.

古文：马既畏船不上，敦发伏掩之，尽殪。
现代文：马已害怕船不上去，贺若敦发起伏兵袭击敌人，全部杀死了敌人。
English: The horse was already afraid of not being able to get on the boat, and Herodong launched an ambush attack on the enemy, killing all of the enemy.

古文：此后实有馈饷及亡命奔瑱者，犹谓敦之设诈，逆遣扞击，并不敢受。
现代文：这以后确实有赠送粮饷及逃亡投奔侯填的人，侯琐还以为是贺若敦设下的奸计，都予以拒绝或抗击，并不敢接受。
English: After this, there were indeed people who gave away grain bags and fled to Houfu, but Houzuo thought it was a trick set up by Herodong, refused or resisted, and did not dare to accept.

古文：相持岁余，瑱等不能制，求借船送敦度江。
现代文：相持一年多，侯填等不能制伏贺若敦，请求借船送贺若敦渡江。
English: They had been together for more than a year, but Hou Jian and others could not subdue He Ruodong, so they asked to borrow a boat to send He Ruodong across the river.

古文：敦虑其或诈，拒而弗许。
现代文：贺若敦担心他们或许欺诈，拒绝不答应。
English: He Ruodong was worried that they might be cheating and refused to say yes.

古文：瑱复遣使谓敦曰： 骠骑在此既久，今欲给船相送，何为不去？ 敦报云： 湘州是我国家之地，为尔侵逼。
现代文：侯琐又派使者对贺若敦说： 骠骑将军在这已很久了，现在给船送你，为什么不离去呢? 贺若敦回答说： 湘州是我国家的领地，被你们侵略逼迫。
English: Houzo also sent an envoy to Herodong saying, "The general has been here for a long time, so why don't you leave?" Herodong replied, "Hangzhou is the territory of my country, which is being invaded and persecuted by you.

古文：敦来之日，欲相平殄。
现代文：我来的时候，想要平定消灭你们。
English: When I came, I came to destroy you.

古文：既未得一决，所以不去。 瑱后日复遣使来，敦谓使者云： 必须我还，可舍我百里，当为汝去。 瑱等留船于江，将兵去津路百里。
现代文：因为未能一决胜负，所以不离去。 侯填第三天又派使者来，贺若敦对使者说： 一定要我回去，可以离开我百里，我当为你们离去。 侯填等把船留在江裹，率兵离开渡口百里。
English: Because he could not win a decisive victory, he did not leave. Hou Jian sent an envoy again on the third day, and He Ruodong said to the envoy: I must go back, you can leave me a hundred miles, I should leave for you. Hou Jian and others left the ship in the river and led the soldiers a hundred miles away from the ferry.

古文：敦觇知非诈，徐理舟烜，勒众而还。
现代文：贺若敦窥视他们并不是欺诈，徐徐地整理船只，率领众人班师。
English: He Ruodong peered at them and saw that they were not cheating. He slowly organized the ships and led the crew.

古文：在军病死者十五六。
现代文：在军中病死的入有十分之五六。
English: Fifty-six out of ten died of disease in the army.

古文：晋公护以敦失地无功，除名为民。
现代文：晋公宇文护因为贺若敦失地无功，将他削除官职为民。
English: Jin Gongwu Wengu removed He Ruodong from his post because of his ineffectual performance.

古文：保定二年，拜工部中大夫。
现代文：保定二年，贺若敦被任命为工部中大夫。
English: In the second year of Baoding, He Ruodong was appointed as the chief doctor of the engineering department.

古文：寻出为金州总管、七州诸军事、金州刺史。
现代文：不久出任金州总管、七州诸军事、金州刺史。
English: He soon became the head of the Jinzhou, the military of the seven states, and the history of Jinzhou.

古文：三年，从柱国杨忠引突厥破齐长城，至并州而还，以敦为殿。
现代文：三年，跟从柱国杨忠引领突厥人攻破齐的长城，到达并州回军，用贺若敦殿后。
English: Three years later, he followed the pillar country Yang Zhong to lead the Turks to break through the Great Wall of Qi, arrived and returned to the army, and used He Ruodong as his empress.

古文：别封一子顺义县公，邑一千户。
现代文：朝廷另封贺若敦的一子为顺义县公，食邑一千户。
English: The imperial court also made one of Heraodun's sons the governor of Shunyi County, which had 1,000 households.

古文：五年，除中州刺史，镇函谷。
现代文：五年，贺若敦任中州刺史，镇守函谷。
English: In five years, He Ruodong was appointed as the chief historian of Zhongzhou and the town guard of Hakodate.

古文：敦恃功负气，顾其流辈皆为大将军，敦独未得，兼以湘州之役，全军而反，不蒙旌赏，翻被除名，每怀怨怒。
现代文：贺若敦依恃军功意气用事，看到他的同辈都做了大将军，惟独自己未能得到大将军的职位，加上因湘州战役，保住军队返回，没有蒙受旌扬赏赐，反而被除去名籍，心中常怀着怨气和愤怒。
English: Seeing that his peers had all been promoted to the rank of general, but that he himself had not been promoted to the rank of general, and that he had not been rewarded with promotion but had been stripped of his title because he had returned from the Battle of Hunan, He often harbored resentment and anger in his heart.

古文：属有台使至，乃出怨言。
现代文：适逢有朝廷使者到来，贺若敦于是口出怨言。
English: When an emissary from the imperial court arrived, Heraudun complained.

古文：晋公护怒，遂征敦还，逼令自杀。
现代文：晋公宇文护恼怒，就征召贺若敦还朝，逼其自杀。
English: Enraged, Jin Gong Uwenguo conscripted He Ruodong and forced him to commit suicide.

古文：时年四十九。
现代文：这一年他四十九岁。
English: He was forty-nine years old.

古文：建德初，追赠大将军。
现代文：建德初年，朝廷追赠他为大将军。
English: In the first year of Jiande, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of grand general.

古文：谥曰烈。
现代文：谧号叫烈。
English: 号烈.

古文：子弼，有文武材略。
现代文：他的儿子贺若弼，有文才武略。
English: His son, Herakazu, was a talented writer and strategist.

古文：大象末，位至开府仪同大将军、扬州刺史、襄邑县公。
现代文：大象末年，官位达到开府仪同大将军、扬州刺史、襄邑县公。
English: In the last years of the elephant, the official rank reached Kaifu Yi Tongda General, Yangzhou Sashih, Xiangyi County.

古文：敦弟谊，亦知名。
现代文：贺若敦的弟弟贺羞茧，也有名。
English: He Ruodong's younger brother, He Xinyu, is also famous.

古文：官至柱国、海陵县公。
现代文：官位达到柱国、海陵县公。
English: He attained the official rank of Zhu Guo and the official rank of Hailing County.

古文：权景宣字晖远，天水显亲人也。
现代文：护量宣字!驴，是玉迷墅超人。
English: Donkey, is the jade maze superman.

古文：父昙腾，魏陇西郡守。
现代文：父亲龌腾，是魏胧酉登守。
English: His father, Zhaoteng, was the governor of Wei Province.

古文：赠秦州刺史。
现代文：赠封羞业刺史。
English: He was given a posthumous honorable mention in history.

古文：景宣少聪悟，有气侠，宗党皆叹异之。
现代文：基宣年少聪明颖悟，有侠义气概，宗族中人都赞叹他不同寻常。
English: Jing Xuan was young, clever and insightful. He was full of courage and chivalry. People of the same clan were surprised and impressed by him.

古文：年十七，魏行台萧宝夤见而奇之，表为轻车将军。
现代文：十七岁时，魏行台萧宝夤见到他后很器重他，表奏他为轻车将军。
English: At the age of seventeen, Wei Xingtai Xiao Baojun was deeply surprised to see him, and asked the court to add him as a light vehicle general.

古文：及宝夤败，景宣归乡里。
现代文：及至宝夤失败，景宣回到乡里。
English: After Xiao Baojun's defeat, he returned to his hometown.

古文：太祖平陇右，擢为行台郎中。
现代文：左祖平定陇西，提升景宣为行台郎中。
English: Zuo Pingding subdued Shaanxi and promoted Jing Xuan to the middle of the Gangtai clan.

古文：魏孝武西迁，授镇远将军、步兵校尉，加平西将军、秦州大中正。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁垦窘，授任悬宣为镇远将军、步兵校尉，加封平西将军、秦州大中正。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu of the Western Han Dynasty was in a difficult situation, and he was awarded the titles of General Zhenyuan, Infantry Lieutenant, General Pingxi, and Vice President of Qinzhou University.

古文：大统初，转祠部郎中。
现代文：大统初年，基宣转任祠部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was transferred to the position of a junior member of the ancestral hall.

古文：景宣晓兵权，有智略。
现代文：量宣通晓用兵的权谋，有智慧才略。
English: He is familiar with the methods of using soldiers, and has the wit and daring to do so.

古文：从太祖拔弘农，破沙苑，皆先登陷阵。
现代文：跟从太祖攻取弘农，击破沙苑，都冲锋陷阵。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in conquering Hongnong and defeating Shayuan, and they all charged into battle.

古文：转外兵郎中。
现代文：转任外兵郎中。
English: He was transferred to Gaheiro junior high school.

古文：从开府于谨援洛阳，景宣督课粮储，军以周济。
现代文：跟随开府于谨支援洛阳，景宣督责考核军粮储备，军队因此得到济助。
English: Following the establishment of the government, Yu Zhi supported Luoyang, and Jing Xuan Gu was responsible for the assessment of nuclear military grain reserves, so the army received financial assistance.

古文：时初复洛阳，将修缮宫室，景宣率徒三千，先出采运。
现代文：当时刚刚收复洛阳，将要修理宫室，景宣率领三千人，先出去采办运输物料。
English: At that time, Luoyang had just been recaptured and was preparing to repair the palace. He led three thousand construction workers to go out first to collect and transport materials.

古文：会东魏兵至，司州牧元季海等以众少拔还，属城悉叛，道路拥塞。
现代文：适逢束魏军队赶到，司州牧元季海等因兵少撤退回去，碰上城中人都叛变了，道路拥挤堵塞。
English: When the Eastern Wei army arrived, Sizhou Zhishi Yuan Jihai and others surrendered the city due to the small number of enemies, and the road was blocked.

古文：景宣将二十骑，且战且走。
现代文：景宣率领二十骑兵，边战边跑。
English: Jing Xuan led twenty cavalrymen and ran while fighting.

古文：从骑略尽，景宣轻马突围，手斩数级，驰而获免，因投民家自匿。
现代文：跟随的骑兵差不多都死了，景宣轻装骑马突破包围，亲手斩了数人，奔驰获免于难，于是投奔到百姓家中躲藏。
English: Almost all of the cavalrymen he was following were dead. Jing Xuan broke through the encirclement lightly loaded on horseback and personally beheaded several people. Benzi was spared, so he ran to the homes of the common people to hide.

古文：景宣以久藏非计，乃伪作太祖书，招募得五百余人，保据宜阳，声言大军续至。
现代文：景宣认为长时间躲藏不是计策，就伪造了太祖的一封书信，招募得到五百多人，保卫据守宜阳，声称大军随后就到。
English: Jing Xuan thought that hiding for a long time was not a strategy, so he forged a letter from Taizu and recruited more than five hundred people to defend Yiyang, claiming that the army would arrive later.

古文：东魏将段琛等率众至九曲，惮景宣，不敢进。
现代文：束魏将领段琛等率军赶到九曲，害怕景宣，不敢进兵。
English: Sok Wei's army, led by the general Duan Jun and others, arrived at Jiuqu, but they were afraid of Jing Xuan and did not dare to enter the army.

古文：景宣恐琛审其虚实，乃将腹心自随，诈云迎军，因得西遁。
现代文：景宣怕段琛探察到他的虚实，就带领自己的心腹之人，假说去迎接大军，因而得以向西逃遁。
English: He was afraid that Duan Xuan would find out the truth about him, so he went to meet the large army with false pretenses and was able to escape back to West Wei.

古文：与仪同李延孙相会，攻孔城。
现代文：与仪同李延孙相会，攻打孔城。
English: He met with Yi and Li Yansun and attacked Kongcheng.

古文：洛阳以南，寻亦来附。
现代文：洛阳以南，不久也来归附。
English: Many areas south of Luoyang soon declared their allegiance.

古文：太祖即留景宣守张白坞，节度东南义军。
现代文：太祖就留景宣守卫张白坞，节制调度东南义军。
English: His great-grandfather stayed in Xuancheng to guard Zhangbai dock and control the southeastern rebel army.

古文：东魏将王元入洛，景宣与延孙等击走之，以功授大行台右丞。
现代文：束魏将领王元轨进入洛地，景宣与李延孙等将他打跑，因功被授任大行台右丞。
English: The Wei general Wang Yuanlu entered Luodi, Jing Xuan and Li Yansun ran him off, and he was awarded the title of Grand Marshal of Taiyuan for his service.

古文：进屯宜阳，攻襄城，拔之，获郡守王洪显，俘斩五百余人。
现代文：进而屯驻在宜阳，攻打襄城，占领了它，擒获郡守王洪显，俘虏杀死五百多人。
English: He then stationed himself in Yiyang, attacked Xiangcheng, occupied it, captured the county governor Wang Hongxian, and killed more than five hundred prisoners.

古文：太祖嘉之，征入朝。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他，征召他入朝。
English: His great-grandfather praised him and called him to the imperial court.

古文：录前后功，封显亲县男，邑三百户。
现代文：记录前后功劳，封他为显亲县男，食邑三百户。
English: He was awarded the title of "Man of Hsien Chien County" for his outstanding achievements, and his restaurant attracted 300 customers.

古文：除南阳郡守。郡邻敌境，旧制，发民守防三十五处，多废农桑，而奸宄犹作。
现代文：任命他为南阳郡守南阳郡邻近敌人边境，旧有的制度是，发动百姓把守防护三十五个地方，多荒废了农业，而为非作歹的人仍然作乱。
English: He was appointed to guard Nanyang County, which is the closest to the enemy's border. The old system was to mobilize the people to guard and protect thirty-five places. Agriculture was mostly abandoned, but those who did evil still caused trouble.

古文：景宣至，并除之，唯修起城楼，多备器械，寇盗敛迹，民得肄业。
现代文：景宣到后，全都废除了旧制，衹修筑起城楼，多预备器械，寇盗收敛了行迹，百姓得以从事农业生产。
English: After the arrival of Jing Xuan, the old system was abolished, the castle was rebuilt and the castle tower was built, more equipment was prepared, the robbers were deterred, and the people were able to engage in agricultural production.

古文：百姓称之，立碑颂德。
现代文：百姓称赞他，立碑歌颂他的恩德。
English: The people praised him and erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：太祖特赏粟帛，以旌其能。
现代文：太祖特意赏赐他粮米布帛，用来旌扬他的才干。
English: The great-grandfather specially rewarded him with grain, rice and cloth, which he used to promote his talent.

古文：迁广州刺史。
现代文：升任他为广州刺史。
English: Later, he moved to Guangzhou to become a historian.

古文：侯景举河南来附，景宣从仆射王思政经略应接。
现代文：侯景率黄河以南兵众来归附，景宣跟从仆射王思政筹划接应。
English: Hou Jing offered land south of the Yellow River to be annexed, and Quan Jingyi and his servant Wang Sizheng came to be responsible for receiving and handling it.

古文：既而侯景南叛，恐东魏复有其地，以景宣为大都督、豫州刺史，镇乐口。
现代文：不久侯景叛变投梁，朝廷担心束魏重新拥有河南土地，用景宣任大都督、豫州刺史，镇守乐口。
English: Not long after, Hou Jing surrendered to the Southern Dynasty again. Because it was feared that the Eastern Wei Dynasty would come to recover the land offered by Hou Jing, the imperial court declared Jing to be the grand governor, the historian of Yuzhou, and the town guard of Lekou.

古文：东魏亦遣张伯德为刺史。
现代文：东魏也派张伯德任刺史。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty also sent Zhang Baode to be a history-maker.

古文：伯德令其将刘贵平率其戍卒及山蛮，屡来攻逼。
现代文：伯德命令他的将领刘贵干率领手下戍守的士兵及山蛮，屡次来进攻逼迫。
English: Zhang Baode sent his general Liu Guiping to lead the headquarters and the mountain barbarians to attack many times.

古文：景宣兵不满千人，随机奋击，前后擒斩三千余级，贵平乃退走。
现代文：景宣兵士不满一千，他根据时机的变化灵活地奋勇杀敌，前后擒获杀死敌方三千多人，贵平才退走。
English: Jing Xuan's soldiers were less than a thousand, and he flexibly killed the enemy according to the change of time and opportunity. He killed more than three thousand of the enemy before and after capture, and Guiping only retreated.

古文：进授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：朝廷晋升他为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The imperial court also awarded him the title of "Imperial Envoy," "General of Chariot and Cavalry" and "Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs."

古文：颍川陷后，太祖以乐口等诸城道路阻绝，悉令拔还。
现代文：颖川失陷后，太祖认为乐口等众城池道路险阻隔绝，命令守军全部撤退回来。
English: After the fall of Yingchuan, Taizu thought that the roads of cities such as Lekou were dangerously cut off, and ordered all the defenders to retreat.

古文：襄州刺史杞秀以狼狈得罪。
现代文：襄州刺史杞秀因处境窘迫难为而获罪。
English: Yangzhou acupuncturist Zou Xiu was found guilty of taking advantage of a difficult situation.

古文：景宣号令严明，戎旅整肃，所部全济，独被优赏。
现代文：景宣号令严明，军队整齐严肃，所率军兵全部渡过黄河，独自被优待奖赏。
English: The proclamation of power was clear, the army was neat and powerful, and all the departments were withdrawn, so they were rewarded.

古文：仍留镇荆州，委以鸦南之事。
现代文：仍然留他镇守荆州，把鶸南的事务委托给他。
English: He still kept him in charge of Jingzhou and entrusted the affairs of southern Anhui Province to him.

古文：初，梁岳阳王萧察将以襄阳归朝，仍勒兵攻梁元帝于江陵。
现代文：起初，梁岳阳王萧察打算拿襄阳归顺朝廷，仍旧率兵在江陵攻打梁元帝。
English: At first, Liang Yueyang King Xiao Cha planned to take Xiangyang and return it to the imperial court, but he still led his troops to attack Emperor Liang Yuan in Jiangling.

古文：察叛将杜岸乘虚袭之。
现代文：萧察的叛将杜岸乘机袭击萧察。
English: Shocha's renegade general Dugan took the opportunity to attack Shocha.

古文：景宣乃率骑三千，助察破岸。
现代文：景宣于是率领三千骑兵，帮助萧察打败杜岸。
English: Jing Xuan then led three thousand cavalry to help Xiao Ca defeat Dugan.

古文：察因是乃送其妻王氏及子嶚入质。
现代文：萧察因此就送他的妻子王氏及儿子萧崇过来作为人质。
English: As a result, Xiao Zha sent his wife Wang Zhi and son Xiao Chong over as hostages.

古文：景宣又与开府杨忠取梁将柳仲礼，拔安陆、随郡。
现代文：景宣又与开府杨忠攻取梁将柳仲礼，占领安陆、随郡。
English: In addition, Jing Xuan and Yang Zhong of Kaifu attacked Liang General Liu Zhongli and conquered Anlu and Su County.

古文：久之，随州城民吴士英等杀刺史黄道玉，因聚为寇。
现代文：过了很久，随州城民吴士英等杀了刺史黄道玉，于是聚众做贼寇。
English: After a long time, Suizhou citizen Wu Shying and others killed Zhi Shi Huang Dao Yu, and then gathered a crowd to become thieves.

古文：景宣以英等小贼，可以计取之，若声其罪，恐同恶者众。
现代文：景宣认为士英等是小贼，可以设计擒住，如果声讨他的罪过，恐怕狼狈为奸的人很多。
English: Jing Xuan thought that Shi Ying and others were petty thieves and could be stopped by design. If he were to be condemned for his sins, I'm afraid there would be a lot of traitors.

古文：乃与英书，伪称道玉凶暴，归功英等。
现代文：就写信给士英，假称黄道玉凶暴，把功劳归于士英等。
English: He wrote a letter to Wu Shiying, pretending that the Zodiac Jade was vicious and cruel, and it was Wu Shiying's great achievement to kill him.

古文：英果信之，遂相率而至。
现代文：士英果然相信了，就率领贼众赶来。
English: Shi Ying really believed it and led the thieves to come.

古文：景宣执而戮之，散其党与。
现代文：景宣拘捕并杀了他，解散了他的同伙。
English: Jing Xuan arrested and killed him, and disbanded his associates.

古文：进攻应城，拔之，获夏侯珍洽。
现代文：进攻应城，占领该城，俘获夏侯珍洽。
English: He also led his troops to attack Yingcheng, defeated and captured the enemy general Xia Hou Zhenchao.

古文：于是应、礼、安、随并平。
现代文：于是应、礼、安、随都被平定。
English: As a result, etiquette, etiquette, etiquette, etiquette, etiquette, etiquette, etiquette, etiquette.

古文：朝议以景宣威行南服，乃授并安肆郢新应六州诸军事、并州刺史。
现代文：朝廷议论认为景宣声威远播南人顺服，于是授任他为并安肆郢新应六州诸军事、并州刺史。
English: The imperial court deliberated and thought that he was very prestigious in the southern frontier, so he was awarded the military titles of He, An, Zhao, Zhao, Xin, and Ying of the six states, as well as the title of Shishi of the state.

古文：寻进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，兼督江北司二州诸军事，进爵为伯，邑五百户。
现代文：不久进升他为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中，兼督察江北司二州诸军事，提升封号为伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain, as well as the title of Inspector of the North Jiangsu Military Department of the Two Provinces, and the promotion seal was Bo, with 500 households in food villages.

古文：唐州蛮田鲁嘉自号豫州伯，引致齐兵，大为民患。
现代文：唐州蛮人田鲁嘉自封为豫州伯，引来查兵，成为百姓很大的祸患。
English: Tianlu Jia, a barbarian from Tangzhou, self-appointed himself as the governor of Yuzhou, attracted soldiers, and became a great disaster for the people.

古文：景宣又破之，获鲁嘉，以其地为郡。
现代文：景宣又打败了他们，抓获鲁嘉，用他的土地作为郡。
English: Jing Xuan defeated them again, captured Lu Jia, and used his land as a county.

古文：转安州刺史。
现代文：转任安州刺史。
English: Transferred to the post of Anzhou magistrate.

古文：梁定州刺史李洪远初款后叛，景宣恶其怀贰，密袭破之，虏其家口及部众。
现代文：梁宣业刺史李洪远起初顺服后来背叛，景宣厌恨他怀有贰，秘密袭击打败了他，俘虏了他的家人及部众。
English: Li Hongyuan initially obeyed and later betrayed, Jing Xuan hated him and harbored a grudge, secretly attacked and defeated him, and captured his family and subordinates.

古文：洪远脱身走免。
现代文：洪远脱身逃跑免难。
English: It was inevitable that Hongyuan would escape.

古文：自是酋帅慑服，无敢叛者。
现代文：自此酋帅胆慑顺服，没有谁敢叛变了。
English: Since then, the chieftain has intimidated obedience, and no one dares to rebel.

古文：燕公于谨征江陵，景宣别破梁司空陆法和司马羊亮于涢水。
现代文：恋公谨征讨逗陵，基宣在一一,另外打败銮司徒陆造和司马差亮。
English: Koikong earnestly enlisted the help of Zhaoling, and Gisen was one of them. In addition, he defeated the disciples Lu Zou and Sima Zhaoliang.

古文：又遣别帅攻拔鲁山。
现代文：又派另一支军队的将帅攻取鲁山。
English: He also sent the general of another army to attack Lushan.

古文：多造舟舰，益张旗帜，临江欲度，以惧梁人。
现代文：多造船舰，增设旗帜，临近长江欲要横渡，以便让梁人害怕。
English: Build more ships, raise more flags, and try to cross the Yangtze River in order to frighten the Liang people.

古文：梁将王琳在湘州，景宣遗之书，谕以祸福。
现代文：凿将王壁在渔业，基宣赠书信给他，用祸福晓谕他。
English: He chiseled the king's wall in the fishery, and Ge Xuan presented a letter to him, telling him about the misfortunes and blessings.

古文：琳遂遣长史席壑因景宣请举州款附。
现代文：王琳于是派长史席壑通过基宣的请求全州归附。
English: Wang Lin then sent the chief historian Shi Jie to annex the whole state through the request of Ji Xuan.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，征为司宪中大夫，寻除基鄀硖平四州五防诸军事、江陵防主，加大将军。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，征召基宣担任司宪中大夫，不久升任他为基都硖平四州五防诸军事、江陵防主，加授大将军。
English: When Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, he conscripted Ji Xuan to serve as the middle doctor of the Constitutional Court, and soon he was promoted to be the commander of the four prefectures, five military defense zones, and the defense of Jiangling, and was awarded the title of general.

古文：保定四年，晋公护东讨，景宣别讨河南。
现代文：保定四年，置公宇文护束讨齐迩，基宣另外讨伐河南。
English: In the four years of Baoding, Gong Yuwen and his bodyguards were dispatched to subjugate Qi, and Ji Xuan was dispatched to subjugate Henan.

古文：齐豫州刺史王士良、永州刺史萧世怡并以城降。
现代文：齐豫州刺史王士良、永州刺史萧世怡都开城投降。
English: Wang Shiliang of Qiyuzhou and Xiao Shiyi of Yongzhou both surrendered at Kaesong.

古文：景宣以开府谢彻守永州，开府郭彦守豫州，以士良、世怡及降卒一千人归诸京师。
现代文：景宣让开府谢彻守卫永州，开府郭彦守卫豫州，让士良、世怡及投降士兵一千人归于京师。
English: Jing Xuan let Kaifu Xiecher guard Yongzhou, Kaifu Guo Yan guard Yuanzhou, and let Shiliang, Shiyi and one thousand surrendered soldiers return to the Beijing Division.

古文：寻而洛阳不守，乃弃二州，拔其将士而还。
现代文：不久洛阳失守，于是弃下永州、豫州，撤出将士班师。
English: Soon after, Luoyang was lost to the enemy, so he abandoned Yongzhou and Yuzhou and withdrew his entire squadron.

古文：至昌州而罗阳蛮反，景宣回军破之，斩首千级，获生口二千、杂畜千头，送阙。
现代文：到达昌州，罗阳蛮人反叛，景宣回军打败了叛贼，杀死一千人，俘获二千人、各种牲畜上千头，送往朝廷。
English: Arriving in Changzhou, Luoyang barbarians rebelled, Jing Xuan Hui defeated the rebels, killed one thousand people, captured two thousand people, and sent thousands of livestock to the imperial court.

古文：还次灞上，晋公护亲迎劳之。
现代文：军队回还驻扎在灞上，晋公宇文护亲自去迎接慰劳。
English: The army was still stationed in Handan, and Jin Gong Yuwengu personally went to meet the consolation.

古文：天和初，授荆州总管、十七州诸军事、荆州刺史，进爵千金郡公。
现代文：天和初年，朝廷授任景宣为荆州总管、十七州诸军事、荆州刺史，晋爵为千金郡公。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, the imperial court appointed Jing Xuan as the general manager of Jingzhou, the military of the seventeen states, the historian of Jingzhou, and the prince of Qianjin County.

古文：陈湘州刺史华皎举州款附，表请援兵。
现代文：陈湘州刺史华皎举州归附，上表请求援兵。
English: South Chen, Xiangzhou, Zhishi and Huayuan surrendered, and the table above requested that North Zhou send troops to help.

古文：敕景宣统水军与皎俱下。
现代文：朝廷令景宣统领水军与华皎一起顺江而下。
English: The Imperial Court decreed his death, and the navy responded.

古文：景宣到夏口，陈人已至。
现代文：景宣到达夏口。陈人已经到了。
English: He came to Xiakou, and the soldiers and horses of the Chen Dynasty had already arrived.

古文：而景宣以任遇隆重，遂骄傲恣纵，多自矜伐，兼纳贿货，指麾节度，朝出夕改。
现代文：而景宣因为受到的任用礼遇隆重，于是骄横傲慢恣意放纵，多居功自夸，兼收纳贿赂的财货，指挥节制调度，早晨作出决定晚上就改了。
English: However, Jing Xuan, because of the high honor of his appointment, became arrogant and self-indulgent, boasting of his many achievements, accepting bribes, commanding moderation and scheduling, making decisions in the morning and changing them in the evening.

古文：将士愤怒，莫肯用命。
现代文：将士都感到愤怒，没有谁肯为他效命。
English: Enraged, the soldiers refused to follow his orders, let alone die for him.

古文：及水军始交，一时奔北，船舰器仗，略无孑遗。
现代文：等到水军开始交战，一时间将士都奔逃败北，船舰器械兵仗，丢弃得一点儿也不剩。
English: By the time the naval forces began to fight, all the soldiers had fled to the north, and there was nothing left of the ship's equipment.

古文：时卫公直总督诸军，以景宣负败，欲绳以军法。
现代文：当时卫公宇文直总督各路军马，因景宣失败，想按军法处治他。
English: At this time, Wei Gong Uwen Zhi Rong led all the way, because of the failure of Quan Jing Xuan, he wanted to use military law to deal with it.

古文：朝廷不忍加罪，遣使就军赦之。
现代文：朝廷不忍对他加罪，派使臣到军中赦免了他。
English: The imperial court could not bear to add to his guilt and sent an envoy to the army to pardon him.

古文：寻遇疾卒。
现代文：不久景宣得病而死。
English: He fell ill and died soon after.

古文：赠河渭鄯三州刺史，谥曰恭。
现代文：朝廷赠封他为河、渭、鄯三州刺史，谧号叫恭。
English: The imperial court granted him the title of He, He, He of the Three Provinces, and his posthumous name was Gong.

古文：子如璋嗣。
现代文：他的儿子权如璋继承父禄。
English: His son, Quan Rugao, succeeded his father.

古文：位至开府、胶州刺史。
现代文：官位达到开府、胶州刺史。
English: The official rank reached Kaifu and Jiaozhou.

古文：如璋弟如玖，仪同大将军、广川县侯。
现代文：如璋的弟弟如玖，官拜仪同大将军、广县侯。
English: Rugao's younger brother, Rugao, was a high-ranking general and the governor of Guangxian County.

古文：景宣之去乐口，南荆州刺史郭贤据鲁阳以拒东魏。
现代文：景宣离开乐口时，南荆州刺史郭贤占据鲁阳来抗拒束魏。
English: When Jing Xuan left Lekou, Guo Xian, the governor of Southern Jing Province, occupied Luyang to resist Shu Wei.

古文：贤字道因，赵兴阳州人也。
现代文：郭贤字道因，是赵兴阳周人。
English: Guo Xian's character, Daoyin, is played by Zhao Xingyang Zhou Ren.

古文：父云，凉州司马。
现代文：父亲郭云，任凉州司马。
English: His father, Guo Yun, held the post of Liangzhou Sima.

古文：贤性强记，学涉经史。
现代文：郭贤生性善于记忆，所学涉及经书史籍。
English: Guo Xiansheng is good at memory, and his studies involve scriptures and historical books.

古文：魏正光末，贼帅宿勤明达围逼豳州，刺史毕晖补贤统军，与之拒守。
现代文：魏正光末年，贼帅宿勤明达包围逼近豳州，刺史毕晖补任郭贤统领军队，舆自己一同拒守。
English: In the last years of Wei Zhengguang, the bandits besieged Qinmingda and approached Zhangzhou. He appointed Guo Xian as the commander of the army and refused to defend himself.

古文：后为州主簿，行北地郡事。
现代文：后来郭贤担任州主簿，掌管北地郡事务。
English: Later, Guo Xian served as the state's chief accountant and was in charge of North County affairs.

古文：以征讨有功，授都督。
现代文：因征讨有功，被授任为都督。
English: He was awarded the title of "Totoku" (governor-general) for his contribution to conscription.

古文：大统二年，齐神武袭陷夏州。
现代文：大统二年，齐神武帝袭击攻陷夏州。
English: In the second year of the Great Reunification, Emperor Qishenwu attacked and conquered Xiazhou.

古文：太祖虑其南下，与朝臣议之。
现代文：太祖忧虑他南下，与朝中大臣商议此事。
English: The great-grandfather was worried about him going south, and discussed the matter with the ministers of the two Koreas.

古文：贤进曰： 高欢兵士虽众，智勇已竭，策其举措，必不敢远来。
现代文：郭贤进献策略说： 高欢兵士虽然众多，智谋武勇已经竭尽，探测他的举动，一定不敢远来。
English: Guo Xian said: Although there are many high-spirited soldiers, their wisdom and bravery have been exhausted. If you want to detect his actions, you must not go too far.

古文：昔贺拔公初薨，关中振骇，而欢不能因利乘便，进取雍州，是其无智。
现代文：当初贺拔公刚死，关中震惊害怕，而高欢不能乘着便利的时机，进攻夺取雍州，这是他没有智略。
English: At first, He Bajong had just died, Guanzhong was shocked and afraid, and Gaohuan could not take advantage of the convenient opportunity to attack and seize Yongzhou. This was not his strategy.

古文：及銮驾西迁，六军寡弱，毛鸿宾丧败，关门不守，又不能乘此危机，以要一战，是其无勇。
现代文：等到魏孝武帝车驾西迁，军兵既少又弱，毛鸿宾丧亡败北，关门不能把守，高欢又不能乘着这一危机，以求打一仗，这是他没有武勇。
English: By the time Emperor Wei Xiaowu drove westward, the army was small and weak, Mao Hongbin was killed and defeated in the north, the gate could not be guarded, and Gaohuan could not take advantage of this crisis to fight a war. This was because he was not brave.

古文：今上下同心，士民戮力，欢志沮丧，宁敢送死。
现代文：现在我们上下一条心，将士百姓齐出力，高欢灰心失望，怎么敢来送死。
English: Now we have one heart and one mind, the soldiers and the people are all working hard, high joy, discouraged and disappointed, how dare we send them to death.

古文：且豳夏荒阻，千里无烟，纵欲南侵，资粮莫继。
现代文：况且豳州夏州荒芜阻塞，千里没有人烟，纵使他想南侵，物资粮草也不能接继。
English: Moreover, Zhangzhou and Xiazhou are barren and blocked, and there is no smoke for thousands of miles. Even if he wants to invade the south, materials, grain and grass cannot succeed.

古文：以此而言，不来必矣。 齐神武后果退，如贤所策。
现代文：由此说来，高欢不来是肯定的了。 齐神武后来果然退兵，如郭贤计议的那样。
English: From this, it is certain that Gao Huan will not come. Qi Shenwu later withdrew from the army, as Guo Xian planned.

古文：寻加伏波将军，从王思政镇弘农。
现代文：不久郭贤加授伏波将军，跟从王思政镇守弘农。
English: Soon after, Guo Xian was promoted to general of Fuba and followed Wang Sizheng as the town guard of Hongnong.

古文：授使持节、行义州事、当州都督。
现代文：被授任使持节、掌管义州事务、担任州都督。
English: He was awarded the title of envoy, took charge of Yishu affairs, and served as the prefect of the prefecture.

古文：转行弘农郡事。
现代文：转而执掌弘农郡政事。
English: He was put in charge of the administration of Hongnong County.

古文：贤质直有算略，思政甚重之，御边之谋，多与贤参决。
现代文：郭贤正直有谋略，王思政很器重他，防御边境的计谋，多与郭贤商讨决定。
English: Guo Xian is honest and has a strategy, Wang Sizheng is very important to him, and the strategy of defending the border is mostly discussed and decided with Guo Xian.

古文：十二年，除辅国将军、南州刺史。
现代文：十二年，郭贤升任辅国将军、南荆州刺史。
English: In the 12th year, Guo Xian was promoted to the general of the auxiliary province and became the governor of South Jingzhou.

古文：及侯景来附，思政遣贤先出三鸦，镇于鲁阳。
现代文：等到侯景来归附，王思政派郭贤先从三鹅出发，镇守在鲁阳。
English: When Hou Jing came to attach, Guo Xianxian, who was sent by Wang Shizheng, set out from Sangu and stayed in Luyang.

古文：加大都督，封安武县子，邑四百户。
现代文：朝廷加授郭贤为大都督，封他为安武县子，食邑四百户。
English: The imperial court awarded Guo Xian the title of grand governor, and made him the son of Anwu County, with 400 households.

古文：寻进车骑大将军、仪同三司，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久晋升车骑大将军、仪同三司、兼任散骑常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and also served as a samurai.

古文：及颍川被围，东魏遣蛮酋鲁和扇动群蛮，规断囗路。
现代文：及至颖!被包围，束魏派蛮人酋长鲁和煽动众蛮人，谋划切断通往三鹅的道路。
English: Being surrounded, Sok Wei sent the barbarian chieftain Lu and incited the barbarians to plan to cut off the road to the Three Geese.

古文：和乃遣其从弟与和为汉广郡守，率其部曲，侵扰州境。
现代文：鲁和于是派他的堂弟鲁与和做汉广郡守，率领手下士卒，侵扰州境。
English: Lu He then sent his cousin Lu Youhe to be the governor of Hanguang County, and led his subordinates to invade the state border.

古文：贤密简士马，轻往掩袭，大破之，遂擒鲁和。
现代文：郭贤秘密挑选士兵，轻装赶去偷袭，大败敌军，终于擒住了鲁和。
English: Guo Xian secretly selected soldiers, dressed lightly and rushed to make a sneak attack, defeated the enemy army, and finally captured Luhe.

古文：既而颍川陷，权景宣等并拔军西还，自鲁阳以东，皆附东魏。
现代文：不久颖川失陷，权景宣等都撤军向西退回，从鲁阳以束的地区，都归附东魏。
English: Soon after the fall of Yingchuan, Quan Jingxuan and others withdrew their troops and retreated to the west, and the areas from Luyang to Sokou were all annexed to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：将彭乐因之，遂来攻逼。
现代文：东魏将领彭乐承接这些地区，于是来攻打进逼。
English: The Eastern Wei general Peng Le undertook these regions, so he came to attack and force them.

古文：贤抚循将士，咸为尽其力用，乐不能克，乃引军退。
现代文：郭贤安抚将士，将士都为他竭尽力量，彭乐不能攻克，就引军退去。
English: Guo Xian calmed down the soldiers, and the soldiers did their best for him. Peng Le could not be defeated, so he withdrew his army.

古文：而东魏又以土民韦默儿为义州刺史，镇父城以逼贤。
现代文：而束魏又让土民韦默儿担任义州刺史，镇守父城来逼迫郭贤。
English: However, Sok Wei also allowed the native Weimer to serve as the chief historian of Yizhou and the town guard of the father city to persecute Guo Xian.

古文：贤又率军攻默儿，擒之。
现代文：郭贤又率军攻打韦默儿，擒获了他。
English: Guo Xian led the army to attack Weimer and captured him.

古文：转广州刺史。
现代文：转任广州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Guangzhou chief historian.

古文：后从尉迟迥伐蜀，行安州事。
现代文：后来郭贤跟从尉迟迥讨伐蜀地，执掌安州事务。
English: Later, Guo Xian fought against Shu with his subordinates and took charge of Anzhou affairs.

古文：魏恭帝元年，行宁蜀郡事，兼益州长史。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，执掌宁蜀郡事务，兼任盆州长史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Gong Emperor, he was in charge of the affairs of Ningshu County, and also served as the governor of the basin.

古文：以平蜀勋，进爵为伯，增邑五百户。
现代文：凭着平蜀功勋，晋升爵位为伯，增加食邑五百户。
English: With the merits of Pingshu, he was promoted to the peerage of Bo, and the number of food villages increased by 500 households.

古文：转行始州事。
现代文：转而执掌始州事务。
English: He was put in charge of Shimotsuke affairs.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为侯，增邑通前一千四百户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，晋升郭贤为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋为侯爵，食邑增至一千四百户。
English: Emperor Xiaohui ascended the throne, and Guo Xian was promoted to the general of the cavalry, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and the marquis. The number of food villages increased to 1,400.

古文：世宗初，除师中大夫。
现代文：世宗初年，升任郭贤为匠师中大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Guo Xian was promoted to the position of Master Craftsman Junior Doctor.

古文：寻出为勋州刺史，镇玉壁。
现代文：不久郭贤出任动州刺史，镇守玉壁。
English: Soon after, Guo Xian became the governor of Zhouzhou and the town guard of Yubi.

古文：武成二年，迁安应等十二州诸军事、安州刺史，进爵乐昌县公。
现代文：武成二年，郭贤被提升为安应等十二州诸军事、安州刺史，晋爵为乐昌县公。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, Guo Xian was promoted to the military of 12 states such as Anying and the history of Anzhou, and was promoted to the highest rank of Lechang County.

古文：贤在官虽无明察之誉，以廉平待物，去后颇亦见思。
现代文：郭贤任职一方虽然没有明察的声誉，但是以廉正公平对待事物，离任后也很被士民思念。
English: Although Guo Xian did not have the reputation of being a clear-sighted person, he treated things with integrity and fairness, and was greatly missed by scholars and the public after he left office.

古文：保定三年，转陕州刺史。
现代文：保定三年，郭贤转任陕州刺史。
English: In the third year of Baoding, Guo Xian was transferred to the post of Shaanxi governor.

古文：天和元年，卒于位。
现代文：天和元年，死于任所。
English: He died at his post in 1909.

古文：赠少保、宁蔚朔三州刺史，谥曰节。
现代文：朝廷赠他为少保、宁蔚朔三州刺史，谧号叫节。
English: The imperial court presented him with the titles of Shobo, Ningyushuo and Sanshou, and his nickname was Matsu.

古文：贤衣服饮食虽以俭约自处，而居家丰丽，室有余赀。
现代文：郭贤衣服饮食虽然以勤俭节约安顿自身，但是住宅富丽，家裹有富余财物。
English: Guo Xian's clothing and diet, although he settled himself with diligence, thrift and economy, but the house is rich, the house is wrapped with rich surplus property.

古文：时论讥其诈云。
现代文：当时舆论讥讽他的虚伪。
English: At the time, public opinion ridiculed his hypocrisy.

古文：子正嗣。
现代文：他的儿子郭正继承父禄。
English: His son Cai Zheng inherited the title.

古文：史臣曰：昔耿恭抗劲虏于疏勒，马敦拒群兵于汧城，虽以生易死，终赖王师之助，其嘉声峻节，亦见称于良史焉。
现代文：史臣曰：昔日耿恭在疏勒抗击强劲的敌军，马敦在沂城抵抗成群的贼兵，虽然用生来换取死，但最终有赖朝廷军队的援助，他们美好的声誉高尚的节操，也被良史所称道。
English: Shichen said: In the past, Geng Gong fought against a strong enemy army in Shule, and Ma Dun resisted hordes of robber soldiers in Lucheng. Although they exchanged life for death, they ultimately depended on the assistance of the imperial army. Their beautiful reputation and noble self-restraint have also been praised by good history.

古文：贺若敦志节慷慨，深入敌境，勍敌绝其粮道，长江阻其归涂，势危而策出无方，事迫而雄心弥厉。
现代文：贺若敦志气品节慷慨大度，深入敌方境内，强敌切断他的粮道，长汀阻挡他的归途，形势危急但他作出的计策灵活多变，事情窘迫但他的雄心更加振奋。
English: He Ruodong was generous and generous, went deep into the enemy's territory, the strong enemy cut off his food supply, Changting blocked his way back, the situation was critical but his strategy was flexible, the situation was embarrassing but his ambition was more exciting.

古文：故能使士卒感其义，敌人畏其威，利涉死地，全师而返。
现代文：故而能让士卒感佩他的义气，敌人畏惧他的威风，身处死地而获便利，保全军队得以班师。
English: Therefore, it can make the soldiers admire his loyalty, the enemy fear his dignity, and it is convenient to be killed, and the army can be protected.

古文：非夫忘生以徇国者，其孰能若此者乎。
现代文：如果不是忘却生命来献身祖国，那么谁能像这样呢?
English: Who would do such a thing, if not for the fact that he gave his life for his country?

古文：俯窥元定之传，曾粪土之不若也。
现代文：俯视元定的传记，竟连粪土也不如。
English: Looking down on the biography of Yuan Ding, even the excrement is not as good.

古文：诚宜裂地以赏之，分职以授之；而茂勋莫纪，严刑已及。
现代文：确实应该分割土地来封赏贺若敦，分出官职来授任贺若敦；但是显赫的功勋没有记录，严酷的刑罚已加到他的身上。唉!
English: It is true that land should have been divided to reward Herodong, and official positions should have been allocated to appoint Herodong; however, there is no record of his distinguished service, and a harsh punishment has been imposed on him. Alas!

古文：嗟乎！政之纰缪，一至于此！
现代文：朝政错谬，竟然到了这种地步!
English: The fallacy of the imperial government has come to this!

古文：天下是以知宇文护不能终其位焉。
现代文：天下人因此预知宇文护不能保住爵位而善终了。
English: As a result, people around the world foresaw that Umenosuke would not be able to retain his title, and he died a happy man.

古文：史宁、权景宣并以将帅之才，受内外之宠。
现代文：史宁、权景宣都凭藉将帅的才能，在朝廷内外受到恩宠。
English: Both Suning and Quan Jingxuan were favored inside and outside the imperial court by virtue of their skill as generals.

古文：总戎薄伐，着克敌之功；布政莅民，垂称职之誉。若此者，岂非有国之良翰欤。
现代文：总领军兵征讨敌人，着有克敌制胜的功勋；施行政教统治百姓，留传称职的美誉：像这样的人，难道不是国家的贤才吗?
English: The commander-in-chief conscripted the enemy, had the merit of defeating the enemy and winning the victory; imposed administrative discipline to rule the people, and left a reputation of being competent: Isn't a person like this a national genius?

古文：然而史在末年，货财亏其雅志。权亦晚节矜骄，丧其威声。
现代文：然而史宁在晚年，贪图财货亏损了他自己的美好志向权景宣也因晚年自夸骄纵，丧失了自己的威名声誉。
English: However, in his later years, Shining's greed for wealth and goods led to a loss of his own beautiful aspirations, and Quan Jingxuan also lost his prestige and reputation due to boasting and arrogance in his later years.

古文：传曰 终之实难 ，其斯之谓矣。
现代文：传上说 保持到底确实很难 ，说的就是这种情况啊!
English: According to legend, it's really hard to keep it up, and that's just the way it is!

古文：陆腾志气懔然，雅仗名节。
现代文：陆腾志气令人敬畏，很仗恃名声和节操。
English: Lu Tengzhi's spirit is awe-inspiring. He is very wary of fame and self-restraint.

古文：及授戎律，建藩麾，席卷巴梁，则功着铭典；云撤江汉，则声流帝籍。
现代文：等到被授予兵权，在一方建立旗帜，攻取巴梁，功名被记载在碑铭典籍上；占领江汉，声誉流布在皇室谱录中。
English: When he was granted the right to wage war, he set up a banner on one side and captured Baliang, and his exploits were recorded in the classic books; when he occupied Jianghan, his reputation spread in the royal genealogy.

古文：身名俱劭，其最优乎。
现代文：身世名声都很美好，造不是几人当中最优秀的吗?
English: They all have a good reputation in the world. Aren't they the best among several people?

