古文：哥舒翰，突骑施首领哥舒部落之裔也。
现代文：哥舒翰，是突骑施首领哥舒部落的后裔。
English: Goshukhan is a descendant of the Tujia leader of the Goshuk tribe.

古文：蕃人多以部落称姓，因以为氏。
现代文：蕃人大多以部落称姓，因此以之为氏。
English: Most of the Yao people call themselves by their tribal surnames, so they go by their clan names.

古文：祖沮，左清道率。
现代文：祖父名叫沮，左清道率。
English: His grandfather's name was De, and his father's name was Zuo Qingdao.

古文：父道元，安西副都护，世居安西。
现代文：父亲名叫道元，安西副都护，世代居住在安西。
English: His father's name was Dogen, the vice-governor of Anxi, and he lived in Anxi for generations.

古文：翰家富于财，倜傥任侠，好然诺，纵蒲酒。
现代文：翰家财产丰盈，倜傥侠义，爱好承诺，纵意扌雩饮酒。
English: The Han family is well-off, chivalrous, and committed to their hobbies, including drinking.

古文：年四十，遭父丧，三年客居京师，为长安尉不礼，慨然发愤折节，仗剑之河西。
现代文：四十岁时，父亲死，在京师客居三年，被长安尉所轻怠，感慨之后发愤改变志向，到河西充军。
English: At the age of forty, his father died, he lived in Beijing for three years, he was neglected by the Chang'an lieutenant, after feeling remorse, he became angry and changed his ambition to join the army in Hexi.

古文：初事节度使王倕，倕攻新城，使翰经略，三军无不震慑。
现代文：开始事奉节度使王亻垂，亻垂攻占新城，使用翰的谋略，三军无不为之震慑。
English: He began to serve the festival to make Wang Zhidie, Zhidie captured the new city, used Han's strategy, and the three armies were all shocked.

古文：后节度使王忠嗣补为衙将。
现代文：后来节度使王忠嗣将他补为衙将。
English: Later, the festival made Wang Zhongzhi supplement him as the grand marshal.

古文：翰好读《左氏春秋传》及《汉书》，疏财重气，士多归之。
现代文：翰喜爱读《左氏春秋传》及《汉书》，疏财仗义，兵士很多都归属他。
English: Han loved to read "The Spring and Autumn Annals of the Zuo Family" and "Chinese Classics," and he was frugal and parsimonious. Many soldiers belonged to him.

古文：忠嗣以为大斗军副使，尝使翰讨吐蕃于新城，有同列为副者，见翰礼倨，不为用，翰怒，挝杀之，军中股怵。
现代文：忠嗣任他为大斗军副使，曾派遣翰在新城讨伐吐蕃，有同为副使的人，见翰礼节傲慢，不为所用，翰大怒，将他杀死，军中人为之发抖。
English: Tadatsugu appointed him as the deputy envoy of the Taito army. He had sent John to fight against the Tujue in the new city. Some people who were also deputy envoys saw John's etiquette as arrogant and useless. John was furious and killed him, which made people in the army tremble.

古文：迁左卫郎将。
现代文：迁为左卫郎将。
English: He was later promoted to General of the Left Guards.

古文：后吐蕃寇边，翰拒之于苦拔海，其众三行，从山差池而下，翰持半段枪当其锋击之，三行皆败，无不摧靡，由是知名。
现代文：后来吐蕃入侵边境，翰在苦拔海抵御，对方三支步兵从上蜂拥而下，翰手持半段枪攻击其前锋，三行步兵全败，所向披靡，由于这而出名。
English: Later, Tubo invaded the border, and Han was struggling to resist. Three infantry of the other side swarmed down from above, and Han attacked his forwards with half a gun in hand. The three lines of infantry were completely defeated, and he was invincible. He became famous for this.

古文：天宝六载，擢授右武卫员外将军，充陇西节度副使、都知关西兵马使、河源军使。
现代文：天宝六年，提拔为右武卫员外将军，充当陇右节度副使、都知关西兵马使、河源军使。
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, he was promoted to the Right Guardsman General, and served as the deputy envoy of the Shandong-Hebei-Hebei-Hebei-Shanghai-Hebei-Shanghai-Hebei-Shanghai-Hebei-Shanghai-Hebei-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shang

古文：先是，吐蕃每至麦熟时，即率部众至积石军获取之，共呼为 吐蕃麦庄 ，前后无敢拒之者。
现代文：原来，吐蕃每当麦熟的时候，就率部队到积石军收割庄稼，一齐呼喊为 吐蕃麦庄 ，前后没有人敢抵御他们。
English: It turned out that whenever the wheat was ripe, Tu Wei would lead his troops to the Jishu army to harvest the crops, shouting together for Tu Wei Zhuang, and no one dared to resist them.

古文：至是，翰使王难得、杨景晖等潜引兵至积石军，设伏以待之。
现代文：现在，翰派遣王难得、杨景晖等人暗中引兵到积石军，设埋伏等待吐蕃人。
English: Now, Han dispatched Wang Rongde, Yang Jingyao and others to secretly lead troops to the Jishi army and set up an ambush to wait for the Tubo people.

古文：吐蕃以五千骑至，翰于城中率骁勇驰击，杀之略尽，馀或挺走，伏兵邀击，匹马不还。
现代文：吐蕃的五千骑兵到，翰在城中率领骁勇战士快速攻击，将之几乎杀尽，剩余的有些逃跑，埋伏的兵士半路拦截攻击，一匹马也没有回去。
English: The five thousand cavalrymen from Tubo arrived, and Han led the valiant warriors in a quick attack in the city, killing almost all of them. Some of the remaining ones fled, and the ambushed soldiers intercepted the attack halfway, and not a single horse returned.

古文：翰有家奴曰左军，年十五六，亦有膂力。
现代文：翰有个家奴名叫左车，年龄十五、六岁，有膂力。
English: John had a domestic slave named Zuo Che, who was fifteen or sixteen years old and had strength.

古文：翰善使枪，追贼及之，以枪搭其肩而喝之，贼惊顾，翰从而刺其喉，皆剔高三五尺而堕，无不死者。
现代文：翰擅长使用长枪，追赶上贼军后，用枪搭在他的肩上喝斥对方，贼兵惊恐回头，翰便用枪刺中其喉，都往上挑起三到五尺高再落下，没有不死的。
English: Han excelled at using a long gun. After catching up with the bandits, he would shout at them with the gun slung over his shoulder. The bandits would turn back in fright, and Han would stab them in the throat with the gun. They would all rise three to five feet high and then fall. None of them would live.

古文：左车辄下马斩首，率以为常。
现代文：左车就下马斩首，一般都是这样。
English: The driver of the left vehicle dismounted and decapitated the horse, as is usually the case.

古文：其冬，玄宗在华清宫，王忠嗣被劾。
现代文：这年冬天玄宗在华清宫，王忠嗣被弹劾。
English: This winter, Xuanzong was at the Huaqing Palace, and Wang Zhongzhi was impeached.

古文：敕召翰至，与语悦之，遂以为鸿胪卿，兼西平郡太守，摄御史中丞，代忠嗣为陇右节度支度营田副大使，知节度事。
现代文：皇上下诏引见翰，与他谈话很高兴，于是迁为鸿胪卿，兼西平郡太守，摄御史中丞，代替忠嗣为陇右节度支度营田副大使，知节度事。
English: The Emperor was pleased to meet Han and talk with him, so he was transferred to the position of Hongwu Sir, also the governor of Xiping County, the vice-president of photography, and the vice-ambassador of Yingtian in place of Tadatsugu, who was in charge of the preparation of the right-hand festival, and was in charge of the festival.

古文：仍极言救忠嗣，上起入禁中，翰叩头随之而前，言词慷慨，声泪俱下，帝感而宽之，贬忠嗣为汉阳太守，朝廷义而壮之。
现代文：于是极力劝说救忠嗣，皇上起驾进入禁中，翰叩头随他前来，言辞慷慨、声泪俱下，皇上感动而对忠嗣从轻发落，贬忠嗣为汉阳太守，朝臣都认为哥舒翰侠义而勇壮。
English: Therefore, he tried his best to persuade the emperor to save Tadatsugu. The emperor drove into the middle of the ban, and Han kowtowed to him. He came with generous words and tears in his voice. The emperor was moved and treated Tadatsugu with contempt, demoting Tadatsugu to Hanyang Dazhu. The courtiers all thought that Goshukhan was chivalrous and brave.

古文：明年，筑神威军于青海上，吐蕃至，攻破之；又筑城于青海中龙驹岛，有白龙见，遂名为应龙城，吐蕃屏迹不敢近青海。
现代文：第二年在青海上驻扎神威军，吐蕃来到，攻破了它；又在青海中龙驹岛筑城，有白龙出现，于是起名为应龙城，吐蕃退却不敢接近青海。
English: In the second year, Shenwei's army was stationed in Qinghai, and Tubo came and defeated it; he also built a city on Longtan Island in Qinghai, and a white dragon appeared, so it was named Yinglong City. Tubo retreated but did not dare to approach Qinghai.

古文：吐蕃保石堡城，路远而险，久不拔。
现代文：吐蕃保护石堡城，路远而且险峻，久攻不下。
English: Tubo protects Shibao Castle, the road is long and steep, and it will not be conquered for a long time.

古文：八载，以朔方、河东群牧十万众委翰总统攻石堡城。
现代文：八年，以朔方、河东群牧十万人，委托给翰统领进攻石堡城。
English: In the eighth year, Han was entrusted with leading the attack on Shibao City with 100,000 people from the Shuo side and the herdsmen from Hedong.

古文：上录其功，拜特进、鸿胪员外卿，与一子五品官，赐物千匹、庄宅各一所，加摄御史大夫。十一载，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：翰派手下将领高秀岩、张守瑜进攻，不到十日便攻占下来，皇上奖励其功，授特进、鸿胪员外卿。十一年，加封开府仪同三司。
English: Han sent his subordinate generals Gao Xiuyan and Zhang Shouyu to attack, and they took over the city in less than ten days. The emperor rewarded their efforts by awarding them the title of "Special Advancement" and "Honorary Foreign Minister." In the eleventh year, Jiafeng was awarded the title of "Third Division."

古文：翰素与禄山、思顺不协，上每和解之为兄弟。
现代文：翰平时与禄山、思顺不谐，皇上常常和解使他们为兄弟。
English: In peacetime, Han was at odds with Lushan and Sishun, but the emperor often reconciled them and made them brothers.

古文：其冬，禄山、思顺、翰并来朝，上使内侍高力士及中贵人于京城东驸马崔惠童池亭宴会。
现代文：这年冬天，禄山、思顺、翰一起来进朝，皇上派内侍高力士及中贵人在京城东面驸马崔惠童池亭设宴会。
English: This winter, Lushan, Shishun, and Han came to the imperial court together, and the emperor sent the palace attendant, Colossus, and other dignitaries to hold a banquet at the Matsu Cui Huidong Pond Pavilion on the east side of the capital.

古文：翰母尉迟氏，于阗之族也。
现代文：翰的母亲尉迟氏，是于阗族人。
English: John's mother, Fei Chi, was a member of the Yi ethnic group.

古文：禄山以思顺恶翰，尝衔之，至是忽谓翰曰： 我父是胡，母是突厥；公父是突厥，母是胡。
现代文：禄山因为思顺不喜欢翰，曾经憎恨他，此时忽然对翰说 ：我父是胡人，母是突厥人；你的父是突厥人，母是胡人。
English: Because Shishun did not like Han, Lu Shan had once hated him. At this time, he suddenly said to Han, "My father is a Hun and my mother is a Turk; your father is a Turk and your mother is a Hun."

古文：与公族类同，何不相亲乎？ 
现代文：与你的族类相同，为什么不相亲呀？ 
English: Same species as you, why not a match?

古文：翰应之曰： 古人云，野狐向窟嗥，不祥，以其忘本也。
现代文：翰对答说： 古人说，野狐向着洞窟嚎叫是不祥的。这是忘本。
English: "The ancients said that it was ominous for a wild fox to howl at a cave," Han said in reply.

古文：敢不尽心焉！ 
现代文：我怎么敢不尽心事奉皇上呢！ 
English: How dare I not do my best to serve the Emperor!

古文：禄山以为讥其胡也，大怒，骂翰曰： 突厥敢如此耶！ 
现代文：禄山认为是在讥讽他是胡人，大怒，辱骂翰说 ：突厥人竟敢这样吗！ 
English: Lokusan thought he was mocking him for being a barbarian, and flew into a rage, insulting John, saying: How dare the Turks do this!

古文：翰欲应之，高力士目翰，翰遂止。
现代文：翰想接口对骂，高力士示意翰，翰于是停止了。
English: When John tried to interrupt with an insult, Goliath motioned for John to stop.

古文：十二载，进封凉国公，食实封三百户，加河西节度使，寻封西平郡王。
现代文：十二年，晋升凉国公，给实封三百户，加封河西节度使，不久封为西平郡王。
English: In the twelfth year, he was promoted to the Prince of Liang Province, given a solid fief of three hundred households, plus a fief of Hexi Festival envoy, and soon became the king of Xiping County.

古文：时杨国忠有隙于禄山，频奏其反状，故厚赏翰以亲结之。
现代文：此时杨国忠和禄山之间有嫌隙，多次上奏他将谋反的罪状，因而以厚礼送给翰想结为亲戚。
English: At this time, there was a rift between Yang Guozhong and Lushan, and he was repeatedly accused of plotting rebellion, so he sent a gift to Han Xiangru as a relative.

古文：十三载，拜太子太保，更加实封三百户，又兼御史大夫。
现代文：十三年，升太子太保，又加实封三百户，兼御史大夫。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo, and he also added 300 households to his fief. He was also appointed as Imperial Historian.

古文：翰好饮酒，颇恣声色。
现代文：翰喜爱饮酒，纵情声色。
English: John likes to drink and is sexually promiscuous.

古文：至土门军，入浴室，遘风疾，绝倒良久乃苏。因入京，废疾于家。
现代文：到土门军，进入浴室，患了中风症，倒地很久才苏醒，于是入京，在家养病。
English: He went to the Tumen army, entered the bathroom, suffered a stroke, fell to the ground for a long time before he woke up, so he went to Beijing and recovered at home.

古文：及安禄山反，上以封常清、高仙芝丧败，召翰入，拜为皇太子先锋兵马元帅，以田良丘为御史中丞，充行军司马，以王思礼、钳耳大福、李承光、苏法鼎、管崇嗣及蕃将火拔归仁、李武定、浑萼、契苾宁等为裨将，河陇、朔方兵及蕃兵与高仙芝旧卒共二十万，拒贼于潼关。
现代文：等到安禄山谋反时，皇上鉴于封常清、高仙芝出军丧败，召哥舒翰入朝，封为皇太子先锋兵马元帅，任田良丘为御史中丞，充当行军司马，任王思礼、钳耳大福、李承光、苏法鼎、管崇嗣以及蕃将火拔归仁、李武定、浑萼、契絆宁等为裨将，河陇、朔方兵以及蕃兵与高仙芝原来的兵一共二十万人，在潼关抵御敌贼。
English: When Anlu Mountain plotted a rebellion, the emperor, in view of the defeat of Feng Changqing and Gao Xianzhi's departure from the army, summoned his brother Shu Han to the imperial court, appointed him as the crown prince's vanguard soldier and horse marshal, appointed Tian Liangqiu as the vice-president of history, and served as the marching steed, appointed Wang Sili, Ying Er Dafu, Li Chengguang, Su Fading, Guan Chongzhi, as well as Yao will fire to Jin, Li Wuding, Hun Cai, Qi Kizanning, etc. A total of 200,000 soldiers from Hebei, Shu

古文：上御勤政楼劳遣之，百僚出饯于郊。
现代文：皇上在勤政楼慰劳送走兵士，百僚在郊外饯行。
English: The emperor consoled and saw off the soldiers at the Gongzheng Building, and the centurions marched in the suburbs.

古文：十五载，加翰尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十五年，加封哥舒翰为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the fifteenth year, Gaofeng's brother Shu Han was appointed as the left-hand man of Shang Shuxu and the second-in-command of Shang Shuxu.

古文：翰至潼关，或劝翰曰： 禄山阻兵，以诛杨国忠为名，公若留兵三万守关，悉以精锐回诛国忠，此汉挫七国之计也，公以为何如？ 
现代文：哥舒翰到了潼关，有人劝告哥舒翰说： 安禄山设兵阻挠，是以杀杨国忠为名分，你如果留三万兵驻守潼关，派所有的精兵锐将折回诛杀杨国忠，这是汉挫败七国的计策，你认为怎么样？ 
English: When Goshukhan arrived at Shaoguan, someone advised Goshukhan, saying, "If you keep 30,000 soldiers stationed at Shaoguan and send all your elite soldiers to fight and kill Yang Guozhong, this is Han's strategy to defeat the Seven Kingdoms. What do you think?

古文：翰心许之，未发。
现代文：翰口中答应了，但未实施。
English: He promised in his speech, but did not implement it.

古文：有客泄其谋于国忠，国忠大惧，及奏曰： 兵法 安不忘危 ，今潼关兵众虽盛，而无后殿，万一不利，京师得无恐乎！
现代文：有门客将其谋划泄漏给杨国忠，国忠非常恐惧，于是上奏给皇上说： 兵法中有 安不忘危 之说，今天潼关兵众虽然强盛，但没有守后的，万一发生不利，京师的安危就难说了！
English: A client leaked his plan to Yang Guozhong. Guozhong was very afraid, so he sent a report to the emperor saying, "In the law of war, there is a saying that peace does not forget danger. Today, although the Shaoguan soldiers are strong, they do not have a rear guard. In the unlikely event of an unfavorable situation, the safety of the Beijing division is difficult to say!

古文：请选监牧小兒三千人训练于苑中。 
现代文：请挑选监牧小儿三千人在苑中训练。 
English: Please select 3,000 supervising children to train in the kindergarten.

古文：诏从之，遂遣剑南军将李福、刘光庭分统焉。
现代文：皇上同意了，于是派遣剑南军将李福、刘光庭分别主管这件事。
English: The emperor agreed, and dispatched Li Fu and Liu Guangting from the Southern Army of Jian to be in charge of the matter.

古文：又奏召募一万人，屯于灞上，令其腹心杜乾运将之。
现代文：又上奏请求召募一万人驻扎在氵霸上，令他的心腹杜乾运率领前往。
English: He also issued a request to recruit ten thousand people to be stationed on Yanba, and sent his confidant Du Qianyun to lead the way.

古文：翰虑为所图，乃上表请乾运兵隶于潼关，遂召乾运赴潼关计事，因斩之。
现代文：哥舒翰担忧杨国忠的图谋，于是上表皇上请杜乾运的兵附属于潼关，于是召引杜乾运于潼关商议事务，杀了他。
English: Goshukhan was worried about Yang Guozhong's plot, so the emperor asked Du Qianyun's soldiers to attach to Shaoguan, so he summoned Du Qianyun to Shaoguan to discuss matters and killed him.

古文：自是，翰心不自安。
现代文：从这以后，哥舒翰的心情更不安逸。
English: From then on, Goshukhan's mood became more and more uneasy.

古文：又素有风疾，至是颇甚，军中之务，不复躬亲，委政于行军司马田良丘。
现代文：又向来有风疾，自这后更是病情加重，军中的事务，不能再亲自过问，委托政事给行军司马田良丘。
English: He had always suffered from rheumatism, and since then his condition had worsened. He was no longer able to personally attend to the affairs of the army, entrusting political affairs to the marshal, Ma Tian Liangqiu.

古文：良丘复不敢专断，教令不一，颇无部伍。
现代文：田良丘又不敢专断行事，教令不一致，队伍涣散。
English: Again, Teraoka did not dare to act arbitrarily, his orders were inconsistent, and his troops were scattered.

古文：其将王思礼、李承光又争长不叶，人无斗志。
现代文：将领王思礼、李承光又为争位长期不合，军队毫无斗志。
English: The generals Wang Sili and Li Chengguang were not in a position to fight for a long time, and the army had no fighting spirit.

古文：先是，翰数奏禄山虽窃河朔，而不得人心，请持重以弊之，彼自离心，因而翦灭之，可不伤兵擒兹寇矣。
现代文：原来，哥舒翰多次上奏说安禄山虽然占据了河朔，但不得人心，请把握住他的弊病，离异他的军心，从而消灭他们，可以不损伤我们的军队而达到擒拿敌寇的目的。
English: Originally, Goshukhan repeatedly said that although Anlu Mountain occupied Heshaku, it was not popular. Please grasp his ills, dissociate his military spirit, and thus eliminate them. You can achieve the goal of capturing the enemy without damaging our army.

古文：贼将崔乾祐于陕郡潜锋蓄锐，而觇者奏云 贼殊无备 ，上然之，命悉众速讨之。
现代文：敌贼将领崔乾在陕郡潜锋蓄锐，但负责侦察敌情的人却上奏说 敌贼毫无准备 ，皇上以为如此，命令所有的军队迅速讨伐敌贼。
English: The enemy general, Cui Qian, was preparing for battle in Shaanxi, but the person responsible for reconnaissance of the enemy situation reported that the enemy was unprepared. The emperor thought so and ordered all the troops to quickly fight the enemy.

古文：翰奏曰： 贼既始为逆，禄山久习用兵，必不肯无备，是阴计也。
现代文：哥舒翰上奏说： 敌贼已经开始准备叛逆，安禄山通晓用兵之道，一定不会没有准备，这是使阴计。
English: Goshukhan intoned: The enemy has already begun to prepare for rebellion. An Lushan is familiar with the way of using soldiers and will not be unprepared. This is a plot.

古文：且贼兵远来，利在速战。
现代文：况且贼兵远道而来，目的在于快战快捷。
English: Moreover, the bandits came from far away, with the aim of fighting quickly.

古文：今王师自战其地，利在坚守，不利轻出；若轻出关，是入其算。
现代文：现在我们的军队在此地作战，目的在于坚守阵地，不能轻易出击；如果轻易出关，就是中了敌贼的圈套。
English: Now our army is fighting in this place, the purpose is to hold the position, not to attack easily; if it is easy to go out, it is a trap of the enemy.

古文：乞更观事势。 
现代文：恳求皇上进一步观察事态形势。 
English: He implored the emperor to further observe the state of affairs.

古文：杨国忠恐其谋己，屡奏使出兵。
现代文：杨国忠担心哥舒翰谋害自己，多次上奏要求出兵。
English: Yang Guozhong was worried that his brother Shuhan was plotting to kill him, and he repeatedly requested the dispatch of troops.

古文：上久处太平，不练军事，既为国忠眩惑，中使相继督责。
现代文：皇上久居太平，不懂军事知识，被国忠所眩惑，派中使不断监督指责。
English: The emperor lived in peace for a long time, did not understand military knowledge, was dazzled by the loyalty of the country, and constantly supervised and criticized by the middle envoy.

古文：翰不得已，引师出关。
现代文：哥舒翰迫不得已，带师出关。
English: As a last resort, his brother Shuhan left the country with his teacher.

古文：六月四日，次于灵宝县之西原。
现代文：六月四日，临时驻扎在灵宝县的西部原野。
English: On June 4, it was temporarily stationed in the western plain of Lingbao County.

古文：八日，与贼交战，官军南迫险峭，北临黄河；崔乾祐以数千人先据险要。
现代文：八日，与敌贼交战，哥舒翰的军队南面临近险峭，北面濒临黄河；崔乾率敌贼数千人先占据了险要位置。
English: On the 8th, in the battle with the enemy bandits, the army of Goshukhan faced a near-perilous cliff in the south and the Yellow River in the north; Cui Qian and thousands of enemy bandits first occupied a critical position.

古文：翰及良丘浮船中流以观进退，谓乾祐兵少，轻之，遂促将士令进，争路拥塞，无复队伍。
现代文：哥舒翰和田良丘等人浮船中流用来观察进退，认为崔乾兵少，轻视敌贼的力量，于是催促将士命令向前开进，人多拥挤堵塞，队伍散乱一团。
English: Goshukhan, Wada Ryoka and others used the middle stream of the floating boat to observe the advance and retreat. They thought that Cui Qian had few soldiers and despised the strength of the enemy, so they urged the officers to order them to move forward. Many people were crowded and jammed, and the team was scattered.

古文：午后，东风急，乾祐以草车数十乘纵火焚之，烟焰亘天。
现代文：午后，东风急吹，崔乾将数十辆车装草纵火焚烧，烟火冲天。
English: In the afternoon, with the east wind blowing fast, Cui Qian set fire to dozens of vehicles loaded with grass, and the fireworks soared into the sky.

古文：将士掩面，开目不得，因为徒所乘，王师自相排挤，坠于河。
现代文：将士掩面，都睁不开眼睛，因此被凶徒乘机，王师自相排挤，坠入河中。
English: The officers covered their faces and could not open their eyes. As a result, they were taken advantage of by the criminals. Wang Shi was pushed out of the way and fell into the river.

古文：其后者见前军陷败，悉溃，填委于河，死者数万人，号叫之声振天地，缚器械，以枪为楫，投北岸，十不存一二。
现代文：后面的人看见前面的军队陷入失败境地，也全部散乱，填积在河水中，数万人死亡，哭叫之声振天动地，他们捆绑器械，用枪作楫，投靠北岸，十个中间存活的不过一二个。
English: The people behind saw the army in front fall into a state of defeat, and they were all scattered, filling the river water, tens of thousands of people died, the sound of crying shook the earth, they tied up their instruments, used their guns as anchors, and retreated to the north shore, with only one or two survivors among the ten.

古文：军既败，翰与数百骑驰而西归，为火拔归仁执降于贼。
现代文：军队已经惨败，哥舒翰和数百名骑兵飞驰向西归去，被火拔归仁执降贼营。
English: The army had already suffered a crushing defeat, and Goshukhan and hundreds of cavalrymen galloped westward, only to be driven back by fire.

古文：禄山谓之曰： 汝常轻我，今日如何？ 
现代文：安禄山对哥舒翰说： 你平常看不起我，今天怎么样？ 
English: An Lushan said to Brother Shu Han, "You usually look down on me, how about today?

古文：翰惧，俯伏称： 肉眼不识陛下，遂至于此。
现代文：哥舒翰异常恐惧，弯腰伏身说： 肉眼不识陛下，于是到了这个地步。
English: Goshukhan was extremely frightened, bent over and said: I don't know your majesty with the naked eye, so it's come to this.

古文：陛下为拨乱主，今天下未平，李光弼在土门，来填在河南，鲁炅在南阳，但留臣，臣以尺书招之，不日平矣。 
现代文：陛下您为拨乱之主，现今天下没有平定，李光弼在土门，来王真在河南，鲁炅在南阳，只要留下我，我写一尺之书招引他们，不需多长时间就可以平定天下。 
English: Your Majesty, you are the master of stirring up trouble. There is no pacification today. Li Guangya is in Tuyun, Lai Wangzhen is in Henan, and Lu Yao is in Nanyang. As long as you leave me, I will write a book of one meter to attract them, and it will not take much time to pacify the world.

古文：禄山大喜，遂伪署翰司空。
现代文：安禄山大喜过望，于是伪置哥舒翰为司空。
English: An Lushan was overjoyed, so he faked Goshukhan as Sihong.

古文：作书招光弼等，诸将报书皆让翰不死节。
现代文：哥舒翰写文招引李光弼等人，各位将领传文给哥舒翰都让他不要丢掉气节。
English: Goshukhan wrote an article to attract Li Guangyao and others, and all generals sent an article to Goshukhan, telling him not to lose his temper.

古文：禄山知事不谐，遂闭翰于苑中，潜杀之。
现代文：安禄山知道事情不能成功，就将哥舒翰关在苑中，偷偷地杀了他。
English: An Lushan knew that the matter could not succeed, so he locked up Goshukhan in the courtyard and secretly killed him.

古文：翰之守潼关也，主天下兵权，肆志报怨，诬奏户部尚书安思顺与禄山潜通，伪令人为禄山遗思顺书，于关门擒之以献。
现代文：哥舒翰驻守潼关，主管天下兵权，放肆个人意志报复怨仇，诬陷户部尚书安思顺与安禄山暗中往来，并将其上奏，令人伪造安禄山留给安思顺的信件，在关门截获用以献给皇上。
English: Goshukhan was stationed at Shaoguan and was in charge of the world's military power. He had the audacity to use his personal will to avenge a grudge. He falsely accused the head of the household, Shangshu Anshun, of secretly communicating with Anlu Shan, and had it recorded. This led to the forgery of a letter from Anlu Shan to Anshun, which was intercepted at the gate and given to the emperor.

古文：其年三月，思顺及弟太仆卿元贞坐诛，徙其家属于岭外，天下冤之。
现代文：这年三月，安思顺以及弟弟太仆卿元贞一起受牵连被杀，将其家属迁移到岭外，天下人为之叫冤。
English: In March of that year, An Shishun and his younger brother, the great retainer Yuan Zhen, were implicated and killed together, and their families were relocated outside of Ling. The whole world cried out for vengeance.

