古文：刘玄字圣公，光武族兄也。
现代文：刘玄字圣公，是光武帝的同族兄长。
English: Liu Xuan Zi Sheng Gong was the older brother of Emperor Guangwu.

古文：弟为人所杀，圣公结客欲报之。
现代文：因为弟弟被人所杀，他便结交宾客准备为弟弟报仇。
English: After his brother is killed, he sets out to avenge his brother's death with a party of guests.

古文：客犯法，圣公避吏于平林。
现代文：宾客犯了法，刘玄为了躲避官吏的追捕，逃到了平林。
English: The guests broke the law, and Liu Xuan fled to the plain forest in order to evade the pursuit of officials.

古文：吏系圣公父子张。
现代文：官吏逮捕了他的父亲刘子张。
English: Officials arrested his father, Liu Zizhang.

古文：圣公诈死，使人持丧归舂陵，吏乃出子张，圣公因自逃匿。
现代文：刘玄装死，让人运着灵柩回到舂陵，官吏就放了刘子张，刘玄从此就逃亡了。
English: Liu Xuan pretended to be dead and had people carry his coffin back to Fuling. The officials released Liu Zizhang, and Liu Xuan fled.

古文：王莽末，南方饥馑，人庶群入野泽，掘凫茈而食之，更相侵夺。
现代文：王莽末年，南方闹饥荒，人们成群结队地跑到野外的沼泽地，挖些荸荠充饥，甚至互相抢夺。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, there was a famine in the south, and people ran to the open marshes in droves, digging up some earthworms to satisfy their hunger, and even robbing each other.

古文：新市人王匡、王凤为平理诤讼，遂推为渠帅，众数百人。
现代文：新市人王匡、王凤经常为他们平理调解，被推为首领，跟从的群众有数百人。
English: Wang Kuang and Wang Feng, both from Xincheng City, often acted as mediators for them, and were promoted as leaders, with hundreds of people following them.

古文：于是诸亡命马武、王常、成丹等往从之；共攻离乡聚，臧于绿林中，数月间至七八千人。
现代文：于是一些逃亡在外的人，像马武、王常、成丹等人都前往投奔，一同攻打离乡聚，并隐藏在绿林山中，数月间队伍壮大到七八千人。
English: As a result, some people who had fled abroad, such as Ma Wu, Wang Chang, Cheng Dan and others, all rushed to join the attack on the gathering of people who had left their hometowns, and hid in the green forests and mountains. Within a few months, the team had grown to seven or eight thousand people.

古文：地皇二年，荆州牧某发奔命二万人攻之，匡等相率迎击于云杜，大破牧军，杀数千人，尽获辎重，遂攻拔竟陵。
现代文：王莽地皇二年，荆州牧某人派两万 奔命兵 攻打他们，王匡等人共同率兵在云杜迎击，大破荆州牧的军队，杀死了数千人，缴获敌军全部军需装备，于是攻下了竟陵。
English: In the second year of Wang Mangdi's reign, a certain person in Jingzhou sent twenty thousand soldiers to attack them. Wang Kuang and others jointly led the troops to counterattack in Yundu. They defeated the army of Jingzhou, killed thousands of people, captured all the military supplies and equipment of the enemy army, and then captured the Mausoleum.

古文：转击云杜、安陆，多略妇女，还入绿林中，至有五万余口，州郡不能制。
现代文：他们转而攻击云杜、安陆，抢掠了许多妇女，返回绿林山中，至此有了五万多人，州郡已无法控制他们。
English: They turned to attack Yundu and Anlu, robbed many women, and returned to the green forest and mountains. At this point, there were more than 50,000 people, and the county was no longer able to control them.

古文：三年，大疾疫，死者且半，乃各分散引去。
现代文：地皇三年，发生大瘟疫，绿林山中的人死亡近半，队伍便各自分散离去。
English: In the third year of the Earth Emperor, a great plague occurred, nearly half of the people in the green forest and mountains died, and the teams dispersed.

古文：王常、成丹西入南郡，号下江兵；王匡、王凤、马武及其支常朱鲔、张卬等北入南阳，号新市兵：皆自称将军。
现代文：王常、成丹西下进入南郡，号称 下江兵 ；王匡、王凤、马武及其党羽朱鲔、张卬等向北进驻南阳，号称 新市兵 ；将帅都自称将军。
English: Wang Chang and Cheng Dan entered Nan County from the west, claiming to be soldiers of the Lower River; Wang Kuang, Wang Feng, Ma Wu and their followers Zhu Xi and Zhang Xi entered Nanyang from the north, claiming to be soldiers of the New City; the generals all claimed to be generals.

古文：七月，匡等进攻随，未能下。
现代文：七月，王匡等进攻随县，未能攻下。
English: In July, Wang Kuang and others attacked Suixian, but failed to capture it.

古文：平林人陈牧、廖湛复聚众千余人，号平林兵，以应之。
现代文：平林人陈牧、廖湛又聚集千余人，号称 平林兵 ，前来响应王匡部队。
English: The Pinglin people Chen Mu and Liao Zhan also gathered more than a thousand people, known as Pinglin soldiers, to come to respond to Wang Kuang's troops.

古文：圣公因往从牧等，为其军安集掾。
现代文：刘玄便投奔陈牧等人，在军中担任安集掾的职务。
English: Liu Xuan then joined Chen Mu and others, and served in the army as the leader of Anji.

古文：是时，光武及兄伯升亦起舂陵，与诸部合兵而进。
现代文：与此同时，光武帝及兄长刘伯升也在舂陵起兵，和各支起义部队合力进击。
English: At the same time, Emperor Guangwu and his brother Liu Po-sheng also raised an army in Fuling, and attacked together with the various insurgent forces.

古文：四年正月，破王莽前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐，斩之，号圣公为更始将军。
现代文：地皇四年正月，攻破了王莽前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐所帅部队，并杀了他们，刘玄被推为更始将军。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Earth Emperor, he defeated the troops led by Wang Mang's former team doctor Zhenfu and subordinate Zheng Liangqiu, and killed them. Liu Xuan was promoted to general.

古文：众虽多而无所统一，诸将遂共议立更始为天子。
现代文：起义部队虽人马众多却没有统一领导，将军们就一同商议拥立刘玄为天子。
English: Although the insurgent forces were numerous, they did not have a unified leadership, and the generals discussed together to support Liu Xuan as the Son of Heaven.

古文：二月辛巳，设坛场于淯水上沙中，陈兵大会。
现代文：二月辛巳日，在淯水的沙滩上设立坛场，大会兵马。
English: On February Xinsi Day, an altar was set up on the beach in Surabaya, and the soldiers and horses gathered there.

古文：更始即帝位，南面立，朝群臣。
现代文：刘玄登上帝位，向南而立，朝见群臣。
English: Liu Xuan ascended to the throne of God, stood to the south, and met with the courtiers.

古文：素懦弱，羞愧流汗，举手不能言。
现代文：刘玄历来性格懦弱，羞愧得汗流浃背，举着手却连话都说不出来。
English: Liu Xuan has always been a weak character, sweating with shame, unable to even speak with his hands raised.

古文：于是大赦天下，建元曰更始元年。
现代文：之后就大赦天下，建元为更始元年。
English: After that, the country was amnestied, and Jianyuan became the first year of the new era.

古文：悉拜置诸将，以族父良为国三老、王匡为定国上公、王凤成国上公、朱鲔大司马、伯升大司徒、陈牧大司空，余皆九卿、将军。
现代文：诸位将领全都封了官爵，以叔父刘良为国三老，王匡为定国上公，王凤为成国上公，朱鲔为大司马，刘伯升为大司徒，陈牧为大司空，其余的都封为九卿或将军。
English: All of the generals were given titles of nobility, with uncle Liu Liang as the Three Elders of the State, Wang Kuang as the First Prince of the State, Wang Feng as the First Prince of the State, Zhu Xi as the Grand Master of the Horse, Liu Bo Sheng as the Grand Master of the Horse, Chen Mu as the Grand Master of the Horse, and the rest as the Nine Lords or Generals.

古文：五朋，伯升拔宛。
现代文：五月，刘伯升攻下宛城。
English: In May, Liu Bo Sheng captured Ancheng.

古文：六月，更始入都宛城，尽封宗室及诸将，为列侯者百余人。
现代文：六月，更始帝进入宛城建都，同宗及众位将领都一一封给爵位，封为列侯的就有一百多人。
English: In June, the first emperor entered Wancheng to build the capital, and the same clan and many generals were given peerages one by one, and there were more than a hundred people who were given the title of vassal.

古文：更始忌伯升威名，遂诛之，以光禄勋刘赐为大司徒。
现代文：更始帝忌妒刘伯升的威望名声，就杀了他，改任光禄勋刘赐为大司徒。
English: The emperor was jealous of Liu Po-sheng's prestige and fame, so he killed him and changed his title to the Grand Knight of the Order of the Star of Liu Bei.

古文：前钟武侯刘望起兵，略有汝南。
现代文：前汉的钟武侯刘望也带兵起义，攻占了汝南。
English: Liu Bang, Prince of Zhongwu in the former Han Dynasty, also led an uprising and conquered the southern part of the country.

古文：时王莽纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈藏既败于昆阳，往归之。
现代文：这时王莽的纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂在昆阳一战惨败，归附刘望。
English: At this time, Wang Mang's Nagan General Yan Yu and Chichizong General Chen Mao were defeated in the First Battle of Kunyang and were annexed by Liu Bang.

古文：八月，望遂自立为天子，以尤为大司马、茂为丞相。
现代文：八月，刘望自立为天子，以严尤为大司马，陈茂为丞相。
English: In August, Liu Bang established himself as the son of heaven, with Yan as the grand steward and Chen Mao as the prime minister.

古文：王莽使太师王匡、国将哀章守洛阳。
现代文：王莽派太师王匡、国将哀章坚守洛阳。
English: Wang Mang sent his grandmaster Wang Kuang and the general to Luoyang.

古文：更始遣定国上公王匡攻洛阳，西屏大将军申屠建、丞相司值李松攻武关，三辅震动。
现代文：更始帝派定国上公王匡攻打洛阳，西屏大将军申屠建、丞相司直李松攻打武关，整个三辅地区都为之震动。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, the emperor dispatched Dinggu Shangguang Gongwang Kuang to attack Luoyang, and the general of Xiping Shen Tu Jian and the minister of justice Sizhi Li Song attacked Wuguan. The entire Sanfu area was shaken.

古文：是时海内豪桀翕然响应，皆杀其牧守，自称将军，用汉年号，以待诏命，旬月之间，遍于天下。
现代文：这时，海内豪杰一致起兵响应，都杀掉州郡的长官，自封为将军，沿用更始的年号，等待着皇帝的诏命，不到一个月的时间，更始帝的支持者遍布全国。
English: At this time, the heroes and heroines of the sea unanimously raised an army to respond, all killed the prefect of the state and county, self-appointed as a general, followed the era name of the emperor, and waited for the emperor's edict. In less than a month, the supporters of the emperor were all over the country.

古文：长安中起兵攻未央官。
现代文：长安城中起义兵也攻打了未央宫。
English: The insurgents in Chang'an City also attacked the Weiyang Palace.

古文：九月，东海人公宾就斩王莽于渐台，收玺绶，传首诣宛。
现代文：九月，东海人公宾就在渐台杀了王莽，收缴了玉玺绶带，把王莽的首级送到了宛城。
English: In September, a public guest from the East China Sea killed Wang Mang in Zhentai, seized the jade sash, and sent Wang Mang's head to Wancheng.

古文：更始时在便坐黄堂，取视之，喜曰： 莽不如是，当与霍光等。 宠姬韩夫人笑曰： 若不如是，帝焉得之乎？ 更始悦，乃悬莽首于宛城市。
现代文：更始帝那时正在便殿闲坐，拿过首级一看，高兴地说： 王莽如果没有篡夺大汉政权，功勋应该和霍光一样。 宠姬韩夫人笑着说： 他若不这样，您又怎能得到这个位置？ 更始帝非常高兴，就把王莽的首级悬挂在宛城的市场上。
English: At that time, Emperor Jahangir was sitting idly in the hall, and when he took a look at Wang Mang's head, he said happily, "If Wang Mang did not usurp the Han Dynasty, his achievements should be the same as Huo Guang's." Mistress Han smiled and said, "If he didn't, how could you get this position?" Emperor Jahangir was very happy, and he hung Wang Mang's head in the market of Wancheng.

古文：是月，拔洛阳，生缚王匡、哀章，至，皆斩之。
现代文：当月，攻下洛阳，活捉王匡、哀章，送到宛城，将他们全部斩首。
English: That month, they captured Luoyang, captured Wang Kuang and Yaizhang alive, sent them to Wancheng, and beheaded them all.

古文：十月，使奋威大将军刘信击杀刘望于汝南，并诛严尤、陈茂。
现代文：十月，派奋威大将军刘信到汝南攻打刘望，杀了严尤、陈茂。
English: In October, he sent General Liu Xin to attack Liu Bang in the south of the country, killing Yan You and Chen Mao.

古文：更始遂北都洛阳，以刘赐为丞相。
现代文：于是更始帝北上定都洛阳，任命刘赐为丞相。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu went to the capital Luoyang in the north and appointed Liu Zhe as chancellor.

古文：申屠建、李松自长安传送乘舆服御，又遣中黄门从官奉迎迁都。
现代文：申屠建、李松从长安送来皇帝的车驾与服饰器物，又派中黄门的官员恭迎更始迁都。
English: Shen Tuojian and Li Song sent the emperor's car and clothing from Chang'an, and also sent officials from Zhonghuangmen to welcome the new capital.

古文：二年二月，更始自洛阳而西。
现代文：更始二年二月，更始帝从洛阳西迁。
English: In February of the following year, Emperor Qianshi moved from Luoyang to the west.

古文：初发，李松奉引，马惊奔，触北宫铁柱门，三马皆死。
现代文：临出发，李松为更始帝导引车马，马受惊狂奔，撞到了北宫门的铁柱上，三匹马都撞死了。
English: On the eve of departure, Li Song led the chariot and horses for the Emperor. The horses were frightened and ran wild, hitting the iron pillar of the North Palace Gate, and all three horses were killed.

古文：初，王莽败，唯未央宫被焚而已，其余宫馆一无所毁。
现代文：当初，王莽被打败时，只有未央宫被焚毁，其余的宫廷馆舍都完好无损。
English: At first, when Wang Mang was defeated, only the Weiyang Palace was burned, the rest of the palace buildings were intact.

古文：宫女数千，备列后庭，自钟鼓、帷帐、舆辇、器服、太仓、武库、官府、市里，不改于旧。
现代文：后宫里还留下数千名的宫女，从钟鼓、帷帐、车乘、器具、服饰，到太仓、武库、官府、街市、里巷，都和旧时一样。
English: Thousands of courtesans still remain in the harem, from bells and drums, curtains, carriages, utensils, and clothing, to warehouses, arsenals, government offices, streets, and alleys, all the same as in the old days.

古文：更始既至，居长乐宫，升前殿，郎吏以次列庭中。
现代文：更始帝入宫后，在长乐宫起居，在前殿朝见百官，宫中的郎官属吏们在庭院里依次排列站立。
English: After Emperor Gensho entered the palace, he lived in the Changle Palace and met with hundreds of officials in the antechamber. The courtiers and officials in the palace were lined up in the courtyard.

古文：更始羞怍，俯首刮席不敢视。
现代文：更始帝非常害羞，低着头用手刮着坐席不敢看他们。
English: Emperor Genshitsu was very shy and did not dare to look at them, keeping his head down and scraping the seats with his hands.

古文：乃徙鲔为左大司马，刘赐为前大司马，使与李轶、李通、王常等镇抚关东。以李松为丞相，赵萌为右大司马，共秉内任。更始纳赵萌女为夫人，有宠，遂委政于萌，日夜与妇人饮宴后庭。
现代文：有几位将领迟到，更始帝问他们抢掠了多少东西，左右侍从官员都是宫中的老侍卫，都惊讶不已，面面相觑。更始帝娶了赵萌的女儿作为夫人，十分宠爱她，于是就把朝政委托赵萌，日夜与女人在后庭饮酒作乐。
English: Several generals arrived late, and the first emperor asked them how many things they had looted. The attendant officials on both sides were old palace guards, and they were all surprised and looked at each other. The first emperor married Zhao Meng's daughter as his wife and loved her very much, so he entrusted the imperial government to Zhao Meng, and drank and made music with the woman in the backyard day and night.

古文：群臣欲言事，辄醉不能见，时不得已，乃令侍中坐帷内与语。
现代文：群臣有事禀报，他都醉得无法接见，万不得已时，就让侍中坐在帷幕内和臣下对话。
English: When a group of vassals had a false report, he was too drunk to receive them. If he had to, he would have an attendant sit inside the curtain and have a dialogue with his vassals.

古文：诸将识非更始声，出皆怨曰： 成败未可知，遽自纵放若此！ 韩夫人尤嗜酒，每侍饮，见常侍奏事，辄怒曰： 帝方对我饮，正用此时持事来乎！ 起，抵破书案，赵萌专权，威福自己。
现代文：赵萌则独断专权，作威作福。
English: Zhao Meng, on the other hand, wields dictatorial power and acts as a tyrant.

古文：郎吏有说萌放纵者，更始怒，拔剑击之。
现代文：官员中有人报告说赵萌放纵，更始帝很生气，拔出剑就把他杀了。
English: One of the officials reported that Zhao Meng had been indulgent, and the emperor was so angry that he drew his sword and killed him.

古文：自是无复敢言。
现代文：从此再没人敢提及此事。
English: No one dared to mention it again.

古文：萌私忿侍中，引下斩之，更始救请，不从。
现代文：赵萌和一名侍郎结了私怨，要把侍中拉出去杀掉，更始帝请求放过侍中，赵萌不答应。
English: Zhao Meng had a personal grudge with a waiter and wanted to pull the waiter out and kill him. Moreover, the emperor asked to let the waiter go, but Zhao Meng did not agree.

古文：时李轶、朱鲔擅命山东，王匡、张卬横暴三辅。
现代文：这时，李轶、朱鲔在山东地区专权行事，王匡、张卬在三辅地区横行暴虐。
English: At this time, Li Xi and Zhu Xi acted with absolute power in Shandong, while Wang Kuang and Zhang Xi were rampant in the Sanfu region.

古文：其所授官爵者，皆群小贾竖，或有膳夫庖人，多着绣面衣、锦裤、襜褕、诸于，骂詈道中。长安为之语曰： 灶下养，中郎将。
现代文：更始帝所任用的官员，都是小人、商贩之流，还有厨子屠夫等人，大多穿着花大衣、花裤子、长罩衫，或是妇人穿的宽大上衣，在路上乱吵乱骂。长安城里有人编了歌谣说： 灶下养，中郎将。
English: The officials appointed by the emperor at the beginning were all villains, merchants, and cooks, butchers, etc. Most of them wore flower coats, flower trousers, long smocks, or wide tops worn by women, and they quarreled and cursed on the road. In Chang'an City, someone made up a song saying: Raised under the stove, the middle child will succeed.

古文：烂羊胃，骑都尉。
现代文：烂羊胃，骑都尉。
English: Rotten sheep's stomach, captain.

古文：烂羊头，关内侯。 
现代文：烂羊头，关内侯。 
English: Rotten sheep's head, Guan Nei Hou.

古文：军帅将军豫章李淑上书谏曰：
现代文：军帅将军豫章人李淑上书劝谏说：
English: The military commander, General Yu Zhang, sent a letter to Li Shu to persuade him, saying:

古文：方今贼寇始诛，王化未行，百官有司宜慎其任。
现代文：军帅将军豫章人李淑上书劝谏说： 现在乱贼寇匪刚刚除掉，王道教化还未推行，应谨慎任命百官僚属。
English: Li Shu, the military commander General Yu Zhang's subordinate, wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: Now that the bandits and robbers have just been eliminated, and the enlightenment of the king's way has not yet been implemented, we should carefully appoint 100 bureaucratic subordinates.

古文：夫三公上应台宿，九卿下括河海，故天工人其代之。
现代文：三公上应天上的星宿，九卿下法江河湖海，所以人只是替天行事。
English: The three great lords answer to the stars in the sky, and the nine great lords answer to the rivers, lakes and seas. Therefore, people only act on behalf of heaven.

古文：陛下定业，虽因下江、平林之势，斯盖临时济用，不可施之既安。
现代文：陛下您立下伟业，虽然曾借助下江、平林兵的势力，但那只是一时之用，不可以在天下安定以后还继续施行。
English: Your Majesty, you have set a great cause, although you have used the power of the Lower River and the Pinglin soldiers, but it is only for a short time, and it can not continue to be implemented after the world is stable.

古文：宜厘改制度，更延英俊，因才授爵，以匡王国。
现代文：现在应该改革制度，招纳贤俊之才，将官位授予有才之人，才能匡正王国。
English: Now is the time to reform the system, recruit talented people, and give positions to talented people in order to rectify the kingdom.

古文：今公卿大位莫非戎陈，尚书显官皆出庸伍，资亭长、贼捕之用，而当辅佐纲维之任。
现代文：而今公卿这样的高位没有一个不是由武将来担任，连尚书这样的显要官员也只是平庸之辈。这些人的才能只够得上当亭长，捉拿盗贼，却担负着辅佐朝纲国政的重任。
English: Today, however, there is not a single high-ranking position such as Kugyo that is not held by Takechi, and even prominent officials such as Shoshu are only mediocrities. The talents of these people are only enough to be the head of a pavilion, to catch thieves, but they are responsible for the important task of assisting the government.

古文：唯名与器，圣人所重。
现代文：圣人所注重的，是名位和器物。
English: The saint's focus is on fame and possessions.

古文：今以所重加非其人，望其毗益万分，兴化致理，譬犹缘木求鱼，升山采珠。
现代文：现在把这最重要的东西委托给不合适的人选，还指望他们对国家有助益，能够振兴教化、治理江山，这就像爬上树捉鱼，登上山采珍珠一样。
English: Now entrusting this most important thing to unsuitable people, and expecting them to be beneficial to the country, to be able to revitalize, educate and govern the country, is like climbing a tree to catch fish and climbing a mountain to collect pearls.

古文：海内望此，有以窥度汉祚。
现代文：天下的人看到这种情况，就难免要暗自图谋汉朝的天下了。
English: When people around the world see this, they will inevitably try to plot the downfall of the Han Dynasty.

古文：臣非有憎疾以求进也，但为陛下惜此举厝。
现代文：我并非讨厌妒忌某些人，想要以此求得升官，只是对陛下的这些行为深感惋惜。
English: I don't mean to be envious of certain people in order to promote myself, but I deeply regret these actions of His Majesty.

古文：败材伤锦，所宜至虑。
现代文：任用不称职的人就会搞乱国家，这是最应该考虑的事情。
English: The appointment of an incompetent person will mess up the country, which is the most important thing to consider.

古文：惟割既往廖妄之失，思隆周文济济之美。
现代文：希望能改正以往荒谬狂妄的过失，追求周文王在众多贤士的辅助下安邦定国的盛世美景。 
English: It is hoped that the absurd and arrogant mistakes of the past can be corrected, and that King Zhouwen can pursue the goal of building a prosperous and beautiful country with the assistance of many sages.

古文：更始怒，系淑诏狱。
现代文：更始帝大怒，把李淑关入监狱。
English: The emperor was furious and put Li Shu in prison.

古文：自是，关中离心，四方怨叛。
现代文：从此关中人心背离，四方的人都怨恨背叛朝廷。
English: From this point on, people's hearts turned away, and people on all sides resented the betrayal of the imperial court.

古文：诸将出征，各自专置牧守，州郡交错，不知所从。
现代文：将领们出征，各自委任州牧郡守，设立的州郡相互交错，百姓不知听从谁的指令。
English: The generals went to war, each of them appointed a provincial governor, and the established provinces and counties were intertwined, and the people did not know whose orders to follow.

古文：十二月，赤眉西入关。
现代文：十二月，赤眉军西向入关。
English: In December, the Red Eyebrows entered the West.

古文：三年正月，平陵人方望立前孺子刘婴为天子。
现代文：三年正月，平陵人方望立前孺子刘婴为天子。
English: In the first month of the third year, the people of Pingling hoped to elevate the former cripple Liu Jiao as the heavenly son.

古文：初，望见更始政乱，度其必败，谓安陵人弓林等曰： 前定安公婴，平帝之嗣，虽王莽篡夺，而尝为汉主。
现代文：开始的时候方望看到更始政治混乱，揣度他必败，就对安陵人弓林等说： 从前的定安公刘婴，是平帝的后代，虽王莽篡夺了帝位，但刘婴也曾是大汉之主。
English: At the beginning, Fangwang saw the political turmoil at the very beginning and guessed that he would be defeated, so he said to the Anling people, such as Yulin: The former Dingan Gong, Liu Jiao, was a descendant of the Ping Emperor. Although Wang Mang usurped the imperial throne, Liu Jiao was also the lord of the great man.

古文：今皆云刘氏真人，当更受命，欲共定大功，何如？ 林等然之，乃于长安求得婴，将至临泾立之。
现代文：现在人们都说刘氏的嫡传应当受命为帝，我们一同来和他共立大业，你们觉得怎么样？ 弓林等表示同意。于是在长安找到刘婴，将他带到临泾正式立为天子。
English: Now people are saying that Liu's heir should be appointed as emperor, and we should work together with him to establish a great cause. What do you think? Yulin and others agree. So they found Liu Jiao in Chang'an and brought him to Linyi to officially establish him as the son of heaven.

古文：聚党数千人，望为丞相，林为大司马。
现代文：聚合党羽数千人，方望为丞相，弓林为大司马。
English: He gathered thousands of party members, with Fangwang as chancellor and Yulin as secretary-general.

古文：更始遣李松与讨难将军苏茂等击破，皆斩之。
现代文：更始派遣李松与讨难将军苏茂将方望等击破，把几个人都杀了。
English: At the same time, he dispatched Li Song and the tribulation general, Su Mao, to defeat Fangwang and others, and killed several people.

古文：又使苏茂拒赤眉于弘农，茂军败，死者千余人。
现代文：又使苏茂拒赤眉于弘农，苏茂军败，死者一千多人。
English: It also caused the defeat of the Sumo army at Hongnong, resulting in the death of more than a thousand people.

古文：三月，遣李松会朱鲔与赤眉战于蓩乡，松等大败，弃军走，死者三万余人。
现代文：三月，遣李松会合朱鲔与赤眉战于踼乡，李松等大败，弃军逃走，死者三万余人。
English: In March, more than 30,000 people were killed in the battle between Zhu Xi and the Red Eyebrows of the Li Song Association, which was sent to fight against the Red Eyebrows. Li Song and others were defeated and abandoned the army and fled.

古文：时王匡、张卬守河东，为邓禹所破，还奔长安。
现代文：这时王匡、张卬驻守河东，被邓禹打败，奔回长安。
English: At this time, Wang Kuang and Zhang Ye were stationed in Hedong. They were defeated by Deng Yu and rushed back to Chang'an.

古文：卬与诸将议曰： 赤眉近在郑、华阴间，旦暮且至。
现代文：张与诸将商议说： 赤眉近在郑、华阴间，旦夕就将到此。
English: Zhang conferred with the generals and said, "Akemi is close to Zheng and Hua Yin, and will be here as soon as the sun sets."

古文：今独有长安，见灭不久，不如勒兵掠城中以自富，转攻所在，东归南阳，收宛王等兵。
现代文：现在只有长安，眼看就会被消灭，倒不如统帅军队掠取城中财物发财，从这里转而进攻沿途经过的地方，东归南阳，把宛王等人的兵收集过来。
English: Now there is only Chang'an, which will be destroyed in the blink of an eye. It would be better for the commander-in-chief of the army to plunder the city's property and make a fortune, turn from here to attack the places along the way, return east to Nanyang, and collect the soldiers of Wan Wang and others.

古文：事若不集，复入湖池中为盗耳。 申屠建、廖湛等皆以为然，共人说更始。
现代文：如果事情不成，就再入湖池中做强盗去算了。 申屠建、廖湛等都赞成，就一起去说服更始。
English: If things don't work out, they can go back to being bandits in the lake. Shen Tuo Jian, Liao Zhan and others all agree, and they go together to persuade the change.

古文：更始怒不应，莫敢复言。
现代文：更始听后大怒，不答应，张卬等不敢再说。
English: After listening to the change, he was furious and did not agree, and Zhang Ye did not dare to say it again.

古文：及赤眉立刘盆子，更始使王匡、陈牧、成丹、赵萌屯新丰，李松军掫，以拒之。
现代文：等到赤眉立刘盆子为帝，更始派遣王匡、陈牧、成月、赵萌屯兵新丰，李松屯兵扌取城，以抵抗他们。
English: When Liu Bonzi was proclaimed emperor by the emperor, he sent Wang Kuang, Chen Mu, Cheng Yue, Zhao Meng, Xin Feng and Li Song to capture the city to resist them.

古文：张卬、廖湛、胡殷、申屠建等与御史大夫隗嚣合谋，欲以立秋日貙膢时共劫更始，俱成前计。
现代文：张卬、廖湛、胡殷、申屠建等与御史大夫隗嚣合谋，准备在立秋那天乘更始祭祀时用武力劫持更始，以完成前面提出的计划。
English: Zhang Xuan, Liao Zhan, Hu Yin, Shen Tu Jian and others conspired with the imperial historian to seize the beginning of the new year by force to complete the previously proposed plan.

古文：侍中刘能卿知其谋，以告之。
现代文：侍中刘能卿知道了他们的阴谋，禀报了更始。
English: Liu Nengqing, an aide-de-camp, found out about their plot and reported the reshuffle.

古文：更始托病不出，召张卬等。
现代文：更始假托有病不出宫，召见张卬等。
English: The replacement vacancy is sick and unable to leave the palace, summoning Zhang Jun and others.

古文：卬等皆入，将悉诛之，唯隗嚣不至。
现代文：张卬等进来，更始准备把他们全都杀掉，只有隗嚣不到。
English: Zhang Jun waited for them to come in, and at first he was ready to kill them all, but there was no clamor.

古文：更始狐疑，使卬等四人且待于外庐。
现代文：更始怀疑，令张卬等四人暂到外边房子里等候。
English: Suspicious again, he ordered Zhang Jun and four others to wait outside the house for a while.

古文：卬与湛、殷疑有变，遂突出，独申屠建在，更始斩之。
现代文：张卬、廖湛、胡殷怀疑有变故，急忙冲出去，只有申屠建在，更始将他杀了。
English: Zhang Ye, Liao Zhan and Hu Yin suspected that something had changed and rushed out. Only Shen Tu Jian was left, and they killed him first.

古文：卬与湛、殷遂勒兵掠东西市。
现代文：张卬、廖湛、胡殷于是率军掠夺东西二市。
English: Zhang Ye, Liao Zhan, and Hu Yin then led the army to plunder the two cities in the east and west.

古文：昏时，烧门入，战于宫中，更始大败。
现代文：天黑时，烧门而入，在宫中混战，更始大败。
English: When it was dark, they broke into the palace, fought in the courtyard, and were soundly defeated.

古文：明旦，将妻子车骑百余，东奔越萌于新丰。
现代文：次日一早，就率妻子车骑百余辆，东奔到新丰赵萌那里去了。
English: In the morning of the next day, he and his wife rode more than 100 bicycles to Xinfeng Zhao Meng.

古文：更始复疑王匡、陈牧、成丹与张卬等同谋，乃并召入。
现代文：更始又怀疑王匡、陈牧、成丹与张卬同谋，就同时召见他们。
English: He also suspected Wang Kuang, Chen Mu, Cheng Dan of being Zhang Ye's accomplices, and summoned them at the same time.

古文：牧、丹先至，即斩之。
现代文：陈牧、成丹先到，即被斩首。
English: Chen Mu and Cheng Dan arrived first and were beheaded.

古文：王匡惧，将兵入长安，与张卬等合。
现代文：王匡吓不过，率军到长安，与张等会合。
English: Wang Kuang could not be intimidated and led his army to Chang'an to meet with Zhang and others.

古文：李松还从更始，与赵萌共攻匡、卬于城内。
现代文：李松回到更始身边，与赵萌共同攻王匡、张卬于城内。
English: Li Song returned to his former side and, together with Zhao Meng, attacked Wang Kuang and Zhang Ye in the city.

古文：连战月余，匡等败走，更始徙居长信宫。
现代文：连战一个多月，王匡等败走，更始迁居到长信宫。
English: After more than a month of continuous battle, Wang Kuang and others were defeated and moved to Changxin Palace.

古文：赤眉至高陵，匡等迎降之，遂共连兵而进。
现代文：赤眉到高陵，王匡等向赤眉投降，于是与赤眉连兵而进。
English: Chakmei went to Gaoling, Wang Kuang and others surrendered to Chakmei, so they marched together with Chakmei.

古文：更始守城，使李松出战，败，死者二千余人，赤眉生得松。
现代文：更始守城，派遣李松出战，失败，死两千多人，赤眉活捉了李松。
English: He began to defend the city, sent Li Song to fight, failed, killed more than two thousand people, and captured Li Song alive.

古文：时松弟汎为城门校尉，赤眉使使谓之曰： 开城门，活汝兄。 汎即开门。
现代文：这时李松弟弟李泛为城门校尉，赤眉派使者对李泛说： 打开城门，饶你老兄的。 李泛就开了门。
English: At this time, Li Song's younger brother Li Pan was the captain of the city gate. The envoy of the Red Eyebrows said to Li Pan: Open the city gate, spare your brother. Li Pan opened the door.

古文：九月，赤眉入城。
现代文：九月，赤眉入城。
English: In September, Akame entered the city.

古文：更始单骑走，从厨城门出，诸妇女从后连呼曰： 陛下，当下谢城！ 更始即下拜，复上马去。
现代文：更始单骑逃走，从厨城门出。许多妇女从后面连连呼喊说 ： 陛下应当下马谢城！ 更始即下马拜谢，然后再上马逃走了。
English: He then fled on horseback, leaving through the kitchen gate. Many women shouted from behind, "Your Majesty should leave the city of Masie!" He first dismounted and then mounted his horse and fled.

古文：初，侍中刘恭以赤眉立其弟盆子，自系诏狱：闻更始败，乃出，步从至高陵，止传舍。
现代文：当初，侍中刘恭因赤眉立了他弟弟刘盆子为帝，就自缚了到监狱去请罪；听说更始失败了，于是出狱。步行追随更始到高陵，在驿站住下。
English: At first, the chamberlain Liu Qiong set up his brother Liu Bonsi as emperor because of his red eyebrows, so he tied himself up and went to prison to plead guilty; when he heard that He Xizhi had failed, he was released from prison. He followed He Xizhi on foot to Gaoling and stayed at the station.

古文：右辅都尉严本恐失更始为赤眉所诛，将兵在外，号为屯卫而实囚之。
现代文：右辅都尉严本怕放跑了更始后赤眉不会放过他，就率军驻扎在外面，名为屯兵保卫更始而实际上是囚禁他。
English: Right Assistant Captain Yan Ben was afraid that the Red Eyebrows would not let him go after he ran away, so he led the army stationed outside, called the garrison to protect him, but actually imprisoned him.

古文：赤眉下书曰： 圣公降者，封长沙王。
现代文：赤眉传下书信说 ： 如圣公肯降，就封他为长沙王。
English: A letter was passed down from the Red Eyebrows, saying: If Shingong were to abdicate, he would be crowned the King of Changsha.

古文：过二十日，勿受。 更始遣刘恭请降，赤眉使其将谢禄往受之。
现代文：但二十天后，就不接受了。 更始派遣刘恭去向赤眉请降，赤眉派遣其将领谢禄前往受降。
English: However, twenty days later, he did not accept it, and sent Liu Qiong to request the surrender of the Red Eyebrows, while the Red Eyebrows sent their general Xielu to accept the surrender.

古文：十月，更始遂随禄肉袒诣长乐宫，上玺绶于盆子。
现代文：十月，更始就随谢禄赤膊到长乐宫，将皇帝的印绶奉献给刘盆子。
English: At the beginning of October, he went shirtless with Xie Lu to the Changle Palace to dedicate the emperor's seal to Liu Bonsi.

古文：赤眉坐更始，置庭中，将杀之。
现代文：赤眉罪责更始，置于庭中，准备杀掉。
English: The red-browed culprit was reproved, placed in the court, and prepared to be killed.

古文：刘恭、谢禄为请，不能得，遂引更始出。
现代文：刘恭、谢禄为更始说情，赤眉没有答应，于是把更始带去。
English: Liu Qiong and Xie Lu pleaded for the restitution, but Akaimei did not agree, so he took the restitution with him.

古文：刘恭追呼曰： 臣诚力极，请得先死。 拔剑欲自刎，赤眉帅樊崇等遽共救止之，乃赦更始，封为畏威侯。
现代文：刘恭追呼说： 我是极力护卫圣公的，请让我死在圣公前面。 拔剑要自杀，赤眉统帅樊崇等连忙共同把他救了，于是赦免更始，封为畏威侯。
English: Liu Qiong called after him, saying, "I tried my best to guard Sheng Kung's horse, please let me die in front of Sheng Kung. When he drew his sword to commit suicide, Red-browed Commander Gong Chong and others rushed to save him, so he was pardoned and given the title of Cui Wei Hou.

古文：刘恭复为固请，竟得封长沙王。
现代文：刘恭再次为更始求情，竟然封了更始为长沙王。
English: Liu Qiong once again pleaded for his release, and was even crowned the King of Changsha.

古文：一旦失之，合兵攻公，自灭之道也。 于是禄使从兵与更始共牧马于郊下，因令缢杀之。
现代文：更始常依谢禄居住，刘恭也加以卫护。三辅苦于赤眉暴虐，都怜悯更始，而张卬等深以为虑，对谢禄说： 现在各营统帅多想夺取圣公，一旦失去了圣公，大家合兵向你进攻，你就是自取灭亡了。 于是谢禄派亲兵与更始一起到郊外去牧马，密令亲兵把更始绞杀了。
English: Keseki often lived with Keseki, and Liu Qiong also protected him. Sanfu, who suffered from Keseki's tyranny, all pitied Keseki, while Zhang Ye, who was deeply concerned, said to Keseki: "Nowadays, battalion commanders often want to capture Shingon. Once you lose Shingon, everyone will attack you together, and you will perish by your own hands." So Keseki sent his own soldiers to the suburbs with Keseki to herd horses, and secretly ordered his own soldiers to strangle Keseki.

古文：刘恭夜往收臧其尸。
现代文：刘恭夜晚去收藏更始尸体。
English: Liu Qiong went to collect more bodies at night.

古文：光武闻而伤焉。诏大司徒邓禹葬之于霸陵。
现代文：光武听到消息很是悲伤，下诏令大司徒邓禹将更始葬于霸陵。
English: Guangwu was very sad to hear the news, and issued a decree that Deng Yu, the chief disciple, would be buried in the mausoleum.

古文：有三子；求，歆，鲤。
现代文：更始有三子： 刘求、刘歆、刘鲤。
English: He had three sons at the beginning of his reign: Liu Qiu, Liu Yao and Liu Yao.

古文：明年夏，求兄弟与母东诣洛阳，帝封求为襄邑侯，奉更始祀；歆为穀孰侯，鲤为寿光侯。
现代文：第二年夏天，刘求兄弟与母亲东到洛阳，帝封求为襄邑侯，奉更始祭祀；刘歆为孰侯，刘鲤为寿光侯。
English: In the summer of the second year, Liu Guo and his mother went to Luoyang. Emperor Guo was the mayor of Xiangyuan, and he was the first to offer the sacrifice. Liu Yao was the mayor of Jiuyuan, and Liu Yao was the mayor of Shuguang.

古文：求后徙封成阳侯。
现代文：刘求后来迁封为咸阳侯。
English: Liu Qiu was later transferred to Xianyang.

古文：求卒，子巡嗣，复徙封濩泽侯。
现代文：求死后，儿子刘巡嗣封，再迁封泽侯。
English: After Gui's death, his son Liu Junzhi was given the fief, and then moved to the fief of Ze.

古文：巡卒，子姚嗣。
现代文：刘巡死后，其子刘姚嗣封。
English: After Liu Qun's death, his son Liu Yao Jifeng succeeded him.

古文：论曰：周武王观兵孟津，退而还师，以为纣未可伐，斯时有未至者也。
现代文：史官评论道： 周武王阅兵于孟津，后来退师而还，是认为殷纣不可伐，伐纣的时机没有到来呢。
English: The historian commented: Zhou Wu Wang held a military parade in Mengjin, and later retired and returned, because he thought that Yin Qi could not be defeated, and the time to defeat him had not come.

古文：汉起，驱轻黠乌合之众，不当天下万分之一，而旌旃之所捴及，书文之所通被，莫不折戈顿颡，争受职命。
现代文：汉代兴起，更始驱使轻锐狡黠乌合之众，人数还不到天下万分之一，而旌旗所到之处，书文传达的地方，莫不放下武器顿首归降，争着接受职命的。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty initially drove the crowd of light-hearted cunning people, the number of whom is less than one in ten thousand in the world, and wherever the banner was carried, wherever the written word was conveyed, there were those who would not lay down their weapons and immediately surrender, vying to receive the command.

古文：非唯汉人余思，固亦几运之会也。
现代文：这不但是人们有怀念汉朝的思想，也是由于时机命运所促成的。
English: This is not only due to people's thoughts of nostalgia for the Han Dynasty, but also due to the opportunity and fate.

古文：夫为权首，鲜或不及。
现代文：首先发难的人很少不受害的。
English: He who strikes first rarely goes unharmed.

古文：陈、项且犹未兴，况庸庸者乎！
现代文：陈胜、项羽尚且没有成就帝业，何况庸庸碌碌之辈呢！
English: Chen Sheng and Xiang Yu have not yet achieved imperial success, let alone the mediocre and mediocre generation!

古文：刘盆子者，太山式人，城阳景王章之后也。
现代文：刘盆子，是太山郡式县人，城阳景王刘章的后代。
English: Liu Bonsi is a native of Taishan County and a descendant of Liu Zhang, the King of Chengyang.

古文：祖父宪，元帝时封为式侯，父萌嗣。
现代文：祖父刘宪，元帝时封为式侯，父亲刘萌嗣位。
English: Liu Xian's grandfather, the former emperor Shifu, was the prince, and his father, Liu Meng, was the heir.

古文：王莽篡位，国除，因为式人焉。
现代文：王莽篡位后封国被除去，因而成了式县人。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, the fiefdom was removed, and thus he became a shikenshin.

古文：天凤元年，琅邪海曲有吕母者，子为县吏，犯小罪，宰论杀之。
现代文：天凤元年，琅笽郡海曲县有一个吕母，她儿子是县吏，犯了一点小罪，县宰把他杀了。
English: In the first year of Tianfeng, there was a Lu mother in Haiqu County, Yunnan County. Her son was a county official. He committed a minor crime, and the county magistrate killed him.

古文：吕母怨宰，密聚客，规以报仇。
现代文：吕母怨恨县宰，秘密纠集宾客，策划为儿子报仇。
English: Lu's mother resented the county magistrate, secretly gathered guests, and plotted revenge for her son.

古文：母家素丰，资产数百万，乃益酿醇酒，买刀剑衣服。
现代文：吕母家素来富有，家产数百万，于是更酿醇酒，购买了刀剑衣服。
English: Lv's mother's family has always been rich, with a family income of millions, so they brewed more alcohol and bought more swords and clothes.

古文：少年来酤者，皆赊与之，视其乏者，辄假衣裳，不问多少。
现代文：年轻人来买酒的，吕母都赊给他们，看到贫乏的，还常借给他们衣裳，不问多少。
English: When young people came to buy wine, Lü Mu always gave them money, and when she saw that they were poor, she often lent them clothes, no matter how much.

古文：数年，财用稍尽，少年欲相与偿之。
现代文：几年过去，家财渐渐花完了，年轻人都准备向她还债。
English: Over the past few years, the family's money has been gradually spent, and young people are ready to repay her debts.

古文：吕母垂泣曰： 所以厚诸君者，非欲求利，徒以县宰不道，枉杀吾子，欲为报怨耳。
现代文：吕母垂泪哭泣说 ： 我之所以优待诸位，不是想求利，只是因为县宰不讲理，枉杀了我的儿子，我要为儿子报仇罢了。
English: Lu's mother wept and said, "The reason why I treated you well is not to seek profit, but because the county magistrate was unreasonable and killed my son without reason. I just want to avenge my son."

古文：诸君宁肯哀之乎！ 少年壮其意，又素受恩，皆许诺。
现代文：你们宁愿哀怜我吗？ 少年们都觉得她忠气壮烈，平时又受了许多恩惠，都答应了她。
English: Would you rather have pity on me? The boys all agreed that she was loyal and strong, and had received many favors in her life.

古文：其中勇士自号猛虎，遂相聚得数十百人，因与吕母入海中，招合亡命，众至数千。
现代文：年轻人中有勇士自称猛虎的，于是互相集聚得数十百人，与吕母一起到了海上，招合亡命之徒，人数到达数千人。
English: Among the young people, there was a brave man who called himself a fierce tiger, so they gathered tens of hundreds of people together, went to the sea with Lu Mu, and recruited the outlaws, reaching thousands of people.

古文：吕母自称将军，引兵还攻破海曲，执县宰。
现代文：吕母自称将军，带兵回来攻破了海曲县，活捉县宰。
English: Liumu claimed to be a general, and led his troops back to break through Haiqu County and capture the county governor alive.

古文：诸吏叩头为宰请。
现代文：县吏们叩头为县宰说情。
English: The county officials kowtowed and pleaded for the county governor.

古文：母曰： 吾子犯小罪，不当死，而为宰所杀。
现代文：吕母说： 我儿子犯了一点小罪，本不当死，却被县宰枉杀了。
English: Lu's mother said, "My son committed a minor crime and should not have died, but he was unjustly killed by the county."

古文：杀人当死，又何请乎？ 遂斩之，以其首祭子冢，复还海中。
现代文：杀人者死，有什么情可说呢？ 于是杀了县宰，拿县宰的头去祭儿子的墓，复回到海上。
English: So he killed the district headman, took the head of the district headman to his son's grave, and returned to the sea.

古文：后数岁，琅邪人樊崇起兵于莒，众百余人，转入太山，自号三老。
现代文：数年后，琅笽郡人樊崇起兵于莒，有众百余人，转战到太山，自号三老。
English: A few years later, Gong County resident Gong Chong raised an army in Gong, with more than a hundred people, and went to fight in Taishan, calling himself the Three Elders.

古文：时青、徐大饥，寇贼蜂起，众盗以崇勇猛，皆附之，一岁间至万余人。
现代文：这时青、徐二州闹大饥荒，盗贼蜂起，强盗们认为樊崇勇猛，都归附于他，一年之间扩大到万余人。
English: At this time, there was a great famine in Qing and Xu Erzhou, the thieves revolted, and the robbers thought that Gong Chong was brave and strong, and they all joined him, expanding to more than 10,000 people within a year.

古文：崇同郡人逄安，东海人徐宣、谢禄、杨音，各起兵，合数万人，复引从崇。
现代文：樊崇同郡人逄安，东海郡人徐宣、谢禄杨音，也各起兵，合起来达数万人，都引兵归樊崇。
English: Yu An, a native of Suizong County, and Xu Xuan and Xie Lu Yangyin, natives of Donghai County, also each raised an army, totaling tens of thousands of people, and all of them led their armies back to Suizong.

古文：共还攻莒，不能下，转掠至姑幕，因击王莽探汤侯田况，大破之，杀万余人，遂北入青州，所过虏掠。
现代文：一起回攻莒县，攻不下，转掠到姑幕县，因而击王莽探汤侯田况，大胜，杀万余人，于是北入青州，所过之地都进行虏掠。
English: Together, they returned to attack Jixian County, failed to capture it, and then plundered Gumiao County. As a result, they made a bold exploration of Tanghou's farmland, won a great victory, and killed more than 10,000 people. They then went north to Qingzhou, and plundered every place they passed.

古文：还至太山，留屯南城。初，崇等以困穷为冠，无攻城徇地之计。
现代文：回到太山，驻扎南城县，起初，樊崇等因穷困而为盗寇，没有攻城略地的打算。
English: Back in Taishan, stationed in Nancheng County, at first, because of their poverty, Yu Chong and others were thieves and robbers, and had no intention of attacking the city.

古文：众既浸盛，乃相与为约：杀人者死，伤人者偿创。
现代文：后来队伍渐渐扩大，就互相约定： 杀人者处死，伤人者偿创伤。
English: Later, as the team gradually expanded, they made a mutual agreement: those who killed would be put to death, and those who injured would pay for their injuries.

古文：以言辞为约束，无文书、旌旗、部曲、号令。
现代文：以言辞为约束，没有文书、旌旗、编制、号令。
English: They are constrained by words, and have no official documents, banners, regulations, or orders.

古文：其中最尊者号三老，次从事，次卒史，泛相称曰巨人。
现代文：其中职位最高的号为三老，其次为从事，再次为卒吏，一般的泛称为 巨人 。
English: Among them, the highest position number is the three olds, followed by the engaged, and then the graduate, generally referred to as the giants.

古文：王莽遣平均公廉丹、太师王匡击之。
现代文：王莽遣平均公廉丹、太师王匡发动进攻。
English: Wang Mang sent the average public official, Lian Dan, and the grandmaster, Wang Kuang, to launch an attack.

古文：崇等欲战，恐其众与莽兵乱，乃皆朱其眉以相识别，由是号曰赤眉。
现代文：樊崇等准备迎战，但耽心自己部下与王莽兵混淆不清，于是令自己部下都把眉毛涂红以相识别，从此号称赤眉。
English: Gong Chong and others were preparing for battle, but they were worried that their subordinates would be confused with Wang Mangbing, so they ordered their subordinates to paint their eyebrows red to identify them. From then on, they were known as the Red Eyebrows.

古文：赤眉遂大破丹、匡军，杀万余人，追至无盐，廉丹战死，王匡走。
现代文：赤眉大破廉丹、王匡军，杀万余人，追到无盐，廉丹战死，王匡逃命而走。
English: The Red Eyebrows defeated the troops of Lian Dan and Wang Kuang, killing more than ten thousand people, and chased them until they ran out of salt. Lian Dan was killed in the battle, and Wang Kuang fled for his life.

古文：崇又引其兵十余万，复还围莒，数月。
现代文：樊崇又引其兵十多万，再次回兵包围莒县，数月。
English: Gong Chong again led his army of more than one hundred thousand soldiers to encircle Gong County for several months.

古文：或说崇曰： 莒，父母之国，奈何攻之？ 乃解去。
现代文：有人对崇说： 莒，是我们的父母之乡，为什么要攻它呢？ 樊崇乃解围而去。
English: Some people said to Zong: "This is the hometown of our parents, why attack it? Zong is breaking away from the siege.

古文：时吕母病死，其众分入赤眉、青犊、铜马中。
现代文：这时吕母病死，她的部下分别加入到赤眉、青犊、铜马各部中。
English: At this time, Lu Mu died of illness, and her subordinates joined the Red Eyebrows, Blue Skulls, and Bronze Horses, respectively.

古文：赤眉遂寇东海，与王莽沂平大尹战，败，死者数千人，乃引去，掠楚、沛、汝南、颍川，还人陈留，攻拔鲁城，转至濮阳。
现代文：赤眉军就侵入东海郡，与王莽沂平郡大尹作战，失败，死数千人，于是离开东海，攻掠楚、沛、汝南、颍川，返回陈留，攻拔鲁城，转到濮阳。
English: The Red Eyebrows invaded Donghai County, fought with Wang Mang and Ping County's Dayin, failed, and killed thousands of people, so they left the East China Sea, attacked and plundered Chu, Pei, Runan, and Lu River, returned to Chenliu, attacked Lu City, and moved to Shenyang.

古文：会更始都洛阳，遣使降崇。
现代文：正好更始定都洛阳，派使者劝樊崇归降。
English: Luoyang, the newly established capital, sent an envoy to persuade Xuanzong to surrender.

古文：崇等闻汉室复兴，即留其兵，自将渠帅二十余人，随使者至洛阳降更始，皆封为列侯。
现代文：樊崇等听说汉室复兴了，就将兵留下，亲自率大帅二十多人随使者到洛阳投降更始，都被封为列侯。
English: When Gong Chong and others heard that the Han Dynasty had been revived, they left their soldiers behind. He personally led more than 20 generals and envoys to Luoyang to surrender, and they were all made princes.

古文：崇等既未有国邑，而留众稍有离叛，乃遂亡归其营，将兵入颍川，分其众为二部，崇与逄安为一部，徐宣、谢禄、杨音为一部。
现代文：樊崇等既没有自己的封地，留守的部众慢慢开始离叛，樊崇等于是离开洛阳返归其兵营，率军入颍川郡，分其部众为二部，樊崇与逄安为一部，徐宣、谢禄、杨音为一部。
English: Since Sui Chong and others did not have their own fiefdoms, the remaining subordinates slowly began to defect. Sui Chong left Luoyang to return to his barracks and led the army into Luochuan County. His subordinates were divided into two parts, Sui Chong and Sui An were one part, and Xu Xuan, Xie Lu, and Yang Yin were another part.

古文：崇、安攻拔长社，南击宛，斩县令；而宣、禄等亦拔阳翟，引之梁，击杀河南太守。
现代文：樊崇和逄安攻拔长社县，南击宛城，斩县令；而徐宣、谢禄等也攻拔阳翟县引部到梁县，击杀河南太守。
English: Gong Chong and Gong An attacked Changshe County, Nan shot Wancheng, and cut off the county; while Xu Xuan, Xie Lu, etc. also attacked Yangshuo County, led to Liang County, and killed Henan Taishou.

古文：赤眉众虽数战胜，而疲敝厌兵，皆日夜愁泣，思欲东归。
现代文：赤眉部众虽多次打胜仗，但疲敝厌战，都日夜愁泣，想要东归。
English: Although the Red Eyebrows won many battles, they were tired and weary of the war. They cried day and night and wanted to return to the East.

古文：崇等计议，虑众东向必散，不如西攻长安。
现代文：樊崇等商议，考虑到一旦东归，部众势必散伙，不如西攻长安。
English: Yan Chong and others deliberated, considering that once the east returned, the troops would inevitably disperse, and it would be better to attack Chang'an from the west.

古文：更始二年冬，崇、安自武关，宣等从陆浑关，两道俱入。
现代文：更始二年冬，樊崇、逄安到武关，徐宣等从陆浑关，两路并进。
English: In the winter of the following year, Gong Chong and Gong An went to Wuguan, while Xu Xuan and others went from Lukhunguan. The two routes went side by side.

古文：三年正月，俱至弘农，与更始诸将连战克胜，众遂大集。
现代文：三年正月，都到达弘农县，与更始诸将连战都获胜，部队就大发展。
English: In the first month of the third year, they all arrived in Hongnong County, and won the battle with the other generals, and the troops developed greatly.

古文：乃分万人为一营，凡三十营，营置三老、从事各一人。进至华阴。
现代文：于是分一万人为一营，共建三十营，每营设三老、从事各一人；进到华阴。
English: As a result, ten thousand people were divided into one battalion, and a total of thirty battalions were built, each with three elders, each engaged in one person; they entered Huayin.

古文：军中常有齐巫鼓舞祠城阳景王，以求福助。
现代文：军中常有齐巫击鼓跳舞祭祀城阳景王以求福衤止。
English: In the army, there were often Qiwu drumming and dancing to worship King Joyangjing for good luck.

古文：巫狂言景王大怒，曰： 当为县官，何故为贼？ 有笑巫者辄病，军中惊动。
现代文：巫者胡说，景王大怒说： 当为天子，何故为贼？ 嘲笑巫者的人就得病，军中为之惊恐。
English: The sorcerer spoke nonsense, and King Gyeong said angrily, "If he is the son of heaven, why is he a thief? Those who mocked the sorcerer fell ill, and the army was terrified.

古文：时方望弟阳怨更始杀其兄，乃逆说崇等曰： 更始荒乱，政令不行，故使将军得至于此。
现代文：这时方望的弟弟方阳怨恨更始杀了他哥哥，就上书劝樊崇等说 ： 更始荒乱，政令不行，故使将军到达这种地步。
English: At this time, Fang Fang's younger brother Fang Yang killed his brother out of resentment, and sent a letter to advise Yan Chong and others, saying: "The beginning is chaotic, the decree is not good, so the general has reached this level.

古文：今将军拥百万之众，西向帝城，而无称号，名为群贼，不可以久。
现代文：现在将军拥有百万之众，西向帝京长安，而无称号，叫做群贼，这是不能持久的。
English: Now the general has a million people, westward to the imperial capital Chang'an, but without a title, called a group of thieves, this is not sustainable.

古文：不如立宗室，挟义诛伐。
现代文：不如立刘氏宗室，打着正义的旗号以进行诛杀讨伐。
English: It would be better to establish the Liu family as the head of the family and carry out a campaign of killing under the banner of justice.

古文：以此号令，谁敢不服？ 崇等以为然，而巫言益盛，前及郑，乃相与议曰： 今迫近长安，而鬼神如此，当求刘氏共尊立之。 六月，遂立盆子为帝，自号建世元年。
现代文：以此号令，谁敢不服？ 樊崇等以为这样很好。樊崇向前挺进到郑县，就与诸将共议说： 现在我军迫近长安，而鬼神这样显灵，应当求刘氏宗室共立为帝。 六月，就立刘盆子为帝，自号建世元年。
English: With this order, who dares not to obey? Yu Chong and others thought this was very good. Yu Chong advanced to Zheng County, and discussed with the generals: Now that our army is approaching Chang'an, and ghosts and gods are so manifest, we should ask Liu's family to co-establish him as emperor. In June, Liu Bonsi was established as emperor, since it was the first year of the founding of the world.

古文：初，赤眉过式，掠盆子及二兄恭、茂，皆在军中。
现代文：当初，赤眉经过式县，虏掠了刘盆子及他的两个哥哥刘恭、刘茂，都留在军中。
English: At first, the Red Eyebrows passed through Shixian County and plundered Liu Bonsi and his two brothers, Liu Gong and Liu Mao, who remained in the army.

古文：恭少习《尚书》，略通大义。
现代文：刘恭从小学习《尚书》，懂得书中的一些大义。
English: Liu Qiong has been studying "Shang Shu" since childhood, and understands some of the major points in the book.

古文：及随崇等降更始，即封为式侯。
现代文：后来随樊崇等投降了更始，即被封为式侯。
English: Later, he capitulated along with Shichong and others, and was given the title of Shihou.

古文：以明经数言事，拜侍中，从更始在长安。
现代文：因通晓经术多次上书议事，拜为侍中，从更始在长安。
English: Due to his knowledge of the scriptures, he was repeatedly invited to attend meetings, and served as an attendant. He has been in Chang'an ever since.

古文：盆子与茂留军中，属右校卒史刘侠卿，主刍牧牛，号曰牛吏。
现代文：刘盆子与刘茂留在赤眉军中，归属于右校卒吏刘侠卿，负责割草喂牛的工作，号称 牛吏 。
English: Liu Bonsi and Liu Mao remained in the Red Eyebrows Army and belonged to the right school graduate officer Liu Xiaoxing, responsible for cutting grass and feeding cattle, known as Cattle Officers.

古文：及崇等欲立帝，求军中景王后者，得七十余人，唯盆子与茂及前西安侯刘孝最为近属。
现代文：后来樊崇等想立皇帝，查找在军中的城阳景王后裔，共得七十多人，只有刘盆子与刘茂及前西安侯刘孝最为近属。
English: Later, Yu Chong and others wanted to establish an emperor, and searched for descendants of King Chengyangjing in the army, obtaining a total of more than seventy people. Only Liu Bonzi and Liu Mao and the former Xi'an Prince Liu Xiao were the closest relatives.

古文：崇等议曰： 闻古天子将兵称上将军。 乃书札为符曰 上将军 ，又以两空札置笥中，遂于郑北设坛场，祠城阳景王。
现代文：樊崇等商议说 ： 听说古代天子带兵称上将军。 于是就用木片写了一个 上将军 的标记，另外又把两个一样大小的空白木片放在箧中，于是在郑北设了一个坛场，祭祀城阳景王。
English: Gong Chong and the others discussed and said, "I heard that in ancient times, the son of heaven led soldiers and was called Shangzheng," so they used a piece of wood to write a mark of Shangzheng, and put two blank pieces of wood of the same size in the urn, so they set up an altar in Zhengbei to worship King Chengyangjing.

古文：诸三老、从事皆大会陛下，列盆子等三人居中立，以年次探札。
现代文：三老、从事都大会于台阶之下，刘盆子、刘茂、刘孝三人站于正中，按年龄大小依次去摸取木片。
English: The three elders and those engaged in capital assembly gathered at the bottom of the steps, while Liu Bonsi, Liu Mao, and Liu Xiao stood in the middle, and according to their ages, they went to feel for pieces of wood.

古文：盆子最幼，后探得符，诸将乃皆称臣拜。
现代文：刘盆子最幼，最后一个去摸，刚好摸中 上将军 木片，坛下诸将于是都向刘盆子称臣拜贺。
English: Liu Bonsi was the youngest and the last to touch it. He just happened to touch the middle piece of wood, and everyone under the altar would bow to Liu Bonsi.

古文：盆子时年十五，被发徒跣，敝衣赭汗，见众拜，恐畏欲啼。
现代文：刘盆子这时年仅十五岁，披着头发光着脚，穿着破衣，脸红流汗看到大家向他跪拜，吓得要哭。
English: Liu Bonsi was only fifteen years old at the time. He was barefoot, with his hair in a ponytail, wearing tattered clothes. He blushed and sweated when he saw everyone kneeling before him. He was so scared that he wanted to cry.

古文：茂谓曰： 善藏符。 盆子即啮折弃之，复还依侠卿。
现代文：刘茂对他说： 把木片藏好。 刘盆子却立即把木片咬断丢掉，复回到刘侠卿身边。
English: Liu Mao said to him, "Hide the piece of wood well." However, Liu Bonsi immediately bit off the piece of wood and threw it away, and then returned to Liu Xiaoqing.

古文：侠卿为制绛单衣、半头赤帻、直綦履，乘轩车大马，赤屏泥，绛襜络，而犹从牧儿遨。
现代文：刘侠卿就替刘盆子制了大红色的单衣、空顶的红帽帻、直线花纹的鞋子，让他乘坐高车大马，车轼前边是赤色的屏泥，车身围着红色帷屏，但刘盆子还是和牧牛伢儿在一起玩。
English: Liu Xiaoxing made a big red singlet, a red cap with an open top, and shoes with a straight pattern for Liu Bonsi, and let him ride a high-wheeled horse. The front of the cart was red mud, and the body was surrounded by a red curtain, but Liu Bonsi still played with the cowherd.

古文：崇虽起勇力而为众所宗，然不知书数。
现代文：樊崇虽然起于勇士而为大家所崇仰，但没有文化不知术数。
English: Although Gong Chong started as a warrior and is admired by everyone, there is no culture that does not know the number of operations.

古文：徐宣故县狱吏，能通《易经》。
现代文：徐宣做过县衙的狱吏，懂得《易经》。
English: Xu Xuan had been a county magistrate's jailer and knew the I Ching.

古文：遂共推宣为丞相、崇御史大夫、逄安左大司马、谢禄右大司马，自杨音以下皆为列卿。
现代文：于是大家共推徐宣为丞相，樊崇为御史大夫，逄安为左大司马，谢禄为右大司马，自杨音以下都为列卿。
English: As a result, everyone recommended Xu Xuan as chancellor, Yu Chong as chief historian, Yu An as left grand secretary, Xie Luo as right grand secretary, and from Yang Yin on down, they were all ranked as lords.

古文：军及高陵，与更始叛将张卬等连和，遂攻东都门，入长安城，更始来降。
现代文：大军到达高陵，与更始叛将张卬等联合，于是攻东都门，进入长安城，更始来投降。
English: The large army reached Gaoling, united with the rebel general Zhang Ye and others, and then attacked Dongdumen, entered Chang'an City, and finally surrendered.

古文：盆子居长东宫，诸将日会论功，争言讙呼，拔剑击柱，不能相一。
现代文：刘盆子住在长乐宫，诸将每天集会讨论谁的功劳大，争言呼叫，拔剑击柱，不能取得一致。
English: Liu Bonsi lived in the Changle Palace. They would gather every day to discuss who had done the greatest work. They would quarrel, call out, draw swords and hit the pillar, but they could not reach a consensus.

古文：三辅郡县营长遣使贡献，兵士辄剽夺之。
现代文：三辅郡县营长派使者来呈献贡品，兵士动辄把贡品抢走了。
English: The Sanshu County Battalion Commander sent an envoy to present the tribute, but the soldiers snatched it away.

古文：又数虏暴吏民，百姓保壁，由是皆复固守。
现代文：又多次掳掠暴虐官吏百姓，百姓从此保壁坚守。
English: In addition, the people were abducted and plundered many times by the tyrannical officials. From then on, the people held fast to the wall.

古文：至腊日，崇等乃设乐大会，盆子坐正殿，中黄门持兵在后，公卿皆列坐殿上。酒未行，其中一人也刀笔书谒欲贺，其余不知书者请起之，各各屯聚，更相背向。大司农杨音按剑骂曰： 诸卿皆老佣也！
现代文：到了腊祭那天，樊崇等设乐举行大会，刘盆子坐在正殿，中黄门带兵站在后面，公卿都列坐于殿上，酒还没有开饮，其中一人拿着刀笔写了名帖准备庆贺，其余不会写字的人都站起来请人代写，一堆一堆地屯聚在一起，互相背靠背，大司农杨音按剑骂道： 各位公卿都是老佣人！
English: On the day of the wax festival, Yu Chong and others held a music festival. Liu Bonzi sat in the main hall, Zhonghuangmen stood in the back with soldiers. The nobles all sat in a row on the hall, the wine had not yet been opened. One of them held a knife and pen to write a famous post to celebrate. The rest of the people who could not write stood up and asked people to write on their behalf. A bunch of people gathered together, back to back. The chief farmer Yang Yin scolded with a sword: All the nobles are old servants!

古文：今日设君臣之礼，反更殽乱，儿戏尚不如此，皆可格杀！ 更相辩斗，而兵众遂各逾宫斩关，入掠酒肉，互相杀伤。
现代文：今天设君臣之礼，反而更加混乱，儿戏也不会乱成这样，都可击杀。 互相争吵打斗，而兵众们也各越过宫殿、斩断关卡，闯进宫殿抢夺酒肉，互相杀伤。
English: Today, the setting of the monarch-vassal salute, on the contrary, is more chaotic, children's games will not be chaotic like this, all can be killed. quarrel and fight with each other, and the soldiers also cross the palace, cut off the checkpoints, break into the palace to snatch wine and meat, and kill each other.

古文：卫尉诸葛稚闻之，勒兵人，格杀百余人，乃定。
现代文：卫尉诸葛稚听到消息，立即带兵而入，击杀百余人，才安定下来。
English: When Lieutenant Zhuge heard the news, he immediately led his troops in and killed more than a hundred people before settling down.

古文：盆子惶恐，日夜啼泣，独与中黄门共卧起，唯得上观阁而不闻外事。
现代文：刘盆子惊惶恐惧，日夜啼哭，单独与中黄门同起同卧，只能上观阁而不闻外面的事。
English: Panic-stricken and terrified, Liu Bonzi cried day and night, sleeping alone with Zhonghuangmen. He could only watch from the pavilion and did not hear what was happening outside.

古文：时掖庭中宫女犹有数百千人，自更始败后，幽闭殿内，掘庭中芦菔根，捕池鱼而食之，死者因相埋于宫中。
现代文：这时住在皇宫旁舍的宫女还有数百上千人，自从更始失败后，被幽闭在殿内，掘庭中芦根萝卜捕捉池鱼来充饥，死了就掩埋在宫中。
English: At this time, there were hundreds of thousands of palace maids who lived in the side rooms of the palace. After the initial failure, they were confined in the palace, digging in the garden to catch pond fish to satisfy their hunger. When they died, they were buried in the palace.

古文：有故祠甘泉乐人，尚共击鼓歌舞，衣服鲜明，见盆子叩头言饥。
现代文：有些过去在甘泉祭神的乐师，还在一起击鼓歌舞，穿着鲜明的衣服，见到刘盆子叩头说肚子饿。
English: Some of the musicians who used to worship in Ganquan were still playing drums, singing and dancing together, wearing bright clothes. When they saw Liu Bonsi, they bowed their heads and said they were hungry.

古文：盆子使中黄门禀之米，人数斗。
现代文：刘盆子派中黄门送米给他们，每人得数斗。
English: Liu Bonzi sent Zhonghuangmen to send rice to them, and each person got a few buckets.

古文：后盆子去，皆饿死不出。
现代文：后来刘盆子走了，都饿死在里面出不来。
English: After Liu Bonsi left, they all starved to death and couldn't get out.

古文：刘恭见赤眉众乱，知其必败，自恐兄弟俱祸，密教盆子归玺绶，习为辞让之言。
现代文：刘恭见赤眉部队乱得不成样子，知道他们必败，自己唯恐兄弟都遭到横祸，暗中教刘盆子把皇帝的玺绶交出，学说辞去帝位的话。
English: Liu Gong saw that the Red Eyebrows' troops were in disarray and knew that they were doomed to defeat. Fearing that his brothers would all meet with misfortune, Liu Gong secretly instructed Liu Pang Zi to hand over the emperor's scepter and learn the words of abdication.

古文：建武二年正朔，崇等大会，刘恭先曰： 诸君共立恭弟为帝，德诚深厚。
现代文：建武二年正月初一，樊崇等举行盛大集会，刘恭先说： 诸君共立我弟盆子为帝，拥立之德至为深厚。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Jianwu era, Zhaozong and others held a grand rally. Liu Qiong first said: All of you have jointly established my brother Bonzi as the emperor, and the virtue of supporting the establishment is profound.

古文：立且一年，肴乱日甚，诚不足以相成。
现代文：在位一年，混乱一天比一天严重，实在不足以成事。
English: One year in office, with the chaos getting worse by the day, is not enough to get things done.

古文：恐死而无所益，愿得退为庶人，更求贤知，唯诸君省察。 崇等谢曰： 此皆崇等罪也。 恭复固请。
现代文：恐怕到死也无好处，愿意退位做一个老百姓，以更求贤明智慧之人为帝，请诸君审察。 樊崇等谢罪说： 这都是我们的罪啊。 刘恭再次固请。
English: I am afraid that there is no benefit to death, I am willing to abdicate and become a commoner, with a more wise and wise person as the emperor, please review. 崇等谢罪 said: This is all our sin. Liu Gong firmly asked again.

古文：或曰： 此宁式侯事邪！ 恭惶恐起去。
现代文：有的人说 ： 这难道是你式侯的事情吗！ 刘恭惊惶害怕，起身而去。
English: Some people said: Isn't this a matter for your family? Liu Qiong panicked and got up to leave.

古文：盆子乃下床解玺绶，叩头曰： 今设置县官而为贼如故。
现代文：刘盆子于是下床解下玺绶，叩头说： 现在设置了天子而仍像过去一样做贼。
English: So Liu Bon Zi got out of bed, undid his robe, and bowed his head and said, "Now I have set up a heavenly son, but I am still a thief as in the past."

古文：吏人贡献，辄见剽劫，流闻四方，莫不怨恨，不复信向。
现代文：吏民贡献物品，经常遭到抢劫，这种丑闻流传四方，莫不怨恨，因而不再信任和向往我们。
English: Officials and citizens contribute goods, and are often robbed. This kind of scandal spreads everywhere, and there is nothing but resentment, so they no longer trust and yearn for us.

古文：诚冀诸君肯哀怜之耳！ 因涕泣嘘唏。
现代文：这都是立的不得其人造成的后果，我乞求保全我这条性命，让位给贤圣的人。
English: All of this is the result of evil men. I beg you to spare my life and give it to a holy man.

古文：崇等及会者数百人，莫不哀怜之，乃皆避席顿首曰； 臣无状，负陛下。
现代文：如果一定要杀我以塞责，我是无法逃避。诚心希望诸君能同情我可怜我。 
English: If you must kill me to stop me, I cannot escape. I sincerely hope that you can sympathize with me and pity me.

古文：请自今已后，不敢复放纵。 因共抱持盆子，带以玺绶。
现代文：因而泪流满面哀叹不止。樊崇等和与会者数百人，莫不为之哀怜，于是都离座叩头说： 臣等不成样，辜负了陛下，自今以后，不敢再放纵了。 因此一起把盆子扶抱起来，为他系上印绶带。
English: As a result, tears streamed down his face and he lamented endlessly. Gong Chong and the hundreds of other attendees could not help but feel sorry for him, so they all bowed from their seats and said, "Our vassals did not live up to expectations, they failed His Majesty, and from now on, they dare not indulge any longer. Therefore, they held up the basin together and tied a seal ribbon for him.

古文：盆子号呼不得已。
现代文：刘盆子呼叫不得已。
English: Liu Bonsi had no choice but to call.

古文：既罢出，各闭营自守，三辅翕然，称天子聪明。
现代文：罢宴后，各闭营自守，三辅一致称天子英明。
English: After the banquet, each closed camp to protect themselves, and the three auxiliaries unanimously called Tianzi Yingming.

古文：百姓争还长安，市里且满。
现代文：百姓争着返回长安，市里住满了人。
English: People scrambled to return to Chang'an, and the city was filled with people.

古文：后二十余日，赤眉贪财物，复出大掠。
现代文：后二十余天，赤眉贪财物，再次出去掠夺。
English: After more than 20 days, Akemi, greedy for wealth, went out to plunder again.

古文：城中粮食尽，遂收载珍宝，因大纵火烧宫室，引兵而西。
现代文：城中的粮食完了，就收集装载珍宝，因此大肆纵火焚烧宫室，带兵向西。
English: When the food in the city was finished, they collected and loaded the treasures, so they set fire to the palace and led the soldiers westward.

古文：过祠南郊，车甲兵马最为猛盛，众号百万。
现代文：经过南郊祭天，车甲兵马最为猛盛，拥众号称百万。
English: After the Southern Suburbs Festival, the chariot soldiers and horses were the most popular, with millions of fans.

古文：盆子乘王车，驾三马，从数百骑。
现代文：刘盆子乘坐王车，驾着三匹马，后面跟着数百骑。
English: Liu Bonzi rode in the royal carriage, driving three horses, followed by hundreds of riders.

古文：乃自南山转掠城邑，与更始将军严春战于郿，破春，杀之，遂入安定、北地。
现代文：于是从终南山一直掠到大城小邑，与更始将军严春战于县，打败严春并把他杀了，于是入安定、北地。
English: As a result, he raided from the end of Nanshan all the way to Dacheng Xiaoyu, and fought with the beginning general Yanchun in the county, defeated Yanchun and killed him, and then entered the stable and the north.

古文：至阳城、番须中，逢大雪，坑谷皆满，士多冻死，乃复还，发掘诸陵，取其宝货，遂污辱吕后尸，凡贼所发，有玉匣殓者率皆如生，故赤眉得多行淫秽。
现代文：到阳城、番须中，遇到大雪，坑谷都堆满了，士卒多冻死，于是返回，发掘诸陵坟墓，窃取墓中宝物，吕后的遗体也遭到污辱。赤眉发掘的墓，凡有玉匣装殓遗体的大都像活的一样，所以赤眉得以多行污秽。
English: When he went to Yangcheng and Pansu Middle School, he encountered heavy snow, the valleys were full of pits, and many soldiers froze to death, so he returned, excavated the tombs of the tombs, stole the treasures in the tombs, and the remains of Lü Guo were also defiled. The tombs excavated by Red Eyebrow, where the bodies were decorated with jade boxes, were mostly alive, so Red Eyebrow was able to do a lot of defilement.

古文：大司徒邓禹时在长安，遣兵击之于郁夷，反为所败，禹乃出之云阳。
现代文：大司徒邓禹这时在长安，派遣军队击之于郁夷，反为赤眉所败，禹只得出云阳。
English: In Chang'an at this time, Deng Yu, the Great Scholar, dispatched an army to attack Ikui, but was defeated by Akemi, and Yu only came to Yunyang.

古文：九月，赤眉复入长安，止桂宫。
现代文：九月，赤眉复入长安，住在桂宫。
English: In September, Akemi returned to Chang'an and lived in Guigong.

古文：时，汉中贼延岑出散关，屯杜陵，逄安将十余万人击之。
现代文：这时汉中贼延岑出兵散关，驻扎杜陵，逄安率十多万人击延岑。
English: At this time, the Han emperor Yan Xun sent troops to Sankuan and stationed them in Duling. Yan An led more than one hundred thousand people to attack Yan Xun.

古文：邓禹以逄安精兵在外，唯盆子与羸弱居城中，乃自往攻之。
现代文：邓禹因逄安精兵在外，只有刘盆子和一些身体虚弱的人住在城里，于是自己率军进攻长安。
English: Deng Yu led his army to attack Chang'an because the elite soldiers of Chang'an were away, and only Liu Bon and some frail people lived in the city.

古文：会谢禄救至，夜战槀街中，禹兵败走。
现代文：恰好谢禄救兵赶到，在槁街上与邓禹军展开夜战，邓禹兵败逃走。
English: Just as Xie Lu's rescuers arrived, they started a night battle with Deng Yu's army on Handan Street. Deng Yu's army was defeated and fled.

古文：延岑及更始将军李宝合兵数万人，与逄安战于杜陵。
现代文：延岑及更始将军李宝合军数万人，与逄安战于杜陵。
English: Yan Xuan and his successor, General Li Bao, together with an army of tens of thousands, fought with Yan An at Tulin.

古文：岑等大败，死者万余人，宝遂降安，而延岑收散卒走。
现代文：延岑等大败，死万余人，李宝向逄安投降。延岑收集散兵后逃走，李宝派人密告延岑说： 你尽力打回来，我当从里面反过去，里外夹攻，可大破逄安。 
English: Li Bao surrendered to Yan'an after Yan'an suffered a crushing defeat and more than ten thousand people were killed. Yan'an gathered the scattered soldiers and fled. Li Bao sent a spy to Yan'an saying, "You should fight back as hard as you can. I should counterattack from the inside and attack from the outside. I can smash Yan'an."

古文：宝乃密使人谓岑曰： 子努力还战，吾当于内反之，表里合势，可大破也。 岑即还挑战，安等空营击之，宝从后悉拔赤眉旌帜，更立己幡旗。安等战疲还营，见旗帜皆白，大惊乱走，自投川谷，死者十余万，逄安与数千人脱归长安。时三辅大乱，人相食，城郭皆空，白骨蔽野，遗人往往聚为营保，各坚守不下。
现代文：延岑即返回挑战，逄安空营还击，李宝从后面拔掉所有赤眉军旗帜，换上自己的幡旗。逄安等战疲了还营，见到旗帜都换成了白旗，大惊乱奔，自投川谷之中，死者达十多万，逄安与数千人脱身回到长安。这时三辅闹大饥荒，人吃人，城郭都空了，野外堆满了白骨，留下来的人往往结营互保，各个坚守不退。
English: Yan Xuan immediately returned to challenge, the Huan air camp returned fire, Li Bao pulled out all the Red Eyebrow Army flags from behind and replaced them with his own flags. Huan and others were tired of fighting and returned to the camp. When they saw that the flags had all been replaced with white flags, they were panicked and ran wildly. They threw themselves into the valley, with more than 100,000 dead. Huan and thousands of people escaped and returned to Chang'an. At this time, Sanfu was suffering from great famine, people were eating people, the city walls were empty, and the field was full of white bones. Those who remained often camped together to protect each other, and

古文：赤眉虏掠无所得，十二月，乃引而东归，众尚二十余万，随道复散。
现代文：赤眉抢不到东西，到了十二月，就带兵东归，还剩下二十多万人，沿途溃散。
English: Red-brow could not grab anything, and by December, he returned east with his soldiers. There were still more than two hundred thousand people left, and they scattered along the way.

古文：光武乃遣破奸将军侯进等屯新安，建威大将军耿弇等屯宜阳，分为二道，以要其还路。
现代文：光武于是派遣破奸将军侯进等驻兵新安县，建威大将军耿弇等驻兵宜阳，分兵两路，以拦截其归路。
English: Guangwu then dispatched traitor-busting General Hou Jin and other soldiers stationed in Xin'an County, and Jianwei General Geng Yao and other soldiers stationed in Yiyang, and divided the soldiers into two groups to intercept their way back.

古文：敕诸将曰： 贼若东走，可引宜阳兵会新安；贼若南走，可引新安兵会宜阳。 明年正月，邓禹自河北度，击赤眉于湖，禹复败走，赤眉遂出关南向。
现代文：命令诸将说： 贼若东走，可以引宜阳兵会师新安；贼若南走，可以引新安兵会师宜阳。 第二年正月，邓禹自河北渡，击赤眉于湖县，邓禹再次败走，赤眉于是出关向南进军。
English: He ordered the generals to say: "If the thief goes east, he can lead the Yiyang Military Association Division to Xin'an; if the thief goes south, he can lead the Xin'an Military Association Division to Yiyang." In the first month of the second year, when Deng Yu crossed from Hebei Province to Hubei Province, Deng Yu was defeated again, and he marched south.

古文：征西大将军冯异破之于崤底。
现代文：征西大将军冯异在崤底打败赤眉军。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Feng Yi, defeated the Red Eyebrows in Loudi.

古文：帝闻，乃自将幸宜阳，盛兵以邀其走路。
现代文：光武闻讯，就亲自率军到宜阳，以强大军队拦阻他们的逃路。
English: When Guangwu heard the news, he personally led the army to Yiyang and blocked their escape route with a strong army.

古文：赤眉忽遇大军，惊震不知所为，乃遣刘恭乞降，曰： 盆子将百万众降，陛下何以待之？ 帝曰： 待汝以不死耳。 樊崇乃将盆子及丞相徐宣以下三十余人肉袒降。
现代文：赤眉忽遇大军，惊震得不知如何是好，于是遣刘恭向光武乞降，说 ： 盆子将百万之众归降于陛下，陛下将怎样对待他们呢？ 帝说 ： 不杀你们就是了。 樊崇就将刘盆子及丞相徐宣以下三十多人去衣露体向光武请降。
English: Akemi suddenly encountered a large army and was so shocked that he didn't know what to do, so he sent Liu Gong to beg for surrender to Guangwu, saying: Bonzi will surrender a million people to your majesty, what will your majesty do with them? The emperor said: If I don't kill you, that's it. Gong Chong then sent Liu Bonzi and more than thirty people under the prime minister Xu Xuan to beg for surrender to Guangwu.

古文：上所得传国玺绶，更始七尺宝敛及玉璧各一。
现代文：光武得到了传国玺绶、更始的七尺宝剑及玉璧各一件。
English: Mitsutake received the Imperial Regalia, the original seven-foot sword, and a piece of jade.

古文：积兵甲宜阳城西，与熊耳山齐。
现代文：缴获的兵器堆积在宜阳城西，与熊耳山一般高。
English: The captured weapons are piled up in the west of Yiyang City, as high as Mount Xiong'er.

古文：帝令县厨赐食，众积困餧，十余万人皆得饱饫。
现代文：帝令县厨赐给赤眉军食物，众军士长时间又饿又困，十多万人得以饱餐一顿。
English: The cook of Diling County gave food to the Red Eyebrows Army. The soldiers were hungry and tired for a long time, and more than 100,000 people were able to have a full meal.

古文：明旦，大陈兵马临洛水，令盆子君臣列而观之。
现代文：次日一早，帝陈列兵马于洛水之旁，令刘盆子君臣列队观看。
English: In the morning of the next day, the emperor displayed soldiers and horses next to the Luo River, and ordered Liu Bon Zi and his courtiers to line up to watch.

古文：谓盆子曰： 自知当死不？ 对曰： 罪当应死，犹幸上怜赦之耳。 帝笑曰： 儿大黠，宗室无蚩者。 又谓崇等曰； 得无悔降乎？
现代文：帝对盆子说 ： 你自知当死不？ 
English: The emperor said to the basin: Do you know that you are going to die?

古文：朕今遣卿归营勒兵，鸣鼓相攻，决其胜负，不欲强相服也。 徐宣等叩头曰： 臣等出长安东都门，君臣计议，归命圣德。
现代文：我现在放你们回营去，你们可以再率领军队鸣鼓相攻，一决胜负，我并不想你们来勉强服从我哩。 徐宣等叩头说： 我们出长安东都门时，君臣商议，向圣上归降。
English: I will now let you go back to the camp, and you can once again lead the army in a drum-beating offensive to decide the outcome of the battle. I do not want you to reluctantly obey me. Xu Xuan and others prostrated themselves and said, "When we left the Chang'an and Dongdu Gate, the monarchs and subjects discussed surrendering to the saint.

古文：百姓可与乐成，难与图始，故不告众耳。
现代文：百姓可以在事成之后与他们一同欢乐，但在开始时是很难同他图谋的，所以我们没有事先告诉群众。
English: The people can rejoice with them after the event, but at the beginning it was difficult to conspire with him, so we did not tell the masses in advance.

古文：今日得降，犹去虎口归慈母，诚欢诚喜，无所恨也。
现代文：今日归降，好比是从虎口中逃出而归慈母，真是欢喜之至，没有什么悔恨的。 
English: Surrendering today is like escaping from the jaws of the tiger and returning to a loving mother. I am so happy and have no regrets.

古文：帝曰： 卿所谓铁中铮铮，庸中佼佼者也。 又曰： 诸卿大为无道，所过皆夷灭老弱，溺社稷，污井灶。
现代文：帝说： 你真不愧是那种铮铮的硬汉子，庸人中的优秀人才啊。 又说： 各位大为无道，所过之处，诛死老弱，对社稷撒尿把井水锅灶都污秽了。
English: The emperor said, "You are truly worthy of being the kind of shameless tough guy, an outstanding talent among the mediocrities." He also said, "You are all very unscrupulous, and wherever you go, you strangle the old and weak, urinate on the society, and make the wells, water pots, and stoves dirty.

古文：然犹有三善：攻破城邑，周遍天下，本故妻妇无所改易，是一善也；立君能用宗室，是二善也；余贼立君，迫急皆持其首降，自以为功，诸卿独完全以付朕，是三善也。 乃令各与妻子居洛阳，赐宅人一区，田二顷。
现代文：但还有三个好处： 攻破城邑遍于天下，没有抛弃原来的妻妾，这是一个好处；立君主能用刘氏宗室，这是第二个好处；别的盗贼立了君，走投无路时往往拿着他的首级投降，自己以为立了功，你们却让盆子活着来降我，这是第三个好处。 于是令他们各与妻子住到洛阳，每人赐住宅一区，赐田二顷。
English: But there are three other benefits: It is a benefit to have conquered cities and towns all over the world without abandoning your former wives and concubines; it is a second benefit to be able to use Liu's family to establish a monarchy; it is a third benefit that other thieves have set up a prince, and when cornered, they often surrender with his head; they think they have done a good deed, but you let the pot live to bring me down; so they let them live with their wives in Luoyang, and each of them was given a residential area and two hectares of land.

古文：其夏，樊崇、逄安谋反，诛死。
现代文：这年夏天，樊崇、逄安谋反，被诛。
English: In the summer of that year, Gong Chong and Gong An plotted a rebellion and were arrested.

古文：杨音在长安时，遇赵王良有恩，赐爵关内侯，与徐宣俱归乡里，卒于家。
现代文：杨音在长安时，对赵王刘良有恩情，赐爵关内侯，与徐宣都回乡下，死于家中。
English: When Yang Yin was in Chang'an, he was kind to Zhao Wang Liu Liang, gave him the title of Lord of Guanai, and both he and Xu Xuan returned to the countryside and died at home.

古文：刘恭为更始报杀谢禄，自系狱，赦不诛。
现代文：刘恭为更始杀了谢禄，自缚下狱请罪，被赦免不杀。
English: Liu Qiong initially killed Xie Lu for revenge, and then went to jail to plead guilty, but was pardoned and not killed.

古文：帝怜盆子，赏赐甚厚，以为赵王郎中。
现代文：光武帝怜爱盆子，赏赐他很多东西，以他为赵王的郎中。
English: Emperor Guangwu took pity on Bonzi and rewarded him with many things, considering him to be the son-in-law of King Zhao.

古文：后病失明，赐荥阳均输官地，以为列肆，使食其税终身。
现代文：后来眼生病，眼睛瞎了，就赐他荥阳一带的均输官地，开设铺店，让他终身食用这里的税收。
English: Later, when his eye got sick and he became blind, he was given a government-allotted land in the Poyang area, opened a store, and allowed him to consume the taxes here for life.

