古文：梁御字善通，其先安定人也。
现代文：梁御字善通，他的祖先是安定人。
English: Liang Youzhi Zentsong, his ancestor is a stable person.

古文：后因官北边，遂家于武川，改姓为纥豆陵氏。
现代文：后来因为到北部边疆当官，就在武川安家，改姓为纥豆陵氏。
English: Later, because he became a government official in the northern borderlands, he made his home in Bukawa and changed his family name to Peasling.

古文：高祖俟力提，从魏太祖征讨，位至扬武将军、定阳侯。
现代文：他的高祖叫俟力提，跟随魏太祖征讨，官至扬武将军、定阳侯。
English: His great-great-grandfather was called Yan Liti, who followed the Wei Emperor to conquer and conquer, and rose to the rank of Yangwu General and Dingyang Marquis.

古文：御少好学，进趋详雅。
现代文：梁御年少时喜爱学习，进退举止安详文雅。
English: When Liang was young, he loved to study, and his movements were calm and elegant.

古文：及长，更好弓马。
现代文：到他长大后，又喜爱射箭骑马。
English: When he grew up, he also loved archery and horseback riding.

古文：尔朱天光西讨，知御有志略，引为左右，授宣威将军、都将。
现代文：尔朱天光西进讨伐，得知梁御有志向才略，收纳他为近臣，授任宣威将军、都将。
English: When Zhu Tianguang marched westward to fight, he learned that Liang Gu had the ambition and talent to be a general, so he accepted him as a close vassal and appointed him as General Xuan Wei.

古文：共平关右，除镇西将军、东益州刺史、第一领民酋长，封白水县伯，邑三百户。
现代文：共同平定关右，他任镇西将军、束益州刺史、第一领民酋长，被封为白水县伯，食邑三百户。
English: Together with Guan Yu, he served as the general of Zhenxi, the governor of Sokouyizhou, and the chief of the first territorial people, and was awarded the title of Baishui County and 300 households of food villages.

古文：转征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：又改任征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was also reappointed as General of the Western Expeditionary Force and Doctor of Medicine of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：后从贺拔岳镇长安。
现代文：后来他跟随贺拔岳镇守长安。
English: Later, he followed He Baduyue, the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：及岳被害，御与诸将同谋翊戴太祖。
现代文：到贺拔岳被害时，梁御和各位将领一起商议拥戴太祖。
English: When Mt. Hebatake was damaged, Emperor Liang and the generals discussed together whether or not to honor the great ancestor.

古文：从征侯莫陈悦，迁武卫将军。
现代文：他跟随太祖征讨侯莫陈悦，升任武卫将军。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to conquer Hou Mo Chen Yue and was promoted to General Wuwei.

古文：太祖既平秦陇，方欲引兵东下，雍州刺史贾显持两端，通使于齐神武。
现代文：太祖平定秦陇后，正准备率兵束下，雍州刺史贾显脚踏两只船，和齐神武互派使者往来。
English: After the Great Ancestor had subdued the Qin Dynasty, he was preparing to lead an army. The Yongzhou Emperor Jiaxian set foot on two ships, and sent envoys to and from Qi Shenwu.

古文：太祖微知其意，以御为大都督、雍州刺史,领前军先行。
现代文：太祖暗中了解到他的意图，任命梁御为大都督、雍州刺史，率前军先行。
English: The great-grandfather secretly understood his intention, appointed Liang Gu as the great governor, Yongzhou stabbed history, and led the vanguard.

古文：既与显相见，因说显曰： 魏室陵迟，天下鼎沸。
现代文：梁御和买显见面后，就劝买显说： 魏室衰落，天下大乱。
English: After Liang Gu and Buy Xian met, he persuaded Buy Xian to say: "The Wei dynasty is in decline, and the world is in turmoil.

古文：高欢志在凶逆，枭夷非远。
现代文：高欢志在叛逆，不久就会被诛灭。
English: Gao Huan Zhi is rebelling and will soon be annihilated.

古文：宇文夏州英姿不世，算略无方，方欲扶危定倾，匡复京洛。
现代文：宇文夏州英姿绝世，策略高深，正打算扶持危亡安定倾覆，匡复京洛。
English: Uwen Xiazhou is a brilliant person with profound strategy. He is planning to support the crisis, stability and overthrow, and recover Beijing and Luo.

古文：公不于此时建立功效，乃怀犹豫，恐祸不旋踵矣。 显即出迎太祖，御遂入镇雍州。
现代文：您不在此时建立功绩，而心怀犹豫，恐怕祸患很快就会来到啊。 贾显立即出城迎接太祖，梁御就入城镇守雍州。
English: If you do not build up merit at this time, but hesitate, I am afraid that the disaster will come soon.Jia Xian immediately left the city to meet the great ancestor, and Liang Gu entered the town to defend Yongzhou.

古文：授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：授任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry and the title of Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：大统元年，转右卫将军，进爵信都县公，邑一千户。
现代文：大统元年，改任右卫将军，晋爵为信都县公，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was reappointed as the General of the Right Division of the National Guard. He was given the title of Jinjue, and became the public official of Xindu County.

古文：寻授尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久任尚书右仆射。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu.

古文：从太祖复弘农，破沙苑，加侍中、开府仪同三司，进爵广平郡公，增邑一千五百户。
现代文：他跟随太祖收复弘农，攻破沙苑，加授侍中、开府仪同三司，晋爵为广平郡公，增加食邑一千五百户。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather to recover Hongnong, defeated Shayuan, and was awarded the title of Chamberlain, Kefu Yi and three divisions, promoted to Guangping County, and increased by 1,500 households.

古文：出为东雍州刺史。
现代文：出任束雍州刺史。
English: Appointed as a member of the Yongzhou Historical Commission.

古文：为政举大纲而已，民庶称焉。
现代文：他为政祇是抓住重要的纲领，百姓都称颂他。
English: He grasped an important platform for the government, and the people praised him.

古文：四年，薨于州。
现代文：大统四年，死于州中。
English: In the fourth year of unification, he died in the middle of the state.

古文：临终唯以国步未康为恨，言不及家。
现代文：他在临终时衹是以国家没有安定为遣憾，没有提到家事。
English: On his deathbed, he expressed regret for the instability of the country and did not mention family affairs.

古文：赠太尉、尚书令、雍州刺史，谥曰武昭。
现代文：被追赠为太尉、尚书令、雍少 史，谧号为武昭。
English: The imperial court sent Huangmen Zhi Rong to supervise his funeral and posthumously awarded him the titles of Shuzhou Zhu Military and Jizhou Zhi Shi. His posthumous name was Yu Ming.

古文：子睿袭爵。
现代文：梁御的儿子梁睿继承了他的爵位。
English: Liang's son, Liang Rui, inherited his title.

古文：天和中，拜开府仪同三司。
现代文：天和年间，任开府仪同三司。
English: During the Heian and Kamakura periods, the post of Kaifu-gi was held by the same three officials.

古文：以御佐命有功，进蒋国公。
现代文：因为梁御辅佐王命有功，梁睿被晋升为蒋国公。
English: Because of Liang Mi Fu's meritorious service to the king, Liang Rui was promoted to Chiang Guogong.

古文：大象末，除益州总管，加授柱国。
现代文：大象末年，他任益州总管，加授柱国。
English: In the last years of the elephant, he was appointed as the chief administrator of Yizhou, and was awarded the pillar country.

古文：睿将之任，而王谦举兵，拒不受代。仍诏睿为行军元帅，讨谦，破之。
现代文：梁睿将要上任，而王谦起兵，拒绝朝廷派人取代他、接着朝廷又下诏命梁睿为行军元帅，讨伐王谦，打败了他。
English: Liang Rui was about to take office, but Wang Qian raised an army and refused to let the imperial court send someone to replace him. Then the imperial court ordered Liang Rui to be the marshal of the march to fight against Wang Qian and defeat him.

古文：进位上柱国。
现代文：梁睿升任上柱国。
English: The official rank was raised to Shangzhuang.

古文：若干惠字惠保，代郡武川人也。
现代文：若干惠字惠保，是代郡武川人。
English: Several Hui and Hui Bao are from Takekawa, Daigun.

古文：其先与魏氏俱起，以国为姓。
现代文：他的祖先和魏氏同时兴起，以国名作为姓氏。
English: His ancestors and the Wei clan arose at the same time, using the country's name as a surname.

古文：父树利周，从魏广阳王深征葛荣，战没，赠冀州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲叫树利周，跟随北魏广阳王元深征讨葛荣，战死，被追赠为冀州刺史。
English: His father was called Shu Li Zhou, who followed the Northern Wei Guangyang Wang Yuan Sheng to fight against Ge Rong, died in battle, and was posthumously awarded the title of Jizhou history.

古文：惠年弱冠，从尔朱荣征伐，定河北，破元颢，以功拜中坚将军。
现代文：若干惠二十岁时，跟随尔朱荣征伐，平定河北，击败元颢，因功被拜为中坚将军。
English: When he was twenty years old, he followed Er Zhu Rong to conquer and pacify Hebei, defeated Yuan Shao, and was worshiped as a key general.

古文：复以别将从贺拔岳西征，解岐州围，擒万俟丑奴，平水洛，定陇右，每力战有功。
现代文：又以别将的身份跟随贺拔岳西征，解除了岐州之围，擒获万俟丑奴，平定水洛，安定陇右，屡次全力作战立有功劳。
English: As a distinguished general, he also followed He Baduyue to the Western Expedition, lifted the siege of Qizhou, captured thousands of ugly slaves, pacified Shuiluo, stabilized the right bank of the Yangtze River, and repeatedly fought to the best of his ability.

古文：封北平县男，邑二百户。
现代文：被封为北平县男，食邑二百户。
English: He was awarded the title of "Beiping County Man" and served 200 households in the county.

古文：累迁镇远将军、都督、直寝、征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：多次升迁为镇远将军、都督、直寝、征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted many times to Zhenyuan General, Governor of the Capital, Zhouzhe, Western Conquest General, and Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：及岳为侯莫陈悦所害，惠与寇洛、赵贵等同谋翊戴太祖。
现代文：到贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害时，若干惠和寇洛、赵贵等人一起商议拥戴太祖。
English: When He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, a number of Hui, Kolo, Zhao Gui and others discussed supporting the great ancestor.

古文：仍从平悦，拜直合将军。
现代文：接着跟随太祖平定侯莫陈悦，任直合将军。
English: Then, he followed the great ancestor to pacify Hou Mo Chen Yue and appointed him as the general of Zhihe.

古文：魏孝武西迁，除右卫将军、大都督，进爵魏昌县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝往西迁徙，他任右卫将军、大都督，晋爵为魏昌县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu migrated to the west, he served as the right guard general, the grand governor, the prince of Wei Chang County, and 500 households in food villages.

古文：出为北华州刺史，加使持节、骠骑将军。
现代文：出任北华州刺史，加授使持节、骠骑将军。
English: He was appointed to the post of North China State Historian, and was awarded the title of Envoy, and the title of Cavalry General.

古文：大统初，拜仪同三司，进爵为公，增邑五百户。
现代文：大统初年，任仪同三司，升为公爵，增加食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Ren Yi was promoted to Duke along with three other officials, and 500 households of food villages were added.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，惠每先登陷阵。
现代文：跟随太祖擒获窦泰，收复弘农，击破沙苑，若干惠常常率先冲锋陷阵。
English: Following the Great Ancestor's conquests of Dou Tai, Hong Nong, and Sha Yuan, several Hui were often the first to charge into battle.

古文：加侍中、开府，进爵长乐郡公，增邑通前二千二百户。
现代文：加授侍中、开府，晋爵为长乐郡公，食邑增至二千二百户。
English: He was also awarded the title of Jizhong and Kaifu, and was given the title of Jinjie as the ruler of Changle County, and the number of food villages increased to 2,200.

古文：四年，魏文帝东巡洛阳，与齐神武战于河桥，惠力战破之，大收降卒。
现代文：大统四年，魏文帝东出巡视洛阳，和齐神武在河桥作战，若干惠竭力作战打败了齐神武，收降了大量的士卒。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, Emperor Weiwen went to the east to inspect Luoyang, and fought with Qi Shenwu in Heqiao. Several Hui fought hard to defeat Qi Shenwu and captured a large number of soldiers.

古文：七年，迁中领军。
现代文：大统七年，他升任中领军。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to the middle leader.

古文：及高仲密举北豫州来附，太祖帅师迎之。
现代文：到高仲密献出北豫州前来归附时，太祖率军迎接他。
English: When Gao Zhongmi came to North Henan Province to annex it, Taizu led an army to welcome him.

古文：军至洛阳，齐神武于邙山将以邀我，太祖乃徙辎重于瀍曲，夜勒兵袭之。
现代文：大军抵达洛阳。齐神武在邙山准备截击我军，太祖就将军事装备转移到溜曲，在夜裹率兵袭击他。
English: The large army arrived in Luoyang. Qi Shenwu was preparing to intercept our army in Shaoshan, and Taizu transferred the military equipment to Lyuqu and attacked him with his soldiers at night.

古文：及战，惠为右军，与中军大破之，逐北数里，虏其步卒。
现代文：交战时，若干惠为右军，和中军一起大败齐神武，追击了几里地，将他的步兵俘获。
English: During the battle, some of Hui's right-wing troops, together with the Chinese army, defeated Qi Shenwu, chased him for several miles, and captured his infantry.

古文：齐神武兵乃萃于左军，军将赵贵等与战不利，诸军因之并退。
现代文：齐神武的军队就集中攻打左军，左军主将赵贵等和敌军作战失利，各军因此全都退却。
English: The army of Qi Shenwu concentrated on attacking the left army, and the leader of the left army, Zhao Gui, lost the battle with the enemy army, so all the armies retreated.

古文：时会日暮，齐神武兵屡来攻惠，惠击之，皆披靡。
现代文：当时正值傍晚，齐神武的军队多次来攻击若干惠，若干惠打击他们，每次都将他们击溃。
English: At that time, it was evening, Qi Shenwu's army repeatedly attacked several Hui, several Hui attacked them, and each time they were defeated.

古文：至夜中，齐神武骑复来追惠，惠徐乃下马，顾命厨人营食。
现代文：到了半夜，齐神武的骑兵又来追击若干惠，若干惠慢慢下马，回头命令做饭的人做好饭食。
English: In the middle of the night, Qi Shenwu's cavalry came to chase a number of Hui, a number of Hui slowly dismounted, turned back and ordered the cook to prepare the meal.

古文：食讫，谓左右曰： 长安死，此中死，异乎？ 
现代文：若干惠吃完后，对身边的人说： 在长安死，在这裹死，有不同吗? 
English: After eating several Hui, he said to the people around him: Is it different to die in Chang'an or here?

古文：乃建旗鸣角，收诸败军而还。
现代文：于是就树起军旗吹响号角，召集各路败军返回。
English: So he set up a banner and blew a trumpet to call all the defeated troops to return.

古文：齐神武追骑惮惠，疑有伏兵，不敢逼。
现代文：齐神武追击的骑兵惧怕若干惠，怀疑有伏兵，不敢逼近。
English: The cavalrymen in pursuit of Qi Shenwu were afraid of several benefits, suspected ambushes, and dared not approach.

古文：至弘农，见太祖，陈贼形势，恨其垂成之功，覆于一篑，于是歔欷不能自胜。
现代文：若干惠抵达弘农，见到太祖，陈述贼军的情况，遗憾其大功即将告成，却功亏一篑，于是叹息不止。
English: Several benefactors arrived in Hongnong, saw the great ancestor, reported the situation of the thief army, regretted that their great work was about to come to an end, but it was a failure, so they sighed more and more.

古文：太祖壮之。
现代文：太祖认为他很勇敢。
English: His great-grandfather praised his bravery.

古文：寻拜秦州刺史，未及之部，迁司空。
现代文：不久他被拜为秦州刺史，还没有来得及到州部就任，又升任司空。
English: Soon after, he was hailed as the history of Qin State, and before he could take up the post of the State Department, he was promoted to the position of the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：惠性刚质，有勇力，容貌魁岸。
现代文：若干惠性情刚直，有勇力，容貌魁武高大。
English: Some of them are upright, courageous, and tall in appearance.

古文：善于抚御，将士莫不怀恩，人思效节。
现代文：善于抚慰统御部下，将士们没有不感激他的恩情的，人人都想为他尽忠。
English: He was good at soothing his subordinates, and the generals did not fail to be grateful for his kindness. Everyone wanted to be loyal to him.

古文：十二年，东魏将侯景侵襄州，惠率兵击走之。
现代文：大统十二年，束魏将领侯景侵犯襄州，若干惠率兵击退了他。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, Sok Wei invaded Xiangzhou with his general Hou Jing, and several Hui soldiers repulsed him.

古文：明年，景请内附，朝议欲收辑河南，令惠以本官镇鲁阳，以为声援。
现代文：第二年，侯景请求归附西魏，朝中商议打算收拾河南，命令若干惠以本官的身份镇守鲁阳，作为声援。
English: In the second year, Hou Jing requested the annexation of West Wei, and the DPRK and China discussed the plan to clean up Henan, and ordered a number of Hui to guard Luyang as their own officials, as a show of solidarity.

古文：遇疾，薨于军。
现代文：遇上生病，死于军中。
English: He fell ill and died in the army.

古文：惠于诸将年最少。
现代文：若干惠在各位将领中年龄最小。
English: He is the youngest among the generals.

古文：早丧父，事母以孝闻。
现代文：他早年丧父，侍奉母亲以孝顺闻名。
English: He lost his father at an early age and was known for his filial piety in serving his mother.

古文：太祖尝造射堂新成，与诸将宴射。
现代文：太祖曾刚刚建成习箭用的射堂，和将领们一起饮宴射箭。
English: The great-grandfather had just built a shooting hall for practicing archery, and he and the generals had a banquet and played archery together.

古文：惠窃叹曰： 亲老矣，何时办此乎？ 
现代文：若干惠私下晓良说： 母亲老了，什么时候能置办这些呢? 
English: Privately, several Hui Xiaolang said: When my mother is old, when can I buy these?

古文：太祖闻之，即日徙堂于惠宅。
现代文：立担得知后，当天就将射堂移到若干惠的宅第。
English: After learning of the charge, the shooting range was moved to a number of Hui's homes on the same day.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他就是这样受到太祖的看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：及薨，太祖为之流涕者久之。
现代文：到他死时，太祖为他流泪很久。
English: When he died, my great-grandfather shed tears for him for a long time.

古文：惠丧至，又临抚焉。
现代文：到了为若干惠办丧时，太祖又亲自前往吊唁。
English: When it came time to hold a funeral for several benefactors, the great-grandfather went to pay his respects in person.

古文：赠本官，加秦州刺史，谥曰武烈。
现代文：追赠他原职，加授秦州刺史，谧号为武烈。
English: He was posthumously awarded his original post, and was also awarded the Qin State History Prize. His nickname was Wu Rong.

古文：子凤嗣。
现代文：他的儿子若干凤继承他的爵位。
English: His son, Guo Feng, succeeded to his title.

古文：凤字达摩，少沉深，有识度。
现代文：若干凤字达尘，年少深沉，有见识气度。
English: Several of the phoenix characters are young, deep, and knowledgeable.

古文：大统末，袭父爵长乐郡公，尚太祖女。
现代文：大面末年，承袭父亲的长乐郡公爵位，娶太祖的女儿为妻。
English: At the end of his life, he inherited his father's title of Duke of Changle County and married his grandfather's daughter.

古文：魏废帝二年，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：魏尘童二年，任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the second year of Wei Chen Tong, he was appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：魏恭帝三年，除左宫伯。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，任左宫伯。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was appointed as the left palace count.

古文：寻出为洛州刺史。
现代文：不久出任洛州刺史。
English: He soon became the mayor of Los Angeles.

古文：征拜大驭中大夫。
现代文：召入任大驭中大夫。
English: He was called to the post of chief surgeon.

古文：保定四年，追录佐命之功，封凤徐国公，增邑并前五千户。
现代文：保定四年，追叙若干惠辅佐王命的功劳，封若干凤为徐国公，食邑增至五千户。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, a number of merits of Huiyuo Suo Wang's life were awarded, a number of phoenixes were awarded to Xu Guogong, and the food villages increased to five thousand.

古文：建德二年，拜柱国。
现代文：建壁二年，任柱国。
English: Two years after the wall was built, he was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：怡峰字景阜，辽西人也。
现代文：怡峰字景阜，是辽西人。
English: Yifeng, also known as Gyeongfu, is a native of western Liaoning Province.

古文：本姓默台，因避难改焉。
现代文：他原来姓默台，因为避乱而改姓。
English: His original surname was Muting, but he changed it to avoid the turmoil.

古文：高祖宽，燕辽西郡守。
现代文：他的高祖叫怡宽，是燕国辽西郡郡守。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Yi Guang, was the governor of Liaoxi County, Yan Province.

古文：魏道武时，率户归朝，拜羽真，赐爵长虵公。
现代文：魏道武时，率领民户归附朝廷，任羽真，赐爵为长她公。
English: During the Wei and Wu Dynasties, Ren Yazhen, who led the people's households to be annexed to the imperial court, was given a peerage as the eldest daughter of the emperor.

古文：曾祖文，冀州刺史。
现代文：他的曾祖叫怡文，是冀州刺史。
English: His great-grandfather was called Yiwen, and was a Jizhou scholar.

古文：峰少从征役，以骁勇闻。
现代文：怡峰年少时就从军征战，以骁勇闻名。
English: At a young age, Yifeng enlisted in the army and became famous for his bravery.

古文：永安中，假龙骧将军，为都将，从贺拔岳讨万俟丑奴，以功授给事中、明威将军，转征虏将军、都督，赐爵蒲阴县男。
现代文：永安年间，他代任龙骧将军，任都将，跟随贺拔岳征讨万俟丑奴，因功授任给事中、明威将军，又改任征虏将军、都督，赐爵为蒲阴县男。
English: During the Yong'an era, he took the place of General Longyu, was promoted to the rank of General, followed He Batyue in the conquest of Manchukuo, and was awarded the title of General Mingwei for his merits. He was also promoted to General of the Conquest and Governor of the Capital, and was awarded the title of the Man of Puyin County.

古文：及岳被害，峰与赵贵等同谋翊戴太祖。
现代文：到贺拔岳被害时，怡峰和赵贵等人共同商议拥戴太祖。
English: When Mt. Heba was damaged, Yifeng and Zhao Gui and others jointly discussed supporting Taizu.

古文：进爵为伯。
现代文：晋升为伯爵。
English: Promoted to count.

古文：时原州刺史史归犹为侯莫陈悦守，太祖令峰与侯莫陈崇讨擒之。
现代文：当时原州刺史史归仍替侯莫陈悦守卫，太祖命怡峰和侯莫陈崇等讨伐擒获了他。
English: At that time, the original state was still guarding Hou Mo Chen Yue, and the great-grandfathers Mu Yifeng and Hou Mo Chen Chong were fighting to capture him.

古文：及齐神武与魏孝武帝构隙，帝频敕太祖简锐卒入卫京邑。
现代文：到齐神武和魏孝武帝结怨时，魏孝武帝频频敕令太祖挑选精锐士卒进入京师保卫。
English: When Qi Shenwu and Emperor Wei Xiaowu came to grudge, Emperor Wei Xiaowu frequently ordered Taizu to select elite soldiers to enter the defense of the capital.

古文：太祖乃令峰与都督赵贵等率轻骑赴洛阳。
现代文：太祖就命怡峰和都督赵贵等人率轻装骑兵奔赴洛阳。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Yifeng and the governor Zhao Gui to lead light cavalry to Luoyang.

古文：至潼关，值魏孝武西迁，峰即从太祖拔回洛，复潼关。
现代文：抵达潼关时，正好遇上魏孝武帝西迁，怡峰便跟从太祖攻下回洛，收复潼关。
English: When he arrived at Shaoguan, he happened to meet Emperor Wei Xiaowu's westward migration. Yi Feng followed his great-grandfather to conquer Luo and recover Shaoguan.

古文：拜安东将军、华州刺史。
现代文：怡峰被拜为安束将军、华州刺史。
English: Yifeng was worshipped as the general of Anzac and the great statesman of Washington.

古文：寻转大都督。
现代文：不久改任大都督。
English: He was soon appointed Grand Governor.

古文：讨曹泥有功，进爵华阳县公，邑一千户。
现代文：讨伐曹泥有功，晋爵为华阳县公，食邑一千户。
English: The crusade against Cao Di was a great success, and Jin Jie became the governor of Huayang County, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：大统年，从太祖破窦泰于小关。
现代文：大统三年，跟随太祖在小关击败窦泰。
English: Three years after unification, he followed his great-grandfather in defeating Dou Tai in Xiao Guan.

古文：还，拜散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：回来后，任散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: After coming back, he was appointed as a knight-errant, a cavalry general and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：又从复弘农，破沙苑，进爵乐陵郡公。
现代文：又跟随太祖收复弘农，攻破沙苑，晋爵为乐陵郡公。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather to recover Hongnong, break through Shayuan, and become the prince of Leling County.

古文：仍与元季海、独孤信复洛阳。
现代文：随后又和元季海、独孤信收复洛阳。
English: Subsequently, he and Yuan Jihai and Du Guoxin recaptured Luoyang.

古文：峰率奇兵至成皋，入其郛，收其户口而还。
现代文：怡峰率奇兵抵达成皋，进入到外城，收没那裹的人口返回。
English: Yifeng led the soldiers to enter the outer city, confiscate the population there and return.

古文：东魏遣行台任祥率步骑万余攻颍川，峰复以轻骑五百邀击之，自是威名转盛。
现代文：束魏派行台任祥率步兵骑兵一万多人进攻颖川，怡峰又以五百名轻装骑兵截击他，从此他的威名变大。
English: Shu Wei sent more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry led by Ren Xiang to attack Yingchuan, and Yifeng intercepted him with five hundred light cavalry. Since then, his prestige has grown.

古文：加授开府仪同三司。
现代文：加授开府仪同三司。
English: He was also awarded the ceremony of opening the prefectural government and the third division.

古文：东魏围洛阳，峰与季海守金墉。
现代文：束魏包围洛阳，怡峰和元季海据守金墉。
English: Shu Wei encircled Luoyang, and Yifeng and Yuan Ji Hai defended Jinlu.

古文：太祖至，围解，即与东魏战于河桥。
现代文：太祖到后，包围解除，接着又和东魏在河桥作战。
English: After the great-grandfather arrived, the encirclement was lifted, and then he fought with the Eastern Wei Dynasty in Heqiao.

古文：时峰为左军，不利，与李远先还，太祖因此班师。
现代文：当时怡峰为左军，失利，和李远率先退回，太祖因此班师。
English: At that time, Yifeng was the left army, lost, and Li Yuan was the first to return, so Taizu was the leader.

古文：诏原其罪。
现代文：朝廷下韶恕免他的罪。
English: He was pardoned by the imperial court.

古文：拜东西北三夏州诸军事、夏州刺史。
现代文：任东西北三夏州诸军事、夏州刺史。
English: He was in charge of the military affairs of the three Xia states in the north, east and west, and the history of the Xia state.

古文：后与于谨讨刘平伏，从解玉壁围，平柏谷坞，并有功。
现代文：后来他和于谨讨伐刘平伏，跟随太祖解除玉壁之围，平定柏谷坞，都立有功劳。
English: Later, he and Yu Zhen fought against Liu Pingfu, followed the great-grandfather to lift the siege of the Jade Wall, and pacified the Kashiwagaya dock, all of which are meritorious.

古文：凉州刺史宇文仲和反，峰与于谨讨之。十五年，东魏围颍川，峰与赵贵赴援。
现代文：凉州刺史宇文仲和造反，怡峰和于谨讨伐他大统十五年，东魏围攻顿川，怡峰和赵贵前往支援。
English: Liangzhou assassinated Yu Wenzhong and rebelled, Yifeng and Yu Zhen fought against him for fifteen years, East Wei besieged Dongchuan, Yifeng and Zhao Gui went to support.

古文：至南阳，遇疾卒，时年五十。
现代文：到达南阳，生病死去，当时他五十岁。
English: When he reached Nanyang, he fell ill and died at the age of fifty.

古文：峰沉毅有胆略，得士卒心，当时号为骁将。
现代文：怡峰沉着刚毅有胆略，深受士卒的拥戴，当时被称为骁将。
English: Yifeng is calm, courageous and daring, and is deeply loved by the soldiers. At that time, he was known as a general.

古文：太祖嗟悼者久之。
现代文：太祖长时间地悲叹哀悼他。
English: The great-grandfather mourned him for a long time.

古文：赠华州刺史，谥曰襄威。
现代文：追赠他为华州刺史，谧号为襄威。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Wah Zhou Zhishi" and his nickname was "Xiang Wei."

古文：子昂嗣。
现代文：怡峰的儿子怡昂继承他的爵位。
English: Yifeng's son, Yiong, succeeded to his title.

古文：官至开府仪同三司。
现代文：官至开府仪同三司。
English: officials to the Kaifu Rite and the three departments.

古文：朝廷追录峰功，封昂郑国公。
现代文：朝廷追录怡峰的功劳，封怡昂为郑国公。
English: The imperial court recorded the merits of Yifeng and crowned Yiang as Zheng Guogong.

古文：昂弟光，少以峰勋，赐爵安平县侯，起家员外散骑常侍，累迁司土中大夫、左武伯，出为汾、泾、豳三州刺史，加开府仪同三司，进爵龙河县公。
现代文：怡昂的弟弟叫怡光，年少时因为怡峰的功勋，被赐爵为安乎县侯，出任员外散骑常侍，几经升迁为司土中大夫、左武伯，出任汾、泾、豳三州刺史，加授开府仪同三司，晋爵为龙河县公。
English: Ieong's younger brother is Ieong Kwang. When he was young, because of Ieong's merits, he was given the title of Anhu County Mayor, served as a non-commissioned officer, and after several promotions, he was promoted to the position of Sidu junior doctor, Zuo Wubo, served as the secretary, secretary, and secretary of the three states, was awarded the title of Kaifu and the three departments, and was promoted to the rank of Longhe County official.

古文：光弟春，少知名，历官吏部下大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：怡光的弟弟怡春，年少时就有名声，历任吏部下大夫、仪同三司。
English: Yichun, the younger brother of Yiguang, was famous when he was young, and successively served as a junior doctor and the third secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：刘亮中山人也，本名道德。
现代文：刘亮是中山人，他原来的名字叫道德。
English: Liu Liang is a native of Zhongshan. His original name was Moral.

古文：祖佑连，魏蔚州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父叫佑连，是北魏蔚州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Yulian, was a historian of the Northern Wei Dynasty in Ulsan.

古文：父持真，镇远将军、领民酋长。
现代文：父亲叫持真，是镇远将军、领民酋长。
English: His father's name was Jizhen, and he was a Zhenyuan general and territorial chief.

古文：魏大统中，以亮着勋，追赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、恒州刺史。
现代文：魏大统年间，因为刘亮的功勋，持真被追赠为车骑大将军、仪同三司、恒州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei, because of Liu Liang's meritorious service, Jizhen was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Three Departments of the Imperial Household, and Historian of Hengzhou.

古文：亮少倜傥，有从横计略，姿貌魁杰，见者惮之。
现代文：刘亮年少时豪迈洒脱，有纵横天下的谋略，他身材魁梧雄健，看到他的人都害怕他。
English: When Liu Liang was young, he was brave and free, he had a strategy to rule the world. He was a big and strong man, and everyone who saw him was afraid of him.

古文：普泰初，以都督从贺拔岳西征，解岐州围，击侯伏侯元进、万俟道洛、万俟丑奴、宿勤明达及诸贼，亮常先锋陷阵。
现代文：普泰初年，他以都督的身份跟随贺拔岳西征，解除了岐州之围，攻打侯伏侯元进、万俟道洛、万俟丑奴、宿勤明达及各贼寇时，刘亮常常率先冲锋陷阵。
English: In the first year of Putai, as the governor of Putai, he followed He Batyue to the Western Expedition, lifted the siege of Qizhou, and when attacking Hou Fu Hou Yuanjin, Wanying Douluo, Wanying Ugly Slave, Suqin Mingda and various bandits, Liu Liang often took the lead in the charge.

古文：以功拜大都督，封广兴县子，邑五百户。
现代文：因功拜为大都督，被封为广兴县子，食邑五百户。
English: He was awarded the title of Guangxing County Son and 500 households in the county were provided with food.

古文：侯莫陈悦害岳，亮与诸将谋迎太祖。
现代文：侯莫陈悦杀害贺拔岳，刘亮和各位将领们商议迎立太祖。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue killed He Batyue, Liu Liang and the generals discussed welcoming the great ancestor.

古文：悦平，悦之党豳州刺史孙定儿仍据州不下，泾、秦、灵等诸州悉与定儿相应，众至数万，推定儿为主，以拒义师。
现代文：侯莫陈悦被平定后，侯莫陈悦的党羽豳州刺史孙定儿仍然据守州城不降服，泾、秦、灵等各州都和孙定儿相呼应，人数达几万，他们推举孙定儿为盟主，以抗拒义师。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue was subdued, Sun Ding'er, the leader of Hou Mo Chen Yue's faction, still held the state capital and refused to surrender. All the states such as Handan, Qin, and Ling agreed with Sun Ding'er, and their number reached tens of thousands. They elected Sun Ding'er as the leader to resist the righteous teacher.

古文：太祖令亮袭之。
现代文：太祖命刘亮袭击他。
English: Grandfather ordered Liu Liang to attack him.

古文：定儿以义兵犹远，未为之备。
现代文：孙定儿认为义兵还相距很远，没有防备。
English: Sun Ding'er thought that the volunteers were still far away and unprepared.

古文：亮乃将二十骑，先竖纛于近城高岭，即驰入城中。
现代文：刘亮就率二十名骑兵，先在靠近豳州城的高山上竖起大旗，随即奔入城中。
English: Liu Liang led twenty cavalrymen and first erected a large flag on a high mountain near Zhangzhou City, and then rushed into the city.

古文：定儿方置酒高会，卒见亮至，众皆骇愕，莫知所为。
现代文：孙定儿正好设置盛大宴会，突然看到刘亮闯进来，众人都大为惊愕，不知如何是好。
English: Sun Ding'er just happened to set up a grand banquet, and suddenly saw Liu Liang burst in. Everyone was very surprised and didn't know what to do.

古文：亮乃麾兵斩定儿，县首，号令贼党。
现代文：刘亮就指挥兵士斩杀了孙定儿，将他的首级挂起来，号令贼众。
English: Liu Liang commanded the soldiers to kill Sun Ding'er, hung up his head, and called out to the thieves.

古文：仍遥指城外纛,命二骑曰： 出追大军。 贼党忷惧，一时降服。
现代文：随后指着远处城外的大旗，命令两名骑兵说： 出城去追赶大军。 贼众恐惧，一下子全都降服。
English: Then, pointing to a large flag flying in the distance outside the city, he ordered two cavalrymen to say: "Leave the city and pursue the large army." The thieves were terrified and all surrendered at once.

古文：于是诸州群贼，皆即归款。
现代文：于是各州所有贼兵，全部很快归顺。
English: As a result, all the bandits in each state quickly surrendered.

古文：及太祖置十二军，简诸将以将之，亮领一军。
现代文：到太祖设置十二军时，挑选各位将领率领各军，刘亮统领一军。
English: When Emperor Taizu set up the 12th army, he selected generals to lead each army, and Liu Liang led one army.

古文：每征讨，常与怡峰俱为骑将。
现代文：每次征讨，他常和怡峰一起作为骑兵将领。
English: He often served as a cavalry general together with Yifeng in every campaign.

古文：魏孝武西迁，以迎驾功，除使持节、右光禄大夫、左大都督、南秦州刺史。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁时，刘亮因为迎驾的功劳，任使持节、右光禄大夫、左大都督、南秦州刺史。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, Liu Liang was appointed as the envoy of Jichijie, the doctor of the right Guanglu, the governor of the left, and the historian of South Qin State because of his contribution.

古文：大统元年，以复潼关功，进位车骑大将军、仪同三司，改封饶阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：大统元年，因为收复潼关的功劳，升任车骑大将军、仪同三司，改封为饶阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry and the three departments of etiquette and etiquette due to his outstanding contribution to the recovery of Shaoguan, and his title was changed to Bao of Raoyang County and 500 households of Shueyi.

古文：寻加侍中。
现代文：不久加授侍中。
English: He was soon promoted to Samurai Junior High School.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农及沙苑之役，亮并力战有功。
现代文：他跟随太祖擒获窦泰，收复弘农以及沙苑之战，刘亮都努力作战立下了功劳。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather Liu Liang in winning Dou Tai, recovering Hong Nong and the Battle of Sha Yuan. Liu Liang made great efforts in the battle.

古文：迁开府仪同三司、大都督，进爵长广郡公，邑通前二千户。
现代文：升任开府仪同三司、大都督，晋爵为长广郡公，食邑增至二千户。
English: He was promoted to Kaifu-gi, Sanji, and Dadu, and given the title of Jinjie as the head of Changguang County, and the number of food villages increased to 2,000.

古文：以母忧去职，居丧毁瘠。
现代文：因为母亲去世而辞职，在守丧期间因哀伤过度而消瘦。
English: He resigned because of his mother's death, and lost weight during the mourning period due to excessive grief.

古文：太祖嗟其至性，每爱惜之。俄起复本官。
现代文：太祖感叹他极为孝顺的性情，常常怜惜他不久起复原职。
English: The great-grandfather laments his extremely filial disposition, and often pities him for not being reinstated soon enough.

古文：亮以勇敢见知，为时名将，兼屡陈谋策，多合机宜。
现代文：刘亮以勇敢闻名，是当时的名将，加上他多次陈述计策，大多和适宜时机的决策相符合。
English: Liu Liang is famous for his bravery. He was a famous player at that time. In addition to his many statements and strategies, most of them are consistent with the decision-making at the right time.

古文：太祖乃谓之曰： 卿文武兼资，即孤之孔明也。 
现代文：太祖就对他说： 你文武兼备，是我的孔明。 
English: The great-grandfather said to him, "You are well-versed in both literature and martial arts. You are my Kongming."

古文：乃赐名亮，并赐姓侯莫陈氏。
现代文：于是赐名为亮，并赐姓为侯莫陈氏。
English: As a result, he was given the name Liang and the surname Hou Mo Chen.

古文：十年，出为东雍州刺史。
现代文：大统十年他出任束雍州刺史。
English: In the 10th year of the Great Reunification, he served as the leader of Yongzhou.

古文：为政清净，百姓安之。
现代文：他为政清简，百姓安定。
English: He is clean and simple for politics, and the people are stable.

古文：在职三岁，卒于州，时年四十。
现代文：在任三年，死于州中，当时他四十岁。
English: After three years in office, he died in the middle of the state, at the age of forty.

古文：丧还京师，太祖亲临之，泣而谓人曰： 股肱丧矣，腹心何寄！ 令鸿胪卿监护丧事。
现代文：他的灵柩送回到京师，太祖亲自前往，哭着对人说： 股肱丧失了，心腹如何寄托! 命令鸿胪卿监护他的丧事。
English: His coffin was sent back to Beijing Division, and the great-grandfather went there in person, weeping and saying to the people, "My coffin is lost, how can I entrust my heart and soul to you!" He ordered Lord Hongyu to supervise his funeral.

古文：追赠太尉，谥曰襄，配享太祖庙庭。
现代文：追赠他为太尉，谧号为襄，将他配祭在太祖庙庭
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of lieutenant and given the posthumous name of Xiang. He was enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：子昶，尚太祖女西河长公主。
现代文：刘亮的儿子刘昶，娶太祖的女儿河西长公主为妻。
English: Liu Liang's son, Liu Wei, married the daughter of his great-grandfather, the eldest princess of Hexi.

古文：大象中，位至柱国、秦灵二州总管。
现代文：大象年间，他官至柱国、秦灵二州总管。
English: During the Year of the Elephant, he rose to the position of pillar state, and Qinling was the head of the two states.

古文：以亮功，封彭国公，邑五千户。
现代文：因为刘亮的功劳，他被封为彭国公，食邑五千户。
English: Because of Liu Liang's merits, he was named Peng Guogong, and fed five thousand households.

古文：昶弟靖，天水郡守。
现代文：刘昶的弟弟刘靖，是天水郡守。
English: Liu Yao's brother, Liu Jing, is the governor of Tianshui County.

古文：靖弟恭，开府仪同三司、饶阳县伯。
现代文：刘靖的弟弟刘恭，是开府仪同三司、饶阳县伯。
English: Liu Jing's younger brother, Liu Gong, is the third secretary of the Kaifu Yi Tong and the mayor of Raoyang County.

古文：恭弟干，上仪同三司、褒中侯。
现代文：刘恭的弟弟刘干，是上仪同三司、褒中侯。
English: Liu Gong's younger brother, Liu Gan, is a member of Shangyi Tong Sanji and Bo Zhonghou.

古文：王德字天恩，代郡武川人也。
现代文：王德字天恩，是代郡武川人。
English: Wang De, known as Tian En, is from the county seat of Takekawa.

古文：少善骑射，虽不经师训，而以孝悌见称。
现代文：他年少时善于骑马射箭，虽然没有经过老师的教导，但他因孝悌而被人称颂。
English: When he was young, he was good at riding and archery. Although he was not taught by a teacher, he was praised for his filial piety.

古文：魏永安二年，从尔朱荣讨元颢，攻河内，应募先登。
现代文：北魏永安二年，他跟随尔朱荣讨伐元颢，进攻河内，应募率先登城。
English: In the second year of the Northern Wei Yong'an, he followed Er Zhu Rong to fight the Yuan Dynasty, attacked Hanoi, and was the first to enter the city.

古文：以功除讨夷将军，进爵内官县子。
现代文：因功授讨夷将军，晋爵为内官县子。
English: He was awarded the title of General for his efforts in fighting against the barbarians, and he was promoted to the peerage as the county magistrate.

古文：又从贺拔岳讨万俟丑奴，平之。
现代文：又跟随贺拔岳讨伐万俟丑奴，平定了他。
English: He also followed He Baduyue to fight against Wanlu Ugly Bastard and subdued him.

古文：别封深泽县男，邑二百户，加龙骧将军、中散大夫。
现代文：另封为深泽县男，食邑二百户，加授龙骧将军、中散大夫。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of "the man of Fukasawa County, 200 households of food village," and was awarded the title of "the general of Longjing" and "the doctor of Zhongshan."

古文：及侯莫陈悦害岳，德与寇洛等定议翊戴太祖。
现代文：到侯莫陈悦杀害了贺拔岳时，王德和寇洛等人商定拥戴太祖。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue killed He Batyue, Wang De and Kolo and others agreed to support the great ancestor.

古文：加征西将军、金紫光禄大夫、平凉郡守。
现代文：加授征西将军、金紫光禄大夫、平凉郡守。
English: Additional awards were given to General Seisei, Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, and Governor of Pingliang County.

古文：德虽不知书，至于断决处分，良吏无以过也。
现代文：王德虽然不懂诗书，但对于决断处理事情，良吏都没办法超过他。
English: Although Wang De doesn't know poetry, he is the best person to deal with things decisively.

古文：泾州所部五郡，而德常为最。
现代文：在泾州所统辖的五个郡中，王德常常是最好的。
English: Among the five counties under the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou, Wang De is often the best.

古文：及魏孝武西迁，以奉迎功，进封下博县伯，邑五百户，行东雍州事。
现代文：到魏孝武帝西迁时，王德因为迎奉的功劳，被晋封为下博县伯，食邑五百户，行束雍州事。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty moved to the west, Wang De was awarded the title of Shangbo County, 500 households in Shibuya, and was in charge of Yongzhou affairs.

古文：在州未几，百姓怀之。
现代文：在州中没多久，民心归附。
English: In the state, it didn't take long for people to come around.

古文：赐姓乌丸氏。
现代文：赐姓为乌丸氏。
English: He was given the surname of Kumaru.

古文：大统元年，拜卫将军、右光禄大夫，进爵为公，增邑一千户，加车骑大将军、仪同三司、北雍州刺史。
现代文：大统元年，任卫将军、右光禄大夫，晋升为公爵，增加食邑一千户，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司、北雍州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Ren Wei was promoted to general and Uguanglu to doctor, and he was promoted to duke. He increased the number of households by 1,000, and he was also given the titles of General of Cavalry, General of Ceremonies, General of the Three Departments, and Governor of North Yongzhou.

古文：其后常从太祖征伐，累有战功。
现代文：之后他常常跟随太祖征讨，多次立下战功。
English: After that, he often followed his great-grandfather's conquests and made war exploits many times.

古文：又从破齐神武于沙苑，加开府、侍中，进爵河间郡公，增邑通前二千七百户。
现代文：又跟随太祖在沙苑打败了齐神武，加授开府、侍中，晋爵为河间郡公，食邑增至二千七百户。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather in defeating Qi Shenwu in Shayuan, and was awarded the title of Kaifu and Samurai, and the title of Jinjie was awarded to the governor of Kawama County, and the number of food villages increased to 2,700.

古文：先是河、渭间种羌屡叛，以德有威名，为夷民所附，除河州刺史。
现代文：此前黄河、渭水之间的羌族多次叛乱，因为王德有威名，为夷民所归附，因此任命他为河州刺史。
English: Previously, the Yi people between the Yellow River and Surabaya rebelled many times, because Wang De had a prestigious name and was attached by the barbarians, so he was appointed as the crown prince of Hezhou.

古文：德绥抚有方，群羌率服。
现代文：王德安抚得法，各地羌人都顺服。
English: Wang De was pacified by the Fa, and people all over the country obeyed.

古文：十三年，授大都督、原灵显三州五原蒲川二镇诸军事。
现代文：大统十三年授大都督、原灵显三州及五原蒲二镇诸军事。
English: In the 13th year of unification, he was given the title of grand governor, and the former Ling Xian of the three states and the two towns of Wuhuanpu became military commanders.

古文：十四年，除泾州刺史。
现代文：大统十四年，任泾州刺史。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：卒于州。
现代文：死在州中。
English: He died in the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：谥曰献。
现代文：谧号为献。
English: The nickname is a tribute.

古文：德性厚重廉慎，言行无择。
现代文：王德性情朴实廉洁谨慎，言行允当。
English: Wang De's nature is simple, honest, prudent, and his words and deeds are reasonable.

古文：母年几百岁，后德终。
现代文：他的母亲活了近一百岁，在王德之后去世。
English: His mother lived nearly a hundred years and died after Wang De.

古文：子庆，小名公奴，性谨厚。
现代文：王德的儿子王庆，小名叫公奴，性情谨慎朴实。
English: Wang De's son, Wang Qing, whose nickname is Gongnu, is prudent and simple-minded.

古文：官至开府仪同三司。
现代文：官至开府仪同三司。
English: officials to the Kaifu Rite and the three departments.

古文：初德丧父，家贫无以葬，乃卖公奴并一女以营葬事。
现代文：当初王德的父亲去世，家中贫困无力埋葬，就卖掉了公奴和一个女儿来办理丧事。
English: When Wang De's father died, the family was too poor to bury him, so they sold their servants and a daughter to pay for the funeral.

古文：因遭兵乱，不复相知。
现代文：因为遇上战乱，他们父子再没有相互得知音讯。
English: Because of the war, they never heard from each other again.

古文：及德在平凉始得之，遂名曰庆。
现代文：到王德在平凉时才找到了他，于是取名为庆。
English: It wasn't until Wang De found him in the cool of the evening that he named him Qing.

古文：史臣曰：梁御等负将率之材，蕴骁锐之气，遭逢丧乱，驰骛干戈，艰难险阻备尝，而功名未立。
现代文：史臣曰：梁御等人有将帅的才能，身藏勇猛的气势，遭遇祸乱，他们奔走在战争中，尝尽了艰难险阻，而功名没有确立。
English: Shichen said: Liang Gu and others have the talent of a general, have the courage of a warrior, and have encountered calamities. They have been in the war, have experienced all the difficulties and obstacles, but their achievements have not been established.

古文：及殷忧启圣，豫奉兴王，参谋缔构之初，宣力经纶之始，遂得连衡灌、郦，方驾张、徐，可谓遇其时也。
现代文：到他们深怀忧虑开启圣明，参与奉立振兴王业，参加谋划营建国家的初期活动，致力于开始治理天下，于是得以和灌婴、郦商相比，同张禹、徐防并驾，可以说是遇上了时机。
English: They were deeply anxious to open the Holy Light, participate in the promotion of the rejuvenation of the royal cause, participate in the initial activities of planning the construction of the country, and are committed to starting to govern the world, so they were able to drive alongside Zhang Yu and Xu Bao, compared to the infant and the merchant, and can be said to have met the opportunity.

古文：并中年即世，远志未申，惜哉！
现代文：他们都在中年去世，远大的志向没有伸张，可惜啊!
English: They all passed away in middle age, their lofty ambitions unfulfilled, what a shame!

古文：惠、德本以果毅知名，而能率由孝道，难矣。
现代文：若干惠、王德本来是以果敢刚毅而闻名，但他们能够遵循孝道，难得啊。
English: Several Hui and Wang De were originally famous for their courage and fortitude, but it is rare for them to follow the filial piety.

古文：图史所叹，何以加焉。
现代文：图史上所感叹的，又有谁能超过他们。
English: In the history of figure skating, who can surpass them?

古文：勇者不必有仁，斯不然矣。
现代文：勇敢的人不一定有仁爱，这不对呀。
English: It's not true that brave people don't necessarily have benevolence.

