古文：昔者周公朝诸侯于明堂之位：天子负斧依南乡而立；三公，中阶之前，北面东上。
现代文：过去周公在明堂接受诸侯朝见，其位置是：周公代表天子，背朝斧扆面向南站立。
English: In the past, Zhou Gong received the princes of the imperial court in the Ming Hall. Its position is: Zhou Gong represents the son of heaven, standing with his back facing south.

古文：诸侯之位，阼阶之东，西面北上。诸伯之国，西阶之西，东面北上。诸子之国，门东，北面东上。诸男之国，门西，北面东上。九夷之国，东门之外，西面北上。八蛮之国，南门之外，北面东上。六戎之国，西门之外，东面南上。五狄之国，北门之外，南面东上。九采之国，应门之外，北面东上。
现代文：三公立于明堂南面中间台阶的前面，面向北，以东边为上位；侯爵的位置，在阼阶的东面，面向西，以北边为上位；伯爵的位置，在西面台阶之西，面向东，以北边为上位；子爵的位置在应门的东面，面向北，以东边为上位；男爵的位置在应门之西，面向北，以东边为上位；夷族诸部的君长，立于东门之外，面向西，以北边为上位；蛮族诸部的君长，立于南门之外，面向北，以东边为上位；戎族诸部的君长，立于西门之外，面向东，以南边为上位；狄族诸部的君长，立于北门之外，面向南，以东边为上位；位于王畿千里之外的诸侯，立于应门之外，面向北，以东边为上位。
English: The three public offices are in front of the middle steps of the south side of the Ming Hall, facing north, with the east side as the uppermost; the position of the marquis, in the east of the steps, facing west, with the north side as the uppermost; the position of the count, in the west of the steps on the west side, facing east, with the north side as the uppermost; the position of the viscount, in the east of the gate, facing north, with the east side as the uppermost; the position of the baron, in the west of the gate, facing north, with the east side as the uppermost; the monarchs of the barbarian tribes,

古文：四塞，世告至。此周公明堂之位也。
现代文：四方边塞地区的君长，每当新君即位时，才朝见。
English: The monarchs of the Shifang Border Region only meet each other in the morning when a new monarch ascends the throne.

古文：明堂也者，明诸侯之尊卑也。
现代文：以上是周公所订明堂朝诸侯的列位。所以明堂，是用以显示诸侯地位的尊卑的。
English: The above are the ranks of Myeongdong Dynasty's lords as set by Zhou Gong. Therefore, Myeongdong is used to show the superiority and inferiority of the status of lords.

古文：昔殷纣乱天下，脯鬼侯以飨诸侯。是以周公相武王以伐纣。
现代文：所以周公辅佐武王以讨伐纣王。武王驾崩，嗣君成王年龄尚小，于是由周公摄政，代行天子职务，以治理天下。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong assisted King Sa Wu to defeat King Gong. King Wu passed away, and his heir, King Cheng, was still young, so Zhou Gong became regent, acting as the son of heaven to govern the world.

古文：武王崩，成王幼弱，周公践天子之位以治天下；六年，朝诸侯于明堂，制礼作乐，颁度量，而天下大服；七年，致政于成王；成王以周公为有勋劳于天下，是以封周公于曲阜，地方七百里，革车千乘，命鲁公世世祀周公以天子之礼乐。
现代文：摄政的第六年，天下诸侯都来明堂朝见，制定了各种礼仪和乐章，颁布了统一天下度量衡的法律，天下人皆心悦诚服。摄政的第七年，就把政权归还给成王。成王认为周公为天下建立了勋劳，所以封周公于鲁，建都曲阜，拥有国土七百里见方，兵车千辆，还命令鲁国国君世世代代用天子的礼乐祭祀周公。
English: In the sixth year of the regency, all the princes of the world came to Ming Hall for a meeting, formulated various etiquettes and music, promulgated a unified law of measurement, and everyone in the world was pleased. In the seventh year of the regency, the power was returned to Cheng Wang. Cheng Wang believed that Zhou Gong had established honor for the world, so he sealed Zhou Gong in Lu, built the capital Qufu, owned 700 square kilometers of land, and a thousand chariots. He also ordered the kings of Lu to use the music of the son of heaven for generations to worship Zhou Gong.

古文：是以鲁君，孟春乘大路，载弧韣；旗十有二旒，日月之章；祀帝于郊，配以后稷。
现代文：因为以上原因，鲁国国君就可以在孟春之月乘大路，车上的旗有带套的弧，旗上缀有十二旒，画有日月的图案，到郊外祭祀上天，并且敢以周的祖先后樱来配享。
English: Because of the above reasons, the prince of the State of Lu can take the highway in the month of Mengchun, the flag on the car has an arc with a sleeve, the flag is decorated with twelve folds, painted with the pattern of the sun and the moon, go to the suburbs to sacrifice to the heavens, and dare to share with the ancestor of Zhou, Hou Sakura.

古文：天子之礼也。
现代文：这些都是天子的礼仪。
English: These are the manners of the Son of Heaven.

古文：季夏六月，以禘礼祀周公于大庙，牲用白牡；尊用牺象山罍；郁尊用黄目；灌用玉瓒大圭；荐用玉豆雕篹；爵用玉琖，仍雕，加以璧散璧角；俎用梡嶡；升歌《清庙》，下管《象》；朱干玉戚，冕而舞《大武》；皮弁素积，裼而舞《大夏》。
现代文：当季夏季六月的时候，还可以以谛礼祭周公于太庙，祭祀用的是白色的公牛，盛酒的尊，有牺尊、象尊和山罍，盛郁鬯酒的尊用黄彝，将郁兽浇地求神时用的勺子是以大圭为柄的玉攒，献食品时用的是用玉雕饰的豆篷，献酒时用的是雕有花纹的玉盏，诸臣在额外献酒时用的是玉散、玉角；盛放牲体的姐用的是皖和威；堂上有乐工歌唱《清庙》之诗，堂下管乐队奏着《象》曲，舞队手执红色的盾牌和玉斧，戴着冕来跳《大武》之舞；还有的头戴皮弃，身穿素衣素积，解开正服前襟而跳《大夏》之舞。
English: During the season of summer in June, it is also possible to make a public offering at the Great Temple with the sacred rites and rituals. The white bull is used for the sacrifice, the sacred ox is used for the offering of wine, the sacred ox is used for the offering of sacrifices, the sacred elephant is used for the offering of elephants, and the sacred yakitori is used for the offering of yakitori, the sacred yakitori is used for the offering of yakitori, the spoon used for the offering of yakitori is made of gypsum, the bean canopy carved with jade is used for the offering of food, the carved jade beads are used

古文：昧，东夷之乐也；《任》，南蛮之乐也。
现代文：同时还有四方少数民族的歌舞：来自东夷的叫昧》，来自南蛮的叫《任》，来自西戎的叫《株离》，来自北狄的叫《禁》。
English: At the same time, there are also songs and dances of the ethnic minorities in the four directions: "Chuan" from Dongyi, "Ren" from Nanban, "Ju Li" from Xi Rong, and "Han" from Beidi.

古文：纳夷蛮之乐于大庙，言广鲁于天下也。
现代文：以上的种种排场，就是要表明鲁国的地位高于天下其他诸侯。
English: The above-mentioned parade is to show that the status of Lu is higher than that of other states in the world.

古文：君卷冕立于阼，夫人副袆立于房中。
现代文：鲁国国君在祭祀周公时，国君身着衰冕之服立于昨阶，夫人头带首饰身着袆服站立在房中。
English: During the worship of Zhou Gong, Lu Guo Guo stood on the last step of the stairs, wearing a waning crown, while his wife stood in the middle of the room, wearing a crown and headdress.

古文：君肉袒迎牲于门；夫人荐豆笾。
现代文：鲁君袒上衣到庙门口去迎接祭祀用的牺牲，夫人献上放好祭品的豆笾等祭器。
English: Lu Junxuan went to the temple gate to meet the sacrificial offering, and his wife presented the bean sprouts and other sacrificial objects.

古文：卿、大夫赞君，命妇赞夫人：各扬其职。
现代文：在祭祀过程中，卿大夫辅佐鲁君，命妇辅佐夫人，各自承担自己的责任。
English: In the course of the ritual, the noble doctor, Fu Zaru, and his wife, Fu Zaru, each assume their own responsibilities.

古文：百官废职服大刑，而天下大服。
现代文：百官中如有废弃自己职守者要严厉处分。这样使得天下的人都能服从。
English: If any of the officials abandons their duties, they should be severely punished. In this way, everyone in the world can obey.

古文：是故，夏礿、秋尝、冬烝，春社、秋省而遂大蜡，天子之祭也。
现代文：所以，鲁国夏夫的礿祭，秋天的尝祭，冬天的烝祭，春天向土神祈求丰收，秋天报答土神的恩典，接着举行对百神的蜡祭，这些本来都是只有天子才有的祭典。
English: Therefore, the burnt offering of Shaf in the State of Lu, the tasting offering in the autumn, the burnt offering in the winter, praying for a good harvest to the earth god in the spring, repaying the grace of the earth god in the autumn, and then holding the wax offering to the hundred gods, all of these are originally festivals that only the Son of Heaven can have.

古文：大庙，天子明堂。
现代文：鲁国的太庙，其形制犹如天子的明堂。
English: The Taimiao of the State of Lu is shaped like the Myeongdong of the Son of Heaven.

古文：库门，天子皋门。
现代文：鲁君公宫的正门是库门，相当于天子的正门皋门。
English: The main gate of the Lujun Palace is the Ku Gate, which is equivalent to the main gate of Tianzi.

古文：雉门，天子应门。
现代文：鲁君公宫的二门雉门，相当于天子的应门。
English: The two gates of the Lu Jun Gong Gong are equivalent to the gate of the heavenly son.

古文：振木铎于朝，天子之政也。
现代文：鲁君要在朝廷上宣布政教法令时也摇动木铎，这是采用天子宣布政教的做法。
English: Lu Jun also shook the wooden stake when he wanted to announce political and religious decrees in the imperial court, which was the practice of using the heavenly son to announce politics and religion.

古文：山节藻棁，复庙重檐，刮楹达乡，反坫出尊，崇坫康圭，疏屏；天子之庙饰也。
现代文：在庙的斗拱上雕刻山形图案，在梁上的短柱雕刻水草图案，双层的屋顶，双层的房檐，刮磨光滑的楹柱，敞亮的大窗，两楹之间设有主客饮毕用于放回空酒杯的土台，土台在酒尊之南；还有一个高的土台，用以安放玉圭，还有镂花的屏风。所有这一切，都是天子太庙才有的装饰。
English: There is a mountain pattern carved on the arch of the temple, a water plant pattern carved on a short column on the beam, a double-layered roof, a double-layered eave, a polished and smooth gable pillar, a large and bright window, a base between the two beams for the host and guest to drink from and return the empty wine glass, the base is south of the wine statue; there is also a high base for placing the topknot, and a screen of embroidered flowers. All of this is the only decoration of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：鸾车，有虞氏之路也。钩车，夏后氏之路也。大路，殷路也。乘路，周路也。
现代文：莺车，这是有虞氏祭天所乘之车；钩车，这是夏代天子祭天所乘之车；大路，这是殷代天子祭天所乘的车；玉路，这是周代天子祭天所乘的车。
English: The yakitori carriage is the carriage used in the Yu Festival; the hook carriage is the carriage used in the Xia Festival; the high road is the carriage used in the Yin Festival; and the jade road is the carriage used in the Zhou Festival.

古文：有虞氏之旗，夏后氏之绥，殷之大白，周之大赤。
现代文：有虞氏莺车上插的是大旎，夏后氏钩车上插的是大摩，一殷代大路上插的是大白，周代玉路上插的是大赤。
English: Yu's hooked wagon is inserted with a large hoop, Xiao's hooked wagon is inserted with a large hoop, Yin's large road is inserted with a large white, and Zhou's jade road is inserted with a large red.

古文：夏后氏骆马，黑鬣。殷人白马，黑首。周人黄马，蕃鬣。
现代文：夏后氏驾车是用白身黑嚣的马，殷代是用黑头的白马，周代用的是黄马而白霞。
English: Xiao's chauffeur was a white horse with a black body, Yin's was a white horse with a black head, and Zhou's was a yellow horse with a white head.

古文：夏后氏，牲尚黑，殷白牡，周骍刚。
现代文：夏后氏祭祀用黑色牺牲，殷代用白色公牛，周代用赤黄色公牛。
English: The Xia Guo clan used black sacrifices, the Yin Dynasty used white bulls, and the Zhou Dynasty used red and yellow bulls.

古文：泰，有虞氏之尊也。山罍，夏后氏之尊也。
现代文：泰是有虞氏用的酒壶，山愚是夏后氏用的酒壶，的酒壶，牺尊、象尊是周代用的酒壶。
English: Tai is a wine jug used by the Yue clan, Shan Gu is a wine jug used by the Xia Hou clan, and Ti's wine jug, Zhai Zun and Xiang Zun are wine jugs used by the Zhou dynasty.

古文：着，殷尊也。牺象，周尊也。爵，夏后氏以琖，殷以斝，周以爵。
现代文：敬酒所用的爵著是殷代用，夏后氏用玉线，殷人用翠，周代用爵。
English: The names used for toasting are Yin Dynasty, Xia Guo's use of jade thread, Yin people's use of cedar, and Zhou Dynasty's use of jade.

古文：灌尊，夏后氏以鸡夷。殷以斝，周以黄目。
现代文：灌祭时所用的酒尊，夏后氏用鸡彝，殷人用翠，周人用黄目。
English: For the sake used in the pouring of the offering, the Xiao clan uses chicken gourd, the Yin people use cedar, and the Zhou people use huangme.

古文：其勺，夏后氏以龙勺，殷以疏勺，周以蒲勺。
现代文：灌祭时酌郁巴所用的勺，夏后氏用龙勺，殷人用疏勺，周人用蒲勺。
English: The spoon used by Yuba, the dragon spoon used by Xia Guo, the spoon used by Yin, and the spoon used by Zhou when pouring offerings.

古文：土鼓蒉桴苇龠，伊耆氏之乐也。
现代文：垒个小土台子就当鼓，把土传成长条就当鼓褪，截一节苇子就当篱来吹，这是上古伊誊氏时代的乐器。
English: It is a musical instrument from the time of the ancient Ili dynasty, in which a small base is used as a drum, a piece of soil is used as a cymbal, and a piece of reed is used as a hedge.

古文：拊搏玉磬揩击，大琴大瑟，中琴小瑟，四代之乐器也。
现代文：而柑搏、玉磐、祝敲、大琴、大瑟、中琴、小瑟，这是虞、夏、商、周四代的乐器。
English: And the mandarin, the tambourine, the gong, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre, the lyre.

古文：鲁公之庙，文世室也。
现代文：鲁公伯禽的庙，相当于天子的文王庙，百世不毁。
English: The temple of Lu Gongbo, equivalent to the temple of King Wen, the son of Heaven, will never be destroyed.

古文：武公之庙，武世室也。
现代文：武公敖的庙，相当于天子的武王庙，也是百世不毁。
English: The temple of King Wu, which is equivalent to the temple of King Wu, the son of Heaven, will never be destroyed.

古文：米廪，有虞氏之庠也；序，夏后氏之序也；瞽宗，殷学也；頖宫，周学也。崇鼎，贯鼎，大璜，封父龟，天子之器也。
现代文：米凛是有虞氏的学校，序是夏代的学校，警宗是殷代的学校，颊宫是周代的学校，这四代的学校，周天子都有，鲁国也都有。
English: Mirin is a school with Yu, Zhou is a school with Xia, Guizong is a school with Yin, Jian Gong is a school with Zhou, Zhou Tianzi and Lu are all schools with these four generations.

古文：越棘，大弓，天子之戎器也。夏后氏之鼓，足。
现代文：崇国的鼎、贯国的鼎、夏后氏的横，封父国的龟甲，这本来是天子拥有的重器。
English: The crown of reverence for the country, the crown of the country, the side of the Xiao clan, the tortoise shell of the fatherland, this was originally a heavy weapon owned by the son of heaven.

古文：殷，楹鼓；周，县鼓。
现代文：越国的戟、大弓，这本是天子使用的兵器。
English: Yue Guo's crossbow and large bow were originally weapons used by the Son of Heaven.

古文：垂之和钟，叔之离磬，女娲之笙簧。
现代文：夏后氏的足鼓，殷人的楹鼓，周人的悬鼓，鲁国也都拥有。垂发明的和钟，叔发明的编磐，女蜗发明的笙簧，鲁国也都拥有。
English: The foot drum of the Xia Hou clan, the gong drum of the Yin people, and the hanging drum of the Zhou people are all owned by Lu. The pendulum invented the bell, the woven rock invented by the uncle, and the reed spring invented by the maiden, Lu also owns.

古文：夏后氏之龙簨虡，殷之崇牙，周之璧翣。
现代文：悬挂钟磐的架子，夏代还只是在架子的横杆上绘龙，殷代又在横杆上加上崇牙，周代又在横杆的两端饰以璧婴，这些东西鲁国也都有。
English: Hanging on the belfry of the bell rock, the Xia Dynasty only painted a dragon on the crossbar of the shelf, the Yin Dynasty added a high tooth to the crossbar, and the Zhou Dynasty decorated the two ends of the crossbar with a baby, all of which Lu country also has.

古文：有虞氏之两敦，夏后氏之四连，殷之六瑚，周之八簋。
现代文：在虞氏祭祀时盛放黍樱用两敦，夏代用四琏，殷代用六瑚，周代用八篡。
English: At the time of the Yu clan's religious rites, two tuns were used to hold the gongs, four tuns were used during the summer, six horns were used during the Yin dynasty, and eight horns were used during the Zhou dynasty.

古文：俎，有虞氏以梡，夏后氏以嶡，殷以椇，周以房俎。
现代文：盛放牲体的姐，有虞氏用皖，夏后氏用威，殷人用俱，周人用房姐。
English: In the case of the sister who has a lot of livestock, the Yu clan uses the yakitori, the Xiao clan uses the yakitori, the Yin clan uses the yakitori, and the Zhou clan uses the yakitori.

古文：夏后氏以楬豆，殷玉豆，周献豆。
现代文：盛放湿物祭品的豆，夏后氏是用木制的，上面没有任何装饰，殷代则用玉加以装饰，周代则更进一步地将玉豆雕饰一番。
English: As for the beans used to hold the wet offerings, the Xia Guo clan used wooden cymbals without any decoration on them, the Yin dynasty used jade to decorate them, and the Zhou dynasty went one step further and carved jade beans.

古文：有虞氏服韨，夏后氏山，殷火，周龙章。有虞氏祭首，夏后氏祭心，殷祭肝，周祭肺。
现代文：有虞氏祭服上的蔽膝什么图案也没有，夏代加上了一种山的图案，殷代又加上一种火的图案，周代又加上一种龙的图案、有虞氏食前之祭看重祭首，夏后氏看重祭心，殷人看重祭肝，周人看重祭肺。
English: There is no pattern on the knee cap of the Yu clan's ceremonial dress. The Xia dynasty added a mountain pattern, the Yin dynasty added a fire pattern, and the Zhou dynasty added a dragon pattern. The Yu clan's pre-feast ritual emphasizes the sacrificial head, the Xia clan's post-feast ritual emphasizes the sacrificial heart, the Yin people emphasize the sacrificial liver, and the Zhou people emphasize the sacrificial lung.

古文：夏后氏尚明水，殷尚醴，周尚酒。
现代文：夏后氏祭祀时崇尚使用明水，殷人崇尚使用甜酒，周人崇尚使用清酒。
English: The Xia Guo clan advocates the use of plain water, the Yin people advocate the use of sweet wine, and the Zhou people advocate the use of sake.

古文：有虞氏官五十，夏后氏官百，殷二百，周三百。
现代文：有虞氏有官五十人，夏后氏有官一百人，殷代有官二百人，周代有官三百人。
English: There were 50 officials from the Yu clan, 100 officials from the Xiao clan, 200 officials from the Yin dynasty, and 300 officials from the Zhou dynasty.

古文：有虞氏之绥，夏后氏之绸练，殷之崇牙，周之璧翣。
现代文：虞代在丧葬时，旗杆上饰以牦牛尾；夏代以练缠绕旗杆，并且还有旒；殷代又在旗侧饰以齿形的刻缯；周代加用扇形的璧翣。
English: In the funeral of the Yu Dynasty, the top of the flagpole was decorated with a yakitori; the Xia Dynasty used the practice of wrapping the flagpole, and there was also a yakitori; the Yin Dynasty decorated the side of the flag with a tooth-shaped carved yakitori; and the Zhou Dynasty added a fan-shaped fan yakitori.

古文：凡四代之服、器、官，鲁兼用之。
现代文：凡属于虞、夏、殷、周四个朝代的服饰、器物、祭祀所需执事官员，鲁国都可以取法应用。
English: All the clothing, utensils, and deacon officials needed for rituals belonging to the four dynasties of Yu, Xia, Yin, and Zhou can be used by Lu.

古文：是故，鲁，王礼也，天下传之久矣。
现代文：因为这样，鲁国所用的是天子的礼仪，这件事已家喻户晓，流传久远了。
English: Because of this, Lu used the etiquette of the Son of Heaven, which has been well known and passed down for a long time.

古文：君臣，未尝相弒也；礼乐刑法政俗，未尝相变也，天下以为有道之国。
现代文：鲁国君臣之间没有发生过互相仇杀的事，礼乐、刑法、政令、习俗等从未发生过变革，全国公认鲁国是一个政权稳定、治理有方的国家。
English: There has never been any vendetta between the princes and ministers of the State of Lu, and there has never been any change in the etiquette, criminal law, government decrees, customs, etc. It is recognized throughout the country that the State of Lu is a country with a stable regime and good governance.

古文：是故，天下资礼乐焉。
现代文：因此，其他国家都到鲁国来学习采用礼乐。
English: As a result, other countries have come to China to learn how to use the ritual music.

