古文：文王在酆，召太公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：周文王在丰邑召见太公，对他说： 唉！
English: King Zhou Wen summoned the Grand Duke in Fengyi and said to him: "Alas!

古文：商王虐极，罪杀不辜，公尚助予，忧民如何？ 
现代文：商纣王暴虐到了极点，随意地杀害无辜的人，请您辅助我拯救万民于水火，您看应该怎么办呢？ 
English: The mercantile king is tyrannical to the extreme, killing innocent people at will. I ask you to help me save the people from fire and water. What do you think should be done?

古文：太公曰： 王其修德以下贤，惠民以观天道。
现代文：太公回答说： 君主应修养德性，礼贤下士，施恩惠于民众，以观察天道的吉凶。
English: The grand duke replied, "A monarch should cultivate virtue, be polite and courteous, and grant favors to the people in order to observe the fortunes of heaven.

古文：天道无殃，不可先倡；人道无灾，不可先谋。
现代文：当天道还没有灾害征兆时，不可以先倡导征伐。当人道没有出现祸乱时，不可先谋划兴师。
English: When there is no sign of disaster in the heavenly way, it is not possible to advocate conquest first. When there is no disaster in the human world, it is not possible to plan for revival first.

古文：必见天殃，又见人灾，乃可以谋；必见其阳，又见其阴，乃知其心；必见其外，又见其内，乃知其意；必见其疏，又见其亲，乃知其情。
现代文：必须看到既出现了天灾，又发生了人祸，才可以谋划兴师征伐；既看到他的公开言行，又了解他的秘密活动，才能知道他的真实想法；既看到他的外在表现，又了解他的内心情况，才能知道他的真实意图；既看到他疏远什么人，又了解他亲近什么人，才能知道他的真实情感。
English: It is necessary to see both natural disasters and man-made disasters in order to plan the rejuvenation campaign; it is necessary to see his public words and deeds and understand his secret activities in order to know his true thoughts; it is necessary to see his external performance and understand his inner situation in order to know his true intentions; it is necessary to see who he is estranged from and understand who he is close to in order to know his true feelings.

古文：行其道，道可致也；从其门，门可入也；立其礼，礼可成也；争其强，强可胜也。
现代文：实行吊民伐罪之道，政治理想就可以实现；遵循正确的路线，统一天下的目的就可以达到；建立适当的制度，就一定能获得成功；确立强大的优势地位，就可以战胜强大的敌人。
English: The political ideal can be realized by practicing the way of hanging the people and punishing the criminals; the goal of unifying the country can be achieved by following the correct line; the establishment of an appropriate system can definitely achieve success; and the establishment of a strong dominant position can defeat a strong enemy.

古文：全胜不斗，大兵无创，与鬼神通，微哉！
现代文：取得全胜而不经过战斗，以大军临敌而没有伤亡，真可谓是用兵如神了。微妙啊！
English: To achieve total victory without fighting, to face the enemy with a large army and suffer no casualties, is truly to be a soldier like a god. Subtle!

古文：微哉！
现代文：微妙啊！
English: Subtle!

古文：与人同病相救，同情相成，同恶相助，同好相趋，故无甲兵而胜，无冲机而攻，无沟堑而守。
现代文： 能与人同疾苦而相互救援，同情感而相互保全，同憎恶而相互帮助，同爱好而有共同追求。因此，不费一兵一卒也能取得胜利，没有冲车机弩也可以发起攻势，没有沟垒也能够坚固防御。
English: To be able to share the same sufferings and mutual relief, the same emotions and mutual protection, the same hatred and mutual assistance, the same interests and common pursuit. Therefore, we can achieve victory without a single soldier, we can launch an offensive without a machine gun, and we can also have a solid defense without a barrier.

古文：大智不智，大谋不谋，大勇不勇，大利不利。
现代文：真正的智慧不是外在表现的聪明，真正的谋略不是外在的计谋，真正的勇敢，不是表现为外在的逞强；真正的利益，不是表现为外在的好处。
English: True wisdom is not the outward show of cleverness, true strategy is not the outward show of cunning, true courage is not the outward show of bravery, true interest is not the outward show of interest.

古文：利天下者，天下启之；害天下者，天下闭之。
现代文：为天下人谋利益的，天下人都会欢迎他；给天下人招致灾祸的，天下人都反对他。
English: He who works for the benefit of the people of the world will be welcomed by the people of the world; he who brings disaster to the people of the world will be opposed by the people of the world.

古文：天下者，非一人之天下，乃天下之天下也。
现代文：天下不是一个人的天下，而是天下所有人的天下。
English: The world is not the world of one person, but the world of all people.

古文：取天下者，若逐野兽，而天下皆有分肉之心；若同舟而济，济则皆同其利，败则皆同其害。
现代文：夺取天下，就像猎逐野兽一般，天下所有人都有分享兽肉的欲望；又好像是同般共渡，若渡河成功，那么大家都可以从中受益，若渡河失败，那么大家都会因此而遭难。
English: Conquering the world is like hunting wild animals. Everyone in the world has the desire to share the meat. It is also like crossing the river together. If the river crossing is successful, then everyone can benefit from it. If the river crossing is unsuccessful, then everyone will suffer.

古文：然则皆有启之，无有闭之也。
现代文：这样做，天下人就都欢迎他，而不会反对他了。
English: By doing so, everyone in the world will welcome him and will not oppose him.

古文：无取于民者，取民者也；无取于国者，取国者也；无取于天下者，取天下者也。
现代文：不从民众那里掠取利益，却能够从民众那里得到利益；不从别国那里掠夺利益，却能够从别国那里获得利益；不掠夺天下利益，却能够从天下获取利益。
English: It does not plunder the interests of the people, but it can obtain the interests of the people; it does not plunder the interests of other countries, but it can obtain the interests of other countries; it does not plunder the interests of the world, but it can obtain the interests of the world.

古文：无取民者，民利之；无取国者，国利之；无取天下者，天下利之。
现代文：不掠取民众利益，民众拥护他，这是民众给予他利益；不掠取别国利益，别国归附他，这是别国给予他利益；不掠夺天下利益，天下拥护他，这是天下给予他利益。
English: If he does not plunder the interests of the people, the people will support him, which is the benefit given to him by the people; if he does not plunder the interests of other countries, other countries will attach to him, which is the benefit given to him by other countries; if he does not plunder the interests of the world, the world will support him, which is the benefit given to him by the world.

古文：故道在不可见，事在不可闻，胜在不可知。
现代文：所以，这种方法使人看不见，这种事情使人听不到，这种胜利使人不可知。
English: Therefore, this method is invisible, this thing is inaudible, and this victory is unknowable.

古文：微哉！
现代文：真是微妙啊！
English: Subtle!

古文：微哉！
现代文：微妙啊！
English: Subtle!

古文： 鸷鸟将击，卑飞敛翼；猛兽将搏，弭耳俯伏；圣人将动，必有愚色。
现代文： 鸷鸟将要发起袭击时，必先收起翅膀低矮地飞行；猛兽将要进行搏斗时，必先平贴耳朵，伏下身子；圣贤将要采取行动时，必先向世人显露出自己的愚钝和笨拙。
English: When an ostrich is about to attack, it must first tuck up its wings and fly low; when a ferocious beast is about to fight, it must first put its ears flat and lower its body; when a sage is about to act, he must first reveal his stupidity and clumsiness to the world.

古文：今彼殷商，众口相惑，纷纷渺渺，好色无极，此亡国之征也。吾观其野，草菅胜谷；吾观其众，邪曲胜直；吾观其吏，暴虐残贼，败法乱刑，上下不觉。
现代文：现在的商朝，谣言四起，社会动乱不已，而纣王依然荒淫无度，这是国家覆亡的征兆，我观察他们的田地里，野草盖过了禾苗；我观察他们的大臣，奸邪之徒超过了忠直之士；我观察他们的官吏，暴虐残酷，违法乱纪。面对这种局面，他们朝廷上下依然执迷不悟。
English: In the present Shang Dynasty, rumors are rampant, social turmoil is incessant, and the king is still immoral, which is a sign of the country's downfall. I observed in their fields, the weeds overtook the seedlings; I observed their ministers, the traitors exceeded the loyalists; I observed their officials, tyrannical and cruel, illegal and undisciplined. Faced with this situation, they still cling to the imperial court.

古文：此亡国之时也。
现代文：这是到了该灭亡的时候了。
English: This is the time to die.

古文：大明发而万物皆照，大义发而万物皆利，大兵发而万物皆服。
现代文：旭日当空则天下万物都能沐浴阳光，正义所至则天下万物都能得到利益，大军兴起则天下万物都会欣然归附。
English: When the rising sun is in the sky, all things in the world can enjoy the sunshine, when justice is supreme, all things in the world can benefit, and when a great army arises, all things in the world will gladly join.

古文：大哉圣人之德！独闻独见，乐哉。 
现代文：伟大啊！圣人的德化，独到的见地，无人能及，这才是最大的欢乐啊！ 
English: Great! The saint's virtue, unique insight, no one can match, this is the greatest joy!

