古文：武王问太公曰： 敌人深入长驱，侵掠我地，驱我牛马，其三军大至，薄我城下，吾士卒大恐，人民系累，为敌所虏，吾欲以守则固，以战则胜，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问太公说： 敌兵长驱直入，侵占我土地，抢夺我牛马，敌人大军蜂涌而来，迫近我城下。我军士兵大为恐惧，民众被拘禁成为俘虏。在这种情况下，我想要做到防守稳固，只要进行战斗就能胜利，该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke: "The enemy soldiers drove straight in, invaded my land, robbed my cattle and horses, the enemy army swarmed and approached my city. Our soldiers were very afraid, and the people were detained as prisoners. In this situation, I want to achieve a solid defense, and I can win as long as I fight. What should I do?

古文：太公曰： 如此者，谓之突兵。
现代文：太公答道： 像这类敌军，叫做突袭性的敌军。
English: The father-in-law replied, "This kind of enemy is called a surprise enemy.

古文：其牛马必不得食，士卒绝粮，暴击而前，令我远邑别军，选其锐士，疾击其后；审其期日，必会于晦，三军疾战，敌人虽众，其将可虏。 
现代文：它的牛马一定缺乏饲料，它的士卒一定没有粮食，所以一直凶猛地向我军发动进攻。在这种情况下，应命令我驻扎在远方的其他部队，挑选精锐的士兵，迅猛地袭击敌人的后方，计算好会攻的时间，务必使其在夜色昏暗的时候与我会合，然后全军迅速猛烈地同敌战斗。这样，就算敌人人数众多，敌将也可以被我俘虏。 
English: His oxen and horses must be short of fodder, and his soldiers must be short of provisions, so that he has been attacking our army fiercely. In this case, I should be ordered to station other troops in the distance, select elite soldiers, quickly attack the enemy's rear, calculate the time of the attack, make sure that it meets me in the dark of the night, and then the whole army will quickly and fiercely fight the enemy. In this way, even if the enemy is numerous, the enemy general can be captured by me.

古文：武王曰： 敌人分为三四，或战而侵掠我地，或止而收我牛马，其大军未尽至，而使寇薄我城下，至吾三军恐惧，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问： 如果敌军分为三、四部分，以一部向我发动进攻以侵占我方土地，以一部驻止以掠夺我牛马财物，其主力部队尚未完全到达，而使一部兵力进逼我城下，以致我全军恐惧，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu asked: "What should I do if the enemy army is divided into three or four parts, one of which attacks me to invade our land, one of which stays to plunder my cattle, horses and property, and whose main force has not yet fully arrived, and forces a force to enter and force me under the city, so that my whole army is afraid?"

古文：太公曰： 谨候敌人未尽至，则设备而待之。
现代文：太公答道： 应仔细观察情况，在敌人尚未完全到达前就完善守备，严阵以待。
English: Taigong replied: We should carefully observe the situation, perfect our defenses before the enemy has fully arrived, and be on the alert.

古文：去城四里而为垒，金鼓旌旗，皆列而张，别队为伏兵；令我垒上多积强弩，百步一突门，门有行马，车骑居外，勇力锐士，隐伏而处。
现代文：在离城四里的地方构筑营垒，把金鼓旌旗都布设、张扬起来，并另派一队人马为伏兵。令我方营垒上的部队多集中强弩，每百步设置一个供部队出击的暗门，门前安放拒马等障碍物，战车、骑兵配置在营垒外侧，勇锐士兵隐蔽埋伏起来。
English: We built a camp four miles from the city, set up and displayed the golden drum and banner, and sent another group of men and horses to ambush the soldiers. The troops on our camp were more concentrated and strong, and a secret door for the troops to attack was set up every hundred paces, obstacles such as horses were placed in front of the door, chariots and cavalry were placed outside the camp, and brave soldiers were hidden and ambushed.

古文：敌人若至，使我轻卒合战而佯走；令我城上立旌旆，击鼙鼓，完为守备。
现代文：敌人如果到来，可先派我轻装部队迎战，随即佯装不敌败退，并令我守军在城上竖立旗帜，敲击鼙鼓，充分做好防守准备。
English: If the enemy arrives, I can first send my light-armed troops to meet the battle, then pretend to be defeated and retreat, and order my defenders to erect flags on the city, beat drums, and fully prepare for defense.

古文：敌人以我为守城，必薄我城下。
现代文：敌人因此将认为我方主力在防守城邑，其军必定进逼到我城下。
English: As a result, the enemy will think that our main forces are defending the city, and their army will certainly advance to my city.

古文：发吾伏兵，以冲其内，或击其外；三军疾战，或击其前，或击其后。
现代文：这时我方应突然出动伏兵，或突击敌军中枢，或攻击敌人的外围。同时再令我全军迅猛出击，奋勇战斗，既攻击敌人的正面，又攻击敌人的后方。
English: At this time, we should suddenly launch an ambush, or a surprise attack on the enemy's center, or attack the enemy's periphery. At the same time, we should also make our whole army quickly attack and fight bravely, both attacking the enemy's front and attacking the enemy's rear.

古文：勇者不得斗，轻者不及走。
现代文：使敌人中勇猛的无法战斗，轻快的来不及逃跑。
English: To render the valiant among the enemy unable to fight, and the light-hearted unable to flee.

古文：名曰突战。
现代文：这种战法称为突战。
English: This kind of warfare is called a surprise attack.

古文：敌人虽众，其将必走。 
现代文：敌人人数众多，他们的将领也必定由于战败而逃走。 
English: The enemy were numerous, and their general must have fled in defeat.

古文：武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 说得真好啊！ 
English: King Wu said, "What a great way to say it!

