古文：柳智感李播狄仁杰王万彻太学郑生赵州参军妻
现代文：柳智感李播狄仁杰王万彻太学郑生赵州参军妻
English: Liu Zhizhong, Li Bo, Di Renjie, Wang Wancher, Taigaku, Zheng Sheng, Zhao Zhou's military wife

古文：柳智感
现代文：柳智感
English: Liu Zhixin

古文：唐河东柳智感，以贞观初为长举县令。
现代文：唐代河东地区有个叫柳智感的人，于贞观初年当上了长举县令。
English: In the eastern region of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Liu Zhixuan, who became the county magistrate of Changzhi County in the first year of Zhenguan.

古文：一夜暴死，明旦而苏。
现代文：一天夜里，他突然死去，第二天早晨又苏醒过来。
English: He died suddenly one night and woke up the next morning.

古文：说云：始忽为冥官所追。
现代文：说道：开始，不经意间被阴间的官吏追命。
English: He said: At the beginning, I was inadvertently chased by the bureaucrats of the underworld.

古文：大官府使者以智感见，谓感曰： 今有一官缺，故枉君任之。
现代文：地府的使者见到我之后，对我说： 现在有一个官职空缺着，所以想请你屈就上任。
English: When the envoy from the prefectural government saw me, he said to me, "There is an official post vacant at the moment, so I would like to ask you to take up the post immediately."

古文：智感辞以亲老，且自陈福业，未应便死。
现代文：我以双亲年迈相推辞，并且说自己天天要祈祷上苍保佑他们长寿，不应该现在就死。
English: I declined, saying that my parents were getting old and that I should pray every day for God to bless them with a long life, and that I should not die now.

古文：王使勘籍，信然。因谓曰： 君未当死，可权判录事。
现代文：阎罗王的使者到我家调查一番，这才相信，于是对我说： 你不该现在就死，可以暂时代理判案的录事。
English: The emissary of the king of hell came to my house to investigate, and I believed it, so he said to me: You should not die now, you can temporarily judge the record of the case.

古文：智感许诺谢。
现代文：柳智感答应下来并表示感谢。
English: Liu Zhixin agreed and expressed his thanks.

古文：吏引退至曹，有五判官，感为第六。
现代文：有位小吏领着他进了分科办事的官署，这里有五个判官，柳智感为第六个人。
English: A petty official led him into the branch office, where there were five judges, with Liu Zhixuan as the sixth person.

古文：其厅事是长屋，人坐三间，各有床案，务甚繁拥，西头一坐处无判官，吏引智感就空坐。
现代文：这厅堂非常大，每个人占三间屋子。他们各有各的床铺和几案，公务繁忙，十分紧张。西头一个坐位没有判官，小吏让柳智感在这里坐下来。
English: This hall is very large, each person occupies three rooms. They each have their own beds and several cases, busy with official duties, very tense. There is no judge in the west seat, and the clerk lets Liu Zhisen sit down here.

古文：群吏将文书簿帐来，取智感署，署案上，退立阶下。
现代文：所有的官吏都将文书帐簿拿到柳智感的官署里来，一一摆在他的几案上，然后都退到台阶下站好。
English: All the officials brought the clerical account books to Liu Zhixuan's government office, placed them one by one on several of his cases, and then all retreated to stand at the bottom of the steps.

古文：智感问之，对曰：气恶逼公，但遥以中事答。
现代文：柳智感问这是怎么回事，回答说：因身上邪气恐冲犯您，所以站在远处来回答您的问话。
English: Liu Zhi asked what was going on and replied, "I am afraid of offending you because of the evil spirits in my body, so I am standing at a distance to answer your question."

古文：智感省读，如人间者，于是为判句文。
现代文：柳智感审看了一下，同人世间一样，于是便写起评语来。
English: Liu Zhixin examined it for a while, just like the rest of the world, and then wrote a comment.

古文：有顷食来，诸判官同食。
现代文：一会儿送饭来了。
English: A little while later, the food arrived.

古文：智感亦欲就之，诸判官曰：君既权判，不宜食此。
现代文：各位判官都在一起吃，柳智感也想过去吃，判官们说：你既然是暂时代理的，就不该吃这样的饭菜。
English: The judges all ate together, and Liu Zhiguang also wanted to go to eat. The judges said: Since you are a temporary agent, you should not eat such a meal.

古文：感从之。
现代文：柳智感听从了他们的话，没有吃。
English: Liu Zhixin obeyed their words and did not eat.

古文：日暮，吏送智感归家，苏而方晓。
现代文：日头落山之后，小吏送他回家，待他苏醒过来天才亮。
English: After the sun had set, he was sent home by the guards, and it was not until he woke up that it was light again.

古文：自归家中。日暝吏复来迎至旦如故。
现代文：自从柳智感回到家中之后，那小吏每到日落后就把他接去，天亮之前再送他回家。
English: Since Liu Zhixuan returned home, the minor official picked him up after sunset and sent him home before dawn.

古文：知幽显昼夜相反矣。
现代文：要知道，阴间和人世白天和晚上是相反的呵。
English: You know, the underworld and the human world are the opposite of day and night.

古文：于是夜判冥事，昼临县职。
现代文：于是，他晚上到阴间判案，白天去县衙门办公。
English: As a result, he went to the underworld at night to adjudicate cases, and went to the county government office during the day.

古文：岁余，智感在冥曹，因起至厕，于堂西见一妇女。年三十许，姿容端正，衣服鲜明，立而掩涕。
现代文：就这样过了一年多。一天，柳智感在地府要去厕所小解，于大堂西侧看见一个妇女，年龄在三十岁左右，姿容端庄，穿着十分鲜艳而明丽的衣常，正站在那里捂着脸哭呢。
English: Just like that, more than a year passed. One day, Liu Zhixin was going to the toilet to relieve himself. On the west side of the lobby, he saw a woman, about thirty years old, with a dignified appearance, wearing a very bright and bright dress, standing there, crying.

古文：智感问何人，答曰：兴州司仓参军之妇也。摄来此，方别夫子，是以悲伤。
现代文：柳智感上前问她是什么人，那妇女回答说：我是兴州司仓参军的夫人呵，被抓到这里，刚刚离开丈夫，所以感到悲伤。
English: Liu Zhixin came forward to ask who she was, and the woman replied: "I am the wife of Xingzhou Sikan who joined the army. I was arrested here and have just left my husband, so I feel sad.

古文：智感以问吏，史曰：官摄来，有所案问，且以证其夫事。
现代文：柳智感向小吏询问此事，小吏说：地府把她抓来，是因为有案子要问，并且让她证明丈夫的一些事情。
English: Liu Zhixin asked the petty official about the matter. The petty official said: The government arrested her because there was a case to be asked, and asked her to prove some things about her husband.

古文：智感因谓女人曰：感长举县令也。
现代文：柳智感于是对那妇女说：我是长举县的县令呵。
English: Liu Zhixin then said to the woman: I am the county magistrate of Changji County.

古文：夫人若被堪问，幸自分就。无为牵引司仓，俱死无益。
现代文：你如果被带去审问，希望你自己分清事实，不要牵连你的丈夫，都死了并没有好处。
English: If you are taken in for questioning, it does no good to hope that you will sort out the facts yourself and not implicate your husband, who is dead.

古文：妇人曰：诚不愿引之，恐官相逼耳。
现代文：那妇女说：我诚然是不想牵连他，可只怕官府相逼呀！
English: The woman said: "Of course I don't want to implicate him, but I'm afraid the authorities will force me to!"

古文：感曰：夫人幸勿相牵，可无逼迫之虑。
现代文：柳智感说：庆幸的是你不想牵连他，这样你就可以免去被逼迫的忧虑了。
English: Liu Zhixin said: Fortunately, you don't want to implicate him, so you can avoid the worry of being persecuted.

古文：妇人许之。
现代文：那妇女答应下来。
English: The woman agreed.

古文：既而还州，先问司仓妇有疾。司仓曰：吾妇年少无疾。
现代文：柳智感来到兴州之后，先去问那位司仓参军的夫人有没有病，司仓说：我的夫人正年轻，没有病。
English: After Liu Zhixin came to Xingzhou, he first asked the secretary's wife who had joined the army whether she was ill. The secretary said: My wife is young and has no illness.

古文：智感以所见告之，说其衣服形貌，且劝令作福。
现代文：柳智感便把自己在阴间的所见告诉了他，而且说出了他夫人的音容笑貌及所穿的衣服，并劝他赶紧为妻子祈祷。
English: Liu Zhixin then told him what he had seen in the underworld, and described his wife's voice, smile, and the clothes she was wearing, and urged him to pray for his wife.

古文：司仓走归家，见妇在机中织，无患也，不甚信之。
现代文：司仓回到家中，见妻子正在机前织布，什么病也没有，不很相信柳智感的话。
English: When the secretary returned home, he saw that his wife was weaving in front of the machine without any illness. He didn't quite believe Liu Zhixin's words.

古文：后十余日，司仓妇暴死。司仓始惧而作福禳之。
现代文：十几天之后，妻子暴病而死，司仓这才感到害怕而祝铸上苍请求驱除灾祸。
English: A dozen days later, his wife died of a violent illness. It was only then that Shikura felt afraid and prayed to God to drive away the disaster.

古文：又兴州官二人考满，当赴京选。
现代文：另外，举州有两位当官的，任期已满，应当进京参加大选，再由朝廷量才授官。
English: In addition, if there are two officials in a prefecture, the term of office has expired, they should go to Beijing to participate in the general election, and then the imperial court will award the post.

古文：谓智感曰：君判冥道事，请问吾选得何官？
现代文：他们对柳智感说：你对阴间的一些事情判断很准确，那你说，我们参加大选会得到什么官职呢？
English: They said to Liu Zhixuan: "You are very accurate in judging some things in the underworld. So, what official position will we get if we participate in the general election?"

古文：智感至冥，以某姓名问小录事。
现代文：柳智感到了地府，把这件事对小录事讲了，并且说出那二位的姓名。
English: Liu Zhi sensed the underworld, told the matter to Xiao Luo, and said the names of the two people.

古文：曰：名簿并封左右函中，检之二日方可得。
现代文：小录事说：功名簿上并列封为左右函中，但任职令第二天才能下来。
English: The small record said: The joint seal on the merit list is in the middle of the left and right letters, but the appointment order can only come down the next day.

古文：后日，乃具告二人。
现代文：第二天白天，柳智感把这些事情全告诉了那两个人。
English: During the day the next day, Liu Zhixin told the two men all these things.

古文：二人至京选，吏部拟官，皆与报不同。
现代文：那二人进京参加大选，吏部拟出任职名单。
English: The two entered Beijing to participate in the general election, and the personnel department drew up a list of positions.

古文：州官闻之，以语智感。
现代文：都跟柳智感说的不一样。那二人听说此事，对柳智感讲了。
English: It was different from what Liu Zhixuan said. The two heard about it and told Liu Zhixuan.

古文：后问小录事，覆检簿，云：定如所检，不错也。
现代文：柳智感急忙赴到地府去问小录事，小录事翻开任职令簿，说：保证跟任职令一样，不会错的呵。
English: Liu Zhixuan hurried to the prefectural government to ask for a small record. The small record opened the appointment order book and said, "Guarantee, just like the appointment order, it can't be wrong."

古文：既而选人过门下，门下审退之。
现代文：第二天，中选的任职名单报到门下省，门下省审查没有通过又退了回去。
English: The next day, the winning list of posts was reported to the next province, and the next province did not pass the review and returned back.

古文：吏部重送名，果是名簿检报者。
现代文：吏部只好重拟名单报上。这次，果然与功名簿上的任职令一样。
English: The personnel department had to redraft the list and publish it. This time, it was indeed the same as the appointment order on the merit list.

古文：于是众威信服。
现代文：因此，大家对柳智感全都信服了。
English: Therefore, everyone was convinced of Liu Zhixin.

古文：智感每于冥簿，见其亲识名状及死时日月，报之，使修福，多得免。
现代文：柳智感第一次在生死簿上，看到自己亲朋好友的名字及死亡日期，都回来告诉本人，让他祭祀祈祷，大多数都幸免一死。
English: For the first time, Liu Zhixuan saw the names and dates of death of his relatives and friends in the life and death book. He came back to tell them to himself, let him sacrifice and pray, and most of them were spared death.

古文：智感权判三年，其吏部来告曰：已得隆州李司户，授正官以代。
现代文：柳智感到地府做了三年的代理判官录事，一天，地府吏部来人对他说：我们已经找到了隆州的李司户，并正式下任职令了，让他取代于你。
English: Liu Zhi felt that the prefectural government had been acting as a judge for three years. One day, a person from the prefectural government's personnel department said to him: We have found Longzhou's Li Shifu, and officially issued an appointment order, letting him replace you.

古文：公不复判矣。
现代文：往后，你就不要来这里办案了。
English: From now on, you don't have to come here to handle cases.

古文：智感至州，因告刺史李德凤，遣人往隆州审焉，其司户已卒。
现代文：柳智感到了州府，于是向刺史李德凤报告了这件事，李德凤立即派人到隆州调查，果然不错，那位李司户已经死了。
English: Liu Zhi sensed the state capital, so he reported the matter to the chief secretary Li Defeng. Li Defeng immediately sent someone to Longzhou to investigate, and sure enough, that Li Shifu was already dead.

古文：问其死日，即吏来告之时也。
现代文：问起死亡日期，正是吏部来人通知他那天。
English: When asked about the date of his death, he said it was the day he was notified by a person from the personnel department.

古文：从此遂绝。
现代文：从此，他去地府的路便断绝了。
English: From then on, his path to the underworld was cut off.

古文：州司遣智感领囚，送至凤州界。
现代文：一天，州司派柳智感押解囚徒，将他们送到凤州地界。
English: One day, the prefectural governor sent Liu Zhixin to escort the prisoners and take them to the border of Fengzhou.

古文：囚四人皆逃。智感忧惧，捕捉不获。
现代文：四个囚徒全逃跑了，使他又忧虑又害怕，追捕半天一个也没有捉到。
English: All four prisoners had escaped, leaving him worried and scared, and after half a day of chasing, not a single one had been caught.

古文：夜宿传舍，忽见其故部吏来告曰：囚尽得矣。
现代文：晚上，他住在旅舍里，忽然看见原来地府中的那位小吏，告诉他说：那四名囚犯，全都找到了。
English: In the evening, when he was staying in a hostel, he suddenly saw the clerk from the original dungeon, who told him: "The four prisoners have all been found.

古文：一人死，三人在南山西谷中，并已擒缚。愿公勿忧。
现代文：一个死了，三个现在南山西谷中，并且已经被捕获，希望你不要忧愁。
English: One is dead, three are now in the southwest valley and have been captured, I hope you don't feel sad.

古文：言毕辞去。
现代文：说完，那小吏告辞而去。
English: After saying this, he said goodbye and left.

古文：智惑即请共入南山西谷，果得四囚。
现代文：柳智感立即找些人一同进了南山西谷，果然找到了四个囚徒。
English: Liu Zhixuan immediately found some people to go into the West Valley of the South Mountain, and found four prisoners.

古文：知走不免，因来抗拒。智感格之，杀一囚，三囚受缚，果如所告。
现代文：囚徒们知道逃不掉了，于是便顽抗，柳智感与他们格斗，杀了一个，其余三个被擒缚，果然跟那小吏说的一样。
English: The prisoners knew that they could not escape, so they stubbornly resisted. Liu Zhixin fought with them, killed one, and the remaining three were chained, just as the policeman said.

古文：智感今存，任慈州司法。
现代文：柳智感现在还活着，任慈州司法。
English: Liu Zhixuan is still alive today, serving as a judge in Cizhou.

古文：光禄卿柳亨说之。
现代文：这是掌管皇室膳食的光禄卿柳亨说的。
English: This was said by Liu Heng, the Guanglu Emperor who is in charge of the royal diet.

古文：亨为邛州刺史，见智感，亲问之。
现代文：柳亨当邛州刺史时，见过柳智感，亲自问过他。
English: When Liu Heng was making history in Zhangzhou, he met Liu Zhixin and asked him personally.

古文：然御史裴同节亦云，见数人说如此。
现代文：同时，御史裴司节也说，听到不少人都这样进过。
English: At the same time, Bishop Pei also said that he had heard that many people had entered in this way.

古文：李播
现代文：李播
English: Lee Boon

古文：高宗将封东岳，而天久霖雨。
现代文：唐高宗李治要去泰山祭祀天地，而天总下雨。
English: The Tang Gaozong Li Zhi went to Mount Tai to worship heaven and earth, but it always rained.

古文：帝疑之，使问华山道士李播，为奏玉京天帝。
现代文：高宗有些疑惑，欲派人去华山询问道士李播，并想让他去玉京奏报天帝。
English: Gao Zong had some doubts. He wanted to send someone to Huashan to inquire about the Taoist priest Li Bang, and wanted him to go to the capital to report on Tian Di.

古文：播，淳风之父也。
现代文：李播，他是李淳凤的父亲呵。
English: Li Bi, he is the father of Li Chunfeng.

古文：因遣仆射刘仁轨至华山，问播封禅事。
现代文：于是，仆射刘仁轨奉旨来到华山，向李播询问去泰山祭祀天地之事。
English: As a result, the servant Liu Renlu was ordered to come to Huashan to ask Li Han about the matter of going to Mount Tai to worship heaven and earth.

古文：播云：待问泰山府君。
现代文：李播说：这得等我问问泰山府君。
English: Li Bi said, "I'll have to ask Taishanfukun about this."

古文：遂令呼之。
现代文：随即，刘仁轨让他把泰山府君喊来。
English: Immediately afterwards, Liu Rengor asked him to call Taishan Fuchun.

古文：良久，府君至，拜谒庭下，礼甚恭。
现代文：喊了好久，泰山府君到了，在庭下拜谒，行大礼。
English: After shouting for a long time, the governor of Taishan Prefecture arrived, bowed before the court, and performed a grand salute.

古文：播云：唐皇帝欲封禅，如何？
现代文：李播说：唐朝皇帝想去你那里祭天地，怎么样？
English: Li Bian said, "The Emperor of the Tang Dynasty wants to go to you to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth. How about it?

古文：府君对曰：合封，后六十年，又合一封。
现代文：府君回答说：应该祭的，六十年之后，还得祭祀一次。
English: The prefect replied, "If it should be offered, it must be offered again after sixty years."

古文：播揖之而去。
现代文：李播向他揖拜而别。
English: Li Bo bowed to him and left.

古文：时仁轨在播侧立，见府君屡顾之。
现代文：当时刘仁轨在李播身旁站着，只见那府君连着瞅了他几眼。
English: At that time, Liu Renzhong was standing next to Li Xuan, only to see the prefect take a few glances at him.

古文：播又呼回曰：此是唐宰相，不识府君，无宜见怪。
现代文：李播见状，急忙又把府君喊了回来，说：这位是当朝的宰相，他不认识府君你，不要见怪。
English: Li Boon saw the letter and hurriedly called Fu Jun back, saying: This is the prime minister of the day, he doesn't know you, don't be surprised.

古文：既出，谓仁轨曰：府君薄怪相公不拜，令左右录此人名，恐累盛德。所以呼回处分耳。
现代文：府君出门之后，李播对刘仁轨说：府君有点责怪你没有向他揖拜，并让手下人记下了你的名字，我担心影响祭祀天地那样的大德之事，所以把他喊回来嘱咐了他几句。
English: After the prefect went out, Li Biao said to Liu Renluo: "The prefect somewhat blamed you for not bowing to him, and had your subordinates write down your name. I was worried about affecting the great virtue of sacrificing heaven and earth, so I called him back and ordered him to say a few words."

古文：仁轨惶汗久之。
现代文：刘仁轨听罢惶恐不安，流了好长时间的汗。
English: Liu Renglu listened with trepidation and anxiety, sweating profusely for a long time.

古文：播曰：处分了，当无苦也。
现代文：李播说：我已经跟他说好了，应该没有什么问题了。
English: Li Biao said, "I have already agreed with him, there should be no problem."

古文：其后帝遂封禅。
现代文：之后不久，高宗顺利地登上泰山，祭祀天地。
English: Soon after, Gaozong successfully ascended Mount Tai to worship heaven and earth.

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：高宗时，狄仁杰为监察御史。江岭神祠，焚烧略尽。
现代文：唐高宗时，狄仁杰任监察御史，江畔岭上一带的庙宇，几乎被他烧光了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Gao, Di Renjie served as the inspector of imperial history, and he almost burned down the temples along the riverside ridge.

古文：至端州。有蛮神，仁杰欲烧之。
现代文：一次，他来到端州，见这里有座蛮神庙，便想烧毁它。
English: Once, when he came to Danzhou, he saw a barbarian temple here and wanted to burn it.

古文：使人入庙者立死。
现代文：然而，派去的人刚一进庙就死了。
English: However, the man they sent died as soon as he entered the temple.

古文：仁杰募能焚之者，赏钱百千。时有二人出应募。
现代文：狄仁杰悬赏一百千钱，招募能烧毁此庙之人。当时，有两个人前来应招。
English: When Di Renjie offered a reward of one hundred thousand dollars for anyone who could burn down the temple, two people came forward.

古文：仁杰问往复何用，人云：愿得敕牒。
现代文：狄仁杰问他们来回都需要什么，回答说：想用一下皇帝给你的命令书。
English: Di Renjie asked them what they needed to go back and forth, and replied: "I want to use the order book given to you by the emperor."

古文：仁杰以牒与之。
现代文：狄仁杰把命令书交给他们。
English: Di Renjie handed over the order to them.

古文：其人持往，至庙，便云有敕，因开牒以入，宣之。
现代文：他们二人拿着它，来到庙门口，便说有命令书，并将其打开走了进去，当即宣读起来。
English: The two of them took it, went to the entrance of the temple, said that there was an order book, opened it, went inside, and immediately began to read it.

古文：神不复动，遂焚毁之。
现代文：那神一动不动，整个庙随即被烧毁了。
English: The god did not move, and the whole temple was immediately burned down.

古文：其后仁杰还至汴州，遇见鬼者曰：侍御后有一蛮神。云被焚舍，常欲报复。
现代文：后来，狄仁杰回到汴州，遇到一个看见鬼的人对他说：在你的身后有一个蛮神，说他的房舍被烧了，常常想寻机报复。
English: Later, when Di Renjie returned to Zhangzhou, he met a person who had seen a ghost and said to him, "Behind you, there is a savage god. He said that his house was burned down, and he often looks for opportunities to take revenge.

古文：仁杰问：事竟如何？
现代文：狄仁杰问：事情后来怎么样？
English: Di Renjie asked: How did things turn out?

古文：见鬼者云：侍御方须台辅，还有鬼神二十余人随从。
现代文：那位看见鬼的人说：侍御方须台辅，所以还有二十多个鬼神跟随着你，他也没有别的办法。
English: The man who saw the ghost said: "The attendant must be assisted, so there are more than twenty ghosts and gods following you, he has no other way.

古文：彼亦何所能为？久之，其神还岭南矣。
现代文：时间长了，那些鬼神就都回到岭南去了。
English: After a long time, those ghosts and gods all went back to Lingnan.

古文：王万彻
现代文：王万彻
English: Wang Wanchie

古文：武太后暮年，宫人多死，一月之间，已数百人。
现代文：武则天晚年的时候，宫中有许多人莫名其妙地死去，一个月之内，死了好几百人。
English: When Wu Zetian was in his later years, many people in the palace died inexplicably. Within a month, several hundred people died.

古文：太后乃召役鬼者王万彻，使祝宫中。
现代文：武则天把巫师王万彻召来，让他在宫中仔细勘察了一番。
English: Wu Zetian summoned the sorcerer Wang Wancher and had him carefully inspect the palace.

古文：彻奏曰：天皇以陛下久临万国，神灵不乐，以致是也。
现代文：王万彻奏报说：天皇认为你统治大唐的时间太长了，神灵们不高兴，所以才出现这种事情。
English: Wang Wancheh reported: "The emperor thinks that you have ruled Datang for too long, and the gods are not happy, which is why this has happened."

古文：太后曰：可奈何？
现代文：武则天说：这如何是好？
English: Wu Zetian said: How is this good?

古文：彻曰：臣能禳之。
现代文：王万彻说：我能设法消除灾祸。
English: Wang Wancher said: I can try to eliminate the disaster.

古文：乃施席于殿前，持刀噀水，四向而咒。
现代文：于是在殿前铺好席子，举着刀喷上水，向四周念着咒语。
English: So he spread a mat in front of the hall, held up a knife to spray water, and chanted spells all around.

古文：有顷曰：皇帝至。彻乃廷诘帝曰：天道有去就，时运有废兴。
现代文：过了一会儿，王万彻说皇帝到了，当即就在殿前盘问起皇帝来，说道：天道有去有来，时运有废有兴。
English: After a while, Wang Wancher said that the emperor had arrived, and immediately interrogated the emperor in front of the hall, saying: The way of heaven has a coming and a going, and the fortune of the times has a waste and a joy.

古文：昔皇帝佐陛下，母临四海，大弘姜嫄、文母之化，遂见推载，万国归心。此天意，非人事也。
现代文：当年皇帝辅佐太后陛下，使她统治四海，大力弘扬周族始祖后稷之母姜嫄、文母等人，改变人心风俗，她渐渐受到拥戴，各个小国也归须于大唐，这是天意，不是人的意志所能左右的。
English: At that time, the emperor assisted the empress dowager to rule the four seas, vigorously promoted the mother of the founder of the Zhou people, the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the mother of the

古文：陛下圣灵在天，幽明理隔，何至不识机会，损害生人，若此之酷哉？
现代文：如今，皇帝陛下的圣灵已经升天，阴间和人世的事理是不相通的，你怎么能不顾际遇时会，伤害活人，且如此之残酷呢？
English: Now that the Holy Spirit of His Majesty the Emperor has ascended to heaven, and the affairs of the underworld and the human world are unrelated, how can you, regardless of the circumstances, hurt the living, and be so cruel?

古文：帝乃空中谓之曰：殆非我意，此王后诉冤得申耳。
现代文：皇帝就在空中对王万彻说：这大概不是我的本意，这是死去的王皇后在诉屈申冤呵。
English: The emperor said to Wang Wancher in the air: "This is probably not my intention, this is the dead empress Wang suing for compensation."

古文：何止后宫，将不利于君。
现代文：何止是后宫死几个人呢，这将大大不利于当朝的君主呵。
English: If more than a few people die in the harem, this will be very detrimental to the monarch of the day.

古文：太后及左右了了闻之，太后默然改容，乃命撤席。
现代文：武则天和手下人听得清清楚楚，她沉默无语，脸色变得十分难看，便令人把席子撤掉。
English: Wu Zetian and his men could hear her clearly. She was silent and speechless, and her face became very ugly, so they had the mat removed.

古文：明年而五王援立中宗，迁太后于上阳宫，以幽崩。
现代文：第二年，在五位王子的支持下，中宗登基，武则天迁居到上阳宫内，在这里被软禁而死。
English: The following year, with the support of the five princes, Emperor Zhongzong ascended the throne, and Emperor Wu Zetian moved to Shangyang Palace, where he died under house arrest.

古文：太学郑生
现代文：太学郑生
English: Taigaku Zheng Sheng

古文：垂拱中，驾在上阳宫。
现代文：唐代垂拱年间，皇帝住在上阳宫里。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the emperor lived in the Shangyang Palace.

古文：太学进士郑生晨发铜驼里，乘晓月，度洛桥。
现代文：太学院的进士郑生早晨起来，乘着天边的晓月之光，由铜驼里出发、过洛桥。
English: In the morning, Zheng Sheng, a graduate of Tai College, got up, took the light of the bright moon on the edge of the sky, started from the Bronze Camel and crossed the Luo Bridge.

古文：下有哭声甚哀，生即下马察之。
现代文：听见桥下有人在哀哀地哭泣。郑生立即跳下马，前去察看。
English: Hearing someone crying sadly under the bridge, Zheng immediately jumped off his horse and went to investigate.

古文：见一艳女，翳然蒙袂曰：孤养于兄嫂，嫂恶，苦我。
现代文：这时，只见一个美丽的女子，她用衣襟蒙住脸说：我是个孤儿，住在兄嫂家中，嫂子十分凶狠，把我折磨得好苦呵。
English: At this time, I saw a beautiful woman, who covered her face with her lapels and said: I am an orphan, I live in my brother's and sister's house, my sister-in-law is very cruel and torments me very much.

古文：今欲赴水，故留哀须臾。
现代文：我今天想投水自尽，因此在要死前想痛哭一场。
English: I want to drown myself today, so I want to cry before I die.

古文：生曰：能逐我归乎？
现代文：郑生说：那么，你能跟我回家吗？
English: Zheng Sheng said: So, can you come home with me?

古文：应曰：婢御无悔。
现代文：那女子回答说：我随你，且不会后悔的。
English: The woman replied, "I will do as you say and I won't regret it."

古文：遂载与之归所居。
现代文：郑生把她扶到马上，当即送回家中。
English: Zheng Sheng helped her onto the horse and immediately sent her home.

古文：号曰汜人，能诵《楚词》《九歌》《招魂》《九辩》之书，亦常拟词赋为怨歌。
现代文：这女子叫汜人，能背诵《楚辞》中的《九歌》、《招魂》、《九辨》等书，也常常写些诗词歌赋，抒发自己心中的幽怨之情。
English: This woman is called Xuanren. She can recite books such as "The Nine Songs," "The Summoning of the Spirits" and "The Nine Distinctions" from "The Analects of Confucius." She also often writes poems and songs to express the bitterness in her heart.

古文：其词艳丽，也莫有属者。
现代文：她的词章艳丽，人世间没有比得上的。
English: There is no equal in the world for the beauty of her lyrics.

古文：因撰《风光词》曰：隆往秀兮昭盛时，播薰绿兮淑华归。
现代文：她的一首风光词这样写道：隆往秀兮昭盛时，播薰绿兮淑华归。
English: One of her scenic sayings reads as follows: "When you are in your prime, you are radiant and beautiful.

古文：故室荑与处萼兮，潜重房以饰姿。
现代文：故室荑与处萼兮，潜重房以饰姿。
English: Therefore, the room is decorated with calyxes, and the heavy room is decorated with ornaments.

古文：见耀态之韶华兮，蒙长霭以为帏，醉融光兮眇眇瀰瀰，远千里兮涵烟眉。
现代文：见耀态之韶华兮，蒙长霭以为帏，醉融光兮眇眇瀰瀰，远千里兮涵烟眉。
English: See the dazzling splendor of the state, think of it as a long time, drunk and bright, far away thousands of miles away.

古文：晨陶陶兮暮熙熙，无蜲娜之秾条兮，娉盈盈以披迟。
现代文：晨陶陶兮暮熙熙，无蜲娜之秾条兮，娉盈盈以披迟。
English: In the morning and in the evening, there's a lot of energy, and there's a lot of energy, and there's a lot of excitement.

古文：醻游颜兮倡蔓卉，縠流倩电兮发随旎。
现代文：醻游颜兮倡蔓卉，縠流倩电兮分随旎！
English: Let's go with the flow, go with the flow, go with the flow!

古文：生居贫，汜人尝出轻缯一端卖之，有胡人酬千金。
现代文：郑生家中很贫困，汜人曾经拿出两丈绸布卖了，有位胡人付给一千斤黄金。
English: Zheng Sheng's family was very poor. A person from Xing once took out two jars of silk and sold them, and a person from Hu paid a thousand kilos of gold.

古文：居岁余，生将游长安。是夕，谓生曰：我湖中蛟室之妹也。
现代文：住了一年多，郑生要去长安游说，这天晚上，汜人对他说道：我是湖中龙宫里的女子呵！
English: After living there for more than a year, Zheng Sheng wanted to go to Chang'an to lobby. That evening, the man said to him, "I am the woman in the dragon's palace in the lake!"

古文：谪而从君。
现代文：因被流放才跟随了你。
English: I only followed you because I was exiled.

古文：后十余年，生兄为岳州刺史，会上巳日，与家徒发岳阳楼，望鄂渚，张宴乐酣。
现代文：今年期限已满，不能长住你这里了，只好跟你告别。郑生怎么也留不住她，她终于走了。十多年之后，郑生的哥哥成了岳州刺史，过上巳节那天，他把家人聚到一起登上岳阳楼，观赏鄂州大地。
English: This year's deadline has expired, I can't stay here any longer, so I have to say goodbye to you. Zheng Sheng couldn't keep her, she finally left. More than ten years later, Zheng Sheng's brother became the history of Yuezhou. On the day of the Snake Festival, he gathered his family together to climb Yueyang Tower and enjoy the land of Ezhou.

古文：生愁思吟曰：情无限兮荡洋洋，怀佳期兮属三湘。
现代文：宴间，鼓乐齐鸣，酒兴正酣，郑生不由生出一丝愁绪，吟道：情无限兮荡洋洋，怀佳期兮属三湘。
English: During the banquet, the drums were beating in unison, the wine was flowing, and Zheng Sheng couldn't help but feel a little sad. He chanted, "Feelings are boundless and vibrant, the auspicious period belongs to Sanxiang."

古文：声未终，有画舻浮漾而来，中为彩楼，高百余尺。其上帷帐栏笼，尽饰帷囊。
现代文：话音未落，有一只漂亮的长方形船顺水而来，中间扎着彩楼，一百多尺高，上面有栏杆，四周盖着帷帐，装饰得十分讲究。
English: While he was still speaking, a beautiful rectangular boat came floating down the river. In the middle of the boat was a pavilion, more than a hundred feet high, with a railing on top, covered with curtains on all sides, and very elaborately decorated.

古文：有弹弦鼓吹者，皆神仙峨眉，被服烟电，裾袖皆广尺。
现代文：有些人正在演奏各种乐器，她们都长着神仙般的蛾眉，身上披着云霞和电光，衣襟和袖子都很宽大。
English: Some are playing various musical instruments, they all have fairy-like moth brows, their bodies are covered with clouds and lightning, and their collars and sleeves are very wide.

古文：中一人起舞，含颦怨慕，形类汜人。
现代文：中间有个人翩然起舞，皱着眉头，眼里闪着爱慕和幽怨之光，看样子像是汜人。
English: In the middle, there is a man dancing, frowning, his eyes glittering with love and bitterness. He looks like a drunkard.

古文：舞而歌曰：泝青春兮江之隅，拖湖波兮袅绿裾。
现代文：她边舞边唱道：溯青春兮江之隅，拖湖波兮袅绿裙。
English: She sang as she danced: tracing youth to the corner of the river, dragging the lake waves to wear a green skirt.

古文：荷拳拳兮来舒，非同归兮何如？
现代文：荷拳拳兮来舒，非同归兮何如？
English: What is the difference between a game of boxing and a game of boxing?

古文：舞毕，敛袖索然。
现代文：跳完了舞，她神情黯然地收起袖子。
English: When the dance was over, she rolled up her sleeves gloomily.

古文：须臾，风涛崩怒，遂不知所往。
现代文：不一会儿，忽然间狂风大作，波涛汹涌，不知道她和那船到哪里去了。
English: In a little while there was suddenly a great storm with rough seas, and it was not known where she and the ship had gone.

古文：赵州参军妻
现代文：赵州参军妻
English: Zhao Zhou's wife joins the army

古文：赵州卢参军，新婚之任，其妻甚美。
现代文：赵州有位卢参军。新婚之后上任。他的妻子相当漂亮。
English: In Zhaozhou, there is a Lu who joined the army. He took office after he got married. His wife is quite beautiful.

古文：数年，罢官还都。
现代文：几年之后，他被罢官回到家中。
English: A few years later, he was demoted and returned home.

古文：五月五日，妻欲之市，求续命物，上于舅姑。车已临门，忽暴心痛，食顷而卒。
现代文：五月初五这天，妻子想到市场买些有益老人长寿的食物，送给公婆，车已到了门口，忽然见得心疼不止，一会儿就死了。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, his wife wanted to go to the market to buy some food that was beneficial to the longevity of the elderly and give it to her in-laws. When the car arrived at the door, she was so distressed that she died in an instant.

古文：卢生号哭毕，往见正谏大夫明崇俨，扣门甚急。
现代文：卢某大哭一场之后，去拜见正谏大夫明崇俨。
English: After crying a lot, Lu went to see Dr. Zhengqi Ming Chongyu.

古文：崇俨惊曰：此端午日，款关而厉，是必有急。
现代文：门敲得很急，明崇俨吃惊地说：这端午佳节，门敲得这样响，必定有什么急事。
English: The knocking on the door was very urgent, and Ming Chongyao said in surprise: This Dragon Boat Festival, the door is knocking so loudly, there must be something urgent.

古文：遂趋而出。
现代文：说罢迎出门去。
English: Say goodbye and go out.

古文：卢氏再拜，具告其事。
现代文：卢某又向他揖拜一番，详细地向他说出事情的经过。
English: Lu bowed to him again and told him the details of the incident.

古文：明云：此泰山三郎所为。
现代文：明崇俨说：这是泰山府君的三公子干的呀！
English: Ming Chongjun said, "This was done by the three nobles of Taishan prefecture!

古文：遂书三符以授卢：还家可速烧第一符，如人行十里，不活；更烧其次，若又不活；更烧第三符。
现代文：随即画了三道符交给卢某，并告诉他：回家可以立即烧第一道符，如果你走出十里地她还没有活，就再烧第二道符。
English: He then drew three symbols and handed them to Lu, telling him that he could immediately burn the first symbol when he got home, and if she was still alive when he got ten miles away, he could burn the second symbol.

古文：横死必当复生，不来真死矣。
现代文：如果还没有活过来，再烧第三道符，意外死亡之人就必定能够复活。如果再不复活，那就是真死了。
English: If they have not come back to life, then burn the third charm, and the person who died by accident will definitely be able to come back to life. If they do not come back to life, then they are truly dead.

古文：卢还如言，累烧三符，其妻遂活，顷之能言。
现代文：卢某回到家中，照他说的去做，连烧三道符，妻子终于活了过来，一会儿便能讲话了。
English: Lu returned home, did as he was told, and even burned three incense sticks. Finally, his wife came back to life and was able to speak in a short time.

古文：初云：被车载至泰山顶，别有宫室，见一年少，云是三郎。令侍婢十余人拥入别室，侍妆梳。
现代文：她开始说：我被车拉到泰山顶上，那里另外还有宫殿。我看见一个少年，说是叫三郎，他让十多个侍从婢女将我拥入一间屋子里，为我梳妆打扮。
English: She began: "I was taken by car to the top of Mount Tai, where there is also a palace, and I saw a young boy, he said his name was Saburo, and he had more than ten servants herd me into a room and dress me up.

古文：三郎在堂前，与他少年双陆，候妆梳毕，方拟宴会。
现代文：三郎站在堂前跟别的少年玩一种叫 双陆 的博戏。
English: Saburo is standing in front of the hall, playing a game called Shuanglu with other boys.

古文：婢等令速妆，已缘眷恋故人，尚且悲泪。
现代文：等我梳妆完毕，才能准备婚礼的筵席，所以婢女们让我快点打扮。我因为眷恋于夫君，便悲伤地流下眼泪。
English: When I finished dressing, I could not prepare the wedding banquet, so the maidservants asked me to dress quickly. Because I was attached to my husband, I shed tears sadly.

古文：有顷，闻人款门云：是上利功曹，适奉都使处分，令问三郎，何以取户家妇？
现代文：有顷，听人敲门说：我是上面派来的功曹史，奉都使的吩咐，来问一下三郎，为什么要娶卢家的媳妇？
English: Suddenly, someone knocked on the door and said, "I am Gong Cao Shi, sent from above, by order of the imperial envoy, to ask Saburo why he wants to marry the Lu family's daughter-in-law."

古文：宜即遣还。
现代文：应该立即送她回去。
English: She should be sent back immediately.

古文：三郎怒云：自取他人之妻，预都使何事！
现代文：三郎气冲冲地说： 我娶他人的媳妇，跟都使有什么关系？ 
English: Saburo said angrily, "What does my marrying someone else's daughter-in-law have to do with anything?

古文：呵功曹令去。
现代文：把功曹史斥责一番，让他马上回去。
English: reprimand Gong Cao Shi and let him go back immediately.

古文：相与往复，其辞甚恶。
现代文：二人你一句我一句，言词十分激烈。
English: The two of you are at each other's throats, the words are very heated.

古文：须臾，又闻款门云：是直符使者，都使令取卢家妇人。
现代文：一会儿，又听有人敲门说： 我是持符的使者，都使让我带卢家媳妇回去。
English: After a while, someone knocked on the door and said, "I'm a messenger with a sign," and they all asked me to take Lu's daughter-in-law back with me.

古文：对局劝之，不听。
现代文：对局的少年劝说三郎，三郎不听。
English: The boy at the station tried to persuade Saburo, but Saburo wouldn't listen.

古文：对局曰：非独累君，当祸及我。
现代文：对局中人说： 这件事不仅连累你，也能祸及于我呵。
English: To the person in the middle of the game: This matter not only affects you, but it can also harm me.

古文：又不听。
现代文：三郎还不听，旋即有狂风吹来。
English: Saburo doesn't listen, and soon a fierce wind blows.

古文：寻有疾风，吹黑云从崖顶来，二使唱言：太一直符，今且至矣！
现代文：黑云涌上崖顶，那二位使者拖长声喊道： 天神的公正之符，现在到了！ 
English: Dark clouds gathered on the cliff top, and the two messengers shouted at length: The angel's seal of justice has now arrived!

古文：三郎有惧色。
现代文：三郎害怕了。
English: Saburo was scared.

古文：风忽卷宅，高百余丈放之，人物糜碎，唯卢氏获存。
现代文：大风忽然把整个楼阁卷到空中，足有一百多丈高，然后再抛下来，人和东西全摔得稀烂，唯独我一个人活着。
English: The gale suddenly swept the entire mansion into the air, more than a hundred feet high, and then threw it down, people and things all fell apart, but I alone am alive.

古文：三使送还，至堂上，见身卧床上，意甚凄恨，被推入形，遂活。
现代文：功曹史等三位使者把我的魂魄送回家中。来到堂前，只见我躺在床上，神情凄苦且有些遗憾，那三位使者便推推我，使魂附于体，随即我便活了过来。
English: Gong Cao Shi and three other emissaries sent my soul home. When they came to the hall, they saw me lying on the bed, looking miserable and somewhat regretful. The three emissaries then pushed me, causing my soul to attach to my body, and I immediately came back to life.

