古文：高祖武皇帝四天监十四年
现代文：起，止，一共四年。梁武帝天监十四年
English: a total of four years. The 14th year of Emperor Liangwu's

古文：春，正月，乙巳朔，上冠太子于太极殿，大赦。
现代文：春季，正月，乙巳朔，梁武帝在太极殿给太子举行冠礼，并且大赦天下。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Liangwu held the crowning ceremony for the crown prince in the Taiji Hall, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：辛亥，上祀南郊。
现代文：辛亥，梁武帝在南郊祭天。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Liangwu held a festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：甲寅，魏主有疾；丁巳，殂于式乾殿。
现代文：甲寅，北魏宣武帝患病，丁巳，在式乾殿病故。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty fell ill, and Emperor Ding Si died of illness at the Imperial Palace.

古文：侍中、中书监、太子少傅催光，侍中、领军将军于忠，詹事王显，中庶子代人侯刚，迎太子诩于东宫，至显阳殿。
现代文：侍中、中书监、太子少傅崔光，侍中、领军将军于忠，詹事王显，中庶子代京人侯刚等人从东宫迎接太子无诩来到显阳殿。
English: The chamberlains, the middle librarian, the young prince Fu Cui Guang, the chamberlains, the leading general Yu Zhong, the general Wang Xian, and the middle illegitimate son, the representative of Beijing, Hou Gang, etc. came from the East Palace to greet the crown prince.

古文：王显欲须明行即位礼，崔光曰： 天位不可暂旷，何待至明！ 
现代文：王显想等天亮以后再为太子举行即位仪式，崔光说： 皇位不可以片刻无主，为什么要等到天亮呢？ 
English: Wang Xian wanted to wait until after dawn to hold the enthronement ceremony for the crown prince, Cui Guang said: The throne cannot be without an owner for a moment, why wait until dawn?

古文：显曰： 须奏中宫。 
现代文：王显说： 必须报告中宫皇后。 
English: Wang Xian said: You must report to the Empress.

古文：光曰： 帝崩，太子立，国之常典，何须中宫令也！ 
现代文：崔光说： 皇上驾崩，太子即位，这是国家正常的规定，何必要等侍中宫的旨令呢！ 
English: Cui Guang said, "The Emperor has passed away, and the Crown Prince has ascended to the throne. This is a normal state regulation. Why wait for the order of the Imperial Household Agency?

古文：于是光等请太子止哭，立于东序；于忠与黄门郎元昭扶太子西面哭十馀声： 止。
现代文：于是，崔光等人请求太子停止哭泣，站在东面；于忠和黄门侍郎元昭搀扶太子面向西哭了十多声后停止了哭泣。
English: As a result, Cui Guang and others asked the prince to stop crying and stand in the east; Yu Zhong and Huangmen waiter, the former Prince Akimoto, stopped crying after crying more than ten times facing west.

古文：光摄太尉，奉策进玺绶，太子跪受，服衮冕之服，御太极殿，即皇帝位。
现代文：崔光代理太尉的职务，捧着策书献上印玺和绶带，太子跪着接授了，穿上礼服，走上太极殿，即皇帝位。
English: Cui Guang, acting as the first lieutenant, held the policy book and presented the seal and ribbon. The prince knelt to receive the award, put on a gown, and walked up to the Taiji Hall, that is, the emperor's throne.

古文：光等与夜直群官立庭中，北面稽首称万岁。
现代文：崔光等人和夜间值勤的官员站立在庭中，向北叩头高呼万岁。
English: Cui Guang and other officials on night duty stood in the courtyard, bowing to the north and shouting "long live."

古文：昭，遵之曾孙也。
现代文：元昭是北魏略阳公元遵的重孙子。
English: Yuan Zhao was the great-grandson of the Northern Wei general Liao Yang.

古文：高后欲杀胡贵嫔，中给事谯郡刘腾以告侯刚，刚以告于忠。
现代文：高后想杀掉胡贵嫔，中给事谯郡人刘腾把件事告诉了侯刚，侯刚又告诉给于忠。
English: After graduating from high school, he wanted to kill Hu Guizhen. Liu Teng, a person from Shijiazhuang County, told Hou Gang about the matter, and Hou Gang told Yu Zhong.

古文：忠问计于崔光，光使置贵嫔于别所，严加守卫，由是贵嫔深德四人。
现代文：于忠向崔光请教计策，崔光就让他将胡贵嫔搬到别的住所，严加守卫，因此胡贵嫔深深地感激这四个人。
English: Yu Zhong asked Cui Guang for advice. Cui Guang asked him to move Hu Guizhen to another residence and keep him under strict guard. Therefore, Hu Guizhen was deeply grateful to these four people.

古文：戊午，魏大赦。
现代文：戊午，北魏大赦天下。
English: At noon, the Northern Wei Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：己未，悉召西伐、东防兵。
现代文：己未，召回全部在西面讨伐蜀国和在东面防范淮地的军队。
English: However, he did not recall all the troops in the west to fight against Shu and in the east to guard against Huai.

古文：骠骑大将军广平王怀扶疾入临，径至太极西庑，哀恸，呼侍中、黄门、领军、二卫，云： 身欲上殿哭大行，又须入见主上。 
现代文：骠骑大将军广平王元怀抱病入朝，径直来到太极殿的西殿，悲愤欲绝，叫来侍中、领军、黄门、左右二卫将军，对他们说： 我要亲自上殿哭悼，并要去见圣上。 
English: The cavalry general, Guangping Wangyuan, came to the West Hall of the Taiji Temple with his illness in his arms. He was overwhelmed with grief and anger. He called the attendants, the leaders of the army, the Yellow Gate, and the left and right guards, and said to them, "I will personally go to the temple to weep and mourn, and I will go to see the saint."

古文：众皆愕然相视，无敢对者。
现代文：众人都惊惧地相互看着，没有敢于答话的人。
English: Everyone looked at each other in shock, and no one dared to answer.

古文：崔光攘衰振杖，引汉光武崩赵熹扶诸王下殿故事，声色甚厉，闻者莫不称善。
现代文：崔光整衣举杖，引用汉光武帝死后赵熹扶持诸位藩王下殿的旧事来加以说明，声音和脸色都显得很激动，听的人没有不说好的。
English: Cui Guang dressed up and raised his cane, citing the old story of Han Guangwu after the death of Emperor Zhao Zong supporting the princes of the lower court to explain. The voice and face were very excited, and the listeners did not hesitate to say yes.

古文：怀声泪俱止，曰： 侍中以古义裁我，我敢不服？ 
现代文：元怀的喊声和眼泪都停了下来，说： 侍中您用古代的事理来教导我，我怎敢不服气！ 
English: The healthy cries and tears stopped, and he said: "Waiter, you are using ancient principles to teach me, how dare I not be convinced!

古文：遂还，仍频遣左右致谢。
现代文：于是就回去了，回去后仍然多次派手下人来谢罪。
English: So he went back, and even after returning, he repeatedly sent subordinates to apologize.

古文：先是，高肇擅权，尤忌宗室有时望者。太子太保任城王澄数为肇所谮，惧不自全，乃终日酣饮，所为如狂，朝廷机要无所关豫。
现代文：起初高肇专权，他特别忌恨宗室里面有名望的人，太子太傅任城王元澄多次被高肇诋毁、陷害，害怕不能保全自己，就整天纵酒，做一些象疯子一样的崐举止，朝廷里的重要事务都不参与。
English: At the beginning of Gao Zhao's dictatorship, he especially hated the famous people in his family. Prince Taifu Rencheng Wang Yuancheng was repeatedly slandered and framed by Gao Zhao. Afraid of not being able to protect himself, he drank all day long, behaved like a madman, and did not participate in important affairs in the court.

古文：及世宗殂，肇拥兵于外，朝野不安。
现代文：等到宣武帝病故，高肇统兵在外，朝廷内外都很不安。
English: By the time Emperor Xuanwu died of illness, Gao Zhaotong's soldiers were on the march, and both inside and outside the imperial court were uneasy.

古文：于忠与门下议，以肃宗幼，未能亲政，宜使太保高阳王雍入居西柏堂省决庶政，以任城王澄为尚书令，总摄百揆，奏皇后请即敕授。
现代文：于忠和门下省的官员们商议，由于孝明帝年幼，不能亲自执政，建议要让太保高阳王元雍住进西柏堂处理各种政务，并且任命任城王元澄为尚书令，总管大小官员，而且上报皇后，请她当即用手书授职。
English: Yu Zhong and the officials of the province under his tutelage discussed that since Emperor Xiaoming was too young to govern in person, it was recommended to let the Taibo Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong live in Xibaidang to deal with various government affairs, and to appoint Rencheng Wang Yuancheng as Shang Shuling, the chief administrator of the size of officials, and to report to the empress, asking her to immediately handwrite the post.

古文：王显素有宠于世宗，恃势使威，为世所疾，恐不为澄等所容，与中常侍孙伏连等密谋寝门下之奏，矫皇后令，以高肇录尚书事，以显与勃海公高猛同为侍中。
现代文：王显一向受宣武帝的宠信，凭借权势滥施淫威，被众人忌恨，他怕不被元澄等人所容纳，就和中常侍孙伏连等人密谋停止门下省的奏议，伪造皇后的命令，任命高肇录尚书事，任命王显和勃海公高猛等人共同作为侍中。
English: Wang Xian had always been favored by Emperor Xuanwu. He abused his power and authority by virtue of his power and was hated by everyone. He was afraid that he would not be accepted by people such as Yuancheng, so he conspired with Sun Fulian and others to stop the petition of the province under his command, forged the queen's order, appointed Gaozhao to record the records, and appointed Wang Xian and Bo Haigong Gao Meng and others as attendants.

古文：于忠等闻之，托以侍疗无效，执显于禁中，下诏削爵任。
现代文：于忠等人听到这件事，假借服侍皇上治疗无效的罪名，把王显抓入监牢，下令剥夺他的爵位、官职。
English: When Yu Zhong and others heard about this, they arrested Wang Xian in prison on the pretext of serving the emperor and treating invalid charges, and ordered him to be stripped of his title and official position.

古文：显临执呼冤，直阁以刀镮撞其掖下，送右卫府，一宿而死。
现代文：王显在被抓时大声喊冤，门卫就用刀环撞击他的腋下，将他送到右卫府，一夜就丧了命。
English: When Wang Xian was arrested, he shouted out his grievances. The doorman hit his shins with a knife ring and sent him to the Right Guard House, where he died overnight.

古文：庚申，下诏如门下所奏，百官总己听于二王，中外悦服。
现代文：庚申，朝廷下令批准了门下省的奏议，百官各安己职，听命于二位王爷，朝廷内外都衷心信服。
English: According to Goshun, the imperial court ordered the approval of the petition of the subordinate province, and all the officials were satisfied with their duties and obeyed the orders of the two princes. Both inside and outside the imperial court were sincerely convinced.

古文：二月，庚辰，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：二月庚辰，北魏尊封皇后为皇太后。
English: February Gengchen, Northern Wei Zongfu Empress became the Empress Dowager.

古文：魏主称名为书告哀于高肇，且召之还。
现代文：北魏孝明帝自己称名写信给高肇报告丧事，并且召他回朝。
English: Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty wrote a letter to Gaozhao to report the funeral and called him back to the imperial court.

古文：肇承变忧惧，朝夕哭泣，至于羸悴。归至瀍涧，家人迎之，不与相见。
现代文：高肇承受着这种变故非常优伤、惊惧，整日哭泣，甚至越来越瘦弱憔悴，回到涧时，家里人迎接他，他却不与他们见面。
English: Gao Zhao was very hurt and frightened by this turn of events. He cried all day and even became thinner and thinner. When he returned to Handan, his family greeted him, but he did not meet them.

古文：辛巳，至阙下，衰服号哭，升太极殿尽哀。
现代文：辛巳，他来到皇宫前，登上太极殿穿着丧服号哭。
English: Suddenly, he came to the front of the Imperial Palace, climbed onto the Taiji Hall, dressed in mourning clothes, and wept.

古文：高阳王雍与于忠密谋，伏直寝邢豹等十馀人于舍人省下，肇哭毕，引入西庑，清河诸王皆窃言目之。
现代文：高阳王元雍和于忠秘密商议，将值寝邢豹等十多人埋伏在舍人省内，等到高肇哭完，把他引入西殿，清河王等众王都偷偷交谈着看着他。
English: Goyang King Yuan Yong and Yuzhong secretly negotiated and ambushed more than ten people, including a sleeping leopard, in Shannan Province. When Gaozhao had finished crying, they brought him to the West Hall, and the kings such as the King of Qinghe were secretly talking and watching him.

古文：肇入省，豹等扼杀之，下诏暴其罪恶，称肇自尽，自馀亲党悉无所问，削除职爵，葬以士礼；逮昏，于厕门出尸归其家。
现代文：高肇进了舍人省，邢豹等人扼杀了他，接着，下令公布高肇的罪恶，假称高肇自杀，因此，对他的亲友全都没有加以追究。又剥夺了他的职务、爵位，用士大夫的礼节安葬他。到了黄昏，从侧门把他的尸体运回他家。
English: Gao Zhaozhou entered the Shannan Province, and the Panthers strangled him. Next, they ordered to publicize Gao Zhaozhou's crimes, pretending that Gao Zhaozhou had committed suicide. Therefore, none of his relatives and friends were prosecuted. They also deprived him of his position and title, and buried him with the etiquette of a scholar. At dusk, they transported his body back to his home through a side door.

古文：魏之伐蜀也，军至晋寿，蜀人震恐。
现代文：北魏的军队攻打蜀地，大军开到晋寿，蜀人非常恐惧。
English: The Northern Wei army attacked Shu, and the large army drove to Jinju. The Shu people were very afraid.

古文：傅竖眼将步兵三万击巴北，上遣宁州刺史任太洪自阴平间道入其州，招诱氐、蜀，绝魏运路。
现代文：傅竖眼率领三万步兵攻打巴北，梁武帝派宁州刺史任太洪从阴平抄小路进入州城，招诱氐人、蜀人，并且断绝了北魏军队的运输线路。
English: Fu Zhiren led 30,000 infantry to attack Pakbei, Emperor Liangwu sent Ningzhou to assassinate Ren Taihong, who cut a path from Yinping to enter the state capital, lured the Xiongnu and Shu people, and cut off the transportation line of the Northern Wei army.

古文：会魏大军北还，太洪袭破魏东洛、除口二戍，声言梁兵继至，氐、蜀翕然从之。
现代文：正赶上北魏大部队向北返回，任太洪袭击了北魏的东洛、除口二个戍地，并且声称梁朝军队紧接着就会到来，氐人、蜀人都归顺了他。
English: Just in time for the Northern Wei army to return to the north, Ren Taihong attacked the Northern Wei's Dongluo and Zengkou two provinces, and claimed that the Liang Dynasty army would arrive immediately, and the people of Hunan and Shu all surrendered to him.

古文：太洪进围关城，竖眼遣统军姜喜等击太洪，大破之，太洪弃关城走还。
现代文：任太洪进军包围了关城，傅竖眼派统军姜喜等人攻打任太洪，击败了他的部队，任太洪放弃关城逃了回来。
English: Ren Taihong marched into and encircled Guancheng, Fu Zhigang sent the unified army Jiang Xi and others to attack Ren Taihong and defeated his troops. Ren Taihong abandoned Guancheng and fled back.

古文：癸未，魏以高阳王雍为太傅、领太尉，清河王怿为司徒，广平王怀为司空。
现代文：癸未，北魏任命高阳王元雍担任太傅、兼太尉，清河王元怿为司徒，广平王元怀为司空。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Gaoyang Wang Yuanyang as taifu and taifu, Qinghe Wang Yuanjun as stu, and Guangping Wang Yuanhuai as sikong.

古文：甲午，魏葬宣武皇帝于景陵，庙号世宗。
现代文：甲午，北魏将宣武帝安葬在景陵，庙号为世宗。
English: In the first half of the 19th century, the Northern Wei Dynasty buried Emperor Xuanwu in the Jingling Mausoleum, and the temple's name was Shizong.

古文：己亥，尊胡贵嫔为皇太妃。
现代文：己亥，尊胡贵嫔为皇太妃。
English: Ji Hai, respect Hu Guizhen as the Crown Princess.

古文：三月，甲辰朔，以高太后为尼，徙居金墉瑶光寺，非大节庆，不得入宫。
现代文：三月甲辰朔，使高太后作了尼姑，把她迁居到金墉瑶光寺，不遇到大的节日庆典，不许入宫。
English: In March, the empress dowager was made a nun and moved to the Golden Light Temple. She was not allowed to attend major festival celebrations or enter the palace.

古文：魏左仆射郭祚表称： 萧衍狂悖，谋断川渎，役苦民劳，危亡已兆；宜命将出师，长驱扑讨。 
现代文：北魏左仆射郭祚上书宣称： 萧衍狂妄无道，谋划切断山川沟渠，以致国内劳役繁重，百姓疲弊，灭亡的危险已显露出来，我国应当派将出兵，长驱直入，讨伐敌人。 
English: Northern Wei's left-hand man, Jing Guo, declared in a letter: Xiao Yan is reckless, planning to cut off mountain rivers and canals, so that domestic labor is heavy, the people are exhausted, and the danger of extinction has been revealed. Our country should send soldiers to drive straight into the enemy.

古文：魏诏平南将军杨大眼督诸军镇荆山。
现代文：于是朝廷诏令平南将军杨大眼率领军队镇守荆山。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered Pingnan General Yang Dajian to lead the army to defend Jingshan.

古文：魏于忠既居门下，又总宿卫，遂专朝政，权倾一时。
现代文：北魏的于忠既担任侍中，又总管禁卫事务，于是他独揽朝政，权倾一崐时。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yu Zhong was not only a chamberlain, but also the head of the imperial guards. As a result, he monopolized the imperial government and was at the top of power.

古文：初，太和中，军国多事，高祖以用度不足，百官之禄四分减一，忠悉命归所减之禄。
现代文：起初，在太和年间，国家频繁用兵，孝文帝为了用度不足的原因，把百官的俸禄减少了四分之一。于忠下令全部恢复了减少的俸禄。
English: At first, during the Taiwa era, the state frequently used soldiers, and Emperor Xiaowen reduced the salary of centurions by a quarter for reasons of insufficient use. Yu Zhong ordered the full restoration of the reduced salary.

古文：旧制民税绢一匹别输绵八两，布一区别输麻十五斤，忠悉罢之。
现代文：旧法规定：百姓每织一匹绢要交八两绵，每织一匹布要交十五斤麻作为税收，于忠都加以免除。
English: According to the old law, the people had to pay eight rupees for each yarn, and 15 jin of hemp for each piece of cloth as taxes, and Yuzhong was exempted.

古文：乙丑，诏文武群官各进位一级。
现代文：乙丑，朝廷诏令使文武百官每人晋升一级。
English: Second, the imperial edict promoted each of the 100 civil and military officials to the next level.

古文：夏，四月，浮山堰成而复溃。或言蛟龙能乘风雨破堰，其性恶铁；乃运东、西冶铁器数千万斤沉之，亦不能合。
现代文：夏季四月，浮山堰修成后却又崩溃，有人说蛟龙能乘风雨破坏渠堰，但它本性厌恶铁，于是就运来东西两治几千万斤铁器沉在江里，但是也没能使坝合扰。
English: In the summer of April, after the construction of the Fushan Weir, it collapsed again. Some people said that the dragon can use the wind and rain to destroy the canal weir, but its nature abhors iron, so it transported tens of millions of pounds of ironware to sink in the river, but it could not disturb the dam.

古文：乃伐树为井干，填以巨石；加土其上，缘淮百里内木石无巨细皆尽，负檐者肩上皆穿，夏日疾疫，死者相枕，蝇虫昼夜声合。
现代文：于是，又伐木交错捆绑成井字形，把大石头填进去，在上面加上土，以此截流筑坝。因此，沿着淮河一面里内的树木石头无论大小都被用光，挑担的人肩膀都磨烂了，夏天里疾病成疫，死掉的人互相倾压着，遍地都是，苍蝇蚊虫聚集不散，日夜轰鸣。
English: As a result, trees and stones, both large and small, along one side of the Huai River have been used up, the shoulders of the bearers are worn out, diseases become epidemics in the summer, dead people are pressing against each other, they are everywhere, flies and mosquitoes gather and do not disperse, and roar day and night.

古文：魏梁州刺史薛怀吉破叛氐于沮水。怀吉，真度之子也。
现代文：北魏梁州刺史薛怀吉在沮水打败了叛乱的氐人，薛怀吉是薛真度的儿子。
English: Xue Huaiji, the son of Xue Zhendu, the governor of Liangzhou in Northern Wei, defeated the rebellious Xiongnu in the Depressing Water.

古文：五月，甲寅，南秦州刺史崔暹又破叛氐，解武兴之围。
现代文：五月甲寅，南秦州刺史崔暹又大败叛乱的氐人，从而解除了对武兴的围困。
English: In May, Jia Yin of Southern Qin State defeated the rebels of Jishi, Cui, and Siam, thus lifting the siege of Wu Xing.

古文：六月，魏冀州沙门法庆以妖幻惑众，与勃海人李归伯等作乱，推法庆为主。
现代文：六月，北魏冀州僧人法庆用妖术迷惑百姓，与勃海人李归伯一同作乱，并推举法庆作首领。
English: In June, Fa Qing, a monk from Jizhou in Northern Wei, used magic to confuse the people, and together with Li Guibo, a man from the Bohai Sea, caused a disturbance, and promoted Fa Qing as the leader.

古文：法庆以尼惠晖为妻，以归伯为十住菩萨、平魔军司、定汉王，自号大乘。
现代文：法庆以尼姑惠晖为妻，让李归伯当十住菩萨、平魔军司、定汉王。自己则号称 大乘 。
English: Fa Qing took the nun Hui Yao as his wife, and made Li Guibo the Ten-Dwelling Bodhisattva, the Warlord of Pingma, and the King of Dinghan. He himself was known as the Mahayana.

古文：又合狂药，令人服之，父子兄弟不复相识，唯以杀害为事。
现代文：他又配置狂药，让人服用了这种药后，父子兄弟不再相认，只知道杀人害命。
English: He also arranged for a psychotropic drug to be administered, after which the father and son no longer recognised each other and only knew how to kill and cause death.

古文：刺史萧宝寅遣兼长史崔伯驎击之，伯驎败死。
现代文：刺史萧宝寅派兼长史崔伯攻打法庆的叛军，崔伯战败而死。
English: The assassin Xiao Baoying sent his second-in-command, Strieber, to attack Fa Qing's rebels. Strieber was defeated and died.

古文：贼众益盛，所在毁寺舍，斩僧尼，烧经像，云 新佛出世，除去众魔。 
现代文：众叛贼气焰更加嚣张，所到之处毁坏寺庙，斩杀僧尼，烧毁经像，还说： 新佛出世，除去众魔 。
English: The rebels became even more arrogant, destroying temples everywhere they went, killing monks and nuns, burning scriptures, and saying: A new Buddha has come into the world, removing all demons.

古文：秋，七月，丁未，诏假右光禄大夫元遥征北大将军以讨之。
现代文：秋季，七月丁未，朝廷诏令右光禄大夫元遥作为征北大将军去讨伐法庆。
English: In the autumn, on the third day of July, the Imperial Court issued an imperial edict ordering Uguoglu Doctor Yuan Yao to go to fight against Fa Qing as a general of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：魏尚书裴植，自谓人门不后王肃，以朝廷处之不高，意常怏怏，表请解官隐嵩山，世宗不许，深怪之。
现代文：北魏尚书裴植，自以为门第不比王肃低，因在朝廷里官位不高而常常怏怏不快，就上书请求辞去官职，退隐到嵩山，宣武帝不同意，并且认为他很怪。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Shangshu Pei Zhi, who thought that he was not inferior to Wang Su, and who was often unhappy because he did not have a high official rank in the imperial court, wrote a letter requesting that he resign from his official post and retire to Songshan. Emperor Xuanwu did not agree and thought he was strange.

古文：及为尚书，志气骄满，每谓人曰： 非我须尚书，尚书亦须我。 
现代文：等他作了尚书，志高气傲，常常对人说： 不是我想作尚书，是尚书要由我来作。 
English: When he had finished his book, he was very proud and often said to people, "I didn't want to write a book, I wanted to write a book."

古文：每入参议论，好面讥毁群官，又表征南将军田益宗，言： 华、夷异类，不应在百世衣冠之上。 
现代文：每次他入朝晋见，议论政事时，他都喜欢当面讥讽伤害众位官员。他还上表诋毁征南将军田益宗，说道： 汉人、夷人种类不同，不应当让夷人位在百世衣冠的汉人之上。 
English: Every time he entered the imperial court and discussed political affairs, he liked to ridicule and hurt many officials in person. He also slandered the Southern Expeditionary Army General Tian Yizong on the table, saying: There are different types of Han people and barbarians, and barbarians should not be placed above the hundred-year-old Han people.

古文：于忠、元昭见之切齿。
现代文：于忠和元昭见了他，都恨得咬牙切齿。
English: When Yu Zhong and Yuan Zhao saw him, they gritted their teeth.

古文：尚书左仆射郭祚，冒进不已，自以东宫师傅，列辞尚书，望封侯、仪同，诏以祚为都督雍、岐、华三州诸军事、征西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：尚书左仆射郭祚，总是企图升官，自认为是太子的师傅，就希望也被封侯和封为开府仪同三司，于是朝廷诏令郭祚为都督雍、岐、华三州诸军事，征西将军及雍州刺吏。
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Guo Jie, always tried to be promoted. He considered himself to be the prince's teacher and hoped to be given the title of prince and the title of Kaifu Yi and Three Departments. Therefore, the imperial court decreed that Guo Jie would be the military governor of the three states of Yong, Qi and Hu, the general of the Western Expedition and the assassin of Yongzhou.

古文：祚与植皆恶于忠专横，密劝高阳王雍使出之；忠闻之，大怒，令有司诬奏其罪。
现代文：郭祚和裴植都讨厌于忠专权无道，暗中劝高阳王元雍让他离开朝廷。于忠听后万分愤恨，命令有关部门诬告郭祚、裴植犯了罪。
English: Guo Gan and Pei Zhi both hated the fact that Guo Gan and Pei Zhi had absolute power, and secretly persuaded the Goyang King Yuan Yong to let him leave the imperial court. Guo Gan and Pei Zhi ordered the relevant departments to falsely accuse Guo Gan and Pei Zhi of committing a crime.

古文：尚书奏： 羊祉告植姑子皇甫仲达云： 受植旨，诈称被诏，帅合部曲欲图于忠。 
现代文：尚书诬告说： 羊祉报告裴值的表弟皇甫仲达说： 我受了裴植的命令，假称受圣上的旨令，率领部曲想要图谋于忠。 
English: Shangshu made a false accusation, saying: "I received an order from Pei Zhi, pretending to receive an order from the Holy Father, and led a detachment to plot against Zhongda."

古文：臣等穷治，辞不伏引；然众证明昞，准律当死。
现代文：我们已经审理完毕，他们虽然不认罪，但是各种证据都很清楚，按法律应判死刑。
English: We have finished the trial, and although they pleaded not guilty, all the evidence is clear, according to the law, they should be sentenced to death.

古文：众证虽不见植，皆言 仲达为植所使，植召仲达责问而不告列 。
现代文：这些证据中虽没有直接是裴植的，但大家都说： 皇甫仲达是被裴植指挥，裴植曾叫来皇甫仲达责问他，但没有告发他。 
English: Although none of these evidences were directly related to Baizhe, everyone said: Emperor Zhongda was directed by Baizhe. Baizhe had summoned Emperor Zhongda to question him, but did not denounce him.

古文：推论情状，不同之理不可分明，不得同之常狱，有所降减，计同仲达处植死刑。
现代文：按常理推算，看不出来他们之间有什么明显的区别，因此不能和其他案子一样，减轻他的罪过，所以一致提议对裴植处以和皇甫仲达一样的死刑。
English: According to common sense, there is no obvious difference between them. Therefore, it is not possible to mitigate his crime as in other cases. Therefore, it is unanimously proposed to impose the same death penalty on Baizhe as that of Emperor Zhongda.

古文：植亲帅城众，附从王化，依律上议，乞赐裁处。 
现代文：裴植曾经亲自率领全城的人马归顺我国，按法律条文作以上议处，但请作出裁决。 
English: Pei Zhi once personally led the entire city to surrender to our country, according to the provisions of the law to make the above discussion, but please make a ruling.

古文：忠矫诏曰： 凶谋既尔，罪不当恕；虽有归化之诚，无容上议，亦不须待秋分。 
现代文：于忠假传圣旨说： 罪行已经犯下，他的罪恶不能宽恕；虽然也有过诚心归顺我们的行为，但不必再经审理，也不用等秋分过后再判死刑。 
English: "The crime has already been committed, and his crime cannot be forgiven; although there was also a sincere act of submission to us, it does not need to be tried again, nor does it need to wait until after the autumn equinox to be sentenced to death.

古文：八月，己亥，植与郭祚及都水使者杜陵韦俊皆赐死。
现代文：八月乙亥，裴植和郭祚以及都水使者杜陵、韦隽都被赐死。
English: In August, Yi Hai, Pei Zhi and Guo Gan, as well as the emissaries of the capital of water, Du Ling and Wei Gan, were all put to death.

古文：俊，祚之婚家也。
现代文：韦隽是郭祚的亲家。
English: Wei Wei is Guo Wei's family.

古文：忠又欲杀高阳王雍，崔光固执不从，乃免雍官，以王还第。
现代文：于忠又想杀高阳王元雍，崔光坚决不同意，于是就罢免了元雍的官职，以亲王的身份回到了他的王府。
English: Yu Zhong also wanted to kill the Goyang King Yuan Yong, but Cui Guang firmly disagreed, so he dismissed Yuan Yong's official position and returned to his royal palace as a prince.

古文：朝野冤愤，莫不切齿。
现代文：朝廷内外都含冤忍愤，没有人不咬牙切齿。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, there was a sense of injustice and resentment, and no one did not grit their teeth.

古文：丙子，魏尊胡太妃为皇太后，居崇训宫。
现代文：丙子，北魏尊封胡太妃为皇太后，让她住进崇训宫。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong appointed Empress Dowager Hu as the empress dowager, and had her live in the Chongxun Palace.

古文：于忠领崇训卫尉，刘腾为崇训太仆，加侍中，侯刚为侍中抚军将军。
现代文：于忠担任崇训宫的卫尉，刘腾担任崇训宫的太仆，加官侍中，侯刚为侍中抚军将军。
English: Yu Zhong served as the guard of the palace, Liu Teng served as the eunuch of the palace, and Hou Gang served as the general of the army.

古文：又以太后父国珍为光禄大夫。
现代文：又封胡太后的父亲胡国珍为光禄大夫。
English: Hu Guozhen, the father of Empress Dowager Hu, was also named Guanglu Doctor.

古文：庚辰，定州刺史田超秀帅众三千降魏。
现代文：庚辰，梁朝定州刺史田超秀率领三千兵马投降了北魏。
English: Geng Chen, Liang Chao, Dingzhou, Zhi Shi, Tian Chaoxiu led 3,000 soldiers and horses to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：戊子，魏大赦。
现代文：戊子，北魏实行大赦。
English: In response, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：己丑，魏清河王怿进位太傅，领太尉，广平王情为太保，领司徒，任城王澄为司空。
现代文：己丑，北魏清河王元怿晋升太傅的职位，兼任太尉，广平王元怀作了太保，兼任司徒，任城王元澄任司空。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Yuancheng of the Qing Dynasty was promoted to the position of Taifu and concurrently served as Taifu, King Guangping of the Yuan Dynasty served as Taifo and concurrently served as Sifu, and King Yuancheng of the Chengdu Dynasty served as Sifu.

古文：庚寅，魏以车骑大将军于忠为尚书令，特进崔光为车骑大将军，并加仪同三司。
现代文：庚寅，北魏孝明帝任命车骑大将军王忠为尚书令，特进崔光为车骑将军，并加封开府仪同三司。
English: Geng Yin, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming appointed the cavalry general Wang Zhong as Shang Shuling, the special envoy Cui Guang as the cavalry general, and awarded the title of Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：魏江阳王继，熙之曾孙也，先为青州刺史，坐以良人为婢夺爵。
现代文：北魏江阳王无继是元熙的曾孙。他原来是青州刺史，因为犯了把良民的女孩当作婢女的罪被剥夺了爵位。
English: Jiangyang Wang Muxi of the Northern Wei Dynasty was the great-grandson of Yuan Xi. He was originally from Qingzhou and was stripped of his title for the crime of using a girl from the gentry as a servant.

古文：继子叉娶胡太后妹，壬辰，诏复继本封，以叉为通直散骑侍郎，叉妻为新平郡君，仍拜女侍中。
现代文：元继的儿子元叉娶了胡太后的妹妹，壬辰，北魏孝明帝下令恢复了元继的原封位，让元叉作了通值散骑侍郎。元叉的妻子是新平郡君，仍担任了女侍中的职务。
English: Yuan Ji's son, Yuan Zha, married Empress Dowager Hu's younger sister, Im Chen. The Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming ordered the restoration of Yuan Zha's original position, and made Yuan Zha a full-fledged horseman. Yuan Zha's wife, Xinping Gu Jun, still held the position of maid of honor.

古文：群臣奏请皇太后临朝称制，九月，乙未，灵太后始临朝听政，犹称令以行事，群臣上书称殿下。
现代文：众大臣上书请求太后临朝，她的命令称为 制 ，作行皇帝的权力，九月乙未，胡太后开始临朝听政，但还是不称 制 而称令，大臣们上书仍称呼她为殿下。
English: The ministers petitioned the Empress Dowager Lin for permission to use the title "Her Imperial Highness" in their petition. In September, Empress Dowager Hu began to attend the imperial court to listen to the government, but still called her "Her Imperial Highness" instead of "Her Majesty."

古文：太后聪悟，颇好读书属文，射能中针孔，政事皆手笔自决。
现代文：太后聪明机智，非常喜爱读书写作，射箭能射中针孔，一切政务都亲手批阅处理。
English: The empress dowager was clever and witty, loved reading and writing very much, could shoot a pinhole in archery, and handled all government affairs with her own hands.

古文：加胡国珍侍中，封安定公。
现代文：她提拔胡国珍为侍中，封为安定公。
English: She promoted Hu Guozhen to the position of chamberlain and named him Prince of Stability.

古文：自郭祚等死，诏令生杀皆出于忠，王公畏之，重足胁息。
现代文：自从郭祚等人死后，诏书、命令、生杀予夺之权都由于忠决定，王公们都畏惧他，人人蹑手蹑脚、敛声屏气。
English: Since the death of Guo Xuan and others, imperial edicts, orders, and the power to give and take life and death are all determined by loyalty. Princes are afraid of him, and everyone cringes and holds their breath.

古文：太后既亲政，乃解忠侍中、领军、崇训卫尉，止为仪同三司、尚书令。
现代文：太后亲政后，就解除了于忠侍中、领军、崇训卫尉的职务，只让他作仪同三司、尚书令。
English: After the Empress Dowager's accession to the throne, she relieved Yu of his duties as a loyal attendant, army leader, and guard lieutenant, and only allowed him to perform ceremonial duties such as the three offices and the imperial edict.

古文：后旬馀，太后引门下侍官于崇训宫，问曰： 忠在端揆，声望何如？ 
现代文：过了十几天，太后把门下侍官叫到崇训宫，问道： 于忠在朝廷中为百官之首，声望如何？ 
English: After a dozen days had passed, the empress dowager called her attendants to the palace and asked: Yu Zhong is the head of a hundred officials in the imperial court, how is his reputation?

古文：咸曰： 不称阙任。 
现代文：众人都说： 他不称职。 
English: Everyone said: he's not up to the job.

古文：乃出忠为都督冀、定、瀛三州诸军事、征北大将军、冀州刺史；以司空澄领尚书令。
现代文：于是就让于忠出朝任都督冀、定、瀛三州诸军事，征北大将军，崐冀州刺史；让司空元澄兼任尚书令。
English: As a result, he appointed Yu Zhongde as the military governor of the three provinces of Hebei, Ding and Shandong, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the historian of Hebei Province; he also appointed Siku Yuancheng as the official secretary.

古文：澄奏： 安定公宜出入禁中，参咨大务。 
现代文：元澄上书说： 安定公应当可以出入宫禁，并参议重大事务。 
English: Motosumi's petition said: Prince Anding should be allowed to enter and leave the palace and participate in major affairs.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令批准了他的请求。
English: He complied.

古文：甲寅，魏元遥破大乘贼，擒法庆并渠帅百馀人，传首洛阳。
现代文：甲寅，北魏将领元遥击败了大乘贼，擒获法庆和他手下一百多人，将他们斩首并把首级送往洛阳。
English: The Northern Wei general Yuan Yao defeated the Mahayana thieves, captured Fa Qing and more than a hundred of his men, beheaded them and sent their heads to Luoyang.

古文：左游击将军赵祖悦袭魏西硖石，据之以逼寿阳；更筑外城，徙缘淮之民以实城内。
现代文：梁朝左游击将军赵祖悦在西硖石一带袭击了北魏军队，并以西硖石为根据地逼近寿阳，又筑起外城，将淮河周围的百姓都迁进来充实内城。
English: General Zhao Zuyue, the left-wing guerrilla of the Liang Dynasty, attacked the Northern Wei army in the area of Xishuanshi, and used Xishuanshi as a base to approach Shouyang. He also built the outer city and moved the people around the Huaihe River to enrich the inner city.

古文：将军田道龙等散攻诸戍，魏扬州刺史李崇分遣诸将拒之。
现代文：将军田道龙等人分别去攻打北魏的各个寨堡，北魏扬州刺史李崇分别派遣众将领去抵抗。
English: General Tian Daolong and others went to attack the Northern Wei fortresses separately, and Northern Wei Yangzhou chief Li Chong separately dispatched generals to lead the resistance.

古文：癸亥，魏遣假镇南将军崔亮攻西硖石，又遣镇东将军萧宝寅决淮堰。
现代文：癸亥，北魏派遣代理镇南将军崔亮攻打西硖石，又派镇东将军萧宝寅掘开淮河堰。
English: In the Heian period, the Northern Wei dispatched the acting Zhennan General Cui Liang to attack the West Shanshi, and also sent the Zhendong General Xiao Baoying to excavate and open the Huaihe Weir.

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，魏以胡国珍为中书监、仪同三司，侍中如故。
现代文：冬季，十月乙酉，北魏任命胡国珍为中书监、认同三司，并保留侍中的职务。
English: In the winter, in October, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Hu Guozhen as the Chinese librarian, recognized the three divisions, and retained the position of attendant.

古文：甲午，弘化太守杜桂举郡降魏。
现代文：甲午，弘化太守杜桂率领全郡投降北魏。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Du Gui, the governor of Gonghua, led the whole county to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，魏于忠用事，自言世宗许其优转；太傅雍等皆不敢违，加忠车骑大将军。
现代文：当初，北魏的于忠掌握朝中权力，自称宣武帝答应加封他，太傅元雍等人都不敢违背圣上的旨意，于是加封于忠为车骑大将军。
English: At first, Northern Wei's Yuzhong held the power of the Korean and Chinese dynasties. He claimed that Emperor Xuanwu had promised to ennoble him, and Taifu Yuan Yong and others did not dare to go against the sacred will. Therefore, Yuzhong was ennobled as the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：忠又自谓新故之际有定社稷之功，讽百僚令加己赏；雍等议封忠常山郡公。
现代文：于忠又自认为在新旧交替时有安定国家政权的功劳，示意官员们上书建议给他增加奖赏，因此元雍等议封于忠为常山郡公。
English: Yu Zhong also considered himself to have the merit of a stable national regime at the time of the change of the old and new governments, and suggested that the officials submit a letter proposing to increase the reward to him. Therefore, Yuan Yong and others proposed to appoint Yu Zhong as the head of Changshan County.

古文：忠又难于独受，乃讽朝廷，同在门下者皆加封邑。
现代文：于忠却又不敢独享，就示意给在门下省的人一同增加封地。
English: However, Yu Zhong did not dare to enjoy it alone, so he indicated that he would increase the fief together with the people under his tutelage.

古文：雍等不得已复封崔光为博平县公，而尚书元昭等上诉不已。
现代文：元雍等人不得已只好又封崔光为博平县公，而尚书元照等人不断地上书投诉。
English: As a last resort, Yuan Yong and others had no choice but to appoint Cui Guang as the governor of Boping County, while Shang Shu, Yuan Zhao and others continued to write complaints.

古文：太后敕公卿再议，太傅怿等上言： 先帝升遐，奉迎乘舆，侍卫省闼，乃臣子常职，不容以此为功。
现代文：胡太后就命令大臣们再次商议，太傅元怿等人上书说： 先帝升天后，迎接新主、保护防卫，本是作臣子的正常职务，不应当把这个当作功劳。
English: Empress Dowager Hu ordered the ministers to discuss the matter again, and Grand Empress Dowager Yuancheng and others sent a letter saying: After the former emperor ascended to the throne, welcoming the new lord and protecting and defending the country were the normal duties of a courtier, and should not be regarded as a merit.

古文：臣等前议授忠茅土，正以畏其威权，苟免暴戾故也。
现代文：我们从前建议授与于忠封地，正因为畏惧他的威风和权势，不过想暂时免除残暴的行为。
English: We had previously proposed to bestow the title of fiefdom on him, precisely because we feared his pomp and power, but we wanted to temporarily get rid of the atrocities.

古文：若以功过相除，悉不应赏，请皆追夺。 
现代文：如果把功劳和过失相抵，全不应当奖赏，请求全部追还封赏。 
English: If the credit and fault are offset, all should not be rewarded, and all rewards should be recovered.

古文：崔光亦奉送章绶茅土。表十馀上，太后从之。
现代文：崔光也送还封地和官爵，书表递上了十几份，太后终于采纳了。
English: Cui Guang also returned the fiefs and titles, and submitted more than a dozen copies of the book, which the empress dowager finally accepted.

古文：高阳王雍上表自劾，称 臣初入柏堂，见诏旨之行一由门下，臣出君行，深知不可而不能禁；于忠专权，生杀自恣，而臣不能违。
现代文：高阳王元雍上书自责，说道： 我刚刚进入柏堂时，看到圣上的诏书旨令都由门下省作主，臣子作主，国君执行，深知这种事不该发生但却不能禁止。于忠独揽朝权，随意生杀予夺，但是我不敢违抗。
English: Goyang Wang Yuan Yong wrote a letter of self-condemnation, saying: When I just entered the temple, I saw that the edicts of the sacred imperial rescript were carried out by the subordinate provinces, the vassals, and the sovereign. I knew that this kind of thing should not happen, but it could not be prohibited. Yu Zhongxu seized the imperial power and killed and captured at will, but I did not dare to disobey.

古文：忠规欲杀臣，赖在事执拒；臣欲出忠于外，在心未行，返为忠废。
现代文：于忠一心想要杀掉我，幸亏在位任事的崔光坚持不允许。我想把于忠逐出京外，心愿还没达到就被于忠破坏。
English: Yu Zhong single-mindedly wanted to kill me, but fortunately, Cui Guang, who was in charge at the time, did not allow it. I wanted to expel Yu Zhong from Beijing, but my wish was not fulfilled and I was destroyed by Yu Zhong.

古文：忝官尸禄，孤负恩私，请返私门，伏听司败。 
现代文：我这样不理政务空食俸禄，辜负了圣上对我的恩惠，请将我免去职位遣返回家，心甘情愿地听从司寇的处置。 
English: By neglecting government affairs and eating my salary in this way, I have failed to live up to His Holiness's grace to me. Please remove me from my position and send me back home, so that I can willingly obey the governor's orders.

古文：太后以忠有保护之功，不问其罪。
现代文：太后因为于忠有过保护她的功劳，没有查问他的罪过。
English: The empress dowager did not inquire into Yu Zhong's guilt because he had served to protect her.

古文：十二月，辛丑，以雍为太师，领司州牧，寻复录尚书事，与太傅怿、太保怀、侍中胡国珍入居门下，同厘庶政。
现代文：十二月辛丑，任命于忠为太师，兼任司州牧，不久又重任录尚书事，和太傅元怿、太保元怀、侍中胡国珍居住在门下省，一同治理朝政。
English: In December of Xinwu, Yuzhong was appointed as the Grand Master, concurrently serving as the State Pastor, and soon he was given the important task of recording the official records. He lived in the province under his tutelage with Grand Master Yuan Xi, Grand Master Yuan Hui, and Vice Admiral Hu Guozhen, and together they governed the imperial government.

古文：己酉，魏崔亮至硖石，赵祖悦逆战而败，闭城自守；亮进围之。
现代文：己酉，北魏崔亮来到硖石，赵祖悦迎战崔亮失败，只好闭城坚守，崔亮进兵包围了他们。
English: Ji Kun, Northern Wei Cui Liang came to Shanshi, Zhao Zuyue failed to meet Cui Liang, but had to keep the city closed, and Cui Liang's soldiers surrounded them.

古文：乙卯，魏主及太后谒景陵。
现代文：乙卯，北魏孝明帝和太后参拜景陵。
English: Second, the Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor and Empress Dowager visited Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：是冬，寒甚，淮、泗尽冻，浮山堰士卒死者什七八。
现代文：这一年冬季，异常寒冷，淮河、泗水都结了冰，浮山堰的兵士死掉十之七八。
English: This year's winter was unusually cold. The Huaihe River and the Surabaya River froze over, and seven out of ten soldiers at the Fushan Dam died.

古文：魏益州刺史傅竖眼，性清素，民、獠怀之。
现代文：北魏益州刺史傅竖眼，生性清淡简朴，百姓和獠人都依附他。
English: In Yizhou, Northern Wei, Shifu had a piercing eye, a light and simple nature, and the people and the eunuchs were attached to him.

古文：龙骧将军元法僧代竖眼为益州刺史，素无治干，加以贪残，王、贾诸姓，本州士族，法僧皆召为兵。
现代文：龙骧将军元法僧代替傅竖眼作益州刺史，他一向缺乏政治才能，而且还非常贪婪残暴，姓王和姓贾的人，都是这个州的士族大户，元法僧都招收他们当兵。
English: He has always lacked political talent, and he is also very greedy and cruel. People with the surnames Wang and Jia are the big families of the warrior class in this state, and the former monks have recruited them as soldiers.

古文：葭萌民任令宗因众心之患魏也，杀魏晋寿太守，以城来降，民、獠多应之；益州刺史鄱阳王恢遣巴西、梓潼二郡太守张齐将兵三万迎之。
现代文：葭萌人任令宗因为众人心中都怨恨北魏，就杀了北魏晋寿太守，献城投降了梁朝，百姓、獠人大部分都响应他。益州刺史鄱阳王元恢派巴西、梓潼二郡太守张齐率领三万兵马迎战敌人。
English: Because of the resentment of the Northern Wei Dynasty in the hearts of the people, Zou Mengren Renlingzong killed the Northern Wei Dynasty Jin Shou Taishou and surrendered the city to the Liang Dynasty, and the majority of the people and the people of Yunnan responded to him. Yizhou Jishi, Shenyang Wang Yuanwei sent Brazil, and Zhang Qi, the Taishou of Zizhou Second County, led 30,000 soldiers and horses to fight the enemy.

古文：法僧，熙之曾孙也。
现代文：元法僧是元熙的曾孙。
English: The former monk is the great-grandson of Yuan Xi.

古文：魏岐州剌史赵王谧，干之子也，为政暴虐。
现代文：北魏岐州刺史赵王元谧是元的儿子，他为政暴虐无道。
English: Zhao Wangyuanqian, the ruler of Qizhou in Northern Wei, was Yuan's son. He was a ruthless tyrant.

古文：一旦，闭城门大索，执人而掠之，楚毒备至，又无故斩六人，阖城凶惧；众遂大呼，屯门，谧登楼毁梯以自固。
现代文：一天，他命令关闭城门大肆搜捕，抓到人就拷打，施展各种酷刑，并且无故杀了六个人，全城人都惊恐万分。百姓就大声呼喊，攻占城门，元谧登上城楼毁坏了梯子来保护自己。
English: One day, he ordered the city gate to be closed and conducted a large-scale manhunt. When people were caught, they were beaten, tortured in various ways, and six people were killed for no reason. The whole city was terrified. The people shouted loudly, captured the city gate, and the Yuan Shao climbed the city tower and destroyed the ladder to protect himself.

古文：胡太后遣游击将军王靖驰驲谕城人，城人开门谢罪，奉送管籥，乃罢谧剌史。
现代文：胡太后派游击将军王靖骑着驿马晓谕城中百姓，城中百姓打开城门请罪，交还锁匙，于是罢免了元谧刺史的职务。
English: Empress Dowager Hu sent the guerrilla general Wang Jing on horseback to speak to the people in the city. The people in the city opened the gate to plead guilty and handed back the keys, thus dismissing the post of Yuan Zhaozhi.

古文：谧妃，太后从女也。
现代文：元谧的妃子是胡太后的干女儿。
English: The concubine of Yuan Xuan was the daughter of Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：至洛，除大司农卿。
现代文：元谧到了洛阳，被任命为大司农。
English: Yuan Xuan arrived in Luoyang and was appointed as the chief of farmers.

古文：太后以魏主尚幼，未能亲祭，欲代行祭事；礼官博议，以为不可。
现代文：胡太后因为孝明帝年龄尚幼，不能亲理朝政，便想代替他进行祭祀之事，礼官多方议论后认为不可以。
English: Empress Dowager Hu, because Emperor Xiaoming was still young and could not personally rule the Imperial Court, wanted to perform the ritual instead of him. After much discussion, the etiquette official thought it was unacceptable.

古文：太后以问侍中崔光，光引汉和熹邓太后祭宗庙故事，太后大悦，遂摄行祭事。
现代文：太后以这事询问侍中崔光，崔光引用汉朝和熹邓太后祭宗庙的旧事，认为可以，太后非常高兴，于是代行祭祀的事务。
English: The empress dowager inquired about this matter with the chamberlain Choe Kwang. Choe Kwang cited the old story of the Han Dynasty and the Dowager Empress Dowager Deng's ancestral temple, and thought it was possible. The empress dowager was very pleased, so she performed the ritual on her behalf.

古文：高祖武皇帝四天监十五年
现代文：北魏南荆州刺史桓叔兴上书请求不再隶属东荆州，被批准。天监十五年
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Southern Jingzhou was annexed by the Southern Jingzhou, and Uncle Huan Xing's petition to no longer belong to the Eastern Jingzhou was approved.

古文：春，正月，戊辰朔，魏大赦，改元熙平。
现代文：春季，正月戊辰，北魏大赦天下，改年号为熙平。
English: Spring, the first month of Bo Chen, the Northern Wei Dynasty was amnestied, and the year was changed to Xi Ping.

古文：魏崔亮攻硖石未下，与李崇屡约水陆并进，崇违期不至。
现代文：北魏崔亮攻打硖石城没能攻下来，就和李崇约定水陆并进，李崇多次违反约定时间不来。
English: When the Northern Wei Cui Liang failed to attack Shanshi City, he agreed with Li Chong to advance by land and sea. Li Chong repeatedly violated the agreed time and did not come.

古文：胡太后以诸将不壹，乃以吏部尚书李平为使持节、镇军大将军兼尚书右仆射，将步骑二千赴寿阳，别为行台，节度诸军，如有乖异，以军法从事。
现代文：胡太后因为众将不和，就委任吏部尚书李平为使持节、镇军大将军兼尚书右仆射，率领步兵、骑兵二千人赶到寿阳，另立行台，指挥调遣各部队，如果有违抗不听命令的人，便用军法来制裁。
English: Because of the discord among the generals, the Empress Dowager Hu appointed Shangshu Li Ping, the head of the cadre department, as the envoy, and Shangshu Yu, the general of the town army, as his right-hand man. He led 2,000 infantry and cavalry to Shouyang, set up a separate platform, commanded and dispatched various troops, and used military law to sanction those who disobeyed orders.

古文：萧宝寅遣轻车将军刘智文等渡淮，攻破三垒；二月，乙巳，又败将军垣孟孙等于淮北。
现代文：萧宝寅派轻军将军刘智文等人渡过淮河，攻破了三座营垒。二月乙巳，又大淮河北部打败了将军垣孟孙等人。
English: Xiao Baoying sent the light army general Liu Zhifeng and others to cross the Huai River and broke through three camps. In February, the northern part of the Great Huai River defeated the general Qi Mengsun and others.

古文：李平至硖石，督李崇、崔亮等刻日水陆进攻，无敢乖互，战屡有功。
现代文：李平来到硖石，督促李崇、崔亮等军队水陆并进，没有人敢违背命令，几次作战都获胜。
English: Li Ping came to Shanshi and urged Li Chong, Cui Liang and other troops to advance by land and sea. No one dared to disobey the order, and they won several battles.

古文：上使左卫将军昌义之将兵救浮山，未至，康绚已击魏兵，却之。
现代文：梁武帝派左卫将军昌义之领兵去解救浮山，军队没有赶到时，康绚已经开始攻打北魏军队，击退了他们。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent the leader of the Left Guards, General Chang Yi, to rescue Fushan. When the army did not arrive, Kang Hua had already begun to attack the Northern Wei army and repelled them.

古文：上使义之与直阁王神念溯淮救硖石。
现代文：梁武帝派昌义之和直王神念溯淮河而上以援救硖石。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent the gods Changyi and Zhiwang to the Huai River to rescue Shishi.

古文：崔亮遣将军博陵崔延伯守下蔡，延伯与别将伊甕生夹淮为营。
现代文：崔亮派遣将军博陵人崔延伯驻守下蔡，崔延伯和副将伊瓮生沿着淮河崐两岸扎营。
English: Cui Liang sent Cui Yanbo, a general from Boling, to garrison the Lower Cai, and Cui Yanbo and his deputy, Yi Yansheng, camped along both banks of the Huaihe River.

古文：延伯取车轮去辋，削锐共辐，两两接对，揉竹为纟亘，贯连相属，并十馀道，横水为桥，两头施大鹿卢，出没随意，不可烧斫。
现代文：崔延伯把车轮的外周去掉，把轮辐削尖，每两辆车对接在一起，用柔软的竹子作成竹索，连贯并列起来，十多辆车并在一起，横在水里作为桥梁，两头设置大辘轳，使桥可以随意出没，不容易烧毁。
English: Cui Yanbo removed the outer circumference of the wheels, sharpened the wheel spokes, docked every two cars together, used soft bamboo to make bamboo ropes, lined up coherently, more than ten cars together, across the water as a bridge, and set up large rafts at both ends, so that the bridge can be freely haunted and not easily burned.

古文：既断赵祖悦走路，又令战舰不通，义之、神念屯梁城不得进。
现代文：既切断了赵祖悦的逃路，又使战船不能通行，昌义之、王神念驻扎在梁城不能够前进。
English: It not only cut off Zhao Zuyue's escape route, but also made the warship impassable. Chang Yizhi and Wang Shennian were stationed in Liangcheng and could not advance.

古文：李平部分水陆攻硖石，克其外城；乙丑，祖悦出降，斩之，尽俘其众。
现代文：李平部署军队分水陆攻打硖石，攻克了外城。乙丑，赵祖悦出城投降，被杀掉，他的部下都被俘获。
English: Li Ping deployed the army to attack Shanshi by land and sea, and conquered the outer city. Yigu, Zhao Zuyue left the city to surrender, was killed, and his subordinates were captured.

古文：胡太后赐崔亮书，使乘胜深入。
现代文：胡太后赐给崔亮书信，命令他乘胜深入。
English: Empress Dowager Hu gave Cui Liang a letter, ordering him to take advantage of the victory and go deeper.

古文：平部分诸将，水陆并进，攻浮山堰；亮违平节度，以疾请还，随表辄发。
现代文：李平分派各将领从水旱两路一同出发，攻打浮山堰。崔亮违抗李平的指挥，借口患病请求撤还，并且刚刚上书就撤军了。
English: Li Ping dispatched his generals to attack the Fushan Weir from the two directions simultaneously. Cui Liang disobeyed Li Ping's command and requested to withdraw under the pretext of illness, and withdrew the army as soon as the letter was sent.

古文：平奏处亮死刑，太后令曰： 亮去留自擅，违我经略，虽有小捷，岂免大咎！
现代文：李平上书建议判处崔亮死刑，太后下命令说： 崔亮进退自作主张，违背了我的战略计划，虽然获得了一些小的胜利，怎么能免除大的罪过！
English: Li Ping wrote a letter suggesting that Cui Liang be sentenced to death, and the Empress Dowager issued an order saying, "Cui Liang advanced and retreated on his own initiative, which violated my strategic plan. Although he has won some small victories, how can he be absolved of major sins!

古文：但吾摄御万机，庶几恶杀，可特听以功补过。 
现代文：但是我日理万机，希望不要轻易杀戮，可以听任他将功赎罪。 
English: However, I have a lot of opportunities every day, I hope not to kill easily, I can let him redeem his sins.

古文：魏师遂还。
现代文：于是北魏军队就返回了。
English: So the Northern Wei army returned home.

古文：魏中尉元匡奏弹于忠： 幸国大灾，专擅朝命，裴、郭受冤，宰辅黜辱。又自矫旨为仪同三司、尚书令，领崇训卫尉，原其此意，欲以无上自处。
现代文：北魏中尉元匡上书揭发于忠 借着国家有难，独揽大权，使裴植、郭祚蒙受冤屈，宰相贬黜受辱，并且又自己假造圣旨当了仪同三司、尚书令，还兼任崇训卫尉。
English: Northern Wei lieutenant Yuan Kuang wrote a letter exposing that Yuzhong took advantage of the country's difficulties to monopolize power, causing Pei Zhi and Guo Gan to suffer injustice, the prime minister to be humiliated, and he himself forged the holy will and became the gitong, the three departments, and Shang Shuling, and also served as the guard lieutenant of Chongxun.

古文：既事在恩后，宜加显戮，请遣御史一人就州行决。
现代文：推论他的这番心意，是想自处至尊之位，既然事情发生在大赦之后，应当公开诛戮，请求派一位御史到州里去执行处决。
English: It was inferred that his intention was to place himself in the supreme position, and since the incident happened after the amnesty, it should be publicly slaughtered, and a request should be made to send a magistrate to the state to carry out the execution.

古文：自去岁世宗晏驾以后，皇太后未亲览以前，诸不由阶级，或发门下诏书，或由中书宣敕，擅相拜授者，已经恩宥，正可免罪，并宜追夺。 
现代文：自从去年宣武帝去世以后，皇太后没能亲理朝政，因此以前各种事不按规定办理，有的由门下省发出诏书，有的由中书省宣布敕令，擅自相互封任，已经受到皇恩宽恕的，确实应当免罪，但也应当追回封授。 
English: Since the death of Emperor Xuanwu last year, the Empress Dowager has not been able to take the reins of government herself. As a result, various matters have not been handled according to regulations in the past. Some were issued by subordinate provinces, some were announced by the People's Republic of China, and mutual appointments were made without authorization. Those who have been pardoned by the emperor should indeed be exonerated, but they should also recover the award.

古文：太后令曰： 忠已蒙特原，无宜追罪；馀如奏。 
现代文：皇太后说： 于忠已经受到了特别的宽恕，不好再追究罪责了，其他的都同意你的意见。 
English: The empress dowager said, "Yu Zhongran has been specially pardoned. It is no longer good to hold him accountable. Everyone else agrees with you."

古文：匡又弹侍中侯刚掠杀羽林。
现代文：元匡又弹劾侍中侯刚捕杀羽林卫士。
English: Yuan Kuang also impeached the courtier Hou Gang for capturing and killing the defender of Ulin.

古文：刚本以善烹调为尝食典御，凡三十年，以有德于太后，颇专恣用事，王公皆畏附之。
现代文：侯刚本来凭着善于烹调作了尚食典御，大约作了三十年。因为对太后有恩，非常专横霸道，王公大臣都害怕他并且依附他。
English: By virtue of his skill in cooking, Hou Gang had served as Shang Cuisine Emperor for about thirty years. Because he was kind to the empress dowager and very domineering, the princes and ministers were afraid of him and clung to him.

古文：廷尉处刚大辟。太后曰： 刚因公事掠人，邂逅致死，于律不坐。 
现代文：廷尉判处侯刚死刑，太后说： 侯刚是为公事抓人，不经意使人死掉了，按法律不应处死。 
English: The imperial lieutenant sentenced Hou Gang to death, and the empress dowager said, "Hou Gang arrested people for official business, and inadvertently caused people to die. According to the law, he should not be put to death.

古文：少卿陈郡袁翻曰：  邂逅 ，谓情状已露，隐避不引，考讯以理者也。
现代文：少卿陈郡人袁翻说： 您所谓的 不经意 是指罪证已经暴露，却掩藏起来不肯招认，于是就按法律拷问他们。
English: Yuan Fu, a member of the Chen County People's Court, said, "What you call inadvertently means that the incriminating evidence has been exposed, but they hide it and refuse to confess, so they torture them according to the law.

古文：今此羽林，问则具首，刚口唱打杀，挝筑非理，安得谓之 邂逅 ！ 
现代文：现在被侯刚打死的这个羽林卫士，问他什么就供认什么，侯刚却嘴里大叫打死他，无理拷打，怎能说是 不经意 ！ 
English: Now, this guardian of the forest, who was beaten to death by Hou Gang, asked him what he would confess to, but Hou Gang shouted from his mouth that he had beaten him to death. Unreasonable torture, how can it be said to be inadvertent!

古文：太后乃削刚户三百，解尝食典御。
现代文：于是太后才削除了侯刚三面户封邑，解除了他尚食典御的职务。
English: As a result, the empress dowager only abolished the fiefdom of Hou Gang Sanmen, and relieved him of his duties as court eunuch.

古文：三月，戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月戊戌朔，出现日食。
English: In March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：魏论西硖石之功。辛未，以李崇为骠骑将军，加仪同三司，李平为尚书右仆射，崔亮进号镇北将军。
现代文：北魏朝廷议论给西硖石之战中的将领行赏，辛未，任命李崇为骠骑将军，加封仪同三司，李平为尚书右仆射，崔亮增加镇北将军的封号。
English: The Northern Wei court deliberated to reward the generals in the battle of Xishuishi, and in the end, Li Chong was appointed as the general of the cavalry, with the addition of the seal of the three departments, Li Ping was the right-hand man of Shang Shu, and Cui Liang increased the seal of the general of Zhenbei.

古文：亮与平争功于禁中，太后以亮为殿中尚书。
现代文：崔亮和李平在朝廷中争夺功劳，最后太后让崔亮作了殿中尚书。
English: Cui Liang and Li Ping competed for merit in the imperial court, and in the end, the empress dowager let Cui Liang become the prince of the palace.

古文：魏萧宝寅在淮堰，上为手书诱之，使袭彭城，许送其国庙及室家诸比还北；宝寅表上其书于魏朝。
现代文：北魏萧宝寅驻扎在淮河坝上，梁武帝写了亲笔信招诱他，让他攻打彭城，答应把他的国庙和妻妾弟兄子侄们送到北方，萧宝寅把梁武帝的信呈交给北魏朝廷。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xiao Baoying was stationed on the dam of the Huai River. Emperor Liang Wudi wrote a personal letter to lure him to attack Pengcheng, promising to send his national temple and his wife, concubine, brothers and nephews to the north. Xiao Baoying presented Liang Wudi's letter to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，淮堰成，长九里，下广一百四十丈，上广四十五丈，高二十丈，树以杞柳，军垒列居其上。
现代文：夏季四月，淮河大坝修成，长九里，下宽一百四十丈，上宽四十五丈，高二十丈，种上了杞柳树，军营就驻扎在坝上。
English: In the summer of April, the Huaihe Dam was completed. It was nine miles long, 140 meters wide at the bottom, 45 meters wide at the top, and 20 meters high. Willow trees were planted, and the military camp was stationed on the dam.

古文：或谓康绚曰： 四渎，天所以节宣其气，不可久塞，若凿湫东注，则游波宽缓，堰得不坏。 
现代文：有人对康绚说： 四河，是天用来宣泄它的 真气 的，不能够长久地阻塞它，如果凿开水向东灌，那么流水宽缓，大坝才能不破坏。 
English: Someone said to Kang Hua: The four rivers are used by heaven to vent its true energy, and it cannot be blocked for a long time. If the water is chiseled to the east, then the water flow is wide and slow, and the dam can not be destroyed.

古文：绚乃开湫东注。
现代文：康绚就凿开水东灌。
English: Kang Hua chiseled open water East Irrigation.

古文：又纵反间于魏曰： 梁人所惧开湫，不畏野战。 
现代文：又对北魏使用反间计，说： 梁朝人怕的是掘开水，不怕攻城野战。 
English: He also used a countermeasure against the Northern Wei Dynasty, saying: What the Liang Dynasty people are afraid of is digging boiling water, but they are not afraid of attacking cities and fields.

古文：萧宝寅信之，凿山深五丈，开湫北注，水日夜分流犹不减，魏军竟罢归。
现代文：萧宝寅相信了，凿山五丈多深，掘开水向北灌注，水日夜分流仍然不见减少，北魏军队竟然撤军回去了。
English: Xiao Baoying believed it, the mountain was five meters high and deep, the excavated water was poured to the north, the water diversion day and night still did not decrease, and the Northern Wei army actually withdrew.

古文：水之所及，夹淮方数百里。
现代文：水到之处，沿淮河方圆数百里都成了泽国。
English: Water everywhere, hundreds of miles along the Huai River have become a lake country.

古文：李崇作浮桥于硖石戍间，又筑魏昌城于八公山东南，以备寿阳城坏。
现代文：李崇在硖石戌之间搭起浮桥，又在八公山东南筑起魏昌城，来防备寿阳城被毁坏，居民们分散到山丘上。
English: Li Chong built a pontoon bridge between the rocks and built Wei Chang City in the southeast of Ba Gong Mountain to prevent Shouyang City from being destroyed and its residents dispersed to the hills.

古文：居民散就冈垄，其水清澈，俯视庐舍冢墓，了然在下。
现代文：水非常清流澈，向下俯视，房屋墓穴都清晰地浮在水中。
English: The water is very clear, looking down, the houses and tombs are clearly floating in the water.

古文：初，堰起于徐州境内，刺史张豹子宣言，谓己必掌其事；既而康绚以他官来监作，豹子甚惭。
现代文：起初，淮河坝从徐州境内建起，刺史张豹子宣称，认为自己一定能掌管这件事，等到后来康绚以其他的官职来监督建坝，张豹子非常恼怒。
English: At first, the Huaihe Dam was built from the territory of Xuzhou, and Zhang Leopardi, the chief historian, declared that he thought he would be able to control the matter. When Kang Hua later supervised the construction of the dam with other official positions, Zhang Leopardi was very angry.

古文：俄而敕豹子受绚节度，豹子遂谮绚与魏交通，上虽不纳，犹以事毕征绚还。
现代文：不久，张豹子受令由康绚管辖，他就诬告康绚和北魏勾通，梁武帝虽然没有听信他的话，却用工程完毕为理由召回了康绚。
English: Soon, Zhang Leopards was ordered to be under the jurisdiction of Kang Hua. He falsely accused Kang Hua of colluding with the Northern Wei Dynasty. Although Emperor Liang Wudi did not believe him, he recalled Kang Hua on the grounds that the project had been completed.

古文：魏胡太后追思于忠之功，曰： 岂宜以一谬弃其馀勋！ 
现代文：北魏胡太后追忆于忠的功劳，说： 怎么能凭着一次错误就不承认他的其他功绩！ 
English: The Empress Dowager Hu of the Northern Wei Dynasty recalled the merits of Zhong, saying: "How can one mistake not recognize his other merits!

古文：复封忠为灵寿县公，亦封崔光为平恩县侯。
现代文：便重新封于忠为灵寿县公，也封崔光为平恩县侯。
English: Yuzhong was reinstated as Lingshou County magistrate, and Cui Guang was reinstated as Ping'an County magistrate.

古文：魏元法僧遣其子景隆将兵拒张齐，齐与战于葭萌，大破之，屠十馀者，遂围武兴。
现代文：北魏元法僧派他的儿子元景隆带兵抗击张齐，张齐与景隆在葭萌作战，大败景隆，在十多个城市进行屠杀，最后包围了武兴。
English: The Northern Wei Yuan Fa Monk sent his son, Yuan Jinglong, to lead troops to fight against Zhang Qi. Zhang Qi and Jinglong fought in Qimeng, defeated Jinglong, carried out massacres in more than ten cities, and finally surrounded Wuxing.

古文：法僧婴城自守，境内皆叛，法僧遣使间道告急于魏。
现代文：元法僧闭城固守，境内军民都背叛了他，元法僧派使节从小路去向北魏告急。
English: The former legal monk closed the city and held fast. The military and the people inside the country all betrayed him. The former legal monk sent envoys to take the back roads and head for the Northern Wei.

古文：魏驿召镇南军司傅竖眼于淮南，以为益州刺史、西征都督，将步骑三千以赴之。
现代文：北魏用驿车从淮南召回镇南军司傅竖眼，让他作益州刺史、西征都督，率领步兵、骑兵三千人开赴武兴。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty recalled the commander of the Southern Zhen Army, Fu Zhimen, from Huainan with a carriage, and asked him to serve as the governor of Yizhou and the governor of the Western Expedition, leading 3,000 infantry and cavalry to Wuxing.

古文：竖眼入境，转战三日，行二百馀里，九遇皆捷。
现代文：傅竖眼进入武兴境内，转战三天，走了二百多里，作战九次都取得胜利。
English: Fu Zhixian entered the territory of Wuxing, fought for three days, walked more than two hundred miles, and achieved victory in nine battles.

古文：五月，竖眼击杀梁州刺史任太洪。
现代文：五月，傅竖眼杀死了梁州刺史任太洪。
English: In May, Fu Zhizhen killed Liangzhou assassin Ren Taihong.

古文：民、獠闻竖眼至，皆喜，迎拜于路者相继。
现代文：百姓、獠人听说傅竖眼来到，都很高兴，在路上欢迎接待的人络绎不绝。
English: When the common people and the people of Yunnan heard that Fu Zhizhen had come, they were all very happy. There was an endless stream of people welcoming and receiving him on the road.

古文：张齐退保白水，竖眼入州，白水以东民皆安业。
现代文：张齐退回去保卫白水，傅竖眼进入梁州，白水城以东的百姓都安居乐业了。
English: Zhang Qi retreated to defend Baishui, Fu Zhianyan entered Liangzhou, and the people east of Baishui City lived and worked in peace.

古文：魏梓潼太守苟金龙领关城戍主，梁兵至，金龙疾病，不堪部分，其妻刘氏帅厉城民，乘城拒战，百有馀日，士卒死伤过半。
现代文：北魏梓潼太守苟金龙兼任关城戍主，梁朝军队来到时，苟金龙病重，不能指挥。他的妻子刘氏率领振作的城中百姓，凭借城池抗击敌兵，打了一百多天，兵士死伤过半。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zizhao's second-in-command, Guo Jinlong, also served as the castellan of Guancheng. When the Liang Dynasty army arrived, Guo Jinlong was seriously ill and unable to command. His wife, Liu, led the people in the city, who fought against the enemy soldiers with the help of the city, and fought for more than a hundred days. More than half of the soldiers were killed or injured.

古文：戍副高景谋叛，刘氏斩景及其党与数千人，自馀将士，分衣减食，劳逸必同，莫不畏而怀之。
现代文：副将高景阴谋叛变，刘氏杀掉高景以及他的同党几十人，对剩下的将士，平分粮食和衣物，劳逸相同，众人莫不既畏惧她又依赖她。
English: Vice Admiral Gao Jing plotted a mutiny, and Liu killed Gao Jing and dozens of his fellow party members. For the remaining soldiers, food and clothing were equally divided, work and rest were the same, and everyone was both afraid of her and dependent on her.

古文：井在城外，为梁兵所据。会天大雨，刘氏命出公私布绢及衣服悬之，绞而取水，城中所有杂物悉储之。
现代文：水井位于城外，被梁兵把守，正赶上天下大雨，刘氏命令拿出公家和私人的布、绢和衣服接雨，然后绞布取水，用城里所有的器具储存水。
English: The water well is located outside the city, guarded by Liang soldiers, and is catching up with the world's heavy rain. Mr. Liu ordered to take out public and private cloths, cocoons and clothes to catch the rain, and then take water from the cloth, and use all the equipment in the city to store water.

古文：竖眼至，梁兵乃退，魏人封其子为平昌县子。
现代文：傅竖眼来到，梁兵才撤退，北魏封她的儿子为平昌县子。
English: Fu Zhixian came, Liang Bingcai retreated, and the Northern Wei Dynasty made her son the first son of Pyeongchang County.

古文：六月，庚子，以尚书令王莹为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，尚书右仆射袁昂为左仆射，吏部尚书王暕为右朴射。
现代文：六月庚子，梁朝任命尚书令王莹为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，任命尚书右仆射袁昂为左仆射，吏部尚书王为右仆射。
English: In June of Geng Zi, the Liang Dynasty appointed Shang Shuling Wang Ying as Zuo Guanglu Daifu and Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, appointed Shang Shuling's right-hand man, Ya Yuan Ang, as his left-hand man, and appointed Shang Shuling Wang as his right-hand man.

古文：暕，俭之子也。
现代文：王是王俭的儿子。
English: Wang is the son of Wang Jian.

古文：张齐数出白水侵魏葭萌，傅竖眼遣虎威将军强虬攻信义将军杨兴起，杀之，复取白水。
现代文：张齐多次从白水出兵，侵犯北魏的葭萌，傅竖眼派虎威将军强虬攻打信义将军杨兴起，杀死了他，重新夺取了白水。
English: Zhang Qi repeatedly sent troops from Baishui to encroach on the Northern Wei's Shumeng, and Fu Zhigen sent General Huwei to forcefully attack General Xinyi Yang, killed him, and re-captured Baishui.

古文：宁朔将军王光昭又败于阳平，张齐亲帅骁勇二万馀人与傅竖眼战。
现代文：宁朔将军王光昭又在阴平被打败，张齐亲自率领二万多勇士和傅竖眼作战。
English: The Ningshuo general Wang Guangzhao was defeated again in Yinping, and Zhang Qi personally led more than twenty thousand warriors to fight against Fu Zhizhen.

古文：秋，七月，齐军大败，走还，小剑、大剑诸戍皆弃城走，东益州复入于魏。
现代文：秋季，七月，张齐的军队大败，逃了回去，小剑、大剑两地的驻军都弃城逃跑，东益州重新回归北魏。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhang Qi's army was defeated and fled back. The garrisons in Xiaojian and Dajian abandoned the city and fled, and East Yizhou reverted to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：八月，乙巳，魏以胡国珍为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史。
现代文：八月乙巳，北魏任命胡国珍为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史。
English: In August, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Hu Guozhen as the cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Yongzhou Jishi.

古文：国珍年老，太后实不欲令出，止欲示以方面之荣；竟不行。
现代文：胡国珍年老，太后实际上不想让他出行，只不过想给他统治一方的荣誉，所以最终也没有出行。
English: Hu Guozhen was old, and the empress dowager did not really want him to travel, but only wanted to give him the honor of ruling the party, so in the end he did not travel.

古文：康绚既还，张豹子不复修淮堰。
现代文：康绚回去之后，张豹子不再修建淮河堰。
English: After Kang Hua returned, Zhang Leopards stopped building the Huaihe Weir.

古文：九月，丁丑，淮水暴涨，堰坏，其声如雷，闻三百里，缘淮城戍村落十馀万口皆漂入海。
现代文：九月丁丑，淮河水急剧上涨，河堰被冲毁，决堤声象雷鸣一样，三百里以内都能听到。沿着淮河的城镇村庄有十多万人被漂入海中。
English: In September, the water of the Huaihe River rose sharply, the weir was washed away, and the sound of breaking the dike was like thunder, which could be heard within 300 miles. More than 100,000 people in towns and villages along the Huaihe River were swept into the sea.

古文：初，魏人患淮堰，以任城王澄为大将军、大都督南讨诸军事，勒众十万，将出徐州来攻堰；尚书右仆射李平以为： 不假兵力，终当自坏。 
现代文：当初，北魏人担心淮河堰的修建会造成危害，就任命任城王元澄为大将军、大都督南讨诸军事，统率十万大军，即将从徐州出兵攻打淮河堰，尚书右仆射李平认为： 不需要动用兵力，淮河堰最后也会自己毁掉。 
English: At first, the Northern Wei people were worried that the construction of the Huaihe weir would cause harm, so they appointed Rencheng Wang Yuancheng as the general and the grand governor of the south to lead a hundred thousand troops to attack the Huaihe weir from Xuzhou. Shangshu's right-hand man Li Ping thought: There is no need to use troops, the Huaihe weir will eventually destroy itself.

古文：及闻破，太后大喜，赏平甚厚，澄遂不行。
现代文：等到听说河堰已冲毁，太后非常高兴，赏赐李平很多东西，元澄于是也没有出兵。
English: When the empress dowager heard that the weir had been washed away, she was very happy and rewarded Li Ping with many things. As a result, Yuan Cheng did not send troops.

古文：壬辰，大赦。
现代文：壬辰，梁朝颁布大赦令。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：魏胡太后数幸宗戚勋贵之家，侍中崔光表谏曰： 《礼》，诸侯非问疾吊丧而入诸臣之家，谓之君臣为谑。
现代文：北魏胡太后多次驾临皇室贵戚以及功臣显贵的家中，侍中崔光上书劝谏说： 《礼记》上讲，诸侯如果不是为了慰问病人或追悼死人而进入大臣的家中，就叫作君臣之间失礼戏谑。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu of the Northern Wei Dynasty repeatedly visited the homes of the royal family's noble relatives and distinguished heroes. The attendant, Cui Guang, sent a letter to persuade her: "The Book of Etiquette" said that if the princes did not enter the minister's home in order to console the sick or mourn the dead, it would be called impolite banter between monarchs and ministers.

古文：不言王后夫人，明无适臣家之义。
现代文：没有提到王后夫人，是为了表明她们根本没有去大臣家的道理。
English: The reason for not mentioning the Queen's ladies-in-waiting is to show that they never went to the minister's house at all.

古文：夫人，父母在有归宁，没则使卿宁。
现代文：诸侯的夫人，父母在时可以回家问侯，父母不在就派大臣去问侯。
English: The wife of a vassal lord can go home to visit her parents when they are there, but if her parents are not there, she can send a minister to visit them.

古文：汉上官皇后将废昌邑，霍光，外祖也，亲为宰辅，后犹御武帐以接群臣，示男女之别也。
现代文：汉朝的上官皇后将要废掉昌邑王时，霍光是她的外祖父，担任宰相，皇后仍然悬挂武帐来接见众大臣，是为了表明男女要加以区分。
English: When the empress, the highest-ranking official of the Han Dynasty, was about to depose the king of Changyi, Huo Guang, her grandfather, was the prime minister, and the empress still hung the military badge to meet the ministers, in order to show that men and women should be distinguished.

古文：今帝族方衍，勋贵增迁，祗请遂多，将成彝式。
现代文：现在皇族正当繁衍兴盛之时，宗戚勋贵升官的很多，请您的人就多起来了，快要成为常规了。
English: Now, when the imperial family is justly flourishing, there are a lot of relatives who have been promoted, so the number of people who invite you has increased, and it is about to become a regular practice.

古文：愿陛下简息游幸，则率土属赖，含生仰悦矣。 
现代文：希望您减少和停止出游探视，如此则天下归心，众生仰戴。 
English: I hope that you will reduce and stop traveling and visiting, so that the world will come to its senses and all sentient beings will respect you.

古文：任城王澄以北边镇将选举弥轻，恐贼虏窥边，山陵危迫，奏求重镇将之选，修警备之严，诏公卿议之。
现代文：任城王元澄认为对北部边境的守将选择任用得太轻率，难以放心，恐怕敌崐人会觊觎边境，皇陵受到危害，于是上书请求注重守边将领的选派，严整防守的纪律，胡太后下令让百官商议这个意见。
English: Rencheng Wang Yuancheng thought that the choice of the guard of the northern border was too careless, it was difficult to be assured, I am afraid that the enemy will attack the border and the imperial mausoleum will be endangered, so he sent a letter requesting to pay attention to the selection of the guard generals and the discipline of strict defense, and the Empress Dowager Hu ordered the hundred officials to discuss this opinion.

古文：廷尉少卿袁翻议，以为： 比缘边州郡官不择人，唯论资级。
现代文：廷尉少卿袁翻认为： 近来过境州郡中，封官从不按照人才选择，只是论资排辈。
English: Yuan Rong, a courtier, believes that: Recently, in the transit states and counties, officials have never been selected according to talent, but only according to seniority.

古文：或值贪污之人，广开戍逻，多置帅领；或用其左右姻亲；或受人货财请属。皆无防寇之心，唯有聚敛之意。
现代文：有时碰上贪污的官员，大量开设哨所，过多地设置将领，有的人重用他的亲属，有的人接受别人求官的贿赂，全无防范敌人的意识，只有聚敛钱财和贪心。
English: Sometimes corrupt officials are encountered, a large number of posts are opened, too many generals are set up, some people reuse their relatives, some people accept bribes from others seeking office, there is no sense of preventing the enemy, only money and greed.

古文：其勇力之兵，驱令抄掠，若值强敌，即为奴虏，如有执获，夺为己富。
现代文：那些勇猛有力的兵士，就被驱赶着去抢劫掠夺，如果碰到强大的敌兵，就被俘虏，如果捕获到东西，就变成自己的财富。
English: Those brave and powerful soldiers were driven to rob and plunder, and if they encountered powerful enemy soldiers, they were captured, and if they captured something, they became their own wealth.

古文：其羸弱老小之辈，微解金铁之工，少闲草木之作，无不搜营穷垒，苦役百端。
现代文：那些瘦弱年老和年少的人，稍微懂一些冶炼技艺以及木工手艺的，都被从营垒中搜寻出来，让他们遭受百般的苦役。
English: The old and infirm soldiers, who had some knowledge of the art of smelting iron, and some skill in felling trees and weeding, were invariably sought out from the barracks and made to do all kinds of hard labour.

古文：自馀或伐木深山，或芸草平陆，贩贸往还，相望道路。
现代文：其余的人有的在深山中伐木，有的在平地锄草，来回贩运作买卖的人在路上川流不息。
English: The rest of the people are either logging in the deep mountains, or cutting grass on the plains. There is a constant stream of people on the road, going back and forth, selling and buying.

古文：此等禄既不多，赀亦有限，皆收其实绢，给其虚粟，穷其力，薄其衣，用其功，节其食，绵冬历夏，加方疾苦，死于沟渎者什常七八。
现代文：这些人的钱饷不足，供给也有限，都收他们实绢，不给他们现粮，用尽他们的精力，减少他们的衣物，使用他们的人工，却限制他们饮食，让他们一年四季不止息地干，再加上疾病劳苦，死在沟壕中的人十有七八。
English: They were underpaid and under-supplied, they were paid in kind, they were denied ready-made food, they were drained of energy, their clothing was reduced, their labour was used up, their diet was restricted, they were made to work all year round, and in addition to disease and toil, 7 out of 10 of them died in the trenches.

古文：是以邻敌伺间，扰我疆场，皆由边任不得其人故也。
现代文：因此，境外的敌人寻找时机来侵扰我们的边境，这都是由于边境官员的任用不能称职造成的。
English: As a result, foreign enemies are finding opportunities to infiltrate our borders, all because of incompetent appointments of border officials.

古文：愚谓自今已后，南北边诸籓及所统郡县府佐、统军至于戍主，皆令朝臣王公已下各举所知，必选其才，不拘阶级；若称职及败官，并所举之人随事赏罚。 
现代文：我认为从现在开始，南北边境各藩镇以及所管辖的各郡县府佐、统军到戍主，都应由朝廷大臣中王公以下的人举荐他们所了解的人来担任，一定要选拔合适的人才，不拘于出身等级，如果所推荐的人称职或渎职，就连同举荐的人一同赏或罚。 
English: I think that from now on, all the provinces and towns along the north-south border, as well as the county and prefectural capitals under their jurisdiction, from the headquarters of the unified army to the emperor, should be recommended by people below the level of the Minister of the Imperial Court Zhong Wangguo to people they know. It is necessary to select the right talent, regardless of the level of birth. If the person recommended is competent or derelict in his duties, he will be rewarded or punished together with the person recommended.

古文：太后不能用。
现代文：太后没有采纳他的建议。
English: The Queen Mother did not take up his suggestion.

古文：及正光之末，北边盗贼群起，遂逼旧都，犯山陵，如澄所虑。
现代文：到了正光末年，北部边郡的强盗蜂拥而起，终于逼近旧都，侵犯皇陵，正象元澄所担心的那样。
English: Towards the end of the reign, the bandits from the northern border counties swarmed and finally approached the old capital and invaded the imperial mausoleum, just as Motosumi had feared.

古文：冬，十一月，交州刺史李畟斩交州反者阮宗孝，传首建康。
现代文：冬季十一月，梁朝交州刺史李杀死了交州叛乱的阮宗孝，将他的首级送到了国都建康。
English: In the winter of November, Liang Zhaozhou assassinated Nguyn Trng Ho, a rebel of Quang Tri Province, and sent his severed head to the national capital, Jiankang.

古文：初，魏世宗作瑶光寺，未就，是岁，胡太后又作永宁寺，皆在宫侧；又作石窟寺于伊阙口，皆极土木之美。
现代文：当初，北魏宣武帝修建瑶光寺，没能建成。这一年，胡太后又修建永宁寺，都建在宫殿旁边。又在伊阙口修筑了石窟寺，都穷尽了土木建筑的华美。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty built the Luguang Temple, but it was not completed. In the same year, Empress Dowager Hu also built the Yongning Temple, both of which were built next to the palace. She also built the Grotto Temple in Ili, both of which exhausted the splendor of civil engineering.

古文：而永宁尤盛，有金像高丈八尺者一，如中人者十，玉像二。
现代文：其中永宁寺尤其壮丽，有一座高一丈八尺的金像，十座普通人高的金像，两座玉像。
English: Among them, Yongning Temple is particularly magnificent, with one gold statue that is eight feet tall, ten gold statues that are the height of ordinary people, and two jade statues.

古文：为九层浮图，掘地筑基，下及黄泉；浮图高九十丈，上刹得高十丈，每夜静，铃鐸声闻十里。
现代文：还建了一座九层佛塔，挖筑地基时，把地下的泉水都挖出来了。佛塔高九十丈，顶上面的柱子还有十丈高，每当夜深人静，塔上的铃铎声十里以外都听得到。
English: A nine-story pagoda was also built, and when the foundation was dug, the underground springs were all dug out. The pagoda is ninety meters high, and the pillars at the top are ten meters high. It is always quiet at night, and the sound of the bells on the tower can be heard more than ten miles away.

古文：佛殿如太极殿，南门如端门。
现代文：佛殿如同太极殿，南门如同端门。
English: The Buddha Hall is like the Taiji Hall, and the south gate is like the end gate.

古文：僧房千间，珠玉锦绣，骇人心目。
现代文：其中有一千间僧人住房，珍珠玉石锦绣琳琅，使人心摇目眩。
English: Among them, there are a thousand monks' dwellings, made of pearl, jade and embroidery, which make people's hearts flutter.

古文：自佛法入中国，塔庙之盛，未之有也。
现代文：自从佛教传入中原，这样壮观的塔庙从未有过。
English: Since Buddhism was introduced to the Central Plains, there has never been such a spectacular pagoda and temple.

古文：扬州刺史李崇上表，以为： 高祖迁都垂三十年，明堂未修，太学荒废，城阙府寺颇亦颓坏，非所以追隆堂构，仪刑万国者也。
现代文：扬州刺史李崇上书，认为： 高祖迁都将近三十年了，宫殿没能加以修筑，太学也荒废了，城楼府庙也很多都残破了，这不是发扬光大祖宗的基业，作为万国表率的样子。
English: Yangzhou historian Li Chong wrote: It has been nearly 30 years since the emigration of the great ancestors, the palaces have not been built, the universities have been abandoned, and many of the palaces and temples have been destroyed. This is not the way to carry forward the great ancestor's legacy as a model for the world.

古文：今国子虽有学官之名，而无教授之实，何异兔丝、燕麦，南箕、北斗！
现代文：现在国子监虽然有学官的名义，却没有教授学生的实际效用，这与那不能纺织的兔丝、不能收获的燕麦、不能簸扬的南箕、不能盛酒的北斗有什么不同呢？
English: Now, although the State Children's Supervisor has the name of an academic official, it does not have the actual effect of teaching students. What is the difference between this and the rabbit silk that cannot be woven, the oats that cannot be harvested, the southern reed that cannot be waved, and the Big Dipper that cannot hold wine?

古文：事不两兴，须有进退；宜罢尚方雕靡之作，省永宁土木之功，减瑶光材瓦之力，分石窟镌琢之劳，及诸事役非急者，于三时农隙修此数条，使国容严显，礼化兴行，不亦休哉！ 
现代文：事情不能两全其美，应当有进有退，所以应当停止尚方署中雕缕奢靡的劳作，节减永宁寺土木修建的事情，减少瑶光寺木材砖瓦的费用，分散修筑石窟的劳力，连同那些不急用的劳役一同都加以减省，等到农闲时节再修建上面所说那些需修缮的建筑，使国家威严显赫，礼仪教化大兴，岂不是真正美好吗？ 
English: Things cannot be the best of both worlds. There should be both progress and setbacks. Therefore, the extravagant work of carving in Shangfang District should be stopped, the civil engineering construction of Yongning Temple should be reduced, the cost of wood bricks and tiles for Luguang Temple should be reduced, the labor force for the construction of grottoes should be reduced together with those laborers who are not urgently needed, and the above-mentioned buildings that need to be repaired should be built during the off-peak season, so that the national dignity is prominent and the etiquette is enlightened. Isn't it really beautiful?

古文：太后优令答之，而不用其言。
现代文：太后宽容地回答了他的建议，却没有采用他的意见。
English: The Queen Mother indulgently replied to his suggestion, but did not adopt his opinion.

古文：太后好事佛，民多绝户为沙门，高阳王友李瑒上言： 三千之罪莫大于不孝，不孝之大无过于绝祀。岂得轻纵背礼之情，肆其向法之意，一身亲老，弃家绝养，缺当世之礼而求将来之益！
现代文：胡太后喜欢从事佛事，因此百姓很多都绝了后代使自己的独生子成为和尚，高阳王的朋友李上书说： 三千种罪过没有比不孝更大的，最大的不孝又没有超过断绝香火后代的，怎么能轻易地纵容百姓们违反礼法之情，抛弃他们遵奉法令之意，独生子对年老双亲丢下不奉养，用违背现世的礼法去求得来世的善报呢！
English: Empress Dowager Hu liked to engage in Buddhist activities, so many of the people cut off their descendants to make their only son a monk. Li Shangshu, a friend of Emperor Gaoyang, said: "There are no three thousand sins greater than unfilial piety, and the greatest unfilial piety does not exceed cutting off incense descendants. How can the people be easily indulged in violating the etiquette and abandoning their intention to abide by laws and regulations? The only son abandoned his elderly parents and did not take care of them, and used the etiquette of this world to seek the good reward of the next world!

古文：孔子云： 未知生，焉知死？ 
现代文：孔子说 不知什么是生，怎么知道什么是死？ 
English: Confucius said, "If you don't know what life is, how can you know what death is?"

古文：安有弃堂堂之政而从鬼教乎！
现代文：怎么能放弃光明正大的礼政去听信那鬼邪之教呢！
English: How can one abandon the above-board etiquette to believe in that satanic cult!

古文：又，今南服未静，众役仍烦，百生之情，实多避役，若复听之，恐捐弃孝慈，比屋皆为沙门矣。 
现代文：并且，现在南面的兵戈还没有平息，各种劳役仍然不断，百姓的心思实际上是想逃避劳役，如果再听任他们这样下去，恐怕会丢弃孝道慈爱，家家户户都作和尚了。 
English: Moreover, the war in the south has not yet subsided, and all kinds of labor service are still continuing. The people's minds are actually trying to escape labor service. If they are allowed to continue like this, I am afraid they will abandon their filial piety and love, and every family will become a monk.

古文：都统僧暹等忿瑒谓之 鬼教 ，以为谤佛，泣诉于太后。
现代文：都统僧暹等人气愤于李所说的 鬼教 ，认为他是在诽谤佛教，对胡太后哭泣着控诉他。
English: The Monk Siam and others were angry at what Li called "ghost religion," believing that he was slandering Buddhism, and they wept and accused him to the Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：太后责之。瑒曰： 天曰神，地曰礻氏，人曰鬼。
现代文：太后责备李，李说： 天叫神，地叫祗，人叫鬼。
English: The Empress Dowager scolded Li, and Li said: Heaven is called God, earth is called earthworm, and man is called ghost.

古文：《传》曰： 明则有礼乐，幽则有鬼神。 
现代文：《礼记》中说： 明则有礼乐，幽则有鬼神。 
English: "Li Ji" said: In the Ming Dynasty, there was ceremonial music, while in the Yu Dynasty, there were ghosts and gods.

古文：然则明者为堂堂，幽者为鬼教。
现代文：因此明者称为堂堂，幽者称为鬼教。
English: Therefore, the clear one is called a hall, and the obscure one is called a ghost.

古文：佛本出于人，名之为鬼，愚谓非谤。 
现代文：佛是由人变成的，叫它是鬼，我认为不能说是诽谤。 
English: Buddha was turned into a ghost by human beings. I don't think it can be called slander.

古文：太后虽知瑒言为允，难违暹等之意，罚瑒金一两。
现代文：胡太后虽然明白李的话正确，却难以违背僧暹等人的心愿，便罚了李一两黄金。
English: Although the Empress Dowager Hu understood that Li's words were correct, it was difficult to go against the wishes of the monk Siam and others, so she fined Li one or two gold coins.

古文：魏征南大将军田益宗求为东豫州刺史，以招二子，太后不许，竟卒于洛阳。
现代文：北魏征南大将军田益宗请求去作东豫州刺史，以便去招降他的两个叛乱的儿子，胡太后不答应，最后他死在了洛阳。
English: The Northern Wei general Tian Yizong requested to make a history of Eastern Henan Province in order to recruit his two rebellious sons. The Empress Dowager Hu did not agree, and he eventually died in Luoyang.

古文：柔然伏跋可汗，壮健善用兵，是岁，西击高车，大破之，执其王弥俄突，系其足于驽马，顿曳杀之，漆其头为饮器。
现代文：柔然国的伏跋可汗，身体壮实高大，善于作战。这一年，他西攻高车，攻破高车城，抓获高车王弥俄突，把他的脚拴在马后面，拖死了他，又把他的头用来作了饮酒的器皿。
English: In this year, he attacked Taka, broke through the Taka city, captured the king of Taka, Miotsugu, tied his feet behind the horse, dragged him to death, and used his head as a drinking vessel.

古文：邻国先羁属柔然后叛去者，伏跋皆击灭之，其国复强。
现代文：邻国中凡是从前归属柔然后来又叛变的，都被伏跋消灭，伏跋的国家重新强大起来。
English: All the neighboring countries that once belonged to Zhuo and then rebelled were eliminated by Fuba, and Fuba's country became strong again.

古文：高祖武皇帝四天监十六年
现代文：天监十六年
English: The 16th year of Tianjing

古文：春，正月，辛未，上祀南郊。
现代文：春季，正月辛未，梁武帝在南郊祭天。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, and the middle of the year, Chen Xuandi went to the southern suburbs to hold a festival.

古文：魏大乘馀贼复相聚，突入瀛州，刺史宇文福之子员外散骑侍郎延帅奴客拒之。
现代文：北魏大乘流匪重新聚集起来，冲入瀛州，刺史宇文福的儿子员外散骑侍郎宇文延率领手下的奴仆和佃客抗拒敌兵。
English: The Northern Wei Dayan bandits regrouped and stormed into Ganzhou, with the son of Shi Uwenfu, the non-commissioned cavalryman Uwen Yan, leading his servants and guests to resist the enemy soldiers.

古文：贼烧斋阁，延突火抱福出外，肌发皆焦，勒众苦战，贼遂散走，追讨，平之。
现代文：流匪烧了斋门，宇文延冲入火中抱出宇文福，他的身体头发都被烧焦，仍然督促众人苦战，流匪终于逃散，他又率兵追杀，消灭了流匪。
English: The ruffians burned the gate of the temple, and Uwen Yan rushed into the fire to carry out Uwen Fu. His body and hair were all scorched, and he still urged everyone to fight hard. The ruffians finally fled, and he led the soldiers to chase and destroy the ruffians.

古文：甲戌，魏大赦。
现代文：甲戌，北魏大赦天下。
English: Armor, the Northern Wei Dynasty amnestied the world.

古文：魏初，民间皆不用钱，高祖太和十九年，始铸太和五铢钱，遣钱工在所鼓铸。
现代文：北魏初建立时，民间都不使用钱币，孝文帝太和十九年时，开始铸造太和五铢钱，派钱工在工场铸造。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty was established at the beginning of the 19th century, people did not use coins. Emperor Xiaowen began to mint the Taihe five-baht coins in the 19th century, and sent money workers to cast them at the factory.

古文：民有欲铸钱者，听就官炉，铜必精练，无得淆杂，世宗永平三年，又铸五铢钱，禁天下用钱不依准式者。
现代文：百姓中有想铸钱的人，就让他们到国家的铸炉去铸造，铜一定要精炼，不能混杂。宣武帝永平三年，又铸造五铢钱，禁止国内使用不合标准的钱。
English: If there are people among the common people who want to mint money, let them go to the state foundry to do so. Copper must be refined and must not be mixed. In the third year of Emperor Yongping, Emperor Xuanwu again minted 50 taels of money, prohibiting the domestic use of substandard money.

古文：既而洛阳及诸州镇所用钱各不同，商货不通。
现代文：这样不久，由于洛阳和各州镇所用钱各不相同，商品货物不能交换、流通。
English: Not long after that, because the money used in Luoyang and each county and town was different, commodity goods could not be exchanged and circulated.

古文：尚书令任城王澄上言以为： 不行之钱，律有明式，指谓鸡眼、镮凿，更无馀禁。
现代文：尚书令任城王元澄上书，认为： 不通行的钱，法律有明文规定，指那些薄小、凿边的钱币，再没有其他的限禁。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Wang Yuancheng, the king of the city, to submit a letter, saying: The law clearly stipulates that non-circulating money refers to those thin, chiseled coins, and there are no other restrictions.

古文：计河西诸州今所行者悉非制限，昔来绳禁，愚窃惑焉。
现代文：估计河南各州现在崐所通行的钱币都不是禁止行列里的，从前发生禁止的事，我感到很困惑。
English: It is estimated that the coins currently in circulation in Henan provinces are not in the prohibited category. I am very puzzled about the prohibited things that happened in the past.

古文：又河北既无新钱，复禁旧者，专以单丝之缣、疏缕之布，狭幅促度，不中常式，裂匹为尺，以济有无，徒成杼轴之劳，不免饥寒之苦，殆非所以救恤冻馁，子育黎元之意也。
现代文：另外，河北既没有新钱，又禁止使用旧钱，只好专用单丝织成的细绢以及疏线织成的粗布，它们幅面狭窄，尺度也不足，不合常规。把一匹布分成几尺，来救济没有的人，白白地费了机织的辛苦，却不能避免饥寒的困扰，这大概不是救济扶助冻饿之人的办法，也不符合养育百姓的本意吧。
English: In addition, Hebei has neither new money nor a ban on the use of old money, so it had no choice but to make special use of thin cocoons woven with monofilament and coarse cloth woven with dotted thread. Their narrow width and insufficient size are not in line with the norm. Dividing a piece of cloth into several feet to help those who have nothing, and wasting the hard work of weaving in vain, but unable to avoid the troubles of cold and hunger, is probably not a way to help those who are cold and hungry, nor is it in line with the original intention of raising the people.

古文：钱之为用，贯繦相属，不假度量，平均简易，济世之宜，谓为深允。
现代文：钱的使用，用绳子穿起来，不用凭借度量工具，既公平又简易，是方便百姓的好办法，确实是再合适不过了的。
English: The use of money, with a rope to wear it, without relying on measuring tools, is both fair and simple, is a good way to facilitate the people, and is really the most appropriate.

古文：乞并下诸方州镇，其太和与新铸五铢及古诸钱方俗所便用者，但内外全好，虽有大小之异，并得通行，贵贱之差，自依乡价。
现代文：请求同时命令各个州镇，不管是太和钱还是新铸的五铢钱，以及古时通行的钱币，凡是地方上一直使用的，只要里外都好，即使有大小的区别，也都一起通行，贵贱的差别，分别按乡里的物价折合。
English: At the same time, the petition ordered all prefectures and towns, no matter whether it was the Taihe money or the newly minted five-baht money, as well as the ancient coins, all of which had been used locally, as long as they were good inside and outside, even if there was a difference in size, they would all pass together, and the difference in price would be converted according to the price in the countryside.

古文：庶货环海内，公私无壅。
现代文：这样，贷物在海内都可流通，公家、私人都可以开展贸易，财物再也不会积压了。
English: In this way, loans can circulate within the country, both public and private can carry out trade, and property will no longer be backlogged.

古文：其鸡眼、镮凿及盗铸、毁大为小、生新巧伪不如法者，据律罪之。 
现代文：那些专铸薄小之钱、凿边之钱、盗铸钱币、将大钱化成小钱以及用各种花招造假钱的人，一律按法律治裁。 
English: Those who specially minted thin money, chiseled money, stole money, turned big money into small money, and used all kinds of tricks to make fake money will all be punished according to the law.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：胡太后下令同意他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：然河北少钱，民犹用物交易，钱不入市。
现代文：但由于河北缺少钱币，百姓仍然以物易物，钱币不能在市面流通。
English: However, due to the shortage of coins in Hebei, people still barter for goods, and coins cannot circulate in the market.

古文：魏人多窃冒军功，尚书左丞卢同阅吏部勋书，因加检核，得窃阶者三百馀人，乃奏： 乞总集吏部、中兵二局勋簿，对句奏案，更造两通，一关吏部，一留兵局。
现代文：北魏很多人假冒军功，尚书左丞卢同查阅吏部的功绩簿，并加以审核，发现了三百多个冒取官位的人，于是上奏说： 请求集中吏部、中兵二局的功劳簿，核对审查上报的文书，抄写二份，一份放在吏部、一份存放兵局。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, many people faked their military merits. Shang Shuzhong and Lu inspected the merit book of the personnel department and audited it. They found more than three hundred people who assumed official positions. Therefore, the report said: Request the concentration of the merit book of the personnel department and the second bureau of the Central Military Commission, check the documents submitted for review, and copy two copies, one to be placed in the personnel department and one to be stored in the military commissariat.

古文：又，在军斩首成一阶以上者，即令行台军司给券，当中竖裂，一支付勋人，一支送门下，以防伪巧。 
现代文：另外，在军队里杀敌可升一级以上的人，就命令行台军司颁发证书，证书从中间竖着分开，一份交给立功的人，一份送交门下省，以便防止耍花招作假。 
English: In addition, for those who kill enemies in the army and can be promoted to the next level or higher, they are ordered to go to the Taiwan Military Department to issue a certificate. The certificate is separated from the middle, one is given to the person who has made meritorious service, and the other is sent to the next province, so as to prevent trickery and fraud.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：胡太后听从了他的建议。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：同，玄之族孙也。
现代文：卢同是卢玄的族孙。
English: Lu Tong is a descendant of Lu Xuan.

古文：中尉无匡奏请取景明元年已来，内外考簿、吏部除书、中兵勋案、并诸殿最，欲以案校窃阶盗官之人，太后许之。
现代文：中尉元匡上书请求把景明元年以来内外考核的帐簿、吏部任职的文书、中兵的功劳查询记录，以及历次考核中的最高等和最低等的名单都取出来，以便核查冒功盗官的人，胡太后批准了他的请求。
English: Lieutenant Yuan Kuang requested in a letter that the account books of the internal and external appraisals since the first year of Jingming, the documents of the personnel department, the merit inquiry records of the middle soldiers, and the lists of the highest and lowest grades in the previous appraisals should be taken out in order to verify the person who stole the official's merits. The Empress Hu approved his request.

古文：尚书令任城王澄表以为： 法忌烦苛，治贵清约。
现代文：尚书令任城王元澄上书认为： 律法最怕烦杂苛刻，治政贵在清平简约。
English: Shang Shuling appointed the king of the city, Yuancheng, to write that: The law is most afraid of being complicated and harsh, and governance is valuable in being clear and simple.

古文：御史之体，风闻是司，若闻有冒勋妄阶，止应摄其一簿，研检虚实，绳以典刑。
现代文：御史台的职责，在于有所风闻就可以上奏，如果知道有冒取功劳官职的人，只须取一本簿籍，调查检验出真假，绳之以法便可。
English: The duty of the Office of the Chief Historian is that if there is a rumor, it can be reported. If you know that there are people who take credit for official positions, you only need to take a book, investigate and verify the truth, and bring them to justice.

古文：岂有移一省之案，寻两纪之事，如此求过，谁谌其罪！
现代文：怎能取尚书省的全部档案到御史台去审查，查找二十多年的旧帐，象这样追查过失，谁能受得了这种罪责！
English: How is it possible to take the entire archives of the Ministry of Education and Culture to the State Administration of History for examination, to look up the old accounts of more than twenty years, and to pursue negligence like this? Who can bear this kind of guilt!

古文：斯实圣朝所宜重慎也。 
现代文：这实在是贤圣的王朝应当慎重对待的事。 
English: This is really an important matter that should be handled carefully by the Holy Office!

古文：太后乃止。
现代文：胡太后这才停止追究。
English: As a result, the empress dowager did not set up seven rooms for the Chongxian Temple.

古文：又以匡所言数不从，虑其辞解，欲奖安之，乃加镇东将军。
现代文：胡太后又因为元匡的多次建议都没有被采纳，怕他提出辞职，想要奖励安慰他，就加封他为镇东将军。
English: Empress Dowager Hu, fearing that Yuan Kuang's many proposals would not be accepted, and wanting to reward and comfort him, added him to the title of Zhendong General.

古文：二月，丁未，立匡为东平王。
现代文：二月丁未，又封元匡为东平王。
English: In February of the same year, Yuan Kuang was also named the King of Dongping.

古文：三月，丙子，敕织官，文锦不得为仙人鸟善之形，为其裁剪，有乖仁恕。
现代文：三月丙子，梁朝下令给织官，命令锦纹不能织仙人鸟兽的形状，因为这样剪裁起来，违背了仁爱。
English: In March, the Liang Dynasty ordered the weavers not to weave the brocade in the shape of a fairy, bird, or beast, because it would violate benevolence.

古文：丁亥，魏广平文穆王怀卒。
现代文：丁亥，北魏广平文穆王元怀去世。
English: Dinghai, Northern Wei Guangping Wenmu Wang Yuanhuai passed away.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，魏以中书监胡国珍为司徒。
现代文：夏季，四月戊申，北魏任命中书监胡国珍为司徒。
English: In the summer, in April, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Chinese librarian Hu Guozhen as a scholar.

古文：诏以宗庙用牲，有累冥道，宜皆以面为之。
现代文：梁武帝在诏书中认为宗庙中祭祀用牲畜，对鬼神有妨害。应当都用面粉去作。
English: In his imperial edict, Emperor Liangwu believed that the sacrificial animals used in ancestral temples were a hindrance to ghosts and gods, and that they should all be made from flour.

古文：于是朝野喧哗，以为宗庙去牲，乃是不复血食，帝竟不从。
现代文：于是朝廷内外议论纷纷，认为宗庙中不用牲畜，就等于不再祭祀。武帝终于不肯听从。
English: As a result, there was a lot of discussion inside and outside the Imperial Court, arguing that if livestock were not used in the ancestral temple, it would mean that there would be no more sacrifices. Emperor Wu finally refused to listen.

古文：八坐乃议以大脯代一元大武。
现代文：朝中的高级官员们就商议用大肉干代替牛。
English: The high-ranking officials of the DPRK and China discussed the use of dried beef instead of beef.

古文：秋，八月，丁未，诏魏太师高阳王雍入居门下，参决尚书奏事。
现代文：秋季，八月丁未，北魏诏令太师高阳王元雍入居门下省，参决尚书奏事。
English: In the autumn, in August, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict ordering the Grand Master Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong to enter the province and participate in the decision-making process.

古文：冬，十月，诏以宗庙犹用脯脩，更议代之，于是以大饼代大脯，其馀尽用蔬果。又起至敬殿、景阳台，置七庙座，每月中再设净馔。
现代文：冬季，十月，因为宗庙仍然用干肉，梁武帝又下诏令制止，于是朝官们又商议替代之物，因此决定用大饼取代肉干，其余的都使用蔬菜水果，又修建至敬殿，景阳台，设置七庙中的神位，每月里又设置素食。
English: In the winter, in October, because the ancestral temple still used dried meat, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict to stop it, so the imperial officials also discussed alternatives, so they decided to replace the dried meat with flatbread, the rest used vegetables and fruits, and built the hall of worship, the scenic balcony, set up the throne of the seven temples, and set up vegetarian food every month.

古文：乙卯，魏诏：北京士民未迁者，悉听留居为永业。
现代文：乙卯，北魏朝廷下诏令，凡在北方代都的没有迁徒的士民，都听任他们留作长久居民。
English: Second, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree that all the scholars and commoners who had not moved to the northern capital should be allowed to remain as permanent residents.

古文：十一月，甲子，巴州刺史牟汉宠叛，降魏。
现代文：十一月甲子，巴州刺史牟汉宠反叛，投降了北魏。
English: In November of the year of the Goat, the state of Pazhou rebelled and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：十二月，柔然伏跋可汗遣俟近尉比建等请和于魏，用敌国之礼。
现代文：十二月，柔然国的伏跋可汗派俟斤尉比建等人向北魏求和。北魏用对待敌对国家使节的礼节接待了柔然使者。
English: In December, Zhu Ranzhong's Fu Bao Khan sent his lieutenant, Yu Jin Bi Jian, and others to the Northern Wei Dynasty to sue for peace. The Northern Wei Dynasty received Zhu Ranzhong's envoy with the etiquette of an envoy from a hostile country.

古文：是岁，以右卫将军冯道根为豫州刺史。
现代文：这一年，梁朝任命右卫将军冯道根为豫州刺史。
English: In the same year, Liang Dynasty appointed the right guard general Feng Dogen as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：道根谨厚木讷，行军能检敕士卒；诸将争功，道根独默然。
现代文：冯道根憨厚口拙，行军作战能督促士兵；众将争夺功劳时，只有冯道根一个人不说话。
English: Von Dogen was a man of few words. He could urge soldiers to march and fight. When the generals competed for credit, Von Dogen was the only one who did not speak.

古文：为政清简，吏民怀之。
现代文：他为政清廉，官吏、百姓都感激他。
English: He is a clean politician, and both officials and the people are grateful to him.

古文：上尝叹曰： 道根所在，令朝廷不复忆有一州。 
现代文：梁武帝曾经赞叹说： 冯道根在的地方，一切无不放心，能让朝廷想不起来还有这个州。 
English: Emperor Liangwu once said admiringly: "In the place where Feng Dogen is, everything is safe. The imperial court can't even remember this prefecture."

古文：魏尚书崔亮奏请于王屋等山采铜铸钱，从之。
现代文：北魏尚书崔亮上书请求在王屋山等地采掘铜铸造钱币，建议被采纳。
English: Northern Wei Shangshu Cui Liang submitted a request to mine copper and mint coins in Wangyashan and other places, and the proposal was accepted.

古文：是后民多私铸，钱稍薄小，用之益轻。
现代文：从此以后，百姓常常私自铸钱，钱币比较薄小，使用一段时间就更轻了。
English: Since then, people have often minted their own money. The coins are relatively thin, so they are lighter to use for a while.

古文：高祖武皇帝四天监十七年
现代文：天监十七年
English: The 17th year of Tianjing

古文：春，正月，甲子，魏以氐酋杨定为阴平王。
现代文：春季，正月甲子，北魏封氐族酋长杨定为阴平王。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yang, the chief of the Qiang people, as the king of Yinping.

古文：魏秦州羌反。
现代文：北魏秦州的羌人造反。
English: The Jurchen rebellion in Qin State in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：二月，癸巳，安成康王秀卒。
现代文：二月癸巳，安成康王萧秀去世。
English: In February, Ancheng Kangwang Xiao Xiu passed away.

古文：秀虽与上布衣昆弟，及为君臣，小心畏敬过于疏贱，上益以此贤之。
现代文：萧秀虽然和梁武帝在贫贱时是兄弟，等到成为君臣关系之后，对梁武帝的谨慎小心、恭恭敬敬超过了朝中那些关系疏远、出身低贱的臣子，梁武帝也更因此而认为他贤良。
English: Although Xiao Xiu and Emperor Liangwu were brothers when he was poor, after he became a monarch-subject relationship, his prudence, caution, and respect for Emperor Liangwu exceeded those distant relations and low-born vassals of the DPRK and China. Emperor Liangwu considered him to be virtuous for this reason.

古文：秀与弟始兴王憺尤相友爱，憺久为荆州刺史，常中分其禄以给秀，秀称心受之，亦不辞多也。
现代文：萧秀和弟弟始兴王萧相互友爱，萧一直作荆州刺史，常常把他的俸禄给萧秀一半，萧秀实心实意地接受，也不认为给的太多而不受。
English: Xiao Xiu and his brother Shi Xing Wang Xiao love each other. Xiao has always been a member of the history of Jingzhou, often giving half of his salary to Xiao Xiu. Xiao Xiu sincerely accepted, and did not think that he was giving too much.

古文：甲辰，大赦。
现代文：甲辰，梁朝大赦天下。
English: Jia Chen and Liang Chao were pardoned by the emperor.

古文：己酉，魏大赦，改元神龟。
现代文：己酉，北魏大赦天下，改年号为神龟。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty amnestied the whole country, and changed the name of the year to the Divine Turtle.

古文：魏东益州氐反。
现代文：北魏东益州的氐人造反。
English: The rebellion in Yizhou in the East of the Northern Wei Dynasty was instigated by the Chinese.

古文：魏主引见柔然使者，让之以籓礼不备，议依汉待匈奴故事，遣使报之。
现代文：北魏孝明帝召见柔然国的使者，责备他们没有尽到藩国的礼节，商议按汉朝对待匈奴的办法，派使者回复他们。
English: Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty summoned the envoys of the Rouran Kingdom, reproached them for not having fulfilled the etiquette of the domain, discussed the method of treating the Xiongnu according to the Han Dynasty, and sent an envoy to reply to them.

古文：司农少卿张伦上表，以为： 太祖经启帝图，日有不暇，遂令竖子游魂一方。
现代文：司农少卿张伦上书，认为： 道武帝开辟国土，日理万机，无暇顾及，于是使社仑这小子在大漠之北割据一方。
English: Zhang Lun, the Secretary of State for Agriculture and Rural Affairs, wrote a letter, saying: Emperor Daowu opened up the land, and there was no time to take care of everything, so he sent this boy to the north of the desert.

古文：亦由中国多虞，急诸华而缓夷狄也。
现代文：这也是因为我们国内不安定，急着对付汉人而放松了对这些夷狄之族的辖制。
English: This is also due to the fact that we are not stable at home, and in our haste to deal with the Han Chinese, we have loosened our control over these Yidi people.

古文：高祖方事南辕，未遑北伐。
现代文：孝文帝正应付南部的事，没来得及向北讨伐。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was dealing with matters in the south and did not have time to march north.

古文：世宗述遵遗志，虏使之来，受而弗答。
现代文：宣武帝遵从先帝遗志，所以前次崐敌虏的使节来到，只接受他们的进见却不回复他们的求和之请。
English: Emperor Xuanwu obeyed the last wishes of the previous emperor, so the envoys who had defeated the enemy last time came, only accepted their views but did not respond to their request for peace.

古文：以为大明临御，国富兵强，抗敌之礼，何惮而为之，何求而行之！
现代文：这是因为圣人当政，国富兵强，拒绝敌人的礼节，有什么可怕的呢？
English: This is because the sage is in power, the country is rich and the army is strong, and the enemy's etiquette is rejected. What is there to fear?

古文：今虏虽慕德而来，亦欲观我强弱；若使王人衔命虏庭，与为昆弟，恐非祖宗之意也。
现代文：对他们有什么可求的呢？现在敌虏虽然仰慕德行前来进见，也是想看看我们是强是弱。如果让圣上的使者衔命去敌虏那里，与他们结成兄弟，恐怕不是祖宗的愿望。
English: What can we ask of them? Although our enemies now admire our virtue and come to see us, they also want to see whether we are strong or weak. If we let the holy emissaries go to our enemies and become brothers with them, I am afraid it is not the wish of our ancestors.

古文：苟事不获已，应为制诏，示以上下之仪，命宰臣致书，谕以归顺之道，观其从违，徐以恩威进退之，则王者之体正矣。
现代文：如果事情不能这样了结，也应当给他们下一道诏书，显示上下君臣间的礼仪，再命令宰相给他们写信，告诉他们归顺的办法，看他们是听还是不听，慢慢地或进而用恩，或退而用威，这才是王者应有的样子呀！
English: If the matter cannot be settled in this way, they should also be given another edict, showing the etiquette between the upper and lower princes and ministers, and then order the prime minister to write to them, telling them the way to surrender, see if they listen or not, slowly or further with grace, or retreat and use force, this is what a king should be like!

古文：岂可以戎狄兼并，而遽亏典礼乎！ 
现代文：怎能因为戎狄之间发生了吞并，就立刻亏损了礼节呢！ 
English: How can one immediately lose decorum because of an annexation between two armies!

古文：不从。
现代文：张伦的建议没被采纳。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：伦，白泽之子也。
现代文：张伦是张白泽的儿子。
English: Zhang Lun is the son of Zhang Bai Ze.

古文：三月，辛未，魏灵寿武敬公于忠卒。
现代文：三月辛未，北魏灵寿武敬公于忠去世。
English: In late March, Ling Shou Wu Jing Gong Yuzhong of the Northern Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：魏南秦州氐反。遣龙骧将军崔袭持节谕之。
现代文：北魏南秦州的氐人造反，朝廷派龙骧将军崔袭持符节去晓谕他们。
English: The Northern Wei and Southern Qin rebelled against each other, and the imperial court sent the Dragon Emperor General Cui He to tell them about it.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，魏秦文宣公胡国珍卒，赠假黄钺、相国、都督中外诸军事、太师，号曰太上秦公，加九锡，葬以殊礼，赠襚仪卫，事极优厚。
现代文：夏季，四月丁酉，北魏秦文宣公胡国珍去世，朝廷赠予他假黄钺、相国、都督中外诸军事、太师等职，号为太上秦公，用隆重的礼仪安葬了他，赠赐衣服和仪仗卫士，丧事极端优厚。
English: In the summer, in April, Dingyao, Northern Wei Qin Emperor Wenxuan's son Hu Guozhen passed away. The imperial court presented him with the titles of "False Yellow Emperor," "Father of the Nation," "Governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces," "Military General" and "Grand Master." He was given the title of "Grand Qin Emperor." He was buried with a grand ceremony. He was given clothes and a guard of honor. The funeral was extremely fine.

古文：又迎太后母皇甫氏之柩与国珍合葬，谓之太上秦孝穆君。
现代文：又把胡太后母亲皇甫氏的灵柩迎来和胡国珍合葬，称作太上秦孝穆君。
English: He also buried the coffin of Empress Dowager Hu's mother, Empress Dowager Hu Fu, together with Empress Dowager Hu Guozhen, known as Empress Dowager Qin Xiao Mu Jun.

古文：谏议大夫常山张普惠以为前世后父无称 太上 者， 太上 之名不可施于人臣，诣阙上疏陈之，左右莫敢为通。
现代文：谏议大夫常山人张普惠认为前代皇后的父亲没有称作 太上 的， 太上 的名字不能加在臣子身上。于是，就去朝殿上书陈述自己的看法，侍从们没人敢给他通报。
English: Zhang Puhui, a doctor from Changshan, thought that the father of the former empress was not called the father, and the name of the mother could not be applied to the vassal. Therefore, he went to the Imperial Palace to present his views, and no one dared to inform him.

古文：会胡氏穿圹，下有磐石，乃密表，以为： 天无二日，土无二王， 太上 者因 上 而生名也，皇太后称 令 以系 敕 下，盖取三从之道，远同文母列于十乱，今司徒为 太上 ，恐乖系敕之意。
现代文：正赶上为胡国珍挖墓穴时碰上了坚固的石头，于是张普惠秘密上表，认为： 天无二日，国无二主， 太上 这个词是从 上 而产生的名称，皇太后称自己的命令为 令 而置于皇上的 敕 之下，是为了顺从 三从 之道理，同于周武王时的文母以妇人而列入善于治理的十人之列。现在封司徒为 太上 ，恐怕会有违于置 令 于 敕 之下的道理。
English: Just in time, when digging a grave for Hu Guozhen, the excavator hit a solid stone, so Zhang Puhui secretly went to the table and thought: There is no second day, there is no second master of the country, the word is the name that comes from the top. The empress dowager called her order an order and placed it under the emperor's command, in order to obey the principle of three obedience, the same as the literary mother at the time of King Zhou Wu was a woman and was included in the list of ten people who were good at governance. Now that the magistrate is the superior, I am afraid it will violate the principle of placing the order under the

古文：孔子称： 必也正名乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 一定要正名！ 
English: Confucius said, "Be sure to use your real name!"

古文：比克吉定兆，而以浅改卜，亦或天地神灵所以垂至戒、启圣情也。
现代文：这一次出现了先兆，于是因墓穴浅而不得不改换地点，也许是天地神灵以此来劝诫、启发圣人。
English: This time there was an omen, so because the grave was shallow, they had to change the location. Perhaps the gods of heaven and earth used this to exhort and inspire the saint.

古文：伏愿停逼上之号，以邀廉光之福。 
现代文：希望能停止使用与帝王一样的封号，来博取因谦让而带来荣耀的福份。 
English: I hope that we can stop using the same title as the emperor to gain the blessing of glory brought by humility.

古文：太后乃亲至国珍宅，召集五品以上博议。
现代文：于是，胡太后就亲自来到胡国珍的住宅，召集五品以下的官员广泛讨论。
English: As a result, Empress Dowager Hu personally came to Hu Guozhen's residence to convene officials below the fifth grade for extensive discussions.

古文：王公皆希太后意，争诘难普惠；普惠应机辨析，无能屈者。
现代文：王公大臣都顺从太后的心意，争相指责张普惠，张普惠随机分辩，没有人能说服他。
English: Wang Gong and his ministers all obeyed the wishes of the empress dowager, competing to blame Zhang Puhui. Zhang Puhui made random arguments, and no one could convince him.

古文：太后使元叉宣令于普惠曰： 朕之所行，孝子之志。
现代文：胡太后派元义向张普惠宣布命令说： 朕所做的，是孝子的心意。
English: Empress Dowager Hu sent Yuan Yi to issue an order to Zhang Puhui, saying, "What I have done is in the spirit of filial piety.

古文：卿之所陈，忠臣之道。
现代文：你所说的，是忠臣的道理。
English: What you said is the principle of loyalty.

古文：群公已有成议，卿不得苦夺朕怀。
现代文：众大臣已经有了定议，你不能这么狠心地剥夺朕的一片心意。
English: The ministers have already made up their minds. You can't deprive me of a piece of my heart so cruelly.

古文：后有所见，勿难言也。 
现代文：以后有什么见解，不要因此而难于启齿。 
English: Don't let this prevent you from speaking your mind in the future.

古文：太后为太上君造寺，壮丽埒于永宁。
现代文：胡太后给太上君建造了寺庙，其雄伟华丽相当于永宁寺。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu built a temple for the Empress Dowager, whose grandeur and magnificence is equivalent to Yongning Temple.

古文：尚书奏复征民绵麻之税，张普惠上疏，以为： 高祖废大斗，去长尺，改重称，以爱民薄赋。
现代文：尚书奏请再向百姓收缴绵麻税，张普惠上书，认为： 道武帝废弃了大斗崐，去掉长尺，修改了重秤，是为了爱护百姓，减轻赋税。
English: Shang Shuxiao asked for the collection of flax tax from the people again, and Zhang Puhui submitted a letter, saying: Emperor Daowu abandoned the great battle axe, removed the long ruler, and modified the heavy scale, in order to protect the people and reduce taxes.

古文：知军国须绵麻之用，故于绢增税绵八两，于布增税麻十五斤，民以称尺所减，不啻绵麻，故鼓舞供调。
现代文：因为军队、国家需要绵麻用品，因此在绢税中增收八两绵，在布税中增收十五斤麻，百姓因为校定秤尺而减交的赋税不止于绵麻两项，因此踊跃交纳。
English: Because the army and the country needed flax products, the government increased the tax on cocoons by eight to two flax cocoons, and the tax on cloth by 15 catties of flax cocoons. The people's tax reduction due to the calibration of the scale was not more than two flax cocoons, so they paid the tax eagerly.

古文：自兹以降，所税绢布，浸复长阔，百姓嗟怨，闻于朝野。
现代文：但是从这以后，所收缴的绢和布，又重新增长增宽，百姓抱怨之声，传遍朝廷内外。
English: But since then, the amount of confiscated silk and cloth has grown and widened again, and the people's voices of complaint have spread throughout the imperial court and beyond.

古文：宰辅不寻其本在于幅广度长，遽罢绵麻。
现代文：宰相不了解这个根本原因在于幅宽、度长，就罢免了绵麻税。
English: The prime minister did not understand that the fundamental reason for this was the width and length of the rope, so he removed the flax tax.

古文：既而尚书以国用不足，复欲征敛。
现代文：接着尚书因为国家用度不够，又想重新征收。
English: Then Shang Shu wanted to re-impose the tax because the state was not spending enough.

古文：去天下之大信，弃己行之成诏，追前之非，遂后三史。
现代文：这样的作法无疑是丢掉百姓的信任，放弃已经实行的命令，继续从前的错误，又犯下今后的过失。
English: There is no doubt that such an approach is to lose the trust of the people, abandon the orders that have been implemented, continue the previous mistakes, and commit future mistakes.

古文：不思库中有大麻，而群臣共窃之也，何则所输之物，或斤羡百铢，未闻有司依律以罪州郡；或小有滥恶，则坐户主，连及三长。
现代文：不去想想国库中绵麻很多，却正在被众臣们盗为己有。
English: Without thinking about it, there is a lot of money in the treasury, but it is being stolen by the ministers.

古文：是以在库绢布，逾制者多，郡臣受俸，人求长阔厚重，无复准极，未闻以端幅有馀还求输官者也。
现代文：为什么这么说？因为百姓交纳货物，有的一斤要多交一百铢，但没听说有关部门按法律惩处州郡官员；而质量稍微差一点，一家之主就被判罪，还株连地方三长。因此库中的绢布，超出规定尺寸的多，众大臣接受俸禄时，人人都愿要尺长幅宽、耐用结实的，再也没有什么发放的标准了，从没听说有谁因为尺幅多出而送回官府。
English: Why do you say that? Because when people pay for goods, they have to pay an extra 100 baht for every kilogram, but they have not heard that the relevant departments punish state and county officials according to the law; and if the quality is slightly worse, the head of the family will be convicted, and even the local magistrate. Therefore, there are many pieces of cloth in the warehouse that exceed the specified size. When ministers receive their salaries, everyone would like to have a wide width, durable and strong. There is no longer any standard for distribution. I have never heard of anyone being sent back to the government office because of the extra width.

古文：今欲复调绵麻，当先正称、尺，明立严禁，无得放溢，使天下知二圣之心爱民惜法如此，则太和之政复见于神龟矣。 
现代文：现在如果要重新征收绵麻税，首先必须校准秤和尺子，明确规定严禁使用大秤大尺，不许放任，以使天下人知道二位圣人爱护百姓、尊重法律的心意是这样坚定，那么孝文帝太和年间的德政就又在陛下的神龟年间出现了。 
English: Now, if the flax tax is to be re-imposed, the scales and rulers must first be calibrated, and it must be clearly stipulated that the use of large scales and rulers is strictly prohibited and must not be allowed to go unchecked, so that the world will know that the two saints' love for the people and respect for the law are so firm, then the German government in the years of Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Cixi will appear again in the years of His Majesty the Tortoise.

古文：普惠又以魏主好游骋苑囿，不亲视朝，过崇佛法，郊庙之事多委有司，上疏切谏，以为： 殖不思之冥业，损巨费于生民，减禄削力，近供无事之僧，崇饰云殿，远邀未然之报，昧爽之臣稽首于外，玄寂之众遨游于内，衍礼忤时，人灵未穆。
现代文：张普惠又因为孝明帝喜爱在园苑中游猎玩乐，不亲自处理朝政，过分地尊崇佛法，把国事大多委派给有关部门，就上书恳切地劝诫他，认为： 做没有理智的死后的功德，损耗百姓巨大的财物，减少臣子们的俸禄，剥夺人力，亲自供奉无所事事的僧人，大肆修建寺庙宫殿，追求飘渺不实的回报，让入朝的大臣在外面叩头，这些僧人却在里面游玩，这是对礼教的违背，对时势的触犯，以致人神都不能安宁。
English: Zhang Puhui also admonished him earnestly in a letter because Emperor Xiaoming liked to hunt and play in the middle of the gardens, did not personally deal with the imperial government, excessively revered Buddhism, and delegated most of the state affairs to the relevant departments, and believed that: doing merit after death without reason, consuming huge wealth of the people, reducing the salary of the courtiers, depriving manpower, personally offering to the idle monks, building temples and palaces in a big way, pursuing ethereal and unrealistic returns, letting the ministers who entered the court kowtow outside, but these monks play inside, which is a violation of etiquette and a violation of the current situation

古文：愚谓修朝夕之因，求礻氏劫之果，未若收万国之欢心以事其亲，使天下和平，灾害不生也。
现代文：我认为整天修行，来乞求不受劫难，不如让百姓把心思都放在奉养双亲上，以使天下和平，不产生灾害。
English: I think it would be better to let the people put their minds on the upbringing of their parents, so that there would be peace in the world and no disasters.

古文：伏愿淑慎威仪，为万邦作式，躬致郊庙之虔，亲纡朔望之礼，释奠成均，竭心千亩。量撤僧寺不急之华，还复百官久折之秩。已造者务令简约速成，未造者一切不复更为。
现代文：希望圣上好好地珍视自己的威仪，为天下作出榜样，亲自向天地和祖先之灵献出虔诚的敬意，亲身参加朔望之礼，祭奠先圣先师，尽心耕种藉田，酌量撤掉那此不急需的僧庙的华丽之饰，恢复百官长久以来被削减了的俸禄，对已经开始建造的寺庙一定要简单节省，快快建成，没有建造的都不要再修建了。
English: It is hoped that the saint will cherish his dignity, set an example for the world, personally pay pious homage to heaven and earth and the spirits of his ancestors, personally participate in the ceremony of the new moon, pay tribute to the first holy forerunner, do his best to cultivate the borrowed fields, remove the ornate decorations of the temples that are not urgently needed, restore the salaries of the officials that have been reduced for a long time, and be sure to simply save the temples that have already begun to be built, and build them quickly, and do not build any that have not been built.

古文：则孝弟可以通神明，德教可以光四海，节用爱人，法俗俱赖矣。 
现代文：这样，圣上的孝悌可以通于神明，道德教化可以光耀天下。节省用度，爱护百姓，法令风俗都依赖于此啊！ 
English: In this way, the filial piety of the saints can be passed on to the gods, and moral enlightenment can shine throughout the world. Saving expenses, caring for the people, and laws and customs all depend on this!

古文：寻敕外议释奠之礼，又自是每月一陛见群臣，皆用普惠之言也。
现代文：不久，北魏孝明帝下令商议供奉先师的礼节，并从此每月接见大臣们一次，这都是采纳了张普惠的劝谏的结果。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered to discuss the etiquette of offering revered teachers, and from then on he received ministers once a month. This was all the result of adopting Zhang Puhui's advice.

古文：普惠复表论时政得失，太后与帝引普惠于宣光殿，随事诘难。
现代文：张普惠又上书评论时政得失，胡太后和孝明帝将张普惠接入宣光殿，以便他随时对时政提出批评。
English: Zhang Puhui also wrote a letter to comment on the merits and demerits of the current government. Empress Dowager Hu and Emperor Xiaoming brought Zhang Puhui into the Xuanguang Palace so that he could criticize the current government at any time.

古文：临川王宏妾弟吴法寿杀人而匿于宏府中，上敕宏出之，即日伏辜。
现代文：临川王萧宏的小妾的弟弟吴法寿杀人之后藏在萧宏府内，梁武帝命令萧宏交出他，当天就把吴法寿依法治罪。
English: Linchuan King Xiaohong's concubine's younger brother Wu Fashou hid in Xiaohong's palace after the murder. Emperor Liang ordered Xiaohong to hand him over, and on the same day Wu Fashou was sentenced to death.

古文：南司奏免宏官，上注曰： 爱宏者兄弟私亲，免宏者王者正法。所奏可。 
现代文：南司奏请免去萧宏官职，梁武帝在奏折上批示： 怜爱萧宏是兄弟的私情，免除萧宏的官职是帝王的法律，批准南司的奏请。 
English: Nanshi requested that Xiao Hong be relieved of his official post, and Emperor Liangwu issued the following order on the petition: To love and pity Xiao Hong is a brother's private love, to relieve Xiao Hong of his official post is the emperor's law, approve Nanshi's petition.

古文：五月，戊寅，司徒、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史临川王宏免。
现代文：五月戊寅，司徒、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史临川王萧宏被免职。
English: In May, Wu Yin, Szeto, the general of the imperial cavalry, and the governor of Yangzhou, Linchuan Wang Xiaohong, were removed from their posts.

古文：宏自洛口之败，常怀愧愤，都下每有窃发，辄以宏为名，屡为有司所奏，上每赦之。
现代文：萧宏自从兵败洛口之后，常常怀着羞愧、愤恨之恼，京城中每当发生了造崐反作乱，都打着萧宏的名号，因此多次被有关部门汇报，梁武帝宽恕了他。
English: Since his defeat at the Battle of Loqou, Xiao Hong had often carried the burden of shame and resentment. Whenever there was a rebellion or disturbance in the capital, he used the name of Xiao Hong. As a result, he was repeatedly reported by the relevant departments. Emperor Liang Wu pardoned him.

古文：上幸光宅寺，有盗伏于骠骑航，待上夜出；上将行，心动，乃于硃雀航过。
现代文：梁武帝临幸光宅寺，有强盗埋伏在萧宏府前以萧宏的官名命名的浮桥骠骑航上，等待梁武帝夜晚出来。梁武帝刚要出发，忽然心中一阵惊悸，于是便从另一座叫朱雀航的桥上过。
English: Emperor Liangwu was visiting the Xingguang Temple. Some robbers lay in wait in front of Xiao Hongfu for the pontoon bridge named after the official name of Xiao Hong, waiting for Emperor Liangwu to come out at night. As Emperor Liangwu was about to set off, he suddenly felt a jolt in his heart, so he went over another bridge called Zhu Cai Hang.

古文：事发，称为宏所使，上泣谓宏曰： 我人才胜汝百倍，当此犹恐不堪，汝何为者？
现代文：事情暴露后，贼人口称是受萧宏指使，梁武帝哭着对萧宏说： 我的人品才能胜过你百倍，但是处在皇位上还感到力不从心，你能做什么？
English: After the affair was exposed, the thieves claimed to have been ordered by Xiao Hong. Emperor Liang Wu said to Xiao Hong with tears: My human qualities are a hundred times better than yours, but I still feel powerless on the throne. What can you do?

古文：我非不能为汉文帝，念汝愚耳！ 宏顿首称无之；故因匿法寿免宏官。
现代文：我不是不能如同汉文帝诛杀淮南王刘长那样把你杀掉，而是可怜你愚蠢啊！ 萧宏叩头说没有这事，但是终于因为藏匿吴法寿被免了官。
English: I'm not saying I can't kill you like Emperor Wen of Han killed Liu Chang of Huainan, but I pity your stupidity! Xiao Hong kowtowed and said there was no such thing, but he was finally relieved of his duties for hiding Wu Fazhou.

古文：宏奢僭过度，殖货无厌。
现代文：萧宏奢侈无度，暴敛无厌。
English: Xiao Hong is extravagant and violent.

古文：库屋垂百间，在内堂之后，关籥甚严，有疑是铠仗者，密以闻。
现代文：他有库房将近一百间，位于内堂的后面，平时看守、防备非常严密，有人怀疑里面是兵器，便秘密上报了梁武帝。
English: He had nearly a hundred storehouses, located behind the inner hall, usually guarded and guarded very closely. Some people suspected that there were weapons inside, so they secretly reported it to Emperor Liangwu.

古文：上于友爱甚厚，殊不悦。
现代文：梁武帝对兄弟友爱看得很重，所以很不高兴。
English: Emperor Liang Wu took brotherly love very seriously, so he was very unhappy.

古文：佗日，送盛馔与宏爱妾江氏曰： 当来就汝欢宴。 
现代文：有一天，梁武帝送给萧宏的爱妾江氏丰盛的酒菜，并说： 我要来你家畅饮。 
English: One day, Emperor Liangwu gave Xiao Hong's beloved concubine Jiang's bountiful food and drink, and said, "I want to come to your home for a drink."

古文：独携故人射声校尉丘佗卿往，与宏及江大饮，半醉后，谓曰： 我今欲履行汝后房。 
现代文：到时他只带了老部下射声校尉丘佗卿前去，和萧宏以及江氏开怀畅饮。半醉之后，梁武帝说： 我现在要去你的后房走走。 
English: At that time, he only took his old subordinate, Colonel Qiu Junqing, to go and have a drink with Xiao Hong and Mr. Jiang. After being half drunk, Liang Wudi said, "I'm going to walk around your back room now."

古文：即呼舆径往堂后。宏恐上见其货贿，颜色怖惧。
现代文：就坐轿一直来到后堂，萧宏恐怕武帝看到他的财物，脸色十分惊恐。
English: Xiao Hong took a sedan all the way to the back hall. I'm afraid Emperor Wu saw his belongings and looked very frightened.

古文：上意益疑之，于是屋屋检视，每钱百万为一聚，黄榜标之，千万为一库，悬一紫标，如此三十馀间。
现代文：于是梁武帝心中更加怀疑他了，便把每间房子都检查了一遍，发现萧宏把每一百万钱堆为一处，用黄色木片作为标志，每一千万钱存在一间库房之中，挂一个紫色标志，共有三十多间。
English: As a result, Emperor Liang Wudi became even more suspicious of him. He inspected each house one by one and found that Xiao Hong had piled up every million yuan in one place, using yellow wood chips as a sign. Ten million yuan was stored in a warehouse with a purple sign. There were a total of more than 30 rooms.

古文：上与佗卿屈指计，见钱三亿馀万，馀屋贮布绢丝绵漆蜜纟宁蜡等杂货，但见满库，不知多少。
现代文：梁武帝和兵佗卿屈指计算，算出共有三亿多万钱，其它的房间贮存着布、绢、丝、绵、漆、蜜、麻、蜡等杂贷，只见满库都是，不知有多少。
English: Emperor Liangwu and General Xinghe were the best at calculating, and they calculated a total of more than 300 million yuan. Other rooms were stocked with cloth, silk, silk, cotton, lacquer, honey, hemp, wax and other miscellaneous loans. All the warehouses were full, I don't know how many.

古文：上始知非仗，大悦，谓曰： 阿六，汝生计大可！ 
现代文：梁武帝这才知道库里放的不是兵器，于是非常高兴，说： 阿六，你的生计真可以啊！ 
English: It was only then that Emperor Liangwu knew that the treasure was not a weapon, so he was very happy and said: Ah Liu, your livelihood is really good!

古文：乃更剧饮至夜，举烛而还。
现代文：于是再行痛饮直到深夜，点着蜡烛回宫。
English: So they drank heavily until late at night, lit candles and went back to the palace.

古文：兄弟方更敦睦。
现代文：从此兄弟俩才重归于好了。
English: Only then did the two brothers get back together.

古文：宏都下有数十邸，出悬钱立券，每以田宅邸店悬上文契，期讫，便驱券主，夺其宅。都下、东土百姓，失业非一。
现代文：萧宏在京城里有数十处府第，他放债立债券时，总是让借债者把自己的田宅或店铺作为抵押写在文契之上，过了期，就把借债者驱赶走，从而夺取他们的住宅，京城和东土百姓不止一人失去产业。
English: Xiao Hong had dozens of offices in Beijing. When he issued bonds, he always asked borrowers to put their homes or shops as collateral on the deed. After the deadline, he drove the borrowers away, thus seizing their homes. More than one person in Beijing and the eastern provinces lost their property.

古文：上后知之，制悬券不得复驱夺，自此始。
现代文：梁武帝后来知道了这事，下令不得再以债券侵夺欠债者的产业，这一规定就是从此而开始的。
English: Emperor Liangwu later learned of this and ordered that the property of debtors should no longer be usurped by means of bonds. This is where this regulation began.

古文：侍中、领军将军吴平侯昺，雅有风力，为上所重，军国大事皆与议决，以为安右将军，监扬州。
现代文：侍中、领军将军吴平侯萧，特别有风度，有骨气，被梁武帝所看重，因此军队、国家的大事都和他商量处理，让他作安右将军，监扬州。
English: Wu Ping Hou Xiao, a chamberlain and the leading general of the army, had a special demeanor and backbone, and was valued by Emperor Liangwu. Therefore, important matters of the army and the country were discussed and handled with him, and he was made the Anyu general and the supervisor of Yangzhou.

古文：昺自以越亲居扬州，涕泣恳让，上不许。
现代文：萧认为让自己驻守扬州不合适，扬州是京邑之地，应当由皇上的亲兄弟来镇守，而自己是皇上的堂弟，不能超越皇上兄弟之亲。
English: Xiao thought that it was not appropriate for him to be stationed in Yangzhou. Yangzhou is the land of the capital city, and it should be guarded by the emperor's brothers, but he was the emperor's cousin and could not surpass the relatives of the emperor's brothers.

古文：在州尤称明断，符教严整。
现代文：因此便流着泪恳切地推辞，但梁武帝不许他推辞。萧治理扬州尤其称得上明察果断、政令严整。
English: When Xiao Jing was in charge of Yongzhou, he was particularly known for being decisive. The decrees he issued were very strict.

古文：辛巳，以宏为中军将军、中书监，六月，乙酉，又以本号行司徒。
现代文：辛巳，梁武帝任命萧宏为中军将军、中书监，六月乙酉，又任命他以中军将军的官号兼司徒。
English: Soon after, Emperor Liangwu appointed Xiao Hong as the general of the Chinese army and the book supervisor of the Chinese army, and appointed him as the official title of the general of the Chinese army.

古文：臣光曰：宏为将则覆三军，为臣则涉大逆，高祖贷其死罪可矣。数旬之间，还为三公，于兄弟之恩诚厚矣，王者之法果安在哉！
现代文：臣司马光曰：萧宏作将领则覆没三军，作臣子则有大逆不道之涉，梁武帝饶恕他的死罪是可以的，但是几十天里，又重新让他位列王公，这从兄弟的恩情讲是非常诚厚的了，可是帝王的法度又在哪里呢？
English: His vassal Sima Guang said: As a general, Xiao Hong annihilated three armies, but as a vassal, he was involved in high treason. It was alright for Emperor Liangwu to pardon his capital crime, but within a few dozen days, he made him a prince again. This was very sincere from the perspective of brotherly kindness, but where was the emperor's rule?

古文：初，洛阳有汉所立《三字石经》，虽屡经丧乱而初无损失。
现代文：当初，洛阳有汉朝立下的《三字石经》，虽然多次遭受战乱却并没有崐在当时受到损坏。
English: At the beginning, Luoyang had the "Three-character Stone Sutra" established by the Han Dynasty. Although it suffered from war many times, it was not damaged at that time.

古文：及魏冯熙、常伯夫相继为洛州刺史，毁取以建浮图精舍，遂大致颓落，所存者委于榛莽，道俗随意取之。
现代文：到了北魏时期，冯熙、常伯夫先后任洛州刺史，破坏了石碑，将其用来修建佛塔寺庙，于是大部分碑文散落，剩下的堆在野草丛中，僧人、俗家人便随意拿走。
English: In the Northern Wei period, Feng Xi and Chang Bof were successively appointed as the history of Luozhou, destroyed the stone monument, and used it to build a stupa temple. As a result, most of the inscriptions were scattered, and the rest were piled up in the wild grass, and monks and laymen took them at will.

古文：侍中领国子祭酒崔光请遣官守视，命国子博士李郁等补其残缺，胡太后许之。会元叉、刘腾作乱，事遂寝。
现代文：侍中领国子祭酒崔光奏请朝廷派官吏去看守，并让国子博士李郁等人补上残缺的部分，胡太后同意了，但是正赶上元叉、刘腾谋反，于是事情便没有得到落实。
English: Choe Kwang-soo, the head of the Imperial Household Agency, asked the Imperial Court to send officials to watch the procession, and to have Dr. Lee Yu and others fill in the missing parts. Empress Dowager Hu agreed, but she was just in time for Yuan Zha and Liu Teng to plot a rebellion, so the matter was not implemented.

古文：秋，七月，魏河州羌却铁忽反，自称水池王；诏以主客郎源子恭为行台以讨之。
现代文：秋季，七月，北魏河州的羌人却铁忽造反，自称为水池王。魏孝明帝下令任命主客郎源子恭为特使去讨伐他。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Xiongnu people of the Northern Wei River State suddenly rebelled and called themselves the Water Pool King. Emperor Wei Xiaoming ordered the appointment of the main guest, Geng Zi Gong, as a special envoy to fight him.

古文：子恭至河州，严勒州郡及诸军毋得犯民一物，亦不得轻与贼战，然后示以威恩，使知悔惧。
现代文：源子恭来到河州，严格命令州郡以及各路军队，不许侵占百姓一件东西，也不许轻易同敌兵作战，然后向叛军示以威力和恩德，使他们有所悔恨、惧怕。
English: Yuan Zi Gong came to Hezhou and strictly ordered the troops of the prefecture and county and all the armies not to occupy a single thing of the people, nor to fight with the enemy soldiers easily, and then showed the power and kindness to the rebels, so that they would have remorse and fear.

古文：八月，铁忽等相帅诣子恭降，首尾不及二旬。
现代文：八月，却铁忽等人来到源子恭处投降，前后不到二十天发邓平定了河州之乱。
English: In August, Guo Tiehong and others came to Yuan Zi Gong's place to surrender. Less than twenty days later, Deng Ping declared the Hezhou Rebellion.

古文：子恭，怀之子也。
现代文：源子恭是源怀的儿子。
English: Minamoto no Tsugaru is the son of Minamoto no Kaoru.

古文：魏宦者刘腾，手不解书，而多奸谋，善揣人意。
现代文：北魏宦官刘腾，不会写字，却很有奸计，善于揣摸别人的心意。
English: Liu Teng, a Northern Wei eunuch, could not write, but he was very cunning and good at guessing the minds of others.

古文：胡太后以其保护之功，累迁至侍中、右光禄大夫，遂干预政事，纳赂为人求官，无不效者。
现代文：胡太后因为他有保护自己的功劳，多次升迁他，直到当了侍中、右光禄大夫，于是他便开始干预政事，收取贿赂替人求官，行贿者没有达不到目的的。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu promoted him many times because he had the merit of protecting himself, until he became an attendant and doctor of the Right Guanglu, so he began to intervene in political affairs, accepting bribes to seek positions for others. Those who paid bribes did not achieve their goals.

古文：河间王琛，简之子也，为定州刺史，以贪纵著名，及罢州还，太后诏曰： 琛在定州，唯不将中山宫来，自馀无所不致，何可更复叙用！ 
现代文：河间王元琛是元简的儿子，作定州刺史，以贪婪放纵而闻名，他卸任回来之后，胡太后诏令说： 元琛在定州时，只没把中山宫带回来，其他没有不弄到手的，怎么可以再任用他！ 
English: Kawama Wang Yuanjun is the son of Yuan Jian, the historian of Dingzhou, famous for his greed and indulgence. After he returned from his post, the Empress Dowager Hu issued a decree saying: When Yuan Jian was in Dingzhou, he only brought back Zhongshan Palace, but he didn't manage to get hold of anything else. How can he be reappointed!

古文：遂废于家。
现代文：于是就把他闲置在家中。
English: So he dismissed him at home.

古文：琛乃求为腾养息，赂腾金宝巨万计。
现代文：元琛就请求刘腾，叙利亚了他的养子，贿赂了刘腾上万的金子珠宝。
English: Yuan Zang then asked Liu Teng, his Syrian adopted son, to bribe Liu Teng with tens of thousands of gold and jewels.

古文：腾为之言于太后，得兼都官尚书，出为秦州刺史，会腾疾笃，太后欲及其生而贵之。九月，癸未朔，以腾为卫将军，加仪同三司。
现代文：刘腾替他在太后那里说情，使他兼任了都官尚书，出京作了秦州刺史。恰在这时，刘腾病得很厉害，胡太后想在他活着时让他富贵，便于九月癸未朔，让刘腾当了卫将军，并加封仪同三司。
English: Liu Teng interceded on his behalf with the empress dowager, so that he concurrently served as the governor of the capital, Shangshu, and went to Beijing to write the history of Qin. At this time, Liu Teng was very ill. Empress Dowager Hu wanted to make him rich while he was alive, so in September, Liu Teng became the General of the Guards, and he was given the title of Jiafeng Yi and San Sisi.

古文：魏胡太后以天文有变，欲以崇宪高太后当之。
现代文：北魏胡太后因为天象有变化，便想让崇宪高太后承担凶兆。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to make the Empress Dowager Chongxian Gao bear the bad omen because the celestial phenomenon had changed.

古文：戊申夜，高太后暴卒；冬，十月，丁卯，以尼礼葬于北邙，谥曰顺皇后。
现代文：戊申夜间，高太后暴死；冬季，十月丁卯，用安葬尼姑的礼节将她安葬在北邙，谥号为顺皇后。
English: In the night of Boshin, the empress dowager Gao died violently; in the winter, October Dingwu, she was buried in Beilun with the funeral etiquette of a nun, and her posthumous name was the Empress Shun.

古文：百官单衣邪巾送至墓所，事讫而除。
现代文：百官们都没有穿着丧服而只是穿着单衣服，头上还都加有驱邪的符，送丧到墓地，丧事完毕之后，便改换了服装。
English: The dignitaries were not dressed in mourning clothes, but only in single clothes, with exorcism symbols on their heads, and were sent to the cemetery. After the funeral, they changed their clothes.

古文：乙亥，以临川王宏为司徒。
现代文：乙亥，梁朝任命临川王萧宏为司徒。
English: Yi Hai, Liang Dynasty appointed Linchuan King Xiaohong as a disciple.

古文：魏胡太后遣使者宋云与比丘惠生如西域求佛经。
现代文：北魏胡太后派使者宋云和僧人惠生到西城去求取佛经。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy, Song Yun, and a monk, Hui Sheng, to Xicheng to obtain Buddhist scriptures.

古文：司空任城王澄奏： 昔高祖迁都，制城内唯听置僧尼寺各一，馀皆置于城外；盖以道俗殊归，欲其净居尘外故也。
现代文：司空任城王元澄上书说： 从前孝文帝迁都时，规定城内只允许设置僧、尼寺庙各一座，其余的都放在城外。这主要是因为僧人和世人不同，想使他们清静地居住在尘世之外的原故。
English: According to a letter written by the city's governor, Yuancheng, "When Emperor Xiaowen moved the capital, it was stipulated that only one temple each for monks and nuns could be set up in the city, and the rest were to be placed outside the city. This was mainly due to the fact that the monks, unlike the people of the world, wanted to live quietly outside the world.

古文：正始三年，沙门统惠深，始违前禁，自是卷诏不行，私谒弥众，都城之中，寺逾五百，占夺民居，三分且一，屠沽尘秽，连比杂居。
现代文：正始三年时，沙门统领惠深，开始违犯从前的禁令，从那以后诏令便不得实行，偷偷谒拜的人越来越多，都城里面，寺庙超过了五百座，将近三分之一的民房被侵占，以致寺庙与那些屠房、酒肆等污秽之地紧挨混杂在一块。
English: At the beginning of the third year, Shamen, the ruler of Yixian, began to violate the previous ban. Since then, the edict has not been implemented, and more and more people have secretly worshiped. In the capital, there are more than five hundred temples, and nearly one-third of the houses have been occupied, so that the temples are closely mixed with those slaughterhouses, liquor stores and other filthy places.

古文：往者代北有法秀之谋，冀州有大乘之变。
现代文：从前代北有法秀谋反，冀州有过大乘叛乱。
English: In the previous Northern Dynasty, there was a rebellion against the Northern Dynasties. Jizhou had a rebellion against the Northern Dynasties.

古文：太和、景明之制，非徒使锱素殊途，盖亦以防微杜渐。
现代文：太和、景明年间的规定，不只是为了使僧俗分开，同时也为了防微杜渐，以免再出现僧人之乱。
English: The stipulation between Taihe and Jingye was not only for the purpose of separating the clergy from the laity, but also for the purpose of preventing chaos among the monks.

古文：昔如来阐教，多依山林，今此僧徒，恋著城邑，正以诱于利欲，不能自已，此乃释氏之糟糠，法王之社鼠，内戒所不容，国曲所共弃也。
现代文：从前佛徒立崐寺传教，大多依傍山林而居，现在的僧人们却恋着城市，这正是因为他们被利欲诱惑，不能约束自己的结果，这是释氏的糟粕，佛祖的败类，为佛教戒律所不容，国家制度所难许。
English: In the past, Buddhists set up monasteries to preach, and most of them lived near the mountains and forests. Nowadays, the monks are in love with the city. This is precisely because they are tempted by greed and cannot restrain themselves. This is the dregs of the Shih clan, the scum of the Buddha, unacceptable by Buddhist precepts, and unacceptable by the national system.

古文：臣谓都城内寺未成可徙者，宜悉徙于郭外，僧不满五十者，并小从大；外州亦准此。 
现代文：我认为凡是都城里没修好、可以搬迁的寺庙，应该都迁到城外去，不足五十个僧人的寺庙，统统合并到寺庙去，外地各州也按此办理。 
English: I think that all temples in the capital city that have not been repaired and can be relocated should be moved outside the city. All temples with less than fifty monks should be merged into a single temple, and the outlying prefectures should also follow this procedure.

古文：诏从之，然卒不能行。
现代文：然而，他的建议到底也没有准行。
English: However, his suggestion never came to fruition.

古文：是岁，魏太师雍等奏： 盐池天藏，资育群生，先朝为之禁限，亦非苟与细民争利。
现代文：这一年，北魏太师元雍等人上书说： 盐池是上天的宝藏，用来养育众生，前代都为此制定了一定的禁令，这并不是为了和百姓争利。
English: In the same year, Northern Wei Grand Master Yuan Yong and others wrote in a letter: "Yanchi is a heavenly treasure, used to nurture all beings. The previous generations have all enacted certain prohibitions for this purpose. This is not to compete with the people.

古文：但利起天池，取用无法，或豪贵封护，或近民吝守，贫弱远来，邈然绝望。
现代文：但是由于人们都想通过盐池来获利，因此取用没有法度，或者被豪门贵戚封占，或者被临近的百姓独自把守，以致那些贫弱之人和远道而来的人都望池兴叹，不能获其利。
English: However, since people all want to make a profit from the salt ponds, there are no legal restrictions on the use of the ponds, and they are either occupied by wealthy families or guarded by the local people alone, so that those who are poor and weak and those who come from far away are looking forward to the ponds and lamenting that they cannot make a profit.

古文：因置主司，令其裁察，强弱相兼，务令得所。
现代文：因此就设置了一个主管部门，令其裁决、督察采盐事务，使强弱都一样，务必使大众都得到利益。
English: Therefore, a competent authority was set up to make its ruling, inspect salt mining affairs, so that the strong and weak are the same, and the public must benefit.

古文：什一之税，自古有之，所务者远近齐平，公私两宜耳。
现代文：征收十分之一的税收方法，自古以来就有，其目的是为了使远近平均，对公对私都有好处。
English: The method of levying a tax of one-tenth has existed from time immemorial, and its purpose is to make far and near average, which is good for both public and private.

古文：及甄琛启求罢禁，乃为绕池之民尉保光等擅自固护；语其障禁，倍于官司，取与自由，贵贱任口。
现代文：等到甄琛启请解除了盐池禁令之后，盐池就被绕池而住的百姓尉保光等人擅自霸占起来，据说他们所立的限禁，加倍地超过了官府的限禁，取与由他们定，盐价贵贱由他们说。
English: After Zhen Rongqi lifted the ban on salt ponds, the salt ponds were occupied without authorization by the people's lieutenant Baoguang and others who lived around the ponds. It is said that the restrictions they set exceeded the restrictions of the government by a factor of two. The amount of salt was determined by them, and the price of salt was determined by them.

古文：请依先朝禁之为便。 
现代文：请求按前朝的做法对此加以限禁才好。 
English: It would be better to ask for a ban, as was done the day before yesterday.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：北魏孝明帝诏令采纳了这一建议。
English: He complied.

