古文：王珍国马仙琕张齐
现代文：王珍国字德重，是沛国相地人。
English: Wang Zhenguo (王珍国) is a native of Peiguo.

古文：王珍国，字德重，沛国相人也。父广之，齐世良将，官至散骑常侍、车骑将军。
现代文：父亲名广之，是齐朝的一员良将，官做到散骑常侍、车骑将军。
English: His father was well-known as a good general in the Qi Dynasty. He was a cavalry officer and a chariot-riding general.

古文：珍国起家冠军行参军，累迁虎贲中郎将、南谯太守，治有能名。
现代文：王珍国初次离家当官，任冠军行参军，屡次升迁任虎贲中郎将、南谯郡太守，在任上以能干闻名。
English: Wang Zhenguo left home for the first time as an official, served as a champion to join the army, and was repeatedly promoted to the post of vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment and governor of Nanlu County. He was famous for his ability in his post.

古文：时郡境苦饥，乃发米散财，以拯穷乏。
现代文：那时郡内苦于饥荒，王珍国就发放粮食钱财，以拯救饥寒交迫的人民。
English: At that time, the county was suffering from famine, and Wang Zhenguo distributed grain money to save the hungry and cold people.

古文：齐高帝手敕云： 卿爱人治国，甚副吾意也。 
现代文：齐高帝亲手撰敕说： 卿爱惜人民辅佐治国，非常合我的心意啊。 
English: Emperor Qi Gao personally wrote the eulogy, saying: "Your Majesty loves the people and helps to govern the State of Georgia, which is very much in line with my heart.

古文：永明初，迁桂阳内史，讨捕盗贼，境内肃清。
现代文：永明初年，王珍国迁任为桂阳郡内史，他讨伐逮捕盗贼，使得郡内非常太平。
English: In the first year of Yongming, Wang Zhenguo was transferred to Guiyang County as the county historian. He cracked down on and arrested thieves, making the county very peaceful.

古文：罢任还都，路经江州，刺史柳世隆临渚饯别，见珍国还装轻素，乃叹曰： 此真可谓良二千石也！ 
现代文：王珍国卸任后，在回京都时，路过江州，江州刺史柳世隆在江边为他设宴饯行，看见王珍国回朝携带的东西少而简朴，于是叹息说： 这位真可谓是贤良的地方大员啊。 
English: After leaving office, Wang Zhenguo passed through Jiangzhou on his way back to Kyoto. The governor of Jiangzhou, Liu Shilong, held a banquet for him along the river. Seeing the few and simple things that Wang Zhenguo brought back to the North, he sighed and said, "This man is truly a virtuous local dignitary."

古文：还为大司马中兵参军。
现代文：王珍国回朝后担任大司马中兵参军。
English: After Wang Zhenguo returned to the imperial court, he served as the grand secretary of the horse soldiers to join the army.

古文：武帝雅相知赏，每叹曰： 晚代将家子弟，有如珍国者少矣。 
现代文：齐武帝对他非常了解和欣赏，经常赞叹道： 近代将领家的子弟中，像珍国这样的太少了。 
English: Emperor Qiwu knew and appreciated him very well, and often praised him: Among the sons of modern generals, there are too few like Zhenguo.

古文：复出为安成内史。
现代文：后来王珍国又外任为安成郡内史。
English: Later, Wang Zhenguo was also appointed as an outside historian of Ancheng County.

古文：入为越骑校尉，冠军长史、钟离太守。
现代文：又被召入任越骑校尉、冠军长史、钟雕郡太守。
English: He was also called to serve as the Viet Cavalry Captain, Champion Long History, and the Governor of Zhongxiao County.

古文：仍迁巴东、建平二郡太守。
现代文：后又迁任巴束、建平二郡太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to Bakoku and Jianping as the governor of the two counties.

古文：还为游击将军，以父忧去职。
现代文：被召回任游击将军，因父亲去世而离职。
English: He was recalled to serve as a guerrilla general, but left his post after his father's death.

古文：建武末，魏军围司州，明帝使徐州刺史裴叔业攻拔涡阳，以为声援，起珍国为辅国将军，率兵助焉。
现代文：建武末年，魏军围困司州，明帝派徐州刺史裴叔业进攻夺取涡阳，作为声援，起用王珍国任辅国将军，率领兵士协助裴叔业。
English: At the end of the Jianwu era, the Wei army besieged Sizhou, and the Ming emperor sent Xuzhou to attack and capture Wuyang. As a show of solidarity, Wang Zhenguo was appointed as the general of the auxiliary country and led the soldiers to assist Pei Shuye.

古文：魏将杨大眼大众奄至，叔业惧，弃军走，珍国率其众殿，故不至大败。
现代文：魏军将领杨大眼率领大部队突然到来，裴叔业害怕了，便弃军而逃，王珍国率领他的部队殿后，才不至于大败。
English: When the Wei general Yang Dajian suddenly arrived with a large force, Pei Shuhei was afraid and fled, leaving Wang Zhenguo to lead his troops. Only then did they avoid a crushing defeat.

古文：永泰元年，会稽太守王敬则反，珍国又率众距之。
现代文：永泰元年，会稽郡太守王敬则反叛，王珍国又率军队前去抵御。
English: In the first year of the Yongtai era, Wang Jing, the grand marshal of Heji County, rebelled, and Wang Zhenguo led the army to resist.

古文：敬则平，迁宁朔将军、青、冀二州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：王敬则被平定后，王珍国迁任宁朔将军、青、冀二州刺史，将军之职依旧。
English: After Wang Jing was subdued, Wang Zhenguo was transferred to the post of general of Ningshuo, Qing and Hebei two states, and the post of general is still the same.

古文：义师起，东昏召珍国以众还京师，入顿建康城。
现代文：高祖兴起义师，束昏侯召王珍国率部队回京师，进入并安顿在建康城。
English: Gao Zu aroused the righteous teachers, and Wang Zhenguo led the troops back to Beijing to enter and settle in Jiankang City.

古文：义师至，使珍国出屯硃雀门，为王茂军所败，乃入城。
现代文：起义队伍到达后，塞昏侯派王珍国屯守朱雀门，结果被王茂军打败，于是退入城内。
English: After the arrival of the uprising team, the Sae Dumo sent Wang Zhenguo to guard the Suzaku Gate. As a result, he was defeated by Wang Mao's army, so he retreated into the city.

古文：仍密遣郄纂奉明镜献诚於高祖，高祖断金以报之。
现代文：王珍国又秘密派遣郄纂手捧明镜献给梁高祖，表明他的诚意，梁高祖用断金作为给他的回报。
English: Wang Zhenguo also secretly sent a hand-held mirror to Liang Gaozu to show his sincerity, and Liang Gaozu gave him a piece of broken gold in return.

古文：时城中咸思从义，莫敢先发，侍中、卫尉张稷都督众军，珍国潜结稷腹心张齐要稷，稷许之。
现代文：当时城中军民都想投奔起义队伍，衹是没有人敢先出头。侍中、卫尉张稷是众军统帅，王珍国暗地裹结交张稷的心腹张齐，对张稷进行邀约，张稷允许了他们的要求。
English: At that time, all the soldiers and civilians in the city wanted to join the uprising team, but no one dared to come forward first. The chamberlain and guard Zhang Ye was the commander of the army, and Wang Zhenguo secretly tied the heart and stomach of Zhang Ye, invited Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye allowed their request.

古文：十二月丙寅旦，珍国引稷于卫尉府，勒兵入自云龙门，即东昏于内殿斩之，与稷会尚书仆射王亮等于西钟下，使中书舍人裴长穆等奉东昏首归高祖。
现代文：十二月丙寅日清晨，王珍国引张稷出卫尉府，率领士兵从云龙门进入内殿，在那裹把束昏侯杀死，王珍国舆张稷在西钟楼下会合尚书仆射王亮等人，派中书舍人裴长穆等人捧着束昏侯的首级投奔梁高祖。
English: In the early morning of the third day of December, Wang Zhenguo led the soldiers from the Cloud Dragon Gate to the inner hall, where they killed the dowager prince. Wang Zhenguo's wife Zhang Zhen met with the scholarly servant Shaowang Liang and others under the West Bell Tower, and sent the scholar Pei Changmu and others to hold the dowager prince's head and rush to Liang Gaozu.

古文：以功授右卫将军，辞不拜；又授徐州刺史，固乞留京师。
现代文：王珍国因功被授予右卫将军，他推辞不拜任；又授予他徐州刺史，他坚持请求留在京师。
English: Wang Zhenguo was awarded the title of General of the Right Division for his meritorious service, but he refused to accept the post; he was also awarded the title of Xuzhou Historian, but he insisted on staying in Beijing Division.

古文：复赐金帛，珍国又固让。
现代文：又赐给他金银布帛，王珍国又坚持推让。
English: He was also given gold, silver and cloth. Wang Zhenguo insisted on making concessions.

古文：敕答曰： 昔田子泰固辞绢谷。
现代文：高祖给他的韶书说： 从前，田子泰坚决辞退绢帛和粮食。
English: Gao Zu said in his imperial edict: Once upon a time, Tian Zi Tai resolutely refused the imperial edict and grain.

古文：卿体国情深，良在可嘉。 
现代文：今天，卿体谅国家的深情，实在值得嘉奖。 
English: Today, Sir's understanding of the nation's deep feelings is truly commendable.

古文：后因侍宴，帝问曰： 卿明镜尚存，昔金何在？ 
现代文：后来，王珍国侍宴，高祖问他： 你的明镜我还保存着，当年我送你的断金在哪裹呢? 
English: Later, at Wang Zhen's state banquet, Gao Zu asked him: I still have your bright mirror. Where is the broken gold ring I gave you that year?

古文：珍国答曰： 黄金谨在臣肘，不敢失坠。 
现代文：珍国回答道： 黄金谨在我的肘间，不敢丢失坠落。 
English: Zhen Guo replied: The gold is between my elbows, I dare not lose it.

古文：复为右卫将军，加给事中，迁左卫将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：后来，王珍国又担任右卫将军，加给事中，又迁任左卫将军，加散骑常侍。
English: Later, Wang Zhenguo served as the right guard general, and in addition, he was transferred to the left guard general, and he was added to the loose riding attendant.

古文：天监初，封滠阳县侯，邑千户。
现代文：天监初年，被封为摄阳县侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, he was appointed as the governor of Zhengyang County, with more than a thousand households in the county.

古文：除都官尚书，常侍如故。
现代文：又任都官尚书，仍任常侍。天监二年。
English: He was also appointed to the post of Shoshu, the official of the capital, and still served as a regular attendant. He remained as a celestial inspector for two years.

古文：五年，魏任城王元澄寇钟离，高祖遣珍国，因问讨贼方略。
现代文：魏朝的任城王元澄侵犯钟离，高祖派王珍国出征，并问他讨贼的方针策略。
English: Yuancheng, the king of Rencheng in the Wei Dynasty, invaded Zhongli, Gao Zu sent Wang Zhenguo to go to war, and asked him about the policy and strategy of catching thieves.

古文：珍国对曰： 臣常患魏众少，不苦其多。 
现代文：王珍国回答： 我衹怕魏军来得人少，不怕他人多。 
English: Wang Zhenguo replied: I am not afraid that the Wei army will have fewer people, and I am not afraid that others will have more.

古文：高祖壮其言，乃假节，与众军同讨焉。
现代文：高祖认为他说得豪壮，就让他持符节，舆众军共同讨伐魏军。
English: Gaozu thought that he was heroic, so he let him hold the festival, and the army of the masses jointly fought against the Wei army.

古文：魏军退，班师。
现代文：魏军撤退，珍国与众军班师回朝。
English: The Wei army retreated, and Zhen Guo and his army returned to the North.

古文：出为使持节、都督梁、秦二州诸军事、征虏将军、南秦、梁二州刺史。
现代文：珍国出任使持节、都督梁秦二州诸军事、征虏将军、南秦梁二州刺史。
English: Zhen Guo served as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Liang Qin Erzhou, the conscript general, and the history of Liang Erzhou in Southern Qin.

古文：会梁州长史夏侯道迁以州降魏，珍国步道出魏兴，将袭之，不果，遂留镇焉。
现代文：那时正当梁州长史夏侯道迁把梁州献出投降了魏军，王珍国从魏兴步行而出，准备袭击夏侯道迁，没有成功，于是就留在那裹镇守。
English: At that time, Liang governor Shi Xia Hou Dao Qian surrendered Liangzhou to the Wei army. Wang Zhenguo went on foot from Wei Xing to attack Xia Hou Dao Qian, but failed, so he stayed there to guard the town.

古文：以无功，累表请解，高祖弗许。
现代文：因为没有功劳，他几次上表，请求解除职务，高祖不许。
English: Because there is no merit, he went to the table several times and asked to be relieved of his duties, but Gaozu would not allow it.

古文：改封宜阳县侯，户邑如前。
现代文：后改封为宜阳县侯，食邑户数和以前一样。
English: Later, it was renamed Yiyang County, and the number of households in the county remained the same as before.

古文：征还为员外散骑常侍、太子右卫率，加后军。
现代文：后来，王珍国被召回，任员外散骑常侍、太子右卫率，并加后军。
English: Later, Wang Zhenguo was recalled and appointed as the non-commissioned officer of the cavalry, the prince of the right guard, and the rear guard.

古文：顷之，复为左卫将军。
现代文：不久，又恢复为左卫将军。
English: Soon, he was reinstated as General of the Left Division.

古文：九年，出为使持节、都督湘州诸军事、信武将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：天监九年，出任使持节、都督渔诸军事、信武将军、渔丛刺史。
English: In the ninth year of Tianjun, he served as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Yuzhu, the general of Nobutake, and the history of Yuzhu.

古文：视事四年，征还为护军将军，迁通直散骑常侍、丹阳尹。
现代文：任职四年后，被召回任护军将军，迁任通直散骑常侍、且阳尹。
English: After serving for four years, he was recalled to serve as a general of the escort army, and was transferred to the position of a regular attendant on horseback, and became Yang Yin.

古文：十四年，卒。
现代文：天监十四年，去世。
English: He died in the fourteenth year of Tianjing.

古文：诏赠车骑将军，给鼓吹一部，赙钱十万，布百匹。
现代文：皇帝下令追赠他为车骑将军，赐给鼓吹一部，送助葬钱十万，布一百匹。
English: The emperor ordered that he be posthumously awarded the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry, that a portion be given to the propagandist, and that a hundred thousand yuan and a hundred horses of cloth be sent to help with the funeral.

古文：谥曰威。
现代文：谧号盛。
English: 号威.

古文：子僧度嗣。
现代文：他的儿子王世仅继承他的官爵。
English: His son, Wang Shih, inherited only his title.

古文：马仙琕，字灵馥，扶风郿人也。
现代文：马仙碑字灵馥，扶风郦县人。
English: Ma Xianbei, also known as Linglong, was from Fufeng County.

古文：父伯鸾，宋冠军司马。
现代文：他父亲名伯鸾，是刘宋的冠军司马。
English: His father's name was Bo Xuan, and he was Liu Song's champion Sima.

古文：仙琕少以果敢闻，遭父忧，毁瘠过礼，负土成坟，手植松柏。
现代文：马仙碑少年时以果敢闻名远近，遭受丧父之痛时，他因哀伤过度而消瘦，超过了礼法的规定，他背土堆坟，亲手种植松柏在坟边。
English: Ma Xianbei was famous for his courage when he was a boy. When he suffered the pain of losing his father, he lost weight due to excessive grief, exceeding the rules of etiquette. He piled up the grave with soil and planted conifers on the graveside with his own hands.

古文：起家郢州主簿，迁武骑常侍，为小将，随齐安陆王萧缅。
现代文：马仙碑开始做官出任郢州主簿，迁任武骑常侍，为小将，跟随齐朝的安陆王萧缅。
English: Ma Xianbei began to work as an official and served as the main book of Bozhou. He was transferred to the post of warrior and horseman. He was a minor general and followed the Anlu King Xiao Ming of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：缅卒，事明帝。
现代文：萧缅去世后，仙碑就事奉齐明帝。
English: After the death of Xiao Ming, Xianbei began to serve Emperor Qiming.

古文：永元中，萧遥光、崔慧景乱，累有战功，以勋至前将军。
现代文：永元年间，萧遥光、崔慧景作乱，仙碑平乱作战，屡有战功，因功劳升为前将军。
English: During the Yongyuan era, Xiao Yaoguang and Cui Huijing caused turmoil, and Xianbei fought to quell the turmoil. He was promoted to former general for his distinguished service.

古文：出为龙骧将军、南汝阴、谯二郡太守。
现代文：出任龙骧将军、南汝阴、谯二郡太守。
English: He served as the general of Longyu County, the governor of Nanruyin County, and the governor of Xiji County.

古文：会寿阳新陷，魏将王肃侵边，仙琕力战，以寡克众，魏人甚惮之。
现代文：那时正当寿阳刚刚沦陷，魏将王肃侵犯边境，仙碑奋力作战，以少胜多，魏人非常害怕他。
English: At that time, Shouyang had just fallen, and the Wei general Wang Su invaded the border. Xianbei fought hard, winning by a few. The Wei people were very afraid of him.

古文：复以功迁宁朔将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：仙碑又因战功而升迁为宁朔将军、豫州刺史。
English: Xianbei was also promoted to Ningshuo General and Yuzhou Sashihong due to his war service.

古文：义师起，四方多响应，高祖使仙琕故人姚仲宾说之，仙琕于军斩仲宾以徇。
现代文：梁高祖义师兴起之后，四面八方很多人来响应，梁高祖派仙碑的老朋友姚仲宾去劝说仙碑投靠高祖，仙碑在军营中将姚仲宾斩首示众。
English: After the rise of Liang Gaozhu Yishi, many people from all over the world responded. Liang Gaozhu sent Yao Zhongbin, an old friend of Xianbei, to persuade Xianbei to support Gaozhu. Xianbei beheaded Yao Zhongbin in the military camp.

古文：义师至新林，仙琕犹持兵于江西，日钞运漕，建康城陷，仙琕号哭经宿，乃解兵归罪。
现代文：起义队伍到了新林，仙碑仍带兵守在长江西岸，每天抢夺义师从水路运输的粮食。建康城被攻陷后，仙碑号啕大哭了一个通宵，逭才解散队伍，到高祖跟前谢罪。
English: When the uprising team arrived in Xinlin, Xianbei still guarded the west bank of the Yangtze River with his troops, and every day he robbed the grain that Yishi transported from the waterway. After Jiankang City was captured, Xianbei cried loudly for an entire night, and only then did he disband the team and go to Gaozu to apologize.

古文：高祖劳之曰： 射钩斩袪，昔人弗忌。
现代文：高祖慰劳他说：管仲箭射公子小白的衣带钩，寺人披割断重耳的衣袖，前人都不计旧怨。
English: Gao Zu consoled him, saying: Guanzhong arrows shot the belt hook of the boy Xiao Bai, the temple people wore the sleeves that cut off the heavy ears, and the predecessors did not care about old grudges.

古文：卿勿以戮使断运，苟自嫌绝也。 
现代文：卿不要因为杀了使者、切断粮食运输这些事情痛恨自己而与我有隔阂。 
English: Sir, do not separate yourself from me by hating yourself for killing the envoys and cutting off the grain shipments.

古文：仙琕谢曰： 小人如失主犬，后主饲之，便复为用。 
现代文：仙碑道谢说： 小人我如同丧家之犬，衹要有人喂养，就会为后来的主人效力。 
English: Xianbei thanked him and said, "I am like a lost dog. If I want to be fed, I will work for my future master."

古文：高祖笑而美之。
现代文：高祖笑着赞美他。
English: Gaozu laughed and praised him.

古文：俄而仙琕母卒，高祖知其贫，赙给甚厚。
现代文：不久，仙碑的母亲去世，高祖知道他很贫穷，送给他很多财物帮助他办理丧事。
English: Soon after, Xianbei's mother passed away. Gaozu knew that he was very poor and gave him a lot of wealth to help him with the funeral.

古文：仙琕号泣，谓弟仲艾曰： 蒙大造之恩，未获上报。
现代文：仙碑失声大哭，他对弟弟仲艾说： 我们已经蒙受了再造之恩，还未报答。
English: Xianbei burst into tears and said to his brother Zhong Ai, "We have received the grace of re-creation, but we have yet to repay it.

古文：今复荷殊泽，当与尔以心力自效耳。 
现代文：今天又受到特殊照顾，今后我当和你共同全心全意为高祖效力啊。 
English: Today, I received special care. In the future, I will work with you wholeheartedly for Gao Zu.

古文：天监四年，王师北讨，仙琕每战，勇冠三军，当其冲者，莫不摧破。
现代文：天监四年，梁武帝率师北伐，仙碑每次作战，都勇冠三军，他所到之处，无不望风披靡。
English: In the four years of the Heaven's Guardian, Emperor Liangwu led the Northern Expedition, and Emperor Xianbei led the three armies in every battle. Wherever he went, he was invincible.

古文：与诸将论议，口未尝言功。
现代文：但到舆各位将领评论功过时，他却绝口不提自已的功劳。
English: But when it came time for the generals to comment on his achievements, he made no mention of his own merits.

古文：人问其故，仙琕曰： 丈夫为时所知，当进不求名，退不逃罪，乃平生愿也。
现代文：有人间他原因，仙埤： 大丈夫被时代所知用，应当进不求名，退不逃罪，遣是我一生的愿望。
English: There is a reason for him to be here, Xianqi: It is good for a man to be known and used by the times. He should not seek fame, retreat or escape. It is my lifelong wish to send him away.

古文：何功可论！ 
现代文：有什么功劳可说呢! 
English: What merit is there to speak of!

古文：授辅国将军、宋安、安蛮二郡太守，迁南义阳太守。
现代文：之后，仙碑被授予辅国将军，宋安、安蛮二郡太守，迁任南义阳太守。
English: After that, Xianbei was awarded the General of the Auxiliary State, Song An and An Man were appointed as the two county governors, and moved to the position of the governor of South Yiyang.

古文：累破山蛮，郡境清谧。
现代文：仙碑屡次打败山裹的蛮人，郡内变得清静安蔷。
English: Xianbei repeatedly defeated the mountain-wrapped barbarians, and the county became quiet and peaceful.

古文：以功封浛洭县伯，邑四百户，仍迁都督司州诸军事、司州刺史，辅国将军如故。
现代文：仙碑因功被封为洽沤县伯，食邑四百户，又迁任都督司州诸军事、司州刺史，并仍旧任辅国将军。
English: As a result of his achievements, Xianbei was awarded the title of Chaozhou County Mayor, 400 households in food villages, and was also transferred to the position of the military governor of Zhouzhou, the governor of Zhouzhou, and the governor of Zhouzhou, and still served as the general of the auxiliary state.

古文：俄进号贞威将军。
现代文：不久进号为贞威将军。
English: He was soon given the title of General Zhenwei.

古文：魏豫州人白皁生杀其刺史琅邪王司马庆曾，自号平北将军，推乡人胡逊为刺史，以悬瓠来降。
现代文：魏豫州人白阜生杀死豫州刺史琅邪王司马庆曾后，自己号称平北将军，推举同乡胡逊任刺史，以献出军事要地悬瓠来投降梁朝。
English: After Bai Fusheng, a native of Yuzhou in Wei, killed the evil king of Yuzhou, Sima Qing Zeng, he called himself the general of Pingbei, promoted his countryman Hu Xun to be the general of Sashi, and surrendered to the Liang Dynasty by offering a military important place.

古文：高祖使仙琕赴之，又遣直阁将军武会超、马广率众为援。
现代文：梁高祖派仙碑前往接收，又派直合将军武会超、马广率大军为后援部队。
English: Liang Gaozhu sent Xianbei to receive him, and also sent Zhouga Generals Wu Huichao and Ma Guang to lead a large army as a supporting force.

古文：仙琕进顿楚王城，遣副将齐苟儿以兵二千助守悬瓠。
现代文：仙碑来到楚王城安顿下来，派副将齐苟儿带兵二千帮助守卫悬瓠。
English: Xianbei came to King Chu's City to settle down, and sent Vice Admiral Qigong with two thousand soldiers to help guard the hanging anchor.

古文：魏中山王元英率众十万攻悬瓠，仙琕遣广、会超等守三关。
现代文：魏中山王元英率领十万大军进攻悬瓠，仙碑派遣马广、武会超等守卫三关。
English: Wei Zhongshan Wang Yuanying led a hundred thousand army to attack the Hanging Mountains, and sent Ma Guang and Wuhui super-class to guard the three passes.

古文：十二月，英破悬瓠，执齐苟儿，遂进攻马广，又破广，生擒之，送雒阳。
现代文：十二月，元英攻破悬瓠城，俘获齐苟儿，又向马广进攻，并攻破了马广的防线，活捉了马广，押送到雒阳。
English: In December, Yuan Ying broke through the city of Zhangye, captured Qigong, attacked Ma Guang, broke through Ma Guang's defense line, captured Ma Guang alive, and escorted him to Fenyang.

古文：仙琕不能救。会超等亦相次退散，魏军遂进据三关。
现代文：仙碑没有及时救援，武会超等也相继撤退散去，魏军就进攻并占据了三关。
English: The Xianbei did not receive timely rescue, and the Wuhui super-class also retreated and dispersed one after another. The Wei army attacked and occupied the three passes.

古文：仙琕坐征还，为云骑将军。
现代文：仙埤因此被召回，改任云骑将军。
English: As a result, Emperor Xianlong was recalled and reassigned to the post of General Yunjie.

古文：出为仁威司马，府主豫章王转号云麾，复为司马，加振远将军。
现代文：又出任仁威司马，府主豫章王转号为云麾将军，后又任司马，加振远将军。
English: He also served as the Zhenwei Sima, and the governor, Yu Zhangwang, changed his name to General Yunqi, and later he also served as the Sima and General Zhenyuan.

古文：十年，朐山民杀琅邪太守刘晣，以城降魏，诏假仙琕节，讨之。
现代文：天监十年，朐山百姓杀死琅邪郡太守刘晰，把城献给魏国投降了，梁武帝命令仙碑持符节前往征讨。
English: Ten years after the establishment of the Heaven's Guardianship, the people of Lushan killed Liu Qiao, the governor of Yuya County, and surrendered the city to Wei. Emperor Liangwu ordered Xianbei to go to the conquest with the festival.

古文：魏徐州刺史卢昶以众十余万赴焉。
现代文：魏国的徐州刺史卢昶率领十多万大军赶到那裹。
English: The Xuzhou vassal of Wei, Shi Lu, led more than a hundred thousand troops to the area.

古文：仙琕与战，累破之，昶遁走。
现代文：仙碑舆卢昶军作战，多次打败魏军，卢昶逃走。
English: Xianbei defeated the Wei army many times, and Lu Wei fled.

古文：仙琕纵兵乘之，魏众免者十一二，收其兵粮牛马器械，不可胜数。
现代文：仙碑派兵乘胜追击，魏军逃脱者仅十分之一二，收缴魏军的兵器、军粮、牛马、器械等等，不可胜数。
English: Xianbei sent soldiers to pursue the victory, only one-tenth of the Wei army escaped, and the Wei army's weapons, military food, cattle, horses, equipment, etc. were collected.

古文：振旅还京师，迁太子左卫率，进爵为侯，增邑六百户。
现代文：仙碑整顿部队，回到京师，迁任太子左卫率，进爵为侯，增加食邑六百户。
English: Xianbei reorganized the troops, returned to the Beijing Division, transferred to the Prince of the Left Guards, became a marquess, and increased the number of food villages to six hundred.

古文：十一年，迁持节、督豫、北豫、霍三州诸军事、信武将军、豫州刺史，领南汝阴太守。
现代文：十一年，迁任持节、督豫北豫霍三州诸军事、信武将军、豫州刺史，兼任南汝阴太守。
English: In the eleventh year, he was transferred to hold the festival, supervise the military of the three states of Henan, Hubei and Hubei, the general of Xinwu, and the historian of Henan, and also serve as the governor of Nanruyin.

古文：初，仙琕幼名仙婢，及长，以 婢 名不典，乃以 玉 代 女 ，因成 琕 云。
现代文：最初，仙碑年幼时名叫仙婢，长大后，认为 婢 字作名不好听，就用 玉 旁代替 女 旁，因而成了 埤 。
English: At first, when Sembi was young, she was called Sengi, but when she grew up, she thought that the word "servant" was not a good name, so she used "jade" instead of "female" and became "mei."

古文：自为将及居州郡，能与士卒同劳逸。
现代文：自从他当上将军并官居州郡长官后，仙埤能够舆士兵们同甘苦，共劳逸。
English: Since he became a general and served as a county magistrate, Xian Qi has been able to share the hardships and joys of the soldiers.

古文：身衣不过布帛，所居无帷幕衾屏，行则饮食与厮养最下者同。
现代文：他身上所穿不过是布帛做的衣服，所住的地方没有帷幕衾屏，行军打仗时，饮食与最低屑的士兵相同。
English: He wore nothing but rags, lived in a place without curtains or screens, and when he went to war he ate the same food as the poorest soldier.

古文：其在边境，常单身潜入敌庭，伺知壁垒村落险要处所，故战多克捷，士卒亦甘心为之用，高祖雅爱仗之。
现代文：他在边境时，经常孤身一人潜入敌人的庭帐，偷偷侦察壁垒村落险要处所，所以每次作战大多能够获胜，士兵们也心甘情愿地听他指挥，为他所用，产担非常喜爱和器重他。
English: When he was at the border, he often sneaked into the enemy's courtyard alone and secretly scouted the most dangerous places in the village, so he was able to win most of the battles. The soldiers also willingly listened to his command and used him. They loved and valued him very much.

古文：在州四年，卒。
现代文：业婆在州上任事四年后去世。
English: She died four years after taking up her post in the state.

古文：赠左卫将军。
现代文：被追赠为左卫将军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Left Division.

古文：谥曰刚。
现代文：谧号刨。
English: 号刨.

古文：子岩夫嗣。
现代文：他的儿子堂去继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Don.

古文：张齐，字子响，冯翊郡人。
现代文：张齐字子响，冯翊郡人。
English: Zhang Qi Zi Zixing, a native of Fengye County.

古文：世居横桑，或云横桑人也。
现代文：因世代居住在横桑，所以有人说他是横桑人。
English: Because he has lived in Yokosuka for generations, some people say he is a Yokosuka native.

古文：少有胆气。
现代文：张齐少年时很有胆气。
English: Zhang Qi had a lot of courage when he was a boy.

古文：初事荆府司马垣历生。
现代文：最初在荆府司马垣历生处做事。
English: At first, he worked at the Magaki Register Office of the Jing Prefecture.

古文：历生酗酒，遇下严酷，不甚礼之。
现代文：历生喜欢酗酒，对待属下很严酷，对人不太有礼貌。
English: All his life he liked to drink, treated his subordinates very harshly, and was not very polite to people.

古文：历生罢官归，吴郡张稷为荆府司马，齐复从之，稷甚相知重，以为心腹，虽家居细事，皆以任焉。
现代文：历生罢官回乡后，吴郡的张稷继任荆府司马，张齐又跟从他做事，张稷很看重他，把他当作自己的心腹，即使是家居中的琐细之事，也都委任给他。
English: After returning to his hometown after being dismissed from his post, Zhang Qi of Wuxian County succeeded him as the mayor of Jingfu, and Zhang Qi followed him to work. Zhang Qi valued him very much and regarded him as his confidant. Even the trivial things in the home were entrusted to him.

古文：齐尽心事稷，无所辞惮。
现代文：张齐服侍张稷尽心尽力，毫无怨言。
English: Zhang Qi served Zhang Ye wholeheartedly and without complaint.

古文：随稷归京师。
现代文：后随张稷回京师。
English: Later, he followed Zhang Ye back to Beijing.

古文：稷为南兗州，又擢为府中兵参军，始委以军旅。
现代文：张稷在南兖州任职，又被提拔为府中兵参军，开始给张齐委派军旅之事。
English: Zhang Qian served in Nanluozhou, and was promoted to join the army as a prefectural soldier, and began to send military travel to Zhang Qi.

古文：齐永元中，义师起，东昏征稷归，都督宫城诸军事，居尚书省。
现代文：南朝齐永元年间，梁高祖率师起义，束昏侯召回张稷，统领宫城诸军事，驻在尚书省。
English: During the Southern Dynasty of Qiyongyuan, Liang Gaozu led his division in an uprising, and was recalled to Zhangye by the dowager empress. He took command of the military in the palace city and was stationed in Shangshu Province.

古文：义兵至，外围渐急，齐日造王珍国，阴与定计。
现代文：起义队伍到了城外，将城包围，形势逐渐危急，张齐白天到王珍国那裹，悄悄与他定下计策。
English: The insurgent team arrived outside the city, surrounded the city, and the situation gradually became critical. Zhang Qi went to Wang Zhenguo during the day and quietly set up a strategy with him.

古文：计定，夜引珍国就稷造膝，齐自执烛以成谋。
现代文：计策一定，当晚就带领王珍国到张稷这儿来联络，张蛮自己手持烛火照明，以促成这个计策的实现。
English: That night, Wang Zhenguo led Wang Zhenguo to Zhang Rong to liaise with him. Zhang Rong himself held a candlelight to facilitate the realization of this strategy.

古文：明旦，与稷、珍国即东昏于内殿，齐手刃焉。
现代文：第二天一早，张齐舆张稷、王珍国在内殿走近柬昏侯，张齐亲手用刀杀死了束昏侯。
English: In the morning of the next day, Zhang Qi, Zhang Ye and Wang Zhenguo approached Kam Du Hou in the inner hall, and Zhang Qi personally killed Zou Du Hou with a knife.

古文：明年，高祖受禅，封齐安昌县侯，邑五百户，仍为宁朔将军、历阳太守。
现代文：第二年，梁产担接受禅让，封张查为安昌县侯，食邑五百户，同时又任宁朔将军、历阳郡太守。
English: In the second year, Liang Sangdang accepted Zen Zhen, and Zhang Zha was appointed as the lord of Anchang County, with 500 households, and at the same time he was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Liyang County.

古文：齐手不知书，目不识字，而在郡有清政，吏事甚修。
现代文：张齐手不会写，目不识字，却在郡守任上有清政之美誉，郡府事务治理得很好。
English: Zhang Qi can't write with his hands and can't read with his eyes, but he has a reputation for clean government as a county governor, and the affairs of the county are well managed.

古文：天监二年，还为虎贲中郎将。
现代文：丢监二年，张齐回京师任虎贲中郎将。
English: Two years after his release from prison, Zhang Qi returned to Beijing to serve as the vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment.

古文：未拜，迁天门太守，宁朔将军如故。
现代文：没有拜任，又迁任天门郡太守，仍旧任宁朔将军。
English: He did not accept the position, but was transferred to the position of the governor of Tianmen County, and was still appointed as the general of Ningshuo.

古文：四年，魏将王足寇巴、蜀，高祖以齐为辅国将军救蜀。
现代文：天监四年，魏国将领王足侵犯巴、蜀，高祖任命张齐为辅国将军，前去救援蜀军。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, the Wei general Wang Zu invaded Ba and Shu. Gaozu appointed Zhang Qi as an auxiliary general to go to the rescue of the Shu army.

古文：未至，足退走，齐进戍南安。
现代文：张查的队伍还没到达蜀地，王星就退走了，强蛮就进驻戍卫直安。
English: Zhang Zha's team had not yet arrived in Shoudi, when Uranus retreated, and the strongman was stationed in Hewei Nao'an.

古文：七年秋，使齐置大剑、寒冢二戍，军还益州。
现代文：天监七年秋季，皇帝命张齐设置大剑、寒冢两个戍所，大军回到益州。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Heaven's Supervision, the emperor ordered Zhang Qi to set up two imperial residences, one for the imperial sword and the other for the imperial scepter, and the great army returned to Yizhou.

古文：其年，迁武旅将军、巴西太守，寻加征远将军。
现代文：逭一年，张齐迁任武旅将军、巴西郡太守，不久又加征远将军。
English: A year later, Zhang Qi was transferred to the post of military brigade general, the governor of Baxi County, and soon he was promoted to general.

古文：十年，郡人姚景和聚合蛮蜒，抄断江路，攻破金井。
现代文：十年，蜀郡人姚景和聚合少数民族蛮蜒，抄断长江水路，攻破金井。
English: Ten years ago, Yao Jinghe, a man from Shu County, and a group of ethnic minorities meandered, cut off the Yangtze River waterway, and broke through Jinjing.

古文：齐讨景和于平昌，破之。
现代文：张齐讨伐姚景和，在平昌地区打败了姚景和。
English: Zhang Qi fought against Yao Jinghe and defeated Yao Jinghe in the Pyeongchang area.

古文：初，南郑没于魏，乃于益州西置南梁州。
现代文：当初，南郑被魏国攻陷，就在益州西面设置了南梁州。
English: At first, Nan Zheng was conquered by Wei, and Nan Liang Prefecture was set up in the west of Yizhou.

古文：州镇草创，皆仰益州取足。
现代文：南梁州州镇处于草创时期，一切都仰仗益州提供物品。
English: Nanliangzhou town is in the pioneering period, everything depends on Yizhou to provide goods.

古文：齐上夷獠义租，得米二十万斛。
现代文：张齐到少数民族夷、僚聚居区去征收额外的租粮，得到大米二十万斛。
English: Zhang Qi went to the ethnic minority Yi and other ethnic minority areas to collect additional rent grain, and obtained 200,000 baht of rice.

古文：又立台传，兴冶铸，以应赡南梁。
现代文：张齐又立台传，兴办冶炼铸造业，以供应南梁州所需。
English: Zhang Qi also established Tai Chuan and set up a smelting and casting industry to supply the needs of Nan Liangzhou.

古文：十一年，进假节、督益州外水诸军。
现代文：天监十一年，张齐进宫为假节、督益州外水诸军。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianjun, Zhang Qi entered the palace for the false festival, supervising and benefiting the troops outside the state.

古文：十二年，魏将傅竖眼寇南安，齐率众距之，竖眼退走。
现代文：十二年，魏军将领傅竖眼侵犯南安，张齐带兵迎战，傅竖眼退走。
English: In the twelfth year, the Wei general and leader Fu Zhizhen invaded Nan'an, Zhang Qi led the troops to fight, and Fu Zhizhen retreated.

古文：十四年，迁信武将军、巴西、梓潼二郡太守。
现代文：十四年，张齐迁任信武将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守。
English: Fourteen years later, Zhang Qi was transferred to the post of General Xinwu and became the governor of the Second County of Zizhi, Brazil.

古文：是岁，葭萌人任令宗因众之患魏也，杀魏晋寿太守，以城归款。
现代文：同年，葭萌人任令宗看到众人受害于魏人，就杀死魏国晋寿郡太守，以整座城投靠梁朝。
English: In the same year, when Renlingzong, a native of Qimeng, saw that the people were suffering from the Wei people, he killed the governor of Jinzhou County, Wei, and took the whole city to support the Liang Dynasty.

古文：益州刺史鄱阳王遣齐帅众三万，督南梁州长史席宗范诸军迎令宗。
现代文：益州刺史鄱阳王派遣张齐率领三万大军，督南梁州长史席宗范诸军迎接任令宗。
English: King Shenyang of Yizhou dispatched Zhang Qi to lead a 30,000-strong army, and Governor Nanliang and Governor Shi Shi Zongfan led the army to welcome Ren Rongzong.

古文：十五年，魏东益州刺史元法僧遣子景隆来拒齐师，南安太守皇甫谌及宗范逆击之，大破魏军于葭萌，屠十余城，魏将丘突、王穆等皆降。
现代文：十五年，魏国东益州刺史元法僧派遣儿子元景隆前来抵抗张齐军，南安郡太守皇甫谌和席宗范迎战，在葭萌大败魏军，屠城十余座，魏将丘突、王穆等都投降了梁军。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Wei dynasty, Yuan Shishi, a monk of Eastern Yizhou, sent his son, Yuan Jinglong, to resist Zhang Qi's army. Emperor Fuxi and Emperor Zongfan, the governor of Nan'an County, led the troops into battle. They defeated the Wei army in Qimeng, slaughtered more than ten cities, and the Wei generals Qiu Tu and Wang Mu all surrendered to Liang's army.

古文：而魏更增傅竖眼兵，复来拒战，齐兵少不利，军引还，于是葭萌复没于魏。
现代文：然而，魏国又增兵给傅竖眼，再次前来舆梁军作战，张齐兵少，作战不利，队伍退回，于是葭萌又落入魏军之手。
English: However, Wei also increased the number of soldiers to give Fu a black eye. Once again, Miao Liang's army came to fight, Zhang Qi's army was small, and the battle was unfavorable. The team retreated, so Qimeng again fell into the hands of the Wei army.

古文：齐在益部累年，讨击蛮獠，身无宁岁。
现代文：张齐在益州一住好几年，不断征讨袭击蛮尽，终年不得安宁。
English: Zhang Qi has lived in Yizhou for several years. He has been constantly attacked and harassed, and has been restless all year round.

古文：其居军中，能身亲劳辱，与士卒同其勤苦。
现代文：他住在军营中时，能够身体力行，与士兵同甘共苦。
English: When he was living in a military camp, he was able to practice and share the hardships with the soldiers.

古文：自画顿舍城垒，皆委曲得其便，调给衣粮资用，人人无所困乏。
现代文：他亲自规划设计宿营地的房舍和城垒，都很妥贴便利，调济配给衣服粮食和用品，使得每个人都不缺乏。
English: He personally planned and designed the buildings and ramparts of the camp, which were very convenient, and distributed clothes, food and supplies, so that everyone did not lack.

古文：既为物情所附，蛮獠亦不敢犯，是以威名行于庸、蜀。
现代文：一旦物质上有所依附以后，蛮僚也不敢再来冒犯，因此张齐的威名盛行于庸、蜀等地。
English: Once materially attached, barbarian colleagues did not dare to offend again, so Zhang Qi's prestige prevailed in places such as Yong and Shu.

古文：巴西郡居益州之半，又当东道冲要，刺史经过，军府远涉，多所穷匮。
现代文：巴西郡占有益州的一半地方，又正当东路的交通要道，刺史经过这裹，军府人员远涉，经常感到衣食匮乏。
English: Brazil County accounts for half of the beneficial state, and it is also a major transportation route on the East Road. History has passed through this area, and the military personnel have traveled far and wide, often feeling the lack of food and clothing.

古文：齐沿路聚粮食，种蔬菜，行者皆取给焉。
现代文：张齐就沿路聚集粮食，种植蔬菜，路过此地的行人都可以自己取用。
English: Zhang Qi collects grain along the road and grows vegetables. Passers-by can pick up the cucumbers themselves.

古文：其能济办，多此类也。
现代文：张齐的办事才能，大多类此。
English: Zhang Qi's business skills are mostly of this type.

古文：十七年，迁持节、都督南梁州诸军事、智武将军、南梁州刺史。
现代文：十七年，返变迁任持节、都督尘錾业诸军事、智武将军、南梁州刺史。
English: In the seventeenth year, the festival of returning and transferring, the military, the generals, and the history of Nanliangzhou.

古文：普通四年，迁信武将军、征西鄱阳王司马、新兴、永宁二郡太守。
现代文：普通四年，张齐迁任信武将军、征西鄱阳王的司马、新兴永宁二郡太守。
English: In four years, Zhang Qi Qian was appointed as the General of Xinwu, the Sima of the West-conquering King of Shenyang, and the new Yongning Second County Governor.

古文：未发而卒，时年六十七。
现代文：他还未出发就去世了，终年六十七岁。
English: He died before he could set out, aged 67.

古文：追赠散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：被迫赠为散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: He was forced to give up his position as a knight errant and a general of the right guard.

古文：赙钱十万，布百匹。
现代文：皇帝送钱十万、布一百匹为他办丧事。
English: A hundred thousand for the funeral and a hundred horses for the cloth.

古文：谥曰壮。
现代文：谧号壮。
English: The call sign is Zhuang.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：王珍国、申胄、徐元瑜、李居士，齐末咸为列将，拥强兵，或面缚请罪，或斩关献捷；其能后服，马仙琕而已。
现代文：卖塑速吏部尚书蛮嬷说：王王蝈、吏皇、涂丞塑、李居士，这些人在变末年都是列将，拥有强兵，但他们有的捆绑了自己向梁朝请罪，有的把所守关隘献给梁朝；其中能够最后才降服的，衹有马仙碑一个人而已。
English: Shang Shuxu, a member of the rapid-response personnel department, said, "Wang Wangyan, Li Wang, Tu Rongyan, and Li Jingshi, these people were all generals at the end of the War of the Reunification, and they had strong soldiers. However, some of them tied themselves up to plead guilty to the Liang Dynasty, and some of them dedicated the pass they were guarding to the Liang Dynasty. Among them, Ma Xianbei was the only one who could finally surrender.

古文：仁义何常，蹈之则为君子，信哉！
现代文：仁义有什么一定之规呢，照着它做了就是君子，真是这样啊!
English: What are the rules of benevolence and righteousness? If you follow them, you'll be a gentleman, that's for sure!

古文：及其临边抚众，虽李牧无以加矣。
现代文：至于他到边境地区安抚民众遣件事，即使是李牧也不能超过他。
English: As for sending him to the border area to pacify the people, even Li Mu can't beat him.

古文：张齐之政绩，亦有异焉。
现代文：张齐的政绩，也有与众不同之处。
English: Zhang Qi's political achievements are also unique.

古文：胄、元瑜、居士入梁事迹鲜，故不为之传。
现代文：申宣、涂五逾、奎星土进入后事迹太少，所以不为他们立传了。
English: Shen Xuan, Tu Wujiao, and Kui Xingtu did not do much after they entered the country, so they were not passed down.

