古文：陶穀，字秀实，邠州新平人。
现代文：陶谷字秀实，邠州州新平人。
English: Hsü-sih Tao-gu, a native of Xinping County, Ganzhou Province.

古文：本姓唐，避晋祖讳改焉。
现代文：本姓唐，避后晋高祖石敬瑭名讳改姓陶。
English: His original family name was Tang, but he changed his name to Tao after avoiding the promotion to high school.

古文：历北齐、隋、唐为名族。
现代文：历任北齐、隋、唐官职，成为名家望族。
English: Successive officials of the Northern Qi, Sui and Tang Dynasties became famous families.

古文：祖彦谦，历慈、绛、澧三州刺史，有诗名，自号鹿门先生。
现代文：其祖父唐彦谦，历任慈、绛、澧三州刺史，有诗名，自号鹿门先生。
English: His grandfather, Tang Yanqian, successively held the titles of Cixi, Zou and Zou of the three states, and had a poetic name, calling himself Mr. Lu Men.

古文：父涣，领夷州刺史，唐季之乱，为邠帅杨崇本所害。
现代文：其父唐涣，领夷州刺史，唐末之乱，被州主将杨崇本害死。
English: His father, Tang Xizhi, the ruler of Yizhou, was killed by the warlord Yang Chongpeng in the late Tang Dynasty.

古文：时穀尚幼，随母柳氏育崇本家。
现代文：当时陶谷还年幼，随母亲柳氏在崇本家长大。
English: At that time, he was still young and grew up with his mother, Yanagi, in the Sugimoto family.

古文：十余岁，能属文，起家校书郎、单州军事判官。
现代文：十多岁，能写文章，起家任校书郎、单州军事判官。
English: More than ten years old, able to write articles, he started his career as a school scribe and a single-state military judge.

古文：尝以书干宰相李崧，崧甚重其文。
现代文：曾经用文章交游宰相李崧，李崧非常看重他的文章。
English: He once used his articles to get to know Prime Minister Li Wei, and Li Wei valued his articles very much.

古文：时和凝亦为相，同奏为著作佐郎、集贤校理。
现代文：当时和凝也任宰相，李崧和和凝一起上奏任命他为著作佐郎、集贤校理。
English: At that time, He Rong also served as the prime minister, and Li Xi and He Rong jointly appointed him as the chief editor of the book and the editor of the anthology.

古文：改监察御史，分司西京，迁虞部员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：改任监察御史，分司西京，升任虞部员外郎、知制诰。
English: He was reassigned to the position of inspector of imperial history, sub-bureau of the Western Capital, and promoted to the position of a member of the Council of State, Gairo, and Chisetsukasa.

古文：会晋祖废翰林学士，兼掌内外制。
现代文：正好后晋高祖废除翰林学士，由他兼管朝中内外诏令。
English: Right after the Emperor Jinguo abolished the Hanlin Baccalaureate, he also took charge of the imperial edicts inside and outside the court.

古文：词目繁委，穀言多委惬，为当时最。
现代文：诏令名目繁多，陶谷的言辞常常适宜，是当时最好的。
English: There are many names for the edict, but Tao Gu's words were often appropriate and the best at the time.

古文：少帝初，赐绯袍、靴、笏、黑银带。
现代文：后晋少帝初期，赐给他绯袍、靴、笏、黑银带。
English: In the early days of the Young Emperor of Later Jin, he was given a robe, shoes, bag, and a black and silver belt.

古文：天福九年，加仓部郎中。
现代文：天福九年，加任仓部郎中。
English: Tenfu nine years later, he was appointed as a junior assistant to Kurabe.

古文：初，崧从契丹以北，高祖入京师，以崧第赐苏逢吉，而崧别有田宅在西京，逢吉皆取之。
现代文：当初，李崧随着契丹兵北迁，高祖进入京师，把李崧的住宅赐给苏逢吉，而李崧在西京另有田地住宅，逢吉都取为己有。
English: At first, Li Qian moved north with the Khitan soldiers, Gao Zu entered Beijing Division, and gave Li Qian's residence to Su Fengji, while Li Qian had another field residence in West Beijing, and took Fengji as his own.

古文：崧自北还，因以宅券献逢吉，逢吉不悦，而崧子弟数出怨言。
现代文：李崧从北边回朝，把住宅券献给逢吉，逢吉不高兴，而李崧的子弟几次口出怨言。
English: When Li Lan returned from the north, he presented the deed of the house to Su Fengji. Su Fengji was not happy, and Li Lan's son complained many times.

古文：其后逢吉乃诱告崧与弟屿、等下狱，崧惧，移病不出。
现代文：后来逢吉诬告李崧与他的弟弟李屿、李山义等人进监狱，李崧害怕，称病不出。
English: Later, Fengji falsely accused Li Yu and his brother Li Yu, Li Shan Yi and others to go to prison. Li Yu was afraid and said that he would not be able to leave the prison.

古文：崧族子昉为秘书郎，尝往候崧，崧语昉曰： 迩来朝廷于我有何议？ 昉曰： 无他闻，唯陶给事往往于稠人中厚诬叔父。 崧叹曰： 穀自单州判官，吾取为集贤校理，不数年擢掌诰命，吾何负于陶氏子哉？ 及崧遇祸，昉尝因公事诣穀，穀问昉： 识李侍中否？ 昉敛衽应曰： 远从叔尔。 穀曰： 李氏之祸，穀出力焉。 昉闻之汗出。
现代文：李崧的族子李日方任秘书郎，曾经前去看望李崧，李崧对李日方说： 近来朝廷对我有什么议论？ 李日方说： 没有别的，只有陶给事往往在大众场合极力诬蔑叔父。 李崧叹道： 陶谷从单州判官任上，我任用为集贤校理，不过几年提升至掌管诰命，我哪里有负于这个陶氏子呢？ 到李崧遇祸，李日方曾经因公事见陶谷，陶谷问李日方： 认识李侍中吗？ 李日方严肃地回答说 ：是我的远房叔父。 陶谷说 ：李氏之祸，是我出的力。 日方听说后脊背出汗。
English: Li Yu's son, Li Yifang, who served as secretary, once went to visit Li Yu. Li Yu said to Li Yifang, "What has the imperial court said about me recently?" Li Yifang said, "There is nothing else, except that Tao Zhi often slanders his uncle in public." Li Yu sighed, "Tao Gu was appointed as a judge in Shan State, I was appointed as a collection of scholars, but after a few years I was promoted to be in charge of the imperial court. How can I be inferior to this Tao's son?" To Li Yu's distress, Li Yifang once met Tao Gu for business, Tao Gu asked Li Yif

古文：穀性急率，尝与兖帅安审信集会，杯酒相失，为审信所奏。
现代文：陶谷脾气急率，曾经与兖州节度安审信集会，杯酒间失和，被审信奏告。
English: Tao Gu is quick-tempered. He once held a letter-writing meeting with the Zhangzhou Festival Security Committee. They had a disagreement over a glass of wine, and the letter was reported.

古文：时方姑息武臣，穀坐责授太常少卿。
现代文：当时朝廷正姑息迁就武将，陶谷因此被贬任太常少卿。
English: At that time, the imperial court was appeasing and accommodating the military commander, and as a result, Tao Gu was demoted to the position of too-frequent minor lord.

古文：尝上言： 顷莅西台，每见台司详断刑狱，少有即时决者。
现代文：陶谷曾经上言 ：以前我在西京监察任上，常见监察部门判决刑事案件，很少能及时处理。
English: Tao Gu once said: In the past, when I was in charge of supervision in Xijing, it was common for the supervision department to judge criminal cases, but it was rarely able to deal with them in a timely manner.

古文：至于闾阎夫妇小有争讼，淹滞积时，坊市死亡丧葬，必俟台司判状，奴婢病亡，亦须检验。
现代文：至于民间夫妇有小事争讼，拖延淹滞，民间死亡丧葬，一定等待监察部门判决，奴仆病亡，也需要检验。
English: As for the civil couples who have small disputes, the delay of drowning, the civil death and funeral, must wait for the judgment of the supervision department, and the servant died of illness, also need to be inspected.

古文：吏因缘为奸，而邀求不已，经旬不获埋瘗。
现代文：官吏乘机为奸，而索求不已，上十天不能埋葬。
English: The officials took advantage of the opportunity to act as spies, and demanded so much that they could not be buried for ten days.

古文：望申条约以革其弊。 从之。
现代文：希望申令条约来革除这些弊端。 
English: It is hoped that the treaty will eliminate these drawbacks.

古文：俄拜中书舍人。
现代文：朝廷采纳了这一建议。不久授任中书舍人。
English: The Imperial Court accepted this suggestion, and he was soon appointed to the post of Chuseonjin.

古文：尝请教习乐工、停二舞郎，及禁民伐桑枣为薪，并从其请。
现代文：曾经请求教习乐工、停罢二舞郎，以及禁止百姓采伐桑枣树木为柴禾，朝廷都采纳了他的请求。
English: He once asked for the teaching of music, the suspension of two dancers, and the prohibition of the people from cutting down mulberry trees for firewood, and the court accepted his request.

古文：开运三年，赐金紫。
现代文：开运三年，赐给他金紫朝服。
English: He was given a gold and purple imperial robe for the first three years of his reign.

古文：契丹主北归，胁穀令从行。
现代文：契丹主回北方，胁令陶谷随行。
English: The Khitan lord returned to the north, and ordered Tao Gu to accompany him.

古文：穀逃匿僧舍中，衣布褐，阳为行者状。
现代文：陶谷逃藏在僧人房舍中，穿大布衣服，装作行路人打扮。
English: He hid in a monk's house, dressed in a large cloth and pretended to be a passer-by.

古文：军士意其诈，持刃陵胁者日数四。
现代文：军士怀疑有诈，持刀威胁他一天四次。
English: The sergeant suspected him of fraud and threatened him with a knife four times a day.

古文：穀颇工历数，谓同辈曰： 西南五星连珠，汉地当有王者出。
现代文：陶谷非常工于历数，对同辈说 ：西南方五星连珠，汉地应当有皇帝出现。
English: Tao Gu was very good at calculating dates, and he said to his contemporaries, "In the southwest, there are five stars in a row, and there should be an emperor in Han."

古文：契丹主必不得归国。 及耶律德光死，有孛光芒指北，穀曰： 自此契丹自相鱼肉，永不乱华矣。 遂归汉，为给事中。
现代文：契丹主一定不得归国。 到耶律德光死去时，有孛星光芒指向北方，陶谷说 ：从此契丹自相残杀，永不侵扰中国。 于是回归汉地，任给事中。
English: The Khitan lord must not return to his country. When Yerut Deguang died, there was a bright star shining to the north, and Tao Gu said, "From now on, the Khitan will kill each other and never invade China." So he returned to Han and left the matter alone.

古文：乾祐中，令常参官转对。
现代文：乾年间，令常参官转对。
English: During the dry years, the order of the regular officers was reversed.

古文：穀上言曰： 五日上章，曾非旧制。
现代文：陶谷上言说： 五天上一道奏章，并非旧制。
English: Tao Gu said, "It is not the old system to play one movement in five days.

古文：百官叙对，且异昌言。
现代文：群臣依次应对，言论不同。
English: The group of courtiers responded in turn, each with a different statement.

古文：徒浼天聪，无益时政，欲乞停转对。
现代文：徒然污染皇上聪明，无益于时政，希望停止转对。
English: It is futile to pollute the emperor's wisdom, it is not beneficial to the current politics, and I hope to stop turning to the right.

古文：在朝群臣有所闻见，即许不时诣阙闻奏。 从之。
现代文：在朝群臣有所闻见，允许随时入宫禀告。 皇帝采纳了。
English: The emperors had heard that courtiers in the imperial court were allowed to enter the palace at any time to deliver obituaries.

古文：仕周为右散骑常侍，世宗即位，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：在后周任右散骑常侍，世宗即位，升任户部侍郎。
English: Later, Zhou was appointed as the right sanshaku (free rider) regular attendant, and Sejong ascended to the throne and was promoted to the position of household attendant.

古文：从征太原，时鱼崇谅迎母后至，穀乘间言曰： 崇谅宿留不来，有顾望意。 世宗颇疑之。
现代文：跟从世宗征伐太原，当时鱼崇谅迎接母亲后到，陶谷乘间说： 崇谅宿留不来，有观望之心。 世宗很怀疑他。
English: Following Sejong's conquest of Taiyuan, when Uso Chongren arrived after greeting his mother, Tao Tani said, "Chongren can't stay, he has a wait-and-see attitude.

古文：崇谅又表陈母病，诏许归陕州就养，以穀为翰林学士。
现代文：崇谅又上表叙述母亲病情，诏令允许他回到陕州赡养母亲，任命陶谷为翰林学士。
English: Chongzhen also described his mother's illness on the table, and the imperial edict allowed him to return to Shaanxi to support his mother, and appointed Tao Gu as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：世宗尝谓宰相曰： 朕观历代君臣治平之道，诚为不易。
现代文：世宗曾经对宰相说 ：我看历代君臣治平之道，实在不易。
English: Sejong once said to the prime minister, "I think it is not easy for the past generations of lords and ministers to maintain peace.

古文：又念唐、晋失德之后，乱臣黠将，僣窃者多。
现代文：又考虑后唐、后晋之后，乱臣狡将，僭窃帝号者多。
English: Also consider that after the Later Tang and Later Jin Dynasties, there were many unruly ministers and cunning generals who plagiarized the title of emperor.

古文：今中原甫定，吴、蜀、幽、并尚未平附，声教未能远被，宜令近臣各为论策，宣导经济之略。 乃命承旨徐台符以下二十余人，各撰《为君难为臣不易论》、《平边策》以进。
现代文：现在中原刚刚平定，羌、蜀、幽、并尚未平定，教化不能施及远方，应当命令近臣各写策论，研究经邦济国的方略。 于是下令承旨徐台符以下二十多人，各撰《为君难为臣不易论》、《平边策》献给皇帝。
English: Now that the Central Plains had just been pacified, but the Shanshan, Shu, and Yu Provinces had not yet been pacified, and enlightenment could not be spread to distant regions, he should order his close vassals to each write a strategy and study the strategy of using the state to help the country. So he ordered more than twenty people from Xu Taifu on down to each write a "Difficult for the King, Difficult for the Vassal" and a "Flat-edge Strategy" and dedicate them to the emperor.

古文：其策率以修文德、来远人为意，惟穀与窦仪、杨昭俭、王朴以封疆密迩江、淮，当用师取之。
现代文：这些策论大多赋以修文德招远人之意，只有陶谷与窦仪、杨昭俭、王仆认为国土接近江、淮，应当用军队攻取。
English: Most of these policies were based on the idea of cultivating literature and morality and attracting people from afar. Only Tao Gu, Dou Yi, Yang Zhaojian, and Wang Mu believed that the land was close to the Huai River and should be conquered by the army.

古文：世宗自克高平，常训兵讲武，思混一天下。
现代文：世宗自攻克高平，常常训练士卒讲习武事，打算统一天下。
English: Shizong conquered Gaoping on his own and often trained his soldiers in martial arts, intending to unify the country.

古文：及览其策，忻然听纳，由是平南之意益坚矣。
现代文：看到陶谷他们的策论，欣然采纳，从此平定江南之意越发坚决。
English: Seeing their strategy in Tao Valley, they readily adopted it, and from then on, they became more and more determined to pacify the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：显德三年，迁兵部侍郎，加承旨。
现代文：显德三年，升任兵部侍郎，加任承旨。
English: After three years of service, Hende was promoted to the position of Hyobu-zirō, and Shoji was appointed to the same position.

古文：世宗留心稼穑，命工刻木为耕夫、织妇、蚕女之状，置于禁中，思广劝课之道，穀为赞辞以进。
现代文：世宗留心农事，命工匠刻木成耕夫、织妇、蚕女的形状，放在宫中，考虑劝课农桑的方法，陶谷为此写赞词呈进皇上。
English: King Sejong paid attention to agricultural affairs and ordered craftsmen to carve logs into the shapes of a ploughman, a weaver, and a female silkworm, and place them in the palace. He also considered the method of exhorting farmers to study mulberry. Tao Gu wrote a commendation for this and presented it to the emperor.

古文：显德六年，加吏部侍郎。
现代文：显德六年，加任吏部侍郎。
English: In the sixth year of Hende's reign, he was also appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre.

古文：宋初，转礼部尚书，依前翰林承旨。
现代文：宋朝初期，转任礼部尚书，仍然像从前兼任翰林承旨。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was transferred to the Ministry of Rites and Literature, but continued to serve as Hanlin Shongi as before.

古文：穀在翰林，与窦仪不协，仪有公望，虑其轧己，尝附宰相赵普与赵逢、高锡辈共排仪，仪终不至相位。
现代文：陶谷在翰林，与窦仪不和，窦仪有名望，陶谷怕他倾轧自己，曾经依附宰相赵普与赵逢、高锡等人共同排挤窦仪，窦仪终于不能做到宰相。
English: In Hanlin, Tao Gu was at odds with Dou Yi. Dou Yi was famous. Tao Gu was afraid that he would devour himself. He once relied on Prime Minister Zhao Pu and Zhao Feng, Gao Xi and others to jointly oust Dou Yi. Finally, Dou Yi could not become Prime Minister.

古文：乾德二年，判吏部铨兼知贡举。
现代文：乾德二年，任判吏部铨兼知贡举。
English: In the second year of Qiande, he was appointed as the judge of the official department and the tribute.

古文：再为南郊礼仪使，法物制度，多穀所定。
现代文：再任南郊礼仪使，一切法物制度，多由陶谷所定。
English: He was reappointed as the Southern Suburbs Etiquette Envoy, and all legal and material systems were mostly determined by Tao Gu.

古文：时范质为大礼使，以卤簿清游队有甲骑具装，莫知其制度，以问于穀。
现代文：当时范质任大礼使，以卤簿清游队中有甲骑具装，不知这是什么制度，向陶谷问教。
English: At that time, he was appointed as a high-ranking envoy, and there was a horse-drawn carriage equipped with a halogen book in the Qing expedition team. I don't know what kind of system it was, so I asked Tao Gu for advice.

古文：穀曰： 梁贞明丁丑岁，河南尹张全义献人甲三百副、马具装二百副。其人甲以布为里，黄泬表之，青绿画为甲文，红锦绿青泬为下裙，绛韦为络，金铜玦，长短至膝。
现代文：陶谷说： 后梁贞明丁丑年，河南尹张全义献给朝廷人甲三百副、马具装二百副，这些人甲以布为衬里，以黄为表层，用青绿画为甲文，用红锦绿青为下裙，以绛韦为络线，金铜佩，长度到膝盖。
English: Tao Gu said: After Liang Zhen Ming Ding Ugly Year, Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi dedicated 300 pairs and 200 pairs of saddlery to the imperial court. These people used cloth as the lining, yellow as the surface layer, blue and green painting as the lining, red brocade, green and blue as the lower skirt, and braided weft as the warp, gold and copper as the weft, and the length to the knee.

古文：前膺为人面二目，背连膺缠以红锦腾蛇。
现代文：前胸制成人面二目，背连胸用红锦腾蛇缠裹。
English: Front chest adult face two eyes, back and chest wrapped with red brocade snake.

古文：马具装盖寻常马甲，但加珂拂于前膺及后鞦尔。
现代文：马具装是平常马甲，只在前胸及后革秋加上珂拂。庄宗进入洛阳，全部烧毁。 
English: The saddlery was the usual gilet, only the forechest and breeches were whitewashed. Zhuangzong entered Luoyang, and everything was burned.

古文：庄宗入洛，悉焚毁。 质命有司如穀说，造以给用。又乘舆大辇，久亡其制，穀创意造之，后承用焉。
现代文：范质命令有关部门按陶谷说的样式，仿造供用。又有皇帝乘坐的辇舆，长期失去旧制，陶谷创意建造，后来沿用不衰。
English: The quality standard ordered the relevant departments to imitate and use the style said by Tao Gu. In addition, the imperial carriage, which had long lost the old system, was built creatively by Tao Gu, and was later used continuously.

古文：明德门成，诏穀为之记。
现代文：明德门建成，诏令陶谷为之作记。
English: The Mingde Gate was completed, and the imperial edict of Tao Gu was issued to mark the occasion.

古文：乾德中，命库部员外郎王贻孙、《周易》博士奚屿同考试品官子弟。
现代文：乾德年间，朝廷命库部员外郎王贻孙、《周易》博士奚屿共同考试品官子弟。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiande, he was the son-in-law of Wang Xinsun, a member of the imperial treasury department, and the son-in-law of Zhou Yi, a doctor and a common examination official.

古文：穀属其子鄑于屿，珝书不通，以合格闻，补殿中省进马。
现代文：陶谷向奚屿托付自己的儿子陶晋阝，陶晋阝文章不通，以合格欺骗皇上，补任殿中省进马。
English: Tao Gu entrusted his son Tao Jintao to Lantau. Tao Jintao did not understand the article, deceived the emperor with his qualification, and was appointed to fill the position.

古文：俄为人所发，下御史府案问，屿责授乾州司户，贻孙责授左赞善大夫，夺穀奉两月。
现代文：不久被人告发，交送御史府审问，奚屿被贬任乾州司户，王贻孙被贬任左赞善大夫，罚陶谷两个月的俸禄。
English: Soon after, he was denounced and sent to the Imperial Historian's Office for interrogation. Linyu was demoted to the position of Qianzhou steward, Wang Shisun was demoted to Zuozanshen doctor, and Tao Gu was fined two months' salary.

古文：穀后累加刑部、户部二尚书。
现代文：陶谷后来历升至刑部、户部二尚书。
English: Tao subsequently rose through the ranks of the Criminal Investigation Department and the Household Division.

古文：开宝三年，卒，年六十八。
现代文：开宝二年，去世，终年六十八岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：赠右仆射。
现代文：追赠右仆射。
English: A right-handed free-throw followed.

古文：穀强记嗜学，博通经史，诸子佛老，咸所总览；多蓄法书名画，善隶书。
现代文：陶谷强记好学，博通经史，诸子佛老，都有所研究；多收集法书名画，擅写隶书。
English: Tao Gu has a strong memory and is eager to learn. He is well-versed in the history of scripture, and has studied all the sons and daughters of the Buddha. He collects a lot of famous paintings and calligraphy, but is not good at writing calligraphy.

古文：为人隽辨宏博，然奔竞务进，见后学有文采者，必极言以誉之；闻达官有闻望者，则巧诋以排之，其多忌好名类此。
现代文：为人隽辨宏博，但奔竞务进，热心宦途迁升，见后学有文采者，一定极力赞誉；听说达官有名望者，则巧为诋毁排挤，他的多忌与好名就像这样。
English: For people who are distinguished and brilliant, but are eager to advance and eager to move up, those who are learned and literate must be highly praised; those who are well-known and well-known must be cleverly discredited and excluded. His much-feared and good name is like this.

古文：初，太祖将受禅，未有禅文，穀在旁，出诸怀中而进之曰： 已成矣。 太祖甚薄之。
现代文：当初，太祖打算受禅，还没有禅文，陶谷在旁边，从怀里取出一篇禅文交给太祖说 ：已经写成了。 
English: At first, Taizu planned to take up Zen, but there was no Zen text yet. With Tao Gu by his side, he took out a Zen text from his arms and handed it to Taizu, saying, "It's already been written."

古文：尝自曰： 吾头骨法相非常，当戴貂蝉冠尔。 盖有意大用也，人多笑之。
现代文：太祖很看不起他。曾经自言自语说 ：我头骨法相不平常，应当戴貂蝉冠。 这是有意受到重用，人们多笑话他。
English: The great-grandfather looked down on him. He once said to himself, "I have an unusual skull shape, so I should wear a skull-and-crossbones crown." This was intentional, and people often made fun of him.

古文：子邴，至起居舍人。
现代文：他的儿子名邴，官至起居舍人。
English: His son, Nagamine, rose through the ranks.

古文：天禧四年，录谷孙寔试秘书省校书郎。
现代文：天禧四年，录用陶谷的孙子陶萛为试秘书省校书郎。
English: In the fourth year of the Tenji era, Tao Gu's grandson Tao Jun was hired as a probationary secretary and provincial school librarian.

古文：扈蒙，字日用，幽州安次人。
现代文：扈蒙字日用，幽州安次人。
English: The Mengzhi characters are commonly used, and the author is from Yuzhou.

古文：曾祖洋，涿州别驾。
现代文：其曾祖父扈洋任涿州别驾。
English: His great-grandfather, Zhai Yangren, was the first governor of Ganzhou.

古文：祖智周，卢龙军节度推官。
现代文：其祖父扈智周任卢龙军节度推官。
English: His grandfather Gong Zhi Zhou served as the commander of the Lulong Army.

古文：父曾，内园使。
现代文：其父扈曾任内园使。
English: His father, Zou, once served as the inner garden envoy.

古文：蒙少能文，晋天福中，举进士，入汉为鄠县主簿。
现代文：扈蒙年轻时会写文章，后晋天福年间，考中进士，到后汉任县主簿。
English: When he was young, Yao Meng would write articles. Later, during the reign of Emperor Tianfu, he was promoted to a scholar in the middle school entrance examination, and served as the chief bookkeeper of the county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：赵思绾叛，遣郭从义讨之。
现代文：赵思绾叛乱，朝廷派遣郭从义征讨。
English: When Zhao Siyi rebelled, the imperial court sent Guo Zongyi to investigate.

古文：郡县吏供给皆戎服趋事，蒙寇服褒博，举止舒缓，从义颇讶之。
现代文：郡县官吏都穿短促军服，扈蒙穿着肥大的儒服，举止舒缓，从义感到很惊讶。
English: The county and prefectural officials all wore short military uniforms, and Yimeng wore a fat Confucian uniform, his demeanor was soothing, and he was very surprised by Zong Rong.

古文：转运使李谷谓曰： 蒙文学名流，不习吏事。 遂不之问。
现代文：转运使李谷对从义说： 扈蒙是文学名流，不熟悉公事。 于是不再追问。
English: The transfer made Li Gu say to Cong Yi: Yimeng is a literary celebrity and is not familiar with public affairs, so he no longer asked questions.

古文：周广顺中，从归德军节度赵晖为掌书记，召为右拾遗、直史馆、知制诰。
现代文：后周广顺年间，跟从归德军节度赵晖任掌书记，召入朝任右拾遗、直史馆、知制诰。
English: Later, during the Zhou Guangshun years, Zhao Jun, who had returned to the German army, was appointed as the secretary of the festival, and was called to the imperial court to collect relics, direct history museum, and intellectual system.

古文：蒙从弟载时为翰林学士，兄弟并掌内外制，时号 二扈 。
现代文：扈蒙的叔伯兄弟扈载当时任翰林学士，兄弟二人掌握朝廷内外制令，当时号称 二扈 。
English: Yu Meng's uncle and brother, Yu Zeng, was a scholar of Hanlin at that time. The two brothers controlled the internal and external orders of the imperial court. At that time, they were known as the two brothers.

古文：宋初，由中书舍人迁翰林学士，坐请托于同年仇华，黜为太子左赞善大夫，稍迁左补阙，掌大名市征。
现代文：宋朝初期，由中书舍人升任翰林学士，因向同年仇华请托私事违法，被贬为太子左赞善大夫，渐渐升职任左补阙，掌管大名集市征税。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of Hanlin Scholar from the position of Chinese scholar. In the same year, he was demoted to the position of Prince Zuo Zanzan, and gradually promoted to the position of Zuo Shu, in charge of the taxation of the daimyo bazaar.

古文：六年，复知制诰，充史馆修撰。
现代文：乾德六年，重新任知制诰，充任史馆修撰。
English: Six years later, he was reappointed to the position of chihsei shuang and was assigned to the history museum as a reviewer.

古文：开宝中，受诏与李穆等同修《五代史》，详定《古今本草》。
现代文：开宝年间，受诏与李穆等人同修《五代史》，审定《古今本草》。
English: During his time in Kaibao, he studied the "History of Five Dynasties" with Li Mu and others, and approved the "Ancient and Modern Texts."

古文：五年，连知贡举。
现代文：开宝五年，连续主持贡举。
English: He has presided over the tribute for five consecutive years.

古文：七年，蒙上书言： 昔唐文宗每召大臣论事，必命起居郎、起居舍人执笔立于殿侧，以纪时政，故《文宗实录》稍为详备。
现代文：开宝七年，扈蒙上书说： 以前唐文宗每次召见大臣商量政事，一定命令起居郎、起居舍人拿着笔在殿侧站着，记载时政，所以《文宗实录》较为详备。
English: In the seventh year of Kaibao, Zeng Meng wrote: In the past, every time Tang Wenzong summoned a minister to discuss political affairs, he would order the secretary to stand at the side of the hall with a pen to record the current affairs, so the "Wenzong Record" is more detailed.

古文：至后唐明宗，亦命端明殿学士及枢密直学士轮修日历，送史官。
现代文：到后唐明宗时，也命令端明殿学士及枢密直学士轮流修撰每日政事，送给史官。
English: After the arrival of the Tang and Ming dynasties, he also ordered the scholars of the Ming Dynasty and the scholars of the Privy Council to take turns to write down the daily affairs of state and send them to the historian.

古文：近来此事都废，每季虽有内殿日历，枢密院录送史馆，然所记者不过臣下对见辞谢而已。
现代文：近来这些措施都被废除了，每季虽然有内殿日记，枢密院录送史馆，但是所记不过臣下对见辞谢之类而已。
English: Recently, these measures have been abolished, and although there is a quarterly diary of the inner hall and a record of the Privy Council sent to the history museum, the records are nothing more than the thanks of the vassals.

古文：帝王言动，莫得而书。
现代文：帝王的语言和行动，都未写进去。
English: Neither the emperor's words nor his actions were written down.

古文：缘宰相以漏泄为虞，昧于宣播，史官疏远，何得与闻。
现代文：原因是宰相担心泄露，传播有误，史官疏远，哪里能知道。
English: The reason is that the prime minister is worried about leaks, miscommunication, and alienation of historians. Who knows?

古文：望自今凡有裁制之官，优恤之言，发自宸衷、可书简策者，并委宰臣及参知政事每月轮知抄录，以备史官撰集。 从之，即以参知政事卢多逊典其事。
现代文：希望从今以后凡是裁制之事、优恤之言，发自内心，可写进书简的，都委托宰相及参知政事每月轮流主持抄录，以备史馆撰集。 朝廷采纳了，就以参知政事卢多逊主管这件事。
English: It is hoped that from now on, the chancellor and the councilor of state will be entrusted with the monthly transcription of all decisions and words of commendation that come from the heart and can be written in a brief, in order to prepare a collection for the history museum.

古文：九年正月，受朝乾元殿，降王在列，声明大备。
现代文：开宝九年正月，皇帝在乾元殿接受朝拜，各地降王在旁列队，声明大备。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Kaibao, the emperor received worship at the Qianyuan Hall, and the vassals from all over the country lined up next to him, ready to make a statement.

古文：蒙上《圣功颂》，以述太祖受禅、平一天下之功，其词夸丽，有诏褒之。
现代文：扈蒙呈上《圣功颂》，备述太祖接受禅位、统一天下的功劳，言辞夸丽，有诏令褒奖他。
English: Yao Meng presented the "Sacred Merit Song," recounting the merits of the great ancestor accepting the zen rank and unifying the country. His words were praiseworthy, and there was a decree to praise him.

古文：为卢多逊所恶，出知江陵府。
现代文：被卢多逊忌恨，调出京城任知江陵府。
English: He was hated by the Ludosons and was transferred out of the capital to serve as the governor of Jiangling.

古文：太宗即位，召拜中书舍人，旋复翰林学士。
现代文：太宗即皇帝位，召他入朝授任中书舍人，不久重任翰林学士。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he called him to the imperial court and appointed him as a scholar of Chinese classics, and soon he was reappointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：与李昉同修《太祖实录》。
现代文：与李日方一起同修《太祖实录》。
English: Studied "Ancestor Records" with Li Yifang.

古文：太平兴国四年，从征太原还，转户部侍郎，加承旨。
现代文：太平兴国四年，跟从太宗征伐太原回朝，转任户部侍郎，加任承旨。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, he followed Emperor Taizong to conquer Taiyuan and return to the imperial court. He was transferred to the position of household attendant, and was additionally appointed to the position of imperial envoy.

古文：雍熙三年，被疾，以工部尚书致仕。
现代文：雍熙三年，染上疾病，以工部尚书衔退休。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, he contracted a disease and retired with the title of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：未几，卒，年七十二。
现代文：不久，去世。终年七十二岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 72.

古文：赠右仆射。
现代文：追赠右仆射。
English: A right-handed free-throw followed.

古文：自张昭、窦仪卒，典章仪注，多蒙所刊定。
现代文：自从张昭、窦仪去世，朝廷典礼章程仪式，多由扈蒙刊定。
English: Since the death of Zhang Zhao and Dou Yi, most of the imperial ceremony regulations have been published by Yimeng.

古文：初，太祖受周禅，追尊四庙，亲郊，以宣祖配天。
现代文：当初，太祖接受后周禅位，追尊四庙，到郊外祭祀祖父，以宣祖配天。
English: At first, the great-grandfather accepted the post of Hou Zhou Zen, chased after the four temples, and went to the suburbs to worship his grandfather, with Xuan Zhou as the matchmaker.

古文：及太宗即位，礼官以为舜郊喾，商郊冥，周郊后稷，王业所因兴也。
现代文：到太宗登皇位，礼官认为舜郊拜砶，商朝郊拜冥、周朝郊拜后稷，王业因他们而兴旺啊。
English: By the time Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, the etiquette officials believed that Wangye thrived because of them.

古文：若汉高之太公，光武之南顿君，虽有帝父之尊，而无预配天之祭。
现代文：至于汉高祖的太公，光武帝的南顿君，虽然有皇帝父亲的尊严，却不能享受配天的祭祀。
English: As for the grand duke of Han Gaozu and Nantonjun of Emperor Guangwu, although they had the dignity of the emperor's father, they could not enjoy the sacrificial rites of matchmaking.

古文：故自太平兴国三年、六年再郊，并以太祖配，于礼为允。
现代文：所以自从太平兴国三年、六年两次郊拜，都以太祖配天，于礼是公允的。
English: Therefore, since the Taiping Xingguo three years, six years and two times of suburban worship, it is fair to worship the ancestors.

古文：太宗将东封，蒙定议曰： 严父莫大于配天，请以宣祖配天。 自雍熙元年罢封禅为郊祀，遂行其礼，识者非之。
现代文：太宗即将到东边封禅时，扈蒙建议说： 严父莫大于配天，请以宣祖配天享祀。 自从雍熙元年罢去封禅而举行郊祀礼，于是施行扈蒙的礼制，有识之士认为这种礼制不公允。
English: When Emperor Taizong was about to go to the east to hold the enthronement ceremony, Yimeng suggested, "There is nothing greater than a strict father who is a match for heaven, so please enjoy worshipping with the proclamation of an ancestor who is a match for heaven." Since Emperor Yongxi retired from the enthronement ceremony in the first year of the Heian period and held a suburban worship ceremony, the Yimeng ritual system was implemented, and people with insight thought that this ritual system was unfair.

古文：蒙性沉厚，不言人是非，好释典，不喜杀，缙绅称善人。
现代文：扈蒙为人沉重厚道，不谈别人的是非，喜欢佛教经典，不喜杀人，缙绅士大夫们称他是善人。
English: He is a man of great virtue, does not talk about the rights and wrongs of others, likes Buddhist classics, and does not like to kill. The gentleman doctors call him a good man.

古文：有笑疾，虽上前不自禁。
现代文：有爱笑的毛病，即使在皇上面前也禁不住。
English: He has a problem with smiling, even in front of the emperor he can't help it.

古文：多著述，有《鳌山集》二十卷行于世。
现代文：他著述很多，有《鳌山集》二十卷流行于世。
English: He wrote a lot, and his twenty-volume "Lushan Collection" became popular around the world.

古文：载字仲熙，有传，见《五代史》。
现代文：扈载字仲熙，有传记，见五代史。
English: inscribed with the name Zhongxi, has a biography, see the Five Dynasties.

