古文：萧瑀萧瑀，字时文，后梁明帝子也。
现代文：萧瑀别名时文，是南朝后梁明帝萧岿的儿子。
English: Xiao Yao, also known as Shi Wen, was the son of Xiao Yao, the Emperor of Liangming after the Southern Dynasty.

古文：九岁，封新安王。
现代文：九岁那年，被封为新安王。
English: At the age of nine, he was named the King of Xin'an.

古文：国除，以女兄为隋晋王妃，故入长安。
现代文：后梁灭亡，因姐姐是隋朝晋王杨广的妃，所以一同进了长安。
English: After Liang's death, because his sister was the empress of the Sui Dynasty's King Yang Guang, they went to Chang'an together.

古文：瑀爱经术，善属文。
现代文：萧瑀喜爱佛学，会写文章。
English: Xiao Wei likes Buddhism and can write articles.

古文：性鲠急，鄙远浮华。
现代文：他性情刚直严峻，轻视鄙弃浮华不实。
English: His disposition is straightforward and stern, he despises and abhors superficiality.

古文：尝以刘孝标《辩命论》诡悖不经，乃著论非之，以为： 人禀天地而生而谓之命，至吉凶祸福则系诸人。
现代文：曾认为刘孝标的《辩命论》违背事实不近情理，就撰写《非辩命论》批驳它，认为： 人靠天地的赐予而生存就叫天命，至于吉凶祸福却因人而异。
English: He once thought that Liu Xiaobiao's "defense of life theory" contradicted the facts and was unreasonable, so he wrote "non-defense of life theory" to refute it, arguing that: People rely on the gifts of heaven and earth to survive is called the destiny of heaven, but as for good luck, evil, misfortune and fortune, it varies from person to person.

古文：今一于命，非先王所以教人者。 
现代文：如果一概归结到天命上去，就不是前代圣贤教导人民的理论。 
English: If everything boils down to the Mandate of Heaven, it is not the theory taught to the people by the sages of previous generations.

古文：通儒柳顾言、诸葛颍叹曰： 是足针孝标膏肓矣！ 
现代文：博古通今的学者柳顾言、诸葛颍赞叹说： 这篇文章足以疗救《辩命论》的病根了！ 
English: Liu Guyan and Zhuge Liang, scholars of ancient and modern times, said with admiration: This article is enough to cure the disease of "Defense of Life"!

古文：晋王为太子，授右千牛。
现代文：晋王杨广当太子时，萧瑀任太子右千牛。
English: When Yang Guang, the Jin king, was crown prince, Xiao Qian was appointed crown prince of the right thousand cows.

古文：即帝位，妃为后，而瑀浸亲宠，频迁尚衣奉御、检校左翊卫鹰扬郎将。
现代文：他登上帝位，萧妃册立为皇后，萧瑀就逐渐受到亲近宠信，连续升任尚衣奉御、检校左翊卫鹰扬郎将。
English: He ascended to the throne, Xiao Bichan was appointed as the empress, and Xiao Yao gradually became close and popular, and was successively promoted to Shangyi Fenggu, and the left guard of school inspection, Ying Yang Lang.

古文：感末疾，不呼医，曰： 天若假吾余年，因得为遁阶矣！ 
现代文：突然患四肢风湿症，不请医生治疗，说 ：如果老天给我一个晚年，这正好作为隐退的理由了！ 
English: Suddenly suffering from rheumatism of the extremities, he did not ask a doctor for treatment, saying: "If God gives me an old age, this is just the reason to retire!"

古文：后闻，责谓曰： 尔亡国后不安小官，而高为怪语，罪不测。 
现代文：他姐姐知道后，责备他说： 你失去新安王的封号后不乐意当小官，大发怨言，会犯无法预料的大罪。 
English: When his sister found out, she scolded him: "After you lost the title of King of Xin'an, you were not happy to be a minor official, complained a lot, and committed unforeseeable crimes.

古文：瑀复治疾，良已。
现代文：萧瑀这才治疗，病才好。
English: This is the only way to treat Xiao Wei, and the only way to get rid of her illness.

古文：拜内史侍郎，数言事忤旨，稍见忌。
现代文：被任命为内史侍郎，多次说话违反炀帝心意，逐渐地被疏远了。
English: He was appointed as Naishi's chamberlain, spoke against Emperor Shun's will many times, and gradually became estranged from him.

古文：帝至雁门，为突厥所围，瑀谋曰： 夷俗，可贺敦与兵马事，况义成公主以帝女为之。
现代文：炀帝巡视雁门关，被突厥围困，萧瑀献计说 ：突厥的习俗，可汗的妻子可贺敦参与军事活动，何况义成公主是以大隋皇帝女儿的身份当了可贺敦。
English: Emperor Qian inspected the Gate of the Wild Goose, which was besieged by the Turks. Xiao Yu said: "Turkic custom, the wife of the khan, Keha Tun, participated in military activities. Moreover, Princess Yicheng became Keha Tun as the daughter of the Great Sui Emperor."

古文：若走一介使镌喻，宜不战而解。
现代文：如果派一名使者快去向她报告这事，不用打仗就可解围。
English: If an emissary were quickly dispatched to inform her of this, the siege could be broken without war.

古文：又众商陛下已平突厥，方复事辽东，故怠不肯战。
现代文：还听到将士们议论陛下平息突厥后，又要征讨辽东，所以不肯出力作战。
English: He also heard the generals discussing the need to conquer Liaodong after His Majesty had pacified the Turks, so he refused to go to war.

古文：愿下诏赦高丽，专讨突厥，则人自奋矣。 
现代文：请发诏令不打高丽，只打突厥，那就人人奋战了。 
English: Please issue a decree not to attack Korea, but only Turkey, and then everyone will fight.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝采用了他的计策。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：既而主诡辞谓突厥，果解围去。
现代文：后来义成公主发出了一个假情报，突厥的军队果然撤走了。
English: Later, Princess Yicheng sent out a false report, and the Turkish army did indeed withdraw.

古文：然帝素意伐辽，又衔瑀以谋擫其机，谓群臣曰： 突厥何能为，瑀乘未解时乃绐恐我！ 
现代文：然而炀帝一直打算征讨辽东，又恨萧瑀乘着献计干扰他的机谋，对群臣说： 突厥能怎么样，萧瑀乘它还没解围来恐吓我！ 
English: However, Emperor Gao had always intended to invade Liaodong, and he hated Xiao Yu for interfering with his plans, saying to his courtiers: "What can the Turks do? Xiao Yu is using it to intimidate me before the siege is lifted!"

古文：遂出瑀为河池郡守。
现代文：于是让他出任河池郡太守。
English: As a result, he was appointed governor of Kawachi County.

古文：部有钞贼万人，吏不制，瑀募勇敢士击降之，悉捐赀畜赐有功。
现代文：辖区内有上万名贼寇，当地官吏控制不了，萧瑀招募勇士打降了他们，把缴获的财物都赏给了立功人员。
English: There were tens of thousands of thieves and robbers in the area under his jurisdiction, and local officials could not control them. Xiao Wei recruited warriors to defeat them, and rewarded the captured property to the meritorious personnel.

古文：又击走薛举众数万。
现代文：还打跑了薛举的几万名来犯叛军。
English: He also chased away tens of thousands of criminal rebels raised by Xue Jiu.

古文：高祖入京师，招之，挈郡自归，授光禄大夫，封宋国公，拜民部尚书。
现代文：高祖李渊进长安后，招呼萧瑀，他献出河池郡投奔了唐朝，被授光禄大夫头衔，封宋国公爵号，任民部尚书官职。
English: After Li Yuan, the great-great-grandfather, entered Chang'an, he invited Xiao Qi. He gave up Hechi County and joined the Tang Dynasty. He was awarded the title of Guanglu doctor, given the title of Duke of Song, and appointed as the official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：秦王领右元帅，攻洛阳，署瑀府司马。
现代文：秦王李世民兼任右元帅，进攻洛阳，萧瑀任秦王府代理司马。
English: Qin King Li Shimin also served as the right field marshal, attacked Luoyang, and Xiao Yu served as the acting Sima of Qin Wangfu.

古文：武德元年迁内史令，帝委以枢管，内外百务悉关决。
现代文：武德元年，升任内史令，高祖把机要事务委托给他，宫庭内外各项政务全都让他参与处理。
English: In the first year of Wu De, he was promoted to the position of Inner Historian, Gao Zu entrusted him with important affairs, and he was involved in all government affairs inside and outside the palace.

古文：或引升御榻，呼曰萧郎。
现代文：有时带他坐上御榻，亲切地喊他 萧郎 。
English: Sometimes he would take him to sit on his couch and affectionately call him Shoro.

古文：瑀自力孜孜，抑过绳违无所惮。
现代文：萧瑀勤恳努力孜孜不倦，批评过失纠正错误无所顾忌。
English: Xiao Yu diligently worked tirelessly, criticizing mistakes and correcting mistakes without any scruples.

古文：上便宜，每见纳用。
现代文：每当提出有益的建议，都被采用。
English: Whenever a useful suggestion is made, it is acted upon.

古文：手诏曰： 得公言，社稷所赖，朕既宝之，故赐黄金一函，公其勿辞。 
现代文：高祖亲笔写诏书说： 您的意见，有利于国家，我很珍爱，所以赏赐一函黄金，您切莫推让。 
English: Gao Zu personally wrote an edict saying: Your opinion is beneficial to the country, I cherish it, so I will reward you with a letter of gold, you must not give in.

古文：是岁，州置七职，秦王为雍州牧，以瑀为州都督。
现代文：这一年，要在七个州设置官署，秦王担任雍州牧，任命萧瑀为雍州都督。
English: In that year, government offices were to be set up in seven provinces. King Qin served as Yongzhou's herdsman and appointed Xiao Gan as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：诏尝下中书，未即行，帝让其稽，瑀曰： 隋季内史诏敕多违舛，百司不知所承。
现代文：高祖的诏书发到中书省，没有即时执行，高祖责备他们拖拉，萧瑀说： 隋朝末年，内史宣布的诏令常常前后矛盾，各主管官吏不知该听哪种。
English: Gao Zu's edict was sent to the Ministry of Literature, but it was not immediately implemented. Gao Zu reproached them for procrastinating. Xiao Wei said: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, the edicts announced in the internal history were often contradictory, and the officials in charge did not know which one to listen to.

古文：今朝廷初基，所以安危者系号令。
现代文：如今开始创建基业，号令关系到国家安危。
English: Now they are starting to create a foundation, which is a matter of national security.

古文：比承一诏，必覆审，使先后不谬，始得下，此所以稽留也。 
现代文：每当接到一项诏令，一定要反复核对，对前后统一的，才能下发，这就是滞留的原因。 
English: Whenever a decree is received, it must be repeatedly checked to ensure that it is consistent before it can be issued, which is the reason for the delay.

古文：帝曰： 若尔，朕何忧乎？ 
现代文：高祖说： 是那样，我还担心什么呢？ 
English: Gaozu said, "If that's the case, what am I worried about?"

古文：初，瑀关内田宅悉赐勋家，至是，还给之。
现代文：当初，萧瑀在关内的田地房屋都交高祖赏给了功臣，到现在，都还给了他。
English: At first, Xiao Yao's field houses in Guanzhong were all given to Gao Zu to reward his meritorious service, but now, they have all been returned to him.

古文：瑀尽以分宗族，独留庙室奉祠。
现代文：他全部分给了族人，只留下祠堂祭祀祖先。
English: He gave the entire portion to the tribe, leaving only the ancestral hall to worship the ancestors.

古文：王世充平，进尚书右仆射。
现代文：王世充被消灭后，萧瑀升任尚书右仆射。
English: After Wang Shichong was eliminated, Xiao Jun was promoted to the post of Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：七年，以荧惑犯右执法，避位，不许。
现代文：武德七年，由于 火星 触犯 右执法星 ，他要求辞职回避，高祖没有同意。
English: In the seventh year of Wude, because Mars violated the Right Law Enforcement Star, he asked to resign and avoid, Gaozu did not agree.

古文：久之，迁左仆射。
现代文：过了很久，改任尚书右仆射。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to the post of Shang Shuxu Yuhudongsha.

古文：贞观初，房玄龄、杜如晦新得君，事任稍分，瑀不能无少望，乘罅切诋，辞旨疏躁。
现代文：贞观初年，房玄龄、杜如晦受到太宗皇帝的信任，朝廷职权逐渐分散，萧瑀不能没有怨恨，一有疏漏就猛烈抨击，言辞粗俗浮躁。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao were trusted by Emperor Taizong, and the authority of the imperial court was gradually dispersed. Xiao Yao could not help but be resentful, and lashed out violently at any omission, and his words were vulgar and impetuous.

古文：太宗怒，废于家。
现代文：太宗生气，让他免职回家。
English: Taizong was so angry that he dismissed him and sent him home.

古文：俄拜特进、太子少师，复为左仆射，实封六百户。
现代文：不久，授予他特进头衔、太子少师官职，恢复左仆射职务，给予收纳六百户租税的实封。
English: Soon, he was awarded the title of "special promotion," the post of "princeling junior division officer," the post of "left-handed archer" was restored, and he was given a sealed envelope for the collection of taxes from 600 households.

古文：帝问瑀： 朕欲长保社稷，奈何？ 
现代文：太宗询问他： 我想永保江山，该怎么办？ 
English: Taizong asked him, "What should I do if I want to save the country?"

古文：瑀曰： 三代有天下所以能长久者，类封建诸侯以为籓屏。
现代文：萧瑀说 ：夏商周三朝能够长久保住天下的办法，都是分封诸侯作为保卫中央的藩国。
English: Xiao Wei said: The best way for the Xia merchants to keep the world safe for a long time is to divide the feudal lords as the central defense of the domain.

古文：秦置守令，二世而绝。
现代文：秦朝设置郡县，两代就灭亡了。
English: The Qin Dynasty set up counties, and two generations died out.

古文：汉分王子弟，享国四百年。
现代文：汉朝把亲属功臣封为王侯，国运也有四百年。
English: The Han Dynasty crowned relatives and meritorious vassals as princes, and there were four hundred years of national movement.

古文：魏、晋废之，亡不旋跬。
现代文：曹魏、晋朝废除分封制，没转过身来就灭亡了。
English: Cao Wei and the Jin Dynasty abolished the feudal system and perished without turning around.

古文：此封建之有明效也。 
现代文：这就是分封制的显著效果。 
English: This is the significant effect of sub-sealing.

古文：帝纳之，始议封建。
现代文：太宗采纳了这个意见，开始商议分封国公刺史。
English: Taizong accepted this opinion and began to discuss the history of the division of fiefs.

古文：坐与陈叔达忿争御前不恭，免。
现代文：后来因与陈叔达在朝廷愤怒争执而获不尊重皇上的罪过，被免除官职。
English: Later, because of an angry dispute with Chen Shuda in the imperial court, he was found guilty of disrespecting the emperor and was removed from office.

古文：岁余，起为晋州都督。
现代文：年底，起用为晋州都督。
English: At the end of the year, he was appointed as the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：入拜太常卿，迁御史大夫，参预朝政。
现代文：后来调回朝廷任太常卿，改任御史大夫，参与朝政。
English: Later, he was transferred back to the Imperial Court as Tai Changqing, and was appointed as Goshi Daifu (Minister of the Imperial Household) and participated in imperial politics.

古文：瑀谕议明辩，然不能容人短，意或偏驳不通，而向法深，房玄龄、魏征、温彦博颇裁正之，其言多黜，瑀亦不平。
现代文：萧瑀议论朝政聪明善辩，但是不能宽容别人的不足，有时存心诡辩观点不一，但他一向法度严谨，房玄龄、魏征、温彦博都不能裁断辩驳，他的意见多数不被采纳，心里也愤愤不平。
English: Xiao Yao was clever and eloquent in discussing the politics of the dynasty, but he could not tolerate the shortcomings of others. At times, he deliberately had different opinions in his arguments. However, he was always strict in his rules. Fang Xuanling, Wei Zheng, and Wen Yanbo could not refute his arguments. Most of his opinions were not accepted, and he was also angry.

古文：会玄龄等小过失，瑀即痛劾，不报，由是自失，罢为太子少傅，加特进，复为太常卿。
现代文：碰巧房玄龄等人犯了小错，萧瑀就拼命弹劾，太宗不予理睬，因此反而给自己造成损失，贬为太子少傅，后来授予特进这个空衔，再任太常卿。
English: It so happened that Fang Xuanling and others made a small mistake, and Xiao Yao desperately tried to impeach them, but the Taizong ignored him. As a result, he caused losses to himself and was demoted to the position of prince junior minister. Later, he was awarded the vacant title of special envoy and reappointed as the permanent secretary.

古文：拜河南道巡省大使。
现代文：后来出任河南道巡省大使。
English: Later, he served as the provincial ambassador of Henan Province.

古文：九年，复参预政事。
现代文：贞观九年，又调回朝廷参与政事。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, he was transferred back to the imperial court to participate in political affairs.

古文：帝尝曰： 武德季，太上皇有废立议，顾朕挟不赏之功，于昆弟弗见容，瑀于尔时不可以利怵死惧，社稷臣也。 
现代文：太宗曾说： 武德末年，太上皇有废除建成另立太子的想法，但我立有无法奖赏的功勋，建成、元吉不能容我，萧瑀那时不理他们的利诱威胁，真是个关系国家安危的大臣。 
English: Emperor Taizong once said: In the last years of the Wu and De dynasties, Emperor Taizong had the idea of abolishing Jiancheng and setting up another prince, but I had a merit that could not be rewarded. Jiancheng and Yuanji could not tolerate me. At that time, Xiao Wei ignored their threat of inducement. He was truly a minister who was concerned about the safety of the country.

古文：因赐诗曰： 疾风知劲草，版荡识诚臣。 
现代文：所以写诗赐给他说： 疾风知劲草，版荡识诚臣。 
English: Therefore, write a poem and give it to him: The whirlwind knows the vigorous grass, and the page knows the honest minister.

古文：又曰： 公守道耿介，古无以过，然善恶太明，或有时而失。 
现代文：又对萧瑀说 ：您守志不移刚直不阿，古人也无法超过，但是善恶分得太清楚了，有时也失去分寸。 
English: He also said to Xiao Yao: You are unswervingly upright, and the ancients cannot surpass you, but the distinction between good and evil is too clear, and sometimes you lose your sense of proportion.

古文：瑀顿首谢曰： 既蒙教，又许以忠亮，虽死日，犹生年也。 
现代文：萧瑀跪地叩头道歉说 ：既承蒙您教导，又肯定我忠诚正直，虽然到了快死的年龄，却如新生一样。 
English: Xiao Yao knelt down and bowed to apologize, saying, "Since I have received your teachings, and I am sure that I am loyal and honest, although I have reached the age of dying, I am like a newborn.

古文：魏征曰： 臣有逆众持法，主恕之以公；孤特守节，主恕之以介。
现代文：魏征说： 有的臣子违背众人心愿坚持法度，国君认为公正而原谅他；孤立无援坚守节操，君主认为刚直而原谅他。
English: Wei Zheng said: Some courtiers go against the wishes of the people to uphold the law, and the sovereign thinks it is fair and forgives him; isolated without support to adhere to discipline, the sovereign thinks it is upright and forgives him.

古文：昔闻其言，乃今见之。
现代文：从前听到有关他的传闻，现在才见到他的实际情况。
English: I heard rumours about him before, but now I've seen him for what he is.

古文：使瑀不遇陛下，庸能自保邪？ 
现代文：假使萧瑀不是遇到陛下，怎能保全自己呢？ 
English: If Xiao Yao hadn't met His Majesty, how could he protect himself?

古文：晋王为皇太子，拜太子太保、同中书门下三品。
现代文：晋王李治立为太子，萧瑀被授予太子太保、同中书门下三品。
English: Li Zhi, the king of Jin, was made the crown prince, and Xiao Wei was awarded the title of crown prince, and the next three prizes of the same school.

古文：帝曰： 三师，以德导太子者也，礼不尊，则无所取法。 
现代文：太宗说： 太子的太师、太傅、太保这三位老师，是用道德教导太子的人，待遇不尊贵，就无处学到礼仪法则。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: The three teachers of the prince, the prince's teacher, the prince's tutor, and the prince's guardian, are the people who teach the prince morality. If they are not treated with dignity, they will have nowhere to learn the rules of etiquette.

古文：乃诏： 师入谒，太子出门迎拜，师答拜；每门，让乃入；师坐，然后坐；书前后著名，称惶恐。 
现代文：于是发出诏令 ：老师进见太子，太子出门迎接礼拜，老师回拜；进门时，太子推让以后才能进去；老师坐下后，太子才坐下；写作文章前后都要写上名字，并且写上 惶恐 一词。 
English: Therefore, a decree was issued: the teacher enters to see the prince, the prince goes out to greet the worship, the teacher returns the worship; when entering the door, the prince can only enter after pushing; after the teacher sits down, the prince sits down; before and after writing the article, the name should be written, and the word "panic" should be written.

古文：瑀素贵，但中狭。
现代文：萧瑀平生地位尊贵，但是心胸狭窄。
English: Xiao Yao held a high position in his lifetime, but he was narrow-minded.

古文：每燕见，辄言： 玄龄辈朋党盗权，若胶固然，特未反耳。
现代文：每到内廷朝见太宗，就反映： 房玄龄一伙人拉帮结派窃取权力，如胶似漆牢不可破，只是还没造反而已。 
English: Whenever he went to the Inner Court to see Emperor Taizong, he would reflect: "Fang Xuanling and his gang have been stealing power like glue, but they haven't rebelled yet.

古文：帝曰： 知臣莫若君。朕虽不明，宁顿懵臧否？ 
现代文：太宗说： 没有谁比君主更了解臣子，我虽然不算聪慧明智，难道对品评善恶也模糊不清？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "There is no one who knows his subjects better than the sovereign. Although I am not smart and wise, am I not clear about judging good and evil?

古文：因为瑀晓解，瑀以帝有所偏信，帝积久亦不平。
现代文：还对萧瑀进行开导。萧瑀认为太宗偏听偏信，时间一长太宗也怨恨他。
English: He also enlightened Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao thought that Taizong was partial to listening and partial to believing, and after a long time, Taizong also resented him.

古文：瑀好浮屠法，间请舍家为桑门，帝许之矣，复奏自度不能为，又足疾不入谒，帝曰： 瑀岂不得其所邪？ 
现代文：萧瑀喜爱佛学，试探地请求出家当和尚，太宗答应他了，他又说自己考虑不能当，还说腿脚有病不能入朝拜见太宗，太宗说： 萧瑀难道没有得到合适的位置吗？ 
English: Xiao Yao loved Buddhism and tentatively asked to be ordained as a monk. Emperor Taizong agreed to his request. He also said that he considered not being able to become a monk, and also said that he had a leg and foot disease and could not go to the emperor to see Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong said: Didn't Xiao Yao get the right position?

古文：乃诏夺爵，下除商州刺史。
现代文：于是发出诏书取消封号，贬为商州刺史。
English: Therefore, an imperial edict was issued to cancel the sealing number and relegate it to the history of Shangzhou.

古文：未几，复其封，加特进。
现代文：没过多久，恢复了他的封号，授予特进头衔。
English: It didn't take long for his rank to be restored, and he was awarded the title of "Special Envoy."

古文：卒，年七十四。
现代文：去世时，七十四岁。
English: He was 74 when he died.

古文：遗命敛以单衣，无卜日。
现代文：遗嘱命令用单层的衣服入殓，安葬不要选择日期。
English: The will ordered that a single layer of clothing be used for the burial, and that no date be selected for the burial.

古文：诏赠司空、荆州都督，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：诏令追认他为司空、荆州都督，安葬在太宗预先为自己营建的昭陵墓地。
English: The imperial edict identified him as Siku, the governor of Jingzhou, and he was buried in the Shouling cemetery that Taizong had built for himself in advance.

古文：太常谥曰肃，帝以其性忌，改谥贞褊。
现代文：太常寺拟定谥号为 肃 ，太宗认为他习性猜忌，改谥号为 贞褊 。
English: Taizho-ji Temple proposed the name "Su," but Emperor Taizong thought that he was too suspicious and changed the name to "Zhengrong."

古文：子锐，尚襄城公主，为太常少卿。
现代文：儿子萧锐，娶太宗的女儿襄城公主为妻，官至太常少卿。
English: His son, Xiao Rui, married Emperor Taizong's daughter, Princess Xiangcheng, and rose to the rank of Vice-Minister.

