古文：孙子武者，齐人也。
现代文：孙子名武，是齐国人。
English: His grandson, Meitu, was from Qi.

古文：以兵法见於吴王阖庐。
现代文：因为他精通兵法受到吴王阖庐的接见。
English: Because he was proficient in the art of war, he was received by King Wu.

古文：阖庐曰： 子之十三篇，吾尽观之矣，可以小试勒兵乎？ 
现代文：阖庐说： 您的十三篇兵书我都看过了，可用来小规模地试着指挥军队吗？ 
English: Zou said, "I have read all thirteen of your military manuals. Can I use them to try to command an army on a small scale?"

古文：对曰： 可。 
现代文：孙子回答说： 可以。 
English: Grandson replied: Yes.

古文：阖庐曰： 可试以妇人乎？ 
现代文：阖庐说： 可以用妇女试验吗？ 
English: Zou said, "Can we experiment with women?"

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：回答说： 可以。 
English: A: Yes.

古文：於是许之，出宫中美女，得百八十人。
现代文：于是阖庐答应他试验，叫出宫中美女，共约百八十人。
English: So the Empress Dowager agreed to let him try, and called out the beautiful women of the court, a total of about one hundred and eighty.

古文：孙子分为二队，以王之宠姬二人各为队长，皆令持戟。
现代文：孙子把她们分为两队，让吴王阖庐最宠爱的两位侍妾分别担任各队队长，让所有的美女都拿一支戟。
English: The grandson divided them into two teams, and let Wu Wangya's two favorite concubines be the captains of each team, and let all the beautiful women hold a scepter.

古文：令之曰： 汝知而心与左右手背乎？ 
现代文：然后命令她们说： 你们知道自己的心、左右手和背吗？ 
English: Then he ordered them: "Do you know your own hearts, right and left hands, and backs?

古文：妇人曰： 知之。 
现代文：妇人们回答说： 知道。 
English: The women replied, "We know.

古文：孙子曰： 前，则视心；左，视左手；右，视右手；後，即视背。 妇人曰： 诺。 
现代文：孙子说： 我说向前，你们就看心口所对的方向；我说向左，你们就看左手所对的方向；我说向右，你们就看右手所对的方向；我说向后，你们就看背所对的方向。 妇人们答道： 是。 
English: The grandson said, "When I say forward, you look in the direction of your heart; when I say left, you look in the direction of your left hand; when I say right, you look in the direction of your right hand; when I say backward, you look in the direction of your back."

古文：约束既布，乃设鈇钺，即三令五申之。
现代文：号令宣布完毕，于是摆好斧铖等刑具，旋即又把已经宣布的号令多次重复地交待清楚。
English: After the announcement of the order was over, they set up the axe and other instruments of torture, and immediately repeated the already announced order several times.

古文：於是鼓之右，妇人大笑。
现代文：就击鼓发令，叫她们向右，妇人们都哈哈大笑。
English: He gave the order to beat the drum and tell them to move to the right, and the women burst into laughter.

古文：孙子曰： 约束不明，申令不熟，将之罪也。 
现代文：孙子说： 纪律还不清楚，号令不熟悉，这是将领的过错。 
English: Sun Tzu said: Discipline is not clear, orders are not familiar, this is the fault of the generals.

古文：复三令五申而鼓之左，妇人复大笑。
现代文：又多次重复地交待清楚，然后击鼓发令让她们向左，妇人们又都哈哈大笑。
English: He repeated the instructions several times, and then beat the drum and ordered them to move to the left. Again, the women burst into laughter.

古文：孙子曰： 约束不明，申令不熟，将之罪也；既已明而不如法者，吏士之罪也。 
现代文：孙子说： 纪律弄不清楚，号令不熟悉，这是将领的过错；现在既然讲得清清楚楚，却不遵照号令行事，那就是军官和士兵的过错了。 
English: Sun Tzu said: "It is the fault of the generals if they do not understand discipline and are not familiar with the orders; it is the fault of the officers and soldiers if they do not act in accordance with the orders after being told clearly.

古文：乃欲斩左右队长。
现代文：于是就要杀左、右两队的队长。
English: As a result, the captains of the left and right teams had to be killed.

古文：吴王从台上观，见且斩爱姬，大骇。
现代文：吴王正在台上观看，见孙子将要杀自己的爱妾，大吃一惊。
English: King Wu was watching on the stage and was shocked to see his grandson about to kill his beloved concubine.

古文：趣使使下令曰： 寡人已知将军能用兵矣。寡人非此二姬，食不甘味，原勿斩也。 
现代文：急忙派使臣传达命令说： 我已经知道将军善用兵了，我要没了这两个侍妾，吃起东西来也不香甜，希望你不要杀她们吧。 
English: He hurriedly sent an envoy to convey his orders, saying: "I already know that the general is good at using soldiers. If I lose these two concubines, I won't be able to eat anything sweet. I hope you won't kill them."

古文：孙子曰： 臣既已受命为将，将在军，君命有所不受。 
现代文：孙子回答说： 我已经接受命令为将，将在军队里，国君的命令有的可以不接受。 
English: Grandson replied: I have accepted the order as a general, will be in the army, some orders of the sovereign may not be accepted.

古文：遂斩队长二人以徇。
现代文：于是杀了两个队长示众。
English: So he killed the two captains of the demonstration.

古文：用其次为队长，於是复鼓之。妇人左右前後跪起皆中规矩绳墨，无敢出声。
现代文：然后按顺序任用两队第二人为队长，于是再击鼓发令，妇人们不论是向左向右、向前向后、跪倒、站起都符合号令、纪律的要求，再没有人敢出声。
English: Then the second person of the two teams was appointed as the captain in order, and then the drum was beaten to issue an order. Whether the women went left to right, forward to back, kneeled down, or stood up, they all complied with the requirements of the order and discipline, and no one dared to speak out.

古文：於是孙子使使报王曰： 兵既整齐，王可试下观之，唯王所欲用之，虽赴水火犹可也。 
现代文：于是孙子派使臣向吴王报告说： 队伍已经操练整齐，大王可以下台来验察她们的演习，任凭大王怎样使用她们，即使叫她们赴汤蹈火也办得到啊。 
English: Therefore, Sun Tzu sent an envoy to report to King Wu: The troops have been well drilled, the great king can step down to inspect their drills, and no matter how the great king uses them, even if he tells them to go through fire and water, they can do it.

古文：吴王曰： 将军罢休就舍，寡人不原下观。 
现代文：吴王回答说： 让将军停止演练，回宾馆休息。我不愿下去察看了。 
English: Wu Wang replied: Let the general stop the drill and go back to the hotel to rest. I don't want to go down and see.

古文：孙子曰： 王徒好其言，不能用其实。 
现代文：孙子感叹地说： 大王只是欣赏我的军事理论，却不能让我付诸实践。 
English: Grandson sighed and said, "The Great King only appreciates my military theory, but he can't let me put it into practice.

古文：於是阖庐知孙子能用兵，卒以为将。
现代文：从此，吴王阖庐知道孙子果真善于用兵，终于任命他做了将军。
English: From then on, Wu Wangtao knew that Sun Ziguo was really good at using soldiers, and finally appointed him as a general.

古文：西破强楚，入郢，北威齐晋，显名诸侯，孙子与有力焉。
现代文：后业吴国向西打败了强大的楚国，攻克郢都，向北威震齐国和晋国，在诸侯各国名声赫赫，这其间，孙子不仅参与，而且出了很大的力啊。
English: Later, the State of Wu defeated the powerful State of Chu to the west, conquered the capital of Shandong, and conquered the states of Qi and Jin to the north, gaining great fame among the various states. During this time, Sun Tzu not only participated, but also exerted great strength.

古文：孙武既死，後百馀岁有孙膑。
现代文：孙子死后，隔了一百多年又出了一个孙膑。
English: After the death of his grandson, more than a hundred years later, another Sun Yat-sen was born.

古文：膑生阿鄄之间，膑亦孙武之後世子孙也。
现代文：孙膑出生在阿城和鄄城一带，也是孙武的后代子孙。
English: Sun Yat-sen was born in the Acheng and Qiancheng areas. He was also a descendant of Sun Wu.

古文：孙膑尝与庞涓俱学兵法。
现代文：他曾经和庞涓一道学习兵法。
English: He once studied the art of war with Pang Jun.

古文：庞涓既事魏，得为惠王将军，而自以为能不及孙膑，乃阴使召孙膑。
现代文：庞涓奉事魏国以后，当上了魏惠王的将军，却知道自己的才能比不上孙膑。就秘密地把孙膑找来。
English: After serving the State of Wei, Pang Jun became the general of King Hui of Wei, but he knew that his talent was not as good as that of Sun Yat-sen. So he secretly sought out Sun Yat-sen.

古文：膑至，庞涓恐其贤於己，疾之，则以法刑断其两足而黥之，欲隐勿见。
现代文：孙膑到来，庞涓害怕他比自己贤能，忌恨他，就假借罪名砍掉他两只脚，并且在他脸上刺了字，想让他隐藏起来不敢抛头露面。
English: When Sun Yat-sen arrived, Pang Yat, fearing that he was more capable than himself and hating him, cut off both of his feet on false charges and wrote on his face to make him hide and not dare to show his face.

古文：齐使者如梁，孙膑以刑徒阴见，说齐使。
现代文：齐国的使臣来到大梁，孙膑以犯人的身份秘密地会见了齐使，进行游说。
English: Envoys from Qi came to Dalian, and Sun Yat-sen secretly met with the envoys as a prisoner to lobby.

古文：齐使以为奇，窃载与之齐。
现代文：齐国的使臣认为他是个难得的人才，就偷偷地用车把他载回齐国。
English: The ambassador of Qi thought that he was a rare talent, so he secretly took him back to Qi by car.

古文：齐将田忌善而客待之。
现代文：齐国将军田忌不仅赏识他而且还象对待客人一样对待他。
English: The general of Qi, Tabi, not only appreciated him but also treated him like a guest.

古文：忌数与齐诸公子驰逐重射。
现代文：田忌经常跟齐国贵族子弟赛马，下很大的赌注。
English: Tabi often raced horses with the children of aristocrats from Qi, placing large bets.

古文：孙子见其马足不甚相远，马有上、中、下、辈。
现代文：孙膑发现他们的马脚力都差不多，可分为上、中、下三等。
English: Sun Yao found that their horse power was similar, and could be divided into upper, middle, and lower classes.

古文：於是孙子谓田忌曰： 君弟重射，臣能令君胜。 
现代文：于是孙膑对田忌说： 你尽管下大赌注，我能让你取胜。 
English: So Sun Yat-sen said to Tabi, "Even if you bet a lot, I can let you win."

古文：田忌信然之，与王及诸公子逐射千金。
现代文：田忌信以为然，与齐王和贵族子弟们比赛下了千金的赌注。
English: Tian Yixin thought so, and made a bet of thousands of dollars with King Qi and the sons of aristocrats.

古文：及临质，孙子曰： 今以君之下驷与彼上驷，取君上驷与彼中驷，取君中驷与彼下驷。 
现代文：到临场比赛，孙膑对田忌说： 现在用您的下等马对付他们的上等马，拿您的上等马对付他们的中等马，让您的中等马对付他们的下等马。 
English: On the eve of the race, Sun Yat-sen said to Tian Mei: Now use your inferior horse against their superior horse, take your superior horse against their intermediate horse, and let your intermediate horse against their inferior horse.

古文：既驰三辈毕，而田忌一不胜而再胜，卒得王千金。
现代文：三次比赛完了，田忌败了一次，胜了两次，终于赢得了齐王千金赌注。
English: After three games, Tianyi lost once, won twice, and finally won the million-dollar bet.

古文：於是忌进孙子於威王。
现代文：于是田忌就把孙子推荐给齐威王。
English: So Tabi recommended her grandson to King Qiwei.

古文：威王问兵法，遂以为师。
现代文：威王向他请教兵法后，就把他当做老师。
English: After King Wei asked him to teach him the art of war, he took him as his teacher.

古文：其後魏伐赵，赵急，请救於齐。
现代文：后来魏国攻打赵国，赵国形势危急，向齐国求救。
English: Later, Wei attacked Zhao. Zhao was in a critical situation and appealed to Qi for help.

古文：齐威王欲将孙膑，膑辞谢曰： 刑馀之人不可。 
现代文：齐威王打算任用孙膑为主将，孙膑辞谢说： 受过酷刑的人，不能任主将。 
English: King Qi Wei planned to appoint Sun Yat-sen as commander-in-chief, but Sun Yat-sen declined, saying, "A person who has been tortured cannot be commander-in-chief."

古文：於是乃以田忌为将，而孙子为师，居辎车中，坐为计谋。
现代文：于是就任命田忌做主将，孙膑做军师，坐在带蓬帐的车里，暗中谋划。
English: So he appointed Tian Mei to be the captain and Sun Ye to be the strategist, sitting in a car with a canopy, plotting in secret.

古文：田忌欲引兵之赵，孙子曰： 夫解杂乱纷纠者不控卷，救斗者不搏撠，批亢捣虚，形格势禁，则自为解耳。
现代文：田忌想要率领救兵直奔赵国，孙膑说： 想解开乱丝的人，不能紧握双拳生拉硬扯；解救斗殴的人，不能卷进去胡乱搏击。要扼住争斗者的要害，争斗者因形势限制，就不得不自行解开。
English: When Tian Bo wanted to lead the rescuers straight to Zhao Guo, Sun Yat-sen said: "If you want to untangle the mess, you can't clench your fists and pull hard; if you want to rescue the fight, you can't get involved in a wild fight. In order to hold the key of the fighters, the fighters had to untangle themselves due to the situation.

古文：今梁赵相攻，轻兵锐卒必竭於外，老弱罢於内。
现代文：如今魏国赵国相互攻打，梁国的精锐部队必定在国外精疲力竭，老弱残兵在国内疲惫不堪。
English: Today, the Wei and Zhao states are attacking each other, the elite troops of the Liang state must be exhausted abroad, and the old and weak remnants are exhausted at home.

古文：君不若引兵疾走大梁，据其街路，旻其方虚，彼必释赵而自救。
现代文：你不如率领军队火速向大梁挺进，占据它的交通要道，冲击它正当空虚的地方，魏国肯定会放弃赵国而回兵自救。
English: You might as well lead the army to advance at high speed to the girder, occupy its traffic routes, and impact its legitimate empty place. Wei will certainly abandon Zhao and return to save itself.

古文：是我一举解赵之围而收弊於魏也。 
现代文：这样，我们一举解救了赵国之围，而又可坐收魏国自行挫败的效果。 
English: In this way, we have relieved the siege of Zhao in one fell swoop, and at the same time we can absorb the effect of Wei's self-defeat.

古文：田忌从之，魏果去邯郸，与齐战於桂陵，大破梁军。
现代文：田忌听从了孙膑的意见。魏军果然离开邯郸回师，在桂陵地方交战，魏军被打得大败。
English: Tianyi listened to Sun Yat-sen's advice. The Wei army did indeed leave the Shuai division and fought in the Guilin area. The Wei army was soundly defeated.

古文：後十三岁，魏与赵攻韩，韩告急於齐。
现代文：十三年后，魏国和赵国联合攻打韩国，韩国向齐国告急。
English: Thirteen years later, Wei and Zhao jointly attacked South Korea, and South Korea became anxious about Qi.

古文：齐使田忌将而往，直走大梁。
现代文：齐王派田忌率领军队前去救援，径直进军大梁。
English: King Qi sent Tianyi to lead the army to the rescue, marching straight into the girders.

古文：魏将庞涓闻之，去韩而归，齐军既已过而西矣。
现代文：魏将庞涓听到这个消息，率师撤离韩国回魏，而齐军已经越过边界向西挺进了。
English: Upon hearing this news, Wei general Pang Jun withdrew his division from Korea back to Wei, while the Qi army had already crossed the border and advanced westward.

古文：孙子谓田忌曰： 彼三晋之兵素悍勇而轻齐，齐号为怯，善战者因其势而利导之。
现代文：孙膑对田忌说： 那魏军向来凶悍勇猛，看不起齐兵，齐兵被称作胆小怯懦，善于指挥作战的将领，就要顺应着这样的趋势而加以引导。
English: Sun Yat-sen said to Tabi: The Wei army was always fierce and brave, and looked down on Qi soldiers. Qi soldiers were called timid and cowardly. Generals who are good at commanding battles should follow this trend and guide them.

古文：兵法，百里而趣利者蹶上将，五十里而趣利者军半至。
现代文：兵法上说： 用急行军走百里和敌人争利的，有可能折损上将军；用急行军走五十里和敌人争利的，可能有一半士兵掉队。
English: It is said in the art of war that: If you use a hundred-mile express march to compete with the enemy, you may lose the general; if you use a fifty-mile express march to compete with the enemy, half of the soldiers may be left behind.

古文：使齐军入魏地为十万灶，明日为五万灶，又明日为三万灶。 
现代文：命令军队进入魏境先砌十万人做饭的灶，第二天砌五万人做饭的灶，第三天砌三万人做饭的灶。 
English: He ordered the army to enter the Wei territory and first build a stove for 100,000 people to cook, the next day build a stove for 50,000 people to cook, and the third day build a stove for 30,000 people to cook.

古文：庞涓行三日，大喜，曰： 我固知齐军怯，入吾地三日，士卒亡者过半矣。 
现代文：庞涓行军三日，特别高兴地说： 我本来就知道齐军胆小怯懦，进入我国境才三天，开小差的就超过了半数啊！ 
English: Pang Hao marched for three days and was particularly pleased to say: I already knew that the Qi army was timid and cowardly. It has only been three days since they entered our country, and more than half of them have deserted!

古文：乃弃其步军，与其轻锐倍日并行逐之。
现代文：于是放弃了他的步兵，只和他轻装精锐的部队，日夜兼程地追击齐军。
English: So he gave up his infantry, and only his lightly armed elite troops pursued the Qi army day and night.

古文：孙子度其行，暮当至马陵。
现代文：孙膑估计他的行程，当晚可以赶到马陵。
English: Sun Yat-sen estimated that he could reach the horse mausoleum that evening.

古文：马陵道陕，而旁多阻隘，可伏兵，乃斫大树白而书之曰 庞涓死于此树之下 。
现代文：马陵的道路狭窄，两旁又多是峻隘险阻，适合埋伏军队。孙膑就叫人砍去树皮，露出白木，写上： 庞涓死于此树之下。 
English: The road to the horse mausoleum is narrow, with many steep and dangerous obstacles on both sides, suitable for ambushing troops. Sun Yat-sen ordered the bark of the tree to be cut off, revealing the white wood, and wrote: Pang Yat-sen died under this tree.

古文：於是令齐军善射者万弩，夹道而伏，期曰 暮见火举而俱发 。
现代文：于是命令一万名善于射箭的齐兵，隐伏在马陵道两边，约定说： 晚上看见树下火光亮起，就万箭齐发。 
English: So he ordered ten thousand soldiers who were good at archery to lie in ambush on both sides of the Ma Ling Road. They agreed that if they saw a fire light up under a tree in the evening, they would shoot thousands of arrows.

古文：庞涓果夜至斫木下，见白书，乃钻火烛之。读其书未毕，齐军万弩俱发，魏军大乱相失。
现代文：庞涓当晚果然赶到砍去树皮的大树下，看见白木上写着字，就点火照树干上的字，上边的字还没读完，齐军伏兵就万箭齐发，魏军大乱，互不接应。
English: That evening, Pang Ye arrived under a large tree that had been stripped of its bark, and when he saw the words written on the white wood, he lit a fire to illuminate the words on the tree trunk. Before he had finished reading the words above, the Qi army ambushed the Wei army, and the Wei army was in chaos and did not respond to each other.

古文：庞涓自知智穷兵败，乃自刭，曰： 遂成竖子之名！ 
现代文：庞涓自知无计可施，败成定局，就拔剑自刎，临死说： 倒成就了这小子的名声！ 
English: Knowing that there was nothing he could do, and that his defeat was a foregone conclusion, Pang Xuan drew his sword and killed himself, saying on his deathbed, "I have made this boy's reputation!

古文：齐因乘胜尽破其军，虏魏太子申以归。
现代文：齐军就乘胜追击，把魏军彻底击溃，俘虏了魏国太子申回国。
English: The Qi army took advantage of the victory to pursue, completely defeated the Wei army, and captured the Wei prince Shen to return to the country.

古文：孙膑以此名显天下，世传其兵法。
现代文：孙膑也因此名扬天下，后世社会上流传着他的《兵法》。
English: Sun Yat-sen also became famous for this, and his "Law of War" was passed down to future generations.

古文：吴起者，卫人也，好用兵。
现代文：吴起是卫国人，善于用兵。
English: Wu Qi was a defender of the country and good at using soldiers.

古文：尝学於曾子，事鲁君。
现代文：曾经向曾子求学，奉事鲁国国君。
English: He once studied under Zeng Zi and served as the crown prince of Lu.

古文：齐人攻鲁，鲁欲将吴起，吴起取齐女为妻，而鲁疑之。
现代文：齐国的军队攻打鲁国，鲁君想任用吴起为将军，而吴起娶的妻子却是齐国人，因而鲁君怀疑他。
English: The army of Qi attacked Lu. Lu Jun wanted to appoint Wu Qi as a general, but Wu Qi's wife was from Qi, so Lu Jun suspected him.

古文：吴起於是欲就名，遂杀其妻，以明不与齐也。
现代文：当时，吴起一心想成名，就杀了自己的妻子，用来表明他不亲附齐国。
English: At that time, Wu Qi wanted to be famous, so he killed his wife to show that he was not close to Qi Guo.

古文：鲁卒以为将。将而攻齐，大破之。
现代文：鲁君终于任命他做了将军，率领军队攻打齐国，把齐军打得大败。
English: Lu Jun finally appointed him as a general and led the army to attack Qi Province, defeating the Qi army.

古文：鲁人或恶吴起曰： 起之为人，猜忍人也。
现代文：鲁国就有的人诋毁吴起说： 吴起为人，是猜疑残忍的。
English: Some people in Russia have slandered Wu Qi, saying, "As a person, Wu Qi is suspicious and cruel.

古文：其少时，家累千金，游仕不遂，遂破其家，乡党笑之，吴起杀其谤己者三十馀人，而东出卫郭门。
现代文：他年轻的时候，家里积蓄足有千金，在外边求官没有结果，把家产也荡尽了，同乡邻里的人笑话他，他就杀掉三十多个讥笑自己的人。然后从卫国的东门逃跑了。
English: When he was young, his family had accumulated a lot of money. He unsuccessfully applied for a post abroad and exhausted his family's assets. People in his hometown and neighborhood made fun of him, and he killed more than 30 people who made fun of him. Then he ran away from the East Gate of our country.

古文：与其母诀，齧臂而盟曰： 起不为卿相，不复入卫。 
现代文：他和母亲决别时，咬着自己的胳膊狠狠地说： 我吴起不做卿相，绝不再回卫国。 
English: When he was saying goodbye to his mother, he bit his own arm and said fiercely: "If I, Wu Qi, do not become the prime minister, I will never return to defend the country."

古文：遂事曾子。
现代文：于是就拜曾子为师。
English: So he followed Zeng Zi as his teacher.

古文：居顷之，其母死，起终不归。
现代文：不久，他母亲死了，吴起最终还是没有回去奔丧。
English: Soon after, his mother died, but Wu Qi did not go back to mourn.

古文：曾子薄之，而与起绝。
现代文：曾子瞧不起他并和他断绝了师徒关系。
English: Zengzi despised him and broke off the relationship with him.

古文：起乃之鲁，学兵法以事鲁君。
现代文：吴起就到鲁国去，学习兵法来奉事鲁君。
English: Wu Qi went to the State of Lu to learn the art of war in order to serve Lu Jun.

古文：鲁君疑之，起杀妻以求将。
现代文：鲁君怀疑他，吴起杀掉妻子表明心迹，用来谋求将军的职位。
English: Lu Jun suspected him, and Wu Qi killed his wife to show his intentions, and used it to seek the position of general.

古文：夫鲁小国，而有战胜之名，则诸侯图鲁矣。
现代文：鲁国虽然是个小国，却有着战胜国的名声，那么诸侯各国就要谋算鲁国了。
English: Although Lu is a small country, it has the reputation of a victorious country, so all the states will have to plan for Lu.

古文：且鲁卫兄弟之国也，而君用起，则是弃卫。 
现代文：况且鲁国和卫国是兄弟国家，鲁君要是重用吴起，就等于抛弃了卫国。 
English: Moreover, Lu and Wei were brotherly countries. If Lu Jun reused Wuqi, it would be tantamount to abandoning Wei.

古文：鲁君疑之，谢吴起。
现代文：鲁君怀疑吴起，疏远了吴起。
English: Lu Jun suspected Wu Qi and alienated Wu Qi.

古文：吴起於是闻魏文侯贤，欲事之。
现代文：这时，吴起听说魏国文侯贤明，想去奉事他。
English: At this time, Wu Qi heard about Wei Guo Wen Hou Xianming and wanted to serve him.

古文：文侯问李克曰： 吴起何如人哉？ 
现代文：文侯问李克说： 吴起这个人怎么样啊？ 
English: Wen Hou asked Li Ke, "How is Wu Qi?

古文：李克曰： 起贪而好色，然用兵司马穰苴不能过也。 
现代文：李克回答说： 吴起贪恋成名而爱好女色，然而要带兵打仗，就是司马穰苴也超不过他。 
English: Li Ke replied, "Wu Qi is greedy for fame and loves women. However, to lead soldiers into battle, even Sima Yi is no better than him.

古文：於是魏文候以为将，击秦，拔五城。
现代文：于是魏文侯就任用他为主将，攻打秦国，夺取了五座城池。
English: As a result, Wei Wenhou appointed him as the main general, attacked Qin, and captured five cities.

古文：起之为将，与士卒最下者同衣食。卧不设席，行不骑乘，亲裹赢粮，与士卒分劳苦。
现代文：吴起做主将，跟最下等的士兵穿一样的衣服，吃一样的伙食，睡觉不铺垫褥，行军不乘车骑马，亲自背负着捆扎好的粮食和士兵们同甘共苦。
English: As the commander-in-chief, Wu Qi wore the same clothes as the lowest-ranking soldiers, ate the same food, slept without mattresses, did not travel by car or horse, and personally carried the bundled grain with the soldiers.

古文：卒有病疽者，起为吮之。
现代文：有个士兵生了恶性毒疮，吴起替他吸吮浓液。
English: One soldier had a malignant poisonous sore, and Wu Qi sucked the thick liquid for him.

古文：卒母闻而哭之。
现代文：这个士兵的母亲听说后，就放声大哭。
English: The soldier's mother burst into tears when she heard the news.

古文：人曰： 子卒也，而将军自吮其疽，何哭为？ 
现代文：有人说： 你儿子是个无名小卒，将军却亲自替他吸吮浓液，怎么还哭呢？ 
English: Some people said: Your son is a nobody, but the general himself sucked the thick liquid for him. Why are you still crying?

古文：母曰： 非然也。往年吴公吮其父，其父战不旋踵，遂死於敌。
现代文：那位母亲回答说： 不是这样啊，往年吴将军替他父亲吸吮毒疮，他父亲在战场上勇往直前，就死在敌人手里。
English: The mother replied, "That's not true. In the past, General Wu used to suck poisonous sores for his father, who died at the hands of the enemy when he was on the battlefield.

古文：吴公今又吮其子，妾不知其死所矣。是以哭之。 
现代文：如今吴将军又给他儿子吸吮毒疮，我不知道他又会在什么时候死在什么地方，因此，我才哭他啊。 
English: Now General Wu is sucking his son's boils again, and I don't know when or where he will die, so I just cry for him.

古文：文侯以吴起善用兵，廉平，尽能得士心，乃以为西河守，以拒秦、韩。
现代文：魏文侯因为吴起善于用兵打仗，廉洁不贪，待人公平，能取得所有将士的欢心，就任命他担任西河地区的长官，来抗拒秦国和韩国。
English: Because Wu Qi was good at using soldiers to fight wars, was honest and not greedy, treated people fairly, and was able to win the favor of all soldiers, Wei Wenhou appointed him as the governor of the West River region to resist Qin and South Korea.

古文：魏文侯既卒，起事其子武侯。
现代文：魏文侯死后，吴起奉事他的儿子魏武侯。
English: After the death of Wei Wenhou, Wu Qi served his son Wei Wuhou.

古文：武侯浮西河而下，中流，顾而谓吴起曰： 美哉乎山河之固，此魏国之宝也！ 
现代文：武侯泛舟黄河顺流而下，船到半途，回过头来对吴起说： 山川是如此的险要、壮美哟，这是魏国的瑰宝啊！ 
English: Wuhou rafted down the Yellow River. When the boat reached the halfway point, he turned back to Wu Qi and said, "The mountain and river are so dangerous and magnificent. This is the treasure of Wei!

古文：起对曰： 在德不在险。
现代文：吴起回答说： 国家政权的稳固，在于施德于民，而不在于地理形势的险要。
English: Wu Qi replied: The stability of state power lies in the virtue of the people, not in the perilous geographical situation.

古文：昔三苗氏左洞庭，右彭蠡，德义不修，禹灭之。
现代文：从前三苗氏左临洞庭湖，右濒彭蠡泽，因为它不修德行，不讲信义，所以夏禹能灭掉它。
English: Once upon a time, the Sanmiao Clan lived on the left side of Dongting Lake, and on the right side of Penghu Lake. Because it did not practice virtue and did not believe in righteousness, Xia Yu was able to eliminate it.

古文：夏桀之居，左河济，右泰华，伊阙在其南，羊肠在其北，修政不仁，汤放之。
现代文：夏桀的领土，左临黄河、济水，右靠泰山、华山，伊阙山在它的南边，羊肠坂在它的北面。因为他不施仁政，所以商汤放逐了他。
English: Xia Yao's territory is bordered on the left by the Yellow River and Jishui, on the right by Mount Tai and Mount Hua, on the south by Mount Ili, and on the north by Sheep Gut Slope. Because he did not practice benevolent politics, Shang Tang banished him.

古文：殷纣之国，左孟门，右太行，常山在其北，大河经其南，修政不德，武王杀之。
现代文：殷纣的领土，左边有孟门山，右边有太行山，常山在它的北边，黄河流经它的南面，因为他不施仁德，武王把他杀了。
English: The territory of Yinqi, on the left is Mengmen Mountain, on the right is Taihang Mountain, Changshan Mountain is on its north side, and the Yellow River passes through its south side, because he did not show mercy, King Wu killed him.

古文：由此观之，在德不在险。
现代文：由此看来，政权稳固在于给百姓施以恩德，不在于地理形势的险要。
English: From this point of view, the stability of the regime lies in extending grace to the people, not in the perilousness of the geographical situation.

古文：若君不修德，舟中之人尽为敌国也。 武侯曰： 善。 
现代文：如果您不施恩德，即便同乘一条船的人也会变成您的仇敌啊！ 武侯回答说： 讲的好。 
English: If you do not show kindness, even the people in the same boat will turn into your enemies! Wuhou replied, "That's good to hear.

古文：吴起为西河守，甚有声名。
现代文：吴起做西河守，取得了很高的声望。
English: Wu Qi became the governor of the West River and gained a high reputation.

古文：魏置相，相田文。
现代文：魏国设置了相位，任命田文做国相。
English: Wei set the stage by appointing Tianwen as minister of state.

古文：吴起不悦，谓田文曰： 请与子论功，可乎？ 
现代文：吴起很不高兴，对田文说： 请让我与您比一比功劳，可以吗？ 
English: Wu Qi was very unhappy and said to Tian Wen, "Please let me compare my merits with yours, is that okay?

古文：田文曰： 可。 
现代文：田文说： 可以。 
English: Tian Wen said: Yes.

古文：起曰： 将三军，使士卒乐死，敌国不敢谋，子孰与起？ 
现代文：吴起说： 统率三军，让士兵乐意为国去死战，敌国不敢图谋魏国，您和我比，谁好？ 
English: Wu Qi said, "Take command of the three armies, let the soldiers be willing to fight to the death for the country, the enemy country will not dare to plot against Wei. Who is better than you and me?

古文：文曰： 不如子。 
现代文：田文说： 不如您。 
English: Tian Wen said: Not as good as you.

古文：起曰： 治百官，亲万民，实府库，子孰与起？ 
现代文：吴起说： 管理文武百官，让百姓亲附，充实府库的储备，您和我比，谁行？ 
English: Wu Qi said, "Managing hundreds of civil and military officials, letting the people be close to them, and enriching the reserves of the prefectural treasury. Compared to you and me, who can do it?

古文：文曰： 不如子。 
现代文：田文说： 不如您。 
English: Tian Wen said: Not as good as you.

古文：起曰： 守西河而秦兵不敢东乡，韩赵宾从，子孰与起？ 
现代文：吴起说： 拒守西河而秦国的军队不敢向东侵犯，韩国、赵国服从归顺，您和我比，谁能？ 
English: Wu Qi said, "If you refuse to defend the West River and the army of Qin dare not invade the east, Korea and Zhao will submit to you. If you and I compare, who can?

古文：文曰： 不如子。 
现代文：田文说： 不如您。 
English: Tian Wen said: Not as good as you.

古文：起曰： 此三者，子皆出吾下，而位加吾上，何也？ 
现代文：吴起说： 这几方面您都不如我，可是您的职位却在我之上，是什么道理呢？ 
English: Wu Qi said: You are not as good as me in these aspects, but your position is above me. What is the reason?

古文：文曰： 主少国疑，大臣未附，百姓不信，方是之时，属之於子乎？
现代文：田文说： 魏君还年轻，国人疑虑不安，大臣不亲附，百姓不信任，正当处在这个时候，是把政事托付给您呢，还是应当托付给我？ 
English: Tian Wen said: Wei Jun is still young, the Chinese people are full of doubts and uneasiness, the ministers are not close, and the people do not trust each other. At this time, is it right to entrust the political affairs to you, or should they be entrusted to me?

古文：属之於我乎？ 起默然良久，曰： 属之子矣。 
现代文：吴起沉默了许久，然后说： 应该托付给您啊。 
English: Wu Qi was silent for a long time, and then said: It should be entrusted to you.

古文：文曰： 此乃吾所以居子之上也。 
现代文：田文说： 这就是我的职位比您高的原因啊。 
English: Tian Wen said: That's why my position is higher than yours.

古文：吴起乃自知弗如田文。
现代文：吴起这才明白在这方面不如田文。
English: It was only then that Wu Qi understood that he was not as good as Tianwen in this respect.

古文：田文既死，公叔为相，尚魏公主，而害吴起。
现代文：田文死后，公叔出任国相，娶了魏君的女儿，却畏忌吴起。
English: After Tianwen's death, his uncle became the minister of state and married Wei Jun's daughter, but he was afraid of Wu Qi.

古文：公叔之仆曰： 起易去也。 
现代文：公叔的仆人说： 吴起是不难赶走的。 
English: My uncle's servant said, "It is not difficult to drive Wu Qi away.

古文：公叔曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：公叔问： 怎么办？ 
English: Uncle asked: What should we do?

古文：其仆曰： 吴起为人节廉而自喜名也。
现代文：那个仆人说： 吴起为人有骨气而又喜好名誉、声望。
English: The servant said, "Wu Qi is a man of backbone and likes honor and reputation.

古文：君因先与武侯言曰： 夫吴起贤人也，而侯之国小，又与彊秦壤界，臣窃恐起之无留心也。 
现代文：您可找机会先对武侯说： 吴起是个贤能的人，而您的国土太小了，又和强大的秦国接壤，我私下担心吴起没有长期留在魏国的打算。 
English: You can find an opportunity to say to Wuhou first: Wu Qi is a capable person, and your land is too small, and it borders the powerful Qin State. I am privately worried that Wu Qi does not plan to stay in Wei for a long time.

古文：武侯即曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：武侯就会说： 那可怎么办呢？ 
English: Wuhou would say, "Then what should we do?"

古文：君因谓武侯曰： 试延以公主，起有留心则必受之。无留心则必辞矣。
现代文：您就趁机对武侯说： 请用下嫁公主的办法试探他，如果吴起有长期留在魏国的心意，就一定会答应娶公主，如果没有长期留下来的心意，就一定会推辞。
English: You took the opportunity to say to Wuhong: Please use the method of marrying the princess to test him. If Wu Qi has the intention of staying in Wei for a long time, he will definitely agree to marry the princess. If he does not have the intention of staying for a long time, he will definitely refuse.

古文：以此卜之。 
现代文：用这个办法能推断他的心志。 
English: Using this method, we can deduce his intentions.

古文：君因召吴起而与归，即令公主怒而轻君。吴起见公主之贱君也，则必辞。 
现代文：您找个机会请吴起一道回家，故意让公主发怒而当面鄙视您，吴起见公主这样蔑视您，那就一定不会娶公主了。 
English: If you find an opportunity to invite Wu Qi to go home with you and deliberately make the princess angry and despise you in person, and if Wu Qi sees the princess despise you in this way, then he will definitely not marry the princess.

古文：於是吴起见公主之贱魏相，果辞魏武侯。
现代文：当时，吴起见到公主如此地蔑视国相，果然婉言谢绝了魏武侯。
English: At that time, Wu Qi saw that the princess was so contemptuous of the minister of state, and he actually politely declined Wei Wuhou.

古文：武侯疑之而弗信也。
现代文：武侯怀疑吴起，也就不再信任他。
English: Wuhou suspected Wuqi and no longer trusted him.

古文：吴起惧得罪，遂去，即之楚。
现代文：吴起怕招来灾祸，于是离开魏国，随即就到楚国去了。
English: Wu Qi was afraid of bringing disaster, so he left Wei and immediately went to Chu.

古文：楚悼王素闻起贤，至则相楚。
现代文：楚悼王一向就听说吴起贤能，刚到楚国就任命他为国相。
English: King Chu Wei had always heard of Wu Qianneng, and appointed him as minister of state as soon as he arrived in Chu.

古文：明法审令，捐不急之官，废公族疏远者，以抚养战斗之士。
现代文：他使法明确，依法办事，令出必行，淘汰并裁减无关紧要的冗员，停止疏远王族的按例供给，来抚养战土。
English: He made the law clear, acted in accordance with the law, made the order necessary, eliminated and reduced unnecessary redundant personnel, and stopped the alienation of the royal family's regular supply to raise the battlefield.

古文：要在彊兵，破驰说之言从横者。
现代文：致力于加强军事力量，揭穿往来奔走的游说之客。
English: He is committed to strengthening the military and debunking the lobbyists who come and go.

古文：於是南平百越；北并陈蔡，卻三晋；西伐秦。
现代文：于是向南平定了百越；向北吞并了陈国和蔡国，打退韩、赵、魏三国的进攻；向西又讨伐了秦国。
English: As a result, he pacified Baekdu to the south, annexed Chen and Cai to the north, and repelled the attacks of Han, Zhao, and Wei to the west; he also fought against Qin to the west.

古文：诸侯患楚之彊。
现代文：诸侯各国对楚国的强大感到忧虑。
English: Princely states were worried about the power of the State of Chu.

古文：故楚之贵戚尽欲害吴起。
现代文：以往被吴起停止供给的疏远王族都想谋害吴起。
English: In the past, the estranged royal family, which had been cut off from supplies by Wuqi, tried to assassinate Wuqi.

古文：及悼王死，宗室大臣作乱而攻吴起，吴起走之王尸而伏之。
现代文：等悼公一死，王室大臣发动骚乱，攻打吴起，吴起逃到楚王停尸的地方，附伏在悼王的尸体上。
English: After the king's death, the minister of the royal court launched a riot and attacked Wu Qi. Wu Qi fled to the place where King Chu's body was buried and attached himself to the king's corpse.

古文：击起之徒因射刺吴起，并中悼王。
现代文：攻打吴起的那帮人趁机用箭射吴起，同时也射中了悼王的尸体。
English: The gang that attacked Wuqi took the opportunity to shoot Wuqi with arrows, and at the same time shot the corpse of the mourning king.

古文：悼王既葬，太子立，乃使令尹尽诛射吴起而并中王尸者。坐射起而夷宗死者七十馀家。
现代文：等把悼王安葬停当后，太子即位。就让令尹把射杀吴起同时射中悼王尸体的人，全部处死，由于射杀吴起而被灭族的有七十多家。
English: After Wang An's funeral was stopped, the crown prince ascended to the throne. He ordered Yin Tuo to shoot Wu Qi and to execute all those who shot Wang An's corpse. More than seventy people were exterminated for shooting Wu Qi.

古文：太史公曰：世俗所称师旅，皆道孙子十三篇，吴起兵法，世多有，故弗论，论其行事所施设者。
现代文：太史公说：社会上称道军旅战法的人，无不称道《孙子》十三篇和吴起的《兵法》，这两部书，社会上流传很广，所以我不加论述，只评论他们生平行事所涉及到的情况。
English: Tai Shikong said: The people in the society who praised Sun Tzu's "The Art of War" are the same people who praised Sun Tzu's "The Thirteenth Chapter" and Wu Zhi's "The Art of War." These two books have been widely circulated in the society, so I will not discuss them, but only comment on the situations involved in their lives.

古文：语曰： 能行之者未必能言，能言之者未必能行。 
现代文：俗话说： 能做的人未必能说，能说的人未必能做。 
English: As the saying goes: Those who can do may not be able to say, and those who can say may not be able to do.

古文：孙子筹策庞涓明矣，然不能蚤救患於被刑。
现代文：孙膑算计庞涓的军事行动是英明的，但是他自己却不能预先避免刖足的酷刑。
English: Sun Yat-sen's calculated military action was wise, but he himself could not avoid the torture of limping in advance.

古文：吴起说武侯以形势不如德，然行之於楚，以刻暴少恩亡其躯。
现代文：吴起向魏武侯讲凭借地理形势的险要，不如给人民施以恩德的道理，然而一到楚国执政却因为刻薄、暴戾、少恩葬送了自己的生命。
English: Wu Qi told Wei Wuhou that it was better to show grace to the people than to take advantage of the perilous geographical situation. However, once he came to power in Chu, he lost his life because of his meanness, violence, and lack of grace.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可叹啊！
English: How sad!

