古文：黄帝问曰：厥之寒热者何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：厥证有寒有热，是怎样形成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "If there is cold and heat, how was it formed?"

古文：岐伯对曰：阳气衰于下则为寒厥，阴气衰于下则为热厥。
现代文：岐伯答道：阳气从人体下部开始衰竭就发病为 寒厥 ，阴气从人体下部开始衰竭就发病为 热厥 。
English: Qi Bo replied: The yang qi begins to fail from the lower part of the human body and the onset is cold, and the yin qi begins to fail from the lower part of the human body and the onset is heat.

古文：帝曰：热厥之为热也，必起于足下者，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：热厥证的发热，一般从足底开始，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: The heat of heatstroke usually starts from the soles of the feet. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：阳气起于足五趾之表，阴脉者，集于足下而聚于足心，故阳气胜则足下热也。
现代文：岐伯答道：阳经之气循行于足五趾的外侧端，汇集于足底而聚汇到足心，所以若阴经之气衰竭于下而阳经之气偏胜，就会导致足底发热。
English: Qi Bo replied: the qi of the yang meridian runs along the outer end of the foot five toes, gathers at the bottom of the foot and converges to the center of the foot, so if the qi of the yin meridian is exhausted at the bottom and the qi of the yang meridian is superior, it will lead to heat on the sole of the foot.

古文：帝曰：寒厥之为寒也，必从五趾而上于膝者，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：寒厥证的感觉寒冷，一般从足五趾渐至膝部，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: the feeling of cold symptoms is cold, generally from the toes to the knees, what is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：阴气起于五趾之里，集于膝下而聚于膝上，故阴气胜则从五趾至膝上寒，其寒也，不从外，皆从内也。
现代文：岐伯答道：阴经之气起于足五趾的内侧端，汇集于膝下后，上聚于膝部。所以若阳经之气衰竭于下而阴经之气偏胜，就会导致从足五趾至膝部的厥冷，这种厥冷，不是由于外寒的侵入，而是由于体内的阳虚所致。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The qi of the yin meridian originates from the medial end of the fifth toe, gathers under the knee, and condenses on the knee. Therefore, if the qi of the yang meridian is exhausted at the bottom and the qi of the yin meridian is superior, it will cause coldness from the fifth toe to the knee. This coldness is not caused by the invasion of external cold, but by the yang deficiency in the body.

古文：帝曰：寒厥何失而然也？
现代文：黄帝问道：寒厥证是损耗了何种精气而形成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What kind of essence was lost to form Kangjuejie?

古文：岐伯曰：前阴者，宗筋之所聚，太阴、阳明之所合也。
现代文：岐伯说：前阴是许多经脉聚汇之处，也是足太阴脾经和足阳明胃经脉汇合之处。
English: Qi Bo said: The anterior yin is the place where many meridians converge, and it is also the place where the foot yin spleen meridian and foot yang bright stomach meridians converge.

古文：春夏则阳气多而阴气少，秋冬则阴气胜而阳气衰。
现代文：一般来说，人体在春夏季节是阳气偏多而阴气偏少，秋冬季节是阴气偏盛而阳气偏衰。
English: Generally speaking, the human body is more yang and less yin in spring and summer, and more yin and less yang in autumn and winter.

古文：此人者质壮，以秋冬夺于所用，下气上争，不能复，精气溢下，邪气因从之而上也。
现代文：患有寒厥证的人，是因为自恃体质强壮，在秋冬阳气偏衰的季节纵欲过度使肾中精气耗损，导致肾向脾胃争夺精气，即使这样也不能使肾精恢复，肾失于固摄造成精气向下溢出，阴寒邪气就从足向上逆行。
English: People with cold symptoms are strong because of their strong constitution. In the autumn and winter yang qi decline season, excessive indulgence causes the loss of essence in the kidney, causing the kidney to compete for essence with the spleen and stomach. Even this cannot restore the kidney essence. The kidney is lost to fixation, causing the essence to overflow downwards. The cold evil spirit travels backwards from the feet upwards.

古文：气因于中，阳气衰，不能渗营其经络，阳气日损，阴气独在，故手足为之寒也。
现代文：阴寒之邪气停聚于中焦，使胃的阳气虚衰，不能化生水谷营养经络，以致阳气日益亏损，阴寒之邪气独胜于内，所以手足感觉寒冷。
English: The evil qi of the cold stagnates in the mid-core, causing the yang qi of the stomach to wane, unable to transform into the nutrient meridians of the trough, resulting in an increasing loss of yang qi, and the evil qi of the cold is superior to the inside, so the hands and feet feel cold.

古文：帝曰：热厥何如而然也？
现代文：黄帝问道：热厥证是怎样形成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "How did the fever certificate come into being?"

古文：岐伯曰：酒入于胃，则络脉满而经脉虚，脾主为胃行其津液者也。
现代文：岐伯答道：酒入于胃，所以使络脉中血液充满，而体内经脉反而空虚。
English: Qi Bo replied: The wine enters the stomach, so the blood in the vas deferens is filled, but the internal meridians are empty.

古文：阴气虚则阳气入，阳气入则胃不和，胃不和则精气竭，精气竭则不营其四肢也。
现代文：脾的功能是主管输送胃中的津液营养，脾无所输送则阴津亏虚，阴津亏虚使剽悍的酒热之气乘虚入扰于内，则导致胃气不和，胃气不和则阴精化生无源而枯竭，阴精枯竭就不能营养四肢。
English: The function of the spleen is to be in charge of transporting the nutrient solution in the stomach. If the spleen has nothing to transport, then the yin is deficient. If the yin is deficient, and the vigorous wine-heat gas is disturbed by the void, it will lead to gastric gas discord. If the gastric gas is discordant, the yin essence will become inactive and exhausted. If the yin essence is exhausted, it will not be able to nourish the limbs.

古文：此人必数醉，若饱以入房，气聚于脾中不得散，酒气与谷气相薄，热盛于中，故热遍于身，内热而溺赤也。
现代文：这种人必然是经常酒醉或者饱食太过之后行房纵欲，致使酒食之气郁居于脾中不得宣散，酒气与谷气相搏结酝酿成热，热盛于中焦，进而波及周身，因有内热而小便色赤。
English: This kind of person is bound to be often drunk or indulge in sexual intercourse after eating too much, causing the alcohol and food gas to reside in the spleen and not be able to be dissipated, the alcohol and grain gas to fight each other and brew into heat, the heat is concentrated in the mid-core, and then spreads around the body, and the urine is red due to internal heat.

古文：夫酒气盛而慓悍，肾气有衰，阳气独胜，故手足为之热也。
现代文：酒性是剽悍浓烈的，肾的精气必受其损伤而日益虚衰，形成阳气独盛于内的局面，所以手足发热。
English: Liquor is strong and powerful, and the essence of the kidney will be damaged and increasingly weak, forming a situation in which yang is predominant, so the hands and feet are hot.

古文：帝曰：厥，或令人腹满，或令人暴不知人，或至半日远至一日，乃知人者，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：厥证有的使人腹部胀满，有的使人猝然不知人事，或者半天，甚至长达一天时间才能苏醒，这是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What is the reason why some illnesses make a person's abdomen swell up, while others make a person suddenly unconscious, or take half a day or even a whole day to wake up?

古文：岐伯曰：阴气盛于上则下虚，下虚则腹胀满；阳气盛于上，则下气重上而邪气逆，逆则阳气乱，阳气乱则不知人也。
现代文：岐伯答道：阴气偏盛在上部，就会使阳气虚衰在下部，阳气下虚则使水谷不化而引起腹部胀满；阳气偏盛在上部，就会使下部的阴气向上逆行，邪气上逆造成阳气紊乱，导致突然不省人事。
English: Qi Bo replied, "If the yin gas prevails in the upper part, it will cause the yang gas to decline in the lower part. If the yang gas prevails, it will cause the water valley to remain unchanged and cause the abdomen to swell. If the yang gas prevails in the upper part, it will cause the yin gas in the lower part to retrograde upward. If the evil gas prevails, it will cause the yang gas disorder, resulting in sudden unconsciousness.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：愿闻六经脉之厥状病能也。
现代文：希望听听六经厥证的病态表现。
English: I would like to hear about the pathological manifestations of the six signs of the zodiac.

古文：岐伯曰：巨阳之厥，则肿首头重，足不能行，发为眴仆。
现代文：岐伯说：足太阳膀胱经发生厥证，上为头部肿胀沉重，下为两足不能行走，发作时眩晕昏扑。
English: Qi Bo said: foot sun bladder after the occurrence of convulsions, the top is the head swelling heavy, the bottom is the two feet can not walk, dizzy fainting when the attack.

古文：阳明之厥，则癫疾欲走呼，腹满不得卧，面赤而热，妄见而妄言。
现代文：足阳明胃经发生厥证，可出现癫疾，奔跑呼叫，腹部胀满不得安卧，面部赤热，神志模糊，出现幻觉，胡言乱语。
English: Foot Yang Ming stomach after the occurrence of convulsions, can appear epilepsy, running call, abdominal distension can not lie down, red-hot face, mental fogginess, hallucinations, gibberish.

古文：少阳之厥，则暴聋颊肿而热，胁痛，䯒不可以运。
现代文：足少阳胆经发生厥证，可见到突然性耳聋，面颊肿而发热，两胁疼痛，小腿不能运动。
English: Sudden deafness, swollen and hot cheeks, pain in both sides of the body, and inability to move the lower legs can be seen.

古文：太阴之厥，则腹满䐜胀，后不利，不欲食，食则呕，不得卧。
现代文：足太阴脾经发生厥证，可见到腹部胀满，大便不爽，不思饮食，食则呕吐，不能安卧。
English: Foot is too yin and spleen is too yang, can see the abdomen is swollen, stool is not good, do not think about diet, food is vomit, can not lie down.

古文：少阴之厥，则口干溺赤，腹满心痛。
现代文：足少阴肾经发生厥证，可出现口干，小便色赤，腹胀满，心痛。
English: Foot, leg, kidney and pharynx symptoms may occur, including dry mouth, red urine, bloated abdomen and heartache.

古文：厥阴之厥，则少腹肿痛，腹胀，泾溲不利，好卧屈膝，阴缩肿，䯒内热。
现代文：足厥阴肝经发生厥证，可见到小腹肿痛，腹胀满，大小便不利，喜欢采取屈膝的体位睡卧，阴囊萎缩而肿，小腿内侧发热。
English: Foot, anus, and liver symptoms occur, with swelling of the lower abdomen, fullness of the abdomen, unfavorable urine and feces, a preference for sleeping in a bent-knee position, an atrophied and swollen scrotum, and fever on the inside of the lower leg.

古文：盛则泻之，虚则补之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：厥证的治则是：实证用泻法，虚症用补法，不实不虚的，取发病经脉的穴位。
English: The treatment of symptoms is: laxative for positive symptoms, tonic for false symptoms, non-truthful for true symptoms, and acupoints for the affected meridians.

古文：太阴厥逆，䯒急挛，心痛引腹，治主病者。
现代文：足太阴脾经发生厥逆，则小腿拘挛，心痛连及腹部，当取发病的本经腧穴治疗。
English: If the foot is too yin and the spleen is retrograde, the calf will be cramped, the heart will be in pain, and the abdomen will be in pain. When the disease occurs, it should be treated by the anus.

古文：少阴厥逆，虚满呕变，下泄清，治主病者。
现代文：足少阴肾经发生厥逆，则腹部虚满、呕逆、下泄清水，当取发病的本经腧穴治疗。
English: If the feet are small and the kidneys are weak, the abdomen will be full, vomit, and leak clear water, so it is necessary to treat the disease through the anus.

古文：厥阴厥逆，挛腰痛，虚满，前闭，谵言，治主病者。
现代文：足厥阴肝经发生厥逆，则筋挛、腰痛，小便不通，胡言乱语，要治它主病之经。
English: If the foot, anus, and liver meridians are retrograde, then muscle cramps, low back pain, urinary incontinence, and gibberish will occur. It is necessary to treat the main disease.

古文：三阴俱逆，不得前后，使人手足寒，三日死。
现代文：如太阴、少阴、厥阴同时厥逆，人会大小便不通，且手足逆冷，上至肘膝，三天后人就会死亡。
English: If the sun is too hot, too cold and too cold at the same time, the person will not be able to urinate and defecate, and the hands and feet will be cold, up to the elbows and knees, and the person will die after three days.

古文：太阳厥逆，僵仆，呕血，善衄，治主病者。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经发生厥逆，身体僵直跌倒，呕血，容易鼻出血，当取发病的本经腧穴治疗。
English: The solar plexus of the foot occurs retrograde, the body falls stiffly, vomiting blood, easy to nosebleed, and when the disease occurs, it is treated by the anus.

古文：少阳厥逆，机关不利，机关不利者，腰不可以行，项不可以顾，发肠痈不可治，惊者死。
现代文：足少阳胆经发生厥逆，关节活动不灵，关节不利，腰部不能活动，颈项不能回顾，如果伴发肠痈者为不可治的危证，如若再发惊厥就会死亡。
English: Shaoyang gallbladder through the occurrence of retrograde, joint inactivity, joint unfavorable, the waist can not move, the neck can not look back, if accompanied by intestinal cramps are incurable danger signs, such as recurrent convulsions will die.

古文：阳明厥逆，喘咳，身热，善惊，衄，呕血。
现代文：足阳明胃经发生厥逆，喘促咳嗽，身发热，容易惊骇，鼻出血，呕血。
English: Foot sun, bright stomach, retrograde, wheezing cough, body fever, easily startled, nosebleed, vomiting blood.

古文：手太阴厥逆，虚满而咳，善呕沫，治主病者。
现代文：手太阴肺经发生厥逆，胸中虚满而咳嗽，常常呕吐涎沫，当取发病的本经腧穴治疗。
English: The hand is too yin and the lungs are retrograde, the chest is full and coughing, often vomiting foam, and when the disease occurs, it is treated through the hernia.

古文：手心主、少阴厥逆，心痛引喉，身热死，不可治。
现代文：手厥阴心包经和手少阴心经发生厥逆，心痛连及咽喉，如果出现身体发热者死，不可治。
English: Hand-jue-yin-heart-wrapping and hand-shao-yin-heart-wrapping are reversible, heartache is connected to the throat, and if there is a fever, the person will die and cannot be cured.

古文：手太阳厥逆，耳聋，泣出，项不可以顾，腰不可以俛仰，治主病者。
现代文：手太阳小肠经发生厥逆，耳聋，流泪，颈项不能回顾，腰不能前后俯仰，当取发病的本经腧穴治疗。
English: Hand and small intestine retrograde, deafness, tears, neck can not look back, waist can not be tilted back and forth, when the onset of the disease through the hernia treatment.

古文：手阳明、少阳厥逆，发喉痹，嗌肿痓，治主病者。
现代文：手阳明大肠经和手少阳三焦经发生厥逆，发为喉部痹塞，咽部肿痛，颈项强直，当取发病的本经腧穴治疗。
English: Hand yangming large intestine meridian and hand shaoyang three-focal meridian occurred retrograde, resulting in laryngeal obstruction, pharyngeal swelling, neck stiffness, and treatment of the main meridian acupoint.

