古文：马衍子豹建武末，上疏自陈曰：臣伏念高祖之略而陈平之谋，毁之则疏，誉之则亲。
现代文：建武末年,冯衍上疏自诉说:臣思高祖的雄才大略及陈平的智谋,如果听取毁谤,则陈平就会被疏远,听取赞誉,陈平就为高祖所亲近。
English: At the end of the Jianwu period, Feng Yan Shangzo said to himself: "I think of Gaozu's great talent and Chen Ping's wisdom. If I listen to slander, Chen Ping will be alienated. If I listen to praise, Chen Ping will be close to Gaozu."

古文：以文帝以明而魏尚之忠，绳之以法则为罪，施之以德则为功。
现代文：以文帝之英明和魏尚之忠诚,绳之以法就成了罪犯,施之以德则成为功臣。
English: With the wisdom of Emperor Wen and the loyalty of Wei Shang, he became a criminal when he was brought to justice, and he became a meritorious subject when he practiced virtue.

古文：逮至晚世，董仲舒言道德，见妒于公孙弘，李广奋节于匈奴，见排于卫青，此忠臣之常所为流涕也。
现代文：到了晚世,董仲舒讲求道德,被公孙弘嫉妒;李广奋节以抗匈奴,却被卫青排斥,这都是忠臣时常为之痛哭流涕的悲剧哩。
English: In his later years, Dong Zhongshu preached morality and was envied by Gongsun Hong; Li Guangteng fought against the Xiongnu but was ostracized by Wei Qing. These are all tragedies for which loyalists often weep bitterly.

古文：臣衍自惟微贱之臣，上无无知之荐，下无冯唐之说，乏董生之才，寡李广之势，而欲免谗口，济怨嫌，岂不难哉！
现代文：我冯衍自思不过是微贱之臣,上面没有魏无知的推荐,下面没有冯唐的劝说,缺乏董仲舒的才学,又没有李广的声势,而想免于谗口,逃过怨嫌,难道不困难吗!
English: I, Feng Yan, consider myself to be nothing more than a lowly vassal. Above me there is no recommendation from Wei the Ignorant, below me there is no persuasion from Feng Tang, I lack the talent and learning of Dong Zhongshu, and I do not have the influence of Li Guang. But if I want to be free from gossip and resentment, isn't it difficult?

古文：臣衍之先祖，以忠贞之故，成私门之祸。
现代文：臣冯衍的先祖冯参,因忠贞不屈,竟酿成私门之祸。
English: Feng Yan's ancestor Feng San, because of his loyalty and indomitability, actually brought about the misfortune of his own family.

古文：而臣衍复遭扰攘之时，值兵革之际，不敢回行求时之利，事君无倾邪之谋，将帅无虏掠之心。
现代文：而臣冯衍又逢扰攘之时,值兵革之际,不敢苟求时会之利,侍君没有倾邪之私谋,将帅没有虏掠之心计。
English: However, the vassal Feng Yan did not dare to ask for the benefit of the meeting when there was a disturbance or when he was on duty. The attendant did not have a sinister plot, and the general did not have the heart to plunder.

古文：卫尉阴兴，敬慎周密，内自修敕，外远嫌疑，故敢与交通。
现代文：卫尉阴兴,敬慎周密,对内能自加修养整饬,对外能远避嫌疑,所以我才敢与他交往。
English: The guard is dark-skinned, cautious and meticulous. He can cultivate and rectify himself internally, and can avoid suspicion externally, so I dare to associate with him.

古文：兴知臣之贫，数欲本业之。
现代文：阴兴知道我贫苦,几次想遗财为我立基本生业。
English: Yin Xing knew that I was poor, and several times he wanted to leave money for me to establish a basic livelihood.

古文：臣自惟无三益之才，不敢处三损之地，固让而不受之，昔在更始，太原执货财之柄，居苍卒之间，据位食禄二十余年，而财产岁狭，居处日贫，家无布帛之积，出无舆马之饰。
现代文：臣自思自己无 益者三友 之才,不敢处于 损者三友 之地,坚决辞而不受。以前在更始时期,屯兵太原执有货财的权柄,居仓卒之间,据位食禄二十余年,而财产一年比一年减少,日子一天比一天贫困,家中无布帛之积蓄,出门无舆马之装饰。
English: The minister thought that he was no better than the three friends who did not benefit, and did not dare to be in the place of the three friends who lost, and resolutely refused to accept it. Previously, in the beginning of the new era, the Taiyuan garrison held the power of goods and wealth, and there were more than 20 years of food and income between the prisoners, but the property decreased year by year, the days became poorer day by day, there was no savings of cloth at home, and there was no decoration of horses when going out.

古文：于今遭清明之时，饬躬力行之秋，而怨仇丛兴，讥议横世。
现代文：现在遇到清明的时期,整饬自身力行善道之秋,而怨仇丛兴,讥议横流人世。
English: Now that we are experiencing a period of clarity, it is the autumn of rectifying ourselves and doing good deeds, while grudges are rife and ridicule is rampant.

古文：盖富贵易为善，贫贱难为工也。
现代文：真是富贵容易为善,贫贱难以为工啊。
English: It is easy for the rich to do good, but it is difficult for the poor to work.

古文：疏远垅亩之臣，无望高阙之下，惶恐自陈，以救罪尤。
现代文：疏远垅亩之臣,无望奉职阙庭之下,只是惶恐自陈,以求解救我的罪过。
English: An estranged vassal, hopelessly under the yoke of the court, only panicked to confess, in order to relieve my guilt.

古文：书奏，犹以前过不用。
现代文：书奏上后,还是因以前的过失而不使用。
English: After the book was played, it was still not used because of previous mistakes.

古文：衍不得志，退而作贼，又自论曰：冯子以为夫人之德，不碌碌如玉，落落如石。
现代文：冯衍不得志,退而作赋,又自评论说:冯子以为人的德行,既不像玉貌碌碌,也不像石形落落。
English: Feng Yan was discouraged and retreated to make fu, and commented: Feng Zi believed that people's virtues are neither like jade, nor like stone.

古文：风兴云蒸，一龙一蛇，与道翱翔，与时变化，夫岂守一节哉？
现代文：风云兴起,一龙一蛇,与道一起翱翔,与时共相变化,岂能拘守一种法度呢?
English: When a storm arises, a dragon and a snake, soaring together with the Tao, changing with the times, can they adhere to one kind of law?

古文：用之则行，舍之则臧，进退无主，屈申无常。
现代文：用之则流行,舍之则隐避,进退无主,屈申无常。
English: To use is to be popular, to renounce is to avoid, to advance and retreat is to have no master, and to yield is to be impermanent.

古文：故曰： 有法无法，因时为业，有度无度，与物趣舍。 
现代文：所以说 :法度是非,都随时俗,物所趋则法度随之,物所舍则法度违之。 
English: Therefore, it is said that the law is right and wrong, it is always vulgar, the law is followed by the trend of things, and the law is violated when things are abandoned.

古文：常务道德之实，而不求当世之名，阔略杪小之礼，荡佚人间之事。
现代文：经常追求道德之实,而不追求当世之名,摆脱微小的礼节,放荡纵逸人间的事情。
English: Always pursue the truth of morality, and do not pursue the name of the world, get rid of minor etiquette, indulge in debauchery and indulge in human affairs.

古文：正身直行，恬然肆志。
现代文：修身走正道,安闲纵情快意。
English: Practice self-cultivation and walk the right path, indulge in leisure and pleasure.

古文：顾尝好俶傥之策，时莫能听用其谋，喟然长叹，自伤不遭。
现代文：曾经喜好卓异的策略,而时代却不能用谋略,喟然长叹,自己哀其不遇。
English: I used to like extraordinary strategies, but the times can't use strategies, I sighed, and I couldn't meet them.

古文：久栖迟于小官，不得舒其所怀。
现代文：长期栖迟于小官,不能展其怀抱。
English: Long-term residence lags behind minor officials, unable to extend its embrace.

古文：抑心折节，意凄情悲。
现代文：抑制心情屈己下人,意气凄凉情绪悲痛。
English: Suppressing the mood of giving in to subordinates, the spirit is bleak and the mood is sad.

古文：夫伐冰之家，不利鸡豚之息；委积之臣，不操市井之利。
现代文：那高官厚禄之家,是不求鸡豚小利的;积聚之臣,是不操商贾之利的。
English: That high-ranking and well-to-do family does not seek petty profit; accumulating vassals do not seek to make a profit.

古文：况历位食禄二十余年，而财产益狭，居处益贫。
现代文：何况是在位食禄二十多年,而财产越来越少,生活越来越贫困。
English: What's more, they have been living on the breadline for more than 20 years, while their property has become less and less, and their lives have become more and more impoverished.

古文：惟夫君子之仕，行其道也。
现代文：这是君子在位,行其道哩。
English: This is a gentleman on the throne, going his own way.

古文：虑时务者不能兴其德，为身求者不能成其功，去而归家，复羁旅于州郡，身愈据职，家弥穷困，卒离饥寒之灾，有丧元子之祸。
现代文：谋划时务的不能兴盛其德,为己身求利的不能成就其功。去而归家,又游荡寄居于州郡,一身更依赖于职事,家庭更加穷困,于是遭逢饥寒的灾难,有长子罹丧之祸。
English: Those who plan the current affairs cannot prosper their virtue, and those who seek profit for themselves cannot achieve their merit. They go and return home, but also wander and live in the state and county, and their bodies are more dependent on their jobs, and their families are more impoverished. As a result, they suffer from the disaster of hunger and cold, and have the misfortune of losing their eldest son.

古文：先将军葬渭陵，哀帝之崩也，营之以为园。
现代文：先将军冯奉世葬在渭陵,哀帝驾崩后,被划入哀帝义陵茔中。
English: The former general Feng Feng was buried in Fuling Mausoleum, and after the death of the Emperor, he was placed in the Yili Mausoleum.

古文：于是以新丰之东，鸿门之上，寿安之中，地势高敞，四通广大，南望郦山，北属泾渭，东瞰河华，龙门之阳，三晋之路，西顾酆鄗，周秦之丘，客观之墟，通视千里，览见旧都，遂定茔焉。
现代文：于是以新丰之东,鸿门之上,寿安之中,地势高而宽敞,四面相通广大,南望郦山,北属泾渭,东瞰河华,龙门之南,三晋之路,西顾酆高阝,周秦时期的土山,宫庭庙宇的废墟,视野广阔,可看见旧都,于是定为墓地。
English: Therefore, in the east of Xinfeng, above Hongmen, in the middle of Shouan, the terrain is high and spacious, and the four sides are wide, south of Lushan, north of Lushan, east of Hehua, south of Longmen, Sanjin Road, west of Guzheng, soil mountains in the Zhou-Qin period, ruins of palaces and temples, the view is broad, the old capital can be seen, so it is designated as a cemetery.

古文：退而幽居。
现代文：退下来幽居。
English: Retire into seclusion.

古文：盖忠臣过故墟而歔欷，孝子入旧室而哀叹。
现代文：忠臣们经过故墟时要欷哀叹,孝子进入旧室就悲伤叹息。
English: Loyal subjects should wail and lament when passing through the ruins, and filial sons and daughters should sigh with sadness when entering the old rooms.

古文：每念祖考，著盛德于前，垂鸿烈于后，遭时之祸，坟墓芜秽，春秋蒸尝，昭穆无列，年衰岁暮，悼无成功，将西田牧肥饶之野，殖生产，修孝道，营宗庙，广祭祀。
现代文：每念祖宗,树立盛德于前,垂大功业于后世,遭时局之祸,坟墓芜秽,春秋祭祀,父南子北排列紊乱。年老岁暮,哀悼功业不成,将向西面肥沃富饶的田野放牧,繁殖生产,修理孝道,经营宗庙,广开祭祀。
English: Every time the ancestors are remembered, they establish great virtues in the past and great achievements in the future, but they are plagued by the current situation, the graves are filthy, the spring and autumn sacrificial rites, the father and the son are disorganized. At the end of the year, mourning the failure of the work, they will graze the fertile and rich fields in the west, breed and produce, repair the filial piety, operate the ancestral temple, and widely open the sacrificial rites.

古文：然后阖门讲习道德，观览乎孔老之论，庶几乎松、乔之福，上陇阪，陟高冈，游精宇宙，流目八纮。
现代文：然后关门讲习道德,观览孔子老子的言论,也许可以享受赤松子和王子乔的洪福。登上陇阪,登上高冈,游精宇宙,极目天地之外。
English: Then close the door to study morality, watch the speech of Confucius, and perhaps enjoy the bountiful blessings of red pine and Prince Joe. Boarded Osaka, boarded Takaoka, travel the universe, beyond the extreme world.

古文：历观九州山川之体，追览上古得失之风，愍道陵迟，伤德分崩。
现代文：细看九州山川之体势,追溯上古得失之风气,悯道之陵迟,伤德之分崩离析。
English: Take a closer look at the shape of the mountains and rivers in Kyushu, trace back the ancient customs of gain and loss, the delay in the path of compassion, and the disintegration of morality.

古文：夫睹其终必原其始，故存其人而咏其道。
现代文：大凡看到其终必须考察其原始,所以存其人而咏其道。
English: The great ones see that they must eventually examine their originality, so they keep their own people and follow their own way.

古文：惟吾志之所庶兮，固与俗其不同；既俶傥而高引兮，愿观其从容。显宗即位，又多短衍以文过其实，遂废于家。
现代文：界正九州之野,往来五岳之山,隐隐约约有超越云霄的意境。于是作赋以自厉,命其篇曰《显志》,显志,就是说光明风化之情,昭彰玄妙之思哩。显宗即位,又有许多人说冯衍文过其实,于是废于家中。
English: The world is the Kyushu countryside, and the mountains of the five mountains are vaguely about to surpass the sky. Therefore, the work is endowed with self-effort, and its article is called "Hanzhi." Hanzhi, that is, the feeling of light and grace, highlights the mysterious thoughts. Hanzong ascended to the throne, and many people said that Feng Yanwen was too true, so he was abandoned at home.

古文：衍娶北地住氏女为妻，悍忌，不得畜媵妾，儿女常自操井臼，老竟逐之，遂埳壈于时。
现代文：冯衍娶北地任氏女为妻,强悍妒忌,不准冯衍养小老婆,儿女常汲水舂米操持家务,老了竟将其驱逐,于是坎坷穷困于一时。
English: Feng Yan married a daughter of a family in the North, and because of strong jealousy, Feng Yan was not allowed to raise a younger wife. His children often had to fetch water and make rice to do housework, and when they got old, they were expelled. As a result, they were very poor for a while.

古文：然有大志，不戚戚于贱贫。
现代文：然而心有大志,不忧愁于贫贱。
English: However, he is ambitious and does not worry about being poor.

古文：居常慷慨叹曰： 衍少事名贤，经历显位，怀金垂紫，揭节奉使，不求苟得，常有陵云之志。
现代文：在家曾慷慨叹道: 冯衍从小经明贤教导,经历过显要位置,掌过印绶,高举符节奉使,不求苟得,常有飞越云霄的志向。
English: At home, he once generously lamented: Feng Yan was taught by sages from an early age, experienced a prominent position, held the seal, held high the symbols, did not seek to obtain, and often had the ambition to fly over the clouds.

古文：三公之贵，千金之富，不得其愿，不概于怀。
现代文：三公的显贵,千金的巨富,不合于我的志愿,我是不屑于获得的。
English: The grandeur of the three dukes, the great wealth of thousands of dollars, is not in line with my will, I do not disdain to obtain.

古文：贫而不衰，贱而不恨，年虽疲曳，犹庶几名贤之风。
现代文：贫而不衰,贱而不恨,年龄虽已衰弱委顿,也要还保持着名贤的作风。
English: Poor but not decrepit, lowly but not hated, although the age has been weakened, it is still necessary to maintain the style of the great and the wise.

古文：修道德于幽冥之路，以终身名，为后世法。 
现代文：修养道德于临死之前,以完成自己的身名,为后世所效法。 
English: Cultivate morality before death, so as to complete one's name and be imitated by future generations.

古文：居贫年老，卒于家。
现代文：家居贫困年老,在家去世。
English: His family was poor and old, and he died at home.

古文：所著赋、诔、铭、说、《问交》、《德诰》、《慎情》、书记说、自序、官录说、策五十篇，肃宗甚重其文。
现代文：所著《赋》、《诔》、《铭》、《说》、《问交》、《德诰》、《慎情》、《书记说》、《自序》、《官录说》、《策》五十篇,肃宗很重视这些文章。
English: He wrote "Fu," "Shu," "Ming," "Saying," "Questioning," "Virtue," "Prudence," "Secretary," "Self-order," "Official Records," and "Strategy" - fifty articles, which Su Zong valued very much.

古文：子豹。
现代文：子冯豹。
English: The son of Feng Pan.

