古文：◎职官五
现代文：职官五
English: Officer Five

古文：○公侯伯驸马都尉附仪宾五军都督府京营京卫锦衣卫附旗手等卫南京守备南京五军都督府南京卫王府护卫附仪卫司总兵官留守司都司附行都司各卫各所宣慰司宣抚司安抚司招讨司长官司附蛮夷长官司军民府附土州土县
现代文：公侯伯驸马都尉附仪宾五军都督府京营京卫锦衣卫附旗手等卫南京守备南京五军都督府南京卫王府护卫附仪卫司总兵官留守司都司附行都司各卫各所宣慰司宣抚司安抚司招讨司长官司附蛮夷长官司军民府附土州土县
English: Prince Hokunma lieutenant with ceremony guest of the five armed forces governor of the capital Beijing battalion Beijing guardsmen clothed guards with flag bearer guarding Nanjing guarding Nanjing five armed forces governor of the capital Nanjing royal guards with ceremony guards general officer of the garrison with the capital with the capital with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces with the provinces

古文：公、侯、伯，凡三等，以封功臣及外戚，皆有流有世。
现代文：公、侯、伯，共三等，用来封赐给功臣及外戚，有的流动而不世袭的流官之职，有的世袭。
English: A total of three ranks, Kugyo, Hou, and Haku, were used to confer titles on meritorious vassals and their relatives. Some of these ranks were hereditary, while others were hereditary.

古文：功臣则给铁券，封号四等：佐太祖定天下者，曰开国辅运推诚；从成祖起兵，曰奉天靖难推诚；余曰奉天翊运推诚，曰奉天翊卫推诚。
现代文：功臣便发给铁券，封号有四等：辅佐太祖平定夭下的，称开国辅运推诚；跟随成祖起兵的，称奉天靖难推诚；其余的称为奉天翊运推诚、奉天翊卫推诚。
English: The meritorious vassals were given iron coupons, and the seal numbers were of four grades: those who assisted the great-great-grandfather in pacifying the country were said to have assisted in the movement to open the country; those who followed the great-great-grandfather in raising an army were said to have assisted in the movement to pacify the country; the rest were said to have assisted in the movement to win the war; and the rest were said to have assisted in the movement to win the war.

古文：武臣曰宣力武臣，文臣曰守正文臣。
现代文：武臣为宣力武臣，文臣为守正文臣。
English: The samurai vassals were called senriki vassals, and the civilian vassals were called kami shosei vassals.

古文：岁禄以功为差。
现代文：每年俸禄按功劳大小有差别。
English: The annual salary varies according to the amount of merit.

古文：已封而又有功，仍爵或进爵，增禄。
现代文：已受封赐而又再立功，仍领原爵或进爵，增加俸梂。
English: Those who have been awarded the title of nobility and have rendered meritorious service again shall still be awarded the title of nobility or knighthood, and their salaries shall be increased.

古文：其才而贤者，充京营总督，五军都督府掌佥书，南京守备，或出充镇守总兵官，否则食禄奉朝请而已。
现代文：那些有才干并且贤能的，充任京营总督，五军都督府掌余书，南京守备，或者出京担任镇守总兵官，否则领取俸禄陪侍上朝而已。
English: Those who are talented and capable will be appointed as the governor of the Beijing camp, the commander of the five military governorates, the guard of Nanjing, or the chief officer of the town guard in Beijing. Otherwise, they will only receive a salary to accompany the former emperor.

古文：年幼而嗣爵者，咸入国子监读书。
现代文：年幼就继承爵位的，都入国子监读书学习。
English: Heirs to the peerage at a young age, they all went to study under the tutelage of the state.

古文：嘉靖八年，定外戚封爵毋许世袭，其有世袭一二代者，出特恩。
现代文：嘉靖八年规定外戚封爵不允许世袭，那些有世袭一二代的，出自特别的恩赐。
English: In the 8th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, it was stipulated that it was not allowed for a maternal relative to inherit the title. Those with one or two generations of inheritance came from special gifts.

古文：驸马都尉，位在伯上。
现代文：驸马都尉地位在伯爵之上。
English: The position of Lieutenant of the Horse is above that of a Count.

古文：凡尚大长公主、长公主、公主，并曰驸马都尉。
现代文：凡是婚配大长公主、长公主、公主，都称驸马都尉。
English: Anyone who marries a grand eldest princess, eldest princess, or princess is called a grand lieutenant.

古文：其尚郡主、县主、郡君、县君、乡君者，并曰仪宾。
现代文：那些婚配郡主、县主、郡君、县君、乡君的，都称仪宾。
English: Those who are married to the county head, the county mayor, the county magistrate, the county magistrate, and the township magistrate are called guests of honor.

古文：岁禄各有差，皆不得与政事。
现代文：每年的俸禄各有差等，都不能干预政事。
English: Salaries vary from year to year, and they are not allowed to interfere in politics.

古文：明初，驸马都尉有典兵出镇及掌府部事者。
现代文：明代初年，驸马都尉有领兵出任镇守以及掌管府部事务的。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Lieutenant Xiongma led the soldiers to serve as the town guard and was in charge of the affairs of the government department.

古文：建文时，梅殷为镇守淮安总兵官，李坚为左副将军。
现代文：建文年间，梅殷为镇守淮安总兵官，李坚为左副将军。
English: During the Jianwen period, Mei Yin was the chief military officer of the town guard of Huai'an, and Li Jian was the left deputy general.

古文：成祖时，李让掌北京行部事。
现代文：成祖年间，李让掌管北京行部事务。
English: During Chengzu's reign, Li Jang was in charge of Beijing's administrative affairs.

古文：仁宗时沐昕，宣宗时宋琥，并守备南京。
现代文：仁宗年间沐听，宣宗年问宋琥，都曾守备南京。
English: During the reign of Emperor Renzong, Emperor Wu listened to him, and during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Song inquired about him. Both of them guarded Nanjing.

古文：英宗时，赵辉掌南京左府事。
现代文：英宗时，趟辉掌管南京左府事务。
English: At the time of Emperor Yingzong, Zhai Hui was in charge of the affairs of Nanjing Zuofu.

古文：其馀惟奉祀孝陵，摄行庙祭，署宗人府事。
现代文：其它的祇奉祀孝陵，代理宗庙祭祀，代理宗人府事务。
English: The others are the Gihon-shishiki-Koryo, acting as a proxy for the ancestral temple's rites, and acting as a proxy for the affairs of the ancestral capital.

古文：往往受命，一充其任。
现代文：往往临时受命，暂时充任。
English: They are often appointed on an ad hoc basis.

古文：若恩亲侯李贞，永春侯王宁，京山侯崔元，以恩泽封侯，非制也。
现代文：至于恩亲侯李贞，永春侯王宁，京山侯崔元，因为恩泽封侯，不合制度。
English: As for Prince Li Zhen, Prince Wang Ning of Yongchun and Prince Cui Yuan of Jingshan, they are not eligible for the system.

古文：中军、左军、右军、前军、后军五都督府，每府左、右都督，都督同知，都督佥事，其属，经历司，经历，都事，各一人。
现代文：中军、左军、右军、前军、后军五都督府，每府有左、右都督，止一品，都督同知，从一品，都督余事，正二品。赏赐功臣挂它的名的虚衔，没有固定人数。下属有，经历司，经历，从五品，都事，从七品，各一人。
English: The Central Army, the Left Army, the Right Army, the Front Army, and the Rear Army have five prefectural governors. Each prefecture has a left and a right prefect, a last one, a prefect with the same name, a junior prefect, a junior prefect, and a senior second prefect. There is no fixed number of honorary titles to be awarded to meritorious vassals. There are subordinates, experience officers, experience, senior fifth prefect, senior second prefect, and senior seventh prefect, one each.

古文：都督府掌军旅之事，各领其都司、卫所，以达于兵部。
现代文：都督府掌管军队的事务，各自统领所属都司、卫所，详见《兵志》卫所中，上达于兵部。
English: The prefectural governor's office was in charge of the affairs of the army, and each of them commanded their own capital city and garrison, as detailed in "Heishi" (Military History) in the Garrison, and in the Military Department.

古文：凡武职，世官流官、土官袭替、优养、优给，所属上之府，移兵部请选。
现代文：凡是武将职位，世袭或是选拔的流官，土官的继承接替、享受优厚的待遇、未袭爵却领全俸的优给待遇，都由所属部门上报到府，再移交兵部呈请选拔。
English: All posts of military commanders, hereditary or elected officials, successors of local officials, enjoying preferential treatment, and preferential treatment of full salary without receiving a knighthood, are reported to the government by the department to which they belong, and then handed over to the military department for selection.

古文：既选，移府，以下之都司、卫所。
现代文：选定之后，移交都督府，再下达到都司、卫所。
English: After being selected, they were transferred to the governor's office, and then to the capital city and the public health center.

古文：首领官听吏部选授，给由亦如之。
现代文：首领官听从吏部选拔任命，履历也由吏部查明回复。
English: Chief officers are selected and appointed by the cadre department, and their resumes are also checked and replied to by the cadre department.

古文：凡武官诰敕、俸粮、水陆步骑操练、官舍旗役并试、军情声息、军伍勾补、边腹地图、文册、屯种、器械、舟车、薪苇之事，并移所司而综理之。
现代文：凡是武官的诰命封敕、俸禄粮、水陆步兵骑兵的操练、官合旗役并试、军事情报、军队补充、边防和腹地的地图、文书簿册、屯田种植、兵器、车船、柴草之事，一并移交有关部门总领。
English: All the affairs of the military attaché's life-saving seal, the salary grain, the drill of the naval infantry and cavalry, the official joint flag service, the military intelligence, the replenishment of the army, the maps of the border and the hinterland, the book of documents, the planting of the military camps, the weapons, the vehicles and the ships, and the firewood were handed over to the heads of the relevant departments.

古文：凡各省、各镇镇守总兵官，副总兵，并以三等真、署都督及公、侯、伯充之。
现代文：所有各省、各镇镇守总兵官、副总兵，都以三等实授、署理都督及公、侯、伯充任。
English: In all provinces and towns, the commander-in-chief of the garrison and deputy commander-in-chief of the garrison were appointed to the posts of third-class regular officer, acting governor of the capital, and prince, lord or vassal.

古文：有大征讨，则挂诸号将军或大将军、前将军、副将军印总兵出，既事，纳之。
现代文：有大的征伐，便挂上各种将军或大将军、前将军、副将军印信统领军队出征，战事结束，便归还。
English: When there is a large-scale expedition, the seals of various generals or great generals, former generals, and vice-generals are posted to lead the army to go to war. When the war is over, they are returned.

古文：其各府之掌印及佥书，率皆公、侯、伯。
现代文：各府的掌印及愈书，几乎都是公、侯、伯。
English: The palm prints and calligraphy of all prefectures are almost all the work of princes, lords, and nobles.

古文：初，太祖下集庆，即置行枢密院，自领之。
现代文：间或有属老将而实授都督的，没有十分之一。当初，太祖攻克集庆，便设置行枢密院，亲自掌管。
English: At the beginning, when Taizu conquered Jieqing, he set up the Imperial Privy Council and personally took charge of it.

古文：又置诸翼统军元帅府。
现代文：又设置各副统军元帅府。
English: In addition, vice-unification army marshal offices were established.

古文：寻罢枢密院，改置大都督府。
现代文：不久废除枢密院，改变设置大都督府。
English: Soon after, the Privy Council was abolished, and the office of the Governor-General was established.

古文：以朱文正为大都督，节制中外诸军事，设司马、参军、经历、都事等官。
现代文：任命朱文正为大都督，节制朝廷内外所有军事事务，下设司马、参军、经历、都事等官。
English: Zhu Wenzheng was appointed as the grand governor, controlling all military affairs both inside and outside the imperial court, with officials in charge of Sima, joining the army, experience, and city affairs.

古文：又增设左、右都督，同知，副使，佥事，照磨各一人，并设断事官。
现代文：又增设左、右都督，同知，副使，愈事，照磨各一人，并设置断事官。
English: In addition, the Left and Right Governors, Tongzhi, Vice-Envoys, Healers, and Healers were each appointed, and an adjudicator was also appointed.

古文：定制，大都督从一品，左、右都督正二品，同知都督从二品，副都督正三品，佥都督从三品，经历从五品，都事从七品；统军元帅府元帅正三品，同知元帅从三品，副使正四品，经历正七品，知事从八品，照磨正九品；又以都镇抚司隶大都督府，秩从四品。
现代文：规定制度，大都督从一品，左、右都督正二品，同知都督从二品，副都督正三品，愈都督从三品，经历从五品，都事从七品；统军元帅府元帅正三品，同知元帅从三品，副使正四品，经历正七品，知事从八品，照磨正九品。又把都镇抚司隶属于大都督府，此前从属中书省，品级为从四品。
English: According to the stipulated system, the grand-duke was ranked first, the left and right grand-dukes were ranked second, the same-ranked grand-duke was ranked second, the vice-grand-duke was ranked third, the greater-ranked grand-duke was ranked third, the experienced grand-duke was ranked fifth, and the prefectural governor was ranked seventh; the marshal of the unified army was ranked third, the same-ranked marshal was ranked third, the vice-envoy was ranked fourth, the experienced grand-duke was ranked seventh, the prefectural governor was ranked eighth, and the prefectural governor was ranked ninth. In addition, the

古文：寻罢统军元帅府。
现代文：不久罢除统军元帅府。
English: The United Army Marshal's Office was soon dismissed.

古文：吴元年，更定官制，罢大都督不设，以左、右都督为长官，同知都督，副都督，佥都督，俱升品秩。
现代文：昊元年，重新制定官制，废除大都督不再设置，以左、右都督为长官，正一品，同知都督，从一品，副都督，正二品，愈都督，从二品，全都提升了品级。
English: In the year of Hao Yuan, the official system was re-established, the first-rank governor was abolished, and the first-rank governor was no longer set up, with the left and right-rank governor as the chief, the first-rank governor, the same-rank governor, the first-rank governor, the vice-governor, the first-rank governor, the second-rank governor, and the second-rank governor, all of which were upgraded.

古文：其属，设参议，经历，断事官，都事，照磨洪武九年，罢副都督，改参议为掌判官。
现代文：它的下属，设有参议，正四品，经历，断事官，从五品，都事，正七品，照磨，从七品。洪武九年废除副都督，改参议为掌判官。
English: Its subordinates have the following ranks: Sangye, Senior Fourth Rank, Experience, Decision-maker, from Fifth Rank, Duji, Senior Seventh Rank, Shoma, from Seventh Rank. In the ninth year of Hongwu, the vice-governor was abolished, and the Sangye was changed to the judge.

古文：十二年，升都督佥事为正二品，掌判官为正三品。
现代文：十二年，升都督愈事为正二品，掌判官为正三品。
English: In 1912, he was promoted to the rank of Senior Second Class and Senior Third Class, respectively.

古文：十三年，始改都督府为五军都督府，分领在京各卫所，及在外各都司、卫所，以中军都督府断事官为五军断事官。
现代文：十三年，开始改都督府为五军都督府，分领在京各卫所，只有锦衣卫等亲军，上直卫不隶属五府，以及在外各都司、卫所，以中军都督府断事官为五军断事官。
English: In the thirteenth year, the governor's office was changed to the five military governor's office, and the leaders were divided in the Beijing garrisons, only the close troops such as the brocade guards, the upper direct guards were not affiliated with the five prefectures, and in the overseas governor's offices and garrisons, the Chinese military governor's office adjudicator was the five military adjudicator.

古文：十五年，置五军十卫参军府，设左、右参军。
现代文：十五年，设置五军十卫参军府，设左、右参军。
English: In the fifteenth year, the Five Armies, Ten Guards, and the Army Headquarters were established, and the Left and Right Armies were established.

古文：十七年，五军各设左、右断事二人，提控案牍一人，二十三年，升五军断事官为正五品，总治五军刑狱。
现代文：十七年，五军各设左、右断事二人，提控案牍一人，都是从九品。二十三年，升五军断事官为正五品，总领掌管五军刑罚诉讼。
English: In the 17th year, two left and right adjudicators were set up in each of the five armed forces, and one person was appointed to file a prosecution case, all from the ninth grade. In the 23rd year, the adjudicator of the five armed forces was promoted to the fifth grade, and the general manager was in charge of the criminal proceedings of the five armed forces.

古文：分为五司，司设稽仁、稽义、稽礼、稽智、稽信五人，各理其军之刑狱。
现代文：分为五司，各司设稽仁、稽义、稽礼、稽智、稽信五人，都为正七品，各自负责其军中的刑罚诉讼。
English: It was divided into five divisions, each division having five members, namely, Keiren, Keiji, Keirei, Keizhi, and Keishin, all of whom held the rank of Shichihon (Senior Seventh Rank), and each of whom was responsible for criminal proceedings in his own army.

古文：二十九年，置五军照磨所，专掌文牍。
现代文：二十九年，设置五军照磨所，专门掌管文书信札。
English: In 1929, the Five-Army Photo-Milling Station was set up, which was specifically in charge of document labels.

古文：建文中，革断事及五司官。
现代文：建文年问，革除断事官及五司官。
English: In response to the Jianwen Yearly Question, the adjudication officer and five officers were dismissed.

古文：永乐元年，设北京留守行后军都督府，置左、右都督，都督同知，都督佥事，无定员，经历、都事各一人。
现代文：丞乐元年，设北京留守行后军都督府，设置左、右都督，都督同知，都督食事，没有固定人数，经历、都事各一人。
English: In the first year of Zhenle, the post-war military governor's office was set up in Beijing. The left and right governors were set up, the governor knew each other, and the governor dined together. There was no fixed number of people, and each person had their own experience and capital affairs.

古文：后又分五府，称行在五军都督府。
现代文：后来又分为五府，称行在五军都督府。
English: Later, it was divided into five prefectures, which were called the five military governorates.

古文：十八年，除 行在 字，在应天者加 南京 字。
现代文：十八年，除去 行在 字样，留守应天的加 南京 字样。
English: In 18 years, the words "in line with" were removed, and the words "in accordance with" and "in Nanjing" were left.

古文：洪熙元年，复称行在，仍设行后府。
现代文：洪熙元年，恢复称行在，接着设行后府。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, it was restored to be called "Gangyeong" and then "Gangyeong" was established.

古文：宣德三年又革。
现代文：宣德三年又革除。
English: Xuan De was expelled again three years later.

古文：正统六年，复除 行在 字。
现代文：正统六年又除去 行在 字样。
English: After six years of orthodoxy, the words "in line with" were removed.

古文：京营，永乐二十二年，置三大营，曰五军营，曰神机营，曰三千营。
现代文：京营，永乐二十二年设三大营，为五军营、神机营、三千营。
English: Beijing camp, Yongle twenty-two years set up three major camps, for the five military camp, Shenji camp, three thousand camp.

古文：五军、神机各设中军、左右哨、左右掖；五军、三千各设五司。
现代文：五军、神机营各设中军、左右哨、左右掖；五军、三干营各设五司。
English: The five armies and the Sacred Machine Battalion each set up a middle army, a left and right sentry post, and a left and right anchor; the five armies and the three-pronged battalion each set up five divisions.

古文：每营俱选勋臣二人提督之。
现代文：每营都选两个功勋大臣提督。
English: Each battalion selects two admiral of the ministry of merits.

古文：其诸营管哨、掖官，曰坐营，曰坐司。
现代文：各营管哨、掖官，称坐营、坐司。
English: Each battalion was headed by a sentinel or eunuch, called a zaibatsu or zaishi.

古文：又设把总、把司、把牌等官。
现代文：各管哨、掖官也大多用功勋之臣担任。又设把总、把司、把牌等官。
English: Most of the posts and eunuchs were also held by meritorious vassals. In addition, there were chief officers, officials in charge of departments, and officials in charge of cards.

古文：景泰元年选三营精锐立十团营，莅以总兵，统以总督，监以内臣。
现代文：又有围子手、幼官、舍人、弹忠、效义各营，都附属于五军营。景泰元年，选拔三营精锐成立十团营，用总兵掌管，用总督统率，用内臣监督。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the elite of the three battalions were selected to establish ten regimental battalions, with the general in charge, the governor in command, and the vassal supervising.

古文：其旧设者，号为老营。
现代文：那些以前设有的，号称老营。
English: Those that were set up before are known as "old camps."

古文：成化三年，分团营为十二，每营又各分五军、三千统骑兵，神机统火器。其各营统领，俱择都督、都指挥或列爵充之，以总督统辖之。
现代文：神机营：战兵一营，左副将一名；战兵二营，练勇参将一名；车兵三营，游击将军一名；车兵四营，佐击将军一名，城守五营，佐擎将军一名；战兵六营，有副将一名；车兵七营，练勇参将一名；城守八营，佐擎将军一名；城守九营，佐擎将军一名；城守十营，佐击将军一名；备兵坐营官一名，大号头官一名。以上由兵部推选。
English: Shenji Battalion: 1 battalion of soldiers, 1 left vice-commander; 2 battalions of soldiers, 1 drill sergeant; 3 battalions of cavalry, 1 guerrilla general; 4 battalions of cavalry, 1 Sasaki general, 5 battalions of castle guards, 1 Sasaki general; 6 battalions of soldiers, 1 vice-commander; 7 battalions of cavalry, 1 drill sergeant; 8 battalions of castle guards, 1 Sasaki general; 9 battalions of castle guards, 1 Sasaki general; 10 battalions of castle guards, 1 Sasaki general; 1 battalion officer of reserves, 1 senior officer.

古文：正德中，又选团营精锐，置东西两官厅，另设总兵、参将统领。
现代文：监枪号头官一名，中军官十一名，千总二十名，选锋把总六名，把总一百二十八名。
English: The head officer of the gunboat was one, the middle-ranking officer was eleven, and the total number of soldiers was twenty thousand. The total number of front-line soldiers was six, and the total number of soldiers was one hundred and twenty-eight.

古文：嘉靖二十九年，革团营官厅，仍并三大营，改三千曰神枢，设副、参、游、佐、坐营、号头、中军、千把总等官。
现代文：以上都由营中推选。总计三大营，共五百八十六名武官。
English: All of the above were elected by the battalions, for a total of three battalions and 586 military attachés.

古文：统以提督总兵官一员。
现代文：以提督总兵官一名统管。
English: It is headed by an admiral, the chief military officer.

古文：已，改提督曰总督，铸 总督京营戎政 印，俾仇鸾佩之。
现代文：后来，改提督为总督，铸造 总督京营戎政 印信，使仇鸾佩戴此信。
English: Later, the admiral was changed to the governor, and the seal letter of the governor, Jingying Rongzheng, was cast, so that the enemy would wear this letter.

古文：更设侍郎一人，协理京营戎政。
现代文：又设侍郎一人，协理京营军政。
English: There was also a chamberlain, who was the co-ordinator of the military government in Kyoto.

古文：定巡视科道官岁一代更，悉革内侍官。
现代文：规定巡枧科道官每年轮换一次，完全革除内侍官。
English: It is stipulated that the gurus will be rotated once a year, and the inner chamberlains will be completely removed.

古文：增设巡视主事，寻亦革。
现代文：增设巡视主事，不久也革除。
English: An additional inspector was appointed, but he was soon dismissed.

古文：隆庆初，仍以总督为提督，改协理为阅视，寻并改阅视为提督。
现代文：隆庆初年，仍以总督为提督，改协理为阅视，不久一并改阅视为提督。
English: In the first year of Longqing, the governor was still regarded as the admiral, and the associate was regarded as the inspector, and the inspector was soon regarded as the admiral.

古文：四年二月，更京营制，三营各设提督，又各设右都御史一员提督之。
现代文：四年二月，改革京营制度，三营各设提督，又各设右都御史一名监理。
English: In February of the fourth year, the reform of the Beijing camp system began, each of the three camps set up an admiral, and each set up a supervisor of the right capital.

古文：九月，罢六提督，仍复总督戎政一人。
现代文：九月，废除六名提督，仍旧恢复焉总督戎政一名。
English: In September, six admirals were abolished, but one was still reinstated as the Governor-General of the Armies.

古文：天启初，增设协理一人，已，仍革一人。
现代文：天启初年，增设协理一人，后来，仍旧革除一人。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, one associate was added, and later, one person was still dismissed.

古文：崇祯初，复增一人。
现代文：崇祯初年，又增设一人。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, another person was added.

古文：京卫指挥使司，指挥使一人，指挥同知二人，指挥佥事四人。
现代文：京卫指挥使司，指挥使一人，正三品，指挥同知二人，从三品，指挥定事四人，正四品。
English: Jingwei conductor envoy division, conductor envoy one person, senior third grade, conductor acquaintance two people, junior third grade, conductor appointment four people, senior fourth grade.

古文：镇抚司，镇抚二人，其属，经历司，经历，知事，吏目，仓大使、副使各一人。
现代文：镇抚司，镇抚二人，从五晶。它的下属，经历司，经历，从七品，知事，正八品，吏目，从九品，仓大使、副使各一人。
English: Zhen Fuzhi, Zhen Fuzhi two, from Wujing. Its subordinates, Zhexing Shi, Zhexing, from Shichiping, Guoan, Zhexiping, Limei, from Jiuping, Cang ambassador, deputy envoy, one each.

古文：所辖千户所，多寡各不等。
现代文：所辖千户所，多少各不相等。
English: The thousands of households under its jurisdiction are not all equally prosperous.

古文：京卫有上直卫，有南、北京卫，品秩并同。
现代文：京卫有上直卫，有南、北京卫，官阶品级都相同。
English: The Beijing Guard has the Upper Guard, the Southern Guard, and the Beijing Guard, and their ranks and ranks are all the same.

古文：各有掌印，有佥书。
现代文：各有掌印、食书。
English: Each one has a palm print and a ration book.

古文：其以恩荫寄禄，无定员。
现代文：他们是因为祖荫恩泽挂衔食禄，没有固定人数。
English: They have no fixed number of members because they are entitled to a stipend as a result of their ancestors' favor.

古文：凡上直卫亲军指挥使司，二十有六。
现代文：所有上直卫亲军指挥使司，共二十六个。
English: A total of twenty-six commanders and envoys of the pro-army forces of the upper straight guard are listed.

古文：曰锦衣卫，曰旗手卫，曰金吾前卫。曰金吾后卫，曰羽林左卫，曰羽林右卫，曰府军卫，曰府军左卫，曰府军右卫，曰府军前卫，曰府军后卫，曰虎贲左卫。
现代文：为锦衣卫、旗手卫、金吾前卫、金吾后卫、羽林左卫、羽林右卫、府军卫、府军左卫、府军右卫、府军前卫、府军后卫、虎贲左卫，这是上十二卫，苏童年问设置。
English: They are Jinling Guard, Standard-bearer Guard, Kingu Forward Guard, Kingu Rear Guard, Ulin Left Guard, Ulin Right Guard, Prefectural Guard, Prefectural Left Guard, Prefectural Right Guard, Prefectural Forward Guard, Prefectural Rear Guard, and Tigress Left Guard. This is the Upper Twelfth Guard, and it was set up by the Soviet children.

古文：曰金吾左卫，曰金吾右卫，曰羽林前卫，曰燕山左卫，曰燕山右卫，曰燕山前卫，曰大兴左卫，曰济阳卫，曰济州卫，曰通州卫。
现代文：金吾左卫、金吾右卫、羽林前卫、燕山左卫、燕山右卫、燕山前卫、大兴左卫、济阳卫、济州卫、通州卫，这是上十卫，永乐年间设置。
English: Kingo Zuwei, Kingo Right Wei, Ulin Avant-garde, Yanshan Zuwei, Yanshan Right Wei, Yanshan Avant-garde, Daxing Zuwei, Jiyang Wei, Jeju Wei, Tongzhou Wei, this is the top ten Wei, Yongle years set up.

古文：曰腾骧左卫，曰腾骧右卫，曰武骧左卫，曰武骧右卫。
现代文：腾壤左卫、腾骏右卫、武壤左卫、武酿右卫，宣德八年设置。
English: Tengyeong left guard, Tengyeong right guard, Wuyeong left guard, Wuyeong right guard, set up by Xuande eight years ago.

古文：番上宿卫名亲军，以护宫禁，不隶五都督府。
现代文：定期轮流宿卫皇宫，称为亲军，以护卫禁宫，不隶属五都督府。
English: They regularly take turns to guard the Imperial Palace, known as the pro-army, to guard the Forbidden City, and are not affiliated with the five prefectural capitals.

古文：其京卫隶都督府者，三十有三。
现代文：那些京卫隶属都督府的，有三十三个。
English: There are thirty-three sub-prefectures of the capital city that are part of the prefectural government.

古文：曰留守左卫，曰镇南卫，曰骁骑右卫，曰龙虎卫，曰沈阳左卫，曰沈阳右卫，隶左军都督府。
现代文：为留守左卫、镇南卫、骁骑右卫、龙虎卫、沈阳左卫、沈阳右卫，隶属左军都督府。
English: They are left guard left guard, town south guard, horse riding right guard, dragon tiger guard, Shenyang left guard, Shenyang right guard, and belong to the Left Army Governor's Office.

古文：曰留守右卫，曰虎贲右卫，曰武德卫，隶右军都督府。
现代文：留守右卫、虎贲右卫、武德卫，隶属右军都督府。
English: The Left Guard Right Guard, the Tiger's Claw Right Guard, and the Military German Guard are subordinate to the Right Army Governor's Office.

古文：曰留守中卫，曰神策卫，曰应天卫，曰和阳卫，及牧马千户所、蕃牧千户所，俱隶中军都督府。
现代文：留守中卫、神策卫、应天卫、和阳卫及牧马千户所、蕃牧千户所，都隶属中军都督府。
English: Rushu Zhongwei, Shinshewei, Yingtianwei, Heyangwei, as well as Muma Chihuso and Tomaki Chihuso, all belonged to the Chinese military governor's office.

古文：曰留守前卫，曰龙骧卫，曰豹韬卫，隶前军都督府。
现代文：留守前卫、龙壤卫、豹韬卫，隶属前军都督府。
English: Left-behind vanguards, dragon-soil vanguards, and leopard-soil vanguards, belonging to the former military governor's office.

古文：曰留守后卫，曰鹰扬卫，曰兴武卫，曰大宁中卫，曰大宁前卫，曰会州卫，曰富峪卫，曰宽河卫，曰神武左卫，曰忠义右卫，曰忠义前卫，曰忠义后卫，曰义勇右卫，曰义勇前卫，曰义勇后卫，曰武成中卫，曰蔚州左卫，隶后军都督府。
现代文：留守后卫、鹰扬卫、兴武卫、大宁中卫、大宁前卫、会州卫、富峪卫、宽河卫、神武左卫、忠义右卫、忠义前卫、忠义后卫、义勇右卫、义勇前卫、义勇后卫、武成中卫、蔚州左卫，隶属后军都督府。又有京卫非亲军而不隶属都督府的，有十五个。
English: The left-behind guards, Yingyang guards, Xingwu guards, Daning middle guards, Daning vanguard guards, Huizhou guards, Fuxin guards, wide river guards, Shenwu left guards, loyal right guards, loyal vanguard guards, loyal rear guards, loyal right guards, loyal vanguard guards, loyal rear guards, Wu Cheng middle guards, and Ulshu left guards belong to the rear army governor's office. There are also 15 Beijing guards who are not pro-army and do not belong to the governor's office.

古文：又京卫非亲军而不隶都督府者，十有五。
现代文：为武功中卫、武功左卫、武功右卫，以上三卫因为都是工匠的缘故，隶属工部。
English: For martial arts middle guard, martial arts left guard, martial arts right guard, because the above three guards are craftsmen, they belong to the engineering department.

古文：曰武功中卫，曰武功左卫，曰武功右卫，曰永清左卫，曰永清右卫，曰彭城卫，曰长陵卫，曰献陵卫，曰景陵卫，曰裕陵卫，曰茂陵卫，曰泰陵卫，曰康陵卫，曰永陵卫，曰昭陵卫。
现代文：永清左卫、永清右卫、彭城卫、长陵卫、献陵卫、景陵卫、裕陵卫、茂陵卫、泰陵卫、康陵卫、永陵卫、昭陵卫。
English: Yongqing Zuwei, Yongqing Zuwei, Pengcheng Wei, Changling Wei, Xianling Wei, Jingling Wei, Yuling Wei, Muling Wei, Tailing Wei, Kangling Wei, Yongling Wei, Zhaoling Wei.

古文：明初，置帐前总制亲军都指挥使司，以冯国用为都指挥使。
现代文：明代初年，设置帐前总制亲军都指挥使司，任命冯国用为都指挥使。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the pro-army capital command envoy department was set up, and Feng Guoyong was appointed as the capital command envoy.

古文：后改置金吾侍卫亲军都护府，设都护，经历，知事，照磨。
现代文：后来改为金吾侍卫亲军都护府，设都护，徒二品，经历，正六品，知事，从七品，照磨，从八品。
English: Later, it was changed to Kingu-serving-and-guarding-close-to-the-army Dugongfu, and Dugong, Dugong 2nd grade, Experience, Senior 6th grade, Governor, Junior 7th grade, Senior 2nd grade, Junior 8th grade were set up.

古文：又置各卫亲军指挥使司，设指挥使，同知指挥使，副使，经历，知事，照磨，千户所正千户，副千户，镇抚、百户。
现代文：又设置各卫亲军指挥使司，设指挥使，正三品，同知指挥使，从三品，副使，正四品，经历，正七品，知事，从八品，照磨，正九品，千户所正千户，正五品，副干户，从五品，镇抚、百户，正六品。
English: In addition, the commanding officers of the guards' relatives were set up, and the commanding officers were set up with the rank of Senior Third Rank, the commanding officers of the same acquaintance were set up with the rank of Junior Third Rank, the deputy officers were set up with the rank of Senior Fourth Rank, the experience officers were set up with the rank of Senior Seventh Rank, the governors were set up with the rank of Senior Eighth Rank, the supervisors were set up with the rank of Senior Ninth Rank, the heads of households were set up with the rank of Senior Thousand Households, the heads of households were set up with the rank of Senior Fifth Rank, the heads of households were set up

古文：因置武德、龙骧、豹韬、飞龙、威武、广武、兴武、英武、鹰扬、骁骑、神武、雄武、凤翔、天策、振武、宣武、羽林十七卫亲军指挥使司，此设亲军卫之始。
现代文：因而设置武德、龙壤、豹韬、飞熊、威武、广武、兴武、英武、鹰扬、骁骑、神武、雄武、凤翔、天策、振武、宣武、羽林十七卫亲军指挥使司，这是设亲军卫的开始。
English: Therefore, the commanding envoys of the 17th Guards were set up in Wude, Longjiao, Leopard, Flying Bear, Weiwu, Guangwu, Xingwu, Yingwu, Yanyang, Xuanjie, Shenwu, Xiongwu, Fengxiang, Tianzhe, Zhenwu, Xuanwu and Hulin. This was the beginning of the establishment of the 17th Guards.

古文：寻罢金吾侍卫亲军都护府。
现代文：不久废除金吾侍卫亲军都护府。
English: Kingo's bodyguards were soon abolished.

古文：洪武、永乐间，增设亲军诸卫，名为上二十二卫，分掌宿卫。
现代文：洪武、永乐年问，增设亲军各卫，称为上二十二卫，分别掌管夜间护卫。
English: In the years of Hongwu and Yongle, pro-army guards were added, known as the upper twenty-two guards, and they were in charge of the night escort.

古文：而锦衣卫主巡察、缉捕、理诏狱，以都督、都指挥领之，盖特异于诸卫焉。
现代文：而锦衣卫主管巡察、缉捕奸人盗贼、审理钦犯案件，由都督、都指挥统领，是特剔不同于其它各卫的。
English: However, the inspection of brocade and clothing guards, the arrest of traitors and thieves, and the hearing of cases of high-ranking criminals are led by the governor and commander, which is particularly different from other guards.

古文：留守五卫，旧为都镇抚司，总领禁卫，先属中书省，改隶大都督府，设都镇抚，副镇抚，知事，寻改宿卫镇抚司，设宿卫镇抚、宿卫知事。
现代文：留守五卫，从前为都镇抚司，总领禁宫侍卫，先前隶属中书省，改为隶属大都督府，设都镇抚，从四品，副镇抚，从五品，知事，从八品。不久改为宿卫镇抚司，设宿卫镇抚、宿卫知事。
English: Lingering Five Guards, formerly the Fusiliers of the Capital Town and the Guards of the Palace of Imprisonment, formerly subordinated to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, were changed to subordinate to the Grand Governor's Office, and the Fusiliers of the Capital Town were set up, from the fourth grade, the Deputy Fusiliers of the Capital Town, from the fifth grade, the Governor, and from the eighth grade. They were soon changed to the Fusiliers of the Capital Town, and the Fusiliers of the Capital Town and the Governors of the Capital Town were set up.

古文：洪武三年，改为留守卫指挥使司，专领军马守御各城门，及巡警皇城与城垣造作之事。
现代文：洪武三年，改为留守卫指挥使司，专门掌管军队人马守御各城门，以及巡逻皇城和城墙修筑的事务。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, it was changed to the Remaining Guard Command and Envoy Division, specifically in charge of the military personnel guarding the imperial gates, as well as the patrol of the imperial city and the construction of the city wall.

古文：后升为留守都卫，统辖天策、豹韬、飞熊、鹰扬、江阴、广洋、横海、龙江、水军左、右十卫。
现代文：后来升为留守都卫，统领天策、豹韬、飞熊、鹰扬、江阴、广洋、横海、龙江、水军左、右十卫。
English: Later, he was promoted to stay-at-home watchman, and led the ten guards of heaven, the leopard, the flying bear, the eagle, the river, the ocean, the sea, the dragon river, and the left and right navies.

古文：八年，复为留守卫，与天策等八卫俱为亲军指挥使司，并隶大都督府。
现代文：八年，恢复焉留守卫，与天策等八卫都为亲军指挥使司，祇有水军左、右二卫为指挥使司，共同隶属大都督府。
English: In the eighth year, the remaining guards were restored, and the eight guards, including Tensaku, were the commanding officers of the pro-army, and only the left and right guards of the navy were the commanding officers, and they were jointly subordinated to the grand governor's office.

古文：十一年，改为留守中卫，增置留守左、右、前、后四卫，仍为亲军。
现代文：十一年，改为留守中卫，增设留守左、右、前、后四卫，仍为亲军。
English: In the eleventh year, it was changed to the left-handed middle guard, and the left-handed, right-handed, front and back guards were added, still pro-army.

古文：十三年，始分隶五都督府。
现代文：十三年，开始分隶五都督府。
English: Thirteen years later, it began to be divided into five governorates.

古文：锦衣卫，掌侍卫、缉捕、刑狱之事，恒以勋戚都督领之，恩荫寄禄无常员。
现代文：锦衣卫掌管侍卫、缉捕、刑狱的事务，常由功勋大臣、外戚都督统领，恩泽袭荫挂衔官员没有固定人数。
English: The brocade guards are in charge of the affairs of the guards, arrests, and prisons. They are often led by the Minister of Merit, the maternal relative of the governor, and there is no fixed number of officials with the title of favor.

古文：凡朝会、巡幸，则具卤簿仪仗，率大汉将军等侍从扈行。
现代文：凡是朝会、巡幸，便挲备卤簿仪仗，率领大汉将军共一千五百零七人等侍从跟随出行。
English: Whenever there is a court meeting or an inspection tour, a ceremonial battle is prepared, and a total of 1,507 attendants, led by the great Han general, travel with him.

古文：宿卫则分番入直。
现代文：夜间侍卫分班轮流入内值班。
English: At night, the guards are on duty inside the liner.

古文：朝日、夕月、耕耤、视牲，则服飞鱼服，佩绣春刀，侍左右。
现代文：祭日、祭月、耕藉、视牲等大祭典，便穿着飞鱼服，佩绣春刀，侍从皇上左右。
English: On major festivals such as the festival day, the festival month, the farming year, and the viewing of animals, they wear flying fish clothes, wear embroidered spring swords, and attend the emperor.

古文：盗贼奸宄，街途沟洫，密缉而时省之。
现代文：有盗贼奸人，虽街巷荒野，秘密缉拿并时时巡查。
English: There are thieves and traitors, although the streets and lanes are a wilderness, they are secretly seized and constantly inspected.

古文：凡承制鞫狱录囚勘事，偕三法司。
现代文：凡是奉旨提审囚徒，甄别审察囚犯，复查案件，会同三个司法部门进行。
English: All orders to arraign prisoners, screen prisoners, and review cases are carried out in conjunction with the three judicial departments.

古文：五军官舍比试并枪，同兵部莅视。
现代文：五军官舍比试武艺，会同兵部到场视察。
English: Five officers, together with the military department, came to the scene to inspect.

古文：统所凡十有七。
现代文：统领有十七个所。
English: There are seventeen stations under his command.

古文：中、左、右、前、后五所，领军士。
现代文：中、左、右、前、后五所，统领军士。
English: Middle, left, right, front, back five, leading sergeant.

古文：五所分銮舆、擎盖、扇手、旌节、幡幢、班剑、斧钺、戈戟、弓矢、驯马十司，各领将军校尉，以备法驾。
现代文：五所分为銮舆、擎盖、扇手、旌节、镕幢、班剑、斧铁、戈戟、弓矢、驯马十司，各自统领将军校尉，以预备天子车驾使用。
English: The five schools were divided into ten departments, each headed by a general and a lieutenant, and were responsible for the preparation of heavenly chariots for use.

古文：上中、上左、上右、上前、上后、中后六亲军所，分领将军、力士、军匠。
现代文：上中、上左、上右、上前、上后、中后六亲军所，分别主管将军、力士、军匠。
English: Upper middle, upper left, upper right, upper front, upper back, middle back six relatives of the military, respectively, in charge of generals, wrestlers, and artisans.

古文：驯象所，领象奴养象，以供朝会陈列、驾辇、驮宝之事。
现代文：驯象所，主管象奴养象，以供奉朝会陈列、驾辇、驮宝的事务。
English: The elephant training center is in charge of raising elephants as slaves for the purpose of exhibiting, driving and collecting treasures for the Imperial Family.

古文：明初，置拱卫司，秩正七品，管领校尉，属都督府。
现代文：明代初年，设置拱卫司，品级正七品，管领校尉，隶属都督府。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Arch Guards were set up, with a rank of Senior Seventh Rank, and the superintendent was a lieutenant, under the jurisdiction of the prefectural government.

古文：后改拱卫指挥使司，秩正三品。
现代文：后来改为拱卫指挥使司，品级正三品。
English: Later, it was changed to the commander of the arch guards, and the grade was raised to the third grade.

古文：寻又改为都尉司。
现代文：不久又改为都尉司。
English: It was soon changed to the Captain's Division.

古文：洪武三年，改为亲军都尉府，管左、右、中、前、后五卫军士，而设仪鸾司隶焉。
现代文：洪武三年，改焉亲军都尉府，管领左、右、中、前、后五卫军士，而设仪鸾司隶属于它。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the pro-army captain's office was reorganized, with the left, right, middle, front and rear five guards officers in charge, and the ceremonial secretary was set up.

古文：四年，定仪鸾司为正五品，设大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：四年，确定仪鸾司马正五品，设大使一人，副使二人。
English: In four years, it was determined that there would be five ceremonial envoys, including one ambassador and two deputy envoys.

古文：十五年，罢仪鸾司，改置锦衣卫，秩从三品，其属有御椅等七员，皆正六品。
现代文：十五年，废除仪鸾司，改设锦衣卫，品级从三品，它的下属有御椅等七员，都是正六品。
English: In the fifteenth year, the Office of Ceremonial Affairs was abolished, and the Office of Brocade and Garments was set up. The rank of the Office of Ceremonial Affairs was raised from Sanpin (三品) to Shoripon (正六品). It had seven subordinates, including the Imperial Chair.

古文：设经历司，掌文移出入；镇抚司，掌本卫刑名，兼理军匠。
现代文：设经历司，掌管收发公文；镇抚司，掌管本卫刑法，兼管军匠。
English: It set up the Criminal Records Division, in charge of receiving and issuing official documents; and the Correction Division, in charge of the Criminal Law of the Mainland, and also in charge of the military artisans.

古文：十七年，改锦衣卫指挥使为正三品。
现代文：十七年，改锦衣卫指挥使为正三品。
English: Seventeen years later, he was promoted to the rank of Senior Third Rank.

古文：二十年，以治锦衣卫者多非法凌虐，乃焚刑具，出系囚，送刑部审录，诏内外狱咸归三法司，罢锦衣狱。
现代文：二十年因为掌管锦衣卫的人多非法凌辱虐待罪囚，于是焚毁刑具，交出关押的罪囚，送交刑部审理甄别，诏令内外案件都归三个司法部门审理，废除锦衣狱。
English: For twenty years, because many of the people in charge of Jin Yi Wei illegally abused and mistreated the prisoners, they burned the torture instruments, handed over the prisoners, sent them to the Criminal Department for trial and screening, and ordered that both domestic and foreign cases should be tried by three judicial departments, and abolished Jin Yi Prison.

古文：成祖时复置。
现代文：成祖时恢复设置。
English: Restore the settings when you become an ancestor.

古文：寻增北镇抚司，专治诏狱。
现代文：不久增设北镇抚司，专门审理钦定案件。
English: Soon, the Beizhen Fusiliers' Office was added to deal specifically with the adjudication of cases.

古文：成化间，刻印畀之，狱成得专达，不关白锦衣，锦衣官亦不得干预。
现代文：成化年间，刻官印授予，结案后可以专门呈报，不必通知锦衣卫，锦衣卫官员也不能干预。
English: During the Chenghua year, the official seal was awarded, and after the case was closed, a special report could be submitted. It was not necessary to notify the brocade guard, and the brocade guard officials could not intervene.

古文：而以旧所设为南镇抚司，专理军匠。
现代文：而以从前所设的为南镇抚司，专门管理军匠。
English: However, the previously established post of Nanzhen Fusiliers was created specifically to manage the artisans.

古文：旗手卫，本旗手千户所，洪武十八年改置。掌大驾金鼓、旗纛，帅力士随驾宿卫。
现代文：校尉、力士，都抽选民间壮丁担任。校尉专门负责执举卤簿仪仗，及驾前宣召官员，差遣做事，隶属锦衣卫。力士专门负责金鼓、旗帜，随驾出入，及守卫四尸弓，隶属旗手卫。
English: School lieutenants and wrestlers are all selected from the local populace. The school lieutenants are specifically responsible for holding the ceremonial battle, and for summoning officials before driving, and dispatching them to work, and are subordinate to the dress guards. Wrestlers are specifically responsible for the golden drum, flag, driving in and out, and guarding the four corpse bows, and are subordinate to the flag guards.

古文：凡岁祭旗头六纛之神，八月于坛，十二月于承天门外，皆卫官莅事，统所五。
现代文：凡是每年祭祀旗头六纛的神灵，八月在坛，十二月在承天门外，都由卫官亲临办理，统领五个所。
English: All of the annual sacrifices to the deities of the six stars on the top of the flag, in August at the altar and in December outside the Gate of Heaven, are carried out in person by the guards, who preside over five places.

古文：府军前卫，掌统领幼军，轮番带刀侍卫。
现代文：府军前卫，掌管统领幼军，轮流带刀值班侍卫。
English: The vanguard of the prefectural army, in charge of leading the children's army, taking turns with the guards on duty.

古文：明初，有带刀舍人。
现代文：明代初年，有带刀舍人。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was a man with a sword.

古文：洪武时，府军等卫皆有习技幼军。
现代文：洪武时，府军等卫都有习练武技的幼军。
English: At the time of Hongwu, the prefectural army and other guards had young soldiers who practiced martial arts.

古文：永乐十三年，为皇太孙特选幼军，置府军前卫，设官属，统所二十有五。
现代文：永乐十三年，为皇太孙特选幼军，设置府军前卫，设置官员，指挥使五人，指挥同知十人，指挥愈事二十人，卫镇抚十人，经历五人，统领二十五个所。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yongle, he specially selected young soldiers for the imperial grandson, set up the vanguard of the prefectural army, set up officials, commanded five people, commanded ten people, commanded twenty people, commanded twenty people, and experienced five people.

古文：金吾、羽林等十九卫，掌守卫巡警，统所凡一百有二。
现代文：金吾、羽林等十九卫，掌管守卫巡警，统领一百零二个所。
English: Kingo, Uebayashi and other nineteen guards were in charge of the guards and patrols, leading one hundred and two stations.

古文：腾骧等四卫，掌帅力士直驾、随驾，统所三十有二。
现代文：腾壤等四卫，掌管率领力士值守皇宫、跟随皇帝车驾，统领三十二个所。
English: Tengyeong and other four guards, in charge of leading the wrestlers on duty at the imperial palace, followed the emperor's car, and commanded thirty-two posts.

古文：南京守备一人，协同守备一人。
现代文：南京守备一人，协同守备一人。
English: Nanjing will be guarded by one person and co-guarded by one person.

古文：南京以守备及参赞机务为要职。
现代文：南京以守备及参赞机务为要职。
English: Nanjing takes the defense and advisory services as an important position.

古文：守备，以公、侯、伯充之，兼领中军都督府事。
现代文：守备，以公、侯、伯爵充任，兼管中军都督府事务。
English: He was in charge of defense, holding the posts of prince, lord and count, and was also in charge of the affairs of the Chinese military governor's office.

古文：协同守备，以侯、伯、都督充之，领五府事。
现代文：协同守备，以侯、伯、都督充任，掌管五府事务。
English: He was in charge of the affairs of the five prefectures in coordination with the provincial governors, and held the posts of kō, haku, and todoku.

古文：参赞机务，以南京兵部尚书领之。
现代文：参赞机务，以南京兵部尚书兼任。
English: Counsellor for Military Affairs, concurrently held the post of Shangshu of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：其治所在中府，掌南都一切留守、防护之事。
现代文：官署在中府，掌管南京一切留守、防护的事务。
English: The government office is located in Zhongfu and is in charge of all matters related to Nanjing's stay-at-home and protection.

古文：永乐十九年迁都北京，命中府掌府事官守备南京，节制南京诸卫所。
现代文：永乐十九年，迁都北京，命令中府掌府事官员守备南京，节制南京各卫所。
English: In the 19th year of Yongle, the capital was moved to Beijing, and the officials in charge of the central government were ordered to guard Nanjing and control the sanatoriums in Nanjing.

古文：洪熙元年，始以内臣同守备。
现代文：洪熙元年，开始任命内侍共同守备。
English: In the first year of Hong Xi, he began to appoint inner chamberlains to jointly guard the palace.

古文：景泰三年，增设协同守备一人。
现代文：景泰三年，增设协同守备一人。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, an additional co-defender was added.

古文：南京五军都督府，左、右都督，都督同知，都督佥事，不全设。
现代文：南京五军都督府，左、右都督，都督同知，都督愈事，不全设。
English: The five military governors of Nanjing, the left and right governors, the governors who knew each other, and the governors who were retired, were not all set up.

古文：其掌印、佥书，皆以勋爵及三等都督为之。
现代文：它的掌印、余书，都以勋爵及三等都督担任。
English: Its palms and remaining books are all held by lords and third-class governors.

古文：分掌南京卫所，以达于南京兵部。
现代文：分别掌管南京卫所，上逵于南京兵部。
English: They were respectively in charge of the Nanjing Sanatorium and the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：凡管领大教场及江上操备等事，各府奉敕分掌之。
现代文：凡是统领大教场以及长江上操练守备等事，各府奉救命分别掌管。
English: All matters such as commanding the large training ground and drills and preparations on the Yangtze River are handled separately by the various prefectures.

古文：城门之管钥，中府专掌之。
现代文：城门的钥匙，中府专门掌管。
English: The key to the city gate is exclusively controlled by the central government.

古文：初设城门郎，洪武十八年革，以门禁锁钥铜牌，命中军都督府掌之。
现代文：起初设城门郎，洪武十八年革除，把门禁锁钥匙铜牌交给中军都督府掌管。
English: At first, a gatekeeper was set up, but Hongwu was dismissed in 18 and handed over the bronze door lock key to the Chinese army to take control of the governor's office.

古文：其属，经历、都事各一人。
现代文：它的下属有经历、都事各一人。
English: Its subordinates are experienced, and each of them has experience.

古文：南京卫指挥使司，凡四十有九。
现代文：南京卫指挥使司，设官详见京卫，共有四十九个。
English: There are a total of forty-nine officers of the Nanjing Military Governor's Office, the details of which can be found in the Beijing Military Governor's Office.

古文：分隶五都督府者三十有二。
现代文：分别隶属五都督府的有三十二个。
English: Thirty-two are subordinate to the five prefectures.

古文：曰留守左卫，曰镇南卫，曰水军左卫，曰骁骑右卫，曰龙虎卫，曰龙虎左卫，曰英武卫，曰龙江右卫，曰沈阳左卫，曰沈阳右卫，隶左府。
现代文：为留守左卫、镂南卫、水军左卫，骁骑右卫、龙虎卫、龙虎左卫、英武卫、龙江右卫、沈阳左卫、沈阳右卫，隶属左府。
English: They are the Left Guard, the Southern Guard, the Left Guard of the Navy, the Right Guard of the Cavalry, the Dragon and Tiger Guard, the Dragon and Tiger Left Guard, the Yingwu Guard, the Longjiang Right Guard, the Shenyang Left Guard, and the Shenyang Right Guard, and are under the jurisdiction of Zuofu.

古文：曰留守右卫，曰虎贲右卫，曰水军右卫，曰武德卫，曰广武卫，隶右府。
现代文：留守右卫、虎贲右卫、水军右卫、武德卫、广武卫，隶属右府。
English: The Left Guard Right Guard, the Tiger's Claw Right Guard, the Naval Right Guard, the Military German Guard, and the General Military Guard belong to the Right Division.

古文：曰留守中卫，曰神策卫，曰广洋卫，曰广天卫，曰和阳卫，及牧马千户所，隶中府。
现代文：留守中卫、神策卫、广洋卫、广天卫、和阳卫以及牧马千户所，隶属中府。
English: Lingering Zhongwei, Shinshewei, Guangyangwei, Guangtianwei, and Yangwei, as well as Buma Senju, belong to Zhongfu.

古文：曰留守前卫，曰龙江左卫，曰龙骧卫，曰飞熊卫，曰天策卫，曰豹韬卫，曰豹韬左卫，隶前府。
现代文：留守前卫、龙江左卫、龙壤卫、飞熊卫、天策卫、豹韬卫、豹韬左卫，隶属前府。
English: The left-behind vanguard, the Longjiang Left Guard, the Longyang Left Guard, the Flying Bear Guard, the Tianchao Guard, the Leopard's Guard, and the Leopard's Flanked Left Guard all belong to the former prefecture.

古文：曰留守后卫，曰横海卫，曰鹰扬卫，曰兴武卫，曰江阴卫，隶后府。
现代文：留守后卫、横海卫、鹰扬卫、兴武卫、江阴卫，隶属后府。
English: Left-behind guards, Yokohai guards, Yingyang guards, Xingwu guards, Jiangyin guards, belong to Houfu.

古文：又亲军卫指挥使司十有七：曰金吾前卫，曰金吾后卫，曰金吾左卫，曰金吾右卫，曰羽林左卫，曰羽林右卫，曰羽林前卫，曰府军卫，曰府军左卫，曰府军右卫，曰府军后卫，曰虎贲左卫，曰锦衣卫，曰旗手卫，曰江淮卫，曰济州卫，曰孝陵卫。
现代文：又有亲军卫指挥使司十七个：为金吾前卫、金吾后卫、金吾左卫、金吾右卫、羽林左卫、羽林右卫、羽林前卫、府军卫、府军左卫、府军右卫、府军后卫、虎贲左卫、锦衣卫、旗手卫、江淮卫、济州卫、孝陵卫。与左府所属十卫，右府所属五卫，前府所属七卫，后府所属五卫，一并听从中府节制。
English: There are also seventeen pro-army guard commanding officers: Kingu avant-guard, Kingu guard, Kingu left guard, Kingu right guard, Ulin left guard, Ulin right guard, Ulin avant-guard, prefectural army guard, prefectural army left guard, prefectural army right guard, prefectural army guard, Tigress left guard, Jinling guard, standard-bearer guard, Jianghuai guard, Jeju guard, Xiaoling guard. Together with the ten guards belonging to the left prefecture, the five guards belonging to the right prefecture, the seven guards belonging to the front prefecture, and the five guards belonging to the rear prefecture,

古文：各卫领所一百一十有八。
现代文：各卫领属所有一百一十八个。
English: There are a total of one hundred and eighteen of them.

古文：王府护卫指挥使司，设官如京卫。
现代文：王府护卫指挥使司，设官如同京卫。
English: The king's palace guards command the envoy department, and the officials are set up like the Beijing guards.

古文：王府仪卫司。仪卫正一人，仪卫副二人，典仗六人。
现代文：王府仪卫司，仪卫正一人，正五品，仪卫副二人，从五品，典仗六人，正六品。
English: Wangfu ceremonial guards, ceremonial guards one, ceremonial guards five, ceremonial guards two, ceremonial guards five, ceremonial guards six, ceremonial guards six.

古文：仪卫，掌侍卫仪仗。
现代文：仪卫，主管侍卫仪仗。
English: The ceremonial guard is in charge of the guard of honor.

古文：护卫，掌防御非常，护卫王邸。
现代文：护卫，主管防御意外突发事件，护卫王府官邸。
English: Escort, in charge of defense against accidents and emergencies, escorting the royal residence.

古文：有征调，则听命于朝。
现代文：有征调，便听从朝廷命令。
English: If there is conscription, they will obey the order of the imperial court.

古文：明初，诸王府置护军府。
现代文：明代初年，各王府设置护军府。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, each royal palace set up a military garrison.

古文：洪武三年，置仪卫司，司设正、副各一人，秩比正、副千户；司仗六人，秩比百户。
现代文：洪武三年，设置仪卫司，各司设正、副各一人，品级视同正、副千户；司仗六人，品级视同百户。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the Division of Ceremonial Guards was set up, with one official and one deputy in each division, and the grade was regarded as equal to that of 1,000 households; there were six officials, and the grade was regarded as equal to that of 100 households.

古文：四年，改司仗为典仗。
现代文：四年，改司仗为典仗。
English: Four years later, it was changed to a ceremonial battle.

古文：五年，置亲王护卫指挥使司，每王府设三护卫，卫设左、右、前、后、中五所，所千户二人，百户十人。
现代文：五年，设置亲王护卫指挥使司，每个王府设三个护卫，每个卫设左、右、前、后、中五所，每所设千户二人，百户十人。
English: In the fifth year, the Prince's Escort Command and Control Division was set up, three escorts were set up in each royal palace, five guards were set up on the left, right, front, back and middle of each guard, two thousand households and ten hundred households were set up in each guard.

古文：又设围子手二所，每所千户一人。
现代文：又设围子手二所，每所千户一人。
English: In addition, two wards were set up, with one person from each thousand households.

古文：九年，罢护军府。
现代文：九年，废除护军府。
English: Nine years later, the Protectorate was abolished.

古文：建文中，改仪卫司为仪仗司，增置吏目一人。
现代文：建文年间，改仪卫司焉仪仗司，增设吏目一人。
English: During the Jianwen period, the ceremonial guard was changed to the ceremonial guard, and an additional officer was added.

古文：成祖初复旧制。
现代文：成祖初年恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system in the first year.

古文：总兵官、副总兵、参将、游击将军、守备、把总，无品级，无定员。
现代文：总兵官、副总兵、参将、游击将军、守备、把总，无品级，无固定人数。
English: Chief military officer, deputy chief soldier, general officer, guerrilla general, guard, commander, no rank, no fixed number.

古文：总镇一方者为镇守，独镇一路者为分守，各守一城一堡者为守备，与主将同守一城者为协守。
现代文：总领镇守一个地区的为镇守，独自镇守一路的为分守，各守一城一堡的为守备，与主将同守一城的为协守。
English: The commander-in-chief of the garrison of a region is the garrison, the independent garrison all the way up is the detached garrison, each garrison of a city and a castle is the garrison, and the garrison of a city together with the commander-in-chief is the joint garrison.

古文：又有提督、提调、巡视、备御、领班、备倭等名。
现代文：又有提督、提调、巡视、备御、领班、备倭等名称。
English: There are also names such as Admiral, Raising and Transferring, Inspection, Preparation, Foreman, and Preparation.

古文：凡总兵、副总兵，率以公、侯、伯、都督充之。
现代文：所有总兵、副总兵，大都以公、侯、伯、都督充任。
English: All generals and vice-generals were mostly appointed as princes, lords, townsmen, and governors.

古文：其总兵挂印称将军者，云南曰征南将军，大同曰征西前将军，湖广曰平蛮将军，两广曰征蛮将军，辽东曰征虏前将军，宣府曰镇朔将军，甘肃曰平羌将军，宁夏曰征西将军，交阯曰副将军，延绥曰镇西将军。
现代文：总兵中挂印称将军的，云南为征南将军，大同为征西前将军，湖广为平蛮将军，两广为征蛮将军，辽东为征虏前将军，宣府为镇朔将军，甘肃为平羌将军，宁夏为征西将军，交肚为副将军，延绥为镇西将军。
English: Among the generals, Yunnan is the general of the Southern Expedition, Datong is the general of the Western Expedition, Huguang is the general of the Barbarian Expedition, Liugang is the general of the Barbarian Expedition, Liaodong is the general of the Western Expedition, Xuanfu is the general of the Zhenshuo Expedition, Gansu is the general of the Pingyao Expedition, Ningxia is the general of the Western Expedition, Kamtou is the vice-general of the Western Expedition, and Yan'an is the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：其在蓟镇、贵州、湖广、四川及儹运淮安者，不得称将军挂印。
现代文：各个印信，洪熙元年制定颁发。那些在蓟镇、贵州、湖广、四川以及催运淮安的，不能挂印称将军。
English: All seal letters were formulated and issued by Hong Xi in the first year of the year. Those who are in Shanzhen, Guizhou, Hukang, Sichuan and Huai'an cannot be stamped as generals.

古文：宣德间，又设山西、陕西二总兵。
现代文：宣德年问，又设山西、陕西二总兵。
English: In response to the Xuande Yearly Question, Shanxi and Shaanxi two general armies were also set up.

古文：嘉靖间，分设广东、广西、贵州、湖广二总兵为四，改设福建、保定副总兵为总兵，又添设浙江总兵。
现代文：嘉靖年问，分设广东、广西、贵州、湖广二总兵焉四总兵，改设福建、保定副总兵焉总兵，又添设浙江总兵。
English: In the year of Jiajing, Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou and Huguang were divided into two general armies and four general armies, and the general armies of Fujian and Baoding were reorganized into vice-general armies, and the general army of Zhejiang was added.

古文：万历间，又增设于临洮、山海。
现代文：万历年间，又增设于临洮、山海。
English: During the Wanli period, it was added to Linyi and Shanhai.

古文：天启间，增设登莱。
现代文：天启年问，增设于登州、莱州。
English: Tianqi New Year's Eve, set up in Dangzhou and Laizhou.

古文：至崇祯时，益纷不可纪，而位权亦非复当日。
现代文：到崇祯时，越发纷繁，数不胜数，而地位权力也不再如当年。
English: By the time of Chongzhen, there were more and more dynasties, countless dynasties, and the status and power were no longer the same as that year.

古文：盖明初，虽参将、游击、把总，亦多有充以勋戚都督等官，至后则杳然矣。
现代文：明代初年，即使是参将、游击、把总，也多有以功勋外戚都督等官充任，到后来就日渐寥落了。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, even if it was a general, guerrilla, or commander-in-chief, there were many officials such as the governor of the capital who were awarded for their merits. Later, they became increasingly rare.

古文：镇守蓟州总兵官一人，旧设。隆庆二年，改为总理练兵事务兼镇守，驻三屯营。协守副总兵三人。分守参将十一人，游击将军六人，统领南兵游击将军三人，领班游击将军七人，坐营官八人，守备八人，把总一人，提调官二十六人。
现代文：分守参将十一人，为通州参将、少涂关参将、石门寨参将、燕河营参将、台头营参将、太平寨参将、马兰峪参将、擅王塑参将、古北口参将、石塘岭参将、喜峰口参将。游击将军六人，统领南兵游击将军三人，领班游击将军七人，坐营官八人，守备八人，把总一人，提调官二十六人。
English: There were eleven divisional commanders, including Tongzhou commander, Shao Tuo Guan commander, Shimenzhai commander, Yanhe battalion commander, Taitou battalion commander, Taipingzhai commander, Malanqian commander, Xuanwang plastic commander, Gu Beigou commander, Shitangling commander, and Xifenggou commander. There were six guerrilla generals, three Southern guerrilla commanders, seven squad leader guerrilla generals, eight camp officers, eight guards, one general, and 26 transfer officers.

古文：镇守昌平总兵官一人，旧设副总兵，又有提督武臣。
现代文：镇守昌平总兵官一人，旧时设副总兵，又有提督武臣。
English: There is only one general officer of the town guard Changping, the former vice-general, and the admiral Wuxin.

古文：嘉靖三十八年，裁副总兵，以提督改为镇守总兵，驻昌平城，听总督节制。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年裁革副总兵，把提督改为镇守总兵，驻守昌平城，听从总督节制。
English: In the 38th year of Jiajing, the vice-commander-in-chief was dismissed, and the admiral was changed to the commander-in-chief of the town guard, stationed in Changping City, and obeyed the governor's restraint.

古文：分守参将三人，游击将军二人，坐营官三人，守备十人，提调官一人。
现代文：分守参将三人，为居庸关参将、黄花镇参将、横岭口参将，游击将军二人，坐营官三人，守备十人，提调官一人。
English: There were three guards and three generals, including Juyongguan, Huanghuazhen, and Henglingkou, two guerrilla generals, three camp officers, ten guards, and one dispatching officer.

古文：镇守辽东总兵官一人，旧设，驻广宁。
现代文：镇守辽东总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻守广宁。
English: The town guard of Liaodong has one general officer, set up in the old days, stationed in Guangning.

古文：隆庆元年，令冬月移驻河东辽阳适中之地，调度防御，应援海州、沈阳。
现代文：隆庆元年，下令冬月移驻河东辽阳适中之地，调度防御，接应援助海州、沈阳。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he ordered Dongyue to move to Liaoyang in the east of the river, a suitable place to dispatch defense and receive assistance from Haizhou and Shenyang.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将五人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，辽匮副总兵旧时为分守，台堕四十五年改为协守，驻守逢旦城，节制开厘、垒、堕旦、沈阳等处。
English: There was only one deputy commander, Liao Qiao deputy commander, who used to be a detachment commander, but was changed to a deputy commander in the 45th year of Taiwan's fall, stationed in Fengtan City, and controlled Kaili, Bai, Fengtan, Shenyang and other places.

古文：游击将军八人，守备五人，坐营中军官一人，备御十九人。
现代文：分守参将五人，焉开原参将、锦义右参将、海盖右参将、宁速参将、宽奠堡参将，游击将军八人，守备五人，坐营中军官一人，备御十九人。
English: There were five guards, five generals, five generals, eight guerrilla generals, five guards, one camp officer and nineteen guards.

古文：镇守保定总兵官一人。
现代文：镇守保定总兵官一人。
English: The town guard of Baoding is headed by a military officer.

古文：弘治十八年，初设保定副总兵，后改为参将。
现代文：弘治十八年，初设保定副总兵，后改为参将。
English: In 18th year of the Heian period, he was initially appointed as Vice-Commander-in-Chief of the Baoding Military Region, and later he was promoted to General.

古文：正德九年，复为分守副总兵。
现代文：正德九年，又改为分守副总兵。
English: In the ninth year of Zhengde, it was changed to the deputy commander of the general staff.

古文：嘉靖二十年，改为镇守。
现代文：嘉靖二十年，改焉镇守。
English: After 20 years of Jiajing, he was replaced as the town's governor.

古文：三十年，改设镇守总兵官。
现代文：三十年，改设镇守总兵官。
English: Thirty years later, he became the town's chief military officer.

古文：万历元年，令春秋两防移驻浮图峪，遇有警，移驻紫荆关，以备入援。
现代文：万历元年，下令春秋雨季防御移驻浮图峪，遇到敌情，移驻紫荆关，以防备入援。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he ordered the defense of the spring and autumn rainy season to be moved to Futuo, and when he encountered hostile situations, he moved to Bijingguan to be prepared for reinforcement.

古文：分守参将四人，游击将军六人，坐营中军官一人，守备七人，把总七人，忠顺官二人。
现代文：分守参将四人，为紫荆关参将、龙固二关参将、置韭口参将、倒马关参将，游击将军六人，坐营中军官一人，守借七人，把总七人，忠顺官二人。
English: There were four deputy commanders, including the general of the Bauhinia Pass, the general of the Longgu Second Pass, the general of the Jiaokou Pass, the general of the Tumbling Horse Pass, six guerrilla generals, one officer of the encampment, seven guards, a total of seven officers, and two loyal officers.

古文：镇守宣府总兵官一人，旧设，驻宣府镇城。
现代文：镇守宣府总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻守宣府镇城。
English: The town guard, the chief military officer of Xuanfu, was set up in the old days, stationed in Xuanfu town.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将七人，游击将军三人，坐营中军官二人，守备三十一人，领班备御二人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，副总兵从前也驻守镇城，嘉靖二十八年移驻永宁城。分守参将七人，为北路独石马营参将、东路怀来永宁参将、上西路万全右卫参将、南路顺圣蔚广参将、中路葛峪堡参将、下西路柴沟堡参将、南山参将，游击将军三人，坐营中军官二人，守备三十一人，领班备御二人，万历八年裁革。
English: There was one deputy commander, and the deputy commander had also been stationed in Zhencheng before, and moved to Yongning City in the 28th year of Jiajing. There were seven deputy commanders, including the North Road Dushima Battalion Commander, the East Road Huailai Yongning Commander, the Upper West Road Wanquan Right Guard Commander, the South Road Shunshengwei Guang Commander, the Middle Road Gefenburg Commander, the Lower West Road Chigou Fort Commander, the Nanshan Commander, three guerrilla generals, two officers in the camp, thirty-one guards, two foremen, and eight years of experience.

古文：镇守大同总兵官一人，旧设，驻大同镇城。
现代文：镇守大同总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻大同镇城。
English: The town guard of Datong, a general officer, was set up in the old days and stationed in Datong town.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将九人，游击将军二人，入卫游击四人，坐营中军官二人，守备三十九人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，旧为左副总兵，万历五年去除左字，驻守左卫城。分守参将九人，焉东路参将、北东路参将、中路参将、西路参将、北西路参将、井坪城参将、迸迭堡参将、总督标下左掖参将、速塑邀参将，万历八年革除。游击将军二人，入卫游击四人，坐营中军官二人，守备三十九人。
English: There was one vice-commander-in-chief, formerly vice-commander-in-chief of the left, who was removed in the fifth year of Wanli and stationed in the left side of the city. There were nine vice-commanders-in-chief of the division, vice-commanders-in-chief of the east road, vice-commanders-in-chief of the north-east road, vice-commanders-in-chief of the middle road, vice-commanders-in-chief of the west road, vice-commanders-in-chief of the north-west road, vice-commanders-in-chief of the Jingping city, vice-commanders-

古文：镇守山西总兵官一人，旧为副总兵，嘉靖二十年改设，驻宁武关。
现代文：镇守山西总兵官一人，旧时为副总兵，嘉靖二十年改设，驻守宁武关。
English: The town guard of Shanxi has one chief military officer, who was formerly the deputy chief military officer, and has been stationed in Ningwuguan since Jiajing was reestablished 20 years ago.

古文：防秋移驻阳方口，防冬移驻偏关。
现代文：秋季防备入侵移驻守阳方口，冬季防备入侵移驻守偏关。
English: In autumn, they are stationed at Yangfangkou to guard against intrusion, and in winter, they are stationed at Yeguan to guard against intrusion.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将六人，游击将军一人，坐营中军官一人，守备十三人，操守二人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，嘉靖四十四年添设，起初驻守偏关，后来移驻老营堡。分守参将六人，为东路代州左参将、西路偏头关右参将、左亟左参将、中路利民堡右参将、河曲县参将、韭垄口参将，游击将军一人，坐营中军官一人，守备十三人，操守二人。
English: There was one deputy general guard soldier, who was added in the 44th year of Jiajing. At first, he was stationed at Yeguan, and later moved to Laoying Fort. There were six deputy general guards, including the east road deputy state left general guard, the west road deputy state right general guard, the left road deputy state left general guard, the left road deputy state left general guard, the middle road deputy state right general guard, the middle road deputy state left general guard, the middle road deputy state general guard, the middle road deputy state general guard, the middle road deputy state general guard, the middle road deputy state general guard, the middle road deputy state left general guard, the middle road deputy

古文：镇守延绥总兵官一人，旧设，驻镇城。
现代文：镇守延绥总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻守镇城。
English: The town guard, Yenyang general officer, was set up in the old days, stationed in the town.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将六人，游击将军二人，入卫游击四人，守备十一人，坐营中军官一人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，定边右副总兵，嘉靖四十一年添设，分守塞塞、棰壹等处，提调大墙及堕旦等处。分守参将六人，为孤参将、东路右参将、西路左参将、中路参将、道王参将、榆林保宁参将，游击将军二人，入卫游击四人，守备十一人，坐营中军官一人。
English: There was one deputy commander, the right-hand deputy commander of Dingbian, which was added in the 41st year of Jiajing, and six deputy commanders, including the lonely commander, the east-right commander, the west-left commander, the middle-road commander, the Tao Wang commander, and the Yulin Borying commander, two guerrilla generals, four guards, eleven guards, and one officer in the camp.

古文：镇守宁夏总兵官一人，旧设，驻镇城。
现代文：镇守宁夏总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻守镇城。
English: The town guard of Ningxia is headed by a general officer, set up in the old days, stationed in the town.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将四人，游击将军三人，入卫游击一人，守备三人，备御领班二人，管理水利屯田都司一人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，也是旧时设置，共同驻守镇城。分守参将四人，为东路右参将、西路左参将、灵州左参将、北路壬虏城参将，游击将军三人，入卫游击一人，万历八年革除，守备三人，备御领班二人，万历九年革除，坐营中军官二人，管理镇城都司一人，领班都司二人，趸匿九年革除，管理水利屯田都司一人。
English: There were four deputy commanders, including the East Road right officer, the West Road left officer, the Lingzhou left officer, and the North Road Nkiru City officer, three guerrilla generals, one enlisted guerrilla, eight years of Wanli expulsion, three guards, two foremen, nine years of Wanli expulsion, two officers in the camp, one person in charge of the township capital, two officers in charge of the township capital, nine years of Yanjing expulsion, and one person in charge of the water district capital.

古文：镇守甘肃总兵官一人，旧设，驻镇城。
现代文：镇守甘肃总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻守镇城。
English: The town guard of Gansu, the chief military officer, was set up in the old days, stationed in the town.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守副总兵一人，分守参将四人，游击将军四人，坐营中军官一人，守备十一人，领班备御都司四人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，甘肃左副总兵，旧时设置，塞塑四十四年移驻高台防御，隆庆四年回驻镇城。分守副总兵一人，凉州右副总兵，旧时设置，分守参将四人，为蓝辽左参将、肃州右参将、西宁参将、镇番参将，游击将军四人，坐营中军官一人，守备十一人，领班备御都司四人。
English: There was one deputy general soldier, Gansu left deputy general soldier, set up in the old days, stationed in Gaotai defense in 44 years, and stationed in Longqing four years ago. There was one deputy general soldier, Liangzhou right deputy general soldier, set up in the old days, four deputy general officers, including Lanliao left general officer, Suzhou right general officer, Xining general officer, and Zhenban general officer, four guerrilla generals, one camp officer, eleven guards, and four squad leaders.

古文：镇守陕西总兵官一人，旧驻会城，后移驻固原。
现代文：镇守陕西总兵官一人，旧时驻守省会城，后移驻固原。
English: The town guard of Shaanxi has one general officer. In the old days, he was stationed in the provincial capital, and later moved to Guyuan.

古文：分守副总兵一人，分守参将五人，游击将军四人，坐营中军官二人，守备八人。
现代文：分守副总兵一人，洮岷副总兵，万历六年改设，驻守洮州。分守参将五人，为河州参将、兰州参将、靖虏参将、陕西参将、阶文西固参将，游击将军四人，坐营中军官二人，守备八人。
English: There was one deputy commander-in-chief, and one deputy commander-in-chief, who had been stationed in Ganzhou for six years. There were five deputy commanders-in-chief, including the commander-in-chief of Hezhou, the commander-in-chief of Lanzhou, the commander-in-chief of Jingru, the commander-in-chief of Shaanxi, and the commander-in-chief of Jowenxi, four guerrilla generals, two officers in camp, and eight guards.

古文：镇守四川总兵官一人，隆庆五年添设，驻建武所。
现代文：镇守四川总兵官一人，隆庆五年增添设置，驻守建武所。
English: The town guard of Sichuan has one chief military officer, who was added in the fifth year of the Longqing era, and is stationed at the military construction office.

古文：分守副总兵一人，协守参将二人，游击将军二人，守备六人。
现代文：分守副总兵一人，松潘副总兵，旧时设置，协守参将二人，为松潘东路左参将、松潘南路右参将，游击将军二人，守备六人。
English: There was one deputy commander-in-chief and one deputy commander-in-chief of Songpan, which was set up in the old days. There were two deputy commanders-in-chief, one deputy commander-in-chief of Songpan East Road, one deputy commander-in-chief of Songpan South Road, two guerrilla generals, and six guards.

古文：镇守云南总兵官一人，旧设，驻云南府。
现代文：镇守云南总兵官一人，旧时设置，驻守云南府。
English: There is one town guard Yunnan general officer, set up in the old days, stationed in Yunnan Prefecture.

古文：分守参将三人，巡抚中军坐营官一人。
现代文：分守参将三人，焉临元参将、永昌参将、顺蒙参将，守备二人，巡抚中军坐营官一人。
English: There were three guards and three generals, including General Yan Lin, General Yong Chang, and General Shun Meng, two guards, and one camp officer in the middle of the patrol.

古文：镇守贵州总兵官一人，旧设，嘉靖三十二年，加提督麻阳等处地方职衔，驻铜仁府。
现代文：镇守贵州总兵官一人，旧时设置，嘉靖三十二年加封提督麻阳等处地方职衔，驻守铜仁府。
English: There is one town guard of Guizhou general military officer, set up in the old days, and in 32nd year of Jiajing, he was given the local title of Admiral Ma Yang and other local titles, stationed in Tongren.

古文：分守参将二人，守备七人，巡抚中军官一人。
现代文：分守参将二人，为提督清浪右参将、提督川贵迤西左参将，守备七人，巡抚中军官一人。
English: There were two guards, Admiral Kiyonami, the right-hand guard, and Admiral Kawakuni, the left-hand guard. There were seven guards and one middle-ranking officer.

古文：镇守广西总兵官一人，旧为副总兵，嘉靖四十五年改设，驻桂林府。
现代文：镇守广西总兵官一人，旧时为副总兵，嘉靖四十五年改设，驻守桂林府。
English: The town guard of Guangxi has one general officer, formerly the deputy general officer, who was reassigned to Jiajing in 1945 and stationed in Guilin Prefecture.

古文：分守参将五人，守备三人，坐营官一人。
现代文：分守参将五人，为浔梧左参将、柳庆有参将、永宁参将、思恩参将、昭平参将，守备三人，坐营官一人。
English: There were five guards, including Gan Wu Zuo, Liu Qing You, Yongning, Sine, and Shohei, three guards, and one camp officer.

古文：镇守湖广总兵官一人，旧设，嘉靖十年罢，十二年复设，万历八年又罢，十二年仍复设，驻省城。
现代文：镇守湖广总兵官一人，旧时设置，嘉靖十年废除，十二年恢复设置，万历八年又废除，十二年仍旧恢复设置，驻守省城。
English: There is only one general officer in charge of the defense of the town of Hukang, which was set up in the old days, abolished in the 10th year of Jiajing, restored in the 12th year, abolished again in the 8th year of Wanli, and still restored in the 12th year, stationed in the provincial capital.

古文：分守参将三人，守备十一人，把总一人。
现代文：分守参将三人，为黎平参将、镇箪参将、鄙阳参将，守备十一人，把总一人。
English: There are three deputy commanders, including Li Ping, Zhenyu, and Mianyang, and eleven guards, for a total of one.

古文：镇守广东总兵官一人。旧为征蛮将军、两广总兵官。
现代文：镇守广东总兵官一人，旧为征蛮将军、两广总兵官。
English: There is one town guard Guangdong general officer, formerly a conscript general, and two Guangdong general officers.

古文：嘉靖四十五年分设，驻潮州府。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年分设，驻守潮州府。
English: It was established in the 45th year of Jiajing and stationed in Chaozhou.

古文：协守副总兵一人，分守参将七人，练兵游击将军一人，守备五人，坐营中军官二人，把总四人。
现代文：协守副总兵一人，潮漳副总兵，万历三年增添设置，驻守直塑。分守参将七人，为潮州参将、琼崖参将、雷廉参将、东山参将、酉些参将、督理广州海防参将、惠州参将，练兵游击将军一人，守备五人，坐营中军官二人，把总四人。
English: There was one deputy commander, Chaozhou deputy commander, who was stationed in Zhigang after three years of construction. There were seven deputy commanders, including Chaozhou deputy commander, Qiongya deputy commander, Lei Lian deputy commander, Dongshan deputy commander, Zouqi deputy commander, Guangzhou coast guard deputy commander, Huizhou deputy commander, one guerrilla general, five guards, and two officers in the camp, for a total of four.

古文：提督狼山副总兵一人，嘉靖三十七年添设，驻通州。
现代文：提督狼山副总兵一人，嘉靖三十七年增添设置，驻守通州。
English: Admiral Wolf Mountain Vice-Commander-in-Chief, stationed in Tongzhou, was added in the 37th year of Jiajing.

古文：镇守江南副总兵一人，旧系总兵官，驻福山港，后移驻镇江、仪真二处。
现代文：镇守江南副总兵一人，旧为总兵官，驻守福山港，后移驻镇江、仪真二处。
English: There is one deputy commander-in-chief of the Southern Jiangsu garrison, formerly the commander-in-chief, stationed at the port of Fukuyama, later moved to Zhenjiang and Yizhen.

古文：嘉靖八年裁革。
现代文：嘉靖八年裁除。
English: He was dismissed in the eighth year of Jiajing.

古文：十九年复设。
现代文：十九年恢复设置。
English: It was restored in 1919.

古文：二十九年仍革。
现代文：二十九年仍旧革除。
English: In 1929, he was still dismissed.

古文：三十二年，改设副总兵，驻金山卫。
现代文：三十二年，改设副总兵，驻守金山卫。
English: Thirty-two years later, he was promoted to vice-general and stationed at Jinshanwei.

古文：四十三年移驻吴淞。
现代文：四十三年移驻昊淞。
English: Forty-three years later, it moved to Haotang.

古文：分守参将二人，游击将军一人，守备六人，凤阳军门中军官一人，把总十三人。
现代文：分守参将二人，为徐州参将、金山参将，游击将军一人，守备六人，凤阳军门中军官一人，把总十三人。
English: There were two guards, including a Xuzhou guard and a Jinshan guard, a guerrilla general, six guards, and an officer from the Fengyang military gate, for a total of thirteen.

古文：镇守浙江总兵官一人，嘉靖三十四年设，总理浙直海防。
现代文：镇守浙江总兵官一人，嘉靖三十四年设置，总理浙直海防。
English: Zhengu, Zhejiang's chief military officer, was set up in the 34th year of Jiajing, and the prime minister of Zhejiang Zhihai Defense.

古文：三十五年，改镇守浙直。
现代文：三十五年改为镇守浙直。
English: Thirty-five years later, it was changed to the town guard of Zhejiang Province.

古文：四十二年，改镇守浙江，旧驻定海县，后移驻省城。
现代文：四十二年改为镇守浙江，旧时驻守定海县，后来移驻省城。
English: In 1942, it was changed to the town of Zhejiang, formerly stationed in Dinghai County, and later moved to the provincial capital.

古文：分守参将四人，游击将军二人，总捕都司一人，把总七人。
现代文：分守参将四人，为杭嘉湖参将、宁绍参将、温处参将、宣金壁参将，游击将军二人，总捕都司一人，把总七人。
English: There are four branch commanders, including the commander of Hangzhou Jiahu, the commander of Ningshao, the commander of Wenchuan, the commander of Xuanjinbi, two guerrilla generals, and one commander of the capital city, for a total of seven people.

古文：分守江西参将一人，守备四人，把总六人。
现代文：分守江西参将一人，为南赣参将，嘉靖四十三年改设，驻守会昌县。守备四人，把总六人。
English: There is one garrison commander in Jiangxi Province, and one in South Gansu Province, and one garrison commander in Hechang County, which was established in 43rd year of Jiajing. There are four garrison commanders, for a total of six.

古文：镇守福建总兵官一人，旧为副总兵，嘉靖四十二年改设，驻福宁州。
现代文：镇守福建总兵官一人，旧时焉副总兵，嘉靖四十二年改设，驻守福宁州。
English: The town guard of Fujian has one general officer, the former deputy general officer, who was reassigned in 42nd year of Jiajing and stationed in Funing Prefecture.

古文：分守参将一人，守备三人，把总七人，坐营官一人。
现代文：分守参将一人，为南路参将，守备三人，把总七人，坐营官一人。
English: There will be one garrison commander and three garrison commanders for the southern route, with a total of seven guards and one camp officer.

古文：镇守山东总兵官一人，天启中增设。
现代文：镇守山东总兵官一人天启年间增添设置。
English: The town guard Shandong general officer was added in the year of the apocalypse.

古文：总督备倭都司一人，领蓟镇班都司四人。
现代文：总督备倭都司一人，兼管蓟镇班都司四人。
English: The governor-general is assisted by a prefectural governor, and also supervises four prefectural governors.

古文：又河南守备三人，领蓟镇班都司四人。
现代文：又河南守备三人，兼管蓟镇班都司四人。
English: There are also three Henan guards, and four people who are also in charge of the Bantu Division of Handan Town.

古文：总督漕运总兵官一人。
现代文：总督漕运总兵官一人。
English: The Governor and the Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army are one.

古文：永乐二年，设总兵、副总兵，统领官军海运。
现代文：永乐二年设总兵、副总兵，统领官军海运。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the commander and deputy commander-in-chief were established, and the commander-in-chief of the naval transportation of the official army was created.

古文：后海运罢，专督漕运。
现代文：后来海运停止，专尸弓督办漕运。
English: Later, the sea transport was stopped, and the corpse bows and arrows superintendent took charge of the transport.

古文：天顺元年又令兼理河道。
现代文：天顺元年，又下令兼管河道。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he also ordered to take charge of the river.

古文：协同督运参将一人，把总十二人，留守司。正留守一人，副留守一人，指挥同知二人。
现代文：协同督运参将一人，天妪元年设，把总十二人，南京二人、笙南直隶二人、江北直隶二人、中都一人、浙江二人、山东一人、湖广一人、江西一人。留守司，正留守一人，正二品，副留守一人，正三品，指挥同知二人，从三品。
English: There will be one co-supervisor of transportation, which was set up in the first year of Tianyu, bringing the total to twelve people, two in Nanjing, two in southern Jiangxi, two in northern Jiangxi, one in central China, two in Zhejiang, one in Shandong, one in Guangxi, and one in Jiangxi. There will be one person on duty, one second-in-command, one second-in-command, one second-in-command, one third-in-command, two co-commanders, and one third-in-command.

古文：其属，经历司，经历，都事。
现代文：它的下属，经历司，经历，正六品，都事，正七品。
English: Its subordinates, the Department of History, History, are ranked 6th, and Affairs, 7th.

古文：断事司，断事，副断事，吏目各一人。
现代文：断事司，断事，正六品，副断事，正七品，吏目各一人。
English: Chief Judge, Chief Judge, Senior Sixth Rank, Deputy Chief Judge, Senior Seventh Rank, one official each.

古文：掌中都、兴都守御防护之事。
现代文：掌管中都、兴都守御防护事务。
English: In charge of protecting Zhongdu and Xingdu.

古文：洪武二年，诏以临濠为中都，置留守卫指挥使司，隶凤阳行都督府。
现代文：洪武二年下诏以临濠焉中都，设置留守卫指挥使司，隶属凤阳行都督府。
English: In the second year of Hongwu's reign, he decreed that Linyi should be the capital, and set up the Remaining Guard Commanding Envoy Office, which was subordinate to the Fengyang District Governor's Office.

古文：十四年，始置中都留守司，统凤阳等八卫，防护皇陵，设留守一人，左、右副留守各一人。
现代文：十四年，开始设置中都留守司，统领凤阳等八卫，凤阳卫、凤匮主煎、凰阳查卫、皇陵卫、留守，街、留守中卫、量并卫、怀速卫，防护皇陵，设留守一人，左、右副留守各一人。
English: In the 14th year, Zhongdu Remaining Division was set up to lead the Fengyang and other eight guards, including Fengyang Guard, Fengxiao Guard, Hoyang Guard, Imperial Tomb Guard, Remaining Guard, Street, Remaining Middle Guard, Balanced Guard, Hoi Sui Guard, and Protection of the Imperial Tombs. There was one Remaining Guard, and one Left and one Right Deputy Remaining Guard.

古文：嘉靖十八年，改荆州左卫为显陵卫，置兴都留守司，统显陵、承天二卫，防护显陵，设官如中都焉。
现代文：属官经历以下的官员，如前所列。嘉靖十八年，改剂州左卫为显陵卫，设置兴都留守司，统领显陵、承天二卫，防护颢陵，设官如同中都留守司。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Emperor, the Zhou Left Division was changed to the Xianling Division, and the Xingdu Left Division was set up to command the Xianling, the Chengtian Second Division and the protection of the Jiaoling Tombs, just like the Zhongdu Left Division.

古文：都指挥使司。都指挥使一人，都指挥同知二人，都指挥佥事四人。
现代文：都指挥使司，都指挥使一人，正二品，都指挥同知二人，从二品，都指挥愈事四人，正三品。
English: Both of them commanded envoys, both of them commanded one envoy, both of them were second-ranked, both of them commanded two of their acquaintances, both of them were second-ranked, both of them commanded four people, and both of them were third-ranked.

古文：其属，经历司，经历，都事。
现代文：它的下属，经历司，经历，正六品，都事，正七品。
English: Its subordinates, the Department of History, History, are ranked 6th, and Affairs, 7th.

古文：断事司，断事，副断事，吏目各一人。
现代文：断事司，断事，正六品，副断事，正七品，吏目各一人。
English: Chief Judge, Chief Judge, Senior Sixth Rank, Deputy Chief Judge, Senior Seventh Rank, one official each.

古文：司狱司，司狱。
现代文：司狱司，司狱，从九品。
English: Warden, warden, from the ninth grade.

古文：仓库、草场，大使、副使各一人。
现代文：仓库、草场，大使、副使各一人。
English: The warehouse, the pasture, the ambassador, the deputy envoy, one each.

古文：行都指挥使司，设官与都指挥使司同。
现代文：行都指挥使司，设官与都指挥便司相同。
English: The post of commander-in-chief is the same as the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：都司，掌一方之军政，各率其卫所以隶于五府，而听于兵部。
现代文：都司掌管一个地区的军队事务，各自统率其卫所隶属于五府，而听命于兵部。
English: The prefectural governor's office is in charge of the military affairs of a region, and each prefectural governor's office is subordinate to the five prefectures, and obeys the orders of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：凡都司并流官，或得世官，岁抚、按察其贤否，五岁考选军政而废置之。
现代文：所有都司都为流动性的非世袭、非土著的流官，有人得到世袭官职，每年巡抚、巡按考察他们贤能与否，每五年考核军中政务来决定废立。
English: All prefectural governors are mobile, non-hereditary, non-indigenous officials. Some are hereditary officials. Every year, the procurators and procurators examine their ability, and every five years, they review the government affairs of the military to decide whether to abolish them.

古文：都指挥使及同知佥事，常以一人统司事，曰掌印，一人练兵，一人屯田，曰佥书。
现代文：都指挥使及同知食事，通常以一人统领本司事务，称焉掌印，一人练兵，一人屯田，称为愈书。
English: They all commanded envoys and dined together, usually with one person in charge of this department's affairs, called "Yuan Pao Yan," one person trained soldiers, and one person set up a military camp, called "Yu Shu."

古文：巡捕、军器、漕运、京操、备御诸杂务，并选充之，否则曰带俸。
现代文：巡捕、军器、漕运、京营操练、防御等各种杂务，一并经选拔任用，否则为带俸任职。
English: Patrol, military equipment, rowing transport, Beijing camp drill, defense and other miscellaneous chores, together with the selection and appointment, otherwise it is a paid position.

古文：凡备倭守备行都指挥事者，不得建牙、升公座。
现代文：所有备倭守备兼任都指挥职务的，不准建立军旗、升公座。
English: All officers and men who hold command positions concurrently shall not be allowed to raise the military flag or hold public office.

古文：凡朝廷吉凶表笺，序衔布、按二司上。
现代文：所有上奏朝廷的吉凶表笺，署名于布、按二司之上。
English: All the auspicious and inauspicious omens sent to the imperial court were signed on the cloth and stamped on the second division.

古文：经历、都事，典文移。
现代文：经历、都事，掌管公文。
English: experience, all affairs, in charge of the official documents.

古文：断事，理刑狱。
现代文：断事，掌管刑罚诉讼。
English: adjudicates criminal cases and presides over criminal proceedings.

古文：明初，置各行省行都督府，设官如都督府。
现代文：明代初年，设置各行省行都督府，设官如同都督府。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, provincial governors' offices were set up, and officials were appointed in the same way as governors' offices.

古文：又置各都卫指挥使司。
现代文：又设置各都卫指挥使司。
English: In addition, a division of commanding officers was set up for each of the Imperial Guards.

古文：洪武四年，置各都卫断事司，以理军官、军人词讼。
现代文：洪武四年，设置各都卫断事司，以受理军官、军人诉讼。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu's reign, the Department of Defense Adjudication was set up in each city to accept lawsuits from officers and soldiers.

古文：又以都卫节制方面，职系甚重，从朝廷选择升调，不许世袭。
现代文：又因为都卫节制一个地区重镇，职位十分重要，从朝廷选择升调，不允许世袭。
English: In addition, because Duwei is a regionally important town, the position is very important, and it is not allowed to be hereditary.

古文：七年，置西安行都卫指挥使司于河州。
现代文：七年，设置西安行都卫指挥使司于河州。
English: In the seventh year, the Xi'an-bound Duwei command and envoy department was set up in Hezhou.

古文：八年十月，诏各都卫并改为都指挥使司，凡改设都司十有三，行都司三，十五年，增置贵州、云南二都司。
现代文：十五年，增设贵州、云南两个都司。
English: In the past 15 years, Guizhou and Yunnan were added as two capital cities.

古文：后以北平都司为北平行都司。
现代文：后来以北平都司为北平行都司。
English: Later, the Beiping Prefecture was renamed the North Parallel Prefecture.

古文：永乐元年改为大宁都司。
现代文：永乐元年，改为大宁都司。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, it was changed to the Danying Prefecture.

古文：宣德中，增置万全都司。
现代文：宣德年问，增设万全都司。
English: The Xuande New Year's Day, the addition of the Department of All Nations.

古文：计天下都司凡十有六。
现代文：总计天下都司共有十六个。
English: In total, there are sixteen prefectures in the world.

古文：又于建昌置四川行都司，于郧阳置湖广行都司。
现代文：十三省都司以外，有渣塞、主宁、趸全三个都司。又在建昌设四川行都司，在郑阳设湖广行都司。
English: In addition to the thirteen provincial capitals, there are three capitals of Jiancai, Zhunan and Shandong. In addition, the capital of Sichuan Province is located in Jianchang, and the capital of Guangxi Province is located in Zhengyang.

古文：计天下行都司凡五。
现代文：总计天下行都司共有五个。
English: In total, there are five world capitals.

古文：明初，又于各行省置都镇抚司，设都镇抚，副镇抚，知事。
现代文：明代初年，又在各行省设置都镇抚司，设都镇抚，从四品，副镇抚，从五品，知事，从八品。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the capital town governor's office was set up in each province, the capital town governor was set up from the fourth grade, the deputy town governor was set up from the fifth grade, and the governor was set up from the eighth grade.

古文：吴元年改都镇抚正五品，副镇抚正六品，知事为提控案牍，省注。
现代文：昊元年，改都镇抚为正五品，副镇抚为正六品，知事为提控案牍，省略记载。
English: In the first year of the year of Hao, Zhenfu of the capital was changed to the fifth grade, Zhenfu of the deputy capital was changed to the sixth grade, and the governor was charged with the case, but the record was omitted.

古文：洪武六年罢。
现代文：洪武六年罢除。
English: Hongwu was ousted six years later.

古文：卫指挥使司，设官如京卫。
现代文：卫指挥使司，设官如同京卫。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards sent an envoy to the capital, setting up an office similar to that of the Imperial Guards.

古文：外卫各统于都司、行都司或留守司。
现代文：品级也相同。外卫各自隶属于都司、行都司或留守司。
English: The ranks are also the same. Each of the guards is subordinate to the commander, the acting commander, or the officer-in-charge.

古文：率世官，或有流官。
现代文：大多为世袭官，有的为流动不世袭的选官。
English: Most of them are hereditary officials, and some are mobile and non-hereditary elected officials.

古文：凡袭替、升授、优给、优养及属所军政，掌印、佥事报都指挥使司，达所隶都督府，移兵部。
现代文：凡有袭替、升授、优厚供给、优厚供养以及下属所的军政，掌印、愈书上报都指挥使司，上连所隶属的都督府，移送给兵部。
English: All cases of succession, promotion, generous provision, generous support, and the military and political affairs of subordinate stations, hand-printed and reported in writing to the commander-in-chief's office, and the governor's office to which Shanglian belongs, shall be transferred to the military department.

古文：每岁抚、按察其贤否，五岁一考选军政，废置之。
现代文：每年，由巡抚、巡按考察他们贤能与否，每五年考查一次军政事务以决定废立。
English: Every year, the procurator and procuratorate inspectors examine whether they are capable or not, and every five years they examine military and political affairs to decide whether to abolish them.

古文：凡管理卫事，惟属掌印、佥书。
现代文：凡是管理军卫事务，祇由掌印、愈书担任。
English: In the management of military affairs, only the commander-in-chief and the secretary-general are in charge.

古文：不论指挥使、同知、佥事，考选其才者充之。
现代文：不论指挥使、同知、愈事，考核选拔那些有才能的人担任。
English: Regardless of whether it is a conductor, a friend or a relative, the examination selects those who have the talent to serve.

古文：分理屯田、验军、营操、巡捕、漕运、备御、出哨、入卫、戍守、军器诸杂务，曰见任管事；不任事入队，曰带俸差操。
现代文：分管屯田、验军、营操、巡捕、漕运、防御、出哨、入卫、戍守、军器等各种杂务，称为见任管事；不任事入队，称为带俸差操。
English: To be in charge of various miscellaneous duties such as garrisoning, inspection of troops, operation, patrol, transport, defense, sentry, guarding, garrisoning, military equipment, etc. is called being in charge of duty; to be in charge of duty without being in charge of duty is called being in charge of duty with pay.

古文：征行，则率其属，听所命主帅调度。
现代文：出征，就率领部属，听从所命主帅调派。
English: When he goes to war, he leads his subordinates and follows the orders of the commander in chief.

古文：所，千户所，正千户一人，副千户二人，镇抚二人，其属，吏目一人。
现代文：所，千户所，正千户一人，正五品，副千卢二人，从五品，镇抚二人，从六品。它的下属，吏目一人。
English: So, Chihouso, Zenshouso, Zenshouso 1 person, Zenshouso 5 persons, Zenshouso 2 persons, Zenshouso 5 persons, Zenshouso 2 persons, Zenshouso 6 persons. Its subordinate, Rishimoku 1 person.

古文：所辖百户所凡十，共百户十人，总旗二十人，小旗百人。
现代文：所辖百户所共十个，有百户十人，正六品。升授、改调、增设无固定人员。总旗二十人，小旗一百人。
English: There are a total of ten hundred households under its jurisdiction, with ten people from each hundred households, and six official ranks. There are no fixed personnel for promotion, transfer, or addition. There are twenty general banners and one hundred small banners.

古文：其守御千户所，军民千户所设官并同。
现代文：守御千户所、军民千户所设官相同。
English: The number of officers assigned to guard 1,000 households and the number of officers assigned to guard 1,000 households are the same.

古文：凡千户，一人掌印，一人佥书，曰管军。
现代文：所有干户，一人掌印，一人食书，为管军。
English: All cadres, one holding a seal, one a ration book, are in charge of the troops.

古文：千户、百户，有试，有实授。
现代文：千户、百户，有试用授官，有实际授官。
English: Thousands of households, hundreds of households, there are probationary officers, there are actual officers.

古文：其掌印，恒以一人兼数印。凡军政，卫下于所，千户督百户，百户下总旗、小旗，率其卒伍以听令。
现代文：掌印，常以一人兼掌数印所有军政事务，由卫下于所，千户督管百户，百户下于总旗、小旗，率领士兵听从命令。
English: In military and political affairs, it is often one person with several palms who is in charge of all military and political affairs, from the guard to the guard, from the thousand households to the hundred households, and from the hundred households to the general flag and the small flag, leading the soldiers to obey orders.

古文：镇抚无狱事，则管军，百户缺，则代之。其守御千户所，不隶卫，而自达于都司。
现代文：兴都留守司、湖广都司、塑广行都司、塑建都司、塑壁行都司、江西都司、广东都司，隶属前军都督府。
English: Hingdu Ruzhu Division, Hukang Division, Shuguang Division, Shujian Division, Shujian Division, Jiangxi Division, Guangdong Division, under the former military governor's office.

古文：凡卫所皆隶都司，而都司又分隶五军都督府。
现代文：大宁都司、万全都司、山西都司、山西行都司，隶属后军都督府。
English: The Danning Capital Bureau, the Wan Zeng Capital Bureau, the Shanxi Capital Bureau, and the Shanxi Xing Capital Bureau are subordinate to the Rear Army Governor's Office.

古文：明初，置千户所，设正千户，副千户，镇抚、百户。
现代文：明代初年，设置干户所，设正千户，正五品，副千户，从五品，镇抚、百户，正六品。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the head household was set up, followed by the chief thousand households, the chief five households, the second thousand households, the second five households, the third thousand households, the third thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fifth thousand households, the fourth thousand households, the fifth thousand households,

古文：又立各万户府，设正万户，副万户，知事，照磨。
现代文：又设立各万户府，设正万户，正四品，副万户，从四品，知事，从八品，照磨，正九品。
English: In addition, 10,000 households were set up, including 10,000 households, 4,000 households, 4,000 families, 10,000 households, 4,000 families, governors, 8,000 families, superintendents, and 9,000 families.

古文：寻以名不称实，遂罢万户府，而设指挥使及千户等官。
现代文：不久因名不副实，于是罢除万户府，而设指挥使以及千户等官。
English: Soon, because the name did not match the reality, he dismissed the government of 10,000 households and appointed a commanding officer and officials of 1,000 households.

古文：核诸将所部有兵五千者为指挥使，千人者为千户，百人者为百户，五十人为总旗，十人为小旗。
现代文：核查各位将领所属部下有五千士兵的为指挥使，有一千士兵的为千户，有一百士兵的为百户，有五十士兵的为总旗，十个士兵的为小旗。
English: Verify that each general's subordinates have five thousand soldiers for the commander, one thousand soldiers for one thousand households, one hundred soldiers for one hundred households, fifty soldiers for the general flag, and ten soldiers for the small flag.

古文：洪武二年，置刻期百户所，选能疾行者二百人，以百户领之。
现代文：洪武二年设置刻期百官所，挑选能快跑的人二百个，由百户统领。
English: In the second year of Hongwu's reign, he set a time limit of one hundred official posts, and selected two hundred people who could run fast, led by one hundred households.

古文：七年，申定卫所之制。
现代文：七年，重新制定卫所制度。
English: Seven years later, the nursing home system was reformed.

古文：先是，内外卫所，凡一卫统十千户，一千户统十百户，百户领总旗二，总旗领小旗五，小旗领军十。
现代文：此前，内外卫所，全是一个卫统领十个千卢，一个千户统领十个百卢，一个百户统领两个总旗，一个总旗统领五个小旗，一个小旗统领十个士兵。
English: Previously, all the internal and external sanitariums had one general in charge of ten thousand rupees, one general in charge of one thousand households in charge of ten hundred rupees, one general in charge of one hundred households in charge of two flags, one general in charge of five small flags, and one small flag in charge of ten soldiers.

古文：至是更定其制，每卫设前、后、中、左、右五千户所，大率以五千六百人为一卫，一千一百二十人为一千户所，一百一十二人为一百户所，每百户所设总旗二人，小旗十人。
现代文：到这时复位制度，每卫设前、后、中、左、右五个千户所，大约以五千六百人为一卫，一千一百二十人为一个千户所，一百一十二人为一个百户所，每百户所设总旗二人，小旗十人。
English: By this time, the restoration system had set up five thousand households in front of, behind, in the middle, to the left and to the right of each guard, with approximately 5,600 people as one guard, 1,120 people as one thousand households, and 112 people as one hundred households, with two general flags and ten small flags set up for every hundred households.

古文：二十年，始命各卫立掌印、佥书，专职理事，以指挥使掌印，同知、佥事各领一所。
现代文：二十年，开始命各卫设立掌印、愈书，专职办理事务，由指挥使掌印，同知、愈事各自统领一所。
English: Twenty years ago, he began to order the guards to set up palm seals, healing books, and full-time management of affairs. The commander would send palm seals, and the comrade and the healer would each lead one.

古文：士卒有武艺不娴、器械不利者，皆责所领之官。
现代文：士兵有武艺不娴熟、器械不锋利的，都责备统领官。
English: Soldiers who are not proficient in martial arts and do not have sharp instruments all blame the commander-in-chief.

古文：二十三年，又设军民指挥使司、军民千户所，计天下内外卫凡五百四十有七，所凡二千五百九十有三。
现代文：二十三年，又设军民指挥使司、军民千户所，总计天下内外卫共有五百四十七个，所共有二千五百九十三个。
English: In the 23rd year, the Civil-Military Command and Control Center and the Civil-Military Thousand-Household Center were also established. In total, there are 547 civil-military command and control centers in the world, with a total of 2593 centers.

古文：自卫指挥以下其官多世袭，其军士亦父子相继，为一代定制。
现代文：从卫指挥以下官员多为世袭，士兵也是父子相继，成为一代的固定制度。
English: Officials from the commander of the guard on down are mostly hereditary, and soldiers are also father-son successively, which has become a fixed system for one generation.

古文：土官，宣慰使司，宣慰使一人，同知一人，副使一人，佥事一人。
现代文：土官，宣慰使司，宣慰使一人，从三品，同知一人，正四品，副使一人，从四品，愈事一人，正五品。
English: A local official, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy, a consolation envoy,

古文：经历司，经历一人，都事一人。
现代文：经历司，经历一人，从七品，都事一人，正八品。
English: Experienced division, experienced one person, from seven products, all things one person, eight products.

古文：宣抚司，宣抚使一人，同知一人，副使一人，佥事一人。
现代文：宣抚司，宣抚使一人，从四品，同知一人，正五品，副使一人，从五品，愈事一人，正六品。
English: The prefect of the mission, the prefect of the mission, one from the fourth grade, one from the same grade, one from the fifth grade, one from the fifth grade, one from the sixth grade, one from the sixth grade.

古文：经历司，经历一人，知事一人，照磨一人。
现代文：经历司，经历一人，从八品，知事一人，正九品，照磨一人，从九品。
English: Experienced division, experienced one person, from eight products, governor one person, nine products, polishing one person, from nine products.

古文：安抚司，安抚使一人，同知一人，副使一人，佥事一人。
现代文：安抚司，安抚使一人，从五品。同知一人，正六品，副使一人，从六品，愈事一人，正七品。
English: A pacifying officer, a pacifying envoy, from the fifth grade; a confidant, from the sixth grade; a deputy envoy, from the sixth grade; a doctor, from the seventh grade.

古文：其属，吏目一人。
现代文：它的下属，吏目一人，从九品。
English: Its subordinate, the number one official, was promoted from the ninth grade.

古文：招讨司，招讨使一人，副招讨一人。
现代文：招讨司，招讨使一人，从五品，副招讨一人，正六品。
English: Recruitment officer, recruitment officer, from one person, from five products, deputy recruitment, one person, six products.

古文：其属，吏目一人。
现代文：它的下属，吏目一人，从九品。
English: Its subordinate, the number one official, was promoted from the ninth grade.

古文：长官司，长官一人，副长官一人，其属，吏目一人。
现代文：长官司，长官一人，正六品，副长官一人，从七品。它的下属，吏目一人，没有入流。
English: A chief officer, a chief officer, a sixth grade official, a vice chief officer, a seventh grade official, and his subordinate, a first grade official, did not join the stream.

古文：蛮夷长官司，长官、副长官各一人。
现代文：蛮夷长官司，长官、副长官各一人，品级同上。
English: A barbarian chief magistrate, a chief officer, and a deputy chief officer, one each, with the same rank.

古文：又有蛮夷官、苗民官及千夫长、副千夫长等官。
现代文：又有蛮夷官、苗民官以及干夫长、副千夫长等官。
English: There were also barbarian officials, Miao civil officials, and officials such as the chief of staff and deputy chief of staff.

古文：军民府、土州、土县，设官如府州县。
现代文：军民府、土州、土县，设官如同府州县。
English: Military and civilian prefectures, prefectures, and counties are set up like prefectures and counties.

古文：洪武七年，西南诸蛮夷朝贡，多因元官授之，稍与约束，定征徭差发之法。
现代文：洪武七年，西南各族蛮夷入京朝拜进贡，大多因袭元时官制授职，稍微有所约束，规定了征调徭役差遣的办法。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu, all the tribes of the Southwest barbarously entered Beijing to worship and pay tribute. Most of them were a little constrained because they followed the system of appointing officials in the Yuan Dynasty, and stipulated the method of recruiting, transferring and dispatching officials.

古文：渐为宣慰司者十一，为招讨司者一，为宣抚司者十，为安抚司者十九，为长官司者百七十有三。
现代文：逐渐形成宣慰司十一个、招讨司一个、宣抚司十个、安抚司十九个、长官司一百七十三个。
English: Gradually, there were formed eleven consolation officers, one summoning officer, ten pacification officers, nineteen pacification officers, and one hundred and seventy-three superintendents.

古文：其府州县正贰属官，或土或流，皆因其俗，使之附辑诸蛮，谨守疆土，修职贡，供征调，无相携贰。
现代文：它的府州县正副属官，有的是蛮夷首领充任并世袭的官，有的是有流动性，非土著、非世袭的官，大概宣慰等司的经历都是流动性的非土著、非世袭的官，府州县属官大多是流官，都遵循他们的习俗，使之能聚集和睦各蛮族，小心守卫边疆，办理各职方的贡品，提供微调，不要有背叛之心。
English: Its prefectural and county subordinate officials, some are barbarian chiefs and hereditary officials, some are mobile, non-indigenous, non-hereditary officials, probably the experience of Xuancheng and other departments are mobile non-indigenous, non-hereditary officials, prefectural and county subordinate officials are mostly stream officials, all follow their customs, so that they can gather and harmonize all barbarians, carefully guard the border, handle the tributes of various officials, provide fine-tuning, and do not have a heart of betrayal.

古文：有相仇者，疏上听命于天子。
现代文：有互相仇杀的，上疏听从天子的命令。
English: Enemies of each other, they obey the orders of the Son of Heaven.

古文：又有番夷都指挥使司三，卫指挥使司三百八十五，宣慰司三，招讨司六，万户府四，千户所四十一，站七，地面七，寨一，并以附寨番夷官其地。
现代文：又有番夷都指挥使司三个，卫指挥使司三百八十五个，宣慰司三个，招讨司六个，万户府四个，干卢所四十一个，站七个，地面七个，寨一个，详见《兵志》卫所中，并以附寨番夷作其地的官吏。
English: There were also three commander-in-chief's offices, three hundred and eighty-five commander-in-chief's offices, three comfort offices, six enlistment offices, four wanhu offices, forty-one kanglu stations, seven stations, seven grounds, and one walled township, as detailed in the middle of the "Heishi" (Historical Records of the Chinese People's Liberation Army), and officials with walled township offices as their local offices.

