古文：◎叛臣中○李全上李全者，濰州北海农家子，同产兄弟三人。全锐头蜂目，权谲善下人，以弓马趫捷，能运铁枪，时号 李铁枪 。
现代文：李全，是潍州北海县农民的儿子，他是三胞胎兄弟中的一个。李全长得尖脑袋，像蜂一样的眼睛，他机巧诡诈，对属下友善，因为弓箭和马上的功夫矫捷，能舞动铁枪，在当时号称 李铁枪 。
English: Li Quan, the son of a farmer in Beihai County, Zhangzhou, was one of the triplet brothers. Li Quan grew up with a sharp head and bee-like eyes. He was cunning and friendly to his subordinates. Because of his skill with the bow and arrow and horse, he could dance the iron gun. At that time, he was known as Li Tie Gun.

古文：初，大元兵破中都，金主窜汴，赋敛益横，遗民保岩阻思乱。
现代文：当初，大元兵攻破中都，金国国君逃到汴京，对百姓的赋敛更重，宋陷落在金国的百姓保护险阻想反抗。
English: At first, the Taiyuan soldiers broke through the Central Capital, the Kim Guo Guojun fled to Suijing, and the restraints on the people were heavier. The Song people trapped in Kim Guo wanted to resist.

古文：于是刘二祖起泰安，掠淄、沂。
现代文：这时刘二祖在泰安起事，攻掠淄、沂二州。
English: At this time, Liu Erzu rebelled in Tai'an and attacked and plundered Shandong and Fujian provinces.

古文：二祖死，霍仪继之。彭义斌、石珪、夏全、时青、裴渊、葛平、杨德广、王显忠等附之。
现代文：刘二祖死后，霍仪接着率众人反抗，彭义斌、石王圭、夏全、时青、裴渊、葛平、杨德广、王显忠等人归附他。
English: After the death of Liu Erzu, Huo Yi then led the people to resist, and Peng Yibin, Shi Wang Gui, Xia Quan, Shi Qing, Pei Yuan, Ge Ping, Yang Deguang, Wang Xianzhong and others joined him.

古文：杨安儿起，掠莒、密，展徽、王敏为谋主，母舅刘全为帅，汲君立、王琳、阎通、董友、张正忠、孙武正等附之，余寇蜂起。
现代文：杨安儿率众起义，攻掠莒、密二州，展徽、王敏为军师，杨安儿的舅舅刘全为元帅，汲君立、王琳、阎通、董友、张正忠、孙武正等人归附了他，其他的寇盗纷纷起兵。
English: Yang An'er led the uprising of the masses, attacked and plundered Shijiazhuang, Mizhou, Zhanhui, Wang Min was the military instructor, Yang An'er's uncle Liu Quan was the marshal, Ku Junli, Wang Lin, Yan Tong, Dong You, Zhang Zhengzhong, Sun Wuzheng and others joined him, and other robbers raised armies one after another.

古文：大元兵至山东，全母及其兄死焉。
现代文：大元兵到山东，李全的母亲和李全的哥哥都死了。
English: When Dayuan soldiers arrived in Shandong, Li Quan's mother and brother were both dead.

古文：全与仲兄福聚众数千，刘庆福、国安用、郑衍德、田四、于洋、洋弟潭等咸附之。
现代文：李全和他的二哥李福招集数千人起义，刘庆福、国安用、郑衍德、田四、于洋、于洋的弟弟于潭等都归附李全。
English: Li Quan and his second brother Li Fu rallied thousands of people to revolt, and Liu Qingfu, Guo Anyong, Zheng Yande, Tian Si, Yu Yang, and Yu Yang's brother Yu Tan all joined Li Quan.

古文：大元兵退，金乃遣完颜霆为山东行省，黄掴为经历官，将花帽军三千讨之，败安儿于阑头滴水，断其南路。
现代文：大元兵退走，金国就派完颜霆为山东行省，黄扌国为经历官，他们率三千花帽军去征讨起义军，在阑头滴水打败杨安儿，截断了他南方的通路。
English: After the Taiyuan soldiers retreated, the State of Jin sent Yan Ting for Shandong Province, and the State of Huang Di for the experience officer. They led the three thousand flower hat army to recruit the rebel army, defeated Yang An'er in Shantou dripping water, and cut off his southern passage.

古文：安儿轻舸走即墨，金人募其头千金，舟人斩以献。
现代文：杨安儿乘船逃到即墨，金人为得到他的头悬赏千金，船夫杀死杨安儿并把他的头献给金人。
English: Yang An'er fled by boat to Zhimo. The goldsmith offered a thousand gold for his head. The boatman killed Yang An'er and gave his head to the goldsmith.

古文：安儿无子，从子友伪称 九大王 ，不闲军务。
现代文：杨安儿没有儿子，他的侄子杨友伪称 九大王 ，杨友不懂军务。
English: Yang An'er does not have a son, his nephew Yang You is falsely called the Nine Great Kings, Yang You does not understand military affairs.

古文：安儿妹四娘子狡悍善骑射，刘全收溃卒奉而统之，称曰 姑姑 ，众尚万余，掠食至磨旗山，全以其众附，杨氏通焉，遂嫁之。
现代文：杨安儿的妹妹四娘子诡诈剽悍，善于骑马射箭，刘全召集逃散的兵卒尊奉她并仍然统兵，称她为 姑姑 ，他们还有部众一万多人，劫掠粮食来到磨旗山，李全率他的部众来归附，杨氏与他往来交好，就嫁给了他。
English: Yang An'er's younger sister, the fourth daughter, was cunning and fierce, and good at riding horses and archery. Liu Quan gathered the soldiers who had fled to honor her and still led the troops, calling her "Auntie." They also had more than ten thousand people. They looted grain and came to Mount Maqi. Li Quan led his subordinates to join him. Mr. Yang befriended him and married him.

古文：全合军与霆战，又败。
现代文：李全率军与完颜霆交战，又失败。
English: Li Quan led the army to fight against Guan Yan Ting, but failed again.

古文：霆骁将张惠望见全，跃马赴之，枪及全，若有絷其马足而止者。
现代文：完颜霆手下的勇将张惠望见李全，跃马上前，用枪刺李全，好像有什么东西绊住了他的马腿使他停了下来。
English: When Zhang Huimang, a brave general under the command of Guan Yan, saw Li Quan, he immediately leapt forward and stabbed Li Quan with a gun. It was as if something had tripped his horse's leg and made him stop.

古文：全得收余众保东海，刘全分军驻崓上。
现代文：李全得以招集余部保卫东海，刘全分兵驻扎在山上。
English: Li Quan was able to call up the remaining troops to defend the East Sea, while Liu Quan's detachment was stationed in the mountains.

古文：霍仪攻沂州不下，霆自清河出徐州，斩仪，溃其众。
现代文：霍仪攻打沂州没成功，完颜霆从清河出兵到徐州，杀死霍仪，使霍仪的部众溃败。
English: Huo Yi did not succeed in attacking Bozhou, and finally Yan Ting sent troops from Qinghe to Xuzhou, killed Huo Yi, and caused Huo Yi's subordinates to collapse.

古文：彭义斌归李全。
现代文：彭义斌归附李全。
English: Peng Yibin belongs to Li Quan.

古文：黄掴者，即阿鲁达。霆即李二措，赐姓完颜。
现代文：黄扌国，就是阿鲁达，完颜霆就是李二措，被赐姓完颜。
English: Huang Rong Guo is Aruda, and Guan Yan Ting is Li Ercso, who was given the surname Guan Yan.

古文：惠号 赛张飞 ，燕侠士也。
现代文：张惠号称 赛张飞 ，是燕地的侠义之士。
English: Zhang Hui is known as "Sai Zhangfei" and is a chivalrous person in Yan.

古文：此数人者，出没岛崓，宝货山委而不得食，相率食人。
现代文：他们这些人，在海岛和山中出没，宝货堆积如山却得不到粮食吃，相继吃人。
English: These people haunt the islands and mountains, hoarding treasure like a mountain but unable to get food to eat. They eat people one after another.

古文：有沈铎者，镇江武锋卒也，亡命盗贩山阳，诱致米商，斗米辄售数十倍，知楚州应纯之亻赏以玉货，北人至者辄舍之。
现代文：有个叫沈铎的人，是镇江武锋军的士兵，逃命在山阳贩卖粮食，他引诱米商到山阳，一斗米往往以高出十倍的价格卖出，楚州知州应纯之用宝玉买他的粮，北方人到楚州的就施舍给他们。
English: There was a man named Shen Qi, a soldier of the Zhenjiang Wufeng Army, who fled for his life to sell grain in Shanyang. He lured rice merchants to Shanyang. A barrel of rice was often sold at a price ten times higher. Chuzhou and Zhizhou should buy his grain with pure precious stones, and northerners would give them alms when they came to Chuzhou.

古文：又说纯之以归铜钱为名，弛度淮之禁，来者莫可遏。
现代文：沈铎又劝应纯之以回收铜钱为名，废去对渡淮河的禁令，来淮南的人不能阻止。
English: Shen Wei also advised that the ban on crossing the Huaihe River should be abolished in the name of recovering copper money. People who come to Huainan cannot be stopped.

古文：安儿之未败也，有意归宋，招礼宋人。
现代文：杨安儿没失败时，有归宋朝的想法，他对宋人以礼相待。
English: When Yang An'er did not fail, he had the idea of returning to the Song Dynasty. He treated the Song people with courtesy.

古文：定远民季先者，尝为大侠刘佑家厮养，随佑部纲客山阳，安儿见而说之，处以军职。
现代文：定远百姓季先，曾经是大侠刘佑家的奴仆，跟随刘佑押送刘佑的货物住在山阳，杨安儿会见并劝说刘佑，任命他为军官。
English: Dingyuan Qixian, once a slave of the great knight Liu You, followed Liu You to escort Liu You's goods and lived in Shanyang. Yang An'er met and persuaded Liu You and appointed him as an officer.

古文：安儿死，先至山阳，寅缘铎得见纯之，道豪杰愿附之意。
现代文：杨安儿死后，季先到山阳，通过沈铎见到了应纯之，对应纯之说北方豪杰愿意归附的意思。
English: After the death of Yang An'er, Ji went to Shanyang first, and through Shen Yao, he saw the meaning of should be pure, corresponding to the pure saying that the northern hero is willing to be attached.

古文：时江、淮制置李珏、淮东安抚崔与之皆令纯之沿江增戍，恐不能御，乃命先为机察，谕意群豪；叙复铎为武锋军副将，辟楚州都监，与高忠皎各集忠义民兵，分二道攻金。
现代文：当时江、淮制置使李珏、淮东安抚使崔与之都命令应纯之在长江沿岸增加守军，恐怕还不能抵御敌人，就命令季先为机察，去安抚豪杰，表示欢迎他们归附；又恢复沈铎武锋军的军籍并担任副将，征用沈铎为楚州都监，沈铎与高忠皎分别招集忠义民兵，分两路攻打金军。
English: At that time, Jiang Zemin, Huai Zi, Li Qian, Huai Dong's pacifying envoy Cui, and they all ordered Ying Chunzhi to increase the defensive forces along the Yangtze River, fearing that they would not be able to resist the enemy. They ordered Ji Qian to be a shrewd observer, to pacify the heroes, and to welcome them to the annexation; they also restored the military status of Shen Zi's martial army and served as vice generals, and conscripted Shen Zi as the Chuzhou Metropolitan Supervisor. Shen Zi and Gao Zhong Zi separately summoned loyalist militias to attack the

古文：先遂以李全五千人附忠皎，合兵攻克海州，粮援不继，退屯东海。
现代文：季先就以李全的五千人归附高忠皎，合兵攻打海州，因为粮食和援兵没及时到来，就退兵在东海驻屯。
English: Earlier in the season, Li Quan's five thousand men were attached to Gao Zhongyao and joined forces to attack Haizhou. Because food and reinforcements did not arrive in time, they withdrew and stationed in the East China Sea.

古文：全分兵袭破莒州，禽金守蒲察李家，别将于洋克密州，兄福克青州，始授全武翼大夫、京东副总管。
现代文：李全分兵袭击并攻破莒州，活捉金国的守将蒲察李家，与李全配合作战的将领于洋攻克密州，李全的哥哥李福攻克青州，宋廷开始授予李全为武翼大夫、京东副总管。
English: Li Quan's detachment attacked and broke through Zhangzhou, captured alive Jin Guo's general Pu Cha Li Jia, the general who cooperated with Li Quan in the war, attacked Yang Mi Zhou, Li Quan's brother Li Fu attacked Qingzhou, and Song Ting began to award Li Quan as a military doctor and vice-governor of Jingdong.

古文：纯之见北军屡捷，密闻于朝，谓中原可复。
现代文：应纯之见北方来的军队多次获胜，就秘密向朝廷上报，认为中原地区可以收复。
English: Due to his pure view, the army from the north won many times, and secretly reported to the imperial court that the Central Plains could be recovered.

古文：时频岁小稔，朝野无事，丞相史弥远鉴开禧之事，不明招纳，密敕珏及纯之慰接之，号 忠义军 ，就听节制。
现代文：这时连年丰收，国家太平无事，丞相史弥远以开禧北伐的事为借鉴，不明目张胆地招纳北方人，密令李珏和应纯之慰劳和接待北方来的军队，把他们称为 忠义军 ，忠义军就听从他们的指挥。
English: At this time, the harvest was plentiful year after year, the country was peaceful, and the prime minister Shiyan took the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition as a reference. He recruited northerners in an undisguised manner, and secretly ordered Li Xihe to accept the consolation and receive the troops from the north. He called them the Loyalist Army, and the Loyalist Army obeyed their command.

古文：于是有旨依武定军生券例，放钱粮万五千人，名 忠义粮 。
现代文：于是有皇帝诏旨说可按武定军生券的例子，发放一万五千人的钱粮给忠义军，名叫 忠义粮 。
English: Therefore, there was an imperial edict saying that the money and grain for 15,000 people could be distributed to the loyalist army according to the example of the Wuding military student voucher, called "loyalty grain."

古文：于是东海马良、高林、宋德珍等万人辐凑涟水，铎纳之，全与刘全俱起羡心焉。
现代文：于是东海的马良、高林、宋德珍等一万人来到涟水，沈铎接纳了他们，李全和刘全都萌生羡慕之心。
English: As a result, ten thousand people from the East China Sea, including Ma Liang, Gao Lin, and Song Dezhen, came to Surabaya. Sheng Yao accepted them, and Li Quan and Liu were all envious.

古文：嘉定十一年五月己丑，全军至涟水，邀先白事楚城，取器甲金谷，议再攻海州，纯之厚劳全金玉器用及其下有差。
现代文：嘉定十一年五月十九日，李全率军到涟水，希望季先向楚州守臣汇报这件事，取出武器、铠甲、钱粮，商量再攻打海州，应纯之用金玉器物分等级慰劳李全和李全的部下。
English: On May 19, Jiading XI, Li Quan led the army to Surabaya, hoping that Ji would first report the matter to Chuzhou Shouwen, take out weapons, armor, money and grain, discuss and then attack Haizhou, and should use pure gold and jade to comfort Li Quan and Li Quan's subordinates.

古文：六月，全围海城，金经略阿不罕、纳不刺等固守不下。
现代文：六月，李全包围了海城，金国经略阿不罕、纳不剌等人坚守海城，李全没攻下。
English: In June, Li Quan encircled Haicheng, and Jin Guo dispatched Abuhan, Na Buxuan and others to hold on to Haicheng, but Li Quan did not capture it.

古文：七月，合郓、单、邳、徐兵来援，全与战于高桥，不胜，退守石秋，分兵袭密州，禽黄掴，械至楚城。
现代文：七月，金人的郓、单、邳、徐州兵马汇合起来援助海城，李全与金军在高桥交战，没取胜，就退兵守卫石秋，分兵袭击密州，活捉黄扌国，把黄扌国押送到楚州。
English: In July, the Jin troops of Yan, Shan, Lu, and Xuzhou joined forces to aid Haicheng. Li Quan fought with the Jin army at Gaoqiao. When he did not win, he withdrew to guard Shiqu, and his detachment attacked Mishu, captured Huangpi alive, and sent Huangpi to Chuzhou.

古文：是冬，徙屯淮阴之龟山。
现代文：这年冬天，李全转移到淮阴的龟山驻屯。
English: This winter, Li Quan was transferred to the Kameyama garrison in Huaiyin.

古文：十二年，山东来归者不止，权楚州梁丙无以赡。
现代文：嘉定十二年，山东来归附的人络绎不绝，权楚州梁丙没有什么可供养他们。
English: In the twelfth year of Jiading, there was an endless stream of people coming from Shandong to join the Qing Dynasty, and the powerful Chuzhou Emperor Liang Pi had nothing to support them.

古文：先恳丙请预借两月，然后帅所部五千并良等万人往密州就食，不许；请速遣全代领其众，又不许。
现代文：季先恳求梁丙向上级请求预借两个月的钱粮，然后率自己的部下五千人和马良等一万人去密州就地解决吃饭问题，梁丙不答应；季先请求赶快派李全代替梁丙统领他的部下，梁丙又不答应。
English: Ji Xian implored Liang Qian to ask his superiors to lend him two months' money and grain, and then lead his five thousand subordinates and ten thousand people such as Ma Liang to solve the problem of eating on the spot in Meizhou. Liang Qian did not agree; Ji Xian requested to quickly send Li Quan to replace Liang Qian to lead his subordinates, and Liang Qian did not agree.

古文：丙以石珪权军务，珪乃夺运粮之舟，二月庚辰，率军二万度淮大掠。
现代文：梁丙让石王圭负责军务，石王圭就夺走运粮船，二月庚辰日，石王圭率领两万人渡过淮河，大肆掠夺。
English: Liang Hii put Shi Wang Gui in charge of military affairs, and Shi Wang Gui seized a grain freighter. On Geng Chen Day in February, Shi Wang Gui led twenty thousand people across the Huai River and plundered extensively.

古文：丙调王显臣、高友、赵邦永以兵逆之，至南度门，显臣败，友、邦永遇珪，下马与作山东语，皆不复战。
现代文：梁丙调王显臣、高友、赵邦永率兵去堵截石王圭，他们到南度门，王显臣失败，高友、赵邦永遇到石王圭，下马和他说山东话，他们都不再交战。
English: Liang He transferred Wang Xiancheng, Gao You and Zhao Bangyong to lead the troops to block and cut off Shi Wanggui. They arrived at Nandu Gate, Wang Xiancheng failed, Gao You and Zhao Bangyong met Shi Wanggui, dismounted and spoke to him in Shandong dialect, and they no longer fought.

古文：丙窘，乃遣全出谕之。
现代文：梁丙没有办法，才派李全出来劝谕他们。
English: Liang Hii had no choice but to send Li Quan out to advise them.

古文：时金人围淮西急，马司都统李庆宗戍濠，出战，丧骑三千，珪及张春皆有亡失。
现代文：当时金人围攻淮西很紧急，马司都统李庆宗戍守濠州，他与金人交战，丧失三千名骑兵，石王圭和张春都有损失。
English: At that time, it was very urgent for the Jin to besiege Huaxi. Li Qingzong, the Grand Marshal of the Mongol Empire, was in charge of Bozhou. He fought with the Jin and lost three thousand cavalrymen. Shi Wanggui and Zhang Chun both suffered losses.

古文：帅司调全与先、珪军援盱眙。
现代文：帅司调李全和季先、石王圭率军援救盱眙。
English: The commanding officer transferred Li Quanhe ahead of the season, and Shi Wanggui led the army to rescue him.

古文：全亦欲自试，亲往东海点军赴之。
现代文：李全也想试试自己的实力，就亲自去东海选兵前去。
English: Li Quan also wanted to test his own strength, so he went to the East Sea to recruit soldiers in person.

古文：癸亥，遇金人于嘉山，战小捷。
现代文：廿六日，李全与金人在嘉山相遇，取得小胜。
English: On the 26th, Li Quan and Jin Ren met in Jiashan and won a small victory.

古文：三月，先军进驻天长，全进驻盱眙，鼎立以待金人。
现代文：三月，季先的军队进驻天长，李全的军队进驻盱眙，他们形成犄角之势，等待金人。
English: In March, Ji Xian's army was stationed in Tianchang, and Li Quan's army was stationed in Handan. They formed a corner of Handan and waited for Jinren.

古文：乙酉，全至涡口，值金将乞石烈牙吾答名 卢鼓槌 者将济，全与其将鹿仙掩之，金兵溺淮者数千，俘获甚众。
现代文：十九日，李全到达涡口，正赶上金国将领乞石烈牙吾答，号称 卢鼓槌 的将要渡淮河，李全和他的部将鹿仙乘金人不备攻打他们，金兵有数千人在淮河中溺死，很多人被俘虏。
English: On the 19th, Li Quan arrived at the vortex mouth, just in time to catch up with the leader of the Jin State, Beggar Rock, known as Lu Drumstick, who was about to cross the Huai River. Li Quan and his subordinate, Deer Immortal, were not prepared to attack them with gold. Thousands of gold soldiers drowned in the Huai River, and many were captured.

古文：壬辰，与阿海战于化陂湖，大捷，杀金数将，得其金牌，追至曹家庄而还。
现代文：廿六日，李全与阿海在化陂湖交战，取得大捷，杀死金兵将领数人，得到了他们的金牌，追击金兵到曹家庄后回来。
English: On the 26th, Li Quan and Ahai fought in Hualing Lake, won a great victory, killed several Golden Soldier generals, got their gold medals, chased the Golden Soldier to Caojiazhuang and came back.

古文：三围俱解，全丧失亦众。
现代文：被金兵包围的地方全被解救，李全也损失惨重。
English: The places surrounded by the gold soldiers were all rescued, and Li Quan also suffered heavy losses.

古文：阿海者，金所谓四驸马也。
现代文：阿海，是金国所谓的四驸马。
English: Ahai is the so-called four-legged horse in China.

古文：全进达州刺史，妻杨氏封令人。
现代文：李全被进升为达州刺史，李全的妻子杨氏被封为令人。
English: Li Quan was promoted to Dazhou chief historian, and Li Quan's wife, Yang, was awarded the title of outstanding.

古文：六月，金元帅张林以青、莒、密、登、莱、濰、淄、滨、棣、宁海、济南十二州来归。
现代文：六月，金国元帅张林献出青、莒、密、登、莱、潍、淄、滨、棣、宁海、济南十二州归附宋朝。
English: In June, Zhang Lin, the marshal of Jin Province, offered the twelve states of Qing, Min, Min, Deng, Lai, Min, Min, Bin, Min, Ninghai and Jinan to be annexed to the Song Dynasty.

古文：始，林心存宋，及掴败，意决而未能达。
现代文：当初，张林心中思念宋朝，黄扌国失败后，张林决心归附宋朝但没能成功。
English: At first, Zhang Lin's heart yearned for the Song Dynasty. After the defeat of Huangdi, Zhang Lin was determined to join the Song Dynasty, but failed.

古文：会全还濰州上冢，揣知林意，乃薄兵青州城下，陈说国家威德，劝林早附。
现代文：恰好李全回到潍州上坟，知道张林的心思，就进兵到青州城下，陈说国家的威德，劝张林早日归附。
English: Just as Li Quan returned to Zhangzhou to visit the tomb, knowing Zhang Lin's thoughts, he marched into the city of Qingzhou, expounded the country's virtues, and persuaded Zhang Lin to return as soon as possible.

古文：林恐全诱己，犹豫未纳。
现代文：张林怕李全是诱惑自己，犹豫着没答应。
English: Zhang Lin was afraid that Li Quan was tempting him, so he hesitated and did not agree.

古文：全约挺身入城，惟数人从，林乃开门纳之，相见甚欢，谓得所托，置酒结为兄弟。
现代文：李全与他相约自己要亲自进入青州城，只带几个随从，张林就开门迎接他，他们相见后十分高兴，张林说他得到了可以托付的人，就摆酒与李全结拜为兄弟。
English: Li Quan made an appointment with him to enter the city of Qingzhou in person, taking only a few followers with him. Zhang Lin opened the door to welcome him. They were very happy to see each other. Zhang Lin said that he had found someone who could be entrusted to him, and he drank wine with Li Quan and bowed as brothers.

古文：全既得林要领，附表奉十二州版籍以归。
现代文：李全得知张林的主要情况，把十二州的疆域图附在上表中回来。
English: When Li Quan learned the main situation of Zhanglin, he returned with the map of the twelve states attached to the above table.

古文：表辞有云： 举诸七十城之全齐，归我三百年之旧主。 表，冯垍所作也。
现代文：他上表的话中有 ：把整个齐地的七十座城池，归还给我三百年的旧主人。 这个奏表，是冯土自写的。
English: Among his last words were: "Return the entire 70 castles of Qi to my 300-year-old master." This report was written by Feng Tu.

古文：秋，授林武翼大夫、京东安抚兼总管，其余授官有差。
现代文：秋天，张林被授予武翼大夫、京东安抚兼总管，其他人也被授予等级不同的官职。
English: In the autumn, Zhang Lin was awarded the title of Wuyi Doctor, and the title of Jingdong Pacifier and General Manager. Others were also awarded different levels of official positions.

古文：进全广州观察使、京东总管，刘庆福、彭义斌皆为统制，增放二万人钱粮，徙屯楚州。
现代文：李全被进升为广州观察使、京东总管，刘庆福、彭义斌都是统制，朝廷增加发放了二万人的钱粮，他们转移到楚州驻扎。
English: Li Quan was promoted to the post of Guangzhou observation envoy and general manager of JD.com, Liu Qingfu and Peng Yibin were in charge of the system, and the imperial court increased the distribution of money grain to 20,000 people, and they were transferred to Chuzhou.

古文：先是，制置使贾涉以朝命督战，许杀金太子者，赏节度使；杀亲王，承宣使；杀驸马，观察使。
现代文：先前，制置使贾涉奉朝廷的命令督战，向大家许诺说杀死金国太子的人，赏给节度使的官职；杀死金国亲王的人，赏给承宣使的官职；杀死金国驸马的人，赏给观察使的官职。
English: Previously, Jia Wanzhong, the commander of the army, had been ordered by the imperial court to supervise the battle, and promised everyone that the person who killed the prince of Jin would be awarded the official post of the festival envoy; the person who killed the prince of Jin would be awarded the official post of the envoy; and the person who killed the horse of Jin would be awarded the official post of the observation envoy.

古文：全致所得金牌于涉，云杀四驸马所获者。
现代文：李全把所得的金牌交给贾涉，说这是杀死金国的四驸马得到的。
English: Li Quan handed the gold medal to Jawang, saying that it was awarded to the four-horse team that killed Jin Guo.

古文：涉上于朝，乞如约赏之，故全有是受，而四驸马实不死也。
现代文：贾涉把金牌交给朝廷，请求皇上如约赏赐李全，因此李全才被任命为广州观察使的官职，而金国的四驸马实际没有死。
English: Jia Zhan handed the gold medal to the imperial court and asked the emperor to reward Li Quan as promised. Therefore, Li Quan was appointed to the official post of Guangzhou observation envoy, while the four horses of Jin Guo did not actually die.

古文：十一月，大雨雪，淮冰合。
现代文：十一月，天下大雨雪，淮河结冰。
English: In November, there was heavy rain and snow, and the Huaihe River froze.

古文：全请于制府曰： 每恨泗州阻水，今如平地矣，请取东西城自效。 制府遣就盱眙刘琸议，琸集诸将燕全，时青、夏全咸愿以长枪三千人从。
现代文：李全向制府请示说： 我常恨泗州有水阻隔，如今像平地一样了，我请求攻取泗州东、西二城来报效国家。 制府派李全到盱眙与刘王卓商议，刘王卓召集众将宴请李全，时青、夏全都愿意率长枪手三千人跟从他。
English: Li Quanzhou petitioned the Government of the Republic of China, saying, "I have always hated that there is a water barrier in Bozhou, but now it is like a flat land. I request that you capture the two cities in the east and west of Bozhou to serve the country." The Government of the Republic of China sent Li Quanzhou to Handan to discuss with Liu Wangzhuo. Liu Wangzhuo gathered all the generals to invite Li Quanzhou to a banquet. Shixing and Xia were all willing to lead three thousand gunmen to follow him.

古文：夜半度淮，潜向泗之东城，将踏濠冰傅城下，掩金人不备。
现代文：李全他们半夜渡过淮河，在泗州东城的方向隐藏起来，准备踏着护城濠的冰靠近城墙，乘金人不备攻城。
English: They crossed the Huaihe River in the middle of the night and hid in the direction of the eastern city of Zhangzhou, preparing to step on the ice of the moat to get close to the city wall.

古文：俄城上荻炬数百齐举，遥谓曰： 贼李三！
现代文：顷刻间城上数百枚荻草做成的火炬一齐举起来，城上的人从远处对李全说： 贼李三！
English: In an instant, hundreds of torches made of rushes on the city were held up together, and people on the city said to Li Quan from a distance: Thief Li San!

古文：汝欲偷城耶？ 天黑，故以火烛之。
现代文：你想偷袭我们的城池吗？ 天色很黑，所以用火把照明。
English: Do you want to attack our city by stealth? It was very dark, so we used torches to light the way.

古文：全知有备，引去。
现代文：李全知道泗州有准备，就退去。
English: Li Quan knew that Zhangzhou was prepared, so he retreated.

古文：十三年，赵拱以朝命谕京东，过青厓崓，严实求内附。
现代文：嘉定十三年，赵拱奉朝廷的命令去京东劝谕，路过青山固，严实请求归附宋朝。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jiading, Zhao Gong was ordered by the imperial court to go to Beijing East for advice. Passing through Qingshan, he earnestly requested to be annexed to the Song Dynasty.

古文：拱与定约，奉实款至山阳，举魏、博、恩、德、怀、卫、开、相九州来归。
现代文：赵拱与严实定约，带着严实的降表来到山阳，严实献出魏、博、恩、德、怀、卫、开、相九州来归附。
English: Zhao Gong made a contract with Yan Si, and came to Sanyang with Yan Si's letter of abdication. Yan Si offered Wei, Bo, En, De, Huai, Wei, Kai, and So Kyushu to be annexed.

古文：涉再遣拱往谕，配兵二千，全亦请往，涉不能止，乃帅楚州及盱眙忠义万余人以行。
现代文：贾涉又派赵拱前去劝谕，配备二千兵卒，李全也请求前去，贾涉不能阻止，李全就率楚州及盱眙的忠义军一万多人出发。
English: Jia Wu also sent Zhao Gong forward to advise, equipped with two thousand soldiers, Li Quan also requested to go, Jia Wu could not stop, Li Quan led more than ten thousand loyalist troops from Chuzhou and Handan to set out.

古文：拱说全曰： 将军提兵度河，不用而归，非示武也，今乘势取东平，可乎？ 于是全合林军得数万，袭东平之城南。
现代文：赵拱劝李全说 ：将军领兵渡过黄河，什么也不干就回来，这不能显示武威，现在乘势攻取东平，可以吗？ 于是李全会合张林的军队共有数万人，袭击东平的城南。
English: Zhao Gong advised Li Quan to say: "The general led the troops across the Yellow River and did nothing but come back. This cannot show military prowess. Can we now take advantage of the situation to capture Dongping?" So Li Quan gathered tens of thousands of Zhang Lin's troops and attacked the south of Dongping.

古文：金参政蒙古刚帅众守东平，全以三千人金银甲、赤帜，绕濠跃马索战。
现代文：金国参政蒙古刚率领众人守卫东平，李全带领三千人穿着金银甲、打着红旗，绕过护城濠跃马求战。
English: The Mongolian Gang, who had participated in the politics of Jin Guo, led the crowd to guard Dongping, and Li Quan led three thousand people wearing gold and silver armor and waving red flags to bypass the city's gate to fight.

古文：时大暑，全见城阻水，矢石不能及，乃与林夹汶水而砦，中通浮梁来往。
现代文：当时天气酷热，李全见东平城被水阻隔，弓箭射不进，就与张林在汶水两边安营扎寨，中间架设浮桥来往。
English: At that time, the weather was extremely hot. Li Quan saw that Dongping City was cut off by water, and bows and arrows could not be shot, so he and Zhang Lin camped on both sides of the water and set up a pontoon bridge in the middle.

古文：一夕，汶水溢，漂大木，断浮梁，全首尾几绝，盖金人堰汶水而决之也。
现代文：一天傍晚，汶水暴涨，把大木头漂走，冲断了浮桥，李全首尾不能相顾，几乎被淹，这是金人做的手脚。
English: One evening, the water of the Wen River surged, carrying away large logs and breaking the pontoon bridge. Li Quan could not keep his eyes open, and was almost drowned. This was the work of Jinren.

古文：诘旦，金骑兵三百奄至，全欣然上马，帅帐前所有骑赴之，杀数人，夺其马，逐北抵山谷。
现代文：第二天早晨，金国的三百名骑兵突然到来，李全欣然上马，统领跟前的所有骑兵迎战，杀死数名金兵，夺来了他们的马，追金兵北达山谷。
English: The next morning, three hundred cavalry from China suddenly arrived. Li Quan gladly mounted his horse, led all the cavalry in front of him to fight, killed several gold soldiers, captured their horses, and chased the gold soldiers north to the valley.

古文：上有龙虎上将军者，贯银甲，挥长槊，盛兵以出，旁有绣旗女将驰枪突斗。
现代文：山上有位龙虎上将军，身穿银甲，挥舞着长槊，率众兵出来，旁边绣旗下有位女将手拿长枪快速地舞动战斗。
English: There is a dragon and tiger general on the mountain, dressed in silver armor, waving a long scepter, leading the soldiers out, and next to him is a female general holding a long gun and quickly dancing to fight.

古文：会诸将至，拔全以出，乃退保长清县，精锐丧失太半，统制陈孝忠死焉。
现代文：恰好众将赶来，把李全从包围圈中救出，李全等人就退兵保卫长清县，精锐兵马损失了一多半，统制陈孝忠战死。
English: Just as the crowd was about to arrive and rescue Li Quan from the encirclement, Li Quan and others withdrew to defend Changqing County. More than half of the elite soldiers and horses were lost, and the commanding officer Chen Xiaozhong was killed.

古文：林兵还青州。
现代文：张林的兵马回到青州。
English: Zhang Lin's soldiers and horses returned to Qingzhou.

古文：全所携镇江军五百人多怨愤，全乃分隶拱，使先归，而以余众道沧州，假盐利以慰赡之。
现代文：李全统率的五百多镇江军多数人心中怨愤，李全就把他们分给赵拱统领，让他们先回去，他自己率领剩下的人取道沧州，靠盐利慰抚和养活他们。
English: The majority of the more than five hundred Zhenjiang troops led by Li Quan were resentful. Li Quan assigned them to Zhao Gong, the leader, and let them go back first. He himself led the rest of the people to take the road to Cangzhou, and comforted and fed them with salt.

古文：龙虎上将军者，东平副帅干不搭；女将者，刘节使女也。
现代文：龙虎上将军，是东平副统帅干不搭；那员女将，是刘节使的女儿。
English: The dragon and tiger general is the deputy commander of Dongping; the female general is the daughter of Liu Jiechi.

古文：全至楚州，属召先赴行在。
现代文：李全来到楚州，朝廷专门召季先去行在。
English: When Li Quan came to Chuzhou, the imperial court specially summoned Ji to go there first.

古文：全自涡口之捷，有轻诸将心，独先尝策战勋，威望不下己，患之。
现代文：李全自从取得涡口大捷以来，就有轻视其他将领的心，只有季先曾经立过战功，威望不在自己的下面，李全认为这是祸患。
English: Ever since Li Quan won the Battle of Turukou, he had despised other generals. Only Ji Xian had made war exploits, and his prestige was not below his own. Li Quan thought this was a calamity.

古文：乃阴结制帅所任吏莫凯，使谮先，先卒，全喜而心益贰。
现代文：李全就暗中交结制置使的下属官吏莫凯，让他诬陷季先，季先去世后，李全很高兴，对朝廷更是存有二心。
English: Li Quan secretly befriended Mokai, a subordinate official of the ambassador, and let him frame Ji Xian. After Ji Xian's death, Li Quan was very happy, and was even more ambivalent about the imperial court.

古文：涉乘先死，欲收其军，辍统制陈选往涟水以总之。
现代文：贾涉趁季先死去的机会，想收他的军队，派统制陈选去涟水统帅季先的军队。
English: Taking the opportunity of Ji Xian's death, Jia Wu wanted to gather his army and sent commander Chen Zheng to Surabaya to command Ji Xian's army.

古文：先党裴渊、宋德珍、孙武正及王义深、张山、张友拒而不受，潜迎石珪于盱眙，奉为统帅。
现代文：季先的党羽裴渊、宋德珍、孙武正和王义深、张山、张友抵制并且不接受陈选的指挥，暗中从盱眙迎来石王圭，把石王圭尊奉为统帅。
English: The previous season's party leaders Pei Yuan, Song Dezhen, Sun Wuzhen and Wang Yishen, Zhang Shan, Zhang You resisted and did not accept Chen Xuan's command, secretly welcoming Shi Wang Gui from Shao and honoring Shi Wang Gui as the commander.

古文：珪道楚城，涉不知觉，及选还，涉耻之，乃谋分珪军为六，请于朝，出修武、京东路钤辖印告各六授渊等，使之分统，谓可散其纵。
现代文：石王圭路过楚州，贾涉不知道，等陈选回来后，贾涉认为很羞耻，就计划把石王圭的军队分成六部分，他向朝廷请示，拿出修武、京东路钤辖的官印、告示各六个授予裴渊等人，让他们分别统领这六军，说这可以分散他们的力量。
English: Shi Wang Gui passed through Chuzhou, but Jia Wan did not know. After Chen Zheng returned, Jia Wan thought it was very shameful and planned to divide Shi Wang Gui's army into six parts. He asked the court for instructions, and took out the military training, the official seal of the Beijing East Road Administration, and the notice to award six each to Pei Yuan and others, so that they could separately command these six armies, saying that this could disperse their power.

古文：渊等阳受命，涉即闻于朝，谓六人已顺从，珪无能为矣。
现代文：裴渊等人表面接受任命，贾涉就把这事上奏给朝廷，说裴渊等六人已经顺从，石王圭不能有什么作为了。
English: Pei Yuan and others ostensibly accepted the appointment, and Jia Wanzhou reported the matter to the imperial court, saying that Pei Yuan and the other six had already complied, and Shi Wanggui could not do anything.

古文：其后有教令皆不纳，然后知渊等犹主珪，涉恐甚。
现代文：这以后上级有什么命令裴渊等六人都不接受，贾涉才知道裴渊等还把石王圭当成统帅，贾涉非常恐惧。
English: After this, Pei Yuan and the other six did not accept any orders from their superiors. It was only when Jia Tang learned that Pei Yuan and the others still regarded Shi Wang Gui as the commander-in-chief that Jia Tang was very afraid.

古文：全结府吏伺知之，乃见涉，请讨珪，涉未有处。
现代文：李全交结制置使司的官吏侦知了这件事的具体情形，就去见贾涉，请求去征讨石王圭，贾涉没做什么安排。
English: When the officials of the Li Quan Jia Jie and the Envoy Division learned the specific circumstances of this matter, they went to see Jia Watan and requested to collect Shi Wang Gui. Jia Watan did not make any arrangements.

古文：议者请以全军布南度门，移淮阴战舰陈于淮岸，以示珪有备，然后命一将招珪军，来者增钱粮，不至罢支，众心一散，珪党自离。
现代文：议事的人请求把李全的军队部署在南度门，把淮阴的战舰陈列在淮河岸边，用这些向石王圭表示政府已有准备，然后命令一位将领去招石王圭的部众，来的人增加钱粮，不来的人不再给钱粮；众心一散，石王圭的党羽自然分崩离析。
English: The negotiators asked for Li Quan's army to be deployed at Nandu Gate and for Huaiyin's warships to be displayed on the banks of the Huai River. They used these to show Shi Wanggui that the government was ready. They then ordered a general to invite Shi Wanggui's subordinates. Those who came would be given more money and grain, and those who did not come would not be given any more money and grain. The hearts of the people were scattered, and Shi Wanggui's party naturally fell apart.

古文：涉用其策，珪技果穷。
现代文：贾涉采用了这个对策，石王圭果然没了办法。
English: Jia Wan adopted this countermeasure, but Shi Wang Gui had no choice.

古文：珪素通好于大元，至是杀渊而挟武正、德珍与其谋主孟导归大元。
现代文：石王圭一向与大元通好，这时就杀裴渊并挟持孙武正、宋德珍和他的军师孟导归附大元。
English: Shi Wanggui had always been friendly with Taiyuan, so he killed Pei Yuan and seized Sun Wuzhen, Song Dezhen and his military instructor Meng Du to attach to Taiyuan.

古文：涟水军未有所属，全求并将之。
现代文：涟水的军队没有人统帅，李全请求合并起来由他指挥。
English: Surabaya's army had no commander, and Li Quan requested that it be merged under his command.

古文：客有请以附淮将者，曰： 使南将主北军，则淮、楚为一。 涉然之，且曰： 先在时有三千虚籍，今当遣明亮核实，因可省费。 全闻之即献计曰： 全若朝将此军，夕与核除虚籍。 因卑辞献珍具以自结，涉不能却，遂以付全。
现代文：贾涉的门客有请求把涟水的军队交给淮河守将统帅的，说： 让南方将领统帅北方军，那就能淮、楚形成一体。 贾涉同意，并且说： 季先在时他的军队有三千个不真实的军籍，现在应该派明亮去核实，还可以节省军费。 李全听说就献计说 ：我李全如果是早晨统帅这支部队，晚上就核实并除去那些不真实的军籍。 
English: Jia Wan's concubine requested that the army of Surabaya be placed under the command of the general of the Huai River, Cun, and said, "Let the southern general command the northern army, then Huai and Chu will be able to form a single unit." Jia Wan agreed, and said, "At the time of Ji Xian, his army had three thousand false military ranks. Now, they should send a bright person to verify, and they can also save military expenses." When Li Quan heard this, he proposed a plan, saying, "If I, Li Quan, were to command this army in the morning, I would verify and remove those false military ranks in the evening

古文：翼日，复命曰： 初谓有虚额，昨夕细点，万五千人之外尚溢十数名。 涉始悟全见绐，他日议更遣幕属点之。
现代文：并趁机说了很多谦卑的话，献出珍宝来巴结贾涉，贾涉不能推辞，就把涟水军的指挥权交给了李全。第二天，李全来复命说 ：起初说是有空额，昨晚仔细查点，在一万五千人之外还多了十几名。 贾涉才明白自己上了李全的当，另一天议定改换自己的幕僚去统帅涟水的军队。
English: And he took the opportunity to say a lot of humble words, offering precious treasures to appease Jia Watan. Jia Watan could not refuse, so he handed over the command of the Surabaya army to Li Quan. The next day, Li Quan came back and said: At first, it was said that there was a vacancy, but last night I checked carefully, and there were more than a dozen people in addition to the fifteen thousand. Jia Watan only realized that he had fallen into Li Quan's trap, and the next day they agreed to change his staff to command the Surabaya army.

古文：吏亟报全，全忽状白涉： 昨夕三鼓，涟水告警，云金人万余在邳州。
现代文：李全结交的制置使司的官吏急忙把这个消息告诉李全，李全赶紧向贾涉报告说： 昨天晚上三更时，涟水来报警，说金人一万多人在邳州。
English: Li Quan's officials hurried to inform Li Quan of the news. Li Quan hurriedly reported to Jia Wu: Yesterday evening, at 3:00 p.m., Lishui called the police and said that there were more than 10,000 gold people in Zhangzhou.

古文：全思涟水去邳咫尺，既无险阻，城壁复弊，一被攻劫，则直临淮面，罪在全矣。
现代文：我李全考虑涟水和邳州近在咫尺，既无险阻，城墙又残破，一旦被攻破，金人就会直接逼近淮水，罪过全在我李全啊！
English: I, Li Quan, considered that Surabaya and Luzhou were close at hand. There was no obstacle, and the city wall was still in ruins. Once it was breached, the Jin people would directly approach Huai Shui. The fault was all mine, Li Quan!

古文：深夜不敢惊制使，已调七千人迎敌矣。 涉知全诈，因寝点军之议。
现代文：深夜我不敢惊动制使，已经调七千人去迎击敌人了。 贾涉知道李全诡诈，就停止了派僚属去统兵的议论。
English: In the middle of the night, I didn't dare to alert the commander, and seven thousand men had already been dispatched to meet the enemy. Jia Wan knew that Li Quan was deceitful, so he stopped talking about sending his subordinates to lead the troops.

古文：全又白制府请于朝，以刘全为总管驻扬州，分数千兵从之，而将其众。
现代文：李全又对制府说，让制府向朝廷请示，以刘全为总管驻扎在扬州，分给他数千人跟随他，而李全来统帅刘全的部众。
English: Li Quan also said to the government that the government should ask the imperial court to instruct Liu Quan to be stationed in Yangzhou as the general manager, assign him thousands of people to follow him, and Li Quan should come to command Liu Quan's subordinates.

古文：十一月丁未，全游金山，作佛事，以荐国殇。
现代文：十一月廿一日，李全游金山，做佛事，祭祀为国牺牲的人。
English: On November 21, Li Quanyou went to Jinshan Mountain to do Buddhist rites and offer sacrifices to those who died for the country.

古文：知镇江府乔行简方舟逆之，大合乐以飨之。
现代文：镇江府知府乔行简迎接李全时与李全的船并行，用大合乐招待他。
English: Zhenjiang prefectural governor Qiao Xingjian greeted Li Quan while walking alongside Li Quan's boat and invited him with great music.

古文：总领程覃迭为主礼，务讠夸北人以繁盛。
现代文：总领程覃交替为李全主持祭礼，极力夸奖说北方人才济济。
English: The chief usher Cheng Zou alternately presided over the ceremony for Li Quan, and praised the talent in the north.

古文：全请所狎娼，覃不与，全归，语其徒曰： 江南佳丽无比，须与若等一到。 始造舭〈舟达〉舟，谋争舟楫之利焉。
现代文：李全向程覃请求要他喜爱的侍女，程覃不给，李全回来后对他的部下说 ：江南的美女无与伦比，我和你们应该一起享受。 他开始制造舭舟达船，谋划争夺靠船获得的利益。
English: Li Quan asked Cheng Yao for his favorite maid, but Cheng Yao refused to give it to him. After Li Quan returned, he said to his subordinates, "The beauty of the south of the Yangtze River is incomparable, and I should enjoy it with you." He began to make rafts and boats, and planned to compete for the profits gained by the boats.

古文：十四年正月，金人将南来，全请于涉，欲与刘琸共图泗州，以伐其谋，涉许之。
现代文：嘉定十四年正月，金人准备南来，李全向贾涉请求，想同刘王卓共同攻打泗州，破坏金人的计划，贾涉允许。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of Jiading, when Jinren was preparing to come to the south, Li Quan asked Jia Wan to attack Zhangzhou together with Liu Wangzhuo and sabotage Jinren's plan. Jia Wan agreed.

古文：全兵至盱眙度淮，攻克泗州之西城，入城布守。
现代文：李全的军队到盱眙渡过淮河，攻克泗州的西城，进城布置防守的事。
English: Li Quan's army crossed the Huai River to Handan, conquered the western city of Handan, and entered the city to set up defenses.

古文：琸徙盱眙刍粟以实之，防城之具俱撤以往，为必守之计。
现代文：刘王卓调盱眙的粮草充实泗州西城，防守盱眙的器具都撤下来运到泗州，做坚守泗州的打算。
English: Liu Wangzhuo's grain and grasses enriched the western city of Ganzhou, and the defensive tools were removed and transported to Ganzhou, with the intention of holding fast to Ganzhou.

古文：未几，卢鼓槌来取西城，全盛兵出战，大败，统制赖兴死，全闭城自守。
现代文：不久，卢鼓槌来攻取西城，李全率大军出来迎战，大败，统制赖兴战死，李全关上城门防守。
English: Soon, Lu Drumstick came to attack the West City, Li Quan led a large army to meet the battle, and was defeated. The governor Lai Xing was killed in the battle, and Li Quan closed the city gate for defense.

古文：明日复战，不胜，全遁归，资粮器械悉以委敌。
现代文：第二天李全与金人又交战没取胜，李全逃了回来，物资、粮食和守城的器械都丢给了敌人。
English: The next day, Li Quan and the Jin people fought again without winning. Li Quan fled back, and the supplies, grain, and equipment for defending the city were all lost to the enemy.

古文：金人既陷蕲州，扈再兴、赵范及其弟葵邀击于天长。
现代文：金人攻陷蕲州后，扈再兴、赵范和赵范的弟弟赵葵在天长邀击金人。
English: After the Jin people invaded Zhangzhou, Zou Zaixing, Zhao Fan and Zhao Fan's brother Zhao Kwai invited the Jin people to attack in Tianchang.

古文：全随行袭金人后，谒而贺曰： 二监军已立大功，乞以余寇付全追之。 然全追之不甚力，亦以是进承宣使。
现代文：李全随行在后面袭击金人，李全拜见他们并对他们说 ：二位监军已立了大功，请把剩下的敌寇交给我李全追击。 但李全追击金人不太尽力，他也因此进升为承宣使。
English: Accompanied by Li Quan, he attacked the Jin people from behind. Li Quan paid them a visit and said to them, "The two supervisors have done a great service. Please give me the remaining enemy bandits. Li Quan will pursue them." However, Li Quan did not do his best to pursue the Jin people, and he was promoted to the position of envoy.

古文：十五年二月，琸再取西城，卢鼓槌背城力战，戒惠必获全，不获则斩。
现代文：嘉定十五年二月，刘王卓再次攻打泗州西城，卢鼓槌背城力战，告诫张惠一定要俘获李全，不俘获就斩杀张惠。
English: In February of the fifteenth year of Jiading, Liu Wangzhuo once again attacked Xicheng, Luzhou, and warned Zhang Hui that he must capture Li Quan, otherwise he would kill Zhang Hui.

古文：惠数尝败全于山东，而不能获，每叹曰： 天假此贼，事未可量。 及闻卢鼓槌言，自度进未必获，退复受戮，即陈跃马奔全壁，弃所执兵请降。
现代文：张惠在山东曾多次败在李全手下，却不能得到他，常叹气说： 上天帮助这个贼，他的事情不能衡量。 张惠听到卢鼓槌的话后，自己估计进不一定得到李全，退又要被杀，就陈兵跃马奔向李全的营地，放弃自己统帅的士兵请求归降。
English: Zhang Hui had been defeated many times in Shandong by Li Quan, but could not get him, and often sighed, "Heaven help this thief, his deeds cannot be measured." After Zhang Hui heard Lu Drumstick's words, he estimated that he would not necessarily get Li Quan, and that he would be killed if he retreated, so Chen Bingyue Ma ran to Li Quan's camp and asked the soldiers who had given up their commander to surrender.

古文：全掖而起之，相与欢甚。
现代文：李全搀他起来，他俩都很高兴。
English: Li Quan picked him up and they were both very happy.

古文：不数日，惠戏下数千人皆潜至，全与惠归，请于制置司官之，令自总一军。
现代文：不几天，张惠部下数千人都偷着前来，李全同张惠回来，向制置司请求授予张惠官职，制置司命令张惠总领自己的军队。
English: Within a few days, thousands of Zhang Hui's subordinates had secretly arrived. Li Quan returned with Zhang Hui to request that Zhang Hui be granted an official post by the Ministry of Supply and Construction. The Ministry of Supply and Construction ordered Zhang Hui to lead his own army.

古文：胶西当登、宁海之冲，百货辐凑，全使其兄福守之，为窟宅计。
现代文：胶西处于登州、宁海的交通要道，各种货物都在这里集散，李全让他的哥哥李福守胶西，作为自己的大本营。
English: Jiaoxi is located on the important transportation route of Dengzhou and Ninghai, and all kinds of goods are distributed here. Li Quan asked his brother Li Fu to keep Jiaoxi as his base camp.

古文：时互市始通，北人尤重南货，价增十倍。
现代文：当时与金国的互市才开通，北方人特别喜欢南方的货物，南方的货物价格增长了十倍。
English: At that time, the mutual market with China had just opened, and northerners were particularly fond of goods from the south, and the price of goods from the south had increased tenfold.

古文：全诱商人至山阳，以舟浮其货而中分之，自淮转海，达于胶西。
现代文：李全引诱商人到山阳，用船装上商人们的货物，获得的利润他分得一半，从淮河转到海上，抵达胶西。
English: Li Quan lured the merchants to Shanyang, loaded the goods of the merchants with the ship, and he got half of the profits. He turned from the Huaihe River to the sea and arrived in Jiaoxi.

古文：福又具车辇之，而税其半，然后从听往诸郡贸易，车、夫皆督办于林，林不能堪。
现代文：李福又用车运送，而且收一半的货税，然后听凭他们到各地去贸易，运送货物的车和人力都由张林负责，张林不能承受。
English: Li Fu also transported by car, and collected half of the goods tax, and then let them go to trade around the country. Zhang Lin was responsible for the car and manpower to transport the goods, and Zhang Lin could not bear it.

古文：林财计仰六盐场，福恃其弟有大造于林，又欲分其半，林许福恣取盐，而不分场。
现代文：张林的财计依靠六个盐场，李福仗着自己的弟弟成全过张林，又想分盐场的一半，张林允许李福随便取盐，但不分盐场。
English: Zhang Lin's financial plan relied on six salt farms. Li Fu, relying on his younger brother, successfully passed through Zhang Lin and wanted to share half of the salt farm. Zhang Lin allowed Li Fu to take salt at will, but did not share the salt farm.

古文：福怒曰： 若背恩耶？
现代文：李福生气地说 ：你想忘恩负义吗？
English: Li Fu said angrily: Do you want to be ungrateful?

古文：待与都统提兵取若头尔！ 林惧，诉于制置司。
现代文：等着我与都统领兵取你的头吧！ 张林恐惧，把这事向制置司汇报了。
English: Wait for me to take your head with the leader of the general troops. Zhang Lin was afraid and reported the matter to the Department of Construction.

古文：涉密召林戏下问之，福伏兵于途以伺，林觉不追。
现代文：贾涉秘密地召来张林的部下询问，李福在中途设下伏兵，张林发现了没有追击。
English: Jia Wu secretly summoned Zhang Lin's subordinates to inquire. Li Fu set up an ambush in the middle of the road, but Zhang Lin found that there was no pursuit.

古文：于是李马儿说林归大元，福狼狈走楚州。
现代文：于是李马儿劝说张林归附了大元，李福狼狈地逃到楚州。
English: As a result, Li Ma'er persuaded Zhang Lin to return to Taiyuan, and Li Fu fled to Chuzhou in panic.

古文：冬，加全招信军节度。
现代文：这年冬，李全被加封为招信军节度。
English: This winter, Li Quan was sealed as a recruit for the army.

古文：林犹遗涉书诋全，明己非叛。
现代文：张林还给贾涉写信诋毁李全，说明自己不是背叛。
English: Zhang Lin also wrote a letter to Jia Wan to slander Li Quan, explaining that he was not a traitor.

古文：涉以咎全，全请为朝廷取之，乃提师驻海州以迫林。
现代文：贾涉因此怪罪李全，李全请求说他愿意替朝廷去追击张林，就率兵驻扎在海州逼迫张林。
English: Jia Wanzhou therefore blamed Li Quan. Li Quan requested that he was willing to pursue Zhang Lin on behalf of the imperial court, and he stationed his soldiers in Haizhou to pursue Zhang Lin.

古文：涉间道遣黥胥王翊、阎琼劳林，林泣涕道其故。
现代文：贾涉派黥胥王翊、阎琼去慰劳张林，张林哭着讲述其中的缘故。
English: Jia Wan sent Yao Wangtao and Yan Qiong to comfort Zhang Lin, and Zhang Lin cried and told the reason.

古文：翊归，全使人杀诸涂。
现代文：王翊回来，李全派人在路上杀了他。
English: When Wang Yao returned, Li Quan sent someone to kill him on the road.

古文：全攻林急，林走，全遂入青州。
现代文：李全攻打张林很急，张林逃走，李全就进入青州。
English: Li Quan attacked Zhang Lin very quickly, Zhang Lin fled, and Li Quan entered Qingzhou.

古文：十六年二月，涉劝农出郊，暮归入门，忠义军遮道，涉使人语杨氏，杨氏驰出门，佯怒忠义而挥之，道开，涉乃入城。
现代文：嘉定十六年二月，贾涉到城郊去勉励农民耕种，晚上回来入城门，忠义军挡住道路，贾涉派人去告诉杨氏，杨氏赶紧出城门，假装对忠义军发怒并挥退他们，道路才打开，贾涉才进入城中。
English: In February of the 16th year of Jiading, Jia Wanzhou went to the outskirts of the city to encourage farmers to cultivate. When he returned to the city gate in the evening, the loyalist army blocked the road. Jia Wanzhou sent someone to tell Mr. Yang. Mr. Yang hurried out of the city gate, pretended to be angry with the loyalist army and drove them away. The road was only opened when Jia Wanzhou entered the city.

古文：自是以疾求去甚力。
现代文：从此贾涉以有病为名，更是极力请求辞职。
English: From then on, Jia Wu, in the name of being ill, even more strongly requested to resign.

古文：五月被召。
现代文：贾涉五月份被召回京城，去世。
English: Jia Wanzhou was recalled to Beijing in May and passed away.

古文：卒。秋，全新置忠义军籍。
现代文：秋天，李全重新设置忠义军的军籍。
English: In the autumn, Li Quan reinstated the military registration of the loyalist army.

古文：初，涉屯镇江副司八千人于城中，翟朝宗统之；分帐前忠义万人，屯五千城西，赵邦永、高友统之；屯五千淮阴，王晖及于潭统之，所以制北军也。
现代文：当初，贾涉在城中驻扎着镇江副司八千人，由翟朝宗统帅；贾涉把自己掌握的一万名忠义军分开，五千人驻扎在城西，由赵邦永、高友统帅；五千人驻扎在淮阴，由王晖和于潭统帅；想以此控制北方归附的军队。
English: At first, Jia Wu stationed eight thousand people of the Zhenjiang Deputy Division in the city, led by Gong Chaozong; Jia Wu separated the ten thousand loyalist troops under his control, five thousand people were stationed in the west of the city, led by Zhao Bangyong and Gaoyou; five thousand people were stationed in Huaiyin, led by Wang Qian and Yu Tan; he wanted to control the army attached to the north in this way.

古文：全轻镇江兵，且以利啖其统制陈选及赵兴，使不为己患；唯忌帐前忠义，乃数称高友等勇，遇出军必请以自随，涉不许。
现代文：李全看不起镇江兵，并且用利引诱镇江兵的统制陈选和赵兴，使他们不成为自己的祸患；只忌恨贾涉手下的忠义军，就多次称赞高友等人勇猛，遇到出兵时一定要请求让这些忠义军跟随自己，贾涉不答应。
English: Li Quan looked down on the Zhenjiang soldiers, and used interest to lure the Zhenjiang soldiers' commanding officers Chen Zheng and Zhao Xing, so that they would not become their own scourge; he only hated Jia for involving the loyalist troops under his command, and repeatedly praised Gao You and others for their bravery. When encountering troops, he must request that these loyalist troops follow him. Jia did not agree.

古文：全每燕戏下，并召涉帐前将校，帐前亦愿隶焉，然未能合也。
现代文：李全常常宴请部下，并召贾涉手下的将校，这些将校也愿意隶属李全，但没能合兵。
English: Li Quan often held banquets for his subordinates, and summoned the officers under his command, who were also willing to be subordinate to Li Quan, but could not join the army.

古文：及丘寿迈摄帅事，全忽请曰： 忠义乌合，尺籍卤莽。莫若别置新籍，一纳诸朝，一申制阃，一留全所，庶功过有考，请给无弊。 寿迈善而诺之。
现代文：丘寿迈担任统帅后，李全急忙请示说： 忠义军是乌合之众，他们的军籍也很杂乱；不如另外设置新的军籍，一部分纳入朝廷，一部分归制置使，一部分留给我李全，这样就可能考核出功过，向国家提出请求时也就没有弊病了。 
English: After Qiu Shumai assumed the post of commander-in-chief, Li Quan hurriedly requested: "The loyalist army is a rabble, and their military ranks are also chaotic; it is better to set up a new military rank, part of which will be included in the imperial court, part of which will be assigned to the envoy, and part of which will be left to me, Li Quan, so that it will be possible to assess the merits and there will be no drawbacks when making a request to the state.

古文：全乃合帐前忠义悉籍之，尽统其军，时人莫悟。
现代文：丘寿迈认为这样好，并答应了。李全就把贾涉手下的忠义军都隶属到自己的军籍中，统帅他的军队，当时人没醒悟。
English: Qiu Shumai thought it was a good idea and agreed. Li Quan then subordinated all the loyalist troops under Jia's command to his own army, commanding his army. At the time, people did not wake up.

古文：十一月，许国自武阶换朝议大夫、淮东安抚制置使，命下，闻者惊异。
现代文：十一月，许国从武阶大夫改为朝议大夫、淮东安抚制置使，命令下达后，听说的人十分惊异。
English: In November, Xu Guo was changed from a military doctor to a doctor of the Imperial Court and an envoy of the Huai Dong pacification system. After the order was issued, the people who heard about it were very surprised.

古文：先是，国奉祠家食，数言全必反，欲倾涉而代之。
现代文：先前，许国在家中祭祀祖宗，多次说李全一定会谋反，想推翻贾涉取而代之。
English: Previously, Xu Guo had been holding ancestor sacrifices at home, repeatedly saying that Li Quan would definitely plot a rebellion and wanted to overthrow Jia Watan instead of him.

古文：会召国奏事，国疏全奸谋甚深，反状已著，非有豪杰不能消弭，盖自鬻也。
现代文：正赶上朝廷召许国奏事，许国上疏说李全的阴谋很深，谋反的迹象已显露出来，非得有豪杰出来是不能消除的，许国这是在自卖自夸。
English: Just in time for the imperial court to summon Xu Guo to report, Xu Guo went on to say that Li Quan's conspiracy was very deep, the signs of rebellion had been revealed, and it was impossible to eliminate without a hero coming out. Xu Guo was boasting.

古文：至是，乔行简为吏部侍郎，上疏论国望轻，不宜帅淮，不报。
现代文：这时，乔行简为吏部侍郎，上疏论奏认为许国威望不高，不适合统帅淮东，皇上没有答复。
English: At this time, Qiao Xingjian was the attendant of the cadre department, and Shang Shou Rongso thought that Xu Guo's prestige was not high and was not suitable for the commander of Huaidong. The emperor did not reply.

古文：山阳参幕徐晞稷雅意开阃，及闻国用，晞稷阙望，乃誉国奏注释以寄全，全得报，不乐。
现代文：山阳参幕徐稷一向有统帅淮东的想法，听说任用了许国后，徐稷感到失望，就誊抄了许国的奏疏，加上注释交给了李全，李全得到后不高兴。
English: Sanyang member of the shogunate Xu Wei always had the idea of General Huadong. After hearing that Xu Guo had been appointed, Xu Wei was disappointed. He copied Xu Guo's playbook and handed it to Li Quan with annotations. Li Quan was not happy when he got it.

古文：是冬，金将李二措及邳州守致书海州，欲附宋，全戏下周岊得之，即以报全。
现代文：这年冬，金国将领李二措和邳州守臣致信海州，想归附宋朝，李全的部下周祒得到了这封信，就把它报告了李全。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin generals Li Ercso and Zhangzhou Shoucheng sent a letter to Haizhou, asking to be annexed to the Song Dynasty. Li Quan's subordinate Zhou Qi received the letter and reported it to Li Quan.

古文：全喜，遣王喜儿以兵二千应接，而己继之。
现代文：李全高兴，派王喜儿率二千名士兵去迎接，自己跟在后面。
English: Li Quan was pleased and sent Wang Xier and two thousand soldiers to meet him, himself following behind.

古文：二措纳喜儿而囚之。
现代文：李二措接待王喜儿并把他囚禁起来。
English: Li Ercso received Wang Xi'er and imprisoned him.

古文：全兵欲攻邳，四面阻水，二措积劲弩备之，全不得进，合兵索战。
现代文：李全的军队想攻打邳州，邳州四面环水，李二措集中强弩防备李全攻城，李全不能进兵，就率军要求金兵出来交战。
English: Li Quan's army wanted to attack Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou is surrounded by water on all sides. Li Ercao concentrated on strong defense to prevent Li Quan from attacking the city. Li Quan could not enter the army, so he led the army to ask the gold soldiers to come out to fight.

古文：全败，欲还楚州，会滨、棣有乱，乃引兵趋山东。
现代文：李全战败，想回楚州，正赶上滨、棣二州有变乱，就带兵赶奔山东。
English: Li Quan was defeated in battle and wanted to return to Chuzhou. He was just in time to catch up with the upheaval in Hunan and Shandong provinces, so he rushed to Shandong with his soldiers.

古文：十七年正月，国之镇，杨氏郊迓，国辞不见，杨氏惭以归。
现代文：嘉定十七年正月，许国到达楚州，杨氏出城迎接，许国推辞不见她，杨氏惭愧地回来。
English: In the first month of the 17th year of Jiading, Xu Guo arrived in Chuzhou, and Mr. Yang went out of the city to meet her. Xu Guo refused to see her, and Mr. Yang returned with shame.

古文：国既视事，痛抑北军，有与南军竞者，无曲直偏坐之，犒赉十裁七八。
现代文：许国处理淮东政事后，极力压制北方军，有与南方军竞争的事，他不管是非曲直都偏袒南方军，对北方军的犒赏才十分之七八。
English: After Xu Guo dealt with the Huaidong political situation, he tried his best to suppress the Northern Army, and there was competition with the Southern Army. He favored the Southern Army regardless of the rights and wrongs, and the reward for the Northern Army was only seven or eight out of ten.

古文：全自山东致书于国，国夸于众曰： 全仰我养育，我略示威，即奔走不暇矣。 全固留青州，国不能致。
现代文：李全在山东给许国写信，许国对众人夸耀说： 李全靠我养育，我稍微向他示威，他就得乖乖地听我指挥。 李全坚持留在青州，许国不能召他前来。
English: Li Quan wrote a letter to Xu Guo in Shandong, and Xu Guo boasted to everyone: Li Quan was brought up by me, I showed him a little demonstration, he had to obediently listen to my command.Li Quan insisted on staying in Qingzhou, Xu Guo could not call him to come.

古文：四月，全遣小吏致再书，国喜，曲加劳接，即日真补承信郎，冀结其心。
现代文：四月，李全派小吏给许国送来第二封信，许国很高兴，对小吏倍加款待，当天就被任命为承信郎，想收买他。
English: In April, Li Quan sent a second letter to Xu Guo from a minor official. Xu Guo was very happy and treated the minor official with hospitality. On the same day, he was appointed as a successor and tried to bribe him.

古文：小吏曰： 小吏奉书而遽得命，诸将校谓何？ 不受，归语其徒以为笑。
现代文：小吏说 ：小吏奉命送信就得到官职，其他的将校说什么？ 小吏没接受任命，回去对他的部下说了并认为这可笑。
English: Petty Officer said: Petty Officer was ordered to send and got the post, what did the other officers say? Petty Officer did not accept the appointment, went back and told his men and thought it was ridiculous.

古文：国见全无来朝，数致厚馈，邀全议事。
现代文：许国见李全没有来，就多次给他送厚礼，邀请李全来议事。
English: Seeing that Li Quan did not come, Xu Guo repeatedly sent him gifts and invited Li Quan to attend the meeting.

古文：会刘庆福亦使人觇国意向，国左右知之，语觇者曰： 制置无害汝等意。 庆福以报全，全集将校曰： 我不参制阃，则曲在我。
现代文：恰巧刘庆福也派人侦察许国的意向，许国的亲信知道后，对侦察的人说 ：制置没有害你们的意思。 刘庆福把这报告了李全，李全召集将校说： 我不参见制帅，那是我没理；现在我不论生死一定要去参见他。 
English: It just so happened that Liu Qingfu also sent someone to investigate Xu Guo's intentions. After Xu Guo's close confidants found out, they said to the investigators, "The arrangement is not meant to harm you." Liu Qingfu reported this to Li Quan. Li Quan called the officers together and said, "I didn't see the commander, that was my mistake; now I must go and see him, no matter whether I live or die."

古文：今不计生死必往见。 八月，全上谒，宾赞戒全曰： 节使当庭趋，制使必免礼。 及庭趋，国端坐纳全拜，不为止。
现代文：八月，李全来拜见许国，主持拜见礼的人告诫李全说： 节使应该到公庭去参拜，制使一定会免去参拜的礼节。 李全到公庭去参拜许国时，许国端坐在公庭上接受李全的参拜，不去制止。
English: In August, when Li Quan came to pay homage to Xu Guodong, the person who presided over the homage admonished Li Quan, saying: "If the emissary should go to the public court to pay homage, the emissary will certainly be exempted from the etiquette of paying homage.

古文：全退，怒曰： 庭参亦常礼，全归本朝，拜人多矣，但恨汝非文臣，本与我等。
现代文：李全退下后，愤怒地说： 去公庭参拜也是常礼，我李全归附本朝，拜见的人多了，只恨你许国不是文臣，本来和我是同等的。
English: After Li Quan retreated, he said angrily, "It is also a common ritual to visit the court. I, Li Quan, belong to this dynasty, and I have visited many people. I only hate that you, Xu Guo, are not a scholar, and that you were originally equal to me.

古文：汝向以淮西都统谒贾制帅，亦免汝拜。
现代文：你过去以淮西都统的身份拜见贾制帅，贾制帅也免去让你下拜。
English: In the past, you used to meet Jia Xizhe Shuai as Huaxi Duoduo, and Jia Xizhe Shuai also spared you from bowing down.

古文：汝有何勋业，一旦位我上，便不相假借耶？
现代文：你有什么功绩，一旦地位在我上面，就不给予宽容吗？
English: What merit do you have that, once you are above me, you do not tolerate?

古文：全赤心报朝廷，不反也。 国继设盛会宴全，遗劳加厚，全终不乐。
现代文：我李全赤心报效朝廷，不反叛。 许国接着设盛宴招待李全，对李全的慰劳和给李全的东西都增多，李全始终不高兴。
English: I, Li Quan, wholeheartedly served the imperial court and did not rebel. Xu Guo then set up a feast to entertain Li Quan, and the consolation and things given to Li Quan increased. Li Quan was always unhappy.

古文：国之客章梦先主幕议，庆福谒见，梦先责客将，令隔帘貌喏，庆福不能堪。
现代文：许国的门客章梦先主持制府议事，刘庆福拜见他，章梦先责怪他不是本府将领，命令他隔着帘子讲话，刘庆福不能忍受。
English: Xu Guo's protégé Zhang Mengxian presided over the deliberation on the establishment of the government, and Liu Qingfu went to see him. Zhang Mengxian accused him of not being the leader of the government and ordered him to speak behind a curtain, which Liu Qingxian could not bear.

古文：国以名马十余噭遗全，不受。
现代文：许国送给李全名马十多匹，李全不接受。
English: Xu Guo gave more than ten famous horses to Li Quan, but Li Quan did not accept them.

古文：国固遣，全俟其充斥阶庭，伺候移时，而复却之。
现代文：许国坚持送给他，李全等马充满阶庭，伺候多时后，就又推却。
English: Xu Guo insisted on giving it to him, Li Quan waited for the horse to fill the courtyard, waited for a long time, and then pushed it away.

古文：如是者半月，卒不受。
现代文：就这样半个月，李全最后仍没接受。
English: After half a month of this, Li Quan still did not accept it.

古文：全欲往青州，惧国苛留，自计曰： 彼所争者拜也，拜而得志，吾何爱焉！ 更折节为礼。
现代文：李全想去青州，恐怕许国无理拘留，就自己打算说： 他所争的是拜见礼，我拜了他就能得志，我还有什么舍不得这个拜见礼呢！ 
English: Li Quan wanted to go to Qingzhou, and was afraid that Xu Guo might have detained him without reason, so he planned to say: What he was disputing was the greeting, if I greeted him, I would be able to achieve my goal, what else could I begrudge this greeting!

古文：因会，席间出紥白事，国见其细故，判从之，全即席再拜谢。
现代文：就对许国更加恭敬。趁着聚会的机会，李全在席间拿出札子汇报事情，许国看了札子内容，都批准，李全在席间再次拜谢。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity of the gathering, Li Quan took out a piece of paper to report the matter between the tables. Xu Guo read the content of the paper and approved it, and Li Quan thanked him again between the tables.

古文：自是动息必请，得请必拜，国大喜，语家人曰： 吾折伏此虏矣。 义斌求赵邦永来山东，全为白之，国诺。
现代文：从此李全有什么举动都向许国请示，得到许国批准都来拜谢，许国非常高兴，对家人说： 我使这个强虏屈服了。 彭义斌请求赵邦永来山东，李全替他汇报了，许国答应。
English: From then on, Li Quan asked Xu Guo for permission to do anything, and when he got approval from Xu Guo, he came to thank him. Xu Guo was very happy and said to his family: I made this tyrant submit. Peng Yibin asked Zhao Bangyong to come to Shandong, Li Quan reported for him, and Xu Guo agreed.

古文：邦永乘间告国曰： 邦永若去，制使谁与处？ 国曰： 我自能兵，尔毋过虑。 邦永泣而辞之。
现代文：赵邦永乘机对许国说： 邦永如果离开，制使依靠谁？ 许国说： 我自己能领兵，你不要过于忧虑。 赵邦永哭着跟许国辞别。
English: Zhao Bangyong took the opportunity to say to Xu Guo: If Bangyong leaves, who will he rely on? Xu Guo said: I can lead the troops myself, don't worry too much. Zhao Bangyong cried and said goodbye to Xu Guo.

古文：全遂往青州。
现代文：李全就去青州。
English: Li Quan went to Qingzhou.

古文：十一月，国集两淮马步军十三万，大阅楚城之外，以挫北人之心。
现代文：十一月，许国会集两淮马步军十三万，在楚州城外大阅兵，以此来压制北方来的人。
English: In November, Hui gathered two Huai Horse infantry armies of 130,000 and held a large military parade outside the city of Chuzhou, in order to suppress people coming from the north.

古文：杨氏及军校留者恐其图己，内自为备。
现代文：杨氏和留下的军校恐怕许国图谋害己，就自己偷着做防备。
English: Mr. Yang and the military school left behind were afraid that Xu Guo planned to harm themselves, so they secretly prepared themselves.

古文：宝庆元年，湖州人潘甫与其从弟丙、壬起兵，密告全党于山阳，全党欲坐致成败，然其谋而不助之力。
现代文：宝庆元年，湖州人潘甫与他的堂弟潘丙、潘壬起兵，秘密地到山阳告诉李全的党羽，李全的党羽想坐在那里等着成功，同意了他们的谋划但不从力量上帮助他们。
English: In the first year of Baoqing, Pan Fu from Huzhou and his cousins Pan Pi and Pan Ren raised an army and secretly went to Shanyang to tell Li Quan's party members that Li Quan's party members wanted to sit there and wait for success. They agreed to their plan but did not help them with their strength.

古文：甫归，阴勒部曲及聚贩盐盗至千余，结束如北军，率众扬言自山阳来拥立济王，事见《竑传》。
现代文：潘甫回来，暗中组织部曲和聚集贩盐的盗贼达一千多人，装束如同北方军，率领众人扬言从山阳来拥立济王，这件事见《赵传》。
English: When Pan Fu returned, he secretly organized and gathered more than a thousand salt thieves, dressed up like the Northern Army, and led them to threaten to come from the mountains to support King Jie. This event is described in "Zhao Biography."

古文：时全图国之意已决，遣庆福还楚城，使为乱。
现代文：当时，李全图谋许国的主意已定，他派刘庆福回到楚州城，让刘庆福在城中闹事。
English: At that time, Li Quantu's intention to plot against Xu Guo was already decided. He sent Liu Qingfu back to Chuzhou City and let Liu Qingfu make trouble in the city.

古文：或教杨氏畜一妄男子，间指谓人曰： 此宗室也。 至语郡僚曰： 会令汝为朝士。 潜约盱眙四军相应。
现代文：又让杨氏养一个无知的男孩子，乘机指着这个男孩子对人说 ：这是赵氏宗室。 甚至对楚州的地方官说 ：到时候命令你为朝中的官员。 暗中约定盱眙四军作为策应。
English: He also let Mr. Yang raise an ignorant boy, and took the opportunity to point to this boy and say, "This is Mr. Zhao's ancestral family," and even said to the local official in Chuzhou, "At the right time, I will order you to be an official of the central government."

古文：忠义统领王文信有众八百，涉徙刺扬州强勇军。
现代文：忠义统领王文信有部众八百人，贾涉把他们刺面调入成为扬州的强勇军。
English: Wang Wenshin, the leader of the Loyalists, had a total of eight hundred people, and Jia Wu transferred them to Yangzhou to become a strong and brave army.

古文：国之聚兵大阅，文信在焉，庆福与谋，令归袭扬州，别遣将劫宝应，事济即挥众度江。
现代文：许国聚兵检阅时，王文信在场，刘庆福与他谋划，命令他回去袭击扬州，另外派将领劫持宝应，事情成功后就率军过长江。
English: Wang Wenshin was present when Xu Guo gathered soldiers for a review. Liu Qingfu plotted with him and ordered him to return to attack Yangzhou. He also sent generals to kidnap Baoying. After the matter was successful, he led the army across the Yangtze River.

古文：盱眙四将不从，于是庆福等谋中辍，止欲快意于许国焉。
现代文：盱眙四军的统帅不答应，于是刘庆福等的阴谋中途停止，只想使许国高兴。
English: The commander-in-chief of the four armies did not agree, so Liu Qingfu and others stopped the plot midway, only wanting to make Xu Guorong happy.

古文：计议官苟梦玉知之，以告国，国曰： 但使反，反即杀，我岂文儒不知兵耶？ 梦玉惧祸及己，求檄往盱眙，复告庆福曰： 制帅欲图汝。 两为自结之计。
现代文：计议官苟梦玉知道刘庆福谋反的事，把它报告给许国，许国说： 就让他们谋反，谋反就杀，我难道是不懂军事的文人吗？ 苟梦玉害怕祸患累及自己，请求往盱眙发檄文，他又告诉刘庆福说： 制帅想图谋你。 他这是两面都交结，谁都不得罪。
English: Guo Mengyu, the procurator, knew that Liu Qingfu was plotting a rebellion, and reported it to Xu Guo. Xu Guo said, "Let them plot a rebellion, and if they plot a rebellion, kill them. Am I not a military man of letters?" Guo Mengyu was afraid of the calamity affecting himself, and asked to send a letter to Liu Qingfu. He also told Liu Qingfu, "The system wants to plot against you. He is the intersection of both sides, and no one can be blamed.

古文：乙卯，国晨起莅事，忽露刃充庭，客骇走，国厉声曰： 不得无礼！ 矢已及颡，流血蔽面，国走。
现代文：二月二十四日，许国早晨起来处理政事，突然兵刃充满公庭，门客惊恐地逃走，许国厉声说： 不要无礼！ 箭已经到了额头，许国血流满面地逃走。
English: On February 24th, Xu Guo got up in the morning to deal with political affairs. Suddenly, the public court was full of swords, and the guests fled in fear. Xu Guo snapped: "Don't be rude! The arrow has already reached the forehead. Xu Guo fled with blood streaming down his face.

古文：乱兵悉害其家，大纵火，焚官寺，两司积蓄尽入贼。
现代文：作乱的士兵把他的全家都害死，放起大火，焚烧官府，两司的积蓄全部落入贼的手中。
English: The rioting soldiers killed his entire family, set off a fire, burned the government office, and all the savings of the two departments fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：亲兵数十人翼国登城楼，缒城走，伏道堂中宿焉。
现代文：数十名亲兵保护许国登上城楼，拴着绳索顺城墙而下逃走，藏在道观中过夜。
English: Dozens of soldiers protecting Xu Guo climbed up the castle tower, ran down the city wall with ropes, and hid in the Taoist temple for the night.

古文：时四明人姚翀通判青州，全豫令还山阳，及涟水而复止之。
现代文：当时四明人姚羽中为青州通判，李全先命令他回山阳，姚羽中到涟水后又被李全阻止住。
English: At that time, Yao Yuzhong, a member of the Four Wise Men, was sentenced to Qingzhou. Li Quan ordered him to return to Shanyang. After Yao Yuzhong arrived in Surabaya, he was stopped by Li Quan.

古文：至是，拥翀入城，与通判宋恭喝犒南北军，使归营。
现代文：这时，刘庆福等护卫姚羽中进城，和通判宋恭一起呵责和犒赏南北军，让他们回营地。
English: At this time, Liu Qingfu and other guards Yao Yuzhong entered the city, and together with Tongzhan Song Qiong, they rebuked and rewarded the North and South armies, and let them return to the camp.

古文：是日，庆福首杀梦先以报貌喏之辱，戒诸军毋害苟梦玉家，护以五十兵。
现代文：当天，刘庆福首先杀死章梦先以报从前让他隔着帘子讲话的耻辱，他告诫各军不要伤害苟梦玉的家，派五十名士兵加以保护。
English: On the same day, Liu Qingfu first killed Zhang Mengxian to repay the shame of letting him speak through the curtain. He warned the army not to harm the home of Guo Mengyu and sent fifty soldiers to protect it.

古文：初，国倚扬州强勇军统制彭兴及淮西亲兵将赵社、朱虎等为腹心，至是首降贼，且助为乱。
现代文：当初，许国倚仗扬州强勇军统制彭兴及淮西亲兵将领赵社、朱虎等为心腹，这时都首先投降，并且帮助贼寇作乱。
English: At first, Xu Guo relied on Peng Xing, the commander of Yangzhou's strong and brave army, and Zhao She and Zhu Hu, the generals of Huaixi's own soldiers, as confidants. At this time, they all surrendered first and helped the bandits to make trouble.

古文：惟丁胜、张世雄、沈兴、杜靖毗、富道不屈，或与贼巷战，兴手杀贼将马良。
现代文：只有丁胜、张世雄、沈兴、杜靖毗、富道不屈服，有的与贼进行巷战，沈兴亲手杀死贼人将领马良。
English: Only Ding Sheng, Zhang Shixiong, Shen Xing, Du Jingwei, and Fudao did not give in. Some fought street battles with the thieves, and Shen Xing personally killed the thief general Ma Liang.

古文：贼党得志，更相贺，独张正忠叹曰： 若曹不识事体，朝廷岂置汝耶？ 王文信复献计庆福曰： 我伪作重伤，提本部军归扬州，扬守必不疑，我生缚守，以其城献。 庆福喜，夜饮而遣之。
现代文：贼党得志，就互相庆贺，只有张正忠叹着气说 ：你们这些人不识事体，朝廷哪能处置你们呢？ 王文信又向刘庆福献计说： 我假装受了重伤，率本部军队回扬州，扬州守臣一定不怀疑，我活捉守臣，献出扬州城。 刘庆福高兴，晚上请王文信喝酒并派他出发。
English: When the Kleptocrats won, they congratulated each other. Only Zhang Zhengzhong sighed and said, "You people don't know what you're doing, how can the court deal with you?" Wang Wenshin also offered a plan to Liu Qingfu, saying, "I'll pretend to be seriously injured and lead the headquarters army back to Yangzhou. The Yangzhou guardsmen won't doubt it. I'll capture the guardsmen alive and surrender Yangzhou City." Liu Qingfu was happy, invited Wang Wenshin to drink in the evening and sent him on his way.

古文：丙辰，许国缢于途。
现代文：二十五日，许国在路上自缢而死。
English: On the 25th, Xu Guo hanged himself on the road and died.

古文：丁巳，文信将至扬州，其徒有亡入城告变者。
现代文：二十六日，王文信将要到扬州，他的部下有逃到扬州城报告王文信叛变的。
English: On the 26th, Wang Wensin was about to go to Yangzhou. Some of his subordinates fled to Yangzhou City to report Wang Wensin's mutiny.

古文：时扬之兵皆在楚，知州兼提点刑狱汪统会同官议，钤辖赵拱曰： 若不纳，则文信必曰： 我归营，何故见拒？ 
现代文：这时扬州的守军都在楚州，扬州知州兼提点刑狱汪统召集官员们商议对策，钤辖赵拱说： 如果不容许王文信进城，那王文信一定说： 我回营，为什么被拒绝？ 
English: At this time, the defenders of Yangzhou were all in Chuzhou, Yangzhou Zhizhou also mentioned the point of Wang Tong Prison to convene officials to discuss countermeasures. Zhao Gong said: If Wang Wensin is not allowed to enter the city, then Wang Wensin must say: I return to the camp, why was I rejected?

古文：将借是以鱼肉城外之民。
现代文：他将以此为借口残害城外的百姓。
English: He will use this as an excuse to kill people outside the city.

古文：拱素善文信，请说止其兵，而以单骑入，俟入城而杀之，然后抚其兵，领往盱眙，分隶张、范戏下。 统喜，遣之。
现代文：我赵拱一向与王文信友好，请让我去劝说王文信把自己的军队留在城外，让他自己单人匹马入城，等王文信入城后就杀死他，然后安抚他的军队，领到盱眙，让他们分别隶属为张惠、范成进的部下。 汪统很高兴，派赵拱前去。
English: I, Zhao Gong, have always been friendly with Wang Wensin, please let me persuade Wang Wensin to leave his army outside the city, let him enter the city alone, wait for Wang Wensin to enter the city and kill him, then pacify his army, lead them to the raft, and let them be subordinated to the subordinates of Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin respectively.

古文：遇文信于十里头，置酒相劳苦，文信伪为裹创状。
现代文：赵拱在十里头与王文信相遇，摆酒宴互相慰劳辛苦，王文信装成受伤的样子。
English: Zhao Gong met Wang Wensin at the ten-mile point, and they had a wine banquet to console each other for their hard work. Wang Wensin pretended to be injured.

古文：拱曰： 忠义反楚州，扬州人见忠义暮归，岂不相疑？
现代文：赵拱说： 忠义军在楚州反叛，扬州人见你们晚上回来，能不怀疑吗？
English: Zhao Gong said, "The loyalist army rebelled in Chuzhou. When the people of Yangzhou see you return in the evening, can they not be suspicious?

古文：不若暂驻兵城外，然后同见提刑，提刑急欲知楚州事也。 文信不疑，联骑入城，坐客次。
现代文：你不如暂时把军队驻扎在城外，然后你和我一同去见提刑，提刑急着知道楚州发生的事。 王文信没怀疑，就和赵拱一起进城，坐在客人的位置上。
English: You might as well station the army outside the city for the time being, and then you and I will go to see the committal, the committal is anxious to know what happened in Chuzhou.Wang Wenshin did not doubt, he and Zhao Gong entered the city and sat in the guest's seat.

古文：拱先入，劝统收戮之，统踌躇不敢发。
现代文：赵拱先进去，劝汪统杀王文信，汪统犹豫不敢动手。
English: Zhao Gong went in advance to persuade Wang Tong to kill Wang Wensin, but Wang Tong hesitated and did not dare to do it.

古文：刘全知其谋，帅甲士突入郡堂，厉声曰： 王统领好人，提刑不必疑，请出受参。 统不得已，出而犒之。
现代文：刘全知道他们的阴谋，率领士兵突然进入府堂，厉声说 ：王统领是好人，提刑不必怀疑，请出来接受他的拜见礼。 汪统不得已，出来犒劳王文信。
English: Liu Quan knew of their plot and suddenly led the soldiers into the palace, and said in a loud voice: "Wang Quan is a good man, there is no need to doubt the sentence, please come out to receive his greeting." Wang Quan had no choice but to come out to reward Wang Wenxin.

古文：刘全以兵翼之出，馆其家。
现代文：刘全率兵保护王文信出来，把他安置在自己家中。
English: Liu Quan led the soldiers to protect Wang Wensin and placed him in his own home.

古文：诘旦，统未有处。
现代文：第二天早晨，汪统没有什么举动。
English: The next morning, there was no sign of Wang Tong.

古文：拱又请引文信出城，与议回屯楚州。
现代文：赵拱又请求让王文信出城，和他商量回去驻屯楚州。
English: Zhao Gong also asked Wang Wensin to leave the city, and discussed with him to return to Chuzhou.

古文：文信知事泄，拱就出，刘全亦请从。
现代文：王文信知道事情已泄露，和赵拱一起出城，刘全也请求跟随。
English: Wang Wenshin knew that the matter had been leaked and left the city with Zhao Gong. Liu Quan also asked to follow.

古文：至平山堂，文信责拱卖己，欲杀之，拱曰： 尔谋如此，三城人命何辜！
现代文：他们到平山堂，王文信责怪赵拱出卖了自己，想杀他，赵拱说 ：你们就这样谋划，三城的人命有什么罪？
English: They went to the Pingshan Hall. Wang Wensin accused Zhao Gong of betraying him and wanted to kill him. Zhao Gong said, "This is how you planned it. What is the crime of the lives of the three cities?"

古文：我已存三城人，身死无憾。
现代文：我已保存了三城人，死而无憾。
English: I have saved three townsmen, and I have no regrets about my death.

古文：然我死，汝八百家老幼在城，岂得生耶？ 文信及其众动色，文信、刘全遂还楚州。
现代文：但我死了，你们八百家老幼都在城中，难道他们能活命吗？ 王文信及其部众变了脸色，于是王文信、刘全就回到了楚州。
English: But I am dead, and your eight hundred families, old and young, are all in the city. Can they live? Wang Wensin and his subordinates turned pale, so Wang Wensin and Liu Quan returned to Chuzhou.

古文：时盱眙总管夏全闻山阳得志，亦怀异图，刘琸厚赂之，乃止。
现代文：这时盱眙总管夏全听说山阳的忠义军如愿以偿，也怀有异心，刘王卓用厚礼贿赂他，他才没作乱。
English: At this time, Xia Quan, the general manager of Shanyang, heard that the loyal volunteers of Shanyang had got what they wanted, but he also harbored a different intention. Liu Wang Zhuo bribed him with a heavy gift, and he did not make a disturbance.

古文：及文信乱，琸惧夏全复动，乃使卞整将兵三千视之，使不敢动。
现代文：王文信叛乱后，刘王卓害怕夏全又要动兵，就让卞整率领三千士兵去监视他，使他不敢行动。
English: After Wang Wenshin's rebellion, Liu Wangzhuo was afraid that Xia Quanzhang would mobilize troops again, so he asked Zou Zhe to lead three thousand soldiers to monitor him, so that he would not dare to act.

古文：整以邀文信为辞，引兵还扬州，因伪言盱眙失守，卞整为乱，于是扬州复震，城门昼闭。
现代文：卞整以邀击王文信为借口，率兵回到扬州，并假称盱眙失守，卞整叛乱，于是扬州又被震动，城门白天也关闭。
English: On the pretext of inviting Wang Wensin to attack, Yan Zhengyi led his troops back to Yangzhou, and pretended to be out of defense to suppress the rebellion. As a result, Yangzhou was shaken again, and the city gate was also closed during the day.

古文：弥远惧激他变，欲姑事涵忍而后图之。
现代文：史弥远害怕激起别的变故，就想暂时容忍然后再消灭他们。
English: Shi Miyan was afraid of provoking another incident, so he wanted to tolerate them for a while and then eliminate them.

古文：谋帅莫可，以徐晞稷尝倅楚州、守海州，得全欢心，晞稷亦勇往，乃授淮东制置使，令出屈抚全。
现代文：谋帅不同意，因为徐稷曾为楚州的副将、海州守臣，得到了李全的欢心，徐稷也勇于前往，朝廷就授予他淮东制置使的官职，命令他委屈自己的心意来安抚李全。
English: The strategist did not agree, because Xu Gan had been the vice-general of Chuzhou and the guardian of Haizhou, and had won the favor of Li Quan. Xu Gan was also brave enough to go, and the imperial court awarded him the official post of Huaidong envoy and ordered him to bend his will to appease Li Quan.

古文：时庆福以事济报全，全又牒义斌等曰： 许国谋反，已伏诛矣，尔军并听我节制。 义斌得牒大骂曰： 逆贼背国厚恩，擅杀制使。
现代文：这时刘庆福向李全报告说事情已经成功，李全又用文牒通知彭义斌等人说： 许国谋反，已经被杀死了，你的军队一并听从我的指挥。 彭义斌得到李全的这个文牒后大骂说 ：这个逆贼背叛国家的厚恩，擅自杀制使，这件事都是因为我引起的，我一定要报这个仇。 
English: At this time, Liu Qingfu reported to Li Quan that the matter had been successful, and Li Quan also used a written ultimatum to inform Peng Yibin and others, saying: Xu Guo plotted a rebellion and has been killed, and your army is all under my command. After Peng Yibin received this written ultimatum from Li Quan, he cursed loudly and said: This traitor betrayed the country's bounty and took it upon himself to suppress the envoys. This all happened because of me, and I must avenge this.

古文：此事皆因我起，我必报此仇。 呼赵邦永曰： 赵二，汝南人，正须尔明此事。 乃斩赍牒人，南向告天誓众，见者愤激。
现代文：他叫来赵邦永说 ：赵二，你是南方人，正需要你来证明这件事。 就杀死送文牒的人，向着南方率众人对天盟誓，看见的人都很激愤。
English: He called Zhao Bangyong and said, "Zhao Er, you are a southerner, and I really need you to prove this." He killed the person who sent the ultimatum, and led everyone to the south to swear to heaven. Everyone who saw this was furious.

古文：全自青州至楚城，佯责庆福不能弹压，致忠义之哄，斩数人，请待罪，朝廷未之诘。
现代文：李全从青州到楚州，假装责怪刘庆福不能弹压忠义军，致使忠义军闹事，李全还杀死数人，请求朝廷治罪，朝廷没有责问他。
English: From Qingzhou to Chuzhou, Li Quan pretended to blame Liu Qingfu for not being able to suppress the loyalist army, causing the loyalist army to riot. Li Quan also killed several people and asked the court to punish him. The court did not blame him.

古文：赵范时知扬州兼提点刑狱，得制置印于溃卒中，以授晞稷。
现代文：这时赵范为扬州知州兼提点刑狱，在溃散的士兵中得到制置使的大印，朝廷把它授予了徐稷。
English: At this time, Zhao Fan for Yangzhou Zhizhou also mentioned the point of imprisonment, in the scattered soldiers to get the seal of the ambassador, the court awarded it to Xu Xi.

古文：全遣骑逆晞稷。
现代文：李全派骑兵迎接徐稷。
English: Li sent his entire cavalry to meet Xu Jun.

古文：己卯，晞稷入楚城。
现代文：三月十九日，徐稷进入楚州。
English: On March 19, Xu Rong entered Chuzhou.

古文：刘全跃马登郡厅，晞稷迎之，全及门下马，拜庭下，晞稷降等止之，贼众乃悦。
现代文：刘全跃马奔向郡府大厅，徐稷迎接他，刘全在厅门下马，拜伏在庭下，徐稷走下台阶阻止了他，叛乱的人就高兴起来。
English: Liu Quan's horse ran to the hall of the county government, and Xu Hui rode to meet him. Liu Quan dismounted at the door of the hall and prostrated himself in front of the court. Xu Hui stepped down to stop him. The rebels were delighted.

古文：四月，潘壬变姓名至楚州，将度淮而北，小校明亮获之，械送行在伏诛。
现代文：四月，潘壬改姓名到楚州，准备渡过淮河去北方，被小校明亮抓获，押送到行在处死。
English: In April, Pan Ren changed his name to Chuzhou and prepared to cross the Huai River to the north. He was caught by a schoolboy and sent to the death row.

古文：甲午，时青使人伪为金兵，道邳州，出涟水，夺全田租而伏骑八百。
现代文：初四日，时青派人伪装成金兵，经过邳州，出兵涟水，夺走了李全的田租并埋伏了八百名骑兵。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Ji Qing sent people disguised as gold soldiers to march through Luzhou, dispatched troops to Surabaya, took away Li Quan's land rent and ambushed 800 cavalry.

古文：翼旦，全引二百骑度淮与斗。伏发，全败，围之，庆福以兵往拔全出。
现代文：第二天早晨，李全率领二百名骑兵渡过淮河与他交战，时青的伏兵发起攻击，李全失败，被包围，刘庆福率兵前来救出李全。
English: The next morning, Li Quan led two hundred horsemen across the Huai River to fight with him. When the ambush launched an attack, Li Quan failed and was surrounded. Liu Qingfu led the troops to rescue Li Quan.

古文：全与庆福俱重伤，归楚州。
现代文：李全和刘庆福都受了重伤，回到楚州。
English: Both Li Quan and Liu Qingfu were seriously injured and returned to Chuzhou.

古文：丁胜、张世雄欲乘全败举兵追北军，晞稷止之。
现代文：丁胜、张世雄想乘李全失败之机领兵追击北方军，被徐稷制止。
English: Ding Sheng and Zhang Shixiong wanted to take advantage of Li Quan's failure to lead troops to pursue the Northern Army, but were stopped by Xu Xi.

古文：全后知其谋，对晞稷诘之，二人不为屈。
现代文：李全后来知道他们的阴谋，当着徐稷的面责问他们，丁胜、张世雄二人没有屈服。
English: Li Quan later found out about their plot and scolded them in front of Xu Yao. Ding Sheng and Zhang Shixiong did not give in.

古文：然惧祸及己，晞稷乃潜授世雄雄胜军统制，教使逃而阳索之。
现代文：然而徐稷害怕祸患殃及自己，就暗中授予张世雄为雄胜军统制，唆使他逃走但表面上还追捕他。
English: However, Xu Xi, fearing that the calamity would befall him, secretly appointed Zhang Shixiong as the commander of the victorious army, incited him to flee, but also pursued him on the surface.

古文：北军追世雄，世雄且战且走，得达扬州。
现代文：北方军追张世雄，张世雄一边战斗，一边前进，得以到达扬州。
English: The Northern Army chased Zhang Shixiong. Zhang Shixiong fought and advanced at the same time, and was able to reach Yangzhou.

古文：晞稷初至楚，缓急相济，如囚赵社，逐朱虎，贼尚知畏。
现代文：徐稷刚到楚州时，宽和严互相配合，如囚禁赵社，驱逐朱虎，叛军才知道畏惧。
English: When Xu Jun first arrived in Chuzhou, the wide and the strict cooperated with each other, such as imprisoning Zhao She and expelling Zhu Hu. Only then did the rebels know fear.

古文：屡令全还战马、军器于制司，全唯唯。
现代文：徐稷多次命令李全归还战马、军器给制司，李全只是答应而已。
English: Xu Xi repeatedly ordered Li Quan to return the horses and military equipment to the manufacturer, but Li Quan only agreed.

古文：退招姚翀及将校饮，酒酣，全曰： 制司追我战马、军器，若何？ 忽有将校曰： 当时忠义只百十人，其他军皆南军乘势将带，若溃将何以还？ 一人曰： 制司必欲追之，不若有官者弃官，无官者归山东为百姓。 一人抵掌愤然，使全反，全阳骂之。
现代文：李全退下后招来姚罛和将校饮酒，正在兴头上，李全问 ：制司向我追还战马、军器，怎么办？ 忽然有位将校说： 当时忠义军只有百十人，其他军都被南方军乘机统领，如果溃败将怎么归还？ 一个人说： 制司一定想让我们还这些，不如有官职的弃官，无官职的回到山东当老百姓。 一个人拍着手掌很愤然，让李全造反，李全表面上骂了他。
English: After Li Quan retreated, he invited Yao Jun and the officers for a drink. He was in high spirits. Li Quan asked: What should the system restore the horses and military equipment to me? Suddenly, an officer said: At that time, the loyalist army only had a hundred and ten people, and the other armies were led by the Southern Army. If they were defeated, how would they be returned? One person said: The system must want us to return these things. It would be better to abandon officials with official posts and return to Shandong as ordinary people without official posts. One person clapped his hands in anger, making Li Quan rebel, and Li Quan scolded him on

古文：翀以告晞稷。
现代文：姚罛把这些告诉徐稷。
English: Yao Zhen told this to Xu Zhen.

古文：翼日，全见晞稷求纳官，晞稷抚之而去。
现代文：第二天，李全拜见徐稷请求辞官，徐稷慰抚他让他离去。
English: The next day, Li Quan met with Xu Yao and asked him to resign. Xu Yao consoled him and let him go.

古文：自是不复谁何，其后至以 恩府 称全、 恩堂 称杨氏，而手足倒置矣。
现代文：从此不再对李全稽察诘问，后来甚至称李全为 恩府 ，称杨氏为 恩堂 ，这样手和脚的位置颠倒了。
English: From then on, he no longer inspected and questioned Li Quan. Later, he even called Li Quan "Enfu" and Yang "Endo," thus reversing the position of his hands and feet.

古文：军器库止余枪干数千，全复取去。
现代文：军器库只剩了数千根枪杆，李全又给取走。
English: There were only a few thousand guns left in the armory, and Li Quan took them away again.

古文：全欲战舰，晞稷使择二艘。
现代文：李全想要战舰，徐稷让他选了二艘。
English: Li Quan wanted a warship, and Xu Yao let him choose two.

古文：全移出淮河，使军习之。
现代文：李全把战舰移到淮河上，让士兵演习。
English: Li Quan moved the warship onto the Huai River for the soldiers to practice.

古文：初，楚城之将乱也，有吏窃许国书箧二以献庆福，皆机事。
现代文：当初，楚州将要发生叛乱，有个官吏偷了许国的两个书箱把它们献给刘庆福，书箱内都是重要的事。
English: At the beginning, there was going to be a rebellion in Chuzhou. An official stole two of Xu Guo's bookcases and gave them to Liu Qingfu. The bookcases contained important matters.

古文：庆福赏盗箧者五百千，未之阅。
现代文：刘庆福赏给偷书箱的人五百万缗钱，没看箱内的内容。
English: Liu Qingfu rewarded the person who stole the book box with five million baht, without looking at the contents of the box.

古文：全始发缄，使家僮读之，有庙堂遗国书令图全者，全大怒；又有苟梦玉书，即以庆福谋告国者，全始恶梦玉反覆。
现代文：李全第一个打开书箱，让家僮读给他听，其中有朝廷给许国的文书，命令许国图谋李全，李全大怒；还有苟梦玉的信，就是把刘庆福的阴谋报告给许国，李全开始恨苟梦玉反复无常。
English: Li Quan was the first to open the bookcase and let Jiayu read to him. Among them was a document from the imperial court to Xu Guo, ordering Xu Guo to plot against Li Quan, which made Li Quan furious; there was also a letter from Guo Mengyu, reporting Liu Qingfu's plot to Xu Guo, which made Li Quan begin to hate Guo Mengyu's capriciousness.

古文：梦玉知之，时已被堂召，亟辞全如京。
现代文：苟梦玉知道了这件事，这时苟梦玉已被宰相召用，他就立即向李全辞别去京城。
English: When Gou Mengyu learned of this, he had already been summoned by the prime minister. He immediately resigned from Li Quan and left for the capital.

古文：己卯，全馈饯梦玉如平时，潜殪诸十里之郊，复出榜捕害梦玉者。
现代文：己卯日，李全像平常一样设宴为苟梦玉送行，暗地里派人在十里以外的城郊害死了他，又出告示逮捕杀害苟梦玉的人。
English: On the same day, Li Quan, as usual, held a banquet to see Gou Mengyu off, secretly sent someone to kill him ten miles away in the suburbs, and issued a notice to arrest the person who killed Gou Mengyu.

古文：全往青州。
现代文：李全去青州。
English: Li Quan went to Qingzhou.

古文：五月丁卯，全取东平，不克。
现代文：五月初七，李全攻打东平，没成功。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Li Quan attacked Dongping without success.

古文：戊寅，刘全以券易制司钱，不如欲，复谋乱，杨氏出二千缗解之，乃止。
现代文：十八日，刘全用生券换制司的钱，没如愿，又计划叛乱，杨氏拿出二千缗进行调解，刘全才没叛乱。
English: On the 18th, Liu Quan used his student ID card to exchange money with the registrar, but it did not work out as he had hoped, and he planned to rebel again. Mr. Yang took out two thousand baht to mediate, but Liu Quan did not rebel.

古文：全引兵攻恩州。
现代文：李全率兵攻打恩州。
English: Li Quan led the troops to attack Enzhou.

古文：明日，义斌出兵与全斗，全败。
现代文：第二天，彭义斌出兵与李全交战，李全失败。
English: The next day, Peng Yibin sent troops to fight with Li Quan, but Li Quan was defeated.

古文：义斌以千五百骑追之，获马二千匹，皆扬州强勇军马也。
现代文：彭义斌率一千五百名骑兵追击李全，缴获二千匹马，这都是扬州强勇军的马。
English: Peng Yibin led 1,500 cavalrymen to chase Li Quan and captured 2,000 horses, all of which were Yangzhou Qiangyong's horses.

古文：庆福往救，又败。
现代文：刘庆福前往救援，又失败。
English: Liu Qingfu went to the rescue, but failed again.

古文：全退保山崮，抽山阳忠义以北。
现代文：李全退兵保守一座山寨，抽调山阳的忠义军往北去。
English: Li Quan retreated to maintain a cottage, and transferred the loyalist troops from Shanyang to the north.

古文：杨氏及刘全皆欲亲赴之，会全遣人求晞稷书与义斌连和，乃止。
现代文：杨氏和刘全都想亲自去，恰好李全派人求徐稷写信与彭义斌讲和，杨氏和刘全才没动身。
English: Mr. Yang and Mr. Liu both wanted to go in person, but Mr. Yang and Mr. Liu didn't leave until Mr. Li Quan sent someone to ask Mr. Xu to write a letter to Peng Yibin to make peace.

古文：义斌纳全降兵，兵势大振，进攻真定，降金将武仙，众至数十万，致书沿江制置使赵善湘曰： 不诛逆全，恢复不成。但能遣兵扼淮，进据涟、海以蹙之，断其南路，如此贼者，或生禽，或斩首，惟朝廷所命。
现代文：彭义斌接纳了李全的降兵，兵势大振，进攻真定，使金国将领武仙投降，部众达到数十万，彭义斌写信给沿江制置使赵善湘说 ：不杀逆赋李全，恢复故土的计划就不能成功，只要能派兵扼守淮河，进兵占据涟水、海州使他窘迫，截断他的南路，像这样的逆贼，或者是活捉，或者是斩杀，就听朝廷的命令了。
English: Peng Yibin accepted Li Quan's troop reduction, the troops were greatly strengthened, the attack was determined, the Kim generals and warriors surrendered, and the number of subordinates reached hundreds of thousands. Peng Yibin wrote to Zhao Shanxiang, the commander of the river system, saying: "Without killing Li Quan, the plan to restore the motherland cannot succeed. As long as we can send troops to guard the Huai River, occupy Surabaya, embarrass him with Haizhou, and cut off his southern route, such a traitor, whether captured alive or killed, will listen to the orders of the imperial court.

古文：贼平之后，收复一京三府，然后义斌战河北，盱眙诸将、襄阳骑士战河南，神州可复也。 时四总管亦各遣计议官致书，乞助讨贼，范亦以为言，不报。
现代文：平灭逆贼之后，收复一京三府，然后我彭义斌在河北作战，盱眙的各位将领、襄阳的骑士在河南作战，神州可以恢复。 当时四总管也各自派计议官给赵善湘写信，请求协助讨贼，赵范也同意这个意见，但没有答复。
English: After defeating the rebels and recovering the three prefectures of Beijing, then I, Peng Yibin, fought in Hebei, and the generals of the Han Dynasty and the knights of Xiangyang fought in Henan, so that the Divine Land could be restored. At that time, the four general managers also sent their respective counselors to Zhao Shanxiang to write a letter requesting assistance in tracing the thieves. Zhao Fan also agreed with this opinion, but did not reply.

古文：全贻书制置司，诬义斌叛，晞稷缴达之。
现代文：李全给制置司写信，诬陷说彭义斌反叛，徐稷汇报给朝廷。
English: Li Quan wrote a letter to the Secretary of the Party, falsely accusing Peng Yibin of rebellion, and Xu Xi reported to the imperial court.

古文：时朝廷知义斌之功，惮全，未欲行赏。
现代文：当时朝廷知道彭义斌的功劳，害怕李全，不想按事实处理。
English: At that time, the imperial court knew the merits of Peng Yibin, feared Li Quan, and did not want to deal with the facts.

古文：未几，义斌俟命不至，拓地而北，与大元兵战于内黄之五马山。大元兵说之降，义斌厉声曰： 我大宋臣，且河北、山东皆宋民，义岂为他臣属耶！ 遂死之。
现代文：不久，彭义斌没等到朝廷的命令，就去北方开拓土地，同大元兵在内黄的五马山交战，大元兵劝他投降，彭义斌厉声说： 我是大宋朝的臣民，况且河北、山东都是大宋朝的百姓，做别人的臣属，义不容许！ 
English: Soon, Peng Yibin did not wait for the order of the imperial court, he went to the north to explore the land, and fought with the Taiyuan soldiers on Wuma Mountain in Neihuang. The Taiyuan soldiers advised him to surrender. Peng Yibin said sharply: I am a subject of the Great Song Dynasty, and moreover, Hebei and Shandong are all the people of the Great Song Dynasty. It is unacceptable to be someone else's subject!

古文：戏下王义深等复归全。
现代文：就被大元兵杀死了。彭义斌的部下王义深等人又归附李全。
English: He was killed by the Taiyuan soldiers. Peng Yibin's subordinate Wang Yishen and others also joined Li Quan.

古文：全使人说时青附己，馈金五百两。
现代文：李全派人劝时青归附自己，送给时青五百两黄金。
English: Li Quan sent someone to persuade Shi Qing to join him and gave him five hundred taels of gold.

古文：青见义斌死，乃附全，自移屯淮阴。
现代文：时青见彭义斌已死，就归附了李全，自己移兵驻扎在淮阴。
English: When the Qing Dynasty saw that Peng Yibin was dead, they annexed Li Quan and moved their troops to be stationed in Huaiyin.

古文：全招青入城饮，折俎铜券二千，他馈称是，恩遍麾下，人人喜悦。
现代文：李全招时青入城饮酒，在宴礼时拿出二千个铜券，别的礼物也很适当，恩惠遍及到部下，使人人喜悦。
English: When Li Quanzhang was young, he went to the city to drink alcohol. At the banquet, he took out two thousand copper coupons. Other gifts were also appropriate. The favors spread to his subordinates, making everyone happy.

古文：晞稷宴青，全馈折俎如前。
现代文：徐稷宴请时青时，李全赠送的礼物和前面一样。
English: At the time of Xu Xi banquet, Li Quan gave the same gift as before.

古文：全将往山东，以南军九百从，官犒铁钱券人五千，全犒铜钱三倍，许携南货免税。
现代文：李全将去山东，率七百名南方军跟从，官府给的犒军铁钱券是每人五千，李全给的犒劳是三倍的铜钱，允许这些人携带南方货物并免交货税。
English: Li Quan will go to Shandong, leading seven hundred Southern troops to follow. The government gave the Shan troops iron money coupons of five thousand per person, and Li Quan's reward was three times the copper money. These people were allowed to carry Southern goods and were exempt from delivery tax.

古文：于是请行者不已，得千人以俱，晞稷又以千八百人继之。
现代文：于是请求跟从的人络绎不绝，李全得到一千人，徐稷又派一千八百人跟在后面。
English: As a result, there was a constant stream of people asking to follow him. Li Quan got a thousand people, and Xu Xi sent another eighteen hundred people to follow behind.

古文：二年春，赵范奉祠，林珙知扬州、权提点刑狱。
现代文：宝庆二年春天，赵范受到优礼，担任管理宫观的闲职，林珙为扬州知州，权提点刑狱。
English: In the spring of the second year of Baoqing, Zhao Fan received a courtesy and served as a sinecure for the management of the palace, and Lin Ye for Yangzhou Zhizhou, and was sentenced to prison.

古文：全北剽山东，南假宋以疑大元，且仰食。
现代文：李全在北方剽掠山东，在南方凭借宋朝来疑惑大元，并靠宋朝养活。
English: In the north, Li Quan raided Shandong, and in the south, he relied on the Song Dynasty to cast doubt on the Great Yuan Dynasty, and relied on the Song Dynasty to support him.

古文：会金与大元争大名，全得往来经理。
现代文：正巧金国与大元争夺大名，李全得以往来经营治理。
English: It just so happened that Jin Guo and Dai Yuan were competing for daimyo, and Li Quan was able to manage the relationship.

古文：三月丙辰朔，大元兵攻青州，全大小百战，终不利，婴城自守。
现代文：三月初一，大元兵攻打青州，李全进行了大小一百多次战斗，始终不能取胜，就环城固守。
English: On the first day of March, the Taiyuan soldiers attacked Qingzhou. Li Quan fought more than a hundred battles, both large and small, but was never able to win. He held fast to Huancheng.

古文：大元筑长围，夜布狗砦，粮援路绝。
现代文：大元兵设了大的包围圈，晚上布置狗寨，李全的运粮路被阻断。
English: The Taiyuan soldiers set up a large encirclement, and set up a dog park in the evening. Li Quan's grain transportation route was blocked.

古文：全遣小校周兴祖缒城，杂樵采者走楚州发援兵，终不能支。
现代文：李全派小校周兴祖身上拴着绳索顺城墙而下，夹杂在砍柴和采集的人中逃到楚州发援兵，最终也不能支持住。
English: Li Quan sent Zhou Xingzu, a primary school pupil, down the city wall with a rope tied to his body. He fled to Chuzhou to send reinforcements, mixed in with the people who were cutting and collecting firewood. In the end, he was unable to stay.

古文：全与福谋，福曰： 二人俱死无益也，汝身系南北轻重，我当死守孤城，汝间道南归，提兵赴援，可寻生路。 全曰： 数十万勍敌，未易支也。
现代文：李全和李福商量对策，李福说： 我们二人都死也没有益处，你一身关系着南方和北方的轻与重，我应该死守孤城，你从小道回到南方，率兵来救援，还可以找到活路。 李全说： 数十万劲敌围城，不容易支撑。
English: Li Quan and Li Fu discussed the countermeasures. Li Fu said, "It is of no use for both of us to die. You alone are responsible for the lightness and heaviness of the south and the north. I should hold fast to the lonely city. If you return to the south from the path and lead the soldiers to rescue, you can still find a way to live." Li Quan said, "Hundreds of thousands of strong enemies are besieging the city. It is not easy to support.

古文：全朝出则城夕陷，不如兄归。 于是全止而福行。
现代文：我早晨出城那么晚上城就会陷落，不如哥哥回去。 于是李全留下，李福去南方。
English: If I leave the city in the morning, the city will fall in the evening, so it's better for my brother to go back. So Li Quan stayed and Li Fu went to the south.

古文：朝廷初以力未能讨，故用晞稷调护，及传全被围，稍欲图贼。
现代文：朝廷最初因力量不足没能征讨李全，所以用徐稷进行协调周旋，传来李全被包围的消息后，渐渐有消灭他的打算。
English: The imperial court initially failed to conscript Li Quan due to lack of strength, so they used Xu Xi to coordinate the operation. After the news that Li Quan was surrounded, they gradually planned to eliminate him.

古文：晞稷畏懦，幸全未归以苟岁月。
现代文：徐稷畏惧懦弱，幸亏李全没回来，他就得过且过地混日子。
English: Xu Yao was afraid and cowardly. Fortunately, Li Quan didn't come back, so he had to muddle through.

古文：朝廷方谋易帅，刘琸久在盱眙，雅意建阃；又见贼势稍孤，意功名可立，使镇江副都统彭忄乇延誉京师，自谓： 素抚镇江，三万人足用，且得四总管欢心，讨贼有余力。 朝廷信之，忄乇亦垂涎代琸，从臾尤力。
现代文：朝廷正计划换统帅，刘王卓在盱眙很久，一向想担任统帅；又看见李全的势力稍稍孤单，就认为可建立功名，派镇江副都统彭忄乇到京城去替他说好话，刘王卓自称： 我一向镇抚镇江，三万人讨贼足够用，况且得到四总管的支持，讨贼是有余力的。 朝廷相信了他，彭忄乇也向往取代刘王卓，对刘王卓极力奉承和怂恿。
English: The imperial court was planning to change the commander-in-chief. Liu Wangzhuo had been in Zhenjiang for a long time and had always wanted to be the commander-in-chief. When he saw that Li Quan's power was a little lonely, he thought that he could build a reputation. He sent the deputy commander-in-chief of the Zhenjiang River, Peng Rong, to Beijing to speak well of him. Liu Wangzhuo said to himself: I have always been the commander-in-chief of the Zhenjiang River. Thirty thousand people are enough to catch thieves. Moreover, I have the support of the four commanders-in-chief, and there is

古文：九月，以琸知楚州兼淮东制置使，忄乇代知盱眙，晞稷不知也。
现代文：九月，朝廷任命刘王卓为楚州知州兼淮东制置使，彭忄乇代为盱眙军知军，徐稷不知道。
English: In September, the imperial court appointed Liu Wangzhuo as the Chuzhou-Chizhou and Huaidong envoy, and Peng Yu as the leader of the Han army, but Xu Yu did not know.

古文：己亥，晞稷以户部侍郎召，未几，出知袁州。
现代文：廿三日，徐稷以户部侍郎的身份被召回朝中，不久，徐稷出朝任袁州知州。
English: On the 23rd, Xu Hui was recalled to the imperial court as a steward of the household department. Soon after, Xu Hui left the imperial court and was assigned to Yuanzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：十一月壬子朔，琸至楚州，心知不能制驭四总管，惟以镇江兵自随。
现代文：十一月初一，刘王卓到楚州。他心里知道不能驾驭四总管，只率镇江兵跟随自己。
English: On the first day of November, Liu Wangzhuo arrived in Chuzhou. He knew in his heart that he could not control the four commanders-in-chief, so he only led the Zhenjiang soldiers to follow him.

古文：时青在淮阴，琸怨其移屯叛己，不召也。
现代文：时青在淮阴，刘王卓怨恨他移动驻地背叛自己，不召用他。
English: When Qing was in Huaiyin, Liu Wangzhuo resented him for moving his residence and betraying himself by not calling him.

古文：夏全请从，琸素畏全狡，亦俾留盱眙。
现代文：夏全请求跟从他，刘王卓一向害怕夏全的狡诈，也让他留在盱眙。
English: Xia Quan asked him to follow him. Liu Wang Zhuo had always been afraid of Xia Quan's cunning, so he let him stay in Handan.

古文：忄乇自揣资望视琸更浅，曰： 琸之止夏全，是欲遗患盱眙也。
现代文：彭忄乇自己估计自己的资历和威望比刘王卓更浅，说： 刘王卓制止夏全跟随他，是想给盱眙留下祸患。
English: Peng Yao himself estimated that his credentials and prestige were more shallow than Liu Wangzhuo, saying: Liu Wangzhuo stopped Xia Quan from following him, wanting to leave a disaster for Yao.

古文：琸犹惮夏全，我何能用？ 乃激夏全曰： 楚城贼党不满三千，健将又在山东，刘制使图之，收功在旦夕。
现代文：刘王卓还怕夏全，我怎么能调动他呢？ 就激怒夏全说： 楚州城里的贼党不满三千人，健将又在山东，刘制使去图谋他们，取得功劳就在早晨或晚上。
English: Liu Wangzhuo was still afraid of Xia Quan, so how could I mobilize him? He enraged Xia Quan and said, "There are less than three thousand thieves in the city of Chuzhou, and there are also strong generals in Shandong. Liu Zhe asked me to go and plot against them, and to get credit in the morning or in the evening.

古文：太尉曷不往赴事会，何端坐为？ 夏全欣然领兵径入楚城，青亦自淮阴复移屯城内。
现代文：太尉怎么不去做这件事，为什么端坐在这里？ 夏全欣然领兵直接进入楚州城，时青也从淮阴又移兵驻扎在城内。
English: Why didn't the captain do this, why did he sit here? Xia Quan gladly led the troops directly into Chuzhou City, and Shi Qing also moved troops from Huaiyin and stationed them in the city.

古文：琸且骇且恐，势不容却，复就二人谋焉。
现代文：刘王卓又吃惊，又恐惧，这种形势不容许他拒绝夏全和时青，他就又和二人商量对策。
English: Liu Wangzhuo was both surprised and afraid. This situation did not allow him to refuse Xia Quan and Shi Qing, so he discussed countermeasures with the two.

古文：时传全已死，福欲分兵赴援，兵少，卒不往。
现代文：这时传说李全已经死了，李福想分兵去救援，因为兵少，最终也没去。
English: At this time, it was rumored that Li Quan had died. Li Fu wanted to send a detachment of soldiers to rescue him, but because there were so few soldiers, he ultimately did not go.

古文：甲子，琸令夏全盛陈兵楚城，贼党震恐，杨氏遣人赂夏全求缓师，乃止。
现代文：十三日，刘王卓命令夏全在楚州城摆开阵势，叛贼的同党感到震惊和恐惧，杨氏派人贿赂夏全请求他缓师，夏全才停止讨伐的举动。
English: On the 13th, Liu Wangzhuo ordered Xia Quan to take up a position in Chuzhou City. The traitor's comrades-in-arms were shocked and frightened. Yang sent someone to bribe Xia Quan and asked him to postpone the attack. Only then did Xia Quan stop the attack.

