古文：平公有疾，秦景公使医和视之，出曰： 不可为也。
现代文：晋平公生了病，秦景公派医和来给他诊断，医和出来后说： 病已经不能治了。
English: When Jin Ping Gong fell ill, Qin Jing Gong sent a doctor to diagnose him. When the doctor came out, he said, "The illness is incurable."

古文：是谓远男而近女，惑以生蛊；非鬼非食，惑以丧志。
现代文：这叫做疏远男人而亲近女人，受了迷惑而生了蛊病。不是因为鬼神作祟，也不是出于饮食不当，而是由于贪恋女色而丧失意志。
English: This is called alienating a man and getting close to a woman, being confused and having an illness. It is not because of evil spirits, nor is it due to improper diet, but due to lust for women and loss of will.

古文：良臣不生，天命不祐。
现代文：良臣将要死去，上天也不能保佑。
English: A good minister is about to die, and even heaven can't save him.

古文：若君不死，必失诸侯。 
现代文：如果国君不死，必然要失掉诸侯的拥护。 
English: If the sovereign did not die, he would inevitably lose the support of the lords.

古文：赵文子闻之曰： 武从二三子以佐君为诸侯盟主，于今八年矣，内无苛慝，诸侯不二，子胡曰 良臣不生，天命不祐 ？ 
现代文：赵文子听说后，说： 我随从诸位卿大夫辅佐国君成为诸侯的盟主，到如今已八年了，国内没有暴乱邪恶，诸侯同心同德，你为什么说 良臣将要死去，上天也不能保佑 呢？ 
English: After hearing this, Zhao Wenzi said, "It has been eight years since I followed your lords, doctors, assistants and sovereigns to become the leader of the princes. There is no violence or evil in the country, and the princes are of one mind and one heart. Why do you say that a good minister is about to die, and heaven cannot bless him?

古文：对曰： 自今之谓。和闻之曰： 直不辅曲，明不规闇，拱木不生危，松柏不生埤。 
现代文：医和回答说： 我说的是自今以后的情况，我听说： 正直的不能辅佐邪曲的，明智的不能规谏昏暗的，大树不能长在又高又险的地方，松柏不能生长在低洼潮湿的地方。 
English: The doctor replied, "I'm talking about the situation from now on. I've heard that: the honest can't help the crooked, the wise can't control the dark, big trees can't grow in high and dangerous places, and conifers can't grow in low and damp places.

古文：吾子不能谏惑，使至于生疾，又不自退而宠其政，八年之谓多矣，何以能久！ 
现代文：你不能谏诤君主贪恋女色，以至于使他生了病，又不能自己引退，而以执政为荣，认为八年已够多了，这怎么能长久呢！ 
English: You can't goad a monarch into lusting after a woman, so that he falls ill and can't retire on his own, but is proud of his reign and thinks that eight years is enough. How can this go on for long?

古文：文子曰： 医及国家乎？ 
现代文：文子问： 当医生的能医治国家吗？ 
English: Fumiko asked: Can a doctor heal the country?

古文：对曰： 上医医国，其次疾人，固医官也。 
现代文：医和回答说： 上等的医生能够医治国家，次一等的只会医治病人，这本来就是医生的职守。 
English: Ihehe replied, "A first-class doctor can heal the country, but a second-class doctor can only heal the sick. This is the duty of a doctor.

古文：文子曰： 子称蛊，何实生之？ 
现代文：文子又问： 你所说的蛊，是从那里生出来的呢？ 
English: Fumiko also asked, "Where did the dragonfly you mentioned come from?"

古文：对曰： 蛊之慝，谷之飞实生之。
现代文：医和回答说： 蛊伤害嘉谷，是从谷子扬起的灰尘中生出来的。
English: He replied, "The maggot that harmed Jia Gu was born from the dust raised by the grain.

古文：物莫伏于蛊，莫嘉于谷，谷兴蛊伏而章明者也。
现代文：物体中没有不隐藏蛊的，也没有比谷子更好的东西，谷气兴起，蛊就隐藏起来，谷子不霉烂生虫，人吃了就得益聪明。
English: There is no object that does not hide maggots, and there is nothing better than millet seeds. When the millet gas rises, the maggots are hidden, the millet seeds do not mold and produce worms, and when people eat them, they gain wisdom.

古文：故食谷者，昼选男德以象谷明，宵静女德以伏蛊慝，今君一之，是不飨谷而食蛊也，是不昭谷明而皿蛊也。夫文， 虫  皿 为 蛊 ，吾是以云。 
现代文：所以吃谷子的人，白天选择有德的男子亲近，就好像因吃谷子而聪明起来，夜晚与有德的女子一起休息而有节制，才能避免蛊惑。如今君王不分昼夜亲近女人，这就如同不享用谷子而去吃蛊虫，就不会像吃谷的人那样聪明，而是做了接受蛊的器皿。在文字中， 虫 和 皿 二字合成 蛊 字，因此我才这么说。 
English: Therefore, the eater of millet selects a virtuous man to approach during the day, as if eating millet makes him wise, and at night he rests with a virtuous woman and is temperate in order to avoid bewitchment. Nowadays, the king is close to women day and night, which is like eating aphids without enjoying millet, and will not be as smart as the eater of grain, but will become a vessel to receive maggots. In the text, the word "worm" and "dish" are combined to form the word "maggot," so I say this.

古文：文子曰： 君其几何？ 
现代文：文子说： 那平公还能活多久呢？ 
English: Fumiko said, "How long can Heiko live?"

古文：对曰： 若诸侯服不过三年，不服不过十年，过是，晋之殃也。 
现代文：医和回答说： 如果诸侯都服从，最多活上三年，诸侯不服，顶多不会超过十年，超过了这个限度，就是晋国的灾难。 
English: Ihe replied, "If all the lords obey, you will live for a maximum of three years. If the lords do not obey, you will live for a maximum of ten years. If you exceed this limit, it will be a disaster for Jin."

古文：是岁也，赵文子卒，诸侯叛晋，十年，平公薨。
现代文：这一年，赵文子死了，诸侯都背叛了晋国，十年以后，平公死去。
English: In the same year, Zhao Wenzi died, and all the princes betrayed Jin. Ten years later, Ping Gong passed away.

