古文：起玄黓摄提格，尽强圉协洽，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年年。晋纪十九晋成帝咸康八年
English: It lasted for a total of six years, from the 19th year of the Jin Dynasty to the 8th year of Emperor Hamkang's reign

古文：显宗成皇帝下咸康八年
现代文：春季，正月，己未朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, the first month, has not yet dawned, and a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：春，正月，己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：乙丑，东晋大赦天下。豫州刺史庾怿送酒犒饷江州刺史王允之。
English: Second Ugly, the East Jin Dynasty was pardoned by the world. Yuzhou Sashihong sent wine to Jiangzhou Sashihong.

古文：乙丑，大赦。豫州刺史庾怿以酒饷江州刺史王允之；允之觉其毒，饮犬，犬毙，密奏之。帝曰： 大舅已乱天下，小舅复欲尔邪！ 
现代文：王允之觉得有毒，用酒喂狗，狗饮酒后死亡，王允之将此事秘密奏报成帝。成帝说： 我大舅庾亮曾经导致国内大乱，小舅庾怿又想这样吗！ 
English: Wang Yunzhi thought it was poisonous and fed the dog with wine. The dog died after drinking the wine. Wang Yunzhi reported the matter to Emperor Cheng in secret. Emperor Cheng said: My great-uncle Hao Liang once caused great turmoil in the country, does little uncle Hao want to do this again!

古文：二月，怿饮鸩而卒。
现代文：二月，庾怿饮毒药自杀。
English: In February, Zhai committed suicide by drinking poison.

古文：三月，初以武悼后配食武帝庙。
现代文：三月，开始把武悼后的牌位供奉在武帝庙。
English: In March, they began to dedicate the plaques left after the memorial service to Emperor Wu in the Temple of Emperor Wu.

古文：庾翼在武昌，数有妖怪，欲移镇乐乡。
现代文：庾翼在武昌，常有妖异的事情发生，便想将镇守地点转移到乐乡。
English: In Wuchang, there are often strange things happening, so he wants to move the town guard to Le Xuan.

古文：征虏长史王述与庾冰笺曰： 乐乡去武昌千有馀里，数万之众，一旦移徙，兴立城壁，公私劳扰。
现代文：征虏长史王述给庾冰写信说： 乐乡距离武昌有千里之遥，数万士众，一旦真的移徙，又要修筑城郭，对公家、对私人都是烦劳困扰。
English: Conscript Wang Shi wrote to Zou Bing: "Le Township is thousands of miles away from Wuchang, tens of thousands of people, once they really migrate, they have to build a castle, which is troublesome for both the public and private sectors.

古文：又江州当溯流数千里，供给军府，力役增倍。且武昌实江东镇戍之中，非但扞御上流而已；缓急赴告，骏奔不难。
现代文：再说江州需要溯水而上，行进几千里供给军府资用，所费的劳力徭役加倍，此外，武昌处在江东镇戍地至西陲的中点，作用不仅是防御抵抗由上流而下的敌寇，而且一旦发生紧急情况或者有需要快速禀报的事，快马奔驰都不难及时赶到。
English: In addition, Wuchang is located at the midpoint of Jiangdong Township and Xidi Township. Its role is not only to defend against enemy pirates coming down from upstream, but also in the event of an emergency or something that needs to be reported quickly, it is not difficult for a fast horse-drawn carriage to arrive in time.

古文：若移乐乡，远在西陲，一朝江渚有虞，不相接救。
现代文：如果移镇乐乡，远处西陲边远之地，一旦长江沿岸有忧患发生，就来不及相救。
English: If you move to Le Township, a remote place in the far west of Yunnan Province, once there is trouble along the Yangtze River, it will be too late to save yourself.

古文：方岳重将，固当居要害之地，为内外形势，使闚之心不知所向。
现代文：驻守地方的重要将领，本来就应当居住在要害的地方，成为对内对外的屏障要冲，使寇贼虽有窥伺之心却无机可乘。
English: The important generals stationed in the region should have lived in the key areas and become a barrier to the inside and outside, so that the robbers, although they have the desire to spy, have no opportunity to take advantage of it.

古文：昔秦忌亡胡之谶，卒为刘、项之资；周围恶檿弧之谣，而成褒姒之乱。
现代文：以往秦王赢政忌惮胡人将灭亡秦国的谶言，最终被刘邦、项羽所利用；周宣王厌恶弧的童谣，却造成周幽王时的褒姒之乱。
English: In the past, the slander that the Qin king won the political power and feared that the Hu people would destroy the Qin state, was eventually used by Liu Bang and Xiang Yu; Zhou Xuan Wang detested the arc of the nursery rhyme, but it caused the rebellion of Zhou Yu Wang.

古文：是以达人君子，直道而行，禳避之道，皆所不取；正当择人事之胜理，思社稷之长计耳。 
现代文：所以通达之人、有道君子，直道而行，都不采取禳避妖异的作法，此时正应当决择人事的大道理，考虑国家的长远之计。 
English: Therefore, those who are well-versed, and those who are virtuous, and walk the straight path, do not adopt the practice of evading the evil. At this time, it is time to decide on the principle of personnel, and consider the long-term strategy of the country.

古文：朝议亦以为然。翼乃止。
现代文：朝廷论议都认为很对，庾翼这才打消迁徙的念头。
English: The imperial court argued that it was quite right, and it was only then that the idea of emigration was dispelled.

古文：夏，五月，乙卯，帝不豫；六月，庚寅，疾笃。
现代文：夏季，五月，乙卯，成帝身体不适。六月，庚寅，病情加重。
English: In the summer, in May, Etu, Chengdi was unwell. In June, Geng Yin, his condition worsened.

古文：或诈为尚书符，敕宫门无得内宰相；众皆失色。
现代文：有人伪造尚书符令，敕令皇宫门人不许让宰相入内，众人都大惊失色。
English: Someone forged the Imperial Rescript, ordering the palace gatekeepers not to allow the prime minister to enter. Everyone was shocked.

古文：庾冰曰： 此必诈也。 
现代文：庾冰说： 这一定有诈。 
English: Hao Bing said: This must be a trick.

古文：推问，果然。
现代文：推究查问，果然如此。
English: After further investigation, this was indeed the case.

古文：帝二子丕、弈，皆在襁褓。
现代文：成帝的两个儿子司马丕和司马奕年幼，都在襁褓之中。
English: The two sons of Emperor Chengdi, Sima Yi and Sima Yi, are young and in their infancy.

古文：庾冰自以兄弟秉权日久，恐易世之后，亲属愈疏，为它人所间，每说帝以国有强敌，宜立长君；请以母亲弟琅邪王岳为嗣，帝许之。
现代文：庾冰因为自己兄弟执掌朝政已久，怕皇帝换代之后，自己与皇帝亲属之间的关系愈加疏远，因而被他人所乘，常常劝说成帝国家外有强敌，应当册立年纪大的君王，并请求让成帝的同母兄弟、琅邪王司马岳为皇位继承人，成帝同意了。
English: Because his brother had been in charge of the imperial government for a long time, Yu Bing was afraid that the relationship between himself and the emperor's relatives would become more and more distant after the emperor's succession, so he was taken advantage of by others. He often persuaded Emperor Cheng that there were strong enemies outside the country and that an older king should be appointed. He also requested that Emperor Cheng's brother by the same mother, the evil king Sima Yue, be the heir to the throne. Emperor Cheng agreed.

古文：中书令何充曰： 父子相传，先王旧典，易之者鲜不致乱。
现代文：中书令何充说： 皇位父子相传，这是先王确立的旧制，改变旧制很少有不导致祸乱的。
English: "The imperial throne is passed down from father to son. This is the old system established by the previous king. Changing the old system rarely does not lead to disaster.

古文：故武王不授圣弟，非不爱也。
现代文：所以周武王不把天子之位传授圣贤的兄弟周公，并不是因为不爱他。
English: Therefore, the reason why King Zhouwu did not bestow the title of the Son of Heaven on Zhou Gong, the brother of the sage, was not because he did not love him.

古文：今琅邪践阼，将如孺子何！ 
现代文：现在如果琅邪王即位，拿两子孺子怎么办！ 
English: Now, if the king of evil ascends to the throne, what will happen to the two sons?

古文：冰不听。
现代文：庾冰不听。
English: He didn't listen.

古文：下诏，以岳为嗣，并以弈继琅邪哀王。
现代文：成帝下诏，让司马岳为皇位继承人，并让自己的儿子司马奕承袭琅邪哀王司马安国的封号。
English: Emperor Cheng decreed that Sima Yue should be the heir to the throne, and that his son Sima Yi should inherit the title of King Sima of An.

古文：壬辰，冰、充及武陵王晞、会稽王昱、尚书令诸葛恢并受顾命。
现代文：壬辰，庾冰、何充以及武陵王司马、会稽王司马昱、尚书令诸葛恢同时受任顾命国政。
English: Ren Chen, Yu Bing, He Zheng, as well as Wuling Wang Sima, Hui King Wang Sima, Shang Shuling Zhuge Wei, were also appointed to attend to state affairs.

古文：癸巳，帝崩。
现代文：癸己，成帝驾崩。
English: Emperor Zengdi is dying.

古文：帝幼冲嗣位，不亲庶政；及长，颇有勤俭之德。
现代文：成帝年幼时继位，不亲自处理政务。等到年岁渐大，颇有勤俭的德行。
English: Emperor Cheng ascended the throne at a young age, and did not personally handle government affairs. As he grew older, he was quite diligent and frugal.

古文：甲午，琅邪王即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：甲午，琅邪王司马岳即帝位，大赦天下。
English: At noon, the evil king Sima Yue ascended the throne, and was pardoned by the world.

古文：己亥，封成帝子丕为琅邪王，弈为东海王。
现代文：己亥，封成帝儿子司马丕为琅邪王，司马奕为东海王。
English: Ji Hai, the son of Emperor Fengcheng, Sima Yi was the king of evil spirits, and Sima Yi was the king of the East Sea.

古文：康帝亮阴不言，委政于庾冰、何充。
现代文：康帝居丧不言，把朝政委交给庾冰和何充。
English: Emperor Kangxi did not speak at the funeral and left the Political Committee of the Imperial Court to Yu Bing and He Chong.

古文：秋，七月，丙辰，葬成帝于兴平陵。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙辰，成帝入葬兴平陵。
English: In autumn, in July, Emperor Cheng was buried in Xingping Mausoleum.

古文：帝徒行送丧，至阊阖门，乃升素舆至陵所。
现代文：康帝徒步行走送葬，直至阊阖门，然后登上素白的车舆到达陵墓所在地。
English: Kang Di walked on foot to the funeral, until the gate, and then boarded Su Bai's carriage to reach the location of the mausoleum.

古文：既葬，帝临轩，庾冰、何充侍坐。
现代文：葬事结束后，康帝驾临殿前，庾冰、何充侍坐于旁。
English: After the funeral, Emperor Kang came to the front of the hall, and the attendants Yu Bing and He Chong sat next to him.

古文：帝曰： 朕嗣鸿业，二君之力也。 
现代文：康帝说： 朕继承国家大业，靠得是你们二人之力。 
English: Kandy said: I will inherit the great cause of the country, relying on the strength of you two.

古文：充曰： 陛下龙飞，臣冰之力也；若如臣议，不睹升平之世。 
现代文：何充说： 陛下龙飞登宝座，是庾冰出的力。如果像我所说的那样，那么陛下就不能目睹这升平之世了。 
English: Hecheng said, "His Majesty's ascension to the throne is the power to break the ice. If it is as I have said, then His Majesty will not be able to witness this ascension.

古文：帝有惭色。
现代文：康帝面有惭色。
English: Emperor Kang was mortified.

古文：己未，以充为骠骑将军、都督徐州、扬州之晋陵诸军事、领徐州刺史，镇京口，避诸庾也。
现代文：己未，任命何充为骠骑将军、都督徐州、扬州的晋陵诸军事、兼领徐州刺史，镇守京口，以避让庾氏家族。
English: In order to avoid giving in to the Gong family, he appointed He Chong as the general of the imperial cavalry, the military governor of Xuzhou and Yangzhou, the military governor of Jinling, and the governor of Xuzhou and Jingkou.

古文：冬，十月，燕王皝迁都龙城，赦其境内。
现代文：冬季，十月，前燕王慕容迁都至龙城，赦其境内罪囚。
English: In winter, in October, the former Yan Wang Murong moved the capital to Longcheng and pardoned prisoners within its territory.

古文：建威将军翰言于皝曰： 宇文强盛日久，屡为国患。今逸豆归篡窃得国，群情不附。
现代文：建威将军慕容翰对慕容说： 宇文部强盛日久，屡次成为国家的忧患，现在宇文逸豆归篡权夺国，群情不肯依附。
English: General Jianwei Muronghan said to Murong: The Ministry of Education and Culture has been flourishing for a long time and has repeatedly become a national concern. Now, Uwen Yatzu is usurping power and seizing the country. The masses are not willing to cling to it.

古文：加之性识庸暗，将帅非才，国无防卫，军无部伍。
现代文：加上他性情见识都平庸昏昧，所用将帅没有才能，国家没有防卫措施，军队没有严密组织。
English: In addition, his temperament and insight are mediocre and dim, his generals have no talent, the country has no defense measures, and the army has no strict organization.

古文：臣久在其国，悉其地形；虽远附强羯，声势不接，无益救援；今若击之，百举百克。
现代文：我长久地居住在他们国家，熟知地形。他们虽然依附远方强大的羯人，但声威、力量都远不可及，对救援没什么帮助。现在如果攻击宇文部，定是百战百胜。
English: I have lived in their country for a long time and am familiar with the terrain. Although they are dependent on powerful people from far away, their prestige and power are far from being able to help. If they attack the Ministry of Education and Culture now, it will be a win-win situation.

古文：然高句丽去国密迩，常有闚之志。
现代文：不过高句丽与我国近在咫尺，对我们常有窥探的心志。
English: However, Goguryeo is so close to China that it often spies on us.

古文：彼知宇文既亡，祸将及己，必乘虚深入，掩吾不备。
现代文：他们知道宇文氏灭亡后，祸患将降临到自己的头上，必定会乘虚而入，袭我不备。
English: They know that after the demise of the Uwen clan, disaster will befall their own heads, and they will certainly take advantage of the situation to attack me.

古文：若少留兵则不足以守，多留兵则不足以行。
现代文：如果留下少量兵力，不足以守御；多留军队则又不能攻克宇文部，这是我们的心腹之患，应当先行除去。
English: If we leave a small number of troops, it will not be enough to defend; if we leave more troops, we will not be able to defeat the U.N. Department of Education. This is a problem close to our hearts, and it should be eliminated first.

古文：此心腹之患也，宜先除之；观其势力，一举可克。宇文自守之虏，必不能远来争利。
现代文：我观察高句丽的力量，我们可以一战而胜。宇文氏是自己保守自己的人，一定不会到远方来与我国争夺利益。
English: I have observed the strength of Goguryeo, and we can win in one battle. The Uwen clan is a self-preserving people, and will not go far away to compete with our country for interests.

古文：既取高句丽，还取宇文，如返手耳。
现代文：攻取高句丽后，回过头来攻取宇文部，就易如反掌了。
English: After conquering Goguryeo, it would be easy to turn around and conquer Umenbu.

古文：二国既平，利尽东海，国富兵强，无返顾之忧，然后中原可图也。 
现代文：这两个国家被平定后，我们便可以尽得东海之利，国富兵强，没有后顾之忧，然后就有可能图谋中原了。 慕容说： 好！ 
English: After these two countries have been pacified, we will be able to take full advantage of the East Sea, the country will be rich and strong, and there will be no worries, and then it will be possible to plot the Central Plains. Murong said: Good!

古文：皝曰： 善！ 将击高句丽。
现代文：前燕军准备进攻高句丽。
English: Yuan Yan's army prepares to attack Goguryeo.

古文：高句丽有二道，其北道平阔，南道险狭，众欲从北道。
现代文：通住高句丽的道路有两条，一条是北道，地形平阔，一条是南道，地势险要狭窄，大家都想走北道。
English: There are two roads leading to Goguryeo. One is the North Road, with a flat topography, and the other is the South Road, with a narrow topography. Everyone wants to take the North Road.

古文：翰曰： 虏以常情料之，必谓大军从北道，当重北而轻南。
现代文：慕容翰说： 敌虏据常情忖度，必定认为大军会走北道，肯定是重北而轻南。
English: Muronghan said, "According to the enemy's common sense, they must think that the big army will go to the north, and it must be the north that is more important than the south.

古文：王宜帅锐兵从南道击之，出其不意，丸都不足取也。
现代文：大王应当率领精兵由南道攻击，出其不意，其都城丸都唾手可得。
English: The great king should lead the elite soldiers to attack from the south, and surprise them, the capital city Maru is within easy reach.

古文：别遣偏师出北道，纵有蹉跌，其腹心己溃，四支无能为也。 
现代文：另遣偏师由北道进发，即使遭受挫折，但他们的腹心已经溃败，四肢便无能为力了。 
English: Another division was dispatched from the North, and even though they suffered a setback, their subordinates were already defeated, and their limbs were powerless.

古文：皝从之。
现代文：慕容听从了他的献策。
English: Murong followed his advice.

古文：十一月，皝自将劲兵四万出南道，以慕容翰、慕容霸为前锋，别遣长史王寓等将兵万五千出北道，以伐高句丽。
现代文：十一月，慕容亲自带领精锐士兵四万人循南道进发，让慕容翰、慕容霸为先锋，另派长史王等率兵众一万五千人由北道进发，征伐高句丽。
English: In November, Murong personally led 40,000 elite soldiers to march along the southern route, with Murong Han and Murong Ba as the vanguard, and sent another 15,000 soldiers led by Chang Shi Wang from the northern route to conquer Goguryeo.

古文：高句丽王钊果遣弟武帅精兵五万拒北道，自帅羸兵以备南道。
现代文：高句丽王钊果然派遣兄弟武率领精兵五万人在北道迎敌，自己带领羸弱的士兵防备南道。
English: Goguryeo's King Goguryeo successfully dispatched 50,000 brother warriors and elite soldiers to meet the enemy in the north, and led his own weak soldiers to defend the south.

古文：慕容翰等先至，与钊合战，皝以大众继之。
现代文：慕容翰等人最先到达，与钊交战，慕容率领大军陆续赶来。
English: Muronghan and others were the first to arrive and fought with the baboons. Murong led a large army to arrive one after another.

古文：左常侍鲜于亮曰： 臣以俘虏蒙王国士之恩，不可以不报；今日，臣死日也！ 
现代文：左常侍鲜于亮说： 我以俘虏的身份蒙受燕王以国士之礼相待的恩泽，不能不报答。今天就是我以死报效的日子。 
English: Zuo's personal attendant, Xian Yu Liang, said: "As a prisoner, I received the grace of the Yan King's treatment as a statesman, and I cannot but repay it. Today is the day I repay it with my death."

古文：独与数骑先犯高句丽阵，所向摧陷。
现代文：独自同数名骑兵先行冲击高句丽的战阵，所到之处敌军均遭挫败。
English: Alone and with several cavalrymen, he attacked Goguryeo's battle line ahead of the enemy, and the enemy was defeated everywhere he went.

古文：高句丽阵动，大众因而乘之，高句丽兵大败。
现代文：高句丽的军阵骚动，燕国大军乘势攻击，高句丽军队大败。
English: Goguryeo's army was in turmoil, and Yan's army took advantage of the situation to attack. The Goguryeo army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：左长史韩寿斩高句丽将阿佛和度加，诸军乘胜追之，遂入丸都。
现代文：左长史韩寿斩杀高句丽将领阿佛和度加，各路军队乘胜追袭，于是进入丸都。
English: Left-wing historian Han Shou assassinated Goguryeo generals Ah Fo and Duka, and the various armies pursued the attack, thus entering Marutsu.

古文：钊单骑走，轻车将军慕舆泥追获其母周氏及妻而还。
现代文：高句丽王钊独自骑马逃跑，轻车将军慕舆追击，抓获高句丽王的母亲周氏和他的妻子后返回。
English: Wang Yao of Goguryeo fled alone on horseback, General Mu Ying of the Light Cavalry pursued him, captured Zhou, the mother of King Goguryeo, and his wife, and then returned.

古文：会王寓等战于北道，皆败没，由是皝不复穷追。遣使招钊，钊不出。
现代文：适逢王等人在北道与高句丽的军队作战，均遭败绩，因此慕容不再穷追高句丽王，派使者招安他，他躲藏不肯出来。
English: At the same time, Wang and others were fighting against Goguryeo's army in the North, and they were all defeated. Therefore, Murong no longer chased after Goguryeo's king and sent an envoy to invite him. He refused to come out of hiding.

古文：皝将还，韩寿曰： 高句丽之地，不可戍守。
现代文：慕容准备返回，韩寿说： 高句丽这地方，不能留兵戍守。
English: As Murong prepared to return, Han Shou said, "In this place of Goguryeo, we can't stay here.

古文：今其主亡民散，潜伏山谷；大军既去，必复鸠聚，收其馀烬，犹足为患。
现代文：现在他们君主逃亡，民众流散，潜伏在山谷之中。我方大军离开后，他们必定又会聚集在一起，收拾残余，仍然可以造成祸患。
English: Now their princes are fled, their people are scattered, and they lurk in the valleys; and when our host is departed, they will surely gather themselves together again, and gather up the remnant, that they may still do mischief.

古文：请载其父尸、囚其生母而归，俟其束身自归，然后返之，抚以恩信，策之上也。 
现代文：我请求用车载上钊父的尸体、用囚车载上钊母带回国去，等钊自缚来归降，然后再交还给他，以恩信抚慰他，这是上策。 
English: I asked him to take my father's body in a car and my mother's body in a prison van and bring them back to the country, wait for me to surrender myself, and then give it back to him and comfort him with a letter of gratitude. This is the best strategy.

古文：皝从之。发钊父乙弗利墓。载其尸，收其府库累世之宝，虏男女五万馀口，烧其宫室，毁丸都城而还。
现代文：慕容听从，发掘高句丽国王父亲乙弗利的陵墓，用车运载尸体，收缴府库中历代积累的财宝，掳获男女民众五万多人，焚毁高句丽王的宫室，又毁坏丸都城郭，然后返回。
English: Murong obeyed, excavated the mausoleum of the Goguryeo king's father, Bifruli, transported the bodies by car, collected the treasures accumulated over the ages in the government treasury, captured more than 50,000 men and women, burned the palace of the Goguryeo king, and destroyed the capital city, and then returned.

古文：十二月，壬子，立妃褚氏为皇后。
现代文：十二月，壬子，康帝立妃子褚氏为皇后。
English: In December, Emperor Kangxi made his daughter, Lady Zou, the empress.

古文：征豫章太守褚裒为待中、尚书。
现代文：征召豫章太守褚裒为侍中、尚书。
English: He was called up by Emperor Yuanzhang to be a chamberlain and a courtier.

古文：裒自以后父，不愿居中任事，苦求外出；乃除建威将军、江州刺史，镇半洲。
现代文：褚裒因为自己是褚皇后的父亲，不愿意在内廷任职，苦苦乞求外出，于是被任为建威将军、江州刺史，镇守半洲。
English: Because he was the father of Empress Dowager Zi, he did not want to serve in the Inner Court and begged to be allowed to go out. Therefore, he was appointed as the general of Jianwei, the governor of Jiangzhou, and the town guard of Hanzhou.

古文：赵王虎作台观四十馀所于鄴，又营洛阳、长安二宫，作者四十馀万人；又欲自鄴起阁道至襄国，敕河南四州治南伐之备，并、朔、秦、雍严西讨之资，青、冀、幽州为东征之计，皆三五发卒。
现代文：后赵王石虎在邺城营建四十多所台观，又营建洛阳、长安二处宫室，参与劳作的达四十多万人。石虎又想从邺城修建阁道到襄国，敕令黄河以南的四个州郡整治南伐的军备，并州、朔州、秦州、雍州准备西讨的军资，青州、冀州、幽州为东征作准备，都是三个男丁中调遣二人，五人中征发三人。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu built more than forty Taiguan in Shicheng, and also built two palaces in Luoyang and Chang'an, with more than 400,000 people participating in the work. Shihhu also wanted to build a loft road from Shicheng to Xiangguo, and ordered the four states and counties south of the Yellow River to rectify the armaments of the Southern Expedition, and the states, Shuozhou, Qinzhou and Yongzhou to prepare the military resources for the Western Expedition, and Qingzhou, Jizhou and Yuzhou to prepare for the Eastern Expedition. Two of the three men were transferred, and three of the five were conscripted.

古文：诸州军造甲者五十馀万人，船夫十七万人，为水所没，虎狼所食者三分居一。
现代文：各州郡的军队共有甲士五十多万人，船夫十七万人，溺水而死、被虎狼吞噬的占三分之一。
English: The armies of the states and counties totaled more than half a million soldiers, 170,000 boatmen, and one-third of those who drowned and were devoured by tigers and wolves.

古文：加之公侯、牧宰竞营私利，百姓失业愁困。
现代文：再加上公侯，牧宰竞相谋取私利，百姓们失去所从事的家业，愁困不堪。
English: Coupled with the fact that princes and shepherds compete for personal gain, the people lose their family businesses and are overwhelmed with grief.

古文：贝丘人李弘因众心之怨，自言姓名应谶，连结党与，署置百寮；事发，诛之，连坐者数千家。
现代文：贝丘人李弘顺应民心的怨恚，自称姓名与谶言相符，聚集党羽，设置百官，事发后被杀，连坐获罪的有几千家。
English: Li Hong, a Becciu man, responded to the grievances of the people, claimed that his name was consistent with the slander, gathered party members, set up hundreds of officials, was killed after the incident, and several thousand families were convicted.

古文：虎畋猎无度，晨出夜归，又多微行，躬察作役。
现代文：石虎打猎没有节制，清晨外出，夜间返回，又经常微服出行，亲自检视工地的劳役情况。
English: Shihu hunting without restraint, go out early in the morning, return at night, and often travel with light clothing, personally inspect the labor conditions at the site.

古文：侍中京兆韦謏谏曰： 陛下忽天下之重，轻行斤斧之间，猝有狂夫之变，虽有智勇，将安所施！
现代文：侍中京兆人韦劝谏说： 陛下轻视天下的重位，轻易地来往于危险之地，倘若突然发生狂人的变乱，即使有智有勇，又将何处施展！
English: Servant-in-chief Beijing Zhao Ren Wei advised him: "Your Majesty despises the weight of the world, and easily travels to and from dangerous places. If there is a sudden madman's upheaval, even if you have wisdom and courage, what will you do?

古文：又兴役无时，废民耘获，吁嗟盈路，殆非仁圣之所忍为也。 
现代文：况且征发徭役不分时节，荒废民众的农业生产，吁嗟叹息之声充溢于行路。恐怕不是仁圣之人所能忍心干的事。 
English: Moreover, the recruitment and dispatch of laborers is carried out regardless of the season, the agricultural production of the people is wasted, and the sound of sighing and sighing overflows on the road. I am afraid it is not something that a benevolent person can bear to do.

古文：虎赐謏谷帛，而兴缮滋繁，游察自若。
现代文：石虎赏赐韦谷物钱帛，但修建工程更加繁多，自己游巡察看泰然自若。
English: Shihu rewarded Wei's grain with money, but the construction projects were more diverse, and he was calm and self-assured as he toured and inspected.

古文：秦公韬有宠于虎，太子宣恶之。
现代文：秦公石韬得到石虎的宠爱，太子石宣憎恶他。
English: Qin Gong Shihong was favored by Shihhu, while Prince Shixuan detested him.

古文：右仆射张离领五兵尚书，欲求媚于宣，说之曰： 今诸侯吏兵过限，宜渐裁省，以壮本根。 
现代文：右仆射张离兼领五兵尚书职位，想讨好石宣，劝说石宣道： 现在诸侯的属吏、兵众都超出了限度，应当逐渐裁省，以增强朝廷的势力。 
English: His right-hand man Zhang Xie left his post of leading the five soldiers and the imperial rescript, trying to please Shi Xuan and persuade him to say: Now the vassals and soldiers of the princes have exceeded the limit, and they should be gradually reduced in order to strengthen the power of the imperial court.

古文：宣使离为奏： 秦、燕、义阳、乐平四公，听置吏一百九十七人，帐下兵二百人；自是以下，三分置一，馀兵五万，悉配东宫。 
现代文：石宣让张离写上奏章说： 秦公、燕公、义阳公、乐平公四人，允许设置吏属一百九十七人，帐下士兵二百人。由此而下，依照等位高低按三分之一的比例设置官吏，配备士卒。
English: Shi Xuan asked Zhang Li to write a report saying: Qin Gong, Yan Gong, Yiyang Gong, and Leping Gong are the first four people, and it is allowed to set up 197 officials and 200 soldiers. From there, officials are set up in a ratio of one-third according to the level, and they are equipped with soldiers.

古文：于是诸公咸怨，嫌衅益深矣。
现代文：所余下的五万士卒，全部配备给东宫。 于是各位王公莫不怨恨，矛盾、隔阂越来越深了。
English: The remaining fifty thousand soldiers were all assigned to the East Palace. As a result, there was resentment among the princes, and the contradictions and estrangement became deeper and deeper.

古文：青州上言： 济南平陵城北石虎，一夕移于城东南，有狼狐千馀迹随之，迹皆成蹊。 
现代文：青州上报说： 济南平陵城北的石雕老虎，一夜间被移到城东南，沿途有一千多只狼狐的足迹，已经踩出了小路。 
English: Qingzhou reported: The stone-carved tigers in the north of the city of Pingling, Jinan, were moved to the southeast of the city overnight. There are more than a thousand wolf and fox footprints along the way, and they have stepped out of the path.

古文：虎喜曰： 石虎者，朕也；自西北徙而东南者，天意欲使朕平荡江南也。
现代文：石虎高兴地说： 所谓石虎，就是朕。自西北迁徙到东南，表明天意想让朕荡平江南。
English: Shihu happily said, "The so-called Shihu is me. I migrated from the northwest to the southeast, indicating that Heaven's will is to let me float to the south of the river."

古文：其敕诸州兵明年悉集，朕当亲董六师，以奉天命。 
现代文：现在敕令各州军队明年全部会齐，朕将亲自统领六师，以遵循天命。 
English: Now that the Emperor has ordered all the state armies to unite next year, I will personally lead the six divisions to follow the destiny.

古文：群臣皆贺，上《皇德颂》者一百七人。
现代文：群臣都称贺，一百零七人呈上《皇德颂》。
English: The ministers all congratulated him, and 107 of them presented him with the "Ode to Imperial Virtue."

古文：制： 征士五人出车一乘，牛二头，米十五斛，绢十匹，调不办者斩。 
现代文：石虎颁发诏令： 被征调的士卒每五人出车一辆，牛二头，米十五斛，绢十匹，不备者斩首。 
English: Shihu issued an edict: For every five taxicab drivers conscripted, one would be dispatched, with two heads of cattle, fifteen bushels of rice, and ten donkeys. Those who were not prepared would be beheaded.

古文：民至鬻子以供军须，犹不能给，自经于道树者相望。
现代文：民众以至于典卖子女供给军需，仍然不能凑齐，在路边树上上吊自尽的远近相望。
English: The people, even to the extent of selling their children to supply the war effort, are still unable to come together, and are hanging themselves from trees along the road, looking at each other from far and wide.

古文：康皇帝
现代文：康皇帝
English: Emperor Kang

古文：显宗成皇帝下建元元年
现代文：晋康帝建元元年
English: Emperor Jinkang in the first year of Jianyuan

古文：春，二月，高句丽王钊遣其弟称臣入朝于燕，贡珍异以千数。
现代文：春季，二月，高句丽王钊派兄弟去前燕国入朝称臣，进贡珍宝异物数以千计。
English: In the spring, in February, the king of Goguryeo sent his brothers to the former Yan country to enter the court and declare themselves as vassals, bringing thousands of foreign treasures as tribute.

古文：燕王皝乃还其父尸，犹留其母为质。
现代文：前燕王慕容这才交还其父尸体，但仍然扣留他们的母亲作人质。
English: Former Yan Wang Murong then returned his father's body, but still held their mother hostage.

古文：宇文逸豆归遣其相莫浅浑将兵击燕；诸将争欲击之，燕王皝不许。
现代文：宇文逸豆归派丞相莫浅浑率兵进攻前燕，前燕国众将争着迎击，前燕王慕容不允许。
English: Yuwen Yatzu dispatched Prime Minister Mo Asahun to lead the troops to attack the former Yan, the former Yan people will compete to meet the attack, the former Yan King Murong is not allowed.

古文：莫浅浑以为皝畏之，酣饮纵猎，不复设备。
现代文：莫浅浑以为慕容畏惧自己，酣饮纵猎，不再设防。
English: Mo Shanhun thought that Murong was afraid of himself, and indulged in drinking and hunting, and no longer set up defenses.

古文：皝使慕容输出击之，莫浅浑大败，仅以身免，尽俘其众。
现代文：慕容让慕容翰出击，莫浅浑大败，仅仅独自幸免，士众全部被俘获。
English: Murong let Muronghan attack, and Mo Asahun was defeated, only he was spared, and all the scholars were captured.

古文：庾翼为人慷慨，喜功名，不尚浮华。
现代文：庾翼为人慷慨，喜好功名。
English: Zou Ying is a generous person and likes fame.

古文：琅邪内史桓温，彝之子也，尚南康公主，豪爽有风概。翼与之友善，相期以宁济海内。
现代文：琅邪内史桓温即桓彝的儿子，娶南康公主为妻，为人豪爽而有风范和气慨，庾翼和他关系友善，二人相约共同平定、拯救天下。
English: 邪内史桓温, the son of 桓, married Princess Nankang as his wife. He was a man of great courage, style and spirit. He and 翼 had a friendly relationship, and the two agreed to jointly pacify and save the world.

古文：翼尝荐温于成帝曰： 桓温有英雄之才，愿陛下勿以常人遇之，常婿畜之。
现代文：庾翼曾经向成帝举荐桓温，说： 桓温具备英雄的才能，希望陛下不要用常人的礼节对待他，按寻常的女婿豢养。
English: Zou Ying once recommended Kuan Wen to Emperor Cheng Rong, saying, "Kuan Wen has the talent of a hero. I hope that Your Majesty will not treat him with the etiquette of an ordinary person, but raise him as an ordinary son-in-law."

古文：宜委以方、邵之任，必有弘济艰难之勋 。
现代文：应当委派给他周宣王时方叔、邵虎那样的重任，他必能建立匡救世事艰难的功勋。 
English: He should be assigned the heavy responsibilities of Zhou Xuan Wang, Shifang Xiu, and Shao Hu. He will surely be able to establish the difficult merits of saving the world.

古文：时杜乂、殷浩并才名冠世，冀独弗之重也，曰： 此辈宜束之高阁，俟天下太平，然后徐议其任耳。 浩累辞征辟，屏居墓所，几将十年，时人拟之管、葛。
现代文：当时杜、殷浩都是才气、声名冠绝当代，唯独庾翼轻视他们，说： 这种人应当束之高阁，等天下太平后，再慢慢商议他们的职务。 殷浩多次拒绝官府的征辟，摒绝世事，隐居于墓地。如此将近十年，当时人把他和管仲、诸葛亮相比。
English: At that time, Du and Yin Hao were both talented and famous contemporaries, but Zou Yingtang despised them, saying, "This kind of person should be kept on a high shelf, and after the world is at peace, they should slowly discuss their duties." Yin Hao repeatedly refused to be recruited by the government, rejected worldly affairs, and lived in seclusion in the cemetery. For nearly ten years, people compared him to Guanzhong and Zhuge Liang.

古文：江夏相谢尚、长山令王濛常伺其出处，以卜江左兴亡。
现代文：江夏相谢尚、长山县令王经常观察他的出仕与隐居，来推测江南的兴亡。
English: Jiangxia Minister Xie Shang and Changshan County Reigning King often observed his service and seclusion to speculate on the rise and fall of Jiangnan.

古文：尝相与省之，知浩有确然之志，既返，相谓曰： 深源不起，当如苍生何！ 
现代文：他们曾经共同前往探视，明了殷浩有坚定的志向，回来后相顾而言说： 殷浩不出来为官，百姓们该怎么办！ 
English: They once went on a visit together and realized that Yin Hao had firm aspirations. After returning, they looked at each other and said: "If Yin Hao does not come out as an official, what should the people do?"

古文：尚，鲲之子也。
现代文：谢尚即谢鲲的儿子。
English: Xie Shang is the son of Xie Yao.

古文：翼请浩为司马；诏除侍中、安西军司，浩不应。
现代文：庾翼请殷浩出任司马，康帝下诏任他为侍中、安西军司，殷浩不从命。
English: Zou Ying invited Yin Hao to serve as Sima, and Emperor Kang made him an attendant and the military governor of Anxi Province, but Yin Hao did not follow his orders.

古文：翼遗浩书曰： 王夷甫立名非真，虽云谈道，实长华竞。
现代文：庾翼送信给殷浩说： 王导树立的声名并不真切，虽说是在谈论玄道，其实助长了浮华豪奢之风。
English: Zou Ying sent a message to Yin Hao saying: Wang Du's reputation is not real. Although he is talking about the occult, he has actually promoted the style of glitz and luxury.

古文：明德君子，遇会处际，宁可然乎！ 
现代文：具有完美德行的君子，遇到机会时难道能这样吗！ 
English: Can a gentleman of perfect virtue do such a thing when he has the opportunity?

古文：浩犹不起。
现代文：殷浩仍然不出仕。
English: Yin Hao still refuses to serve.

古文：殷羡为长沙相，在郡贪残，庾冰与翼书属之。
现代文：殷羡任长沙相，在郡中贪婪残暴，庾冰写信给庾翼，托他庇护。
English: Yin envied the minister of Changsha and was greedy and cruel in the county. Yan Bing wrote to Xing Ying and asked him for protection.

古文：翼报曰： 殷君骄豪，亦似由有佳儿，弟故小令物情容之。
现代文：庾翼答复说： 殷羡骄纵豪强，恐怕就是因为有好儿子，所以我也从物理人情出发对他稍加宽容。
English: Zou Ying replied: I'm afraid it's because I have a good son that I'm envious of his arrogance, so I'm also a little tolerant of him from the perspective of physical human feelings.

古文：大较江东之政，以妪煦豪强，常为民蠹；时有行法，辄施之寒劣。
现代文：总体考较一下江南的朝政，因为纵容豪强，经常成为危害百姓的蠹虫。当时实行的法令，就在寒门百姓身上施行。
English: On the whole, compared with the imperial government in the south of the Yangtze River, because of its indulgence of the brave and strong, it often became a tapeworm that harmed the people. The decrees implemented at that time were implemented on the people of Hammen.

古文：如往年偷石头仓米一百万斛，皆是豪将辈，而直杀仓督监以塞责。山遐为馀姚长，为官出豪强所藏二千户，而众共驱之，令遐不得安席。
现代文：比如往年有人偷石头城仓库藏米一百万斛，都是豪强之辈，却只杀死仓库的督监搪塞责任，山遐任余姚的长官，为官府清理出豪强藏匿不报的百姓二千户，于是众豪强共同驱逐他，使他不得安宁。
English: For example, in previous years, someone stole a million baht worth of stored rice from the warehouse in Stone Town. They were all heroes and strongmen, but they only killed the supervisor of the warehouse to shirk their responsibilities. Yamazaki served as Yuyao's chief and cleared out two thousand households of heroes and strongmen hiding and not reporting for the government. Therefore, many heroes and strongmen jointly expelled him, making him restless.

古文：虽皆前宰之惛谬，江东事去，实此之由。
现代文：这虽然都是前任宰相王导为官昏昧荒谬所致，但江东的大业日渐衰微，实在由此而生。
English: Although all of this is the result of the former Prime Minister Wang Du's official confusion and absurdity, the great cause of Jiangdong is waning day by day, and this is really the reason for this.

古文：兄弟不幸，横陷此中，自不能拔足于风尘之外，当共明目而治之。
现代文：你我兄弟身遭不幸，枉自陷身政务之中，自己无法拔足于风尘之外，就应当共同睁亮眼睛加以治理。
English: You and I, brothers and sisters, who have suffered misfortune and have been caught up in government affairs in vain, unable to extricate ourselves from the wind and dust, should open our eyes and govern together.

古文：荆州所统二十馀郡，唯长沙最恶；恶而不黜，与杀督监者复何异邪！ 
现代文：荆州所统辖的二十多个郡，唯有长沙恶迹最为昭著，恶而不遭贬黜，这与只杀督监有什么不同呢！ 
English: Of the more than twenty counties under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou, only Changsha has the most notorious evil, evil without being disparaged. What is the difference between this and only killing supervisors?

古文：遐，简之子也。
现代文：山遐即山简的儿子。
English: Yamazaki is the son of Yamazane.

古文：翼以灭胡取蜀为己任，遣使东约燕王皝，西约张骏，刻期大举。
现代文：庾翼以攻灭胡虏、收取蜀地为己任，派使者向东与前燕王慕容相约，向西与张骏相约，商定日期大举行动。
English: Zou Ying took it as his duty to attack and destroy the Huns and take back Shu, and sent emissaries to the east to meet with the former Yan Wang Murong, and to the west to meet with Zhang Ye, and agreed on a date for a large-scale action.

古文：朝议多以为难，唯庾冰意与之同，而桓温、谯王无忌皆赞成之。
现代文：朝廷论议大多认为困难，唯有庾冰的意见与庾翼相同，而桓温、谯王司马无忌都赞成。
English: Most of the discussions in the imperial court were of the opinion that it would be difficult, but Shibing's opinion was the same as Shubing's, while Kuan Wen and Shao Wang Sima were all in favour.

古文：无忌，承之子也。
现代文：司马无忌即司马承的儿子。
English: Sima Mugu is the son of Sima Cheng.

古文：秋，七月，赵汝南太守戴开帅数千人诣翼降。
现代文：秋季，七月，后赵汝南太守戴开率领数千人向庾翼投降。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Zhao Runan's second-in-command Dai Kai led thousands of people to surrender to Xingyi.

古文：丁巳，下诏议经略中原。
现代文：丁已，康帝下诏让朝廷论议经略中原的事宜。
English: However, Emperor Kang issued an edict ordering the imperial court to discuss the situation in Central Plains.

古文：翼欲悉所部之众北伐，表桓宣为都督司、雍、梁三州、荆州之四郡诸军事、梁州刺史，前趣丹水；桓温为前锋小督、假节，帅众入临淮；并发所统六州奴及车牛驴马，百姓嗟怒。
现代文：庾翼想全数出动所统领的士众北伐，表荐桓宣为都督司州、雍州、梁州、荆州的四个郡诸军事及梁州刺史，前赴丹水；任桓温为前锋小督、假节，率士众进入临淮。同时出动自己统领的六州奴仆及车牛驴马，百姓叹息怨恨。
English: Zou Ying wanted to dispatch all the soldiers of the Northern Expedition led by the commander, and recommended Huan Xuan as the governor of the four counties of Sizhou, Yongzhou, Liangzhou and Jingzhou to the military and Liangzhou to the history, and went to Danshui; appointed Huan Wen as the vanguard of the small governor, the false festival, and led the soldiers into Linhuai. At the same time, he dispatched the slaves of the six states and the oxen and donkeys led by himself, and the people sighed with resentment.

古文：代王什翼犍复求婚于燕，燕王皝使纳马千匹为礼；什翼犍不与，又倨慢无子壻礼。八月，皝遣世子俊帅前军师评等击代。
现代文：代王拓跋什翼犍又向前燕求婚，前燕王慕容让他献出一千匹马作为聘礼，拓跋什翼犍不肯给，又骄傲自大，毫无女婿应有的礼节，八月，慕容派世子慕容俊率前军师慕容评等人进攻代国。
English: The acting king, Tuoba Shih Tzu, proposed marriage to the former Yan, and the former Yan king, Murong, asked him to offer a thousand horses as a betrothal gift. Tuoba Shih Tzu refused to give it, and he was proud and arrogant, without the etiquette that a son-in-law should have. In August, Murong sent his heir, Murong Jun, and his former military instructor, Murong Hui, and others to attack the acting country.

古文：什翼犍帅众避去，燕人无所见而还。
现代文：拓跋什翼犍率领士众避开，前燕军没有遇见敌人，于是返回。
English: Tuoba Shiji led the warriors to avoid the crowd. The former Yan army did not meet the enemy, so they returned.

古文：汉主寿卒，谥曰昭文，庙号中宗；太子势即位，大赦。
现代文：成汉国主李寿死，谥号为昭文，庙号为中宗。太子李势即位，大赦境内罪囚。
English: Li Shou, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, died. His posthumous name was Shouwen, and his temple name was Zhongzong. Prince Li Xian ascended the throne, and he granted amnesty to criminals in China.

古文：赵太子宣击鲜卑斛谷提，大破之，斩首三万级。
现代文：后赵太子石宣进攻鲜卑部斛提，重创其军，斩首三万级。
English: Afterward, Zhao Taizi and Shixuan attacked the Xianbei's Shanti, severely damaging his army and decapitating 30,000 soldiers.

古文：宇文逸豆归执段辽弟兰，送于赵，并献骏马万匹。
现代文：宇文逸豆归执获段辽的兄弟段兰，送到后赵国，并且献上骏马一万匹。
English: Duan Liao's brother, Duan Lan, won the right to keep Uwen Yatzu, and sent him to Hou Zhao and presented him with ten thousand horses.

古文：赵王虎命兰帅所从鲜卑五千人屯令支。
现代文：后赵王石虎命令段兰率领追从他的鲜卑部五千人屯军令支。
English: Afterward, Zhao Wang Shihhu ordered Duan Lan to lead a detachment of five thousand troops to chase after him.

古文：庾翼欲移镇襄阳，恐朝廷不许，乃奏云移镇安陆。
现代文：庾翼想转移镇守地到襄阳，怕朝廷不同意，于是上奏说移镇安陆。
English: Xing Ying wanted to transfer the town to Xiangyang, fearing that the imperial court would not agree, so he made a report saying that the town would be moved to Anlu.

古文：帝及朝士皆遣使譬止翼，翼遂违诏北行；至夏口，复上表请镇襄阳。
现代文：康帝和朝廷大臣都派使者晓谕制止，庾翼便违背诏令向北行进，到达夏口后，又上表请求镇守襄阳。
English: Emperor Kang and the ministers of the Imperial Court both sent envoys to stop it, so Xing Ying disobeyed the imperial edict and marched north. After reaching Xia Kou, he again requested the table to guard Xiangyang.

古文：翼时有众四万，诏加翼都督征讨诸军事。
现代文：庾翼当时拥有兵众四万人，康帝下诏加授他都督征讨诸军事。
English: At that time, Xingyi had 40,000 soldiers, and Emperor Kang gave him the additional title of military governor.

古文：先是车骑将军、扬州刺史庾冰屡求出外，辛巳，以冰都督荆、江、宁、益、梁、交、广七州、豫州之四郡诸军事，领江州刺史，假节，镇武昌，以为翼继援。
现代文：此前，车骑将军、扬州刺吏庾冰多次请求外出任职，辛巳，任命庾冰都督荆州、江州、宁州、益州、梁州、交州、广州及豫州等四郡诸军事，兼领江州刺史、假节，镇守武昌，作为庾翼的后援。
English: Previously, the cavalry general and Yangzhou assassin, Yu Bing, had repeatedly requested to go out to serve, and Xin Si appointed Yu Bing as the governor of Jingzhou, Jiangzhou, Ningzhou, Yizhou, Liangzhou, Jiaozhou, Guangzhou and Yuzhou, as well as the territorial governor of Jiangzhou, and the town guard of Wuchang.

古文：征徐州刺史何充为督扬、豫、徐州之琅邪诸军事，领扬州刺史，录尚书事，辅政。
现代文：征召徐州刺史何充为都督扬州、豫州、徐州的琅邪诸军事，兼领扬州刺史，录尚书事，辅佐朝政。
English: He Zicheng, the governor of Xuzhou, was called up to be the military governor of Yangzhou, Yuzhou and Xuzhou. He also led the military history of Yangzhou, recorded records, and assisted the imperial government.

古文：以琅邪内史桓温为都督青、徐、兗三州诸军事、徐州刺史，征江州刺史褚裒为卫将军，领中书令。
现代文：任命琅邪内史桓温为都督青州、徐州、兖州诸军事及徐州刺史，褚裒任卫将军，兼领中书令。
English: He appointed the governor of Qingzhou, Xuzhou, and Zhangzhou, the military governor of Xuzhou, and the military governor of Xuzhou, and the general of Wei, and the leader of the Chinese army.

古文：冬，十一月，己巳，大赦。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己巳，东晋大赦天下。
English: In winter, in November, the Eastern Jin Dynasty was overthrown.

古文：显宗成皇帝下建元二年
现代文：建元二年
English: Founded in the second year of Jianyuan

古文：春，正月，赵王虎享群臣于太武殿，有白雁百馀集马道之南，虎命射之，皆不获。
现代文：春季，正月，后赵王石虎在太武殿宴享群臣，有一百多只白雁停栖在马道的南面，石虎让人射雁，都没射中。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, after Zhao Wang Shihu feasted with a group of ministers at the Taiwu Palace, there were more than a hundred white geese perched on the south side of the horse road. Shihu let people shoot geese, but they did not hit.

古文：时诸州兵集者百馀万，太史令赵揽密言于虎曰： 白雁集庭，宫室将空之象，不宜南行。 
现代文：当时各州军队会集起来已有一百多万人，太史令赵揽秘密地对石虎说： 白雁停栖庭院，是宫室将要空寂无人的征兆，不适宜向南进发。 
English: At that time, there were more than one million people gathered in the army of each state. Taishi ordered Zhao Zhaobao to secretly say to Shihu: The white geese stopped in the courtyard is a sign that the palace will be empty and uninhabited, and it is not suitable to go south.

古文：虎信之，乃临宣武观，大阅而罢。
现代文：石虎相信他，于是驾临宣武观，举行盛大的阅兵式，然后作罢。
English: Shihu believed him, so he came to Xuanwu, held a grand military parade, and then quit.

古文：汉主势改元太和，尊母阎氏为皇太后，立妻李氏为皇后。
现代文：成汉国主李势改年号为太和，尊奉母亲阎氏为皇太后，册立妻子李氏为皇后。
English: Li Xian, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, changed his name to Taihe, honored his mother Yan as empress dowager, and proclaimed his wife Li as empress.

古文：燕王皝与左司马高诩谋伐宇文逸豆归。
现代文：前燕王慕容和左司马高翊谋议，准备讨伐宇文逸豆归。
English: Former Yan Wang Murong and Zuo Si Ma Gao Yao discussed and prepared to fight against Uwen Yidzu Gui.

古文：诩曰： 宇文强盛，今不取，必为国患，伐之必克；然不利于将。 
现代文：高翊说： 宇文氏强盛，现在不攻灭，必然成为国家的祸患。如果攻伐必能取胜，只是对将帅有所不利。 
English: Gao Yao said: The Uwen clan is strong, and if it is not defeated now, it will inevitably become a national calamity. If it is attacked, it will surely win, but it will be unfavorable to the general.

古文：出而告人曰： 吾往必不返，然忠臣不避也。 
现代文：高翊出来后告诉别人说： 我这一去必定回不来了，但是忠臣不避祸。 
English: After Gao Yao came out, he told others, "I definitely won't come back now, but a loyal subject doesn't avoid disaster."

古文：于是皝自将伐逸豆归。
现代文：于是慕容自为统帅，攻伐宇文逸豆归。
English: As a result, Murong made himself the commander-in-chief and attacked Uwen Yatzu.

古文：以慕容翰为前锋将军，刘佩副之；分命慕容军、慕容恪、慕容霸及折冲将军慕舆根将兵，三道并进。
现代文：任命慕容翰为前锋将军，刘佩作他的副手；分别命令慕容军、慕容恪、慕容霸及折冲将军慕舆根率领军队，分三路同时进发。
English: He appointed Murong Han as the vanguard general and Liu Pe as his deputy; he ordered Murong Jun, Murong Ke, Murong Ba, and General Mu Myugen to lead the army separately and advance in three directions at the same time.

古文：高诩将发，不见其妻，使人语以家事而行。
现代文：高翊临行前，不见他的妻子，让人转告家中事务，然后出发。
English: Before leaving, Gao Yao did not see his wife. He asked her to tell him about the affairs at home, and then set off.

古文：逸豆归遣南罗大涉夜干将精兵逆战，皝遣人驰谓慕容翰曰： 涉夜干勇冠三军，宜小避之。 
现代文：宇文逸豆归派南罗城主涉夜干统率精兵迎战，慕容派人急速告诉慕容翰： 涉夜干勇冠三军，应当稍稍避让。 
English: Uwen Yatzu was dispatched by the lord of Nanlu City to lead the elite soldiers in the night march to meet the battle, and Murong sent a person to quickly tell Muronghan: If you are the champion of the three armies in the night march, you should give in a little.

古文：翰曰： 逸豆归扫其国内精兵以属涉夜干，涉夜干素有勇名，一国所赖也。
现代文：慕容翰说： 宇文逸豆归尽数出动国内精兵交付给涉夜干，涉夜干素来有勇悍的名声，被他们全国所仰仗。
English: Muronghan said, "Uwen Yatzu dispatched as many domestic elite soldiers as possible and delivered them to the night watchmen. The night watchmen have always had a reputation for bravery and are respected by the whole country.

古文：今我克之，其国不攻自溃矣。
现代文：现在我战败他，他们的国家便会不战自溃。
English: Now that I've defeated him, their country will collapse without a fight.

古文：且吾孰知涉夜干之为人，虽有虚名，实易与耳，不宜避之，以挫吾兵气。 
现代文：况且我熟知涉夜干的为人，虽有虚名，其实容易对付，不应当避让他，这会挫伤我军的士气。 
English: Moreover, I am familiar with the person who wanders at night, although he has a false name, he is actually easy to deal with, and he should not be avoided, which will dampen the morale of our army.

古文：遂进战。
现代文：于是前进接战。
English: So they advanced to engage in battle.

古文：翰自出冲阵，涉夜干出应之；慕容容霸从傍邀击，遂斩涉夜干。
现代文：慕容翰亲自出马冲击敌阵，涉夜干出阵应战，慕容霸从侧面截击，于是斩杀了涉夜干。
English: Muronghan himself rode out to attack the enemy's line, while Wudao Jian took up the challenge, and Murongba intercepted the attack from the side, thus killing Wudao Jian.

古文：宇文士卒见涉夜干死，不战而溃；燕兵乘胜逐之，遂克其都城。
现代文：宇文氏的士卒见涉夜干死亡，不战自溃。燕军乘胜追击，于是攻克宇文氏的都城。
English: Seeing the death of Uwen's vassal, Wading through the night, Yan's army defeated itself without a fight. Yan's army took advantage of the victory and attacked, thus conquering Uwen's capital city.

古文：逸豆归走死漠北，宇文氏由是散亡。
现代文：宇文逸豆归逃跑，死于大漠以北，宇文氏由此离散灭亡。
English: Uwen Yatzu fled and died north of the desert, and the Uwen clan dispersed and died.

古文：皝悉收其畜产、资货，徙其部众五千馀落于昌黎，辟地千馀里。
现代文：慕容尽数收缴他们的畜产、物资、钱财，把宇文氏五千多个村落迁徙到昌黎，开辟国土一千多里。
English: Murong did his best to confiscate their livestock, materials and money, and moved more than five thousand villages of the Uwen clan to Changli, opening up more than a thousand miles of land.

古文：更命涉夜干所居城曰威德城，使弟彪戍之而还。
现代文：把涉夜干原先居住的城镇改名为威德城，让兄弟慕容彪戍守，然后班师回国。
English: He changed the name of the town where he used to live to Weide City, let his brother Murong Biao stay there, and then the team returned to China.

古文：高诩、刘佩皆中流矢卒。
现代文：高翊、刘佩都被流矢射中身亡。
English: Gao Yao and Liu Pei were both killed in the crossfire.

古文：诩善天文，皝尝谓曰： 卿有佳书而不见与，何以为忠尽！ 
现代文：高翊擅长天文，慕容曾对他说： 你有好书却不见你给我看，怎么能说尽忠！ 
English: Gao Yao was good at astronomy. Murong once said to him, "You have a good book, but if you don't show it to me, how can you be loyal?"

古文：诩曰： 臣闻人君执要，人臣执职。
现代文：高翊说： 我听说人君执掌大要，人臣执掌具体事务。
English: Gao Wei said: I have heard that the superior man is in charge of the general affairs, and the subordinate man is in charge of the specific affairs.

古文：执要者逸，执职者劳。
现代文：执掌大要的人安逸，执掌具体事务的人辛苦。
English: Those who are in charge of major issues are at ease, while those who are in charge of specific matters have a hard time.

古文：是以后稷播种，尧不预焉。
现代文：所以后稷播种庄稼，唐尧不参与其事。
English: Therefore, Houyi sowed crops, and Tang Jun did not participate in it.

古文：占候、天文，晨夜其苦，非至尊之所宜亲，殿下将焉用之！ 
现代文：从事占候、天文，清晨、夜晚十分辛苦，不是至尊之人应当亲自参与的，殿下准备学来干什么？ 
English: Engaging in divination, astronomy, in the morning and at night is very hard. It is not something that the Most Exalted One should personally participate in. What is Your Highness preparing to learn?

古文：皝默然。
现代文：慕容默然不语。
English: Murong falls silent.

古文：初，逸豆归事赵甚谨，贡献属路。
现代文：当初，宇文逸豆归侍奉后赵国甚为恭敬，贡献物品的人不绝于路。
English: At first, Zhao Guo was very respectful after the return of Uwen Yatzu to serve, and people who contributed items were constantly on the road.

古文：及燕人伐逸豆归，赵王虎使右将军白胜、并州刺史王霸自甘松出救之。比至，宇文氏已亡，因攻威德城，不克而还；慕容彪追击，破之。
现代文：等到前燕人攻伐宇文逸豆归，后赵王石虎派右将军白胜、并州刺史王霸从甘松出发救援，等到达时，宇文氏已经灭亡，顺势进攻威德城，不胜而退。慕容彪追袭，击败后赵军。
English: By the time the Yan people attacked and besieged Uwen Yidonggui in the past, and Zhao Wang Shihogu sent the right-wing general Bai Sheng and the provincial commander Wang Ba from Gansong to rescue, the Uwen clan had already perished, attacked Weide City, and retreated without victory. Murong Biao pursued and defeated the post-Zhao army.

古文：慕容翰之与宇文氏战也，为流矢所中，卧病积时不出。
现代文：慕容翰与宇文氏交战时，被流箭射中，长期卧床养伤，不出门。
English: During the battle between Muronghan and the Uwen clan, he was shot by a stray arrow. He was bedridden for a long time to recover from his injuries and did not go out.

古文：后渐差，于其家试骋马。
现代文：后来逐渐痊愈，在家中试着骑马。
English: Later, he gradually recovered and tried horseback riding at home.

古文：或告翰称病而私飞骑乘，疑欲为变。
现代文：有人告发慕容翰假称有病却私下练习骑乘，怀疑他想作乱。
English: Some people accused Muronghan of pretending to be ill while secretly practicing riding, suspecting that he wanted to make trouble.

古文：燕王皝虽藉翰勇略，然中心终忌之，乃赐翰死。
现代文：前燕王慕容虽然仰仗慕容翰的勇悍和谋略，但心中终究有所忌惮，于是赐令慕容翰自裁。
English: Although the former Yan Wang Murong relied on Murong Han's bravery and strategy, he eventually had some misgivings in his heart, so he ordered Murong Han to arbitrate.

古文：翰曰： 吾负罪出奔，既而复还，今日死已晚矣。
现代文：慕容翰说： 我当初负罪出逃，后来又返回，今天死亡已算晚了。
English: Muronghan said, "I initially fled after being found guilty, and later returned. Today, it's too late to die.

古文：然羯贼跨据中原，吾不自量，欲为国家荡壹区夏。
现代文：不过羯族寇贼占据中原，我不自量力，原想为国家荡平、统一宇内。
English: However, the Dong bandits occupied the Central Plains, and I did not try my best. I originally wanted to level the country and unify the country.

古文：此志不遂，没有遗恨，命矣夫！ 
现代文：这一志向不能实现，我死了也会遗憾，这就是命运吧！ 
English: This ambition can not be realized, I will be sorry when I die, this is fate!

古文：饮药而卒。
现代文：随即饮毒药身死。
English: He then drank poison and died.

古文：代王什翼犍遣其大人长孙秩迎妇于燕。
现代文：代王拓跋什翼犍派其大人长孙秩到前燕国迎娶妻子。
English: The reigning king, Tuoba Shih Tzu, sent his adult eldest grandson, Chizhi, to Qianyan to marry his wife.

古文：夏，四月，凉州将张瓘败赵将王擢于三交城。
现代文：夏季，四月，凉州将领张在三交城击败后赵将领王擢。
English: In the summer, in April, after Liangzhou defeated Zhang in Sanjiajie, Zhao led the king.

古文：初，赵领军王朗言于赵王虎曰： 盛冬雪寒，而皇太子使人伐宫材，引于漳水，役者数万，吁嗟满道，陛下宜因出游罢之。 
现代文：当初，后赵领军王朗对后赵王石虎陈言说： 隆冬雪寒的季节，太子却让人砍伐修建宫室的木材，沿漳水运送而来，参与劳役的人有数万，吁嗟叹息之声充溢道路，陛下应当乘出游时加以制止。 
English: At first, Wang Lang, the leader of Zhao's army, said to Zhao Shihu Chen, the leader of Zhao's army: In the cold and snowy season of mid-winter, the prince had people cut down the wood to build the palace and transported it along the Yanshui River. Tens of thousands of people participated in the labor service, and the road was filled with the sound of sighing and sighing. His Majesty should stop it when traveling.

古文：虎从之。
现代文：石虎听从。
English: Shihu obeyed.

古文：太子宣怒。
现代文：太子石宣发怒。
English: Prince Shi Xuan was furious.

古文：会荧惑守房，宣使太史令赵揽言于虎曰： 房为天王，今荧惑守之，其殃不细。
现代文：适逢火星在房宿，石宣让太史令赵揽对石虎说： 房宿是天王，现在火星停留于此，祸殃不小。
English: When Mars was in the house, Shi Xuan ordered Zhao Zhao to say to Shi Hu: "The house is the heavenly king. Now Mars is staying here, which is a great misfortune.

古文：宜以贵臣王姓者当之。 
现代文：应当用显贵大臣中姓王的人承当罚责。 
English: A high-ranking minister with the surname Wang should be used to carry out the punishment.

古文：虎曰： 谁可者？ 
现代文：石虎说： 谁能承当？ 
English: Shihu said: Who can take responsibility?

古文：揽曰： 无贵于王领军。 
现代文：赵揽说： 没有比领军王朗更显贵的了。 
English: Zhao Zhaobao said: There is no one more distinguished than the leader Wang Lang.

古文：虎意惜朗，使揽更言其次。
现代文：石虎心中怜惜王朗，让赵览再说其次的人选。
English: Shihu pitied Wang Lang in his heart, and let Zhao Zhan be the second choice.

古文：揽无以对，因曰： 其次唯中书监王波耳。 
现代文：赵揽无法回答，于是说： 其次只有中书监王波了。 
English: Zhao Zhaobao could not answer, so he said: Next, there is only the Chinese book supervisor Wang Bo.

古文：虎乃下诏，追罪波前议枯矢事，腰斩之，及其四子，投尸漳水；既而愍其无罪，追赠司空，封其孙为侯。
现代文：石虎于是下诏，追穷王波从前评议送矢给汉国，自取其辱一事的罪责，处以腰斩之刑，连同四个儿子，将尸体丢入漳水。不久又怜悯王波没有罪过而遭极刑，追赠为司空，封王波孙子为侯。
English: Shihu then issued an edict to hunt down poor Wang Bo, who had previously criticized and sent arrows to Han, to take the blame for his humiliation, and was sentenced to beheading. Together with his four sons, he threw the body into the water. Soon, he took pity on Wang Bo, who was not guilty and was sentenced to capital punishment. He was posthumously awarded the title of Empress Dowager, and Wang Bo's grandson was given the title of prince.

古文：赵平北将军尹农攻燕凡城，不克而还。
现代文：后赵北平将军尹农进攻前燕国凡城，不胜而退。
English: After that, Zhao Beiping's general Yin Nong attacked the former Yan Guofan City, but retreated in defeat.

古文：汉太史令韩皓上言： 荧惑守心，乃宗庙不修之谴。 
现代文：成汉国太史令韩皓上书说： 火星在心宿，是对不修缮宗庙的谴责。 
English: Han Zheng, the Grand Historian of the Han Dynasty, said in a letter: Mars is in the heart, which is a condemnation of not repairing the ancestral temple.

古文：汉主势命群臣议之。
现代文：成汉国主李势令群臣论议此事。
English: The head of the Han Dynasty, Li Xian, ordered a group of ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：相国董皎、侍中王嘏以为： 景、武创业，献、文承基，至亲不远，无宜疏绝。 
现代文：相国董皎、侍中王嘏认为： 景皇帝李特、武皇帝李雄创定国家大业，献皇帝李骧、文皇帝李寿禀承国家政权，至亲的关系并不疏远，不应当疏远绝祀。 
English: Dong Xi, a compatriot, and Wang Xi, an attendant, believed that: the Jing Emperor Li Te and the Emperor Wu Li Xiong created a great national cause, and dedicated the Emperor Li Xi and the Emperor Wen Li Shoujun to the national political power. The relationship between the relatives is not alienated, and they should not be alienated from each other.

古文：乃更命祀成始祖、太宗，皆谓之汉。
现代文：于是重新下令祭祀成始祖李特和太宗李雄，都用汉的称谓。
English: As a result, he re-ordered the sacrificial rites of the founding fathers Li Te and Taizong Li Xiong, both using the title of Han.

古文：征西将军庾翼使梁州刺史桓宣击赵将李罴于丹水，为罴所败，翼贬宣为建威将军。
现代文：征西将军庾翼让梁州刺史桓宣进攻在丹水后赵将领李罴，被李罴战败。庾翼贬黜桓宣为建威将军。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Zou Ying, let Liang Zhou stab Shih Kuan Xuan to attack, and after Danshui, Zhao led Li Ying, and was defeated by Li Ying. Zou Ying denounced Zou Kuan Xuan as the general of Jian Wei.

古文：宣惭愤成疾，秋，八月，庚辰，卒。
现代文：桓宣为此惭愧、气愤，因而染病。秋季，八月，庚辰，桓宣故去。
English: As a result, Kuan Xuan was ashamed and angry, and became ill. In the autumn, in August, in Gengchen, Kuan Xuan passed away.

古文：翼以长子方之为义城太守，代领宣众；又以司马应诞为襄阳太守，参军司马勋为梁州刺史，戍西城。
现代文：庾翼让长子庾方之出任义城太守，代为统领桓宣的部众。又让司马应诞出任襄阳太守，参军司马勋任梁州刺史，戍守西城。
English: Gong Ying made his eldest son, Gong Fang, the governor of Yicheng and the leader of Huan Xuan's army. He also made Sima Ying Guo the governor of Xiangyang and Sima Xun, who had joined the army, the governor of Liangzhou and the governor of Xicheng.

古文：中书令褚裒固辞枢要；闰月，丁巳，以裒为左将军、都督兗州、徐州之琅邪诸军事、兗州刺史，镇金城。
现代文：晋中书令褚裒坚持辞绝枢要的重任，闰月，丁巳，任褚裒为左将军、都督兖州和徐州的琅邪诸军事、兖州刺史，镇守金城。
English: Jin Zhongshu Shuling Ren insisted on resigning from the pivotal important duties, leap month, Ding Si, Ren Ren was the left general, the governor of Zhangzhou and Xuzhou, the military, the history of Zhangzhou, and the town guard of Jincheng.

古文：帝疾笃，庾冰、庾翼欲立会稽王昱为嗣；中书监何充建议立皇子聃，帝从之。
现代文：康帝病重，庾冰、庾翼想扶立会稽王司马昱为嗣君，中书监何充建议册立皇子司马聃，康帝听从何充的建议。
English: Kang Di was seriously ill, and Yan Bing and Yan Ying wanted to appoint the king of the imperial court, Sima Ye, as his heir. The Chinese librarian He Chong suggested to appoint the prince, Sima Ye, and Kang Di followed He Chong's suggestion.

古文：九月，丙申，立聃为皇太子。
现代文：九月，丙申，立司马聃为皇太子。
English: In September, Hsin installed Sima Yi as crown prince.

古文：戊戌，帝崩于式乾殿。
现代文：戊戌，康帝在式乾殿驾崩。
English: Emperor Kang died at the Imperial Palace.

古文：己亥，何充以遗旨奉太子即位，大赦。
现代文：己亥，何充按康帝遗诏推奉太子即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: According to Emperor Kangxi's last will and testament, He Chong promoted the prince, that is, the emperor's throne, to the world.

古文：由是冰、翼深恨充。
现代文：由此庾冰、庾翼深深痛恨何充。
English: As a result, the ice and the wings are deeply hated.

古文：尊皇后褚氏为皇太后。
现代文：穆帝尊奉康帝皇后褚氏为皇太后。
English: Mu Di respected Emperor Kang's empress Dowager Sui as the empress dowager.

古文：时穆帝方二岁，太后临朝称制。
现代文：当时穆帝刚两岁，太后临朝亲政。
English: At that time, Mu Di was just two years old, and the empress dowager was close to the imperial court.

古文：何充加中书监，录尚书事。
现代文：何充被加授中书监，录尚书事。
English: He Cheng was awarded the title of middle school librarian, and recorded the school's books.

古文：充自陈既录尚书，不宜复监中书；许之，复加侍中。
现代文：何充自己陈述，既任录尚书事，不应再领导中书，获得允许，又加授他为侍中。
English: He made his own statement that since he was in charge of record-keeping, he should no longer be in charge of Chinese books. He was allowed, and he was awarded as an attendant.

古文：充以左将军褚裒，太后之父，宜综朝政，上疏荐裒参录尚书；乃以裒为侍中、卫将军、录尚书事，持节、督、刺史如故。
现代文：何充认为左将军褚裒是褚太后的父亲，应当总揽朝政，便上疏举荐褚裒参录尚书，于是朝廷任命褚裒为侍中、卫将军、录尚书事，持节和原先的都督、刺史职位不变。
English: He Chun thought that General Zou was the father of Empress Dowager Zou and should be in charge of the government, so he recommended Zou to participate in the record of records. Therefore, the imperial court appointed Zou as the Vice-Admiral, the General of the Imperial Guard, and the record of records, keeping the same position as the former governor and the historian.

古文：裒以近戚，惧获讥嫌，上疏固请居籓；改授都督徐、兗、青三州、扬州之二郡诸军事、卫将军、徐、兗二州刺史，镇京口。
现代文：褚裒因为是亲近的外戚身份，惧怕由此遭人讥讽猜忌，便上疏坚持请求出任藩镇长官。于是改授他都督徐州、兖州、青州三州及扬州的二郡诸军事，卫将军，徐州和兖州刺史，镇守京口。
English: Because of his status as a close relative, and fearing ridicule and suspicion as a result, Shang So insisted on requesting to be appointed as the governor of the town. He was then re-awarded as the military governor of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou, Qingzhou and Yangzhou, the general of Wei, the governor of Xuzhou and Zhangzhou, and the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：尚书奏： 裒见太后，在公庭则如臣礼，私觌则严父。 
现代文：尚书奏议说： 褚裒与太后相见，在朝廷则褚裒执臣子礼节，私下见面则太后尊礼父亲。 
English: Shang Shuxiao proposed: "When you meet the Empress Dowager, you should observe the etiquette of a courtier in the imperial court, but when you meet her in private, you should respect her father."

古文：从之。
现代文：太后听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，葬康帝于崇平陵。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙丑，康帝入葬崇平陵。
English: In winter, in October, in the second ugliness, Kangdi was buried in Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：江州刺史庾冰有疾；太后征冰辅政，冰辞，十一月，庚辰，卒。
现代文：江州刺史庾冰有病，太后征召庾冰入朝辅佐国政，庾冰辞谢不受。十一月，庚辰，庾冰故去。
English: The Empress Dowager summoned Bing Bing to join the Imperial Household as an aide-de-camp, but Bing Bing refused. In November, Geng Chen, Bing Bing passed away.

古文：庾翼以家国情事，留子方之为建武将军，戍襄阳。
现代文：庾翼因为家事国事难以兼顾，留下儿子庾方之任建武将军，戍守襄阳。
English: Because it was difficult for Xing Ying to balance family affairs with state affairs, he left his son Xiang Fang to be appointed as General Jianwu, and he remained in charge of Xiangyang.

古文：方之年少，以参军毛穆之为建武司马以辅之。
现代文：因庾方之年轻，让参军毛穆之任建武将军司马，辅佐庾方之。
English: Due to the young age of Shikata, Maomu, who had joined the army, was appointed as the second-in-command of the Kenmu army to assist Shikata.

古文：穆之，宝之子也。
现代文：毛穆之即毛宝的儿子。
English: Mao Mu Zhi is the son of Mao Bao.

古文：翼还镇夏口，诏翼复督江州，又领豫州刺史。
现代文：庾翼返回，镇守夏口。朝廷下诏让庾翼再督察江州，又兼领豫州刺史。
English: Xing Ying returned to guard Xia Kou. The imperial court ordered Xing Ying to supervise Jiangzhou again, and he also took charge of the history of Yuzhou.

古文：翼辞豫州，复欲移镇乐乡，诏不许。
现代文：庾翼辞谢豫州刺史职务，仍然想移镇乐乡，朝廷下诏不同意。
English: Xing Ying resigned from the post of chief historian of Yuzhou and still wanted to move to Le Township, but the imperial court did not agree.

古文：翼仍缮修军器，大佃积谷，以图后举。
现代文：庾翼仍然修缮兵器，大举屯田，积蓄谷物，以图后举。
English: The Kuomintang was still repairing weapons, heavily fortifying fields, and stockpiling grain, as shown in the following diagram.

古文：赵王虎作河桥于灵昌津，采石为中济，石下，辄随流，用功五百馀万而桥不成，虎怒，斩匠而罢。
现代文：后赵王石虎在灵昌津建造黄河渡桥，开采石料作为桥墩，但石块投下后，便被水冲走，耗用劳力五百多万，渡桥却未建成。石虎发怒，斩杀工匠，停止建造。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu built a bridge across the Yellow River in Lingchangjin, mining stone as a bridge pier, but after the stone was thrown, it was washed away by the water, consuming more than five million labor, but the bridge was not built. Shihhu was angry, killed the craftsman, and stopped the construction.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝上之上
现代文：孝宗穆皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Xiaozongmu

古文：显宗成皇帝下永和元年
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu

古文：春，正月，甲戌朔，皇太后设白纱帷于太极殿，抱帝临轩。
现代文：春季正月，甲戌朔，皇太后在太极殿设置白纱帷怅，抱着穆帝驾临殿前。
English: In the first month of spring, the Empress Dowager set up white gauze curtains in the Taiji Hall and came to the front of the hall with Mu Di in her arms.

古文：赵义阳公鉴镇关中，役烦赋重，文武有长发者，辄拔为冠缨，馀以给宫人。
现代文：后赵义阳公石鉴镇守关中，徭役繁多，赋税沉重。文武官员头发长的，就拔下来当冠帽的缨绳，剩下的送给宫女。
English: Later, when Zhao Yiyang Gongshi Jianzhen was in charge of guarding the pass, there were many duties and heavy taxes. The civil and military officials had long hair, so they pulled off the bridle of the crown cap, and gave the rest to the princess.

古文：长史取发白赵王虎，虎征鉴还鄴。以乐平公苞代镇长安。
现代文：长史拿着头发禀报后赵王石虎，石虎征召石鉴回邺城，让乐平公石苞代为镇守长安。
English: After Zhao Wang reported to Shihu, Shihu conscripted Shi Jian back to Handan City, and let Leping Gong Shi Jian take over as the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：发雍、洛、秦、并州十六万人治长安未央宫。
现代文：又征发雍州、洛州、秦州、并州的十六万人营建长安未央宫。
English: In addition, 160,000 people from Yongzhou, Luozhou, Qinzhou and Bianzhou were conscripted to build the Chang'an Palace.

古文：虎好猎，晚岁，体重不能跨马，乃造猎车千乘，刻期校猎。
现代文：石虎喜欢打猎，晚年身体沉重不能骑马，就建造打猎用的车子一千辆，定期比赛打猎。
English: Shihu liked hunting. In his later years, he was too heavy to ride a horse, so he built a thousand hunting cars and regularly went hunting.

古文：自灵昌津南至荥阳东极阳都为猎场，使御史监察其中禽兽，有犯者罪至大辟。
现代文：从灵昌津向南到荥阳东境的阳都，都划为猎场，让御史监护，其中的禽兽有人敢伤害，便获罪，被处以大辟的极刑。
English: From Lingshangjin in the south to Yangdu in the east of Shenyang, they were all designated as hunting grounds and placed under the supervision of the imperial historian. If anyone dared to harm one of these animals, they would be found guilty and sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：民有美女，佳牛马，御史求之不得，皆诬以犯兽，论死者百馀人。
现代文：百姓有美丽女子或上好的牛马，御史如果弄不到手，就诬陷他们伤害禽兽，论罪处死的有一百多人。
English: The people had beautiful women or fine cattle and horses. If the magistrate couldn't get his hands on them, he would frame them for harming animals. More than a hundred people were convicted and executed.

古文：发诸州二十六万人修洛阳宫。发百姓牛二万头，配朔州牧官。
现代文：又征发各州二十六万人修建洛阳宫，征发百姓牛畜二万头调配给朔州的牧官。
English: He also conscripted and dispatched 260,000 people from each prefecture to build the Luoyang Palace, and conscripted and dispatched 20,000 people, cattle and animals to be assigned to the pastoral officials in Shuozhou.

古文：增置女官二十四等，东宫十二等，公侯七十馀国皆九等，大发民女三万馀人，料为三等以配之；太子、诸公私令采发者又将万人。
现代文：又增设宫中女官，分置二十四等，东宫十二等，七十多个公侯封国都分九等，大举征选民女三万多人，分成三等配置各处。太子、各王公私下发令征选的美女又将近万人。
English: In addition, court ladies were added, divided into twenty-four classes, the East Palace into twelve classes, and more than seventy princely fiefs were divided into nine classes. More than thirty thousand female voters were enlisted, divided into three classes and placed everywhere. Princes and princes privately issued orders to enlist nearly ten thousand beautiful women.

古文：郡县务求美色，多强夺人妻，杀其夫及夫自杀者三千馀人。
现代文：各个郡县极力选取美女，经常强行夺占百姓的妻子，杀害她们的丈夫，加上丈夫自杀的，人数达三千多。
English: Counties and counties tried their best to select beautiful women, often forcibly seizing people's wives, killing their husbands, and the number of husbands who committed suicide reached more than three thousand.

古文：至鄴，虎临轩简第，以使者为能，封侯者十二人。
现代文：美女送到邺后，石虎在殿前挑选分等，因为使者能干，被封侯的有十二人。
English: After the beautiful woman was sent to the imperial court, Shihu selected and ranked them in front of the palace. Because the emissaries were capable, there were twelve people who were knighted.

古文：荆楚、扬、徐之民流叛略尽；守令坐不能绥怀，下狱诛者五十馀人。
现代文：荆楚、扬州、徐州的民众流失、背叛几乎无存。当地的守令坐罪因不能安绥关切他们，被下狱诛杀的有五十多人。
English: The people of Jingchu, Yangzhou, and Xuzhou were almost nonexistent in their loss and betrayal. The local guards were convicted of sedition for not being able to pacify and care for them, and more than fifty people were sent to prison and killed.

古文：金紫光禄大夫逯明因侍切谏，虎大怒，使龙腾拉杀之。
现代文：金紫光禄大夫明乘侍奉石虎时直言力谏，石虎大怒，让骁勇的龙腾中郎将他摧折而死。
English: When Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu Ming Rong served the stone tiger, he was outspoken, and the stone tiger was furious, so that the courageous Dragon Teng Zhong Lang broke him and died.

古文：燕王皝以牛假贫民，使佃苑中，税其什之八，自有牛者税其七。
现代文：前燕王慕容把牛借给贫民，让他们在苑囿中佃耕，赋税收取十分之八，自己有牛的收税十分之七。
English: Former Yan King Murong lent cattle to the poor, let them plow in the garden, and collected eight-tenths of the tax, and seven-tenths of the tax for his own cattle.

古文：记室参军封裕上书谏，以为： 古者什一而税，天下之中正也。
现代文：记室参军封裕上书规谏，认为： 古时按十分之一的比例收税，这是天下最公正的税法。
English: He said: In ancient times, taxes were levied at a rate of one-tenth, which was the fairest tax law in the world.

古文：降及魏、晋，仁政衰薄，假官田官牛者不过税其什六，自在有牛者中分之，犹不取其七八也。
现代文：延及魏、晋，仁政衰微，借官田、官牛的也不过纳税十分之六，自己有牛的只纳税一半，尚且不采用十分之七八的税制。
English: In the Wei and Jin dynasties, when benevolent government was in decline, those who borrowed government land and cattle paid only six-tenths of the tax, and those who had their own cattle paid only half of the tax, even though they did not adopt the seven-eighths of the tax system.

古文：自永嘉以来，海内荡析，武宣王绥之以德，华夷之民，万里辐凑，襁负而归之者，若赤子之归父母。
现代文：从永嘉年以来，国内动荡离析，武宣王用仁德安绥民众，汉族和夷族的民众，不远万里前来汇集，背负襁褓来归附的情景，如同幼儿归附父母。
English: Since the Yongjia era, the domestic turmoil has been disintegrating. King Wu Xuan used benevolence and tranquility to pacify the people, and the people of the Han nationality and the Yi nationality came from thousands of miles away to gather and carry the shackles to return to the scene, just like children returning to their parents.

古文：是以户口十倍于旧，无用者什有三四。
现代文：所以人口户数比起以往增长十倍，没有田地的人达十分之三四。
English: As a result, the number of households has increased tenfold compared to the past, and three-fourths of the people have no fields.

古文：及殿下继统，南摧强赵，东兼高句丽，北取宇文，拓地三千里，增民十万户，是宜悉罢苑囿以赋新民，无牛者官赐之牛，不当更收重税也。
现代文：等到殿下继位，在南方挫败强大的赵国，在东方兼并了高句丽，在北方攻取宇文部，拓展国土三千里，增加民众十万户。此时应当全部放弃苑囿分给新附民众耕种，没牛的官府赐给牛，不应再收取重税。
English: Wait until His Imperial Highness succeeds to the throne, defeats the powerful Zhao state in the south, annexes Goguryeo in the east, and conquers Umenbu in the north, expanding the country by three thousand miles and increasing the population by one hundred thousand households. At this time, it is necessary to give up all the garden plots to the newly attached people for farming, and the government office that has no cattle should be given to the cattle, and heavy taxes should no longer be collected.

古文：且以殿下之民用殿下之牛，牛非殿下之有，将何在哉！
现代文：况且以殿下之民的身份使用殿下的牛，牛不为殿不私有，又为何人所有呢！
English: Moreover, they use His Highness's cattle as His Highness's people. Cows are not private property, so why should anyone own them?

古文：如此，则戎旗南指之日，民谁不箪食壶浆以迎王师，石虎谁与处矣！
现代文：这样，则战旗南指的那一天，百姓们谁不送饭送水，勇跃犒劳，迎接大王的军队呢？石虎又能与谁共处呢！
English: In this way, on the day when the battle flag points south, which of the people will not send food and water and work hard to welcome the great king's army? Who can the stone tiger coexist with?

古文：川渎沟渠有废塞者，皆应通利，旱由灌溉，潦则疏泄。
现代文：川渎沟渠有毁废堵塞的，都应开通、疏浚，天旱可以灌溉，天涝可以泄洪。
English: If the river ditch is clogged with waste, it should be opened and dredged. The drought can be irrigated, and the flood can be released.

古文：一夫不耕，或受之饥。况游食数万，何以得家给人足乎？
现代文：一人不耕种，就会有人挨饿，更何况游动民众有数万人，怎能做到家有裕财，人人丰足呢！
English: If no one cultivates, there will be people starving, not to mention that there are tens of thousands of people on the move. How can we achieve wealth and abundance for everyone?

古文：今官司猥多，虚费廪禄，苟才不周用，皆宜澄汰。
现代文：现在各种官吏众多，白白耗费俸禄，只要才能不堪任用，都应淘汰。
English: At present, there are so many bureaucrats of all kinds, all of whom spend their salaries in vain, that they should be eliminated as soon as they become unsuitable for appointment.

古文：工商末利，宜立常员。
现代文：从事工商业获利，应当设置固定人数。
English: A fixed number of people should be engaged in industry and commerce for profit.

古文：学生三年无成，徒塞英俊之路，皆当归之于农。
现代文：学员三年无所成就，白白堵塞才的晋升之路，都应当遣返他们重新务农。
English: Trainees who have achieved nothing in three years and have blocked the promotion path of talents in vain should be repatriated to resume farming.

古文：殿下圣德宽明，博采刍荛。
现代文：殿下圣德宽明，广泛地考察征求樵人、渔夫的意见。
English: His Imperial Highness, with his broad-minded and virtuous character, made extensive investigations and solicited the opinions of fishermen and fishermen.

古文：参军王宪、大夫刘明并以言事忤旨，主者处以大辟，殿下虽恕其死，犹免官禁锢。
现代文：参军王宪、大夫刘明都因论事违背圣旨，主持的官员判处大辟酷刑，殿下虽然饶恕他们死罪，但仍然免去官职，禁锢不用。
English: Wang Xian, who joined the army, and Liu Ming, a doctor, were both sentenced to be severely tortured by the presiding officials for violating the sacred will. Although His Imperial Highness pardoned them of the death penalty, they were still relieved of their official duties and did not have to be imprisoned.

古文：夫求谏诤而罪直言，是犹适越而北行，必不获其所志矣！
现代文：寻求谏诤却惩罚直言的人，这如同要去越国却向北行走，必定不能实现志向。
English: Seeking to punish those who are outspoken while seeking to punish them is like going to the country of Yue while walking to the north. It is bound to fail to achieve its goal.

古文：右长史宋该等阿媚苟容，轻劾谏士，己无骨鲠，嫉人有之，掩蔽耳目，不忠之甚者也。 
现代文：右长史宋该等人阿媚奉承，苟且安身，轻率地弹劾直谏之士，自己没有脊骨，嫉妒别人具有，遮掩殿下耳目，这是最严重的不忠。 
English: It is the worst kind of disloyalty for the Right Reverend Sun Yat-sen to be flattered by the Right Reverend Sun Yat-sen's flattery, to be complacent and complacent, to lightly impeach the Right Reverend Sun Yat-sen's people, to have no backbone himself, to be jealous of what others have, and to cover the ears and eyes of His Imperial Highness.

古文：皝乃下令，称： 览封记室之谏，孤实惧焉。
现代文：慕容于是下令，内称： 省览记室封裕的劝谏，孤实在为此恐惧。
English: Murong then gave an order, saying, in part, "I am afraid of the persuasion of the provincial recorder, Fong Yu.

古文：国以民为本，民以谷为命，可悉罢苑囿以给民之无田者。
现代文：国以民为根本，民以粮食为命根，可以全部废除苑囿，交给百姓中没有田地的人耕种。
English: The state takes the people as the foundation, and the people take grain as the lifeblood. It can completely abolish the garden tax and give the people who do not have fields to cultivate.

古文：实贫者，官与之牛；力有馀愿得官牛者，并依魏、晋旧法，沟渎果有益者，令以时修治。
现代文：实在贫穷的，官府借给耕牛；财力有余却想得到官府耕牛的，都依照魏、晋旧法收税。沟渎对生产有益的，命令按时修治。
English: For those who are really poor, the government will lend them oxen; for those who have more than enough money but want to get oxen from the government, they will collect taxes according to the old laws of Wei and Jin Dynasties. If the ditching is beneficial to production, the order will be repaired on time.

古文：今戎事方兴，勋伐既多，岁未可喊，俟中原平一，徐更议之。
现代文：现在战事刚刚兴起，建立功勋的机会很多，百官不便裁减，等平定、统一中原后，再慢慢论议此事。
English: Now that the war has just begun, there are many opportunities to establish merit, and it is inconvenient to reduce hundreds of officials. After the Central Plains are pacified and unified, the matter will be discussed slowly.

古文：工商、学生皆当裁择。
现代文：工商之人、学员人数，都应当裁减选择。
English: People in industry and commerce, as well as the number of trainees, should reduce their choices.

古文：夫人臣关言于人主，至难也，虽有狂妄，当择其善者而从之。
现代文：人臣向人主陈言，这是很难的事，虽然有狂妄之处，应当择善而从。
English: It is a hard thing for a vassal to say to his master, though there is arrogance in it, that he should choose the good and follow it.

古文：王宪、刘明，虽罪应废黜，亦由孤之无大量也，可悉复本官，仍居谏司。
现代文：王宪、刘明，虽然按罪应废黜，也是因为孤没有雅量，可以恢复原来官职，仍然当谏议官。
English: Wang Xian and Liu Ming, although they should be deposed according to the crime, it is also because they have no elegance that they can resume their original official position and still serve as magistrates.

古文：封生蹇蹇，深得王臣之体，其赐钱五万。
现代文：封裕忠正耿直，深知王臣的礼节，特赐钱五万。
English: He gave Yu Zhongzheng a special gift of fifty thousand yuan, knowing the etiquette of a king and minister.

古文：宣示内外，有欲陈孤过者，不拘贵贱，勿有所讳！ 
现代文：现在向内外宣示晓谕，如有想指出孤的过失的，不论贵贱，不必有所忌讳！ 
English: Now proclaim the edict inside and outside, if anyone wants to point out someone's faults, no matter how high or low, there is no need to be ashamed!

古文：皝雅好文学，常亲临庠序讲授，考校学徒至千馀人，颇有妄滥者，故封裕及之。
现代文：慕容雅好文学，经常亲临学校讲授，考查录用生徒达一千多人，其中颇有姑妄滥收之人，所以封裕谈到此事。
English: Murong Ya is good at literature. He often visits schools to give lectures. He has recruited more than a thousand students through examinations, among whom there are quite a few who are reckless with money, so Feng Yu talked about this matter.

古文：诏征卫将军褚裒，欲以为扬州刺史、录尚书事。
现代文：朝廷下诏征召卫将军褚裒，想让他任扬州刺史，录尚书事。
English: The imperial court issued an edict to conscript Wei General Zou, and wanted him to serve as Yangzhou's historian and record the records.

古文：吏部尚书刘遐、长史王胡之说裒曰： 会稽王令德雅望，国之周公也，足下宜以大政授之。 
现代文：吏部尚书刘遐、长史王胡之劝说褚裒道： 会稽王司马昱德行昭著、素负雅望，是国家的周公，足下应把国家大政交给他。 
English: Liu Yao and Wang Hu, the chief secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, tried to persuade him, saying, "Cabinet Secretary Wang Sima Rongde is well-known and well-respected. He is the country's Zhou Gong, and the country's major affairs should be handed over to him.

古文：裒乃固辞，归籓。
现代文：褚裒于是坚决辞谢不受封职，回归藩镇。
English: Therefore, he resolutely refused to accept the appointment and returned to the town.

古文：壬戌，以会稽王昱为抚军大将军，录尚书六条事。
现代文：壬戌，朝廷任命会稽王司马昱为抚军大将军，录尚书六条事。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed the auditor Wang Sima Qian as the general of the army, recording six things.

古文：昱清虚寡欲，尤善玄言，常以刘惔、王濛及颍川韩伯为谈客，又辟郗超为抚军掾，谢万为从事中郎。
现代文：司马昱清虚寡欲，特别擅长谈论玄言，经常让刘、王及颍川人韩伯作谈客，又征用郗超为抚军椽吏，谢万为从事中郎。
English: Sima Qianqing was vain and avaricious, and he was particularly good at talking about occult words. He often invited Liu, Wang and Han Bo, a native of Qianchuan, to be his guests. He also enlisted Yao Chao as a military official, and Xie Wan as a middle-ranking official.

古文：超，鉴之孙也，少卓荦不羁。
现代文：郗超即郗鉴的孙子，少年时便卓绝出众，不受羁绊。
English: Gong Chao is the grandson of Gong Jian. When he was a young boy, he was outstanding and unencumbered.

古文：父愔，简默冲退而啬于财，积钱至数千万，尝开库任超所取；超散施亲故，一日都尽。
现代文：父亲郗，简微寡言，性情淡泊却吝惜钱财，积蓄钱财无数。曾经打开库房任由郗超取用，郗超发放、施舍给亲朋故旧，一日之内都散发殆尽。
English: Father Zou, taciturn, light-hearted but stingy with money, saved countless amounts of money. He once opened the storehouse and allowed Zou Chao to use it, and Zou Chao distributed and gave alms to relatives and friends, and all of it was spent within a day.

古文：万，安之弟也，清旷秀迈，亦有时名。
现代文：谢万即谢安的兄弟，清静旷远，卓尔不群，当时也很有名望。
English: Xie Wan, that is, Xie An's brother, was a quiet, distant and distinguished person. He was also very famous at that time.

古文：燕有黑龙、白龙见于龙山，交首游戏，解角而去。
现代文：前燕国在龙山出现黑龙和白龙，交首戏游，丢下龙角离开。
English: In the past, Yan Guo saw a black dragon and a white dragon in Longshan Mountain. They had a playful encounter and left Longkou.

古文：燕王皝亲祀以太牢，赦其境内，命所居新宫曰和龙。
现代文：前燕王慕容亲自用太牢的礼节祭祀，赦免境内罪犯，把自己居住的新宫殿命名为和龙。
English: The former Yan King Murong personally used Taiji's etiquette to offer sacrifices, pardoned criminals within the territory, and named the new palace where he lived as Warong.

古文：都亭肃侯庾翼疽发于背。
现代文：都亭肃侯庾翼的背疽发作，上表乞请儿子庾爰之行辅国将军职、荆州刺史，把后事委托给他。
English: Du Ting, Suhou, Zou Ying's gangrene attack, begged his son Zou Zhi to serve as an auxiliary national general, Jingzhou stabbed history, and entrusted the aftermath to him.

古文：表子爰之行辅国将军、荆州刺史，委以后任；司马义阳硃焘为南蛮校尉，以千人守巴陵。
现代文：又任司马义阳人朱焘为南蛮校尉，率一千人驻守巴陵。
English: Zhu Xi, a native of Sima Yiyang, was also a Namban lieutenant and garrisoned Baling with a thousand men.

古文：秋，七月，庚午，卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚午，庾翼故去。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the late afternoon, Xing Ying passed away.

古文：翼部将干瓚等作乱，杀冠军将军曹据。
现代文：庾翼的部将干瓒等人作乱，杀害冠军将军曹据。
English: His subordinate, Geng Yao, and others rioted and killed the champion, General Cao Zuo.

古文：硃焘与安西长史江虨，建武司马毛穆之、将军袁真等共诛之。
现代文：朱焘和安西长史江、建武司马毛穆之、将军袁真共同讨杀他。
English: Zhu Xi and Anxi Changsijiang, Jianwu Sima Mao Muzhi, and General Yuan Zhen jointly tried to kill him.

古文：虨，统之子也。
现代文：江即江统的儿子。
English: Jiang is the son of Jiang Tong.

古文：八月，豫州刺史路永叛奔赵，赵王虎使永屯寿春。
现代文：八月，豫州刺史路永背叛晋投奔后赵，后赵王石虎让他屯军寿春。
English: In August, Yu Zhou stabbed Shi Lu Yong for betraying Jin and defecting to Later Zhao, and Later Zhao Wang Shihu ordered him to send troops to Shuchun.

古文：庾翼既卒，朝议皆以诸庾世在西籓，人情所安，宜依翼所请，以庾爰之代其任。
现代文：庾翼死后，朝廷论议都认为庾氏家族世世代代驻守西部藩镇，为人心所向，应当同意庾翼的请求，让庾爰之接替职位。
English: After the death of Gong Ying, the imperial court argued that the Gong family had been stationed in the western provinces and towns for generations, and that they should agree to Gong Ying's request and let Gong Zhi take over the position.

古文：何充曰： 荆楚，国之西门，户口百万。北带强胡，西邻劲蜀，地势险阻，周旋万里。
现代文：何充说： 荆楚是国家的西方门户，有民众百万，北边连结强大的胡虏，西边邻近强大的汉国，地势险阻，周边有万里之遥。
English: He Chong said: Jingchu is the western gateway of the country, with millions of people, the north is connected to the powerful Hulun, the west is close to the powerful Han, the terrain is dangerous, and the surrounding area is thousands of miles away.

古文：得人则中原可定，失人则社稷可忧，陆抗所谓 存则吴存，亡则吴亡 者也，岂可以白面少年当之哉！
现代文：得到合适的人选那么中原可以平定，所用非人那么国家命运可堪忧虑，这就是陆抗所说的： 存则吴存，亡则吴亡 。怎能让白脸少年人担当这样的职位呢！
English: If a suitable candidate is found, then the Central Plains can be pacified. If a non-person is used, then the fate of the country can be worried about. This is what Lu Qi said: "To exist is to exist, to die is to die." How can a white-faced young man be allowed to hold such a position!

古文：桓温英略过人，有文武器干。西夏之任，无出温者。 
现代文：桓温英气、谋略过人，有文武两方面的才干，西边这个职位，没有比桓温更合适的人了。 
English: There is no one more suitable for this position in the west than Kuan Wen, who is heroic, a brilliant strategist, and talented in both literature and martial arts.

古文：议者又曰： 庾爰之肯避温乎？
现代文：论议者又说： 庾爰之肯让给桓温吗？
English: The commentator also said: "Is Zou Ziying willing to concede to Kanwen?

古文：如令阻兵，耻惧不浅。 
现代文：如果他率军抗命，国家所受的耻辱和惊惧都不会小。 
English: If he led his army to disobey orders, the country would suffer great shame and consternation.

古文：充曰： 温足以制之，诸君勿忧。 
现代文：何充说： 桓温足以制服他，你们不必担忧。 
English: He Chong said: "Kuan Wen is enough to subdue him, you don't have to worry.

古文：丹杨尹刘惔每奇温才，然知其有不臣之志，谓会稽王昱曰： 温不可使居形胜之地，其位号常宜抑之。 
现代文：丹杨尹刘经常为桓温的才干惊奇，但知道他有不甘为臣的志向，刘对会稽王司马昱说： 桓温不能让他占据地形便利的地方，对他的地位、封号也应当经常贬抑。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu was often surprised by Huan Wen's talent, but knowing that he had the ambition to be a subject, Liu said to the king of the inspection, Sima Qian: Huan Wen cannot let him occupy a place with convenient terrain, and his status and seal should also be constantly demeaned.

古文：劝昱自镇上流，以己为军司，昱不听；又请自行，亦不听。
现代文：劝司马昱自己镇守长江上游，让自己任军司，司马昱不听。刘又请求自己前往，也不获准许。
English: He urged Sima Yi to take charge of the upstream of the Yangtze River and make himself the commander of the army, but Sima Yi did not listen. Liu also asked to go himself, but he was not allowed.

古文：庚辰，以徐州刺史桓温为安西将军、持节、都督荆、司、雍、益、梁、宁六州诸军事、领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，爰之果不敢争，又以刘惔监沔中诸军事，领义成太守，代庾方之。
现代文：庚辰，任命徐州刺史桓温为安西将军，持节，都督荆州、司州、雍州、益州、梁州、宁州诸军事，领护南蛮校尉，荆州刺史，庾爰之果然不敢与他争位。又任命刘监察沔中诸军事，兼领义成太守，替代庾方之。
English: Geng Chen appointed Xuzhou's Shih Kuan Wen as the general of Anxi Province, Ji Jie as the military governor of Jingzhou, Shizhou, Yongzhou, Yizhou, Liangzhou, and Ningzhou, and appointed Liu Guanzhong as the military governor of Yicheng Province, and appointed Liu Guanzhong as the military governor of Shizhou Province, and appointed Liu Guanzhong as the military governor of Yicheng Province.

古文：徙方之、爰之于豫章。
现代文：把庾方之、庾爰之迁徙到豫章。
English: The 方之 and 之 were moved to Yuzhang.

古文：桓温尝乘雪欲猎，先过刘惔，惔见其装束甚严，谓之曰： 老贼欲持此何为？ 
现代文：桓温曾经想乘下雪外出打猎，先过访刘，刘见他装束十分齐整，对他说： 老贼想这样去干什么？ 
English: Once, when Kuan Wen wanted to go out hunting in the snow, he visited Liu first. Liu saw that he was dressed very neatly and said to him, "What does the old thief want to do like this?"

古文：温笑曰： 我不为此，卿安得坐谈乎！ 
现代文：桓温笑着回答： 我不去打猎，你还哪能在家中坐谈呢！ 
English: Kuan Wen replied with a smile, "If I don't go hunting, how can you sit and talk at home?"

古文：汉主势之弟大将军广，以势无子，求为太弟，势不许。
现代文：成汉国主李势的兄弟、大将军李广，因为李势没有儿子，请求让自己当皇太弟，李势不同意。
English: Emperor Chenghan's brother, General Li Guang, because he had no son, asked to become the emperor's younger brother. Li Xiang did not agree.

古文：马当、解思明谏曰： 陛下兄弟不多，若复有所废，将益孤危。 
现代文：马当、解思明劝谏说： 陛下兄弟不多，如果再有所废免，将会更加孤弱危险。 
English: Madang and Xie Siming advised him, "Your Majesty does not have many brothers. If there is another annulment, there will be a greater risk of isolation and weakness.

古文：固请许之。
现代文：坚决请求答应李广的请求。
English: I strongly request that Li Guang's request be granted.

古文：势疑其与广有谋，收当、思明斩之，夷其三族。
现代文：李势怀疑他们和李广有预谋，拘捕马当、解思明斩首，夷灭三族。
English: Li Xiang suspected that they and Li Guang had a premeditated plan to arrest Ma Dang, decapitate Xie Siming, and exterminate the three tribes.

古文：遣太保李弈袭广于涪城，贬广为临邛侯，广自杀。
现代文：又派太保李奕进攻在涪城的李广，贬黜李广为临邛侯，李广自杀。
English: He also sent the imperial bodyguard Li Yi to attack Li Guang in Handan City. Li Guang was demoted to the position of Linyi marquis, and Li Guang committed suicide.

古文：思明被收，叹曰： 国之不亡，以我数人在也，今其殆矣！ 
现代文：解思明被捕时，叹息说： 国家之所以不灭亡，是因为有我们这几个人在，现在危险了！ 
English: When Xie Siming was arrested, he said with a sigh: "The reason why the country will not perish is because there are a few of us. Now it's in danger!"

古文：言笑自若而死。
现代文：谈笑自若赴死。
English: They talk and laugh as if they were about to die.

古文：思明有智略，敢谏诤；马当素得人心。及其死，士兵无不哀之。
现代文：解思明有智慧、谋略，敢于直言谏诤。马当素来得人心，他们死后，士民们无不哀悼。
English: Xie Mingming had wisdom and strategy, and dared to be outspoken. Ma Dang always won the hearts of the people, and when they died, the scholars and the people all mourned.

古文：冬，十月，燕王皝使慕容恪攻高句丽，拔南苏，置戍而还。
现代文：冬季，十月，前燕王慕容派慕容恪进攻高句丽，攻克南苏，设置戍守后返回。
English: In winter, October, the former Yan Wang Murong sent Murong Guo to attack Goguryeo, conquer Nansu, set up a garrison, and then return.

古文：十二月，张骏伐焉耆，降之。
现代文：十二月，张骏攻伐焉耆，使之投降。
English: In December, Zhang Xuan attacked Yan Xuan and forced him to surrender.

古文：是岁，骏分武威等十一郡为凉州，以世子重华为刺史；分兴晋等八郡为河州，以宁戎校尉张瓘为刺史；分敦煌等三郡及西域都护等三营为沙州，以西胡校尉杨宣为刺史。
现代文：这年，张骏分出武威等十一郡；设置凉州，让世子张重华任刺史；分出兴晋等八郡为河州，让宁戎校尉张任刺史；又分出敦煌等三个郡及西域都护的三营为沙州，让西胡校尉杨宣任刺史。
English: In this year, Zhang Ye divided eleven counties including Wuwei; set up Liangzhou, and appointed his son Zhang Chonghua as the historian; divided eight counties including Xingjin into Hezhou, and appointed Ningyong Lieutenant Zhang as the historian; and divided three counties including Dunhuang and three battalions of the Western Capital Guard into Shazhou, and appointed Xihu Lieutenant Yang Xuan as the historian.

古文：骏自称大都督、大将军、假凉王，督摄三州，始置祭酒、郎中、大夫、舍人、谒者等官，官员皆仿天朝而微变其名，车服旌族拟于王者。
现代文：张骏自称大都督、大将军、假凉王，督摄三州，开始设置祭酒、郎中、大夫、舍人、谒者等官员，官号都仿效东晋朝廷，只是稍稍改变名称。车服旌旗都仿效帝王。
English: Zhang Ye claimed to be the great governor, the great general, the false cool king, and the governor of the three states, and began to set up officials such as the sacrificial wine, the middle-man, the doctor, the layman, and the eunuch. The official titles were modeled after the East Jin Dynasty, but the names were slightly changed. The car clothes and flags were modeled after the emperor.

古文：赵王虎以冠军将军姚弋仲为持节、十郡六夷大都督、冠军大将军。
现代文：后赵王石虎任冠军将军姚弋仲为持节、十郡六夷大都督、冠军大将军。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu appointed the champion general Yao Yizhong as the head of the festival, the governor of ten counties and six counties, and the champion general.

古文：弋仲清俭鲠直，不治威仪，言无畏避，虎甚重之。
现代文：姚弋仲清静俭朴耿直，不修威仪，说话无所畏惧，石虎非常器重他。
English: Yao Junzhongqing is quiet and frugal, simple and straightforward, not arrogant, speaks without fear, and the stone tiger is very serious about him.

古文：朝之大议，每与参决，公卿皆惮而下之。
现代文：朝廷的重大决议，姚弋仲时常参与决断，公卿大臣都对他心存忌惮，执礼恭敬。
English: In major decisions of the imperial court, Yao Yizhong often participated in the decision-making, and the noblemen and ministers were wary of him and bowed respectfully.

古文：武城左尉，虎宠姬之弟也，尝入弋仲营，侵扰其部众。
现代文：武城左尉是石虎宠姬的兄弟，曾闯入姚弋仲的营地，侵扰部众。
English: Wu Cheng Zuofei is the brother of Shihu Damingji. He once broke into Yao Yuzhong's camp and disturbed the members of the club.

古文：弋仲执而数之曰： 尔为禁尉，迫胁小民，我为大臣，目所亲见，不可纵也。 
现代文：姚弋仲将他擒获，数落他说： 你身为制止邪妄行为的校尉，却胁迫小小百姓，我身为大臣，亲眼所见，就不能宽纵你。 
English: Yao Yuzhong caught him and scolded him, saying, "You, as a captain to stop evil deeds, are coercing ordinary people. As a minister, I can't indulge you as I saw with my own eyes.

古文：命左右斩之。
现代文：令左右侍从推出斩首。
English: Ordered the left and right attendants to roll out the heads.

古文：尉叩头流血，左右固谏，乃止。
现代文：左尉谢罪求饶，叩头直至流血，左右侍从极力劝阻，姚弋仲这才饶他性命。
English: The left lieutenant pleaded guilty and begged for mercy, bowing down until he bled, while the attendants on his right and left tried their best to dissuade him. It was only then that Yao Yizhong spared his life.

古文：燕王皝以为古者诸侯即位，各称元年，于是始不用晋年号，自称十二年。
现代文：前燕王慕容认为古代诸侯即位，都各自称为元年，便开始不用晋年号，自称十二年。
English: Former Yan Wang Murong believed that the ancient princes who ascended the throne were each called the first year, so he began to not use the Jin year name and called himself the twelfth year.

古文：赵王虎使征东将军邓恒将兵数万屯乐安，治攻具，为取燕之计。
现代文：后赵王石虎让征东将军邓恒率数万军队屯兵乐安，修制进攻器械，为攻打前燕国作准备。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu let the eastward-marching general Deng Heng lead tens of thousands of troops to settle down, repair offensive equipment, and prepare for the attack on the former Yan country.

古文：燕王皝以慕容霸为平狄将军，戍徒河；恒畏之，不敢犯。
现代文：前燕王慕容任慕容霸为平狄将军，戍守徒河。邓恒畏惧，不敢侵犯。
English: Former Yan Wang Murong Ren Murongba was the general of Ping Di, guarding the Tu River. Deng Heng was afraid and did not dare to encroach.

古文：显宗成皇帝下永和二年春，正月，丙寅，大赦。己卯，都乡文穆侯何充卒。
现代文：永和二年春季，正月，丙寅，晋大赦天下。己卯，都乡文穆公何充死。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yonghe era, in the first month of the year, Cui Yin was awarded the title of Jintai. At the same time, the mayor of the capital, Wenmugong, died.

古文：充有器局，临朝正色，以社稷为己任，所选用皆以功效，不私亲旧。
现代文：何充兼具才识和度量，上朝时面容端肃，以治国为己任，所选用的人都有所成就，不为亲朋故友徇私情。
English: He was both talented and prudent. When he ascended to the throne, his face was solemn, and he took governing the country as his duty. All the people he chose had achieved something, and they were not relatives, friends, or personal feelings.

古文：初，夫馀居于鹿山，为百济所侵，部落衰散，西徙近燕，而不设备。
现代文：当初，扶馀部居住在鹿山，遭百济的侵拢，部落衰败离散，便向西迁徙靠近前燕国，但不设防备。
English: At first, the remnant lived in Lushan, invaded by Baekje, the tribe decayed and dispersed, then migrated westward near the former Yan country, but did not set up defenses.

古文：燕王皝遣世子俊帅慕容军、慕容恪、慕舆根三将军、万七千骑袭夫馀。
现代文：前燕王慕容派世子慕容俊率慕容军、慕容恪、慕舆根三位将军、骑兵共一万七千人进攻扶馀部。
English: Former Yan King Murong sent his heir, Murong Jun, to lead the Murong Army, Murong Kaku, and Murong Gen, three generals, and a total of 17,000 cavalry to attack the remnants.

古文：俊居中指授，军事皆以任恪。遂拔夫馀，虏其王玄及部落五万馀口而还。
现代文：慕容俊居中指挥，具体军务都委派给慕容恪，于是攻克扶馀，掳获扶馀王玄和部落民众五万多人返回。
English: Murong Jun was in the middle of the command, the specific military affairs were assigned to Murong Ju, so he conquered Buyeo, captured Buyeo Wang Xuan and more than 50,000 tribal people returned.

古文：皝以玄为镇军将军，妻以女。
现代文：慕容任玄为镇军将军，把女儿许配给他为妻。
English: Murong Renxuan was the general of the town army, and gave his daughter in marriage to him as his wife.

古文：二月，癸丑，以左光禄大夫蔡谟领司徒，与会稽王昱同辅政。
现代文：二月，癸丑，晋任左光禄大夫蔡谟兼领司徒职务，与会稽王司马昱共同辅佐朝政。
English: In February, he was promoted to the post of Doctor of the Left Hand of the Divine Light, and also held the post of the leader of the clergy, and attended the meeting of King Sima Qian as a co-assistant to the imperial government.

古文：褚裒荐前光禄大夫顾和、前司徒左长史殷浩；三月，丙子，以和为尚书令，浩为建武将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：褚裒向朝廷荐举前光禄大夫顾和、前司徒左长史殷浩，三月，丙子，朝廷任命顾和为尚书令，殷浩为建武将军、扬州刺史。
English: He recommended to the imperial court that Gu He, former Guanglu doctor, and Yin Hao, former Sittu Zuochangshi, be promoted. In March, the imperial court appointed Gu He as Shang Shuling, and Yin Hao as Jianwu General and Yangzhou Shuling.

古文：和有母丧，固辞不起，谓所亲曰： 古人有释衰绖从王者，以其才足干时故也。
现代文：顾和为亡母服丧，坚持辞绝不肯出仕，对自己亲近的人说： 古人中有脱下丧服从事君王事务的，是因为他们的才能足以济世治事。
English: When Gu He was in mourning for his dead mother, he insisted on resigning and refused to serve, saying to those close to him: Among the ancients, those who took off their mourning clothes to engage in royal affairs did so because their talents were sufficient to manage the affairs of the world.

古文：如和者，正足以亏孝道、伤风俗耳。 
现代文：像我这样的人如果这么做，就只有使孝道有损，伤风败俗而已。 
English: If people like me do this, it will only damage filial piety and corrupt morals.

古文：识者美之。
现代文：有见地的人都称赞他。
English: Everyone with insight praised him.

古文：浩亦固辞。
现代文：殷浩也坚持辞谢不受职。
English: Yin Hao also insisted that he would not accept the post.

古文：会稽王昱与浩书曰： 属当厄运，危弊理极，足下沈识淹长，足以经济。
现代文：会稽王司马昱给殷浩写信说： 国家正当困厄的命运，危殆的弊病理当终尽，足下的见识深远、广博、出众，足以经世救国。
English: Wang Simaqi, the Auditor-General, wrote to Yin Hao, saying: The fate of the country's legitimate predicament, the dangerous maladies and pathologies must come to an end, and the insights at hand are far-reaching, extensive and outstanding, sufficient to save the country from the world.

古文：若复深存挹退，苟遂本怀，吾恐天下之事于此去矣。
现代文：如果再深存谦抑之心，随随便便满足个人的心愿，我怕天下之事就此无可挽回了。
English: If you continue to have a deep sense of modesty and casually satisfy your personal wishes, I'm afraid the world will be irrevocably changed.

古文：足下去就，即时之废兴，则家国不异，足下宜深思之。 
现代文：足下的去就，就是时世的废兴，家庭与国家命运紧密相连不可分割，足下还是好好想想！ 
English: The family and the country's fate are inextricably linked. Think about it!

古文：浩乃就职。
现代文：殷浩这才就职。
English: It was only then that Yin Hao took office.

古文：夏，四月，己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，己酉朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer, in April, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：五月，丙戌，西平忠成公张骏薨。
现代文：五月，丙戌，西平忠成公张骏去世。
English: In May, Xiping Zhongcheng Zhang Ye passed away.

古文：官属上世子重华为使持节、大都督、太尉、护羌校尉、凉州牧、西平公、假凉王；赦其境内；尊嫡母严氏为大王太后，母马氏为王太后。
现代文：前凉的官员属吏表请世子张重华为使持节、大都督、太尉、护羌校尉、凉州牧、西平公、假凉王，赦其境内罪囚。张重华尊奉父亲的正妻严为氏大王太后，生母马氏为王太后。
English: Former officials in Liangshan were on the list of officials who asked Zhang Chonghua's son, Zhang Chonghua, to pardon their prisoners for crimes committed in the territory. Zhang Chonghua honored his father's legal wife, Yan Weishi, as the great queen dowager, and his biological mother, Ma Weishi, as the queen dowager.

古文：赵中黄门严生恶尚书硃轨，会久雨，生谮轨不修道路，又谤讪朝政，赵王虎囚之。
现代文：后赵国中黄门严生与尚书朱轨交恶，适逢淫雨连绵，严生谮毁朱轨不修整道路，又诽谤、讥讽朝政，后赵王石虎将朱轨囚禁。
English: Later, in the middle of Zhao, Huangmen Yan Sheng had a bad relationship with Shang Shu Zhu Liao, which coincided with continuous rain. Yan Sheng destroyed Zhu Liao without repairing the road, and slandered and ridiculed the imperial government. Later, Zhao Wang Shiguo imprisoned Zhu Liao.

古文：蒲洪谏曰： 陛下既有襄国、鄴宫，又修长安、洛阳宫殿，将以何用？
现代文：蒲洪劝谏说： 陛下已经拥有襄国、邺宫，又营建长安、洛阳的宫殿，准备用来干什么！
English: Puhong advised him, "Your majesty already owns Xiangguo and Jiu Palace, and has built palaces in Chang'an and Luoyang. What are you going to use them for?"

古文：作猎车千乘，环数千里以养禽兽，夺人妻女十万馀口以实后宫，圣帝明王之所为，固若是乎？
现代文：又制造猎车一千辆，围地几千里用来豢养禽兽，强夺百姓妻子、女儿十多万人充实后宫，贤圣的帝王、明智的君主的所作所为，难道原本就是如此吗！
English: He also made a thousand hunting cars, surrounded thousands of miles of land to raise animals, and forcibly took more than a hundred thousand people's wives and daughters to enrich his harem. Is this what a wise emperor and a wise monarch would do?

古文：今又以道路不修，欲杀尚书。
现代文：现在又因道路没有修整，就想杀害尚书。
English: Now, because the road has not been repaired, they want to kill Shang Shu.

古文：陛下德政不修，天降淫雨，七旬乃霁。霁方二日，虽有鬼兵百万，亦未能去道路之涂潦，而况人乎！
现代文：陛下的德政不修，上天才降淫雨，历经七十天刚放晴，天晴才两天，即使有鬼神之兵一百万人，也不能去除道路上的泥泞和积水，何况人呢！
English: Your majesty's political system is not in order. The rain only started falling yesterday. After seventy days, it has just cleared up, and it has only been sunny for two days. Even if there were a million soldiers of ghosts and gods, they would not be able to remove the mud and standing water on the roads, let alone people!

古文：政刑如此，其如四海何！其如后代何！
现代文：政治和刑法变成这样，对天下人如何交待，对后人如何交待！
English: Politics and criminal law have become like this, how to treat people around the world, how to treat future generations!

古文：愿止作役，罢苑囿，出宫女，赦硃轨，以副众望。 
现代文：希望能停止劳作的徒役，废除苑囿，释放宫女，赦免朱轨，用以满足众人的期望。 
English: It is hoped that the abolition of forced labor, the abolition of the imperial garden, the release of the imperial concubine, and the amnesty of Zhu Lai can be used to meet the expectations of many people.

古文：虎虽不悦，亦不之罪，为之罢长安、洛阳作役，而竟诛硃轨。
现代文：石虎虽然不高兴，但也没有降罪蒲洪，为此停止了长安、洛阳两地的劳作徒役，但终究诛杀了朱轨。
English: Although Shihu was not happy, he did not reduce the sentence of Pu Hong. For this reason, he stopped the labor service in Chang'an and Luoyang, but eventually killed Zhu Rail.

古文：又立私论朝政之法，听吏告其君，奴告其主。
现代文：又制定惩治私下议论朝政的刑法，允许属吏告发君长，奴仆告发主人。
English: In addition, a criminal law was enacted to punish private discussion of court politics, allowing subordinate officials to denounce their superiors, and slaves to denounce their masters.

古文：公卿以下，朝觐以目相顾，不必复相过从谈语。
现代文：自此公卿大臣以下，朝会觐见时以目光互相示意，不再敢互相来往交谈。
English: From then on, nobles and ministers below the level of court nobles and ministers no longer dared to talk to each other, but only winked at each other when they met in the imperial court.

古文：赵将军王擢击张重华，袭武街，执护军曹权、胡宣，徙七千馀户于雍州。
现代文：后赵将军王擢攻打张重华，袭击武街，抓获了护军曹权、胡宣，将七千多户百姓迁徙到雍州。
English: Later, Zhao's general Wang Yuanzhong attacked Zhang Chonghua, attacked Wu Street, captured Guard Sergeant Quan and Hu Xuan, and moved more than seven thousand households to Yongzhou.

古文：凉州刺史麻秋、将军孙伏都攻金城，太守张冲请降，凉州震动。
现代文：凉州刺史麻秋、将军孙伏都攻打金城，太守张冲请求投降，凉州人十分震惊恐惧。
English: Liangzhou's Prince Maqiu and General Sun Fudu attacked Jincheng, and the warlord Zhang Chong asked for surrender. The people of Liangzhou were very shocked and afraid.

古文：重华悉发境内兵，使征南将军裴恒将之以御赵。
现代文：张重华出动了境内的全部军队，让征南将军裴恒统率着他们去抵御后赵。
English: Zhang Chonghua sent out all the troops in the territory, and let the Southern Expeditionary General Pei Hengtong lead them to resist Hou Zhao.

古文：恒壁于广武，久而不战。
现代文：裴恒在广武坚壁固守，久不交战。
English: Pei Heng held fast in Guangwu Jianbi and did not fight for a long time.

古文：凉州司马张耽言于重华曰： 国之存亡在兵，兵之胜败在将。
现代文：凉州司马张耽向张重华进言说： 国家的存亡取决于军队，军队的胜败取决于将领。
English: Liangzhou Sima Zhang Tan said to Zhang Chonghua: The survival of the country depends on the army, and the victory or defeat of the army depends on the generals.

古文：今议者举将，多推宿旧。
现代文：如今评议者荐举将领，大多推举故旧。
English: Nowadays, the reviewers recommend the promotion of generals, most of which are old-fashioned.

古文：夫韩信之举，非旧德也。盖明主之举，举无常人，才之所堪，则授以大事。
现代文：韩信被荐举，并非由于他是过去的功臣，所以贤明君主的荐举，并没有固定不变的人选，只要才能胜任，就授以重任。
English: Han Xin was recommended, not because he was a past hero, so the recommendation of the wise monarch, there is no fixed candidate, as long as he is competent, he will be given important tasks.

古文：今强寇在境，诸将不进，人情危惧。
现代文：如今强敌就在境内，众将领都不前进，人心恐惧。
English: Now the powerful enemy is in the country, the generals are not advancing, and the people are afraid.

古文：主簿谢艾，兼资文武，可用以御赵。 
现代文：主簿谢艾，才兼文武，可以起用他来抵御赵。 
English: The chief accountant, Xie Ai, who is both a scholar and a warrior, can be used to fend off Zhao.

古文：重华召艾，问以方略；艾愿请兵七千人，必破赵以报。
现代文：张重华召见谢艾，问他用什么办法抵御后赵，谢艾请求给他七千兵众，一定攻破赵以作报答。
English: Zhang Chonghua summoned Xie Ai and asked him what he could do to resist Hou Zhao. Xie Ai asked him to give him seven thousand soldiers to defeat Zhao as a reward.

古文：重华拜艾中坚将军，给步骑五千，使击秋。
现代文：张重华授予谢艾中坚将军，配给他步兵骑兵五千人，让他去攻打麻秋。
English: Zhang Chonghua awarded General Xie Ai with 5,000 infantry and cavalry, and ordered him to attack Maqiu.

古文：艾引兵出振武，夜有二枭鸣于牙中，艾曰： 六博得枭者胜。
现代文：谢艾带领军队出了振武，夜里有两只猫头鹰在军营中呜叫，谢艾说： 玩六博棋时，得到饰有猫头鹰图案棋子的人获胜。
English: Xie Ai led the army out of the trembling, at night there are two owls wailing in the military camp, Xie Ai said: When playing chess, the one who gets the owl-decorated pieces wins.

古文：今枭鸣牙中，克敌之兆也。 
现代文：如今猫头鹰在军营中呜叫，这是战胜敌人的征兆。 
English: Now the owl hoots in the camp, a sign of victory over the enemy.

古文：进与赵战，大破之，斩首五千级。
现代文：于是就进军与后赵交战，大败后赵军队，斩首五千多人。
English: So he marched into battle with Emperor Zhao, defeated Emperor Zhao's army, and beheaded more than five thousand people.

古文：重华封艾为福禄伯。
现代文：张重华封谢艾为福禄伯。
English: Zhang Chonghua casts Xie Ai as Fluke.

古文：麻秋之克金城也，县令敦煌车济不降，伏剑而死。
现代文：麻秋攻克金城的时候，县令敦煌人车济不投降，用剑自杀而死。
English: When Ma Qiu conquered Jincheng, the county commander Dunhuang did not surrender and committed suicide with a sword.

古文：秋又攻大夏，护军梁式执太守宋晏，以城应秋，秋遣晏以书诱致宛戍都尉敦煌宋矩。矩曰： 为人臣，功既不成，唯有死节耳！ 
现代文：麻秋又攻打大夏，护军梁式拘捕了太守宋晏，举城投降以响应麻秋。麻秋派遣宋晏带着书信去劝诱宛戍都尉敦煌人宋矩前来投降，宋矩说： 作为人主的臣下，既然不能成就功业，只有为气节而死了。 
English: Ma Qiu also attacked Daxia, and Liang Shih, a military escort, arrested the eunuch Song Xuan, and the city surrendered in response to Ma Qiu. Ma Qiu sent Song Xuan with a letter to persuade the governor of Dunhuang, Song Ri, to surrender. Song Ri said, "As a vassal of the human master, since I cannot accomplish my duty, I only died for the sake of qi."

古文：先杀妻子而后自刎。
现代文：于是他就先把妻儿杀掉，然后自刎而死。
English: So he first killed his wife and children, and then hanged himself.

古文：秋曰： 皆义士也。 
现代文：麻秋说： 这些人全都是义士。 
English: Ma Qiu said: These people are all righteous.

古文：收而葬之。
现代文：为他们收尸安葬。
English: Their bodies were taken away for burial.

古文：冬，汉太保李弈自晋寿举兵反，蜀人多从之，众至数万。
现代文：冬季，成汉太保李奕在晋寿起兵反叛，蜀人大多都跟从他，兵众多达数万。
English: In winter, Chenghan Taipo Li Yi rebelled in Jinshou, and most of the Shu people followed him, with tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：汉主势登城拒虞，弈单骑突门，门者射而杀之，其众绵溃。
现代文：成汉国主李势登上城墙抵御，李奕单身匹马冲击城门，守卫城门的人向他射击，射死了他，其兵众全都溃逃。
English: Li Xiang, the ruler of Chenghan, climbed the city wall to defend himself. Li Yi's single horse crashed into the city gate. The guards at the gate shot at him and killed him. All of his soldiers fled.

古文：势大赦境内，改年嘉宁。
现代文：李势在境内实行大赦，改年号为嘉宁。
English: Li Xian implemented an amnesty in the territory and changed his name to Jianing.

古文：势骄淫，不恤国事，多居禁中，罕接公卿，疏忌旧臣，信任左右，谗诌并进，刑罚苛滥，由是中外离心。
现代文：李势骄奢淫佚，不操心国家大事，常常身居宫中，很少与公卿大臣接触，疏远忌惮昔日的臣下，信任跟随在身边的人，谗言媚语并进，刑罚苛刻泛滥，因此宫廷内外的人们全都与他离心。
English: Li was arrogant, extravagant and lascivious, unconcerned with national affairs. He often lived in the palace, rarely had contact with nobles and ministers, shunned and alienated former vassals, trusted and followed those around him, indulged in flattery and harsh punishments. As a result, people inside and outside the palace were all alienated from him.

古文：蜀土先无獠，至是始从山出，自巴西至犍为、梓潼，布满山谷十馀万落，不可禁制，大为民患。
现代文：蜀地以前没有獠族人，到这时他们开始从山中出来，从巴西至犍为、梓潼，十多万个部落布满了山谷，无法禁止控制，给百姓带来了深重的祸患。
English: Previously, there were no Yi people in Shu. At that time, they began to emerge from the mountains. From Brazil to Yunnan to Zhejiang, more than a hundred thousand tribes filled the valley, which could not be prohibited and controlled, and brought serious disasters to the people.

古文：加以饥馑，四境之内，遂至萧条。
现代文：再加上临逢荒年，国境之内，终于变得一片萧条。
English: Coupled with the approaching lean years, within the borders, it finally became a depression.

古文：安西将军桓温将伐汉，将佐皆以为不可。
现代文：安西将军桓温准备讨伐成汉，将领辅佐全都认为不可行。
English: Anxi General Kanwen was preparing to invade Chenghan, but all the generals and assistants thought it was not feasible.

古文：江夏相袁乔劝之曰： 夫经略大事，固非常情所及，智者了于胸中，不必待众言皆合也。
现代文：江夏相袁乔劝谏桓温说： 攻取天下这样的大事，本来就不是按常理所能预测的，智慧高超的人自己在心中决定就可以了，不必非要等众人的意见全都统一。
English: Yuan Qiao, the governor of Jiangxi Province, advised Zou Huanwen, saying, "To conquer such a big thing in the world is not something that can be predicted according to common sense. It is enough for a highly intelligent person to make his own decision in his heart. There is no need to wait for everyone's opinion to be unified.

古文：今为天下之患者，胡、蜀二寇而已。蜀虽险固，比胡为弱，将欲除之，宜先其易者。
现代文：如今作为天下祸患的，只有胡、蜀二敌而已，蜀国虽然地势险固，但力量比胡人软弱，如果准备除掉他们，应该先攻打容易攻取的一方。
English: Today, only the two enemies, Hu and Shu, are the scourge of the world. Although Shu is in a precarious position, its strength is weaker than that of the Hu people. If you are going to get rid of them, you should first attack the side that is easy to capture.

古文：李势无道，臣民不附，且恃其险远，不修战备。
现代文：李势毫无道义，臣僚百姓与他离心，而且他凭借着自己的天险与偏远，没有做交战的准备。
English: Li Xiang was immoral, his ministers and people were alienated from him, and he did not prepare for war due to his natural danger and remoteness.

古文：宜以精卒万人轻赍疾趋，比其觉之，我已出其险要，可一战擒也。
现代文：应该派一万精锐士兵轻装迅速开进，等到他察觉以后，我们已经穿越过了他的险要之地，一次交战就可以擒获他。
English: He should send ten thousand of his best soldiers, lightly armed, to advance rapidly until he perceives that we have passed through his danger zone and can capture him in a single engagement.

古文：蜀地富饶，户口繁庶，诸葛武侯用之抗衡中夏，若得而有之，国家之大利也。
现代文：蜀地物产富饶，人口众多，诸葛亮用它与中原抗衡，如果我们得到而占有了此地，这对国家大有好处。
English: Shu is rich in products and has a large population. Zhuge Liang used it to compete with the Central Plains. If we get and occupy this place, it will be of great benefit to the country.

古文：论者恐大军既西，胡必窥觎，此似是而非。
现代文：谈论此事的人唯恐大军西进以后，胡人一定会乘虚图谋，这是似是而非的说法。
English: People who talk about this are afraid that after the great army advances westward, the Hu people will certainly use false plots, which is a specious argument.

古文：胡闻我万里远征，以为内有重备，必不敢动；纵有侵轶，缘江诸军足以拒守，必无忧也。 
现代文：胡人听说我们万里远征。会认为国内设有严密的防备，一定不敢轻举妄动。纵然有所侵扰，沿长江布防的各路军队也足以抵御防守，肯定没有什么忧患。 
English: The Hu people heard about our long-distance expedition. They will think that the country has a strict defense, and they will not dare to act rashly. Even if there is an intrusion, the armies along the Yangtze River will be enough to resist the defense, and there will certainly be no worries.

古文：温从之。
现代文：桓温听从袁乔的意见。
English: Kanwen listened to Yuan Qiao's advice.

古文：乔，瑰之子也。
现代文：袁乔是袁的儿子。
English: Yuan Qiao is Yuan's son.

古文：十一月，辛未，温帅益州刺史周抚、南郡太守谯王无忌伐汉，拜表即行；委安西长史范汪以留事，加抚督梁州之四郡诸军事；使袁乔帅二千人为前锋。
现代文：十一月辛未，桓温率领益州刺史周抚、南郡太守谯王司马无忌讨伐成汉，进上表章后立即行动。将留守事务委托给安西长史范汪，让周抚担任都督梁州的四郡诸军事。让袁乔率领二千人作为前锋。
English: In late November, Huan Wen led the Yizhou governor, Zhou Fu, and the Nan County governor, Wang Sima, to fight against the Han Dynasty. They took immediate action after entering the capital. They entrusted the remaining affairs to the Anxi governor, Fan Wang, and let Zhou Fu serve as the military governor of the four counties of Liangzhou. Let Yuan Qiao lead 2,000 people as a striker.

古文：朝廷以蜀道险远，温众少而深入，皆以为忧，惟刘惔以为必克。
现代文：朝廷因为蜀道艰险遥远，桓温的兵力不足而又深入敌后，都为此担忧，只有刘认为一定能取胜。
English: The imperial court was worried because Shu Road was difficult and dangerous and far away, and Kanwen's troops were insufficient and deep behind the enemy's lines. Only Liu believed that he could definitely win.

古文：或问其故，惔曰： 以博知之。
现代文：有人问他为什么，刘说： 通过博戏知道的。
English: When asked why, Liu said, "I learned about it through the game."

古文：温，善博者也，不必得则不为。
现代文：桓温是善于博戏的人，不能肯定取胜的他就不干。
English: Kuan Wen is a good player. If he is not sure of winning, he will not do it.

古文：但恐克蜀之后，温终专制朝廷耳。 
现代文：只是恐怕攻克蜀地之后，桓温最终要在朝廷专权罢了。 
English: However, I am afraid that after conquering Shunde, Kuan Wen will eventually take over the exclusive power of the imperial court.

古文：显宗成皇帝下永和三年
现代文：永和三年
English: Three Years of Yonghe

古文：春，二月，桓温军至青衣。
现代文：春季，二月，桓温的部队抵达青衣。
English: In the spring, in February, Kuan-Wen's troops arrived in Qingyi.

古文：汉主势大发兵，遣叔父右卫将军福、从兄镇南将军权、前将军昝坚等将之，自山阳趣合水。
现代文：成汉国主李势大举出兵，派叔父右卫将军李福、堂兄镇南将军李权、前将军昝坚等人率领兵众，从山阳开赴合水。
English: The ruler of the Han Dynasty, Li Xian, sent troops in a big way, sending his uncle, the right guard general Li Fu, his cousin, the Zhenan general Li Quan, the former general Yu Jian, and others to lead the troops from Shanyang to Heshui.

古文：诸将欲伏于江南以待晋，昝坚不从，引兵自江北鸳鸯碕渡向犍为。
现代文：众将领想要在长江以南设下埋伏以等待东晋的军队，昝坚没有听从，带领军队从长江以北的鸳鸯渡过长江，奔赴犍为。
English: The generals wanted to set up an ambush south of the Yangtze River to wait for the Eastern Jin's army, but Yu Jian did not listen, leading the army from the north of the Yangtze River to cross the Yangtze River and rush to Luoyang.

古文：三月，温至彭模。
现代文：三月，桓温抵达彭模。
English: In March, Kanen arrived in Pengmiao.

古文：议者欲分为两军，异道俱进，以分汉兵之势。
现代文：有人提议应该兵分两路，分头并进，用以削弱成汉军的威势。
English: Some people suggested that the soldiers should be divided into two groups and march side by side, in order to weaken the power of the Chinese army.

古文：袁乔曰： 今悬军深入万里之外，胜则大功可立，不胜则噍类无遗，当合势齐力，以取一战之捷。
现代文：袁乔说： 如今孤军深入万里之外，胜利可以建立大功，败则尽死无遗，应当聚合威势，齐心协力，以争取一战成功。
English: Yuan Qiao said: Now that the lone army is thousands of miles away, victory can build great achievements, while defeat is inexhaustible. It is necessary to gather strength and make concerted efforts to strive for success in the First World War.

古文：若分两军，则众心不一，万一偏败，大事去矣。
现代文：如果兵分两路，则众心不一，万一一方失败，讨伐蜀汉的大事就完了。
English: If the soldiers are divided into two sides, then there will be discord. In the unlikely event that one side fails, the important matter of fighting against Shu Han will be over.

古文：不如全军而进，弃去釜甑，赍三日粮，以示无还心，胜可必也。 
现代文：不如以完整的军队前进，扔掉釜甑一类的炊具，只带三天的军粮，以显示义无返顾的决心，肯定可以取胜。 
English: It is better to advance with a complete army, throw away cooking utensils such as kettles, and only bring three days of rations to show that there is no turning back, and you can definitely win.

古文：温从之，留参军孙盛、周楚将赢兵守辎重，温自将步卒直指成都。
现代文：桓温听从了他的意见。留下参军孙盛，周楚带领瘦弱的士兵守卫轻重装备，桓温亲自统率步兵直接开赴成都。
English: Kuan Wen listened to his advice. He left Sun Sheng, who had joined the army, and Zhou Chu led the thin soldiers to guard the heavy and light equipment. Kuan Wen personally led the infantry directly to Chengdu.

古文：楚，抚之子也。
现代文：周楚是周抚的儿子。
English: Zhou Chu is the son of Zhou Fu.

古文：李福进攻彭模，孙盛等奋击，走之。
现代文：李福进军攻打彭模，孙盛等人奋力反击，赶跑了他。
English: Li Fu marched to attack Peng Mo, while Sun Sheng and others fought back and chased him away.

古文：温进，遇李权，三战三捷，汉兵散走归成都，镇东将军李位都迎诣温降。
现代文：桓温进军，遇上了李权，三次交战，三次获胜，成汉的军队溃散逃回了成都，镇军将军李位都迎到桓温那里投降。
English: Huan Wen marched in, met Li Quan, fought three times, won three times, Chenghan's army broke up and fled back to Chengdu, and the town's army general Li Yidu came to Huan Wen to surrender.

古文：昝坚至犍为，乃知与温异道，还，自沙头津济，比至，温已军于成都之十里陌，坚众自溃。
现代文：昝坚到了犍为以后，才知道和桓温走的不是一条路，掉头返回，从沙头津渡过长江，等到抵达成都，桓温已经驻扎在成都的十里陌，昝坚的兵众自己就溃散了。
English: After Yu Jian arrived in Luoyang, he knew that he was not following the same path as Guan Wen. He turned around and went back. He crossed the Yangtze River from Shatoujin. When he reached the capital, Guan Wen was already stationed in Chengdu's Shili Miao. Yu Jian's soldiers dispersed on their own.

古文：势悉众出战于成都之笮桥，温前锋不利，参军龚护战死，矢及温马首。
现代文：李势把全部兵众都调往成都的笮桥迎战，桓温的前锋部队出师不利，参军龚护战死，流箭射中了桓温的马头。
English: Li Zheng transferred all the soldiers to Chengdu's Fenqiao to meet the battle, and Kuan Wen's vanguard troops were unfavorably dispatched, and the soldiers died in the battle, and the arrow hit Kuan Wen's horse's head.

古文：众惧，欲退，而鼓吏误鸣进鼓；袁乔拔剑督士卒力战，遂大破之。
现代文：兵众见状十分害怕，想要撤退，而负责击鼓的官吏却误击了前进的鼓声。袁乔拔出战剑督促士兵奋力攻战，终于大败李势的军队。
English: The soldiers were so frightened that they wanted to retreat, but the official in charge of beating the drums mistakenly beat the advancing drums. Yuan Qiao pulled out his sword and urged the soldiers to fight hard, and finally defeated Li Xiang's army.

古文：温乘胜长驱至成都，纵火烧其城门。
现代文：桓温乘胜长驱直入抵达成都，放火焚烧了城门。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, Kuan Wen drove straight into the capital and set fire to the city gate.

古文：汉人惶惧，无复斗志。
现代文：成汉人惊慌恐惧，再没有继续抵抗的斗志了。
English: Panic and fear gripped the Chinese people, and they no longer had the fighting spirit to continue to resist.

古文：势夜开东门走，至葭萌，使散骑常侍王幼送降文于温，自称 略阳李势叩头死罪 ，寻舆榇面缚诣军门。
现代文：李势趁夜打开东门逃跑，到了葭萌，让散骑常侍王幼给桓温送去了请求投降的文书，自称 略阳人李势叩头请求死罪。 
English: Li Xiang took advantage of the night to open the east gate to escape. When he arrived at Qimeng, he had Wang You, a straggler and regular attendant, send a document requesting surrender to Huan Wen. Li Xiang, a self-proclaimed ruffian, kowtowed and requested the death penalty.

古文：温解缚焚榇，送势及宗室十馀人于建康；引汉司空谯献之等以为参佐，举贤旌善，蜀人悦之。
现代文：不久便拉着棺材，双手反绑于身后来到了桓温的军营门前投降。桓温为他松开了双手，焚烧了棺材，把李势及宗室亲属十多人送到了建康。任用汉司空谯献之等作为参佐，举拔贤能奖掖善事，蜀人十分高兴。
English: Soon after, he pulled the coffin with his hands tied behind his back and surrendered in front of the military camp of Huan Wen. Huan Wen released his hands for him, burned the coffin, and sent Li Xian and more than a dozen of his family members to Jiankang. The people of Shu were very happy to appoint Han Si Kuo Xian and others as councillors, and to give them the merit award for their good deeds.

古文：日南太守夏侯览贪纵，侵刻胡商，又科调船材，云欲有所讨，由是诸国恚愤。
现代文：日南太守夏侯览贪婪放纵，侵吞掠夺胡族商人，又下令征调造船用的木材，说准备讨伐征战使用，因此各国对他十分愤恨。
English: Because of his greed and indulgence, he plundered and pillaged Hu merchants, and ordered the requisition of timber for shipbuilding, saying that he was preparing to fight for the use of war, all countries were very angry with him.

古文：林邑王文攻陷日南，将士死者五六千，杀览，以尸祭天。
现代文：林邑王范文攻陷了日南，日南的将士有五六千人死亡，杀掉了夏侯览，用他的尸体祭祀上天。
English: Lin-yi's king, Fan Wen, invaded the south of Japan. Five or six thousand soldiers from the south of Japan died. He killed Xia Houxian and used his corpse as a sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：檄交州刺史硃蕃，请以郡北横山为界。
现代文：给交州刺史朱蕃送去檄文，请求以郡北的横山作为与晋的分界。
English: He sent a letter to Zhu Xi, the governor of Jiaozhou, requesting that the boundary between Jiaozhou and Jin be set at Hengshan in the north of the county.

古文：文既去，蕃使督护刘雄戍日南。
现代文：范文离开以后，朱蕃让督护刘雄戍守日南。
English: After the departure of Fan Wen, Zhu Xi let Liu Xiong, the overseer, take charge of Nichinan.

古文：汉故尚书仆射王誓、镇东将军邓定、平南将军王润、将军隗文等皆举兵反，众各万馀。
现代文：成汉过去的尚书仆射王誓、镇东将军邓定、平南将军王润、将军隗文等人全都起兵反叛，各自拥有兵众数万。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Shaowangye, Zhendong's general Deng Ding, Pingnan's general Wang Run, and Zouwen's general all rebelled, each with tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：桓温自击定，使袁乔击文，皆破之。
现代文：桓温亲自攻打邓定，让袁乔攻打隗文，全都大败了他们。
English: Huan Wen personally attacked Dandong, and let Yuan Qiao attack Xiamen, and they all defeated them.

古文：温命益州刺史周抚镇彭模，斩王誓、王润。
现代文：桓温命令益州刺史周抚镇守彭模，斩杀了王誓、王润。
English: Kuan Wen ordered the governor of Yizhou Province, Zhou Fu, to stab the town guard, Peng Meng, and killed Wang Zhe and Wang Run.

古文：温留成都三十日，振旅还江陵。
现代文：桓温在成都逗留了三十天，整顿部队后返回了江陵。
English: Kuan Wen stayed in Chengdu for thirty days and returned to Gangneung after reorganizing the troops.

古文：李势至建康，封归义侯。
现代文：李势抵达建康，被封为归义侯。
English: Li Xiang arrived in Jiankang and was given the title of Guiyi Hou.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，邓定、隗文等入据成都，征虏将军杨谦弃涪城，退保德阳。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁巳，邓定、隗文等人进占成都，征虏将军杨谦放弃了涪城，退守德阳。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Si, Dang Ding, Xing Wen and others occupied Chengdu, and the conscript general Yang Qian abandoned Shicheng and retreated to Deyang.

古文：赵凉州刺史麻秋攻枹罕。
现代文：后赵凉州刺史麻秋攻打罕。
English: Later, Zhao Liangzhou stabbed Shi Maqiu and attacked Han.

古文：晋昌太守郎坦以城大难守，欲弃外城。
现代文：晋昌太守郎坦因为罕城大难以防守，想放弃外城。
English: Jinchang Taizhong Langtan wanted to give up the outer city because the rare city was very difficult to defend.

古文：武成太守张悛曰： 弃外城则动众心，大事去矣。 
现代文：武成太守张悛说： 放弃了外城就会动摇众心，大事也就完了。 
English: Zhang Ye, the governor of Wucheng, said, "If we give up the outer city, it will shake everyone's hearts, and the big event will be over.

古文：宁戎校尉张璩从悛言，固守大城。
现代文：宁戎校尉张琚听从了张悛的话，固守城池。
English: Ningyong's captain Zhang Ye listened to Zhang Ye's words and held fast to the castle.

古文：秋帅众八万，围堑数重，云梯地突，百道皆进。城中御之，秋众死伤数万。
现代文：麻秋率领八万兵众将护城河团团包围，云梯地道，各路俱进，城中的士兵顽强抵抗，麻秋的兵众死伤数万。
English: Ma Qiu led 80,000 soldiers to encircle the moat in groups, and the soldiers in the city stubbornly resisted, and tens of thousands of soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：赵王虎复遣其将刘浑等帅步骑二万会之。
现代文：后赵王石虎又派他的将领刘浑等人率领步、骑兵二万人与麻秋会合。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu sent his general Liu Hun and others to lead the way, and 20,000 cavalrymen rallied with Ma Qiu.

古文：郎坦恨言不用，教军士李嘉潜引赵兵千馀人登城；璩督诸将力战，杀二百馀人，赵兵乃退。
现代文：郎坦痛恨张悛不采纳自己的意见，叫军士李嘉悄悄地带领一千多赵士兵登上城墙。张琚督促众将领奋力战斗，杀死了二百多人，后赵军队这才后退。
English: Lang Tan hated Zhang Ye for not accepting his opinion and ordered Sergeant Li Jia to quietly lead more than a thousand Zhao soldiers onto the city wall. Zhang Ye urged the generals to fight hard and killed more than two hundred people, after which Zhao's army retreated.

古文：璩烧其攻具，秋退保大夏。
现代文：张琚焚烧了后赵军队进攻的器械，麻秋退守大夏。
English: Zhang Hui burned the post-Zhao army's offensive equipment, and Maqiu retreated to Daxia.

古文：虎以中书监石宁为征西将军，帅并、司州兵二万馀人为秋等后继。
现代文：石虎任命中书监石宁为征西将军，率领并州、司州的军队二万多人作为麻秋的后继部队。
English: Shihu appointed the Chinese librarian, Shi Ning, as the general to conquer the West, and he led more than twenty thousand troops from Anhui and Shizhou as the successor force to Maqiu.

古文：张重华将宋秦等帅户二万降于赵。
现代文：张重华的部将宋秦等人率领二万多户人家向后赵投降。
English: Zhang Chonghua's general, Song Qin, and others led more than 20,000 families to surrender to Later Zhao.

古文：重华以谢艾为使持节、军师将军，帅步骑三万进军临河。
现代文：张重华任命谢艾为使持节、军师将军，率领步、骑兵三万人进军临河。
English: Zhang Chonghua appointed Xie Ai as the envoy to hold the festival, the general of the division, led the march, and the cavalry of 30,000 people marched into Linhe.

古文：艾乘轺车，戴白窥，鸣鼓而行。
现代文：谢艾乘着轻车，戴着白色便帽，击鼓前进。
English: Xie Ai rides in a light car, wearing a white cap, and beats a drum.

古文：秋望见，怒曰： 艾年少书生，冠服如此，轻我也 。
现代文：麻秋远远望见，愤怒地说： 谢艾是年轻书生，如此穿着，这是轻视我。 
English: Maqiu could see him from far away and said angrily: Xie Ai is a young scholar, wearing such clothes is a slight against me.

古文：命黑槊龙骧三千人驰击之，艾左右大扰。
现代文：于是就命令装备黑色矛的三千龙骧兵驰马攻打他，跟随在谢艾周围的人大为惊忧。
English: So he ordered three thousand dragons equipped with black spears to attack him on horseback, and the people around Xie Ai were very worried.

古文：或劝艾宜乘马，艾不从，下车，踞胡床，指麾处分；赵人以为有伏兵，惧不敢进。
现代文：有人劝谢艾应该骑马，谢艾不听，下车以后，坐在交椅上，指挥部署，后赵军以为有伏兵，因害怕不敢再前进了。
English: Some people advised Xie Ai to ride a horse, but Xie Ai did not listen. After getting off the bus, he sat on a chair and commanded the deployment. After that, Zhao Jun thought there was an ambush and did not dare to move forward for fear.

古文：别将张瑁自间道引兵截赵军后，赵军退，艾乘势进击，大破之，斩其将杜勋、汲鱼，获首虏一万三千级，秋单马奔大夏。
现代文：别将张瑁率兵从小路截断了后赵军队的后路，后赵军队兵退，谢艾乘势进攻，大破后赵军，斩杀了后赵将领杜勋、汲鱼，斩杀其兵众一万三千多人，麻秋单身匹马逃奔大夏。
English: Don't let Zhang Jun and his soldiers cut off the rear path of the late Zhao army from the path, the late Zhao army soldiers retreated, Xie Ai took advantage of the situation to attack, broke the late Zhao army, killed the late Zhao generals Du Xun and Zhu Yu, killed more than 13,000 of his soldiers, and Ma Qiu fled to Baxia on a single horse.

古文：五月，秋与石宁复帅众十二万进屯河南，刘宁、王擢略地晋兴、广武、武街，至于曲柳。
现代文：五月，麻秋和石宁又率领十二万兵众进军驻扎在黄河以南，刘宁、王擢攻略晋兴、广武、武街，直至曲柳。
English: In May, Ma Qiu and Shi Ning led 120,000 soldiers to march south of the Yellow River, and Liu Ning and Wang Yuanzhang attacked Jinxing, Guangwu, Wu Jie, and even Quliu.

古文：张重华使将军牛旋御之，退守枹罕，姑臧大震。
现代文：张重华让将军牛旋抵抗他们，后退固守罕，姑臧城内大为震恐。
English: Zhang Chonghua let General Niu Xuan resist them, and retreated to a defensive position. The city of Gushan was terrified.

古文：重华欲亲出拒之，谢艾固谏。
现代文：张重华想亲自出征抵抗，谢艾退切劝谏。
English: Zhang Chonghua wanted to personally go out to resist, but Xie Ai strongly advised him against it.

古文：别驾从事索遐曰： 君者，一国之镇，不可轻动 。
现代文：索遐说： 君王镇摄一国，不可轻率行动。 
English: Soh said: King Town is a national treasure, and we should not act rashly.

古文：乃以艾为使持节、都督征讨诸军事、行卫将军，遐为军正将军，帅步骑二万拒之。
现代文：张重华于是任命谢艾为使持节，都督征讨诸军事、行卫将军职，任命索遐为军正将军，率领二万步、骑兵抵抗赵军。
English: Zhang Chonghua then appointed Xie Ai as the envoy to hold the festival, the governor to recruit and recruit military and guards, and appointed Sokun as the army general, leading twenty thousand paces and cavalry to resist Zhao's army.

古文：别将杨康败刘宁于沙阜，宁退屯金城。
现代文：别将杨康在沙阜打败刘宁，刘宁后退驻扎在金城。
English: Don't let Yang Kang beat Liu Ning in Shafu. Liu Ning will retreat and stay in Jincheng.

古文：六月，辛酉，大赦。
现代文：六月，辛酉，晋实行大赦。
English: In June, Xinjiang and Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，林邑复陷日南，杀督护刘雄。
现代文：秋季，七月，林邑的军队又攻陷日南，杀掉了督护刘雄。
English: In the autumn, in July, Lin's army invaded Nichinan and killed Liu Xiong, the overseer.

古文：隗文、邓定等立故国师范长生之子贲为帝而奉之，以妖异惑众，蜀人多归之。
现代文：隗文、邓定等人立前国师范长生的儿子范贲为帝，并尊奉他，他们靠妖异之辞迷惑民众，蜀人大多归附。
English: Zouwen, Dangding and others made Fan Ye, the son of the former state teacher Fan Changsheng, emperor, and worshipped him. They confused the people with magical words, and most of the Shu people followed them.

古文：赵王虎复遣征西将军孙伏都、将军刘浑帅步骑二万会麻秋军，长驱济河，击张重华，遂城长最。
现代文：后赵王石虎又派征西将军孙伏都、将军刘浑率领步、骑兵二万人与麻秋的军队会合，长驱直入，渡过黄河，攻打张重华，屯军长最。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu also sent the Western Conquest generals Sun Fudu and Liu Hun to lead the way, and 20,000 cavalrymen met with Ma Qiu's army, drove straight in, crossed the Yellow River, and attacked Zhang Chonghua, the commander of the camp.

古文：谢艾建牙誓众，有风吹旌旗东南指，索遐曰： 风为号令，今旌旗指敌，天所赞也。 
现代文：谢艾在军前竖起大旗与兵众誓师，恰好风吹旌旗指向东南，索遐说： 风向就是号令，现在旌旗指向敌人，这是上天的助。 
English: Xie Ai raised a large flag in front of the army with the soldiers swearing allegiance, just as the wind blew the flag to the southeast, Sohu said: The wind direction is the signal, now the flag is pointing to the enemy, this is God's help.

古文：艾军于神鸟，王擢与艾前锋战，败走，还河南。
现代文：谢艾屯军于神鸟，王擢与谢艾的前锋部队交战，被打败，逃回黄河以南。
English: Xie Aitun's army was at the sacred bird, and Wang Zhan fought with Xie Aitun's forward troops. He was defeated and fled back to the south of the Yellow River.

古文：八月，戊午，艾进击秋，大破之，秋遁归金城。
现代文：八月，戊午，谢艾进军攻打麻秋，大败麻秋，麻秋逃回金城。
English: In August, at noon, Xie Ai marched to attack Maqiu, defeated Maqiu, and Maqiu fled back to Jincheng.

古文：虎闻之，叹曰： 吾以偏师定九州，今以九州之力困于枹罕。彼有人焉，未可图也！ 
现代文：石虎听说以后，叹息道： 我靠部分军队平定了九州，如今拥有九州的兵力却受困于罕，他们有人才在这里，不可图谋！ 
English: After hearing this, Shihu sighed, "I used part of my army to pacify Kyushu, but now I have Kyushu's army, but they are trapped. They only have people here, they can't plot!"

古文：艾还，讨叛虏斯骨真等万馀落，皆破平之。
现代文：谢艾班师返回，讨伐反叛敌虏的斯骨真等一万多个部落，全都打败平定了他们。
English: Xie Aiban's division returned and fought against more than ten thousand tribes, including the rebel enemy, the Dizengo, and defeated and pacified them all.

古文：赵王虎据十州之地，聚敛金帛，及外国所献珍异，府库财物，不可胜纪；犹自以为不足，悉发前代陵墓，取其金宝。
现代文：后赵王石虎占据了十州的地域，聚集收敛金帛，以及外国所进献的珍异宝物，府库里的财物，不可胜数，但自己还是觉得不够，把前代的陵墓全都挖掘开，夺走了其中的金宝。
English: After Zhao Wang Shihhu occupied the region of Shizhou, he gathered and collected gold ingots, as well as rare and exotic treasures donated by foreign countries, and the treasures in the government treasury, which were countless, but he still felt that they were not enough. He excavated all the mausoleums of the previous generation and took away the gold treasure.

古文：沙门吴进言于虎曰： 胡运将衰，晋当复兴，宜苦役晋人以厌其气。 
现代文：僧人吴进向石虎进言说： 胡族的命运将要衰落，晋王朝当要复兴，应当让晋人服艰苦的劳役，以抑制他们的气势。 
English: The monk Wu Jin said to Shi Hu: The fate of the Hu people will decline, the Jin dynasty should be revived, and the Jin people should be made to do hard labor to curb their power.

古文：虎使尚书张群发近郡男女十六万人，车十万乘，运士筑华林苑及长墙于鄴北，广袤数十里。
现代文：石虎让尚书张群征发附近各郡的男女十六万人，车十万辆，运土到邺城以北，修筑华林苑及漫长的围墙，占地方圆数十里。
English: Shihu allowed Shangshu Zhang Qun to conscript 160,000 men and women and 100,000 vehicles from the nearby counties, transport the soil to the north of Lucheng, and build Huarinyuan and a long fence, covering dozens of miles in the local area.

古文：申钟、石璞、赵揽等上疏陈天文错乱，百姓凋弊。
现代文：申钟、石璞、赵揽等人上疏，陈述目前天文星象错乱，百姓凋敝。
English: Shen Zhong, Shijun, Zhao Zhaobao and others were absent, stating that the current astronomical constellations were disordered, and the people were withered.

古文：虎大怒曰： 使苑墙朝成，吾夕没无恨矣。 
现代文：石虎勃然大怒，说： 即使宫苑和围墙早晨建成，而我晚上就死去，也死无遗憾。 
English: The stone tiger flew into a rage and said, "Even if the palace and the wall are built in the morning and I die in the evening, I will die with no regrets."

古文：促张群使然烛夜作；暴风大雨，死者数万人。
现代文：石虎督促张群让人们占燃烛火，夜不停工。天降暴风大雨，死亡的人达数万。
English: Shihu urged Zhang Qun to let people light candles and work non-stop at night. Storms and heavy rain fell from the sky, killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：郡国前后送苍麟十六，白鹿七，虎命司虞张曷柱调之以驾芝盖，大朝会列于殿庭。
现代文：各郡国先后送上苍麟十六只，白鹿七头，石虎命令司虞张曷柱调驯它们，用来驾芝盖车，举行盛大朝会时陈列在殿堂庭院。
English: Each county and province successively sent sixteen celestial unicorns, seven white deer, and Shihu ordered the magistrate Zhang Shizhu to tame them, use them to drive the covered wagon, and display them in the courtyard of the Great Hall of the People when holding a grand imperial meeting.

古文：九月，命太子宣出祈福于山川，因行游猎。
现代文：九月，石虎命令太子石宣到各地的山川祈求福祉，顺便周游打猎。
English: In September, Shi Hu ordered Prince Shi Xuan to go to the mountains and rivers of various regions to pray for welfare, and to travel around hunting.

古文：宣乘大辂，羽葆华盖，建天子旌旗，十有六军戎卒十八万，出自金明门。虎从其后宫升陵霄观望之，笑曰： 我家父子如是，自非天崩地陷，当复何愁！
现代文：石宣乘坐大车，车子饰以鸟羽华盖，树立天子旌旗，十六路军队的十八万士卒从金明门出发，石虎从后宫登上陵霄观眺望，笑着说： 我家父子如此，除非天崩地陷，还有什么可愁的呢！
English: Shi Xuan rode in a chariot, the chariot was decorated with a bird's feather cape, the flag of the Son of Heaven was raised, 180,000 soldiers of the 16th Route Army set out from the Jinming Gate, Shi Hu from the harem ascended the tomb to look around, and said with a smile: My father and son are like this, unless the sky falls, what else is there to be sad about!

古文：但抱子弄孙，日为乐耳。 
现代文：我只管去抱儿子逗孙子，终日享受天伦之乐吧。 
English: I'll just go and cuddle my son and play with my grandchild, and enjoy the family fun all day long.

古文：宣所舍，辄列人为长围，四面各百里，驱禽兽，至暮皆集其所，使文武跪立，重行围守，炬火如昼，命劲骑百馀驰射其中，宣与姬妾乘辇临观，兽尽而止。
现代文：石宣每到一地停留，就让人们结成漫长的围圈，四边各有一百多里，然后驱赶禽兽，到傍晚让禽兽全都汇集在他的住所附近，让文武官员全都跪立，再把禽兽围拢起来，火炬把四周照得如同白昼，石宣命令强劲骑兵一百多人驰马向围圈中射击，石宣和姬妾们乘车观看，直到禽兽全被射死才停止。
English: Every time Shi Xuan stopped at a place, he would have people form a long enclosure, with more than a hundred miles on each side, and then drive away the animals. In the evening, he would have all the animals gather near his residence. He would have all the civil and military officials kneel down, and then surround the animals. The torch would shine around as if it were broad daylight. Shi Xuan ordered more than a hundred strong cavalrymen to ride into the enclosure and shoot. Shi Xuan and his concubines would ride in the car to watch until all the animals were shot to death.

古文：或兽有迸逸，当围守者，有爵则夺马，步驱一日，无爵则鞭之一百。
现代文：有时个别禽兽逃出围圈，负责围守该地段的人，有爵位的就剥夺他的马让他步行一天，没爵位的就责罚一百鞭。
English: Sometimes individual animals escape from the enclosure, and the person responsible for guarding the area is deprived of his horse and made to walk for a day if he has a title, and is punished with a hundred lashes if he does not have a title.

古文：士卒饥冻死者万有馀人，所过三州十五郡，资储皆无孑遗。
现代文：士卒饥寒交迫，死亡的人有一万多，所经过的三州十五郡，物资储备全都挥霍无遗。
English: The soldiers were starving and cold, more than ten thousand people died, the three states and fifteen counties passed through, and the material reserves were all squandered.

古文：虎复命秦公韬继出，自并州至于秦、雍，亦如之。
现代文：石虎又命令石韬继石宣之后出行，从并州到秦州、雍州，情况和石宣一样。
English: Shihu also ordered Shijie to travel after Shixuan, from Bianzhou to Qinzhou and Yongzhou, the same situation as Shixuan.

古文：宣怒其与己钧敌，愈嫉之。
现代文：石宣对石韬和自己势均力敌很恼怒，对他越发嫉恨。
English: Shi Xuan was very angry with Shi Yao and his equal opponent, and became more and more jealous of him.

古文：宦者赵生得幸于宣，无宠于韬，微劝宣除之，于是始有杀韬之谋矣。
现代文：宦官赵生得宠于石宣，在石韬面前不受宠爱，于是就暗地里劝说石宣除掉石韬，从此开始有了杀石韬的图谋。
English: The eunuch Zhao Sheng was favored by Shi Xuan, and was not favored in front of Shi Xuan, so he secretly persuaded Shi Xuan to get rid of Shi Xuan, and from then on there was a plot to kill Shi Xuan.

古文：赵麻秋又袭张重华将张瑁，败之，斩首三千馀级。
现代文：后赵的麻秋又攻袭张重华的部将张瑁，打败了他，斩首三千多级。
English: Later, Zhao's Maqiu attacked Zhang Chonghua's subordinate Zhang Xuan, defeated him, and beheaded more than three thousand people.

古文：枹罕护军李逵帅众七千降于赵，自河以南氐、羌皆附于赵。
现代文：罕护军李逵率领七千兵众投降了后赵，自黄河以南，氐族、羌族全都归附了后赵。
English: After the surrender of the seven thousand soldiers of the Han protection army led by Li Zhe, all the Yao and Yao people from the south of the Yellow River were attached to Hou Zhao.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，遣侍御史俞归至凉州，授张重华侍中、大都督、督陇右、关中诸军事、大将军、凉州刺史、西平公。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙丑，晋派侍御史俞归到凉州，授予张重华侍中、大都督、督陇右、关中诸军事、大将军、凉州刺史、西平公。
English: In the winter, in October, the second ugly, the Jin sent the attendant, Shi Yan, to return to Liangzhou, and awarded Zhang Chonghua as the attendant, the grand governor, the governor of the right, the military of the middle, the general, Liangzhou Zhishi, and Xiping.

古文：归至姑臧，重华欲称凉王，未肯受诏，使所亲沈猛私谓归曰： 主公弈世为晋忠臣，今曾不如鲜卑，何也？
现代文：俞归抵达姑臧，张重华想称凉王，不肯接受诏命，让亲信沈猛私下里对俞归说： 主公世代都是晋王室的忠臣，如今却竟然不如鲜卑，为什么？
English: When Xingui arrived in Guzheng, Zhang Chonghua wanted to call him the King of Cool, but he refused to accept the imperial order, so he had his close friend Shen Meng say to Xingui in private, "Our lord has been a loyal subject of the Jin royal family for generations, but now he is actually inferior to Xianbei. Why?

古文：朝廷封慕容皝为燕王，而主公才为大将军，何以褒劝忠贤乎！
现代文：朝廷封慕容为燕王，而主公仅仅才是大将军，靠什么褒奖勉励忠臣贤良呢！
English: The imperial court hailed Murong Yong as the King of Swallows, while the lord was only a great general. What reward could he rely on to encourage his loyal and virtuous vassals?

古文：明台宜移河右，共劝州主为凉王。
现代文：您应该向黄河以西的民众发布文告，共同劝州主作凉王。
English: You should issue a proclamation to the people west of the Yellow River to jointly persuade the state to be the king of cool.

古文：人臣出使，苟利社稷，专之可也。 
现代文：臣下出使于外，如果是对国家有利的事情，擅自决定也是可以的。 
English: If it is in the interest of the country for a vassal to be sent abroad, the decision can be made without authorization.

古文：归曰： 吾子失言！
现代文：俞归说： 阁下说错了！
English: Xing Gui said, "Your Excellency is wrong!

古文：昔三代之王也，爵之贵者莫若上公；及周之衰，吴、楚始僭号称王，而诸侯亦不之非，盖以蛮夷畜之也；借使齐、鲁称王，诸侯岂不四面攻之乎！
现代文：过去三代称王的时候，尊贵的爵位没有什么能比得上上公；等到周室衰微，吴国、楚国开始僭越封号称为王，而其他诸侯国不加非难，是因为把他们作为蛮夷来对待，假使齐国、鲁国称王，其他诸侯国岂不四面攻击他们吗！
English: In the past three generations, when kings were proclaimed, there was nothing comparable to the noble title of Shangguang. When the Zhou dynasty declined, the kingdoms of Wu and Chu began to claim the title of king, while the other principalities did not criticize them because they treated them as barbarians. If the kingdoms of Qi and Lu were proclaimed kings, would not the other principalities attack them on all sides?

古文：汉高祖封韩、彭为王，寻皆诛灭，盖权时之宜，非厚之也。
现代文：汉高祖封韩信、彭越为王，不久把他们全都诛灭，这是一时的权宜之计，不是厚待他们。
English: Henkel's ancestors made Han Xin and Peng Yue kings, and soon annihilated them all. This was a temporary expedient, not a generous treatment of them.

古文：圣上以贵公忠贤，故爵以上公，任以方伯，宠荣极矣，岂鲜卑夷狄所可比哉！
现代文：圣主因为主公忠诚贤明，所以赐爵上公，授以一方重任，恩宠荣耀登峰造极，难道是鲜卑夷狄所能比拟的吗？
English: Because the Lord is faithful and wise, the Lord bestowed the title of Duke on the Duke, gave him a heavy responsibility, and the grace and glory reached the peak. Is it comparable to Xianbei Di?

古文：且吾闻之，功有大小，赏有重轻。
现代文：况且我听说，功有大小，赏有重轻。
English: Besides, I've heard that merit is not as important as reward.

古文：今贵公始继世而为王，若帅河右之众，东平胡、羯，修复陵庙，迎天子返洛阳，将何以加之乎？ 
现代文：如今主公刚刚继位就称王，如果率领黄河以西的民众，东进平定胡人、羯人，修复陵庙，迎接天子返回洛阳，将会被加授什么职位呢？ 
English: Now that the lord has just ascended the throne, if he were to lead the people west of the Yellow River, go east to subdue the Huns and Jurchens, restore the mausoleums, and welcome the Son of Heaven back to Luoyang, what position would he be awarded?

古文：重华乃止。
现代文：张重华于是放弃了称凉王的打算。
English: Zhang Chonghua then gave up the idea of calling him the king of cool.

古文：武都氐王杨初遣使来称籓；诏以初为使持节、征南将军、雍州刺史、仇池公。
现代文：武都氐王杨初派使者前来向晋称藩，朝廷下诏，任命杨初为使持节、征南将军、雍州刺史、仇池公。
English: Yang Chu, the king of Wudang, sent an envoy to Jin to claim the domain, and the imperial court issued an edict, appointing Yang Chu as the envoy, the general to conquer the south, the governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of Qi.

古文：十二月，振威护军萧敬文杀征虏将军杨谦，攻涪城，陷之，自称益州牧，遂取巴西，通于汉中。
现代文：十二月，振威护军萧敬文杀掉了征虏将军杨谦，攻打涪城，攻了下来，自称益州牧。占据了巴西，直达汉中。
English: In December, Xiao Jingwen, Zhenwei's protector, killed Yang Qian, a conscript general, and attacked and took down Shicheng, calling himself Yizhou Mu. He occupied Brazil, reaching as far as Hanzhong.

