古文：二十有九年春，王正月，公在楚。
现代文：二十九年春季，周历正月，襄公在楚国。
English: In the spring of the 29th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Prince Xiang was in Chu.

古文：夏五月，公至自楚。
现代文：夏季五月，襄公从鲁国回来。
English: In the summer of May, Prince Xiang returned from Lu.

古文：庚午，卫侯衎卒。
现代文：庚午日，卫侯去世。
English: On the day of the Gengpo, Wei Hou passed away.

古文：阍弑吴子馀祭。
现代文：阍杀害了吴国国君馀祭。
English: He killed Emperor Yuanzai of the State of Wu.

古文：仲孙羯会晋荀盈、齐高止、宋华定、卫世叔仪、郑公孙段、曹人、莒人、滕人、薛人、小邾人城杞。
现代文：仲孙羯会合晋国的荀盈、齐国的高止、宋国的华定、卫国的世叔仪、郑国的公孙段、曹国人、莒人、滕人、薛人、小邾人修筑杞国国都的城墙。
English: The middle generation of Sun Yat-sen's followers in Jin, Qi, Gao Zhi, Song, Huading, Wei, Shishi, Zheng, Cao, Yao, Teng, Xue and Xiao Yao built the city wall of the capital of the State of Yao.

古文：晋侯使士鞅来聘。
现代文：晋侯派遣士鞅来鲁国聘问。
English: The Jin princes dispatched their envoys to Lu to ask questions.

古文：杞子来盟。
现代文：杞子来鲁国结盟。
English: Shanzi came to Russia to form an alliance.

古文：吴子使札来聘。
现代文：吴子派遣札来鲁国聘问。
English: Wu Zi sent an envoy to Lu to solicit questions.

古文：秋九月，葬卫献公。
现代文：秋季九月，安葬卫献公。
English: In September of autumn, the funeral and dedication ceremony was held.

古文：齐高止出奔北燕。
现代文：齐国的高止逃到了北燕。
English: Gaozhou of Qi fled to Beiyan.

古文：冬，仲孙羯如晋。
现代文：冬季，仲孙羯去到晋国。
English: In winter, Nakasone went to Jin Province.

古文：二十九年春，王正月，公在楚，释不朝正于庙也。
现代文：二十九年春季，周王朝历法的正月， 公在楚 ，这是为了解释不在祖庙中举行听政的原因。
English: In the spring of the 29th year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, the public was held in Chu, which was to explain the reason for not holding political hearings in the ancestral temple.

古文：楚人使公亲襚，公患之。
现代文：楚国人让鲁襄公亲自为楚康王的尸体赠送寿衣，襄公对这感到忧虑。
English: The people of Chu asked Lu Xianggong to personally present the shroud for the body of King Chu Kang. Xianggong was worried about this.

古文：穆叔曰： 祓殡而襚，则布币也。 
现代文：穆叔说： 先扫除棺材的凶邪然后给死者赠送衣服，这就等于朝见时陈列皮币。 
English: Mu Xiu said: First, sweep away the evil of the coffin and then give clothes to the deceased, which is equivalent to displaying coins at the morning meeting.

古文：乃使巫以桃茢先祓殡。
现代文：于是就让巫人用桃棒、笤帚先在棺材上扫除不祥。
English: So he asked the sorcerer to use a peach stick and a pickaxe to sweep away the bad luck on the coffin.

古文：楚人弗禁，既而悔之。
现代文：楚国人没有禁止，不久以后又感到后悔。
English: The people of Chu did not ban it, but soon regretted it.

古文：二月癸卯，齐人葬庄公于北郭。
现代文：二月初六日，齐国人在外城北部安葬齐庄公。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, the people of Qi buried Qi Zhuang in the northern part of the city.

古文：夏四月，葬楚康王。公及陈侯、郑伯、许男送葬，至于西门之外。诸侯之大夫皆至于墓。
现代文：夏季，四月，安葬楚康王，鲁襄公和陈哀公、郑简公、许悼公都参加送葬，到达西门外边，各诸侯的大夫都到了墓地。
English: In the summer, in April, the funeral of King Chu Kang, Lu Xiangjun and Chen Aigong, Zheng Jiang and Xu Yougong all participated in the funeral, reaching the outside of the West Gate, and the doctors of all the princes came to the cemetery.

古文：楚郏敖即位。王子围为令尹。
现代文：楚国的郏敖即位，王子围做令尹。
English: The Emperor of Chu is enthroned, surrounded by princes.

古文：郑行人子羽曰： 是谓不宜，必代之昌。
现代文：郑国的使者子羽说： 这叫做不恰当，令尹必然要代替楚君而昌盛。
English: Zheng's emissary Zi Yu said: This is called inappropriate, so that Yin will inevitably replace Chu Jun and flourish.

古文：松柏之下，其草不殖。 
现代文：松柏的下面，草是不能繁殖的。 
English: Grass cannot grow under conifers.

古文：公还，及方城。
现代文：鲁襄公回来，到达方城山。
English: Lu Xianggong returned and arrived at Fangcheng Mountain.

古文：季武子取卞，使公冶问，玺书追而与之曰： 闻守卞者将叛，臣帅徒以讨之，既得之矣，敢告。 
现代文：季武子占领了卞地，派公冶来问候襄公，用封泥加印把信封好了追上去给了公冶，信上说： 听到戍守卞地的人打算叛变，下臣率领部下讨伐了他，已经得到卞地了，谨此报告。 
English: Ji Wuzi occupied Handan, sent Gongye to greet Prince Xiang, sealed the envelope with mud, and gave it to Gongye. The letter said: "I heard that the people of Handan were planning to rebel, and my subordinates led their men to fight him. I have obtained Handan, and I would like to report this."

古文：公冶致使而退，及舍而后闻取卞。
现代文：公冶表达了使命就退出去，到达帐篷以后才听到占领了卞地。
English: He expressed his mission and then left. It was only after he arrived at the tent that he heard that the camp had been occupied.

古文：公曰： 欲之而言叛，只见疏也。 
现代文：鲁襄公说： 想要这块地方而又说叛变，只能是对我表示疏远。 
English: Lu Xianggong said, "If you want this place and call it a rebellion, you can only alienate me.

古文：公谓公冶曰： 吾可以入乎？ 
现代文：鲁襄公对公冶说： 我可以进入国境吗？ 
English: Lu Xiang said to Gongye: Can I enter the border?

古文：对曰： 君实有国，谁敢违君！ 
现代文：公冶回答说： 君王据有国家，谁敢违背君王？ 
English: The courtier replied: A king has his country, who would dare to disobey the king?

古文：公与公冶冕服。固辞。强之而后受。
现代文：鲁襄公赐给公冶冕服，公冶坚决辞谢，勉强他，然后才接受了。
English: Prince Lu Xiang gave Gongye the coronation robe, but Gongye firmly declined, forcing him to accept it.

古文：公欲无入，荣成伯赋《式微》，乃归。五月，公至自楚。
现代文：鲁襄公想不进入国境，荣成伯赋《式微》这首诗，鲁襄公这才回国。
English: Lu Xiang Gong didn't want to cross the border, but Rongcheng Bofu's poem "Shi Wei" made Lu Xiang Gong return to China.

古文：公冶致其邑于季氏，而终不入焉。曰： 欺其君，何必使余？ 
现代文：五月，鲁襄公从楚国回来。公冶把他的封邑送还给季氏，而且始终不再进入季孙的家门，说： 欺骗他的国君，何必派我？ 
English: In May, Prince Lu Xiang returned from the State of Chu. He gave back his fief to the Ji clan, and never again entered the house of the Ji family, saying: "Why did you send me to deceive his sovereign?

古文：季孙见之，则言季氏如他日。
现代文：季孙和他见面，就和季孙像以前一样说话。
English: When Ji Sun met him, he spoke to Ji Sun as before.

古文：不见，则终不言季氏。
现代文：不相见，公冶始终不谈季氏。
English: Despite the disagreement, Gongye has never spoken about Ji.

古文：及疾，聚其臣，曰： 我死，必无以冕服敛，非德赏也。
现代文：等到公冶病危，聚集他的家臣，说： 我死了以后，一定不要用冕服入敛，因为这不是由于德行而所得的赏赐。
English: When the emperor was gravely ill, he gathered his courtiers and said, "After my death, you must not use the crown and robe to restrain yourself, for they are not the reward of virtue.

古文：且无使季氏葬我。 
现代文：并且还不要让季氏来安葬我。 
English: And don't let Ji come to bury me.

古文：葬灵王。
现代文：安葬周灵王。
English: The burial of King Zhou Ling.

古文：郑上卿有事，子展使印段往。
现代文：郑国的上卿子展有事不能离开，他派印段前去。
English: Shangqing Zicheng of Zheng could not leave for some reason, so he sent Huangdan to go.

古文：伯有曰： 弱，不可。 
现代文：伯有说： 年纪轻，不行。 
English: He said, "I'm too young, I can't."

古文：子展曰： 与其莫往，弱不犹愈乎？
现代文：子展说： 与其没有人去，尽管年轻，比没人去还要好一点吧？
English: Sub-exhibition said: Rather than no one going, although young, it's better than no one going, right?

古文：《诗》云： 王事靡盬，不遑启处。 
现代文：《诗》说： 王事应当细致，没有空闲安居。 
English: "Poetry" says: Royal affairs should be meticulous, there is no time for idleness.

古文：东西南北，谁敢宁处？
现代文：东西南北，谁敢安安稳稳地居住？
English: East, west, north and south, who dares to live safely and steadily?

古文：坚事晋、楚，以蕃王室也。
现代文：坚定地事奉晋国、楚国，用以捍卫王室。
English: He steadfastly served the states of Jin and Chu to defend the royal family.

古文：王事无旷，何常之有？ 
现代文：王事没有缺失，有什么常例不常例？ 
English: There is no shortage of royal affairs. What are the usual and unusual cases?

古文：遂使印段如周。
现代文：于是就派印段前去成周。
English: So he sent the printing section ahead to Cheng Chou.

古文：吴人伐越，获俘焉，以为阍，使守舟。
现代文：吴国人进攻越国，抓到了俘虏，让他做看门人，派他看守船只。
English: The Wu people attacked Yue, captured the prisoner, made him a porter, and sent him to guard the ship.

古文：吴子馀祭观舟，阍以刀弑之。
现代文：吴王馀祭观看船只，看门人用刀杀死了吴王。
English: After the festival, King Wu watched the boats. The gatekeeper killed King Wu with a sword.

古文：郑子展卒，子皮即位。
现代文：郑国的子展死，子皮即位为上卿。
English: Zheng's son Zhan died, and Zi Pei ascended to the throne as Shangnian.

古文：于是郑饥，而未及麦，民病。
现代文：当时郑国有饥荒而还没有到麦收，百姓很困乏。
English: At that time, there was a famine in Zhengzhou and the wheat harvest had not yet come, so the people were very poor.

古文：子皮以子展之命，饩国人粟，户一钟，是以得郑国之民。
现代文：子皮用子展的遗命把粮食赠给国内的人们，每户一钟，因此得到郑国百姓的拥护。
English: Zi Pei used Zishan's last wish to donate grain to people in the country, one hour per household, and therefore received the support of the people of Zheng.

古文：故罕氏常掌国政，以为上卿。
现代文：所以罕氏经常掌握国政，作为上卿。
English: That is why the Han clan has always been in charge of state affairs, as a high-ranking lord.

古文：宋司城子罕闻之，曰： 邻于善，民之望也。 
现代文：宋国的司城子罕听到了，说： 接近于善，这是百姓的期望。 
English: Shi Chengzihang of the Song Dynasty heard this and said, "Close to good, this is what the people expect.

古文：宋亦饥，请于平公，出公粟以贷。使大夫皆贷。
现代文：宋国也发生了饥荒，司城子罕向宋平公请求，拿出公家的粮食借给百姓，让大夫也都出借粮食。
English: There was also a famine in Song, and Sicheng Zihan asked Song Pingguo to lend grain from the public to the people, and let the doctors also lend grain.

古文：司城氏贷而不书，为大夫之无者贷。
现代文：司城氏借出粮食不写契约，又替缺少粮食的大夫借给百姓。
English: The Shicheng clan lent grain without writing a contract, and lent it to the people for the doctor who was short of grain.

古文：宋无饥人。
现代文：宋国没有挨饿的人。
English: There are no starving people in Song.

古文：叔向闻之，曰： 郑之罕，宋之乐，其后亡者也！
现代文：叔向听说了这件事，说： 郑国的罕氏，宋国的乐氏，大约是最后灭亡的啊，两家恐怕都要掌握政权吧！
English: Uncle Xiang heard about this and said, "The Han clan in Zhengzhou and the Le clan in Song will probably be the last to perish. I'm afraid both of them will seize power."

古文：二者其皆得国乎！
现代文：这是因为百姓归向他们的缘故。
English: This is because the people are turning against them.

古文：民之归也，施而不德，乐氏加焉，其以宋升降乎？ 
现代文：施舍而不自以为给人恩惠，乐氏就更高出一筹了，这一家大概是会随着宋国的盛衰而升降吧！ 
English: If you give alms without thinking that you are doing people a favour, you will be higher up the ladder. This family will probably rise and fall with the rise and fall of the Song Dynasty.

古文：晋平公，杞出也，故治杞。
现代文：晋平公，是杞女所生的，所以修整杞国的城墙。
English: Prince Jinping was born of a woman named Yao, so he repaired the city walls of Yao.

古文：六月，知悼子合诸侯之大夫以城杞，孟孝伯会之。
现代文：六月，知悼子会合诸侯的大夫为杞国筑城墙，孟孝伯参加了。
English: In June, Meng Xiao Bo took part in the meeting of doctors from various provinces to build a city wall for his country.

古文：郑子大叔与伯石往。
现代文：郑国的子太叔和伯石前去。
English: Zheng Guo's great-great-uncle and Bo Shi walked forward.

古文：子大叔见大叔文子，与之语。
现代文：子太叔见到太叔文子，和他说话。
English: His great-uncle saw his great-uncle Fumiko and spoke to him.

古文：文子曰： 甚乎！其城杞也。 
现代文：文子说： 为杞国筑城这件事过分了！ 
English: Fumiko said, "Building a city for my country is too much!

古文：子大叔曰： 若之何哉？
现代文：子太叔说： 拿他怎么办好啊！
English: The great-uncle said: "What should we do with him?

古文：晋国不恤周宗之阙，而夏肄是屏。其弃诸姬，亦可知也已。
现代文：晋国不担心周室的衰微，反而保护夏朝的残馀，它会丢弃姬姓诸国，也就可以想象到了。
English: Jin did not worry about the decline of the Zhou dynasty, but instead protected the remnants of the Xia dynasty. It could be imagined that Jin would discard Empress Zhou.

古文：诸姬是弃，其谁归之？
现代文：丢弃姬姓诸国，有谁去归向他？
English: Who would turn to him after abandoning his maiden name, Zhu Guo?

古文：吉也闻之，弃同即异，是谓离德。
现代文：吉听说：丢弃同姓而亲近异姓，这叫做离德。
English: Ji heard that: abandoning the same surname and getting close to a different surname, this is called leaving Germany.

古文：《诗》曰： 协比其邻，昏姻孔云。 
现代文：《诗》说： 和谐他的近亲，姻亲就会和他友好来往。 
English: "Poetry" says: "It is necessary to be on good terms with one's neighbors in order to be friendly with one's in-laws."

古文：晋不邻矣，其谁云之？ 
现代文：晋国把近亲不看作近亲，还有谁来和他友好往来？ 
English: Jin Province does not regard close relatives as close relatives, who else would have friendly relations with him?

古文：齐高子容与宋司徒见知伯，女齐相礼。宾出，司马侯言于知伯曰： 二子皆将不免。
现代文：齐国的高子容和宋国的司徒进见知伯，女齐作为相礼者，客人出去了，女齐对知伯说： 这两位将不免于祸。
English: Gao Zirong from Qi Province and Szeto from Song Province came to see Zhi Bo. Zi, as the best man, went out as a guest. Zi said to Zhi Bo, "These two will not be spared from disaster."

古文：子容专，司徒侈，皆亡家之主也。 
现代文：子容专权，司徒奢侈，都是使家族灭亡的大夫。 
English: Gao Zi Rong is domineering, and Sito is extravagant. They are both deceased.

古文：知伯曰： 何如？ 
现代文：知伯说： 怎么呢？ 
English: Zhibo said, "How come?"

古文：对曰： 专则速及，侈将以其力毙，专则人实毙之，将及矣。 
现代文：女齐回答说： 专横就会很快及于祸患，奢侈将会由于力量强大而死，专横别人就会要他的命，他将要及于祸患了。 
English: The woman replied: Arrogance will soon meet with disaster, luxury will die because of strong power, arrogant others will want his life, he will meet with disaster.

古文：范献子来聘，拜城杞也。
现代文：范献子来鲁国聘问，拜谢在杞国筑城。
English: Fan Xianzi came to Lu to ask for advice, and Bai Xie went on to build a city in Shandong.

古文：公享之，展庄叔执币。
现代文：鲁襄公设享礼招待他，展庄叔拿着束帛。
English: Lu Xiang set up a ceremony to invite him, and Uncle Zhan Zhuang came out holding a bunch of money.

古文：射者三耦，公臣不足，取于家臣。
现代文：参加射礼的要三对人。公臣的人选不够，在家臣中选取。
English: Three pairs of people are required to take part in the shooting ceremony. There are not enough candidates from the court officials, so they are selected from the vassals.

古文：家臣：展瑕、展玉父为一耦。公臣：公巫召伯、仲颜庄叔为一耦，鄫鼓父、党叔为一耦。
现代文：家臣，展暇、展王父作为一对，公臣，公巫召伯、仲颜庄叔作为一对，鄫鼓父、党叔作为一对。
English: The vassals, Zhan Zhaozhong and Zhan Wang Fuzhong as a pair, the courtiers, the court magicians, Zhao Bo and Zhong Yan Zhuang as a pair, the gong drum father and the party uncle as a pair.

古文：晋侯使司马女叔侯来治杞田，弗尽归也。
现代文：晋平公派司马女叔侯来鲁国办理使鲁国归还杞国土田的事情，但没有全部归还给杞国。
English: Jinping Gong sent Sima's female uncle Hou to Lu to arrange for Lu to return the land, but not all of it was returned to Lu.

古文：晋悼夫人愠曰： 齐也取货。先君若有知也，不尚取之！ 
现代文：晋悼公夫人很生气他说： 女齐办事不得力，先君如果有知，不会赞助他这样办事的。 
English: The wife of Emperor Jinmu was very angry. He said, "Women are not good at doing things together. If Emperor Jinmu had known, he would not have supported him in doing things this way."

古文：公告叔侯，叔侯曰： 虞、虢、焦、滑、霍、扬、韩、魏，皆姬姓也，晋是以大。
现代文：晋平公把这件事告诉了叔侯。叔侯说： 虞国、虢国、焦国、滑国、霍国、杨国、韩国、魏国，都是姬姓，晋国因此而扩大。
English: Prince Jinping told this to his uncle. The uncle said: Yu Guo, Ya Guo, Jiao Guo, Gao Guo, Huo Guo, Yang Guo, Han Guo, Wei Guo, are all surnames of Hime, and Jin Guo expanded as a result.

古文：若非侵小，将何所取？
现代文：如果不是入侵小国，将要从哪里取得？
English: If not by invading small countries, where are they going to get it from?

古文：武、献以下，兼国多矣，谁得治之？
现代文：武公、献公以来，兼并的国家就多了，谁能够治理它？
English: Since Wu Gong and Xing Gong, there have been more countries annexed, who can govern it?

古文：杞，夏馀也，而即东夷。
现代文：杞国，是夏朝的后代，而接近东夷。
English: Yunnan Province is a descendant of the Xia Dynasty, and is close to Dongyi.

古文：鲁，周公之后也，而睦于晋。
现代文：鲁国，是周公的后代，而和晋国和睦。
English: The state of Lu is a descendant of Zhou Gong, while the state of Jin is at peace.

古文：以杞封鲁犹可，而何有焉？
现代文：把杞国封给鲁国还是可以的，有什么杞国不杞国？
English: It is still possible to give the fiefdom of Min Guo to Lu Guo. What is Min Guo without Min Guo?

古文：鲁之于晋也，职贡不乏，玩好时至，公卿大夫相继于朝，史不绝书，府无虚月。
现代文：鲁国对于晋国，贡品不缺乏，玩物按时送到，公卿大夫不断前来朝见，史官没有中断过记载，国库没有一个月不接受鲁国的贡品。
English: As far as Jin was concerned, there was no shortage of tribute from Lu, the toys were delivered on time, the noble doctors kept coming to see the emperor, the historian did not interrupt the record, and the treasury did not accept the tribute from Lu for a month.

古文：如是可矣！何必瘠鲁以肥杞？
现代文：像这样就可以了，何必要损害鲁国而增强杞国？
English: It can be done like this. Why is it necessary to harm Lu and strengthen Han?

古文：且先君而有知也，毋宁夫人，而焉用老臣？ 
现代文：如果先君有知，就宁可让夫人自己去办，又哪里用得着我老臣？ 
English: If you know, you'd rather let your wife do it herself, and what do you need my old minister for?

古文：杞文公来盟。书曰 子 ，贱之也。
现代文：杞文公来鲁国结盟，《春秋》称他为 子 ，这是表示对他不尊重。
English: Emperor Wen made an alliance with Russia, and "Spring and Autumn" called him a son, which was a sign of disrespect to him.

古文：吴公子札来聘，见叔孙穆子，说之。
现代文：吴国的公子札来鲁国聘问，见到叔孙穆子，很喜欢他。
English: Wuzhong's prince Zada came to Lu to ask questions. When he saw his great-uncle Muzi, he liked him very much.

古文：谓穆子曰： 子其不得死乎？
现代文：对穆子说： 您恐怕不得善终吧！
English: To Muzo he said: I'm afraid you won't have a happy ending!

古文：好善而不能择人。吾闻 君子务在择人 。
现代文：喜欢善良而不能够选择贤人，我听说君子应当致力选择贤人。
English: I have heard that a gentleman should strive to choose a wise man.

古文：吾子为鲁宗卿，而任其大政，不慎举，何以堪之？
现代文：您做鲁国的宗卿而主持国政，不慎重举拔善人，怎么能受得了呢？
English: How can you, as the patriarch of the State of Lu, preside over the affairs of the State and carelessly promote good people?

古文：祸必及子！ 
现代文：祸患必然到您身上。 
English: Disaster will surely befall you.

古文：请观于周乐。
现代文：公子札请求聆听观看周朝的音乐和舞蹈。
English: The prince requested to listen to and watch Zhou Dynasty's music and dance.

古文：使工为之歌《周南》《召南》，曰： 美哉！
现代文：于是让乐工为他歌唱《周南》、《召南》。季札说： 美啊！
English: So he asked the musicians to sing "Zhou Nan" and "Zhao Nan" for him. Ji Fata said: Beautiful!

古文：始基之矣，犹未也。然勤而不怨矣。 
现代文：王业开始奠定基础了，还没有完善，然而百姓勤劳而不怨恨了。 
English: Wangye has begun to lay the foundation, not yet perfect, but the people are hardworking and not resentful.

古文：为之歌《邶》《鄘》《卫》，曰： 美哉，渊乎！
现代文：为他歌唱《邶风》、《邶风》、《卫风》之歌，他说： 美好又深沉啊！
English: Singing for him the songs of "Fengfeng," "Fengfeng" and "Weifeng," he said: "Beautiful and profound!

古文：忧而不困者也。
现代文：忧愁而不困惑。
English: Sad but not confused.

古文：吾闻卫康叔、武公之德如是，是其《卫风》乎？ 
现代文：我听说卫康叔、武公的德行就像这样，这大概就是《卫风》吧！ 
English: I've heard that the virtue of Uncle Wei Kang and Grand Duke Wu is like this. This is probably "The Winds of Wei," right?

古文：为之歌《王》，曰： 美哉！
现代文：为他歌唱《王风》之歌，他说： 美啊！
English: Singing the song "King Wind" for him, he said: "Beautiful!

古文：思而不惧，其周之东乎？ 
现代文：思虑而不恐惧，大概是周室东迁以后的音乐吧！ 
English: Thoughtfulness without fear, that's probably the music that's been playing since the Zhou family moved east!

古文：为之歌《郑》，曰： 美哉！
现代文：为他歌唱《郑风》之歌，他说： 美啊！
English: Singing the song "Zheng Feng" for him, he said: "Beautiful!

古文：其细已甚，民弗堪也，是其先亡乎！ 为之歌《齐》，曰： 美哉，泱泱乎，大风也哉！
现代文：但是它琐碎得太过分了，百姓不堪忍受了。这大概是郑国要先灭亡的原因吧！ 为他歌唱《齐风》之歌，他说： 美啊，多么宏大的声音呵！
English: But it was too trivial, and the people could not bear it. This is probably the reason why Zheng Guo was the first to perish! Singing the song "Qi Feng" for him, he said: "Beautiful, what a magnificent voice!"

古文：表东海者，其大公乎！
现代文：这是大国的音乐啊！作为东海的表率的，大概是太公的国家吧！
English: This is the music of a great power! As a role model for the East China Sea, it is probably the country of Taiko!

古文：国未可量也。 
现代文：国家前途是不可限量的。 
English: The future of this country is limitless.

古文：为之歌《豳》，曰： 美哉，荡乎！
现代文：为他歌唱《豳风》之歌，他说： 美啊，浩荡博大呵！
English: Singing for him the song from "The Wind Rises," he said: "Beauty, vastness and grandeur!

古文：乐而不淫，其周公之东乎？ 
现代文：欢乐而不过度，大概是周公东征的音乐吧！ 
English: Cheerful but not excessive, it's probably the music of Zhou Gong's Eastern Expedition!

古文：为之歌《秦》，曰： 此之谓夏声。
现代文：为他歌唱《秦风》之歌，他说： 这就叫做西方的夏声。
English: Singing the song of "Qin Feng" for him, he said: This is called the summer sound of the West.

古文：夫能夏则大，大之至也，其周之旧乎？ 为之歌《魏》，曰： 美哉，沨沨乎！
现代文：夏就是大，大到极点了，恐怕是周朝的旧乐吧！ 为他歌唱《魏风》，他说： 美啊！抑扬顿挫呵！
English: Summer is great, great to the extreme, I'm afraid it's the old music of the Zhou Dynasty! Singing "Wei Feng" for him, he said: Beautiful!

古文：大而婉，险而易行，以德辅此，则明主也。 
现代文：宏亮而又婉转，艰难而流畅，再用德行加以辅助，就是贤明的君主了。 
English: Magnificent yet gentle, difficult yet smooth, and supported by virtue, he is a wise monarch.

古文：为之歌《唐》，曰： 思深哉！
现代文：为他歌唱《唐风》，他说： 思虑很深啊！
English: Singing "Tang style" for him, he said, "You are very thoughtful!

古文：其有陶唐氏之遗民乎？
现代文：大概有陶唐氏的遗民吧？
English: Could it be that they are the remaining residents of the Tao Tang District?

古文：不然，何忧之远也。
现代文：否则，为什么那么忧深思远呢？
English: Otherwise, why so gloomy and far-sighted?

古文：非令德之后，谁能若是？ 
现代文：不是美德者的后代，谁能像这样？ 
English: Who but the progeny of the virtuous could be like this?

古文：为之歌《陈》，曰： 国无主，其能久乎？ 
现代文：为他歌唱《陈风》，他说： 国家没有主人，难道能够长久吗？ 
English: Singing "The Old Style" for him, he said: "Can a country exist for long without a master?

古文：自《郐》以下无讥焉。
现代文：从《郐风》以下的诗歌，季札听了就没有评论了。
English: After listening to poems from "Fury of the Wind" onward, Ji Zha had no comment.

古文：为之歌《小雅》，曰： 美哉！
现代文：乐师为他歌唱《小雅》，他说： 美啊！
English: Musicians sang "Little Pretty" for him, and he said: "Beautiful!

古文：思而不贰，怨而不言，其周德之衰乎？
现代文：忧愁而没有背叛的心，怨恨却不表现在语言中，恐怕是周朝德行衰微的乐章吧！
English: Sorrow but no betrayal of the heart, resentment but not expressed in the language, I'm afraid it's the decaying music of the Zhou Dynasty!

古文：犹有先王之遗民焉。 
现代文：还有先王的遗民啊。 
English: There are also the remnants of the former king.

古文：为之歌《大雅》，曰： 广哉，熙熙乎！
现代文：为他歌唱《大雅》，他说： 广博啊，和美呵！
English: Singing "Daya" for him, he said: "Oh, the vastness, the beauty!

古文：曲而有直体，其文王之德乎？ 
现代文：抑扬顿挫而本体刚健劲直，大概是文王的德行吧！ 
English: It is probably the virtue of King Wen that his body is strong and vigorous, even though he is often frustrated.

古文：为之歌《颂》，曰： 至矣哉！
现代文：为他歌唱《颂》，他说： 到达顶点了！
English: Singing "Ode" for him, he said: "It's come to a climax!

古文：直而不倨，曲而不屈，迩而不偪，远而不携，迁而不淫，复而不厌，哀而不愁，乐而不荒，用而不匮，广而不宣，施而不费，取而不贪，处而不底，行而不流，五声和，八风平，节有度，守有序，盛德之所同也。 
现代文：正直而不倨傲，婉柔而不屈挠，亲近而不相逼，疏远而不离心，活泼而不邪乱，反复而不厌倦，哀伤而不忧愁，欢乐而不过度，常用而不匮乏，宽广而不显露，施舍而不浪费，收取而不贪婪，静止而不停滞，行进而不流荡。五声和谐，八风协调。节奏有一定的规律，乐器都按次序，这都是盛德之人所共同具有的。 
English: Honest but not arrogant, gentle but not inflexible, close but not pressing, distant but not centrifugal, lively but not chaotic, repetitive but not tiring, sad but not melancholy, joyful but not excessive, common but not scarce, broad but not revealing, charitable but not wasteful, receiving but not greedy, still but not stagnant, marching but not wandering. Five-voice harmony, eight-wind coordination. The rhythm has a certain regularity, the musical instruments are in order, which are all common to the people of Shengde.

古文：见舞《象箾》《南籥》者，曰： 美哉！犹有憾。 
现代文：公子札看到跳《象箾》、《南籥》舞，说： 美啊，但还有所遗憾。 
English: When the prince saw the "Zhongyao" and "Nanjing" dances, he said, "It's beautiful, but I still have some regrets."

古文：见舞《大武》者，曰： 美哉！
现代文：看到跳《大武》舞，说： 美啊！
English: When he saw the "Great Warrior" dance, he said: "Beautiful!

古文：周之盛也，其若此乎？ 
现代文：周朝兴盛的时候，大概就像这种情况吧！ 
English: When the Zhou Dynasty flourished, it was probably like this!

古文：见舞《韶濩》者，曰： 圣人之弘也，而犹有惭德，圣人之难也。 
现代文：看到跳《韶濩》舞，说： 像圣人那样的弘大，尚且还有所惭愧，可见当圣人不容易啊！ 
English: Seeing Hongda dancing the "Dragonfly" dance, he said, "It's not easy to be a saint like Hongda, who is like a saint, even though he still has some shame.

古文：见舞《大夏》者，曰： 美哉！
现代文：看到跳《大夏》舞，说： 美啊！
English: When they see the "Big Summer" dance, they say: "Beautiful!"

古文：勤而不德，非禹其谁能修之？ 
现代文：勤劳而不自以为有德，如果不是禹，还有谁能做到呢？ 
English: If not Yu, who else can do it?

古文：见舞《韶箾》者，曰： 德至矣哉！
现代文：看到跳《韶箾》舞，说： 功德到达顶点了，伟大啊！
English: When he saw the "Gong" dance, he said, "Gongde has reached the pinnacle, great!

古文：大矣，如天之无不帱也，如地之无不载也，虽甚盛德，其蔑以加于此矣。观止矣！
现代文：像上天的没有不覆盖，像大地的没有不承载。盛德到达顶点，就不能再比这更有所增加了，聆听观看就到这里了。
English: Like the sky, there is nothing that does not cover, like the earth, there is nothing that does not carry. When virtue reaches its peak, it cannot be increased any more than this, listening and watching are here.

古文：若有他乐，吾不敢请已！ 
现代文：如果还有别的音乐，我不敢再请求欣赏了。 
English: If there were any other music, I would not dare to ask to enjoy it.

古文：其出聘也，通嗣君也。故遂聘于齐，说晏平仲，谓之曰： 子速纳邑与政！
现代文：公子札的出国聘问，是为了新立的国君通好的缘故，因此就到齐国聘问，喜欢晏平仲，对他说： 您赶快交还封邑和政权。
English: The reason why Prince Fuda went abroad to ask questions was for the goodwill of the newly established sovereign. Therefore, he went to Qi Province to ask questions. He liked Zou Pingzhong and said to him, "You should quickly return the fief and political power."

古文：无邑无政，乃免于难。
现代文：没有封邑没有政权，这才能免于祸难。
English: Without these two things, you will not be able to avoid disaster.

古文：齐国之政，将有所归，未获所归，难未歇也。 
现代文：齐国的政权将会有所归属，没有得到归属，祸难不会停止。 
English: The regime in Qi will be owned and not owned, and the calamity will not stop.

古文：故晏子因陈桓子以纳政与邑，是以免于栾、高之难。
现代文：所以晏子通过陈桓子交还了政权和封邑，因为这样，而免于栾氏、高氏发动的祸难。
English: Therefore, through Chen Huan Zi, Yao Zi returned the political power and fiefdoms, and because of this, he was spared the calamity unleashed by the Yao clan and the Gao clan.

古文：聘于郑，见子产，如旧相识，与之缟带，子产献纻衣焉。谓子产曰： 郑之执政侈，难将至矣！
现代文：季札到郑国聘问，见了子产，好像老朋友一般。季札给子产赠送白绢大带，子产给季札献上麻布衣服，公子札对子产说： 郑国的执政者奢侈，祸难将要来临了！
English: Kizza came to Zheng to ask questions, and when he saw Zisang, he seemed to be an old friend. Kizza presented Zisang with a white satin belt, Zisang presented Zisang with linen clothes, and Zisang said to Zisang: The ruler of Zheng is extravagant, and disaster is coming!

古文：政必及子。
现代文：政权必然落到您手中。
English: The government will inevitably fall into your hands.

古文：子为政，慎之以礼。
现代文：您执政，要用礼来谨慎地处事。
English: When you are in power, you should use propriety to act prudently.

古文：不然，郑国将败。 
现代文：否则，郑国将会败亡。 
English: Otherwise, Zheng will be defeated.

古文：適卫，说蘧瑗、史狗、史、公子荆、公叔发、公子朝，曰： 卫多君子，未有患也。 
现代文：季札到达卫国，与蘧瑗、史狗、史、公子荆、公叔发、公子朝谈得很投机，他说： 卫国有很多贤能的君子，不会有什么祸患。 
English: When Ji Zha arrived at the Northern Capital, he had a very speculative conversation with Zhai, Shigou, Shi, Gongzi Jing, Gongzhu Fa, and Gongzi Dynasty. He said: There are many virtuous gentlemen in the Northern Capital, and there will be no disaster.

古文：自卫如晋，将宿于戚。闻钟声焉，曰： 异哉！
现代文：公子札从卫国去晋国，准备在戚地住宿。听到钟声，说： 奇怪啊！
English: Prince Fuda went to Jin Province from the old country and was preparing to stay with relatives. Hearing the bells, he said, "How strange!

古文：吾闻之也： 辩而不德，必加于戮。 
现代文：我听说了，发动变乱而没有德行，必然遭到诛戮。
English: I've heard it said that if you start a riot and don't have any morals, you're bound to get killed.

古文：夫子获罪于君以在此，惧犹不足，而又何乐？
现代文：这一位就在这地方得罪国君，害怕还来不及，又有什么可以寻欢作乐的？
English: This one has offended the sovereign in this very place. It's too late to be afraid. What is there to be happy about?

古文：夫子之在此也，犹燕之巢于幕上。
现代文：这一位在这地方，就像燕子在帐幕上做窝。
English: This one in this place is like a swallow making a nest in a tent.

古文：君又在殡，而可以乐乎？ 
现代文：国君又正停棺还没有安葬，难道可以寻欢作乐吗？ 
English: The Emperor is still in the coffin and has not yet been buried. Is it possible to have fun?

古文：遂去之。
现代文：于是就不住在戚地。
English: So he left.

古文：文子闻之，终身不听琴瑟。
现代文：孙文子听到了这番话，一辈子不再听音乐。
English: Sun Wenzi heard the words of Ji Fata and stopped listening to music for the rest of his life.

古文：適晋，说赵文子、韩宣子、魏献子，曰： 晋国其萃于三族乎！ 
现代文：公子札到了晋国，喜爱赵文子、韩宣子、魏献子，说： 晋国的政权大约要聚集在这三家了！ 
English: When the prince arrived in Jin, he loved Zhao Wenzi, Han Xuan Zi, and Wei Xian Zi, and said, "The political power of Jin is about to gather in these three families!"

古文：说叔向，将行，谓叔向曰： 吾子勉之！
现代文：他喜爱叔向，离别时，对叔向说： 您努力吧！
English: He loved Uncle Xiang, and when he was leaving, he said to Uncle Xiang: You should work hard!

古文：君侈而多良，大夫皆富，政将在家。
现代文：国君奢侈而优秀的臣子很多，大夫都富有，政权将要归于大夫家。
English: There are many extravagant and excellent vassals of the sovereign, the doctors are rich, and the political power will belong to the doctor family.

古文：吾子好直，必思自免于难。 
现代文：您好直话直说，一定要考虑使自己免于祸难。 
English: To put it bluntly, you must consider saving yourself from disaster.

古文：秋九月，齐公孙虿、公孙竈放其大夫高止于北燕。
现代文：秋季，九月，齐国的公孙虿、公孙灶放逐他们的大夫高止到北燕。
English: In the autumn, in September, Gongsun Yao and Gongsun Zhao of Qi Province exiled their doctor Gaozhou to Beiyan.

古文：乙未，出。
现代文：初二日，出国。
English: On the first two days, he left the country.

古文：书曰： 出奔。 罪高止也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 出奔 ，这是由于高止有罪。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that he ran away because Gao Zuo was guilty.

古文：高止好以事自为功，且专，故难及之。
现代文：高止喜欢生事，而且自己居功，同时又专横，所以祸难到了他身上。
English: Gao Zuo likes to make trouble, and he takes credit for it, and at the same time he is domineering, so the calamity has fallen on him.

古文：冬，孟孝伯如晋，报范叔也。
现代文：冬季，孟孝伯去到晋国，这是回报范叔的聘问。
English: In winter, Meng Xiao Bo went to Jin Province, which was a return to Uncle Fan's request.

古文：为高氏之难故，高竖以卢叛。
现代文：由于高氏受到放逐的缘故，高竖在卢地发动叛乱。
English: As a result of Gao's exile, Gao Zhizhi launched a rebellion in Ludi.

古文：十月庚寅，闾丘婴帅师围卢。
现代文：十月二十七日，闾丘婴带兵包围卢地。
English: On October 27th, the soldiers of the Mengqiu Infants' Brigade surrounded Ludi.

古文：高竖曰： 苟使高氏有后，请致邑。 
现代文：高竖说： 如果让高氏有后代，我请求把封邑交还给国君。 
English: Gao Zhizhe said: If the Gao clan has descendants, I request that the fief be returned to the sovereign.

古文：齐人立敬仲之曾孙酀，良敬仲也。
现代文：齐国人立了敬仲的曾孙酀，这是认为敬仲贤良。
English: The people of Qi established the great-grandson of Jianzhong, which was considered to be virtuous.

古文：十一月乙卯，高竖致卢而出奔晋，晋人城绵而寘旃。
现代文：十一月二十三日，高竖归还卢地而逃亡到晋国，晋国人在绵地筑城，把他安置在那里。
English: On November 23rd, Gao Zhili returned to Ludi and fled to Jin. The people of Jin built a city in Mandi and placed him there.

古文：郑伯有使公孙黑如楚，辞曰： 楚、郑方恶，而使余往，是杀余也。 
现代文：郑国的伯有派公孙黑去楚国，公孙黑不肯去，说： 楚国和郑国正在关系不好，互相憎恨，而派我去，这是等于杀死我。 
English: The nobles of Zheng sent Gongsun Hei to Chu, but Gongsun Hei refused to go, saying, "The relationship between Chu and Zheng is not good, they hate each other, and to send me would be tantamount to killing me."

古文：伯有曰： 世行也。 
现代文：伯有说： 你家世世代代都是办外交的。 
English: Bo You said: Your family has been engaged in diplomacy for generations.

古文：子晳曰： 可则往，难则已，何世之有？ 
现代文：公孙黑说： 可以去就去，有困难就不去，有什么世世代代是办外交的。 
English: Gongsun Hei said, "If you can go, go; if you have difficulties, don't go. It is up to each generation to conduct diplomacy."

古文：伯有将强使之。
现代文：伯有要强迫他去。
English: Bo has to force him to go.

古文：子晳怒，将伐伯有氏，大夫和之。
现代文：公孙黑发怒，准备攻打伯有氏，大夫们为他们调和。
English: The grandson was furious and prepared to attack Mr. Bo You. The doctors reconciled the situation for them.

古文：十二月己巳，郑大夫盟于伯有氏。
现代文：十二月初七日，郑国的大夫们在伯有家里结盟。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th lunar month, the doctors of Zheng Guo made an alliance at Bo You's home.

古文：裨谌曰： 是盟也，其与几何？
现代文：裨谌说： 这次结盟，它能管多久呢？
English: "How long will this alliance last?

古文：《诗》曰： 君子屡盟，乱是用长。 
现代文：《诗》说： 君子多次结盟，动乱因此滋长。 
English: "Poetry" said: Nobles have allied many times, and turmoil has grown as a result.

古文：今是长乱之道也。祸未歇也，必三年而后能纾。 
现代文：现在这样是滋长动乱的做法，祸乱不能停止，一定要三年然后才能解除。 
English: Now this is the way to breed turmoil, the scourge cannot be stopped, it must be three years before it can be lifted.

古文：然明曰： 政将焉往？ 
现代文：然明说： 政权将会到哪家去？ 
English: Yan Ming said: Where will the regime go?

古文：裨谌曰： 善之代不善，天命也，其焉辟子产？
现代文：裨谌说： 好人代替坏人，这是天命，政权哪能避开子产？
English: "Good people will replace bad people. This is the destiny of heaven. How can the regime avoid having children?

古文：举不踰等，则位班也。
现代文：如果不是越级提拔别人，那么按班次也应该子产执政了。
English: If others are not promoted beyond their grade, then it should be the children who are in power according to their shift.

古文：择善而举，则世隆也。
现代文：选择贤人而提拔，这是为大家所尊重的。
English: It is respected by all to choose the wise and promote them.

古文：天又除之，夺伯有魄。子西即世，将焉辟之？
现代文：上天又为子产清除障碍，使伯有丧失了精神，子西又去世了，执政的人只有子产不能辞其责。
English: Heaven also cleared the obstacles for Zibo, so that Bo You lost his spirit, Zixi died again, and only Zibo could not be held responsible by the people in power.

古文：天祸郑久矣，其必使子产息之，乃犹可以戾。
现代文：上天降祸于郑国很久了，一定要让子产平息它，国家才可以安定。
English: It has been a long time since the heavens have brought disaster to Zheng Guo. We must let the children's products calm it down before the country can be stable.

古文：不然，将亡矣。 
现代文：不这样，就将会灭亡了。 
English: Otherwise, it will perish.

