古文：李浑，字季初，赵郡柏人人也。
现代文：李浑，字季初，赵郡柏人人。
English: Li Hun, at the beginning of the word season, Zhao County Bai Ren.

古文：曾祖灵，魏巨鹿公。
现代文：曾祖父李灵，为魏巨鹿公。
English: His great-grandfather, Li Ling, was a Wei giant deer.

古文：父遵，魏冀州征东府司马，京兆王愉冀州起逆，遇害。
现代文：父亲李遵，为魏冀州征东府司马，京兆王元愉在冀州反叛，杀害了李遵。
English: His father, Li Zun, was the Sima of Wei and Jizhou's campaign to conquer the eastern prefecture, and Jing Zhao Wang Yuan Yu rebelled in Jizhou and killed Li Zun.

古文：浑以父死王事，除给事中。
现代文：李浑因父亲为王事而死，被授任给事中。
English: Because his father died for the royal cause, Li Hun was given the post of vice-regent.

古文：时四方多难，乃谢病，求为青州征东府司马。
现代文：当时四方多难，便称病辞官，要求任青州征柬府司马。
English: At that time, it was difficult for the four parties, so they called the sick leave officer and asked to be appointed as the secretary of the Qingzhou conscription office.

古文：与河间邢邵、北海王昕俱奉老母、携妻子同赴青、齐。
现代文：与河间邢邵、北海王听均侍奉老母、携妻子儿女同赴青、齐。
English: He served his old mother with Kawama Shishao and Hokkai Wanghu, and went to the Qing Dynasty with his wife and children.

古文：未几而尔朱荣入洛，衣冠歼尽。
现代文：不久而尔朱荣入洛，作官的人全部杀尽。
English: Soon after, Er Zhu Rong entered Luo and killed all the officials.

古文：论者以为知机。
现代文：评论这件事的人认为李浑有预见。
English: Commentators on the matter believe that Li Hun had foresight.

古文：永安初，除散骑常侍。
现代文：永安初年，任散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he was appointed as a samurai.

古文：普泰中，崔社客反于海岱，攻围青州。
现代文：普泰年间，崔社客在海岱谋反，围攻青州。
English: During the Putai era, Cui Shake led a rebellion in Haizhu and besieged Qingzhou.

古文：诏浑为征东将军、都官尚书，行台赴援。
现代文：韶李浑为征东将军、都官尚书、行台赴援。
English: Gong Lihun was a general in charge of conquering the East, a government official in charge of official documents, and went to Taiwan to help.

古文：而社客宿将多谋，诸城各自保，固壁清野。
现代文：而社客为久经沙场的多谋老将，众城各自保守，坚壁清野。
English: However, social customers are long-suffering and resourceful veterans of the battlefield, each city is conservative, and the walls are clear.

古文：时议有异同。
现代文：当时商议攻打的策略不一致。
English: At that time, the attack strategy was not consistent.

古文：浑曰： 社客贼之根本，围城复逾晦朔。
现代文：李浑说： 社客为贼人的根本，围城又超过一月。
English: Li Hun said: Social guests are the root of thieves, and the siege has been going on for more than a month.

古文：乌合之众，易可崩离。
现代文：乌合之众，容易崩溃。
English: In a crowd, it's easy to fall apart.

古文：若简练骁勇，衔枚夜袭，径趣营下，出其不意，咄嗟之间，便可擒殄。
现代文：如果挑选骁勇士卒，衔枚夜间偷袭，直奔营下，出其不意，瞬息之间便可擒拿消灭。
English: If you choose a group of brave soldiers, sneak attack at night, go straight to the camp, surprise them, they can be captured and eliminated in a flash.

古文：如社客就擒，则诸郡可传檄而定。
现代文：如社客捕获，那么众郡传檄文就可以平定。
English: If the social guest is captured, then the counties can be pacified.

古文：何意冒热攻城，疲损军士。 
现代文：为何冒暑攻城，使军士疲惫。 
English: Why attack the city in the heat, making the sergeant tired.

古文：诸将迟疑，浑乃决行。
现代文：众将迟疑不决，李浑就决定执行。
English: The generals hesitated, but Li Hun decided to carry it out.

古文：未明，达城下，贼徒惊散，生擒社客，斩首送洛。
现代文：天没亮，到达城下，贼众惊散，生擒社客，斩下首级，送往洛。
English: After dark, when they reached the city, the thieves dispersed in panic. The surviving members of the community had their heads chopped off and were sent to Luo.

古文：海隅清定。
现代文：海隅平定。
English: Kaisumi has been pacified.

古文：后除光禄大夫，兼常侍，聘使至梁。
现代文：后任光禄大夫，兼常侍，出使到梁。
English: Later, he served as a doctor of Guanglu, and also as a regular attendant, and was sent to Liang.

古文：梁武谓之曰： 伯阳之后，久而弥盛，赵李人物，今实居多。
现代文：梁武对他说： 老子之后，久而愈盛，赵李人物，今很多。
English: Liang Wu said to him: After Lao Zi, Zhao Li became more and more prosperous. There are many Zhao Li figures now.

古文：常侍曾经将领，今复充使，文武不坠，良属斯人。 
现代文：您曾经为将领，今又充任使臣，文武俱佳，实属此人。 
English: You used to be a general, and now you are a minister. You are good at literature and martial arts. You really belong to this person.

古文：使还，为东郡太守，以赃征还。
现代文：出使回来，为束郡太守，因贪脏召回。
English: He was sent back to serve as the governor of Shokugun, but was recalled for corruption.

古文：世宗使武士提以入，浑抗言曰： 将军今日犹自礼贤耶？ 
现代文：世宗让武士将他架入朝中，李浑抗争说： 将军今天还礼待贤士吗? 
English: Shizong asked the samurai to place him in the middle of the court, and Li Hun protested, saying, "Does the general still treat the wise men with courtesy today?"

古文：世宗笑而舍之。
现代文：世宗笑而放了他。
English: Sejong laughed and let him go.

古文：天保初，除太子少保。时邢邵为少师，场愔为少傅，论者为荣。
现代文：天保初年，任太子少保，邢邵为少师，杨惰为少傅，谕者以为荣耀。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Ren Taizi was promoted to Shao Bao, Zou Shao was promoted to Shao Shi, Yang Lian was promoted to Shao Fu, and the oracle thought it was an honor.

古文：以参禅代仪注，赐爵泾阳县男。
现代文：因以佛教禅宗修持方法取代测天的法式，赐予泾阳县男的爵位。
English: For replacing the French method of measuring the sky with the Buddhist Zen practice method, he was given the title of the highest-ranking man in Shenyang County.

古文：删定《麟趾格》。
现代文：删定《麟趾格》。
English: "Lindy" has been deleted.

古文：寻除海州刺史。
现代文：不久任海州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Haizhou.

古文：土人反，共攻州城。
现代文：土人反叛，共同攻打州城。
English: The natives rebelled and jointly attacked the state capital.

古文：城中多石，无井，常食海水。
现代文：城中地下多石，没有井，常年饮海水。
English: There are many rocks underground in the city, and there is no well, so people drink seawater all year round.

古文：贼绝其路。
现代文：贼断绝取水道路。
English: Thieves cut off the water supply.

古文：城内先有一池，时旱久涸，一朝天雨，泉流涌溢。
现代文：城内原有一池，当时干旱早已干涸，一天早上下雨，泉水喷涌溢出。
English: There used to be a pond in the city, but by that time the drought had long since dried up. One morning it rained, and the spring water gushed out.

古文：贼以为神，应时骇散。
现代文：贼人认为有神，立即惊散。
English: The thieves thought they were in the presence of a god and immediately dispersed.

古文：浑督励将士，捕斩渠帅。
现代文：李浑督促鼓励将士，捕杀首领。
English: Li Hongdu urged to encourage soldiers to hunt down and kill leaders.

古文：浑妾郭氏在州干政纳货，坐免官。
现代文：李浑妾郭氏在州参与政事，接纳财物，连坐免去官职。
English: Li Hun's concubine, the Guo clan, took part in politics in the state, accepted property, and was removed from office.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子湛，字处元。
现代文：子李湛，宇处元。
English: His son, Li Zhan, became the prime minister.

古文：涉猎文史，有家风。
现代文：广阅文史书籍，有家庭遣风。
English: He reads a lot of literature and history books and has a family tradition.

古文：为太子舍人，兼常侍，聘陈使副。
现代文：为太子舍人，兼任常侍，出使陈为副使。
English: He was the prince's concubine, and also served as an aide-de-camp, and Chen, the envoy, was the deputy envoy.

古文：袭爵泾阳县男。
现代文：继承泾阳县男爵位。
English: He succeeded to the barony of Fenyang County.

古文：浑与弟绘、纬俱为聘梁使主，湛又为使副，是以赵郡人士，目为四使之门。
现代文：李浑舆弟李绘、李纬全是出使梁的主使，李湛又为副使，因此趟郡人士，称为四使之门。
English: Li Hun's younger brothers, Li Miao and Li Wei, were the chief envoys of Liang, and Li Zhan was the deputy envoy, so the people who went to the county were called the four gatekeepers.

古文：绘，字敬文。
现代文：李绘，字敬文。
English: Li painting, the word "Jingwen."

古文：年六岁，便自愿入学，家人偶以年俗忌，约而弗许。
现代文：六岁时，便自愿入学，家裹人因为忌讳偶年上学的风俗，阻止而没有同意。
English: At the age of six, he voluntarily enrolled in school, but his family did not agree because they did not approve of the custom of attending school twice a year.

古文：伺其伯姊笔牍之间，而辄窃用，未几遂通《急就章》。
现代文：伺其叔伯姐姐写字之际，就偷着使用，不久就通晓了《急就章》。
English: When her uncle's sister was writing, she secretly used it, and soon became familiar with the "Emergency Chapter."

古文：内外异之，以为非常儿也。
现代文：家内家外的人都对此感到惊异，认为他是一个非同寻常的小孩。
English: People inside and outside the family were amazed and thought he was an unusual child.

古文：及长，仪貌端伟，神情朗隽。
现代文：到年长，仪貌端庄魁伟，神情爽朗英俊。
English: When he is older, his appearance is dignified and dignified, and he has a cheerful and handsome appearance.

古文：河间邢晏，即绘舅也，与绘清言，叹其高远。
现代文：河间邢晏，就是李绘的舅父。舆李绘清谈玄理，赞叹其志向高远。
English: Kawama Minoru, is the uncle of Li Miao. Miao Li Miao talks about metaphysics, and admires his lofty aspirations.

古文：每称曰： 若披云雾，如对珠玉，宅相之寄，良在此甥。 
现代文：每每称赞说： 好像拨开云雾，如同珠玉相配，住宅风水之相的寄托，实在此外甥。 
English: "It's like clearing away the clouds, like matching jewels. The foundation of the residential feng shui phase is actually in this nephew."

古文：齐王萧宝夤引为主簿记室，专管表檄，待以宾友之礼。
现代文：齐王萧宝夤举荐为主簿记室，专管上表和檄文，用宾友之礼对待他。
English: Xiao Baojun, the king of Qi, was recommended as the main bookkeeping office. He was in charge of the upper table and the obituary, and he was treated as a friend.

古文：司徒高邕辟为从事中郎，征至洛。
现代文：司徒高邕征召为从事中郎，召至洛。
English: Sito Takahiro was conscripted to serve as churo, and was called to Kyoto.

古文：时敕侍中西河王、秘书监常景选儒学十人缉撰五礼，绘与太原王又同掌军礼。
现代文：当时奉皇帝之命侍中西河王、秘书监常景选拔儒家学者十人编辑撰写五礼，李绘与太原王义共同掌管军礼的编撰。
English: At that time, by order of the emperor, Zhong Xihe Wang, the secretary and supervisor of Changjing, selected ten Confucian scholars to edit and write the Five Rites. Li Miao and Taiyuan Wang Yi were jointly in charge of compiling the military etiquette.

古文：魏静帝于显阳殿讲《孝经》、《礼记》，绘与从弟骞、裴伯茂、魏收、卢元明等俱为录议。
现代文：魏静帝在颢阳殿讲《孝经》、《礼记》，奎绘与从弟李蹇、裴伯茂、魏收、卢元明等全都作绿议。
English: Emperor Wei Jing recited "The Book of Filial Piety" and "The Book of Etiquette" in Fenyang Hall, and Quibao and his younger brothers Li Xi, Pei Bo Mao, Wei Jie, and Lu Yuanming were all present for the discussion.

古文：素长笔札，尤能传受，缉缀词议，简举可观。
现代文：李绘素来擅长写作，尤其善于传授，编辑缀合言词议论，简要周全。
English: Li Miao has always been good at writing, especially good at teaching, editing words and phrases, concise and thorough.

古文：天平初，世宗用为丞相司马。
现代文：天平初年，世宗任用为丞相司马。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, Sejong was appointed as chancellor Sima.

古文：每罢朝，文武总集，对扬王庭，常令绘先发言端，为群僚之首。
现代文：每当罢朝，文武官员会集，在王廷面君奏对，时常让李绘首先发言，是群僚的首领。
English: Whenever there was a war, the civil and military officials would gather, and in the royal court, they would play a game of face-to-face, often letting Li Miao speak first. He was the leader of the group.

古文：音辞辩正，风仪都雅，听者悚然。
现代文：音辞辩正，风度仪表都很高雅，听的人都很吃惊。
English: His speech was eloquent, his manners and appearance were very elegant, and everyone who heard him was surprised.

古文：武定初，兼常侍，为聘梁使主。
现代文：武定初年，兼任常侍，任出使梁的主使。
English: In the first year of Wuding, he also served as a regular attendant and was appointed as the chief envoy of the envoy Liang.

古文：梁武帝问绘： 高相今在何处？ 
现代文：梁武帝问李绘： 高相今在哪裹? 
English: Liang Wudi asked Li Pu: Where is Gao Xiang now?

古文：绘曰： 今在晋阳，肃遏边寇。 
现代文：李绘说： 今在晋阳，严禁边境的敌寇。 
English: Li Miao said: Now in Jinyang, it is strictly forbidden to cross the border.

古文：梁武曰： 黑獭若为形容？高相作何经略？ 
现代文：梁武说： 黑獭如果进行活动，高相作什么谋划? 
English: Liang Wu said, "If the Black Dragonfly carries out activities, what will the high priests plan to do?

古文：绘曰： 黑獭游魂关右，人神厌毒，连岁凶灾，百姓怀土。
现代文：李绘说： 黑獭在关右游荡，入神憎恨，连年灾害，百姓怀恋故土。
English: Li Peng said: "The Black Kite is wandering in Guanzhu, hated by the gods, plagued by disasters year after year, and the people are nostalgic for their homeland.

古文：丞相奇略不世，畜锐观衅，攻昧取亡，势必不远。 
现代文：丞相奇略非凡，蓄养锐气，窥伺敌人的间隙，攻取昏乱无道、自找灭亡者，为时一定不远。 
English: The time is not far off when you will be able to see strange and extraordinary things, keep up your spirits, spy on the enemy's gaps, and capture those who are confused and have no way out, and seek their own destruction.

古文：梁武曰： 如卿言极佳。 
现代文：梁武说： 如果像您所讲的，很好。 
English: Liang Wu said, "If it plays out as you said, it's fine.

古文：与梁人泛言氏族，袁狎曰： 未若我本出自黄帝，姓在十四之限。 
现代文：同梁人广泛地谈论氏族。袁狎说： 不像我本出自黄帝，姓在十四个之内。 
English: He and Liang were chatting about the issue of clans. Yuan Shao said, "It's not like I'm after the Yellow Emperor. I'm one of the 14 descendants of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：绘曰： 兄所出虽远，当共车千秋分一字耳。 
现代文：李绘说： 兄所出与我虽然很远，应当都是车千秋分一字罢了。 
English: Li Peng said: Although my brother and I are very far apart, it should be just a stone's throw away.

古文：一坐大笑。
现代文：满座大笑。
English: Those present heard loud laughter.

古文：咸以为化感所致，皆请申上。
现代文：前后的使者，都通书信要求作买卖，李绘独自恪守清尚，梁人很看重他的廉洁。
English: Envoys both before and after sent him letters asking him to do business, but Li Wei was the only one who adhered to cleanliness. Liang people highly valued his cleanliness.

古文：绘曰： 猛兽因斗而毙，自是偶然，贪此为功，人将窥我。 
现代文：出使回来，授任平南将军、高阳内史。郡境内过去有猛兽，百姓一直忧虑这件事。李绘想修栅栏，于是猛兽因争斗而死。都认为是感化所致，请求报告皇上。
English: Li Zui said, "The ferocious beasts died as a result of fighting each other. By chance, I will be looked down upon if I take credit for this.

古文：竟不听。
现代文：李绘不允许。
English: Li painting is not allowed.

古文：高祖东巡郡国，在瀛州城西驻马久立，使慰之曰： 孤在晋，知山东守唯卿一人用意。
现代文：高祖到东方巡视郡国，在瀛州城西停马久立，派人慰问他诳： 我在晋，知道山东郡守衹有你一个人用心。
English: Gao Zu went to the east to inspect the county, and stopped at Ma Jiuling in the west of Zhangzhou City, and sent someone to console him: I am in Jin, and I know that Shandong County Shouyi has your sole attention.

古文：及入境观风，信如所闻。
现代文：到了入境观风，确如所闻。
English: When we arrived at the port of entry, the scene was exactly as we had heard.

古文：但善始令终，将位至不次。 
现代文：祇要善始善终，将会破格晋升。 
English: If you have a good start and a good finish, you will be promoted to a higher level.

古文：河间守崔谋恃其弟暹势，从绘乞麋角鸰羽。
现代文：河间郡守崔谋依仗他弟弟崔暹的权势，向李绘讨取麋角鸰羽。
English: The governor of Kawama County, Cui Mu, relied on the power of his younger brother, Cui Siam, to negotiate with Li Miao to get the horns and feathers.

古文：绘答书曰： 鸰有六翮，飞则冲天，麋有四足，走便入海。
现代文：李绘回信说： 鸰有六根长羽毛，飞即冲天，麋有四条腿，跑便入海。
English: Li Peng wrote back, "The dragonfly has six long feathers and flies up to the sky. The dragonfly has four legs and runs into the sea.

古文：下官肤体疏懒，手足迟钝，不能逐飞追走，远事佞人。 
现代文：下官我肢体懒散，手脚迟钝，不能追赶飞禽走兽，事奉远方的小人。 
English: Subordinate officer, my limbs are lazy, my hands and feet are sluggish, I can't chase birds and beasts, and I serve a dwarf from far away.

古文：是时世宗使暹选司徒长史，暹荐绘，既而不果，咸谓由此书。
现代文：此时世宗让崔暹选拔司徒长史，崔暹举荐了李绘，事后没有结果，都说是由于逭封信。
English: At this time, Shizong asked Cui Siem to select Shitu Changshi, Cui Siem recommended Li Pu, but there was no result after the fact, and it was all said to be due to Yu's letter.

古文：天保初，为司徒右长史。
现代文：天保初年，为司徒右长史。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed to the post of Shtuu choshi.

古文：绘质性方重，未尝趋事权势，以此久而屈沉。
现代文：李绘品德方正持重，不曾趋炎附势，因此长久地被埋没。
English: Li Yipin and De Fangzheng held a lot of weight, and did not tend to be inflamed, so they were buried for a long time.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：赠南青州刺史，谥曰景。
现代文：全遏，字曲，奎运同族兄奎藉之子。
English: Zeng Jian, Zi Qu, son of Kuiyun's older brother, Kuiyuan.

古文：公绪，字穆叔，浑族兄籍之子。性聪敏，博通经传。
现代文：天性聪明敏捷，博通经传。
English: Smart and agile by nature, with a broad knowledge of the classics.

古文：魏末冀州司马，属疾去官。
现代文：魏末为冀州司马，托病辞去官职。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, Jizhou Sima resigned from his post due to illness.

古文：后以侍御史征，不至，卒。
现代文：后召为侍御史，没有到任，去世。
English: Later, he was summoned to be an attendant to the Emperor, but he did not arrive at the post and died.

古文：公绪沉冥乐道，不关世务，故誓心不仕。
现代文：公铐沉迷于修道，不关心世事，所以决心不作官。
English: Public officials indulge in religious practice, do not care about worldly affairs, so they are determined not to be officials.

古文：尤善阴阳图纬之学。
现代文：尤其善于阴阳图纬乏学。
English: He is especially good at the study of yin and yang.

古文：尝语人云： 吾每观齐之分野，福德不多，国家世祚，终于四七。 
现代文：曾经对人说： 我每次观察齐厘的分野，福德不多，国家命运终于二十八年。 
English: I once said to a person: Every time I observe the field of Qi Li, there is not much merit, and the fate of the country is finally 28 years.

古文：及齐亡之岁，上距天保之元二十八年矣。
现代文：到查亡那一年，上距型星元年二十八年。
English: To the year of the death of the investigation, the year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the twenty-eight years.

古文：公绪潜居自待，雅好著书，撰《典言》十卷，又撰《质疑》五卷，《丧服章句》一卷，《古今略记》二十卷，《玄子》五卷，《赵语》十三卷，并行于世。
现代文：公绪以隐居看待自己，很爱著书，撰《典言》十卷，又撰《质疑》五卷，《丧服章句》一卷，《古今略记》二十卷，《玄子》五卷，《趟语》十三卷，都流传于世。
English: He loved to write. He wrote ten volumes of "Analects," five volumes of "Questioning," one volume of "The Funeral Chapter," twenty volumes of "A Brief History of the Past and the Present," five volumes of "The Xuan Zi" and thirteen volumes of "The Journey," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：李玙，字道璠，陇西成纪人，凉武昭王暠之五世孙。
现代文：李琐，字道墦，陇西成纪人，凉武昭王李嵩的五世孙。
English: Li Zhao, the fifth generation grandson of Li Song, the King of Liangwuzha, was born in the west of Shaanxi.

古文：父韶，并有重名于魏代。
现代文：父亲李韶，都在魏代有名望。
English: His father, Li Xi, was a famous star in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：玙温雅有识量。
现代文：李琅温文典雅，有见识和度量。
English: Li Yanwen is an elegant writer, insightful and measured.

古文：释褐太尉行参军，累迁司徒右长史。
现代文：始任官职为太尉行参军，几次升迁任司徒右长史。
English: His first official position was that of a captain in the army, and he was promoted several times to the position of chief historian.

古文：及迁都于邺，留于后，监掌府藏，及撤运宫庙材木，以明干见称。
现代文：及迁都到邺，留任于后方，监管府库，以及撤运宫庙的材木，以精明强干著称。
English: and moved the capital to Handan, remaining in the rear, supervising the treasury, as well as the removal of timber from the palace and temple. He was known for his shrewdness.

古文：累迁骠骑大将军、东徐州刺史。
现代文：多次升迁任骠骑大将军、束徐州刺史。
English: He was promoted several times to the post of grand general of cavalry and became the leader of the Xuzhou cavalry.

古文：解州还，遂称老疾，不求仕。
现代文：免去州郡的官职还乡，于是自称年老多病，不求为官。
English: He was exempted from the state and county official position and returned to his hometown. Therefore, he claimed to be old and sick, and did not seek an official position.

古文：齐受禅，进玙兼前将军，导从于圆丘行礼。
现代文：齐承受帝位，追命召李琉兼前将军，跟随皇帝在圆丘行礼。
English: Qi assumed the imperial throne, summoned Li Liuqian, a former general, and followed the emperor to perform a salute on the round mound.

古文：玙意不愿策名两朝，虽以宿旧被征，过事即绝朝请。
现代文：李琐内心不愿在两个朝代作官，虽然以老臣被征，遇了此事就辞绝了朝廷的召请。
English: In his heart, Li Zuo did not want to serve as an official in two dynasties. Although he was conscripted as an old minister, he refused the invitation of the imperial court.

古文：天保四年卒。
现代文：天保四年去世。
English: Tenpo died four years later.

古文：子诠、韫、诵。
现代文：儿子李诠、李祖。
English: His sons are Li Yan and Li Zu.

古文：韫无行。
现代文：李诵、李祖品行不端。
English: Li Ch'ing and Li Zu's conduct was improper.

古文：诵以女妻穆提婆子怀廆，超迁临漳令、仪同三司。
现代文：李诵将女儿给穆提婆的儿子怀魔作妻子，破例升任临漳令、仪同三司。
English: Li Qiao married his daughter to Huai Ma, the son of Muti Bao, and was exceptionally promoted to the posts of Linyi Rong, Yi Tong San Si.

古文：韫与陆令萱女弟私通，令萱奏授太子舍人。
现代文：李租与陆令萱的妹妹私通，令萱奏请授予太子舍人的官职。
English: Li Reng had an affair with Lu Lingyao's younger sister, and Lingyao requested that the crown prince give her an official position.

古文：弟瑾，字道瑜，名在魏书。
现代文：弟弟李瑾，字道瑜，其名在《魏书》上有记载。
English: His younger brother, Li Yu, also known as Daoyu, is mentioned in the "Weishu."

古文：才识之美，见称当代。
现代文：才学之美，为当时称赞。
English: The beauty of talent was praised at the time.

古文：瑾六子，彦之、倩之、寿之、礼之、行之、凝之，并有器望。
现代文：李瑾有六个儿子，产之、倩之、寿之、礼之、行之、凝之，都有才具和名望。
English: Li Yao had six sons, including Zang Zi, Zang Zi, Shou Zi, Li Zi, Xing Zi and Jian Zi, all of whom were talented and famous.

古文：行之与兄弟深相友爱，又风素夷简，为士友所称。
现代文：行之与兄弟深相友爱又具有风采素养，平易质朴，为士人和朋友称赞。
English: He and his brothers are deeply in love with each other and have a refined style, plain and simple, and are praised by scholars and friends.

古文：范阳卢思道是其舅子，尝赠诗云： 水衡称逸人，潘杨有世亲，形骸预冠盖，心思出风尘。 
现代文：范阳卢思道是他舅舅的儿子，曾经赠诗说： 水衡称逸人，潘、杨有世亲，形骸预冠盖，心思出风尘。 
English: Fan Yang Lu Sidao was the son of his uncle. He once said in a poem: "Water balance is said to be excellent, Pan and Yang have relatives, the shape of the skeleton is pre-crowned, and the wind and dust come out of the mind."

古文：时人以为实录。
现代文：当时的人认为是符合实际的记载。
English: People at the time believed it to be an accurate account.

古文：玙从弟晓，字仁略。
现代文：李琉叔伯弟弟李晓，字仁略。
English: Uncle Li Liu's younger brother, Li Xiao, abbreviated as Ren.

古文：魏太尉虔子。
现代文：魏太尉李虔的儿子。
English: He was the son of Wei Tai Li Qian.

古文：学涉有思理。
现代文：广学博览，有思辩能力。
English: Broadly educated, with the ability to reason.

古文：释褐员外侍郎。
现代文：开始作官为员外侍郎。
English: He began his career as a chamberlain.

古文：尔朱荣之害朝士，将行，晓衣冠为鼠所噬，遂不成行，得免河阴之难。
现代文：氽朱荣杀害朝廷官员，将出发，李晓的衣服、帽子被老鼠所咬，就没有走成，得以免除河阴之难。
English: Zhai Zhu Rong killed the imperial official and was about to set out. Li Xiao's clothes and hat were bitten by rats, so he did not make it and was able to avoid the difficulties of the river.

古文：及迁都邺，晓便寓居清河，托从母兄崔悛宅。
现代文：到迁都邺，李晓便寓居清河，寄住在姨表兄长崔棱的宅院中。
English: After moving to Duduo, Li Xiao lived in Qinghe and stayed in the courtyard of his aunt's cousin, Cui Ren.

古文：给良田三十顷，晓遂筑室安居，训勖子侄，无复宦情。
现代文：供给良田三十顷，李晓于是建房安居，教导勉励子侄，不再有作官的心绪。
English: After providing 30 hectares of good farmland, Li Xiao built a house to live in, taught and encouraged his son and nephew, and was no longer in the mood to be an official.

古文：武定末，以世道方泰，乃入都从仕。
现代文：武定末年，因世道平安，就进京作官。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he entered Beijing to work as an official due to the peacefulness of the world.

古文：除顿丘守，卒。
现代文：任顿丘守，去世。
English: Ren Dongqiu Gu, passed away.

古文：郑述祖，字恭文，荥阳开封人。
现代文：郑述祖，字恭文，荣阳开封人。
English: Zheng Shuzu, Zi Gongwen, Rongyang Kaifeng people.

古文：祖羲，魏中书令。
现代文：祖父郑羲，任魏中书令。
English: His grandfather, Zheng Yao, was a Wei-Zhong Shuling.

古文：父道昭，魏秘书监。
现代文：父亲郑道昭，任魏秘书监。
English: His father, Zheng Dao Zhao, was a secretary and supervisor in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：述祖少聪敏，好属文，有风检，为先达所称誉。
现代文：述祖从小聪明敏捷，好写文章，有风纪，为先贤所称赞。
English: The narrator's ancestor was smart and agile from a young age, good at writing articles, disciplined, and praised by the sages.

古文：释褐司空行参军。
现代文：开始作官为司空行参军。
English: He began to join the army as an officer.

古文：天保初，累迁太子少师、仪同三司、兖州刺史。
现代文：天保初年，几次升迁任太子少师、仪同三司、兖州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted several times to the position of the young prince's teacher, the third secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：时穆子容为巡省使，叹曰： 古人有言： 闻伯夷之风，贪夫廉，懦夫有立。 
现代文：当时穆子容为巡省使，赞叹说： 古人有这样的话： 聆听伯夷的美德，贪夫变得廉洁，懦夫也能立身。 
English: At that time, Mu Zirong was the provincial inspector, and he said with admiration: The ancients had this to say: Listen to the virtue of Bo Yi, the greedy man becomes incorruptible, and the coward can stand up.

古文：今于郑兖州见之矣。 
现代文：今天从郑兖州身上见到了这种情况。 
English: This is what we saw from Zheng Bozhou today.

古文：初，述祖父为光州，于城南小山起斋亭，刻石为记。
现代文：起初述祖父亲为光州刺史，在城南小山上建起供斋祀用的亭子，刻石为记。
English: At first, it was said that the ancestor's father was a Gwangju historian and built a pavilion on a hill in the south of the city for religious services, which is recorded in stone.

古文：述祖时年九岁。
现代文：述祖当时九岁。
English: He was nine years old at the time.

古文：及为刺史，往寻旧迹，得一破石，有铭云： 中岳先生郑道昭之白云堂。 
现代文：到作刺史，前往访寻遗迹，得到一块破损的石头，上有铭文说： 中岳先生郑道昭之白云堂。 
English: To make history, went to visit the ruins, got a broken stone, there is an inscription saying: Zhongyue Mr. Zheng Dao Zhao's Baiyun Hall.

古文：述祖对之呜咽，悲动群僚。
现代文：述祖对着它呜咽，悲痛之情感动群僚。
English: The narrator sobs at it, and the emotion of grief moves his colleagues.

古文：有人入市盗布，其父怒曰： 何忍欺人君！ 
现代文：有人入市盗布，他的父亲发怒说： 怎么忍心欺负他人! 
English: When someone entered the city to steal cloth, his father angrily said, "How dare you bully others!

古文：执之以归首，述祖特原之。
现代文：抓送他自首，述祖破例宽恕了他。
English: He was arrested and turned himself in, but the patriarch pardoned him as an exception.

古文：自是之后，境内无盗。
现代文：从此以后，境内没有盗贼。
English: Since then, there have been no thieves in the country.

古文：人歌之曰： 大郑公，小郑公，相去五十载，风教犹尚同。 
现代文：人们歌颂他们说： 大郑公，小郑公，相距五十年，风俗教化还一样。 
English: People sing their praises and say: "Big Zheng Gong, little Zheng Gong, fifty years apart, the customs and education are still the same."

古文：述祖能鼓琴，自造《龙吟十弄》，云尝梦人弹琴，寤而写得。
现代文：述祖能弹琴，自己创作《龙吟十弄》，说是曾经梦见有人弹琴，醒来写成。
English: The narrator's ancestor could play the piano and wrote "Dragon Chanting" himself, saying that he once dreamed of someone playing the piano and woke up to write it.

古文：当时以为绝妙。
现代文：当时认为绝妙。
English: I thought it was brilliant at the time.

古文：所在好为山池，松竹交植。盛馔以待宾客，将迎不倦。
现代文：所在之地喜欢造山池，松竹交错种植，用丰盛的酒食招待宾客，送往迎来毫不疲倦。
English: The place where it is located likes mountain pools, staggered planting of pine and bamboo, inviting guests with rich wine and food, and sending them to usher in without tiring.

古文：未贵时，在乡单马出行，忽有骑者数百，见述祖皆下马，曰 公在此 ，行列而拜。
现代文：没有富贵时，在乡间独马出行，忽然有骑马的人数百，见到述祖都下马，说 您在这裹 ，排成行列下拜。
English: When he was not rich and famous, he used to travel around the countryside on horseback. Suddenly, there were hundreds of people on horseback. When he saw them dismount, he said, "You are here," and they lined up to bow down.

古文：述祖顾问从人，皆不见，心甚异之。
现代文：述祖回头问跟随的人，都说没有见到，心裹非常奇怪造件事。
English: When the narrator looked back and asked his followers, they all said that they had not seen it, and that it was a very strange thing to do.

古文：未几备征，终历显位。
现代文：不久被征，最终历任显贵的官位。
English: He was soon conscripted and eventually rose through the ranks of the nobility.

古文：及病笃，乃自言之。
现代文：到病重，才自己讲逭件事。
English: I didn't tell anyone until I was very ill.

古文：且曰： 吾今老矣，一生富贵足矣，以清白之名遗子孙，死无所恨。 
现代文：而且说： 我现在老了，一生富贵已满足了，把清白的名声留给子孙，死了也没有遗憾。 
English: And he said: I am now old, I have had enough of being rich, I will leave my clean reputation to my children and grandchildren, and I have no regrets when I die.

古文：遂卒于州。
现代文：于是在光州去世。
English: He died in Gwangju.

古文：述祖女为赵郡王睿妃。
现代文：述祖的女儿为赵郡王高教的妃子。
English: The daughter of the narrator's ancestor was the concubine of Wang Gaoqing of Zhao County.

古文：述祖常坐受王拜，命坐，王乃坐。
现代文：述祖经常坐着接受赵郡王的拜礼，让坐，王才坐。
English: The narrator's ancestor often sat to receive Zhao Guo Wang's worship. Let him sit, and only then will the king sit.

古文：妃薨后，王更娶郑道荫女。王坐受道荫拜，王命坐，乃敢坐。
现代文：妃去世后，王又娶郑道荫之女，趟郡王坐着接受道荫的拜礼，王让坐，才敢坐。
English: After the death of his wife, the king married the daughter of Zheng Daoying, and the county king sat to receive Daoying's worship. The king only dared to sit when he was asked to do so.

古文：王谓道荫曰： 郑尚书风德如此，又贵重宿旧，君不得譬之。 
现代文：王对道荫说： 郑尚书风范德行如此，又是尊贵的老臣，您不能比他。 
English: Wang said to Daoying: Zheng Shang's style of writing is so virtuous, and he is also a distinguished old minister. You cannot be better than him.

古文：子元德，多艺术，官至琅邪守。
现代文：儿子元德，多技艺，官至琅邪守。
English: His son, Yuan De, was a multi-skilled, highly respected official.

古文：元德从父弟元礼，字文规。
现代文：元德从父弟元礼，字文规。
English: The origin of German is from the father and brother, the origin of German is from the father and brother, the origin of German is from the word.

古文：少好学，爱文藻，有名望。
现代文：年少好学，喜爱文采。有名望。
English: Young and eager to learn, loves literature. Famous.

古文：世宗引为馆客，历太子舍人。
现代文：世宗征引为门客，任太子舍人。
English: Sejong was enlisted as a disciple, and was appointed crown prince.

古文：崔昂妻，即元礼之姊也，魏收又昂之妹夫。
现代文：崔显的妻子，就是五擅的姐姐，苏监又是崔昂的妹夫。
English: Cui Xian's wife is Wu Xan's sister, and Su Guan is Cui Ang's brother-in-law.

古文：昂尝持元礼数篇诗示卢思道，乃谓思道云： 看元礼比来诗咏，亦当不减魏收？ 
现代文：崔昂曾经持元礼数篇诗给卢思道看，对思道说： 看元礼近来诗作，也当不次于魏收? 
English: Cui Ang once showed Lu Sidao several poems of the Yuan Dynasty, and said to Sidao, "Looking at the recent poems of the Yuan Dynasty, shouldn't it be second only to the Wei Dynasty?

古文：答云： 未觉元礼贤于魏收，但知妹夫疏于妇弟。 
现代文：回答说： 不觉得元礼比魏收贤能，衹知道妹夫比妇弟疏漏。 
English: He replied, "I don't think the Yuan Dynasty was more virtuous than the Wei Dynasty, but I know that a brother-in-law is better than a sister-in-law.

古文：元礼入周，卒于始州别驾。
现代文：元礼到周代，在始州别驾的官职上去世。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty, he died in the official position of the First Prefect of the State.

