古文：大星火灾水灾僧一行汪凤僧普满秦城芭蕉睿陵僧兴圣观骆驼杖
现代文：大星火灾水灾僧一行汪凤僧普满秦城芭蕉睿陵僧兴圣观骆驼杖
English: Great Star Fire Flood Monk Wang Feng Monk Pu Man Qin City Basho Rui Ling Monk Xing Shengkun Camel Cane

古文：大星
现代文：大星
English: Big Star

古文：唐开元二年五月二十九日夜，大流星如瓮。或如盆大者，贯北斗，并西北落。
现代文：唐朝开元二年五月二十九日的晚上，有一个大流星象瓮那样大，还有象盆那样大的，贯北斗星，都坠落在西北方。
English: On the evening of May 29th, the second year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a large meteor as big as a dragonfly and as big as an elephant basin, which penetrated the Big Dipper and fell in the northwest.

古文：小者随之无数。天星尽摇，至晓乃止。
现代文：小的跟着落下来的有无数个，天上的星星全都摇动了。到天亮时才停止。
English: Many small ones fell with it, and all the stars in the sky were shaken, and it was not until daybreak that it stopped.

古文：七月，襄王崩，谥殇帝。
现代文：七月襄王死了，死后给 殇帝 称号。
English: In July, King Xiang died, and after his death, the title was given to Emperor Xizong.

古文：十月，吐蕃入陇右，掠羊马，杀伤无数。
现代文：十月吐蕃进入了陇右，掠夺羊马，死伤了无数。
English: In October, the Tujia entered the right bank of the Yangtze River and plundered the sheep and horses, causing countless deaths and injuries.

古文：其年六月，大风拔树发屋，长安街中树，连根出者十七八。长安城初建，隋将作大匠高颖所植槐树，殆三百余年，至是拔出。
现代文：这年的六月，大风将大树和房屋都给刮倒了，长安街上的树，连根拔出的十棵中就有七八棵，长安城刚开始建设时，隋将高颖领头所种植的槐树，大概有三百多年了。到这时被连根拔出。
English: In June of this year, a strong wind brought down large trees and houses. Of the ten trees on Chang'an Street, seven or eight were uprooted. When the construction of Chang'an City began, the eucalyptus trees planted by Sui general Gao Ying were about three hundred years old. At this time, they were uprooted.

古文：终南山竹，开花结子，绵亘山谷，大小如麦。
现代文：终南山的竹子，开花结子，布满整个山谷，大小就象是麦粒。
English: At the end of the Nanshan, the bamboo, the flowering buds, covered the entire valley, the size of which was like a grain of wheat.

古文：其岁大饥，其竹并枯死。
现代文：那年天下闹饥荒，那些竹子也都枯萎而死。
English: That year, there was a famine, and all the bamboo withered and died.

古文：岭南亦然。
现代文：岭南的也是这样。
English: It's the same in Lingnan.

古文：人取而食之，醴泉雨面，如米颗，人可食之。
现代文：人们都拿它来吃，醴泉下了面粉，象米粒，人可以吃它。
English: People use it to eat, and flour comes out of it like grains of rice, so people can eat it.

古文：后汉襄楷云：国中竹柏枯者，不出三年，主当之。人家竹结实枯死者，家长当之。
现代文：后汉襄楷说： 国里的竹柏枯萎时，不出三年，国主当死，人家的竹子结了子而枯死的，家长当死。 
English: Later, Han Xiangkai said: When the bamboo and cypresses in a country wither, within three years, the head of the country should die, other people's bamboo should wither and die, and the parents should die.

古文：终南竹花枯死者，开元四年而太上皇崩。
现代文：终南山的竹子开花而枯死了，果然在开元四年的时候太上皇驾崩了。
English: The bamboo of Nanshan finally bloomed and withered, and the Emperor died in the fourth year of the first year of the reign.

古文：火灾
现代文：火灾
English: The fire

古文：开元五年，洪潭二州，复有火灾。
现代文：开元五年，洪潭二州都发生了火灾。
English: In the first five years of the year, fires occurred in two counties of Hongtan.

古文：昼日，人见火精赤燩燩，所诣即火起。
现代文：白天有人看见有火精红而干燥燥的，火精所到的地方就起了大火。
English: During the day, someone saw a reddish, dry flame, and a fire broke out in the area where the flame came from.

古文：东晋时，王弘为吴郡太守，亦有此灾。弘挞部人，将为不慎。
现代文：东晋的时候，王弘做吴郡的太守，也发生了这样的火灾，王弘就用鞭子打他的部下，认为他们做事不小心。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, when Wang Hong was the governor of Wu County, a similar fire occurred. Wang Hong whipped his subordinates, believing that they were careless in their work.

古文：后坐厅事，见一物赤如信幡，飞向人家舍上，俄而火起。
现代文：后来王弘在大厅处理事务，看见了一个东西红得象指挥行动的旗帜，飞到了人家的屋上，不一会就起了大火。
English: Later, Wang Hong was dealing with matters in the lobby, saw something red like a command action banner, flew to the roof of someone's house, and a fire broke out soon after.

古文：方知变不复由人，遭爇人家，遂免笞罚。
现代文：才明白了发生的火灾不是由于人引起的。遭点燃的人家，于是免除了鞭打的惩罚。
English: Only then did he understand that the fire was not caused by a person. The man's house was set on fire, and he was exempted from the punishment of whipping.

古文：水灾
现代文：水灾
English: Floods

古文：唐开元八年，契丹叛。
现代文：唐朝开元八年的时候，契丹叛乱，关中派兵救援营府。
English: In the eighth year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, when the Khitan rebelled, Guanzhong sent soldiers to rescue the camp.

古文：关中兵救营府，至渑池缺门，营于穀水侧。夜半水涨，漂二万余人。
现代文：到了渑池的城门，驻扎在穀水的旁边。半夜里突然涨水，淹死了二万多人。
English: They arrived at the city gate of Dianchi and stationed themselves next to the grain water. In the middle of the night, the water suddenly rose, drowning more than twenty thousand people.

古文：唯行纲夜樗蒲不睡，接高获免。
现代文：只有行纲夜樗蒲不曾睡，他就上高处才幸免没有淹死。
English: It was only when he climbed to higher ground that he was able to avoid drowning.

古文：村店并没尽，上阳宫中水溢，宫人死者十七八。
现代文：村店全被淹没，上阳宫里水满外流，宫里的人被淹死的十个里就有七八个。
English: The village shops were all flooded, the water in the Shangyang Palace was overflowing, and seven or eight out of ten people in the palace were drowned.

古文：其年，京兴道坊一夜陷为池，没五百家。
现代文：那年京城的兴道坊，一夜之间就塌陷变成了池塘，淹死了五百家。
English: That year, Jingcheng's Xingdaofang collapsed overnight and turned into a pond, drowning 500 families.

古文：初邓州三鸦口见二小儿以水相泼；须臾，有大蛇十围已上，张口向天。
现代文：当初在邓州的三鸦口看见有两个小孩用水互相泼洒。不一会，有一条大蛇有十围多长，张着大口向着天。
English: At first, I saw two children splashing each other with water in Sanraikou, Denzhou. Soon, there was a big snake with a circumference of more than ten meters, with its large mouth open to the sky.

古文：人或有斫射者，俄而云雨晦冥，雨水漂二百家。
现代文：就有人砍射它，不久乌云满天大雨倾盆，天昏地暗，大水漂流淹死了二百多家。
English: Someone shot at it, and soon dark clouds covered the sky and heavy rain fell. The sky was dark, and more than two hundred people were drowned by the rushing water.

古文：小儿及蛇，不知所在。
现代文：那小孩和蛇都不知道哪里去了。
English: The child and the snake are both missing.

古文：僧一行
现代文：僧一行
English: The monk and his entourage

古文：唐开元十五年，一行禅师临寂灭，遗表云：他时慎勿以宗子为相，蕃臣为将。
现代文：唐朝开元十五年的时候，一行禅师临死的时候，曾给皇帝留下了一封信说： 有一天，千万不要用宗子做相，蕃臣做将。 
English: In the fifteenth year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, when the Zen master I Ching was on the verge of death, he left a letter to the emperor saying, "One day, don't use your son-in-law as your heir, but use your vassal as your successor."

古文：后李林甫擅权于内，安禄山弄兵于外，东都为贼所陷。
现代文：后来李林甫在朝庭内独揽大权，安禄山在朝庭外发动兵变，东都被逆贼所攻破。
English: Later, Li Linfu monopolized power in the imperial court, An Lushan launched a mutiny outside the imperial court, and both were defeated by the traitors.

古文：天宝中，乐人及闾巷好唱胡《渭州》，以回纥为破。
现代文：天宝年间，那些乐人以及里巷都喜欢唱胡地的《渭州》曲，唱回纥为 破 音。
English: During the Tenpo era, those musicians and the people in the alleys liked to sing Hu Di's "Luzhou" song, singing back to the gong as a breaking sound.

古文：后逆胡兵马，竟被回纥击破。
现代文：后来逆胡安禄山的兵马，竟然被回纥所打败。
English: Later, the invading soldiers and horses of the Juanlu Mountains were actually defeated by the Hui.

古文：国风兴废，潜见于乐音。
现代文：因此说国家形势的好坏，在乐音里可以暗示出来。
English: Therefore, the good or bad of a country's situation can be hinted at in its music.

古文：时两京小儿，多将钱摊地，于穴中更争胜负，名曰投胡。
现代文：当时两京的小孩，大多数喜欢把钱摆在地上，在穴中争夺胜负。并把这种做法叫做 投胡 。
English: At that time, most children in Beijing and Beijing liked to put money on the ground and compete for victory in the hole. And they called this practice "throwing mud."

古文：后士庶果投身于胡庭。
现代文：以后士大夫和庶民果然投身到了胡庭。
English: After that, the shidafu and the common people really threw themselves into the battle.

古文：两京童谣曰： 不怕上兰单，唯愁答辩难。
现代文：两京有童谣说： 不怕上兰单，唯愁答辩难。
English: There is a nursery rhyme in the two capitals that says: Don't be afraid of being singled out, it's just hard to defend yourself.

古文：无钱求案典，生死任都官。 
现代文：无钱求案典，生死任都官。 
English: No money to ask for a case file, life or death to be a government official.

古文：及克复，诸旧僚朝士，系于三司狱，鞠问罪状，家产罄尽，骨肉分散，申雪无路，即其兆也。
现代文：等到夺回了被占领的地方，那些从前的官吏及士大夫们被绑在了三司狱，审讯罪状，最后他们是倾家荡产、妻离子散，无路申冤雪耻。这就是那童谣所预兆的啊。
English: When the occupied areas were recaptured, those former officials and scholars were tied up in the Third Division Prison, tried for their crimes, and in the end, they lost their homes, their wives, and had no way to redress their grievances. This is what the nursery rhyme foreshadowed.

古文：汪凤
现代文：汪凤
English: Wang Feng

古文：唐苏州吴县甿汪凤，宅在通津，往往怪异起焉。
现代文：唐朝苏州吴县有个农民叫汪凤，他的住宅在通津。在那里常常发生一些奇怪的事情。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a farmer named Wang Feng in Suzhou's Wuxian County. His residence was in Tongjin. Strange things often happened there.

古文：不十数年，凤之妻子洎仆使辈，死丧略尽。
现代文：不到十多年的时间，汪凤的妻子、孩子，以及家里的仆人等，几乎全死了。
English: In less than ten years, Wang Feng's wife, children, and household servants were almost all dead.

古文：凤居不安，因货之同邑盛忠。
现代文：汪凤感到住在这里很不太平，于是就把它卖给了同城里一个叫盛忠的人。
English: Wang Feng felt uneasy living here, so he sold it to a man named Sheng Zhong in the same city.

古文：忠居未五六岁，其亲戚凋陨，又复无几。
现代文：盛忠住了没有五六年的时间，他的亲戚又死了不少。
English: Moritada lived for less than five or six years, and many of his relatives died.

古文：忠大忧惧，则损其价而摽货焉。吴人皆知其故，久不能售。
现代文：盛忠十分忧愁害怕，就想降低价钱便宜卖出，可是吴人都知道是什么原因，所以很长时间没有卖出去。
English: Sheng Zhong was very sad and afraid, so he wanted to lower the price and sell it cheaply, but the people of Wu all knew what the reason was, so he did not sell it for a long time.

古文：邑胥张励者，家富于财，群从强大，为邑中之蠹横，居与忠同里。
现代文：城里有个叫张励的人，家里很有钱。跟从他的人多，势力很强大，是城里有名的坏蛋，他横行霸道，和盛忠住邻居。
English: There was a man in the city named Zhang Li, whose family was very rich. He had many followers and was very powerful. He was a notorious villain in the city. He was domineering and lived next door to Sheng Zhong.

古文：每旦诣曹，路经其门，则遥见二青气，粗如箭竿，而紧锐彻天焉。
现代文：他每天到官署去上班，都要经过盛忠的门前。一天他远远的看见了盛忠的宅院里有两股青气，象箭杆那样粗，而且密接无间直贯长空。
English: Every day, when he went to work at the government office, he had to pass in front of Sheng Zhong's door. One day, he saw from a distance that there were two streams of youth in Sheng Zhong's courtyard. They were as thick as arrow shafts, and they ran through the sky in an unbroken line.

古文：励谓实玉之藏在下，而精气上腾也。
现代文：张励认为住宅的下面埋藏的全是宝玉，而年久无人知道，所以精气才往上升腾。
English: Zhang Li believes that all the treasures buried under the house are gems, and no one has known for a long time, so the spirit is rising.

古文：不以告人，日日视之。
现代文：但他却不把这种想法告诉给别人，自己天天的观察。
English: But he doesn't tell others about this idea, he observes it every day.

古文：因诣忠，请以百缗而交关焉。
现代文：一天他就到了盛忠那里，请求用一百缗铜钱买盛忠的住宅。
English: One day, he went to Moritada and asked him to buy Moritada's house with 100 baht.

古文：寻徙入，复晨望，其气不衰。
现代文：不久就搬了进去。他又在早晨看见了青气非常的旺盛。
English: He soon moved in, and in the morning he saw that the grass was very green.

古文：于是大具畚锸，发其气之所萌也。
现代文：于是就准备了簸箕和锹，挖那冒着青气的地方。
English: So they prepared pickaxes and shovels to dig up the greenery.

古文：掘地不六七尺，遇盘石焉。
现代文：挖地不到六七尺深，就碰上了一块大磐石。
English: After digging to a depth of less than six or seven feet, he hit a large rock.

古文：去其石，则有石柜，雕镌制造，工巧极精，仍以铁索周匝束缚，皆用铁汁固缝，重以石灰密封之。
现代文：挖掉那磐石，就发现地下有个石柜，上面刻有图案，制造的工艺卡分精巧。四周还用铁索链捆绑着。都用铁水把四周坚固地焊上，又用石灰把它封得很严密。
English: After digging out the rock, they found a stone cabinet in the basement, with a pattern engraved on it, made of exquisite craft cards. It was also tied around with a wire chain. It was welded firmly around with molten iron and sealed tightly with lime.

古文：每面各有朱记七窠，文若谬篆，而又屈曲勾连，不可知识，励即加钳锤，极力开拆。
现代文：四面各有七个红色的文字标记着，那文字好象是写错了的篆字，而又弯弯曲曲的勾连着，使人难以认识。张励就用钳锤用力敲打拆开石柜。
English: Each of the four sides is marked with seven red characters. The characters seem to be misspelled swastikas, but they are crooked and intertwined, making them difficult to recognize. Zhang Li used a hammer to break open the stone cabinet.

古文：石柜既启，有铜釜，可容一斛，釜口铜盘覆焉，用铅锡锢护。
现代文：等石柜打开以后，里面有一个铜锅，可以盛下十斗的东西，锅口用盘盖着，又用铅锡将它紧锢保护，还用紫印九颗来回地在上面印着。
English: After the stone cabinet was opened, there was a copper pot inside, which could hold ten buckets of things. The mouth of the pot was covered with a plate, and it was tightly protected with lead and tin, and nine purple stamps were printed on it.

古文：仍以紫印九窠，回旋印之，而印文不类前体，而全如古篆。
现代文：但印文和前面的笔体不一样，全象石篆字，人没有能解释的。
English: However, the printed text is different from the previous handwriting, completely resembling the characters of the stone carvings, and no one can explain it.

古文：人无解者。励拆去铜盘，而釜口以绯缯三重幂之。
现代文：张励拆掉了铜盘，那锅口用红色的丝织品覆盖了三层。
English: Zhang Li removed the copper plate and covered the mouth of the pot with three layers of red silk fabric.

古文：励才揭起，忽有大猴跳而出。
现代文：张励刚揭开，忽然有一只大猴从里面跳出来。
English: Zhang Li just opened it, and suddenly a big monkey jumped out.

古文：众各惊骇，无敢近者。
现代文：人们都惊讶害怕，没有敢靠近的。
English: People were surprised and scared, no one dared to approach.

古文：久之，超逾而莫如所诣。
现代文：过了很长时间，大猴跳越着不知到哪里去了。
English: After a long time, the big monkey hopped over the rope and went I don't know where.

古文：励因视釜中，乃有石铭云：祯明元年，七月十五日，茅山道士鲍知远，囚猴神于此。其有发者，发后十二年，胡兵大扰，六合烟尘，而发者俄亦族灭。
现代文：张励就看那锅里，便有石头上刻的字说： 祯明元年，七月十五日，茅山道士鲍知远，在这里囚禁神猴，有发现的，发现后十二年，胡兵就要大肆扰乱，天下烟尘四起，而发现的人不久也就要灭族。 
English: Zhang Li looked into the pot and saw the words carved on the stone: "In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, on the 15th day of the 7th month, the Taoist priest Bao Zhiyuan of Maoshan imprisoned the sacred monkey here. If it is found, twelve years after the discovery, the Hu soldiers will make a great disturbance, the world will be covered with smoke and dust, and those who find it will soon be exterminated.

古文：祯明即陈后主叔宝年号也。
现代文：祯明就是陈后主叔宝的年号。
English: Zhenming is the year of Chen Houzhu's Uncle Bao.

古文：励以天宝二年十月发，至十四年冬，禄山起戎，自是周年，励家灭矣。
现代文：张励在天宝二年十月发现了神猴，到了十四年的冬天，安禄山起兵叛乱。从这时以后一年张励家也就都死了。
English: Zhang Li discovered the divine monkey in October of the second year of Tianbao, and in the winter of the fourteenth year, the Anlu Mountain mutinied. From this time on, Zhang Li's family all died.

古文：僧普满
现代文：僧普满
English: Sang Pu Man

古文：唐大历中，泽潞有僧，号普满，随意所为，不拘僧相，或歌或笑，莫喻其旨。
现代文：唐朝大历年间，泽潞有个和尚，号叫普满。他想怎么做就怎么做，不受任何拘束，看上去不象和尚的样子。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk in Zaozhuang who went by the name of Puman. He did whatever he wanted, without any restraint, and he didn't look like a monk.

古文：以言事往往有验，故时人待之为万回。
现代文：有时歌唱，有时大笑，没有能明白他的用意的人。
English: Sometimes singing, sometimes laughing, no one could understand what he meant.

古文：建中初，于潞州佛舍中题诗数篇而亡。
现代文：他所说的事情，常常都能得到验证。因此当时的人待他为万回。建中初年，他在潞州佛舍里题诗有好几篇而后就死了。
English: The things he said could often be verified. Therefore, people at that time treated him as a million times. In the first year of junior high school, he had several poems inscribed in the Bozhou Buddhist monastery and then died.

古文：所记者云： 此水连泾水。 双珠血满川。
现代文：所记下的诗说： 此水连泾水，双珠血满川。
English: The poem that was written down said: This water is brackish water, and the double-pearl river is full of blood.

古文：青牛将赤虎，还号太平年。 
现代文：青牛将赤虎，还号太平年。 
English: The young bull will be a red tiger, also known as the year of peace.

古文：题诗后，人莫能知。
现代文：题诗后，人都没有知道的。
English: After the title poem, no one knows the ending.

古文：及贼泚称兵，众方解悟。
现代文：等到贼泚采取军事行动，大家才理解醒悟诗的意思。
English: It was not until the bandits took military action that everyone understood the meaning of the poem.

古文：此水者泚字，泾水者，自泾州兵乱也。双珠者，泚与滔也，青牛者，兴元二年乙丑岁，乙者木也，丑者牛也。明年改元贞元，岁在丙寅。丙者火也，寅者虎也。
现代文：此水就是 泚 字，泾水是指从泾州兵乱，双珠是泚和滔，青牛是指兴元二年是乙丑年，乙是木的意思，丑是牛的意思，第二天改元贞元年，那年属丙寅年，而丙是火的意思，寅是虎的意思。
English: This water is the character, 水 refers to the warring states of Bozhou, 双珠 refers to  and滔, 青牛 refers to the second year of Xingyuan, B is the year of the ugly, B is the meaning of wood, Ugly is the meaning of cattle, the next day to change the first year of the Yuan Zhen, that year is the year of C, and C is the meaning of fire, C is the meaning of the tiger.

古文：至是贼已平，故云青牛将赤虎，还号太平年。
现代文：到这时逆贼已被平定，所以说青牛将赤虎，还号太平年。
English: By this time, the rebels had been subdued, so it is said that the young bull will be a red tiger, also known as the Taiping Year.

古文：秦城芭蕉
现代文：秦城芭蕉
English: Qincheng Basho

古文：天水之地，迩于边陲，土寒，不产芭蕉。
现代文：天水这个地方，离边陲很近，这里土凉，不出产芭蕉。
English: This place, Tianshui, is very close to the border. It is cold here and does not produce plantains.

古文：戎师使人于兴元求之，植二本于亭台间。
现代文：戎师让人从兴元弄来了二棵种到了亭台中间。
English: Rongshi asked someone from Xingyuan to bring two walnuts and plant them in the middle of the pavilion.

古文：每至入冬，即连土掘取之，埋藏于地窟。候春暖，即再植之。
现代文：每年到了入冬的时候，就把它连土挖出来，埋藏在地窟里，等到春暖花开时再把它栽上。
English: Every year, when winter comes, they dig it up with the soil, bury it in a hole, and plant it again when the spring flowers bloom.

古文：庚午辛未之间，有童谣曰： 花开来裹，花谢束裹。 
现代文：庚午辛未之年，有童谣说： 花开来裹，花谢来裹。 
English: In the year of Geng Wu and Xin Wei, there was a nursery rhyme that said: "Wrap up the blossoms, wrap up the blossoms."

古文：而又节气变而不寒，冬即和煦。夏即暑毒，甚于南中，芭蕉于是花开。
现代文：而节气变的不寒冷了，冬天和煦，夏天酷热，夏天比南方的中午还热，这时芭蕉就开花了。
English: But the solar terms are not cold, the winter is warm, the summer is hot, the summer is hotter than the noon in the south, then the plantain will bloom.

古文：秦人不识，远近士女来看者，填咽衢路。
现代文：秦人都不认识，远近的男女前来观赏的人很多，主要的街道都站满了人。
English: Qin people do not know each other, there are many men and women from near and far who come to watch, and the main streets are full of people.

古文：寻则蜀人犯我封疆，自尔年年一来，不失芭蕉开谢之候。
现代文：不久蜀国人侵犯我们疆界，从那时开始，年年都要来一次，都不错过芭蕉开花和花谢的时候。
English: Soon, the people of Shu invaded our borders, and since then, they have come once a year, and they do not miss the time of the flowering of the plantain and the thanksgiving.

古文：乙亥岁，歧陇援师不至，自陇之西，竟为蜀人所有。
现代文：乙亥年，岐陇的援救的军队还没到，从陇的西面开始，竟然被蜀人所占领。
English: In the Year of the Boar, the army that came to Qin's rescue had not yet arrived, and it was occupied by the Shu people, starting from the west side of Qin.

古文：暑湿之候，一如巴邛者。
现代文：夏天湿热的时候和巴邛一样。
English: When it's hot and humid in the summer, it's the same as the Bajau.

古文：盖剑外节气，先布于秦城。
现代文：这大概是剑外节气先散布到秦城。
English: This is probably due to the fact that the extra-solar solar terms spread to Qincheng first.

古文：童谣之言，不可不察。
现代文：童谣的话，不可以不考察。
English: In the case of nursery rhymes, it is essential to examine them.

古文：睿陵僧
现代文：睿陵僧
English: Rui Ling Monk

古文：睿陵之侧，有贫僧居之。
现代文：睿陵的旁边，有个贫和尚住在这里。
English: Next to the mausoleum, a poor monk lives here.

古文：草衣芒履，不接人事。
现代文：他穿着草衣草鞋，不接触人间的事。
English: He wears grass clothes and grass shoes, and does not come into contact with the things of the world.

古文：尝燔木取灰贮之，亦有施其资镪者，得即藏于灰中，无所使用。
现代文：曾经烧木头把木灰都贮藏起来，也有施舍给他钱的，他得到了就藏在灰中，没有使用的地方。
English: There was once a man who used to burn wood and store the ashes, and there was also a man who was given alms money. When he received it, he hid it in the ashes, and there was no place to use it.

古文：出入必挽一拖车，谓人曰： 此是驷马车，汝知之乎？
现代文：出门一定要拉着一辆拖车，对人们说： 这是四匹马拉的车，你们知道吗？
English: You have to pull a trailer when you go out and say to people: This is a four-horse carriage, do you know that?

古文：他日，必有龙舆凤辇，萃于此地。 
现代文：有一天，一定有龙车凤车聚集在这个地方。 
English: One day, there must have been a lot of dragons and phoenixes gathered in this place.

古文：居人罔测其由。
现代文：住在这里的人都猜不到他说话的意思。
English: No one who lives here can guess what he means.

古文：及汉高祖皇帝，因山于此，陵寝陶器，所用须灰。僧贮灰甚多，至于毕功，资用不阙。
现代文：等到汉高祖皇帝，因为这是因山，把陵墓建在了这里，里边的陶器，需要用木灰处理，和尚贮藏木灰很多，到了工程完毕时和尚的灰也没用缺。
English: Emperor Han Gaozu built the mausoleum here because of the mountain, and the pottery inside needed to be treated with wood ash. The monk stored a lot of wood ash, and when the project was completed, the monk's ash was not lacking.

古文：又于灰积中颇获资镪。辇辂之应，不差毫厘。
现代文：又在积灰当中找到了很多的钱，龙辇凤辂的说法应验了，而且丝毫不错。
English: They also found a lot of money in the ashes. The legend of the dragon and the phoenix has come true, and it's not bad at all.

古文：因山既毕，僧亦化灭。
现代文：因山建陵既毕，和尚也化灭了。
English: After the construction of the mausoleum was over, the monk also disappeared.

古文：睿陵行礼官寮，靡不知者。
现代文：去睿陵顶礼朝拜的当官的，没有不知道的。
English: The officials who went to pay homage at the top of the mausoleum did not know anything about it.

古文：兴圣观
现代文：兴圣观
English: Xing Sheng Gu

古文：蜀城旧有兴圣观，废为军营，庭宇堙毁，已数十年。
现代文：四川城里过去有座兴圣观，废后做了军营。这里的庭宇被毁坏淹没，已经有数十年了。
English: In Sichuan City, there used to be a temple of Xing Sheng Guan, which was later abandoned and turned into a military camp. The courtyard here has been destroyed and flooded for decades.

古文：军中生子者，奕世擐甲矣，殊不知此为观基。
现代文：军营里生的男孩，已经一代接一代的穿上铠甲当兵了。很多人不知道，这就是观基。
English: Boys born in military camps have been wearing armor as soldiers for generation after generation. Many people do not know that this is Guanji.

古文：甲申岁，为蜀少主生日，僚属将率俸金营斋。
现代文：在甲申那年，是蜀少主出生的日子，官属们都拿着薪俸来营斋。
English: In the year of Jiaxing, it was the day of the birth of Shu Shao Jun, and all the officials and subordinates came to the camp to break the fast with their salaries.

古文：忽下令，遣将营斋之费，及修兴圣观。
现代文：忽然传下命令，要把营斋的费用分派来修建兴圣观。
English: Suddenly, an order was issued to allocate the expenses of the camp to the construction of Xing Sheng Gu.

古文：左徒藏事，急如星火，不日而观成。
现代文：左徙藏事官重修建任务，急迫如同星火，不几天就修建成了。
English: The left-wing Tibetan officials redoubled the construction task, the urgency was like a star fire, and the construction was completed in a few days.

古文：丹雘未晞，兴圣统师而入蜀。
现代文：还没等颜料干透，兴圣就率领军队进入了四川。
English: Before the paint was dry, Xingsheng led the army into Sichuan.

古文：嗟乎，国之兴替，运数前定，其可以苟延哉。
现代文：唉，国家的兴衰是先前早就定好的了，那里可以苟且延长呢？
English: Alas, the rise and fall of a country has long been predetermined. How can it be prolonged?

古文：骆驼杖
现代文：骆驼杖
English: Camel scepter

古文：蜀地无骆驼，人不识之。
现代文：蜀地没有骆驼，人们都不认识骆驼是什么样。
English: There are no camels in Shu, and people don't know what a camel looks like.

古文：蜀将亡，王公大人及近贵权幸出入宫省者，竟执骆驼杖以为礼，自是内外效之。
现代文：蜀将要灭亡时，有王公大人以及亲近的贵族和有权的被宠幸的来宫省见时，竟然拿着骆驼杖作为礼物。
English: When Shu was about to perish, some princes and nobles, as well as the powerful and privileged, came to the palace to see the emperor, and they even brought camel sticks as gifts.

古文：其杖长三尺许，屈一头。傅以桦皮。
现代文：从这时开始宫内外的人都模仿着这个样子做，那骆驼杖有三尺多长，一头弯曲，包上桦树皮。
English: From then on, people inside and outside the palace imitated this look. The camel cane was more than three feet long, curved at one end, and wrapped in birch bark.

古文：识者以为不祥。
现代文：有学识的人都以为这是不吉祥的。
English: Learned people thought it was inauspicious.

古文：明年，北军至，骆驼塞剑栈而来，般辇珍宝，填满城邑，至是方验。
现代文：第二年，北军到了，骆驼塞满剑阁栈道而来，各种车和珍宝填满了城邑，到这时才得到验证。
English: It was not until the following year, when the Northern army arrived, and camels filled the Jiankang causeway, and all kinds of carts and treasures filled the towns, that it was verified.

