古文：说张相国曰： 君安能少赵人，而令赵人多君？
现代文：有人游说张相国说： 您哪里能轻视赵国人，反而使赵国人尊重您？
English: Some people lobbied Zhang Xianguo and said, "How can you despise the people of Zhao and make them respect you?"

古文：君安能憎赵人，而令赵人爱君乎？
现代文：您怎么能憎恶赵国人，反而使赵国人爱戴您呢？
English: How can you hate the people of Zhao, but make them love you?

古文：夫胶漆，至韧也，而不能合远；鸿毛，至轻也，而不能自举。
现代文：胶漆是最粘的东西，但却不能把两个相距很远的东西粘合在一起；鸿毛是最轻的东西，可是不能自己举起自己。
English: Glue is the stickiest thing, but it can't stick two things together that are far apart; hair is the lightest thing, but it can't lift itself.

古文：夫飘于清风，则横行四海。
现代文：飘浮在清风之中，才能在四海横行。
English: It is only by floating in the breeze that we can sail the four seas.

古文：故事有简而功成者，因也。
现代文：所以事情用简单办法就能成功的原因，是有所依凭。
English: So there is a reason why things can be done in a simple way.

古文：今赵万乘之强国也，前漳、滏，右常山，左河间，北有代，带甲百万，尝抑强齐，四十余年而秦不能得所欲。
现代文：如今赵国是拥有万辆兵车的强国，它前面有天堑漳河、滏水，右面有险峻的常山，左面有河间那样的粮仓，北面有代地的丰富物产，有甲兵百万，曾经压制过强大的齐国，四十多年来秦国都没有得到他想要得到的。
English: Today, Zhao is a powerful country with tens of thousands of military vehicles. In front of it are the Tianyu River and the Surabaya River, on the right is the precipitous Changshan Mountain, on the left is a granary like the one between the rivers, on the north is the rich products of the place, and there are millions of soldiers. Zhao once suppressed the powerful Qi, and for more than forty years, Qin has not gotten what he wanted.

古文：由是观之，赵之于天下也不轻。
现代文：由此看来，赵国在天下是不容轻视的。
English: From this point of view, Zhao is not to be despised in the world.

古文：今君易万乘之强赵，而慕思不可得之小梁，臣窃为君不取也。 
现代文：如今您轻视拥有万辆兵车的强大赵国，而爱慕思念不可能得到的小小魏国，臣认为您的想法是不可取的。 张相国说： 好。 
English: Now that you despise the powerful Zhao State, which has ten thousand chariots, and love the small Wei State, which is impossible to obtain, the minister thinks that your idea is not desirable.Zhang Xianguo said: Good.

古文：君曰： 善。 自是之后，众人广坐之中，未尝不言赵人之长者也，未尝不言赵俗之善者也。
现代文：从此以后，在大庭广众之中，张相国没有不谈论赵国人长处的。没有不谈论赵国美好风俗的。
English: Since then, among the general public, Zhang Xiangguo has never failed to talk about the strengths of Zhao people. He has never failed to talk about the beautiful customs of Zhao.

