古文：刘昉，博陵望都人也。
现代文：刘昉，博陵望都人。
English: Liu Wei, a resident of Bodu, Boling.

古文：父孟良，仕魏，位大司农卿。
现代文：父亲刘孟良，仕于魏，官至大司农卿。
English: His father, Liu Mengliang, served in the Wei Dynasty and rose to the position of Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：从武帝入关，为梁州刺史。
现代文：后来跟随周武帝入关中，任梁州刺史。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Zhou Wudi into the customs, and was appointed as the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：昉轻狡，有奸数。
现代文：刘昉轻浮狡黠，多有奸计。
English: Liu Ye is frivolous and cunning, and often has a cunning plan.

古文：周武帝时，以功臣子入侍皇太子。
现代文：周武帝时，刘昉因是功臣之子，入宫侍奉皇太子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou, Liu Bei, as the son of a meritorious subject, entered the palace to serve the crown prince.

古文：及宣帝嗣位，以技佞见狎，出入宫掖，宠冠一时。
现代文：周宣帝继位，刘昉因奸邪之技受到宣帝的亲昵，出入宫廷，宠幸冠于当时。
English: Zhou Xuandi succeeded to the throne, and Liu Bei was favored by Xuandi because of his treacherous skills. He was in and out of the court, and was the most favored at that time.

古文：位小御正，与御正中大夫颜之仪并见亲信。
现代文：官任小御正，与御正中大夫颜之仪一同受到宣帝的亲昵宠信。
English: He was appointed to the post of Junior Vice-Regent, and together with the Vice-Regent, Doctor Yan Zhi Yi, he was favored by Emperor Xuan.

古文：及帝不悆，召昉及之仪俱入卧内，属以后事。
现代文：宣帝病重，召刘昉和颜之仪一起进入卧室，嘱咐后事。
English: Emperor Xuan was gravely ill, and summoned Liu Ye and Yan Zhi Yi to go into the bedroom together.

古文：帝失喑，不复能言。
现代文：宣帝声哑，不能再说话。
English: Emperor Xuan is mute and can no longer speak.

古文：昉见静帝幼冲，又素奇隋文帝。
现代文：刘昉见静帝幼小，又一直称奇隋文帝。
English: Liu Xuan saw Emperor Jing as a small child, and always called him the strange Sui Emperor.

古文：时文帝以后父故，有重名于天下，昉遂与郑译谋，引帝辅政。
现代文：当时，隋文帝因为是皇后之父的缘故，名重于天下。刘昉就和郑译谋划，引荐隋文帝辅佐朝政。
English: At that time, the Sui Emperor, because he was the father of the Empress, was more important than the world. Liu Bei and Zheng Yi planned to introduce the Sui Emperor as an assistant to the government.

古文：帝固让，不敢当，昉曰： 公若为，当速为之。
现代文：文帝坚决推让，不敢担当。刘昉说： 公若是干的话，就应该尽快干。
English: Emperor Wen resolutely yielded and did not dare to take charge. Liu Ye said: If the public is to do it, it should be done as soon as possible.

古文：如不为，昉自为也。 
现代文：如果不干，我自己干。 
English: If not, I'll do it myself.

古文：帝乃从之，及帝为丞相，以昉为司马。
现代文：文帝于是听从刘昉的建议。文帝任丞相，以刘昉为司马。
English: Emperor Wen then followed Liu Ye's suggestion. Emperor Wen appointed him as chancellor, with Liu Ye as secretary.

古文：时宣帝弟汉王赞居要冲，每与帝同帐而坐。
现代文：当时，宣帝的弟弟汉王宇文赞住在宫禁中，常常与文帝同帐而坐。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan's younger brother, Han Wang Yu Wenzan, was living under palace ban and often sat at the same table with Emperor Wen.

古文：昉饰美妓进赞，赞甚悦之。
现代文：刘昉把打扮美丽的妓女进奉给宇文赞，宇文赞非常高兴。
English: Liu Ye presented the beautifully dressed prostitute to Yu Wenzan. Yu Wenzan was very happy.

古文：昉因说赞曰： 大王，先帝之弟，时望所归。
现代文：刘昉于是对宇文赞说： 大王是先帝的弟弟，时人一致敬仰。
English: Liu Ye then said to Yu Wenzan: The great king was the younger brother of the former emperor, and people at that time all admired him.

古文：孺子幼冲，岂堪大事！
现代文：宣帝的孺子幼小，怎么能够担当大事！
English: Emperor Xuan's son is so young, how can he be in charge of such an important matter!

古文：今先帝初崩，群情尚扰，王且归第。待事宁后，入为天子，此万全计也。 
现代文：如今先帝刚刚驾崩，众人的情绪尚未稳定，大王姑且回住宅，等到事情安定之后，入朝为天子。这是万全之计。 
English: Now that the former emperor has just passed away and the mood of the people is not yet stable, the great king will return to his residence and wait until things are stable before entering the imperial court as the son of heaven. This is a perfect plan.

古文：赞时年未弱冠，性识庸下，以为信然，遂从之。
现代文：宇文赞当时尚未成年，见识平庸低下，认为确实是这样，就听从了刘昉的话。
English: At that time, Yu Wenzan was not yet an adult, saw the mediocrity and low intelligence, and thought that this was indeed the case, so he listened to Liu Yao.

古文：文帝以昉有定策功，拜上大将军，封黄国公，与沛国公郑译皆为心膂。
现代文：文帝认为刘昉有拥立皇帝之功，授官上大将军，封爵黄国公，和沛国公郑译都是文帝的心腹。
English: Emperor Wen believed that Liu Bei had the merit of supporting the establishment of the emperor. Liu Bei was awarded the title of general, Huang Guogong was knighted, and Pei Guogong Zheng was a confidant of Emperor Wen.

古文：前后赏赐钜万，出入以甲士自卫，朝野倾瞩，称为黄、沛。
现代文：二人前前后后得到的赏赐的数目极大，出入有甲士随身卫护，朝野人士都瞩目于二人，称为黄、沛。
English: The number of rewards received by the two before and after is enormous. They are escorted by a warrior, and people in and out of court pay attention to the two, calling them Huang and Pei.

古文：时人语曰： 刘昉牵前，郑译推后。 
现代文：当时的人说： 刘昉在前牵扯，郑译在后推助。 
English: People at the time said: Liu Ye is the leader, Zheng Yi is the follower.

古文：昉自恃功，有骄色。
现代文：刘昉自恃功劳，有骄傲之色。
English: Liu Ye is proud of his achievements.

古文：然性粗疏，溺于财利，富商大贾朝夕盈门。
现代文：然而性情粗犷疏简，沉溺于财物私利，富商大贾早早晚晚不绝于门。
English: However, with a coarse, narrow and simple temperament, indulging in wealth and self-interest, the rich businessman Dajia never fails to come to the door sooner or later.

古文：于时尉迟迥起兵，帝令韦孝宽讨之。
现代文：这个时候，尉迟迥起兵作乱，文帝令韦孝宽率兵讨伐。
English: At this time, the second-in-command of the imperial army, Wei Xiaoguang, started a riot, and Emperor Wen ordered Wei Xiaoguang to lead the troops in a crusade.

古文：至武陟，诸将不一。
现代文：大军到了武陟，诸将不和。
English: When the great army arrived at Wuyi, they would not get along with each other.

古文：帝欲遣昉、译一人往监军，因谓之曰： 须得心膂以统大军，公两人谁行？ 
现代文：文帝想派刘昉或郑译前往监军，于是就对二人说： 一定要有心腹之人统率大军，你们二人谁去？ 
English: Emperor Wen wanted to send Liu Bei or Zheng Yi to supervise the army, so he said to the two: There must be a confidant to lead the army. Which of you two will go?

古文：昉辞未尝为将，译以母老为请，帝不怿。
现代文：刘昉以不曾做过将领推辞，郑译则因母亲年老推辞，文帝不高兴。
English: Emperor Wen was not happy with Liu Xuan's excuse that he had never been a general, and Zheng Yue's excuse that his mother was too old.

古文：而高颎请行，遂遣之。
现代文：高赹请求前往，文帝就派遣高赹为监军。
English: Gao Gan requested to go, and Emperor Wen sent Gao Gan to supervise the troops.

古文：由是恩礼渐薄。
现代文：因此，刘昉所受到的恩宠礼遇逐渐减少。
English: As a result, Liu Ye's favors have been gradually reduced.

古文：又王谦、司马消难相继反，文帝忧之，忘寝与食。
现代文：王谦、司马消难相继告反，文帝甚为忧虑，废寝忘食。
English: Wang Qian and Sima Qianlu resigned one after another. Emperor Wen was very worried and lost sleep.

古文：昉逸游纵酒，不以职司为意，相府事多所遗落。
现代文：刘昉优游自得，纵酒为乐，不把心思放在自己的职责上，丞相府的许多事情都荒废了。
English: Liu Shanyou traveled at his own leisure, indulged in drinking for pleasure, and did not put his mind on his duties. Many things of the Prime Minister's Office were wasted.

古文：帝深衔之，以高颎代司马。
现代文：文帝甚为怨恨，以高赹代替刘昉为丞相府司马。
English: Emperor Wen was so resentful that Gao Qi replaced Liu Bei as the prime minister.

古文：是后益见疏忌。
现代文：这以后，刘昉更遭疏远猜忌。
English: Since then, Liu Wei has been further alienated and mistrusted.

古文：及受禅，进柱国，改封舒国公，闲居无事，不复任使。
现代文：文帝受禅，刘昉晋升为柱国，改封舒国公，闲居无事，再也不得任用。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Zen, Liu Bei was promoted to pillar state, changed his title to Shu Guogong, lived a leisurely life, and was no longer allowed to be appointed.

古文：昉自以佐命元功，中被疏远，甚不自安。
现代文：刘昉自认为是辅助文帝受命的元老功臣，中途被文帝疏远，自己甚感不安。
English: Liu Bei considered himself to be a veteran hero who assisted Emperor Wen. However, he was alienated by Emperor Wen and felt very uneasy.

古文：后遇京师饥，上命禁酒。
现代文：后来逢上京师饥谨，文帝命令禁止饮酒。
English: Later, whenever he was hungry in Beijing, Emperor Wen ordered a ban on alcohol.

古文：昉使妾赁屋，当垆酤酒。
现代文：刘昉让姬妾租赁房屋，站在酒店里卖酒。
English: Liu Yao let his concubine rent a house and stand in the hotel to sell liquor.

古文：治书侍御史梁毗劾奏之，有诏不问。
现代文：治书侍御史梁毗弹劾刘昉，文帝诏令不加追究。
English: The imperial secretary Shi Liangbei impeached Liu Bei, but Emperor Wen decreed that he would not be investigated.

古文：昉郁郁不得志。
现代文：刘昉郁郁不乐，很不得志。
English: Liu Wei was depressed and unhappy. He was very discouraged.

古文：时上柱国梁士彦、宇文忻俱失职怨望，时昉并与之交，数相往来。
现代文：当时，上柱国梁士彦、宇文忻因皆因失去职务而心怀怨恨。这时，刘昉就和他们交往，相互间多次来往。
English: At that time, Shangzhu Guo, Liang Shih-yan and Uwen Zhao all harbored resentment because they had lost their positions. At that time, Liu Zhao got in touch with them, and they visited each other many times.

古文：士彦妻有美色，昉与私通，士彦不之知也，情好弥协，遂相与谋反，许推士彦为帝。
现代文：梁士彦的妻子容貌美丽，刘昉与之私通，梁士彦不知道这件事，与刘昉的情感更加和谐，于是就互相谋划造反，答应推举梁士彦为皇帝。
English: Liang Shih-yan's wife was beautiful, and Liu Bei fornicated with her. Liang Shih-yan did not know about this, and his feelings were more harmonious with Liu Bei's, so they plotted a rebellion together and agreed to promote Liang Shih-yan as emperor.

古文：后事泄，帝穷问之。
现代文：后来事情败露，文帝穷究此事。
English: Later, the affair was exposed, and Emperor Wen investigated the matter thoroughly.

古文：昉自知不免，默无所封。
现代文：刘昉自知难以幸免，默默无语，不作回答。
English: Knowing that he would not be spared, Liu Ye was speechless and did not answer.

古文：诏诛之曰：
现代文：诏令诛杀，诏曰：
English: The edict was clear, the edict said:

古文：上柱国郕国公梁士彦、杞国公宇文忻、柱国舒国公刘昉等，朕受命之初，并展勤力，酬勋报效，荣高禄重。
现代文： 上柱国成阝国公梁士彦、杞国公宇文忻、柱国舒国公刘日方等，在朕刚刚受命禅位之时，都一起施展才力，酬答勋位，报恩效力，荣显隆高，享禄甚重。
English: At the time when I was just ordered to meditate, Shangzhu Guo, Chengzhang Guo, Liang Shih Yan, Zhengzhang Guo, Wenzhou Guo, Shu Guo, Liu Yifang, and so on, all of them together displayed their talents, rewarded me with orders, rewarded me with favors, and received high honors and great rewards.

古文：朝夕宴言，备知朕意。
现代文：朝夕宴乐谈笑，都明白朕的意思。
English: Morning and evening banquets, fun and laughter, all understand what I mean.

古文：但心如溪壑，志等豺狼，不荷朝恩，忽谋逆乱。
现代文：但是，他们心如溪壑阴险，志似豺狼一样凶狠，不感戴朝廷恩典，突然阴谋悖逆作乱。
English: However, their hearts are treacherous, and they are as ferocious as jackals. Unaware of the grace of the imperial court, they suddenly conspire to rebel and create chaos.

古文：士彦称有相者，云其应箓，年过六十，必据九五。
现代文： 梁士彦声称，有相命的人说他上应符命，年过六十，必登皇帝之位。
English: Liang Shihang claimed that people with the same fate as him said that he should live up to his destiny, and that he should ascend to the throne of the emperor when he was over sixty.

古文：初平尉迟迥，暂临相州，已有反心，彰于道路。
现代文：当初平定尉迟迥，暂时管理相州，已有反叛之心，路人皆已知晓。
English: At first, Lieutenant Ping Ding was tardy, he was temporarily in charge of Xiangzhou, he already had a rebellious heart, and everyone passing by knew about it.

古文：朕即遣人代之，不声其罪。
现代文：朕即派遣人去代替他，没有张扬他的罪过。
English: So we sent someone in his place, and we did not expose his sin.

古文：入京之后，逆意转深。
现代文：进入京城之后，叛逆之心更为明显。
English: After entering the capital, the spirit of rebellion became even more apparent.

古文：忻、昉之徒，言相扶助。
现代文：宇文忻、刘昉之辈，说要扶助梁士彦。
English: Members of the Uwenqi and Liuqi families said they wanted to support Liang Shihang.

古文：士彦许率僮仆，克期不远，欲於蒲州起事。即断河桥，捉黎阳之关，塞河阳之路。
现代文：梁士彦答应率领部属，在不远的将来，想在蒲州举兵造反，随即断绝河桥，占领黎阳关，阻击河阳的道路。
English: Liang Shih-yan promised to lead his subordinates to revolt in Puzhou in the near future, and then cut off the river bridge, occupied Liyang Pass, and blocked the road to Heyang.

古文：自谓一朝奋发，无人当者，其第二子刚，每常苦谏，第三子叔谐，固深劝奖。
现代文：自称一旦起兵造反，无人能够抵挡。他的二儿子梁刚苦苦劝谏，三儿子梁叔谐坚定地鼓励造反作乱。
English: He said that no one could resist him if he started a military rebellion. His second son, Liang Gang, worked hard to persuade him, and his third son, Liang Shuhong, firmly encouraged him to rebel.

古文：朕既闻知，犹恐枉滥，及授晋部之任，欲验蒲州之情。
现代文：朕听到以后，还恐怕枉杀无辜，就命其出任晋州，想证实一下其反叛之事。
English: After I heard this, I was afraid that I might have killed an innocent person, so I appointed him to Jinzhou and wanted to confirm his rebellion.

古文：士彦得以欣然，云是天赞。
现代文：梁士彦得任晋州，十分高兴，说是苍天相助。
English: Liang Shiyan was very happy to be appointed to Jinzhou and said that it was a godsend.

古文：忻往定鄴城，自矜不已，位极人臣，犹恨赏薄。
现代文： 宇文忻前往平定邺城，一直自恃功劳，官位达到了臣子的极点，还怨恨赏赐少。
English: Uwen Yao went to the city of Fengting, and has been praising himself for his achievements. His official rank has reached the pinnacle of a vassal, and he still resents the small reward.

古文：朕深念其功，不计无礼，任以武候，授以领军，寄之爪牙，委之心腹。
现代文：朕深念其功劳，不计较他的无礼，任命他为武候将军，授予他领军之职，把他当作爪牙，视为心腹。
English: I deeply remember his merits, and regardless of his rudeness, I appointed him as a general-in-waiting, gave him the position of leading the army, and regarded him as a minion and confidant.

古文：忻密为异计，树党宫闱，多奏交友，入参宿卫。
现代文：宇文忻密谋造反，在宫闱中树立党羽，多次奏请让他的朋友入宫为护卫。
English: Uwen Yao plotted to rebel, set up a faction in the palace, and repeatedly asked his friend to enter the palace as an escort.

古文：朕推心待物，言必依许。
现代文：朕推心置腹相待，有请必定依允。
English: I treat each other with all my heart, and if there is a request, I will certainly comply.

古文：为而弗止，心迹渐彰，仍解禁兵，令其改悔。
现代文：宇文忻一直这样做而不知止，心迹逐渐露了出来。朕就解除他的禁军首领之职，令他改正悔过。
English: Uwen Hui had been doing this without stopping, and his intentions gradually came to light. I relieved him of his duties as head of the Forbidden Army and made him correct and repent.

古文：而志规不逞，愈结於怀，乃与士彦情意偏厚，俱营贼逆，逢则交谋。委士彦河东，自许关右，蒲津事建，即望从征讨，两军结东西之旅，一举合连横之势，然后北破晋阳，还图宗社。
现代文：其志没有得逞，心中更加怨恨，就和梁士彦交情甚厚，一起密谋造反作乱，一碰面就相互谋划，把河东交给梁士彦，自领关中，蒲津之事发生后，就希望跟随征讨，两军东西相连，一举而成连横的形势，共同北上攻破晋阳，回过头来再图宗庙社稷。
English: His ambition did not succeed, his heart was more resentful, and he had a very strong friendship with Liang Shih-yan. They plotted together to rebel and create chaos. As soon as they met, they planned together to hand over Hedong to Liang Shih-yan. After the events in Putuo and Putuo, they hoped to follow the conquest. The two armies were connected from east to west, creating a horizontal situation in one fell swoop. Together, they went north to conquer Jinyang, and came back to rebuild the Zong Temple and Shrine.

古文：昉入佐相府，便为非法，三度事发，二度其妇自论。
现代文： 刘昉入相府辅助，就做违犯法度之事，三次败露，二次都由妻妾揽了下来。
English: When Liu Ye entered the prime minister's office as an aide, he did something that violated the law. He was exposed three times, and both times his wife and concubine took him down.

古文：常云姓是 卯金刀 ，名是 一万日 ，刘氏应王，为万日天子。
现代文：常常说他的姓是 卯金刀 ，名是 一万日 ，刘姓应该称王，为万日天子。
English: It is often said that his surname is Ukinji, his name is 10000 days, and his surname Liu should be called Wang, meaning 10000 days.

古文：朕训之导之，望其修改。
现代文：朕教育引导，希望他改过。
English: I educate and guide, and I hope he will change.

古文：口请自新，志存如旧，亦与士彦情好深重，逆节奸心，尽探肝膈。
现代文：刘昉口头说要重新做人，心里所想依然如旧。也和梁士彦交情甚厚，心存叛逆奸伪，互相视为腹心。
English: Liu Wei said verbally that he wanted to be a new person, but in his heart, his thoughts were still the same as before. He also had a very close friendship with Liang Shihang, harboring treachery and treachery, and regarded each other as confidants.

古文：尝共士彦论太白所犯，问东井之间，思秦地之乱，访轩辕之里，愿宫掖之灾。
现代文：曾经和梁士彦议论太白星所犯之地，见太白星犯于东井之间，想要秦地动乱，延及轩辕之里，希望宫廷发生灾难。
English: He once had a discussion with Liang Shihong about the place where Taibai Xing committed the crime. He saw that Taibai Xing committed the crime between the east and west wells. He wanted the Qin Dynasty to be in turmoil, extending to the turbulent areas, and hoped that a disaster would occur at the court.

古文：唯侍蒲坂事兴，欲在关内应接，残贼之策，千端万绪。
现代文：只等蒲坂之事发生，准备在关内接应。凶狠阴毒的计谋，千头万绪，还有很多。
English: Just waiting for something to happen in Gamasaka, ready to respond in Kansai. There are many vicious and sinister schemes, thousands of them.

古文：惟忻及昉，名位并高，宁肯北面曲躬，臣于士彦？
现代文： 宇文忻和刘昉，名望地位都已很高，怎肯躬身北面，向梁士彦称臣？
English: Uwen Zang and Liu Zang, both of whom already had a high reputation, how could they bow to the north and call Liang Shih-yan their subordinate?

古文：乃是各怀不逊，图成乱阶，一得扰攘之基，方逞吞并之事。
现代文：原是各自心怀不轨，阴谋作乱，一旦得到作乱的基业，就会行吞并之事。
English: Originally, each of them harbored evil intentions and plotted to create turmoil. Once they obtained the foundation to create turmoil, they would proceed with the annexation.

古文：士彦、忻、昉身为谋首，叔谐赞成父意，议实难容，并已处尽。
现代文：梁士彦、宇文忻、刘昉身为谋乱之首，梁叔谐赞成其父之意，依议实在难以宽容，一并处死。
English: Liang Shih-yan, Yu Wen-tao, and Liu Xuan were the ringleaders of the conspiracy, and Liang Shih-yan agreed with his father's will, which was really intolerable, and they were all executed together.

古文：士彦、忻、昉兄弟叔侄，特恕其命。
现代文：梁士彦、宇文忻、刘昉的兄弟叔侄，特意饶恕其性命。 
English: The brothers, uncles and nephews of Liang Shih-yan, Wu Wen-tao and Liu Hui made a special effort to spare their lives.

古文：俄以病乞骸骨，诏徵还京师，赐以御药，中使相望，顾问不绝。
现代文：临施刑的时候，来到朝堂之上，宇文忻见到高赹，向高赹叩头请求哀怜。刘昉愤然对宇文忻说 ：事情的形势已经这样，叩头干什么？ 
English: At the time of the execution, when he came to the top of the imperial hall, Uwen Yao saw Gao Yao and bowed to him to ask for mercy. Liu Yao angrily said to Uwen Yao: The situation is already like this, why bow?

古文：卒于家，谥曰安。
现代文：于是被诛杀，其家籍没入官。
English: As a result, he was beaten to death, and his family did not enter the civil service.

古文：子偲嗣。大业中，位尚书主爵郎。郭衍，字彦文，自云太原介休人也。
现代文：事情过后数日，文帝身穿素服来到射殿，把三家的财物全部放置在前面，命文武百官射箭取之，以此作为众官员的鉴戒。郭衍字彦文，自称是太原介休人。
English: A few days after the incident, Emperor Wen, dressed in plain clothes, came to the Hall of Archers and placed all the belongings of the three families in front of him. He ordered all the officials to shoot arrows, as a warning to the officials. Guo Yanji Yanwen claimed to be Taiyuan's deputy.

古文：父崇，以舍人从魏孝武帝入关，位侍中。
现代文：父郭崇，以舍人之职跟随魏孝武帝入关中，官至侍中。
English: His father, Guo Chong, followed Emperor Wei Xiaowu into the imperial palace as a concubine and rose through the ranks to the position of chamberlain.

古文：衍少骁武，善骑射。
现代文：郭衍少年时骁勇英武，善于骑马射箭。
English: As a boy, Guo Yan was brave and good at horseback archery.

古文：建德中，以军功累迁仪同大将军。
现代文：周武帝建德中，因军功累迁至仪同大将军。
English: In the middle of the Zhouwu Emperor Jiande, he was transferred to the general of the ceremony due to his military service.

古文：又从周武帝平并州，以功加开府，封武强县公，赐姓叱罗氏。
现代文：又跟从周武帝平定并州，因功加授开府，封爵武强县公，赐姓叱罗氏。
English: He also followed Emperor Zhou Wu in pacifying and annexing the prefecture, and was awarded the title of Duke of Wuqiang County, and was given the surname of Zhao Luo.

古文：宣政元年，为右中军熊渠中大夫。
现代文：宣政元年，官右中军熊渠中大夫。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he became an officer of the Right Middle Army and a junior doctor of Xiongqiu.

古文：尉迟迥之乱，从韦孝宽讨之，以功授上柱国，封武山郡公。
现代文：尉迟迥作乱，跟从韦孝宽讨伐之，因功授上柱国，封爵武山郡公。
English: He was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo (上柱国) and the title of Wushan Guo (武山郡) for his contribution to the Wei-Hsiao-Kuan War.

古文：密劝隋文帝杀周室诸王，早行禅代，由是大被亲昵。
现代文：秘密劝谏隋文帝诛杀周室诸王，早行禅代之事，因此很得隋文帝的亲昵。
English: He secretly advised Emperor Sui to kill the kings of the Zhou dynasty and start the Zen dynasty early, so he was very fond of Emperor Sui.

古文：开皇元年，衍复旧姓为郭氏。
现代文：开皇元年，郭衍恢复原姓郭氏。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Guo Yan restored the original surname of Guo.

古文：突厥犯塞，以衍为行军总管，领兵屯平凉。
现代文：突厥进犯边塞，隋文帝任命郭衍为行军总管，率兵屯居平凉。
English: When the Turks invaded the border fortress, Emperor Sui appointed Guo Yan as the general manager of the march, and led the soldiers to live in Pingliang.

古文：数岁，虏不入境。
现代文：几年间，突厥人不敢进犯边境。
English: For several years, the Turks did not dare to invade the border.

古文：征为开漕渠大监。
现代文：征为开漕渠大监。
English: He was conscripted as the superintendent of canal construction.

古文：部率水工，凿渠引渭水，经大兴城北，东至潼关，漕运四百余里，关中赖之，名曰富人渠。
现代文：统率所部水利工人，开凿水渠引渭水，经过大兴城往北，再往东到潼关，水道运输四百多里，关中都依赖这条水渠，称之为 富人渠 。
English: He led the water conservancy workers of the headquarters, dug a canal to divert water, passed through Daxing City to the north, and then east to Shaoguan. The waterway transport is more than 400 miles, and Guanzhong relies on this canal, which is called the rich man's canal.

古文：五年，授瀛州刺史，遇秋霖大水，其属县多致漂没，人皆上高树，依大冢。
现代文：开皇五年，郭衍任瀛州刺史，遇到连绵秋雨，发生洪水，所辖各县大部分都被洪水淹没，百姓都爬上高树，依靠大的土冢求生。
English: In the fifth year of the Emperor's reign, Guo Yan, the governor of Zhangzhou, encountered continuous autumn rains and floods. Most of the counties under his jurisdiction were flooded. People climbed tall trees and relied on large earthen mounds to survive.

古文：衍亲备船筏，并齐粮食拯救之，民多获济。
现代文：郭衍亲自准备船只木筏，带着粮食去拯救灾民，许多灾民得到救济。
English: Guo Yan personally prepared boats and rafts to rescue the victims with grain, and many victims received relief.

古文：衍先开仓赈恤，后始闻奏。
现代文：郭衍先开仓赈济灾民，然后才上奏朝廷。
English: Guo Yan first opened a warehouse to help the victims of the disaster, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：上大善之，迁授朔州总管。
现代文：隋文帝十分称赞郭衍此举，晋升郭衍为朔州总管。
English: Emperor Sui highly praised Guo Yan for this move and promoted Guo Yan to be the governor of Shuozhou.

古文：所部有恆安镇，北接蕃境，常劳转运。
现代文：所辖有恒安镇，北与蕃夷接壤，常有转运粮草之劳。
English: It has jurisdiction over Heng'an Town, which shares a border with Shiyi to the north, and often has to transport grain and hay.

古文：衍乃选沃饶地，置屯田，岁嬴万余石，人免转输之劳。
现代文：郭衍就选土地肥沃的地方，驻扎军队开荒种地作为军饷，每年收获粮食一万多石，免除了人们转运粮草的劳苦。
English: Guo Yan chose a place with fertile land and stationed troops to reclaim wasteland and plant crops as war bounty, harvesting more than 10,000 kilos of grain every year, and sparing people the labor of transporting grain and grass.

古文：又筑桑乾镇，皆称旨。
现代文：又建筑桑乾镇。这些都符合文帝的意思。
English: He also built Sangqian Town. These are all in line with the meaning of Emperor Wen.

古文：十年，从晋王广出镇扬州。
现代文：开皇十年，跟从晋王杨广外出镇守扬州。
English: In the tenth year of the Emperor's reign, he went out to guard Yangzhou with Yang Guang, the King of Jin.

古文：遇江表构逆，命衍为总管，先屯京口。
现代文：适逢江东发生叛乱，命郭衍为总管，先屯兵京口。
English: At the time of the rebellion in the east of the Yangtze River, Guo Yan was appointed as the general manager, and the first troops were sent to the capital.

古文：于贵洲南与贼战，败之。
现代文：贵州之南与贼兵交战，大败贼兵。
English: The south of Guizhou fought against the bandits and defeated the bandits.

古文：仍讨东阳、永嘉、宣城、黟、歙诸洞，尽平之。
现代文：接着讨伐东阳、永嘉、宣城、黟、歙诸处，全都平定乱贼。
English: Next, they went to fight in Dongyang, Yongjia, Xuancheng, Handan and Handan, and they all defeated the bandits.

古文：授蒋州刺史。
现代文：授任蒋州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：衍临下甚倨，事上甚卑。
现代文：郭衍对下十分傲慢，对上十分卑下。
English: Guo Yan is very arrogant to his inferiors and very humble to his superiors.

古文：晋王爱昵之，宴赐隆厚。
现代文：晋王杨广喜爱亲昵他，宴乐赏赐十分丰厚。
English: Yang Guang, the King of Jin, loved him dearly and rewarded him very richly with banquets.

古文：迁洪州总管。
现代文：改任洪州总管。
English: He was appointed as the Governor of Hongzhou.

古文：王有夺宗之谋，托衍心腹，遣宇文述以情告之。
现代文：晋王有争立太子之计，把郭衍视作心腹，派遣宇文述将实情告诉郭衍。
English: Jin Wang considered Guo Yan as his confidant and sent Wu Wenshu to tell Guo Yan the truth.

古文：衍大喜曰： 若所谋事果，自可为皇太子。如其不谐，亦须据淮海，复梁、陈之旧。
现代文：郭衍大喜，说： 如果谋划的事情成功，晋王自然可以成为皇太子，假如不能成功，亦可依托淮海，恢复梁、陈的形势，割据江南。
English: Guo Yan was overjoyed and said, "If the plan succeeds, Jin Wang can naturally become crown prince. If it doesn't succeed, he can rely on Huaihai to restore the situation of Liang and Chen and divide the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：副君酒客，其如我何！ 
现代文：到时候我就成了皇太子的酒宴之客，谁还能把我怎么样！ 
English: At that time, I became the guest of the crown prince's banquet, and who could blame me!

古文：王因召衍，阴共计议。
现代文：晋王于是召见郭衍，暗地里一起计议。
English: Jin Wang then summoned Guo Yan and secretly discussed the matter with him.

古文：又恐人疑无故来往，托以妻患瘿，王妃萧氏有术能疗之。
现代文：郭衍恐怕人们怀疑他无故和晋王来往，假托妻子患有瘿疾，晋王妃萧氏有医术能够治疗。
English: Guo Yan is afraid that people will suspect that he has been dating Jin Wang for no reason, pretending that his wife is suffering from malaria, and that Jin Wangfei Xiao has the medical skills to treat it.

古文：以状奏帝，听共妻向江都，往来无度。
现代文：郭衍就把这种情况上奏，文帝听任他和妻子一起到江都，来往没有限制。
English: Guo Yan reported the situation to Emperor Wen, who allowed him and his wife to travel to Jiangdu without restriction.

古文：衍又诈称广州俚反，王乃奏衍行兵讨之。
现代文：郭衍又谎称广州俚人造反，晋王就奏请让郭衍领兵征讨。
English: Guo Yan also falsely claimed that Guangzhou instigated the rebellion, and Jin Wang requested Guo Yan to lead the army to investigate.

古文：由是大修甲仗，阴养士卒。
现代文：于是，郭衍大肆修治铠甲器械，暗地扩充军队。
English: As a result, Guo Yan extensively repaired armor equipment and secretly expanded the army.

古文：及王入为太子，徵授左监门率，转左宗卫率。
现代文：晋王杨广入宫为太子，征郭衍入京，授职左监门率，转任左宗卫率。
English: Yang Guang, the Jin king, entered the palace as the crown prince, and Zeng Guoyan entered Beijing. He was given the post of the left guard and became the left guard.

古文：文帝于仁寿宫将大渐，太子与杨素矫诏令衍、宇文述领东宫兵，帖上台宿卫，门禁并由之。
现代文：文帝将死于仁寿宫，太子和杨素假托皇帝诏令，令郭衍和宇文述统领东宫兵马，兼领上台宿卫，宫门的禁领都由二人决定。
English: Emperor Wen will die in Renshou Palace, the prince and Yang Su will rely on the emperor's edict, and Guo Yan and Wu Wenshu will lead the East Palace soldiers and horses, and also lead the guards on the stage, and the ban on the palace gate will be decided by two people.

古文：及上崩，汉王起逆，而京师空虚，使衍驰还，总兵居守。
现代文：文帝驾崩，汉王起兵造反，京城空虚。让郭衍迅速返回京城，统率兵马防守。
English: Emperor Wen passed away, the Han king rebelled, and the capital was empty. Guo Yan was allowed to quickly return to the capital and lead the soldiers and horses to defend it.

古文：大业元年，拜左武卫大将军。
现代文：大业元年，郭衍任左武卫将军。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, Guo Yan was appointed as General Zuowei.

古文：帝幸江都，令统左军，改授光禄大夫，又从征吐谷浑，出金山道，纳降二万余户。
现代文：炀帝巡幸江都，令郭衍统领左军，改任光禄大夫。又跟从炀帝远征吐谷浑，出兵金山道，接受投降之人二万多户。
English: Emperor Qian toured the capital of the Yangtze River and ordered Guo Yan to lead the left army, and he was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu. He also followed the expedition of Emperor Qian to Tugu Hun and sent troops to Jinshan Road, and accepted more than twenty thousand people to surrender.

古文：衍能揣上意，阿谀顺旨，帝每谓人曰： 唯郭衍心与朕同。 
现代文：郭衍能够揣度皇帝的意思，阿谀逢迎，顺从旨命，炀帝常常对人说： 只有郭衍的心思与朕相同。 
English: Guo Yan was able to figure out the emperor's meaning, obey the emperor's will, and obey the emperor's order. The emperor often said to people: Only Guo Yan's mind is the same as mine.

古文：又尝劝帝取乐，五日一视事，无得效高祖空自劬劳。
现代文：郭衍又曾劝炀帝寻求快乐，五天上一次朝理事，不要效法高祖白白辛劳。
English: Guo Yan had also advised Emperor Xuan to seek happiness, and not to follow the example of Emperor Gao Baibai and work hard.

古文：帝从之，益称其孝顺。
现代文：炀帝听从他的建议，更加称赞郭衍孝顺。
English: Emperor Yao followed his advice and praised Guo Yan even more.

古文：初，新令行，衍封爵从例除。
现代文：当初，新令施行的时候，郭衍的封爵依照旧例免除。
English: Initially, when the new order was implemented, Guo Yan's knighthood was exempted in accordance with the old practice.

古文：六年，以恩旧封真定侯。
现代文：大业六年，因得到炀帝的恩幸依旧封为真定侯。
English: After six years of hard work, thanks to the blessing of Emperor Xizong, he was still given the title of Zhending Hou.

古文：从往江都，卒。
现代文：跟从炀帝去江都，死于途中。
English: He followed Emperor Qian to Jiangdu and died on the way.

古文：赠左卫大将军。谥曰襄。
现代文：追赠左大将军，谥号为襄。
English: He was posthumously awarded the rank of General of the Left, and his nickname was Jo.

古文：长子臻，武牙郎将。
现代文：长子郭臻，官武牙郎将。
English: The eldest son, Guo Zhen, was a military commander.

古文：次子嗣本，孝昌令。
现代文：次子嗣本，任孝昌令。
English: His second son, Ren Takamasa, succeeded him.

古文：张衡，字建平，河内人也。
现代文：张衡，字建平，河内人。
English: Zhang Heng, alias Jian Ping, from Hanoi.

古文：祖嶷，魏河阳太守。
现代文：祖父张嶷，魏时任河阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Ye, was the regent of Heyang during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父允，周万州刺史。
现代文：父张允，周时任万州刺史。
English: His father, Zhang Yun, was appointed as the chief historian of Wanzhou at that time.

古文：衡幼怀志尚，有骨梗风。
现代文：张衡自幼怀有高尚的志向，有坚强耿直之风。
English: Zhang Heng has a noble aspiration since childhood, and has a strong and straightforward style.

古文：十五，诣太学受业，研精覃思，为同辈所推。
现代文：十五岁那年到太学学习，研习精要，思虑深邃，受到同辈的推崇。
English: At the age of fifteen, he went to study at Taixu, studied the essence, thought deeply, and was respected by his peers.

古文：周武帝居太后忧，与左右出猎，衡露髻舆榇，扣马切谏。
现代文：周武帝在太后丧葬期间，与身边的人出外打猎，张衡散开发髻，载着棺材跟随周武帝，扣住马首直言劝谏。
English: During the funeral of the empress dowager, Emperor Zhou Wudi went hunting with the people around him. Zhang Heng San developed a sledge, carried the coffin and followed Emperor Zhou Wudi, holding the horse's head to persuade him.

古文：帝嘉焉，赐衣一袭，马一匹，擢拜汉王侍读。
现代文：武帝嘉奖张衡，赐给他一身衣服，一匹马，擢升为汉王侍读。
English: Emperor Wu commended Zhang Heng, gave him a set of clothes and a horse, and promoted him to the position of the King's Attendant.

古文：衡又就沈重受《三礼》，略究大旨。
现代文：张衡又到沈重那里学习《三礼》，约略探究《三礼》主旨。
English: Zhang Heng also went to Shen Chong to study "Three Rites" and roughly explore the theme of "Three Rites."

古文：累迁掌朝大夫。
现代文：多次升迁至掌朝大夫。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of palm doctor.

古文：隋文帝受禅，拜司门侍郎。
现代文：隋文帝受禅即位，任张衡为司门侍郎。
English: Emperor Sui Wen accepted Zen's accession to the throne and appointed Zhang Heng as Simen's chamberlain.

古文：及晋王广为河北行台，衡历刑部、度支二曹郎。
现代文：晋王杨广任河北行台，张衡历任刑部和度支二曹郎。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, served as the governor of Hebei Province, and Zhang Heng served as the second sergeant of the Department of Criminal Justice and the Department of Justice.

古文：行台废，拜并州总管掾。
现代文：行台之制废除后，张衡任并州总管椽。
English: After the abolition of the guild system, Zhang Heng was appointed as the state general manager.

古文：王转牧扬州，衡复为掾。
现代文：晋王杨广转而牧守扬州，张衡又任掾属。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, was transferred to be the shepherd of Yangzhou, and Zhang Heng was appointed to be the vassal.

古文：王甚亲任之，衡亦竭虑尽诚。
现代文：晋王非常亲近重用张衡，张衡亦是竭尽忠诚。
English: Jin Wang was very close to Zhang Heng, and Zhang Heng was also extremely loyal.

古文：夺宗之计，多衡所建。
现代文：争夺皇太子位之计，大多是张衡谋划的。
English: Most of the schemes to compete for the position of crown prince were planned by Zhang Heng.

古文：迁扬州总管司马。
现代文：改任扬州总管司马。
English: He was reappointed as Yangzhou Chief Administrator Sima.

古文：熙州李英林反，署置百官，以衡为行军总管讨平之，拜开府。
现代文：熙州李英林造反，署中设置文武百官。朝廷任命张衡为行军总管，征讨平定李英林叛乱，官拜开府。
English: When Li Yinglin rebelled in Xizhou, hundreds of civil and military officials were set up in the station. The imperial court appointed Zhang Heng as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops to subdue Li Yinglin's rebellion, and the official opened the government.

古文：及王为皇太子，拜衡右庶子。
现代文：及晋王为皇太子，任张衡为右庶子。
English: And Jin Wang is the crown prince, and Zhang Heng is the second son.

古文：炀帝嗣位，除给事黄门侍郎、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：炀帝即位，张衡任给事黄门侍郎、银青光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, and Zhang Heng was appointed as the attendant of Huangmen and the doctor of Yinqingguanglu.

古文：迁御史大夫，甚见亲重。
现代文：升任御史大夫，深得炀帝的亲信重用。
English: He was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian, and was deeply used by Emperor Xuan's close confidants.

古文：大业三年，帝幸榆林郡，还至太原，谓衡曰： 朕欲过公宅，可为朕作主人也。 
现代文：大业三年，隋炀帝临幸榆林郡，回至太原，对张衡说 ：朕想到你的家宅看一看，你可以作为朕的主人。 
English: In the third year of the Taiei era, the Sui Dynasty Emperor Lin Xinglin County returned to Taiyuan and said to Zhang Heng: I would like to take a look at your home, you can be my master.

古文：衡驰至河内，与宗族具牛酒。
现代文：张衡即疾驰至河内，和宗族准备牛羊酒菜迎接炀帝。
English: Zhang Heng immediately sped to Hanoi, where he and his clan prepared beef, mutton, wine and dishes to welcome the emperor.

古文：帝上太行，开直道九十里，以抵其宅。
现代文：炀帝上太行山，开辟直道九十里，以抵达张衡宅第。
English: Emperor Qian ascended Mount Taihang and opened a ninety-mile straight road to reach Zhang Heng's residence.

古文：帝悦其山泉，留宴三日，因谓衡曰： 往从先皇拜太山之始，途经洛阳，瞻望于此，深恨不得相过，不谓今日得谐宿愿。 
现代文：炀帝喜欢这里的山川泉水，留下宴饮三日，对张衡说： 当初跟随先皇拜祭太山的时候，途经洛阳，远远瞻望这个地方，因不能过此而深为遗憾，想不到今日得遂昔日的愿望。 
English: Emperor Qian liked the mountain and river spring water here, and left the banquet for three days, saying to Zhang Heng: At first, when I followed the former emperor to visit the Tai Shan Festival, I passed through Luoyang and looked far and wide at this place. I was deeply sorry that I couldn't go there, and I couldn't imagine that I would be able to fulfill my old wish today.

古文：衡俯伏辞谢，奉觞上寿。
现代文：张衡伏地俯首辞谢，奉觞为炀帝祝寿。
English: Zhang Heng bowed his head and said thank you, and gave his best wishes to Emperor Xizong.

古文：帝益欢，赐其宅傍田三十顷、良马一匹、金带、缣彩六百段、衣一袭、御食器一具。
现代文：炀帝更加高兴，赐给张衡宅旁边的土地三十顷，良马一匹，金带、缣纟采六百段、衣服一身、御用餐器一套。
English: Emperor Yao was even more pleased, and gave Zhang Heng 30 hectares of land next to his house, a fine horse, a gold belt, 600 gold ingots, a suit of clothes, and a set of royal dinnerware.

古文：衡固让，帝曰： 天子所至称幸者，盖为此也，不足为辞。 
现代文：张衡坚决推辞，炀帝说： 天子临幸这里，就是为了这个，不足以辞谢。 
English: Zhang Heng firmly refused, and Emperor Zou said, "It is not enough to thank Heaven for sending me here for this reason.

古文：衡复献食于帝，帝令颁赐公卿，下至卫士，无不沾给。
现代文：张衡又奉献食物给炀帝，炀帝命令赏赐给公卿，下至卫士，没有不沾沐皇恩的。
English: Zhang Heng also dedicated food to Emperor Qian. Emperor Qian ordered to reward the nobles, down to the guards, there was no one who did not touch the royal grace.

古文：衡以籓邸之旧，恩宠莫与为比，颇自骄贵。
现代文：张衡认为原有的诸侯王府第，恩宠都没有能够和他相比的，很是自我骄傲矜贵。
English: Zhang Heng believed that the grace of the original princes and princes could not be compared with him, and he was very proud of himself.

古文：明年，帝幸汾阳宫。
现代文：第二年，炀帝临幸汾阳宫。
English: In the second year, Emperor Xizong came to Shiyang Palace.

古文：时帝欲大汾阳宫，令衡与纪弘整具图奏之。
现代文：这时，炀帝想扩大汾阳宫，命令张衡和纪弘整准备图纸上奏。
English: At this time, Emperor Gao wanted to expand the Poyang Palace and ordered Zhang Heng and Ji Hongzhi to prepare the drawings.

古文：衡承间进谏，以比年劳役，百姓疲敝为请。帝意甚不平。
现代文：张衡寻找机会进谏，以连年劳役、百姓疲惫为理由请求炀帝不要再大兴土木。
English: Zhang Heng looked for an opportunity to enter the capital and pleaded with Emperor Zhao not to build any more large-scale civil engineering projects, citing the long years of forced labor and the exhaustion of the people as reasons.

古文：后尝目衡谓侍臣曰： 张衡自谓由甚计画，令我有天下。 
现代文：炀帝非常不高兴。后来曾经目视张衡对侍臣说 ：张衡自称是按照他的计谋，让我获得了天下。 
English: Emperor Qian was very unhappy. Later, he once looked Zhang Heng in the eye and said to his attendant: Zhang Heng claimed that it was according to his strategy that I gained the world.

古文：时齐王暕失爱于上，帝密令人求其罪。
现代文：当时，齐王杨失去了炀帝的宠爱，炀帝令人秘密地搜求齐王的罪行。
English: At that time, King Yang of Qi fell out of favor with Emperor Gong, who ordered a secret search for King Qi's crimes.

古文：有人谮暕违制，将伊阙令皇甫诩从之汾阳宫。
现代文：有人诬陷杨违犯制度，将伊阙令皇甫诩带进汾阳宫。
English: Someone falsely accused Yang of violating the system and brought the Yili Emperor Fu Rong into the Shenyang Palace.

古文：又录前幸涿郡及祠恆岳时，父老谒见者，衣冠不整。
现代文：又记录先前临幸涿郡和祭祀恒山时，当地父老去谒见，衣冠不整。
English: It was also recorded that when Linhongye County and Hengshan were previously worshiped, the local elders went to see him, and his robe was not in order.

古文：帝谴衡以宪司皆不能举正，出为榆林太守。
现代文：炀帝指责张衡身为宪司而不能加以匡正，将张衡贬出京城任榆林太守。
English: Emperor Yao accused Zhang Heng of being the constitutional secretary and not being able to rectify it, and demoted Zhang Heng from the capital to be the governor of Yulin.

古文：明年，帝复幸汾阳宫，衡督役筑楼烦城，因而谒帝。
现代文：第二年，炀帝又临幸汾阳宫，张衡督促工役修筑楼烦城，因此谒见炀帝。
English: In the second year, Emperor Xizong also visited the Xinyang Palace, and Zhang Heng urged the construction workers to build a building to annoy the city, so he saw Emperor Xizong.

古文：帝恶衡不损瘦，以为不念咎，因谓曰： 公甚肥泽，宜且还郡。 
现代文：炀帝厌恶张衡身体没有瘦下来，认为他心中不记念过失，因而对张衡说： 你太肥胖了，应该回到榆林郡去。 
English: Emperor Yao was disgusted that Zhang Heng had not lost weight and thought that his heart did not remember his mistakes, so he said to Zhang Heng: You are too fat, you should go back to Yulin County.

古文：衡复之榆林。
现代文：张衡又到了榆林。
English: Zhang Heng went to Yulin again.

古文：俄而敕衡督役江都宫。
现代文：不久又敕令张衡去江都宫监督工役。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered Zhang Heng to go to the Jiangdu Palace to supervise the construction workers.

古文：有人诣衡讼宫监者，衡不为理，还以讼书付监，其人大为监所困。
现代文：有人到张衡那里告江都的监工，张衡不予受理，回去把诉状交给了监工，那个告状的人因此而受到监工的严厉报复。
English: Someone went to Zhang Heng to sue the supervisor of Jiangdu. Zhang Heng did not accept the complaint and went back and handed the complaint to the supervisor. As a result, the person who filed the complaint suffered severe retaliation from the supervisor.

古文：礼部尚书杨玄感使至江都，其人诣玄感称冤。
现代文：礼部尚书杨玄感出使到江都，那人到杨玄感的住处喊冤。
English: Yang Xuanquan, secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, sent an envoy to Jiangdu, and the man went to Yang Xuanquan's residence to complain.

古文：玄感固以衡为不可。 
现代文：杨玄感认为张衡这样做很不对。
English: Yang Xuan sensed that Zhang Heng was very wrong to do so.

古文：及与相见，未有所言，又先谓玄感曰： 薛道衡真为枉死。 
现代文：等到二人相见，张衡对那事情只字不提，又先对杨玄感说： 薛道衡真是被冤枉死的！ 
English: When the two met, Zhang Heng did not say a word about the matter, but first said to Yang Xuanxin: Xue Daoheng was really wrongfully killed!

古文：玄感具上其事。
现代文：杨玄感把这些事情都上报给了炀帝。
English: Yang Xuanxuan reported all these things to Emperor Xuan.

古文：江都郡丞王世充又奏衡频减顿具。
现代文：江都郡丞王世充又上奏张衡不断地减少每顿饭的食物。
English: Wang Shichong, the county magistrate of Jiangdu County, also appealed to Zhang Heng to constantly reduce the amount of food at each meal.

古文：帝怒，锁衡诣江都市，将斩之。
现代文：隋炀帝大怒，把张衡锁械到江都刑场，准备斩首。
English: The Sui and Qin emperors were enraged and sent Zhang Heng to the Jiangdu execution site, ready to be beheaded.

古文：既而除名，放还田里。
现代文：接着就除去名籍，放回故里。
English: After that, they will be removed from the register and returned to their hometowns.

古文：帝每令亲人觇衡所为。
现代文：炀帝命令其亲族时常观注张衡的所作所为。
English: Emperor Qian ordered his relatives to constantly observe Zhang Heng's actions.

古文：八年，帝自辽东还都，妄言衡怨望，谤讪朝政，帝赐死于家。
现代文：大业八年，炀帝从辽东回到京城，有人妄言张衡心怀怨恨，诽谤朝政，炀帝就将张衡赐死家中。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of King Taejo, Emperor Gong returned to Beijing from Liaodong. Some people falsely said that Zhang Heng harbored resentment and slandered the imperial government. Emperor Gong gave Zhang Heng a death sentence at home.

古文：临死，大言曰： 我为人作何物事，而望久活！ 
现代文：临死时，张衡大声说： 我替别人做了什么事情，指望长久活下去！ 
English: When he was about to die, Zhang Heng said in a loud voice: I have done something for others, I hope to live for a long time!

古文：后炀帝崩，王世充推越王侗为主，征拜吏部尚书，颇见亲委。及世充僭号，汪复用事。世充平，遂以凶党伏诛。裴蕴，河东闻喜人也。祖之平，父忌，并《南史》有传。
现代文：监督行刑的人塞起耳朵，督促他赶快自尽。唐高祖武德初年，朝廷认为张衡赐死不当其罪，追赠大将军，南阳郡公，谥号为忠。有子名希云。裴蕴，河东闻喜人。祖父裴之平，父裴忌，《南史》都有传。
English: The person supervising the execution plugged his ears and urged him to commit suicide as soon as possible. In the first year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, the imperial court considered Zhang Heng's death to be an unwarranted crime. He was posthumously awarded the title of General, Nanyang County Duke, and his posthumous name was Zhong. He had a son named Xiyun, Pei Yun, and a son named Wenshi in Hedong. His grandfather Pei Zhiping, his father Pei Bo, and "Southern History" were all passed down.

古文：忌在陈，与吴明彻同见俘于周，周赐爵江夏公，在隋十余年而卒。
现代文：裴忌在陈朝，与吴明彻一同被周朝俘虏，周朝赐爵江夏公，入隋十多年而死。
English: In the Chen Dynasty, Peiqi was captured by the Zhou Dynasty together with Wu Mingche. The Zhou Dynasty gave the title of Duke to Jiang Xiaogong, but he died more than ten years later in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：蕴明辩有吏干，仕陈，历直阁将军、兴宁令。
现代文：裴蕴聪明善辩，有官吏之才，出仕陈朝，历任直阁将军、兴宁令。
English: Pei Yun was clever and good at debate, and had the ability to be an official. He served in the Chen Dynasty, and successively held the positions of General Zhiqiao and General Xingning.

古文：以父在北，阴奉表于隋文帝，请为内应。
现代文：因为父亲在北朝，裴蕴私下上表给隋文帝，请求作为内应。
English: Because his father was in the Northern Dynasty, Pei Yun privately made a request to the Sui Emperor.

古文：及陈平，上悉阅江南衣冠之士，次至蕴，以夙有向化心，超授仪同。
现代文：等到陈朝被消灭，文帝接见江南投降的官员，依次到了裴蕴，因为裴蕴早就有归顺隋朝之心，越级授为仪同。
English: When the Chen Dynasty was eliminated, Emperor Wen received the officials who surrendered in the south of the Yangtze River, and then came to Baekryong, because Baekryong had already had the heart to surrender to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：仆射高颎不悟上旨，谏曰： 蕴无功于国，宠逾伦辈，臣未见其可。 
现代文：仆射高赹不明白文帝的旨意，谏阻道： 裴蕴对国家没有功劳，宠幸超过同类人，臣认为不可。 
English: The servant Gao Yao did not understand the will of Emperor Wen, and said, "Pei Yun did not do any service to the country. He was favored more than other people of his kind. The minister thought it was impossible."

古文：又加上仪同，复谏。
现代文：又加授上仪同，高赹又谏阻。
English: In addition, he was also awarded the honorable mention, and received high praise and encouragement.

古文：上曰： 可加开府。 
现代文：文帝说 ：可以加授开府。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "It is possible to award the post of prefect.

古文：乃不敢复言。
现代文：高赹才不敢再说。
English: Gao Yao didn't dare to say anything.

古文：即日拜开府仪同三司，礼赐优洽。
现代文：即日升任开府仪同三司，礼仪赏赐优厚。
English: On the same day, he was promoted to the post of Kaifu ceremony and three departments, and the etiquette was rewarded generously.

古文：历洋、直隶三州刺史，俱有能名。
现代文：历任洋州、直州、棣州三州刺史，都有好名声。
English: The successors of Yangzhou, Zhouzhou and Zhangzhou have a good reputation.

古文：大业初，考绩连最。
现代文：大业初年，考绩连年最佳。
English: In the first year of my career, my performance was the best year after year.

古文：炀帝闻其善政，徵为太常少卿。
现代文：隋炀帝听说裴蕴政绩甚佳，征召裴蕴入京任太常少卿。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan heard that Pei Yun's performance in politics was very good, and called him to Beijing to serve as the Vice-Minister.

古文：初，文帝不好声技，遣牛弘定乐，非正声清商及九部四舞之色，皆罢遣从百姓。
现代文：当初，隋文帝不喜爱音乐技艺，派遣牛弘审定音乐，不是正声清商乐和九部四舞之类的，都剔除出来，回归民间。
English: At first, Emperor Sui Wen did not like musical skills, and sent Niu Hong to examine the music, not the upright, clear commercial music and the nine-part four-dance, all of which were eliminated and returned to the folk.

古文：至是，蕴揣知帝意，奏括天下周、齐、梁、陈乐家子弟，皆为乐户。
现代文：到了现在这种情况，裴蕴揣测炀帝的意思，奏请收罗天下周、齐、梁、陈四朝的声乐之家的子弟，都作为乐户。
English: In the current situation, Pei Yun speculated on the meaning of Emperor Gong, and invited the children of the vocal music families of the four dynasties of Luo, Zhou, Qi, Liang and Chen to play as musicians.

古文：其六品已下，至于凡庶，有善音乐及倡优百戏者，皆直太常。
现代文：六品以下以至于平民百姓，有擅长音乐和倡优百戏的人，都隶属太常。
English: People from the sixth grade and below to the common people, people who are good at music and those who are good at acting, all belong to Tai Chang.

古文：是后异技淫声咸萃乐府，皆置博士，递相教传，增益乐人至三万余。
现代文：自此之后，奇异的技艺，淫荡的音乐都汇集在乐府官署，皆设置博士，递相教习传授，乐人增加到三万多人。
English: Since then, bizarre skills and lascivious music have been brought together at the Music Office, all of whom have been awarded doctorates, teaching and teaching, and the number of musicians has increased to more than thirty thousand.

古文：帝大悦，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：隋炀帝十分高兴，升任裴蕴为户部侍郎。
English: Emperor Sui was very pleased and promoted Pei Yun to the position of household attendant.

古文：时犹承文帝和平后，禁网疏阔，户口多漏。
现代文：当时尚承接文帝时的和顺升平，禁忌罗网宽疏，户籍人口多有疏漏。
English: At that time, it was still under Emperor Jianwen's era of rising and leveling, and the taboo was broad and sparse, and there were many omissions in the household registration population.

古文：或年及成丁，犹诈为小，未至于老，已免租赋。
现代文：有的年已成丁，还诈称为小儿，有的未到老年，已免除租税。
English: Some have become children and are still fraudulently called children, and some have not reached old age and have been exempted from tax.

古文：蕴历为刺史，素知其情，因是条奏，皆令貌阅。
现代文：裴蕴历任刺史，原就知道这种情况，因此逐条奏闻，皆令查验相貌。
English: Pei Yun, who has been a historian, knew about this situation, so he recorded the stories one by one and had everyone's appearance checked.

古文：若一人不实，则官司解职，乡正、里长皆远流配。
现代文：如果有一人不属实，就将负责的官吏免职，乡正、里长都发配到远方。
English: If one of them is not true, the responsible official will be removed from office, and the head of the township and the head of the village will be sent far away.

古文：又许民相告，若纠得一丁者，令被纠之家代输赋役。
现代文：又准许百姓互相告发，如果查出有一丁隐瞒，就让被揪出的人家代为输奉赋税和劳役。
English: It also allowed the people to inform on each other, and if anything was found to be hidden, the family of the person who was caught would be made to pay taxes and labor service.

古文：是岁大业五年也。
现代文：这一年是大业五年。
English: This year marks the fifth anniversary of the Great Leap Forward.

古文：诸郡计帐，进丁二十四万三千，新附口六十四万一千五百。
现代文：名个州郡合计增加人丁二十四万三千，新增加户口六十四万一千五百。
English: The total increase in the number of people in each prefecture and county was 243,000, and the number of newly added households was 641,500.

古文：帝临朝览状，谓百官曰： 前代无好人，致此罔冒。
现代文：隋炀帝临朝观览奏状，对百官说： 前代没有好人，致使出现这种欺瞒冒昧之事。
English: The Emperor of the Sui and Song dynasties, who was in the imperial court, looked at the report and said to the hundred officials: There were no good people in the previous generation, which led to this kind of deception and presumption.

古文：今进民口皆从实者，全由裴蕴一人用心。
现代文：如今增加百姓人口都能够属实，全都由于裴蕴一人花费心思。
English: Today, the increase in the population of the people can be true, all due to the efforts of one person.

古文：古语云，得贤而理，验之信矣。 
现代文：古人说 得到贤才而治理 ，检验于事实确实如此。 
English: The ancients said "governed by sages," and this is indeed the case.

古文：由是渐见亲委，拜京兆赞务，发扌适纤毫，吏民慑惮。
现代文：因此，裴蕴逐渐受到宠信和重用，任京兆赞务，纤毫之事都得到揭发检举，官员百姓都惊恐忌惮。
English: As a result, Pei Yun was gradually favored and reused, and he was appointed as the Beijing Zhao Zhan, and every little thing was exposed and reported, and officials and ordinary people were terrified.

古文：未几，擢授御史大夫，与裴矩、虞世基参掌机密。
现代文：不久，裴蕴被擢升为御史大夫，和裴矩、虞世基一起参与掌管机密。
English: Soon, Pei Yun was promoted to the position of imperial historian, and participated in the management of secrets together with Pei An and Yu Shiji.

古文：蕴善候伺人主微意，若欲罪者，则曲法顺情，锻成其罪；所欲宥者，则附从轻典，因而释之。
现代文：裴蕴善于体察皇帝的细微之意，如果想归罪某人，就枉法徇情，铸成其罪名；如果想宽恕某人，就依从轻的法典，因而就把他释放。
English: Pei Yun was good at perceiving the emperor's subtle meaning. If he wanted to incriminate someone, he would fabricate a crime; if he wanted to pardon someone, he would follow the light code and release him.

古文：是后大小之狱皆以付蕴，宪部、大理莫敢与夺，必禀承进止，然后决断。
现代文：自此之后，大大小小的案件都交付裴蕴审理，刑部、大理寺都不敢与他争夺，举动必定秉承他的意思，然后才作出决断。
English: Since then, large and small cases have been handed over to Peiyun for trial. Neither the Criminal Investigation Department nor Dali Temple dared to compete with him. They must act according to his will before making a decision.

古文：蕴亦机辩，所论法理，言若悬河，或重或轻，皆由其口，剖析明敏，时人不能致诘。
现代文：裴蕴亦是机敏善辨，论述法典刑理，口若悬河，不论刑罚轻重，都是由裴蕴一口决定，解剖析理，明辩敏锐，当时的人不能有什么疑问。
English: Peiyun was also quick-witted and discerning. When discussing the criminal law of the code, his mouth was like a river. Regardless of the severity of the punishment, it was all determined by Peiyun. He was keen on dissection and argumentation, so people at the time could not have any doubts.

古文：杨玄感之反也，帝遣蕴推其党与，谓蕴曰： 玄感一呼，从者十万。
现代文：杨玄感造反，炀帝派遣裴蕴推问杨玄感的党羽，对裴蕴说： 杨玄感一声呼喊，跟从的人有十万。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, Emperor Qian sent Pei Yun to interrogate Yang Xuanxuan's followers. He said to Pei Yun, "Yang Xuanxuan shouted out loudly, and 100,000 people followed him.

古文：益知天下人不欲多，多即相聚为盗耳。
现代文：越发知道天下的人不要求多，多了就相聚为强盗。
English: The more we know that people around the world do not ask for more, the more they come together as robbers.

古文：不尽加诛，则后无以劝。 
现代文：不全部加以诛杀，就无法惩戒后人。 
English: If we don't kill them all, we won't be able to discipline the next generation.

古文：蕴由是乃峻法理之，所戮者数万人，皆籍没其家。
现代文：裴蕴因此就用严刑峻法加以审理，杀戮数万人，其家产皆籍没入官。
English: As a result, Pei Yun was tried under the Severe Penal Code, tens of thousands of people were killed, and all of his family property was confiscated.

古文：帝大称善，赐奴婢十五口。
现代文：炀帝大加赞赏，赐给裴蕴十五个奴婢。
English: Emperor Yao was very appreciative and gave Baekhyun fifteen male and female slaves.

古文：司隶大夫薛道衡以忤意获谴，蕴知帝恶之，乃奏曰： 道衡负才恃旧，有无君之心。
现代文：司隶大夫薛道衡因为违忤炀帝的旨意而遭贬斥，裴蕴知道炀帝讨厌薛道衡，就上奏道： 薛道衡自负有才，倚仗着是旧臣，心里没有君主。
English: Sifu doctor Xue Daoheng was scorned for violating Emperor Xuan's will. Pei Yun knew that Emperor Xuan hated Xue Daoheng, so he said: Xue Daoheng is arrogant and talented, but he is an old minister, and he has no monarch in his heart.

古文：见诏书每下，便腹非私议，推恶于国，妄造祸端。
现代文：每次见到诏书下，就在腹内指责非议，把自己的恶意推及国家，妄自制造祸端。
English: Every time they see an imperial edict, they inwardly blame and criticize it, push their own malice onto the country, and wantonly create calamity.

古文：论其罪名，似如隐昧，源其情意，深为悖逆。 
现代文：论其罪名，似乎隐晦暗昧，探究其情意之源，大为悖乱叛逆。 
English: As for his crime, it seems to be obscure and obscure, and to explore the source of his feelings, he is very rebellious and rebellious.

古文：帝曰： 然。
现代文：炀帝说 ：是这样的。
English: Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：我少时与此人相随行役，轻我童稚，共高颎、贺若弼等外擅威权。
现代文：我小的时候和这个人相随在行旅中，他轻视我年幼，和高赹、贺若弼等人专擅权威。
English: When I was a child, I accompanied this man on a journey. He despised my young age, and Gao Yao, He Ruo Yao and others were all experts in authority.

古文：自知罪当诬罔，及我即位，怀不自安，赖天下无事，未得反耳。
现代文：他自知有欺瞒之罪，到我即位时，心中不能自安，仰赖天下平安无事，才没能造反。
English: He knew that he was guilty of deception, and when I came to the throne, he could not be at peace in his heart, relying on the peace and tranquility of the world, so he could not rebel.

古文：公论其逆。妙体本心。 
现代文：你说他叛逆，巧妙地体味到了他的本心。 
English: You say that he is rebellious, subtly getting a taste of his true nature.

古文：于是诛道衡。
现代文：于是就诛杀薛道衡。
English: So he killed Xue Daoheng.

古文：又帝问苏威以讨辽之策，威不愿帝复行，且欲令帝知天下多贼，乃诡答： 今者之役，不愿发兵，但诏赦群盗，自可得数十万。
现代文：炀帝又向苏威询问征讨辽地的策略，苏威不希望炀帝再去征讨，而且想让炀帝知道天下盗贼很多，就诡诈地回答说 ：如今这次征讨，希望不要出动军队，只是颁诏大赦群盗，自然可以得到数十万人。
English: Emperor Qian also asked Su Wei about the strategy for the conquest of Liaodong. Su Wei did not want Emperor Qian to conquer again, and wanted to let Emperor Qian know that there are many thieves in the world, so he deceitfully replied: This time, I hope you will not send troops to conquer, but just issue a general amnesty for thieves, and you can naturally get hundreds of thousands of people.

古文：遣关内奴贼及山东历山飞、张金称等头别为一军，出辽西道；诸河南贼王薄、孟让等十余头，并给舟楫，浮沧海道。
现代文：派遣关中的奴贼和山东的历山飞、张金称等盗贼头领另为一支军马，出兵辽西道；河南诸贼王薄、孟让等十几位头领，给他们舟船，渡沧海道。
English: He dispatched the bandits of Guanzhong and Leshanfei of Shandong, Zhang Jin Rong and other bandit leaders as an army horse, and sent troops to Liaocheng West Road; Henan bandits Wang Bo, Meng Zhan and other more than a dozen leaders, gave them boats to cross the Canghai Highway.

古文：必喜于免罪，竞务立功，一岁之间，可灭高丽矣。 
现代文：众贼必因免除罪名而欢喜，争着要求立功，一年之内，高丽国就可以消灭了。 
English: The bandits will rejoice over the acquittal and compete to claim the credit. Within a year, the Koryo Kingdom will be destroyed.

古文：帝不怿曰： 我去尚犹未克，鼠窃安能济乎！ 
现代文：炀帝不高兴地说 ：我去尚且不能取胜，鼠窃狗盗之辈怎能成功！ 
English: Emperor Xuan was displeased and said, "I can't win even if I go, how can the rat-stealing, dog-stealing generation succeed!"

古文：威出后，蕴奏曰： 此大不逊，天下何处有许多贼！ 
现代文：苏威出去后，裴蕴奏道： 这人太不恭敬，天下哪里有这么多贼？ 
English: After Su Wei went out, Pei Yun said: This man is too disrespectful. Where in the world are there so many thieves?

古文：帝悟曰： 老革多奸，将贼胁我。
现代文：炀帝省悟道： 苏威老贼多有奸诈，用盗贼来威胁我。
English: Zou Di Guoxu said: Su Wei, the old thief, is more treacherous and threatens me with thieves.

古文：欲搭其口，但隐忍之，诚极难耐。 
现代文：想利用他的口，故而只是容忍。这人实在是让人难以忍耐。 
English: You want to use his mouth, so you just tolerate it. He's really hard to put up with.

古文：蕴知上意，遣张行本奏威罪恶，帝付蕴推鞫之，乃处其死。
现代文：裴蕴知道炀帝的意思，就派张行本上奏苏威的罪恶，炀帝就把苏威交给裴蕴审讯，于是就把苏威杀了。
English: Knowing the Emperor's intention, Baekhyun sent Zhang Xing to record Su Wei's crimes in a book. Emperor Baekhyun handed Su Wei over to Baekhyun for trial, and then killed Su Wei.

古文：帝曰： 未忍便杀。 
现代文：炀帝说 ：不能忍受就杀。 
English: Emperor Qian said, "If you can't bear it, kill it."

古文：遂父子及孙三世并除名。
现代文：于是就将苏威父子和孙辈三代都除去名籍。
English: As a result, Suwei's father, son and three generations of grandchildren were all removed from the family register.

古文：蕴又欲重己权势，令虞世基奏罢司隶刺史以下官属，增置御史百余人。
现代文：裴蕴又想加重自己的权势。令虞世基奏请罢除司隶刺史以下的官员属吏，增设御史一百多人。
English: Pei Yun also wanted to increase his own power. He asked Yu Shiji to remove the officials who were subordinate to officials below Shishi, and to add more than a hundred people to Shishi.

古文：於是引致奸黠，共为朋党，郡县有不附者，阴中之。
现代文：于是裴蕴引荐罗织奸邪狡黠之人，一起结成党羽，郡县官吏有不依附他们的，就暗地中伤他们。
English: As a result, Pei Yun introduced Luo Wei, a treacherous and cunning person, and they formed a party together. If the county officials did not adhere to them, they secretly slandered them.

古文：于时军国多务，凡是兴师动众，京都留守，及与诸蕃互市，皆令御史监之。
现代文：这个时候国家多事，凡是兴师动众、京都留守和各藩镇互相交易，都命令御史监督。
English: At this time, there were many events in the country, and whenever there was a need to motivate people to study and stay in Kyoto, or when there was a need for the various domains and towns to trade with each other, the governor was ordered to supervise the situation.

古文：宾客附隶，遍于郡国，侵扰百姓，帝弗之知也。
现代文：宾客和各类依附之人，遍及郡国，侵害骚扰百姓，炀帝不知道这些事情。
English: Guests and all kinds of dependents are all over the county, abusing and harassing the people, and the emperor does not know these things.

古文：以度辽之役，进位银青光禄大夫。
现代文：渡海击辽的战役中，晋职位银青光禄大夫。
English: In the campaign to cross the sea and defeat Liao, Jin's position of silver Qingguanglu doctor won.

古文：及司马德戡将为乱也，江阳长张惠绍夜弛告之。
现代文：司马德勘将要作乱的时候，江阳长张惠绍连夜驰报裴蕴。
English: When Sima Dekan was about to start a riot, the governor of Jiangyang Province, Zhang Huishao, went out at night to report to Baikun.

古文：蕴共惠绍谋，欲矫诏发郭下兵民，尽取荣公护兒节度，收在外逆党宇文化及等，仍发羽林殿脚，遣范富娄等入自西苑，取梁公萧钜及燕王处分，扣门援帝。
现代文：裴蕴和张惠绍秘密谋划，想假传诏令，调动城里的军队和百姓，集中在一起听从荣公来护儿的调度指挥，收伏京城之外的乱党宇文化及等人，接着调动羽林军和为隋炀帝拉龙舟的人，派遣范富娄等人到西苑，取梁公萧钜和燕王来处理此事，然后上门救援炀帝。
English: Pei Yun and Zhang Huishao secretly plotted to falsify the imperial edict, mobilize the army and people in the city, concentrate together to obey the dispatching command of Rong Gong to protect the children, capture the disorderly party culture and others outside the capital, then mobilize the Yulin Army and those who pull the dragon boat for the Sui and Qian Dynasties, send Fan Fuxi and others to Xiyuan, take Liangong Xiaoqi and Yan Wang to deal with the matter, and then go to the door to rescue Emperor Xuan.

古文：谋议已定，遣报虞世基。
现代文：谋划计议已定，派人报告虞世基。
English: The planning discussion has been decided, send someone to report to Yu Shiji.

古文：世基疑反者不实，抑其计。
现代文：虞世基怀疑造反的事情不实，就把裴蕴的计谋压下了。
English: Yu Shiji suspected that the rebellion was not true, so he suppressed Pei Yun's plot.

古文：须臾，难作。
现代文：很快，灾难就发生了。
English: Soon, disaster struck.

古文：蕴叹曰： 谋及播郎，竟误人事！ 
现代文：裴蕴感叹道： 和虞世基谋划，竟然误了大事！ 
English: Baekhyun sighed, "I planned with Yu Shiji, but I missed the big event!

古文：遂见害。
现代文：于是被杀害。
English: He was killed.

古文：子愔，为尚辇直长，亦同日死。
现代文：其子裴忄音，任尚辇直长，也在同一天被杀害。
English: His son Pei Xuanying, Ren Shangxuan, was also killed on the same day.

古文：袁充，字德符，本陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：袁充字德符，祖先是陈郡阳夏人。
English: Yuan Chong Zi De Fu, ancestor of Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：其后寓居丹阳。
现代文：后来寓居于丹阳。
English: Later he lived in Danyang.

古文：祖昂，父君正，俱为梁侍中。
现代文：祖父袁昂、父袁君正，都曾任梁朝侍中。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Ang, and his father, Yuan Junzheng, both served as Liang's aides-de-camp.

古文：充少警悟，年十余岁，其父党至门，时冬初，充尚衣葛衫。
现代文：袁充自幼机警敏悟，十多岁的时候，他的父亲的同事来到他家，这时已是初冬，袁充还穿着粗布衣衫。
English: Yuan Chong has been alert and alert since he was a child. When he was more than ten years old, his father's colleague came to his house. It was early winter, and Yuan Chong was still wearing a coarse cloth shirt.

古文：客戏充曰： 袁郎子，絺兮绤兮，凄其以风。 
现代文：客人戏耍袁充说 ：袁郎子，纟希兮纟谷兮，凄其以风。 
English: The guests playfully said to Yuan Cheng: "Yuan Rongzi, you are so happy, so happy, so happy, it's amazing.

古文：充应声答曰： 唯絺与绤，服之无斁。 
现代文：袁充应声而答道： 惟纟希与纟谷，服之无。 
English: Yuan Cheng replied in response: "But there is no difference between Xiangxi and Shibuya.

古文：以是大见嗟赏。
现代文：因此而大受赞赏。
English: For this reason, it is greatly appreciated.

古文：仕陈，年十七，为秘书郎。
现代文：仕于陈朝，十七岁那年任秘书郎。
English: He served the Chen Dynasty and became a secretary at the age of seventeen.

古文：历太子舍人、晋安王文学、吏部侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：历任太子舍人、晋安王文学、吏部侍郎、散骑常侍等职。
English: He held the posts of prince's concubine, Jinan king's literature, secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, horseback riding attendant and so on.

古文：及陈灭归国，历蒙、鄜二州司马。
现代文：陈国被消灭后，归于隋朝，历任蒙、二州司马。
English: After Chen Province was eliminated, it was returned to the Sui Dynasty, and successively held by Meng and Erzhou Sima.

古文：充性好道术，颇解占候，由是领太史令。
现代文：袁充生来喜爱道术。颇会占候之术，因此而任太史令。
English: Yuan Cheng was born with a liking for Taoism. He was quite good at divining the future, which is why he was appointed Grand Historian.

古文：时上将废皇太子，正穷东宫官属，充见上雅信符应，因希旨进曰： 比观玄象，皇太子当废。 
现代文：当时，文帝准备废除皇太子杨勇，正在穷究东宫的官员属吏。袁充见文帝特别相信符兆之应，于是就迎合文帝的旨意进言道： 连续观察天象，皇太子应当废除。 
English: At that time, Emperor Wen was preparing to abolish Crown Prince Yang Yong, and officials belonging to the East Palace were exhaustively investigating. Yuan Cheng saw that Emperor Wen particularly believed in the response of signs, so he catered to the will of Emperor Wen and said: Continuous observation of celestial objects, the crown prince should be abolished.

古文：上然之。
现代文：文帝认为袁充说得对。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：充复表奏隋兴以后，日景渐长，曰： 开皇元年，冬至日影一丈二尺七寸二分，自尔渐短。
现代文：袁充又上表奏称隋朝建立以后，日影逐渐加长，道： 开皇元年，冬至那天日影一丈二尺七寸二分，自此以后逐渐缩短。
English: Yuan Shong also mentioned that after the establishment of the Sui Dynasty, the shadow of the sun gradually lengthened, saying: In the first year of the Emperor, on the day of the winter solstice, the shadow of the sun was as long as two feet and seven inches and two minutes, and since then it has gradually shortened.

古文：至十七年，冬至影一丈二尺六寸三分。
现代文：到了开皇十七年，冬至那天日影一丈二尺六寸三分。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Emperor's reign, on the day of the winter solstice, the sun's shadow was one joule, two shaku, six suns and three minutes.

古文：四年冬至，在洛阳测影，一丈二尺八寸八分。
现代文：开皇四年冬至，在洛阳观测日影，长一丈二尺八寸七分。
English: On the winter solstice in the fourth year of the emperor, he observed the sun's shadow in Luoyang. It was 2 feet, 8 inches and 7 minutes long.

古文：二年，夏至影一尺四寸八分，自尔渐短。
现代文：开皇二年，夏至那天日影长一尺四寸八分。自此以后逐渐缩短。
English: In the second year of the Emperor, on the day of the summer solstice, the length of the shadow was 1 shaku 4 sun 8 bu. Since then, it has gradually shortened.

古文：至十六年，夏至影一尺四寸五分。
现代文：到了开皇十六年，夏至日影长一尺四寸五分。
English: By the 16th year of the Emperor's reign, the length of the summer solstice shadow was 1 shaku 4 sun 5 bu.

古文：《周官》以土圭之法正日影，日至之影尺有五寸。
现代文：《周官》用土圭的方法确定日影，夏至日影长一尺五寸。
English: "Zhou Guan" uses the method of Tu Gui to determine the sun shadow, and the summer solstice sun shadow is one foot and five inches long.

古文：郑玄云： 冬至之影一丈三尺。 
现代文：郑玄说 ：冬至日影长一丈三尺。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: The winter solstice sun shadow is three feet long.

古文：今十六年夏至之影，短于旧影五分，十七年冬至之影，短于旧影三寸七分。
现代文：如今，开皇十六年夏至的日影，比过去的日影短五寸；开皇十七年冬至日影，比往日的日影短三寸七分。
English: Today, the shadow of the sun on the summer solstice of the 16th year of the Emperor is five inches shorter than the shadow of the past; the shadow of the sun on the winter solstice of the 17th year of the Emperor is three inches and seven minutes shorter than the shadow of the past.

古文：日去极近，则影短而日长；去极远，则影长而日短。
现代文：太阳离得最近的时候，就日影短而白昼长；离得最远时，就日影长而白昼短。
English: When the sun is closest, the shadow is short and the day is long; when it is farthest away, the shadow is long and the day is short.

古文：行内道，则去极近；外道，则去极远。
现代文：太阳运行于内道，就离得最近；运行外道，就离得最远。
English: When the sun moves through the inner path, it is closest to the earth; when it moves through the outer path, it is farthest away.

古文：《尧典》曰： 日短星昴，以正仲冬。 
现代文：《尧典》说： 白昼短昴星出，正是仲冬 。
English: "The Analects" says: The day is short, the stars are out, and it is midwinter.

古文：据昴星昏中，则知尧时仲冬，日在须女十度。
现代文：根据昴星黄昏出现在正中，知道尧时仲冬，太阳在须女星十度。
English: According to the Pleiades, twilight occurs in the middle of the day, and it is known that at midwinter, the sun is ten degrees ahead of the Pleiades.

古文：以历数推之，开皇已来冬至，日在斗十一度，与唐尧之代，去极并近。
现代文：根据历数推算，开皇以来冬至那天，太阳在斗星十一度，和唐尧那个时代相距都很近。
English: According to the calculation of the calendar, since the founding of the emperor, on the day of the winter solstice, the sun has been in the star eleven times, which is very close to the time of Tang Jun.

古文：谨案《春秋元命包》云： 日月出内道，璇玑得常，天帝崇灵，圣王相功。 
现代文：谨案《春秋元命包》云 日月以内道出，旋玑能够恒常，天帝崇尚生灵，圣明的帝王辅助其功。 
English: The solemn proposal of "Spring, Autumn and New Year's Life Package" is issued by the sun and the moon, the rotation can be constant, the heavenly emperor reveres the living beings, and the holy emperor supports their work.

古文：京房《别对》曰： 太平日行上道，升平行次道，霸世行下道。 
现代文：京房《别对》说 ：太平之世太阳运行上道，升平之世太阳运行次道，争霸之世太阳运行下道。 
English: "Don't get it wrong," said Kyofusa: In a peaceful world, the sun moves up, in a leveling world, the sun moves down, and in a world of competition, the sun moves down.

古文：伏惟大隋启运，上感乾元，影短日长，振古未之有也。 
现代文：我想大隋上承大运，上感皇天，日影短而白昼长，自古以来都没有过。 
English: I think that the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty.

古文：上大悦，告天下。
现代文：文帝非常高兴，诏告天下。
English: Emperor Wen was very happy and announced it to the world.

古文：将作役功，因加程课，丁匠苦之。
现代文：准备大兴劳役事功，因而增加赋税，人丁工匠倍受其苦。
English: Preparations were made to greatly encourage labor and service, and as a result, taxes were increased, and craftsmen suffered greatly as a result.

古文：仁寿初，充言上本命与阴阳律吕合者六十余条而奏之，因上表曰： 皇帝载诞之初，非止神光瑞气，嘉祥应感。至于本命行年，生月生日，并与天地日月、阴阳律吕，运转相符，表里合会。
现代文：仁寿初年，袁充说文帝的本命与阴阳律吕相合者有六十多条，因而上表奏道 ：皇帝刚刚诞生之时，不仅有神光瑞气，吉祥嘉庆之兆，而且本命行年，出生的月日，都与天地、日月、阴阳、律吕的运行转化相符应，表里相合。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wenxu's life, Yuan Chong said that there were more than sixty aspects of Emperor Wen's life that were in accordance with the laws of yin and yang. Therefore, the above table recited: When the emperor was just born, there was not only a divine radiance and auspicious auspiciousness, but also the year of his life and the month and day of his birth all corresponded to the transformation of the operation of heaven and earth, the sun and the moon, yin and yang, and the laws of heaven and earth, and were in accordance with appearances.

古文：此诞圣之异，宝历之元。
现代文：这是圣明帝王诞生的异兆，是宝贵的历日的开始。
English: This is a sign of the birth of the Holy Emperor Ming and the beginning of a precious calendar.

古文：今与物更新，改年仁寿，岁月日子，还共诞圣之时并同，明合天地之心，得仁寿之理。
现代文：如今，各种事物更新，改年号为仁寿，岁月日时，都与圣王诞生之时相同，明晰地合乎天地之心，符合仁德长寿之理。
English: Nowadays, all kinds of things are updated, the year is changed to benevolence and longevity, and the years and days are the same as when the holy king was born, clearly in line with the heart of heaven and earth, in line with the principle of benevolence and longevity.

古文：故知洪基长算，永永无穷。 
现代文：因此知道宏大基业享之永久、源源无有尽头。 
English: Therefore, we know that the grand cause is eternal and has no end.

古文：上大悦，赏赐优崇，侪辈莫之比。
现代文：文帝十分高兴，给袁充的赏赐很是优厚，同类的人没有人能与他相比。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased. The reward given to Yuan Chong was very generous. No one of his kind could be compared to him.

古文：仁寿四年甲子岁，炀帝初即位，充及太史丞高智宝奏言： 去岁冬至，日景逾长。
现代文：仁寿四年甲子岁，炀帝刚刚即位，袁充和太史丞高智宝上奏道： 去年冬至，日影更长。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Renzhou's reign, when he was just one year old, Emperor Xizong had just ascended to the throne. Yuan Chong and Grand Historian Gao Zhibao recited: Last winter solstice, the sun's shadow was longer.

古文：今岁皇帝即位，与尧受命年合。
现代文：今年皇帝即位，与尧承受天命之年相合。
English: The emperor's ascension to the throne this year coincides with the year in which Zou received the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：昔唐尧受命四十九年，到上元第一纪甲子，天正十一月庚戍冬至；陛下即位，其年即当上元第一纪甲子，天正十一月庚戍冬至，正与唐尧同。
现代文：当年唐尧承受天命四十九年，到上元第一纪甲子，岁月正是十一月庚戍日冬至；陛下即位，其年岁正当上元第一纪甲子，岁月正是十一月庚戍日冬至，刚好和唐尧相同。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan received the 49th year of the Mandate of Heaven, to the 1st year of the 1st century BC, the time was the winter solstice in November of the 1st century BC; His Majesty's accession to the throne, his year of birth was the 1st year of the 1st century BC, the time was the winter solstice in November of the 1st century BC, just the same as Tang Xuan.

古文：自放勋以来，凡经八上元，其间绵代，未有仁寿甲子之合。
现代文：自放勋以来，总共经历八次上元，其间绵延数代，没有像仁寿甲子这样契合的。
English: Since he was awarded the decoration, he has experienced a total of eight Shangyuan, during which several generations have been extended. There is no one who fits like Renju Jiazi.

古文：谨案：第一纪甲子，太一在一宫，天目居武德，阴阳历数，并得符同唐尧。
现代文：谨案：第一纪甲子，太一在一宫，天目居于武德，阴阳历法之数，都和唐尧之时相符合。
English: I respectfully submit that the first generation of Jia Zi, Taichi in one palace, Tenmoku in martial arts, and the number of yin and yang calendars are all consistent with the time of Tang Xuan.

古文：唐尧丙辰生，丙子年受命，止合三五。
现代文：唐尧丙辰年生，丙子年承受天命，只合三五之数。
English: Those born in the Year of the Horse in Tang Dynasty and those born in the Year of the Horse in the Year of the Horse will inherit the fate of heaven, which is only 35 in number.

古文：未若己丑甲子，支干并当六合。
现代文：不像己丑甲子，天干地支都应六合。
English: Unlike the self-loathing son, the heavenly and earthly branches should be six-in-one.

古文：允一元三统之期，合五纪九章之会，共帝尧同其数，与皇唐比其踪。
现代文：与一元三统之期相符，和五纪九章之会相合，和帝尧历数相同，与皇唐基业相并。
English: It coincides with the period of the unification of the Yuan and the Three Kingdoms, coincides with the meeting of the Five Dynasties and Nine Dynasties, coincides with the number of emperors and empresses, and coincides with the foundation of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：信所谓皇哉唐哉，唐哉皇哉者矣。 
现代文：所说的 皇哉唐哉，唐哉皇哉 确实是这样的。 
English: What is said, "Tangya, Tangya, Tangya" is indeed so.

古文：仍讽齐王暕率百官拜表奉贺。
现代文：接着又讽刺齐王杨日柬，率领文武百官上表奉贺。
English: Next, he satirized King Qi, Yang, Japanese, and Cambodians, and led hundreds of civil and military officials to offer their congratulations.

古文：后荧惑守太微者数旬，时缮修宫室，征役繁重，充乃上表称 陛下修德，荧惑退舍 。
现代文：后来，荧惑守于太微垣达几十天，当时正修缮宫殿，征用劳役繁重，袁充就上表说 ：陛下修省德行，荧惑就会退出太微垣。 
English: Later, Fu Rong stayed in Taibeiguan for dozens of days. At that time, the palace was being repaired, and labor was heavily requisitioned. Yuan Chong said on the table: "If His Majesty cultivates virtue, Fu Rong will withdraw from Taibeiguan."

古文：百僚毕贺。
现代文：文武百官都来祝贺。
English: Hundreds of military and civilian officials came to congratulate him.

古文：帝大喜，前后赏赐将万计。
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，前前后后赏赐给袁充的财物以万计。
English: Emperor Yao was very pleased and rewarded Yuan Zong with tens of thousands of dollars in wealth.

古文：时军国多务，充候帝意欲有所为，便奏称天文见象，须有改作，以是取媚于上。
现代文：当时国家正值多事，袁充等待炀帝想要做点事情的时候，就奏称上天垂象，应该有所改作，用这些来讨好炀帝。
English: At that time, the country was in the middle of many things. When Yuan Chong was waiting for Emperor Gong to do something, he said that it was a sign from heaven that he should make some changes and use these to please Emperor Gong.

古文：大业六年，迁内史舍人。
现代文：大业六年，袁充升任内史舍人。
English: After six years of hard work, Yuan Zheng was promoted to the post of secretary of history.

古文：从征辽东，拜朝请大夫、秘书少监。
现代文：跟随炀帝征伐辽东，任朝请大夫、秘书少监。
English: He followed Emperor Qian in conquering the eastern part of Liaodong, and he invited a doctor, a secretary, and a junior superintendent.

古文：后天下大乱，帝初罹雁门之厄，又盗贼益起，心不自安。
现代文：后来，天下大乱，隋炀帝刚刚遭遇雁门的灾厄，盗贼又四面蜂起。炀帝心中不能自安。
English: Later, the world was in turmoil, the Sui and Qian Dynasties had just suffered the disaster of the Wild Goose Gate, and thieves rose up on all sides. The Qian Dynasties heart could not be at peace.

古文：充复托天文，上表陈嘉瑞以媚上曰：
现代文：袁充又假托天象。上表陈述吉兆，以讨好炀帝，其表说：
English: Yuan Chong also pretended to be a celestial being. The above table stated the auspicious signs in order to please Emperor Gong. The table said:

古文：伏惟陛下握录图而驭黔首，提万善而化八纮，以百姓为心，匪一人受庆，先天罔违所欲，后天必奉其时。
现代文： 陛下掌握天下，统治百姓，总揽各种善政，教化八方，把百姓放在心上，而不是一人独受上天的吉庆，先天不违其所欲，后天必尊奉其时。
English: His majesty controls the world, rules the people, comprehensively carries out all kinds of good governance, enlightens all sides, and keeps the people in mind, rather than one person alone receiving the auspiciousness of heaven. The day before yesterday does not go against his wishes, and the day after tomorrow will respect his time.

古文：是以初膺宝历，正当上元之纪；乾之初九，又与本命符会。
现代文：因此，陛下初登大位，正当上元之纪；乾之初九，又与陛下本命相符。
English: Therefore, His Majesty's ascension to the throne for the first time is justifiable, and His Majesty's ascension to the throne for the ninth time is consistent with His Majesty's original destiny.

古文：斯则圣人冥契，故能动合天经。
现代文：这些与圣人暗相契合，故而动止与天道运行相合。
English: These coincide with the sages, so the movement and movement coincide with the movement of heaven.

古文：谨案去年已来，玄象星瑞，毫厘无爽。
现代文：谨案去年以来，天象星兆，丝毫没有差错。
English: Since last year, the astrological omens have not been wrong at all.

古文：谨录尤异，上天降祥、破突厥等状七事。
现代文：谨记录特别奇异之事，如上天降祥瑞、破突厥等七件事情。
English: I would like to record seven particularly strange things, such as the heaven-sent Xiang Rui and the destruction of the Turkic peoples.

古文：其一，去八月二十八日夜，大流星如斗，出王良北，正落突厥营，声如崩墙。其二，八月二十九日夜，复有大流星如斗，出羽林，向北流，正当北方。
现代文： 其一，去年八月二十八日夜，一流星像斗那么大，从王良之北而出，正好落在突厥营中，声音像大墙崩塌一样；其二，八月二十九夜，又有斗大的流星，出于羽林，向北方流去，正对着北方。
English: First, on the night of August 28 last year, a star as big as a dipper came out of the north of Wang Liang and fell right in the Turkic camp, with a sound like a great wall collapsing; second, on the night of August 29, another meteor as big as a dipper came out of the forest of feathers and flowed to the north, directly facing the north.

古文：依占，频二夜流星坠贼所，贼必败散。其三，九月四日夜，频有两星大如斗，出北斗魁，向东北流。
现代文：根据星占，二颗流星夜中频频坠入贼营，贼人必定败亡散失；其三，九月四日夜，又有两颗斗大的流星，从北斗魁出，流向东北方。
English: According to the horoscope, two meteors frequently fell into the thieves' camp during the night, and the thieves must have been defeated and dispersed. On the evening of the third and fourth of September, two large meteors emerged from the Big Dipper and flowed to the northeast.

古文：依占，北斗主杀伐，贼必破败。其四，岁星主福德，频行京都二处分野。
现代文：根据星占，北斗主杀伐，贼兵必定大败；其四，岁星主福德，频频行于京都二分野处。
English: According to the horoscope, if the Big Dipper slays the thief, the thief will surely be defeated. In addition, the four-year-old star Lord Fudou frequently travels to the two fields in Kyoto.

古文：依占，国家之福。其五，去七月内，荧惑守羽林，九月七日已退舍。
现代文：根据星占，这是国家的福样；其五，去年七月间，荧惑守于羽林，九月七日退出羽林。
English: According to the horoscope, this is a blessing for the country; the fifth, in July last year, fluorescence kept in the forest, September 7 out of the forest.

古文：依占，不出三日，贼必败散。其六，去年十一月二十日夜，有流星赤如火，从东北向西南，落贼帅卢明月营，破其橦车。其七，十二月十五日夜，通汉镇北有赤气互北方，突厥将亡之应也。
现代文：根据星占，超不过三天，贼兵必定失败散亡；其六，去年十一月二十日夜，有一颗流星红得像火一样，以东北流向西南，落在贼帅卢明月营中，撞坏贼兵的一辆战车；其七，十二月十五日夜，通汉镇之北有一片红光一直居于北方，这是突厥将要败亡的应兆。
English: According to the horoscope, if it takes more than three days, the bandits will surely fail and perish; sixth, on the night of November 20 last year, a meteor red like fire, flowing from the northeast to the southwest, landed in the bandit commander Lu Mingyue's camp and crashed a bandit's chariot; seventh, on the night of December 15, north of Tonghan Town, a red light has been living in the north, which is a sign that the Turks will be defeated.

古文：依勘《城录》，河南、洛阳并当甲子，与乾元初九爻及上元甲子符合。
现代文：依据《城录》来看，河南、洛阳都应甲子，与乾元初九爻和上元甲子相符合。
English: According to the "City Directory," Henan and Luoyang are all in Kozi, which is consistent with the first nine years of the Qianyuan and the Kozi of the Shangyuan.

古文：此是福地，永无所虑。
现代文：这是福祥之地，永远不会有什么忧虑。
English: This is the land of blessing, there will never be any worries.

古文：旋观往政，侧闻前古，彼则异时间出，今则一朝总萃。
现代文：回观昔日政治，侧闻前古之事，那些都是不同的时间间隔而出，如今则是一朝之中总汇诸奇异之事。
English: Looking back on the politics of yesteryear, listening to the things of the past, those are all from different time intervals, and now it is a morning summary of strange things.

古文：岂非天赞有道，助歼凶孽？
现代文：这岂不是上天赞助有道之人，帮助歼灭凶顽吗？
English: Isn't this heaven's way of supporting the righteous and helping to destroy the wicked?

古文：方清九夷于东濊，沉五狄于北溟，告成岱岳，无为汾水。
现代文：刚刚在东秽廓清九夷，又沉五狄于北溟，以成事上报岱岳，无为于汾水。 
English: He had just cleared nine mountains in Dongtuxiguo, and sank five mountains in Beilun, and then reported that he had succeeded in reaching Mt.

古文：书奏，帝大悦，超拜秘书令。
现代文：书上奏后，炀帝非常高兴，越级提升袁充为秘书令。
English: After the book was published, Emperor Qian was very pleased and promoted Yuan Chong to the rank of secretary.

古文：亲待逾昵，每欲征讨，充皆预知之，乃假托星象，奖成帝意，在位者皆切患之。
现代文：炀帝亲宠过于常人，每次欲加征讨，袁充都事先知道。于是就假托星象，鼓励赞成炀帝的意思。朝中官员都非常痛恨他。
English: Emperor Xizong was too close to ordinary people, and Yuancheng knew in advance every time he wanted to increase the levy. So he pretended to be a star and encouraged the approval of Emperor Xizong. Officials in the DPRK and China hated him very much.

古文：宇文化及弑逆之际，并诛充。
现代文：宇文化及弑炀帝行叛逆之际，将袁充一并诛杀。
English: On the occasion of the rebellion of Emperor Yu and Emperor Zou, Yuan Cheng was killed together.

