古文：明星玉女昌容园客妻太玄女西河少女梁玉清江妃毛女秦宫人钩翼夫人南阳公主程伟妻梁母董永妻酒母女儿
现代文：明星玉女昌容园客妻太玄女西河少女梁玉清江妃毛女秦宫人钩翼夫人南阳公主程伟妻梁母董永妻酒母女儿
English: Star lady Chang Rongyuan guest wife too dark-skinned lady West River girl Liang Yu Qingjiang princess hair woman Qin palace people hook wing lady Nanyang princess Cheng Wei wife Liang mother Dong Yong wife wine mother daughter

古文：明星玉女
现代文：明星玉女
English: The star's daughter

古文：明星玉女者，居华山。服玉浆，白日升天。
现代文：明星玉女住在华山，服食玉浆而白日升天。
English: The star lady lives in Huashan, takes the food and drink and ascends to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：山顶石龟，其广数亩，高三仞。
现代文：山顶上有个石龟，有几亩地那么大的范围，高二丈四。
English: There is a stone turtle on the top of the mountain, with a range as large as several acres of land, with a height of 2'4."

古文：其侧有梯磴，远皆见。
现代文：石龟的侧面有梯磴，从远处都能看见。
English: The tortoise has a ladder on its side, which can be seen from far away.

古文：玉女祠前有五石臼，号曰玉女洗头盆。
现代文：玉女祠的前面有五个石臼，称作玉女洗头盆。
English: In front of the Jade Maiden's Shrine, there are five stone mills, known as the Jade Maiden's basin.

古文：其中水色，碧绿澄澈，雨不加溢，旱不减耗。
现代文：石臼中水色碧绿，也很清澈，下雨时不增多溢出，天旱时也不减少。
English: The water in the stone mill is turquoise and very clear. It does not overflow when it rains, nor does it decrease when it is dry.

古文：祠内有玉石马一匹焉。
现代文：祠内有一匹玉石马在那里。
English: There is a jade horse in the ancestral hall.

古文：昌容
现代文：昌容
English: Chang Rong

古文：昌容者，商王女也，修道于常山，食蓬蔂根二百余年，颜如二十许。
现代文：昌容是商王的女儿，在常山修道，吃了二百多年蓬蔂根，容颜还象二十多岁似的。
English: Chang Rong is the daughter of a merchant king, a monk in Changshan. She has eaten more than two hundred years of pongee roots, and her face still looks like she is in her twenties.

古文：能致紫草，鬻与染工，得钱以与贫病者，往来城市，世世见之。
现代文：她能弄到紫草卖给染工，得到钱就送给贫穷有病的人，往来城市买东西，几代人都见到过她。
English: She can get the comfrey to sell to the dyer, and when she gets the money, she gives it to the poor and the sick, and goes to and from the city to buy things. People have seen her for generations.

古文：远近之人，奉事者千余家，竟不知其所修之道。
现代文：远近的人敬奉她的有一千多家，人们竟然不知道她所修之道。
English: There are more than a thousand people from near and far who venerate her, yet people don't know about the path she has taken.

古文：常行日中，不见其影。
现代文：她常在日光下行走，人们却看不见她有影子。
English: She often walks in the sunlight, but people can't see her shadow.

古文：或云： 昌容能炼形者也。 
现代文：有人说： 昌容是能炼形的神仙。 
English: Some people say: Chang Rong is a divine being who can refine forms.

古文：忽冲天而去。
现代文：后来，她忽然冲天而去。
English: Later, she suddenly flew into the sky.

古文：园客妻
现代文：园客妻
English: The gardener's wife

古文：园客妻，神女也。
现代文：园客的妻子是个神女。
English: The gardener's wife is a goddess.

古文：园客者，济阴人也，美姿貌而良，邑人多欲以女妻之，客终不娶。
现代文：园客是济阴县人，相貌漂亮人又好，县里很多人想把女儿给他做妻子，园客始终不娶。
English: The gardener is from Jiyin County. He is handsome and good-looking. Many people in the county want to give him their daughter as a wife, but the gardener will never marry.

古文：常种五色香草，积数十年，服食其实。
现代文：他经常种五色香草，一直种了几十年，吃的是香草的果实。
English: He often grows five-colored vanilla, has been growing for decades, and eats the fruit of vanilla.

古文：忽有五色蛾集香草上。
现代文：一天，忽然有五色蛾落在香草上。
English: One day, a five-coloured moth suddenly landed on the herbs.

古文：客收而存之以布。
现代文：园客就把五色蛾收集起来，又用布给五色蛾垫上。
English: The gardener then collected the five-coloured moths and used a cloth to place them on a cushion.

古文：生华蚕焉。
现代文：五色蛾就在布垫上生出华蚕。
English: Five-coloured moths produce silkworms on cloth mats.

古文：至蚕出时，有一女自来助客养蚕，亦以香草饲之。
现代文：到蚕出的时候，有一个女子自己来帮助园客养蚕，也用香草饲养它。
English: By the time the silkworms come out, there is a woman herself to help gardeners raise silkworms, and also raise it with herbs.

古文：蚕壮，得茧百三十枚。
现代文：蚕长大了，收获了一百三十枚蚕茧。
English: The silkworm grew up and reaped one hundred and thirty cocoons.

古文：茧大如瓮，每一茧，缲六七日乃尽。
现代文：蚕茧象瓮那么大，每一个蚕茧抽缫丝六七天才抽完。
English: The cocoons are as big as cocoons, and it takes six or seven days to draw all the silk from each cocoon.

古文：缲讫，此女与园客俱去，济阴今有华蚕祠焉。
现代文：缫丝全部抽完以后，这个女子与园客一起走了。济阴县如今还有华蚕祠。
English: After all the cocoons were drawn, the woman left with the gardeners. Today, there is still a silkworm sanctuary in Jiyin County.

古文：太玄女
现代文：太玄女
English: Too much of a tomboy

古文：太玄女，姓颛，名和，少丧父。
现代文：太玄女姓颛名和，小时候就失去了父亲。
English: She lost her father when she was a child.

古文：或相其母子，皆曰不寿。恻然以为忧。
现代文：有人给她母子相面，都说她不能长寿，她悲悲切切地因为这事而发愁。
English: She grieved bitterly over the fact that she and her mother had been told that she would not live long.

古文：常曰： 人之处世，一失不可复生。
现代文：她常说： 人活在世上，一旦失去就不能复生。
English: She often said: People live in the world, and once they are lost, they cannot be revived.

古文：况闻寿限之促，非修道不可以延生也。 
现代文：何况听说寿限短促，不修行不可长生啊。 
English: What's more, I've heard that the lifespan is short, and you can't live forever without practicing.

古文：遂行访明师，洗心求道，得王子之术。
现代文：于是她就走访明师，洗心求道，学到了王子之术。
English: So she went to visit the master, washed her heart, and learned the art of the prince.

古文：行之累年，遂能入水不濡。
现代文：修行了几年，就能进到水中而不沾湿。
English: After a few years of training, they can enter the water without getting wet.

古文：又能徙官府宫殿城市屋宅于他处，视之无异，指之即失其所在，门户椟柜有关钥者，指之即开，指山山摧，指树树拆，更指之，即复如故。
现代文：下大雪寒冷时，她穿着单衣站在冰上，而脸色不变，身体温暖，可以坚持到几天。又能把官府、宫殿、屋宅移到别处，看起来与原来无异，用手一指就又都消失了。门户箱柜有锁头的，她用手一指就开。指山山崩，指树树倒，再指一指它，就又恢复如旧。
English: When it snows heavily and is cold, she stands on the ice wearing a singlet, but her face is unchanged and her body is warm, which can last for several days. She can also move the government office, palace, and mansion to another place, and they will look the same as before, and they will all disappear with a single finger. The portal box has a lock, and she can open it with a single finger. If it is a landslide, if it is a tree falling, if it is a tree falling, if it is a tree falling, if it is a tree falling, if it is a tree falling, if it is a tree falling, if it is a tree falling, if it

古文：将弟子行山间，日暮，以杖叩石，即开门户。
现代文：领着弟子在山里走，日落的时候，她用手杖敲一敲石头，石头就打开门户。
English: She led her disciple to walk in the mountains. At sunset, she tapped a stone with her cane, and the stone opened the portal.

古文：入其中，屋宇床褥帏帐，廪供酒食如常。
现代文：进到里面，屋舍床褥帏帐，贮存的粮米酒食象平常一样。
English: Once inside, the dormitory beds are made, and the stored grain, rice, wine, and food are prepared as usual.

古文：虽行万里，所在常尔。
现代文：即使行走万里，所到之处总是这样。
English: Even if you walk for thousands of miles, it's always like this everywhere you go.

古文：能令小物忽大如屋，大物忽小如毫芒。
现代文：她还能让小的东西忽然间变得象房子那么大，让大的东西忽然间变得象细毛和芒刺那么小。
English: She could make small things suddenly as big as houses, and big things suddenly as small as hairs and thorns.

古文：或吐火张天，嘘之即灭。
现代文：有时吐出火来弥漫天空，吹一口气它就灭了。
English: Sometimes it breathes fire and fills the sky, and with a single breath it is extinguished.

古文：又能坐炎火之中，衣履不燃。
现代文：她还能坐在烈火之中，而衣服不燃烧。
English: She can sit in the middle of a fire and her clothes don't burn.

古文：须臾之间，或化老翁，或为小儿，或为车马，无所不为。
现代文：能在一会儿工夫，或变成老翁，或变成小孩，或变成车马，没有什么东西不能变。
English: You can turn into an old man, or a child, or a horse and carriage in a moment. There is nothing that cannot be changed.

古文：行三十六术甚效，起死回生，救人无数。
现代文：她施行三十六样法术都很灵，起死回生，救人无数。
English: Her thirty-six spells were very effective, bringing people back to life and saving countless lives.

古文：不知其何所服食，亦无得其术者。
现代文：但人们不知道她服食什么东西，也没有学到她的法术的人。
English: But no one knows what she eats, or who learned her spells.

古文：颜色益少，鬓发如鸦。
现代文：她的容颜越来越年轻，鬓发乌黑。
English: Her face is getting younger and younger, her hair is turning jet black.

古文：忽白日升天而去。
现代文：有一天，她忽然白日升天而去。
English: One day, she suddenly ascended into the sky.

古文：西河少女
现代文：西河少女
English: The West River Girl

古文：西河少女者，神仙伯山甫外甥也。
现代文：西河少女，是神仙伯山甫的外甥女。
English: The girl from the West River is the niece of Shenshen Bo Shanfu.

古文：山甫雍州人，入华山学道，精思服食，时还乡里省亲族。
现代文：伯山甫是雍州人，进入华山修道，精心思道服食仙药，有时回到家乡故里探望亲戚族人。
English: Baoshanfu is a native of Yongzhou. He entered the Huashan monastery, carefully meditated and took food and medicine, and sometimes returned to his hometown to visit relatives.

古文：二百余年，容状益少。
现代文：二百多年了，伯山甫的容貌状态越来越年轻。
English: For more than two hundred years, Heshan Fu's appearance has been getting younger and younger.

古文：入人家，即知其家先世已来善恶功过，有如目击。
现代文：他走进别人家里，就知道那家先代以来的善恶功过，就象亲眼见到一般。
English: When he walks into someone else's home, he knows the good and bad deeds of that family since the previous generation, as if he saw it with his own eyes.

古文：又知将来吉凶，言无不效。
现代文：又知道将来的吉凶，他说的话无不灵验。
English: He also knows the future, and what he says is always right.

古文：见其外甥女年少多病，与之药。
现代文：看他的外甥女年少多病，就给她药吃。
English: Seeing how young and sick his niece was, he gave her some medicine.

古文：女服药时，年已七十，稍稍还少，色如婴儿。
现代文：他的外甥女服药时，已经七十岁了，吃药后渐渐返回少年，脸色象婴儿。
English: His niece, who was in her 70s when she started taking the pills, gradually returned to her youthful, baby-faced self.

古文：汉遣使行经西河，于城东见一女子，笞一老翁。
现代文：汉朝派使者行经西河，在城东看到一个女子正打一个老翁。
English: The Han Dynasty sent an envoy to travel through the West River. In the east of the city, they saw a woman beating an old man.

古文：头白如雪，跪而受杖。
现代文：这个老翁头白如雪，跪在地上接受杖打。
English: The old man, his head as white as snow, kneeled on the ground to be beaten with a cane.

古文：使者怪而问之，女子答曰： 此是妾儿也。
现代文：使者觉得奇怪就问那女子，女子回答说： 这是我的儿子。
English: And the messenger wondered, and asked the damsel: and the damsel answered, This is my son.

古文：昔妾舅伯山甫，得神仙之道，隐居华山中。
现代文：从前，我的舅舅伯山甫得了神仙之道，隐居在华山中。
English: Once upon a time, my uncle, Bishan Fu, was granted immortality and lived in seclusion in the Huashan Mountains.

古文：悯妾多病，以神药授妾，渐复少壮。
现代文：他可怜我多病，就拿神药给我，我吃了药就渐渐恢复少壮。
English: He took pity on my illness and gave me some divine medicine. After taking the medicine, I gradually regained my youthful strength.

古文：今此儿，妾令服药不肯，致此衰老，行不及妾，妾恚之，故因杖耳。 
现代文：如今这个儿子，我让他服药他不肯，以致这般衰老，走路追不上我，我生他的气，所以就杖打他。 
English: Now this son, I asked him to take medicine, he didn't want to, so he's so old, he can't walk with me, I'm angry with him, so I beat him with a cane.

古文：使者问女及儿年各几许，女子答云： 妾年一百三十岁，儿年七十一矣。 
现代文：使者问女子和儿子年龄各多少，女子回答说： 我一百三十岁，儿子七十一岁。 
English: The messenger asked the woman and her son how old they were. The woman replied, "I am one hundred and thirty years old, and my son is seventy-one."

古文：此女亦入华山而去。
现代文：这个女子也入华山而去。
English: This woman also fled to Huashan.

古文：梁玉清
现代文：梁玉清
English: Liang Yuqing

古文：《东方朔内传》云，秦并六国，太白星窃织女侍儿梁玉清、卫承庄，逃入卫城少仙洞，四十六日不出。
现代文：《东方朔内传》记载，秦始皇吞并六国的时候，太白星把织女的侍女梁玉清和卫承庄拐走，逃进卫城的少仙洞，四十六天不出来。
English: "Oriental History" records that when the First Emperor of Qin annexed the Six Kingdoms, Taibai Xing abducted the weaver's maid, Liang Yuqing, and Wei Chengzhuang, fled into the Shoshen Cave in the Acropolis, and did not come out for 46 days.

古文：天帝怒，命五岳搜捕焉。
现代文：天帝大怒，命令五岳之神搜捕他们。
English: The Heavenly Emperor was furious and ordered the Gods of the Five Mountains to hunt them down.

古文：太白归位，卫承庄逃焉。
现代文：太白星被抓回去，卫承庄逃跑了。
English: Taibai Xing was taken back and Wei Chengzhuang fled.

古文：梁玉清有子名休，玉清谪于北斗下。
现代文：梁玉清有个儿子名叫休，玉清被贬到北斗下。
English: Liang Yuching had a son named Xiu. Yuching was demoted to the level of the Big Dipper.

古文：常春，其子乃配于河伯，骖乘行雨。
现代文：每年当春，梁玉清的儿子就分配给河伯，驾车行雨。
English: Every year in the spring, Liang Yuqing's son is assigned to Hebei, driving in the rain.

古文：子休每至少仙洞，耻其母淫奔之所，辄回驭，故此地常少雨焉。江妃
现代文：梁玉清的儿子休每次到少仙洞，就因为那里是他母亲淫奔的地方，而觉得羞耻，就把雨车赶回，所以这个地方常常少雨。江妃
English: Every time Liang Yuqing's son Xu went to Shao Xian Cave, he felt ashamed because it was the place where his mother had run away, so he drove the rain cart back, so this place often had little rain.

古文：郑交甫常游汉江，见二女，皆丽服华装，佩两明珠，大如鸡卵。
现代文：郑交甫曾经在汉江游玩时见到两个女子，她们都穿着华丽的服装，佩戴着两个像鸡蛋那么大的明珠。
English: Zheng Jiafu once saw two women while traveling on the Han River. They were both dressed in gorgeous clothing and wearing two pearls as big as eggs.

古文：交甫见而悦之，不知其神人也。谓其仆曰： 我欲下请其佩。 
现代文：交甫看到了很喜欢，不知道她们是神仙，就对他的仆人说： 我想要下去讨求她们佩戴的珠子。 
English: When Kaifu saw them, he liked them very much. Not knowing that they were immortals, he said to his servant, "I want to go down and ask for the beads they wear."

古文：仆曰： 此间之人，皆习于辞，不得恐罹悔焉。 
现代文：仆人说： 这里的人都善于辞令，得不到，恐怕还会沮丧后悔。 
English: The servant said, "The people here are good at making speeches. If they don't get what they want, I'm afraid they'll be disappointed and regret it."

古文：交甫不听，遂下与之言曰： 二女劳矣。 
现代文：交甫不听，就下去跟她们说： 二位女子辛苦了。 
English: When Kaifu didn't listen, he went down and said to them, "These two women have worked hard.

古文：二女答曰： 客子有劳，妾何劳之有？ 
现代文：二女回答说： 旅居异地的人辛苦，我们有什么辛苦？ 
English: The two women replied, "People who live in other places have a hard time. What hard time do we have?

古文：交甫曰： 桔是橙也，我盛之以笥，令附汉水，将流而下，我遵其旁搴之，知吾为不逊也，愿请子佩。 
现代文：交甫说： 桔子就是橙子，我用方筐盛着它，令它浮在汉水上，将顺流而下。我沿着它的旁边提取它，知道我是不辞让的，想请求您佩戴的东西。 
English: Kaifu said, "An orange is an orange. I put it in a square basket, let it float on the Han River, and it will float down the river. I extracted it along its side, knowing that I was uncompromising and wanted to ask you to wear something.

古文：二女曰： 桔是橙也，盛之以莒，令附汉水，将流而下，我遵其旁，卷其芝而茹之。 
现代文：二女说： 桔子是橙子，用圆筐盛之，令它浮于汉水，顺流而下，我在它的旁边，卷其芝而吃之。 
English: The second girl said, "Oranges are oranges. I put them in a basket, let them float in the Han River, and then go down the river. Next to them, I roll them up and eat them."

古文：手解佩以与交甫，交甫受而怀之。
现代文：亲手解下佩珠把它交给了交甫。交甫接过珠子就揣在怀中。
English: He untied the bead with his own hands and handed it to Kaifu. Kaifu took the bead and held it in his arms.

古文：即趋而去，行数十步，视怀空无珠，二女忽不见。
现代文：快步离开以后，走了几十步，看到怀中已空，明珠没有了，二女也忽然不见了。
English: After leaving at a brisk pace, he walked a few dozen steps and saw that his arms were empty, the pearl was gone, and the two women had suddenly disappeared.

古文：《诗》云： 汉有游女，不可求思。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 汉有游女，不可求思。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: If there is a wandering woman in China, do not think about it.

古文：言其以礼自防，人莫敢犯，况神仙之变化乎？
现代文：说的是她们以礼自防，没有人敢冒犯，何况是神仙变化的呢？
English: What they are saying is that they protect themselves with courtesy, no one dares to offend them, and what's more, the gods have changed?

古文：毛女
现代文：毛女
English: The Hairy Woman

古文：毛女，字玉姜，在华阴山中。
现代文：毛女叫玉姜，住在华阴山中。
English: The maiden's name is Jade Jiang, and she lives in the Huayin Mountains.

古文：山客猎师，世世见之。
现代文：进山之客和猎师，一代代人都见过她。
English: Visitors to the mountains and hunters have seen her for generations.

古文：形体生毛，自言秦始皇宫人也。
现代文：她遍体生毛，自己说是秦始皇的宫女。
English: She had hair all over her body and said that she was the daughter of Emperor Qin Shi Huang.

古文：秦亡，流亡入山，道士教食松叶，遂不饥寒，身轻如此。
现代文：秦朝灭亡时逃亡进山，道士教给她吃松树叶，于是不饥寒，身轻如此。
English: When the Qin Dynasty was overthrown, she fled into the mountains. Taoists taught her to eat pine leaves, so she was never hungry or cold, and her body was light.

古文：至西汉时，已百七十余年矣。
现代文：到西汉时，已经一百七十多年了。
English: By the time it reached the Western Han Dynasty, it was already more than 170 years old.

古文：秦宫人
现代文：秦宫人
English: Qin Gongren

古文：汉成帝时，猎者于终南山中见一人，无衣服，身生黑毛。
现代文：汉成帝时，打猎的人在终南山中见到一个人。这个人没有衣服，身上生着黑毛。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hancheng, a hunter saw a man in the South Mountain. The man had no clothes and had black hair.

古文：猎人欲取之，而其人逾坑越谷，有如飞腾，不可追及。
现代文：猎人想要抓住她，而那个人跳过坑越过山谷，像飞腾一般，不能追到。
English: The hunter tried to catch her, but the man leapt over the pit and over the valley, like a bird, and could not be caught.

古文：于是乃密伺其所在，合围而得之。
现代文：于是猎人就在暗中窥伺她所在之处，合围抓到她。
English: So the hunters spied on her whereabouts and rounded her up.

古文：问之；言： 我本秦之宫人，闻关东贼至，秦王出降，宫室烧燔，惊走入山。
现代文：并问她，她说： 我本来是秦朝的宫女，听说函谷关以东的贼兵来到，秦王出城投降，宫室被烧，就逃走进了山。
English: And asked her, she said: I used to be the Qin Dynasty's concubine. I heard that the robber soldiers from east of the Hangeul Pass arrived, the Qin King left the city to surrender, and his palace was burned, so I fled into the mountains.

古文：饥无所餐，当饿死，有一老翁，教我食松叶松实。
现代文：饿了没有东西吃，要饿死了，有一个老翁教我吃松叶松果。
English: Hungry, nothing to eat, starving to death, an old man taught me to eat pine needles and pine nuts.

古文：当时苦涩，后稍便之，遂不饥渴，冬不寒，夏不热。 
现代文：当时吃后觉得苦涩，后来渐渐适应了，就不饥渴了，冬天不觉得冷，夏天不觉得热。 
English: At that time, I felt bitter after eating. Later, as I gradually adapted, I didn't feel hungry or thirsty, I didn't feel cold in winter, and I didn't feel hot in summer.

古文：计此女定是秦王子婴宫人，至成帝时，一百许岁，猎人将归，以谷食之。
现代文：估计这个女子一定是秦王子婴的宫女，到汉成帝时，一百多岁了，猎人就把她领回去，拿五谷给她吃。
English: It is estimated that this woman must have been the concubine of the infant Prince Qin. By the time of Emperor Han, she was more than a hundred years old, so the hunter took her back and gave her grain to eat.

古文：初时闻谷臭，呕吐，累日乃安。
现代文：开始时她闻到谷子觉得臭而呕吐，过了些日子就适应了。
English: At first, she vomited when she smelled the smell, but after a few days she got used to it.

古文：如是一年许，身毛稍脱落，转老而死。
现代文：如此一年多，女子身上的毛渐渐脱落，转眼变老而死。
English: For more than a year, the hair on the woman's body gradually fell off, and she suddenly became old and died.

古文：向使不为人所得，便成仙人也。
现代文：先前假使不被人所获，就成为仙人了。
English: In the past, if you didn't get caught, you became a hermit.

古文：钩翼夫人
现代文：钩翼夫人
English: Mrs. Hookwings

古文：钩翼夫人，齐人也，姓赵，少好清净。
现代文：钩翼夫人是齐人，姓赵，小时候就喜好清净。
English: Mrs. Hook Wing is a Qian, surnamed Zhao, who liked to be clean when she was a child.

古文：病卧六年，右手卷，饮食少。
现代文：她有病卧床六年，右手卷曲，饮食少。
English: She has been bedridden for six years, has a curled right hand and eats little.

古文：汉武帝时，望气者云东北有贵人气，推而得之，召到。
现代文：汉武帝时，望气的人说东北方有贵人气，经推算而找到她，召她进宫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Wudi, hopeful people said that there was a noble popularity in the northeast, and after calculation, they found her and called her to the palace.

古文：姿色甚伟，武帝发其手而得玉钩，手得展。
现代文：她的姿色很美，汉武帝扒开她的右手而得到玉钩，手能伸开了。
English: Her appearance was very beautiful. Emperor Hanwu opened her right hand and got a jade hook. Her hand was able to stretch out.

古文：幸之，生昭帝。
现代文：汉武帝宠幸她，生下昭帝。
English: Emperor Hanwu favored her, and she gave birth to Emperor Zhao.

古文：武帝寻害之，殡尸不冷而香。
现代文：武帝后来杀害了她，殡殓时，她的尸体不冷而香。
English: Emperor Wu later killed her, and at the funeral, her body was not cold but fragrant.

古文：一月后，昭帝即位，更葬之，棺空，但有丝履，故名其宫曰钩翼，后避讳改为弋。
现代文：一个月后，昭帝即位，为她改葬，棺中已空，只有丝鞋，所以给她的宫命名为钩翼，后来避讳改为弋。
English: A month later, Emperor Zhao ascended to the throne, and her coffin was empty except for a pair of silk shoes, so her palace was named the Hook Wing Palace. Later, the name was changed to the Imperial Palace.

古文：南阳公主
现代文：南阳公主
English: Nanyang Princess

古文：汉南阳公主，出降王咸。
现代文：汉朝的南阳公主，下嫁给王咸。
English: Nanyang Princess of the Han Dynasty, married to Wang Xian.

古文：属王莽秉政，公主夙慕空虚，崇尚至道。
现代文：王咸的族人王莽掌管政务。公主早就仰慕空虚，崇尚至道。
English: Wang Mang, a member of Wang Xian's clan, is in charge of government affairs. The princess has long admired emptiness and advocated the Tao.

古文：每追文景之为理世，又知武帝之世，累降神仙，谓咸曰： 国危世乱，非女子可以扶持。
现代文：常常追念文帝、景帝治理的盛世，又知道武帝那一代，屡有神仙降临，就对王咸说： 国家危机，时代混乱，不是女子可以扶持的。
English: Often recalling the golden age of the governance of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, and knowing that Emperor Wu's generation was frequently visited by the gods, he said to Wang Xian: National crisis, chaos of the times, is not something a woman can support.

古文：但当自保恬和，退身修道，稍远嚣竞，必可延生。
现代文：只应自保安然平和，退身修道，与喧闹纷争稍远，一定可以延年。
English: It is only necessary to keep oneself safe and peaceful, retreat to the monastery, and stay away from the noise and strife for a while, which will surely prolong one's life.

古文：若碌碌随时进退，恐不可免于支离之苦，奔迫之患也。 
现代文：如果平庸无能地随着时势进退，恐怕不能免除流离之苦和奔波之患。 
English: If mediocrity and incompetence advance and retreat with the times, I am afraid that we will not be able to avoid the suffering of displacement and the scourge of rushing.

古文：咸曰黾俯世禄，未从其言。
现代文：王咸说他尽力为朝廷俸禄勤劳，没有听从她的话。
English: Wang Xian said that he tried his best to work hard for the imperial court and did not listen to her words.

古文：公主遂于华山结庐，栖止岁余。
现代文：公主就在华山盖了草房，住了一年多。
English: The princess built a grass hut on Huashan Mountain and lived there for more than a year.

古文：精思苦切，真灵感应，遂舍庐室而去。
现代文：由于她精思苦修，就有真灵感应，终于舍弃屋室而去。
English: As a result of her hard work, she had a true inspiration and finally left the house.

古文：人或见之，徐徐绝壑，秉云气冉冉而去。
现代文：有的人看到她在绝壁上慢慢地乘着云气冉冉而去。
English: Some people saw her on the cliff slowly riding on the clouds and running away.

古文：咸入山追之，越巨壑，升层巅，涕泗追望，漠然无迹。
现代文：王咸入山去追她，越过大沟，登上一层层山巅，涕泪交流地追望，但四处寂静无声也无公主的踪迹。
English: Wang Xian chased her into the mountains, crossed the ditch, climbed up the mountain peaks, and looked after her with tears and exchanges, but there was no trace of the princess.

古文：忽于岭上见遗朱履一双，前而取之，已化为石。
现代文：忽而在岭上见到公主遗留的一双红鞋，就上前去取它，红鞋已经变成石头了。
English: Suddenly, on the ridge, he saw a pair of red shoes left behind by the princess, so he went up to get them. The red shoes had turned into stone.

古文：因谓为公主峰，潘安仁为记，行于世。
现代文：于是称那里为公主峰。潘安仁为此事写了传记，流传在世上。
English: So they called it the Princess Peak. Pan Anren wrote a biography about this, which has been passed down to the world.

古文：程伟妻
现代文：程伟妻
English: Cheng Wei's wife

古文：汉期门郎程伟妻，得道者也。
现代文：汉代期门郎程伟的妻子，是个得道的人。
English: The wife of Cheng Wei, a monk in the Han Dynasty, was a learned person.

古文：能通神变化，伟不甚异之。
现代文：她能通神变化，程伟也不太觉得稀奇。
English: She can channel change, and Cheng Wei doesn't think it's strange.

古文：伟当从驾出行，而服饰不备，甚以为忧。
现代文：有一次，程伟跟着皇帝出行，而服饰没有准备，很为此事忧愁。
English: Once, Cheng Wei accompanied the emperor on a trip, but the clothes were not prepared, and he was very sad about this.

古文：妻曰： 止阙衣耳，何愁之甚耶？ 
现代文：他的妻子说： 只不过缺少衣服而已，何必愁得那么厉害呢？ 
English: His wife said, "It's just a lack of clothes, why worry so much?"

古文：即致两匹缣，忽然自至。
现代文：就弄来两匹双丝细绢，这两匹绢是忽然自己来的。
English: So he brought two fine-haired pheasants. The two pheasants had suddenly appeared of their own accord.

古文：伟亦好黄白之术，炼时即不成，妻乃出囊中药少许，以器盛水银，投药而煎之，须臾成银矣。
现代文：程伟也喜好烧炼丹药点化金银的法术，炼时没有成功，他的妻子就从囊中拿出一点点药，用容器盛装水银，把药投进去煎熬，不一会儿就变成银子了。
English: Cheng Wei was also fond of the magic of burning herbs and spices to make gold and silver. When it was not successful, his wife took out a little medicine from her bag, put mercury in a container, and threw the medicine into it. After a while, it turned into silver.

古文：伟欲从之受方。终不能得。
现代文：程伟想要跟她学习这个法术，始终没能办到。
English: Cheng Wei wanted to learn this spell from her, but he was never able to.

古文：云，伟骨相不应得。
现代文：他的妻子说，从程伟的骨相看，他不应该得到点金术。
English: His wife said that judging from Cheng Wei's bones, he should not get a gold medal.

古文：逼之不已，妻遂蹶然而死。尸解而去。
现代文：程伟不停地逼迫她，她就急遽而死，尸解而去。
English: Cheng Wei continued to persecute her, and she died suddenly and was dissected.

古文：梁母
现代文：梁母
English: Liang Moo

古文：梁母者，盱眙人也，寡居无子，舍逆旅于平原亭。
现代文：梁母是盱眙人，寡居没有儿子，在平原亭开个客店。
English: Liang's mother was a widow with no son. She opened an inn in Pingyuan Pavilion.

古文：客来投憩，咸若还家。
现代文：客人来投宿休息，全像回到家里一样。
English: When guests come to stay, it's like coming home.

古文：客还钱多少，未尝有言。
现代文：客人给钱多少，她也从不说什么。
English: She never says how much her guests pay.

古文：客住经月，亦无所厌。
现代文：客人住几个月，她也没有什么厌烦的表示。
English: Guests stay for months, and she shows no sign of tiring.

古文：自家衣食之外，所得施之贫寒。
现代文：挣到的钱，除了自家衣食之外，就把它施舍给贫寒的人。
English: The money they earn, in addition to their own food and clothing, they give it to the poor.

古文：常有少年住经日，举动异常，临去曰： 我东海小童也。 
现代文：曾有个年轻人在这住了几天，这个年轻人举动异常，临走时说： 我是东海小童。 
English: There was a young man who lived here for a few days. This young man behaved abnormally and said as he was leaving: I am a Tokaido child.

古文：母亦不知小童何人也。
现代文：梁母也不知道小童是什么人。
English: Liang's mother did not know who the child was.

古文：宋元徽四年丙辰，马耳山道士徐道盛暂至蒙阴，于蜂城西遇一青牛车，车自行。
现代文：宋元徽四年丙辰，马耳山道士徐道盛临时到蒙阴去，在蜂城西遇见一辆青牛拉的车，牛车自己往前走。
English: In the fourth year of the Song and Yuan Dynasties, the Maltese Taoist Xu Daosheng went to Mengyin temporarily. He met a cart pulled by a young ox in the west of Bee City, and the ox cart went forward on its own.

古文：见一童呼为徐道士前，道盛行进，去车三步许止。
现代文：这时只见一个小童召呼徐道士前去，徐道盛就往前走，离车三步左右站住了。
English: At this time, I saw a child calling Xu Daosheng to go forward. Xu Daosheng walked forward and stopped about three steps away from the car.

古文：又见二童子，年并十二三许，齐着黄衣，绛裹头上髻，容服端整，世所无也。
现代文：又看到两个童子，年龄都在十二三岁左右，都穿着黄色衣服，用大红色的布帛裹着头上发髻，而容貌端庄服饰整齐，是人世上没有的。
English: I also saw two boys, both about twelve or thirteen years old, both dressed in yellow, with their hair tied up with a large red cloth around their heads, and their appearance dignified and neatly dressed, such as is not to be found in the world.

古文：车中人遣一童子传语曰： 我平原客舍梁母也，今被太上召还，应过蓬莱寻子乔，经太山考召，意欲相见，果得子来。
现代文：车里的人派一个小童传话说： 我是平原客舍的梁母，如今被太上道君召回，应当经过蓬莱寻访子乔，经泰山考召，意欲相见，果得子来。
English: The people in the car sent a small child to say: I am the mother of the guest house in the plain, and now I have been called back by the empress Dowager. I should go through Penglai to look for my son Qiao, pass the test of Mount Tai, and if I want to meet him, my son will come.

古文：灵辔飘飘，岗崄巇，津驿有限，日程三千。
现代文：灵辔飘飘，山脊上艰险崎岖，渡口和驿站有限，每日行程三千。
English: The casket floats, the ridge is difficult and rugged, the ferry and the station are limited, and the daily trip is three thousand.

古文：侍对在近，我心忧劳，便当乘烟三清，此三子见送到玄都国。
现代文：陪同尊长回答应对就在近日，我的心里很忧伤，就得乘烟霞上三清，这三个童子送我到玄都国。
English: Accompanying His Eminence replied, "It was just recently. My heart was very sad, so I had to take advantage of the smog to go to Sanqing. These three boys sent me to Xuandu Province."

古文：汝为我谢东方诸清信士女，太平在近，十有余一，好相开度，过此忧危。 
现代文：你替我向东方各位清信士女辞谢。太平就在近期，十一年后，好度引你，度过这个危难之忧。 
English: Thank you for me to all the women of the East who are pure believers. Peace is in the near future, eleven years later, good luck to you, get through this crisis.

古文：举手谢云： 太平相见。 
现代文：梁母又举手告辞说： 太平时再相见。 
English: Liang's mother also raised her hand in farewell and said, "I'll see you again when the world is at peace."

古文：驰车腾逝，极目乃没。
现代文：就驱车腾飞而去，极力望去就没影了。
English: I drove away, and when I tried to look back, there was no shadow.

古文：道盛还逆旅访之，正梁母度世日相见也。
现代文：徐道盛回到平原旅舍打听梁母，正是梁母脱离尘世的那天见到她的。
English: Xu Daosheng went back to the Plain Hostel to inquire about Liang's mother. It was the day Liang's mother left this world that he met her.

古文：董永妻
现代文：董永妻
English: Dong Yongzhuan

古文：董永父亡，无以葬，乃自卖为奴。
现代文：董永的父亲死了，没有钱安葬，董永就自卖为奴。
English: Dong Yong's father died, and without money to bury him, Dong Yong sold himself into slavery.

古文：主知其贤，与钱千万遣之。
现代文：主人知道他品德好，给他一千万钱打发他走了。
English: His master knew that he had a good character and gave him ten million dollars to let him go.

古文：永行三年丧毕，欲还诣主，供其奴职。
现代文：董永行三年丧礼守孝完毕，就想回到主人那里，奉行他的奴隶职责。
English: After three years of funeral and filial piety, Dong Yongxing wanted to return to his master and carry out his slave duties.

古文：道逢一妇人曰： 愿为子妻。 
现代文：在路上，董永遇到一个女子，这个女子对他说： 愿意做您的妻子。 
English: On the way, Dong Yong met a woman who said to him, "I am willing to be your wife."

古文：遂与之俱。
现代文：就与董永一起到主人家。
English: Together with Dong Yong, they went to the master's house.

古文：主谓永曰： 以钱丐君矣。 
现代文：主人说： 我把钱给你了。 
English: The owner said, "I gave you the money.

古文：永曰： 蒙君之恩，父丧收藏，永虽小人。必欲服勤致力，以报厚德。 
现代文：董永说： 我承蒙您的恩德，父亲死了使他的尸骨得到收藏，我董永即使是小人，也一定要承担劳役尽我之力，用来报答您的厚德。 
English: Dong Yong said: I am indebted to your kindness. My father died so that his bones could be collected. Even though I am a villain, I must do my best to repay your kindness.

古文：主曰： 妇人何能？ 
现代文：主人问： 这个女子能做什么？ 
English: The host asked: What can this woman do?

古文：永曰： 能织。 
现代文：董永说： 能纺织。 
English: Dong Yong said: Can weave.

古文：主曰： 必尔者，但令君妇为我织缣百匹。 
现代文：主人说： 你一定要这样做的话，只要让你的妻子给我织一百匹双丝细绢就行了。 
English: The master said, "If you must do this, just have your wife weave me a hundred pairs of silk stockings."

古文：于是永妻为主人家织，十日而百匹具焉。
现代文：于是董永的妻子就给主人家织布，十天就把一百匹双丝细绢全部织成了。
English: As a result, Dong Yong's wife began to weave cloth for her master's family, and in ten days she had woven a hundred pairs of fine silk cocoons.

古文：酒母
现代文：酒母
English: Mother of Wine

古文：酒母，阙下酒妇。
现代文：酒母，是都城里卖酒的女子。
English: "Wine mother" is a woman who sells wine in the capital.

古文：遇师呼于老者，不知何许人也。
现代文：遇到一个师父叫于老，不知是哪里人。
English: Encountered a master called Yu Lao, I don't know who he is.

古文：年五十余，云已数百岁。
现代文：这个于老五十多岁，他自己说已经几百岁了。
English: This man is in his fifties, but he says he is hundreds of years old.

古文：酒妇异之，每加礼敬。
现代文：卖酒的女子觉得他是个奇人，常常加礼恭敬。
English: The woman selling alcohol thinks he's a freak, and often gives him a respectful bow.

古文：忽来谓妇曰： 急装束，与汝共应中陵王去。 
现代文：有一天，于老忽然来对女子说： 赶快打扮，我和你一起接应中陵王去。 
English: One day, Yu Lao suddenly came to the woman and said: "Quickly dress up, I will go with you to meet Zhongling Wang."

古文：是夜果有异人来，持二茅狗，一与于老，一与酒妇，俱令骑之，乃龙也。
现代文：这天晚上果然有异人到来，那个人牵着两只茅狗，一只给了于老，一只给了卖酒的女子，让他们全都骑上，茅狗原来是龙。
English: That evening, a stranger did indeed arrive. The man was leading two thatched dogs. He gave one to the old man and one to the woman selling wine, and they all rode on it. The thatched dog turned out to be a dragon.

古文：相随上华阴山上，常大呼云： 于老酒母在此。 
现代文：他们就随着那个异人上了华阴山。山上有人常常大声呼喊着说： 于老酒母在此。 
English: They followed the stranger up Huayin Mountain. On the mountain, someone would often call out loudly, "Here is old mother Yu."

古文：女几
现代文：女几
English: Girl's high chair

古文：女几者，陈市上酒妇也，作酒常美。
现代文：女几是陈市上造酒的女子，她造的酒很是美味。
English: She is a woman who makes wine in Chen City. The wine she makes is very delicious.

古文：仙人过其家饮酒，即以素书五卷质酒钱。
现代文：有一次，仙人路过她家饮酒，就用素书五卷抵押酒钱。
English: Once, when a genie passed by her house to drink, he pawned five volumes of plain paper to pay for the alcohol.

古文：几开视之，乃仙方养性长生之术也。
现代文：女几打开书一看，原来是仙方养性长生的法术。
English: When the girl opened the book, it turned out to be a spell for cultivating longevity.

古文：几私写其要诀，依而修之。
现代文：她就偷偷地把书中的要诀写下来，依照它修炼。
English: She secretly wrote down the key points in the book and practiced according to it.

古文：三年，颜色更少，如二十许人。
现代文：三年时间，女几的容颜更年轻了。像二十岁左右的人。
English: In three years, the girl's face has become younger, like that of a 20-year-old.

古文：数岁，质酒仙人复来，笑谓之曰： 盗道无师，有翅不飞。 
现代文：几年后，抵押酒钱的那个仙人又来了，他笑着对女几说： 偷来的道没有老师，有翅膀也不能飞。 
English: A few years later, the hermit who pawned the wine money came again. He smiled and said to the girl: "The stolen road has no teacher, and it can't fly with wings.

古文：女几随仙人去，居山历年，人常见之。
现代文：女几就跟着仙人走了，在山上住了许多年，人们常常见到她。
English: The girl followed the hermit and lived in the mountains for many years, where she was often seen.

古文：其后不知所适，今所居即女几山也。
现代文：其后不知道她到哪里去了，如今，她居住过的山就是女几山。
English: After that, I don't know where she went, but today, the mountain where she lived is Mengjiashan.

