古文：廉颇者，赵之良将也。
现代文：廉颇，是赵国优秀的将领。
English: He was an honest man and an excellent general of Zhao.

古文：赵惠文王十六年，廉颇为赵将伐齐，大破之，取阳晋，拜为上卿，以勇气闻於诸侯。
现代文：赵惠文王十六年，廉颇率领赵军征讨齐国，大败齐军，夺取了阳晋，被赵王封为上卿，他以作战勇敢闻名于诸侯各国。
English: In the 16th year of King Zhao Huiwen, he led the Zhao army to invade Qi, defeated the Qi army, captured Yangjin, and was appointed by King Zhao as Shangqing. He was famous for his bravery in battle.

古文：蔺相如者，赵人也，为赵宦者令缪贤舍人。
现代文：蔺相如是赵国人，是赵国宦者令缪贤家的门客。
English: Gong Xiangru is a native of Zhao, and a protégé of Zhao's ruler, Ling Muixian.

古文：赵惠文王时，得楚和氏璧。
现代文：赵惠文王的时候，得到了楚国的和氏璧。
English: During the reign of King Zhao Huiwen, he was awarded the title of "Wu Shi Bi" of Chu.

古文：秦昭王闻之，使人遗赵王书，原以十五城请易璧。
现代文：秦昭王听说了这件事，就派人给赵王一封书信，表示愿意用十五座城池换和氏璧。
English: When Qin Zhao Wang heard about this, he sent a letter to Zhao Wang, expressing his willingness to exchange fifteen castles for the gems of the He clan.

古文：赵王与大将军廉颇诸大臣谋：欲予秦，秦城恐不可得，徒见欺；欲勿予，即患秦兵之来。
现代文：赵王同大将军廉颇及大臣们商量：要是把宝玉给了秦国，秦国的城邑恐怕不可能得到，白白地被人欺骗；要是不给呢，就怕秦军马上来攻打赵国。
English: Zhao Wang discussed with the great general Renpo and the ministers: if the precious stones were given to Qin, the cities and towns of Qin would probably be impossible to obtain, and they would be deceived in vain; if they were not given, they would be afraid that the Qin army would immediately attack Zhao.

古文：计未定，求人可使报秦者，未得。
现代文：对策没有商量好，想找一个能派到秦国去回复的使者，没能找到。
English: The countermeasures were not well discussed, and in an attempt to find an emissary who could be sent to Qin to respond, they were unable to find one.

古文：宦者令缪贤曰： 臣舍人蔺相如可使。 
现代文：宦者令缪贤说： 我的门客蔺相如可以出使秦国。 
English: The eunuch ordered Miao Xian to say: My disciple Miao Xuan can be sent to Qin.

古文：王问： 何以知之？ 
现代文：赵王问： 你怎么知道他可以呢？ 
English: Zhao Wang asked: How do you know he can swim?

古文：对曰： 臣尝有罪，窃计欲亡走燕，臣舍人相如止臣，曰： 君何以知燕王？ 
现代文：缪贤回答说： 为臣曾犯过罪，私下打算逃亡到燕国去，我的门客相如阻拦我，说： 您如何知道燕王肯定会收留您？ 
English: Miao Xian replied, "My vassal once committed a crime and secretly planned to flee to Yan's country. My guests stopped me and said, "How do you know that Yan's king will definitely accept you?"

古文：臣语曰： 臣尝从大王与燕王会境上，燕王私握臣手，曰 原结友 。
现代文：我对他说： 我曾随从大王在国境上与燕王会见，燕王私下握住我的手，说 愿意跟您交个朋友 。
English: I said to him: I once accompanied the great king to meet with King Yan on the border. King Yan privately shook my hand and said that he would like to make friends with you.

古文：以此知之，故欲往。 
现代文：因此我知道他能收留我，所以想往他那里去。 
English: So I knew he could take me in, so I wanted to go to him.

古文：相如谓臣曰： 夫赵强而燕弱，而君幸於赵王，故燕王欲结於君。
现代文：相如对我说： 赵国强，燕国弱，而您受宠于赵王，所以燕王想要和您结交。
English: He said to me: Zhao Guoqiang, Yan Guoqiang, and you are favored by Zhao Wang, so Yan Wang wants to make friends with you.

古文：今君乃亡赵走燕，燕畏赵，其势必不敢留君，而束君归赵矣。
现代文：现在您是从赵国逃到燕国，燕国畏惧赵国，这种形势下燕王必定不敢收留您，而且还会把您捆绑起来送回赵国。
English: Now you have fled from Zhao to Yan, and Yan is afraid of Zhao. Under these circumstances, Yan would not dare to take you in, and he would tie you up and send you back to Zhao.

古文：君不如肉袒伏斧质请罪，则幸得脱矣。 
现代文：您不如脱掉上衣，露出肩背，伏在斧刃之下请求大王治罪，这样也许侥幸被赦免。 
English: You might as well take off your coat, bare your shoulders, and throw yourself under the axe to plead with the great king for punishment, and you might even be pardoned.

古文：臣从其计，大王亦幸赦臣。
现代文：臣听从了他的意见，大王也开恩赦免了为臣。
English: The vassal obeyed his advice, and the great king graciously pardoned the vassal.

古文：臣窃以为其人勇士，有智谋，宜可使。 
现代文：臣私下认为这人是个勇士，有智谋，派他出使很适宜。 
English: Privately, the minister thought that this man was a brave and resourceful man, and it was appropriate to send him on a mission.

古文：於是王召见，问蔺相如曰： 秦王以十五城请易寡人之璧，可予不？ 
现代文：于是赵王立即召见，问蔺相如说： 秦王用十五座城请求交换我的和氏璧，能不能给他？ 
English: So King Zhao immediately summoned him and asked him, "If King Qin asks for fifteen cities in exchange for my Wa Ji Bi, can you give it to him?"

古文：相如曰： 秦强而赵弱，不可不许。 
现代文：相如说： 秦国强，赵国弱，不能不答应它。 
English: Similarly, Qin Guoqiang and Zhao Guoqiang cannot but agree to it.

古文：王曰： 取吾璧，不予我城，奈何？ 
现代文：赵王说： 但是秦王如果得了我的宝璧，不给我城邑，又该怎么办？ 
English: Zhao Wang said, "But if King Qin gets my treasure and does not give me the cities, what should he do?

古文：相如曰： 秦以城求璧而赵不许，曲在赵。赵予璧而秦不予赵城，曲在秦。
现代文：相如说： 秦国请求用城换璧，赵国如不答应，赵国理亏；赵国给了璧而秦国不给赵国城邑，秦国理亏。
English: Similarly, it is said that: Qin requested to use the city for Bi; if Zhao did not agree, Zhao was at a loss; if Zhao gave Bi and Qin did not give the city to Zhao, Qin was at a loss.

古文：均之二策，宁许以负秦曲。 王曰： 谁可使者？ 
现代文：两种对策衡量一下，宁可答应它，让秦国来承担理亏的责任。 赵王说： 谁可以派为使臣？ 
English: After weighing the two countermeasures, he would rather agree to it and let Qin assume the responsibility for the loss.Zhao Wang said: Who can be sent as an envoy?

古文：相如曰： 王必无人，臣原奉璧往使。
现代文：相如说： 大王如果确实无人可派，臣愿捧护宝璧前往出使。
English: Similarly, it is said that if the great king really has no one to send, the vassal is willing to take care of the treasure and go on a mission.

古文：城入赵而璧留秦；城不入，臣请完璧归赵。 
现代文：城邑归属赵国了，就把宝璧留给秦国；城邑不能归赵国，我一定把和氏璧完好地带回赵国。 
English: If the city belongs to Zhao, I will leave the treasure to Qin; if the city does not belong to Zhao, I will definitely bring the treasure back to Zhao.

古文：赵王於是遂遣相如奉璧西入秦。
现代文：赵王于是就派遣蔺相如带好和氏璧，西行入秦。
English: King Zhao then dispatched Yuxiang to take Good and Mr. Qi westward to Qin.

古文：秦王坐章台见相如，相如奉璧奏秦王。
现代文：秦王坐在章台上接见蔺相如，蔺相如捧着和氏璧献给秦王。
English: The King of Qin was sitting on the platform of the chapter when he met Zou Xiangru. Zou Xiangru was holding Wushi Bi, dedicated to the King of Qin.

古文：秦王大喜，传以示美人及左右，左右皆呼万岁。
现代文：秦王大喜，把和氏璧给妻妾和左右侍从传看，左右都高呼万岁。
English: The king of Qin was overjoyed, and passed down the recipe to his wife, concubine, and attendants on his right and left. They all shouted "Long live the king!"

古文：相如视秦王无意偿赵城，乃前曰： 璧有瑕，请指示王。 
现代文：蔺相如看出秦王没有用城邑给赵国抵偿的意思，便走上前去说： 这块美玉上有一点点瑕疵，让我指给大王看。 
English: Yu Xiangru saw that Qin Wang did not intend to compensate Zhao Guo with a city or town, so he stepped forward and said: There is a little flaw on this gem, let me show it to the great king.

古文：王授璧，相如因持璧卻立，倚柱，怒发上冲冠，谓秦王曰： 大王欲得璧，使人发书至赵王，赵王悉召群臣议，皆曰 秦贪，负其强，以空言求璧，偿城恐不可得 。
现代文：秦王把璧交给他，蔺相如于是手持璧玉退后几步站定，身体靠在柱子上，怒发冲冠，对秦王说： 大王想得到宝璧，派人送信给赵王，赵王召集全体大臣商议，大家都说： 秦国贪得无厌，倚仗它的强大，想用空话得到宝璧，给我们的城邑恐怕是不能得到的。 
English: The king of Qin gave him the gems, and Yuxiang did as he was told, so he took a few steps back with the gems in his hand and stood still, leaning against the pillar with his hair standing on end. He said to the king of Qin: The great king wanted to get the gems, so he sent someone to King Zhao. King Zhao called all the ministers together to discuss the matter. Everyone said: The Qin state is insatiably greedy, it relies on its strength, and it wants to get the gems with empty words. I'm afraid that our cities and towns will not be able to get them.

古文：议不欲予秦璧。
现代文：商议的结果不想把宝璧给秦国。
English: As a result of the deliberation, I don't want to give the treasure to Qin.

古文：臣以为布衣之交尚不相欺，况大国乎！
现代文：我认为平民百姓的交往尚且不互相欺骗，何况是大国呢！
English: I think that ordinary people do not deceive each other in their dealings, let alone a great power!

古文：且以一璧之故逆强秦之驩，不可。
现代文：况且为了一块璧玉的缘故就使强大的秦国不高兴，也是不应该的。
English: Moreover, it is not right to make the powerful Qin state unhappy for the sake of a gemstone.

古文：於是赵王乃斋戒五日，使臣奉璧，拜送书於庭。
现代文：于是赵王斋戒了五天，派我捧着和氏璧，在殿堂上恭敬地拜送国书。为什么要这样呢？
English: So Zhao Wang fasted for five days, and sent me to hold a copy of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, and to respectfully bow in front of the Great Hall of the People. Why was this?

古文：何者？严大国之威以修敬也。
现代文：是尊重大国的威望以表示敬意呀。
English: It is to show respect for the prestige of a great power.

古文：今臣至，大王见臣列观，礼节甚倨；得璧，传之美人，以戏弄臣。
现代文：如今我来到贵国，大王却在一般的台观接见我，礼节非常傲慢；得到和氏璧后，传给姬妾们观看，这样来戏弄我。
English: Now that I have come to your country, the great king has received me on a common stage, and his etiquette is very haughty. After receiving a match, he passed it to his concubines to watch, thus to tease me.

古文：臣观大王无意偿赵王城邑，故臣复取璧。
现代文：我观察大王没有给赵王十五城的诚意，所以我又收回宝璧。
English: I observed that the king did not have the sincerity to give King Zhao the fifteenth city, so I took back the treasure.

古文：大王必欲急臣，臣头今与璧俱碎於柱矣！ 
现代文：大王如果一定要逼我，我的头今天就同宝璧一起在柱子上撞碎！ 
English: Great King, if you must force me, I will smash my head on the pillar together with Bao Bi today!

古文：相如持其璧睨柱，欲以击柱。
现代文：相如手持宝璧，斜视庭柱，就要向庭柱上撞去。
English: Like holding a treasure and squinting at a pillar, it is necessary to bump into the pillar.

古文：秦王恐其破璧，乃辞谢固请，召有司案图，指从此以往十五都予赵。
现代文：秦王怕他真把和氏璧撞碎，便向他道歉，坚决请求他不要如此，并召来主管的官员查看地图，指明从某地到某地的十五座城邑交割给赵国。
English: King Qin was afraid that he would really smash and crush He Shi Bi, so he apologized to him, firmly asked him not to do so, and summoned the responsible officials to check the map and specify fifteen cities and towns from a certain place to a certain place to be handed over to Zhao.

古文：相如度秦王特以诈详为予赵城，实不可得，乃谓秦王曰： 和氏璧，天下所共传宝也，赵王恐，不敢不献。
现代文：相如估计秦王不过用欺诈手段假装给赵国城邑，实际上赵国是不可能得到的，于是就对秦王说： 和氏璧是天下公认的宝物，赵王惧怕贵国，不敢不奉献出来。
English: Just as it was estimated that King Qin only pretended to give the city-state of Zhao by fraudulent means, but in fact it was impossible for Zhao to get it, he said to King Qin: He's Bi is a treasure recognized by the world. King Zhao is afraid of your country and dares not not to dedicate it.

古文：赵王送璧时，斋戒五日，今大王亦宜斋戒五日，设九宾於廷，臣乃敢上璧。 
现代文：赵王送璧之前，斋戒了五天，如今大王也应斋戒五天，在殿堂上安排九宾大典，我才敢献上宝璧。 
English: Zhao Wang fasted for five days before sending the treasure, and now the great king should also fast for five days, and arrange a nine-guest ceremony in the hall of fame, before I dare to present the treasure.

古文：秦王度之，终不可强夺，遂许斋五日，舍相如广成传。
现代文：秦王估量此事，毕竟不可强力夺取，于是就答应斋戒五天，请相如住在广成宾馆。
English: King Qin assessed the matter, after all, it could not be taken by force, so he agreed to fast for five days, and invited him to stay at the Guangcheng Hotel.

古文：相如度秦王虽斋，决负约不偿城，乃使其从者衣褐，怀其璧，从径道亡，归璧于赵。
现代文：相如估计秦王虽然答应斋戒，但必定背约不给城邑，便派他的随从穿上粗麻布衣服，怀中藏好宝璧，从小路逃出，把宝璧送回赵国。
English: According to the estimation, although King Qin had promised to fast, he would surely renege on the agreement and not give the city. He sent his attendants to put on coarse linen clothes, hide the treasure in their bosoms, escape from the path, and send the treasure back to Zhao.

古文：秦王斋五日後，乃设九宾礼於廷，引赵使者蔺相如。
现代文：秦王斋戒五天后，就在殿堂上安排了九宾大典，去请赵国使者蔺相如。
English: Five days after the king of Qin fasted, he arranged a grand ceremony for nine guests in the hall of fame to invite the emissary of the State of Zhao, Gong Xunru.

古文：相如至，谓秦王曰： 秦自缪公以来二十馀君，未尝有坚明约束者也。
现代文：相如来到后，对秦王说： 秦国从穆公以来的二十几位君主，从没有一个坚守盟约的。
English: When he arrived, he said to King Qin: Of the twenty-odd sovereigns of the Qin state since Mu Gong, there has never been one who has adhered to the covenant.

古文：臣诚恐见欺於王而负赵，故令人持璧归，间至赵矣。
现代文：我实在是怕被大王欺骗而对不起赵王，所以派人带着宝璧回去，从小路已到赵国了。
English: I was really afraid of being deceived by the great king and I felt sorry for King Zhao, so I sent someone to take the treasure back, and I have arrived in the Kingdom of Zhao from the path.

古文：且秦强而赵弱，大王遣一介之使至赵，赵立奉璧来。
现代文：况且秦强赵弱，大王派一位使臣到赵国，赵国立即就把宝璧送来。
English: Moreover, Qin Qiang Zhao weak, the king sent an envoy to Zhao, Zhao immediately sent the treasure.

古文：今以秦之强而先割十五都予赵，赵岂敢留璧而得罪於大王乎？
现代文：如今凭您秦国的强大，先把十五座城邑割让给赵国，赵国怎么敢留下宝璧而得罪大王呢？
English: Now, relying on the strength of your Qin State, you have first ceded fifteen cities and towns to Zhao State. How dare Zhao State leave treasures and offend the great king?

古文：臣知欺大王之罪当诛，臣请就汤镬，唯大王与群臣孰计议之。 
现代文：我知道欺骗大王之罪应被诛杀，我情愿下油锅被烹，只希望大王和各位大臣仔细考虑此事。 
English: I know that the crime of deceiving the king should be fought, I would rather be boiled in oil, I just hope that the king and the ministers will carefully consider this matter.

古文：秦王与群臣相视而嘻。
现代文：秦王和群臣面面相觑并有惊怪之声。
English: King Qin and his courtiers looked at each other with surprise.

古文：左右或欲引相如去，秦王因曰： 今杀相如，终不能得璧也，而绝秦赵之驩，不如因而厚遇之，使归赵，赵王岂以一璧之故欺秦邪！ 
现代文：侍从有人要把相如拉下去，秦王趁机说： 如今杀了相如，终归还是得不到宝璧，反而破坏了秦赵两国的交情，不如趁此好好款待他，放他回到赵国，赵王难道会为了一块璧玉的缘故而欺骗秦国吗！ 
English: An attendant said that someone was trying to drag Zongru down, and King Qin took the opportunity to say: "Now that you have killed Zongru, you will not get the treasure after all. On the contrary, you have destroyed the friendship between the two countries of Qin and Zhao. It would be better to treat him well and let him return to the country of Zhao. Would King Zhao deceive the country of Qin for the sake of a jewel?"

古文：卒廷见相如，毕礼而归之。
现代文：最终还是在殿堂上接见相如，完成了大礼让他回国。
English: In the end, he was still received in the hall of fame, and the grand ceremony was completed, allowing him to return to his country.

古文：相如既归，赵王以为贤大夫使不辱於诸侯，拜相如为上大夫。
现代文：相如回国后，赵王认为他是一位称职的大夫，身为使臣不受诸侯的欺辱，于是封相如为上大夫。
English: After Xiangru returned to China, Zhao Wang considered him to be a competent doctor, and as an envoy, he was not bullied by the princes, so he appointed Xiangru as the chief doctor.

古文：秦亦不以城予赵，赵亦终不予秦璧。
现代文：秦国没有把城邑给赵国，赵国也始终不给秦国和氏璧。
English: Qin did not give the cities to Zhao, and Zhao did not give the cities to Qin.

古文：其後秦伐赵，拔石城。
现代文：此后秦国攻打赵国，夺取了石城。
English: After that, Qin attacked Zhao and captured Shicheng.

古文：明年，复攻赵，杀二万人。
现代文：第二年，秦国再次攻赵，杀死两万士卒。
English: The following year, Qin attacked Zhao again, killing 20,000 soldiers.

古文：秦王使使者告赵王，欲与王为好会於西河外渑池。赵王畏秦，欲毋行。
现代文：秦王派使者通告赵王，想在西河外的渑池与赵王进行一次友好会见。
English: Qin sent an envoy to inform Zhao Wang that he wanted to have a friendly meeting with Zhao Wang in Dianchi outside the West River.

古文：廉颇、蔺相如计曰： 王不行，示赵弱且怯也。 
现代文：赵王害怕秦国，想不去。廉颇、蔺相如商议道： 大王如果不去，就显得赵国既软弱又胆小。 
English: Zhao Wang was afraid of Qin, and did not want to go. Renpo and Yan Xiang agreed: If the Great King did not go, Zhao would appear weak and timid.

古文：赵王遂行，相如从。
现代文：赵王于是前往赴会，相如随行。
English: Zhao Wang then went to the meeting, as if he was accompanying.

古文：廉颇送至境，与王诀曰： 王行，度道里会遇之礼毕，还，不过三十日。
现代文：廉颇送到边境，和赵王诀别说： 大王此行，估计路程和会见礼仪结束，再加上返回的时间，不会超过三十天。
English: Lianpo was sent to the border and said goodbye to Zhao Wang: The great king is on this trip, and it is estimated that the end of the journey and the meeting ceremony, plus the return time, will not exceed thirty days.

古文：三十日不还，则请立太子为王。以绝秦望。 
现代文：如果三十天还没回来，就请您允许我们立太子为王，以断绝秦国的妄想。 
English: If he has not returned in thirty days, please allow us to install the crown prince as king, so as to break the delusion of Qin.

古文：王许之，遂与秦王会渑池。
现代文：赵王同意这个意见，便去渑池与秦王会见。
English: Zhao Wang agreed with this opinion and went to Dianchi to meet with Qin Wang.

古文：秦王饮酒酣，曰： 寡人窃闻赵王好音，请奏瑟。 
现代文：秦王饮到酒兴正浓时，说： 寡人私下里听说赵王爱好音乐，请您弹瑟吧！ 
English: When Qin Wang drank the wine, he said, "Some people have heard that Zhao Wang likes music, please play it!

古文：赵王鼓瑟。
现代文：赵王就弹起瑟来。
English: Zhao Wang jumped up and down.

古文：秦御史前书曰 某年月日，秦王与赵王会饮，令赵王鼓瑟 。
现代文：秦国的史官上前来写道： 某年某为某日，秦王与赵王一起饮酒，令赵王弹瑟。 
English: A Qin historian came forward and wrote: On a certain day in a certain year, the Qin king and the Zhao king drank alcohol together, causing the Zhao king to lose his temper.

古文：蔺相如前曰： 赵王赵王窃闻秦王善为秦声，请奏盆缻秦王，以相娱乐。 
现代文：蔺相如上前说： 赵王私下里听说秦王擅长秦地土乐，请让我给秦王捧上盆缶，以便互相娱乐。 
English: Gong Xiangru said, "King Zhao has heard in private that King Qin is good at Qin folk music. Please let me give King Qin some pots and cans so that we can entertain each other."

古文：秦王怒，不许。
现代文：秦王发怒，不答应。
English: King Qin became angry and did not agree.

古文：于是相如前进缻，因跪请秦王。
现代文：这时相如向前递上瓦缶，并跪下请秦王演奏。
English: At this time, Yang Rong handed the tin can forward, and knelt down to ask Qin Wang to play.

古文：秦王不肯击缻。相如曰： 五步之内，相如请得以颈血溅大王矣！ 
现代文：秦王不肯击缶，相如说： 在这五步之内，我蔺相如要把脖颈里的血溅在大王身上了！ 
English: Qin Wang did not want to beat the drum, so he said: "Within these five steps, I am about to splash the blood from my neck onto the great king!"

古文：左右欲刃相如，相如张目叱之，左右皆靡。
现代文：侍从们想要杀相如，相如圆睁双眼大喝一声，侍从们都吓得倒退。
English: The attendants wanted to kill him so much, so much that they cried out with eyes wide open. The attendants were so scared that they all retreated.

古文：於是秦王不怿，为一击缶。
现代文：当时秦王不大高兴，也只好敲了一下缶。
English: At that time, Qin Wang was not very happy, so he had no choice but to knock on the can.

古文：相如顾召赵御史书曰 某年月日，秦王为赵王击鲊 。
现代文：相如回头招呼赵国史官写道： 某年某月某日，秦王为赵王敲缶。 
English: Similarly, the historian of the State of Zhao wrote: "In a certain year, in a certain month, on a certain day, the King of Qin knocked over a can for the King of Zhao.

古文：秦之群臣曰： 请以赵十五城为秦王寿 。
现代文：秦国的大臣们说： 请你们用赵国的十五座城向秦王献礼。 
English: The ministers of Qin said, "Please use the fifteen cities of Zhao to make a gift to King Qin."

古文：蔺相如亦曰： 请以秦之咸阳为赵王寿。 
现代文：蔺相如也说： 请你们用秦国的咸阳向赵王献礼。 
English: Gong Xiangru also said: Please use the salty sun of Qin to make a gift to King Zhao.

古文：秦王竟酒，终不能加胜於赵。
现代文：秦王直到酒宴结束，始终也未能压倒赵国。
English: Until the end of the banquet, King Qin was never able to overpower Zhao.

古文：赵亦盛设兵以待秦，秦不敢动。
现代文：赵国原来也部署了大批军队来防备秦国，因而秦国也不敢有什么举动。
English: Zhao had also deployed a large number of troops to protect Qin, so Qin did not dare to do anything.

古文：既罢归国，以相如功大，拜为上卿，位在廉颇之右。
现代文：渑池会结束以后，赵王回到国内，他认为蔺相如功劳大，就封他为上卿，地位在廉颇之上。
English: After the end of the Dianchi Pool Party, Zhao Wang returned to the country. He believed that Yan Xiang's contribution was great, so he was appointed as Shangqing, and his status was higher than that of Lian Bo.

古文：廉颇曰： 我为赵将，有攻城野战之大功，而蔺相如徒以口舌为劳，而位居我上，且相如素贱人，吾羞，不忍为之下。 
现代文：廉颇说： 我是赵国将军，有攻城野战的大功，而蔺相如只不过靠能说会道立了点功，可是他的地位却在我之上，况且蔺相如本来是卑贱之人，我感到羞耻，不能忍受在他之下。 
English: Liang Pu said: I am the general of Zhao, and I have made great contributions to the siege of the city and the field battle, while Yan Xiangru has only made some contributions by virtue of being able to speak, but his status is above me. Moreover, Yan Xiangru is originally a lowly person. I feel ashamed and cannot bear to be below him.

古文：宣言曰： 我见相如，必辱之。 
现代文：并且扬言说： 如果让我遇到蔺相如，一定要羞辱他。 
English: And he threatened, "If I ever run into him, I'll humiliate him."

古文：相如闻，不肯与会。
现代文：相如听到后，不肯和他见面。
English: After hearing this, he refused to meet with him.

古文：相如每朝时，常称病，不欲与廉颇争列。
现代文：蔺相如每到上朝时，常常以生病为借口躲在家里，不愿和廉颇去争位次的先后。
English: Whenever he came to Shang Dynasty, he often used illness as an excuse to hide at home. He did not want to fight with Renpo for the first place.

古文：已而相如出，望见廉颇，相如引车避匿。
现代文：没过多久，相如外出，蔺相如坐着马车出门，远远看到廉颇，蔺相如赶紧让人掉转车子回避。
English: It didn't take long before the two of them were out and about in a carriage. From a distance, it looked like they were going out for a ride. The two of them quickly had someone turn the carriage around to avoid them.

古文：於是舍人相与谏曰： 臣所以去亲戚而事君者，徒慕君之高义也。
现代文：于是相如的门客就一起来直言进谏说： 我们所以离开亲人来侍奉您，就是仰慕您高尚的节义呀。
English: So the gatekeepers came together and said bluntly, "The reason why we left our relatives to serve you is to admire your noble righteousness."

古文：今君与廉颇同列，廉君宣恶言而君畏匿之，恐惧殊甚，且庸人尚羞之，况於将相乎！
现代文：如今您与廉颇官位相同，廉老先生口出恶言，而您却因害怕躲着不敢见他，您的畏惧未免太过分了，平庸的人尚且感到羞耻，何况是身为将相的人呢！
English: Now you are in the same position as the corrupt official, Mr. Lian Lao is speaking evil words, but you are afraid to see him because you are afraid to hide. Your fear is too much, the mediocre person is still ashamed, let alone as a person who will be photographed!

古文：臣等不肖，请辞去。 
现代文：我们这些人没有才能，请让我们告辞吧！ 
English: Those of us without talent, please let us go!

古文：蔺相如固止之，曰： 公之视廉将军孰与秦王？ 
现代文：蔺相如坚决地挽留他们，说： 诸位认为廉将军和秦王相比谁厉害？ 
English: Yan Xiangru resolutely held them back, saying: "You all think General Liang is more powerful than King Qin?

古文：曰： 不若也。 
现代文：回答说： 廉将军比不了秦王。 
English: He replied: General Liang is no match for King Qin.

古文：相如曰： 夫以秦王之威，而相如廷叱之，辱其群臣，相如虽驽，独畏廉将军哉？
现代文：相如说： 以秦王的威势，而我却敢在朝廷上呵斥他，羞辱他的群臣，我蔺相如虽然无能，难道会怕廉将军吗？
English: Zang Rong said: With the prestige of King Qin, and I dare to shout at him in the court and humiliate his ministers, will I, Zang Rong, although incompetent, be afraid of General Ren?

古文：顾吾念之，强秦之所以不敢加兵於赵者，徒以吾两人在也。今两虎共斗，其势不俱生。
现代文：但是我想到，强秦所以不敢对赵国用兵，就是因为有我们两人在呀，如今两虎相斗，势必不能共存。
English: But it occurred to me that the reason why Qiang Qin did not dare to use troops against Zhao Guo was because of the two of us. Now that the two tigers are fighting, they are bound to be unable to coexist.

古文：吾所以为此者，以先国家之急而後私雠也。 
现代文：我之所以这样忍让，就是为了要把国家的急难摆在前面，而把个人的私怨放在后头。 
English: The reason why I have tolerated this is that I want to put the country's urgent difficulties in the foreground and put my personal grudges in the background.

古文：廉颇闻之，肉袒负荆，因宾客至蔺相如门谢罪。
现代文：廉颇听说了这些话，就脱去上衣，露出上身，背着荆条，由宾客带引，来到蔺相如的门前请罪。
English: After hearing these words, Lianbao took off his shirt, exposing his upper body, carrying a thorn, led by guests, and came to plead guilty in front of the door.

古文：曰： 鄙贱之人，不知将军宽之至此也。 
现代文：他说： 我是个粗野卑贱的人，想不到将军您是如此的宽厚啊！ 
English: He said, "I am a coarse and lowly man, but I didn't expect you to be so generous, General!"

古文：卒相与驩，为刎颈之交。
现代文：二人终于和好，成为生死与共的好友。
English: The two are finally reconciled and become lifelong friends.

古文：是岁，廉颇东攻齐，破其一军。
现代文：这一年，廉颇向东进攻齐国，打败了它的一支军队。
English: In this year, Renpo attacked Qi to the east and defeated one of its armies.

古文：居二年，廉颇复伐齐几，拔之。
现代文：过了两年，廉颇又攻打齐国的几邑，把它攻占了。
English: Two years later, he attacked and occupied several towns in Qi.

古文：後三年，廉颇攻魏之防陵、安阳，拔之。
现代文：此后三年，廉颇进攻魏国的防陵、安阳，都攻克了。
English: After that, in the next three years, Liangpo attacked Wei's tomb defense and Anyang, and conquered them all.

古文：後四年，蔺相如将而攻齐，至平邑而罢。
现代文：再过四年，蔺相如领兵攻齐，打到平邑就收兵了。
English: After another four years, Yuxiang led the troops to attack the Qi, and when they reached Pingyi, they withdrew the troops.

古文：其明年，赵奢破秦军阏与下。
现代文：第二年，赵奢在阏与城下大败秦军。
English: In the second year, Zhao Shu defeated the Qin army in the city of Shao.

古文：赵奢者，赵之田部吏也。
现代文：赵奢，本是赵国征收田租的官吏。
English: Zhao Shuang was originally an official of the State of Zhao who collected land rents.

古文：收租税而平原君家不肯出租，奢以法治之，杀平原君用事者九人。
现代文：他在征收租税的时候，平原君家不肯缴纳，赵奢依法处治，杀了平原君家九个当权管事的人。
English: When he was collecting taxes, many members of the Pingyuan family refused to pay, so Zhao Shuang dealt with them according to the law and killed nine members of the Pingyuan family who were in charge.

古文：平原君怒，将杀奢。
现代文：平原君大怒，要杀死赵奢。
English: He was furious and wanted to kill Zhao.

古文：奢因说曰： 君於赵为贵公子，今纵君家而不奉公则法削，法削则国弱，国弱则诸侯加兵，诸侯加兵是无赵也，君安得有此富乎？
现代文：赵奢趁机劝说道： 您在赵国是贵公子，现在要是纵容您的家臣不遵奉公家的法令，就会使法令削弱，法令削弱了就会使国家衰弱，国家衰弱了诸侯就要出兵侵犯，诸侯出兵侵犯赵国就会灭亡，您又怎能保有这些财富呢？
English: Zhao Shuang took the opportunity to persuade him, saying: You are a noble in Zhao. If you allow your vassals to disobey the laws of the public, you will weaken the laws. If the laws are weakened, the country will be weakened. If the country is weakened, the princes will send troops to invade. If the princes send troops to invade Zhao, the country will perish. How can you keep these riches?

古文：以君之贵，奉公如法则上下平，上下平则国强，国强则赵固，而君为贵戚，岂轻於天下邪？ 
现代文：以您的地位和尊贵，能奉公守法就会使国家上下公平，上下公平就能使国家强盛，国家强盛了赵氏的政权就会稳固，而您身为赵国贵戚，难道会被天下人轻视吗？ 
English: With your status and dignity, if you can serve the public and abide by the law, it will make the country fair, and if it is fair, it will make the country strong. If the country is strong, the Zhao clan's regime will be stable. And as a member of the Zhao family, will you be despised by the world?

古文：平原君以为贤，言之於王。
现代文：平原君认为他很有才干，把他推荐给赵王。
English: Mr. Hirahara thought he was very talented and recommended him to Mr. Zhao.

古文：王用之治国赋，国赋大平，民富而府库实。
现代文：赵王任用他掌管全国的赋税，全国赋税非常公平合理，百姓生活富足，国库也非常充实。
English: Zhao Wang appointed him to be in charge of the national taxation. The national taxation is very fair and reasonable, the people's life is rich, and the treasury is also very full.

古文：秦伐韩，军於阏与。
现代文：秦国进攻韩国，军队驻扎在阏与。
English: Qin attacked Korea, with troops stationed in Tongyeong.

古文：王召廉颇而问曰： 可救不？ 
现代文：赵王召见廉颇问道： 可以派兵去援救吗？ 
English: Zhao Wang summoned Renpo and asked: Can you send soldiers to rescue him?

古文：对曰： 道远险狭，难救。 
现代文：廉颇回答说： 道路远，而且又艰险又狭窄，很难援救。 
English: "It's a long way, and it's dangerous and narrow, so it's difficult to rescue," Mr. Liang replied.

古文：又召乐乘而问焉，乐乘对如廉颇言。
现代文：赵王又召见乐乘问这件事，乐乘的回答和廉颇的话一样。
English: Zhao Wang also summoned Le Rong to ask about this matter, and Le Rong's answer was the same as that of Lian Bo.

古文：又召问赵奢，奢对曰： 其道远险狭，譬之犹两鼠斗於穴中，将勇者胜。 
现代文：又召见赵奢来问，赵奢回答说： 道远地险路狭，就譬如两只老鼠在洞里争斗，谁更勇猛谁就能取得胜利。 
English: He also summoned Zhao Shuang to ask. Zhao Shuang replied, "The road ahead is dangerous and narrow. It's like two mice fighting in a cave. Whoever is more courageous will win."

古文：王乃令赵奢将，救之。
现代文：赵王便派赵奢领兵，去救援阏与。
English: Zhao Wang then sent Zhao Cao to lead the soldiers to rescue Yu Yu.

古文：兵去邯郸三十里，而令军中曰： 有以军事谏者死。 
现代文：军队离开邯郸三十里，赵奢就在军中下令说： 有谁来为军事进谏的就处以死刑。 
English: When the army was 30 miles away from Handan, Zhao Cao gave an order in the army: "Anyone who comes to Handan for military reasons will be sentenced to death."

古文：秦军军武安西，秦军鼓譟勒兵，武安屋瓦尽振。
现代文：秦军驻扎在武安西边，秦军击鼓呐喊的练兵之声，把武安城中的屋瓦都震动了。
English: The Qin army was stationed on the west side of Wu'an. The drumming and shouting of the Qin army made the roof tiles in the city of Wu'an shake.

古文：军中候有一人言急救武安，赵奢立斩之。
现代文：赵军中的一个侦察人员请求急速援救武安，赵奢立即把他斩首。
English: One of the scouts in Zhao's army requested rapid rescue of Wu'an, and Zhao Xiao immediately beheaded him.

古文：坚壁，留二十八日不行，复益增垒。
现代文：赵军坚守营垒，停留二十八天不向前进发，反而又加筑营垒。
English: Zhao's army held fast to the camp and did not advance for 28 days. Instead, they built more camps.

古文：秦间来入，赵奢善食而遣之。
现代文：秦军间谍潜入赵军营地，赵奢用饮食好好款待后把他遣送回去。
English: Qin spies sneaked into Zhao's camp. Zhao treated him to a good meal and then sent him back.

古文：间以报秦将，秦将大喜曰： 夫去国三十里而军不行，乃增垒，阏与非赵地也。 
现代文：间谍把情况向秦军将领报告，秦将大喜，说： 离开国都三十里军队就不前进了，而且还增修营垒，阏与不会为赵国所有了。 
English: The spy reported the situation to the general of the Qin army. Qin was overjoyed and said, "If you leave the capital of the country for thirty miles, the army will not advance, and it will also build additional camps.

古文：赵奢既已遣秦间，卷甲而趋之，二日一夜至，今善射者去阏与五十里而军。
现代文：赵奢遣送秦军间谍之后，就令士兵卸下铁甲，快速向阏与进发。两天一夜就到达前线，下令善射的骑兵离阏与五十里扎营。
English: After Zhao Shuang sent spies to the Qin Army, he ordered the soldiers to unload their iron armor and quickly march to Yao. They reached the front line in two days and one night, and ordered the cavalrymen who were good at shooting to camp 50 miles away from Yao.

古文：军垒成，秦人闻之，悉甲而至。
现代文：军营筑成后，秦军知道了这一情况，立即全军赶来。
English: After the military camp was built, the Qin army knew about this situation and the whole army came immediately.

古文：军士许历请以军事谏，赵奢曰： 内之。 
现代文：一个叫许历的军士请求就军事提出建议，赵奢说： 让他进来。 
English: When a sergeant named Xu Lian asked for military advice, Zhao Lan said: Let him in.

古文：许历曰： 秦人不意赵师至此，其来气盛，将军必厚集其阵以待之。
现代文：许历说： 秦人本没想到赵军会来到这里，现在他们赶来对敌，士气很盛，将军一定要集中兵力严阵以待。
English: Xu Li said: The Qin people did not expect the Zhao army to come here. Now they have arrived to confront the enemy. Morale is very high. The general must concentrate the troops and wait.

古文：不然，必败。 
现代文：不然的话，必定要失败。 
English: Otherwise, it is bound to fail.

古文：赵奢曰： 请受令。 
现代文：赵奢说： 请你接受我的军法处置教。 
English: Zhao Luxa said: Please accept my military law treatment.

古文：许历曰： 请就鈇质之诛。 
现代文：许历说： 我请求接受死刑。 
English: Xu Lian said: I request to accept the death penalty.

古文：赵奢曰： 胥後令邯郸。 
现代文：赵奢说： 等我回到邯郸以后再下令吧。 
English: Zhao Cao said, "Let me wait until I get back to Handan before I give the order."

古文：许历复请谏，曰： 先据北山上者胜，後至者败。 
现代文：许历请求再提个建议，说： 先占据北面山头的得胜，后到的失败。 
English: Hui Lian asked Cang to make another suggestion, saying, "First win the victory of occupying the northern mountain, and then lose the victory."

古文：赵奢许诺，即发万人趋之。
现代文：赵奢同意，立即派出一万人迅速奔上北面山头。
English: Zhao Shuang agreed and immediately sent ten thousand people to rush up the mountain to the north.

古文：秦兵後至，争山不得上，赵奢纵兵击之，大破秦军。
现代文：秦兵后到，与赵军争夺北山但攻不上去，赵奢指挥士兵猛攻，大败秦军。
English: After the Qin soldiers arrived, they fought with the Zhao army for the North Mountain, but they could not attack it. Zhao Cao commanded the soldiers to attack fiercely and defeated the Qin army.

古文：秦军解而走，遂解阏与之围而归。
现代文：秦军四散逃跑，于是阏与的包围被解除，赵军回国。
English: The Qin army scattered and fled, so the siege of Zhiyong was lifted, and the Zhao army returned to the country.

古文：赵惠文王赐奢号为马服君，以许历为国尉。
现代文：赵惠文王赐给赵奢的封号是马服君，并任许历为国尉。
English: King Zhao Huiwen gave Zhao Shuang the title of Ma Fu Jun, and appointed Xu Li as a national lieutenant.

古文：赵奢於是与廉颇、蔺相如同位。
现代文：赵奢于是与廉颇、蔺相如职位相同。
English: As a result, Zhao Xiao was in the same position as Renpo and Yao Xiangru.

古文：後四年，赵惠文王卒，子孝成王立。
现代文：四年以后，赵惠文王去世，他的儿子孝成王即位。
English: Four years later, King Zhao Huiwen died, and his son Prince Xiaocheng ascended the throne.

古文：七年，秦与赵兵相距长平，时赵奢已死，而蔺相如病笃，赵使廉颇将攻秦，秦数败赵军，赵军固壁不战。
现代文：赵孝成王七年，秦军与赵军在长平对阵，那时赵奢已死，蔺相如也已病危，赵王派廉颇率兵攻打秦军，秦军几次打败赵军，赵军坚守营垒不出战。
English: In the seventh year of Zhao Xiaocheng's reign, the Qin army and the Zhao army faced off in Changping. At that time, Zhao Shuang was already dead, and Zhao Xiangru was also critically ill. Zhao Wang sent Liangpo to attack the Qin army, the Qin army defeated the Zhao army several times, and the Zhao army kept the camp and did not fight.

古文：秦数挑战，廉颇不肯。
现代文：秦军屡次挑战。廉颇置之不理。
English: The Qin army repeatedly challenged them, but they ignored them.

古文：赵王信秦之间。
现代文：赵王听信秦军间谍散布的谣言。
English: Zhao Wang believed the rumors spread by the Qin spies.

古文：秦之间言曰： 秦之所恶，独畏马服君赵奢之子赵括为将耳。 
现代文：秦军间谍说： 秦军所厌恶忌讳的，就是怕马服君赵奢的儿子赵括来做将军。 
English: The Qin army spy said: What the Qin army abhors and is afraid of is that Zhao Xuan, the son of Ma Fu Jun, Zhao Shuang, will become a general.

古文：赵王因以括为将，代廉颇。
现代文：赵王因此就以赵括为将军，取代了廉颇。
English: As a result, Zhao Wang appointed Zhao Kuo as his general, replacing Liang Bo.

古文：蔺相如曰： 王以名使括，若胶柱而鼓瑟耳。
现代文：蔺相如说： 大王只凭名声来任用赵括，就好像用胶把调弦的柱粘死再去弹瑟那样不知变通。
English: Gong Xiangru said: The great king only appointed Zhao Bang on the basis of reputation, just like using glue to stick the tuning post to death and then playing it.

古文：括徒能读其父书传，不知合变也。 
现代文：赵括只会读他父亲留下的书，不懂得灵活应变。 
English: Zhao Kuang can only read the books left by his father and does not know how to be flexible.

古文：赵王不听，遂将之。
现代文：赵王不听，还是命赵括为将。
English: Zhao Wang didn't listen, so he ordered Zhao Kuo to take over.

古文：赵括自少时学兵法，言兵事，以天下莫能当。
现代文：赵括从小就学习兵法，谈到用兵之法，以为天下没人能抵得过他。
English: Zhao Kuan has been studying the art of war since he was a child. When it comes to the art of using weapons, he thinks that no one in the world can beat him.

古文：尝与其父奢言兵事，奢不能难，然不谓善。
现代文：他曾与父亲赵奢谈论用兵之事，赵奢也难不倒他，但是也不说他好。
English: He had talked with his father, Zhao Luxa, about the use of soldiers. Zhao Luxa could not defeat him, but he did not like him either.

古文：括母问奢其故，奢曰： 兵，死地也，而括易言之。
现代文：赵括的母亲问赵奢这是什么缘故，赵奢说： 用兵打仗是关乎生死的事，他却把它说得那么容易。
English: Zhao Guan's mother asked Zhao Guan what was the reason for this. Zhao Guan said, "Fighting with soldiers is a matter of life and death, but he said it so easily.

古文：使赵不将括即已，若必将之，破赵军者必括也。 
现代文：如果赵国不用赵括为将也就罢了，要是一定让他为将，使赵军失败的一定就是他呀 。
English: If Zhao Guo didn't need Zhao Kuo as his general, it would be fine. If he had to be the general, he would be the one to cause the defeat of Zhao's army.

古文：及括将行，其母上书言於王曰： 括不可使将。 
现代文：等到赵括将要起程的时候，他母亲上书给赵王说： 不可以让赵括做将军。 
English: When Zhao Kuan was about to set off, his mother wrote to Zhao Wang saying, "We can't let Zhao Kuan become a general.

古文：王曰： 何以？ 
现代文：赵王说： 为什么？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: Why?

古文：对曰： 始妾事其父，时为将，身所奉饭饮而进食者以十数，所友者以百数，大王及宗室所赏赐者尽以予军吏士大夫，受命之日，不问家事。
现代文：回答说： 当初我侍奉他父亲，那时他是将军，由他亲自捧着饮食侍候吃喝的人数以十计，被他当做朋友看待的数以百计，大王和王族们赏赐的东西全都分给军吏和僚属，接受命令的那天起，就不再过问家事。
English: He answered: I was in the service of his father, who was then a general, and he himself carried the food and served the food and drink to tens of people, and to hundreds whom he regarded as friends, and all the rewards given by the great king and the royal family were distributed to the military officers and their subordinates. From the day he received the order, he no longer asked about domestic affairs.

古文：今括一旦为将，东向而朝，军吏无敢仰视之者，王所赐金帛，归藏於家，而日视便利田宅可买者买之。
现代文：现在赵括一下子做了将军，就面向东接受朝见，军吏没有一个敢抬头看他的，大王赏赐的金帛，都带回家收藏起来，还天天访查便宜合适的田地房产，可买的就买下来。
English: Now that Zhao Kui has suddenly become a general, he faces east to receive the imperial court, and none of the military officials dare to look up at him. The gold ingots awarded by the great king are all taken home and collected. He also visits cheap and suitable field real estate every day, and buys what he can buy.

古文：王以为何如其父？
现代文：大王觉得他哪一点像他的父亲？
English: In what way does the king think he is like his father?

古文：父子异心，原王勿遣。 
现代文：父子二人的心地不同，希望大王不要派他领兵。 
English: The hearts of father and son are different, and I hope the Great King will not send him to lead the army.

古文：王曰： 母置之，吾已决矣。 
现代文：赵王说： 您就把这事放下别管了，我已经决定了。 
English: Zhao Wang said: You can put this matter aside and leave it alone, I have already decided.

古文：括母因曰： 王终遣之，即有如不称，妾得无随坐乎？ 
现代文：赵括的母亲接着说： 您一定要派他领兵，如果他有不称职的情况，我能不受株连吗？ 
English: Zhao Guan's mother went on to say, "You must send him to lead the troops. If he is incompetent, can I be exempted from joining the company?

古文：王许诺。
现代文：赵王答应了。
English: Zhao Wang agreed.

古文：赵括既代廉颇，悉更约束，易置军吏。
现代文：赵括代替廉颇之后，把原有的规章制度全都改变了，把原来的军吏也撤换了。
English: After Zhao Kui replaced Ren Pu, the original rules and regulations were all changed, and the original military officials were also replaced.

古文：秦将白起闻之，纵奇兵，详败走，而绝其粮道，分断其军为二，士卒离心。
现代文：秦将白起听到了这些情况，便调遣奇兵，假装败逃，又去截断赵军运粮的道路，把赵军分割成两半，赵军士卒离心。
English: When Qin general Bai Qi heard of these circumstances, he dispatched a miracle soldier, pretended to be defeated and fled, and went to cut off Zhao Jun's grain transportation route, split Zhao Jun into two halves, and centrifuged Sergeant Zhao.

古文：四十馀日，军饿，赵括出锐卒自博战，秦军射杀赵括。
现代文：过了四十多天，赵军饥饿，赵括出动精兵亲自与秦军搏斗，秦军射死赵括。
English: After more than forty days, Zhao's army was starving, and Zhao Guo sent his elite soldiers to fight the Qin army in person. The Qin army shot and killed Zhao Guo.

古文：括军败，数十万之众遂降秦，秦悉阬之。
现代文：赵括军队战败，几十万大军于是投降秦军，秦军将他们全部活埋了。
English: Zhao Guan's army was defeated, and hundreds of thousands of troops surrendered to the Qin army, which buried them alive.

古文：赵前後所亡凡四十五万。
现代文：赵国从长平之战开始到结束，前后损失共四十五万人。
English: From the beginning to the end of the Changping War, Zhao lost a total of 450,000 people.

古文：明年，秦兵遂围邯郸，岁馀，几不得脱。赖楚、魏诸侯来救，乃得解邯郸之围。
现代文：第二年，秦军就包围了邯郸，围困了一年多，赵国几乎不能保全，全靠楚国、魏国军队来援救，才得以解除邯郸的包围。
English: In the second year, the Qin army besieged Yunnan, and the siege lasted for more than a year. Zhao could hardly be saved, and it was entirely up to the Chu and Wei armies to come to the rescue before the siege of Yunnan could be lifted.

古文：赵王亦以括母先言，竟不诛也。
现代文：赵王也由于赵括的母亲有言在先，终于没有株连她。
English: Zhao Wang also because of Zhao Guan's mother's words in the first place, finally there is no stock connect her.

古文：自邯郸围解五年，而燕用栗腹之谋，曰 赵壮者尽於长平，其孤未壮 ，举兵击赵。
现代文：邯郸解围之后五年，燕国采纳栗腹的计谋，说是 赵国的壮年男子都在长平战役中死去，他们的遗孤尚未成人 ，燕王便发兵攻赵。
English: Five years after the lifting of the siege, Yan Guo adopted the strategy of chestnut belly, saying that the prime men of Zhao Guo had all died in the Changping Campaign, and their orphans had not yet reached adulthood. Yan Wang then sent troops to attack Zhao.

古文：赵使廉颇将，击，大破燕军於鄗，杀栗腹，遂围燕。
现代文：赵王派廉颇领兵反击，在鄗城大败燕军，杀死栗腹，于是包围燕国都城。
English: Zhao Wang sent Liangpo to lead the counterattack, defeated the Yan army in Lucheng, killed Liangbei, and then surrounded the capital city of Yan.

古文：燕割五城请和，乃听之。
现代文：燕国割让五座城请求讲和，赵王才答应停战。
English: Yan's state ceded five cities to request peace, and Zhao Wang only agreed to an armistice.

古文：赵以尉文封廉颇为信平君，为假相国。
现代文：赵王把尉文封给廉颇，封号是信平君，让他任代理相国的职务。
English: Zhao Wang gave Liangpo the title of "feiwen" (second-in-command) with the title of "xinpingjun" (shinpingjun) and appointed him to the post of acting minister of foreign affairs.

古文：廉颇之免长平归也，失势之时，故客尽去。
现代文：廉颇在长平被免职回家，失掉权势的时候，原来的门客都离开他了。
English: When Renpo was dismissed from his post in Changping and returned home, losing his power, his former clients left him.

古文：及复用为将，客又复至。
现代文：等到又被任用为将军，门客又重新回来了。
English: When he was reappointed as a general, the concierge came back again.

古文：廉颇曰： 客退矣！ 
现代文：廉颇说： 先生们都请回吧！ 门客们说： 唉！
English: The lame man said, "All gentlemen, please come back!" The doormen said, "Alas!

古文：客曰： 吁！
现代文：您的见解怎么这样落后？
English: Why are your views so backward?

古文：君何见之晚也？夫天下以市道交，君有势，我则从君，君无势则去，此固其理也，有何怨乎？ 
现代文：天下之人都是按市场交易的方法进行结交，您有权势，我们就跟随着您，您没有权势了，我们就离开，这本是很普遍的道理啊，有什么可抱怨的呢？ 
English: People all over the world conduct business by means of market transactions. If you are powerful, we will follow you. If you are not powerful, we will leave. This is a very common truth. What is there to complain about?

古文：居六年，赵使廉颇伐魏之繁阳，拔之。
现代文：又过了六年，赵国派廉颇进攻魏国的繁阳，把它攻克了。
English: After another six years, Zhao sent Renpo to attack Wei's prosperous country and conquered it.

古文：赵孝成王卒，子悼襄王立，使乐乘代廉颇。
现代文：赵孝成王去世，太子悼襄王即位，派乐乘接替廉颇。
English: Prince Zhao Xiaocheng died, Prince Xiang ascended the throne in his father's memory, and was succeeded by Prince Liangpo.

古文：廉颇怒，攻乐乘，乐乘走。
现代文：廉颇大怒，攻打乐乘，乐乘逃跑了。
English: Liang was furious, attacked Le Rong, and Le Rong fled.

古文：廉颇遂奔魏之大梁。
现代文：廉颇于是也逃奔魏国的大梁。
English: Consequently, Renpo also fled to the Liang of Wei.

古文：其明年，赵乃以李牧为将而攻燕，拔武遂、方城。
现代文：第二年，赵国便以李牧为将进攻燕国，攻下了武遂、方城两座城池。
English: In the following year, Zhao attacked Yan with Li Mu as its general, capturing the two cities of Wusui and Fangcheng.

古文：廉颇居梁久之，魏不能信用。
现代文：廉颇在大梁居住了很长时间，魏国对他不能信任重用。
English: Liang lived in Dalian for a long time, and the State of Wei could not trust him.

古文：赵以数困於秦兵，赵王思复得廉颇，廉颇亦思复用於赵。
现代文：赵国由于屡次被秦兵围困，赵王就想重新用廉颇为将，廉颇也想再被赵国任用。
English: As Zhao was repeatedly besieged by Qin soldiers, King Zhao wanted to use Renpo again as a general, and Renpo also wanted to be reappointed by Zhao.

古文：赵王使使者视廉颇尚可用否。
现代文：赵王派了使臣去探望廉颇，看看他还能不能任用。
English: Zhao Wang sent an envoy to visit Renpo to see if he could still be appointed.

古文：廉颇之仇郭开多与使者金，令毁之。
现代文：廉颇的仇人郭开用重金贿赂使者，让他回来后说廉颇的坏话。
English: Guo Kai, a corrupt enemy, bribed the envoy with a large sum of money so that he would say bad things about the corrupt leader when he returned.

古文：赵使者既见廉颇，廉颇为之一饭斗米，肉十斤，被甲上马，以示尚可用。
现代文：赵国使臣见到廉颇之后，廉颇当他的面一顿饭吃了一斗米、十斤肉，又披上铁甲上马，表示自己还可以被任用。
English: After Zhao Guo's envoy saw Renpo, Renpo ate a bucket of rice and ten catties of meat for a meal in front of him, put on a suit of armor and mounted a horse, indicating that he could still be appointed.

古文：赵使还报王曰： 廉将军虽老，尚善饭，然与臣坐，顷之三遗矢矣。 
现代文：赵国使者回去向赵王报告说： 廉将军虽然已老，饭量还很不错，可是陪我坐着时，很短的时间内就拉了三次屎。 
English: Zhao's emissary went back to report to Zhao Wang: Although General Liang is old, his diet is still very good, but when he sat with me, he pooped three times in a very short time.

古文：赵王以为老，遂不召。
现代文：赵王认为廉颇老了，就不再把他召回了。
English: Zhao Wang thought that Liang was quite old, so he no longer recalled him.

古文：楚闻廉颇在魏，阴使人迎之。
现代文：楚国听说廉颇在魏国，暗中派人去迎接他。
English: Chu heard that Renpo was in Wei and secretly sent someone to meet him.

古文：廉颇一为楚将，无功，曰： 我思用赵人。 
现代文：廉颇虽做了楚国的将军，并没有战功，他说： 我想指挥赵国的士兵啊。 
English: Although Renpo was a general of the State of Chu, he had no military merit. He said, "I want to command the soldiers of the State of Zhao."

古文：廉颇卒死于寿春。
现代文：廉颇最终死在寿春。
English: Renpo eventually died in Shuchun.

古文：李牧者，赵之北边良将也。
现代文：李牧是赵国北部边境的良将。
English: Li Mu is a good general on the northern border of Zhao.

古文：常居代雁门，备匈奴。
现代文：长期驻守代地雁门郡，防备匈奴。
English: He was stationed in Ganmen County for a long time to guard against the Huns.

古文：以便宜置吏，市租皆输入莫府，为士卒费。
现代文：他有权根据需要任命官吏，防地内城市的租税都送入李牧的幕府，作为军队的经费。
English: He had the right to appoint officials as needed, and the taxes of the cities within the defense zone were sent to the shogunate of Li Mu as funds for the army.

古文：日击数牛飨士，习射骑，谨烽火，多间谍，厚遇战士。
现代文：他每天宰杀几头牛犒赏士兵，教士兵练习射箭骑马，小心看守烽火台，多派侦察敌情的人员，对战士待遇优厚。
English: He slaughtered several oxen every day to reward the soldiers, taught the soldiers to practice archery and horseback riding, carefully guarded the campfire, sent more personnel to reconnoiter the enemy situation, and treated the soldiers well.

古文：为约曰： 匈奴即入盗，急入收保，有敢捕虏者斩。 
现代文：订出规章说： 匈奴如果入侵，要赶快收拢人马退入营垒固守，有胆敢去捕捉敌人的斩首。 
English: Regulations were drawn up, saying: "If the Huns invade, we must quickly round up the men and horses, retreat to the camp, hold fast, and have the courage to capture the enemy's heads."

古文：匈奴每入，烽火谨，辄入收保，不敢战。
现代文：匈奴每次入侵，烽火传来警报，立即收拢人马退入营垒固守，不敢出战。
English: Every time the Xiongnu invaded, they were alerted by the campfire and immediately gathered their men and horses, retreated to the camp and held fast, not daring to go to war.

古文：如是数岁，亦不亡失。
现代文：像这样过了好几年，人马物资也没有什么损失。
English: After several years like this, there is no loss of manpower and material.

古文：然匈奴以李牧为怯，虽赵边兵亦以为吾将怯。
现代文：可是匈奴却认为李牧是胆小，就连赵国守边的官兵也认为自己的主将胆小怯战。
English: However, the Xiongnu thought that Li Mu was timid, and even the officers and soldiers guarding the border of Zhao also thought that their master was timid and afraid of war.

古文：赵王让李牧，李牧如故。
现代文：赵王责备李牧，李牧依然如故。
English: Zhao Wang reprimanded Li Mu, but Li Mu remained the same.

古文：赵王怒，召之，使他人代将。
现代文：赵王发怒，把他召回，派别人代他领兵。
English: Enraged, Zhao Wang recalled him and sent someone else to lead the troops in his place.

古文：岁馀，匈奴每来，出战。
现代文：此后一年多里，匈奴每次来侵犯，新来的将领就出兵交战。
English: After that, for more than a year, every time the Huns invaded, the newly arrived generals sent troops to fight.

古文：出战，数不利，失亡多，边不得田畜。
现代文：出兵交战，屡次失利，损失伤亡很多，边境上无法耕田、放牧。
English: Troops have been sent out to fight, and they have repeatedly failed, with many losses and casualties. It is impossible to cultivate fields and graze cattle on the border.

古文：复请李牧。
现代文：赵王只好再请李牧出任。
English: Zhao Wang had no choice but to invite Li Muxing to take up the post.

古文：牧杜门不出，固称疾。
现代文：李牧闭门不出，坚持说自己正在生病。
English: Li Mu did not leave the house, insisting that he was ill.

古文：赵王乃复强起使将兵。
现代文：赵王于是就强迫命令他统率兵马。
English: King Zhao then forced him to command the troops.

古文：牧曰： 王必用臣，臣如前，乃敢奉令。 
现代文：李牧说： 大王一定要用我，我还是像以前那样做，才敢奉命。 
English: Li Mu said: The great king must use me, I still have to do the same as before before I dare to follow orders.

古文：王许之。
现代文：赵王答应他的要求。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：李牧至，如故约。
现代文：李牧来到边境，还按照原来的章程。
English: When Li Mu came to the border, he still followed the original regulations.

古文：匈奴数岁无所得。终以为怯。
现代文：匈奴好几年都一无所获，但又始终认为李牧胆怯。
English: The Xiongnu had not won anything for several years, but always thought that Li Mu was timid.

古文：边士日得赏赐而不用，皆原一战。
现代文：边境的官兵每天得到赏赐可是无用武之地，都愿意打一仗。
English: The officers and soldiers at the border are willing to fight a battle every day when they are rewarded with useless land.

古文：於是乃具选车得千三百乘，选骑得万三千匹，百金之士五万人，彀者十万人，悉勒习战。
现代文：于是李牧就准备了精选的战车一千三百辆，精选的战马一万三千匹，敢于冲锋陷阵的勇士五万人，善射的士兵十万人，全部组织起来训练作战。
English: As a result, Li Mu prepared 1,300 carefully selected chariots, 13,000 carefully selected horses, 50,000 warriors who dared to charge into battle, and 100,000 soldiers who were good at shooting. All of them were organized to train for battle.

古文：大纵畜牧，人民满野。
现代文：同时让大批牲畜到处放牧，放牧的百姓布满整个原野。
English: At the same time, a large number of livestock are allowed to graze everywhere, and the grazing people cover the entire field.

古文：匈奴小入，详北不胜，以数千人委之。
现代文：匈奴小股人马入侵，李牧就假装失败，李牧故意把几千人丢弃给匈奴。
English: The Huns invaded in small groups, and Li Mu feigned defeat. Li Mu deliberately abandoned several thousand people to the Huns.

古文：单于闻之，大率众来入。
现代文：单于听到这种情况，就率领大批人马入侵。
English: As soon as he heard about the situation, he led a large number of people to invade.

古文：李牧多为奇陈，张左右翼击之，大破杀匈奴十馀万骑。
现代文：李牧埋伏了许多奇兵，张开左右两翼包抄反击敌军，大败匈奴，杀死十多万人马。
English: Li Mu ambushed many strange soldiers, opened the left and right wings to encircle and counterattack the enemy army, defeated the Xiongnu, and killed more than one hundred thousand horses.

古文：灭襜褴，破东胡，降林胡，单于奔走。
现代文：灭了襜褴，打败了东胡，收降了林胡，单于逃跑。
English: They exterminated the Yao, defeated the Donghu, conquered the Linhu, and simply fled.

古文：其後十馀岁，匈奴不敢近赵边城。
现代文：此后十多年，匈奴人再不敢接近赵国边境城镇。
English: More than ten years later, the Huns no longer dared to approach the border towns of Zhao.

古文：赵悼襄王元年，廉颇既亡入魏，赵使李牧攻燕，拔武遂、方城。
现代文：赵悼襄王元年，廉颇已经逃到魏国之后，赵国派李牧进攻燕国，攻克了武遂、方城。
English: In the first year of King Zhao's reign, after Renpo had fled to Wei, Zhao sent Li Mu to attack Yan, and conquered Wusui and Fangcheng.

古文：居二年，庞暖破燕军，杀剧辛。
现代文：两年后，庞煖打败燕军，杀死剧辛。
English: Two years later, Pang Xuan defeated Yan's army and killed Heuxin.

古文：後七年，秦破杀赵将扈辄於武遂，斩首十万。
现代文：又过了七年，秦军在武遂打败并杀死赵将扈辄，斩杀十万赵军。
English: Seven years later, the Qin army defeated and killed Zhao Zhaojuan in Wusui, slaughtering 100,000 Zhao soldiers.

古文：赵乃以李牧为大将军，击秦军於宜安，大破秦军，走秦将桓齮。
现代文：赵国便任命李牧为大将军，在宜安进攻秦军，大败秦军，赶走秦将桓齮。
English: Zhao Guo then appointed Li Mu as the general, attacked the Qin army in Yian, defeated the Qin army, and drove away the Qin general Huan Yu.

古文：封李牧为武安君。
现代文：李牧被封为武安君。
English: Li Mu was given the title of Wu Anjun.

古文：居三年，秦攻番吾，李牧击破秦军，南距韩、魏。
现代文：又过三年，秦军进攻番吾，李牧击败秦军，又向南抵御韩国和魏国。
English: Three years later, the Qin army attacked Fangu, Li Mu defeated the Qin army, and went south to resist Korea and Wei.

古文：赵王迁七年，秦使王翦攻赵，赵使李牧、司马尚御之。
现代文：赵王迁七年，秦国派王翦进攻赵国，赵国派李牧、司马尚抵御秦军。
English: In the seventh year of King Zhao's migration, the State of Qin sent Wang Qi to attack the State of Zhao, and the State of Zhao sent Li Mu and Sima Shang to resist the Qin army.

古文：秦多与赵王宠臣郭开金，为反间，言李牧、司马尚欲反。
现代文：秦国向赵王的宠臣郭开贿赂很多金钱，让他施行反间计，造谣说李牧、司马尚要谋反。
English: Qin State bribed a lot of money to Guo Kai, the favorite of King Zhao, to let him carry out countermeasures and spread rumors that Li Mu and Sima Shang were planning to rebel.

古文：赵王乃使赵葱及齐将颜聚代李牧。
现代文：赵王便派赵葱和齐国将军颜聚接替李牧，李牧不接受命令。
English: Zhao Wang then sent Zhao Qian and Qi General Yan Ju to replace Li Mu. Li Mu did not accept the order.

古文：李牧不受命，赵使人微捕得李牧，斩之。废司马尚。
现代文：赵王派人暗中乘其不备逮捕了李牧，把他杀了，并撤了司马尚的官职。
English: Zhao Wang secretly sent someone to take advantage of his unpreparedness to arrest Li Mu, killed him, and removed Sima Shang from his official position.

古文：後三月，王翦因急击赵，大破杀赵葱，虏赵王迁及其将颜聚，遂灭赵。
现代文：三个月之后，王翦趁机猛攻赵国，大败赵军，杀死赵葱，俘虏了赵王迁和他的将军颜聚，终于灭了赵国。
English: Three months later, Wang Hui took the opportunity to attack Zhao, defeated Zhao's army, killed Zhao Ying, captured Zhao Wang Qian and his general Yan Ju, and finally destroyed Zhao.

古文：太史公曰：知死必勇，非死者难也，处死者难。
现代文：太史公说：知道将死而不害怕，必定是很有勇气；死并非难事，而怎样对待这个死才是难事。
English: Taishikong said: "It must be very courageous to know that you can die without fear; death is not difficult, but how to deal with this death is difficult."

古文：方蔺相如引璧睨柱，及叱秦王左右，势不过诛，然士或怯懦而不敢发。
现代文：当蔺相如手举宝璧斜视庭柱，以及呵斥秦王侍从的时候，就面前形势来说，最多不过是被杀，然而一般士人往往因为胆小懦弱而不敢如此表现。
English: In the situation before him, the most he could do was to be killed when he raised his hand and squinted at the courtyard pillar, and when he shouted at the attendants of King Qin. However, ordinary nobles often did not dare to do so because of their timidity and cowardice.

古文：相如一奋其气，威信敌国，退而让颇，名重太山，其处智勇，可谓兼之矣！
现代文：相如一旦振奋起他的勇气，其威力就伸张出来压倒敌国。后来又对廉颇谦逊退让，他的声誉比泰山还重，他处事中表现的智慧和勇气，可以说是兼而有之啊！
English: Just as, once his courage is aroused, his power is stretched out to overwhelm the enemy country. Later, he humbly concedes to the corrupt. His reputation is heavier than Mount Tai. The wisdom and courage he shows in his dealings can be said to be a combination of both!

