古文：程钜夫，名文海，避武宗庙讳，以字行。其先自徽州徙郢州京山，后家建昌。
现代文：程钜夫，名文海，字钜夫。祖籍徽州，由徽州迁居郢州京山，后又迁到建昌。
English: Cheng Yufu, known as Wenhai, Zhe Yufu. He was born in Huizhou and moved from Huizhou to Jingshan, Zhangzhou, and then to Jianchang.

古文：叔父飞卿，仕宋，通判建昌，世祖时，以城降。
现代文：叔父程飞卿，为宋朝建昌通判，世祖时投降元朝。
English: His uncle, Cheng Feiqing, was Jianchang Tongzhan of the Song Dynasty and surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：钜夫入为质子，授宣武将军、管军千户。
现代文：钜夫作为人质入京，授宣武将军、管军千户。
English: The widower entered the capital as a hostage and was awarded the title of General of the Imperial Army and put in charge of a thousand households.

古文：他日，召见，问贾似道何如人，钜夫条对甚悉，帝悦，给笔札书之，乃书二十余幅以进。
现代文：有天世祖召见，问他贾似道为人如何，钜夫详细回答，世祖甚为满意，让他写下来。他写了二十余张纸进呈。
English: One day, the ancestor was summoned to see him and asked him what kind of person Jia Li Dao was. The woodcutter answered in detail, and the ancestor was very satisfied and asked him to write it down. He wrote more than twenty pieces of paper and submitted it.

古文：帝大奇之，因问今居何官，以千户对，帝谓近臣曰： 朕观此人相貌，已应贵显；听其言论，诚聪明有识者也。
现代文：又问他现居何官职，他说是千户。帝对近侍臣僚说 ：朕观此人是显贵相貌，听其言论，聪明有见识，可以做翰林。 
English: He also asked him how many official positions he currently held, and he said it was a thousand. The emperor said to his close attendants and ministers: I consider this man to be distinguished in appearance, listen to his speech, intelligent and knowledgeable, and can be a good friend.

古文：至元十九年，奏陈五事：一曰取会江南仕籍，二曰通南北之选，三曰立考功历，四曰置贪赃籍，五曰给江南官吏俸。
现代文：丞相火礼霍孙传旨至翰林院，翰林院认为他年少，奏请为应奉翰林文字，世祖对钜夫说： 从今以后，凡国家政事之得失，朝臣之正邪，你都要告诉朕。 钜夫叩头谢恩，表示要竭忠报效。
English: Ho Sun, the minister of the imperial court, passed on the imperial edict to the Hanlin Academy. The Hanlin Academy thought that he was too young, and asked him to recite the Hanlin characters. The ancestor said to the woodcutter: From now on, you must tell me all the gains and losses of national politics, and the rights and wrongs of the courtiers. The woodcutter bowed and thanked him, and said that he must be loyal and serve.

古文：朝廷多采行之。
现代文：不久，晋升为翰林院修撰，后又升为集贤直学士兼秘书少监。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the post of editor of the Hanlin Academy, and later he was promoted to the post of junior supervisor and secretary of the Jixian Zhi Academy.

古文：赐地京师安贞门，以筑居室。二十年，加翰林集贤直学士，同领会同馆事。
现代文：至元十九年，钜夫奏陈有关官吏，特别是江南官吏的选拔、考核、俸禄、建立赃官档案等五项建议，多为朝廷采行，在京师安贞门赐地一块，供他建筑房舍。二十年，加翰林集贤直学士，同领会同馆事。
English: By the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, most of the five proposals made by Yan Fu Soo Chen regarding the selection, assessment, salary, and establishment of eunuch archives of relevant officials, especially those from the south of the Yangtze River, were adopted by the imperial court. He was given a piece of land at Anzhenmen in Beijing to build a house. For twenty years, he was a scholar at the Hanlin Collection of Virtues and Virtues, and a member of the same council and the same museum.

古文：二十三年，见帝，首陈： 兴建国学，乞遣使江南搜访遗逸；御史台、按察司，并宜参用南北之人。 
现代文：二十三年，朝见皇帝，奏请兴建国学，遣使到江南去搜访隐居于山林的宋朝遗老及御史台、按察司的官员，应南北人参用。
English: In the 23rd year, the imperial court met with the emperor and requested him to build a study of the country, and sent an envoy to the south of the Yangtze River to search for Song Dynasty elders and officials of the Imperial Historian's Office and the Inspector-General's Office who were living in seclusion in the mountains.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：这些意见都得到世祖的肯定和采纳。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：二十四年，立尚书省，诏以为参知政事，钜夫固辞。
现代文：二十四年，设立尚书省，诏令钜夫为参知政事，钜夫坚决推辞。
English: Twenty-four years later, the Ministry of Education and Culture was established, and it was decreed that the widower would participate in government affairs, but the widower firmly refused.

古文：又命为御史中丞，台臣言： 钜夫南人，且年少。 
现代文：又命为御史中丞，台臣认为钜夫是南人，且年纪尚轻。
English: He was also appointed to the position of Mishi Chujo (Minister of History). The Tai retainer thought that the widower was from the south and was still young.

古文：帝大怒曰： 汝未用南人，何以知南人不可用！
现代文：帝大怒道 ：汝未用过南人，何以知南人不可用？
English: The emperor angrily said, "You haven't used Nanren before, how do you know Nanren can't be used?"

古文：自今省部台院，必参用南人。 
现代文：自今以后，省、部、台、院都必须参用南人。 
English: From now on, provinces, ministries, Taiwan and hospitals must use Nanren.

古文：遂以钜夫仍为集贤直学士，拜侍御史，行御史台事，奉诏求贤于江南。
现代文：于是以钜夫仍为集贤直学士，拜侍御史，主持御史台政事，奉诏至江南求贤。
English: As a result, Yifu was still regarded as a virtuous scholar, and he served the emperor, presided over the imperial court, and went to the south of the Yangtze River to seek virtue.

古文：初，书诏令皆用蒙古字，及是，帝特命以汉字书之。
现代文：原先，诏令皆用蒙古文字，这次，世祖特命用汉字书写。
English: Originally, imperial edicts were all written in Mongolian characters, but this time, the patriarch ordered them to be written in Chinese characters.

古文：帝素闻赵孟藡、叶李名，钜夫临当行，帝密谕必致此二人；钜夫又荐赵孟頫、余恁、万一鹗、张伯淳、胡梦魁、曾晞颜、孔洙、曾冲子、凌时中、包铸等二十余人，帝皆擢置台宪及文学之职。
现代文：帝久闻赵孟隴、叶李之名，钜夫在临行时，帝密令他必须找到这两人。钜夫还举荐了赵孟頫、余恁、万一鹗、张伯淳、胡梦魁、曾日希颜、孔洙、曾氵中子、凌时中、包铸等二十余人。世祖把他们均升为台谏官和文学之职。
English: Emperor Qianlong heard the names of Zhao Mengyao and Ye Li for a long time. When the woodcutter was about to leave, Emperor Ming ordered him to find these two people. The woodcutter also recommended more than 20 people, including Zhao Mengyao, Yu Yao, Wan Yi Yao, Zhang Bo Chun, Hu Mengkui, Zeng Rihi Yan, Kong Yao, Zeng Yao Zhongzi, Ling Shizhong, and Bao Ji. The ancestor promoted them all to the post of Taiwan eunuch and literature.

古文：还朝，陈民间利病五事，拜集贤学士，仍还行台。
现代文：钜夫回朝，又陈关于民间利病五事。拜集贤学士，仍还行台任职。
English: When the widower returned to the imperial court, he also made a speech about the five things that benefit the people and cure diseases.

古文：二十六年，时相桑哥专政，法令苛急，四方骚动。
现代文：二十六年，桑哥专政，严刑峻法，四方骚动不安。
English: Twenty-six years later, the Sango dictatorship, severe punishments and harsh laws, and unrest in all directions.

古文：钜夫入朝，上疏曰： 臣闻天子之职，莫大于择相，宰相之职，莫大于进贤。苟不以进贤为急，而惟以殖货为心，非为上为德、为下为民之意也。
现代文：钜夫入朝上疏说 ：臣闻天子的职责，莫大于择相；宰相之职，莫大于推举贤才，如果不以推举贤才为首要职责，一心只想到如何弄到钱财，这不是为国家，也不是为人民。
English: "There is no greater duty for a vassal than to choose a consort; there is no greater duty for a prime minister than to select a wise man. If you do not take the selection of a wise man as your primary duty, and only think about how to get money, it is not for the country, and it is not for the people.

古文：昔文帝以决狱及钱谷问丞相周勃，勃不能对，陈平进曰： 陛下问决狱，责廷尉；问钱谷，责治粟内史。
现代文：昔日汉文帝问丞相周勃关于刑法、钱粮的事，周勃回答不出来。陈平上前说道： 关于刑法的事，陛下应该问廷尉，关于钱粮，应该问内史。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty asked Premier Zhou Bo about criminal law and money and grain. Zhou Bo could not answer. Chen Ping stepped forward and said: Regarding criminal law, His Majesty should ask the Court Lieutenant, regarding money and grain, he should ask the Inner Historian.

古文：宰相上理阴阳，下遂万物之宜，外镇抚四夷，内亲附百姓。 
现代文：宰相的职责是上使阴阳调和，下使万物相适应；对外镇抚四夷，对内安抚百姓。 
English: The prime minister's duty is to reconcile yin and yang at the top and everything else at the bottom; to pacify the outside world and to pacify the people at home.

古文：观其所言，可以知宰相之职矣。
现代文：从陈平的言论中，可知宰相的职责是什么了。
English: From Chen Ping's remarks, we can see what the duties of the prime minister are.

古文：今权奸用事，立尚书钩考钱谷，以剥割生民为务，所委任者，率皆贪饕邀利之人，江南盗贼窃发，良以此也。
现代文：今权臣执政，立尚书省专门搜求钱粮，以剥削百姓为职责。所任用的人，都是贪婪图利之人。江南之所发生乱事，正是由于这个原因。
English: Now that a powerful minister is in power, the Ministry of Education and Culture has been set up specifically to search for money and grain, with the responsibility of exploiting the people. The people appointed are all greedy profiteers. It is for this reason that the turmoil in the south of the Yangtze River occurred.

古文：臣窃以为宜清尚书之政，损行省之权，罢言利之官，行恤民之事，于国为便。 
现代文：臣认为应该清查尚书的政绩，削弱行省的权力，罢黜开口只谈利益的官僚，对百姓进行抚恤，只有这样才于国有利。 
English: The minister believed that the only way to benefit the country was to investigate Shang Shu's political achievements, weaken the power of the provinces, remove bureaucrats who only talked about interests, and provide subsidies to the people.

古文：桑哥大怒，羁留京师不遣，奏请杀之，凡六奏，帝皆不许。
现代文：桑哥大怒，把钜夫拘留于京师，不派他任官，还奏请朝廷杀掉他。他奏请了六次，世祖都不批准。
English: Sangho was furious and detained the woodcutter in the capital, refusing to appoint him as an official, and also petitioned the court to kill him. He petitioned six times, but the patriarch did not approve.

古文：钜夫既还行台，二十九年，又召钜夫与胡祗遹、姚燧、王惮、雷膺、陈天祥、杨恭懿、高凝、陈俨、赵居信等十人，赴阙赐对。
现代文：钜夫回到行台后，二十九年又召他与胡祗、姚燧、王恽、雷膺、陈天祥、杨恭懿、高凝、陈俨、赵居信等十人入京。三十年，任命钜夫为闽海道肃政廉访使。
English: After Yan Fu returned to Taiwan, he was called to Beijing in 29th year, together with ten others, including Hu Wei, Yao Wei, Wang Wei, Lei Wei, Chen Tianxiang, Yang Gongyao, Gao Jing, Chen Wei, and Zhao Juxin. For thirty years, Yan Fu was appointed as an envoy of the Yanhai Highway for the prevention of political corruption.

古文：三十年，出为闽海道肃政廉访使，兴学明教，吏民畏爱之。大德四年，迁江南湖北道肃政廉访使。
现代文：他在福建兴办学校提倡教化，官吏怕他，百姓爱他。大德四年，转任江南湖北道肃政廉访使。
English: He advocated the establishment of a school in Fujian to promote enlightenment, officials feared him, and the people loved him. In four years, Dade was transferred to Cangzhou, Hubei Province, as a political corruption envoy.

古文：至官，首治行省平章家奴之为民害者，上下肃然。
现代文：到任后首先惩治行省平章家奴中之为害百姓的人。
English: After taking office, he first punished those who harmed the people among the slaves of the Pingzhang family in the province.

古文：八年，召拜翰林学士，商议中书省事。
现代文：八年，回朝拜为翰林学士，参与商议中书省事。
English: Eight years later, he returned to China to become a scholar of Hanlin, and participated in the discussion on how to save the country.

古文：十年，以亢旱、暴风、星变，钜夫应诏陈弭灾之策，其目有五：曰敬天，曰尊祖，曰清心，曰持体，曰更化。
现代文：十年，发生干旱、暴风、星变等，钜夫应诏陈奏消灾良策五项，即敬天、尊祖、清心、顾全大体、改革弊政，成宗认为很好。
English: Ten years ago, droughts, storms, star changes, etc. occurred, and the woodcutter should play five good measures to eliminate disasters, namely, respect for heaven, respect for ancestors, purity of heart, consideration for the whole, and reform of maladministration. Chengzong thought it was very good.

古文：帝皆然之。云南省臣言： 世祖亲平云南，民愿刻石点苍山，以纪功德。 
现代文：云南省臣报告说： 世祖亲自平定云南，百姓希望把功绩刻在点苍山石上。 
English: A Yunnan provincial official reported: "The Ancestor personally pacified Yunnan, and the people hope to engrave the achievement on the Point Cangshan Stone."

古文：诏钜夫撰其文。
现代文：朝廷诏令钜夫撰其文。
English: The Imperial Court ordered the widower to write his article.

古文：十一年，拜山南江北道肃政廉访使，复留为翰林学士。
现代文：十一年，拜山南江北道肃政廉访使，但仍留京为翰林学士。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, Baishan Nankangbuk-do Sui Zheng Lian envoy, but still remained in Beijing as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：至大元年，修《成宗实录》。
现代文：至大元年，修《成宗实录》。
English: By the first year of the Taisho era, the "Chengzong Record" was revised.

古文：二年，召至上都。
现代文：二年，召钜夫至上都。
English: Two years later, the call to the widower became paramount.

古文：三年，复拜山南江北道肃政廉访使。
现代文：三年，再拜山南江北道肃政廉访使。
English: Three years later, he was sent as a visiting envoy to North Shannan Jiangsu Province.

古文：四年，与李谦、尚文等十六人同赴阙，赐对便殿。拜浙东海右道肃政廉访使，留为翰林学士承旨。
现代文：四年，与李谦、尚文等十六人同回朝廷，钜夫拜浙东海右道肃政廉访使，但仍留为翰林学士承旨。
English: In four years, together with Li Qian, Shang Wen and other sixteen people, he returned to the imperial court as a visiting envoy from the East China Sea and Zhejiang Province, but he still remained as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：皇庆元年，修《武宗实录》。
现代文：皇庆元年，修《武宗实录》。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he revised the "Bujong Record."

古文：二年，旱，钜夫应诏陈桑林六事，忤时宰意。
现代文：二年，皇帝鼓励他说： 中书议事，只有卿所言甚是恰当，以后遇事直言就是。 
English: In the second year, the emperor encouraged him, saying, "In the middle of a book discussion, only what you say is appropriate, and in the future, you should speak your mind.

古文：明日，帝遣近侍赐上尊，劳之曰： 中书集议，惟卿所言甚当，后临事，其极言之。 于是诏钜夫偕平章政事李孟、参知政事许师敬议行贡举法，钜夫建言： 经学当主程颐、朱熹传注，文章宜革唐、宋宿弊。 
现代文：诏令钜夫与平章政事李孟、参知政事许师敬商议实行贡举法。钜夫建议： 经学当以程颐、朱熹的注释为主，文章应革除唐、宋的弊病。 
English: The edict ordered Yan Fu to discuss the implementation of the tribute method with Li Meng, the political secretary of Pingzhang, and Xu Shi, the political secretary of Sangzhi. Yan Fu suggested: The study should be based on the commentary of Cheng Xi and Zhu Xi, and the article should eliminate the ills of Tang and Song.

古文：命钜夫草诏行之。
现代文：命钜夫草拟诏书施行。
English: The edict to be drafted by the prefect will come into effect.

古文：三年，以病乞骸骨归田里，不允，命尚医给药物，官其子大本郊祀署令，以便侍养。
现代文：三年，因病请求辞职归家，不准，命尚医给药物，任其子程大本为郊祀署令，以便就近侍养。
English: Three years later, he requested to resign due to illness and return home, but was not allowed to do so. He ordered his doctor to give him medicine, and allowed his son, Cheng Daben, to be the sub-district priest so that he could be closer to attend to him.

古文：敕行省及有司常加存问。居三年而卒，年七十。
现代文：皇帝常派人去看望，予以鼓励，安慰，特授光禄大夫，赐上等酒器，命廷臣在齐化门外为他南还饯行。回家三年后而卒，年七十岁。
English: The emperor often sent people to visit him, to encourage and comfort him, he was specially awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor, he was given fine wine vessels, and he ordered courtiers to walk for him outside the Qihua Gate. He died three years after returning home, at the age of seventy.

古文：泰定二年，赠大司徒、柱国，追封楚国公，谥文宪。
现代文：泰定二年，赠大司徒、柱国，追封楚国公，谥 文宪 。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he bestowed the title of Daishi-tou and Zhu-guo, and restored the title of Chu-guo, and promulgated the Constitution.

古文：赵孟頫赵孟頫，字子昂，宋太祖子秦王德芳之后也。
现代文：赵孟頫字子昂，宋太祖子秦王德芳之后。
English: Zhao Mengyao Ziang, after the Song Emperor's ancestor Qin Wang Defang.

古文：五世祖秀安僖王子偁，四世祖崇宪靖王伯圭。
现代文：其五世祖秀安僖王子翶，即宋孝宗父。其四世祖为崇宪靖王赵伯圭，孝宗赐宅第于湖州，故孟頫为湖州人。
English: His fifth-generation ancestor, Prince Xiu Anqian, was the father of Song Xiaozong. His fourth-generation ancestor was Zhao Bokei, the King of Chongxian and Jing, who was given a residence in Huzhou by Emperor Xiaozong. Therefore, Meng Zong was a native of Huzhou.

古文：高宗无子，立子偁之子，是为孝宗，伯圭，其兄也，赐第于湖州，故孟頫湖州人。曾祖师垂，祖希永，父与，仕宋，皆至大官；入国朝，以孟頫贵，累赠师垂集贤侍读学士，希永太常礼仪院使，并封吴兴郡公，与集贤大学士，封魏国公。
现代文：曾祖名师垂，祖父名希永，父名与山言，皆为宋朝大官。元朝赠师垂为集贤侍读学士，希永为太常礼仪院使并封吴兴郡公，与山言为集贤大学士，封魏国公。
English: His great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：孟頫幼聪敏，读书过目辄成诵，为文操笔立就。
现代文：孟頫自幼聪敏，读书过目不忘，下笔成文。
English: Meng Wei has been intelligent since childhood. He never forgets what he has read and writes down what he has read.

古文：年十四，用父荫补官，试中吏部铨法，调真州司户参军。
现代文：十四岁因其家世代为官亦入补官爵，并通过了吏部选拔官员的考试，调任真州司户参军。
English: At the age of fourteen, because of his family's generations of officials, he was also made a supplementary official, and passed the examination for the selection of officials in the personnel department, and was transferred to the Zhenzhou Sido to join the army.

古文：宋亡，家居，益自力于学。
现代文：宋亡后居家，更致力于学问。
English: After Song's death, he stayed at home and devoted himself more to learning.

古文：至元二十三年，行台侍御史程钜夫奉诏搜访遗逸于江南，得孟頫，以之入见。
现代文：至元二十三年，行台侍御史程钜夫奉诏搜访隐居于江南的宋代遗臣，将孟頫引见世祖。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Cheng Yifu, a courtier of Emperor Taizong, issued an imperial edict to search for the Song Dynasty's surviving vassals who were living in seclusion in the south of the Yangtze River, and introduced Meng Xi to his ancestor.

古文：孟頫才气英迈，神采焕发，如神仙中人，世祖顾之喜，使坐右丞叶李上。
现代文：世祖见孟頫才气豪迈，神采焕发，如神仙中人，大喜，使坐于右丞叶李之上。
English: The founder of the world was overjoyed to see Meng Rong's great talent and radiant spirit, like that of a god, sitting on the right side of the throne.

古文：或以孟頫年少，初自南方来，讥国法不便，意颇不平，责孟頫曰： 今朝廷行至元钞，故犯法者以是计赃论罪。
现代文：当时朝廷方设立尚书省，命孟頫起草诏书，颁布天下。世祖看了诏书后称赞道 ：说出了朕心中所要说的话。 朝廷召集百官于刑部，商讨制定刑法。大家认为凡贪赃满至元宝钞二百贯者，论死罪。
English: At that time, the imperial court set up the Ministry of Education and Culture, and ordered Meng Xi to draft the imperial edict and promulgate it to the world. After reading the imperial edict, the patriarch praised: I have said what I wanted to say. The imperial court convened hundreds of officials in the criminal department to discuss the formulation of the criminal law. Everyone thought that anyone who was greedy enough to steal 200 yuan worth of treasure would be sentenced to death.

古文：汝以为非，岂欲沮格至元钞耶？ 
现代文：孟頫则认为太重，因为钞法创立后的几十年内，已大幅度贬值，以贬值之钞来决定人之生死，不足采取。
English: Meng Wei, on the other hand, thought that it was too heavy, because the value of banknotes had been significantly depreciated in the decades after the establishment of the Banknote Law, and it was not enough to use depreciated banknotes to determine people's life and death.

古文：孟頫曰： 法者人命所系，议有重轻，则人不得其死矣。
现代文：有人见他年少，又是来自南方，不了解元朝国情，指责他反对以至元钞来定罪，是想阻碍至元宝钞的流行。孟頫理直气壮地反驳，指出： 刑法是关系到人命的生死，必须分别轻重。
English: Some people saw that he was young, came from the south, and did not understand the national conditions of the Yuan Dynasty, and accused him of opposing the criminalization of even yuan banknotes and trying to hinder the popularity of yuan treasure banknotes. Meng Xuan righteously countered, pointing out: Criminal law is related to the life and death of human beings, and must be weighted separately.

古文：孟頫奉诏与议，不敢不言。
现代文：孟頫奉诏参与商议，不敢不言。
English: Meng Rong did not dare to refuse to participate in the discussion.

古文：今中统钞虚，故改至元钞，谓至元钞终无虚时，岂有是理！
现代文：你不讲道理，企图以势压人，这是不行的！ 这人哑口无言。
English: You can't be unreasonable and try to use your influence to put pressure on people, that's not acceptable!

古文：公不揆于理，欲以势相陵，可乎！ 
现代文：世祖打算重用孟頫，但遭到一些人的阻止。
English: Shizu planned to reuse Meng Qi, but was stopped by some people.

古文：其人有愧色。帝初欲大用孟頫，议者难之。二十四年六月，授兵部郎中。兵部总天下诸驿，时使客饮食之费，几十倍于前，吏无以供给，强取于民，不胜其扰，遂请于中书，增钞给之。
现代文：至元二十四年六月，授孟頫兵部郎中之职，兵部总管全国驿站，当时来往使臣的饮食费用比过去增加了几十倍，当地官府无力供给，只有强取于民，不胜骚扰，请中书省以增加钞币解决。
English: In June, the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Meng Ye was promoted to the post of vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and became the general manager of the Ministry of Military Affairs. At that time, the cost of meals for envoys to and from China had increased dozens of times compared to the past. The local government was unable to provide food, so they had to force it on the people, which caused a lot of harassment. They asked the Ministry of Literature to increase the amount of banknotes to solve the problem.

古文：至元钞法滞涩不能行，诏遣尚书刘宣与孟頫驰驿至江南，问行省丞相慢令之罪，凡左右司官及诸路官，则径笞之。
现代文：文原内严厉而外宽恕，家贫而为官廉洁。早年客居京师时，有一书生病重，从袋中取出一金，嘱托文原将此金交给他家属。
English: In his early years, when he was a guest teacher in Kyoto, he was seriously ill. He took a coin from his bag and asked Fumihara to give it to his family.

古文：孟頫受命而行，比还，不笞一人，丞相桑哥大以为谴。
现代文：此书生病逝，而同房一书生把那金子偷走了，文原另买同量的金子给死者家属，此事他终身未同人说起。有文集若干卷，藏于家中。至顺四年，赠江浙行省参知政事，谥 文肃 。
English: This book died of illness, and a student in the same room stole the gold. Wen Yuan also bought the same amount of gold to give to the families of the deceased, a matter he never mentioned to the same person. There are several volumes of the anthology, hidden at home. In the fourth year of Shun, he was given the title of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Governor, and the title of Wenshu.

古文：时有王虎臣者，言平江路总管赵全不法，即命虎臣往按之。
现代文：当时有个叫王虎臣的官员，揭发了平江路总管赵全的违法事实，朝廷命虎臣去查处。
English: At that time, an official named Wang Huchen exposed the illegal facts of the general manager of Pingjiang Road, Zhao Quan, and the court ordered Huchen to investigate.

古文：叶李执奏不宜遣虎臣，帝不听，孟頫进曰： 赵全固当问，然虎臣前守此郡，多强买人田，纵宾客为奸利，全数与争，虎臣怨之。
现代文：右丞叶李坚持奏请不可派虎臣，世祖不听。孟頫进言说： 赵全违法固当问罪，但虎臣以前在平江也常常强买民田，纵令下属臣僚奸诈营利。赵全曾多次与他争斗，虎臣怀恨在心。
English: Yu Zhen Ye Li insisted that he could not send a tiger minister, but the patriarch did not listen. Meng Xi Jin said: Zhao Quan should be punished for breaking the law, but the tiger minister often bought people's fields in Pingjiang before, and ordered subordinate ministers to cheat and make profits. Zhao Quan had fought with him many times, and the tiger minister held a grudge.

古文：虎臣往，必将陷全，事纵得实，人亦不能无疑。 
现代文：今派虎臣去，必然陷害赵全；纵然查出赵全不法事实，人们也不能不有所怀疑。 
English: If he sends a tiger minister now, he will inevitably frame Zhao Quan; even if Zhao Quan's illegal facts are found out, people can't help but have doubts.

古文：帝悟，乃遣他使。
现代文：世祖这才明白过来，改派别人去处理。
English: It was only then that the patriarch came to his senses and sent someone else to deal with it.

古文：桑哥钟初鸣时即坐省中，六曹官后至者，则笞之，孟頫偶后至，断事官遽引孟頫受笞，孟俯入诉于都堂右丞叶李曰： 古者刑不上大夫，所以养其廉耻，教之节义，且辱士大夫，是辱朝廷也。 
现代文：帝闻孟頫家境素来清贫，赐钞五十锭。曹元用字子贞，祖籍阿城，后迁居汶上。
English: Tiwen Mengyao's family has always been poor and was given a 50-baht banknote. Cao Yuan used the name Zizhen and was originally from Acheng. Later, he moved to Wenshan.

古文：桑哥亟慰孟頫使出，自是所笞，唯曹史以下。他日，行东御墙外，道险，孟頫马跌堕于河。桑哥闻之，言于帝，移筑御墙稍西二丈许。
现代文：《授时历》应用了五十年，未曾做进一步检验、研究，履谦每天观测日影和早晚五星宿度，经过校正，将至治三年冬至和泰定二年夏至的时间，各减二刻，并著《二至晷景考》二卷及《经串演撰八法》一卷。
English: The "Giving of Time Calendar" has been applied for 50 years without further inspection and research. He observed the shadow of the sun and the morning and evening five-star constellation every day. After calibration, he reduced the time of the winter solstice in the third year and the summer solstice in the second year by two hours each. He also wrote two volumes of "Two to Six Scenery Study" and one volume of "Eight Methods of Writing Through Serial Performance."

古文：帝闻孟頫素贫，赐钞五十锭。
现代文：他还计划根据乐理来改正元朝郊祭天地、庙祀祖宗的音乐，可惜这一愿望未能实现。
English: He also planned to correct the music of the Yuan Dynasty Suburban Festival and the music of the temple worship of the ancestors according to the music theory, but unfortunately this wish did not come true.

古文：二十七年，迁集贤直学士。是岁地震，北京尤甚，地陷，黑沙水涌出，人死伤数十万，帝深忧之。
现代文：履谦去世后，朝廷于至顺三年五月，赠翰林学士、资善大夫、上护军，追封为汝南郡公，谥 文懿 。至元二十七年，升孟頫为集贤直学士。这年地震，北京尤其剧烈，死伤数十万人，世祖为之忧心如焚。
English: After the death of Lu Qian, in May of the third year of Zhishun, the imperial court presented Hanlin Baccalaureate, Zhishan Doctor, Shangguojun, and posthumously conferred the title of Runan County Governor,  文. In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Meng Wei was promoted to Jixian Zhi Baccalaureate. In this year, the earthquake in Beijing was particularly violent, with hundreds of thousands of deaths and injuries, and the ancestors were worried.

古文：时驻跸龙虎台，遣阿剌浑撒里驰还，召集贤、翰林两院官，询致灾之由。
现代文：皇帝驻于龙虎台，派阿剌浑撒里回京，召集贤、翰林两院官会议，询问此次天灾发生的原因及消灾的办法。
English: The emperor, who was stationed in Longhu Square, sent Aqihunsari back to Beijing to convene a meeting of the two emperors, Xian and Hanlin, to inquire about the cause of the natural disaster and the way to eliminate the disaster.

古文：议者畏忌桑哥，但泛引《经》、传及五行灾异之言，以修人事、应天变为对，莫敢语及时政。
现代文：但这些官员害怕丞相桑哥的淫威，不敢说实话，只是泛引《经》、《传》及五行灾异的话，以修人事、应天变来回答，不敢触及时政。
English: However, these officials were afraid of the tyrannical power of Emperor Sanguo and did not dare to tell the truth. They only quoted extensively from the "Ching," "Zhuan" and "Five Elements" to answer questions about personnel and changes in the weather, and did not dare to touch on the politics of the time.

古文：先是，桑哥遣忻都及王济等理算天下钱粮，已征入数百万，未征者尚数千万，害民特甚，民不聊生，自杀者相属，逃山林者，则发兵捕之，皆莫敢沮其事。
现代文：在此以前，桑哥遣忻都及王济清理全国钱粮，大加搜括，已征入数百万，未征者还有数千万，弄得民不聊生，相继自杀。逃入山林者，官府发兵追捕，无人敢来劝阻。
English: Prior to this, Sango dispatched the governor and Wang Ji to clean up the country's money and grain, and conducted a large-scale search. Millions of money had been collected, and tens of millions more had not been collected, making the people bored and committing suicide one after another. Those who fled into the mountains and forests were pursued by the government, and no one dared to dissuade them.

古文：孟頫与阿剌浑撒里甚善，劝令奏帝赦天下，尽与蠲除，庶几天变可弭。
现代文：孟頫与阿剌浑撒里非常友好，劝他去奏请皇上大赦天下，免除赋税，这样就可能消弭天灾。
English: Meng Yao was very friendly with Ayin Khunsari, and advised him to appeal to the emperor for a general amnesty and exemption from taxation, which would eliminate the natural disaster.

古文：阿剌浑撒里入奏，如孟頫所言，帝从之。
现代文：阿剌浑撒里按照孟頫的意见向皇帝奏禀，并得到皇帝的允许。
English: In accordance with Mencius's advice, Ajahnsari appealed to the emperor and obtained the emperor's permission.

古文：诏草已具，桑哥怒谓必非帝意。
现代文：诏书已经草拟好了，桑哥大怒，说这不是皇上的旨意。
English: The edict had already been drafted, and Sango was furious, saying that this was not the emperor's will.

古文：孟頫曰： 凡钱粮未征者，其人死亡已尽，何所从取？
现代文：孟頫挺身而出对桑哥说： 百姓死亡已尽，那些未征上来的钱粮到哪里去征？
English: Mencius stood up and said to Sango, "The people have all died. Where is the money and grain that has not been collected going to?

古文：非及是时除免之，他日言事者，倘以失陷钱粮数千万归咎尚书省，岂不为丞相深累耶！ 
现代文：若不及时免除，以后若有人将此未征之数千万钱粮作为损失而归咎于尚书省，这岂不深深连累了丞相？ 
English: If it is not exempted in time, if someone in the future blames the tens of millions of money grain that has not been levied as a loss on Shangshu Province, will this not deeply affect the prime minister?

古文：桑哥悟，民始获苏。
现代文：桑哥明白其利害，同意全部免除，人民因而得救。
English: Sangho, knowing what was at stake, agreed to absolve everyone, and the people were saved.

古文：帝尝问叶李、留梦炎优劣，孟頫对曰： 梦炎，臣之父执，其人重厚，笃于自信，好谋而能断，有大臣器；叶李所读之书，臣皆读之，其所知所能，臣皆知之能之。 
现代文：世祖曾问孟頫，叶李与留梦炎哪个好。孟頫说： 梦炎是我父亲的挚友，为人庄重厚道，很自信，多谋能断，有大臣之才。叶李所读的书我都读过，他所知所能的事，臣都能知能办。 
English: The ancestor once asked Meng Xuan which was better, Ye Li or Li Mengyan. Meng Xuan said: Ye Li Mengyan was my father's best friend. He was a dignified and courteous person, very self-confident, resourceful, and had the talent of a minister. I have read all the books that Ye Li read, and the things that he knew and could do, the minister could do intelligently.

古文：帝曰： 汝以梦炎贤于李耶？
现代文：世祖说： 你是认为梦炎比叶李要贤吗？
English: The ancestor said: Do you think that Mengyan is more virtuous than Ye Li?

古文：梦炎在宋为状元，位至丞相，当贾似道误国罔上，梦炎依阿取容；李布衣，乃伏阙上书，是贤于梦炎也。
现代文：但是，梦炎在宋朝为状元，位至丞相，而在贾似道欺上误国之时，梦炎却对贾似道阿谀顺从。叶李当时虽为平民，却敢于上书朝廷，斥责贾似道，显然贤于梦炎。
English: However, in the Song Dynasty, Mengyan was the highest-ranking official, reaching the rank of prime minister, but when Jia Liangtao deceived the country, Mengyan obeyed Jia Liangtao. Although Ye Li was a commoner at the time, he dared to write to the imperial court and reprimand Jia Liangtao, and was obviously good at Mengyan.

古文：汝以梦炎父友，不敢斥言其非，可赋诗讥之。 
现代文：你因为梦炎是你父亲的挚友，不敢非议，可赋诗以规劝他。 
English: You are your father's best friend because of your sleep paralysis. You dare not criticize him, but you can write a poem to persuade him.

古文：孟頫所赋诗，有 往事已非那可说，且将忠直报皇元 之语，帝叹赏焉。
现代文：孟頫赋诗一首，其中有 往事已非那可说，且将忠直报皇元 之语，世祖看后大加赞赏。
English: Meng Rongfu wrote a poem, one of which was "The past is not what it used to be, and I will faithfully report to the emperor," which was greatly appreciated by the ancestor.

古文：孟頫退谓奉御彻里曰： 帝论贾似道误国，责留梦炎不言，桑哥罪甚于似道，而我等不言，他日何以辞其责！
现代文：孟頫退朝后对奉御彻里说 ：皇上在谈论贾似道误国时，责备留梦炎当时不敢指责。如今，桑哥的罪恶甚于似道，而我等不加指责，将来如何能推卸责任？
English: After retiring from the throne, Meng Xuan said to Feng Yicheri: "When the emperor was talking about Jia Lijiao's error of the country, he did not dare to blame the blame of the dream. Nowadays, Sango's evil is more serious than Lijiao, and we do not blame, how can we shirk responsibility in the future?

古文：然我疏远之臣，言必不听，侍臣中读书知义理，慷慨有大节，又为上所亲信，无逾公者。
现代文：然我毕竟不是皇上亲信之臣，说话皇上必不听从。侍臣中读书知理、慷慨有气节而又为皇上所亲信的人中，没有能超过你的。
English: But after all, I am not a trusted vassal of the Emperor, and the Emperor will not listen to what I say. Among the courtiers who are well-read, intelligent, generous and virtuous, and who are trusted by the Emperor, none can surpass you.

古文：夫损一旦之命，为万姓除残贼，仁者之事也。
现代文：捐出自己生命而为百姓除害，是仁者之事，希望你能这样！ 
English: Donating your own life to eliminate harm for the people is a matter of benevolence, I hope you can do so!

古文：帝曰： 太祖行事，汝知之乎？ 
现代文：彻里果然向世祖揭发桑哥的罪恶。
English: Cherry did indeed expose Sango's crimes to the patriarch.

古文：孟頫谢不知，帝曰： 太祖行事，多可取者，朕皆知之。 
现代文：世祖大怒，命卫士掌嘴，彻里口鼻血涌，倒在地上。再问，彻里还是斥责桑哥罪行，大臣也相继指责桑哥，于是世祖将桑哥按罪诛杀，并废除尚书省，凡有罪的大臣也统统罢官。
English: The patriarch flew into a rage, ordered the guards to slap his lips, and he fell to the ground with blood gushing from his nose and mouth. Again, the chariot rebuked Sango for his crime, and the ministers also accused Sango one after another, so the patriarch killed Sango for his crime, abolished the Ministry of Education, and dismissed all guilty ministers.

古文：孟頫自念久在上侧，必为人所忌，力请补外。
现代文：世祖有意让孟頫参与中书省政事，孟頫坚持不肯。他预料，久在君王身边，必受人嫉妒，故极力请求到外地任职。
English: The ancestor intended to let Meng Wei participate in the government affairs of the Chinese Province of Calligraphy, but Meng Wei insisted. He expected that he would be envied if he stayed with the king for a long time, so he strongly requested to serve in other places.

古文：其父求得他人尸，遂诬告同役者杀掀儿，既诬服。
现代文：至元二十九年，出任同知济南路总管府事。当地有个叫元掀儿的人，在盐场服役，因不胜艰苦而逃走。其父诬告是同服劳役的人将掀儿杀害了。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he served as the chief administrator of Jinan Road in Tongzhi. There was a local man named Yuan Hatchet, who served in the salt field and fled because of the hardships. His father falsely accused a fellow laborer of killing Hatchet.

古文：孟頫疑其冤，留弗决。
现代文：孟頫怀疑其中有冤情，不立即判决。
English: Meng Wei suspected that there was a grievance and did not immediately make a judgment.

古文：逾月，掀儿自归，郡中称为神明。
现代文：过了一月，掀儿自己回归盐场。郡中人都称赞孟頫料事如神。
English: After one month, he returned to the salt mine. Everyone in the county praised Meng Xuan for his excellent work.

古文：佥廉访司事韦哈剌哈孙，素苛虐，以孟頫不能承顺其意，以事中之。会修《世祖实录》，召孟頫还京师，乃解。
现代文：佥廉访司事韦哈刺哈孙，性情暴虐，因孟頫不顺他的意，借口中伤他；恰逢朝廷要修《世祖实录》，召孟頫还京，这才无事。
English: Zou Lian's visiting secretary Wei Ha stabbed Hasun, his temper was violent, because Meng Yao did not comply with his wishes, he slandered him under the pretext; it was just at the time when the imperial court wanted to repair the "Ancestor's Record" and call Meng Yao back to Beijing, this was nothing.

古文：久之，迁知汾州，未上，有旨书金字《藏经》，既成，除集贤直学士、江浙等处儒学提举，迁泰州尹，未上。
现代文：其后，调孟頫为汾州知州，还未成行，又令他书写金字《藏经》，接着又任命为集贤直学士、江浙等处儒学提举，后调任泰州尹。
English: After that, Meng Wei was transferred to Zhangzhou and Zhizhou, but he had not yet been promoted, and he was also ordered to write the "Tibetan Classics" in gold letters, and then he was appointed as a scholar of Confucianism in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and then transferred to Taizhou Yin.

古文：至大三年，召至京师，以翰林侍读学士，与他学士撰定祀南郊祝文，及拟进殿名，议不合，谒告去。
现代文：至大三年，召孟頫回京师，授翰林侍读学士，命与其他学士共同撰写祀南郊祝文。在拟定殿名的问题上，与其他人意见不合，告假还乡。
English: In his third year of university, Meng Wei was called back to Beijing to teach, Han Lin was awarded a bachelor's degree, and he was ordered to write a congratulatory letter to the southern suburbs together with other bachelors. On the issue of formulating the name of the hall, he disagreed with others and returned home.

古文：仁宗在东宫，素知其名，及即位，召除集贤侍讲学士、中奉大夫。
现代文：仁宗在东宫时，就闻知孟頫之名，即位后召他任集贤侍讲学士、中奉大夫。
English: When Nanzong was in the East Palace, he knew the name of Meng Xuan, and after the enthronement, he called him to serve as a scholar and doctor.

古文：延祐元年，改翰林侍讲学士，迁集贤侍讲学士、资德大夫。
现代文：延元年，改任翰林侍讲学士，后又任集贤侍讲学士、资德大夫。
English: In the first year of Yan, he was reappointed as Hanlin Attendant Lecturer, and later as Jixian Attendant Lecturer and Zide Doctor.

古文：三年，拜翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫。
现代文：延三年，拜翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫。
English: After three years of extension, Bai Hanlin graduated with a bachelor's degree and became an honorary doctor.

古文：帝眷之甚厚，以字呼之而不名。帝尝与侍臣论文学之士，以孟頫比唐李白、宋苏子瞻。又尝称孟頫操履纯正，博学多闻，书画绝伦，旁通佛、老之旨，皆人所不及。
现代文：帝待他甚厚，只呼其字而不呼其名，在与侍臣谈论文学之士时，把孟頫比作唐代李白、宋代苏子瞻，称赞他品行纯正，博学多闻，书画绝伦，又精通佛学及老庄之学，这些都是人所不及的。
English: The emperor treated him very generously, referring to him only by his name and not by his name. When discussing literary figures with his courtiers, he compared Meng Qi to Li Bai of the Tang Dynasty and Su Zizan of the Song Dynasty, praising him for his pure character, erudite knowledge, excellent calligraphy and painting, and proficiency in Buddhism and Lao Zhuang studies, all of which are second to none.

古文：有不悦者间之，帝初若不闻者。
现代文：不乐意的人想离间仁宗与孟頫的亲密关系，仁宗不加理会。
English: Unhappy people want to sever the close relationship between Rinzong and Meng Xi, but Rinzong ignores them.

古文：又有上书言国史所载，不宜使孟頫与闻者，帝乃曰： 赵子昂，世祖皇帝所简拔，朕特优以礼貌，置于馆阁，典司述作，传之后世，此属呶呶何也！ 
现代文：既而又有人上书，奏请朝廷不能让孟頫参与编修国史。仁宗说 ：赵子昂是世祖皇帝选拔的重臣，朕特加优待，让他在馆阁从事著述，传之后世，你们口罗嗦些什么？ 
English: As soon as someone submitted a petition, it was reported to the imperial court that Meng Xuan could not be allowed to participate in compiling the national history. Renzong said: Zhao Zi'ang was the chief minister selected by the ancestral emperor, I gave him special treatment, let him engage in writing in the pavilion, and pass it on to future generations. What are you talking about?

古文：俄赐钞五百锭，谓侍臣曰： 中书每称国用不足，必持而不与，其以普庆寺别贮钞给之。 
现代文：赐孟頫钞五百锭，叮嘱侍臣： 中书总说国用不足，这笔赏金他们必不肯付与，可从普庆寺库存中支给。 
English: He gave Meng Xuan a 500-baht banknote, and told the attendant: The General Secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters said that the money was not enough for the country. They would certainly not be willing to pay this reward, but could pay it from the inventory of Puqing Temple.

古文：孟頫尝累月不至宫中，帝以问左右，皆谓其年老畏寒，敕御府赐貂鼠裘。
现代文：孟頫曾数月不至宫中，帝问左右，都说孟頫年老畏寒。帝令御府赐与貂鼠皮裘。
English: Meng Xuan had not been to the palace for several months. When the emperor asked around, they all said that Meng Xuan was old and afraid of the cold. The emperor gave him the skin of a muskrat.

古文：初，孟頫以程钜夫荐，起家为郎，及钜夫为翰林学士承旨，求致仕去，孟頫代之，先往拜其门，而后入院，时人以为衣冠盛事。
现代文：孟頫原是因程钜夫的举荐而以兵部郎中起家的。后来钜夫任翰林学士承旨时辞官归家，朝廷以孟頫代之。孟頫就任后，先去拜谒钜夫，然后再入翰林院视事，当时传为士大夫的佳话。
English: Meng Xuan originally started his career as a junior member of the military department on the recommendation of Cheng Xuanfu. Later, when Xuanfu was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, he resigned and returned home, and the imperial court replaced him with Meng Xuan. After Meng Xuan took office, he first went to pay homage to Xuanfu, and then went to Hanlin Academy to observe the situation. At that time, it was a good story about the scholar doctor.

古文：追封魏国公，谥文敏。
现代文：延六年，获准南归。仁宗又遣使催他回朝，因病未能成行。
English: Six years later, he was allowed to return to the south. Rinzong also sent him to urge him to return to the North, but he was unable to do so due to illness.

古文：孟頫所著，有《尚书注》，有《琴原》、《乐原》，得律吕不传之妙。诗文清邃奇逸，读之使人有飘飘出尘之想。
现代文：至治元年，英宗遣使到孟頫家中，命他书写《孝经》。二年六月病卒，年六十九岁。追封魏国公，谥 文敏 。孟頫的著作有《尚书注》、《琴原》、《乐原》，其诗文音律清新，含义深远，读之使人有飘然出世之感。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Yingzong sent an envoy to Meng Xi's home and ordered him to write "The Book of Filial Piety." Meng Xi died of illness in June of the second year, at the age of sixty-nine. He was succeeded by Wei Guogong, Yu Wenmin. Meng Xi's works include "The Commentary on Shang Shu," "The Origin of the Qin" and "The Origin of Music." The tone of his poetry is fresh and the meaning is far-reaching. Reading it gives one the feeling of being born into the world.

古文：篆、籀、分、隶、真、行、草书，无不冠绝古今，遂以书名天下。
现代文：其篆、籀、分、隶、真、行、草书，无不为古今之冠，因以书法闻名天下。
English: Its,,分,隶,真,行, and草書 are the crown jewels of the past and the present. It is famous throughout the world for its calligraphy.

古文：天竺有僧，数万里来求其书归，国中宝之。
现代文：天竺僧人，数万里来求其字归，国中视为珍宝。
English: Tenzin monks travel tens of thousands of miles to reclaim their title, and are regarded as a national treasure.

古文：其画山水、木石、花竹、人马，尤精致。
现代文：其画山水、木石、花竹、人马，尤为精致。
English: His paintings of landscape, wood and stone, flowers and bamboo, people and horses are particularly exquisite.

古文：前史官杨载称孟頫之才颇为书画所掩，知其书画者，不知其文章，知其文章者，不知其经济之学。
现代文：前史官杨载，说孟頫之才为书画所掩盖，知其书画者不知其文章，知其文章者不知其经邦济世之学。
English: Yang Zai, a former historian, said that Meng Wei's talent was covered up by calligraphy and painting. Those who knew his calligraphy and painting did not know his articles, and those who knew his articles did not know his study of the state and the world.

古文：人以为知言云。
现代文：人们认为这是深知孟頫才能的评语。
English: It is thought to be a comment on Meng's talent.

古文：子雍、奕，并以书画知名。
现代文：其子赵雍、赵奕，都以书画知名。
English: His sons, Zhao Yong and Zhao Yi, are both famous for their calligraphy and painting.

