古文：十有三年春，郑罕达帅师取宋师于嵒。
现代文：十三年春季，郑国的罕达刷林军队在嵒地奇袭宋国军队，轻松打败了他们。
English: In the spring of the 13th year, Zheng's Xanda-Chulin army made a surprise attack on Song's army in Handi, and easily defeated them.

古文：夏，许男成卒。
现代文：夏季，许元公去世。
English: In the summer, Prince Xu died.

古文：公会晋侯及吴子于黄池。
现代文：哀公在黄池与晋侯和吴子会见。
English: Aiko met with Jin Hou and Wu Zi in Huangchi.

古文：楚公子申帅师伐陈。
现代文：楚国的公子申率领军队攻打陈国。
English: Chen, the prince of Chu, led an army to attack Chen.

古文：於越入吴。
现代文：越国军队攻打吴国。
English: The Yue people entered the State of Wu.

古文：秋，公至自会。
现代文：秋季，哀公从黄池回来。
English: In autumn, Aigong returns from Huangchi.

古文：晋魏曼多帅师侵卫。
现代文：晋国的魏曼多率领军队攻打卫国。
English: Weimando of Jin led an army to invade and defend the country.

古文：葬许元公。
现代文：安葬许元公。
English: The funeral of Prince Xu Yuan is over.

古文：九月，螽。
现代文：九月，鲁国发生蝗灾。
English: In September, a locust plague occurred in Russia.

古文：冬十有一月，有星孛于东方。
现代文：冬季十一月，有一颗彗星出现在东方。
English: In the winter of November, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：盗杀陈夏区夫。
现代文：犯罪的人杀掉了陈国的夏弓区夫。
English: The criminal killed Chen Guo's husband, Xia Yucheng.

古文：十有二月，螽。
现代文：十二月，鲁国蝗虫成灾。
English: In December, a plague of locusts hit the country of Lu.

古文：十三年春，宋向魋救其师。
现代文：十三年春季，宋国的向魋救援他们的军队。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Song Dynasty, Xiang Yu of the Song Dynasty came to the rescue of their army.

古文：郑子賸使徇曰： 得桓魋者有赏。 
现代文：郑国的武子魋派人通告全军说： 抓到向魋的有赏。 
English: Zheng's son-in-arms, Xuan Zang, sent a message to the whole army, saying, "If you catch Xiang Zang, there will be a reward.

古文：魋也逃归。
现代文：向魋就逃走回国。
English: Xiang Yao fled back to China.

古文：遂取宋师于嵒，获成讙、郜延。以六邑为虚。
现代文：郑军就在嵒地全部歼灭宋军，俘虏了成讙郜延，把六个城邑掳掠一空，然后两国都不加管辖。
English: Zheng's army completely annihilated the Song army in Handan, captured Chengdu and Yan'an, and plundered six cities. After that, both countries were no longer under his jurisdiction.

古文：夏，公会单平公、晋定公、吴夫差于黄池。
现代文：夏季，哀公在黄池会见单平公、晋定公、吴王夫差。
English: In the summer, Ai Gong met with Shan Ping Gong, Jin Ding Gong and Wu Wang Fuzha in Huangchi.

古文：六月丙子，越子伐吴，为二隧。畴无馀、讴阳自南方，先及郊。
现代文：六月十一日，越王攻打吴国，兵分两路，越国的畴无馀、讴阳从南边走，先到达吴国国都的郊区。
English: On June 11th, King Yue attacked the State of Wu. The troops were divided into two groups. There was no spare territory in the State of Yue. Shenyang went from the south and reached the suburbs of the capital of the State of Wu first.

古文：吴大子友、王子地、王孙弥庸、寿於姚自泓上观之。
现代文：吴国的太子友、王子地、王孙弥庸、寿於姚在泓水上观察越军。
English: The prince's friends, princes, Wang Sun Yiyong, and Shou Yuyao of Wu observed the Vietnamese army on the Surabaya River.

古文：弥庸见姑蔑之旗，曰： 吾父之旗也。
现代文：弥庸见到姑蔑的旗帜，说： 那是我父亲的旗帜。
English: When Yiyong saw the despised flag, he said, "That is my father's flag."

古文：不可以见仇而弗杀也。 
现代文：我不能见到仇人而不杀死他们。 
English: I can't see my enemies without killing them.

古文：大子曰： 战而不克，将亡国。请待之。 
现代文：太子友说： 如果作战不能取胜，将会亡国，请等一等。 
English: Prince Tomo said, "If we can't win the battle, we'll lose the country. Please wait."

古文：弥庸不可，属徒五千，王子地助之。
现代文：王孙弥庸不同意，集合部下五千人出战，王子地帮助他。
English: Wang Sun Yiyong disagreed and gathered five thousand of his subordinates to go to war to help him.

古文：乙酉，战，弥庸获畴无馀，地获讴阳。
现代文：二十日，两军交战，弥庸俘虏了畴无馀，王子地俘虏了讴阳。
English: On the 20th, the two armies clashed. Yiyong captured Zhuoyu, and the prince captured Fenyang.

古文：越子至，王子地守。
现代文：越王勾践率军到达，王子地防守。
English: Yue Wang Gochun arrived with his army and defended the prince's territory.

古文：丙戌，复战，大败吴师。获大子友、王孙弥庸、寿於姚。
现代文：二十一日，再次交战，越军大败吴军，俘虏了太子友、王孙弥庸、寿於姚。
English: On the twenty-first day, they fought again, and the Vietnamese army defeated the Wu army, and captured Taizi You, Wang Sun Yiyong, and Shou Yu Yao.

古文：丁亥，入吴。
现代文：二十二日，越军进入吴国。
English: Dinghai, the Vietnamese army entered the State of Wu.

古文：吴人告败于王，王恶其闻也，自刭七人于幕下。
现代文：吴国人向吴王报告战败。吴王深恐诸侯听到这个消息，亲自把七个报信的吴人杀死在帐幕里边。
English: The people of Wu reported the defeat to the king of Wu. The king of Wu was deeply afraid that the princes would hear the news, and personally killed the seven Wu people who reported the news inside the tent.

古文：秋七月辛丑，盟，吴、晋争先。
现代文：秋季，七月初六日，吴国和晋国争执歃血的先后。
English: In the autumn, on the 6th day of the 7th month, the disputes between the State of Wu and the State of Jin resulted in bloodshed.

古文：吴人曰： 于周室，我为长。 
现代文：吴国人说： 在周王室中，我们是老大。 
English: Wu people said: In the Zhou royal family, we are the boss.

古文：晋人曰： 于姬姓，我为伯。 
现代文：晋国人说： 在姬姓之中，我们为首。 
English: The people of Jin said, "Among the Hime surnames, we are at the top.

古文：赵鞅呼司马寅曰： 日旰矣，大事未成，二臣之罪也。
现代文：赵鞅对司马寅说： 天已晚了，大事没有成功，是我们两个臣下的罪过。
English: Zhao Wei said to Sima Yin: It is too late, the great event did not succeed, it is the fault of our two subjects.

古文：建鼓整列，二臣死之，长幼必可知也。 
现代文：竖起旗帜整顿队列，我们两人战斗到死，次序先后就可以定了。 
English: Put up the flag and re-arrange the queue. The two of us will fight to the death. The order can be decided one after the other.

古文：对曰： 请姑视之。 
现代文：司马寅说： 请姑且到吴营那里观察一下。 
English: Sima Yin said: Please go to Wu Ying to observe.

古文：反曰： 肉食者无墨。
现代文：回来，说： 高贵的人的脸色没有灰暗无神的。
English: He returned and said, "The countenance of the noble man is not gloomy and lifeless.

古文：今吴王有墨，国胜乎？
现代文：现在吴王面色灰暗，是他的国家被敌人战胜了吗？
English: Now that King Wu is grey-faced, has his country been defeated by the enemy?

古文：大子死乎？
现代文：或许是太子死了吧？
English: Perhaps the crown prince is dead?

古文：且夷德轻，不忍久，请少待之。 
现代文：而且夷人轻佻不沉着，不能长久忍耐，请稍等一等。 
English: Moreover, the barbarians are frivolous and restless, and cannot be patient for a long time. Please wait a moment.

古文：乃先晋人。
现代文：吴国人就让晋国人先歃血。
English: The Wu people let the Jin people draw blood first.

古文：吴人将以公见晋侯，子服景伯对使者曰： 王合诸侯，则伯帅侯牧以见于王。伯合诸侯，则侯帅子男以见于伯。
现代文：吴国人要带领哀公进见晋定公，子服景伯对使者说： 天子会合诸侯，那么诸侯之长就率领诸侯进见天子；诸侯之长会合诸侯，那么侯就率领子、男进见诸侯领袖。
English: The people of Wu wanted to lead Ai Gong to see Jin Ding Gong, and Zifu Jingbo said to the messenger: When the Son of Heaven gathers the princes, then the chief of princes will lead the princes to see the Son of Heaven; when the chief of princes gathers the princes, then the princes will lead the sons and men to see the leaders of princes.

古文：自王以下，朝聘玉帛不同。
现代文：从天子以下，朝聘时所用的玉帛也不相同。
English: From the emperor on down, the jade brooches used for court appointments are also different.

古文：故敝邑之职贡于吴，有丰于晋，无不及焉，以为伯也。
现代文：所以敝邑进贡给吴国的，要比晋国丰厚，而没有不如的，因为把吴国作为诸侯的领袖。
English: Therefore, the tribute paid to the State of Wu by the County of Yan was more generous than that paid to the State of Jin, but it was not inferior, because it regarded the State of Wu as the leader of the princes.

古文：今诸侯会，而君将以寡君见晋君，则晋成为伯矣，敝邑将改职贡。鲁赋于吴八百乘。若为子男，则将半邾以属于吴，而如邾以事晋。
现代文：现在诸侯会见，而君王准备带领寡君进见晋君，那么晋国就成为诸侯的领袖了，敝邑将会改变进贡的数量：鲁国进贡按八百辆战车给贵国，如果变成子、男，那么将会按邾国战车的一半作为贡品，而按邾国战车的数来事奉晋国。
English: Now the princes are meeting, and the king is preparing to lead the nobles to Jin, then Jin will become the leader of the princes, and the county will change the number of tribute: the tribute of Lu will be based on eight hundred chariots for your country, and if it becomes a son or a man, then half of the chariots of Shao will be used as a tribute, and the number of chariots of Shao will be used to serve Jin.

古文：且执事以伯召诸侯，而以侯终之，何利之有焉？ 
现代文：而且执事以诸侯之长的身分召集诸侯，而以一般诸侯的身分结束，这有什么好处呢？ 
English: Besides, what good is it if you gather the dukes as counts and end up as marquesses?

古文：吴人乃止，既而悔之，将囚景伯。
现代文：吴国人就没有那么做。不久又后悔了，准备囚禁景伯。
English: The people of Wu did not do that. They soon regretted it and prepared to imprison Jingbo.

古文：景伯曰： 何也立后于鲁矣。将以二乘与六人从，迟速唯命。 
现代文：景伯说： 何已经在鲁国立了继承人了，打算带两辆车子和六个人跟随去，早走晚走听你们的命令。 
English: King Bo said, "Why do you already have an heir in the State of Lu, and plan to take two cars and six people to follow you, and leave early or late to listen to your orders.

古文：遂囚以还。
现代文：吴国人就囚禁了景伯，带回去。
English: The people of Wu then imprisoned King Bo and took him back.

古文：及户牖，谓大宰曰： 鲁将以十月上辛，有事于上帝先王，季辛而毕。
现代文：到达户牖，景伯对太宰说： 鲁国将要在十月的第一个辛日祭祀天帝和先王，最后一个辛日完毕。
English: Arriving at the Hukong, King Bo said to the Dazai: Lu will have to offer sacrifices to the Heavenly Emperor and the Ancestor King on the first hard day of October, and the last hard day is over.

古文：何世有职焉，自襄以来，未之改也。
现代文：何世世代代都在祭祀中担任一定的职务，从鲁襄公以来没有改变过。
English: Many generations have held certain positions in the rituals, and this has not changed since the time of King Lu Xiang.

古文：若不会，祝宗将曰： 吴实然。 且谓鲁不共，而执其贱者七人，何损焉？ 
现代文：如果我不参加，祝宗将会说 是吴国让他这样的 ，而且贵国认为鲁国不恭敬，而只逮捕了他们七个卑微的人，对鲁国有什么损害呢？ 
English: If I don't attend, Zhu Zong will say that the State of Wu made him do it, and your country thinks that the State of Lu is disrespectful, but only arrested seven of their lowly people, what harm is there to the State of Lu?

古文：大宰嚭言于王曰： 无损于鲁，而祗为名，不如归之。 
现代文：太宰嚭对吴王说： 对鲁国没有损害，而只能造成坏名声，不如放他回去。 
English: Dazai Yan said to Wu Wang: There is no damage to Lu, but it can only cause a bad reputation. It is better to let him go back.

古文：乃归景伯。
现代文：于是就放回了景伯。
English: So he put the crane back.

古文：吴申叔仪乞粮于公孙有山氏曰： 佩玉繠兮，余无所系之。旨酒一盛兮，余与褐之父睨之。 
现代文：吴国的申叔仪到公孙有山氏那里讨粮食，说： 佩玉垂下来啊，我没有地方系住；甜酒一杯啊，我和贫苦的老头斜视着。 
English: Uncle Shen Yi of the State of Wu went to Gongsun Yushan to ask for grain, saying: "Pei Yuling, I have no place to live; a glass of sweet wine, I am squinting with the poor old man.

古文：对曰： 粱则无矣，麤则有之。
现代文：公孙有山氏回答说： 细粮已经没了，粗粮还有一些。
English: His great-grandson, Mr. Ariyama, replied, "We no longer have fine grains, but we still have some coarse grains.

古文：若登首山以呼曰，庚癸乎，则诺。 
现代文：如果你登上首山喊 下等货啊 ，就答应你。 
English: If you climb to the top of the mountain and shout that you are inferior goods, I will agree with you.

古文：王欲伐宋，杀其丈夫而囚其妇人。大宰嚭曰： 可胜也，而弗能居也。 
现代文：吴王夫差想要攻打宋国，准备杀死那里的男人而囚禁妇女，太宰嚭说： 我们虽然可以战胜，但不能在那里久留。 
English: Wu Wangfusha wanted to attack Song and planned to kill the men there and imprison the women, Dazai said: Although we can win, we can't stay there for long.

古文：乃归。
现代文：吴王这才回国。
English: They withdrew and returned to their country.

古文：冬，吴及越平。
现代文：冬季，吴国和越国讲和。
English: In winter, Wu and Yue made peace.

