古文：《旧唐史•韩退之传》，初言： 愈常以为魏、晋以还，为文者多拘偶对，而经诰之指归，不复振起。故所为文，抒意立言，自成一家新语，后学之士，取为师法。
现代文：《旧唐书•韩愈传》开头说： 韩愈时常以为从魏、晋以来，做文章的人拘泥于对仗，而对经典的思想意义，不再提倡，所以做文章抒发意见讲大道理，自己成为一家的新说法。
English: "Old Tang Dynasty Books • Han Yu Biography" begins: Han Yu often thought that since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, people who wrote articles were fixated on confrontation, and no longer advocated the ideological significance of the classics. Therefore, when writing articles, he expressed his opinions, spoke the truth, and became a new saying.

古文：当时作者甚众，无以过之。故世称 韩文 。 
现代文：后辈的学人多取他的榜样，当时这样做文章的很多，但是没有人能超过他，所以世人称为 韩文 。 
English: Later generations of scholars mostly followed his example. At that time, there were many articles that did so, but no one could surpass him, so the world is called Korean.

古文：而又云： 时有恃才肆意，亦盭孔、孟之旨。
现代文：而又说： 韩愈常常依仗自己的才华随意写作，也会违背孔子、孟子的精神实质。
English: But he also said: Han Yu often relies on his own talent to write at will, and will also violate the spiritual essence of Confucius and Mencius.

古文：若南人妄以柳宗元为罗池神，而愈撰碑以实之。
现代文：举例说吧：南方人很随便很轻率地把柳宗元称作 罗池神 ，韩愈就撰写碑文予以记载，使之成为事实。
English: Let's take an example: the people of the south very casually and carelessly called Liu Zongyuan the god of Luo Lake, and Han Yu wrote an inscription to record this and make it a fact.

古文：李贺父名晋，不应进士，而愈为贺作《讳辩》，令举进士。
现代文：李贺的父亲名叫李晋，不应该考进士，而韩愈为李贺作《讳辩》，叫他应进士考试。
English: Li He's father's name is Li Jin, and he should not be allowed to take the entrance examination. Han Yu, however, wrote "Concealment" for Li He, telling him that he should pass the entrance examination.

古文：又为《毛颖传》，讥戏不近人情。
现代文：又作《毛颖传》讥讽世态不近人情。
English: He also wrote "Mao Ying Zhen" (Mao Ying Biography) to satirize the inhumanity of the world.

古文：此文章之甚纰缪者。
现代文：这些是文章中很错误的。
English: That's what's wrong with the article.

古文：撰《顺宗实录》，繁简不当，叙事拙于取舍，颇为当代所非。 
现代文：所作《顺宗实录》，繁简不妥当，记事情的取舍不当，很受当代人的非议。 
English: He was criticized by his contemporaries for his "Shunzong Shihro" (The True Record of Shunzong), which was improper in its simplicity, and improper in its choice of subjects to record.

古文：裴晋公有《寄李翱书》曰： 昌黎韩愈，仆知之旧矣，其人信美材也。
现代文：裴晋公有《寄李翱书》说： 昌黎韩愈，我早就知道他了，这人的确有才能。
English: Bae Jinkong said in "Send Li Xun Shu": "Chang Li Han Yu, I've known him for a long time, this man really has talent.

古文：近或闻诸侪类云：恃其绝足，往往奔放，不以文立制，而以文为戏。
现代文：近来有时听朋友们说：他依仗出群的才华，往往肆意逞才，不用文章去建立法制，而以文章为游戏。
English: Recently, I have sometimes heard friends say: He relies on outstanding talent, often recklessly, does not use articles to establish the legal system, but uses articles as a game.

古文：可矣乎？
现代文：这可以吗？
English: Is that okay?

古文：今之不及之者，当大为防焉尔。 
现代文：现今一些不及他的人，应当为此提防着。 
English: Some of his current underachievers should be wary of that.

古文：《旧史》谓愈为纰缪，固不足责，晋公亦有是言，何哉？
现代文：《旧唐书》说韩愈有错误，是可以理解的，且用不着指责的。但裴度也这样说是为什么呢？
English: The "Old Tang Dynasty Book" says that Han Yu made a mistake, which is understandable and does not need to be criticized. But why did Pei Du also say this?

古文：考公作此书时，名位犹未达，其末云： 昨弟来，欲度及时干进，度昔岁取名，不敢自高。
现代文：因为裴度写这封信时，名誉地位都还没有。信的最后写着： 昨日小弟来，是想能及时在功名上有所进取。我虽然名为 度 ，也不敢自视甚高。
English: Because when Pei Du wrote this letter, he didn't have any reputation status yet. At the end of the letter, he wrote: My younger brother came yesterday, because he wanted to make progress in his career in a timely manner. Although my name is Du, I don't dare to think too highly of myself.

古文：今孤茕若此，游宦谓何！
现代文：现在孤零潦倒到这个地步，出外做官又是为了什么呢？
English: Now that I am alone and depressed to this point, what is the purpose of going abroad to work as an official?

古文：是不能复从故人之所勉耳！但置力田园，苟过朝夕而已。 
现代文：因此，我不能听从老朋友的勉励，今后只去致力于耕种田园，苟且地过日子罢了。 
English: Therefore, I cannot listen to the exhortation of an old friend, and in the future I will only devote myself to cultivating the countryside and living a simple life.

古文：然而，公出征淮西，请愈为行军司马，又令作碑，盖在此累年之后，相知已深，非复前比也。
现代文：可是到了后来，裴度出征淮西时，请韩愈作他的行军司马，还让他写过碑文。这些事都在许多年之后，二人相互了解已深，与未成名之前二人的关系是不能相比的。
English: However, later, when Baidu went to Huaxi, he asked Han Yu to be his marching steed, and also asked him to write an inscription. All these things are many years later, the two have a deep understanding of each other, and the relationship between the two people before they became famous cannot be compared.

