古文：黄帝曰：愿闻其奇邪而不在经者。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道奇邪不在经脉的情况。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I want to know if there is any strange evil in the meridians."

古文：岐伯曰：血络是也。
现代文：岐伯说：这就是血络。
English: Qi Bo said: This is the bloodline.

古文：黄帝曰：刺血络而仆者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有时针刺血络放血会使病人昏倒其原因是什么？
English: Huang Di said: Sometimes acupuncture blood circulation and bloodletting will cause the patient to faint. What is the reason?

古文：血出而射者，何也？
现代文：有时针刺放血其出血呈喷射状是为什么？
English: Sometimes the bleeding from acupuncture and phlebotomy is jet-like. Why is that?

古文：血少黑而浊者，何也？
现代文：有时针刺放出的血量少，且色黑质浊是为什么？
English: Sometimes the amount of blood released by acupuncture is small, and why is the color black?

古文：血出清而半为汁者，何也？
现代文：有时血质清稀且其中一半像水液一样是为什么？
English: Sometimes the blood is thin and half of it looks like water. Why?

古文：拔针而肿者，何也？
现代文：有的拔针后局部肿起是为什么？
English: Why are there local swellings after needle removal?

古文：血出若多若少而面色苍苍者，何也？
现代文：有的无论出血量或多或少都出现面色苍白是为什么？
English: Some people, regardless of the amount of bleeding, appear more or less pale. Why?

古文：拔针而面色不变而烦悗者，何也？
现代文：有的拔针后面色不变但感觉心胸烦闷是为什么？
English: Why is it that the color of some needles does not change after withdrawal, but I feel anxious?

古文：多出血而不动摇者，何也？
现代文：有的虽然出血很多但病人没有任何不适是为什么？
English: In some cases, although there is a lot of bleeding, the patient does not feel any discomfort. Why?

古文：愿闻其故。
现代文：以上八种情况我想知道其中的道理。
English: I want to know why.

古文：岐伯曰：脉气盛而血虚者，刺之则脱气，脱气则仆。
现代文：岐伯说：经脉中气偏盛而血偏虚的，针刺络脉放血则脱气，气脱失会出现昏倒。
English: Qi Bo said: If the qi in the meridians is too high and the blood is too low, the needling of the vas deferens the qi, and the loss of qi will cause fainting.

古文：血气俱盛而阴气多者，其血滑，刺之则射。
现代文：经脉中气血俱盛而阴气较多的，血也流行滑疾，针刺络脉放血时血液就会喷射而出。
English: There is a lot of qi and blood in the menses, but more yin. Blood is also slippery. When the acupuncture vein discharges blood, the blood will be ejected.

古文：阳气蓄积，久留而不泻者，其血黑以浊，故不能射。
现代文：阳气蓄积于络脉之内，停留已久而不能外泻，可导致血色黑暗而稠浊，所以血也就不会远射。
English: Yang qi accumulates in the vas deferens, stays for a long time and cannot be released, which can cause the blood color to be dark and thick, so the blood does not travel far.

古文：新饮而液渗于络，而未合和于血也，故血出而汁别焉。
现代文：刚刚饮过水而水渗入到血络中，尚未与血液完全混合，所以针刺放出的血中有水液夹杂。
English: Just after drinking water, the water seeps into the bloodstream and has not yet completely mixed with the blood, so the blood released by the needle prick is mixed with water.

古文：其不新饮者，身中有水，久则为肿。
现代文：那些不是由于刚饮过水的，由于体内原本有水液，因为水液停留日久，则蓄积形成水肿病。
English: Those are not due to just drinking water, because there is water in the body originally, because the water stays for a long time, the accumulation forms edema disease.

古文：阴气积于阳，其气因于络，故刺之血未出而气先行，故肿。
现代文：阴气积聚在阳分，已经渗入到络脉，所以在刺络脉时血还没有流出而气先流出，所以使局部肿起。
English: Yin gas accumulates at the yang point and has already infiltrated into the vas deferens, so when the vas deferens is stabbed, the blood has not yet flowed out and the gas has flowed out first, causing local swelling.

古文：阴阳之气，其新相得而未和合，因而泻之，则阴阳俱脱，表里相离，故脱色而苍苍然。
现代文：阴气和阳气刚刚相遇而尚未彼此协调，就针刺络脉放血使阴气、阳气同时外泻，就会阴气、阳气都虚，且表里失去联系，所以使面色无华而呈现苍白色。
English: Yin and yang have just met and have not yet coordinated with each other, so they need to prick the veins and discharge blood to make yin and yang leak out at the same time, then yin and yang will be empty, and the inside and outside will lose contact, so the complexion will be dull and pale.

古文：刺之血出多，色不变而烦悗者，刺络而虚经，虚经之属于阴者，阴脱，故烦悗。
现代文：针刺络脉出血过多，虽面色不变而心胸烦闷，是因为针刺络脉而使经脉空虚，空虚之经脉连接五脏之阴，阴脱，因此心中烦闷。
English: Needle-pierced veins bleed excessively, although the complexion is unchanged and the heart is bored, it is because of the needle-pierced veins that the meridians are empty. The empty meridians connect the yin and yang of the five internal organs, so the heart is bored.

古文：阴阳相得而合为痹者，此为内溢于经，外注于络，如是者，阴阳俱有余，虽多出血而弗能虚也。
现代文：阴阳的邪气结合在一起而形成痹症，邪气在内充溢于经脉，在外渗注于络脉，像这种情况，阴阳都是邪气有余，针刺放血时出血虽多一些，也不会感觉虚脱。
English: The evil spirits of yin and yang combine to form paresis. The evil spirits overflow the meridians on the inside and seep into the vas deferens on the outside. In this case, the evil spirits of yin and yang are more than enough. Although there is more bleeding during acupuncture and bloodletting, there will be no feeling of collapse.

古文：黄帝曰：相之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样来观察血络呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can we observe the blood circulation?

古文：岐伯曰：血脉者，盛坚，横以赤，上下无常处，小者如针，大者如筋，则而泻之万全也，故无失数矣。
现代文：岐伯说：血脉中邪气亢盛的，血络大而坚硬、充盈于皮下而色红，上下没有固定部位，小的像针，大的像筷子一样粗细，遇到这种情况，施用泻法针刺络脉放血是安全的，但要注意在施治时，切不可违背治疗的常规。
English: Qi Bo said: If the evil spirits are abundant in the blood vessels, the blood vessels are large and hard, full and red under the skin, and there are no fixed parts above and below, the small ones are like needles, and the large ones are as thick as chopsticks. In this situation, it is safe to apply the laxative method of needling the blood vessels, but it should be noted that when administering the treatment, it must not violate the treatment routine.

古文：失数而反，各如其度。
现代文：如果不按常规要求，非但没有疗效，还会出现上述那些已见的不良症状。
English: If you do not follow the usual requirements, instead of having no therapeutic effect, you will also have the above-mentioned adverse symptoms.

古文：黄帝曰：针入而肉着者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：进针以后，往往有肌肉紧紧地裹住针身的情况，这是为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: After the needle is inserted, there is often a situation where the muscle tightly wraps around the needle body. Why is this?

古文：岐伯曰：热气因于针，则针热，热则内着于针，故坚焉。
现代文：岐伯说：这是由于体内热气作用于针体，使针体随之而热，针体热则导致肌肉与针粘附在一起，所以出现针在肌肉中坚固而不能转动。
English: Qi Bo said: This is because the hot air in the body acts on the needle body, causing the needle body to heat up. The heat of the needle body causes the muscle and needle to stick together, so the needle appears to be solid in the muscle and cannot be rotated.

