古文：◎西域一
现代文：西域一
English: West Region 1

古文：○哈密卫柳城火州土鲁番
现代文：哈密卫柳城火州土鲁番
English: Hamiweiliu City, Huzhou, Turuban

古文：哈密，东去嘉峪关一千六百里，汉伊吾卢地。
现代文：哈密，东面距离嘉峪关一千六百里，汉代伊吾卢所在地。
English: Hami, located 1,600 li to the east of Jiayuguan, is the location of the Han Dynasty's Iguru.

古文：明帝置宜禾都尉，领屯田。
现代文：汉代明帝时期在此设置宜禾都尉，统领屯田军。
English: During the Ming Dynasty of the Han Dynasty, Yihe Duifeng was set up here to lead the Tonden Army.

古文：唐为伊州。
现代文：唐代此地为伊州。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, this place was called Izhou.

古文：宋入于回纥。
现代文：宋代该地并入回纥。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the area was incorporated into Huizhou.

古文：元末以威武王纳忽里镇之，寻改为肃王，卒，弟安克帖木儿嗣。
现代文：元朝末年，威武王纳忽里镇守该地，不久改由肃王镇守。肃王去世后，由其弟安克帖木儿继承王位并统治这个地方。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Weiwu Wang Nakhuli Zhengu guarded the place, soon to be replaced by Su Wang Zhengu. After Su Wang's death, his brother Ankh Timur inherited the throne and ruled the place.

古文：洪武中，太祖既定畏兀儿地，置安定等卫，渐逼哈密。
现代文：洪武年间，明太祖已经平定了畏兀儿地区，设置了安定等卫所，便渐渐逼近哈密。
English: During the Hongwu era, the Ming emperor Taizu had already pacified the region and set up a stable and other sanctuaries, and gradually approached Hami.

古文：安克帖木儿惧，将纳款。
现代文：安克帖木儿感到威胁，便想向明朝廷投诚。
English: Ankh Timur felt threatened and wanted to surrender to the Ming court.

古文：成祖初，遣官招谕之，许其以马市易，即遣使来朝，贡马百九十匹。
现代文：明成祖初年，朝廷派官员前去招谕安克帖木儿，答应允许他们以马与中原地区交易货物，安克帖木儿即派使者来京城朝贡，献贡马一百九十匹。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court sent officials to invite Ankh Timur, promising to allow them to trade goods with horses in the Central Plains region. Ankh Timur sent an envoy to pay tribute to the capital, offering one hundred and ninety horses.

古文：永乐元年十一月至京，帝喜，赐赉有加，命有司给直收其马四千七百四十匹，择良者十匹入内厩，余以给守边骑士。
现代文：永乐元年十一月安克帖木儿的使者到达京都，皇帝甚为喜悦，对他们加以赏赐，让有关官府按其价值收购他们带来的四千七百四十匹马，挑选出其中十匹优良者充入宫廷内厩，其余的交给守卫边疆的骑兵。
English: In November of the first year of Yongle, the emissaries of Ankh Timur arrived in Kyoto. The emperor was very pleased and rewarded them by letting the relevant government offices purchase the 4,740 horses they brought according to their value. Ten of the best horses were selected to fill the stables in the palace, and the rest were given to the cavalry guarding the border.

古文：明年六月复贡，请封，乃封为忠顺王，赐金印，复贡马谢恩。
现代文：第二年六月安克帖木儿又派人向朝廷献贡，请求朝廷给予册封。朝廷便封他为忠顺王，给他颁赐金印。安克帖木儿又派人向朝廷献贡马表示谢恩。
English: In June of the following year, Ankh Timur also sent someone to pay tribute to the imperial court, requesting the imperial court to grant him a title. The imperial court then crowned him as the King of Loyalty and presented him with a gold seal. Ankh Timur also sent someone to pay tribute to the imperial court to express his gratitude.

古文：已而迤北可汗鬼力赤毒死之，其国人以病卒闻。
现代文：不久哈密以北的可汗鬼力赤将忠顺王安克帖木儿毒死，其国人向朝廷谎称安克帖木儿病逝。
English: Not long after, the khan of the north of Hami, Qiliqa, poisoned the king of Zhongshun, Anktemur, and his countrymen lied to the court that Anktemur had died of illness.

古文：三年二月遣官赐祭，以其兄子脱脱为王，赐玉带。
现代文：三年二月朝廷派官前去赐祭，封安克帖木儿的兄长的儿子脱脱为王，给脱脱颁赐玉带。
English: In February of the third year, the imperial court sent an official to give a sacrifice, and the son of Ankh-Timur's elder brother, Dhotu, became king, and Dhotu was given a jade belt.

古文：脱脱自幼俘入中国，帝拔之奴隶中，俾列宿卫，欲令嗣爵。恐其国不从，遣官问之，不敢违，请还主其众。
现代文：脱脱自幼被中国俘虏，皇帝将他从奴隶中选拔出来，充当宿卫，想让他继承哈密的王位，但怕其国人不服从，便派官员前去询问。其国人不敢违抗朝廷的旨意，请求脱脱回去主持政务。
English: Having escaped from captivity in China as a child, the emperor selected him from among the slaves to act as a bodyguard and wanted him to succeed to the throne of Hami, but fearing that his countrymen would not obey, he sent officials to inquire. His countrymen did not dare to defy the will of the imperial court and asked to escape and return to preside over government affairs.

古文：因赐其祖母及母彩币，旋遣使贡马谢恩。
现代文：朝廷便给脱脱的祖母和母亲赏赐彩币，不久脱脱使派使者向朝廷献贡马表示谢恩。
English: The imperial court rewarded the grandma and mother of the escapees with colored coins, and soon the escapees sent an envoy to the imperial court to offer tribute horses to express their gratitude.

古文：四年春，甘肃总兵官宋晟奏，脱脱为祖母所逐。
现代文：四年春，甘肃的总兵官宋晟上奏朝廷，说脱脱被其祖母所驱逐。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Song Xuan, the general officer of Gansu, reported to the imperial court that Dadu was expelled by his grandmother.

古文：帝怒，敕责其头目曰： 脱脱朝廷所立，即有过，不奏而擅逐之，是慢朝廷也。
现代文：皇帝听到此消息后很愤怒，下敕令责备哈密的头目说： 脱脱是朝廷所立的王，即使有过错，你们不上奏朝廷而擅自将其驱逐出去，这是怠慢朝廷的表现。
English: The emperor was very angry after hearing this news. He issued an order to reprimand the leader of Hami, saying, "Tatsuatsu is a king appointed by the imperial court. Even if there is a mistake, you did not report it to the imperial court and expelled him without authorization. This is a manifestation of negligence of the imperial court.

古文：老人昏耄，头目亦不知朝廷耶？
现代文：老人年纪大了头脑发昏，难道作为头目的也不知上面还有朝廷吗？
English: The old man is getting dizzy in his old age. As the leader, does he not know that there is an imperial court above him?

古文：即迎归，善匡辅，俾孝事祖母。 
现代文：你们立刻把脱脱迎接回去，好好地匡辅他，让他给其祖母行孝。 
English: You should immediately welcome him back, support him well, and let him show filial piety to his grandmother.

古文：由是脱脱得还，祖母及头目各遣使谢罪。
现代文：这样，脱脱回到哈密，脱脱的祖母和哈密的头目也各派人向朝廷谢罪。
English: In this way, the escapee returned to Hami, and the escapee's grandmother and the leader of Hami also sent people to the court to apologize.

古文：三月立哈密卫，以其头目马哈麻火者等为指挥、千百户等官，又以周安为忠顺王长史，刘行为纪善，辅导。
现代文：三月，朝廷设置哈密卫，任命哈密的头目马哈麻火等人分别为指挥、千户长、百户长等官职，又任命周安为忠顺王脱脱的长史，刘行为纪善，辅佐和引导他。
English: In March, the imperial court set up Hamiwei, and appointed Hami's leader, Maha Maha, and others to the positions of commander, head of a thousand households, and head of a hundred households, respectively. Zhou An was also appointed as the long history of escaping from King Zhongshun, and Liu acted as a disciplinarian, assisting and guiding him.

古文：冬，授头目十九人为都指挥等官。
现代文：该年冬天，朝廷又给十九位头目授予都指挥等官职。
English: In the winter of the same year, the imperial court also awarded nineteen leaders with official positions such as metropolitan commanders.

古文：明年，宋晟奏，头目陆十等作乱，已诛，虑他变，请兵防御。
现代文：第二年，宋晟上奏朝廷，说头目陆十等人作乱，已被诛杀，但怕引起其他变故，请求朝廷增兵防备。
English: The following year, Song Xuan reported to the imperial court that the ringleader, Lu Xiu, and others who had caused the disturbance had been killed in battle, but he requested the imperial court to increase the number of soldiers to be on the alert, for fear of causing other changes.

古文：帝命晟发兵应之，而以安克帖木儿妻子往依鬼力赤，恐诱贼侵哈密，敕晟谨备。
现代文：皇帝派宋晟增兵应变，又因安克帖木儿的妻和儿子已投奔鬼力赤，怕他们引诱鬼力赤入侵哈密，便敕令宋晟小心防备。
English: The emperor sent Song Tao to increase the number of soldiers to cope with the situation, and because Ankettemur's wife and son had already joined the Red Ghosts, fearing that they would lure the Red Ghosts to invade Hami, he ordered Song Tao to be careful.

古文：晟卒，以何福代，又敕福开诚抚忠顺。
现代文：宋晟去世，皇帝派何福代行宋晟职务，同时又敕令何福开诚布公地安抚忠顺王。
English: After the death of Song Kun, the emperor sent He Fu to act as Song Kun's deputy. At the same time, he ordered He Fu to openly appease King Zhong Shun.

古文：会头目请设把总一人理国政，帝敕福曰： 置把总，是增一王也；政令不一，下安适从。 
现代文：此时有的头目请求朝廷在哈密增一名把总以治理哈密的政务，皇帝敕谕何福说： 设置把总，就等于增设了一个王；这会造成政令不一，下面的人会无所适从的。 
English: At this time, some leaders requested the imperial court to increase the number of governors in Hami to govern the affairs of Hami. The emperor told He Fu: "Setting up a governor is equivalent to adding a king; this will result in inconsistent decrees, and the people below will be at a loss.

古文：寝其议。
现代文：便将这个提议搁置一边。
English: The proposal was shelved.

古文：自是，比岁朝贡，悉加优赐，其使臣皆增秩授官。
现代文：从此以后，哈密连年向朝廷献贡，朝廷对他们也都优加赏赐，并给哈密派来的使臣增授官秩。
English: From then on, Hami continued to pay tribute to the imperial court year after year. The imperial court also rewarded them generously and conferred higher ranks on the envoys sent by Hami.

古文：帝眷脱脱特厚，而脱脱顾凌侮朝使，沈湎昏聩，不恤国事，其下买柱等交谏不从。
现代文：皇帝特别厚待脱脱，对他寄予厚望，而脱脱却凌侮朝廷的使者，整天沉湎于酒色，昏聩不体恤国事民情，其手下买住等人交相进谏，他也不听。
English: The emperor was especially generous to Shutu and had high hopes for him, but Shutu insulted the emissaries of the imperial court, indulged in wine all day long, was drowsy and insensitive to national affairs and people's feelings, and did not listen to his subordinates who bought houses and other people.

古文：帝闻之怒，八年十一月遣官赐敕戒谕之。
现代文：皇帝听说这种情况后，于八年十一月派官员颁赐敕令去戒谕脱脱。
English: When the emperor heard about the situation, he sent officials to issue an imperial edict to break away from the edict in November 2008.

古文：未至，而脱脱以暴疾卒。
现代文：所派的官员还未到哈密，脱脱便得暴病去世。
English: The official had not yet arrived in Hami when he became violently ill and died.

古文：讣闻，遣官赐祭。
现代文：讣告传到朝廷后，皇帝派官员前去吊祭。
English: After the obituary was reported to the imperial court, the emperor sent officials to the hanging ceremony.

古文：擢都指挥同知哈剌哈纳为都督佥事，镇守其地，赐敕及白金、彩币。
现代文：接着朝廷便提升都指挥同知哈剌哈纳为都督佥事，让他镇守哈密，并给他颁发敕令和赏赐白金、彩币。
English: Next, the imperial court promoted the commander of the capital, his comrade, Haruhana, to the position of the governor of the capital, let him guard Hami, and issued him a royal decree and rewarded him with platinum and colored coins.

古文：且封脱脱从弟兔力帖木儿为忠义王，赐印诰、玉带，世守哈密。
现代文：皇帝又封脱脱的堂弟兔力帖木儿为忠义王，给他颁赐印有玺章的诰命和玉带，让他世代守卫哈密。
English: The emperor also crowned his cousin, Usili Timur, as the King of Loyalty, bestowing upon him the scepter of life and the scepter of life and the scepter of life and the scepter of life, so that he would guard Hami for generations.

古文：十年，贡马谢恩，自是修贡惟谨，故王祖母亦数奉贡。
现代文：十年，忠义王向朝廷贡献马匹表示谢恩，从此以后他们对朝廷都小心修贡，忠顺王的祖母也数次向朝廷献贡。
English: Ten years later, King Zhongyi offered horses to the imperial court to express his gratitude. Since then, they have been careful to pay tribute to the imperial court. King Zhongshun's grandmother also paid tribute to the imperial court several times.

古文：十七年，帝以朝使往来西域者，忠义王致礼延接，命中官赍绮帛劳之，赐其母妻金珠冠服、彩币，及其部下头目。
现代文：十七年，皇帝因为朝廷的使者在西域地区往来时，忠义王都致礼迎接，便派宦官带绮帛前去慰劳，给忠义王的母亲、妻子赏赐金珠冠服和彩币，对忠义王部下的头目也加以赏赐。
English: In the seventeenth year, the emperor sent eunuchs to comfort Prince Chungyi, because when the imperial envoys came and went in the western region, Prince Chungyi always greeted them with a bow. The emperor rewarded Prince Chungyi's mother and wife with gold and pearl crowned robes and colored coins, and also rewarded the head of Prince Chungyi's staff.

古文：其使臣及境内回回寻贡马三千五百余匹及貂皮诸物，诏赐钞三万二千锭、绮百、帛一千。
现代文：忠义王的使臣以及哈密境内的回回人不久便向朝廷献贡马三千五百多匹及貂皮等物，皇帝下诏给他们赏赐钱钞三万二千锭、绮一百匹、帛一千匹。
English: The envoys of King Loyalty and the Hui-Hui people in Hami territory soon offered more than three and a half thousand horses and yakitori skins to the imperial court. The emperor issued an edict to reward them with money and banknotes of thirty-two thousand baht, one hundred baht, and one thousand baht.

古文：二十一年贡驼三百三十、马千匹。
现代文：二十一年，他们又向朝廷贡献骆驼三百三十峰、马一千匹。
English: In 1921, they also donated 330 camels and 1,000 horses to the imperial court.

古文：仁宗践阼，诏谕其国。
现代文：仁宗登皇帝位时，下诏令谕告哈密。
English: When Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, he issued a decree to inform Hami.

古文：洪熙元年再入贡，贺即位。
现代文：洪熙元年他们再次向朝廷进贡，祝贺新皇帝登位。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, they once again paid tribute to the imperial court and congratulated the new emperor on his enthronement.

古文：仁宗崩，宣宗继统，其王兔力帖木儿亦卒，使来告哀。
现代文：仁宗去世，宣宗即皇帝位，哈密的忠义王兔力帖木儿也去世，派使者前来朝廷告哀。
English: When Emperor Nianzong died, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and Emperor Hami's loyal vassal, Prince Tamerlane, also died, and sent an envoy to the imperial court to offer condolences.

古文：宣德元年遣官赐祭，命故王脱脱子卜答失里嗣忠顺王，且以登极肆赦，命其国中亦赦，复贡马谢恩。
现代文：宣德元年朝廷派官前去吊祭，任命前忠顺王脱脱的儿子卜答失里继承忠顺王位，并因新皇帝登位实行大赦，朝廷也命令哈密在国内实行大赦。哈密又向朝廷献贡马表示谢恩。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, the imperial court sent an official to the hanging ceremony, appointed the son of the former King Taizhun, Bu Taizhong, to succeed the throne of Taizhun, and implemented an amnesty due to the new emperor's ascension to the throne. The imperial court also ordered Hami to implement an amnesty in the country. Hami also presented tribute horses to the imperial court to express his gratitude.

古文：明年遣弟北斗奴等来朝，贡驼马方物。
现代文：第二年忠顺王派他的弟弟北斗奴等人前来朝贡，向朝廷进献骆驼和马等特产。
English: In the following year, King Zhongshun sent his younger brother Beidou and others to pay tribute to the imperial court, offering camels, horses and other special products.

古文：授北斗奴都督佥事，因命中官谕王，遣故忠义王弟脱欢帖木儿赴京。
现代文：朝廷给北斗奴授以都督佥事之职，并命令宦官前去谕告忠顺王，将前忠义王的弟弟脱欢帖木儿遣送到京城来。
English: The court appointed Beidou Nong to the post of governor and ordered the eunuch to go and tell King Zhongshun to send the former King Zhongyi's younger brother, Deguan Timur, to the capital.

古文：三年以卜答失里年幼，命脱欢帖木儿嗣忠义王，同理国事。
现代文：三年朝廷因卜答失里年幼，任命脱欢帖木儿继承忠义王位，与忠顺王一起同理国事。
English: Three years later, the imperial court, due to a misunderstanding with the young prince, appointed Deguan Timur to succeed to the throne of Zhongyi, and together with King Zhongshun, he was in charge of state affairs.

古文：自是，二王并贡，岁或三四至，奏求婚娶礼币，命悉予之。
现代文：从此，两个王一起向朝廷献贡，一年甚至朝贡三四次，并请求朝廷赐婚娶用的礼币，皇帝都下令给予他们。
English: From then on, the two kings together paid tribute to the imperial court, and even paid tribute to the imperial court three or four times a year. They also asked the imperial court to grant them gift money for marriage, and the emperor ordered to give it to them.

古文：正统二年，脱欢帖木儿卒，封其子脱脱塔木儿为忠义王，未几卒。
现代文：正统二年，脱欢帖木儿去世，朝廷封他的儿子脱脱塔木儿为忠义王，不久脱脱塔木儿也去世。
English: In the second year of the orthodoxy, Deguan Timur died, and the court named his son Deguan Timur as the king of loyalty. Deguan Timur also died soon after.

古文：已而忠顺王亦卒，封其子倒瓦答失里为忠顺王。
现代文：接着不久，忠顺王亦谢世，朝廷便封他的儿子倒瓦答失里为忠顺王。
English: Soon after that, King Zhongshun also passed away, and the imperial court crowned his son as the King of Zhongshun.

古文：五年遣使三贡，廷议以为烦，定令每年一贡。
现代文：五年倒瓦答失里派使者向朝廷献贡三次，朝廷大臣觉得这样太烦琐，给他们规定一年献贡一次。
English: After five years of trying and failing, they sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court three times. The ministers of the imperial court thought this was too cumbersome and ordered them to pay tribute once a year.

古文：初，成祖之封忠顺王也，以哈密为西域要道，欲其迎护朝使，统领诸番，为西陲屏蔽。
现代文：当初，明成祖之所以分封忠顺王，是因为哈密是西域的要道，想让他迎送保护朝廷的使臣，让他统领西域诸番国，作为保卫西部边陲的屏障。
English: At first, the reason why Ming Cheng Zu assigned the fief to King Zhong Shun was because Hami was the key to the western region, and he wanted him to welcome the envoys protecting the imperial court, and let him rule over the western region countries, as a barrier to protect the western border.

古文：而其王率庸懦，又其地种落杂居。一曰回回，一曰畏兀儿，一曰哈剌灰，其头目不相统属，王莫能节制。
现代文：但是忠顺王手下的人多是庸碌懦怯之辈，其地方又是种落杂居之处，有回回人，有畏兀儿人，有哈剌灰人，其头目互相没有统属关系，忠顺王也无法节制他们。
English: However, most of the people under the command of King Zhongshun were mediocre and cowardly, and the place was a place of mixed residence, with Hui Hui people, Hui children people, and Hui gray people. Their leaders had no hierarchical relationship with each other, and King Zhongshun could not control them.

古文：众心离涣，国势渐衰。
现代文：加上哈密众心离散，于是国势渐衰。
English: Coupled with the dispersion of Hami's people's hearts, the national situation gradually declined.

古文：及倒瓦答失里立，都督皮剌纳潜通瓦剌猛可卜花等谋杀王，不克。
现代文：等到倒瓦答失里继任为王时，都督皮剌纳便暗地里勾结瓦剌的猛可卜花等人谋杀忠顺王，结果没有成功。
English: When he lost the succession to the king in the tile-throwing contest, the Tudor Pizhna secretly colluded with the tile-throwing Mammoth and others to murder King Zhongshun, but the result was not successful.

古文：王父在时，纳沙州叛亡百余家，屡敕王令还，止遣其半，其贡使又数辱驿吏卒，呵叱通事，当四方贡使大宴日，恶言诟詈，天子不加罪，但令慎择使臣，以是益无忌。
现代文：忠顺王的父亲在位时，曾接纳了沙州叛逃过来的一百余户人家，朝廷屡次敕令忠顺王将这些人遣还回沙州，忠顺王只遣送回去一半。忠顺王的献贡使者又数次侮辱驿亭的吏卒，呵叱责骂通事。当朝廷设宴宴请四方来的献贡使者时，忠顺王的使者竟然恶言诟骂。皇帝对此也不加罪，只命令忠顺王以后要谨慎地挑选使臣，于是他们益发无所顾忌。
English: When King Zhongshun's father was on the throne, he had received more than a hundred families who had defected from Shazhou. The imperial court repeatedly ordered King Zhongshun to send these people back to Shazhou, but King Zhongshun only sent back half of them. King Zhongshun's envoy to pay tribute insulted the officials of Xingting several times, scolding and cursing them. When the imperial court held a banquet to invite the envoys to pay tribute from all over the country, King Zhongshun's envoy even cursed and cursed. The emperor did not add to this, but ordered King Zhongshun to carefully select his envoys,

古文：其地，北瓦剌，西土鲁番，东沙州、罕东、赤斤诸卫，悉与构怨。由是邻国交侵。
现代文：哈密的北面是瓦剌，西面是土鲁番，东面是沙州、罕东、赤斤等卫所，四面都与哈密构怨不和，于是其邻国交相入侵。
English: To the north of Hami is Wawu, to the west is Turpan, to the east are Shazhou, Handong, Chakjin and other sanctuaries. All four sides are at odds with Hami, so its neighbors have invaded each other.

古文：罕东兵抵城外，掠人畜去。
现代文：罕东的军队抵达城外，将人畜掳掠而去。
English: Khandong's army arrived outside the city and carried off people and animals.

古文：沙州、赤斤先后兵侵，皆大获。
现代文：沙州、赤斤也先后发兵入侵，都大获而归。
English: Shazhou and Chajin also sent troops to invade successively, but they all returned with great success.

古文：瓦剌酋也先，王母弩温答失里弟也，亦遣兵围哈密城，杀头目，俘男妇，掠牛马驼不可胜计，取王母及妻北还，胁王往见，王惧不敢往，数遣使告难。
现代文：瓦剌的酋长也先，是忠顺王的母亲驽温答失里的弟弟，也派军队包围哈密城，杀死哈密的头目，俘获男女众人和抢去牛马骆驼不可胜数。也先还把忠顺王的母亲和妻子带到瓦剌，威胁忠顺王自己去瓦剌相见，忠顺王害怕不敢去，数次派使者向明朝廷告难。
English: The chieftain of Wawu, who was the younger brother of the mother of King Zhongshun, also sent an army to encircle the city of Hami, killed the leader of Hami, captured countless men and women and robbed countless horses, camels and cattle. He also first brought the mother and wife of King Zhongshun to Wawu, threatened King Zhongshun to meet him in Wawu, but King Zhongshun was afraid and did not dare to go, and sent envoys to the Ming court several times.

古文：敕令诸部修好，迄不从，惟王母妻获还。
现代文：朝廷敕令各部相互修好，但各部都不服从，只有忠顺王的母亲和妻子获准回哈密。
English: The imperial edict ordered all ministries to make amends with each other, but all ministries disobeyed, and only the mother and wife of King Zhongshun were allowed to return to Hami.

古文：十年，也先复取王母妻及弟，并撒马儿罕贡使百余人掠之，又数趣王往见。
现代文：十年，也先又将忠顺王的母亲、妻子和弟弟，以及撒马儿罕献贡使者等一百多人掳掠到瓦剌，数次逼忠顺王去瓦剌相见。
English: Ten years later, more than a hundred people, including the mother, wife, and younger brother of King Zhongshun, as well as the envoy of Samarkand to pay tribute, were abducted and taken to Waju, and King Zhongshun was forced to visit Waju several times.

古文：王外顺朝命，实惧也先。
现代文：忠顺王表面上顺从朝廷的安排，实际上很惧怕也先。
English: On the surface, King Zhongshun is obedient to the arrangements of the imperial court, but in reality, he is very afraid.

古文：十三年夏，亲诣瓦剌，居数月方还；而遣使诳天子，谓守朝命不敢往。
现代文：十三年夏，忠顺王亲自到瓦剌拜访也先，居住了数月才回哈密，却派遣使者欺骗天子，声称自己遵守朝廷的命令不敢私自前往瓦剌。
English: In the summer of the thirteenth year, King Zhongshun personally visited Wawu first, and lived there for several months before returning to Hami. However, he sent an envoy to deceive the emperor, claiming that he would not dare to go to Wawu without the order of the imperial court.

古文：天子为赐敕褒嘉。
现代文：天子曾为此颁赐敕令对他加以褒奖。
English: For this, the Son of Heaven once issued an imperial edict to commend him.

古文：已，知其诈，严旨诘责，然其王迄不能自振。
现代文：不久，天子知道了他的欺诈行为，严厉下旨前去诘责，但忠顺王已经无法振作起来了。
English: Before long, the heavenly son learned of his deceitful behavior and sternly issued an order to reprimand him, but King Zhongshun was no longer able to cheer up.

古文：会也先方东犯，不复还故土，以是哈密获少安。
现代文：此时正好碰上也先向东进犯，不回故土，于是哈密获得少许的安息。
English: At this time, it just so happened that the cormorants also attacked the east first, and did not return to their native land, so Hami got a little rest.

古文：景泰三年遣其臣捏列沙朝贡，请授官。
现代文：景泰三年忠顺王派其臣下捏列沙向朝廷献贡，请求给其使者授以官秩。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Jing Tai, King Zhong Shun sent his vassals to knead sand to pay tribute to the imperial court, and requested that his envoy be given an official rank.

古文：先是，使臣至京必加恩命。
现代文：此前，哈密的使者到京城必然受到朝廷的任命。
English: Previously, Hami's emissaries to the capital had to be appointed by the imperial court.

古文：是时于谦掌中枢，言哈密世受国恩，乃敢交通瓦剌。
现代文：此时是于谦掌管中枢权力，上奏说哈密世代都受到朝廷的恩宠，这才敢于与瓦剌交通。
English: At this time, it was Yu Qian who was in charge of the central power. It was reported that the Hami generation were all favored by the imperial court, and that was why they dared to communicate with the Varangians.

古文：今虽归款，心犹谲诈。
现代文：现今他们虽然归顺朝廷，但其心还是诡诈莫测。
English: Today, although they submit to the imperial court, their hearts are still treacherous.

古文：若加官秩，赏出无名。
现代文：如果给其使者加封官秩，则是赏出无名。
English: If the envoy is given an official rank, it will be a nameless one.

古文：乃止。终景泰世，使臣无授官者。
现代文：于是朝廷便没有给哈密使者授官加秩。在景泰皇帝在位期间，哈密的使臣都没一人授官。
English: As a result, the imperial court did not award any rank to Hami's envoys. During the reign of Emperor Jing Tai, none of Hami's envoys were awarded any rank.

古文：天顺元年，倒瓦答失里卒，弟卜列革遣使告哀，即封为忠顺王。
现代文：天顺元年，倒瓦答失里去世，其弟弟卜列革派使者到朝廷告哀，朝廷当即封卜列革为忠顺王。
English: In the first year of the Tenshun era, the king of Tangwa died, and his younger brother, Brege, sent an envoy to the imperial court to mourn. The imperial court immediately sealed Brege as the king of Zhongshun.

古文：时都指挥马云使西域，闻迤北酋癿加思兰梗道，不敢进。
现代文：此时都指挥马云出使西域，听说北边的酋长扎加思兰挡道，便不敢前进。
English: At this time, they all commanded Ma Yun to send envoys to the western region. When they heard that the northern chieftain Zagathlan was blocking the way, they did not dare to advance.

古文：会哈蜜王报道已通，云乃行，至哈密。
现代文：等哈密的忠顺王前来报告说道路已通，马云才前进，到达哈密。
English: It was not until Hami's King Zhongshun came to report that the road was open that Ma Yun moved forward and reached Hami.

古文：而贼兵实未退，且谋劫朝使。
现代文：其实贼军并没有退去，还谋划劫持朝廷使者。
English: In fact, the bandits did not retreat, and even plotted to kidnap the imperial envoy.

古文：帝疑王与贼通，遣使切责。
现代文：皇帝怀疑忠顺王与扎加思兰相互勾结，便派使者前去深切责问。
English: The emperor suspected that King Zhongshun was colluding with Zagasiran and sent an envoy to question him.

古文：四年，王卒，无子，母弩温答失里主国事。
现代文：土鲁番，地处火州西部一百里，离哈密有一千多里，离嘉峪关有二千六百里远。
English: Turpan is located 100 miles west of Huzhou, more than 1,000 miles from Hami, and 2,600 miles from Jiayuguan.

古文：初，也先被诛，其弟伯都王及从子兀忽纳走居哈密。
现代文：汉代该地是车师前王的地盘。隋代该地是高昌国。
English: In the Han Dynasty, this place was the site of the former king of the Chariots. In the Sui Dynasty, this place was Gaochang.

古文：王母为上书乞恩，授伯都王都督佥事，兀忽纳指挥佥事。
现代文：唐代灭了高昌国，设置西州和交河县，该地就是交河县的安乐城所在地。
English: The Tang Dynasty destroyed Gaochang Province and set up Xizhou Province and Jiahe County, which is the location of Jiahe County's Anle City.

古文：自卜列革之亡，亲属无可继，命国人议当袭者。
现代文：宋代该地又称为高昌，被回鹘人所占领，曾向朝廷进过贡。
English: During the Song Dynasty, this area, also known as Gaochang, was occupied by the Uighurs, who paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：头目阿只等言脱欢帖木儿外孙把塔木儿官都督同知，可继。
现代文：元代在此设置了万户府。永乐四年明朝廷派官员出使别失八里，路过土鲁番，便将彩币赐给他们。
English: In the 4th year of the Yongle Emperor, the Ming Dynasty sent an envoy to Bebari, passing through Turuban, and gave them the lucky coins.

古文：王母谓臣不可继君，而安定王阿儿察与忠顺王同祖，为请袭封。
现代文：其万户长赛因帖木儿便派使者向明朝廷贡献玉璞，第二年抵达京城。
English: The head of the ten thousand households, Sayin Timur, sent an emissary to the Ming court to contribute jade ingots, which arrived in the capital the following year.

古文：七年冬，奏上，礼官言： 癿加思兰见哈密无主，谋据其地，势危急，乞从其请。 帝命都指挥贺玉往。
现代文：六年，土鲁番的僧人清来率领自己的徒弟法泉等人向朝廷献贡。皇帝想通过他们来转化和引导番族人的习俗，便授予清来灌顶慈慧圆智普通国师的称号，让他的徒弟七人都做土鲁番僧界的司官，给予他们优厚的赏赐。
English: In the sixth year, Qing Lai, a monk from Turuban, led his apprentice Fa Quan and others to pay tribute to the imperial court. The emperor wanted to use them to transform and guide the customs of the Qiang people, so he awarded Qing Lai the title of ordinary state teacher, and let his seven apprentices be officers of the Turuban monk community, and gave them generous rewards.

古文：至西宁逗遛不进，哈密使臣苦儿鲁海牙请先行，又不许。
现代文：自此以后，清来的徒弟来京城向朝廷献贡的不绝，向朝廷贡献的多是名马、海青和其他物品，天子亦数次派遣官员前去奖赏慰劳他们。
English: Since then, there has been a steady stream of Qing-era apprentices coming to the capital to pay tribute to the imperial court. Most of their contributions to the imperial court were famous horses, sea egrets and other items. The Emperor also sent officials several times to reward and console them.

古文：帝逮玉下吏，改命都指挥李珍，而敕安定、罕东护使臣偕往。阿儿察以哈密多难，力辞不行，珍乃返。哈密素衰微，又妇人主国，众益离散。癿加思兰乘隙袭破其城，大肆杀掠，王母率亲属部落走苦峪，犹数遣使朝贡，且告难。
现代文：二十年，土鲁番的首领尹吉儿察和哈密首领一起共向朝廷贡献马一千三百匹，皇帝给他们加以赏赐。不久尹吉儿察被别失八里的首领歪思所驱逐，逃到京城来。天子怜悯他，任命他为都督佥事，派人将他遣送回故乡。
English: Twenty years ago, the leader of Turpan, Yin Jielcha, together with the leader of Hami, contributed a total of 1,300 horses to the imperial court, and the emperor rewarded them. Soon, Yin Jielcha was expelled by the leader of Beigubari, Shixi, and fled to Beijing. The Son of Heaven took pity on him, appointed him as the prefect of the capital, and sent him back to his hometown.

古文：朝廷不能援，但敕其国人速议当继者而已。
现代文：尹吉儿察感激中国，于洪熙元年亲自率部落里的人前来朝贡。宣德元年也如此。
English: Yin Jielcha was grateful to China. In the first year of Hongxi, he personally led the people of the tribe to come to pay tribute. This was also the case in the first year of Xuande.

古文：其国残以破故，来者日众。
现代文：天子对他们礼遇甚厚，尹吉儿察回国后病逝。三年，他的儿子满哥帖木儿前来朝贡。
English: The emperor treated them with great courtesy, and after his return to China, Yin Jielcha died of illness. Three years later, his son Mange Timur came to pay tribute.

古文：成化元年，礼官姚夔等言： 哈密贡马二百匹，而使人乃二百六十人。
现代文：不久都督锁恪的弟弟猛哥帖木儿也来京城朝贡，朝廷任命他为指挥佥事。五年，都指挥佥事也先帖木儿前来朝贡。
English: Soon, the younger brother of the duke, Tamerlane's brother, Tamerlane, also came to pay tribute to the capital, and the court appointed him as a conductor. Five years later, Tamerlane also came to pay tribute.

古文：以中国有限之财，供外蕃无益之费，非策。 帝下廷臣议，定岁一入贡，不得过二百人，制可。明年，兵部言王母避苦峪久，今贼兵已退，宜令还故土，从之。
现代文：正统六年，朝廷大臣说土鲁番已经长期未来献贡了，正好碰上米昔儿的使臣要回去，皇帝便让该使臣带上钞币顺便替朝廷赏赐给土鲁番的首领巴剌麻儿。
English: Six years after the enthronement of the emperor, the minister of the court said that Turpan had not paid tribute for a long time. Just as Michiel's envoy was about to return, the emperor asked the envoy to bring banknotes and give them to the leader of Turpan, Bajimaer, on behalf of the court.

古文：已而贡使言其地饥寒，男妇二百余人随来丐食，不能归国。
现代文：第二年土鲁番就派使者向朝廷献贡品了。当初之时，因土鲁番介于于阗、别失八里等大国之间，势力甚为微弱。
English: In the second year, Turuban sent an envoy to offer tribute to the imperial court. At the beginning, Turuban's power was very weak because it was between the great powers such as Yunnan and Beidou Baili.

古文：命人给米六斗、布二疋，遣之。初，国人请立把塔木儿，以王母不肯，无王者八年。
现代文：后来他们侵夺了火州和柳城，将这两个地方并入自己的版图内，于是土鲁番的势力一日强于一日，其首领也密力火者也私自称王了。
English: Later, they invaded Huozhou and Liucheng and incorporated the two places into their own territory. As a result, Turpan's power became stronger day by day, and its leader, who was also close to Huozhou, also claimed to be the king.

古文：至是头目交章请，词极哀。
现代文：景泰三年，土鲁番的首领偕同他的妻子和其部下的头目都各派使者向朝廷献贡品。
English: In the third year of King Taejo's reign, the leader of the Turuban, Soo, together with his wife and the leaders of his subordinates, sent envoys to the imperial court to offer tribute.

古文：乃擢把塔木儿为右都督，摄行国王事，赐之诰印。
现代文：天顺三年他们又来献贡物，朝廷给他们的二十四名使臣封官进秩。
English: In the third year of Tenshun, they came again to offer tribute, and the imperial court promoted twenty-four of their envoys to higher ranks.

古文：五年，王母陈老病乞药物，帝即赐之。
现代文：朝廷还先后派指挥白全、都指挥桑斌等人出使过土鲁番。
English: The imperial court also successively sent commanders Bai Quan and Du commander Sang Bin and others to Turpan.

古文：寻与瓦刺、土鲁番遣使三百余人来贡，边臣以闻。
现代文：成化元年，礼部大臣姚夔等人提议规定，土鲁番三年或五年献贡一次，献贡的使者不能超过十人。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Yao Jun and others proposed to stipulate that Turuban should pay tribute once every three or five years, and the tribute envoys should not exceed ten people.

古文：廷议贡有定期，今前使未回后使又至，且瓦剌强寇，今乃与哈密偕；非哈密挟其势以邀利，即瓦剌假其事以窥边。帝乃却其献，令边臣宴赉，遣还。
现代文：五年土鲁番派使者来献贡，其首领阿力自称为速檀，上奏请求朝廷给他们赐予海青、马鞍、绣有蟒纹的官服、彩币和其他器物。礼部大臣说他们所要求的东西大多违反禁令，不能全部答应他们，只给他们赐予彩币和布帛。
English: Five years later, Turpan sent an envoy to pay tribute. Its leader, Ali, who called himself Sodan, petitioned the court to give them a horse, a saddle, an embroidered official uniform, coins and other items. The Minister of Ceremonies said that most of the things they asked for violated the ban and could not grant them everything, but only gave them coins and cloth.

古文：贡使坚不受赐，必欲亲诣阙下，乃命遣十之一赴京。
现代文：第二年他们又来献贡，上奏要求朝廷赐予忽拨思筝、鼓锣、革占镫和高丽布等物。
English: The following year, they came again to pay tribute, and requested the Imperial Court to bestow on them items such as the koto, drum, gourd and gauze.

古文：八年，把塔木儿子罕慎以父卒请嗣职。帝许之，而不命其主国事，国中政令无所出。
现代文：朝廷大臣们商量后没有答应。此时的土鲁番日益强盛，而哈密因没有王主持政务势力得到削弱，阿力就想吞并哈密。
English: The ministers of the imperial court did not agree after discussion. At this time, Turuban was becoming increasingly powerful, and Hami was weakened by the fact that there was no king to preside over government affairs. Ali wanted to annex Hami.

古文：土鲁番速檀阿力乘机袭破其城，执王母，夺金印，以忠顺王孙女为妾，据守其地。
现代文：九年春天，阿力率兵攻破哈密城，绑架了哈密忠顺王的母亲，抢走金印，安置了守卫的军队之后才离开哈密。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, A Li and his soldiers broke through Hami City, kidnapped the mother of King Hami Zhongshun, robbed the gold seal, and only left Hami after placing the guarding army.

古文：九年四月，事闻，命边臣谨戒备，敕罕东、赤斤诸卫协力战守。
现代文：朝廷任命李文等人前去经略哈密事务，结果是无功而返。阿力依然对朝廷修贡如故，一年之中派使者向朝廷献贡三次，朝廷仍然善待他们，未曾对他们说过一句严厉的话。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Wen and others to go and handle Hami's affairs, but the result was fruitless. Ah Li still paid tribute to the imperial court as before, sending emissaries to pay tribute to the imperial court three times in one year. The imperial court still treated them kindly and never said a harsh word to them.

古文：寻遣都督同知李文、右通政刘文赴甘肃经略。
现代文：这样土鲁番的使者更加傲慢，要求朝廷给他们赐驯象。
English: Thus, the envoys of the Turuban became even more arrogant and demanded that the court give them a tamed elephant.

古文：抵肃州，遣锦衣千户马俊奉敕往谕。
现代文：兵部大臣说象是为礼仪和战备做准备的，按礼制规定只有进献没有向朝廷求索的，于是拒绝了他们的请求。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the Armed Forces said that they seemed to be preparing for etiquette and combat readiness, and according to the rules of etiquette, only those who did not ask the imperial court for donations, so he refused their request.

古文：时阿力留其妹婿牙兰守哈密，而己携王母、金印已返土鲁番。
现代文：他们又说土鲁番已夺得了哈密的城池，拥有瓦剌部落奄檀王的一万人马，又收捕了曲先和亦思渴的头目倒剌火只，请求朝廷派使者打通道路，以便土鲁番与中国之间和好往来。
English: They also said that Turpan had captured the city of Hami, owned ten thousand horses belonging to the king of the Wabi tribe, Amadan, and had also arrested Quxian and the head of the Thirsty, and asked the court to send an envoy to open the road so that Turpan and China could have a good relationship.

古文：俊至，谕以朝命，抗词不逊，羁俊月余。
现代文：皇帝说： 往西的道路畅通无阻，不需要派遣官员去打通。
English: The emperor said: The road to the west is unimpeded, there is no need to send officials to open it.

古文：一日，牙兰忽至，言大兵三万即日西来，阿力乃宴劳俊等，舁王母出见。
现代文：阿力如果诚心向朝廷献贡，朝廷不计较他此前所犯的过失，仍会礼待他。 
English: If Ah Li sincerely pays tribute to the imperial court, the imperial court will still treat him with courtesy, regardless of his previous mistakes.

古文：王母惧不敢言，夜潜遣人来云： 为我奏天子，速发兵救哈密。 文等以闻，遂檄都督罕慎及赤斤、罕东、乜克力诸部集兵进讨。
现代文：土鲁番的使者又说赤斤等卫所，素来与土鲁番有仇，请求朝廷派将士护送他们回去，并说阿力虽然夺得哈密，只是拿哈密的物产来充当贡品，他们愿意把自己的家属作为人质抵押在边境，让朝廷给他们颁赐敕令，好让他们回去后谕告他们的王，让其向朝廷献运哈密城的官印。
English: The envoys of Turfan also said that the Red Guards and other guards had always been hostile to Turfan, and asked the court to send soldiers to escort them back. They also said that although Ali had captured Hami, he only took Hami's property as a tribute. They were willing to pledge their families as hostages at the border and let the court give them a royal decree, so that they could go back and tell their king to present the official seal of Hami City to the court.

古文：十年冬，兵至卜隆吉儿川，谍报阿力集众抗拒，且结别部谋掠罕东、赤斤二卫。
现代文：皇帝同意派将士护送他们回去，颁敕令给他们带回去谕告阿力，让阿力把哈密城的官印和忠顺王的母亲献出来，立刻就与他和好如初。
English: The emperor agreed to send soldiers to escort them back, and issued an imperial order to take them back and tell A-Li to present the official seal of Hami City and the mother of King Zhongshun to A-Li, and immediately made peace with him.

古文：文等不敢进，令二卫还守本土，罕慎及乜克力、畏兀儿之众退居苦峪，文等亦引还肃州。
现代文：这批使臣回去后，土鲁番又派遣另外的使臣再次到京城向朝廷献贡，就是不归还所占领的哈密。十二年八月，甘州的守卫大臣上奏说土鲁番的使者声称忠顺王的母亲已去世，哈密城的印信都保存着，一旦得到朝廷的敕谕即送还给朝廷。
English: After these envoys returned, Turuban sent another group of envoys to the capital to pay tribute to the imperial court, that is, not to return the occupied Hami. In August of the twelfth year, the Minister of Defense of Gansu reported that Turuban's envoy claimed that the mother of King Zhongshun had died. The seal of Hami was preserved, and once the imperial edict was received, it would be returned to the imperial court.

古文：帝乃命罕慎权主国事，因其请给米布，且赐以谷种。
现代文：皇帝此前已拒绝土鲁番的献贡使者进入中国，一听到这个消息后便又让他们进入京城。
English: The emperor had previously refused the tribute envoys of Turpan to enter China, and upon hearing this news, he allowed them to enter Beijing.

古文：文等无功而还。土鲁番久据哈密，朝命边臣筑苦峪城，移哈密卫于其地。
现代文：此时朝廷的大臣对土鲁番一意姑息，致使远方的小丑无所顾忌。十四年，阿力去世，他的儿子阿黑麻承袭了速檀的职位，派使者向朝廷献贡。十八年，哈密的都督罕慎悄悄地带兵直捣哈密，战胜了土鲁番的守军。
English: At this time, the ministers of the imperial court were lenient with Turuban, causing the distant clown to have no scruples. In fourteen years, Ali died, and his son Ahima inherited the position of Haste and sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court. In eighteen years, the governor of Hami, Han Shen, quietly led the soldiers to directly attack Hami and defeated the defenders of Turuban.

古文：十八年春，罕慎纠罕东、赤斤二卫，得兵一千三百人，与己所部共万人，夜袭哈密城破之，牙兰遁走；乘势连复八城，遂还居故土。
现代文：贼将牙兰逃走。
English: The thief ran away with the ivory.

古文：巡抚王朝远以闻，帝喜，赐敕奖励，并奖二卫。
现代文：阿黑麻对此颇为惊惧。朝廷大臣提议罕慎有功，可立他为哈密的忠顺王。阿黑麻听说后，愤怒地说： 罕慎又不是忠顺王的族人，怎么能立他为忠顺王！ 
English: Aheima was quite alarmed by this. The minister of the imperial court suggested that Han Sen could be appointed as the king of loyalty to Hami. After hearing this, Aheima said angrily: Han Sen is not a member of the king of loyalty, how can he be appointed as the king of loyalty!

古文：朝远请封罕慎为王，且言土鲁番亦革心向化，与罕慎议和，宜乘时安抚，取还王孙女及金印，俾随王母共掌国事，哈密国人亦乞封罕慎。
现代文：于是便假装与罕慎联姻结亲。弘治元年阿黑麻亲自到哈密城下，引诱罕慎出来与他结盟，罕慎中计被阿黑麻抓住杀死，哈密又被土鲁番占据。
English: Therefore, he pretended to be a relative of Han Zhen. In the first year of the Heian period, Aheima himself went to the town of Hami and lured Han Zhen into an alliance with him. Han Zhen was caught and killed by Aheima, and Hami was occupied by Turuban.

古文：廷议不从，乃进左都督，赉白金百两、彩币十表里，特敕奖劳，将士升赏有差。
现代文：阿黑麻派使者向朝廷献贡，声称自己已与罕慎联姻结亲，请求朝廷赐予蟒纹官服和九龙浑金膝衤阑等物。他所派遣的使者到甘州时，罕慎被杀的消息已经传到朝廷，朝廷也没怪罪他们，只让其使者回去谕告阿黑麻，将所侵占的地方归还给中国。
English: Aheima sent emissaries to pay tribute to the imperial court, claiming that he had married and married Khanshen, and asked the imperial court to grant him a crimson official uniform and a gold-plated knee cap. When the emissaries he sent arrived in Ganzhou, the news of Khanshen's death had already reached the imperial court. The imperial court did not blame them, but only allowed the emissaries to return to tell Aheima to return the occupied land to China.

古文：弘治元年从其国人请，封罕慎为忠顺王。
现代文：土鲁番的贼人知道中国容易对付，并不遵奉朝廷的命令，又派使者前来献贡。
English: The Turuban thieves knew that China was easy to deal with, so they disobeyed the order of the imperial court and sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：土鲁番阿力已死，而其子阿黑麻嗣为速檀，伪与罕慎结婚，诱而杀之，仍令牙兰据其地。
现代文：礼部大臣建议减少给他们的赐予，拘留他们的使臣，这样番贼才稍为有所忌惧。三年春，土鲁番偕同撒马儿罕向朝廷贡献狮子，表示愿意将哈密城的官印献还给朝廷，朝廷也即释放了所拘留的使臣。
English: The Minister of Ceremonies suggested reducing the gifts given to them and detaining their envoys, so that the thieves were a little afraid. In the spring of the third year, Turupan and Samarkand presented a lion to the court and expressed their willingness to return the official seal of Hami City to the court, and the court released the detained envoys.

古文：哈密都指挥阿木郎来奔求救，廷臣请谕土鲁番贡使，令复还侵地，并敕赤斤、罕东，共图兴复。
现代文：礼部大臣请求不要接纳他们的贡品，皇帝不听。等到他们的使臣回去时，皇帝命令宦官张芾护送他们，并谕告内阁草拟一份敕文。
English: When their envoys returned, the emperor ordered the eunuch Zhang Ye to escort them and ordered the cabinet to draft a memorial.

古文：明年，哈密旧部绰卜都等率众攻牙兰，杀其弟，夺其叛臣者盼卜等人畜以归。
现代文：内阁大臣刘吉等人上奏说： 阿黑麻辜负和背叛了朝廷所给予他的恩泽，竟然杀死朝廷所立的罕慎，应派大将率军直捣他的巢穴，消灭他们的种族，这样才足以洗泄中国的怨愤。
English: Cabinet Minister Liu Ji and others made a report, saying: Ah Heima betrayed and betrayed the favor given to him by the imperial court, and even killed the emperor appointed by the imperial court. It is necessary to send a general with an army to directly attack his lair and destroy their race. This is enough to vent China's resentment.

古文：事闻，进秩加赏。先是，罕慎遣使来贡，未还而遘难，其弟奄克孛剌率部众逃之边方，朝命以赐罕慎者还赐其弟。
现代文：或者即使不马上征讨他们，亦应当像古代帝王所做的那样封闭玉门关，拒绝他们的献贡使臣进入国内，这也还不失大体。可是现在皇上既宠幸他们的使臣，对他们待以厚礼，还派宦官为使者伴送他们回去，这是什么道理啊？
English: Or, even if they are not immediately requisitioned, they should, as the ancient emperors did, close the Yumen gate and refuse their tribute envoys to enter the country, which is also fair enough. But now that the emperor has favored their envoys, treated them with courtesy, and sent eunuchs as envoys to accompany them back, what is the reason?

古文：阿黑麻之去哈密也，止留六十人佐牙兰。
现代文：陛下做事都应遵守制定的宪法，现却无缘无故地把番族人召进宫殿看戏狮子，对他们大加赏赐宫廷用品，让他们夸耀着出去。
English: His Majesty, who is supposed to abide by the constitution in everything he does, is now, without any reason, calling the tribunes into the palace to watch the lion play, and lavishing them with court paraphernalia, so that they can go out with a flourish.

古文：阿木郎觇其单弱，请边臣调赤斤、罕东兵，夜袭破其城，牙兰遁去，斩获甚多，有诏奖赉。
现代文：众人听说此事后都大为惊骇叹息，说祖宗以来，从来没有发生过这样的事情，不知皇上为何委屈自己作为万乘之主的尊严，去玩奇兽，让异言异服之人，杂沓清静庄严的地方。
English: After hearing about this, everyone was shocked and sighed, saying that such a thing had never happened since the time of our ancestors. I don't know why the emperor would abuse his dignity as the Lord of the World, play with strange beasts, and allow people with different opinions to mingle in a quiet and solemn place.

古文：当是时，阿黑麻桀傲甚，自以地远中国，屡抗天子命。
现代文：况且土鲁番的使臣满剌土儿是罕慎的妻舅，竟然忘却主人服侍仇人，这是违反天道之人所做的事。
English: Moreover, Turuban's envoys were full of arrogance, and Turuban's son-in-law was an imprudent brother-in-law. He even forgot his master to serve the enemy, which was a thing done by a person who violated the heavenly way.

古文：及破哈密，贡使频至，朝廷仍善待之，由是益轻中国。
现代文：而且阿黑麻现在正聚集人马，图谋侵犯肃州，名义上打着向朝廷献贡的旗号，其意图实在是无法预测。
English: Moreover, Aheima is now gathering people and horses, attempting to invade Suzhou, nominally under the banner of paying tribute to the imperial court. Its intention is really unpredictable.

古文：帝乃薄其赐赉，或拘留使臣，却其贡物，敕责令悔罪。
现代文：兵部大臣提议将其使臣拘留起来，正合事宜。如果皇上不停止张芾的使命，那么土鲁番的使臣回国后，阿黑麻必然认为中国的皇帝是可以用希罕的宠物来打动的。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the Armed Forces proposed that his envoy be detained, which was exactly the right thing to do. If the emperor did not stop Zhang Ye's mission, then after Turuban's envoy returned to China, Ahima must have thought that the Chinese emperor could be impressed with a rare pet.

古文：己，访获惠顺王族孙陕巴，将辅立之。
现代文：大臣们为国家出谋划策，而天子则不听，这使我们又有什么办法！长番贼的志气，损我们天朝威风的事，莫过于此了。 
English: The ministers make plans for the country, but the Son of Heaven does not listen, so what can we do? The ambition of the long-serving thief, the thing that undermines the prestige of our heavenly government, is nothing more than this.

古文：阿黑麻渐警惧，三年遣使叩关，愿献还哈密及金印，释其拘留使臣。
现代文：这份疏章送到皇帝手上后，皇帝制止了张芾的使命，并向内阁大臣询问兴兵征讨和封关绝贡之事。
English: After this epitaph was delivered to the emperor, the emperor stopped Zhang Ye's mission and asked the cabinet minister about the recruitment of soldiers and the blockade.

古文：天子纳其贡，仍留前使者。
现代文：刘吉等人认为现在兴兵征讨和封关绝贡都还不到时候，只请求皇上减少对他们的赏赐。
English: Liu Ji and others believed that it was not yet time to raise an army and collect taxes. They only asked the emperor to reduce their reward.

古文：明年，果以城印来归，乃从马文升言，还其所拘使臣。
现代文：并说饲养狮子每天要用二只羊，十年下来就要用去七千二百只羊；守卫狮子一天要用五十名校尉，一年就要花去一万八千个人工。
English: He also said that it takes two sheep a day to raise a lion, and 7,200 sheep a decade; it takes 50 lieutenants a day to guard a lion, and 18,000 laborers a year.

古文：文升又言： 番人重种类，且素服蒙古，哈密故有回回、畏兀儿、哈剌灰三种，北山又有小列秃、乜克力相侵逼，非得蒙古后裔镇之不可。今安定王族人陕巴，乃故忠义王脱脱近属从孙，可主哈密。 天子以为然，而诸番亦共奏陕巴当立。
现代文：如果能停止喂养，听任狮子自己倒毙而亡，这可作为传之千载的美谈。
English: If you can stop feeding and let the lion die on its own, this can be passed down as a thousand-year-old fairy tale.

古文：五年春立陕巴为忠顺王，赐印诰、冠服及守城戎器，擢阿木郎都督佥事，与都督同知奄克孛剌共辅之。
现代文：皇帝没有采纳这个意见。同年秋天，土鲁番又派遣使者从海路向朝廷贡献狮子，朝廷命令地方官员拒绝，其使者却偷偷地到达京城。礼部大臣请求皇帝追究沿途有关官员的罪责，同时拒绝接见其使者，皇帝同意。
English: The emperor did not accept this opinion. In the autumn of the same year, Turfan again sent an envoy by sea to the court to offer a lion. The court ordered local officials to refuse, but his envoy secretly arrived in Beijing. The Minister of Ceremonies asked the emperor to investigate the guilt of relevant officials along the way, and at the same time refused to receive his envoy. The emperor agreed.

古文：已而诸番索陕巴犒赐不得，皆怨。阿木郎又引乜克力人掠土鲁番牛马，阿黑麻怒，六年春潜兵夜袭哈密，杀其人百余，逃及降者各半。
现代文：正当此时，中外都太平无事，大臣马文升、耿裕等人，了解本国情况，多次裁减土鲁番献贡使者的进京人数和给予他们的赏赐品，阿黑麻这才稍为了解中国还是有人的。四年秋天，土鲁番派使者再次向朝廷贡献狮子，并表示愿意归还所掠去的金印和十一座城市。
English: Just at this time, both China and foreign countries were peaceful. Minister Ma Wensheng, Geng Yu and others, to understand the situation of their country, repeatedly reduced the number of Turfan tribute envoys to Beijing and the rewards given to them. Ah, this is a little to understand that there are still people in China. In the autumn of the fourth year, Turfan sent envoys to contribute lions to the court again, and expressed his willingness to return the plundered gold seal and eleven cities.

古文：陕巴与阿木郎据大土剌以守。
现代文：边防大臣将此上报朝廷，朝廷答应让他们献贡，他们果然归还了哈密城的金印。
English: The Minister of Border Defense reported this to the Imperial Court, which promised to make them pay tribute, and they did indeed return the gold seal of Hami City.

古文：大土剌，华言大土台也。围三日不下。
现代文：第二年朝廷册封陕巴为忠顺王，把陕巴安置在哈密，对阿黑麻的使臣给予优厚的赏赐，先前所留的土鲁番使者也全部予以释放。
English: In the second year, the imperial court proclaimed Shaanba as the King of Zhongshun, placed Shaanba in Hami, gave a generous reward to the envoys of Aheme, and released all the Turuban envoys who had previously remained.

古文：阿木郎急调乜克力、瓦剌二部兵来援，俱败去。乃执陕巴，擒阿木郎支解之。
现代文：六年春天，土鲁番所派的前一批使臣二十七人回去，还未出国境，后一批使者三十九人还留在京城，阿黑麻就又袭击并攻陷了哈密，把陕巴绑架走了。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the first batch of twenty-seven envoys sent by Turuban returned before leaving the country, and the second batch of thirty-nine envoys still remained in Beijing. Aheima then attacked and captured Hami, and kidnapped Shaanba.

古文：牙兰复据守，并移书边臣诉阿木郎罪。时土鲁番先后贡使皆未还。
现代文：皇帝任命侍郎张海等人去经略西域事务，优待土鲁番的使臣，让他们到京城来进见皇帝。
English: The emperor appointed chamberlain Zhang Hai and others to manage the affairs of the western region, and treated the envoys of Turuban favorably, allowing them to come to the capital to see the emperor.

古文：边臣以其书不逊，且僣称可汗，乞命将遣兵先剿除牙兰，然后直抵土鲁番，馘阿黑麻之首，取还陕巴。
现代文：礼部大臣耿裕等人进谏道： 朝廷驾驭外番之国，应当珍惜大体。土鲁番使臣去年就已经进入京都，皇上却久不宣召他们进见，而今年三月以来，皇上却一再宣召他们进宫，给他们赐予币帛羊酒，而这正是他们的轻视谩骂文书投进朝廷之时，这些小人们不知内情，将会认为朝廷此时对待他们比往昔更加优待，是怕他们的缘故。此事关系到国体，不可不慎重处理。
English: Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies Geng Yu and others went into the palace saying: The imperial court should cherish the general rule of governing a country that is off-duty. The Turuban envoys had already entered Kyoto last year, but the emperor had not summoned them for a long time. Since March of this year, the emperor has repeatedly summoned them to the palace and given them money and wine. This is when their contemptuous and abusive letter was sent to the imperial court. These little people do not know the inside story and will think that the imperial court is treating them more favorably than in the past because they are afraid of them. This matter is related to the national identity and must be handled carefully

古文：否则降敕严责，令还陕巴，乃宥其罪。
现代文：况且阿黑麻倔强无礼，早已蓄谋了与朝廷的对抗之心。
English: Moreover, Ahimsa was stubborn and impolite, and had already plotted a confrontation with the imperial court.

古文：廷议从后策，令守臣拘贡使，纵数人还，赍敕晓示祸福。
现代文：所派遣的使臣，一定是他的亲信心腹，现在让他们在宫殿进出，对他们毫无防备。万一奸宄之徒窥探时机，使其逆谋得逞，则后悔也来不及了。
English: The envoys he had sent must have been his own confidants, and now he let them enter and leave the palace, leaving them unguarded. If the traitors had spied an opportunity to succeed in their treachery, it would be too late to regret it.

古文：帝如其请，命廷推大臣赴甘肃经略。初，哈密变闻，丘浚谓马文升曰： 西陲事重，须公一行。 文升曰： 国家有事，臣子义不辞难。
现代文：现在招待其使臣写亦满速儿等人的宴席和赏赐都已完毕，他们还不肯离去，说是怕朝廷又宣召他们进宫，若不以远方之物为宝，则远方之人自会有分寸。狮子原本是野兽，不足为奇，何至于麻烦陛下您屡次视察，致使荒僻之地的小人得以觐见您的圣颜，藉为自己的口实。 
English: Now that the banquet and the rewards for those who had invited his envoys, such as Scribe and Mansei, were over, they still refused to leave, saying that they were afraid of the court summoning them back to the palace. If you do not treasure things from far away, then people from far away will come to their senses. It is not surprising that the lion was originally a beast. What troubles you, Your Majesty, is that you have repeatedly inspected it, so that small people in desolate places can see your holy face and use it as their excuse.

古文：然番人嗜利，不善骑射，自古未有西域能为中国患者，徐当靖之。 
现代文：该疏章传到皇帝手上后，皇帝即把土鲁番使者遣送回去。张海等人抵达甘肃，遵照朝廷的决定，拒绝他们的贡品，将他们前任所派的使臣一百七十二人拘留在边境，封闭了嘉峪关，永远断绝这条进贡的道路。
English: Zhang Hai and others arrived in Gansu and, in accordance with the decision of the imperial court, refused their tribute, detained one hundred and seventy-two envoys sent by their predecessors at the border, closed Jiayuguan, and forever cut off this road to tribute.

古文：浚复以为言，文升请行。
现代文：同时巡抚许进等人又悄悄地出兵直捣哈密，赶走了牙兰，这样阿黑麻才渐渐有所畏惧。
English: At the same time, the governor Xu Jin and others quietly dispatched troops to directly attack Hami and drive away the cormorant, so that Ahimsa gradually became afraid.

古文：廷臣佥言北寇强，本兵未可远出，乃推兵部右侍郎张海、都督同知缑谦二人。
现代文：他们的邻邦无法向朝廷献贡，也全埋怨阿黑麻。十年冬天，土鲁番将陕巴送还朝廷，叩关请求通贡，朝廷决定答应他们。
English: Their neighbors were unable to pay tribute to the imperial court, and they all complained about Ah Hao Ma. In the winter of the tenth year, Turpan returned Shaanba to the imperial court, knocking on the gate to request the payment of tribute, and the imperial court decided to agree to them.

古文：帝赐敕指授二人，而二人皆庸才，但遣土鲁番人归谕其主，令献还侵地，驻甘州待之。
现代文：十二年，因土鲁番使臣再次请求，朝廷下令将已安置到广东的前土鲁番使者全部释放回国。十七年，阿黑麻去世，他的各位儿子争权互相仇杀。
English: In 112, at the request of the Turuban envoys again, the imperial court ordered the release of all the former Turuban envoys who had been resettled in Guangdong. In 17 Aheima died, and his sons fought for power and killed each other.

古文：明年，阿黑麻遣使叩关求贡，诡言愿还陕巴及哈密，乞朝廷亦还其使者。
现代文：不久，他的长子满速儿承袭速檀职位，向朝廷修贡如故。第二年，忠顺王陕巴去世，他的儿子拜牙即继承王位。
English: Soon after, his eldest son, Mansao, succeeded to the post of Sodan and continued to pay tribute to the imperial court. The following year, King Taishun of Shaanxi died, and his son Baiga succeeded to the throne.

古文：海等以闻，请再降敕宣谕。
现代文：但是拜牙即昏愚失道，哈密国内更加动乱。
English: But Baiga immediately lost his way, and there was even more turmoil in Hami.

古文：廷议言，先已降敕，今若再降，有伤国体，宜令海等自遣人往谕。
现代文：而满速儿的桀黠狡诈比他的父亲阿黑麻有过之而无不及，于是又有吞并哈密之心。
English: However, Mansaer's cunning and deceitfulness surpasses that of his father, Ahima, and so he annexes Hami's heart.

古文：不从命，则仍留前使，且尽驱新使出关，永不许贡，仍与守臣檄罕东、赤斤诸部兵，直捣哈密，袭斩牙兰。
现代文：正德四年，满速儿的弟弟真帖木儿居住在甘州。土鲁番的献贡使臣请求把真帖木儿还给土鲁番，朝廷决定不答应他们，后来因甘州的守卫大臣也上奏请求，才把真帖木儿送还给土鲁番。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengde, Mansuo's younger brother, Zhen Timur, lived in Ganzhou. The tributary envoys of Turpan requested that Zhen Timur be returned to Turpan. The court decided not to grant their request. Later, Zhen Timur was returned to Turpan because the Minister of Defense of Gansu also made a request.

古文：如无机可乘，则封嘉峪关，毋纳其使。
现代文：真帖木儿一回去就把我国的边境情况告诉其兄，与其兄满速儿一起共谋违逆朝廷。九年他们诱使科牙即叛变朝廷，又占领了哈密。
English: As soon as he returned, he told his brother about the border situation in our country. Together with his brother Mansei, they conspired to rebel against the imperial court. In nine years, they induced Koga to rebel against the imperial court and occupied Hami.

古文：陕巴虽封王，其还与否，于中国无损益，宜别择贤者代之。
现代文：朝廷派彭泽去经略哈密事务，彭泽用财物将哈密城和金印赎了回来。
English: The court sent Penza to manage the affairs of Hami, and Penza redeemed the city of Hami and the gold seal with his property.

古文：帝以陕巴既与中国无损益，则哈密城池已破，如献还，当若何处之。
现代文：不久满速儿的部下他只丁又占领了哈密，并引导满速儿进犯肃州。从此，哈密便没有再回到中国，而且其祸患还延到甘肃中部。
English: Not long after, his subordinates captured Hami and led him to invade Suzhou. From then on, Hami never returned to China, and his evil spread to central Gansu.

古文：廷臣复言陕巴乃安定王千奔之侄，忠顺王之孙，向之封王，欲令镇抚一方尔。
现代文：此时朝廷大臣内部又互相倾轧，番族首领窥探到这种内情后，更加放肆地进谗言挑拨离间，使得贼人的心腹得以服侍天子，于是中国的国体大为损伤，贼人的气焰更加炽盛。
English: At this time, the ministers of the imperial court were at each other's throats again, and after spying on this situation, the chiefs of the clans became more presumptuous in slandering and sowing discord, enabling the thief's henchmen to serve the Son of God. As a result, China's national body was greatly damaged, and the thief's pride became more ardent.

古文：今被虏，孱弱可知，即使复还，势难复立。宜革其王爵，居之甘州，犒赉安定王，谕以不复立之故。
现代文：十五年朝廷又允许土鲁番前来进贡。甘肃巡按潘仿说： 番贼违犯朝廷成命，杀戮百姓，剽掠财物，其造成的悲惨之状不可胜言。
English: Fifteen years later, the imperial court allowed the Turuban to come to pay tribute. The Gansu patrol said according to Pan Yiming: The bandits violated the imperial order, killed people, and plundered property. The tragic situation caused by them is beyond words.

古文：令都督奄克孛剌总理哈密事，与回回都督写亦虎仙，哈剌灰都督拜迭力迷失等分领三种番人以辅之。
现代文：现在他们虽然表示悔罪，但这能赎回他们前段时间所犯罪行的万分之一吗？数年来，我们虽然对他们封闭了关隘，但没有对他们追究罪责。
English: Now that they have expressed remorse, does that redeem one ten-thousandth of the crimes they committed some time ago? For several years, although we have closed our gates to them, we have not prosecuted them.

古文：且修浚苦峪城堑，凡番人散处甘、凉者，令悉还其地，给以牛具口粮。
现代文：现今他们因国内物资困惫请求与我们通贡，并想窥探我们的意向，打探我们的虚实情况，延缓我们的计划，以重利引诱我们。
English: Now, because of the shortage of domestic materials, they are demanding tribute from us, and they want to spy on our intentions, find out our true situation, delay our plans, and lure us with heavy profits.

古文：若陕巴未还，不必索取，我不急陕巴，彼将自还也。
现代文：如果我们不在此时稍追究一下他们的罪责，将会更加招致他们对我们的轻视怠慢之心，致使他们反复向我们挑衅，这不是使中国为尊以便驾驭外番之国的良策。
English: If we don't hold them slightly accountable at this time, it will make them treat us with more contempt and negligence, causing them to repeatedly provoke us. This is not a good way to make China respectable in order to control the outsider.

古文：帝悉如其言，敕谕海等。
现代文：况且他们的番族文书中用的是难以顺从之词，表达的是敢于抗拒朝廷的情状。
English: Moreover, they used the words "difficult to obey" in their documents, expressing the situation of daring to resist the imperial court.

古文：海等见敕书将弃陕巴，甚喜，即逐其贡使，闭嘉峪关，缮修苦峪城，令流寓番人归其地，拜疏还朝。
现代文：现在正是他们悔罪请求通贡之日，就有如此侮辱、怠慢、不恭敬之语，其中的权变奸诈已经显而易见。如果说来者不拒，是驾驭番国的常理，那么将他们所干的坏事全部略去不谈，而接纳他们的求和使臣，必将会使他们的使臣贪冒朝廷的恩礼，饱受朝廷的赏赐，再到市场上私自贩卖，满载而归。
English: Now, on the very day of their repentance and request for tribute, there are such insults, slights, and disrespectful words, in which the power shift and treachery are already obvious. If the speaker does not refuse, it is common sense to control the country, then omitting all the bad things they have done and accepting their peace envoys will surely make their envoys embezzle the court's gift, be rewarded by the court, and then go to the market to sell themselves and return with a full load.

古文：八年正月至京，言官交章劾其经略无功，并下吏贬秩，而哈密终不还。文升锐意谋兴复，用许进巡抚甘肃以图之。
现代文：他们的欲望已经满足之后，其骄横之志必然又会萌发，稍不顺心，动辄寻找借口，反复向我们挑衅，这就是在目前将会发生的事。
English: After their desires have been satisfied, their arrogance will inevitably sprout again, a little uncomfortable, always looking for excuses, repeatedly provoking us, this is what will happen now.

古文：进偕大将刘宁等潜师夜袭，牙兰逸去，斩其遗卒，抚降余众而还。
现代文：他们背叛朝廷，没被朝廷加罪，反而获得了掳掠之利；他们向朝廷献贡，未必会遭朝廷的拒绝，又能得到皇帝赏赐的荣耀，这种事他们有何惧怕而不去做呢？
English: They betrayed the imperial court, and instead of being punished by the imperial court, they received the profits of plunder; they paid tribute to the imperial court, and they would not necessarily be rejected by the imperial court, and they would receive the glory bestowed by the emperor. What did they fear and not do?

古文：自明初以来，官军无涉其地者，诸番始知畏，阿黑麻亦欲还陕巴。然哈密屡破，遗民入居者旦暮虞寇。
现代文：我认为现在应乘他们处于窘迫之机，暂设让他们有所畏惧而屈服的计策。虽然我们接受他们的悔过之词，但暂时拒绝他们的使者前来献贡，降赦令谴责他们违反朝廷成命的行为，仍向他们索讨未交还过来的人质。
English: I think that now is the time to take advantage of their predicament and temporarily devise a strategy to make them cower in fear and surrender. Although we accept their words of repentance, we temporarily refuse their envoys to come to pay tribute, pardon them, condemn them for violating the orders of the imperial court, and still ask them for the hostages that have not been returned.

古文：阿黑麻果复来攻，固守不下，讫散去。诸人自以穷窘难守，尽焚室庐，走肃州求济。
现代文：对其番族文书中有疑问的地方，详加究问，让他们了解中国的尊严，朝廷的天威不容冒犯，这样或许其背反之志不萌发，向朝廷的归顺服从可能长久。 
English: If there are any doubts in the documents of his followers, they should be investigated in detail, so that they can understand the dignity of China, and the authority of the imperial court should not be offended. In this way, perhaps his rebellious desire will not germinate, and his submission to the imperial court may last for a long time.

古文：边臣以闻，诏赐牛具、谷种，并发流寓三种番人及哈密之寄居赤斤者，尽赴苦峪及瓜、沙州，俾自耕牧，以图兴复。
现代文：此时王琼竭力主张与土鲁番通和，没有接纳潘仿的意见。第二年，世宗登上皇帝位，贼人的心腹写亦虎仙被朝廷诛杀，贼人失去依靠后，再次图谋侵犯边境地区。嘉靖三年贼人进犯肃州，劫掠甘州；四年又侵犯肃州，但这二次都失败而归。
English: At this time, Wang Qiong insisted on making peace with Turpan, and did not accept Pan Miao's opinion. The next year, Shizong ascended to the throne, and the thief's henchman was killed by the imperial court. After the thief lost his reliance, he once again attempted to invade the border area. In the third year of Jiajing, the thief invaded Suizhou and plundered Ganzhou; in the fourth year, he invaded Suizhou, but he failed both times.

古文：时哈密无王，奄克孛剌为之长。
现代文：于是他们又卑词向朝廷请求通贡。
English: So they resorted to begging the imperial court for tribute.

古文：十年遣其党写亦虎仙等来贡，给币帛五千酬其直，使臣犹久留，大肆咆。
现代文：此时正碰上张璁、桂萼等人兴封疆之狱，于是他们暗地里庇护满速儿，允许他们向朝廷献贡。
English: At this time, Zhang Xuan, Gui Cale and others were facing the prison of Xingfu Jiang, so they secretly sheltered Mansuo and allowed them to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：礼官徐琼等极论其罪，乃驱之去。时诸番以朝廷闭关绝贡不得入，咸怨阿黑麻，阿黑麻悔，送还陕巴及哈密之众，乞通贡如故。
现代文：贼人的同党牙兰，本是曲先人氏，年幼时被番人掳掠而去，长大后既狡黠又健壮，阿力便将自己的妹妹嫁给他，让他掌握兵权，长期以来一直成为西部边境地区的祸患。
English: The thief's fellow party member, Yalan, originally from the Qu Xianren clan, was abducted by guards when he was young. He grew up to be cunning and strong. A Li then married his sister to him, allowing him to seize military power. For a long time, he has been a scourge in the western border areas.

古文：廷议谓无番文不可骤许，必令具文乃从其请。陕巴前议废，今使暂居甘州，俟众头目俱归心，然后修复哈密城堑，令复旧业。
现代文：到此时他得罪了其主人满速儿，便于七年夏天率鲁番，土鲁番每年从他那里征调妇女和牛马，他因不胜土鲁番的侵暴，也率领自己的族属数千帐人前来归附朝廷，边关大臣全将他们安置在内地。
English: By this time, he had offended his master, Manchurian, and in the summer of the seventh year, he led the Turpan. Every year, the Turpan conscripted women, cattle, and horses from him. Because he could not overcome the violence of the Turpan, he also led thousands of accountants from his tribe to come and join the imperial court. The Minister of the Frontier placed them all in the inland.

古文：帝悉从之。冬，起王越总制三边军务兼经理哈密。
现代文：满速儿为此很愤怒，让他的部下虎力纳咱儿勾引瓦剌部落侵犯肃州，结果没有获胜，他便又派使臣前来请求献贡。
English: Manchurian was very angry about this, and let his subordinates seduce the Varangian tribe to invade Suzhou. As a result, they did not win, and he sent envoys to request tribute.

古文：十一年秋，越言哈密不可弃，陕巴亦不可废，宜仍其旧封，令先还哈密，量给修城、筑室之费，犒赐三种番人及赤斤、罕东、小列秃、乜克力诸部，以奖前劳，且责后效。帝亦报可。
现代文：总督王琼请求朝廷答应他们，而詹事霍韬则说： 番人自从攻陷哈密以来，朝廷大臣中有提议允许他们献贡的，也有提议拒绝他们献贡的，皇帝的圣谕是必须要有他们用番文书写的悔罪文书交上来才答应他们的要求。现在王琼翻译后送上来的土鲁番文书，都是满速儿部下小人们的话语，没有印信可作凭据。
English: The governor, Wang Qiong, asked the court to agree to their demands, while Zhan Shih Huo Tong said: "Since the fall of Hami, some ministers of the court have proposed to allow them to pay tribute, while others have proposed to refuse to pay tribute. The emperor's edict is that they must submit a letter of repentance written in the watchman's script before their demands can be met. The Turfan documents that Wang Qiong has now translated and sent to us are all the words of Mansei's subordinates, and there is no seal to serve as proof.

古文：自是哈密复安，土鲁番亦修贡惟谨。
现代文：如果我们匆匆忙忙地答应他们的要求，恐怕他们会更加骄横，以后就更难驾驭他们了。
English: If we rush to meet their demands, I'm afraid they will become more arrogant, and it will be more difficult to control them in the future.

古文：奄克孛剌者，罕慎弟也，与陕巴不相能。
现代文：这是值得担忧的第一件事情。哈密的城池虽然已经在口头上献还出来了，但没有真实凭据可以相信，怎么能够兴复哈密国？
English: This is the first thing to worry about. Although Hami's city has been returned verbally, there is no real evidence to believe, how can Hami be restored?

古文：当事患之，令陕巴娶罕慎女，与之结好。陕巴嗜酒掊克，失众心，部下阿孛剌等咸怨。
现代文：有的大臣提议对哈密弃置不问算了，这样，他们就愈益得志，必定会再劫掠我们的罕东卫所，引诱我们的赤斤卫所，掳掠我们的瓜州、沙州，对外他们与瓦剌联结在一起，对内则骚扰我们的河西地区，如此一来，边疆地区的警报便永远不会停息了。
English: Some ministers have proposed abandoning Hami and not bothering about it. In this way, the more they get motivated, the more they will plunder our Khandong sanitarium, lure our Shakjin sanitarium, and plunder our Guazhou and Shazhou. To the outside world, they are linked with the Varangians, and to the inside world, they harass our Hexi region. In this way, the alarm in the frontier region will never cease.

古文：十七年春，阴构阿黑麻迎其幼子真帖木儿主哈密。
现代文：这是值得担忧的第二件事情。牙兰是土鲁番满速儿的心腹，率领众人前来投奔我们，而土鲁番那边则说不知他的去向，我们怎么知道他不是假装投降来诱骗我们呢？
English: This is the second thing to worry about. Aslan is the confidant of Turfan Manasir, leading the people to come to us, while Turfan said that he did not know where he was going. How do we know that he is not pretending to surrender to lure us?

古文：陕巴惧，挈家走苦峪。
现代文：日后土鲁番侵犯我们的边境，理由是我们接纳了他们的叛臣。
English: Later, the Turks invaded our borders on the grounds that we had received their traitors.

古文：奄克孛剌与写亦虎仙在肃州，边臣以二人为番众所服，令还辅陕巴，与百户董杰偕行。
现代文：如果我们不把他们的叛臣交还给他们，他们就不归还我们的哈密。从此以后西部边境多战事，而哈密则永无兴复的日子了。
English: If we don't give them back their traitors, they won't give us back Hami, and there will be more fighting on the western border, and Hami will never recover.

古文：杰有胆略。
现代文：这是值得担忧的第三件事情。
English: That's the third thing to worry about.

古文：既抵哈密，阿孛剌与其党五人约夜以兵来劫。
现代文：牙兰到来后，每天要供给他们粮食，所花的费用实在不少，还说这是羁縻政策收不到的效果。
English: After the arrival of the herdsmen, they had to provide them with food every day, which cost a lot of money, and it was said that this was an effect that the protection policy could not obtain.

古文：杰知之，与奄克孛剌等谋，召阿孛剌等计事，立斩之，其下遂不敢叛。
现代文：倘若土鲁番的首领率人来叩关，索讨他们的叛徒，我们是交给他们呢还是拒绝他们呢？
English: If the chiefs of the Turufans should come knocking at our gates with their followers, asking for their traitors, shall we give them to them, or shall we refuse them?

古文：乃令陕巴还哈密，真帖木儿还土鲁番。
现代文：或者要是牙兰包藏祸心，在边境内发动变乱，与边境外的贼人协调呼应，我们如何抵御他们？
English: Or if the usurpers harbor evil intentions, instigate turmoil within the borders, and coordinate with the thieves outside the borders, how can we resist them?

古文：真帖木儿年十三，其母即罕慎女也，闻父已死，兄满速儿嗣为速檀与诸弟相仇杀，惧不敢归，愿倚奄克孛剌，曰： 吾外祖也。 
现代文：这是值得担忧的第四件事。
English: That's the fourth thing to worry about.

古文：边臣虑与陕巴隙，居之甘州。
现代文：有的大臣说现在陕西被饥馑所困，甘肃孤悬在边境很危险，哈密可以放弃了。
English: Some ministers said that now Shaanxi is trapped by famine, Gansu is in danger of being isolated on the border, and Hami can give up.

古文：十八年冬，陕巴卒，其子拜牙即自称速檀，命封为忠顺王。
现代文：我则认为保哈密就可以保甘肃和陕西，保甘肃也就是保陕西了。如果认为哈密难以守卫就放弃哈密，那么甘肃难守也将放弃甘肃吗？
English: On the other hand, I think that Gansu and Shaanxi can be protected by Hami, and Gansu can be protected by Shaanxi. If Hami is considered difficult to defend and is abandoned, will Gansu also be abandoned if it is difficult to defend?

古文：正德三年，写亦虎仙入贡，不与通事偕行，自携边臣文牒投进。
现代文：昔日文皇之所以扶立哈密，是因为元朝留在哈密的残余力量能够自立，这才扶立他们的。
English: The reason why Emperor Wen supported Hami in the past was because the remaining forces of the Yuan Dynasty in Hami were able to stand on their own, which is why they supported them.

古文：大通事王永怒，疏请究治，写酋亦奏永需求。
现代文：他们假借其名，我们朝廷则分享其利。现在忠顺王的王位已经三次无人继承了，这是上天废除他们，谁又能兴复呢？
English: They use his name, and we, the court, share in the profits. Now the throne of King Loyalty has been vacant for three times. This is God's way of abolishing them. Who can restore them?

古文：永供奉豹房，恃宠恣横。诏勿究治，两戒谕之。
现代文：为今之计还是在诸夷族人之中，寻求那自身雄杰能够守卫哈密的人，把金印托付给他，让他与诸番族人和睦相处，带领他们作为我们中国的藩蔽，这样就可以了。
English: For now, the plan is still among the Yi people to find someone who is a hero who can guard Hami, entrust him with the golden seal, let him live in peace with the Fang people, and lead them as our Chinese henchmen. That's all right.

古文：写酋自是益轻朝廷，潜怀异志。
现代文：如果一定要寻求到忠顺王的后裔才扶立为王，这就显得太顽固了。 
English: If it is necessary to seek the descendants of King Zhongshun before establishing Fu Rong as king, this is too stubborn.

古文：初，拜牙即嗣职，满速儿与通和，且遣使求真帖木儿，边臣言与之便。
现代文：霍韬的疏章呈送给皇帝后，皇帝很欣赏他如此留心边境事务，便交给兵部去确切讨论。
English: After presenting Hoh Xuan's seal to the emperor, the emperor was very appreciative of his attention to border affairs, and handed it over to the military department for further discussion.

古文：枢臣谓土鲁番稔恶久，今见我扶植哈密，声势渐张，乃卑词求贡，以还弟为名。
现代文：尚书胡世宁等人竭力主张不能抛弃牙兰，也不必再去兴复哈密，请求朝廷一心一意考虑自治之策，皇帝便接受了他们的建议。
English: Shangshu, Hu Shining and others tried their best to argue that Dacran should not be abandoned and that it was no longer necessary to restore Hami. They asked the imperial court to consider the autonomy plan wholeheartedly, and the emperor accepted their proposal.

古文：我留其弟，正合古人质其亲爱之意，不可遽遣。帝从之。六年始命写亦虎仙偕都督满哈剌三送之西还，至哈密，奄克孛剌欲止之，二人不可。护至土鲁番，遂以国情输满速儿，且诱拜牙即叛。
现代文：从此朝廷允许土鲁番的首领前来进贡，而对哈密城和金印以及忠顺王的存亡等不再过问，这样河西地区就稍为获得一些安宁，百姓得到一些休息，而满速儿则更加桀骜不驯了。十二年满速儿派使臣向朝廷上奏三件事：其一，请求追究巡抚陈九畴的罪行；其二，请求朝廷派官前去议和；其三，请求朝廷将叛徒牙兰交还给他们。
English: From then on, the court allowed the leaders of Turpan to come to pay tribute, and no longer questioned Hami City and Jin Ying, as well as the survival and death of King Zhong Shun. In this way, the Hexi region gained some peace, the people got some rest, and Mansei became more unruly. In the 12th year, Mansei sent envoys to the court to report three things: First, request to investigate the crimes of the inspector Chen Jiuzhong; Second, request the court to send officials to negotiate peace; Third, request the court to return the traitor Garan to them.

古文：拜牙即素昏愚，性又淫暴，心怵属部害已，而满速儿又甘言诱之，即欲偕奄克孛剌同往，不从，奔肃州。
现代文：该奏章中的语言大多是悖逆傲慢之词，朝廷无法治他们的罪，只好告诫他们修职献贡时不能说狂妄之言。但自从写亦虎仙被杀，他只丁阵亡，牙兰又投降朝廷之后，满速儿也丧失了他所依靠的力量，其势力也渐渐孤单，手下的各部也各为雄长，自己称王向朝廷献贡的竟多达十五人，其政权也不统一了。
English: Most of the words in the play were words of rebellious arrogance, and the court could not punish them for their sins, so they had to warn them not to say arrogant words when performing their duties and paying tribute. But since the Tiger Immortal was killed, he only died in battle, and Aslan surrendered to the court, Man of Speed also lost the power he relied on, and his power gradually became lonely, and his subordinates were all powerful. There were as many as fifteen people who claimed to be kings and paid tribute to the court, and their power was not unified.

古文：八年秋，拜牙即弃城叛入土鲁番。满速儿遣火者他只丁据哈密，又遣火者马黑木赴甘肃言拜牙即不能守国，满速儿遣将代守，乞犒赐。
现代文：十五年，甘肃巡抚赵载陈述边境事务时说： 土鲁番屡次顺服又屡次反叛，朝廷对他们安抚太多，太信任他们，这更助长了他们的奸诈狡猾。今后他们一旦前来侵犯，应杀死他们所派来的使臣，把使臣的随从迁徙到两粤，封关拒绝与他们往来。
English: Fifteen years ago, Zhao Zai, the governor of Gansu Province, said in a statement on border affairs: Turuban repeatedly obeyed and repeatedly rebelled. The imperial court appeased them too much and trusted them too much, which further promoted their treacherous cunning. In the future, once they come to encroach, they should kill the envoys sent by them, relocate the envoys of the envoys to Guangdong, and refuse to deal with them.

古文：九年四月，事闻，命都御史彭泽往经略。
现代文：即使他们悔改自己的罪过，也只允许他们向朝廷献贡，不可一动就将所拘留的随从交还给他们。
English: Even if they repent of their sins, they are only allowed to pay tribute to the imperial court, and they are not allowed to return the detained attendants to them.

古文：泽未至，贼遣兵分掠苦峪、沙州，声言予我金币万，即归城印。泽抵甘州，谓番人嗜利，可因而款也。
现代文：让他们内部有所牵挂，对外有所畏惧，这样就不敢轻易侵犯我们边境了。 皇帝采纳了他的意见。
English: Let them worry internally and fear externally, so that they will not dare to easily invade our borders. The emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：遣通事马骥谕令还侵地及王，当予重赏。
现代文：二十四年，满速儿去世，他的长子沙继嗣为速檀，他的弟弟马黑麻也自称速檀，占据了哈密。
English: Twenty-four years later, Mansuyer passed away. His eldest son, Sa, became the successor to Mansuyer, and his younger brother, Ma Heima, also called himself Mansuyer, took over Hami.

古文：满速儿伪许之，泽即畀币帛二千及白金酒器一具。
现代文：不久兄弟俩相互仇杀，马黑麻为了与其兄抗衡便与瓦剌部落联姻结亲，并在沙州垦荒种田，图谋进犯中国。
English: Soon the two brothers were at each other's throats. In order to compete with his brother, Ma Heima married into the Varangian tribe, ploughed barren fields in Shazhou, and attempted to invade China.

古文：十一年五月，拜疏言： 臣遣通事往宣国威，要以重赏，其酋悔过效顺，即以金印及哈密城付之。
现代文：他的部下前来向边关的守卫大臣报告，马黑麻便到边境叩关请求向朝廷献贡，并要求朝廷在边境以内的地区安置他。边关守卫大臣劝谕并制止了他的图谋，他便回到自己的故乡，与其兄长一起生活。
English: His subordinates came to report to the border guard minister, and Ma Heima went to the border to knock on the gate to ask for tribute to the court, and asked the court to place him in the area within the border. The border guard minister advised and stopped his plot, and he returned to his hometown to live with his brother.

古文：满哈剌三、写亦虎仙二人召还他只丁，并还所夺赤斤卫印。
现代文：总督张珩将此情况上报朝廷，皇帝下诏允许他们向朝廷献贡。二十六年规定让他们每五年献一次贡。后来他们按规定日期献贡，只是献贡的使者人数越来越多。
English: Governor Zhang Ye reported the situation to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict allowing them to pay tribute to the imperial court. In 266, it was stipulated that they should pay tribute once every five years. Later, they paid tribute according to the prescribed date, but the number of emissaries paying tribute was increasing.

古文：惟忠顺王在他所，未还。
现代文：到世宗末年时，他们所呈送给朝廷的番字文书已有二百四十八道之多。
English: By the end of the Sect's life, they had sent as many as two hundred and forty-eight manuscripts to the Imperial Court.

古文：请录效劳人役功，赐臣骸骨归田里。 
现代文：朝廷难违他们的盛情，全给他们有所赏赐。隆庆四年马黑麻继承了其兄的职位，派遣使臣向朝廷谢恩。
English: The imperial court could not resist their generosity and rewarded them all. In the fourth year of the Longqing, Ma Heima inherited his brother's position and sent envoys to thank the imperial court.

古文：帝即令还朝。忠顺王迄不返，他只丁亦不肯退，复要重赏，始以城来归。
现代文：马黑麻的弟弟琐非等三人，亦各自自称为速檀，各派使者向朝廷献贡。
English: Three others, including Ma Heima's younger brother Zohfei, also called themselves Sodan, and each sent emissaries to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：明年五月，甘肃巡抚李昆上言： 得满速儿牒，谓拜牙即不可复位，即还故土，已失人心，乞别立安定王千奔后裔。
现代文：礼部大臣请求裁减给他们的犒劳和赏赐，让他们的使者附在马黑麻使臣群中一起献贡，皇帝同意。一直到万历朝时，他们都向朝廷奉贡不绝。四年，忠顺王去世，没有子嗣，由其母亲弩温答失里主持哈密政事。当初，也先被杀时，也先的弟弟伯都王和侄子兀忽纳逃到哈密居住。
English: The Minister of Ceremonies asked for a reduction in the reward and reward given to them, so that their emissaries could be attached to the Ma Heima group of envoys to pay tribute, and the emperor agreed. Until the Wanli Dynasty, they all paid tribute to the imperial court. In four years, King Zhongshun died without a son, and his mother, Jowen, presided over the affairs of Hami. When he was killed, his brother, King Bodu, and his nephew, Jokhuna, fled to live in Hami.

古文：此言良然。如必欲其复国，乞敕满速儿兄弟送还，仍厚赐缯帛，冀其效顺。 
现代文：忠顺王的母亲为他们上书朝廷，请求朝廷对他们加恩，任命伯都王为都督佥事、兀忽纳为指挥佥事。自卜列革死后，其亲属中无人可继承王位，于是朝廷命令哈密的国人推荐出可继承王位之人来。头目阿只等人上奏，说脱欢帖木儿的外孙把塔木儿官至都督同知，可继承王位。
English: The mother of King Zhongshun wrote to the court for them, asking the court to grant them favor, appointing King Bodu as the governor and Gonghuna as the commander. Since Brege's death, none of his relatives could inherit the throne, so the court ordered Hami's compatriots to recommend someone who could inherit the throne. The leader, Adachi, and others played the trumpet, saying that the grandson of the disgraced Timur, who knew Tamur from the governor to the governor, could inherit the throne.

古文：廷议： 经略西陲已逾三载，而忠顺迄无还期，宜兴师绝贡，不可遂其要求，损我威重。
现代文：忠顺王的母亲声称臣子不能继承君王之位，说安定王阿尔察与忠顺王是同一祖先，请求朝廷封阿儿察为忠顺王。七年冬天，忠顺王母亲的奏章上报朝廷后，礼部大臣说 ：扎加思兰见哈密无主，图谋占领哈密。现在形势危急，请朝廷同意她的请求。 
English: The mother of King Zhongshun claimed that a vassal could not succeed to the throne of the king, said that King Arca and King Zhongshun were the same ancestor, and requested the court to appoint Arca as King Zhongshun. In the winter of the seventh year, after the petition of the mother of King Zhongshun was reported to the court, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: Zagaslan saw Hami without an owner and tried to occupy Hami. Now the situation is critical, please allow the court to agree to her request.

古文：但城印归，国体具在，宜敕责满速儿背负国恩，求取无厌。
现代文：皇帝派都指挥贺玉前往哈密册封。贺玉到西宁后便逗留不前，哈密的使臣苦儿鲁海牙请求贺玉允许自己先行一步，贺玉又不答应。
English: The emperor sent all his emissaries to command Hera to go to Hami to be crowned. When Hera arrived in Xining, she did not move forward. Hami's emissary bitterly begged Hera to allow him to go ahead, but Hera did not agree.

古文：仍量赐其兄弟，令其速归忠顺。不从，则闭关绝贡，严兵为备。 
现代文：于是皇帝便将贺玉逮捕交有关官吏处理，改派都指挥李珍代替贺玉的职务，同时敕令安定、罕东两地保护使臣李珍前往哈密。阿儿察认为哈密多难，对朝廷的册封力辞不行，李珍便返回京城。
English: As a result, the emperor had He Yuping arrested and handed him over to the relevant officials for handling, and he was reassigned to command Li Zhen to replace He Yuping in his duties. At the same time, the emperor ordered Li Zhen, the protection envoy of the two provinces of Anhui and Dongguan, to go to Hami. Alca thought that Hami was too difficult, and he could not give up on the imperial seal, so Li Zhen returned to Beijing.

古文：从之。初，写亦虎仙与满速儿深相结，故首倡逆谋。
现代文：哈密素来就国力衰微，加上又是由女人主持国政，众人之心便更加离散。
English: Hamid has always been concerned about the decline of national strength, and with a woman presiding over national affairs, the hearts of the people are more scattered.

古文：已而有隙，满速儿欲杀之，大惧，求他只丁为解，许赂币千五百匹，期至肃州畀之，且啖之入寇，曰肃州可得也。
现代文：扎加思兰便乘机攻破哈密的城池，大肆杀掠，忠顺王的母亲率领亲属和手下人逃到苦峪，不过对朝廷还数次派使者朝贡，并向朝廷告难。
English: Zagathlan then took the opportunity to break through Hami's citadel, killing and plundering. The mother of King Zhongshun led her relatives and subordinates to escape to Kuching, but she also sent emissaries several times to pay tribute to the imperial court and complain to the imperial court.

古文：满速儿喜，令与其婿马黑木俱入贡，以觇虚实，且徵其赂。
现代文：朝廷也无法救援他们，只敕令哈密的国人迅速推荐出可继承忠顺王位的人而已。其国因被外敌残破的缘故，逃到中原来的人一日比一日多。
English: The imperial court could not save them either, but ordered Hami's compatriots to quickly recommend someone who could inherit the throne of loyalty. Due to the fact that his country was destroyed by foreign enemies, more and more people fled to China.

古文：边臣以同来火者撒者儿，乃火者他只丁弟，惧为变，并其党虎都写亦羁之甘州，而督写亦虎仙出关，惧不肯去。
现代文：成化元年，礼部大臣姚夔等人说 ：哈密向朝廷献贡马二百匹，而派来的使者却有二百六十人，以我们中国有限的财力，提供给外蕃之国做无益的花费，不是良策。 
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Yao Wei, and others said: Hami presented two hundred horses to the imperial court, but the envoys sent were two hundred and sixty people. With our limited financial resources in China, it is not a good idea to spend money uselessly to a foreign country.

古文：他只丁闻其弟被拘，怒，复又夺哈密城，请满速儿移居之，分兵胁据沙州，拥众入寇，至兔儿壩，游击芮宁与参将蒋存礼，都指挥黄荣、王琮各率兵往御。
现代文：皇帝把姚夔等人的奏章交给朝廷大臣们商议，大臣们规定让哈密一年献一次贡品，献贡使者人数不得超过二百人，皇帝同意。第二年，兵部上奏说忠顺王的母亲到苦峪避难时间不短了，现在贼兵已经退走了，应让她回到哈密故土去了，皇帝同意。
English: The emperor submitted the report of Yao Xuan and others to the imperial ministers for discussion. The ministers stipulated that Hami should offer tribute once a year, and the number of tribute envoys should not exceed two hundred, and the emperor agreed. The following year, the report to the military department said that the time for the mother of King Zhongshun to take refuge in Kuching was not short, and now the robber soldiers had retreated, she should return to her native land of Hami, and the emperor agreed.

古文：宁先抵娑子壩，遇贼。贼悉众围宁，而分兵缀诸将，宁所部七百人皆战没。
现代文：不久哈密的朝贡使者说其地饥寒交迫，有男女二百多人随他一起到中国来乞食，现无法回国。朝廷命令给他们每人米六斗、布二匹，把他们遣送回去。
English: Soon after, Hami's tributary envoy said that his land was starving and cold, and that more than two hundred men and women had followed him to China to beg, and were now unable to return home. The court ordered that each of them be given six bushels of rice and two horses of cloth, and that they be sent back.

古文：贼薄肃州城，索所许币。副使陈九畴固守，且先绝其内应，贼知事泄，虑援兵至，大掠而去。
现代文：当初，哈密的国人请求朝廷立把塔木儿为王，因忠顺王的母亲不肯，致使哈密八年时间内无王。
English: At first, Hami's compatriots asked the imperial court to make Tamur the king. Due to the refusal of the loyal king's mother, Hami was without a king for eight years.

古文：十二年正月，羽书闻，廷议复命彭泽总制军务，偕中官张永、都督郤永率师西征。
现代文：到现在这个地步时哈密的头目交相上奏章请求朝廷封把塔木儿为王，其言词极为哀伤。朝廷于是将把塔木儿提升为右都督，让他代行国王的职事，给他颁赐诰印。
English: At this point in time, the leader of Hami, Kota Shojo, requested the court to crown Tamur as king, and his words were extremely sad. The court would then promote Tamur to the right-hand governor, let him perform the duties of the king, and give him the imperial seal.

古文：贼还至瓜州，副总兵郑廉合奄克孛剌兵击败之，斩七十九级。
现代文：五年，忠顺王的母亲陈述自己年老有病，请求皇帝赐予药物，皇帝立即赏赐给她。
English: In the fifth year, the mother of King Zhongshun declared that she was old and sick, and asked the emperor to give her medicine. The emperor immediately gave it to her.

古文：贼乃遁去，又与瓦剌相攻，力不敌，移书求款，泽等乃罢行。
现代文：不久哈密与瓦剌、土鲁番一起派遣使者三百人向朝廷献贡，边防大臣将此上报朝廷。
English: Soon after, Hami, together with Waju and Turuban, sent 300 envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court. The Minister of Border Defense reported this to the imperial court.

古文：先是，写亦虎仙与子米儿马黑木、婿火者马黑木及其党失拜烟答俱以内应系狱，失拜烟答被捶死。
现代文：朝廷大臣说献贡有时间规定，现在哈密前次来献贡的使者还未回去，后一批的使者又来献贡，而且瓦剌是西域的强寇，现与哈密一起派使者前来，如果不是哈密挟瓦剌的势力以邀取利益，即是瓦剌假借献贡之名来窥探我边境的虚实。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court said that there was a time limit for paying tribute. Now, the envoys from Hami's previous visit to pay tribute have not yet returned, and the latter group of envoys have come to pay tribute again. Moreover, Varro is a strong invader in the western region, and is now sending envoys to come with Hami. If it is not Hami who is using Varro's power to solicit profits, it is Varro who is using the name of paying tribute to spy on the truth and falsity of our border.

古文：及事平，械写亦虎仙赴京，下刑部狱，其子仍系甘州。
现代文：于是皇帝拒绝了他们的贡品，命令边防大臣在当地设宴款待他们，然后把他们遣送回去。
English: So the emperor refused their tribute and ordered the minister of the frontier to give them a banquet there and then send them back.

古文：失拜烟答子米儿马黑麻者，写亦虎仙侄婿他，以入贡在京，探知王琼欲倾彭泽，突入长安门讼父冤，下锦衣狱。
现代文：但朝贡的使者却坚持不肯接受边防大臣的宴赐，非要亲自到朝廷朝觐皇帝，于是皇帝便让其中十分之一的使者赴京。八年，把塔木儿的儿子罕慎向朝廷报告其父去世的消息，请求朝廷让他继承其父的职位。皇帝答应了他，但不让他主持国事，于是哈密的政令没有人出。土鲁番的速檀阿力乘机袭击并攻破了哈密城，俘虏忠顺王的母亲，夺取了忠顺王的金印，把忠顺王的孙女娶为妾，占领了哈密。
English: However, the envoys of the tributes insisted that they did not want to accept the gift of the Minister of Border Defense. They had to go to the imperial court in person to pay homage to the emperor. Therefore, the emperor sent one-tenth of the envoys to Beijing. In eight years, he sent Tamur's son Han Shan to the imperial court to report the news of his father's death and asked the court to let him inherit his father's position. The emperor agreed, but did not allow him to preside over state affairs, so there was no decree from Hami. Turuban's Sodan Ali took the opportunity to attack and break through Hami City,

古文：会兵部、法司请行甘肃讯报，琼欲因此兴大狱，奏遣科道二人往勘。
现代文：九年四月，此事传到朝廷后，皇帝命令边防大臣小心戒备，敕令罕东、赤斤等卫所与边防大臣协力守卫。
English: In April of the ninth year, after the matter was reported to the imperial court, the emperor ordered the minister of border defense to be careful and alert, and ordered the guard stations such as Handong and Chakjin to jointly guard with the minister of border defense.

古文：明年，勘至，于泽无所坐。
现代文：不久，朝廷派遣都督同知李文、右通政刘文到甘肃去经略边防事务。
English: Soon after, the imperial court sent Li Wen and Liu Wen to Gansu to oversee border defense affairs.

古文：琼怒，劾泽欺罔辱国，斥为民。
现代文：他们到达甘肃，便派锦衣千户马俊奉敕令去谕告阿力退兵。
English: When they arrived in Gansu, they sent Ma Jun, a member of the Jin Yi thousand households, to tell Ali to withdraw from the army.

古文：坐昆、九畴激变，逮下吏，并获重谴。明年，写亦虎仙亦减死，遂夤缘钱宁，与其婿得侍帝左右。
现代文：此时阿力只留下他的妹夫牙兰守卫哈密，自己则携带忠顺王的母亲和掳来的金印已回到土鲁番。马俊到达后，将朝廷的命令告诉阿力，而阿力极力抗辩，其言词极不谦逊，还把马俊羁留了一个多月。
English: At this time, Ali only left his brother-in-law Galan to guard Hami, while he himself returned to Turfan with the mother of the loyal king and the captured gold seal. After Ma Jun arrived, he told Ali the order of the court, and Ali strenuously defended himself, his words were extremely immodest, and he also detained Ma Jun for more than a month.

古文：帝悦之，赐国姓，授锦衣指挥，扈驾南征。满速儿犯边后，屡求通贡，不得。十五年归先所掠将卒及忠顺王家属，复求贡。
现代文：一天，牙兰忽然到土鲁番，说有大军三万即日从西边过来，阿力这才设宴慰劳马俊等人，把忠顺王的母亲抬出来与马俊等人相见。忠顺王的母亲因害怕不敢出声，在夜里偷偷派人过来传话说： 替我上奏给天子，快速出兵救哈密。 
English: One day, Aslan suddenly arrived in Turfan, saying that a large army of thirty thousand had come from the west that very day. Ali then held a banquet to console Lao Ma Jun and the others, and brought out the mother of King Zhongshun to meet with Ma Jun and the others. The mother of King Zhongshun was afraid to speak out, so she secretly sent someone over in the night to say: "Sing to the Son of Heaven for me, and quickly send troops to rescue Hami."

古文：廷议许之，而王迄不还。巡按御史潘仿力言贡不当许，不听。
现代文：李文等人将此上报朝廷，朝廷便传檄文给都督罕慎和赤斤、罕东、乜克力等卫所，要他们集结军队进兵哈密讨伐阿力。
English: Li Wen and others reported this to the imperial court, and the imperial court then sent an imperial edict to the governor, Han Shen, and the imperial guards, such as Chakjin, Handong, and Xingceli, asking them to assemble an army and march into Hami to fight Ali.

古文：明年，世宗嗣位，杨廷和以写亦虎仙稔中国情实，归必为边患，于遗诏中数其罪，并其子婿伏诛，而用陈九畴为甘肃巡抚。
现代文：十年冬天，大军到达卜隆吉儿川，有谍报说阿力已集结众人准备抗拒朝廷军队，并勾结别的部落图谋劫掠罕东、赤斤二个卫所。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, a large army arrived at the Blongjil River. There was a spy report saying that Ah Li had gathered everyone to prepare to resist the imperial army, and colluded with other tribes to plunder the two sanctuaries in Handong and Chakjin.

古文：时满速儿比岁来贡，朝廷待之若故，亦不复问忠顺王事。嘉靖三年秋，拥二万骑围肃州，分兵犯甘州。
现代文：李文等人便不敢进兵，让罕东、赤斤二个卫所的军队回去守卫自己的本土，罕慎和乜克力、畏兀儿的军队便退居到苦峪，李文等人也引兵回肃州。
English: Li Wen and others did not dare to enter the army, so they let the troops of the two garrisons led by Handong and Chakjin go back to guard their own homeland. The troops led by Handong and Chaklin retreated to Bitou, and Li Wen and others also led the troops back to Suizhou.

古文：九畴及总兵官姜奭等力战败之，斩他只丁，贼乃却去。
现代文：皇帝于是命令罕慎暂时主持国政，因罕慎向朝廷请求给予米和布，朝廷便给他赏赐谷种。李文等人就这样无功而回了。
English: The emperor then ordered Hanshin to temporarily preside over state affairs. Because Hanshin asked the court to give him rice and cloth, the court rewarded him with grain seeds. Li Wen and others returned without any results.

古文：事闻，命兵部尚书金献民西讨，抵兰州，贼已久退，乃引还。
现代文：土鲁番长期占据哈密后，朝廷命令边防大臣修筑苦峪城，将哈密卫所移到苦峪城。
English: After Turfan occupied Hami for a long time, the imperial court ordered the Minister of Border Defense to build Kuching City and move the Hami Guard Station to Kuching City.

古文：九畴因力言贼不可抚，乞闭关绝贡，专固边防，可之。明年秋，贼复犯肃州，分兵围参将云冒，而以大众抵南山。
现代文：十八年春天，罕慎纠集罕东和赤斤二个卫所的军队一千三百人，与自己手下的军队合起来共一万人，乘夜袭击哈密城，牙兰逃跑而去，罕慎乘势接连收复八个城，于是回到故土居住。巡抚王朝远将此消息上报朝廷，皇帝很高兴，颁赐敕令对罕慎予以奖励，对罕东、赤斤二个卫所也予以嘉奖。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, Han Sheng gathered 1,300 soldiers from the two garrisons of Handong and Chakjin, and together with the army of his subordinates, a total of 10,000 people, attacked Hami City at night. As Lalan fled, Han Sheng took advantage of the situation to recapture eight cities in succession, and then returned to his native land to live. The governor of the dynasty reported this news to the court. The emperor was pleased and issued a royal decree to reward Han Sheng, and also to commend the two garrisons of Handong and Chakjin.

古文：九畴时已解职，他将援兵至，贼始遁。当是时，番屡犯边城，当局者无能振国威，为边疆复仇雪耻，而一二新进用事者反借以修怨。由是，封疆之狱起。
现代文：王朝远请求朝廷封罕慎为王，并说吐鲁番也洗心革面向化朝廷，现与罕慎议和，朝廷应乘机对吐鲁番予以安抚，取回忠顺王的孙女和金印，让她与忠顺王的母亲一起共同掌管国事，而且哈密国的人也请求封罕慎为王。
English: Wang Chaoyuan asked the court to crown Han Shan as king, and said that Turpan had also changed his mind and turned to the court, and was now negotiating with Han Shan. The court should take the opportunity to appease Turpan, retrieve King Zhongshun's granddaughter and gold seal, and let her jointly manage state affairs with King Zhongshun's mother. Moreover, the people of Hami also asked to crown Han Shan as king.

古文：百户王邦奇者，素憾杨廷和、彭泽，六年春，上言： 今哈密失国，番贼内侵，由泽赂番求和，廷和论杀写亦虎仙所致。
现代文：朝廷大臣商议后不同意王朝远的请求，皇帝便提升罕慎为左都督，给他赏赐白金一百两、彩币十表里，特地敕令奖赏犒劳，对他手下的将士也都按等差给予提升和奖赏。弘治元年朝廷顺从哈密国人的请求，封罕慎为忠顺王。土鲁番的阿力此时已死，他的儿子阿黑麻继承其父的速檀职务，假装与罕慎联姻结婚，将罕慎诱骗到手后杀死，仍派牙兰占据哈密。
English: After deliberation, the ministers of the imperial court did not agree to the request from far away from the dynasty. The emperor then promoted Khanshen to the left governor and rewarded him with one hundred taels of platinum and ten tables of colored coins. He also gave a special order to reward the reward, and the soldiers under his command were also promoted and rewarded according to the same difference. In the first year of the Hongzhi era, the imperial court complied with the request of the people of Hami and crowned Khanshen as the King of Zhongshun. At this time, Turuban's Ali was dead, and his son Ahima inherited his father's swift dance position, pretended to marry

古文：诛此两人，庶哈密可复，边境无虞。 桂萼、张璁辈欲藉此兴大狱，斥廷和、泽为民，尽置其子弟亲党于理，有自杀者。
现代文：哈密的都指挥阿木郎逃奔到中国求救，朝廷大臣请求皇帝谕告土鲁番的献贡使者，让他们回去转告其首领退还所占领的哈密领土，同时敕令赤斤、罕东二个卫所，共同谋划收复哈密。第二年，哈密原来罕慎的旧部绰卜都等人率领众人攻打牙兰，杀死牙兰的弟弟，从叛变的大臣者盼卜等人那里夺取了人和牲畜后凯旋而归。
English: Amuro, the commander of Hami's capital, fled to China for help. The Minister of the Imperial Court asked the Emperor to tell Turfan's envoys to pay tribute, so that they could go back and tell their leaders to return the occupied Hami territory. At the same time, he ordered Chakkin and Khandong's two sanitariums to jointly plan to recapture Hami. The following year, Hami's formerly cautious former minister, Pokobdu, and others led the people to attack Gawran, kill Gawran's younger brother, seize people and livestock from the renegade minister, Dhanab, and others, and return in triumph.

古文：复遣给事、锦衣官往按。
现代文：此事传到朝廷后，朝廷给绰卜都等人加官奖赏。
English: After the matter came to the attention of the imperial court, the court rewarded Chiobudu and others with promotion.

古文：番酋牙兰言非敢获罪天朝，所以犯边，由冤杀写亦虎仙、失拜烟答二人故。
现代文：先前，罕慎派遣使者向朝廷献贡，其使者还未回去罕慎就蒙难而亡了。罕慎的弟弟奄克勃剌便率领部下众人逃到边疆地区避难，朝廷命令将原打算赐给罕慎的东西赐给奄克孛剌。阿黑麻离开哈密时，只留下六十人辅佐牙兰。
English: Previously, Hanshin had sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, but the envoy died before Hanshin could return. Hanshin's younger brother, Amak Burgu, led his men to take refuge in the border region, and the imperial court ordered that what was originally intended to be given to Hanshin be given to Amakusa. When Ahima left Hami, only sixty people were left to assist Sagaran.

古文：今愿献还城印赎前罪。事下兵部，尚书王时中等言： 番酋乞贡数四，先已下总制尚书王宪，因其贡使镌责。
现代文：阿木郎探听到牙兰的力量很单薄微弱时，便请求边防大臣调集赤斤、罕东的军队，在夜间袭击并攻破哈密城的防守，牙兰逃走，其手下被官兵斩杀和俘虏甚多，皇帝下诏令予以奖赏。值此之时，阿黑麻甚为桀傲不驯，自以为土鲁番离中国甚远，屡次违抗天子的命令。等到官军攻破哈密城赶走牙兰后，土鲁番的使者频频到朝廷献贡，朝廷仍善待他们，于是阿黑麻更加轻视中国。
English: When Amuro discovered that Aslan's power was very weak, he asked the Minister of Border Defense to mobilize the armies of Chakkin and Khandong to attack and break through the defense of Hami City at night. Aslan fled, many of his men were killed and captured by officers and soldiers, and the emperor issued a decree to reward them. At this time, Ahima was very proud and unruly. He thought that Turpan was far away from China, and repeatedly defied the orders of the Son of Heaven. When the government army broke through Hami City and drove out Aslan, the envoys of Turpan frequently came to the court to pay tribute. The court still treated them well

古文：所请当不妄，第其词出牙兰，非真求贡之文，或诈以款我。
现代文：皇帝便减少对他们的赏赐，或拘留他们的使臣，或拒绝收纳他们的贡品，敕令责成他们悔罪。
English: The emperor reduced their rewards, or detained their envoys, or refused to accept their tribute, and ordered them to repent.

古文：若果悔罪，必先归城印及所掠人畜，械送首恶，稽首关门，方可听许。 帝纳之。
现代文：不久，朝廷寻访到忠顺王的族孙陕巴，想辅立陕巴为王。阿黑麻逐渐感到惊惧，三年派使者叩见边关大臣，愿意归还哈密之地和掳去的金印，希望朝廷释放所拘留的土鲁番使臣。
English: Soon, the imperial court visited Sun Shaanba, a descendant of King Zhongshun, and wanted to make Shaanba the king. Aheima gradually became alarmed, and for three years sent an envoy to meet with the border minister, willing to return the land of Hami and the captured gold seal, and hoping that the imperial court would release the detained Turuban envoy.

古文：萼以前狱未竟，必欲重兴大狱，请留质牙兰，遣译者谕其主还侵地。而与礼、兵二部尚书方献夫、王时中等协议，为挑激之词，言番人上书者四辈，皆委咎前吏，虽词多诋饰，亦事发有因。
现代文：天子收纳了他的贡品，但仍不释放前次所扣留的土鲁番使者。第二年，阿黑麻果然把哈密城和金印献出来归顺朝廷，朝廷便听从马文升的建议，放还所拘留的土鲁番使臣。马文升又说 ：番人很看重种族，而且素来对蒙古人很服帖。
English: Tianzi collected his tribute, but still did not release the Turuban envoy who had been detained the previous time. The following year, Ahima did indeed offer the city of Hami and the golden seal to surrender to the court, and the court followed the advice of Ma Wensheng and released the detained Turuban envoy. Ma Wensheng also said: The guards attach great importance to race, and have always been very subservient to the Mongols.

古文：宜遣官严核激变虚实，用服其心，其他具如前议。九畴报捷时，言满速儿、牙兰已毙炮石下，二人实未死。
现代文：哈密以前有回回、畏兀儿、哈剌灰三个种族，其北部山区又遭小列秃、乜克力人的侵逼，所以这个地方非得有蒙古人的后裔来镇守不可。现在安定王的族人陕巴，是前忠义王脱脱的近亲从孙，可以主持哈密的政务。 
English: In the past, there were three races in Hami: Hui-Hui, Hui-Hai, and Hui-Hai. The northern mountainous area was also invaded and oppressed by the Xiao-Li-Zhao and the Jia-Keli people. Therefore, the descendants of the Mongols had to defend the town. Now, Shaanba, a member of the Stable King's tribe, is a close relative and descendant of the former King Zhongyi, and can preside over the government affairs of Hami.

古文：帝固疑之。览萼等议，益疑边臣欺罔，手诏数百言，切责九畴，欲置之死，而戒首辅杨一清勿党庇，遂遣官逮九畴。尚书金献民、侍郎李昆以下，坐累者四十余人。
现代文：天子认为马文升的话有理，而各番国也共同上奏说陕巴可立为王。五年春，朝廷便立陕巴为忠顺王，给他颁赐印诰、冠服和守卫城池的武器，提升阿木郎为都督佥事，与都督同知奄克孛剌一起共同辅佐陕巴。
English: Tianzi thought that Ma Wensheng's words were reasonable, and all the provinces also jointly reported that Shaanba could be made king. In the spring of the fifth year, the court made Shaanba the king of Zhongshun, awarded him the seal, crown and weapons to guard the castle, promoted Amuro to the governor of Anji, and jointly assisted Shaanba together with the governor and Chiamakou.

古文：七年正月，九畴逮至下狱。
现代文：不久诸番国向陕巴索讨犒赐之物而不得，皆有怨愤。
English: Soon, all the tributary states were complaining to Shaanxi and Baso that they were not allowed to ask for gifts.

古文：萼等必欲杀之，并株连廷和、泽。刑部尚书胡世宁力救，帝稍悟，免死戍边，泽、献民等皆落职。
现代文：阿木郎又勾引乜克力人抢劫土鲁番的牛马，阿黑麻甚为愤怒，于六年春天偷偷地派兵在夜间袭击哈密，杀死哈密一百多人，逃跑的和投降的也各占一半。
English: Amuro also lured the Shankarites to rob Turfan's cattle and horses. Ahima was so angry that in the spring of the sixth year he secretly sent soldiers to attack Hami at night, killing more than a hundred people in Hami, with half of them fleeing and the other half surrendering.

古文：番酋气益骄，而萼又荐王琼督三边，尽释还九畴所系番使，许之通贡。
现代文：陕巴和阿木郎便占据大土剌坚守。大土剌，按华语就是大土台的意思。
English: Shaanxi Ba and Amuro then occupied and held on to the large earthen mound. Large earthen mound, according to the Chinese language, means large foundation.

古文：番酋迄不悔罪，侮玩如故。
现代文：阿黑麻的军队将大土剌包围了三天也没攻下来。
English: Aheima's army besieged the large mound for three days and did not attack it.

古文：时以牙兰获罪其主，率部帐来归，边臣受之。
现代文：阿木郎也急忙调遣乜克力和瓦剌二地的军队前来救援，但都失败而回。
English: Amuro also hurriedly dispatched troops from Shinkoku and Wakashiki to come to the rescue, but they all failed and returned.

古文：满速儿怒，其部下虎力纳咱儿引瓦剌二千余骑犯肃州，至老鹳堡，值撒马儿罕贡使在堡中，贼呼与语，游击彭浚急引兵击之。
现代文：于是阿黑麻俘虏了陕巴，活捉阿木郎后将他肢解而死。这样，牙兰便又据守哈密，并移文书边关大臣，向边关大臣诉说阿木郎的罪行。
English: As a result, Aheima captured Shaanba, captured Amuro alive and dismembered him to death. In this way, Garan kept Hami and sent a letter to the border minister to tell the border minister about Amuro's crime.

古文：贼言欲问信通和，浚不听，进战，破之。
现代文：此时土鲁番先后派来向朝廷献贡的使者都还没有回去。
English: At this time, the emissaries sent by Turuban successively to pay tribute to the imperial court have not returned.

古文：贼遁走赤斤，使人持番文求贡，委罪瓦剌，词多悖谩。
现代文：边关大臣认为牙兰的文书中言词不谦逊，并擅自称可汗，请求朝廷派遣将领带兵先剿灭牙兰，然后再直达土鲁番，割下阿黑麻的首级，把陕巴夺回来。
English: The minister of the frontier thought that the words in the document of Aslan were not humble, and claimed to be a khan, and requested the court to send the tie soldiers to destroy Aslan first, and then go straight to Turpan, cut off the head of Ahemea, and win back Shaanba.

古文：琼希时贵指，必欲议抚，因言番人且悔，宜原情赦罪，以罢兵息民，并上浚及副使赵载功状。
现代文：或者请朝廷降敕令给阿黑麻，对他严加责备，让他送还陕巴，这样才宽恕他的罪行。朝廷大臣商议后认为后面这一条建议可行，让边关大臣拘留土鲁番的献贡使者，故意放他们几个人回去，让他们把敕令交给阿黑麻，向他明示如何做才是福如何做会招祸。
English: After deliberation, the ministers of the imperial court thought that the latter suggestion was feasible. They asked the frontier minister to detain the tributary envoys of Turuban, deliberately let a few of them go back, let them give the imperial order to Aheima, and show him how to do it, and how to do it would be a blessing and how to do it would be a disaster.

古文：章下兵部。初，胡世宁之救陈九畴也，欲弃哈密不守，言： 拜牙即久归土鲁番，即还故土，亦其臣属，其他族裔无可继者。
现代文：皇帝同意大臣们的请求，命朝廷大臣推荐一位大臣前往甘肃经略此事。当初，哈密事变传到朝廷时，丘浚就对马文升说 ：西部边陲所发生的事很重要，您必须亲自去一趟。 马文升说： 国家有事，面对困难做臣子的有义不容辞的责任。
English: The emperor agreed to the request of the ministers and ordered the minister of the imperial court to recommend a minister to go to Gansu to discuss the matter. At the beginning, when the Hami Incident was reported to the imperial court, Qiu Jun said to Ma Wensheng: What happened in the western borderlands is very important, you must go there in person. Ma Wensheng said: The country is in trouble, and it is the duty of a courtier to face difficulties.

古文：回回一种，早已归之。哈剌灰、畏兀儿二族逃附肃州已久，不可驱之出关。
现代文：但是番族人贪利，不善于骑马射箭，自古以来没有哪一个西域之国能对中国构成威胁的，所以对西部边陲的事变可慢慢地清除。 
English: However, the Bang people are greedy and not good at riding horses and archery. Since ancient times, no country in the western region can pose a threat to China, so the events on the western border can be slowly cleared.

古文：然则哈密将安兴复哉？
现代文：现在丘浚又对马文升提起旧话，马文升便向皇帝请求亲自到甘肃去经略此事。
English: Now Qiu Jun brought up the old story again to Ma Wensheng, who then asked the emperor to personally go to Gansu to handle the matter.

古文：纵得忠顺嫡派，畀之金印，助之兵食，谁与为守？不过一二年，复为所夺，益彼富强，辱我皇命，徒使再得城印，为后日要挟之地。
现代文：但是朝廷大臣都说北部的敌寇很强大，本朝的兵部尚书不可远离朝廷，于是便推荐兵部右侍郎张海和都督同知缑谦二人前往甘肃。皇帝颁赐敕令授予二人，但该二人都是庸才，只派土鲁番的人回去谕告阿黑麻，让他将所侵之地献出来，而自己驻扎在甘州等待消息。
English: However, the ministers of the imperial court all said that the enemy raiders in the north were very powerful, and that the military department of this dynasty should not be far away from the imperial court, so they recommended the right attendant of the military department, Zhang Hai, and the governor, Tong Zhixian, to go to Gansu. The emperor issued a royal decree to award the two, but the two were mediocre, and only sent the Turuban people back to tell Aheme that he should sacrifice the invaded land, while he was stationed in Gansu to wait for news.

古文：乞圣明熟筹，如先朝和宁交址故事，置哈密勿间。
现代文：第二年，阿黑麻派使者叩见边关大臣请求向朝廷献贡，诡称自己愿意归还陕巴和哈密，请朝廷也归还所扣留的土鲁番使者。
English: The following year, the envoys sent by Ahima met with the Minister of the Frontier to request tribute to the imperial court, saying that they were willing to return Shaanxi Ba and Hami, and asked the imperial court to return the detained Turpan envoys.

古文：如其不侵扰，则许之通贡。
现代文：张海等人上报朝廷，请求皇帝再降敕令宣谕阿黑麻。
English: Zhang Hai and others reported to the imperial court, requesting the emperor to further lower the imperial edict to proclaim Ah Hao Ma.

古文：否则，闭关绝之，庶不以外番疲中国。 
现代文：朝廷大臣议论时说，先前已经降过敕令，现在若再降敕令，有伤国体，应让张海等人自己派人前去宣谕阿黑麻。
English: During the discussion, the Minister of the Imperial Court said that the imperial edict had already been lowered, and if the imperial edict was lowered again, it would hurt the national body, and Zhang Hai and others should be allowed to send their own people to proclaim Ah Hao Ma.

古文：詹事霍韬力驳其非。至是，世宁改掌兵部，上言： 番酋变诈多端，欲取我肃州，则渐置奸回于内地。事觉，则多纵反间，倾我辅臣。
现代文：如果阿黑麻不服从命令，则仍扣留土鲁番前次派来的使者，把新来的使者全部驱赶到边关之外，永远不许他们再来献贡，同时让张海等人与当地守卫大臣一起传檄文给罕东、赤斤等部的军队，让他们直捣哈密，袭击并斩杀牙兰。如果无机可乘，则封闭嘉峪关，不接纳土鲁番的使者。
English: If Aheme disobeyed the order, he would still detain the envoys previously sent by Turuban, drive all the newly arrived envoys out of the border gate, and never allow them to come back to pay tribute. At the same time, he would have Zhang Hai and others, together with the local guard minister, deliver a message to the troops of Handong and Chakjin, so that they would directly attack Hami, attack and kill Daclan. If there was no opportunity, then Jiayuguan would be closed and the envoys of Turuban would not be accepted.

古文：乃者许之朝贡，使方入关，而贼兵已至，河西几危。
现代文：陕巴虽然被封为忠顺王，但他回与不回，对我们中国并没有损害或好处，我们可以再挑选贤者代替他。
English: Although Shaanba was named the King of Zhongshun, whether he returns or not does not harm or benefit China. We can choose a wise man to replace him.

古文：此闭关与通贡，利害较然。今琼等既言贼薄我城堡，缚我士卒，声言大举，以恐吓天朝，而又言贼方惧悔，宜仍许通贡，何自相牴牾。
现代文：皇帝认为既然陕巴对中国没有损害或好处，而哈密的城池已经残破，如果土鲁番将哈密城池和陕巴献还给朝廷，应当如何处置？朝廷大臣又说陕巴是安定王千奔的侄子，是忠顺王的孙子，以前封他为忠顺王是想让他镇守安抚一方罢了。现今他被俘虏，可知其自身孱弱，即使回来，也很难立为王了。
English: The emperor thought that since the Shaanxi Ba had no harm or benefit to China, and the Hami fortress had been destroyed, what should be done if Turuban returned the Hami fortress and the Shaanxi Ba to the imperial court? The imperial minister also said that the Shaanxi Ba was the nephew of the King of Stability, the grandson of the King of Loyalty, and that he had previously named him the King of Loyalty to appease one side. Now that he was a prisoner, he was weak, and even if he returned, it would be difficult for him to become king.

古文：霍韬又以贼无印信番文为疑，臣谓即有印信，亦安足据。
现代文：应当将其忠顺王的爵位革除，让他到甘州居住，再犒劳和奖赏安定王，将不再立陕巴为王的原因告诉安定王。
English: He should be stripped of his title of "Loyal Subordinate King" and sent to live in Ganzhou. He should then reward and reward Wang Ding and tell Wang Ding the reason why he will no longer make Shaanxi Ba the king.

古文：第毋堕其术中，以间我忠臣，弛我边备，斯可矣。
现代文：再命令都督奄克孛剌总理哈密的政务，让他与回回族都督写亦虎仙、哈剌灰族都督拜迭力迷失等人分别统领三种番族人以辅卫中国。
English: He also ordered the governor of Amak to supervise the political affairs of the prime minister Hami, and let him and the governor of the Hui and Hui people, respectively, command the three tribes to assist in the defense of China.

古文：牙兰本我属番，为彼掠去，今束身来归，事属反正，宜即抚而用之。
现代文：然后再修筑苦峪的城壕，凡是散居在甘州、凉州的番族人，都让他们回到自己的故土去，发给他们耕牛、农具和口粮。如果陕巴没回来，也不必去索取，我们不急着要陕巴，他将会自己回来的。
English: After that, bitter trenches will be built. All the Ban people scattered in Ganzhou and Liangzhou will be allowed to return to their homeland, and they will be given cattle, farm tools and rations. If Shaanba does not return, there is no need to ask for it. We are not in a hurry to have Shaanba, he will return on his own.

古文：招彼携贰，益我藩篱。至于兴复哈密，臣等窃以为非中国所急也。
现代文：皇帝全部按照朝廷大臣所说的去做，并将此意敕令给张海等人。
English: The emperor did everything according to what the minister of the imperial court said, and gave this order to Zhang Hai and others.

古文：夫哈密三立三绝，今其王已为贼用，民尽流亡。
现代文：张海等人看到敕令书上说将放弃陕巴，很高兴，马上驱逐土鲁番的献贡使者，封闭嘉峪关，修筑苦峪的城壕，让流居的番族人全迁回故乡，便给朝廷上疏回京交差。
English: When Zhang Hai and others saw that the imperial edict said that Shaanxi and Tibet would be abandoned, they were very happy. They immediately expelled the tribute envoys from Turpan, closed Jiayuguan, built bitter trenches, and allowed the exiled Qiang people to move back to their hometowns. They then gave the imperial court permission to return to Beijing.

古文：借使更立他种，彼强则入寇，弱则从贼，难保为不侵不叛之臣。
现代文：八年正月张海等人回到京城，朝廷的言官交相上奏弹劾他们在甘肃无功而返，将张海等人交给司法官员贬斥官秩，但哈密最终还是没还回来。马文升则锐意图谋收复哈密，他派许进做甘肃巡抚以图谋此事。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, Zhang Hai and others returned to Beijing. The imperial court's spokesmen communicated with each other to impeach them in Gansu, but they returned without success. Zhang Hai and others were handed over to judicial officials to denounce their official rank, but Hami eventually did not return. Ma Wensheng was determined to recover Hami. He sent Xu Jin to be the Gansu inspector to attempt this.

古文：故臣以为立之无益，适令番酋挟为奸利耳。
现代文：许进和大将刘宁等人在夜间偷偷出兵袭击，牙兰逃走，官军便斩杀牙兰留下的守军，安抚好投降的众人后才回军。
English: Xu Jin and General Liu Ning and others secretly attacked at night, and Aslan fled. The government army then killed the defenders left behind by Aslan, and only returned to the army after pacifying the people who had surrendered.

古文：乞赐琼玺书，令会同甘肃守臣，遣番使归谕满速儿，诘以入寇状。
现代文：自从明朝建立以来，官军从来没有到过西域，至此诸番族人才开始知道畏惧，阿黑麻也想把陕巴送还过来。
English: Since the establishment of the Ming Dynasty, the government army had never been to the western region. At this point, the people of the Fan nationality began to be afraid. Ah Heima also wanted to send the Shaanxi Ba back.

古文：倘委为不知，则令械送虎力纳咱儿。
现代文：但是哈密城屡遭破坏，其间的居民早晚都担心有敌寇入侵。阿黑麻又来攻打，由于哈密的军民坚守，阿黑麻攻打不下，最终散去。
English: However, the city of Hami was repeatedly destroyed, and the residents of the area were worried about the invasion of enemy invaders sooner or later. Ahima attacked again, but because the soldiers and civilians of Hami held firm, Ahima could not be attacked and eventually dispersed.

古文：或事出瓦剌，则缚其人以自赎。
现代文：哈密的各种人都认为该地穷困窘迫难以坚守，便把房舍全部焚烧掉，逃到肃州来请求帮助。
English: All kinds of people in Hami thought that the poverty and distress of the place were difficult to adhere to, so they burned all the buildings and fled to Suzhou to ask for help.

古文：否则羁其使臣，发兵往讨，庶威信并行，贼知敛戢。更敕琼为国忠谋，力求善后之策，以通番纳贡为权宜，足食固圉为久计，封疆幸甚。 
现代文：边关大臣将此上奏朝廷，皇帝下诏给他们赐予牛、农具和谷种，同时也将这些东西分发给流浪出来的三种番族人和寄居在赤斤的哈密人，让他们全部到苦峪和瓜州、沙州，让他们自己从事耕种放牧，以图兴复故国。此时哈密没有王，奄克孛剌充当哈密的长官。
English: The frontier minister reported this to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict to give them cattle, farm tools, and grains. At the same time, he distributed these things to the three kinds of tribals who had wandered out and the Hami people who had sojourned in Chijin, and let them all go to Kuching, Guazhou, and Shazhou, and let them engage in farming and grazing themselves in an attempt to restore their homeland. At this time, Hami did not have a king, and Amakusa acted as the chief of Hami.

古文：疏入，帝深然之，命琼熟计详处，毋轻信番言。
现代文：十年奄克孛剌派其党徒写亦虎仙等人前来朝贡，朝廷赐予他们币帛五千，以抵偿其贡品的价值。
English: In the tenth year, Amakusa sent his party members such as Kaki and Kosen to pay tribute to the emperor, and the imperial court gave them five thousand coins to compensate for the value of their tribute.

古文：至明年，甘肃巡抚唐泽亦以哈密未易兴复，请专图自治之策。
现代文：但奄克孛剌的使臣还是久留在京城不回去，常常对别人发怒咆哮。
English: However, Amakusa's envoys remained in Kyoto for a long time and did not return, often ranting and raving at others.

古文：琼善之，据以上闻，帝报可。
现代文：礼部官员徐琼等人极力主张治他们的罪，于是朝廷便将他们赶出京城让他们回去。
English: Xu Qiong, an official of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and others strongly advocated the punishment of their crime, so the court drove them out of Beijing and let them go back.

古文：自是置哈密不问，土鲁番许之通贡，西陲藉以息肩。
现代文：此时各番国因为朝廷封闭了嘉峪关而无法进入中国，便全都怨恨阿黑麻，阿黑麻感到后悔，把陕巴和掳抢去的哈密人送了回来，请求朝廷允许他们像以前那样献贡。
English: At this time, all the countries could not enter China because the court had closed Jiayuguan, and they all resented Ah Hao Ma. Ah Hao Ma felt regret, sent back Shaanxi Ba and the Hami people who had been captured, and asked the court to allow them to pay tribute as before.

古文：而哈密后为失拜烟答子米儿马黑木所有，服属土鲁番。
现代文：朝廷大臣商议后认为他们没有送番国的文书来，不可贸然答应他们，一定要让他们送文书来后才同意他们的请求。
English: After deliberation, the ministers of the Imperial Court decided that since they had not sent the documents of the second country, they should not rush to agree to their request, but must first have them send the documents before agreeing to their request.

古文：朝廷犹令其比岁一贡，异于诸番，迄隆庆、万历朝犹入贡不绝，然非忠顺王苗裔矣。
现代文：对于陕巴，前次大家商议时决定废除他的王位，现在让他暂时居住在甘州，等众头目都归顺朝廷时，再修好哈密的城堑，让他重复旧业。
English: For Shaanba, it was decided to abolish his throne at the last time of everyone's deliberation, and now let him temporarily live in Ganzhou. When all the leaders are obedient to the imperial court, then repair the castle of Hami, and let him repeat the old business.

古文：柳城，一名鲁陈，又名柳陈城，即后汉柳中地，西域长史所治。
现代文：皇帝同意这些提议。冬天，朝廷起用王越来总制三边的军务，并兼任哈密的经理事务。
English: The emperor agreed to these proposals. In the winter, the imperial court appointed Wang Yue as the general manager of the military affairs of the three sides, and also served as the manager of Hami.

古文：唐置柳中县。西去火州七十里，东去哈密千里。经一大川，道旁多骸骨，相传有鬼魅，行旅早暮失侣多迷死。
现代文：十一年秋，王越上奏说哈密不能弃，陕巴也不能废，应让他仍当哈密的王，让他先回哈密，按实际拨给他们修城堑、建房舍的费用，犒赏三种番族人和赤斤、罕东、小列秃、乜克力等部落，以奖励他们前次的功劳，责成他们再接再厉。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year, Wang Yue made a report saying that Hami could not be abandoned, nor could Shaanba be abandoned. He should still be the king of Hami, let him return to Hami first, allocate the cost of repairing the city walls and building houses to them according to the actual situation, reward the three kinds of tributaries and tribes such as the red crane, the khandong, the small vulture, and the cormorant, to reward their previous merits, and instruct them to make further efforts.

古文：出大川，渡流沙，在火山下，有城屹然广二三里，即柳城也。
现代文：皇帝也同意王越的提议。从此，哈密又安定下来，土鲁番也向朝廷小心恭顺地献贡。奄克孛剌，是罕慎的弟弟，与陕巴不和。
English: The emperor also agreed to Wang Yue's proposal. From then on, Hami settled down again, and Turupan also paid tribute to the imperial court. Ama Kecheng, the younger brother of Han Shen, was at odds with Shaanxi Ba.

古文：四面皆田园，流不环绕，树木阴翳。
现代文：主持西域事务的朝廷官员对此颇为担心，让陕巴娶罕慎的女儿，以便与奄克孛剌结好。
English: The imperial official who presided over Western affairs was quite worried about this, and let Shaanxi Ba marry Han Shen's daughter in order to make peace with Amoke.

古文：土宜穄麦豆麻，有桃李枣瓜胡芦之属。
现代文：陕巴既嗜酒如命又聚敛贪狠，失去了众人的拥护，其部下阿孛剌等人也都有怨言。
English: Shaanxi Ba, who is both a compulsive drinker and a greedy hoarder, has lost the support of many people, and his subordinates, including the grandma, also have complaints.

古文：而葡萄最多，小而甘，无核，名锁子葡萄。
现代文：十七年春，阿孛剌等人暗地里与阿黑麻勾结，迎接阿黑麻的幼子真帖木儿到哈密为王。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Ama and others secretly colluded with Ahima to welcome Ahima's young son, Manchamul, to Hami as king.

古文：畜有牛羊马驼。
现代文：陕巴感到畏惧，带领全家逃到苦峪。
English: Shaanba felt afraid and led the whole family to escape to Bitou.

古文：节候常和。土人纯朴，男子椎结，妇人蒙皂布，其语音类畏兀儿。
现代文：此时奄克孛剌与写亦虎仙都在肃州，边关大臣认为番族百姓对奄克孛剌和写亦虎仙颇信服，便让他们二人回去辅佐陕巴，让百户董杰与他们同行。董杰此人颇有胆略。
English: At this time, Amagakure and Shiraitokosen were both in Suizhou. The Minister of Frontier Affairs thought that the people of the Ban people were quite convinced of Amagakure and Shiraitokosen, so he let them both go back to assist Shaanxi Ba, and let Hyakko Dongjie go with them. Dongjie was quite a daredevil.

古文：永乐四年，刘帖木儿使别失八里，因命赍彩币赐柳城酋长。
现代文：他们抵达哈密时，阿孛剌约了五位同党准备乘夜带兵劫持他们。
English: When they arrived in Hami, the imam arranged for five of his party to travel by night with soldiers to abduct them.

古文：明年，其万户瓦赤剌即遣使来贡。七年，傅安自西域还，其酋复遣使随入贡。
现代文：董杰了解这一情况后，与奄克孛剌等人商量后，将阿孛剌等人召来商量事情，乘机将阿孛剌擒拿住斩杀，阿孛剌的手下人于是便不敢反叛了。
English: After Dong Jie understood this situation, and after discussing with Ama Kechuan and others, he summoned Ao Yao and others to discuss the matter, and took the opportunity to kill Ao Yao. As a result, Ao Yao's subordinates did not dare to rebel.

古文：帝即命安赍绮帛报之。
现代文：董杰等人便让陕巴回到哈密，让真帖木儿回土鲁番。
English: Dong Jie and others then let Shaanba return to Hami and let Zhen Timur return to Turpan.

古文：十一年夏，遣使随白阿儿忻台入贡。
现代文：真帖木儿年纪只有十三岁，他的母亲就是罕慎的女儿。
English: At the age of only thirteen, Jin Timur's mother is the daughter of Han Sheng.

古文：冬，万户观音奴再遣使随安入贡。二十年与哈密共贡羊二千。
现代文：真帖木儿听到父亲阿黑麻已死，其兄满速儿继承了速檀的职位，与各位兄弟正互相仇杀，于是有点害怕不敢回去，愿意投靠奄克孛剌，说： 这是我的外祖父。 
English: Hearing that his father Ahemea had died, and that his brother Manseer had inherited the post of swift, and that he and his brothers were fighting each other, Manseer was a little afraid to go back, and was willing to rely on Amakusa, saying, "This is my grandfather."

古文：宣德五年，头目阿黑把失来贡。
现代文：边关大臣考虑到真帖木儿与陕巴有仇，便让他居住在甘州。
English: The Minister of Frontier Affairs, considering that Zhen Timur had a grudge against the Shaanxi Bao, allowed him to live in Ganzhou.

古文：正统五年、十三年并入贡。自后不复至。
现代文：十八年冬，陕巴去世，陕巴的儿子拜牙即自称为速檀，朝廷下令封他为忠顺王。
English: In the winter of the 18th year, Shaanba died. Shaanba's son Baiga called himself Sodan, and the court ordered him to be named King of Zhongshun.

古文：柳城密尔火州、土鲁番，凡天朝遣使及其酋长入贡，多与之偕。
现代文：正德三年，写亦虎仙到京城朝贡时，不和通事官员同行，而是自带边关大臣所发给的文牒径自投奔京城而去。
English: In the third year of Zhengde's reign, when Emperor Taizong paid tribute to the capital, he did not go with the officials, but went to the capital with a written order from the Minister of Border Affairs.

古文：后土鲁番强，二国并为所灭。
现代文：大通事王永很愤怒，上疏给朝廷请求治写亦虎仙的罪，写亦虎仙也上奏朝廷，讲了王永的需求。
English: Wang Yong was very angry about the matter. Shang Suo sent a request to the imperial court to punish the crime of writing Tiger Immortal. Writing Tiger Immortal also reported to the imperial court and spoke of Wang Yong's needs.

古文：火州，又名哈剌，在柳城西七十里，土鲁番东三十里，即汉车师前王地。
现代文：王永在豹房手下供职，常常恃宠恣意行事、横行霸道。皇帝下诏不给他们治罪，只戒谕他们而已。写亦虎仙从此更加轻视朝廷，偷偷地心怀异志。
English: Wang Yong served under Leopard House, and often acted arbitrarily and tyrannically. The emperor did not punish them, but only reprimanded them. From then on, the Tiger Immortal despised the imperial court even more, secretly harboring dissent.

古文：隋时为高昌国。唐太宗灭高昌，以其地为西州。
现代文：当初，拜牙即在哈密承继为忠顺王时，满速儿便与哈密通和，并派使者来索讨真帖木儿，边关大臣上奏朝廷说还是将真帖木儿交给土鲁番为好。
English: At first, when Baiga succeeded Hamijong as the king of Zhongshun, Manjor made peace with Hamijong and sent an envoy to solicit the real Timur. The border minister reported to the court that it would be better to give the real Timur to Turfan.

古文：宋时回鹘居之，尝入贡。元名火州，与安定、曲先诸卫统号畏兀儿，置达鲁花赤监治之。
现代文：中枢大臣说土鲁番酝酿作恶已经很久了，现今看朝廷扶植哈密，朝廷的声势渐渐扩张开来，于是满速儿以要求归还弟弟为名，卑词请求向朝廷献贡。
English: The Minister of Central Affairs said that Turuban had been brewing evil for a long time, and now he saw the imperial court supporting Hami, and the imperial court's voice gradually expanded, so Mansei requested a tribute to the imperial court in the name of demanding the return of his brother.

古文：永乐四年五月命鸿胪丞刘帖木儿护别失八里使者归，因赍彩币赐其王子哈散。
现代文：我们把他的弟弟留下来，正好符合古人所说的以其亲爱之人为人质的治理办法，因此不能马上把真帖木儿遣送回去。皇帝同意。六年朝廷才让写亦虎仙与都督满哈剌三二人把真帖木儿送回西边的土鲁番去。
English: We kept his younger brother, just in line with what the ancients said about holding one's beloved as a hostage, so we couldn't send Zhen Timur back immediately. The emperor agreed. It took six years for the imperial court to send Zhen Timur back to Turpan in the west, with the help of the three men, the prince and the governor.

古文：明年遣使贡玉璞方物。使臣言，回回行贾京师者，甘、凉军士多私送出境，泄漏边务。
现代文：他们一行到达哈密时，奄克孛剌想制止他们这么做，而写亦虎仙和满哈剌三不答应。
English: When they arrived in Hami, Amaq wanted to stop them from doing so, but both the tiger and the man did not agree.

古文：帝命御史往按，且敕总兵官宋晟严束之。七年遣使偕哈烈、撒马儿罕来贡。
现代文：他们二人把真帖木儿护送到土鲁番后，便把哈密的真实情况告诉给了满速儿，并引诱拜牙即背叛朝廷投奔土鲁番。
English: After the two of them escorted the real Timur to Turfan, they told the true situation of Hami to Manchurian, and lured Baiga to betray the court and go to Turfan.

古文：十一年夏，都指挥白阿儿忻台遣使偕俺的干、失剌思等九国来贡。
现代文：拜牙即素来昏庸愚钝，性情又很淫暴，心里害怕部下伤害自己，而满速儿又以好言好语引诱他，他便想和奄克孛剌立刻同往土鲁番，奄克孛剌不肯去，他便逃到肃州。
English: Baiga, who had always been dim-witted and stupid, and had a very violent temper, was afraid that his subordinates would harm him. However, Manxun seduced him with kind words. He wanted to go to Turpan with Amoke immediately. Amoke did not want to go, so he fled to Suzhou.

古文：秋，命陈诚、李暹等以玺书、文绮、纱罗、布帛往劳。十三年冬，遣使随诚来贡。
现代文：八年秋，拜牙即弃城叛逃到土鲁番。满速儿派火者他只丁占据哈密，又派火者马黑木到甘肃上书给边关大臣，说拜牙即没有能力守卫自己的国家，现由满速儿派遣将领代为看守，请朝廷予以犒赏。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year, Baiga deserted the city and defected to Turfan. He was the only one to occupy Hami, and he sent the firefighter Ma Hegi to Gansu to write to the Minister of the Border, saying that Baiga was not able to defend his country, and now Mansei sent generals to act as guards, and asked the court to reward him.

古文：自是久不至。正统十三年复贡，后遂绝。
现代文：九年四月，此事传到朝廷，皇帝派都御史彭泽前去经略此地区的事务。
English: In April of the ninth year, the matter was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor sent the imperial envoy, Shi Pengze, to oversee the affairs of the region.

古文：其地多山，青红若火，故名火州。
现代文：彭泽还未到达，贼人就已分兵抢掠了苦峪和沙州，声称朝廷必须给他们一万金币，他们就把这两个城的官印交出来。
English: Penza had not yet arrived, but the thieves had already divided their forces and plundered Kuching and Shazhou, claiming that the court must give them ten thousand gold coins, and they handed over the official seals of the two cities.

古文：气候热。
现代文：彭泽抵达甘州后，认为番人贪利，可以借此招抚他们，于是派通事马骥去土鲁番，说只要他们归还所侵占的土地，交还哈密的忠顺王，就给他们重赏。
English: After arriving in Ganzhou, Pengze thought that the guards were greedy and could use this to entice them, so he sent the messenger horse to Turpan, saying that as long as they returned the occupied land and returned the loyal king of Hami, he would give them a heavy reward.

古文：五谷、畜产与柳城同。
现代文：满速儿假装答应，彭泽即刻付予他们币帛二千和白金酒器一套。
English: Manzhao pretended to agree, and Pengze immediately paid them 2,000 yuan and a set of platinum wine vessels.

古文：城方十余里，僧寺多于民居。东有荒城，即高昌国都，汉戊己校尉所治。
现代文：十一年五月，彭泽上疏说： 我派通事到土鲁番去宣扬朝廷的威风，答应给他们重赏，土鲁番的酋长表示悔过，要效顺朝廷，当即把金印和哈密城交还出来。
English: In May of the eleventh year, Peng Ze Shang So said: I sent agents to Turpan to promote the prestige of the imperial court and promised them a reward. The chiefs of Turpan expressed remorse and wanted to obey the imperial court and immediately return the gold seal and Hami City.

古文：西北连别失八里。国小，不能自立，后为土鲁番所并。
现代文：满哈剌三、写亦虎仙二人也召回了他只丁，并归还了他们抢夺去的赤斤卫所的大印。现在只有忠顺王还在土鲁番未回来。
English: Two of them, Manhajongsan and Zhiyihuaxian, also recalled him, and returned the seal of the Red Guards they had robbed. Now, only King Zhongshun has not returned to Turpan.

古文：土鲁番，在火州西百里，去哈密千余里，嘉峪关二千六百里。
现代文：请求朝廷记下为之效劳的人员的功劳，容许我辞官还乡。 
English: I asked the Imperial Court to record the merits of the personnel who had worked for me, and to allow me to return to my hometown.

古文：汉车师前王地。
现代文：皇帝当即让彭泽回朝。
English: The emperor immediately let Pengze return to the imperial court.

古文：隋高昌国。唐灭高昌，置西州及交河县，此则交河县安乐城也。
现代文：忠顺王最终没有放回来，他只丁也不肯撤退，要挟朝廷再给以重赏，才把哈密城交出来。
English: In the end, King Zhongshun did not let them back in. He refused to retreat at all, and only surrendered the city of Hami after threatening the imperial court to give him a heavy reward.

古文：宋复名高昌，为回鹘所据，尝入贡。元设万户府。
现代文：第二年五月，甘肃巡抚李昆上奏说： 得到满速儿的一封文牒，他说拜牙即不能复位了，即使让他回到哈密，也已丧失了人心，还是请求朝廷另外封立安定王千奔的后裔为好。
English: In May of the following year, Li Kun, the procurator of Gansu Province, made the following report: Having received an ultimatum from Mansuyer, he said that Baiga could not be reinstated, and that even if he were to return to Hami, he had already lost the hearts of the people, so he asked the imperial court to appoint another descendant of Wang Qianben.

古文：永乐四年遣官使别失八里，道其地，以彩币赐之。
现代文：我认为他的这番话很对。如果一定要由拜牙即来复国，请求朝廷敕令满速儿兄弟把他送回来，仍然给他赏赐优厚的缯帛等物，希望他能效顺朝廷。 
English: I think his words are right. If it is necessary for Baiga to return to the country, he should ask the court to order his brother Mitsuko to send him back, and still give him a generous reward of money and other things, hoping that he will obey the court.

古文：其万户赛因帖木儿遣使贡玉璞，明年达京师。六年，其国番僧清来率徒法泉等朝贡。
现代文：朝廷大臣商议时说 ：派官员专门经略西部边疆的事务已有三年之多，而忠顺王至今还没有归期，应动兵断绝与他们通贡，不能满足他们所提的要求，以免大损我们朝廷的威风。
English: When the ministers of the imperial court were deliberating, they said: It has been more than three years since we sent officials to manage the affairs of the western frontier, and King Zhongshun has not yet returned. We should mobilize troops to cut off the tribute to them. If we cannot meet their demands, we will greatly damage the prestige of our imperial court.

古文：天子欲令化导番俗，即授为灌顶慈慧圆智普通国师，徒七人并为土鲁番僧纲司官，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：只要城印归还过来了，那么国体就存在，朝廷应该敕令谴责满速儿背叛朝廷、忘恩负义，向朝廷索求无厌。
English: As long as the seal of the city is returned, then the national identity will exist. The imperial court should issue an order to condemn Mansei for betraying the imperial court, being ungrateful, and demanding everything from the imperial court.

古文：由是其徒来者不绝，贡名马、海青及他物。
现代文：同时也适量赏赐一些礼物给满速儿兄弟，让他们尽快归还忠顺王。如果他们不听从朝廷的命令，就封闭关隘，断绝通贡，整顿军队做好战备。 皇帝同意。
English: At the same time, he also rewarded some gifts to the Mansor brothers in an appropriate amount, so that they could return the loyalty to the king as soon as possible. If they did not obey the order of the court, they would close the pass, cut off the tribute, and rectify the army to be ready for battle. The emperor agreed.

古文：天子亦数遣官奖劳之。二十年，其酋尹吉儿察与哈密共贡马千三百匹，赐赉有加。
现代文：原先，写亦虎仙与满速儿互相勾结得很深，所以他首先倡导哈密背叛朝廷，并入土鲁番。不久两人之间有了间隙，满速儿想杀写亦虎仙，写亦虎仙大为恐惧，求他只丁前去调解，答应贿赂满速儿币一千五百匹，约定写亦虎仙到肃州时就交付，并引诱满速儿入侵，说肃州唾手可得。
English: Originally, Write Tiger Immortal and Mansei were deeply in collusion with each other, so he first advocated Hami to betray the imperial court and join Turpan. Soon there was a gap between the two. Mansei wanted to kill Write Tiger Immortal. Write Tiger Immortal was very afraid and asked him to go to mediation. He promised to bribe Mansei with 1,500 coins. He agreed to deliver Write Tiger Immortal when he arrived in Suizhou, and lured Mansei to invade, saying that Suizhou was at hand.

古文：已而尹吉儿察为别失八里酋歪思所逐，走归京师。
现代文：满速儿颇为高兴，让写亦虎仙和自己的女婿马黑木一起向朝廷进贡，一边窥探中国的虚实，一边向写亦虎仙索取所答应的贿赂。
English: Manchurian was quite pleased, and had Shih Yih Huxian and his son-in-law Ma Hegi pay tribute to the imperial court together. While spying on China's truth and falsehood, he asked Shih Yih Huxian for the promised bribe.

古文：天子悯之，命为都督佥事，遣还故土。尹吉儿察德中国，洪熙元年躬率部落来朝。宣德元年亦如之。
现代文：边防大臣看到与他们同来的火者撒者儿，是火者他只丁的弟弟，怕发生变故，便把撒者儿和他的同党虎都写一起拘留在甘州，督促写亦虎仙出关，写亦虎仙由于害怕而不肯离去。他只丁听说他的弟弟已被拘留，很愤怒，又夺回哈密城，请满速儿移居到哈密，派兵占领沙州，率众入侵边关，到达兔儿坝。
English: The Minister of Border Defense saw the fireman who came with them, the fireman who was his younger brother, fearing that something would happen, he detained the fireman and his fellow party member, the tiger, together in Ganzhou. He urged the fireman and the tiger to leave the border, and the fireman and the tiger were afraid and refused to leave. When he heard that his younger brother had been detained, he was very angry and took back Hami City. He asked the fireman to move to Hami, send troops to occupy Shazhou, and lead the crowd to invade the border and reach the rabbit dam.

古文：天子待之甚厚，还国病卒。
现代文：游击芮宁和参将蒋存礼，以及都指挥黄荣、王琮各率兵前去防守。
English: The guerrilla Huning and the general officer Jiang Cunli, as well as the commanders Huang Rong and Wang Hui, led their troops forward to defend.

古文：三年，其子满哥帖木儿来朝。
现代文：芮宁首先抵达沙子坝，与贼人遭遇。
English: Huning first arrived at the sand dam and encountered the thieves.

古文：正统六年，朝议土鲁番久失贡，因米昔儿使臣还，令赍钞币赐其酋巴剌麻儿。明年遣使入贡。
现代文：贼人将芮宁全部包围起来，又派军队去阻滞各位将领的进军，芮宁的部队七百人全部战死。
English: The bandits completely encircled Huning, and sent troops to block the advance of the generals. All seven hundred of Huning's troops were killed.

古文：初，其地介于阗、别失八里诸大国间，势甚微弱。
现代文：贼人进逼到肃州城，索讨亦虎仙所欠的一千五百匹帛。
English: The robbers forced their way into Suzhou City and demanded the fifteen hundred pennies that Yixian owed.

古文：后侵掠火州、柳城，皆为所并，国日强，其酋也密力火者遂僣称王。
现代文：肃州副使陈九畴全力坚守，而且首先除掉城内的接应内线，贼人知道事情已经泄露，怕朝廷的援兵到达，在大肆掠夺之后便离去了。
English: Chen Jiuzhong, the vice-commander of Suizhou, did his best to hold out, and first of all eliminated the internal lines of communication within the city. The thieves knew that the matter had been leaked, feared the arrival of reinforcements from the court, and left after plundering.

古文：以景泰三年，偕其妻及部下头目各遣使入贡。
现代文：十二年正月，插有鸟羽的文书将此事传到朝廷，朝廷大臣讨论后又任命彭泽来总制军务，让他和宦官张永、都督却永率军征讨西域。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, a document with bird feathers inserted transmitted the matter to the imperial court. After discussion, the ministers of the imperial court appointed Peng Ze to be in charge of military affairs, and let him and the eunuch Zhang Yong and the governor Chao Yong lead the army to conquer the western region.

古文：天顺三年复贡，其使臣进秩者二十有四人。
现代文：贼人回到瓜州，副总兵郑廉会合奄克孛剌的军队将贼人击败，斩获贼人的首级七十九个。
English: When the bandits returned to Guazhou, Vice-Marshal Zheng Lian rallied the troops of Amakusa to defeat the bandits and captured seventy-nine bandits' heads.

古文：先后命指挥白全、都指挥桑斌等使其国。
现代文：贼人于是逃走，又与瓦剌部互相攻打，因力量不敌瓦剌，便移文书给边关大臣向朝廷求和，彭泽等人便停止西征。
English: As a result, the bandits fled, and then fought with the Wawasan troops. As their forces were no match for the Wawasan troops, they sent a letter to the Minister of Frontier Affairs to sue for peace with the imperial court, and Penza and the others stopped their westward march.

古文：成化元年，礼官姚夔等定议，土鲁番三年或五年一贡，贡不得过十人。
现代文：此前，写亦虎仙和他充当米儿的儿子马黑木、充当火者的女婿马黑木以及同党失拜烟答都作为内应被投入监狱，失拜烟答遭捶打而死。等该事件平定以后，写亦虎仙被戴上枷锁押赴京城，交给刑部监狱，他的儿子仍关在甘州。
English: Prior to this, he and his son Ma Hei-ki, who acted as Mi'er, and his son-in-law Ma Hei-ki, who acted as the fireman, as well as his fellow party member Shubai Yan-ta, were all thrown into prison as internal charges, and Shubai Yan-ta was beaten to death. After the incident was settled, Hei Hei-ki was put in shackles and taken to Beijing and handed over to the Criminal Investigation Department prison. His son is still imprisoned in Ganzhou.

古文：五年遣使来贡，其酋阿力自称速檀，奏求海青、鞍马、蟒服、彩币、器用。
现代文：失拜烟答的儿子马黑麻，在当地是米儿，他是写亦虎仙的侄女婿，因向朝廷献贡便暂时留在京城。
English: Ma Heima, the son of the disgraced Yuta, is known locally as Miru. He is the niece and son-in-law of Puyi Huaxian, and temporarily stayed in Beijing to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：礼官言物多违禁，不可尽从，命赐彩币、布帛。
现代文：探知王琼想扳倒彭泽，便突然闯进长安门诉讼他的父亲有冤，把彭泽投进了锦衣卫的监狱里。
English: Detecting that Wang Qiong wanted to bring down Peng Ze, he suddenly broke into Chang'an Gate to sue his father for injustice and threw Peng Ze into the prison of Jin Yi Wei.

古文：明年复贡，奏求忽拨思筝、鼓罗、〈革占〉镫、高丽布诸物。廷议不许。
现代文：此时兵部和法司请求朝廷传布甘肃来的讯报，王琼想借此构成一个大狱，便上奏请朝廷派遣科道中的两个人前去核实。第二年，审核报告送到朝廷，没有证明彭泽有罪。
English: At this time, the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Department of Justice requested the court to spread the news from Gansu. Wang Qiong wanted to use this to create a big prison, so he appealed to the court to send two people from the science department to verify. The following year, the verification report was sent to the court and did not prove Pengze's guilt.

古文：时土鲁番愈强，而哈密以无主削弱，阿力欲并之。
现代文：王琼很愤怒，便弹劾彭泽欺罔朝廷使国家受到损辱，将彭泽贬斥为普通百姓。李昆、陈九畴被认为犯有激变土鲁番人的罪行，遭逮捕后交给法官审理，并遭深重的谴责。
English: Wang Qiong was very angry, and he impeached Peng Zhe for cheating the court and bringing disgrace to the country, and denounced Peng Zhe as an ordinary citizen. Li Kun and Chen Jiuzhong were considered to have committed the crime of the revolutionary Turubans. After being arrested, they were brought to the judge for trial, and were severely condemned.

古文：九年春，袭破其城，执王母，夺金印，分兵守之而去。
现代文：又过了一年，写亦虎仙被减免死罪，他便攀附钱宁，和他女婿一起得以服侍在皇帝的左右。
English: A year later, when the death penalty was commuted for Pu Yihu Xian, he attached himself to Qian Ning, and together with his son-in-law, they were able to serve at the emperor's side.

古文：朝廷命李文等经略，无功而还。
现代文：皇帝喜欢他们，赐给他们国姓，授予他们锦衣指挥的官衔，让他们侍候皇帝南征。
English: The emperor liked them, gave them the surname of the country, granted them the official title of the commander of the brocade, and let them wait for the emperor to go to the south.

古文：阿力修贡如故，一岁中，使来者三，朝廷仍善待之，未尝一语严诘。贡使益傲，求驯象。兵部言象以备仪卫，礼有进献，无求索，乃却其请。
现代文：满速儿自侵犯边关以后，屡次请求向朝廷通贡，朝廷不答应。十五年，满速儿将先前所劫掠去的将领和士兵以及忠顺王的家属全部归还过来，并且又请求向朝廷献贡。
English: After encroaching on the frontier, Mansuo repeatedly requested the imperial court to pay tribute, but the imperial court did not agree. In 15 years, Mansuo returned all the generals and soldiers and the family members of King Zhongshun that he had previously plundered, and also requested to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：使臣复言已得哈密城池及瓦剌奄檀王人马一万，又收捕曲先并亦思渴头目倒刺火只，乞朝廷遣使通道，往来和好。
现代文：朝廷大臣讨论后决定答应他的请求，而忠顺王最终没有还回来。巡按御史潘仿极力上奏说不应答应满速儿的请求，而皇帝不听。
English: After discussion, the ministers of the Imperial Court decided to grant his request, but King Tadatsune ultimately did not return. The inspector-general, Spen, tried his best to say that Mansei's request should not be granted, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：帝曰： 迤西道无阻，不须遣官。阿力果诚心修贡，朝廷不计前愆，仍以礼待。 
现代文：第二年，世宗接皇帝位，杨廷和认为写亦虎仙熟悉中国的实情，放他回去必然成为边境的大患，便在正德皇帝的遗诏中书数了他的罪行。
English: The following year, when King Sejong ascended to the throne, Yang Tinghe thought that the writer was familiar with the reality of China and that letting him go back would inevitably become a big problem at the border, so he listed his crimes in the last will and testament of the Zhengde Emperor.

古文：使臣复言赤斤诸卫素与有仇，乞遣将士护行，且谓阿力虽得哈密，止以物产充贡，愿质使臣家属于边，赐敕归谕其王，献还城印。
现代文：世宗皇帝便将写亦虎仙和他的儿子、女婿一起诛杀了，并起用陈九畴担任甘肃巡抚。此时满速儿连年来向朝廷献贡，朝廷仍像以前那样礼待他们，亦不过问忠顺王的事。嘉靖三年秋天，满速儿率二万骑兵包围肃州，又分兵侵犯甘州。
English: Emperor Sejong then killed the emperor and his son and son-in-law together, and appointed Chen Juzang as the inspector of Gansu. At this time, Mansuo had been paying tribute to the imperial court for years. The imperial court still treated them with the same courtesy as before, and did not ask about the loyal Shun Wang. In the autumn of the third year of Jiajing, Mansuo led 20,000 cavalry to surround Suizhou, and a detachment of soldiers invaded Gansu.

古文：帝从其护行之请，而赐敕谕阿力献王母及城印，即和好如初。
现代文：陈九畴和总兵官姜等人经过力战打败了入侵的贼人，斩杀了他只丁，贼人才退走。
English: Chen Juzhong and the general officer Jiang and others defeated the invading thief after a hard-fought battle, killed him only Ding, and the thief retreated.

古文：使臣还，复遣他使再入贡，而不还哈密。十二年八月，甘州守臣言，番使谓王母已死，城印俱存，俟朝廷往谕即献还。
现代文：此事上报到朝廷时，皇帝命令兵部尚书金献民率兵西征，到达兰州时，因贼人已经退走很久了，便带兵回到京城。
English: When this matter was reported to the imperial court, the emperor ordered the military department Shang Shujin to lead the soldiers to the west. When they arrived in Lanzhou, because the thieves had already retreated for a long time, they took the soldiers back to Beijing.

古文：帝已却其贡使，复俾入京。
现代文：陈九畴借机极力陈说贼人不能招抚，请求朝廷封闭关隘，断绝通贡，一心巩固边防，皇帝同意。
English: Chen Juzhen took the opportunity to strongly argue that the thieves could not be appeased, and asked the court to close the pass, cut off the tribute, and concentrate on consolidating the border defense. The emperor agreed.

古文：时大臣专务姑息，致遐方小丑无顾忌。
现代文：第二年秋天，贼人又侵犯肃州，分兵将参将云冒包围起来，以大队兵力进抵南山。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the bandits invaded Suizhou again. A detachment of soldiers encircled Shengjing Yunchang and marched to Nanshan with a large force.

古文：十四年，阿力死，其子阿黑麻嗣为速檀，遣使来贡。
现代文：此时陈九畴已经解职，其他的将领率援兵赶来，贼人才开始逃走。
English: At this time, Chen Juzhen had been relieved of his duties, other generals and reinforcements arrived, and the thieves began to flee.

古文：十八年，哈密都督罕慎潜师捣哈密，克之。
现代文：当此之时，番人屡次侵犯边关城市，有关官员没有能力振奋国威，替边疆报仇雪耻，有几个新上任的官员反而借此构怨积愤。于是，封疆的大狱由此而兴。
English: At this time, the guards repeatedly invaded the border cities, and the relevant officials were unable to boost the national prestige and avenge the borderlands. Instead, several newly appointed officials took advantage of this to build up resentment. As a result, the hell of sealing the borderlands arose.

古文：贼将牙兰遁走。
现代文：百户王邦奇，对杨廷和、彭泽素有仇恨，便于六年春上书说： 现今哈密国已经丧失，番贼侵略到内地，都是因为彭泽贿赂番人以求和和杨廷和治写亦虎仙的罪并杀死他而造成的。将此二人诛杀掉，哈密国就可得到兴复，边境地区就会安宁无事。 
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Banqi, the hundred-household king, who had always had a hatred for Yang Ting and Peng Ze, wrote: Today, Hami State has been lost, and the invaders invaded the mainland, all because Peng Ze bribed the watchman to seek peace and the crime of Yang Ting and Ji Zhishi and Tiger Immortal and killed him. If these two people are killed, Hami State can be restored, and the border area will be peaceful.

古文：阿黑麻颇惧。朝议罕慎有功，将立为王。阿黑麻闻之，怒曰： 罕慎非忠顺族，安得立！ 
现代文：桂萼、张璁等也想借此事大兴牢狱，便把杨廷和、彭泽贬斥为平民，把他们自己的子弟、亲戚、党徒安排做狱官，致使有些人自杀身亡。
English: Gui Caly, Zhang Xuan and others also wanted to take advantage of this to make the prison more prosperous, so they denounced Yang Tinghe and Peng Ze as commoners and arranged their own children, relatives and party members to be prison officers, causing some of them to commit suicide.

古文：乃伪与结婚。
现代文：他们又派给事和锦衣官前去哈密巡按。
English: They also sent an official in formal attire and brocade to inspect Hami.

古文：弘治元年躬至哈密城下，诱罕慎盟，执杀之，复据其城，而遣使入贡；称与罕慎缔姻，乞赐蟒服及九龙浑金膝襕诸物。
现代文：番族首领牙兰说并不是想得罪明朝廷，之所以侵犯边境，是由于朝廷冤枉杀死写亦虎仙和失拜烟答两个人的缘故。
English: The leader of the Bang ethnic group, Jalan, said that he did not want to offend the Ming court, and the reason for the border violation was that the court had unjustly killed two people, Shibei Tiger Immortal and Shubai Yanzhao.

古文：使至甘州，而罕慎之变已闻，朝廷亦不罪，但令还谕其主，归我侵地。
现代文：现在愿意将哈密城的官印交还出来以赎前番侵犯边境之罪。此事皇帝交给兵部处理，尚书王时中等人说 ：番族首领请求向朝廷献贡已有四次之多，先前已经交给总制尚书王宪处理，王宪让其贡使回去转达朝廷的谴责之意。
English: Now he is willing to return the official seal of Hamicheng to atone for the crime of encroaching on the border by the previous vassal. The emperor handed the matter over to the military department to deal with, and the king of Shangshu said: The leader of the vassal clan has requested to pay tribute to the imperial court as many as four times. Previously, it had been handed over to the general system of Shangshu Wang Xian to deal with, and Wang Xian had his tributary return to convey the condemnation of the imperial court.

古文：番贼知中国易与，不奉命，复遣使来贡。
现代文：现在牙兰的请求应当不会是虚妄的。考虑到这些话是从牙兰嘴里出来的，大概不是想真正向朝廷献贡，而是欺骗我们以求得和平。
English: Now, the request of Aylan should not be false. Considering that these words came out of Aylan's mouth, he probably did not really want to pay tribute to the imperial court, but to deceive us in order to obtain peace.

古文：礼官议薄其赏，拘使臣，番贼稍惧。三年春，偕撒马儿罕贡狮子，愿献还城印，朝廷亦还其使臣。
现代文：如果他果真有悔罪之意，一定会先将哈密城的印和所掳掠的人畜交还回来，把首恶分子戴上枷锁送过来，然后在嘉峪关门口向朝廷大臣稽首，才能答应他们的请求。 
English: If he really wanted to repent, he would first return the seal of Hami City and the plundered people and animals, put the ringleaders in shackles, and then present his head to the imperial minister at the gate of Jiayuguan to grant their request.

古文：礼官请却勿纳，帝不从。
现代文：皇帝采纳了这个建议。
English: The emperor accepted the suggestion.

古文：及使还，命内官张芾护行，谕内阁草敕。
现代文：桂萼因前次的大狱没有兴成，想重兴大狱，便请求朝廷留下牙兰的人质，再派遣译者去谕告牙兰，让他归还所侵之地。
English: Since the previous Great Terror did not succeed, Katsura, wanting to revive the Great Terror, asked the imperial court to leave Gawain as a hostage, and then sent an interpreter to tell Gawain to return the invaded land.

古文：阁臣刘吉等言： 阿黑麻背负天恩，杀我所立罕慎，宜遣大将直捣巢穴，灭其种类，始足雪中国之愤。
现代文：同时，桂萼等人又与礼部、兵部的尚书方献夫、王时中等人协商，向皇帝呈上带有挑拨性的言词，说番族人向朝廷上书已有四辈，他们都将罪责推诿在前任官员身上，虽然他们的言语多是诋毁矫饰之词，但事出亦必有原因。
English: At the same time, Gui Cale and others also negotiated with Shang Shufang Xianfu and Wang Shizhong from the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Military Affairs, and presented the emperor with provocative words, saying that there had been four generations of Banshu people who had written to the court, and they all blamed the former officials. Although their words were mostly slanderous and pretentious, there must be a reason for the incident.

古文：或不即讨，亦当如古帝王封玉门关，绝其贡使，犹不失大体。今宠其使臣，厚加优待，又遣中使伴送，此何理哉！
现代文：朝廷应派官员对前任官员有无激变番族人之事严加核查，以使番族人心服，至于其他方面可按上次的提议办。
English: The imperial court should send officials to strictly verify whether the former officials have radical changes in the people of the guard, so that the people of the guard can be convinced, and as for other aspects, it can be done according to the previous proposal.

古文：陛下事遵成宪，乃无故召番人入大内看戏狮子，大赉御品，夸耀而出。
现代文：陈九畴当初向朝廷报捷时，声称满速儿、牙兰二人都已死在炮石之下，而实际上二人并未死。
English: At first, Chen Jiuquan reported to the imperial court that Mansuo'er and Yalan had both died under the artillery stones, but in fact, the two did not die.

古文：都下闻之，咸为骇叹，谓祖宗以来，从无此事。奈何屈万乘之尊，为奇兽之玩，俾异言异服之人，杂遝清严之地。
现代文：皇帝本来对此就怀疑过陈九畴，现在看了桂萼等人的提议之后，更加怀疑边防大臣欺罔朝廷，于是手书诏书数百字，严厉责备陈九畴，想置他于死地，同时告诫首辅杨一清不要庇护陈九畴，于是派官将陈九畴逮捕起来。
English: The emperor had doubted Chen Jiuquan about this, but now, after reading the proposal of Gui Cale and others, he was even more suspicious that the Minister of Border Defense was cheating the imperial court, so he wrote several hundred words of a handwritten edict, severely rebuked Chen Jiuquan, wanted to put him to death, and at the same time warned Yang Iqing, the chief aide, not to shelter Chen Jiuquan, so he sent an officer to arrest Chen Jiuquan.

古文：况使臣满剌土儿即罕慎外舅，忘主事仇，逆天无道。而阿黑麻聚集人马，谋犯肃州，名虽奉贡，意实叵测。
现代文：尚书金献民、侍郎李昆以下的四十多人都因此受牵连。七年正月，陈九畴被逮到京城投入监狱，桂萼等人一定要杀他，并株连杨廷和和彭泽。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Chen Juzheng was arrested in Beijing and thrown into prison. Gui Caly and others were determined to kill him, along with Yang Tinghe and Peng Ze.

古文：兵部议羁其使臣，正合事宜。若不停张芾之行，彼使臣还国，阿黑麻必谓中土帝王可通情希宠，大臣谋国，天子不听，其奈我何。长番贼之志，损天朝之威，莫甚于此。 
现代文：刑部尚书胡世宁奋力挽救，皇帝稍有醒悟，免除了陈九畴的死罪，发配去守边疆，彭泽、金献民等人都被削夺了官职。这样一来，番族首领气焰更为嚣张、骄横，而桂萼又举荐王琼监督三边事务，将陈九畴所拘留的番族使者全部释放回去，并允许他们向朝廷通贡。番族首领却并不悔改自己的罪过，仍像以前一样侮辱和玩弄中国。这时因牙兰得罪了其主人，便率领自己的部下来归附朝廷，边防大臣接纳了他。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Shangshu Hu Shining, tried his best to save the situation, and the emperor had a bit of a wake-up call and pardoned Chen Jiuzhong from the death penalty and sent him to guard the border. Pengze, Jin Xianmin and others were stripped of their official positions. As a result, the leaders of the Qiang people became more arrogant and arrogant, and Gui Cai recommended Wang Qiong to supervise the trilateral affairs, release all the Qiang emissaries detained by Chen Jiuzhong, and allow them to pay tribute to the court. However, the leaders of the Qiang people did not repent of their

古文：疏入，帝止芾行，而问阁臣兴师、绝贡二事。吉等以时势未能，但请薄其赐赉。
现代文：满速儿为此很愤怒，其部下虎力纳咱儿勾引瓦剌的二千多骑兵侵犯肃州，到老鹳堡时，正好撒马儿罕的献贡使者在该堡中，贼人便呼叫该使者，与他讲话。
English: Manxiao was very angry about this, and his subordinates, Hulin, lured more than two thousand cavalrymen to invade Suzhou. When they arrived at the old fortress, Samarhan's tribute envoy happened to be in the castle, and the thieves called the envoy and spoke to him.

古文：因言饲狮日用二羊，十岁则七千二百羊矣，守狮日役校尉五十人，一岁则一万八千人矣。
现代文：游击彭浚急忙带兵袭击贼军。贼人声称自己是想问信通和的，彭浚不理，进兵战斗，打败了贼军。
English: The guerrilla Peng Jun hurriedly led his troops to attack the bandits. The bandits claimed that they wanted to ask for peace and communication, but Peng Jun ignored them, marched into battle, and defeated the bandits.

古文：若绝其餧养，听其自毙，传之千载，实为美谈。
现代文：贼人逃到赤斤，派人持番族文书前来求贡，并将罪过推诿到瓦剌头上，其言词颇多狂忤谩骂之句。
English: The thief fled to Chakkin, sent a man with a document of the Ban people to come to ask for tribute, and blamed the crime on the head of the tile, his words quite a lot of wild abuse.

古文：帝不能用。秋，又遣使从海道贡狮子，朝命却之，其使乃潜诣京师。礼官请治沿途有司罪，仍却其使，从之。
现代文：王琼抓住这个机会，一心想招抚他们，便上书给朝廷说番族人已经悔悟自己的罪过，应该原谅他们并赦免他们的罪行，以便我们停止战争使百姓得到休息，同时为彭浚和副使赵载请功。
English: Wang Qiong seized the opportunity and, with a single-minded desire to appease them, wrote a letter to the imperial court saying that the Qiang people had repented of their sins and should be forgiven and pardoned for their crimes, so that we could stop the war and give the people a rest, and at the same time ask for merit for Peng Jun and Vice-Envoy Zhao Zhaoxing.

古文：当是时，中外乂安，大臣马文升、耿裕辈，咸知国体，于贡使多所裁损，阿黑麻稍知中国有人。
现代文：他的这个奏章被皇帝转到兵部。当初，胡世宁救陈九畴时，就想放弃哈密，他说： 拜牙即长期居住在土鲁番，即使让他回到哈密，他也会臣属于土鲁番，而哈密的其他族人没有可继承王位的。
English: At the beginning, when Hu Shining rescued Chen Jiuzhong, he wanted to give up Hami, saying: Baiga has been living in Turpan for a long time, even if he is allowed to return to Hami, he will be a subject of Turpan, and other members of Hami cannot inherit the throne.

古文：四年秋，遣使再贡狮子，愿还金印，及所据十一城。
现代文：回回族早已归顺土鲁番，哈剌灰和畏兀儿二个族逃到肃州依附朝廷已很久，不能将他们赶到关外去。这样一来哈密怎么能够兴复呢？
English: The Hui people had already surrendered to Turfan in Shun Province, and the two tribes of the Hao Hui and the Dui Hui had fled to Suizhou to cling to the imperial court for a long time. It was impossible to drive them out of Guan. So how could Hami be revived?

古文：边臣以闻，许之，果以城印来归。
现代文：纵然寻找到忠顺王的嫡系亲属，将金印交给他，给他提供军粮，谁来替他守卫？
English: Even if we find the legitimate relatives of King Zhongshun, hand over the gold seal to him, and provide him with military rations, who will guard him?

古文：明年封陕巴为忠顺王，纳之哈密，厚赐阿黑麻使臣，先所拘者尽释还。
现代文：不到一二年，又会被土鲁番夺走，使土鲁番更加富强，辱没我们朝廷的成命，使土鲁番再得哈密城的大印，成为日后要挟朝廷之地。
English: In less than a year or two, it would be taken away by Turfan, making Turfan richer and stronger, humiliating our imperial court, and making Turfan once again obtain the Great Seal of Hamei City, becoming a place to threaten the imperial court in the future.

古文：六年春，其前使二十七人还，未出境，后使三十九人犹在京师，阿黑麻复袭陷哈密，执陕巴以去。
现代文：请求皇上圣明深思熟虑，像先朝皇帝处理交问题一样，不去过问哈密的事务。如果他们不侵扰边关，就答应与他们通贡。否则就封闭关隘，断绝与他们的往来，不让外部的番国来拖累中国。 
English: Ask the Emperor Shengming to be thoughtful and not to inquire about Hami's affairs as the previous emperor did in dealing with diplomatic issues. If they do not invade the border, he will agree to pay tribute to them. Otherwise, he will close the border and cut off contacts with them, and not let the outside countries drag China down.

古文：帝命侍郎张海等经略，优待其使，俾得进见。礼官耿裕等谏曰： 朝廷驭外番，宜惜大体。番使自去年入都，久不宣召，今春三月以来，宣召至再，且赐币帛羊酒，正当谩书投入之时，小人何知，将谓朝廷恩礼视昔有加，乃畏我而然。
现代文：詹事霍韬则竭力辩驳胡世宁之言不对。现在，胡世宁改为掌管兵部事务，便上疏说： 番族首领狡诈多端，想夺取我们的肃州，在内地逐渐安插了一些奸细。一旦被发觉后，他们大多施行反间计，扳倒朝廷所派的边关大臣。
English: Zhan Zhihuo tried his best to refute Hu Shining's words. Now that Hu Shining was in charge of the military affairs, he said: The leaders of the Qiang people were cunning and devious. They wanted to seize our Suzhou and gradually planted some spies in the inland. Once they were discovered, most of them carried out countermeasures and overthrew the frontier minister sent by the court.

古文：事干国体，不可不慎。况此贼倔强无礼，久蓄不庭之心。
现代文：假如我们答应让他们进京朝贡，其使臣刚刚进关，贼兵亦已到达，河西地区几度陷于危急之中。
English: If we had agreed to let them pay tribute to the imperial court in Beijing, their envoys would have just entered the pass, the robber soldiers would have already arrived, and the Hexi region would have been in danger several times.

古文：所遣使臣，必其亲信腹心，乃令出入禁掖，略无防闲。
现代文：在此情况下，是闭关还是通贡，两者相比较孰利孰害是很明白的。
English: In this case, it is very clear whether it is the closure or the tribute, and the comparison between the two is beneficial and harmful.

古文：万一奸宄窥伺，潜逞逆谋，虽悔何及。今其使写亦满速儿等宴赉已竣，犹不肯行，曰恐朝廷复宣召。
现代文：现今王琼等人既然说贼人已逼近我们的城堡，绑架我们的士兵，声称贼人要大举进攻，这恐怕是威吓朝廷，另一方面又说贼人慑于朝廷的威力正在悔罪，应仍答应与他们通贡，他们的言词是多么自相矛盾。
English: Now, since Wang Qiong and others say that the thieves have approached our castle, kidnapped our soldiers, and claimed that the thieves want to attack in a big way, this is probably to intimidate the court. On the other hand, they say that the thieves are repenting of the power of the court and should still agree to pay tribute to them. How contradictory their words are.

古文：夫不宝远物，则远人格。
现代文：霍韬又对贼人没有盖印信的番文产生怀疑，而依我看即使贼人的番文盖有印信，亦不足为凭。
English: He also doubted that the thief did not seal the letter, and in my opinion, even if the thief's letter was stamped with a seal, it would not be enough proof.

古文：狮本野兽，不足为奇，何至上烦銮舆，屡加临视，致荒徼小丑，得觐圣颜，藉为口实。 
现代文：只要不堕入他们的圈套，使他们无法达到离间我们忠臣之间的关系，废弛我们边疆地区防卫的目的，就可以了。牙兰本是我们朝廷所属的番臣，被土鲁番人掳掠而去，现今束身前来归附，其事属于反正，应马上安抚并任用他。招抚对他们携有二心的人，会使我们的藩篱屏障更为坚固。
English: As long as we don't fall into their traps, so that they can't achieve the goal of splitting the relationship between our loyal subjects and weakening the defense of our border areas, it's fine. Aslan was a vassal belonging to our court, who was abducted by the Turubans, and now he has come to attach himself, it's all right. We should immediately appease and appoint him. Appeasing those who have a double heart will make our barrier stronger.

古文：疏入，帝即遣还。
现代文：至于是否去兴复哈密，我们认为不用我们中国着急。
English: As for whether to reinstate Hami, we don't think China needs to worry.

古文：张海等抵甘肃，遵朝议，却其贡物，羁前后使臣一百七十二人于边，闭嘉峪关，永绝贡道。
现代文：哈密国已是三立三灭，现在其王也已被贼人所利用，百姓也全部流亡了。假如在哈密另立其他族为王，则他们强大时便会入侵中国，而弱小时则会服从贼人，难保他们不做侵叛之臣。
English: The state of Hami has already been established and destroyed three times, and now its king has also been used by thieves, and all the people have fled into exile. If other tribes were to be established as kings in Hami, they would invade China when they were strong, and when they were weak, they would obey the thieves. It is difficult to guarantee that they would not be rebellious vassals.

古文：而巡抚许进等，又潜兵直捣哈密，走牙兰，阿黑麻渐惧。
现代文：所以我认为兴复哈密对中国无益，只会给番族首领向朝廷要挟提供便利。
English: Therefore, I believe that the reinstatement of Hami is of no benefit to China, and will only make it easier for the chiefs of the Fan nationality to blackmail the imperial court.

古文：其邻邦不获贡，胥怨阿黑麻。十年冬，送还陕巴，款关求贡，廷议许之。十二年，其使再求，命前使安置广东者悉释还。
现代文：故请求皇上给王琼赐盖有玉玺的文书，让他会同甘肃的守卫大臣，把番国使者遣送回去，让其使者告诉满速儿，诘问他为何入侵中国。
English: Therefore, he asked the emperor to give Wang Qiong a document stamped with a jade scepter, so that he, together with the Minister of Defense of Gansu, could send back the envoy to protect the country, so that his envoy could tell Mansaur and ask him why he invaded China.

古文：十七年，阿黑麻死，诸子争立，相仇杀。
现代文：假如他推诿说自己不知此事，则让他把虎力纳咱儿戴上枷锁解送到中国来。
English: If he prevaricates and says he doesn't know, then let him put the tiger in chains and send him to China.

古文：已而长子满速儿嗣为速檀，修贡如故。
现代文：如果这次入侵是出自瓦剌，则让他把瓦剌绑缚起来替自己赎罪。否则就拘留他们的使臣，发兵征讨他们。
English: If this invasion is from the corvids, then let him bind the corvids to atone for his sin, otherwise detain their envoys and send an army to collect them.

古文：明年，忠顺王陕巴卒，子拜牙即袭，昏愚失道，国内益乱。而满速儿桀点变诈逾于父，复有吞哈密之志。
现代文：只有威力和信用二者并行，贼人才会知道收敛自己。同时再敕令王琼要为国家尽忠尽谋，力求好的善后计划，以通番纳贡为临时之计，充实粮库加强保卫为长久之策，这就是边疆地区的大幸了。 
English: Only when power and trust go hand in hand can the thieves know how to restrain themselves. At the same time, Wang Qiong was ordered to be loyal to the country, strive for a good aftercare plan, use the general tribute as a temporary measure, and enrich the granary and strengthen the defense as a long-term strategy. This is the great fortune of the frontier area.

古文：正德四年，其弟真帖木儿在甘州，贡使乞放还。
现代文：该疏章递到皇帝手上时，皇帝深以为然，命令王琼深思熟虑周详地处理问题，不可轻信番人之言。
English: When the imperial edict was handed over to the emperor, the emperor was deeply convinced and ordered Wang Qiong to deal with the problem in a thoughtful and thorough manner. The guard's words should not be trusted.

古文：朝议不许，乃以甘州守臣奏送还。
现代文：到第二年，甘肃巡抚唐泽也认为哈密无法轻易地兴复，请求朝廷一心考虑自治之策。
English: By the following year, Tang Ze, the governor of Gansu Province, also believed that Hami could not be easily restored, and asked the imperial court to consider the policy of autonomy.

古文：还即以边情告其兄，共谋为逆。
现代文：王琼对他的提议称善，将他的提议上报给皇帝，皇帝认为可行。
English: Wang Qiong praised his proposal and reported it to the emperor. The emperor thought it was feasible.

古文：九年诱拜牙即叛，复据哈密。
现代文：从此朝廷便不再过问哈密的兴复之事，答应土鲁番的通贡请求，这样西部边疆地区的百姓便免除了劳役之苦。
English: From then on, the imperial court no longer asked about Hami's recovery, and agreed to Turupan's request for tribute, so that the people in the western frontier region were spared the hardships of labor.

古文：朝廷遣彭泽经略，赎还城印。
现代文：后来哈密被失拜烟答充当米儿的儿子马黑木所占有，臣属于土鲁番。
English: Later, Hami was occupied by Ma Hegi, the son of Ma Er, who was the son of Ma Er, and belonged to Turuban.

古文：其部下他只丁复据之，且导满速儿犯肃州。自是，哈密不可复得，而患且中于甘肃。
现代文：朝廷对哈密还是让他们每年献一次贡品，与对待诸番国的做法有异，到隆庆、万历皇帝当政时，哈密还向朝廷不绝地进贡，只不过统治哈密的已不是忠顺王的后代了。
English: The imperial court still had them pay tribute to Hami once a year, which was different from the way they treated other countries. When the Longqing and Wanli emperors were in power, Hami continued to pay tribute to the imperial court. However, the ruler of Hami was no longer a descendant of King Zhongshun.

