古文：五年春正月，甲戌，己丑，陈侯鲍卒。
现代文：五年春正月，甲戌这天、己丑这天，陈桓公鲍去世。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, on the day of Armor, on the day of Self-loathing, Chen Kuan Bao passed away.

古文：夏，齐侯、郑伯如纪。
现代文：夏季，齐侯、郑伯到纪国去。
English: In the summer, Qi Hou and Zheng Bo went to Ji Guo.

古文：天王使仍叔之子来聘。
现代文：周天王派仍叔的儿子来鲁国访问。
English: Zhou Tianwang sent his uncle's son to visit Lu.

古文：葬陈桓公。
现代文：安葬陈桓公。
English: The funeral of Chen Kan is over.

古文：城祝丘。
现代文：在祝丘这个地方筑城。
English: They built a city in this part of Zhuqiu.

古文：秋，蔡人、卫人、陈人从王伐郑。
现代文：秋季，蔡国人、卫国人、陈国人跟随周桓王讨伐郑国。
English: In the autumn, the Cai people, the Wei people, and the Chen people followed the King of Zhou to invade Zheng.

古文：大雩。
现代文：举行了大规模秋雨祭祀。
English: The festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：螽。
现代文：发生了蝗灾。
English: There was a plague of locusts.

古文：冬，州公如曹。
现代文：冬季，州国国君到曹国去。
English: In winter, the prince of the state went to Cao.

古文：五年春正月，甲戌，己丑，陈侯鲍卒，再赴也。
现代文：五年春季，正月，去年十二月二十一日，今年正月初六，陈侯鲍逝世。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the first month, December 21 of last year, and the sixth day of this year, Chen Hou Bao passed away.

古文：于是陈乱，文公子佗杀大子免而代之。
现代文：《春秋》所以记载两个日子，是由于发了两次讣告而日期不同。当时陈国发生动乱，文公的儿子佗杀了太子免而取代他。
English: "Spring and Autumn" therefore records two days, the dates are different due to the fact that two obituaries were issued. At that time, there was turmoil in Chen Guo, and the son of Wengong killed the prince and replaced him.

古文：公疾病而乱作，国人分散，故再赴。
现代文：陈侯病危的时候动乱发生，国内臣民纷纷离散，因此发了两次讣告
English: When Chen Hou was critically ill, there was turmoil and the domestic subjects scattered one after another, so two obituaries were issued

古文：夏，齐侯、郑伯朝于纪，欲以袭之。
现代文：夏季，齐僖公、郑庄公去纪国访问，想要乘机袭击纪国。
English: In the summer, Prince Qizong and Prince Zhengzhuang visited Ji Province and wanted to take the opportunity to attack Ji Province.

古文：纪人知之。
现代文：纪国人发觉了。
English: Historians have discovered it.

古文：王夺郑伯政，郑伯不朝。
现代文：周桓王夺去了郑庄公的政权，郑庄公不再朝觐。
English: King Zhou Huan took away Zheng Zhuang Gong's political power, and Zheng Zhuang Gong no longer held the imperial court.

古文：秋，王以诸侯伐郑，郑伯御之。
现代文：秋季，周桓王带领诸侯讨伐郑国，郑庄公出兵抵御。
English: In the autumn, King Zhou Kuan led the princes to attack Zheng, and Zheng Zhuang sent troops to resist.

古文：王为中军；虢公林父将右军，蔡人、卫人属焉；周公黑肩将左军，陈人属焉。
现代文：周桓王率领中军；虢公林父率领右军，蔡军、卫军隶属于右军；周公黑肩率左军，陈军隶属于左军。
English: Zhou Kuan Wang led the Central Army; Zou Gonglin's father led the Right Army; Cai Jun and Wei Jun belonged to the Right Army; Zhou Gonghe led the Left Army; Chen Jun belonged to the Left Army.

古文：郑子元请为左拒以当蔡人、卫人，为右拒以当陈人，曰： 陈乱，民莫有斗心，若先犯之，必奔。
现代文：郑国的子元建议用左方阵来对付蔡军和卫军，用右方阵来对付陈军，说： 陈国动乱，百姓都缺乏战斗意志，如果先攻击陈军，他们必定奔逃。
English: Zheng Guo's son Yuan suggested using the left phalanx to deal with Cai Jun and Wei Jun, and the right phalanx to deal with Chen Jun, saying: Chen Guo is in turmoil, the people lack the will to fight, if they attack Chen Jun first, they will certainly run away.

古文：王卒顾之，必乱。
现代文：周天子的军队看到这种情形，又一定会发生混乱。
English: When Zhou Tianzi's army saw this situation, there was bound to be chaos.

古文：蔡、卫不枝，固将先奔。
现代文：蔡国和卫国的军队支撑不住，也一定会争先奔逃。
English: The army of Cai Guo and Wei Guo cannot be supported, and they will certainly try to escape first.

古文：既而萃于王卒，可以集事。 
现代文：这时我们可集中兵力对付周天子的中军，我们就可以获得成功。 
English: At this time, we can concentrate our forces to deal with Zhou Tianzi's Chinese army, and we can achieve success.

古文：从之。
现代文：郑庄公听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：曼伯为右拒，祭仲足为左拒，原繁、高渠弥以中军奉公，为鱼丽之陈，先偏后伍，伍承弥缝。
现代文：曼伯担任右方阵的指挥，祭仲足担任左方阵的指挥，原繁、高渠弥带领中军护卫郑庄公，摆开了叫做鱼丽的阵势，前有偏，后有伍，伍弥补偏的空隙。
English: Manbo served as the commander of the right phalanx, Saizhongfei served as the commander of the left phalanx, and the Chinese escort Zheng Zhuang, led by Yuan Shiang and Gao Quya, opened the so-called "fishy" position. There was a gap in front, a gap behind, and a gap to make up for the gap.

古文：战于葛，命二拒曰： 旝动而鼓。 
现代文：在繻葛双方交战。郑庄公命令左右两边方阵说： 大旗一挥，就击鼓进军。 
English: Zheng Zhuang ordered the phalanxes on both sides to march forward, saying, "As soon as the flag is waved, march forward to the beat of drums."

古文：蔡、卫、陈皆奔，王卒乱。
现代文：郑国的军队发起进攻，蔡、卫、陈军一起奔逃，周军因此混乱。
English: Zheng's army launched an attack, Cai, Wei, and Chen fled together, leaving Zhou's army in disarray.

古文：郑师合以攻之，王卒大败。
现代文：郑国的军队从两边合拢来进攻，周军终于大败。
English: Zheng's army closed in from both sides to attack, and Zhou's army was finally defeated.

古文：祝聃射王中肩，王亦能军。
现代文：祝聃射中周桓王的肩膀，桓王还能指挥军队。
English: I wish to shoot King Kan in the shoulder, so that he can command the army.

古文：祝聃请从之。
现代文：祝聃请求前去追赶。
English: Zhu Yao asked him to go and catch up.

古文：公曰： 君子不欲多上人，况敢陵天子乎！
现代文：郑庄公说： 君子不希望欺人太甚，哪里敢欺凌天子呢？
English: Zheng Zhuanggong said: A gentleman does not want to bully people too much. How dare he bully the Son of Heaven?

古文：苟自救也，社稷无陨，多矣。 
现代文：只要能挽救自己，国家免于危亡，这就足够了。 
English: As long as they can save themselves and the country from peril, that's enough.

古文：夜，郑伯使祭足劳王，且问左右。
现代文：夜间，郑庄公派遣祭仲足去慰问周桓王，同时也问候他的左右随从。
English: In the evening, Zhengzhuang sent Saizhongfei to offer condolences to King Zhou, and also to greet his left and right attendants.

古文：仍叔之子来聘，弱也。
现代文：仍叔的儿子前来聘问。
English: His uncle's son came to ask him for a job.

古文：秋，大雩，书不时也。
现代文：《春秋》所以记为 仍叔之子 而不记他的名字，是由于他年轻。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," he is referred to as the son of Uncle Yang, but his name is not recorded because he was young.

古文：凡祀，启蛰而郊，龙见而雩，始杀而尝，闭蛰而烝。
现代文：秋季，为求雨而举行大的祭祀。《春秋》记载这件事，是由于这不是按时的祭祀。凡是祭祀，昆虫惊动举行郊祭，苍龙角亢二宿出现举行雩祭，秋天寒气降临举行尝祭，昆虫蛰伏举行烝祭。
English: In autumn, a big sacrifice is held to pray for rain. "Spring and Autumn" records this event because it is not a timely sacrifice. In general, when there is a sacrifice, insects are alarmed and hold a suburb festival, in autumn, when the cold weather descends, a tasting festival is held, and in autumn, when the cold weather descends, an insect feast is held.

古文：过则书。冬，淳于公如曹，度其国危，遂不复。
现代文：如果过了规定的时间举行祭礼，就要记载。冬季，淳于公到曹国。自己估计他的国家将发生危难，因此没有再回国了。
English: If the festival is held after the specified time, it must be recorded. In winter, Junyukong went to Cao. He estimated that his country would be in danger, so he did not return home.

