古文：孟子曰： 伯夷，目不视恶色，耳不听恶声。
现代文：孟子说： 伯夷这个人，眼睛不看丑恶的景象，耳朵不听丑恶的声音。
English: Mencius said: Bo Yi is a person whose eyes do not see ugly sights, and whose ears do not hear ugly sounds.

古文：非其君不事，非其民不使。
现代文：不是他自己认可的君主，不侍奉；不是他认可的民众，不役使。
English: He does not serve a sovereign whom he does not recognize; he does not serve a people whom he does not recognize.

古文：治则进，乱则退。
现代文：国家有治就积极进取，国家混乱他就退避隐居。
English: When the country is governed, he is proactive, but when the country is in chaos, he retreats into seclusion.

古文：横政之所出，横民之所止，不忍居也。
现代文：横暴放纵的政事出现的地方，横暴放纵的民众居住的地方，他都不能忍受在那里居住。
English: He could not bear to live in a place with a tyrannical government or a tyrannical people.

古文：思与乡人处，如以朝衣朝冠坐于涂炭也。
现代文：想象着和乡下人相处，就象穿戴着上朝的衣帽坐在污泥炭灰之中一样。
English: Imagining getting along with the country folk is like sitting in the sludge and peat ash with a yakitori hat on.

古文：当纣之时，居北海之滨，以待天下之清也。
现代文：在商纣王的时候，他住在北海之滨，以等待天下能够清明。
English: When he was the king of merchants, he lived on the coast of the North Sea, waiting for the world to become clear.

古文：故闻伯夷之风者，顽夫廉，懦夫有立志。
现代文：所以，听到伯夷这种风范的，贪婪的人也会变得清廉，懦弱的人也会树立志向。
English: Therefore, when listening to this kind of etiquette, greedy people will also become incorruptible, and cowardly people will also set up aspirations.

古文：伊尹曰： 何事非君？
现代文：伊尹说： 为何侍奉不理想的君主呢？
English: Yi Yin said: Why serve a monarch who is not ideal?

古文：何使非民？ 
现代文：为何役使不信任的民众呢？ 
English: Why help a distrustful public?

古文：治亦进，乱亦进。曰： 天之生斯民也，使先知觉后知，使先觉觉后觉。
现代文：国家有治积极进取，国家混乱也积极进取，他又说： 上天生育这些民众，是要使先知的人帮助后知的人知道，使先觉的人帮助后觉的人觉悟。
English: He also said, "God gave birth to these people so that those who prophesy would help those who learn later to know, and those who think ahead would help those who think later to understand."

古文：予，天民之先觉者也；予将以此道觉此民也。 
现代文：我，就是上天降生的百姓中先觉悟的人，我要用这个尧、舜之道去帮助那些上天所生的民众。 
English: I, who am the first to be enlightened among the people born of heaven, will use this way to help the people born of heaven.

古文：思天下之民匹夫匹妇有不与被尧舜之泽者，若己推而内之沟中，其自任以天下之重也。
现代文：想那天下的百姓，天下百姓中有一个男人或一个女人没有得到尧舜之道恩泽的，就像是自己将他们推进沟中去一样。伊尹就是这样自愿把天下的重担挑在肩头的。
English: Thinking about the people of the world, if there is a man or a woman among the people of the world who has not received the grace of the Way of the Dragon, it is as if he has pushed them into the ditch. In this way, Yi Yin voluntarily took the burden of the world on his shoulders.

古文：柳下惠，不羞污君，不辞小官。进不隐贤，必以其道。遗佚而不怨，阨穷而不悯。
现代文：柳下惠并不觉得侍奉贪官污吏是耻辱，不会因官职小而觉得卑贱；进到朝廷不隐瞒自己的才干，一定根据自己的原则办事；被冷落遗忘而隐逸也不怨恨，处于困窘之境也不忧愁。
English: Liu Shimohui did not feel that it was a disgrace to serve corrupt officials, nor did she feel inferior because of the small official position; when she entered the imperial court, she did not hide her talents, but always acted according to her own principles; she did not resent being neglected and forgotten, nor did she feel sad when she was in a difficult situation.

古文：与乡人处，由由然不忍去也。 尔为尔，我为我，虽袒裼裸裎于我侧，尔焉能浼我哉？ 
现代文：与乡里的农民相处，很随便地而不忍心离开。所以他说： 你是你，我是我，即使有美女一丝不挂赤裸裸站在我身边，又怎么能迷惑沾染我呢？ 
English: So he said, "You are you, I am I. Even if there is a beautiful woman standing naked next to me, how can she seduce me?"

古文：故闻柳下惠之风者，鄙夫宽，薄夫敦。
现代文：所以听说柳下惠风范的人，狭隘的人变得宽容，刻薄的人变得厚道。
English: Therefore, people who have heard that Yanagishita is a benevolent person, narrow-minded people have become tolerant, and mean-spirited people have become kind.

古文：孔子之去齐，接淅而行；去鲁，曰： 迟迟吾行也。 去父母国之道也。
现代文：孔子离开齐国，把已浸在水中的米捞起来就走；离开鲁国，却说： 我们慢慢走吧，这是离开祖国的做法。 
English: When Confucius left Qi Province, he scooped up the rice that had been soaked in water and left. However, when he left Lu Province, he said, "Let's go slowly. This is the way to leave the motherland."

古文：可以速而速，可以久而久，可以处而处，可以仕而仕，孔子也。 
现代文：该快就快，该久就久，该闲处在家就闲处在家，该做官就做官。这就是孔子。 
English: The quick should be quick, the long should be long, the idle at home should be idle at home, the official should be official. This is Confucius.

古文：孟子曰： 伯夷，圣之清者也；伊尹，圣之任者也；柳下惠，圣之和者也；孔子，圣之时者也。
现代文：孟子说： 伯夷这个人，是圣贤中清高的人；伊尹这个人，是圣贤中有责任的人；柳下惠这个人，是圣贤中的随和的人；孔子这个人，是圣贤中能够因时而变的人。
English: Mencius said, "Bo Yi is a person who is clear and high among the sages; Yin is a person who is responsible among the sages; Liu Xie Hui is a person who is easy-going among the sages; Confucius is a person who can change with the times among the sages.

古文：孔子之谓集大成。
现代文：孔子可说是集大成了。
English: Confucius can be said to be the culmination.

古文：集大成也者，金声而玉振之也。
现代文：所谓集大成者，就好比演奏音乐时敲击金钟而玉磐也有振动一样。
English: The so-called great achievers are like striking a golden bell while playing music, and Tamanban also vibrates.

古文：金声也者，始条理也；玉振之也者，终条理也。
现代文：所谓的金声，是节奏旋律的开始；所谓玉振，是节奏旋律的终结。
English: The so-called golden sound is the beginning of the rhythmic melody; the so-called tambourine is the end of the rhythmic melody.

古文：始条理者，智之事也；终条理者，圣之事也。智，譬则巧也；圣，譬则力也。
现代文：所谓节奏旋律的开始，是智的体现；所谓节奏旋律的终结，是圣的体现。智，就好比技能；圣，就好比力量。
English: The beginning of the so-called rhythmic melody is the embodiment of wisdom; the end of the so-called rhythmic melody is the embodiment of holiness. Wisdom is like skill; holiness is like power.

古文：由射于百步之外也，其至，尔力也；其中，非尔力也。 
现代文：这就像射箭于百步之外，箭能到达，是你的力量；箭能射中，就不单靠力量了。 
English: It's like shooting an arrow from a hundred paces away. If the arrow can reach you, it's your strength; if the arrow can hit you, it's not just your strength.

