古文：曹操为汉鬼蜮，君子所不道。
现代文：曹操算是汉朝的阴险的叛逆者，是君子所不愿谈及的。
English: Cao Cao was the most insidious traitor of the Han Dynasty, which the gentleman did not want to talk about.

古文：然知人善任使，实后世之所难及。
现代文：但他了解并善于任用他人，实在是后代所难以赶得上的。
English: But he understands and is good at appointing others, which is really difficult for future generations to catch up with.

古文：荀彧、荀攸、郭嘉，皆腹心谋臣，共济大事，无待赞说。
现代文：荀彧、荀攸、郭嘉都是他的心腹谋士，共同成大事，不必称赞评说。
English: Zou, Zou You and Guo Jia are his confidants and advisers. They have jointly accomplished great things, and there is no need to praise or comment on them.

古文：其余智效一官，权分一郡，无小无在，卓然皆称其职。
现代文：至于其它的人，有智慧就授予官位的，有权变让他分管一个郡的，无论官职大小，都使他们卓然有成，十分称职。
English: As for the rest of them, whoever has the wisdom to give him a post and the power to put him in charge of a county, regardless of the size of the post, has made them outstandingly successful and highly competent.

古文：恐关中诸将为害，则属司隶校尉钏繇以西事，而马腾、韩遂遣子入侍。
现代文：曹操担心关中的将领们祸害关中，就让司隶校尉钟繇去主管西边的事务，结果马腾、韩遂派遣儿子到宫中侍候。
English: Cao Cao was worried that the generals of Guanzhong would wreak havoc on Guanzhong, so he sent Lieutenant Colonel Zhong Qi to be in charge of the affairs in the west. As a result, Ma Teng and Han Sui sent their sons to wait in the palace.

古文：当天下乱离，诸军乏食，则以枣祗、任峻建立屯田，而军国饶裕，遂芟群雄。
现代文：当时天下纷乱，军队缺乏粮食，就让枣祗、任峻屯田，结果国家富饶丰裕，于是消灭了群雄。
English: At that time, the country was in turmoil, and the army was short of food, so they let Zaozhuang and Renjun occupy the field. As a result, the country was rich and abundant, so the heroes were eliminated.

古文：欲复盐官之利，则使卫觊镇抚关中，而诸将服。
现代文：当想恢复盐务管理的利益时，就让卫觊镇守安抚关中，结果将领们都信服。
English: When he wanted to restore the benefits of salt management, he had the town of Weiqi guard the pacification gate. As a result, the generals were convinced.

古文：河东未定，以杜畿为太守，而卫固、范先束手禽戮。
现代文：河东没有平定，就派杜畿去当太守，使得卫固、范先束手被擒被杀。
English: When the eastern part of the river was not pacified, he sent Dugi to be the governor, and Wei Gu and Fan Xiancate were captured and killed.

古文：并州初平，以梁习为刺史，而边境肃清。
现代文：并州刚刚平定，就派梁习去当刺史，使得边境平静安泰。
English: And as soon as the state was pacified, he sent Liang Xi to act as a punisher, making the border calm and safe.

古文：杨州陷于孙权，独有九江一郡，付之刘馥而恩化大行。
现代文：扬州被孙权攻陷，只剩下九江一个郡，曹操把权力交给刘馥，结果恩德教化广泛实行。
English: Yangzhou was conquered by Sun Quan, leaving only one county in Jiujiang. Cao Cao handed over power to Liu Bei. As a result, the Enlightenment was widely implemented.

古文：冯翊困于鄜盗，付之郑浑而民安寇灭。
现代文：冯翊被鄜州盗寇所困，曹操就交给郑浑去办理，结果百姓安定盗寇消灭。
English: Feng Yu was trapped by the Zhangzhou bandits, and Cao Cao sent Zheng Hun to deal with the situation. As a result, the people were able to eliminate the bandits.

古文：代郡三单于恃力骄恣，裴潜单车之郡，而单于詟服。
现代文：代郡有匈奴三单于军队，依仗武力骄横恣肆，裴潜只乘一辆车进入代郡，使得单于心中折服。
English: On behalf of the county, there are three Xiongnu soldiers in the army, relying on force, arrogance and arbitrariness. Pei Qian only took one car to enter the county, which made the soldiers bow down in their hearts.

古文：方得汉中，命杜袭督留事，而百姓自乐，出徙于洛、邺都至八万口。
现代文：才得到汉中，就认命杜袭负责留守之事，结果百姓自得其乐，从洛阳、邺地迁来的人口达到八万。
English: As soon as he won the Han Middle Class, he accepted the task of being responsible for the people who stayed behind. As a result, the people enjoyed themselves, and the number of people who moved from Luoyang and Handi reached 80,000.

古文：方得马超之兵，闻当发徒，惊骇欲变，命赵俨为护军，而相率还降，致于东方者亦二万口。
现代文：刚刚得到马超的军队时，马超军队听说将把他们发配他地，都惊恐想要兵变，曹操命令赵俨为护军，结果马超军都互相带领回来归降，送到东方的人口也有两万。
English: When they had just received Ma Chao's army, Ma Chao's army heard that they would be sent to another place. They were all terrified and wanted to mutiny. Cao Cao ordered Zhao Wei to escort the army. As a result, Ma Chao's army all led each other back to surrender, and the population sent to the East was also twenty thousand.

古文：凡此十者，其为利岂不大哉！
现代文：以上十件事所产生的好处难道不大吗？
English: Aren't the benefits of the above ten things great?

古文：张辽走孙权于合服，郭淮拒蜀军于阳平，徐晃却关羽于樊，皆以少制众，分方面忧。
现代文：张辽在合肥打跑孙权，郭淮在阳平抵御蜀国军队，徐晃在樊城打关羽，都是以少胜多，解除了一方面的忧患。
English: Zhang Liao defeated Sun Quan in Hefei, Guo Huai resisted the Shu army in Yangping, and Xu Qiang defeated Guan Yu in Lucheng, all of which were won by a few, and relieved one side of the worries.

古文：操无敌于建安之时，非幸也。
现代文：曹操在建安时期天下无敌，不是侥幸的。
English: Cao Cao's invincibility during the period of building national security was not a fluke.

