古文：徐则，东海郯人也。
现代文：徐则，东海郯县人。
English: Xu Ze, a native of Handan County in the East China Sea.

古文：幼沈静，寡嗜欲。
现代文：小时候沉着稳重，没有不良的嗜好。
English: When I was a child, I was calm and steady, and had no bad hobbies.

古文：受业于周弘正，善三玄，精于议论，声擅都邑，则叹曰： 名者实之宾，吾其为宾乎！ 
现代文：跟从周弘正学习，喜欢《周易》、《老子》、《庄子》，擅长于议论，名声远播都城。徐则叹息说： 名声不过是实质的外表，我怎么能舍去本质而去追求外表呢？ 
English: He studied under Zhou Hongzheng, liked "Zhou Yi," "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi," was good at discussion, and his fame spread far and wide in the capital. Xu sighed and said: "Fame is nothing but the appearance of substance. How can I give up the essence and pursue the appearance?"

古文：遂怀栖隐之操，杖策入缙云山。
现代文：于是怀有栖隐山林的念头，拄着拐杖到缙云山中隐居。
English: Therefore, with the aspiration of living in the hidden mountain forest, he walked into the Qinyun Mountain with a cane.

古文：后学数百人，苦请教授，则谢而遣之。
现代文：后辈学子几百人，苦苦请求徐则教授，徐则推辞不干，而打发他们走。
English: Several hundred of the younger generation of students pleaded with Xu Zexu to teach them, but Xu Zexu refused to do so and sent them away.

古文：不娶妻，常服巾褐。
现代文：不娶妻，常穿着粗布衣巾。
English: He does not marry a wife, and often wears a headscarf and coarse cloth shorts.

古文：陈太建时，应召来憩于至真观。
现代文：陈太建年间，应召到至真观小憩。
English: During Chen Taijian's years, he was called to Zizhenguan for a short break.

古文：期月，又辞入天台山，因绝谷养性，所资唯松水而已，虽隆冬洹寒，不服绵絮。
现代文：过了一月，又辞观到天台上，绝食五谷以修身养性，每日所用不过松涧之水罢了。即使是隆冬季节天气寒冷，也不穿棉衣。
English: After a month, he left the monastery and went to the rooftop again. He went on a five-day hunger strike to improve his health. The only thing he uses every day is water from a pine tree. Even in the middle of winter, when the weather is cold, he doesn't wear a cotton coat.

古文：太傅徐陵为之刊山立颂。
现代文：太傅徐陵为徐则书写颂文并刻在山上。
English: Taifu Xuling carves the names of mountains and mountains for him.

古文：初在缙云山，太极真人徐君降之曰： 汝年出八十，当为王者师，然后得道也。 
现代文：他刚到缙云山时，太极真人徐君对徐则说： 你年过八十，会做帝王的老师，然后才能得道。 
English: Once upon a time, in Shanyun Mountain, the real-life Taijiquan master Xu Jun came to him and said, "You are over eighty years old, you should be the teacher of the king, and only then will you attain the Way.

古文：晋王广镇扬州，知其名，手书召之曰： 夫道得众妙，法体自然，包涵二仪，混成万物，人能弘道，道不虚行。
现代文：晋王杨广镇守扬州，知徐则之名，亲笔写信召徐则说： 道得源于万物的玄妙变化，法来源于大自然，包涵阴阳的变化，混然而成万物，人们能够弘扬道，道则存在于人们的言行之中。
English: Yang Guangzhen, the king of Jin, who guarded Yangzhou, knew the name of Xu Ze, and wrote a letter in his own hand to summon Xu Ze, saying: Tao originates from the mysterious changes of all things, law originates from nature, embraces the changes of yin and yang, and blends into all things, people can promote Tao, and Tao exists in people's words and deeds.

古文：先生履德养空，宗玄齐物，深明义味，晓达法门。
现代文：先生履行德教修身辟谷，以玄为本整齐万物，深明其趣味，通晓于法门。
English: The teacher performs moral education, cultivates oneself, clears the valley, and arranges all things based on the Unseen. He has a deep understanding of its taste and is well versed in the Dharma.

古文：悦性冲玄，怡神虚白，餐松饵术，栖息烟霞。望赤城而待风云，游玉堂而驾龙凤，虽复藏名台岳，犹且腾实江淮，藉甚嘉猷，有劳寤寐。
现代文：悦性怡神，从虚空玄妙的人体感应中体会道的玄妙，餐松食，在烟霞中栖息，望赤城以等待风起云升，游玉堂而驾龙凤之车，虽然在天台山隐居，名声却仍然远播于江淮之地。
English: Pleasant and pleasant spirit, from the emptiness of the mysterious human body to the sensibility of the mysterious Tao, eating loose food, roosting in the haze, looking at Akagi to wait for the wind to rise, touring the Jade Hall and driving the dragon and phoenix car, although he lives in seclusion on Mount Tiantai, his reputation is still spreading far and wide in the land of Jianghuai.

古文：钦承素道，久积虚襟，侧席幽人，梦想岩穴。
现代文：我想借重你的良谋，有劳你早晚辛苦。一向钦佩你的道术，长久地存于我胸臆，侧席以待隐居之人，作梦都想你。
English: Respect your Taoism, occupy my empty mind for a long time, and the dim-witted person on the side bench dreams of the cave where you live.

古文：霜风已冷，海气将寒，偃息茂林，道体休悆。
现代文：霜风变冷，海气即将变寒，隐居在茂林之中，精神与道体均吉庆安宁。
English: The frosty wind is already cold, the sea air will be frozen, still lying in the mountains and forests, do not forget to protect the body.

古文：昔商山四皓，轻举汉庭，淮南八公，来仪籓邸。
现代文：当初商山四位老隐士，举荐于汉庭，淮南八公，来藩王之宫朝仪，过去和现在虽有不同，山谷却没有变化。
English: Originally, the four old hermits of Shangshan were recommended to the Han court, and the eight kings of Huainan came to the palace of the king. Although there are differences between the past and the present, the valley has not changed.

古文：古今虽异，山谷不殊，市朝之隐，前贤已说，导凡述圣，非先生而谁！
现代文：隐居市井和朝廷，前贤已作出表率。导引凡人阐述圣理，除了先生还有谁呢？
English: Former sages have set an example by living in seclusion both in the city and in the court. Who else is there to guide ordinary people in expounding the sacred teachings but you, sir?

古文：故遣使人，往彼延请，想无劳束带，贲然来思，不待蒲轮，去彼空谷。
现代文：故特地遣使到山谷相请，想先生不辞劳苦，欣然而来，不再待在蒲轮上面，离开你隐居的山谷。
English: Therefore, I specially sent you to the valley to invite each other. I want you to work hard and come gladly, no longer stay on the crane, and leave the valley where you live in seclusion.

古文：希能屈己，伫望披云。 
现代文：望先生能委屈自己，我伫立等候你披云而来。 
English: Admire the virtuous committee itself, stand up and look forward to the light.

古文：则谓门人曰： 吾今年八十一，王来召我，徐君之旨，信而有徵。 
现代文：徐则对门人说： 我今年八十一岁，晋王来召我，徐君的话果然灵验。 
English: Xu then said to his disciple, "I am eighty-one years old this year, and the King of Jin has summoned me. Xu Jun's words have really worked.

古文：于是遂诣扬州。晋王将请受道法，则辞以时日不便。
现代文：于是到了扬州，晋王请徐则讲授道法，徐则以时日不便推辞。
English: So when they arrived in Yangzhou, Jin Wang asked Xu to give a lecture on Taoism, but Xu declined, saying it would take too much time.

古文：其后夕中，命侍者取香火，如平常朝礼之仪。至于五更而死，支体柔弱如生，停留数旬，颜色无变。
现代文：到了半夜，命侍者取来香火，好像平常朝圣的礼仪一样，到五更而死，而肢体柔软如同活着一样，停放了几十天，颜色没有变化。
English: In the middle of the night, the attendant fetched incense, as if it were the usual pilgrimage rite. At five o'clock, he died, but his limbs were as soft as if he were still alive. He was immobilized for dozens of days, and his color did not change.

古文：晋王下书曰： 天台真隐东海徐先生，虚确居宗，冲玄成德，齐物处外，检行安身。草褐蒲衣，餐松饵术，栖隐灵岳，五十余年。
现代文：晋王下书说： 天台山隐士东海徐先生，表里俱为人所敬仰，以谦和玄默为德，视万物于身外，约束以安身，着粗布蒲衣，餐松食，栖隐于天台山上，五十余年。
English: Jin Wang wrote: Mr. Donghai Xu, the Tiantai Mountain hermit, has been admired by people inside and out, with modesty and silence as his virtue, seeing everything outside the body, restraining himself with comfort, wearing coarse cloth clothes, eating sparingly, and dwelling on the Tiantai Mountain for more than 50 years.

古文：卓矣仙才，飘然胜气，千寻万顷，莫测其涯。
现代文：卓越的仙才啊，飘然腾气升天，千寻峻岭，万倾碧涛，都不能窥其踪迹。
English: An outstanding sage, soaring into the sky, with no trace of him to be found on any of the mountains, plains or rivers.

古文：寡人钦承道风，久餐德素，频遣使乎，远此延屈，冀得虔受上法，式建良缘。
现代文：寡人我景仰先生道家风度，久闻先生道德质朴，频频派遣使者，到远方请来先生，希望能虔诚地接受高深的道法，以结良缘。
English: I respectfully inherit his moral demeanor, suck his Taoism for a long time, frequently send messengers, and invite him from afar, hoping to piously accept the law and achieve a good marriage.

古文：至此甫尔，未淹旬日，厌尘羽化，反真灵府。
现代文：现在先生刚到这里，还不到十天，就厌弃尘世羽化升天，返朴归真于灵府。
English: Now, as soon as I arrived here, less than ten days ago, I renounced the earthly life and ascended to heaven, returning to the spiritual home.

古文：身体柔软，颜色不变，经方所谓尸解地仙者哉！
现代文：身体柔软，颜色不变，这是经方家所谓 尸解地仙 之术。
English: The body is soft and the color does not change, which is the so-called "necropsy of the earth nymph" of the sutras.

古文：诚复师礼未申，而心许有在，虽忘怛化，犹怆于怀，丧事所资，随须供给。
现代文：诚感延师的礼仪没有举行，而延师之心早在，即使忘掉忧愁，仍然怆然于怀。丧事所需费用，随时按需求供给。
English: The etiquette of sincerity Yan Shi did not take place, but Yan Shi's heart was still in mind as early as possible, even if he forgot his sorrow. The expenses required for the funeral will be provided at any time according to demand.

古文：霓裳羽盖，既且腾云，空椁余衣，讵藉坟垄！
现代文：霓裳羽盖，既然已经腾云而去，空棺连同余下的衣服，怎能葬在坟中。
English: How could the empty coffin be buried in the grave with the rest of the clothes, since the coffin lid had already flown away.

古文：但杖为犹存，示同俗法，宜遣使人，送还天台定葬。 
现代文：但拐杖和鞋子仍在，就按照俗法，应派遣使者送还天台山定葬。 
English: However, if the crutches and shoes are still there, according to the common law, an emissary should be sent to return them to Tiantai Mountain for burial.

古文：是时自江都至于天台，在道多见则徒步，云得放还。
现代文：当时从江都到天台山，沿道多看见徐则徒步行走，说得以放还。
English: At that time, from Jiangdu to Tiantai Mountain, Xu Zexu was mostly seen walking on foot along the road, saying that he could be released.

古文：至其旧居，取经书道法，分遗弟子，仍令净扫一房，曰： 若有客至，宜延之于此。 
现代文：到了旧居，徐则取出经书道法分送给弟子，仍叫打扫一间房子，说： 如有客来，宜把他们请到这里。 
English: When he arrived at his former residence, Xu took out the book of calligraphy and gave it to his disciple. He still asked him to clean one room, saying, "If there are guests, it is best to invite them here."

古文：然后跨石梁而去，不知所之。
现代文：然后跨过石梁，不知到什么地方去了。
English: Then he stepped over the stone beam and went I don't know where.

古文：须臾，尸柩至，方知其灵化。时年八十二。
现代文：过了一会儿，尸柩到了，弟子们才知道徐则已灵化，时年八十二岁。
English: After a while, the coffin arrived, and only then did the disciples know that Xu Zeng had become enlightened, at the age of eighty-two.

古文：晋王闻而益异之，赗物千段，遣画工图其状貌，令柳抃为之赞曰： 可道非道，常道无名。上德不德，至德无盈。
现代文：晋王听说这件事，更加惊奇，特赐锦缎千匹，派画工画出徐则的相貌，命柳巧言作讠赞说： 能用语言表达的道，不是永恒不变的道，永恒存在的道是无可名状的；上上之德不是凡俗的德，至上之德是没有界限的。
English: Hearing of this, King Jin was even more surprised. He specially gave thousands of brocade horses and dispatched painters to paint Xu Ze's face. He praised Xu Ze and said: The way that can be expressed in words is not the eternal and unchanging way, the way that exists forever is indescribable; the highest virtue is not an ordinary virtue, and the highest virtue has no boundaries.

古文：玄风扇矣，而有先生。
现代文：玄风扇起来，才有先生。
English: It is only when the fan is turned up that there is a sir.

古文：夙炼金液，怡神玉清。石髓方软，云丹欲成。
现代文：夙昔炼金液，怡神于天地之上，玉石刚软化，云丹又将炼成。
English: In the past, the gold-refining liquid, Yi Shen, was above heaven and earth. The jade was just softening, and the yuandao was about to be refined.

古文：言追葛稚，将侣茅嬴。
现代文：就去追慕葛洪，将与茅嬴为伴。
English: He will go to admire Ge Hong, and will be accompanied by Mao Yu.

古文：我王遥属，爰感灵诚。
现代文：我王遥嘱，乃感到先生的真诚。
English: I feel the sincerity of Mr. Wang's request from afar.

古文：柱下暂启，河上沉精。留符告信，化杖飞声。
现代文：柱下史暂启如上，河水沉静无声，留此符以告信，如化杖飞声腾龙。
English: The history under the pillar is temporarily opened as above, the river is quiet and silent, leaving this sign as a message, such as a cane flying dragon.

古文：永思灵迹，曷用摅情？
现代文：永远思念先生灵踪，向哪里发抒思念之情？
English: Always thinking of you, where can I send my thoughts?

古文：时披素绘，如临赤城。 
现代文：现在披上素绢之衣作吊，如同来到天台一样。 
English: Now, draped in a plain robe, he hangs from it as if he were on the rooftop.

古文：时有建安宋玉泉、会稽孔道茂、丹阳王远知等，亦行辟谷，以松水自给，皆为炀帝所重。
现代文：当时还有建安人宋玉泉、会稽人孔道茂、丹阳人王知远等，也行辟谷之术，以松涧之水自给，都受到炀帝的器重。
English: At that time, there were also Song Yuquan, a Jianan person, Kong Daomao, an auditor, and Wang Zhiyuan, a Danyang person, who also practiced the art of digging out valleys and self-supplied themselves with water from pine and reed, all of which were valued by Emperor Qian.

