古文：完颜元宜，本名阿列，一名移特辇，本姓耶律氏。
现代文：完颜元宜，原名阿列，另有一名叫移特辇，本姓耶律氏。
English: Yan Yuan Yuan Yi, whose original name was Alie, also had another name, Yittei, whose original surname was Yelu.

古文：父慎思，天辅七年，宗望追辽主至天德，慎思来降，且言夏人以兵迎辽主，将渡河去。
现代文：他的父亲是耶律慎思，在天辅七年，宗望追赶辽国君主到了天德的时候，慎思前来投降，并说西夏国派军队迎接辽国君主，就要渡过河去。
English: His father was Yerut Shensi. In the seventh year of Tianyu, when Zongwang chased the Liao monarch to Tiantai, Shensi came to surrender, and said that Xixia had sent troops to meet the Liao monarch, and they were going to cross the river.

古文：宗望移书夏人谕以祸福，夏人乃止。
现代文：宗望下书信给西夏人，讲清祸福利害，西夏人才没有派兵。
English: Zongwang sent a letter to the Xixia people to clarify the disaster and welfare harm, but the Xixia people did not send troops.

古文：赐慎思姓完颜氏，官至仪同三司。
现代文：皇上赐予慎思改姓完颜氏，官至仪同三司。
English: The emperor granted him the right to change his family name to Kanyan, and he was appointed to three offices.

古文：元宜便骑射，善击球。
现代文：完颜元宜熟习骑射，擅长打。
English: Yan Yuanyi is familiar with riding and shooting, and is good at playing.

古文：皇统元年，充护卫，累迁瓯里本群牧使，入为武库署令，转符宝郎，海陵篡立，为兵部尚书。
现代文：皇统元年，他担任了护卫，一步步提升至瓯里本群牧使，入朝做武库署令，又转任符宝郎。海陵王篡位，元宜为兵部尚书。
English: In the first year of imperial unification, he served as an escort, and was promoted step by step to the post of group herdsman in Bali, entered the imperial court as the director of the arsenal, and was transferred to the post of treasure hunter.

古文：天德三年，诏凡赐姓者皆复本姓，元宜复姓耶律氏。历顺义、昭义节度使，复为兵部尚书、劝农使。
现代文：天德三年，海陵下诏书命令凡是赏赐姓氏的人都恢复原来的姓氏，元宜也恢复本姓耶律氏，他历任了顺义、昭义节度使，再次担任兵部尚书、劝农使。
English: In the third year of Tiande, the imperial rescript issued by Hailing ordered that all those who were awarded surnames should restore their original surnames, and Yuan Yi also restored his original surname, Yelu. He successively served as the Shunyi and Shoyi Festival envoy, and once again served as the military secretary and the agricultural envoy.

古文：海陵伐宋，以本官领神武军都总管，以大名路骑兵万余益之。
现代文：海陵王征伐宋国，元宜以本官兼任神武军都总管，增派给他万余大名路骑兵。
English: Emperor Haile Selassie conquered the Song Dynasty, and Yuan Yi appointed him as the commander-in-chief of the Shenwu army, and assigned him more than ten thousand famous cavalrymen.

古文：前锋渡淮，拔昭关，遇宋兵万余于柘皋，力战却之。
现代文：军队的前锋渡过淮水，攻克昭关，在柘皋遇上宋兵一万多人，奋力战退了他们。
English: The army's vanguard crossed Huai Shui, conquered Zhaoguan, and met more than ten thousand Song soldiers in Handan, and fought them off.

古文：至和州，宋兵十万来拒，元宜麾军力战，抵暮而罢。
现代文：到了和州，十万宋兵前来抵抗，元宜带军奋战，直到傍晚才收兵。
English: When they arrived at Hezhou, 100,000 Song soldiers came to resist, and Yuan Yi led the army to fight until the evening.

古文：宋人乘夜袭营，元宜击走之，黎明追及宋兵，斩首数万，以功迁银青光禄大夫。
现代文：宋国人乘夜袭击军营，元宜把他们打退，黎明时追上宋兵，杀死了数万。凭这个功绩，元宜被提升为银青光禄大夫。
English: The Song people attacked the military camp at night, and Yuan Yi drove them back, caught up with the Song soldiers at dawn, and killed tens of thousands. With this achievement, Yuan Yi was promoted to the Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor.

古文：海陵增置浙西道都统制，使元宜领之，督诸军渡江，佩金牌，赐衣一袭。
现代文：海陵王增设浙西道都统制，让元宜兼任这个职位，督领各路军队渡江，佩带金牌，并赐他一套衣冠。
English: King Hailing added the administration of the western Zhejiang province, and let Yuan Yi concurrently hold this position, supervise the crossing of the river by various armies, wear a gold medal, and give him a set of crowns.

古文：是时，世宗已即位于辽阳，军中多怀去就。
现代文：这时候，世宗已经在辽阳即位，军中很多人都想着是去是留。
English: At this time, Shizong had already ascended to the throne in Liaoyang, and many people in the army were thinking about whether to go or stay.

古文：海陵军令惨急，亟欲渡江，众欲亡归，决计于元宜。
现代文：海陵王的军令甚急，极想渡江，众人都想逃跑回去，只等元宜做出决断。
English: King Hailing's military order was very urgent. He desperately wanted to cross the river. Everyone wanted to run away and wait for Yuan Yi to make a decision.

古文：猛安唐括乌野曰： 前阻淮渡，皆成擒矣。
现代文：身为猛安的唐括乌野说 ：前面有淮水阻挡，我们都会被捉住。
English: Uno, who is a fierce defender, said, "If there is water in front of us, we will all be caught.

古文：比闻辽阳新天子即位，不若共行大事，然后举军北还。 
现代文：近来听说新天子在辽阳即位，我们不如共行大事，然后全军回北方去。 
English: Recently, I heard that a new emperor has ascended to the throne in Liaoyang. We might as well carry out the great event together, and then the whole army will go back to the north.

古文：元宜曰： 待王祥至谋之。 
现代文：元宜说： 等王祥来了再谋划此事。 
English: Yuan Yi said: Wait for Wang Xiang to come and then plan the matter.

古文：王祥者元宜子，为骁骑副都指挥使，在别军。
现代文：王祥是元宜的儿子，任骁骑副都指挥使，在别的军营里。
English: Wang Xiang, the son of Yuan Yi, was appointed commander of the cavalry and deputy commander of the cavalry, in another military camp.

古文：元宜使人密召王祥，既至，遂约诘旦卫军番代即行事。
现代文：元宜派人秘密把他召来，王祥到了之后，就约定次日清晨在卫军轮换交接的时候开始行事。
English: Yuan Yi sent someone to summon him secretly, and after Wang Xiang arrived, they agreed to begin the next morning at the time of the rotation of the guards.

古文：元宜先欺其众曰： 有令，尔辈皆去马，诘旦渡江。 
现代文：元宜先是欺哄众人说 ：上方有令，尔等都弃去马匹，明日一早渡江。 
English: At first, Motoyoshi deceived the crowd by saying, "The authorities have ordered us to abandon our horses and cross the river in the morning."

古文：众皆惧，乃以举事告之，皆许诺。
现代文：众人都很恐惧，元宜这才把举行反叛的事情告诉他们，大家都答应了。
English: Everyone was very scared. It was only then that Yuan Yi told them about the rebellion, and they all agreed.

古文：十月乙未黎明，元宜、王祥与武胜军都总管徒单守素、猛安唐括乌野、谋克斡卢保、娄薛、温都长寿等率众犯御营。
现代文：十月三十日黎明，元宜、王祥与武胜军都总管徒单守素，猛安唐括乌野，谋克斡卢保、娄薛、温都长寿等人率兵侵入御营。
English: At dawn on October 30th, Yuan Yi, Wang Xiang and the general manager of the victorious army, Tutu Shan Shou Su, led by the head of the victorious army, Meng'an Tang, including Uno, and led by Lu Bao, Xue Xue, and Wen Du Changshou, invaded the imperial camp.

古文：海陵闻乱，以为宋兵奄至，揽衣遽起，箭入帐中，取视之，愕然曰： 乃我兵也。 
现代文：海陵王听到混乱的声音，以为是宋军突袭，急忙揽衣而起，有箭射入了军帐中，他捡起来一看，惊愕地说 ：是我的军兵啊。 
English: Hearing the sounds of chaos, King Hailing thought it was a surprise attack by the Song army. He hurriedly gathered up his clothes and got up. An arrow shot into the military ledger. He picked it up, looked at it, and said in amazement, "It's my soldiers."

古文：大庆山曰： 事急矣，当出避之。 
现代文：大庆山说： 事情紧急，应当逃出去躲避一下。 
English: Daqingshan said, "The situation is urgent, we should run away and take shelter."

古文：海陵曰： 走将安往。 
现代文：海陵王说： 逃到哪里去呢？ 
English: King Haering said, "Where shall we flee?"

古文：方取弓，已中箭仆地。
现代文：正要取弓，就已经中箭倒地了。
English: He was about to take the bow when he was hit by an arrow and fell to the ground.

古文：延安少尹纳合斡鲁补先刃之，手足犹动，遂缢杀之。
现代文：延安府少尹纳合斡鲁补先用刀砍了他，他的手脚还在动弹，于是又把他勒死。
English: Yan'an Prefecture Minor Yin Na He Yang Lu first cut him with a knife, his hands and feet were still moving, and then strangled him.

古文：骁骑指挥使大磐整兵来救，王祥出语之曰： 无及矣。 
现代文：骁骑指挥使大磐搬兵前来救援，王祥出来对他说 ：已经来不及了。 
English: The commander of the cavalry ordered Oban to come to the rescue. Wang Xiang came out and said to him, "It's too late.

古文：大磐乃止。
现代文：大磐于是停止行动。
English: Oiwa then stopped the action.

古文：军士攘取行营服用皆尽，乃取大磐衣巾裹海陵尸，焚之。遂收尚书右丞李通、浙西道副统制郭安国、监军徒单永年、近侍局使梁珫、副使大庆山，皆杀之。
现代文：军兵夺取的行营服装用品都用完了，就把大磐的衣服拿来包裹海陵王的尸体焚烧，接着逮捕了尚书右丞李通、浙西道副统制郭安国、监军徒单永年、近侍局使梁糵、副使大庆山，把他们全部杀掉。
English: When the soldiers ran out of the camp clothing and supplies they had seized, they wrapped Dawan's clothes around Hailing Wang's body and burned it. Next, they arrested Shang Shuyuan Li Tong, Guo Anguo, deputy commander of the West Zhejiang Province, Guan Junan Yongnian, Liang Qi, an envoy of the Imperial Household Agency, and Daqing Shan, a deputy envoy of the Imperial Household Agency, and killed them all.

古文：元宜行左领军副大都督事，使使者杀皇太子光英于南京。
现代文：元宜兼代左领军副大都督的职权，派使者到南京刺死皇太子光英。大军返回北方。
English: In addition to his duties as the deputy grand governor of the left leading army, Yuan Yi sent an envoy to Nanjing to stab the crown prince Guangying to death. The large army returned to the north.

古文：大军北还。大定二年春，入见，拜御史大夫，诏曰： 高桢为御史大夫，号为正直，颇涉烦碎，臣下衣冠不正亦被纠举。
现代文：大定二年春，元宜入朝拜见天子，授官御史大夫。皇上下诏书说： 高桢做御史大夫，号称正直，太牵涉烦琐小事，下臣衣冠不整也被察问。
English: In the spring of the second year of Dading, Yuan Yi entered the imperial court to worship the emperor and was awarded the post of Imperial Historian. The imperial edict said: Gao Yao, as Imperial Historian, is known to be honest, too involved in trivial matters, and his vassal's clothes and crown were not in order.

古文：职事有大于此者，尔宜勉之。 
现代文：有比这更为重大的工作要做，你应该自我勉励。 
English: There is more important work to be done than this, and you should push yourself.

古文：未几，拜平章政事，封冀国公。赐玉带、甲第一区，复赐姓完颜氏。
现代文：不久，元宜官拜平章政事，封为冀国公，受赐玉带及一处宅院，重又赐姓完颜氏。
English: Before long, Yuan Yi was given the title of Bai Pingzhang for political affairs, the title of Ji Guogong, a jade belt and a mansion, and the surname of Kan Yan.

古文：往泰州路规措讨契丹事，元宜使忠勇校尉李荣招窝斡，窝斡杀荣，诏追赠荣进官四阶。
现代文：元宜到泰州路谋划征讨契丹的事情。他派忠勇校尉李荣招降窝斡，窝斡杀了李荣，皇上诏令追封李荣加官四级。
English: Yuan Yi went to Taizhou Road to plan the matter of conscription to fight the Khitan. He sent Lieutenant Li Rong, a loyal and brave officer, to recruit a subordinate, Wo Wei, who killed Li Rong. The emperor's edict made Li Rong a four-level official.

古文：五月，上闻元宜将还，遣使止之。
现代文：五月，皇上听说元宜即将回来，派使臣阻止了他。
English: In May, the emperor heard that Yuan Yi was about to return and sent an envoy to stop him.

古文：契丹已平、元宜还朝，奏请益诸群牧铠甲。
现代文：平定契丹之后，元宜还朝，奏请皇上给各群牧赏赠铠甲。
English: After subduing Khitan, Yuan Yi returned to the emperor and asked the emperor to award armor to each herdsman.

古文：诏从之，每群牧益二十副。
现代文：皇上下诏书答应了他的要求，赏给每个群牧二十副铠甲。
English: The imperial edict agreed to his request, awarding each herdsman twenty pairs of armor.

古文：元宜复请益临潢戍军士马，诏给马六百匹。
现代文：元宜又奏请赏马匹与临潢戍军士，诏令赏马六百匹。
English: Gengi also made a request to reward the horses and the Linyi sergeant, and the imperial edict rewarded six hundred horses.

古文：久之，罢为东京留守。
现代文：很长时间以后，元宜罢职而任东京留守。
English: After a long time, Motoyoshi resigned and stayed in Tokyo.

古文：乞还所赐甲第，上从之，赐以袭衣、吐鹘、厩马、海东青鹘。
现代文：他请求归还赐给他的宅第，皇上应允，并赐给他衣饰、吐鹘、厩马和海东青鹘。
English: He asked for the return of the house that had been given to him, and the emperor agreed, and gave him clothes, spittoons, stables, and the East Sea cod.

古文：未几，致仕，薨于家。
现代文：没过多久，元宜辞官，在家中死去。
English: Not long after, Motoyoshi resigned from his post and died at home.

古文：上闻之，遣使致祭，赙赠甚厚。
现代文：皇上得知消息，遣使臣前往祭奠，给他办丧的财物十分丰厚。
English: When the Emperor learned of the news, he sent an envoy to pay his respects. His funeral goods were very rich.

古文：大定十一年，尚书省奏拟纳合斡鲁补除授，上曰： 昔废海陵，此人首入弑之，人臣之罪莫大于是，岂可复加官使？
现代文：大定十一年，尚书省上奏打算给纳合斡鲁补封授官职，皇上说： 昔日废除海陵的时候，是这个人首先进去杀了海陵。臣子的罪责没有比这重大的，怎么可以再加官进职呢？
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Shangshu Province's Shangso planned to give Nahe Yulu the post of official, and the emperor said: In the past, when Hai Ling was abolished, this person was the first to go in and kill Hai Ling. The guilt of the minister is not more serious than this, how can he be promoted again?

古文：其世袭谋克姑听仍旧。 
现代文：他所袭的谋克职位暂且照旧。 
English: For the time being, his position as coach will remain the same.

古文：大定十八年，紥里海上言： 凡为人臣能捍灾御侮有功者，宜录用之。今弑海陵者以为有功，赏以高爵，非所以劝事君也。
现代文：大定十八年，扎里海上书说： 凡是作为臣子能够保卫免灾、抵抗欺侮、立有功劳的，应该录用，而现在认为杀海陵的人有功，赏给高官，这不是鼓励事奉君王的做法。
English: In the 18th year of Dading, the Zari maritime book said: Anyone who, as a vassal, is able to protect from disaster, resist bullying, and has merit should be hired, but now it is considered that those who kill the mausoleum have merit and are awarded to high-ranking officials. This is not a way to encourage the service of the king.

古文：宜削夺，以为人臣之戒。
现代文：应当削夺他们的职权，以此来作为臣子们的戒鉴。
English: Their powers should be curtailed as a warning to their subjects.

古文：臣在当时亦与其党，如正名定罪，请自臣始。 
现代文：臣在当时也是他们的同党，如果要矫正名分判定罪行，请从臣下开始。 
English: At that time, their vassals were also members of the same party. If you want to correct the name and determine the crime, please start with the vassals.

古文：上曰： 紥里海自请其罪以劝事君，此亦人之所难。 
现代文：皇上说 ：扎里海自己请罪以鼓励事奉君王，这也是别人难以做到的。 
English: The emperor said, "Zarikai himself pleaded guilty to encourage him to serve the king, which is difficult for others to do.

古文：遂以紥里海充赵王府祗候郎君。
现代文：于是让扎里海到赵王府充任祗候郎君。
English: So he sent Zari Hai to Zhao Wangfu to act as his attendant.

古文：元宜子习涅阿补，大定二十五年为符宝祗候，乞依女直人例迁官，上曰： 赐姓一时之权宜。 
现代文：元宜的儿子习涅阿补，于大定二十五年做了符宝祗候。他请求按女真人的惯例提升官职，皇上说： 赏赐姓氏是一时的权宜之计。 
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Datong, Gengi's son, Xi Ne'er Ah Cu, made a treasure-hunting expedition. He requested to be promoted to an official post according to the custom of the Jurchens. The emperor said, "Giving a surname is a temporary expedient.

古文：令习涅阿补还本姓。
现代文：下令习涅阿补还原本来的姓氏。
English: He ordered Xi Nea to make up the original surname.

古文：论曰：《春秋》书 齐公子商人弑其君舍 ，又曰： 齐人弑其君商人。 
现代文：笔者评论：《春秋》一书中记载 齐国公子商人杀死君王舍 ，又说 齐国人杀死君王商人 。
English: The author's comment: "Spring and Autumn" records in the book that the merchants of the princes of Qi killed the royal family, and that the merchants of the kings were killed by the people of Qi.

古文：嗟乎，弑舍者商人也，弑商人者邴埸、阎职也。
现代文：唉，杀死舍的是商人，杀商人的是邴蜀欠、阎职。
English: Alas, it is the merchants who kill the houses, and the merchants who kill the merchants are in debt and out of a job.

古文：海陵弑熙宗，完颜元宜弑海陵。
现代文：海陵杀了熙宗，完颜元宜又杀了海陵。
English: Hailing killed Xi Zong, Yan Yuan Yi killed Hailing again.

古文：商人之弑也，邴埸、阎职去之。
现代文：商人被杀后，邴蜀欠、阎职逃走。
English: After the businessman was killed, Gong Shuguang and Yan Rong fled.

古文：海陵之弑也，元宜归于世宗。
现代文：海陵被杀后，元宜归附世宗。
English: After Hailing was killed, Yuan Yi became a vassal of Shizong.

古文：邴、阎贱役，元宜都将也，握君之亲兵，窥利以弑之，其罪岂容诛乎，世宗仅能不大用之而已。
现代文：邴蜀欠和阎职是卑贱的仆役，元宜则是都将，掌握君主的亲兵，窥伺私利而杀君，他的罪行哪是处死就能抵偿的呢？世宗仅仅能够不重用他而已。
English: Zhaozong and Yan Rong are lowly servants, Yuan Rong is a general, he controls the monarch's personal soldiers, spies for personal gain and kills the prince. Which of his crimes can be compensated by death? Shizong can only not reuse him.

古文：紥里海犹杀人而自首者也，在律，杀人未闻准首免罪而又予赏者也，况弑逆乎。
现代文：扎里海还是杀人而自首的，按法律，没听说杀人可以因为自首被免罪而又给予奖赏的，更何况是杀害君主！
English: According to the law, it is unheard of for a murderer to be exonerated and rewarded for surrendering, let alone for killing a monarch!

古文：海陵弑五十三年，得有胡沙虎之事。
现代文：海陵被杀五十三年后，又发生了胡沙虎的事件。
English: Fifty-three years after the murder of Hailing, the Hu Shahu incident happened again.

古文：纥石烈执中，本名胡沙虎，阿疏裔孙也。
现代文：纥石烈执中，原名胡沙虎，是阿礡的孙子。
English: Zhai Shi Lerong, formerly known as Hu Sha Hu, is the grandson of Grandmother Zhou.

古文：徙东平路猛安。
现代文：转为东平路猛安。
English: It was changed to Dongping Road, Meng'an.

古文：大定八年，充皇太子护卫，出职太子仆丞，改鹰坊直长，再迁鹰坊使、拱卫直指挥使。
现代文：大定八年，他充当皇太子护卫，出任太子仆丞，改任鹰坊直长，又升迁鹰坊使、拱卫直指挥使。
English: In the 8th year of Dading, he acted as the crown prince's bodyguard, served as the prince's footman, was reappointed as Yingfang Zhiang, and was promoted to Yingfang Envoy and Gongwei Zhiang Envoy.

古文：明昌四年，使过阻居，监酒官移剌保迎谒后时，饮以酒，酒味薄，执中怒，殴伤移剌保，诏的决五十。
现代文：明昌四年，他奉命出使，路过阻居，监酒官移剌保迎接较迟，请他饮酒，酒味道也不浓，纥石烈执中恼怒起来，打伤移剌保，诏令重打五十大板。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, he was ordered to send an envoy, passing through the block of residences, the liquor inspector Miao Bao was late to meet him, invited him to drink, the wine was not strong, he became angry in the middle of the quarrel, injured Miao Bao, and ordered to hit fifty large plates.

古文：未几，迁右副点检，肆傲不奉职，降肇州防御使。
现代文：不久，改任右副点检，但他放肆狂傲地不去任职，被降为肇州防御使。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of right deputy inspector, but he arrogantly refused to take the post and was demoted to the post of Zhaozhou defense envoy.

古文：逾年，迁兴平军节度使。
现代文：过了一年，调任兴平军节度使。
English: A year later, he was transferred to be the Xingping Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：丁母忧，起复归德军节度使，改开远军兼西南路招讨副使。
现代文：母亲去世后，他守丧期未满就出任归德军节度使，又改任开远军兼西南路招讨副使。
English: After his mother's death, before the period of mourning was over, he served as the returning German army's festival envoy, and was also reassigned as the deputy envoy of the Kaiyuan army and the southwestern road.

古文：俄知大名府事。
现代文：然后又担当知大名府事。
English: Then he was also in charge of Chidaimyo prefectural affairs.

古文：承安二年，召为签枢密院事。
现代文：承安二年，执中被召用为签枢密院事。
English: In the second year of Cheng'an, he was called to be a member of the Privy Council.

古文：诏佐丞相襄征伐，执中不欲行，奏曰： 臣与襄有隙，且杀臣矣。 
现代文：皇帝诏令他辅佐丞相襄出征，他不想去，上奏道 ：臣与襄有隔阂，还是先杀了臣吧。 
English: The emperor gave him the order to go to the front with his assistant, Sojo, but he didn't want to go, so he said, "There is a rift between me and Sojo, so let's kill me first."

古文：上怒其言不逊，事下有司，既而赦之，出为永定军节度使。改西北路招讨使，复为永定军，坐夺部军马解职。
现代文：皇上恼怒他出言不逊，把事情交付给有关部门处置。不久给予赦免，让他出京担任永定军节度使，改任西北路招讨使，后回到永定军，因强夺部下军中马匹而被解职。
English: The emperor was annoyed by his insolent words and handed the matter over to the relevant departments. Soon he was pardoned, and he was sent to Beijing to serve as the Yongding Army's envoy for the festival, changed to the Northwest Road recruiting envoy, and then returned to the Yongding Army. He was dismissed for forcibly seizing horses from his subordinates.

古文：泰和元年，起知大兴府事。
现代文：泰和元年，执中重被起用为知大兴府事。
English: In the first year of the Thai-Japanese War, Keizhong Chong was appointed as the head of Chida University.

古文：诏契丹人立功官赏恩同女直人，许存养马匹，得充司吏译人，著为令。
现代文：皇上下诏，恩许给立功的契丹人同女真人一样封官加赏，允许存养马匹，可以充当司吏、翻译的，派给官职。
English: The emperor decreed that the Khitan people who had rendered meritorious services should be awarded the same rewards as the Jurchen people, allowed to keep horses, and could serve as officials and translators and be assigned to official positions.

古文：执中格诏不下，上责之曰； 汝虽意在防闲，而不知朝廷自有定格，自今勿复如此烦碎生事也。 
现代文：执中迟迟不下达诏书，皇上责备他道 ：你虽然本意在于防范，却不知道朝廷自有一定规矩，从今后不要再像这样烦琐生事了。 
English: The emperor reproached him for the delay in issuing the imperial decree, saying: Although your intention is to prevent, you do not know that the imperial court has its own rules. In the future, do not cause trouble like this.

古文：乃下诏行之。
现代文：执中这才颁行诏书。
English: Only then was the imperial edict issued.

古文：涞水人魏廷实祖任儿，旧为靳文昭家放良，天德三年，编籍正户，已三世矣。
现代文：涞水人魏廷实的祖父任儿，过去曾是靳文昭家释放的平民，天德三年，被编籍入了正户，至今已经三代了。
English: Ren'er, the grandfather of Wei Tingshi from Surabaya, used to be a commoner released by the Yuwen Zhao family. Three years ago, Tiande was registered into the main family, so far there have been three generations.

古文：文昭孙勍诋廷实为奴，及妄诉殴詈，警巡院鞫对无状，法当诉本贯。
现代文：靳文昭的孙子靳京力，诋毁魏廷实是奴仆，并诬告殴打骂人，警巡院审断说没有这种情况，依法应投诉到本地官府。
English: Gong Wenzhao's grandson, Gong Jingli, slandered Wei Tingrong as a slave, and falsely accused him of beating and cursing people. The Intermediate People's Court of the People's Republic of China ruled that this was not the case, and a complaint should be made to the local government according to the law.

古文：勍诉于府，执中使廷实纳钱五百贯与勍。
现代文：靳京力投诉于大兴知府，执中让魏廷实交出五百贯钱给靳京力。
English: Yanjingli filed a complaint with the Daxing prefectural government. During the proceedings, Wei Ting was ordered to hand over 500 yuan to Yanjingli.

古文：廷实不从，还涞水，执中径遣锁致廷实。
现代文：魏廷实拒不服从，回到涞水，执中径直派人把他绑锁押来。
English: Wei Tingshi refused to obey, returned to Surabaya, and directly sent someone to bind and lock him.

古文：御史台请移问，执中转奏御史台不依制，府未结断，令移推。
现代文：御史台请执中把案子转交给他审问，执中却上奏御史台不遵守规定，知府还没结断，就命令知府移交案子。
English: The governor's office asked the court to transfer the case to him for questioning, but the court ruled that the governor's office did not comply with the rules, and ordered the governor's office to transfer the case before it was closed.

古文：诏吏部侍郎李柄、户部侍郎粘割合答推问。炳、合答奏御史台理直，诏乃切责执中。
现代文：皇上命令吏部侍郎李炳、户部侍郎粘割合答推究此案，李炳与合答启奏说御史台道理正直，皇上于是下诏严词责斥执中。
English: The emperor ordered the secretary of the personnel department, Li Xi, and the secretary of the household department to investigate the case. Li Xi and the co-respondents said that the story was honest, and the emperor then issued a stern reprimand.

古文：御史中丞孟铸奏弹执中 贪残专恣，不奉法令。
现代文：御史中丞孟铸弹劾执中： 贪婪残暴，恣意专横，不守法令。
English: Meng cast impeachment in the impeachment process: greed, cruelty, arbitrariness, and non-compliance with laws.

古文：释罪之后，累过不悛。
现代文：减释罪责之后，屡犯过失而不悔改。
English: After the reduction of his criminal responsibility, he repeatedly committed crimes without repentance.

古文：既蒙恩贷，转生跋扈。
现代文：蒙受圣上恩典，却转而行为跋扈。
English: Blessed with divine grace, he turned out to be a scoundrel.

古文：如雄州诈认马，平州冒支俸，破魏廷实家。发其冢墓，拜表不赴，祈雨聚妓，殴詈同僚擅令停职，失师帅之体，不称京尹之任 。
现代文：例如在雄州诈认马匹，在平州冒领俸禄，破坏魏廷实的家业，掘开他家坟墓，不向皇上呈报奏章，私自祈雨，聚会娼妓，殴打谩骂同僚，擅自令他们停职，丧失师帅体统，不称京尹职位。 
English: For example, he swindled horses in Xiongzhou, swindled a salary in Pingzhou, destroyed Wei Tingshi's family business, dug up his family's grave, did not present a report to the emperor, prayed for rain, gathered prostitutes, beat up and abused his colleagues, suspended them without authorization, lost the dignity of a teacher, and was not called Jing Yin.

古文：上曰： 执中粗人，似有跋扈尔。 
现代文：皇上说： 执中是个粗人，行为好像有些跋扈。 
English: The emperor said, "Xizhong is a coarse person, and his behavior seems a bit pretentious.

古文：铸对曰： 明天子在上，岂容有跋扈之臣。 
现代文：孟铸答道： 圣明天子在上，怎能容忍有跋扈的臣子？ 
English: Meng Jian replied: How can the holy Emperor tolerate a pompous vassal?

古文：上意寤，取阅奏章，诏尚书省问之。
现代文：皇上心中醒悟，取上奏章来看，诏令尚书省进行审察。
English: The emperor came to his senses and ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to investigate.

古文：由是改武卫军都指挥使。
现代文：由此，执中被改授武卫军都指挥使。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the post of commander-in-chief of the armed forces.

古文：平章政事仆散揆宣抚河南，执中除山东东西路统军使。
现代文：平章政事仆散揆宣抚河南，执中被任命为山东东西路统军使。
English: Pingzhang's political servant, Sanzhao, was appointed as the military envoy of Shandong's east-west road unification.

古文：揆行省汴京伐宋，升诸道统军司为兵马都统府，执中为山东两路兵马都统，定海军节度使完颜撒剌副之。
现代文：仆散揆开往汴京攻伐宋国，各道统军司提升为兵马都统府，执中是山东两路兵马都统，定海军节度使完颜撒剌是他的副手。
English: His servant, Sanzang, went to Beijing to attack the Song Dynasty. The military commanders of each province were promoted to the General Headquarters of the Korean People's Army. The General Headquarters of the Korean People's Army was in charge of Shandong Province and the Korean People's Army. Sanzang was the vice-chairman of the Naval Festival.

古文：执中分兵驻金城、朐山，请益发东平路兵屯密、沂、宁海、登、莱以遏兵冲，诏从之，时泰和六年四月也。
现代文：执中分派军兵进驻金城、朐山，请求上方增派东平路军队屯驻到密、沂、宁海、登、莱州等地，以扼守在交通要道，皇帝下令照办。当时是泰和六年四月。
English: At that time, it was April of the 6th year of the Taihe reign. The emperor ordered to dispatch troops to be stationed in Jincheng and Lushan from the central government, and requested that more Dongping Road troops be stationed in the upper part of the country to be stationed in places such as Mi, Handan, Ninghai, Deng and Laizhou, in order to guard the important transportation routes.

古文：五月，宋兵犯金城，执中遣巡检使周奴以骑兵三百御之。
现代文：五月，宋军进犯金城，执中派巡检使周奴率骑兵三百人迎击。
English: In May, the Song army invaded Jincheng, and the central government sent patrols to let Zhou Nu and his 300 cavalry meet the attack.

古文：会宋益兵转趋沭阳，谋克三合伏卒五十人篁竹中，伺宋兵过突出击之，杀十数人，追至县城，宋兵不敢出。
现代文：恰遇上宋军增兵转往沭阳，谋克三合就在竹林中埋伏下军兵五十人，等宋军路过时突然出击，杀死十多人，一直追赶到县城，宋军不敢再出战。
English: Just as the Song Army's reinforcements were moving to Fenyang, a group of soldiers ambushed fifty soldiers in the bamboo grove in an attempt to defeat the Triple Alliance. When the Song Army passed by, they suddenly attacked, killing more than ten people, and chased them all the way to the county seat. The Song Army did not dare to go to war again.

古文：会周奴以兵入城，宋兵逾城走，三合已焚其舟，合击大破之，斩首五百余级，杀宋统领李藻，擒忠义军将吕璋。
现代文：恰逢周奴率军进城，宋兵越城逃走，三合却早已烧掉了他们的船只，前后合击，大破宋军，斩得首级五百多个，杀死了宋军统领李藻，擒获了忠义军将吕璋。
English: Just as Zhou Nu led the army into the city, the Song soldiers fled across the city, but the Sanhe had already burned their ships. They fought back and forth, defeated the Song army, cut off more than five hundred heads, killed the Song army leader Li Miao, and captured the loyal army general Lv Ying.

古文：十月，执中率兵二万出清口，宋以步骑万余列南岸，战舰百艘拒上流，相持累日。
现代文：十月，执中率军兵二万从清口出发，宋国派步军骑兵上万人列阵南岸，成百艘战船扼守在上游，相持了数日。
English: In October, Guizhong led an army of twenty thousand soldiers from Qingkou, and Song sent infantry and cavalry of more than ten thousand men to the south coast, and hundreds of warships clung to the upstream, holding each other for several days.

古文：执中以舟兵二千搏战，遏宋舟兵，遣副统移剌古与涅率精骑四千自下流径渡。
现代文：执中派水军二千出战，阻遏宋国水军，又遣副统移剌古与涅率精锐骑兵四千径直从下游渡江。
English: The central government dispatched a naval force of two thousand to fight and deter the Song naval force, and also dispatched four thousand elite cavalrymen led by Gonggu and Nie to cross the river from the lower reaches.

古文：宋兵望骑兵登南岸，水陆俱溃。追斩及溺死者甚众，尽获其战舰及战马三百，遂克淮阴，进兵围楚州。
现代文：宋军望见骑兵登上南岸，水陆两军全部溃散，被追杀和淹死了很多人，我军尽数收缴了宋国战船和战马共计三百。接着攻克淮阴，进军包围了楚州。
English: The Song army saw the cavalry on the south bank, the two armies were all dispersed, many people were chased and drowned, and our army collected a total of three hundred Song warships and horses. Then they conquered Huaiyin and encircled Chuzhou.

古文：迁元帅左监军。
现代文：执中被提拔为元帅左监军。
English: In the process, he was promoted to Marshal of the Left Supervision Army.

古文：执中纵兵虏掠，上闻之，杖其经历官阿里不孙，放还所掠。
现代文：他纵容兵士抢夺掳掠，皇上闻知，杖罚他的经历官阿里不孙，发放归还了他掠夺之物。
English: He connived with soldiers to loot and plunder, the emperor heard about it, punished him with a cane, and returned what he had looted.

古文：未几，宋人请和，诏罢兵。
现代文：不久，宋国求和，皇上诏令停战。
English: Soon after, the Song Dynasty sued for peace, and the emperor ordered an armistice.

古文：除西南路招讨使，改西京留守。
现代文：执中被授职西南路招讨使，又改任西京留守。
English: In the process, he was given the post of Southwest Recruitment Envoy, and he was also transferred to stay in West Beijing.

古文：大安元年，授世袭谋克，复知大兴府事，出知太原府，复为西京留守，行枢密院，兼安抚使。
现代文：大安元年，执中受封世袭谋克，重又担当知大兴府事，又出京做太原知府，再为西京留守，代职枢密院，兼安抚使。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, he was given the hereditary title of Mokke in the middle of his reign, and he was also in charge of the reestablishment of Chida, and he went to Beijing to be the governor of Taiyuan, and then he stayed in West Beijing, acting as the Privy Council, and concurrently as the pacifying envoy.

古文：以劲兵七千遇大兵，战于定安之北，薄暮，先以麾下遁去。众遂溃。
现代文：执中的七千精兵遭遇大军，在定安以北交战，傍晚，执中先带着手下亲兵逃走，众军兵也就跟着溃败了。
English: The seven thousand elite soldiers in the middle of the battle encountered a large army and fought in the north of Ding'an. In the evening, the middle of the battle first fled with his own soldiers, and the soldiers followed the rout.

古文：行次蔚州，擅取官库银五千两及衣币诸物，夺官民马，与从行私人入紫荆关，杖杀涞水令。
现代文：走到蔚州，执中擅自取出库银五千两以及衣帛等财物，抢夺官家百姓的马匹，和随从的亲兵进入紫荆关，打死了涞水县令。
English: When he went to Ulshu, he took out 5,000 taels of silver and 5,000 taels of cloth from the treasury and other property without authorization, robbed the horses of officials and commoners, and entered the Bauhinia Pass with his soldiers, and killed the governor of Surabaya.

古文：至中都，朝廷皆不问。乃迁右副元帅，权尚书左丞。
现代文：到了中都，朝廷全不查问，又提升他为右副元帅，代理尚书左丞。
English: When he arrived in the capital, the imperial court did not inquire at all, and promoted him to vice-marshal of the right, acting for Shangshu Zuo.

古文：执中益无所忌惮，自请步骑二万屯宣德州，与之三千，令驻妫川。
现代文：执中更加无所忌惮，个人请求调拨步军骑兵二万人屯驻宣德州，皇上给他三千人，命他驻扎在妫川。
English: He was even more unscrupulous in his actions. He personally requested that 20,000 infantry and cavalry troops be stationed in Xuandezhou, and the emperor gave him 3,000 and ordered him to be stationed in Luochuan.

古文：崇庆元年正月，执中乞移屯南口或屯新庄，移文尚书省曰： 大兵来必不能支，一身不足惜，三千兵为可忧，十二关、建春、万宁宫且不保。 
现代文：崇庆元年正月，执中请求移兵驻扎南口或新庄，传送公文给尚书省说 ：如果有大部队来犯我必定抵挡不了，我一人死不值得怜惜，这三千军兵却让人担忧，而且十二关、建春和万宁宫也会守卫不住。 
English: In the first month of the first year of Chongqing, the commander-in-chief requested the transfer of troops to be stationed in Nankou or Xinzhuang, and sent an official document to Shangshu Province, saying: "If a large army comes to attack, I will certainly not be able to resist, my death alone is not worth pitying, but these three thousand soldiers are worrying, and the twelve gates, Jianchun and Wanning Palace will not be able to be guarded.

古文：朝廷恶其言，下有司按问，诏数其十五罪，罢归田里。
现代文：朝廷憎恶他的言词，传令有关部门加以审查，下诏列数他十五条罪状，罢除官职遣回原乡。
English: The imperial court detested his words and ordered the relevant departments to examine them. He was charged with 15 offenses, dismissed from his post and sent back to his hometown.

古文：明年，复召至中都，预议军事。
现代文：第二年，又把他召回中都，参与商议军中事务。
English: The next year, he was called back to the capital to participate in the discussion of military affairs.

古文：左谏议大夫张行信上书曰： 胡沙虎专逞私意，不循公道，蔑省部以示强梁，媚近臣以求称誉，骫法行事，枉害平民。
现代文：左谏议大夫张行信上书说： 胡沙虎专行私人意图，不遵循公道，蔑视省部以显示强横，取媚亲近臣子以求得赞誉，违法办事，枉害平民。
English: Zhang Xing, the doctor of Zuoqian, wrote in his letter: Hu Shazhu exclusively pursued private intentions, did not follow justice, disdained the provincial and ministerial departments to show his power, courted courtiers to gain praise, acted illegally, and harmed civilians.

古文：行院山西，出师无律，不战先退，擅取官物，杖杀县令。
现代文：在山西任职时，出兵而无纪律，不战而退逃，擅自取用官家财物，施杖刑打死县令。
English: When he served in Shanxi, he sent troops without discipline, fled without a fight, took official property without authorization, and beat a county magistrate to death with a cane.

古文：屯驻妫川，乞移内地，其谋略概可见矣。
现代文：驻守妫川时，却乞求移军内地，他的谋略如何也大约可以看得出来。
English: When he was stationed at Shukawa, he begged to be transferred to the interior, and his strategy can be roughly seen.

古文：欲使改易前非。以收后效，不亦难乎。
现代文：要让他改正以前的错误，以获得今后的功效，不是很难办到的吗？
English: Isn't it difficult to get him to correct his previous mistakes in order to gain future effectiveness?

古文：才诚可取，虽在微贱皆当擢用，何必老旧始能立功。
现代文：人才确实可取，即便出身微贱，也都应当起用，为什么必定是以前的老旧人物才能立功！
English: Talent is indeed desirable, even if it comes from a lowly background, it should also be used, why must it be the old figures of the past who can make a contribution!

古文：一将之用，安危所系，惟朝廷加察，天下幸甚。 
现代文：一位将帅的任用，关系到国家安危，希望朝廷明察，这是天下人的极大幸运。 
English: The appointment of a commander-in-chief is related to national security, and it is hoped that the imperial court will take a close look at it. This is a great fortune for the people of the world.

古文：丞相徒单镒以为不可用，参知政事絪跪奏其奸恶，乃止。
现代文：丞相徒单镒认为不能取用，参知政事王堂跪奏他的奸恶，事情于是停了下来。
English: The chancellor, Tsuchidan, thought that he could not use it, and the vice-governor, Wang Tong, kneeled down to play his treachery, and the matter stopped.

古文：执中善结近幸，交口称誉。
现代文：执中善于结交皇帝身边的宠臣，他们对执中交口称赞。
English: He was good at making friends with the emperor's favorite vassals, and they praised his friendship.

古文：五月，诏给留守半俸，预议军事。
现代文：五月，皇上下诏给留守官执中一半俸禄，参与商议军事。
English: In May, the emperor issued an imperial edict to give half of the salary to the remaining officials to participate in military negotiations.

古文：张行信复谏曰： 伏闻以胡沙虎老臣，欲起而用。
现代文：张行信再次进谏道 ：听说因为胡沙虎是老臣，要起用他。
English: Zhang Xingxin once again enters the ring: I heard that because Hu Shaguo is an old minister, he will be used.

古文：人之能否，不在新旧。彼向之败，朝廷既知之矣。乃复用之，无乃不可乎。 
现代文：人的能干与否，不在于是新是旧，他先前的战斗失败，朝廷早已知晓，还要重新起用，恐怕不可以吧？ 
English: Whether a man is capable or not does not depend on whether he is new or old. The Imperial Court has already learned of his previous battle defeat, and he has to be reappointed. I'm afraid that's not possible, is it?

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是皇上没有再做这件事。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：上终以执中为可用，赐金牌，权右副元帅，将武卫军五千人屯中都城北。
现代文：最终，皇上还是认为执中可以任用，赐给他金牌，暂任右副元帅，率领武卫军五千人屯兵在中都城北。
English: In the end, the emperor still thought that he could appoint Tsuru, giving him a gold medal, temporarily serving as the right vice-marshal, leading five thousand soldiers of the Imperial Guard in the north of the capital.

古文：执中乃与其党经历官文绣局直长完颜丑奴、提控宿直将军蒲察六斤、武卫军钤辖乌古论夺剌谋作乱。
现代文：执中与其同党经历官文绣局直长完颜卫奴、提控宿直将军蒲察六斤、武卫军钤辖乌古论夺剌等人阴谋叛乱。
English: Guizhong and his fellow party members experienced the rebellion plotted by Guan Yanwei, the director of the Bureau of Literature and Embroidery, Guizhong Pu Zhaojun, the general Pu Zhaojun, and Wu Wei Jun, the commander of the Wu Wei army.

古文：是时，大元大兵在近，上使奉职即军中责执中止务驰猎。不恤军事。
现代文：这时候，大元的大军在近处，皇上派人到武卫军中斥责执中只顾骑马打猎，不管军事。
English: At this time, the great army of the Great Yuan was nearby, and the emperor sent someone to the armed guards to reprimand them for riding horses and hunting, regardless of the military.

古文：执中方饲鹞，怒掷杀之，遂妄称知大兴府徒单南平及其子刑部侍郎驸马都尉没烈谋反，奉诏讨之。
现代文：执中正在喂鹞鹰，他恼怒地把它摔死在地上。随后假称大兴府知府徒单南平及其儿子刑部侍郎、驸马都尉没烈谋反，奉诏令进行讨伐。
English: While the executioner was feeding the eagle, he angrily threw it to the ground and killed it. Subsequently, pretending that the Daxing prefectural governor Nanping and his sons, the minister of the criminal department and the captain of the horse, did not conspire, they carried out the crusade according to the imperial decree.

古文：南平姻家福海，别将兵屯于城北，遣人以好语招之，福海不知，既至乃执之。
现代文：徒单南平的亲家福海，另外带兵屯驻在城北，执中派人花言巧语招他来，福海不知道有诈，一来就被抓起来。
English: Fukai, a relative of Nanping, was stationed in the north of the city with another soldier, and in the middle of the execution, he sent people to invite him. Fukai did not know that there was fraud, and he was arrested.

古文：八月二十五日未五更，分其军为三军，由章义门入，自将一军由通玄门入。
现代文：八月二十五日未到五更的时候，执中把军马分为三路，从章义门进城，自己率一支军兵从通玄门进城。
English: On August 25th, before the five o'clock bell rang, Xu Zhong divided the army horses into three routes, entering the city from Zhangyi Gate, and leading an army into the city from Tongyuan Gate.

古文：执中恐城中出兵来拒，乃遣一骑先驰抵东华门大呼曰： 大军至北关，已接战矣。 
现代文：执中恐怕城中出兵来抵抗，就派一名骑兵先飞驰到东华门大声呼叫： 大军到了北关，已经交战了。 
English: Fearing that troops would be sent from the city to resist during the execution, he sent a cavalryman to rush to Donghua Gate first and shouted: The army has arrived at Beiguan and has already engaged in battle.

古文：既而再遣一骑亦如之。
现代文：然后再派一名骑兵去喊。
English: Then he sent another cavalryman to shout.

古文：使徒单金寿召知大兴府徒单南平，南平不知，行至广阳门西富义坊，马上与执中相见，执中手枪刺之堕马下，金寿斫杀之。
现代文：他让徒单金寿召来大兴府知府徒单南平，南平不知道何事，走到广阳门西边的富义坊，在马上与执中相见，执中举长枪把他刺落于马下，徒单金寿挥刀杀死了南平。
English: He asked the tutor Jin Shou to summon the tutor Nanping, the governor of Daxingfu. Nanping did not know what happened, went to Fuyi Square on the west side of Guangyang Gate, and immediately met with the tutor. The tutor held up a long gun and stabbed him under the horse. The tutor Jin Shou killed Nanping with a sword.

古文：使乌古论夺剌召没烈，杀之。
现代文：执中让乌古论夺剌召见没烈，也把他杀死。
English: In the middle of the execution, he let Ugu talk about seizing the scepter and summoning the deceased, and he also killed him.

古文：符宝祗候鄯阳、护卫十人长完颜石古乃闻乱，遽召大汉军五百人赴难，与执中战不胜，皆死之。
现代文：符宝祗候鄯阳、护卫十人长完颜石古乃，听到叛乱的消息，就召集大汉军五百人前往解救危难，和执中交战而不能战胜，全部战死。
English: When Feng Bao was on his way to Shiyang and the ten guards had finished escorting Yan Shiguo, they heard the news of the rebellion and summoned five hundred Han soldiers to go to the rescue, but they could not win the battle with Xuzhong and all died in the battle.

古文：执中至东华门，使呼门者亲军百户冬儿、五十户蒲察六斤，皆不应，许以世袭猛安、三品职事官，亦不应。
现代文：执中来到东华门，让人呼叫守门的亲军百户冬儿、五十户蒲察六斤，两人都不答应，执中许诺封与世袭猛安、三品职事官，还是不应声。
English: When the middle-ranking officials came to the East China Gate, they were asked to call the gatekeepers' relatives, the hundred households of Dongren, the fifty households of Pucha, and the six jin. Both of them did not agree. The middle-ranking officials promised the hereditary and the three-grade officials, but they still did not respond.

古文：呼都点检徒单渭河，谓河即徒单镐也。
现代文：又让人呼叫都点检徒单渭河，也即是徒单镐。
English: In addition, people are calling for all spot inspectors to single out the river, that is, single out the river.

古文：渭河缒城出见执中，执中命聚薪焚东华门，立梯登城。
现代文：徒单渭河顺着绳子攀下城来进见执中，执中下令堆积柴禾焚烧东华门，架梯子登城。
English: He climbed down the city along the rope to see the magistrate. The magistrate ordered to pile up firewood to burn the Donghua Gate, and set up a ladder to climb up the city.

古文：护卫斜烈、乞儿、亲军春山共掊锁开门纳执中。
现代文：护卫斜烈、乞儿、亲军春山一同破锁开门迎接执中。
English: The guards, the beggars, and the pro-army Spring Mountain all broke the lock to open the door to welcome the middle school.

古文：执中入宫，尽以其党易宿卫。自称监国都元帅，居大兴府，陈兵自卫。
现代文：执中进入宫中，把宿卫全部换成他的党羽，自称监国都元帅，盘踞大兴府，安置军兵以自卫。
English: Xuanzhong entered the palace, replaced all the guards with his followers, claimed to be the superintendent of the capital, occupied Daxingfu, and stationed soldiers for self-defense.

古文：急召都转运使孙椿年取银币赏金寿、夺剌及军官军士、大兴府舆隶。
现代文：他急速召来都转运使孙椿年取出银钱赏给徒单金寿、乌古论夺剌及其军官兵士以及大兴府的奴仆差役。
English: He quickly summoned and transferred the capital so that Sun Tsubakinen could take out the money to reward Tochan Jinshou, Ugudong Ruo and his officers and soldiers, as well as the servants of Daxingfu.

古文：是夜，召声妓与亲党会饮。
现代文：当夜，执中叫来歌妓，和亲信党羽聚会饮酒。
English: That night, a courtesan was called in from the middle of the night to have a drinking party with close friends and party members.

古文：明日，以兵逼上出居卫邸，诱左丞完颜纲至军中，即杀之。
现代文：第二天，他派兵逼迫皇帝出宫住到卫地的房宅，把左丞完颜纲诱骗到军中，随即把他杀掉。
English: The next day, he sent soldiers to force the emperor to leave the palace and live in a house in the palace grounds. He tricked Zuo Chengyan into joining the army and then killed him.

古文：执中意不可测，丞相徒单镒劝执中立宣宗，执中然之。
现代文：执中的心思很难猜度，丞相徒单镒劝他立宣宗为帝，执中答应了。
English: It is difficult to guess the thoughts of the emperor, but the emperor's son, Emperor Xuanzong, persuaded him to make Emperor Xuanzong, and the emperor agreed.

古文：是时，庄献太子在中都，执中以皇太子仪仗迎庄献入居东宫。
现代文：这时，庄献太子在中都，执中以皇太子礼仪迎接庄献住进东宫。
English: At this time, Prince Zhuo Xian was in the Central Capital, and he was greeted with the etiquette of a crown prince when he entered the East Palace.

古文：召符宝郎徒单福寿取符宝，陈于大兴府露阶上。盗用御宝出制，除完颜丑奴德州防御使，乌古论夺剌顺天军节度使，蒲察六斤横海军节度使，徒单金寿永定军节度使，虽除外官，皆留之左右。
现代文：执中让符宝郎徒单福寿取出符宝，摆放在大兴府的露天石阶上，他盗用御宝假传诏令，封完颜丑奴为德州防御使，乌古论夺剌为顺天军节度使，蒲察六斤为横海军节度使，徒单金寿为永定军节度使。虽然封给的是外地的官职，却都留在身边。
English: In the middle of the execution, he had the treasure hunter, Tushan Fushou, take out the treasure and place it on the open-air stone steps of Daxingfu. He plagiarized the imperial treasure fake edict, sealed Yan Xiu Niu as the Texas defense envoy, Wukong Ruzhu as the Shuntian army festival envoy, Pucha Liujin as the horizontal navy festival envoy, and Tushan Jinshou as the Yongding army festival envoy. Although the official positions were given to foreign countries, they all remained at his side.

古文：其余除拜犹数十人。
现代文：其他拜官授职的还有几十人。
English: There are dozens of other people who have been ordained.

古文：同时有两蒲察六斤，其一守东华门不肯从乱者。
现代文：当时有两个叫蒲察六斤的，其中有个守卫东华门不肯服从叛乱。
English: At that time, there were two men named Puca Liujin, one of whom was a guard at the Donghua Gate who refused to obey the rebellion.

古文：召礼部令史张好礼欲铸监国元帅印，好礼曰： 自古无异姓监国者。 
现代文：执中让礼部令史张好礼铸造监国元帅印鉴，张好礼说： 自古没有异姓做监国的。 
English: In the middle of the ceremony, the Ministry of Ceremonies ordered the historian Zhang Haoli to cast the seal of the Marshal of the Supervision of the State. Zhang Haoli said: Since ancient times, there has not been a different surname as the Supervisor of the State.

古文：乃止。
现代文：执中于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：遣奉御完颜忽失来等三人，护卫蒲鲜班底、完颜丑奴等十人，迎宣宗于彰德。使宦者李思忠弑上于卫邸。
现代文：他派遣奉御完颜忽失来一行三人，护卫蒲鲜班底、完颜丑奴等十人，到彰德迎接宣宗，让宦官李思忠到卫地宅邸杀死皇帝。
English: He dispatched a party of three people, including the emperor's wife, to meet Emperor Xuanzong in Zhangde, and sent the eunuch Li Sizhong to kill the emperor in the palace of the Emperor of Wei. He was escorted by ten people, including members of the Pu Xian team and the eunuch's wife.

古文：尽撤沿边诸军赴中都平州、骑兵屯蓟州以自重，边戍皆不守矣。
现代文：他把沿边军队全部撤往中都平州、把骑兵派驻蓟州以增强自己的力量，边界关戍都不再把守。
English: He withdrew all the troops along the border to Pingzhou, the central capital, and stationed cavalry in Zhangzhou to strengthen his forces. He no longer guarded the border checkpoints.

古文：九月甲辰，宣宗即位，拜执中太师、尚书令、都元帅、监修国史，封泽王，授中都路和鲁忽土世袭猛安。
现代文：九月七日，宣宗即位，拜执中为太师、尚书令、都元帅、监修国史，加封为泽王，授予中都路和鲁忽士世袭猛安。
English: On September 7th, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne. He was given the titles of Taishi, Shang Shurong, Du Marshal, and Supervisor of National History, as well as the additional title of Zhao Wang, and granted the Chu Du Lu and Lu Kuo Shi the hereditary title of Meng An.

古文：以其弟同知河南府特末也为都点检，兼侍卫亲军都指挥使，子猪粪除濮王傅、兵部侍郎，都点检徒单渭河为御史中丞，乌古论夺剌遥授知真定府事，徒单金寿遥授知东平府事，蒲察六斤遥授知平阳府事，完颜丑奴同知河中府事，权宿直将军。
现代文：授任执中的弟弟、同知河南府特末也为都检点，兼侍卫亲军都指挥使。任命执中的儿子猪粪为濮王傅、兵部侍郎，都点检徒单渭河为御史中丞。遥授乌古论夺剌为知真定府事，徒单金寿为知东平府事，蒲察六斤为知平阳府事。任完颜丑奴为同知河南府事，代理宿直将军。
English: The younger brother, Tongzhi Henan Fu Te Matsu, who was appointed as the middle-ranking official, was also the capital inspection point, and also the commanding officer of the palace guards. The middle-ranking official's son, Bo Guo, was appointed as the king's cupbearer and the attendant of the military department, and the middle-ranking official's son, Tongzhi Shan Yinghe, was appointed as the vice-chancellor of the imperial history department. Yuan Zhi Wu Guo Rong was appointed as the governor of Zhizhen Dingfu, Tongzhi Jinshou was appointed as the governor of Zhidongpingfu, and Pu Zha

古文：诏以乌古论谊居第赐执中，仪鸾局给供张，妻王赐紫结银铎车。
现代文：皇上下诏书把乌古论谊的府宅赐给执中，让仪鸾局供给仪仗，赐予他妻子王氏紫结银铎车。
English: The imperial edict bestowed the house of the ancient friendship to the middle-ranking official, let the ceremonial bureau provide ceremonial weapons, and gave his wife Wang Zijie a silver chariot.

古文：戊申，执中侍朝，宣宗赐之坐，执中就坐不辞。
现代文：十一日，执中侍立朝中，宣宗赐给他座位，执中坐下，并不推辞。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xuanzong gave him a seat, and Xuanzong sat down and did not refuse.

古文：无何，执中奏请降卫绍王为庶人，奏再上，诏百官议于朝堂。
现代文：不久，执中奏请皇上把卫绍王贬为庶人。经过两次上奏，皇上下令让百官到朝堂上商议此事。
English: Not long after, the person in charge of the middle recital asked the emperor to relegate King Weishao to a commoner. After two recitals, the emperor ordered a hundred officials to come to the court to discuss the matter.

古文：太子少傅奥屯忠孝、侍读学士蒲察思忠附执中议，众相视莫敢言，独文学田廷芳奋然曰： 先朝素无失德，尊号在礼不当削。 
现代文：太子少傅奥屯忠孝、侍读学士蒲察思忠，都附和执中的提议，众大臣相互对视，不敢发话，唯独文学田廷芳奋起说道 ：先朝从没有丧失德行，所封尊号符合礼数，不应削除。 
English: The young prince Fu Otun Zhongxiao and the scholar-in-waiting Puchasizhong all agreed with the proposal. The ministers looked at each other and did not dare to speak. However, the literary Tian Tingfang stood up and said: The first dynasty never lost its virtue. The honorary title is in line with the number of courtesies and should not be deleted.

古文：于是从之者礼部张敬甫、谏议张信甫、户部武文伯、庞才卿、石抹晋卿等二十四人。
现代文：于是表示赞同的有礼部张敬甫、谏议张信甫、户部武文伯、庞才卿、石抹晋卿等二十四人。
English: Twenty-four people, including Zhang Jingfu of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zhang Xinfu of the Ministry of Speech, Wu Wenbo of the Ministry of Household, Pang Caiqing, and Shima Jinshing, expressed their approval.

古文：宣宗曰： 辟诸问途，百人曰东行是，十人曰西行是，行道之人果适东乎、适西乎。
现代文：宣宗说： 就像是问路，一百人说向东走对，十个人说向西走对，行路人最后是往东还是往西呢？
English: Xuan Zong said, "It's like asking for directions. If a hundred people say it's right to go east, and ten people say it's right to go west, will the traveler end up going east or west?"

古文：岂以百人、十人为是非哉？ 
现代文：难道凭一百人和十人的数目来判断是非吗？ 
English: Is it right to judge by the number of a hundred and ten?

古文：既而曰： 朕徐思之。 
现代文：然后又说： 朕再慢慢想想。 
English: Then he added: I'll think about it slowly.

古文：数日，诏降为东海郡侯。
现代文：几天后，皇上下诏贬执中为东海郡侯。
English: A few days later, the Emperor issued an imperial edict demoting him to the position of Count of Tokaigun.

古文：大元游骑至高桥，宰臣以闻。宣宗使人问执中，执中曰： 计画已定矣。 
现代文：大元的巡哨骑兵到了高桥，宰相告知了宣宗，宣宗派人向执中询问情况，执中说： 已经谋划好了。 
English: The patrol cavalry of the Taiyuan arrived at Takahashi, and the prime minister informed Xuan Zong. Xuan Zong sent a person to inquire about the situation at the command center, and Xuan Zong said, "The plan has been made."

古文：既而让宰执曰： 吾为尚书令，岂得不先与议而遽奏耶？ 
现代文：之后，执中责备宰相道 ：我是尚书令，你们怎么不先一同商议就直接上奏呢？ 
English: After that, the conductor scolded the prime minister, saying, "I'm the conductor, why don't you just play the music without discussing it with me first?"

古文：宰执逊谢而已。
现代文：宰相只好低头谢罪。
English: The prime minister had to bow his head in apology.

古文：提点近侍局庆山奴、副使惟弼、奉御惟康请除执中，宣宗念援立功，隐忍不许。
现代文：提点近侍局使庆山奴、副使惟弼、奉御惟康请求除掉执中，宣宗念他援助立位有功，心中不忍，就没有应允。
English: At the request of the close attendants' office, Qing Shanzhong, deputy envoys Weiyi and Bong You Weikang were removed from their posts, and Xuan Zong was honored for his assistance. If they could not bear it in their hearts, they did not agree.

古文：元帅右监军术虎高琪屡战不利，执中戒之曰： 今日出兵果无功，当以军法从事矣。 
现代文：元帅右监军术虎高琪，屡次作战失利，执中警告他： 今天出兵若还不成功，就要按军法办事了。 
English: Marshal Right Supervisor of Military Tactics Tiger Gao Qi, who had repeatedly failed in battle, warned him in the middle of his speech: If today's troop deployment is not successful, it is necessary to act in accordance with military law.

古文：高琪出战复败，自度不免，颇闻庆山奴诸人有谋，十月辛亥，高琪遂率所将飐军入中都，围执中第。
现代文：术虎高琪出战再次失败，自己思量难免受惩罚。他早就听说庆山奴等人有意谋反，于是在十月十五日，率领礣军进入中都，包围了执中的府第。
English: He had already heard that Qing Shannu and others intended to rebel, so on October 15, he led his army into the capital and surrounded the capital.

古文：执中闻变，弯弓注矢外射，不胜，登后垣欲走，衣絓堕而伤股，军士就斩之。
现代文：执中听得变乱，搭弓向外放箭，敌不过，登上后墙要逃，因为挂住衣服而摔下地，伤了大腿，军士就地杀死了他。
English: During the execution, he was heard to be disorganized. He raised his bow and shot arrows, but the enemy did not stop. He climbed onto the back wall to escape, but fell to the ground because he was hanging up his clothes, injuring his thigh. The sergeant killed him on the spot.

古文：高琪持执中首诣阙待罪，宣宗赦之。以为左副元帅。
现代文：术虎高琪拿着执中首级来到宫门等待定罪，宣宗赦免了他，并任命他为左副元帅。
English: Zhuhu Gaoqi came to the palace gate with the head of the executioner to wait for conviction. Xuanzong pardoned him and appointed him as the left deputy marshal.

古文：执中之党呼于衢路曰： 飐军反矣，杀之者有赏。 
现代文：执中的同党在街衢上呼喊道 ：礣军造反了，杀死礣兵的人有赏。 
English: The adherent of the same party shouted on the street: the Boers have rebelled, and those who kill the Boers will be rewarded.

古文：市人从之。
现代文：市民响应，礣兵死了很多人，整个军队都恐惧不安。
English: The citizens responded, many soldiers died, and the entire army was afraid.

古文：飐军死者甚众，一军皆恟恟，宣宗遣近侍抚谕之，诏有司量加赙赠，众乃稍安。
现代文：宣宗派近侍告慰礣军，令有关部门酌量给予丧葬财物，众军兵才稍稍安定下来。
English: Xuan Zong sent his attendants to console the dead soldiers and ordered the relevant departments to give funeral goods at their discretion. Only then did the soldiers settle down a bit.

古文：明日，除特末也泰宁军节度使，乌古论奋剌真授知济南府事，徒单金寿真授知归德府事，蒲察六斤真授知平阳府事。
现代文：第二天，皇上任命特末也为泰宁军节度使，授实际官职与乌古论夺剌为济南府知府，徒单金寿为归德府知府，蒲察六斤为平阳府知府。
English: The next day, the emperor appointed Te Matsu to be the chief envoy of the Taining Army, conferred the actual official position and the ancient theory to win the title of the governor of Jinan Prefecture, Tozan Jinshou to be the governor of Guide Prefecture, and Pucha Rokkin to be the governor of Pingyang Prefecture.

古文：甲寅，左谏议大夫张行信上封事曰： 《春秋》之法，国君立不以道，若尝与诸侯盟会，即列为诸侯。
现代文：十八日，左谏议大夫张行信向皇帝呈上封事，在封事中说： 按《春秋》书中的法则，国君不依靠既定的规律立位，如果曾经与诸侯会盟，就列位为诸侯。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Xingxin, the doctor of the Left Hand Council, presented a letter to the emperor. In the letter, he said: According to the rules in the "Spring and Autumn" book, the sovereign does not rely on established laws to establish his position. If he was once allied with the princes, he will be ranked as princes.

古文：东海在位已六年矣，为其臣者谁敢干之。
现代文：东海王在位达六年，他的臣子谁也不敢冒犯他。
English: The king of the East Sea has been on the throne for six years, and none of his courtiers dare to offend him.

古文：胡沙虎握兵入城，躬行弑逆，当是时惟鄯阳、石古乃率众赴援，至于战死，论其忠烈，在朝食禄者皆当愧之。
现代文：胡沙虎带兵入城，叛逆杀君，当时只有鄯阳、石古乃率人赶去救援，以至于战死。就他的忠烈而言，朝中领俸禄的大臣都该感到羞愧。
English: Hu Shagu led troops into the city, rebelled and killed the prince. At that time, only Puyang, Ishigun and his men rushed to the rescue and died in the battle. As far as his loyalty is concerned, the ministers who received salaries in the middle of the dynasty should be ashamed.

古文：陛下始亲万机，海内望化，褒显二人，延及子孙，庶几少慰贞魂，激天下之义气。
现代文：陛下开始亲理政事，海内各方仰望归化，褒奖两人，延福于其子孙，多少抚慰一下贞烈魂灵，以激励天下人的忠义风气。
English: His Majesty began to personally manage the affairs of state, and all parties in the country looked up to the naturalization, praised the two, extended blessings to their children and grandchildren, and somewhat comforted the souls of the virtuous, in order to inspire the loyalty of the people of the world.

古文：宋徐羡之、傅亮、谢晦弑营阳王立文帝，文帝诛之，以江陵奉迎之诚，免其妻子。
现代文：宋国徐羡之、傅亮、谢晦杀营阳王而立文帝，文帝杀掉他们。而因为江陵迎驾心诚，赦免了他的妻儿。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang, and Xie Yu assassinated Yang Wang and established Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen killed them, but because of Jiangling's sincerity, he pardoned his wife and children.

古文：胡沙虎国之大贼，世所共恶，虽已死而罪名未正，合暴其过恶，宣布中外，除名削爵，缘坐其家，然后为快。
现代文：胡沙虎是国家的大贼，为人所共同憎恶，虽然已死但罪名没有正式判定，应当揭露他的罪状，向朝廷内外宣布，削除名号，革去官爵，连坐他的家眷，这才是大快人心。
English: Hu Shazhu was a great thief of the country and was universally hated. Although he was dead, he had not been officially convicted of any crime. His guilt should be revealed and announced to the imperial court and beyond. His name should be removed, he should be stripped of his title and his family members should also be stripped of their titles. This would be a great relief to the people.

古文：陛下若不忍援立之劳，则依仿元嘉故事，亦足以示惩戒。 
现代文：陛下如果不忍心泯灭他帮助立位的功劳，就仿照元嘉的旧例处置，也足以表示惩戒了。 
English: If His Majesty does not have the heart to wipe out the merit of his help to establish the throne, it is enough to punish him by following the old example of Yuan Jia.

古文：宣宗乃下诏暴执中过恶，削其官爵。
现代文：宣宗于是下昭揭露执中的罪状，削除官爵。
English: Xuan Zong then revealed the charges in the indictment and removed the official title.

古文：赠鄯阳、石古乃，加恩其子。
现代文：赠给鄯阳和石古乃，加恩封赏他们的儿子。
English: presented to Shanyang and Shikunai, and Ghan rewarded their son.

古文：庆山奴、惟弼、惟康皆迁赏，近侍局自此用事矣。
现代文：庆山奴、惟弼、惟康都加官奖赏，近侍局从此开始行使权力。
English: Qing Shannu, Wei Xuan and Wei Kang were rewarded with additional posts, and the Office of the Close Attendant began to exercise its powers.

古文：论曰：金九主，遇弑者三，其逆谋者十人。
现代文：著者评论：金国九位君主，被臣下杀死的三人，被谋反的共有十人。
English: Author's comment: Of the nine monarchs of the Kim dynasty, three were killed by their subjects, and a total of ten were plotted against.

古文：熙宗之弑，惟大兴国一人世宗声其罪而磔之思陵之侧。
现代文：熙宗被杀，只有大兴国这一人被世宗明定罪并在思陵旁边分尸而死。
English: Xizong was killed, and only Daxing Guo was convicted by Shizongming and dismembered next to the mausoleum.

古文：徒单贞虽诛。未闻暴其罪状，后以戚畹又复赠官追封。
现代文：徒单贞虽然被诛杀，但没听到揭露他的罪状，后来由于他是外戚，又追封官号。
English: Although Tsuchizan Zhen was beaten to death, he did not hear the charges against him revealed. Later, because he was a maternal relative, he was stripped of his official title.

古文：余秉德、唐括辩等六人，皆以他罪诛，海陵之弑，其首恶为完颜元宜，则令终焉。
现代文：余下的秉德、唐括辩等六人，都因别的罪行被杀。海陵之死，元凶是完颜元宜，却让他自然死亡。
English: The remaining six people, including Bingde and Tang Baofeng, were all killed for other crimes. The culprit of Hailing's death was Kuan Yan Yuan Yi, but he died a natural death.

古文：卫绍王之弑曰胡沙虎，不死于司败之诛，而死于高琪之手。
现代文：卫绍王被胡沙虎所杀，他没死于司败的杀戮，却死于术虎高琪之手。
English: King Weishao was killed by the Hu Sha tiger. He did not die from Sibei's killing, but died at the hands of the magic tiger Gao Qi.

古文：古所谓弑君之贼人得而讨之者，谓请于公上而致讨焉。如孔子之请讨陈恒是也。
现代文：古人所讲杀君之贼子应当诛杀，是指奏请皇上后才得以征讨，就像孔子奏请讨伐陈恒那样。
English: The ancients said that the thief who killed the prince should be killed, which means that it was only possible to subjugate him after he appealed to the emperor, just as Confucius appealed to Chen Heng.

古文：岂有如琪之擅杀而以为功者乎。
现代文：哪有像高琪那样擅自杀人而因之立功的呢？
English: Where is there anyone like Gao Qi who has killed people without permission and received credit for it?

古文：金之政刑，其乱若此，国欲不亡，其可得乎！
现代文：金国的刑律如此混乱，国家要不灭亡，难道可以做到吗？
English: The criminal law of the People's Republic of China is so chaotic. If the country is not to perish, can it be done?

