古文：起柔兆执徐三月，尽强圉大荒落，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起柔兆执徐三月，尽强圉大荒落，凡一年有奇。
English: Every year is full of surprises, from the mildest March to the worst March.

古文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝中显德三年
现代文：后周世宗显德三年
English: Three years after Zhou Zongxiande

古文：三月，甲午朔，上行视水寨，至淝桥，自取一石，马上持之至寨以供砲，从官过桥者人赍一石。
现代文：三月，甲午朔，后周世宗巡视水寨，到达淝桥，亲自捡取一块石头，骑在马上拿着到寨中供炮使用，随从官员过桥的每人也携带一块石头。
English: In March, a little after noon, Zhou Shizong inspected the water castle, arrived at the bridge, personally picked up a stone, rode on a horse and took it to the castle for use by the cannon, and each person accompanying the officials across the bridge also carried a stone.

古文：太祖皇帝乘皮船入寿春壕中，城上发连弩射之，矢大如屋椽。牙将馆陶张琼遽以身蔽之，矢中琼髀，死而复苏。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝乘坐牛皮船进入寿春护城河中，城上用连弩发射，箭矢像房屋的椽子那样粗；牙将馆陶人张琼立即用身体遮挡，箭射中张琼的大腿，昏死过去又苏醒过来。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty rode a cowhide boat into the Shuchun Moat. The city used a connecting anchor to launch the arrows, which were as thick as the rafters of a house. Zhang Qiong, a ceramist at the General Dentistry Museum, immediately shielded himself with his body. The arrow hit Zhang Qiong's thigh, and he passed out and woke up.

古文：镞着骨不可出，琼饮酒一大卮，令人破骨出之。流血数升，神色自若。
现代文：箭头射进骨头不能拔出，张琼喝下一大杯酒，命令人敲破骨头取出箭，流血好几升，神态脸色仍从容自如。
English: The arrow shot into the bone cannot be pulled out. Zhang Qiong drank a large glass of wine and ordered someone to break the bone and take out the arrow. She bled several liters and her face was still relaxed.

古文：唐主复以右仆射孙晟为司空，遣与礼部尚书王崇质奉表入见，称： 自天祐以来，海内分崩，或跨据一方，或迁革异代，臣绍袭先业，奄有江表，顾以瞻乌未定，附凤何从！
现代文：南唐主又任命右仆射孙晟为司空，派遣他与礼部尚书王崇质奉持表章入周进见，表称： 自从唐朝天以来，天下分崩离析，有的地区割据一方，有的地区改朝换代，臣下继承祖先基业，拥有江表之地，只是因为看那乌鸦都没有落脚，要想附凤攀龙又从何谈起！
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty also appointed his right-hand man, Emperor Jia Sun Rong, as the second-in-command, and sent him and the head of the ceremonial department, Emperor Shangshu, to hold a ceremony to enter Zhoujin, saying: Since the Tang Dynasty, the world has fallen apart, some regions have been separated, some regions have changed dynasties, and the vassals have inherited the ancestral inheritance and own the land of the river table, just because the crows have not settled down. If you want to attach a phoenix and climb a dragon, where do you start?

古文：今天命有归，声教远被，愿比两浙、湖南，仰奉正朔，谨守土疆，乞收薄伐之威，赦其后服之罪，首于下国，俾作外臣，则柔远之德，云谁不服！ 
现代文：如今天命已有归宿，声威教化泽被远近，希望比照两浙的吴越、湖南的楚国，敬奉中原号令，谨守土地疆域，乞求收敛征伐的威势，赦免后来臣服的罪过，从我小国开始，让我作您域外臣子，那么安抚边远的德政，还有谁不服从！ 
English: If today's mission has a destination, and the voice of Wei and the teaching of Huazawa has been carried far and near, I hope that, in accordance with the Wu Yue of the two Zhejiang and the Chu Kingdom of Hunan, we will respect the Central Plains, adhere to the territorial boundaries, beg for the power of conquest to be restrained, and forgive the sins of later submission. Starting from my small country, let me be your foreign minister, then appease the remote German government, who else disobeys!

古文：又献金千两，银十万两，罗绮二千匹。
现代文：又贡献黄金千两，白银十万两，罗绮二千匹。
English: He also contributed one thousand taels of gold, one hundred thousand taels of silver, and two thousand horses.

古文：晟谓冯延己曰： 此行当在左相，晟若辞之，则负先帝。 
现代文：孙晟对冯延巳说： 此行应当由您左相出使，然而我孙晟如果推辞，那就有负先帝烈祖厚望。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said to Feng Yanshi, "This trip should be sent by your left emissary. However, if I, Sun Yat-sen, refuse, then I will fail the expectations of our forefathers.

古文：既行，知不免，中夜，叹息谓崇质曰： 君家百口，宜自为谋。
现代文：上路以后，自知不免一死，半夜叹息，对王崇质说： 您家有一百多口人，应该好好地为自己盘算。
English: After going on the road, knowing that death was inevitable, he sighed in the middle of the night and said to Wang Chongqing: Your family has more than a hundred people, you should make a good plan for yourself.

古文：吾思之熟矣，终不负永陵一培土，馀无所知。 
现代文：我已经考虑得很成熟了，最后决不辜负永陵烈祖的在天之灵，其余的一无所知了。 
English: I have thought about it very maturely, and in the end I will definitely live up to the spirit of the Yongling martyrs in heaven, and I don't know anything else.

古文：南汉甘泉宫使林延遇，阴险多计数，南汉主倚信之；诛灭诸弟，皆延遇之谋也。
现代文：南汉甘泉宫使林延遇，为人阴险，善于算计，南汉主依靠信任他；诛杀消灭君主的诸兄弟，都是林延遇的主意。
English: The Southern Han Dynasty's Ganquan Palace made Lin Yan Rong, an insidious person, good at calculation. The Southern Han Dynasty's lord relied on and trusted him. It was Lin Yan Rong's idea to kill and destroy the monarch's brothers.

古文：乙未卒，国人相贺。
现代文：乙未，林延遇去世，国中之人互相庆贺。
English: When Lin Yan passed away, people in the country celebrated with each other.

古文：延遇病甚，荐内给事龚澄枢自代，南汉主即日擢澄枢知承宣院及内侍省。
现代文：林延遇病情危重时，推荐内给事龚澄枢代替自己，南汉主当日提升龚澄枢主持承宣院和内侍省。
English: When Lin Yan was critically ill, the recommendation was to replace him with Zou Chenghu. On the same day, the Southern Han Emperor promoted Zou Chenghu to preside over the Xuanxuan Academy and the Ministry of the Imperial Household.

古文：澄枢，番禺人也。
现代文：龚澄枢是番禺人。
English: He is a native of Panyu.

古文：光、舒、黄招安巡检使、行光州刺史何超以安、随、申、蔡四州兵数万攻光州。
现代文：光、舒、黄招安巡检使、行光州刺史何超率领安、随、申、蔡四州军队数万人进攻光州。
English: Guangming, Shu, Huangzhao, the inspector of Anzhuang, and the governor of Gwangju, Zhishi Hechao, led tens of thousands of troops from Anzhuang, Su, Shen and Cai to attack Gwangju.

古文：丙申，超奏唐光州刺史张绍弃城走，都监张承翰以城降。
现代文：丙申，何超奏报南唐光州刺史张绍弃城逃跑，都监张承翰率城投降。
English: Bishin, He Chaozhou reported that Zhang Shao, the governor of Gwangju in southern Tang Dynasty, abandoned the city and fled, and Zhang Chenghan, the governor of the capital, led the city to surrender.

古文：丁酉，行舒州刺史郭令图拔舒州。唐蕲州将李福杀其知州王承巂，举州来降。
现代文：丁酉，行舒州刺史郭令图攻克舒州，南唐蕲州将领李福杀死知州王承，率州前来投降。
English: Ding Jun, marched to Shuzhou to assassinate Guo Lingtu and conquer Shuzhou. Li Fu, the general of the Southern Tang Dynasty, killed Wang Cheng of Chizhou and led the state to surrender.

古文：遣六宅使齐藏珍攻黄州。
现代文：后周派遣六宅使齐藏珍进攻黄州。
English: Later that week, he dispatched Liukake to send Qi Zangzhen to attack Huangzhou.

古文：彰武留后李彦頵，性贪虐，部民与羌胡作乱，攻之。
现代文：彰武留后李彦，生性贪婪暴虐，所辖百性和羌胡部落发动叛乱，进攻李彦。
English: After Zhang Wu stayed, Li Yan, by nature greedy and tyrannical, and the Baicheng and Yanhu tribes under his jurisdiction launched a rebellion and attacked Li Yan.

古文：上召彦頵还朝。
现代文：后周世宗召李彦回朝进京。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong summoned Li Yan to return to the capital in the morning.

古文：秦、凤之平也，上赦所俘蜀兵以隶军籍，从征淮南，复亡降于唐。
现代文：秦州、凤州平定时，后周世宗赦免所俘获的后蜀士兵将他们编入军籍，跟随征伐淮南，他们又逃亡向南唐投降。
English: After Zhou Shizong pardoned the captured post-Shu soldiers and enlisted them into the army, they followed the conquest of Huainan, and they fled to South Tang and surrendered.

古文：癸卯，唐主表献百五十人；上悉命斩之。
现代文：癸卯，南唐主上表献出降卒一百五十人；世宗命令将他们全部斩首。
English: At the same time, the Lord of Southern Tang presented a list of one hundred and fifty surrendered soldiers; Shizong ordered that they all be beheaded.

古文：舒州人逐郭令图，铁骑都指挥使洛阳王审琦选轻骑夜袭舒州，复取之，令图乃得归。
现代文：舒州人驱逐郭令图，铁骑都指挥使洛阳人王审琦选轻骑兵夜晚袭击舒州，又收复舒州，郭令图于是得以返归。
English: The people of Shuzhou expelled Guo Lingtu, and the commander of the Iron Cavalry ordered the Luoyang people to attack Shuzhou at night and recover Shuzhou. Guo Lingtu was able to return.

古文：马希崇及王延政之子继沂皆在扬州，诏抚存之。
现代文：马希崇和王延政的儿子王继沂都在扬州，后周世宗下诏安抚慰问他们。
English: Ma Xizong and Wang Jizhe, the son of Wang Yanzheng, were both in Yangzhou. Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict to appease and comfort them.

古文：丙午，孙晟等至上所。
现代文：丙午，孙晟等人到达后周世宗所在之处。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Sun Yat-sen and others arrived at the place where Zhou Shizong was.

古文：庚戌，上遣中使以孙晟诣寿春城下，示刘仁赡，且招谕之。
现代文：庚戌，后周世宗派遣朝廷使者带孙晟到寿春城下，并且让他招安南唐守将。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong sent an emissary of the imperial court to take Sun Yat-sen to Shuchun Castle and asked him to recruit An Nan, the governor of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：仁赡见晟，戎服拜于城上。
现代文：刘仁赡见到孙晟，在城上身着戎装行拜礼。
English: When Liu Renyi saw Sun Yat-sen, he went to the top of the city dressed in military attire to worship.

古文：晟谓仁赡曰： 君受国厚恩，不可开门纳寇。 
现代文：孙晟对刘仁赡说： 您身受国君深厚恩泽，不可打开城门迎纳敌寇。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said to Liu Renyi: You are the recipient of the profound favor of the sovereign, you must not open the city gate to welcome the enemy invaders.

古文：上闻之，甚怒，晟曰： 臣为唐宰相，岂可教节度使外叛邪！ 
现代文：世宗听说后，十分恼怒，孙晟说： 臣下我身为宰相，岂能教唆节度使叛变投敌呢！ 
English: When Sejong heard of this, he was very angry. Sun Yat-sen said, "My vassal, as prime minister, how can I instigate Sejong to defect to the enemy?

古文：上乃释之。
现代文：世宗于是释放了他。
English: Wu Zetian forgave him and released him.

古文：唐主使李德明、孙晟言于上，请去帝号，割寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六州之地。仍岁输金帛百万以求罢兵。
现代文：南唐主派遣李德明、孙晟对后周世宗说，请求废除帝号，割让寿州、濠州、泗州、楚州、光州、海州等六州之地，并且每年进贡黄金绢帛百万，以求休兵停战。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang dispatched Li Deming and Sun Yat-sen to Zhou Shizong, requesting the abolition of the imperial title, the cession of six states including Shoushou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Chuzhou, Gwangju, and Haizhou, and an annual tribute of one million taels of gold in order to obtain a truce and an armistice.

古文：上以淮南之地已半为周有，诸将捷奏日至，欲尽得江北之地，不许。
现代文：世宗因为淮南之地已经一半被后周占有，各路将领捷报连日到达，便打算取得全部长江以北的地方，不答应唐主所请。
English: Because half of the land of Huainan had already been occupied by Hou Zhou, Shizong planned to take all the places north of the Yangtze River, and did not agree to the Tang Lord's request.

古文：德明见周兵日进，奏称： 唐主不知陛下兵力如此之盛，愿宽臣五日之诛，得归白唐主，尽献江北之地。 
现代文：李德明眼看后周军队日益推进，上奏称述： 唐主不知道陛下的兵力如此强盛，希望给臣下五天不作讨伐的宽限，使臣下得以返归禀告唐主，献出全部长江以北之地。 
English: Li De saw with his own eyes that Hou Zhou's army was advancing day by day. In his last report, he said: "The Tang Lord does not know that His Majesty's army is so strong. He hopes to give his subjects five days' grace not to make a crusade, so that his subjects can return to report to the Tang Lord and offer all the land north of the Yangtze River."

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：世宗于是准许他。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：晟因奏遣王崇质与德明俱归。
现代文：孙晟便奏请派王崇质与李德明一道返归。
English: Sun Yat-sen then asked Wang Chongqing to return with Li Deming.

古文：上遣供奉官安弘道送德明等归金陵，赐唐主诏，其略曰： 但存帝号，何爽岁寒！
现代文：世宗派遣供奉官安弘道送李德明等人返归金陵，赐南唐主书信，信中大致说： 只管保存帝号，为什么要失去松柏不怕天寒地冻依旧郁郁葱葱的品格！
English: King Sejong sent the offering officer Anhong Dao to send Li Deming and others back to Jinling, and gave the South Tang Dynasty master a letter, which roughly said: Even if the imperial title is preserved, why lose the lush character of pine and cypress, which is not afraid of cold and frost!

古文：倘坚事大之心，终不迫人于险。 
现代文：倘若能坚定自己事奉大周的信念，终究不会被人逼入险境绝地。 
English: If you can strengthen your faith in serving the Great Zhou Dynasty, you will not be forced into a dangerous situation.

古文：又曰： 俟诸郡之悉来，即大军之立罢。
现代文：又说： 等到江北各州全部献来，我的大军立即休战。
English: He also said, "Wait until all the states north of the Yangtze River have been sacrificed, and my great army will immediately cease fighting."

古文：言尽于此，更不烦云，苟曰未然，请从兹绝。 
现代文：话已在此说尽，不再赘述；倘若说还不行，请从此决绝。 
English: I've said all I can say here, so I won't say any more, and if I can't say any more, I'll stop now.

古文：又赐其将相书，使熟议而来。
现代文：又赐给南唐将相书信，让他们仔细商议而来。
English: He also sent a letter to the Nantang generals, asking them to come to discuss the matter carefully.

古文：唐主复上表谢。
现代文：南唐主又上表道谢。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang expressed his thanks again.

古文：李德明盛称上威德及甲兵之强，劝唐主豁江北之地，唐主不悦。
现代文：李德明盛赞后周世宗声威德行和军队强盛，规劝南唐主割让长江以北之地，南唐主不高兴。
English: After Li Deming praised Zhou Zongzong's virtuous conduct and strong army, he advised the Southern Tang Lord to cede the land north of the Yangtze River. The Southern Tang Lord was not happy.

古文：宋齐丘以割地为无益，德明轻佻，言多过实，国人亦不之信。
现代文：宋齐丘认为割让土地无济于事；李德明为人轻浮，经常言过其实，国中之人也不相信他的话。
English: Song Qiqiu believed that ceding land would not help; Li Deming was frivolous, often exaggerated, and people in the country did not believe his words.

古文：枢密使陈觉、副使李征古素恶德明与孙晟，使王崇质异其言，因谮德明于唐主曰： 德明卖国求利。 
现代文：枢密使陈觉、副使李徵古素来憎恶李德明和孙晟，让王崇质说得同李德明不一样，趁势对南唐主说李德明的坏话道： 李德明出卖国家求取私利。 
English: Privy envoy Chen Jue and deputy envoy Li Zhigu have always detested Li Deming and Sun Yat-sen, so Wang Chongqing said something different from Li Deming, and took advantage of the situation to speak ill of Li Deming to the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty: Li Deming sold out the country for personal gain.

古文：唐主大怒，斩德明于市。
现代文：南唐主勃然大怒，将李德明在街市斩首。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty flew into a rage and beheaded Li Deming in the market.

古文：吴程攻常州，破其外郭，执唐常州团练使赵仁泽，送于钱唐，仁泽见吴越王弘亻叔不拜，责以负约。弘亻叔怒，抉其口至耳。
现代文：吴程进攻常州，攻破常州外城，抓获南唐常州团练使赵仁泽，解送到钱唐。赵仁泽见到吴赵王钱弘不下跪叩拜，斥责钱弘背信负约；钱弘发怒，把他的嘴一直撕裂到耳边。
English: Wu Cheng attacked Changzhou, broke through the outer city of Changzhou, captured the Southern Tang Changzhou group training envoy Zhao Renzhe, and sent him to Qiantang. Zhao Renzhe saw Wu Zhao Wang Qian Hong unable to kneel and prostrate, rebuked Qian Hong for breaking his promise; Qian Hong became angry and tore his mouth all the way to his ear.

古文：元德昭怜其忠，为傅良药，得不死。
现代文：元德昭怜惜他的忠诚，为他敷用好药，得以不死。
English: Yuan Dezhao took pity on his loyalty and gave him good medicine so that he would not die.

古文：唐主以吴越兵在常州，恐其侵逼润州，以宣、润大都督燕王弘冀年少，恐其不习兵，征还金陵。
现代文：南唐主因吴越军队在常州城下，害怕他们侵犯进逼润州，又因宣、润大都督燕王钱弘冀年纪轻，怕他不熟习军事，便征召他返回金陵。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang, fearing that the Wuyue army was encroaching on and forcing Rongzhou, because the Wuyue army was under the city of Changzhou, and fearing that Yan Wang Qian Hongji, the governor of Xuanwu and Rongwu, was too young to be familiar with military affairs, conscripted him to return to Jinling.

古文：部将赵鐸言于弘冀曰： 大王元帅，众心所恃，逆自退归，所部必乱。 
现代文：部将赵铎对钱弘冀说： 大王身为元帅，是众人心目中的支柱，反而自己退归京城，部众必定大乱。 
English: General Zhao Wei said to Qian Hongji: The great king, as a marshal, is a pillar in the eyes of the people, but he retreated to the capital, and the people must be in turmoil.

古文：弘冀然之，辞不就征，部分诸将，为战守之备。
现代文：钱弘冀认为是这样，推辞不接受征召，部署众将，作好战斗守卫的准备。
English: Qian Hongji thought so. He refused to accept the call-up, deployed generals, and prepared for the battle.

古文：龙武都虞候柴克宏，再用之子也，沉默好施，不事家产，虽典宿卫，日与宾客博奕饮酒，未尝言兵，时人以为非将帅才。
现代文：龙武都虞候柴克宏是柴再用的儿子，沉默寡言、乐善好施，不管家产，虽然典领宫廷警卫，但仍每天与宾客们下棋喝酒，不曾谈论军事，当时人认为他不是将帅的材料。
English: Zhai Kehong, the son of Longwu Dugu, was a taciturn man who was good at giving and generous with his money. Although he was given the title of palace guard, he still played chess and drank wine with his guests every day. He never talked about the military. At that time, people thought he was not the material to be a great general.

古文：至是，有言克宏久不迁官者，唐主以为抚州刺史。
现代文：到这时，有人说柴克宏很久没迁升官职，南唐主便任命他为抚州刺史。
English: At this time, some people said that Zhai Kehong had not been promoted for a long time, and the Lord of Nantang appointed him as Fuzhou chief historian.

古文：克宏请效死行陈，其母亦表称克宏有父风，可为将，苟不胜任，分甘孥戮。
现代文：柴克宏请求在军队效命，他母亲也进表称柴克宏有父亲遗风，可以为将，如果不能胜任，甘愿满门抄斩。
English: Chai Kehong requested to serve in the army. His mother also wrote that Chai Kehong had his father's legacy and could be a general, but if he was not competent, he would be willing to do anything.

古文：唐主乃以克宏为右武卫将军，使将兵会袁州刺史陆孟俊救常州。
现代文：南唐主于是任命柴克宏为右武卫将军，让他领兵会合袁州刺史陆孟俊救援常州。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then appointed Zhai Kehong as the general of the Right Division of Wuwei, and let him lead the troops to join Yuan Zhou and Lu Mengjun to rescue Changzhou.

古文：时唐精兵悉在江北，克宏所将数千人皆羸老，枢密使李征古复以铠仗之朽蠹者给之。
现代文：当时南唐精锐部队都在长江以北，柴克宏所率领的数千人都瘦弱年迈，枢密使李徵古又将铠甲兵器中锈蚀破烂的给他。
English: At that time, the elite troops of Southern Tang were all north of the Yangtze River, and the thousands of people led by Zhai Kehong were thin and old. The confidential envoy Li Qigu also gave him the rusted and tattered armored weapons.

古文：克宏诉于征古，征古慢骂之，众皆愤恚，克宏怡然。
现代文：柴克宏向李徵古申诉，李徵古傲慢地辱骂他，部众都忿忿不平，柴克宏却安然如常。
English: Zhai Kehong complained to Li Zhenggu, Li Zhenggu arrogantly insulted him, the club members were angry, but Zhai Kehong was safe as usual.

古文：至润州，征古遣使召还，以神卫统军硃匡业代之。
现代文：到达润州，李徵古派遣使者召他回来，任命神卫统军朱匡业取代他。
English: Arriving in Runzhou, Li Zhenggu sent an envoy to call him back and appointed Zhu Kuangye of the United Guards to replace him.

古文：燕王弘冀谓克宏： 君但前战，吾当论奏。 
现代文：燕王钱弘冀对柴克宏说： 您只管在前面打仗，我自会安排奏报。 
English: Yan Wang Qian Hongji said to Zhai Kehong: You can only fight in the front, I will arrange a report.

古文：乃表克宏才略可以成功，常州危在旦莫，不宜中易主将。
现代文：于是上表说柴克宏才能谋略可以成就功业，常州危在旦夕，不适宜中途调换主将。
English: As a result, the above table said that Zhai Kehong can only strategize and can accomplish his work. Changzhou is in imminent danger, and it is not appropriate to change the captain halfway.

古文：克宏引兵径趣常州，征古复遣使召之，克宏曰： 吾计日破贼，汝来召吾，必奸人也！ 
现代文：柴克宏领兵直奔常州，李徵古又派遣使者召他，柴克宏说： 我估计数日可以破敌，你来召我回去，必定是奸人啊！ 
English: Zhai Kehong led his army straight to Changzhou, and Li Zhigu sent an envoy to summon him. Zhai Kehong said, "I estimate that I can defeat the enemy in a few days. If you come to summon me back, you must be a traitor!"

古文：命斩之。
现代文：命令斩首。
English: The order was given to execute them.

古文：使者曰： 受李枢密命而来。 
现代文：使者说： 我接受李枢密的命令而来。 
English: The messenger said, "I have come on the orders of Li Shuxin.

古文：克宏曰： 李枢密来，吾亦斩之！ 
现代文：柴克宏说： 李枢密来，我也斩他首级。 
English: Zhai Kehong said, "If Li Shuzhong comes, I will cut off his head."

古文：初，鲍修让、罗晟在福州，与吴程有隙，至是，程抑挫之，二人皆怨。
现代文：当初，鲍修让、罗晟在福州时，与吴程有裂隙，到这时，吴程压制刁难他们，二人都有怨恨。
English: At first, when Bao Xujuan and Luo Jue were in Fuzhou, there was a rift with Wu Cheng. By this time, Wu Cheng was suppressing and harassing them, and both of them had resentment.

古文：先是，唐主遣中书舍人乔匡舜使于吴越，壬子，柴克宏至常州，蒙其船以幕，匿甲士于其中，声言迎匡舜。
现代文：在这以前，南唐主派遣中书舍人乔匡舜到吴越出使，壬子，柴克宏到达常州，用帐幕蒙在船上，将全副武装的士兵藏匿在里面，声称前来接乔匡舜。
English: Prior to this, the Lord of Southern Tang dispatched the Chinese scholar Qiao Kuangyao to Wu Yue as an envoy, and Zhe Ke Hong arrived in Changzhou, covered the ship with a tent, hid the fully armed soldiers inside, and claimed to come to pick up Qiao Kuangyao.

古文：吴越逻者以告，程曰： 兵交，使在其间，不可妄以为疑。 
现代文：吴越巡逻士兵将情况报告，吴程说： 两国交战，使者可以在其间来往，不可随便怀疑。 
English: Wu Yue patrol soldiers will report the situation, Wu Cheng said: The two countries are at war, the messenger can come and go between them, do not casually doubt.

古文：唐兵登岸，径薄吴越营，罗晟不力战，纵之使趣程帐，程仅以身免。
现代文：南唐士兵登上岸，直接逼近吴越营寨，罗晟不拼力作战，放进来让他们奔向吴程的营帐，吴程仅仅自己幸免于难。
English: Southern Tang soldiers came ashore and directly approached Wu Yue's encampment. Luo Yao did not fight hard, but let them run into Wu Cheng's camp. Wu Cheng only survived himself.

古文：克宏大破吴越兵，斩首万级。
现代文：柴克宏大破吴越军队，斩首一万级。
English: Zhai Kehong defeated the army of Wu Yue and decapitated 10,000 soldiers.

古文：硃匡业至行营，克宏事之甚谨。
现代文：朱匡业到达军营，柴克宏事奉他很恭敬。
English: Zhu Kuangye arrived at the military camp, Zhai Kehong served him very respectfully.

古文：吴程至钱唐，吴越王弘亻叔悉夺其官。
现代文：吴程到达钱唐，吴越王钱弘削夺他的一切职务。
English: When Wu Cheng arrived in Qiantang, Qian Hong, the king of Wu Yue, stripped him of all his posts.

古文：甲寅，蜀主以捧圣控鹤都指挥使李廷珪为左右卫圣诸军马步都指挥使，仍分卫圣、匡圣步骑为左右十军，以武定节度使吕彦琦等为使，廷珪总之，如赵廷隐之任。
现代文：甲寅，后蜀主任命捧圣控鹤都指挥使李廷为左右卫圣诸军马步都指挥使，仍旧分卫圣、匡圣步兵、骑兵为左右十个军，任命武定节度使吕彦琦等为军使，李廷总领，如同赵廷隐的职务。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, after the death of Emperor Shu, Emperor Wu appointed Li Ting as the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the left and right guards of the holy army, the commander of the holy army, the commander of the holy army, the commander of the holy army, the commander of the holy army, the commander of the holy

古文：初，柴克宏为宣州巡检使，始至，城堑不修，器械皆阙，吏云： 自田頵、王茂章、李遇相继叛，后人无敢治之者。 
现代文：当初，柴克宏为宣州巡检使，开始到达时，城墙、护城河长年失修，战备器具都有损缺，官吏说： 自从田、王茂章、李遇相继叛变，后来的人没有敢修治城池器械的。 
English: At the beginning, Zhai Kehong was the inspector of Xuanzhou. When he first arrived, the city wall and moat had been in disrepair for many years, and the battle-ready equipment was deficient. Officials said: Since Tian, Wang Maozhang, and Li Ying successively rebelled, later people did not dare to repair the city equipment.

古文：克宏曰： 时移事异，安有此理！ 
现代文：柴克宏说： 时代变换事情不同，哪有这种道理！ 
English: Chai Kehong said: Times change, things are different, how can there be such a reason!

古文：悉缮完之。
现代文：全部修缮完好。
English: Everything is in good repair.

古文：由是路彦铢攻之不克，闻吴程败，乙卯，引归。
现代文：因此路彦铢攻城不克，听说吴程兵败，乙卯，撤退返回。
English: Therefore, Lu Yanqi did not attack the city, and when he heard that Wu Cheng was defeated, he withdrew and returned.

古文：唐主以克宏为奉化节度使，克宏复请将兵救寿州，未至而卒。
现代文：南唐主任命柴克宏为奉化节度使，柴克宏又请求领兵救援寿州，没有到达而去世。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Zhai Kehong as the envoy of the Fenghua Festival. Zhai Kehong also requested to lead soldiers to rescue Shoushou, but he did not arrive and died.

古文：河阳节度使白重赞以天子南征，虑北汉乘虚入寇，缮完守备，且请兵于西京。
现代文：河阳节度使白重赞因为天子南征，顾虑北汉有可能乘虚入侵，修治防御工事，并且向西京请求增兵。
English: The Heyang Festival caused Bai Chongzong to praise the Southern Expedition of the Son of Heaven, worry that the Northern Han might invade by taking advantage of the situation, repair the fortifications, and request more troops from West Beijing.

古文：西京留守王晏初不之与，又虑事出非常，乃自将兵赴之。
现代文：西京留守王晏起初不给军队，后又考虑事情发生在非常时期，于是亲自统率军队赶赴。
English: At first, Wang Qian, who stayed behind in West Beijing, did not give it to the army, but later, considering that the incident occurred during a time of emergency, he personally led the army to rush to the scene.

古文：重赞以晏不奉诏而来，拒不纳，遣人谓之曰： 令公昔在陕服，已立大功，河阳小城，不烦枉驾！ 
现代文：白重赞因为王晏不是接受诏令前来，拒不接纳，派人对他说： 令公您昔日在陕城归服，已立大功，河阳区区小城，不劳屈尊枉驾！ 
English: Because Wang Qian did not come to accept the edict, but refused to accept it, he sent a person to say to him: My lord, you surrendered in Shaanxi in the past, you have done a great service, a small city in Heyang District, it is useless to bow down!

古文：晏惭怍而还。
现代文：王晏羞愧而回。
English: Wang Yao was ashamed and went back.

古文：孟、洛之民，数日惊扰。
现代文：孟州、洛州的百姓，惊恐骚动了好几天。
English: The people of Mengzhou and Lozhou panicked and rioted for several days.

古文：唐主命诸道兵马元帅齐王景达将兵拒周，以陈觉为监军使，前武安节度使边镐为应援都军使。
现代文：南唐主命令诸道兵马元帅齐王李景达领兵抵抗后周军队，任命陈觉为监军使，前武安节度使边镐为应援都军使。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang ordered the military marshal of various provinces, Qi Wang Li Jingda, to lead the troops to resist the army of Hou Zhou, and appointed Chen Jue as the supervising envoy, and the former Wu'an Festival envoy, Bian Qi, as the envoy to support the capital.

古文：中书舍人韩熙载上书曰： 信莫信于亲王，重莫重于元帅，安用监军使为！ 
现代文：中书舍人韩熙载上书说： 论信任，没有比亲王更可信的；论权重，没有比元帅更重要的，哪里用得上监军使呢！ 
English: Han Xizhe, the author of the book, wrote: "In terms of trust, there is nothing more trustworthy than a prince; in terms of weight, there is nothing more important than a marshal, so what is the use of supervising envoys!

古文：唐主不从。
现代文：南唐主没听从。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty did not listen.

古文：遣鸿胪卿潘承祐诣泉、建召募骁勇，承祐荐前永安节度使许文稹、静江指挥使陈德诚、建州人郑彦华、林仁肇。
现代文：派遣鸿胪卿潘承到泉州、建州召募矫健勇猛的人材，潘承推荐前永安节度使许文稹、静江指挥使陈德诚、建州人郑彦华、林仁肇。
English: He sent Pan Cheng to Quanzhou and Jianzhou to recruit vigorous and courageous personnel. Pan Cheng recommended former Yongan Festival commander Xu Wenyi, Jingjiang commander Chen Decheng, and Jianzhou people Zheng Yanhua and Lin Renzhao.

古文：唐主以文稹为西面行营应援使，彦华、仁肇皆为将。
现代文：南唐主任命许文稹为西面行营应援使，郑彦华、林仁肇都为将领。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang appointed Xu Wenyi as the envoy to the Western Camp, and Zheng Yanhua and Lin Renzhao as generals.

古文：仁肇，仁翰之弟也。
现代文：林仁肇是林仁翰的弟弟。
English: Lin Renzhao is the younger brother of Lin Renhan.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，以侍卫新军都指挥使、归德节度使李重进为庐、寿等州招讨使，以武宁节度使武行德为濠州城下都部署。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲子，后周世宗任命侍卫亲军都指挥使、归德节度使李重进为庐、寿等州招讨使，任命武宁节度使武行德为濠州城下都部署。
English: In the summer, in April, Kozi, and later Zhou Shizong appointed the bodyguards to command the troops, the festival of returning to Germany to make Li Chongjin the envoy for recruiting and dispatching troops to the states of Zhai, Shou, and so on, and the festival of appointing Wu Ning to make Wu Xingde the envoy for deploying troops to the city of Zhangzhou.

古文：唐右卫将军陆孟俊自常州将兵万馀人趣泰州，周兵遁去，孟俊复取之，遣陈德诚戍泰州。
现代文：南唐右卫将军陆孟俊从常州领兵一万多人赶赴泰州，后周军队逃遁离去，陆孟俊收复泰州，派遣陈德诚守卫泰州。
English: Lu Mengjun, general of the Southern Tang Right Guards, led more than 10,000 soldiers from Changzhou to Taizhou. The troops fled the next week. Lu Mengjun recovered Taizhou and sent Chen Decheng to guard Taizhou.

古文：孟俊进攻扬州，屯于蜀冈，韩令坤弃扬州走。
现代文：陆孟俊进攻扬州，屯驻在蜀冈，韩令坤丢弃扬州逃跑。
English: Lu Mengjun attacked Yangzhou and stationed in Shuanggang, while Han Lingkun abandoned Yangzhou and fled.

古文：帝遣张永德将兵救之，令坤复入扬州。
现代文：后周世宗派遣张永德领兵救援，韩令坤再入扬州。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong sent Zhang Yongde to lead the rescue, and Han Lingkun re-entered Yangzhou.

古文：帝又遣太祖皇帝将兵屯六合。
现代文：世宗又派遣宋太祖皇帝领兵屯驻六合。
English: Shizong also sent Emperor Song Taizu to lead the troops stationed in Liuhe.

古文：太祖皇帝令曰： 扬州兵有过六合者，折其足！ 
现代文：宋太祖皇帝下令说： 扬州士兵有过六合的，折断他的脚！ 
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty ordered, "If a Yangzhou soldier has had sex, break his legs!"

古文：令坤始有固守之志。
现代文：韩令坤这才有固守的决心。
English: Han Lingkun only had the determination to stick to it.

古文：帝自至寿春以来，命诸军昼夜攻城，久不克。会大雨，营中水深数尺，攻具及士卒失亡颇多，粮运不继，李德明失期不至，乃议旋师。
现代文：世宗亲自到达寿春以来，命令各军昼夜攻城，长久未能攻克；适逢大雨，军营中水深数尺，攻城器材以及士兵损失逃亡很多，粮草运输接应不上，李德明超过期限没有到达，于是商议回师。
English: Since Shuzong personally arrived in Shuchun, he ordered all the armies to attack the city day and night, but they could not conquer it for a long time. When it rained heavily, the water depth in the military camp was several feet, the siege equipment and soldiers lost a lot of escape, the grain and grass transportation could not be met, and Li Deming did not reach the deadline, so they discussed returning to the division.

古文：或劝帝东幸濠州，声言寿州已破，从之。
现代文：有人劝说世宗往东巡视濠州，声称寿州已经攻破；世宗听从。
English: Some people persuaded Sejong to go east to inspect Bozhou, claiming that Shoushou had been conquered; Sejong obeyed.

古文：己巳，帝自寿春循淮而东，乙亥，至濠州。
现代文：己巳，世宗从寿春沿着淮河东进，乙亥，到达濠州。
English: As we all know, Shizong traveled from Shuchun along the east of the Huaihe River to Yihai and arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：韩令坤败唐兵于城东，擒陆孟俊。
现代文：韩令坤在扬州城东击败南唐军队，擒获陆孟俊。
English: Han Lingkun defeated the Southern Tang army in the east of Yangzhou and captured Lu Mengjun.

古文：初，孟俊之废马希萼立希崇也，灭故舒州刺史杨昭恽之族而取其财。杨氏有女美，献于希崇。
现代文：当初，陆孟俊废黜马希萼拥立马希崇，诛灭原舒州刺史杨昭恽全家而取得杨家财产，杨家有个女儿长得美丽，陆孟俊把她献给马希崇。
English: At first, Lu Mengjun dethroned Ma Xicheng, supported Ma Xizong, and annihilated the entire family of the former Shuzhou assassin Yang Zhaojun to acquire the property of the Yang family. The Yang family had a beautiful daughter, and Lu Mengjun dedicated her to Ma Xichong.

古文：令坤入扬州，希崇以杨氏遗令坤，令坤嬖之。
现代文：韩令坤进入扬州，马希崇把杨氏送给韩令坤，韩令坤宠爱她。
English: When Han Lingkun entered Yangzhou, Ma Xizong gave Ms. Yang to Han Lingkun, who doted on her.

古文：既获孟俊，将械送帝所。杨氏在帘下，忽抚膺恸哭。令坤惊问之，对曰： 孟俊昔在潭州，杀妾家二百口。今见之，请复其冤。 
现代文：已经抓获陆孟俊，给他带上脚镣手铐准备押送到世宗所在之处；杨氏站在竹帘下，突然捶胸痛哭，韩令坤惊讶而问她，回答说： 陆孟俊昔日在潭州，杀死贱妾家人二百口，今日见到，请报冤仇。 
English: Lu Mengjun had already been captured, and they had put shackles on his feet and handcuffs on him in preparation for escorting him to where Sejong was. Ms. Yang stood under a bamboo curtain and suddenly burst into tears. Han Lingkun asked her in surprise and replied: "Lu Mengjun killed 200 members of his concubine's family in Tamzhou a long time ago. Seeing him today, please take revenge."

古文：令坤乃杀之。
现代文：韩令坤就杀了陆孟俊。
English: Han Lingkun then killed Lu Mengjun.

古文：唐齐王景达将兵二万自瓜步济江，距六合二十馀里，设栅不进。
现代文：南唐齐王李景达领兵二万从瓜步渡过长江，距离六合二十余里，设置栅栏不再前进。
English: Li Jingda, the king of Qi in Southern Tang, led 20,000 soldiers across the Yangtze River at a leisurely pace. The distance was more than 20 miles, and a fence was set up to prevent them from advancing.

古文：诸将欲击之，太祖皇帝曰： 彼设栅自固，惧我也。
现代文：后周众将领想出击，宋太祖皇帝说： 他们设置栅栏固守，是怕我们啊。
English: After Zhou's generals wanted to attack, Emperor Song Taizu said, "They are afraid of us because they have set up a fence to defend themselves."

古文：今吾众不满二千，若往击之，则彼见吾众寡矣；不如俟其来而击之，破之必矣！ 
现代文：如今我们部众不满二千，倘若前往攻击，他们就看出我们人数的多少了；不如等待他们来而出击，必定可打败他们了。 
English: We are now less than two thousand strong, and if we attack they will see how many of us there are; it is better to wait for them to attack, and they will be defeated.

古文：居数日，唐出兵趣六合，太祖皇帝奋击，大破之，杀获近五千人，馀众尚万馀，走渡江，争舟溺死者甚众，于是唐之精卒尽矣。
现代文：过了几天，南唐出兵赶赴六合，宋太祖皇帝奋勇出击，大败敌军，杀死抓获近五千人，余下部众还有一万多，逃奔渡江，争船淹死的很多，于是南唐的精锐部队丧失殆尽。
English: A few days later, the Southern Tang dispatched troops to Liuhe, and the Emperor Song Taizu bravely attacked, defeated the enemy army, killed and captured nearly five thousand people, and there were more than ten thousand remaining members. They fled to cross the river, and many of the ships were drowned. As a result, the elite troops of Southern Tang were lost.

古文：是战也，士卒有不致力者。
现代文：这场战斗，士兵有不卖力的。
English: The soldiers fought hard in this battle.

古文：太祖皇帝阳为督战，以剑斫其皮笠。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝假装督战，用剑砍那些战不卖力的士兵的皮斗笠。
English: Emperor Song Taizu pretended to supervise the battle and used his sword to cut the leather caps of those soldiers who did not fight hard.

古文：明日，遍阅其皮笠，有剑亦者数十人，皆斩之，由是部兵莫敢不尽死，先是，唐主闻扬州失守，命四旁发兵取之。
现代文：第二天，普遍检查皮斗笠，上面有剑砍痕迹的有数十人，全部推出斩首，从此所部士兵没有敢不拼死作战的。在此之前，南唐主听说扬州失守，命令四周州军发兵夺取扬州。
English: The next day, there was a general inspection of the leather dueling hats, and dozens of people with sword cut marks on them were all beheaded. From then on, the soldiers of the headquarters did not dare to fight to the death. Prior to this, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty heard that Yangzhou was lost and ordered the surrounding state army to send troops to seize Yangzhou.

古文：己卯，韩令坤奏败楚州兵万馀人于湾头堰，获涟州刺史秦进崇。张永德奏败泗州兵万馀人于曲溪堰。
现代文：己卯，韩令坤奏报在湾头堰击败扬州军队一万多人，抓获涟州刺史秦进崇；张永德奏报在曲溪堰击败泗州军队一万多人。
English: At the same time, Han Lingkun reported that he defeated more than 10,000 Yangzhou troops at the Bay Head Dam and captured Qin Jinsong, the governor of Zhangzhou; Zhang Yongde reported that he defeated more than 10,000 Zhangzhou troops at the Quxi Dam.

古文：丙戌，以宣徽南院使向训为淮南节度使兼沿江招讨使。
现代文：丙戌，后周世宗任命宣徽南院使向训为淮南节度使兼沿江招讨使。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Xiang Xun, the envoy of the Southern Xuanhui Academy, as the envoy of the Huainan Festival and the envoy of the invitation along the river.

古文：涡口奏新作浮梁成。
现代文：涡口奏报新建浮桥落成。
English: The newly built pontoon bridge was completed.

古文：丁亥，帝自濠州如涡口。
现代文：丁亥，世宗从濠州前往涡口。
English: Dinghai, Shizong went to Turukou from Zhangzhou.

古文：帝锐于进取，欲自至扬州，范质等以兵疲食少，泣谏而止。
现代文：世宗锐意进取，打算亲自到扬州，范质等人认为军队疲乏粮食缺少，哭着劝谏而阻止。
English: Shizong was determined to forge ahead and planned to go to Yangzhou in person, but the generals and others thought that the army was tired and short of food, so they tried to dissuade him with tears.

古文：帝尝怒翰林学士窦仪，欲杀之，范质入救之。帝望见，知其意，即起避之。质趋前伏地，叩头谏曰： 仪罪不至死，臣为宰相，致陛下枉杀近臣，罪皆在臣。 
现代文：世宗曾经生翰林学士窦仪的气，想杀他；范质进去救窦仪，世宗远远望见，知道来意，立即起身避他，范质急步向前伏在地上，磕头进谏说： 窦仪的罪不至于死，臣下身为宰相，导致陛下错杀近臣，罪都在臣下身上。 
English: Shizong once had the spirit of Hanlin Scholar Douyi and wanted to kill him; Guan Qi went in to save Douyi. Shizong could see him from afar and knew what he was up to and immediately got up to avoid him. Guan Qi hurried forward and prostrated himself on the ground. Shantou Jinlu said: Guan Qi's sin is not to die, his vassal is the prime minister, causing his majesty to kill his close vassal by mistake, the sin is all on his vassal.

古文：继之以泣。
现代文：接着哭泣。
English: Then crying.

古文：帝意解，乃释之。
现代文：世宗怒气消解，于是释放窦仪。
English: Sejong's anger dissipated, so he released Douyi.

古文：北汉葬神武帝于交城北山，庙号世祖。
现代文：北汉在交城北山安葬神武帝刘，庙号为世祖。
English: Emperor Liu of the Northern Han Dynasty was buried in Jiaocheng's Beishan, and the temple was named after him.

古文：五月，壬辰朔，以涡口为镇淮军。
现代文：五月，壬辰朔，后周将涡口改为镇淮军。
English: In May, Renchenshuo, and the following week, the vortex mouth was changed to Zhenhuai Jun.

古文：丙申，唐永安节度使陈诲败福州兵于南台江，俘斩千馀级。
现代文：丙申，南唐永安节度使陈诲在南台江击败福州军队，俘虏斩首一千余级。
English: According to Yi Shen, the Yong'an Festival of Southern Tang enabled Chen Yi to defeat the Fuzhou army in the Nantai River, and the captives were beheaded more than a thousand times.

古文：唐主更命永安曰忠义军。
现代文：南唐主将永安军改名为忠义军。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang renamed the Yongan Army to the Loyalist Army.

古文：诲，德诚之父也。
现代文：陈诲是陈德诚的父亲。
English: Chen Yu is Chen Decheng's father.

古文：戊戌，帝留侍卫亲军都指挥使李重进等围寿州，自涡口北归，乙卯，至大梁。
现代文：戊戌，世宗留下侍卫亲军都指挥使李重进等围攻寿州，从涡口北上返归；乙卯，到达大梁。
English: Wu Zong, Shizong left his bodyguards and commanded his troops to besiege Shoushou, returning north from Turukou; Yi Wu, reached Daliang.

古文：六月，壬申，赦淮南诸州系囚，除李氏非理赋役，事有不便于民者，委长吏以闻。
现代文：六月，壬申，后周赦免淮南各州关押的囚犯，废除南唐李氏不合理的赋税徭役，事情有不便利百姓的，委托州县官吏奏报。
English: In June, the Jinshin Emperor pardoned the prisoners detained by the states of Huainan the following week, and abolished the unreasonable tax collection of the Southern Tang Dynasty. If the matter was not convenient for the people, he entrusted the state and county officials to report it.

古文：侍卫步军都指挥使、彰信节度使李继勋营于寿州城南，唐刘仁赡伺继勋无备，出兵击之，杀士卒数百人，焚其攻具。
现代文：侍卫步军都指挥使、彰信节度使李继勋在寿州城南安营，南唐刘仁赡等候李继勋没有防备，出兵袭击，杀死士兵数百人，焚毁后周军队的攻城器具。
English: The commander of the bodyguards and foot soldiers, Zhang Xin, ordered Li Jixun to camp in the south of Shoushu City, and Liu Renyi of Southern Tang waited for Li Jixun to attack unprepared, kill hundreds of soldiers, and burn the siege equipment of Hou Zhou's army.

古文：唐驾部员外郎硃元因奏事论用兵方略，唐主以为能，命将兵复江北诸州。
现代文：南唐驾部员外郎朱元利用奏报政事论述用兵策略，南唐主认为他有才能，命他统领军队收复长江以北各州。
English: Zhu Yuan, the captain of the Southern Tang Dynasty, used the report on political affairs to discuss the strategy of using soldiers. The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty thought he was talented and ordered him to lead the army to recover the states north of the Yangtze River.

古文：秋，七月，辛卯朔，以周行逢为武平节度使，制置武安、静江等军事。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛卯朔，后周世宗任命周行逢为武平节度使，制置武安、静江等军事。
English: In the autumn, July, Xinwu Shuo, later Zhou Shizong appointed Zhou Xingfeng as Wu Ping Festival envoy, and set up Wu'an, Jingjiang and other military.

古文：行逢既兼总湖、湘，乃矫前人之弊，留心民事，悉除马氏横赋，贪吏猾民为民害者皆去之，择廉平吏为刺史、县令。
现代文：周行逢既已兼管洞庭湖、湘水地区，于是就矫正前人的弊端，关心百姓生计，全部废除马氏的横征暴敛，贪官污吏扰民成为百姓祸害的全部革去，选择廉洁平正的官吏担任刺史、县令。
English: Since Zhou Xingfeng was also in charge of the Dongting Lake and Hunan Water areas, he corrected the shortcomings of his predecessors, concerned about the livelihood of the people, completely abolished the Ma clan's extortion and violence, eliminated the corrupt officials who disturbed the people and became the scourge of the people, and selected honest and upright officials to serve as magistrates and county magistrates.

古文：朗州民、夷杂居，刘言，王逵旧将卒多骄横，行逢壹以法治之，无所宽假，众怨怼且惧。
现代文：郎州地区华夏、蛮夷之民共同居住，刘言、王逵旧日将领大多骄横不法，周行逢一律用法制来管理，没有一点宽容姑息，众人既怨恨又恐惧。
English: In the Langzhou area, the people of Huaxia and barbarians live together. Liu Yan and Wang Xi, the generals of the old days, are mostly arrogant and lawless. Zhou Xing always uses the legal system to manage. There is no tolerance or appeasement, and everyone is both resentful and fearful.

古文：有大将与其党十馀人谋作乱，行逢知之，大会诸将，于座中擒之。数曰： 吾恶衣粝食，充实府库，正为汝曹，何负而反！
现代文：有个大将与其党羽十几人阴谋发动叛乱，周行逢知道此事，便设宴大会众将，在座位上擒获他，数落说： 我穿布衣、吃粗粮，充实国库，正是为了你们，为何负心而谋反！
English: There was a general and more than a dozen members of his party plotting to start a rebellion. When Zhou Xing knew about this, he held a banquet for the generals. He was caught in his seat and said several times: I wear cloth, eat coarse grains, and enrich the national treasury, just for you, why do you have a negative heart and plot a rebellion!

古文：今日之会，与汝诀也！ 
现代文：今日宴会，是与你诀别！ 
English: Today's banquet is a farewell to you!

古文：立挝杀之，座上股栗。
现代文：立刻打死他，在座将领吓得双腿发抖。
English: He was killed instantly, and the generals present trembled in fear.

古文：行逢曰： 诸君无罪，皆宜自安。 
现代文：周行逢说： 诸位没有罪过，都应该自己心安。 
English: Zhou Xingfeng said, "You are not guilty, and you should be at peace with yourselves.

古文：乐饮而罢。
现代文：大家高兴地饮酒而结束。
English: Everyone ended up drinking happily.

古文：行逢多计数，善发隐伏，将卒有谋乱及叛亡者，行逢必先觉，擒杀之，所部凛然。
现代文：周行逢足智多谋，善于抉发隐患，将吏士兵有阴谋作乱和叛变逃亡的，周行逢必定事先察觉，拘捕斩杀，因此部众对他十分敬畏。
English: Zhou Xingfeng was resourceful and good at solving hidden dangers. If the officers and soldiers had conspired to cause turmoil and mutiny and escape, Zhou Xingfeng must have noticed in advance, arrested and killed, so his subordinates were very afraid of him.

古文：然性猜忍，常散遣人密诇诸州事，其之邵州者，无事可复命，但言刺史刘光委多宴饮。
现代文：然而他生性多疑残忍，经常分头派人秘密探察各州情况，他派到邵州的人，没有情况可以报告，便只说刺史刘光委经常设宴饮酒。
English: However, he was suspicious and cruel by nature. He often sent people separately to secretly investigate the situation in each state. The person he sent to Shaozhou had no information to report, so he only said that Liu Guangke, the chief of staff, often held banquets and drank alcohol.

古文：行逢曰： 光委数聚饮，欲谋我邪！ 
现代文：周行逢说： 刘光委多次聚众宴饮，想算计我吧！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng said, "Liu Guangkui's committee has gathered many times for banquets.

古文：即召还，杀之。
现代文：立即召回，杀死他。
English: Recall immediately, kill him.

古文：亲卫指挥使、衡州刺史张文表恐获罪，求归治所，行逢许之。
现代文：亲卫指挥使、衡州刺史张文表畏恐无辜获罪，请求解除兵权回归治所衡州，周行逢准许。
English: The commander-in-chief of the imperial guard, Zhang Wenshi of Hengzhou, fearing that innocent people would be convicted, requested that the military authority be revoked and returned to Hengzhou, the seat of government, and his request was granted.

古文：文表岁时馈献甚厚，及谨事左右，由是得免。
现代文：张文表一年四季馈赠贡献十分丰厚，同时小心事奉周行逢身边亲信，因此得以免罪。
English: Zhang Wenshe made very rich contributions to gifts throughout the year, and at the same time carefully served the relatives around him, so he was exonerated.

古文：行逢妻郧国夫人邓氏，陋而刚决，善治生，尝谏行逢用法太严，人无亲附者。
现代文：周行逢妻子郧国夫人邓氏，丑陋而刚强决断，善于操持生计，曾经规劝周行逢，用法太严的话别人就不会亲附。
English: Zhou Xingfan's wife, Mrs. Deng, ugly and strong-willed, good at making a living, once advised Zhou Xingfan that if the usage is too strict, others will not be attached.

古文：行逢怒曰： 汝妇人何知！ 
现代文：周行逢发怒说： 你妇道人家知道什么！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng said angrily: What do you know about women's morality!

古文：邓氏不悦，因请之村墅视田园，遂不复归府舍。
现代文：邓氏不愉快，因此请求到乡村草房看守田园，于是不再回归府第官舍。
English: Mr. Deng was not happy, so he asked to go to a rural grass hut to watch over the countryside, so he did not return to the prefectural government house.

古文：行逢屡遣人迎之，不至。一旦，自帅僮仆来输税，行逢就见之，曰： 吾为节度使，夫人何自苦如此！ 
现代文：周行逢屡次派人接她，不肯到来；有一天，她亲自带领家僮仆人前来交纳赋税，周行逢上前见她，说： 我身为节度使，夫人为何如此自找苦吃！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng repeatedly sent people to pick her up, but she refused to come; one day, she personally led the servants of the family to come to pay taxes, Zhou Xingfeng came forward to see her and said: I am the festival envoy, why is my wife so hard on herself!

古文：邓氏曰： 税，官物也。
现代文：邓氏说： 赋税，是官家的财富。
English: Mr. Deng said, "Taxation is the source of wealth for government officials.

古文：公为节度使，不先输税，何以率下！
现代文：您身为节度使，不首先交纳赋税，用什么去做下面百姓的表率！
English: As a tax collector, if you don't pay your taxes first, how can you set an example for the people below?

古文：且独不记为里正代人输税以免楚挞时邪？ 
现代文：再说你难道不记得当里正代人交纳赋税来免除刑杖拷打的时候了吗？ 
English: Besides, don't you remember when the people of Rome paid a tax to be spared the cane?

古文：行逢欲与之归，不可，曰： 公诛杀太过，常恐一旦有变，村墅易为逃匿耳。 
现代文：周行逢想同她回家，她不答应，说： 您诛杀太过分，我常常担心有朝一日发生变化，乡村草房容易逃避藏匿。 
English: Whenever Zhou Xing wanted to go home with her, she would not agree, saying, "You have fought too hard. I often worry that things will change one day. It is easy to hide in a rural grass hut.

古文：行逢惭怒，其僚属曰： 夫人言直，公宜纳之。 
现代文：周行逢又羞又气，他的僚属说： 夫人说得有理，您应该接受。 
English: Shy and angry, Zhou Xingfan's colleagues said, "Your wife is right, you should accept it."

古文：行逢婿唐德求补吏，行逢曰： 汝才不堪为吏，吾今私汝则可矣。汝居官无状，吾不敢以法贷汝，则亲戚之恩绝矣。 
现代文：周行逢的女婿唐德要求补任官吏，周行逢说： 你的才能不配做官吏，我如今私下照顾你倒是可以的；但如你当官不像样，我不敢用法来宽容你，那亲戚间的情谊就断绝了。 
English: Zhou Xingfeng's son-in-law Tang De asked for a replacement official, Zhou Xingfeng said: Your talent is not worthy of being an official, I can take care of you privately now; but if you are not a good official, I dare not use the law to tolerate you, the friendship between relatives will be severed.

古文：与之耕牛、农具而遣之。
现代文：给他耕牛、农具而遣送回家。
English: He was sent home with oxen and farm tools.

古文：行逢少时尝坐事黥，隶辰州铜坑，或说行逢： 公面有文，恐为朝廷使者所嗤，请以药灭之。 
现代文：周行逢年轻时曾经因事定罪受黥刑，发配辰州铜，有人劝说周行逢： 您脸上刺有字，恐怕会被朝廷使者所嗤笑，请用药来除去。 
English: When Zhou Xingfeng was young, he was convicted of a crime and sentenced to be beaten. He was awarded the Chenzhou bronze medal. Someone persuaded Zhou Xingfeng: You have a tattoo on your face. I'm afraid the emissary of the imperial court will laugh at you. Please use medicine to remove it.

古文：行逢曰： 吾闻汉有黥布，不害为英雄，吾何耻焉！ 
现代文：周行逢说： 我听说汉代有个黥布，并不因此妨碍他成为英雄，我何必为此感到羞耻呢！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng said: I heard that there was a piece of cloth in the Han Dynasty, but it did not prevent him from becoming a hero. Why should I be ashamed of it?

古文：自刘言、王逵以来，屡举兵，将吏积功及所羁縻蛮夷，检校官至三公者以千数。
现代文：从刘言、王逵以来，多次起兵，将领官吏积累功劳以及所属羁縻州县的蛮夷部落首领，赏赐加封得到司徒、司马、司空三公散官头衔的数以千计。
English: Since Liu Yan and Wang Qian, thousands of generals and officials have been awarded the titles of Sutor, Sima, and Siku.

古文：前天策府学士徐仲雅，自马希广之废，杜门不仕，行逢慕之，署节度判官。
现代文：前天策府学士徐仲雅，从马希广被废黜以后，闭门不出，周行逢仰慕他，任命他代理节度判官。
English: The day before yesterday, Xu Zhongya, an academician of the Central Government, did not leave home after Ma Xiguang was deposed. Zhou Xingfan admired him and appointed him as the acting judge of the festival.

古文：仲雅曰： 行逢昔趋事我，奈何为之幕吏！ 
现代文：徐仲雅说： 周行逢昔日在我手下做事，我怎么能做他幕府的官吏！ 
English: Xu Zhongya said: Zhou Xingfeng used to work under me, how can I be an official of his shogunate!

古文：辞疾不至。
现代文：推辞有病而不到职。
English: He resigned because he was ill and unable to work.

古文：行逢迫胁固召之，面授文牒，终辞不取，行逢怒，放之邵州，既而召还。
现代文：周行逢强迫威胁再三征召，当面授予任职文书，终究坚辞不就，周行逢发怒，将他流放到邵州，不久又召回。
English: Zhou repeatedly conscripted him under the threat of coercion and presented him with a letter of appointment. In the end, his insistence was not enough, and Zhou flew into a rage, exiled him to Shaoshou, and soon recalled him.

古文：会行逢生日，诸道各遣使致贺，行逢有矜色，谓仲雅曰： 自吾兼镇三府，四邻亦畏我乎？ 
现代文：遇上周行逢生日，各府州分别派遣使者表示祝贺，周行逢面有骄色，对徐仲雅说： 从我总领武平、武安、静江三府之后，四方比邻也都畏服我吗？ 
English: On the occasion of his birthday last week, all prefectures and states separately sent envoys to express their congratulations. Xu Zhongya said to Xu Zhongya: Since I have been the leader of the three prefectures of Wuping, Wu'an and Jingjiang, are my neighbors in the four directions also afraid of me?

古文：仲雅曰： 侍中境内，弥天太保，遍地司空，四邻那得不畏！ 
现代文：徐中雅说： 侍中您管辖境内，满天太保，遍地司空，四邻八方哪能不畏服呢！ 
English: Xu Zhongya said: "Your attendant is in charge of the territory, the whole country is under your protection, and the sky is everywhere. How can you not be intimidated by your neighbors?

古文：行逢复放之邵州，竟不能屈。
现代文：周行逢再次将他流放到邵州，最后没能使他屈服。
English: Zhou Xingfeng exiled him to Shaoshou again, but failed to make him give in.

古文：有僧仁及，为行逢所信任，军府事皆预之，亦加检校司空，娶数妻，出入导从如王公。
现代文：有个叫仁及的僧人，得到周行逢信任，军府事务都参与，也加封为检校司空，娶了好几个妻子，出来进去开道跟从的排场如同王公一般。
English: There was a monk named Ren Ji, who was trusted by Zhou Xingfan and was involved in the affairs of the military government. He was also given the title of school inspector, married several wives, and came out to open the way and followed the parade like a prince.

古文：辛亥，宣懿皇后符氏殂。
现代文：辛亥，后周宣懿皇后符氏去世。
English: Xinhai, after the death of Zhou Xuanqi, the Empress Fu died.

古文：唐将硃元取舒州，刺史郭令图弃城走。
现代文：南唐将领朱元攻取舒州，后周刺史郭令图弃城逃跑。
English: Zhu Yuan, the general of the Southern Tang Dynasty, conquered Shuzhou, after which Zhou stabbed Shi Guo and ordered him to abandon the city and flee.

古文：李平取蕲州。
现代文：李平攻取蕲州。
English: Li Ping captured Bozhou.

古文：唐主以元为舒州团练使，平为蕲州刺史。
现代文：南唐主任命朱元为舒州团练使，李平为蕲州刺史。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang appointed Zhu Yuan as the Shuzhou regimental drill sergeant, and Li Ping as the Zhangzhou drill sergeant.

古文：元又取和州。
现代文：朱元又攻取和州。
English: Zhu Yuan went on to capture He Prefecture.

古文：初，唐人以茶盐强民而征其粟帛，谓之博征，又兴营田于淮南，民甚苦之。及周师至，争奉牛酒迎劳。
现代文：当初，南唐将茶、盐强行配给农民而征收粮食布帛，称为 博征 ，又在淮南兴造营田，农民很吃苦头；及至后周军队到达，农民争相奉送牛酒来迎接慰劳。
English: At first, the Southern Tang Dynasty forcibly distributed tea and salt to farmers and levied grain quotas, known as "Bo Zheng," and built farmland in Huainan. Farmers suffered a lot; and when the Zhou army arrived, farmers scrambled to send cattle wine to welcome the consolation.

古文：而将帅不之恤，专事俘掠，视民如土芥。民皆失望，相聚山泽，立堡壁自固，操农器为兵，积纸为甲，时人谓之 白甲军 。
现代文：但后周将帅不体贴安抚，反而专门从事掳掠，把农民视为粪土草芥；农民都很失望，相互聚集在山林湖泽，建立城堡壁垒自己固守，操持农具作为武器，拼缀纸片作为铠甲，当时人称之为 白甲军 。
English: However, Zhou Zhouzhuai was not considerate to appease the cranes, but specialized in kidnapping and plundering, and regarded the peasants as dung and mustard; the peasants were very disappointed, gathered together in the mountains, forests and lakes, built castle barriers to defend themselves, wielded farm tools as weapons, and patched pieces of paper as armor. At that time, they were called the White Armored Army.

古文：周兵讨之，屡为所败，先所得唐诸州，多复为唐有。
现代文：后周军队讨伐他们，屡次被打败，先前所得到南唐各州，大多再为南唐所有。
English: Later, the Zhou army fought against them and was repeatedly defeated. Most of the states of southern Tang that were previously obtained were then owned by southern Tang.

古文：唐之援兵营于紫金山，与寿春城中烽火相应。
现代文：南唐的救援部队在紫金山安营，与寿春城中的烽火遥相呼应。
English: The relief forces of Southern Tang set up camp in Zijin Mountain, echoing the bonfires in Shouchun City.

古文：淮南节度使向训奏请以广陵之兵并力攻寿春，俟克城，更图进取，诏许之。
现代文：淮南节度使向训上奏请求派广陵的军队合力进攻寿春，等待攻克寿春城，再计划进取，后周世宗下诏同意。
English: During the Huainan Festival, Zhou Shizong requested that the army of Guangling be sent to attack Shuchun, and waited for the city of Shuchun to be conquered before proceeding with the plan. Later, Zhou Shizong agreed to the request.

古文：训封府库以授扬州主者，命扬州牙将分部按行城中，秋毫不犯，扬州民感悦，军还，或负糗Я以送之。
现代文：向训封好都府仓库交给扬州主管人员，命令扬州牙将部署在城中的巡逻，纪律严明秋毫无犯，扬州百姓感动喜悦，军队返回，有的人背着干粮送去。
English: Yangzhou officials were instructed to seal and seal the prefectural warehouse, and Yangzhou officials were ordered to deploy patrols in the city. The discipline was strict, and no crime was committed. Yangzhou people were moved with joy. The army returned, and some people carried dry grain on their backs.

古文：滁州守将亦弃城去，皆引兵趣寿春。
现代文：滁州守将也弃城离去，都领兵赶赴寿春。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou also abandoned the city and left, leading his troops to Shuchun.

古文：唐诸将请据险以邀周师，宋齐丘曰： 如此，则怨益深，不如纵之，以德于敌，则兵易解也。 乃命诸将各自守，毋得擅出击周兵。
现代文：南唐众将请求占据险要来迎击后周军队，宋齐丘说： 如此的话，怨仇就更深了。 于是命令众将各自退保坚守，不得擅自出击后周军队。
English: Song Qiqiu said, "If this is the case, the resentment will be deeper," and ordered the Southern Tang people to defend themselves and not to attack the Western Zhou army without authorization.

古文：由是寿春之围益急。
现代文：因此寿春的围困益发紧急。
English: As a result, the siege of Shuchun is becoming more and more urgent.

古文：齐王景达军于濠州，遥为寿州声援，军政皆出于陈觉，景达署纸尾而已。拥兵五万，无决战意，将吏畏觉，无敢言者。
现代文：齐王李景达军队到达濠州，远远地为寿州声援，军政命令都出于陈觉之手，李景达只是在文书末尾署名而已，拥有五万军队，却无决战之意，将领官吏畏惧陈觉，没有敢说的。
English: The army of the king of Qi, Li Jingda, arrived in Zhangzhou and supported Shoushou from afar. The military and political orders were issued by Chen Jue. Li Jingda only signed at the end of the document. He had 50,000 troops, but had no intention of a decisive battle. The generals and officials were afraid of Chen Jue and did not dare to speak.

古文：八月，戊辰，端明殿学士王朴、司天少监王处讷撰《显德钦天历》，上之。
现代文：八月，戊辰，端明殿学士王朴、司天少监王处纳撰成《显德钦天历》上奏。
English: In August, Wang Pu, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, and Wang Siten, a minor overseer of the palace, compiled and performed the "Xian Deqin Calendar."

古文：诏自来岁行之。
现代文：后周世宗诏令从来年开始施行。
English: Later, the edict of Zhou Shizong came into effect.

古文：殿前都指挥使、义成节度使张永德屯下蔡，唐将林仁肇以水陆军援寿春。永德与之战，仁肇以船实薪刍，因风纵火，欲焚下蔡浮梁，俄而风回，唐兵败退。
现代文：殿前都指挥使、义成节度使张永德屯驻下蔡，南唐将领林仁肇率水军、陆军救援寿春；张永德与他交战，林仁肇在船舱装满柴草，借着风势放火，打算烧毁下蔡浮桥，一会儿风向改变，南唐军队溃败退兵。
English: In front of the palace, the commander and the governor of Yicheng sent Zhang Yongde to stay in Lower Cai, and the Southern Tang general Lin Renshao led the navy and army to rescue Shouchun; Zhang Yongde fought with him, Lin Renshao filled the cabin with firewood and set it on fire with the help of the wind, intending to burn the Lower Cai floating bridge. The wind changed direction in a moment, and the Southern Tang army was defeated and withdrew.

古文：永德为铁绠千馀尺，距浮梁十馀步，横绝淮流，系以巨木，由是唐兵不能近。
现代文：张永德用铁索一千多尺，在距离浮桥十几步的地方，拦腰阻截淮水河道，并系上巨大的木头，因此南唐军队无法接近。
English: Zhang Yongde used an iron cable more than a thousand feet long, and at a distance of more than ten steps from the floating bridge, he stopped his waist to block the Huai Shui River, and tied a huge piece of wood, so the South Tang Army could not approach.

古文：九月，丙午，以端明殿学士、左散骑常侍、权知开封府事王朴为户部侍郎，充枢密副使。
现代文：九月，丙午，后周世宗任命端明殿学士、左散骑常侍、权知开封府事王朴为户部侍郎，充任枢密副使。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 9th month, the late Zhou Shizong appointed Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, Zuo Sanzhong (左散騎常侍) and Guanzhi Kaifeng (权知开封府事王朴) as household attendants and appointed them as vice-ministers of the privy council.

古文：冬，十月，癸酉，李重进奏唐人寇盛唐，铁骑都指挥使王彦升等击破之，斩首三千馀级。
现代文：冬季十月，癸酉，李重进奏报南唐军队侵犯盛唐，铁骑都指挥使王彦升等击败来敌，斩首三千多级。
English: In the winter of October, Li Chongjin reported that the South Tang army invaded Sheng Tang. The commander of the Iron Cavalry, Wang Yan Sheng, defeated the enemy and beheaded more than three thousand people.

古文：彦升，蜀人也。
现代文：王彦升是蜀人。
English: Wang Yansheng is from Shu.

古文：丙子，上谓侍臣： 近朝征敛谷帛，多不俟收获、纺绩之毕。 
现代文：丙子，后周世宗对侍从大臣说： 近代各朝征收粮食布帛，大多不等到收获、纺织完毕。 
English: Later, Zhou Shizong said to the attendant minister: In modern times, each dynasty levied grain cloth, most of which did not wait until the harvest and weaving were completed.

古文：乃诏三司，自今夏税以六月，秋税以十月起征，民间便之。
现代文：于是诏令三司，从今夏税在六月开始征收，秋税在十月开始征收，乡里民间感到便利。
English: As a result, the three departments issued a decree that the summer tax would be levied in June and the autumn tax would be levied in October, which was convenient for the people in the countryside.

古文：山南东道节度使、守太尉兼中书令安审琦镇襄州十馀年，至是入朝，除守太师，遣还镇。
现代文：山南东道节度使、守太尉兼中书令安审琦坐镇襄州十几年，到这时进京入朝，授官守太师，遣送返回镇所。
English: Shannan hosted the festival envoy, the captain of the guard and the chief secretary of the court, and the judge of the court sat in the town of Xiangzhou for more than ten years. At this time, he went to Beijing and entered the imperial court, was awarded the post of captain of the guard, and was sent back to the town.

古文：既行，上问宰相： 卿曹送之乎？ 
现代文：上路以后，后周世宗问宰相： 爱卿等送他了吗？ 
English: After getting on the road, Zhou Shizong asked the prime minister: Did Ai Qing et al. send him?

古文：对曰： 送至城南，审琦深感圣恩。 
现代文：回答说： 送到京城南面，安审琦深深感激皇上的恩德。 
English: He replied, "I was sent to the south side of the capital, and I am deeply grateful to the emperor for his kindness.

古文：上曰： 近朝多不以诚信待诸侯，诸侯虽有欲效忠节者，其道无由。
现代文：世宗说： 近代各朝大多不用诚信对待诸侯，诸侯即使有想效忠尽节的，那路也无从可走。
English: Sejong said: Most of the modern dynasties do not treat lords with integrity. Even if lords want to be loyal to the end, there is no way to go.

古文：王者但能毋失其信，何患诸侯不归心哉！ 
现代文：统治天下的人只要能不失信用，怕什么诸侯不心归诚服呢！ 
English: As long as the people who rule the world can not lose credibility, what are the princes afraid of?

古文：壬午，张永德奏败唐兵于下蔡。
现代文：壬午，张永德奏报在下蔡击败南唐军队。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, Zhang Yongde reported that the Southern Tang army was defeated in the Lower Cai.

古文：是时唐复以水军攻永德，永德夜令善游者没其船下，縻以铁锁，纵兵击之，船不得进退，溺死者甚众。
现代文：当时南唐再次用水军进攻张永德，张永德夜晚命令善于游泳的士兵潜没到敌船底下，系上铁锁，发兵攻击，船只不能前进后退，淹死的南唐兵很多。
English: At that time, Southern Tang attacked Zhang Yongde with naval forces again. At night, Zhang Yongde ordered soldiers who were good swimmers to dive under the enemy ship, tie an iron lock, and attack the ships. The ships could not advance or retreat, and many Southern Tang soldiers drowned.

古文：永德解金带以赏善游者。
现代文：张永德解下身上的金带赏给善于游泳的士兵。
English: Zhang Yongde loosened the gold band on his body to reward the soldiers who were good at swimming.

古文：甲申，以太祖皇帝为定国节度使兼殿前都指挥使。
现代文：甲申，后周世宗任命宋太祖皇帝为定国节度使兼殿前都指挥使。
English: Gao Shen, later Zhou Shizong, appointed Emperor Song Taizu as the envoy for the National Day and the commander of the envoy before the palace.

古文：太祖皇帝表渭州军事判官赵普为节度推官。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝表举渭州军事判官赵普为节度推官。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty appointed the military judge of Zhangzhou, Zhao Pu, as the chief of the festival.

古文：张永德与李重进不相悦，永德密表重进有二心，帝不之信。
现代文：张永德和李重进关系不和，张永德秘密上表说李重进有外心，后周世宗不相信。
English: Zhang Yongde and Li Shujin had a bad relationship. Zhang Yongde secretly said that Li Shujin had an ulterior motive, but Zhou Shizong did not believe it.

古文：时二将各拥重兵，众心忧恐。
现代文：当时两位将领各自握有重兵，众人心里担忧恐惧。
English: At that time, the two generals each had a heavy army, and the hearts of the people were worried and fearful.

古文：重进一日单骑诣永德营，从容宴饮，谓永德曰： 吾与公幸以肺腑俱为将帅，奚相疑若此之深邪？ 
现代文：李重进有一天单人匹马到张永德营帐，从容自如地欢宴饮酒，对张永德说： 我和您有幸因是皇上的心腹而都做将帅，为何相互疑忌如此之深呢？ 
English: One day, Li Chongjin rode alone to Zhang Yongde's camp, feasted and drank with ease, and said to Zhang Yongde: I and you have the honor of being the emperor's confidant and are both generals, why is mutual suspicion so deep?

古文：永德意乃解，众心亦安。
现代文：张永德的敌意于是消除，众人心里也踏实了。
English: Zhang Yongde's hostility was thus eliminated, and everyone's hearts were steadfast.

古文：唐主闻之，以蜡书遗重进，诱以厚利。其书皆谤毁及反间之语，重进奏之。
现代文：南唐主闻讯，派人将封有书信的蜡丸带给李重进，用高官厚禄来引诱，书信中都是毁谤朝廷和策反离间的话；李重进将来信奏报。
English: According to the news, the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent someone to bring a wax ball containing a letter to Li Chongjin, using the high official's generous salary to lure him. The letter contained words that slandered the imperial court and alienated the strategists; Li Chongjin would later publish the letter.

古文：初，唐使者孙晟、钟谟从帝至大梁，帝待之甚厚，每朝会，班于中书省官之后。时召见，饮以醇酒，问以唐事。
现代文：当初，南唐使者孙晟、钟谟跟随世宗到达大梁，世宗待他们很优厚，每次朝会，让他们排在中书省官员的后面，时常召见，给他们喝美酒，询问南唐情况。
English: At first, the emissaries of Southern Tang Dynasty, Sun Yat-sen and Zhong Moo, followed Shizong to Daliang. Shizong treated them very generously. Every time there was a meeting of the imperial court, he made them stand in line behind the officials of the Ministry of Culture and Literature. He often called them to see him, gave them fine wine to drink, and asked them about Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：晟但言 唐主畏陛下神武，事陛下无二心。 
现代文：孙晟只说： 唐主畏服陛下神武，事奉陛下别无二心。 
English: Sun Yat-sen only said, "The Emperor fears to serve His Majesty, and there is no other way to serve His Majesty.

古文：及得唐蜡书，帝大怒，召晟，责以所对不实。
现代文：及至获得南唐蜡丸中的书信，世宗勃然大怒，召见孙晟，斥责他回答的不是实情。
English: Upon receiving the letter in the South Tang wax pill, Shizong flew into a rage, summoned Sun Yat-sen, and rebuked him for not answering the truth.

古文：晟正色抗辞，请死而已。
现代文：孙晟神色严正言辞激昂，只求一死。
English: Sun Yat-sen's expression was stern and his words were impassioned. He only wanted to die.

古文：问以唐虚实，默不对。
现代文：再问南唐国中虚实，缄口不答。
English: When asked about the truth and falsehood in Southern Tang, he did not answer.

古文：十一月，乙巳，帝命都承旨曹翰送晟于右军巡院，更以帝意问之。
现代文：十一月，乙巳，世宗命令都承旨曹翰送孙晟到右军巡院，再按世宗意思问他。
English: In November, at the eleventh hour, Shizong ordered Cao Han to send Sun Yat-sen to the Right-wing Military Inspection, and then to interrogate him according to Shizong's will.

古文：翰与之饮酒数行，从容问之，晟终不言。
现代文：曹翰与他饮酒，酒过几巡以后，和言悦色地问他，孙晟始终不说。
English: Cao Han drank alcohol with him. After a few rounds of drinking, he asked him pleasantly, but Sun Yat-sen never said anything.

古文：翰乃谓曰： 有敕，赐相公死。 
现代文：曹翰于是对他说： 我有敕书，赐相公自杀。 
English: Cao Han then said to him, "I have a secret letter, and I have ordered my father-in-law to commit suicide."

古文：晟神色怡然，索鞋笏，整衣冠，南向拜曰： 臣谨以死报国！ 
现代文：孙晟神色安祥，寻找朝袍朝笏，整理衣帽，向南叩拜说： 臣下我谨以死报国。 
English: Sun Yat-sen looked peaceful, looking for a morning robe, sorting his clothes and hat, and bowed to the south and said, "My vassal, I am willing to die for my country."

古文：乃就刑。
现代文：于是赴刑。
English: He was sentenced to death.

古文：并从者百馀人皆杀之，贬钟谟耀州司马。
现代文：连同随从一百多人都镣死，钟谟贬为耀州司马。
English: He and more than a hundred of his followers were killed, and Zhong Mo was demoted to the position of the secretary of Yaozhou.

古文：既而帝怜晟忠节，悔杀之，召谟，拜卫尉少卿。
现代文：事后世宗怜惜孙晟的忠诚节操，后悔杀他，召回钟谟，授予卫尉少卿。
English: Afterwards, Shizong took pity on Sun Yat-sen's loyalty and self-restraint, regretted killing him, recalled Zhong Moo, and awarded him the title of Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：帝召华山隐士真源陈抟，问以飞升、黄白之术。对曰： 陛下为天子，当以治天下为务，安用此为！ 
现代文：后周世宗召见华山隐士真源人陈抟，询问羽化升仙、冶炼金子的法术，陈抟回答： 陛下是天子，应当以治理天下为己任，哪里用得着这些呢！ 
English: Later, Zhou Shizong summoned the Huashan hermit Zhenyuan Chen Qi to inquire about the magic of feathering and smelting gold. Chen Qi replied: Your Majesty is the son of heaven, and it is your duty to govern the world. Why do you need these things?

古文：戊申，遣还山，诏州县长吏常存问之。
现代文：戊申，世宗遣送他回山，诏令州县长官经常看望问候。
English: Wushin, Shizong sent him back to the mountains, and ordered the prefectural governor to visit him often for greetings.

古文：十二月，壬申，以张永德为殿前都点检。
现代文：十二月，壬申，后周世宗任命张永德为殿前都检点。
English: In December, in Jinshin, the late Zhou Shizong appointed Zhang Yongde as a prefectural inspector.

古文：分命中使发陈、蔡、宋、亳、颍、兗、曹、单等州丁夫数万城下蔡。
现代文：后周世宗分别命令宫中使者征发陈州、蔡州、宋州、亳州、颍州、兖州、曹州、单州等地壮丁民夫修筑下蔡城。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong ordered the emissaries of the imperial court to separately solicit and dispatch Chenzhou, Caizhou, Songzhou, Bozhou, Bozhou, Bozhou, Caozhou, Shanzhou and other places to build the Lower Caicheng.

古文：是岁，唐主诏淮南营田害民尤甚者罢之。
现代文：这一年，南唐主诏令取消损害百姓特别严重的部分淮南营田。
English: In the same year, the Emperor of Southern Tang cancelled the part of Huainan Yingtian that caused particularly serious damage to the people.

古文：遣兵部郎中陈处尧持重币，浮海如契丹乞兵。契丹不能为之出兵，而留处尧不遣。
现代文：派遣后部郎中陈处尧携带厚礼渡海到契丹乞求出兵；契丹不能为南唐出兵，因而留下陈处尧不送还。
English: He sent his second-in-command, Chen Duanqi, to cross the sea to Khitan to beg for troops; Khitan could not send troops to the Southern Tang Dynasty, so Chen Duanqi was left behind.

古文：处尧刚直有口辩，久之，忿怼，数面责契丹主，契丹主亦不之罪也。
现代文：陈处尧刚强直率，有口才善辩，时间久了，忿怼怨恨，多次当面指责契丹主，契丹主也不怪罪他。
English: Chen Duan is strong and forthright, eloquent and eloquent. He has been angry and resentful for a long time, and has repeatedly accused the Qidan Lord in person. The Qidan Lord did not blame him.

古文：蜀陵、荣州獠叛，弓箭库使赵季文讨平之。
现代文：后蜀陵州、荣州僚人造反，弓箭库使赵季文讨伐平定叛乱。
English: After the leaders of Shuling and Rongzhou created a rebellion, the bow and arrow depot sent Zhao Jiwen to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔括境内民捕，劳扰颇多，判明州钱弘亿手疏切谏，罢之。
现代文：吴越王钱弘搜求境内的百姓当兵，烦劳骚扰颇多，明州刺史钱弘亿亲笔上疏恳切劝谏，吴越王于是撤消此举。
English: Qian Hong, the king of Wu Yue, searched for people in the territory to serve as soldiers, and there was a lot of trouble and harassment. Qian Hong, the prince of Ming, earnestly advised him in writing, and the king of Wu Yue then revoked the move.

古文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝中显德四年春，正月，己丑朔，北汉大赦，改元天会。
现代文：显德四年春季，正月，己丑朔，北汉实行大赦，改年号为天会。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Hende, in the first month of the year, the Northern Han implemented an amnesty and changed the name of the year to Tianhui.

古文：以翰林学士卫融为中书侍郎、同平章事，内客省使段恒为枢密使。
现代文：任命翰林学士卫融为中书侍郎、同平章事，内客省使段恒为枢密使。
English: Hanlin Scholar Wei Rong was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese envoy, Tongping Zhangji, and Duan Heng, the envoy of the Inner Mongolia Province, was appointed as the envoy of the Chinese envoy.

古文：宰相屡请立皇子为王，上曰： 诸子皆幼，且功臣之子皆未加恩，而独先朕子，皆自安乎！ 
现代文：后周宰相多次请求册立皇子为王，世宗说： 儿子们都还年幼；况且功臣的儿子都没加封，反而独自先封朕的儿子，能心安理得么！ 
English: After Zhou, the prime minister, repeatedly requested that the prince be made king, Shizong said, "My sons are still young; moreover, the sons of heroes have not been crowned, but my son alone has been crowned first. Can I do this with peace of mind?

古文：周兵围寿春，连年未下，城中食尽。
现代文：后周军队围攻寿春，连年没有攻下，城中粮食吃光。
English: Later, the Zhou army besieged Shuchun, but failed to capture it for years. The city ran out of grain.

古文：齐王景达自濠州遣应援使、永安节度使许文稹、都军使边镐、北面招讨使硃元将兵数万，溯淮救之，军于紫金山，列十馀寨如连珠，与城中烽火晨夕相应，又筑甬道抵寿春，欲运粮以馈之，绵亘数十里。
现代文：齐王李景达从濠州派遣应援使、永安节度使许文稹和都军使边镐、北面招讨使朱元领兵数万，沿淮水而上救援寿春，军队驻扎在紫金山，排列十几个营寨如同串连的珠子，与城中的烽火早晚相呼应，又修筑两旁有墙的通道直达寿春，准备运输粮食来供应城中，绵延横亘长达几十里。
English: The king of Qi, Li Jingda, dispatched envoys from Bozhou, the Yong'an Festival dispatched Xu Wenzhong and the capital army dispatched the border troops, and the north side invited Zhu Yuan to lead tens of thousands of soldiers to rescue Shouchun along the Huai River. The army was stationed in the Purple Mountain, with more than a dozen camps lined up like beads in a row, echoing the bonfires in the city in the morning and evening. They also built a passage with walls on both sides straight to Shouchun, preparing to transport grain to supply the city, stretching for dozens of miles.

古文：将及寿春，李重进邀击，大破之，死者五千人，夺其二寨。
现代文：通道将要修到寿春城下，李重进拦截出击，大败南唐军，死的有五千人，夺取两个营寨。
English: The passage will be built to the foot of Shouchun Castle. Li Chongjin intercepted the attack, defeated the Southern Tang Army, killed five thousand people, and captured two camps.

古文：丁未，重进以闻。
现代文：丁未，李重进奏报。
English: Ding Wei, Li Chongjin report.

古文：戊申，诏以来月幸淮上。
现代文：戊申，世宗下诏宣布于下月亲临淮水之上。
English: According to reports, Sejong issued an edict announcing that he would personally visit Huai Shui next month.

古文：刘仁赡请以边镐守城，自帅众决战，齐王景达不许，仁赡愤邑成疾。
现代文：刘仁赡请求让边镐守城，自己率领部众决一死战；齐王李景达不准许，刘仁赡因气抑郁成疾。
English: Liu Renyi requested that the border troops defend the city, and he led the troops to fight to the death; the king of Qi, Li Jingda, did not allow it, and Liu Renyi became ill due to qi depression.

古文：其幼子崇谏夜泛舟渡淮北，为小校所执，仁赡命腰斩之，左右莫敢救，监军使周廷构哭于中门以救之，仁赡不许。
现代文：刘仁赡的小儿子刘崇谏夜晚乘船准备渡到淮北，被军中小校抓获，刘仁赡命令腰斩，左右部将没有人敢去救，监军使周廷构在中门大哭来相救；刘仁赡不允许。
English: Liu Renyi's youngest son, Liu Chongyao, took a boat at night to cross to Huaibei, and was captured by a military school. Liu Renyi ordered him to be beheaded, and no one dared to save him. The supervisor of the army made Zhou Tingjie cry loudly at the middle gate to save him; Liu Renyi did not allow it.

古文：廷构复使求救于夫人，夫人曰： 妾于崇谏非不爱也，然军法不可私，名节不可亏，若贷之，则刘氏为不忠之门，妾与公何面目见将士乎！ 
现代文：周廷构又派人向夫人求救，夫人说： 贱妾对崇谏不是不怜爱，然而军法不可徇私，名节不可亏损；倘若宽容他，刘氏就成为不忠之家，贱妾与刘公将有什么面目去见将吏士卒呢！ 
English: Zhou Tingji also sent someone to his wife to ask for help. His wife said, "The concubine is not unmerciful to Chongzhen, but the military law must not be selfish, and the name must not be lost. If he is tolerated, the Liu clan will become a family of infidelity. What kind of face will the concubine and Liu Gongjun have when they meet the judge?

古文：趣命斩之，然后成丧。将士皆感泣。
现代文：催促命令腰斩，然后收敛安葬，将吏士兵都感动流泪。
English: Urging the order to behead him, and then restraining and burying him, the soldiers were moved to tears.

古文：议者以唐援兵尚强，多请罢兵，帝疑之。
现代文：议事的人认为南唐援军还强大，大多请求撤兵，世宗怀疑所议。
English: The people at the meeting thought that the South Tang reinforcements were still strong, and most of them requested the withdrawal of troops, but Shizong doubted what was discussed.

古文：李谷寝疾在第。二月，丙寅，帝使范质、王溥就与之谋，谷上疏，以为： 寿春危困，破在旦夕，若銮驾亲征，则将士争奋，援兵震恐，城中知亡，必可下矣！ 
现代文：李卧病在家，二月，丙寅，世宗派范质、王溥前去与他商议，李上书，认为： 寿春危难困苦，朝夕之间可以攻破，倘若皇上亲自出征，将士就会奋勇争先，南唐援军震惊恐慌，城中守军知道危亡，就必定可以攻下了！ 
English: Li was ill at home, in February, Cui Yin, the world's religious standard, and Wang Yao went to consult with him, Li wrote a letter, saying: Shuchun is in danger and distress, it can be broken between morning and evening, if the emperor personally goes to war, the soldiers will fight bravely, the South Tang reinforcements are shocked and panicked, the defenders in the city know that they are in danger, they must be able to attack!

古文：上悦。
现代文：世宗很高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：庚午，诏有司更造祭器、祭玉等，命国子博士聂崇义讨论制度，为之图。
现代文：庚午，后周世宗诏令有关部门另外制造祭器、祭玉等，命国子博士聂崇义探讨研究礼仪制度，画出图来。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the late Zhou Shizong issued an edict ordering the relevant departments to manufacture additional sacrificial vessels, ritual beads, etc., and ordered Dr. Guo Zi to explore and study the etiquette system and draw a picture.

古文：甲戌，以王朴权东京留守兼判开封府事，以三司使张美为大内都巡检，以侍卫都虞候韩通为京城内外都巡检。
现代文：甲戌，后周世宗任命王朴暂时代理东京留守兼判开封府事，任命三司使张美为大内都巡检，任命侍卫都虞候韩通为京城内外都巡检。
English: After the Jiajing Incident, Zhou Shizong appointed Wang Pak as the temporary representative of Tokyo to stay in the capital and decided to open the government, appointed Zhang Mei as the inspector of the capital, and appointed Dugou Han Tong as the inspector of the capital.

古文：乙亥，帝发大梁。
现代文：乙亥，世宗从大梁出发。
English: Eiji and Sejong leave from the girders.

古文：先是周与唐战，唐水军锐敏，周人无以敌之，帝每以为恨。
现代文：在这之前后周与南唐交战，南唐水军精锐敏捷，后周无法同它抗衡，世宗经常以此为恨。
English: Before this, Sui Zong had been at war with Southern Tang. The Southern Tang's navy was elite and agile, and Sui Zong could not compete with it. Shizong often hated this.

古文：返自寿春，于大梁城西汴水侧造战舰数百艘，命唐降卒教北人水战，数月之后，纵横出没，殆胜唐兵。
现代文：从寿春返回后，在大梁城西汴水岸边制造战舰数百艘，命令南唐投降士卒教北方兵水战，几个月以后，后周水军纵横江湖，出没水中，差不多胜过南唐水军。
English: After returning from Shouchun, he built hundreds of warships on the shore of the West Surabaya River in Dalian City, and ordered the South Tang surrendering soldiers to teach the northern soldiers and sailors to fight. A few months later, the Hou Zhou Navy stretched across the rivers and lakes and appeared in the water, almost better than the South Tang Navy.

古文：至是命右骁卫大将军王环将水军数千自闵河沿颍入淮，唐人见之大惊。
现代文：到这时，命令右骁卫大将军王环率领水军数千人从闵河沿颍水进淮水，南唐军队看见大为震惊。
English: At this time, he ordered Wang Huan, general of the Right Division of the National Guard, to lead thousands of sailors from the Min River along the Min River into the Huai River. The Southern Tang Army was shocked to see this.

古文：乙酉，帝至下蔡。三月，己丑夜，帝渡淮，抵寿春城下。
现代文：乙酉，世宗到达下蔡；三月，己丑，夜晚，世宗渡过淮水，抵达寿春城下。
English: In September, Shizong arrived in Lower Cai; in March, at dusk, Shizong crossed Huai Shui and arrived at the foot of Shuchun Castle.

古文：庚寅旦，躬擐甲胄，军于紫金山南，命太祖皇帝击唐先锋寨及山北一寨，皆破之，斩获三千馀级，断其甬道，由是唐兵首尾不能相救。
现代文：庚寅早晨，亲自穿上盔甲，驻军紫金山南面，命令宋太祖皇帝攻击南唐先锋寨以及山北营寨，全都击破，斩获三千多首级，掐断敌军通道，由此南唐军队首尾无法互相救援。
English: In the morning, Geng Yin personally put on armor and garrisoned troops south of the Purple Mountain, and ordered Emperor Song Taizu to attack the Southern Tang Vanguard Village and the Northern Shandong Ying Village. All of them were defeated, more than three thousand heads were cut off, and enemy channels were cut off. As a result, the Southern Tang Army was unable to rescue each other.

古文：至暮，帝分兵守诸寨，还下蔡。
现代文：到傍晚，世宗诏令分兵把守各个营寨，返回下蔡。
English: In the evening, Shizong issued an edict to his soldiers to guard each camp and return to Lower Cai.

古文：唐硃元恃功，颇违元帅节度；陈觉与元有隙，屡表元反覆，不可将兵，唐主以武昌节度使杨守忠代之。
现代文：南唐朱硃元倚仗有战功，常常违抗元帅指挥；陈觉与朱元有裂隙，屡次上表说朱元反复无常，不可领兵，南唐主任命武昌节度使杨守忠取代他。
English: Zhu Xingyuan of Southern Tang relied on his war exploits and often defied the marshal's command; Chen Jue had a rift with Zhu Yuan, repeatedly saying that Zhu Yuan was capricious and could not lead soldiers. The Lord of Southern Tang appointed Wuchang Jiedu to replace him with Yang Shouzhong.

古文：守忠至濠州，觉以齐王景达之命，召元至濠州计事，将夺其兵。元闻之，愤怒，欲自杀，门下客宋垍说元曰： 大丈夫何往不富贵，何必为妻子死乎！ 
现代文：杨守忠到达濠州，陈觉用齐王李景达的命令，召见朱元到濠州计划军事，准备夺取他的兵权；朱元听说此事，异常愤怒，想要自杀，门下客人宋劝朱元说： 大丈夫到哪里不能富贵，何必为了妻子儿女去死呢！ 
English: Yang Shouzhong arrived in Ganzhou, Chen Jue used the order of the king of Qi, Li Jingda, to summon Zhu Yuan to Ganzhou to plan the military and prepare to seize his military power; Zhu Yuan heard about this, was extremely angry and wanted to commit suicide, and his guest Song advised Zhu Yuan to say: Where can a good husband not be rich, why should he die for his wife and children!

古文：辛卯夜，元与先锋壕寨使硃仁裕等举寨万馀人降，裨将时厚卿不从，元杀之。
现代文：辛卯夜晚，朱元与先锋壕寨使朱仁裕等率领营寨中一万多人投降；副将时厚卿不服从，朱元杀死了他。
English: On the night of Xinwu, Zhu Yuan and the vanguard of the entrenchment made more than 10,000 people in the camp surrender, led by Zhu Renyu and others; Vice Admiral Shi Houqing disobeyed, and Zhu Yuan killed him.

古文：帝虑其馀众沿流东溃，遽命虎捷左厢都指挥使赵晁将水军数千沿淮而下。
现代文：世宗考虑南唐其余部众会沿着水流向东溃逃，赶紧命令虎捷左厢都指挥使赵晁带领数千水军沿着淮水而下。
English: Considering that the rest of the Southern Tang Dynasty would flee eastward along the water flow, Shizong hastily ordered the command of the left compartment of the Tiger Train to make Zhao Jun lead thousands of sailors down along the Huai Shui.

古文：壬辰旦，帝军于赵步，诸将击唐紫金山寨，大破之，杀获万馀人，擒许文稹、边镐、杨守忠。
现代文：壬辰早晨，世宗驻扎在赵步，众将攻击南唐紫金山营寨，大败唐军，杀死俘获一万多人，活捉许文稹、边镐、杨守忠。
English: In the morning of the ninth day of the ninth month, Shizong was stationed in Zhaobou, and the crowd attacked the camp of Southern Tang's Purple Mountain, defeated the Tang army, killed and captured more than ten thousand people, and captured Xu Wenzong, Bianqi, and Yang Shuzhong alive.

古文：馀众果沿淮东走，帝自赵步将骑数百循北岸追之，诸将以步骑循南岸追之，水军自中流而下，唐兵战溺死及降者殆四万人，获船舰粮仗以十万数。
现代文：其余部队果然沿着淮水向东逃跑，世宗从赵步率领数百骑兵沿北岸追赶，众将率步兵、骑兵沿南岸追赶，水军从淮水中流而下，南唐军队战死淹死和投降的将近四万人，缴获船舰粮食兵器数以十万计。
English: The rest of the troops fled eastward along Huai Shui. Shizong led hundreds of cavalrymen from Zhao Bu along the north shore and chased them. The generals led infantry and cavalry along the south shore and chased them. The navy flowed down from Huai Shui. Nearly 40,000 Southern Tang troops were killed in battle, drowned or surrendered, and hundreds of thousands of ships' grain weapons were captured.

古文：晡时，帝驰至荆山洪，距赵步二百馀里。
现代文：黄昏时分，世宗奔驰到荆山洪，距离赵步二百多里。
English: At dusk, Shizong drove to Jing Mountain, more than two hundred miles away from Zhao Bu.

古文：是夜，宿镇淮军，癸酉，从官始至。
现代文：当夜，住宿在镇淮军，癸酉，随从官员才到达。
English: That night, the accomodation was in the town of Huaijun, but the officials did not arrive until the following morning.

古文：刘仁赡闻援兵败，扼吭叹息。
现代文：刘仁赡听说援兵溃败，气噎喉咙而叹息。
English: Hearing that the reinforcements had been defeated, Liu Renyi sighed with a lump in her throat.

古文：甲午，发近县丁夫数千城镇淮军，为二城，夹淮水，徙下蔡浮梁于其间，扼濠、寿应援之路。
现代文：甲午，后周征发附近州县壮丁民夫修筑镇淮军城，建造两座城，中夹淮水，将下蔡浮桥迁移到两城之间，掐断濠州、寿州接应救援的道路。
English: In the afternoon of January 1st, the following week, Zhuang Dingminfu of Zhuozhou County, which was nearby, started to build the town of Huai Juncheng, built two cities, with Huai Shui in the middle, moved the lower Cai Floating Bridge between the two cities, and cut off the road for Bozhou and Shoushou to receive the rescue.

古文：会淮水涨，唐濠州都监彭城郭廷谓以水军溯淮，欲掩不备，焚浮梁。右龙武统军赵匡赞觇知之，伏兵邀击，破之。
现代文：适逢淮水上涨，南唐濠州都监彭城人郭廷谓率水军沿淮水而上，想乘不备之时突然袭击，焚毁浮桥；右龙武统军赵匡赞窥察知道，埋伏军队拦击，打败南唐军。
English: When the Huai River was rising, Guo Ting, the superintendent of Pengcheng, the capital of Bozhou, Southern Tang Dynasty, led the naval forces along the Huai River. He wanted to take advantage of the unprepared time to make a surprise attack and burn the pontoon bridge. Zhao Kuangzan, the right dragon military commander, knew from observation that the ambush army would intercept and defeat the Southern Tang Army.

古文：唐齐王景达及陈觉皆自濠州奔归金陵，惟静江指挥使陈德诚全军而还。
现代文：南唐齐王李景达和陈觉都从濠州逃回金陵，只有静江指挥使陈德诚全军而还。
English: Li Jingda and Chen Jue, the king of Southern Tang Qi, both fled from Zhangzhou back to Jinling. Only the command of Jingjiang made Chen Decheng's entire army march back.

古文：戊戌，以淮南节度使向训为武宁节度使、淮南道行营都监，将兵戍镇淮军。
现代文：戊戌，后周世宗任命淮南节度使向训为武宁节度使、淮南道行营都监，领兵戍守镇淮军。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Huainan Festival Envoy Xiang Xun as Wu Ning Festival Envoy, Huainan Road Campaign Supervisor, and led the troops to guard the town of Huai Jun.

古文：己亥，上自镇淮军复如下蔡。
现代文：己亥，后周世宗从镇淮军再次前往下蔡。
English: After Ji Hai, Zhou Shizong went from Zhenhuai Army to lower Cai again.

古文：庚子，赐刘仁赡诏，使自择祸福。
现代文：庚子，赐刘仁赡诏书，让他自己选择吉凶祸福。
English: Geng Zi, give Liu Renyao the imperial edict and let him choose his own good fortune, misfortune and misfortune.

古文：唐主议自督诸将拒周，中书舍人乔匡舜上疏切谏，唐主以为沮众，流抚州。
现代文：南唐主拟议亲自督率众将抵抗后周，中书舍人乔匡舜上书恳切劝谏，南唐主认为动摇军心，流放抚州。
English: One week after the Lord of Southern Tang proposed to personally lead the people to resist, the Chinese scholar Qiao Kuangjun wrote a letter to earnestly persuade him. The Lord of Southern Tang believed that the military spirit would be shaken and Fuzhou would be exiled.

古文：唐主问神卫统军硃匡业、刘存忠以守御方略，匡业诵罗隐诗曰： 时来天地皆同力，运去英雄不自由。 
现代文：南唐主问神卫统军朱匡业、刘存忠防御策略，朱匡业背诵罗隐的诗道： 时机到来天地都同力助，气运离去英雄也身不由己。 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty asked Zhu Kuangye and Liu Cunzhong of the Shenwei United Army for their defense strategy. Zhu Kuangye recited the poem of Luo Yin: When the time comes, heaven and earth will help together, and the hero will not be able to help himself if the qi fortune leaves.

古文：存忠以匡业言为然。
现代文：刘存忠认为朱匡业的话很对。
English: Liu Cunzhong believes that Zhu Kuangye's words are right.

古文：唐主怒，贬匡业抚州副使，流存忠于饶州。
现代文：南唐主发怒，贬谪朱匡业为抚州副使，将刘存忠流放到饶州。
English: The lord of Southern Tang got angry, demoted Zhu Kuangye to vice-envoy of Fuzhou, and exiled Liu Cunzhong to Raozhou.

古文：既而竟不敢自出。
现代文：不久他自己也居然不敢出行。
English: It wasn't long before he didn't even dare to travel.

古文：甲辰，帝耀兵于寿春城北。
现代文：甲辰，后周世宗在寿春城北显示兵力。
English: Jiachen, after Zhou Shizong in Shuchun north of the city to show strength.

古文：唐清淮节度使兼侍中刘仁赡病甚，不知人，丙午，监军使周廷构、营田副使孙羽等作仁赡表，遣使奉之来降。
现代文：南唐清淮节度使兼侍中刘仁赡病得很重，不省人事，丙午，监军使周廷构、营田副使孙羽等以刘仁赡的名义起草表书，派遣使者拿着前来投降。
English: Liu Renyi, the envoy of the Southern Tang Dynasty and the attendant of the Qing and Huai dynasties, was very ill and unconscious. In the afternoon of the third day, Zhou Tingji, the supervisor of the army, and Sun Yu, the deputy envoy of Yingtan, drafted a form in the name of Liu Renyi and sent an envoy to take it and surrender.

古文：丁未，帝赐仁赡诏，遣阖门使万年张保续入城宣谕，仁赡子崇让复出谢罪。
现代文：丁未，世宗赐刘仁赡诏书，派遣门使万年人张保续入城宣示安抚，刘仁赡儿子刘崇让又出城告罪。
English: Ding Wei, the emperor gave Liu Renyao the imperial edict, and sent the messenger Zhang Bao into the city to declare and appease, and Liu Renyao's son Liu Chongzhang went out of the city to complain.

古文：戊申，帝大陈甲兵，受降于寿春城北，廷构等舁仁赡出城，仁赡卧不能起，帝慰劳赐赉，复令入城养疾。
现代文：戊申，世宗大陈军旅，在寿春城北面接受投降，周廷构等抬着刘仁赡出城，刘仁赡躺着不能起来，世宗慰劳赏赐，又让他进城养病。
English: Wushin, Shizong of the Great Chen Army Brigade, accepted the surrender on the north side of Shuchun City. Zhou Tingjie and others carried Liu Renyi out of the city. Liu Renyi lay down and could not get up. Shizong consoled and rewarded him, and let him go into the city to recover from his illness.

古文：庚戌，徙寿州治下蔡，赦州境死罪以下。
现代文：庚戌，将寿州府治迁到下蔡，赦免州境内死罪以下全部囚犯。
English: Gyeongbokgung, transferred the governorship of Shoushu to Lower Chae, and pardoned all prisoners convicted of crimes punishable by death or less in the state.

古文：州民受唐文书聚山林者，并召令复业，勿问罪。有尝为其杀伤者，毋得仇讼。
现代文：州中百姓因受到南唐刑法处理而聚集山林的，一并召回让他们重操旧业，不加问罪；有曾经被他们伤害过的，不得报仇打官司。
English: People in the state who have gathered in the mountains and forests because they have been dealt with by the Southern Tang Criminal Law will be recalled together to let them resume their old business without being charged with a crime; if they have been injured, they must not take revenge and sue.

古文：曏日政令有不便于民者，令本州条奏。
现代文：昔日政令有不便于百姓的，命令本州条陈奏报。
English: In the past, government decrees that were inconvenient to the people were ordered to be reported to the state.

古文：辛亥，以刘仁赡为天平节度使兼中书令，制辞略曰： 尽忠所事，抗节无亏，前代名臣，几人堪比！
现代文：辛亥，任命刘仁赡为天平节度使兼中书令，制书内容大致说： 对事奉的君主竭尽忠诚，高风亮节没有欠缺，前代名臣良将，能有几人可以比拟！
English: In Xinhai, Liu Renyi was appointed as the Tianping Sectarian Envoy and the Central Book Order, and the contents of the book were roughly as follows: Be loyal to the monarch you serve, there is no shortage of high winds and bright festivals, and the previous generation of famous ministers and generals can be compared to several people!

古文：朕之伐叛，得尔为多。 
现代文：朕讨伐叛逆，得到你才真正值得称道。 
English: I fought against the rebels, and it is truly commendable that you won.

古文：是日，卒，追赐爵彭城郡主。
现代文：当日，刘仁赡去世，追赐爵位为彭城郡王。
English: On the same day, Liu Renyi passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Pengcheng County King.

古文：唐主闻之，亦赠太师。
现代文：南唐主闻悉，也追赠刘仁赡为太师。
English: When the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty heard of this, he also posthumously awarded Liu Renyi the title of Grand Master.

古文：帝复以清淮军为忠正军，以旌仁赡之节，以右羽林统军杨信为忠正节度使、同平章事。
现代文：世宗又将清淮军改为忠正军来表彰刘仁赡的节操，任命右羽林统军杨信为忠正节度使、同平章事。
English: Shizong also changed the name of the Qing and Huai armies to the Zhongzheng army in recognition of Liu Renyi's discipline, and appointed Yang Xin of the Uyulin unified army as the Zhongzheng discipline envoy and the same rank.

古文：前许州司马韩伦，侍卫马军都指挥使令坤之父也。
现代文：前许州司马韩伦，是侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤的父亲。
English: The former Xuzhou Sima Hanlun was the father of Han Lingkun, commander of the Horse Guards and Horse Army.

古文：令坤领镇安节度使，伦居于陈州，干预政事，贪污不法，为公私患，为人所讼，令坤屡为之泣请。
现代文：韩令坤兼领镇安节度使，韩伦居住在陈州，干预当地政事，贪污违法，成为官府、百姓的祸患，被人起诉，韩令坤屡次为他哭泣求情。
English: Han Lingkun is also the leader of the town's festival. Han Lingkun lives in Chenzhou, interferes in local politics, commits corruption and violations of the law, has become a scourge of the government and the people, and has been sued. Han Lingkun has repeatedly cried for him.

古文：癸丑，诏免伦死，流沙门岛。
现代文：癸丑，后周世宗下诏韩伦免于处死，流放沙门岛。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong exempted Han Lun from the death penalty and exiled him to Shamen Island.

古文：伦后得赦还，居洛阳，与光禄卿致仕柴守礼及当时将相王溥、王晏、王彦超之父游处，恃势恣横，洛阳人畏之，谓之十阿父。
现代文：韩伦后来得到赦免返回，居住洛阳，与光禄卿退休柴守礼以及当时将相王溥、王晏、王彦超的父亲交游相处，依杖权势恣意横行，洛阳百姓怕他们，称作 十阿父 。
English: Han Lun was later pardoned and returned to live in Luoyang. He was friends with the retired Chai Shouli of Guangluqing and the fathers of Wang Zou, Wang Zou and Wang Yanchao at that time. They relied on the power of the cane to run amok. The people of Luoyang were afraid of them and called them the Ten Fathers.

古文：帝既为太祖嗣，人无敢言守礼子者，但以元舅处之，优其俸给，未尝至大梁。尝以小忿杀人，有司不敢诘，帝知而不问。
现代文：世宗成为太祖继承人，别人不敢说他是柴守礼的儿子，只以长舅看待柴守礼，给他优厚的俸禄给养，但未曾到达大梁；柴守礼曾经因一点小小的忿恨而杀人，官吏不敢查究，世宗知道而不过问。
English: When Sejong became the great-grandfather's successor, others did not dare to say that he was the son of Chai Shouli. They only regarded Chai Shouli as the eldest uncle and gave him a generous salary and support, but never reached the great beam. Chai Shouli once killed someone because of a little bit of anger. Officials did not dare to investigate. Sejong knew but did not ask.

古文：诏开寿州仓振饥民。
现代文：后周世宗诏令打开寿州粮仓救济饥民。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict to open grain silos in Shoushou to help the hungry.

古文：丙辰，帝北还，夏，四月，己巳，至大梁。
现代文：丙辰，世宗北上返回；夏季，四月，己巳，到达大梁。
English: In the spring, Sejong returned to the north; in the summer, in April, he arrived in Jimei.

古文：诏修永福殿，命宦官孙延希董其役。
现代文：后周世宗诏令修缮永福殿，命令宦官孙延希监督工程。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict to repair Yongfu Hall and ordered eunuch Sun Yanxi to supervise the project.

古文：丁丑，帝至其所，见役徒有削柿为匕，瓦中啖饭者，大怒，斩延希于市。
现代文：丁丑，世宗到达修缮场所，看到役徒有使用木片削成的勺子，在瓦片中盛饭吃的，勃然大怒，将孙延希在街市斩首。
English: Ding Ug, Shizong arrived at the repair site and saw that the servant had used a spoon made of wood chips to eat in the tiles. He flew into a rage and beheaded Sun Yanxi in the market.

古文：帝之克秦、凤也，以蜀兵数千人为怀恩军。
现代文：后周世宗攻克秦州、凤州后，将后蜀士兵数千人组建为怀恩军。
English: Later, after Zhou Shizong conquered Qinzhou and Fengzhou, he organized thousands of post-Shu soldiers into the Huai'en Army.

古文：乙亥，遣怀恩指挥使萧知远等将士八百馀人西还。
现代文：乙亥，派遣怀恩指挥使萧知远等率领将士八百多人向西返回。
English: Yi Hai dispatched Commander Wynn to make Xiao Zhiyuan and other leaders lead more than 800 soldiers to return to the west.

古文：壬午，李谷扶疾入见，帝命不拜，坐于御坐之侧。
现代文：壬午，李抱病入朝谒见，世宗命令不必不拜，让他坐在天子座位的旁边。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, when Li Po fell ill and went to the imperial court, Shizong ordered him not to bow, but to sit next to the throne.

古文：谷恳辞禄位，不许。
现代文：李恳切辞去俸禄职位，但世宗不答应。
English: Li earnestly resigned from the salary position, but Shizong did not agree.

古文：甲申，分江南降卒为六军、三十指挥，号怀德军。
现代文：甲申，后周将江南投降的士兵分编成六军、三十指挥，号称怀德军。
English: Gao Shun, in the following week, divided the soldiers who surrendered in the south of the Yangtze River into six armies and thirty commands, known as the Huai De Army.

古文：乙酉，诏疏汴水北入五丈河，由是齐、鲁舟楫皆达于大梁。
现代文：乙酉，后周世宗诏令疏通汴水让其向北流入五丈河，从此齐、鲁一带的船只都能直达大梁。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict to clear the muddy water and let it flow north into the Wuzhang River. From then on, ships in the Qi and Lu areas could reach the girders directly.

古文：五月，丁酉，以太祖皇帝领义成节度使。
现代文：五月，丁酉，后周世宗任命宋太祖皇帝兼领义成节度使。
English: In May, Ding Xi, later Zhou Shizong, appointed Emperor Song Taizu to concurrently lead the Yicheng Festival envoy.

古文：诏以律令文古难知，格敕烦杂不壹，命侍御史知杂事张湜等训释，详定为《刑统》。
现代文：后周世宗诏令因法律条令文字古奥艰深难以明白，格式、敕令繁杂众多互为统一，命令御史知杂事张等训诂诠释，缜密编定为《刑统》。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued the Imperial Edict, which was difficult to understand due to the ancient and profound nature of the legal provisions. The format and the numerous and complicated edicts were unified, and the interpretation of the edicts, such as the order to inform the historian of miscellaneous matters, was carefully compiled into the "Code of Criminal Law."

古文：唐郭迁谓将水军断涡口浮梁，又袭败武宁节度使武行德于定远，行德仅以身免。
现代文：南唐郭廷谓率领水军切断涡口浮桥，并且在定远偷袭击败武宁节度使武行德，武行德仅仅自己逃脱。
English: In Southern Tang, Guo Ting led the navy to cut off the Vortex Floating Bridge, and secretly attacked Dingyuan and defeated Wu Ning Jiedu to make Wu Xingde escape. Wu Xingde only escaped by himself.

古文：唐主以廷谓为滁州团练使，充上淮水陆应援使。
现代文：南唐君主任命郭廷谓为滁州国练使，充任上淮水陆应援使。
English: The monarch of Southern Tang appointed Guo Ting as the national training envoy of Zhangzhou, acting as the auxiliary envoy of Shanghuai, Shuizhou and Lu.

古文：蜀人多言左右卫圣马步都指挥使、保宁节度使、同平章事李廷珪为将败覆，不应复典兵，廷珪亦自请罢去。
现代文：后蜀人大多议论左右卫圣马步都指挥使、保宁节度使、同平章事李廷担任将领而兵败覆没，不应该再统领军队；李廷自己也请求罢免。
English: Later, most of the Shu people argued that Li Ting, who had served as the commander of the left and right guards of St. Matthew's Day, the commander of the Baoning Festival, and the commander of the Tongping Festival, should no longer lead the army; Li Ting himself also requested to be dismissed.

古文：六月，乙丑，蜀主加廷珪检校太尉，罢军职。
现代文：六月，乙丑，后蜀主诏令李廷加官检校太尉，罢去军队职务。
English: In June, in the second month of the year, after the emperor of Shu issued an imperial edict, Li Tingga was demoted from the rank of inspector to that of lieutenant and dismissed from the army.

古文：李太后以典兵者多非其人，谓蜀主曰： 吾昔见庄宗跨河与梁战，及先帝在太原，平二蜀，诸将非有大功，无得典兵，故士卒畏服。
现代文：李太后因为统领军队的将帅大多不是合适人选，就对后蜀主说： 我从前看见唐庄宗跨越黄河与梁朝作战，以及先帝在太原任职，其后平定西川、东川，各位将领没有重大战功，不得统领军队，所以士兵畏惧服从。
English: Because most of the generals leading the army were not suitable candidates, Empress Dowager Li said to Emperor Shoshu: I have seen Tangzhuangzong cross the Yellow River to fight against the Liang Dynasty, and the former emperor served in Taiyuan, and then pacified the West River and East River. Your generals have no major war exploits and are not allowed to lead the army, so soldiers are afraid to obey.

古文：今王昭远出于厮养，伊审征、韩保贞、赵崇韬皆膏粱乳臭子，素不习兵，徒以旧恩置于人上，平时谁敢言者！一旦疆场有事，安能御大敌乎！
现代文：如今王昭远出身役徒下人，伊审征、韩保贞、赵崇韬都是膏粱纨、乳臭未干的贵胄子弟，素来不熟悉军事，只是因为旧日恩宠而置于常人之上，平时谁敢说他们，然而一旦边疆有战事，他们怎么能抵御入侵大敌呢！
English: Today, Wang Zhaoyuan was born as a subordinate of an officer, while Yi Xuan Zheng, Han Baozhen, and Zhao Chongyi are all children of nobles who have never been familiar with military affairs. They are only placed above ordinary people because of the grace of the old days. In normal times, who would dare to speak of them, but once there is a war on the frontier, how can they resist the invasion of the great enemy?

古文：以吾观之，惟高彦俦太原旧人，终不负汝，自馀无足任者。 
现代文：按我的观察，只有高彦俦是先帝在太原时的老人，终究不会背负您，其余均不值得重用。 
English: According to my observation, only Takahikoma is the old man of the former emperor in Taiyuan, after all, it will not carry you, and the rest are not worth reusing.

古文：蜀主不能从。
现代文：后蜀主没能听从。
English: Lord Hōshō did not listen.

古文：丁丑，以前华州刺史王祚为颍州团练使。
现代文：丁丑，后周世宗任命前华州刺史王祚为颍州团练使。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed the former Huazhou acolyte Wang Xi as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Regiment.

古文：祚，溥之父也。
现代文：王祚是王溥的父亲。
English: Wang Yao is the father of Wang Yao Zuo.

古文：溥为宰相，祚有宾客，溥常朝服侍立。客坐不安席，祚曰： 犭屯犬不足为起。 
现代文：王溥担任宰相，遇到王祚有宾客，王溥经常穿着朝服立着侍候，客人们坐在席上很不安，王祚说： 犬子不值得诸位为他起身。 
English: Wang Hui served as prime minister, and when he met guests, he often stood waiting in his imperial robes. The guests were uneasy as they sat at the table. Wang Hui said, "Dog Son is not worth you getting up for him."

古文：秋，七月，丁亥，上治定远军及寿春城南之败，以武宁节度使兼中书令武行德为左卫上将军，河阳节度使李继勋为右卫大将军。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁亥，后周世宗处理定远军和寿春城南的失败，任命武宁节度使兼中书令武行德为左卫上将军，河阳节度使李继勋为右卫大将军。
English: In the autumn, in July, after Dinghai and Zhou Shizong dealt with the defeat of the Dingyuan army and Shouchun south of the city, the Wu Ning Festival envoy appointed Wu Xingde as the left guard general, and the Heyang Festival appointed Li Jixun as the right guard general.

古文：北汉主初立七庙。
现代文：北汉主开始设立祖宗七庙。
English: Northern Han rulers began to establish seven ancestral temples.

古文：司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事李谷卧疾二年，凡九表辞位，八月，乙亥，罢守本官，令每月肩舆一诣便殿议政事。
现代文：司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事李卧病二年，前后共九次上表辞职；八月，乙亥，后周世宗诏令免去李同平章事之职保留原官，让他每月坐着轿子到便殿一次，议论朝廷政事。
English: For two years, Siku and his subordinate attendants, Tongping Zhangji and Li Jiao fell ill and resigned nine times. In August, Emperor Yihai and later Emperor Zhou decreed that Li Tongping should be relieved of his duties and remain as the original official, and that he should sit in a palanquin and go to the toilet once a month to discuss the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：以枢密副使、户部侍郎王朴检校太保，充枢密使。
现代文：后周世宗任命枢密副使、户部侍郎王朴为检校太保，充任枢密使。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Wang Pu, the vice-envoy of the privy council and the steward of the household, as the inspector of the school and appointed him as the envoy of the privy council.

古文：怀恩军至成都，蜀主遣梓州别驾胡立等八十人东还，且致书为谢，请通好。
现代文：怀恩军到达成都，后蜀主派遣梓州别驾胡立等八十人向东返回，并且致书信表示感谢，请求通使友好。
English: After the Huai'en army reached the capital, the Lord of Shu sent eighty people such as Zizhou Beilun and Hu Li to return to the east, and sent a letter to express gratitude and request the envoy for friendship.

古文：癸未，立等至大梁。
现代文：癸未，胡立等人到达大梁。
English: Soon after, Hu Li and others arrived at the girders.

古文：帝以蜀主抗礼，不之答。蜀主闻之，怒曰： 朕为天子郊祀天地时，尔犹作贼，何敢如是！ 
现代文：后周世宗因为后蜀主采用对等礼节，便不回复他；后蜀主闻悉后，发怒说： 朕为天子在郊外祭祀天地时，你还在当盗贼，怎么敢如此无礼！ 
English: Afterward, Zhou Shizong did not reply to him because the late Shushi used reciprocal etiquette; after the late Shushi heard about it, he became angry and said: When I was sacrificing heaven and earth for the Son of Heaven in the suburbs, you were still a thief. How dare you be so rude!

古文：九月，中书舍人窦俨上疏请令有司讨论古今礼仪，作《大周通礼》，考正钟律，作《大周正乐》。
现代文：九月，中书舍人窦俨上书请求命令有关官员研讨纂集古今的礼仪，撰作《大周通礼》，考究校正黄钟律度，撰作《大周正乐》。
English: In September, the person in charge of the Central Library of the People's Republic of China, Dou Yu, requested that the relevant officials study and compile the ancient and modern etiquette, write the "Big Weekly Ritual," study and correct the yellow clock rhythm, and write the "Big Weekly Music."

古文：又以： 为政之本，莫大择人；择人之重，莫先宰相。
现代文：同时认为： 治理政事的根本，没有比选择人材更重要的；选择人材的重点，没有比挑选宰相更首要的。
English: At the same time, it is believed that: there is nothing more fundamental to the governance of political affairs than the selection of personnel; there is nothing more important in the selection of personnel than the selection of prime ministers.

古文：自有唐之末，轻用名器，始为辅弼，即兼三公、仆射之官。
现代文：自从唐朝末年以来，轻易赐爵封官，刚担任宰相辅佐天子处理朝政，便立即兼领司徒、司空、司马三公和仆射的官位。
English: Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, he was easily given the title of knight, and as soon as he assumed the post of prime minister to assist the emperor in dealing with the imperial government, he immediately concurrently held the official positions of the magistrate, the magistrate, the magistrate and the magistrate.

古文：故其未得之也，则以趋竞为心；既得之也，则以容默为事。但思解密勿之务，守崇重之官，逍遥林亭，保安宗族。
现代文：因此许多人在没得到职位时，就一门心思追逐猎取；得到职位以后，就专以沉默寡言、明哲保身为事，只考虑如何解脱耗神费力的政务，守住位高权重的官职，整天逍遥在园林亭台之中，保护家族的平安。
English: Therefore, when many people do not get a post, they are all about chasing and hunting; when they get a post, they are all about taciturn, wise self-preservation, and only consider how to get rid of the time-consuming government affairs, hold a high-ranking and powerful official post, and spend the whole day in the garden pavilions to protect the peace of the family.

古文：乞令即日宰相于南宫三品、两省给、舍以上，各举所知。
现代文：请求命令现任宰相至尚书省六部尚书、中书省及门下省给事中、中书舍人以上，各自荐举所知道的人材。
English: The request orders the current prime minister to the six departments of the Ministry of Calligraphy, the Ministry of Calligraphy, the Ministry of Chinese Calligraphy and the subordinate provinces to give more than the middle and middle calligraphers, respectively, to recommend the talents they know.

古文：若陛下素知其贤，自可登庸；若其未也，且令以本官权知政事。
现代文：倘若陛下平素知道其人贤能，自己可以提拔任用；倘若不清楚，暂且让其人以原来官位暂时主持政事。
English: If His Majesty is aware of the merits of the person, he can promote and appoint him; if it is not clear, let the person temporarily preside over the government affairs with the original official position.

古文：期岁之间，察其职业，若果能堪称，其官已高，则除平章事；未高，则稍更迁官，权知如故。
现代文：用一年左右的时间，考察他的职责业绩，倘若果真能够胜任，他原来的官位已经高了，就正式授予平章事；倘若原来的官位不高，就再稍加提升，代理主持政事照旧。
English: It will take about a year to examine his duties and performance. If he is truly competent, and his original official position is high, he will be officially awarded a medal; if the original official position is not high, he will be promoted a little more, and the deputy will preside over the government as before.

古文：若有不称，则罢其政事，责其举者。
现代文：倘若有不称职的，就罢免他处理政事的资格，追究荐举者的责任。
English: If anyone is found to be incompetent, his or her qualification to handle government affairs shall be revoked, and the responsibility of the person who recommended him or her shall be investigated.

古文：又，班行之中，有员无职者太半，乞量其才器，授以外任，试之于事，还则以旧官登叙，考其治状，能者进之，否者黜之。 
现代文：此外，在朝做官的班次行列之中，有名额而无职责的占了大半，请求衡量他们的才能本领，授官出外任职，在实际事务中试用，回京入朝后按原职登录叙用，考察他的政绩，能干的提拔，无能的贬黜。 
English: In addition, among the ranks of officials in the DPRK, those with posts but no responsibilities accounted for the majority, and they were asked to measure their talents and skills, to be assigned to positions outside the country, to be tested in actual affairs, to be registered and classified according to their original positions after returning to Beijing and entering the DPRK, to examine their political achievements, to be promoted for ability, and to be demoted for incompetence.

古文：又请： 令盗贼自相纠告，以其所告赀产之半赏之；或亲戚为之首，则论其徒侣而赦其所首者。
现代文：又请求： 让盗贼自己相互检举揭发，将被告发者的一半财产赏给告发者；或有亲戚替他自首的，就判处他的党徒同伙而赦免所自首者。
English: He also requested: Let the thieves themselves accuse and expose each other, and award half of the property of the accuser to the accuser; or if there is a relative who surrenders on his behalf, then sentence his fellow party members and pardon the one who surrenders.

古文：如此，则盗不能聚矣。
现代文：像这样，盗贼就不能聚集了。
English: That way, the thieves can't regroup.

古文：又，新郑乡村团为义营，各立将佐，一户为盗，累其一村；一户被盗，罪其一将。
现代文：另外，新郑的乡村组织成义营，分别设立将佐，一户当盗贼，就连累一村，一户遭遇盗抢，就怪罪一将。
English: In addition, Xinzheng's villages are organized into righteous battalions, with generals and lieutenants set up separately. If a family is a thief, it will drag down a village, and if a family is robbed, it will blame a general.

古文：每有盗发，则鸣鼓举火，丁壮云集，盗少民多，无能脱者。
现代文：每当有盗贼发生，就击鼓举火，成年男子云集出事地点，盗贼少而百姓多，便没有能漏网逃脱的。
English: Whenever there is a theft, drums are beaten and fires are lit. Grown men gather at the site of the incident. There are few thieves but many people. No one can escape.

古文：由是邻县充斥而一境独清。
现代文：如此邻近县乡盗贼充斥而新郑全境独自肃清盗贼。
English: So the neighboring counties and townships are full of thieves, and Xinzheng is the only one to clean up the thieves.

古文：请令他县皆效之，亦止盗之一术也。
现代文：请求下令其他州县都仿效新郑，这也是阻止盗贼的一个办法。
English: The request ordered other states and counties to follow Xin Zheng's example, which is also a way to deter thieves.

古文：又，累朝已来，屡下诏书，听民多种广耕，止输旧税，及其既种，则有司履亩而增之，故民皆疑惧而田不加辟。
现代文：同时，历朝以来，多次颁下诏书，听凭农民在旧田以外多种广耕，只交纳旧税，但等到农民已经种上，官吏就丈量田亩而增税，所以农民都怀疑惧怕而田地不再开辟。
English: At the same time, since ancient times, imperial edicts have been issued many times, allowing farmers to cultivate extensively in many ways other than the old fields and only pay the old tax. However, when the farmers have planted, the officials will measure the acres and increase the tax, so the farmers are suspicious and afraid and the fields will no longer be opened up.

古文：夫为政之先，莫如敦信，信苟著矣，则田无不广，田广则谷多，谷多则藏之民犹藏之官也。 
现代文：实行政令的先决条件，没有比诚实信用更重要的，如果信用卓著，田地就不会不扩大，田地扩大粮食就增多，粮食增多藏在农民手里就如同藏在官府一样。 
English: The preconditions for the implementation of the Executive Order are no more important than honesty and trust. If the trust is outstanding, the fields will not fail to expand. If the fields expand, the grain will increase. The increase in grain is hidden in the hands of farmers just as it is hidden in the government.

古文：又言： 陛下南征江、淮，一举而得八州，再驾而平寿春，威灵所加，前无强敌。
现代文：又说： 陛下南下征伐长江、淮水流域，一举而取得八个州，再次出征而平定寿春，神威所至之处，前面无有强敌对手。
English: He also said: His Majesty went to the south to conquer the Yangtze River and Huai Shui basin, won eight states in one fell swoop, and went to war again to pacify Shuchun. Wherever Shen Wei went, there was no strong opponent in front.

古文：今以众击寡，以治伐乱，势无不克。但行之贵速，则彼民免俘馘之灾，此民息转输之困矣。 
现代文：如今以多击少，以治伐乱，势必攻无不克，只是行动上贵在神速，对方的百姓就可免于俘获斩首的灾难，这里的百姓则能消除辗转运输的困苦。 
English: Nowadays, it is imperative to strike more with less, to control the chaos of logging, and to attack without fail. However, it is important to act quickly, so that the people on the other side can be spared the disaster of being captured and beheaded, and the people here can eliminate the hardships of transportation.

古文：帝览而善之。
现代文：世宗阅后认为好。
English: The emperor praised the performance after watching it.

古文：俨，仪之弟也。
现代文：窦俨是窦仪的弟弟。
English: Dou Yu is Dou Yi's younger brother.

古文：冬，十月，戊午，设贤良方正直言极谏、经学优深可为师法、详闲吏理达于教化等科。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊午，后周设立贤良方正直言极谏、经学优深可为师法、详闲吏理达于教化等科荐举人材。
English: In winter, in October, in the afternoon, and in the afternoon, it is set up to recommend talents who are good at honesty, excellent at speaking, excellent at studying, and can be teachers and teachers, and detailed idlers are good at education and other sciences.

古文：癸亥，北汉麟州刺史杨重训举城降，以为麟州防御使。
现代文：癸亥，北汉麟州刺史杨重训率城投降，后周世宗任命他为麟州防御使。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Yang Chongxun, the governor of Linshou in Northern Han, led the city to surrender. Later, Zhou Shizong appointed him as the defense envoy of Linshou.

古文：己巳，以王朴为东京留守，听以便宜从事。
现代文：己巳，后周世宗任命王朴为东京留守，准许他根据情况机断行事。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Wang Pu to stay in Tokyo, allowing him to act according to the situation.

古文：以三司使张美充大内都点检。
现代文：任命三司使张美充任大内都点检。
English: The three departments appointed Zhang Meicheng as the inspector of the university.

古文：壬申，帝发大梁；十一月，丙戌，至镇淮军，是夜五鼓，济淮；丁亥，至濠州城西。
现代文：壬申，世宗从大梁出发。十一月，丙戌，到达镇淮军，当夜五更，渡过淮水。丁亥，到达濠州城西。
English: In Jinshin, Shizong set out from Dayang. In November, he reached the town of Huaijun, and that night, he crossed Huaishui. In Dinghai, he reached the west of Zhangzhou.

古文：濠州东北十八里有滩，唐人栅于其上，环水自固，谓周兵必不能涉。
现代文：濠州东北十八里有个滩，南唐人在滩上设置栅栏，四周环水据以固守，认为后周军队必定无法渡河。
English: There is a beach 18 li northeast of Zhangzhou. The Southern Tang Dynasty people set up a fence on the beach and surrounded it with water, believing that the enemy army would not be able to cross the river.

古文：戊子，帝自攻之，命内殿直康保裔帅甲士数百，乘橐驼涉水，太祖皇帝帅骑兵继之，遂拔之。
现代文：戊子，世宗亲自攻打，命令内殿直康保裔率领全副武装士兵数百人，乘着骆驼涉水，宋太祖皇帝率领骑兵随后，于是拔取。
English: Wuzi, Shizong personally attacked, ordered the inner court to lead hundreds of fully armed soldiers to wade into the water on camels, and Emperor Song Taizu led the cavalry, and then withdrew.

古文：李重进破濠州南关城。
现代文：李重进攻破濠州南关城。
English: Li Chong launched an attack to break through Zhangzhou's Nanguan City.

古文：癸巳，帝自攻濠州，王审琦拔其水寨。
现代文：癸巳，世宗亲自进攻濠州，王审琦攻取了南唐军水寨。
English: Soon after, Shizong personally attacked Zhangzhou, and Wang Jian captured the Southern Tang Army's water village.

古文：唐人屯战船数百于城北，又植巨木于淮水以限周兵。
现代文：南唐军队在城北面聚集数百条战船，又在淮水中竖起大木头来阻拦后周军队。
English: The Southern Tang army gathered hundreds of warships on the north side of the city, and erected large trees in Huai Shui to block the Hou Zhou army.

古文：帝命水军攻之，拔其木，焚战船七十馀艘，斩首二千馀级，又攻拔其羊马城，城中震恐。丙申夜，唐濠州团练使郭廷谓上表言： 臣家在江南，今若遽降，恐为唐所种族，请先遣使诣金陵禀命，然后出降。 
现代文：世宗命令水军进攻，拔掉大木头，烧毁战船七十多艘，斩首二千多级，又攻破羊马城，城中震动恐慌，丙申夜晚，南唐濠州团练使郭廷谓上表给后周世宗说： 臣下家在江南，如今倘若马上投降，恐怕被唐人诛灭全族，请求先派遣使者到金陵请命，然后出城投降。 
English: Shizong ordered the navy to attack, uprooted large trees, burned more than seventy warships, beheaded more than two thousand echelons, and broke through Yangma City. The city was shaken with panic. In the evening of the same day, Guo Ting was summoned to the table by the Southern Tang's Bozhou Regiment. Zhou Shizong said: My vassal's family is in the south of the Yangtze River. If I surrender right now, I'm afraid the Chinese will annihilate my entire family. I request that you first send an envoy to Jinling to plead for my life, and then leave the city to surrender.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：世宗答应了他。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：辛丑，帝闻唐有战船数百艘在泗水东，欲救濠州。自将兵夜发水陆击之。
现代文：辛丑，世宗听说南唐有数百艘战船在涣水东面，准备救援濠州，便亲自领兵夜晚派出水军、陆军进攻。
English: Outraged, Sejong heard that hundreds of warships from Southern Tang were to the east of Surabaya, preparing to rescue Surabaya, so he personally led the troops and sent the navy and army to attack at night.

古文：癸卯，大破唐兵于洞口，斩首五千馀级，降卒二千馀人，因鼓行而东，所至皆下。
现代文：癸卯，在洞口大败南唐军队，斩首五千余级，投降士兵二千多人，后周军队乘势击鼓向东行进，所到之处都被攻克。
English: Yu Yu defeated the Southern Tang army in Hougou, beheading more than five thousand people and surrendering more than two thousand soldiers. The following week, the army marched eastward, beating drums. Everywhere they went, they were defeated.

古文：乙巳，至泗州城下，太祖皇帝先攻其南，因焚城门，破水寨及月城。
现代文：乙巳，到达泗州城下，宋太祖皇帝先攻城南，乘势焚烧城门，攻破水寨和月城。
English: Shortly after arriving at the city of Zhangzhou, Emperor Song Taizu first attacked the southern part of the city, took advantage of the situation to burn the city gate, and broke through the water castle and the moon city.

古文：帝居于月城楼，督将士攻城。
现代文：世宗住在月城楼上，监督将士攻打泗州城。
English: Sejong lived on the upper floor of Yuecheng and supervised the soldiers' attack on Zhangzhou City.

古文：北汉主自即位以来，方安集境风，未遑外略。
现代文：北汉主从即位以来，正忙于安定国内，没空对外攻略。
English: Since ascending the throne, the ruler of the Northern Han Dynasty has been busy stabilizing the country and has not had time to attack the outside world.

古文：是月，契丹遣其大同节度使、侍中崔勋将兵来会北汉，欲同入寇。北汉主遣其忠武节度使、同平章事李存瑰将兵会之，南侵潞州，至其城下而还。
现代文：当月，契丹派遣大同节度使、侍中崔勋领兵来会合北汉军队，准备共同入侵后周，北汉君主派遣忠武节度使、同平章事李存领兵会合崔勋的军队，南下侵犯潞州，到达城下而返回。
English: In the same month, the Khitan Empire dispatched the loyal military envoy and the military leader of the Northern Han Dynasty, Choe Son, to meet with the Northern Han Army and prepare for a joint invasion. A week later, the Northern Han Dynasty sent the loyal military envoy and the military leader of the Northern Han Dynasty, Choe Son, to invade Zhangzhou from the south, reaching the city and returning.

古文：北汉主知契丹不足恃而不敢遽与之绝，赠送勋甚厚。
现代文：北汉主知道契丹靠不住而不敢立即与之断绝关系，便赠送给崔勋很丰厚的礼物。
English: The Northern Han Emperor knew that Khitan was unreliable and did not dare to break off relations with him immediately, so he presented a very rich gift to Cui Xun.

古文：十二月，乙卯，唐泗州守将范再遇举城降，以再遇为宿州团练使。
现代文：十二月，乙卯，南唐泗州守将范再遇率城投降，后周任命范再遇为宿州团练使。
English: In December, South Tang's governor of Zhangzhou, Fan Zaidi, surrendered the city, and the following week, Fan Zaidi was appointed as the training envoy of the Suzhou group.

古文：上自至泗州城下，禁军中刍荛者毋得犯民田，民皆感悦，争献刍粟；既克泗州，无一卒敢擅入城者。
现代文：世宗亲自到达泗州城下，下令军中割草打柴的人不得侵犯农民田地，农民都感激喜悦，争相献送粮草；攻克泗州以后，没有一名士兵敢擅自入城。
English: Shizong personally arrived at the foot of the city of Ganzhou and ordered the soldiers who were cutting grass and chopping wood not to encroach on the farmers' fields. The farmers were grateful and eager to donate grain and grass. After conquering Ganzhou, no soldier dared to enter the city without permission.

古文：帝闻唐战船数百艘泊洞口，遣骑诇之，唐兵退保清口。
现代文：世宗闻悉南唐数百艘战船停泊在洞口，派遣骑兵侦察，南唐军队退守清口。
English: Shizong heard that hundreds of warships from Southern Tang were anchored at the mouth of the cave, and sent cavalry to investigate. The Southern Tang army retreated to the mouth of the cave.

古文：戊午旦，上自将亲军自淮北进，命太祖皇帝将步骑自淮南进，诸将以水军自中流进，共追唐兵。
现代文：戊午，世宗亲自率领警卫部队从淮水北岸挺进，命令宋太祖皇帝率领步兵、骑兵从淮水南岸挺进，众将率领水军从淮水中流挺进，共同追击南唐军队。
English: At noon, Shizong personally led the guard troops to advance from the north bank of Huai Shui, and ordered Emperor Song Taizu to lead the infantry and cavalry to advance from the south bank of Huai Shui, and the generals to lead the navy to advance from the Huai Shui stream to jointly pursue the South Tang army.

古文：时淮滨久无行人，葭苇如织，多泥淖沟堑，士卒乘胜气茇涉争进，皆忘其劳。
现代文：当时淮水之滨长久没有行人，芦苇茂密如织，到处沼泽沟坑，士兵凭借胜利的气势跋涉泥泞争相前进，都忘却了劳累。
English: At that time, there were no pedestrians on the coast of Huai Shui for a long time. The reeds were thick as a weave, there were swamps and ditches everywhere, and the soldiers trudged through the mud and scrambled forward with the momentum of victory, forgetting the fatigue.

古文：庚申，追及唐兵，且战且行，金鼓声闻数十里。
现代文：庚申，追上南唐军队，边打边进，金鼓的声音传到周围数十里。
English: Goshun, catching up with the Southern Tang army, marched forward while playing, and the sound of the golden drum spread to dozens of miles around.

古文：辛酉，至楚州西北，大破之。
现代文：辛酉，到达楚州西北，大败南唐军。
English: Xinlu, reached the northwest of Chuzhou, defeated the Southern Tang Army.

古文：唐兵有沿淮东下者，帝自追之，太祖皇帝为前锋，行六十里，擒其保义节度使、濠、泗、楚、海都应援使陈承昭以归。
现代文：南唐军队有沿淮水向东而下的，世宗亲自追赶，宋太祖皇帝担任前锋，出行六十里，擒获南唐保义节度使、濠、泗、楚、海都应援使陈承昭而返归。
English: Southern Tang's army went eastward along the Huai River, and Shizong personally chased them. Emperor Song Taizu served as the vanguard and traveled sixty miles. He won the Southern Tang's pledge of allegiance, and the envoys of the Northern Tang, the Northern Tang, the Southern Tang, the Chu, and the Hai all returned with the assistance of Chen Chengzhao.

古文：所获战船烧沉之馀得三百馀艘，士卒杀溺之馀得七千馀人。唐之战船在淮上者，于是尽矣。
现代文：所缴获的战船除去烧毁沉没之外共得三百多艘，士兵斩杀淹死之外共俘七千多人，南唐人在淮水上的战舰，全在这场战斗中歼灭了。
English: In total, more than three hundred captured warships were burned and sunk, and more than seven thousand soldiers were captured in addition to being killed and drowned. The warships of the Southern Tang Dynasty on the Huai Shui were all destroyed in this battle.

古文：郭廷谓使者自金陵还，知唐不能救，命录事参军鄱阳李延邹草降表。
现代文：郭廷谓的使者从金陵回来，得知南唐朝廷不能救援，便命令录事参军鄱阳人李延邹起草投降表书。
English: Guo Ting's so-called emissary returned from Jinling, learned that the Southern Tang Dynasty could not rescue, and ordered Li Yanju, a member of the army from Shiyang, to draft a surrender form.

古文：延邹责以忠义，廷谓以兵临之，延邹掷笔曰： 大丈夫终不负国为叛臣作降表！ 
现代文：李延邹用忠义来斥责郭廷谓，郭廷谓用兵器相逼，李延邹将笔掷地说： 大丈夫最终决不辜负国家去为叛臣写投降表书！ 
English: Li Yanxuan used loyalty to rebuke Guo Tingzhe, Guo Tingzhe used weapons to force, Li Yanxuan said with a stroke of the pen: It's okay, I will definitely live up to the country and write a surrender form for the traitor!

古文：廷谓斩之，举濠州降，得兵万人，粮数万斛。
现代文：郭廷谓杀死他，率濠州投降，后周得到兵员万人，粮食数万斛。
English: Guo Ting claimed to have killed him, led Zhangzhou to surrender, and the following week received ten thousand soldiers and tens of thousands of cormorants.

古文：唐主赏李延邹之子以官。
现代文：南唐主用官位赏赐李延邹的儿子。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang rewarded the son of Li Yanxuan with an official post.

古文：壬戌，帝济淮，至楚州，营于城西北。
现代文：壬戌，世宗渡过淮水，到达楚州，在城西北安营。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River and the Huai River, Shizong arrived in Chuzhou and camped in the northwest of the city.

古文：乙丑，唐雄武军使、知涟水县事崔万迪降。
现代文：乙丑，南唐雄武军使、知涟水县事崔万迪投降。
English: Second Ugly, South Tang Xiong's military envoy, and the governor of Zhishui County, Cui Wandi, surrendered.

古文：丙寅，以郭廷谓为亳州防御使。
现代文：丙寅，任命郭廷谓为毫州防御使。
English: Cui Yin, appointed Guo Ting as the defense envoy of millizhou.

古文：戊辰，帝攻楚州，克其月城。
现代文：戊辰，世宗进攻楚州，攻克城外的月城。
English: In Boshin, Shizong attacked Chuzhou and conquered Yuecheng outside the city.

古文：庚午，郭廷谓见于行宫，帝曰： 朕南征以来，江南诸将败亡相继，独卿能断涡口浮梁，破定远寨，所以报国足矣。
现代文：庚午，郭廷谓在行宫拜见，世宗说： 朕南下征伐以来，江南众将相继战败逃亡，只有爱卿能切断涡口浮桥，击破定远寨，用以报答国家的战功足够了。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Guo Ting said that he would pay a visit to the palace. Shizong said: "Since I went to the south to invade, the people in the south of the Yangtze River have been defeated and fled one after another. Only Ai Qing can cut off the Turbulent Bay floating bridge and break through Dingyanzhai, which is enough to repay the country's war service.

古文：濠州小城，使李璟自守，能守之乎！ 
现代文：濠州是个小城，让李自己把守，能守住吧！ 
English: Zhangzhou is a small city, let Li guard it himself, if he can!

古文：使将濠州兵攻天长。
现代文：派他率领濠州军队进攻天长。
English: He was sent to lead the Bozhou army to attack Tianchang.

古文：帝遣铁骑左厢都指挥使武守琦将骑数百趋扬州，至高邮。唐人悉焚扬州官府民居，驱其人南渡江。
现代文：世宗派遣铁骑左厢都指挥使武守琦率领数百骑奔赴扬州，到达高邮；南唐人焚烧扬州全部官府民宅，驱赶扬州百姓向南渡过长江。
English: Shizong dispatched the cavalry to Yangzhou and sent several hundred cavalrymen led by Take Shou Yi to Gaoyou. The Southern Tang people burned all the government residences in Yangzhou and drove the Yangzhou people south across the Yangtze River.

古文：后数日，周兵至，城中馀癃病十馀人而已；癸酉，守琦以闻。
现代文：几天以后，后周军队到达，城中只剩下十几个手脚不便的癃病患者。癸酉，武守琦将情况报告。
English: A few days later, Hou Zhou's army arrived, and there were only a dozen or so rickets patients left in the city., Take Shou  will report on the situation.

古文：帝闻泰州无备，遣兵袭之，丁丑，拔泰州。
现代文：世宗闻悉泰州没有防备，派兵袭击。丁丑，拔取泰州。
English: Sejong heard that Taizhou was unprepared and sent troops to attack. Ding Jiu, plucked Taizhou.

古文：南汉中书侍郎、同平章事卢膺卒。
现代文：南汉中书侍郎、同平章事卢膺去世。
English: Tongping Zhangji Lu, a junior secretary in the Southern Han Dynasty, passed away.

古文：南汉主闻唐屡败，忧形于色，遣使入贡于周，为湖南所闭，乃治战舰，修武备。既而纵酒酣饮，曰： 吾身得免，幸矣，何暇虑后世哉！ 
现代文：南汉主闻悉唐军屡遭失败，忧愁溢于言表，派遣使者向后周进贡，道路被湖南所阻塞，于是建造战舰，进行军事准备；不久纵酒狂饮，说： 我自身能免于战火，就很幸运了，还有什么闲暇来考虑后代呢！ 
English: When the lord of the Southern Han heard that the Tang army had suffered repeated defeats, he was saddened beyond words. He sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Western Zhou, and the road was blocked by Hunan. So he built warships and made military preparations. Soon he was drinking heavily and said: I am very lucky to be free from the flames of war, what leisure do I have to think about future generations!

古文：唐使者陈处尧在契丹，白契丹主请南游太原，北汉主厚礼之。留数日，北还，竟卒于契丹。
现代文：南唐使者陈处尧在契丹，禀报契丹主请求南下太原游玩，北汉主对他厚礼相待；停留数日，北上返回，陈处尧最终死在契丹。
English: The Southern Tang's emissary Chen Duan was in Khitan. He reported to the Khitan lord that he requested to go south to visit Taiyuan. The Northern Han lord treated him with courtesy. He stayed for a few days and returned to the north. Chen Duan eventually died in Khitan.

