古文：罗绍威，《旧唐书》云：绍威，字端己。魏州贵乡人。
现代文：罗绍威，魏州贵乡人。
English: Luo Shaowei, a Guizhou villager from Weizhou.

古文：父宏信，本名宗弁，初为马牧监，事节度使乐彦贞。
现代文：父亲罗弘信，本名罗宗弁，开头做马牧监，服事节度使乐彦贞。
English: His father, Luo Hongxin, whose real name was Luo Zuben, started out as a horse herdsman and served as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：光启末，彦贞子从训骄盈太横，招聚兵甲，欲诛牙军。
现代文：光启末年，乐彦贞的儿子乐从训骄横太盛，招聚兵马，想诛灭魏州牙军。
English: At the end of the Guangqi era, Le, the son of Le Yanzhen, was too proud and arrogant to be disciplined. He gathered soldiers and horses and wanted to annihilate the Wei Zhou Fang Army.

古文：牙军怒，聚噪攻之，从训出据相州。
现代文：牙军大怒，聚集呐喊攻打他，乐从训出逃据守相州。
English: Enraged, the Aya army gathered and shouted to attack him, and Le fled from the drill to defend Sangshu.

古文：牙军废彦贞，囚于龙兴寺，逼令为僧，寻杀之，推小校赵文建为留后。
现代文：牙军废除乐彦贞，囚禁在龙兴寺，逼着要他做僧人，不久便杀死了他，推举小校赵文建任留后。
English: The imperial army abolished Lok Yan Zhen, imprisoned him in Longxing Temple, forced him to become a monk, killed him soon after, and promoted the minor Zhao Wenjian to remain in office.

古文：先是，宏信自言，于所居遇一白须翁，谓之曰： 尔当为土地主。 
现代文：此前，罗弘信自己说，在居住的地方遇见一位白胡须的老头，对他说： 你将成为一方土地的主人。 
English: Previously, Luo Hongxin himself said that he met an old man with a white beard in the place where he lived and said to him: You will become the owner of one side of the land.

古文：如是者再，心窃异之。
现代文：这样做梦遇见了两次，内心觉得怪异。
English: I've had this dream twice, and I feel weird inside.

古文：既而文建不洽军情，牙军聚呼曰： 孰愿为节度使者？ 
现代文：不久赵文建与军心不协，牙军们相聚呼喊说 ：谁愿做节度使？ 
English: Soon, Zhao Wenjian and the military were not in agreement, and the soldiers gathered and shouted: "Who would like to be the commander?

古文：宏信即应曰： 白须翁早以命我，可以君长尔曹。 
现代文：罗弘信立即应声回答说 ：白须老头早就告诉我，可以做你们的君长。 
English: Luo Hongxin immediately responded to the voice and replied: "Old man Baizu told me long ago that I can be your ruler."

古文：唐文德元年四月，牙军推宏信为留后。
现代文：唐朝文德元年四月，牙军们推举罗弘信为魏州留后。
English: In April of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Luo Hongxin was selected by the imperial army to stay in Weizhou.

古文：朝廷闻之，即正授节旄。
现代文：朝廷闻讯，就正式授给他节旄。
English: Upon hearing the news, the Imperial Court officially awarded him the title of Emperor.

古文：乾宁中，太祖急攻兗、郓，硃瑄求援于太原。时李克用遣大将李存信率师赴之，假道于魏，屯于莘县。
现代文：乾宁年间，太祖急攻兖州、郓州，朱王宣向太原求援，这时李克用派大将李存信领兵前往赴援，向魏州借用道路，屯驻在莘县。
English: During the Qianning era, Emperor Taizu suddenly attacked Bozhou and Ganzhou, and Zhu Wangxuan went to Taiyuan to ask for help. At this time, Li Ke used to send General Li Cunxin to lead the troops to go to the aid, borrowed the road from Weizhou, and stationed in Bozhou County.

古文：存信御军无法，稍侵魏之刍牧，宏信不平之。
现代文：李存信带兵没有法度，不断征取魏州的牛马，罗弘信对此不平。
English: Li Cunxin led troops without any legal restrictions and constantly requisitioned cattle and horses from Weizhou. Luo Hongxin was not happy about this.

古文：太祖因遣使谓宏信曰： 太原志吞河朔，回戈之日，贵道堪忧。 
现代文：太祖乘机派使者对罗弘信说 ：太原晋人志在吞并河朔，当回师之日，贵道就很可忧虑了。 
English: The great-grandfather took the opportunity to send an envoy to Luo Hongxin and said: Taiyuan Jinren's ambition is to annex Heshaku, and when the day of return comes, your path will be very worrying.

古文：宏信惧，乃归款于太祖，仍出师三万攻李存信，败之。
现代文：罗弘信便感到害怕，于是与太祖结好，又出兵三万人攻打李存信，打败了他。
English: Luo Hongxin felt afraid, so he made friends with the great-grandfather, and sent 30,000 soldiers to attack Li Cunxin and defeat him.

古文：未几，李克用领兵攻魏，营于观音门外，属邑多拔。
现代文：不久，李克用领兵攻打魏州，扎营于观音门外，魏州所属城邑多被晋军攻占。
English: Soon after, Li Ke led his troops to attack Weizhou and set up camp outside the Guanyin Gate. Most of the cities and towns belonging to Weizhou were occupied by the Jin army.

古文：太祖遣葛从周援之，战于洹水，擒克用男落落以献。太祖令送于宏信，斩之，晋军乃退。
现代文：太祖派葛从周援救罗弘信，在洹水与晋军交战，活捉了李克用的儿子落落献上，太祖令将落落送给罗弘信，罗弘信杀了他，晋军才退。
English: The great-great-grandfather sent Ge from Zhou to rescue Luo Hongxin. He fought against the Jin army in Surabaya. He captured Li Kegui's son alive and presented him to Luo Hongxin. The great-great-grandfather gave Luo Hongxin to Luo Hongxin. Luo Hongxin killed him, and the Jin army withdrew.

古文：是时，太祖方图兗、郓，虑宏信离贰，每岁时赂遗，必卑辞厚礼。
现代文：这时太祖正在图取兖州、郓州，担心罗弘信背离自己，每年岁时节日都送给他财物，必定言辞谦卑、礼物丰盛。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather was trying to capture Luzhou and Luzhou. He was worried that Luo Hongxin would abandon him. Every year, he would give him money and goods at the festival. His words were humble and his gifts were plentiful.

古文：宏信每有答贶，太祖必对魏使北面拜而受之，曰： 六兄比予有倍年之长，兄弟之国，安得以常邻遇之。 
现代文：罗弘信每有回礼，太祖必当着魏州使者的面朝北方拜揖而接受，说： 六兄是比我年纪大一倍的兄长，兄弟之邦，哪能用通常邻邦的礼仪看待。 
English: Whenever Luo Hongxin returned a salute, the great-grandfather would bow to the north in front of the Wei envoy and accept it, saying: "Six brothers are brothers who are twice as old as me, a brotherly nation, which can be viewed with the usual neighborly etiquette.

古文：朝廷因而命之，寻正授旄钺，累加检校太尉、兼侍中，封长沙郡王。
现代文：所以罗弘信以为太祖很看得起自己。后来罗弘信历官至检校太尉，被封为临清王。光化元年八月，在任上去世。罗绍威继承父亲的职位自称魏州留后，朝廷也就顺便任命他，接着正式授与他旄节斧钺，加封为检校太尉、兼侍中，封为长沙郡王。
English: Therefore, Luo Hongxin thought that his great-grandfather thought highly of him. Later, Luo Hongxin rose through the ranks of officials to the rank of lieutenant of school inspection and was named the king of Linqing. In August of the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, he died in office. After Luo Shaowei inherited his father's position and said that he would stay in Weizhou, the imperial court also appointed him by the way, and then officially conferred him with the title of "King of County." He was also given the title of lieutenant of school inspection and the title of "Junior Chamberlain" and the title of "King of Changsha County."

古文：昭宗东迁，命诸道修洛邑，绍威独营太庙，制加守侍中，进封鄴王。
现代文：唐昭宗东迁洛阳，太祖命各道营修洛邑，罗绍威单独营修太庙，诏令加封他为守侍中，进封为邺王。
English: Tang Zhaozong moved to Luoyang in the east, the great-grandfather ordered the construction of Luoyang in all directions, and Roshowi alone built the imperial temple. The imperial edict added him as a guard of attendants, and he was crowned as the king of Shao.

古文：初，至德中，田承嗣盗据相、魏、澶、博、卫、贝等六州，召募军中子弟，置之部下，号曰 牙军 ，皆丰给厚赐，不胜骄宠。
现代文：当初，至德年间，田承嗣盗取占据相、魏、澶、博、卫、贝等六州，招募军中子弟，安置在部下，称为 牙军 ，都供给丰厚的赏赐，使牙军不胜骄宠。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Dezong, Tian Chengzhe stole and occupied six prefectures, including Xiang, Wei, Zhou, Bo, Wei, and Bei, recruited soldiers and placed them under his command, called the Fang Army, and provided them with rich rewards, making the Fang Army very proud.

古文：年代浸远，父子相袭，亲党胶固，其凶戾者，强贾豪夺，逾法犯令，长吏不能禁。
现代文：年代久远，父子相承，亲戚党徒交结牢固，那凶暴的人，强取豪夺，违犯法令，官员不能制止。
English: With a long history, father and son inherited, relatives and party members have a strong relationship, those violent people, forcibly take plunder, violate laws and regulations, officials can not stop.

古文：变易主帅，有同兒戏，自田氏已后，垂二百年。主帅废置，出于其手，如史宪诚、何全皞、韩君雄、乐彦贞，皆为其所立。优奖小不如意，则举族被诛。
现代文：牙军们随便变换主帅，就像儿戏，从田氏以后，近二百年，主帅的废立，全出于牙军之手，如史宪诚、何全白皋、韩君雄、乐彦贞，都是他们拥立的，对他们的优待奖赏稍不如意，就全家被诛。
English: It is like a child's play for the Aja soldiers to change their coach at will. For nearly 200 years since the time of the Tian clan, the scrapping of the coach was entirely due to the hands of the Aja soldiers. For example, Shi Xiancheng, He Quan Baiyao, Han Junxiong, and Lok Yanzhen were all supported by them. If their preferential treatment and reward were a little less than satisfactory, the whole family would be executed.

古文：绍威惩其往弊，虽以货赂姑息，而心衔之。
现代文：罗绍威苦于牙军以往形成的弊病，虽以财货收买姑息迁就，但内心不满他们。
English: Rossoway suffered from the ills of the dental army in the past. Although they bought indulgences with money and goods, they were dissatisfied with them.

古文：绍威嗣世之明年正月，幽州刘仁恭拥兵十万，谋乱河朔，进陷贝州，长驱攻魏。
现代文：罗绍威继承父职的第二年正月，幽州刘仁恭拥兵十万图谋扰乱河朔，进攻占领贝州，长驱直攻魏州。
English: In the first month of the second year after Luo Shaowei succeeded his father, Liu Rengong of Yuzhou led 100,000 soldiers in an attempt to disrupt Hexuo, attack and occupy Beizhou, and directly attack Weizhou.

古文：绍威求援于太祖，太祖遣李思安援之，屯于洹水。葛从周自邢、洺引军入魏州。燕将刘守文、单可及与王师战于内黄，大败之，乘胜追蹑。
现代文：罗绍威向太祖求援，太祖派李思安援助他，屯驻在洹水，葛从周自邢州、氵名州领军进入魏州，燕军将领刘守文、单可及与太祖的军队在内黄交战，燕军大败，太祖的军队乘胜追击。
English: Luo Shaowei appealed to the Great Patriarch for help. The Great Patriarch sent Li Si'an to assist him and stationed him in Surabaya. Ge led the army from Zhou, Zhangzhou, and Yanming into Wei. Liu Shouwen, the general of the Yan army, fought with the Great Patriarch's army in Inner Huang. The Yan army suffered a major defeat, and the Great Patriarch's army pursued the victory.

古文：会从周亦出军掩击，又败燕军，斩首三万余级。
现代文：遇上葛从周也出军掩击，又打败燕军。斩首三万余级。
English: When confronted with Ge, Zhou also sent troops to cover the attack and defeated Yan's army. He beheaded more than thirty thousand people.

古文：三年，绍威遣使会军，同攻沧州以报之。
现代文：三年，罗绍威派使者与太祖会合军队，一同进攻沧州以回报太祖。
English: Three years later, Roshowei sent an envoy to join forces with Taizu and together they attacked Cangzhou to repay Taizu.

古文：自是绍威感太祖援助之恩，深加景附。
现代文：从此罗绍威感念太祖援助之恩，深为仰慕并依附于他。
English: From then on, Rossoway was deeply grateful for his grandfather's assistance, and deeply admired and attached to him.

古文：绍威见唐祚衰凌，群雄交乱，太祖兵强天下，必知有禅代之志，故倾心附结，赞成其事，每虑牙军变易，心不自安。
现代文：罗绍威眼见唐朝国运衰落，群雄交相作乱，太祖兵力强于天下，知道他必定有受禅代帝的意图，所以全心全意依附交结他，成就他的事业，又经常担心牙军发生变乱，内心不安。
English: Seeing the decline of the Tang Dynasty's national fortune, the turmoil caused by the rivalry of great men, and the great-grandfather's military strength being stronger than the world, Rossowei knew that he must have the intention of being accepted by the Emperor of the Zen Dynasty, so he wholeheartedly adhered to him and accomplished his cause, and he was often worried about the chaos of the imperial army, and his heart was uneasy.

古文：天祐初，州城地无故自陷，俄而小校李公牷谋变，绍威愈惧，乃定计图牙军，遣使告太祖，求为外援。
现代文：天初年，州城的地面无故下陷，不久小校李公亻全谋变，罗绍威更加害怕，于是定计除掉牙军，派使者告诉太祖请求他做外援。
English: In the first year of Tian Tian, the ground of the prefecture-level city sank without reason. Soon, the schoolboy Li Gongyao plotted a coup d'etat. Rossoway was even more afraid, so he decided to get rid of the Chinese army and sent an envoy to tell the great-grandfather to ask him for foreign aid.

古文：太祖许之，遣李思安会魏博军再攻沧州。
现代文：太祖答应了他，派李思安会同魏博镇军队再次攻打沧州。
English: The great-grandfather agreed to him and sent Li Si'an Association and Wei Bo Town's army to attack Cangzhou again.

古文：先是，安阳公主薨于魏，太祖因之遣长直军校马嗣勋选兵千人，伏兵仗于巨橐中，肩舁以入魏州，言助女葬事。
现代文：在这以前，安阳公主在魏州去世，太祖乘机派遣长直军校马嗣勋挑选士兵一千人，将兵器藏在巨大的口袋中，用肩舆抬入魏州，说是赞助安阳公主的葬事。
English: Before this, when Princess Anyang died in Weizhou, the great-great-grandfather took the opportunity to send Ma Shih-hun, the head of the Ma Zhizhong Military Academy, to select a thousand soldiers, hide the weapons in huge pockets, and carry them into Weizhou on his shoulders, saying that he was sponsoring the funeral of Princess Anyang.

古文：天祐三年正月五日，太祖亲率大军济河，声言视行营于沧、景，牙军颇疑其事。
现代文：天三年正月五日，太祖亲自领军渡过黄河，声称到沧州、景州视察行营，牙军很怀疑他的行动。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Heian period, Taizu personally led the army across the Yellow River, claiming to inspect the camps in Cangzhou and Jingzhou. The Chinese army was very suspicious of his actions.

古文：是月十六日，绍威率奴客数百与嗣勋同攻之，时宿于牙城者千余人，迟明尽诛之，凡八千家，皆赤其族，州城为之一空。
现代文：这月十六日，罗绍威率领数百家奴门客与马嗣勋共同攻打牙军，当时住在牙城的一千多牙军，到天亮时全被诛杀，共八千家，都被灭了族，州城为之一空。
English: On the 16th of this month, Rossoway led hundreds of Numengui and Ma Shihun to jointly attack the Yaga army. At that time, more than a thousand Yaga soldiers living in Yaga City were all killed by dawn. A total of eight thousand houses were destroyed, and the state capital was empty.

古文：翼日，太祖自内黄驰至鄴。
现代文：第二天，太祖从内黄奔到邺州。
English: The next day, Taizu ran from Neihu to Zhangzhou.

古文：时魏军二万，方与王师同围沧州，闻城中有变，乃拥大将史仁遇保于高唐，六州之内，皆为勍敌，太祖遣诸将分讨之，半岁方平。
现代文：当时魏军二万，正与朝廷军队一同包围沧州，听到魏州城中发生事变，魏军于是拥着大将史仁遇固守高唐，六州之内，皆为劲敌，太祖派众将分兵征讨他们，半年才平定。
English: At that time, the 20,000-strong Wei army was encircling Cangzhou together with the imperial army. Hearing that an incident had occurred in the city of Weizhou, the Wei army then held on to Gaotang with the general Shi Ren. Within the six states, they were all fierce enemies. Taizu sent soldiers to enlist them, and it took half a year to subdue them.

古文：自是绍威虽除其逼，然寻有自弱之悔。
现代文：从此罗绍威虽然清除了逼迫自己的牙军，然而立刻又后悔削弱了自己的力量。
English: From then on, although Rossoway cleared the teeth of his persecutors, he immediately regretted having weakened his own strength.

古文：不数月，复有浮阳之役，绍威飞挽馈运，自鄴至长芦五百里，叠迹重轨，不绝于路。
现代文：不到几个月，又发生浮阳战役，罗绍威飞车馈送运输军需，从邺都到长芦五百里，车轨交叠，不绝于路。
English: Less than a few months later, the Battle of the Floating Sun took place again. Rossoway's flying car was used to feed and transport military supplies. It was five hundred miles from Shidu to Changlu, and the tracks overlapped, never ending the road.

古文：又于魏州建元帅府署，沿道置亭候，供牲牢、酒备、军幕、什器，上下数十万人，一无阙者。
现代文：又在魏州建立元帅府，沿路设置亭候，供应牲牢、酒备、军幕、什器，太祖上下全军几十万人，所用军需都不缺少。
English: He also established a marshal's office in Weizhou, set up pavilions along the road, and supplied livestock, wine, military tents, and furniture. There were hundreds of thousands of people in the whole army up and down the Taizu, and there was no shortage of military supplies.

古文：及太祖回自长芦，复过魏州，绍威乘间谓太祖曰： 邠、岐、太原终有狂谲之志，各以兴复唐室为词，王宜自取神器，以绝人望。天与不取，古人所非。 
现代文：到太祖从长芦回来，再次经过魏州时，罗绍威乘机对太祖说 ：州、岐下、太原终有狂妄诡密的意图，各以复兴唐朝王室为名，大王应当自己夺取国家政权，以断绝别人的企图，上天赐与的而不要，是古人就非议的。 
English: When the great-grandfather came back from Changlu and passed through Weizhou again, Rossoway took the opportunity to say to the great-grandfather: "Zhou, Qizhi, and Taiyuan all have arrogant and cunning intentions, each in the name of reviving the Tang Dynasty royal family. The great king should seize state power himself in order to break other people's attempts. Heaven-given but not, is what the ancients criticized.

古文：太祖深感之。
现代文：太祖深深感谢他。
English: The great-grandfather thanked him profusely.

古文：及登极，加守太傅、兼中书令，赐号扶天启运竭节功臣。
现代文：到太祖登帝位，加封罗绍威为守太傅、兼中书令，赐与扶天启运竭节功臣名号。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he appointed Luo Shaowei as Shou Taifu and Chung Shuling, and gave him the title of Fu Tian Qixing Festival meritorious subject.

古文：车驾将入洛，奉诏重修五凤楼、朝元殿，巨木良匠非当时所有，倏架于地，溯流西立于旧址之上，张设绨绣，皆有副焉。
现代文：御驾将进洛阳时，罗绍威奉诏令重修五凤楼、朝元殿，巨大的木材和精巧的工匠都非当时所有，而建筑忽然耸立于地，逆洛水西立于旧址之上，张设彩绣。
English: When he was about to enter Luoyang, Roshowei issued an imperial edict to rebuild the Wufeng Building and the Imperial Palace. Huge timber and skillful craftsmen were not available at that time, but the buildings suddenly stood on the ground, west of Luoshui, on the old site, decorated with colorful embroidery.

古文：太祖甚喜，以宝带、名马赐之。
现代文：太祖很高兴，将宝带、名马赐给罗绍威。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and gave Roshowe a treasure belt and a famous horse.

古文：先是，河朔三镇司管钥、备洒扫皆有阉人，绍威曰： 此类皆宫禁指使，岂人臣家所宜畜也。 
现代文：在这以前，河朔三镇掌握官府钥匙、负责洗抹扫地的都是阉人，罗绍威说 ：这种人都只能供宫禁中驱使，哪是人臣家中能蓄养的。 
English: Prior to this, the key to the government offices in the three towns of Hexuo and the person in charge of washing and sweeping were all eunuchs. Rossoway said: Such people can only be driven by the palace ban, which can be maintained in the homes of courtiers.

古文：因搜获三十余辈，尽以来献，太祖嘉之。
现代文：于是搜到三十多人，全献给朝廷，太祖嘉奖他。
English: As a result, more than thirty people were found, all dedicated to the imperial court, and the great-grandfather commended him.

古文：开平中，加守太师、兼中书令，邑万户。
现代文：开平年间，加封为守太师，兼中书令，食邑一万户。
English: During the Kaiping era, Kaifeng served as the Grand Master of the Imperial Palace, as well as the Vice-Regent of the People's Republic of China, and provided food for 10,000 households.

古文：绍威尝以临淄、海岱罢兵岁久，储庾山积，惟京师军民多而食益寡，愿于太行伐木，下安阳、淇门，斫船三百艘，置水运自大河入洛口，岁漕百万石，以给宿卫，太祖深然之。
现代文：罗绍威曾认为临淄、海岱息兵多年，储存的粮食堆积如山，只有京城军民多而粮食很缺乏，于是愿到太行山砍伐树木，运到安阳、淇门，造船三百艘，用水运从黄河进入洛水，一年可漕运百万石粮食，以供应警卫京师的部队，太祖深以为是。
English: Luo Shaowei once thought that Linyi and Haikou had kept soldiers for many years, and the stored grain was piled up like a mountain, only the Beijing army and people were many and the grain was very scarce, so he was willing to cut down trees in Taihang Mountain, transport them to Anyang and Qimen, build three hundred ships, transport them from the Yellow River to Luoshui by water, and paddle a million stone of grain a year to supply the guards of the Beijing division, which was deeply believed by Taizu.

古文：会绍威遘疾革，遣使上章乞骸骨，太祖抚案动容，顾使者曰： 亟行语而主，为我强饭，如有不可讳，当世世贵尔子孙以相报也。 
现代文：然而逢罗绍威染上重病，派使者呈上奏章请求退休归家，太祖抚摸着桌子为之动容，回头对使者说： 赶快回去告诉你的主人，请为我勉力吃些饭食保养身体，如有不测，我当让他的子孙显贵以报答他。 
English: However, whenever Rossoway fell seriously ill and sent an envoy to present a petition to retire and return home, the great-grandfather stroked the table and was moved. He turned to the envoy and said, "Go back quickly and tell your master, please try your best to eat some food for me and take care of my health. If anything happens, I should let his descendants be honored to repay him."

古文：仍命其子周翰监总军府。
现代文：又命他的儿子罗周翰总理军府。
English: He also ordered his son Luo Zhouhan, the prime minister, to take over the military government.

古文：及讣至，辍朝三日，册赠尚书令。
现代文：当讣告传来后，太祖停止上朝三天，册赠罗绍威为尚书令。
English: When the obituary arrived, the great-great-grandfather paused for three days and presented the book to Roshowe as a gift.

古文：绍威在镇凡十七年，年三十四薨。
现代文：罗绍威在藩镇共十七年，年三十四岁时去世。
English: Rossoway spent a total of seventeen years in the town and died at the age of thirty-four.

古文：绍威形貌魁伟，有英杰气，工笔札，晓音律。
现代文：绍威形貌威武伟岸，有英雄豪杰气概，通文笔，晓音律。
English: Shaowi's appearance is majestic and powerful, with a heroic and heroic spirit, a pen, and a clear intonation.

古文：每命幕客作四方书檄，小不称意，坏裂抵弃，自擘笺起草，下笔成文，虽无藻丽之风，幕客多所不及。江东人罗隐者，佐钱镠军幕，有诗名于天下。
现代文：性情又精悍聪明敏捷，信服儒家思想，明通为官之道。喜欢招揽文人，藏书万卷，开设学校，设置书楼，每当歌酒宴会，与宾客幕僚吟诗做赋，颇有情致。江东人罗隐，在吴越王钱军中幕府做事，有诗天下闻名。
English: His temperament was refined, intelligent and agile. He was convinced of Confucianism and knew how to be an official. He liked to recruit writers, collect thousands of books, open a school, set up a library, hold a song and wine banquet, and chant poems with guests and staff. He was quite affectionate. Luo Ying, a man from Jiangdong, worked for the shogunate in the army of King Qian of Wuyue. He was famous for his poetry.

古文：绍威遣使赂遗，叙南巷之敬，隐乃聚其所为诗投寄之。
现代文：罗绍威派人致送财礼，表达敬慕之意，罗隐于是收集自己所做的诗。投寄给他。
English: Rossoway sent someone to send him a gift of money to express his admiration, so Rowan collected the poems he had written and sent them to him.

古文：绍威酷嗜其作，因目己之所为曰《偷江东集》，至今鄴中人士讽咏之。
现代文：罗绍威酷爱罗隐的诗作，因而命名自己的诗集叫《偷江东集》，至今邺中人士仍吟咏罗绍威的诗。
English: Rossoway loved Luo Ying's poetry so much that he named his poetry collection "Stealing the East River," and people at school still sing Rossoway's poems.

古文：绍威尝有公宴诗云： 帘前淡泊云头日，座上萧骚雨脚风。 
现代文：绍威曾有聚宴时所做诗云 ：帘前淡泊云头日，座上萧骚雨脚风。 
English: Sauvé once composed a poem during a banquet: On the first day, with the curtains drawn and the sky overcast, it was raining and windy.

古文：虽深于诗者，亦所叹伏。
现代文：就是精于写诗的人，也深为叹服。
English: Even those who are good at writing poetry are deeply impressed.

古文：绍威子三人，长曰廷规，位至司农卿，尚太祖女安阳公主，又尚金华公主，早卒。
现代文：绍威有子三人：大儿叫罗廷规，位至司农卿，娶太祖女儿安阳公主为妻，又娶金华公主为妻，早逝。
English: Shaowei had three sons: his eldest son was named Luo Tingfu, who rose to the rank of Sino-nongqing, married his great-grandfather's daughter, Princess Anyang, and married Princess Jinhua, who died young.

古文：诏赠侍中，陈人为之罢市。
现代文：二儿叫罗周翰，继承罗绍威任魏博节度使，也早逝。
English: The second son was named Luo Zhouhan, who succeeded Luo Shaowei as Wei Bo's regent, and also died early.

古文：子縠，仕至左骁卫大将军、宣徽北院使。
现代文：三儿叫罗周敬，历任滑州节度使，另有传。
English: The third son was called Luo Zhou Jian, the successive governor of Slanting, and there is another legend.

古文：唐庄宗入汴，与从兄岩皆族诛。
现代文：开平四年夏天诏令度金华公主出家为尼姑，住在宋州元静寺，是因为太祖对罗家推行恩惠，以成就她的节操。
English: In the summer of the 4th year of the Heian period, Princess Jinhua was ordained as a nun and lived in the Yuanjing Temple in Songzhou. This was because her great-grandfather had granted favors to the Luo family in order to save her life.

古文：王珂，河中人。
现代文：王珂，河中人。
English: Wang Ke, from the middle of the river.

古文：祖纵，盐州刺史。
现代文：祖父王纵，为盐州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Wang Zheng, was a historian of Yanzhou.

古文：父重荣，河东节度使，破黄巢有大功，封琅邪郡王。
现代文：父亲王重荣，为河中节度使，破黄巢有大功，被封为琅邪郡王。
English: His father, Wang Chong Rong, was an envoy to the Mid-Heaven Festival, and was awarded the title of "King of the Evil County" for his great contribution to breaking the Yellow Nest.

古文：珂本重荣兄重简之子，出继重荣。
现代文：王珂本是王重荣的哥哥王重简的儿子，过继给王重荣。
English: Wang Keben was the son of Wang Chong Rong's brother, Wang Chong Jian, and was adopted by Wang Chong Rong.

古文：唐僖宗光启三年，重荣为部将常行儒所害，推重荣弟重盈为蒲帅，以珂为行军司马。
现代文：唐僖宗光启三年，王重荣被部将常行儒杀害，王重荣的弟弟王重盈被推举为蒲州主帅，以王珂为行军司马。
English: In the third year of the reign of Tang Xizong Guangqi, Wang Chung Rong was killed by the general Changxing Ju. Wang Chung Rong's brother, Wang Chung Ying, was elected as the general of Puzhou, with Wang Ke as the marshal.

古文：及重盈卒，军府推珂为留后。
现代文：到王重盈去世后，军府推举王珂为留后。
English: After Wang Chung-ying's death, the military government chose Wang Ke as the successor.

古文：时重盈子珙为陕州节度使，瑶为绛州刺史，由是争为蒲帅，瑶、珙连上章论列，又与太祖书云： 珂非吾兄弟，盖余家之苍头也，小字忠兒，安得继嗣！ 
现代文：当时王重盈的儿子王珙任陕州节度使，王瑶任绛州刺史，因此争当蒲州主帅，王瑶、王珙连上奏章论理，又写信给太祖说 ：王珂不是我的兄弟，只不过是我家的一个家奴，小字叫忠儿，哪能继位！ 
English: At that time, Wang Chung-ying's son, Wang Hui, served as the envoy of the Shaanxi Festival, and Wang Hui served as the governor of Bozhou, and therefore competed to be the governor of Bozhou. Wang Hui and Wang Hui even wrote a letter to the great-grandfather saying, "Wang Ke is not my brother, he is just a domestic slave of my family. His nickname is Zhong'er, how can he succeed to the throne!"

古文：珂亦上章云： 亡父有兴复之功。 
现代文：王珂也上奏章说 ：亡父有复兴唐朝皇室的功劳。 
English: Wang Ke also wrote on the scroll: "My late father is credited with reviving the Tang Dynasty royal family."

古文：又遣使求援于太原，李克用为保荐于朝，昭宗可之。
现代文：又派使者向太原求援，李克用向朝廷保荐他，昭宗答应了。
English: He also sent an envoy to Taiyuan to ask for help. Li Kegui recommended him to the imperial court, and Akimune agreed.

古文：既而珙厚结王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建为援，三镇互相表荐，昭宗诏谕之曰： 吾以太原与重荣有再造之功，已俞其奏矣。 
现代文：不久王珙厚结王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建为支援，三镇都上表推荐王珙，昭宗诏谕他们说： 我因李克用与王重荣有再造朝廷之功，已批准了他的奏请。 
English: Soon after, Wang Qiaohu joined Wang Xingyu, Li Maozhen, and Han Jian as supporters. The three towns recommended Wang Qiaohu to the emperor, and the Zhaozong issued an edict to them saying, "I have approved Li Keyan's petition because of Li Keyan's and Wang Chung Rong's achievements in rebuilding the imperial court."

古文：乾宁二年五月，三镇率兵入觐，贼害时政，请以河中授珙、瑶，又连兵以攻河中。
现代文：乾宁二年五月，三镇领兵入京求见皇上，危害朝政，请求将河中府授给王珙、王瑶，又联合发兵进攻河中。
English: In May of the second year of Qianning, the three towns led an army into Beijing to meet the emperor, endangering the imperial government, requesting that the central government of the river be awarded to Wang Qian and Wang Qian, and jointly attacking the middle of the river.

古文：克用闻之，出师以讨三镇，瑶、珙兵退，晋师拔绛州，擒瑶斩之。
现代文：李克用闻讯，出兵以讨伐三镇，王瑶、王珙兵退，晋军攻下绛州，擒获王瑶并杀了他。
English: Li Ke used the news to send troops to attack the three towns. Wang Yao and Wang Yao's soldiers retreated, and the Jin army captured Zhangzhou, captured Wang Yao and killed him.

古文：及克用驻军于渭北，昭宗以珂为河中节度使，正授旄钺，克用因以女妻珂；珂至太原谢婚成礼，克用令李嗣昭将兵助珂，攻珙于陕焉。
现代文：当李克用在渭水北岸驻军时，昭宗任王珂为河中节度使，正式授与他旄节斧钺，李克用因而将女儿嫁给王珂。王珂到太原拜谢姻亲举行婚礼，李克用令李嗣昭领兵帮助王珂，到陕地攻打王珙。
English: When Li Ke used to garrison troops on the north shore of Surabaya, Zhaozong appointed Wang Ke as the envoy of the Mid-River Festival, and officially conferred him with the title of "Imperial Envoy of the Mid-River Festival." Li Ke used this to marry his daughter to Wang Ke. Wang Ke went to Taiyuan to hold a wedding to thank his in-laws. Li Ke used to order Li Shizhao to lead the troops to help Wang Ke, and to attack Wang Ye in Shaanxi.

古文：光化末，太祖谓张存敬曰： 珂恃太原之势，侮慢邻封，尔为我持一绳以缚之。 
现代文：光化末年，太祖对张存敬说： 王珂依恃太原的势力，欺侮轻视邻邦，你替我拿根绳子去把他捆起来。 
English: In the last years of the Gwanghwa era, the great-grandfather said to Zhang Cunxiong: "Wang Kei, you have abused the power of Taiyuan and bullied and despised your neighbors. Take a rope for me and go and tie him up."

古文：天复元年春，存敬兵下晋、绛，令何纟因守晋州以扼太原援师。
现代文：天复元年春天，张存敬领兵攻下晋州、绛州，令何纟因守卫晋州以阻扼太原的援军。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Zhang Cunjing led an army to capture Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and ordered He Yingyin to guard Jinzhou to block Taiyuan's reinforcements.

古文：二月，大军逼河中，珂妻书告太原曰： 敌势攻逼，朝夕为俘囚，乞食于大梁矣，大人安忍不救！ 
现代文：二月，大军进逼河中，王珂的妻子写信给太原李克用说： 梁军进攻逼近，我们将在朝夕间成为俘虏囚犯，向大梁乞讨饭食了，大人怎忍心不救！ 
English: In February, when the army was approaching the river, Wang Ke's wife wrote a letter to Taiyuan Li Kegui, saying: "The Liang army's attack is approaching, we will become captive prisoners in the morning and evening, begging for food from Liang, how can adults not help!

古文：克用曰： 前途既阻，众寡不敌，救则与尔两亡。
现代文：李克用说： 我前路已经受阻，寡不敌众，援救则与你们一起灭亡。
English: Li Kegui said: My way forward has been blocked, I am outnumbered, and the rescue will perish with you.

古文：可与王郎归朝廷。 
现代文：你可与王郎一起回归唐朝。 
English: You can return to the Tang Dynasty with Wang Lang.

古文：珂复求救于李茂贞，茂贞不答。
现代文：王珂向李茂贞求救，李茂贞不答理。
English: Wang Ke asked Li Maozhen for help, but Li Maozhen did not answer.

古文：珂势穷蹙，即登城谓存敬曰： 吾与汴王有家世事分，公宜退舍，俟汴王至，吾自听命。 
现代文：王珂势穷力竭，即登上城墙对张存敬说： 我与梁王有世家的情分，您应后撤三十里，等梁王来，我自当听他处置。 
English: King Kes exhausted his strength and climbed onto the city wall to say to Zhang Cunqian: I have a family relationship with King Liang. You should retreat thirty miles. When King Liang comes, I should listen to him.

古文：存敬即日退舍。
现代文：张存敬即日退避三十里。
English: Zhang Cun Rong retreated 30 miles on the same day.

古文：三月，太祖自洛阳至，先哭于重荣之墓，蒲人闻之感悦。
现代文：三月，太祖从洛阳来到，先哭祭于王重荣之墓，蒲州人闻讯感动喜悦。
English: In March, the great-grandfather came from Luoyang, first crying at the tomb of Wang Chongrong, and the people of Puzhou were moved with joy when they heard the news.

古文：珂欲面缚牵羊以见，太祖曰： 太师阿舅之恩，何时可忘，郎君若以亡国之礼相见，黄泉其谓我何！ 
现代文：王珂想反缚双手牵着羊去见太祖，太祖说： 太师阿舅重荣对我的大恩，何时能忘，郎君要以亡国之礼见我，太师在黄泉之下将怎样说我！ 
English: Wang Ke wanted to tie his hands together and lead the sheep to see his grandfather. His grandfather said: "When will I forget the great kindness that Grandmaster Chulong Rong has shown me? My brother-in-law wants to see me with the honor of ruining the country. What will Grandmaster Chulong Rong say about me under the hellfire?"

古文：及珂出迎于路，握手歔欷，联辔而入。
现代文：到王珂出城到路上迎接太祖时，两人握手抽泣，并排骑马进城。
English: When Wang Ke went out of the city to meet his grandfather on the road, the two shook hands and sobbed, and rode side by side into the city.

古文：乃以居敬守河中，珂举家徙于汴。
现代文：于是以张存敬镇守河中，王珂全家迁往汴州。
English: As a result, the whole Wang Ke family moved to Ganzhou, with Zhang Cunqian as the town guard.

古文：后入觐，被杀于华州传舍。
现代文：后来王珂入京觐见太祖，被杀死在华州的邮传馆舍中。
English: Later, Wang Ke went to Beijing to see his great-grandfather and was killed in the post office building in Huazhou.

