古文：王綝，字方庆，以字显。
现代文：王綝，字方庆，以字为人所知。
English: Wang Yao, also known as Fang Qing, is famous for his calligraphy.

古文：其先自丹杨徙雍咸阳。
现代文：其先人从丹阳迁到雍地咸阳。
English: Their ancestors moved from Danyang to Xianyang in the Yongdi Mountains.

古文：父弘直，为汉王元昌友。
现代文：父亲名弘直，是汉王元昌之友。
English: His father, Nagahiro Nao, was a friend of the Han king, Yuan Chang.

古文：王好畋游，上书切谏，王稍止，然益疏斥。
现代文：王爱好游玩田猎，上书恳切地劝谏，王略有收敛，不过也就疏远他了。
English: Wang likes to travel and hunt in the fields. He wrote a letter to earnestly persuade Zou. Wang slightly restrained himself, but he also alienated him.

古文：终荆王友。
现代文：后来为荆王友。
English: He later became Jing Wangyou.

古文：方庆起家越王府参军，受司马迁、班固二史于记室任希古，希古它迁，就卒其业。
现代文：王方庆自越王府参军起家。向记室任希古学习司马迁、班固的《史记》及《汉书》二史。后来任希古去了别处，乃停止了其学习。
English: Wang Fangqing joined the army in Yuewangfu and started his career. He studied Sima Qian and Ban Gu's "Histories" and "Chinese Classics" from Ren Xigu of the Records Office. Later, Ren Xigu went to another place, but stopped his studies.

古文：武后时，累迁广州都督。
现代文：武后时，升任广州都督。
English: When she became empress dowager, she was promoted to the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：南海岁有昆仑舶市外区琛琲，前都督路元睿冒取其货，舶酋不胜忿，杀之。
现代文：南海每年都有昆仑岛的船来卖外域的珠宝，前任都督路元睿又任意拿货不给钱，船主十分生气，将路元睿又杀了。
English: Every year in the South China Sea, ships from Kunlun Island come to sell foreign jewelry. The former governor, Lu Yuanrui, arbitrarily took the goods and did not pay. The ship owner was very angry and killed Lu Yuanrui.

古文：方庆至，秋毫无所索。
现代文：王方庆继任都督，丝毫都不向船主索要。
English: Wang Fangqing succeeded as governor and did not ask the shipowner for anything.

古文：始，部中首领沓墨，民诣府诉，府曹素相饷谢，未尝治。
现代文：当初，部中的首领们都极贪婪，百姓到都督府来控告，府中官属与那些首领一向有联系，受他们的馈赠，所以从未治过他们的罪。
English: At the beginning, the heads of the ministries were extremely greedy. The people came to the governor's office to complain. The officials of the governor's office had always been in contact with those heads and received gifts from them, so they never cured them of their sins.

古文：方庆约官属不得与交通，犯者痛论以法，境内清畏。
现代文：王方庆到任后，约束吏属不得与那些部首领有来往，违者要依法论处，于是境内都畏法清廉。
English: After Wang Fangqing took office, the restraining officers were not allowed to have any dealings with the heads of those departments, and violators were to be dealt with according to law. As a result, everyone in the country was afraid of the law.

古文：议者谓治广未有如方庆者，号第一，下诏赐瑞锦、杂彩，以著善政。
现代文：那些评论者说治理广州还没有一个像王方庆这样治理有方的，可号称第一。皇帝下诏赐给瑞锦、杂彩，表扬他的善政。
English: Those commentators said that there is no one who has governed Guangzhou as well-governed as Wang Fangqing, and it can be said to be the first. The emperor issued a decree to give Ruijin and Hakkai, praising his good governance.

古文：转洛州长史，封石泉县子。
现代文：后来转为洛州长史，封石泉县子爵。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Governor of Los Angeles and named Viscount of Shiquan County.

古文：迁鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，进凤阁侍郎。
现代文：后升任鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，升任凤阁侍郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Xingtai waiter, Tongfeng Pavilion Xingtai Pingzhangji, and then to the position of Xingtai waiter.

古文：神功初，清边道大总管武攸宜破契丹凯还，且献俘，内史王及善以孝明帝忌月，请鼓吹备而不作，方庆曰： 晋穆帝纳后，当康帝忌月，时以为疑。
现代文：神功初年，清边道大总管武攸宜击破契丹后凯旋，将要献俘宗庙，内史王及善提出这是孝明帝的忌月，要求鼓吹乐队备而不用。王方庆说 ：以前晋穆帝娶皇后，正当康帝的忌月，时人都为之犹豫。
English: In the first year of Shengong, the general manager of Qingbian Road, Wu Youyi, defeated Khitan and returned in triumph, and was going to dedicate the ancestral temple to the emperor. The Inner History King and the good man proposed that this was the month of the death of Emperor Xiaoming, and requested that the band be prepared. Wang Fangqing said: Previously, Emperor Jinmu married the queen, and it was the month of the death of Emperor Kang, so people hesitated.

古文：荀询谓《礼》有忌日无忌月，自月而推，则忌时忌年，俞无理据。
现代文：荀讷说《礼》中提到了忌日，但没有忌月的提法及礼仪。从 月 而推论，那就还可以有忌时、忌年，那就越发没有理论根据了。
English: Janne said that the day of death was mentioned in the "Rite," but there was no mention of the month of death and etiquette. Inferring from the month, then there could still be a time of death, a year of death, and then there would be no theoretical basis.

古文：世用其言。
现代文：那时就用了荀讷的意见。
English: That's when I used my intuition.

古文：臣谓军方大凯，作乐无嫌。 
现代文：臣以为现在正是我军获得大胜，作乐不会有妨碍的。 
English: The vassal thought that now that our army had won a great victory, there would be no obstacle to making music.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝诏令允许作乐。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：武后幸玉泉祠，以山道险，欲御腰舆。
现代文：武后到玉泉祠去，因山道险窄，想乘手挽的 腰舆 。
English: Wu Hou went to Yuquan Shrine. Due to the narrow mountain road, she wanted to take the hand-carved waist lamp.

古文：方庆奏： 昔张猛谏汉元帝 乘船危，就桥安 。
现代文：王方庆上奏说： 以前张猛劝谏汉元帝说： 乘船有危险，走桥安稳。 
English: Wang Fangqing said in his report: Zhang Meng previously advised Emperor Han Yuan to say: "It is dangerous to take the boat, but it is safe to walk on the bridge."

古文：帝乃从桥。
现代文：元帝听从了从桥上渡河。
English: Yuan Di obeyed and crossed the river from the bridge.

古文：今山阿危峭，隥道曲狭，比於楼船，又复甚危，陛下奈何轻践畏涂哉？ 
现代文：现在此地山高崖陡，栈道曲折狭窄。与汉元帝时的楼船相比，又危险多了。陛下怎么能轻易地就登险途呢？ 
English: Nowadays, the mountains here are high, the cliffs are steep, and the winding paths are narrow. Compared to the mansion ship at the time of Emperor Han Yuan, it is much more dangerous. How can His Majesty easily climb the perilous path?

古文：后为罢行。
现代文：武后听后，中止了此行。
English: After hearing this, Wu Hou stopped the trip.

古文：方庆尝以 令，期及大功丧，未葬，不听朝贺；未除，弗豫享宴。
现代文：王方庆曾经提出： 礼法，包括了五服内之丧，死者未葬，不听朝贺；丧期未满，不享宴饮。
English: Wang Fangqing once put forward: the etiquette includes the funeral within five sets of clothes, the deceased is not buried, do not listen to morning greetings; the mourning period is not over, do not enjoy the banquet.

古文：比群臣不遵用，颓紊教谊，不可长 。
现代文：如今群臣都不遵用，弄乱了、败坏了礼教，这种情况不能放任。 
English: Today, the ministers do not follow it, and they have disrupted and corrupted the etiquette. This situation cannot be allowed to continue.

古文：有诏申责，内外畏之。
现代文：有诏令申责不遵礼教者，于是朝廷内外都很怕他。
English: There was an imperial edict reprimanding those who did not follow the precepts, so people inside and outside the imperial court were afraid of him.

古文：后尝就求义之书，方庆奏： 十世从祖义之书四十余番，太宗求之，先臣番上送，今所存惟一轴。
现代文：武后曾向王方庆索求王羲之的书法。王方庆上奏 ：十世从祖王羲之的书法有四十多幅，太宗索求，臣先父已全部奉上，现在仅存一幅。
English: Empress Wu had asked Wang Fangqing for Wang Xizhi's calligraphy. Wang Fangqing played: the tenth generation had more than forty pieces of calligraphy from the ancestor Wang Xizhi, Taizong asked for it, the forefather had submitted all of them, and now only one piece remains.

古文：并上十一世祖导、十世祖洽、九世祖珣、八世祖昙首、七世祖僧绰、六世祖仲宝、五世祖骞、高祖规、曾祖褒并九世从祖献之等凡二十八人书共十篇。 
现代文：那时一并奉献的还有十一世祖王导、十世祖王洽、九世祖王繤、八世祖王昙首、七世祖王僧绰、六世祖王仲宝、五世祖王骞、高祖王规、曾祖王褒及九世从祖王献之等共二十八人的书共十篇。 
English: At that time, there were also a total of ten books dedicated by twenty-eight people, including the eleventh patriarch Wang Du, the tenth patriarch Wang Cai, the ninth patriarch Wang Xi, the eighth patriarch Xuanshu, the seventh patriarch So Zu, the sixth patriarch Zhong Bao, the fifth patriarch Wang Xi, the high patriarch Wang Gu, the great patriarch Wang Bo, and the ninth from the patriarch.

古文：后御武成殿遍示群臣，诏中书舍人崔融序其代阀，号《宝章集》，复以赐方庆，士人歆其宠。
现代文：武后去武成殿将这些书作遍示群臣，还诏令中书舍人崔融排列说明其世代门阀，称之为《宝章集》，又将集子赐给王方庆。士人都欣羡其宠。
English: Empress Wu went to Wucheng Palace to show these books to the courtiers. She also ordered the scribe Cui Rong to arrange the books to show their generations, calling it the "Treasure Collection." She also gave the collection to Wang Fangqing. The courtiers were all envious of her favor.

古文：以老乞身，改麟台监，脩国史。
现代文：后来王方庆告老要求退休，改任他为麟台监，修撰国史。
English: Later, Wang Fangqing told his father that he wanted to retire, and he was appointed as the superintendent of Lintai to revise the national history.

古文：中宗复为皇太子，拜方庆检校左庶子。
现代文：中宗再次被确认为皇太子时，委任王方庆为检校左庶子。
English: When Zhongzong was once again confirmed as the crown prince, Wang Fangqing was appointed as the illegitimate son of the school inspector.

古文：后欲季冬讲武，有司不时办，遂用明年孟春。
现代文：武后想要在冬季练武，有司不能按时准备好，于是决定来年春天再练。
English: Wu Hou wanted to practice martial arts in the winter, but Yuji couldn't get ready on time, so he decided to practice again next spring.

古文：方庆曰： 按《月令》 孟冬，天子命将帅讲武，习射御，角力。 
现代文：王方庆上奏 ：按照《月令》中说 冬季，天子命将帅习武，练习射箭、驾战车，角力较量 。
English: Wang Fangqing's recital: According to the "Monthly Order," in winter, the heavenly son will practice martial arts, practice archery, drive a chariot, and compete in wrestling.

古文：此乃三时务农，一时讲武，安不忘危之道。
现代文：这是三个季度务农，一个季度练武，平安之日不忘战乱之时。
English: This is the time of three seasons of farming, one season of martial arts, and the day of peace not forgetting the war.

古文：孟春不可以称兵。
现代文：春天不可以举兵。
English: You can't raise an army in the spring.

古文：兵，金也，金胜木。
现代文：兵，当五行之金；金胜木。
English: The soldier is the gold of the five elements; the gold is the wood of victory.

古文：方春木王，而举金以害盛德，逆生气。
现代文：春天，正是木旺之时，举金会伤德，扼杀生气。
English: In spring, when the trees are in full bloom, raising money can hurt morale and kill your energy.

古文：孟春行冬令，则水潦为败，雪霜大挚，首种不入。
现代文：孟春季节而干冬季干的事，将会发生水涝，雪霜也会使人不安，种子不能入土。
English: Meng spring season and dry winter dry things, there will be waterlogging, snow frost will also make people uneasy, seeds can not enter the soil.

古文：今孟春讲武，以阴政犯阳气，害发生之德，臣恐水潦败物，霜雪损稼，夏麦不登。
现代文：如今孟春时练兵，以阴政触犯阳气，危害了生物的生机。臣担心涝水将会冲毁东西，霜雪会打坏庄稼，以致夏麦不熟。
English: Now, Meng Chun is training soldiers, and he is using yin politics to offend yang, endangering the vitality of living things. The minister is worried that the floodwater will wash away things, frost and snow will damage crops, and the summer barley will not ripen.

古文：愿陛下不违时令，前及孟冬，以顺天道。 
现代文：恳请陛下不要违背时令，还是提前到冬季练兵，以顺应自然规律。 
English: I implore Your Majesty not to violate the season, but to advance to winter training in order to conform to the laws of nature.

古文：手制褒允。
现代文：武后写手制同意他的建议并予以褒奖。
English: Wu Hou agreed to his suggestion and praised him.

古文：是岁，真拜左庶子，进封公，奉入同职事三品，兼侍太子，更 弘 为 崇 ；沛王为太子，读书，方庆奏人臣于天子，未有斥子名者。
现代文：这一年，实任王方庆为左庶子，进而封公，奉入同职事三品，兼侍太子读书。王方庆上奏： 人臣对于天子，没有一个指斥太子名字不当的。
English: In the same year, Wang Fangqing, the real Wang Fangqing, became the left illegitimate son, and then he was given the title of prince. He was promoted to the third grade of the same post, and also studied to be the prince's attendant. Wang Fangqing played up: As for the prince, none of the courtiers pointed out that the prince's name was improper.

古文：晋山涛启事，称皇太子不名，孝敬为太子，更 贤 为 文 。
现代文：以前，晋时的山涛有《启事》，中称皇太子的名字不合式。孝敬为太子时，改名字中的 弘 字为 崇 字；沛王为太子，即改名字中的 贤 字为 文 字。
English: In the past, there was an "advertisement" in the mountains of the Jin Dynasty, which said that the name of the crown prince was not in accordance with the style. When Xiao Jing was the prince, he changed the 弘 character in the name to 崇 character; when Pei Wang was the prince, he changed the 贤 character in the name to 文 character.

古文：今东宫门殿名多嫌触，请一改之，以协旧典。 
现代文：现在东宫的门、殿名称很多涉嫌触讳，恳请一一改去，使能遵符旧典。 
English: Now, many of the doors and hall names of the East Palace are suspected of having been forged, and we kindly request that they be changed one by one so that they can conform to the old code.

古文：制可。
现代文：武后制令可以。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：长安二年卒，赠兗州都督，谥曰贞。
现代文：长安二年死，追赠兖州都督，赐谥为 贞 。
English: Two years after the death of Chang'an, he was posthumously awarded the governorship of Zhangzhou and given the title of Zheng.

古文：中宗复位，以东宫旧臣，赠吏部尚书。
现代文：中宗复位，因他是东宫的旧臣，又追赠吏部尚书。
English: Zhongzong was restored to the throne, because he was a former vassal of the East Palace, and he was also posthumously awarded the title of Li Bu Shangshu.

古文：方庆博学，练朝章，著书二百余篇，尤精《三礼》。
现代文：王方庆博学多才，熟悉朝章，著书二百多篇，特别精通《周礼》、《校礼》、《礼记》。
English: Wang Fangqing is a multi-talented scholar, familiar with the morning chapter, author of more than two hundred books, especially proficient in "Weekly Rites," "School Rites" and "Rites."

古文：学者有所咨质，酬复渊诣，故门人次为《杂礼答问》。
现代文：学礼者有什么疑问向他咨询，他一定回答得十分深刻精到。所以他的门生们把他的答问辑录起来而成《杂礼答问》一书。
English: He must have been able to answer any questions that his students asked him, so his disciples compiled his answers into a book called "Questions and Answers on Deviant Rites."

古文：家聚书多，不减秘府，图画皆异本。
现代文：他家藏书极多，与皇家秘府不相上下，图画也都是精本。
English: He has a large collection of books, on a par with that of the Imperial Privy Council, and his pictures are also in fine condition.

古文：方庆殁后，诸子不能业，随皆散亡。
现代文：王方庆死后，他的几个儿子不能继承祖业，以后这些书画都散失了。
English: After the death of Wang Fangqing, several of his sons could not inherit the ancestral property, and later these paintings and calligraphy were lost.

古文：孙俌。六世孙玙，别传。
现代文：孙子名俌，六世孙名玙。
English: His grandson, the sixth generation of Sun Myung Seok, was born.

古文：玙曾孙抟。赞曰：李德裕著书称： 方庆为相时，子为眉州司士参军。
现代文：评论：李德裕著书说： 王方庆任宰相时，他的儿子任眉州司士参军。
English: Comment: Li Deyu said in his book: When Wang Fangqing was prime minister, his son was appointed as Meizhou magistrate to join the army.

古文：武后曰： 君在相位，何子之远？ 
现代文：武后问他 ：你位居宰相，为什么儿子在那么远处？ 
English: Takego asked him: You are the prime minister, why is your son so far away?

古文：对曰； 卢陵是陛下爱子，今尚在远，臣之子庸敢相近？ 
现代文：王方庆回答 ：庐陵王是陛下的爱子，现在尚在远方，臣的儿子怎敢放在近处？ 
English: Wang Fangqing replied, "King Fuling is Your Majesty's beloved son. He is still far away. How dare you place a minister's son nearby?"

古文：以比仓唐悟文侯事。 
现代文：用以比况仓唐警悟文侯的事。 
English: To use the analogy of the storehouse of the Tang Dynasty to enlighten the literati.

古文：光化三年，罢为工部侍即，贬溪州刺史。
现代文：王方庆确实是个君子。即使是仓惶急迫之时，也不忘诱导君王为善。
English: Wang Fangqing is indeed a gentleman. Even in a time of panic and urgency, he does not forget to induce the king to be good.

古文：又贬崖州司户参军事，赐死蓝田驿。
现代文：及至建议改动太子的名字以震动群臣，显示了中兴的萌芽。所谓人难言之事，对于王方庆还难吗？故德裕之称道他，实在不假啊！
English: The suggestion to change the prince's name shocked the courtiers and showed the buds of ZTE. Is it still difficult for Wang Fangqing to say the so-called difficult things? Therefore, Deyu's praise of him is really true!

古文：韦思谦，名仁约，以近武后父讳为嫌，遂以字行。
现代文：韦思谦名仁约，因为音近武后父讳，乃以字为名。
English: Wei Sichen was named Ren Rong, because he was close to Wu Hou's father, but he was named after a character.

古文：其先出雍州杜陵，后客襄阳，更徙为郑州阳武人。
现代文：他的祖先原籍雍州杜陵，后迁居襄阳，又搬移到郑州阳武定居落籍。
English: His ancestors were originally from Yongzhou Duling, and later moved to Yangyang, and then moved to Yangwu, Zhengzhou, where they settled and were registered.

古文：八岁丧母，以孝闻。
现代文：八岁时母亲去世，以孝闻名。
English: His mother died when he was eight years old, and he was known for his filial piety.

古文：及进士第，累调应城令，负殿，不得进官。
现代文：及进士第，累调应城县令，因小过失闻于朝廷，按例不得提拔。
English: and promoted to the first rank, the cumulative transfer was made according to the order of the city and county. Due to minor faults, it was known to the imperial court, and as usual, it was not allowed to be promoted.

古文：吏部尚书高季辅曰： 予始得此一人，岂以小疵弃大德邪？ 
现代文：吏部尚书高季辅说： 我选拔贤能才得到这个人，怎么能因他有点小毛病而不顾大节呢？ 
English: Officer Shangshu Gao Jisuke said, "I selected a talented person to get this person, how can I ignore the big day because he has a little problem?

古文：擢监察御史。
现代文：就提拔他为监察御史。
English: He was promoted to inspector general of history.

古文：常曰： 御史出使，不能动摇山岳，震慑州县，为不任职。 
现代文：他常说 ：御史到各地巡察惩邪扶正，声威不能动摇山岳、震慑州县，就是不称职。 
English: He often said, "It is not up to you to go around inspecting, punishing and helping to rectify evil. Your voice cannot shake the mountains or shake the prefectures.

古文：中书令褚遂良市地不如直，思谦劾之，罢为同州刺史。
现代文：中书令褚遂良购置土地，低于应有的价值，思谦检举了他。褚遂良被罢中书令调任同州刺史。
English: The land purchased by Zou Suiliang according to the Chinese imperial edict was worth less than it should have been, and Xi Qian reported him. Zou Suiliang was removed from the imperial edict and transferred to the post of the governor of the same province.

古文：及复相，出思谦清水令。
现代文：到后来遂良复任宰相，把思谦贬出朝廷到清水县任县令。
English: Later, Suiliang was reinstated as prime minister, and Shih Chien was demoted from the imperial court to the position of county magistrate in Shimizu County.

古文：或吊之，答曰： 吾狷直，触机辄发，暇恤身乎？
现代文：有人来安慰他，他回答说： 我急躁直率，一遇不当之事立即激动。
English: When someone came to console him, he replied: "I am impetuous and forthright, and I immediately become agitated when something inappropriate happens.

古文：丈夫当敢言地，要须明目张胆以报天子，焉能录录保妻子邪？ 
现代文：哪有时间顾恤自身？大夫处于监察这种要敢于说话的地位，更重要的是明目张胆直言，来报答天子的恩德，怎么能碌碌无所作为，只知保全妻子儿女呢？ 
English: Where is the time for self-compassion? A doctor is in the position of supervising those who dare to speak, and more importantly, to speak out, to repay the grace of the Son of God. How can he do nothing but protect his wife and children?

古文：沛王府长史皇甫公义引为仓曹参军，谓曰： 公非池中物，屈公为数旬客，以重吾府。 
现代文：沛王府长史皇甫公义引荐他担任仓曹参军，对他说： 您不是那种蛰处于小池的神物，暂时委曲您在这里客居一段时期，使我们王府增添威望。 
English: Shi Huangfu, the governor of King Pei's palace, justly recommended him to join the army as Cang Cao, and said to him: You are not the kind of god who stays in a small pond. I have temporarily appointed you to stay here for a period of time to increase the prestige of our royal palace.

古文：改侍御史，高宗贤之，每召与语，虽甚倦，徙倚轩槛，犹数刻罢。
现代文：后改任侍御史，高宗很看重他。常召见和他谈话，虽然很疲倦，在屋内走来走去，还谈一段时间才停。
English: After he was reassigned to the position of Samurai Governor, Gaozong thought highly of him. He would often call on him and talk to him, and although he was very tired, he would walk around the house and continue to talk for a while before stopping.

古文：疑狱剧事，多与参裁。
现代文：凡疑难案情和急重大事，多和他研讨裁决。
English: Whenever there is a difficult case or an urgent matter, he is often consulted on the ruling.

古文：武候将军田仁会诬奏御史张仁祎，帝廷诘，仁祎懦不得对。思谦为辩其枉，因言仁会营罔陷人不测者，词旨详畅，帝善之，仁祎得不坐。
现代文：武侯将军田仁会诬奏御史张仁，高宗在朝中当面诘问。仁惶懦不能作答，思谦为仁辩冤，并说田仁会是搞诬陷来害人的，讲的详尽有力。高宗认为说得好，仁终于没有坐罪。
English: Wuhou general Tian Ren would falsely impersonate the imperial historian Zhang Ren, and Gaozong questioned him face-to-face in the court. Jin could not answer, but Shi Qian defended Ren, and said that Tian Ren would set up a frame-up to harm people, and spoke in detail and powerfully. Gaozong thought it was well said, and Ren finally did not take the blame.

古文：累迁右司郎中、尚书左丞，振明纲辖，朝廷肃然。
现代文：思谦累迁右司郎中、尚书左臣，整顿纪纲，使朝廷严肃有法。
English: Shih-hsien was successively moved to the middle of the right secretary, and Shang-shu to the left minister, and the discipline was reorganized, so that the imperial court was serious and lawful.

古文：进御史大夫。
现代文：晋升为御史大夫。
English: He was promoted to goshi taifu.

古文：性謇谔，颜色庄重，不可犯。
现代文：思谦性格忠直，态度庄重，凛然不可犯。
English: Shih-hsien's character is loyal and upright, his attitude is dignified, and he is unoffendable.

古文：见王公，未尝屈礼。或以为讥，答曰： 耳目官固当特立。
现代文：每遇见王公，未曾行跪拜大礼，有人以为不够恰当，思谦回答说： 做御史的人是君王的耳目，应当有特殊的地位，雕？鹰？
English: Whenever he met a prince who had not performed the prostration, some people thought it was not appropriate, and Sihian replied: The person who does the imperial history is the ear and eye of the king, and should have a special position, sculptor? eagle?

古文：雕、鹗、鹰、鹯，岂众禽之偶，奈何屈以狎之？ 
现代文：难道是一般的禽类？为什么要我屈从与他们亲近？ 
English: Are they ordinary fowl? Why should I stoop to be close to them?

古文：帝崩，思谦扶疾入临，涕泗冰须，俯伏号绝，诏给扶侍。
现代文：高宗驾崩，思谦抱病入内临丧，泪涕凝结须髯，俯伏号哭气绝。诏令派人搀扶。
English: Gao Zong passed away, Shi Qian fell ill and went into mourning, his tears clotted his beard, and he was overcome with tears. The emperor sent someone to help him.

古文：转司属卿，复为右肃政大夫。
现代文：后转任司属卿，再任肃政大夫。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and then to the position of Senior Political Officer.

古文：故事，大夫与御史钧礼，思谦独不答。
现代文：按旧规，大夫与御史同礼，只有思谦一人不予回礼。
English: According to the old rules, the doctor and the historian were given the same salute, and only Shih Chien was not allowed to return the salute.

古文：或以为疑，思谦曰： 班列固有差，奈何尚姑息邪？ 
现代文：有人认为不合情理。思谦说： 朝廷班列向来有个差次，为什么要无原则呢？ 
English: Some people think it is unreasonable. Si Qian said: The Imperial Household Agency has always had a post, why is it unprincipled?

古文：垂拱初，封博昌县男，同凤阁鸾台三品。转纳言，辞疾，不许，诏肩舆以朝，听子孙侍。
现代文：则天皇帝垂拱年初，封为博昌县男爵，同凤阁鸾台三品，转任纳言，思谦以病辞，帝不准，下诏可以乘肩舆上朝，让其子孙随侍。
English: Then, at the beginning of the year of the Tian Emperor Hanging Arch, he was awarded the title of Baron of Bochang County, the three prizes of Tongfeng Pavilion and Xingtai, and was transferred to the post of Nagan, and Shih Qian used his sick leave, but the emperor did not allow it, and issued a decree that he could ride on the shoulders of the emperor and let his children and grandchildren accompany him.

古文：以太中大夫致仕，卒，赠幽州都督。
现代文：后以太中大夫退休，去世后追赠为幽州都督。
English: Later, he retired as a middle-aged doctor and was posthumously awarded the title of Yuzhou governor.

