古文：太祖文皇帝上之上元嘉元年
现代文：起，止，一共四年。宋文帝元嘉元年
English: a total of four years. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Songwen

古文：春，正月，魏改元始光。
现代文：春季正月，北魏改年号为始光。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Wei Dynasty changed its name to the beginning of the year.

古文：丙寅，魏安定殇王弥卒。
现代文：丙寅，北魏安定殇王拓跋弥去世。
English: Hsin-Yin, Northern Wei's King Tuoba died.

古文：营阳王居丧无礼，好与左右狎昵，游戏无度。
现代文：营阳王刘义符在为其父宋武帝刘裕服丧期间，喜欢与左右侍从亲昵轻佻，嬉戏游乐，不能自我节制。
English: During the mourning period for his father, Emperor Liu Yu of the Song Dynasty, Liu Yifu, the king of Yingyang, liked to be intimate and frivolous with his attendants, play and have fun, and could not restrain himself.

古文：特进致仕范泰上封事曰： 伏闻陛下时在后园，颇习武备，鼓鞞在宫，声闻于外。
现代文：以特进衔退休的范泰呈上一本用皂囊封板的奏章，说： 我听说陛下常常在后花园习武练功，鼓虽在宫中，鼓声却远传宫外，在禁宫深院，打闹砍杀，又在朝廷各部公堂之间，喧哗嘶喊。
English: Fan Tai, who retired with the title of special promotion, presented a musical score sealed with a soap bag, saying: I heard that His Majesty often practiced martial arts in the back garden. Although the drum is in the palace, the sound of the drum is transmitted far outside the palace, in the deep court of the Forbidden Palace, fighting and slashing, and in the court of the various departments of the court, shouting and shouting.

古文：黩武掖庭之内，喧哗省闼之间，非徒不足以威四夷，只生远近之怪。
现代文：如此，则不但不能威服四方夷族，而只能使远近各邦觉得怪诞不经。
English: In this way, not only can it not intimidate the barbarians in all directions, but it can only make the states near and far feel grotesque.

古文：陛下践祚，委政宰臣，实用高宗谅暗之美；而更亲狎小人，惧非社稷至计，经世之道也。 
现代文：陛下即位以来，把政务都交给了宰相大臣，实际上同商朝的高宗武丁一样，有着服丧期间闭口不言的美誉。想不到您却与小人亲近，恐怕这不是治理国家的好办法和维持世风的好策略。 
English: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has handed over all government affairs to the Prime Minister. In fact, like Gao Zongwuding of the Shang Dynasty, he has the reputation of keeping his mouth shut during the period of mourning. Unexpectedly, you are close to villains, I am afraid this is not a good way to govern the country and a good strategy to maintain the world style.

古文：不听。
现代文：刘义符没有理会范泰的劝告。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：泰，宁之子也。
现代文：范泰是范宁的儿子。
English: Fan Tai is Fanning's son.

古文：南豫州刺史庐陵王义真，警悟爱文义，而性轻易，与太子左卫率谢灵运、员外常侍颜延之、慧琳道人情好款密。
现代文：刘宋南豫州刺史庐陵王刘义真，聪睿敏捷，喜爱文学，但是性情轻浮，常与太子左卫率谢灵运、员外常侍颜延之以及慧琳道人等情投意合，过从甚密。
English: Liu Yizhen, the king of Liu Song's Southern Henan Province, was intelligent, quick-witted, and loved literature, but he had a frivolous temperament. He often had a close relationship with Prince Zuo Wei, Prince Xie Lingyun, his frequent attendant Yan Yanzhi, and Huilin Daojin.

古文：尝云： 得志之日，以灵运、延之为宰相，慧琳为西豫州都督。 
现代文：刘义真曾经说： 有朝一日我当上皇帝，就任命谢灵运、颜延之任宰相，慧琳道人为西豫州都督。 
English: Liu Yizhen once said: One day, when I became emperor, I appointed Xie Lingyun and Yan Yan as prime ministers, and Huilin Tao as the governor of West Henan Province.

古文：灵运，玄之孙也，性褊傲，不遵法度，朝廷但以文义处之，不以为有实用。
现代文：谢灵运是谢玄的孙子，性情傲慢偏激，不遵守法令及世俗的约束。当时朝廷只把他放在文学侍从之臣的位置上，却不认为他有从事实际工作的才干。
English: Xie Lingyun was the grandson of Xie Xuan. He was extremely arrogant and did not abide by laws and regulations. At that time, the imperial court only placed him in the position of a literary servant, but did not think that he had the ability to engage in practical work.

古文：灵运自谓才能宜参权要，常怀愤邑。
现代文：而谢灵运却自认为他的才能应该参与朝廷机要，因而常常愤愤不平。
English: Xie Lingyun, on the other hand, believed that his talents should be used for the benefit of the imperial court, and was often resentful.

古文：延之，含之曾孙也，嗜酒放纵。
现代文：颜延之是颜含的曾孙，喜爱饮酒，放荡不羁。
English: Yan Yan Zhi is the great-grandson of Yan Han Rong. He likes to drink alcohol and is a libertine.

古文：徐羡之等恶义真与灵运等游，义真故吏范晏从容戒之，义真曰： 灵运空疏，延之隘薄，魏文帝所谓 古今文人类不护细行 者也；但性情所得，未能忘言于悟赏耳。 
现代文：司空徐羡之等对刘义真与谢灵运的交游，十分厌恶。刘义真的旧部范晏曾婉言规劝刘义真，刘义真说： 谢灵运思想空疏不切实际，颜延之心胸狭窄，见识浅薄，正如魏文帝曹丕所说的 古今文人，多不拘小节 呀！然而，我们几人性情相投，不能象古人说的互相理解而忘了言语那样。 
English: Liu Yizhen and Xie Lingyun's meeting was highly disliked by Siku Xu Enzhi and others. Liu Yizhen's old department Fan Zhou had gently advised Liu Yizhen. Liu Yizhen said: Xie Lingyun's thoughts are empty and impractical, Yan Yan's heart is narrow, and his knowledge is shallow. As Wei Emperor Cao Pi said, ancient and modern literati, no matter how small! However, we have several human feelings in common, and we cannot forget words as the ancients said.

古文：于是羡之等以为运、延之构扇异同，非毁执政，出灵运为永嘉太守，延之为始安太守。
现代文：于是，徐羡之等认为谢灵运、颜延之挑拨是非，离间亲王与朝廷的关系，诽谤朝廷要臣，贬谢灵运为永嘉太守，颜延之为始安太守。
English: As a result, Xu Enzhi and others believed that Xie Lingyun and Yan Yan were the instigators of right and wrong, severed the relationship between the prince and the court, slandered the court dignitaries, and disparaged Xie Lingyun as the Yongjia Empress Dowager and Yan Yan as the Shi'an Empress Dowager.

古文：义真至历阳，多所求索，执政每裁量不尽与。
现代文：刘义真来到历阳之后，不断向朝廷索要供应，掌权的朝臣每次都裁减，不完全听命。
English: After Liu Yizhen came to Liyang, he constantly asked the imperial court for supplies, and the courtiers in power cut back each time, not fully obeying orders.

古文：义真深怨之，数有不平之言，又表求还都。
现代文：刘义真深怀怨恨，经常有愤懑不平的言论，又上书朝廷请求回到京师建康。
English: Liu Yizhen harbored deep grudges and often made angry remarks. He also wrote to the imperial court to request that Jiankang return to Beijing.

古文：咨议参军庐江何尚之屡谏，不听。
现代文：谘议参军庐江人何尚之多次进言劝阻，刘义真拒不接受。
English: Liu Yizhen refused to accept the repeated advice and dissuasion of He Shang, a member of the Minjiang people who had been advised to join the army.

古文：时羡之等已密谋废为庶人，徙新安郡。
现代文：此时，徐羡之等已经在密谋策划废黜少帝刘义符，但废黜刘义符后，身为次子的刘义真依照顺序，应当继位。
English: At this time, Xu Enzhi and others were already plotting to dethrone the young emperor Liu Yifu, but after the dethronement of Liu Yifu, Liu Yizhen, the second son, should succeed in accordance with the order.

古文：前吉阳令堂邑张约之上疏曰： 庐陵王少蒙先皇优慈之遇，长受陛下睦受之恩，故在心必言，所怀必亮，容犯臣子之道，致招骄瓷之愆。
现代文：于是，徐羡之等便利用刘义真与刘义符之间早已存在的宿怨，先上疏弹劾刘义真的种种罪行，将刘义真贬为平民，放逐到新安郡。前吉阳县令堂邑人张约之上疏说： 庐陵王从小就得到先帝优厚慈爱的待遇，长大后又受到陛下和睦友爱的恩宠，所以心里有什么话，一定要说出来，内心想什么，一定会不加掩饰地表现出来。
English: As a result, Xu Enzhi and others took advantage of the long-standing feud between Liu Yizhen and Liu Yifu, and first impeached Liu Yizhen for various crimes, reduced Liu Yizhen to a commoner, and exiled him to Xin'an County. Former Jiyang County townspeople Zhang Yowang said: King Fuling received the first emperor's excellent and loving treatment from an early age, and was favored by His Majesty's harmony and friendship when he grew up. Therefore, whatever you have in your heart, you must say it, and whatever you think in your heart, you must show it without disguise.

古文：至于天恣夙成，实有卓然之美，宜在容养，灵善掩瑕，训尽议方，进退以渐。
现代文：或许在某些地方违背了为臣之道，招致骄傲放纵而带来的灾祸。但他聪明早熟，确有过人的才华，应该对他宽容教养，发挥他的长处，宽恕他的缺点，以恰当的方法训戒引导，升降都不应该过急。
English: In some areas, he may have violated the principle of being a vassal, leading to the calamity brought about by pride and indulgence. However, he is intelligent and precocious, and indeed has superhuman talent. He should be educated with tolerance, give play to his strengths, forgive his shortcomings, discipline and guide him in an appropriate manner, and promotion and demotion should not be too hasty.

古文：今猥加剥辱，幽徙远郡，上伤陛下常棣之笃，下令远近恇然失图。
现代文：如今朝廷突然剥夺了他的爵位，把他放逐并幽禁到边远的地方。对上伤害了陛下手足之情，对下使远近民心仓皇失措。
English: Now the imperial court has suddenly deprived him of his title, banished him and confined him to a remote place. On the one hand, it has hurt the feelings of His Majesty's brothers and sisters, and on the other hand, it has made the hearts of people near and far panic.

古文：臣伏思大宋开基造次，根条未繁，宜广树籓戚，敦睦以道。
现代文：我认为，我们大宋刚刚建立，宗室枝叶未繁，应该广泛树立藩属屏障，互相之间，敦厚和睦。
English: In my opinion, we have just established the Great Song Dynasty, and the branch families have not yet multiplied. It is necessary to establish a wide range of barriers between clans, so that there will be a strong harmony between each other.

古文：人谁无过，贵能自新；以武皇之爱子，陛下之懿弟，岂可以其一眚，长致沦弃哉！ 
现代文：人谁能无过，可贵的是能够改过自新。刘义真是武皇帝的爱子，是陛下的品德美好的弟弟，怎么可以因为他一时之过，就长期地舍弃放逐！ 
English: Liu Yi was truly the beloved son of Emperor Wu, a younger brother with a fine moral character. How could he abandon his exile for a long time because of a momentary lapse?

古文：书奏，以约之为梁州府参军，寻杀之。
现代文：奏疏呈上后，朝廷任命张约之为梁州府参军，不久，便把他杀了。
English: After the report was submitted, the imperial court appointed Zhang Youyi to join the army in Liangzhou, and he was killed soon after.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，魏主东巡大宁。
现代文：夏季四月，甲辰，北魏国主拓跋焘向东巡视，抵达大宁。
English: In the summer of April, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, went on an inspection tour to the east and arrived in Daning.

古文：秦王炽磐遣镇南将军吉毘等帅步骑一万，南伐白苟、车孚、崔提、旁为四国，皆降之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣镇南将军乞伏吉毗等，率领步、骑兵共一万人，向南讨伐白苟、车孚、崔提、旁为等四个部族，全部降服。
English: Western Qin King Qibao sent Zhenan General Qibao Jibai to the south, leading a total of ten thousand foot and cavalry soldiers to fight four tribes including Baiguo, Chefu, Cui Ti and Bamboo, and all of them surrendered.

古文：徐羡之等以南兗州刺史檀道济先朝旧将，威服殿省，且有兵众，乃召道济及江州刺史王弘入朝；五月，皆至建康，废立之谋告之。
现代文：刘宋司空徐羡之等因南兖州刺史檀道济是刘宋武帝时代的大将，威望震慑朝廷内外，而且掌握强大的军队，于是，便征召檀道济及江州刺史王弘入朝。五月，二人先后抵达京师建康，徐羡之等就把废立皇帝的计划告诉了他们。
English: Liu Song, Sikyong Xu Enzhi and others, because of the fact that Dang Daoji, the governor of southern Luzhou, was a great general in the era of Liu Songwu, whose prestige shocked both inside and outside the imperial court, and who had a powerful army at his disposal, they conscripted Dang Daoji and Wang Hong, the governor of Jiangzhou, into the imperial court. In May, the two arrived in Jiankang, Beijing, successively, and Xu Enzhi and others told them about the plan to abolish the emperor.

古文：甲申，谢晦以领军府屋败，悉令家人出外，聚将士于府内；又使中书舍人邢安泰、潘盛为内应。
现代文：甲申，领军将军谢晦声称：领军将军府第破败，于是将家人全部迁到别的地方，而在府中聚集了将士，又派中书舍人刑安泰、潘盛为内应。
English: Gao Shin, the leader of the army, General Xie Yu claimed that: the leader of the army was defeated in the first place, so he moved all his family members to other places, and gathered soldiers in the capital, and also sent the Chinese scholars Qi Antao and Pan Sheng to respond.

古文：夜，邀檀道济同宿，晦悚动不得眠，道济就寝便熟，晦以此服之。
现代文：这天夜里，谢晦邀请檀道济同居一室，谢晦又紧张又激动，不能合眼，檀道济却倒头便睡，十分酣畅，谢晦不由得大为敬服。
English: That night, Xie Hui invited Dang Daoji to live together in the same room. Xie Hui was so nervous and excited that he couldn't close his eyes. Dang Daoji, on the other hand, fell asleep. It was very pleasant. Xie Hui couldn't help but be greatly impressed.

古文：时帝于华林园为列肆，亲自沽卖，以与左右引船为乐，夕，游天渊池，即龙舟而寝。
现代文：当时，少帝刘义符在皇家华林园造了一排商店，亲自买入卖出，讨价还价；又跟左右佞臣一起，划船取乐。傍晚，刘义符又率左右游逛天渊池，夜里就睡在龙舟上。
English: At that time, the young emperor Liu Yifu built a row of shops in the Royal Hua Lin Garden, personally bought and sold, and bargained; he also rowed for fun with his right and left vassals. In the evening, Liu Yifu also wandered around Tianyuan Pond, and slept on the dragon boat at night.

古文：乙酉诘旦，道济引兵居前，羡之等继其后，入自云龙门；安泰等先诫宿卫，莫有御者。
现代文：乙酉凌晨，檀道济引兵开路，徐羡之等随后继进，从云龙门入宫。刑安泰等已先行说服了皇家禁卫军，所以没有人出来阻挡。
English: In the early morning of the 2nd day of the 4th month, Dang Daozi led the troops to open the road, and Xu Enzhu and others followed, entering the palace from the Yunlong Gate. Ching Antae and others had first convinced the Royal Guards, so no one came out to block.

古文：帝未兴，军士进杀二侍者，伤帝指，扶出东阁，收玺绶，群臣拜辞，卫送故太子宫。
现代文：刘义符还没有起床，军士已经闯入，杀掉刘义符的两个侍从，砍伤刘义符的手指，将刘义符扶持出东阁，收缴了皇帝的玉玺和绶带。文武百官向他叩拜辞行，由军士把刘义符送回到他的故居太子宫。
English: Liu Yifu had not yet got up, but the sergeant had already broken in, killed two of Liu Yifu's attendants, cut Liu Yifu's fingers, helped Liu Yifu out of the East Pavilion, and seized the emperor's jade bracelet and sash. Hundreds of civil and military officials bowed to him and resigned, and the sergeant sent Liu Yifu back to his former residence, the Imperial Palace.

古文：侍中程道惠劝羡之等立皇弟南豫州刺史义恭。
现代文：侍中程道惠劝徐羡之等人拥立皇弟、南豫州刺史刘义恭。
English: The middle-ranking samurai, Cheng Daohui, advised Xu Enzhi and others to support the younger brother of the emperor, Liu Yigong, the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：羡之等以宜都王义隆素有令望，又多符瑞，乃称皇太后令，数帝过恶，废为营阳王，以宜都王辰承大统，赦死罪以下。
现代文：徐羡之等却认为宜都王刘义隆一向有很高的声望，又多有祥瑞之兆出现，于是，就宣称奉皇太后张氏之命，列举刘义符过失罪恶，废为营阳王，而由宜都王刘义隆继承皇帝之位，赦免死罪以下人犯。
English: Xu Enzhi and others, however, believed that Liu Yilong, the king of Yidu, always had a high reputation and many auspicious signs appeared. Therefore, he declared that he would follow the order of the Empress Dowager Zhang to list Liu Yifu's faults and sins and abolish him as the king of Yingyang, while Liu Yilong, the king of Yidu, would inherit the emperor's throne and pardon the following offenders of the death penalty.

古文：又称皇大后令，奉还玺绶；并废皇后为营阳王妃，迁营阳王于吴。使檀道济入守朝堂。
现代文：又声称奉皇太后之命，收回皇帝印信，贬皇后司马茂英为营阳王妃，把刘义符送到吴郡，由檀道济入宫守卫朝堂。
English: He also claimed to have been ordered by the Empress Dowager to take back the Emperor's seal letter, to demote Empress Sima Maoying to Princess Yingyang, to send Liu Yifu to Wu County, and to enter the palace to guard the imperial hall from Dandooji.

古文：王至吴，止金昌亭；六月，癸丑，羡之等使邢安泰就弑之。
现代文：刘义符抵达吴郡后，被软禁在金昌亭。六月，癸丑，徐羡之等派刑安泰，前去刺杀刘义符。
English: After Liu Yifu arrived in Wuxi County, he was placed under house arrest in Jinchangting. In June, Zou Yuxi, Xu Enzhi and others were dispatched to assassinate Liu Yifu.

古文：王多力，突走出昌门，追者以门关踣而弑之。
现代文：刘义符年轻力壮，奋战突围，逃出昌门，追兵用门闩捶击，将刘义符打翻在地杀死。
English: Liu Yifu was young and strong. He fought hard to break through the encirclement, escaped from Changmen, and struck the pursuing soldiers with the latch of the door, knocking Liu Yifu to the ground and killing him.

古文：裴子野论曰：古者人君养子，能言而师授之辞，能行而傅相之礼。宋之教诲，雅异于斯，居中则任仆妾，处外则近趋走。
现代文：裴子野论曰：古代君王养育儿子，儿子会说话的时候，由师傅教他文辞；会走路的时候，由师傅教他礼仪，刘宋国的皇家教育，一向与此不同；皇子在宫里的时候，交给奴仆婢女；在宫外，则依靠左右跟班。
English: Peizhino said: Ancient kings raised their sons. When the son could speak, the master taught him vocabulary; when he could walk, the master taught him etiquette. The royal education of Liu Song was always different from this. When the prince was in the palace, he was handed over to the servants; outside the palace, he relied on the left and right followers.

古文：太子、皇子，有帅，有侍，是二职者，皆台皁也。
现代文：不论是太子，还是皇子，都有所属的 帅 和 侍 ，但是，担任这二种职务的人，都是等级低下的臣仆。
English: Both the crown prince and the prince have subordinate officers and attendants, but the people who hold these two positions are low-ranking servants.

古文：制其行止，授其法则，导达臧否，罔弗由之；言不及于礼义，识不达于今古，谨敕者能劝之以吝啬，狂愚者或诱之以凶慝。
现代文：太子、皇子们的言谈举止，教育修养，以及行善行恶都由他们诱导。
English: Princes and princes' speech and behavior, education and cultivation, as well as their good and evil deeds are all induced by them.

古文：虽有师傅，多以耆艾大夫为之；虽有友及文学，多以膏粱年少为之；具位而已，亦弗与游。
现代文：而他们口中从不谈论礼义，见识不知古今。因此，拘束谨慎的人，能把太子和皇子引向小气鄙俗，而狂妄粗暴的人，则可能把太子和皇子引向凶暴与邪恶。太子、皇上们虽然也有师傅，多由年迈力衰的大臣充任，虽然也有 友 和《文学》这些设置，但多是些纨子弟充当，徒有其名而已。
English: But they never talk about etiquette, and they do not know the past or the present. Therefore, restrained and prudent people can lead princes and princes to pettiness and vulgarity, while arrogant and rude people may lead princes and princes to violence and evil. Although princes and emperors also have masters, they are mostly filled by old and weak ministers, and although there are friends and "literature" settings, they are mostly brats who act in their name.

古文：幼王临州，长史行事；宣传教命，又有典签；往往专恣，窃弄威权，是以本枝虽茂而端良甚寡。
现代文：何况，皇子们也不愿跟这些人来往。年幼的亲王，赴州就任，而负实际责任的，却是长史，并由长史推广教化，执行政务，又设有典签一职。他们也往往窃弄权柄，恣意横行。所以，皇族根部虽然很茂盛，优良的枝叶却很少。
English: Moreover, the princes do not want to associate with these people. The young princes, who go to the state to take office and bear actual responsibility, have a long history, and are promoted and educated by the long history, carry out government affairs, and have a post of legatee. They also often steal power and act arbitrarily. Therefore, although the roots of the royal family are very lush, there are few fine branches.

古文：嗣君冲幼，世继奸回，虽恶物丑类，天然自出，然习则生常，其流远矣。
现代文：继位的小皇帝年纪幼小，邪恶奸佞之人世代不断。虽然恶物丑类，出自上天，然而习惯已成，流毒久远呵！
English: The little emperors who succeed to the throne are very young, and evil and treacherous people continue to rise from generation to generation. Although evil and ugliness come from heaven, they have become habitual and have been poisoned for a long time!

古文：降及太宗，举天下而弃之，亦昵比之为也。呜呼！
现代文：直到刘宋太宗皇帝刘，更是无道，连整个国家都丢弃了他，也是由于亲近奸佞小人的缘故呀！呜呼！
English: Until Liu Song Taizong, Emperor Liu was even more ruthless, and even the entire country abandoned him, also because of his closeness to the traitorous villain! Alas!

古文：有国有家，其鉴之矣！
现代文：有国有家的人，应当以此为鉴。
English: People with state-owned homes should learn from this.

古文：傅亮帅行台百官奉法驾迎宜都王于江陵。 
现代文：刘宋尚书令傅亮率领行台的文武百官，携带皇帝专用的法驾，前往江陵迎接宜都王刘义隆。
English: Liu Songzhang ordered Fu Liang to lead the hundreds of civil and military officials of Taiwan, carrying the emperor's special legal driver, to Jiangling to meet Liu Yilong, the king of Yidu.

古文：祠部尚书蔡廓至寻阳，遇疾不堪前；亮与之别。
现代文：随行的祠部尚书蔡廓走到寻阳，患病不能继续前进。
English: Accompanying the ancestral hall, Shangshu Cai Guo went to seek the sun, but was too ill to continue.

古文：廓曰： 营阳在吴，宜厚加供奉；一旦不幸，卿诸人有弑主之名，欲立于世，将可得邪！ 
现代文：傅亮与蔡廓辞别时，蔡廓说： 如今营阳王刘义符在吴郡，朝廷的供奉应十分优厚。万一发生不幸，你们几人有弑君之罪名，到那时候，仍想活在世上就难了！ 
English: When Fu Liang bade farewell to Cai Guo, Cai Guo said, "Nowadays, the camp of Yang Wang Liu Yi Fu is in Wuxi County, and the offerings of the imperial court should be very generous. In case of misfortune, several of you are guilty of slandering the king, and at that time, it will be difficult to still want to live in the world!"

古文：时亮已与羡之议害营阳王，乃驰信止之，不及。
现代文：当时，傅亮已经与徐羡之商量好，决定谋害营阳王刘义符，听了蔡廓这番话后，便急忙写信给徐羡之，阻止这次行动，但已来不及。
English: At that time, Fu Liang had already had a good discussion with Xu Enzhi and decided to plot the murder of Yang Wang Liu Yifu. After listening to Cai Guo's words, he hurriedly wrote to Xu Enzhi to stop this action, but it was too late.

古文：羡之大怒曰： 与人共计议，如何旋背即卖恶于人邪？ 
现代文：徐羡之大怒，说： 与人共同商议的计划，怎么能够转过身就改变主意，而把恶名加给别人呢！ 
English: Enraged, Xu Enzhi said, "How can you turn around and change your mind after discussing a plan with others, and give others a bad name!

古文：羡之等以遣使者杀前庐陵王义真于新安。
现代文：徐羡之等又派人杀死了流放在新安的庐陵王刘义真。
English: Xu Enzhi and others also sent people to kill Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling who was exiled to Xin'an.

古文：羡之以荆州地重，恐宜都王至，或别用人，乃亟以录命除领军将军谢晦行都督荆、湘等七州诸军事、荆州刺史，欲令居外为援，精兵旧将，悉以配之。
现代文：徐羡之认为荆州之地十分重要，恐怕宜都王刘义隆抵达京师后，或许任命别人继任，于是他以录尚书事、总领朝政的名义，任命领军将军谢晦代理都督荆、湘等七州诸军事，兼荆州刺史，希望谢晦居外地作为声援。于是，为谢晦配备了精锐军队和能征善战的将领。
English: Xu Enzhi thought that the land of Jingzhou was very important, and feared that Liu Yilong, the king of the capital, might appoint someone else to succeed him after he arrived in Beijing. Therefore, in the name of recording Shang's records and leading the government, he appointed the leading general Xie Yu as the deputy governor of the seven states of Jing and Hunan, and hoped that Xie Yu would stay abroad as solidarity. Therefore, Xie Yu was equipped with elite troops and generals who could fight well.

古文：秋，七月，行台至江陵，立行门于城南，题曰 大司马门 。
现代文：秋季七月，行台到江陵，把象征性的宫城城门立在城南，题名 大司马门 。
English: In the autumn, in July, he went to Gangneung and erected the symbolic Miyagi Castle Gate in the south of the city, called the Daesima Gate.

古文：傅亮帅百僚诣门上表，进玺绂，仪物甚盛，宜都王时年十八，下教曰： 猥以不德，廖降大命，顾己兢悸，何以克堪！
现代文：傅亮率领文武百官前往 大司马门 ，呈上奏章和皇帝玉玺和服装，仪式盛大隆重。宜都王刘义隆当时年仅十八岁，发布文告说： 我无才无德，蒙上天错爱降下大命。我实在惶恐惊悸，怎么能够担负起如此大任！
English: Fu Liang led hundreds of military and civilian officials to the Grand Sima Gate, presented the imperial rescript and the emperor's jade bracelet and clothing, and the ceremony was grand and grand. Liu Yilong, the king of Yidu, was only eighteen years old at the time, and issued a statement saying: I have no talent and no virtue, I am covered with the mistakes of heaven, and I love the great destiny. I am really terrified, how can I take on such a big task!

古文：辄当暂归朝廷，展哀陵寝，并与贤彦申写所怀。望体其心，勿为辞费。
现代文：现在暂且回到京师，哀祭祖先陵墓，并与朝中贤能的大臣陈述我的意见，希望诸位大臣体谅我的用心，不要再说别的。 
English: For the time being, I will return to Beijing to mourn the mausoleums of my ancestors and to present my views with the competent ministers of the DPRK and the People's Republic of China. I hope that the ministers will understand my intentions and not say anything else.

古文：府州佐史并称臣，请题榜诸门，一依宫省；王皆不许。
现代文：荆州府州长史及其他辅助官员一律称臣，并请求仿效国都宫城，更改各门名称。刘义隆一概不许。
English: Governor Shi of Jingzhou Prefecture and other supporting officials all praised him, and requested that he follow the example of the national capital, Miyagi, and change the names of each gate. Liu Yilong was not allowed to do so.

古文：教州、府、国纲纪宥所统内见刑，原逋责。
现代文：而且命令荆州、都督府和宜都国的官署宽怒管辖地区内已叛决的罪人，和无力偿还的债务。
English: Moreover, he ordered the government offices of Jingzhou, the governor's office and Yidu to pardon the criminals who had rebelled and the debts that could not be repaid in the areas under their jurisdiction.

古文：诸将佐闻营阳、庐陵王死，皆以为疑，劝王不可东下。
现代文：刘义隆左右将领和亲信闻知营阳王刘义符、庐陵王刘义真二人被杀身死，都认为可疑，劝刘义隆不要东下。
English: When Liu Yilong's generals and relatives heard that Liu Yifu, the king of Yingyang, and Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling, had both been killed, they thought it was suspicious and advised Liu Yilong not to go to the East.

古文：司马王华曰： 先帝有大功于天下，四海所服；虽嗣主不纲，人望未改。
现代文：司马王华说： 先帝功盖天下，四海威服；虽然继承人违法犯纪，皇家的威望却没有改变。
English: Sima Wanghua said: The former emperor's achievements covered the world, and he was held in high esteem. Although his heirs broke the law and violated discipline, the prestige of the imperial family has not changed.

古文：徐羡之中才寒士，傅亮布衣诸生，非有晋宣帝、王大将军之心明矣；受寄崇重，未容遽敢背德。
现代文：徐羡之才能中等、出身寒士；傅亮也是由平民起家的书生。他们并没有晋宣帝司马懿、王敦那样的野心，这一点是很明显的。他们接受托孤的重任，享有崇高的地位，一时不会背叛。
English: Xu Enshi's talent is middling, and he was born a cold warrior; Fu Liang is also a scholar who came from a commoner's family. It is obvious that they do not have the same ambition to be promoted as Emperor Sima Qian and Wang Dun. They accept the heavy responsibility of supporting the lonely, enjoy a lofty position, and will not betray for a while.

古文：畏庐陵严断，将来必不自容；以殿下宽睿慈仁，远近所知，且越次奉迎，冀以见德；悠悠之论，殆必不然。
现代文：只是害怕庐陵王刘义真下肯宽宥，将来无地自容，才痛下毒手。殿下聪睿机敏，仁慈宽厚，远近闻名。他们这次破格率众前来奉迎，是希望殿下感激他们。毫无根据的谣言，一定不是真的。
English: It was only out of fear that Liu Yizhen, the King of Fuling, would be so forgiving that he would not be able to show his face in the future, that the cruel hand was inflicted. His Royal Highness is intelligent, quick-witted, kind and generous, and is well-known far and wide. This time, they came with an unprecedented number of people to welcome him, hoping that His Royal Highness would be grateful to them. The unfounded rumor must not be true.

古文：又，羡之等五人，同功并位，孰肯相让！
现代文：另外，徐羡之等五人，功劳地位相同，谁肯服谁？
English: In addition, Xu Enzhi and other five people have the same merit status, who is willing to serve whom?

古文：就怀不轨，势必不行。
现代文：即使他们中有人心怀不轨，企图背叛，也势必不成。
English: Even if some of them have evil intentions and try to defect, they will not succeed.

古文：废主若存，虑其将来受祸，致此杀害；盖由贪生过深，宁敢一朝顿怀逆志！
现代文：被废黜的君主如果活着，他们担心将来遭到报复，所以才起杀机，是因为他们过于贪生怕死的缘故，他们怎么敢一朝之间突然谋反呢！
English: If the deposed monarch is alive, they are afraid of future reprisals, so they start the killing machine, because they are too greedy for life and death, how dare they suddenly rebel!

古文：不过欲握权自固，以少主仰待耳。
现代文：只不过想牢牢地掌握大权，巩固地位，奉立年轻的君主使自己得到重视而已！
English: He just wanted to firmly hold on to power, consolidate his position, and appoint a young monarch to make himself important!

古文：殿下但当长驱六辔，以副天人之心。 
现代文：殿下只管坐上六匹马拉的车驾，长驱直入，才能不辜负上天及百姓的希望。 
English: His Royal Highness only needs to get into a six-horse carriage and drive straight ahead in order to live up to the hopes of heaven and the people.

古文：王曰： 卿复欲为宋昌邪！ 
现代文：宜都王刘义隆说： 你莫非想当宋昌第二！ 
English: Liu Yilong, the king of Yidu, said: You must want to be second to Song Chang!

古文：长史王昙首、南蛮校尉到彦之皆劝王行，昙首仍陈天人符应。
现代文：长史王昙首、南蛮校尉到彦之等都劝刘义隆动身东行。王昙首又分析了天象和人间的种种祥瑞征兆。
English: Changshi Wang Shanshu, Namban school captain Zuihong and others all advised Liu Yilong to leave for the east. Wang Shanshu also analyzed the various auspicious signs of the celestial and human worlds.

古文：王乃曰： 诸公受遗，不容背义。
现代文：刘义隆才说： 徐羡之等接受先帝的遗命，不致于背义忘恩。
English: Liu Yilong said: Xu Enzhi and others accepted the last will of the former emperor, not to be ungrateful and disloyal.

古文：且劳臣旧将，内外充满，今兵力又足以制物，夫何所疑！ 
现代文：而且功臣旧将，布满朝廷内外，现有的兵力又足以制服叛乱，如此，我还有什么可疑虑的呢！ 
English: Moreover, the meritorious old generals are everywhere inside and outside the imperial court, and the existing troops are enough to subdue the rebellion. So, what doubts do I still have?

古文：乃命王华总后任，留镇荆州。王欲使到彦之将兵前驱，彦之曰： 了彼不反，便应朝服顺流；若使有虞，此师既不足恃，更开嫌隙之端，非所以副远迩之望也。 
现代文：于是，刘义隆命令王华总管善后事务，留守荆州，又想派到彦之率军作前锋，先行出发开道，到彦之说： 如果肯定他们不反，就应该穿上官服，顺流而下，倘若万一发生不测，我的这支军队根本不能抵御，却使他们由此产生误会，不符合远近人民对我们的期望。 
English: As a result, Liu Yilong ordered Wang Hua, the general manager of the aftermath affairs, to stay behind in Jingzhou. He also wanted to send the army led by Yan Zhi to be the vanguard and go ahead of the way. To Yan Zhi, he said: If you are sure that they do not oppose, you should put on the official uniform and go down the river. In case of an accident, this army of mine cannot resist at all, but it will cause them to have misunderstandings. It does not meet the expectations of the people near and far.

古文：会雍州刺史褚叔度卒，乃遣彦之权镇襄阳。
现代文：正好雍州刺史褚叔度去世，刘义隆就派遣到彦之暂且镇守襄阳。
English: Liu Yilong was dispatched to Hanyang to temporarily take charge of the town of Hanyang after the death of his uncle in Yongzhou.

古文：甲戌，王发江陵，引见傅亮，号泣，哀动左右。
现代文：甲戌，刘义隆一行从江陵出发，他接见了傅亮，痛哭不已，悲哀的情绪感动了左右侍从人员。
English: Armor, Liu Yilong and his party set off from Jiangling. He met Fu Liang, weeping bitterly. The sad mood moved the attendants on both sides.

古文：既而问义真及少帝薨废本末，悲哭呜咽，侍侧都莫能仰视。
现代文：过了一会儿，刘义隆又问及刘义真及少帝刘义符被废及被杀的经过，不胜哀恸，悲哭不止，两旁侍从都不敢抬头。
English: After a while, Liu Yilong asked Liu Yizhen and the young emperor Liu Yifu about the process of being abolished and killed. The attendants on both sides did not dare to look up.

古文：亮流汗沾背，不能对；乃布腹心于到彦之、王华等，深自结纳。
现代文：傅亮汗流浃背，张口结舌不能应对。过后，傅亮派心腹去结交到彦之、王华这些人，与他们建立亲密的关系。
English: Fu Liang was drenched in sweat and couldn't keep his mouth shut. Afterwards, Fu Liang sent his henchmen to make friends with Yan Zhi and Wang Hua to establish a close relationship with them.

古文：秦王炽磐遣太子暮末帅征北将军木弈干等步骑三万，出貂渠谷，攻河西白草岭、临松郡，皆破之，徙民二万馀口而还。
现代文：刘义隆命令他的府州文武百官和军队加强保护，严密戒备。从建康来的临时朝廷文武官员和军队则不能接近他的队伍。中兵参军朱容子，手抱佩刀，守卫在刘义隆所乘船舱房门外，衣不解带地守卫长达几十天。北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣太子乞伏暮末率征北将军木弈干等以及步、骑兵三万人向貂渠谷出击，进攻北凉的白草岭和临松郡，秦军都攻破这几个地方，俘虏居民二万余人而还。
English: Liu Yilong ordered his prefectural and provincial civil and military officials and troops to strengthen protection and be on high alert. The temporary imperial civil and military officials and troops from Jiankang could not approach his team. The Chinese soldiers joined the army Zhu Yongzi, holding a sword in his hand, guarded outside the door of the cabin where Liu Yilong was on board, and guarded for dozens of days. The Northern Wei ruler Tuobao returned to the palace. The West Qin King Quibu Glowing Rock dispatched the prince to Quibu at dusk, led by the Northern General Mu Yi Gang, and 30,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the Lugu Valley, attacking the Bai Cao Ling and

古文：八月，丙申，宜都王至建康，群臣迎拜于新亭。
现代文：八月，丙申，宜都王至建康，群臣迎拜于新亭。
English: In August, Hsin, the king of Yidu, came to Jiankang, and a group of courtiers paid homage to him at Xinting.

古文：徐羡之问傅亮曰： 王可方谁？ 
现代文：徐羡之问傅亮曰： 王可方谁？ 
English: Xu Enzhi asked Fu Liang: Who is Wang Kefang?

古文：亮曰： 晋文、景以上人。 
现代文：亮曰： 晋文、景以上人。 
English: It read: Jinwen, Jing is older than you.

古文：羡之曰： 必能明我赤心。 
现代文：羡之曰： 必能明我赤心。 
English: Envy says: I will be able to know my true heart.

古文：亮曰： 不然。 
现代文：亮曰： 不然。 
English: Light says: Otherwise.

古文：丁酉，王谒初宁陵，还，止中堂。
现代文：丁酉，刘义隆拜谒了其父宋武帝的陵墓初宁陵，回来停留在中堂。
English: Ding Xi and Liu Yilong paid a visit to their father Emperor Songwu's mausoleum, the Chuning Mausoleum, and then returned to stay in the middle hall.

古文：百官奉玺绶，王辞让数四，乃受之，即皇帝位于中堂。
现代文：朝廷的文武百官呈上皇帝的印信，刘义隆推让了几次，才接受，在中堂继承了皇位。
English: The imperial court's civil and military officials presented the emperor's seal letter. Liu Yilong gave in several times before accepting it, and succeeded to the throne in the middle hall.

古文：备法驾入宫，御太极前殿，大赦，改元，文武赐位二等。
现代文：然后又乘坐皇帝专用的法驾入宫，登太极前殿，下令大赦，改年号为元嘉，文武百官一律加官二等。
English: Then, he rode into the palace in the emperor's special carriage, ascended the Taiji front hall, ordered an amnesty, changed the year name to Yuan Jia, and promoted all civil and military officials to the second class.

古文：戊戌，谒太庙。
现代文：戊戌，刘义隆祭拜皇家祖庙。
English: Wu Xi, Liu Yilong worship the royal ancestral temple.

古文：诏复庐陵王先封，迎其柩及孙修华、谢妃还建康。
现代文：下诏恢复刘义真庐陵王的封号，把刘义真的灵柩及刘义真的母亲孙修华、刘义真的正室谢妃，迎回建康。
English: The following edict restored the seal of Liu Yizhen's tomb king, and welcomed Liu Yizhen's coffin, Liu Yizhen's mother Sun Xiuhua, and Liu Yizhen's lawful wife Xiefei back to Jiankang.

古文：庚子，以行荆州刺史谢晦为真。
现代文：庚子，刘义隆下诏，命代理荆州刺史谢晦改为实任。
English: Geng Zi, Liu Yilong issued an edict, and Jingzhou Zishi Xie Yao, the deputy of Jingzhou, was appointed to the post.

古文：晦将行，与蔡廓别，屏人问曰： 吾其免乎？ 
现代文：谢晦赴任前，向祠部尚书蔡廓辞行，屏去左右侍从，问蔡廓： 你看我能够幸免吗？ 
English: Before taking up the post, Xie Yao wrote to the minister of the ancestral hall, Shang Shu Cai Kuo, to tender his resignation. He went to the attendants on both sides and asked Cai Kuo: Do you think I can survive?

古文：廓曰： 卿受先帝顾命，任以社稷，废昏立明，义无不可。
现代文：蔡廓说： 你们接受先帝临终托孤大事，以社稷的兴衰为己任，废黜昏庸无道的君主而改立英明的皇帝，从道义上讲，没有什么不可。
English: Cai Guo said, "From a moral point of view, there is nothing you cannot do if you accept the former emperor's dying wish to be left alone, to take the rise and fall of society as your own responsibility, and to depose the dull monarch and replace him with a wise emperor.

古文：但杀人二兄而以之北面，挟震主之威，据上流之重，以古推今，自免为难。 
现代文：可是，杀害人家的两个哥哥，却又北面称臣，则有震主之威。你又镇守长江上流重镇，这样，以古推今，你恐怕在劫难逃。 
English: However, if you kill someone's two elder brothers, but still claim to be a vassal of the North, then you have the might of the Shogun. You also guard a major town in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. In this way, from ancient times to the present, you are likely to be doomed.

古文：晦始惧不得去，既发，顾望石头城，喜曰： 今得脱矣！ 
现代文：谢晦这才开始害怕无法得以逃脱，等到船只离岸，谢晦回首顾望石头城，按捺不住内心的喜悦，说： 今日终于得以脱险了！ 
English: It was only then that Xie Yu began to fear that he would not be able to escape. When the ship left the shore, Xie Yu looked back at the stone city, unable to suppress his inner joy, saying: "Today I was finally able to escape!

古文：癸卯，徐羡之进位司徒，王弘进位司空，傅亮加开府仪同三司，谢晦进号卫将军，檀道济进号征北将军。
现代文：癸卯，刘义隆下诏，擢升司空徐羡之为司徒，王弘进升为司空，傅亮加授开府仪同三司，谢晦则加授卫将军，檀道济进号征北将军。
English: Zou Yu, Liu Yilong issued the edict, promoted the Secretary of the Air Force Xu Qian to the position of the Secretary of the Air Force, Wang Hongjin was promoted to the Secretary of the Air Force, Fu Liang was awarded the Grand Cordon of the People's Republic of China, Xie Hui was awarded the title of General of the Air Force, and Dang Dao Jijin was awarded the title of General of the North.

古文：有司奏车驾依故事临华林园听讼。
现代文：有关部门上疏奏请文帝，依照惯例到华林园听取诉讼。
English: Relevant departments have requested Wen Di to go to Huarimyuan to hear the lawsuit in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：诏曰： 政刑多所未悉；可如先者，二公推讯。 
现代文：刘义隆下诏说： 我对于政务刑法很不熟悉，可以跟从前一样，仍请徐羡之、王弘二公主持。 
English: Liu Yilong said: I am not familiar with the Criminal Law of Government Affairs, so I can still ask Xu Enzhi and Wang Hongyi to preside over it as before.

古文：帝以王昙首、王华为侍中，昙首领右卫将军。华领骁骑将军，硃容子为右军将军。
现代文：随后，刘义隆又任命王昙首、王华为侍中，王昙首还兼任右卫将军，王华兼任骁骑将军，朱容子为右军将军。
English: Subsequently, Liu Yilong also appointed Wang Xizhou and Wang Huai as chamberlains, Wang Xizhou also concurrently served as the right guard general, Wang Hua concurrently served as the cavalry general, and Zhu Rongzi as the right army general.

古文：甲辰，追尊帝母胡婕妤曰章皇后。
现代文：甲辰，刘义隆追尊生母胡婕妤为章皇后。
English: Jiachen, Liu Yilong followed his birth mother, Hu Yao, to become the empress of Zhang.

古文：封皇弟义恭为江夏王，义宣为竟陵王，义季为衡阳王；仍以义宣为左将军，镇石头。
现代文：封皇弟刘义恭为江夏王，刘义宣为竟陵王，刘义季为衡阳王。仍命刘义宣任左将军，镇守石头。
English: Liu Yixuan, the younger brother of the emperor, was named the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yixuan was named the king of Jingling, and Liu Yizi was named the king of Hengyang. Liu Yixuan was still appointed as the left general and guarded the stone.

古文：徐羡之等欲即以到彦之为雍州，帝不许；征彦之为中领军，委以戎政。
现代文：徐羡之等打算任命到彦之为雍州刺史，文帝不许；文帝征召到彦之来京，担任中领军，负责京师守卫。
English: Xu Enzhi et al. intended to appoint Hikonshi to write the history of Yongzhou, but Emperor Wen did not allow it; Emperor Wen conscripted Hikonshi to come to Beijing to serve as the leader of the army and be responsible for guarding Beijing.

古文：彦之自襄阳南下，谢晦已至镇，虑彦之不过己。
现代文：到彦之于是从襄阳南下赴京，这时，领军将军谢晦已经到荆州，担心到彦之不会来看自己。
English: When he arrived in Beijing from the south of Xiangyang, the leading general Xie Yu had already arrived in Jingzhou and was worried that he would not be able to see him.

古文：彦之至杨口，步往江陵，深布诚款，晦亦厚自结纳；彦之留马及利剑、名刀以与晦，晦由此大安。
现代文：到彦之一到杨口，就从陆路前往江陵探望谢晦，真挚地表达自己的诚意。谢晦也推心置腹，缔结友情。到彦之留下自己的名马及利剑、名刀赠给谢晦，谢晦至此才完全安定下来。
English: Once he arrived in Yangkou, Yan traveled by land to Gangneung to visit Xie Hui and sincerely express his sincerity. Xie Hui also put his heart and soul into it and forged a friendship. Yan left his famous horse, sword and famous sword to Xie Hui. It was only then that Xie Hui fully settled down.

古文：柔然纥升盖可汗闻魏太宗殂，将六万骑入云中，杀掠吏民，攻拔盛乐宫。
现代文：柔然汗国纥升盖可汗郁久闾大檀闻知北魏明元帝拓跋嗣去世的消息，率骑兵六万人攻入云中地区，屠杀掳掠吏民百姓，并且攻陷了盛乐宫。
English: Hearing the news of the death of Emperor Tuoba of Northern Wei Mingyuan, Zhu Ranzhong, Khan Yu Jiuyong, and his 60,000 cavalry invaded the Yunchu region, slaughtered and plundered the officials and people, and captured the Shengle Palace.

古文：魏世祖自将轻骑讨之，三日二夜至云中。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘亲自率领轻骑兵前往讨伐，他们三天两夜，才抵达云中。
English: Northern Wei ruler Tuobao personally led the light cavalry to the crusade, and it took them three days and two nights to reach Yunchang.

古文：纥升盖引骑围魏主五十馀重，骑逼马首，相次如堵。
现代文：纥升盖可汗率领柔然骑兵将拓跋焘的轻骑队伍包围五十余重，铁骑紧逼拓跋焘的马首，依次排列，如同铁墙。
English: Zou Shengkai Khan led the gentle cavalry to surround the light cavalry team of Tuobao with more than fifty heavy, and the iron riders pressed the horse's head of Tuobao, and lined up in turn, like an iron wall.

古文：将士大惧，魏主颜色自若，众情乃安。
现代文：北魏将士大为恐惧，拓跋焘却神情自若，十分镇静，军心这才安定。
English: The Northern Wei generals were very afraid, but Tuobao was self-assured, very calm, and the military spirit was stable.

古文：纥升盖以弟子於陟斤为大将，魏人射杀之；纥升盖惧，遁去。
现代文：纥升盖可汗任命他的侄儿郁久闾于陟斤为大将。北魏用箭射杀了郁久闾于陟斤；纥升盖可汗郁久闾大檀恐慌，率柔然大军逃走。
English: The Northern Wei shot Iku Jiuyong with an arrow and killed him; Iku Jiuyong panicked and fled with his army.

古文：尚书令刘絜言于魏主曰： 大檀自恃其众，必将复来，请俟收田毕，大发兵为二道，东西并进以讨之。 
现代文：尚书令刘对拓跋焘说： 郁久闾大檀仗恃他的兵多将广，一定会卷土重来。请等秋天田里的庄稼收割以后，我们派遣大军分兵两路，从东、西两个方向同时并进，加以讨伐。 
English: Shang Shu ordered Liu to say to Tuobao: Yu Jiu's army is large and will surely return. Please wait until the crops in the fields are harvested in the autumn, we will send a large army of soldiers in two directions, from the east and west at the same time, to fight.

古文：魏主然之。
现代文：拓拔焘允准。
English: Permission is granted to expand the garden.

古文：九月，丙子，立妃袁氏为皇后；耽之曾孙也。
现代文：九月，丙子，刘宋皇帝刘义隆封王妃袁齐妫为皇后。袁齐妫是袁耽的曾孙女。
English: In September, the great-grandson of Emperor Liu Song, Liu Yilong, crowned Princess Yuan Qichen as empress. Yuan Qichen was the great-granddaughter of Yuan Tan.

古文：冬，十月，吐谷浑威王阿柴卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，吐谷浑可汗慕容阿柴去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Murong Achai, the first Khan of Tugu, died.

古文：阿柴有子二十人，疾病，召诸子弟谓之曰： 先公车骑，以大业之故，舍其子拾虔而授孤；孤敢私于纬代而忘先君之志乎！
现代文：慕容阿柴共有二十个儿子。病重时，慕容阿柴把他的子弟们召集到病榻前，对他们说： 先公车骑将军因维持汗国大业的缘故，不教他的儿子慕容拾虔继承汗位，而把大任交给了我。我怎么敢用私心把汗位传给自己的儿子慕容纬代，而忘记先帝的伟大志向呢！
English: Murong Achai had a total of twenty sons. When he was seriously ill, Murong Achai called his sons to his bedside and said to them: First, ride the bus to the general. For the sake of maintaining the great cause of the Khanate, he did not teach his son Murong Qigong to inherit the throne, but handed over the great task to me. How dare I selfishly pass the throne to my son Murong Yatai, and forget the great ambition of the former emperor!

古文：我死，汝曹当奉慕璝为主。 
现代文：我死后，你们要拥戴慕容慕为汗。 
English: After my death, you will embrace Murong Muxing.

古文：纬代者，阿柴之长子；慕璝者，阿柴之母弟、叔父乌纥提之子也。
现代文：慕容纬代是慕容阿柴的长子；慕容慕是慕容阿柴同母异父的弟弟、叔父慕容乌纥堤的儿子。
English: Murong Yatai is the eldest son of Murong Achai; Murong Mu is the half-brother of Murong Achai and the son of his uncle, Murong Wuxi.

古文：阿柴又命诸子各献一箭，取一箭授其弟慕利延使折之，慕利延折之；又取十九箭使折之，慕利延不能折。
现代文：慕容阿柴又命令所有的儿子，每人各拿出一箭，在其中抽出一支，叫他的弟弟慕容慕利延折断，慕容慕利延就把它折断。阿柴又把剩下的十九支箭合在一起，叫慕容慕利延折断，慕利延无法折断。
English: Murong Achai also ordered all his sons to take out one arrow each and draw one out of it, and tell his brother Murong Achai to break the string, and Murong Achai would break it. Achai also put the remaining nineteen arrows together, and told Murong Achai to break the string, and Murong Achai could not break it.

古文：阿柴乃谕之曰： 汝曹知之乎？
现代文：慕容阿柴于是告诫大家说： 你们知道吗？
English: Murong Achai then admonished everyone, saying: Do you know?

古文：孤则易折，众则难摧。
现代文：一支箭容易折断，一把箭则难以摧折。
English: An arrow is easily broken, but an arrow is hard to break.

古文：汝曹当戮力一心，然后可以保国宁家。 
现代文：你们应该同心合力，然后才可以保国保家。 
English: You should work together, and then you can protect your country and your family.

古文：言终而卒。
现代文：说完就去世了。
English: And then he died.

古文：慕璝亦有才略，抚纳秦、凉失业之民及氐、羌杂种至五六百落，部众转盛。
现代文：慕容慕也富有才干韬略，他妥善地安抚了来自凉州、秦州失业的难民，以及羌族、氐族等各部族共五六百余部落，增加了部众人数和国家的实力。
English: Murongmu was also very talented. He properly pacified the unemployed refugees from Liangzhou and Qinzhou, as well as more than five or six hundred tribes of the Yi and Yao ethnic groups, increasing the number of followers and the strength of the country.

古文：十二月，魏主命安集将军长孙翰、安北将军尉眷北击柔然，魏主自将屯柞山。
现代文：十二月，北魏国主拓跋焘，派安集将军长孙翰、安北将军尉眷，北上进攻柔然汗国。拓跋焘亲自率兵，屯驻在柞山。
English: In December, the head of the Northern Wei state, Tuoba Gu, sent the Anji general Sun Han and the Anbei general's lieutenant to the north to attack the Juran Khanate. Tuoba Gu personally led the troops and stationed in Lushan.

古文：柔然北遁，诸军追之，大获而还。
现代文：柔然汗国的部众闻讯北逃，北魏的几路大军紧紧追击，大获全胜而回。
English: Reluctantly, the leaders of the Khanate fled north, pursued by several armies of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and returned with a complete victory.

古文：翰，肥之子也。
现代文：长孙翰是长孙肥的儿子。
English: The eldest grandson, Han, is the son of the eldest grandson, Hui.

古文：诏拜营阳王母张氏为营阳太妃。
现代文：刘宋文帝下诏，封营阳王的母亲张氏为营阳太妃。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen decreed that Zhang, the mother of Yingying Yang Wang, would become Yingyang Taifei.

古文：林邑王范阳迈寇日南、九德诸郡。
现代文：林邑王范阳迈，进犯刘宋日南、九德等郡。
English: Wang Fanyangmai of Linyi invaded Liu Songrin, Jiude and other counties.

古文：宕昌王梁弥怱遣子弥黄入见于魏。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥匆，派遣他的儿子梁弥黄，前往北魏朝见。
English: Tang Chang Wang Liang Yixuan sent his son Liang Yiguang to meet the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：宕昌，羌之别种也。
现代文：宕昌是羌族的一个支派。
English: The Gaochang is a tribe of the Yi people.

古文：羌地东接中国，西通西域，长数千里，各有酋帅，部落分地，不相统摄；而宕昌最强，有民二万馀落，诸种畏之。
现代文：羌族所居住的地域，东与中原相接，西与西域相通，东西长数千里。羌族各支各有首领，部落与部落之间也分地而居，不相管辖。其中，属宕昌部的实力最强，共有二万多个部落，其他各部族都非常畏惧他们。
English: The region inhabited by the Yao people is bordered by the Central Plains in the east, and by the Western Regions in the west, extending thousands of miles from east to west. Each branch of the Yao people has its own leader, and the tribes also live separately from each other and are not under the same jurisdiction. Among them, the strongest is the one belonging to the Tangchang Department, with a total of more than 20,000 tribes, and the other tribes are very afraid of them.

古文：夏主将废太子璝而立少子酒泉公伦。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃，准备废黜太子赫连而改立幼子酒泉公赫连伦。
English: Xia Wang Herian was very energetic and prepared to depose Prince Herian and replace him with his young son Jiuquan Gong Herianlun.

古文：璝闻之，将兵七万北伐伦。
现代文：赫连听到这个消息，立即率兵七万人北上进攻赫连伦。
English: Hearing this news, Helian immediately led 70,000 soldiers north to attack Helianthus.

古文：伦将骑三万拒之，战于高平，伦败死。
现代文：赫连伦率兵三万人迎击，双方在高平大战。赫连伦兵败身死。
English: Helian Lung led 30,000 soldiers to counterattack, and the two sides fought a great war. Helian Lung's soldiers were defeated and died.

古文：伦兄太原公昌将骑一万袭璝，杀之，并其众八万五千，归于统万。夏主大悦，立昌为太子。
现代文：赫连伦的同胞兄、太原公赫连昌率骑兵一万人袭击赫连的大军，斩杀赫连，收服了他的部众八万五千人，回到国都统万，夏王大喜，封赫连昌为太子。
English: Hereng Lun's brother and compatriot, Taiyuan Gong Hereng Chang, led 10,000 cavalry to attack Hereng's large army, killed Hereng, conquered 85,000 of his subordinates, returned to the national capital Tongwan, King Xia was delighted, and made Hereng Chang the prince.

古文：夏主好自矜大，名其四门：东曰招魏，南曰朝宋，西曰服凉，北曰平朔。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃一向妄自尊大，他给都城统万的四个城门分别命名：东门为招魏门，南门为朝宋门，西门为服凉门，北门为平朔门。
English: Xia Wang Herlian has always been full of arrogance. He named the four gates of the capital Tongwan separately: the East Gate is the Zhaowei Gate, the South Gate is the Song Dynasty Gate, the West Gate is the Clothes Gate, and the North Gate is the Pingshuo Gate.

古文：太祖文皇帝上之上元嘉二年
现代文：元嘉二年
English: in the second year of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，徐羡之、傅亮上表归政，表三上，帝乃许之。
现代文：春季，正月，刘宋司徒徐羡之、尚书令傅亮上书刘宋文帝，请求文帝亲自主持朝政，归还政权，一连上奏了三次，文帝才批准。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Liu Song, accompanied by Xu Enzhi and Shang Shuling Fu Liang, sent a letter to Liu Song Emperor, requesting Emperor Wen to personally hold the imperial government and return the power. It was played three times in a row, and Emperor Wen only approved it.

古文：丙寅，始亲万机。
现代文：丙寅，文帝开始亲自处理朝廷政务。
English: Cui Yin, Emperor Wen began to personally handle the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：羡之仍逊位还第，徐羡之、程道惠及吴兴太守王韶之等并谓非宜，敦劝甚苦，乃复奉诏视事。
现代文：徐羡之于是辞职返回私宅。徐佩之、侍中程道惠、吴兴太守王韶之等都认为徐羡之此举不合适，苦苦规劝敦促徐羡之返回朝廷。
English: As a result, Xu Enzhi resigned and returned to his private residence. Xu Peizhi, the middle-ranking courtier Cheng Daohui, and the Wu Xing governor Wang Xi all thought that Xu Enzhi's action was inappropriate, and they tried hard to persuade and urge Xu Enzhi to return to the imperial court.

古文：辛未，帝祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：徐羡之于是接受诏书，当朝视事。辛未，刘宋文帝前往南郊，祭祀天神。下令大赦。
English: Xu Enzhi then accepted the edict, and the imperial court looked into the matter. Soon after, Emperor Liu Songwen went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to the gods. He ordered an amnesty.

古文：己卯，魏主还平城。
现代文：己卯，北魏国主拓跋焘返回平城。
English: At the same time, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：二月，燕有女子化为男。
现代文：二月，北燕国中有女子变成了男子。
English: In February, there was a case of a woman turning into a man in Beiyan Province.

古文：燕主以问群臣，沿书左丞傅权对曰： 西汉之末，雌鸡化为雄，犹有王莽之祸。
现代文：北燕王以此询问朝中文武官员的意见。尚书左丞傅权回答说： 西汉末年，母鸡变为公鸡，结果出现了王莽篡汉的大祸。
English: King Yan of the North asked the opinion of the Chinese military officials in the DPRK. Shang Shuzhouzong Fu Quan replied: In the last years of the Western Han Dynasty, the hen became a rooster, resulting in the great disaster of Wang Mang's usurpation of Han.

古文：况今女化为男，臣将为君之兆也。 
现代文：何况今天发生的是女子变为男子，这是臣属变成君王的先兆！ 
English: Moreover, what is happening today is the transformation of a woman into a man, a prelude to the transformation of a subject into a king!

古文：三月，丙寅，魏主尊保母窦氏为保太后。
现代文：三月，丙寅，北魏国主拓跋焘尊奉他的乳母窦氏为保太后。
English: In March, Hsin Yin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, honored his wet nurse, Dou Shi, as his empress dowager.

古文：密后之殂也，世祖尚幼，太宗以窦氏慈良，有操行，使保养之。
现代文：拓跋焘的母亲杜贵嫔死时，拓跋焘年纪尚幼。明元帝拓跋嗣因为窦氏心地善良，品德好，所以让她哺育拓跋焘。
English: When Tu Guijuan, Tuobao's mother, died, Tu Guijuan was still very young. Mingyuan Emperor Tuobao, because of Dou's kind heart and good moral character, let her nurse Tu Guijuan.

古文：窦氏抚视有恩，训导有礼，世神德之，故加以尊号，奉养不异所在。
现代文：窦氏精心照顾拓跋焘，至为疼爱，教导也很有方，拓跋焘十分感激，所以继位后奉上尊号，奉养她跟生母一样。
English: The Dou family took good care of Tuobao. They loved her very much and taught her very well. Tuobao was very grateful, so after she succeeded to the throne, she was given the title of nobility, and she was raised just like her birth mother.

古文：丁巳，魏以长孙嵩为太尉，长孙翰为司徒，奚斤为司空。
现代文：丁巳，北魏国主拓跋焘任命长孙嵩为太尉，长孙翰为司徒，奚斤为司空。
English: At the same time, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, appointed the eldest son, Song, as the first lieutenant, the eldest son, Han, as the second lieutenant, and the youngest son, Jin, as the second lieutenant.

古文：夏，四月，秦王炽磐遣平远将军叱卢犍等，袭河西镇南将军沮渠白蹄于临松，擒之，徙其民五千馀户于枹罕。
现代文：夏季四月，西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣平远将军叱卢犍等袭击北凉国镇南将军沮渠白蹄镇守的临松，擒获沮渠白蹄，把临松五千余户居民强行迁徙到罕。
English: In the summer of April, the Western Qin Dynasty's King Cuibao sent General Pingyuan to reprimand Lu Yao and others for attacking the Northern Liang Province's General Zhenan and capturing the town of Baiji, the town guard of Linsong, and forcibly relocating more than 5,000 residents of Linsong to Han.

古文：魏主遣龙骧将军步堆等来聘，始复通好。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘派遣龙骧将军步堆等前来刘宋访问，两国又恢复了友好关系。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, sent General Longyu to pay a visit to Liu Song, and the two countries resumed friendly relations.

古文：六月，武都惠文王杨盛卒。
现代文：六月，受东晋封号的氐族首领、武都惠文王杨盛去世。
English: In June, Yang Sheng, the leader of the Yi people and the King of Wudu Huiwen, who received the title of Eastern Jin, passed away.

古文：初，盛闻晋亡，不改义熙年号，谓世子玄曰： 吾老矣，当终为晋臣，汝善事宋帝。 
现代文：当初，杨盛听说东晋灭亡的消息，坚持不改东晋的义熙年号，对他的世子杨玄说： 我已经老朽了，应当至死当晋朝的臣民；而你们则应好好事奉宋国。 
English: At first, when Yang Sheng heard the news of the fall of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, he insisted on not changing the name of the Eastern Jin Dynasty to Yixi, and said to his son Yang Xuan: I have become old and decrepit, and I should die as a subject of the Jin Dynasty; and you should serve the Song Dynasty well.

古文：及盛卒，玄自称都督陇右诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州刺史、武都王，遣使来告丧，始用元喜年号。
现代文：等到杨盛去世，杨玄自称都督陇右诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州刺史和武都王，派遣使臣前往刘宋报丧。这时，才开始改用元嘉年号。
English: After Yang Sheng's death, Yang Xuan claimed to be the military governor of Guizhou, the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Kaifu and the three departments, the governor of Qin and the king of Wu, and sent envoys to Liu Song to pay his respects. It was only then that he began to use the Yuan carnival name.

古文：秋，七月，秦王炽磐镇南将军吉毘等南击黑水羌酋丘担，大破之。
现代文：秋季七月，西秦王乞伏炽磐派镇南将军乞伏吉毗等，南下袭击黑水羌族部落酋长丘担，大败丘担的军队。
English: In the autumn of July, the Western Qin Dynasty's King Qibao sent the Zhennan general Qibao Jibai to the south to attack the Black Water Yi tribal chief Qotan and defeat Qotan's army.

古文：八月，夏武烈帝殂，葬嘉平陵，庙号世祖；太子昌即皇帝位。大赦，改元承光。
现代文：八月，夏国武烈帝赫连勃勃去世，安葬在嘉平陵，庙号称世祖；夏太子赫连昌即皇帝位，下令大赦，改年号为承光。
English: In August, Emperor Wu of Xia died and was buried in the Jiaping Mausoleum. The temple was called the ancestor. Emperor Xia's son, Herenchang, issued an amnesty and changed his name to Chengguang.

古文：王弘自以始不预定策，不受司空；表让弥年，乃许之。
现代文：王弘因最初未能参与废黜少帝、拥戴文帝的政变，因此不接受司空一职的任命，不断地呈上奏章，辞让了一年，文帝才下诏批准。
English: Because Wang Hong initially failed to participate in the coup that deposed the young emperor and supported Emperor Wen, he did not accept the appointment of the post of Sikuo, and constantly submitted his resignation. It took a year for Emperor Wen to give his approval.

古文：乙酉，以弘为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：乙酉，宋文帝任命王弘为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: At the same time, Emperor Songwen appointed Wang Hong as the general of chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：冬，十月，丘担以其众降秦，秦以担为归善将军；拜折冲将军乞伏信帝为平羌校尉以镇之。
现代文：冬季，十月，黑水羌族部落酋长丘担，率领他的部众归降西秦。西秦任命丘担为归善将军。另行任命折冲将军乞伏信帝为平羌校尉，以镇抚归附的黑水羌族部落。
English: In the winter, in October, Qiu Tan, the chief of the Heishui Yi tribe, led his followers to surrender to the Western Qin Dynasty. The Western Qin Dynasty appointed Qiu Tan as the general of Guishan. In addition, it appointed General Orichong as the lieutenant of Pingyao, and the attached Heishui Yi tribe as the commander of Zhenfu.

古文：癸卯，魏主大举伐柔然，五道并进。
现代文：癸卯，北魏国主拓跋焘大规模讨伐柔然汗国，五路兵马，同时并进。
English: At the same time, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty launched a large-scale crusade against the Rouran Khanate, with five armies and horses marching simultaneously.

古文：长孙翰等从东道出黑漠，廷尉卿长孙道生等出白、黑二漠之间，魏主从中道，东平公娥清出栗园，奚斤等从西道，出尔寒山。
现代文：司徒长孙翰等从东路，出兵黑漠；廷尉卿长孙道生等出兵白漠、黑漠之间；拓跋焘亲自率军，从中道直入；东平公娥清出兵栗园；奚斤等从西道，出兵尔寒山。
English: Sun Han, the head of the Jurchen army, sent troops to the Black Desert from the East Road; Tingyuqing, the head of the Jurchen army, Sun Dosheng, sent troops to the White Desert and the Black Desert; Tuoba Yu personally led the army and went straight from the Middle Road; Dongping Gong'e Qing sent troops to the Chestnut Garden; and Xing Jin and others sent troops to the Cold Mountain from the West Road.

古文：诸军至漠南，舍辎重，轻骑，赍十五日粮，度漠击之。
现代文：几路军队到达漠南以后，舍弃辎重，改作轻骑兵，每人带十五天的干粮，深入大漠攻击。
English: After several armies arrived in the south of the desert, they abandoned their heavy baggage and changed into light cavalry, each with fifteen days of dry rations, to attack deep into the desert.

古文：柔然部落大惊，绝迹北走。
现代文：柔然各部落大吃一惊，全部撤退，向北逃窜。
English: Surprised, all the tribes retreated and fled north.

古文：十一月，以武都世子玄为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：十一月，以武都世子玄为北秦州刺史、武都王。
English: In November, Emperor Wu of Northern Qin State was crowned as the King of Wu.

古文：初，会稽孔宁子为帝镇西咨议参军，及即位，以宁子为步兵校尉；与侍中王华并有富贵之愿，疾徐羡之、傅亮专权，日夜构之于帝。
现代文：最初，刘宋会稽人孔宁子为刘义隆镇西谘议参军。刘义隆即位以后，任命孔宁子为步兵校尉。孔宁子与侍中王华都有追求荣华富贵的强烈愿望，对徐羡之、傅亮等专揽大权深怀不满。
English: At first, the auditor of the Liu Song Society, Kong Ningzi, advised Liu Yilong Zhen Xi to join the army. After Liu Yilong ascended the throne, he appointed Kong Ningzi as an infantry lieutenant. Both Kong Ningzi and Wang Hua had a strong desire to pursue glory and wealth, and were deeply dissatisfied with Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang's exclusive power.

古文：会谢晦二女当适彭城王义康、新野侯义宾，遣其妻曹氏及长子世休送女至建康。
现代文：于是，他们日夜在刘义隆面前，捏造罪状，陷害徐、傅二人。正巧，谢晦的两个女儿将分别嫁给彭城王刘义康、新野侯刘义宾，所以，谢晦派他的妻子曹氏和长子谢世休送女儿抵达建康。
English: As a result, they fabricated charges day and night in front of Liu Yilong, framing Xu and Fu. It just so happened that Xie Yu's two daughters would be married to Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, and Liu Yibin, the lord of Xinye respectively. Therefore, Xie Yu sent his wife Cao and his eldest son Xie Shixiu to escort his daughters to Jiankang.

古文：帝欲诛羡之、亮，并发兵讨晦，声言当伐魏，取河南，又言拜京陵，治行装舰。
现代文：文帝打算诛杀徐羡之、傅亮，并准备发兵讨伐谢晦。于是，他宣称要征伐北魏，又声称到京口的兴宁陵祭拜祖母孝懿皇后，整治行装，放到战舰上。
English: Emperor Wen planned to kill Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang, and was preparing to send an army to fight against Xie Ying. Therefore, he declared that he would conquer the Northern Wei Dynasty, and also claimed that he would go to the Xingning Mausoleum in Beijing to worship his grandmother, Empress Xiaoqi, and that he would rectify and equip it and put it on a warship.

古文：亮与晦书曰： 薄伐河朔，事犹未已，朝野之虑，忧惧者多。 
现代文：傅亮写信给谢晦说： 目前，朝廷就要动员讨伐黄河以北，事情并不到此为止。朝廷内外的官吏和百姓，对此多深感忧虑和恐惧。 
English: Fu Liang wrote a letter to Xie Hui, saying: At present, the imperial court is about to mobilize a crusade north of the Yellow River, and things will not end here. Many officials and people inside and outside the imperial court are deeply worried and fearful about this.

古文：又言： 朝士多谏北征，上当遣外监万幼宗往相咨访。 
现代文：又写道： 朝中多数官员都劝阻皇上北征，皇上将要派遣外监万幼宗去荆州听取你的意见。 
English: He also said, "The majority of people in the DPRK are going to the Northern Expedition, and the emperor is preparing to send the overseer Wan Yong Zong to you for consultation and discussion."

古文：时朝廷处分异常，其谋颇泄。
现代文：当时朝廷的举动不同寻常，文帝的清洗计划有些泄漏。
English: At that time, the imperial court's disposition was unusual, and the scheme was often leaked.

古文：太祖文皇帝上之上元嘉三年
现代文：元嘉三年春季，正月，谢晦的弟弟黄门侍郎谢，派专人飞驰警告谢晦。
English: In the spring of the third year of Yuan Jia, in the first month of the year, Xie Yao's younger brother Huangmen waiter Lang Xie sent a special person to rush to warn Xie Yao.

古文：春，正月，谢晦弟黄门侍郎爵驰使告晦，晦犹谓不然，以傅亮书示咨议参军何承天曰； 外间所闻，咸谓西讨已定，幼宗岂有上理！ 
现代文：但谢晦仍以为不至于此，并拿出傅亮的信给谘议参军何承天看，说： 估计万幼宗一二日之内就会到达，傅亮怕我招惹是非，所以先送此信。 何承天说： 我在外面听到的，都说向西讨伐我们的计划已经确定，万幼宗怎么会有到这里来的道理！ 
English: But Xie Yu still did not think it would come to this, and he took out Fu Liang's letter and showed it to He Chengtian, who was advising and joining the army, and said: It is estimated that Wan Youzong will arrive within a day or two. Fu Liang was afraid that I would cause trouble, so he sent this letter first. He Chengtian said: What I heard outside said that our plan to fight to the west had been determined, how could Wan Youzong come here!

古文：晦尚谓虚妄，使承天豫立答诏启草，言伐虏宜须明年。
现代文：谢晦仍然认为谣言虚妄不可信，就命何承天先行起草回答诏书的奏章，建议朝廷如果讨伐北魏，最好延到明年。
English: Xie Yu still thought that the rumor was false and not credible, so he ordered He Jingtian to first draft a reply to the imperial rescript, and suggested that if the imperial court wanted to fight against the Northern Wei Dynasty, it would be best to postpone it until next year.

古文：江夏内史程道惠得寻阳人书，言 朝廷将有大处分，其事已审 ，使其辅国府中兵参军乐冏封以示晦。
现代文：江夏内史程道惠接到一封寻阳方面送来的信，信中说： 朝廷将有大规模的非常行动，事情已经明确了。 程道惠派辅国府中兵参军乐，把信封好送给谢晦。
English: Cheng Daohui, a member of the Inner History Commission of Jiangxi Province, received a letter from the Xuanyang side, which said: The Imperial Court will have a large-scale emergency operation, the matter has been clarified. Cheng Daohui sent soldiers to join the military music and send the envelope to Xie Yu.

古文：晦问承天曰： 若果尔，卿令我云何？ 
现代文：谢晦问何承天： 如果真有不测，你认为我该怎么办呢？ 
English: Xie Yu asked He Chengtian: If something really happens, what do you think I should do?

古文：对曰： 蒙将军殊顾，常思报德。
现代文：何承天说： 我蒙受将军您的特殊照顾，常想报答您的恩惠。
English: He Chengtian said: I have received your special care as a general, and I always want to repay your favor.

古文：事变至矣，何敢隐情！
现代文：如今事情已经发生了变化，怎么敢隐瞒真情！
English: Now things have changed, how dare they hide the truth!

古文：然明日戒严，动用军法，区区所怀，惧不得尽。 
现代文：可是，一旦明天下令戒严，动不动就用军法制裁，我心中要说的话，恐怕不能说尽。 
English: However, tomorrow, martial law and the use of military law, according to my own short-sighted thinking, I am afraid I cannot enjoy the best of days.

古文：晦惧曰： 卿岂欲我自裁邪？ 
现代文：谢晦惊恐地问道： 你难道让我自杀吗？ 
English: Xie Yu asked in horror, "Are you asking me to commit suicide?"

古文：承天曰： 尚未至此。
现代文：何承天说： 还不到这个地步。
English: He Chengtian said: It's not at that stage yet.

古文：以王者之重，举天下以攻一州，大小既殊，逆顺又异。境外求全，上计也。
现代文：以帝王的威严和全国的力量去进攻一个州，实力大小既悬殊，民心逆顺又迥异·您到国境外保全性命，是上策。
English: With the majesty of the emperor and the strength of the whole country to attack a state, the strength of the size is disparate, the people's hearts are contrary and different. It is the best policy for you to go abroad to save your life.

古文：其次以腹心将兵屯义阳，将军自帅大众战于夏口；若败，即趋义阳以出北境，其次也。 
现代文：其次，派心腹将领驻军义阳，将军您亲率大军与敌人在夏口决战；如果失败，可以取道义阳北上出境，投奔北魏，这是中策。 
English: Secondly, send a trusted general to garrison the army in Yiyang, and the general will lead your own army to fight the enemy in Xiakou; if you fail, you can take the road of Yiyang to the north and go to the Northern Wei Dynasty. This is the middle way.

古文：晦良久曰： 荆州用武之地，兵粮易给，聊且决战，走复何晚！ 
现代文：谢晦沉吟良久才说： 荆州是兵家必争之地，兵力和粮草都容易接济，不妨先来一次决战，打败了再走也不晚。 
English: Xie Yu pondered for a long time before he said, "Jingzhou is a place where soldiers must fight. It is easy to get supplies of troops and grain and grass. We may as well have a decisive battle first. If we defeat them, it will not be too late to leave.

古文：乃使承天造立表檄，又与卫军咨议参军琅邪颜邵谋举兵，邵饮药而死。
现代文：于是，命令何承天撰写檄文；又与卫军谘议参军琅邪人颜商讨起兵反抗。颜服毒自杀。
English: As a result, he ordered He Chengtian to write an apology; he also consulted with the guards about joining the army and the wicked Yan to discuss starting a rebellion. Yan committed suicide by taking poison.

古文：晦立幡戒严，谓司马庾登之曰： 今当自下，欲屈卿以三千人守城，备御刘粹。 
现代文：谢晦竖起大旗，下令戒严，对司马庾登之说： 我现在要亲自东下出征，打算委屈你以三千人守卫江陵，防备刘粹。 
English: Xie Hui put up a big flag, ordered martial law, and said to Sima Qiandenzhi: I will personally go to the east to go to war, and I intend to offend you by guarding Jiangling with three thousand people to prevent Liu Qi.

古文：登之曰： 下官亲老在都，又素无部众，情计二三，不敢受此旨。 
现代文：庾登之说： 我的双亲都已年迈，身在建康，而我自己又从来没有过直属的部队，我考虑再三，不敢接受这项命令。 
English: "My parents are both elderly and in poor health, and I myself have never had any troops under my direct command. I have thought about it many times, but I don't dare to accept this order," said Zou Dengzhi.

古文：晦仍问诸将佐： 战士三千足守城否？ 
现代文：谢晦又问其他将领和佐臣： 战士三千人，够不够守城？ 
English: Xie Hui also asked the other generals and sages: Three thousand soldiers, is it enough to defend the city?

古文：南蛮司马周超对曰： 非徒守城而已，若有外寇，可以立功。 
现代文：南蛮司马周超说： 不仅足够守城，如有敌人从外面攻击，还可以立功。 
English: Nanban Sima Zhou Chao said: Not only is it enough to defend the city, if there is an enemy attacking from the outside, it can also be meritorious.

古文：登之因曰： 超必能力，下官请解司马、南郡以授之。 
现代文：庾登之于是说： 周超一定能够胜任，我愿意解除司马和南郡太守两个职务转授给他。 
English: Yu Dengzhi then said: Zhou Chao must be competent, I am willing to relieve Sima and Nanshun Taishou of two positions and transfer them to him.

古文：晦即于坐命超为司马，领南义阳太守；转登之为长史，南郡如故。
现代文：谢晦当即就在座位上任命周超为司马，兼任南义阳郡太守。改庾登之为长史，仍任南郡太守如初。
English: Xie Yu immediately appointed Zhou Chao as Sima and also as the governor of South Yiyang County. It has been a long time since he was appointed as governor, but he is still the governor of South Yiyang County.

古文：登之，蕴之孙也。
现代文：庾登之是庾蕴的孙子。
English: Zou Dengzhi is the grandson of Zou Yun.

古文：帝以王弘、檀道济始不预废弑之谋，弘弟昙首又为帝所亲委，事将发，密使报弘，且召道济，欲使讨晦。
现代文：刘宋文帝认为王弘、檀道济在开始并没有参预废弑刘义真、刘义符的阴谋，王弘的弟弟王昙首又是刘宋文帝亲近信任的心腹。所以，在开始行动之前，刘义隆秘密派人告诉王弘，并且召见檀道济，打算派檀道济去讨伐谢晦。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen believed that Wang Hong and Dang Daoji did not participate in the conspiracy to depose Liu Yizhen and Liu Yifu at the beginning, and Wang Hong's brother Wang Xizhou was also a close confidant of Emperor Liu Songwen. Therefore, before starting the action, Liu Yilong secretly sent someone to tell Wang Hong and summoned Dang Daoji, intending to send Dang Daoji to fight Xie Yue.

古文：王华等皆以为不可，帝曰： 道济止于胁从，本非创谋。杀害之事，又所不关。
现代文：王华等刘义隆身边的大臣都坚决反对。刘义隆说： 檀道济当初只不过是被胁迫而随从徐羡之等行事，本不是他主动提出，而谋杀的事，更与他没有关系。
English: Wang Hua and other ministers around Liu Yilong are firmly opposed. Liu Yilong said: At the beginning, Tang Daoji was just coerced and followed Xu Enzhi. It was not his initiative, and the murder had nothing to do with him.

古文：吾抚而使之，必将无虑。 
现代文：我安抚并使用他，不必有其他顾虑。 
English: I'll placate and use him, I don't have to worry about anything else.

古文：乙丑，道济至建康。
现代文：乙丑，檀道济抵达建康。
English: Second Ugly, Tandooji arrived in Jiankang.

古文：丙寅，下诏暴羡之、亮、晦杀营阳、庐陵王之罪，命有司诛之，且曰： 晦据有上流，或不即罪，朕当亲帅六师为其过防。
现代文：丙寅，刘宋文帝下诏公布徐羡之、傅亮、谢晦杀害营阳王刘义符、庐陵王刘义真的罪状，命有关部门逮捕诛杀，并且说： 谢晦据守长江上游，可能不会立即伏法。朕将亲自统率朝廷的大军前往讨伐。
English: Emperor Xianyin, Liu Songwen issued a decree to announce the guilt of Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and Xie Hui for the murder of Yangyang King Liu Yifu and Fuling King Liu Yizhen, and ordered the relevant departments to arrest and kill them, and said: Xie Hui is guarding the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, and may not immediately surrender. I will personally lead the imperial army to the crusade.

古文：可遣中领军在彦之即日电发，征北将军檀道济骆驿继路，符卫军府州，以时收翦，已命雍州刺史刘粹等断其走伏。
现代文：可派中领军到彦之即日开始急速出发，征北将军檀道济陆续出发为后继。符卫军府及荆州官属，应及时逮捕并诛杀谢晦。已命雍州刺史刘粹等截击，切断其逃跑或潜伏的道路。
English: It is possible to send the central leading army to depart rapidly on the same day as the arrival of Yan, and the Northern Expeditionary Army General Dang Daoji will depart successively as the successor. The Fuwei Military Headquarters and the Jingzhou officials should be arrested and killed in time. It has been ordered to intercept the Yongzhou assassin Liu Qi and cut off his escape or lurking path.

古文：罪止元凶，馀无所问。 
现代文：罪犯只限谢晦一人，其他胁从者一律不加追究。 
English: The criminal is limited to one person, Xie Yu, and all other followers of coercion will not be investigated.

古文：是日，诏召羡之、亮。
现代文：这天，文帝下诏召见徐羡之、傅亮。
English: On this day, Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict summoning Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang.

古文：羡之行至西明门外，谢爵正直，遣报亮云： 殿内有异处分。 
现代文：徐羡之走到建康城西明门外，谢正在值班，派人飞报傅亮说： 殿内举动异常！ 
English: Xu Enzhi walked to the Ximing Gate of Jiankang City. Xie was on duty and sent someone to report to Fu Liang: The behavior inside the palace is abnormal!

古文：亮辞以嫂病暂还，遣信报羡之，羡之还西州，乘内人问讯车出郭，步走至新林，入陶灶中自经死。
现代文：傅亮马上借口嫂嫂生病，暂时回家，派人通知徐羡之，徐羡之回到西城，乘坐宫廷内部人出差的车逃出建康城，又步行走到新林，在一个烧陶器的窑里，自缢身死。
English: Fu Liang immediately used the excuse that his sister-in-law was ill, went home temporarily, and sent someone to inform Xu Enzhi. Xu Enzhi returned to Xicheng, took the car of a palace insider on a business trip to escape from Jiankang City, walked to Xinlin, and hanged himself in a pottery kiln.

古文：亮乘车出郭门，乘马奔兄迪墓，屯骑校尉郭泓收之。
现代文：傅亮乘车逃出建康城，再乘马奔其兄傅迪的墓园，屯骑校尉郭泓将他逮捕。
English: Fu Liang fled Jiankang City by car, and then rode his horse to the cemetery of his brother Fu Di. He was arrested by the cavalry captain Guo Wei.

古文：至广莫门，上遣中书舍人以诏书示亮，并谓曰： 以公江陵之诚，当使诸子无恙。 
现代文：到建康城北门广莫门，文帝刘义隆派中书舍人拿诏书给傅亮看，对他说： 因你当初在江陵迎驾时，态度至为诚恳，所以饶恕你的儿子们不死。 
English: When he arrived at Guangmo Gate, the north gate of Jiankang City, Emperor Wen sent Liu Yilong to take the imperial edict to Fu Liang and said to him, "Since you were so sincere when you first arrived in Jiangling, please forgive your sons so that they will not die.

古文：亮读诏书讫，曰： 亮受先帝布衣之眷，遂蒙顾托。
现代文：傅亮读过诏书说： 我出身平民，蒙先帝垂爱，赋予托孤大任。
English: Fu Liang read the imperial edict and said: I am a commoner by birth, loved by the late emperor, and entrusted with a great responsibility.

古文：黜昏立明，社稷之计也。
现代文：废黜昏君，迎立明主，全是为国家百年大计。
English: Dethroning the dim-witted emperor and welcoming the enlightened master are all centenary plans for the country.

古文：欲加之罪，其无辞乎！ 
现代文：要想把罪过强加在我身上，还怕没有借口吗？ 
English: Is there no excuse for trying to pin the blame on me?

古文：于是诛亮而徙其妻子于建安；诛羡之二子，而宥其兄子佩之。
现代文：于是，傅亮被杀，他的妻室和子女被放逐到建安。又斩杀了徐羡之的两个儿子，而饶恕了他的侄儿徐佩之。
English: As a result, Fu Liang was killed, and his wife and children were exiled to Jian'an. He also killed Xu Enzhi's two sons, but spared his nephew Xu Peizhi.

古文：诛晦子世休，收系谢爵。
现代文：诛杀了谢晦的儿子谢世休，逮捕谢。
English: killed Xie Xie's son Xie Shixiu, arrested Xie.

古文：帝将讨谢晦，问策于檀道济，对曰： 臣昔与晦同从北征，入关十策，晦有其九，才略明练，殆为少敌。
现代文：刘宋文帝将要讨伐谢晦，向檀道济询问策略，檀道济说： 我当年与谢晦一同北伐，当时得以入关的十项计策，有九项是由谢晦提出的。谢晦才略精明老练，大约很少有敌手。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen was going to fight against Xie Hui and asked Dang Daoji about his strategy. Dang Daoji said, "I was with Xie Hui in the Northern Expedition. At that time, nine out of the ten strategies for gaining entry were proposed by Xie Hui. Xie Hui was a bit shrewd and experienced and had few opponents.

古文：然未尝孤军决胜，戎事恐非其长。
现代文：但他从没有单独带领部队打过胜仗，战场上的军事行动，恐怕不是他所擅长的。
English: But he has never led troops to victory alone, and military operations on the battlefield are probably not his forte.

古文：臣悉晦智，晦悉臣勇。
现代文：我了解谢晦的才智，谢晦也了解我的勇敢。
English: I am familiar with Xie Yu's wisdom, and Xie Yu is familiar with my courage.

古文：今奉王命以讨之，可未陈而擒也。 
现代文：今天我奉皇帝的命令来讨伐他，可以在他没有摆开阵势以前，就把他擒获。 
English: Today, by order of the emperor, I have come to fight him, so that I may capture him before he has taken up his position.

古文：丁卯，征王弘为侍中、司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史，以彭城王义康为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：丁卯，宋文帝召见王弘，并任命他为侍中、司徒、录尚书事和扬州刺史；任命彭城王刘义康为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事和荆州刺史。
English: Emperor Dingwu and Emperor Songwen summoned Wang Hong and appointed him as a chamberlain, an attendant, a recorder and a historian of Yangzhou; appointed Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, as the military governor of eight states including Jing and Hunan and a historian of Jingzhou.

古文：乐冏复遣使告谢晦以徐、傅及爵等已诛。
现代文：辅国府中兵参军乐，再派人报告谢晦，说徐羡之、傅亮、谢等已被杀。
English: Fu Guofu soldiers participated in the military music, and then sent someone to report to Xie Ying, saying that Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang, Xie and others had been killed.

古文：晦先举羡之、亮哀，次发子弟凶问，既而自出射堂勒兵。
现代文：于是，谢晦先为徐羡之、傅亮举行祭礼，又为弟弟及儿子发布死讯。
English: As a result, Xie Yu first held a ceremony for Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang, and then announced the death of his brother and son.

古文：晦从高祖征讨，指麾处分，莫不曲尽其宜，数日间，四远投集，得精兵三万人。
现代文：然后亲自走出虎帐统率军队。谢晦当年随刘宋武帝南征北讨，经验丰富，所以发号施令，指挥调动，莫不切实妥当，几天之间，人们从四面八方投奔谢晦，很快就聚集了精兵三万人。
English: Then he personally stepped out of the tiger cage to lead the army. Xie Hui, who accompanied Emperor Liu Songwu on the Southern Expedition to the North, was rich in experience, so it was appropriate to give orders and command mobilization. Within a few days, people rushed to Xie Hui from all directions, and soon gathered 30,000 elite soldiers.

古文：乃奉表称羡之、亮等忠贞，横被冤酷。
现代文：于是，谢晦上表，盛赞徐羡之、傅亮等都是忠贞之臣，却遭受横暴的冤杀。
English: As a result, Xie Yu, Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and others were all loyal vassals, but they were brutally murdered.

古文：且言： 臣等若志欲执权，不专为国，初废营阳，陛下在远，武皇之子尚有童幼，拥以号令，谁敢非之！
现代文：又说： 我们这些人如果想长久地把握权柄，不一心为国家着想，我们当初在废黜营阳王时，陛下您远在荆州，武皇帝的儿子中还有幼童，我们完全可以拥戴小皇帝，发号施令，谁敢说个不字！
English: He also said, "If we people want to hold power for a long time, we should not be single-minded for the sake of the country. When we dethroned King Yang, Your Majesty was far away in Jingzhou. Emperor Wu's sons still had young children. We can fully embrace the little emperor and give orders. Who would dare to say a word!

古文：岂得溯流三千里，虚馆七旬，仰望鸾旗者哉！
现代文：怎么会逆流而上三千里，虚位七十多天，去迎接陛下的鸾旗！
English: How could he swim three thousand miles against the current, and wait for more than seventy days, to meet His Majesty's banner!

古文：故庐陵王，于营阳之世积怨犯上，自贻非命。不有所废，将何以兴！
现代文：已故的庐陵王刘义真，在营阳王在位的时候，就曾积恨，冒犯皇上，是他自己死于非命，不有所废黜，怎么会有兴起！
English: The late Fuling King Liu Yizhen, when Yingyang Wang Rong was on the throne, had accumulated resentment and offended the emperor. He himself died a violent death, without being deposed, how could there be a rise!

古文：耿弇不以贼遗君、父，臣亦何负于宋室邪！
现代文：耿不曾把贼寇遗留给君王，我又有什么地方辜负了宋皇室呢！
English: Geng did not leave the thieves and robbers to the king, and where did I fail the Song royal family?

古文：此皆王弘、王昙首、王华险躁猜忌，谗构成祸。
现代文：这都是因为王弘、王昙首、王华一伙阴险、狂暴，多所猜忌和挑拨离间造成的灾祸。
English: This is all because of the evil caused by Wang Hong, Wang Xizhou, and Wang Hua, who are insidious, violent, and have many suspicions and sow discord.

古文：今当举兵以除君侧之恶。 
现代文：现在，我要发动大军，以清除陛下身边的邪恶之徒。 
English: Now, I am going to unleash a great army to cleanse His Majesty's entourage of evil doers.

古文：秦王炽磐复遣使如魏，请用师于夏。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐，再次派使臣前往北魏，请求对夏国采取军事行动。
English: The king of Western Qin begged for help and again sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request military action against Xia.

古文：初，袁皇后生皇子劭，后自详视，使驰白帝曰： 此儿形貌异常，必破国亡家，不可举。 
现代文：最初，刘义隆的皇后袁氏，生下皇子刘劭以后，端详婴儿良久，派人飞快报告刘义隆，说： 此儿相貌异常，将来一定会弄得国破家亡，不能养他！ 
English: At first, Liu Yilong's empress Yuan, after giving birth to the prince Liu Xuan, looked at the baby for a long time, sent a person to quickly report Liu Yilong, saying: This is an abnormal appearance, in the future it will definitely cause the country to collapse, can not support him!

古文：即欲杀之。
现代文：就要动手把婴儿弄死。
English: I'm going to kill the baby.

古文：帝狼狈至后殿户外，手拨幔禁之，乃止。
现代文：刘义隆急急忙忙赶到后殿门外，用手拨开门帘阻止，这才留下刘劭一命。
English: Liu Yilong hurriedly rushed to the back of the hall and opened the door curtain with his hand to stop it, which only left Liu Ye with his life.

古文：以尚在谅暗，故秘之。
现代文：只是在为父亲守丧期间生子，违犯礼教，所以一直保密。
English: It's just that having a child during his father's funeral is against the rules of etiquette, so they've kept it a secret.

古文：闰月，丙戌，始言劭生。
现代文：闰正月，丙戌，才宣布皇子刘劭诞生。
English: The birth of Prince Liu Ye was announced on the first day of the leap month.

古文：帝下诏戒严，大赦，诸军相次进路以讨谢晦。
现代文：文帝下诏戒严，实行大赦，各路军队依次出发，讨伐谢晦。
English: Emperor Wen decreed martial law and implemented an amnesty, and the various armies set out in turn to fight against Xie Ying.

古文：晦以弟遯为竟陵内史，将万人总留任，帅众二万发江陵，列舟舰自江津至于破冢，旌旗蔽日，叹曰： 恨不得以此为勤王之师！ 
现代文：谢晦任命他的弟弟谢遁为竟陵内史，率领一万人留守江陵。他自己则亲自率兵二万人从江陵出发，他指挥的战舰，从江津一直排列到破冢，旌旗招展，遮天蔽日，谢晦长叹一声，说： 真恨不得这是一支保护皇家的大军！ 
English: Xie Hui appointed his younger brother Xie Jie as the official historian of the imperial mausoleum, and led ten thousand people to stay in Gangneung. He himself personally led twenty thousand soldiers from Gangneung. The warships under his command, from Jiangjin, were lined up to the pier, waving flags and covering the sun. Xie Hui sighed and said: I wish this was an army to protect the royal family!

古文：晦欲遣兵袭湘州刺史张邵，何承天以邵兄益州刺史茂度与晦善，曰： 邵意趣未可知，不宜遽击之。 
现代文：谢晦想要派兵袭击湘州刺史张，何承天因为张的哥哥、益州刺史张茂度与谢晦私交甚好，就说： 张的态度还不明朗，不应该轻率地发动攻击。 
English: Xie Hui wanted to send troops to attack Zhang Shishi of Hunan Province, but He Chengtian, because Zhang's brother, Zhang Maodu of Yizhou Province, had a very good personal relationship with Xie Hui, said: Zhang's attitude is still unclear, and it should not be rash to launch an attack.

古文：晦以书招邵，邵不从。
现代文：谢晦写信招抚张，张不肯追随谢晦。
English: Xie Hui wrote a letter to woo Zhang, but Zhang refused to follow Xie Hui.

古文：二月，戊午，以金紫光禄大夫王敬弘为尚书左仆射，建安太守郑鲜之为右仆射。
现代文：二月，戊午，刘宋文帝任命金紫光禄大夫王敬弘为尚书左仆射，任命建安太守郑鲜之为右仆射。
English: In the afternoon of February, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Wang Jinghong, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, as Shang Shuxu's left-hand retainer, and appointed Jian An's eunuch Zheng Xian as his right-hand retainer.

古文：敬弘，廙之曾孙也。
现代文：王敬弘是王的曾孙。
English: Wang Jinghong is Wang's great-grandson.

古文：庚申，上发建康。
现代文：庚申，刘义隆从建康出发。
English: Goshun and Liu Yilong set off from Jiankang.

古文：命王弘与彭城王义康居守，入居中书下省；侍中殷景仁参掌留任；帝姊会稽长公主留止台内，总摄六宫。
现代文：命令王弘与彭城王刘义康留守京师建康，进驻中书下省；侍中殷景仁也参预负责留守京师的任务。文帝的姐姐会稽长公主刘兴弟住进皇宫，总管后宫事务。
English: He ordered Wang Hong and Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, to stay in the capital to supervise Jiankang, and to be stationed in the province of Zhongshizhe. Yin Jingren, an aide-de-camp, also participated in the task of being in charge of the Beijing division. Liu Xingdi, the sister of Emperor Wen, the chief inspector of the imperial court, lived in the imperial palace and was in charge of the harem affairs.

古文：谢晦自江陵东下，何承天留府不从。
现代文：谢晦从江陵东下，何承天留守江陵没有随从。
English: Xie Ya went east from Jiangling, but He Chengtian stayed in Jiangling without any followers.

古文：晦至江口，到彦之已至彭城洲。
现代文：谢晦抵达西江口，到彦之的军队已开进彭城洲。
English: Xie Yu arrived at the mouth of the West River, and Yan Zhi's army had already entered Pengchengzhou.

古文：庾登之据巴陵，畏懦不敢进；会霖雨连日，参军刘和之曰： 彼此共有雨耳；檀征北寻至，东军方强，唯宜速战。 
现代文：庾登之据守巴陵，胆怯畏缩，不敢前进。当时正值大雨连绵，数日不停，参军刘和之警告庾登之说： 我们遇雨，敌人也遇雨，征北将军檀道济的大军不久就要到了，官军实力正强，我们应该速战速决才好。 
English: At that time, it was raining heavily for several days in a row. Liu Hezhi, who had joined the army, warned Zou Dengzhi, saying, "When it rains on us, it also rains on the enemy. The great army of the Northern Expeditionary Force General Dang Daoji will soon arrive. The strength of the government army is strong. We should make a quick decision.

古文：登之恇怯，使小将陈祐作大囊，贮茅悬于帆樯，云可以焚舰，用火宜须晴，以缓战期。
现代文：庾登之还是畏惧不敢战，却令手下的小军官陈，制造了一个大型口袋，装满茅草悬挂在桅杆之上，声称可以用来焚毁敌人的舰船。
English: He was still afraid to fight, but ordered his petty officer Chen to make a large bag full of thatch and hang it on the mast, claiming that it could be used to burn enemy ships.

古文：晦然之，停军十五日。乃使中兵参军孔延秀攻将军萧欣于彭城洲，破之。又攻洲口栅，陷之。
现代文：用火攻必须等到天晴，他用这个办法，延缓会战的日期，谢晦却同意了庾登之的做法，逗留了十五日，才派中兵参军孔延秀进攻驻扎在彭城洲的将军萧欣，大败萧欣的军队，又进攻彭城洲口官军营垒阵地，一举攻克。
English: He used this method to delay the date of the battle, but Xie Hui agreed to the approach of Xue Dengzhi and stayed for fifteen days before sending soldiers to join the army of Kong Yanxiu to attack the general Xiao Xin stationed in Pengchengzhou, defeated Xiao Xin's army, and attacked the camp of the Pengchengzhou official army, and defeated it in one fell swoop.

古文：诸将咸欲退还夏口，到彦之不可。乃保隐圻。
现代文：官军的大小将领都主张退走，据守夏口，到彦之反对，于是退守隐圻。
English: The generals of the imperial army, both big and small, all advocated retreating, and Natsukuchi was defended, which was opposed by Hiko, who then retreated to Inba.

古文：晦又上表自讼，且自矜其捷，曰： 陛下若枭四凶于庙庭，悬三监于降阙，臣便勒众旋旗，还保所任。 
现代文：谢晦又上疏为自己辩护，并且十分骄傲地夸耀自己在军事上的胜利，说： 陛下如果把 四凶 斩首，把 三监 的人头悬挂在宫墙上，我就立刻停止进攻，回转旌期，折返我的任所。 
English: Xie Hui defended himself and proudly boasted of his military victory, saying: "If Your Majesty beheads the four murderers and hangs the heads of the three jailers on the palace wall, I will immediately stop the attack, turn back the tide, and return to my post."

古文：初，晦与徐羡之、傅亮为自全之计，以为晦据上流，而檀道济镇广陵，各有强兵，足以制朝廷；羡之、亮居中秉权，可得持久。
现代文：当初，谢晦与徐羡之、傅亮为了保全自己，就用谢晦把守长江上游，又把檀道济安置在广陵，使他们各自拥有强兵，足以胁制朝廷；而徐羡之、傅亮在朝中居高官、掌实权，可以维持长久的安定。
English: At first, Xie Hui, Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang, in order to protect themselves, used Xie Hui to guard the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, and also placed Dandooji in Guangling, so that they each had strong soldiers, enough to threaten the imperial court; while Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang were high-ranking officials in the DPRK, holding real power, and could maintain long-term stability.

古文：及闻道济帅众来上，惶惧无计。
现代文：等到谢晦听说檀道济率兵来攻打自己，不禁大为惶恐，束手无策。
English: When Xie Yu heard that Dang Daoji led an army to attack him, he couldn't help but panic and was helpless.

古文：道济既至，与到彦之军合，牵舰缘岸。
现代文：檀道济的大军一到隐圻，立即与到彦之的军队合兵一处，战舰沿岸停泊。
English: As soon as the great army of Dandooji arrived at Hakuin, they immediately joined forces with the army of Zuihikoshi, and the warships anchored along the coast.

古文：晦始见舰数不多，轻之，不即出战。
现代文：谢晦最初看见战舰不多，毫不在意，也不马上发动攻击。
English: At the beginning of Xie Yue, there were not many ships to see them, so they despised the government army and did not go to war immediately.

古文：至晚，因风帆上，前后连咽；西人离沮，无复斗心，戊辰，台军至，忌置洲尾，列舰过江，晦军一时皆溃。
现代文：到了晚上，东风大起，官军的船舰，帆篷满张，陆续抵达，前后相连，塞满江面。谢晦军队的士气涣散，军心沮丧，不再有斗志。戊辰，官军舰队挺进到忌置洲尾，战舰排列着渡过长江，谢晦的军队一触即溃，全军大败。
English: In the evening, the easterly wind picked up, and the ships of the government army, with full sails, arrived one after another, connected back and forth, and filled the river. The morale of Xie Yu's army was scattered, the military spirit was depressed, and there was no more fighting spirit. In the morning, the government army fleet advanced to the end of the Imji Peninsula, and the warships lined up to cross the Yangtze River. Xie Yu's army was defeated at the first touch, and the whole army was defeated.

古文：晦夜出，投巴陵，得小船还江陵。
现代文：谢晦在夜色的掩护下出走，投奔巴陵，找到一艘小船回到江陵。
English: Xie Hui escaped in the middle of the night, ran to Baling, and found a small boat to return to Gangneung.

古文：先是，帝遣雍州刺史刘粹自陆道帅步骑袭江陵，至沙桥；周超帅万馀人逆战，大破之，士众伤死者过半。
现代文：最初，刘宋文帝派遣雍州刺史刘粹从陆路，率领步骑兵袭击江陵，刘粹的军队刚到沙桥，谢晦的司马周超就率军一万多人迎战，刘粹军大败，死伤的士卒在一半以上。
English: At first, Emperor Liu Songwen dispatched Liu Zi, the governor of Yongzhou, to attack Jiangling by land, leading the infantry and cavalry. Liu Zi's army had just arrived at Sand Bridge, and the grateful Sima Zhou Chao led more than 10,000 soldiers to fight. Liu Zi's army was defeated, and more than half of the soldiers were killed or injured.

古文：俄而晦败问至。
现代文：不久，就传来谢晦战败的消息。
English: Soon after, news of Xie Yu's defeat came.

古文：初，晦以粹善，以粹子旷之为参军；帝疑之，王弘曰： 粹无私，必无忧也。 
现代文：最初，谢晦与刘粹私交甚好，并任命刘粹的儿子刘旷之为参军；宋文帝对刘粹的态度，感到怀疑。王弘说： 刘粹没有野心，一定不会出差错。 
English: At first, Xie Hui had a very good personal relationship with Liu Qi, and appointed Liu Qi's son, Liu Kuang, to join the army; Emperor Song Wen was suspicious of Liu Qi's attitude. Wang Hong said: Liu Qi has no ambition, he will not make a mistake.

古文：及受命南讨，一无所顾，帝以此嘉之。
现代文：等到刘粹接受朝廷的命令讨伐谢晦，则一无反顾，宋文帝因此对刘粹倍加赞许。
English: When Liu Zi received the order from the imperial court to fight against Xie Ying, he did not turn his back on him. Therefore, Emperor Song highly praised Liu Zi.

古文：晦亦不杀旷之，遣还粹所。
现代文：谢晦也并没有因此杀害刘旷之，反而把他送回到刘粹那里。
English: Xie Hui did not kill Liu Guangzhi for this, but instead sent him back to Liu Zichong.

古文：丙子，帝自芜湖东还。
现代文：丙子，刘宋文帝从芜湖东归建康。
English: Liu Songwen Emperor returned to Jiankang from the east of Wuhu.

古文：晦至江陵，无它处分，唯愧谢周超而已。
现代文：谢晦逃回江陵，也没有做其他部署，只是惭愧地向周超道歉。
English: Xie Yue fled to Jiangling, there was no other measures, only to say with shame that he was sorry to Zhou Chao.

古文：其夜，超舍军单舸诣到彦之降。
现代文：当天晚上，周超舍弃他指挥的军队，一个人乘舟前往到彦之的营地请降。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhou Chao abandoned the army he was commanding and went by boat to Yan's camp to surrender.

古文：晦从散略尽，乃携其弟遯等七骑北走。
现代文：谢晦的部将全部散尽，于是，谢晦携同他的弟弟谢遁等人共七匹马向北逃去。
English: Xie Yao's troops were all scattered, so Xie Yao, his brother Xie Yao and seven other horses fled to the north.

古文：遯肥壮，不能乘马，晦每待之，行不得速。
现代文：谢遁体胖且壮，不能骑马，谢晦常常要停下来等候，因此他们的速度很慢。
English: Xie Qian is fat and strong, and can't ride a horse. Xie Yao often has to stop and wait, so their speed is very slow.

古文：己卯，至安陆延头，为戍主光顺之所执，槛送建康。
现代文：己卯谢晦一行才逃到安陆延头，被当地戍守的将领光顺之俘虏，用囚车送到京师建康。
English: Ji Ushe and his party only escaped to Anlu Yankou, where they were captured by the local warlord, Guangshun, and sent to Jiankang in a prison wagon.

古文：到彦之至马头，何承天自归。
现代文：到彦之的军队进抵马头，谢晦的谘议参军何承天投降。
English: Zuihiko's army entered and arrived at Ma Tau, and He Jingtian's advice to join the army resulted in his surrender.

古文：彦之因监荆州府事，以周超为参军；刘粹以沙桥之败告，乃执之。
现代文：到彦之于是主持荆州政务，任命周超为参军，等到刘粹把沙桥之败的情形上报，才逮捕了周超。
English: Therefore, Yan Yan presided over the Jingzhou government affairs and appointed Zhou Chao to join the army. It was not until Liu Zi reported the defeat of the Sand Bridge that Zhou Chao was arrested.

古文：于是诛晦、爵、遯及其兄弟之子，并同党孔延秀、周超等。
现代文：于是，刘义隆下令斩谢晦、谢、谢遁以及他们兄弟的儿子，同时被斩的还有谢晦的同党孔延秀、周超等人。
English: As a result, Liu Yilong ordered the beheading of Xie Xie, Xie, Xie Yao and their brothers' sons, as well as Xie Xie's fellow party members Kong Yanxiu, Zhou Chao and others.

古文：晦女彭城王妃被发徒跣，与晦诀曰： 大丈夫当横尸战场，奈何狼藉都市！ 
现代文：谢晦的女儿、彭城王妃披散头发，光着双脚，与父亲诀别，她说： 大丈夫应当战死沙场，为什么要行为不法以致在都城的市上被斩！ 
English: Xie Yu's daughter, Princess Pengcheng, wore her hair loose and her feet bare as she bade farewell to her father. She said: "It's all right for a man to die on the battlefield, but why should he be beheaded for doing something illegal in the capital's market!

古文：庾登之以无任，免官禁锢；何承天及南蛮行参军新兴王玄谟等皆见原。
现代文：庾登之因为在谢晦军中没有实权，所以被免除官职，监禁起来。何承天及南蛮行参军、新兴人王玄谟等都得到朝廷的赦免。
English: Because he had no real power in Xie Yu's army, Xu Dengzhi was relieved of his official duties and imprisoned. He Chengtian and Nanban Xing joined the army, and the new king of men, Xuan Mu, were all pardoned by the imperial court.

古文：晦之走也，左右皆弃之。唯延陵盖追随不舍，帝以盖为镇军功曹督护。
现代文：谢晦败走的时候，左右亲信都抛弃他各自逃命，唯独延陵盖一人追随谢晦不肯离去，刘宋文帝又命延陵盖为镇军功曹督护。
English: When Xie Yu was defeated and fled, his right and left cronies all abandoned him and fled for their lives, except for Yan Ling Gai, who followed Xie Yu and refused to leave. Emperor Liu Songwen also ordered Yan Ling Gai to be the town's military hero.

古文：晦之起兵，引魏南蛮校尉王慧龙为授。
现代文：谢晦起兵之时，曾连络北魏南蛮校尉王慧龙为外援。
English: When Xie Yu raised an army, he contacted the Northern Wei Southern Barbarian Captain Wang Huilong for foreign aid.

古文：慧龙帅众一万拔思陵戍，进围项城。闻晦败，乃退。
现代文：王慧龙率军队一万人，攻陷思陵戍，进而包围了项城，等到听说谢晦战败，才退回北魏境内。
English: Wang Huilong led an army of ten thousand people, captured Shiling, and then surrounded Xiangcheng. When he heard that Xie Yu was defeated, he returned to the territory of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：益州刺史张茂度受诏袭江陵；晦败，茂度军始至白帝。
现代文：益州刺史张茂度也曾接受文帝的诏书去袭击江陵；谢晦战败的时候，张茂度的军队才到白帝城。
English: Zhang Maodu, the governor of Yizhou, also accepted the edict of Emperor Wen to attack Jiangling; when Xie Yu was defeated, Zhang Maudu's army only arrived at Baidicheng.

古文：议者疑茂度有贰心，帝以茂度弟邵有诚节，赦不问，使还。
现代文：当时的人怀疑张茂对朝廷有二心，刘宋文帝却因为张茂度的弟弟张忠诚，有节操，对张茂度的行为不加追究，只是派人接替而召他回京师。
English: At that time, people suspected that Zhang Maodou was not loyal to the imperial court, but Emperor Liu Songwen, because Zhang Maodou's younger brother Zhang was loyal and disciplined, did not investigate Zhang Maodou's behavior, but sent someone to replace him and called him back to Beijing.

古文：三月，辛己，帝还建康，征谢灵运为秘书监，颜延之为中书侍郎，赏遇甚厚。
现代文：三月，辛己，刘宋文帝返回建康，征召谢灵运担任秘书监、颜延之为中书侍郎，赏赐和礼遇都非常优厚。
English: In March, Emperor Xinzhi and Liu Songwen returned to Jiankang, and summoned Xie Lingyun to serve as secretary supervisor, and Yan Yan to serve as secretary. The rewards and courtesy were very generous.

古文：帝以慧琳道人善谈论，因与议朝廷大事，遂参权要，宾客辐凑，门车常有数十两，四方赠赂相系，方筵七八，座上恒满。
现代文：文帝因为慧琳道人擅长谈论分析，所以常跟他商讨国家大事，慧琳道人因此得到参预国家机要的机会。于是，宾客们四面八方争先恐后地拥到慧琳道人的门庭，门前等侯召见的车常有数十辆之多，各地送来的财物，前后相接，每天的筵席就有七八桌，座位常满。
English: Since Emperor Wen was good at discussing and analyzing, he often discussed national affairs with her, which gave her the opportunity to attend important state occasions. As a result, guests flocked to her courtyard in all directions. There were often dozens of cars waiting in front of the door, and goods from all over the country were coming and going. There were seven or eight tables at the banquet every day, and the seats were often full.

古文：琳著高屐，披貂裘，置通呈、书佐。
现代文：慧琳道人脚穿高齿木屐，身披貂皮外衣，在府中设立负责传达的通呈官和掌书翰的官佐。
English: Wearing high-toothed wooden clogs on her feet and a mink coat, Hui Lin Dao set up an official in charge of communication and an official assistant in charge of books in the government.

古文：会稽孔觊尝诣之，遇宾客填咽，暄凉而已。
现代文：会稽人孔觊曾经拜访慧琳道人，正遇宾客拥挤，两个人只能寒暄两句，不能多说别的话。
English: The auditor of the association, Kong Hao, once visited Hui Lin Daojin, and when the guests were crowded, the two of them could only exchange a few words of greeting, and could not say anything else.

古文：觊慨然曰： 遂有黑衣宰相，可谓冠屦失所矣！ 
现代文：孔觊感慨叹息，说： 如今穿黑衣服的和尚都做了宰相，这真可以说衣冠文士失所了！ 
English: Kong Yu sighed with emotion and said, "Nowadays, monks wearing black clothes have all become prime ministers, which can truly be said that the crown scribes have lost their way!"

古文：夏，五月，乙未，以檀道济为征南大将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，到彦之为南豫州刺史。
现代文：夏季，五月，乙未，刘宋文帝任命檀道济为征南大将军、开府仪同三司和江州刺史；擢升到彦之为南豫州刺史。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Dang Daoji as the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and the General of the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：遣散骑常待袁渝等十六人分行诸州郡县，观察吏政，访求民隐；又使郡县各言损益。
现代文：又派遣散骑常侍袁渝等十六人，分别巡察各州郡县，考察官员的政绩，访求民间无处申诉的疾苦。
English: He also dispatched 16 people, including Yuan Yu, a knight-errant, to inspect each prefecture and county, inspect the political achievements of officials, and visit the sufferings of the people who have nowhere to appeal.

古文：丙午，上临延贤堂听讼，自是每岁三讯。
现代文：刘宋文帝还命郡县上疏奏报当地的行政得失。丙午，刘宋文帝亲自到延贤堂听取诉讼。从此，每年前来三次。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th, Liu Songwen himself went to Yanxian Hall to listen to the lawsuit. Since then, he has come three times a year.

古文：左仆射王敬弘，性恬淡，有重名；关署文案，初不省读。
现代文：左仆射王敬弘，性情恬然，甘于淡泊，在朝廷内外享有盛誉。
English: His left-hand man, Shoo Takahiro, was a quiet character and liked to keep a low profile. He enjoyed a high reputation inside and outside the court.

古文：尝预听讼，上问以疑狱，敬弘不对。
现代文：可是在签署文稿时，从来不事先审阅。
English: However, when signing a document, it is never reviewed in advance.

古文：上变色，问左右： 何故不以讯牒副仆射？ 
现代文：有一次，他随同刘宋文帝听取民间诉讼，文帝就一件有疑问的案件询问王敬弘，王敬弘回答不出。
English: Once, he accompanied Liu Songwen to listen to a civil lawsuit. Emperor Wen asked Wang Jinghong about a questionable case, and Wang Jinghong could not answer.

古文：敬弘曰： 臣乃得讯牒读之，正自不解。 
现代文：文帝脸色大变，问左右侍臣： 你们为什么不把案卷的副本送给王仆射？ 王敬弘回答说： 我已看到了案卷的副本，可是看不懂。 
English: Emperor Wen's face changed dramatically, and he asked his attendants: "Why didn't you give a copy of the case file to Wang Fuxia?" Wang Jinghong replied: "I have seen a copy of the case file, but I don't understand it.

古文：上甚不悦，虽加礼敬，不复以时务及之。
现代文：文帝非常不高兴，虽然对他仍然礼敬，却不再与他讨论国家大事。
English: Emperor Wen was very unhappy. Although he still treated him with respect, he no longer discussed national affairs with him.

古文：六月，以右卫将军王华为中护军，待中如故。
现代文：六月，刘宋文帝任命右卫将军王华为中护军，同时仍兼任侍中。
English: In June, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed the right guard general Wang Huai as the middle guard, while still serving as a chamberlain.

古文：华以王弘辅政，王昙首为上所亲任，与己相埒，自谓力用不尽，每叹息曰： 宰相顿有数人，天下何由得治！ 
现代文：王华认为，司徒王弘是文帝的辅弼之臣，侍中王昙首又是皇上十分信任的心腹，他们的地位与自己相当。因此，王华自以为自己的才能，无法完全施展，他常常叹息着说： 朝中宰相，一时之间多达数人，天下怎么能够治理！ 
English: According to Wang Hua, Wang Hong, the tutor, was the aide-de-camp of Emperor Wen, and Wang Xizhe, the chamberlain, was the trusted confidant of the emperor. Their status was equivalent to his own. Therefore, Wang Hua thought that he could not fully display his talent. He often sighed and said: How can the world be governed by the prime ministers of the Middle Kingdom, when there are only a few of them at a time?

古文：是时，宰相无常官，唯人主所与议论政事、委以机密者，皆宰相也，故华有是言。
现代文：当时，朝中没有固定的宰相，只要谁与皇帝讨论国家大事，国家机要大事交给谁办，谁就是宰相，所以王华才有这样的议论。
English: At that time, there was no fixed prime minister in the imperial court. As long as whoever discussed national affairs with the emperor, and whoever was assigned to handle the important affairs of the state apparatus, was the prime minister, Wang Hua only had such a discussion.

古文：亦有任侍中而不为宰相者；然尚书令、仆，中书监、令，侍中，侍郎，给事中，皆当时要官也。
现代文：当时也有任侍中的职务而不是宰相的人；然而，尚书令、仆射、中书监、中书令、侍中、侍郎、给事中等都是重要的官职。
English: At that time, there were also people who held the position of Samurai-chū, but not the position of prime minister; however, Shosho-rei, Hokusha, Chusho-ken, Chusho-rei, Samurai-chū, Samurai-ro, and Gyoji-chū were all important official positions.

古文：华与刘湛、王昙首、殷景仁俱为侍中，风力局干，冠冕一时。
现代文：王华与刘湛、王昙首、殷景仁都担任侍中的职务，他们风采卓然，精明干练，荣显一时。
English: Wang Hua, Liu Zhan, Wang Xizhou and Yin Jingren all held the position of chamberlain. They were elegant, shrewd and capable, and they were momentarily honored.

古文：上尝与四人于合殿宴饮，甚悦。
现代文：刘宋文帝曾经在合殿设宴款待他们四人，与他们共同欢饮，特别高兴。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen once held a banquet for the four of them in the hall of residence, and was particularly pleased to drink with them.

古文：既罢出，上目遂良久，叹曰： 此四贤，一时之秀，同管喉脣，恐后世难继也！ 
现代文：筵席散后，文帝目送他们好久好久，叹息道： 这四位贤才，是一时之俊杰，一起作为我的喉唇，恐怕后世很难再出现。 
English: After the banquet was over, Emperor Wen looked at them for a long time and sighed, "These four sages are only good for a short time. Together, they are my throat and lips. I'm afraid it will be difficult for them to reappear in the future."

古文：黄门侍郎谢弘微与华等皆上所重，当时号曰五臣。
现代文：黄门侍郎谢弘微与王华等都深得刘宋文帝的重用，当时他与王华、刘湛、王昙首、殷景仁等号称五臣。
English: Huangmen's attendants Xie Hongwei and Wang Hua were deeply used by Emperor Liu Songwen. At that time, he and Wang Hua, Liu Zhan, Wang Shanshou, and Yin Jingren were known as the Five Ministers.

古文：弘微，琰之从孙也。
现代文：谢弘微，是谢琰的侄孙。
English: Xie Hongwei is Xie Yao's grandnephew.

古文：精神端审，时然后言，婢仆之前不妄语笑，由是尊卑大小，敬之若神。
现代文：他一向端重严谨，在适当的时机，才开口说话，在仆役奴婢面前，也从不随便说笑，因此不论尊卑大小，都象对待神明一样恭敬他。
English: He has always been very strict, and only opens his mouth at the right time, and never makes jokes in front of servants and slaves, so no matter how big or small, they respect him as if he were a god.

古文：从叔混特重之，常曰： 微子异不伤物，同不害正，吾无间然。 
现代文：他的堂叔谢混对他尤其推崇敬重，常说： 谢弘微这人，与别人相异时不会伤害别人，与别人相同时也不会违背正道，对他我是没什么毛病可挑的了。 
English: His uncle, Xie Hongwei, held him in high esteem. He often said, "Xie Hongwei is a person who does not hurt others when he is different from others, and does not violate the righteous path when he is the same as others. I have nothing bad to say about him."

古文：上欲封王昙首、王华等，拊御床曰： 此坐非卿兄弟，无复今日。 
现代文：刘宋文帝打算封王昙首、王华等人爵位，他抚摸着御座说： 这个宝座，如果不是你们兄弟，我今天就坐不上。 
English: Emperor Liu Songwen planned to confer peerages on Wang Xizhou, Wang Hua and others. He stroked the throne and said, "This throne, if it were not for you brothers, I would not be able to sit on it today."

古文：因出封诏以示之。
现代文：于是，他就拿出封爵的诏书给他们看。
English: So he took out his knighthood certificate and showed it to them.

古文：昙首固辞曰： 近日之事，赖陛下英明，罪人斯得。臣等岂可因国之灾以为身幸！ 
现代文：王昙首坚决辞让说： 近来发生的事，全仰赖陛下英明决断，使罪人得到应有的惩罚；我们怎么可以因为国家的灾难，而自己得到好处！ 
English: Wang Xizhou resolutely conceded and said, "What has happened recently is entirely dependent on Your Majesty's wise decision, so that the guilty will receive the punishment they deserve; how can we benefit ourselves because of the country's disaster!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：文帝才作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：魏主诏问公卿： 今当用兵，赫连、蠕蠕，二国何先？ 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘下诏书遍问朝中文武大臣： 现在我们要出兵讨伐赫连和蠕蠕，应当先讨伐哪一国？ 
English: The Emperor of the Northern Wei asked the Chinese Minister of Military Affairs of the DPRK: Now that we are going to send troops to fight against Khelene and Cormac, which country should we fight first?

古文：长孙嵩、长孙翰、奚斤皆曰： 赫连土著，未能为患。
现代文：太尉长孙嵩、司徒长孙翰、司空奚斤都说： 赫连氏土生土长，暂时还不足为患。
English: Sun Song, the captain, Sun Han, the head of the scouts, and Sun Jianjin, the chief of the scouts, all said, "The native son of the Heren clan is not enough for the time being.

古文：不如先伐蠕蠕，若追而及之，可以大获；不及则猎于阴山，取其禽兽皮角以充军实。 
现代文：不如先伐蠕蠕，如果能够追到他们，可以大获全胜；如果追不到，我们则到阴山作一次大狩猎，可以获取大批禽兽的毛皮骨角，用来充实军用物资。 
English: If we can chase them, we can win a great victory; if we can't chase them, we can go to the gloomy mountains for a big hunt, and can obtain a large number of animal fur and bone horns, which can be used to enrich military supplies.

古文：太常崔浩曰： 蠕蠕鸟集兽逃，举大众追之则不能及，轻兵追之又不足以制敌。
现代文：太常崔浩说： 蠕蠕来的时候，象飞鸟一样霎时集结；去的时候，也象野兽一样霎时逃散。用大军追赶，一定不会追上，如果用少量的军队追赶，又无法把他们制服。
English: Too often, Cui Hao said: When creeping things come, they gather like birds; when they go, they scatter like beasts. If you chase them with a large army, you will not catch up, and if you chase them with a small army, you will not be able to subdue them.

古文：赫连氏土地不过千里，政刑残虐，人神所弃，宜先伐之。 
现代文：赫连氏土地不过一千里，政治残暴，刑法酷烈，得不到上天的保佑和人民的拥护，应当先行讨伐赫连。 
English: The Khelian land is only a thousand miles away, the politics is brutal, the criminal law is harsh, and they will not receive the blessing of heaven and the support of the people. They should first fight against Khelian.

古文：尚书刘絜、武京候安原请先伐燕。
现代文：尚书刘、武京侯安原则请求先行讨伐北燕。
English: Shangshu Liu and Wujing Houan requested that Beiyan be defeated first.

古文：于是魏主自云中西巡至五原，因畋于阴山，东至和兜山。
现代文：于是，北魏国主拓拔焘从云中向西视察，抵达五原，到阴山狩猎，又往东抵达和兜山。
English: As a result, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tu Bajun, inspected from the clouds to the west, arrived at the Wuhuan, went hunting in the Yin Mountain, and arrived in the east and drove around the mountain.

古文：秋，八月，还平城。
现代文：秋季，八月，拓跋焘才返回平城。
English: In the autumn, in August, Tuobao returned to Pingcheng.

古文：诏殿中将军吉恒聘于魏。
现代文：刘宋文帝下诏，派殿中将军吉恒出使北魏。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen issued an edict to send General Ji Heng to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：燕太子永卒，立次子翼为太子。
现代文：北燕太子冯永去世，封次子冯翼为太子。
English: Feng Yong, the Prince of Northern Yan, died, and Feng Ying, the second son of Feng, became the prince.

古文：秦王炽磐伐河西，至廉川，遣太子暮末等步骑三万攻西安，不克，又攻番禾。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐讨代北凉，大军抵达廉川，乞伏炽磐派遣太子乞伏暮末等率领步、骑兵共三万人，进攻西安，不能攻克，于是又转攻番禾。
English: The Western Qin king, Qibaoqiao, sent the prince Qibaoqiao to lead a total of 30,000 cavalry to attack Xi'an, but could not conquer it, so he turned to attack Fanhe.

古文：河西王蒙逊发兵御之，用遣使说夏主，使乘虚袭枹罕。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊出军迎战，极力抵御，同时又派使臣出使夏国游说，请夏国国主赫连昌乘西秦国内空虚之际，袭击西秦的都城罕。
English: At the same time, he sent envoys to lobby Xia, asking the ruler of Xia, Herenchang, to take advantage of the emptiness in West Qin to attack the capital of West Qin.

古文：夏主遣征南大将军呼卢古将骑二万攻苑川，车骑大将军韦伐将骑三万攻南安。
现代文：夏国国主赫连昌派遣征南大将军呼卢古率领骑兵二万人，进攻西秦的苑川；派车骑大将军韦伐率领骑兵三万人，进攻南安。
English: Emperor He Lianchang of Xia dispatched General Hu Lugu with 20,000 cavalry to attack Yuanchuan in West Qin; General Wei Hua with 30,000 cavalry to attack Nan'an.

古文：炽磐闻之，引归。
现代文：西秦国王乞伏炽磬听到这个消息，立即从北凉撤军回国。
English: Upon hearing this news, the King of Western Qin immediately withdrew his troops from Beiyang and returned to China.

古文：九月，徙其境内老弱、畜产于浇河及莫河仍寒川，留左丞相昙达守枹罕。
现代文：九月，乞伏炽磐把境内的老弱妇孺和家畜，集中迁徙到浇河郡和莫河的仍寒川，同时又命令左丞相乞伏昙达留守京师罕。
English: In September, Gui Fu Blazing Rock concentrated the old and weak women and children and livestock in the territory to Gehe County and Mohe's Yosamsangcheon, and ordered the Minister of the Left to stay in Beijing Shikhan.

古文：韦伐攻拔南安，获秦秦州刺史翟爽、南安太守李亮。
现代文：夏国的车骑大将军韦伐率众攻陷南安城，生擒西秦秦州刺史翟爽和南安太守李亮。
English: Xia's cavalry general Wei Var led the crowd to attack Nan'an City, and the West Qin, Qin State, and Nan'an Taizhou Li Liang were defeated.

古文：吐谷浑握逵等帅部众二万馀落叛秦，奔昂川，附于吐谷浑王慕璝。
现代文：隶属西秦的吐谷浑部落酋长慕容握逵率所属二万帐落背叛西秦，逃到昂川，归附了吐谷浑可汗慕容慕。
English: The chief of the Tugu Hun tribe, Murong, who belonged to the Western Qin, betrayed the Western Qin and fled to the Angchuan River, where he was joined by the Tugu Hun Khan, Murong.

古文：大旱，蝗。
现代文：天下大旱，出现蝗灾。
English: There was a great drought and a plague of locusts.

古文：左光禄大夫范泰上表曰： 妇人有三从之义，无自专之道。
现代文：刘宋左光禄大夫范泰上疏说： 女子有三从的大义，而没有自作主张的道理。
English: Liu Song Zuoguanglu's doctor, Fan Tai Shangsuo, said: Women have the great virtue of having three followers, but they do not have the right to make their own claims.

古文：谢晦妇女犹在尚方，唯陛下留意。 
现代文：现在谢晦家的妇女仍被羁押在尚方作坊里做苦工，敬请陛下留意。 
English: Now, the women of Xie Yue's family are still detained in Shangfang's workshop to do hard labor, please pay attention to your majesty.

古文：有诏原之。
现代文：于是，刘宋文帝下诏赦免了她们。
English: As a result, Emperor Liu Songwen issued an edict to pardon them.

古文：魏主闻夏世祖殂，诸子相图，国人不安，欲伐之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘听到夏国主赫连勃勃去世，儿子们内哄，民心不安的消息，打算征讨夏国。
English: Northern Wei ruler Tuobao heard the news of the death of Xia ruler Herengong, his sons' infighting, and the people's anxiety, and planned to conquer Xia.

古文：长孙嵩等皆曰： 彼若城守，以逸待劳，大檀闻之，乘虚入寇，此危道也。 
现代文：长孙嵩等人都说： 夏国如果围绕城池固守，以逸待劳，而柔然汗国的郁久闾大檀听说了这一消息，会乘我们国内空虚，大举进攻，这可是危险的策略。 
English: Eldest grandson Song and others said: If the summer country sticks around the city and waits for trouble, and the gentle Khan country hears this news, it will take advantage of the emptiness in our country and attack in a big way. This is a dangerous strategy.

古文：崔浩曰： 往年以来，荧惑再守羽林、钩己而行，其占秦亡。
现代文：太常崔浩说： 说起当年，火星两次紧傍着羽林星和钩己星运转，算卦占卜都预示着秦国一定灭亡。
English: Too often, Cui Hao said: Speaking of that year, Mars twice orbited close to Haurin and Hooki, and all the divination and fortune-telling foreshadowed the certain demise of Qin.

古文：今年五星并出东方，利于西伐。
现代文：今年，金、木、水、火、土五星同时出现在东方，显示西征一定胜利。
English: This year, the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire and earth appeared in the east at the same time, showing that the western expedition was a certain victory.

古文：天人相应，不可失也。 
现代文：上天的旨意和凡世的人心是互相呼应的，良机不可失去。 
English: The will of heaven and the human heart are in harmony. This is a golden opportunity that must not be lost.

古文：嵩固争之，帝大怒，责嵩在官贪污，命武士顿辱之。
现代文：长孙嵩仍然坚持不能西征，拓跋焘暴跳如雷，斥责长孙嵩做官贪赃枉法，命令武士强按他的头，猛烈触地，殴打侮辱。
English: The eldest Sun Song still insisted that he could not go to the West, and he jumped up and down violently, rebuked the eldest Sun Song for being a corrupt official, ordered the samurai to forcefully press his head, violently hit the ground, and beat and insult him.

古文：于是遣司空奚斤帅四万五千人袭蒲阪，宋兵将军周几是由万人袭陕城，以河东太守薛谨为乡导。
现代文：于是，拓跋焘派遣司空奚斤率领四万五千人袭击夏国的蒲阪；派宋兵将军周几率一万人袭击陕城；命令河东太守薛谨为大军的向导。
English: As a result, Tuobao dispatched Sikuo Shujin to lead forty-five thousand people to attack Busan in Xia; sent Song general Zhou Qi to attack Shaanxi with ten thousand people; and ordered Hedong governor Xue Jian to be the guide of the army.

古文：谨，辨之子也。
现代文：薛谨是薛辩的儿子。
English: Xue Zhen is the son of Xue Fen.

古文：魏主欲以中书博士平棘李顺总前驱之兵，访于崔浩，浩曰： 顺诚有筹略，然臣与之婚姻，深知其为人果于去就，不可专委。 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘打算让中书博士、平棘人李顺全权指挥前锋部队。他征求崔浩的意见，崔浩说： 李顺确实很有谋略，善于筹划，但是，我与李顺是姻亲，深知他为人非常自信，不可委任他要职。 
English: Tuobao, the head of the Northern Wei state, planned to give Li Shun, a doctor of Chinese literature and a thorn in the side of Ping, the full power to command the forward troops. He sought the opinion of Cui Hao. Cui Hao said: Li Shun is indeed very strategic and good at planning, but I am related to Li Shun by marriage. I know that he is very confident and cannot appoint him to the post.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：拓跋焘于是停止了他的任命。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：浩与顺由是有隙。
现代文：崔浩和李顺之间因此产生了隔阂。
English: This created a rift between Cui Hao and Li Shun.

古文：冬，十月，丁巳，魏主发平城。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁己，拓跋焘一行从平城出发。
English: In the winter, in October, Ding Zi and Tuo Bao and his party set out from Pingcheng.

古文：秦左丞相昙达与夏呼卢古战于嵻良山，昙达兵败。
现代文：西秦左丞相乞伏昙达与夏国的征南大将军呼卢古在山会战，乞伏昙达兵败。
English: The Western Qin Minister of the Left, Cao Cao, and the Southern Expeditionary Army General of Xia Province, Hulugu, fought in the mountains, and Cao Cao was defeated.

古文：十一月，呼卢古、韦伐进攻枹罕。
现代文：十一月，呼卢古与车骑大将军韦伐合兵进攻西秦的都城罕。
English: In November, Hulugu attacked the capital of Western Qin with the cavalry general Wei Hua.

古文：秦王炽磐迁保定连。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐迁都定连，率众据城死守。
English: The king of Western Qin begged for the relocation of the fiery rock to the capital Dinglian, and led the people to defend the city.

古文：呼卢古入南城，镇京将军赵寿生帅死士三百人力战却之。
现代文：夏国大将呼卢古攻入罕南城。西秦镇京将军赵寿生率领敢死队三百人，浴血抵抗，击退呼卢古。
English: General Xia Guo attacked Hulugu into Hannan City. West Qin Zhenjing General Zhao Shousheng led a death squad of three hundred people to resist bloodshed and repel Hulugu.

古文：呼卢古、韦伐又攻沙州刺史出连虔于湟河，虔遣后将军乞伏万年击败之。
现代文：呼卢古、韦伐又合兵攻打沙州刺史出连虔据守的湟河。出连虔派遣后将军乞伏万年击退了呼卢古和韦伐的进攻。
English: In addition, Hulugu and Weihua joined forces to attack Shazhou's stronghold of Shilianqiao. After being dispatched by Shilianqiao, the general fought off Hulugu's and Weihua's attack.

古文：又攻西平，执安西将军库洛干，坑战士五千馀人，掠民二万馀户而去。
现代文：呼卢古、韦伐率军再攻西平，俘获了西秦的安西将军库洛干，活埋了西秦战士五千余人，掠走居民二万余户，班师回国。
English: Hulugu and Wei Wa led the army to attack Xiping again, captured West Qin's Anxi General Kulogan, buried more than five thousand West Qin soldiers alive, plundered more than twenty thousand households, and returned to China.

古文：仇池氐杨兴平求内附。
现代文：仇池氐族部落酋长杨兴平请求归附刘宋。
English: Yang Xingping, chief of the Qiuqi Yi tribe, requested to be annexed to Liu Song.

古文：梁、南秦二州刺史吉翰遣始平太守宠咨据武兴。
现代文：刘宋梁州、南秦州二州刺史吉翰派始平太守庞谘进军占据武兴。
English: Liu Song, Liang Zhou, and the two states of South Qin Province sent Shi Shi Jihang to occupy Wu Xing.

古文：氐王杨产遣其弟难当将兵拒咨，咨击走之。
现代文：氐王杨玄派他的弟弟杨难当率军迎击庞谘，被庞谘击退。
English: The warlord Yang Xuan sent his brother Yang Nantang to lead an army against Pang Zhi, but Pang Zhi repulsed him.

古文：魏主行至君子津，会天暴寒，冰合，戊寅，师轻骑二万济河袭统万。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘，抵达君子津，正遇天气酷寒，气温急骤下降，黄河冰封。戊寅，拓跋焘亲自统率轻骑兵二万人，踏冰渡过黄河，袭击夏国都城统万。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Guo, arrived in Jiu Zi Tsu, when the weather was extremely cold, the temperature dropped sharply, and the Yellow River was frozen. In Wu Yin, Tuoba Guo personally led 20,000 light cavalry, crossed the Yellow River on the ice, and attacked the summer capital city of Tong Man.

古文：壬午，冬至，夏主方燕群臣，魏师奄至，上下惊扰。
现代文：壬午，冬至，夏王赫连昌正在与文武群臣欢歌宴饮。北魏大军的突然出现，使夏国上下不胜惊恐。
English: At midsummer, the winter solstice, Xia King He Lianchang was feasting and drinking with his courtiers. The sudden appearance of the Northern Wei army caused great consternation in Xia.

古文：魏主军于黑水，去城三十馀里。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘驻军在黑水，距统万城只有三十余里。
English: The Northern Wei ruler Tuobao garrisoned troops in Heishui, only more than 30 miles away from the city of Wancheng.

古文：夏主出战而败，退走入城。
现代文：赫连昌率兵迎战，大败而回，急向城中撤退。
English: He Lianchang led his troops into battle, was soundly defeated, and hastily retreated into the city.

古文：门未及闭，内三郎豆代田帅众乘胜入西宫，焚其西门；宫门闭，代田逾宫垣而出。
现代文：城门还没有来得及关闭，北魏禁军内三郎豆代田率众乘胜攻进西宫，纵火焚烧了西宫城门；夏军关闭了所有的宫门，豆代田跳出宫墙撤退。
English: Before the city gate could be closed, the Northern Wei Forbidden Army led by Doushirota, a member of the Inner Council, took advantage of the victory to attack the West Palace, setting fire to the West Palace gate; the Xia Army closed all the palace gates, and Doushirota jumped out of the palace wall and retreated.

古文：魏主拜代田勇武将军。
现代文：拓跋焘擢升豆代田为勇武将军。
English: Tuoba Zhao promoted Doudai Tian to the rank of general.

古文：魏军夜宿城北，癸未，分兵四掠，杀获数万，得牛马十馀万。
现代文：这天夜里，北魏军队在城北扎营。癸未，北魏军队四处出动，抢夺掳掠，斩杀及俘虏夏国军民数万人，缴获牛马十余万头。
English: On this night, the Northern Wei army encamped in the north of the city. In the morning, the Northern Wei army deployed everywhere, robbed and plundered, killed and captured tens of thousands of Xia soldiers and civilians, and captured more than 100,000 heads of cattle and horses.

古文：魏主谓诸将曰： 统万未可得也，它年当与卿等取之。 
现代文：拓跋焘对他手下的各位大将说： 统万城恐怕打不下了，以后跟各位再来攻取。 
English: Tuoba said to the generals under his command, "I'm afraid we can't conquer the whole city. I'll come back later to conquer it with you."

古文：乃徙其民万馀家而还。
现代文：于是，裹胁当地居民一万余户，班师回国。
English: As a result, more than 10,000 households of local residents in Wuzhou were affected, and the teachers returned to China.

古文：夏弘农太守曹达闻周几将至，不战而走。
现代文：夏国的弘农太守曹达听说北魏将军周几率军将要打来，没等大军到达，先弃城逃走。
English: Cao Da, the Hongnong governor of Xia Province, heard that the Northern Wei general Zhou Qianlu and his army were about to arrive. Before the large army arrived, he abandoned the city and fled.

古文：魏师乘胜长驱，遂入三辅。
现代文：北魏军队乘胜长驱直入，迅速深入长安附近的三辅地区。
English: The Northern Wei army drove straight into the victorious Chang'an and quickly penetrated into the Sanfu area near Chang'an.

古文：会几卒于军中，蒲阪守将东平公乙斗闻奚斤将至，遣使诣统万告急。
现代文：不料周几在行军途中去世。夏国镇守蒲阪的守将东平公赫连乙斗听说北魏司空奚斤率领的大军就要到达，派使节往都城统万告急。
English: Unexpectedly, Zhou Jian died on the way to the capital. Dongping Gongheren Yidu, the governor of Busan, the garrison town of Xia Guo, heard that a large army led by the Northern Wei Sikuo Shujin was about to arrive, and sent an envoy to the capital in a hurry.

古文：使者至统万，魏军已围其城；还，告乙斗曰： 统万已败矣。 
现代文：使者到统万时，看到北魏的大军已经包围统万，便回去报告赫连乙斗： 统万已经被攻陷。 
English: When the envoy arrived at Tongwan, he saw that the great army of the Northern Wei Dynasty had encircled Tongwan, so he went back to report to Heren Yidu: Tongwan has been captured.

古文：乙斗惧，弃城西奔长安，斤遂克蒲坂。
现代文：赫连乙斗惊惧不已，放弃蒲阪城，向西逃往长安。奚斤于是攻克了蒲阪。
English: Horrified, Heren Yito abandoned the city of Busan and fled west to Chang'an. Shinkin then conquered Busan.

古文：夏主之弟助兴先守长安，乙斗至，与助兴弃长安，西奔安定。
现代文：夏王赫连昌的弟弟赫连助兴正在镇守长安，赫连乙斗到后，赫连助兴与赫连乙斗放弃长安向西逃往安定。
English: Xia Wang Herenshang's younger brother, Herenshu Xing, was guarding Chang'an. After Herenshu A arrived, Herenshu Xing and Herenshu A abandoned Chang'an and fled westward to stability.

古文：十二月，斤入长安，秦、雍氐羌皆诣斤降。
现代文：十二月，奚斤率军进入长安，夏国秦州、雍州所属的氐族部落和羌族部落，全向奚斤投降。
English: In December, Shujin led his army into Chang'an. The Qin and Yao tribes of Xia, Qinzhou and Yongzhou all surrendered to Shujin.

古文：河西王蒙逊及氐王杨玄闻之，皆遣使附魏。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊和氐王杨玄听到这个消息，也都派遣使臣向北魏帝国归附。
English: Upon hearing this news, King Deshu Mengxun and King Yang Xuan of Northern Lianghe also sent envoys to join the Northern Wei Empire.

古文：前吴郡太守徐佩之聚党百馀人，谋以明年正会于殿中作乱，事觉，壬戌，收斩之。
现代文：刘宋前吴郡太守徐佩之，集结党羽一百余人，阴谋策划明年元旦朝会时，在殿中发动叛乱，事情泄漏。壬戌，逮捕了徐佩之，斩首。
English: Xu Peizhi, the former governor of Wu County, Liu Song, gathered more than a hundred party members and plotted to launch a rebellion in the palace during the New Year's Day meeting of the imperial court next year, and the matter was leaked. Ren Yu arrested Xu Peizhi and beheaded him.

古文：营阳太妃张氏卒。
现代文：刘宋营阳太妃张氏去世。
English: Liu Songyingyang, the Dowager Empress Zhang, passed away.

古文：秦征南将军吉毘镇南漒，陇西人辛澹帅户三千据城逐毘，毘走还枹罕，澹南奔亿池。
现代文：西秦征南将军乞伏吉毗镇守南，陇西人辛澹率领部众三千户占据南城，驱逐乞伏吉毗，乞伏吉毗逃回罕，辛澹向东南撤退，逃往仇池。
English: The Western Qin general who wanted to conquer the South besieged the town of Qiwu Jivi to guard the South, and the Shaanxi people led by Xin Xin occupied the South Town and expelled Qiwu Jivi, Qiwu Jivi fled back to Han, and Xin Xin retreated to the southeast and fled to Quchi.

古文：魏初得中原，民多逃隐。
现代文：北魏最初占领中原时，当地的居民大多逃亡、隐藏。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty first occupied the Central Plains, most of the local residents fled and hid.

古文：天兴中，诏采诸漏户，令输缯帛；于是自占为茧罗觳户者甚众，不隶郡县，赋役不均。
现代文：天兴年间，拓跋下诏清查这些没有纳入户籍的人家，命他们缴纳绸缎布匹。于是，自己申报缴纳绸缎布匹的人家非常多，不隶属任何郡县，使赋税徭役很不均匀。
English: During the Heian period, Emperor Tuoba issued an edict to investigate the homes of those people who were not included in the household register and ordered them to pay the silk cloth tax. As a result, there were many people who declared themselves to pay the silk cloth tax and did not belong to any county or prefecture, so the tax collection was very uneven.

古文：是岁，始诏一切罢之，以属郡县。
现代文：这一年，北魏国主拓跋焘下诏停止一切清查，将上述人家隶属郡县。
English: In the same year, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba, issued an edict to stop all investigations and subordinate the above-mentioned people to counties.

古文：太祖文皇帝上之上元嘉四年春，正月，辛巳，帝祀南郊。
现代文：元嘉四年春季正月，辛己，刘宋文帝前往都城建康南郊，祭祀天神。
English: In the spring of the first month of the fourth year of the Yuan Jia, Xin Zi and Emperor Liu Songwen went to the southern suburb of Jiankang, the capital city, to worship Tenjin.

古文：乙酉，魏主还平城。
现代文：乙酉，北魏国主拓跋焘回到平城。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：统万徙民在道多死，能至平城者什才六七。
现代文：从统万强行迁徙的民户在途中死亡甚多，能到达平城的，不过十分之六七。
English: Many of the people who were forcibly relocated from Tongwan died on the way, but only 67 out of every 10 were able to reach Pingcheng.

古文：己亥，魏主如幽州。
现代文：己亥，拓跋焘前往幽州。
English: Ji Hai, Tuobao went to Yuzhou.

古文：夏主遣平原公定帅众二万向长安。
现代文：夏王赫连昌派遣平原公赫连定率军二万人，准备收复长安。
English: Xia King He Lianchang dispatched Plains King He Lian to lead a regular army of twenty thousand people to prepare to recover Chang'an.

古文：魏主闻之，伐木阴山，大造攻具，再谋伐夏。
现代文：拓跋焘听到消息后，下令砍伐阴山林木，大规模兴造攻城械具，准备第二次进攻夏国。
English: After Tuobao heard the news, he ordered to cut down the forest trees of the shadowy mountains, build large-scale siege equipment, and prepare for the second attack on Xia.

古文：山羌叛秦。
现代文：山地羌族部落背叛了西秦。
English: Mountainous Yi tribes betrayed the Western Qin Dynasty.

古文：二月，秦王炽磐遣左丞相昙达招慰武始诸羌，征南将军吉毘招慰洮阳诸羌。
现代文：二月，西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣左丞相乞伏昙达招抚慰问武始山地羌族部落，又命征南将军乞伏吉毗安抚洮阳各个羌族部落。
English: In February, the Western Qin Emperor Qibujiao sent his left minister, Qibujingda, to solicit condolences from the Qiang tribes in the Wuxi Mountains, and also ordered the southern general, Qibujingbi, to pacify the various Qiang tribes in Fenyang.

古文：羌人执昙达送夏；吉毘为羌所击，奔还，士马死伤者什八九。
现代文：羌族人生擒西秦乞伏昙达，把他献给夏国。乞伏吉毗也受到洮阳羌族的攻击，大败而回，士卒马匹死亡伤残的占十之八九。
English: The Yao people lived in the west of Qin Dynasty and dedicated him to Xia. The Yao Jiwei was also attacked by the Yao people in Shiyang, but they were defeated and turned back. Eight out of ten horses were killed or maimed.

古文：魏主还平城。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘回到平城。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：乙卯，帝如丹徒，己巳，谒京陵。
现代文：乙卯，刘宋文帝前往丹徒。己己，祭拜京陵。
English: Second, Emperor Liu Songwen went to Dantu. He went to worship the imperial mausoleum.

古文：初，高祖既贵，命藏微时耕具以示子孙。
现代文：最初，刘宋武帝在富贵之后，下命把他幼年贫穷微贱时所用耕田农具收藏起来，以展示给子孙。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Liu Songwu, after he became rich, was ordered to collect the farm tools he used when he was poor and humble to show them to his children and grandchildren.

古文：帝至故宫见之，有惭色。
现代文：文帝抵达故宫，看到他父亲早年用过那些耕具，深感惭愧。
English: When Emperor Wen arrived at the Forbidden City, he was deeply ashamed to see that his father had used those farming tools in his early years.

古文：近侍或进曰： 大舜躬耕历山，伯禹亲事水土。
现代文：他身边侍臣中有人进言说： 当年大舜亲自在历山耕田种地，大禹也曾亲自治理水土。
English: One of the courtiers around him said, "In those days, Daju himself cultivated fields in Leshan, and Dayu was also in charge of water and soil.

古文：陛下不睹遗物，安知先帝之至德，稼穑之艰难乎！ 
现代文：陛下不看到这些遗物，怎么能够知道先帝崇高的仁德和耕种的艰难呢！ 
English: Without seeing these relics, how can His Majesty know the former emperor's noble benevolence and the hardships of farming?

古文：三月，丙子，魏主遣高凉王礼镇长安。
现代文：三月，丙子，北魏国主拓跋焘亲自委派高凉王拓跋礼镇守长安。
English: In March, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty personally appointed Gao Liang as the governor of Chang'an.

古文：礼，斤之孙也。
现代文：拓跋礼是拓跋斤的孙子。
English: Tuoba Li is the grandson of Tuoba Jin.

古文：又诏执金吾桓贷造桥于君子津。
现代文：同时又下诏命令执金吾桓贷在君子津建造大桥。
English: At the same time, he issued an imperial edict ordering the executioner, King Gokhan, to build a bridge in Junjitsu.

古文：丁丑，魏广平王连卒。
现代文：丁丑，北魏广平王拓跋连去世。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Northern Wei Guangping King Tuoba Lian passed away.

古文：丁亥，帝还建康。
现代文：丁亥，刘宋文帝刘义隆返回建康。
English: Dinghai, Liu Song, Emperor Liu Yilong returned to Jiankang.

古文：戊子，尚书右仆射郑鲜之卒。
现代文：戊子，刘宋尚书右仆射郑鲜之去世。
English: On the 15th, Shangshu's right-hand man Zheng Xianzhi passed away.

古文：秦王炽磐以辅国将军段晖为凉州刺史，镇乐都；平西将军麹景为沙州刺史，镇四平；宁朔将军出连辅政为梁州刺史，镇赤水。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐任命辅国将军段晖为凉州刺史，驻守乐都；任命平西将军景为沙州刺史，镇守西平；又命宁朔将军出连辅政为梁州刺史，坐镇赤水。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Blazing Rock to appoint the general of the auxiliary state, Duan Xi, as the governor of Liangzhou and stationed in Le; to appoint the general of Pingxi, Jing, as the governor of Shazhou and stationed in Xiping; and to order the general of Ningshuo, Zilian, as the governor of Liangzhou and stationed in Chishui.

古文：夏，四月，丁未，魏员外散骑常侍步堆等来聘。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁未，北魏特使员外散骑常侍步堆等前往刘宋访问。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Wei, the special envoy of the Northern Wei Dynasty, rode out to visit Liu Song.

古文：庚戌，以廷尉王徽之为交州刺史，征前刺史杜弘文。
现代文：庚戌，刘宋任命廷尉王徽之为交州刺史，征召前交州刺史杜弘文回京。
English: Geng Zheng and Liu Song appointed the imperial lieutenant Wang Hui as the secretary of Jiaozhou, and conscripted the former secretary of Jiaozhou Du Hongwen to return to Beijing.

古文：弘文有疾，自舆就路；或劝之待病愈，弘文曰： 吾杖节三世，常欲投躯帝庭，况被征乎！ 
现代文：当时杜弘文正患重病，得到命令后，亲自备车上路，有人劝告他等病稍好些再走，杜弘文说： 我家祖孙三代镇守边陲，平时就渴望到京城去，何况今日又得到征召！ 
English: At that time, Du Hongwen was suffering from a serious illness. After receiving the order, he personally prepared the car to go on the road. Someone advised him to wait for the illness to get a little better before going. Du Hongwen said: My family's three generations of ancestors and grandchildren guard the border. In normal times, they are eager to go to Beijing. What's more, today they have been conscripted!

古文：遂行，卒于广州。
现代文：于是，杜弘文抱病启程，走到广州去世。
English: As a result, Du Hongwen became ill and left for Guangzhou, where he died.

古文：弘文，慧度之子也。
现代文：杜弘文是杜慧度的儿子。
English: Du Hongwen is the son of Du Huidu.

古文：魏奚斤与夏平原公定相持于长安。
现代文：北魏司空奚斤跟夏国的平原公赫连定在长安对峙。
English: In Chang'an, the Northern Wei Sikyong Shujin and Xia's Plains Gonghe Lianding confronted each other.

古文：魏主欲乘虚伐统万，简兵练士，部分诸将，命司徒长孙翰等将三万骑为前驱，常山五素等将步兵三万为后继，南阳王伏真等将步兵三万部送攻具，将军贺多罗将精骑三千为前候。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘打算乘夏国后方空虚，攻打夏国的都城统万，于是，挑选精兵，严格训练，部署将领。拓跋焘还任命司徒长孙翰等率领三万骑兵为前锋，任命常山王拓跋素等率领步兵三万人为后继，派遣南在前锋部队之前，负责搜索侦察。拓跋素是拓跋遵的儿子。
English: The ruler of Northern Wei, Tuoba Guo, planned to take advantage of the emptiness in the rear of Xia and attack the capital city of Xia, Tongwan. Therefore, he selected elite soldiers, trained them strictly, and deployed generals. Tuoba Guo also appointed the leader of the 30,000 cavalry, such as the leader of the 30,000 cavalry, Sun Han, and the leader of the 30,000 infantry, such as the leader of the 30,000 infantry, such as the King of Changshan, Tuoba Su, as his successor. He was responsible for searching and reconnaissance before sending the front-line troops south. Tuoba Su is the son of Tuoba Zun.

古文：素，遵之子也。五月，魏主发平城，命龙骧将军代人陆俟督诸军镇大碛以备柔然。
现代文：五月，北魏国主拓跋焘亲自从平城出发，临行前又命令龙骧将军、代郡人陆俟统率北方各路兵马镇守大碛，防备柔然汗国乘虚来攻。
English: In May, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, personally set out from Pingcheng. Before leaving, he ordered General Longyao and the deputy of the county, Lu Wei, to lead the soldiers and horses in the north to guard the Great Wall, to prevent the Rouran Khanate from taking advantage of the false attack.

古文：辛巳，济君子津。
现代文：辛巳，拓跋焘一行从君子津渡黄河西上。
English: All of a sudden, Tuobao and his party set out from Junzizu to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：壬午，中护军王华卒。
现代文：壬午，刘宋中护军王华去世。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third month, Wang Hua, a member of Liu Song's middle guard, passed away.

古文：魏主至拔邻山，筑城，舍辎重，以轻骑三万倍道先行。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘抵达拔邻山，在那里兴筑城堡，留下辎重，然后率领轻骑兵三万人，加速先行进发。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, arrived at Bajiao Mountain, where he built a castle, left the baggage behind, and then led 30,000 light cavalry to speed up the advance.

古文：群臣咸谏曰： 统万城坚，非朝夕可拔。
现代文：朝中随行的文武官员都劝阻他说： 统万城十分坚固，不是一日之内就可以攻克的。
English: The civil and military officials accompanying Kim Jong Un all dissuaded him, saying, "Unification of Korea is very solid, and it cannot be conquered in a day.

古文：今轻车讨之，进不可克，退无所资，不若与步兵、攻具一时俱往。 
现代文：如今您率领轻装部队去讨伐，恐怕不能一时攻破，想要退回又没有粮饷及其他军用物资，不如与步兵一道，携带攻城械具进攻统万。 
English: Now that you are leading light troops to fight, I'm afraid you can't break through all at once. If you want to go back and don't have grain and other military supplies, it's better to go with the infantry, carrying siege equipment to attack the city.

古文：帝曰： 用兵之术，攻城最下。必不得已，然后用之。
现代文：拓跋焘说： 用兵的策略，攻城是最下策；非到万不得已，不可使用。
English: Tuobao said: the strategy of using soldiers, attacking the city is the bottom line; it can not be used unless it is absolutely necessary.

古文：今以步兵、攻具皆进，彼必惧而坚守。
现代文：现在我们如果以步兵携攻城械具一起开进，敌人见状，一定会恐惧并坚守城池。
English: Now, if we march into the city with infantry and siege equipment, the enemy will see the situation, be afraid, and hold on to the city.

古文：若攻不时拔，食尽兵疲，外无所掠，进退无地。
现代文：如果我们不能按时攻下，粮食吃完，兵士疲劳，城外又没什么可以抢夺的，那时我们就会进退不得，陷入窘境。
English: If we don't capture the city on time, if we run out of food, if our soldiers are tired, and if there's nothing to take outside the city, then we'll be in a quandary.

古文：不如以轻骑直抵其城，彼见步兵未至，意必宽弛；吾羸形以诱之，彼或出战，则成擒矣。
现代文：不如先用骑兵长驱直抵统万城下，敌人见到我们的步兵没有来，一定不太在意。我们再故意装出羸弱不堪的样子，引诱他们出击，他们如果出城迎战，就会被我们生擒。
English: It would be better to use the cavalry commander to drive straight to the foot of the city of Tongwan first. When the enemy sees that our infantry has not come, they will not be too concerned. We will then deliberately pretend to be weak and lure them to attack. If they go out to fight, they will be captured by us.

古文：所以然者，吾之军士去家二千馀里，又隔大河，所谓 置之死地而后生 者也。
现代文：所以这样的原因，是因为我们的将士离家二千余里，又隔着一条黄河，这就是所谓 置之死地而后生 啊！
English: So the reason for this is because our soldiers are more than two thousand miles away from home, and across a Yellow River, which is the so-called place of death and rebirth!

古文：故以之攻城则不足，决战则有馀矣。 
现代文：三万人的轻骑兵，攻城自然不够，但用来决战，还绰绰有余。 
English: Thirty thousand light cavalry is not enough to attack the city, but it is more than enough for a decisive battle.

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是大军启程。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：六月癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，癸卯朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：魏主至统万，分军伏于深谷，以少众至城下。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘抵达统万，大军分别埋伏在深谷之中，只派少数部队来到城下。
English: Tuobao, the ruler of Northern Wei, arrived in Tongwan. The large army was separately ambushed in a deep valley, and only a few troops were sent to the outskirts of the city.

古文：夏将狄子玉降魏。言： 夏主闻有魏师，遣使召平原公定，定曰： 统万坚峻，未易攻拔。待我擒奚斤，然后徐往。内外击之，蔑不济矣。 
现代文：夏国的大将狄子玉投降了北魏，他向拓跋焘报告说： 夏王赫连昌听说北魏大军将到，就派人征召平原公赫连定回军，赫连定说： 统万城坚固险峻，不容易攻破，等我生擒奚斤然后再赶赴统万，内外夹击北魏大军，没有不成功的道理。 
English: The general of Xia Province, Di Ziyu, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. He reported to Tuoba Yu: Xia King Helianchang heard that the Northern Wei Dynasty army was about to arrive, so he sent someone to recruit the Plain King Helian Ding to return to the army. Helian Ding said: "The Great Wall of China is solid and precipitous, and it is not easy to break through. I will wait until I have enough strength and then rush to the Great Wall of China to attack the Northern Wei Dynasty army inside and outside. There is no reason why I will not succeed."

古文：故夏主坚守以待之。 
现代文：所以夏王赫连昌专心守城，等待赫连定。 
English: Therefore, Xia Wang Herenchang concentrated on defending the city, waiting for Herending.

古文：魏主患之。
现代文：拓跋焘听到这席话，十分忧虑。
English: Tuobao was very worried when he heard this.

古文：乃退军以示弱，遣娥清及永昌王健帅骑五千西掠居民。
现代文：于是命令军队撤退，显示懦弱。又派遣娥清和永昌王拓跋健率领骑兵五千人向西大肆劫掠居民。
English: Therefore, he ordered the army to retreat, showing cowardice. He also sent E Qing and Yongchang King Tuoba Jian to lead five thousand cavalry to the west to plunder the residents.

古文：魏军士有得罪亡奔夏者，言魏军粮尽，士卒食菜，辎重在后，步兵未至，宜急击之。
现代文：北魏军中的士卒有人因犯罪逃走，投降了夏军，他向夏国报告说，魏军的粮草已经用尽，军中士卒每天只吃菜，而辎重补给还在后方，步兵也尚未到达，应当乘机急速地袭击他们。 
English: A sergeant in the Northern Wei Army, who had fled because of a crime, surrendered to the Xia Army. He reported to Xia Guo that the grain and grass of the Wei Army had been exhausted, the sergeant only ate vegetables every day, and the heavy supplies were still in the rear, and the infantry had not yet arrived, so he should take the opportunity to attack them quickly.

古文：夏主从之。
现代文：赫连昌同意。
English: He Lianchang agreed.

古文：甲辰，将步骑三万出城。
现代文：甲辰，赫连昌亲自统率步、骑兵共三万人出城。
English: Jia Chen and Herenchang personally led the march, and a total of 30,000 cavalry left the city.

古文：长孙翰等皆言： 夏兵步陈难陷，宜避其锋。 
现代文：北魏的大臣司徒长孙翰等人都说： 夏国的骑、步兵的阵势难以攻破，我们应该避开他的锋锐。 
English: Northern Wei minister Sun Han and others said: Xia's cavalry and infantry positions are difficult to break through, we should avoid his sharpness.

古文：魏主曰： 吾远来求贼，惟恐不出。
现代文：拓跋焘说： 我们远道而来，就是要引诱敌人出城，唯恐他们不出。
English: Tuobao said, "We have come all this way to lure the enemy out of the city, lest they leave."

古文：今既出矣。乃避而不击，彼奋我弱，非计也。
现代文：现在他们既然出城了，我们却避而不打，只能使敌人士气旺盛，我们却被削弱，这不是用兵的好计策！ 
English: Now that they have left the city, we are avoiding them instead of fighting them. This can only embolden the enemy, but we are weakened. This is not a good strategy for using soldiers!

古文：遂收众伪遁，引而疲之。
现代文：于是，命令部队集结假装逃走，引诱敌人追赶，使他们疲惫。
English: Therefore, he ordered the troops to gather and pretend to flee, luring the enemy to chase and exhausting them.

古文：夏兵为两翼，鼓噪追之，行五六里，会有风雨从东南来，扬沙晦冥。
现代文：夏国的军队兵分两路，左右追击包抄，鼓声震天，追了五六里路，就赶上大风雨从东南而来，漫漫尘沙，遮天蔽日。
English: The soldiers of Xia's army were divided into two groups, chasing and encircling from left to right, and the drums shook the sky. After chasing for five or six miles, they caught up with the heavy wind and rain coming from the southeast, the dust was thick and the sky covered the sun.

古文：宦者赵倪，颇晓方术，言于魏主曰： 今风雨从贼上来，我向之，彼背之，天不助人；且将士饥渴，愿陛下摄骑避之，更待后日。 
现代文：北魏军中的宦官赵倪相当通晓神道法术，就对魏主拓跋焘说： 如今风雨是从敌人那边袭来，我们逆风，敌人顺风，这表明天不助我。更何况我们的将士饥渴交加，希望陛下暂时避开他们的锋锐，等以后再寻找时机。 
English: Zhao Ni, a eunuch in the Northern Wei army, who was quite familiar with Shinto magic, said to the Wei Lord Tuoba: "Nowadays, the wind and rain are coming from the enemy side. We are against the wind, and the enemy is with the wind. This shows that the heavens will not help me. What's more, our soldiers are hungry and thirsty. I hope that Your Majesty will temporarily avoid their sharpness, and wait for a later opportunity.

古文：崔浩叱之曰： 是何言也！
现代文：太常崔浩厉声喝止说： 这是什么话！
English: Too often, Cui Hao would yell out in a loud voice: "What is this saying!

古文：吾千里制胜，一日之中，岂得变易！
现代文：我们千里而来，自有制胜的策略，一天之内怎么可以说变就变！
English: We have come thousands of miles, our own winning strategy, how can it be said to change in a day!

古文：贼贪进不止，后军已绝，宜隐军分出，奄击不意。
现代文：敌人贪图胜利的战果，不会停止追击，根本没有后继军队。我们应该把精兵隐蔽起来，分别出击，对他们作一次意外的突袭。
English: The enemy is greedy for the fruits of victory, will not stop the pursuit, there is no follow-up army at all. We should hide the elite soldiers, launch separate attacks, and make an unexpected surprise attack on them.

古文：风道在人，岂有常也！ 
现代文：刮风下雨，要看人们怎么利用，怎么可以硬套常规而认定对我们不利！ 
English: Whether it is windy or rainy depends on how people use it, how they can rigidly stick to the routine and determine that it is unfavorable to us!

古文：魏主曰： 善！ 
现代文：拓跋焘说： 你说的极对！ 
English: Tuoba said, "That's great!

古文：乃分骑为左右队以掎之。
现代文：于是，把骑兵分作两队，牵制敌军。
English: As a result, the cavalry was divided into two teams to hold back the enemy.

古文：魏主马蹶而坠，几为夏兵所获；拓跋齐以身捍蔽，决死力战，夏兵乃退。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘忽因坐骑失蹄摔倒，掉下马来，几乎被夏国的军卒所抓获。拓跋齐用自己的身体护卫遮挡敌人对拓跋焘的进攻，拼死尽力搏战，夏国围攻的士兵才被打退。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuoba Gui, suddenly fell from his horse due to a riding accident, and was almost caught by Xia Guo's soldiers. Tuoba Gui used his bodyguards to block the enemy's attack on Tuoba Gui, and fought to the death. The soldiers besieging Xia Guo were beaten back.

古文：魏主腾马得上，刺夏尚书斛黎文，杀之，又杀骑兵十馀人，身中流矢，奋击不辍，夏众大溃。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘趁此机会，翻身跳上马背，直刺夏国尚书斛黎文，当即把他杀死，随后又杀死敌人骑兵十多个人，自己也被流箭射中，但他仍然奋力杀敌，苦战不休，夏国的部队完全崩溃。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuobao, took this opportunity to turn over and jump on horseback, stabbing Xia Guo Shangshu and Li Wen, killing him immediately, and then killing more than ten enemy cavalrymen. He was also shot by a stray arrow, but he still struggled to kill the enemy, fighting hard, and Xia Guo's troops completely collapsed.

古文：齐，翳槐子玄孙也。
现代文：拓跋齐是拓跋翳槐的玄孙。
English: Tuoba Qi is the great-great-grandson of Tuoba Yao.

古文：魏人乘胜逐夏主至城北，杀夏主之弟河南公满及兄子蒙逊，死者万馀人。
现代文：北魏国部队乘胜把夏国残兵追到统万城北，杀死了夏王赫连昌的弟弟阿南公赫连满和侄儿赫连蒙逊，杀死士卒一万多人。
English: The Northern Wei troops took advantage of the victory to chase the remaining soldiers of Xia to the north of Tongwan City, killing the brother of Xia King Herenchang, Anangong Herenman and his nephew Heren Monson, and killing more than 10,000 soldiers.

古文：夏主不及入城，遂奔上邽。
现代文：夏王赫连昌来不及跑进城去，于是便逃奔上。
English: Xia Wang Herenchang did not have time to run into the city, so he ran away.

古文：魏主微服逐奔者，入其城；拓跋齐固谏，不听。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘换上士兵的服装追赶逃跑的敌人，并进入了统万城。拓跋齐苦苦劝阻，拓跋焘坚决不听。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, changed into a soldier's costume to chase the fleeing enemy and entered Tongwan City. Tuobao tried hard to dissuade him, but Tuobao resolutely refused to listen.

古文：夏人觉之，诸门悉闭；魏主因与齐等入其宫中，得妇人裙，系之槊上，魏主乘之而上，仅乃得免。
现代文：后来夏国人发觉了这件事，把几个城门都关了起来。拓跋焘于是与拓跋齐等人混进内宫之中，弄到了几件女人穿的裙子，用它当绳索，绑在铁槊上，拓跋焘借此爬上城墙，逃出城外，才免于被擒。
English: Later, the Xia people found out about this and closed several city gates. Tuobao then mixed with Tuobao Qi and others into the inner palace, got a few skirts worn by women, used it as a rope and tied it to a shovel. Tuobao used it to climb the city wall and escape from the city to avoid being captured.

古文：会日暮，夏尚书仆射问至奉夏主之母出走，长孙翰将八千骑追夏主至高平，不及而还。
现代文：等到了黄昏的时候，夏国的尚书仆射问至保护着赫连昌的母亲逃出城外。北魏司徒长孙翰率领八百骑兵追赶夏王赫连昌，一直追到高平，没有追上，便回来了。
English: At dusk, Xia's courtier, Shang Shuxu, asked Sun Quan, who was protecting Helian Chang's mother, to escape from the city. Northern Wei's head of state, Sun Han, led eight hundred cavalry to chase after Xia's king, Helian Chang, all the way to Gaoping. He did not catch up and returned.

古文：乙巳，魏主入城，获夏王、公、卿、将、校及诸母、后妃、姊妹、宫人以万数，马三十馀万匹，牛羊数千万头，府库珍宝、车旗、器物不可胜计，颁赐将士有差。
现代文：乙巳，北魏国主拓跋焘进入统万城，俘虏夏国的亲王、公爵、高级文官、军事将领以及赫连昌的太后太妃皇后嫔妃、姐妹、宫女等数以万计。还缴获马匹三十余万匹，牛羊几千万头，国库中的珍宝、车辆、旌旗，各种精美的器物，多得不可胜数，拓跋焘把它们按等级分别赏赐给自己的将士。
English: At this time, the Northern Wei ruler Tuobao entered Tongwan City and captured tens of thousands of princes, dukes, high-ranking civil servants, military generals, and the empress dowager Queen Tofei, sisters, and concubines of Helianchang. He also captured more than 300,000 horses, tens of millions of cattle and sheep, and countless treasures, vehicles, banners, and various exquisite items in the national treasury. Tuobao rewarded them to his soldiers according to their ranks.

古文：初，夏世祖性豪侈，筑统万城，高十仞，基厚三十步，上广十步，宫墙高五仞，其坚可以厉刀斧。
现代文：当初，夏王赫连勃勃，性情奢侈，兴筑了这座统万城，城墙高十仞，墙基厚达三十步，上宽十步，宫墙高约五仞，它坚硬得可以用来磨砺刀斧。
English: At the beginning, Xia Wangheren was vigorous and extravagant in nature, and he built this world-class city. The city wall is ten paces high, the wall foundation is thirty paces thick, the upper width is ten paces, and the palace wall is about five paces high. It is so hard that it can be used to sharpen scythes and axes.

古文：台榭壮大，皆雕镂图画，被以绮绣，穷极文采。
现代文：亭台楼阁、水榭也都十分雄伟壮丽，全都雕刻图画，用锦绣装饰，精致侈华，无以复加。
English: The pavilions, pavilions and pavilions are also very majestic and magnificent, all carved pictures, decorated with brocade, exquisite luxury, can not be overstated.

古文：魏主顾谓左右曰： 蕞尔国而用民如此，欲不亡，得乎！ 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘看到这些，回头对左右侍从官员说： 一个小国，却把百姓奴役到这种地步，怎么能够不亡国呢？ 
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuobao, saw this and turned to the officials around him and said, "How can a small country enslave its people to such an extent without losing its country?"

古文：得夏太史令张渊、徐辩，复以为太史令。
现代文：北魏还俘虏了夏国太史令张渊和徐辩，任命他们仍旧担任太史令。
English: The Northern Wei also captured Zhang Yuan and Xu Fen, the Tai Shi Ling of Xia, and appointed them as Tai Shi Ling.

古文：得故晋将毛修之、秦将军库洛干，归库洛干于秦，以毛修之善烹调，用为太官令。
现代文：拓跋焘还俘虏了前东晋的大将毛之以及西秦的将领库洛干，把库洛干送回西秦。因毛之擅长烹调，就任命他为北魏的太官令。
English: Tuobao also captured the former Eastern Jin general Maozhi and the Western Qin general Kulogan, and sent Kulogan back to the Western Qin. Because Maozhi was good at cooking, he was appointed as the Northern Wei's eunuch.

古文：魏主见夏著作郎天水赵逸所为文，誉夏主太过，怒曰： 此竖无道，何敢如是！谁所为邪？
现代文：拓跋焘还看到一篇夏国著作郎天水人赵逸写的文章，过分吹捧赫连昌，大怒说： 这小子是个无道君主，怎么胆敢如此，谁写的文章？
English: Tuobao also saw an article written by Xia Guo's son, Tianshui man Zhao Yizhen, which was overly praising He Lianchang, and angrily said: This kid is a lawless monarch, how dare he do that, who wrote the article?

古文：当速推之！ 
现代文：应当快快查出问罪！ 
English: The culprits should be quickly identified!

古文：崔浩曰： 文士褒贬，多过其实，盖非得已，不足罪也。 
现代文：崔浩劝阻说： 文人写文章，无论是赞颂，还是抨击，大多数都是言过其实，不一定发自内心，只不过是不得不写而已，用不着惩罚。 
English: Cui Hao advised: "When writers write articles, whether they are praising or criticizing, most of them are exaggerated, not necessarily from the heart, but they just have to write, they don't need to be punished.

古文：乃止。
现代文：拓跋焘这才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：魏主纳夏世祖三女为贵人。
现代文：拓跋焘把赫连勃勃的三个女儿收入后宫作自己的妃子。
English: Tuobao took the three daughters of Herengong into his harem as his concubines.

古文：奚斤与夏平原公定犹相拒于长安。
现代文：北魏司空奚斤与夏国的平原公赫连定仍在长安对峙。
English: The confrontation between the Northern Wei's Sikyong Shujin and Xia's Pingyuan Gonghe Lianding is still going on in Chang'an.

古文：魏主命宗正娥清、太仆丘堆帅骑五千略地关右。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘命令宗正娥清、太仆丘堆率骑兵五千人开赴关右一带，去占领地盘。
English: The ruler of Northern Wei, Tuobao, ordered Zong Zheng'eqing, Taipu Qiu and five thousand cavalrymen to go to Guanzhong and occupy the site.

古文：定闻统万已破，遂奔上邽；斤追至雍，不及而还。
现代文：赫连定听说统万城已经被攻破，于是他率众投奔上。奚斤率部追击，追到雍城，没有追上，只好班师。
English: He Lianding heard that Tongwan City had been breached, so he led the crowd to rush up. He led the pursuit, chased to Yongcheng, did not catch up, and had to lead the team.

古文：清、堆攻夏贰城，拔之。
现代文：娥清与丘堆联合进攻夏国的贰城，攻克贰城。
English: E Qing and Yau Dui jointly attacked Lucheng in Xia Province and conquered Lucheng.

古文：魏主诏斤等班师。
现代文：拓跋焘下诏命令奚斤等将领班师。
English: Tuoba issued an edict ordering Xujin to wait for the shift leader to arrive.

古文：斤上疏言： 赫连昌亡保上邽，鸠合馀烬，未有蟠据之资；今因其危，灭之为易。
现代文：奚斤上疏说： 如今赫连昌逃到上自保，集结残部，还不足以长久盘踞在那里。
English: Hao Jin Shang Zuo said, "Nowadays, He Lianchang has fled to Shang Zi Bao, and it is not enough for the remnants to stay there for a long time.

古文：请益铠马，平昌而还。 
现代文：现在，我们乘他危急，彻底消灭他极其容易，请增加士卒和马匹，等我削平赫连昌再班师。 
English: Now, we are taking advantage of his critical situation, and it is extremely easy to completely eliminate him. Please increase the number of soldiers and horses, and wait for me to cut Ping Herenchang's second division.

古文：魏主不许。
现代文：拓跋焘不许。
English: It's not allowed to go too far.

古文：斤固请，乃许之，给斤兵万人，遣将军刘拔送马三千匹，并留娥清、丘堆使共击夏。
现代文：奚斤坚决请求，拓跋焘才应允，又拨给奚斤士卒一万人，派遣将军刘拔送去战马三千匹，并且留下娥清，丘堆二人，命令他们配合奚斤一道攻击夏国。
English: He sent General Liu Badu with three thousand horses, and left two men, E Qing and Yau Dui, and ordered them to attack Xia together with him.

古文：辛酉，魏主自统万东还，以常山王素为征南大将军、假节，与执金吾桓贷、莫云留镇统万。
现代文：辛酉，北魏国主拓跋焘从统万出发，向东回国。拓跋焘任命常山王拓跋素为征南大将军、假节，命他与执金吾桓贷、莫云留下镇守统万。
English: Xin Zhen, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zhen set out from Tongwan and returned to the east. Tuoba Zhen appointed the Changshan King Tuoba Su as the Southern Expeditionary General, the False Festival, and ordered him to stay with the King and Mo Yun to guard Tongwan.

古文：云，题之弟也。
现代文：莫云是莫题的弟弟。
English: Mo Yun is Mo Qi's younger brother.

古文：秦王炽磐还枹罕。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐回到罕城。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Blazing Rock to return to Han City.

古文：秋，七月，己卯，魏主至柞岭。
现代文：秋季七月，己卯，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达柞岭。
English: In the autumn of July, Tuobao, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Fuling.

古文：柔然寇云中，闻魏已克统万，乃遁去。
现代文：当时，柔然汗国正在进犯云中，他们听说北魏的军队已经攻克了统万，才撤退北逃。
English: At that time, the Rouran Khanate was on the offensive, and they heard that the Northern Wei army had conquered Tongwan, before retreating to the north.

古文：秦王炽磐谓群臣曰： 孤知赫连氏必无成，昌险归魏，今果如孤言。 
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐对他手下的文武群臣说： 我早就知道赫连氏必定不会成大气候，才冒险归降了北魏，现在发生的一切都应验了我的预言。 
English: The King of Western Qin begged for help from his wise men and warriors, saying, "I knew long ago that the Khelian Dynasty would not become a great power, so I took the risk of returning to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Everything that has happened now has fulfilled my prophecy."

古文：八月，遣其叔父平远将军渥头等入贡于魏。
现代文：八月，乞伏炽磐派他的叔父、平远将军乞伏渥头等人到北魏朝拜进贡。
English: In August, Beggar Blazing Rock sent his uncle, General Pingyuan, and others to pay tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：壬子，魏主还至平城，以所获颁赐留台百官有差。
现代文：壬子，北魏国主拓跋焘返抵平城，把缴获的战利品按等级分别赏赐给留守的文武百官。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, returned to Pingcheng, and awarded the captured trophies to the remaining civil and military officials according to their ranks.

古文：魏主为人，壮健鸷勇，临城对阵，亲犯矢石，左右死伤相继，神色自若；由是将士畏服，咸尽死力。
现代文：北魏国主为人壮健勇敢，沉着稳重，无论是攻打城池，还是两军对阵，短兵相接，都能亲自冒着乱箭飞石，身先士卒。他的左右士卒相继倒下，或死或伤，他却神色自若，毫不畏惧。因此，将士们对他无不畏惧钦佩，都愿尽力效死。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty was a strong and brave man, calm and steady. Whether he was attacking a city, or two armies facing each other, he could personally brave the chaos of arrows and stones and lead his soldiers. His left and right soldiers fell one after another, or died or were injured, but he looked confident and unafraid. Therefore, the soldiers admired him fearlessly and were willing to die for him.

古文：性俭率，服御饮膳，取给而已。
现代文：他生性节俭，衣服饮食够用就已满足。
English: He is frugal by nature and is content with just enough food and clothing.

古文：群臣请增峻京城及修宫室曰： 《易》云： 王公设险，以守其国。 
现代文：文武百官请求加固京师的城墙，修缮皇宫的建筑，说： 《易经》说： 王公设险，固守国家。 
English: Hundreds of civil and military officials requested that the city walls of the capital be strengthened and the buildings of the imperial palace be repaired, saying: "The Yi Jing" said: Wang Gong set up risks and adhered to the country.

古文：又萧何云： 天子以四海为家，不壮不丽，无以重威。  
现代文：萧何也曾经说过： 天子以四海为家，不壮不丽，不能增加威严。  
English: Xiao He also once said: The Son of Heaven takes the four seas as his home, and is neither magnificent nor beautiful, and cannot increase his majesty.

古文：帝曰： 古人有言： 在德不在险。 
现代文：拓跋焘却说： 古人曾经说过： 只在恩德，不在险要。 
English: But Tuobao said: The ancients once said: Only in the end, not in the crisis.

古文：屈丐蒸土筑城而朕灭之。岂在城也？
现代文：赫连屈丐用蒸过的土建筑城墙，却被我灭掉了，这怎么在城的坚固不坚固呢？
English: Hereng Keguai used steamed earth to build the city wall, but I destroyed it. How is this not solid in the city?

古文：今天下未平，方须民力，土功之事，朕所未为。
现代文：而今，天下还没有太平，正需要人力，大兴土木的事，我不想去做。
English: But now, the world is not yet at peace, manpower is needed, and I don't want to do the big civil engineering project.

古文：萧何之对，非雅言也。 
现代文：萧何的话并不正确。 
English: What Xiao He said to Han Gao Zu is not a kind word!

古文：每以为财者军国之本，不可轻费。
现代文：拓跋焘常常把财物看做是军队和国家的基础，不可以轻意浪费。
English: Tuobao often regards property as the foundation of the army and the country, and it should not be wasted lightly.

古文：至于赏赐，皆死事勋绩之家，亲戚贵宠未尝横有所及。
现代文：至于赏赐，也都赏给为国死难将士的遗属或有功之家，皇亲国戚以及倍受恩宠的人和显贵达官很少有人无缘无故得到赏赐。
English: As for rewards, they are also given to the surviving dependents or meritorious families of soldiers who died for the country, the relatives of the emperor and the people of the country, as well as the favored people and prominent dignitaries. Very few people are rewarded for no reason.

古文：命将出师，指授节度，违之者多致负败。
现代文：他选任将领出征，亲自指挥谋划，面授机宜，凡是违背他旨意的人，大多失败。
English: He selected generals to lead the expedition, personally directed the planning, and taught the opportunities. Anyone who went against his will mostly failed.

古文：明于知人，或拔干于卒伍之中，唯其才用所长，不论本末。
现代文：他知人善任，有时在士卒中选拔将领，只看重并使用他的才干，不在乎他的出身。
English: He knows how to handle people well, and sometimes selects generals from soldiers, only valuing and using his talent, regardless of his origin.

古文：听察精敏，下无遁情，赏不遗贱，罚不避贵，虽所甚爱之人，终无宽假。
现代文：拓跋焘观察敏锐，部下没有什么隐情能逃出他的眼睛。他赏赐不论贫贱，惩罚不避权贵，赏罚分明，既使是他平时最宠爱的人，也绝不纵容包庇。
English: Tuobao is keenly observant, and nothing hidden from his subordinates can escape his eyes. He rewards no matter how poor, punishes no matter how powerful, and rewards and punishes clearly, even if it is the person he likes the most, he will never indulge in concealment.

古文：常曰： 法者，朕与天下共之，何敢轻也。 
现代文：他常说： 国家的法律，是我与天下臣民应共同遵守的，怎么敢轻视呢。 
English: He often said: The law is the common standard for me and all the people in the world, how dare we change it so easily?

古文：然性残忍，果于杀戮，往往已杀而复悔之。
现代文：然而，拓跋焘却生性残忍，杀人从不手软，但是杀人之后，又常常后悔。
English: However, Tuobao is cruel by nature. He is never soft on killing, but after killing, he often regrets it.

古文：九月，丁酉，安定民举城降魏。
现代文：九月，丁酉，夏国所属的安定城居民献出城池，投降北魏。
English: In September, the residents of Dingyao, the stable city belonging to Xia, surrendered the city and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：氐王杨玄遣将军苻白作围秦梁州刺史出连辅政于赤炎。
现代文：氐王杨玄派遣将军苻白作，在赤水围攻西秦梁州刺史出连辅政。
English: King Yang Xuan of Qin dispatched general Zou Bai Zuo to besiege Western Qin Liangzhou in Chishui, and dispatched Zhen Liang Zuo to assist in the siege.

古文：城中粮尽，民执辅政以降。
现代文：赤水城中粮草断绝，百姓生擒出连辅政，开城门投降。
English: Grain and grass were cut off in the city of Akamizu, and the people were forced to surrender and open the city gates.

古文：辅政至骆谷，逃还。
现代文：出连辅政在被押送途中，走到骆谷，逃回西秦。
English: On the way of being escorted, Dew Lian Fu Zheng walked to Luogu and fled back to West Qin.

古文：冬，十月，秦以骁骑将军吴汉为平南将军、梁州刺史，镇南漒。
现代文：冬季，十月，西秦王乞伏炽磐任命骁骑将军吴汉为平南将军和梁州刺史，驻守南。
English: In the winter, in October, the Western Qin king begged the Blazing Rock to appoint the cavalry general Wu Han as the general of Pingnan and the governor of Liangzhou, stationed in the south.

古文：十一月，魏主遣司马公孙轨兼大鸿胪，持节策拜杨玄为都督荆、梁等四州诸军事、梁州刺史、南秦王。
现代文：十一月，北魏国主拓跋焘派遣军司马公孙轨兼任大鸿胪，持节策，任命氐王杨玄为都督荆、梁等四州诸军事和梁州刺史，封南秦王。
English: In November, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, dispatched the military secretary, Ma Gongsunlu, to concurrently serve as the Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great

古文：及境，玄不出迎；轨责让之，欲奉策以还，玄惧而郊迎。
现代文：公孙轨一行抵达杨玄辖境之后，杨玄却不出来迎接，公孙轨斥责他，并打算奉诏书回去。杨玄才感到恐惧，亲自赶到效外迎接。
English: After Gongsunlu and his party arrived in the territory under Yang Xuan's jurisdiction, Yang Xuan did not come out to meet him. Gongsunlu rebuked him and planned to return with an edict. Yang Xuan only felt fear and rushed to meet him in person outside of school hours.

古文：魏主善之，以轨为尚书。
现代文：拓跋焘认为公孙轨处理得当，提升公孙轨为尚书。
English: Tuobao believes that the public-grandson track has been handled properly, and the promotion of the public-grandson track is a must.

古文：轨，表之子也。
现代文：公孙轨是公孙表的儿子。
English: Gongsunlu is the son of Gongsun watch.

古文：十二月，秦梁州刺史吴汉为群羌所攻，帅户二千还于枹罕。
现代文：十二月，西秦梁州刺史吴汉遭到羌族各部落的攻击，率领二千户部属返回罕。
English: In December, Wuhan, the capital of Liang Prefecture in West Qin Province, was attacked by various Yi tribes. He led 2,000 retainers back to Han.

