古文：黎阳客李迥秀琅邪人崔咸季攸武德县田臾裴徽李陶长洲陆氏女刁缅
现代文：黎阳客李迥秀琅邪人崔咸季攸武德县田臾裴徽李陶长洲陆氏女刁缅
English: Li Yang's guest Li Yanxiu's evil person Cui Xianji's evil person Cui Xianji's evil person Cui Xianji's evil person Cui Xianji's evil person Cui Xianji's evil person

古文：王无有王升高生
现代文：王无有王升高生
English: The king has no son, the king has no son

古文：黎阳客
现代文：黎阳客
English: Liyang Guest House

古文：开元中，有士人家贫，投丐河朔，所抵无应者。
现代文：开元年间，有一位读书人家境贫寒，投奔乞求到河北，所到的地方没有接应的。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, there was a reader from a poor family who went to Hebei to beg, but the place he went to did not accept him.

古文：转至黎阳，日已暮，而前程尚遥。忽见路旁一门，宅宇甚壮，夜将投宿。
现代文：他又转奔到黎阳，天色已晚，可是前程还很遥远，忽然看见路旁有一个门，宅院房子很壮观。夜里他要投宿那里，就上前敲门。
English: It was getting late, but he still had a long way to go. Suddenly, he saw a door on the side of the road. The courtyard house was magnificent. He wanted to spend the night there, so he knocked on the door.

古文：乃前扣门，良久，奴方出。客曰：日暮，前路不可及，辄寄外舍，可乎？
现代文：很久，奴仆才出来。客人说：天晚了，前面的路远不能走到地方，就寄居在外面的房舍，可以吗？
English: It was a long time before the servants came out. The guest said, "It's getting late, and the road ahead is too far to walk to anywhere. Can we stay in the house outside?"

古文：奴曰：请白郎君。
现代文：奴仆说：请问问郎君。
English: The servant said, "Please ask your stepfather."

古文：乃入。
现代文：就进去了。
English: And he went in.

古文：须臾闻曳履声，及出，乃衣冠美丈夫，姿度闲远，昂然秀异。命延客，与相拜谒，曰：行李得无苦辛，有弊庐，不足辱长者。
现代文：不一会儿，听到走路声，等他出来一看，竟是衣冠楚楚的美男子，姿态闲适，潇洒秀美，命令请客人进来，和客人相互拜见，说：旅行能不辛苦吗；有个破屋子，不能够辱你来住。
English: Soon after, he heard the sound of someone walking, and when he came out, he saw that it was actually a well-dressed, handsome man, with a relaxed, dashing, and beautiful demeanor, who ordered the guests to come in, to meet with the guests, and said: "Isn't it hard to travel? You can't live in a broken house."

古文：客窃怪其异，且欲审察之，乃俱就馆，颇能清论，说齐周已来，了了皆如目见。
现代文：黎阳客私下对这件事很奇怪，将要观察一下，于是和他一起到了馆舍。那男子很能高谈阔论，说齐国以来的事，清清楚楚都如亲眼所见。
English: In private, Li Yangge was very curious about this matter. He wanted to observe it, so he went with him to the mansion. The man was very eloquent and said that the events since Qi Guo were as clear as if he saw them with his own eyes.

古文：客问名，曰：我颖川荀季和，先人因官，遂居此焉。
现代文：黎阳客问他的名字，他说：我是颍川荀季和，父辈因做官到此，于是住在这里。
English: When asked his name by a visitor from Liyang, he said, "I am Xingchuan Xingjiwu. My parents came here to work as officials, so I live here.

古文：命设酒肴，皆精洁，而不甚有味。
现代文：又命令摆设饭菜，都很精洁。可是不太有味。
English: He also ordered the dishes to be set out, which were very clean, but not very tasty.

古文：有顷，命具榻舍中。邀客入，仍敕一婢侍宿。
现代文：过了一会儿，让人准备下榻的屋子，邀请客人进来，仍旧让一个婢女侍候睡觉。
English: After a while, let someone prepare the room to stay in, invite guests in, still let a maid wait to sleep.

古文：客候婢款狎，乃问曰：郎君今为何官？
现代文：客人等候婢女恳切亲近，就问说：郎君现在做什么官？
English: The guests waited for the maid to approach them earnestly, and then asked, "What position does your husband hold now?"

古文：曰：见为河公主簿，慎勿说也。
现代文：婢女说：做河公主簿，千万别和人说。
English: The maid said, "Don't ever tell anyone you're a river princess.

古文：俄闻外有叫呼受痛之声，乃窃于窗中窥之。见主人据胡床，列灯烛，前有一人，被发裸形，左右呼群鸟啄其目，流血至地。主人色甚怒曰：更敢暴我乎？
现代文：不久听到外面有人叫呼遭受痛苦的声音，就悄悄到窗户那偷看，看见主人坐在胡床上，摆着灯烛，前面有一个人，披发裸体，左右的人呼叫群鸟啄他的眼睛，流血到地上，主人很发火，说：竟敢欺凌我吗？
English: Soon he heard the sound of someone crying out in pain, so he crept to the window and peeped in. He saw his master sitting on a cane bed, with a candle in front of him. There was a man in front of him, with his hair hanging down, naked. People around him were calling for birds to peck out his eyes, which were bleeding to the ground. His master was furious and said, "How dare you bully me?

古文：客谓曰：何人也？
现代文：客人问他：是什么人？
English: The guest asked him: Who is it?

古文：曰：何须强知他事。
现代文：说：何必一定勉强知道别的事情？
English: He said: "Why should I have to be forced to know anything else?

古文：固问之，曰：黎阳令也，好射猎，数逐兽，犯吾垣墙，以此受治也。
现代文：客人坚持问他，主人说：是黎阳令，喜好射猎，几次追赶野兽，冲撞了我的矮墙，因此受治裁。
English: The guest persisted in asking him, and the host said, "It was Li Yang Rong, he likes shooting, he chased wild animals several times, and he ran into my low wall, so he was punished."

古文：客窃记之。
现代文：客人偷偷记下了。
English: The guest secretly jotted it down.

古文：明旦顾视，乃大冢也。
现代文：第二天回去一看，竟是一座大坟墓。
English: When I went back the next day, it turned out to be a big grave.

古文：前问，人云是荀使君墓。
现代文：上前问，别人说是荀使君坟墓。
English: Go ahead and ask. Others say it's the grave of Emperor Xizong.

古文：至黎阳，令果辞以目疾。客曰：能疗之。
现代文：到了黎阳，黎阳令果然因为眼病推辞不见。客人说：能治好。
English: When he arrived in Liyang, Liyangling did not refuse to see him because of his eye disease. The guest said, "It can be cured."

古文：令喜，乃召入，具为说之。
现代文：县令很高兴，就召呼客人进来。
English: The county magistrate was very pleased and invited the guests to come in.

古文：令曰：信有之。
现代文：客人全都跟他说了。县今说：真有这样的事？
English: The guests all told him about it. The prefectural governor said, "Is this really happening?

古文：乃暗令乡正，具薪数万束，积于垣侧。
现代文：就暗暗让乡正准备柴禾几万捆，堆在墙旁边。
English: Let the township secretly prepare tens of thousands of bales of firewood and pile them up next to the wall.

古文：一日，令率群吏，纵火焚之，遂易其墓，目即愈。
现代文：一天县令率领群吏放火烧了荀使君墓，还迁走了坟墓。
English: One day, the county magistrate led a group of officials to set fire to the tomb of the envoy, and also moved the tomb.

古文：厚以谢客而不告也。
现代文：县令眼睛就好了。县令用厚礼谢客人却不告诉他真相。
English: The county magistrate's eyes were just fine. The county magistrate thanked the guest profusely but did not tell him the truth.

古文：后客还至其处，见一人头面焦烂，身衣败絮，蹲于榛棘中，直前诣，客不识也。曰：君颇忆前寄宿否？
现代文：后来客人回到他的住处，看见一个人头面焦烂，身穿破衣，蹲在荆棘中，一直上前，客人不认识他，他说：你还记得以前寄宿的事吗？
English: Later, the guest returned to his place and saw a man with a scorched face, wearing tattered clothes, squatting in the thorns, all the way forward, the guest did not know him, he said: Do you remember the previous boarding?

古文：客乃惊曰：何至此耶？
现代文：客人就惊奇地说：你怎么到这来了呢？
English: The guest said in surprise: How did you get here?

古文：曰：前为令所苦，然亦知非君本意，吾自运穷耳。
现代文：说：以前因为你受苦，但是也知道不是你的本意，我自己运气不好。
English: He said, "I used to suffer because of you, but I know it wasn't your intention. I've had bad luck myself.

古文：客甚愧悔之，为设薄酹，焚其故衣以赠之。鬼忻受遂去。
现代文：客人很惭愧后悔，为他摆设薄酒，烧了自己的衣服赠给他，鬼愉快地接受就离开了。
English: The guest was very ashamed and regretted it. He set out wine for him, burned his own clothes and gave them to him. The ghost happily accepted it and left.

古文：李迥秀
现代文：李迥秀
English: Li Yuxiu

古文：尚书李迥秀，素与清禅寺僧灵贞厚善。
现代文：尚书李迥秀，一向和清禅寺灵贞很友好。
English: Shangshu Li Yuxiu has always been very friendly with Lingzheng of Qingcheng Temple.

古文：迥秀卒数年，灵贞忽见两吏，赍符追之，遂逼促就路，奄然而卒。
现代文：迥秀死了几年，灵贞忽然看见两个小吏，持符追来，就逼迫他上路，灵贞奄奄一息最后死去。
English: A few years after Gongxiu's death, Lingzheng suddenly saw two petty officials chasing after her, holding badges. They forced him onto the road, and Lingzheng died with her last breath.

古文：前至一处，若官曹中。
现代文：到前面一个地方，很象官府，不一会儿有请灵贞进去拜见。
English: He went to a place in front, very much like a government office, and after a while he invited Lingzhen to come in and see him.

古文：须臾延谒，一人朱衣银章，灵贞自疑命当未死。朱衣曰：弟子误相追，阇梨当还。
现代文：他看见一个人穿着红衣服，上面有白色花纹。灵贞自己疑心命不该死，穿朱衣的人说：弟子错追你，高僧该回去。
English: He saw a man wearing a red robe with a white pattern on it. Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche doubted whether he deserved to die. The man in the vermilion robe said, "Your disciple is wrong to chase you. The high priest should go back."

古文：命敕前吏送去。欲取旧路，吏曰：此乃不可往，当别取北路耳。
现代文：命令从前的小吏送他回去，想要寻找来时的路，小吏说：这里不可以去，应当另找北路吧。
English: He ordered the former minor official to send him back, and when he tried to find his way back, the minor official said: "You can't go here, you should find another northern route."

古文：乃别北行，路甚荒塞，灵颇不怿。
现代文：就另往北走，路很荒凉，灵贞很不高兴。
English: She walked further north. The road was desolate, and Lingzhen was very unhappy.

古文：可行数十里，又至一府城，府甚丽。门吏前呵云：可方便见将军。
现代文：大约走了几十里路，又到一个府城，府上很华丽，门吏上前大声说：允许你们就便去见将军。
English: After walking about a few dozen miles, they came to another provincial capital. The palace was very ornate, and the gatekeeper stepped forward and said in a loud voice, "If you are allowed, you can go to see the general."

古文：即引入，见一人紫衣，据厅事，年貌与李公相类，谓曰：贞公那得远来？
现代文：就领引灵贞进去，看见一个穿紫衣的人，在那里办公事，年龄相貌跟李公很相似，对灵贞说：贞公从哪儿远来？
English: He led Ling Zhen inside and saw a man dressed in a purple robe, who was doing office work there and was of a similar age and appearance to Li Gong. He said to Ling Zhen: "Where did Zhen Gong come from?

古文：灵贞乃知正是。
现代文：灵贞才知道正是李公。
English: Ling Zhen only knew that it was Li Gong.

古文：因延升阶，叙及平旧。临别握手曰：欲与阇梨论及家事，所不忍言。
现代文：李公便请灵贞上来台阶，叙说平素旧事，临别握手说：想要和高僧谈家事，又不忍说出。
English: Li Gong then invited Ling Zhen to come up the steps, recounted the plain old things, shook hands at the parting and said: If you want to talk about family affairs with a high priest, you can't bear to say it.

古文：遂忽见泪下。
现代文：说着就流下泪来。
English: She burst into tears as she spoke.

古文：灵贞固请之，乃曰：弟子血祀将绝，无复奈何。可报季友等，四时享奠，勤致丰洁。兼为写《法华经》一部，是所望也。
现代文：灵贞坚持请他说，李公就说：弟子的儿孙，将要断绝了，不再有什么办法了，可告诉季友等人，四季享奠，尽力达到丰富清洁的程度，同时给我写一部法华经，这是我所希望的。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche insisted on asking him, and Li Gong said: "The children and grandchildren of the disciples will be cut off, and there is no longer any way to tell Ji You and others to enjoy the four seasons, try their best to achieve a rich and clean level, and write me a copy of the Lotus Sutra. This is what I hope for."

古文：即挥涕诀。灵贞遂苏，具以所见告。诸子及季友，素有至性焉，为设斋及写经。
现代文：李迥秀就挥泪诀别，灵贞就苏醒了，把看见的事全都告诉了迥季的儿子们和季友，他们一向非常有人的本性，就给李迥秀摆设斋饭、写经书。
English: Li Yuxiu said goodbye with tears, Ling Zhen woke up, and told all the things she saw to the sons and classmates of Li Yuxiu. They have always been very human nature, so they set up a meal for Li Yuxiu and wrote scriptures.

古文：唯斋损独怒曰：妖僧妄诞，欲诬玷先灵耳！
现代文：只有斋损发怒说：妖僧荒诞，想要诬玷我的祖先吧。
English: Only Zaizai became angry and said, "You are a grotesque demon priest, you want to defame my ancestors."

古文：其后竟与权梁山等谋反伏诛，兄弟流窜，竟无种嗣矣。
现代文：以后竟然和权梁山等人谋反被杀，他的兄弟也逃跑了，最终李迥秀没有后代了。
English: Later, he was killed for conspiring with Quan Liangshan and others, and his brother also ran away. Eventually, Li Yuxiu had no descendants.

古文：琅邪人
现代文：琅邪人
English: 邪人

古文：琅邪有人行过任城，暮宿郭外。
现代文：琅邪有个人走过任城，夜晚住宿在城郭外。
English: One day, a man passed through Rencheng and stayed outside the castle at night.

古文：主人相见甚欢，为设杂果。
现代文：主人见着他很高兴，给他摆设杂果。
English: His master was pleased to see him and gave him some fruit.

古文：客探取怀中犀靶小刀子，将以割梨，主人色变，遂奄然而逝。所见乃冢中物也。
现代文：客人取出怀中犀把小刀子，想要用刀割梨。主人色变，于是突然死去，客人所见的都是坟中的东西。
English: The guest takes out a pocket knife and tries to cut the pear with it. The owner changes colour and suddenly dies. All the guest sees is what is in the grave.

古文：客甚惧，然亦以此刀自护。且视冢旁有一穴，日照其中颇明，见棺梓已腐败，果盘乃树叶贮焉。
现代文：客人很恐惧，同样也用这把刀自卫，并看到坟旁边有一个洞穴，太阳照着里面很明亮，又看见棺材已经腐烂，果盘里装的是树叶！
English: Terrified, the guest also used the knife to defend himself, and saw a cave next to the grave, the sun shining brightly inside, and saw that the coffin was rotten, and the fruit dish was filled with leaves!

古文：客匍匐得出，问左右人，无识此冢者。
现代文：客人爬出来，问附近的人，没有知道这座坟墓是谁的。
English: The guest crawled out and asked people nearby, not knowing who the grave belonged to.

古文：崔咸
现代文：崔咸
English: And all who heard him were mocking him.

古文：博陵崔咸，少习静，家于相州，居常葺理园林。
现代文：博陵崔咸，年少习惯清静。家住相州，住在那儿常常修理园林。
English: Boling Cui Xian, used to tranquility when he was young. He lives in Xiangzhou, where he often repairs gardens.

古文：独在斋中，夜雷雨后，忽有一女子，年十六七，逾垣而入。
现代文：这天独自在书斋中，夜里雷雨过后，忽然看见一个女子，年龄十六七岁，越墙而入，抱着崔咸进入屋内。
English: On this day, alone in the study, after a thunderstorm at night, I suddenly saw a woman, aged sixteen or seventeen, climb over the wall and enter the house with Cui Xian in her arms.

古文：拥之入室，问其所从来，而终无言。
现代文：崔咸问她从哪里来，可她最终没有说话。
English: Choi Han asked her where she was from, but she eventually did not speak.

古文：咸疑其遁者，乃深藏之。将旦而毙，咸惊惧，未敢发。
现代文：崔咸怀疑她是逃跑的人，就把她深藏起来，将要到天亮的她就死了。
English: Suspecting that she was a fugitive, Cui Xian hid her deep inside, and she died just before dawn.

古文：乃出于里内，占其失女家。
现代文：咸很恐惧，不敢取出她来，就走出家门来到街上，占卜那个死去的女人的家。
English: Afraid to take her out, Haman went out into the street and divined the dead woman's house.

古文：须臾，有奴婢六七人，丧服行语，若有寻求者。相与语曰：死尚逸，况生乎？
现代文：过了一会儿，有六七个奴婢，穿着孝服边走边说，象有找人的意思，互相说着：死人还能逃跑，何况活人呢！
English: After a while, there were six or seven men and women, dressed in filial piety, walking about as if they were looking for someone, saying to each other: "A dead man can still escape, let alone a living one!"

古文：咸从而问之，对曰：郎君何用问？
现代文：崔咸跟着问她们，她们回答说：郎君何必问这个！
English: Cui Xian then asked them, and they replied, "Brother-in-law, why do you have to ask this!

古文：固问之，乃曰：吾舍小娘子，亡来三日。
现代文：崔咸坚持问她们。就说：我们家的小娘子，死了已三天，昨夜才装殓。
English: Cui Xian persisted in asking them. He said, "Our little daughter has been dead for three days, and it was only decorated last night.

古文：昨夜方殓，被雷震，尸起出，忽不知所向。
现代文：遭到雷震，尸体从棺中出来，不知到哪去了！
English: After being hit by a thunderstorm, the body came out of the coffin and I don't know where it went!

古文：咸问其形容衣服，皆是宵遁者，乃具昨夜之状。
现代文：崔咸问她的容貌穿着是什么样子，都很象夜里跑来的那个人。
English: Cui Xian asked her what she looked like and what she was wearing. They all looked like the man who had come running in the night.

古文：引至家验之，果是其尸，衣裳足履皆泥污。
现代文：就把昨夜的情况全都说了出来，领她们到家里验证，果然是那个人的尸体！衣裳鞋子都是污泥。
English: I told them everything about the previous night and took them to the house to verify that it was indeed the man's body! His clothes and shoes were covered in mud.

古文：其家大异之。归将葬，其尸重不可致，咸乃奠酒祝语之，乃去，时天宝元年六月。
现代文：那家的人非常奇怪，回去将要给她入葬，那尸体沉重得不能抬起。崔咸就祭酒祈祷，才抬回去了。当时是天宝元年六月。
English: The people of that family were very strange. They were going back to bury her, and the body was too heavy to lift. Cui Xian prayed for the sacrificial wine, and then carried it back. It was June of the first year of Tianbao.

古文：季攸
现代文：季攸
English: Qiu You

古文：天宝初，会稽主簿季攸，有女二人，及携外甥孤女之官。
现代文：天宝初年。会稽主簿季攸，有两个女儿，等同时带外甥孤女来到官府。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Ji You, the chief auditor of the association, who had two daughters, came to the government office with his niece and niece.

古文：有求之者，则嫁己女，己女尽而不及甥。甥恨之，因结怨而死，殡之东郊。
现代文：有来求婚的，就出嫁自己的女儿。自己的女儿都嫁出了却没嫁外甥女，外甥女很忌恨，由于结下怨恨而死。灵柩停放在东郊。
English: If someone came to propose marriage, he would marry his own daughter. His own daughters were all married, but he did not marry his niece. The niece was very jealous and died because she bore a grudge. The coffin was parked in the eastern suburbs.

古文：经数月，所给主簿市胥吏姓杨，大族子也，家甚富，貌且美。
现代文：经过几个月，所给主簿市胥吏姓杨，是个大家族的儿子，家里很富贵。
English: After a few months, he was given the surname Yang, the son of a large family, and the family was very rich.

古文：其家忽有失胥，推寻不得。意其为魅所惑也，则于废墟墓访之。
现代文：相貌又美，他家忽然失去胥吏。推算寻找不到，料想他被鬼所迷惑，就在废墟坟墓中寻找。
English: Handsome and beautiful, his family suddenly lost their priest. Unable to find him, he searched for him among the ruins and tombs, thinking he had been possessed by a ghost.

古文：时大雪，而女殡室有衣裾出。
现代文：当时下大雪，而季攸外甥女的殡室内竟有衣裙出现。
English: It was snowing heavily at the time, and a dress appeared in the funeral room of Ji You's niece.

古文：胥家人引之，则闻屋内胥叫声，而殡宫中甚完，不知从何人。
现代文：胥吏家人率领进去，就听到棺内有胥吏的叫声，可是棺材很完好，不知道是从哪里进去的。
English: When the family members of the executioners led them inside, they heard the cries of the executioners from inside the coffin, but the coffin was in perfect condition and they did not know where it had come from.

古文：遽告主簿，主簿发其棺，女在棺中，与胥同寝，女貌如生。
现代文：家人立刻报告主簿，主簿让人打开那棺材。季攸外甥女在棺材里，和胥吏同睡在一起，外甥女的容貌象活时一样。
English: The family immediately reported the owner's book, and the owner's book had the coffin opened. Ji You's niece was in the coffin, sleeping with the officials, and her appearance was the same as when she was alive.

古文：其家乃出胥，复修殡屋。
现代文：他家就抬出胥吏，又修整殡室。
English: His family took out the funeral director and repaired the funeral parlour.

古文：胥既出如愚，数日方愈。
现代文：胥吏出来以后象傻子，几天才缓过来。
English: After the bailiffs came out, they were like idiots, and it took a few days for them to calm down.

古文：女则下言于主簿曰：吾恨舅不嫁，惟怜己女，不知有吾，故气结死。
现代文：外甥女对主簿说：我恨舅舅不嫁我，只怜爱自己的女儿，不知道有我，所以气绝而死。
English: The niece said to the bookkeeper, "I hate my uncle for not marrying me. I only pity my own daughter. She didn't know I existed, so she died of exhaustion."

古文：今神道使吾嫁与市吏，故辄引与之同衾。
现代文：现在神道让我嫁给市吏，所以我就领引他，和他同床！
English: Now Shinto wants me to marry a city official, so I will seduce him and sleep with him!

古文：既此邑已知，理须见嫁。
现代文：既然这个城邑已经知道，按理应当被嫁！
English: Since the town already knows, she should be married off!

古文：后月一日，可合婚姻。惟舅不以胥吏见期，而违神道。请即知闻，受其所聘，仍待以女胥礼。至月一日，当具饮食，吾迎杨郎。望伏所请焉。
现代文：后月一日，可结为婚姻，只有舅舅不按胥吏的期望，而违背神道的话，请马上听着，接受他的聘礼，照旧以对待女婿的礼节对待胥吏，到了那月一日，应当准备饭菜，我迎接杨郎，希望按我所说的请他。
English: On the first day of the following month, the marriage can be concluded, only if the uncle does not live up to the expectations of the eunuchs, but violates Shinto, please listen immediately, accept his betrothal gift, treat the eunuchs with the etiquette of the son-in-law as before, on the first day of that month, the meal should be prepared, I welcome Yang Lang, I hope to invite him as I said.

古文：主簿惊叹，乃召胥一问。为杨胥，于是纳钱数万，其父母皆会焉。
现代文：主簿惊叹，就召来胥吏一问，当作杨胥，因此收下几万钱，他的父母也都会见了。
English: The head librarian was astonished, and summoned the magistrate to inquire. He thought it was Yang Hui, so he received tens of thousands of money, and his parents also met.

古文：攸乃为外生女造作衣裳帷帐，至月一日，又造馔大会。
现代文：主簿季攸就给外甥女做衣裳帷帐，到了那月一日，又做好饭菜大会宾客。
English: The main bookkeeper, Ji Yu, made clothes and curtains for her niece, and on the first day of the month, she also prepared meals for the guests of the conference.

古文：杨氏鬼又言曰：蒙恩许嫁，不胜其喜，今日故此亲迎杨郎。
现代文：杨氏鬼又说：蒙恩许嫁，不胜欣喜，今天因此亲自迎接杨郎。
English: Yang's ghost also said, "I'm so happy to have been granted the right to marry, so I'm personally greeting Yang Lang today.

古文：言毕，胥暴卒，乃设宴婚礼，厚加棺殓，合葬于东郊。
现代文：说完，胥吏暴死，就摆设阴间婚礼，厚加棺殓，合葬在东郊。
English: Having said that, when the magistrate died violently, they arranged a wedding in the underworld, added a thick coffin, and buried them together in the eastern suburbs.

古文：武德县田叟
现代文：武德县田叟
English: Tianluo, Wude County

古文：武德县酒封村田叟，日晚，将往河内府南，视女家礼事。
现代文：武德县酒封村田叟，天晚时，将要去河内府南面。看看女儿家礼的事。
English: At dusk, Murata Min, a sake brewer from Wude County, will go to the south of Hanoi to see her daughter's wedding.

古文：出村，有二人随之。与叟言，谓叟曰：吾往河南府北，喜翁相随。
现代文：走出村子，有两个人跟着他，和田叟说话，对田叟说：我们去河南府北面，很高兴一起去。
English: When he went out of the village, two people followed him and talked to Tian Tao. They said to Tian Tao, "Let's go to the north of Henan Province. We are happy to go together."

古文：及至路而二人不肯去。
现代文：等到上大道时，那两个人不肯离去。
English: When they reached the main road, the two men refused to leave.

古文：叟视之非凡，乃下驴谓之曰：吾与汝非旧相识，在途相逢，吾观汝指顾，非吉人也。
现代文：田叟看他们不同寻常，就从驴上下来对他们说：我和你们不是老相识，只在路上相遇，我看你们指点观望的样子，不是吉祥的人。
English: Seeing that they were unusual, Tian Yao dismounted from his donkey and said to them, "I haven't known you for a long time, we only met on the road. I see the way you are looking on, and it's not auspicious.

古文：汝姑行，吾从此南出。
现代文：你们姑且走吧，我从这南面走。
English: I'll leave you to it. I'll go from the south.

古文：汝若随吾，吾有返而已，不能偕矣。
现代文：你们如果跟着我，我只有返回罢了。不能一起走了。
English: If you follow me, I'll have to go back. I can't go with you.

古文：二人曰：慕老父德，故此陪随。
现代文：那两个人说：羡慕你的功德，所以这样陪伴着您。
English: The two said, "I admire your merits, so I accompany you like this."

古文：如不愿俱，请从此逝，翁何怒也？
现代文：如果不愿意一起走，请从这里分离，您何必发怒呢！
English: If you don't want to go together, please separate from here. Why should you be angry?

古文：方酬答，适会田叟邻舍子，自东来，问叟何为，叟县以告。
现代文：当他们对话之时，正赶上田叟邻居的儿子，从东面来了，问田叟做什么，田叟把刚才的事全都告诉了他。
English: While they were talking, the son of Tian Yao's neighbor arrived from the east and asked Tian Yao what he was doing. Tian Yao told him everything that had just happened.

古文：邻舍子告二人，老父不愿与君俱，可东去，从老父南行，君何须相绊也？
现代文：领居的儿子告诉那两个人：老人不愿意和你们一起走，你们可以向东去，却跟着老人往南行，你们为啥偏要干扰他呢？
English: The son of the next-door neighbor told the two men: The old man does not want to go with you, you can go to the east, but follow the old man to the south, why do you want to disturb him?

古文：二人曰：诺。
现代文：那两个人说：行。
English: The two men said, "Go ahead.

古文：因东去，叟遂南。邻舍子亦西还，到家未几，闻父老惊家叫。邻舍子问之，叟男曰：父往女家，计今适到。而所乘驴乃却来，何谓也？
现代文：于是他们向东去，田坡就向南走，邻居的儿子也向西返回，他到家不久，就听到老人家里有惊叫声，邻居的儿子上前问，田叟的儿子说：父亲去姐姐家，算计现在正好在那儿，可是所骑的驴却回来了，为什么？
English: So they went east, and Tian Po went south, and the neighbor's son returned to the west. Shortly after he arrived home, he heard screams in the old man's house. The neighbor's son came forward and asked, and Tian Yao's son said: "My father went to my sister's house, and he thought he was right there, but the donkey he was riding came back. Why?"

古文：邻舍子乃告以田叟逢二人状，因与叟男寻之。
现代文：邻居的儿子就把田叟碰见两上人的情况都告诉了他。
English: The neighbor's son told him all about the time when Tian Qi met the two superiors.

古文：至与二人言处，叟死沟中，而衣服甚完，无损伤。乃知二人取叟之鬼也。裴徽
现代文：于是就和田叟的儿子去找田叟。到了和那两个人说话的地方，看见田叟已经死在沟里，可是衣服很完好，没有损伤，就知道那两个人是要田叟命的鬼。裴徽
English: So he and Tian Yao's son went to look for Tian Yao. When they arrived at the place where the two men were talking, they saw that Tian Yao had already died in the ditch, but his clothes were in perfect condition and there was no damage. They knew that the two men wanted to kill Tian Yao.

古文：河东裴徽，河南令回之兄子也。
现代文：河东裴徽，是河南令回的兄长的儿子。
English: Hedong Peihui is the son of the eldest brother of Henan Linghui.

古文：天宝中，曾独步行庄侧，途中见一妇人，容色殊丽，瞻靓艳泆，久之。徽问：何以独行？
现代文：天宝年间，曾独自步行在村庄边，路上看见一个妇人，容貌特别漂亮，光艳照人，过了一会儿，徽问她为什么一个人走。
English: During the Tianbao years, he once walked alone on the edge of the village. On the road, he saw a woman with a particularly beautiful, radiant face. After a while, Hu asked her why she was walking alone.

古文：答云：适婢等有少交易，迟迟不来，故出伺之。
现代文：她回答说：刚才婢女们有点东西要买，迟迟没来，所以出来等候她们。
English: She answered, "The maids were late in coming with something to buy, so I went out to wait for them."

古文：徽有才思，以艳词相调，妇人初不易色，齐献酬数四。
现代文：徽很有才思，用艳词挑逗她。妇人开始不改变脸色，也应酬几句。
English: Hui is very talented and teases her with sweet words. The woman does not change her face at first, but also greets her with a few words.

古文：前至其家，邀徽相过。
现代文：往前走到了她的家，妇人请他探访。
English: He went on to her house, where she invited him to visit.

古文：室宇宏丽。入门后，闻老婢怒云：女子何故令他人来？
现代文：见那室宇宏伟壮丽，进了大门以后，听到老婢女发怒地说：你为什么让别人进来？
English: Seeing the grandeur of the room, after entering the gate, I heard the old maid angrily say: Why did you let someone else come in?

古文：名教中宁有此事。
现代文：名教坊中哪有这样的事？
English: Where is there such a thing in a famous school?

古文：女辞门有贤客，家人问者甚众。
现代文：女子告诉她说门外有位贤能的客人，很多家人过来问。
English: The woman told her that there was a virtuous guest outside the door, and many family members came to ask.

古文：有倾老婢出，见徽辞谢，举动深有士风。
现代文：隔了一会儿老婢女出来，看见徽要告辞，他的一举一动很有士人风度。
English: After a while, the old maid came out, saw the crest and wanted to say goodbye. His every move was very gentlemanly.

古文：须臾，张灯施幕，邀徽入坐。侍数人，各美色，香气芳馥，进止甚闲。
现代文：过一会儿，点灯拉幕邀请裴徽进来坐，几个侍女，各有美色，香气浓郁，举止很闲雅。
English: After a while, the lights were turned on and the curtain was pulled back to invite Pei Hui to come in and sit down. There were several maids, each of whom was beautiful, fragrant, and had a very relaxed and elegant demeanor.

古文：寻令小娘子出云：裴郎何须相避？
现代文：不久让妇人出来，说：裴郎何必躲避我？
English: After a while, the woman came out and said, "Why does Perón have to hide from me?

古文：妇人出，不复入。
现代文：妇人出来，不再进去。
English: The woman came out and did not go in again.

古文：徽窃见室中甚嚣，设绮帐锦茵，如欲嫁者，独心喜欲留。
现代文：徽偷偷看见屋里很喧闹，摆设绮帐锦绣垫子，象要出嫁似的，他独自欣喜想要留下。
English: Hu secretly saw that there was a lot of noise in the room, and it was decorated with brocade curtains and embroidered cushions, as if they were getting married. He was so happy that he wanted to stay alone.

古文：会腹胀，起如厕，所持古剑，可以辟恶。
现代文：正赶上他腹胀，起身到厕所。所拿的古剑，可以避邪。
English: Just as his bloating was catching up with him, he got up and went to the toilet. The ancient sword he took could ward off evil.

古文：厕毕。
现代文：上完厕所，他拿剑削纸。
English: After going to the toilet, he took a sword and whittled paper.

古文：取剑坏纸，忽见剑光粲然，执之欲回，不复见室宇人物。
现代文：忽然看见剑光璀璨，他拿剑要回去，却再看不见屋里的人和物。
English: Suddenly he saw the sword shining brightly. He wanted to take the sword and go back, but he could no longer see the people and things in the room.

古文：顾视在孤墓上丛棘中，因大号叫。
现代文：环顾周围发现自己在孤墓上的丛棘中，于是大声哭叫。
English: Looking around, he found himself in a thicket of thorns on a lonely grave, so he cried loudly.

古文：家人识徽，持烛寻之。去庄百余步，瞪视不能言，久之方悟尔。
现代文：家人听出是裴徽，拿蜡烛寻找他，离村庄一百多步，见他瞪眼看大家说不出话，很久才明白过来。
English: Family members heard that it was Pei Hui, took candles to look for him, more than a hundred steps away from the village. Seeing him staring at everyone speechless, it took a long time to understand.

古文：李陶
现代文：李陶
English: Li Tao

古文：天宝中，陇西李陶，寓居新郑。
现代文：天宝年间，陇西李陶，住在新郑，常常睡在他的屋中。
English: During the Tenpo era, the Shaanxi Li Tao, who lived in Xinzheng, often slept in his house.

古文：常寝其室，睡中有人摇之，陶惊起，见一婢袍裤，容色甚美。
现代文：睡觉时有人摇晃他，陶惊惧地站起来，看见一个婢女穿着袍裤，容貌很美丽。
English: Someone shook him while he was sleeping, and Tao stood up in fright and saw a beautiful maid in robes and trousers.

古文：陶问：那忽得至此？
现代文：李陶问她怎么忽然能够到这里？
English: Li Tao asked her how she was suddenly able to get here?

古文：婢云：郑女郎欲相诣。
现代文：婢女说：郑女郎想要到你这来。
English: The maid said, "Lady Zheng wants to come to you."

古文：顷之，异香芬馥，有美女从西北陬壁中出，至床所再拜。
现代文：顷刻之间，异香芬芳，有个美女从西北板壁里出来，到床那儿拜了又拜。
English: In an instant, fragrant and fragrant, a beautiful woman came out of the northwest board wall and bowed and bowed to the bed.

古文：陶知是鬼，初不交语，妇人惭怍却退。
现代文：李陶知道她是鬼。最初也不和她说话。美女惭愧退去。
English: Li Tao knew that she was a ghost. At first, he did not speak to her. The beautiful woman was ashamed to leave.

古文：婢慢骂数四云：田舍郎，待人故如是耶？
现代文：婢女谩骂几次说：田舍郎，能这样待人吗？
English: The maid scolded him several times and said, "Tashero, can you treat people like this?

古文：令我女郎愧耻无量。
现代文：让我们女郎羞愧得无地自容？
English: Let's make our girls feel ashamed of themselves?

古文：陶悦其美色，亦心讶之，因绐云：女郎何在？
现代文：李陶喜欢她的美色，心里非常惊讶，于是哄骗说：女郎在哪里？
English: Li Tao liked her beauty and was very surprised, so he lied and said, "Where is the girl?"

古文：吾本未见，可更呼之。
现代文：我本来没有看见，可以再召呼她。
English: I didn't see her, so I can call her again.

古文：婢云来。
现代文：婢女说来吧。
English: Let the maid speak.

古文：又云：女郎重君旧缘，且将复至，忽复如初，可以殷勤也。
现代文：又说：女郎重视您的旧情，还将再来，不要再象当初那样，应该热情对待。
English: He also said: The girl values your old feelings and will come again. Don't be like you were at the beginning. You should treat her warmly.

古文：及至，陶下床致敬，延止偶坐，须臾相近。
现代文：等她到了，李陶下床表示敬意，邀请她两人并坐，不一会儿又靠近点儿。
English: When she arrived, Li Tao got out of bed to show his respect and invited her to sit next to him. Soon, they moved closer again.

古文：女郎貌既绝代，陶深悦之，留连十余日。
现代文：女郎相貌已经是绝代佳人，李陶非常高兴，逗留了十多天。
English: The girl's appearance is already a great beauty. Li Tao was very happy and stayed for more than ten days.

古文：陶母躬自窥觇，累使左右呼陶，陶恐阻己志，亦终不出。
现代文：李陶母亲亲自窥视，多次让左右的人召呼李陶。李陶担心母亲阻碍自己的心愿，也始终不出来。
English: Li Tao's mother personally spied on him and repeatedly had people around him call for Li Tao. Li Tao was worried that his mother was hindering his wishes, and he was never able to find out.

古文：妇云：大家召君，何以不往？得无坐罪于我？
现代文：妇人说：大家召呼你，为什么不出来，该不会怪罪我吧？
English: The woman said, "Everyone is calling for you. Why don't you come out? Won't you blame me?"

古文：陶乃诣母，母流涕谓陶曰：汝承人昭穆，乃有鬼妇乎？
现代文：李陶就到母亲那儿去，母亲流泪对李陶说：你要承继李家宗嗣，该有鬼妇吗？
English: Li Tao went to his mother, and his mother shed tears and said to Li Tao: "You want to succeed the Li family's heir, should you have a ghost wife?

古文：陶云改之。自尔留连，半岁不去。
现代文：李陶说改正，从此在这留连，半年也不离去。
English: Li Tao said that he had made a correction and would stay here for the next six months.

古文：其后陶参选，之上都，留妇在房。
现代文：以后李陶参加选职，到了上都，留妇人在房间。
English: After that, Li Tao participated in the election, and when he arrived in Shangdu, he left his wife in the room.

古文：陶后遇疾笃，鬼妇在房，谓其婢云：李郎今疾亟，为之奈何？
现代文：李陶后来得了重病。鬼妇在房里，对她的婢女说：李郎现在病急，该怎么办？
English: Li Tao later fell seriously ill. The ghost woman was in the room and said to her maid: "Li Lang is very ill now, what should I do?"

古文：当相与往省问。
现代文：应当和我去探问！
English: You should go and investigate with me!

古文：其夕，至陶所，相见忻悦。
现代文：到了潼关，被鬼关司所阻拦，有几天也不能通过。
English: When I got to Shaoguan, I was blocked by the ghost guard, and I couldn't pass for a few days.

古文：陶问：何得至此？
现代文：正赶上李陶堂兄也去赴选，进潼关，鬼得以跟着过关。
English: Just in time, Li Tao's cousin also went to the election, and entered the pass, and the ghost was able to pass the pass.

古文：云：见卿疾甚，故此相视。
现代文：那天晚上，到了李陶住的地方，相见很高兴。
English: That evening, when I arrived at the place where Li Tao lived, I was very happy to see him.

古文：素所持药，因和以饮陶，陶疾寻愈。
现代文：李陶问她怎么能到这里，回答说：看见你病得厉害，所以在这见面。真情地拿着药，就调好给李陶喝了。
English: Li Tao asked her how she got here, and she replied, "I saw that you were very ill, so I met you here. I sincerely took the medicine and prepared it for Li Tao to drink."

古文：其年选得临津尉，与妇同众至舍。
现代文：李陶病不久就好了，那年当选成临津尉，和妇人一同回到住舍。
English: Li Tao soon recovered from his illness. That year, he was elected as a lieutenant of Linjin and returned to his residence with his wife.

古文：数日，当之官。鬼辞不行，问其故，云：相与缘尽，不得复去。
现代文：过几天，李陶去上任，鬼告辞不去，问她原因，就说：和你的缘份已尽，不能再去。
English: After a few days, Li Tao went to take office, and the ghost said goodbye and did not go. When I asked her why, she said: "Your fate is over, you can no longer go."

古文：言别凄怆，自此遂绝。
现代文：告别语言凄怆，从此就销声匿迹。
English: The farewell speech was dismal and has since disappeared.

古文：长洲陆氏女
现代文：长洲陆氏女
English: Nagasu Lu's daughter

古文：长洲县丞陆某，家素贫。
现代文：长洲县丞陆某，家境一向贫寒。
English: Mr. Lu, a resident of Changzhou County, has always been poor.

古文：三月三日，家人悉游虎丘寺，女年十五六，以无衣不得往，独与一婢守舍。
现代文：三月三日，家人全去游览虎丘寺。女儿年龄十五六岁，因为没有衣服不能去，独自和一个婢女守着房舍。
English: On March 3, the whole family went to visit the Tiger Hill Temple. My daughter, who is 15 or 16 years old, couldn't go because she didn't have any clothes, so she guarded the building alone with a maid.

古文：父母既行，慨叹投井而死。
现代文：父母走了以后，她慨叹之余投井而死。
English: After her parents left, she threw herself into a well and died.

古文：父母以是为感，悲泣数日，乃权殡长洲县。
现代文：父母因此很悲伤，悲泣了几天，就把尸体暂且停放在长洲县。
English: As a result, the parents were very sad and cried for several days, so they temporarily parked the body in Cheung Chau County.

古文：后一岁许，有陆某者，曾省其姑。
现代文：以后一年左右，有个姓陆的，曾经探望她的姑姑，姑姑家和那个女子殡葬的地方很近。
English: About a year later, a woman surnamed Lu visited her aunt, who lived very close to the place where the woman was buried.

古文：姑家与女殡相近，经殡宫过，有小婢随后，云：女郎欲暂相见。某不得已，随至其家。
现代文：经过殡宫，有个小婢女跟在后面，说：女郎想要暂时相见。陆某不得已，跟着到她的家。
English: After passing the funeral home, a little maid followed behind, saying: "The girl wants to see me for a while. Lu Mou had no choice but to follow her to her home."

古文：家门卑小，女郎靓妆，容色婉丽。问云：君得非长洲百姓耶？
现代文：家门很窄小，女郎美丽端庄，容貌婉丽，问道：你不是长洲百姓吗？
English: The door of the house is very narrow and small, the girl is beautiful and dignified, her appearance is graceful, she asked: Aren't you a Changzhou people?

古文：我是陆丞女，非人，鬼耳。
现代文：我是陆丞的女儿，不是人，是鬼。
English: I am Lu Cheng's daughter, not a person, but a ghost.

古文：欲请君传语与府。今临顿李十八求婚，吾是室女，义难自嫁。
现代文：想请你传话给我家，现在临顿李十八求婚，我是有家的女儿，从道义上说难以自己出嫁。
English: I would like to invite you to send a message to my family, and now Linton Lee XVIII has proposed marriage. I am a daughter with a family, and it is morally difficult for me to get married.

古文：可与白大人，若许为婚，当传语至此，其人尚留殡宫中。少时，当州坊正，从殡宫边过，见有衣带出外，视之，见妇人。
现代文：可以告诉大人，如果答应成婚，应当传话到这里。那人还留在殡宫里，不多会儿，当州坊正，从殡宫边经过，看见衣带露出来，仔细一看，见是妇人。
English: You can tell the adults that if you agree to get married, you should send a message here. The man remained in the funeral home, and soon, when the prefect was passing by the funeral home, he saw the dress exposed, and when he took a closer look, he saw a woman.

古文：以白丞。
现代文：把这事告诉陆丞，丞亲自去。
English: Tell this to Lu Zheng, and Zheng Zheng will go in person.

古文：丞自往，使开壁取某，置之厅上，数日能言。
现代文：让人打开殡宫墙壁取出陆某，放在厅里，几天才能说话。
English: Let someone open the walls of the funeral home, take out Lu Mou, and put him in the hall. It will be a few days before he can speak.

古文：问焉得至彼，某以女言对，丞叹息。
现代文：陆丞问陆某怎么能到那儿，陆某把女子的话告诉他。陆丞叹息，派人寻问临顿李十八。
English: Lu Zheng asked Lu Mou how he could get there, and Lu Mou told him the woman's words. Lu Zheng sighed and sent someone to inquire about Linton Li 18.

古文：寻令人问临顿李十八，果有之，而无恙自若。初不为信，后数日乃病，病数日卒。
现代文：果然有这个人，却没有病很正常。最初不相信，过几天就病了，病几天就死了。
English: At first, I didn't believe it, but after a few days I got sick, and after a few days I died.

古文：举家叹恨，竟将女与李子为冥婚。
现代文：全家叹息悔恨，最终让女儿和李十八结为阴间婚姻。
English: The whole family sighed with remorse, and finally let their daughter and Li Shichang get married in the underworld.

古文：刁缅
现代文：刁缅
English: Burma/Myanmar

古文：宣城太守刁缅，本以武进。
现代文：宣城太守刁缅，本来凭武功进取，最初做玉门军使。
English: Xuancheng Taishou Yuming, originally advanced by virtue of martial arts, was originally a military envoy of the Jade Gate.

古文：初为玉门军使，有厕神形见外厩，形如大猪，遍体皆有眼，出入溷中，游行院内。
现代文：有个厕神，在外面的马圈出现，形状象大猪，全身都有眼睛，出入在厕所里，游行在院内。
English: There is a toilet god, appearing outside the stable, shaped like a large pig, with eyes all over his body, entering and leaving in the toilet, and parading in the yard.

古文：缅时不在，官吏兵卒见者千余人。
现代文：刁缅当时不在家，官吏兵卒看见的有一千多人。
English: Yiming was not at home at the time, but more than a thousand officials and soldiers saw him.

古文：如是数日。缅归，祭以祈福，厕神乃灭。
现代文：象这样几天，刁缅回家了，祭祀来祈祷求福，厕神就消失了。
English: After a few days like this, the Burmese went home, made sacrifices to pray for good fortune, and the toilet god disappeared.

古文：缅旬迁伊州刺史，又改左卫率右骁卫将军左羽林将军，遂贵矣。
现代文：刁缅十天后升到伊州做刺吏，又调转做左卫率右骁卫将军左羽林将军，从此富贵了。
English: Ten days later, Ermye was promoted to Izhou to be an assassin, and then transferred to be the left guard and the right guard general, General Zuo Yulin, and has been rich ever since.

古文：王无有
现代文：王无有
English: Wang Wuyue

古文：楚丘主簿王无有，新娶，妻美而妒。
现代文：楚丘主簿王无有新娶妻子，妻子漂亮却嫉妒。
English: Chu Qiu's chief bookkeeper, Wang Muyu, has a new wife. The wife is beautiful, but jealous.

古文：无有疾，将如厕，而难独行，欲与侍婢俱，妻不可。
现代文：王无有病了，要到厕所，却难以自己去，想和侍女一起去，妻子不答应。
English: Wang Muyu is ill. He wants to go to the toilet, but it is difficult for him to go by himself. He wants to go with the maid, but his wife does not agree.

古文：无有至厕，于垣穴中，见人背坐，色黑且壮。
现代文：王无有到厕所，在墙洞里，看见有人背坐着，肤色黑又很健壮。
English: Wang Muyu went to the toilet, and in the wall cavity, he saw someone sitting on his back, with a dark and robust complexion.

古文：无有以为役夫，不之怪也。
现代文：王无有以为是役夫，没有感到奇怪。
English: Wang Muyu thought it was a servant and did not feel surprised.

古文：顷之，此人回顾，深目巨鼻，虎口乌爪。谓无有曰：盍与子鞋。
现代文：过了一会儿，这个人回头看，只见他深陷的睛睛，巨大的鼻子，虎口乌爪，对王无有说：把你的鞋给我。
English: After a while, the man looked back, only to see his deep-set eyes, huge nose, and black talons, and said to Wang Muyi: "Give me your shoes."

古文：无有惊，未及应，怪自穴引手，直取其鞋，口咀之。鞋中血见，如食肉状，遂尽之。
现代文：王无有惊恐，没等回答，妖怪从洞穴中伸出手，直来拿他的鞋，嘴里嚼着，鞋里出现血，象吃肉的样子，就吃光了。
English: Wang Mu was terrified. Without waiting for an answer, the specter reached out from the cave and reached for his shoes, chewing them in its mouth. Blood appeared in the shoes, as if it were eating meat, and it ate them up.

古文：无有恐，先告其妻，且尤之曰：仆有疾如厕，虽一婢相送，君适固拒。
现代文：王无有惊恐，先告诉他的妻子，又责怪她说：我有病到厕所仅仅让一个婢女送我，你就坚决阻拦。
English: Wang Muyu was horrified. He first told his wife, and then blamed her: "I'm too sick to go to the toilet, just let a maid take me, and you will resolutely stop me."

古文：果遇妖怪，奈何？
现代文：果真遇到妖怪，怎么办？
English: If you do encounter a monster, what should you do?

古文：妇犹不信，乃同观之。
现代文：妇人还不信，就一同去看看。
English: When she still did not believe, they went to have a look.

古文：无有坐厕，怪又见，夺余一鞋。
现代文：王无有到厕所，妖怪又出现了，夺他剩下的那只鞋，嚼着。
English: When Wang Muyu went to the toilet, the specter appeared again, snatching his remaining shoe and chewing it.

古文：妻恐，扶无有还。
现代文：妻子惊恐。搀扶王无有回屋。
English: His wife was terrified. The relief king had no home to return to.

古文：他日，无有至后院，怪又见，语无有曰：吾归汝鞋。
现代文：另一天，王无有到后院，妖怪又出现了，它告诉王无有说：我还给你鞋。
English: The next day, Wang Mu You went to the backyard, and the monster appeared again. It told Wang Mu You, "I'll give you your shoes back."

古文：因投其旁，鞋并无伤。
现代文：于是将鞋扔在王无有旁边，鞋并没有损坏。
English: So he threw the shoe next to Wang Mu Rong. The shoe was not damaged.

古文：无有请巫解奏，鬼复谓巫：王主簿禄尽，余百日寿。不速归，死于此。
现代文：王无有请巫婆解释这件事，鬼又对巫婆说：王主簿官禄做到头了，还有一百多天活头，不快回家，就死在这。
English: Wang Wuyu asked the witch to explain the matter, and the ghost said to the witch, "The king's official salary has been paid, and he still has more than a hundred days to live. If he doesn't go home soon, he will die here."

古文：无有遂归乡，如期而卒。
现代文：王无有于是返回家乡，到预算的日子就死了。
English: So Wang Mu You returned to his hometown and died on the day of the budget.

古文：王升
现代文：王升
English: Wang Sheng

古文：吴郡陆望，寄居河内。表弟王升，与望居相近。
现代文：吴郡陆望，寄住河内，表弟王升，和陆望住得很近。
English: Cousin Wang Sheng from Luwang, Wuxi County, stayed in Hanoi and lived very close to Luwang.

古文：晨谒望，行至庄南故村人杨侃宅篱间，忽见物两手据厕，大耳深目，虎鼻猪牙，面色紫而斒斓，直视于升，惧而走。
现代文：早晨拜见陆望，走到村庄南边已经死去的村人杨侃宅院里，忽然看见个怪物，两手按着厕所，大耳朵、深陷的眼睛，虎鼻猪牙，面容呈紫色而且斑斑点点，直看着王升。
English: In the morning, he went to see Lu Wang, walked to the dead villager Yang Kan's house on the south side of the village, and suddenly saw a monster, with both hands on the toilet, big ears, deep-set eyes, tiger snout and teeth, face purple and speckled, looking straight at Wang Sheng.

古文：见望言之，望曰：吾闻见厕神无不立死，汝其勉之。
现代文：王升惊恐而逃，看见陆望就说了这事。陆望说：我听说看见厕神的没有不立刻死的，你要努力活呀。
English: Wang Sheng panicked and fled. When he saw Lu Wang, he told Lu Wang about this. Lu Wang said, "I heard that if you see the Toilet God, you will not die immediately. You should try to live."

古文：升意大恶，及还即死。
现代文：王升料想要有极凶的事发生，等到回家就死了。
English: Wang Shengyo wanted something terrible to happen, and he would die when he got home.

古文：高生
现代文：高生
English: High school students

古文：天宝中，有渤海高生者，亡其名。病热而瘠，其臆痛不可忍。
现代文：天宝年间，有个渤海的高生，忘了他的名字，病情严重而且身体瘦弱，胸中痛不可忍，召呼医生看病。
English: During the Tianbao era, a high school student in Bohai forgot his name. He was seriously ill and weak, with unbearable pain in his chest. He called for a doctor.

古文：召医视之，医曰：有鬼在臆中，药可以及。于是煮药而饮之，忽觉暗中动摇。
现代文：医生说：有鬼在你的胸中，药可以治到。于是煮药喝了，忽觉暗中有人摇动他。
English: The doctor said: "There is a ghost in your chest, the medicine can cure it." So he boiled the medicine and drank it, and suddenly he felt someone shaking him in the dark.

古文：有顷，吐涎斗余，其中凝固不可解，以刀剖之，有一人涎中起。初甚么麽，俄长数尺。
现代文：过了一会儿，吐出口水有一斗多，其中有个不可解化的固体。用刀剖开它，有一个人从口水中站起，开始很小，很快长到几尺。
English: After a while, he spat out a bucketful of water with an indissoluble solid in it. He cut it open with a knife, and a man stood up from the saliva, starting small and quickly growing to several feet.

古文：高生欲苦之，其人趋出，降阶遽不见。
现代文：高生想要让他吃点儿苦头，那个人赶紧出来，跑下台阶立刻不见了。
English: The high school student wanted to give him a hard time, but the man hurried out, ran down the steps and immediately disappeared.

古文：自是疾闻。
现代文：从此以这种疾病闻名。
English: Since then, the disease has not been well known.

