古文：杨博，字惟约，蒲州人。
现代文：杨博，字惟约，蒲州人。
English: Yang Bo, also known as Wei Yu, is a native of Puzhou.

古文：父瞻，御史，终四川佥事。
现代文：其父杨瞻，曾任御史，死于四川佥事职任上。
English: His father, Yang Zhan, who once held the post of imperial historian, died in office in Sichuan.

古文：博登嘉靖八年进士，除盩啡知县，调长安。
现代文：杨博名载嘉靖八年进士榜，授职为稨知县，调迁到长安。
English: Yang Bo's name was listed in the eight-year promotion list of Jiajing. He was assigned to Shuchi County and transferred to Chang'an.

古文：征为兵部武库主事，历职方郎中。
现代文：被征召为兵部武库主事，担任过职方郎中。
English: He was called up to be in charge of the arsenal of the Ministry of Military Affairs and served as a former henchman.

古文：大学士翟銮巡九边，以博自随。
现代文：大学士翟銮巡视九边，让杨博跟随自己。
English: Zou, a university scholar, inspected the nine sides and asked Yang Bo to follow him.

古文：所过山川形势，土俗好恶，士卒多寡强弱，皆疏记之。
现代文：所有经过的山川形势，当地习俗好坏，士卒多寡强弱，都分门别类做了记载。
English: All the mountain and river situations that have passed, the good and bad of local customs, and the number of strong and weak soldiers have been recorded by category.

古文：至肃州，属番数百遮道邀赏。
现代文：抵达肃州，臣属的少数民族民众几百人阻塞道路请求封赏。
English: Arriving in Suzhou, hundreds of ethnic minority people blocked the road to request a reward.

古文：銮虑来者益众，不能给。
现代文：翟銮顾虑前来求赏的人会更多，自己不能进行遍赏。
English: There will be more people who come to ask for the award, but they can't do it themselves.

古文：博请銮盛仪卫，集诸番辕门外，数以天子宰相至，不悉众远迎，将缚以属吏。
现代文：杨博请求翟銮盛大仪卫，将少数民族民众召集到辕门外，训斥道，天子宰相驾到，不全体远迎，拟将他们绑缚送给负责官吏。
English: Yang Bo asked Yu Sheng Da Yi Wei to gather the ethnic minority people outside the city gate, and scolded them, saying that if the Prime Minister did not arrive, they would all be welcomed far away, and he intended to tie them up and send them to the responsible officials.

古文：诸番罗拜请罪，乃稍赉其先至者，余皆惧不复来。
现代文：少数民族民众环列跪拜请罪，于是翟銮对先来的人稍示赏赐，其余的人都畏惧而不敢再来。
English: Ethnic minority people kneel in a row to ask for forgiveness, so the gong shows a little reward to the first person to come, and the rest of the people are afraid and dare not come again.

古文：銮还，荐博可属大事。
现代文：翟銮返回后，举荐杨博可以担当大任。
English: After Zou's return, Yang Bo, who was recommended by Zou, can take on the important post.

古文：吉囊、俺答岁盗边，尚书张瓒一切倚办博。
现代文：吉囊、俺答在年关时骚扰边关，尚书张瓒一概倚仗杨博经办。
English: Yoshizuku and I both harassed the border guards at the New Year's Eve, and Shangshu and Zhang Ye both leaned on Yang Bo for help.

古文：帝或中夜降手诏，博随事条答，悉称旨。
现代文：有时皇帝半夜传下手谕，杨博依事条分缕析，都合乎皇帝心意。
English: Sometimes, the emperor would issue an edict in the middle of the night, and Yang Bo would analyze it according to the article, which suited the emperor's mind.

古文：毛伯温代瓒，博当迁，特奏留之。
现代文：毛伯温取代张瓒后，杨博本该调走，毛伯温却特意上奏挽留他。
English: After Mao Bowen replaced Zhang Ye, Yang Bo should have been transferred away, but Mao Bowen deliberately kept him.

古文：已，迁山东提学副使，转督粮参政。
现代文：不久，调任山东提学副使，转任督粮参政。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of vice-envoy of Shandong to promote education, and then to the post of governor of grain to participate in politics.

古文：二十五年，超拜右佥都御史，巡抚甘肃。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年越级提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚甘肃。
English: In the 25th year of Jiajing's reign, he was promoted to the rank of Right Handed Metropolitan Historian, and became the governor of Gansu Province.

古文：大兴屯利，请募民垦田，永不征租。
现代文：大兴屯垦之利，奏请皇帝招募百姓垦荒造田，永远不征租税。
English: Daxing the benefits of settlement and reclamation, the emperor was asked to recruit people to reclaim wasteland and build fields, and never levy taxes.

古文：又以暇修筑肃州榆树泉及甘州平川境外大芦泉诸处墩台，凿龙首诸渠。
现代文：并利用闲暇修筑肃州榆树泉和甘州平川境外大芦泉等处的墩台，开凿龙首等渠道。
English: He also used his leisure time to build a platform at the Eucalyptus Spring in Suizhou and the Dairu Spring outside of Pingchuan, Gansu, and to excavate channels such as the Dragon's Head.

古文：初，罕东属番避土鲁番乱，迁肃州境上，时与居民戕杀。
现代文：开始，罕东臣服的少数民族躲避吐鲁番的骚扰，迁徙到肃州境内，时常与当地居民搏杀。
English: At first, the ethnic minorities of Handong Subjugation evaded the harassment of Turpan, migrated to the territory of Suzhou, and often fought with the local residents.

古文：监生李时旸以为言，事下守臣。
现代文：监生李时因此发表言论，事情下派到守臣处理。
English: As a result, the prison inmate Li Shiji made a statement, and the matter was sent to Shoucheng for handling.

古文：博为筑金塔、白城七堡，召其长，令率属徙居之。
现代文：杨博为此修筑了白城等七堡，召集他们的头人，命令他们率领部属迁徙到那里居住。
English: To this end, Yang Bo built seven fortresses such as Baicheng, summoned their chiefs, and ordered them to lead their subordinates to migrate and live there.

古文：诸番徙七百余帐，州境为之肃清。
现代文：少数民族民众迁徙了七百多帐，州境因此得到整肃。
English: Ethnic minority people have migrated more than seven hundred accounts, and the state border has thus been rectified.

古文：总兵官王继祖却寇永昌，镇羌参将蔡勋等战镇番、山丹，三告捷，斩首百四十余级。
现代文：总兵官王继祖在永昌击退敌寇，镇羌参将蔡勋等在镇番、山丹奋战，三战三捷，杀敌一百四十余众。
English: The general officer Wang Jizu repelled the enemy corsairs in Yongchang, and the town gendarme general Cai Xun and others fought hard in Zhenban and Shandan, winning three battles and three victories, killing more than one hundred and forty enemies.

古文：进博右副都御史。
现代文：杨博被提升为右副都御史。
English: Yang Bo was promoted to the post of Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian.

古文：以母忧归。
现代文：因为母亲的丧事归乡。
English: He returned home because of his mother's death.

古文：仇鸾镇甘肃，总督曾铣劾之，诏逮治。
现代文：仇鸾镇守甘肃，总督曾铣弹劾他，皇帝下诏逮捕他治罪。
English: The governor Zeng Yao impeached him, and the emperor issued an edict to arrest and punish him.

古文：博亦发其贪罔三十事。
现代文：杨博也揭发了他三十件贪赃欺骗的事。
English: Yang Bo also exposed his thirty cases of corruption and deception.

古文：鸾拜大将军，数毁之，帝不听。
现代文：鸾授职大将军，屡次诋毁他，皇帝没有理睬。
English: The emperor did not pay any attention to Zou Jianzhong, who had repeatedly slandered him.

古文：服阕，鸾已诛，召拜兵部右侍郎。
现代文：杨博服丧期满，仇鸾已被处死，皇帝召见并授予他兵部右侍郎。
English: When Yang Bo's period of mourning was over and his enemy had been executed, the emperor summoned him and awarded him the title of Right Attendant of the Military Department.

古文：转左，经略蓟州、保定。
现代文：旋即任左侍郎，为苏州、保定经略。
English: He was immediately appointed as the Left Attendant, and oversaw the administration of Suzhou and Baoding.

古文：初，俺答薄都城，由潮河川入，议者争请为备。
现代文：起初，俺答迫近都城，从潮河川入关，谏者纷纷请求做好防备。
English: At first, I was told that I was approaching the capital, entering from the tidal rivers and rivers, and I was asked to be prepared.

古文：水湍悍，不可城。
现代文：因水流湍急，不能修筑城墙。
English: Due to the rapid flow of water, it is impossible to build the city wall.

古文：博缘水势建石墩，置戍守，还督京城九门。
现代文：杨博依照水势修建石墩，安排戍卒守卫，自己返京督守京城九门。
English: Yang Bo built a stone watchtower according to the water level, arranged guards for the watchtower, and returned to Beijing to guard the nine gates of the capital.

古文：时因寇警，岁七月分兵守陴。
现代文：当时因为敌寇警报，当年七月分派兵士守卫城垛。
English: At that time, soldiers were assigned to guard the castle moat in July of that year because of the enemy's alarm.

古文：博曰： 寇至，须镇静，奈何先事自扰？ 
现代文：杨博告诫： 敌寇来了，必须镇静，怎么能事先自扰！ 
English: Yang Bo cautioned: the enemy bandits are coming, we must be calm, how can we disturb ourselves in advance!

古文：罢其令。
现代文：罢免了县令。
English: The county magistrate was dismissed.

古文：寻迁总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：不久调任蓟、辽、保定总督负责军务。
English: He was soon transferred to be in charge of military affairs as the governor of Handan, Liao and Baoding.

古文：博以蓟逼京师，护畿甸陵寝为大，分布诸将，画地为防。
现代文：杨博认为蓟州近临京都，护卫京都地区和皇族陵寝为大，分遣众将，划地设防。
English: Yang Bo believed that Bozhou was close to Kyoto, and the protection of the Kyoto area and the imperial mausoleum was of great importance. He dispatched generals and set up fortifications.

古文：三十三年秋，把都儿及打来孙十余万骑犯蓟镇，攻墙。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年秋天，把都儿和打来孙十多万骑兵进犯蓟镇，攻攀城墙。
English: In the autumn of the 33rd year of Jiajing, more than one hundred thousand cavalry marched into the town and scaled the city wall.

古文：帝忧甚，数遣骑侦博。
现代文：皇帝很担忧，多次派遣快骑侦探杨博。
English: The emperor was very worried and repeatedly dispatched the fast-riding detective Yang Bo.

古文：博擐甲宿古北口城上，督总兵官周益昌等力御。
现代文：杨博穿戴盔甲露宿在古北口城墙上，督促总兵官周益昌等人奋力抵抗。
English: Yang Bo wore armor and camped out on the ancient north gate of the city wall, urging the chief military officer Zhou Yichang and others to resist.

古文：帝大喜，驰赐绯豸衣，犒军万金。
现代文：皇帝大为欢慰。派快骑赐送绯豸衣，犒赏军士万两白银。
English: The emperor was greatly pleased. He sent a swift rider to give away the robe and rewarded the sergeant with ten thousand taels of silver.

古文：寇攻四昼夜不得入，乃并攻孤山口，登墙。
现代文：敌寇攻打了四昼夜也没能攻入，便合力攻击孤山口，登临城墙。
English: The enemy raiders fought for four days and nights, but were unable to break in. They then joined forces to attack the lonely mountain pass and reached the city wall.

古文：官军断一人腕，乃退屯虎头山。
现代文：官军斩断了一名敌寇的手腕，敌寇退却后在虎头山驻扎。
English: The government army cut off the wrist of an enemy robber. After the enemy robber retreated, he was stationed in Kudu Mountain.

古文：博募死士，夜以火惊其营，寇扰乱，比明悉去。
现代文：杨博招募敢死队，夜间用火器惊扰敌营。敌寇忧虑烦乱，天刚亮就全部撤离。
English: Yang Bo recruited death squads and used firearms to scare the enemy camp at night. The enemy raiders were worried and upset, and they all withdrew at first light.

古文：进右都御史，荫子锦衣千户。
现代文：杨博晋升为右都御史，荫庇儿子为锦衣千户。
English: Yang Bo was promoted to the position of the Right Metropolitan Historian, and his son, Yingbi, was promoted to the highest position of the thousand households.

古文：明年，打来孙复入益昌，击却之。
现代文：第二年，打来孙又攻入益昌，杨博击退了他们。
English: The following year, when Sun made another attack on Yichang, Yang Bo repelled them.

古文：遂擢博兵部尚书，录防秋功，加太子少保。
现代文：朝廷提拔杨博任兵部尚书，簿录秋防的功绩，加封太子少保。
English: The imperial court promoted Yang Bo to the post of military secretary, recorded his achievements in the autumn defense, and promoted him to the post of crown prince.

古文：严嵩父子招权利，诸司为所挠，博一切格不行。
现代文：严嵩父子招揽权力，诸司职权时常受到干扰，杨博恪守职责，一切不允通融。
English: Yan Song and his son solicited power, the powers and functions of various departments were often interfered with, Yang Bo adhered to his duties, and did not allow any accommodation.

古文：嵩恨博，会丁父忧去。
现代文：严嵩恼恨杨博，杨博遇上父亲的丧事而辞官。
English: Yan Song resented Yang Bo. When Yang Bo's father passed away, he resigned from his post.

古文：兵部尚书许论罢，帝起博代之。
现代文：兵部尚书许论罢官，皇帝起用杨博代替他。
English: He was dismissed by the Ministry of Military Affairs, and the emperor appointed Yang Bo to replace him.

古文：博未终丧，疏辞。
现代文：杨博丧服日期未满，上疏推辞。
English: Yang Bo's funeral date has not yet expired, and his resignation has been rescinded.

古文：而帝以大同右卫围急，改博总督宣、大、山西军务。博墨縗驰出关。
现代文：但是皇帝以大同右卫围困急迫，改派杨博总督宣府、大同、山西军务，杨博穿戴黑孝服奔驰出关。
English: However, the emperor was in a hurry due to the siege of Datong Uwei, and reassigned Yang Bo, the governor of Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi, to military affairs. Yang Bo wore a black filial piety uniform and drove out of the pass in a Mercedes.

古文：未至，侍郎江东等以大军进，寇引去。
现代文：杨博还未抵达，侍郎江东等大军进击，敌寇已经离开。
English: Yang Bo hadn't arrived yet, but his attendant Jiang Dong and other large armies were advancing, and the enemy bandits had already left.

古文：时右卫围六月，守将王德战亡，城中刍粟且尽，士死守无二心。
现代文：当时，右卫被围困六个月，守将王德阵亡，城中粮草耗尽，士卒誓死守卫而无反叛之心。
English: At that time, the right guard was besieged for six months, the guard Wang De was killed, the grain and grass in the city were exhausted, and the soldiers swore to guard and not rebel.

古文：博厚抚恤，奏行善后十事。
现代文：杨博大加抚恤，奏请办理十件善后事宜。
English: Yang Bo gave him a big raise and asked him to deal with ten issues.

古文：以给事中张学颜言，留博镇抚。
现代文：因为给事中张学颜的谏言，皇帝留下杨博任镇抚。
English: Because of Zhang Xueyan's criticism in the matter, the emperor left Yang Bo in charge.

古文：奏蠲被寇租，因佥其丁壮为义勇，分隶诸将。
现代文：杨博奏请免除被敌寇占领的地方的租税，于是招募其中的壮丁做义勇，分别隶属各将官。
English: Yang Boseo asked to be exempted from the tax of the place occupied by the enemy, so he recruited the young men to be volunteers, and they were subordinated to the generals.

古文：博以边人不习车战，寇入辄不支，请造箱车百辆，有警则右卫车东，左卫车西，使相声援。
现代文：杨博认为边地的人不熟谙车战，敌寇入侵就力不能支，奏请修造一百辆偏箱车；有警报则右卫车在东，左卫车在西，相互声援。
English: Yang Bo thought that the people in the outlying areas were not familiar with the car battle, and could not support the invasion of the enemy. He requested the construction of one hundred side-box cars; when there was an alarm, the right guard car was in the east, and the left guard car was in the west, and they supported each other.

古文：又以大同墙圮，缮治为急；次则塞银钗、驿马诸岭，以绝窥紫荆路；备居庸南山，以绝窥陵寝畿甸路；修阳神地诸墙堑，以绝入山西路。
现代文：又认为大同城墙毁坏，修缮的事急迫；其次是堵塞银钗、驿马诸岭，以便断绝敌寇窥探紫荆的道路；在居庸关南山设防，以便断绝敌寇窥探皇室陵寝京畿的道路；修筑阳神地诸城墙阻堑，以便断绝敌寇入侵山西的通道。
English: He also believed that the Datong city wall had been destroyed and the matter of repair was urgent; secondly, it was necessary to block the Yintai and Yimaju Mountains in order to cut off the enemy's way of spying on the Bauhinia; fortify the South Mountain of Juyongguan in order to cut off the enemy's way of spying on the imperial family's tomb in Gyeonggi; and build the Yangshendai city walls to obstruct the enemy's invasion of Shanxi.

古文：乃于大同牛心山诸处筑堡九，墩台九十二，接左卫高山站，以达镇城。
现代文：于是在大同牛心山等处修筑了九座堡垒，九十二个墩台，连接左卫高山站，以便联络镇城。
English: Therefore, in Datong Niu Xin Mountain and other places, nine fortresses and ninety-two towers were built to connect Zuo Gaoshan Station in order to contact the town.

古文：浚大濠二，各十八里，小濠六十有四。
现代文：开掘了两条大沟，各长十八里，开掘小沟六十四条。
English: Two large ditches were excavated, each 18 li long, and 64 small ditches were excavated.

古文：五旬讫功，赐敕奖赉。
现代文：耗费五十天时间完工，受到嘉奖赏赐。
English: It took 50 days to complete and was highly commended.

古文：帝数欲召博还，又虞边，以问嵩。
现代文：皇帝几度想将杨博召回，又顾虑边疆，便询问严嵩。
English: The emperor wanted to recall Yang Bo several times, but he was worried about the border, so he asked Yan Song.

古文：嵩雅不喜博，请令江东署部事，俟秋防毕徐议之，遂不召。
现代文：严嵩一向不喜欢杨博，奏请任命他为江东署理部事，等待秋防完毕后再慢慢计议，于是不召杨博。
English: Yan Song has always disliked Yang Bo. Therefore, he requested that Yang Bo be appointed as the deputy director of the East River, and waited for the autumn defense to be completed before slowly deliberating. Therefore, Yang Bo was not called.

古文：秋防讫，加太子太保，留镇如故。
现代文：秋防完毕，加封为太子太保，依然留任镇守。
English: After the autumn defense was completed, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo and remained as the town guard.

古文：哱素把伶及叛人了都记等数以轻骑寇边，博先后计擒之。
现代文：口孛索把伶和反叛了的都记等几度拥轻骑袭扰边关，杨博先后设计擒获了他们。
English: After several times of harassing and harassing the border gate, Yang Bo successively designed and captured them.

古文：又数出奇兵袭寇，寇稍徙帐。
现代文：并几次派出骑兵袭击敌寇，敌寇稍稍迁移了营帐。
English: And several times sent cavalry to attack the enemy, the enemy slightly moved camp.

古文：因议筑故总督翁万达所创边墙，招还内地民为寇掠者千六百余人。
现代文：于是杨博倡议修筑前总督翁万达所创设的边墙，招回被敌寇劫掠过的内地民众一千六百多人。
English: As a result, Yang Bo proposed to build the border wall created by the former governor, Ong Wanda, and to call back more than 1,600 people from the mainland who had been plundered by the enemy.

古文：又请通宣、大荒田水利，薄其租。
现代文：又奏请疏通宣府、大同荒田的水利设施，少征租税。
English: It also requested that the water conservancy facilities in Xuanfu and Datong wasteland be dredged, and that less tax be levied.

古文：报可。
现代文：朝廷准奏。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：改蓟辽总督。
现代文：改任蓟辽总督。
English: He was reappointed Governor of Liaoning Province.

古文：秋防竣，廷议欲召博还，吏部尚书吴鹏不可。
现代文：秋防完毕，廷议打算召回杨博，吏部尚书吴鹏不赞成。
English: After the completion of the autumn defense, the court deliberated to recall Yang Bo, but Wu Peng, the secretary of the personnel department, did not approve.

古文：郑晓署兵部，争之曰： 博在蓟、辽则蓟、辽安，在本兵则九边俱安。 
现代文：郑晓署兵部，争辩道： 杨博在蓟、辽则蓟、辽安定，在兵部则九边都得平安。 
English: Zheng Xiaodong of the Ministry of Military Affairs argued: Yang Bo is safe in Shandong, Liaodong, and Liaodong, and in the Ministry of Military Affairs, he is safe in all directions.

古文：乃如还，加少保。
现代文：于是被召回，加封少保。
English: As a result, he was recalled and given the title of Junior Security Guard.

古文：帝忧边甚，博每先事为防，帝眷倚若左右手。
现代文：皇帝很担忧边关，杨博每每事先布署好防务，皇帝倚重他如左右手。
English: The emperor was very worried about the border. Yang Bo had arranged a good defense in advance, and the emperor leaned on him like a right and left hand.

古文：尝语阁臣： 自博入，朕每忧边，其语博预为谋。 
现代文：曾对内阁大臣讲： 自从杨博入朝，我常常忧虑边关，与杨博谈话让他预先谋划。 
English: He once said to the cabinet minister: Since Yang Bo entered the DPRK, I have often worried about border issues. When talking with Yang Bo, I asked him to plan ahead.

古文：博上言： 今九边，蓟镇为重。
现代文：杨博进言 ：当今九边，蓟镇最重要。
English: Yang Bo Jinyan: In today's Jiubei, Handan is the most important.

古文：请敕边臣逐大同寇，使不得近蓟，宣、大诸将从独石侦情形，预备黄花、古北诸要害，使一骑不得入关，即首功也。 
现代文：奏请敕令边臣驱逐大同的敌寇，使他们不能接近蓟，宣、大诸位将领从独石侦察情况，在黄花、古北诸要害预先设防，不使一骑入关，便是首功。 
English: The first achievement was to request the emperor to order the border officials to expel the enemy corsairs of Datong, so that they could not approach the capital. The generals of Xuan and Dai surveyed the situation from the monolith, and fortified the key areas of Huanghua and Gubei in advance, so that not a single cavalry could enter the pass.

古文：帝是之。
现代文：皇帝称是。
English: The emperor thought it was right.

古文：四十二年十月，寇拥众窥蓟州，声言犯辽阳。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年十月，敌寇拥众窥视蓟州，声称要进犯辽阳。
English: In October of the 42nd year of Jiajing, the enemy bandits peered at Luzhou, claiming to invade Liaoyang.

古文：总督杨选帅师东，博檄止之。
现代文：总督杨选率师东进，杨博传檄制止。
English: Governor Yang Seong-pyo led the division eastward, and Yang Bo Chuan-chi stopped it.

古文：又手书三往，卒不从。
现代文：又亲自给他写了三封信，杨选最终没有听从意见。
English: He also personally wrote three letters to him, but Yang Xuan ultimately did not listen to his advice.

古文：博拊几曰： 败矣。 
现代文：杨博抚摩着案几叹息 ：败了啊！ 
English: Yang Bo stroked the case with a few sighs: defeated!

古文：急征兵入援，寇已溃墙子岭，犯通州。
现代文：紧急征兵增援，敌寇已击溃墙子岭守军，进犯通州。
English: Emergency recruitment of reinforcements, enemy corsairs have defeated the Wanziling defenders and attacked Tongzhou.

古文：帝叹曰： 庚戌事又见矣。 
现代文：皇帝叹息 ：庚威望戌年的事情又重现了。 
English: The emperor sighed, "The events of the year of Geng Wei's death have happened again.

古文：诸路兵先后至。
现代文：几路兵马先后赶到。
English: Several lines of soldiers and horses arrived successively.

古文：命宣大总督江东统文武大臣分守皇城、京城，镇远侯顾寰以京营兵分布城内外。
现代文：任命宣、大总督江东统帅文武大臣分路驻守皇城、京城，镇辽侯顾寰把京营兵分布在城内外。
English: He appointed Xuan, the great governor of Jiangdong, the commander-in-chief, and the minister of literature and armed forces to garrison the imperial city, the capital city, and the town of Liao Hou Gu Wei, and to distribute the Beijing camp soldiers inside and outside the city.

古文：寇解而东，躏顺义、三河，饱掠去。
现代文：敌寇化解后向东而去，蹂躏顺义、三河，大肆劫掠之后退去。
English: After the enemy corsairs were disbanded, they headed east, ravaged Shunyi and the Three Rivers, looted extensively, and then retreated.

古文：援兵不发一矢，取道毙及零骑伤残者报首功。
现代文：援兵不发一箭，沿途击毙零散的敌骑或伤残之敌报称首功。
English: The reinforcements did not fire a single arrow, and the scattered enemy cavalry killed along the way or the wounded and disabled enemy reported the first achievement.

古文：帝怏怏，谕博曰： 贼复饱飏，何以惩后？ 
现代文：皇帝怏怏不乐，告诉杨博说： 敌贼饱掠而去，以后怎么惩戒？ 
English: The emperor was displeased and told Yang Bo, "How can we discipline the enemy after they have plundered everything?"

古文：遂诛选。
现代文：便诛杀了杨选。
English: He then killed Yang Xuan.

古文：博惧及，徐阶力保持之。
现代文：杨博担忧自己，徐阶全力保护了他。
English: Yang Bo was worried about himself, and Xu Qi did his best to protect him.

古文：帝念博前功，不罪。
现代文：皇帝念及杨博以前的功绩，没有治罪。
English: The emperor, mindful of Yang Bo's previous exploits, did not punish him.

古文：久之，改吏部尚书。
现代文：此后很久，改任吏部尚书。
English: A long time after that, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu.

古文：隆庆改元，请遵遗诏，录建言诸臣，死者皆赠恤。
现代文：隆庆元年，奏请遵循先帝的遗诏，录用曾因劝谏而被治罪的大臣们，死者都受赠赐抚恤。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the imperial edict of the former emperor was obeyed, and the ministers who had been punished for persuading others to commit crimes were hired, and the dead were all given pensions.

古文：时方计群吏，山西人无一被黜者。
现代文：当时统计众吏，山西人没有一人被罢免。
English: At that time, all officials were counted, and no one from Shanxi was dismissed.

古文：给事中胡应嘉劾博庇其乡人，博连疏乞休。
现代文：给事中胡庆嘉弹劾杨博庇护同乡，杨博接连上疏请求退休。
English: During the incident, Hu Qingjia impeached Yang Bo for sheltering a fellow villager, and Yang Bo successively requested retirement.

古文：并慰留，且斥言者。
现代文：朝廷抚慰挽留，而且对舆论进行了驳斥。
English: The imperial court appeased and restrained, and refuted the public opinion.

古文：一品满三考，进少傅兼太子太傅。
现代文：在一品官任上三次满考后，升为少傅兼太子太傅。
English: After passing the examination three times, he was promoted to Shao Fu and Prince Taifu.

古文：帝将游南海子，博率同列谏。
现代文：皇帝打算巡游南海子，杨博率领同僚劝谏。
English: The emperor planned to tour Nanhaizi, and Yang Bo led his colleagues to persuade him.

古文：御史詹仰庇以直言罢，博争之。
现代文：御史詹仰庇因直言被罢免，杨博进行了争辩。
English: Mishi Zhan Yangpi was dismissed for his outspokenness, and Yang Bo argued with him.

古文：屯盐都御史庞尚鹏被论，博议留。
现代文：屯盐部御史庞尚鹏遭议论，杨博提议挽留他。
English: Pang Shangpeng, the superintendent of the Municipal Salt Department, has been the subject of discussion, and Yang Bo proposed to retain him.

古文：忏旨，遂谢病归。
现代文：违背了圣意，于是称病归乡。
English: He violated the sacred will, so he returned home saying he was ill.

古文：尚书刘体乾等交章乞留，不听。
现代文：尚书刘体乾等递交奏章请求他留住，没有听从。
English: Shangshu Liu Tieqian and others asked him to keep the symphony, but he did not listen.

古文：大学士高拱掌吏部，荐博堪本兵。
现代文：大学士高拱执掌吏部，举荐杨博堪为将才。
English: Gao Gong, a university graduate, was put in charge of the personnel department and recommended Yang Boqian as a general.

古文：诏以吏部尚书理兵部事。
现代文：皇帝下诏令他任吏部尚书兼理兵部的事务。
English: The emperor issued a decree to appoint him as the secretary of the personnel department and to manage the affairs of the military department.

古文：陈蓟、昌战守方略，谓： 议者以守墙为怯，言可听，实无少效。
现代文：陈述蓟、昌战守的方针策略，称 ：言官认为居守城墙是胆怯，言论可以听听，其实没有什么效果。
English: He stated the policy and strategy for the defense of Zou and Chang, saying: the spokesman thought that the defense of the city wall was timid, the speech could be heard, but in fact there was no effect.

古文：墙外邀击，害七利三；墙内格斗，利一害九。
现代文：在墙外迎击，害占七成利为三成；在墙内格斗，利占一成害为九成。
English: When fighting outside the wall, the harm is 70% and the benefit is 30%; when fighting inside the wall, the benefit is 10% and the harm is 90%.

古文：夫因墙守，所谓先处战地而待敌。
现代文：凭借城墙据守，称为先抵战场等待敌人。
English: By virtue of the city wall fortified, known as the first to arrive at the battlefield waiting for the enemy.

古文：名守，实战也。
现代文：名义称守，实际上是战。
English: It is nominally defensive, but in reality it is a war.

古文：臣为总督，尝拒打来孙十万众，以为当守墙无疑。 
现代文：我任部督，曾抗拒打来孙的十万之余，认为应当毫无疑虑地据守城墙。 
English: When I was appointed governor, I resisted the more than one hundred thousand rupees sent to me by my grandson, believing that the city wall should be defended without hesitation.

古文：因陈明应援、申驻守、处京营、谕属夷、修内治诸事，帝悉从之。
现代文：因此陈述明确呼应与援、申明驻守、安排京营、晓谕少数部族、修正内治等事，皇帝全都听从了。
English: Therefore, the statement clearly echoed and supported, affirmed the garrison, arranged the Beijing camp, told the minority tribes, amended the internal affairs, etc. The emperor obeyed all of them.

古文：博魁梧丰硕，临事安闲有识量。
现代文：杨博魁梧肥壮，遇事能安闲处置，有胆识、有度量。
English: Yang Bo is burly and fat. He can deal with things calmly, he has courage and a sense of proportion.

古文：出入中外四十余年，始终以兵事著。
现代文：出入朝廷四十多年，始终以兵事著称。
English: He has been in and out of the Imperial Court for more than forty years and has always been known for his military service.

古文：六年，高拱罢，乃改博吏部，进少师兼太子太师。
现代文：隆庆六年，高拱罢官，于是改派杨博负责吏部，晋升少师兼太子太师。
English: In the sixth year of Longqing, Gao Gong was dismissed, so Yang Bo was reassigned to be in charge of the personnel department and promoted to junior teacher and prince teacher.

古文：明年秋，疾作，三疏乞致仕归。
现代文：第二年秋天，患疾病，多次请求辞官归乡。
English: In the autumn of the following year, he fell ill and repeatedly asked to return home.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：过了一年去世。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：赠太傅，谥襄毅。
现代文：赠封太傅，谥号襄毅。
English: He was awarded the title of Taifu and given the posthumous name of Xiang Yi.

古文：拱柄国时，欲中徐阶危祸，博造拱，力为解。
现代文：高拱主持朝政时欲使徐阶陷入危险的祸难，杨博拜访高拱尽力替他解脱。
English: When Gao Gong was presiding over the government, he wanted to plunge Xu Shifu into a dangerous calamity. Yang Bo visited Gao Gong and tried his best to free him.

古文：拱亦心动，事获已。
现代文：高拱也被感动，事情才算完结了。
English: Gao Gong was also moved, and that was the end of it.

古文：其后张居正逐拱，将周内其罪，博毅然争之。
现代文：此后张居正排挤了高拱，准备周密地罗织他的罪状，杨博毅然抗争。
English: After that, Zhang Juzheng pushed Gao Gong aside and prepared to elaborate on his charges, while Yang Bo resolutely resisted.

古文：及兴王大臣狱，博与都御史葛守礼诣居正力为解。
现代文：等到兴起王大臣狱案，杨博与都御史葛守礼到张居正处尽力替他解脱。
English: When Minister Wang's prison case arose, Yang Bo and the governor of the capital, Ge Shouli, went to Zhang Ju Zheng's place and tried their best to free him.

古文：居正愤曰： 二公谓我甘心高公耶？ 
现代文：张居正愤懑道 ：二公说我对高公有成见耶？ 
English: Zhang Juzheng angrily said, "Did the two officials say that I have a prejudice against Gao Gong?"

古文：博曰： 非敢然也，然非公不能回天。 
现代文：杨博回答 ：不敢如此，但是除了您无人能有回天术。 
English: Yang Bo replied, "I don't dare to do so, but except you, no one can have the power to turn back time."

古文：会帝命守礼偕都督朱希孝会讯，博阴为画计，使校尉怵大臣改供；又令拱仆杂稠人中，令大臣识别，茫然莫辨，事乃白。
现代文：遇上皇帝任命守礼和都督朱希孝联合审讯，杨博暗中替他谋划计策，唆使校尉恐吓王大臣翻供；又指使高拱的仆人混杂在人群中，指令王大臣识别，却茫然不能分辨，事情才弄明白。
English: When the emperor appointed Shouli and the governor Zhu Xixiao for a joint trial, Yang Bo secretly plotted a strategy for him, instigated the captain to intimidate Wang Jian into making a confession, and ordered Gao Jian's servants to mingle in the crowd, instructing Wang Jian to identify, but he was unable to distinguish, and only then did he understand the matter.

古文：马森，字孔养，怀安人。
现代文：人们因此称杨博为长者。马森，字孔养，怀安人。
English: People therefore call Yang Bo an elder. Ma Sen, the character Kong Yang, a person from Huai'an.

古文：父俊，晚得子，家人抱之坠，殒焉。
现代文：父亲马俊，晚年得子，家仆抱他不慎坠地摔死。
English: His father, Ma Jun, died in his old age after a servant accidentally fell to his death while holding him.

古文：俊绐其妻曰 我误也 ，不之罪。
现代文：马俊哄骗妻子说 ：我的过失啊！ 
English: Ma Jun lied to his wife and said: My fault!

古文：逾年而举森。
现代文：没有追究仆人的罪过。过了一年有了马森。
English: There was no investigation of the servant's guilt. A year later, there was Mazen.

古文：嘉靖十四年成进士，授户部主事，历太平知府。
现代文：嘉靖十四年，中进士，授职为户部主事，历任太平知府。
English: In the 14th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was promoted to junior high school student, was appointed as the head of the household department, and successively served as the Taiping prefectural governor.

古文：民有兄弟讼者，予镜令照曰： 若二人老矣，忍伤天性乎？ 
现代文：民间有兄弟间诉讼的案子，马森给他们镜子命令彼此照照，说 ：如果两个人老了，忍心损伤兄弟情份吗？ 
English: In a civil case involving a lawsuit between brothers, Maassen gave them a mirror and ordered them to look at each other, saying: "If two people grow old, can they bear to damage the brotherhood?

古文：皆感泣谢去。
现代文：都感激得流泪含羞而去。
English: They were so grateful that they shed tears and went away.

古文：再迁江西按察使。
现代文：又升迁江西按察使。
English: He was also promoted to the post of inspector general of Jiangxi Province.

古文：有进士嬖外妇而杀妻，抚按欲缓其狱，森卒抵之法。
现代文：有位进士宠爱别的女人而杀害妻子，抚按想轻判，马森最终使他伏法。
English: There was a young man who killed his wife because he loved another woman. Fudan wanted to give him a lighter sentence, but Maassen eventually made him confess.

古文：历左布政使，就擢巡抚右副都御史。
现代文：历任左布政使，擢升巡抚右副都御史。
English: Successive left-wing political envoys, promoted to the rank of inspector general and right-wing vice-governor.

古文：入为刑部右侍郎，改户部。
现代文：入朝任刑部右侍郎，改派到户部。
English: Entered the imperial court as the right hand man of the criminal department, and was reassigned to the household department.

古文：初，森在江西荐布政使宋淳。
现代文：起初，马森在江西举荐布政使宋淳。
English: At first, Ma Sen recommended cloth envoy Song Jun in Jiangxi.

古文：淳后抚南、赣，以赃败，森坐调大理卿。
现代文：宋淳后来巡抚南、赣，因贪赃败绩，马森因过失调任大理卿。
English: Later, Song Jun, the governor of Nan and Handan, lost his position due to corruption, and Ma Sen was transferred to the position of Daliqing due to negligence.

古文：屡驳疑狱，与刑部尚书郑晓、都御史周延称为 三平 。
现代文：几度驳辩疑案，与刑部尚书郑晓、都御史周延并称 三平 。
English: He refuted the doubtful case several times, and was called Sanping together with the criminal department's Shangshu Zhengxiao and the capital's Zhou Yan.

古文：病归，起南京工部右侍郎。
现代文：因病归乡，重新启任南京工部右侍郎。
English: Due to illness, he returned to his hometown and resumed his position as the right-hand man of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：改户部，督仓场，寻转左。
现代文：改派到户部，督察仓场，不久转任左侍郎。
English: He was reassigned to the Household Department, inspecting warehouses, and soon transferred to the Left Attendant.

古文：以右都御史总督漕运，兼巡抚凤阳，迁南京户部尚书。
现代文：以右都御史身分总督漕运，兼任凤阳巡抚，晋升南京户部尚书。
English: He served as the governor of Cao Yun as the right-hand governor of the capital, concurrently served as the Fengyang inspector, and was promoted to the Nanjing household.

古文：隆庆初，改北部。
现代文：隆庆初年，改任北部的官职。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was transferred to a government post in the north.

古文：是时，登极诏书蠲天下田租半。
现代文：当时，皇帝登基诏书减免了国家一半的田租。
English: At that time, the imperial edict of enthronement reduced and exempted half of the country's farm rents.

古文：太仓岁入少，不能副经费，而京、通二仓积贮无几。
现代文：太仓的年收入减少，不能应付开支，而且京、通二仓的储藏无几。
English: The annual income of Taicang has decreased, unable to meet expenses, and there is little storage in Beijing and Tongni Cang.

古文：森钩校搜剔，条行十余事。
现代文：马森查对搜剔，处理十多件事。
English: Ma Sen checked on the search and dealt with more than ten things.

古文：又列上钱谷出入之数，劝帝节俭。
现代文：又列出钱谷出入的数目，劝谏皇帝节俭。
English: He also listed the number of people entering and leaving Qianya and advised the emperor to be frugal.

古文：帝手诏责令措置，森奏： 祖宗旧制，河、淮以南以四百万供应京师，河、淮以北以八百万供边。
现代文：皇帝亲拟诏书责令他安排处置，马森上奏： 祖宗的旧制度，黄河、淮河以南地区供给京师四百万银两，黄河、淮河以北地区供给边关八百万银两。
English: The emperor personally drafted an edict and ordered him to arrange the disposal, and Ma Sen recited: Under the old system of the ancestors, the areas south of the Yellow River and the Huai River provided the Beijing division with 4 million silver taels, and the areas north of the Yellow River and the Huai River provided the border gate with 8 million silver taels.

古文：一岁之入，足供一岁之用。
现代文：一年的收入，足以供给一年的费用。
English: One year's income is enough to cover one year's expenses.

古文：后边陲多事，支费渐繁，一变而有客兵之年例，再变而有主兵之年例。
现代文：后来边陲战事频繁，开支逐渐繁多，一变而有外籍部队的年度给养，再变而有本地部队的年度给养。
English: Later, there were frequent battles on the frontier, and the expenses gradually increased. One change was the annual supply of foreign troops, and another change was the annual supply of local troops.

古文：其初止三五十万耳，后渐增至二百三十余万。
现代文：起初的费用只三百五十万两，后来渐渐增至六百三十多万两。
English: At first, the cost was only 3.5 million taels, but later it gradually increased to more than 6.3 million taels.

古文：屯田十亏七八，盐法十折四五，民运十逋二三，悉以年例补之。
现代文：屯田的十有七、八受亏损，盐法也十折四、五，民粮运输十有二、三被拖欠，全部用补给边关的年度费用弥补。
English: In seven out of ten cases, or eight out of ten cases, the tunden suffered losses, the salt method also increased by four or five tenths, and the transportation of grain was delayed in two or three out of ten cases, all of which were made up for by the annual cost of replenishing the border.

古文：在边则士马不多于昔，在太仓则输入不益于前，而所费数倍。
现代文：在边关则兵卒马骑少于往昔，在太仓则输入之数不及以往，而且耗费数倍于以前。
English: At the border, there are fewer soldiers riding horses than in the past. At Taicang, the number of inputs is less than in the past, and the cost is several times higher than before.

古文：重以诏书蠲除，故今日告匮，视往岁有加。
现代文：又下诏书减免赋税，所以今日宣告匮乏，比往年更甚。
English: He also issued a decree to reduce and exempt taxes, so today's announcement of scarcity is even worse than in previous years.

古文：臣前所区画，算及锱铢，不过纾目前急，而于国之大体，民之元气，未暇深虑。
现代文：我以前的筹划，算及锱铢细利，不过是解救燃眉之急，但对国家大体，民众的元气，没有闲暇做进一步考虑。
English: My previous plan, including the trickle-down effect, was just to relieve the urgent need, but for the country as a whole, the vitality of the people, there was no leisure to further consider.

古文：愿广集众思，令廷臣各陈所见。 
现代文：而当集思广益，指令朝廷中大臣各陈己见。 
English: But when it comes to brainstorming, the middle ministers of the imperial court each have their own opinion.

古文：又奏河东、四川、云南、福建、广东、灵州盐课事宜。
现代文：又奏请河东、四川、云南、福建、广东、灵州的盐课事宜。
English: He also reported on the matter of salt classes in Hedong, Sichuan, Yunnan, Fujian, Guangdong and Lingzhou.

古文：诏皆如所请。
现代文：诏令都依从了他的请求。
English: The imperial edicts complied with his request.

古文：帝尝命中官崔敏发户部银六万市黄金。
现代文：皇帝曾经任命宦官崔敏拨户部的六万银两买黄金。
English: The emperor once appointed eunuch Cui Min to allocate sixty thousand silver and two gold to the household.

古文：森持不可，且言，故事御札皆由内阁下，无司礼径传者，事乃止。
现代文：马森坚持不赞同，而且声称，以往皇帝的诏令都由内阁下发，没有由司礼径直传递的，此事才休止。
English: Masson insisted that he did not agree, and claimed that in the past, the emperor's edicts were issued by the cabinet and were not directly transmitted by the priests, and the matter was only suspended.

古文：即，又命购珠宝，森亦力争，不听。
现代文：既而皇帝又下令购置珠宝，马森也极力争辩，没有听从。
English: Even though the emperor ordered the purchase of the jewels, Maassen argued strenuously and did not obey.

古文：三年，以母老乞终养。
现代文：隆庆三年，以母亲年迈为由请求回家养老送终。
English: In the third year of Longqing, on the grounds of her mother's old age, she requested to go home for old-age care.

古文：赐驰驿归，后屡荐不起。
现代文：皇帝赏赐他乘驿车归乡的礼遇，后来几度举荐他都不出山。
English: The emperor rewarded him with the courtesy of returning to his hometown by stagecoach, and later recommended him several times to stay away from the mountains.

古文：森为考官时，夏言婿出其门，欲介之见言，谢不往。
现代文：马森任考官时，夏言的女婿出自他的门下，想介绍他见夏言，他辞谢而没有前往。
English: When Maassen was an examiner, Natsugen's son-in-law came from his school and wanted to introduce him to Natsugen, but he declined and did not go.

古文：严嵩闻而悦之，森亦不附。
现代文：严嵩听说后很喜欢他，马森也没有趋附。
English: Yan Song liked him very much after hearing about him, and Ma Sen did not like him.

古文：为徐阶所重，遂引用之。
现代文：被徐阶看重后，引荐录用。
English: After being valued by Xu Ju, he was recommended and hired.

古文：里居，赞巡抚庞尚鹏行一条鞭法，乡人为立报功祠。
现代文：居住乡里，支持巡抚庞尚鹏施行一条鞭法，乡里的人替他修筑报功祠。
English: He lived in the village and supported the procurator Pang Shangpeng in enforcing a whip law, and the people in the village built a memorial shrine for him.

古文：万历八年卒。
现代文：万历八年去世。
English: He died eight years later.

古文：赠太子少保，谥恭敏。
现代文：追赠太子少保，谥号恭敏。
English: He was posthumously granted the title of Prince Junior Protector, and his posthumous name was changed to Gongmin.

古文：刘体乾，字子元，东安人。
现代文：刘体乾，字子元，东安人。
English: Liu Tieqian, a native of Dong'an.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年，考取进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：授行人，改兵科给事中。
现代文：授封行人，改派兵部给事中。
English: Awarded the title of pedestrian, reassigned to the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：司礼太监鲍忠卒，其党李庆为其侄鲍恩等八人乞迁。
现代文：司礼太监鲍忠去世，他的党羽李庆替他的侄子鲍恩等八人请求升迁。
English: The ceremonial eunuch Bao Zhong died, and his henchman Li Qing requested promotion for his nephew Bao En and eight others.

古文：帝已许之，以体乾言，止录三人。
现代文：皇帝已经同意，因为刘体乾的谏言只录用了三人。
English: The emperor has agreed, because Liu Tieqian's criticism led to only three people being hired.

古文：转左给事中。
现代文：转为左给事中。
English: Turn left to the middle of the road.

古文：帝以财用绌，诏廷臣集议。
现代文：皇帝因财政费用不足，诏令朝廷大臣汇聚意见。
English: Due to insufficient financial expenses, the emperor ordered the imperial court ministers to gather opinions.

古文：多请追宿逋，增赋额。
现代文：大多数请求追索以往的拖欠，增加赋税数额。
English: Most of the requests seek to recover past arrears and increase the amount of tax paid.

古文：体乾独上奏曰： 苏轼有言： 丰财之道，惟在去其害财者。 
现代文：唯独刘休乾上奏说： 苏轼说 丰财之道，唯有清除损耗财资的人事 。
English: However, Liu Xueqian said in his report: Su Shi said that the only way to get rich is to eliminate the personnel who waste money and resources.

古文：今之害最大者有二，冗吏、冗费是也。
现代文：现在最大的危害有两件，即是冗吏、冗费。
English: There are now two greatest harms, that is, redundancy and redundancy.

古文：历代官制，汉七千五百员，唐万八千员，宋极冗至三万四千员。
现代文：历代官制，汉代七千五百人，唐代一万八千人，宋代最臃肿达到三万四千人。
English: Throughout the ages, there were 7,500 officials in the Han Dynasty, 18,000 in the Tang Dynasty, and up to 34,000 in the Song Dynasty.

古文：本朝自成化五年，武职已逾八万。
现代文：本朝从成化五年，武职已经超过八万。
English: In the five years since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there have been more than 80,000 military posts.

古文：合文职，盖十万余。
现代文：合计文职，大概十万多人。
English: In total, there are more than one hundred thousand civil servants.

古文：今边功升授、勋贵传请、曹局添设、大臣恩荫，加以厂卫、监局、勇士、匠人之属，岁增月益，不可悉举。
现代文：现在边功升授、勋贵传请、曹局添设、大臣恩荫，加上厂卫、盐局、勇士、匠户，岁增月益，不胜枚举。
English: At present, there are promotions for meritorious service, honors and awards, the establishment of the Cao Bureau, and the patronage of the minister, plus the factory guards, the salt bureau, the warriors, and the artisans, and the year-on-year increase is countless.

古文：多一官，则多一官之费。
现代文：多一官，就多一官的费用。
English: One more official means one more official's expenses.

古文：请严敕请曹，清革冗滥，减俸将不赀。
现代文：请皇上严格敕令诸分科办事的官署，清理革除冗员，减少的俸禄将不可估量。
English: I would like to ask the emperor to strictly order the government offices that deal with various disciplines to clean up and eliminate redundant personnel. The reduction in salary will be immeasurable.

古文：又闻光录库金，自嘉靖改元至十五年，积至八十万。
现代文：又听说光禄的库存金，自嘉靖元年至十五年，积累达八十万两。
English: It was also heard that Guanglu's inventory of gold had accumulated to 800,000 taels from the first year of Jiajing to the fifteenth year.

古文：自二十一年以后，供亿日增，余藏顿尽。
现代文：自嘉靖二十一年以后，供应的东西天天增加，积蓄顷刻耗尽。
English: Since the 21st year of Jiajing, the supply of things has increased every day, and the savings have been exhausted in an instant.

古文：进御果蔬，初无定额，止眎内监片纸，如数供御。
现代文：进贡皇宫的水果蔬菜，起初没有定额，只根据太监的片纸所记，如数供给皇宫。
English: At first, there was no quota for the fruits and vegetables brought to the Imperial Palace as tribute. They were supplied to the Imperial Palace according to the number written on a piece of paper by a eunuch.

古文：乾没狼籍，辄转鬻市人。
现代文：太监将宫中没用完的东西侵吞了，并且往往转卖给市井中人。
English: The eunuchs embezzled what was left over from the palace and often resold it to people in the city.

古文：其他诸曹，侵盗尤多。
现代文：其他诸官署，侵吞盗窃更多。
English: Other government departments have committed even more embezzlement and theft.

古文：宜著为令典，岁终使科道臣会计之，以清冗费。
现代文：应当制定明确的法令，年终派科道官核算数额，以便清除冗费。
English: A clear decree should be made to send a Taoist scholar to calculate the amount at the end of the year in order to eliminate redundancy.

古文：二冗既革，国计自裕。
现代文：两大冗耗革除，国家自然会富裕。
English: If the two major wastes are eliminated, the country will naturally become rich.

古文：舍是而督逋、增赋，是扬汤止沸也。 
现代文：舍弃此举，却督促还欠、增加赋税，此举是扬汤止沸啊！ 
English: Abandoning this move, but urging to pay back debts and increase taxes, this move is a hot potato!

古文：于是部议请汰各监局人匠。
现代文：因此部议请求裁减各监司局的人员匠户。
English: Therefore, the ministerial meeting requested that the personnel of the supervisory bureaus be reduced.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝依从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：累官通政使，迁刑部左侍郎。
现代文：升职为通政使后，调迁刑部左侍郎。
English: After he was promoted to the post of political envoy, he was transferred to the left hand man of the penal department.

古文：改户部左侍郎，总督仓场。
现代文：改任户部左侍郎，总理粮仓草场。
English: He was reappointed as the Left Hand Man of the Household and the Prime Minister's Granary Pasture.

古文：隆庆初，进南京户部尚书。
现代文：隆庆初年，提升为南京户部尚书。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was promoted to the Nanjing Household Department of Shangshu.

古文：南畿、湖广、江西银布绢米积逋二百六十余万，凤阳园陵九卫官军四万，而仓粟无一月储。
现代文：南畿、湖广、江西的银、布、绢、米累积拖欠二百六十多万，凤阳园陵九卫官军四万人，而仓库存粮数不够一个月的开销。
English: The accumulated arrears of silver, cloth, cocoons and rice in Nanki, Hukang and Jiangxi amount to more than 2.6 million yuan, and the number of grain stocks in warehouses is not enough for one month's expenses.

古文：体乾再疏请责成有司，又条上六事，皆报可。
现代文：刘体乾再度上疏请求皇帝责令有司解决，又条列了六件事，都答复可行。
English: Liu Tieqian once again requested the emperor to order the division to solve the problem, and also listed six things, all of which can be answered.

古文：马森去，召改北部。
现代文：马森离去后，皇帝召见刘体乾并改任他北京户部尚书。
English: After Ma Sen left, the emperor summoned Liu Tieqian and reassigned him to the Beijing Household Department of Shang Shu.

古文：诏取太仓银三十万两。
现代文：诏令提取太仓的银资三十万两。
English: He ordered the withdrawal of 300,000 taels of silver from Taicang.

古文：体乾言： 太仓银所存三百七十万耳，而九边年例二百七十六万有奇，在京军粮商价百有余万蓟州、大同诸镇例外奏乞不与焉。
现代文：刘体乾劝谏 ：太仓的银资库存三百七十万两，但是九边的年例就达二百七十六万多，驻京师的军队的粮饷依市场价需要一百多万两，蓟州、大同诸镇另外的奏请尚未计算在内。
English: Liu Tieqian advised that the inventory of silver in Taicang had increased to 3.7 million taels, but the annual demand in Jibei was more than 2.76 million taels, and the grain needed by the army stationed in Beijing was more than 1 million taels according to the market price. The additional requests from Zhangzhou and Datong towns had not yet been calculated.

古文：若复取以上供，经费安办？ 
现代文：如果又索取供应皇上，经费怎么筹办？ 
English: If the emperor were to request supplies again, how would the funds be organized?

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：体乾复奏： 今国计绌乏，大小臣工所共知。
现代文：刘体乾再次上奏 ：现在国家财力匮乏，是大大小小的臣僚所共知之事。
English: Liu Tieqian played again: Now the country's financial resources are scarce, which is a common knowledge among ministers large and small.

古文：即存库之数，乃近遣御史所搜括，明岁则无策矣。
现代文：即便库存的数额，也是最近派遣御史搜括的，明年就没有办法了。
English: Even if the amount of inventory is recently dispatched, there is no way to do it next year.

古文：今尽以供无益费，万一变起仓卒，如国计何？ 
现代文：现在全数供给了无益的靡费，万一仓促间起变故，国家将怎么办呢？ 
English: Now that all the money has been spent on a futile sweep, what will the country do in the event of a sudden change?

古文：于是给事中李已、杨一魁、龙光，御史刘思问、苏士润、贺一桂，傅孟春交章乞如体乾言，阁臣李春芳等皆上疏请，乃命止进十万两。
现代文：因此，给事中李已、杨一魁、龙光，御史刘思问、苏士润、贺一桂、傅孟春纷纷上书请求皇帝依循刘体乾的谏言，内阁大臣李春芳等都上奏疏恳请，皇帝才下令只提取十万两。
English: Therefore, Li Ye, Yang Yik Kui, Long Guang, Gu Shi Liu Si Qian, Su Shirun, He Yik Gui, Fu Meng Chun all sent letters to request the emperor to follow Liu Tie Jian's advice, and the cabinet minister Li Chun Fang also sent a letter to implore the emperor to withdraw only 100,000 taels.

古文：又奏太和山香税宜如泰山例，有司董之，毋属内臣。
现代文：他又奏请太和山的香火税仿照泰山的办法，有关部门负责办理，不归属太监负责。
English: He also requested that the incense tax of Taihe Mountain be modeled on the method of Mount Tai, and that the relevant departments be responsible for handling it, not the eunuchs.

古文：忤旨，夺俸半年。
现代文：违背了皇帝的旨意，被剥夺了半年薪俸。
English: He violated the emperor's will and was deprived of half a year's salary.

古文：帝尝问九边军饷，太仓岁发及四方解纳之数。
现代文：皇帝曾经询问九边的军饷、太仓的年支出额以及四方送解交纳的资财数。
English: The emperor once inquired about the military pay of the nine provinces, the annual expenditure of Taicang, and the number of funds sent and received by the four provinces.

古文：体乾奏： 祖宗朝止辽东、大同、宣府、延绥四镇，继以宁夏、甘肃、蓟州，又继以固原、山西，今密云、昌平、永平、易州俱列戍矣。
现代文：刘体乾上奏称 ：视宋朝只有辽东、大同、宣府、延绥四座边镇，继而补充宁夏、甘肃、蓟州，再续补固原、山西，现在密云、昌平、永平、易州都列入边镇。
English: Liu Tieqian said in his report: According to the Song Dynasty, there were only four border towns in Liaodong, Datong, Xuanfu and Yancheng, which were later supplemented by Ningxia, Gansu and Ganzhou, and then continued to be supplemented by Guyuan and Shanxi, and now Miyun, Changping, Yongping and Yizhou are included in the border towns.

古文：各镇防守有主兵。
现代文：每镇有当地屯兵防守。
English: Each town is defended by a local garrison.

古文：其后增召募，增客兵，而坐食愈众。
现代文：后来增加招募的数额，增派了客兵，使闲坐食饷的人越来越多。
English: Later, the amount of recruitment was increased, and more guest soldiers were sent, so that more and more people were sitting idle.

古文：各镇刍饷有屯田。
现代文：各镇有屯田筹集粮饷。
English: Every town has its tonden to raise grain.

古文：其后加民粮，加盐课，加京运，而横费滋多。 
现代文：后来增加民用粮食、增加盐税，增加输送京师的数额，使中间的靡费滋生很多。 
English: Later, the amount of grain for civilian use was increased, the salt tax was increased, and the amount of money for the transportation of the capital division was increased, so that there was a lot of waste in the middle.

古文：因列上隆庆以来岁发之数。
现代文：于是陈列隆庆以来每年的支出数额。
English: As a result, the annual expenditure since Longqing has been the highest.

古文：又奏： 国家岁入不足供所出，而额外陈乞者多。
现代文：并上奏 ：国家每年入不敷出，但是额外陈书请求的人很多。
English: He also said that the state cannot make ends meet every year, but there are many people who request additional books.

古文：请以内外一切经费应存革者，刊勒成书。 
现代文：请求将朝廷内外一切应当保留或革除的经费，刊印成文书。 
English: Request that all funds within and outside the Imperial Court that should be retained or eliminated be printed into a document.

古文：报可。
现代文：答复可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：诏市绵二万五千斤，体乾请俟湖州贡。
现代文：诏令购买二万五千斤绵，刘体乾奏请等候湖州的朝贡。
English: The imperial edict ordered the purchase of twenty-five thousand catties of cotton, and Liu Tie, please wait for the tribute from Huzhou.

古文：帝不从，趣之急。
现代文：皇帝没有听从，急迫催促此事。
English: The emperor did not listen and pressed the matter.

古文：给事中李已言： 三月非用绵时，不宜重扰商户。 
现代文：给事中李已劝谏 ：三月不是用绵的时候，不应该过分惊扰商户。 
English: During the meeting, Li advised that merchants should not be overly alarmed when cotton is not used in March.

古文：体乾亦复争，乃命止进万斤。
现代文：刘体乾也再度争辩，皇帝才只购入一万斤。
English: Liu Tieqian also argued again that the emperor only bought 10,000 catties.

古文：逾年，诏趣进金花银，且购猫睛、祖母绿诸异宝。
现代文：过年后皇帝下诏催促进贡金花银，并且购求猫眼、祖母绿诸种珍异宝物。
English: After the New Year, the emperor issued an edict to promote the tribute of gold and silver, and to purchase cat's eyes, emeralds and other rare and exotic treasures.

古文：已上书力谏，体乾请从已言，不纳。
现代文：李已上奏皇帝极力劝谏，刘体乾恳求皇帝听从李已的谏言，没有被采纳。
English: Li Ye appealed to the emperor to strongly advise him, Liu Tieqian pleaded with the emperor to listen to Li Ye's advice, but it was not accepted.

古文：内承运库以白劄索部帑十万。
现代文：内承运库以白条子索要户部银十万两。
English: The inner carrier depot demanded 100,000 taels of silver from the head office with a white bar.

古文：体乾执奏，给事中刘继文亦言白答刂非体。
现代文：刘体乾执意上奏，给事中刘继文也称白条子事不合体制。
English: Liu Tieqian insisted on playing, and Liu Jiwen also said that the white stripe was not in accordance with the system.

古文：帝报有旨，竟取之。
现代文：皇帝答复有圣旨，竟然提取了银两。
English: The emperor replied that he had a sacred decree, and even extracted two silver coins.

古文：体乾又乞承运库减税额二十万，为中官崔敏所格，不得请。
现代文：刘体乾又请求承运库减少二十万的税额，被宦官崔敏阻挠，不能奏请皇帝。
English: Liu Tieqian also requested the shipping depot to reduce the tax amount of 200,000 yuan, but was obstructed by eunuch Cui Min and could not appeal to the emperor.

古文：是时内供已多，数下部取太仓银，又趣市珍珠黄绿玉诸物。
现代文：当时皇宫的供给已经很多，屡次降旨户部提取太仓的银两，又催促求购珍珠、黄玉绿玉等物品。
English: At that time, the supply of the imperial palace was already plentiful. The household department repeatedly issued orders to extract the silver from Taicang, and also urged the purchase of pearls, topaz and other items.

古文：体乾清劲有执，每疏争，积忤帝意，竟夺官。
现代文：刘体乾清正刚直性格执拗，每每上疏争辩，屡屡逆拂皇帝的心意，竟然被剥夺官职。
English: Liu Tieqianqing was a stubborn and upright person. He argued with his superiors and repeatedly went against the emperor's wishes. He was even deprived of his official post.

古文：给事中光懋、御史凌琯等交章请留，不听。
现代文：给事中光懋、御史凌等人纷纷上奏恳求皇帝留用他，皇帝没有听从。
English: In the middle of the matter, Guangyao, Mishi Ling and others pleaded with the emperor to keep him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：神宗即位，起南京兵部尚书，奏言： 留都根本重地，故额军九万，马五千余匹。
现代文：神宗即帝位，起用他任南京兵部尚书，他上奏称： 留都是国家的根本性重地，以往的军队数额为九万，马匹五千多匹。
English: Shenzong, that is, the emperor, appointed him as the secretary of the Nanjing Military Department, and he made a report saying: Remaining is the fundamental center of gravity of the country. In the past, the number of troops was 90,000, and there were more than 5,000 horses.

古文：今军止二万二千，马仅及半，单弱足虑。
现代文：现在军队只有二万二千，马匹仅仅达到半数，势单力弱很令人忧虑。
English: Now there are only twenty-two thousand soldiers, and only half of them are horses, which is very worrying.

古文：宜选诸卫余丁，随伍操练，发贮库草场银买马。 
现代文：应当挑选诸卫所的多余兵丁，跟随部队一起操练，拨调贮库草场的银资购买马匹。 
English: The surplus soldiers of the sanctuaries should be selected, followed by the troops to practice together, and the money from the storage and pasture should be allocated to buy horses.

古文：又条上防守四事。
现代文：又逐条上奏防守的四件事。
English: He also listed four things to do on defense.

古文：并从之。
现代文：皇帝都依从了。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：万历二年致仕，卒。
现代文：万历二年，他退休了。
English: Two years later, he retired.

古文：赠太子少保。
现代文：去世后，追赠为太子少保。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：王廷，字子正，南充人。
现代文：王廷，字子正，南充人。
English: Wang Ting, Zizi Zheng, Nanchong Ren.

古文：嘉靖十一年进士。
现代文：嘉靖十一年考取进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 11th year of Jiajing.

古文：授户部主事，改御史。
现代文：授任户部主事，改任御史。
English: He was appointed as the head of the Household Department, and later as the Imperial Historian.

古文：疏劾吏部尚书汪鋐，谪亳州判官。
现代文：上疏弹劾吏部尚书汪钅宏，被贬为亳州判官。
English: Shangshu Wang Binghong, a member of the impeachment committee of Shangzhou, was demoted to judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：历苏州知府，有政声。
现代文：历任苏州知府，颇有政绩声誉。
English: Successive governors of Suzhou, quite a reputation for political achievements.

古文：累迁右副都御史，总理河道。
现代文：升任右副都御史，总理河道。
English: He was promoted to vice-governor of the capital and prime minister.

古文：三十九年，转南京户部右侍郎，总督粮储。
现代文：三十九年转任南京户部右侍郎，总理粮食储备。
English: In 1939, he was transferred to Nanjing as the right hand man of the household, the prime minister's grain reserve.

古文：南京督储，自成化后皆以都御史领之，至嘉靖二十六年，始命户部侍郎兼理。
现代文：南京的粮储督理，自成化元年以后均由都御史领命，到嘉靖二十六年才开始指令户部侍郎兼任。
English: Since the first year of the Republic of China, the grain storage supervisor of Nanjing was appointed by the prefectural governor, but it was not until the 26th year of the Jiajing Dynasty that the post was also assigned to the household attendant.

古文：及振武营军乱，言者请复旧制，遂以副都御史章焕专领，而改廷南京刑部。
现代文：等到振武营的军队叛乱，舆论要求恢复旧制度，于是让副都御史章焕专门领命，改派王廷去南京刑部。
English: When Zhenwuying's army rebelled, public opinion demanded the restoration of the old system, so the vice-governor of the capital, Zhang Huan, was given a special mission and Wang Ting was reassigned to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：未上，复改户部右侍郎兼左佥都御史，总督漕运，巡抚凤阳诸府。
现代文：王廷还没上任，又被改任户部右侍郎兼任左佥都御史，总督漕运，巡抚凤阳诸府。
English: Wang Ting had not yet taken office when he was appointed as the right-hand man of the household and concurrently the left-hand man of the capital, the governor of Cao Yun, and the governor of Fengyang.

古文：时倭乱未靖，廷建议以江南属镇守总兵官，专驻吴淞，江北属分守副总兵，专驻狼山。
现代文：当时倭寇骚乱还没有肃清。王廷建议派遣江南地方镇守总兵官，专门驻防吴淞，江北的属地分派的副总兵，专门驻防狼山。
English: At that time, the wokou riots had not yet been cleared up. Wang Ting proposed to send the chief military officer of the south of the Yangtze River to be stationed in Wuxi, and the deputy chief military officer of the north of the Yangtze River to be stationed in Wolf Mountain.

古文：遂为定制。
现代文：于是成为定制。
English: So it became a custom order.

古文：淮安大饥，与巡按御史朱纲奏留商税饷军，被诏切让。
现代文：淮安发生大饥荒，他与巡按御史朱纲奏请留下商税做军队的粮饷，被皇帝下诏严厉申斥。
English: When a great famine occurred in Huai'an, he and the inspector-general Zhu Gangxiao asked to leave the merchant tax as the army's grain fund, which was severely reprimanded by the emperor.

古文：给事中李邦义因劾廷拘滞，吏部尚书严讷为廷辨，始解。
现代文：给事中李邦义于是弹劾王廷不知道变通，吏部尚书严讷替王廷辩护，才得解脱。
English: In this case, Li Bangyi did not know how to change the impeachment of Wang Ding, and the cadre department had to defend Wang Ding in a strict manner before he could be released.

古文：转左侍郎，还理部事。
现代文：转任左侍郎，仍然负责户部事务。
English: He was transferred to the position of Left Attendant, and was still in charge of household affairs.

古文：以通州御倭功，加俸二级。
现代文：因为在通州抗击倭寇的功绩，增加二级薪俸。
English: Because of the merits of resisting the Japanese invaders in Tongzhou, the second-level salary was increased.

古文：迁南京礼部尚书，召为左都御史。
现代文：调任南京礼部尚书，左都御史。
English: He was transferred to the Nanjing etiquette department as Shangshu and became Zuo Guoshi.

古文：奏行慎选授、重分巡、谨刑狱、端表率、严检束、公举劾六事。
现代文：上奏皇帝推行慎重选官授职、重视分区巡察。认真办理刑狱、端正表率、严格检查与约束、公开举荐与弹劾等六件事。
English: He urged the emperor to promote the careful selection and appointment of officials, attach importance to the inspection of districts, and conscientiously handle six matters, including imprisonment, correct example rate, strict inspection and restraint, public recommendation and impeachment.

古文：隆庆元年六月，京师雨潦坏庐舍，命廷督御史分行振恤。
现代文：隆庆元年六月，京都雨大成灾毁坏房舍，皇帝指令王廷督促御史分别进行赈灾、抚恤。
English: In June of the first year of the Ryukyuan era, Kyoto was hit by a major rainstorm that destroyed houses, and the emperor ordered Wang Ting to urge Gu Shi to carry out disaster relief and pension separately.

古文：会朝觐天下官，廷请严禁馈遗，酌道里费，以儆官邪，苏民力。
现代文：正赶上皇帝要接受天下百官的朝拜，王廷奏请皇帝严禁馈赠，斟酌道里的费用，以戒备官场的邪恶，恢复民力。
English: Just in time for the emperor to receive the adoration of the world's officials, Wang Tingso asked the emperor to strictly prohibit gifts, consider the expenses of the road, guard against the evil of the officialdom, and restore people's power.

古文：帝谒诸陵，诏廷同英国公张溶居守。
现代文：皇帝拜祭诸位皇陵，诏令王廷同英国公张溶留居驻守。
English: The emperor paid homage to all the imperial mausoleums, and ordered the royal court and the British government to remain stationed there.

古文：中官许义挟刃胁人财，为巡城御史李学道所笞。
现代文：宦官许义持刀勒索别人的钱财，被巡城御史李学道鞭笞。
English: The eunuch Xu Yi held a knife to extort money from others and was whipped by the inspector of the city, Li Xueduo.

古文：群珰伺学道早朝，邀击之左掖门外。
现代文：一群太监窥视李学道上早朝之机，相约在左掖门外殴打了他。
English: A group of eunuchs spied on Li Xuedao in the early morning and beat him outside the Zuoying Gate.

古文：廷上其状，论戍有差。
现代文：王廷上奏告了他们一状，使他们分别受到戍边的发配。
English: The royal court sued them, and they were each fined.

古文：御史齐康为高拱劾徐阶，廷言： 康怀奸党邪，不重惩无以定国是。 
现代文：御史齐康替高拱弹劾徐阶。王廷进谏 ：齐康身怀奸党之邪恶，不从重惩罚不能安定国家大计。 
English: Emperor Qikang impeached Xu Ji on behalf of Gao Qiang. Wang Ting took the initiative: Qikang harbored the evil of the traitor party, and without severe punishment, the country's overall plan could not be stabilized.

古文：帝为谪康，谕留阶。
现代文：皇帝贬责了齐康，下诏挽留徐阶。
English: The emperor reprimanded Qikang and ordered Xu Ju to be detained.

古文：拱遂引疾去。
现代文：高拱便称病引退。
English: Gao Gong then announced his retirement due to illness.

古文：而给事中张齐者，尝行边，受贾人金。
现代文：给事中张齐，曾经巡视边关，接受过商人的钱财。
English: Zhang Qi, who was in charge of the matter, once inspected the border and accepted money from merchants.

古文：事稍泄，阴求阶子璠居间，璠谢不见。
现代文：事情刚刚败露，就暗中求助徐阶的儿子徐从中斡旋，徐推辞不见他。
English: As soon as the affair was exposed, he secretly sought help from Xu Zhong's son, Xu Zhong, to mediate, but Xu declined to see him.

古文：齐恨，遂摭康疏语复论阶，阶亦引疾去。
现代文：张齐怀恨在心，于是摘取齐康奏疏中的话再度弹劾徐阶，徐阶也称病引退。
English: Zhang Qi harbored a grudge, so he took Qi Kang's words from the middle of the song and impeached Xu Shifu again. Xu Shifu also said that he was ill and retired.

古文：廷因发齐奸利事，言： 齐前奉命赏军宣大，纳盐商杨四和数千金，为言恤边商、革余盐数事，为大学士阶所格。
现代文：王廷便揭发张齐的奸诈好利的劣迹，进谏： 张齐先前奉命赐赏宣、大的军队，接受了盐商杨四和的几千两银子，替他宣扬抚恤边地商人、革除以后的盐课等事，被大学士徐阶阻止。
English: The royal court then exposed Zhang Qi's treachery and profiteering, leading to his downfall: Zhang Qi had previously been ordered to reward propaganda and a large army, accepted several thousand taels of silver from the salt merchant Yang Sihe, and advocated for him to subsidize the merchants in the border areas, the salt class after the expulsion, and other things. He was stopped by the university scholar Xu Qi.

古文：四和抵齐取贿，踪迹颇露。
现代文：杨四和否认张齐收受贿赂，踪迹显露。
English: Yang Sihe denied that Zhang Qi accepted bribes, and the trail was revealed.

古文：齐惧得罪，乃借攻阶冀自掩。 
现代文：张齐惧怕被治罪，于是借攻徐阶谋求掩饰自己。 
English: Zhang Qi was afraid of being punished, so he tried to cover himself by attacking Xu Ju.

古文：遂下齐诏狱。
现代文：皇帝便将张齐打入诏狱。
English: The emperor then sent Zhang Qi to the imperial prison.

古文：刑部尚书毛恺当齐戍，诏释为民。
现代文：刑部尚书毛恺在张齐被发配去戍边的时候，宣布皇帝诏令将他削职为民而释放。
English: When Zhang Qi was sent to Fuxian, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Maoqi, announced that the emperor had decreed that he would be relieved of his duties and released.

古文：拱起再相，廷恐其修郤，而恺亦阶所引，遂先后乞休以避之。
现代文：高拱再度升职拜相，王廷担心他记恨宿怨，而且毛恺也是徐阶引荐的，于是先后请求辞官以便回避高拱。
English: Gao Gong was once again promoted to the position of vice-minister. Wang Ding was worried that Gao Gong had a grudge against him, and that Mao Dun was also recommended by Xu Ji, so he successively asked the secretary to avoid Gao Gong.

古文：给事中周芸、御史李纯朴讼齐事，谓廷、恺阿阶意，罗织不辜。
现代文：给事中周芸、御史李纯朴为张齐辩冤，称王廷、毛恺阿谀徐阶，给无辜者罗织罪名。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhou Ying and Gu Shi Li Chunpu defended Zhang Qi's grievances, saying that Wang Ting, Mao Yao and Xu Qi had fabricated charges against innocent people.

古文：刑部尚书刘自强覆奏： 齐所坐无实，廷、恺屈法徇私。 
现代文：刑部尚书刘自强再度上奏 ：对张齐的定罪不实，王廷、毛恺徇私枉法。 
English: Liu Ziqiang, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, appealed again: Zhang Qi's conviction was not true, and Wang Ting and Mao Qian had acted out of self-interest.

古文：诏夺恺职，廷斥为民，宥齐，补通州判官。
现代文：诏令剥夺毛恺的官职，将王廷贬斥为民，饶恕了张齐，将他补任通州判官。
English: The imperial edict deprived Mao Jun of his official position, denounced Wang Ting as a commoner, pardoned Zhang Qi, and appointed him as Tongzhou magistrate.

古文：万历初，齐以不谨罢，恺已前卒。
现代文：万历初年，张齐因为不谨慎被罢免，毛恺在此之前已经去世。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Zhang Qi was removed from his post for imprudence. Mao Yao had already passed away before that.

古文：浙江巡按御史谢廷杰讼恺狷洁有古人风，坐按张齐夺官，今齐已黜，足知恺守正。
现代文：浙江巡按御史谢廷杰辩解道，毛恺洁身自好有古人风范，因为压抑张齐获罪被剥夺官职，现在张齐已被罢黜，足以知晓毛恺操守正直。
English: Zhejiang inspector general Xie Tingjie argued that Mao Dun's clean and self-righteous demeanor was typical of the ancients. Because he suppressed Zhang Qi, he was convicted and deprived of his official position. Now that Zhang Qi has been ousted, it is enough to know that Mao Dun is honest.

古文：诏复恺官。
现代文：诏令恢复毛恺的官职。
English: The imperial edict restored Mao Xuan to his official position.

古文：于是巡抚四川都御史曾省吾言： 廷守苏州时，人比之赵清献。
现代文：因此，巡抚四川的都御史曾省吾进谏 ：王廷任苏州太守的时候，人们将他与赵清献相提并论。
English: Therefore, the governor of Sichuan's capital city, Guishi, once said: When Wang Ting was the governor of Suzhou, people compared him to Zhao Qingxian.

古文：直节劲气，始终无改。
现代文：耿直有气节，始终没有更改。
English: Geng Zhi has the temperament, and he has never changed.

古文：宜如毛恺例复官。 
现代文：应该像毛恺一般恢复官职。 
English: He should be reinstated like Mao Zedong.

古文：芳仍得贳死。
现代文：诏令他就原官职退休。
English: He was ordered to retire from his post.

古文：恺赠太子少保，谥端简。
现代文：万历十六年，供给的粮食如定制，仍旧以其高寿特赐慰问之情。第二年去世。谥号恭节。
English: In the 16th year of Wanli, the grain provided, such as custom-made, was still consoled by its high longevity. He died the following year.

古文：葛守礼，字与立，德平人。
现代文：葛守礼，字与立，德平人。
English: Ge Shouli, Zi and Li, De Pingren.

古文：嘉靖七年，举乡试第一。
现代文：嘉靖七年，考取乡试第一名。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the township examination.

古文：明年成进士，授彰德推官。
现代文：第二年考中进士，授职彰德的推官。
English: In the second year, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as a tutor of Zhang De.

古文：巨盗诬富家，株连以百数，守礼尽出之。主狱者谮之御史。
现代文：大盗诬陷富贵人家，株连者上百。葛守礼将他们全部释放，主持刑狱的人向御史诬陷他。
English: Ge Shouli released all of them, but the person who presided over the imprisonment framed him to Mishi.

古文：会藩府狱久不决，属守礼，一讯即得，乃大惊服。
现代文：遇上藩府的刑狱久久不能裁决，交付葛守礼，一次审讯就解决了，于是大为惊叹佩服。
English: He was surprised and impressed by the fact that he could not make a decision for a long time when he was sentenced to prison by the domain government, and he was handed over to Ge Shouli, and the case was resolved after one hearing.

古文：冬至，赵王戒百官朝服贺，守礼独不可。
现代文：冬至日，赵王请百官穿朝服朝贺，唯独葛守礼认为不可。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, Zhao Wang invited hundreds of officials to wear imperial robes for morning greetings, but Ge Shouli thought it was unacceptable.

古文：迁兵部主事。
现代文：不久他调任兵部主事。
English: He was soon transferred to be the head of the military department.

古文：父丧服阕，补礼部。
现代文：父亲去世，葛守礼守丧期满除服，补任礼部职。
English: After his father's death, Ge Shou was relieved of his duties at the end of the mourning period and was appointed to the position of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：宁府宗人悉锢高墙，后稍得脱，因请封。
现代文：宁府的宗族人全部被禁锢在高墙内，后来渐渐获得解脱，于是请求封赏。
English: Ningfu's clan members were all confined within the high walls, and later gradually gained their freedom, so they asked for a reward.

古文：礼部尚书夏言议量复中尉数人。
现代文：礼部尚书夏言提议酌量恢复几名中尉的官职。
English: Shangshu Xiayan of the Ministry of Ceremonies proposed that several lieutenants be reinstated at their discretion.

古文：未上，而言入阁，严嵩代之。
现代文：奏书未上，夏言进入内阁，严嵩执掌礼部。
English: Before the report was submitted, Natsugen entered the cabinet, and Yan Song took charge of the ceremonial department.

古文：守礼适迁仪制郎中，驳不行。
现代文：葛守礼降职为仪制郎中，驳议不行。
English: The demotion of Ge Shouli to the position of ceremonial page boy cannot be refuted.

古文：故事，郡王绝，近支得以本爵理府事，不得继封。
现代文：先例，郡王绝嗣，近亲能够像原来的爵位处理府中事宜，却不能继承封赏。
English: Precedent, the county king is a deadbeat, close relatives can deal with government affairs like the original peerage, but they cannot inherit the award.

古文：交城、怀仁、襄垣近支绝，以继封请，守礼持之坚。
现代文：交城、怀仁、襄垣的近亲绝嗣，请求继承封赏，葛守礼坚持不让步。
English: The close relatives of Jiaocheng, Huairen, and Xiangyuan requested to inherit the reward, and Ge Shouli insisted on not conceding.

古文：会以疾在告，三邸人乘间行赂，遂得请。
现代文：遇上他告疾在家，三座邸的人乘机行贿，于是请求获得批准。
English: When he fell ill at home, the people of the three mansions took the opportunity to pay bribes, and then asked for approval.

古文：旗校诇其事以闻。
现代文：锦衣卫的旗校刺探得知此事。
English: Jin Rongwei's flag school spy learned about this.

古文：所籍记赂遗十余万，独无守礼名，帝由是知守礼廉。
现代文：有簿籍记录的贿赂达十多万，唯独没有葛守礼的名字，皇帝由此知道了葛守礼的廉洁。
English: There is a book record of bribes amounting to more than one hundred thousand, but there is no name of Ge Shouli, and the emperor knew the integrity of Ge Shouli from this.

古文：迁河南提学副使，再迁山西按察使，进陕西布政使，擢右副都御史，巡抚河南。
现代文：葛守礼调任河南提学副使，又调任山西按察使，晋升为陕西布政使，擢升右副都御史，巡抚河南地区。
English: Ge Shouli was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of Henan to study, transferred to the post of inspector of Shanxi Province, promoted to the post of political envoy of Shaanxi Province, promoted to the post of vice-governor of the capital and governor of Henan Province.

古文：入为户部侍郎，督饷宣、大。
现代文：入朝任户部侍郎，督察宣、大的粮饷。
English: Entered the imperial court and was appointed as a household attendant, inspector, and great granary.

古文：改吏部。
现代文：改任吏部职。
English: He was reassigned to the position of secretary.

古文：自左侍郎迁南京礼部尚书。
现代文：由左侍郎晋升为南京礼部尚书。
English: He was promoted from Sadajiro to Shosho of the Nanjing etiquette club.

古文：李本署吏部事，希严嵩指考察廷臣，署守礼下考，勒致仕。
现代文：李本负责吏部事务，秉承严嵩旨意考察朝廷大臣，葛守礼被列为下等，勒令退休。
English: Li Ben was responsible for the affairs of the cadre department, adhering to the will of Yan Song to investigate the imperial minister, Ge Shouli was classified as inferior, and was ordered to retire.

古文：后帝问守礼安在，左右谬以老病对。
现代文：后来皇帝询问葛守礼在何处，左右的人胡诌他以年老病患告退。
English: Later, the emperor asked Ge Shouli where he was, and people around him lied that he had retired because he was old and sick.

古文：帝为叹惜久之。
现代文：皇帝为他叹惜了很久。
English: The emperor mourned for him for a long time.

古文：隆庆元年，起户部尚书。
现代文：隆庆元年，葛守礼起任户部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Ge Shouli took up the post of household secretary.

古文：奏言： 畿辅、山东流移日众，以有司变法乱常，起科太重，征派不均。
现代文：上奏进谏： 京城附近、山东一带的流民日益增多，因为有司变法扰乱纲常，征收的科税太重，征派又不均衡。
English: Waxing and waning: The number of displaced people in the vicinity of Beijing and around Shandong is increasing day by day. Because of the disturbance of the normal order caused by the change of government, the collection of science tax is too heavy, and the collection is unbalanced.

古文：且河南北，山东西，土地硗瘠，正供尚不能给，复重之徭役。
现代文：况且河南北部，山东西部，土地贫瘠，正常的供给尚且不能保障，重复繁重的徭役更无从谈起。
English: Moreover, the northern part of Henan, the eastern and western parts of the mountains, the land is barren, the normal supply can not yet be guaranteed, and the repetitive heavy labor is out of the question.

古文：工匠及富商大贾，皆以无田免役，而农夫独受其困，此所谓舛也。
现代文：工匠和富商大贾，都以无田免去徭役，只有农夫受此困厄，这就很不合事理。
English: Both craftsmen and rich merchants are exempted from forced labor with no fields, only farmers suffer from this predicament, which is very unreasonable.

古文：乞正田赋之规，罢科差之法。
现代文：请求纠正田赋的规章，罢除科差不公的法令。
English: Request to rectify the regulations of Tianfu, and repeal the unfair laws and regulations.

古文：又国初征粮，户部定仓库名目及石数价值，通行所司，分派小民，随仓上纳，完欠之数了然可稽。
现代文：开国之初征收粮食，户部审定仓库的名称和数量与价值，颁布给各司，分派给黎民百姓，百姓税粮上交给各自仓库，缴纳与拖欠的数目了然可查。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, grain was collected, the name, quantity and value of warehouses were approved by the Household Department, promulgated to all departments, distributed to the Lebanese people, and the people's tax grain was handed over to their respective warehouses. The number of payments and arrears can be clearly investigated.

古文：近乃定为一条鞭法，计亩征银。不论仓口，不问石数。
现代文：现在制定了一条鞭法，依照田亩数征收银赋，不论仓库，不问储存数量。
English: Now a whip law has been formulated, according to the number of mu of land, the silver tax will be levied, regardless of the warehouse, regardless of the amount of storage.

古文：吏书夤缘为奸，增减洒派，弊端百出。
现代文：官吏书记攀附为奸，任意增减分派数额，弊端百出。
English: Clerical clerks act as spies, arbitrarily increase or decrease the amount allocated, and there are many drawbacks.

古文：至于收解，乃又变为一串铃法，谓之夥收分解。
现代文：等到收集解送，就又变成一串铃法，称为一起征收而分散解送。
English: Wait until the collection and delivery, it will become a string of bells method, known as the collection together and distributed delivery.

古文：收者不解，解者不收，收者获积余之赀，解者任赔补之累。
现代文：征收的人不解送，解送的人不参加征收，征收的人获取多余的资财，解送的人承担赔贴的责任。
English: The person who collects the tax does not send it back, the person who sends it back does not participate in the collection, the person who collects the tax obtains the excess capital, and the person who sends it back bears the responsibility for the loss.

古文：夫钱谷必分数明而后稽核审，今混而为一，是为那移者地也。愿敕所司，酌复旧规。 
现代文：钱谷必须分开则数目明晰便于稽查审核，现在混为一团，是为那些贪污挪用者提供机会，希望敕令有司酌情恢复旧规章。 
English: Qiantu must be separated, the number should be clear to facilitate inspection and review, and it is now mixed together to provide an opportunity for those who have embezzled and misappropriated, and it is hoped that the relevant departments will restore the old regulations as appropriate.

古文：诏悉举行。
现代文：诏令全部施行。
English: All the imperial edicts have been implemented.

古文：于是奏定国计簿式，颁行天下。
现代文：因此上奏确立国家财政大计的簿记方式，颁布于天下。
English: Therefore, it was proposed to establish a bookkeeping method for the national financial budget, which was promulgated to the world.

古文：自嘉靖三十六年以后，完欠、起解、追征之数及贫民不能输纳，备录簿中。
现代文：自嘉靖三十六年以后的完欠、解送、追征的数额以及贫民不能缴纳的，全部记录在簿。
English: After the 36th year of Jiajing, the amount of arrears, remittance and collection, as well as the amount that the poor could not pay, were all recorded in the book.

古文：自府州县达布政，送户部稽考，以清隐漏那移侵欺之弊。
现代文：从府州县到布政，送交户部稽查考核，以便清查隐瞒疏漏侵占欺诈的弊端。
English: From Fuzhou County to Buzheng, send it to the Household Department for inspection and assessment, in order to investigate the drawbacks of concealing negligence, embezzlement and fraud.

古文：又以户部专理财赋，必周知天下仓库盈虚，然后可节缩调剂。
现代文：让户部专门负责财政赋税，必须详细知晓国家仓库的盈虚，然后才可能节制、压缩或进行调剂。
English: Having the Ministry of Households exclusively responsible for fiscal taxation, it is necessary to know in detail the surplus and deficit of the national warehouse, and then it is possible to control, compress or adjust.

古文：祖宗时令天下岁以文册报部，乃请遣御史谭启、马明谟、张问明、赵岩分行天下董其事，并承敕以行。覃恩例尝边军，或言士伍虚冒，宜乘给赏汰之。
现代文：先帝在世时下令全国每年将文册报告户部，于是请皇帝派遣史谭启、马明谟、张问明、赵岩分区巡行全国负责其事，并且承敕令行事，广施恩泽，按例犒赏边防军，或者有论及虚冒士伍名额的，应当乘行赏之机加以淘汰。
English: When the former emperor was alive, he ordered the whole country to report the book to the household department every year. Therefore, he asked the emperor to send Stanqi, Ma Mingmu, Zhang Qianming, and Zhao Yan to patrol the whole country to be responsible for the matter, and to act under the imperial command, to be generous, and to reward the border guards as usual. Or if there is a discussion about the number of false warriors, it should be eliminated by taking the opportunity to reward.

古文：守礼言： 此朝廷旷典，乃以贾怨耶？ 
现代文：葛守礼进谏 ：这是朝廷从未有过的事，是想收集怨恨吗？ 
English: Ge Shouli's accession to the throne: This is something the imperial court has never done before. Is it an attempt to collect grudges?

古文：议乃止。
现代文：议论于是终止。
English: The discussion then ended.

古文：大学士高拱与徐阶不相能，举朝攻拱。
现代文：大学士高拱与徐阶不和睦，朝廷官员都攻击高拱。
English: Gao Gong, a university scholar, did not get along with Xu Qi, and the imperial officials all attacked Gao Gong.

古文：侍郎徐养正、刘自强，拱所厚，亦诣守礼言。守礼不可，养正等遂论拱。
现代文：侍郎徐养正、刘自强，为高拱所看重，也到葛守礼处进言，葛守礼不允许，徐养正等人终究抨击了高拱。
English: The attendants, Xu Yangzheng and Liu Ziqiang, valued Gao Gong and also went to Ge Shouli's office for advice. Ge Shouli did not allow it, and Xu Yangzheng and others eventually criticized Gao Gong.

古文：守礼寻乞养母归。
现代文：葛守礼即刻请求回家侍养母亲。
English: Ge Shouli immediately asked to go home to take care of her mother.

古文：及拱再相，深德守礼，起为刑部尚书。
现代文：等到高拱再度任宰相，对葛守礼非常感激，起用他任刑部尚书。
English: When Gao Gong was reappointed as prime minister, he was very grateful to Ge Shouli and appointed him as Minister of Justice.

古文：初，阶定方士王金等狱，坐妄进药物，比子杀父律论死。
现代文：起初，徐阶审定方士王金等人刑狱，以妄自进奉药物定罪，参照子杀父的刑律定为死罪。
English: At first, Xu Qian approved the sentence of Fang Shi Wang Jin and others to prison, convicted them of drug abuse, and sentenced them to death according to the sentence of son killing father.

古文：诏下法司会讯。
现代文：诏令法司会审。
English: The Imperial Edict ordered that the case be tried by the Legal Affairs Bureau.

古文：守礼等议金妄进药无事实，但习故陶仲文术，左道惑众，应坐为从律编戍。
现代文：葛守礼等人评议王金没有妄自进奉药物的事实，但是沿习以往陶仲文的方术、邪道蛊惑民众，应当依照附从之律将其戍边。
English: Ge Shouli and others commented on the fact that Wang Jin did not practice medicine on his own, but followed the methods and evil ways of Tao Zhongwen in the past to seduce the people, and should be punished according to the law of obedience.

古文：给事中赵奋言： 法司为天下平。
现代文：给事中赵奋进谏 ：司法是天下公平的机构。
English: During the presentation, Zhao Fenjin said, "The judiciary is the fairest institution in the world.

古文：昔则一主于入，而不为先帝地；今则一主于出，而不恤后世议。
现代文：过去审案者主张将王金入重罪，而不给先帝留面子；现今主审者又一味主张为其开脱，而不考虑后世的议论。
English: In the past, the adjudicator advocated Wang Jin to be convicted of a serious crime, without giving the former emperor any face; nowadays, the presiding judge also insisted on his acquittal, without considering the discussions of future generations.

古文：罪有首而后有从，金等为从，孰为首？
现代文：罪有首犯者而后就有从犯者，王金等人为从犯者，谁是首犯呢？
English: If there is a first offender, then there are accomplices. Wang Jin and others are accomplices. Who is the first offender?

古文：将以陶仲文为首，则仲文死已久。
现代文：以陶仲文为首犯，那么陶仲文已经死了很久。
English: If Tao Zhongwen is the main culprit, then Tao Zhongwen has been dead for a long time.

古文：为法如此，陛下何赖哉！ 
现代文：如此执法，陛下将依赖什么呢？ 
English: What will His Majesty rely on to enforce the law in this way?

古文：疏入，报闻。
现代文：奏疏送入皇宫，皇帝答复知道了。
English: The report has been submitted, and the reply has been received.

古文：寻改守礼左都御史。
现代文：不久将葛守礼改任为左都御史。
English: Soon after, Ge Shouli was reassigned to the post of Sadogoto Imperial Historian.

古文：奏言： 畿内地势洼下，河道堙塞，遇潦则千里为壑。
现代文：上奏称 ：京畿地区地势低洼，河道淤塞，遇上涝积则千里成为沟壑。
English: The report said: the Gyeonggi region is low-lying, the river is silted up, and in the event of accumulation, thousands of kilometers become gullies.

古文：请仿古井田之制，浚治沟洫，使旱潦有备。 
现代文：恳请仿效古代的井田制，疏治沟渠与田间水道，使旱涝有备。 
English: I implore you to follow the example of the ancient well-field system and manage ditches and field waterways to prepare for droughts and floods.

古文：章下有司。
现代文：奏章下达给有司。
English: The score was given to Arisue.

古文：又申明巡抚事宜，条列官箴、士节六事。
现代文：又申明巡抚的事宜，条陈官箴、士节等六件事。
English: It also affirms six things, including the governor's affairs, the rules for officials, and the judge's day.

古文：守礼议王金狱，与拱合，然不附拱。
现代文：葛守礼对王金案狱的评议，与高拱的想法相合，然而并不附和高拱。
English: Ge Shouli's comments on Wang Jin's imprisonment coincide with Gao Gong's thoughts, but he does not agree with Gao Gong.

古文：后张居正欲以王大臣事构杀拱，守礼力为解，乃免。
现代文：后来张居正意欲用王大臣的事罗织罪名诛杀高拱，葛守礼极力替他辩解，才幸免于难。
English: Later, Zhang Juzheng wanted to use the Minister Wang's affair to frame Gao Gong, and Ge Shouli tried his best to defend him, only to be spared.

古文：阶、拱、居正更用事，交相轧。
现代文：徐阶、高拱、张居正交替掌权，彼此倾轧。
English: Xu Jia, Gao Gong and Zhang Ju are alternately in power, and they are tearing each other apart.

古文：守礼周旋其间，正色独立，人以为难。
现代文：葛守礼周旋于他们中间，清正独立，人们认为这是很难得的事。
English: Ge Shouli mingled with them and was honest and independent, which people thought was a rare thing.

古文：万历三年，以老乞休。
现代文：万历三年，以年老为由请求退休。
English: After three years of hard work, he asked to retire on the grounds of old age.

古文：诏加太子少保，驰驿归。
现代文：诏令加封太子少保，乘驿车返乡。
English: He was ordered to add the title of prince to that of minor protector, and returned home by stagecoach.

古文：六年卒。
现代文：六年，去世。
English: He died six years later.

古文：赠太子太保，谥端肃。
现代文：追赠太子太保，谥号端肃。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name became Dangsu.

古文：靳学颜，字子愚，济宁人。
现代文：靳学颜，字子愚，济宁人。
English: Zou Xueyan, Zizi Gu, Jining people.

古文：嘉靖十三年举乡试第一。
现代文：嘉靖十三年，中举乡试第一名。
English: In the 13th year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the junior high school examination.

古文：明年成进士，授南阳推官，以廉平称。
现代文：第二年考取进士，授职为南阳推官，以廉洁平易著称。
English: In the second year, he passed the entrance examination and was awarded the post of Nanyang magistrate. He was known for his honesty and simplicity.

古文：历吉安知府，治行高，累迁左布政使。
现代文：历任吉安知府，治政业绩很高，升调为左布政使。
English: Successive Ji'an prefectural governors, with high political performance, were promoted to Zuo Bu political envoys.

古文：隆庆初，入为太仆卿，改光禄。
现代文：隆庆初年，入朝任太仆卿，改任光禄寺。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he entered the imperial court as Taihuko-kyo and was reassigned to Koroku-ji Temple.

古文：旋拜右副都御史，巡抚山西。
现代文：不久委任为右副都御史，巡抚山西。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of Shanxi Province.

古文：应诏陈理财，凡万余言。
现代文：应对诏令陈述理财之道，共计一万多字。
English: In total, more than 10,000 words are needed to explain the way of financial management.

古文：言选兵、铸钱、积谷最切。
现代文：阐述选兵、铸钱、积谷等最为中肯。
English: It is most pertinent to explain the roles of selecting soldiers, minting money, and accumulating grain.

古文：其略曰：
现代文：其大意是说：
English: The article said in summary:

古文：宋初禁军十万，总天下诸路亦不过十万，其后庆历、治平间增至百余万。
现代文： 宋朝初年有十万禁军，总计全国各路兵马也没有十万，此后庆历、治平年间军队人数增至一百多万。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, there were 100,000 forbidden soldiers. In total, there were less than 100,000 soldiers and horses in all parts of the country. Since then, the number of troops has increased to more than one million during the celebration of the New Year and the establishment of peace.

古文：然其时财用不绌。
现代文：然而当时的财政开支不匮乏。
English: However, there was no shortage of financial expenditure at the time.

古文：我朝边兵四十万。
现代文：我朝边防军达四十万。
English: I have four hundred thousand border guards.

古文：其后虽增兵益戍，而主兵多缺，不若宋人十倍其初也。
现代文：此后虽然增加兵马扩充边军，但是多缺将才，不像宋代是其初的十倍。
English: After that, although the number of soldiers and horses was increased to expand the frontier army, there was a shortage of generals, unlike the Song Dynasty, which was ten times larger than the beginning.

古文：然自嘉靖中即以绌乏告，何哉？
现代文：然而自从嘉靖中期就告知以绌乏，为什么呢？
English: However, since the middle of the Jiajing Dynasty, it has been told to be scarce. Why?

古文：宋虽增兵，而天下无养兵费。
现代文：宋朝虽然增添兵马，然而国家没有养兵的经费。
English: Although the Song Dynasty increased the number of soldiers and horses, the state did not have the funds to maintain the soldiers.

古文：我朝以民养兵，而新军又一切仰太仓。
现代文：我朝以民养兵，而且新军又一切仰仗太仓。
English: My government relies on the people to raise troops, and the new army is too dependent on the military.

古文：旧饷不减，新饷日增，费一也。
现代文：旧饷没减，新饷日增，这是靡费一。
English: The old debt has not been reduced, and the new debt is increasing day by day. This is the biggest cost.

古文：周丰镐、汉四都，率有其名而无实。
现代文：周丰镐、汉西都，一般是有名无实。
English: Zhou Fengyao, Han Xidu, are generally famous but not real.

古文：我朝留都之设，建官置卫，坐食公帑，费二也。
现代文：我朝设置留都，建官制置衙门，坐食公款，这是靡费二。
English: I set up the capital in the morning, set up the official system, set up the gate, and eat public money. This is the second largest expense.

古文：唐、宋宗亲或通名仕版，或散处民间。
现代文：唐、宋的宗亲或者列名于官吏的名册，或者散处民间。
English: Tang and Song dynasties' relatives are either listed in the official roster, or scattered among the common people.

古文：我朝分封列爵，不农不仕，吸民膏髓，费三也。
现代文：我朝分封的列位公爵，不务农不入仕，吸吮民众的骨髓，这是靡费三。
English: I am a crowned duke assigned to the morning, not a farmer, not a servant, sucking the marrow of the people, this is the third time.

古文：有此三者，储畜安得不匮。
现代文：有这三项，储蓄怎么能不匮乏？
English: With these three things, how can there be no shortage of savings?

古文：而其间尤耗天下之财者，兵而已。夫陷锋摧坚，旗鼓相当，兵之实也。
现代文：而且其中最耗费国家资财的是军队，冲锋陷阵，挥旗鸣鼓，是军队的职责。
English: Moreover, the army is one of the biggest drains on the country's resources. It is the army's duty to charge into battle, waving flags and beating drums.

古文：今边兵有战时，若腹兵则终世不一当敌。
现代文：现在边防军有战斗的机会，而内地军队则终世也不会临敌。
English: Now the border troops have a fighting chance, while the mainland troops will never face the enemy.

古文：每盗贼窃发，非阴阳、医药、杂职，则丞贰判簿为之将；非乡民里保，则义勇快壮为之兵。
现代文：每当盗贼窃案发生，不是阴阳、医药、杂职，则是县丞的副手或判簿为将；不是乡民里保，则义勇快壮为兵。
English: Whenever there is a theft by a thief, it is not the yin and yang, medicine, or miscellaneous duties, but the deputy of the county magistrate or the judge's book; it is not the protection of the villagers, but the bravery of the soldiers.

古文：在北则借盐丁矿徒，在南则借狼土。
现代文：在北方则借助盐丁矿徒，在南方则借助狼兵、土兵。
English: In the north, it was done with the help of salt miners, and in the south, with the help of wolf soldiers and local soldiers.

古文：此皆腹兵不足用之验也。
现代文：这都是内地军队不堪任用的验证。
English: All of this is proof that the mainland military is not up to the job.

古文：当限以轮番守戍之法。
现代文：应当用轮番戍守的法则加以约束。
English: They should be restrained by the law of rotation.

古文：或远不可征，或弱不可任，则听其耕商，而移其食以饷边。
现代文：或有遥远不能征调的，或有羸弱不能胜任的，就听任他们农耕经商，但是移调他们的粮食充作边军军饷。
English: Whether they were too far away to be conscripted or too weak to do so, they were allowed to farm and do business, but their grain was diverted to pay the salaries of the border troops.

古文：如免班军而征偿，省充发而输赎，亦变通一策也。
现代文：例如免却班军而征银两，减少充军发配而令其输粮自赎，也是一种变通的策略。
English: For example, it is also a flexible strategy to avoid sending troops and collect silver, and to reduce the distribution of troops and make them pay for grain delivery.

古文：欲京兵强，亦宜责以轮番戍守。
现代文：想使京师兵马强悍，也应该责成他们轮番戍守边关。
English: If you want to make the soldiers and horses of the Beijing division strong, you should also order them to take turns guarding the border.

古文：夫京师去宣府、蓟镇才数百里，京营九万卒，岁以一万戍二镇，九年而一周，未为苦也，而怯者与边兵同其劲矣。
现代文：京城距宣府、蓟镇只几百里，京营有九万兵卒，每年用一万兵卒戍守两镇，九年一个轮回，并不劳苦，而且使怯弱者同边防军一样强悍。
English: The capital city is only a few hundred miles away from Xuanfu and Shanzhen. There are ninety thousand soldiers in the capital camp, and ten thousand soldiers are used to guard the two towns every year, with a nine-year cycle. It is not hard work, and it makes the timid as strong as the border guards.

古文：又以畿辅之卒填京戍之阙，其部伍、号令、月粮、犒赏亦与京卒同，而畿辅之卒皆亲兵矣。
现代文：又用京郊的士卒填充京师戍边后的空缺，他们的编制、号令、月粮饷、犒赏也与京师士卒相同，使京郊的士卒都成为亲兵。
English: They also used soldiers from the suburbs of Beijing to fill the vacancies left by the departure of the Beijing division. Their organization, orders, rations, and rewards were the same as those of the Beijing division soldiers, so that the soldiers from the suburbs of Beijing became their own soldiers.

古文：夫京卒戍蓟镇，则延、固之费可省。
现代文：京师戍守蓟镇，那么延庆、固原的费用就可以节省。
English: The Beijing Division will be stationed in Handan Town, so the cost of Yanqing and Guyuan can be saved.

古文：戍宣府，则宣府、大同之气自张。
现代文：戍守宣府，那么宣府、大同的气势自然得到张扬。
English: If you defend Xuanfu, then the momentum of Xuanfu and Datong will naturally be promoted.

古文：寇畏宣、大之力制其后，京卒之劲当其前，则仰攻深入之事鲜矣。
现代文：敌寇畏惧宣府、大同的势力控制其后，强劲的京师兵马又阻挡其前，这样仰攻深入内地侵扰的事就少了。
English: The enemy raiders were afraid of the Xuanfu, the Datong forces took control afterwards, and the strong Beijing division soldiers and horses blocked their advance, so there were fewer cases of invasions into the inland.

古文：臣又睹天下之民皇皇以匮乏为虑者，非布帛五谷不足也，银不足耳。
现代文： 我又看见天下的民众惶惶以匮乏为忧，不是布帛五谷不充足，而是银两不充足。
English: And I saw the people of the world panic and worry about scarcity. It is not that there is not enough cloth and grain, but that there is not enough silver.

古文：夫银，寒不可衣，饥不可食，不过贸迁以通衣食之用，独奈何用银而废钱？
现代文：银两，天寒不能充衣，饥馑不能充食，不过用作贸易流通以交换衣食之用，为何只任用银两而废弃铜钱？
English: Silver two, the cold of the sky cannot be filled with clothing, hunger cannot be filled with food, but it is used for trade circulation to exchange clothing and food. Why only use silver two and discard copper money?

古文：钱益废，银益独行。
现代文：越是废弃钱，银两就更加独行。
English: The more money is thrown away, the more the silver two go their separate ways.

古文：独行则藏益深，而银益贵，货益贱，而折色之办益难。
现代文：独行银则收藏越多，使银两更昂贵，货物价格更贱，使折银征赋的办法更难办。
English: The more silver collected, the more expensive the silver, the lower the price of goods, and the more difficult it is to collect silver.

古文：豪右乘其贱收之，时其贵出之。
现代文：富豪乘物价低贱时收购，待价格抬升时售出。
English: The rich buy when prices are low and sell when prices are high.

古文：银积于豪右者愈厚，行于天下者愈少。更逾数十年，臣不知所底止矣。
现代文：银两更加积聚到富豪手中，流行天下的银两就愈少，再过数十年，我不知道尽头何在。
English: The more silver two accumulates in the hands of the rich, the less silver two is popular in the world. In a few decades, I don't know where it will end.

古文：钱者，泉也，不可一日无。
现代文：钱是货币，不能一天没有。
English: Money is currency, you can't go a day without it.

古文：计者谓钱法之难有二：利不鸑本，民不愿行。
现代文：会计称钱法有两难：获利不及本钱，百姓不愿意推行。
English: The accountant said that the money law has two difficulties: the profit is less than the capital, and the people are not willing to implement it.

古文：此皆非也。
现代文：其实都并非如此。
English: In fact, this is not the case at all.

古文：夫朝廷以山海之产为材，以亿兆之力为工，以贤士大夫为役，何本之费？
现代文：朝廷用山海的物产做材料，用亿兆的民力做工，用贤士大夫做劳役，有什么成本的花费？
English: The imperial court uses the products of the mountains and seas as materials, uses trillions of people to work, and uses sages and doctors as laborers. What are the costs?

古文：诚令民以铜炭赎罪，而匠役则取之营军，一指麾间，钱遍天下矣。
现代文：如果命令百姓用铜炭赎罪，而且用营军充工匠之役，一声令下，钱遍及天下。
English: If the people are ordered to atone for their sins with copper and coal, and if the army is used to fill the role of craftsmen, the money will spread all over the world.

古文：至不顾行钱者，独奸豪尔。
现代文：至于不愿使用钱的人，唯有奸豪。
English: As for those who do not want to use money, they are nothing but scoundrels.

古文：请自今事例、罚赎、征税、赐赉、宗禄、官俸、军饷之属，悉银钱兼支。
现代文：恳请从现在开始的事例、罚赎、征税、赐赍、宗禄、官俸、军饷之类，全部兼用银两制钱。
English: I earnestly request that from now on, all cases, fines, levies, bounties, tributes, government salaries, military pay, and the like, all use silver two-system money.

古文：上以是征，下以是输，何患其不行哉。
现代文：上以此征收，下以此输纳，怎么担心它不施行。
English: On the one hand, it will be used to collect taxes, and on the other hand, it will be used to pay taxes. How can we worry about it not being implemented?

古文：臣又闻中原者，边鄙之根本也。
现代文： 我又听说中原是边疆的根基，百姓是中原的根基。
English: I also heard that the Central Plains are the foundation of the frontier, and the people are the foundation of the Central Plains.

古文：百姓者，中原之根本也，民有终身无银，而不能终岁无衣，终日无食。
现代文：百姓可以终身无银两，却不能终年无衣食。
English: People can live without money, but they can't live without food and clothing.

古文：今有司夙夜不遑者，乃在银而不在谷，臣窃虑之。
现代文：现在有关部门早晚心神不安的是银两而不是谷物，我私下忧虑这事。
English: Now, the relevant departments are worried about silver rather than grain, and I am privately worried about this.

古文：国家建都幽燕，北无郡国之卫，所恃为腹心股肱者，河南、山东、江北及畿内八府之人心耳。
现代文：国家在幽燕建都，北方没有做护卫的郡国，自恃为心腹股肱的是河南、山东、江北和京都八府的人心。
English: The country has built the capital in Yuyan, and there is no county-level country in the north to serve as a guard. It is the people's hearts in eight prefectures of Henan, Shandong, Jiangbei and Kyoto that are self-proclaimed as the heart.

古文：其人率鸷悍而轻生，易动而难戢，游食而寡积者也。
现代文：这些人都强悍但轻生，容易挑动而难以止息，游食而少积蓄。
English: These people are strong but frivolous, easy to provoke but difficult to stop, wandering and saving little.

古文：一不如意，则轻去其乡；往往一夫作难，千人响应，前事已屡验矣。
现代文：一事不如意，就轻率地离开乡土；往往一个人作难，千人响应，前面的事例已屡屡应验。
English: If things are not satisfactory, they rashly leave the countryside; often one person makes difficulties, a thousand people respond, and the previous examples have been fulfilled again and again.

古文：弭之之计，不过曰恤农以系其家，足食以系其身，聚骨肉以系其心。
现代文：安抚他们的办法，不过是称体恤农夫以便系縻他们的家庭，使他们粮食充足以便系縻自身，使他们骨肉相聚以便系縻他们的心思。
English: The only way to pacify them is to have compassion on the farmers so that they can feed their families, so that they can have enough food to feed themselves, so that they can have their flesh and blood together so that they can feed their minds.

古文：得三万焉，犹足塞转徙者之望。
现代文：现在试核实官仓的贮藏，每府获得几十万两，那么负责会计的人就可以高枕而卧了。
English: Now try to verify the storage of official warehouses, each government will receive hundreds of thousands of taels, then the person in charge of accounting can lie back and sleep.

古文：设不满万，岂得无寒心？
现代文：获得三万两，怎么能不寒心呢？
English: How can you not be cold-hearted after winning thirty thousand taels?

古文：臣窃意不满万者多也。
现代文：我私下以为不足万两者很多。
English: I personally think that less than 10,000 is a lot.

古文：臣近者疏请积谷，业蒙允行。
现代文： 我最近奏疏请求积聚谷物，业已获行许可。
English: I recently applied for permission to stockpile grain and it has been granted.

古文：第恐有司从事不力，无以塞明诏。
现代文：但担心有司办事不力，不能体现贤明的诏令。
English: However, they were worried that the officials were not able to do their jobs well and could not implement the wise edict.

古文：敢即臣说申言之：
现代文：冒昧以我的观点做点声明。
English: I'd like to venture a statement of my own.

古文：其一曰官仓，发官银以籴也。
现代文：其一是官仓，发放官银做平籴。
English: On the one hand, there was the government warehouse, where government money was issued to be used as money changers.

古文：一曰社仓，收民谷以充也。
现代文：其二是社仓，征收百姓的谷物来填充。
English: The second was the warehouse, which was filled by collecting grain from the people.

古文：官仓非甚丰岁不能举，社仓虽中岁皆可行。
现代文：官仓不是很丰盈的年份不能有举办，社仓虽然是中等年成也能行事。
English: Kanakura cannot be held in years that are not very abundant, and Shakura can be held even if it is a middle-aged year.

古文：唐义仓之开，每岁自王公以下皆有入。
现代文：唐代开设义仓，每年从王公以下都有征入。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, a benevolent warehouse was opened, and every year there was a levy from the king and below.

古文：宋则准民间正税之数，取二十分之一以为社。
现代文：宋代则额定民间的正税数，提取二十分之一作为社仓之数。
English: In the Song Dynasty, the positive tax number of the folk was rated, and one-twentieth was extracted as the number of company warehouses.

古文：诚仿而推之，就土俗，合人情，占岁候以通其变，计每岁二仓之入以验其功，著为令，而岁岁修之，时其丰歉而敛散之。
现代文：诚然仿效推广此法，顺应土俗，合乎人情，占卜年成气候，以便知晓其变化，核算每年两仓的收入来检验他们的功效，立为法令，并且每年做些修正，以丰歉之时做集散处理。
English: It is true that we should follow the example of promoting this method, conforming to local customs and customs, conforming to human feelings, divining the annual climate to know its changes, calculating the income of two warehouses each year to test their effectiveness, establishing it as a law, and making some amendments every year, and handling it as a collection and distribution at the time of apology.

古文：在官仓者，民有大饥则以振。
现代文：官仓的粮食，百姓有大饥荒则做赈济。
English: The government stores grain, but when the people are starving, the government provides relief.

古文：在民仓者，虽官有大役亦不听贷。
现代文：民仓的粮食，虽然官府有大规模的劳役也不听凭借贷。
English: Although the government has a large-scale labor force, it does not lend grain from private warehouses.

古文：借此藏富于民，即藏富于国也。
现代文：借助此法藏富于民，也就是藏富于国。
English: With the help of this method, the rich are hidden from the people, that is, the rich are hidden from the country.

古文：今言财用者，不忧谷之不足，而忧银之不足。
现代文：现在谈论财资费用，不是担忧谷物不充足，而是担忧银两不充足。
English: Now, when we talk about financial expenses, we are not worried about the shortage of grain, but about the shortage of silver.

古文：夫银实生乱，谷实弭乱。
现代文：银两实际上会产生祸乱，而谷物实能消除祸乱。
English: Silver and gold actually produce evil, and grain can actually eliminate evil.

古文：银之不足，而泉货代之；五谷不足，则孰可以代者哉？
现代文：银两不充足，用钱币替代。五谷不充足，则用什么替代呢？
English: If silver and rice are not enough, they will be replaced by coins. If grain is not enough, what will be used instead?

古文：故曰明君不宝金玉，而宝五谷，伏惟圣明垂意。
现代文：所以说贤明的君主不宝贵金玉，而珍重五谷，希望圣上留意此事。 
English: Therefore, it is said that a wise monarch does not value gold, but treasures grain. I hope that His Holiness will pay attention to this matter.

古文：疏入，下所司议，卒不能尽行也。
现代文：奏疏呈送宫中，下交给主管部门讨论最终没有能够全部施行。
English: In the end, it was not possible to fully implement the report, which was submitted to the palace and handed over to the competent authorities for discussion.

古文：治绩亦有闻。
现代文：不久他被征召为工部右侍郎，改任吏部职。
English: Soon after, he was called up to serve as the right hand man of the engineering department and was transferred to the administrative department.

古文：赞曰：明之中叶，边防堕，经费乏。当时任事之臣，能留意于此者鲜矣。
现代文：升任左侍郎。靳学颜品行端正廉洁，目睹高拱以首辅身份掌管选拔官吏，非常专横跋扈，于是称病回家，直至去世。评议：明朝中叶，边防松弛，经费匮乏。当时负责事务的大臣，能够留意到这个问题的很少。
English: He was promoted to the position of Left Attendant. Zou Xueyan was upright and honest, and when he witnessed Gao Gong, who was in charge of selecting officials as the first assistant, he was very domineering, so he called home sick until he died. Review: In the middle of the Ming Dynasty, the border defense was slack and funds were scarce. The minister in charge of affairs at that time was able to notice this problem very little.

古文：若杨博、马森、刘体乾、葛守礼、靳学颜之属，庶几负经济之略者。
现代文：如杨博、马森、刘体乾、葛守礼、靳学颜之类，差不多都有经邦济世的谋略。
English: For example, Yang Bo, Ma Sen, Liu Tieqian, Ge Shouli, Zou Xueyan, and so on, almost all of them have the strategy of passing through the State Council.

古文：就其设施与其所建白，究而行之，亦补苴一时而已，况言之不尽行，行之不能久乎！
现代文：就他们的设想和作为，推究后施行，也只能修补一时罢了，何况所建议的也没有全部施行，施行的也不能持久。
English: As far as their ideas and actions are concerned, after investigation and implementation, it can only be a temporary fix. What's more, not all of the suggestions have been implemented, and the implementation cannot be sustained.

古文：自时厥后，张居正始一整饬。
现代文：从当时至后世，张居正才做一番整治。
English: From that time to the next generation, Zhang Juzheng was the first to do some rectification.

古文：居正殁，一切以空言从事，以迄于亡。
现代文：张居正死了，一切以空言行事，直至灭亡。
English: Zhang Jiusheng is dead, all with empty words and actions, until his death.

古文：盖其坏非朝夕之积矣。
现代文：所以明朝的腐坏不是朝夕间积聚的。
English: Therefore, the decay of the morning is not accumulated in the morning and evening.

