古文：莺莺传
现代文：莺莺传
English: 傳

古文：唐贞元中，有张生者，性温茂，美风容，内秉坚孤，非礼不可入。
现代文：唐代贞元年间，有位张生，他性格温和而富于感情，风度潇洒，容貌漂亮，意志坚强，脾气孤僻。
English: During the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Zhang Sheng, whose character was gentle and full of emotion, his demeanor was dashing, his appearance was beautiful, his will was strong, and his temper was lonely.

古文：或朋从游宴，扰杂其间，他人皆汹汹拳拳，若将不及；张生容顺而已，终不能乱。
现代文：凡是不合于礼的事情，就别想让他去做。有时跟朋友一起出去游览饮宴，在那杂乱纷扰的地方，别人都吵闹起哄，没完没了，好像都怕表现不出自己，因而个个争先恐后，而张生只表面上逢场做戏般敷衍着。
English: Don't ask him to do anything that is not proper. Sometimes he goes out with friends to visit a banquet, and in that chaotic place, others are noisy and endless, as if they are afraid of not being able to express themselves, so they are all scrambling, and Zhang Sheng is only pretending to be playful.

古文：以是年二十三，未尝近女色。
现代文：他从不参与始终保持稳重。虽然已是二十三岁了，还没有真正接近过女色。
English: He never gets involved and always keeps a low profile. Although he is 23 years old, he has never really been close to a woman.

古文：知者诘之，谢而言曰： 登徒子非好色者，是有凶行。
现代文：与他接近的人便去问他，他表示歉意后说： 登徒子不是好色的人，却留下了不好的品行。
English: People who were close to him went to question him, and he apologized and said: Deng Tu Zi is not a womanizer, but he has left a bad character.

古文：余真好色者，而适不我值。
现代文：我倒是喜欢美丽的女子，却总也没让我碰上。
English: I do like beautiful women, but I've never met one.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：大凡物之尤者，未尝不留连于心，是知其非忘情者也。 
现代文：大凡出众的美女，我未尝不留心，凭这可以知道我不是没有感情的人。 
English: I have never failed to notice a great and outstanding beauty, by which I can know that I am not a person without feelings.

古文：诘者识之。
现代文：问他的人这才了解张生。
English: People who ask him about this only understand Zhang Sheng.

古文：无几何，张生游于蒲，蒲之东十余里，有僧舍曰普救寺，张生寓焉。
现代文：过了不久，张生到蒲州游览。蒲州的东面十多里处，有个庙宇名叫普救寺，张生就寄住在里面。
English: Soon after, Zhang Sheng visited Puzhou. More than ten miles to the east of Puzhou, there is a temple called the Purification Temple, and Zhang Sheng stayed there.

古文：适有崔氏孀妇，将归长安，路出于蒲，亦止兹寺。
现代文：当时正好有个崔家寡妇，将要回长安，路过蒲州，也暂住在这个寺庙中。
English: At that time, there happened to be a widow of the Cui family, who was going back to Chang'an, passing through Puzhou, and also temporarily living in this temple.

古文：崔氏妇，郑女也；张出于郑，绪其亲，乃异派之从母。
现代文：崔家寡妇是郑家的女儿，张生的母亲也姓郑，论起亲戚，算是另一支派的姨母。
English: The widow of the Cui family is the daughter of the Zheng family, and the mother of Zhang Sheng is also surnamed Zheng. In terms of relatives, she is the aunt of another branch.

古文：是岁，浑瑊薨于蒲，有中人丁文雅，不善于军，军人因丧而扰，大掠蒲人。
现代文：这一年，浑瑊死在蒲州，有宦官丁文雅，不会带兵，军人趁着办丧事进行骚扰，大肆抢劫蒲州人。
English: In the same year, Han Xuan died in Puzhou. There was a eunuch, Ding Wenya, who would not bring soldiers. The soldiers took advantage of the funeral to harass and rob the people of Puzhou.

古文：崔氏之家，财产甚厚，多奴仆，旅寓惶骇，不知所托。
现代文：崔家财产很多，又有很多奴仆，旅途暂住此处，不免惊慌害怕，不知依靠谁。
English: The Cui family has a lot of property and a lot of servants. They are staying here temporarily on their journey. They are panicked and afraid, and they don't know who to rely on.

古文：先是张与蒲将之党有善，请吏护之，遂不及于难。
现代文：在此以前张生跟蒲州将领那些人有交情，就托他们求官吏保护崔家，因此崔家没遭到兵灾。
English: Prior to this, Zhang Sheng had friendships with those who were generals in Puzhou, and he asked them to ask officials to protect the Cui family, so the Cui family was not affected by the military disaster.

古文：十余日，廉使杜确将天子命以总戎节，令于军，军由是戢。
现代文：过了十几天，廉使杜确奉皇帝之命来主持军务，向军队下了命令，军队从此才安定下来。
English: After a dozen days, Du Ji, the emperor's envoy, was ordered by the emperor to preside over the military affairs and gave orders to the army. Only then did the army settle down.

古文：郑厚张之德甚，因饰馔以命张，中堂宴之。
现代文：郑姨母非常感激张生的恩德，于是大摆酒席款待张生。
English: Aunt Zheng was very grateful for Zhang Sheng's kindness, so she treated Zhang Sheng to a grand banquet.

古文：复谓张曰： 姨之孤嫠未亡，提携幼稚，不幸属师徒大溃，实不保其身，弱子幼女，犹君之生，岂可比常恩哉？
现代文：在堂屋的正中举行宴饮，又对张生说： 我是个寡妇，带着孩子，不幸正赶上军队大乱，实在是无法保住生命，弱小的儿子年幼的女儿，都是亏你给了他们再次生命，怎么可以跟平常的恩德一样看待呢？
English: They held a banquet in the middle of the hall, and said to Zhang Sheng: I am a widow with a child, unfortunately, I am catching up with the army chaos, it is really impossible to save my life, my weak son and young daughter are all thanks to you for giving them life again, how can I be treated the same as the usual charity?

古文：今俾以仁兄礼奉见，冀所以报恩也。 
现代文：现在让他们以对待仁兄的礼节拜见你，希望以此报答你的恩情。 
English: Now let them treat you with brotherly courtesy, hoping to repay your kindness.

古文：命其子，曰欢郎，可十余岁，容甚温美。
现代文：便叫她的儿子拜见。儿子叫欢郎，大约十多岁，容貌漂亮。
English: Then she called her son to meet her. Her son's name was Huan Lang, he was about ten years old, and he was handsome.

古文：次命女： 出拜尔兄，尔兄活尔。 
现代文：接着叫她女儿拜见： 出来拜见你仁兄，是仁兄救了你。 
English: Then she called out to her daughter: Come out and meet your brother, he saved you.

古文：久之辞疾，郑怒曰： 张兄保尔之命，不然，尔且掳矣，能复远嫌乎？ 
现代文：过了好久未出来，推说有病。郑姨生气地说： 是你张兄保住了你的命，不然的话，你就被抢走，还讲究什么远离避嫌呢？ 
English: Aunt Zheng said angrily, "It was your brother Zhang who saved your life, otherwise, you would have been snatched away. Why do you care about avoiding suspicion?

古文：久之乃至，常服睟容，不加新饰。
现代文：过了好久她才出来。
English: It was a long time before she came out.

古文：垂鬟接黛，双脸销红而已，颜色艳异，光辉动人。
现代文：穿着平常的衣服，面貌丰润，没加新鲜的装饰，环形的发髻下垂到眉旁，两腮飞红，面色艳丽与众不同，光彩焕发，非常动人。
English: Wearing ordinary clothes, her face is plump, without any fresh decoration, her ring-shaped bun hangs down to her eyebrows, her cheeks are red, her complexion is gorgeous and different, radiant and very moving.

古文：张惊为之礼，因坐郑旁。
现代文：张生非常惊讶她的美貌急忙跟她见礼，之后她坐到了郑姨的身旁。
English: Zhang Sheng was very surprised by her beauty and hurried to bow to her, after which she sat down next to Aunt Zheng.

古文：以郑之抑而见也，凝睇怨绝，若不胜其体者。
现代文：因为是郑姨强迫她出见的，因而眼光斜着注视别处，显出很不情愿的样子，身体好像支持不住似的。
English: Because it was Aunt Zheng who forced her to see him, she looked away with slanted eyes, showing a very reluctant look, as if she couldn't support her body.

古文：问其年纪，郑曰： 今天子甲子岁之七月，终于贞元庚辰，生年十七矣。 
现代文：张生问她年龄，郑姨说： 现在的皇上甲子那年的七月生，到贞元庚辰年，今年十七岁了。 
English: Zhang Sheng asked her how old she was, and Aunt Zheng said, "The present Emperor Jiazi was born in July of that year, in the year of Zhen Yuan Geng Chen, and this year she is seventeen years old.

古文：张生稍以词导之，不对，终席而罢。
现代文：张生慢慢地用话开导引逗，但郑的女儿根本不回答。宴会结束了只好作罢。
English: Zhang Sheng slowly used words to enlighten and seduce, but Zheng's daughter did not answer at all. The banquet was over and they had to call it quits.

古文：张自是惑之，愿致其情，无由得也。
现代文：张生从此念念不忘，心情再也不能平静，想向她表白自己的感情，却没有机会。
English: Zhang Sheng never forgot this, and his mood could no longer be calm. He wanted to express his feelings to her, but he didn't have a chance.

古文：崔之婢曰红娘，生私为之礼者数四，乘间遂道其衷。
现代文：崔氏女的丫环叫红娘，张生私下里多次向她叩头作揖，趁机说出了自己的心事。
English: The maidservant of Cui's daughter is called Hong Niang. Zhang Sheng bowed down to her many times in private and took the opportunity to tell her what was on his mind.

古文：婢果惊沮，腆然而奔，张生悔之。
现代文：丫环果然吓坏了，很害羞地跑了，张生很后悔。
English: The maiden was really scared and ran away very shyly. Zhang Sheng regretted it very much.

古文：翼日，婢复至，张生乃羞而谢之，不复云所求矣。
现代文：第二天，丫环又来了，张生羞愧地道歉，不再说相求的事。
English: The next day, the maidservant came again. Zhang Sheng humbly apologized and no longer talked about courtship.

古文：婢因谓张曰： 郎之言，所不敢言，亦不敢泄。然而崔之姻族，君所详也，何不因其德而求娶焉？ 
现代文：丫环于是对张生说： 你的话，我不敢转达，也不敢泄露，然而崔家的内外亲戚你是了解的，为什么不凭着你对她家的恩情向他们求婚呢？ 
English: The maidservant then said to Zhang Shenglu: I dare not convey or reveal your words, but you know the relatives inside and outside the Cui family, why not propose to them with your kindness to her family?

古文：张曰： 余始自孩提，性不苟合。
现代文：张生说： 我从孩童时候起，性情就不随便附合。
English: Zhang Sheng said, "Since I was a child, I have never been easily attached.

古文：或时绔绮间居，曾莫流盼。
现代文：有时和妇女们在一起，也不曾看过谁。
English: Sometimes I was with women and I didn't see anyone.

古文：不为当年，终有所蔽。
现代文：当年不肯做的事，如今到底还是在习惯上做不来。
English: What I didn't want to do back then, I still can't do out of habit.

古文：昨日一席间，几不自持。
现代文：昨天在宴会上，我几乎不能控制自己。
English: Yesterday at the banquet, I could hardly control myself.

古文：数日来，行忘止，食忘饱，恐不能逾旦暮。
现代文：这几天来，走路忘了到什么地方去，吃饭也感觉不出饱还是没饱。
English: For the past few days, I have forgotten where to go when walking, and I don't feel full when eating.

古文：若因媒氏而娶，纳采问名，则三数月间，索我于枯鱼之肆矣。
现代文：恐怕过不了早晚，我就会因相思而死了。如果通过媒人去娶亲，又要 纳采 ，又要 问名 ，手续多得很，少说也得三四个月，那时恐我也就不会在人世了。
English: I'm afraid that sooner or later, I'll die of love. If I go through a matchmaker to get married, and I have to choose a name, and I have to ask for a name, there are a lot of procedures, at least three or four months, then I'm afraid I won't be alive.

古文：尔其谓我何？ 
现代文：你说我该咋办呢？ 
English: What do you think I should do?

古文：婢曰： 崔之贞慎自保，虽所尊不可以非语犯之，下人之谋，固难入矣。
现代文：丫环说： 崔小姐正派谨慎很注意保护自己，即使所尊敬的人也不能用不正经的话去触犯她。奴才的主意，就更难使她接受。
English: The maidservant said, "Miss Cui is a decent and prudent person who is very careful to protect herself. Even someone she respects cannot offend her with improper words. It is even more difficult to make her accept the idea of a servant.

古文：然而善属文，往往沉吟章句，怨慕者久之。
现代文：然而她很会写文章，常常思考推敲文章写法，怨恨 思的情形常持续很久。
English: However, she is very good at writing articles, often thinking about and refining how to write articles, and the resentment often lasts for a long time.

古文：君试为喻情诗以乱之，不然则无由也。 
现代文：您可以试探地做些情诗来打动她，否则，是没有别的门路了。 
English: You can try to impress her with some love poems, otherwise, there is no other way.

古文：张大喜，立缀春词二首以授之。
现代文：张生非常高兴，马上做了两首诗交给了红娘。
English: Zhang Sheng was very happy and immediately made two poems and handed them to Hong Niang.

古文：是夕，红娘复至，持彩笺以授张曰： 崔所命也。 
现代文：当天晚上，红娘又来了，拿着彩信纸交给张生说： 这是崔小姐让我交给你的。 
English: In the evening of the same day, Hong Niang came again, took the MMS and handed it to Zhang Sheng, saying, "This is what Miss Cui asked me to give you."

古文：题其篇曰《明月三五夜》，其词曰： 待月西厢下，近风户半开。
现代文：看那篇诗的题目是《明月三五夜》，那诗写道： 待月西厢下，迎风户半开。
English: Look at that poem, the title of which is "Three-Five Nights of the Bright Moon." The poem says: "Wait for the moon under the west compartment, and half-open the door to the wind."

古文：拂墙花影动，疑是玉人来。 
现代文：拂墙花影动，疑是玉人来。 
English: The shadows on the wall are moving. I suspect it's Tamahito.

古文：张亦微喻其旨，是夕，岁二月旬有四日矣。
现代文：张也微微地明白了诗的含义，当天晚上，是二月十四日。
English: Zhang also slightly understood the meaning of the poem. That evening, it was February 14th.

古文：崔之东有杏花一株，攀援可逾。
现代文：崔莺莺住房的东面有一棵杏花树，攀上它可以越过墙。
English: There is an apricot tree on the east side of Choi Min's house. If you climb it, you can get over the wall.

古文：既望之夕，张因梯其树而逾焉，达于西厢，则户半开矣。红娘寝于床，生因惊之。红娘骇曰： 郎何以至？ 
现代文：阴历十五的晚上，张生于是把那棵树当作梯子爬过墙去。到了西厢房，一看，门果然半开着，红娘躺在床上，张生很吃惊。红娘十分害怕，说： 你怎么来了？ 
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day of the lunar calendar, Zhang Sheng then used the tree as a ladder to climb over the wall. When he arrived at the west wing room, he saw that the door was indeed half open, and the red daughter was lying on the bed. Zhang Sheng was very surprised. The red daughter was very scared and said: How did you come?

古文：张因绐之曰： 崔氏之笺召我也，尔为我告之。 
现代文：张生对她说： 崔小姐的信中召我来的，你替我通报一下。 
English: Zhang Sheng said to her, "I was summoned by Miss Cui's letter, please inform me.

古文：无几，红娘复来，连曰： 至矣！
现代文：不一会儿，红娘又来了，连声说： 来了！
English: A short while later, Little Red Riding Hood came again and said in unison, "Here it is!

古文：至矣！ 
现代文：来了！ 
English: Why are you still sleeping?

古文：张生且喜且骇，必谓获济。
现代文：张生又高兴又害怕，以为一定会成功。
English: Zhang Sheng was both happy and scared, thinking that he would definitely succeed.

古文：及崔至，则端服严容，大数张曰： 兄之恩，活我之家，厚矣。是以慈母以弱子幼女见托。
现代文：等到崔小姐到了，就看她穿戴整齐，表情严肃，大声数落张生说： 哥哥恩德，救了我们全家，这是够大的恩了，因此我的母亲把幼弱的子女托付给你，为什么叫不懂事的丫环，送来了淫乱放荡词？
English: When Miss Cui arrived, she was neatly dressed, her expression was serious, and she said in a loud voice, "Brother Nde, you saved our whole family. This is a big enough grace. That's why my mother entrusted her young and weak children to you. Why did you call her a incompetent maid and send her lewd and debauched words?"

古文：奈何因不令之婢，致淫逸之词，始以护人之乱为义，而终掠乱以求之，是以乱易乱，其去几何？
现代文：开始是保护别人免受兵乱，这是义，最终乘危要挟来索取，这是以乱换乱，二者相差无几。
English: The beginning is to protect others from the turmoil, which is righteousness, and the end is to take advantage of the threat to demand, which is to change the turmoil with the turmoil, the two are almost the same.

古文：试欲寝其词，则保人之奸，不义；明之于母，则背人之惠，不祥；将寄与婢仆，又惧不得发其真诚。
现代文：假如不说破，就是保护别人的欺骗虚伪行为，是不义；向母亲说明这件事呢，就辜负了人家的恩惠，不吉祥；想让婢女转告又怕不能表达我的真实的心意。
English: If I don't expose it, I'm protecting someone else's deceit and hypocrisy, which is an injustice; if I tell my mother about it, I'm betraying someone's favor, which is not auspicious; if I want my maid to pass it on, I'm afraid I won't be able to express my true feelings.

古文：是用托短章，愿自陈启，犹惧兄之见难，是用鄙靡之词，以求其必至。
现代文：因此借用短小的诗章，愿意自己说明，又怕哥哥有顾虑，所以使用了旁敲侧击的语言，以便使你一定来到。
English: Therefore, I borrowed a short verse, willing to explain myself, but afraid of my brother's concerns, so I used the language of side-by-side, so that you would definitely come.

古文：非礼之动，能不愧心，特愿以礼自持，无及于乱。 
现代文：如果不合乎礼的举动，能不心里有愧吗？只希望用礼约束自己，不要陷入淫乱的泥潭。 
English: If you act in a manner that is not proper, can you not feel guilty? I only hope that you will use proper etiquette to restrain yourself and not fall into the quagmire of immorality.

古文：言毕，翻然而逝。
现代文：说完，马上就走了。
English: After saying this, he left immediately.

古文：张自失者久之，复逾而出，于是绝望。
现代文：张生愣了老半天，不知道怎样才好，只好又翻过墙回去了，于是彻底绝望。
English: Zhang Sheng was stunned for a long time and did not know what to do, so he had to go back over the wall, and then he was in complete despair.

古文：数夕，张生临轩独寝，忽有人觉之。
现代文：一连几个晚上，张生都靠近窗户睡觉，忽然有人叫醒了他。
English: For several nights in a row, Zhang Sheng slept close to the window, and suddenly someone woke him up.

古文：惊骇而起，则红娘敛衾携枕而至。抚张曰： 至矣！
现代文：张生惊恐地坐了起来，原来是红娘抱着被子带着枕头来了，安慰张生说： 来了！来了！
English: Zhang Sheng sat up in fright. It turned out that it was the Red Maiden who came with a pillow and a quilt, comforting Zhang Sheng and saying, "It's coming! It's coming!

古文：至矣！
现代文：还睡觉干什么？ 
English: Why are you still sleeping?

古文：睡何为哉？ 
现代文：把枕头并排起来，把被子搭在一起，然后就走了。
English: Put the pillows side by side, pull the covers together, and off you go.

古文：并枕重衾而去。张生拭目危坐久之，犹疑梦寐，然而修谨以俟。
现代文：张生擦了擦眼睛，端正地坐着等了半天，疑心是在做梦，但是还是打扮得整整齐齐，恭恭敬敬地等待着。
English: Zhang Sheng wiped his eyes, sat upright and waited for half a day. He suspected that he was dreaming, but he dressed neatly and waited respectfully.

古文：俄而红娘捧崔氏而至，至则娇羞融冶，力不能运支体，曩时端庄，不复同矣。
现代文：不长时间红娘就扶着崔莺莺来了。来了后崔莺莺显得妖美羞涩，和顺美丽，力气好像支持不了肢体，跟从前的端庄完全不一样。
English: It didn't take long for the Red Maiden to come and support Choi Min. After she arrived, Choi Min looked beautiful and shy, and Shun beautiful. Her strength seemed to be unable to support her limbs, which was completely different from her previous demure appearance.

古文：是夕旬有八日也，斜月晶莹，幽辉半床。
现代文：那晚上是十八日，斜挂在天上的月亮非常皎洁，静静的月光照亮了半床。
English: It was the evening of the 18th, and the moon, hanging obliquely in the sky, was very bright. The quiet moonlight lit up half of the bed.

古文：张生飘飘然，且疑神仙之徒，不谓从人间至矣。
现代文：张生不禁飘飘然，简直疑心是神仙下凡，不认为是从人间来的。
English: Zhang Sheng couldn't help but feel buoyant. It was as if his doubt had descended from the gods. He didn't think it had come from the human world.

古文：有顷，寺钟鸣，天将晓，红娘促去。
现代文：过了一段时间，寺里的钟响了，天要亮了。红娘催促快走，崔小姐娇滴滴地哭泣，声音委婉。
English: After some time, the bell in the temple rang, and it was about to dawn. The Red Daughter urged her to hurry, and Miss Cui cried softly.

古文：崔氏娇啼宛转，红娘又捧之而去，终夕无一言。
现代文：红娘又扶着走了。整个晚上莺莺没说一句话。
English: Hong Niang helped her walk away again. She didn't say a word the entire evening.

古文：张生辨色而兴，自疑曰： 岂其梦邪？ 
现代文：张生在天蒙蒙亮时就起床了，自己怀疑地说： 难道这是做梦吗？ 
English: Zhang Sheng got up when it was getting light, and said to himself doubtfully: Is this a dream?

古文：是后又十余日，杳不复知。张生赋《会真诗》三十韵，未毕，而红娘适至。因授之，以贻崔氏。
现代文：等到天亮了，看到化妆品的痕迹还留在臂上，香气还留在衣服上，在床褥上的泪痕还微微发亮、晶莹。这以后十几天，关于莺莺的消息一点也没有。张生就作《会真诗》三十韵，还没作完，红娘来了，于是交给了她，让送给崔莺莺。
English: When it was dawn, she saw that the traces of the cosmetics were still on her arm, the fragrance was still on her clothes, and the tears on the mattress were still shiny and sparkling. For the next ten days, there was no news about Hao. Zhang Sheng composed "Hui Zhen Shi" with thirty rhymes, and before it was finished, Hong Niang came, so he handed it to her and let her give it to Cui Yao.

古文：自是复容之，朝隐而出，暮隐而入，同安于曩所谓西厢者，几一月矣。
现代文：从此莺莺又允许了，早上偷偷地出去，晚上偷偷地进来，一块儿安寝在以前所说的 西厢 那地方，几乎一个月。
English: From then on, he allowed me to sneak out in the morning and sneak back in at night, and we slept together in what used to be called the West Wing for almost a month.

古文：张生常诘郑氏之情，则曰： 我不可奈何矣，因欲就成之。 
现代文：张生常问郑姨的态度，莺莺就说： 我没有办法告诉她。 
English: Zhang Sheng often asked Aunt Zheng's attitude, and Zou said: I have no way to tell her.

古文：无何，张生将之长安，先以情喻之。
现代文：张生便想去跟她当面谈谈，促成这件事。不久，张生将去长安，先把情况告诉崔莺莺。
English: Zhang Sheng wanted to talk to her face-to-face and facilitate this matter. Soon, Zhang Sheng will go to Chang'an and first tell Cui Wei about the situation.

古文：崔氏宛无难词，然而愁怨之容动人矣。
现代文：崔莺莺仿佛没有为难的话，然而忧愁埋怨的表情令人动心。
English: Cui Wei did not seem to be in any difficulty, but his sad and complaining expression was touching.

古文：将行之再夕，不可复见，而张生遂西下。
现代文：将要走的第二天晚上，莺莺没有来。张生于是向西走了。
English: On the evening of the next day, when he was about to leave, the cormorant did not come. Zhang Sheng then went west.

古文：数月，复游于蒲，会于崔氏者又累月。
现代文：过了几个月，张生又来到蒲州，跟崔莺莺又聚会了几个月。
English: A few months later, Zhang Sheng came to Puzhou again and met with Cui Yao for a few more months.

古文：崔氏甚工刀札，善属文，求索再三，终不可见。
现代文：崔莺莺字写得很好，还善于写文章，张生再三向她索要，但始终没见到她的字和文章。
English: Cui Junji wrote very well and was also good at writing articles. Zhang Sheng repeatedly asked her, but never saw her writing or articles.

古文：往往张生自以文挑，亦不甚睹览。
现代文：张生常常自己用文章挑逗，崔莺莺也不大看。
English: Zhang Sheng often uses his own articles to tease, but Cui Lan doesn't think much of it.

古文：大略崔之出人者，艺必穷极，而貌若不知；言则敏辩，而寡于酬对。待张之意甚厚，然未尝以词继之。时愁艳幽邃，恒若不识；喜愠之容，亦罕形见。
现代文：大体上讲崔莺莺超过众人，技艺达到极高的程度，而表面上好像不懂；言谈敏捷雄辩，却很少应酬；对张生情意深厚，然而却未用话表达出来；经常忧愁羡慕隐微深邃，却常像无知无识的样子；喜怒的表情，很少显现于外表。
English: Generally speaking, Cui Yao is superior to others. He has a very high level of skill, but he doesn't seem to understand on the surface; he speaks quickly and eloquently, but rarely greets; he has a deep feeling for Zhang Sheng, but he doesn't express it in words; he is often sad and envious, but he often looks like he doesn't know anything; his expression of joy and anger rarely appears on the surface.

古文：异时独夜操琴，愁弄凄恻，张窃听之，求之，则终不复鼓矣。
现代文：有一天夜晚。
English: One night.

古文：以是愈惑之。
现代文：独自弹琴，心情忧愁，弹奏的曲子很伤感。
English: Playing the piano alone, feeling sad, playing a very sad tune.

古文：张生俄以文调及期，又当西去。
现代文：张生偷偷地听到了，请求她再弹奏一次，却始终没弹奏，因此张生更猜不透她的心事。
English: Zhang Sheng secretly heard it and asked her to play it again, but she never did, so Zhang Sheng couldn't figure out what was on her mind.

古文：当去之夕，不复自言其情，愁叹于崔氏之侧。
现代文：不久张生考试的日子到了，又该到西边去。临走的晚上，张生不再诉说自己的心情，而在崔莺莺面前忧愁叹息。
English: Soon the day of Zhang Sheng's exam arrived, and it was time for him to go to the west. On the evening before his departure, Zhang Sheng no longer told of his feelings, but sighed with sadness in front of Cui Yao.

古文：崔已阴知将诀矣，恭貌怡声，徐谓张曰： 始乱之，终弃之，固其宜矣，愚不敢恨。
现代文：崔莺莺已暗暗知道将要分别了，因而态度恭敬，声音柔和，慢慢地对张生说： 你起先是玩弄，最后是丢弃，你当然是妥当的，我不敢怨恨。
English: Cui Yao already secretly knew that they were going to separate, so she had a respectful attitude and a soft voice, and slowly said to Zhang Sheng: At first you play with me, but in the end you discard me. Of course, you are right, and I dare not hold a grudge.

古文：必也君乱之，君终之，君之惠也；则殁身之誓，其有终矣，又何必深感于此行？
现代文：一定要你玩弄了我，又由你最终娶我，那是你的恩惠。就连山盟海誓，也有到头的时候，你又何必对这次的离去有这么多感触呢？
English: You must have toyed with me, and you finally married me, that is your boon. Even if there is a vow at the end, why do you have to feel so much about this departure?

古文：然而君既不怿，无以奉宁。
现代文：然而你既然不高兴，我也没有什么安慰你的。
English: However, since you are not happy, I have nothing to comfort you.

古文：君常谓我善鼓琴，向时羞颜，所不能及。
现代文：你常说我擅长弹琴，我从前害羞，办不到。
English: You often say that I am good at playing the piano, I used to be shy, I can't do it.

古文：今且往矣，既君此诚。 
现代文：现在你将早走了，让我弹琴，就满足您的意愿。 
English: Now that you will be leaving early, let me play the piano and I will fulfill your wishes.

古文：因命拂琴，鼓《霓裳羽衣序》，不数声，哀音怨乱，不复知其是曲也。左右皆嘘唏，崔亦遽止之。投琴，泣下流连，趋归郑所，遂不复至。
现代文：于是她开始弹琴，弹的是《霓裳羽衣曲》序，还没弹几声，发出的悲哀的声音又怨又乱，不再知道弹的是什么曲子，身边的人听了哭了起来，崔莺莺也突然停止了演奏，扔下了琴，泪流满面；急步回到了母亲处，再没有来。
English: So she began to play the piano. She was playing the prelude to "The Ruffian's Song," and before she had played a few notes, the mournful sound she emitted was angry and confused. She no longer knew what tune she was playing. People around her started to cry when they heard it. Cui Yao also suddenly stopped playing, threw down the piano, and burst into tears. She hurried back to her mother and never came back.

古文：明旦而张行。
现代文：第二天早上张生出发了。
English: The next morning, Zhang Sheng set off.

古文：明年，文战不胜，张遂止于京，因贻书于崔，以广其意。
现代文：第二年，张生没有考中，便留在长安，于是写给崔莺莺一封信，要她把事情看开些。
English: In the second year, Zhang Sheng did not take the middle school entrance examination and stayed in Chang'an, so he wrote a letter to Cui Yao, asking her to look at things from a different angle.

古文：崔氏缄报之词，粗载于此。曰： 捧览来问，抚爱过深，儿女之情，悲喜交集。
现代文：崔莺莺的回信，粗略地记载于此，信中说： 捧读来信，知道你对我感情很深厚。男女之情的流露，使我悲喜交集。
English: Cui Yao's reply, roughly transcribed here, said: "Reading your letter, I know that your feelings for me are very deep. The outpouring of feelings between a man and a woman makes me sad and happy at the same time.

古文：兼惠花胜一合，口脂五寸，致耀首膏唇之饰。虽荷殊恩，谁复为容？
现代文：又送我一盒花胜，五寸口脂。你送我这些是想使头发增彩，使嘴唇润泽，虽然承受特殊的恩惠，但打扮了又给谁看呢？
English: You also gave me a box of flowers and a five-inch lipstick. You gave me these to brighten my hair and moisturize my lips. Although I received special favors, who would I show them to if I was dressed up?

古文：睹物增怀，但积悲叹耳。
现代文：看到这些东西更增加了想念，这些东西更使悲伤叹息越来越多罢了。
English: Seeing these things has only increased the longing, and these things have only made the sadness and sighing more and more.

古文：伏承使于京中就业，进修之道，固在便安。
现代文：你既接受了到京城参加考试的任务，而进身的途径，就应该在长安安下心来。
English: Since you have accepted the task of going to Beijing to take the exam, you should keep Chang'an in mind as a way to advance.

古文：但恨僻陋之人，永以遐弃，命也如此，知复何言？
现代文：只遗憾怪僻浅陋的我，因为路远而被丢弃在这里。是我的命该如此，还能说什么呢？
English: I only regret that I, a strange and shallow person, have been abandoned here because of the distance. This is how my life should be, what else can I say?

古文：自去秋已来，常忽忽如有所失，于喧哗之下，或勉为语笑，闲宵自处，无不泪零。
现代文：从去年秋天以来，常常精神恍惚，像失掉了什么。在喧闹的场合，有时勉强说笑，而在清闲的夜晚自己独处时，怎能不偷偷流泪。
English: Since last autumn, I've often been in a daze, feeling like I've lost something. On noisy occasions, I sometimes can't help but laugh, but when I'm alone on a relaxing evening, I can't help but secretly shed tears.

古文：乃至梦寝之间，亦多感咽。
现代文：甚至在睡梦当中，也常感叹呜咽。
English: Even in my sleep, I often sigh and sob.

古文：离忧之思，绸缪缱绻，暂若寻常；幽会未终，惊魂已断。
现代文：想到离别忧愁又缠绵，真觉得我们相处的时间太短，虽然很短可又很不平常。秘密相会没有结束，好梦突然中断了。
English: Thinking about the sadness of parting and lingering, I really feel that our time together is too short. Although it is short, it is very unusual. The secret meeting did not end, and the good dream was suddenly interrupted.

古文：虽半衾如暖，而思之甚遥。
现代文：虽然被子的一半还使人感到温暖，但想念你更多更远。
English: Although half of the quilt is still warm, I miss you more and more.

古文：一昨拜辞，倏逾旧岁。
现代文：好象昨天才分别，可是转眼就过去一年了。
English: It seems like only yesterday that we separated, but in the blink of an eye, a year has passed.

古文：长安行乐之地，触绪牵情，何幸不忘幽微，眷念无斁。
现代文：长安是个行乐的地方，不知是什么牵动了你的思绪，还想着我这个微不足道的人。
English: Chang'an is a place of pleasure. I don't know what has affected your thoughts, but you are still thinking about me, an insignificant person.

古文：鄙薄之志，无以奉酬。
现代文：可是我却想念你没有边没有沿，只是我低下卑微的头，无法向你答谢什么。
English: But I miss you without edge or border, only I bow my humble head, unable to thank you for anything.

古文：至于终始之盟，则固不忒。
现代文：至于我们的山盟海誓，我从来没有改变。
English: As for our oath, I have never changed it.

古文：鄙昔中表相因，或同宴处，婢仆见诱，遂致私诚，儿女之心，不能自固。君子有援琴之挑，鄙人无投梭之拒。
现代文：我从前跟你以表亲关系相接触，有时一同宴饮相处。是婢女引诱我，于是就在私下与你诚心。青春男女的心不能自我控制，你有时借听琴来挑逗我，我没有象投梭那样的拒绝。
English: I used to be in contact with you as a cousin, sometimes we dined together. It was my maid who seduced me, so I was sincere with you in private. The hearts of young men and women cannot control themselves, you sometimes borrow a harp to tease me, I did not refuse like a shuttlecock.

古文：及荐寝席，义盛意深，愚陋之情，永谓终托。
现代文：等到与你同居，情义很浓，感情很深，我愚蠢浅薄的心，认为终身有了依靠。
English: Wait until I live with you, the feeling is very strong, the feelings are very deep, my stupid shallow heart thinks that I have a life-long support.

古文：岂期既见君子，而不能定情，致有自献之羞，不复明侍巾帻。
现代文：哪里想到见了您以后，却不能成婚！以致给我造成了的羞耻，不再有光明正大的做妻子的机会。
English: Who would have thought that after meeting you, I would not be able to get married! So much shame has been heaped on me that I no longer have a fair chance of becoming a wife.

古文：没身永恨，含叹何言？
现代文：这是死后也会遗憾的事情，我只能心中叹息，还能说什么呢？
English: This is something I will regret even after I die. I can only sigh in my heart. What else can I say?

古文：倘仁人用心，俯遂幽眇；虽死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：如果仁义的人肯尽心尽力，体贴我的苦衷，因而委屈地成全婚事，那么即使我死去了，也会像活着的时候那样高兴。
English: If a good and righteous man is willing to do his best, considerate of my plight, and thus wrongfully consummate the marriage, then even if I die, I will be as happy as I was when I was alive.

古文：如或达士略情，舍小从大，以先配为丑行，以要盟为可欺。则当骨化形销，丹诚不泯；因风委露，犹托清尘。
现代文：或许是通达的人，把一切事情都看得很随便，忽略小的方面，而只看大的方面，把婚前结合看作丑行，把胁迫订的盟约看作可要挟的条件，那么我形体虽然消失，但诚心也不会泯灭。凭着风借着露，我的灵魂还会跟在你的身边。
English: Perhaps it is the man of understanding, who sees everything very casually, ignores the small aspects, but only looks at the big aspects, regards the pre-marital union as a scandal, regards the covenant made under duress as a condition that can be blackmailed, then although my body disappears, my sincerity will not be extinguished. By the wind through the dew, my soul will follow you around.

古文：存没之诚，言尽于此；临纸呜咽，情不能申。
现代文：我生死的诚心，全表达在这信上面了。面对信纸我泣不成声，感情也觉得抒发不出来。
English: The sincerity of my life and death is fully expressed in this letter. Facing the letter paper, I can't cry, and I feel that I can't express my feelings.

古文：千万珍重！珍重千万！
现代文：只是希望你千万爱惜自己，千万爱惜自己。
English: I just hope you take care of yourself, take care of yourself.

古文：玉环一枚，是儿婴年所弄，寄充君子下体所佩。
现代文：玉环一枚是我婴儿时带过的，寄去权充您佩带的东西。
English: A jade ring I brought with me when I was a baby. I am sending it to you as something you can wear.

古文：玉取其坚润不渝，环取其终使不绝。兼乱丝一絇，文竹茶碾子一枚。
现代文：玉 取它的坚固润泽不改变。环 取它的始终不断；加上头发一缕，文竹茶碾子一枚。
English: Its firm moisturizing luster does not change. The ring takes it all the time; plus a strand of hair, a piece of bamboo tea grinder.

古文：此数物不足见珍，意者欲君子如玉之真，弊志如环不解，泪痕在竹，愁绪萦丝，因物达情，永以为好耳。
现代文：这几种东西并不值得被看重，我的意思不过是想让您如玉般真诚，也表示我的志向如环那样不能解开。泪痕落到了竹子上，愁闷的情绪像缠绕的丝。借物表达情意，永远成为相好。
English: These things are not worthy of being valued, I just want to make you as sincere as a pearl, and also mean that my ambition is as unbreakable as a ring. Tears fall on the bamboo, sad emotions are like twisted silk. Express affection with borrowed objects, and become friends forever.

古文：张生发其书于所知，由是时人多闻之。
现代文：心近身远，相会没有机会了。内心的忧郁也许会与你千里相会合。
English: The heart is close to the body, there is no chance to meet. The inner melancholy may meet you thousands of miles away.

古文：所善杨巨源好属词，因为赋《崔娘诗》一绝云： 清润潘郎玉不如，中庭蕙草雪销初。
现代文：请你千万爱惜保护自己。不要把我老放在心上。 张生把她的信给好朋友看了，由此当时有很多人知道了这事。张生的好友杨巨源好写诗填词，他就把这事作了一首《崔娘》绝句诗： 清润潘郎玉不如，中庭蕙草雪销初。
English: Please cherish and protect yourself. Don't always put me in your heart. Zhang Sheng showed her letter to a good friend, which made a lot of people know about it at the time. Zhang Sheng's friend Yang Jiuyuan was good at writing poetry, and he made a "Cui Niang" poem about this: "Clear Pan Lang Yu is not as good as, the courtyard is covered with grass and snow."

古文：风流才子多春思，肠断萧娘一纸书。 
现代文：风流才子多春思，肠断萧娘一纸书。 
English: The womanizing talented son thinks too much, and the heartbroken despondent daughter is a piece of paper.

古文：河南元稹，亦续生《会真诗》三十韵。
现代文：河南的元稹亦接着张生的会真诗又作才三十韵。
English: Henan's Yuan Qi also followed Zhang Sheng's real poetry and composed only thirty rhymes.

古文：诗曰。微月透帘栊，萤光度碧空。
现代文：诗写道：微微的月光透过窗棂与帘子照入室内，天空也被月色映得有些明亮。
English: The poem reads: The faint moonlight shines through the curtains and blinds into the room, and the sky is also reflected somewhat brightly by the moon.

古文：遥天初缥缈，低树渐葱胧。
现代文：在月光之下遥远的天空显得模糊，低处的树木也略露出青翠的颜色。
English: In the moonlight, the distant sky is blurred, and the low-lying trees also show a hint of green.

古文：龙吹过庭竹，鸾歌拂井桐。
现代文：风吹拂着院中的竹子，声如龙吟，鸾鸟的歌声穿过了井旁的桐树。
English: The wind blows the bamboo in the courtyard, the sound is like a dragon singing, the song of the ostrich passes through the paulownia tree next to the well.

古文：罗绡垂薄雾，环珮响轻风。
现代文：罗绡飘曳像薄雾，身上佩带的玉饰在轻风中发出响声。
English: Rowan floats like mist, and the jade ornaments worn on the body make a noise in the breeze.

古文：绛节随金母，云心捧玉童。
现代文：仪仗随着 西王母 ，云中托着 玉童 。
English: The ceremonial battle with the Western Queen Mother, holding the golden child in the clouds.

古文：更深人悄悄，晨会雨濛濛。
现代文：夜晚人静无声，早晨相会时却下着僇僇细雨。
English: In the evening, people are silent, but in the morning, when they meet, it is drizzling.

古文：珠莹光文履，花明隐绣龙。
现代文：绣鞋上嵌着珠玉一类的饰物，光闪闪的，并绣有不明显的龙形花纹。
English: The embroidered shoes are embedded with jewel-like ornaments, shiny, and embroidered with an inconspicuous dragon pattern.

古文：瑶钗行彩凤，罗帔掩丹虹。言自瑶华浦，将朝碧玉宫。
现代文：行走时头上的凤形首饰颤动着，罗做的披肩胜过红色的虹霓。从 瑶华浦 去到 碧玉宫 。
English: When walking, the phoenix-shaped jewelry on the head shakes, and the shawl made by Luo trumps the red rainbow ribbon. From Zhenhua Pu to the Jade Palace.

古文：因游洛城北，偶向宋家东。
现代文：因到洛城北面游览，偶然的机会遇见了 宋玉的东邻女 。
English: Due to a visit to the north side of Los Angeles, I met Song Yu's neighbor from the east by chance.

古文：戏调初微拒，柔情已暗通。
现代文：调戏时，开头还微微拒绝，实际上心中已默许。
English: At the beginning of the teasing, she still refused slightly, but in fact, she had acquiesced in her heart.

古文：低鬟蝉影动，回步玉尘蒙。
现代文：低头时像蝉翼似的发髻微微颤动，回来的时候，脚上落了一层灰尘。
English: When he looked down, his hair quivered like the wings of a cicada. When he came back, a layer of dust had settled on his feet.

古文：转面流花雪，登床抱绮丛。
现代文：转过脸来如花之美，如雪之白，上床抱着丝绸被子。
English: She turned her face into the beauty of a flower, the whiteness of snow, and went to bed hugging her silk comforter.

古文：鸳鸯交颈舞，翡翠合欢笼。
现代文：像鸳鸯那样脖子相贴舞动，又像翡翠鸟那样聚在一起欢乐。
English: Dancing neck to neck like dragonflies, and rejoicing together like emerald birds.

古文：眉黛羞偏聚，唇朱暖更融。
现代文：眉上的黛色因羞涩而聚向一边，嘴唇上的红色因温暖已融化。
English: The violet on her brow has gathered to one side from shyness, and the red on her lips has melted from the warmth.

古文：气清兰蕊馥，肤润玉肌丰。
现代文：呼出的气像兰花的蕊那样香，皮肤滋润，美好的肌肉很丰满。
English: The exhaled breath is fragrant like the stamens of an orchid, the skin is moisturized, and the beautiful muscles are plump.

古文：无力佣移腕，多娇爱敛躬。
现代文：没有力气懒得移动手腕，呈现多种娇态，喜欢缩着身子。
English: He doesn't have enough strength to move his wrists, he has a variety of facial expressions, and he likes to cower.

古文：汗流珠点点，发乱绿葱葱。
现代文：流出的汗聚成了一串串汗珠，头发散乱，呈现闪闪绿色。
English: The perspiration gathered into a string of beads, the hair scattered and turned a shimmering green.

古文：方喜千年会，俄闻五夜穷。
现代文：正为千载难逢的相会高兴，却突然听见已到五更。
English: I was happy for the once-in-a-lifetime meeting, but suddenly I heard that it was already five more.

古文：留连时有恨，缱绻意难终。
现代文：恋恋不舍时产生遗憾，情意缠绵难以结束。
English: When love is unrequited, regret arises, and it is difficult to end the lingering feelings.

古文：慢脸含愁态，芳词誓素衷。
现代文：懒洋洋的脸色露出忧愁的神态，用美丽的语言发誓，说出了肺腑之言。
English: His lazy face showed a sad expression, he swore in beautiful language, and spoke his heart out.

古文：赠环明运合，留结表心同。
现代文：赠送玉环表明命运永远相合。留下同心结象征两心相同。
English: The gift of a jade ring indicates that their fates are forever intertwined, and leaving a concentric knot symbolizes that their hearts are the same.

古文：啼粉流宵镜，残灯远暗虫。
现代文：夜晚照镜梳妆，眼泪把脸上的粉都冲掉了，昏暗的灯火下，听得到远处虫子鸣叫的声音。
English: At night, I look in the mirror to put on my makeup, tears wash away the powder on my face, and under the dim light, I can hear the sound of insects chirping in the distance.

古文：华光犹苒苒，旭日渐瞳瞳。
现代文：化妆后依然光彩很鲜明，而早晨的太阳也渐渐出来了。
English: After applying makeup, the radiance is still very bright, and the morning sun is gradually coming out.

古文：乘鹜还归洛，吹箫亦上嵩。
现代文：乘着野鸭回归洛水，吹箫的人也登上了嵩山。
English: The wild ducks returned to Luoshui, and the bagpipers climbed Mount Song.

古文：衣香犹染麝，枕腻尚残红。
现代文：衣服上像沾上了麝香，枕头上滑腻腻还留有红色。
English: The clothes look like they've been stained with musk, and the pillows are sticky and red.

古文：幂幂临塘草，飘飘思渚蓬。
现代文：密密的塘边上的草，轻轻飘飞就像沙洲的蓬草。
English: The grass on the edge of the pond is so dense that it gently flutters like the fluffy grass on a sandbar.

古文：素琴鸣怨鹤，清汉望归鸿。
现代文：弹奏素琴像鹤，仰望天上盼鸿雁归来。
English: Play the suqin like a crane, look up to the sky and hope for the return of the wild geese.

古文：海阔诚难渡，天高不易冲。
现代文：大海宽阔难以飞渡，天高，也难飞。
English: The sea is wide and difficult to fly across, and the sky is high and difficult to fly.

古文：行云无处所，萧史在楼中。
现代文：像朝为行云的巫山神女一样没有固定处所。
English: Like the Wushan Goddess of the Morning, she has no fixed abode.

古文：张之友闻之者，莫不耸异之，然而张志亦绝矣。
现代文：只有萧史一个人留在楼中 张生的朋友听到这事的，没有不感到惊异的，然而张生的念头断了。
English: Xiao Shi was the only one left in the building. Zhang Sheng's friends were surprised to hear this, but Zhang Sheng's idea was cut off.

古文：稹特与张厚，因征其词。
现代文：元稹与张生特别有交情，便问他关于这事的想法。
English: Yuan Qi, who was particularly friendly with Zhang Sheng, asked him what he thought about this.

古文：张曰： 大凡天之所命尤物也，不妖其身，必妖于人。
现代文：张生说： 大凡上天差遣的特出的东西，不祸害他自己，一定祸害别人。
English: Zhang Sheng said, "A great and extraordinary thing sent by heaven will not harm itself, but will certainly harm others."

古文：使崔氏子遇合富贵，乘宠娇，不为云，不为雨，为蛟为螭，吾不知其所变化矣。
现代文：假使崔莺莺遇到富贵的人，凭借宠爱，能不做风流韵事，成为潜于深渊的蛟龙，我就不能预测她会变成什么。
English: If Cui Yao meets a rich man and, by virtue of being favored, can avoid having an affair and become a dragon lurking in the abyss, I can't predict what she will become.

古文：昔殷之辛，周之幽，据百万之国，其势甚厚。
现代文：以前殷朝的纣王，周代的周幽王，拥有百万户口的国家，那势力是很强大的。
English: In the past, the king of Yin Dynasty, the king of Zhou Dynasty, the king of Zhou Dynasty, the country with a million households, that power is very powerful.

古文：然而一女子败之，溃其众，屠其身，至今为天下僇笑。
现代文：然而一个女子就使它垮台了，军队崩溃，自身被杀，至今被天下耻笑。
English: However, a woman brought it down, the army collapsed, she was killed, and has been ridiculed by the world ever since.

古文：予之德不足以胜妖孽，是用忍情。 
现代文：我的德行难以胜过怪异不祥的东西，只有克服自己的感情，跟她断绝关系。 
English: My virtue is no match for the weird, sinister thing, and I have no choice but to overcome my feelings and break off relations with her.

古文：于时坐者皆为深叹。
现代文：当时在座的人都为此深深感叹。
English: Everyone present at the time was deeply moved by this.

古文：后岁余，崔已委身于人，张亦有所娶。
现代文：以后一年多，崔莺莺嫁给了别人，张生也娶了亲。
English: More than a year later, Cui Yao married someone else, and Zhang Sheng also married a relative.

古文：适经所居，乃因其夫言于崔，求以外兄见。
现代文：一次张生恰好经过崔莺莺住的地方，就通过崔的丈夫转告崔莺莺，要求以表兄的身份相见。
English: One time, Zhang Sheng happened to pass by the place where Cui Yao lived. He told Cui Yao through Cui's husband and asked to meet him as a cousin.

古文：夫语之，而崔终不为出。
现代文：丈夫告诉了崔莺莺。可是崔莺莺始终也没出来。
English: Her husband told Choi Min, but Choi Min never came out.

古文：张怨念之诚，动于颜色，崔知之，潜赋一章词曰： 自从消瘦减容光，万转千回懒下床。
现代文：张生怨恨思念的诚意，在脸色上表现得很明显。崔莺莺知道后，暗地里写了一首诗： 自从消瘦减容光，万转千回懒下床。
English: The sincerity of Zhang Sheng's resentment and longing was clearly shown on his face. After knowing this, Cui Yao secretly wrote a poem: "Since losing weight and losing my eyesight, I've gotten out of bed a thousand times."

古文：不为旁人羞不起，为郎憔悴却羞郎。 
现代文：不为旁人羞不起，为郎憔悴却羞郎。 
English: He is not ashamed of others, but he is ashamed of himself.

古文：竟不之见。
现代文：最后也未见张生。
English: In the end, Zhang Sheng was nowhere to be seen.

古文：后数日，张生将行，又赋一章以谢绝云： 弃置今何道，当时且自亲。
现代文：后来又过了几天，张生将要走了，崔莺莺又写了一篇断绝关系的诗： 弃置今何道，当时且自亲。
English: A few days later, when Zhang Sheng was about to leave, Cui Yao wrote another poem to break off the relationship: Abandonment now, at that time it was self-reliance.

古文：还将旧时意，怜取眼前人。 
现代文：还将旧时意，怜取眼前人。 
English: It also conveys an old-fashioned sense of pity for those in front of you.

古文：自是绝不复知矣。
现代文：从此以后彻底断绝了音信。
English: Since then, there has been no contact at all.

古文：时人多许张为善补过者。
现代文：当时的人大多赞许张生是善于弥补过失的人。
English: At that time, most people praised Zhang Sheng as a person who was good at making up for mistakes.

古文：予常与朋会之中，往往及此意者，夫使知者不为，为之者不惑。
现代文：我常在朋友聚会时，谈到这个意思，是为了让那些明智的人不作这样的事；做这样事的人不被迷惑。
English: I have often spoken of this matter in the company of my friends, so that those who are wise will not do such things, and those who do such things will not be deceived.

古文：贞元岁九月，执事李公垂，宿于予靖安里第，语及于是。
现代文：贞元年九月，朋友李公佐，留宿在我们靖安里住宅里，我谈起了这件事。
English: In September 1981, my friend Li Gongzao stayed with us in our Jing'anli residence, and I talked about this matter.

古文：公垂卓然称异，遂为《莺莺歌》以传之。
现代文：李公佐觉得这件事非常出奇，连连称道。于是我便作了《莺莺歌》来传播这件事。
English: Li Guanzao thought it was very strange and praised it repeatedly. So I made "Song of Songs" to spread the story.

古文：崔氏小名莺莺，公垂以命篇。
现代文：崔氏小名叫莺莺，公佐就以此为篇名。
English: Cui's middle name is Zou, and Kousa used this as the title of the story.

