古文：萧岩寿耶律撒剌萧速撒耶律挞不也萧挞不也萧忽古耶律石柳萧岩寿，乙室部人。
现代文：萧岩寿，乙室部人。
English: Xiao Yanshou, a member of the Second Division.

古文：性刚直尚气，仕重熙末。
现代文：性情刚直，崇尚气节。重熙末出任官职。
English: He was a man of upright disposition and advocated austerity. He assumed an official position at the end of the Heian period.

古文：道宗即位，皇太后屡称其贤，由是进用。
现代文：道宗即位，皇太后屡次称赞他贤能，因此得到选拔任用。
English: When Emperor Daozong ascended the throne, the empress dowager repeatedly praised his virtues, and he was selected and appointed.

古文：上出猎较，岩寿典其事，未尝高下于心，帝益重之。
现代文：皇上出宫狩猎较射，由萧岩寿典掌其事，不曾随心所欲地处理事宜，皇上更加看重他了。
English: When the emperor left the palace to go hunting, Xiao Yanshou took charge of the matter. He did not deal with the matter as he wished. The emperor valued him even more.

古文：历文班太保、同知枢密院事。
现代文：历任文班太保、同知枢密院事。
English: Successively held the posts of secretary of education, secretary of the privy council and secretary of the privy council.

古文：咸雍四年，从耶律仁先伐阻卜，破之，有诏留屯，亡归者众，由是镌两官。
现代文：咸雍四年，随耶律仁先讨伐阻卜，击破之，诏令就地驻守，然而逃回的人很多，因此岩寿的两个官职都被削夺。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, following the lead of Ye Lujin, he first fought against and defeated the obstruction, and ordered the imperial edict to be stationed on the spot. However, many people fled back, so Iwaju's two official posts were taken away.

古文：十年，讨敌烈部有功，为其部节度使。
现代文：十年，讨伐敌烈部立功，任敌烈部节度使。
English: Ten years later, he made meritorious contributions to the crusade against the enemy's stronghold and served as the envoy of the enemy's stronghold.

古文：大康元年，同知南院宣徽使事，迁北面林牙。
现代文：大康元年，任同知南院宣徽使，迁北面林牙。
English: In the first year of the Great Prosperity, he was appointed as the heraldic envoy of the South China Academy of Sciences and moved to Linya in the north.

古文：密奏乙辛以皇太子知国政，心不自安，与张孝杰数相过从，恐有阴谋，动摇太子。
现代文：秘密上奏称乙辛因为皇太子主持国政，心中不安，与张孝杰多次来来往往，恐怕会有阴谋，危害太子。
English: It was secretly reported that because the crown prince presided over state affairs, Yixin was uneasy and often came and went with Zhang Xiaojie. I'm afraid there will be a conspiracy to harm the crown prince.

古文：上悟，出乙辛为中京留守。
现代文：皇上领悟，出贬乙辛为中京留守。
English: The emperor realized that it was best to leave Yixin in the capital.

古文：会乙辛生日，上遣近臣耶律白斯本赐物为寿，乙辛因私属白上： 臣见奸人在朝，陛下孤危。
现代文：适逢乙辛生日，皇上派近臣耶律白斯本赐给物品祝寿，乙辛于是私下嘱托他向皇上表白 ：我发现奸臣在朝中当权，皇上孤立危急。
English: On the occasion of Yixin's birthday, the emperor sent a close retainer, Yeludbai Seben, to give him gifts to celebrate his birthday. Yixin then privately asked him to confess to the emperor: I discovered that a treacherous retainer was in power in the imperial court, and that the emperor was dangerously isolated.

古文：身虽在外，窃用寒心。 
现代文：我人虽在外，私下里非常担心。 
English: Even though I'm not there, I'm very worried in private.

古文：白斯本还，以闻。
现代文：白斯本回京，如实奏闻。
English: Bai Seben returned to Beijing, according to the report.

古文：上遣人赐乙辛车，谕曰： 无虑弗用，行将召矣。 
现代文：皇上派人赐给乙辛车子，晓谕他说： 不必担心不受重用，很快就会召你回京了。 
English: The emperor sent someone to give the carriage to Yixing and told him: "Don't worry about not being reused, you will soon be called back to Beijing."

古文：由是反疑岩寿，出为顺义军节度使。
现代文：从此反而疑心岩寿，将他出贬为顺义军节度使。
English: From then on, Iwatsuki became suspicious of him, and demoted him to the position of Shunyi Army's festival envoy.

古文：乙辛复入为枢密使，流岩寿于乌隗路，终身拘作。
现代文：乙辛再度入京任枢密使，将岩寿流放到乌隗路，终身服劳役。
English: Yixin once again entered Beijing as a privy councilor, exiled Iwaju to Wushan Road, and sentenced him to hard labor for life.

古文：岩寿虽窜逐，恒以社稷为忧，时人为之语曰： 以狼牧羊，何能久长！ 
现代文：岩寿尽管遭到斥逐，心中总是忧虑国家大局，时人对他说： 以狼牧羊，何能久长！ 
English: Despite being ousted, Iwatsuki was always worried about the country's overall situation. People said to him at the time: "How long can you shepherd sheep with wolves?"

古文：三年，乙辛诬岩寿与谋废立事，执还杀之，年四十九。
现代文：三年，乙辛诬陷岩寿参与谋划废父立子之事，将他抓回来杀掉了，年四十九岁。
English: Three years later, at the age of forty-nine, Yixing falsely accused Iwasu of being involved in the planning of the birth of a child without a father, arrested him, and killed him.

古文：乾统间，赠同中书门下平章事，绘像宜福殿。
现代文：乾统年间，天祚帝追赠他为同中书门下平章事，在宜福殿为他绘制画像。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qian, Emperor Tianmu posthumously awarded him the honorary title of "Dongzhong Shumen" and painted a portrait for him in Yifu Hall.

古文：岩寿廉直，面折廷诤，多与乙辛忤，故及于难。
现代文：岩寿清廉正直，在朝廷上犯颜直谏，据理力争，经常触犯乙辛，因此遭了杀身之祸。
English: Iwatsuki was honest and incorruptible. He was rude and argumentative at court, and often offended Yixin. As a result, he was killed.

