古文：刘怀珍，字道玉，平原人，汉胶东康王寄后也。
现代文：刘怀珍，字道玉，平原人，是汉代胶东康王的后代。
English: Liu Huai Zhen, also known as Daoyu, was a native of the plains and a descendant of King Jiaodongkang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：祖昶，宋武帝平齐，以为青州治中，至员外常侍。
现代文：祖父刘昶，在宋武帝平定齐地时，任他为青州治中，官职做到员外常侍。
English: Grandfather Liu Wei, when Emperor Song Wuding was in power, appointed him as the Vice-governor of Qingzhou, and his official position was that of non-commissioned officer.

古文：伯父奉伯，宋世为陈南顿二郡太守。
现代文：他伯父名奉伯，在宋代任陈和南顿二郡太守。
English: His uncle, whose name was Fongbo, served as the deputy governor of Chen and Nantong counties in the Song Dynasty.

古文：怀珍幼随奉伯至寿阳，豫州刺史赵伯符出猎，百姓聚观，怀珍独避不视，奉伯异之，曰： 此儿方兴吾宗。 
现代文：怀珍小时候跟随奉伯到寿阳，豫州刺史赵伯符去打猎，百姓都去看，独有怀珍不去，奉伯认为他很特别，说： 遣孩子要使我们家族兴旺的。 
English: When Huai Zhen was a child, he followed Feng Bo to Shouyang. He went hunting with Zhao Bofu, a famous hunter in Yuzhou. The people all went to see him. Only Huai Zhen did not go. Feng Bo thought he was very special and said, "Sending a child will make our family prosperous."

古文：本州辟主簿。
现代文：郡里启用他为主簿。
English: The county made him the head librarian.

古文：元嘉二十八年，亡命司马顺则聚党东阳，州遣怀珍将数千人掩讨平之。宋文帝召问破贼事状，怀珍让功不肯当，亲人怪问焉，怀珍曰： 昔国子尼耻陈河间之级，吾岂能论邦域之捷哉！ 
现代文：元嘉二十八年时，逃将司马在束阳结伙为寇，州府派怀珍领几千人去讨伐，平定了贼寇宋文帝召他去询问破贼的情况，怀珍谦让而不居功，家裹人奇怪地问起这事，怀珍说： 从前国子尼把陈述河闲的级别作为羞耻的事，我怎能以国家的胜利为功呢! 
English: In the 28th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the fugitive general Sima formed a band of bandits in Sokyang. The state government sent Huai Zhen to lead several thousand people to fight and quell the bandits. Emperor Songwen called him to inquire about the situation of the bandits. Huai Zhen humbly conceded and did not take credit. His family members asked about this in a strange way. Huai Zhen said, "Since the former Emperor Guo Zinni made it a matter of shame to report the level of river idleness, how can I take credit for the country's victory?"

古文：时人称之。
现代文：当时的人都赞扬他。
English: It was praised by people at the time.

古文：江夏王义恭出镇盱眙，道遇怀珍，以应对见重，取为骠骑长兼墨曹行参军。
现代文：江夏王义恭出京镇守盱眙，在路上遇到怀珍，因为应答得体被看重，调他做骠骑长兼墨曹行参军。
English: King Yigong of Jiangxia went out of Beijing to guard the capital. On the way, he met Huai Zhen, who was valued because he answered politely, and transferred him to be the commander of the cavalry and the commander of the army.

古文：寻除振武将军、长广太守。
现代文：不久授予他振武将军、长庐太守。
English: He was soon given the titles of General Zhenwu and Governor of Nagatoro Province.

古文：孝建初，为义恭大司马参军、直阁将军。
现代文：孝建初年，任义恭的大司马参军、直合将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojian, the grand steed of Emperor Yixiong joined the army and became General Zhaohai.

古文：怀珍北州旧姓，门附殷积，启上门生千人充宿卫。孝武大惊，召取青、冀豪家私附得数千人，土人怨之。
现代文：怀珍是北州的旧贵族，攀附他家的人很多他奏请把一千多门生召来作护卫，孝武帝大惊，召来青、冀两州的豪族的私人附属有几千人，士族有怨恨。
English: Huai Zhen was an old aristocrat from Beizhou. Many people from his family followed him. He invited more than a thousand of his disciples to serve as bodyguards. Emperor Xiaowu was shocked. He invited several thousand private members of powerful families from Qing and Jie Provinces. The warrior class resented this.

古文：随府转太宰参军。
现代文：后来随王府转任太宰参军。
English: Later, he was transferred to Dazaifu to join the army.

古文：大明二年，虏围泗口城，青州刺史颜师伯请援。
现代文：大明二年，北虏围攻泗口城，青州刺史颜师伯请求援军。
English: In the 2nd year of the Daming Dynasty, the Hukuru besieged the Hukou City, and the Qingzhou Shishi Yan requested reinforcements.

古文：孝武遣怀珍将步骑数千赴之，于麋沟湖与虏战，破七城。
现代文：孝武帝派怀珍领几千步兵骑兵赴援，在麋沟湖和北虏作战，攻下了七座城。
English: Emperor Xiaowu sent Huai Zhen to lead several thousand infantry and cavalry to the rescue, fought in Xinggou Lake and Beikru, and captured seven cities.

古文：拜建武将军、乐陵河间二郡太守，赐爵广晋县侯。
现代文：被授予建武将军、乐陵、河闲两郡太守、封为广晋县侯。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Jianwu County, the title of Governor of Leling County, the title of Governor of Hanyu County, and the title of Prince of Guangjin County.

古文：明年，怀珍启求还，孝武答曰： 边维须才，未宜陈请。 
现代文：第二年，怀珍上表请求回京，孝武帝回覆： 边疆正需要人才，不宜请求遣事。 
English: In the second year, Huai Zhen requested to return to Beijing, and Emperor Xiaowu replied: The frontier is in need of talent, it is not appropriate to request the transfer of affairs.

古文：竟陵王诞反，郡豪民王弼劝怀珍应之，怀珍斩弼以闻。孝武大喜，除豫章王子尚车骑参军，加龙骧将军。
现代文：竟陵王刘诞反叛，郡裹的豪强王弼蛊惑怀珍响应，怀珍斩了王弼并报告了朝廷，孝武帝大喜，授子他为豫章王子尚的车骑参军，加官龙骧将军。
English: King Liu Xing rebelled, and the powerful Wang Zhaozhu Huizhen of the county responded. Huizhen beheaded Wang Yao and reported to the imperial court. Emperor Xiaowu was overjoyed. He gave his son, Prince Yuanzhang, a horse and chariot to join the army, and promoted him to the rank of general.

古文：泰始初，除宁朔将军、东安东莞二郡太守，率龙骧将军王敬则、姜产步骑五千讨寿阳。
现代文：泰始初年，任宁朔将军、东安东莞两郡太守，领着龙骧将军王敬则、姜产等五千步兵骑兵讨伐寿阳。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, he was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of the two counties of Dong'an and Dongguan, and led the 5,000 infantry and cavalry of the Longyi generals Wang Jingzhe and Jiang Zhanzhong to fight against Shouyang.

古文：庐江太守王仲子南奔，贼遣伪庐江太守刘道蔚五千人顿建武涧，筑三城。
现代文：庐江太守王仲子向南逃跑，贼寇派伪庐江太守刘道蔚的五千人马驻扎在建武涧，筑了三座城垒。
English: The governor of the Li River, Wang Zhongzi, fled to the south, and the bandits sent five thousand soldiers of the pseudo governor of the Li River, Liu Daowei, to stay in Jianwu and build three fortresses.

古文：怀珍遣军主段僧爱等马步三百余人掩击斩之。
现代文：怀珍派军主段僧爱等马步兵三百多人掩杀过去斩了他。
English: Huai Zhen sent the commander of the army, Duan Ai, to wait for more than three hundred horse infantry to kill him.

古文：引军至晋熙，伪太守阎湛拒守，刘子勋遣将王仲虬步卒万人救之，怀珍遣马步三千人袭击仲虬，大破之于莫邪山，遂进寿阳。
现代文：带兵到晋熙，伪太守阎湛据城抵抗，刘子勋派将领王仲纠领一万步兵来救，怀珍派三千步骑袭击仲刨，在莫邪山大败仲纠，于是进了寿阳。
English: He led the troops to Jinxi, and the pseudo-emperor Yan T'an led the resistance in the city, Liu Zixun sent the general Wang Zhong to lead 10,000 infantry to rescue, Huai Zhen sent 3,000 cavalry to attack Zhong Bao, defeated Zhong Zhong in Mozhaishan Mountain, and then entered Shouyang.

古文：又遣王敬则破殷琰将刘从等四垒于横塘死虎，怀珍等乘胜逐北，顿寿春长逻门。
现代文：又派王敬则到横塘死虎攻破了殷琰的将领刘从等修筑的四座工事，怀珍等人乘胜追杀逃跑的敌人，驻军在寿春的畏逻门。
English: He also sent Wang Jing to Hengtang to break through the four constructions built by the general Liu Cong and others, and Huai Zhen and others took advantage of the victory to chase and kill the fleeing enemy. The troops were stationed at the Danglu Gate in Shuchun.

古文：宋明帝嘉其功，除羽林监、屯骑校尉，将军如故。
现代文：宋明帝嘉奖他的功劳，授予他羽林监、屯骑校尉，将军一职未变。
English: Emperor Song of the Ming Dynasty commended him for his service and awarded him the title of feathered forest inspector, camp cavalry captain, and the position of general remained unchanged.

古文：怀珍请先平贼，辞让不受。
现代文：怀珍请求先要扫平贼寇，推让不受。
English: Huai Zhen requested that the bandits be wiped out first, but was refused.

古文：建安王休仁浓湖与贼相持，久未决。
现代文：建安王休仁在浓湖和贼寇对阵，很久没能取胜。
English: King Jian'an and King Huiren fought against thieves and robbers in the thick lake and could not win for a long time.

古文：明帝召怀珍还，拜前将军，加辅国将军，领军向青山助击刘胡，事平，除游击将军，辅国将军如故。
现代文：明帝召怀珍回京，授予他前将军，加辅国将军，领兵向青山去协助攻击刘胡。乱事平定后，授予他游击将军，辅国将军的职位不变。
English: Emperor Ming summoned Huai Zhen back to Beijing and awarded him the former general, the general of the Auxiliary State, and led the troops to Aoyama to assist in the attack on Liu Hu. After the chaos was settled, he was awarded the guerrilla general, and the position of the general of the Auxiliary State remained unchanged.

古文：青州刺史沈文秀拒命，明帝遣其弟文炳宣喻，使怀珍领马步三千人随文炳俱行。
现代文：青州刺史沈文秀抗拒朝廷命令，明帝派他弟弟文炳去宣示命令，派怀珍领着三千骑兵步兵跟着文炳一起去。
English: Shen Wenshu, the governor of Qingzhou, resisted the imperial order. The Ming emperor sent his brother, Wenyi, to announce the order, and sent Huai Zhen, leading three thousand cavalry and infantry, to accompany Wenyi.

古文：未至，薛安都引虏，徐、兖已没，张永、沈攸之于彭城大败。
现代文：还未走到，薛安都带着北虏杀来，徐、兖陷落，张永和沈攸之在彭城大败。
English: Before they got there, Xue An led the northern troops to kill, Xu and Yao fell, and Zhang Yong and Shen Youzhi were defeated in Pengcheng.

古文：敕怀珍步从盱眙自淮阴济淮救永等，而官军为虏所逐，相继奔归，怀珍乃还。
现代文：皇上命怀珍领兵从盱眙经淮阴渡淮水救援张永等，但是官军被敌人追赶，陆续逃回了，怀珍才回来。
English: The emperor ordered Huai Zhen to lead the army from Zhen via Huaiyin to Huai Shui to rescue Zhang Yong, but the government army was chased by the enemy and fled back one after another, and Huai Zhen came back.

古文：三年春，敕怀珍权镇山阳。
现代文：三年的春天，皇上命怀珍暂时镇守山阳。
English: In the spring of the third year, the emperor ordered Huai Zhen to temporarily guard Sanyang.

古文：先是明帝遣青州刺史明僧暠北征，僧暠遣将于王城筑垒，以逼沈文秀，堑壁未立，为文秀所破，仍进攻僧暠。
现代文：原先，明帝派青州刺史明僧蒿对北方征讨，僧嵩派将领在王城筑工事，来逼沈文秀，壕沟城墙还没完工，被文秀攻破了，又去进攻僧莴。
English: Originally, the Ming Emperor sent the Qingzhou Zhangshi Ming monks and nuns to the north to solicit, the monks and nuns sent generals to build construction in the royal city to force Shen Wenshu, the trench wall was not completed, it was broken by Wenshu, and then attacked the monks and nuns.

古文：帝使怀珍率龙骧将军王广之五百骑，步卒二千人沿海救援，至东海，而僧暠已退保东莱。怀珍进据朐城，众心忷惧，或欲且保郁州。
现代文：皇帝派怀珍带领龙骧将军王广之的五百骑兵，二千名步兵，沿着海边去救援，到束海县时，僧高已退到东莱，怀珍进占朐城，大家心裹恐慌，有的人想要再退保郁州。
English: The emperor sent five hundred cavalrymen and two thousand infantrymen, led by the dragon general Wang Guangzhi, to the rescue along the coast. When they arrived at Sokhai County, the monk Gao had already retreated to Donglai, and Huai Zhen entered the city of Zhancheng. Everyone was in a panic, and some people wanted to retreat to Baozhou.

古文：怀珍谓众曰： 卿等传文秀厚赂胡师，规为外援，察其徒党，何能必就左衽。
现代文：怀珍对大家说： 你们传说文秀给胡人送了很多礼，相约做他的外援，但分析他的部下，未必就都想投靠外族。
English: Huizhen said to everyone, "You say that Wenxiu sent many gifts to the Hu people and agreed to be his foreign aid, but if you analyze his subordinates, they may not all want to rely on foreigners.

古文：齐士庶见于名义积叶，声介一驰，东莱可飞书而下，何容阻军缓迈止于此邪？ 遂进至黔陬。
现代文：齐国的士族和平民多年来受到影响，呼啸而来，东莱衹凭一封劝降信就可攻破，怎能在这裹阻而不进呢? 于是进兵到黔陬。
English: The soldiers and civilians of Qi have been affected for many years and have come roaring in. Donglaicheng can be broken through with a letter of persuasion. How can it be blocked here and not enter? So the soldiers entered the city.

古文：伪高密、平昌二郡太守溃走，怀珍达朝廷意，送致文炳，文秀终不从命，焚烧郭邑。
现代文：伪高密、平昌两郡太守败逃，怀珍转达朝廷的旨意，送到文炳那襄，文秀最终不听从，烧了城郭。
English: Pseudo Gaomi, Pyeongchang's two-county governor, was defeated and fled. Huai Zhen conveyed the imperial court's will and sent it to Wenzhong Naxiang. Wenshu eventually disobeyed and burned the castle.

古文：百姓闻怀珍至，皆喜。
现代文：百姓听说怀珍到了，都高兴。
English: When the people heard that Huai Zhen had arrived, they were all happy.

古文：伪长广太守刘桃根领数千人戍不其城，怀珍引军次洋水。众皆曰： 文秀今游骑满境内，宜坚壁伺隙。 
现代文：伪长广太守刘桃根带着几千人守卫不其城，怀珍领兵驻扎在洋水，大家说： 文秀的游动骑兵现在满境内乱跑，我们应该坚守等待他疏忽的机会。 
English: Liu Momogen, the pseudo-governor of Guangda, guarded the city with several thousand people, and Huai Zhen led the troops stationed in Yangshui. Everyone said: Wenxiu's roving cavalry is now running wild throughout the territory, we should stick to waiting for the opportunity of his negligence.

古文：怀珍曰： 今众少粮单，我悬彼固，政宜简精锐，掩其不备耳。 
现代文：怀珍说： 现在我们兵少粮饷不足，我们没有稳固的阵地他们有坚固的城垒，正应该用精锐兵马，杀他个冷不防。 
English: Huai Zhen said: Now our soldiers are short of food and water, and we don't have a stable position. They have a strong fortress. We should just use our elite soldiers and horses to kill him.

古文：遣王广之将百骑袭陷其城，桃根走。
现代文：派王广之带一百骑兵攻破敌城，桃根逃跑了。
English: He sent Wang Guangzhi with a hundred cavalry to break through the enemy city, and Taogan fled.

古文：伪东莱太守鞠延僧数百人据城，劫留高丽献使。
现代文：伪束莱太守鞠延僧领几百人守城，劫持了高丽派来的使者。
English: Pseudo-Suklai Taishu Marien led several hundred men to defend the city and kidnapped the envoy sent by Goryeo.

古文：怀珍又遣宁朔将军明庆符与广之击降延僧，遣高丽使诣京师。
现代文：怀珍又派宁朔将军明庆符和广之一起攻城，逼使延僧投降，让高丽的使者到京师去。
English: Huai Zhen also sent Ningshuo General Ming Ching Fu and Guang Yi to attack the city, forcing Yan Zang to surrender and allowing Goryeo's envoys to go to Beijing.

古文：文秀闻诸城皆败，乃遣使张灵硕请降，怀珍乃还。
现代文：文秀听说几座城都被攻破了，就派使者张灵硕来请求投降，怀珍才回京。
English: When Wenxiu heard that several cities had been breached, he sent an envoy, Zhang Lingshuo, to request surrender, and Huizhen returned to Beijing.

古文：其秋，虏遂侵齐，围历城、梁邹二城，游骑至东阳，扰动百姓。
现代文：那年秋天，北虏又侵犯齐国，包围了历城和凿塑两城，游动骑兵到了塞匮一带，骚扰百姓。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Northern Hordes invaded Qi again, encircled the two cities of Licheng and Zhishu, and the cavalry roamed to the area of Jiaxiao, harassing the people.

古文：冀州刺史崔道固、兖州刺史刘休宾告急。
现代文：冀业刺史崔道固、兖州刺史刘休宾向朝廷报告形势危急。
English: Cui Daogu, the governor of Hebei Province, and Liu Xiubin, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, reported to the imperial court that the situation was critical.

古文：休宾，怀珍从弟也。
现代文：体宾就是怀珍的堂弟。
English: The guest of honor was Huai Zhen's cousin.

古文：朝廷以怀珍为使持节、都督徐兖二州军事、辅国将军、平胡中郎将、徐州刺史，封艾县侯，邑四百户，督水步四十余军赴救。
现代文：朝廷任坏趁为使持节、都督徐兖两州军事、辅国将军、平胡中郎将、徐州刺史，封为艾县侯，食邑四百产，指挥水步兵四十多个军赶去援救。
English: The imperial court took advantage of the bad appointment to make the festival, the military governor of the two states, the general of the auxiliary state, the general of Pinghu, and the governor of Xuzhou, the lord of Ai County, the four hundred products of the food village, and the command of the water infantry of more than forty armies rushed to rescue.

古文：二城既没，乃止。
现代文：二城被攻陷了，才停止援救行动。
English: The rescue operation was only stopped when the second city was captured.

古文：改授宁朔将军、竟陵太守，转巴陵王征西司马，领南义阳太守。
现代文：改授为宁朔将军、竟陵太守，转任巴陵王的征西司马，领南义阳太守。
English: He was awarded the titles of Ningshuo General and Jingting Daju. He was transferred to the post of the king of Baling, and the post of the governor of South Yiyang.

古文：建平王景素为荆州，仍徙右军司马，迁南郡太守，加宁朔将军。
现代文：建平王景素治理荆蛆时，又转任右军司马，升南郡太守，加官宁朔将军。
English: When Jianping Wang Jingsu governed Jingyao, he was also transferred to the position of the right army Sima, the governor of Shennan County, and the additional officer Ningshuo General.

古文：明帝手诏怀珍曰： 卿性忠谠，平所仗赖。
现代文：旦堕亲自写诏给越叁说： 你性情忠诚正直，是我乎常依赖的人。
English: Tang Pu personally wrote to Yue Yao, saying, "You are loyal and honest, and I often rely on you.

古文：在彼与年少共事，不可深存受益。
现代文：在那儿和年轻人一起共事，不能遇于考虑他们对你好。
English: When you're out there working with young people, you can't think about them being nice to you.

古文：景素儿乃佳，但不能接物，颇亦堕事，卿每谏之。 
现代文：景素儿是好的，但是不会待人接物，办事不力，你要常常劝他。 
English: Jing Su'er is good, but he doesn't take kindly to others and can't do things well. You should often persuade him.

古文：怀珍奉旨。
现代文：怀趁遵奉圣旨。
English: Take advantage of the opportunity to carry out the sacred will.

古文：帝寝疾，又诏怀珍曰： 卿不应乃作景素佐，才旧所寄，今征卿参二卫直。 
现代文：皇上病倒了，又下韶给怀珍说： 你不应衹做量塞的助手，你的才能，应起到原来的作用，现在召你参与二卫直的事。 
English: When the emperor fell ill, he sent a message to Huai Zhen saying, "You should not be an assistant to the governor. Your talent should play its original role, and now you are called upon to participate in the affairs of Erwei Zhi."

古文：会帝崩，乃为安成王抚军司马，领南高平太守。
现代文：正遇皇上驾崩，就做了空盛王的抚军司马。领南高平太守。
English: Just before the Emperor's death, he became the general of the army of King Ku Sheng. He led the Southern Gaoping Dynasty.

古文：朝廷疑桂阳王休范，中书舍人王道隆宣旨，以怀珍为冠军将军、豫章太守。
现代文：朝廷怀疑桂阳王体箠，派中害舍人王道隆宣示圣旨，任换珍为冠军将军、更睦太守。
English: The imperial court suspected that Guiyang's king had committed seppuku, and sent Wang Daolong, a meddlesome layman, to proclaim the sacred edict, appointing Zhen as champion general and changing his title to grand marshal.

古文：怀珍曰： 休范须有祸萌，安敢便发，若终为寇，必请奉律吞之。
现代文：怀珍说： 体箠虽然有作祸的苗头，怎敢马上发动，如果最终成了叛贼，我一定请求按法灭了他。
English: Huai Zhen said: Although there is a germ of mischief in the body, how dare it start immediately. If it eventually becomes a traitor, I will definitely ask for him to be eliminated according to the law.

古文：今者赐使，恐成猜迫。 
现代文：现在如果派我去，恐怕成了逼迫他叛乱了。 
English: If they send me now, I'm afraid it will be to force him to rebel.

古文：固请不就，乃除黄门郎，领虎贲中郎将、青州大中正。
现代文：坚决请求不去上任，于是授予他黄门郎，领虎贲中郎将、青州大中正。
English: He firmly requested not to take up the post, so he was awarded the title of Huangmenro, the leader of the tigers, the leader of the middle school, and the leader of the middle school of Qingzhou University.

古文：桂阳反，加怀珍前将军，守石头。
现代文：桂阳王反叛，朝廷加封怀珍为前将军，镇守石头。
English: King Guiyang rebelled, the imperial court added Huai Zhen as a former general, and the town was garrisoned by stone.

古文：为使持节、督豫司二州郢州之西阳军事、冠军将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：为使持节、督豫司二州和坚州的更盟军事、冠军将军、逸蚶刺史。
English: To make the festival, the governor of the two states and the military commander of the state of Jianzhou, the champion of the general, and the history of the history.

古文：建平王景素反，怀珍遣子灵哲领兵赴京师。
现代文：建垩王基墓反叛，堡趁派儿子玺茎带兵赶到京城护驾。
English: Jianye Wangji's tomb rebelled, and the castle took the opportunity to send his son Yan Zhu to rush to the capital with soldiers to escort him.

古文：升明元年，进号征虏将军。
现代文：升明元年，晋升为征虏将军。
English: In the first year after his promotion, he was promoted to Conscript General.

古文：沈攸之在荆楚，朝议疑惑，怀珍遣冗从仆射张护使郢，致诚于世祖，并陈计策。
现代文：沈攸之在荆楚，朝臣们议论他有不轨之心，怀珍派冗从仆射张护到郢城，向世祖表示诚意，并献上计策。
English: Shen Youzhi was in Jingchu, the courtiers talked about him having a bad heart, and Huai Zhen sent Zhou from Puxi to Zhangye, expressed his sincerity to the patriarch, and presented a strategy.

古文：及攸之起兵，众谓当沿流直下，怀珍谓僚佐曰： 攸之矜躁夙著，虐加楚服，必当阻兵中流，声劫幼主。不敢长驱决胜明矣。 
现代文：等到攸之起兵，大家都说会沿江直下，怀珍对属下说： 攸之向来骄躁得很，施暴力要楚地屈服，定会在中游驻兵，以声势震撼幼主，不敢长驱直下来决一胜负，这是很明白的。 
English: When Yuanzhi's army started, everyone said that it would go straight down the river. Huai Zhen said to his subordinates: Yuanzhi has always been very arrogant, and he will use violence to forcefully surrender. He will definitely station troops in the middle of the river, and he will shake the young master with his powerful voice, and he will not dare to go straight down to decide the outcome. This is very clear.

古文：遣子灵哲领马步数千人卫京师。
现代文：他派儿子灵哲带几千步骑去保卫京城。
English: He sent his son, Lingzhe, to ride several thousand paces to defend the capital.

古文：攸之遣使许天保说结怀珍，怀珍斩之，送首于太祖。太祖送示攸之。
现代文：攸之派许玉惺为使者去劝堡趁联合叛乱，廛趁杀了他，把首级送给太祖，太祖送给攸之看。
English: Yuanzhi sent Xu Yuxuan as an envoy to persuade the castle to take advantage of the joint rebellion, Yuanzhi killed him, and sent the head to the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather to Yuanzhi.

古文：进号左将军，徙封中宿县侯，增邑六百户。
现代文：晋升为左将军，改封为中宿县侯，增加食邑六百户。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left, changed his title to Lord of Nakajuku County, and increased the number of restaurants to 600.

古文：攸之围郢城，怀珍遣建宁太守张谟、游击将军裴仲穆统蛮汉军万人出西阳，破贼前锋公孙方平军数千人，收其器甲。
现代文：攸之围攻坚球，怀趁派建宁太守灵谨、游击将军裴健穆带领蛮军和汉军一万人从西阳出兵，击败贼军的前锋公孙方平的几千人，收缴他们的武器镜甲。
English: At the critical moment of the siege, taking advantage of the fact that Jianning was too cautious, the guerrilla general Pei Jianmu led the barbarian army and the Han army of ten thousand people to send troops from Xiyang, defeated several thousand people of the vanguard of the thief army, Gongsun Fangping, and seized their weapons and armor.

古文：进平南将军，增督南豫、北徐二州，增邑为千户。
现代文：晋升为平南将军，增督南豫、北徐两州的军事指挥权，增加封邑到一千户。
English: He was promoted to Pingnan General, increased the military command authority of the two states of Nanyu and Beixu, and increased the number of fiefs to one thousand.

古文：初，孝武世，太祖为舍人，怀珍为直阁，相遇早旧。
现代文：当初，在孝武时代，太祖任舍人，怀珍任直合，相识得早。
English: At first, in the era of the filial piety, the great-grandfather was a layman, and Huai Zhen was a direct match, and they met early.

古文：怀珍假还青州，上有白骢马，啮人，不可骑，送与怀珍别。
现代文：怀珍得假回青州时，皇上有匹白骢马，咬人，不能骑，送给怀珍作为赠别礼物。
English: When Huai Zhen returned to Qingzhou on leave, the emperor gave Huai Zhen a white horse, which bites and cannot be ridden, as a parting gift.

古文：怀珍报上百匹绢。
现代文：堡趁以百匹绢回报。
English: The castle took the opportunity to reward him with a hundred horses.

古文：或谓怀珍曰： 萧君此马不中骑，是以与君耳。
现代文：有人对怀珍说： 萧君逭匹马不能骑，所以送给你了。
English: Someone said to Huai Zhen: Xiao Jun can't ride a horse, so I gave it to you.

古文：君报百匹，不亦多乎？ 
现代文：你回报了百匹绢，岂不是太多了吗? 
English: Isn't it too much for you to give back a hundred camels?

古文：怀珍曰： 萧君局量堂堂，宁应负人此绢。
现代文：怀珍说： 萧君气度堂堂，怎会辜负别人这些绢。
English: Huai Zhen said: Xiao Jun has a dignified demeanor, how can he live up to others' expectations.

古文：吾方欲以身名托之，岂计钱物多少。 
现代文：我正想把身名托付给他，哪去考虑钱物的多少。 
English: I was about to entrust him with my identity, never mind the amount of money.

古文：太祖辅政，以怀珍内资未多，二年冬，征为都官尚书，领前军将军，以第四子宁朔将军晃代为豫州刺史。
现代文：太祖辅政时，觉得怀珍在京内的资历不多，二年的冬天，召为都官尚书，领前军将军，以第四个儿子宁朔将军萧晃代替他为豫州刺史。
English: When the great-grandfather was a vice-president, he felt that Huizhen did not have much experience in Beijing. In the winter of the second year, he was called to be the official of the capital, Shangshu, to lead the generals of the former army, and his fourth son, Ningshuo General Xiao Xing, replaced him as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：或疑怀珍不受代，太祖曰： 我布衣时，怀珍便推怀投款，况在今日，宁当有异？ 
现代文：有人怀疑坏趁不会接受让人代理的命令，太祖说： 我在做平民时，檀珍就诚心相待，何况今，怎会不同? 
English: Some people suspect that the bad guys will not accept the order to let people act on their behalf. The great-grandfather said: When I was a commoner, I treated everyone with sincerity. Besides, how would it be different now?

古文：晃发经日，而疑论不止。
现代文：芦昱出发一天了，还有人疑惑。
English: One day after the departure of the reed raft, there are still doubts.

古文：上乃遣军主房灵民领百骑追送晃，谓灵民曰： 论者谓怀珍必有异同，我期之有素，必不应尔。
现代文：皇上就派军主良玺民带着一百骑兵追上送萧晃，并交待灵民： 议论这事的人说怀珍一定不同意，我以往常的情形来期望他，这些议论一定不会应验。
English: The emperor sent the commander, Liang Shimin, with a hundred cavalry to catch up with and send Xiao A, and told the spiritual people: The people who talk about this matter say that Huai Zhen must not agree, I expect him in the usual situation, these arguments will not come true.

古文：卿是其乡里，故遣卿行，非唯卫新，亦以迎故也。 
现代文：你是他同乡，特地派你去，不但护卫新任官员，也要靠你迎回原任官员。 
English: You are his fellow townsman, specially sent to escort the new official, but also to welcome back the former official.

古文：怀珍还，仍授相国右司马。
现代文：怀珍回京，又授予他相国右司马。
English: Huai Zhen returned to Beijing, and he was also awarded the title of Right Secretary of the State Council.

古文：建元元年，转左卫将军，加给事中，改霄城侯，增邑二百户。
现代文：建元元年，转任左卫将军，加官给事中，改封霄城侯，增加封邑二百户。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was transferred to the post of General of the Left Division of the Guards. While he was in the process of being promoted, he was changed to the post of mayor of Xiaoshan, and the number of fiefs increased by 200 households.

古文：明年，加散骑常侍。
现代文：第二年，加官散骑常侍。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the rank of Sangi (free-riding) regular attendant.

古文：虏寇淮、肥，以本官加平西将军，假节，西屯巢湖，为寿春势援，虏退乃还。
现代文：北虏侵犯淮、肥，他凭原官加官平西将军，假节，向西驻军在巢湖，作为寿春的声援，北虏退兵才回京。
English: When the Northern Ruthenians invaded Huai and Hui, he took advantage of his position to appoint General Pingxi as his second-in-command. On a false pretext, he garrisoned troops in Chaohu to the west. As a show of solidarity with Shuchun, the Northern Ruthenians only returned to Beijing after they had left the army.

古文：怀珍年老，以禁旅辛勤，求为闲职，转光禄大夫，常侍如故。
现代文：怀珍老了，因为禁卫军辛劳，请求任闲职，转任光禄大夫，常侍职位不变。
English: When Huai Zhen was old, because of the hard work of the imperial guards, he asked to be appointed to a sinecure, and was transferred to the post of Guanglu doctor. The position of the regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：其冬，虏寇朐山，授使持节、安北将军，本官如故，领兵救授。
现代文：那年冬天，北虏侵犯朐山，授予他使持节、安北将军，原职不变，领兵去救援。
English: That winter, the Northern Ruthenians invaded Shaoshan, and he was given the position of General Anbei, the same as before, to lead the troops to the rescue.

古文：未至，事宁，解安北、持节。
现代文：还未走到，战事就平静下来，免了安北将军和持节的职权。
English: Before they arrived, the war had calmed down, and General Anbei and Ji Jie were relieved of their duties.

古文：四年，疾笃，上表解职，上优诏答许，别量所授。
现代文：四年，病重，上表请求辞职，皇上优抚批准，另外根据情况授职。
English: Four years later, seriously ill, he submitted his resignation as requested in the above table, which was approved by the Emperor, and he was given a post according to the circumstances.

古文：其夏，卒，年六十三。
现代文：那年夏天，去世。终年六十三岁。
English: He died that summer, at the age of 63.

古文：遗言薄葬。
现代文：遗嘱简单殓葬。
English: The will was simply buried.

古文：世祖追赠散骑常侍、镇北将军、雍州刺史，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：世祖追赠他为散骑常侍、镇北将军、雍州刺史，谧号敬侯。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of strolling equerry, Zhenbei general, and Yongzhou statesman by the founder of the dynasty, and his posthumous name was Chong.

古文：子灵哲，字文明。
现代文：他儿子名灵哲，字文明。
English: His son's name is Lingzhe, and his first name is Wenming.

古文：解褐王国常侍、行参军，尚书直郎，齐台步兵校尉。
现代文：出仕任王国常侍、行参军，尚书直郎，齐台步兵校尉。
English: He served as a regular attendant of the kingdom, marched into the army, Shang Shun Nairo, and became a lieutenant of the Qidai Infantry.

古文：建元初，历宁朔将军，临川王前军谘议，庐陵内史，齐郡太守，前军将军。
现代文：建元初年，历任宁朔将军，临川王的前军谘议，庐陵内史，齐郡太守，前军将军。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the successive generals of Ningshuo, the former army of King Linchuan for consultation, the history of Fuling, the governor of Qi County, and the former army general.

古文：灵哲所生母尝病，灵哲躬自祈祷，梦见黄衣老公曰： 可取南山竹笋食之，疾立可愈。 
现代文：灵哲的亲生母亲曾经得病，灵哲亲自祈祷，梦见黄衣老人说： 可取南山竹笋来吃，病立即会好。 
English: Lingzhe's biological mother had once been ill. Lingzhe himself prayed and dreamed of an old man in yellow, saying: "You can take Nanshan bamboo shoots to eat, and you will get better immediately."

古文：灵哲惊觉，如言而疾瘳。
现代文：灵哲惊醒，照他的话去做。
English: Ling Zhe woke up and did as he was told.

古文：嫡母崔氏及兄子景焕，泰始中没虏，灵哲为布衣，不听乐。
现代文：母亲的病痊愈了。嫡母崔氏以及兄长的儿子景焕，在泰始年间被陷在北虏中，灵哲是一介平民，不听音乐。
English: His mother has recovered from her illness. His mother, Choi, and his brother's son, Jing Hwan, were caught up in the Northern Rebellion during the reign of Emperor Taizhi. Ling Zhe is a commoner and does not listen to music.

古文：及怀珍卒，当袭爵，灵哲固辞以兄子在虏中，存亡未测，无容越当茅土，朝廷义之。
现代文：到怀趁死时，当承袭爵位，玺哲坚决推让，因为兄长的儿子在北方，不知死活，自己不能超越名分承袭爵位，朝廷认为他很有大义。
English: At the time of Huai's death, when it came to inheriting the title of nobility, Yu Zhe resolutely gave in, because his elder brother's son was in the north and did not know whether he would live or die. He could not go beyond the call of duty to inherit the title of nobility. The court considered him to be very righteous.

古文：灵哲倾产私赎嫡母及景焕，累年不能得。
现代文：灵哲把财产全拿出来要赎回嫡母和景焕，多年来没有成功。
English: Ling Zhe took out all of his property to redeem his mother and Jing Huan, but he was unsuccessful for many years.

古文：世祖哀之，令北使告虏主，虏主送以还南，袭怀珍封爵。
现代文：世担很同情他，让北方的使者告诉北虏首领，北虏首领把他们送回南方，承袭了怀珍的爵位。
English: Shetan was very sympathetic to him, and asked the northern envoy to tell the northern leader, who sent them back to the south and inherited Huai Zhen's title.

古文：灵哲永明初历护军长史，东中郎谘议，领中直兵，出为宁朔将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守，西阳王左军司马。
现代文：灵哲永明初年历任护军长史，东中郎谘议，领中直兵，出京任宁朔将军、巴西、梓潼二郡的太守，西阳王的左军司马。
English: In the first year of Ling Zhe Yongming's reign, he served as the commander of the guard, consulted with Dong Zhong Lang, led the middle and direct soldiers, and went to Beijing as the general of Ningshuo, Brazil, the governor of the two counties of Zizhi, and the left army of the king of Xiyang.

古文：隆昌元年，卒，年四十九。
现代文：隆昌元年去世，终年四十九岁。
English: Longchang died in the first year of the year, at the age of 49.

古文：李安民，兰陵承人也。
现代文：李安民，是兰陵承地人。
English: Li Anmin is a native of Lanling, Chengdu.

古文：祖嶷，卫军参军。
现代文：祖父名嶷，曾任卫军参军。
English: His grandfather, Nagamine, was a member of the Imperial Guard and joined the army.

古文：父钦之，殿中将军，补薛令。
现代文：父名钦之，曾任殿中将军，补为薛县县令。
English: His father's name was Kinzhi, and he was once a general in the palace, and later became the county magistrate of Xue County.

古文：安民随父之县，元嘉二十七年没虏，率部曲自拔南归。
现代文：安民随着父亲到县裹，元嘉二十七年陷在北虏中，他带着部下自救，回到南方。
English: Anmin followed his father to the county, and Yuanjia was trapped in the north for 27 years. He took his subordinates to save himself and returned to the south.

古文：太初逆，使安民领支军。
现代文：太初时，让安民领支军。
English: At the very beginning, let Anmin lead the army.

古文：降义师，板建威将军，补鲁爽左军。
现代文：他投降了正义军队，板令他为建威将军，补为鲁爽的左军。
English: He surrendered to the righteous army and was appointed as the general of Jianwei and the left army.

古文：及爽反，安民遁还京师，除领军行参军，迁左卫殿中将军。
现代文：到鲁爽反叛时，安民逃回京城，授予他领军行参军，又升为左卫殿中将军。
English: When Lu Shuang rebelled, Anmin fled back to Beijing, and he was granted the right to lead the army to join the army, and he was promoted to the middle general of the Left Palace Guards.

古文：大明中，虏侵徐、兖，以安民为建威府司马、无盐令，除殿中将军，领军讨汉川互螫贼。
现代文：大明年间北虏侵犯徐、兖，任安民为建威府司马、无盐县县令。任殿中将军，带领军队去讨伐漠川一带互相攻打的贼寇。
English: When the Northern Invaders invaded Xu and Handan during the Chinese New Year, Anmin was appointed as the Jianwei prefectural magistrate and the county magistrate of Wuxi County. He was appointed as the general of the palace and led the army to fight the bandits who were attacking each other in the area of Mu River.

古文：晋安王子勋反，明帝除安民武卫将军、领水军，补建安王司徒城局参军，击赭圻、湖白、荻浦、獭窟，皆捷，除积射将军、军主。
现代文：晋安王子勋反叛，明帝授予安民为武卫将军、领水军，补为建安王的司徒城局参军，进击赭圻、湖白、荻浦、獭窟等地，都取胜了，授予他积射将军、军主。
English: When Prince Jinan rebelled, Emperor Ming awarded Anmin with the title of General of the Imperial Guards and the Imperial Navy, and he also joined the army of King Jianan's Bureau of the City of St. Petersburg, and fought in places such as Handan, Hubei, Jianpu, and Shuguang. He won, and he was awarded the title of General of the Artillery and the Commander of the Army.

古文：张兴世据钱溪，粮尽，为贼所逼。
现代文：张兴世据守钱溪，粮草完了，被贼军急攻。
English: Zhang Xingshi was defending Qianxi, the grain and weeds were finished, and was suddenly attacked by the thief army.

古文：安民率舟乘数百，越贼五城，送米与兴世。
现代文：安民带着数百条船，过了贼军的五道防缦，送米给兴世。
English: With hundreds of boats, Anmin passed through the five lines of defense of the thief army and sent rice to Xingshi.

古文：伪军主沈仲、王张引军自贵口欲断江，安民进军合战破之。
现代文：伪军主沈仲、王张领兵在鲼口想截断长江的运输，安民进兵与他交战击败了他。
English: Shen Zhong, the leader of the pseudo-army, and Wang Zhang, the leader of the soldiers, wanted to cut off the transportation of the Yangtze River at the mouth of the Yangtze River. The Anmin soldiers fought with him and defeated him.

古文：又击鹊尾、江城，皆有功。
现代文：又进击鹊尾、江城，都有功。
English: It also made forays into Shanwei and Jiangcheng, both of which were successful.

古文：事平，明帝大会新亭，劳接诸军主，樗蒲官赌，安民五掷皆卢，帝大惊，目安民曰： 卿面方如田，封侯状也。 
现代文：事情平定了，明帝在新亭大会众军，慰劳众军主，和皇上用骰子赌博，安民连掷五次都是全黑好点，皇上大惊，看着安民说： 你脸方形像田字，是封侯的相。 
English: The matter was settled. Emperor Ming assembled the troops in the new pavilion, consoled the laborers and warlords, and gambled with the emperor with dice. Emperor Anmin threw all black five times in a row. The emperor was shocked and looked at Emperor Anmin and said, "Your face is square like a rice field, it is the face of a feudal lord."

古文：安民少时贫窭，有一人从门过，相之曰： 君后当大富贵，与天子交手共戏。 
现代文：安民小时很穷，有一个人从他门前过，看了他的相说： 你以后会有大富贵，和天子共玩游戏。 
English: When Anmin was very poor, a man passed in front of his door, looked at him and said, "In the future, you will be very rich and play games with the Son of Heaven."

古文：至是安民寻此人，不知所在。
现代文：到这时，安民再去找这个人，不知在哪裹。
English: At this time, Anmin went to look for this person again, I don't know where.

古文：从张永、沈攸之讨薛安都于彭城，军败，安民在后拒战，还保下邳。
现代文：跟随张永、沈攸之在彭城讨伐薛安都，军队战败，安民在后抵抗，退到下邳坚守。
English: He followed Zhang Yong and Shen Youzhi to fight against Xue Andu in Pengcheng. The army was defeated, but Anmin resisted and retreated to Jiaozuo to hold out.

古文：除宁朔将军，戍淮阳城。论贵口功，封邵武县子，食邑四百户。
现代文：授予他宁朔将军，戍守淮阳城根据鲈口战斗中的功劳，封他为邵武县子，食邑四百户。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Ningshuo, and he guarded Huaiyang City. According to his merits in the Battle of Hekou, he was awarded the title of Son of Shouwu County, with 400 households in Shouyuan.

古文：复随吴喜、沈攸之击虏，达睢口，战败，还保宿豫。
现代文：又跟着吴喜、沈攸之进击北虏，到睢口，战败，退回宿豫坚守。
English: He also followed Wu Xi and Shen Yue to attack Beikru, arrived at Hekou, was defeated, and returned to Suyuan to hold out.

古文：淮北既没，明帝敕留安民戍角城。
现代文：淮北陷落后，明帝命令留安民在角城戍守。
English: After the fall of Huaibei, Emperor Ming ordered the Anmin to stay and defend themselves in Jiaocheng.

古文：除宁朔将军、冗从仆射。
现代文：任他为宁朔将军、冗从仆射。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and was a diligent subordinate.

古文：戍泗口，领舟军缘淮游防，至寿春。
现代文：戍守泗口，带着船队沿着淮水游动防卫，到寿春。
English: He guarded Hekou, and took the fleet to swim along the Huai River to defend it, and arrived at Shouchun.

古文：虏遣伪长社公连营十余里寇汝阴，豫州刺史刘勔击退之。虏荆亭戍主升乞奴弃城归降，安民率水军攻前，破荆亭，绝其津迳。迁宁朔将军、冠军司马、广陵太守、行南兖州事。
现代文：北虏派伪长社公以十多里连营的声势侵犯汝阴，豫州刺史刘劻打退了他，北虏的荆亭戍主升乞奴弃城投降，安民带着水军杀上前，攻破荆亭，断绝了他们的水陆要道升为宁朔将军、冠军司马、庐睦太守、行南兖州事。
English: The Northern Ruthenians sent the pseudo-Choseki to invade Ruyin with a more than ten-mile long battalion, and the Yuzhou assassin Liu Yao repulsed him. The Northern Ruthenians' Jing Ting, the lord of Jing Ting, surrendered and left the city, and the Anmin took the navy to advance, break through Jing Ting, and cut off their water and land routes to become the general of Ningshuo, the champion of Sima, and the governor of Yimut, and conduct the Southern Ruthenian affairs.

古文：太祖在淮阴，安民遥相结事，明帝以为疑，徙安民为刘韫冠军司马、宁朔将军、京兆太守，又除宁朔将军、司州刺史，领义阳太守，并不拜，重除本职，又不拜，改授宁朔将军、山阳太守。
现代文：太祖在淮阴时，安民与太祖远地相交结，明帝猜疑，改任安民为刘粗的冠军司马、宁远将军、京兆太守，又拜为宁朔将军、司州刺史，领义阳太守，他都不接受，重新授他原职，又不接受，改授为宁朔将军、山阳太守。
English: When the great-grandfather was in Huaiyin, Anmin and the great-grandfather intersected at a distance, and the Ming emperor suspected, and changed the title of Anmin to Liu Gou's champion Sima, Ningyuan general, Jingzhao governor, and worshiped as Ningshuo general, Shizhou Shishi, territorial Yiyang governor, he did not accept, re-awarded him his original post, and did not accept, re-awarded as Ningshuo general, Shanyang governor.

古文：泰始末，淮北民起义欲南归，以安民督前锋军事，又请援接，不克，还。
现代文：泰始末年。淮北的百姓起义想要回到南边，朝廷任安民督前锋军事，又请求援助迎接，没成功，就回来了。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Taizong, when the people of Huaibei revolted and wanted to return to the south, the imperial court acted as the vanguard of the military, and requested assistance to meet them, but it was not successful, so they returned.

古文：除越骑校尉，复为宁朔将军、山阳太守。
现代文：授他为越骑校尉，又任宁朔将军、山阳太守。
English: He was awarded the title of Viet Cavalry Lieutenant, and was also appointed as the General of Ningshuo and the Governor of Sanyang.

古文：三巴扰乱，太守张澹弃涪城走，以安民假节、都督讨蜀军事、辅师将军。
现代文：三巴扰乱，太守张澹丢弃涪城逃走，朝廷命安民为假节、都督讨蜀的军事、辅师将军。
English: The three buses were disrupted, the daimyō Zhang Ye abandoned Shicheng and fled, the imperial court ordered the safety of the people to be a false festival, and the military and auxiliary division generals of Shu were criticized by the governor.

古文：五獠乱汉中，敕安民回军至魏兴，事宁，还至夏口。
现代文：五僚在汉中作乱时，命安民回兵到魏兴，乱事平定了，回到夏口。
English: When the Five Wise Men caused a disturbance in Hanzhong, they returned safely to Wei Xing, the disturbance was settled, and they returned to Xia Kou.

古文：元徽初，除督司州军事、司州刺史，领义阳太守，假节、将军如故。
现代文：元徽初年，授予他督司州军事、司州刺史，领义阳太守，假节和将军的职权不变。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Hui Dynasty, he was awarded the position of the director of the military of the prefecture, the director of the military history of the prefecture, the governor of Yiyang, and the general.

古文：别敕安民曰： 九江须防，边备宜重，今有此授，以增鄢郢之势，无所致辞也。 
现代文：另外命令安民说： 九江要设防，边境戒备要加强，现在你有这样的职权，增强鄢郢的力量，那是没有话说了。 
English: In addition, he ordered Anmin to say: Jiujiang should be fortified, border vigilance should be strengthened, now you have such authority to strengthen the power of Yao, that is beyond words.

古文：及桂阳王休范起事，安民出顿，遣军援京师。
现代文：到桂阳王休范反叛时，安民出城驻扎，派兵援助京师。
English: When Guiyang's Wang Xuan rebelled, Anmin left the city and stationed there, sending troops to aid the Beijing Division.

古文：征授左将军，加给事中。建平王景素作难，冠军黄回、游击将军高道庆、辅国将军曹欣之等皆密遣致诚，而游击将军高道庆领众出讨，太祖虑其有变，使安民及南豫州刺史段佛荣行以防之。
现代文：召他为左将军，加官给事中，建平王景素作乱，冠军黄回、游击将军高道庆、辅国将军曹欣之等人都暗地派人去表示诚意，而游击将军高道庆却领兵出京讨伐，太祖怕他变心，让安民和南豫州刺史段佛荣去防备他。
English: He called him as the left general, and in the middle of the matter, Jianping Wang Jingsu made a disturbance, champion Huang Hui, guerrilla general Gao Daoqing, auxiliary general Cao Xin and others secretly sent people to express their sincerity, but the guerrilla general Gao Daoqing led the troops to fight in Beijing. The great-grandfather was afraid of his change of heart, so he asked Anmin and Nan Yu Zhou Zhishan Buddha Rong to guard him.

古文：安民至京口，破景素军于葛桥。
现代文：安民到京口，在葛桥打败了景素的军队。
English: Anmin went to Jingkou and defeated Jing Su's army in Geqiao.

古文：景素诛，留安民行南徐州事。
现代文：景素被诛杀后，留下了安民行南徐州事。
English: After Jing Su was beaten to death, he left the Anmin line south of Xuzhou.

古文：城局参军王迥素为安民所亲，盗绢二匹，安民流涕谓之曰： 我与卿契阔备尝，今日犯王法，此乃卿负我也。 
现代文：城局参军王迥素是安民的亲信，他偷了两匹绢，安民流着泪对他说： 我与你曾经有很好的感情，今天你犯了王法，这是你负了我呀。 
English: Wang Yuxu, a member of the city government, was a close friend of Anmin. He stole two mules. Anmin said to him in tears, "I once had very good feelings for you. Today, you have violated the King's Law. It is you who have defeated me."

古文：于军门斩之，厚为敛祭，军府皆震服。
现代文：在军门斩了他，又很隆重地收殓和祭奠了他，军府裹的人都震惊畏服。
English: He was beheaded at the military gate, and his body was ceremoniously received and laid in state. Everyone in the military government was shocked and awed.

古文：授冠军将军，骁卫将军，不拜。
现代文：授予他冠军将军，骁骑将军，他不受。
English: Give him a champion general, a cavalry general, he's not going to take it.

古文：转征虏将军、东中郎司马、行会稽郡事。
现代文：转任为征虏将军、束中郎司马、行会稽郡事。
English: He was reassigned to the positions of Conscript General, Sokuchu Rōsima, and Gyokai Kenki Gunji.

古文：安民将东，太祖与别宴语，淹留日夜。
现代文：安民将要东行，太祖为他设宴饯别，迟留了一日一夜。
English: When Anmin was about to leave for the east, his grandfather held a farewell banquet for him, and he stayed there for a day and a night.

古文：安民密陈宋运将尽，历数有归。
现代文：安民悄悄地告诉太祖宋的国运将要完了，这是有定数的。
English: Anmin quietly told Emperor Taizong that the National Movement of the Song Dynasty would be over, which was a definite result.

古文：苍梧纵虐，太祖忧迫无计，安民白太祖欲于东奉江夏王跻起兵，太祖不许，乃止。
现代文：苍梧王暴虐恣肆，太祖忧虑急切没有办法，安民告诉太祖要到束边去跟着江夏王刘跻起兵，太祖不答应，于是没去。
English: King Cangwu was tyrannical and reckless, and the great-grandfather was worried and anxious and had no choice. Anmin told the great-grandfather that he wanted to go to Shoubian to join forces with King Liu of Jiangxia. The great-grandfather did not agree, so he did not go.

古文：苍梧废，太祖征安民为使持节督北讨军事、冠军将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：苍梧五被废黜，太祖召安民任使持节督北讨军事、冠军将军、南兖州刺史。
English: Cangwu was dethroned, and Taizu summoned Anmin and appointed him as the military governor of the North, the champion general, and the governor of the South.

古文：沈攸之反，太祖召安民以本官镇白下，治城隍，加征虏将军。
现代文：沈攸之反叛，太祖召安民凭原官资格镇守白下，修城壕。加官征虏将军。
English: When Shen You rebelled, the great-great-grandfather called on Anmin to serve as a town guard under Bai with the qualification of a former official, and to build a trench. An officer was added to recruit a general.

古文：进军西讨，又进前将军。
现代文：向西进兵讨伐，又晋升前将军。
English: He marched westward and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：行至盆城，沈攸之平，仍授督郢州司州之义阳诸军事、郢州刺史，持节、将军如故。
现代文：走到盆赃，沈攸之叛乱已被平定了，又授予他督郢州和司州的义阳诸军事、郢州刺史，持节和将军的职权未变。
English: When he came to the basin, Shen You's rebellion had been quelled, and he was given the powers of the governor of Shizhou and the military of Yiyang in Shizhou, the history of Shizhou, the festival and the general.

古文：升明三年，迁左卫将军，领卫尉。
现代文：升明三年，升为左卫将军，领卫尉。
English: After three years of promotion, he was promoted to General of the Left Division and Lieutenant of the Left Division.

古文：太祖即位，为中领军，封康乐侯，邑千户。
现代文：太祖即位时，任中领军，封为康乐侯，食邑有一千户。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was appointed as the leader of the army, and was given the title of Kangle Hou. There were a thousand households in the food village.

古文：宋泰始以来，内外频有贼寇，将帅已下，各募部曲，屯聚京师。安民上表陈之，以为： 自非淮北常备，其外余军，悉皆输遣。若亲近宜立随身者，听限人数。 
现代文：宋泰始年以后，国家内外常有贼寇，将帅以下的官员，各自招募部下，屯驻在京城，安民奏陈皇上，认为 除了淮北的常备军以外，其余的军队，都要遣散，如果亲近的人需要随身护卫，也要限定人数 。
English: After the first year of the Song and Tai Dynasties, there were often bandits in and out of the country. The generals and lower-ranking officials recruited their own subordinates and stationed them in Beijing. Emperor Anmin told Emperor Chen that in addition to the standing army of Huaibei, the rest of the army should be disbanded, and if close people needed bodyguards, the number should also be limited.

古文：上纳之，故诏断众募。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见，特下诏制止众人招募部下。
English: The emperor adopted his opinion and issued a special edict to stop everyone from recruiting subordinates.

古文：时王敬则以勋诚见亲，至于家国密事，上唯与安民论议，谓安民曰： 署事有卿名，我便不复细览也。 
现代文：当时王敬则因为勋劳被宠幸，至于国家的机密大事，皇上衹和安民谈论，对安民说： 在奏事的摺裹署有你的名字，我就不再详细看了。 
English: At that time, Wang Jing was favored because of his meritorious service. As for the state's confidential matters, the Empress Dowager discussed with Anmin, and said to Anmin: "If there is your name in the filing office of the report, I will not read it in detail."

古文：寻为领军将军。
现代文：不久任领军将军。
English: He was soon appointed general of the army.

古文：虏寇寿春，至马头。诏安民出征，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：北虏侵犯寿春，到了马头下诏命安民出征，加赐鼓吹一部。
English: The North Korean invaders invaded Shuchun, and when they arrived at the horse's head, they issued an order to the people to go to war.

古文：虏退，安民沿淮进寿春。
现代文：北虏退兵丁，安民沿着淮水进入寿春。
English: Beikru retired in Ding, and Anmin entered Shouchun along Huai Shui.

古文：先是宋世亡命王元初聚党六合山，僭号，自云垂手过膝。
现代文：原先宋代的逃将王元初聚伙在六合山称王，自己说自己垂手过膝。
English: Originally, Wang Yuanchu, the fugitive general of the Song Dynasty, gathered a group in Liuhe Mountain to proclaim himself king, and said that he was on his hands and knees.

古文：州部讨不能擒，积十余年。
现代文：州郡兵马去征讨不能擒他，已有十多年了。
English: It has been more than ten years since the state and county soldiers and horses have been unable to beat him.

古文：安民遣军侦候，生禽元初，斩建康市。
现代文：安民派人侦察，活捉了元初，在建康的市集上斩了。
English: Anmin sent someone to investigate, caught him alive in the early 2000s, and beheaded him at the market in Jiankang.

古文：加散骑常侍。
现代文：加官散骑常侍。
English: The additional officer strolls along with the regular attendants.

古文：其年，虏又南侵，诏安民持节履行缘淮清泗诸戍屯军。
现代文：那年，北虏又南侵，朝廷诏命安民持节管辖沿淮水的清泗等一带的驻军。
English: That year, the Northern Huns invaded the South again, and the imperial court issued an edict to govern the garrisons in the areas such as Qingshan along Huai Shui.

古文：虏攻朐山、连口、角城，安民顿泗口，分军应赴。
现代文：北虏攻打朐山、连、角城，安民驻守泗口，分派兵力赶往各处。
English: Hokuriku attacked Shaoshan, Lian and Kakucho, and Anmin garrisoned Hekou, dispatching troops to rush everywhere.

古文：三年，引水步军入清，于淮阳与虏战，破之。
现代文：三年，带领水步军进到淮阳驻扎，和敌人交战，打败丫他们。
English: In three years, he led the water marching army into Huaiyang and stationed there. He fought with the enemy and defeated them.

古文：虏退，安民知有伏兵，乃遣族弟马军主长文二百骑为前驱，自与军副周盘龙、崔文仲系其后，分军隐林。
现代文：北虏退兵。安民了解到敌人有埋伏，就派堂弟马军主长文带二百骑兵为先锋，自己和军副周盘龙、崔文仲跟在后面，分散军队躲在山林中。
English: When Anmin learned that the enemy was lying in wait, he sent his cousin, the leader of the Horse Army, Long Wen, with 200 cavalry as the vanguard, followed by himself, the deputy commander of the Army, Zhou Panlong, and Cui Wenzhong, and dispersed the army to hide in the mountains.

古文：及长文至宿豫，虏见众少，数千骑遮之。
现代文：当长文到了宿豫时，敌人看他人少，几千骑兵就掩杀过来。
English: When Changwen arrived at Suyuan, the enemy saw few others, and several thousand cavalrymen came to cover him.

古文：长文且退且战，引贼向大军，安民率盘龙等趋兵至，合战于孙溪渚战父弯侧，虏军大败，赴清水死不可胜数。
现代文：长文边战边退，诱使贼兵到大车埋伏的地方，安民领着盘龙等人挥兵杀去，在孙溪渚战父弯的边上交战，北虏大败，投到清水中淹死的人数都数不清。
English: Changwen withdrew from the battlefield, lured the robber soldiers to the ambush place of the truck, Anmin led the Panlong and others to kill the soldiers, and fought on the edge of the Sun Xizhu bend, and the northern army was defeated, and the number of people who drowned in the clear water was countless.

古文：虏遣其菟头公送攻车材至布丘，左军将军孙文显击破走之，烧其车材。
现代文：北虏派菟头公运送做攻车用的木料到布丘去，左军将军孙文显打跑了他们，烧了那些做攻车的木材。
English: The Northern Hordes sent Shantou officials to transport timber to Buqiu to be used for attacking vehicles, but the Left Army's General Sun Wenxian defeated them and burned the timber used for attacking vehicles.

古文：淮北四州闻太祖受命，咸欲南归。
现代文：淮北四州听说太祖即位，都想回南方。
English: The four states of Huaibei all wanted to return to the south when they heard that the great ancestor was enthroned.

古文：至是徐州人桓摽之、兖州人徐猛子等，合义众数万砦险求援。
现代文：到这时鳖蛆人桓蝗之、蛮州人涂猛王等人，集合了几万起义人马，结寨在险要处，请求援兵。
English: By this time, tens of thousands of insurgents had gathered, including the Xingren Kuan Locusts and the barbarians from the barbarian state, the Tu Meng Wang, and they camped at the critical point to request reinforcements.

古文：太祖诏曰： 青徐泗州，义举云集。
现代文：太祖下诏说： 壹途等四州，义军如云集合。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict saying: "The four states are waiting for the next step, and the rebels are gathering like a cloud.

古文：安民可长辔遐驭，指授群帅。 
现代文：安民可长驱而去，指挥众将。 
English: Anmin can drive away and command the general.

古文：安民赴救留迟，虏急兵攻摽之等皆没，上甚责之。
现代文：安民滞留救援迟了，北虏紧急派兵攻打，擦之等人都被击溃，皇上很是责备他。
English: Ammin was delayed in staying and rescuing, Beikru urgently sent troops to attack, and all of them were defeated, and the emperor was very critical of him.

古文：太祖崩，遗诏加侍中。
现代文：太祖驾崩，遣诏加他为侍中。
English: When the great-grandfather passed away, he was sent an imperial edict to be made a chamberlain.

古文：世祖即位，迁抚军将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：世祖即位，升他为抚军将军、丹阳尹。
English: The founder ascended to the throne and was promoted to general of the army, Danyang Yin.

古文：永明二年，迁尚书左仆射，将军如故。安民时屡启密谋见赏，又善结尚书令王俭，故世传俭启有此授。
现代文：永明二年，升尚书左仆射，将车一职不变安民因多次奏陈密计被奖赏，又结交了尚书令王俭，所以世人传言是于俭奏请才有这样的授职。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Shang Shuling was promoted to the position of left-hand man, and the position of chariot driver was awarded to Anmin for repeatedly playing Chen's secret plan, and he also made friends with Shang Shuling Wang Jian. Therefore, the world rumor was that it was only after Yu Jian played the role that he was awarded this position.

古文：寻上表以年疾求退，改授散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，将军如故。
现代文：不久上表以年老多病为由请求辞职，改任为散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，将军的职务未变。
English: Soon after, he requested to resign on the grounds that he was too old and ill, and was reassigned to the position of strolling attendant, and doctor of the Golden and Purple Star, but his duties as a general did not change.

古文：四年，为安东将军、吴兴太守，常侍如故。
现代文：永明四年，任安东将军、吴兴郡太守，常侍一职不变。
English: In the four years of Yongming, he served as General Anton and Governor of Wuxing County, and his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：卒官，年五十八。
现代文：死在任上，终年五十八岁。
English: He died in office at the age of 58.

古文：赙钱十万，布百匹。
现代文：送丧礼十万钱，布一百匹。
English: A hundred thousand for the funeral and a hundred horses for the cloth.

古文：吴兴有项羽神护郡听事，太守不得上。
现代文：吴兴有项羽的神灵守护郡府大厅，太守不能上堂。
English: Wu Xing has the guardian deities of Xiangfei guarding the county hall, and the governor cannot enter the hall.

古文：太守到郡，必须祀以轭下牛。
现代文：每个太守到郡，一定要用驾车的牛来祭祀。
English: Every daimyō who comes to the county must use the oxen he drives to make a sacrifice.

古文：安民奉佛法，不与神牛，著屐上听事。
现代文：安民信佛教，不用牛祭神，穿着木屐到厅里。
English: An Min believed in Buddhism, did not use cattle to worship the gods, and wore a wooden yoke to enter the hall.

古文：又于听上设八关斋。
现代文：还在厅中设八关斋。
English: There are also eight refreshment stations in the hall.

古文：俄而牛死，葬庙侧，今呼为 李公牛冢 。
现代文：不久牛死了，埋在庙边，现在称为 李公牛坟 。
English: Soon after, the cow died and was buried next to the temple, in what is now known as the Li Bull's Grave.

古文：及安民卒，世以神为祟。
现代文：等到安民去世，世人都认为是神灵害死的。
English: By the time of his death, the world believed that he had been killed by the gods.

古文：诏曰： 安民历位内外，庸绩显著。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 安民历任内外职务，功劳显着。
English: The imperial edict said: An Min's achievements in domestic and foreign posts are remarkable.

古文：赠镇东将军，鼓吹一部，常侍、太守如故，谥曰肃侯。 
现代文：确是忠诚气节高，总是合我心意。在京郊执政，正要寄托大任。突然逝世，心中悲痛。追赠为镇束将军，赐鼓吹一部，常侍、太守的职务仍像以前一样。谧号肃侯。 
English: It is true that loyalty is high and always meets my heart's desire. He was governing in the suburbs of Kyoto and was about to be entrusted with a great responsibility. He died suddenly, and his heart was saddened. He was posthumously awarded the title of Zenzaku Shogun, given the role of a preacher, and his duties as a regular attendant and daimyō remained the same as before. His posthumous name was Soho.

古文：王玄载，字彦休，下邳人也。
现代文：王玄载，字彦休，是下邳人。
English: Wang Xuan Zai, also known as Yan Hui, is a member of the Lower Han Dynasty.

古文：祖宰，伪北地太守。
现代文：祖父王宰，做过伪北周太守。
English: His grandfather, Wang Zai, was the pseudo-governor of Northern Zhou.

古文：父蕤，东莞太守。
现代文：父亲王蕤，曾任东莞太守。
English: His father, Wang Qi, was once the governor of Dongguan.

古文：玄载解褐江夏王国侍郎、太宰行参军。
现代文：王玄载最初任官是做江夏王国侍郎、太宰行参军。
English: Wang Xuanzhai was first appointed to be the attendant of the Jiangxia Kingdom, and then joined the army as Dazai.

古文：泰始初，为长水校尉。
现代文：泰始初，任长水校尉。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was appointed chief water officer.

古文：随张永征彭城，台军大败，玄载全军据下邳城拒虏，假冠军将军。
现代文：跟随张永出征彭城，中央军大败，王玄载率全军据守下邳城抵抗敌虏，被任命为假冠军将军。
English: Following Zhang Yong's expedition to Pengcheng, the Central Army suffered a crushing defeat, and Wang Xuan led the whole army to defend the city against the enemy, and was appointed the fake champion general.

古文：官军新败，人情恐骇，以玄载士望，板为徐州刺史、持节、监徐州豫州梁郡军事、宁朔将军、平胡中郎将，寻又领山阳、东海二郡太守。
现代文：当时官军刚失败，心情恐骇，朝廷考虑到王玄载在士民中很有些威望，便行文任命他为徐州刺史、持节、监徐州、豫州、梁郡军事、宁朔将军、平胡中郎将，不久又领山阳、东海二郡太守。
English: At that time, the government army had just been defeated and was in a fearful mood. The imperial court, considering that Wang Xuanzhe had a lot of prestige among the scholars and the people, appointed him as the governor of Xuzhou, the military governor of Xuzhou, the military governor of Yuzhou, the military governor of Liang County, the general of Ningshuo, the general of Pinghu, and soon the governor of Shanyang and the two counties of the East China Sea.

古文：出为持节、督梁南北秦三州军事、冠军将军、西戎校尉、梁秦二州刺史。
现代文：泰始五年，任督青、兖二州刺史，将军、东海郡的职务仍旧。泰始七年，又任徐州刺史，督徐、兖二州军事、钟离太守，将军、郎将等仍旧。迁任左军将军。又被任命为宁朔将军、历阳太守，改任持节、都督二豫、冠军将军、西戎校尉、梁、秦二州刺史。
English: In the first five years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed as the governor of Qing, the military governor of Erzhou, the general and the governor of Donghai County. In the first seven years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, the military governor of Erzhou, the military governor of Zhongli, the general and the deputy general. He was transferred to the general of the Left Army. He was also appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the military governor of Liyang, and was reappointed as the governor of Jisai, the governor of Erzhou, the champion general, the lieutenant of Xi Rong,

古文：进号征虏将军。
现代文：后进号征虏将军。
English: He was promoted to General of Conscripts.

古文：寻徙督益宁二州、益州刺史、建宁太守，将军、持节如故。
现代文：不久又移督益、宁二州、益州刺史、建宁太守，将军、持节等仍旧。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Dukuyi, Ningyuzhou, Yizhou Zhishi, Jianning Dazhu, Shogun, Jishie and so on.

古文：沈攸之之难，玄载起义送诚，进号后军将军，封鄂县子。
现代文：沈攸之反叛时，王玄载率兵起义向太祖表示忠诚，被进号为后军将军，封为鄂县子。
English: During the rebellion of Shen You, Wang Xuan Zai led the soldiers in an uprising to show their loyalty to the great ancestor, and was promoted to the rank of rear-army general and given the title of E County son.

古文：征散骑常侍，领后军，未拜，建元元年，为左民尚书，鄂县子如故。
现代文：后调任散骑常侍，领后军，他没上任，建元元年，担任左民尚书，仍旧为鄂县子爵。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of straggler, leading the rearguard, but he did not take up the post, and in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he served as the left-hand man of Shangshu, still a viscount of E County.

古文：会虏动，南兖州刺史王敬则奔京师，上遣玄载领广陵，加平北将军、假节、行南兖州事，本官如故。
现代文：赶上北虏有所动作，南兖州刺史王敬则逃回京师，皇上派王玄载领广陵太守，加平北将军、假节、行南兖州事，本官仍旧。
English: When the northern troops caught up with them, Wang Jing, the governor of southern Luzhou, fled back to Beijing. The emperor sent Wang Xuan to take over as the governor of Guangling, and promoted him to the position of the general of the north, but he was still in charge of southern Luzhou.

古文：事宁，为光禄大夫、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：事件平定后，被任命为光禄大夫、员外散骑常侍。
English: After the incident was settled, he was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu and a non-commissioned officer of Zong.

古文：永明四年，为持节监兖州缘淮诸军事、平北将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：永明四年，担任持节监兖州沿淮一带诸军事、平北将军、兖州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he served as the military, the general of Pingbei, and the historian of Bozhou along the Huai River.

古文：六年，卒，时年七十六。
现代文：永明六年，去世，年六十六岁。
English: Yongming was six years old and passed away at the age of 66.

古文：谥烈子。
现代文：谥号为 烈子 。
English: His nickname was "Retsu."

古文：永明中，历青、冀、兖、益四州刺史，平北将军。
现代文：王玄载喜欢谈玄说理，讲究士人操行，在梁、益一带很有清誉和政绩，西州之人至今还很怀念他。
English: Wang Xuanjie liked to talk about theories and theories, pay attention to the conduct of scholars, and had a very clear reputation and political achievements in the Liang and Yi areas. People in Xizhou still miss him very much.

古文：史臣曰：宋氏将季，离乱日兆，家怀逐鹿，人有异图。故蕃岳阻兵之机，州郡观衅之会。此数子皆宿将旧勋，与太祖比肩为方伯，年位高下，或为先辈，而荐诚君侧，奉义万里。
现代文：史臣曰：宋氏将近衰亡，离乱迹象一天比一天更明显，家家想夺大位，人人怀有特别的企图，因此藩镇成了阻兵的机会，州郡成了起兵的地方这几个人都是出身老将军或旧贵族，和太祖都同是一方霸主，年龄和地位的高低，有的还比太祖强。
English: Shi Zhen said: The Song Dynasty is on the verge of collapse, and the signs of disorder are becoming more and more obvious day by day. Every family wants to seize the throne, and everyone has a special intention. Therefore, the townships have become an opportunity to resist the army, and the counties have become the places to start the army. These few people are all from old generals or old aristocrats, and they are the same as the great-grandfathers. Age and status, high and low, some are even stronger than the great-grandfathers.

古文：以此知乐推之非妄，信民心之有归。
现代文：但他们献诚意给君王，在万里外都遵奉大义，因此我们懂了乐于荐举的事不假，相信民心是有所归依的。
English: But they gave their sincerity to the king and obeyed the Great Righteousness all over the world, so we understood that they were happy to recommend the matter, and believed that the people's hearts were converted.

古文：玄载兄弟门从，世秉诚烈，不为道家所忌，斯今之耿氏也。
现代文：玄载的兄弟门人，世代具备忠烈，不被道家嫉妒，这就是现在的耿氏呀。
English: The brothers of Xuanzang, generations of loyalists, are not envied by Taoists. This is the current Geng family.

古文：赞曰：霄城报马，分义先推。
现代文：赞曰：霄城来了报讯的快马，想到大义而首先荐上诚意。
English: Zang said: Xiaocheng has come to report the fast horse, think of the great righteousness and first recommend the sincerity.

古文：灵哲守让，方轨丁、韦。
现代文：灵哲奉守谦让，正要步丁、韦的后尘。
English: Ling Zhe adhered to the principle of modesty and was about to follow in the footsteps of Ding and Wei.

古文：李佐东土，谋发天机。王为清政，其风不衰。
现代文：李氏辅佐在东方，谋略切中天机，王氏有清明的政治，那风尚总不衰微。
English: In the East, Li's aide-de-camp had a strategy to seize the opportunity, while Wang's had a clear-cut policy, and that trend has not waned.

古文：玄邈简朕，早背同归。
现代文：玄邈深合君王的心意，先是背离，后来同别人一样归附太祖。
English: Xuanzang deeply conformed to the king's will, first deviating, and later, like others, adhering to his great-grandfather.

