古文：虞卿谓春申君曰： 臣闻之《春秋》，于安思危，危则虑安。
现代文：虞卿对春申君说： 臣下听《春秋》上说，在安定的时候要想到存在的危险，在危险的时候要思虑如何安定。
English: Yuqing said to Chunshenjun: "Listening to "Spring and Autumn," your vassals should think about the existing danger when it is stable, and think about how to be stable when it is dangerous.

古文：今楚王之春秋高矣，而君之封地不可不早定也。
现代文：如今楚王年龄大了，您的封地，是不可不及早确定的。
English: Now that King Chu is old, your fiefdom cannot be determined too early.

古文：为主君虑封者，莫如远楚。
现代文：替您考虑封地，莫如远离楚国的都城更好些。
English: Consider fiefdoms for you, it is better to be far away from the capital city of Chu.

古文：秦孝公封商君，孝公死，而后不免杀之。
现代文：秦孝公封公孙鞅于商地，秦孝公死后，他没有免掉被后王杀害的灾祸。
English: After the death of Qin Xiaogong, he did not escape the disaster of being killed by the queen.

古文：秦惠王封冉子，惠王死，而后王夺之。
现代文：秦昭王封冉子予穰，昭王死后，后王剥夺了他的封地。
English: Qin Zhaowang appointed his son to the throne. After the death of Zhaowang, the queen stripped him of his fief.

古文：公孙鞅，功臣也；冉子，亲姻也。
现代文：公孙鞅是泰国的功臣，冉子是秦王的姻亲。
English: Gongsun Rong is a hero of Thailand, and Ran Zi is a relative by marriage of King Qin.

古文：然而不免夺死者，封近故也。
现代文：然而却没有免掉被夺去封地、遭杀害的命运，这是由于封地太靠近都城的缘故。
English: However, he was not spared the fate of being deprived of his fief and killed, because his fief was too close to the capital.

古文：太公望封于齐，邵公奭封于燕，为其远王室矣。
现代文：太公望封在齐地，邵公爽封在燕地，之所以能够寿终正寝，是因为他们的封地远离王室的缘故。
English: The reason why Taigongwang was sealed in Qi, and Shao Gongshuang was sealed in Yan, was that their fiefs were far away from the royal family.

古文：今燕之罪大而赵怒深，故君不如北兵以德赵，践乱燕，以定身封，此百代之一时也。 
现代文：如今燕国犯有很大的伐赵之罪，赵国对它积怨很涤，所以，您不如向摹匕进军：既可以使赵国感激您，又可以翦灭残破的燕国，以此来确定自己的封地，这是百代难遇的一个好时机。 
English: Now Yan Guo has committed a great crime of felling Zhao, and Zhao Guo has a lot of grudges against it. Therefore, you might as well march to Handan. You can not only make Zhao Guo grateful to you, but also annihilate the remnants of Yan Guo. In this way, you can determine your own fiefdom. This is a good opportunity for a hundred generations.

古文：君曰： 所道攻燕，非齐则魏。
现代文：春申君说： 进攻燕国所经过的道路，不在齐国就在魏国。
English: Chun Shun said, "The road of the attack on Yan Guo is not in Qi, but in Wei.

古文：魏、齐新怨楚，楚君虽欲攻燕，将道何哉? 
现代文：魏国、齐园刚刚与楚国结下怨仇，楚王虽然想要攻打燕国，将从什么地方通过呢？ 
English: Wei and Qi Yuan had just formed a grudge with Chu. Although King Chu wanted to attack Yan, where would he pass?

古文：对曰： 请令魏王可。 
现代文：虞卿回答说： 请使魏王答应借道。 
English: Yu Jing replied, "Please ask the Wei King to agree to take this route."

古文：君曰： 何如? 
现代文：春申君说： 怎么办？ 
English: Chunshen said, "What should we do?

古文：对曰： 臣请到魏，而使所以信之。 
现代文：虞卿回答说： 臣下请求到魏国去，并顺便向他们说明借道的道理。 
English: Yuqing replied, "Our vassals have requested to go to Wei, and by the way, I would like to explain to them the reason for taking this route.

古文：乃谓魏王曰： 夫楚亦强大矣，天下无敌，乃且攻燕。 
现代文：于是虞卿到魏国对魏王说： 楚国已经很强大了，天下无敌，就要攻打燕国。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Yu went to Wei and said to the Wei king, "Chu is already very powerful and invincible, so we must attack Yan."

古文：魏王曰： 乡也子云天下无敌，今也子云乃且攻燕者，何也? 
现代文：魏玉说： 先前，您说楚国天下无敌；如今，您又说将要攻打燕国，这是为什么？ 
English: Wei Yu said: Previously, you said that Chu was invincible; now, you say that you will attack Yan. Why is that?

古文：对曰： 今为马多力则有矣，若曰胜千钧则不然者，何也?
现代文：虞卿回答说： 如今说马有很大力气，那是对的，如果说马的力量能驮千钧，那是不对的，为什么呢？
English: Yuqing replied, "Nowadays, it is correct to say that a horse has great strength, but it is not correct to say that a horse's strength can lift thousands of kilos. Why?

古文：夫千钧，非马之任也。
现代文：因为千钧不是马所能承担得了的。
English: For a thousand ills a horse cannot bear.

古文：今谓楚强大则有矣，若越赵、魏而斗兵于燕，则岂楚之任也哉? 
现代文：如今说楚国强大，那是真的，如果跨越赵国、魏国而跟燕国交战，楚国能承受得了吗？
English: Nowadays, it is said that Chu is powerful, which is true. If it crosses Zhao and Wei and fights with Yan, will Chu be able to withstand it?

古文：非楚之任而楚为之，是敝楚也。
现代文：不是楚国该承担的事，楚国偏要去做，这是破坏楚国的强大。
English: It is not something that the state of Chu should undertake, but rather something that the state of Chu wants to do. This is a way to undermine the power of the state of Chu.

古文：敝楚见强魏也，其于王孰便也? 
现代文：破坏楚国是强大魏国，这对大王来说，哪种情况更有利？ 
English: Destroying Chu is a powerful Wei, which situation is more favorable for the great king?

