古文：万章问曰： 或曰： 百里奚自鬻于秦养牲者，五羊之皮，食牛，以要秦穆公。 信乎？ 
现代文：万章问： 有人说，百里奚以五张羊皮的价格将自己卖给秦国养牲畜的人，替人养牛，以此来谋求秦穆公的录用，你相信这件事情吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: Some people say that Bai Lijuan sold himself to a livestock breeder in Qin at the price of five sheepskins, and raised cattle for others, in order to seek the recruitment of Qin Mu Gong. Do you believe this?

古文：孟子曰： 否，不然。好事者为之也。
现代文：孟子说： 不，不是这样的，这是好事之徒编造出来的。
English: Mencius said, "No, that's not true. It was made up by a good-doer."

古文：百里奚，虞人也。晋人以垂棘之璧与屈产之乘，假道于虞以伐虢。
现代文：晋国人拿垂棘出的美玉和屈地产的好马，向虞国借道攻打虢国。
English: The people of Jin Province took the beautiful gems from the thorns and the good horses from Qu's estate and attacked Yunnan Province by way of Yu Province.

古文：宫之奇谏，百里奚不谏。
现代文：宫之奇劝谏虞君，百里奚没有劝阻，因为他知道虞君是劝阻不了的于是就离去了。
English: Miyazokichi advised Yan Yu Jun, and Bai Lijun did not dissuade him, because he knew that Yu Jun could not be dissuaded, so he left.

古文：知虞公之不可谏而去，之秦，年已七十矣，曾不知以食牛干秦穆公之为污也，可谓智乎？
现代文：他到秦国时，已有七十岁了，竟会不知道以养牛的方式去干求秦穆公是秽行，能说是聪明吗？
English: When he arrived in Qin, he was already seventy years old. How could he not know that it was a filthy deed to solicit Qin Mu Gong by raising cattle? Could it be said that he was clever?

古文：不可谏而不谏，可谓不智乎？
现代文：知道不可不可劝阻便不去劝阻，能说是不明智吗？
English: He foresaw that Yu Gong could not be dissuaded, so he did not try to dissuade him.

古文：知虞公之将亡而先去之，不可谓不智也。
现代文：知道虞君将要毁亡而先离开，就不可以说不明智了。
English: He also foresaw the impending demise of Prince Yugo, and left early. Isn't that also unwise?

古文：时举于秦，知穆公之可与有行也而相之，可谓不智乎？
现代文：当时在秦国被选荐，知道秦穆公是个有作为的人而辅佐，难道说不明智吗？
English: At that time, he was recommended in Qin, and knowing that Qin Mu Gong was a man of accomplishment and assisted him, wouldn't it be wise?

古文：相秦而显其君于天下，可传于后世，不贤而能之乎？
现代文：辅佐秦国而使秦国的君主名扬天下，并可流传后世，不贤明能做到这样吗？
English: He assisted the Qin State and made the Qin monarch famous all over the world, and can be passed down to future generations. Is it possible for an unwise person to do this?

古文：自鬻以成其君，乡党自好者不为，而谓贤者为之乎？ 
现代文：卖掉自己以成就君主，连一般乡党中清白的人都不肯干，怎么能说贤者倒肯这样干呢？ 
English: To sell oneself in order to become a monarch, even the innocent people in the general village party are not willing to do it, how can it be said that the wise people are willing to do it?

