古文：《夏书》：禹堙洪水十三年，过家不入门。
现代文：《夏书》上记载：禹治理洪水经历了十三年，路过家门也不进入。
English: "Summer Book" recorded: Yu governance flood experienced thirteen years, passing through the door does not enter.

古文：陆行载车，水行乘舟，泥行乘毳，山行则梮，以别九州；随山浚川，任土作贡；通九道，陂九泽，度九山。
现代文：行陆路时乘车，走水路时乘船，经过泥路就乘毳，走山路就乘登山的轿，以划分九州的边界，他随着山脉的走势疏通了河流，根据土地情况确定赋税等级；他修通了九州的道路，筑起了九州的湖泽堤岸，度量了九州的大山。
English: When traveling by land, he took a car, when traveling by water, he took a boat, when traveling by mud, he took a plow, and when traveling by mountain, he took a mountaineering saloon to divide the borders of Kyushu. He dredged rivers according to the movement of the mountains and determined the tax level according to the land conditions. He repaired roads in Kyushu, built the lake embankment in Kyushu, and measured the mountains in Kyushu.

古文：然河灾之羡溢，害中国也尤甚。
现代文：然而黄河泛滥成灾，给中原造成很大危害。
English: However, the Yellow River flooded, causing great harm to the Central Plains.

古文：唯是为务，故道河自积石，历龙门，南到华阴，东下底柱，及盟津、雒内，至于大伾。
现代文：他把治理黄河当作首要任务，因此从积石山开始引导黄河水流，经过龙门，南流到华阴县，东下经底柱山以及盟津、雒水的弯曲处，到达大任山。
English: He regarded the management of the Yellow River as the primary task, so he began to guide the flow of the Yellow River from Zhishishan, through Longmen, southward to Huayin County, and eastward through Shizhu Mountain and the bends of Mengjin and Surabaya, to reach Dairen Mountain.

古文：于是禹以为河所从来者高，水湍悍，难以行平地，数为败，乃酾二渠以引其河，北载之高地，过洚水，至于大陆，播为九河。同为迎河，入于勃海。
现代文：于是大禹认为黄河发源地高，水流湍急，难以在平地上流行，几次疏导失败，于是就把黄河分流成两条河以减小水势，向北引水过高地，经过洚水，到达大陆，分布而成九条河，在迎河汇同，流入勃海。
English: As a result, Dayu thought that the Yellow River originated in a high place, the water flow was rapid, it was difficult to spread on the plain, and several diversions failed. Therefore, he diverted the Yellow River into two rivers to reduce the water potential, diverted the water to the north over the highlands, passed through Surabaya, reached the mainland, and distributed it into nine rivers, and merged with the Ying River and flowed into the Bohai Sea.

古文：九川既疏，九泽既陂，诸夏乂安，功施乎三代。
现代文：九州的河流已被疏通，九州的湖泽已被筑堤，华夏各国得到治理而安定，功绩使夏、商、周三代受益不绝。
English: The rivers of Kyushu have been dredged, the lakes of Kyushu have been dammed, the countries of China have been governed and stabilized, and the achievements have benefited the summer, merchants, and the third generation.

古文：自是之后，荥阳下引河东南为鸿沟，以通宋、郑、陈、蔡曹、卫，与济、汝、淮、泗会。
现代文：从这以后，荣阳以下引黄河水流向东南，成为鸿沟，把宋、郑、陈、蔡、曹、卫各国连结起来，分别与济水、汝水、淮水、泅水交汇。
English: Since then, Rongyang has led the Yellow River water flow to the southeast, becoming a chasm, connecting the Song, Zheng, Chen, Cai, Cao and Wei countries, respectively, with Jishui, Ye water, Huai water and Surabaya water.

古文：于楚，西方则通渠汉川、云梦之际，东方则通沟江、淮之间。
现代文：在楚地，西面在漠水和云梦之间修渠连通，束面就在长江、淮水之间挖沟连通。
English: In Chudi, the west side is connected by a canal between the desert water and Yunmeng, while the north side is connected by a trench between the Yangtze River and Huai Shui.

古文：于吴，则通渠三江、五湖。
现代文：在吴地，就把三江、五湖了开渠连通。
English: In Wudi, canals were dug between the three rivers and five lakes.

古文：于齐，则通淄、济之间。
现代文：在齐地，就连通淄水和济水。
English: In Qiji, there is a connection between the Sui and Jishui Rivers.

古文：于蜀，则蜀守李冰凿离堆，避沫水之害，穿二江成都中。
现代文：在蜀地，就有蜀国太守李冰凿通离单，避开沫水的危害，在成都开凿了两条江河。
English: In Shoudi, Li Bing, the first governor of Shoudi, chiseled his way out of the water, avoiding the harm of foam, and he chiseled two rivers in Chengdu.

古文：此渠皆可行舟，有余则用溉，百姓飨其利。
现代文：这些河渠都能行船，多余的水就用来灌溉，百姓享受到了它的好处。
English: These canals are deep enough for boats, and the extra water is used to irrigate farmland, bringing a lot of convenience to the people.

古文：至于它，往往引其水，用溉田，沟渠甚多，然莫足数也。
现代文：至于渠水所经过的地区，人们往往饮水灌田，沟渠相当多，但数不清。
English: As for the areas through which the canal water passes, people often irrigate fields with drinking water, and there are quite a few ditches, but they are innumerable.

古文：魏文侯时，西门豹为邺令，有令名。
现代文：魏文侯的时候，西门豹为邺县县令，名声很好。
English: During the reign of Wei Wenhou, Ximenpao was the county magistrate of Jixian County, with a very good reputation.

古文：至文侯曾孙襄王时，与群臣饮酒，王为群臣祝曰： 令吾臣皆如西门豹之为人臣也！ 
现代文：到文侯曾孙襄王的时候，同大臣一起饮酒，襄王为各大臣祝酒说： 希望我的大臣都像西门豹做臣子一样！ 
English: When the great-grandson of Prince Wen, King Xiang, came, he drank alcohol with the ministers. King Xiang made a toast to the ministers and said, "I hope my ministers will be like Ximen leopards as courtiers!"

古文：史起进曰： 魏氏之行田也以百亩，邺独二百亩，是田恶也。
现代文：史起进谏道： 魏氏实行一个男子一百亩田，邺县单独有两百亩，这里的田不好。
English: Shi Qigong Road: Wei implemented a man with a hundred mu of land, and Handan County alone has two hundred mu, and the fields here are not good.

古文：漳水在其旁，西门豹不知用，是不智也。
现代文：漳水在它的旁边，西门豹不知道利用，这是不聪明。
English: Surabaya water is next to it, the western leopard does not know how to use it, it is not clever.

古文：知而不兴，是不仁也。
现代文：知道了不去干，这是不仁。
English: If you know about it and don't do it, it's not compassionate.

古文：仁智豹未之尽，何足法也！ 
现代文：仁和智西门豹都没有全达到，怎么能够效仿呢？ 
English: Both Jin and Zhixi Mengpang have not fully achieved, how can they follow suit?

古文：于是以史起为邺令，遂引漳水溉邺，以富魏之河内。
现代文：于是任命史起为邺县县令，便引漳水灌溉邺县，使魏国的河内地区富裕起来。
English: Therefore, he appointed Shiqi as the county magistrate of Jixian County, and then diverted Jixian water to irrigate Jixian County, making the Hanoi region of Wei rich.

古文：民歌之曰： 邺有贤令兮为史公，决漳水兮灌邺旁，终古舄卤兮生稻梁 。
现代文：百姓歌颂他道： 邺县有贤能的县令，是史公，打开漳水，灌溉邺县周围地区，使自古以来的盐咸地上，长出了稻粱。 
English: The people sang his praises: "The virtuous county magistrate of Jixian County is Shi Gong, who opened the Jixian River and irrigated the surrounding areas of Jixian County, causing rice stalks to grow on the salt and salty land since ancient times."

古文：其后韩闻秦之好兴事，欲罢之，无令东伐。
现代文：这以后，韩听说秦国喜欢兴建之事，就打算使秦国疲惫不堪，使它不能向东方出兵。
English: After this, Han, hearing that Qin liked to build, intended to wear Qin down so that it would not be able to send troops to the East.

古文：及使水工郑国间说秦，令凿泾水，自中山西邸瓠口为渠，并北山，东注洛，三百余里，欲以溉田。
现代文：于是韩国派遣水工郑国秘密地游说秦国，要它凿穿泾水，从中山以西到瓠口，修一条水渠，依着北山，向东注入洛水，全长三百多里，想用来灌溉农田。
English: As a result, South Korea sent water engineer Zheng Guo to secretly lobby Qin Guo, asking him to dig through the reeds, from the west of Zhongshan to Hukou, build a canal, along the North Mountain, and inject Luo water to the east, with a total length of more than three hundred miles, and want to use it to irrigate farmland.

古文：中作而觉，秦欲杀郑国。
现代文：事情在进行过程中被发觉了，秦国打算杀掉郑国。
English: During the project, it was discovered by Qin.

古文：郑国曰： 始臣为间，然渠成亦秦之利也。
现代文：郑国说： 开始时臣是间谍，但渠成后也是秦国的利益。
English: Zheng Guo said: At the beginning, the minister was a spy, but after the success, it was also the interests of Qin.

古文：臣为韩延数岁之命，而为秦建万世之功。 
现代文：臣替韩国延长几年的命运，为秦却是建立了万世的功业。 
English: The vassal extended the fate of Korea for a few years, but for Qin, he established a great achievement.

古文：秦以为然，卒使就渠。
现代文：秦国也认为是这样，最后命他继续把渠修成。
English: Qin thought he was right, and finally ordered him to continue building the canal.

古文：渠成而用注填阏之水，溉舄卤之地四万余顷，收皆亩一钟。
现代文：渠修成后就引淤积浑浊的水流灌溉盐咸地四万多顷，使收成都达到每亩一钟。
English: After the canal was built, the muddy water flow was silted up to irrigate more than 40,000 hectares of salt and salty land, so that the harvest reached one minute per mu.

古文：于是关中为沃野，无凶年，秦以富强，卒并诸侯，因名曰郑国渠。
现代文：于是关中地区成为肥沃的土地，没有灾年，秦国因此而富强，最后吞并了诸侯，因而把渠命名为郑国渠。
English: As a result, the Guanzhong area became a fertile land, and there was no year of disaster. As a result, the Qin state became rich and strong, and finally annexed the princes, thus naming the canal the Zhengguo Canal.

古文：汉兴三十有九年，孝文时河决酸枣，东溃金堤，于是东郡大兴卒塞之。
现代文：汉朝建立了三十九年，孝文帝的时候，黄河在酸枣决堤，东面的金堤崩溃，于是东郡大举发动士兵堵塞黄河。
English: In the 39th year of the establishment of the Han Dynasty, during the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, the Yellow River broke through the dike at the junction, and the gold dike in the east collapsed, so Dong County launched soldiers to block the Yellow River.

古文：其后三十六岁，孝武元光中，河决于瓠子，东南注巨野，通于淮、泗。
现代文：这以后过了三十六年，孝武帝元光年间，黄河在瓠子决口，向东南流入钜野泽，流到了淮水、泅水。
English: Thirty-six years later, during the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, the Yellow River began to flow south-east from the mouth of the Jiaozi River into the Jianye Lake, flowing into the Huai Shui and Jian Shui.

古文：上使汲黯、郑当时兴人徒塞之，辄复坏。
现代文：皇上派遣汲黯、郑当时发动人员来堵塞决口，很快又崩溃了。
English: The emperor sent officials to block the breach, and it soon collapsed again.

古文：是时，武安侯田蚡为丞相，其奉邑食鄃。
现代文：这时武昼侯田蚣为丞相，他的邑地在郎县。
English: At this time, Takehirokō Tendai was the chancellor, and his hometown was in Rō Prefecture.

古文：鄃居河北，河决而南则鄃无水灾。邑收入多。
现代文：郃县在黄河以北，黄河决向南，那么郇县就没有水灾，邑县收入增多。
English: Yixian is north of the Yellow River, and the Yellow River is heading south, so there will be no floods in Yixian, and the income of Yixian will increase.

古文：蚡言于上曰： 江、河之决皆天事，未易以人力强塞，强塞之未必应天。 
现代文：田蚧对皇上说： 长江、黄河的决堤都是天意，不适合用人的力量来强行堵塞，强行堵塞决口未必符合天意。 
English: Tian Xuan said to the emperor: The breakage of the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are all the will of heaven. It is not suitable to use human power to forcefully block them. Forcibly blocking the breach is not necessarily in line with the will of heaven.

古文：而望气用数者亦以为然，是以久不复塞也。
现代文：而且仰望云气用术数来占卜的人也这样认为，因此很久以来不再堵塞了。
English: Moreover, people who look up to Yunqi to use the magic number to divinize also think so, so it has not been blocked for a long time.

古文：时郑当时为大司农，言： 异时关东漕粟从渭上，度六月罢，而渭水道九百余里，时有难处。
现代文：当时郑当时为大司农，说 从前关东从渭水上水运粟米，大概需要六个月的时间，但渭水有九百多里，时常有危险的地方。
English: At that time, Zheng, who was the chief secretary of farmers at the time, said that in the past, it took about six months for Guandong to transport poppy rice from Surabaya by boat, but Surabaya is more than nine hundred miles away, and there are often dangerous places.

古文：引渭穿渠起长安，旁南山下，至河三百余里，径，易漕，度可令三月罢；而渠下民田万余顷又可得以溉。
现代文：从长安开一条渠引渭水，依着南山而下流，到黄河有三百多里，是一条直道，容易行船，估计用三个月时间就可以了；而且渠水经过的一万多顷农田又可得到灌溉。
English: From Chang'an, a canal is opened to divert the water, and it flows down the Nanshan Mountain. It is more than three hundred miles to the Yellow River. It is a straight road, easy to navigate, and it is estimated that it will take three months. Moreover, more than ten thousand hectares of farmland through which the canal water passes can be irrigated.

古文：此损漕省卒，而益肥关中之地，得谷。 
现代文：这样既能减少漕运时间和兵卒，又能使关中农田更加肥沃，多获得粮食。 
English: This will not only reduce the rowing time and soldiers, but also make Guanzhong farmland more fertile and obtain more grain.

古文：上以为然，令齐人水工徐伯表，发卒数万人穿漕渠，三岁而通。
现代文：天子认为说得很对，就派齐国入水工徐伯做下记号，派遣士兵几万人开漕挖渠，三年就通了。
English: Tianzi thought that this was very correct, so he sent the water engineer Xu Bo from Qi Guorun to make a mark and dispatched tens of thousands of soldiers to row and dig a canal, which was completed in three years.

古文：以漕，大便利。
现代文：用来漕运，果然十分便利。
English: Used for rowing transport, it is indeed very convenient.

古文：其后漕稍多，而渠下之民颇得以溉矣。
现代文：这以后漕运逐渐增多，渠周围的百姓都颇能得到溉田的利益。
English: After that, the number of paddlers gradually increased, and the people around the canal were quite able to benefit from the irrigation fields.

古文：后河东守番系言： 漕从山东西，岁百余万右，更底柱之艰，败亡甚多而烦费。
现代文：后来河东太守番系说： 从山东漕运粮米西行入关，一年一百多万石，经过底柱地区的艰险后，破坏损失很大而且花费巨大。
English: Later, the governor of the Taihuan region in eastern China said: "From Shandong to the west, the grain and rice were transported by rowing, with more than one million kilos of grain entering the customs. After passing through the hardships of the base area, the damage was great and the cost was huge.

古文：穿渠引汾溉皮氏、汾阴下，引河溉汾阴、蒲坂下，度可得五千顷。
现代文：开渠引汾水灌溉皮氏、汾阴一带地区，引黄河水灌溉汾阴、蒲坂地区，估计可以造田五千顷。
English: It is estimated that 5,000 hectares of farmland can be created if a canal is built to divert water from the Yangtze River to irrigate the land around Peizhi and Jinyin, and to divert water from the Yellow River to irrigate the land around Jinyin and Busan.

古文：故尽河堧弃地，民茭牧其中耳，今溉田之，度可得谷二百万右石以上。
现代文：因为这全是黄河边被遗弃的荒地，百姓在这裹打草放牧，现在在这裹灌溉耕种，估计可以得到二百万石以上的谷。
English: Because this is all abandoned wasteland on the edge of the Yellow River, where people used to graze and now irrigate crops, it is estimated that more than two million stone can be obtained from the valley.

古文：谷从渭上，与关中无异，而底柱之东可毋复漕。 
现代文：这些谷从渭水漕运，与关中收获的没有两样，而底柱以束就可不再进行漕运了。 
English: These valleys are rowed from Surabaya and are no different from those harvested in Guanzhong, while the base pillars can no longer be rowed in bundles.

古文：上以为然，发卒数万人作渠田。
现代文：皇上认为他说得对，就派几万名士兵开渠灌田。
English: The emperor thought he was right, so he sent tens of thousands of soldiers to open canals to irrigate the fields.

古文：数岁，河移徙，渠不利，田者不能偿种。
现代文：过了几年，黄河改道，河渠就不再有用了，种田人的收成不够抵偿粮种。
English: A few years later, the Yellow River was rerouted, the canals were no longer useful, and the farmers' harvests were insufficient to compensate for the loss of grain.

古文：久之，河东渠田废，予越人，令少府以为稍入。
现代文：久而久之，河东的灌渠耕地全都作废，把它们给越人，命少府稍稍收入一点租赋。
English: Over time, the canal fields to the east of the river were completely abandoned, and the imperial court gave them to the people who had moved from the hinterland to cultivate them, so that Shofu could get a little meager rental income from them.

古文：其后人有上书，欲通褒斜道及漕，事下御史大夫张汤。
现代文：这以后有人上书，打算疏通褒斜道以及漕运，天子把逭件事交给御史大夫张汤处理。
English: After this, someone submitted a letter, intending to unclog the Pohang slope and the rowing transport, and Tianzi handed the matter over to the chief historian Zhang Tang.

古文：汤问之，言： 抵蜀从故道，故道多阪，回远。
现代文：张汤询问这件事后，说 从故道进入蜀郡，故道有很多坡，曲折遥远。
English: After inquiring about the matter, Zhang Tang said that he entered Shu County from the old road. The old road had many slopes and twists and turns.

古文：今穿褒斜道，少阪，近四百里；而褒水通沔，斜水通渭，皆可以行船漕。
现代文：现在凿通褒斜道，坡路少，比原路程少四百里；而褒水与沔水相通，斜水与渭水相通，都可以行船漕运。
English: At present, there are fewer slopes and the distance is 400 miles less than that of the original route. However, the connection between Baoshu and Surabaya, and the connection between the inclined waterway and Surabaya, can be made by rowing boats.

古文：漕从南阳上沔入褒，褒绝水至斜，间百余里，以车转，从斜下渭。
现代文：漕运船只从南阳沿沔水上行进入褒水，从褒水登陆到斜水旱路一百多里，用车来转运，从斜水下行驶入渭水。
English: Rowing boats travel from Nanyang upstream along the Surabaya Water to enter the Surabaya Water. They travel more than a hundred miles from the landfall in the Surabaya Water to the dry road in the inclined water. They are transferred by car and travel from the inclined water to the Surabaya Water.

古文：如此，汉中谷可致，而山东从沔无限，便于底柱之漕。
现代文：这样，漠中的粮食可以弄来，山东的粮食经过沔水没有禁限，比经过底柱的漕运方便。
English: In this way, the grain in the desert can be obtained, and the grain in Shandong has no restrictions through Surabaya, which is more convenient than rowing through the base.

古文：且褒斜材木竹箭之饶，似于巴、蜀。 
现代文：而且褒水、斜水富产材木竹箭，可同巴蜀媲美。 
English: Moreover, Baoshui and Xiangshui are rich in timber, wood, bamboo and arrows, which is comparable to Bashu.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：天子认为有道理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：拜汤子卬为汉中守，发数万人作褒斜道五百余里。
现代文：封张汤的儿子张印为汉中太守，派遣几万人开凿出裹斜道五百多里。
English: Zhang Tang's son, Zhang Yin, became the ruler of the Han Dynasty and sent tens of thousands of people to excavate more than five hundred miles of inclined roads.

古文：道果便近，而水多湍石，不可漕。
现代文：道路果然方便而且路近，但水流湍急多石，不能通船漕运。
English: The road is indeed convenient and the road is close, but the water is swift and rocky, and it is not possible to row through.

古文：其后，严熊言： 临晋民愿穿洛以溉重泉以东万余顷故恶地。
现代文：这以后严熊说 临晋的百姓希望凿穿洛水，来灌溉重泉以东的一万多顷旧有的盐咸地。
English: After that, Yan Xiong said, the people of Linjin hoped to drill through Luo water to irrigate more than 10,000 hectares of old salt and salty land east of the heavy spring.

古文：诚即得水，可令亩十石。 
现代文：倘若果然能够得到水灌溉，可使亩产达到十石。 
English: If water irrigation can be achieved, the production per mu can reach ten koku.

古文：于是为发卒万人穿渠，自徵引洛水至商颜下。
现代文：于是调发兵卒一万人来开渠，从征地引洛水到颜山下。
English: As a result, ten thousand soldiers were dispatched to open the canal, drawing water from the land requisition to the foot of Mt. Yan.

古文：岸善崩，乃凿井，深者四十余丈。
现代文：洛水河岸易塌方，于是沿流凿井，最深的达四十多丈。
English: Since the earth bank is prone to collapse, wells have been drilled along the river, with the deepest reaching more than forty meters.

古文：往往为井，井下相通行水。
现代文：许多地方凿了井，井下相互连通，使水通行。
English: Wells have been dug in many places, and they are interconnected underground to allow water to flow.

古文：水隤以绝商颜，东至山领十余里间。
现代文：水从地下穿商颜山而过，束行到山岭之中十多里远。
English: The water passes through the Shangyan Mountains from underground and travels more than ten miles into the mountains.

古文：井渠之生自此始。
现代文：井渠的诞生就从这时候开始。
English: This led to the creation of the well channel.

古文：穿得龙骨，故名曰龙首渠。
现代文：凿渠时得到了龙骨，所以渠名就叫龙首渠。
English: The keel was obtained when the canal was dug, which is why the canal is called Longshou Canal.

古文：作之十余岁，渠颇通，犹未得其饶。
现代文：这条渠筑了十多年，很有些地方通了水，但仍没得到太大的利益。
English: The canal has been under construction for more than ten years, and some places have been smoothed, but it has not received much benefit.

古文：自河决瓠子后二十余岁，岁因以数不登，而梁楚之地尤甚。
现代文：从黄河在瓠子地区决口后二十多年，每年因此而年成不好，而梁国、楚国一带尤其严重。
English: For more than 20 years since the Yellow River burst its banks in Zizi, the land has not had a good harvest every year due to waterlogging, and the situation in Liangchu area is even more serious.

古文：上既封禅，巡祭山川，其明年，干封少雨。
现代文：天子封禅以后，巡视祭祀了山！第二年，干旱少雨。
English: After the enthronement of the Son of Heaven, the inspection and worship of the mountain began! The second year, drought and little rain.

古文：上乃使汲仁、郭昌发卒数万人塞瓠子决河。
现代文：皇上就派汲仁、郭昌调兵几万人堵塞瓠子地区的黄河决口。
English: The emperor sent Kuren and Guo Chang to dispatch tens of thousands of soldiers to block the Yellow River's mouth in Zizi District.

古文：于是上以用事万里沙，则还自临决河，湛白马玉璧，令群臣从官自将军以下皆负薪寘决河。
现代文：在造以后，皇上到万里沙进行祭祀，回来的路上亲自到黄河决口处，把白马玉璧沉入河中，命群臣从宫中自将军以下都背负薪柴，填塞决口。
English: After it was built, the emperor went to Wanli Sha to perform a religious service. On his way back, he personally went to the mouth of the Yellow River and sank the white horse, Yubi, into the river. He ordered his ministers, from the palace to the generals, to carry firewood and fill the mouth of the river.

古文：是时，东郡烧草，以故薪柴少，而下淇园之竹以为揵。
现代文：当时东郡百姓烧草，因此柴薪少，于是就用淇园地区的竹子作为楗。
English: At that time, the people of Dong County were burning grass, so there was less firewood, so they used bamboo from the Qiyuan area as straw.

古文：上既临河决，悼功之不成，乃作歌曰：
现代文：皇上既然亲临了黄河的决口处，悲痛塞河没能成功，就作歌道：
English: Since the emperor personally visited the mouth of the Yellow River, he was unable to successfully block the river, so he wrote a song:

古文：瓠子决兮将奈何？
现代文：瓠子河决啊有何办法？
English: What can be done about the Hanzi River?

古文：浩浩洋洋，虑殚为河。
现代文：浩浩荡荡的水，担心全成为黄河。
English: The vast and turbulent water is feared to become the Yellow River.

古文：殚为河兮地不得宁，功无已时兮吾山平。
现代文：全成黄河啊地方不安，河工没有休止啊吾山已经凿乎。
English: It's all about the river Ah, the region is in turmoil, river works are incessant Ah, my mountain has been leveled.

古文：吾山平兮巨野溢，鱼弗郁兮柏冬日。
现代文：吾山凿平啊钜野泽外流，鱼儿不高兴啊又临近冬天。
English: My mountain is flattened, the river is outflowing, the fish are unhappy, and winter is approaching.

古文：正道弛兮离常流，蛟龙骋兮放远游。
现代文：河道废弛啊水常流，蛟龙驰骋啊放任远游。
English: The river is slack, the water is flowing, the dragon is galloping, and it is allowed to travel.

古文：归旧川兮神哉沛，不封禅兮安知外！
现代文：水流回到了旧河道啊，是神在照顾沛县，不出来封禅啊不知道外面的事！
English: Returning to the old way brings great blessings. If you don't practice Zen, how will you know about it?

古文：皇谓河公兮何不仁，泛滥不止兮愁吾人！
现代文：我对河伯说呀你为何不仁，泛滥不休啊愁煞人！
English: I said to Hebe, "Why are you so insensitive, why do you go on and on and on, you miserable person!

古文：啮桑浮兮淮、泗满，久不反兮水维缓。
现代文：啮桑漂浮在水中啊淮水、泅水满，久不归故道啊惟愿水流稍缓。
English: The river is full of water, but it will not return to the old way for a long time. I wish the water flow was a little slower.

古文：一曰：
现代文：另一首是：
English: The other is:

古文：河汤汤兮激潺湲，北渡回兮迅流难。
现代文：黄河汤汤啊水流急，北渡曲折啊水流难疏通。
English: The Yellow River has rapid water flow, and the North Passage is tortuous, and the water flow is difficult to clear.

古文：搴长蒋兮湛美玉，河公许兮薪不属。
现代文：拔取草芊插在决口啊沉美玉于河，河伯同意息水啊但草不足。
English: Pulling out the straw and inserting it at the mouth of the river, Hebei agreed to accept the water, but there was not enough grass.

古文：薪不属兮卫人罪，烧萧条兮噫乎何以御水！隤林竹兮揵石菑，宣防塞兮万福来。
现代文：草不足啊是卫人的罪，百姓烧柴尚不足啊如何御水，伐淇园的竹啊做成楗来堵石柱，宣防被堵住了啊万福就到来。
English: The lack of grass is the guardian's sin, the people's firewood is still insufficient, how to conserve water, the bamboo of the logging park is made into a cocoon to block the stone pillar, the announcement of prevention is blocked, and good luck will come.

古文：于是卒塞瓠子，筑宫其上，名曰宣防。
现代文：于是终于堵塞了瓠子的决口，在上面建筑了一座宫殿，名叫宣防。
English: So they finally plugged the breach in the dike and built a palace on top of it, called Xuan Bao.

古文：而道河北行二渠，复禹旧迹，而梁、楚之地复宁，无水灾。
现代文：而且在黄河北岸修了两条渠来疏导水流，恢复了大禹时的旧貌。梁、楚地区重又得到了安宁，没有了水灾。
English: At the same time, two canals were built to divert the river water to the north, restoring the appearance of Yu Shi, and the Liang and Chu regions were once again peaceful, and there were no floods.

古文：自是之后，用事者争言水利。
现代文：从这以后，当权的人都争相说修水渠的好处。
English: Since then, officials in charge of river and canal affairs have been scrambling to propose the construction of water conservancy.

古文：朔方、西河、河西、酒泉皆引河及川谷以溉田。
现代文：朔方、西河、河西、酒泉等地区都引黄河水及河谷的水来灌溉农田。
English: Shuo Fang, Xihe, Hexi, Jiuquan and other regions all draw water from the Yellow River and the valley to irrigate farmland.

古文：而关中灵轵、成国、湋渠引诸川，汝南、九江引淮，东海引巨定，泰山下引汶水，皆穿渠为溉田，各万余顷。
现代文：而关中的灵轵、成国、漳渠引各川，汝南、九江引淮水，束海引钜定，泰山的下面引汶水，都凿渠来灌田，各有一万多顷。
English: On the other hand, Guanzhong's Linglong, Chengguo's, and Zou's canals lead to various rivers, while the south of the Ryukyus and Jiujiang's canals lead to the Huai River, the Sokhai's canals lead to the Fengting River, and the lower reaches of Mount Tai's canals lead to the Wenshui River. All of these canals are dug to irrigate fields, with more than 10,000 hectares each.

古文：它小渠及陂山通道者，不可胜言也。
现代文：其他的小渠以及劈山通水道的，数不胜数。
English: There are countless other small canals, as well as water channels through the mountains.

古文：自郑国渠起，至元鼎六年，百三十六岁，而儿宽为左内史，奏请穿凿六辅渠，以益溉郑国傍高卬之田。
现代文：从开凿郑国渠的时候起，到元鼎六年，有一百三十六年了，而倪宽为左内史，上奏请求开凿六辅渠，以利于郑国渠一带地高的农田的灌溉。
English: From the time of digging the Zhengguo Canal to the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, there were one hundred and thirty-six years, and Ni Kuan was the left inner history, the last request was to dig six auxiliary canals to facilitate the irrigation of farmland with high ground around the Zhengguo Canal.

古文：上曰： 农，天下之本也。
现代文：皇上说： 农业，是天下的根本。
English: The emperor said, "Agriculture is the foundation of the world.

古文：泉流灌浸，所以育五谷也。
现代文：泉流浇灌滋润，是用来培育五谷的。
English: Watered and moistened by a spring stream, it is used to cultivate crops.

古文：左、右内史地，名山川原甚众，细民未知其利，故为通沟渎，畜陂泽，所以备旱也。
现代文：左右内史的地方，名山名河原来都相当多，百姓不知道它们的好处，所以就开凿沟渠，增高湖堤，用来防备旱灾。
English: Throughout history, there have been many famous mountains and rivers. The people did not know their benefits, so they dug ditches and raised lake dikes to prevent droughts.

古文：今内史稻田租挈重，不与郡同，其议减。
现代文：现在内史稻田的田租约令重，与各郡不同，我主张减免。
English: Currently, paddy field leases in historical rice paddies are onerous, and unlike in other counties, I am in favor of a reduction or exemption.

古文：令吏民勉农，尽地利，平繇行水，勿使失时。 
现代文：命令官民致力于农业，充分利用土地的潜力，平衡水利，不要使百姓误了农作时间。 
English: He ordered the public and private sectors to devote themselves to agriculture, make full use of the potential of the land, balance water conservancy, and not make the people miss the farming time.

古文：后十六岁，太始二年，赵中大夫白公复奏穿渠。
现代文：过了十六年后，到了太始二年，赵国的中大夫白公又上奏请求开渠。
English: Sixteen years later, in the second year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Bai Gong, the middle doctor of Zhao, again requested the opening of the canal.

古文：引泾水，首起谷口，尾入栎阳，注渭中，袤二百里，溉田四千五百余顷，因名曰白渠。
现代文：引泾水，从谷口开始，流入砾阳，注入渭水中，长二百里，灌溉四千五百多顷的农田，因此渠名叫白渠。
English: It is 200 miles long and irrigates more than 4,500 hectares of farmland. That is why the canal is called the White Canal.

古文：民得其饶，歌之曰： 田于何所？
现代文：百姓得到了它的好处，就歌颂它道： 田在什么地方?
English: And when the people saw the good of it, they glorified it, saying, Where is the field?

古文：池阳、谷口。
现代文：池阳、谷口就是。
English: Ikeyo and Taniguchi are examples.

古文：郑国在前，白渠起后。
现代文：郑国渠在前面，白渠在后面。
English: The Zhengguo Canal is in the foreground, with the White Canal excavated behind.

古文：举臿为云，决渠为雨。
现代文：举起的镭像云，开挖的渠像雨。
English: A plough lifted up is like a cloud, and a ditch dug is like rain.

古文：泾水一石，其泥数斗。
现代文：泾水一石，泥有几斗。
English: A pebble in the water is worth several buckets of mud.

古文：且溉且粪，长我禾黍。
现代文：一面灌溉一面施肥，使我的禾黍生长。
English: I irrigate and fertilize to make my crops grow.

古文：衣食京师，亿万之口。 
现代文：供给京师的衣食，达亿万的人数。 
English: The number of people who supply food and clothing to the capital's teachers is in the hundreds of millions.

古文：言此两渠饶也。
现代文：是说这两个渠的富饶的。
English: That is to say, the two canals are rich.

古文：是时，方事匈奴，兴功利，言便宜者甚众。
现代文：这时候汉朝正和匈奴作战，兴建功利，陈述对国家有利的事的人相当多。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty was at war with the Xiongnu, and there were quite a lot of people who built utilitarian buildings and stated things that were beneficial to the country.

古文：齐人延年上书言： 河出昆仑，经中国，注勃海。是其地势西北高而东南下也。
现代文：齐国人延年给皇上写信道： 黄河发源于昆仑山，流经中原，注入勃海，这是因为它的地势西北高而东南低。
English: The people of Qi wrote to the emperor for many years: The Yellow River originates in the Kunlun Mountains, flows through the Central Plains, and flows into the Bohai Sea. This is because its terrain is high in the northwest and low in the southeast.

古文：可案图书，观地形，令水工准高下，开大河上领，出之胡中，东注之海。
现代文：可以考证图书，观察地形，命水工测量高低，在山头上开辟大河，流行于胡人中，向东注入大海。
English: You can study books, observe the terrain, order hydrologists to measure the height, open up large rivers on the mountain, popular among the Hu people, and inject the sea to the east.

古文：如此，关东长无水灾，北边不忧匈奴，可以省堤防备塞，士卒转输，胡寇侵盗，覆军杀将，暴骨原野之患。
现代文：这样，关东地区可长期没有水灾，北边不必担忧匈奴，可以节省堤防和堵塞决口的费用，省去士兵运输粮食，以及胡敌的侵略，减少士兵的伤亡和将领的损失，避免抛尸荒野的忧患。
English: In this way, the Kanto region can be free of floods for a long time, and the north side does not have to worry about the Huns. It can save the cost of dikes and blockage of openings, save soldiers from transporting grain, as well as enemy aggression, reduce soldiers' casualties and generals' losses, and avoid the sorrow of throwing corpses into the wilderness.

古文：天下常备匈奴而不忧百越者，以其水绝壤断也。
现代文：天下常防备匈奴而不担心百越的原因，是百越地区的水阻隔着他们。
English: The reason why the world is constantly on guard against the Huns and does not worry about the Hundred Yue is that the water in the Hundred Yue region separates them.

古文：此功一成，万世大利。 
现代文：这一功业一旦成就，将成为万代的大利。 
English: Once this feat is accomplished, it will be a great benefit for all generations.

古文：书奏，上壮之，报曰： 延年计议甚深。
现代文：书上奏后，皇上认为他计划伟大，回信道： 延年计划相当深刻。
English: After the book was published, the emperor thought his plan was great, and replied, "The plan to extend the year is quite profound.

古文：然河乃大禹之所道也，圣人作事，为万世功，通于神明，恐难改更。 
现代文：但黄河是大禹所疏导而成的，圣人所做的事情，成为万代的功业，与神灵相通，恐怕难以更改。 
English: However, the Yellow River was diverted by Dayu, and what the sage did has become the work of all generations, and is connected with the gods. I am afraid it is difficult to change.

古文：自塞宣房后，河复北决于馆陶，分为屯氏河，东北经魏郡、清河、信都、勃海入海，广深与大河等，故因其自然，不堤塞也。
现代文：自从堵塞了宣房的决口后，黄河又在北面的馆陶地区决口，分流而成屯氏河，东北经魏郡、清河、信都、渤海流入大海，宽和深与大河一样，所以顺其自然，没有发生堵塞事件。
English: Since the blockage of the outfall of Xuanfang, the Yellow River has also broken through the outfall in the Guangtou area in the north, branching into the Tunxi River, and flowing into the sea in the northeast through Wei County, Qinghe, Xindu and Bohai Sea. It is as wide and deep as the big river, so it went with the flow and there was no blockage incident.

古文：此开通后，馆陶东北四五郡虽时小被水害，而兖州以南六郡无水忧。
现代文：这开通以后，馆陶东北的四五个郡虽然时常遭受小规模的水灾，但兖州以南六郡却没有水忧。
English: After this was opened, although the four or five counties in the northeast of Guantao often suffered from small-scale floods, the six counties in the south of Ganzhou did not have water worries.

古文：宣帝地节中，光禄大夫郭昌使行河。
现代文：宣帝地节年间，光禄大夫郭昌被派遣巡行黄河。
English: During the Xuan Di Festival, Guanglu doctor Guo Chang was sent to the Yellow River.

古文：北曲三所水流之势皆邪直贝丘县。
现代文：北面三处曲折地方水流之势都缓慢经过贝丘县。
English: In the north, three meandering currents are slowly moving through Becciu County.

古文：恐水盛，堤防不能禁，乃各更穿渠，直东，经东郡界中，不令北曲。
现代文：郭昌担心水大后，堤防不能承受，就另外开渠，直着向东，经过束郡境内，不使它向北弯曲。
English: Guo Chang was worried that after the flood, the dike would not be able to withstand it, so he opened another canal, straight to the east, passing through the territory of Sok County, to prevent it from bending to the north.

古文：渠通利，百姓安之。
现代文：渠通后受益，百姓感到安全了。
English: After the canal was opened, people benefited and felt safe.

古文：元帝永光五年，河决清河灵鸣犊口，而屯氏河绝。
现代文：元帝永光五年，黄河在清河灵鸣犊口决口，屯氏河从此就绝迹了。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Yongguang of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yellow River broke through the Lingming estuary of the Qing River, and the Tunxi River has since disappeared.

古文：成帝初，清河都尉冯逡奏言： 郡承河下流，与兖州东郡分水为界，城郭所居尤卑下，土壤轻脆易伤。
现代文：成帝年初，清河都尉冯逡上奏说道： 清河郡在黄河的下游，与兖州的束郡以水为界，郊区的居民地势尤其低下，土壤轻脆容易损坏。
English: At the beginning of the year of Emperor Chengdu, Qinghe captain Feng Yu said: Qinghe County is in the lower reaches of the Yellow River, and it is bordered by water with Shuzhou's Shu County. The residents in the suburbs are particularly low-lying, and the soil is brittle and easily damaged.

古文：顷所以阔无大害者，以屯氏河通，两川分流也。
现代文：眼下所以没有多大的灾害，是由于屯氏河畅通，两河分流的缘故。
English: The reason why there are not many disasters at the moment is due to the smooth flow of the Tunxi River and the diversion of the two rivers.

古文：今屯氏河塞，灵鸣犊口又益不利，独一川兼受数河之任，虽高增堤防，终不能泄。
现代文：现在屯氏河被堵塞了，灵鸣犊口又更加不利，衹有一条大河肩负着几条河流的任务。即使加高堤防，也终不能泄流。
English: Now the Tunxi River is blocked, and the Lingming estuary is even more unfavorable. There is a big river shouldering the task of several rivers. Even if the embankment is raised, it will not be able to discharge.

古文：如有霖雨，旬日不霁，必盈溢。
现代文：如果碰上连绵大雨，十多天不晴，河水一定会溢出来。
English: If there is continuous heavy rain and it is cloudy for more than ten days, the river will definitely overflow.

古文：灵鸣犊口在清河东界，所在处下，虽令通利，犹不能为魏郡、清河减损水害。
现代文：灵鸣犊口在清河东部边界，位置低下，即使让它通畅，仍不能为魏郡、清河减轻水害。
English: Lingming estuary is on the eastern border of Qinghe River, and its location is low. Even if it is made smooth, it still cannot alleviate the flood damage for Wei County and Qinghe River.

古文：禹非不爱民力，以地形有势，故穿九河，今既灭难明，屯氏河不流行七十余年，新绝未久，其处易浚。
现代文：大禹并不是不珍惜民力，是因为地形有高低之势，所以开凿了九河，现在已经灭迹难以分明，屯氏河水不流通有七十多年，刚断绝不久，容易疏浚。
English: Dayu did not underestimate the power of the people. Because the terrain is uneven, he dug up the Jiuhe River. It is now difficult to trace its course. The water of the Tunxi River has not been circulated for more than 70 years. It has just been cut off for a short time, and it is easy to dredge.

古文：又其口所居高，于以分流杀水力，道里便宜，可复浚以助大河泄暴水，备非常。
现代文：还有它的发源地势高，可用来分流减轻水力，疏导方便，可重新疏浚以帮助大河分泄洪水，以备特殊情况。
English: In addition, its source is high, which can be used for diversion to reduce hydraulic force, and dredging is convenient. It can be re-dredged to help the river divert floodwaters, in case of special circumstances.

古文：又地节时郭昌穿直渠，后三岁，河水更从枚第二曲间北可六里，复南合。
现代文：另外地节年中郭昌开凿直渠，过了三年，黄河水流又从原来第二处拐弯的地方北面大约六里，重新向南汇合。
English: In addition, Guo Chang dug a straight canal in the middle of the festival, and after three years, the Yellow River water flowed about six miles north of the original second turning point and reconnected to the south.

古文：今其曲势复邪直贝丘，百姓寒心，宜复穿渠东行。
现代文：现在它弯曲的势头重又缓慢经过旦丘县，百姓感到寒心，应重新开渠使水向东流。
English: Now it is bending heavily and slowly through Danqiu County, the people feel cold and should re-open the canal to make the water flow eastward.

古文：不豫修治，北决病四五郡，南决病十余郡，然后忧之，晚矣。 
现代文：不加以修治的话，北面决口就使四五郡受害，南面决口就会使十多郡受害，到这之后再来忧虑它。就已晚了。 
English: If left untreated, the north rupture will cause damage to four or five counties, and the south rupture will cause damage to more than ten counties. Worry about it later. It's too late.

古文：事下丞相、御史，白博士许商治。《尚书》，善为算，能度功用。
现代文：这件事交给丞相、御史处理，丞相、御史说博士许商研究《尚书》，善于计算，能估计费用。
English: This matter was handed over to the prime minister and the minister of history to deal with. The prime minister and the minister of history said that Dr. Xu Shang had studied "Shang Shu" and was good at calculation and could estimate the cost.

古文：遣行视，以为屯氏河盈溢所为，方用度不足，可且勿浚。
现代文：派许商去巡视，认为屯氏河泛滥情况正当国家财力人力不足的时候，可暂且不加以疏浚。
English: They sent a businessman to inspect the situation and decided that the flooding of the Tunxi River was justified and that the dredging could be suspended when the country's financial resources and manpower were insufficient.

古文：后三岁，河果决于馆陶及东郡金堤，泛滥兖、豫，入平原、千乘、济南，凡灌四郡三十二县，水居地十五万余顷，深者三丈，坏败官亭室庐且四万所。
现代文：三年后，黄河果然在馆陶以及束郡的金堤决，淹没了兖州和豫州，进入平原、千乘和济南等地，一共淹灌了四个郡三十二个县，水淹地十五万多顷，深者地方达三丈，损坏官亭房屋将近四万所。
English: Three years later, the Yellow River did indeed break through the golden dike in Zhuntao and Shu County, flooded Luzhou and Yuzhou, and entered the plains, Qianjiang and Jinan and other places, flooding a total of four counties and thirty-two counties, flooding more than 150,000 hectares, reaching three meters deep in some places, and damaging nearly 40,000 government pavilions.

古文：御史大夫尹忠对方略疏阔，上切责之，忠自杀。
现代文：御史大夫尹忠答对的策略不切实际，天子狠狠地责备了他，尹忠于是自杀。
English: Superintendent of History Yin Zhong's strategy of replying was impractical. Tianzi severely rebuked him, and Yin Zhong then committed suicide.

古文：遣大司农非调调均钱谷河决所灌之郡，谒者二人发河南以东漕船五百木叟，徙民避水居丘陵，九万七千余口。
现代文：皇上派遣大司农非调调拨均平钱和谷给黄河决口所淹灌的郡县，派遣两个谒者征派河南以束的漕船五百艘，迁移百姓躲避水流居住到丘陵上，共有九万七千多人。
English: The emperor dispatched the grand secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Pingcheng and Gu to the counties and counties flooded by the Yellow River, dispatched two raftsmen to conscript five hundred rowing boats from Henan Province, and relocated the people to avoid the water flow and live on the hills, a total of more than 97,000 people.

古文：河堤使者王延世使塞，以竹落长四丈，大九围，盛以小石，两船夹载而下之。
现代文：黄河堤的使者王延世被派往堵塞决口，用落地长四丈，直径九围的竹，装着小石，用两只船夹载着投入河中。
English: The emissary of the Yellow River embankment, Wang Yanshi, was sent to block the breach, using bamboo with a landing length of four feet and a diameter of nine circumferences, loaded with pebbles, and loaded into the river with two boat clips.

古文：三十六日，河堤成。
现代文：三十六天，黄河堤形成。
English: Thirty-six days later, the Yellow River dike was formed.

古文：上曰： 东郡河决，流漂二州，校尉廷世堤防三旬立塞。
现代文：皇上说： 束郡的黄河决口，漂流到二州，校尉王延世修筑堤防，三旬建成。
English: The emperor said: The Yellow River in Sok County broke off and drifted to the two states. Captain Wang Yanshi built a dike, which was completed in the thirties.

古文：其以五年为河平元年。
现代文：命以五年为河平元年。
English: He was sentenced to five years in prison.

古文：卒治河者为著外繇六月。
现代文：士卒中治理黄河的记下来充当六个月的边役。
English: He served as a sidekick for six months, taking notes on the management of the Yellow River.

古文：惟延世长于计策，功费约省，用力日寡，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：衹有王延世长于计谋策划，形成功业所花费的很节省，所用的力量与时间都少，朕很欣赏这件事。
English: Although Wang Yanshi is good at planning and planning, the formation of a successful business is very economical, and the power and time used are few. I appreciate this very much.

古文：其以延世为光禄大夫，秩中二千石，赐爵关内侯，黄金百斤。 
现代文：特任王延世为光禄大夫，领取中二千石的俸禄，赐爵为关内侯，赏黄金百斤。 
English: The specially appointed Wang Yonsei was the doctor of Guanglu, received a salary of 2,000 koku, was given a peerage as the governor of Guanai, and was awarded 100 kg of gold.

古文：后二岁，河复决平原，流入济南、千乘，所坏败者半建始时，复遣王延世治之。
现代文：过了两年，黄河又在平原决口，流入济南、千乘，所损坏的有建始时一半多，皇上又派王延世去治理童回。
English: Two years later, the Yellow River broke through the plains and flowed into Jinan and Qianren, damaging more than half of the original construction, and the emperor sent Wang Yanshi to govern Tonghui.

古文：杜钦说大将军王凤，以为： 前河决，丞相史杨焉言延世受焉术以塞之，蔽不肯见。
现代文：丝麸劝说大将军工凰，认为 前一次黄河决口，丞相史杨焉说王延世是用杨焉提供的方法来堵塞决口的，这件事被隐藏着不肯曝光。
English: Si Yan persuaded the general Gong Ying that the previous Yellow River breach, the prime minister Shi Yangyan said that Wang Yanshi used the method provided by Yangyan to plug the breach, this matter was hidden and refused to be exposed.

古文：今独任延世，延世见前塞之易，恐其虑害不深。
现代文：现独任王延世，王延世看到上次堵塞决口很容易，恐怕他考虑问题不会很深刻。
English: Now, only Wang Yonsei is in charge. Wang Yonsei saw that it was easy to plug the breach last time. I am afraid that he will not consider the problem very deeply.

古文：又审如焉言，延世之巧，反不如焉。
现代文：又果真像杨焉所说的话，王延世的技术就反而不如杨焉的了。
English: And indeed, as Yang Yan said, Wang Yanshi's technology is not as good as Yang Yan's.

古文：且水势各异，不博议利害而任一人，如使不及今冬成，来春桃华水盛，必羡溢，有填淤反壤之害。
现代文：况且水势各不相同，不广泛讨论利害而用一个人，假使不能在今年冬天成功，来年春天桃花盛开时水就大了，一定会泛滥，将有被淤泥填塞和使土壤返还的危害。
English: Moreover, the water potential varies. If one person is used without extensive discussion of the interests, if it cannot be successful this winter, the water will be big when the peach blossoms are in full bloom next spring, it will certainly flood, and there will be the harm of being filled with silt and causing the soil to return.

古文：如此，数郡种不得下，民人流散，盗贼将生，虽重诛延世，无益于事。
现代文：如果这样，几个郡的谷种不能种下，人民流离失所，盗贼将会产生，即使重杀王延世，对事情也将无益。
English: If this is the case, crops in several counties will not be planted, people will be displaced, thieves will emerge, and even if Wang Yonsei is killed, it will not be beneficial to the situation.

古文：宜遣焉及将作大匠许商、谏大夫乘马延年杂作。
现代文：应派遣杨焉以及将作大臣许商、谏大夫乘马延年一同参与。
English: Yang Yan should be dispatched, as well as Minister Xu Shang and Dr. Zou Jianlin.

古文：延世与焉必相破坏，深论便宜，以相难极。
现代文：王延世同杨焉一定会相互拆台，深论利益，实在是太难了。
English: Wang Yanshi and Yang Yan will surely destroy each other, and it is really too difficult to discuss the benefits.

古文：商、延年皆明计算，能商功利，足以分别是非，择其善而从之，必有成功。 
现代文：许商和乘马延年都懂得计算，能估测利益，足以分别是非，选择他们对的地方加以采纳，一定会成功。 
English: Both the hawker and the horse rider know how to calculate, can estimate the benefits, enough to distinguish right from wrong, choose their place to adopt, will certainly succeed.

古文：凤如钦言，白遣焉等作治，六月乃成。
现代文：王凤听从了杜钦的话，告诉皇上派杨焉等人去治河，六个月就成功了。
English: Wang Feng listened to Du Qin's words and told the emperor to send Yang Yan and others to control the river, which was successful in six months.

古文：复赐延世黄金百斤，治河卒非受平贾者，为著外繇六月。
现代文：皇上又赐给王延世黄金百斤。治理黄河的士兵不接受平价的，就记下服了六个月的边役。
English: The emperor also gave Wang Yanshi a hundred catties of gold. If the soldiers who governed the Yellow River did not accept parity, they had to write down that they had served as porters for six months.

古文：后九岁，鸿嘉四年，杨焉言： 从河上下，患底柱隘，可镌广之。 
现代文：九年后，到了鸿嘉四年，杨焉说 从黄河上游到下游的人们，都担心底柱地区河堤倒塌，可以凿山使河面变宽。 
English: Nine years later, in the fourth year of Hongjia, Yang Yan said that people from the upper reaches to the lower reaches of the Yellow River were worried about the collapse of the embankment in the base column area, and they could dig mountains to widen the river surface.

古文：上从其言，使焉镌之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的话，派杨焉负责凿山。
English: The emperor listened to his words and put Yang Yan in charge of hewing the mountain.

古文：镌之裁没水中，不能去，而令水益湍怒，为害甚于故。
现代文：凿山的石头埋在水中，不能流走，反而使水更加湍急，形成的危害比以前更大。
English: The stone of the hewn mountain is buried in the water, and cannot flow away, but makes the water more turbulent, and the harm caused is greater than before.

古文：是岁，勃海、清河、信都河水湓溢，灌县邑三十一，败官亭民舍四万余所。
现代文：这一年，勃海、清河、信都的黄河水泛滥，淹没县邑三十一个，损坏官亭民屋四万多所。
English: In that year, the Yellow River flooded the cities of Bohai, Qinghe and Xindu, inundating 31 counties and towns and damaging more than 40,000 government buildings and private houses.

古文：河堤都尉许商与丞相史孙禁共行视，图方略。
现代文：黄河堤都尉许商与丞相史孙禁一同巡视，图谋计策。
English: The captain of the Yellow River embankment, Xu Shang, and the prime minister, Sun Quan, went on a tour together to plot strategies.

古文：禁以为： 今河溢之害数倍于前决平原时。
现代文：孙禁认为 现在黄河泛滥的危害比上一次平原地区决口厉害几倍。
English: Sun Han believes that the current flooding of the Yellow River is several times more harmful than the last flood in the plain area.

古文：今可决平原金堤间，开通大河，令入故笃马河。
现代文：如今可以在平原金堤地区内开通大河，使河水流入以前的笃马河。
English: Nowadays, it is possible to open a large river in the plain Jintai area, so that the river water flows into the former Tuduma River.

古文：至海五百余里，水道浚利，又干三郡水地，得美田且二十余万顷，足以偿所开伤民田庐处，又省吏卒治堤救水，岁三万人以上。 
现代文：到大海有五百多里，水路畅通无阻，又可使三郡的水地干燥，得到肥田近二十多万顷，足以抵偿开通大河所损坏的百姓的田屋，又省却官兵治堤救水，一年达三万人以上。 
English: There are more than five hundred miles to the sea, the waterway is unimpeded, and the water in the three counties can be dried, and nearly two hundred thousand hectares of fertilized fields can be obtained, which is enough to compensate for the farmhouses of the people damaged by the opening of the river, but it does not require officers and soldiers to dike and save water, up to more than thirty thousand people a year.

古文：许商以为： 古说九河之名，有徒骇、胡苏、鬲津，今见在成平、东光、鬲界中。
现代文：许商认为 古代传说九河的名称有徒骇、胡苏、鬲津，现在在成平、束光和鬲地境内可以见到。
English: Xu Shang believes that the names of the nine rivers in ancient legends include Tuoq, Husu, and Suijin, and can now be seen in Chengping, Sokwang, and Loudi.

古文：自鬲以北至徒骇间，相去二百余里，今河虽数移徙，不离此域。
现代文：从鬲津以北到徒骇间的距离是两百多里，现在的黄河虽然几次迁移，但没有离开这个地域。
English: The distance from north of Shaozing to Tuogang is more than two hundred miles. Although the current Yellow River has migrated several times, it has not left this area.

古文：孙禁所欲开者，在九河南笃马河，失水之迹，处势平夷，旱则淤绝，水则为败，不可许。 
现代文：孙禁想要开凿的地方，在九河南面的笃马河，没有水流的路线，地势平坦，干旱时就淤积断流，水多时就会崩塌，不可取。 
English: The place where Sun Zhen wants to excavate, in the south of the Jiuhe River, is the Tuduma River. There is no water flow, the terrain is flat, and when it is dry, it will be silted up and cut off. The water will often collapse, which is not desirable.

古文：公卿皆从商言。
现代文：公卿都跟许商意见一致。
English: The court nobles all agreed with Xu Shang.

古文：先是，谷永以为： 河，中国之经渎，圣王兴则出图书，王道废则竭绝。
现代文：这以前，谷永认为 黄河，是中原的主干河流，圣王兴起就出图和书，王道消失就干枯断水。
English: Prior to this, Gu Yong believed that the Yellow River was the main river of the Central Plains. When the holy king arose, he issued maps and books, and when the royal road disappeared, the water dried up.

古文：今溃溢横流，漂没陵阜，异之大者也。
现代文：现在河水崩溃横流，淹没陵屋，是最大的怪异了。
English: Now that the river has broken its banks and flooded the mausoleum, the strangest thing has happened.

古文：修政以应之，灾变自除。 
现代文：修改政治来回应它，灾变可以自然消除。 
English: Modify politics to respond to it, and the cataclysm can be naturally eliminated.

古文：是时，李寻、解光亦言： 阴气盛则水为之长，故一日之间。昼减夜增，江河满溢，所谓水不润下，虽常于卑下之地，犹日月变见于朔望，明天道有因而作也。
现代文：这时李寻、解光也说 阴气盛水就上涨，所以一天之中，白天水减，夜晚水增，江河水满溢出，所谓水不滋润低下之地，虽然它常在低下的地方，就好像曰月在朔望时变化，明白天道是有原因而运行的。
English: At this time, Li Xun and Xue Guang also said that water rises when there is a gloomy atmosphere, so during the day, water decreases during the day, water increases at night, river water overflows, the so-called water does not moisten the low place, although it is often in the low place, it is like the moon changes when the moon is sighted, and it is clear that the heavenly road is running for a reason.

古文：众庶见王延世蒙重赏，竞言便巧，不可用。
现代文：众人见王延世获得重赏，竞相进言简便奸巧的计谋，不可用。
English: Everyone saw that Wang Yonsei won a great reward, and they competed with each other to come up with a simple and cunning plan.

古文：议者常欲求索九河故迹而穿之，今因其自决，可且勿塞，以观水势。
现代文：建议的人经常想考究九河的旧迹而去开凿它，现在乘它自己决，可暂且不加堵塞，以观察水势。
English: Proponents of the proposal often want to explore the Jiuhe's historical sites and excavate it, but now they can use it to make their own decisions, temporarily without plugging, to observe the water potential.

古文：河欲居之，当稍自成川，跳出沙土，然后顺天心而图之，必有成功，而用财力寡。 
现代文：黄河水想流经它，应当渐渐形成河，跳出沙土，然后顺天意而图划，一定会成功，而且所费财力少。 
English: If the Yellow River water wants to flow through it, it should gradually form a river, jump out of the sand, and then plan according to the will of heaven. It will surely succeed, and it will cost less money.

古文：于是遂止不塞。
现代文：于是便停止不加堵塞。
English: It then stopped without jamming.

古文：满昌、师丹等数言百姓可哀，上数遣使者处业振赡之。
现代文：满吕、师丹等人几次进言说百姓可哀，天子几次派使者去安抚百姓，加以救济。
English: Several times, Man Lü, Shidan, and others made speeches saying that the people were pitiful, and several times the Son of Heaven sent emissaries to pacify the people and provide relief.

古文：哀帝初，平当使领河堤，奏言： 九河今皆寘灭，按经义治水，有决河深川，而无堤防雍塞之文。
现代文：哀帝初年，平当奉命管理黄河堤岸，他上奏说道： 九河到现在全都淤塞了，按照经文意义来治理河水，有分泄的河流和疏浚的大川，但没有堤防淤塞的文字。
English: In the first year of Lai Di, Ping Dang was ordered to manage the embankment of the Yellow River, and he said in his speech: The nine rivers have all been silted up to now, and the rivers have been managed according to the meaning of the scriptures. There are leaking rivers and large rivers that have been dredged, but there is no text on dike silting.

古文：河从魏郡以东，北多溢决，水迹难以分明。
现代文：黄河从魏郡往东，北面有许多水溢出而成的决口，水流踪迹难以分明。
English: The Yellow River flows from Wei County to the east, and in the north there are many outflowing water outfalls. The water flow traces are difficult to distinguish.

古文：四海之众不可诬，宜博求能浚川疏河者。 
现代文：四海的群众不能欺骗，应广泛征求能疏浚河流的人。 
English: The masses of the four seas cannot be deceived, and people who can dredge rivers should be widely solicited.

古文：下丞相孔光、大司空何武，奏请部刺史、三辅、三河、弘农太守举吏民能者，莫有应书。
现代文：天子把这件事交给了丞相孔光、大司空何武，上奏请求部署刺史、三辅、三河、弘农太守举荐官民中能治理河水的人，没有人来响应号召。
English: Tianzi handed the matter over to the prime minister, Kong Guang, and the grand secretary, Ku He Wu, and requested the deployment of Sisi, Sanfu, Sanhe, and Hongnongdaizhou to recommend officials and people who could control the river water. No one responded to the call.

古文：待诏贾让奏言：
现代文：待诏买让上奏说道：
English: Waiting for the prelude to be played, he said:

古文：治河有上、中、下策。
现代文：治理黄河有上、中、下三策。
English: There are three measures to control the Yellow River: upper, middle and lower.

古文：古首立国居民，疆理土地，必遗川泽之分，度水势所不及。
现代文：古代建立国家，安定百姓，划分土地，一定要留下川河与湖泽的分布，估测水势所达不到的地方。
English: To establish a country in ancient times, stabilize the people, and divide the land, we must leave the distribution of rivers and lakes, and estimate the places where the water potential cannot be reached.

古文：大川无防，小水得入，陂障卑下，以为汙泽，使秋水多，得有所休息，左右游波，宽缓而不迫。
现代文：大河没有防备，小水得以进入，水岸低下，成为死水湖泊，假使秋天水多，就得让水能停留，水波左右晃荡，从容舒缓而不急迫。
English: Large rivers are unprepared, small water can enter, the banks are low and become dead water lakes. If there is a lot of water in the autumn, it is necessary to let the water energy stay, the water waves swing around, and it is calm and not urgent.

古文：夫土之有川，犹人之有口也。
现代文：土地上有河，就像人有口一样。
English: There are rivers on the land, just as there are mouths.

古文：治土而防其川，犹止儿蹄而塞其口，岂不遽止，然其死可立而待也。
现代文：治理土地而防备河水，就像使儿童啼哭停止而堵住他的口一样，难道会不立即停止，但他的死期也可立刻等到。
English: As the weeping of a child is stopped by stopping his mouth, so is the training of the earth and the guarding of the streams, unless it is stopped at once; but his death may come at once.

古文：故曰： 善为川者，决之使道；善为民者，宣之使言。 
现代文：所以说： 善于治理河水的，打开河口使它得以疏导，善于治理百姓的，应让他们畅所欲言。 
English: Therefore it is said: He who is good at controlling the water of a river should open the mouth of the river so that it can be diverted, and he who is good at controlling the people should let them speak freely.

古文：盖堤防之作，近起战国，雍防百川，各以自利。
现代文：大概堤防的兴作，起于战国，堵塞百川，各自为了自己的利益。
English: The construction of dykes probably began in the Warring States period, to block a hundred rivers, each for their own benefit.

古文：齐与赵、魏，以河为竟。
现代文：齐国与趟国和魏国，以黄河作为境界。
English: The Yellow River marked the boundary between Qi and Wei.

古文：赵、魏濒山，齐地卑下，作堤去河二十五里。
现代文：赵国、魏国靠近山地，齐国地势低下，所筑的堤离黄河二十五里。
English: The states of Zhao and Wei are close to the mountains, and the state of Qi is low-lying. The dike they built is 25 miles away from the Yellow River.

古文：河水东抵齐堤，则西泛赵、魏，赵、魏亦为堤去河二十五里。
现代文：黄河水向东抵达到齐国堤岸时，就会向西淹没趟地和魏地，趟国和魏国也建堤离黄河二十五里。
English: When the water of the Yellow River reaches the banks of Qi to the east, it will flood Wandi and Wei to the west. Wandi and Wei have also built dikes 25 miles away from the Yellow River.

古文：虽非其正，水尚有所游荡。
现代文：这虽然不很对，但水尚能有所回旋余地。
English: That's not quite right, but the water still has some wiggle room.

古文：时至而去，则填淤肥美，民耕田之。
现代文：水有时到了马上就退去，这样土地被填上淤泥后相当肥沃，百姓就在遣裹开荒种田。
English: The water sometimes recedes as soon as it arrives, so the land is quite fertile after being filled with silt, and the people are moving away from barren fields.

古文：或久无害，稍筑室宅，遂成聚落。
现代文：有时很久没有灾害，百姓便逐渐在此建筑住房，便形成村落。
English: Sometimes there are no disasters for a long time, and the people gradually build houses here and form villages.

古文：大水时至漂没，则更起堤防以自救，稍去其城郭，排水泽而居之，湛溺自其宜也。
现代文：大水到来时被淹没后，就重建堤防来自救，稍微离开他们的城郭一点，把水排走后就住在那里，水沉没得正合适。
English: When the flood came and they were submerged, they rebuilt the dike to save themselves, moved slightly away from their castle, drained the water away and lived there. The water sank just right.

古文：今堤防陿者去水数百步，远者数里。
现代文：现在堤防狭隘的地方离水衹有几百步，远的有几里。
English: Now, where the dike is narrow, there are hundreds of steps and several miles away from the watercourse.

古文：近黎阳南故大金堤，从河西西北行，至西山南头，乃折东，与东山相属。
现代文：靠近黎阳南面以前的大金堤，从黄河以西向西北方向蜿蜒，到西山南头后，就折向东，与东山相连。
English: Close to the south of Liyang, the great gold dike before meandered from the west of the Yellow River to the northwest, and after reaching the south end of the West Mountain, it turned to the east and connected with the East Mountain.

古文：民居金堤东，为庐舍，往十余岁更起堤，从东山南头直南与故大堤会。
现代文：百姓住在金堤东面，建筑了房屋，往往十多年重新建堤，从束山南头笔直往南与旧大堤汇合。
English: The people lived on the east side of the gold dike, built houses, and often rebuilt the dike for more than ten years. From the south end of the mountain, they went straight south to meet the old dike.

古文：又内黄界中有泽，方数十里，环之有堤，往十余岁太守以赋民，民今起庐舍其中，此臣亲所见者也。
现代文：另外内黄境内有湖泽，方圆几十里，围绕湖的有堤，往往十多年太守便把部分土地分给百姓，百姓现在在裹面建造房屋，这是臣所亲眼见到的。
English: In addition, there is a lake in Inner Hwang, which is dozens of miles in circumference, and there is a dike around the lake. Often, for more than ten years, the governor has allocated part of the land to the people. The people are now building houses in Wucheng, which the minister has seen with his own eyes.

古文：东郡白马故大堤亦复数重，民皆居其间。
现代文：束郡白马的旧大堤也有好几道，百姓都住在里面。
English: The old embankment in Baima, Sok County, also has several roads, and people live inside them.

古文：从黎阳北尽魏界，故大堤去河远者数十里，内亦数重，此皆前世所排也。
现代文：从黎阳往北走完魏境，旧大堤离黄河远的几十里，裹面也有几道堤，这都是前代所建成的。
English: From Liyang to the north to the end of Weijing, the old embankment is dozens of miles away from the Yellow River, and there are also several embankments in Wuchuan, all of which were built by the previous generation.

古文：河从河内北至黎阳为石堤，激使东抵东郡平刚；又为石堤，使西北抵黎阳、观下；又为石堤；使东北抵东郡津北；又为石堤，使西北抵魏郡昭阳；又为石堤，激使东北。
现代文：黄河从河内向北到黎阳为石堤，水拍击石头使它向东抵达束郡的平刚；又建造石堤，使水流向西北到黎阳、观县下；又建石堤，使水流向东北抵达束郡渡口以北；再建石堤，使它向西北抵达魏郡的昭阳；又建石堤，水激流向东北。
English: The Yellow River from Hanoi in the north to Liyang is a stone dike, and the water hits the stone so that it reaches Pinggang in Sok County in the east; the stone dike is also built so that the water flows to the northwest to Liyang and Guan County; the stone dike is also built so that the water flows to the northeast to the north of the ferry in Sok County; the stone dike is rebuilt so that it reaches Zhaoyang in Wei County in the northwest; the stone dike is also built, and the water rushes to the northeast.

古文：百余里间，河再西三东，迫厄如此，不得安息。
现代文：一百多里间，黄河两次向西三次向东，如此曲折，不得安息。
English: For more than a hundred miles, the Yellow River flows twice to the west and three times to the east. With such twists and turns, there is no rest.

古文：今行上策，徙冀州之民当水冲者，决黎阳遮害亭，放河使北入海。
现代文：现在实行上策的话，就要把冀州地区在水流要道地方的百姓迁走，打开黎阳遮害亭的决口，施放黄河的水流使它向北流入大海。
English: If the best policy is to be implemented now, it is necessary to relocate the people in Jizhou region who live in areas where the water flow is important, open the breach of the Liyang shelter, and let the water flow of the Yellow River flow northward into the sea.

古文：河西薄大山，东薄金堤，势不能远泛滥，期月自定，难者将曰： 若如此，败坏城郭田庐冢墓以万数，百姓怨恨。 
现代文：黄河西面临近大山，东西靠近金堤，看形势就不会长久泛滥，过了整一个月后就会自然安定。诘难的人将会说： 如果这样的话，就会损坏数以万计的城郭田屋冢墓，百姓将怨恨。 
English: The west side of the Yellow River is facing the nearby mountains, and the east and west sides are close to the golden dike. According to the situation, it will not flood for a long time, and it will naturally stabilize after a whole month. The people who are struggling will say: If this is the case, tens of thousands of castles, fields, houses and tombs will be damaged, and the people will be resentful.

古文：昔大禹治水，山陵当路者毁之，故凿龙门，辟伊阙，析底柱，破碣石，堕断天地之性。
现代文：从前大禹治水，山陵挡水路的就把它摧毁，所以凿开龙门，开辟伊阙，劈开底柱，破开碣石，破坏了天地的特性。
English: In the past, Dayu controlled the water, and the mountains and hills that blocked the waterway destroyed it. Therefore, he chiseled the gantry, opened the Yili, split the base column, and broke the flint, destroying the characteristics of heaven and earth.

古文：此乃人功所造，何足言也！
现代文：这是人的功力所形成的，又有什么可说的呢！
English: This is the result of man's efforts, so what can we say?

古文：今濒河十郡治堤岁费且万万，及其大决，所残无数。
现代文：现在靠近黄河的十个郡所花费的治堤费就近亿，至于大的决口，所毁坏的无法计数。
English: Ten counties near the Yellow River now spend nearly 100 million yuan on dike maintenance. As for large breaches, the damage is incalculable.

古文：如出数年治河之费，以业所徙之民，遵古圣之法，定山川之位，使神人各处其所，而不相奸。
现代文：如果拿出几年治理黄河的费用，来安置所迁移的百姓，遵照古代圣人的方法，确定山川的位置，使神人各自在自己的位置，互不千扰。
English: If you take out the cost of managing the Yellow River for several years to resettle the displaced people, follow the methods of ancient sages to determine the location of mountains and rivers, so that the godmen are each in their own position and do not disturb each other.

古文：且以大汉方制万里，岂其与水争咫尺之地哉？
现代文：况且以大汉刚统治万里的江山，难道会与水争咫尺的土地吗?
English: Moreover, with the Great Han just ruling the vast country, will the land compete with the water?

古文：此功一立，河定民安，千载无患，故谓之上策。
现代文：这一功业一旦建立，黄河安定，百姓太平，千年无忧，所以称作上策。
English: Once this undertaking is established, the Yellow River will be stable, the people will be peaceful, and there will be no worries for a thousand years, so it is called the best policy.

古文：若乃多穿漕渠于冀州地，使民得以溉田，分杀水怒，虽非圣人法，然亦救败术也。
现代文：如果在冀州地区多挖漕渠，使百姓得以用来灌溉农田，分担水流的急势，即使不是圣人的方法，但也是挽救失败的招术。
English: If more canals are dug in the Jizhou region, so that the people can be used to irrigate farmland and share the water flow, even if it is not a saint's method, it is a way to save failure.

古文：难者将曰： 河水高于平地，岁增堤防，犹尚决溢，不可以开渠。 
现代文：诘难的人将说： 黄河水位高出平地，每年增加堤防，尚且决口，不可以再开渠。 
English: Those who are struggling with difficulties will say: The Yellow River's water level is higher than the flat land, the dike is increased every year, and there is still a breach, so it is impossible to re-open the canal.

古文：臣窃按视遮害亭西十八里，至淇水口，乃月金堤，高一丈。
现代文：臣私下巡视了遮害亭西面十八里的地方，到淇水入河口，就有金堤，高一丈。
English: The minister privately inspected a place 18 li west of the sheltering pavilion. When the water entered the estuary, there was a golden dike, one story high.

古文：自是东，地稍下，堤稍高，至遮害亭，高四五丈。
现代文：从造往东，地势渐低，堤渐高，到遮害亭，高四五丈。
English: From the construction to the east, the terrain is getting lower and lower, the embankment is getting higher and higher, and the shelter pavilion is getting higher and higher.

古文：往六七岁，河水大盛，增丈七尺，坏黎阳南郭门，入至堤下。
现代文：以前六七年，黄河水大，增高到一丈七尺，毁坏了黎阳南面的城门，水流到了堤下。
English: Sixty-seven years ago, the Yellow River was very high, rising to a height of seven feet, destroying the southern gate of Liyang, and the water flowed under the embankment.

古文：水未逾堤二尺所，从堤上北望，河高出民屋，百姓皆走上山。
现代文：水还没有越过堤下二尺多，从堤上向北一望，衹见黄河高出民屋，百姓都跑到山上。
English: The water had not yet crossed more than two feet below the embankment. Looking north from the embankment, I saw that the Yellow River was higher than the houses, and the people all ran to the mountains.

古文：水留十三日，堤溃，吏民塞之。
现代文：水停留了十三天，堤倒塌了，官民加以堵塞。
English: The water stayed for thirteen days, the dike collapsed, and officials and citizens blocked it.

古文：臣循堤上，行视水势，南七十余里，至淇口，水适至堤半，计出地上五尺所。
现代文：臣沿着堤往上游行走，察看水势，向南行匕十多里，到达淇口，水才达堤的一半，估计高出地面五尺左右。
English: The minister walked upstream along the embankment to observe the water level, and traveled more than ten miles to the south. When he reached the mouth of the river, the water only reached half of the embankment, and was estimated to be about five feet above the ground.

古文：今可从淇口以东为石堤，多张水门。
现代文：现在可以从淇口以东建石堤，多开设水闸。
English: A stone dike can now be built to the east of Kikuchi, and more sluices can be opened.

古文：初元中，遮害亭下河去堤足数十步，至今四十余岁，适至堤足。
现代文：初元年间，遮害亭比黄河低离堤足有几十步远，到现在四十多年，才到堤脚。
English: At the beginning of the 21st century, the sheltering pavilion was lower than the Yellow River and was dozens of steps away from the foot of the embankment. Now, it has been more than forty years since it reached the foot of the embankment.

古文：由是言之，其地坚矣。
现代文：由此来说，这个地方很坚固。
English: So this place is pretty solid.

古文：恐议者疑河大川难禁制，荥阳漕渠足以卜之，其水门但用木与土耳，今据坚地作石堤，势必完安。
现代文：恐怕议论的人会怀疑黄河是大河难以制服，荣阳的漕渠足以证明，这个水闸衹用木和土，现在依据结实的地基来建石堤，一定会很安全。
English: I'm afraid that the critics will suspect that the Yellow River is a big river that is difficult to control. Rongyang's canal is enough to prove that this sluice gate with wood and soil, now based on a solid foundation to build a stone dike, will be very safe.

古文：冀州渠首尽当卬此水门。
现代文：冀州地区水渠全都靠这个水门。
English: All canals in the Jizhou region rely on this water gate.

古文：治渠非穿地也，但为东方一堤，北行三百余里，入漳水中，其西因山足高地，诸渠皆往往股引取之；旱则开东方下水门溉冀州，水则开西方高门分河流。
现代文：修渠不是挖地，衹建东方的一道堤，向北行三百多里，流入漳水中，它的西面因为山脚是高地，各渠都往往分别引水；干旱时就打开东方低地的水闸灌溉冀州，水涝时就打开西方高处的水闸进行分流。
English: The canal is not dug, but a dike is built in the east, and it flows northward for more than three hundred miles and flows into the Bohai water. Because the foot of the mountain is highland in the west, each canal often diverts water separately; when it is dry, the sluice in the eastern lowlands is opened to irrigate Jizhou, and when it is wet, the sluice in the western highlands is opened to divert water.

古文：通渠有三利，不通有三害。
现代文：开通水渠有三利，不开通水渠有三害。
English: There are three benefits to opening water channels, and three harms to not opening water channels.

古文：民常罢于救水，半失作业；水行地上，凑润上彻，民则病湿气，木皆立枯，卤不生谷；决溢有败，为鱼鳖食：此三害也。
现代文：百姓经常疲于救水，基本上失掉了生产；水流行在地上，积累的水分蒸发，百姓就会得风湿病，树木都会很快变枯，形成盐碱地不生长谷子；河口决口，成为鱼鳖的食物：这是三种危害。
English: The people are often tired of saving water, and basically lose production; the water circulates on the ground, the accumulated moisture evaporates, and the people will get rheumatism; the trees will quickly wither, forming a saline soil and not growing grain; the estuary will break and become food for fish gills: these are three kinds of hazards.

古文：若有渠溉，则盐卤下湿，填淤加肥；故种禾麦，更为粳稻，高田五倍，下田十倍；转漕舟船之便：此三利也。
现代文：如果有渠水灌溉，那么盐碱就下沉，填上淤泥增加肥料；所以种上禾麦，再种粳稻，产量高于高产田的五倍，高出低产田的十倍；有利于漕运船只的便利：这是三种便利。
English: If there is irrigation with canal water, the salt and alkali will sink and fill with silt to increase fertilizer; therefore, planting wheat and replanting paddy rice, the output is five times higher than that of high-yield fields and ten times higher than that of low-yield fields; it is conducive to the convenience of rowing ships: these are three conveniences.

古文：今濒河堤吏卒郡数千人，伐买薪石之费岁数千万，足以通渠成水门；又民利其溉灌，相率治渠，虽劳不罢。
现代文：现在临近黄河堤边的官兵有几千人，砍伐薪草、购买石头的费用一年几千万，这些费用拿来足以开通水渠建成水闸；另外百姓得到了灌溉的好处，就会争相开渠，即使劳累也不感到疲倦。
English: At present, there are thousands of officers and soldiers near the embankment of the Yellow River. The cost of cutting firewood and grass and buying stones is tens of millions a year. These costs are enough to open canals and build sluices. In addition, if the people get the benefits of irrigation, they will compete to open canals. Even if they are tired, they will not feel tired.

古文：民田适治，河堤亦成，此诚富国安民，兴利除害，支数百岁，故谓之中策。
现代文：百姓的农田得到了治理，黄河的堤岸也筑成了，造真是富国安民，兴利除害，可以维持几百年，所以叫做中策。
English: The people's farmland has been managed, and the embankment of the Yellow River has been built, which is truly conducive to the prosperity of the country and the safety of the people, and can be maintained for hundreds of years, so it is called the Middle Way.

古文：若乃缮完故堤，增卑倍薄，劳费无已，数逢其害，此最下策也。
现代文：如果就修理旧堤，把低地填高，把薄处加厚，劳累花费没有止境，屡次遭受它的危害，这是最下的一种策略。
English: If you just repair the old dike, fill the lowland up, and thicken the thin place, there is no end to the effort and expense, and you will repeatedly suffer from its harm. This is the lowest strategy.

古文：王莽时，征能治河者以百数，其大略异者，长水校尉平陵关并言： 河决率常于平原、东郡左右，其地形下而土疏恶。
现代文：王莽的时候，征召能治理黄河的人有一百来人，其中大致比较突出的有长水校尉平陵关并说： 黄河决口一般常在平原、束郡左右，它的地形低下而土质疏松。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, there were about a hundred people conscripted to manage the Yellow River. Changshui Lieutenant Pinglingguan was the most prominent among them, and he said: The mouth of the Yellow River is generally located in the plains and around Sokun. Its terrain is low and the soil is loose.

古文：闻禹治河时，本空此地，以为水猥，盛则放溢，少稍自索，虽时易处，犹不能离此。
现代文：听说大禹治理黄河时，本来是空过这个地方了的，认为这裹水多，水大时就放出多余的水，水少睁堤慢就会流完，即使时常换地方，也不能离开这一带。
English: It is said that when Dayu was managing the Yellow River, he used to pass by this place. He thought that there was a lot of water in this area. When the water level was high, he would release the excess water. If the water level was low, the dike would slowly run out. Even if he frequently changed places, he could not leave this area.

古文：上古难识，近察秦、汉以来，河决曹、卫之域，其南北不过百八十里者，可空此地，勿以为官亭民室而已。 
现代文：上古时代难以识别，近来观察秦汉以来，黄河的决口在曹、卫一带，南北距离不超过一百八十里，可以把这个地方空出来，不要建造官亭民室罢了。 
English: In ancient times, it was difficult to identify. Recently, since the Qin and Han dynasties, the mouth of the Yellow River has been in the Cao and Wei areas, with a north-south distance of no more than 180 miles. This place can be vacated, and it is not necessary to build a government pavilion.

古文：大司马史长安张戎言： 水性就下，行疾则自刮除成空而稍深。
现代文：大司马史长安的张戎说： 水的本性是趋向低地，快速行驶就会自然刮除泥土形成空地再逐渐加深。
English: Zhang Rong of Ma Shi Chang'an said: The nature of water is to tend to the lowlands. If it travels quickly, it will naturally scrape away the soil to form a clearing and then gradually deepen.

古文：河水重浊，号为一石水而六斗泥。
现代文：黄河水相当浑浊，号称是一石水有六斗泥。
English: The water of the Yellow River is quite turbid. It is said that there are six buckets of mud in a stone of water.

古文：今西方诸郡，以至京师东行，民皆引河、渭山川水溉田。
现代文：现在西面各郡，以至京师以束，百姓都引黄河、渭水和山水灌溉农田。
English: At present, people in all counties in the west, even as far as Beijing and Shifang, are using the Yellow River, the Bohai River and mountain water to irrigate farmland.

古文：春夏干燥。少水时也，故使河流迟，贮淤而稍浅；雨多水暴至，则溢决。
现代文：春夏干燥，是水少的时候，因此黄河水流迟缓，淤积而逐渐变浅；雨多的时候水疯狂涌来，这样就会决口。
English: Spring and summer are dry, when there is little water, so the Yellow River flows slowly, silting up and gradually becoming shallow; when there is a lot of rain, the water rushes madly, so it will burst.

古文：而国家数堤塞之，稍益高于平地，犹筑垣而居水也。
现代文：而国家几次堵塞决口，逐渐比地高，就像是筑矮墙而居住在水中。
English: But the country blocked the breach several times, gradually higher than the ground, like building a low wall and living in the water.

古文：可各顺从其性，毋复灌溉，则百川流行，水道自利，无溢决之害矣。 
现代文：可以各自顺从它们的情况，不要再用来灌溉了，这样就会百！流畅，水路自然就顺利，没有决河的危害了。 
English: They can each follow their own situation, and no longer use it for irrigation. In this way, it will flow smoothly, the waterway will naturally be smooth, and there will be no danger of the river breaking.

古文：御史临淮韩牧以为 可略于《禹贡》九河处穿之，纵不能为九，但为四五，宜有益。 
现代文：御史临淮的韩牧说道： 可以大致依照《禹贡》上的九河的地方来开凿，即使不能开凿成九条，祇要能成四五条，也是有益的。 
English: Han Mu of Gu Shi Linhuai said: You can roughly follow the place of the nine rivers on "Yugong" to excavate. Even if you can't excavate into nine, it's only useful to be able to make four or five.

古文：大司空掾王横言： 河入勃海，勃海地高于韩牧所欲穿处。
现代文：大司空掾王横说： 黄河流入勃海，勃海地势比韩牧打算开凿的地方高。
English: The Yellow River flows into the Bohai Sea, and the Bohai Sea potential is higher than the place where Hanmu intends to excavate.

古文：往者天尝连雨，东北风，海水溢，西南出，浸数百里，九河之地已为海所渐矣。
现代文：以前天曾连着下雨，刮东北风，海水泛滥，向西南涌出，淹没几百里地，九河的地方已被大海所侵吞了。
English: In the past days, it rained continuously, the northeast wind blew, and the seawater flooded and gushed out to the southwest, flooding hundreds of miles of land. The Jiuhe area has been swallowed up by the sea.

古文：禹之行河水，本随西山下东北去。
现代文：大禹通流黄河之水，本来随着西面山势而往东北下流的。
English: The water of the Yellow River flowing through Dayu originally flowed down to the northeast along with the mountains in the west.

古文：《周谱》云定王五，年河徙，则今所行非禹之所穿也。
现代文：《周谱》记载定王五年黄河移位，那么现在所流行的地方不是大禹所开凿的了。
English: "Zhou Shu" recorded the shift of the Yellow River in the fifth year of Ding Wang, so the places that are popular now are not dug by Dayu.

古文：又秦攻魏，决河灌其都，决处遂大，不可复补。
现代文：另外秦国攻打魏国，决开黄河淹没了魏国的首都，决口的地方逐渐增大，不能再补丁。
English: In addition, Qin attacked Wei, and the Yellow River flooded the capital of Wei. The place of the breach gradually increased, and it could not be patched up.

古文：宜却徙完平处，更开空，使缘西山足乘高地而东北入海，乃无水灾。 
现代文：应退回到原来完全平整的地方去，重新开凿，使河水沿着西山足以着高地向东北流入大海，这样就没有了水灾。 
English: They should go back to the original completely flat area and re-excavate, so that the river water can flow along the West Mountain to the highlands to the northeast into the sea, so that there is no flood.

古文：沛郡桓谭为司空掾，典其议，为甄丰言： 凡此数者，必有一是。
现代文：沛郡的桓谭为司空掾，掌管他们的建议，他对甄丰说道： 所有这些建议，一定有一种是对的。
English: Pei County's Huan Tan is the chief magistrate in charge of their suggestions, he said to Zhenfeng: All these suggestions, there must be one that is right.

古文：宜详考验，皆可豫见，计定然后举事，费不过数亿万，亦可以事诸浮食无产业民。
现代文：应仔细加以考察，大都可以预见，计划确定后再来进行工作，费用不过几亿，也可以雇佣那些吃白食没有产业的人。
English: It should be carefully examined, most of them can be foreseen, the work will be carried out after the plan is determined, the cost is only a few hundred million, and those who eat nothing and have no industry can also be hired.

古文：空居与行役，同当衣食；衣食县官，而为之作，乃两便，可以上继禹功，下除民疾。 
现代文：可以省下住房和劳力，权当作为衣食；向政府要衣食，政府给他们做，这样两方面都便利，可以向上继承大禹功业，向下消除民间疾苦。 
English: They can save housing and labor, and use their power as food and clothing; they can ask the government for food and clothing, and the government will give it to them. This is convenient in both respects, and they can inherit the achievements of Dayu up and eliminate the hardships of the people down.

古文：王莽时，但崇空语，无施行者。
现代文：王莽的时候，人们只好讲空话，没有加以施行的人。
English: When the king was reckless, people had no choice but to say empty words, and those who did not put them into practice.

古文：赞曰：古人有言： 微禹之功，吾其鱼乎！ 
现代文：赞曰：古人曾说过： 如果没有大禹的功劳，我们都已成了鱼啊！ 
English: Zang said: The ancients once said: If it were not for Dayu's merits, we would all have become fish!

古文：中国川原以百数，莫著于四渎，而河为宗。
现代文：中国河流平原上百数，没有比四渎更著名的了，四渎中又以黄河作为宗主。
English: There are hundreds of rivers on the plains of China, and none is more famous than the Yangtze. The Yellow River is the dominant river in the Yangtze.

古文：孔子曰： 多闻而志之，知之次也。 
现代文：孔子说： 多听并留心记住，是求知的次要方面。 
English: Confucius said: Listening more and paying attention to memorizing are secondary aspects of seeking knowledge.

古文：国之利害，故备论其事。
现代文：水是国家的利害，所以要详细地论述它的来龙去脉。
English: Water is a national interest, so it is necessary to discuss its ins and outs in detail.

