古文：吴起儒服，以兵机见魏文侯。
现代文：吴起穿着儒生的服装，以兵法进见魏文侯。
English: Wu Qi dressed in Confucian clothing and advanced to Wei Wenhou with military methods.

古文：文侯曰： 寡人不好军旅之事。 
现代文：文侯说： 我不爱好军事。 
English: Wen Hou said: I don't like the military.

古文：起曰： 臣以见占隐，以往察来，主君何言与心违。
现代文：吴起说： 我从表面现象推测您的意图，从您过去的言行观察您将来的抱负，您为什么要言不由衷呢？
English: Wu Qi said: I inferred your intention from the surface phenomenon, and observed your future ambitions from your past words and deeds. Why did you not say what you meant?

古文：今君四时使斩离皮革，掩以朱漆，画以丹青，烁以犀象。
现代文：现在您一年到头杀兽剥皮，在皮革上涂以红漆，给以色彩，烫上犀牛和大象的图案。
English: Now you kill and skin animals all year round, paint the leather with red paint, give it a colour, and brand it with rhinoceros and elephant patterns.

古文：冬日衣之则不温，夏日衣之则不凉。
现代文：冬天穿着不暖和，夏天穿着不凉快。
English: It is not warm to wear in winter, and it is not cool to wear in summer.

古文：以长戟二丈四尺，短戟一丈二尺。
现代文：制造的长戟达二丈四尺，短戟达一丈二尺。
English: The length of the long pongee manufactured is up to 2 feet 4 inches, and the short pongee is up to 1 foot 2 inches.

古文：革车奄户，缦轮笼毂，观之于目则不丽，乘之以田则不轻，不识主君安用此也？
现代文：用皮革把重车护起来，车轮车毂也加以覆盖，这看在眼里并不华丽，坐去打猎也不轻便，不知您要这些东西做什么？
English: To protect a heavy vehicle with leather, and to cover the wheels and rims, does not look magnificent to the eye, and it is not easy to go hunting. I do not know what you want these things to do?

古文：若以备进战退守，而不求用者，譬犹伏鸡之搏狸，乳犬之犯虎，虽有斗心，随之死矣。
现代文：如果说您准备用来作战，却又不去寻求会使用它们的人。这就好像孵雏的母鸡去和野猫搏斗，吃奶的小狗去进犯老虎，虽有战斗的决心，随之而来的必然是死亡。
English: If you prepare weapons for war, but do not seek those who will use them, it is like a hen that hatches a chick and fights with a wild cat, or a puppy that eats milk and attacks a tiger. If you are determined to fight, death will inevitably follow.

古文：昔承桑氏之君，修德废武，以灭其国；有扈氏之君，恃众好勇，以丧其社稷。
现代文：从前承桑氏的国君，只许文德，废驰武备，因而亡国。有扈氏的国君仗着兵多，恃勇好战，也丧失了国家。
English: Once upon a time, the kings of the Chosan clan were only virtuous and did not fight, and as a result, they lost their country. The kings of the Min clan fought with many soldiers, were brave and warlike, and also lost their country.

古文：明主鉴兹，必内修文德，外治武备。
现代文：贤明的君主有鉴于此，必须对内修明文德，对外做好战备。
English: In view of this, a wise monarch must be clear about domestic reforms and be prepared to fight abroad.

古文：故当敌而不进，无逮于义也；僵尸而哀之，无逮于仁也。 
现代文：所以，面对敌人而不敢进战，这说不上是义；看着阵亡将士的尸体而悲伤，这说不上是仁。 
English: Therefore, facing the enemy and not daring to go to war cannot be called righteousness; looking at the dead bodies of soldiers and feeling sad cannot be called benevolence.

古文：于是文侯身自布席，夫人捧觞，醮吴起于庙，立为大将，守西河。
现代文：于是文侯亲自设席，夫人捧酒，宴请吴起于祖庙，任命他为大将，主持西河防务。
English: So Wen Hou personally set up a table, his wife served wine, invited Wu Qi to a banquet at the ancestral temple, appointed him general, and presided over the defense of the West River.

古文：与诸侯大战七十六，全胜六十四，余则钧解。
现代文：后来，吴起与各诸侯国大战七十六次，全胜六十四次，其余十二次也来分胜负。
English: Later, Wuqi fought seventy-six wars with various principalities and kingdoms, winning a total of sixty-four times, and the remaining twelve times were also won and lost.

古文：辟土四面，拓地千里，皆起之功也。
现代文：魏国向四面扩张领土达千里，都是吴起的功绩！
English: The expansion of the territory of Wei to thousands of miles in all directions is the achievement of Wu Zhi!

古文：吴子曰： 昔之图国家者，必先教百姓而亲万民。
现代文：吴起说： 从前谋求治好国家的君主，必先教育 百姓 ，亲近 万民 。
English: Wu Qi said: In the past, a monarch who sought to heal the country must first educate the people and be close to all the people.

古文：有四不和：不和于国，不可以出军；不和于军，不可以出陈；不和于陈，不可以进战；不和于战，不可以决胜。
现代文：在四种不协调的情况下，不宜行动：国内意志不统一，不可以出兵；军队内部不团结，不可以上阵；临战阵势不整齐，不可以进战，战时行动不协调，不可能取得胜利。
English: In four kinds of uncoordinated situations, it is not appropriate to act: if the domestic will is not unified, it is impossible to send troops; if there is no unity within the army, it is impossible to go to battle; if the battle formation is not neat, it is impossible to go to war; if the wartime actions are not coordinated, it is impossible to achieve victory.

古文：是以有道之主，将用其民，先和而造大事。
现代文：因此，英明的君主，准备用他的民众去作战的时候，必先搞好团结然后才进行战争。
English: Therefore, a wise ruler, when preparing to go to war with his people, must first achieve unity before going to war.

古文：不敢信其私谋，必告于祖庙，启于元龟，参之天时，吉乃后举。
现代文：虽然如此，他还不敢自信其谋划的正确，必须祭告祖庙，占卜凶吉，参看天时，得到吉兆然后行动。
English: Nevertheless, he did not dare to be confident that his plan was correct. He had to preach to the ancestral temple, tell fortunes, look at the time of day, get good omens and then act.

古文：民知君之爱其命，惜其死，若此之至，而与之临难，则士以死为荣，退生为辱矣。 
现代文：让民众知道国君爱护他们的生命，怜惜他们的死亡，做到这样周到的地步，然后再率领他们去打仗，他们就会以尽力效死为光荣，以后退偷生为耻辱了。 
English: Let the people know that the sovereign loves their lives, pities their deaths, and is so considerate, and then lead them to war, they will be honored by their efforts to die, and they will be ashamed to die later.

古文：吴子曰： 夫道者，所以反本复始；义者，所以行事立功；谋者，所以违害就利；要者，所以保业守成。
现代文：吴子说：  道 是用来恢复人们善良的天性的， 义 是用来建功立业的。 谋 是用来趋利避害的。 要 是用来巩固、保全事业成果的。
English: Wu Zi said: Tao is used to restore people's good nature, righteousness is used to build merits and establish undertakings, strategy is used to seek benefits and avoid harms, and virtue is used to consolidate and preserve the achievements of undertakings.

古文：若行不合道，举不合义，而处大居贵，患必及之。
现代文：如果行为不合于 道 ，举动不合于 义 ，而掌握大权，分居要职，必定祸患无穷。
English: If one's behavior is not in accordance with the Way, if one's actions are not in accordance with righteousness, and if one holds great power and holds important positions separately, one's woes are bound to be endless.

古文：是以圣人绥之以道，理之以义，动之以礼，抚之以仁。
现代文：所以， 圣人 用 道 来安抚天下，用 义 来治理国家，用 礼 来动员民众，用 仁 来抚慰民众。
English: Therefore, sages use Tao to pacify the world, use righteousness to govern the country, use etiquette to mobilize the people, and use benevolence to comfort the people.

古文：此四德者，修之则兴，废之则衰，故成汤讨桀而夏民喜悦，周武伐纣而殷人不非。
现代文：这四项美德发扬起来国家就兴盛，废弃了国家就衰亡。所以，商汤讨伐夏桀夏民很高兴，周武王讨伐殷纣殷人却不反对。
English: If these four virtues are developed, the country will prosper, but if they are abandoned, the country will decline and die. Therefore, the Shang and Tang people are happy to fight the Xia and Xia people, but King Zhou Wu does not object to fighting the Yin and Yang people.

古文：举顺天人，故能然矣。 
现代文：这是由于他们进行的战争，顺手天理，合乎人情，所以才能这样。 
English: It is because of the war they are waging, which is in accordance with the laws of nature and human nature, that they are able to do so.

古文：吴子曰： 凡治国治军，必教之以礼，励之以义，使有耻也。
现代文：吴子说： 凡治理国家和军队，必须用礼来教育人们，用义来勉励人们，使人们鼓起勇气。
English: Wu Zi said: Whoever governs the country and the army must use courtesy to educate people, use righteousness to encourage people, and encourage people's courage.

古文：夫人有耻，在大足以战，在小足以守矣。
现代文：人们有了勇气，力量强大就能出战，力量弱小也能竖守。
English: When people have courage, the strong can go to war, and the weak can defend themselves.

古文：然战胜易，守胜难。
现代文：然而取得胜利比较容易，巩固胜利却很困难。
English: However, it is relatively easy to win, but it is difficult to consolidate the victory.

古文：故曰：天下战国，五胜者祸，四胜者弊，三胜者霸，二胜者王，一胜者帝。
现代文：所以说，天下从事战争的国家，五战五胜的，会招来祸患；四战四胜的，会国力疲弊；三战三胜的，可以称霸；二战二胜的，可以称王；一战一胜的，可以成就帝业。
English: Therefore, it is said that countries that engage in war all over the world, if they win five battles and five victories, they will bring disaster; if they win four battles and four victories, their national strength will be exhausted; if they win three battles and three victories, they can dominate; if they win two victories in World War II, they can be called kings; if they win one battle and one victory, they can achieve empire.

古文：是以数胜得天下者稀，以亡者众。 
现代文：因此，多次战争的胜利而取得天下的少，由此而亡国的却很多。 
English: As a result, few countries have achieved victory in multiple wars, but many have lost their countries as a result.

古文：吴子曰： 凡兵者之所以起者有五：一曰争名，二曰争利，三曰积恶，四曰内乱，五曰因饥。
现代文：吴子说： 战争的起因有五种：一是争名，二是争利，三是积仇，四是内乱，五是饥荒。
English: Wu Zi said: There are five causes of war: one is the name dispute, the second is the profit dispute, the third is the accumulation of vendettas, the fourth is civil unrest, and the fifth is famine.

古文：其名有五：一曰义兵，二曰强兵，三曰刚兵，四曰暴兵，五曰逆兵。
现代文：用兵的性质也有五种：一是义兵，二是强兵，三是刚兵，四是暴兵，五是逆兵。
English: There are also five kinds of characteristics for the use of soldiers: one is a volunteer soldier, the second is a strong soldier, the third is a strong soldier, the fourth is a violent soldier, and the fifth is a rebel soldier.

古文：禁暴救乱曰义，恃众以伐曰强，因怒兴师曰刚，弃礼贪利曰暴，国乱人疲，举事动众曰逆。
现代文：禁暴除乱，拯救危难的叫义兵，仗恃兵多，征伐别国的叫强兵，因怒兴兵的叫刚兵，背理贪利的叫暴兵，不顾国乱氏疲，兴师动众的叫逆兵。
English: Those who ban violence and eliminate disorder and save the peril are called volunteers, those who fight and fight more are called strong soldiers, those who invade other countries are called strong soldiers, those who arouse soldiers because of anger are called strong soldiers, those who act against reason and greed are called violent soldiers, those who do not care about the fatigue of the country's chaos are called rebels, and those who arouse teachers and move the masses are called rebel soldiers.

古文：五者之，各有其道，义必以礼服，强必以谦服，刚必以辞服，暴必以诈服，逆必以权服。 
现代文：对付这五种不同性质的用兵，各有不同的方法，对义兵必须用道理折服它，对强兵必须用谦让悦服它，对刚兵必须用言辞说服它，对暴兵必须用计谋制服它，对逆兵必须用威力压服它。 
English: To deal with these five different types of soldiers, each has different methods. For the volunteer soldiers, it is necessary to use reason to subdue them. For the strong soldiers, it is necessary to use modesty to please them. For the rebel soldiers, it is necessary to persuade them with words. For the ruffian soldiers, it is necessary to subdue them with tricks. For the rebel soldiers, it is necessary to use power to suppress them.

古文：武侯问曰： 愿闻治兵、料人、固国之道。 
现代文：武侯对吴起说 我想知道关于治理军队、统计人口、巩固国家的方法。 
English: Wuhou said to Wu Qi, "I want to know about how to govern the army, count the population, and consolidate the country."

古文：起对曰： 古之明王，必谨君臣之礼，饰上下之仪，安集吏民，顺俗而教，简寡良才，以备不虞。
现代文：吴起回答说： 古时贤明的国君，必严守君臣间的礼节，讲究上下间的法度，使吏民各得其所，按习俗进行教育，选募能干的人，以防不测。
English: Wu Qi replied: In ancient times, wise sovereigns would strictly observe the etiquette between sovereigns and subjects, pay attention to the laws between the upper and lower levels, let officials and people have their own place, carry out education according to customs, and select and recruit capable people to prevent accidents.

古文：昔齐桓募士五万，以霸诸侯；晋文召为前行四万，以获其志；秦缪置陷陈三万，以服邻敌。
现代文：从前齐桓公招募勇士五万，赖以称霸诸侯。晋文公招集勇士四万作为前锋，以得志于天下，秦穆公建立冲锋陷阵的部队三万，用以制服邻近的敌国。
English: In the past, King Qi Huan recruited 50,000 warriors to help him dominate the provinces, King Jin Weng recruited 40,000 warriors as forwards to conquer the world, and King Qin Mu established 30,000 storming troops to subdue the neighboring enemy countries.

古文：故强国之君，必料其民。民有胆勇气力者，聚为一卒。
现代文：所以，发备图强的君主，必须查清人口，把勇敢强壮的人，编为一队。
English: Therefore, the monarch, who is preparing to send a strong army, must find out the population and make a team of brave and strong people.

古文：乐以进战效力，以显其忠勇者，聚为一卒。能逾高超远，轻足善走者，聚为一卒。
现代文：把乐意效命显示忠勇的人，编为一队。把能攀高跳远、轻快善走的人，编为一队。
English: Assemble a group of men who are willing to serve and show loyalty and courage. Assemble a group of men who can climb, jump, and walk briskly.

古文：王臣失位而欲见功于上者，聚为一卒。
现代文：把因罪罢官而想立功报效的人，编为一队。
English: Let's put together a team of people who want to make a difference after being fired for a crime.

古文：弃城去守，欲除其丑者，聚为一卒。
现代文：把曾弃守城邑而想洗刷耻辱的人，编为一队。
English: Those who had deserted the garrison and wanted to wash their shame, formed a team.

古文：此五者，军之练锐也。
现代文：这五种编队都是军队中的精锐部队。
English: These five formations are all elite units in the army.

古文：有此三千人，内出可以决围，外入可以屠城矣。 
现代文：如果有这样三千人，由内出击可以突破敌人的包围，由外进攻，可以摧毁敌人的城邑。 
English: If there are such three thousand people, they can break through the enemy's encirclement by attacking from the inside, and they can attack from the outside and destroy the enemy's cities.

古文：武侯问曰： 愿闻陈必定、守必固、战必胜之道。 
现代文：武侯说： 我想知道如何能使阵必定、守必固、战必胜的方法。 
English: Wuhou said, "I want to know how I can make the battle sure, the defense sure, and the battle sure to win.

古文：起对曰： 立见且可，岂直闻乎！
现代文：吴起答： 立即看到成效都可以，岂只是知道而已！
English: Wu Qian replied: You can see the results immediately, it's just knowing!

古文：君能使贤者居上，不肖者处下，则陈已定矣；民安其田宅，亲其有司，则守已固矣。
现代文：您能将有才德的人加以重用，没有才德的人不予重用，那么阵就已稳定了。民众安居乐业，亲敬官吏，那末守备就已巩固了。
English: If you can make heavy use of those with talent, and not make heavy use of those without talent, then the formation is already stable. The people live and work in peace, and respect the officials, then the defense has been consolidated.

古文：百姓皆是吾君而非邻国，则战已胜矣。 
现代文：百姓都拥护自己的国君，而反对敌国。那末战争就已胜利了。 
English: The people rally to their sovereign against the enemy, and the war is won.

古文：武侯尝谋事，群臣莫能及，罢朝而有喜色。
现代文：武侯曾经和群臣商议国事，群臣的见解都不如他，他退朝以后面有喜色。
English: Wuhou used to discuss state affairs with his vassals, but the vassals' opinions were not as good as his. He was overjoyed after his abdication.

古文：起进曰： 昔楚庄王尝谋事，群臣莫能及，退朝而有忧色。
现代文：吴起进谏说： 从前楚庄王曾经和群臣商议国事，群臣都不及他，他退朝后面有忧色。
English: Wu Qizhishan said: Once upon a time, the king of Chuzhuang discussed state affairs with his ministers. The ministers were not as good as him, and there was sadness behind his retreat.

古文：申公问曰： 君有忧色，何也？ 
现代文：申公问他： 您为什么面有忧色呢? 
English: Shen Gong asked him: Why do you have a gloomy face?

古文：曰： 寡人闻之，世不绝圣，国不乏贤，能得其师者王，得其友者霸。
现代文：楚庄王说： 我听说世上不会没有圣人，国家不会缺少贤人，能得到他们做老师的，可以称王，得到他们做朋友的，可以称霸。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang said: I have heard that there will not be no saints in the world, and the country will not lack sages. If you can get them as teachers, you can be called a king, and if you can get them as friends, you can be called a ruler.

古文：今寡人不才，而群臣莫及者，楚国其殆矣！ 
现代文：现在我没有才能，而群臣还不如我，楚国真危险了。 
English: Now that I have no talent, and the ministers are not as good as me, Chu is really in danger.

古文：此楚庄王之所忧，而君说之，臣窃惧矣。 
现代文：这是楚庄王所忧虑的事，您却反而喜悦，我私下深感忧惧。 
English: This is something that King Chu Zhuang is worried about, but you are happy about it. Privately, I am deeply worried.

古文：于是武侯有惭色。
现代文：于是武侯表示很惭愧。
English: As a result, Wuhou expressed his shame.

