古文：四始之至，颂居其极。
现代文：风、大雅、小雅、颂是极好的，颂它又是最好的。
English: Wind, grand elegance, small elegance, and eulogy are excellent, and eulogy is the best.

古文：颂者，容也，所以美盛德而述形容也。
现代文：颂是容貌，用来赞美大的德行，借舞蹈的容貌来表达。
English: Ode is appearance, used to praise great virtue, expressed by the appearance of dance.

古文：昔帝喾之世，咸墨为颂，以歌《九韶》。
现代文：从前帝喾的时代，咸墨作颂来歌唱《九韶》。
English: From the era of the former Emperor Qianlong, "Nine Melodies" has been sung in praise of salted ink.

古文：自商以下，文理允备。
现代文：从《商颂》以来，颂的文辞和意思是完备了。
English: Since the "Merchant's Ode," the wording and meaning of the ode have been perfected.

古文：夫化偃一国谓之风，风正四方谓之雅，容告神明谓之颂。
现代文：简爱欧化影响到一个诸侯国的诗叫作 风 ，影响到端正天下风俗的诗叫作 雅 ，用容貌舞蹈来禀告神道的诗叫作 颂 。 
English: A poem that influences the Europeanization of a vassal state is called a style, a poem that influences the proper customs of the world is called a style, and a poem that uses appearance and dance to denounce Shintoism is called a ode.

古文：风雅序人，事兼变正；颂主告神，义必纯美。
现代文：风 和 雅 叙述人事，人事兼有正确的和变乱的； 颂 以禀告神道为主，含义一定要纯正美好。
English: Style and elegance describe personnel, and personnel are both correct and chaotic; eulogy is mainly an obituary of Shinto, and the meaning must be pure and beautiful.

古文：鲁国以公旦次编，商人以前王追录，斯乃宗庙之正歌，非宴飨之常咏也。
现代文：鲁国因周公旦的功勋按次序编成《鲁颂》，商朝人因追念先王记下《商颂》，这是用在宗庙理的雅正乐歌，不是宴会上经常唱的歌咏。
English: Because of the merits of Zhou Gongdan, the State of Lu compiled the "Song of Lu" in order, and the Shang Dynasty people wrote down the "Song of Shang" in memory of the former king. This is an aristocratic music song used in ancestral temples, not a song often sung at banquets.

古文：《时迈》一篇，周公所制，哲人之颂，规式存焉。
现代文：《周颂》中的《时迈》这一篇，周公创作，圣人的颂，保存着作颂的规范。
English: In the "Song of Zhou," the "Time-lapse" piece, created by Zhou Gong, is a hymn to a saint, and preserves the norms of hymn-writing.

古文：夫民各有心，勿壅惟口。晋舆之称原田，鲁民之刺裘鞸，直言不咏，短辞以讽，丘明子顺，并谓为诵，斯则野诵之变体，浸被乎人事矣。
现代文：百姓各有各的想法，不要禁止他们言说，晋国众人赞美田野，鲁国百姓讽刺穿着鹿裘和祭服的，直率地说出，不是歌咏，用简短的话来讽喻，左丘明和子顺，都称作颂，这是民间的颂，是颂的变体，渐渐影响到人事上去了。
English: The people all have their own ideas. Don't forbid them to say that the people of Jin praise the fields, the people of Lu satirize the people wearing deer antlers and ceremonial clothes, and say it frankly. It is not a song, but a short word to use as a metaphor. Zuo Quming and Zishun are both called ode. This is a folk ode, a variant of ode, and gradually affects personnel.

古文：及三闾《橘颂》，情采芬芳，比类寓意，乃覃及细物矣。
现代文：到楚国三闾大夫屈原作《橘颂》情感和文采都很美好，用类似的物作比，寄托自己的情意，颂又推广到细小的物品上了。
English: According to the "Ode to Tangerine" written by Qu Yuan, a doctor of the Three Prefectures of Chu, the emotion and literary style are very beautiful. Comparing with similar things, he pinned his feelings, and the ode was extended to small items.

古文：至于秦政刻文，爰颂其德。
现代文：至于秦始皇刻石，于是称颂他的功德。
English: As for Qin Shihuang's stone carving, he was praised for his merits.

古文：汉之惠景，亦有述容。沿世并作，相继于时矣。
现代文：汉朝的惠帝景帝，也有描状容貌的歌舞，沿袭下来，都有创作，一代代继续不断了。
English: Hui Di and Jing Di of the Han Dynasty also had songs and dances depicting facial features, which have been passed down and have been created and continued from generation to generation.

古文：若夫子云之表充国，孟坚之序戴侯，武仲之美显宗，史岑之述熹后，或拟《清庙》，或范《駉》、《那》，虽浅深不同，详略各异，其褒德显容，典章一也。
现代文：像杨雄赞美赵充国的《赵充国颂》，班固称述窦融的《安丰戴侯颂》，有的仿照《周颂·清庙》有的效法《鲁颂·駉》和《商颂·那》，虽然或浅或深不同，或详略不一，它的赞美功德，显示舞容、典雅法则是一致的。
English: Like Yang Xiong's praise of Zhao Chongguo's "Zhao Chongguo's National Anthem," Ban Guo's praise of Dou Rong's "Anfeng Dai Hou's Anthem," some imitate "Zhou Song · Qing Temple" and some imitate "Rusong · Lu" and "Shang Song · Na," although they may be shallow or deep, or slightly different in detail, its praise merit shows that the dance and elegance are consistent.

古文：至于班傅之《北征》、《西征》，变为序引，岂不褒过而谬体哉！
现代文：到了班固的《北征颂》、傅毅的《西征颂》，变成铺叙，难道不是赞美过头变成破坏体制了吗？
English: When Ban Gu's "Ode to the Northern Expedition" and Fu Yi's "Ode to the Western Expedition" were turned into propaganda, wasn't it overpraise that turned into the destruction of the system?

古文：马融之《广成》、《上林》，雅而似赋，何弄文而失质乎！
现代文：马融的》广成颂》《上林颂》，要求典雅却写得像赋，为什么玩弄文采却失去它的本质呢？
English: Ma Rong's "Ode to Guangcheng" and "Ode to Shanglin" require elegance but are written like Fu. Why play with literature but lose its essence?

古文：又崔瑗《文学》，蔡邕《樊渠》，并致美于序，而简约乎篇。
现代文：又崔瑗的《南阳文学颂》，蔡邕的《京兆樊惠渠颂》，都是吧序文写得美好，却把颂写得简单。
English: In addition, Cui Yao's "Nanyang Literature Ode" and Cai Yao's "Beijing Zhaohui Canal Ode" are both written beautifully in the preface, but the ode is simple.

古文：挚虞品藻，颇为精核。至云杂以风雅，而不变旨趣，徒张虚论，有似黄白之伪说矣。
现代文：挚虞在《文章流别论》里对颂的评价，大都是精确的，至于说到其中夹杂着风雅，却不改变歌颂的旨趣，徒然发挥空论，好像黄铜白锡混杂着可以铸剑的胡说了。
English: The evaluation of the eulogy in the "Articles of Farewell" is mostly accurate, but as far as it is mixed with style, it does not change the essence of the eulogy, but vainly exerts empty talk, like brass and white tin mixed with nonsense that can make a sword.

古文：及魏晋杂颂，鲜有出辙。陈思所缀，以《皇子》为标；陆机积篇，惟《功臣》最显。其褒贬杂居，固末代之讹体也。
现代文：到了魏晋驳杂的颂，很少有离开写作规范的，曹植所作，以《皇太子生颂》作标志，陆机积起来的篇章，以《汉高祖功臣颂》最著名，其中赞美的和贬斥的混杂在一起，实在是乱世的不正确的体制了。
English: By the time of the Wei and Jin dynasties, there were very few odes that deviated from the standard of writing. The ones written by Cao Zhi were marked by the "Ode on the Birth of the Crown Prince," and the chapters accumulated by the land machine were most famous for the "Ode on the Meritorious Servants of the Han and Gao Dynasties," in which praise and disparagement were mixed together. It was really a chaotic and incorrect system.

古文：原夫颂惟典懿，辞必清铄，敷写似赋，而不入华侈之区；敬慎如铭，而异乎规戒之域；揄扬以发藻，汪洋以树义，虽纤巧曲致，与情而变，其大体所底，如斯而已。赞者，明也，助也。
现代文： 颂 的创作，内容要典雅，辞藻要华美。
English: In the creation of an ode, the content should be elegant and the words should be beautiful.

古文：昔虞舜之祀，乐正重赞，盖唱发之辞也。
现代文：描写虽然近似赋，但不流于过分华靡的境地；严肃庄重有如 铭 ，但又和 铭 的规劝警戒意义不同。
English: Although the description is similar to Fu, it does not flow into an excessively glamorous situation; it is as serious and solemn as Ming, but it is different from the exhortation and warning meaning of Ming.

古文：及益赞于禹，伊陟赞于巫咸，并扬言以明事，嗟叹以助辞也。故汉置鸿胪，以唱言为赞，即古之遗语也。
现代文：颂是本着颂扬的基本要求来敷陈文采，从广义的意义上来确立内容。至于细致巧妙的描写，也必须根据实际情况采取变通。颂的写作，大致就是这样了。 赞 的意思就是说明，就是辅助。
English: A eulogy is based on the basic requirements of eulogy to lay out the text and establish the content in a broad sense. As for the detailed and skillful description, it must also be flexible according to the actual situation. The writing of the eulogy is roughly like this. The meaning of praise is to explain, that is, to assist.

古文：至相如属笔，始赞荆轲。
现代文：相传从前虞舜时的祭祀，很重视乐官的赞辞，那就是歌唱之前要作说明的辞句。
English: According to legend, the sacrificial rites at the time of the former yakitori place great importance on the praise of the musicians, that is, the words to be explained before singing.

古文：及迁《史》固《书》，托赞褒贬，约文以总录，颂体以论辞；又纪传后评，亦同其名。
现代文：至于益帮助禹的话，伊陟向巫咸所作的说明，都是讲明事情，用语气帮助言辞。所以，汉代设置鸿胪官，他在各种典礼上呼喊礼拜的话就是 赞 ：这些都是古代留传下来口头上讲的 赞 。
English: As for the words of Yigong helping Yu, the explanations made by Yigong to Wuxian were all clarifying things and using tone to help words. Therefore, the Han Dynasty set up a Hongyuan official, and he shouted the words of worship at various ceremonies are praise: these are all praise that have been passed down from ancient times and spoken orally.

古文：而仲治《流别》，谬称为述，失之远矣。
现代文：到司马相如进行写作，才在《荆轲论》中对荆轲进行了赞美。
English: It was not until Sima Xiangru began to write that he praised Jing Bao in "On Jing Bao."

古文：及景纯注《雅》，动植必赞，义兼美恶，亦犹颂之变耳。然本其为义，事在奖叹，所以古来篇体，促而不广，必结言于四字之句，盘桓乎数韵之词。约举以尽情，昭灼以送文，此其体也。
现代文：后来司马迁的《史记》和班固的《汉书》便借赞辞来进行褒扬或批评：那是用简要的文辞加以总结，用颂的体裁而加以议论；《史记》和《汉书》的最后，又各有一篇《太史公自序》和《叙传》作一总评，它和 赞 的名称是相同的。可是挚虞的《文章流别论》，却把这种 赞 误称为 述 ，那就差得很远了。
English: Later, Sima Qian's "Historical Records" and Ban Gu's "Chinese Books" used praise to praise or criticize: it was summarized with a brief wording and discussed in the form of a eulogy; at the end of "Historical Records" and "Chinese Books," there was also a general review of "Tai Shi Gong Zi Xuan" and "Biography," which had the same name as the praise. However, the earnest "Articles of Farewell" mistakenly called this praise as a description, which was far from it.

古文：发源虽远，而致用盖寡，大抵所归，其颂家之细条乎！赞曰∶
现代文：后来郭璞注《尔雅》，在《尔雅图赞》中，无论是动物植物都写了 赞 ，内容兼有褒扬和贬抑。
English: Later, Guo Yu annotated "Lya," and in "Lya Tu Zan," he wrote "Zan" for both animals and plants, with both praise and disparagement.

古文：容体底颂，勋业垂赞。镂影攡声，文理有烂。
现代文：形容美德写成颂，赞扬功业写成赞；描绘形容和组成声韵，使文辞清晰而鲜明。
English: Describe the virtues to be written as a hymn, praise the merits to be written as a praise; describe and compose rhymes to make the words clear and vivid.

古文：年积愈远，音徽如旦。
现代文：这样的颂或赞，虽然年代久远，它的美好却像清晨一样美丽。
English: Such a hymn or praise, though ancient, is as beautiful as the morning.

古文：降及品物，炫辞作玩。
现代文：后世用颂赞来品评平常事物，往往就是炫耀辞采来作游戏了。
English: Later generations use praise to evaluate ordinary things, often it is a show of rhetoric to make games.

