古文：先主甘皇后，沛人也。
现代文：先主的甘皇后，是沛县人。
English: Our ancestor, Empress Kan, was from Pae County.

古文：先主临豫州，住小沛，纳以为妾。
现代文：先主到豫州时，住在小沛，将甘皇后纳为妾室。
English: When the forefather came to Yuzhou, he lived in Xiaopei and took Queen Gan as his concubine.

古文：先主数丧嫡室，常摄内事。
现代文：先主多为征期先后去世，甘皇后经常管理府内之事。
English: Most of the forefathers died during the war, and Empress Kan often managed the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：随先主於荆州，产后主。
现代文：后来跟随先主一直来到荆州，生下后主。
English: Later, he followed his master all the way to Jingzhou, where his second master was born.

古文：值曹公军至，追及先主於当阳长阪，于时困偪，弃后及后主，赖赵云保护，得免於难。
现代文：正好曹公的军队来到，一直追赶先主到了当阳县的长阪，当时情境困顿危急，先主就抛下甘皇后跟后主，托付给赵云保护，两人才幸免于难。
English: Just as Cao Gong's army arrived, they chased the first lord all the way to Nagasaka in Dangyang County. At that time, the situation was desperate and critical. The first lord left Queen Kan and the second lord, entrusting protection to Zhao Yun. Only the two survived.

古文：后卒，葬于南郡。
现代文：甘皇后去世后，安葬在南郡。
English: After the death of Empress Kan, she was buried in Nam-gun.

古文：章武二年，追谥皇思夫人，迁葬於蜀，未至而先主殂陨。
现代文：章武二年，被追封谥号为皇思夫人。并将墓葬迁到蜀地，但还没有到，先主就去世了。
English: In the second year of Zhangwu, she was given the posthumous title of Empress Dowager, and her tomb was moved to Shu, but she had not yet arrived when she died.

古文：丞相亮上言： 皇思夫人履行脩仁，淑慎其身。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮上奏说： 皇思夫人行为正直，德行宽和，勤谨修身。
English: Prime Minister Zhuge Liang said in his report: Mrs. Wang Si is honest, virtuous, and diligent in self-cultivation.

古文：大行皇帝昔在上将，嫔妃作合，载育圣躬，大命不融。
现代文：先帝过去在上将时，甘皇后和睦嫔妃，并诞育皇嗣，但天命不佑。
English: In the past, when the former emperor was a general, Queen Kan was a concubine and gave birth to an heir, but fate was not on her side.

古文：大行皇帝存时，笃义垂恩，念皇思夫人神柩在远飘飖，特遣使者奉迎。
现代文：先帝还在世时，坚守信义，施加恩德，考虑到皇思夫人的灵柩还在远处，就特地派使者前去迎接。
English: When the former emperor was still alive, he adhered to the principles of loyalty and benevolence. Considering that the coffin of Mrs. Wang Si was still far away, he specially sent an envoy to meet her.

古文：会大行皇帝崩，今皇思夫人神柩以到，又梓宫在道，园陵将成，安厝有期。
现代文：侍奉先帝驾崩，现在皇思夫人的灵柩已经回到京城，又有梓宫在道，陵寝即将建成，下葬之日近在眼前。
English: After serving the former emperor passed away, the coffin of Mrs. Wang Si Rong has now returned to Beijing, and there is also the Zi Gong on the way, the mausoleum is about to be built, and the day of burial is close at hand.

古文：臣辄与太常臣赖恭等议：礼记曰： 立爱自亲始，教民孝也；立敬自长始，教民顺也。 
现代文：臣就和太常大臣赖恭等人商议说：《礼记》中说 建立爱敬之心从亲人开始，是教导百姓孝顺；建立敬重之心从对长辈开始，是教导百姓和顺。 
English: The minister discussed with the First Vice-Minister Lai Hong and others and said: "According to the Book of Rites, to establish a heart of love and respect, starting with relatives, is to teach the people filial piety; to establish a heart of respect, starting with elders, is to teach the people harmony.

古文：不忘其亲，所由生也。
现代文：不忘怀亲人，是这些行为产生的根源。
English: Not forgetting their loved ones is the root cause of these actions.

古文：春秋之义，母以子贵。
现代文：春秋的义理，母亲凭借儿子而贵重。
English: In spring and autumn, a mother is more valuable because of her son.

古文：昔高皇帝追尊太上昭灵夫人为昭灵皇后，孝和皇帝改葬其母梁贵人，尊号曰恭怀皇后，孝愍皇帝亦改葬其母王夫人，尊号曰灵怀皇后。
现代文：过去高皇帝追尊太上昭灵夫人为昭灵皇后，孝和皇帝改葬他的母亲梁贵人，并封尊号为恭怀皇后，孝愍皇帝也改葬他的母亲王夫人，封尊号为灵怀皇后。
English: In the past, Emperor Gao honored his mother-in-law, Lady Zhaoling, as Empress Zhaoling, Emperor Xiaowa reburied his mother, Liang Guijin, and gave her the honorary title of Empress, and Emperor Xiaozhen reburied his mother, Lady Wang, and gave her the honorary title of Empress.

古文：今皇思夫人宜有尊号，以慰寒泉之思，辄与恭等案谥法，宜曰昭烈皇后。
现代文：现在皇思夫人应该有尊号，以安慰她的九泉之下的魂灵，臣就和赖恭等人查阅谥法，应该封尊号为昭烈皇后。
English: Now, the Empress Dowager should have an honorific title to comfort the souls under her nine springs, and the minister should consult with Lai Qiong and others to find out the law, and the honorific title should be awarded to the illustrious empress.

古文：诗曰： 谷则异室，死则同穴。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 活着的时候不同处居室，死后要葬在同一墓穴中。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "When you are alive, you should live in different places, but when you die, you should be buried in the same grave."

古文：故昭烈皇后宜与大行皇帝合葬，臣请太尉告宗庙，布露天下，具礼仪别奏。 制曰可。
现代文：所以昭烈皇后应该和先帝合葬，臣请求敬告宗庙，昭告天下，详细的礼仪流程再另外上奏。 
English: Therefore, the Empress Zhaorong should be buried together with the former emperor. The vassal requested to report to the ancestral temple, report to the world, and the detailed etiquette process should be performed separately.

古文：先主穆皇后，陈留人也。
现代文：后主的诏令回复可行。先主的穆皇后，是陈留人。
English: It is possible to reply to the Emperor's edict. The Emperor's Empress Mu is a Chen resident.

古文：兄吴壹，少孤，壹父素与刘焉有旧，是以举家随焉入蜀。
现代文：穆皇后的兄长吴壹，年少时父亲就去世了，吴壹的父亲向来和刘焉有交情，所以带着全家随着刘焉到了蜀地。
English: Wu Yi, the elder brother of Empress Mu, lost his father when he was young. Wu Yi's father had always been friends with Liu Yan, so he brought his whole family to Shu.

古文：焉有异志，而闻善相者相后当大贵。
现代文：刘焉怀有二心，又得知有善于看相的人说穆皇后当得大贵。
English: Liu Yan had second thoughts, and learned that people who were good at reading faces said that Empress Mu was very precious.

古文：焉时将子瑁自随，遂为瑁纳后。
现代文：刘焉当时带着儿子刘瑁跟随，就为刘瑁求娶穆皇后。
English: At that time, Liu Yan was accompanied by his son Liu Yao, and he asked for Liu Yao to marry Empress Mu.

古文：瑁死，后寡居。
现代文：刘瑁死后，穆皇后守寡独居。
English: After Liu Ye's death, Empress Mu lived alone as a widow.

古文：先主既定益州，而孙夫人还吴，群下劝先主聘后，先主疑与瑁同族，法正进曰： 论其亲疏，何与晋文之於子圉乎？ 
现代文：先主平定益州后，孙夫人返回东吴，大臣们都劝说先主聘娶穆皇后，先主担心自己跟刘瑁是同族，法正进谏说： 要说到其中的亲疏远近，哪里比得上晋文公和子圍呢？ 
English: When Sun Yat-sen returned to East Wu after he had conquered Yizhou, his ministers tried to persuade him to marry Empress Mu. He was worried that he was of the same race as Liu Bei. Fa Zhengjin said, "In terms of closeness and distance, how can we compare with Prince Jinwen and his children?"

古文：於是纳后为夫人。
现代文：于是先主纳穆皇后为夫人。
English: So the late Lord Namu became the wife of the Queen.

古文：建安二十四年，立为汉中王后。
现代文：建安二十四年，先主册立她为汉中王后。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jian'an, she was first appointed as the queen of the Han Dynasty.

古文：章武元年夏五月，策曰： 朕承天命，奉至尊，临万国。
现代文：章武元年夏五月，先主诏令说: 朕承受天命，登上至尊之位，治理各邦国。
English: In the summer and May of the 1st year of Zhangwu's reign, he issued the following edict: "I have received the heavenly mandate to ascend to the supreme throne and govern all the states.

古文：今以后为皇后，遣使持节丞相亮授玺绶，承宗庙，母天下，皇后其敬之哉！ 建兴元年五月，后主即位，尊后为皇太后，称长乐宫。
现代文：现在册立王后为皇后，派使者持符节，丞相诸葛亮授予玺印绶带，承续宗庙，母仪天，皇后应该敬重啊！ 建兴元年五月，后主登基，尊奉穆皇后为皇太后，称长乐恭。
English: Now it is time to proclaim the queen as empress, send an envoy to hold the festival of symbols, the prime minister Zhuge Liang awarded the seal ribbon, the succession of the ancestral temple, the mother's day, the queen should be respected! In May of the first year of Jianxing, the empress ascended to the throne, honored the Empress Mu as the empress dowager, and praised Changle Gong.

古文：壹官至车骑将军，封县侯。
现代文：吴壹做官到车骑将军，被封为县侯。
English: Wu Yi, as an official, became a chariot and cavalry general, and was named a county magistrate.

古文：延熙八年，后薨，合葬惠陵。
现代文：延熙八年，穆皇后去世，和先主合葬在惠陵。
English: In the eighth year of Yanxi, Empress Mu passed away and was buried with her husband in Huiling.

古文：后主敬哀皇后，车骑将军张飞长女也。
现代文：后主的敬哀皇后，是车骑将军张飞的长女。
English: She is the eldest daughter of Zhang Fei, the general of the cavalry.

古文：章武元年，纳为太子妃。
现代文：章武元年，后主纳娶她为太子妃。
English: In the first year of Zhangwu, Queen Nana married her to become the crown princess.

古文：建兴元年，立为皇后。
现代文：建兴元年，后主册立她为皇后。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, after the main book, she was appointed as the queen.

古文：十五年薨，葬南陵。
现代文：建兴十五年，敬哀皇后去世，安葬在南陵。
English: After fifteen years of construction, the queen died and was buried in the South Mausoleum.

古文：后主张皇后，前后敬哀之妹也。
现代文：后主的张皇后，是敬哀皇后的妹妹。
English: The heir apparent, Empress Zhang, is the sister of the late Empress Dowager.

古文：建兴十五年，入为贵人。
现代文：建兴十五年，入宫做为贵人。
English: Jianxing fifteen years, into the palace as a noble.

古文：延熙元年春正月，策曰： 朕统承大业，君临天下，奉郊庙社稷。
现代文：延熙元年春正月，后主诏令说： 朕继承大统，君临天下，尊奉宗庙社稷。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Yanxi, the late lord issued a decree saying: "I will succeed to the supreme leadership, reign over the world, and honor the patriarchal temple and shrine."

古文：今以贵人为皇后，使行丞相事左将军向朗持节授玺绶。
现代文：现在封贵人为皇后，派代理丞相事宜的左将军向郎持符节授予印信绶带。
English: Now that she is the empress, General Zuo, who was sent to act as acting prime minister, awarded the seal ribbon to her husband.

古文：勉脩中馈，恪肃禋祀，皇后其敬之哉！ 
现代文：和睦后妃，恭敬祭祀，皇后应该敬重啊！ 
English: Queen of harmony, respectful of sacrifice, the empress should be respected!

古文：咸熙元年，随后主迁于洛阳。
现代文：咸熙元年，张皇后跟随后主迁到洛阳。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Empress Zhang and her family moved to Luoyang.

古文：刘永字公寿，先主子，后主庶弟也。
现代文：刘永，字公寿，是先主的儿子，后主的弟弟。
English: Liu Yong, also known as Gongshou, was the son of the founder and the younger brother of the successor.

古文：章武元年六月，使司徒靖立永为鲁王，策曰： 小子永，受兹青土。
现代文：章武元年六月，后主派司徒靖封刘永为鲁王，并下诏说: 皇子刘永，受到天子册封。
English: In June of the first year of the Zhangwu era, Emperor Go-Shirakawa sent the tutor Jing to anoint Liu Yong as the King of Lu, and issued the following edict: Prince Liu Yong was anointed by Heaven.

古文：朕承天序，继统大业，遵脩稽古，建尔国家，封于东土，奄有龟蒙，世为藩辅。
现代文：朕承受天命，继承伟业，遵循沿袭古人，修建你的藩国，将你封到东土，那里有龟山和蒙山，世代做为藩篱。
English: I bear the destiny of heaven, inherit the great cause, follow the tradition of the ancients, build your domain, and seal you to the East, where there are Kameyama and Mengshan, which have been used as barriers for generations.

古文：呜呼，恭朕之诏！
现代文：啊，接受朕的诏令。
English: Ah, accept my edict.

古文：惟彼鲁邦，一变適道，风化存焉。
现代文：你的封国鲁地，经历了变革，就接近圣明仁德，还留有风俗教化。
English: Your fukoku-rudi, having undergone a transformation, is close to Saint Mingren's morality, and still has customs and education.

古文：人之好德，世兹懿美。
现代文：百姓仰慕仁德，世代都很美好。
English: The people admire benevolence, and all generations are beautiful.

古文：王其秉心率礼，绥尔士民，是飨是宜，其戒之哉！ 
现代文：你应该秉持本心，恪守礼仪，安抚那里的百姓，按照礼仪进行祭祀，应该警诫啊！ 
English: You should uphold your original heart, abide by the etiquette, appease the people there, and perform the ritual according to the etiquette. You should be warned!

古文：建兴八年，改封为甘陵王。
现代文：建兴八年，刘永被改封为甘陵王。
English: In the eighth year of Jianxing, Liu Yong was changed to Ganling Wang.

古文：初，永憎宦人黄皓，皓既信任用事，谮构永于后主，后主稍疏外永，至不得朝见者十馀年。
现代文：当初，刘永憎恨宦官黄皓，黄皓被后主倚重信任，委以重任，就向后主构陷刘永，后主渐渐疏远刘永，以至于刘永有十多年时间不能入朝拜见。
English: At first, Liu Yong hated the eunuch Huang Qi. Huang Qi was trusted and entrusted with important duties by the Empress Dowager, so he framed Liu Yong to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager gradually alienated Liu Yong, so that Liu Yong was unable to visit the Imperial Court for more than ten years.

古文：咸熙元年，永东迁洛阳，拜奉车都尉，封为乡侯。
现代文：咸熙元年，刘永的封地迁到洛阳，被任命为奉车都尉，封为乡侯。
English: In the first year of the Xianxi Dynasty, Liu Yong's fief moved to Luoyang, and he was appointed to the position of Fengche Duifeng (奉车都尉) and was given the title of townsman.

古文：刘理字奉孝，亦后主庶弟也，与永异母。
现代文：刘理，字奉孝，也是后主的弟弟，跟刘永不是同母亲。
English: Liu Li, also known as Feng Xiao, is also the younger brother of the heir, and is not the same mother as Liu Yong.

古文：章武元年六月，使司徒靖立理为梁王，策曰： 小子理，朕统承汉序，祗顺天命，遵脩典秩，建尔于东，为汉藩辅。
现代文：章武元年六月，后主派司徒靖立刘理为梁王，并诏令说： 皇子刘理，朕延续汉代基业，顺承天命，依据典章制度，将你封到东土，做为朝廷的藩篱。
English: In June of the first year of the Zhangwu era, Liu Li was appointed as the Prince of Liang by the Emperor, who sent his tutor, the Grand Prince Jing, and issued a decree saying: "Prince Liu Li, I am continuing the Han Dynasty's hereditary right, obeying the will of Heaven, and according to the award system, I will seal you to the East and make you the barrier of the Imperial Court.

古文：惟彼梁土，畿甸之邦，民狎教化，易导以礼。
现代文：你的封地梁国，就在京城附近，百姓接受到京城的教化，容易引导他们遵守礼仪。
English: Your fief, Liangguo, is near the capital city. The people have been educated by the capital city, and it is easy to guide them to observe etiquette.

古文：往悉乃心，怀保黎庶，以永尔国，王其敬之哉！ 
现代文：你到了封地，要尽心尽力，安抚守卫百姓，以延续你的封国，要敬重啊！ 
English: When you arrive at your fiefdom, you must do your best to appease the people guarding it, in order to continue your fiefdom. Be respectful!

古文：建兴八年，改封理为安平王。
现代文：建兴八年，后主改封刘理为安平王。
English: In the eighth year of Jianxing, his successor changed his title from Liu Li to Anping Wang.

古文：延熙七年卒，谥曰悼王。
现代文：延熙七年，刘理去世，谥号为悼王。
English: In the seventh year of Yanxi, Liu Li died, and his nickname was "Mourning King."

古文：子哀王胤嗣，十九年卒。
现代文：他的儿子哀王刘胤承袭爵位，在延熙十九年去世。
English: His son, King Aye Liuyin, inherited the title and died in the 19th year of Yanxi.

古文：子殇王承嗣，二十年卒。
现代文：他的儿子殇王刘承继承爵位，但在延熙二十年去世。
English: His son, Shao Wang Liu Cheng, succeeded to the title, but died in the 20th year of Yanxi.

古文：景耀四年诏曰： 安平王，先帝所命。
现代文：景耀四年，后主下诏说： 安平王，是先帝所下令册封的。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of King Jingyao, the empress dowager issued an edict saying: King Anping was crowned by order of the former emperor.

古文：三世早夭，国嗣颓绝，朕用伤悼。
现代文：但连续三代侯王都早逝，封国继承人断绝，朕非常痛心。
English: However, three successive generations of princes have died early, and the heirs to the fiefdom have been cut off. I am very sad.

古文：其以武邑侯辑袭王位。 
现代文：现在让武邑侯刘辑继承王位。 
English: Now let Wuyi marquis Liu Ji succeed to the throne.

古文：辑，理子也，咸熙元年，东迁洛阳，拜奉车都尉，封乡侯。
现代文：刘辑，是刘理的儿子，咸熙元年，东迁到洛阳，被授予奉车都尉之职，封为乡侯。
English: Liu Ji, the son of Liu Li, moved east to Luoyang in the first year of the Han Dynasty, and was awarded the post of lieutenant of Fengche, and was named a township lord.

古文：后主太子璿，字文衡。
现代文：后主的太子刘璿，字文衡。
English: The heir apparent's son, Prince Liu Bei, is called Wenheng.

古文：母王贵人，本敬哀张皇后侍人也。
现代文：刘璿的母亲是王贵人，本来是敬哀皇后的侍从。
English: Liu Yao's mother was a noblewoman, and was originally an attendant of the Empress Dowager.

古文：延熙元年正月策曰： 在昔帝王，继体立嗣，副贰国统，古今常道。
现代文：延熙元年正月，后主诏令说： 过去的帝王，都会设立继承人，做为国家的储君，是古往今来的常理。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yanxi, the emperor issued a decree saying: The emperors of the past would set up an heir to be the crown prince of the country, which is a common sense from ancient times to the present.

古文：今以璿为皇太子，昭显祖宗之威，命使行丞相事左将军朗持节授印绶。
现代文：现在册立刘璿为皇太子，以光大祖宗的威德，令代理丞相事宜的左将军向郎持符节授予印信绶带。
English: Now, Liu Ye was registered as the crown prince, and with the virtue of the great-great-grandfather, General Zuo, who was acting as the acting prime minister, was ordered to award the seal ribbon to Langdai Fu Jie.

古文：其勉脩茂质，祗恪道义，谘询典礼，敬友师傅，斟酌众善，翼成尔德，可不务脩以自勖哉！ 
现代文：应该注重修身养性，恪守道义，研习典章礼仪，尊师敬友，吸收众人的长处，以修养自身品德，你不能不修习并勉励自身啊！ 
English: It is necessary to pay attention to self-cultivation, adhere to morality, study the rules and etiquette, respect teachers and friends, absorb the strengths of many people, and cultivate one's own character. You can't not practice and encourage yourself!

古文：时年十五。
现代文：当时刘璿十五岁。
English: At that time, Liu Ye was 15 years old.

古文：景耀六年冬，蜀亡。
现代文：景耀六年冬，蜀国灭亡。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Jingyao, Shu was destroyed.

古文：咸熙元年正月，锺会作乱於成都，璿为乱兵所害。
现代文：咸熙元年正月，钟会在成都作乱，刘璿被乱兵杀害。
English: In the first month of the year of Xianxi, the Bell Association rioted in Chengdu, and Liu Yao was killed by the rioters.

古文：评曰：易称有夫妇然后有父子，夫人伦之始，恩纪之隆，莫尚於此矣。
现代文：评说：《易经》中说，有夫妇才会有孩子，伦理关系的开端，恩威法纪的昌盛，都是从这里开始的。
English: Comment: It is said in the Book of Changes that only married couples can have children, the beginning of ethical relationships, and the prosperity of the Enwei Legal Code all began here.

古文：是故纪录，以究一国之体焉。
现代文：所以将这些记录下来，以探究一国的体例
English: So document these to explore a country's case.

