古文：彭龟年，字子寿，临江军清江人。
现代文：彭龟年字子寿，临江军清江人。
English: Peng Jian Zizhou, a member of the Linjiang Army from Qingjiang.

古文：七岁而孤，事母尽孝。
现代文：他七岁时父亲去世了，彭龟年很孝顺地侍奉母亲。
English: When he was seven years old, his father passed away, and Peng served his mother very dutifully.

古文：性颖异，读书能解大义。
现代文：彭龟年生性聪明、卓异，读书能解释清楚其中主要的意思。
English: Peng Kuei is intelligent and extraordinary in nature. Reading can explain the main meaning clearly.

古文：及长，得程氏《易》读之，至忘寝食，从朱熹、张栻质疑，而学益明。
现代文：当他长大后，得到程氏的《易》一书并认真阅读它，以致废寝忘食，彭龟年时常请朱熹、张木式解答疑难问题，他的学问大大提高。
English: When he grew up, he got Mr. Cheng's "Yi" book and read it carefully, so that he lost sleep and forgot to eat. In the year of the tortoise, he often asked Zhu Xi and Zhang Mu to answer difficult questions, and his knowledge greatly improved.

古文：登乾道五年进士第，授袁州且春尉、吉州安福丞。
现代文：彭龟年考中乾道五年的进士，被授予袁州宜春尉、吉州安福县丞之职。
English: He was awarded the post of Yuanzhou Yichun lieutenant and Jizhou Anfu county magistrate.

古文：郑侨、张枃同荐，除太学博士。
现代文：郑侨、张木匀铸钱之案，连及士大夫一起向朝廷推荐他，彭龟年拜为太学博士。
English: In the case of Zheng Qiao and Zhang Muyin minting money, he was recommended to the imperial court together with Shidafu, and Peng Qianlin was awarded the title of Doctor of Science.

古文：殿中侍御史刘光祖以论带御器械吴端，徙太府少卿，龟年上疏乞复其位，贻书宰相云： 祖宗尝改易差除以伸台谏之气，不闻改易台谏以伸幸臣之私。 兼魏王府教授，迁国子监丞。
现代文：殿中侍御史刘光祖因为指责带御器械吴端，被改任太府少卿，彭龟年上疏乞求恢复他的职位，并写信给宰相说： 祖宗时曾改换官员的差遣及任职以增强台谏官的勇气，没有听说调换台谏官以维护宠臣私利的。 彭龟年兼任魏王府教授，升为国子监丞。
English: Liu Guangzu, the Grand Chamberlain of the Imperial Court, was transferred to the position of Taifu Shosho (Minor Secretary of the Taifu) because he accused Wu Duan of carrying imperial instruments. Peng Jian, the Grand Chamberlain, begged to be reinstated in his position and wrote to the Prime Minister, saying: At the time of Emperor Zongzong, officials were sent and positions were changed to strengthen the courage of the eunuchs of the Taifu Court. I have not heard that eunuchs of the Taifu Court were changed in order to protect the private interests of the favorite. Peng Jian also served as a professor of the Wei Wangfu Court and was promoted

古文：以侍御史林大中荐，为御史台主簿。
现代文：由于侍御史林大中的推荐，彭龟年被任命为御史台主簿。
English: As a result of the recommendation of the chamberlain, Shilin Daizhong, Peng Kuei was appointed as the main book of the Imperial History Museum.

古文：改司农寺丞，进秘书郎兼嘉王府直讲。
现代文：又改任司农寺丞，升为秘书郎兼嘉王府直讲。
English: He was also reassigned to the post of Sionoji-jo, and was promoted to secretary-ro and a direct report to the Kao government.

古文：光宗尝亲郊，值暴风雨感疾，大臣希得进见。
现代文：光宗曾亲自参加郊祀，正值暴风雨之际因而生病了，大臣们很少得以觐见。
English: Mitsumune, who had personally attended the suburban shrine, fell ill at the time of the storm, and ministers were rarely able to see him.

古文：久之，疾平，犹疑畏不朝重华宫。
现代文：时间过了很久，光宗的病好了，但仍对孝宗疑心重重，担心孝宗废他的皇位另立新人，于是光宗不去朝拜孝宗住处重华宫。
English: After a long time, Guangzong's illness was cured, but he was still suspicious of Xiaozong, worried that Xiaozong would abolish his throne and set up a new one, so Guangzong did not go to pay homage to Xiaozong's residence, Chonghua Palace.

古文：龟年以书谯赵汝愚，且上疏言： 寿皇之事高宗，备极子道，此陛下所亲睹也。
现代文：彭龟年写信责备赵汝愚，并上疏说： 寿皇侍奉高宗，完全遵守为人之子的要求去做，这是陛下所亲眼目睹的事实。
English: In the year of the Peng turtle, he wrote a letter to rebuke Zhao Ruwu, and said in the epilogue: Emperor Shou served Gao Zong and fully complied with the requirements of the Son of Man, which was a fact witnessed by His Majesty.

古文：况寿皇今日止有陛下一人，圣心拳拳，不言可知。特遇过宫日分，陛下或迟其行，则寿皇不容不降免到宫之旨，盖为陛下辞责于人，使人不得以窃议陛下，其心非不愿陛下之来。
现代文：况且寿皇今天只有陛下一个儿子，圣上的恳切之心，不言而喻，特别是遇到要去重华宫的日子，陛下有时延迟行动，而寿皇不得不降旨免去陛下去重华宫的礼节，是为了替陛下开脱，使人们不能因此私下议论陛下，寿皇内心并非不希望陛下去拜见。
English: Moreover, it goes without saying that His Majesty has only one son, His Imperial Highness, today, and His Imperial Highness sometimes delays his actions, especially on days when he has to go to Chonghua Palace. His Imperial Highness had to issue an order to exempt His Majesty from the etiquette of Chonghua Palace in order to excuse His Majesty, so that people could not talk about His Majesty in private. His Imperial Highness does not wish to visit His Majesty.

古文：自古人君处骨肉之间，多不与外臣谋，而与小人谋之，所以交斗日深，疑隙日大。
现代文：自古人君处理骨肉亲人间的事，多不与外臣商量，而与小人商量，所以与亲人之间的不满情绪一天天加深，彼此的疑心、距离一天天增大。
English: Since ancient times, when dealing with the affairs of flesh and blood relatives, most people did not consult with foreign ministers, but with villains, so the dissatisfaction between relatives deepened day by day, and the suspicion and distance between each other increased day by day.

古文：今日两宫万万无此。
现代文：今天两宫之间万万不要出现这样的结果。
English: Don't let such a result happen between the two palaces today.

古文：然臣所忧者，外无韩琦、富弼、吕诲、司马光之臣，而小人之中，已有任守忠者在焉，惟陛下裁察。 
现代文：然而我所担心的是，朝外没有韩琦、富弼、吕诲、司马光这样的忠臣，而小人之中，已有任守忠掌握了大权，希望陛下裁断、明察。 
English: However, what I am worried about is that there are no loyal retainers such as Han Zheng, Fu Zheng, Lu Yao, and Sima Guang outside the DPRK, and among the villains, Ren Shou Zhong has already seized great power. I hope that His Majesty will judge and see clearly.

古文：又言： 使陛下亏过宫定省之礼，皆左右小人间谍之罪。
现代文：彭龟年又说 ：使陛下亏损去重华宫拜见寿皇之礼仪，都是左右小人离间的罪过。
English: Peng Kuei also said, "Causing your majesty to lose money to go to Chonghua Palace to visit Emperor Shou's etiquette is a sin that separates the left and right villains."

古文：宰执侍从但能推父子之爱，调停重华；台谏但能仗父子之义，责望人生。
现代文：宰相、执政与侍从只能从中拉拢父子之间的感情，调和陛下与重华宫的关系；台谏只能根据父子之间合宜的道德责望人主。
English: The prime minister, the government and the attendants can only draw the feelings between the father and the son and reconcile the relationship between His Majesty and the Chonghua Palace; the emperor can only blame the person according to the appropriate morality between the father and the son.

古文：至于疑间之根，盘固不去，曾无一语及之。
现代文：至于二人间误会的根源，坚固而难以根除，宰执、台谏却未曾有一句话谈及此。
English: As for the root cause of the misunderstanding between the two, it is solid and difficult to eradicate, but there has never been a word about it from the boss and the boss.

古文：今内侍间谍两宫者固非一人，独陈源在寿皇朝得罪至重，近复进用，外人皆谓离间之机必自源始。
现代文：今天内侍中离间两宫的人固然并非一人，只有陈源在孝宗时被重重得罪，最近又被提拔重用，外人都说离间的关键一定从陈源开始。
English: Of course, there is not only one person in today's Naishi who separates the two palaces. Only Chen Yuan was repeatedly offended when he was a filial son, and was recently promoted and reused. Outsiders say that the key to separation must begin with Chen Yuan.

古文：宜亟发威断，首逐陈源，然后肃命銮舆，负罪引慝，以谢寿皇，使父子欢然，宗社有永，顾不幸欤？ 居亡何，光宗朝重华，都人欢悦。
现代文：应立即显示朝廷威力加以裁决，首先驱逐陈源，然后迅速登上銮车，前去认错，以向孝宗谢罪，使父子之间融洽，宗社长久，这不是很好吗？ 过了不久，光宗到重华宫朝拜孝宗，都城的人欢欣鼓舞。
English: Isn't it good that the imperial court should immediately show its power to make a ruling, first expel Chen Yuan, and then quickly board the carriage and go forward to admit the mistake, so as to thank Xiaozong for the sin, so that the father and son can get along well and the sect can last for a long time? Not long after, Guangzong went to Chonghua Palace to worship Xiaozong, and the people in the capital were jubilant.

古文：寻除起居舍人，入谢，光宗曰： 此官以待有学识人，念非卿无可者。 
现代文：不久，彭龟年拜官起居舍人，他进宫谢恩，光宗说 ：这个官职是用以等待有才识的人，想想除了你没人可以胜任。 
English: Soon after, Peng Kuei, who had been an official worshiper for years, gave up his official residence. When he entered the palace, Guangzong thanked him and said, "This official post is used to wait for talented people. Think about it, no one can be competent except you."

古文：龟年述祖宗之法为《内治圣鉴》以进。
现代文：彭龟年说 ：我这本书主要是为了防止宦官、宫中妇女得宠后弄权，多有请托，这些人如果看到，恐怕不能让皇上经常阅读。 
English: "I wrote this book mainly to prevent eunuchs and women in the imperial court from being favored and gaining power," said Peng Jiannian. "If these people see it, I'm afraid they won't let the emperor read it often."

古文：光宗曰： 祖宗家法甚善。 龟年曰： 臣是书大抵为宦官、女谒之防，此曹若见，恐不得数经御览。 光宗曰： 不至是。 他日，龟年奏： 臣所居之官，以记注人君言动为职，车驾不过宫问安，如此书者又数十矣，恐非所以示后。 有旨幸玉津园，龟年奏： 不奉三宫，而独出宴游，非礼也。 又言： 陛下误以臣充嘉王府讲读官，正欲臣等教以君臣父子之道。臣闻有身教，有言教，陛下以身教，臣以言教者也，言岂若身之切哉。 
现代文：光宗说 ：不至于这样。 过了一天，彭龟年上奏道： 我所居之官职，主要职责是记述君主的言行，皇上不到重华宫问安，如此之事记下的有数十次了，恐怕难以向后人交待。 皇上下旨去玉津园，彭龟年奏道： 皇上不尊奉三宫，而独自出去游宴，不合礼仪。 又说： 陛下误把我充任嘉王府讲读官，正是想要我们教给嘉王君臣父子之道。我听说有身教，有言教，陛下凭借身教，我通过言教来教育嘉王，言教怎比得上身教有效。 
English: Guangzong said, "Not so." After a day, Peng Kuei gave a speech, saying, "In my official position, my main duty is to record the words and deeds of the monarch. The emperor did not come to Chonghua Palace to ask for greetings. I have recorded such things dozens of times, and I am afraid it will be difficult to pass on to future generations." The emperor gave the order to go to Yujin Garden, and Peng Kuei gave a speech, saying, "It is not proper etiquette for the emperor to visit the Three Palaces and go out to dinner alone." He also said, "Your majesty mistakenly appointed me as a lecturer

古文：绍熙五年五月，寿皇不豫，疾浸革，龟年连三疏请对，不获命。
现代文：绍熙五年五月，孝宗生病，后疾病逐渐严重，彭龟年连续三次上疏请求与皇上对话，没得到回音。
English: In May of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Emperor Xiaozong fell ill, and his illness gradually worsened. In the year of the tortoise, Emperor Xiaozong asked for a dialogue with the emperor three times in a row, but received no response.

古文：属上视朝，龟年不离班位，伏地扣额久不已，血渍鹙甓。
现代文：恰好皇上上朝，彭龟年不离开班位，伏地叩头久久不停，鲜血浸入甓。
English: Just as the emperor ascended to the throne, Peng Kuei did not leave his seat, bowed down to the ground for a long time, and blood soaked into the cocoon.

古文：光宗曰： 素知卿忠直，欲何言？ 龟年奏： 今日无大于不过宫。 光宗曰： 须用去。 龟年言： 陛下屡许臣，一入宫则又不然。
现代文：彭龟年奏道 ：今日之事没有能大过拜见寿皇的。 光宗说： 我一定会去。 彭龟年说： 陛下屡次答应我，一进宫后就又不遵守诺言。
English: Peng Jiannian said, "There is nothing more important today than to visit Emperor Shou." Guangzong said, "I will definitely go." Peng Jiannian said, "His Majesty promised me many times, but once he entered the palace, he did not keep his promise."

古文：内外不通，臣实痛心。 同知枢密院余端礼曰： 扣额龙墀，曲致忠恳，臣子至此，为得已邪？ 上云： 知之。 
现代文：言行不一致，我实在痛心。 同知枢密院余端礼说 ：在宫殿前的台阶上叩头，委婉地表现出恳切之情，做臣子的做到这个地步，为了什么？ 皇上说： 我知道了。 
English: The discrepancy between words and deeds really pains me. Ditto the Privy Councillor Yu Dangli said: "Kowtowing on the steps in front of the palace, euphemistically showing sincere feelings, being a courtier to this degree, for what? The emperor said: I know.

古文：孝宗崩，宁宗受禅，是夕召对，宁宗蹙额云： 前但闻建储之义，岂知遽践大位，泣辞不获，至今震悸。 龟年奏： 此乃宗祏所系，陛下安得辞，今日但当尽人子事亲之诚而已。 因拟起居札子，乞日进一通。
现代文：孝宗驾崩，宁宗受禅即位，当天晚上召人对话，宁宗皱着眉头说： 以前只听说我可能被立为王储，谁知立即就登上了皇位，我竭力推辞未得到恩准，至今内心还震惊、害怕。 彭龟年奏道： 这是关系到国家宗社之事，陛下怎能推辞，今天只须尽人子之责诚心地事奉父亲。 于是拟定起居札子，乞求每日呈上。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozong, Emperor Ningzong was enthroned by Emperor Zhen. That evening, Emperor Ningzong called for a dialogue. Emperor Ningzong frowned and said, "Previously, I had only heard that I might be made crown prince. Who knows, I immediately ascended to the throne. I tried my best to decline, but I did not get approval. To this day, I am still shocked and scared. Emperor Peng Jianxu said, "This is a matter related to the national ancestral society. How can Your Majesty decline? Today, I only need to fulfill my duty as a son of man and sincerely serve my father." He then drew up

古文：又与翊善黄裳同奏往朝南内，因定过宫之礼，乞先一日入奏，率百官恭谢。
现代文：彭龟年又与翊善黄裳一同到南内朝拜，于是制定拜见泰安宫光宗的礼仪，请求提前一天进宫上奏，率领百官恭请。
English: In the year of the turtle, Peng Jian and Gong Sheng Huang Xiang also went to Nan'ei to worship together, so they formulated the etiquette for visiting the Tai'an Palace of Guangzong, requesting to enter the palace one day in advance, and led hundreds of officials to pay their respects.

古文：宁宗朝泰安宫，至则寝门已闭，拜表而退。
现代文：宁宗朝拜泰安宫，到宫前时卧室门已关闭，于是奏上拜表就退出了。
English: Ning Zong paid homage to the Tai'an Palace. When he arrived in front of the palace, the bedroom door was already closed, so he played the prayer card and left.

古文：时议欲别建泰安宫，而光宗无徙宫之意。
现代文：当时，大臣们议论想另建泰安宫，而光宗没有迁移宫殿的打算。
English: At that time, ministers discussed the idea of building another Tai'an Palace, but Guangzong had no intention of moving the palace.

古文：龟年言： 古人披荆棘立朝廷，尚可布政出令，况重华一宫岂为不足哉？
现代文：彭龟年说： 古人披荆斩棘建立王朝，还能发布政令，况且重华一个宫殿难道还不够用吗？
English: Peng Kuei said: The ancients built dynasties by cutting thorns and thistles. They could also issue decrees. Besides, isn't it enough to have a palace?

古文：陛下居狭处，太上居宽处，天下之人必有谅陛下之心者。 于是宫不果建。
现代文：陛下住窄处，太上皇住宽处，天下百姓，定会体谅陛下的。 于是停止建筑宫殿。
English: Your Majesty lives in a narrow place, the Emperor lives in a wide place, and the people of the world will surely understand Your Majesty, so stop building palaces.

古文：迁中书舍人。刘庆祖已带遥郡承宣使，而以太上随龙人落阶官，龟年缴奏，宁宗批： 可与书行。 龟年奏： 臣非为庆祖惜此一官，为朝廷惜此一门耳。夫 可与书行 ，近世弊令也，使其可行，臣即书矣，使不可行，岂敢因再令而遂书哉？ 宁宗尝谓： 退朝无事，恐自怠惰，非多读书不可。 龟年奏： 人君之学与书生异，惟能虚心受谏，迁善改过，乃圣学中第一事，岂在多哉！ 
现代文：彭龟年奏道： 我并不是为刘庆祖惋惜这一官职，是为朝廷惋惜这种做事的方法。 可以记下施行 ，这是近代有弊病的法令，如果它可行，我就记下了，如果它不可行，怎敢由于皇上的再次命令而就记下呢？ 宁宗曾说 ：退朝后无所事事，恐怕自己滋生怠惰之情，非要多读书不可。 彭龟年奏道： 君主的学问与书生的学问不同，只要能虚心纳谏，遵善改过，这是圣学中的第一大事，并不在多少。 
English: Peng Kenenso said, "I do not regret this official position for Liu Qingzu, but I do regret this way of doing things for the imperial court. It is possible to write down the implementation, this is a modern law with drawbacks, if it is feasible, I will write it down, if it is not feasible, how dare I write it down because of the emperor's repeated order?" Ningzong once said, "After retiring, there is nothing to do, I am afraid that I will breed laziness, I must read more." Peng Kenenso said, "The knowledge of a monarch is different from that of a scholar, as long as one can humbly accept the

古文：一日，御笔书朱熹、黄裳、陈傅良、彭龟年、黄由、沈有开、李巘、京镗、黄艾、邓驲十人姓名示龟年云： 十人可充讲官否？ 龟年对曰： 陛下若招来一世之杰如朱熹辈，方厌人望，不可专以潜邸学官为之。 寻除侍讲，迁吏部侍郎，升兼侍读。
现代文：一天，皇上书写了朱熹、黄裳、陈傅良、彭龟年、黄由、沈有开、李山献、京镗、黄艾、邓马日十个人的姓名给彭龟年看并问： 这十个人可以充当讲官吗？ 彭龟年回答 ：陛下如果招来一世之杰出人物如朱熹等，才不负众望，不可以专任潜邸的学官侍讲。 不久彭龟年拜官侍讲，改为吏部侍郎，又升兼侍读。
English: One day, the emperor wrote down the names of ten people, Zhu Xi, Huang Xiang, Chen Fu Liang, Peng Gui Nian, Huang Yu, Shen Youkai, Li Shan Xian, Jing Xuan, Huang Ai, and Deng Ma Rih to Peng Gui Nian and asked: Can these ten people serve as lecturers? Peng Gui Nian replied: If Your Majesty invites outstanding figures of the first generation, such as Zhu Xi, they will not live up to the expectations of the public, and they cannot be full-time lecturers of the Hidden Residence. Soon, Peng Gui Nian became a lecturer, changed to a clerk, and was promoted to a

古文：龟年知事势将变，会暴雨震雷，因极陈小人窃权、号令不时之弊。
现代文：彭龟年知道形势将会变化，正值暴雨雷鸣出现，于是极力陈述小人窃权、号令不按时传达的弊端。
English: Peng Jian knew that the situation would change, just as the rainstorm and thunderstorm appeared, so he tried his best to explain the drawbacks of the thief's right to steal and the failure to communicate the order on time.

古文：遣充金国吊祭接送伴使。
现代文：彭龟年被派遣充当金国吊祭接送伴使。
English: Peng Kuei was dispatched to act as the escorting envoy of the Golden National Hanging Festival.

古文：初，朱熹与龟年约共论韩侂胄之奸，会龟年护客，熹以上疏见绌，龟年闻之，附奏云： 始臣约熹同论此事。
现代文：当初，朱熹与彭龟年约定共同论斥韩胄的奸邪，正巧彭龟年接待来使，朱熹一人因为上疏论斥韩胄被罢黜，彭龟年听说此事后，附会朱熹的奏书说： 当初我约好与朱熹一同反映此事。
English: At the beginning, Zhu Xi and Peng Guiren agreed to jointly discuss and denounce Han Zheng's treachery. It just so happened that Peng Guiren was receiving the envoy. Zhu Xi was ousted because of his criticism of Han Zheng. After Peng Guiren heard about this, Zhu Xi's report said: At the beginning, I agreed to reflect on this matter with Zhu Xi.

古文：今熹既罢，臣宜并斥。 不报。
现代文：今天朱熹已经被罢，我也应该一同被贬。 
English: Today, Zhu Xi has been ousted, and I should be ousted as well.

古文：迨归，见侂胄用事，权势重于宰相，于是条数其奸，谓： 进退大臣，更易言官，皆初政最关大体者。
现代文：皇上没有接受。等到彭龟年从金回朝后，见韩胄主持政事，权势比宰相还大，于是彭龟年分条列举他奸邪的事例，说 ：进退大臣，更换言官，都是初期执政最关大体的事。
English: The emperor did not accept it. After Peng Jian returned to the North from Jin, he saw that Han Xuan presided over the government affairs and had more power than the prime minister. Therefore, Peng Jian listed the cases of his treachery in detail, saying: The promotion and demotion of ministers, and the replacement of spokespersons were the most important things in the early days of governing.

古文：大臣或不能知，而侂胄知之，假托声势，窃弄威福，不去必为后患。 上览奏甚骇，曰： 侂胄朕之肺腑，信而不疑，不谓如此。 批下中书，予侂胄祠，已乃复入。
现代文：有的事大臣们不可能知道，而韩胄知道，他假托皇上的声势，窃取权力作威作福，不把他贬去必定成为后患。 皇上看到彭龟年的奏章很惊骇 ：韩胄是我的心腑，我对他信而不疑，不想他如此行事。 皇上批示下达到中书，让韩胄到一祠观任职，很久以后才又重新回到朝廷。
English: Some things are impossible for the ministers to know, but Han Zheng knew that he was pretending to support the emperor's influence, stealing power to gain prestige and benefit, and if he did not degrade him, he would certainly become a hindrance. The emperor was shocked to see Peng Kuei's report: "Han Zheng is my heartthrob, I have no doubt about him, and I don't want him to act like this." The emperor's instructions reached the middle book, and Han Zheng was sent to a small temple to serve, only to return to the imperial court after a long time.

古文：龟年上疏求去，诏侂胄与内祠，龟年与郡，以焕章阁待制知江陵府、湖北安抚使。
现代文：彭龟年上疏请求去职，皇上诏令韩胄任宫内祠观官，彭龟年任地方官，以焕章阁待制身份任江陵府知府、湖北安抚使。
English: At the request of Peng Jingsu, Peng Jingsu resigned from his post, and the emperor issued a decree to appoint Han Zheng as the palace's ancestral hall observer, Peng Jingsu as a local official, and Huan Zhangge as the governor of Gangneung Prefecture and the pacification envoy of Hubei Province.

古文：龟年丐祠，庆元二年，以吕棐言落职；已而追三官，勒停。
现代文：彭龟年请求一祠观职务，庆元二年，由于吕蓒的指控，彭龟年被革职；以后他三次被除名，被勒令停职。
English: Peng Guiren requested a position as a temple observer. In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Peng Guiren was dismissed from his post due to Lv Ying's accusation. Later, he was expelled three times and was ordered to suspend his duties.

古文：嘉泰元年，复元官。
现代文：嘉泰元年，彭龟年恢复原职。
English: In the first year of the Jia Tai era, Peng Kengni resumed his original post.

古文：起知赣州，以疾辞，除集英殿修撰、提举冲佑观。
现代文：被起用为赣州知州，以有病为由辞去，拜官集英殿修撰、提举冲佑观。
English: He was appointed as Zhangzhou Chizhou, resigned on the grounds of illness, and wrote and promoted Chong Youkun after paying homage to the official Shuying.

古文：开禧二年，以待制宝谟阁致仕，卒。
现代文：开禧二年，以待制宝谟阁之职退休，不久彭龟年死去。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he retired from the post of the cabinet of state treasure, and died soon after.

古文：龟年学识正大，议论简直，善恶是非，辨析甚严，其爱君忧国之忱，先见之识，敢言之气，皆人所难。
现代文：彭龟年的学识很纯正，议论简明正直，对善恶是非，辨析很严格，他爱君忧国的诚信，先见之明的见识，敢言的气魄，都是人们所难以做到的。
English: Peng Kulin's knowledge is very pure, his discussions are concise and honest, he is strict in distinguishing between right and wrong, and he loves the king and worries about the country. His sincerity, foresight, and courage to speak out are all difficult for people to achieve.

古文：晚既投闲，悠然自得，几微不见于颜面。
现代文：晚年他已经清闲下来，悠然自得地生活，几乎不为世人所知。
English: In his later years, he had become more relaxed, living a carefree life, almost unknown to the world.

古文：自伪学有禁，士大夫鲜不变者，龟年于关、洛书益加涵泳，扁所居曰止堂，著《止堂训蒙》，盖始终特立者也。
现代文：自从对伪学有禁令后，士大夫很少有不改变做学问的方向的，彭龟年对关中张载、洛阳程氏之书更加沉湎，把居处的匾额题为 止堂 ，著《止堂训蒙》，始终如一，坚持自己的立场。
English: Since the ban on pseudoscience, there are very few scholars who do not change the direction of learning. Peng Jian's book on Guanzhong Zhangzhao and Luo Yangcheng's book is more serious. He titled the residence's inscription "Shidang" with "Shidang Xunmen" and consistently adhered to his position.

古文：闻苏师旦建节，曰： 此韩氏之阳虎，其祸韩氏必矣。 及闻用兵，曰： 祸其在此乎？ 所著书有《经解》、《祭仪》、《五致录》、奏议、外制。
现代文：他听说苏师旦执杖符节，说： 这是韩氏的阳虎，其必祸害于韩氏。 等彭龟年听说朝廷将要发兵时，他说： 韩氏的灾祸大概会从此而起了吧。 彭龟年所著书有《经解》、《祭仪》、《五致录》、奏议、外制。
English: He heard that Su Shidan held a staff and said, "This is the yang tiger of the Han clan, and it will surely bring disaster to the Han clan." When Peng Jiannian heard that the imperial court was about to send troops, he said, "The disaster of the Han clan will probably start from here." The books written by Peng Jiannian include "Meditation," "Ceremony," "Five Records," "Proposal" and "Foreign Edition."

古文：侂胄诛，林大中、楼錀皆白其忠，宁宗诏赠宝谟阁直学士。
现代文：韩胄被杀后，林大中、楼钥都向皇上报告彭龟年的忠心，宁宗诏令赠他为宝谟阁直学士。
English: After Han Xuan was killed, both Lin Daozhong and Lou Jiao reported to the emperor about Peng Guo Nian's loyalty, and Ning Zong issued an edict awarding him the title of Baomu Ge Direct Bachelor.

古文：章颖等请易名，赐谥忠肃。
现代文：章颖等请求换个名称，皇上赐给彭龟年谥号 忠肃 。
English: Zhang Ying and others requested a change of name, and the emperor gave Peng Kuei the posthumous name of Zhong Sui.

古文：除中书门下检正诸房公事，守殿中侍御史兼侍讲，迁侍御史，行起居郎兼权刑部侍郎。
现代文：皇上对章颖等人说： 彭龟年忠心耿耿可嘉，应该得到谥号。如果人人如此，一定能使君主处于无过错的境地。 
English: The emperor said to Zhang Ying and others: Peng Kuei's loyalty is outstanding and deserves a nickname. If everyone is like this, it will definitely put the monarch in a faultless situation.

古文：以刘德秀论劾，奉祠而卒。詹体仁，字元善，建宁浦城人。
现代文：不久，皇上加赠彭龟年龙图阁学士，又提拔了他的儿子彭钦。詹体仁字元善，建宁浦城人。
English: Soon after, the emperor awarded Peng Jianlong with a bachelor's degree and promoted his son Peng Qin, also known as Zhan Tianren and Yuan Zhen, from Jianningpu City.

古文：父綎，与胡宏、刘子翚游，调赣州信丰尉。
现代文：其父詹忄造，与胡宏、刘子交游甚多，被调任赣州信丰县尉。
English: His father, Zhan Shuzo, had a lot of friendships with Hu Hong and Liu Zi, and was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou Xinfeng County Lieutenant.

古文：金人渝盟，綎见张浚论灭金秘计，浚辟为属。
现代文：金人背弃盟约后，詹忄造拜见张浚陈述了灭金之计，张浚召他为属下。
English: After the goldsmiths reneged on the covenant, Zhan Zhezong paid homage to Zhang Jian and expounded the plan to destroy the gold. Zhang Jian called him to be his subordinate.

古文：体仁登隆兴元年进士第，调饶州浮梁尉。
现代文：詹体仁在隆兴元年考中进士，被调任饶州浮梁县尉。
English: Zhan Tizhen was promoted to lieutenant in the first year of the Longxing examination, and was transferred to Raozhou Fuliang County.

古文：郡上体仁获盗功状当赏，体仁曰： 以是受赏，非其愿也。 谢不就。
现代文：郡府呈上詹体仁捕捉盗寇的立功状建议加以赏赐，詹体仁说： 因此而受赏，不是我的本意。 
English: The prefectural government submitted a proposal to award Zhan Tizhen with a meritorious achievement for catching robbers. Zhan Tizhen said, "It was not my intention to be awarded for this.

古文：为泉州晋江丞。
现代文：婉言谢绝了赏赐。詹体仁任泉州晋江县丞。
English: Wan Yan declined the reward. Zhan Tianren was appointed as the county magistrate of Quanzhou Jinjiang County.

古文：宰相梁克家，泉人也，荐于朝。
现代文：宰相梁克家是泉州人，他向朝廷推荐詹体仁。
English: Prime Minister Liang Kejia was from Quanzhou, and he recommended Zhan Tizhen to the imperial court.

古文：入为太学录，升太学博士、太常博士，迁太常丞，摄金部郎官。
现代文：詹体仁进入朝中为太学录，被升为太学博士、太常博士，调任太常丞，摄金部郎官。
English: Zhan Tizhen entered the Imperial Middle School as Taishu-roku, was promoted to Taigaku-hakase, Taichang-hakase, transferred to Taichang-joseong, and became a steward of the Regent's Department.

古文：光宗即位，提举浙西常平，除户部员外郎、湖广总领，就升司农少卿。
现代文：光宗即位后，詹体仁任提举浙西常平官，拜为户部员外郎、湖广总领，就任司农少卿。
English: After the enthronement of Guangzong, Zhan Tizhen was appointed and promoted to the post of Zhexi Changping official, and was appointed as the head of the household department, the general leader of Hunan and Guangxi, and the junior secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：奏蠲诸郡赋输积欠百余万。
现代文：詹体仁奏请蠲除各郡积欠的应交纳的赋税一百余万。
English: Zhan Tian Rinso asked that the county tax arrears of more than one million yuan be eliminated.

古文：有逃卒千人入大冶，因铁铸钱，剽掠为变。
现代文：有逃跑的士兵一千人进入大冶境，他们用铁铸钱，剽掠财物，骚扰百姓。
English: A thousand runaway soldiers entered the Great Smelting Region. They used iron to cast money, plundered property, and harassed the people.

古文：体仁语戎帅： 此去京师千余里，若比上请得报，贼势张矣。
现代文：詹体仁告诫驻地军队统帅 ：这里离京师一千多里，如果等到向上面请示得到回音，敌人的势力已十分嚣张了。
English: Zhan Tizhen admonished the commander-in-chief of the resident army: here is more than a thousand miles away from the Beijing Division, if you wait until you get a response from the top, the enemy's forces have become very arrogant.

古文：宜速加诛讨。 帅用其言，群党悉散。
现代文：应立即加以讨伐。 统帅按照他的意见行事，乱党全部散去。
English: The general acted in accordance with his opinion, and all the ruffians dispersed.

古文：除太常少卿，陛对，首陈父子至恩之说，谓： 《易》于《家人》之后次之以《睽》，《睽》之上九曰： 见豕负涂，载鬼一车，先张之弧，后说之弧，匪寇婚媾，往，遇雨则吉。
现代文：詹体仁拜为太常少卿，他晋见光宗对话时，首先就陈述父子之间恩情至为深厚的道理，说： 《易经》在《家人卦》之后就是《睽卦》，《睽卦》的上九爻辞说： 见到满身是泥的猪，观到装满着鬼的一辆车子，先张开弓，又放下弓，因为不是敌人，却是亲家迎婚。前行，遇雨则吉祥。 
English: Zhan Ti Ren Bai was a too-frequent minor lord. When he met with Emperor Guangzong for a dialogue, he first stated the reason why the affection between father and son was so profound, saying: "The I Ching" after "Family Ties" is "The Tale of the Three Brothers." The last nine lines of "The Tale of the Three Brothers" say: Seeing a pig covered with mud, watching a car full of ghosts, first open the bow, and then put down the bow, because it is not an enemy, but a family wedding. Go forward, it is auspicious in the rain.

古文：夫疑极而惑，凡所见者皆以为寇，而不知实其亲也。
现代文：当人极度怀疑而至迷惑时，凡有所见都以为是敌人，却不知道其实是他们的亲人啊。
English: When people are extremely suspicious and confused, they think that anyone who sees them is their enemy, but they don't know that they are actually their relatives.

古文：孔子释之曰： 遇雨则吉，群疑亡也 。
现代文：孔子解释道： 遇雨则吉祥，是因为种种疑惑都没有了。 
English: Confucius explained: When it rains, it is auspicious, because all kinds of doubts are gone.

古文：盖人伦天理，有间隔而无断绝，方其未通也，湮郁烦愤，若不可以终日；及其醒然而悟，泮然而释，如遇雨焉，何其和悦而条畅也。
现代文：大体说来，人伦天理，会有隔阂却不会中断消失，当其正处在隔阂不通之时，人们就会心情不畅，郁闷烦乱，似乎难以终日，等到突然清醒明白，烦郁一下子消融释放，如遇霖雨，这是何等欢悦舒畅啊！
English: Generally speaking, it is human nature that there will be estrangement but it will not be interrupted and disappear. When it is in a state of estrangement, people will be in a bad mood, depressed and upset, it seems difficult to spend the whole day, until they suddenly wake up and understand, and the depression is suddenly dissolved and released, such as in case of rain, what a joy and comfort it is!

古文：伏惟陛下神心昭融，圣度恢豁，凡厥疑情，一朝涣然若揭日月而开云雾，丕叙彝伦，以承两宫之欢，以塞兆民之望 。
现代文：窃以为陛下神人之心光明融和，圣者之度恢宏豁达，所有怀疑之事，一朝涣然而解而有如拨开的雾，见及日月，好好地畅述天伦之情，以承接太上皇和皇太后的欢心，以满足亿万人民的期望。 
English: He thought that the hearts of His Majesty's gods and mortals were bright and harmonious, that the wisdom of the sages was magnificent and open-minded, that all doubts would be cleared away like a fog, that the sun and the moon would be seen, and that the feelings of the heavenly family would be well expressed, in order to inherit the goodwill of the Emperor and Empress Dowager, and to meet the expectations of hundreds of millions of people.

古文：时上以积疑成疾，久不过重华宫，故体仁引《易》睽弧之义，以开广圣意。
现代文：当时皇上因为心中疑虑成疾，很久没有到重华宫去看望孝宗，所以詹体仁引用《易》人与人相互离别孤独的经义，来开导宽解皇上的心。
English: At that time, the emperor did not go to Chonghua Palace for a long time to visit Xiaozong because of doubts in his heart, so Zhan Tianzhen quoted the "Yi" people to leave each other alone to enlighten and liberate the emperor's heart.

古文：孝宗崩，体仁率同列抗疏，请驾诣重华宫亲临祥祭，辞意恳切。
现代文：孝宗驾崩，詹体仁率领同僚上疏坚决反对光宗做出的决定，请皇上到重华宫亲自主持祭礼，其言辞十分恳切。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozong, Zhan Tizhen, led by his colleague Shang Shou, resolutely opposed the decision made by Emperor Guangzong and invited the emperor to personally hold the ceremony at Chonghua Palace. His words were very sincere.

古文：时赵汝愚将定大策，外庭无预谋者，密令体仁及左司郎官徐谊达意少保吴琚，请宪圣太后垂帘为援立计。
现代文：当时赵汝愚将要制定大策，外庭无人参加商议，赵汝愚密令詹体仁及左司郎官徐谊把意见传达给少保吴琚，请宪圣太后垂帘听政定下决策。
English: At that time, Zhao Rugu was about to formulate a major policy, and no one from the outer court participated in the deliberation. Zhao Rugu secretly ordered Zhan Tizhen and Zuo Si Lang official Xu Yi to convey their opinions to the Minor Protector Wu Xi, and asked the Empress Dowager Xian Sheng to listen to the political decision-making.

古文：宁宗登极，天下晏然，体仁与诸贤密赞汝愚之力也。
现代文：宁宗登位后，天下安定，詹体仁与各位贤者私下称赞赵汝愚做出了大贡献。
English: After Ningzong ascended the throne, the country was stable. Zhan Tizhen and all the sages privately praised Zhao Rugu for his great contribution.

古文：时议大行皇帝谥，体仁言： 寿皇圣帝事德寿二十余年，极天下之养，谅阴三年，不御常服，汉、唐以来未之有，宜谥曰 孝 。 卒用其言。
现代文：当时讨论大行皇帝谥号，詹体仁说： 寿皇圣帝事奉德寿皇二十多年，奉献了天下所能有的最好的奉养，居丧三年间，不穿常服，汉唐以来从未有过，应赠谥号 孝 。 
English: At that time, when discussing the emperor's posthumous name, Zhan Tizhen said: The holy Emperor Shouwang served the virtuous Emperor Shouwang for more than 20 years, and dedicated the best possible care to the world. During the three years of mourning, he did not wear ordinary clothes, which has never happened since the Han and Tang Dynasties. He should be given the posthumous name Xiao.

古文：孝宗将复土，体仁言： 永阜陵地势卑下，非所以妥安神灵。 与宰相异议，除太府卿。
现代文：最终采用了詹体仁的意见。孝宗将要被入殓，詹体仁说： 永阜陵地势低下，不能使神灵得以妥善安置。 詹体仁与宰相意见不同，被任命为太府卿。
English: In the end, the opinion of Zhan Tizhen was adopted. When Takamune was about to be enthroned, Zhan Tizhen said, "Yongfu Mausoleum is too low-lying for the gods to be properly enshrined." Zhan Tizhen disagreed with the prime minister and was appointed grand minister.

古文：寻直龙图阁、知福州，言者竟以前论山陵事罢之。
现代文：不久为直龙图阁、福州知州，言官竟由于他以前议论过山陵之事而罢免了他。
English: Not long after, in the case of Jialong Tuko and Fuzhou Zhizhou, the speaker dismissed him because he had previously discussed the matter of the mountain.

古文：退居霅川，日以经史自娱，人莫窥其际。
现代文：詹体仁退任后居住在較川，每天以经史自娱，人们没有能窥视到他的内心的。
English: After his retirement, Zhan Tizhen lived in Qiaochuan. He amused himself with the scriptures every day. People could not see into his heart.

古文：始，体仁使浙右，时苏师旦以胥吏执役，后倚侂胄躐跻大官，至是遣介通殷勤。
现代文：起初，詹体仁出使浙右，当时苏师旦以胥吏身份主管役事，后倚仗韩胄的势力跻身为大官，到这时他派人来献殷勤。
English: At first, Zhan Tizhen sent an envoy to Zhejiang. At that time, Su Shitan was in charge of the duties as a magistrate. Later, he relied on the power of Han Xuan to become a high-ranking official. At this time, he sent someone to entertain.

古文：体仁曰： 小人乘君子之器，祸至无日矣，乌得以污我！ 未几，果败。
现代文：詹体仁说： 小人得到天子的器重，其灾祸来到没有几日了，不要玷污了我。 不久，苏师旦果然失败。
English: Zhan Tizhen said: The villain has gained the weight of the son of heaven, and his calamity has not come for a few days, do not defile me. Soon, Su Shidan failed.

古文：复直龙图阁、知静江府，阁十县税钱一万四千，蠲杂赋八千。
现代文：詹体仁恢复直龙图阁、静江府知府之职，搁置十县税钱一万四千，蠲免杂赋八千。
English: Zhan Tizhen resumed the post of governor of Zhilong Tu Ge and Jingjiang Prefecture, and set aside 14,000 yuan in taxes from 10 counties and 8,000 yuan in miscellaneous subsidies.

古文：移守鄂州，除司农卿，复总湖广饷事。
现代文：詹体仁被任守鄂州，拜为司农卿，又任总湖广饷事之职。
English: Zhan Tizhen was appointed to guard Ezhou, to serve as the Secretary of Agriculture, and to serve as the head of Lake Guangyuan.

古文：时岁凶艰食，即以便宜发廪振捄而后以闻。
现代文：当时年成不好百姓难以吃饱，詹体仁不等请示，自做主张发放仓中粮食以赈济百姓，事情过后才报告皇上得知。
English: At that time, the poor harvest made it difficult for the people to have enough to eat. Zhan Tizhen did not wait for instructions, but made his own proposal to distribute the grain in the warehouse to help the people. The matter was only reported to the emperor after the event.

古文：侂胄建议开边，一时争谈兵以规进用。
现代文：韩胄建议扩大疆域，一时间大家争相谈论军事以谋求进升。
English: Han Zheng proposed to expand the territory. For a while, everyone was eager to talk about the military in order to seek advancement.

古文：体仁移书庙堂，言兵不可轻动，宜遵养俟时。
现代文：詹体仁上书给朝廷，说军队不可以轻举妄动，应养精蓄锐等待时机。
English: Zhan Tizhen sent a letter to the imperial court, saying that the army should not act rashly, but should keep up its energy and wait for the right time.

古文：皇甫斌自以将家子，好言兵，体仁语僚属，谓斌必败，已而果然。
现代文：皇甫斌自以为是将家之子，好谈兵，詹体仁与属下谈论时说他必定失败，结果果然如此。
English: Emperor Fubin thought of himself as the son of a general and a good conversationalist. When Zhan Tizhen talked with his subordinates, he said that he must fail, and the result was indeed so.

古文：开禧二年卒，年六十四。
现代文：开禧二年，詹体仁死去，终年六十四岁。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Zhan Tizhen died at the age of 64.

古文：体仁颖迈特立，博极群书。
现代文：詹体仁特别聪明勤勉，有超人之品行，又博览群书。
English: Zhan Tizhen is particularly clever and diligent, has superhuman morals, and is well-read.

古文：少从朱熹学，以存诚慎独为主。
现代文：少年时跟随朱熹学习，以心存良知、慎于独处时之所为为根本。
English: When he was a boy, he studied under Zhu Xi, and his fundamental principles were to keep a clear conscience and be careful about what he did when he was alone.

古文：为文明畅，悉根诸理。
现代文：写文章明白畅达，穷究各种道理。
English: Write articles clearly and smoothly, and thoroughly investigate all kinds of reasons.

古文：周必大当国，体仁尝疏荐三十余人，皆当世知名士。
现代文：周必大当政时，詹体仁曾上疏推荐了三十多个人，都是当时世上的知名士人。
English: When Zhou Bida was in power, Zhan Tizhen had recommended more than thirty people to Shangsuo, all of whom were famous scholars in the world at that time.

古文：郡人真德秀早从其游，尝问居官莅民之法，体仁曰： 尽心、平心而已，尽心则无愧，平心则无偏。 世服其确论云。
现代文：郡人刘德秀早年跟随他游历，曾问以居位治民之法，詹体仁说： 尽心、平心而已，尽心就心中无愧，平心就不会有偏袒。 世人信服他的言论正确。
English: Liu Dexiu, a resident of the county, traveled with him in his early years. He once asked Zhan Tizhen about the method of governing the people according to one's position. Zhan Tizhen said, "It's all about sincerity and equanimity. If you are sincere, your heart will not be ashamed. If you are not sincere, there will be no favoritism. The world is convinced that his words are correct.

