古文：马怀素，润州丹徒人也。
现代文：马怀素，润州丹徒人。
English: Ma Huai Su, a resident of Dantou, Rongzhou.

古文：寓居江都，少师事李善。
现代文：家住江都，年少时从师于李善。
English: He grew up in Jiangdu and studied under Li Shan when he was young.

古文：家贫无灯烛，昼采薪苏，夜燃读书，遂博览经史，善属文。
现代文：家境贫穷点不起灯，白天采集柴草，夜晚点燃用来看书，博览经史，擅长写文章。
English: His family was poor and couldn't afford a lamp, so he collected firewood and grass during the day and lit a fire at night to read books, read about history and was good at writing articles.

古文：举进士，又应制举，登文学优赡科，拜郿尉，四迁左台监察御史。
现代文：考取进士，又应考制举，荣登文字优赡科，提为尉，四次升迁为左台监察御史。
English: He passed the entrance examination, and was promoted according to the examination system. He was awarded the first place in the Department of Writing and Grammar, was promoted to lieutenant, and was promoted four times to the position of inspector of the left platform.

古文：长安中，御史大夫魏元忠为张易之所构，配徙岭表，太子仆崔贞慎、东宫率独孤祎之饯于郊外。
现代文：长安年中，御史大夫魏元忠被张易之诬陷，发配至岭表，太子仆崔贞慎、东宫率独孤之在郊外为之饯行。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an era, the imperial historian Wei Yuanzhong was framed by Zhang Yi and sent to the Ling table, while the prince's servant Cui Zhengshen and the Eastern Palace led the lonely in the suburbs.

古文：易之怒，使人诬告贞慎等与元忠同谋，则天令怀素按鞫，遣中使促迫，讽令构成其事，怀素执正不受命。
现代文：易之生气，派人诬告贞慎等人与元忠同谋，则天命令怀素审讯，并派遣中使催促，暗示使其构成罪，怀素刚正不受命。
English: When Yi became angry and sent someone to falsely accuse Zhengshen and others of being in cahoots with Yuanzhong, Heaven ordered Huai Su to be put on trial, and sent an envoy to urge him, implying that it constituted a crime. Huai Su did not accept the order.

古文：则天怒，召怀素亲加诘问，怀素奏曰： 元忠犯罪配流，贞慎等以亲故相送，诚为可责，若以为谋反，臣岂诬罔神明？
现代文：则天生气，诏见怀素亲自质问，怀素上奏说 ：元忠犯罪流放，贞慎等人以朋友亲情相送，确实可以责备，如果认为他们是谋反，我不就在欺骗神明吗？
English: The emperor was angry, and personally questioned Huai Su. Huai Su said, "It is true that I can reproach Yuan Zhong for his crime and exile, and Zhen Shan and others for sending their friends and relatives. If I thought they were plotting a rebellion, wouldn't I be cheating the gods?"

古文：昔彭越以反伏诛，栾布奏事于其尸下，汉朝不坐，况元忠罪非彭越，陛下岂加追送之罪。
现代文：当年彭越由于谋反被杀，栾布在其尸首旁上奏陈事，汉朝对他不定罪，况且元忠的罪和彭越不同，陛下怎么能追加罪状呢。
English: At that time, Peng Yue was killed as a result of plotting a rebellion, and the Han Dynasty did not convict him. Moreover, Yuan Zhong's crime was different from Peng Yue's, so how could His Majesty add additional charges?

古文：陛下当生杀之柄，欲加之罪，取决圣衷可矣。
现代文：陛下手握生死权力，若想追加其罪，这取决于圣上的心愿就可以了。
English: Your Majesty holds the power of life and death in your hands. If you want to add to your sins, it is up to your sacred will.

古文：若付臣推鞫，臣敢不守陛下之法？ 
现代文：如果托付给我审讯，我能敢不遵守陛下的法律吗？ 
English: If I am committed for trial, dare I disobey your majesty's law?

古文：则天意解，贞慎等由是获免。
现代文：则天明白其意，贞慎等人由此获免。
English: However, the heavens made their intentions clear, and Zhengshen and the others were thus spared.

古文：时夏官侍郎李迥秀恃张易之之势，受纳货贿，怀素奏劾之，迥秀遂罢知政事。
现代文：当时夏官侍郎李迥秀倚仗张易之的权势，接受贿赂，怀素上奏请求将其弹劾，迥秀于是被罢免官职。
English: At that time, Li Yuxiu, the summer official's valet, relied on Zhang Yizhi's power, accepted bribes, and secretly petitioned for his impeachment. As a result, Yuxiu was removed from office.

古文：怀素累转礼部员外郎，与源乾曜、卢怀慎、李杰等充十道黜陟使。
现代文：怀素多次升为礼部员外郎，与源乾曜、卢怀慎、李杰等人充任十道黜陟使。
English: Huai Su was promoted several times to the position of a member of the etiquette club, and he served as an envoy of the Ten Precepts along with Yuan Qianyou, Lu Huai Shen, Li Jie and others.

古文：怀素处事平恕，当时称之。
现代文：怀素处事公平宽待，为当时人所称道。
English: At that time, he was known for his fair and lenient treatment of people.

古文：使还，迁考功员外郎。
现代文：使令完成归来，升为考功员外郎。
English: He was ordered to complete his return, and was promoted to the rank of kakunin gairo.

古文：时贵戚纵恣，请托公行，怀素无所阿顺，典举平允，擢拜中书舍人。
现代文：当时达官贵戚恣情放纵，互相推诿职责公然进行，怀素无所阿谀逢迎，处事公平得当，提升为中书舍人。
English: At that time, high-ranking officials and their relatives indulged in arbitrary indulgence, shirked their responsibilities openly, had nothing to apologize for, handled things fairly, and were promoted to the position of middle school students.

古文：开元初，为户部侍郎，加银青光禄大夫，累封常山县公，三迁秘书监，兼昭文馆学士。
现代文：开元初年，为户部侍郎，加银青光禄大夫，多次封为常山县公，多次提升为秘书监，兼昭文馆学士。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he served as the head of the Household Department, and was awarded the silver medal and the doctor's degree of Qingguanglu. He was repeatedly appointed as the public official of Changshan County, and was promoted to the superintendent of secretaries several times. He was also a scholar of the Shou Library.

古文：怀素虽居吏职，而笃学，手不释卷，谦恭谨慎，深为玄宗所礼，令与左散骑常侍褚无量同为侍读。
现代文：怀素虽然身居吏职，却非常喜爱学习，手不释卷，谦恭谨慎，极为玄宗所尊敬，令其与左散常侍褚无量一起作为侍读。
English: Although Huai Su was an official, he loved to study very much. He kept his hand on the scroll, was humble and cautious, and was highly respected by Xuanzong, so that he and Zuo San often served as attendants together.

古文：每次阁门，则令乘肩舆以进。
现代文：每次从旁门进来，都要他们坐着大轿。
English: Every time they came in through the side door, they had to ride in a large sedan.

古文：上居别馆，以路远，则命宫中乘马，或亲自送迎，以申师资之礼。
现代文：皇上居住在别馆，由于路远，则令可在宫中乘马，有时候亲自送迎，以表尊师之礼。
English: The emperor lived in a separate building, but because of the distance, he was allowed to ride a horse in the palace, and sometimes he personally greeted them, as a sign of respect.

古文：是时秘书省典籍散落，条疏无叙，怀素上疏曰： 南齐已前坟籍，旧编王俭《七志》。
现代文：这时秘书省的典籍散落，条目无法叙述，怀素上疏说： 南齐以前的典籍已埋入土里，王俭编的《七志》很陈旧。
English: At this time, the secretary of the classic books of the province were scattered, the items could not be described, and he said carelessly: The classic books before Nanqi have been buried in the soil, and the "Seven Stories" compiled by Wang Jian is very old.

古文：已后著述，其数盈多，《隋志》所书，亦未详悉。
现代文：以后的著述，数量很多，也未必详悉。
English: Subsequent writings, many in number, are also not necessarily detailed.

古文：或古书近出，前志阙而未编；或近人相传，浮词鄙而犹记。
现代文：近来发行的有些书，以前史志缺乏的又没有编入，有些是近人相传，浮词浅鄙却还记载。
English: Some of the books that have been published recently have not been compiled into the history books that were previously lacking, and some have been passed down from generation to generation, but they are still recorded.

古文：若无编录，难辩淄、渑。
现代文：如果不编录，则难辩淄、渑。
English: If it is not catalogued, it is difficult to discuss.

古文：初，无量与马怀素俱为侍读，顾待甚厚；及无量等卒后，秘书少监康子原、国子博士侯行果等又入侍讲，虽屡加赏赐，而礼遇不逮褚焉。
现代文：希望括减近来书籍的篇目，增入以前史志所遗缺的，续编王俭的《七志》，将其珍藏在秘府。 皇上于是诏令研究此方面的学者国子博士尹知章等人，分部撰写，并且刊正经史，粗创首尾。
English: Hoping to reduce the number of chapters of recent books and add the sequel to Wang Jian's "Seven Histories," which was previously missing from the historical record, and to preserve it in a secret place, the emperor ordered the scholar Dr. Kuniko Yin Zhizhang and others, who studied this area, to write a section and publish it as a historical record, roughly creating the beginning and the end.

古文：刘子玄，本名知几，楚州刺史胤之族孙也。
现代文：此时怀素病死，年龄六十岁，皇上特意为他举哀，停止上朝一天，赠予润州刺史，谥号文。刘子玄，原名知几，楚州刺史刘胤之的族孙。
English: At this time, Huai Su died of illness, at the age of sixty, the emperor specially mourned for him, stopped the last day of the morning, and presented the Renshu sashimi, nickname Wen. Liu Zi Xuan, originally known as Chi Chi, was the grandson of the Chuzhou sashimi Liu Yanzhi.

古文：少与兄知柔俱以词学知名，弱冠举进士，授获嘉主簿。
现代文：年少时与兄知柔都以擅长词学著名，二十岁考取进士，被封为获嘉主簿。
English: When she was young, she and her brother Chiro were both famous for their proficiency in lexicography. At the age of twenty, she passed the entrance examination and was awarded a master's degree.

古文：证圣年，有制文武九品已上各言时政得失，知几上表陈四事，词甚切直。
现代文：证圣初年，朝廷令九品以上的文武官员谈时政得失，知几上书陈述四事，语词非常恳切率直。
English: In the first year of the enthronement ceremony, the imperial court ordered the civil and military officials of nine grades and above to talk about the gains and losses of politics at the time, and to report four things in writing. The words were very sincere and straightforward.

古文：是时官爵僭滥而法网严密，士类竞为趋进而多陷刑戮，知几乃著《思慎赋》以刺时，且以见意。
现代文：当时官场虚假而法网严密，读书人竞相趋进却多遭杀害，知几于是著《思慎赋》，针贬时弊，表述见解。
English: At that time, the officialdom was false and the legal network was strict, and readers competed to enter but were mostly killed. Therefore, Zhiquan wrote "Thoughtful Fu," pointing out the shortcomings of the times and expressing opinions.

古文：凤阁侍郎苏味道、李峤见而叹曰： 陆机《豪士》所不及也。 
现代文：凤阁侍郎苏味道、李峤读了《思慎赋》后高兴地说： 陆机《豪士》怕不及也。 
English: Fengge's waiter, Su Ji, said happily after Li Yao read "Thoughtful Feeding": "I can't be afraid of the land machine" Hero. "

古文：知几长安中累迁左史，兼修国史。
现代文：知几在长安多次升迁为左史，兼撰写国史。
English: Zhiqian was promoted many times in Chang'an to become a left historian, and also wrote a national history.

古文：擢拜凤阁舍人，修史如故。
现代文：升为凤阁舍人，依旧著史。
English: He was promoted to the position of Fengge villager and continued to write history.

古文：至忠惜其才，不许解史任。
现代文：至忠怜惜知几的才学，不同意解除史任。
English: The most loyal, the most compassionate, the most knowledgeable, do not agree with the removal of Shi Rong.

古文：宗楚客嫉其正直，谓诸史官曰： 此人作书如是，欲置我何地！ 
现代文：宗楚客嫉妒知几的正直，对各位史官说 ：此人著书如此这般，想置我于何地？ 
English: The Zongchu guest envied the honesty of Zhiqiu and said to the historians, "This man wrote such and such a book, where do you want to put me?"

古文：时知几又著《史通子》二十卷，备论史策之体。
现代文：当时知几又著《史通子》二十卷，充分阐述史策的体裁。
English: At that time, Zhiqian also wrote 20 volumes of "Historian's Son," fully expounding the genre of historiography.

古文：太子右庶子徐坚深重其书，尝云： 居史职者，宜置此书于座右。 
现代文：太子右庶子徐坚非常看重这本书，曾经说： 任史职的人，应该将此书放置座右。 
English: The prince's son-in-law Xu Jian attaches great importance to this book. He once said, "Those who hold the post of historian should place this book on the right.

古文：知几自负史才，常慨时无知己，乃委国史于著作郎吴兢，别撰《刘氏家史》十五卷、《谱考》三卷。
现代文：知几自负史才，常常慨叹时代无知己，于是将国史委托给著作郎吴兢，自己另外撰写《刘氏家史》十五卷、《谱考》三卷。
English: He often lamented the ignorance of the times, so he entrusted the national history to the author Lang Wu Jing, and he also wrote "Liu Family History" in 15 volumes and "Commentary" in 3 volumes.

古文：推汉氏为陆终苗裔，非尧之后。
现代文：推究汉氏为陆终的后代，不是尧的后代。
English: It is inferred that the Han family is the offspring of the Lu family, not the descendants of the Yao family.

古文：彭城丛亭里诸刘，出自宣帝子楚孝王嚣曾孙司徒居巢侯刘恺之后，不承楚元王交。
现代文：彭城、丛亭里诸刘，是宣帝的儿子楚孝王器的曾孙司徒居巢侯刘恺的后代，不是接续楚元王交。
English: Pengcheng and Zhu Liu in the cluster of pavilions are the descendants of the great-grandson of Emperor Xuan's son, Prince Zhu Xiaowang, Prince Liu Xuan, not the continuation of King Chuyuan.

古文：皆按据明白，正前代所误，虽为流俗所讥，学者服其该博。
现代文：都考察明白，纠正了前代的错误，虽然被一般人所讥讽，但学者佩服他的博学。
English: Although he was ridiculed by the general public, scholars admired his erudition.

古文：初，知几每云若得受封，必以居巢为名，以绍司徒旧邑；后以修《则天实录》功，果封居巢县子。
现代文：起初，知几经常说如果得以受封，一定用居巢作为名字，用来接续司徒家族；后来因修《则天实录》有功，果然被封为居巢县子。
English: At first, Zhiqian often said that if he was given the title, he would definitely use Jiuye as a name to succeed the Szeto family; later, he was awarded the title of Jiuye County Son due to his contribution to the compilation of "Zhe Tian Shi Lu."

古文：又乡人以知几兄弟六人进士及第，文学知名，改其乡里为高阳乡居巢里。
现代文：又乡人因为知几兄弟六人考取进士，文章学问著名，改他们所在的乡里名为高阳乡居巢里。
English: The villagers also changed the name of their village to Gaoyang Township because six brothers from the village had passed the entrance examination and were well-known for their literature and culture.

古文：臣怀此异议，其来自久，日不暇给，未及搉杨。
现代文：景云中，知几多次升太子左庶子，兼崇文馆学士，仍旧修国史，加封银青光禄大夫。
English: In Jingyun, Zhiqian was repeatedly promoted to the left child of the crown prince, and was also a bachelor of the Chongwen Academy. He still studied national history, and was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：今属殿下亲从齿胄，将临国学，凡有衣冠乘马，皆惮此行，所以辄进狂言，用申鄙见。皇太子手令付外宣行，仍编入令，以为常式。
现代文：当时玄宗在东宫，知几因姓名音读类似皇上的名字，于是改名为子玄。第二年，皇太子准备亲自定位于国学，有司起草礼节记载，使随从臣子都乘马着衣戴帽，子玄进言。皇太子手令付外公开执行，仍然编入命令，定为常规。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong was in the East Palace. He changed his name to Emperor Zi Xuan because the pronunciation of his name was similar to that of the emperor. The following year, when the crown prince was preparing to study Chinese classics in person, a secretary drafted a record of etiquette, so that the attendant courtiers were all wearing clothes and hats, and Emperor Zi Xuan gave a speech. The execution of the crown prince's order was made public, and it was still compiled into an order, making it a regular practice.

古文：开元初，迁左散骑常侍，修史如故。
现代文：开元初年，子玄升为左散骑常侍，修史依旧。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, Zi Xuan Sheng became a left-handed riding attendant, and the revision of history remained the same.

古文：九年，长子贶为太乐令，犯事配流。
现代文：九年，长子贶为太乐令，触犯刑律被发配流放。
English: In the ninth year, the eldest son, Yu, was sentenced to exile for violating the Criminal Law.

古文：子玄诣执政诉理，上闻而怒之，由是贬授安州都督府别驾。
现代文：子玄命令主持政事者诉说道理，皇上知道了非常生气，于是降子玄为安州都督。
English: Zi Xuan ordered the presiding politician to appeal to the emperor. The emperor was very angry when he found out, so he demoted Zi Xuan to the position of Anzhou governor.

古文：子玄掌知国史，首尾二十馀年，多所撰述，甚为当时所称。
现代文：子玄主管国史，前前后后二十多年，撰述很多，颇为当时人所称道。
English: Zi Xuan was in charge of national history for more than 20 years and wrote a lot, which was quite praised by people at the time.

古文：礼部尚书郑惟忠尝问子玄曰： 自古已来，文士多而史才少，何也？ 
现代文：礼部尚书郑惟忠曾经问子玄 ：自古以来，文士多而史才少，为什么？ 
English: Zheng Weizhong once asked Zixuan: Since ancient times, there have been more scribes and fewer historians. Why?

古文：对曰： 史才须有三长，世无其人，故史才少也。
现代文：子玄回答说 ：史才必须具备三个长处，世上没有这样的人，所以史才少。
English: Zi Xuan replied, "To be a historian, you must have three strengths. There are no such people in the world, so there are few historians."

古文：三长：谓才也，学也，识也。
现代文：三个长处：称之为才、学、识。
English: Three strengths: call them talent, learning and knowledge.

古文：夫有学而无才，亦犹有良田百顷，黄金满籝，而使愚者营生，终不能致于货殖者矣。
现代文：有学而无才，也就如有良田万顷，黄金满鬭，却让愚蠢的人经营，最终不能成为经商的人。
English: If a man has learning but no talent, just as if a man has a thousand acres of good farmland and a pot of gold, but he lets a stupid man manage it, in the end he cannot become a man of business.

古文：如有才而无学，亦犹思兼匠石，巧若公输，而家无楩楠斧斤，终不果成其宫室者矣。
现代文：如果有才而无学，就好比想着木料石头，像公输一样能干，但家中没有木便木冉斧斤，最终不能成为建造宫室的人。
English: If you have talent but no learning, it is like thinking about wood and stone. You are as capable as a civil engineer, but you do not have wood and stone at home, and ultimately you cannot become a person who builds a palace.

古文：犹须好是正直，善恶必书，使骄主贼臣，所以知惧，此则为虎傅翼，善无可知，所向无敌者矣。
现代文：史才还要应是正直，善恶都写，使骄主贼臣，因此知道害怕，这就如虎添翼，善无可加，所向无敌了。
English: History should also be honest, good and evil should be written, so that arrogant masters and thieves should be afraid. This is like adding wings to a tiger, adding nothing to the good, and becoming invincible.

古文：脱苟非其才，不可叨居史任。
现代文：如果没有这些才能，不能担任史任。
English: If you don't have these talents, you can't serve as a historian.

古文：自夐古已来，能应斯目者，罕见其人。 
现代文：自古以来，能符合这些条件的人很少见。 
English: Since ancient times, people who can meet these conditions are rare.

古文：时人以为知言。
现代文：当时人们认为这是聪明之言。
English: At the time, people thought it was a clever thing to say.

古文：子玄至安州，无几而卒，年六十一。
现代文：子玄到安州，没有几年就去世了，享年六十一岁。
English: Zixuan went to Anzhou, and died within a few years, at the age of sixty-one.

古文：自幼及长，述作不倦，朝有论著，必居其职。
现代文：子玄自小到老，著述作文从不倦怠，朝拜皇上时有论著，一定被授官职。
English: From childhood to old age, Zi Xuan never tired of writing essays. When he worshipped the emperor, he wrote essays, and he was certainly awarded official posts.

古文：预修《三教珠英》、《文馆词林》、《姓族系录》，论《孝经》非郑玄注、《老子》河上公注，修《唐书实录》，皆行于代，有集三十卷。
现代文：子玄准备撰写《三教珠莫》、《文馆词林》、《姓族系录》，阐述《孝经》不是郑玄注释、《老子》不是河上公注释，撰写《唐书实录》，有文集三十卷。
English: Zi Xuan is preparing to write "Three Teachings of Zhu Mo," "The Literature Library's Thesaurus" and "The Genealogy of Surnames and Families," to explain that "The Book of Filial Piety" is not Zheng Xuan's commentary, "Lao Zi" is not He Shanggong's commentary, and to write "The Tang Book Record," which has 30 volumes of essays.

古文：坚父子以词学著闻，议者方之汉世班氏。
现代文：数年后，玄宗下令河南府有学识者写《史通》进献，玄宗读了认为子玄的著述很好，追封子玄为汲郡太守，后又追封工部尚书，谥号文。
English: A few years later, Xuanzong ordered scholars in Henan Province to write "History" as a contribution. Xuanzong read it and thought that Zi Xuan's writings were very good. He appointed Zi Xuan as the governor of Ku County. Later, he also appointed Shang Shu from the Ministry of Industry and Commerce as the second-ranked scholar.

古文：元行冲，河南人，后魏常山王素连之后也。
现代文：元行冲，河南人，后魏常山王素连的后代。
English: Yuan Xingchong, a native of Henan Province, was a descendant of King Su Lian of Changshan in the late Wei Dynasty.

古文：少孤，为外祖司农卿韦机所养。
现代文：少年时死了双亲，为外祖司农卿韦机抚养。
English: When he was a boy, his parents died, and he was raised by his maternal grandfather, Wei Jiao, the Minister of Agriculture.

古文：博学多通，尤善音律及诂训之书。
现代文：博闻多学，尤其擅长音律和训诂的写作。
English: He is well-versed in many subjects, and is particularly good at writing music and chanting.

古文：举进士，累转通事舍人，纳言狄仁杰甚重之。
现代文：考取进士，多次转为通事舍人，狄仁杰非常器重他。
English: After he passed the entrance examination for cadets, Di Renjie paid much attention to him.

古文：行冲性不阿顺，多进规诫，尝谓仁杰曰： 下之事上，亦犹蓄聚以自资也。
现代文：元行冲性情耿直，多次进言规诫，曾经对仁杰说 ：下奉事上，就好比用自己积蓄来充实皇上的积蓄。
English: Yuan Xingchong had a straightforward disposition and repeatedly gave advice and admonition. He once said to Renjie: "In terms of service, it is like using one's own savings to enrich the emperor's savings."

古文：譬贵家储积，则脯腊膎胰以供滋膳，参术芝桂以防疴疾。
现代文：如贵家的积蓄，脯腊月奚胰作为饭食用，参术芝精作为预防疾病用。
English: Such as your family's savings, Ganoderma lucidum can be eaten as a meal, and Ganoderma lucidum extract can be used to prevent diseases.

古文：伏想门下宾客，堪充旨味者多，愿以小人备一药物。 
现代文：我想门下宾客，可以充作好味者多，希望用小人备做一种药物。 
English: I think there are many guests at the door who can serve as good taste, hoping to use villains to prepare a drug.

古文：仁杰笑而谓人曰： 此吾药笼中物，何可一日无也！ 
现代文：仁杰笑着说 ：这是我的药中宠物，怎么可以一日没有呢？ 
English: Renjie smiled and said, "This is my medicine pet, how can I go a day without it?"

古文：九迁至陕州刺史，兼陇右、关内两道按察使，未行，拜太常少卿。
现代文：九次迁为陕州刺史，兼陇右、关内两道按察使，又授予太常少卿。
English: He was transferred nine times to serve as the Shaanxi Provincial Historian, and also served as the inspector of the two provinces of Guanzhong and Guanzhong, and was also awarded the title of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：行冲以本族出于后魏，而未有编年之史，乃撰《魏典》三十卷，事详文简，为学者所称。
现代文：元行冲认为本族出于后魏，但没有编年史，于是撰写《魏典》三十卷，事情详细而文笔简练，为学者称道。
English: Yuan Xingchong believed that his people came from the late Wei Dynasty, but did not have a chronicle, so he wrote "Weijing" thirty volumes, detailed and concise, praised as a scholar.

古文：初魏明帝时，河西柳谷瑞石有牛继马后之象，魏收旧史以为晋元帝是牛氏之子，冒姓司马，以应石文。
现代文：初魏明帝时，河西柳谷瑞石有牛跟在马后的形象，魏收旧史认为晋元帝是牛氏的后代，冒姓司马，用来应证石文。
English: At the beginning of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, there was an image of a cow following a horse in Ruishi, Liugu, Hexi Province. The Wei and Qi dynasties believed that Emperor Jin Yuan was a descendant of the cow family, and used the name Sima to correspond to the stone inscription.

古文：行冲推寻事迹，以后魏昭成帝名犍，继晋受命，考校谣谶，著论以明之。
现代文：行冲追根究底，认为后魏昭成帝名犍，继晋元帝后受命，考正谣谶，特著论以明确这件事。
English: He went to the root of the matter and thought that Emperor Wei Zhaochen was famous, and Emperor Jin Yuan was ordered to correct the rumor and write a special book to clarify the matter.

古文：开元初，自太子詹事出为岐州刺史，又充关内道按察使。
现代文：开元初年，自太子詹事出朝任岐州刺史，又充任关内道按察使。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, since the prince Zhan Ji came to the imperial court, he was appointed as the governor of Qizhou, and also served as the inspector of Guanai Road.

古文：行冲自以书生不堪博击之任，固辞按察，乃以宁州刺史崔琬代焉。
现代文：行冲自己认为书生不可以担负搏击责任，因此辞去按察使。让宁州刺史崔琬代替。
English: Xingchong himself thought that the scholar could not bear the responsibility of fighting, so he resigned as an inspector. Let Ningzhou Zhi Shi Cui Lu replace him.

古文：俄复入为右散骑常侍、东都副留守。
现代文：不久又入朝为右散骑常侍、东都副留守。
English: Soon after, he entered the imperial court as an attendant of the right sanshaku, while the deputy attendant of the eastern capital was absent.

古文：时嗣彭王志柬庶兄志谦被人诬告谋反，考讯自诬，系狱待报，连坐十数人，行冲察其冤滥，并奏原之。
现代文：当时嗣彭王志目柬同父异母的哥哥志谦被人诬告谋反，审问之下，被迫承认了自己的不实之罪，就关进狱中等待判罪，十多人受牵连，行冲察明此事是冤案，一起将原情上奏。
English: At that time, Peng Wang Zhimekam's half-brother Zhi Qian was falsely accused of plotting rebellion. Under interrogation, he was forced to admit his false guilt and was put in prison to await sentencing. More than a dozen people were implicated. They rushed to find out that the matter was a wrongful case and reported the original situation together.

古文：四迁大理卿。
现代文：四次迁为大理卿。
English: He was transferred four times to become the Lord of Dali.

古文：时扬州长史李杰为侍御史王旭所陷，诏下大理结罪，行冲以杰历政清贞，不宜枉为谗邪所构，又奏请从轻条出之。
现代文：当时扬州长史李杰遭侍御史王旭陷害，皇上命令由大理卿评判，行冲认为李杰从政期间清白正直，不应该白白地被谗言陷害，又上奏请求按分列条目来从轻处理。
English: At that time, the Yang governor Shi Li Jie was framed by the attendant Shi Wang Xu. The emperor ordered that the case be judged by Dali Sir. Xing Chong believed that Li Jie was innocent and honest during his political career, and should not be framed in vain. He also requested that the case be handled lightly according to the itemized list.

古文：当时虽不见从，深为时论所美。
现代文：当时虽不被采纳，却深为一时的舆论所赞誉。
English: Although it was not adopted at the time, it was highly praised by public opinion.

古文：俄又固辞刑狱之官，求为散职。
现代文：不久又坚持辞去刑狱官，求为散职。
English: Soon he insisted on resigning as a correctional officer and asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：七年，复转左散骑常侍。
现代文：七年，又转为左散骑常侍。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the Left Riding Stable.

古文：九迁国子祭酒，月馀，拜太子宾客、弘文馆学士。
现代文：九次迁为国子祭酒，一月后，被授予太子宾客、弘文馆学士。
English: Nine times it was moved to the Kuniko Matsuri, and one month later, it was awarded the Prince Guest and the Kobunkan Bachelor.

古文：累封常山郡公。
现代文：多次被封为常山郡公。
English: He was made the Lord of Changshan County several times.

古文：先是，秘书监马怀素集学者续王俭《今书七志》，左散骑常侍褚无量于丽正殿校写四部书，事未就而怀素、无量卒，诏行冲总代其职。
现代文：先时，秘书监马怀素召集学者来接续王俭的《今书七志》，左散骑常侍褚无量在丽正殿校写四部书，事未成而马怀素、诸无量就死了，皇上下令行冲总代其职。
English: Previously, the secretary supervisor Ma Huai Su had summoned scholars to continue Wang Qian's "Seven Stories of This Book," and the left rider, the constant attendant, Miao Miao, had written four books at the Lizheng Hall. However, Ma Huai Su and Zhu Miao died before the work was completed, and the Emperor's subordinate commander, Xing Chong, took over his duties.

古文：于是行冲表请通撰古今书目，名为《群书四录》，命学士鄠县尉毋煚、栎阳尉韦述、曹州司法参军殷践猷、太学助教余钦等分部修检，岁馀书成，奏上，上嘉之。
现代文：于是行冲上表请求通撰古今书目，名为《群书四录》，命学士县尉毋、栎阳尉韦述、曹州司法参军殿践猷、太学助教余钦等分部修检，一年多后书成，献给皇上。
English: So, he went to the table and requested to compile a complete ancient and modern bibliography, called the "Four Records of Books," which included the revision of the following sections: County Lieutenant, Shenyang Lieutenant, Wei Shu, Caozhou Judicial and Military Hall, and Taigaku Assistant Professor Yu Qin. It was written more than a year later and dedicated to the emperor.

古文：又特令行冲撰御所注《孝经》疏义，列于学官。
现代文：皇上又特令行冲撰御所注《孝经》疏义，在学馆陈列。
English: The emperor also ordered Gyocho to compile a summary of the "Filial Piety" annotated by the emperor, and display it at the school.

古文：寻以衰老罢知丽正殿校写书事。
现代文：不久因为衰老缘故停止主持丽正殿校写书的事务。
English: Soon, because of aging, he stopped presiding over the business of writing books for Lizheng Hall School.

古文：初，有左卫率府长史魏光乘奏请行用魏征所注《类礼》，上遽令行冲集学者撰《义疏》，将立学官。
现代文：当初，有左卫率府长史魏光乘上奏请求通用魏征所注《类礼》，皇上即令行冲召集学者撰写《义疏》，准备陈列在学馆。
English: At the beginning, there was a request for the general use of the "Classification of Rites" noted by Wei Zheng, and the Emperor ordered Xing Chong to convene scholars to write "Yisiao" and prepare to display it in the school.

古文：行冲于是引国子博士范行恭、四门助教施敬本检讨刊削，勒成五十卷，十四年八月奏上之。
现代文：行冲于是召引国子博士范行恭、四门助教施敬本研讨削减，缩成五十卷，十四年八月献给皇上。
English: Therefore, Guochong summoned Dr. Guo Zi, Dr. Fan Xingqiong, and four assistant professors Shi Jing to reduce the study and shrink it into fifty volumes, which were dedicated to the emperor in August 14th.

古文：尚书左丞相张说驳奏曰： 今之《礼记》，是前汉戴德、戴圣所编录，历代传习，已向千年，著为经教，不可刊削。
现代文：尚书左丞相张说反驳说： 今天的《礼记》，是前汉戴德、戴圣编录，历代传习，已近千年，为经典著作，不可刊削。
English: Shangshu Zuoxiao Zhang said and countered: Today's "Rites and Rituals" is the former Han Dai De and Dai Sheng compilation, which has been passed down through the ages for nearly a thousand years. It is a classic work and cannot be edited.

古文：至魏孙炎始改旧本，以类相比，有同抄书，先儒所非，竟不行用。
现代文：到了魏代孙炎开始改旧本，以类相比，有同抄书，与先人所编的不同，终究没有采用。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Sun Yat-sen began to revise the old version, and compared with the class, there was a copy of the same book, which was different from that compiled by the predecessors. After all, it was not adopted.

古文：贞观中，魏征因孙炎所修，更加整比，兼为之注，先朝虽厚加赏锡，其书竟亦不行。
现代文：贞观年中，魏征根据孙炎所致，使之更加有秩序，并为之注解，先朝虽厚加赏赐，但书终究也不予采用。
English: In the middle of the Zhenguan year, Wei Zheng made it more orderly according to the rise of Sun Yat-sen, and annotated it. Although the first dynasty rewarded it heavily, the book was not adopted after all.

古文：何遽持一己之区区，抗群情之噂沓褷，舍勿矜之美，成自我之私，触近名之诫，兴犯众之祸？
现代文：现在行冲等人去除魏征所做注解，缩成一家，然而与先人比较，章句隔绝，如果要采用，我担心不行。 
English: Now, Xingchong and others have removed the annotation made by Wei Zheng and shrunk into a family, but compared with their predecessors, the chapters are isolated. If they want to adopt it, I'm afraid they can't.

古文：一举四失，中材不为，是用韬声，甘此沉默也。 行冲俄又累表请致仕，制许之。
现代文：皇上认为张说是对的，于是赐给行冲等人二百匹绢，将书贮存在内府，最终不得在学馆陈列。行冲不满众儒排挤自己，辞去官职，著论以排解郁闷，名为《释疑》。
English: The emperor thought Zhang was right, so he gave 200 horses to Xing Chong and others, stored the books in the inner palace, and ultimately was not allowed to display them in the school hall. Xing Chong was dissatisfied with the crowd of Confucians crowding him out, resigned from his official post, and wrote a treatise on how to resolve depression, called "Dispute Resolution."

古文：十七年卒，年七十七，赠礼部尚书，谥曰献。
现代文：元行冲不久又多次上书请求做官，皇上应允了。十七年逝世，终年七十七岁，追封礼部尚书，谥号叫献。
English: Soon after, Yuan Xingchong repeatedly petitioned to be made an official, and the emperor agreed. He died at the age of seventy-seven in 17 and was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Ceremonies. His posthumous name was Xian.

古文：吴兢，汴州浚仪人也。
现代文：吴兢，汴州浚仪人。
English: Wu Jing, a member of the Bozhou Dredging Team.

古文：励志勤学，博通经史。
现代文：励志勤学，博通经史。
English: Dedication to study diligently, broad knowledge of history.

古文：宋州人魏元忠、亳州人硃敬则深器重之，及居相辅，荐兢有史才，堪居近侍，因令直史馆，修国史。
现代文：宋州人魏元忠、亳州人朱敬则十分器重吴兢，等到居相辅位，推荐吴兢有史才，可以居近侍，于是使他任直史馆，撰写国史。
English: Song State's Wei Yuanzhong and Zhangzhou's Zhu Jing were very fond of Wu Jing, and when they were in a complementary position, they recommended that Wu Jing had historical talent and could be a close attendant, so he was appointed to the direct history museum to write national history.

古文：累月，拜右拾遗内供奉。
现代文：几个月后，授予右拾遗内供奉。
English: A few months later, he was awarded the Right Reverence Award.

古文：神龙中，迁右补阙，与韦承庆、崔融、刘子玄撰《则天实录》成，转起居郎。
现代文：神龙二年，升右补阙，与韦承庆、崔融、刘子玄一起撰写《则天实录》成功，转为起居郎。
English: In the second year of the Dragon God, he was promoted to the post of right supplement, and together with Wei Chengqing, Cui Rong and Liu Zi Xuan, he successfully wrote "Zetian Shih Lu" and became a kijiro.

古文：俄迁水部郎中，丁忧还乡里。
现代文：不久升水部郎中，遭逢父母丧事返回乡里。
English: Soon after, he became a junior water minister, but was forced to return to the countryside when his parents died.

古文：开元三年服阕，抗疏言曰： 臣修史已成数十卷，自停职还家，匪忘纸札，乞终馀功。 
现代文：开元三年，停止服丧，上奏给皇帝说： 我修史已完成数十卷，自从停职还家，不忘纸札，请求继续完成剩下的工作。 
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he stopped mourning and reported to the emperor: I have completed dozens of volumes of revision of history. Since returning home from suspension, I have not forgotten the piece of paper and asked to continue to complete the remaining work.

古文：乃拜谏议大夫，依前修史。
现代文：于是授予谏议大夫，依照从前撰写国史。
English: Therefore, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Legislation and wrote the history of the country in accordance with the past.

古文：俄兼修文馆学士，历卫少卿、右庶子。
现代文：不久兼修文馆学士，经历卫尉少卿、左庶子等职。
English: Soon, he also completed a bachelor's degree at the Academy of Literature, and experienced the positions of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, Junior Secretary of the Imperial Guards, and bastard son of the left.

古文：居职殆三十年，叙事简要，人用称之。
现代文：居职将近三十年，撰书叙事简明扼要，人们使用时称道他。
English: He has been in office for nearly three decades, and people praise him when he writes a concise narrative.

古文：末年伤于太简。
现代文：末年伤于叙事过于简略，《国史》未修成。
English: Towards the end of his life, he was hurt by the fact that the narrative was too brief and the "National History" was not completed.

古文：《国史》未成，十七年，出为荆州司马，制许以史稿自随。
现代文：十七年，出任荆州司马，皇帝诏令允许将史稿自己带走。
English: In the seventeenth year, he served as Jingzhou Sima, and the emperor's edict allowed him to take the historical manuscript away with him.

古文：中书令萧嵩监修国史，奏取兢所撰《国史》，得六十五卷。
现代文：中书令肖嵩监修国史，上奏拿取吴兢撰写的《国史》，得到六十五卷。
English: Xiao Song supervised the revision of the history of the country, and Wu Jing's "History of the Country" was selected for publication, resulting in sixty-five volumes.

古文：累迁台、洪、饶、蕲四州刺史，加银青光禄大夫，迁相州长垣县子。
现代文：多次升台、洪、饶、蕲四州刺史，加封银青光禄大夫，升相州长史，封襄垣县子。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the four prefectures of Taizhou, Hong, Rao and Handan. He was also awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, promoted to prefectural governor, and awarded the title of Xiangyuan son.

古文：天宝初改官名，为鄴郡太守，入为恆王傅。
现代文：天宝初年改官名，为邺郡太守，入朝任恒王傅。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he changed his official name to the governor of Qi County, and entered the imperial court as Prince Heng Fu.

古文：兢尝以梁、陈、齐、周、隋五代史繁杂，乃别撰《梁》、《齐》、《周史》各十卷、《陈史》五卷、《隋史》二十卷，又伤疏略。
现代文：吴兢曾经认为梁、陈、齐、周、隋五代史繁杂，于是另外撰写梁、齐、周史各十卷、《陈史》五卷、《隋史》二十卷，又由于太简略受到损害。
English: Wu Jing once thought that the history of the five dynasties of Liang, Chen, Qi, Zhou and Sui was complicated, so he also wrote ten volumes of Liang, Qi and Zhou history, five volumes of "Chen history" and twenty volumes of "Sui history," and was slightly damaged because it was too simple.

古文：兢虽衰耗，犹希史职，而行步伛偻，李林甫以其年老不用。
现代文：吴兢虽然年老气衰，还是希望担任史职，但行步伛偻，李林甫认为吴兢年老不予任用。
English: Although Wu Jing is old and feeble, he still hopes to serve as a historian. However, Li Linfu believes that Wu Jing is too old to be appointed.

古文：天宝八年，卒于家，时年八十馀。
现代文：天宝八年，在家中去世，终年八十多岁。
English: Tianbao eight years, died at home, more than eighty years old.

古文：兢卒后，其子进兢所撰《唐史》八十馀卷，事多纰缪，不逮于壮年。
现代文：吴兢死后，他的儿子进献他撰写的《唐史》八十多卷，事情多有纰缪，赶不上壮年所写。
English: After the death of Wu Jing, his son presented him with more than eighty volumes of "Tang History," which he had written. Many of the events were amusing, but they could not keep up with those written in his prime.

古文：兢家聚书颇多，尝目录其卷第，号《吴氏西斋书目》。
现代文：吴兢家积聚的书很多，曾经按条目登记书的次序，名为《吴氏西齐书目》。
English: There are many books accumulated by the Wu Jing family, which were once called "Wu's West Qi Bibliography" according to the order of the entry registration book.

