古文：许孟容，字公范，京兆长安人也。
现代文：许孟容字公范，京兆长安人。
English: Xu Meng Rong is a public figure and a resident of Beijing-Zhao Chang'an.

古文：父鸣谦，究通《易象》，官至抚州刺史，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：父许鸣谦，研究通晓《易象》，官至抚州刺史，死后追赠礼部尚书。
English: His father, Xu Mingqian, was well versed in the study of "Ixiang" and served as an official in Fuzhou. After his death, he bequeathed the book to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：孟容少以文词知名，举进士甲科，后究《王氏易》登科，授秘书省校书郎。
现代文：许孟容年少时即以文章著称，应试进士甲科，之后研究《王氏易》，登科后授秘书省校书郎。
English: When he was young, Xu Meng Rong was famous for his articles. He was supposed to take the entrance examination for Jia Ke, and later studied "Wang Shiyi." After entering the university, he became a secretary and a provincial school scribe.

古文：赵赞为荆、襄等道黜陟使，表为判官。
现代文：当时赵赞任荆州、襄州等道黜陟使，推荐许孟容为判官。
English: At that time, Zhao Zan was appointed as the magistrate of Jingzhou, Xiangzhou and other provinces, and recommended Xu Mengrong as the judge.

古文：贞元初，徐州节度使张建封辟为从事，四迁侍御史。
现代文：贞元初，被徐州节度使张建封召为从事，四度升任侍御史。
English: At the beginning of the Zhengyuan era, Zhang Jianfeng was summoned by the Xuzhou Festival to be engaged, and he was promoted to the position of the attendant of history four times.

古文：李纳屯兵境上，扬言入寇。
现代文：李纳屯兵徐州边境，扬言将进犯。
English: Li Na sent troops to the Xuzhou border, threatening to invade.

古文：建封遣将吏数辈告谕，不听。
现代文：张建封数次派人前去劝止，李纳不听。
English: Zhang Jianfeng sent people forward several times to dissuade him, but Li Na did not listen.

古文：于是遣孟容单车诣纳，为陈逆顺祸福之计。纳即日发使追兵，因请修好。
现代文：于是派许孟容单车往见李纳，对他陈说叛逆招祸、归顺得福的道理，李纳当天便派专使追回人马，乘势请求同朝廷和好。
English: Therefore, he sent Xu Meng Rong on a bicycle to see Li Na, and expounded to him the principle that rebellion brings misfortune and surrender brings blessing. On the same day, Li Na sent a special envoy to recover the man and horse, and took advantage of the situation to request reconciliation with the imperial court.

古文：遂表孟容为濠州刺史。
现代文：这以后张建封便推荐许孟容为濠州刺史。
English: After this, Zhang Jianfeng recommended Xu Meng Rong as a candidate for the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：无几，德宗知其才，征为礼部员外郎。
现代文：没多久，德宗皇帝闻知许孟容的才干，召为礼部员外郎。
English: Not long after, Emperor Dezong heard of Xu Mengrong's talent and called him to be a member of the ceremonial club.

古文：有公主之子，请补弘文、崇文馆诸生，孟容举令式不许。
现代文：有一公主之子，请求补弘文馆、崇文馆诸生，许孟容坚持原则不应允。
English: There was a son of a princess who asked to supplement the Hongwu Museum and the Chongwen Museum. Xu Mengrong insisted on the principle of not agreeing.

古文：主诉于上，命中使问状。
现代文：公主向皇上告状，皇上命太监查问情况。
English: The princess complained to the emperor, who ordered a eunuch to investigate the situation.

古文：孟容执奏，竟得迁本曹郎中。
现代文：许孟容据理禀奏终于得胜。升任礼部郎中。
English: Xu Meng Rong finally won the game. He was promoted to vice-minister.

古文：德宗降诞日，御麟德殿，命孟容等登座，与释、老之徒讲论。
现代文：德宗寿诞日，驾幸麟德殿，命许孟容等登殿侍坐，与一班佛、老之徒讲经论学。
English: On the anniversary of the founder's death, he went to the Lin De Hall and ordered Meng Rong and others to attend the hall, and he lectured on the scriptures with a group of Buddhists and old disciples.

古文：十四年，转兵部郎中。
现代文：贞元十四年，调任兵部郎中。
English: In the 14th year of the Sadamoto era, he was transferred to the position of Hyobu roju.

古文：未满岁，迁给事中。
现代文：未及一年，调任给事中。
English: Less than a year later, he was transferred to the middle of a case.

古文：十七年夏，好畤县风雹伤麦，上命品官覆视，不实，诏罚京兆尹顾少连已下。
现代文：贞元十七年夏，好县风雹毁伤麦田，皇上命品官前往复查，结果并非真实，便下诏处罚京兆尹顾少连以下所有官员。
English: In the summer of the seventeenth year of the Zhengyuan era, the wind of a good county caused damage to the wheat fields. The imperial magistrate went to review the situation, but the result was not true, and he issued an edict to punish all officials below Jing Zhaoyin Gu Shoran.

古文：敕出，孟容执奏曰： 府县上事不实，罪止夺俸停官，其于弘宥，已是殊泽。
现代文：诏令写出，许孟容禀奏道： 府县上奏之事不实，惩罚止于削夺俸禄罢免职务，就圣上宽赦而言，已属特别恩典。
English: According to the imperial edict, Xu Meng Rong wrote: "The prefectural report is not true. The punishment is to reduce the salary and remove the post. As far as the Holy Father's pardon is concerned, it is a special grace.

古文：但陛下使品官覆视后，更择宪官一人，再令验察，覆视转审，隐欺益明。
现代文：但陛下派品官复查后，宜另选御史一人，令再察验，若有隐瞒欺诈愈加清楚。
English: However, after His Majesty has sent an inspector to review the matter, it is advisable to choose another official historian and order another inspection. If there is any concealment of fraud, it will become even clearer.

古文：事宜观听，法归纲纪。
现代文：事情应多看多听，执法方合于国家纲纪。
English: People should pay more attention to what they see and hear, and the enforcement of the law should be in line with the national discipline.

古文：臣受官中谢日，伏请诏敕有须详议者，则乞停留晷刻，得以奏陈。
现代文：臣受官入朝谢恩之日，俯首恳请：诏书敕令中如有须详加计议的，则乞请停留片刻，使臣下有机会陈奏。
English: On the day when a vassal was admitted to the imperial court, he bowed his head and begged: "If there is anything in the imperial edict that needs to be discussed in detail, please stay for a while so that your vassal can have a chance to discuss it."

古文：此敕既非急，宣可以少驻。 
现代文：此敕令既非急于宣布，可以稍留几日勿发。 
English: There is no hurry to announce this order, so it can be delayed for a few days.

古文：诏虽不许，公议是之。
现代文：皇上虽未应允，群臣却认为许孟容言之有理。
English: Although the emperor did not agree, the courtiers thought that Xu Meng Rong's words were reasonable.

古文：十八年，浙江东道观察使裴肃卒，以摄副使齐总为衢州刺史。
现代文：贞元十八年，浙江东道观察使裴肃去世，朝廷让代理副使齐总为衢州刺史。
English: In the 18th year of the Zhengyuan era, Pei Su, the Zhejiang host observation envoy, passed away, and the imperial court let the acting deputy envoy Qi Zong for the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：时总为肃剥下进奉以希恩，遽授大郡，物议喧然。
现代文：前时齐总为裴肃盘剥治下百姓向朝廷进奏以图恩宠，现在果然得授大郡刺史，舆论哗然。
English: Previously, the people under the rule of Pei Sui always played a favor to the imperial court, and now they have been awarded the history of the county, and the public opinion is in an uproar.

古文：诏出，孟容执奏曰： 陛下比者以兵戎之地，或有不获已超授者。
现代文：诏书写出，许孟容谏奏道： 陛下近来对于军事要地官员，偶尔有未建功而破例提拔的。
English: After the edict was issued, Xu Meng Rong chimed in, "Recently, your majesty has made an exception for military officials in important places to be promoted without meritorious service.

古文：今衢州无他虞，齐总无殊绩，忽此超授，群情惊骇。
现代文：现在衢州没别的忧患，齐总也无大的功绩，忽然破格提升，官员们人人震惊。
English: Now there is no other sorrow in Zhangzhou, and there is no great achievement in Qi. Suddenly, it has been upgraded to an unprecedented level, and the officials are all shocked.

古文：总是浙东判官，今诏敕称权知留后，摄都团练副使，向来无此敕命。
现代文：齐总不过浙东道一名判官，现在诏令授他代理留后，兼任都团练副使，向来没有这样的敕命。
English: Qizong was only a magistrate in Zhejiang Province. Now, after the imperial edict granted him to stay as a deputy, he also served as a deputy envoy for regimental training. He has never had such a hard life.

古文：便用此诏，尤恐不可。
现代文：颁发这一诏令，恐怕不太妥当。
English: I'm afraid it's not appropriate to issue this edict.

古文：若总必有可录，陛下须要酬劳，即明书课最，超一两资与改。
现代文：倘若齐总有必须超常录用的功绩，陛下定要酬劳他，就应写明考课优异，超一两级改授即可。
English: If Qi always has a merit that requires extraordinary admission, and His Majesty wants to reward him, he should write the examination course excellence, exceeding one or two levels can be re-taught.

古文：今举朝之人，不知总之功能，衢州浙东大郡，总自大理评事兼监察御史授之，使遐迩不甘，凶恶腾口。
现代文：现在满朝官员，不知齐总有什么功绩或才干，衢州是浙东大郡，齐总以大理评事兼监察御史官职得授衢州刺史，必使远近官吏心中不服，乃至恶言出口。
English: Now the officials of the Manchurian dynasty do not know what achievements or talents Qi always has. Bozhou is the largest county in eastern Zhejiang. Qi always awarded the history of Bozhou with the post of commentator and inspector of history. This will surely make the officials from far and near dissatisfied, and even speak ill of them.

古文：如臣言不切，乞陛下暂停此诏，密使人听察，必贺圣朝无私。
现代文：假如臣之言不当谴责，恳请陛下暂停发此诏，暗中派人听取反映，满朝文武必定赞扬陛下圣明无私。
English: If the words of the minister are improperly condemned, I implore His Majesty to suspend the issuance of this edict and secretly send someone to listen to the feedback. The whole court must praise His Majesty's holiness and selflessness.

古文：今齐总诏谨随状封进。 
现代文：现谨将提升齐总的诏书随臣之奏状缄封进上。 
English: I now have the honour to enclose herewith the Imperial Rescript elevating General Qi to the rank of subject.

古文：寻有谏官论列，乃留中不下。
现代文：接着又有谏官陈说，于是将提升齐总的诏书留在朝中不再下达。
English: Chen, the eunuch, then said that the edict to promote Qi Zong would be left in the court and would not be issued again.

古文：德宗召孟容对于延英，谕之曰： 使百执事皆如卿，朕何忧也。 
现代文：德宗召许孟容在延英殿叙话，对他说： 假使百官都像爱卿一样，我还有什么忧虑呢？ 
English: Emperor Dezong summoned Xu Meng Rong to speak at the Yan Ying Palace and said to him, "If all officials were like Ai Qing, what would I have to worry about?

古文：自给事中袁高论卢杞后，未尝有可否，及闻孟容之奏，四方皆感上之听纳，嘉孟容之当官。
现代文：自从给事中袁高谏说卢杞一事之后，没人再对皇上的行为评说可否，等听到许孟容谏奏之事，四方官员皆为皇上能听纳忠言而感动，赞扬许孟容非常称职。
English: Ever since Yuan Gaobao mentioned Lu Ye in the incident, no one has been able to comment on the emperor's behavior. Upon hearing of Xu Meng Rong's speech, officials from all four sides were moved by the emperor's ability to listen to honest advice, and praised Xu Meng Rong for being very competent.

古文：十九年夏旱，孟容上疏曰：
现代文：贞元十九年夏旱，许孟容上疏道：
English: In the summer drought of 19th year of Zhengyuan, Xu Mengrong went to the ditch:

古文：臣伏闻陛下数月已来，斋居损膳，为兆庶心疲，又敕有司，走于群望，牲于百神，而密云不雨，首种未入。
现代文： 臣俯首，听说陛下数月以来，斋居减食，为百姓操心竭虑。又命官员奔赴各地，祭祀百神，可仍然密云不雨，麦种未播。
English: The vassal bowed his head, hearing that His Majesty had been fasting and cutting down on food for several months, worrying about the people. He also ordered officials to rush to various places to worship hundreds of gods, but it still did not rain, and the wheat seeds were not sown.

古文：岂觞醪有阙，祈祝非诚，为阴阳适然，丰歉前定，何圣意精至，甘泽未答也？
现代文：难道缺少美酒供奉，祈祷不够虔诚？
English: Is there a lack of good wine for offering, and are prayers not pious enough?

古文：臣历观自古天人交感事，未有不由百姓利病之急者、切者，邦家教令之大者、远者。
现代文：或是天地安排，丰歉命定？若非如此，为何圣上精诚所至，老天不降甘霖作为回答呢？臣历年研究自古而今上天下民交互感应之事，没有一桩不是与百姓急迫、深切之利害，国家重大、影响深远之政令相关。
English: Or is it the arrangement of heaven and earth, the predestination of abundant apologies? If not so, why is it that God's sincerity is supreme, and God does not lower the rain as an answer? Over the years, we have studied the interaction between the people of the world from ancient times to the present, and there is no matter that is not related to the urgent and profound interests of the people, and the major and far-reaching decrees of the country.

古文：京师是万国所会，强干弱枝，自古通规。
现代文：京师乃万方朝会之地，加强京师削弱地方是自古通行之规。
English: Beijing division is the place of Wanfang Dynasty Association, strengthening Beijing division and weakening the place is the rule since ancient times.

古文：其一年税钱及地租，出入一百万贯。
现代文：京师一年所收税钱及地租，多达一百万贯左右。
English: The taxes and land rents collected by the Beijing division in a year amount to about one million yuan.

古文：臣伏冀陛下即日下令，全放免之；其次，三分放二。
现代文：臣俯首，恳望陛下即日下令，全部减免；求其次，也要减免三分之二。
English: The vassal bowed his head and implored His Majesty to order the reduction and exemption of all taxes on the same day; secondly, he also asked for the reduction and exemption of two-thirds.

古文：且使旱涸之际，免更流亡。
现代文：这样又可使大旱之年，百姓免于流亡。
English: In this way, the people can be saved from exile in the year of great drought.

古文：若播种无望，征敛如旧，则必愁怨迁徙，不顾坟墓矣。
现代文：若播种无望，官府依旧征税敛租，那么必使百姓愁怨而迁徙，不恋先人故土。
English: If sowing is hopeless and the government continues to collect taxes and collect rents, it will surely make the people resentful and migrate, and they will not love the ancestral homeland.

古文：臣愚以为德音一发，膏泽立应，变灾为福，期在斯须。
现代文：臣之愚见以为，陛下德音一发出，恩泽必有报应，变灾为福，希望就在须臾之间。
English: The foolishness of the vassal thought that as soon as His Majesty's decree was issued, the boon would have its reward, the disaster would turn into a blessing, and hope would be in the air.

古文：户部所收掌钱，非度支岁计，本防缓急别用。
现代文：再说户部所收取掌管的钱财，并非用作计划内开支，本为防备意外之急需。
English: Furthermore, the monies collected and managed by the Household Department are not used for planned expenses, but for emergencies.

古文：今此炎旱，直支一百余万贯，代京兆百姓一年差科，实陛下巍巍睿谋，天下鼓舞歌扬者也。
现代文：现在遭此大旱，直接支付一百万贯，顶替京兆府百姓一年的租税，实为陛下之绝大谋略，普天下人必定欢欣鼓舞歌颂陛下圣德。
English: Now, with this drought, the direct payment of one million yuan to replace the one-year tax of the people of Jingzhao Prefecture is indeed His Majesty's great strategy. People all over the world will surely rejoice, encourage and praise His Majesty's holiness.

古文：复更省察庶政之中，有流移征防，当还而未还者，徒役禁锢，当释而未释者，逋悬馈送，当免而未免者，沉滞郁抑，当伸而未伸者，有一于此，则特降明命，令有司条列，三日内闻奏。
现代文：且应进一步审查各种政务之中有流放征戍应当回还而未还的，服役囚禁应当释放而未放的，拖欠进献应当免除而未免的，冤屈郁抑应当申雪而未申的，一有发现，就应特别降诏明令，命主管官员书写详实，三日内奏报。
English: And it should be further examined that among various government affairs, there are cases of banishment and collection of debts that should be returned but have not been returned, cases of imprisonment for service that should be released but have not been released, cases of contribution in arrears that should be exempted but have not been exempted, and cases of grievances that should be settled but have not been settled. As soon as they are found, a special decree should be issued, ordering the competent officials to write in detail and report within three days.

古文：其当还、当释、当免、当伸者，下诏之日，所在即时施行。
现代文：那些当还、当放、当免、当申的，下诏之日，所在官署应立即执行。
English: For those who are to be returned, released, exempted, or petitioned, the relevant government office shall immediately implement them on the date of the following edict.

古文：臣愚以为如此而神不监，岁不稔，古未之有。
现代文： 臣之愚见，以为如果这样做了而神灵看不到，年景不丰饶，自古未有这种事。 
English: In the foolish opinion of the vassals, they thought that if they did this and the gods could not be seen, the year would not be fruitful, and there had never been such a thing since ancient times.

古文：事虽不行，物议嘉之。
现代文：许孟容奏请之事虽未实行，舆论却称赞他。
English: Although Xu Meng Rong's invitation to perform was not carried out, the public praised him.

古文：贞元末，坐裴延龄、李齐运等谗谤流贬者，动十数年不量移，故因旱歉，孟容奏此以讽。
现代文：贞元末，因遭裴延龄、李齐运等谗言毁谤而获罪流放贬谪的官员，常常十数年不宽赦调职，所以借旱灾歉收一事，许孟容上奏委婉地批评。
English: At the end of the Zhengyuan era, officials who were exiled and demeaned because they were slandered by Pei Yanling, Li Qiyun and others were often not pardoned and transferred for more than ten years. Therefore, Xu Meng Rong took advantage of the drought and poor harvest to make a euphemistic criticism.

古文：然终贞元世，罕有迁移者。
现代文：但直到贞元之世结束，也极少有获赦调任的。
English: However, until the end of Sadamoto's life, very few were pardoned and transferred.

古文：孟容以讽谕太切，改太常少卿。
现代文：许孟容因批评朝政太激烈，改任太常寺少卿。
English: Xu Meng Rong was transferred to the post of Junior Secretary of the Taizho-ji Temple for criticizing the imperial government as too violent.

古文：元和初，迁刑部侍郎、尚书右丞。
现代文：元和初，调任刑部侍郎、尚书右丞。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of the Criminal Investigation Department's chamberlain, and became Shoshuu-jo.

古文：四年，拜京兆尹，赐紫。
现代文：元和四年，官拜京兆尹，赐紫服。
English: In the 4th year of the Yuan and He was given a purple robe.

古文：神策吏李昱假贷长安富人钱八千贯，满三岁不偿。
现代文：神策吏李昱向长安富人借贷八千贯钱，满了三年仍不偿还。
English: Li Jian, an official of the State Administration for Religious Affairs, borrowed 8,000 yuan from a rich man in Chang'an and still hasn't repaid it after three years.

古文：孟容遣吏收捕械系，克日命还之，曰： 不及期当死。 
现代文：许孟容派属吏拘捕他并加上刑具囚禁，限期命他偿还，说： 到限期不还便处死。 
English: Xu Meng Rong sent his subordinate officers to arrest him and imprison him with torture instruments, and ordered him to repay within a time limit, saying: If he does not repay within the time limit, he will be put to death.

古文：自兴元已后，禁军有功，又中贵之尤有渥恩者，方得护军。故军士日益纵横，府县不能制。
现代文：自兴元以后，禁军有功或侍从宦官中最受恩宠者，只有他们才能获护军勋位，因此军士日益恣肆横行，府县官员不能制止他们。
English: Since the Xingyuan era, only the most favored of the eunuchs with meritorious service or attendants of the Forbidden Army can be awarded the Order of the Protection Army, so the sergeants are increasingly running amok, and prefectural officials cannot stop them.

古文：孟容刚正不惧，以法绳之，一军尽惊，冤诉于上。
现代文：许孟容刚正不惧，依法制裁他们，禁军中人人惊怕，便向皇上诉冤。
English: Xu Meng Rong was not afraid, he sanctioned them according to the law, and everyone in the forbidden army was frightened, so he appealed to the emperor.

古文：立命中使宣旨，令送本军，孟容系之不遣。
现代文：皇上立即命太监传旨，命将扣押的军士送还本军，但许孟容仍将他们囚禁而不放还。
English: The emperor immediately ordered the eunuch to transmit the order to return the detained sergeants to the army, but Xu Meng Rong still imprisoned them and did not return them.

古文：中使再至，乃执奏曰： 臣诚知不奉诏当诛，然臣职司辇毂，合为陛下弹抑豪强。
现代文：太监再度前来，许孟容禀奏道： 臣确实知道不遵圣旨该当死罪，但臣在朝廷奉职，理应为陛下抑制豪强。 
English: When the eunuch came again, Xu Meng Rong chimed in, "It is true that a minister knows that it is a capital offense to disobey a sacred edict, but as a minister serving in the imperial court, he should have restrained his arrogance for the sake of His Majesty."

古文：钱未尽输，昱不可得。 
现代文：皇上因他笃守正道，同意了他的做法。
English: The emperor agreed to his course of action because he was a staunch adherent to the right path.

古文：上以其守正，许之。
现代文：此后豪强销声敛迹，许孟容威望大震。
English: Since then, the strong and powerful sales have been restrained, and the prestige of Xu Mengrong has been shaken.

古文：自此豪右敛迹，威望大震。改兵部侍郎。
现代文：后调任兵部侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Hyobushojiro.

古文：俄以本官权知礼部贡举，颇抑浮华，选择才艺。
现代文：不久以原职代理礼部贡举，淘汰了一些浮华之人，而选拔了一批多才多艺之士。
English: Soon after, the Ministry of Ceremonies, acting as the original agency, held a tribute, eliminated some flashy people, and selected a group of multi-talented people.

古文：出为河南尹，亦有威名。
现代文：后出任河南尹，亦有威望和名声。
English: He later served as Henan Yin, and also had prestige and fame.

古文：俄知礼部选事，征拜吏部侍郎。
现代文：不久任礼部选事，征召回朝，官拜吏部侍郎。
English: He was soon appointed as a member of the etiquette department, called back to the imperial court, and became an attendant of the official etiquette department.

古文：会十年六月，盗杀宰相武元衡，并伤议臣裴度。
现代文：元和十年，盗贼杀害了宰相武元衡，并击伤议臣裴度。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan and the 10th year of the Heian period, thieves killed the prime minister, Bu Yuanhei, and wounded the councilor, Pei Du.

古文：时淮夷逆命，凶威方炽，王师问罪，未有成功。
现代文：当时淮夷叛乱，凶焰正烈，朝廷派兵征讨，未获成功。
English: At that time, the Huaiyi Rebellion was in full swing, and the imperial court sent soldiers to subdue it, but they were unsuccessful.

古文：言事者继上章疏请罢兵。
现代文：朝官们相继奏请皇上罢兵。
English: The imperial officials successively appealed to the emperor to call off the troops.

古文：是时盗贼窃发，人情甚惑，独孟容诣中书雪涕而言曰： 昔汉廷有一汲黯，奸臣尚为寝谋。
现代文：这时盗贼出发，人心十分惶惑，惟独许孟容去到中书省边拭泪边说： 从前汉世朝廷有一位诤臣汲黯，奸臣尚且施行阴谋。
English: At this time, the thieves set out, the hearts of the people were very confused, but Xu Meng Rong went to the Chinese Book Ministry to wipe his tears and said: Once upon a time, there was a vassal in the Han Dynasty, and the vassal still carried out the conspiracy.

古文：今主上英明，朝廷未有过失，而狂贼敢尔无状，宁谓国无人乎？
现代文：现在主上英明，朝廷没有失误，可是狂贼胆敢如此嚣张，难道说国家真是没人了吗？
English: Now the Lord is wise, the imperial court has not made a mistake, but the mad thieves dare to be so arrogant. Is it possible that the country is really empty?

古文：然转祸为福，此其时也。
现代文：然而转祸为福现在正是时候。
English: However, now is the time to turn bad luck into good.

古文：莫若上闻，起裴中丞为相，令主兵柄，大索贼党，穷其奸源。 
现代文：不如奏请皇上，起用裴中丞为宰相，让他掌管兵权，大举搜索贼党，断绝祸根。 
English: It would be better to petition the emperor to appoint Pei Zhongzheng as prime minister, put him in charge of the military, search for the bandits in a big way, and cut off the root of evil.

古文：后数日，度果为相，而下诏行诛。
现代文：数日后，裴度果然做了宰相，立即下诏讨伐叛党。
English: A few days later, Pei Du did indeed become prime minister, and immediately issued an edict to crack down on the rebel party.

古文：时孟容议论人物，有大臣风彩。
现代文：当时许孟容评议他人的才德，显示出大臣的风采。
English: At that time, Xu Mengrong commented on the talent of others, showing the style of the minister.

古文：由太常卿为尚书左丞，奉诏宣慰汴宋陈许河阳行营诸军，俄拜东都留守。
现代文：后以太常卿职位任尚书左丞，奉诏安抚汴、宋、陈、许及河阳行营诸军，不久官拜东都留守。
English: After that, he was appointed to the position of the ethereal chancellor, Shang Shuzhanzhong, and was given the command to pacify the armies of Zhai, Song, Chen, Xu and Heyang, and soon the officials of Baidong were all left behind.

古文：元和十三年四月卒，年七十六，赠太子少保，谥曰宪。
现代文：元和十三年四月许孟容去世，年七十六，追赠太子少保，谥号宪。
English: Xu Meng Rong died in April 13th, 76 years old. He was posthumously given the title of Prince Junior Protector and the posthumous name of Xian.

古文：孟容方劲，富有文学。
现代文：许孟容为人正直刚强，博学多识善做文章。
English: Xu Meng Rong is an honest and strong person. He is erudite, knowledgeable and good at writing articles.

古文：其折衷礼法，考详训典，甚坚正，论者称焉。
现代文：他对礼法的说解、对前代经典的考释都很确凿合理，受到人们称赞。
English: His explanation of the etiquette and interpretation of the previous classics are very reasonable and have been praised by people.

古文：而又好推毂，乐善拔士，士多归之。
现代文：许孟容又好助人成事，喜欢结交和选拔贤良之人，因此士人纷纷归附他。
English: Xu Meng Rong is also good at helping people accomplish things, likes to make friends and select virtuous people, so scholars have attached themselves to him.

古文：吕元膺，字景夫，郓州东平人。
现代文：吕元膺字景夫，郓州东平人。
English: Lv Yuanqi, also known as Jingfu, was from Dongping, Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖绍宗，右拾遗。
现代文：曾祖吕绍宗，任右拾遗。
English: Zengzu Lü Shao Zong, appointed by the right to collect relics.

古文：祖霈，殿中侍御史。
现代文：祖父吕霈，任殿中侍御史。
English: His grandfather, Lv Ying, was appointed as the palace's chamberlain.

古文：父长卿，右卫仓曹参军，以元膺赠秘书监。
现代文：父吕长卿，任右卫仓曹参军，后来靠了吕元膺得以追赠秘书监。
English: His father, Lv Changqing, joined the army as the Right Guard Cang Cao, and later, thanks to Lv Yuanqi, he was able to posthumously receive the title of Secretary Supervisor.

古文：元膺质度瑰伟，有公侯之器。
现代文：吕元膺品性不凡胸襟宏大，有公卿王侯的气度。
English: Lv Yuanpi's character is extraordinarily broad-minded, with the air of a noble prince.

古文：建中初，策贤良对问第，授同州安邑尉。
现代文：建中初，参加贤良方正科考试及第，授同州安邑县尉。
English: At the beginning of Jianzhong Middle School, he took part in the Xianlu Fangzheng Examination and won the first prize, and was awarded the County Lieutenant of Tongzhou Anyi County.

古文：同州刺史侯鐈闻其名，辟为长春宫判官。
现代文：同州刺史侯钅乔闻知他的名声，召他做长春宫巡官。
English: The prefect of the same prefecture, Hou Yingqiao, heard of his reputation and called him to be the inspector of the Changchun Palace.

古文：属浦贼侵轶，鐈失所，元膺遂潜迹不务进取。
现代文：恰值蒲州盗贼侵袭，侯钅乔失去立身之地，吕元膺也就隐藏踪迹不再追求仕进。
English: Just as the thieves in Puzhou attacked, Hou Yijiao lost his foothold, and Lv Yuanqian also hid his tracks and no longer pursued advancement.

古文：贞元初，论惟明节制渭北，延在宾席，自是名达于朝廷。
现代文：贞元初，论惟明任淮北节度使，吕元膺应邀做幕僚，从此名声达于朝廷。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, On the other hand, he was appointed as the envoy of the North Huaibei Festival, and Lv Yuanqi was invited to be a staff member. From then on, his reputation reached the imperial court.

古文：惟明卒，王栖曜代领其镇。
现代文：论惟明去世，王栖曜代理其职。
English: On the death of Wei Ming, Wang Siyou took over his duties.

古文：德宗俾栖曜留署使职，咨以军政。
现代文：德宗让王栖曜将吕元膺留在官署任职，参谋军政事务。
English: Emperor Dezong asked Wang Suiyou to keep Lü Yuanqi in the government office to serve as a staff officer for military and political affairs.

古文：累转殿中侍御史，征入，真拜本官，转侍御史。
现代文：先后调任殿中侍御史，征召入朝实授此职。又升任侍御史。
English: He was successively transferred to the position of courtier-historian in the palace, called up to the Imperial Court to assume this position, and promoted to the position of courtier-historian.

古文：丁继母忧，服阕，除右司员外郎。出为蕲州刺史，颇著恩信。
现代文：逢继母去世，服丧期满，授右司员外郎，出任蕲州刺史，颇有施恩重义的好名声。
English: When his stepmother passed away and the period of mourning was over, he was given the title of right secretary, and served as the governor of Zhangzhou. He had a good reputation for being generous.

古文：尝岁终阅郡狱囚，囚有自告者曰： 某有父母在，明日元正不得相见。 
现代文：曾于岁末视察监狱，囚犯中有人诉说： 我有父母在，明日正月初一却不能相见。 
English: I once visited a prison at the end of the year, and one of the prisoners complained: My parents are here, but I can't see them on the first day of the first month tomorrow.

古文：因泣下。
现代文：因而伤心落泪。
English: And cry.

古文：元膺悯焉，尽脱其械纵之，与为期。
现代文：吕元膺怜悯他们，全都解除刑具让他们回家，约定时间返回监狱。
English: Lv Yuanju took pity on them, removed all the instruments of torture, let them go home, and returned to the prison at the agreed time.

古文：守吏曰： 贼不可纵。 
现代文：负责看守的狱吏劝道： 贼人不可放纵。 
English: The prison officer in charge of the guards advised: Thieves must not be indulged.

古文：元膺曰： 吾以忠信待之。 
现代文：吕元膺说： 我是以真诚和信义对待他们的。 
English: Lu Yuanjun said: I treated them with sincerity and loyalty.

古文：及期，无后到者。
现代文：到了规定时间，没有一个犯人迟回。
English: At the appointed time, not a single prisoner was late.

古文：由是群盗感义，相引而去。
现代文：因此群盗感激他的情义，相约不在蕲州犯案。
English: Therefore, the bandits were grateful for his kindness and agreed not to commit the crime in Zhangzhou.

古文：元和初，征拜右司郎中、兼侍御史，知杂事，迁谏议大夫、给事中。
现代文：元和初，征召回京授右司郎中、兼侍御史知杂事，调任谏议大夫、给事中。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was called back to Kyoto to serve as the second-in-command of the Right Division of the Imperial Household Agency, as well as the second-in-command of the Imperial Household Agency, and he was transferred to the position of the second-in-command and the third-in-command of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：规谏驳议，大举其职。
现代文：批评规劝，辩是论非，十分尽责。
English: Criticize and persuade, debate the merits and demerits, be very conscientious.

古文：及镇州王承宗之叛，宪宗将以吐突丞璀为招讨处置使。
现代文：待到镇州王承宗叛乱时，宪宗欲封吐突承璀为招讨处置使。
English: When the rebellion of Wang Chengzong occurred in Zhenzhou, Jianzong wanted to arrest and punish Chengzong.

古文：元膺与给事中穆质、孟简，兵部侍郎许孟容等八人抗论不可，且曰： 承璀虽贵宠，然内臣也。
现代文：吕元膺同给事中穆质、孟简以及兵部侍郎许孟容等八人，直言反对认为不可。并说道： 承璀虽身贵位尊，但身为宦官。
English: Lv Yuan Rong, together with eight others, including Muxian, Meng Jian, and the military attaché Xu Meng Rong, bluntly objected that it was impossible, and said: Although Cheng Rong was a dignitary, he was a eunuch.

古文：若为帅总兵，恐不为诸将所伏。 
现代文：如果他做主帅统领兵马，恐怕诸将不服。 
English: If he becomes the commander-in-chief, I'm afraid everyone will be dissatisfied.

古文：指谕明切，宪宗纳之，为改使号，然犹专戎柄，无功而还。
现代文：所言明白中肯，被宪宗采纳，替吐突承璀改了封使名号，可他仍然独掌兵权，结果无功而还。
English: What he said was clear and pertinent, and was adopted by the Constitutionalists, who changed the name of the envoy in place of Tutu, but he was still in sole control of the military, and as a result he returned without success.

古文：出为同州刺史，及中谢，上问时政得失，元膺论奏，辞气激切，上嘉之。
现代文：吕元膺出任同州刺史，到入朝谢恩那天，皇上问他对当前治政得失的看法，吕元膺一一陈说，情辞慷慨激烈，得到皇上赞许。
English: On the day of his accession to the throne, the emperor asked Lyu Won-soo for his views on the current administration. Lyu Won-soo was generous and passionate in his speech, which won the emperor's approval.

古文：翌日谓宰相曰： 元膺有谠言直气，宜留在左右，使言得失，卿等以为何如？ 
现代文：次日皇上对宰相说： 吕元膺能直言有正气，应留在朕身边，让他评论政务得失，众卿以为如何？ 
English: The next day, the emperor said to the prime minister, "What do you think of Lü Yuanxuan's ability to speak candidly and honestly? He should stay by my side and let him comment on the merits and demerits of government affairs."

古文：李籓、裴垍贺曰： 陛下纳谏，超冠百王，乃宗社无疆之休。
现代文：李藩、裴土自庆贺道： 陛下纳谏，超过前代所有君王，实为宗庙社稷万世无疆之喜庆事。
English: The Li Clan and the Baidu Clan congratulated themselves, saying, "Your Majesty's accession to the throne surpasses all previous monarchs, and is truly a joyous event that will never be surpassed by any other in the history of the family temple."

古文：臣等不能广求端士，又不能数进忠言，孤负圣心，合当罪戾。
现代文：臣等不能广为搜求端直之士，又不能时时进献忠言，辜负了圣上爱心，理当问罪。
English: If ministers and others cannot widely search for upright people, and cannot always offer loyal advice, they have failed to live up to the sacred love, and should be punished.

古文：请留元膺给事左右。 
现代文：请留元膺在陛下身边供职。 
English: Please continue to serve alongside His Majesty.

古文：寻兼皇太子侍读，赐以金紫。
现代文：随即便让吕元膺兼任太子侍读，赐紫服金鱼袋。
English: He also allowed Lü Yuanxuan to serve as the prince's attendant and gave him a purple goldfish bag.

古文：寻拜御史中丞。未几，除鄂岳观察使，入为尚书左丞。
现代文：不久官拜御史中丞，没多久，授鄂岳观察使，入朝任尚书左丞。
English: Soon after, he was given the official title of Imperial Historian, and not long after that, he was awarded the title of Ege Observation Envoy.

古文：度支使潘孟阳与太府卿王遂迭相奏论，孟阳除散骑常侍，遂为邓州刺史，皆假以美词。
现代文：度支使潘孟阳与太府卿王遂交相上奏争执，结果潘孟阳授散骑常侍，王遂派任邓州刺史，诏书上都写着美辞嘉语。
English: Pan Mengyang, the governor-general's representative, and Wang Sui, the governor-general, quarreled with each other. As a result, Pan Mengyang was given the rank of equerry, and Wang Sui was appointed as the governor of Dangzhou. The imperial edict was full of fine words and beautiful language.

古文：元膺封还诏书，请明示枉直。
现代文：吕元膺将诏书封缄退还，请求写明二人行为的是非曲直。
English: Lü Yuanzhang returned the imperial rescript seal and asked that the rights and wrongs of the two men's actions be made clear.

古文：江西观察使裴堪奏虔州刺史李将顺赃状，朝廷不覆按，遽贬将顺道州司户。
现代文：江西观察使裴堪奏报虔州刺史李将顺贪赃情状，朝廷未经复查，立即将李将顺贬为道州司户。
English: Jiangxi Observation made Pei Kan report the situation of corruption and bribery of Li Zhe Shun to Qianzhou Zhishi, and the imperial court immediately relegated Li Zhe Shun to the position of the governor of Doushou without further investigation.

古文：元膺曰： 廉使奏刺史赃罪，不覆检即谪去，纵堪之词足信，亦不可为天下法。 
现代文：吕元膺说： 廉使奏刺史犯贪赃之罪，不复查核实即行贬谪，即使裴堪之言可信，这种做法也不可取。 
English: Lu Yuanzhang said: "It is a crime of embezzlement for an unethical envoy to play a part in slandering history. Without checking and verifying, it is tantamount to slander. Even if Pei Kan's words are credible, this practice is not advisable.

古文：又封诏书，请发御史按问，宰臣不能夺。
现代文：又封还诏书，请求朝廷派御史前往查问，宰臣不能定夺。
English: He also sent an imperial rescript, requesting the imperial court to send the imperial historian to investigate, but the vice-minister could not make a decision.

古文：代权德舆为东都留守、检校工部尚书、兼御史大夫、都畿防御使。
现代文：后吕元膺替代权德舆任东都留守、检校工部尚书、兼御史大夫、都畿防御使。
English: After Lv Yuanqi's replacement, the authority of the East was left behind, the inspection of the school construction department was left behind, and the inspector of the history department and the defense envoy to Gyeonggi Province were left behind.

古文：旧例，留守赐旗甲，与方镇同。
现代文：按照旧例，留守一概赐予旗帜和甲衣，和方镇待遇相同。
English: According to the old practice, the left-behinds were all given flags and coats of arms, and the same treatment as Fangzhen.

古文：及元膺受任不赐，朝论以淮西用兵，特用元膺守洛，不宜削其仪制，以沮威望，谏官论列，援华、汝、寿三州例。
现代文：及至吕元膺受任留守却不赐，朝官们认为淮西有战事，特地用吕元膺留守洛阳，不宜削减仪仗规格而降低他的威信，谏官们援引华、汝、寿三州之例陈述看法。
English: The imperial officials thought that there was a war in Huaxi, and they specifically used Lv Yuanqi to stay in Luoyang. It was not appropriate to reduce his prestige by reducing the standards of honor, and the eunuchs cited the examples of Hua, Ru, and Shou to state their views.

古文：上曰： 此数处并宜不赐。 
现代文：皇上说： 这几处，都应该不赐。 
English: The emperor said, "All of these places should be exempted."

古文：留守不赐旗甲，自元膺始。
现代文：留守而不赐旗甲的规矩，就是从吕元膺开始的。
English: The rule of staying behind and not being given a cap started with Lü Yuanxuan.

古文：十年七月，郓州李师道留邸伏甲谋乱。
现代文：元和十年七月，郓州李师道留居邸宅埋伏甲士阴谋叛乱。
English: In July of the 10th year of the Yuan and the 10th year of the Heian period, Li Shidao of Zhangzhou stayed at the mansion to ambush the conspiracy of insurgents.

古文：初，师道于东都置邸院，兵谍杂以往来，吏不敢辨。
现代文：当初，李师道在东都修建府第宅院，兵士细作出入混杂，官吏不敢查辨。
English: At first, when Li Shidao was building the prefectural residence in Dongdu, soldiers mingled with each other, and officials were afraid to investigate.

古文：因吴元济北犯，郊畿多警，防御兵尽戍伊阙。
现代文：因吴元济向北进犯，京郊多警报，防御之兵尽去伊阙驻守。
English: Due to Wu Yuanji's attack to the north, there were multiple alarms in the suburbs of Beijing, and the soldiers defending the city all went to Ili to stay.

古文：师道伏甲百余于邸院，将焚宫室而肆杀掠。
现代文：李师道埋伏百余甲士于府宅，准备焚烧宫室，大肆掠杀。
English: Li Shidao ambushed more than a hundred soldiers in the palace, prepared to burn the palace, and plundered it.

古文：已烹牛飨众，明日将出。
现代文：已经烹牛宴餐兵士，第二天就要起事。
English: The soldiers, who had already prepared a feast of oxen, were to rise the next day.

古文：会小将李再兴告变，元膺追兵伊阙，围之，半月无敢进攻者。防御判官王茂元杀一人而后进。
现代文：恰好小将李再兴密告变乱之事，吕元膺到伊阙追回军队，将李师道邸宅围困半日，没人敢攻进去，防御判官王茂元斩杀一人后兵士们这才进攻。
English: It just so happened that the young general Li Zaixing tipped off the authorities about the disturbance. Lv Yuanpi went to Yili to recover the troops and besieged Li Shidao's mansion for half a day. No one dared to enter. The soldiers only attacked after the defense judge Wang Maoyuan beheaded one person.

古文：或有毁其墉而入者，贼众突出，围兵奔骇。
现代文：有的兵士毁墙进去，众贼人奋力冲出，围困的士兵惊恐奔逃。
English: Some soldiers broke through the wall to get in, the thieves fought their way out, and the besieged soldiers fled in terror.

古文：贼乃团结，以其孥偕行。出长夏门，转掠郊墅，夺牛马，东济伊水，望山而去。
现代文：贼人紧紧靠在一起，让妇女儿童跟着一起走，出了长夏门，在郊外抢掠民舍，夺人牛马，东渡伊水，朝山区而去。
English: The thieves huddled close together, letting the women and children go with them. They went out of the Changxia Gate, robbed houses in the suburbs, took cattle and horses, went east to Yishui, and headed for the mountains.

古文：元膺诫境上兵重购以捕之。
现代文：吕元膺传令驻境军士，悬赏重金捕捉贼人。
English: Lv Yuanqi sent a message to the resident sergeant, offering a reward of heavy money to catch the thief.

古文：数月，有山棚卖鹿于市。贼过，山棚乃召集其党，引官兵围于谷中，尽获之。
现代文：数月后，有山民在集市上卖鹿，发现贼人经过，立即召集他的同伙，引来官兵将贼人围在山谷中，尽数俘获。
English: A few months later, a mountain villager who was selling deer at the market found the thief passing by and immediately gathered his accomplices. He brought in officers and soldiers to surround the thief in the valley and capture as many as possible.

古文：穷理其魁，乃中岳寺僧圆净，年八十余，尝为史思明将，伟悍过人。
现代文：追查贼首，原来是中岳寺僧圆净，八十余岁，曾在史思明手下为将，魁梧忄票悍过人。
English: When the thief's head was traced, it turned out to be the 80-plus-year-old Zhongyue Temple monk Yuanjing, who had served under Shi Siming as a general and was a formidable warrior.

古文：初执之，使折其胫，锤之不折。
现代文：刚捉住他时，命人折断他的胫骨，可是锤不断。
English: When they caught him, they ordered someone to break his tibia, but the hammer didn't stop.

古文：圆净骂曰： 脚犹不解折，乃称健兒乎！ 
现代文：圆净骂道： 连折断脚都不会，还称得上是健儿吗？ 
English: Yuancheng scolded, "You can't even break your foot, can you still be called a good athlete?"

古文：自置其足教折之。
现代文：说罢伸出脚教兵士将自己的脚折断。
English: Saying stop sticking your foot out teaches soldiers to break their own feet.

古文：临刑叹曰： 误我事，不得使洛城流血！ 
现代文：临刑时叹息道： 误了我的事啊，没能让洛阳城流血！ 
English: At the time of his execution, he sighed: I made a mistake, I failed to make Luoyang City bleed!

古文：死者凡数十人。
现代文：被处死的共数十人。
English: A total of dozens of people were executed.

古文：留守防御将二人，都亭驿卒五人，甘水驿卒三人，皆潜受其职署而为之耳目，自始谋及将败无知者。
现代文：其中留守防御将领二人，都亭驿卒五人，甘水驿卒三人，都暗中接受了圆净的委任而替他充当耳目，从开始密谋到事败之前一直无人知晓。
English: Among them, two left-behind defense generals, five from Du Ting and three from Gan Shui, all secretly accepted Yuancheng's appointment and acted as his eyes and ears. From the beginning of the conspiracy to the defeat, no one knew.

古文：初，师道多买田于伊阙、陆浑之间，凡十余处，故以舍山棚而衣食之。
现代文：先前，李师道在伊阙、陆浑两地间大量购置田地，共计十余处，所以有钱施舍山民供其衣食之用。
English: Previously, Li Shidao purchased a large number of fields between Ili and Lukhun, a total of more than ten, so he had the money to give alms to the mountain people for their food and clothing.

古文：有訾嘉珍、门察者，潜部分之，以属圆净。
现代文：有叫訾嘉珍和门察的两个人，暗中谋划部署，使这些钱财都归属圆净。
English: There are two people called Gong Jiazhen and Mencha, secretly planning and deploying, so that all this money belongs to Hengting.

古文：以师道钱千万伪理佛寺，期以嘉珍窃发时举火于山中，集二县山棚人作乱。
现代文：他们表面装作用李师道的千万钱财修理佛寺，实际指望訾嘉珍秘密起事时用在山中点火做饭，聚集两县山民造反作乱。
English: On the surface, they pretended to use Li Shidao's tens of millions of money to repair Buddhist temples. In reality, they hoped that when Gong Jiazhen secretly started a riot, they would use it to light fires in the mountains to cook and gather the mountain people of the two counties to rebel.

古文：及穷按之，嘉珍、门察皆称害武元衡者。
现代文：待到查清案情，訾嘉珍、门察都供认自己是杀害武元衡的凶手。
English: By the time the case was investigated, both Zou Jiazhen and the inspector had confessed to being the murderer of Wu Yuanhe.

古文：元膺以闻，送之上都，赏告变人杨进、李再兴锦彩三百匹、宅一区，授之郎将。
现代文：吕元膺将案情上报朝廷，将犯人押送京师，赏赐出首叛乱者杨进、李再兴锦彩三百匹、宅第一片，授予郎将之职。
English: Lv Yuanpi reported the case to the imperial court, sent the prisoners to the Beijing division, and rewarded the first rebels Yang Jin and Li Zaixing with 300 horses and the first piece of land, and awarded the post of general.

古文：无膺因请募山河子弟以卫宫城，从之。
现代文：吕元膺随即请求召募中原子弟来保卫宫城，朝廷应允。
English: Lv Yuanpi then immediately requested to recruit middle-aged atomic brothers to defend the palace, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：盗发之日，都城震恐，留守兵寡弱，不可倚，而元膺坐皇城门，指使部分，气意自若，以故居人帖然。
现代文：盗贼生发之日，都城震恐，留守之兵人少力弱不足依赖，而吕元膺坐镇皇城门，指挥部署，气度自如，因此居民人心安定。
English: On the day of the thief's birth, the capital was shaken with fear, and the soldiers left behind were less powerful and less dependent, while Lv Yuanpi sat at the town's imperial gate, commanding and deploying, with a relaxed demeanor, so the residents' hearts were stable.

古文：数年，改河中尹，充河中节度等使。
现代文：数年后，吕元膺调任河中尹，兼河中节度使等职。
English: A few years later, Lu Yuanjun was transferred to the post of the Vice-governor of Hechu, and also held the post of the Vice-governor of Hechu.

古文：时方镇多事姑息，元膺独以坚正自处，监军使洎往来中贵，无不敬惮。
现代文：当时方镇多生事变姑息养奸，惟独吕元膺立身行事能坚守正道，监军使以及往来的宫中显贵，无不敬而畏之。
English: At that time, Fangzhen was prone to many incidents and tolerated treachery. However, only Lv Yuan Rong stood up and acted in a way that could stick to the right path. He was respected and feared by supervising envoys and court dignitaries who came and went.

古文：入拜吏部侍郎，因疾固让，改太子宾客。
现代文：后入朝拜吏部侍郎，因患病执意辞谢，便改授太子宾客。
English: After that, he became an attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, but due to illness, he insisted on resigning and was instead awarded the title of Prince Guest.

古文：元和十五年二月卒，年七十二，赠吏部尚书。
现代文：元和十五年二月去世，年七十二，追赠吏部尚书。
English: He died in February of the 15th year of the Yuan and the 72nd year of the Heian period.

古文：元膺学识深远，处事得体，正色立朝，有台辅之望。
现代文：吕元膺学识深远，处事得体，在朝中肃然而立，有宰相三公的威仪。
English: Lv Yuan Rong was a man of profound learning, who conducted his affairs with propriety. He stood solemnly in the middle of the court and had the dignity of the three prime ministers.

古文：初游京师时，故相齐映谓人曰： 吾不及识娄、郝，殆斯人之类乎！ 
现代文：当初吕元膺到京师做官时，前宰相齐映对人说： 我没赶上见到娄师德、郝处俊，大概他们就是吕元膺一类的人吧！ 
English: When Lyu Yuan-tao first came to Beijing to work as an official, former Prime Minister Qi Rong said to people: I didn't have time to meet Yu Shide and Yu Chengjun, I guess they were people like Lyu Yuan-tao!

古文：其业官行己，始终无缺云。
现代文：吕元膺无论执行公务还是办私事，始终没有过失。
English: No matter whether he was performing his official duties or conducting private affairs, Lyu Yuanjun never made any mistakes.

