古文：辛幼安流寓江南，而豪侠之气未除。
现代文：原文宋朝人辛弃疾寄居江南时，仍不改豪侠的气概。
English: When people of the Song Dynasty abandoned their illnesses to live in the south of the Yangtze River, they still retained their heroic spirit.

古文：一日，陈同甫来访，近有小桥，同甫引马三跃而马三却。
现代文：有一天陈同甫来拜访，经过一道小桥，陈同甫策马三次，马却向后退三次。
English: One day, Chen Tongfu came to visit. Passing a small bridge, Chen Tongfu pulled the horse three times, but the horse retreated three times.

古文：同甫怒，拔剑斩马首。
现代文：陈同甫生气起来，当下拔剑斩下马头。
English: Chen Tongfu became angry and immediately drew his sword to cut off the horse's head.

古文：徒步而行。
现代文：大步而行。
English: Take it in stride.

古文：幼安适倚楼而见之，大惊异，即遣人询访，而陈已及门，遂与定交。
现代文：辛弃疾正好在楼上看见这种情形，很惊叹陈同甫的豪气，立刻派人去延请结交，而陈同甫却已经上门，于是两人惺惺相惜，成为好朋友。
English: Xin Qianzhi happened to see this situation upstairs, and was very surprised at Chen Tongfu's arrogance. He immediately sent someone to invite him to make friends, but Chen Tongfu had already come to the door, so the two of them took pity on each other and became good friends.

古文：后十数年，幼安帅淮，同甫尚落落贫甚，乃访幼安于治所，相与谈天下事。
现代文：数十年之后，辛弃疾已成为淮地一带的将帅，而陈同甫还贫困不得志。陈同甫依然直接上门去见辛弃疾，一起谈论天下事。
English: Decades later, Xin Qiaozi had become a general in the Huaiji area, while Chen Tongfu was still impoverished. Chen Tongfu still went directly to the door to see Xin Qiaozi and talk about world affairs together.

古文：幼安酒酣，因言南北利害，云：南之可以并北者如此，北之可以并南者如此。 钱塘非帝王居。
现代文：辛弃疾在酒酣耳热之际，开始高谈阔论起南宋和北方外族的军事形势，并说明南宋想收复北地要如何如何来作战，而北方若想并吞南宋又要如何如何。辛弃疾说： 钱塘一带非常危险，不适合建为国都。
English: In the heat of the moment, Xin Qianzhi began to talk about the military situation of the Southern Song Dynasty and the foreign ethnic groups in the North, and explained how the Southern Song Dynasty wanted to recover the North and how to fight, and how the North wanted to annex the Southern Song Dynasty. Xin Qianzhi said: The Qiantang area is very dangerous and is not suitable for building a national capital.

古文：断牛头山，天下无援兵；决西湖水，满城皆鱼鳖。 
现代文：北人只要占领牛头山，就能阻断四方来援的勤王之师；然后再引西湖的水来灌城，马上整个京城的军民百姓都成了鱼鳖。 
English: As long as the northerners occupied Niutou Mountain, they would be able to block the king-loving division that came from four directions to help; then they would draw water from the West Lake to flood the city, and immediately the entire military and civilian population of Beijing would become fish bait.

古文：饮罢，宿同甫斋中。
现代文：酒后，辛弃疾留宿陈同甫在馆里。
English: After drinking, Xin abandoned his illness and stayed with Chen Tongfu in the hall.

古文：同甫夜思：幼安沉重寡言，因酒误发，若醒而悟，必杀我灭口。遂中夜盗其骏马而逃。
现代文：陈同甫想起辛弃疾一向慎重寡言，酒后说了不少不该说的话，一旦酒醒回想起来，一定杀他灭口，于是半夜偷了辛弃疾的骏马逃走。
English: Chen Tongfu remembered that Xin Qiaozi had always been cautious and reticent. After drinking, he had said a lot of things he should not have said. Once he sobered up, he would definitely kill him, so he stole Xin Qiaozi's horse in the middle of the night and fled.

古文：幼安大惊。后同甫致书，微露其意，为假十万缗以济乏。
现代文：辛弃疾大惊，后来陈同甫写信向辛弃疾借十万缗钱济困，并在信中暗示当晚辛弃疾说过的言论。
English: Xin Qiaojie was shocked. Later, Chen Tongfu wrote to Xin Qiaojie to borrow 100,000 baht to relieve his financial difficulties. In the letter, he hinted at the remarks made by Xin Qiaojie that night.

古文：幼安如数与焉。
现代文：辛弃疾只好如数给他。
English: He had no choice but to give in to his illness.

