古文：朱公居陶，生少子。
现代文：原文陶朱公范蠡住在陶，生了小儿子。
English: Zhu Gong lived in Taodi and gave birth to a little son.

古文：少子壮，而朱公中男杀人，囚楚，朱公曰： 杀人而死，职也，然吾闻 千金之子，不死于市 。 
现代文：小儿子长大以后，陶朱公的次子杀人，被囚禁在楚国，陶朱公说： 杀人者死，这是天经地义的。然而我听说 富家子不应在大庭广众之间被处决 。 
English: After his youngest son grew up, Tao Zhu Gong's second son committed a murder and was imprisoned in the state of Chu. Tao Zhu Gong said, "It is only natural that a murderer should die. However, I heard that a rich man's son should not be executed in public."

古文：乃治千金装，将遣其少子往视之。
现代文：于是准备千两黄金，要派小儿子前往探视。
English: So he prepared a thousand taels of gold and sent his youngest son to pay a visit.

古文：长男固请行，不听。以公不遣长子而遣少弟， 是吾不肖 ，欲自杀。
现代文：长子一再请求前往，陶朱公不肯，长子认为父亲不派长子而派小弟，分明是认为自己不肖，想自杀。
English: The eldest son repeatedly asked to go, but Tao Zhu Gong refused. The eldest son thought that his father did not send the eldest son but sent the younger brother. Clearly, he thought he was ugly and wanted to commit suicide.

古文：其母强为言，公不得已，遣长子。为书遗故所善庄生，因语长子曰： 至，则进千金于庄生所，听其所为，慎无与争事。 
现代文：母亲大力说项，陶朱公不得已，派长男带信去找老朋友庄生，并告诉长子说： 到了以后，就把这一千两黄金送给庄生，随他处置，千万不要和他争执。 
English: His mother said this emphatically. As a last resort, Tao Zhu Gong sent his eldest son with a letter to find his old friend Zhuang Sheng, and told his eldest son, "When you get there, give this one thousand two hundred gold to Zhuang Sheng. Do whatever he tells you, and never argue with him."

古文：长男行，如父言。
现代文：长男前往，照父亲的话做。
English: The eldest son went and did as his father said.

古文：庄生曰： 疾去毋留，即弟出，勿问所以然。 
现代文：庄生说： 你赶快离开，不要停留，即使令弟被放出来，也不要问他为什么。 
English: Zhuang Sheng said, "You should leave as soon as possible, don't stay. Even if your brother is released, don't ask him why.

古文：长男阳去，不过庄生而私留楚贵人所。
现代文：长男假装离去，也不告诉庄生，而私下留在楚国一个贵人的家里。
English: The eldest son pretended to leave without telling Zhuang Sheng, but secretly stayed at the home of a dignitary in Chu.

古文：庄生故贫，然以廉直重，楚王以下皆师事之。朱公进金，未有意受也，欲事成后复归之以为信耳。而朱公长男不解其意，以为殊无短长。
现代文：庄生很穷，但以廉洁正直被人尊重，楚王以下的人都以老师的礼数来敬事他，陶朱公送的金子，他无意接受，想在事成后归还以表诚信，而陶朱公的长男不了解庄生，以为他只是个平平常常的普通人而已。
English: Zhuang Sheng was very poor, but he was respected for his honesty and integrity. People from King Chu on down honored him with the etiquette of a teacher. He had no intention of accepting the gold sent by Tao Zhu Gong, but wanted to return it in good faith after the event. However, Tao Zhu Gong's eldest son did not understand Zhuang Sheng and thought he was just an ordinary person.

古文：庄生以间入见楚王，言某范蠡星某宿不利楚，独为德可除之。
现代文：庄生利用机会入宫见楚王，说明某某星宿不利，若楚国能独自修德，则可以解除。
English: Zhuang Sheng took advantage of the opportunity to enter the palace to see King Chu, indicating that a certain star was unfavorable, and if Chu could cultivate virtue alone, it could be lifted.

古文：王素信生，即使使封三钱之府，贵人惊告朱公长男曰： 王且赦，每赦，必封三钱之府。 
现代文：楚王向来信任庄生，立刻派人封闭三钱之府。楚国贵人很惊奇地告诉陶朱公的长男说： 楚王将要大赦了。因为每次大赦一定封闭三钱之府。 
English: King Chu had always trusted Zhuang Sheng and immediately sent someone to close the Three Coins House. The dignitary of the State of Chu was surprised and told the eldest son of Tao Zhu Gong: "King Chu will grant a general amnesty. Because every time there is a general amnesty, the Three Coins House must be closed."

古文：长男以为赦，弟固当出，千金虚弃，乃复见庄生。
现代文：长男认为遇到大赦，弟弟本来就当出狱，则一千两黄金是白花的，于是又去见庄生。
English: The eldest son thought that if there was an amnesty, his younger brother should have been released from prison in the first place, and that a thousand taels of gold was nothing, so he went to see Zhuang Sheng again.

古文：生惊曰： 若不去耶？ 
现代文：庄生惊讶地说： 你没有离开吗？ 
English: Zhuang Sheng was surprised and said, "You didn't leave?"

古文：长男曰： 固也，弟今且赦，故辞去。 
现代文：长男说： 是啊。我弟弟很幸运在今天碰上楚王大赦，所以来告辞。 
English: The eldest son said, "Yes. My younger brother was very lucky to encounter the amnesty of King Chu today, so he came to say goodbye."

古文：生知其意，令自入室取金去。
现代文：庄生知道他的意思，便叫他自己进去拿黄金回去。
English: Zhuang Sheng knew what he meant and told him to go in and take the gold back.

古文：庄生羞为孺子所卖，乃入见楚王曰： 王欲以修德禳星，乃道路喧传陶之富人朱公子杀人囚楚，其家多持金钱赂王左右，故王赦，非能恤楚国之众也，特以朱公子故。 
现代文：长男这么做，使庄生感到非常不舒服，就入宫见楚王说： 大王想修德除灾，但外头老百姓传言陶的富人朱公子杀人，囚禁在楚国，他的家人拿了很多钱来贿赂大王左右的人，所以大王这次大赦，并非真正怜恤楚国的民众，只是为了开释朱公子而已。 
English: The eldest son did this, which made Zhuang Sheng feel very uncomfortable. He went to the palace to see King Chu and said: The great king wants to cultivate virtue and eliminate disasters, but the common people outside have rumored that the rich man Zhu Gongzi, who killed Tao, was imprisoned in Chu. His family took a lot of money to bribe the people around the great king. Therefore, the great king's amnesty this time is not really compassionate to the people of Chu, but only to release Zhu Gongzi.

古文：王大怒，令论杀朱公子，明日下赦令。
现代文：楚王很生气，立即下令杀朱公子，第二天才下大赦令。
English: King Chu was very angry and immediately ordered Zhu Gongzi to be killed. The next day, he issued an amnesty.

古文：于是朱公长男竟持弟丧归，其母及邑人尽哀之，朱公独笑曰： 吾固知必杀其弟也，彼非不爱弟，顾少与我俱，见苦为生难，故重弃财。至如少弟者，生而见我富，乘坚策肥，岂知财所从来哉!
现代文：于是陶朱公的长男最后只有运弟弟的尸体回家，他的母亲及乡人都很哀伤，陶朱公却笑着说： 我本来就知道他一定会害死自己的弟弟。他并不是不爱弟弟，只是从小和我在一起，见惯了生活的艰苦，所以特别重视身外之财；至于小弟，生下来就见到我富贵，过惯富裕的生活，哪里知道钱财是怎么来的。
English: As a result, the eldest son of Tao Zhu Gong finally only had to carry the body of his younger brother home. His mother and villagers were very sad, but Tao Zhu Gong smiled and said: I knew he would definitely kill his younger brother. He did not dislike his younger brother, but he had been with me since childhood and was accustomed to the hardships of life, so he paid special attention to external wealth; as for his younger brother, he was born to see me rich, accustomed to a wealthy life, and who knows where the money came from.

古文：吾遣少子，独为其能弃财也，而长者不能，卒以杀其弟。一一事之理也，无足怪者，吾日夜固以望其丧之来也! 
现代文：我派小儿子去，只因为他能丢得开财物，而长男做不到，最后害死弟弟，是很正常的，一点不值得奇怪，我本来就等着他带着丧事回来。 评译
English: I sent my younger son because he was able to get away with it, but my older son couldn't, and he ended up killing his brother, which was normal and not at all strange, and I was expecting him to come back with a funeral.

