古文：真宗时，并州谋帅，上谓辅臣曰： 如张齐贤、温仲舒皆可任，但以其尝历枢近，或有固辞，宜召至中书询问，愿往则授之。 
现代文：真宗时，谋求并州将帅的人选，真宗对辅政大臣说： 象张齐贤、温仲舒都可以胜任此职，只是因为他们曾经在枢密院供职，有时会坚决推辞，应该把二人召至中书省询问二下，如果他们愿意前往就授予官职。 
English: When Zhenzong was looking for a candidate for the position of concurrent prefect, Zhenzong said to the Vice-Minister of State: Like Zhang Qixian and Wen Zhongshu, they are both qualified for this position, but because they once served in the Privy Council, sometimes they will firmly refuse, the two should be summoned to the Central Literature Department for questioning, and if they are willing to go, they will be granted official positions.

古文：及召二人至，齐贤辞以恐为人所谗。
现代文：等到把二人召至中书省，张齐贤以恐怕被别入进谗言来推辞。
English: When the two were summoned to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, Zhang Qixian refused, saying that he was afraid of being singled out for criticism.

古文：仲舒曰： 非敢有辞，但在尚书班已十年，若得改官端揆，赐都部署添给，敢不承命？ 
现代文：温仲舒说： 不敢有推辞之言，只是我在尚书之位已经十年了，如果改任我为执政大臣，赐给都部署之职，增添体禄，敢不听命吗？ 
English: Wen Zhongshu said: I don't dare to make any excuses, but I have been in the position of writing for ten years. If I am reappointed as the ruling minister, given the position of deployment, and added dignity, dare not disobey?

古文：辅臣以闻，上曰： 是皆不欲往也，勿强之。 
现代文：辅政大臣把他们的话传达给皇上，皇上说： 这是不打算前往任职，不要勉强他们。 
English: The Vice-Minister of State conveyed their words to the Emperor, and the Emperor said, "This is because they do not intend to go to work, do not force them."

古文：王元之自翰林学士以本官刑部郎中知黄州，遣其子嘉祐献书于中书门下，以为： 朝廷设官，进退必以礼，一失错置，咎在廊庙。
现代文：王元之自翰林学士以本官刑部郎中知黄州，派遣他的儿子嘉祐到中书门下献书，认为： 朝廷设官，是进是退必按照礼节，一但失当，错误派官，罪责在于朝廷决策大臣。
English: Wang Yuanzhi sent his son Jia Yu to the Chinese Academy of Letters to present a book to the Chinese Academy of Letters. Wang Yuanzhi knew Huangzhou from his time as a scholar of Hanlin and as a junior official in the criminal investigation department. He believed that the court appointed officials in accordance with etiquette, but it was inappropriate and wrong to appoint officials, and the blame lay with the decision-making ministers of the court.

古文：某一任翰林学士，三任制诰舍人，以国朝旧事言之，或得给事中，或得侍郎，或为谏议大夫。
现代文：我一任翰林学士，三任制诰舍人，按照本朝的惯例来说，或者得给事中，或者侍郎，或者为谏议大夫。
English: I am a scholar of Hanlin, a three-term scholar, and according to the practice of this dynasty, I either have to be in the middle of things, or a waiter, or a doctor of debate.

古文：某独异于斯，斥去不转一级，与钱谷俗吏，混然无别，执政不言，人将安仰？ 
现代文：唯独我不一样，离开官位后没有转升一级，和管理钱谷的俗吏，混然没有差别，执政大臣不说，别人将怎么信服？ 
English: However, I am not the same, I have not been promoted to the next level after leaving the post, and there is no difference between me and the laymen who manage Qiangu. If the ruling minister does not speak, how will others be convinced?

古文：予谓仲舒尝为二府，至于自求迁转及增请给；元之一代刚正名臣，至于公移笺书，引例乞转。
现代文：我认为温仲舒曾经为二府大员，至于自己要求升迁及增加体禄；王元之乃是一代刚正名臣，至于公开献书，援引石例，请求升级。
English: I think that Wen Zhongshu was once a member of the two prefectures, and as for himself, he asked for promotion and increase in honor; Wang Yuanzhi was a generation of upright and famous ministers, and as for public dedication, he cited stone examples and requested promotion.

古文：唯其至诚不矫伪故也。
现代文：是由于只有他们的至诚，从不掩饰虚伪啊！
English: It's because they are the only ones who are sincere and never hide their hypocrisy!

古文：后之人外为大言，避宠辞禄，而阴有营求，失其本真者多矣，风俗使然也。
现代文：后来的人表面大言不惭，避宠辞禄，而暗中孜孜以求，失去真诚的人太多了，风俗使然啊！
English: People of later times were ostensibly boastful, avoiding flattery, but secretly earnestly seeking it. There are too many people who have lost their sincerity, because of customs!

