古文：孝哀皇帝，元帝庶孙，定陶恭王子也。
现代文：孝哀皇帝，是汉元帝的庶孙，定陶恭王的儿子。
English: Emperor Xiao Ai was the great-grandson of Emperor Han Yuan and the son of King Ding Tao Gong.

古文：母曰丁姬。
现代文：母亲是丁姬。
English: Her mother is Ding Ji.

古文：年三岁嗣立为王，长好文辞法律。
现代文：三岁时嗣立为王，成人后爱好文辞法律。
English: At the age of three, he was crowned king. As an adult, he became interested in literature and law.

古文：元延四年入朝，尽从傅、相、中尉。
现代文：元延四年入都朝见成帝，他的傅、相、中尉都一同前来。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Yuan Yan went to the capital to see Emperor Zheng, and his chief, minister, and lieutenant all came with him.

古文：时成帝少弟中山孝王亦来朝，独从傅。
现代文：此时成帝的少弟中山孝王也来朝见，却只有傅同来。
English: At this time, Emperor Cheng's younger brother, Zhongshan Xiao Wang, also came to see the emperor, but only Fu Tong came.

古文：上怪之，以问定陶王，对曰： 令，诸侯王朝，得从其国二千石。
现代文：上甚不解，就问定陶王，定陶王答道： 朝廷有令，各侯王来朝，其封国爵在二千石的官吏应一同前来。
English: When he was puzzled, he asked King Ding Tao. King Ding Tao replied, "The Imperial Court has issued an order that all princes and queens should come to the Imperial Court, and their officials with the title of nobility of 2,000 koku should come with them.

古文：傅、相、中尉皆国二千石，故尽从之。 
现代文：傅、相、中尉都是二千石，所以都应该一同前来。 
English: Fu, So, and Lieutenants are all 2,000 koku, so they should all come together.

古文：上令诵《诗》，通习，能说。
现代文：皇上叫他背诵《诗》，都很熟悉，且能说明其义。
English: The emperor asked him to recite the "Poems," which were all familiar and could explain their meaning.

古文：他日问中山王： 独从傅在何法令？ 
现代文：又一日，成帝问中山王： 只要傅同来是根据哪条法令？ 
English: The next day, Emperor Cheng asked King Zhongshan: As long as Fu Tong is here, according to which law?

古文：不能对。
现代文：中山王无言以对。
English: I can't answer that.

古文：令诵《尚书》，又废。
现代文：叫他背诵《尚书》，中间又遗忘了。
English: He was asked to recite "Shang Shu" and forgot it in the middle.

古文：及赐食于前，后饱；起下，袜系解。
现代文：成帝请他吃饭，别人吃完了他还在吃，离席时，连袜带子也掉下来了。
English: Emperor Chengdi invited him to dinner. When the others had finished eating, he was still eating. When he left the table, even his garter fell off.

古文：成帝由此以为不能，而贤定陶王，数称其材。
现代文：成帝看到这些就认为中山王是个无能的人，而对定陶王则十分喜欢，经常夸他的才能。
English: When Emperor Cheng saw this, he thought that King Zhongshan was an incompetent person, while King Dingtao was very fond of him and often praised his talent.

古文：时王祖母傅太后随王来朝，私赂遗上所幸赵昭仪及帝舅票骑将军曲阳侯王根。
现代文：此时定陶王的祖母傅太后陪同来朝，私下馈赠成帝所宠爱的赵昭仪及帝舅骠骑将军、曲阳侯王根。
English: At this time, King Ding Tao's grandmother, Empress Dowager Fu, accompanied him to the DPRK and privately presented the Emperor's favorite Zhao Zhaoyi and the Emperor's uncle, the cavalry general, Prince Quyang Wanggen.

古文：昭仪及根见上亡子，亦欲豫自结为长久计，皆更称定陶王，劝帝以为嗣。
现代文：赵昭仪及王根见皇上无子，也想早日与一位合适的王子建立关系保持自己的富贵长久，就都极力夸奖定陶王，劝成帝立他为太子。
English: Zhao Zhaoyi and Wang Gen saw that the emperor had no son, and they also wanted to establish a relationship with a suitable prince as soon as possible to maintain their wealth for a long time. They both praised King Ding Tao and persuaded Emperor Cheng to make him the prince.

古文：成帝亦自美其材，为加元服而遣之，时年十七矣。
现代文：成帝也很欣赏定陶王才能，就在朝中为他举行成人加冠礼后遣他回封地定陶，此时十七岁了。
English: Emperor Cheng also appreciated King Ding Tao's talent, and after holding an adult coronation ceremony for him in the court, he sent him back to the fiefdom of Ding Tao, at this time he was seventeen years old.

古文：明年，使执金吾任宏守大鸿胪，持节征定陶王，立为皇太子。
现代文：第二年，皇上派执金吾任宏代理大鸿胪，持帝诏召定陶王，立为皇太子。
English: In the second year, the emperor sent Jinwuerinhong to act as the representative of Dahongye, holding the imperial rescript to appoint Tao Wang and establish him as the crown prince.

古文：谢曰： 臣幸得继父守籓为诸侯王，材质不足以假充太子之宫。
现代文：定陶王谢诏说： 小臣有幸得继承先父守藩为诸侯王，才能德性都不够进入太子之宫。
English: Ding Tao Wang Xie Zhao said: "The junior minister is fortunate to inherit his father's domain as the prince of princes, but talent and virtue are not enough to enter the prince's palace.

古文：陛下圣德宽仁，敬承祖宗，奉顺神祇，宜蒙福晁子孙千亿之报。
现代文：陛下圣德宽仁，敬承祖宗，奉顺神祗，理应受天之福多子多孙。
English: Your majesty is a saintly and benevolent person, respects the ancestors, obeys the gods, and deserves to be blessed with many children and grandchildren.

古文：臣愿且得留国邸，旦夕奉问起居，俟有圣嗣，归国守籓。 
现代文：臣愿暂居京都馆舍，晨昏奉问皇上起居，待皇上有圣嗣之后，就归封国守藩。 
English: The vassals would like to stay in the Kyoto residence for a while. In the morning, they would like to ask the emperor to live there. After the emperor has a heir, they will return to the domain of the national guard.

古文：书奉，天子报闻。
现代文：书上奏后，天子说都知道了。
English: After the performance of the book, Tianzi said that they all knew.

古文：后月余，立楚孝王孙景为定陶王，奉恭王祀，所以奖厉太子专为后之谊。
现代文：一个多月过后，下诏书立楚孝王孙刘景为定陶王，奉定陶恭王祭祀，这是为了奖励太子重视宗桃的品行。
English: More than a month later, the next imperial edict established that King Chu Xiao and King Sun Liu Jing were to be enshrined as King Ding Tao, and King Ding Tao as King Gong. This was to reward the prince for valuing Zongtao's moral conduct.

古文：语在《外戚传》。
现代文：具体记载在《汉书·外戚传》。
English: For the details, see "Hanshu, Gaozhi Zhuang."

古文：绥和二年三月，成帝崩。
现代文：绥和二年三月，成帝驾崩。
English: In March of the following year, Emperor Chengde passed away.

古文：四月丙午，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙。
现代文：四月初四日，太子即皇帝位，拜谒汉高祖庙。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, the prince, that is, the emperor, paid homage to the Han Gao Ancestral Temple.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为太后。
English: The respected empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the empress is the empress dowager.

古文：大赦天下。赐宗室王子有属者马各一驷，吏民爵，百户牛酒，三老、孝弟、力田、鳏、寡、孤、独帛。
现代文：大赦天下，赏赐宗室王子尚在五服之中的马各一乘，吏民加爵，每百户牛酒若干，三老、孝悌力田、鳏寡孤独各赐布帛。
English: He granted a general amnesty to the whole world, and rewarded each of the princes of the imperial family who were still in the middle of their five years of service with a horse ride, officials and commoners with a peerage, a certain amount of cattle and wine for every hundred households, and the three elders, filial piety and virtue, and widows and widowers and the lonely with cloth bags.

古文：太皇太后诏尊定陶恭王为恭皇。
现代文：太皇太后下诏尊定陶恭王为恭皇。
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial edict designating King Tao of Gong as the King of Gong.

古文：五月丙戌，立皇后傅氏。诏曰： 《春秋》 母以子贵 ，奠定陶太后曰恭皇太后，丁姬曰恭皇后，各置左右詹事，食邑如长信宫、中宫。 
现代文：五月十九日，立傅氏为皇后，下诏说： 《春秋》有言 母以子贵， 现尊定陶太后为恭皇太后，丁姬为恭皇后，各设左右省视官员，食邑与太后，皇后相同。 
English: On May 19th, the Fu clan was established as the empress, and the following edict was issued: "In Spring and Autumn, there is a saying that mother is more valuable than son. Now, it is decided that the Dowager Empress Tao will be the Dowager Empress Gong, and Ding Ji will be the Dowager Empress Gong. The left and right sides will be set up as provincial officials, and the food will be the same as the Dowager Empress and the Empress.

古文：追尊傅父为崇祖侯、丁父为褒德侯。
现代文：追赠傅太后之父为崇祖侯，恭皇后丁姬之父为褒德侯。
English: The father of Empress Dowager Fu was Chong Zuo, and the father of Empress Dowager Ding Ji was Baode.

古文：封舅丁明为阳安侯，舅丁满为平周侯。
现代文：封舅父丁明为阳安侯，舅父子丁满为平周侯。
English: Feng's uncle Ding Ming was Yang Anhou, and his uncle Ding Man was Ping Zhouhou.

古文：追谥满父忠为平周怀侯，皇后父晏为孔乡侯，皇太后弟侍中光禄大夫赵钦为新成侯。
现代文：追谥丁满之父丁忠为平周怀侯，皇后父傅晏为孔乡侯，皇太后之弟侍中光禄大夫赵钦为新成侯。
English: Ding Zhong, the father of Ding Man, was the Prince of Ping Zhou, the father of the Empress Fu Xi was the Prince of Kong Township, and the brother of the Empress Dowager, Zhao Qin, was the Prince of Xincheng.

古文：六月，诏曰： 郑声淫而乱乐，圣王所放，其罢乐府。 
现代文：六月，下诏说： 郑声淫而乱乐，圣人所弃，现在罢免乐府。 
English: In June, the following edict was issued: "Zheng Xiangxing and chaotic music, abandoned by sages, now dismissed from the Music Office."

古文：曲阳侯根前以大司马建社稷策，益封二千户。
现代文：曲阳侯王根曾以大司马建议立太子以安社稷，加封二千户。
English: Wang Gen, the Marquis of Quyang, once suggested that the crown prince should be crowned with the title of Prince of Anzhe, which resulted in an additional 2,000 households.

古文：太仆安阳侯舜辅导有旧恩，益封五百户，及丞相孔光、大司空汜乡侯何武益封各千户。
现代文：太仆安阳侯舜辅导有旧恩，加封五百户，另外丞相孔光，大司空汜乡侯何武各加封千户。
English: The eunuch, Anyang Houyi, had the old grace to add five hundred households, and the prime minister, Kong Guang, and the chief magistrate, Kuangxuan Township, Hou Hewu, each added a thousand households.

古文：诏曰： 河间王良丧太后三年，为宗室仪表，益封万户。 
现代文：下诏说： 河间王良为太后服丧三年，是宗室表率，加封一万户。 
English: The next edict said: "Kawama Wangliang has been mourning the death of the empress dowager for three years, is the head of the family, and has been awarded 10,000 additional households.

古文：又曰： 制节谨度以防奢淫，为政所先，百王不易之道也。
现代文：诏文又说： 制节谨慎适度以防止奢淫，是为政的首要任务，是历代不可改易的常法。
English: The imperial edict also said: To prevent extravagance, it is the primary task of politics to establish a prudent and appropriate system of restrictions, which is an unchangeable common law throughout the ages.

古文：诸侯王、列侯、公主、吏二千石及豪富民多畜奴婢，田宅亡限，与民争利，百姓失职，重困不足。
现代文：各侯王、列侯、公主、吏二千石及豪富民多富奴婢，田宅无限，与民争利使百姓失其常业，处于严重困境。
English: The lords, princes, princesses, and officials of 2,000 koku, the rich and the poor, the rich and the slaves, the unlimited fields and houses, and the people's struggles and interests have caused the people to lose their usual occupation, and they are in a serious predicament.

古文：其议限列。 
现代文：应制定限禁的条例。 
English: There should be a statute of limitations.

古文：有司条奏： 诸王、列侯得名田国中，列侯在长安及公主名田县道，关内侯、吏民名田，皆无得过三十顷。
现代文：有关官员条呈： 各王、列侯能在其封国占有的田地，列侯在长安及公主在各县道占有的田地，关内侯、吏民占有的田地，都不得超过三十顷。
English: According to the relevant officials: the fields that kings and lords can occupy in their fiefdoms, the fields that lords can occupy in Chang'an and princesses can occupy in county roads, and the fields that Guanai lords and officials can occupy must not exceed thirty hectares.

古文：诸侯王奴婢二百人，列侯、公主百人，关内侯、吏民三十人。
现代文：各侯王奴婢二百人，列侯、公主百人，关内侯、吏民三十人。
English: Each lord had 200 slaves and maids of honour, 100 lieutenants and princesses, and 30 vassals and officials.

古文：年六十以上，十岁以下，不在数中。
现代文：年六十以上、十岁以下，不在此数额之中。
English: Those over the age of 60 and under the age of 10 are not included in this amount.

古文：贾人皆不得名田、为吏，犯者以律论。
现代文：商人都不允许占田、为吏，犯者按法论处。
English: Merchants are not allowed to occupy fields or act as officials, and offenders will be dealt with according to the law.

古文：诸名田、畜、奴婢过品，皆没入县官。
现代文：凡是占田与畜奴婢超过限额的，都没收入县官。
English: Any county officials whose farmland and livestock exceed the quota are not paid.

古文：齐三服官、诸官织绮绣，难成，害女红之物，皆止，无作输。
现代文：齐三服官、诸官所织的绮绣、技术复杂难以达到这劳害女工之物，都停止制作，已制成的也不允许献纳。
English: The production of embroidered robes, which were woven by three different officials and officials, and which were technically complex and difficult to achieve, and which were harmful to female workers, was stopped, and those that had already been made were not allowed to be donated.

古文：除任子令及诽谤诋欺法。
现代文：撤销任二千石职达三年可以任一子为郎以及诽谤欺诬论罪之法。
English: Revocation of the law that any son of a 2,000-koku post for up to three years can be a son, and the law on the crime of defamation and deception.

古文：掖庭宫人年三十以下，出嫁之。
现代文：内宫宫人在三十岁以下的，可以出嫁。
English: Inner palace courtiers under the age of thirty can get married.

古文：官奴婢五十以上，免为庶人。
现代文：官家奴婢五十岁以上的，免去奴婢籍而为平民。
English: The servants and maidservants of officials and families who are over fifty years old shall be exempted from the status of servants and maidservants and shall become commoners.

古文：禁郡国无得献名兽。
现代文：郡国不许献珍禽异兽。
English: The county is not allowed to donate rare birds and animals.

古文：益吏三百石以下奉。
现代文：增加吏禄在三百石以下的俸禄。
English: An increase in the salary of officials earning less than 300 koku.

古文：察吏残贼酷虐者，以时退。
现代文：主持考察的官吏残暴酷虐的，发现后即时免职。
English: The official who presided over the inspection was found to be brutal and cruel, and was immediately removed from office.

古文：有司无得举赦前往事。
现代文：有关官员不得加重或赦免以前已作处置的旧案。
English: Relevant officials must not aggravate or pardon old cases that have already been dealt with.

古文：博士弟子父母死，予宁三年。 
现代文：博士弟子父母死，赐与归家三年的服丧期。 
English: After the death of the parents of a doctoral disciple, he was given a three-year mourning period before returning home.

古文：秋，曲阳侯王根、成都侯王况皆有罪，根就国，况免为庶人，归故郡。
现代文：秋，曲阳侯王根、成都侯王况都有罪。王根离开京师到封地去，王况削职为民，回老家去。
English: In the autumn, Quyang lord Wang Gen and Chengdu lord Wang Quan were both found guilty. Wang Gen left Beijing to go to his fief, while Wang Quan resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：诏曰： 朕承宗庙之重，战战兢兢，惧失天心。
现代文：下诏说： 朕继承大统的重任，战战兢兢惧失天心。
English: The next edict said: "I have inherited the important task of the grand unification, and I am trembling with fear of losing my heavenly heart.

古文：间者日月亡光，五星失行，郡国比比地动。
现代文：近来日月无光，五行失行，郡国经常发生地震。
English: Recently, the sun and moon have been dark, the five elements have been out of action, and earthquakes often occur in the county.

古文：乃者河南、颍川郡水出，流杀人民，坏败庐舍。
现代文：同时河南、颍川郡黄河决口，淹死百姓，冲坏屋舍。
English: At the same time, the Yellow River in Henan and Luochuan County broke its banks, drowning people and destroying houses.

古文：朕之不德，民反蒙辜，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：朕的德行浅薄。以致百姓遭罪，朕深感恐惧。
English: I am deeply afraid that my virtue is shallow and that the people will suffer.

古文：已遣光禄大夫循行举籍，赐死者棺钱，人三千。
现代文：已派光禄大夫巡视灾区举其名籍，赐死者棺木之费，每人三千。
English: Dr. Guanglu has been sent to inspect the disaster area to name names and give the deceased coffin fee of three thousand per person.

古文：其令水所伤县邑及他郡国灾害什四以上，民赀不满十万，皆无出今年租赋。 
现代文：令遭受水灾的县邑及其他郡国因灾害减收四成以上，人民资财不满十万的，都免除今年租赋。 
English: The counties, townships and other counties and provinces that have suffered from floods and have lost more than 40% of their income due to disasters, and whose people's assets are less than 100,000, are exempt from this year's rent.

古文：建平元年春正月，赦天下。
现代文：建平元年春正月，赦免天下。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Jianping, the world was pardoned.

古文：侍中骑都尉新成侯赵钦、成阳侯赵皆有罪，免为庶人，徙辽西。
现代文：侍中骑都尉新成侯赵欣，成阳侯赵讠斤皆有罪，废其爵为平民，放徙到辽西。
English: Zhao Xin, the lord of Xincheng, Zhao Xin, the lord of Chengyang, and Zhao Bingjin, the captain of the cavalry, were all guilty. They were stripped of their titles and exiled to the west of Liaoning.

古文：太皇太后诏外家王氏田非冢茔，皆以赋贫民。
现代文：太皇太后下诏说： 外戚家王氏田地不是冢域场，都交给贫民耕种。 
English: The empress dowager issued an edict saying, "The fields of the Wang family, my maternal relatives, are not fields of rice fields, but are to be farmed by the poor.

古文：二月，诏曰： 盖闻圣王之治，以得贤为首。
现代文：二月，皇上下诏说： 曾闻圣王得以国泰民安，实以能启用贤才为首。
English: In February, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: It was once said that the holy king was able to keep the country and the people safe, but it was actually the wise men who were able to lead the way.

古文：其与大司马、列侯、将军、中二千石、州牧、守、相举孝弟厚能直言通政事，延于侧陋可亲民者，各一人。 
现代文：现诏付大司马、列侯、将军、中二千石、州牧、守、相等举荐孝悌淳直能直言通政事，虽地位低微亦可担任治民之官，每人荐一人。 
English: At present, grand steward, vassal lord, general, junior vassal of 2,000 koku, state herdsman, and governor are recommended equally. Filial piety and straightforwardness can be used to communicate politics, and although the status is low, it can also serve as a civil servant. Each person recommends one person.

古文：三月，赐诸侯王、公主、列侯、丞相、将军、中二千石、中都、郎吏金、钱、帛，各有差。
现代文：三月，赐各侯王、公主、列侯、相、丞相、将军、中二千石、中都官郎吏金钱布帛，各有等差。
English: In March, each lord, princess, vassal lord, minister, josei minister, general, junior vassal of 2,000 koku, junior vassal of the capital, and junior vassal of the capital were given money cloth bags, each with a difference.

古文：冬，中山孝王太后媛、弟宜乡侯冯参有罪，皆自杀。
现代文：冬季，中山孝王太后冯媛、太后弟宜乡侯冯参有罪，全都自杀了。
English: In the winter, Zhongshan Xiaowang's empress dowager Feng Yuan and her younger brother Yixiang Hou Feng San were found guilty and all committed suicide.

古文：二年春三月，罢大司空，复御史大夫。
现代文：二年春三月，罢设大司空，恢复御史大夫。
English: In the spring and March of the following year, the position of Daishi-kuro was abolished, and the position of Mishi-taifu was reinstated.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 汉家之制，推亲亲以显尊尊。
现代文：夏季四月，下诏说： 汉家制度，对天子之至亲，当极尊号。
English: In the summer of April, the following edict was issued: The Han system, the closest relative to the heavenly son, should be highly respected.

古文：定陶恭皇之号不宜复称定陶。
现代文：定陶恭皇的号不应再称定陶。
English: Ding Tao should no longer be called Ding Tao.

古文：尊恭皇太后曰帝太太后，称永信宫；恭皇后曰帝太后，称中安宫。
现代文：尊恭皇太后为帝太太后，称永信宫；恭皇后为帝太后，称中安宫。
English: After the Empress Dowager Zongyong became the wife of the emperor, it was called Yongxin Palace; after the Empress Dowager Zongyong became the empress dowager, it was called Zhongan Palace.

古文：立恭皇庙于京师。
现代文：立恭皇庙于京师。
English: Rikkyo Imperial Temple was built in Kyoto.

古文：赦天下徒。 
现代文：赦免天下被流放的罪犯。 
English: pardoning exiled criminals around the world.

古文：罢州牧，复刺史。
现代文：罢设州牧，恢复刺史。
English: Set up state pastures, restore grazing history.

古文：六月庚申，帝太后丁氏崩。
现代文：六月初五日，皇太后丁氏去世。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Ding passed away on the 5th of June.

古文：上曰： 朕闻夫妇一体。
现代文：皇上说： 朕闻夫妇为一体。
English: The emperor said, "My wife and I are one.

古文：《诗》云： 谷则异室，死则同穴。 
现代文：《诗》说： 生则异内外之室，死则同冢墓之穴。 
English: "Poetry" says: "Birth is the chamber of the inside and outside, and death is the pit of the coffin."

古文：昔季武子成寝，杜氏之殡在西阶下，请合葬而许之。
现代文：昔日鲁大夫季武子的寝陵修成后，其妻杜氏之殡在西阶下，子孙请求合葬而得到同意。
English: Once upon a time, after the construction of the mausoleum of Lu Doctor Ji Muxi, the funeral of his wife, Du Shi, was held under the west steps, and his children and grandchildren requested to be buried together, which was approved.

古文：附葬之礼，自周兴焉。 郁郁乎文哉！
现代文：附葬之礼，从周朝就兴起了。孔子说： 周朝的仪典文章大备啊！
English: Funeral rites have been on the rise since the Zhou Dynasty. Confucius said, "Let's prepare the ritual articles for the Zhou Dynasty!"

古文：吾从周。 
现代文：我遵循周礼。 
English: I advocate accepting the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孝子事亡如事存。
现代文：孝子事死者如事生者。
English: Filial piety to the dead is like filial piety to the living.

古文：帝太后宜起陵恭皇之园。 
现代文：皇太后应起陵于恭皇之陵园。 
English: The empress dowager should be buried in the mausoleum of Emperor Qianlong.

古文：遂葬定陶。
现代文：于是葬丁太后于定陶。
English: As a result, Empress Dowager Ding was buried in Dingtao.

古文：发陈留、济阴近郡国五万人穿复土。
现代文：征集陈留、济阴附近郡国五万人开挖墓穴并进行封土。
English: Fifty thousand people from counties near Chenliu and Jiyin were recruited to dig graves and carry out soil sealing.

古文：待诏夏贺良等言赤精子之谶，汉家历运中衰，当再受命，宜改元、易号。
现代文：待诏夏贺良等作汉高祖为赤帝之精的谶言，说汉家历运中衰，应再受天命，要改元易号。
English: Emperor Xia He Liang and others wrote the eulogy of Han Gao Zu as the spirit of the Red Emperor, saying that the Han family was in the middle of a decline, and should again accept the mandate of heaven, and change the name of Yuan Yi.

古文：诏曰： 汉兴二百载，历数开元。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 汉兴二百年，历数开元。
English: The imperial edict said: Han Xing is two hundred years old, and the calendar is one thousand years old.

古文：皇天降非材之佑，汉国再获受命之符，朕之不德，曷敢不通！
现代文：皇天保佑朕这不才之人，汉国再获受命之符，朕的德行菲薄，岂敢不遵！
English: May the Emperor bless me, a man of no talent, so that China may once again receive the seal of command. My virtue is feeble, how dare I disobey!

古文：夫基事之元命，必与天下自新，其大赦天下。
现代文：大凡更受天的大命，必须改制更新，现大赦天下。
English: Great and more by the great mandate of heaven, must be reformed and updated, and now amnesty to the world.

古文：以建平二年为太初元年。号曰陈圣刘太平皇帝。
现代文：以建平二年为太初元将元年，号称陈圣刘太平皇帝。
English: Jianping two years is the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year, known as Chen Sheng Liu Taiping Emperor.

古文：漏刻以百二十为度。 
现代文：漏刻以一百二十为度。 
English: Leakage is one hundred and twenty degrees.

古文：七月，以渭城西北原上永陵亭部为初陵。
现代文：七月，以渭城西北原上永陵亭都为初陵。
English: In July, the Yongling Pavilion on the plain northwest of Fucheng was designated as the first mausoleum.

古文：勿徙郡国民，使得自安。
现代文：勿须迁徙郡国居民，使他们能自安。
English: There is no need to relocate the county residents so that they can live in peace.

古文：八月，诏曰： 待诏夏贺良等建言改元、易号，增益漏刻，可以永安国家。
现代文：八月，下诏说： 待诏夏贺良等建议改元易号，增加漏刻，可以使国家长治久安。
English: In August, the next imperial edict said: It is necessary to wait for the imperial edict of Xia He Liang and other suggestions to change the Yuan and Yi number and increase the leaks, which can make the country enjoy long-term peace and stability.

古文：朕过听贺良等言，冀为海内获福，卒亡嘉应。
现代文：朕过于听信贺良等言，希望为四海造福，然而并无什么福祉降临。
English: I listened too much to the words of Hera and others, hoping to benefit the four seas, but nothing good came of it.

古文：皆违经背古，不合时宜。
现代文：他们的建议都是违经背古、逆时而动的。
English: All of their suggestions are against the teachings of the past and go against the times.

古文：六月甲子制书，非赦令也皆蠲除之。
现代文：六月初九日所下诏书，除赦令以外，一律取消。
English: The edict issued on the 9th day of the 6th month, with the exception of the pardon, was cancelled.

古文：贺良等反道惑众，下有司。 
现代文：贺良等反道惑众，交付执法部门处置。 
English: Hera and other anti-Mao agitators will be handed over to law enforcement authorities for disposition.

古文：皆伏辜。
现代文：夏贺良等都伏罪。
English: Xia He Liang and others all committed the crime of hiding.

古文：丞相博、御史大夫玄、孔乡侯晏有罪。
现代文：丞相朱博、御史大夫赵立、孔乡侯傅宴有罪。
English: Consul-General Zhu Bo, Imperial Historian Zhao Li, and Kongxiang Hou Fuyan were found guilty.

古文：博自杀，玄减死二等论，晏削户四分之一。
现代文：朱博自杀，赵立减死二等论罪，傅宴削减食邑户四分之一。
English: Zhu Bo committed suicide, Zhao Li's death was reduced to a second-class crime, and the banquet was reduced by a quarter.

古文：语在《博传》。
现代文：其事记在《朱博传》中。
English: The story is recorded in Zhu Bo's Biography.

古文：三年春正月，立广德夷王弟广汉为广平王。
现代文：三年春正月，立广德夷王弟广汉为广平王。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Guang Dehi's younger brother, Guang Han, was made the king of Guangping.

古文：癸卯，帝太太后所居桂宫正殿火。
现代文：正月二十一日，皇太后所居桂宫正殿火灾。
English: On the 21st day of the first month, a fire broke out in the main hall of the Empress Dowager's residence, Katsura Palace.

古文：三月己酉，丞相当薨。
现代文：三月二十八日，丞相平当去世。
English: On March 28th, the prime minister, Pingtang, passed away.

古文：有星孛于河鼓。
现代文：有彗星出现于河鼓间。
English: A comet appeared between the river drums.

古文：夏六月，立鲁顷王子郚乡侯闵为王。
现代文：夏六月，立鲁顷王子吾阝乡侯闵为王。
English: In the summer of June, the prince of Wushan Township, Hou Yi, was crowned king.

古文：冬十一月壬子，复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土祠，罢南、北郊。
现代文：冬季十一月初五日，恢复甘泉泰山祭祠、汾阴后土祭祠，取消南北郊祭。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month of winter, the Ganquan Taishan Festival Shrine and the Shuyin Houdu Festival Shrine were restored, and the North and South Suburbs Festival was cancelled.

古文：东平王云、云后谒、安成恭侯夫人放皆有罪。云自杀，谒、放弃市。
现代文：东平王云、云后谒、安成恭侯夫人放都有罪，云自杀，谒、放都处死。
English: Dongping Wangyun, Yun Houyi, and An Chenggyonghou Madam Fang were all guilty, Yun committed suicide, and Bao and Fang were all executed.

古文：四年春，大旱。
现代文：四年春季，发生大旱灾。
English: In the spring of 2004, a severe drought occurred.

古文：关东民传行西王母筹，经历郡国，西入关至京师。
现代文：关东民间传行西王母的神机妙算，经历郡国，西入关到长安。
English: According to the folk tales of Kanto, Xi Wangmo's miraculous and ingenious calculation went through the county, and Xi Guanzhong went to Chang'an.

古文：民又会聚祠西王母，或夜持火上屋，击鼓号呼相惊恐。
现代文：群众又聚集祭祀西王母，有的夜间持火上屋，击鼓号呼互相惊恐。
English: The masses also gathered to worship the Queen of the West, sometimes holding bonfires at night, beating drums and shouting to frighten each other.

古文：二月，封帝太太后从弟侍中傅商为汝昌侯，太后同母弟子侍中郑业为阳信侯。
现代文：二月，封帝太太后从弟侍中傅商为汝昌侯，太后同母弟之子侍中郑业为阳信侯。
English: In February, after the wife of Emperor Feng, Fu Shang, the younger brother's equerry, became Ru Chang Hou, and Zheng Ye, the younger brother's son's equerry, became Yang Xin Hou.

古文：三月，侍中驸马都尉董贤、光禄大夫息夫躬、南阳太守孙宠皆以告东平王封列侯。语在《贤传》。
现代文：三月，侍中驸马都尉董贤、光禄大夫息夫躬、南阳太守孙宠都以告发东平王有功而封为列侯，其事记在《董贤传》中。
English: In March, the chamberlains, Captain Dong Xian, Dr. Guanglu, and the Nanyang governor, Sun Qiao, were all made lords of the manor for their service in denouncing the Dongping King, which was recorded in "The Biography of Dong Xian."

古文：夏五月，赐中二千石至六百石及天下男子爵。
现代文：夏季五月，赐中二千石至六百石及天下男子爵级。
English: In the summer of May, 2,000 koku to 600 koku were awarded to junior high school students, as well as a knighthood.

古文：六月，尊帝太太后为皇太太后。
现代文：六月，尊帝太太后为皇太太后。
English: In June, she became the empress dowager.

古文：秋八月，恭皇园北门灾。
现代文：秋季八月，恭皇园北门发生火灾。
English: In the autumn of August, a fire broke out at the north gate of King's Park.

古文：冬，诏将军、中二千石举明兵法有大虑者。
现代文：冬季，诏令将军，中二千石举荐熟谙兵法有策谋思虑的人。
English: In the winter, the general of the imperial edict, the person who is familiar with the military method and has the strategy and consideration in the middle of two thousand stones.

古文：元寿元年春正月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：元寿元年春季正月初一，发生日偏食。
English: A partial solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yuan Shou.

古文：诏曰： 朕获保宗庙，不明不敏，宿夜忧劳，未皇宁息。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 朕继承大统，不明不敏，深夜忧劳，无暇宁息。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "I am the heir to the throne. I am not well-versed in history. I have to work late into the night. I have no time to rest.

古文：惟阴阳不调，元元不赡，未赌厥咎。
现代文：仍是阳阴不调，百姓不足，不知过错在何处。
English: The yang and yin are still out of kilter, there are not enough people, and I don't know where the fault lies.

古文：娄敕公卿，庶几有望。至今有司执法，未得其中，或上暴虐，假势获名，温良宽柔，陷于亡灭。
现代文：屡令公卿，望其励精图治，至今有关官员执法，没有正确目标，有的残暴凶虐，借势获名，而温良宽柔的人，却受到摧残而亡灭。
English: The relevant officials have been enforcing the law without the correct goal, and some have been cruel and brutal, taking advantage of the situation to gain fame, while the gentle and gentle people have been destroyed and perished.

古文：是故残贼弥长，和睦日衰，百姓愁怨，靡所错躬。
现代文：因之残贼之风日烈，和睦之气日衰，百姓愁苦怨恨，不知如何立身。
English: As a result, the remnants of the bandits are becoming more and more powerful, the spirit of harmony is fading, the people are sad and resentful, and they do not know how to stand up.

古文：乃正月朔，日有蚀之，厥咎不远，在余一人。公卿大夫其各悉心勉帅百寮，敦任仁人，黜远残贼，期于安民。
现代文：于是正月初一，发生日食，其过不远，责任都由朕承担，公卿大夫都要尽心尽力为百僚表率，重用仁人，贬黜残贼，以期安定人民。
English: Therefore, on the first day of the first month of the year, a solar eclipse occurred, which was not far away, and the responsibility was borne by me. The court nobles and doctors should do their best to set an example for the hundred, re-use the benevolent, and disparage the remnants, in order to stabilize the people.

古文：陈朕之过失，无有所讳。
现代文：列举朕的过失，知无不言。
English: Enumerate my faults, I know all about them.

古文：其与将军、列侯、中二千石举贤良方正能直言者各一人。
现代文：可与将军、列侯、中二千石举荐贤良方正能直言的各一人。
English: I can recommend with generals, vassals, and middle-aged men of 2,000 koku, each one of them who can speak frankly.

古文：大赦天下。 
现代文：大赦天下。 
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：丁巳，皇太太后傅氏崩。
现代文：正月十七日，皇太后傅氏驾崩。
English: On the 17th day of the first month, Empress Dowager Fu passed away.

古文：三月，丞相嘉有罪，下狱死。
现代文：三月，丞相王嘉有罪，下狱死。
English: In March, the chancellor Wang Jia was found guilty and died in prison.

古文：秋九月，大司马票骑将军丁明免。
现代文：秋九月，大司马骠骑将军丁明免职。
English: In autumn and September, General Ding Ming, the head of the Horse Cavalry Division, was relieved of his duties.

古文：孝元庙殿门铜龟蛇铺首鸣。
现代文：孝元帝庙殿门铜龟蛇及门铺首发出声音。
English: The bronze turtle and snake at the gate of the Xiaoyuan Imperial Temple and the first to make a sound.

古文：二年春正月，匈奴单于、乌孙大昆弥来朝。
现代文：二年春正月，匈奴王单于鸟孙大昆弥来朝。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, King Xiongnu came to the DPRK alone with the bird Sun Daqun.

古文：二月，归国，单于不说。
现代文：二月，回国，单于不悦。
English: In February, he returned to China, only to be disappointed.

古文：语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：事记在《匈奴传》中。
English: The incident is recorded in the "History of the Huns."

古文：夏四月壬辰晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏季四月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In summer, a partial solar eclipse occurs on April 30.

古文：五月，正三公官公职。
现代文：五月，正三公官分职。
English: In May, he was promoted to the third rank of public official.

古文：大司马卫将军董贤为大司马，丞相孔光为大司徒，御史大夫彭宣为大司空，封长平侯。
现代文：大司马卫将军董贤为大司马，丞相孔光为大司徒，御史大夫彭宣为大司空，封长平侯。
English: Major General Ma Wei Dong Xian was the Major General, Minister Kong Guang was the Major General, Grand Historian Peng Xuan was the Major General, and Fuchang was the Major General.

古文：正司直、司隶，造司寇职，事未定。
现代文：正司直、司隶，创置司寇职，未作最后确定。
English: There is no final decision on whether to create a new position of secretary or inspector, or whether to create a new position of secretary and inspector.

古文：六月戊午，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：六月初三日，哀帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On the third day of the beginning of June, Emperor Ai passed away at the Miyang Palace.

古文：秋九月壬寅，葬义陵。
现代文：秋季九月十八日，葬于义陵。
English: In the autumn, on September 18th, he was buried in Yiling.

古文：赞曰：孝哀自为籓王及充太子之宫，文辞博敏，幼有令闻。
现代文：班固评论：汉哀帝从为藩王到被立为太子，文辞博敏，幼有善闻。
English: Ban Gu's comment: From the time he was the king of the domain to the time he was made the crown prince, Emperor Haenei was a man of eloquence and had a good memory from a young age.

古文：睹孝成世禄去王室，权柄外移，是故临朝娄诛大臣，欲强主威，以则武、宣。
现代文：目睹汉成帝时爵禄尽入王家，权柄转入外戚之手，所以哀帝执政屡诛大臣，意图加强主威，以武帝、宣帝为法。
English: Witnessing that when Emperor Hancheng died, all the wealth of the royal family went to the royal family, and the power was transferred to the hands of the relatives, so the emperor repeatedly appointed ministers to strengthen his authority, with Emperor Wu and Emperor Xuan as the law.

古文：雅性不好声色，时览卞射武戏。
现代文：生性不爱声色，有时看看手持角力的武戏。
English: By nature, I don't like gossip. Sometimes I watch martial arts with hand-to-hand combat.

古文：即位痿痹，末年寖剧，飨国不永，哀哉！
现代文：即位时身患瘘痹之疾，以后逐渐加重，从二十岁起当了六年皇帝就去世了。可惜啊！
English: When he ascended the throne, he was suffering from paralysis, which gradually worsened. He had been emperor for six years since the age of twenty, when he died. What a pity!

