古文：夫正位北辰，向明南面，所以运天枢，毓黎献者，何尝不经道纬德，以勒皇迹者哉？《绿图》曰：潬潬咴咴，棼棼雉雉，万物尽化。 
现代文：北极星处于天的正中，帝王受命南面而治，就像北极星那样来治理天下，养育百姓；因此，怎能不颂扬其功德，刻下他的伟大事迹呢！绿图中说： 变化不定，杂乱纷纷，万物都发育滋长。 
English: The North Star is in the middle of the sky, and the emperor is ordered to rule from the south, just like the North Star to govern the world and nurture the people; therefore, how can we not praise his merits and engrave his great deeds! The green map says: Change is uncertain, disorder is rampant, and everything develops and grows.

古文：言至德所被也。
现代文：这是讲至上之德所达到的。
English: This is achieved by speaking of the supreme virtue.

古文：《丹书》曰∶ 义胜欲则从，欲胜义则凶。 
现代文：丹书中说： 道义胜于私欲就吉利，私欲胜过道义就凶险。 
English: In the Book of Daniel it says: Morality trumps selfishness for good luck, and selfishness trumps morality for bad luck.

古文：戒慎之至也。
现代文：这是指要加以警戒和慎重。
English: It means to be alert and cautious.

古文：则戒慎以崇其德，至德以凝其化，七十有二君，所以封禅矣。
现代文：因此，警戒慎重可以使道德高尚，至上之德可以化生万物，所以古来七十二个帝王，都曾到泰山来举行封禅典礼。
English: Therefore, vigilance and prudence can make morality noble, and the supreme virtue can transform all things, so seventy-two emperors have come to Mount Tai to hold the ceremony of fusing Zen.

古文：昔黄帝神灵，克膺鸿瑞，勒功乔岳，铸鼎荆山。
现代文：传说黄帝生来神奇灵异，可以享受很多福瑞，在泰山的岩石上铭刻功绩，在荆山下冶铸铜鼎。
English: Legend has it that the Yellow Emperor was born with magical powers and could enjoy many blessings, inscribing his exploits on the rocks of Mount Tai and smelting copper tripods under Mount Jing.

古文：大舜巡岳，显乎《虞典》。
现代文：大舜巡视山岳的事情，在《尚书·舜典》中有着明确记载。
English: There is a clear record of Daxu's inspection of the mountains in the Shangshu Xingren.

古文：成康封禅，闻之《乐纬》。
现代文：周成王和周康王封禅的典礼，在纬书《乐经·动声仪》中也有记载。
English: The ceremony of the enthronement of Zhou Cheng Wang and Zhou Kang Wang is also recorded in the book "Music and Movement Instrument."

古文：及齐桓之霸，爰窥王迹，夷吾谲谏，拒以怪物。
现代文：到了东周齐桓公称霸时，曾经想要按照帝王的礼节来封禅；管仲以没有奇怪的景象出现不适合封禅为由加以劝阻。
English: When Eastern Zhou Qi Kuan came to dominate, he once wanted to seal Zen according to the emperor's etiquette; Guanzhong dissuaded him on the grounds that there was no strange scene that was not suitable for sealing Zen.

古文：固知玉牒金镂，专在帝皇也。
现代文：由此看来，在石碑上刻下功绩，只适合于帝王。
English: From this point of view, it is only suitable for emperors to inscribe their achievements on stone tablets.

古文：然则西鹣东鲽，南茅北黍，空谈非征，勋德而已。
现代文：不过管仲所说的要出现西海的比翼鸟、东海的比目鱼、南方的三脊茅以及北方的黄米等祥瑞，不过是一些空话，根本无法验证，封禅只要帝王的功德宏大就可以了。
English: However, what Guanzhong said about the auspiciousness of the winged bird in the West Sea, the flounder in the East Sea, the three-rowed maple in the south and the yellow rice in the north, are just empty words, which cannot be verified at all. As long as the emperor's merits are great, it is fine.

古文：是以史迁八书，明述封禅者，固禋祀之殊礼，铭号之秘祝，祀天之壮观矣。
现代文：司马迁在《史记》中将《封禅书》作为《八书》之一，对封禅进行了清楚地表述，由此看来封禅确实是祭天的重大典礼；而铭刻功绩以表示祝福和祈祷是祭天中最重要的场面了。
English: Sima Qian, in his "Histories," included the "Book of Seals" as one of the "Eight Books" and gave a clear description of the Seals. From this, it appears that the Seals are indeed an important ceremony of the Festival of Heaven; and the inscribing of merits to express blessings and prayers is the most important scene of the Festival of Heaven.

古文：秦皇铭岱，文自李斯，法家辞气，体乏弘润；然疏而能壮，亦彼时之绝采也。
现代文：秦始皇在泰山上铭刻了自己的功德，此文出自李斯之手，具有法家文辞的特点，缺少圆润宏达的风格。虽然它看上去比较粗糙，却十分有力，是当时文采不错的作品。
English: Qin Shihuang inscribed his own merits on Mount Tai. This text was written by Li Si, and has the characteristics of a legalist's writing, but lacks a rounded and grand style. Although it looks rough, it is very powerful, and was a good literary work at the time.

古文：铺观两汉隆盛，孝武禅号于肃然，光武巡封于梁父，诵德铭勋，乃鸿笔耳。
现代文：展望两汉，封禅的礼节十分盛大而隆重，比如西汉武帝在肃然山封禅、东汉光武帝在梁父山封禅，歌颂他们功德的封禅文章，都出自大家之手。
English: Looking at the two Han dynasties, the etiquette of fusing Zen is very grand and solemn. For example, Emperor Wu of the Western Han Dynasty fused Zen at Mount Sooranzan, Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty fused Zen at Mount Liangchuzhan. Fused Zen articles extolling their merits were all written by everyone.

古文：观相如《封禅》，蔚为唱首。
现代文：司马相如的《封禅文》，是汉代第一次出现的佳作。
English: Sima Xiangru's "Feng Zhenwen" is an excellent work that first appeared in the Han Dynasty.

古文：尔其表权舆，序皇王，炳玄符，镜鸿业；驱前古于当今之下，腾休明于列圣之上，歌之以祯瑞，赞之以介丘，绝笔兹文，固维新之作也。及光武勒碑，则文自张纯。
现代文：它道出了封禅的开始，对历代的帝王进行了叙述，展现了美好的福瑞，同时反映了宏伟的功业，对武帝进行了歌颂，说他的功绩超越了以往，对他的美德进行了歌颂，称武帝贤于列圣；用吉祥的符瑞来歌颂，用泰山企盼帝王的临幸来赞美。这篇文章最后由司马相如写成了《封禅文》，可以认为是汉代禅文的新作。到东汉光武帝时的《泰山刻石文》，则出自张纯之手。
English: It recounts the beginning of the Hozan, describes the emperors of all ages, shows the wonderful blessings, and at the same time reflects the magnificent achievements. It praises Emperor Wu, saying that his achievements surpass the past, praises his virtues, praises Emperor Wu as a saint, praises him with auspicious flags, and praises him with Taishan's anticipation of the emperor's arrival. This article was finally written by Sima Xiangru as "Hozan," which can be considered a new work of Han Dynasty Zen. "Taishan engraved stone text" at the time of Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty was written by Zhang Chun.

古文：首胤典谟，末同祝辞，引钩谶，叙离乱，计武功，述文德；事核理举，华不足而实有馀矣！
现代文：它在开始的时候是学习《尚书》，末尾的地方却写的像是祝辞；其中引用了很多纬书，对西汉末年的战乱进行了叙述，对光武帝的武功文德进行了颂扬，叙事符合现实而且说理正确，虽然文采欠佳，但是内容充实。
English: At the beginning, it was a study of "Shangshu," but at the end it was written like a congratulation; it quoted a lot of books, described the war at the end of the Western Han Dynasty, and praised the martial arts and virtues of Emperor Guangwu. The narrative was realistic and the reasoning was correct. Although the literature was not good, the content was rich.

古文：凡此二家，并岱宗实迹也。
现代文：上面这两位所写的封禅文，都铭刻在了泰山上的岩石上。
English: The above two people wrote a seal of Zen, are inscribed on the rock on Mount Tai.

古文：及扬雄《剧秦》，班固《典引》，事非镌石，而体因纪禅。
现代文：至于扬雄的《剧秦美新》，班固的《典引》，虽然没有刻石，所写都是有关封禅的事。
English: As for Yangxiong's "Drama Qin Meixin" and Banggu's "An Introduction," although there is no engraved stone, they are all about fusing Zen.

古文：观《剧秦》为文，影写长卿，诡言遁辞，故兼包神怪；然骨制靡密，辞贯圆通，自称极思，无遗力矣。
现代文：读《剧秦美新》，它的写作显然是模仿司马相如的《封禅文》；其中多用隐约诡诈的言辞，因而写了不少神怪之事。但它的整个结构相当严密，文辞有条理而圆和畅通。扬雄自己说写这篇作品已 极尽思考 ，可见他是用尽全力了。
English: Reading "Drama Qin Meixin," its writing is clearly an imitation of Sima Xianglu's "Fu Zhenwen"; it mostly uses vaguely deceitful words, and thus writes a lot of strange things. But its entire structure is quite strict, and the words are organized, round and smooth. Yang Xiong himself said that he had thought about writing this work as much as possible, which shows that he had exhausted all his efforts.

古文：《典引》所叙，雅有懿采，历鉴前作，能执厥中，其致义会文，斐然馀巧。
现代文：《典引》的描写，雅正而优美；这是作者考察了前人的得失，因而能掌握得当；它表达意义、组成文章，写得富有文采而又巧妙。
English: The description of the "Introduction" is elegant and graceful; this is the author's examination of the gains and losses of the predecessors, so that it can be properly grasped; it expresses meaning, composes articles, and is written richly and skillfully.

古文：故称 《封禅》靡而不典，《剧秦》典而不实 ，岂非追观易为明，循势易为力欤？
现代文：所以班固曾说： 《封禅文》虽然华丽却不典雅，《剧秦美新》虽然典雅但不核实。 这岂不是考察了前人的作品就易于认识明确，循其体势就容易收到功效吗？
English: That's why Ban Gu once said: "Fu Zhenwen," although gorgeous, is not elegant, and "Drama Qin Meixin," although elegant, is not verifiable. Isn't it easy to understand the works of the predecessors after examination, and it is easy to receive the effect by following their posture?

古文：至于邯郸《受命》，攀响前声，风末力寡，辑韵成颂，虽文理顺序，而不能奋飞。
现代文：至于魏初邯郸淳的《受命述》，不过攀附前代名作，风力不足；写得好像颂体，虽然文理还有条不紊，却很平庸而不高超。
English: As for Wei Chuxiong's "The Story of an Order," although it clings to the previous masterpiece, it lacks wind; it is written like an ode, although it is still orderly in terms of literature and science, it is mediocre and not superb.

古文：陈思《魏德》，假论客主，问答迂缓，且已千言，劳深绩寡，飙焰缺焉。
现代文：到曹植的《魏德论》，是假设主客的议论，一问一答，文势迂缓，长达千言；费劲不小，却收效甚微，缺乏力量和光芒。
English: Cao Zhi's "Weidong Theory" is a hypothetical discussion between the host and the guest, one question and one answer, the writing style is slow, and it is a thousand words long; it takes a lot of effort, but it has little effect, and it lacks strength and light.

古文：兹文为用，盖一代之典章也。
现代文：这种文体的作用，是一个时代的典章制度。
English: The role of this style is the ceremonial system of an era.

古文：构位之始，宜明大体，树骨于训典之区，选言于宏富之路；使意古而不晦于深，文今而不坠于浅；义吐光芒，辞成廉锷，则为伟矣。
现代文：在写作上开始考虑布局时，必须明确其总的面貌。要如《伊训》、《尧典》一类著作树立主干，从宏伟富丽方面来选择言辞，使内容合于古意而不致深奥不明显，文辞新颖而又不流于浮浅，内容能放出光芒，文辞能利如锋刃，就是最好的作品了。
English: When starting to consider the layout in writing, it is necessary to clarify its overall appearance. It is necessary to establish the backbone of works such as "Yitong" and "Jingxuan" and select the words from the magnificent and rich aspects, so that the content is consistent with the ancient meaning without being profound and not obvious, the words are novel and do not flow in the shallow, the content can emit light, and the words can be as sharp as a blade, which is the best work.

古文：虽复道极数殚，终然相袭，而日新其采者，必超前辙焉。
现代文：即使古人把道理讲完，方法用尽，后世作者必将有所继承，但只要在文采上不断创新，就一定会超过前代作者。总结：
English: Even if the ancients have exhausted the theory and methods, future generations of authors will certainly inherit something, but as long as they continue to innovate in literature, they will certainly surpass the previous generation of authors.

古文：赞曰∶封勒帝绩，对越天休。
现代文：封禅时在泰山上刻下帝王的功业，是称扬帝王来报答上天授予美命。
English: At the time of the enthronement ceremony, the emperor's deeds were engraved on Mount Tai, praising the emperor to repay the heavens for granting him a good life.

古文：逖听高岳，声英克彪。
现代文：远听那高山之上，美妙的声音十分动人。
English: Listening from high up on the mountain, the beautiful sound is very moving.

古文：树石九旻，泥金八幽。
现代文：树立的石碑高入云霄，封禅的文章传遍八方。
English: The stone monument that was erected soared into the sky, and the articles on the seal of Zen spread all over the world.

古文：鸿律蟠采，如龙如虬。
现代文：封禅大法凝成的佳作，腾空飞舞，有如虬龙。
English: An excellent work of solidified Fuzhen Dafa, soaring and flying, like a dragon.

