古文：潘濬字承明，武陵汉寿人也。
现代文：潘濬，字承明，武陵郡汉寿县人。
English: Pan Qi, surnamed Chengming, from Hanshou County, Wuling County.

古文：弱冠从宋仲子受学。
现代文：他二十岁时跟随宋仲子学习。
English: At the age of 20, he studied under Song Zhongzi.

古文：年未三十，荆州牧刘表辟为部江夏从事。
现代文：还不到三十岁，荆州牧刘表征召他作为州中江夏从事。
English: He was not yet thirty years old when he was recruited by Liu Bei, the governor of Jingzhou Province, to serve as the leader of Jiangxia in Jingzhou Province.

古文：时沙羡长赃秽不脩，濬按杀之，一郡震竦。
现代文：当时沙羡县县长贪赃枉法不修德行，潘濬依律将他处死，全郡都很震惊。
English: At that time, the governor of Shaqen County was corrupt and did not practice virtue, and Pan Yu executed him in accordance with the law. The whole county was shocked.

古文：后为湘乡令，治甚有名。
现代文：后来潘濬担任湘乡县县令，因政绩颇有名声。
English: Later, Pan Ye served as the county magistrate of Xiangxiang County, and became quite famous for his political achievements.

古文：刘备领荆州，以濬为治中从事。
现代文：刘备兼领荆州，任命潘濬为治中从事。
English: Liu Bei concurrently led Jingzhou and appointed Pan Ye to be in charge of the administration.

古文：备入蜀，留典州事。
现代文：刘备进入蜀地后，留下潘濬主管荆州事务。
English: After Liu Bei entered Shu, he left Pan Ye in charge of Jingzhou affairs.

古文：孙权杀关羽，并荆土，拜濬辅军中郎将，授以兵。
现代文：孙权杀了关羽，吞并了荆州，以潘濬为辅军中郎将，授予部队。
English: Sun Quan killed Guan Yu, annexed Jingzhou, and appointed Pan Ye as the second-in-command of the auxiliary army.

古文：迁奋威将军，封常迁亭侯。
现代文：升任他为奋威将军，封爵常迁亭侯。
English: He was promoted to General Fenwei and knighted as Prince of Changchun.

古文：权称尊号，拜为少府，进封刘阳侯，迁太常。
现代文：孙权称帝登基，任命潘濬为少府，晋封为刘阳侯，升任太常。
English: Sun Quan proclaimed the enthronement of the emperor, appointed Pan Ye as a minor prefect, promoted Liu Yang as a prince, and promoted him to the position of Grand Vizier.

古文：五谿蛮夷叛乱盘结，权假濬节，督诸军讨之。
现代文：五溪蛮夷叛乱聚集，孙权授予潘濬符节，督领各军前往讨伐。
English: The Wuxi barbarian rebellion gathered, Sun Quan awarded the Pan Yu Festival, and led the army to go to the crusade.

古文：信赏必行，法不可干，斩首获生，盖以万数，自是群蛮衰弱，一方宁静。
现代文：他有功必赏，法令不容触犯，斩杀俘虏的反叛者，有上万之数。从此各蛮夷部落势力衰弱，当地获得安定。
English: He has a merit that must be rewarded, the law cannot be violated, and there are tens of thousands of rebels who have killed prisoners. Since then, the barbarian tribes have weakened and the region has gained stability.

古文：先是，濬与陆逊俱驻武昌，共掌留事，还复故。
现代文：昔日，潘濬与陆逊一同驻守武昌，一起主管留守事务，平叛回来后依然如此。
English: In the past, Pan Zheng and Lu Xun were stationed in Wuchang together, and they were in charge of the affairs left behind. This is still the case after the return of the rebels.

古文：时校事吕壹操弄威柄，奏按丞相顾雍、左将军朱据等，皆见禁止。
现代文：当时校事吕壹操纵权柄威势，上奏审查丞相顾雍、左将军朱据等人，他们都被他拘禁起来。
English: At that time, school official Lü Yi manipulated the power of authority, and he had the Minister of Education Gu Yong, the Left General Zhu Rong and others detained.

古文：黄门侍郎谢厷语次问壹： 顾公事何如？ 
现代文：黄门侍郎谢瞇在言谈时问吕壹： 顾公的事怎么样? 
English: Huangmen waiter Xie Jun asked Lü Yi during the conversation: What about the matter of Gu Gong?

古文：壹答： 不能佳。 
现代文：吕壹回答说： 不会好的。 
English: Lu Yi replied, "It won't be fine."

古文：厷又问： 若此公免退，谁当代之？ 
现代文：谢瞇又问： 如果顾公被罢免职位，谁能接替他? 
English: Xie Jun also asked: If Gu Gong is removed from his post, who can replace him?

古文：壹未答厷，厷曰： 得无潘太常得之乎？ 
现代文：吕壹没有回答谢瞇，谢瞇说： 该不会是潘太常身处此位吧? 
English: Lu Yi did not answer Xie Yao. Xie Yao said, "Isn't Pan Taizong often in this position?

古文：壹良久曰： 君语近之也。 
现代文：吕壹很久才说： 您说的相近了。 
English: It took Lu Yi a long time to say: What you said is close.

古文：厷谓曰： 潘太常常切齿於君，但道远无因耳。
现代文：谢瞇对他说： 潘太常常对您恨得咬牙切齿，只是距离遥远对您没有办法罢了。
English: Xie Yao said to him, "Pan often hates you so much that he grinds his teeth, but there's nothing you can do about the distance.

古文：今日代顾公，恐明日便击君矣。 
现代文：他如今接替顾公，明天恐怕就会对付您了。 
English: He's taking over from Gu Gong now, and I'm afraid he'll be dealing with you tomorrow.

古文：壹大惧，遂解散雍事。
现代文：吕壹很是恐惧，就停止了对顾雍的审查、软禁。
English: Out of fear, Lu Yi stopped the censorship and house arrest of Gu Yong.

古文：濬求朝，诣建业，欲尽辞极谏。
现代文：潘濬请求入朝觐见，要回到建业，想要极力倾言劝谏孙权。
English: Pan Zheng requested to go to the imperial court, to return to Jianye, and to try his best to persuade Sun Quan.

古文：至，闻太子登已数言之而不见从，濬乃大请百寮，欲因会手刃杀壹，以身当之，为国除患。
现代文：到建业后，得知太子孙登已经多次劝说而孙权都不听从，于是潘濬宴请群臣，打算借聚会之机亲手用刀杀掉吕壹，由自己一人承担罪责，替国家除去祸患。
English: After arriving at Jianye, he learned that Prince Sun Deng had repeatedly persuaded Sun Quan, but Sun Quan did not listen, so Pan Yu invited a group of ministers to a banquet, intending to use the opportunity of the gathering to personally kill Lü Yi with a knife, and take the blame on his own to remove the scourge for the country.

古文：壹密闻知，称疾不行。
现代文：吕壹暗中得知这一消息，称病不参加宴会。
English: Lu Yi secretly learned this news and said that he would not attend the banquet due to illness.

古文：濬每进见，无不陈壹之奸险也。
现代文：潘濬每次进朝拜见孙权，都陈述吕壹的奸诈险恶。
English: Every time Pan Xuan entered the court to pay homage to Sun Quan, he described the treachery and evil of Lü Yi.

古文：由此壹宠渐衰，后遂诛戮。
现代文：因此吕壹的恩宠逐渐衰退，后来终于被诛杀。
English: As a result, Lu Yi's favor gradually declined, and he was eventually killed.

古文：权引咎责躬，因诮让大臣，语在权传。
现代文：孙权引咎自责，也因此责备朝臣们，其言辞记在《孙权传》中。
English: Sun Quan blamed himself and reproached his courtiers for this, and his words are recorded in "The Biography of Sun Quan."

古文：赤乌二年，濬卒，子翥嗣。
现代文：赤乌二年，潘濬去世，儿子潘翥承袭爵位。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Pan Xuan died, and his son Pan Xuan inherited the title.

古文：濬女配建昌侯孙虑。
现代文：潘翥的女儿嫁给建昌侯孙虑。
English: Pan Zheng's daughter married Jianchang Hou Sun Qian.

古文：陆凯字敬风，吴郡吴人，丞相逊族子也。
现代文：陆凯，字敬风，吴郡吴县人，是丞相陆逊同族兄弟的儿子。
English: Lu Kai, also known as Jing Feng, a native of Wu County, Wuxian County, was the son of the same ethnic group as the Prime Minister Lu Xun.

古文：黄武初为永兴、诸暨长，所在有治迹，拜建武都尉，领兵。
现代文：黄武初年，陆凯是永兴、诸暨县长，所在职位都有政绩，被任命为建武都尉，统率部队。
English: In the first year of Huangwu, Lu Kai was the county governor of Yongxing and Zhuji, and his posts had political achievements. He was appointed as the captain of Jianwu and led the troops.

古文：虽统军众，手不释书。
现代文：虽说他带领兵众，但手不离书本。
English: Although he led the troops, his hands never left his books.

古文：好太玄，论演其意，以筮辄验。
现代文：喜欢研读扬雄的《太玄》，评价推衍该书含意，用蓍草占卜就会应验。
English: He likes to study Yang Xiong's "The Great Mystery," and evaluates and deduces the meaning of the book. He will fulfill his divination using the reed.

古文：赤乌中，除儋耳太守，讨朱崖，斩获有功，迁为建武校尉。
现代文：赤乌年间，陆凯任儋耳太守，讨伐朱崖，斩俘敌军有功，被升任为建武校尉。
English: During the Akaw period, Lu Kai served as the governor of Huludao, fought against the Zhujiajiao, and was promoted to the rank of Jianwu lieutenant.

古文：五凤二年，讨山贼陈毖於零陵，斩毖克捷，拜巴丘督、偏将军，封都乡侯，转为武昌右部督。
现代文：五凤二年，陆凯在零陵征讨山贼陈毖，斩杀陈毖顺利告捷，担任巴丘督、偏将军，封爵都乡侯，转任武昌右部督。
English: In the second year of Wufeng, Lu Kai led a raid on the tomb of the bandit Chen Qi, successfully killed Chen Qi, and served as the governor of Bachu, the general, the lord of the township, and the governor of the right part of Wuchang.

古文：与诸将共赴寿春，还，累迁荡魏、绥远将军。
现代文：他与将领们一同赶赴寿春作战，回军后，被升为荡魏、绥远将军。
English: Together with his generals, he rushed to fight in Shuchun. After returning to the army, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Wei Dynasty and Yuan Dynasty.

古文：孙休即位，拜征北将军，假节领豫州牧。
现代文：孙休称帝登基，陆凯被任命为征北将军、持符节兼任豫州牧。
English: Sun Xiu was enthroned as emperor, Lu Kai was appointed as general of the Northern Expedition, and he also served as governor of Yuzhou during the Festival of the Sign.

古文：孙皓立，迁镇西大将军，都督巴丘，领荆州牧，进封嘉兴侯。
现代文：孙皓被扶立为帝，陆凯被升任为镇西大将军，督管巴丘，兼任荆州牧，晋封嘉兴侯。
English: Sun Yat-sen was enthroned as emperor, Lu Kai was promoted to Zhenxi Grand General, governor of Bachu, concurrently Jingzhou herdsman, and Jiaxing Hou.

古文：孙皓与晋平，使者丁忠自北还，说皓弋阳可袭，凯谏止，语在皓传。
现代文：孙皓与晋国议和，使者丁忠从北方返回东吴，劝说孙皓可以攻袭弋阳，陆凯谏言阻止孙皓，其言论记录在《孙皓传》。
English: Sun Yat-sen negotiated peace with the Jin Dynasty. The envoy Ding Zhong returned to Dongwu from the north to persuade Sun Yat-sen to attack Fenyang. Lu Kai-yin said to stop Sun Yat-sen, and his words were recorded in the "Legend of Sun Yat-sen."

古文：宝鼎元年，迁左丞相。
现代文：宝鼎元年，陆凯被升为左丞相。
English: In the first year of Baoding, Lu Kai was promoted to minister of the left.

古文：皓性不好人视己，群臣侍见，皆莫敢迕。
现代文：孙皓生性不喜欢别人看自己，各位大臣侍奉朝见，都不敢违背他的意思。
English: Sun Yat-sen did not like others to look at him, and the ministers who served the imperial court did not dare to go against his wishes.

古文：凯说皓曰： 夫君臣无不相识之道，若卒有不虞，不知所赴。 
现代文：陆凯劝孙皓说： 君臣之间没有互不相识的道理，如果突然发生意料之外的事情，大臣们都不知您会前往何方。 
English: Lu Kai advised Sun Yat-sen, "There is no reason why officials should not know each other. If something unexpected happens, the ministers do not know where you will go.

古文：皓听凯自视。
现代文：孙皓任凭陆凯看自己。
English: Sun Yat-sen allowed Lu Kai to see himself.

古文：皓徙都武昌，扬土百姓溯流供给，以为患苦，又政事多谬，黎元穷匮。
现代文：孙皓迁都武昌，扬州地区百姓要逆流供应武昌用度，百姓都以此为苦，再加上当时政事颇多失误，百姓贫穷匮乏。
English: When Sun Yat-sen moved the capital to Wuchang, the people in Yangzhou region had to go against the flow to supply the consumption of Wuchang. The people suffered from this. In addition, there were a lot of mistakes in the political affairs at that time, and the people were poor.

古文：凯上疏曰：
现代文：陆凯上疏说：
English: Lu Kai went on to say:

古文：臣闻有道之君，以乐乐民；无道之君，以乐乐身。
现代文： 臣下听说有道的君主，用愉快事情使百姓欢悦;无道之君，用愉快事情使自己欢心。
English: Subordinates have heard that a virtuous ruler uses pleasant things to make the people happy; a wicked ruler uses pleasant things to make himself happy.

古文：乐民者，其乐弥长；乐身者，不乐而亡。
现代文：使百姓欢乐之人，愉悦会更长;使自己欢心者，不能真正取得欢乐只会灭亡。
English: Those who make the people happy will be happy for a longer time; those who make themselves happy will not be able to truly achieve happiness and will only perish.

古文：夫民者，国之根也，诚宜重其食，爱其命。
现代文：百姓，是国家的根本，实在应当重视他们衣食，爱惜他们的生命。
English: The people are the foundation of the country. We should really pay attention to their food and clothing, and cherish their lives.

古文：民安则君安，民乐则君乐。
现代文：百姓安定则国君安稳，人民愉快则国君欢愉。
English: When the people are stable, the sovereign is stable. When the people are happy, the sovereign is happy.

古文：自顷年以来，君威伤於桀纣，君明闇於奸雄，君惠闭於群孽。
现代文：自近年以来，国君的威信被桀、纣般的暴行减损，国君的圣明被奸恶的野心人物遮蔽，国君的恩惠被小人们的行径掩盖。
English: In recent years, the prestige of the sovereign has been undermined by outrageous violence, the sacredness of the sovereign has been obscured by treacherous and ambitious persons, and the benevolence of the sovereign has been covered up by the actions of small people.

古文：无灾而民命尽，无为而国财空，辜无罪，赏无功，使君有谬误之愆，天为作妖。
现代文：没有天灾但百姓的生命穷尽，无所作为但国家的财库空虚，惩罚无罪之人，奖赏无功之人，使得国君有过失之处，上天也为显出灾祸。
English: There is no natural disaster, but the lives of the people are exhausted. There is no action, but the treasury of the country is empty. Punish those who are innocent, reward those who are not meritorious. Where the prince is at fault, heaven is also a disaster.

古文：而诸公卿媚上以求爱，困民以求饶，导君於不义，败政於淫俗，臣窃为痛心。
现代文：但各公卿大臣献媚国君求得恩宠，困扰百姓以求富有，诱导国君陷之于不义，败坏朝政扰乱风俗，臣下暗自为之痛心。
English: However, court nobles and ministers courted the favor of the sovereign by flattering him, troubled the people in order to get rich, induced the sovereign to fall into injustice, corrupted court politics and disturbed customs, and the vassals were secretly heartbroken.

古文：今邻国交好，四边无事，当务息役养士，实其廪库，以待天时。
现代文：现在与邻国结交友好，四方边境没有战事，应当致力停息徭役养育将士，充实国家财库，等待天赐良机。
English: Now that we have established friendly relations with our neighboring countries, and there is no war on the borders of the four sides, we should strive to stop war and nurture soldiers, enrich the national treasury, and wait for a God-given opportunity.

古文：而更倾动天心，骚扰万姓，使民不安，大小呼嗟，此非保国养民之术也。
现代文：却去倾扰不断更改上天旨意，骚扰百姓，让天下不得安定，大人孩子都呼喊哀嚎，这实在不是保国养民的办法。
English: But to disturb and constantly change God's will, to harass the people, to make the world unstable, adults and children are crying out, this is really not a way to protect the country and feed the people.

古文：臣闻吉凶在天，犹影之在形，响之在声也，形动则影动，形止则影止，此分数乃有所系，非在口之所进退也。
现代文： 臣下听说吉凶之事对于天意，就像影子要靠形体才能显现，回音要有声音才能被听到，形体移动那影子跟着移动，形体停止则影静，这种情形的运数有它内在关联之处，而不是依靠言语来决定进退。
English: When a subject hears of something auspicious or inauspicious, it is like a shadow that needs a shape to appear, an echo that needs a sound to be heard, a shadow that moves when a shape moves, and a shadow that is silent when a shape stops. The number of operations in this situation is intrinsically related, rather than relying on words to determine the advance and retreat.

古文：昔秦所以亡天下者，但坐赏轻而罚重，政刑错乱，民力尽於奢侈，目眩於美色，志浊於财宝，邪臣在位，贤哲隐藏，百姓业业，天下苦之，是以遂有覆巢破卵之忧。
现代文：昔日秦朝之所以丢失天下，只是因为奖赏轻微而刑法严重，政令刑法错乱，百姓的财力都供给君主奢侈耗尽，君主被美色迷昏双眼，志向也被财物所消耗，奸邪臣子在位掌权，贤明智慧之人隐居深藏，百姓战战兢兢，天下感到痛苦，就有了覆巢之下破卵的担忧。
English: In the past, the reason why the Qin Dynasty was lost to the world was only because the reward was small and the criminal law was serious, the government decreed that the criminal law was disordered, the people's financial resources were exhausted to provide the monarch with luxury, the monarch was dazzled by beauty, the ambition was also consumed by wealth, the treacherous and evil vassals were in power, the wise and intelligent people were hiding deep, the people were trembling, and the world felt pain, so there was a concern of breaking eggs under the nest.

古文：汉所以强者，躬行诚信，听谏纳贤，惠及负薪，躬请岩穴，广采博察，以成其谋。
现代文：汉朝之所以强盛，因为君主亲身践行诚信，听从谏言接纳贤才，恩惠普及山中普通百姓身上，亲身延请隐居山穴之人，广泛采纳众人意见，时常考察社会民俗，以此成就自己的谋略。
English: The reason why the Han Dynasty was so powerful was that the monarch personally practiced honesty, listened to the advice of the wise, spread the grace to the ordinary people in the mountains, personally invited the people who lived in the mountain caves, widely adopted the opinions of the people, and often examined the social folk customs to achieve his own strategy.

古文：此往事之明证也。
现代文：这都是过去明确验证的。
English: This has been clearly proven in the past.

古文：近者汉之衰末，三家鼎立，曹失纲纪，晋有其政。
现代文： 近代汉代衰微，三国鼎立，曹魏政权失去纲纪，晋朝就代替它的统治。
English: The modern Han Dynasty declined, the Three Kingdoms were established, the Cao Wei regime lost its discipline, and the Jin Dynasty replaced its rule.

古文：又益州危险，兵多精强，闭门固守，可保万世，而刘氏与夺乖错，赏罚失所，君恣意於奢侈，民力竭於不急，是以为晋所伐，君臣见虏。
现代文：再加上益州地势险要，兵力精良强大，闭关固守，可保守万世基业，但刘禅的给予与夺取交错悖乱，赏赐与惩罚失去公平，国君对奢侈之事恣意妄为，民力在没有紧急大事时却被消耗枯竭，因此受到晋国的讨伐，君臣都被俘虏。
English: In addition, Yizhou's geographical position is precarious, its military strength is excellent and powerful, and it can protect its eternal heritage. However, Liu Zhen's giving and taking are intertwined and disorderly, rewards and punishments are not fair, the sovereign acts arbitrarily on extravagant matters, and the people's strength is depleted when there is no urgent matter. Therefore, it was subjected to Jin's crusade, and the monarchs and courtiers were all captured.

古文：此目前之明验也。
现代文：这些是近来之事明确验证的。
English: This has been clearly demonstrated by recent events.

古文：臣闇於大理，文不及义，智慧浅劣，无复冀望，窃为陛下惜天下耳。
现代文： 臣对于大道理愚昧不明，文辞不能完好地表达心意，智慧浅薄，不再有所奢望，只是私下为陛下可惜天下罢了。
English: The vassal is ignorant of the great truth, his words cannot fully express his thoughts, his wisdom is shallow, and he no longer has any extravagant hopes. Privately, however, it is a great pity for His Majesty.

古文：臣谨奏耳目所闻见，百姓所为烦苛，刑政所为错乱，愿陛下息大功，损百役，务宽荡，忽苛政。
现代文：臣下谨奏自己看到听到之事，百姓所受到的烦扰苛刻，刑政所受到的破坏错乱，希望陛下能停止无功的大事，减少繁杂劳役，致力于宽和施惠，取消苛政。
English: His subjects should faithfully report what they have seen and heard, the troubles and harshness suffered by the people, and the destruction and disorder suffered by the criminal government, and hope that His Majesty can stop the useless big things, reduce the complicated labor service, devote himself to clemency and benefit, and abolish the harsh government.

古文：又武昌土地，实危险而塉确，非王都安国养民之处，船泊则沈漂，陵居则峻危，且童谣言： 宁饮建业水，不食武昌鱼；宁还建业死，不止武昌居。 
现代文： 另外，武昌的土地，实在危险而贫瘠，不是可以定都并安定国家养育百姓的地方，在船上漂泊则会沉没漂流，在高地上居住又会险峻不安，况且有童谣说： 宁饮建业水，不食武昌鱼;宁还建业死，不止武昌居。 
English: In addition, the land of Wuchang is really dangerous and barren. It is not a place where the capital can be established and the country can be stabilized and people can be raised. If you drift on a boat, you will sink and drift. If you live on high ground, you will be dangerously insecure. Moreover, there is a nursery rhyme that says: It is better to drink Jianye water than to eat Wuchang fish; it is better to die in Jianye than to live in Wuchang.

古文：臣闻翼星为变，荧惑作妖，童谣之言，生於天心，乃以安居而比死，足明天意，知民所苦也。
现代文：臣下听说翼星发生变化，火星出现怪异征兆，童谣所说，实出于上天之意，于是用安居来比较死亡，足以显明天意，也能了解百姓困苦所在。
English: The vassals heard that the winged star had changed and the planet Mars was showing strange signs. As the nursery rhyme says, it was really God's will, so they used a safe house to compare death, which was enough to show God's will, and also to understand where the people's hardships were.

古文：臣闻国无三年之储，谓之非国，而今无一年之畜，此臣下之责也。
现代文： 臣下听说国家没有三年的储备，就不能称为国家，而如今却没有可用一年的积蓄，这都是臣子们的责任。
English: The vassals heard that the country cannot be called a country without a three-year reserve, but now there is no one-year reserve, which is the responsibility of the vassals.

古文：而诸公卿位处人上，禄延子孙，曾无致命之节，匡救之术，苟进小利於君，以求容媚，荼毒百姓，不为君计也。
现代文：而各位公卿的职位居于人上，优厚的爵位俸禄传承给子孙，竟都没有为国献身的节操，匡救时弊的办法，只是一味给国君进献小利，借此求得国君的欢心，荼毒天下的百姓，这并不是君主深远考虑的。
English: However, the positions of the noblemen are above the people, and the generous salaries of the titles are passed down to their descendants, but they do not have the discipline to devote themselves to the country, and the way to save the country is just to give small profits to the king, to win the favor of the king, and to poison the people of the world. This is not a far-reaching consideration of the monarch.

古文：自从孙弘造义兵以来，耕种既废，所在无复输入，而分一家父子异役，廪食日张，畜积日耗，民有离散之怨，国有露根之渐，而莫之恤也。
现代文：自从孙弘创制义兵以来，农事耕种逐渐废驰，部队所在再无经济上的输入，而将一家父子分散去服不同的劳役，官府供应日益增长，国家积蓄逐渐耗尽，百姓有亲人离散的怨忿，国家有大树露根的趋势，却无人来体恤这种情况。
English: Since Sun Hong created the system of volunteer soldiers, agricultural cultivation has gradually been abandoned, there is no longer any economic input in the army, but a father and son are dispersed to serve different labor services, the supply of the government is increasing day by day, the national savings are gradually exhausted, the people have the resentment of relatives being separated, and the country has the trend of large trees taking root, but no one has come to sympathize with this situation.

古文：民力困穷，鬻卖儿子，调赋相仍，日以疲极，所在长吏，不加隐括，加有监官，既不爱民，务行威势，所在骚扰，更为烦苛，民苦二端，财力再耗，此为无益而有损也。
现代文：百姓处于竭力穷困之时，只好变卖儿女，而各种赋税征收仍不断催促，他们的疲惫已到了极点，所在地方的官吏，对这样情况不加以庇护和修正，再加上部分监官不仅不爱护百姓，反而倚仗权势骚扰所辖地区，当地百姓更感到烦忧苛刻，人民受着这两方面的困苦，财力一再损耗，这是没有益处只有损害的制度。
English: At a time when the people are desperately poor, they have no choice but to sell their sons and daughters, and the collection of various taxes is still constantly urged. Their exhaustion has reached the extreme. The local officials do not protect and correct this situation. In addition, some supervisors not only do not love the people, but rely on power to harass the areas under their jurisdiction. The local people are even more worried and demanding. The people suffer from these two aspects, and their financial resources are repeatedly depleted. This is a system that has no benefit but only damage.

古文：愿陛下一息此辈，矜哀孤弱，以镇抚百姓之心。
现代文：希望陛下全部罢免这些官吏，怜悯孤苦弱势的百姓，以此来安定抚慰百姓之心。
English: I hope that His Majesty will remove all these officials and have mercy on the lonely and vulnerable people, in order to stabilize and soothe the hearts of the people.

古文：此犹鱼鳖得免毒螫之渊，鸟兽得离罗网之纲，四方之民襁负而至矣。
现代文：这就像鱼鳖能够脱离有毒螫的深潭，鸟兽得以逃脱捕捉它们的罗网，这样四方百姓就会扶老携幼前来归附了。
English: It's like a fish's fin can get out of the deep pool of poisonous gills, and birds and beasts can escape the net that catches them, so that the people of the four directions will help the old and the young to come and join them.

古文：如此，民可得保，先王之国存焉。
现代文：如此以往，百姓可以得到爱护，先王创建的国家也能长存。
English: In this way, the people can be cared for, and the country founded by the former king can survive.

古文：臣闻五音令人耳不聪，五色令人目不明，此无益於政，有损於事者也。
现代文： 臣下听说沉溺于音乐使人听事不敏，沉溺于色彩使人眼见不明，这些东西朝政没有益处，却有损于治国之事。
English: Subjects have heard that indulging in music makes people hard of hearing, and indulging in color makes people blind. These things are not beneficial to the government, but they are detrimental to the governance of the country.

古文：自昔先帝时，后宫列女，及诸织络，数不满百，米有畜积，货财有馀。
现代文：自昔日先帝手上开始，后宫嫔妃加上织造女工，人数不满一百，但粮食有储备，财物有富余。
English: From the time of the former emperor, the number of harem concubines plus female weavers was less than a hundred, but there were reserves of grain and surplus property.

古文：先帝崩后，幼、景在位，更改奢侈，不蹈先迹。
现代文：先帝崩逝后，幼、景继位，变得奢侈起来，不沿着先帝的脚步走。
English: After the demise of the former emperor, the younger, Jing, became extravagant and did not follow in the footsteps of the former emperor.

古文：伏闻织络及诸徒坐，乃有千数，计其所长，不足为国财，然坐食官廪，岁岁相承，此为无益，愿陛下料出赋嫁，给与无妻者。
现代文：我听说宫中织造女工和徒坐无事的女子，就数以千计，计算她们的工作，不足以为国家增加财富，反而白白享用官廪粮食，年年如此，实在没有益处。希望陛下选出她们给予嫁妆，嫁给那些无妻之人。
English: I have heard that there are thousands of weavers and idle women in the palace, and that their work is not enough to increase the wealth of the country, but they enjoy the official grain for free, year after year, which is really useless. I hope that Your Majesty will choose them to give dowry and marry those who have no wives.

古文：如此，上应天心，下合地意，天下幸甚。
现代文：这样，上顺应天意，下合百姓心意，是天下的大幸事。
English: In this way, it is a great blessing for the world that the top is in accordance with the will of heaven and the bottom is in accordance with the will of the people.

古文：臣闻殷汤取士於商贾，齐桓取士於车辕，周武取士於负薪，大汉取士於奴仆。
现代文： 臣下听说殷汤王从商贾中选拔人才，齐桓公从马车夫里选拔人才，周武王从樵夫中选拔人才，大汉朝从仆从中选拔人才。
English: Subjects heard that King Yin Tang selected talents from merchants, King Qi Huan selected talents from carriage drivers, King Zhou Wu selected talents from woodworkers, and the Han Dynasty selected talents from servants.

古文：明王圣主取士以贤，不拘卑贱，故其功德洋溢，名流竹素，非求颜色而取好服、捷口、容悦者也。
现代文：圣明的君主按照贤德的标准选拔人才，不拘泥出身的卑贱，故而他们的功德广大，名垂青史，他们并非追求外表而选取那些服饰出众、巧言善辩、外貌出众之人。
English: The wise monarchs select their men according to the standard of virtue, not according to their birth, so their merits are great and their names go down in history. They do not choose those who are well-dressed, well-spoken, and well-looking for the sake of appearance.

古文：臣伏见当今内宠之臣，位非其人，任非其量，不能辅国匡时，群党相扶，害忠隐贤。
现代文：臣下看到现在宫内受宠之臣，他们所处的职位都不得其人，这些人没有能力担负职位带来的责任，不能辅佐国事匡救时弊，反而结党营私互相勾结，陷害忠良遮蔽贤能。
English: The vassals saw that the favored vassals in the imperial court were not qualified for their positions. These people were not capable of shouldering the responsibilities brought by their positions. They were not able to assist in the affairs of state and save the day. Instead, they colluded with each other to frame up the loyal and cover up the virtuous.

古文：愿陛下简文武之臣，各勤其官，州牧督将，藩镇方外，公卿尚书，务脩仁化，上助陛下，下拯黎民，各尽其忠，拾遗万一，则康哉之歌作，刑错之理清。
现代文：希望陛下挑选文武大臣，令他们各自勤于职务，在外镇守的州牧、督将，朝中的公卿、尚书，勤于修治仁德教化，上助陛下治国，下救百姓困苦，各尽自己的忠心，补救陛下万一的过失，这样，则颂扬天下太平的歌谣就会出现，搁置刑罚不用的盛世就会到来。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will select the ministers of literature and armed forces and have them diligently perform their duties. The provincial pastors, governors-general, court nobles, and scholars who are stationed in foreign towns will diligently practice benevolence and enlightenment, help His Majesty govern the country, and save the people from hardship. Each of them will do their best to be loyal and remedy His Majesty's possible mistakes. In this way, songs praising world peace will appear, and a prosperous world without the use of punishment will come.

古文：愿陛下留神思臣愚言。
现代文：希望陛下注意考虑臣下的不当之言。 
English: I hope your majesty will take heed and consider the unwarranted words of your subjects.

古文：时殿上列将何定佞巧便辟，贵幸任事，凯面责定曰： 卿见前后事主不忠，倾乱国政，宁有得以寿终者邪！
现代文：当时朝中将领何定谄媚逢迎，受宠专权，陆凯当面斥责他说： 你看前前后后那些侍奉君主不忠诚，倾覆国家祸乱朝政之人，有哪一个能得享长寿的?
English: At that time, the general of the central government, He Dingtao, was popular with the people and was favored with exclusive power. Lu Kai rebuked him in person, saying, "You see, all those who served the monarch and were not loyal, who overthrew the national calamity and the government of the dynasty, which one can enjoy a long life?

古文：何以专为佞邪，秽尘天听？
现代文：你为什么专门干那些奸佞邪恶的坏事，堵塞君主的视听?
English: Why did you specifically do those treacherous and evil evil things, blocking the monarch's audio-visual?

古文：宜自改厉。
现代文：应当自我勉励改正。
English: Self-correction should be encouraged.

古文：不然，方见卿有不测之祸矣。 
现代文：否则，会看到你有无法预料的灾祸! 
English: Otherwise, you will see an unforeseen disaster!

古文：定大恨凯，思中伤之，凯终不以为意，乃心公家，义形於色，表疏皆指事不饰，忠恳内发。
现代文：何定十分痛恨陆凯，考虑着中伤陆凯。陆凯始终不以为意，一心为国家办事，正义之气流于神色，上表上疏都直接指责国事不作讳饰，忠恳之言都发自肺腑。
English: He must have hated Lu Kai very much and considered slandering Lu Kai. Lu Kai was always unconcerned, he worked for the country wholeheartedly, the air of justice flowed in his countenance, he did not play coy when he directly criticized the state affairs, and his sincere words came from the bottom of his heart.

古文：建衡元年，疾病，皓遣中书令董朝问所欲言，凯陈： 何定不可任用，宜授外任，不宜委以国事。
现代文：建衡元年，陆凯病重，孙皓派中书令董朝询问他有什么想说的话，陆凯陈述说： 何定不能重用，应该授予他京城以外的职务，不应当把朝廷大事托付他。
English: In the first year of Jianheng, Lu Kai was seriously ill, and Sun Yat-sen sent a letter to Dong Chao to ask him what he wanted to say. Lu Kai stated: He must not be reused, he should be assigned to positions outside the capital, and he should not be entrusted with the major events of the imperial court.

古文：奚熙小吏，建起浦里田，欲复严密故迹，亦不可听。
现代文：奚熙是个小官，但在浦里建起自己的田园，想恢复严密的旧迹，也不可信任。
English: Gongxi is a minor official, but he can't be trusted to build up his own countryside in Uri and restore the strict old ways.

古文：姚信、楼玄、贺卲、张悌、郭逴、薛莹、滕脩及族弟喜、抗，或清白忠勤，或姿才卓茂，皆社稷之桢幹，国家之良辅，愿陛下重留神思，访以时务，各尽其忠，拾遗万一。 
现代文：姚信、楼玄、贺邵、张悌、郭逴、薛莹、滕脩以及我同族弟弟陆喜、陆抗，他们有的清廉正直忠诚勤奋，有的才能资质卓越过人，都是国家的栋梁，朝廷的贤能的辅佐之人，希望陛下对他们加以留意和考虑，向他们询问时务，让他们能尽忠职守，补正陛下万一出现的过失。 
English: Yao Xin, Lou Xuan, He Shao, Zhang Xuan, Guo Xuan, Xue Ying, Teng Ying, and my fellow brothers Lu Xi and Lu Anti, some of them are honest, loyal and diligent, and some of them have outstanding talents and qualifications. They are the pillars of the country and the virtuous assistants of the imperial court. I hope that His Majesty will pay attention to and consider them, ask them about current affairs, so that they can perform their duties faithfully and correct His Majesty's mistakes in case they occur.

古文：遂卒，时年七十二。
现代文：随后陆凯去世，时年七十二岁。
English: Lu Kai then passed away at the age of seventy-two.

古文：子祎，初为黄门侍郎，出领部曲，拜偏将军。
现代文：陆凯的儿子陆祎，起初是黄门侍郎，出朝到京外统领军队，被任命为偏将军。
English: Lu Kai's son, Lu Yao, was originally a Yellow Gate chamberlain. He went to Beijing to command the army, and was appointed as a general.

古文：凯亡后，入为太子中庶子。
现代文：陆凯去世后，他入朝做了太子中庶子。
English: After Lu Kai's death, he entered the imperial court as an illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：右国史华覈表荐祎曰： 祎体质方刚，器幹强固，董率之才，鲁肃不过。
现代文：右国史华核上表推举陆祎说： 陆祎体质刚健，才能突出，意志坚强，有统领军队的才能，鲁肃也不能超过他。
English: Shi Huaguan of the State Council of the People's Republic of China said: Lu Xun is physically robust, his talent is outstanding, his will is strong, and he has the ability to command the army. Rusu cannot surpass him.

古文：及被召当下，径还赴都，道由武昌，曾不回顾，器械军资，一无所取，在戎果毅，临财有节。
现代文：等到被征召正当东下时，径直返回京城，途经武昌时，甚至不曾回头，器械军资，无一拿取。他在军事上果敢刚毅，面对钱财也能坚守节操。
English: When he was conscripted to go to the east, he went straight back to Beijing. When he passed through Wuchang, he didn't even look back. He didn't take any equipment or military resources. He was brave and courageous in the military, and he could stick to discipline in the face of money.

古文：夫夏口，贼之冲要，宜选名将以镇戍之，臣窃思惟，莫善於祎。 
现代文：夏口，是敌军进攻我国的要塞，应当精选名将前往镇守防卫，我暗自思量，没有谁比陆祎更合适。 
English: Xiakou is a fortress of the enemy attacking our country. I thought to myself that there is no one more suitable than Lu Wei to be selected to go to the town to guard and defend.

古文：初，皓常衔凯数犯颜忤旨，加何定谮构非一，既以重臣，难绳以法，又陆抗时为大将在疆埸，故以计容忍。
现代文：当初，孙皓常常愤恨陆凯多次冒犯自己的尊严违背自己的旨意，加上何定不止一次的构陷陆凯，既考虑到陆凯是朝廷重臣，难以将他绳之以法，又因为陆抗当时是镇守边疆的大将，因而考虑再三还是继续容忍。
English: At first, Sun Yat-sen often resented Lu Kai for repeatedly offending his dignity and going against his will. In addition, Lu Kai must have been framed more than once. Considering that Lu Kai was a senior court official, it was difficult to bring him to justice, and because Lu Anti was a general guarding the frontier at that time, he considered whether to continue to tolerate him.

古文：抗卒后，竟徙凯家於建安。
现代文：陆抗死后，孙皓最终将陆凯全家迁移到建安。
English: After Lu Qi's death, Sun Yat-sen eventually moved Lu Kai's entire family to Jian'an.

古文：或曰宝鼎元年十二月，凯与大司马丁奉、御史大夫丁固谋，因皓谒庙，欲废皓立孙休子。
现代文：有人说宝鼎元年十二月，陆凯与大司马丁奉、御史大夫丁固谋划，趁着孙皓拜谒祖庙时，准备废掉孙皓扶立孙休的儿子。
English: Some people say that in December of the first year of Baoding, Lu Kai, together with the chief secretary Martin Bong and the chief historian Dr. Ding, plotted to take advantage of Sun Yat-sen's visit to the ancestral temple to depose Sun Yat-sen's son Sun Xiu.

古文：时左将军留平领兵先驱，故密语平，平拒而不许，誓以不泄，是以所图不果。
现代文：当时左将军留平率军为先锋部队。因而将这个计划暗中告知留平，留平拒绝且不同意执行这一计划，但发誓决不泄密，因此他们的谋划没有取得结果。
English: At that time, General Zuo Ruiping led the army as the vanguard force. Therefore, he secretly informed Ruiping of this plan. Ruiping refused and disagreed with the implementation of this plan, but vowed never to divulge the secret, so their plan did not achieve results.

古文：太史郎陈苗奏皓久阴不雨，风气回逆，将有阴谋，皓深警惧云。
现代文：太史郎陈苗上奏孙皓说天阴很久但不下雨，风气回旋逆行，将会有人暗中有所图谋。
English: Sun Yat-sen said that it would be cloudy for a long time, but it would not rain, and the trend would be retrograde, and there would be someone plotting behind the scenes.

古文：予连从荆、扬来者得凯所谏皓二十事，博问吴人，多云不闻凯有此表。
现代文：孙皓深为警惕和戒备。我接连从荆州、扬州来的人那里得到陆凯上谏孙皓二十件事的奏章，广泛询问吴国之人，多数人说没听说陆凯有这些奏章。
English: Sun Yat-sen was very alert and cautious. I received the twenty-something recitals of Sun Yat-sen on Lu Kai from people who came from Jingzhou and Yangzhou one after another, and I made extensive inquiries with people in Wu. Most people said that they had not heard of Lu Kai having these recitals.

古文：又按其文殊甚切直，恐非皓之所能容忍也。
现代文：又阅读奏表，发现其中文辞很是耿直急切，恐怕不是孙皓所能容忍得下的。
English: He also read the transcript and found that the words in it were very earnest and eager, which was probably more than Sun Yat-sen could tolerate.

古文：或以为凯藏之箧笥，未敢宣行，病困，皓遣董朝省问欲言，因以付之。
现代文：有人认为是陆凯将奏章藏在小竹箱里，不敢直言上奏。病重时，孙皓派董朝前来探省询问他想说的话，陆凯才把这些奏章委托给董朝。
English: Some people think that Lu Kai hid the music in a small bamboo box and did not dare to play it. When he was seriously ill, Sun Yat-sen sent Dong Chao to visit the province to ask what he wanted to say. Lu Kai entrusted these music to Dong Chao.

古文：虚实难明，故不著于篇，然爱其指擿皓事，足为后戒，故钞列于凯传左云。
现代文：具体情况真假难辨，所以不著录在书中，但我赞赏陆凯指责孙皓过失的言行，足以成为后世的鉴戒，因而抄录在陆凯传的后面。
English: It is difficult to distinguish whether the specific situation is true or false, so it is not recorded in the book, but I appreciate Lu Kai's words and deeds accusing Sun Yat-sen of negligence, which is enough to be a warning to future generations, and is therefore copied in the back of Lu Kai's biography.

古文：皓遣亲近赵钦口诏报凯前表曰： 孤动必遵先帝，有何不平？
现代文：孙鰑派亲信赵钦口传诏书回答陆凯之前的奏表说： 寡人行动必定遵循先帝遗训，有什么不平的呢?
English: Sun Yat-sen sent his close confidant, Zhao Qin, to deliver a message in reply to Lu Kai's previous report, saying: Some people's actions must follow the former emperor's behest. What's wrong with that?

古文：君所谏非也。
现代文：您所谏之事不对。
English: What you say is not true.

古文：又建业宫不利，故避之，而西宫室宇摧朽，须谋移都，何以不可徙乎？ 
现代文：再加上建业皇宫居住不吉利，因此要远避，西宫的房屋也已腐坏朽塌，应计划迁都，凭什么不能搬迁呢? 
English: In addition, it is unlucky to live in the Jianye Palace, so you should stay away from it. The buildings of the West Palace have also rotted and collapsed. You should plan to move the capital. Why can't you move it?

古文：凯上疏曰：
现代文：陆凯再上疏说：
English: Lu Kai went on to say:

古文：臣窃见陛下执政以来，阴阳不调，五星失晷，职司不忠，奸党相扶，是陛下不遵先帝之所致。
现代文： 为臣私见陛下掌权以来，阴阳无法调和，五星失去正常运行规律，官吏在职不忠，奸邪结党营私，是陛下不遵循先帝遗训导致的。
English: Since His Majesty came to power, the yin and yang cannot be reconciled, the five stars have lost their normal operation pattern, officials have been unfaithful in their duties, and traitors and evil cliques have been running the party and the country, all of which were caused by His Majesty's failure to follow the teachings left behind by the former emperor.

古文：夫王者之兴，受之於天，脩之由德，岂在宫乎？
现代文：帝王的兴起，受命于天，由修养德行而成，重点岂在宫室的好坏?
English: The rise of the emperor, ordered by heaven, was made by cultivation of virtue. Is the focus on the quality of the palace?

古文：而陛下不谘之公辅，便盛意驱驰，六军流离悲惧，逆犯天地，天地以灾，童歌其谣。
现代文：而陛下不咨询辅佐朝政的大臣，就决意出动兵马迅速挺进，使六军流离惊恐，触犯天地神祗，天地就会降灾，儿童就会唱出警示童谣。
English: However, without consulting the ministers who assist the government, His Majesty decided to mobilize the troops and horses to advance rapidly, causing the six armies to flee in fear, violating the gods of heaven and earth. Heaven and earth would be affected by the disaster, and children would sing warning nursery rhymes.

古文：纵令陛下一身得安，百姓愁劳，何以用治？
现代文：纵然使陛下一人得以安稳，而百姓愁苦疲乏，依靠什么治理天下?
English: Even if His Majesty alone is kept safe and sound, and the people are weary and weary, on what do they depend for the governance of the world?

古文：此不遵先帝一也。
现代文：这是不遵先帝遗训的第一点。
English: This is the first point of not following the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：臣闻有国以贤为本，夏杀龙逢，殷获伊挚，斯前世之明效，今日之师表也。
现代文： 为臣听说拥有国家之人以贤才为根本，夏桀杀害直臣关龙逢，殷汤得到良臣伊尹，这是前朝的明显校验，现在的借鉴。
English: For the vassal, it is said that the person who owns the country takes the talent as the fundamental, Xia Yao killed the direct vassal Guan Longfeng, and Yin Tang got the good vassal Yi Yin, which is the obvious proof of the former dynasty and the reference for the present.

古文：中常侍王蕃黄中通理，处朝忠謇，斯社稷之重镇，大吴之龙逢也，而陛下忿其苦辞，恶其直对，枭之殿堂，尸骸暴弃。
现代文：中常侍王蕃性情通达情理，在朝中行事忠诚正直，是国家栋梁，大吴国的龙逢，而陛下忿恨他说话不好听，厌恶他直言对答，将他在殿堂上斩首，还把尸体抛弃街市。
English: Zhongzheng's attendant Wang Qian had a reasonable disposition, acted loyally and honestly in the court, and was the pillar of the country, the dragon of the Great Wu Kingdom. However, His Majesty resented that he was not easy to listen to, detested his straightforward answers, beheaded him in the hall of fame, and dumped his corpse in the market.

古文：邦内伤心，有识悲悼，咸以吴国夫差复存。
现代文：天下百姓对此伤心，有识之士悲痛不已，都认为陛下是吴国夫差再世。
English: The people around the world are sad about this, and people with insight are saddened, and they all think that His Majesty is a reincarnation of Wu Guofu.

古文：先帝亲贤，陛下反之，是陛下不遵先帝二也。
现代文：先帝亲近贤能，而陛下行事与先帝相违背。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第二点。
English: The former emperor was close to virtue, while His Majesty acted contrary to the former emperor. This is the second point of His Majesty's non-compliance with the last instruction of the former emperor.

古文：臣闻宰相国之柱也，不可不强，是故汉有萧、曹之佐，先帝有顾、步之相。
现代文： 为臣听说宰相是国家的基柱，不能不强壮，所以汉朝有萧何、曹参的辅佐，先帝有顾雍、步骘的帮助。
English: The vassal heard that the prime minister is the pillar of the country and must be strong, so the Han Dynasty had the assistance of Xiao He and Cao San, and the former emperor had the help of Gu Yong and Bu Xi.

古文：而万彧琐才凡庸之质，昔从家隶，超步紫闼，於彧已丰，於器已溢，而陛下爱其细介，不访大趣，荣以尊辅，越尚旧臣。
现代文：而万彧这个琐屑小人，才智平庸，之前是跟随人家的家奴，现在越步进入皇宫，对他来说已经非常恩重了，对他的任用已经超过他做为役使的才能，而陛下喜好他微末才能，不问他是否有远大志向，令他荣耀地窃据尊贵辅臣的位置上，享受超过旧臣的待遇。
English: But Wan Xun, a petty villain with mediocre intelligence, who was previously a slave to follow others, is now stepping into the palace. He has been very grateful to him, and his appointment has exceeded his ability as a servant. And His Majesty likes his tiny talent, and does not ask if he has lofty aspirations, so that he can gloriously steal the position of honorable assistant minister, and enjoy more than the treatment of the old minister.

古文：贤良愤惋，智士赫咤，是不遵先帝三也。
现代文：贤良之士愤慨惋惜，智谋之人惊吓叹息。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第三点。
English: The virtuous are indignant and regretful, and the clever are shocked and sigh. This is the third point of His Majesty's non-compliance with the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：先帝爱民过於婴孩，民无妻者以妾妻之，见单衣者以帛给之，枯骨不收而取埋之。
现代文： 先帝爱护百姓甚于护佑婴孩，没有妻子的百姓就为他娶妻，看到穿着单薄的人就提供丝织品，有无人收埋的枯骨就好好掩埋。
English: The previous emperor loved the people more than he did babies. People without wives would marry them for him. When he saw people wearing thin clothes, he would provide them with silk fabrics. If there were bones that no one had taken away, they would be buried.

古文：而陛下反之，是不遵先帝四也。
现代文：而陛下与先帝做法相反，这是不遵循先帝遗训的第四点。 
English: Contrary to what His Majesty and the former emperor did, this is the fourth point of not following the former emperor's behest.

古文：昔桀纣灭由妖妇，幽厉乱在嬖妾，先帝鉴之，以为身戒，故左右不置淫邪之色，后房无旷积之女。
现代文： 过去桀纣亡国是源于妖妇，周幽王、周厉王的动乱起在嬖妾，先帝以此为鉴，把这些作为自己的警戒，所以他身边不安置淫邪的女色，后宫没有旷怨积攒的女子。
English: In the past, the destruction of a country was caused by a sorceress. The upheavals of Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang were caused by concubines. The former emperor took this as a lesson and used it as his own warning. Therefore, he was not afraid to have a lecherous woman around him, and there were no women in his harem who had accumulated grudges.

古文：今中宫万数，不备嫔嫱，外多鳏夫，女吟於中。
现代文：现在陛下后宫有数以万计的嫔妃，不设置女官，宫外多鳏夫，宫中妃嫔多有哀叹。
English: Now, there are tens of thousands of concubines in His Majesty's harem. There are no maids of honor, there are many widowers outside the palace, and many concubines in the palace lament.

古文：风雨逆度，正由此起，是不遵先帝五也。
现代文：风雨倒泄逆吹失常，正是因此而起。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第五点。
English: This is the fifth point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：先帝忧劳万机，犹惧有失。
现代文： 先帝为国忧劳日理万机，仍然担心有什么缺失。
English: The former emperor, who worked tirelessly for the country, is still worried about what is missing.

古文：陛下临阼以来，游戏后宫，眩惑妇女，乃令庶事多旷，下吏容奸，是不遵先帝六也。
现代文：陛下继位以来，在后宫中游玩嬉闹，迷惑沉湎于女色。所以导致政事多有荒废，下属官吏藏污纳垢。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第六点。
English: Since His Majesty's succession to the throne, he has been frolicking in the middle of the harem and indulging in womanizing. As a result, government affairs are often wasteful, and subordinate officials hide dirt. This is the sixth point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：先帝笃尚朴素，服不纯丽，宫无高台，物不彫饰，故国富民充，奸盗不作。
现代文： 先帝崇尚朴素，服饰没有精细华丽，没有高大的宫殿，用品不雕刻镂饰，所以国富民足，不生奸盗之事。
English: The previous emperor advocated simplicity. His clothes were not elaborate ornate, there were no grand palaces, and his utensils were not carved and decorated. As a result, the country was prosperous and there were no robberies.

古文：而陛下徵调州郡，竭民财力，土被玄黄，宫有朱紫，是不遵先帝七也。
现代文：而陛下征调州郡财货，竭尽调取百姓人力财力，地面铺上彩色的丝帛，宫中尽是朱衣紫绶。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第七点。
English: On the other hand, His Majesty requisitioned the state and county's wealth and goods, made every effort to mobilize the people's manpower and financial resources, covered the ground with colored silk and clothed the palace in red and purple. This is the seventh point of His Majesty's failure to follow the Emperor's behests.

古文：先帝外仗顾、陆、朱、张，内近胡综、薛综，是以庶绩雍熙，邦内清肃。
现代文： 先帝治国对外倚靠顾雍、陆逊、朱然、张昭，对内亲近胡综、薛综，故此朝政和睦协调，国内清明整肃。
English: The former emperor relied on Gu Yong, Lu Xun, Zhu Ran, and Zhang Zhao to govern the country externally, and was close to Hu Zimin and Xue Zimin internally. Therefore, the government and politics of the dynasty were harmoniously coordinated, and the country was cleansed and purified.

古文：今者外非其任，内非其人，陈声、曹辅，斗筲小吏，先帝之所弃，而陛下幸之，是不遵先帝八也。
现代文：现在在外官员不能担当重任，宫内任用之人没有合适人选，陈声、曹辅，本是才识短浅、器量狭小的小官吏，是先帝放弃不用的人，而陛下非常宠幸他们。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第八点。
English: At present, foreign officials cannot take on heavy responsibilities, and there is no suitable candidate for those appointed within the Imperial Palace. Chen Sheng and Cao Fu were originally minor officials with shallow knowledge and small stature. They were people whom the former emperor gave up and did not need, and His Majesty was very favored by them. This is the eighth point of His Majesty's failure to follow the former emperor's behest.

古文：先帝每宴见群臣，抑损醇醲，臣下终日无失慢之尤，百寮庶尹，并展所陈。
现代文： 先帝每次宴饮召见群臣，都节制饮酒，大臣终日都不会因疏忽怠懈而导致过失，百官吏役，都能完整阐明自己的看法。
English: Every time the former emperor invited his courtiers to a banquet, they all refrained from drinking alcohol. The ministers did not make mistakes due to negligence and laziness throughout the day, and the officials were able to fully explain their views.

古文：而陛下拘以视瞻之敬，惧以不尽之酒。
现代文：而陛下却用臣下瞻仰敬畏的尊重拘束他们，用毫无节制的饮酒使他们产生恐惧。
English: His Majesty, on the other hand, held his subjects in awe-inspiring reverence and terrorized them with his unbridled drinking.

古文：夫酒以成礼，过则败德，此无异商辛长夜之饮也，是不遵先帝九也。
现代文：酒是成就礼仪之物，饮酒过分则败坏品德，这与商纣王终夜饮酒没有两样。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第九点。
English: Wine is a thing of accomplishment of etiquette, drinking too much is corrupting one's character, which is no different from the merchant king drinking all night. This is the ninth point of his majesty's non-compliance with the emperor's last instruction.

古文：昔汉之桓、灵，亲近宦竖，大失民心。
现代文： 过去汉朝的桓、灵二帝，亲近宦官，失去大量民心。
English: In the past, Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling of the Han Dynasty were close to eunuchs and lost a lot of people's hearts.

古文：今高通、詹廉、羊度，黄门小人，而陛下赏以重爵，权以战兵。
现代文：现在高通、詹廉、羊度，都是黄门宦官，不正小人，但陛下却赐赏给他们尊贵的爵位，使他们获掌握统管军队的大权。
English: Now, Gao Tong, Zhan Lian, and Yang Du are all eunuchs of the Yellow Gate, crooked villains, but His Majesty has given them noble titles, giving them the power to control the army.

古文：若江渚有难，烽燧互起，则度等之武不能御侮明也，是不遵先帝十也。
现代文：如果长江一线出现紧急情况，战火四起，则羊度等人的军事才干不能抵御敌人是非常明白的事情。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十点。
English: If there is an emergency on the Yangtze River front and war breaks out, it is very clear that the military talent of Yang Du and others cannot resist the enemy. This is the tenth point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：今宫女旷积，而黄门复走州郡，条牒民女，有钱则舍，无钱则取，怨呼道路，母子死诀，是不遵先帝十一也。
现代文： 现在后宫女子旷怨积攒，而黄门宦官还在州郡中流窜，张贴文告强招民女，有钱人家用钱相抵，贫苦人家的女子就被强行夺取，怨声载道，母女永别。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十一点。
English: Now the harem girls have accumulated a lot of resentment, and the eunuchs of the Yellow Gate are still running rampant in the prefectures and counties, posting notices to forcefully recruit women, the rich are competing with money, the women of the poor are forcibly seized, the complaints are spreading, and the mother and daughter are parting forever. This is the eleventh point of His Majesty's disobedience to the last teachings of the First Emperor.

古文：先帝在时，亦养诸王太子，若取乳母，其夫复役，赐与钱财，给其资粮，时遣归来，视其弱息。
现代文： 先帝在世，也养育诸王太子，若有选择乳母，乳母丈夫又在服劳役，就赏赐他们钱财，供应他们食粮，偶尔送遣乳母归家，探望自己的子女。
English: When the former emperor was alive, he also raised princes and princesses. If he chose a wet nurse and the wet nurse's husband was a laborer, he would reward them with money and provide them with food. Occasionally, he would send the wet nurse home to visit his own children.

古文：今则不然，夫妇生离，夫故作役，儿从后死，家为空户，是不遵先帝十二也。
现代文：现在朝廷不是这样，夫妇生离，丈夫依旧被派作劳役，子女无人照料随后夭折，这户人家就成为无人空户。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十二点。
English: This is not the case in the Imperial Court today. Couples are separated, the husband is still assigned to labor service, the children are left unattended and then die prematurely, leaving the family empty-handed. This is the twelfth point of His Majesty's failure to follow the Emperor's behest.

古文：先帝叹曰： 国以民为本，民以食为天，衣其次也，三者，孤存之於心。 
现代文： 先帝感叹过： 国以百姓为本，民以饮食为天，衣服在后，这三者，一直留存在我心中。 
English: The former emperor lamented: The country is people-oriented, the people are food-oriented, and clothing-oriented. These three things have always remained in my heart.

古文：今则不然，农桑并废，是不遵先帝十三也。
现代文：现在则不然，农耕桑织全都废驰。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十三点。
English: This is the thirteenth point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：先帝简士，不拘卑贱，任之乡闾，效之於事，举者不虚，受者不妄。
现代文： 先帝挑选官员，不拘泥他们出身的低微，让他们在乡邑中任职，以事务考验他们，举荐者不虚报，任职者不妄作。
English: The former emperor selected officials, regardless of their lowly origin, let them serve in the townships, and tested them with affairs. The recommenders did not report falsely, and the incumbents did not act recklessly.

古文：今则不然，浮华者登，朋党者进，是不遵先帝十四也。
现代文：现在则不然，浮华不实之人登位受用，四处结党之人提拔升官。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十四点。
English: However, this is not the case now. People who are flashy and false are enthroned and used, and people who form parties everywhere are promoted and promoted. This is the fourteenth point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：先帝战士，不给他役，使春惟知农，秋惟收稻，江渚有事，责其死效。
现代文： 先帝时期的士兵，没有其他的劳役，让他们在春季只从事农耕，秋季只努力收割，长江沿岸出现战事，就责令他们誓死为国效力。
English: The soldiers in the previous emperor's time had no other labor service, so they were only engaged in farming in the spring and harvesting in the fall. If there was a war along the Yangtze River, they were ordered to swear to die for the country.

古文：今之战士，供给众役，廪赐不赡，是不遵先帝十五也。
现代文：现在的兵士，迫使他们服各种劳役，而官府对他们毫无供养赡赐。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十五点。
English: Today's soldiers are forced to do all kinds of labor, and the government does nothing to support them. This is the fifteenth point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：夫赏以劝功，罚以禁邪，赏罚不中，则士民散失。
现代文： 赏赐用以鼓励人们立功，惩罚用以禁止人们作恶，赏罚不公允，那官吏百姓就会离心四散。
English: If rewards are used to encourage people to perform meritorious deeds, and punishments are used to prohibit people from doing evil, and if rewards and punishments are not fair, then the officials and the people will be scattered.

古文：今江边将士，死不见哀，劳不见赏，是不遵先帝十六也。
现代文：现在守卫长江一线的将士，死者没有受到哀怜抚恤，辛劳没有受到奖励赏赐。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十六点。
English: The soldiers who are now guarding the Yangtze River front line, the dead have not received any pity or compensation, and their hard work has not been rewarded.This is the sixteenth point of His Majesty's failure to comply with the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：今在所监司，已为烦猥，兼有内使，扰乱其中，一民十吏，何以堪命？
现代文： 现在各地监管任职，已经烦多杂乱，又有朝中使者出使四方，其中更为扰乱，一个百姓十个官，如何承受得住?
English: At present, the supervision and administration of various regions is already too complicated and messy, and there are also envoys from the DPRK and China sent to the four directions, which is even more disruptive. One citizen, ten officials, how can we bear it?

古文：昔景帝时，交阯反乱，实由兹起，是为遵景帝之阙，不遵先帝十七也。
现代文：昔日景帝时期，交阯叛乱，实际就是因此而起。这是陛下遵循景帝的过错、不遵先帝遗训的第十七点。
English: In the past, during the reign of Emperor Jing, the Jiaozuo Rebellion actually started because of this. This is the seventeenth point of His Majesty's fault of following Emperor Jing and not following the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：夫校事，吏民之仇也。
现代文： 校事之人是官员民众的仇敌。
English: The people in charge of school affairs are the enemies of officials and the public.

古文：先帝末年，虽有吕壹、钱钦，寻皆诛夷，以谢百姓。
现代文：先帝晚年，虽有吕壹、钱钦，但不久都被诛杀，以向百姓谢罪。
English: In the late years of the last emperor, although there were Lü Yi and Qian Qin, they were all killed soon after, in order to apologize to the people.

古文：今复张立校曹，纵吏言事，是不遵先帝十八也。
现代文：现在重新设置校事职务，纵容这些密探告发他人。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十八点。
English: This is the 18th point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：先帝时，居官者咸久於其位，然后考绩黜陟。
现代文： 先帝时期，为官者都是久在职位，然后根据考核成绩升迁罢黜。
English: During the reign of the previous emperor, all officials had been in their positions for a long time, and were then promoted or dismissed according to their performance evaluation.

古文：今州县职司，或莅政无几，便徵召迁转，迎新送旧，纷纭道路，伤财害民，於是为甚，是不遵先帝十九也。
现代文：现在州县官员，有的到位任职不久，便收到征召升迁调任，迎新送旧，调动的官员纷纷来往于赴任的路上，劳民伤财，在这方面很是严重。这是陛下不遵先帝遗训的第十九点。
English: Now, some state and county officials, soon after taking office, have received conscription, promotion and transfer, and the newly transferred officials have come and gone on their way to office, and the labor and financial losses are very serious in this regard. This is the 19th point of His Majesty's disobedience to the Emperor's last teachings.

古文：先帝每察竟解之奏，当留心推按，是以狱无冤囚，死者吞声。
现代文： 先帝每次审查已经判决的案件报告，常留心推究案情，所以监狱中没有受到冤屈的囚犯，被处死的人无以辩驳。
English: Every time the former emperor reviewed the case report of a case that had already been adjudicated, he often paid attention to the circumstances of the case, so there were no prisoners who were wronged in prison, and those who were executed could not argue.

古文：今则违之，是不遵先帝二十也。
现代文：现在却违背这种作法。这是不遵先帝遗训的第二十点。
English: Now they are violating this practice. This is the 20th point of not following the Emperor's last instruction.

古文：若臣言可录，藏之盟府；如其虚妄，治臣之罪。
现代文： 若是为臣所言能采纳，可收藏在掌管文书的官府;如果为臣所言有所虚妄，就治办我的罪过。
English: If what a vassal says can be accepted, it can be stored in the government office in charge of documents; if what a vassal says is untrue, it will be my fault.

古文：愿陛下留意。
现代文：希望陛下仔细考虑为臣所奏。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will carefully consider my request.

古文：胤字敬宗，凯弟也。
现代文：陆胤，字敬宗，陆凯的弟弟。
English: Lu Tan, also known as Keizong, is Lu Kai's younger brother.

古文：始为御史、尚书选曹郎，太子和闻其名，待以殊礼。
现代文：起初担任御史、尚书选曹郎，太子孙和得知他的声名，以特殊礼节接待他。
English: At first, he served as an imperial historian, a selector of books, and a prince's descendant, and when he learned of his reputation, he received him with special courtesy.

古文：会全寄、杨竺等阿附鲁王霸，与和分争，阴相谮构，胤坐收下狱，楚毒备至，终无他辞。
现代文：正值全寄、杨竺等阿奉亲附鲁王孙霸，与孙和分庭争斗，暗地相互构陷生怨，陆胤因此获罪被捕下狱，受尽酷刑，始终没有改口。
English: At the time of the Zhenxing, Yang Xuan and other Afeng relatives followed the lead of the King of Lu, Sun Ba, and fought with Sun Wabing, secretly setting up a grudge against each other. As a result, Lu Yin was convicted, arrested and imprisoned, tortured, and never changed his mind.

古文：后为衡阳督军都尉。
现代文：后来陆胤担任衡阳督军都尉。
English: Later, Lu Tan served as a captain of the Hengyang Governor's Army.

古文：赤乌十一年，交阯九真夷贼攻没城邑，交部骚动。
现代文：赤乌十一年，交趾、九真的少数民族反叛者攻陷城邑，交州地区骚动不安。
English: In the 11th year of the reign of Emperor Akebono, ethnic minority rebels from Kojima and Kyushu invaded the city, leading to unrest in the Kojima area.

古文：以胤为交州刺史、安南校尉。
现代文：朝廷任命陆胤为交州刺史、安南校尉。
English: The imperial court appointed Lu Yin as the secretary of Jiaozhou and the captain of Annan.

古文：胤入南界，喻以恩信，务崇招纳，高凉渠帅黄吴等支党三千馀家皆出降。
现代文：陆胤进军南方地区，以恩信告知当地百姓，致力推行招安纳降政策，高凉贼寇头目黄吴等党羽三千多家都出寨投降。
English: Lu Yin marched into the southern region, informed the local people with the letter of gratitude, and worked hard to implement the policy of recruiting and accepting, and more than three thousand party members, including the leader of the Gaoliang bandits, Huang Wu, surrendered.

古文：引军而南，重宣至诚，遗以财币。
现代文：陆胤率军往南，再表明自己的恳切诚意，赠予钱财。
English: Lu Yan led the army to the south, and then showed his earnest sincerity by giving away money and property.

古文：贼帅百馀人，民五万馀家，深幽不羁，莫不稽颡，交域清泰。
现代文：于是贼首一百多人，五万多家百姓，以及深山偏远不服教管的人，全都叩头归附，于是交州地区太平安定。
English: As a result, more than one hundred thieves, more than fifty thousand people, as well as people who do not submit to religious control in the remote mountains, all kowtowed to the annexation, so the Jiaozhou area was peaceful and stable.

古文：就加安南将军。
现代文：陆胤被就地加授安南将军。
English: Lu Tan was promoted to General Annan on the spot.

古文：复讨苍梧建陵贼，破之，前后出兵八千馀人，以充军用。
现代文：随即又讨伐苍梧郡建陵贼军并攻破了他们，前后出兵八千多人，以补充陆胤军事需用。
English: He then attacked the Cangwu County tomb robbers and defeated them, sending more than eight thousand soldiers to supplement Luyin's military needs.

古文：永安元年，徵为西陵督，封都亭侯，后转在虎林。
现代文：永安元年，陆胤被授予西陵督，封为都亭侯，后转到虎林。
English: In the first year of the Yong'an era, Lu Yin was awarded the title of the governor of the western mausoleum and the title of the governor of the capital, after which he was transferred to the tiger forest.

古文：中书丞华覈表荐胤曰： 胤天姿聪朗，才通行絜，昔历选曹，遗迹可纪。
现代文：中书丞华核上表推举陆胤说： 陆胤天资聪颖，才能过人，品行良正，过去被用作选曹官职，政绩有足以记录之处。
English: Chuanshujo Hua Jian said of the nomination of Lu Tan on the list: Lu Tan is talented, talented, and has a good moral character. In the past, he was used as an elected official, and his political achievements are well documented.

古文：还在交州，奉宣朝恩，流民归附，海隅肃清。
现代文：后在交州，奉命传扬朝廷恩典，各地流散百姓归附，边远地域得以安定。
English: Later, in Jiaozhou, he was ordered to propagate the grace of the imperial court, and the scattered people in various regions were annexed, and the remote areas were stabilized.

古文：苍梧、南海，岁有暴风瘴气之害，风则折木，飞砂转石，气则雾郁，飞鸟不经。
现代文：苍梧、南海，年年有暴风、瘴气的危害，暴风则折断树木，飞沙走石，瘴气则毒雾凝结，飞鸟不敢经过。
English: In Cangwu and Nanhai, there are storms and hailstorms every year. Storms break trees, sand and stones are blown away, and hailstorms condense poisonous fog, so birds dare not pass by.

古文：自胤至州，风气绝息，商旅平行，民无疾疫，田稼丰稔。
现代文：自陆胤到达交州后，暴风毒瘴全都消散，商旅平安行路，百姓不受疾疫流行之苦，田地庄稼丰收富足。
English: Since Luyin arrived in Jiaozhou, the storm and the locusts have all dissipated, the merchants and travelers have traveled safely, the people have not suffered from the epidemic, and the crops in the fields have been rich and plentiful.

古文：州治临海，海流秋咸，胤又畜水，民得甘食。
现代文：州治靠近大海，海水秋天很咸，陆胤又教人蓄海水晒成盐，民众用盐调味得享美食。
English: The prefecture is close to the sea, and the seawater is very salty in autumn. Luyin also teaches people to store seawater to make salt, and people can enjoy food seasoned with salt.

古文：惠风横被，化感人神，遂凭天威，招合遗散。
现代文：恩惠之风遍及当地，教化之功感动神明，所以凭借天威，招集流民。
English: The wind of grace pervaded the local area, and the work of enlightenment moved the gods, so by virtue of heaven's power, the exiles were summoned.

古文：至被诏书当出，民感其恩，以忘恋土，负老携幼，甘心景从，众无携贰，不烦兵卫。
现代文：等到他接到诏书将要离开交州时，百姓感念他的恩德，甚至忘却眷恋故土，扶老携幼，甘心跟随在后，人民不怀二心，不须烦劳军队驻守。
English: By the time he received the edict to leave Jiaozhou, the people were so impressed by his kindness that they even forgot their attachment to the motherland, supported the elderly and children, and were willing to follow him. The people did not have any second thoughts, and did not have to bother the army to stay.

古文：自诸将合众，皆胁之以威，未有如胤结以恩信者也。
现代文：向来将领聚集百姓，都以威势相胁迫，没有像陆胤那样能用恩德信义来巩固人心。
English: Generals have always gathered the people and used their power to coerce them, but they have not been able to use grace, loyalty and righteousness to consolidate the hearts of the people like Lu Yin.

古文：衔命在州，十有馀年，宾带殊俗，宝玩所生，而内无粉黛附珠之妾，家无文甲犀象之珍，方之今臣，实难多得。
现代文：他奉命在州府任职，已有十余年，当地宾客也有不同风俗，还是珍宝物品的特产之地，而陆胤的内室却无粉黛戴珠的妻妾，家中却无玳瑁、犀角、象牙之类珍宝，现在大臣，像这样的实在难以多得。
English: He has been appointed to serve in the prefectural government for more than ten years. The local guests have different customs, and it is also a special place for the production of precious items. However, Lu Yin's inner chamber does not have a wife and concubine who wear pink beads, and his family does not have treasures such as ivory, rhinoceros horn, and ivory. Now he is a minister, it is really hard to get more like this.

古文：宜在辇毂，股肱王室，以赞唐虞康哉之颂。
现代文：他应当放置在京城，辅佐君主，以此可得赞赏唐尧盛世康宁的颂歌。
English: He should be placed in the capital, assisting the monarch, in order to gain appreciation for Tang Xing Shengxing Kangning's ode.

古文：江边任轻，不尽其才，虎林选督，堪之者众。
现代文：驻守长江的责任比较轻，不能完全地发挥他的才能，选任虎林都督，能担当此职的人很多。
English: The responsibility of garrisoning the Yangtze River is relatively light, and it is not possible to give full play to his talents. There are many people who can take on this position.

古文：若召还都，宠以上司，则天工毕脩，庶绩咸熙矣。 
现代文：如果将陆胤召回京都，恩赐他更高的职位，则能完好地修治社稷功业，朝政会由此得到很好的治理。 
English: If Lu Tan were to be recalled to Kyoto and given a higher position, he would be able to carry out his duties well, and the Imperial Court would be well governed.

古文：胤卒，子式嗣，为柴桑督、扬武将军。
现代文：陆胤去世后，他的儿子陆式继承了他的爵位，被任命为柴桑督、扬武将军。
English: After the death of Lu Yin, his son Lu Shih inherited his title and was appointed the Governor of Chai and the General of Yangwu.

古文：天策元年，与从兄祎俱徙建安。
现代文：天策元年，陆式与堂兄陆祎都被流徙建安。
English: In the first year of the Tensei era, Lu Shih and his cousin Lu Yao were both exiled to Jian'an.

古文：天纪二年，召还建业，复将军、侯。
现代文：天纪二年，陆式被召还建业，恢复将军之职、侯爵爵位。
English: In the second year of Tianji, Lu Xi was called back to Jianye to resume the post of general and the title of marquis.

古文：评曰：潘濬公清割断，陆凯忠壮质直，皆节梗梗，有大丈夫格业。
现代文：评曰：潘濬公正清廉，果敢刚毅，陆凯忠诚勇壮，质朴正直，都有高尚的节操气概，有大丈夫品格功业。
English: The review said: Pan Xuan is fair and honest, courageous and strong-willed, Lu Kai is loyal and brave, simple and honest. They all have noble integrity and good character.

古文：胤身絜事济，著称南土，可谓良牧矣。
现代文：陆胤品行高洁有所成就，在南方地区为人著称，可算得上是贤能的地方长官了。
English: Lu Ying has made some achievements, and is well-known in the southern region. He can be regarded as a capable local governor.

