古文：自序汉初，魏无知封高良侯，子均，均子恢，恢子彦。
现代文：汉朝初年，魏无知被封为高良侯，他的儿子名均，魏均的儿子名恢，魏恢的儿子名彦。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Wei Wuzhizhi was given the title of Gao Lianghou. His son was named Nanzhun, Wei Jun's son was named Nahua, and Wei Huasun's son was named Maohan.

古文：彦子歆，字子胡，幼孤有志操，博洽经史，成帝世，位终钜鹿太守，仍家焉。
现代文：魏彦的儿子魏歆，字子胡，幼年时就死去了父亲，颇有志气和节操，对经传史籍有广博的知识。汉成帝的时候，官职做到了巨鹿太守，退休后家居在巨鹿。
English: Wei Yan's son Wei Zi, also known as Zi Hu, lost his father at a young age. He was quite ambitious and disciplined, and had extensive knowledge of historical texts. During the reign of Emperor Han, he held the official position of Koga Taishu, and after retirement, he lived in Koga.

古文：歆子悦，字处德，性沉厚有度量，宣城公赵国李孝伯见而重之，以女妻焉。
现代文：魏歆的儿子魏悦，字处德，性格深沉厚重而大度有气量，宣城公赵人李孝伯对他非常器重，就把自己的女儿许配给他为妻。
English: Wei Rong's son, Wei Yue, whose name means virtue, had a deep, heavy and generous character. Li Xiao Bo, the mayor of Xuancheng, was very fond of him and married his daughter to him.

古文：位济阴太守，以善政称。
现代文：魏悦官任济阴太守，因为他有很好的政绩而受到世人的称颂。
English: Wei Yue official was appointed as Jiyin Daju because he had a good political record and was praised by the world.

古文：悦子子建，字敬忠。
现代文：魏悦之子魏子建，字敬忠。
English: Wei Zijian, son of Wei Yue, surnamed Jingzhong.

古文：释褐奉朝请，累迁太尉从事中郎。
现代文：他脱去布衣而赴朝廷做官，官职接连升迁而任太尉从事中郎。
English: He took off his clothes and went to the imperial court to work as an official. He was promoted one after another and was appointed captain to be a middle-ranking official.

古文：初，世宗时平氐，遂于武兴立镇，寻改为东益州。
现代文：起初，本朝世宗时平定氐人，就在武兴这个地方设立镇，不久改为东益州。
English: At first, when Emperor Zong of this dynasty conquered the Xiongnu people, he set up a town in the place of Wuxing, which was soon changed to Dongyishu.

古文：其后镇将、刺史乖失人和，群氐作梗，遂为边患，乃除子建为东益州刺史。
现代文：后来这里的镇将、刺史施政违背民意，失去人心，当地氐人由此而作乱，于是成为边患，朝廷就任命魏子建为东益州刺史。
English: Later, the town commander and chief historian of Dongyi Province, Wei Zijian, was appointed as the chief historian of Dongyi Province by the imperial court.

古文：子建布以恩信，风化大行，远近清静。
现代文：魏子建到任之后，对当地百姓广施恩德，示以诚信，大力推行感化教育，于是这一带远近安宁清静。
English: After Wei Zijian took office, he extended kindness to the local people, showed good faith, and vigorously promoted the influence education, so this area was peaceful and quiet.

古文：正光五年，南、北二秦城人莫折念生、韩祖香、张长命相继构逆，佥以州城之人莫不劲勇，同类悉反，宜先收其器械。
现代文：正光五年，南北两秦城的莫折念生、韩祖香、张长命等人相继叛逆，大家都认为秦州城的人个个都强悍勇敢，因为同类的缘故，他们全都会反叛，应当首先收缴他们的武器。
English: In the Zhengguang Five-Year Plan, the people of the two Qin Cities in the north and south of the country, such as Muxing Nian Sheng, Han Zu Xiang, and Zhang Changmei, rebelled one after another. Everyone thought that the people of Qinzhou City were all strong and brave, because of the same reasons, they would all rebel, and their weapons should be confiscated first.

古文：子建以为城人数当行陈，尽皆骁果，安之足以为用，急之腹背为忧，乃悉召居城老壮晓示之；并上言诸诚人本非罪坐而来者悉求听免。
现代文：魏子建却认为这些人屡次效力疆场，都是骁勇顽强之辈，对他们进行安抚就可以为我效力，如果对他们逼之太急就会使我们腹背受敌，于是就召集居住城中的男女老幼，用道理来说服他们；并且向朝廷上书说这些人本来没有犯什么罪，而且来这里的人都要求朝廷赦免。
English: Wei Zijian, on the other hand, thought that these people had repeatedly served in the battlefield. They were brave and tenacious people. If they were appeased, they could serve me. If they were forced too quickly, it would make us suffer from the enemy. So he gathered men, women and children living in the city and used reason to convince them. He also wrote to the court that these people had not committed any crime, and the people who came here asked the court for pardon.

古文：肃宗优诏从之。
现代文：肃宗就听从他的意见下令宽厚地对待他们。
English: Sozong obeyed his advice and ordered to treat them kindly.

古文：子建渐分其父兄子弟外居郡戍，内外相顾，终获保全。
现代文：魏子建把他们的父兄子弟分散到外地的郡县或戍地居住，使他们内外互相照顾，终于得以保全。
English: Wei Zijian dispersed their parents and siblings to live in outlying counties or counties, so that they could take care of each other inside and outside, and finally be preserved.

古文：及秦贼乘胜，屯营黑水，子建乃潜使掩袭，前后斩获甚众，威名赫然，先反者及此悉降。
现代文：后来氐人乘胜骚扰，在黑水屯营，魏子建就派兵暗中偷袭，前后斩杀和俘获的人非常多，威名赫赫，原先反叛的氐人到这时全部投降。
English: Later, the Yan people took advantage of the victory to harass. In the Heishui camp, Wei Zijian sent troops to secretly attack. There were a lot of people who were killed and captured before and after, and the reputation was high. At this time, the originally rebellious Yan people all surrendered.

古文：乃间使上闻，肃宗甚嘉之，诏子建兼尚书为行台，刺史如故。
现代文：魏子建就派人上报朝廷，肃宗对他予以嘉奖，诏令他兼任尚书作为代表朝廷的行台，仍任东益州刺史。
English: Wei Zijian sent someone to report to the imperial court, Su Zong gave him an award, and ordered him to serve as the representative of the imperial court, and he still served as the East Yizhou historian.

古文：于是威震蜀土，其梁、巴、二益、两秦之事，皆所节度。
现代文：于是，魏子建的威名震慑蜀地，梁州、巴州、益州、秦州等数州的军事，全都归他总揽。
English: As a result, the prestige of Wei Zijian shocked Shu, and the military of several states such as Liangzhou, Bazhou, Yizhou, and Qinzhou all belonged to him.

古文：梁州刺史傅竖眼子敬和中心以为愧，在洛大行货贿，以图行台。
现代文：梁州刺史傅竖眼之子傅敬和对此心中不服，在洛阳用钱财大行贿赂，想替父亲谋求行台这个职位。
English: Fu Jianhe, the son of Liangzhou assassin Fu Jianye, was not satisfied with this. In Luoyang, he bribed with money and wealth to seek the position of Xingtai for his father.

古文：先是，子建亦屡求归京师，至此，乃遣刺史唐永代焉，竖眼因为行台。
现代文：早先，魏子建也曾屡次向朝廷请求回到京师，到这时，朝廷就派唐永代替魏子建任东益州刺史，傅竖眼因此而得以充任行台之职。
English: Earlier, Wei Zijian had also repeatedly requested the imperial court to return to Beijing. At this time, the imperial court sent Tang Yong to replace Wei Zijian as the East Yizhou historian, and Fu Zhizhen was thus able to perform the duties of the official.

古文：子建将还，群氐慕恋，相率断道。
现代文：魏子建将要回京的时候，氐人对他十分仰慕眷恋，相互跟随着阻断了道路。
English: When Wei Zijian was about to return to Beijing, the people of Xi'an were very fond of him and blocked his path.

古文：主簿杨僧复先行晓喻，诸氐忿曰： 我留刺史，尔送出也！ 
现代文：主簿杨僧覆走在前面对他们加以劝喻，氐人们愤怒地说： 我们要挽留刺史，而你却要把他送走！ 
English: The chief scribe, Yang Senghu, walked in front of them to persuade them, prompting the people to angrily say, "We want to keep Sashih, but you want to send him away!"

古文：斫之数创，几死。
现代文：把杨僧覆砍了数刀，几乎将他砍死。
English: He slashed Yang Zengfei with several knives, nearly killing him.

古文：子建徐加慰譬，旬日方得前行，吏人赠遗，一无所受。
现代文：魏子建对他们慢慢加以劝慰诱导，过了上十天才得以成行，对当地官吏们赠送的礼物，一概都不接受。
English: Wei Zijian slowly persuaded and induced them, and after ten days he was able to make the trip. He did not accept any gifts from local officials.

古文：而东益氐、蜀寻反，攻逼唐永，永弃城而走，乃丧一籓矣。
现代文：不久，东益州一带的氐人和蜀人相率反叛，攻逼刺史唐永，唐永只得弃城而逃，于是又丧失了一处藩城。
English: Soon, the people of Shandong and Shu in the area of East Yizhou rebelled together and attacked and besieged Shi Tangyong. Tangyong had to abandon the city and flee, thus losing another domain city.

古文：初永之走，子建客有沙门昙璨及钜鹿人耿显皆没落氐手，及知子建之客，垂泣追衣物还之，送出白马。
现代文：当初唐永逃走时，魏子建的宾客和尚昙璨和巨鹿人耿显都落入氐人之手，氐人得知他们是魏子建的贵宾之后，就流着眼泪把他们的衣物追回来送还他们，并把他们送出白马城。
English: When Tang Yong initially fled, Wei Zijian's guests, the monk Zhuo and the giant deer, Geng Xian, both fell into the hands of the eunuchs. After the eunuchs learned that they were Wei Zijian's honored guests, they tearfully recovered their clothes and returned them, and sent them out of Baima City.

古文：遗爱所被如此。
现代文：氐人就是这样把对魏子建的敬爱加之于他的宾客。
English: In this way, Xuanren added his respect for Wei Zijian to his guests.

古文：自国家开华阳等郡，梁州邢峦、益州傅竖眼及子建为最。
现代文：自从国家开辟华阳等郡以后，梁州的邢峦、益州的傅竖眼和魏子建，都是最早的刺史。
English: Since the country opened up Huayang and other counties, Liangzhou's Zou, Yizhou's Fu Zhigen and Wei Zijian are the earliest history.

古文：初，子建为前军将军，十年不徙，在洛闲暇，与吏部尚书李韶、韶从弟延实颇为弈棋，时人谓为耽好。
现代文：当初，魏子建任前军将军之职，整整十年没有调任其他官职，在洛阳闲暇的时候，与吏部尚书李韶、李韶的堂弟李延实经常在一起下棋，当时的人都说他们沉溺于这种嗜好。
English: At first, Wei Zijian was appointed as a general of the former army, and he was not transferred to other official positions for ten years. In his leisure time in Luoyang, he often played chess with Li Zhaoxu, a senior official, and Li Yanshi, Li Zhaoxu's cousin. At that time, people said that they indulged in this hobby.

古文：子建每曰： 棋于机权廉勇之际，得之深矣。
现代文：子建常常说： 下棋对于机巧灵活、方正勇敢，可以得到很好的领悟。
English: Zi Jian often said: Playing chess, you can get a good understanding of how to be clever, flexible, and brave.

古文：且吾未为时用，博弈可也。 
现代文：况且我没有被时代所重用，正好可以下棋玩耍。 
English: Moreover, I have not been reused by the times, just so I can play chess.

古文：及一临边事，凡经五年，未曾对局。
现代文：到了他后来去边地任事，共有五年之久，都没有与人对局。
English: When he later went to work on the sidelines, for a total of five years, he did not play against anyone.

古文：还洛后，俄拜常侍、卫尉卿。
现代文：魏子建回洛阳后，即被授予常侍、卫尉卿之职。
English: After Wei Zi Jian returned to Luoyang, he was awarded the position of a regular attendant and an officer of the imperial guard.

古文：初，元颢内逼，庄帝北幸，子建谓所亲卢义僖曰： 北海自绝社稷，称籓萧衍，吾老矣，岂能为陪臣？ 
现代文：当初，北海王元颢威逼朝廷，庄帝逃到北方，魏子建对他的亲信卢义僖说道： 北海王自绝于国家，甘称萧衍的藩属，我年纪已老，怎么能够做一个陪臣？ 
English: At the beginning, the North Sea king, Yuan Shao, forced the imperial court by force. Emperor Zhuang fled to the north. Wei Zijian said to his close confidant, Lu Yijun: "The North Sea king has cut himself off from the country. He is a member of the clan called Xiao Yan. I am old. How can I be a vassal?

古文：遂携家口居洛南，颢平乃归。
现代文：于是就携带全家到洛阳南边居住，直到元颢之乱被平定以后才又回来。
English: So he took his whole family to live in the south of Luoyang, and did not return until after the Yuan Dynasty Rebellion had been quelled.

古文：先苦风痺，及此遂甚，以卿任有务，屡上书乞身，特除右光禄大夫。
现代文：他原先就患有风疒卑症，到这时病情加剧，因为职任在身事务繁忙，就多次向朝廷上书请求退职，皇帝特授予他右光禄大夫之职。
English: He had already been suffering from inferiority complex. By this time, his condition had worsened. Because he was busy with his duties, he repeatedly wrote to the imperial court to request retirement. The emperor specially awarded him the post of doctor of the right light.

古文：邢杲之平，太傅李延实子侍中彧为大使，抚慰东土，时外戚贵盛，送客填门，子建亦往候别。
现代文：邢杲被平定后，太傅李延实之子侍中李充任大使，前往抚慰东边属地，当时外戚十分显贵，前来送行的人非常之多，魏子建也去送别。
English: After Yunnan was pacified, Li Zijian, the son of the Grand Duke Li Yanshi, and his chamberlain Li Zongren, became ambassadors and went to comfort the eastern territories. At that time, the maternal relative was very distinguished, and many people came to see him off. Wei Zijian also went to see him off.

古文：延实曰： 小兒今行，何以相勖？ 
现代文：李延实对他说： 小儿今日要启程，你有什么话勉励他？ 
English: Li Yanshi said to him: My child is going to leave today, do you have any words of encouragement for him?

古文：子建曰： 益以盈满为诫。 
现代文：魏子建说道： 富贵者应当以盈满为戒。 
English: Wei Zijian said: The rich should beware of abundance.

古文：延实怅然久之。
现代文：李延实听了这话之后，久久地怅然有所思。
English: After hearing this, Li Yanshi paused for a long time.

古文：及庄帝杀尔朱荣，遇祸于河阴者其家率相吊贺。
现代文：到了庄帝杀掉朱荣后，在河阴遭到朱荣祸害的人的家属都为此率相吊贺。
English: After Zhuangdi killed Zhu Rong, the families of those who were harmed by Zhu Rong in Heyin all congratulated each other.

古文：太尉李虔第二子仁曜，子建之女婿，往亦见害。
现代文：太尉李虔的第二个儿子李仁曜，是魏子建的女婿，往日也被朱荣所害。
English: Second Lieutenant Li Qian's second son, Li Renyao, is Wei Zijian's son-in-law, and has also been victimized by Zhu Rong in the past.

古文：子建谓姨弟卢道虔曰： 朝廷诛翦权强，凶徒尚梗，未闻有奇谋异略，恐不可济。
现代文：子建对他的姨弟卢道虔说： 朝廷诛杀翦灭了强权，但元凶的党徒还在作梗，我没有听说朝廷对此有什么奇谋异略，恐怕事情不会就此罢休。
English: Zi Jian said to his uncle Lu Daoqian: "The imperial court killed and eliminated the power, but the culprit party members are still obstructing, I have not heard that the imperial court has any strange plans for this, I am afraid things will not stop here.

古文：此乃李门祸始，吊贺无乃匆匆？ 
现代文：这是李家祸害的开始，现在就吊贺不是太过于匆忙吗？ 
English: This is the beginning of the scourge of the Li family. Isn't it too hasty to send congratulations now?

古文：及永安之后，李氏宗族流离，或遇诛夷，如其所虑。
现代文：永安以后，李氏家族流离失散，有的遭到诛杀夷灭，正像魏子建原先所忧虑的那样。
English: After Yongan, the Li family was scattered and dispersed, and some were killed and exterminated, just as Wei Zijian originally worried about.

古文：后历左光禄大夫，加散骑常侍、骠骑大将军。
现代文：后来，魏子建任左光禄大夫，加封散骑常侍、骠骑大将军。
English: Later, Wei Zi Jian was appointed as the doctor of the Left Guanglu, as well as the imperial equerry and the general of the imperial cavalry.

古文：子建自出为籓牧，董司山南，居脂膏之中，遇天下多事，正身洁己，不以财利经怀。
现代文：魏子建自从出任州郡刺史，管辖太行山南广大地区，身处非常富裕的地方，又遇上天下多事之秋，但他能够洁身自好，清廉奉公，从不贪图财利中饱私囊。
English: Since Wei Zijian assumed the post of prefectural and county magistrate, governing the vast area of Taihang and Shannan, he has been in a very affluent place and has encountered a lot of things in the world, but he is able to be clean and honest, serve the public, and never covet money and profit to fill his pockets.

古文：及归京师，家人衣食常不周赡，清素之迹，著于终始。
现代文：及至他回归京师，一家人连衣食都常常感到不充裕，他的清廉朴素的事迹，自始至终著称于世。
English: By the time he returned to Beijing, his family was often short of food and clothing. He was known throughout the world for his honesty and simplicity.

古文：性存重慎，不杂交游，唯与尚书卢义僖、姨弟泾州刺史卢道裕雅相亲昵。
现代文：他为人谨慎自重，从不随便交朋结友，只是同尚书卢义僖、姨弟泾州刺史卢道裕平素相互间亲密相处。
English: He was a prudent and self-respecting person, and never made friends casually. He only had a close relationship with Shangshu Lu Yixuan and his uncle, Zhangzhou Jishu Lu Dao Yuping.

古文：及疾笃，顾敕二子曰： 死生大分，含气所同，世有厚葬，吾平生不取，蘧蒢裸身，又非吾意。
现代文：他病重的时候，告诫他的两个儿子说： 生死寿命有限，而人都是有生命的，现今有的人死后加以厚葬，这是我平生所不取的；但赤身裸体用竹席裹着埋葬，也不是我意愿所求。
English: When he was gravely ill, he admonished his two sons: "Life and death have a limited lifespan, and all people are alive. Nowadays, some people die and are given a big funeral, which is something I would never do; but being buried naked and wrapped in a bamboo mat is not what I want.

古文：气绝之后，敛以时服。
现代文：我气绝之后，只须用寻常的服饰加以装殓就行。
English: After I'm exhausted, I just have to decorate it with ordinary clothes.

古文：吾生年契阔，前后三娶，合葬之事，抑又非古。
现代文：我生平聚散离合，前后曾三次娶妻，夫妻合葬之事，或许不合古训。
English: I have been married three times in my life, and it may not be in accordance with the ancient teachings for a husband and wife to be buried together.

古文：且汝二母先在旧茔，坟地久固，已有定别。
现代文：况且你们的两位母亲早先已葬有旧茔，坟地久经修固，已有固定的处所。
English: Besides, your two mothers have already been buried with old urns, the cemetery has been repaired for a long time, and there is a fixed place.

古文：唯汝次母墓在外耳，可迁入兆域，依班而定，行于吾墓之后。
现代文：只是你们的次母坟墓在外地，可以迁入我家墓地之内，依照名分次序而定，葬在我的坟墓后边。
English: However, since your second mother's grave is in a different place, you can be moved to my family cemetery and, depending on the order of names, be buried behind my grave.

古文：如此足矣，不须附合。
现代文：像这样做就可以了，不须合葬。
English: It's okay to do it like this, you don't have to be buried together.

古文：当顺吾心，勿令吾有遗恨。 
现代文：你们应当顺从我的心意，不要使我死后感到遗恨。 
English: Obey my wishes and do not hate me after my death.

古文：永熙二年春，卒于洛阳孝义里舍，时年六十三，赠仪同三司、定州刺史，谥曰文静。
现代文：永熙二年春，魏子建死于洛阳孝义里家中，时年六十三岁，朝廷封赠仪同三司、定州刺史，谥号定为文静。
English: In the spring of the second year of Yongxi, Wei Zijian died at the home of Luoyang Xiao Yili, at the age of sixty-three. He was awarded the imperial seal with three divisions and Dingzhou engraved history, and his posthumous name was set as Wen Jing.

古文：二子，收、祚。
现代文：他的两个儿子，一个名收，一个名祚。
English: Wei Hui has been alert and agile since he was a child.

古文：收字伯起，小字佛助。
现代文：魏收字伯起，小字佛助。
English: Wei collected the characters "伯起" and "小字佛助."

古文：年十五，颇已属文。
现代文：十五岁的时候就能够写文章。
English: I was able to write articles at the age of fifteen.

古文：及随父赴边。值四方多难，好习骑射，欲以武艺自达。
现代文：后来跟随父亲到边疆，正值四方多难之时，喜爱练习骑马射箭，想要凭借武艺实现自己的抱负。
English: Later, when he followed his father to the frontier, he liked to practice horse riding and archery, and wanted to achieve his ambitions with the help of martial arts.

古文：荥阳郑伯调之曰： 魏郎弄戟多少？ 
现代文：荥阳人郑伯调侃他说： 魏郎耍弄了多久的兵器？ 
English: Shenyang Zhengbo mocked him and said: Wei Lang, how many weapons have you used?

古文：收惭，遂折节读书。
现代文：魏收听了感到羞惭，于是就改变平日的志向而刻苦读书。
English: Ashamed, he studied hard.

古文：夏月坐板床，随树阴讽诵，积年，床板为之锐减，而精力不辍。
现代文：夏天月夜，他坐在板床上伴着树荫诵读诗文，久而久之，床板都被他磨损不少，但精力始终没有废弛。
English: On a summer moonlit night, he sat on a wooden bed in the shade of a tree and recited poetry. Over time, he wore out the floorboards a lot, but his energy never waned.

古文：以文华显。
现代文：终于因文章富于华采而崭露头角。
English: He rose to prominence through the pageantry of his writing.

古文：初以父功除太学博士，及尔朱荣于河阴滥害朝士，收亦在围中，以日晏获免。
现代文：起初凭借父亲的功绩而任太学博士，到朱荣在河阴滥杀朝中士人时，魏收也在其中，只因天晚而得以幸免。
English: At first, he was appointed as a doctor of taigaku by virtue of his father's merits. When Zhu Rong was indiscriminately killing Korean sergeants in Heyin, Wei Jie was also among them, but he was only spared because of bad weather.

古文：吏部尚书李神俊重收才学，奏授司徒记室参军。
现代文：吏部尚书李神俊器重魏收的才学，奏请朝廷授予他司徒记室参军之职。
English: Li Shenshun, a member of the General Staff, who was a scholar of Shangshu Li Shenshun and had the ability to learn from the Wei Dynasty, petitioned the imperial court to grant him the post of Sittu Ji Office to join the army.

古文：永安三年，除北主客郎中。
现代文：永安三年，任北主客郎中。
English: In the third year of Emperor Yongan of Xiaozhuang, he served as the guest of the north.

古文：前废帝立，妙简近侍，诏试收为《封禅书》，收下笔便就，不立草稿，文将千言，所改无几。
现代文：前废帝即位后，精心选择近侍，诏令魏收试作《封禅书》，魏收下笔立就，不打草稿，全文将近千字，写成之后改动的地方没有几处。
English: After the former deposed emperor ascended to the throne, he carefully selected his close attendants and ordered Wei Rong to try to write "The Sealed Book of Zen." Wei received the pen and stood up, without making a draft. The full text is nearly a thousand words, and there are few places where it has been changed since it was written.

古文：时黄门郎贾思同侍立，深奇之。
现代文：当时，黄门郎贾思同在皇帝身旁侍立，对魏收的文才深感惊异。
English: At that time, Huangmen Lang Jias stood beside the emperor and was deeply surprised by Wei Hui's literary talent.

古文：帝曰： 虽七步之才，无以过此。 
现代文：对皇帝说道： 即使以曹植七步能诗的才华，也不能超过这个人。 
English: He said to the emperor, "Even if Cao Zhi could recite poetry at seven steps, his talent would not surpass that of this man."

古文：迁散骑侍郎，寻敕典起居注，并修国史。
现代文：于是把他升为散骑侍郎，不久又令他掌管撰写起居注，并且编修国史。
English: He then promoted him to the rank of horseback riding attendant, and soon he put him in charge of writing the starting notes and compiling the national history.

古文：俄兼中书侍郎，年二十六。
现代文：不多时又兼任中书侍郎，时年二十六岁。
English: Not infrequently, he also served as junior secretary, at the age of twenty-six.

古文：出帝初，又诏收摄本职，文诰填积，事咸称旨。
现代文：出帝初年，又诏令魏收任中书侍郎，为朝廷起草的文诰积案盈箱，但都很称皇帝的心意。
English: In the first year after the emperor's abdication, he also ordered Wei to take over the post of the chief secretary of the imperial court. The documents he drafted for the imperial court were a treasure trove, but they were all said to be the emperor's will.

古文：黄门郎崔忄夌从齐献武王入朝，熏灼于世，收初不诣门。
现代文：黄门郎崔跟从齐献武王入朝，气焰逼人，不可一世，魏收当初就是不上他的家门。
English: Huangmen Lang Cui followed Qi Xianwu Wang into the imperial court. He was so excited that he couldn't contain himself. Wei Jie didn't join his family at first.

古文：忄夌为帝《登祚赦》，云 联托体孝文 ，收嗤其率直。
现代文：崔为皇帝撰写《登祚赦》，文中说 朕托体孝文 ，魏收讥笑其文过于平直。
English: Cui wrote "Dengyu Pardon" for the emperor, saying in the text that "I am a filial son," Wei Jie scoffed that his text was too straightforward.

古文：正员郎李慎以告之，忄夌深忿忌。
现代文：正员郎李慎将此事告知崔，崔深感气愤和忌恨。
English: The official, Li Shin, informed Choi of the incident, and Choi was deeply angered and disgusted.

古文：时前废帝殂，令收为诏，忄夌乃宣言：收普泰世出入帏屋，一日造诏，优为词旨，然则义旗之士，尽为逆人；又收父老合解官归侍。 
现代文：当时前废帝死，令魏收起草诏书，崔就扬言说： 魏收在北魏普泰年间出入宫廷，有一次替皇帝起草诏书，文词意旨都显得非常好，但是那些举旗起义的人，全都是叛逆之徒；再者，魏收的父亲年岁已老，他理当解除官职回家侍养。 
English: At that time, the former emperor died, and Wei Jie was ordered to draft an edict. Cui threatened: Wei Jie entered and left the court during the Northern Wei-Pu-Tai period, and once drafted an edict for the emperor. The meaning of the text was very good, but those who raised the flag and revolted were all traitors; moreover, Wei Jie's father was old, and he should be relieved of his official duties and go home to serve.

古文：南台将加弹劾，赖尚书辛雄为言于中尉綦俊，乃解。
现代文：御史台将要对魏收加以弹劾，幸亏尚书辛雄出来为他在中尉綦俊面前说话，此事才得以消解。
English: The Imperial Historian's Office was preparing to impeach Wei Jie. Fortunately, Shang Shuxu Xinxiong interceded on his behalf in front of Lieutenant Zou Jun, and was able to ease the situation.

古文：收有贱生弟仲同先未齿录，因此怖惧，上籍，遣还乡扶侍。
现代文：魏收有个出身低微的弟弟魏仲同早先没有被叙用，为此感到恐惧，就将他登记入籍，遣送还乡去服侍他的父亲。
English: Wei Hui had a low-born brother, Wei Zhongtong, who had not been enlisted earlier. Fearing this, he registered him as a naturalized citizen and sent him back to his hometown to serve his father.

古文：出帝尝大发士卒，狩于嵩少之南，旬有六日，时既寒苦，朝野嗟怨。
现代文：出帝曾经出动大批士卒，在嵩少山之南狩猎，前后十六天，当时已经是寒冬腊月，朝廷和百姓对此都嗟怨不已。
English: Emperor Dezong once dispatched a large number of soldiers to hunt in the south of Song Shaoshan for 16 days, when it was already a cold winter month. The court and the people were very angry about this.

古文：帝与从官皆胡服而骑，宫人及诸妃主杂其间，奇伎异饰，多非礼度。
现代文：皇帝和随从官员全都是穿着胡服骑着马，宫女和众妃不分主仆混杂其间，还有奇装异饰的歌妓舞女，种种情形多不符合礼度。
English: The emperor and his attendant officials were all dressed in imperial robes and riding on horses, the palace maids and concubines mingled with each other regardless of their masters and servants, and there were also courtesans and dancers in fancy dress, all of which did not meet the standards of propriety.

古文：收欲言则畏惧，欲默不能已，乃上《南狩赋》以讽焉，年二十七，虽富言淫丽，而终归雅正。
现代文：对此，魏收想要进言又感到畏惧，想要保持沉默却又不能自已，于是就作了一篇《南狩赋》加以讽谕，时年二十七岁，文章虽然辞藻繁富华丽，但毕竟是雅正之作。
English: In this regard, Wei Jie wanted to speak and felt afraid, wanted to remain silent but could not help himself, so he made a "South Hunting Fu" to ironically, at the age of twenty-seven. Although the article is rich and gorgeous, it is after all a work of elegance.

古文：帝手诏报焉，甚见褒美。
现代文：皇帝读了之后亲手写下诏书给予回答，对它十分褒扬赞美。
English: Emperor Xiaowu personally approved the reading of the edict with his own handwriting, and received a great deal of praise.

古文：郑伯谓曰： 卿不遇老夫，犹应逐免。 
现代文：郑伯知道后对魏收说： 你要是没有遇上我，现在还只能去张弓逐兔哩。 
English: After Zheng Bo knew, he said to Wei Hui, "If you hadn't met me, you'd still only be able to chase rabbits with a bow."

古文：初，齐献武王固让天柱大将军，帝敕收为诏，令遂所请，欲加相国，问收相国品秩，收以实对，帝遂止。
现代文：当初，齐献武王坚决推辞天柱大将军的职位，皇帝令魏收起草诏书，答应他的请求，并且想要升任其为相国，就问魏收相国属于哪个等级，魏收照实回答，皇帝才没有这样做。
English: At first, Qichenwu Wang resolutely refused the position of Tianzhu General, and the emperor ordered Wei Jie to draft an edict, agreed to his request, and wanted to be promoted to his sister country. He asked Wei Jie what level the sister country belonged to. Wei Jie replied truthfully that the emperor did not do so.

古文：收既未测主相之意，以前事不安，求解，诏许焉。
现代文：魏收既然没有猜度出皇上要任用其为相国的本意，就因为先前的事而惴惴不安，因而请求免去官职，皇帝诏令准许。
English: I don't know what the prime minister's intention was, but in addition to the fear caused by the previous incident, I asked for his resignation and got his permission.

古文：久之，除帝兄子广平王赞开府从事中郎，收不敢辞，乃为《庭竹赋》以致己意。
现代文：过了一段时间，又授予魏收为其兄之子广平王元赞的开府从事中郎，魏收不敢推辞，就写了一篇《庭竹赋》以表达自己的心意。
English: After a period of time, he also awarded Wei Jie to be the middle son of his brother's son, Guangping Wang Yuanzan. Wei Jie did not dare to refuse, so he wrote a "Tian Zhu Fu" to express his thoughts.

古文：寻兼中书舍人，与济阴温子升、河间邢子才齐誉，世号三才。
现代文：不久兼任中书舍人，才气声誉与济阴人温子升、河间人邢子才并列，世人称之为三才。
English: Soon, he also served as the person in charge of the Chinese calligraphy school. He was as famous as the Jilin people's Wanzi Sheng and the Kawama people's Shanzi Cai, and was known as the Three Cai.

古文：时出帝猜忌献武，内有间隙，收遂以疾固辞而免。
现代文：当时出帝猜忌献武王，两人之间有较深的隔阂，于是魏收就托病坚决推辞而被免去职位。
English: At that time, there was a deep rift between the two men, and Wei Jie was dismissed from his post after he refused to resign on the grounds of illness.

古文：其舅崔孝芬怪而问之，收曰： 惧有晋阳之甲。 
现代文：他的舅父崔孝芬对此感到奇怪，问魏收为什么要这样做，魏收回答说： 我害怕献武王会兴晋阳之兵。 
English: His uncle, Cui Xiaofeng, was puzzled and asked Wei Jie why he was doing this. Wei Jie replied, "I am afraid that sacrificing the King of Wu will lead to the rise of the soldiers of Jinyang."

古文：寻而献武南上，帝西入关。
现代文：不久，献武王自南而上，出帝向西入关。
English: Soon, Emperor Xianwu marched up from the south and entered the pass from the west.

古文：收兼通直散骑常侍副王昕娉萧衍，昕风流文辩，收辞藻富逸，衍及其群臣咸加敬异。
现代文：魏收兼任通直散骑常侍帮助王昕出使梁朝，王昕人品风流而长于文辩，魏收辞藻富丽而超逸，萧衍及其群臣都对他们倍加敬重。
English: Wei Hui also served as a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry to help Wang Hui send out the envoys to the Liang Dynasty. Wang Hui was a person of refined taste and excelled in literary debate. Wei Hui's words were rich and exquisite. Xiao Yan and his group of retainers held them in high esteem.

古文：先是，南北初和，李谐、卢元明首通使命，二人才器，并为邻国所重。
现代文：先前，南北刚刚和好，李谐、卢元明首先充当使者，两人的才干，都受到邻国的尊重。
English: Earlier, the South and the North had just been reconciled, and Wei sent Li Hani and Lu Yuanming as envoys to the Southern Dynasty for the first time. Both men's talents and knowledge were admired by Nan Liang.

古文：至此，衍称曰： 卢、李命世，王、魏中兴，未知后来复何如耳？ 
现代文：到了这一次，萧衍称赞说： 卢元明、李谐著称于当世，王昕、魏收重新兴盛于现时，不知今后又将是怎样啊？ 
English: This time, Xiao Yan praised and said: Lu Yuanming and Li Jinyu are famous in the present world, Wang Qian and Wei Jie are thriving again at present, I don't know what will happen in the future.

古文：文襄启收兼散骑常侍，修国史。
现代文：文襄王启奏皇帝授魏收兼散骑常侍，修国史。
English: King Wenxiang was awarded the Wei Collection by the emperor, and he was also a knight-errant and a regular attendant, and he was responsible for national history.

古文：武定二年，除正常侍，领兼中书侍郎，仍修史。
现代文：武定二年，升任正常侍，领兼中书侍郎，仍然编修国史。
English: In the second year of Wuding, he was promoted to a regular attendant, leader and junior secretary, and still studied history.

古文：帝宴百僚，问何故名人日，皆莫能知。
现代文：有一次，皇帝宴请朝廷百官，问众人是什么原因叫 人日 ，大家都不知道。
English: Once, the emperor invited hundreds of court officials to a banquet and asked everyone what the reason was for the name "People's Day," but no one knew.

古文：收对曰： 晋议郎董勋 答问 ，称俗云正月一日为鸡，二日为狗，三日为猪，四日为羊，五日为牛，六日为马，七日为人。
现代文：魏收说道： 晋代议郎董勋所撰《答问》一文中，说民间习俗称正月一日为鸡，二日为狗，三日为猪，四日为羊，五日为牛，六日为马，七日为人。 
English: Wei Hui said: In the article "Answer to a Question" written by the Jin deputy Dong Xun, it is said that the folk custom says that the first day of the first month is a chicken, the second day is a dog, the third day is a pig, the fourth day is a sheep, the fifth day is a cow, the sixth day is a horse and the seventh day is a person.

古文：时邢邵亦在侧，甚恧焉。
现代文：当时邢邵也在旁边，感到非常惭愧。
English: At that time, Zou Shao was also nearby, very ashamed.

古文：自南北和好，书下纸每云 想彼境内宁静，此率土安和 。
现代文：自从南北和好，往来书信中常常说 想彼境内宁静，此率土安和 。
English: Since the North and the South were reconciled, it is often said in the letters between them, "If you want peace in the other country, make peace in your own country."

古文：萧衍后使，其书乃去 彼 字，自称犹著 此 ，欲求无外之意。
现代文：萧衍后来派使者，书信上就去掉了 彼 字，称自己一方还是用 此 ，这是要表示没有外心的意思。
English: Xiao Yan later sent an envoy, and the word "he" was removed from the letter, saying that his side still used "this," which was to show that there was no ulterior motive.

古文：收定报书云： 想境内清晏，今万国安和。 
现代文：魏收撰写的回信中说： 想境内清晏，今万国安和。 
English: Wei Hui changed this sentence to: I want to clean up the country, and now the world is at peace.

古文：南人复书，依以为体。
现代文：此后南人复信，都依此为本。
English: Since then, all the replies from the South have been based on this.

古文：后献武入朝，静帝授相国，固让，令收为启。
现代文：后来齐献武王入朝，静帝授予他相国之职，献武王坚决推让，就令魏收给他写一封书函。
English: Later, Qi Qianwu Wang entered the imperial court, and Emperor Jing granted him the post of consort of a foreign country. However, Qianwu Wang resolutely refused, and ordered Wei Rui to write a letter to him.

古文：启成呈上，文襄时侍侧，献武指收曰： 此人当复为崔光。 
现代文：写成之后呈上审阅，当时文襄王在一旁侍立，献武王指着魏收说： 这人是又一个崔光。 
English: After it was written, it was submitted for review. At that time, Wenxiang Wang stood by, and Xianwu Wang pointed to Wei Wei and said, "This person is another Cui Guang."

古文：四年，献武于西门豹祠宴集，谓司马子如曰： 魏收为史官，书吾善恶。
现代文：武定四年，献武王在西门豹祠设宴集会，他对司马子如说： 魏收做史官，在史书里写了我的善与恶。
English: In the fourth year of Wuding, King Xianwu held a banquet and meeting at the West Gate Leopard Shrine. He said to Sima Zi: Wei Hui was a historian and wrote about my good and evil in the history book.

古文：闻北伐时，诸贵常饷史官饮食，司马仆射颇曾饷不？ 
现代文：听说在北伐的时候，许多朝中权贵经常用酒食款待史官，司马仆射你是不是也曾款待他呢？ 
English: I've heard that during the Northern Expedition, many of the imperial and court dignitaries often entertained the historian with wine and food. Did you also entertain him?

古文：因共大笑。
现代文：在座的人都一齐大笑。
English: So they both burst out laughing.

古文：仍谓收曰： 卿勿见元康等在吾目下趋走，谓吾以为勤劳，我后世身名在卿手，勿谓我不知。 
现代文：献武王又对魏收说： 你不要因为看到元康等人在我眼下往来趋奉，就说我认为他们勤勉辛劳，我后世的身名全在你的笔下，不要说我这个人不明智。 
English: King Xianwu also said to Wei Hui, "Don't say that because you have seen Yuan Kang and others come and go in my presence, I think they are diligent and hardworking, and my future life is all under your pen. Don't say that I am not a wise person."

古文：寻加兼著作郎。
现代文：不久，魏收被授任兼著作郎。
English: Soon, Wei Hui was added as a co-author.

古文：静帝曾季秋大射，普令赋诗，收诗末云： 尺书征建鄴，折简召长安。 
现代文：静帝曾经在秋末之时举行大射礼，令参加的人都赋诗，魏收在他的诗篇结尾说： 尺书征建邺，折简召长安。 
English: Emperor Jing once held a grand firing ceremony at the end of autumn, and all the participants were ordered to make poems. Wei Hui said at the end of his poem: "Shakusho called for Jianye, and Jianye called for Chang'an."

古文：文襄壮之，顾谓人曰： 在朝今有魏收，便是国之光采。
现代文：文襄王认为诗意壮伟，对在场的人说： 朝廷今天有魏收，是国家的光采。
English: Gao Cheng very much appreciated the grandeur of the poem, and said to the people around him: I have Wei Jie now, which is the glory of the country.

古文：雅俗文墨，通达纵横，我亦使子才、子升时有所作，至于词气并不及之。
现代文：他的文笔高雅而通俗，文辞通达，纵横捭阖，我也叫邢子才、温子升经常写诗作文，但他们在文辞气势方面却赶不上魏收。
English: His writing is elegant and popular, his diction is fluent, and he is fluent both vertically and horizontally. I also call him Zizicai and Wenzisheng, and they often write poetry compositions, but they can't keep up with Wei Jie in terms of rhetorical momentum.

古文：吾或意有所怀，忘而不语，语而不尽，意有未及。
现代文：我有时候心中蕴藏着某种思想感情，却往往容易忘怀而未能表达出来，说出来又言不尽意，意思总是表达得不清楚。
English: I sometimes have certain thoughts and feelings in my heart, but I often forget them easily and fail to express them, and I can't say them well, and I can't always express my meaning clearly.

古文：及收呈草，皆以周悉。
现代文：到了魏收把他起草的文稿呈给我看时，我都认为把我的意思表达得十分周密完备。
English: By the time Wei Jie showed me the document he had drafted, I thought I had expressed my thoughts very well.

古文：此亦难有。 
现代文：这也真是难得。 
English: That's really rare.

古文：又敕兼主客郎，接萧衍使谢延徐陵。
现代文：后来又授予魏收兼主客郎之职，接待萧衍派来的使者谢和徐陵。
English: Later, Wei Zhi was also awarded the position of host and hostess, and received the envoys Xie and Xu Ling sent by Xiao Yan.

古文：侯景既陷台城，衍鄱阳王范时为合州刺史，文襄敕收以书喻之。
现代文：侯景攻陷台城的时候，萧衍属下鄱阳王萧范当时任合州刺史，文襄王令魏收写了一封信去晓之以理。
English: When Houjing conquered Taicheng, Xiao Yan's subordinate, the Poyang King Xiao Fan, was in charge of writing the history of Hezhou. King Wenxiang ordered Wei to write a letter to clarify the truth.

古文：范得书，乃率部伍西上，口州刺史崔圣念入据其城。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范接到书信之后，就带领他的部下西上，某州刺史崔圣念就进入并占据了合州城。
English: After Xiao Fan, the king of Shenyang, received the letter, he led his subordinates westward, and Cui Shengnian, the governor of a certain state, entered and occupied Hezhou City.

古文：文襄谓收曰： 今定一州，卿有其力，犹恨 尺书征建鄴 未郊耳。 
现代文：文襄王对魏收说： 现在又平定了一个州，你出了大力，但遗憾的是 尺书征建邺 的意愿还未能得以实现。 
English: King Wenxiang said to Wei Rui: Now another province has been pacified, you have made great efforts, but unfortunately, your intention to recruit and build a fort has not yet been realized.

古文：文襄崩，文宣如晋阳，今与黄门郎崔季舒、高德正、吏部郎中尉瑾于北第参掌机密。
现代文：文襄王死后，文宣王到了晋阳，令魏收与黄门郎崔季舒、高德正、吏部郎中尉瑾一道在北第参掌机密。
English: After the death of King Wenxiang, King Wenxuan went to Jinyang, and Wei Rui, together with Huangmen Lang Cui Jishu, Gao Dezheng, and Li Bu Lang, Lieutenant Zou, were sent to North Dili.

古文：转秘书监，兼著作郎，又除定州大中正。
现代文：又转授秘书监之职，兼著作郎，又授任定州大中正。
English: Wei Jie was also transferred to the post of secretary supervisor, author's assistant, and vice-president of Dingzhou University.

古文：时齐将受禅，杨愔奏收置之别馆，令撰禅代诏册诸文，遣徐之才守门不听出。
现代文：当时北齐皇帝将要受禅，杨忄音奏请将魏收安置在别馆，令他撰写禅代诏册等各种文件，派徐之才把守馆门不让他出去。
English: At that time, Bei Qi would be accepted by the East Wei Zen, and Yang Zunyan requested that he be placed in another hall, let him write the texts of the Zen Dynasty, and sent Xu Zhicai to guard the portal and not allow him to enter.

古文：天保元年，除中书令，仍兼著作郎，封富平县子。
现代文：天保元年，魏收升任中书令，仍兼著作郎，并封为富平县子。
English: In the first year of the Northern Qi era, he was appointed as the middle secretary, still concurrently serving as the scribe, and was named the son of Fuping County.

古文：二年，受诏撰魏史，除魏尹，故优以禄力，专在史阁，不知郡事。
现代文：天保二年，魏收奉诏撰写魏史，被授予魏尹，享受优厚的俸禄，专门在史阁任事，不管州郡的政事。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, Wei received an imperial edict to write the history of Wei, and was awarded Wei Yin. He enjoyed a generous salary and worked exclusively in the history cabinet, regardless of the political affairs of the county.

古文：初，帝令群臣各言志，收曰： 臣愿得直笔东观，早出《魏书》。 
现代文：当初，皇帝令朝中群臣一个个谈论自己的志向，魏收说道： 臣愿聘直词于东观，早日写出《魏书》。 
English: At first, the emperor ordered the courtiers in the court to talk about their ambitions one by one. Wei Jie said: The courtiers are willing to speak directly to Dongguan and write "Weishu" at an early date.

古文：故帝使收专其任。
现代文：因此，皇帝就让魏收专心从事《魏书》的编撰工作。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wenzhong ordered him to take up his post full-time.

古文：又诏平原王高隆之总监之，隆之署名而已，帝敕收曰： 好直笔，我终不作魏太武诛史官。 
现代文：又诏令平原王高隆之总监修史之事，高隆之仅仅是挂名而已。皇帝敕令魏收说： 你尽管秉笔直书，我决不会像魏太武帝那样诛杀史官。 
English: He also ordered the general director of the Plain King Gaolong to revise the history. Gaolong was just a name. The emperor ordered Wei Wei to say: Even though you write straightforwardly, I will never kill the historian like Wei Taiwu.

古文：始魏初，邓渊撰《代记》十余卷，其后崔浩典史，游雅、高允、程骏、李彪、崔光、李琰之世修其业。
现代文：先前，北魏初年邓渊撰写《代纪》十余卷，其后崔浩掌管编修国史，游雅、高允、程骏、李彪、崔光、李琰之等人相继从事这项工作。
English: Previously, in the first year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Deng Yuan wrote more than ten volumes of "Daiji." After that, Cui Hao was in charge of compiling the national history, and Youya, Gao Yun, Cheng Yu, Li Biao, Cui Guang, Li Xizhi and others successively engaged in this work.

古文：浩为编年体，彪始分作纪表志传，书犹未出。
现代文：崔浩采用编年体，到李彪才开始分为纪、表、志、传，史书还不曾问世。
English: Cui Hao used the chronological system, and it was not until Li Biao that they began to be divided into chronicle, table, history, and biography. The history book had not yet come out.

古文：世宗时，命邢峦追撰《高祖起居注》，书至太和十四年，又命崔鸿、王遵业补续焉。
现代文：世宗时，命邢峦追忆撰写了《高祖起居注》，编写到了太和十四年，又命崔鸿、王遵业补充续写。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Myeongseong wrote "A Note on the Residence of Emperor Gao," which was compiled in the 14th year of King Taejo's reign. He also ordered Choe Hong and Wang Zunye to supplement and continue the work.

古文：下讫肃宗，事甚委悉。
现代文：往下截止于肃宗，所积累的史料非常齐全。
English: Down to Su Zong, the accumulated historical materials are very complete.

古文：济阴王晖业撰《辩宗室录》三十卷。
现代文：济阴王元晖业又撰写了《辨宗室录》三十卷。
English: Wang Yuanjunye of Jilin Province also wrote 30 volumes of "Banshu Shuroku."

古文：收于是与通直常侍房延祐，司空司马辛元植，国子博士刁柔、裴昂之，尚书郎高孝干专总斟酌，以成《魏书》。
现代文：于是，魏收就与通直常侍房延，司空司马辛元植，国子博士刁柔、裴昂之，尚书郎高孝干对史实进行广泛收集，反复斟酌，从而写成《魏书》。
English: As a result, Wei Jie, together with Tsun Zhi Chang Zhi Fang Yan, Tsuko Sima Xin Yuan Zhi, Dr. Kun Zi Jiao, Pei Ang Zhi, and Shang Shulang Gao Xiao Gan, extensively collected historical facts and repeatedly considered them, thus writing "Weishu."

古文：辨定名称，随条甄举，又搜采亡遗，缀续后事，备一代史籍，表而上闻。
现代文：辨别确定各种名称，甄别选用各种史料，又搜集亡佚、遗漏的史实，缀补续写后来的事实，终于完整地撰写出一代史籍，具表呈上皇帝审阅。
English: After distinguishing and determining various names, screening and selecting various historical materials, collecting the lost and omitted historical facts, supplementing and continuing the later facts, and finally writing a complete generation of historical books, the form was submitted to the emperor for review.

古文：勒成一代大典，凡十二纪、九十二列传，合一百一十卷，五年三月奏上之。
现代文：撰成一个朝代的堪称典范的历史巨著，共有十二纪、九十二列传，共计一百一十卷，于天保五年三月上奏朝廷。
English: It was compiled into an exemplary historical masterpiece of a dynasty, with a total of twelve periods and ninety-two series of biographies, a total of one hundred and ten volumes, and was presented to the imperial court in March of the 5th year of the Tenpo era.

古文：秋，除梁州刺史，收以志未成，奏请终业，许之。
现代文：这一年秋天，朝廷授予魏收梁州刺史之职，魏收因为其修史的志向还没有完全实现，就上奏皇帝请求让他成就未竟之业，皇帝依允了他的请求。
English: In the autumn of that year, the imperial court awarded Wei Jie the post of Liangzhou historian. Because Wei Jie's ambition of revising history had not yet been fully realized, he appealed to the emperor to let him accomplish his unfinished business. The emperor complied with his request.

古文：十一月，复奏十志：《天象》四卷，《地形》三卷，《律历》二卷，《礼》、《乐》四卷，《食货》一卷，《刑罚》一卷，《灵征》二卷，《官氏》二卷，《释老》一卷，凡二十卷，续于纪传，合一百三十卷，分为十二帙。
现代文：同年十一月，又写成十志上奏朝廷，计有：《天象志》四卷，《地形志》三卷，《律历志》二卷，《礼志》、《乐志》四卷，《食货志》一卷，《刑罚志》一卷，《灵征志》二卷，《官氏志》二卷，《释老志》一卷，共二十卷，续在纪传之后，合成一百三十卷，分为十二册。
English: In November of the same year, he also wrote ten books to be submitted to the imperial court, including: "Celestial Phenomena" four volumes, "Topography" three volumes, "Law Calendar" two volumes, "Rituals" and "Music" four volumes, "Food" one volume, "Penal Code" one volume, "Spiritual Quest" two volumes, "Kanzishi" two volumes, "Shiroshi" one volume, a total of twenty volumes, continued after the biography, composed of one hundred and thirty volumes, divided into twelve volumes.

古文：其史三十五例，二十五序，九十四论，前后二表一启焉。
现代文：这部史书有三十五例，二十五序，九十四论，前后二表一启。
English: There are thirty-five cases in its history, twenty-five prefaces, ninety-four treatises, and two tables and an introduction.

