古文：齐、魏战于马陵，齐大胜魏，杀太子申，覆十万之军。
现代文：齐国、魏国在马陵交战，齐国把魏国打得大败，杀死了魏国太子申，消灭魏军十万人。
English: Qi and Wei fought at Maling. Qi defeated Wei, killed Wei's Prince Shen, and wiped out 100,000 Wei troops.

古文：魏王召惠施而告之曰： 夫齐，寡人之仇也，怨之至死不忘。国虽小，吾常欲悉起兵而攻之，何如? 
现代文：魏王召来惠施告诉他说： 齐国是寡人的仇敌，仇怨至死也不会忘记，魏国虽然很小，但我常想调集全部兵力进攻它，你觉得怎么样？ 
English: The king of Wei summoned Hui Shi and told him: "Qi Guo is the enemy of few people, and I will never forget the hatred to the death. Although Wei Guo is small, I often want to mobilize all the troops to attack it. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 不可。
现代文：惠施回答说： 不可以这样做。
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：臣闻之，王者得度，而霸者知计。
现代文：臣下听说，为王者要适合法度，称霸者要懂得计谋。
English: Subjects have heard that those who want to be king must be fit for the law, and those who want to dominate must know how to strategize.

古文：今王所以告臣者，疏于度而远于计。
现代文：现在大王告诉臣下的，离法度和计谋都太远了。
English: Now the great king tells his subjects that they are too far away from the law and the plot.

古文：王固先属怨于赵，而后与齐战。
现代文：大王本来先同赵国结下了仇怨，而后又同齐国作战。
English: Originally, the great king first forged a grudge with Zhao, and then fought with Qi.

古文：今战不胜，国无守战之备，王又欲悉起而攻齐，此非臣之所谓也。
现代文：现在没有胜利，国家没有守卫作战的后备，大王又要调全部兵力进攻齐国，臣下不赞同这样的做法。
English: Now there is no victory, the country has no reserve to defend the war, and the great king wants to transfer all the troops to attack Qi. The vassals do not agree with such an approach.

古文：王若欲报齐乎，则不如因变服折节而朝齐，楚王必怒矣。
现代文：大王如果想报复齐国，不如就更换君主的服装屈己下人去朝拜齐国，楚王一定会发怒。
English: If the great king wants to take revenge on Qi, it would be better to change the monarch's clothing and have his subordinates bow down to Qi. King Chu will certainly be angry.

古文：王游人而合其斗，则楚必伐齐。以休楚而伐罢齐，则必为楚禽矣。是王以楚毁齐也。 魏王曰： 善。 
现代文：大王派人到齐、楚两国游说，促成它们的争斗，那么楚国一定会进攻齐国，以强大的楚国去进攻疲敝的齐国，齐国就一定会被楚国击败，这是大王用楚国来毁掉齐国。 魏王说： 太好了。 
English: The Great King sent people to Qi and Chu to lobby the two countries and promote their struggle, then the State of Chu would definitely attack the State of Qi, with the powerful State of Chu to attack the tired State of Qi, the State of Qi would definitely be defeated by the State of Chu, this was the Great King using the State of Chu to destroy the State of Qi.

古文：乃使人报于齐，愿臣畜而朝。田婴许诺。
现代文：就派人向齐国报告，魏王愿意称臣朝拜，田婴答应了。
English: He sent someone to Qi to report that the Wei king was willing to invite his vassals to pay homage, and Tian Rong agreed.

古文：张丑曰： 不可。
现代文：张丑说： 不行。
English: Zhang Jiu said, "You can't do that.

古文：战不胜魏，而得朝礼，与魏和而下楚，此可以大胜也。
现代文：打不赢魏国，而能够让魏国行赣见之礼，与魏国联合而降服楚国，这可以获得大胜。
English: It is not possible to defeat Wei, but it is possible to make Wei pay homage, unite with Wei and surrender to Chu, which can win a great victory.

古文：今战胜魏，覆十万之军，而禽太子申；臣万乘之魏，而卑秦、楚，此其暴于戾定矣。
现代文：现在战胜了魏国，消灭十万魏军，而且擒获了太子申，使拥有万辆兵车的魏国臣服，轻视秦国、楚国，齐王暴戾是一定的了。
English: Now that he has defeated Wei, wiped out 100,000 Wei troops, and captured the crown prince Shen, he has made Wei, which has 10,000 chariots, submit to him, and despised Qin and Chu. Qi Wang's tyranny is certain.

古文：且楚王之为人也，好用兵而甚务名，终为齐患者，必楚也。 
现代文：况且楚王的为人，喜欢用兵而且很图虚名，最终成为齐国祸患的，一定是楚国了。 
English: Moreover, King Chu was a man who liked to use soldiers and was very vain. It must have been Chu that eventually became the scourge of Qi.

古文：田婴不听，遂内魏王，而与之并朝齐侯再三。
现代文：田婴不听从，于是接纳了魏王，并阅他多次朝见齐侯。
English: Tianying did not listen, so he accepted the Wei king, and read him many times to see the prince.

古文：赵氏丑之。
现代文：赵国感到羞耻。
English: Zhao Guo felt ashamed.

古文：楚王怒，自将而伐齐，赵应之，大败齐于徐州。
现代文：楚王大怒，自己率兵进攻齐国，赵国响应，在徐州把齐国打得大败。
English: King Chu was furious and led his troops to attack Qi. Zhao responded by defeating Qi in Xuzhou.

