古文：东阳少年起兵，欲立令史陈婴为王。
现代文：原文秦朝时期东阳的年轻人起，兵想要拥立县里的官吏陈婴为王。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, the young men of Dongyang wanted to make Chen Jiao, an official in the county, their king.

古文：婴母曰： 暴得大名不祥，不如有所属，事成封侯；不成，非世所指名也。 
现代文：陈婴的母亲说： 突然获得这么高的名声不是什么好事，不如依附他人，如果起义成功了，日后仍然能够封侯；即使是失败了，也不至于成为后人唾骂的对象。 
English: Chen Yu's mother said, "It's not a good thing to suddenly gain such a high reputation. It's better to rely on others. If the uprising succeeds, it can still be sealed in the future; even if it fails, it won't become the object of future generations' abuse."

古文：婴乃推项梁。
现代文：于是陈婴就率军推举项梁为王。
English: As a result, Chen Ying led the army to nominate Xiang Liang as king.

古文：王陵以兵属汉，项羽取陵母置军中。陵使至，则东向坐陵母，欲以招陵。
现代文：王陵率兵投靠汉王刘邦，项羽把王陵的母亲请来，安置在军中，王陵派人探问消息，项羽就让王陵的母亲坐在东面的位置上，以表示自己的尊敬，想以此来招降王陵。
English: Wang Ling led the soldiers to support the Han King Liu Bang. Xiang Yu invited Wang Ling's mother and placed her in the army. Wang Ling sent people to inquire about the news. Xiang Yu let Wang Ling's mother sit in the east position to show his respect, and wanted to use this to recruit Wang Ling.

古文：陵母私送使者，泣曰： 愿为妾语陵，善事汉王，汉王长者，毋以老妾故持二心。 
现代文：王陵的母亲在私底下送别使者的时候，哭着对他说： 希望你替我转告王陵，让他好好侍奉汉王，汉王是长者，不要因为我而对汉王抱持二心。 
English: When Wang Ling's mother sent the messenger away privately, she cried and said to him, "I hope you will tell Wang Ling for me, and let him serve the Han King well. The Han King is an elder, and don't hold a grudge against the Han King because of me."

古文：遂伏剑而死。
现代文：然后引剑自杀了。
English: With that, Rick killed himself with a sword.

古文：婴母知废，胜于陈涉、韩广、田横、英布、陈豨诸人；陵母知兴，胜于亚父、蒯通、贯高诸人。
现代文：陈婴的母亲在起义之前，就已经断定必败，仅这点就已经超过了陈涉、韩广、田横、英布、陈豨等人；王陵的母亲断定刘邦必胜，也超过了亚父、蒯通、贯高等人。
English: Before the uprising, Chen Jiao's mother had already determined that he would be defeated, which alone was more than Chen Zhao, Han Guang, Tian Yang, Ying Bu, Chen Yao and others; Wang Ling's mother determined that Liu Bang would win, and also more than Asifu, Zhaotong, and Guan Gao.

古文：姜叙讨贼，其母速之，马超叛，杀刺史、太守，叙议讨之，母曰： 当速发，勿顾我。 
现代文：姜叙讨贼，他的母亲催促他，马超叛乱，杀死刺史、太守，姜叙商议要讨伐马超，他的母亲说： 应当迅速发兵，不要管我。 
English: Jiang Xiu was hunting for a thief. His mother urged him. Ma Chao rebelled and killed Jishi, the governor. Jiang Xiu wanted to fight Ma Chao. His mother said, "You should send troops quickly. Don't mind me."

古文：超袭执叙母，母骂超而死，明大义也；乃楚项争衡，雌雄未定，而陵母预识天下必属长者，而唯恐陵失之，且伏剑以绝其念，死生之际，能断决如此，女子中伟丈夫哉!
现代文：马超突袭抓住了姜叙的母亲，姜叙的母亲大骂马超而死，这是深明大义的行为；楚汉相争，胜负没有定论的时候，王陵的母亲已经断言天下必定会属于汉王所有，唯恐王陵失去辅佐汉王平天下的机会，而引剑自杀，了断王陵心中的牵挂，在生死关头能够如此果断，真可以说是位女中丈夫了。
English: Ma Chao caught the mother of Jiang Xiu in a surprise attack, and the mother of Jiang Xiu cursed Ma Chao and died. This was a profound act of justice; when Chu and Han were fighting and the outcome was not conclusive, the mother of Wang Ling had already asserted that the world would certainly belong to the Han king. Lest Wang Ling lose the opportunity to assist Han Wang Ping in the world, she committed suicide with a sword, breaking the concern in Wang Ling's heart. Being able to be so decisive at the critical moment of life and death can truly be said to be the husband of a woman.

古文：徐庶之不终于昭烈也，其母存也，陵母不伏剑，陵亦庶也。
现代文：徐庶最后不能辅佐刘备，是因为要保全自己母亲的性命，如果王陵的母亲没有自杀，那么王陵的遭遇也将会和徐庶一样吧!
English: In the end, Xu Shiao could not assist Liu Bei because he wanted to save his mother's life. If Wang Ling's mother had not committed suicide, then Wang Ling's fate would have been the same as that of Xu Shiao!

