古文：管仲有疾，桓公往问之，曰： 仲父病矣，将何以教寡人？ 
现代文：原文管仲生病了，齐桓公去看望他，问他道： 您生病了，还有什么话指教我吗？ 
English: The original text: Guanzhong fell ill, Qi Kuan Gong went to visit him and asked him: You are ill, do you have any advice for me?

古文：管仲对曰： 愿君之远易牙、竖刁、常之巫、卫公子启方。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 希望君主疏远易牙、竖刁、常之巫、卫公子启方。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "I hope the monarch will distance himself from Iga, Zhisheng, Changzhi, and Wei Gongzi."

古文：公曰： 易牙烹其子以慊①寡人，犹尚可疑耶？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 易牙把他的儿子都烹了，以让我尝尝人肉的味道，难道还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Qi Huan Gong said, "Iga cooked his son so that I could taste the taste of human flesh. Can there still be any doubt?

古文：对曰： 人之情非不爱其子也。
现代文：管仲说： 一个人没有不爱自己的孩子的，这是人之常情。
English: Guanzhong said: A person does not have a child who does not love him, this is a common human feeling.

古文：其子之忍，又何有于君？ 
现代文：易牙连他的儿子都不爱，又怎么能爱大王呢？ 
English: Iga doesn't even love his son, so how can he love the great king?

古文：公又曰： 竖刁自宫以近寡人，犹尚可疑耶？ 
现代文：齐桓公又说： 竖刁自己阉割了自己，以来侍奉我，难道还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Lord Qi Kuan also said, "Since I castrated myself and have been serving me since then, can I still have doubts?

古文：对曰： 人之情非不爱其身也，其身之忍，又何有于君。 
现代文：管仲答道： 一个人没有不爱惜自己身体的，这是人之常情。
English: Guanzhong replied: A person does not have to spare his own body, this is a common human feeling.

古文：公又曰： 常之巫审于死生，能去苛病，犹尚可疑耶？ 
现代文：竖刁连自己的身体都不爱惜，又怎么能爱惜大王呢？ 齐桓公又说： 常之巫能占卜生死、去病除灾，难道还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Zhifu didn't even care about his own body, so how could he care about the great king? Qi Huan also said, "Is it possible to doubt that a common witch can predict life and death, cure diseases, and eliminate disasters?"

古文：对曰： 死生，命也；苛病，天也。君不任其命，守其本，而恃常之巫，彼将以此无不为也。 
现代文：管仲说： 生死有命，灾病无常，大王不听任命运，固守其本来的常道，而只是依赖常之巫，那么他将因此而骄横跋扈，无所不为。 
English: Guanzhong said: Life and death have life and death, disasters and diseases are impermanent, the great king does not listen to the appointment and fortune, adheres to his original normal way, but only relies on the magic of normal, then he will be arrogant and do everything.

古文：公又曰： 卫公子启方事寡人十五年矣，其父死而不敢归哭，犹尚可疑耶？ 
现代文：齐桓公又说： 卫公子启方服侍我已经有十五年了，他父亲死的时候他都不愿意回去哭丧，难道还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Prince Qi Huan also said, "I have been serving Emperor Wei for fifteen years. When his father died, he did not want to go back to mourn. Is it possible to doubt?

古文：对曰： 人之情非不爱其父也，其父之忍，又何有于君。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲说： 人之常情，没有不爱自己父亲的，他连他的父亲都不爱，还能爱大王吗？ 齐桓公说： 好吧。 
English: Guanzhong said, "It is human nature that no one does not love his father. He does not even love his father. Can he still love the great king?" Qi Kuan Gong said, "Okay."

古文：管仲死，尽逐之。
现代文：管仲死后，齐桓公就把这些人都驱逐走了。
English: After Guanzhong's death, King Qi Kuan expelled all these people.

古文：食不甘，宫不治，苛病起，朝不肃，居三年，公曰： 仲父不亦过乎？ 
现代文：可是不久，齐桓公就觉得饭不香甜，起居不舒服，病魔缠身了，并且，宫中的治理松散了，朝中的秩序也不稳了。这样过了三年，齐桓公说： 管仲是不是太过分了？ 
English: However, it was not long before Prince Qi Huan felt that his food was not delicious, his living conditions were not comfortable, and he was plagued by illness. Moreover, the governance in the palace was loose, and the order in the court was not stable. After three years of this, Prince Qi Huan said: Was Guanzhong too excessive?

古文：于是皆复召而反。
现代文：于是又把那四个人都召回了宫里。
English: Then he summoned the four men back to the palace.

古文：明年，公有病，常之巫从中出曰： 公将以某日薨。 
现代文：第二年，齐桓公病了，就是常之巫从中捣的鬼。他从宫中出来对人说： 桓公将在某月某日死。 
English: In the second year, Prince Qi Kuan fell ill, and it was the evil spirit of Chang Zhi Wu who came out of the palace and said to the people, "Prince Qi Kuan will die on a certain day in a certain month."

古文：管仲易牙、竖刁、常之巫相与作乱。塞宫门，筑高墙，不通人，公求饮不得，卫公子启方以书社四十下卫。公闻乱，慨然叹，涕出，曰： 嗟乎!
现代文：卫公子启方带着千户齐民降归了卫国。齐桓公听说他们叛乱了，不禁长叹了一口气，流着泪后悔说： 唉，管仲的见识还有不远大的吗？ 
English: Emperor Wei's son, Emperor Qifang, returned to defend the country with a thousand families. When Emperor Qi heard that they had rebelled, he couldn't help but sigh and regretfully said through tears, "Alas, isn't Guanzhong's insight far-reaching?"

古文：圣人所见岂不远哉？ 昔吴起杀妻求将，鲁人谮之；乐羊伐中山，对使者食其子，文侯赏其功而疑其心。
现代文：吴起的妻子是齐国人，吴起为了取得鲁国将领的地位，去攻击齐国，便杀死了妻子以向鲁国表明自己的心迹，可是鲁国人却因此说他的坏话。战国魏文侯的将领乐羊讨伐中山国，中山国君把乐羊的儿子烹煮为汤，送来给乐羊，乐羊当着使者的面喝了一碗，表示出不在乎的样子，魏文侯虽然奖赏他的功劳，却怀疑他的居心。
English: Wu Zhi's wife was from Qi. In order to obtain the status of Lu's general and attack Qi, Wu Zi killed his wife to show his intentions to Lu, but the Lu people said bad things about him. The warlord Wei Wen Hou's general, Le Yang, fought against Zhongshan. Zhongshan's governor cooked Le Yang's son into soup and sent it to Le Yang. Le Yang drank a bowl in front of the envoy, showing indifference. Although Wei Wen Hou rewarded him for his service, he doubted his intentions.

古文：夫能为不近人情之事者，其中正不可测也。
现代文：能做出不近人情之事的人，其心也不可测。
English: The heart of a man who can do inhuman things is unfathomable.

古文：天顺中，都指挥马良有宠。
现代文：明英宗天顺年间，都指挥马良非常宠爱妻子。
English: During the Ming Ying Zong and Tian Shun years, the general Ma Liang was very fond of his wife.

古文：良妻亡，上每慰问。
现代文：他的妻子去世后，英宗常常安慰他。
English: After his wife's death, Yingzong often consoled him.

古文：适数日不出，上问及，左右以新娶对。
现代文：可后来马良有几天都没有出现，英宗问是怎么回事，身边的人说他刚刚娶了新娘子。
English: However, after that, Ma Liang did not appear for a few days, and Ying Zong asked what was going on. The people around him said that he had just married his bride.

古文：上怫然曰： 此厮夫妇之道尚薄，而能事我耶？ 
现代文：英宗很生气地说： 他连夫妻的感情都看得这么淡薄，还能够忠心地伺候我吗？ 
English: Yingzong said angrily, "Can he serve me faithfully when he is so indifferent to the feelings of a husband and wife?

古文：杖而疏之。
现代文：于是打了他板子，开始疏远了他。
English: So I punched him in the face and started distancing myself from him.

古文：宣德中，金吾卫指挥傅广自宫，请效用内廷。
现代文：明宣宗宣德年间，金吾卫指挥傅广阉割自己请求到宫中效命。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingxuan and Emperor Xuande, King Wuwei's commander Fu Guangxuan requested to be sent to the imperial court.

古文：上曰： 此人已三品，更欲何为？
现代文：宣宗说： 此人官位已到三品，他还想要做什么呢？
English: Xuan Zong said, "This man has reached the third grade of official rank, what else does he want to do?

古文：自残希进，下法司问罪。 
现代文：居然自甘卑贱以求权势!交付法司问罪。 唉！
English: He actually humbled himself to seek power! He should be handed over to the legal department for questioning. Alas!

古文：噫!此亦圣人之远见也。
现代文：这也是圣人的远见卓识之处。
English: This is where the sage's foresight comes in.

