古文：贞观六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕此见众议以祥瑞为美事，频有表贺庆。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗对侍臣们说： 我近来见人议论，认为上天呈现吉祥的征兆是美好的事情，频频上表庆贺。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his courtiers: I have recently seen people argue that it is a wonderful thing for the heavens to show auspicious signs, and I often celebrate.

古文：如朕本心，但使天下太平，家给人足，虽无祥瑞，亦可比德于尧、舜。
现代文：而我认为，只要天下太平，家家户户富足美满，即使上天没有祥瑞之兆，也可比尧、舜的清明之治了。
English: And I think that as long as the world is peaceful, and every family is rich and happy, even if there is no sign of auspiciousness in heaven, it can be compared to the clear-cut rule of  and.

古文：若百姓不足，夷狄内侵，纵有芝草遍街衢，凤凰巢苑囿，亦何异于桀、纣？
现代文：如果老百姓穷困不堪，夷狄等少数民族又侵犯中原，纵然满街都长着芝草，苑囿中有凤来栖，这样的时代与桀、纣时又有什么差别呢？
English: If the common people are poor and destitute, and ethnic minorities such as the Yidi invade the Central Plains, even if the streets are covered with turf grass and there are phoenixes in the gardens, what is the difference between such an era and the time of the Dragon and the Grasshopper?

古文：尝闻石勒时，有郡吏燃连理木，煮白雉肉吃，岂得称为明主耶？
现代文：我听说后赵石勒称帝的时候，有个郡县的官员点燃连理木，煮白雉肉吃，故意制造祥瑞，难道石勒就可因此被称作明君吗？
English: I heard that after Zhao Shiller was crowned emperor, a county official set fire to a piece of timber, cooked and ate egret meat, and deliberately created Xiang Rui. Could this be why Shiller was called Ming Jun?

古文：又隋文帝深爱祥瑞，遣秘书监王劭著衣冠，在朝堂对考使焚香，读《皇隋感瑞经》。
现代文：另外，隋文帝最喜欢祥瑞。他叫秘书监王劭穿着特异的衣服，戴着奇怪的帽子，在朝堂上当着众位大臣洗手焚香，闭着眼睛，口中念念有词，读《皇隋感瑞经》。
English: In addition, Emperor Sui Wen liked Xiang Rui the most. He had his secretary, Guan Wang Quan, wear special clothes and a strange hat, wash his hands and burn incense in front of the ministers in the morning hall, close his eyes, recite words from his mouth, and read the "Emperor Sui Xiang Rui Sutra."

古文：旧尝见传说此事，实以为可笑。
现代文：我过去看到这些人为制造祥瑞之兆，觉得可笑之极。
English: I used to find it hilarious when I saw these people doing their fake good luck signs.

古文：夫为人君，当须至公理天下，以得万姓之欢心。
现代文：身为国君应当治理好天下，以此来赢得百姓的拥戴。
English: As a sovereign, he should govern the country well in order to win the people's support.

古文：若尧、舜在上，百姓敬之如天地，爱之如父母，动作兴事，人皆乐之，发号施令，人皆悦之，此是大祥瑞也。
现代文：尧、舜在位时，百姓像对待天地那样敬重他们，像对待父母那样爱戴他们。不管什么事情，百姓都乐意去做，他们发号施令，百姓都乐意接受，这才是真正的祥瑞之兆啊。
English: When the emperor and empress were on the throne, the people respected them as if they were heaven and earth, and loved them as if they were their parents. No matter what, the people were willing to do, they gave orders, and the people were willing to accept. This is the true sign of auspiciousness.

古文：自此后诸州所有祥瑞，并不用申奏。 
现代文：从今以后，各州府如果发现有祥瑞之兆，就不要再上报朝廷了。 
English: From now on, if the various prefectures find any signs of auspiciousness, they should no longer report to the imperial court.

古文：贞观八年，陇右山崩，大蛇屡见，山东及江、淮多大水。
现代文：贞观八年，陇右一带发生山崩，大蛇时常出没。另外，崤山以东及江淮地区也常常发生洪灾。
English: In the 8th year of Zhenguan, landslides occurred in the area of Handan to the right, and large snakes often appeared. In addition, floods often occurred in the areas east of Handan and Jianghuai.

古文：太宗以问侍臣，秘书监虞世南对曰： 春秋时，梁山崩，晋侯召伯宗而问焉，对曰： 国主山川，故山崩川竭，君为之不举乐，降服乘缦，祝币以礼焉。 
现代文：唐太宗向大臣们询问此事，秘书监虞世南说： 春秋的时候，梁山崩塌，晋国国君召集大臣伯宗查问原因，大臣伯宗说： 山川是国家的主脉，如今山崩溃，河断流，大王现在应该不再奏乐、不穿华丽的衣服，乘坐没有文饰的马车，用钱币拜祭梁山。 
English: Tang Taizong asked the ministers about this, and the secretary, Guan Yu Shnan, said: In the spring and autumn, Liangshan collapsed, and the prince of Jin summoned the minister Bozong to investigate the cause. The minister Bozong said: Mountains and rivers are the main veins of the country. Now that the mountains have collapsed and the rivers have broken, the great king should no longer play music, wear ornate clothes, ride a carriage without decoration, and worship Liangshan with money.

古文：粱山，晋所主也。晋侯从之，故得无害。
现代文：梁山，是晋国属地，晋国国君采纳了这个意见，果然事后再无灾害。
English: Liangshan is a territory belonging to the State of Jin, and the ruler of the State of Jin adopted this opinion, and there was no disaster afterwards.

古文：汉文帝元年，齐、楚地二十九山同日崩，水大出，令郡国无来献，施惠于天下，远近欢洽，亦不为灾。
现代文：汉文帝元年，齐、楚之地有二十九座山在同一天崩溃，洪水泛滥。汉文帝下令周围的郡国不再向朝廷进献供奉，又向老百姓施加恩惠，远近之地的百姓无不欢欣鼓舞，不久，灾害自然消失。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hanwen, twenty-nine mountains in the lands of Qi and Chu collapsed on the same day and flooded. Emperor Hanwen ordered the surrounding counties to no longer make offerings to the imperial court, and also imposed favors on the people. The people in the far and near lands were delighted and encouraged. Soon, the disasters disappeared naturally.

古文：后汉灵帝时，青蛇见御座；晋惠帝时，大蛇长三百步，见齐地，经市入朝。
现代文：后来汉灵帝时，有人在皇帝的御座旁发现了一条青蛇；晋惠帝时，在齐地发现了一条长三百步的大蛇，这条蛇经过集市进入朝堂。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Hanling, someone found a green snake next to the emperor's throne; during the reign of Emperor Jinhui, a large snake with a length of three hundred paces was found in Qi, this snake entered the imperial hall through the market.

古文：按蛇宜在草野，而入市朝，所以为怪耳。
现代文：一般来说，蛇应当生活在杂草丛生的荒野，而这条蛇却进入了集市、朝堂，所以大家都非常奇怪。
English: In general, snakes should live in the overgrown wilderness, but this snake has entered the market, the temple, so everyone is very strange.

古文：今蛇见山泽，盖深山大泽必有龙蛇，亦不足怪。
现代文：现在有人在大山、大河边发现了蛇，深山大河必潜藏着龙蛇，这是自然现象，实不足为怪。
English: Now someone has found a snake on the edge of a big mountain or a big river. A dragon snake must be lurking in a deep mountain river. This is a natural phenomenon, and it is not surprising.

古文：又山东之雨，虽则其常，然阴潜过久，恐有冤狱，宜断省系囚，庶或当天意。
现代文：另外，山东普降大雨，虽是寻常之事，但时间持续过长，恐怕民间有冤情，应当重新审理官司，或许可以顺从天意。
English: In addition, although it is common for heavy rain to fall in Shandong, but the time lasts too long, I am afraid that the people have grievances and should re-examine the lawsuit, and may be able to obey the will of heaven.

古文：且妖不胜德，修德可以销变。 
现代文：而且邪不压正，只要修炼道德就可以使灾害自然消失。 
English: Moreover, as long as we cultivate morality, we can make disasters disappear naturally.

古文：太宗以为然，因遣使者赈恤饥馁，申理冤讼，多所原宥。
现代文：唐太宗觉得此话有理，于是就派使者到灾区赈济灾民，采用宽大为怀的政策重新审理官司，平反了很多冤假错案。
English: Tang Taizong thought this was reasonable, so he sent an envoy to the disaster area to help the victims, adopted a lenient policy to re-examine the lawsuits, and rectified many unjust, false and wrong cases.

古文：贞观八年，有彗星见于南方，长六丈，经百余日乃灭。
现代文：贞观八年，有彗星出现在南方，此彗星长六丈，足足过了一百多天才消失。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, a comet appeared in the south. This comet was six feet long, and it took more than a hundred days to disappear.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 天见彗星，由朕之不德，政有亏失，是何妖也？ 
现代文：对此，唐太宗对侍臣说： 天上出现了彗星，是提醒我的德行有亏缺，这是什么凶兆呢？ 
English: In response, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: A comet appeared in the sky, reminding me of my lack of virtue. What kind of omen is this?

古文：虞世南对曰： 昔齐景公时彗星见，公问晏子。
现代文：虞世南说： 过去齐景公看见彗星，就问晏子是何原因。
English: Yu Shennan said, "In the past, when Lord Qi Jing saw a comet, he asked what the reason was.

古文：晏子对曰： 公穿池沼畏不深，起台榭畏不高，行刑罚畏不重，是以天见彗星，为公戒耳！ 
现代文：晏子说： 主公挖掘池塘唯恐不深，修筑台榭唯恐不高，实施刑罚唯恐不严，所以上天就呈现彗星，这是对主公的警戒呀！ 
English: The lame man said, "The Lord digs ponds so that they will not be too deep, builds platforms so that they will not be too high, and imposes punishments so that they will not be too severe. Therefore, comets appear in the sky. This is a warning to the Lord!"

古文：景公惧而修德，后十六日而星没。
现代文：齐景公非常畏惧，于是就修养道德，十六天之后，彗星就陨落了。
English: Qi Jing Gong was very afraid, so he cultivated morality. Sixteen days later, the comet fell.

古文：陛下若德政不修，虽麟凤数见，终是无益。
现代文：陛下如果不加强仁政，虽然境内屡次出现凤凰之类的祥瑞之兆，终究对国家是没有益处的。
English: Your Majesty, if you do not strengthen benevolent governance, despite the repeated appearance of auspicious signs such as the phoenix in the country, it will ultimately be of no benefit to the country.

古文：但使朝无阙政，百姓安乐，虽有灾变，何损于德？
现代文：只要朝廷政治清明，百姓安乐，即使有灾害变故，也不会损害陛下的圣德。
English: As long as the politics of the imperial court is clear and the people are happy, even if there are disasters, it will not damage the sanctity of His Majesty.

古文：愿陛下勿以功高古人而自矜大，勿以太平渐久而自骄逸，若能终始如一，彗见未足为忧。 
现代文：希望陛下不要因为自己功高盖世就骄傲自大，也不要因为天下太平已久就放纵逸乐。如果能始终如一地坚持德治，即使天上出现了彗星也不足为惧。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will not be arrogant because of his great contribution to the world, nor indulge in pleasure because the world has been peaceful for a long time. If you can consistently adhere to virtue, even if a comet appears in the sky, it is not enough to be afraid.

古文：太宗曰： 吾之理国，良无景公之过。
现代文：唐太宗说： 我治理国家，自诩没有犯过齐景公那样的过失。
English: Tang Taizong said: I govern the country, and I do not think I have committed the same mistake as Qi Jing Gong.

古文：但朕年十八便为经纶王业，北剪刘武周，西平薛举，东擒窦建德、王世充，二十四而天下定，二十九而居大位，四夷降伏，海内乂安。
现代文：但是我十八岁就开始创业，北面灭掉了武周，西面铲平了薛举的势力，东面擒获了窦建德、王世充这些乱世枭雄。二十四岁时就平定了天下，二十九岁登上帝位，四方少数民族臣服归顺，海内升平，百姓安乐。
English: However, I started my business at the age of eighteen. In the north, I eliminated Wu Zhou, in the west, I leveled the power of Xue Zhu, and in the east, I captured Dou Jiande and Wang Shichong, these heroes of the chaotic world. At the age of twenty-four, I leveled the world. At the age of twenty-nine, I ascended to the throne of God. The ethnic minorities in the four directions surrendered, the inland was leveled, and the people were happy.

古文：自谓古来英雄拨乱之主无见及者，颇有自矜之意，此吾之过也。
现代文：自认为力挽乱世之狂澜，古来英雄无人可比，所以志得意满，傲视古今，这是我的过失。
English: I consider myself to have the power to turn the world upside down. Since ancient times, there has been no comparable hero. Therefore, I am full of pride and look down on the past and the present. This is my fault.

古文：上天见变，良为是乎？
现代文：如今上天显示了征兆，这是在警告我啊！
English: Now the heavens are showing signs, warning me!

古文：秦始皇平六国，隋炀帝富有四海，既骄且逸，一朝而败，吾亦何得自骄也？
现代文：昔日，秦始皇平定六国，隋炀帝富有四海，但他们骄奢淫逸，所以功亏一篑，在历史上如过眼云烟般迅速消失了。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Shihuang conquered six countries, and Sui and Yan emperors were rich in the four seas, but they were arrogant and debauched, so their achievements were short-lived and they quickly disappeared in history.

古文：言念于此，不觉惕焉震惧！ 
现代文：我又有什么值得骄傲自满的呢？每每想到这些，不觉胆战心惊，我是怕重蹈前人的覆辙。 
English: What do I have to be proud of? Every time I think about it, I am afraid of repeating the mistakes of my predecessors.

古文：魏征进曰： 臣闻自古帝王未有无灾变者，但能修德，灾变自销。
现代文：魏徵说： 我听说历代的帝王没有谁没见过灾变，但只要能加强仁政和修养，灾变自然会烟消云散。
English: Wei Zheng said: I have heard that there is no emperor in history who has not seen the disaster, but as long as we can strengthen benevolent government and cultivation, the disaster will naturally disappear.

古文：陛下因有天变，遂能戒惧，反复思量，深自克责，虽有此变，必不为灾也。 
现代文：陛下因为上天有变故，便能有所警觉，反复思考反省，境内即使有灾害，其实也算不上是灾害了。 
English: Because the heavens have changed, His Majesty can be alert, think and reflect repeatedly. Even if there is a disaster within the territory, it is actually not a disaster.

古文：贞观十一年，大雨，谷水溢，冲洛城门，入洛阳宫，平地五尺，毁宫寺十九，所漂七百余家。
现代文：贞观十一年，天降大雨。谷水河泛滥成灾，冲毁了洛阳城门，淹进洛阳宫，平地水深五尺，毁坏宫寺十九处，淹没民房七百多家。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, heavy rain fell from the sky. The Gu Shuihe River flooded catastrophically, washing away the Luoyang City Gate, flooding Luoyang Palace, flooding the flat land to a depth of five feet, destroying nineteen palaces and temples, and flooding more than seven hundred houses.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕之不德，皇天降灾。
现代文：唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 是我没有德行，所以皇天才会降灾。
English: Emperor Taizong said to his attendant ministers, "It is because I am not virtuous that the emperor is able to prevent disasters."

古文：将由视听弗明，刑罚失度，遂使阴阳舛谬，雨水乖常。
现代文：大概是因为我视听不明、刑罚失当，才使阴阳错乱，雨水反常吧。
English: It's probably because I don't understand audio-visual and my punishment is inappropriate that the yin and yang are out of kilter and the rain is abnormal.

古文：矜物罪己，载怀忧惕。朕又何情独甘滋味？
现代文：现在是应该抚恤百姓，反省我自己的过失的时候了，我还有什么心情独自安享这些珍馐美味呢？
English: Now is the time to show compassion to the people and reflect on my own mistakes. How can I enjoy these delicacies alone?

古文：可令尚食断肉料，进蔬食。
现代文：传我令，停止供应肉类食品，只进蔬菜素食。
English: I order you to stop serving meat products and only serve vegetarian food.

古文：文武百官各上封事，极言得失。 
现代文：另外，让文武百官都上书奏事，畅言政事得失。 
English: In addition, let all the civil and military officials submit their reports in writing, and openly discuss the gains and losses of politics.

古文：中书侍郎岑文本上封事曰：
现代文：不久，中书侍郎岑文本呈上了一篇奏疏：
English: Not long after, the text of the Chinese Book of Longjing was presented with a report:

古文：臣闻开拨乱之业，其功既难；守已成之基，其道不易。
现代文：我听说创业于乱世，是非常困难的；要守住已有的基业，也不是件容易的事情。
English: I heard that it is very difficult to start a business in a chaotic world; it is not easy to keep the existing foundation.

古文：故居安思危，所以定其业也；有始有卒，所以崇其基也。
现代文：君王只有居安思危，才能巩固基业：要有始有终，才能将基业发扬光大。
English: Only by living in peace and minding the dangers can the monarch consolidate the foundation: if there is a beginning and an end, the foundation can be carried forward.

古文：今虽亿兆乂安，方隅宁谧，既承丧乱之后，又接凋弊之余，户口减损尚多，田畴垦辟犹少。
现代文：如今虽然已经天下太平，但大唐是在战乱中创业的，长期的战争使民生凋敝，百姓死伤无数，田地得到开垦的也很少。
English: Today, although the world is at peace, Datang was founded in the midst of war. The long-term war has caused people's livelihoods to wither, countless people have been killed and injured, and few fields have been reclaimed.

古文：覆焘之恩著矣，而疮痍未复；德教之风被矣，而资产屡空。
现代文：虽然贞观以来朝廷实施了很多仁政，但战争的创伤非一时半刻可以平复；如今朝廷的道德教化已遍及天下，但老百姓依然很贫困。
English: Although the imperial court has implemented a lot of benevolent policies since Zhenguan, the wounds of war can not be healed overnight. Today, the moral enlightenment of the imperial court has spread all over the world, but the people are still very poor.

古文：是以古人譬之种树，年祀绵远，则枝叶扶疏；若种之日浅，根本未固，虽壅之以黑坟，暖之以春日，一人摇之，必致枯槁。
现代文：古人把治国比喻为种树，培育的时间越长，树木越枝繁叶茂；如果培植的时间不够，根基不稳固，虽然为树添上肥沃的黑土，让春天和煦的阳光照耀它，但只要有人摇动树木，树木必然会折断并枯萎。
English: The ancients likened governing a country to planting trees. The longer it takes to cultivate, the more branches and leaves the trees will have. If there is not enough time to cultivate, the foundation will not be stable. Although adding fertile black soil to the tree and letting the spring sunshine shine on it, as long as someone shakes the trees, the trees will inevitably break and wither.

古文：今之百姓，颇类于此。
现代文：现在的老百姓，就像培植不久的树木。
English: Cultivating current citizens is like cultivating young trees.

古文：常加含养，则日就滋息；暂有征役，则随日凋耗；凋耗既甚，则人不聊生；人不聊生，则怨气充塞；怨气充塞，则离叛之心生矣。故帝舜曰： 可爱非君，可畏非民。 
现代文：如果常常对百姓进行含养体恤，那么他们就会恢复元气；只要有劳役，他们就会气息奄奄；过多消耗民力，就会民不聊生；民不聊生，就会怨声载道；怨声载道恐怕就会产生背离叛乱之心。所以舜说： 可爱非君，可畏非民。 
English: If you often nurture and sympathize with the people, then they will regain their vitality; as long as there is labor service, they will lose their breath; if you consume too much people's power, the people will not enjoy life; if the people do not enjoy life, there will be complaints; if there are complaints, I am afraid that there will be a deviation from the spirit of rebellion. Therefore, Zou said: It is lovely not to be a prince, but it is terrible not to be a people.

古文：孔安国曰： 人以君为命，故可爱。
现代文：孔安国说： 百姓把命运寄托在君王身上，所以君王可爱。
English: Kong An Guo said: The people entrust their fate to the king, so the king is lovely.

古文：君失道，人叛之，故可畏。 
现代文：君王治国无道，百姓就会反对他，所以百姓可畏。 
English: If a ruler governs a country without a path, the people will oppose him. Therefore, the people are to be feared.

古文：仲尼曰： 君犹舟也，人犹水也。
现代文：孔子说： 君王像船，百姓像水。
English: Confucius said: The king is like a ship, and the people are like water.

古文：水所以载舟，亦所以覆舟。 
现代文：水可以使船浮起来，也可以使船沉没。 
English: Water can float a ship or sink it.

古文：是以古之哲王虽休勿休，日慎一日者，良为此也。
现代文：所以自古以来，君王在天下太平之后内心的忧患并没有消除，反而一日比一日更谨慎，正是因为这个原因啊。
English: That is why, since ancient times, emperors have not eliminated their inner worries after the world is at peace, but on the contrary, they have become more cautious day by day, precisely for this reason.

古文：伏惟陛下览古今之事，察安危之机，上以社稷为重，下以亿兆在念。明选举，慎赏罚，进贤才，退不肖。
现代文：希望陛下能通晓古今之事，体察政治的得失，上以国家为重，下以苍生为念，公正地选举官员，慎重地实施赏罚，提拔贤才，斥退庸人。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will be able to understand the past and the present, appreciate the gains and losses of politics, put the country first and the people second, fairly elect officials, carefully implement rewards and punishments, promote talents, and reject mediocrity.

古文：闻过即改，从谏如流。
现代文：清楚自己的过失并加以改正，从谏如流。
English: Be aware of your mistakes and correct them, and you will never be the same.

古文：为善在于不疑，出令期于必信。
现代文：用人不疑，言必有信。
English: If you employ someone without any doubts, your word must be trustworthy.

古文：颐神养性，省游畋之娱；云奢从俭，减工役之费。
现代文：修养上，能无为无欲，修持心性，免去游宴畋猎的欢娱；去掉奢侈，一切从俭，节省大兴土木的费用。
English: In terms of self-cultivation, one should be able to do nothing and have no desire, cultivate one's character, avoid the pleasure of feasting and hunting; eliminate luxury, all from frugality, and save the cost of large-scale civil engineering.

古文：务静方内，而不求辟土；载弓矢，而不忘武备。
现代文：政治上，应崇尚清静，不要无休止地开疆拓土，应马放南山，刀枪入库，但也不可忘了军备的必要。
English: Politically, it is necessary to advocate tranquility, not to endlessly expand the territory, but also not to forget the need for armaments.

古文：凡此数者，虽为国之恒道，陛下之所常行。
现代文：以上几点，是治国应当坚持的原则，陛下自己也在身体力行。
English: The above points are the principles that should be adhered to in governing the country, and His Majesty himself is doing his best.

古文：臣之愚昧，惟愿陛下思而不怠，则至道之美与三、五比隆，亿载之祚与天地长久。
现代文：我不才，只希望陛下能持之以恒，使国家像三皇五帝时一样兴盛安定，万世流芳。
English: I am not. I only hope that His Majesty can persevere and make the country as prosperous and stable as it was when there were three emperors and five emperors.

古文：虽使桑穀为妖，龙蛇作孽，雉雊于鼎耳，石言于晋地，犹当转祸为福，变灾为祥，况雨水之患，阴阳恒理，岂可谓天谴而系圣心哉？
现代文：即使出现桑穀那样的妖孽，有龙蛇兴妖作怪，鸡飞到鼎上鸣叫，晋地的石头会说话这样的怪事，也会转祸为福，化凶为吉，何况雨水这样的自然灾害，是阴阳变化的常事，怎么可以说是上天在谴责陛下，而让您如此不安呢？
English: Even if there were such strange things as sorcerers like Mulberry, dragons and snakes creating monsters, chickens flying to the top of the mountain and chirping, and the stones in Jin can speak, they would turn misfortune into blessing and evil into good. What's more, natural disasters such as rain are common occurrences of yin and yang changes. How can it be said that the heavens are condemning His Majesty, leaving you so uneasy?

古文：臣闻古人有言： 农夫劳而君子养焉，愚者言而智者择焉。 
现代文：古人说： 农民劳动而君子抚养他们，愚昧的人发表议论，聪明的人择善而从。 
English: The ancients said: peasants work and gentlemen raise them, ignorant people make speeches, and clever people choose the good and follow.

古文：辄陈狂瞽，伏待斧钺。
现代文：臣妄自陈述肤浅之见，冒死进言。
English: The vassal is presumptuous to state a superficial view, and speaks at the risk of his life.

古文：太宗深纳其言。
现代文：看了这篇奏疏，唐太宗认为非常有道理，就采纳了他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong highly appreciated his words.

