古文：太康失邦，昆弟五人须于洛汭，作《五子之歌》。
现代文：康的国家被灭了，他的兄弟五人流浪到洛汭，在该处作了《五子之歌》。
English: Kang's country was annihilated, and his five brothers wandered to Luoyang, where they composed "Song of the Five Sons."

古文：太康尸位，以逸豫灭厥德，黎民咸贰，乃盘游无度，畋于有洛之表，十旬弗反。
现代文：太康虽然处在尊位却不理朝事，又贪图安逸享乐，丧失天子应该具备的德行，所以众民都怀着二心；面对这样的情形，他竟还不会改，仍然沉迷玩乐，到洛水的南面打猎，百天还不回来。
English: Although Taikang was in a high-ranking position, he did not pay attention to the affairs of the imperial court, and he was greedy for comfort and pleasure, and lost the virtues that a heavenly son should possess. Therefore, all the people were double-minded. Faced with such a situation, he still would not change, still indulged in play, went hunting in the south of Luoshui, and did not return for a hundred days.

古文：有穷后羿因民弗忍，距于河，厥弟五人御其母以从，徯于洛之汭。
现代文：有穷国的君主羿，趁着百姓对太康的不满，在河北抵御太康，不让他回国。太康的五个弟弟，侍奉他们的母亲，在洛水湾等待太康。
English: The monarch of a poor country, taking advantage of the people's dissatisfaction with Taikang, rose up in Hebei to resist Taikang and not let him return home. Taikang's five younger brothers, serving their mother, waited for Taikang in Luoshui Bay.

古文：五子咸怨，述大禹之戒以作歌。
现代文：这时五人都埋怨太康，因此叙述大禹的教导而写了歌诗。
English: At this time, all five of them complained of being too well-off, so they wrote poems describing Dayu's teachings.

古文：其一曰： 皇祖有训，民可近，不可下，民惟邦本，本固邦宁。
现代文：其中一首说： 伟大的祖先曾有明训，百姓可以亲近而不可看轻；百姓是国家的根本，根本牢固，国家才会安宁。
English: One of them said: The great ancestors once had a clear teaching, the people can be close but not despised; the people are the foundation of the country, the foundation is solid, and the country will be peaceful.

古文：予视天下愚夫愚妇一能胜予，一人三失，怨岂在明，不见是图。
现代文：我看天下的人，愚夫愚妇都能够胜过我。一人多次犯错，但依然不知道悔悟，百姓的怨恨，难道要明显地表现出来才会感觉到吗？
English: I see that people all over the world, both fools and fools, can outperform me. A person can make mistakes many times, but still does not know repentance. Does the resentment of the people have to be clearly manifested before it can be felt?

古文：予临兆民，懔乎若朽索之驭六马，为人上者，奈何不敬？ 
现代文：应当考察它还未形成之时。我治理兆民，恐惧得像用坏索子驾着六匹马；做君主的人怎么能不敬不怕？ 
English: It is necessary to examine the time when it was not yet formed. I govern a trillion people, and fear is like driving six horses with a bad rope; how can a monarch be neither respectful nor afraid?

古文：其二曰： 训有之，内作色荒，外作禽荒。甘酒嗜音，峻宇雕墙。
现代文：其中第二首说： 训诫中有这些话：在宫中沉迷女色，在外沉迷游猎翱翔；喜欢喝酒和爱听音乐，修筑高大殿宇又雕饰宫墙。
English: The second said, "In the precepts are these words: In the palace, indulge in womanly pleasures; outside, indulge in hunting and soaring; like to drink and listen to music; build tall buildings and decorate palace walls.

古文：有一于此，未或不亡。 
现代文：身为国君，这些事只要有一桩，国家就会灭亡。 
English: If one of the above ten crimes is committed, no one will be spared.

古文：其三曰： 惟彼陶唐，有此冀方。
现代文：其中第三首说： 那陶唐氏的尧皇帝，曾经据有冀州这地方。
English: The third poem says: Emperor Yao of the Tao and Tang dynasties once ruled Jizhou.

古文：今失厥道，乱其纪纲，乃厎灭亡。 
现代文：现在废弃他的治国之道，破坏了他所建立的法度，就会灭亡！ 
English: Now discard his way of governing, destroy the law he established, and you will perish!

古文：其四曰： 明明我祖，万邦之君。
现代文：其中第四首说： 我们英明睿智的先祖大禹，是万国之君。
English: The fourth of them says: Our wise and sagacious ancestor, Dayu, is the ruler of all nations.

古文：有典有则，贻厥子孙。
现代文：他建立的典章与法度，留给了后代子孙。
English: The rules and regulations he established have been passed down to future generations.

古文：关石和钧，王府则有。
现代文：征赋和计量平均，王家府库丰殷。
English: In terms of average enlistment and measurement, the royal family's treasury is rich and abundant.

古文：荒坠厥绪，覆宗绝祀！ 其五曰： 呜呼曷归？
现代文：现在废弃破坏这些法度，就断绝祭祀又危及宗亲！ 其中第五首说： 唉！哪里才是我们的归宿？
English: Now, abandoning and destroying these laws, they cut off the sacrificial rites and endanger the patriarchs! The fifth of them says: Alas! Where is our home?

古文：予怀之悲。
现代文：我的心情十分悲痛！
English: My heart is full of sorrow!

古文：万姓仇予，予将畴依？
现代文：万姓都仇恨我们，我们将依靠谁？
English: Everyone hates us, who are we going to rely on?

古文：郁陶乎予心，颜厚有忸怩。弗慎厥德，虽悔可追？ 
现代文：我的心思郁闷，内心惭愧。不愿慎行祖德，即使懊悔，却不知是否有补救之策？ 
English: My mind is depressed, my heart is ashamed. I don't want to be prudent, even if I repent, I don't know if there is a remedy?

