古文：初六日，晨起，雾仍密翳。
现代文：初六日早晨起来，雾气仍然浓密地遮蔽着山野。
English: When I got up in the morning on the sixth day of the first lunar month, the fog was still thickly covering the mountains and fields.

古文：晨餐毕，别僧宝林出，而雨忽至；仍返庵中，坐久之，雨止乃行。
现代文：吃完早餐，告别僧人宝林走出庵中，雨忽然来临；于是仍然返回庵中，坐了许久，雨停后才出发。
English: After breakfast, the farewell monk Paulin went out of the hermitage, the rain suddenly came; so he still returned to the hermitage, sat for a long time, and only left after the rain stopped.

古文：由洞门南越一岭，五里，望见东面一山中剖若门，意路且南向，无由一近观。又二里至树林，忽渡桥，路转而东。又一里，正取道断山间，乃即东向洋溪大道也。
现代文：北面那块大平地中的水从它西面的上破来，汇合陈钱口来的水，经过钱山、平田在洋溪汇合；南面那块大平地中的水从西面那座断裂开的山开始，到路口水流才往东面流下去，然后汇合石门山东麓卢子垅的水，经过塘前在洋溪汇合。两溪合流后叫洋岔溪，从此才能够航行船只，流入安福县城。
English: The water in the large flat land in the north breaks from its western side, merging with the water from Chen Qiankou, passing through Qianshan and Ping Tian and merging in Yangxi; the water in the large flat land in the south starts from the broken mountain in the west, and only flows to the east when the water flows to the intersection, and then merges with the water from Luzihou at the eastern foot of Shimen Mountain, and merges in Yangxi after passing through the pond. After the two streams merge, they are called Yangshuo Creek, and only then can ships sail and flow into the city of Anfu County.

古文：初望断山甚逼削，及入之，平平无奇，是名错了坳，其南即路口西下之水所出。
现代文：起初望见那断裂开的山时，觉得很狭窄，山崖很陡直，等进入断开处，却发现平平无奇，这里名叫错了坳，它南面就是路口往西流下去的水所流出的地方。
English: At first, when I saw the cracked mountain, I thought it was very narrow, the cliff was very steep, and so I entered the break, but found it was flat, here is called the wrong fork, it is the south of the junction flowing down to the west where the water flows out.

古文：由坳入即东南行，三里为午口。
现代文：从错了坳进去就往东南行，走三里为午口。
English: Entered from the wrong fork and headed southeast, walking three miles to the mouth of the pass.

古文：南上岭，山峡片石森立，色黑质秀如英石一种制作盆景，假山之特殊石头。
现代文：往南走上山岭，见山峡中一块块石头丛密地耸插着，石色青黑石质优良，如同英德县特产的石头。
English: Walking south up the mountain, I saw clumps of stones jutting out from the canyon. The stone color is blue-black and the stone quality is excellent, just like the stone that is a specialty of Yingde County.

古文：又二里，一小峰尖圆特立，土人号为天子地。
现代文：又走两里，一座小山峰尖峭而呈圆状，非常引人注目地耸立着，当地人称它为天子地。
English: Two miles further on, a small peak, sharp and round, rises very prominently. Locals call it Tianzi Di.

古文：乃东逾一岭，共五里，为铜坑。
现代文：往东翻越一座山岭，共走五里，为铜坑。
English: To the east, we climbed over a mountain ridge and walked a total of five miles to the copper mine.

古文：浓雾复霾，坑之上，即路口南来初起之脊也。
现代文：这时浓雾弥漫，天空又布满阴霆。铜坑的上面，就是从路口往南延伸而来的山最初耸起的山脊。
English: At this time, the fog was thick and the sky was overcast. Above the copper pit was the first ridge of the mountain stretching south from the junction.

古文：由此南向黑雾中五里，忽间溪声如沸，已循危崖峭壁上行，始觉转入山峡中也。
现代文：从此处往南，在浓黑的雾气中走了五里，忽然听到沸腾的溪流声，随即，顺着高崖峭壁往上走，这才发觉转进了山峡中。
English: From here, I walked south for five miles in the thick black fog. Suddenly, I heard the sound of a boiling stream. I immediately walked up the high cliff, only to find that I had turned into a canyon.

古文：雾中下瞰，峭石屏立溪上，沉黑逼仄，然不能详也。
现代文：从雾中向下俯瞰，高而陡峻的石头屏障似地立在溪流上边，颜色深黑，十分狭窄，不能详细看清具体情形。
English: Looking down through the mist, a high and steep stone barrier stands like a barrier above the stream. It is dark in color and very narrow, so it is not possible to see the specific situation in detail.

古文：已而竹影当前，犬声出户，遂得石门，乃入而炊。
现代文：随后，竹影呈现在眼前，狗叫的声音从门中传出，这就是石门寺，于是进到寺中烧火做饭。
English: Then, a bamboo shadow appeared in front of my eyes, and the sound of a dog barking came from the door, which was Shimen Temple, so I went into the temple to light a fire and cook.

古文：问石门之奇，尚在山顶五里而遥，时雾霾甚，四顾一无所见，念未即开雾，余欲餐后即行。
现代文：探间到石门的奇景，还在山顶五里多远的地方，当时雾气、阴霆很浓密，四处探望一无所见，心想浓雾倘若未散开，我吃了饭后就出发。
English: I was still more than five miles away from the top of the mountain, when the fog and gloom were very thick. I looked around and saw nothing. I thought that if the thick fog did not disperse, I would set out after eating.

古文：见签板在案，因诀之大士。
现代文：看见签板就放在案桌上，于是祈求大士决断。
English: When he saw the signature board, he put it on the desk and prayed for the decision of the magistrate.

古文：得七签，其由云： 赦恩天下遍行周，敕旨源源出罪尤，好向此中求善果，莫将心境别谋求。 
现代文：抽签后得到七签，签语说： 赦臣民恩天下到处行救济，却原来皇救圣旨源源出罪显过失，好生向我佛界求得那善果，切莫将心境把别物来谋取。 
English: After the drawing of lots, seven signatures were obtained. The signatures said: "Forgive the subjects and the people, and show mercy to the world, and provide relief everywhere. However, the emperor's sacred intention to save the world was originally a sin and a mistake. Seek the good fruit from the Buddhist world, and do not use your mind to seek other things.

古文：余曰： 大士知我且留我，晴必矣。 
现代文：我看签后说道： 大士知道我的心性并且留我，天气必将变晴。 
English: After I saw the sign, I said: Daishi knows my heart and will keep me. The weather will get better.

古文：遂留寺中。
现代文：于是便停留在寺中。
English: So he stayed in the temple.

古文：已而雨大作，见一行冲泥而入寺者，衣履淋璃，盖即路口之刘，以是日赴馆于此，此庵乃其所护持开创者。
现代文：随即风雨大作，见一行人从泥地中冲入寺内，衣服鞋子上雨水直往下淌，他们就是路口的刘家人，选择在这天前来此处的书塾中，此庵就是他家护助支持而创建的。
English: Then, in a dramatic turn of events, I saw a group of people rush into the temple from the mud, with rainwater running straight down on their clothes and shoes. They were the Liu family from the intersection, who had chosen to come to the school on this day. This hermitage was created with the support of his family.

古文：初见余，甚落落孤独而不合，既而同向火，语次大合。
现代文：他们刚见到我时，显出与我合不来的样子，随后一同烤火，慢慢谈得很投机。
English: When they first saw me, they didn't seem to get along with me, and then they made a fire together and slowly talked very opportunistically.

古文：师名刘仲钰，号二玉；弟名刘古心，字若孩。
现代文：老师名叫刘仲汪，别号刘二玉；弟子名叫刘古心，表字若孩。
English: The teacher's name is Liu Zhongwang, alias Liu Eryu; the disciple's name is Liu Guxin, alias Ruo Ying.

古文：迨暮，二玉以榻让余，余乃拉若孩同榻焉。
现代文：到晚上，二玉将他的床铺让给我，我就拉了若孩同床睡眠。
English: In the evening, Futama gave up his bed to me, and I slept with him.

古文：若孩年甫冠，且婚未半月，辄入山从师，亦可嘉也。初七日，平明，闻言天色大霁者，余犹疑诸人故以此嘲余，及起果然。亟索饭，恐雾湿未晞ī干，候日高乃行。
现代文：初七日天大亮后，听到有人说天气已晴，我还怀疑是众人故意用这话嘲弄我，等起来观看天气果真已经放晴。于是急忙吃饭，又担心雾气潮湿未干，直等到太阳升起好高才出发。
English: After dawn on the seventh day of the first month, I heard someone say that the weather had cleared up. I also suspected that people were deliberately mocking me with this word, and waited to see if the weather had really cleared up. So I hurried to eat, and worried that the fog was damp and not dry, and waited until the sun rose high before setting off.

古文：僧青香携火具，而刘二玉挈壶以行。
现代文：僧人青香携带着生火器材，而刘二玉提了个壶一同前行。
English: The monk Ao Xiang carried fire-making equipment, while Liu Eryu carried a pot.

古文：迨下山，日色已过下午矣。
现代文：等到走下山，已经是下午了。
English: By the time I walked down the mountain, it was already afternoon.

古文：予欲行，二玉曰： 从此南逾岭，下白沙五里，又十五里而至梁上，始有就宿处。
现代文：我想往前走，二玉说： 从此处往南翻过山岭，下到白沙有五里，又走十五里到达梁上，才有投宿处。
English: I want to go further, said the second bead: From here, I have to go south across the mountains, five miles down to Baisha, and another fifteen miles to reach Liangshan, before I can find a place to stay.

古文：日色如此，万万不能及。 
现代文：天色已晚，万万不可能赶到那地方。 
English: It was late in the day and it was impossible to get there.

古文：其父号舞雩，其兄弟四人。
现代文：说完，一定要拉我到他家去飞我顺从了他，由原路往下走。
English: Having said that, he insisted on taking me to his house to fly. I obeyed him and walked down the original path.

古文：初八日，二玉父子割牲设醴，必欲再留一日，俟其弟叔璿归，时往钱山岳家。
现代文：还没到铜坑就折向北去，共走十里便到他家，他家正好在路口那庙的背后、山脊的中间。走进他家门，天已经黑了，二玉叫他的家人拿了酒来痛饮，直到一更多时才去就寝。初八日二玉父子俩杀牲摆酒，一定要留我再住一日，说等他弟弟叔增回家后用马送我走。
English: Before reaching Tongkeng, I turned north and walked a total of ten miles to his house. His house was just behind the temple at the intersection, in the middle of the ridge. When I walked into his house, it was already dark. Futama asked his family to bring wine to drink, and they didn't go to bed until after midnight. On the eighth day of the first month, Futama's father and son killed animals and drank wine. They must keep me for another day, saying that when his brother, Unzen, came home, he would send me away on a horse.

古文：以骑送余。余苦求别，迨午乃行。
现代文：我苦苦向他们求别，到午时才出发。
English: I begged them to let me go, and I didn't leave until noon.

古文：西南向石门北麓行，即向所入天子地处也。
现代文：往西南朝石门山的北麓行，那里就是前两天进到天子地所经过的地方。
English: Heading southwest to the northern foot of Mount Shimen, that's where I passed two days ago on my way to Tianzi.

古文：五里，有小流自铜坑北麓西北注山峡间，忽有乱石蜿蜒。
现代文：走五里，有一条小水从铜坑北麓往西北流入山峡中，忽见山峡中乱石曲折延伸。
English: After walking for five miles, a small stream flows from the northern foot of the copper pit to the northwest into the canyon, and suddenly you can see the twists and turns of the rocks in the canyon.

古文：得一石横卧涧上，流淙淙透其下，匪直跨流之石，抑其石玲珑若云片偃卧，但流微梁伏，若园亭中物，巧而不钜即生硬耳。
现代文：有一块石头横卧在涧流上，流水涂涂地穿过石下，石头不是直接横跨在水流上的，而是形态玲珑若一片云彩仰卧着；水流涓细石梁低伏，像园林亭榭中的景物一样，小巧而不太大。
English: There is a stone lying on the turbulent flow, the flowing water passes under the stone, the stone is not directly across the water flow, but the shape is exquisite, like a cloud lying on its back; the water flow is thin, the stone beams are low, like the scenery in the garden pavilion, small and not too large.

古文：过此，石错立山头，俱黝然其色，岈然其形，其地在天子地之旁，与向入山所经片峙之石连峰共脉也。
现代文：过了此地，石头交错地耸立山头，石色淡黑，如耸立的小山峰，这里位于天子地的旁边，和前两天人山时所经过的耸石对峙的山地是同一山脉。
English: After passing through this place, the mountains are interlaced with stones. The stone color is light black, like a small mountain peak. This place is located next to Tianzi, and the mountains that are facing each other are the same mountains.

古文：又五里，逾冈而得大涧，即铜坑下流，是为南村。
现代文：又走五里，翻过一座山冈便见到一条大山涧，它就是铜坑水的下游，这里是南村。
English: After walking another five miles, I turned over a hill and saw a large hawthorn, which is the lower reaches of the copper pit, here is the South Village.

古文：有一峰兀立涧北，是为洞仙岩。
现代文：有一座山峰突兀直立在涧流北边，这是洞仙岩。
English: There is a mountain peak that stands abruptly upright on the north side of the stream, this is Dongxian Rock.

古文：逾涧南循西麓行，其西为竺高南下之大洋，南村之南即为永新界。
现代文：越过山涧南面，顺山的西麓而行，山的西面是从竺高往南延伸下来的宽阔的天平地，南村的南面就是永新县界。
English: Cross the southern face of the mountain and walk along the western foot of the mountain. The western face of the mountain is a broad plain extending southward from the summit. The southern face of the southern village is the county boundary of Yongxin County.

古文：又五里遂与大路合。
现代文：又走五里便与大路汇合。
English: After another five miles, it joins the main road.

古文：又五里，一涧东自牢芳坳来，渡之而南，即为梁上。
现代文：又走五里，一条大山涧从东面的劳芳坳流来，这坳在禾山最高顶端的西面，就是北面和石门山往南延伸过来的山峰相连而并列着的那个。渡过山涧往南走，就是梁上。
English: After another five miles, a large mountain stream flowed from the Laofang stream in the east. This stream is on the west side of the highest peak of the He Mountain, which is the one that is connected and juxtaposed with the peaks of the Shimen Mountain extending southward in the north. Crossing the mountain stream to the south is Liangshang.

古文：复南五里，连逾东来二涧，过青塘墅。
现代文：又往南走五里，接连跨过从东面流来的两条涧流，过了青塘墅。
English: I walked another five miles to the south, crossing two turbulent streams coming from the east, and passed Qingtang Villa.

古文：又二里暮，宿于西塘之王姓家。
现代文：又走两里，傍晚时投宿在西塘一个姓王的人家。
English: They walked another two miles, and in the evening they stayed at the home of a man named Wang in Xitang.

古文：初九日，晨餐后，南行。西逾一北来之涧，共六、七里，至汤家渡，始与大溪遇。渡溪南行，又五里为桥上。
现代文：那里有元阳观、元阳洞，元阳洞外排列着三个门，洞内可以走进去很深，我因不知道这情况而竟然走开了。
English: There are the Yuanyang Temple and the Yuanyang Cave. There are three doors outside the Yuanyang Cave, and it is very deep inside the cave. I didn't know this, so I walked away.

古文：前溪复自北而南。
现代文：前面折往东去的那条溪流到此处又自北向南流。
English: The stream that turns to the east in the foreground flows here from north to south.

古文：仍渡溪东，乃东向逾山，四里为太和，又四里逾一岭，已转行高石坳之南矣。
现代文：仍然渡过溪水到了东面，就往东翻越山峦，走四里为太和，又走四里越过一座山岭，这时已经绕行到高石坳的南边了。
English: Still, after crossing the stream to the east, he climbed eastward over the mountains, walked four miles to Taihe, and walked another four miles over a mountain ridge, by which time he had already circumnavigated to the south of the high rock ridge.

古文：小岭西为东阁坪，东为坑头冲，由坑南下二里，则大溪西自中坊东来。
现代文：小岭的西面为东阁坪，东面为坑头冲，由坑南下走两里，一条大溪从西面的中坊向东流来。
English: The west side of the small ridge is Donggapping, the east side is Hangtouchong, walk two miles south from the pit, and a large stream flows from Zhongfang in the west to the east.

古文：路随之东入山峡，又二里为龙山，数家倚溪上。
现代文：路沿着溪流往东进入山峡中，又走二里为龙山，有几户人家坐落在溪岸上。
English: The road follows the stream to the east and enters the canyon. After another two miles, it becomes Longshan. Several homes are located on the banks of the stream.

古文：循溪东去，崖石飞突，如蹲狮奋虎，高瞰溪上。
现代文：顺溪往东去，崖石飞突，如蹲卧的雄狮、奋起的猛虎，高高俯视溪流。
English: Along the stream to the east, the cliff stones are flying, such as the crouching lion, the rising tiger, high overlooking the stream.

古文：路出其下，滩石涌激，上危崖而飞沫，殊为壮观。
现代文：路从崖石下边通过，滩石交错而溪水涌激到高峻的崖石上，浪花飞溅，极为壮观。
English: The road passes under the cliff, the beach rocks are staggered and the stream water gushes onto the steep cliff, the waves splash, extremely spectacular.

古文：三里，山峡渐开，溪路出峡，南北廓然。
现代文：走三里，山峡渐渐开阔，溪流和道路出了山峡后，南北两面非常空阔。
English: After walking for three miles, the gorge gradually opens up. After the stream and the road leave the gorge, the north and south sides are very open.

古文：又二里，溪转而南，有大路逾冈而东者，由李田入邑之路也；随溪南下者，路江道也。
现代文：又走两里，溪流折往南，有条大路越过山冈往东而去，那是由李田入县城的路；顺溪南下的，是到路江的路。
English: After walking another two miles, the stream turned south, and there was a big road crossing the mountains and hills to the east. It was the road from Lida to the county seat; the road going south along the stream was the road to Lujiang.

古文：于是北望豁然无碍，见禾山高穹其北，与李田之望禾山无异也。
现代文：从那里向北望去，是一片平坦的开阔地，只见禾山高高隆起，耸立在北面，与在李田望禾山没有差异。
English: From there, looking to the north, it is a flat, open land. You can only see the He Mountain rising high and towering in the north, which is no different from the He Mountain in Litian.

古文：始知牢芳岭之东，又分一支起为禾山；从牢芳排列南至高石坳者，禾山西环之支，非即一山也。
现代文：这才知道，劳芳岭的东面又分出一支耸起而成为禾山；从劳芳岭往南排列到高石坳的，是禾山环绕向西面的支脉，与禾山不是同一山。
English: It was only then that it became clear that the eastern side of Lau Fong Ridge was separated by a ridge that rose up to become a mountain of straw. The ridge stretching from Lau Fong Ridge to the south to Gao Shijie is a branch of the mountain of straw that surrounds it to the west, and is not the same mountain as the mountain of straw.

古文：五里至龙田溪，转东行溪上，居肆较多他处。
现代文：禾山西南面有溪水南流而下，到此处与龙山大溪汇合而向南流去，路也沿溪而去。走五里到龙田，溪水转往东去，溪岸上住宅店铺较多于别处。
English: In the southwest of He Mountain, there is a stream flowing southward. At this point, it merges with Longshan Mountain Stream and flows southward, and the road also follows the stream. Walk five miles to Longtian, the stream turns to the east, and there are more residential shops on the shore of the stream than elsewhere.

古文：渡溪，循溪南岸东向行。
现代文：渡过溪流，顺溪南岸往东行。
English: Cross the stream and go east along the south bank of the stream.

古文：三里，溪环东北，路折东南，又三里，溪自北来复与路遇，是为路江。
现代文：三里后，溪绕往东北去，路折向东南面。又走三里，溪从北面流来重与路交合，这里就是路江。
English: After three miles, the stream goes around to the northeast, and the road turns to the southeast. After another three miles, the stream flows from the north to the intersection with the road, and here is the Lujiang River.

古文：先是与静闻约，居停于贺东溪家，至路江问之，则前一里外所过者是；乃复抵贺，则初一日静闻先至路江，遂止于刘心川处；于是复转路江。
现代文：原先与静闻约定，要他们留在贺东溪家等候，到路江打听，才知所过的前面一里外就是贺东溪家；于是又往回走到贺家，却得知静闻在初一那天就已到达路江，便住在刘心川处；于是又从贺家转回路江。
English: Originally, they had agreed with Jingwen that they should stay at the Hedong Creek House and wait, and inquire at the Lu River, only to find out that the house in front of them was the Hedong Creek House; so they went back to the He House, but learned that Jingwen had arrived at the Lu River on the first day, and then lived at the Liu Xin River; so they turned from the He House to the Lu River.

古文：此里余之间，凡三往返而与静闻遇。
现代文：这一里多路，我们往返共三次才与静闻相会。
English: After this long journey, we made a total of three round trips before meeting Jingwen.

古文：初十日，昧爽，由路江以二舆夫、二担夫西行。
现代文：初十日黎明时，雇了两个轿夫、两个挑担的从路江往西行。
English: At dawn on the 10th day of the first month, he hired two sedan-drivers and two porters to travel west from Lujiang.

古文：循西来小水，初觉山径凹豁，南有高峰曰石泥坳，永宁之界山也；北有高峰曰龙凤山，即昨所过龙山溪南之峰也，今又出其阳矣。
现代文：顺着西面流来的小溪走，起初觉得山路凹陷开阔。南面有座高峰叫石泥坳，是永宁县的界山；北面有座高峰叫龙凤山，就是昨天所经过的龙山溪南面的山峰，今天又到了它的南面。
English: Walking along the stream flowing from the west, at first I felt that the mountain road was open. To the south, there is a peak called Shidiwu, which is the boundary mountain of Yongning County; to the north, there is a peak called Longfeng Mountain, which is the peak on the south side of Longshan Creek that I passed yesterday, and today I reached its south side.

古文：共十里为文竺，居廛á住房地颇盛，一水自南来，一水自西下，合于村南而东下路江者也。
现代文：共走十里为文竺，村中房舍很多，一条水从南边来，一条水从西边来，在村南汇合后往东流下路江。
English: There are many houses in the village. One water comes from the south, one water comes from the west, and after the south of the village merges, it flows east down the Lu River.

古文：路又溯西溪而上，三里人岩壁口，南北两山甚隘，水出其间若门。
现代文：路又溯西边来的溪流往上行，走三里进入岩壁口，南北两座山之间非常狭窄，水流其间，如穿过一道门。
English: The path also follows the stream coming from the west upwards, and after walking three miles it enters the mouth of the rock wall. The area between the two mountains to the north and south is very narrow, and the water flows between them as if it were passing through a door.

古文：二里渐扩，又五里为桥头，无桥而有市，永新之公馆在焉。
现代文：走二里后山隘逐渐向两边扩展，又走五里为桥头，这里没有桥而有集市，永新县的公馆就设在这地方。
English: After walking two miles, the mountain pass gradually expanded to both sides, and walked five miles to the bridgehead. There is no bridge here, but there is a market. The Yongxin County residence is located in this place.

古文：一路直西向茶陵，一路渡溪西南向勒í子树下。
现代文：道路在桥头分成两条：一条直往西向茶陵而去，一条渡过溪流西南向劳子树下而去。
English: The road splits into two at the bridgehead: one goes straight west towards the tea grove, one crosses the stream southwest towards the larch tree.

古文：于是溪流渐微，七里，过塘石，渐上陂陀。
现代文：从桥头起，我们从西南的那条道走，溪流渐渐地变得涓细，走七里，过了塘石，渐渐上到倾斜而凸凹不平的山坡间。
English: From the bridgehead, we walked along the road from the southwest, the stream gradually became narrow, walked seven miles, passed the pond, and gradually climbed up to the sloping and uneven mountain slope.

古文：三里，登一冈，是为界头岭，湖广、江西分界处也。
现代文：三里后，登上一座山冈，这是界头岭，是湖广、江西两省的分界处。
English: After three miles, we ascended a mountain ridge, which is the boundary ridge, and is the demarcation point of the two provinces of Hunan, Guangxi and Jiangxi.

古文：盖崇山南自崖子垅，东峙为午家山。
现代文：大略崇山从南面的崖子垅蜿蜒而来，到界头岭东面耸起为午家山。
English: The roughly lofty mountain meanders from the cliff to the south, and rises to the east of the Jiedouling as the Wujiashan.

古文：东行者分永宁、永新之南北界，北转者至月岭下伏为唐舍，为茶陵、永新界。
现代文：午家山向东延伸的一支成为永宁县和永新县的南北界，折往北去的一支延伸到月岭低伏下来，低伏处为唐舍，它是茶陵和永新分界的地方。
English: The one that extends to the east of Wujiashan becomes the north-south boundary between Yongning County and Yongxin County. The one that bends to the north extends to Yueling and lowers down. The low-lying area is Tangxiao, which is the place where Chaling and Yongxin are separated.

古文：下冈，水即西流，闻黄雩ú仙在其南，遂命舆人迂道由皮唐南入皮南，去界头五里矣。
现代文：下了山冈，水就往西流，听说黄零仙庙在山冈的南面，便叫众人绕道由皮唐往南进入皮南，这时离开界头已经有五里远了。
English: After descending the mountain, the water flowed westward. Hearing that Huang Zixian Temple was on the south side of the mountain, they asked everyone to take a detour from Pitang to the south to enter Pinang. At this time, it was already five miles away from the boundary.

古文：于是入山，又五里，遂南登仙宫岭，五里，逾岭而下。
现代文：从皮南进入山中，又走五里，往南越过一条溪流，它就是黄零溪的下游。于是往南攀登仙宫岭，五里，越过岭头往下走。
English: From Pingnan into the mountains, walk another five miles, to the south across a stream, it is the lower reaches of Huangzhi Creek. So climb south to Xianguiling, five miles, cross the ridge and go down.

古文：望南山高插天际者，亦谓之界山，即所称石牛峰，乃永宁、茶陵界也，北与仙宫夹而成坞。
现代文：望见南面有座高插天际的山，它也称为界山，就是所称的石牛峰，是永宁、茶陵的分界，它与北面的仙宫岭相夹峙而形成山坞。
English: Looking to the south, there is a mountain high in the sky. It is also known as the Boundary Mountain, that is, the so-called Stone Cow Peak. It is the boundary between Yongning and Chaling. It is sandwiched against the north of the Xianguiling and forms a dock.

古文：坞中一峰自西而来，至此卓立，下有庙宇，即黄雩也。
现代文：山坞中有一座山峰从西面延伸过来，到此处高高直立起，山峰脚下有个庙宇，这就是黄零仙庙。
English: In the dockyard, there is a mountain peak stretching from the west, standing tall and upright here, and there is a temple at the foot of the peak, which is the Huang Zixian Temple.

古文：至庙，见庙南有涧奔涌，而不见上流。
现代文：到了庙边，见庙南边有涧流奔涌，但却不见涧流的上游。
English: When I got to the edge of the temple, I saw a turbulent current rushing along the south side of the temple, but I did not see the upstream of the turbulent current.

古文：往察之，则卓峰之下，一窍甚庳ē低矮，乱波由窍中流出，遂成滔滔之势。
现代文：走过去仔细观看，原来直立的山峰下有一个很低矮的小洞，纷乱的水流从小洞中流出，便形成滔滔之势。
English: When I walked over to take a closer look, there was a very low small hole under the originally upright mountain peak. Turbulent water flowed out of the small hole, forming a torrent.

古文：所称黄雩者，谓雩祝祈雨之祭祀之所润济一方甚涯也。
现代文：所称的黄零仙，据说是干旱时祭祀它，天就降下雨水滋润一方土地、救助一方黎民百姓的神，很是灵验。
English: The so-called Huang Zixian is said to be a god who is worshipped in times of drought, when rain falls from the sky to moisten the land and help the people of Li. It is very effective.

古文：索饭于道士，复由旧路登仙宫岭。
现代文：我们向道士索要了些饭吃，又从原路攀登仙宫岭。
English: We asked the Taoist priest for some food and climbed Xianguiling from the original path.

古文：五里，逾岭北下，又北十里，与唐舍、界头之道合。
现代文：五里，越过岭头往北下去，又往北走十里，与唐舍、界头来的道路交合。
English: Five miles, cross the ridge head and go north, and then go north for ten miles, and meet the road coming from Tang She and Jie Tou.

古文：下岭是为光前，又有溪自西而东者，发源崖子垅，渡溪又北行三里，过崇冈。
现代文：下了岭为光前，又有条溪水自西向东流，它发源于崖子垅，那地方在黄零仙庙西北的重山中。过溪流又往北行三里，经过崇冈。
English: Before the ridge was cleared, there was another stream that flowed from west to east. It originated from the cliff, that place in the heavy mountains northwest of Huang Zixian Temple. The stream flowed north for three miles, passing through Chonggang.

古文：地名。又二里，复得一溪亦东向去，是名芝水，有石梁跨其上。
现代文：又走二里，又见到一条溪水也是向东流去，它叫芝水，有座石桥横跨在溪上。
English: After walking another two miles, I saw another stream flowing to the east. It is called Shizui, and there is a stone bridge across the stream.

古文：渡梁即为勒子树下，始见大溪自东南注西北，而小舟鳞次其下矣。
现代文：跨过石桥就是劳子树下，这才见到一条大溪自东南流注西北，小船像鱼鳞一样停泊在溪流中。
English: After crossing the stone bridge under the larch tree, I saw a large stream flowing from the southeast to the northwest, with small boats anchored in the stream like fish scales.

古文：自界岭之西岭下，一小溪为第一重，黄雩之溪为第二重，崖子垅溪为第三重，芝水桥之溪为第四重。
现代文：从界岭的西面起，岭下的一条小溪为第一重，黄零仙庙的溪水为第二重，崖子垅的溪水为第三重，芝水桥下的溪水为第四重，只有黄零仙庙的那条水流最大。
English: From the west side of the ridge, a small stream under the ridge is the first weight, the stream of Huang Zixian Temple is the second weight, the stream under the cliff is the third weight, and the stream under the Zhishui Bridge is the fourth weight. Only the stream of Huang Zixian Temple is the largest.

古文：惟黄雩之水最大，俱从东转西，合于小关洲之下，西至勒子树下而胜舟，至高陇而更大云。 勒子 ，树名，昔有之，今无矣。
现代文：它们都是从东折往西，汇合在小关洲的下面，又往西流到劳子树下，这里能够航行船只，到了高陇水流更大。 劳子 是树的名称，此种树先前有，如今没有了。
English: They all flow from east to west, converging under the Ogaseki Peninsula, and then flowing west to the Raozi tree, where ships can sail, and to the higher water flow.Raozi is the name of the tree, this kind of tree used to exist, but now it is gone.

