古文：正月之朝，乡长复事。
现代文：正月初一朝见的时候，乡长们汇报工作。
English: When I saw them in the early morning of the first month of the year, the heads of the townships reported on their work.

古文：君亲问焉，曰： 于子之乡，有居处好学、慈孝于父母、聪慧质仁、发闻于乡里者，有则以告。
现代文：桓公亲自咨问他们，说： 在你的乡里，发现平日好学、孝敬父母、聪明仁惠、在当地有一定名声的人，就应向上级报告。
English: Huan Gong asked them in person and said, "In your hometown, if you find a person who is good at studying, honors his parents, is clever and benevolent, and has a certain reputation in the local area, you should report it to your superiors.

古文：有而不以告，谓之蔽明，其罪五。 
现代文：如果有这样的人却不报告，叫埋没贤明，要判五刑之罪。 
English: If there is such a person but does not report it, it is called burying the wise, and it is a five-sentence crime.

古文：有司已于事而竣。
现代文：主管这方面事务的官员报告后退下。
English: After the presenter finished his report, he left.

古文：桓公又问焉，曰： 于子之乡，有拳勇股肱之力秀出于众者，有则以告。
现代文：桓公又对乡长们说： 在你的乡里，发现勇敢强健、力气出众的人，就应向上级报告。
English: Prince Kan also said to the heads of the villages, "If you find a brave, strong, and powerful person in your village, you should report it to your superiors.

古文：有而不以告，谓之蔽贤，其罪五。 
现代文：如果有这样的人却不报告，叫埋没贤能，要判五刑之罪。 
English: There are five kinds of crimes, including reporting and not reporting, which is called burying talent.

古文：有司已于事而竣。
现代文：主管这方面事务的官员报告后退下。
English: After the presenter finished his report, he left.

古文：桓公又问焉，曰： 于子之乡，有不慈孝于父母、不长悌于乡里、骄躁淫暴、不用上令者，有则以告。
现代文：桓公还对乡长们说： 在你的乡里，发现不孝敬父母、不友爱兄弟、骄横暴戾、不服从君长命令的人，就应向上级报告。
English: Prince Kan also said to the heads of the villages: If you find in your village anyone who does not show filial respect to his parents, does not love his brothers, is arrogant and violent, and does not obey the orders of the monarch, you should report it to your superiors.

古文：有而不以告，谓之下比，其罪五。 
现代文：如果有这样的人却不报告，叫包庇坏人，要判五刑之罪。 
English: There are also five kinds of crimes, such as failing to report and covering up for subordinates.

古文：有司已于事而竣。
现代文：主管这方面事务的官员报告后退下。
English: After the presenter finished his report, he left.

古文：是故乡长退而修德进贤，桓公亲见之，遂使役官。
现代文：所以，乡长们回去以后，都修养品德，推荐贤才，桓公亲自接见被推举的人，授他们以官职。
English: Therefore, after the township chiefs returned home, they all cultivated their moral character and recommended talents. Huan Gong personally received the people who were nominated and awarded them with official positions.

古文：桓公令官长期而书伐，以告且选，选其官之贤者而复用之，曰： 有人居我官，有功休德，惟慎端悫以待时，使民以劝，绥谤言，足以补官之不善政。 
现代文：桓公命令官长每年纪录有功之臣，以便上报备案，从中遴选出贤能的官员提拔使用。推荐时说： 我这里有这样的官员，他功劳卓著，品德高尚，谨慎正派，处事不失时机，能以劝勉的办法治理百姓，制止诽谤，这个人足以替补不称职的官员。 
English: Prince Huan ordered the governors to record the meritorious officials every year, so that they could be reported for the record, and to select the capable officials for promotion and use. When recommending, he said: I have such an official here, he is highly meritorious, has high moral character, is prudent and decent, never misses an opportunity, can govern the people by means of persuasion, and stop slander. This person is enough to replace an incompetent official.

古文：桓公召而与之语，訾相其质，足以比成事，诚可立而授之。
现代文：然后桓公就召见被推荐的人，和他谈话，估量审视他的素质，看他是否可以辅助完成国事，确实可提拔当大官的就委以重任。
English: Then King Huan summoned the recommended person, talked with him, assessed and examined his qualities to see if he could assist in the completion of state affairs. If he could indeed be promoted to a high-ranking official, he would be entrusted with an important task.

古文：设之以国家之患而不疚，退问之其乡，以观其所能而无大厉，升以为上卿之赞。
现代文：桓公还以国家可能遇到的患难诘问他，如果问不倒，再退而诘问乡里的事情，以观察他的能力，如没有大毛病，就晋升他做上卿的助手。
English: Huan Gong also asked him about the possible difficulties that the country might encounter. If he could not answer the question, he would step back and ask about the things in the countryside to observe his ability. If there were no major problems, he would promote him to be the lord's assistant.

古文：谓之三选。
现代文：以上乡长推荐，官长选拔，国君亲自面试，叫做三选。
English: The recommendation of the head of the township, the selection of the official, and the interview of the sovereign himself are called the three selections.

古文：国子、高子退而修乡，乡退而修连，连退而修里，里退而修轨，轨退而修伍，伍退而修家。
现代文：国子、高子回去后整治乡政，乡长回去后整治连政，连长回去后整治里政，里有司回去后整治轨，轨长回去后整治伍，伍回去后整治家。
English: Kuniko and Takako went back to rectify the township government, the head of the township went back to rectify the township government, the head of the company went back to rectify the township government, the chief of the company went back to rectify the township government, the chief of the division went back to rectify the division, the chief of the division went back to rectify the division, and the chief of the division went back to rectify the division.

古文：是故匹夫有善，可得而举也；匹夫有不善，可得而诛也。
现代文：所以百姓中凡有好的，可得到推举，百姓中凡有坏的，要受到诛罚。
English: Wherefore the good of the people shall be taken, and the evil of the people shall be punished.

古文：政既成，乡不越长，朝不越爵，罢士无伍，罢女无家。
现代文：政令定下以后，乡里不逾越长幼的次序，朝中不逾越爵位的等级，没有德行的男人不能入伍，没有德行的女人不能外嫁。
English: After the decree was issued, the order of the eldest son and the youngest son in the village could not exceed the order of the eldest son and the youngest son in the township, and the order of the peerage could not exceed the order of the peerage in the court, and a man without virtue could not enlist in the army, and a woman without virtue could not marry.

古文：夫是，故民皆勉为善。
现代文：这样，百姓因此都努力向善。
English: As a result, the people are trying to do good.

古文：与其为善于乡也，不如为善于里；与其为善于里也，不如为善于家。
现代文：与其在乡里做好事，不如回到里中做好事；与其在里中做好事，不如回到家中做好事。
English: Instead of doing good in the countryside, it is better to do good in the village; instead of doing good in the village, it is better to do good at home.

古文：是故士莫敢言一朝之便，皆有终岁之计；莫敢以终岁之议，皆有终身之功。
现代文：所以大家都不敢只图一时的便宜，都有一年的计划；都不敢满足于一年的计划，都有终身立功的打算。
English: Therefore, everyone dares not only to be cheap for a moment, but also has a one-year plan; they dare not be satisfied with a one-year plan, and they all have the intention to make a lifetime contribution.

古文：桓公曰： 伍鄙若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 伍鄙怎样治理？ 
English: Kankong asked: How should we govern the country?

古文：管子对曰： 相地而衰征，则民不移；政不旅旧，则民不偷；山泽各致其时，则民不苟；陆、阜、陵、墐、井、田、畴均，则民不憾；无夺民时，则百姓富；牺牲不■，则牛羊遂。 
现代文：管子回答说： 按照土地的肥瘠逐级降低赋税的标准，那么百姓就不会迁徙；为政不抛弃先君故旧，百姓就不会苟且从事；山林河泽依照时令开放或封禁，百姓就不会随意出入砍柴捕猎；陆地、土山、井田等分配均平，百姓就不会怨恨；不侵夺农时贻误农事，百姓就能富足；祭祀用的牲畜不过度屠杀，牛羊就能繁殖增加。 
English: Guanzi replied: According to the standard of reducing taxes step by step according to the fertility of the land, then the people will not migrate; if the government does not abandon the old ways of the ancestors, the people will not be strictly engaged; if the mountains and rivers are open or closed according to the season, the people will not enter and leave at will to cut firewood and hunt; if the distribution of land, soil, mountains and fields is even, the people will not resent; if the farmers are not robbed, the people will be able to be rich; if the livestock used for sacrifice is not slaughtered excessively, the cattle and sheep will be able to multiply.

古文：桓公曰： 定民之居若何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 怎样划定百姓的居处？ 
English: Kankong asked: How should the residences of the common people be delineated?

古文：管子对曰： 制鄙。
现代文：管仲回答说： 建立郊野之政。
English: Guanzhong replied, "To establish a countryside government."

古文：三十家为邑，邑有司；十邑为卒，卒有卒帅；十卒为乡，乡有乡帅；三乡为县，县有县帅；十县为属，属有大夫。
现代文：规定郊野三十家为一邑，邑有主管的人；十邑为一卒，由卒帅领导；十卒为一乡，由乡帅领导；三乡为一县，由县帅领导；十县为一属，由大夫领导。
English: It is stipulated that the 30 rural areas are one township, and there is a person in charge of the township; ten townships are one unit, led by a sergeant; ten units are one township, led by a township sergeant; three townships are one county, led by a county sergeant; ten counties are one group, led by a doctor.

古文：五属，故立五大夫，各使治一属焉；立五正，各使听一属焉。
现代文：全国共分五属，所以共设五位大夫，让他们各自治理一属的政事；另外再设五位政长，让他们各自监察一属的政事。
English: The whole country is divided into five clans, so there are five doctors at the top, each of whom is responsible for the political affairs of one clan; in addition, there are five chiefs, each of whom is responsible for the political affairs of one clan.

古文：是故正之政听属，牧政听县，下政听乡。 
现代文：所以五位政长的职责就是监察五位大夫的治理情况，五位大夫的职责就是监察县帅的治理情况，县帅的职责就是监察乡帅的治理情况。 
English: Therefore, the duty of the five chief executives is to monitor the governance of the five doctors, the duty of the five doctors is to monitor the governance of the county magistrate, and the duty of the county magistrate is to monitor the governance of the township magistrate.

古文：桓公曰： 各保治尔所，无惑淫怠而不听治者！ 
现代文：桓公说： 各自治理好所管辖的地方，不要有人放荡怠慢而不服从治理！ 
English: Kanko said, "In the places governed by the various autonomous regions, do not let anyone indulge in debauchery and neglect and disobey the governance!

