古文：崔隐甫，贝州武城人。
现代文：崔隐甫，贝州武城人。
English: Cui Yingfu, a native of Wucheng, Bishu.

古文：隋散骑侍郎亻麃曾孙。
现代文：是隋朝散骑侍郎崔的曾孙。
English: He was the great-grandson of the Sui Dynasty's cavalry officer Choe.

古文：解褐左玉钤卫兵曹参军，迁殿侍御史内供奉。
现代文：初任左玉钤卫兵曹参军，后来升任殿中侍御史内供奉。
English: The first left jade guard Cao joined the army, and later he was promoted to attendant of the palace.

古文：浮屠惠范倚太平公主胁人子女，隐甫劾状，反为所挤，贬邛州司马。
现代文：僧人惠范倚仗太平公主胁逼人家子女，崔隐甫检举揭发其罪状，反遭排挤，贬为邛州司马。
English: The monk Hui Fan relied on the Taiping Princess to coerce other people's children, Cui Yingfu investigated and exposed his crimes, but he was ousted and relegated to the position of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：玄宗立，擢汾州长史，兼河东道支度营田使，迁洛阳令。
现代文：玄宗即位，升任汾州长史，兼河东道支度营田使，又升为洛阳令。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Hebei Province, and the governor of Luoyang Province.

古文：梨园弟子胡雏善笛，有宠，尝负罪匿禁中。
现代文：那时，梨园弟子胡雏善于吹笛，得宠。曾经负罪躲藏在禁中。
English: At that time, Li Yuan's disciple Hu Chai was good at playing the flute and was favored. He once committed the crime of hiding in the Forbidden City.

古文：帝以他事召隐甫，从容指曰： 就卿丐此人。 
现代文：皇帝因别的事召崔隐甫，缓缓地对他说 ：我就问你要这个人。 
English: The emperor had called Cui Yinfu for some other reason, and slowly said to him, "I'll ask you about this man."

古文：对曰： 陛下轻臣而重乐工，请解官。 
现代文：崔隐甫回答： 陛下看轻臣而重视一个乐工。请辞官。 
English: Cui Yingfu replied, "Your Majesty does not value a humble subject, but a musician. Please resign."

古文：再拜出，帝遽谢，与胡雏，隐甫杀之，有诏贳死，不及矣。
现代文：再拜以后出来，皇帝醒悟，立刻道歉，把胡雏交给他。崔隐甫立刻杀了胡雏，皇帝下诏免他一死。诏下，已经来不及了。
English: After bowing again, he came out, the emperor woke up, immediately apologized, and handed Hu Jia to him. Cui Yingfu immediately killed Hu Jia, and the emperor issued an edict to spare his life. The edict was too late.

古文：赐隐甫百缣。
现代文：赐给崔隐甫缣百段。
English: Choe In-bok was given a hundred dan.

古文：孙佺败绩于奚，擢隐甫并州司马护边，会兄逸甫疾甚，未及行，诏责逗留，下除河南令。
现代文：孙亻全与奚人作战失败，皇帝升崔隐甫为并州司马，让他守护边陲，正好他的哥哥崔逸甫病危，未能及时启程。诏责斥他逗留延误，贬为河南令。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's failed battle with the Xiongnu, the emperor promoted Cui Ying-fu to the position of conciliator and allowed him to guard the border of Yunnan. However, his brother, Cui Yifu, was critically ill and was unable to leave in time. The emperor reprimanded him for the delay and demoted him to the position of Henan governor.

古文：累拜华州刺史、太原尹，入为河南尹。
现代文：以后历任华州刺史、太原尹，又入为河南尹。
English: Later, Huazhou Zhishi, Taiyuan Yin, and Henan Yin were added.

古文：居三岁，进拜御史大夫。
现代文：过了三年，升为御史大夫。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to chief historian.

古文：初，台无狱，凡有囚则系大理。
现代文：当初，台里没有牢狱，凡有囚犯，都关在大理。
English: At the beginning, there was no prison in Taili, and all prisoners were locked up in Dali.

古文：贞观时，李乾祐为大夫，始置狱，由是中丞、侍御史皆得系人。
现代文：贞观年时，李乾为大夫，开始设置牢狱。从此，中丞、侍御史都可以捕人。
English: In Zhenguan's year, Li Qian became a doctor and began to set up a prison. From then on, the Vice-Commander and the Grand Historian could arrest people.

古文：隐甫执故事，废掘诸狱。
现代文：崔隐甫根据过去的例子，废除了台里的牢狱。
English: Cui Yinfu abolished the prison in Taili according to past examples.

古文：其后患囚往来或漏泄，复系之厨院云。
现代文：后来，囚犯往来有时发生泄密，成了个问题，乃又把人关在厨院内。
English: Later, when prisoner communications became a problem because of occasional leaks, they were confined to the kitchen.

古文：台中自监察御史而下，旧皆得颛事，无所承谘。
现代文：台中自监察御史以下，以前都专断独行，不向谁报告请示。
English: Taichung, from the Supervisor of History on down, used to do things arbitrarily, without reporting to anyone for instructions.

古文：隐甫始一切令归禀乃得行，有忤意辄劾正，多贬绌者，台吏侧目，威名赫然。
现代文：从崔隐甫开始，一切事情都必须禀报以后才能施行，有违背皇帝意思的就即刻改正，很多都受到批评重来，于是台吏们都小心谨慎，不敢马虎，崔隐甫的威名赫赫然。
English: From the beginning of Cui Yingfu, all matters had to be reported before they could be implemented. Anything that went against the emperor's will was immediately corrected, and many were criticized again. As a result, the officials were cautious and did not dare to be careless. Cui Yingfu's prestige was overwhelming.

古文：帝尝诏校外官岁考。
现代文：皇帝曾诏命崔隐甫去主持外官的每年考核。
English: The emperor had ordered Cui Yingfu to preside over the foreign minister's annual appraisal.

古文：异时必委曲参审，竟春未定。隐甫一日会朝集使，询逮检实，其暮皆讫，议者服其敏。
现代文：过去，都要反复研究议论，一冬春都不能检查完，崔隐甫一早上把被考核者都集中起来，询问后即刻核实，到晚上就考核完了。评论者都佩服他的敏捷。
English: In the past, it was necessary to repeatedly study the discussion, and the examination could not be completed in the winter and spring. Cui Yinfu gathered the examinees in the morning, checked them immediately after questioning, and completed the examination in the evening. Commentators all admired his agility.

古文：帝尝谓曰： 卿为大夫，天下以为称职。 
现代文：皇帝曾经对他说 ：你任大夫职，天下人都认为是称职的。 
English: The emperor once said to him, "When you hold the post of doctor, everyone in the world thinks you are qualified.

古文：张说当国，隐甫素恶之，乃与中丞宇文融、李林甫暴其过，不宜处位，说赐罢；然帝嫉朋党，免其官，使侍母。
现代文：张说执政。崔隐甫一向讨厌张说，于是与中丞宇文融、李林甫一同揭发他的过错，不该处宰相之位。张说被罢相位。但皇帝也不喜欢他们联结为党，免了崔隐甫的官，让他回去侍奉母亲。
English: Zhang said that he was in power. Cui Yingfu always hated Zhang, so he, together with the middle-ranking officials Uwen Rong and Li Linfu, exposed Zhang's faults and said that he should not hold the position of prime minister. Zhang said that he was ousted from the position. However, the emperor did not like their alliance as a party and dismissed Cui Yingfu from his post and let him go back to serve his mother.

古文：岁余，复为大夫。
现代文：一年多以后，又招回任大夫。
English: More than a year later, he was called back to work as a doctor.

古文：迁刑部尚书，兼河南尹。
现代文：后升为刑部尚书，兼河南尹。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Penal Department of Shangshu, and also Henan Yin.

古文：帝还京师，即拜东都留守。累封清河郡公。
现代文：皇帝回到京师，就任崔隐甫为东都留守，后封爵清河郡公。
English: When the emperor returned to Beijing, he appointed Cui Yingfu as the governor of the Eastern Capital, and later made him the lord of Qinghe County.

古文：卒，赠益州大都督，谥曰忠。
现代文：死后追赠益州大都督，赐谥为 忠 。
English: After his death, he posthumously bestowed the title of Yizhou's grand governor and bestowed the title of "loyal disciple."

古文：始，帝欲相隐甫也，谓曰： 牛仙客可与语，卿常见否？ 
现代文：当初，皇帝有任崔隐甫为宰相的意思。对他说： 牛仙客很可以一起谈谈，你常见到他吗？ 
English: At first, the emperor intended to appoint Cui Yingfu as prime minister. He said to him: "Cow Immortal is very easy to talk to. Do you often see him?

古文：对曰： 未也。 
现代文：崔隐甫说 ：没有见过。 
English: Li Yuan replied, "No."

古文：帝曰： 可见之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：可以去见见他。 
English: The emperor said, "You can go and see him."

古文：隐甫终不诣。
现代文：但崔隐甫始终没去见牛仙客。
English: But Cui Yinfu never went to see Niu Xianke.

古文：他日又问，对如初。
现代文：过了些日子，皇帝又问去与牛仙客谈过话没有。
English: A few days later, the emperor asked again whether he had spoken with the cowherd.

古文：帝乃不用。
现代文：崔隐甫的回答与前一次一样。
English: Cui Yinfu's answer was the same as the previous time.

古文：子弟或问故，答曰： 吾不以其人微易之也，其材不逮中人，可与之对耶？ 
现代文：皇帝于是决定不用他为相。
English: The emperor then decided not to use him as a consort.

古文：隐甫所至絜介自守，明吏治，在职以强正称云。
现代文：崔隐甫每到一处，都清廉耿介，自守很严，精通治理之道。在职时以强正闻名。
English: Whenever Cui Yinfu went to a place, he was always clean and honest, very strict in self-protection, and well-versed in governance. He was famous for being strong and upright when he was in office.

古文：赞曰：严挺之拒宰相不肯见李林甫，崔隐甫违诏不屈牛仙客，信刚者乎！
现代文：评论：严挺之不肯去见宰相李林甫，崔隐甫不肯去见牛仙客，确实是刚直的人！
English: Comment: Yan Tingzhi refused to meet with Prime Minister Li Linfu, and Cui Yingfu refused to meet with Niu Xianke. They are indeed upright people!

古文：二人坐是皆不得相，彼亦各申其志也。
现代文：他二人都因此而不得任宰相，但也都表达了他们的节志。
English: As a result, neither of them was allowed to become prime minister, but they both expressed their wishes.

古文：管夷吾以编栈谕之，信曲与直不相函哉！
现代文：管夷吾曾以编栈打比方，的确，曲与直是不能相包容在一起的。
English: Guan Yiwu once used the analogy of weaving, indeed, the song and the straight line cannot be contained together.

