古文：十有二年春正月。
现代文：十二年春季正月，无事。
English: In the first month of spring in 2012, nothing happened.

古文：夏六月壬寅，公会杞侯、莒子，盟于曲池。
现代文：夏季六月，壬寅日，桓公在曲池与杞侯、莒子结盟。
English: In the summer of June, on Renin Day, King Kan formed an alliance with Shoko and Shoshi in Quchi.

古文：秋七月丁亥，公会宋公、燕人，盟于穀丘。
现代文：秋季七月，丁亥日，桓公在穀丘与宋庄公、燕国人结盟。
English: In the autumn of July, on Dinghai Day, Huan Gong allied with Song Zhuang Gong and Yan Guozhong in Guqiu.

古文：八月壬辰，陈侯跃卒。
现代文：八月壬辰日，陈国国君跃去世。
English: In August, on Imjin Day, Chen Guo Guo Junyue passed away.

古文：公会宋公于虚。
现代文：桓公在虚地与宋公会面。
English: Lord Kan met with Lord Song in a vacant lot.

古文：冬十有一月，公会宋公于龟。
现代文：冬季十一月，桓公在龟地与宋公会面。
English: In the winter of November, King Kan met with King Song at Kamechi.

古文：丙戌，公会郑伯，盟于武父。
现代文：丙戌日，桓公会见郑厉公，与其在武父结盟。
English: On the same day, Kuan Gong met with Zheng Liguo and allied with him in Wuchang.

古文：丙戌，卫侯晋卒。
现代文：丙戌日，卫侯晋去世。
English: On the same day, Wei Hou Jin passed away.

古文：十有二月，及郑师伐宋。
现代文：十二月，鲁国和郑国的军队攻打宋国。
English: In December, the armies of Lu and Zheng attacked Song.

古文：丁未，战于宋。
现代文：丁未日，在宋国交战。
English: Ding Wei Rong fought in Song.

古文：十二年夏，盟于曲池，平杞、莒也。
现代文：十二年，夏季，鲁桓公和杞侯、莒子在曲池会盟，这是让杞国和莒国讲和。
English: In the summer of the twelfth year, Prince Lu Huan made an alliance with the governors of Yunnan Province and Yunnan Province in Quchi. This was the beginning of the peace talks between the two countries.

古文：公欲平宋、郑秋，公及宋公盟于句渎之丘。
现代文：桓公想和宋国、郑国讲和。秋季，桓公和宋庄公在句渎之丘会盟。
English: Kuan Kung wanted to make peace with Song and Zheng. In the autumn, Kuan Kung and Song Zhuang made an alliance at the Hill of Sincerity.

古文：宋成未可知也，故又会于虚。冬，又会于龟。
现代文：由于不知道宋国对议和有无诚意，所以又在虚地会见；冬季，又在龟地会见。
English: Since they did not know whether Song's counter-proposal was sincere or not, they met again in the Empty Quarter; in winter, they met again in the Turtle Quarter.

古文：宋公辞平，故与郑伯盟于武父。
现代文：宋公拒绝议和，所以桓公和郑厉公在武父结盟，盟后就率领军队进攻宋国。
English: Song Gong refused to negotiate peace, so Huan Gong and Zheng Liguang allied with Wuchang, and after the alliance, they led the army to attack Song.

古文：遂帅师而伐宋，战焉，宋无信也。
现代文：发生这场战争，是因为宋国不讲信用。
English: This war happened because Song was not trustworthy.

古文：君子曰： 苟信不继，盟无益也。
现代文：君子说： 如果一再不讲信用，结盟也没有好处。
English: The gentleman said, "If you don't trust each other again and again, it's no good to form an alliance."

古文：《诗》云： 君子屡盟，乱是用长。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 君子多次结盟，反而使动乱滋长。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Nobles have made alliances many times, but they have caused turmoil to grow.

古文：无信也。 
现代文：就是由于没有信用。 
English: It's because there's no trust.

古文：楚伐绞，军其南门。
现代文：楚国进攻绞国，军队驻扎在南门。
English: Chu attacked Zhengyang, and the army was stationed at Nanmen.

古文：莫敖屈瑕曰： 绞小而轻，轻则寡谋，请无扞采樵者以诱之。 
现代文：莫敖屈瑕说： 绞国地小而人轻浮，轻浮就缺少主意。请对砍柴的人不设保卫，用这引诱他们。 
English: "If a country is small and people are frivolous, then frivolity is a lack of courage. Please do not set up a defense for the woodcutters, and use this to lure them.

古文：从之。
现代文：楚王听从了屈瑕的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：绞人获三十人。
现代文：绞军俘获了三十个砍柴人。
English: The wranglers captured thirty woodcutters.

古文：明日，绞人争出，驱楚役徒于山中。
现代文：第二天，绞军争着出城，把楚国的砍柴人赶到山里。
English: On the second day, the Zhian army also rushed out of the city, chasing the Chu army to chop wood in the mountains.

古文：楚人坐其北门而覆诸山下，大败之，为城下之盟而还。
现代文：楚军坐等在北门，同时在山下设伏兵，大败绞军，强迫绞国订立城下之盟而回国。
English: The Chu army waited at the north gate, and at the same time set up an ambush at the foot of the mountain, defeated the besieging army, forced the besieging country to conclude an alliance under the city, and returned home.

古文：伐绞之役，楚师分涉于彭。
现代文：在进攻绞国的这次战役中，楚军分兵渡过彭水。
English: In this battle of the attack on Zhengyang, the detachment of the Chu army crossed the Pengshui River.

古文：罗人欲伐之，使伯嘉谍之，三巡，数之。
现代文：罗国准备攻打楚军，派遣伯嘉去侦探，三次遍数了楚军的人数。
English: Luo Guo was preparing to attack the Chu army and sent Bo Jia to be a detective. He counted the number of the Chu army three times.

