古文：变复之家，谓虎食人者，功曹为奸所致也。
现代文：专为消灾而祈祷的人说老虎吃人是功曹为非作歹造成的。
English: People who pray specifically for disaster relief say that tigers eating people is the result of good deeds and bad deeds.

古文：其意以为，功曹众吏之率，虎亦诸禽之雄也。
现代文：他们的意思以为，功曹是众官吏的首领，老虎也是各种禽兽的首领。
English: They thought that Gong Cao was the leader of all officials, and the tiger was also the leader of all kinds of animals.

古文：功曹为奸，采渔於吏，故虎食人以象其意。
现代文：功曹为非作歹，侵榨下级官吏，所以老虎才吃人，以显示功曹的为非作歹。
English: A meritorious person is one who has not committed any wrongdoing, who has exploited lower-level officials. That is why tigers eat people, to show that meritorious people have not committed any wrongdoing.

古文：夫虎食人，人亦有杀虎。
现代文：老虎吃人，人也有杀老虎的。
English: Tigers eat people, and people also kill tigers.

古文：谓虎食人，功曹受取於吏，如人食虎，吏受於功曹也乎？
现代文：说老虎吃人是因为功曹受贿榨取下级官吏，如果是人杀虎而食，那么是下级官吏对功曹受贿榨取吗？
English: It is said that tigers eat people because the gong cao takes bribes to squeeze out lower-level officials. If people kill tigers to eat, is it the lower-level officials who take bribes to squeeze out the gong cao?

古文：案世清廉之士，百不能一。
现代文：考察世间上清正廉洁的人，一百个里面挑不出一个。
English: If you look at the world's clean and honest people, you can't pick one out of a hundred.

古文：居功曹之官，皆有奸心，私旧故可以幸，苞苴赂遗，小大皆有。
现代文：当上功曹这样的官，都是怀有奸心的，亲戚朋友因此可以侥幸得利或免罪，索贿受贿之事，大小官员都有。
English: Officials like Gong Cao are all treacherous, so relatives and friends can get lucky or be exonerated. Officials of all sizes solicit and accept bribes.

古文：必谓虎应功曹，是野中之虎常害人也。
现代文：一定要说老虎吃人是应和功曹的为非作歹，这就是说山野中的老虎时时刻刻都在伤害人了。
English: It must be said that tigers eat people according to their merits and demerits, which means that tigers in the mountains and fields are harming people all the time.

古文：夫虎出有时，犹龙见有期也。
现代文：老虎出没有一定的时间，好比龙隐现有一定的时间一样。
English: There is no definite time for the tiger to appear, just as there is no definite time for the dragon to disappear.

古文：阴物以冬见，阳虫以夏出。
现代文：阴物在冬天出现，阳虫在夏天出现。
English: The nymphs appear in the winter, the male worms in the summer.

古文：出应其气，气动其类。
现代文：阴物或阳虫的出现是应和阴气或阳气的，阴气和阳气能够分别感动它们的同类。
English: The appearance of yin or yang insects should be accompanied by yin or yang, and yin and yang can separately move their counterparts.

古文：参、伐以冬出，心、尾以夏见。
现代文：参宿中的伐星冬季出现，心宿、尾宿夏季出现。
English: The felling star in the middle of the roost appears in winter, and the heart and tail roosts appear in summer.

古文：参、伐则虎星，心、尾则龙象。
现代文：参、伐代表 白虎 ，心、尾代表 苍龙 。
English: The white tiger represents the middle and tail, and the dragon represents the heart and tail.

古文：象出而物见，气至而类动，天地之性也。
现代文：天上的星象出现了，地上和它相应的东西也就现身了。阴阳之气到来同类事物就相应感动，这是天地的本性。
English: When the stars in the sky appear, the corresponding things on the ground also appear. When the yin and yang qi arrives, similar things are correspondingly moved. This is the nature of heaven and earth.

古文：动於林泽之中，遭虎搏噬之时，禀性狂勃，贪叨饥饿，触自来之人，安能不食？
现代文：人行动于山林草泽之中，正遇上老虎在捕捉食物的时候，老虎本性凶狠残暴，因饥饿而特别贪婪，碰到自动走上来的人，怎么能不吃掉呢？
English: A man is moving through the mountains and forests when he encounters a tiger hunting for food. Tigers are ferocious and cruel by nature, and are particularly greedy due to hunger. When they encounter a man who comes up to them of his own accord, how can they not eat him?

古文：人之筋力，羸弱不适，巧便不知，故遇辄死。
现代文：人的筋力，瘦弱不敌于虎，灵巧敏捷也不如老虎，所以遇到老虎往往死于非命。
English: Human muscle strength, thinness and weakness are no match for tigers, and dexterity and agility are not as good as tigers, so when encountering tigers, they often die a violent death.

古文：使孟贲登山，冯妇入林，亦无此害也。
现代文：如果是孟贲登上山，冯妇进入森林，也就不会遭到这样的祸害了。
English: If Mencius had climbed the mountain, and Feng women had entered the forest, they would not have suffered such a calamity.

古文：孔子行鲁林中，妇人哭，甚哀，使子贡问之： 何以哭之哀也？ 
现代文：孔子行走在鲁国的山林之中，有位妇人在啼哭，哭得很悲哀。孔子让子贡去问妇人： 为什么事哭得这么悲哀？ 
English: When Confucius was walking in the forests of Lu, he came across a woman who was wailing and crying very sadly. Confucius asked Zigong to ask the woman: "Why are you crying so sadly?"

古文：曰： 去年虎食吾夫，今年食吾子，是以哭哀也。 
现代文：妇人说： 去年老虎吃了我的丈夫，今年又吃了我的儿子，因此哭得很伤心。 
English: The woman said, "Last year the tiger ate my husband, and this year it ate my son, so I cried a lot.

古文：子贡曰： 若此，何不去也？ 
现代文：子贡说： 既然如此，为什么不离开这里呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "In that case, why don't you leave?"

古文：对曰： 吾善其政之不苛、吏之不暴也。 
现代文：妇人回答说： 我喜欢这里的赋税徭役不繁重，官吏不贪暴。 
English: The woman replied, "I like that the taxes and duties here are not onerous, and the officials are not corrupt.

古文：子贡还报孔子。
现代文：子贡回来告诉了孔子。
English: Zigong came back and told Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 弟子识诸！
现代文：孔子说： 学生们要记住这件事情。
English: Confucius said: Students should remember this.

古文：苛政暴吏，甚於虎也。 夫虎害人，古有之矣。
现代文：繁重的赋税徭役和贪暴的官吏，比虎害更可怕！ 老虎伤害人，自古就有。
English: Heavy-duty tax collectors and corrupt officials are more terrible than the harm caused by tigers! Tigers have been harming people since ancient times.

古文：政不苛，吏不暴，德化之足以却虎。然而二岁比食二人，林中兽不应善也。
现代文：政令不繁酷，官吏不贪暴，这样的道德教化完全可以使老虎退却，然而两年中老虎连吃两个人，这说明山林中的猛兽是不会应和善政的。
English: Government decrees are not onerous, officials are not greedy, and such moral education can completely make tigers retreat. However, tigers have eaten two people in two years, which shows that the wild beasts in the mountains and forests are not amenable to good governance.

古文：为廉不应，奸吏亦不应矣。
现代文：既然对廉吏不应和，对奸吏也就不会应和了。
English: Since there should be no reconciliation with corrupt officials, there will be no reconciliation with traitors.

古文：或曰： 虎应功曹之奸，所谓不苛政者，非功曹也。
现代文：有人说： 老虎吃人只是应和功曹的为非作歹，这里所说的政令不繁酷，不是指功曹说的。
English: Some people said, "Tigers only eat people when they agree with Gong Cao's actions. The decree is not harsh and does not mean what Gong Cao said.

古文：妇人，廉吏之部也，虽有善政，安耐化虎？ 
现代文：妇人是廉吏统属的百姓，即使有善政，怎么能感化老虎呢？ 
English: Women are the common people subordinate to the corrupt officials. Even if there is a good government, how can they influence the tigers?

古文：夫鲁无功曹之官，功曹之官，相国是也。
现代文：鲁国没有功曹这样的官职，功曹一职由相国担任。
English: There is no official post of gong cao in Lu. The post of gong cao is held by the partner country.

古文：鲁相者殆非孔、墨，必三家也。为相必无贤操，以不贤居权位，其恶，必不廉也。
现代文：鲁国的 相 ，大概不是孔子、墨子这样的人，而一定是孟孙氏、叔孙氏、季孙氏三家的人，他们做相国，必不会有贤良的行为。以一个不贤良的人居于有权势的地位，他的恶劣品行使他一定不会廉洁。
English: The ruler of the State of Lu is probably not someone like Confucius or Mozi, but must be a member of the three families of Monsun, Shosun, and Ji Sun. If they are the ruler of the State of Lu, they will certainly not have virtuous behavior. If a non-virtuous person lives in a powerful position, he will certainly not be honest in his bad behavior.

古文：必以相国为奸，令虎食人，是则鲁野之虎常食人也。
现代文：如果一定要说由于 相国 作恶而使得老虎吃人，这就是说，鲁国山野中的老虎一定经常吃人了。
English: If it must be said that the tiger eats people because of the evil deeds of the other country, that is to say, the tigers in the mountains and fields of Lu must often eat people.

古文：水中之毒，不及陵上；陵上之气，不入水中；各以所近，罹殃取祸。
现代文：水中的毒，不会达到丘陵之上；丘陵的气，也不会进入水中。人们各自在附近的地方，遭殃受害。
English: The poison in the water does not reach the top of the hill, and the air from the hill does not enter the water. People are affected in their own neighborhoods.

古文：是故渔者不死於山，猎者不溺於渊。
现代文：因此打渔的人不会死在山上，打猎的人不会淹死在水中。
English: So fishermen don't die in the mountains, and hunters don't drown in the water.

古文：好入山林，穷幽测深，涉虎窟寝，虎搏噬之，何以为变？
现代文：喜好进入山林，钻到山林的极深处，走进了老虎居住的洞穴，老虎扑咬他，怎么就成了灾变呢？
English: He likes to go into the mountain forest, he drills into the depths of the mountain forest, he walks into the cave where the tiger lives, the tiger bites him, how can it be a catastrophe?

古文：鲁公牛哀病化为虎，搏食其兄，同变化者不以为怪。
现代文：鲁国的公牛哀因病变成了老虎，捕吃了他的兄长，因为他已经变得和老虎完全相同，人们也就不以为怪了。
English: Lu's bull, Meng Ying, turned into a tiger and ate his brother, because he had become exactly the same as the tiger, so people did not think it was strange.

古文：入山林草泽见害於虎，怪之非也。
现代文：进入山林草泽，被老虎所伤害，把它当成怪事，这就不对了。
English: It's not right to go into the forest and be mauled by a tiger and think it's strange.

古文：蝮蛇悍猛，亦能害入。
现代文：蝮蛇凶猛，也能伤害人。
English: Boa constrictors are ferocious and can hurt people.

古文：行止泽中，於蝮蛇，应何官吏？
现代文：走过山林草泽之中，被蝮蛇所伤害，此事应和什么样的官吏呢？
English: Walking through the mountains and forests, being hurt by a python, what kind of official should this matter with?

古文：蜂虿害人，入毒气害人，入水火害人。
现代文：蜂、蝎会伤害人，毒气会伤害人，水火会伤害人。
English: Bees and scorpions can hurt people, poison gas can hurt people, water and fire can hurt people.

古文：人为蜂虿所螫，为毒气所中，为火所燔，为水所溺，又谁致之者？
现代文：人被蜂蝎所螫，被毒气所侵，被火所烧，被水所淹，又是谁造成的呢？
English: People are stung by wasps and scorpions, attacked by poison gas, burned by fire, flooded by water, and who caused it?

古文：苟诸禽兽，乃应吏政。行山林中，麋鹿、野猪、牛象、熊罢、豺狼、蜼蠼，皆复杀人。
现代文：如果说只有禽兽才应和官吏的苛政，在山林中行走，麋鹿、野猪、牛、象、熊、罴、豺、狼、蜼、蠼等同样都会伤害人。
English: If it is said that only animals should walk in the mountains and forests in accordance with the harsh policies of officials, then elk, wild boar, cattle, elephants, bears, lynxes, jackals, wolves, badgers, martens, etc. will also harm people.

古文：苟谓食人乃应为变。蚤虱闽虻皆食人，人身强大，故不至死。
现代文：如果说只有吃了人才是应和苛政算成灾变，那么蚤、虱、蚊、虻都吸人血，人的身体强大，所以不至于会死。
English: If it is said that only those who have eaten human beings can be counted as a catastrophe, then fleas, ticks, mosquitoes, and maggots all suck human blood, and the human body is strong, so it will not die.

古文：仓卒之世，谷食之贵，百姓饥饿，自相啖食，厥变甚於虎。变复之家，不处苟政。
现代文：动乱年代，粮食缺乏，物价昂贵，百姓饥饿，互相残食，那种灾变比老虎吃人更可怕，专为消灾而祈祷的人却不把它归结为是由苛政所造成的。
English: In times of turmoil, when food is scarce and prices are high, when people are starving and eating each other's leftovers, when the cataclysm is more terrible than a tiger eating a man, those who pray specifically for the elimination of the disaster do not attribute it to the harsh government.

古文：且虎所食，非独人也，含血之禽，有形之兽，虎皆食之。
现代文：况且老虎所吃的，不仅仅是人，有血肉形体的飞禽走兽，虎都可以吃它们。
English: Moreover, what tigers eat is not only people, but also flesh-and-blood birds and beasts. Tigers can eat them all.

古文：人谓应功曹之奸，食他禽兽，应何官吏？
现代文：老虎吃人，说是应和了功曹的为非作歹，吃其他禽兽，应和什么样的官吏呢？
English: When a tiger eats a human, it is said that it should do what is right and not what is wrong. When it eats other animals, what kind of official should it be?

古文：夫虎，毛虫；人，倮虫。
现代文：老虎是毛虫，人是倮虫。
English: Tigers are caterpillars, humans are aphids.

古文：毛虫饥，食倮虫，何变之有？
现代文：毛虫饥饿了，就吃掉倮虫，这有什么灾变呢？
English: When the caterpillar is hungry, it eats the aphid. What kind of catastrophe is this?

古文：四夷之外，大人食小人，虎之与蛮夷，气性一也。
现代文：四夷居住的地区，大人吃小人，老虎与蛮夷，气质特性是一样的。
English: In the areas inhabited by the barbarians, the adults eat the villains, the tigers eat the barbarians, and the temperament characteristics are the same.

古文：平陆、广都，虎所不由也；山林、草泽，虎所生出也。
现代文：平原和大都市，是老虎不经过的地方，山林草泽，是老虎生活出没的地方。
English: The plains and big cities are places where tigers do not pass, and the mountains, forests and grasslands are places where tigers live.

古文：必以虎食人应功曹之奸，是则平陆、广都之县，功曹常为贤，山林、草泽之邑功曹常伏诛也。
现代文：一定要把老虎吃人说成是应和功曹的为非作歹，这样说来，那么平原大都市的地方，功曹经常是贤明的；山林草泽的地方，功曹经常该伏法了。
English: It is necessary to make the tiger-eating man into a person who should and should not do evil to the gong cao. In this way, the gong cao is often wise in the plains and big cities; in the mountains and forests, the gong cao should always be submissive.

古文：夫虎食人於野，应功曹之奸，虎时入邑行於民间，功曹游於闾巷之中乎？
现代文：如果说老虎在山野吃人，是应和功曹的为非作歹，老虎有时进入城镇，在百姓中间行走，这是应和功曹在大街小巷走来走去吗？
English: If it is said that tigers eat people in the mountains and fields, is it necessary to do evil with the gong cao? If tigers sometimes enter towns and walk among the people, is it necessary to walk around with the gong cao?

古文：实说，虎害人於野不应政，其行都邑，乃为怪。
现代文：照实说来，老虎在野外伤害人，不应和政治的得失，老虎行走在城镇，才是怪事。
English: To tell the truth, it is strange that tigers should injure people in the wild, and there should be no political gains or losses, but tigers walk in towns.

古文：夫虎，山林之兽，不狎之物也，常在草野之中，不为驯畜，犹人家之有鼠也，伏匿希出，非可常见也。
现代文：老虎是山林中的野兽，是不可亲近的东西。它常在草野之中，不为人们所驯服和豢养。好比人家户有了老鼠，隐藏起来很少出现。
English: The tiger is a wild beast in the mountains and forests, and it is something that cannot be approached. It is often found in the grasslands, and cannot be tamed and raised by people. It is like a mouse in a household, and it rarely appears when it is hidden.

古文：命吉居安，鼠不扰乱；禄衰居危，鼠为殃变。
现代文：命运吉利又处于平安之时，老鼠不会扰乱；禄命衰微，又处于倒霉之时，老鼠就会成为灾变的征兆。
English: When fortune is good and there is peace, the rat will not disturb it; when fortune is fading and there is misfortune, the rat will become a sign of disaster.

古文：夫虎亦然也：邑县吉安，长吏无患，虎匿不见；长吏且危，则虎入邑，行於民间。
现代文：老虎也同样如此，地方上吉利安定，长官没有祸患，老虎隐藏不出现，长官将要出现危难，老虎就进入城镇，在百姓中间行走。
English: The same is true of the tiger. The land is auspicious and stable. The magistrate has no misfortune. The tiger hides and does not appear. The magistrate will be in danger. The tiger enters the town and walks among the people.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：长吏光气已消，都邑之地与野均也。
现代文：长官的精神之气已经离开形体而消失了，他所在的都市城镇便变得和旷野一样。
English: The spirit of the chief has left the body and disappeared, and his city and town have become like the wilderness.

古文：推此以论，虎所食人，亦命时也。
现代文：以此推论，老虎所吃的人，也是命运时运所决定了的。
English: By this reasoning, the fate of the person eaten by the tiger is also determined by fate.

古文：命讫时衰，光气去身，视肉犹尸也，故虎食之。
现代文：命运完结时运衰微，精神之气离开了身体，这个人的肉体看起来就和死尸一样，所以老虎要吃他。
English: At the end of a man's life, his fortunes decline, his spirit leaves his body, and his body looks like a corpse, so the tiger wants to eat him.

古文：天道偶会，虎适食人，长吏遭恶，故谓为变，应上天矣。
现代文：自然之道正好凑在一起，老虎正好吃人，长官正好处在倒霉之中，所以就把老虎吃人说成是灾变应和了功曹的苛政了。
English: The forces of nature just happened to come together, the tiger just happened to eat a man, and the governor was in the midst of misfortune, so the tiger eating a man was seen as a cataclysm and the result of Gong Cao's harsh government.

古文：古今凶验，非唯虎也，野物皆然。
现代文：从古至今凶险的征兆，不仅仅是老虎，凡野生动物都是如此。
English: From ancient times to the present, signs of danger have been seen not only in tigers, but in all wild animals.

古文：楚王英宫楼未成，鹿走上阶，其後果薨。
现代文：楚王刘英的宫楼尚未修完，野鹿跑上宫殿台阶，事后刘英果然死了。
English: The palace of Liu Ying, King of Chu, had not yet been completed. A wild deer ran up the palace steps, and Liu Ying died as a result.

古文：鲁昭公且出，瞿鹆来巢，其後季氏逐昭公，昭公奔齐，遂死不还。
现代文：鲁昭公将要逃亡，鸜鹆飞来鲁国筑窝，事后季孙氏赶走了鲁昭公，昭公逃到齐国，于是死在那儿再也没有回来。
English: Lu Zhaogong was about to flee, Zhai flew to Lu to build a nest, after which the Qisun clan drove Lu Zhaogong away, and Zhaogong fled to Qi, where he died and never returned.

古文：贾谊为长沙王傅，鹏鸟集舍，发书占之，曰： 主人将去。 
现代文：贾谊贬为长沙王太傅时，鵩鸟飞进他的住宅，他打开策数书占卜，书上说： 主人将要离开这里。 
English: When Jia Yi was demoted to Changsha Wang Taifu, an ostrich flew into his house. He opened a divination book and read: "My master is about to leave this place."

古文：其後迁为梁王傅。
现代文：事后他升迁为梁怀王太傅。
English: He was later promoted to Liang Huai Wang Taifu.

古文：怀王好骑，坠马而薨；贾谊伤之，亦病而死。
现代文：怀王好骑马，坠马而死，贾谊很悲伤，也生病死了。
English: Huai Wang loved to ride horses and died after falling from a horse. Jia Yi was very sad and also died of illness.

古文：昌邑王时，夷鸪鸟集宫殿下，王射杀之，以问郎中令龚遂，龚遂对曰： 夷鸪野鸟，入宫，亡之应也。 
现代文：昌邑王之时，夷鸪鸟停落在宫殿下，昌邑王用箭射杀这些鸟，并把这件事询问郎中令龚遂。龚遂回答说： 夷鸪是野鸟，飞入宫中，是死亡的征兆。 
English: During the reign of King Chang-i, the egrets stopped at the foot of the palace. King Chang-i shot the birds with arrows and asked his son-in-law, So So, about it. So So replied, "The egrets are wild birds, flying into the palace is a sign of death."

古文：其後昌邑王竟亡。
现代文：事后，昌邑王果然死了。
English: After the incident, Changyi Wang did indeed die.

古文：卢奴令田光与公孙弘等谋反，其且觉时，狐鸣光舍屋上，光心恶之。其後事觉坐诛。
现代文：卢奴县令田光与公孙弘等人参与谋反，谋反事将要被查觉时，狐狸在田光的屋顶上鸣叫，田光心里很厌恶，以后事情被发觉而获罪处死。
English: Lunu County ordered Tian Guang and Gongsun Hong and others to participate in the conspiracy. When the conspiracy was about to be discovered, the fox chirped on the roof of Tian Guang. Tian Guang was disgusted. Later, the matter was discovered and he was convicted and executed.

古文：会稽东部都尉礼文伯时，羊伏下，其後迁为东莱太守。
现代文：礼文伯任会稽郡东部都尉时，羊伏在他的官厅下，事后他升迁为东莱郡太守。
English: When Li Wenbo was appointed as the eastern captain of Caijing County, Yang Hui was under his office. Later, he was promoted to the governor of Donglai County.

古文：都尉王子凤时，麇入府中，其後迁丹阳太守。
现代文：王子凤任都尉时，獐子跑进都尉府中，事后他升迁为丹阳太守。
English: When Prince Feng was appointed captain, Zizi ran into the captain's office, and later he was promoted to Danyang governor.

古文：夫吉凶同占，迁免一验，俱象空亡，精气消去也。
现代文：同是野物来临的征兆，但有吉有凶，同属一类的占验，却有升官有免职，都象征人去屋空，精神之气离开了人体。
English: The same is the sign of the coming of wild animals, but there are good luck and bad luck, the same kind of divination, but there are promotions and dismissals, all symbolizing that people go to the roof, and the spirit leaves the human body.

古文：故人且亡也，野鸟入宅；城且空也，草虫入邑。
现代文：所以人将要死了，野鸟飞进住宅；城将要空了，野物进入城镇。
English: Therefore men shall die, and the fowls of the air shall come into the houses; the city shall be deserted, and the beasts of the field shall enter into the city.

古文：等类众多，行事比肩，略举较著，以定实验也。
现代文：诸如此类实在太多，已有的事例列举不完，略为列举较为显著的事例，用以断定作为变异现象的野物实际上验证的是什么。
English: There are too many examples of this kind to enumerate them all, but here are a few of the more prominent ones to show what the wild animal, as a phenomenon of variation, actually testifies to.

