古文：还自卫，三卿宴于蓝台，智襄子戏韩康子而侮段规。
现代文：智襄子从卫国返回晋国，与韩康子、魏桓子三位卿在蓝台宴会，智襄子戏弄韩康子还侮辱段规。
English: Zhi Xiangzi returned to Jin from the old country, and had a banquet with Han Kangzi and Wei Huanzi at the Blue Table. Zhi Xiangzi teased Han Kangzi and insulted Duan Gui.

古文：智伯国闻之，谏曰： 主不备，难必至矣。 
现代文：智伯国听说后，劝谏说： 主人若不防备的话，灾难必然临头。 
English: After hearing this, Zhi Bo Guo said to Zhu Xi: "If the master does not take precautions, disaster will inevitably come."

古文：曰： 难将由我，我不为难，谁敢兴之！ 
现代文：智襄子说： 是不是有灾难要看我，我不发难，谁敢对我发难呢！ 
English: Zhi Xiangzi said: Is there a calamity to see me, I do not make difficulties, who dares to make difficulties for me!

古文：对曰： 异于是。
现代文：智伯国说： 恐怕不是这样。
English: Zhi Bo Guo said: I'm afraid that's not the case.

古文：夫郤氏有车辕之难，赵有孟姬之谗，栾有叔祁之愬，范、中行有亟治之难，皆主之所知也。
现代文：郤氏遭受车辕之难，赵氏被孟姬进谗言致死，栾盈被母亲叔祁诉说他想作乱，范氏、中行氏在亟治被杀害，这些都是主人所知道的。
English: Mr. Zou suffered from the difficulties of the chariot race, Mr. Zhao was killed by Meng Jizhong's slander, Ms. Yu Ying was told by her mother's uncle that he wanted to make a riot, Mr. Fan and Mr. Zhong Xing were killed in the crackdown, all of which were known to the owner.

古文：《夏书》有之曰： 一人三失，怨岂在明？
现代文：《夏书》上有句话说： 一个人屡犯过失，结下的怨毒不在明处。
English: There is a saying in the "Summer Book": A person repeatedly commits mistakes, and the bitterness is not obvious.

古文：不见是图。 
现代文：应当在还不显露时就加以防范。 
English: It should be prevented while it is not yet apparent.

古文：《周书》有之曰： 怨不在大，亦不在小。 
现代文：《周书》上有句话说： 怨恨不在于大，也不在于小。 
English: There is a saying in the "Weekly Bulletin": Grudges are neither big nor small.

古文：夫君子能勤小物，故无大患。
现代文：君子能注意小事情，因此没有大的患难。
English: A gentleman can pay attention to small things, so there is no big trouble.

古文：今主一宴而耻人之君相，又弗备，曰 不敢兴难 ，无乃不可乎？
现代文：如今主人在一次宴会上就羞辱了人家的君主和国相，又不加戒备，还说他们 不敢发难 ，这恐怕不行吧？
English: Now the host has humiliated someone's monarch and minister of state at a banquet, without warning, and said that they dare not make trouble, I'm afraid that's not possible, is it?

古文：夫谁不可喜，而谁不可惧？
现代文：谁不可以让人高兴，而谁又不令人惧怕呢？
English: Who is not allowed to make people happy, and who is not scary?

古文：蜹蚁蜂虿，皆能害人，况君相乎！ 
现代文：连蚊子、蚂蚁、黄蜂、蝎子都能害人，更何况是君主、国相呢！ 
English: Even mosquitoes, ants, wasps and scorpions can harm people, not to mention monarchs and ministers of state!

古文：弗听。
现代文：但是智襄子不听劝告。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：自是五年，乃有晋阳之难。
现代文：从这之后五年，就发生了晋阳之难。
English: Five years after that, the Battle of Jinyang happened.

古文：段规反，首难，而杀智伯于师，遂灭智氏。
现代文：段规回国后，首先策划发难，在军中杀了智伯，于是消灭了智氏。
English: After Duan Gui returned to China, he first planned the attack, killed Zhi Bo in the army, and then eliminated the Zhi clan.

