古文：吴道玄冯绍正张藻陈闳韦无忝卢棱伽毕宏净域寺资圣寺老君庙
现代文：吴道玄冯绍正张藻陈闳韦无忝卢棱伽毕宏净域寺资圣寺老君庙
English: Wu Daoxuan, Feng Shao Zheng, Zhang Mo, Chen Zhen, Wei Wu Zhen, Lu Ren, Gaba Hong, Pure Land Temple, Zi Sheng Temple, Laojun Temple

古文：金桥图崔圆壁
现代文：金桥图崔圆壁
English: The Golden Bridge and the Circular Wall

古文：吴道玄
现代文：吴道玄
English: Wu Daoxuan

古文：唐吴道玄字道子，阳翟人也。少孤贫。
现代文：唐朝人吴道玄，字道子，阳翟人，小时候是个贫穷的孤儿。
English: Wu Daoxuan, a man of the Tang Dynasty, was a poor orphan when he was a child.

古文：天授之性，年未弱冠，穷丹青之妙。
现代文：吴道玄成为一名著名的画家，是上天给他的这种才能。
English: Wu Daoxuan became a famous painter. This talent was given to him by heaven.

古文：浪迹东洛，玄宗知其名，召入供奉。
现代文：他未长大成人就通晓绘画的奥妙，他在东都洛阳流浪，唐玄宗知道他擅长绘画的名声，将他召入宫中为皇家作画。
English: He was familiar with the mysteries of painting before he was an adult. He wandered around Luoyang, the eastern capital. Tang Xuan Zong knew of his reputation for being good at painting and invited him to the palace to paint for the royal family.

古文：大略宗师张僧繇千变万状，纵横过之。
现代文：吴道玄的画，大体上是师承张僧繇。但是他又发展，变化了张僧繇的画法。
English: Wu Daoxuan's painting is basically a disciple of Zhang Xiangyao, but he developed and changed Zhang Xiangyao's painting method.

古文：两都寺观，图画墙壁四十余间，变像即同，人相诡状，无一同者。
现代文：不论从那方面看，都超过了张僧繇。吴道玄为东都洛阳、西都长安的佛寺、道观，绘制了四十多间壁画，都是菩萨，鬼怪一类的画。但是每幅画上的人物形像诡谲，而且一人一相，没有雷同的。
English: Wu Daoxuan is the leader of the Buddhist temples and Taoist temples in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and Chang'an, the western capital, and has painted more than forty murals, all of which are paintings of bodhisattvas and ghosts. However, the figures in each painting are eerily similar, and each person has a unique look.

古文：其见在为人所睹之妙者。
现代文：是当今人们能看到的，这类题材的画当中画得最好的。
English: It is the best of its kind that can be seen today.

古文：上都兴唐寺御注金刚经院，兼自题经文。
现代文：京都长安兴唐寺中保存皇帝亲自注释的《金刚经》的宅院，这里的壁画也是吴道玄画的，并且上面的经文也是他题写的。
English: The mural here is also painted by Wu Daoxuan, and the above verses are also inscribed by him.

古文：慈恩寺塔前面文殊普贤，西面降魔盘龙等。又小殿前门菩萨，景公寺地狱帝释龙神，永寿寺中三门两神，皆绝妙当时。
现代文：慈恩寺塔前面的文殊、普贤二位菩萨，西面的降魔、盘龙等图像，小殿前门的菩萨；景公寺《地狱图》中的帝释护法神；永寿寺中山门上的两神，都是当时最绝妙的艺术品。
English: The two bodhisattvas Monju and Fugen in front of the tower of Jion-ji Temple, the images of demons and pan dragons on the west side, the bodhisattva at the front door of the small hall, the god of protection and protection of the Dharma in the "Hell Map" of Gyeonggung-ji Temple, and the two gods on the Zhongshan Gate of Yeongju-ji Temple were the most wonderful works of art at that time.

古文：朱景玄云：有旧家人尹老八十余，尝云： 见吴生画中门内神，圆光最在后，一笔成。
现代文：朱景玄曾经讲过这样一件事：我家有位姓尹的老仆人，大约有八十多岁了。一次，这位老仆人讲，他亲眼见到吴道玄给我家宗庙中门画家神时，最后画头顶的圆轮佛光时，一笔就画成了。当时。
English: Zhu Jingxuan once talked about such a thing: My family has an old servant surnamed Yin, who is about eighty years old. Once, this old servant said that when he personally saw Wu Daoxuan painting the gods of the middle gate of my family's temple, and when he finally painted the round Buddha light at the top of his head, he painted it with a single stroke. At that time.

古文：当时坊市老幼，日数百人，竟候观之。
现代文：街坊邻里的老老少少都来观看。每天有好几百人，都挤在那儿等候看见吴先生作画。
English: Every day, hundreds of people crowd there, waiting to see Mr. Wu paint.

古文：缚阑。施钱帛与之齐。
现代文：为了维持秩序，前面拦上绳索。
English: In order to maintain order, a rope is tied in front.

古文：及下笔之时，望者如堵。
现代文：观看的人纷纷布施钱物给吴先生。等到吴先生下笔绘画时，围观的人挤成了一堵墙。
English: Onlookers gave money and gifts to Mr. Wu. By the time Mr. Wu finished painting, the crowd had formed into a wall.

古文：风落电转，规成月圆，宣呼之声，惊动坊邑。
现代文：只见吴先生长笔一挥，如同风过电转，转瞬间，在家神头顶上画出一个如圆月般的圆轮金光。人们的赞叹叫好声惊动了整个街区。
English: Mr. Wu's long stroke of a pen was like the wind passing through electricity, and in an instant, he drew a round golden light like a full moon on the top of the head of the God of the Home. People's applause shocked the entire block.

古文：或谓之神也。
现代文：有的人称吴道玄为天神。
English: Some people call Wu Daoxuan a god.

古文：又景公寺老僧玄纵云：吴生画此地狱变成之后，都人咸观，皆惧罪修善。
现代文：还有一位景公寺的老僧人玄纵说：吴先生画成这个寺院的《地狱图》后，京都里的人都来观看。
English: There is also an old monk of Gyeonggung Temple, Genshong, who said: After Mr. Wu painted the "hell map" of this temple, people in Kyoto came to watch.

古文：两市屠沾，鱼肉不售。又开元中驾幸东洛。
现代文：看后都惧怕死后进到地狱中受到惩罚而修善行，两市的屠夫商贩都不卖鱼肉了，怕因为杀生而获罪。
English: Butchers and traders in both cities have stopped selling fish and meat for fear of being punished for killing animals.

古文：吴生与裴旻、张旭相遇，各陈所能。
现代文：开元年间，唐玄宗驾临东都洛阳时，吴道玄与裴旻、张旭相遇在一起，各自展示自己的绝艺。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, when Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty arrived in the eastern capital of Luoyang, Wu Daoxuan met with Pei Yao and Zhang Xu, and each of them showed their outstanding skills.

古文：裴剑舞一曲，张书一壁，吴画一壁。
现代文：裴旻舞了一曲剑，张旭书了一墙壁草书，吴道玄绘制了一幅壁画。
English: Pei Hao danced a sword dance, Zhang Xu wrote a wall cursive, and Wu Daoxuan painted a mural.

古文：都邑人士，一日之中，获覩三绝。
现代文：洛阳城中的朝野人士，一天中欣赏到三种绝艺。
English: The morning and evening people in the city of Luoyang can enjoy three kinds of masterpieces in one day.

古文：又画玄元庙，《五圣千官》。
现代文：吴道玄又给玄元庙作过壁画。
English: Wu Daoxuan also painted murals for the Xuan Yuan Temple.

古文：宫殿冠冕，势倾云龙，心若造化。故杜员外甫诗云：妙绝动宫墙也。
现代文：他在这里画的《五圣千官图》，画中的宫殿和唐高祖、太宗、高宗、中宗、睿宗及分列两厢的众位文武大臣头上的冠冕，胜过汉朝时的云龙，宫门上的绘画构思绘制的巧妙不凡，如同大自然自己创造出来的一样。
English: The "Five Sacred and Profane Figures" he painted here, the palace in the painting and the crowns on the heads of Tang Gaozu, Taizong, Gaozong, Zhongzong, Ruizong and the ministers of literature and martial arts, which are separated into two compartments, are better than the clouds and dragons in the Han Dynasty. The paintings on the palace gate are ingeniously conceived and painted, as if created by nature itself.

古文：又玄宗天宝中，忽思蜀中嘉陵江山水，遂假吴生驿递，令往写貌。
现代文：因此，诗人杜甫在诗中称赞道：神妙的手笔将宫墙画得象真的一样生动啊！唐玄宗天宝年间，皇上忽然思念蜀中的嘉陵江山水。于是发给吴道玄一道手令，让沿途驿站为他提供车马，载他去嘉陵江边去写生。
English: Therefore, the poet Du Fu praised in his poem: "Wonderful handwriting makes the palace wall as vivid as real!" During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor suddenly missed the scenery of the Jialing River in Shu. Therefore, he issued a warrant to Wu Daoxuan, asking the stations along the way to provide him with horses and carriages to take him to the edge of the Jialing River to paint life.

古文：及回日，帝问其状。
现代文：待到他返回京都后，玄宗皇帝问：此去怎么样？
English: After he returned to Kyoto, Emperor Xuanzong asked, "How about going here?"

古文：奏云：臣无粉本，并记在心。
现代文：请将嘉陵江山水的写生草本拿来让我看看。吴道玄回答说：我没有写生的草本，都记在心中了。
English: Please show me the sketched herbs of the Jialing River landscape. Wu Daoxuan replied: I don't have any sketched herbs, I have them all in my heart.

古文：遣于大同殿图之，嘉陵江三百里山水，一日而毕。
现代文：玄宗皇帝命令他在大同殿的墙壁上画出来。嘉陵江三百里锦山秀水，仅用一天时间就画完了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered him to draw it on the wall of the Datong Hall. The Jialing River, with its three hundred miles of beautiful scenery, was completed in just one day.

古文：时有李将军山水擅名，亦画大同殿壁，数月方毕。
现代文：当时以擅画山水画而名传京都的李思训将军，也在大同殿作壁画。他的这幅山水壁画用了好几个月的工夫才画完。
English: At that time, Kyoto's famous landscape painter, General Li Sishun, was also painting murals in the Datong Hall. It took him several months to complete this landscape mural.

古文：玄宗云：李思训数月之功，吴道玄一日之迹，皆极其妙也。
现代文：玄宗皇帝说：李思训将军花费好几个月的工夫绘完了一幅山水壁画，吴道玄仅用了一天时间就画完了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong said: General Li Sichen spent several months to complete a landscape mural, while Wu Daoxuan finished it in just one day.

古文：又画殿内五龙。
现代文：两幅壁画画的都好极了。吴道玄又在殿内画《五龙图》。
English: Both murals are excellent. Wu Daoxuan also painted "Five Dragons" in the hall.

古文：鳞甲飞动。每欲大雨，即生烟雾。
现代文：五条龙摇首摆尾，象要腾飞似的，每当天要下雨时，画上就生出烟雾来。
English: The five dragons shake their heads and wag their tails as if they were about to take flight. Every time it rains, smoke comes out of the painting.

古文：吴生常持金刚经，自此识本身。
现代文：吴道玄经常随身携带《金刚经》，从《金刚经》中认识他自身。
English: Wu Daoxuan often carries the Diamond Sutra with him and knows himself from the Diamond Sutra.

古文：当天宝中，有杨庭光与之齐名。
现代文：天宝年间，有个叫杨庭光的人，跟吴道玄齐名。
English: During the Tenpo era, there was a man named Yang Tingguang, who was as famous as Wu Daoxuan.

古文：潜画吴生真于讲席。
现代文：一次，杨庭光偷偷地给正在讲课的吴道玄画像。
English: On one occasion, Yang Tingguang surreptitiously gave Wu Daoxuan, who was giving a lecture, a picture.

古文：众人之中，引吴观之。
现代文：画好后当众拿给吴道玄看。
English: After the painting is done, show it to Wu Daoxuan in public.

古文：亦见便惊。语庭光云：老夫衰丑，何用图之。
现代文：吴道玄看到这幅画像后大吃一惊，对杨庭光说：我年老了，衰弱多病又长期丑陋，怎么好劳你驾来给我画像呢。
English: Wu Daoxuan was taken aback when he saw the picture and said to Yang Tingguang, "I am old, weak, sickly and ugly for a long time. Why don't you come and give me a picture?"

古文：因斯叹伏。
现代文：但是他非常叹服杨庭光画得确实好。
English: But he was very impressed with Yang Tingguang's really good drawing.

古文：其画人物、佛像、鬼神、禽兽、山水、台殿、草木，皆神妙也。国朝第一。
现代文：吴道玄画的人物、佛像、神鬼、鸟兽、山水、草木、台殿，都出神入化，是当时国内第一高手。
English: The characters, Buddha statues, gods and demons, birds and beasts, landscapes, plants and trees, and pedestals in Wu Dao's black-and-white paintings were all inspired, and he was the best in the country at the time.

古文：张怀瓘云：吴生画，张僧繇后身，斯言当矣。
现代文：张怀瓘说：吴先生的画，是张僧繇画法的延续，这种说法是恰当的啊！
English: Zhang Huaiyao said: Mr. Wu's painting is a continuation of Zhang Xiangyao's painting method, this statement is appropriate!

古文：又开元中，将军裴旻居母丧。
现代文：开元之年间，将军裴旻在家守母丧，到吴道玄那儿。
English: During the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, General Pei Jun, who was at home mourning his mother, went to Wu Daoxuan.

古文：诣道子，请于东都天宫寺画神鬼数壁，以资冥助。
现代文：请吴道玄为他在东都洛阳的天宫寺绘制几幅状写神鬼的壁画，用此来给在阴间的母亲求得神佛的保佑。
English: He asked Wu Daoxuan to paint several murals depicting gods and demons for him at Tiangong Temple in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and use them to seek the blessings of gods and Buddhas for his mother in the underworld.

古文：道子答曰：废画已久。
现代文：吴道子回答说：我已经很久不作画了。
English: Wu Daozi replied, "I haven't painted for a long time.

古文：若将军有意，为吾缠结。舞剑一曲。
现代文：如果将军真的有意请我作画，为我缠绸结作彩饰，请舞一曲剑。
English: If the general really intends to invite me to paint, to weave silk for me to decorate, please dance a sword dance.

古文：庶因猛励，就通幽冥。
现代文：或许因为你剑舞的勇猛凌厉，能让我的画重新跟阴界相通。
English: Perhaps because of your fierce sword dance, you can make my paintings reconnect with the underworld.

古文：旻于是脱去服，若常时装饰。走马如飞，左旋右抽，掷剑入云。高数＋丈，若电光下射。
现代文：裴旻听了后立即脱去丧服，换上平常穿的衣裳，骑在马上奔跑如飞，左右舞剑，将剑一下掷入空中，高几十丈，然后向电光一样射下来，裴旻伸手拿着剑鞘接着。
English: After hearing this, Pei Jun immediately took off his mourning clothes and put on his usual clothes. He ran like a bird on the horse, swung his sword from side to side, threw the sword into the air, several tens of meters high, and then shot it down like lightning. Pei Jun held out his hand and continued holding the scabbard.

古文：旻引手执鞘承之，剑透室而入。
现代文：从高空中坠落下来的宝剑，穿透了剑鞘。
English: The sword, which fell from the sky, pierced the scabbard.

古文：观者数千百人，无不惊況。
现代文：几千人围观，没有一个人不被这种惊险的场面所惊惧。
English: Several thousand people were in the audience, and no one was not frightened by this thrilling scene.

古文：道子于是援毫图壁，飒然风起，为天下之壮观。
现代文：吴道子于是挥笔在墙壁上作画，随着笔墨挥舞，飒飒地刮起了大风。这种壮观的情景是世上罕见的。
English: Wu Daozi then waved a pen to draw on the wall, and as he waved the pen and ink, a strong wind suddenly blew. This spectacular scene is rare in the world.

古文：道子平生所画。得意无出于此。
现代文：吴道子一生中画了许多画，他自认为得意的作品没有超过这幅的。
English: Wu Daozi painted many pictures in his life, but he did not consider himself to be good at more than this one.

古文：又道子访僧请茶。
现代文：一次，吴道子到一个寺院里去，向僧人讨杯茶喝，僧人没有理会他。
English: Once, Wu Daozi went to a temple to ask a monk for a cup of tea, but the monk ignored him.

古文：僧不加礼，遂请笔砚。于壁上画驴一头而去。
现代文：于是他要来笔墨，在寺院的墙壁上画了一头驴后，便离开了这个寺院。
English: So he took a brush and ink and drew a donkey on the walls of the temple, and then left the temple.

古文：一夜，僧房家具并踏破，被恼乱不可堪。
现代文：一天夜里，这个寺院僧人房里的家具都被踏坏，僧人又气又恼不堪忍受。
English: One night, the furniture in the monk's room of this monastery was all trampled down, and the monk was angry and annoyed beyond endurance.

古文：僧知是道子，恳邀到院祈求。乃涂却画处。
现代文：僧人知道这是吴道子在报复他们，恳切地邀请他来寺院里请求他原谅，吴道子才将壁上画的驴涂去。
English: The monks knew that it was Wu Daozi who was taking revenge on them, and earnestly invited him to come to the temple to ask his forgiveness. It was only then that Wu Daozi painted the donkey off the wall.

古文：又西明慈恩多名画。
现代文：西明慈恩寺内有许多名画。
English: There are many famous paintings in Ximing Ci'en Temple.

古文：慈思塔前壁有湿耳狮子趺心花，为时所重。
现代文：慈恩塔前壁有湿耳狮子趺心花，为当时人看重。
English: The front wall of the Tower of Compassion has a wet ear lion's mane heart flower, which was valued by people at that time.

古文：圣善敬爱，亦有古画。
现代文：敬爱父母的题材，也有古人在这里作的画。
English: The theme of honoring parents, there are also paintings made by the ancients here.

古文：圣善木塔院多郑广文画并书。
现代文：圣善木塔院，多是郑广文的绘画与题字。
English: Most of the paintings and inscriptions in the Shenzhen Wooden Pagoda are by Zheng Guangwen.

古文：敬爱山亭院有雉尾若真。砂子上有进士房鲁题名处。
现代文：敬爱山亭院画上的野鸡尾羽象真的一样，砂子上有进士房鲁的题名。
English: The pheasant's tail feathers on the painting of Jingai Mountain Pavilion are just like the real ones, and there is the title of Jin Shifang Lu on the sand.

古文：后有人题诗曰：姚家新婿是房郎，未解芳颜意欲狂。
现代文：后来有人题诗说：姚家的新姑爷是房郎，未有知道新娘是什么样子就心驰神摇了。
English: Later, someone wrote a poem saying: The new uncle of the Yao family is the steward, and without knowing what the bride looked like, his heart was shaken.

古文：见说正调穿羽箭，莫教射破寺家墙。
现代文：听说他正在调试穿羽箭呢，且莫让他的箭穿破寺院的墙啊。
English: I heard that he is trying out a feathered arrow, and he must not let his arrow pierce the walls of the temple.

古文：寺西北角有病龙院并吴画。
现代文：寺的西北角有病龙院和吴道子绘制的壁画。
English: In the northwest corner of the temple, there are murals painted by Ill Dragon Temple and Wu Daozi.

古文：冯绍正
现代文：冯绍正
English: Feng Shaozheng

古文：唐开元，关辅大旱。京师缺雨尤甚。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，关中一带大旱，京都长安雨水缺得尤其厉害。
English: During the first year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, there was a severe drought in the Guanzhong area, and the lack of rainwater in Kyoto Chang'an was particularly severe.

古文：亟命大臣遍祷于山泽间而无感应。
现代文：玄宗皇帝急迫地命令大臣们在各个山中和沼泽地带祈祷求雨，一点反应也没有。
English: Emperor Xuanzong urgently ordered his ministers to pray for rain in the mountains and swamps, but there was no response.

古文：上于龙池，新剏一殿。因召少府监冯绍正，令于四壁各图一龙。
现代文：玄宗皇帝命人在龙池旁边新造一座大殿，并召见少府监冯绍正，让他在新造的这座大殿的四面墙壁上各画一条龙。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered someone to build a new hall next to the Dragon Pool, and summoned the Young Prefect Feng Shao Zheng, asking him to paint a dragon on each of the four walls of the newly built hall.

古文：绍正乃先于西壁画素龙。奇状蜿蜒，如欲振跃。绘事未半，若风云随笔而生。
现代文：冯绍正先在西墙上画一条白龙，形状奇特蜿蜒欲飞，没画到一半，似乎有风云随着笔的挥动而产生。
English: Feng Shao is first drawing a white dragon on the west wall. The shape is strangely sinuous and wants to fly. Before he is halfway through, it seems that a storm is brewing with the wave of the pen.

古文：上及从官于壁下观之，鳞甲皆湿，设色未终，有白气若檐庑间出，入于池中。
现代文：玄宗皇上和侍从官们在壁下观看，龙身上的鳞片都湿了。着色还未完，有白气好象从厅堂的屋檐下飘出来，进入龙池中。
English: Emperor Xuanzong and his attendants were watching under the wall. The scales on the dragon's body were wet. The coloring was not yet finished, and white gas seemed to float out from under the eaves of the hall and into the dragon pond.

古文：波涛汹涌，雷电随起。侍御数百人皆见白龙自波际，乘云气而上。
现代文：龙池中波涛汹涌，接着电闪雷鸣，伴随在皇上身边的几百名侍从人员，都看见了一条白龙从龙池水中，乘着云气上升腾飞到天上。
English: The waves in the Dragon Pool were turbulent, followed by lightning and thunder. The hundreds of attendants accompanying the emperor all saw a white dragon rise from the water of the Dragon Pool and soar into the sky on the clouds.

古文：俄顷阴雨四布，风雨暴作。不终日而甘泽遍于畿内。
现代文：不一会儿阴云布满四周围，风雨暴作，不到一天的工夫整个京都地区都普遍下了一场雨。
English: Within a short time, dark clouds spread all around, storms raged, and in less than a day's time, the entire Kyoto area was hit by widespread rain.

古文：张藻
现代文：张藻
English: Algae

古文：唐张藻衣冠文学，时之名流。
现代文：唐朝人张藻是文学士子，当时的社会名流。
English: Zhang Mo, a person from the Tang Dynasty, was a scholar of literature and a social celebrity at that time.

古文：松石山水，擅当代名。
现代文：他在绘画松、石、山、水方面，在当时很有名气。
English: He was famous at the time for his paintings of pine trees, rocks, mountains and water.

古文：唯松树特出古今。
现代文：他画的松树，奇特超过古今的名家高手。
English: His paintings of pine trees surpass those of famous artists of the past and present.

古文：能用笔，常以手握双管，亦一时齐下。
现代文：张藻会用笔，常常手握双笔，双笔齐下。
English: Zhang Sao would use a pen, often holding two pens in his hand, both at the same time.

古文：一为生枝，一为枯枝。
现代文：一画生枝，一画枯枝。
English: One drawing of a live branch, one drawing of a dead branch.

古文：气傲烟雾，势逾风雨。
现代文：神韻傲视烟雾，气势超过风雨。
English: Shen Yun is proud of the smoke, the momentum exceeds the wind and rain.

古文：其槎枿鳞皴之质，随意纵横。
现代文：画松枝和松干上的鳞片时，看他就象随便往上涂抹似的。
English: When he draws the scales on pine branches and trunks, it looks as if he is simply smearing them on.

古文：生枝则润合春泽，枯枝则干裂秋风。
现代文：然而，画出来的生枝，象经过春雨的滋润一样；画出来的枯枝，则象让肃杀的秋风给吹裂了似的。
English: However, the painted branches look as if they have been moistened by the spring rain; the painted dead branches look as if they have been cracked by the harsh autumn wind.

古文：其山水之状，则高低秀绝，咫尺深重。石突欲落，泉喷如吼。
现代文：张藻画的山水画，山势有高有低峻秀极了。咫尺大的地方，山岩深重，巨石突兀欲落，泉水喷涌仿佛发出鸣声。
English: Zhang Mo's landscape paintings, the mountains are high and low, and they are extremely beautiful. In places as large as a foot, the mountain rocks are deep, the boulders are jutting and falling, and the spring water gushes out as if it were singing.

古文：其近也逼人而寒，其远也极天之净。
现代文：你离它近了寒气逼人，离远了给人象天际一样清净的感觉。
English: When you are close to it, the air is chilly, and when you are far away, it feels as clear as the sky.

古文：图障在人间最多。
现代文：张藻画的屏风在世间留存最多。
English: Zhang Sao's folding screens are the most preserved in the world.

古文：今宝应寺西院山水松石，具有题记。精巧之迹也。
现代文：现在宅应寺西院还有他画的山水松石，旁边还有他的题记，乃是精巧的墨迹。
English: Today, the West Courtyard of Yakyo-ji Temple still has the landscape and pines that he painted, as well as his inscription next to it, which is an elaborate ink blot.

古文：松石山水，并居神品。
现代文：张藻画的松、石、山、水，都已达到出神入化的境界，都是精妙的艺术品。
English: The pines, rocks, mountains, and water in Zhang Mo's paintings have all reached the realm of inspiration, and are all exquisite works of art.

古文：又后士人家有张藻松石障。
现代文：后来有一位知识人家有张藻画的松石屏风。
English: Later, there was an intellectual who had a pine screen painted by Zhang Cao.

古文：士人云：兵部李员外约好画成癖，知而购之。
现代文：这个人说：兵部员外郎李约爱画成癖，知道后购买了去。
English: This person said: Li Youai, the son-in-law of a member of the military, has a habit of drawing, and he bought it after he knew about it.

古文：其家弱妻，已练为衣里矣。唯得两幅，双栢一石在焉。
现代文：他的年轻妻子，已经将屏风画蒸煮漂白后作衣服里子了，只剩下一栢一石两幅了。
English: His young wife had already boiled and bleached the screen paintings to make the lining of the dress, and only one frame and two stones were left.

古文：嗟惋久之。
现代文：李约感叹惋惜了很长时间。
English: Li You lamented and regretted for a long time.

古文：陈闳
现代文：陈闳
English: Chen Yao

古文：唐陈闳，会稽人。
现代文：唐朝陈闳，会稽人。
English: Tang Dynasty Chen Xi, auditor.

古文：以能写真人物子女等，本道荐之，玄宗开元中召入供奉。每令写御客，妙绝当时。
现代文：因为他能够绘画男女人物画像而由本地道府推荐，在开元年间被唐玄宗召入宫内主给皇家作画，每次奉命为皇上绘画的像，都是当时最好的画像。
English: Because of his ability to paint male and female figures, he was recommended by the local prefectural government. In the early 1900s, he was called by Emperor Tang Xuanzong to the palace to paint the royal portrait. Every time he was ordered to paint the emperor's portrait, it was the best image at the time.

古文：玄宗射猪鹿兔、按鹰等，并按舞图真容，皆受诏写貌。
现代文：唐玄宗狩猎射野猪、麇鹿、野兔，驾鹰等场面，和按乐起舞的场面，陈闳都受皇上的诏令将它们绘画下来。
English: The scenes of Tang Xuan Zong hunting and shooting wild boar, elk, hare, and driving eagles, as well as the scenes of dancing to music, were all painted down by the emperor's edict.

古文：又太清宫肃宗真容。
现代文：太清宫的唐肃宗的画像也是陈闳绘制的。
English: The image of the Tang Su Sect in the Taiqing Palace was also painted by Chen Yu.

古文：匪唯龙头凤姿，日角月宇之状。而笔力遒润，风彩英逸，合符应瑞。
现代文：陈闳不只将皇上、嫔妃们的丰彩画下来，而且他们的福贵相也逼真的表现出来。他的笔力遒劲、润韫，画出的人物风彩英俊飘逸，而且符合应验的祥瑞。
English: Chen Yao not only painted the emperors and empresses in rich colors, but also vividly showed their happy and dignified faces. His brushstrokes are vigorous and smooth, and the characters he drew are handsome and elegant, and they are in line with the auspiciousness of fulfillment.

古文：天假其能也。
现代文：这是上天赋于他的才能啊。
English: It's a gift he was born with.

古文：国朝阎令公之后，一人而已。
现代文：在本朝的阎立本之后，陈闳可算是最擅长画人物像的第一高手了。
English: After Yan Liben of this dynasty, Chen Xi can be said to be the first master who is best at painting portraits.

古文：今咸宜观天尊殿内画上仙图及当时供奉道士等真，皆其踪也。
现代文：现在的咸宜观天尊殿内的仙人壁画，和供奉的道士的画像，都是陈闳的手笔啊。
English: The mural paintings of hermits in the hall of the Temple of Heaven in Hamgyong and the images of Taoist priests are all the work of Chen Yao.

古文：又曾为故吏部侍郎徐画本行经幡二口。有女能织成，妙绝无并。
现代文：陈闳还曾为已故吏部徐侍郎画德行经幡二口，其中的女经幡能织，没有比这再绝妙的了。
English: Chen Yao also once painted two copies of the Sutra of Virtue and Conduct for the late cadre Xu Jiulang, one of which was a female sutra banner. There is nothing more wonderful than this.

古文：唯写真人神人物子女等，妙品上上。
现代文：陈闳的画，只画男女人物、神人的画像，是最精妙的上乘之作。
English: Chen Yao's paintings, depicting only male and female figures and images of gods, are the most exquisite and superior works.

古文：韦无忝
现代文：韦无忝
English: Wei Wuzhong

古文：唐韦无忝，京兆人也。
现代文：唐朝人韦无忝，是京都地区人。
English: Wei Wuzhong, a Tang Dynasty person, is from Kyoto.

古文：玄宗朝，以画马异兽擅其名。
现代文：唐玄宗在位时，因为能画马和奇异的野兽而闻名。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, he was famous for being able to draw horses and strange beasts.

古文：时称韦画四足，无不妙也。
现代文：当时称赞韦无忝的画说：韦无忝画的四脚动物，没有不好的。
English: At that time, he praised Wei Wuxuan's paintings, saying: "There are no bad four-footed animals in Wei Wuxuan's paintings.

古文：曾见貌外国所献狮子，酷似其真。
现代文：韦无忝曾经画过外国人进献的狮子，跟其狮非常相象。
English: Wei Wuxuan once drew a lion donated by a foreigner, which was very similar to his own lion.

古文：后狮子放归本国，唯画者在图，时因观览。
现代文：后来这头狮子又放回本国去了，只有它的像绘在画上，供当时的人欣赏。
English: Later, the lion was returned to its home country, only its image was painted on the painting, for the people of that time to enjoy.

古文：百兽见之皆惧。
现代文：百兽见了画上的狮子都惊恐惧怕。
English: All the animals were terrified when they saw the lion in the painting.

古文：又玄宗时猎，一箭中两野猎。
现代文：有一次，唐玄宗狩猎时一箭射中两只野猎。
English: Once, when Tang Xuan Zong was hunting, he shot two wild boars with one arrow.

古文：诏于玄武北门写貌。
现代文：玄宗非常高兴，诏令韦无忝在玄武门画玄宗一箭射杀双猪的场面。
English: Xuanzong was very happy. He ordered Wei Wuzhen to paint the scene of Xuanzong shooting two pigs with one arrow at the Xuanzong Gate.

古文：传在人间，英妙之极也。
现代文：这幅画后来流传在民间，画得好极了。
English: This painting was later circulated among the people, and it was extremely well done.

古文：夫以百兽之性。
现代文：百兽有百性。
English: All beasts have a hundred natures.

古文：有雄毅逸群之骏，有驯扰之良。
现代文：有雄悍刚毅群体奔驰的野马，有经人工驯养性情温顺的家养良马。
English: There are wild horses that are strong and courageous, and there are domesticated horses that have been tamed by artificial domestication.

古文：爪距既殊，毛鬣各异。
现代文：它们蹄爪不一样，毛鬃各不相同。
English: Their hooves and claws are different, and their coats are different.

古文：前辈或状其怒则张口，善则垂头。
现代文：前辈人画兽。或是画它发怒则张着口，画它温顺就垂下头。
English: The previous generation painted beasts. If they were angry, their mouths were open, if they were docile, their heads were down.

古文：若展一笔以辨其性情，奋一毛而知其名字，古所未能也，韦公能之。
现代文：然而，只画一笔就能让人辨识它的性情，只画它的一根鬃毛就让人知道它的名称，以前的古人是做不到的，只有韦无忝能有这么高的造诣。
English: However, only one brushstroke can make people recognize its temperament, and only one bristle can make people know its name. The ancients could not do it before, and only Wei Muxuan can have such a high level of accomplishment.

古文：《异兽图》破分。人家往往有之。
现代文：韦无忝画的《异兽图》，打破常例，京都人家往往都有。
English: Wei Wuxuan's painting "Strange Beast," breaking the norm, is often found in Kyoto homes.

古文：京都寺观无画处。
现代文：京都的寺观没有韦无忝《异兽图》的。
English: The view of temples in Kyoto is nothing like that depicted in "Stranger Things."

古文：其画兽等妙品上上。卢棱伽
现代文：韦无忝的画，以兽画为特别精妙的艺术品。卢棱伽
English: Wei Wuzhen's paintings, with animal paintings as particularly exquisite works of art. Lu Renjia

古文：唐卢棱伽，吴道玄弟子也。
现代文：唐朝人卢棱伽，是吴道玄的弟子。
English: Lu Renga, a Tang Dynasty man, was a disciple of Wu Daoxuan.

古文：画迹似吴，但才力有限。
现代文：他的画，形似吴道子的画，但是才力不及吴道子。
English: His paintings are similar in shape to those of Wu Daozi, but he is not as talented as Wu Daozi.

古文：颇能细画。
现代文：卢棱伽擅长工笔画。
English: Lu Renga is good at brushstrokes.

古文：咫尺间山水寥廓，物像精备。
现代文：他的画咫尺间，山水苍天，勾画特别细密精致。
English: His paintings are extraordinarily detailed and delicate, depicting the sky and the landscape in the blink of an eye.

古文：经变佛事，是其所长。
现代文：画佛经上说的佛祖、菩萨的画像，尤其是他的专长。
English: His specialty is painting images of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas mentioned in Buddhist scriptures.

古文：吴生尝于京师画总持寺三门，大获众货。
现代文：吴道玄曾经给京都的总持寺画过山门，得到很多人的布施。
English: Wu Daoxuan once painted the mountain gate for the Sojiji Temple in Kyoto, and received donations from many people.

古文：棱伽乃窃画庄严寺三门。锐思开张，颇臻其妙。
现代文：卢棱伽暗中为庄严寺画山门，神思突然打开，绘的画像几乎达到尽善尽美的程度。
English: Lu Renjia secretly painted the mountain gate for the solemn temple, his mind suddenly opened, and the painted image almost reached the level of perfection.

古文：一日，吴生忽见之，惊叹曰：此子笔力，常时不及我，今乃类我。
现代文：一天，吴道玄来庄严寺看这幅画像，惊异地赞叹道：棱伽的笔力过去赶不上我，现在跟我相近了。
English: One day, Wu Daoxuan came to the Solemn Temple to look at this painting, and marveled: "Renga's brushstrokes used to be too slow for me, but now they are close to me."

古文：是子也，精爽尽于此矣。居一月。棱伽果卒。
现代文：这个人啊，他的精神魂魄全都在这幅画像上用尽了。过了一个月，卢棱伽果然死去了。
English: This man, his spirit and soul were all exhausted in this picture. A month later, Lu Renjia died.

古文：毕宏
现代文：毕宏
English: Bi Hong

古文：唐毕宏，大历二年为给事中。
现代文：唐朝人毕宏，唐代宗大历二年官任给事中。
English: Bi Hong, a Tang Dynasty person, is in the middle of his second year of official appointment in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：画《松石》于左省厅壁，好事者皆诗之。
现代文：曾在左省衙厅堂的墙壁上画《松石图》，许多好事的人都写诗赞许。
English: He once painted "Pine Rock Map" on the walls of the Zuo Province Government Hall, and many people wrote poems to praise his good deeds.

古文：改京兆少尹为右庶子。
现代文：后来，毕宏由京兆少尹改任右庶子。
English: Later, Bi Hong was changed from Jing Zhao Shao Yin to his son-in-law.

古文：树石擅名于代。
现代文：毕宏因擅长画树、石而闻名。
English: Bi Hong is famous for being good at painting trees and stones.

古文：树木改步变古，自宏始也。
现代文：改用古法画树木，毕宏是第一个这样作的。
English: Bi Hong was the first to switch to the ancient method of painting trees.

古文：净域寺
现代文：净域寺
English: Joroki-ji Temple

古文：唐大穆皇后宅。
现代文：净域寺原先是唐朝大穆皇后的宅第。
English: Jingshui Temple was originally the residence of the Queen of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：寺僧云：三阶院门外。是神尧皇帝射孔雀处。
现代文：寺里的僧人说：三层台阶的院门外面，是当年神尧皇帝射孔雀的地方。
English: A monk in the temple said, "Outside the three-step courtyard gate is the place where Emperor Shennong shot peacocks.

古文：禅院门内外。《游目记》云：王昭隐画门西里面和修吉龙王有灵。
现代文：禅院门内外，《游目记》上说：王昭隐居在画门西里面，和修吉龙王有神交。
English: Inside and outside the gate of the Zen monastery, "Travelogue" said: Wang Zhao lived in seclusion in the west of the painting gate, and had a close relationship with King Xujiu Long.

古文：门内之西，火目药叉及北方天王甚奇猛。
现代文：门里的西边，壁上画的火目药叉和北方天王都非常奇谲威猛。
English: On the west side of the gate, the fire duster and the king of the north painted on the wall are very strange and powerful.

古文：门东里面，贤门野叉部落，鬼首蟠虵，汗烟可惧。
现代文：门里面东侧，墙壁上画的贤门野叉部落，各个都是鬼脑袋，盘曲的蛇身，满脸汗烟，让人恐惧。
English: On the east side of the inside of the door, the Xianmen wild boar tribe painted on the wall, each is a ghost head, a coiled snake body, a face full of sweat and smoke, which is frightening.

古文：东廓树石险怪。高僧亦怪。
现代文：东廊下面画的山石高峻、树木怪异，画上的僧人也怪异。
English: The mountains and rocks depicted below the east gallery are very tall, the trees are strange, and the monks depicted are also strange.

古文：西廊庙菩萨院门里南壁，皇甫轸画鬼神及雕。
现代文：西廊庙菩萨院门里的南墙壁上，是皇甫轸画的鬼神和大雕。
English: On the south wall inside the gate of the West Corridor Temple's Bodhisattva Courtyard, there is a ghost god and a large carving painted by Emperor Fu Xi.

古文：鹗势若脱壁。轸与吴道玄同时。
现代文：大雕象鱼鹰要下水扑鱼的样子，几乎欲从壁上飞落下来。皇甫轸和吴道子是同一时代的人。
English: The large sculpture looks like an osprey about to dive into the water to catch a fish, and almost wants to fly down from the wall. Wang Fuxi and Wu Daozi are from the same era.

古文：吴以其艺逼己，募人杀之。
现代文：吴道子认为皇甫珍绘画的技艺有可能超过自己，于是花钱雇人将皇甫轸杀害了。
English: Wu Daozi thought that Wang Fuzhen's painting skills might surpass his own, so he paid someone to kill Wang Fuzhen.

古文：资圣寺
现代文：资圣寺
English: Shisho-ji Temple

古文：资圣寺中门窗间，吴道子画《高僧》。
现代文：资圣寺中门窗前，有吴道子画的《高僧图》。
English: In front of the doors and windows of Zhisheng Temple, there is a painting of "High Priest" by Wu Daozi.

古文：韦述赞，李严书。
现代文：上面有韦述撰写的赞词，李严书写的。
English: On it was a eulogy written by Wei Shu, written by Li Yan.

古文：中三门外两面上层，不知何人画人物，颇类阎今。
现代文：中间那道山门外两面上层的人物画，不知道是谁画的，很像出自阎立本的手笔。
English: In the middle, there is a two-layered figure painting outside the mountain gate. I don't know who painted it, but it is very similar to the handwriting of Yan Liben.

古文：寺西廊北隅。扬坦画《近塔天女》。
现代文：寺里西廊北角，有扬坦画的《近塔天女图》。
English: In the north corner of the west corridor of the temple, there is a painting by Yang Tan, "Tower Maiden."

古文：明睇将瞬。团塔院北堂有铁观音高三丈余。
现代文：天女的明眸在向你睇视，似乎马上就要移看别处。团塔所在的庭院北面殿堂里有铁铸观音塑像一尊，高三丈多。
English: The bright eyes of the celestial maiden are gazing at you, as if they are about to look away. In the courtyard to the north of the main hall, where the tower is located, there is a cast iron statue of Guanyin, more than three stories tall.

古文：观音院两廊《四十二贤圣》，韩干画，元载赞。
现代文：观音院两廊绘有《四十二贤圣图》，是韩干画的。元载撰写的赞辞。
English: The two corridors of Guanyin Temple are painted with the "Forty-two sages" painting, which was painted by Han Gan.

古文：东廊北《散马》，不意见者如将嘶蹀。
现代文：廊北面画有《群马图》，没有留心观看它们的人，似乎感到这是一群真马，正要奋蹄嘶鸣。
English: On the north side of the corridor there is a painting of the "Group of Horses," and those who do not pay attention to them seem to feel that this is a group of real horses that are about to hoof it.

古文：圣僧中龙树商船和循绝妙。
现代文：画上圣僧中的龙树高僧和商船，次序和谐，布局巧妙。
English: The dragon tree high priest and the merchant ship among the holy monks are painted, the order is harmonious, and the layout is ingenious.

古文：团塔上菩萨，李真画。四面花鸟，边鸾画。
现代文：团塔墙壁上的菩萨，是李真画的；四面的花鸟，是边鸾画的。
English: The bodhisattvas on the walls of the tower were painted by Li Zhen; the flowers and birds on the four sides were painted by Bian Qi.

古文：当药上菩萨顶上茂葵尤佳。
现代文：药王菩萨头顶上的那支蜀葵，画的尤其精妙。
English: The painting of the hollyhock on the top of the Medicine King's head is particularly exquisite.

古文：塔中藏千部《法华经》。
现代文：团塔中藏有上千部《法华经》。
English: There are more than a thousand copies of the Lotus Sutra in the tower.

古文：词人作诸画连句，柏梁体。
现代文：有词人给这些画作的连句写在上面，用的是仿梁鹄、左伯体书写的。
English: Some poets have written couplets for these paintings on them, using imitation Liangyao and Zuo Bo.

古文：吴生画勇矛戟攒，出奇骋变势万端。
现代文：大意是这样的：吴道子画的兵勇持矛执戟如同在刺杀拼斗，他的画出尽奇思变化万端。
English: The idea is this: Wu Daozi's paintings of soldiers bravely holding spears and wielding halberds are like a battle of assassins. His paintings are full of whimsy and variety.

古文：苍苍鬼怪层壁宽，覩之忽忽毛发寒。
现代文：宽阔的墙壁上用深青的颜色画着众多的鬼怪，让人看一眼就恐惧得头发根上簌簌地直冒寒气。
English: On the wide walls, numerous ghosts are painted in dark blue colors, making people feel cold with fear at the first sight.

古文：棱伽效之力所瘅，李真、周昉优劣难。
现代文：卢棱伽竭尽全力模仿这些画终于积劳成疾，李真，周昉的画很难分出谁优谁劣来。
English: Lu Renga tried his best to imitate these paintings, but eventually the work accumulated into a disease. Li Zhen, Zhou Qi's paintings are difficult to distinguish who is superior and who is inferior.

古文：活禽生奔推边鸾，花方嫩彩犹未干。
现代文：画奔跑飞动的禽鸟花卉当推边鸾，那含露欲滴的花蕊，宛若刚刚点染上去似的，墨还未干呢！
English: When painting the running and flying birds and flowers, push the edge of the frame, the dewy flower stalks, as if they had just been dyed, the ink is not yet dry!

古文：韩干变态如急湍。
现代文：韩干的画形态变化特快，象湍急的流水一样，一时一个变化。
English: Han Gan's painting forms change extremely fast, like fast flowing water, one change at a time.

古文：惜哉壁画势未殚，后人新画何漫汗。
现代文：值得高兴的是壁画正在蓬勃发展，后来人的新作正浩浩荡荡地涌现出来。
English: It is worth rejoicing that murals are flourishing, and new works by later artists are emerging in droves.

古文：老君庙
现代文：老君庙
English: Laojun Temple

古文：东郡北邙山有玄元观。观南有老君庙。
现代文：东都洛阳北邙山有一座玄元观，观南有一座老君庙。
English: Luoyang, the eastern capital, has a Xuan Yuan Temple in Beishanshan, and there is a Laojun Temple in Guannan.

古文：台殿高敞，下瞰伊洛。
现代文：这座庙台殿高大宽敞，居高临下俯瞰伊水、洛水一带的广袤沃野。
English: This mausoleum is tall and spacious, overlooking the vast fertile fields of the Yishui and Luoshui regions.

古文：神仙泥塑之像，皆开元中杨惠之所制。奇巧精严，见者增敬。
现代文：庙里的泥塑神仙，都是开元年间杨惠之制作的，塑功精细严整，造形奇异巧妙，使见到神像的人顿增敬意。
English: The clay statues of deities in the temple were all made by Yang Huizhong in the first year of the 21st century. The sculpting work is fine and precise, and the shapes are strange and ingenious, so that people who see the statues of gods are more respectful.

古文：壁有吴道玄画五圣真容及老子化胡经事，丹青妙绝，古今无比。
现代文：庙内墙壁上，有画圣吴道子绘画的唐朝开国后高祖、太宗、高宗、中宗、睿宗五位皇帝的画像，以及老子过函谷关化胡的事。这些画精妙到极至，古往今来无可比拟。
English: On the walls of the temple, there are paintings of the five emperors Gaozu, Taizong, Gaozong, Zhongzong and Ruizong of the Tang Dynasty after the founding of the country, as well as the story of Laozi passing through Hanzhongguan and Hu, painted by St. Wu Daozi. These paintings are exquisite to the extreme and incomparable from ancient times to the present.

古文：杜工部诗云：配极玄都閟，凭高禁籞长。
现代文：杜甫曾写一首《冬日洛城北谒玄元皇帝庙》的五言排律赞颂这些画。诗称：配极玄都閟，凭高禁籞长。
English: Du Fu once wrote a poem in praise of these paintings, the five-syllable sequence of "Winter in the North of Luocheng and the Temple of Emperor Xuan Yuan." The poem is called: "With the extreme Xuan Du, with the high ban, the long ban."

古文：守祧严具礼，掌节镇非常。
现代文：守祧严具礼，掌节镇非常。
English: The festival is observed with strict etiquette, and the town is very festive.

古文：碧瓦初寒外，金茎一气旁。
现代文：碧瓦初寒外。金茎一气旁。
English: Biwa is out in the cold for the first time. Kanetsu is furious.

古文：山河扶绣户，日月近雕梁。
现代文：山河扶绣户，日月近雕梁。
English: The mountains and rivers support the embroiderers, and the sun and moon are close to the carved beams.

古文：仙李蟠根大，猗兰弈叶光。
现代文：仙李蟠根大，猗兰弈叶光。
English: Xian Li is a great scholar, while Lan Lan is a brilliant scholar.

古文：世家遗旧史，道德付今王。
现代文：世家遗旧史，道德付今王。
English: Morality is king in this day and age.

古文：画手看前辈。
现代文：画手看前辈。
English: Painters look to their predecessors.

古文：吴生远擅场。
现代文：吴生远擅场。
English: Wu Sheng is far from being on the court.

古文：森罗回地轴，妙绝动宫墙。
现代文：森罗回地轴，妙绝动宫墙。
English: Because of the earth's axis, the palace wall will never move.

古文：五圣联龙衮，千官列雁行。
现代文：五圣联龙衮，千官列雁行。
English: The Five Immaculate Conception and the Dragon Dance, thousands of officials line up to see the geese.

古文：冕旒俱秀发，旌旗尽飞扬。
现代文：冕旒俱秀发，旌旗尽飞扬。
English: The crowns are in place, the hair is in place, the flags are flying.

古文：翠柏深留景，红梨迥得霜。
现代文：翠柏深留景，红梨迥得霜。
English: The cedar and cypress trees are deeply rooted in the landscape, the red pears are dipped in cream.

古文：风筝吹玉柱，露井冻银床。
现代文：风筝吹玉柱，露井冻银床。
English: A kite is blowing on a jade pillar, and a dewdrop on a bed of frozen silver.

古文：身退卑周室，经传拱汉皇。
现代文：身退卑周室，经传拱汉皇。
English: It is said that he was the most despised emperor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：谷神如不死，养拙更何乡。
现代文：谷神如不死，养拙更何乡。
English: If the valley god does not die, it is even more difficult to maintain.

古文：金桥图
现代文：金桥图
English: Map of Golden Bridge

古文：玄宗封泰山回，车驾次上党。潞之父老，负担壶浆，远近迎谒。
现代文：唐玄宗泰山封禅归来，车驾人马走到上党，潞州的父老乡亲挑着食品提着水、酒，远近迎接拜谒。
English: After the return of Tang Xuan Zong's Tai Shan Fuzhen Zen, the car drove people and horses to the upper party, and the parents and fellow villagers of Zhangzhou picked up food, carried water and wine, and welcomed the worshippers from far and near.

古文：上皆亲加存问。受其献馈，锡赉有差。
现代文：玄宗皇帝亲自出面对来迎接拜谒的人们加以问候，亲自接受人民的馈献。皇上的回赏有差别。
English: Emperor Xuanzong personally came out to greet the people who came to pay homage, and personally accepted the people's gifts. There is a difference in the emperor's reward.

古文：父老有先与上相识者，上悉赐以酒食，与之话旧。
现代文：乡亲中有先跟玄宗皇帝相识的，皇上都赏赐他们酒食，跟他们话旧。
English: Among the villagers, those who first met Emperor Xuanzong, the emperor rewarded them with food and wine and had a long talk with them.

古文：故所过村部，必令询访孤老丧疾之家，加吊恤之。
现代文：因此，凡是经过的村落，玄宗皇帝一定命令人前去询访孤老丧疾的人家，并给予吊唁与抚恤。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong ordered his emissaries to visit the homes of the elderly and the sick in every village they passed through, and to offer condolences and compensation.

古文：父老欣欣然，莫不瞻戴，扣乞驻留焉。
现代文：乡亲们都非常高兴，所到之处没有不前来瞻仰拥戴皇上的，并请求皇上暂时留驻在这里。
English: The villagers were very happy, and wherever they went, they did not fail to come to see and embrace the emperor, and asked the emperor to stay here temporarily.

古文：及卓驾过金桥，御路萦转。上见数千里间，旗纛鲜洁，羽卫齐整。谓左右曰：张说言我勒兵三十万，旌旗经千里间，陕右上党，至于太原。
现代文：待到圣驾路经金桥时，道路盘绕回转，玄宗皇帝看到几千里间，旌旗光艳，卫队齐整，于是对跟随在左右的侍从们说：宰相张说说我统率三十万大军，旌旗逶迤千里，从陕右的上党到山西的太原。
English: When he reached the Sacred Driving Road and passed through the Golden Bridge, the road twisted and turned. Emperor Xuanzong saw thousands of miles, the flags were bright, and the guards were in good order. So he said to the attendants who followed him on the right and left: Prime Minister Zhang said that I was in command of 300,000 troops, flying the flag for thousands of miles, from Shangdang in Shaanxi to Taiyuan in Shanxi.

古文：真才子也。
现代文：真是才子啊！
English: What a talent!

古文：左右皆称万岁。
现代文：左右听了后，都山呼万岁。
English: After listening to both sides, Du Shan shouted "long live."

古文：上遂召吴道玄、韦无忝、陈闳。令同制《金桥图》。
现代文：于是，玄宗皇帝召吴道玄、韦无忝、陈闳进见，命令他们共同绘制《金桥图》。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong summoned Wu Daoxuan, Wei Wuxuan and Chen Jianjin and ordered them to jointly draw the "Golden Bridge Map."

古文：圣容及上所乘照夜白马，陈闳主之。桥梁山水，车舆人物，草树鹰鸟，器丈帷幕，吴道玄主之。狗马驴骡，牛羊骆驼，猫猴猪貀，四足之属，韦无忝主之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝和他骑的那匹照夜白马，由陈闳来画；桥梁山水、车舆人物、草树鹰鸟、器丈帷幕，由吴道玄来画；狗马驴骡、牛羊骆驼、猫猴猪貀等四足动物，由韦无忝来画。
English: Emperor Xuanzong and the shining white horse he rode were painted by Chen Zhen; bridges, landscapes, chariot characters, grasses, trees, eagles and birds, and tall curtains were painted by Wu Daoxuan; dogs, horses, donkeys, camels, cats, monkeys, pigs and other four-legged animals were painted by Wei Wu Zhen.

古文：图成。时谓三绝焉。
现代文：《金桥图》画成后，当时人称它为三绝。
English: After the "Golden Bridge" was painted, people called it the "Three Absolutes."

古文：崔圆壁
现代文：崔圆壁
English: Cui Yuanbi

古文：安禄山之陷两京，王维、郑虔、张通皆处于贼庭。
现代文：安禄山反叛后攻陷东、西两京，王维、郑虔、张通都在安禄山的朝中任职。
English: Wang Wei, Zheng Qian, and Zhang Tong all served in the Anlu Mountain imperial court after the rebellion of Anlu Mountain and the fall of the eastern and western capitals.

古文：洎克复。俱囚于杨国忠旧宅。
现代文：待到唐肃宗李亨清除叛乱、收复两京后，他们都被囚禁在杨国忠的旧宅。
English: After Emperor Li Heng of the Su Zong Dynasty of Tang eliminated the rebellion and recovered the two capitals, they were all imprisoned in the old house of Yang Guozhong.

古文：崔相国圆因召于私第。
现代文：宰相崔圆将他们三人召到自己的家中，让他们在他家的几处墙上绘画。
English: Prime Minister Cui Yuan called the three of them to his home and asked them to paint on several walls of his house.

古文：令画名画数壁。当时皆以圆勋贵莫二，望其救解。
现代文：当时，这三个人都认为崔圆的功勋没有任何一个人可以赶得上，都希望他能帮忙解救自己。
English: At that time, these three people all believed that no one could match Cui Yuan's achievements, and they all hoped that he could help them save themselves.

古文：故运思精深，颇极能事。
现代文：因此都精心构思，精心绘画，一心想将壁画画得最好。
English: Therefore, they are all carefully conceived, carefully painted, and want to paint the best murals.

古文：故皆获宽典。
现代文：壁画完成后，他们三个人都得到了宽大处理。
English: All three were granted clemency after the mural was completed.

古文：至于贬降，必获善地。
现代文：有的人被贬降到外地，去的也是比较好的地方。
English: Some people were relegated to other places, and they went to better places.

