古文：二十日饭而行，犹寒甚而天复霁。
现代文：二十日吃过饭后启程，天气仍然很冷，但却晴朗。
English: The weather was still very cold, but it was sunny when we left after dinner on the 20th.

古文：由西门北向循西山行，五里，抵一村，其北有水自西峡出，遂随之入。
现代文：从西门向北顺西山走，五里，来到一个村庄，村庄北有条河从西边的峡谷流出，于是顺着河走进峡谷。
English: From the West Gate, walk north along the West Mountain for five miles and come to a village. North of the village, there is a river flowing out of the canyon on the west side, so follow the river into the canyon.

古文：一里余，稍陟坡，一里余，有村在涧西，曰四平坡。
现代文：走一里多，逐渐上坡，一里多，有个村庄在沟涧西面，名四平坡。
English: Walk more than a mile, gradually uphill, more than a mile, there is a village in the west of the gully, the famous four flat slope.

古文：北转五里，渡溪桥，又北上三里，为九鼎山寺。
现代文：•往北转五里，渡过溪桥，又往北上三里，是九鼎山寺。
English: • Turn north for five miles, cross the stream bridge, and go north for three miles. This is Jiuding Mountain Temple.

古文：又二里陟其巅，饭。
现代文：又走二里登上山顶，吃饭。
English: They walked another two miles to the top of the mountain to eat.

古文：下午，从东北下，三里，过北溪桥，仍合大路，循梁王山西麓西北溯流入。
现代文：下午，从东北下山，三里，过北溪桥，然后与大路会合，顺梁王山西麓往西北溯流进去。
English: In the afternoon, I went down the mountain from the northeast, walked three miles, crossed the Beixi Bridge, then joined the highway, and followed the west foot of Liangwang Mountain to the northwest.

古文：五里，梁王村。
现代文：五里，是梁王村。
English: Wuli is Liangwang Village.

古文：北八里，松子哨。
现代文：往北走八里，到松子哨。
English: Walk north for eight miles to Matsuzi Sentinel.

古文：行半里，溪西去，路北上，半里，逾岭。
现代文：走半里，溪水向西流去，道路往北上，半里，翻越岭。
English: Walk half a mile, the stream flows to the west, the road goes north, half a mile, over the ridge.

古文：又东北下者五里，则溪复自西来，又有一小溪，自幕山北麓来与之合，乃涉其交会处，是为云、宾之界。
现代文：又往东北下五里，于是溪水又从西边流来，又有一条小溪，从幕山北麓流来与溪水汇合，于是从两条溪交会之处渡过去，这是云南县、宾川州的分界。
English: Another five miles to the northeast, so the stream water flows from the west again, and there is another stream that flows from the northern foot of Mount Makuhari and merges with the stream water, so it crosses the place where the two streams meet. This is the boundary between Yunnan County and Binchuan State.

古文：又东二里，为自北关，已暮。
现代文：又往东走二里，为自北关，太阳已经落山。
English: Another two miles to the east, and the sun has already set.

古文：又东二里半，渡涧桥之北。
现代文：又往东走二里半，渡到涧桥北面。
English: Walk east for another two and a half miles, and you will reach the north side of the bridge.

古文：又东半里，转北一里半，为山冈铺，宿。
现代文：又往东走半里，转北走一里半，到山冈铺，在这里住宿。
English: Walk another half-mile to the east, turn north and walk another mile and a half to Yamagatabu, where you will stay.

古文：二十一日平明，行大坞中。
现代文：二十一日天亮时，在大山坞中行走。
English: At dawn on the twenty-first day, I was walking in a large dockyard.

古文：北向十里，其西为宾居。
现代文：向北走十里，西面是宾居。
English: Walk north for ten miles and you will find Binju in the west.

古文：又北五里，有小水出田间。又北三里，有涧自西峡出，随之北二里，为火头基。
现代文：又往北走五里，田间流出一股小水，又往北走三里，从西边峡谷中伸出沟涧，顺沟涧往北走二里，名火头基。
English: Another five miles to the north, a small stream of water flows out of the field, another three miles to the north, a gully protrudes from the western canyon, and two miles to the north along the gully, the famous fire base.

古文：西北连渡二溪，又北五里，总府庄。
现代文：往西北接连渡过二条溪流，又往北走五里。为总府庄。
English: To the northwest, we crossed two streams in succession, and then walked five miles to the north. It is the capital village.

古文：又北三里，宾川州在东坡上，东倚大山，西临溪流，然去溪尚里许；其滨溪东岸者，曰大罗城。
现代文：又往北走三里，宾川州在东边坡上，东靠大山，西临溪流，但距离溪流还有一里左右；滨临溪水东岸的是大罗城。
English: Another three miles to the north, Binchuan Prefecture is on the eastern slope, east of the mountain, west of the stream, but there is still about one mile from the stream; on the east bank of the stream is Dala City.

古文：令行李先去，余草记西崖上。
现代文：让行李朝前去，我在西崖上草写日记。
English: I left my luggage facing forward and scribbled in my diary on the West Cliff.

古文：望州北有冈自东界突而西，其北又有冈自西界突而东，交错于坞中，为州下流之钥，溪至是始曲折潆之，始得见其形焉。
现代文：看到州北有冈从东边向西突起，冈北又有冈从西边向东突起，在坞中交错，是宾川州溪流下游的关口，溪流到这里才曲折绕冈，于是得以看出其地形。
English: I saw that in the north of the prefecture, there is a hill that protrudes from the east to the west, and in the north of the prefecture, there is another hill that protrudes from the west to the east, and they are interlaced in the dock. It is the downstream pass of the stream of Binchuan prefecture. The stream meanders around the hill only here, so I was able to see its topography.

古文：又北三里半，逾东突之冈，则见有村当其北麓，是名红帽村。
现代文：又往北走三里半，越过向东突起的冈，就看到冈北麓有村庄，这村名红帽村。
English: Another three and a half miles to the north, over the hill that juts out to the east, you will see a village at the northern foot of the hill. This village is called Red Hat Village.

古文：溪自东南潆东突之冈，西转而潆于村之前，其前又开大坞北去。
现代文：溪流从东南潇绕向东突起的冈，转向西从村前绕过，前面又敞开大山坞向北伸去。
English: The stream runs from the southeast around the hill that juts out to the east, turns to the west and goes around the front of the village, and stretches northward with a large dock open in front of it.

古文：仍循西山北行，五里，渐转而西，于是岐分为二：东北随流遵大坞直去者，由牛井街通浪沧卫道；西北从小坞逾岭者，由江果往鸡足道。
现代文：于是顺西山往北走，五里，渐渐转向西走，这里分出两条岔路：往东北随水流沿大山坞直走的，是从牛井街通往浪沧卫的路；往西北顺小山坞翻越岭的，是从江果去鸡足山的路。
English: So they walked north along Xishan Mountain for five miles, gradually turning to the west. There are two branching paths here: the one that follows the water flow to the northeast and goes straight along the large mountain dock is the road from Niujing Street to Langcangwei; the one that goes over the ridge to the northwest along the small mountain dock is the road from Jiangguo to Qiuzu Mountain.

古文：余初由山冈铺北望，以为东界大山之北岭即鸡足，而川中之水当西转出澜沧江。
现代文：我当初从山冈铺往北望，以为东部大山的北岭就是鸡足山，而坝子中的水应当转向西流出澜沧江。
English: At first, I looked northward from the mountain ridge, thinking that the northern ridge of the eastern mountain was the Chicken's Foot Mountain, and the water in the dam should turn west to flow out of the Lancang River.

古文：至是始知宾川之流乃北出金沙江，所云浪沧卫而非澜沧江也；其东界大山，乃自梁王出北转，夹宾川之东而北抵金沙，非大脊也。
现代文：到这里才知道宾川州的河流是往北流出金沙江，所说的浪沧卫并不是澜沧江；东部大山是从梁王山北面转，夹在宾川州的东边往北延伸到金沙江，不是主要山脊。
English: It was only here that I learned that the river in Binchuan County flows northward from the Jinsha River, and that the Langcangwei River is not the Lancang River. The eastern mountain is turned northward from Liangwang Mountain and extends northward to the Jinsha River on the east side of Binchuan County. It is not the main ridge.

古文：从小坞西二里，逾西界之脊，始见鸡足在西，其高与东界并，然东界尤屏亘，与雷应同横穹半壁云。
现代文：顺小山坞往西走二里，越过西部的山脊，才看见鸡足山在西边，其高度和东部大山并列，但东部大山尤其像屏障般地横贯，和雷应山一样横着隆起半壁。
English: After walking two miles west along the small mountain dock and crossing the ridge in the west, I saw the Chicken's Foot Mountain in the west. Its height is on a par with the eastern mountain, but the eastern mountain is especially like a barrier, and like Lei Ying Mountain, it has a raised half-wall.

古文：从脊上南望，其南五德山横亘天南，即前洱海卫所望九鼎西高拥之山，其上有雪处也，至是又东西横峙；其东又耸幕山，所谓梁王山也；二山中坳稍低，即松子哨度脊而北处也。
现代文：从脊上往南望、南面五德山横贯南部天际，就是先前在洱海卫所看到的九鼎山西边高拥之山，山上有积雪的地方，到这里又东西横峙；其东又耸立着幕山，是所说的梁王山，两山之间稍低的山坳，就是从松子哨越过山脊往北走的地方。
English: Looking southward from the ridge, the southern face of Mount Wutai stretches across the southern sky, which is the high mountain on the west side of Jiuding Mountain that was previously seen by the Bohai Coast Guard. Where there is snow on the mountain, things stand side by side; to the east of it stands the curtain mountain, which is the so-called Liangwang Mountain. The slightly lower ridge between the two mountains is the place where you cross the ridge from Pine Whistle to the north.

古文：从岭西行三里，稍北下，有溪自西而东，注于宾川大溪，架梁其上，覆以亭，是为江果村，在溪北岸，其流与火头基等。
现代文：顺岭往西走三里，逐渐北下，有条溪从西向东，注入宾川大溪，溪上架有桥，盖着亭，这里名江果村，村子在溪北岸，溪流和火头基相等。
English: Shunling went west for three miles and gradually went north. There was a stream flowing from west to east, feeding into the Binchuan Creek. There was a bridge over the stream and a pavilion was built. Here was the famous Jianguo Village. The village was on the north bank of the stream. The stream and the foundation of the fire were equal.

古文：时日甫下午，前向东洞尚三十五里，中无托宿，遂止。
现代文：这时才是下午时分，向前去东洞还有三十五里，途中没有寄宿的地方，于是停止前行。
English: By this time it was mid-afternoon, there were still thirty-five miles to go to Dongdong, and there was no place to stay on the way, so we stopped moving forward.

古文：二十二日昧爽，由江果村饭，溯溪北岸西行。
现代文：二十二日天亮，在江果村吃饭，顺北岸溯溪往西走。
English: At dawn on the 22nd, we had dinner in Jiangguo Village and walked west along the north bank of the river.

古文：其溪从西峡中来，乃出于鸡山南支之外，五福之北者，洱海东山之流也。
现代文：溪水从西边峡谷中流来，是从鸡足山南支以外流出的，五福山北面的，是洱海东山的水流。
English: The stream water flows from the middle of the west canyon, flowing from outside the southern branch of the Chicken's Foot Mountain, and the north side of Mount Wufu is the water flow of the East Mountain of the Bohai Sea.

古文：四里，登岭而北，寒风刺骨，幸旭日将升，惟恐其迟。
现代文：走四里，登岭往北走，寒风刺骨，幸好太阳即将升起，生怕它迟迟不出。
English: Walk four miles, climb the ridge to the north, the cold wind is biting, fortunately the sun is about to rise, I'm afraid it will be late.

古文：盘岭而北一里半，见岭北又开东西坞，有水从其中自西而东，注于宾川大溪，即从牛井街出者。
现代文：盘绕岭向北走一里半，看见岭北又敞开东西走向的山坞，有条河顺坞中从西向东流，注入宾川大溪，就是从牛井街流出去的。
English: Walking north for a mile and a half around the ridge, I saw a dock in the north of the ridge that was open to the east and west. There was a river flowing from west to east in the dock and flowing into the Binchuan Creek, which flowed out of Niu Jing Street.

古文：此坞名牛井，有上下诸村，其水自鸡足峡中来，所谓盒子孔之下流也。
现代文：此坞名牛井，有上下各村，溪水从鸡足山峡谷中流来，是所说的盒子孔河的下游。
English: This well-known cow well, with villages up and down, and stream water flowing from the middle of the Chicken Foot Mountain Canyon, is the lower reaches of the so-called Box Hole River.

古文：于是西向渐下，一里半而抵坞中。
现代文：于是往西逐渐下，一里半就抵达坞中。
English: So we gradually headed west, and after a mile and a half, we arrived in the middle of the dock.

古文：又西一里过坞中村后，在坊曰 金牛溢井 ，标胜也。
现代文：又往西走一里经过坞中的村庄后，有块 金牛溢井 的碑坊，标明是名胜处。
English: After walking west for another mile past the village in the dock, there is a monument to the Golden Cow Overflowing Well, which is clearly marked as a place of scenic beauty.

古文：土人指溪北冈头，有井在石穴间，云是昔年牛从井出处也。又西二里，复逾冈陟峡，盖其山皆自南突出，濒溪而止，溪东流潆之，一开而为炼洞，再开而为牛井，此其中突而界之者。
现代文：又往西走二里，再次翻越山冈，穿过峡谷，因为这里的山都是往南突出，濒临溪边而止，溪水向东绕流，第一道敞开的坞是炼洞，第二道敞开的坞是牛井，此冈向中突出而成为两道山坞的分界。
English: He walked another two miles to the west, over the hill again, and through the canyon, because the mountains here protrude to the south and stop at the edge of the stream. The stream flows around to the east. The first open dock is the refining cave, and the second open dock is the cow well. This hill protrudes in the middle and becomes the boundary between the two docks.

古文：盘峡而上，迤逦西北，再平再上，五里，越岭而复得坞。
现代文：盘绕峡谷而上，峡谷曲折连绵伸向西北，两次平行两次上坡，走五里，越过岭就又到达山坞。
English: Winding up the canyon, the canyon zigzags continuously to the northwest, twice parallel and twice uphill, walking five miles, crossing the ridge and reaching the dock.

古文：稍下一里半，有坊在坡，曰 广甸流芳 。
现代文：逐渐下一里半，坡上有块牌坊，叫 广甸流芳 。
English: Gradually down a mile and a half, there is a landmark on the slope, called Guangdian Liufang.

古文：又一里半，复过一村后，此亦炼洞最东南村也。
现代文：又走一里半，再从一个村庄背后过，这也是炼洞最东南的村庄。
English: Walk another mile and a half, and then pass behind a village, which is also the southeasternmost village of the cave.

古文：又北二里，有村夹道，有公馆在村头东北俯溪，是为炼洞之中村。
现代文：又往北走二里，道路两旁有村庄，公馆在村头东北俯瞰溪流，这是炼洞的中村。
English: Walk another two miles north, there are villages on both sides of the road, the guesthouse is in the northeast of the village overlooking the stream, this is the middle village of Chengdong.

古文：其北二里，复上岭。
现代文：往村北走二里，又上岭。
English: Walk two miles to the north of the village and you will reach Shangling.

古文：二里，越之而北，有坊曰 炼法龙潭 ，始知其地有蛰龙，有炼师，此炼洞所由名也。
现代文：二里，翻越岭往北，有块名 炼法龙潭 的牌坊，才知道此地有蛰龙，有炼师，这是炼洞之名的由来。
English: Two miles to the north, across the ridge, there is a pagoda named "Changfa Longtan." Only then do you know that there are dragons and refiners in this place. This is the origin of the name of the refining cave.

古文：又北二里，村聚高悬，中有水一池，池西有亭覆井，即所谓龙潭也。深四五丈，大亦如之，不溢不涸，前濒于塘，土人浣于塘而汲于井。
现代文：又往北二里，村庄高高坐落，中间有一池水，池西有亭子复盖着的井，就是所说的龙潭言龙潭有四五丈深，大处也如此，不溢不涸，前面濒临水塘。当地人在塘中洗涤而从井中汲水。
English: Another two miles to the north, the village sits high, with a pool of water in the middle and a well covered with a pavilion on the west of the pond. This is the so-called Longtan. The Longtan is four or five meters deep, and so is most of it. It does not overflow or dry out, and there is a pond in front. Locals wash in the pond and draw water from the well.

古文：此鸡山外壑也，登山者至是，以为入山之始焉。
现代文：这是鸡足山的外层壑谷，登山的人来到这里，作为进鸡足山的开始。
English: This is the outer valley of the Chicken Foot Mountain, and climbers come here as the beginning of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：其村有亲迎者，鼓吹填街。
现代文：村里有迎亲的人，满街都是奏乐打鼓的人。
English: There were people in the village welcoming relatives, and the streets were full of people playing music and playing drums.

古文：余不顾而过，遂西北登岭。
现代文：我没有理会就走过了，于是往西北登岭。
English: I didn't pay attention and walked past, so I headed northwest to Dengling.

古文：五里，有庵当岭，是为茶庵。
现代文：五里，有座庵位于岭上，这是茶庵。
English: At Wuli, there is a hermitage on the ridge, which is a tea hermitage.

古文：又西北上一里半，路分为二：一由岭直西，为海东道，一循峡直北，为鸡山道。
现代文：又往西北上一里半，道路分成两条：一条顺岭一直往西，是去海东的路；一条顺峡谷一直往北，是去鸡足山的路。
English: Another mile and a half to the northwest, the road divides into two: a straight ridge all the way to the west, is the road to the east of the sea; a straight canyon all the way to the north, is the road to the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：遂北循之。
现代文：于是往北顺路走。
English: So I walked north along the road.

古文：稍下三里而问饭，发筐中无有，盖为居停所留也。
现代文：逐渐下三里然后找饭吃，打开筐中没有吃的，大概是住宿时被主人享用了。
English: He gradually walked three miles and then looked for something to eat. When he opened the basket, there was nothing to eat. It was probably used by the owner during his stay.

古文：又北下一里，有溪自西南峡中出，其峡回合甚窅ｙｏ深远，盖鸡足南峡之山所泄余波也。
现代文：又往北下一里，从西南边峡谷中流来溪水，此峡谷环绕得很深远，大概是鸡足山南峡谷之山所延伸的余脉。
English: Another mile to the north, a stream flows from the middle of the southwest canyon, which is surrounded by a very deep canyon, probably the remnants of the southern canyon of Mt.

古文：有桥亭跨两崖间。
现代文：有桥亭横跨在两座崖之中。
English: A bridge pavilion straddles two cliffs.

古文：越其西，又北上逾岭，一里，有哨兵守岭间。又北一里，中壑稍开，是为拈花寺，寺东北向。
现代文：走到峡谷西面，又往北上，翻越岭，一里，有哨兵守例冷中，又往北走一里，正中的壑谷逐渐开阔，这是拈花寺，寺朝东北。
English: Walk to the west of the canyon, go north again, climb over the ridge, one mile, there is a sentry guarding the middle of the cold, go north again for one mile, the middle of the valley gradually opens, this is the Flower Temple, the temple is in the northeast.

古文：余馁ｌěｉ饥饿甚，入索饭于僧。
现代文：我十分饥饿，进寺向僧人索要饭吃。
English: I was so hungry that I went to the temple to ask the monks for food.

古文：随寺北西转，三里，逾冈之脊，是为见佛台。
现代文：从寺北往西转，三里，翻越冈脊，这里名见佛台。
English: From the north of the temple to the west, three miles, over the ridge, here is the famous Buddha platform.

古文：由此西北下一里，又涉一北下之峡，又西逾一北下之脊，始见脊西有坞北坠，坞北始逼鸡山之麓。
现代文：从这里往西北下一里，又穿过一道往北延伸的峡谷，才看见脊西面有向北坠的山坞，山坞北部开始靠近鸡足山之麓。
English: From here, one mile to the northwest, and through a canyon extending to the north, you can see a dock on the west side of the ridge that drops to the north, and the northern dock begins near the foot of Chicken's Foot Mountain.

古文：盖鸡山自西北突而东南，坞界其中，至此坞转东北峡，路盘其东南支，乃谷之绾会处也。
现代文：原来鸡足山从西北向东南突起，山坞是其中的分界，到这里山坞转向东北边的峡谷，道路盘绕其东南支脉，是山谷联结交会的地方。
English: Originally, the Chicken's Foot Mountain protruded from the northwest to the southeast, and the dock was the demarcation between them. At this point, the dock turned to the northeastern canyon, and the road wound around its southeastern branch. It was the place of the valley junction.

古文：西一里，见有坊当道左，跨南山侧，知其内有奥异。
现代文：往西走一里，看见道路左边有牌坊，跨到南山侧面，知道坊内有奥秘、奇异之处。
English: Walking one mile to the west, I saw an archway on the left side of the road, straddling the side of Nanshan Mountain, and knew that there was a mysterious and strange place inside the archway.

古文：讯之牧者，曰： 其上有白石崖，须东南逾坡一里乃得。 
现代文：向放牧的人询问，回答说： 坊上面有白石崖，必须从东南翻越坡一里才能看到。 
English: He asked the herdsmen about it, and they replied, "There is a white stone cliff above the village, and you have to climb over a mile of slope from the southeast to see it.

古文：余乃令行李从大道先向鸡山，独返步寻之。
现代文：我于是让行李等大路先去鸡足山，我独自返回，徒步去找白石崖。
English: So I left my luggage and waited for the main road to go to Chicken Foot Mountain first. I returned alone and walked to find the White Rock Cliff.

古文：曲折东南上，果一里，得危崖于松箐之间。
现代文：往东南曲折而上，果然走一里，在松警之间看到陡崖。
English: I zigzagged up to the southeast, walked for a mile, and saw a steep cliff between the pine cones.

古文：崖间有洞，洞前有佛字，门北向，钥不得入。
现代文：崖中间有洞，洞前有佛寺，寺门向北，锁着不能进去。
English: There is a cave in the middle of the cliff, in front of the cave there is a Buddhist temple, the temple gate faces north, it is locked and cannot be entered.

古文：乃从其西逾窒阻塞径之棘以入，遍游洞阁中。
现代文：于是从西边塞满道路的荆棘中进去，在洞阁中到处游览。
English: So I went into the thorns that filled the road on the west side and toured around the cave.

古文：又攀其西崖探阁外之洞，见其前可以透植木而出，乃从之下，一里仍至大路。
现代文：又攀登西边的山崖探寻阁外的洞，看见俞面可以从所栽种的树木中穿出去，于是顺着下去，一里仍然下到大路上。
English: He also climbed the western cliff to explore the cave outside the loft, and saw that the cornice could pass through the planted trees, so he followed it down, and still went down a mile to the main road.

古文：又西北二里，下至坞中，渡溪，是为洗心桥，鸡山南峡之水，西自桃花箐、南自盒子孔出者，皆由此而东出峡，东南由炼洞、牛井而合于宾川者也。
现代文：又往西北走二里，下到坞中，渡过溪流，这是洗心桥，鸡足山南边峡谷中从西部桃花警、南部盒子孔流出来的水，都经过这里向东流出峡谷，往东南经过炼洞、牛井然后汇入宾川溪。
English: Another two miles to the northwest, down to the dock, across the stream, this is the bridge of the heart, in the canyon on the south side of the chicken foot mountain, the water flowing from the west of the peach blossom guard and the south of the box hole flows through here to the east of the canyon, to the southeast through the refining cave, the cow well and then into the Binchuan Creek.

古文：溪北鸡山之麓，有村颇盛，北椅于山，是为沙址村，此鸡山之南麓也。
现代文：溪流北边的鸡足山麓，有个比较大的村庄，北部靠山，这是沙址村，这里是鸡足山的南麓。
English: To the north of the stream, at the foot of the Chicken's Foot Mountain, there is a relatively large village, to the north of the mountain, this is the Sand Site Village, here is the southern foot of the Chicken's Foot Mountain.

古文：于是始迫鸡山，有上无下矣。
现代文：从这里开始迫近鸡足山，道路有上无下了。
English: From here, the road begins to approach the Chicken's Foot Mountain, and the road is up and down.

古文：从村后西循山麓，转而北入峡中，缘中条而上，一里，大坊跨路，为灵山一会坊，乃按君宋所建者。
现代文：从村后往西顺山麓走，转向北进入峡谷中，沿着中间的支脉而上，一里，大牌坊横跨道路，名灵山一会坊，是姓宋的按察使所修建的。
English: From the village, walk to the foot of the Xishun Mountain, turn north into the middle of the canyon, and walk up along the middle branch. For one mile, the large arch spans the road, and there is a meeting place on the famous Lingshan Mountain. It was built by a surveyor named Song.

古文：于是冈两旁皆涧水冷冷，乔松落落。
现代文：从这里开始冈两旁都是哗哗的涧水，众多的大松树。
English: From here, both sides of the hill are full of rushing water and numerous large pine trees.

古文：北上盘冈二里，有岐，东北者随峡，西北者逾岭；逾岭者，西峡上二里有瀑布，随峡者，东峡上二里有龙潭；瀑之北即为大觉，潭之北即为悉檀。
现代文：往北绕着冈攀登二里，有岔路，往东北的顺峡谷走，往西北的翻越岭；翻越岭后，往西边峡谷上二里有瀑布；顺着峡谷走，往东边峡谷上二里有龙潭；瀑布的北面就是大觉寺，龙潭的北面就是悉檀寺。
English: Climb north around the hill for two miles, there is a fork in the road, go to the northeast along the canyon, go to the northwest across the ridge; after crossing the ridge, there are two waterfalls in the canyon to the west; go along the canyon, go to the east along the canyon and there is Longtan; the north side of the waterfall is Dajue Temple, and the north side of Longtan is Siddan Temple.

古文：余先皆不知之，见东峡有龙潭坊，遂从之。
现代文：我事先完全不知道这些情况，看见东边峡谷有龙潭的牌坊，就顺着走。
English: I was completely unaware of these circumstances beforehand, and when I saw the Longtan archway in the east canyon, I followed it.

古文：盘磴数十折而上，觉深窅险峻，然不见所谓龙潭也。
现代文：绕着数十级曲折的石阶而上，感到幽深险峻，但看不见所说的龙潭。
English: Walking up the stone steps with dozens of twists and turns, I felt deep and precipitous, but I could not see the so-called Longtan.

古文：逾一板桥，见坞北有寺，询之，知其内为悉檀，前即龙潭，今为壑矣。
现代文：过了一支木板桥，看见山坞北边有寺庙， 询问，知道里面是悉檀寺，寺前就是龙潭，如今成了沟壑。
English: After crossing a wooden board bridge, I saw a temple on the north side of the dock, inquired, and knew that it was Siddan Temple inside, and Longtan in front of the temple. Now it has become a gully.

古文：时余期行李往大觉，遂西三里，过西竺、龙华而入宿于大觉。
现代文：当时我已约定行李等去大觉寺，于是往西走三里，经过西竺寺、龙华寺然后到大觉寺住宿。
English: At that time, I had already arranged for my luggage to go to Daikaku-ji Temple, so I walked three miles to the west, passing through Saiho-ji Temple and Ronghua-ji Temple, and then to Daikaku-ji Temple for accommodation.

古文：二十三日饭于大觉，即东过悉檀。
现代文：二十三日在大觉寺吃过饭，就往东去悉檀寺。
English: On the 23rd, after eating at Daikokuji Temple, he went east to Shidanji Temple.

古文：悉檀为鸡山最东丛林，后倚九重崖，前临黑龙潭，而前则回龙两层环之。
现代文：悉檀寺是鸡足山最东边的寺院，背靠九重崖，前临黑龙潭，但前面则有两层曲折的山梁环绕。
English: Siddan-ji Temple is the easternmost temple on the Jiu Foot Mountain. It is backed by the Nine-Storied Cliff and fronted by the Black Dragon Pool, but the front is surrounded by two layers of winding mountain beams.

古文：先是省中诸君或称息潭，或称雪潭，至是而后知其皆非也。
现代文：先前，省城里的各位朋友有的称息潭，有的称雪潭，到这里之后才知道都说错了。
English: Previously, some friends in the provincial capital called it Xuitan, some called it Xuetan, but only after arriving here did they know that they had all said the wrong thing.

古文：弘辨、安仁二师迎饭于方丈，即请移馆。
现代文：弘辨、安仁两位法师迎接我到方丈中吃饭，请我立即搬迁住处。
English: Two mages, Koban and Anren, welcomed me to the abbot's school for dinner and asked me to move my residence immediately.

古文：余以大觉遍周以足疾期晤相约见面，于是欲少须之等待。
现代文：我因为大觉寺的遍周师有足疾而约我去会面，于是希望稍微等待一下。
English: I had made an appointment to meet the Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Venerable Ven.

古文：乃还过大觉，西上一里，入寂光寺。
现代文：就返回大觉寺，往西上一里，进入寂光寺。
English: He returned to Daikaku-ji Temple and walked one mile west to enter Jakko-ji Temple.

古文：住持者留点。
现代文：住持留我吃点心。
English: The chief priest kept me to eat dim sum.

古文：此中诸大刹，惟此七佛殿左右两旁俱辟禅堂方丈，与大觉、悉檀并丽。
现代文：此处的各大寺庙，只有这座七佛殿左右两边都开辟成禅堂方丈，和大觉寺、悉檀寺同样华美。
English: Of all the temples here, only this Seven-Buddha Hall has a Zen temple abbot on both sides, and it is just as beautiful as Daikaku-ji Temple and Siddan-ji Temple.

古文：又稍西半里，为水月、积行二庵，皆其师用周所遗也，亦颇幽整。
现代文：又稍稍往西走半里，到水月、积行二庵，都是他们的师傅用周遗留下来的，也很幽静整齐。
English: Another half-mile slightly to the west, to Mizugetsu and Jyogyo Nian, both of which were left by their master Zhou, are also very quiet and tidy.

古文：二十四日入晤遍周，方留款而弘辨、安仁来顾，即恳移寓。
现代文：二十四日在寺内和遍周会面，遍周正殷勤留客而弘辨、安仁来探望，就恳请让我搬迁住处。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, I met with Hen Zhou in the temple. Hen Zhou was diligently entertaining guests, and when Anren came to visit, he implored me to move my residence.

古文：遂同过其寺，以静闻骨悬之寺中古梅间而入。
现代文：于是和他们一齐拜访悉檀寺，把静闻的遗骨悬挂在寺中的古梅间然后进去。
English: So they visited Siddan-ji Temple together, hung Jingwen's remains in the temple's ancient plum room, and then went inside.

古文：问仙陀、纯白何在，则方监建塔基在其上也。
现代文：询问仙陀、纯白在什么地方，则正在上面监督建造塔基。
English: If you ask Cinderella or Purity where they are, they are supervising the construction of the tower base.

古文：先是余在唐大来处遇二僧，即殷然以瘗ｙì埋葬骨事相订。
现代文：在这之前我在唐大来处遇见仙陀、纯白两位僧人，就真诚地把埋葬静闻遗骨的事预定了。
English: Prior to this, I met two monks, Senda and Chungbaek, at the entrance of the University of Tang Dynasty, and I sincerely made a reservation for the burial of Jingwen's remains.

古文：及入山，见两山排闼ｔ门，东为水口，而独无一塔，为山中欠不足事。
现代文：等到进入鸡足山时，看见两山推门，东边是水口，但唯独没有一座塔，成为山中欠缺的事。
English: When entering the Chicken's Foot Mountain, I saw two mountains pushing the door, the east side was the water outlet, but there was no tower, which became a lack of things in the mountain.

古文：至是知仙陀督塔工，而未知建于何所。弘辨指其处，正在回龙环顾间，与余意合。
现代文：到这里知道仙陀监督建塔工作，却不知道塔建在哪里 弘辨指示建塔处，正是在曲折山梁环绕之中，和我的心意相合。
English: To this day, I know that Sendao supervised the construction of the tower, but I don't know where the tower was built. The place where Hongban instructed the construction of the tower was in the twists and turns of the mountain, which coincided with my heart.

古文：饭后，遂东南二里，登塔基，晤仙陀。
现代文：吃过饭后，就往东南走二里，登上塔基，和仙陀会面。
English: After eating, he walked two miles southeast, climbed onto the tower base, and met with Sendao.

古文：二十五日自悉檀北上，经无息、无我二庵。
现代文：二十五日从悉檀寺往北上，经过无息庵、无我庵。
English: On the 25th, I walked north from Siddan-ji Temple, passing by Muki-an and Muga-an.

古文：一里，过大乘庵，有小水二派，一自幻住东，一自兰陀东，俱南向而会于此，为悉檀西派者也。
现代文：一里，经过大乘庵，有两股小水，一股来自幻住庵东，一股来自兰陀寺东，都向南流而到此会合，成为悉檀寺西的一股水。
English: One mile past the Daijyo-an, there are two small streams, one from the east of the hallucinatory hermitage and one from the east of the Lando-ji Temple, both flowing south and meeting here, becoming a stream of water west of the Siddan-ji Temple.

古文：从二水之中蹶坡上，二里余，东为幻住，今为福宁寺，西冈为兰陀。
现代文：从二股小水之中登坡而上，二里多，东边是幻住庵，如今名福宁寺；西边冈上是兰陀寺。
English: Climbing up the slope from the middle of the two small streams, there are more than two miles. On the east side is Genshuan, now known as Fukuning Temple; on the west hill is Lando Temple.

古文：幻住东水，即野愚师静室东峡所下，与九重崖为界者；幻住西水，即与艮一兰陀寺夹坞之水，上自莘野静室，发源于念佛堂，而为狮子林中峡之水也。
现代文：幻住庵东的水，就是从野愚法师静室东边的峡谷流下来，和九重崖形成分界的水；幻住庵西边的水，就是和良一法师的兰陀寺隔着山坞的水，从上面萃野的静室流来，发源于念佛堂，从而成为狮子林峡谷中的水。
English: The water to the east of the hallucinatory hermitage is the water that flows down from the canyon on the east side of the still room of the wild fool mage and forms a boundary with the nine-story cliff; the water to the west of the hallucinatory hermitage is the water of the lando temple of the good mage across the dock, flowing from the still room of the field above, originating from the Buddhist temple, and thus becoming the water in the canyon of the lion forest.

古文：循东冈幻住旁，北向一里而得一静室，即天香者。
现代文：一沿东冈幻住庵旁边，往北一里就走到一间静室，是天香静室。
English: Along the east hill next to the phantom residence, one mile to the north, you will come to a quiet room, which is the Heavenly Fragrance Quiet Room.

古文：时寺中无人，人讯莘野庐，小沙弥指在盘崖杳蔼遥远不可见的山雾间，当危崖之西。
现代文：当时寺中没有人，进去讯问萃野的住所，小沙弥指着盘绕深远的崖间，在陡崖的西面。
English: There was no one in the temple at the time, so he went inside to inquire about Tsuchino's place of residence. Kosami pointed to the deep cliff, on the west side of the steep cliff.

古文：乃从其后蹑崖上，穿林转磴，俱在深翠中，盖其地无乔松，惟杂木缤纷，而叠路其间，又一景矣。
现代文：于是从背后攀崖而上，穿树林绕石阶，都是在深深的翠绿中走，因为这里没有高大的松树，只有缤纷的杂木，而道路重叠在其中，又是一种景致。
English: So I climbed up the cliff from behind, walked through the woods and around the stone steps, all in deep green, because there are no tall pine trees here, only colorful trees, and the roads overlap in them, which is another kind of scenery.

古文：数十曲，几一里，东蹑冈，即野愚庐；西缘崖度峡，即莘野庐道。
现代文：转数十道弯，将近一里，往东登冈，就是野愚的住处；往西攀缘山崖穿过峡谷，就是去萃野住处的路。
English: Turn dozens of turns, nearly a mile, to the east up the hill, is the residence of the wild goose; to the west, climbing the cliff through the canyon, is the road to the residence of the wild goose.

古文：于是西向傍崖，横陟半里，有一静室高悬峡中，户扃门户关闭莫入，是为悉檀寺库头所结。
现代文：于是往西傍靠山崖，横穿半里，有一处静室高悬在峡谷中，门关着不能进去，这是悉檀寺库头所建筑的。
English: So I went to the west side of the cliff, half a mile across, and there was a quiet room hanging high in the canyon, with the door closed so I couldn't get in. It was built by the head of the Siddan Temple library.

古文：由其前西下兰陀寺，蹑其后而上，又半里而得莘野静室。
现代文：从静室前往西下到兰陀寺，从寺背后攀登而上，又半里就到萃野的静室。
English: From the seclusion room, go west to Lando Temple, climb up from the back of the temple, and half a mile to the seclusion room of Sukeno.

古文：时知莘野在牟尼山，而其父沈翁在室，及至而其门又扃，知翁别有所过，莫可问。
现代文：那时知道萃野在牟尼山，而其父沈翁在静室，等走到时静室的门又关着，知道沈翁另有拜访的地方，没有人可以询问。
English: At that time, he knew that Sumino was in Mount Muni, and his father, Shen Weng, was in the seclusion room. When he got there, the door of the seclusion room was closed. He knew that Shen Weng had another place to visit, and no one could inquire.

古文：遂从其左上，又得一静室。
现代文：于是从静室的左边上，又到一处静室。
English: Then, from the upper left of the quiet room, there is another quiet room.

古文：主僧亦出，有徒在，询之，则其师为兰宗也。
现代文：主持的僧人也外出了，有徒弟在，询问他，原来他的师傅是兰宗。
English: The presiding monk also went out. An apprentice was there and asked him about his teacher, who turned out to be Lanzong.

古文：又问： 沈翁何在？ 曰： 在伊室。 
现代文：又问： 沈翁在哪里？  回答说： 在他的居室。 
English: He also asked, "Where is Shen Rong?" and was answered, "He is in his bedroom."

古文：问： 室何扃？ 曰： 偶出，当亦不远。 
现代文：问： 居室为什么关着？  回答说： 偶然出去，应当不会太远。 
English: Question: Why is the bedroom closed? Answer: If you happen to go out, it shouldn't be too far.

古文：余欲还，以省中所寄书畀之。
现代文：我想返回去，把从省会所带来的信送给他。
English: I want to go back and give him the letter I brought from the provincial capital.

古文：其徒曰： 恐再下无觅处，不若留此代致也。 
现代文：这徒弟说： 恐怕再下去也没地方找，不如留在这里我代送。 
English: The apprentice said, "I'm afraid there's no place to go any further. It's better to stay here and I'll take it for you."

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又从左峡过珠帘翠壁，蹑台入一室，则影空所栖也。
现代文：又从左边峡谷经过珠帘翠壁，登台进入一室，是影空的栖身处。
English: From the canyon on the left, pass the beaded curtain wall, enter the stage and enter a room, which is the shelter of the shadow space.

古文：影空不在。
现代文：影空不在。
English: There is no shadow.

古文：乃从其左横转而东，一里，入野愚静室，所谓大静室也。
现代文：于是从室的左边横转向东走，一里，进入野愚的静室，是所谓的大静室。
English: So he walked from the left side of the room to the east, one mile, and entered the Wild Fool's quiet room, the so-called Great Quiet Room.

古文：有堂三楹横其前，下临绝壁。
现代文：有三间堂屋横列其前，下面对着绝壁。
English: There are three halls in a row in front of it, facing the cliff below.

古文：其堂窗棂疏朗，如浮坐云端，可称幽爽。
现代文：其堂屋窗户明亮宽敞，坐在其中如同浮在云端，可以称得上幽静清爽。
English: Its large windows are bright and spacious, and sitting in them is like floating on a cloud, which can be described as quiet and refreshing.

古文：室中诸老宿具在。
现代文：室中众位高僧都在。
English: All the high priests are in the room.

古文：野愚出迎。
现代文：野愚出来迎接。
English: Noguchi came out to greet them.

古文：余入询，则兰宗、影空及罗汉壁慧心诸静侣也。
现代文：我进去后询问，是兰宗、影空以及罗汉壁的慧心等静侣。
English: After I went in, I asked if it was the tranquil couple of Lanzong, Ying Kuo and the wisdom of Luo Hanbi.

古文：是日野愚设供招诸静侣，遂留余饭。
现代文：这天野愚设饭食招待众静侣，就留我吃饭。
English: On this day, Amano-U set up a meal to invite all the quiet couples, and he left me to eat.

古文：饭后，见余携书箧，因取箧中书各传观之。
现代文：饭后，看见我携带着书筐，于是各人取筐中的书传阅。
English: After the meal, they saw that I was carrying a book basket, so they each took a book from the basket and passed it around.

古文：兰宗独津津不置，盖曾云游过吾地，而潜心文教者。
现代文：唯独兰宗津津乐道，不忍释手，因为他曾经云游过我的家乡，并且潜心于文教。
English: However, Lan Zong Tsu Tsu Le Dao could not bear to let go, because he had been to my hometown and devoted himself to literature and education.

古文：既乃取道由林中西向罗汉壁，从念佛堂下过，林翳不知，竟平行而西。
现代文：接着取道从林中往西去罗汉壁，从念佛堂下经过，堂被树林遮蔽，没有看见，竟然向西平行。
English: Next, I took a path from the forest to the west to the Rohan Wall, passing under the Nembutsu Hall. The hall was obscured by trees, and I didn't see it, even though it was parallel to the west.

古文：共一里半，有龛在磐石上，入问道。
现代文：共一里半，磐石上有石屋，进去问路。
English: A total of one and a half miles, there are stone houses on the rock, go in and ask for directions.

古文：从其西南半里，逾一突嘴，即所谓望台也，此支下坠，即结为大觉寺者。
现代文：顺石屋西南走半里，越过一道突起的山口，就是所谓的望台，此座山往下坠，就是建盖大觉寺的地方。
English: Half a mile south-west of Shunshiya, you will pass over a prominent mountain pass, the so-called watchtower. This mountain falls down and is the place where Daikyo-ji Temple was built.

古文：望台之西，山势内逊，下围成峡，而旃ｚｈｎ檀檀香林之静室倚之。
现代文：望台西边，山势往里退，下面围成峡谷，而旗檀林静室傍靠在那里。
English: On the west side of the observation deck, the mountains recede and form a canyon below, while the Flag Danglin Tranquility Room is next to it.

古文：峡西又有脉一支，自山尖前拖而下，是为旃檀岭，即西与罗汉壁分界者。
现代文：峡谷西边又有一支山脉，从山尖前伸下去，这是旗檀岭，就是西边和罗汉壁分界的山。
English: On the west side of the canyon, there is another mountain range that extends from the top of the mountain. This is Qidanling, the mountain that separates the west side from the Rohan Wall.

古文：是脉下坠，即为中支，而寂光、首传寺倚之，前度息阴轩，东转而尽于大士阁者也。
现代文：这支山脉往下坠，就成为正中的一支，是寂光寺、首传寺傍靠的山，往前越过息阴轩，转东延伸到大士阁结束。
English: This mountain range falls down and becomes one of the straight ones, it is the mountain next to Jakko-ji Temple and Shuchuan-ji Temple, it extends past Sikyo-ken, turns east and ends at Daishikaku.

古文：由望台平行而西，又二里半而过此岭。
现代文：从望台往西平行，又走二里半然后经过此岭。
English: From the watchtower, walk parallel to the west for another two and a half miles and then pass this ridge.

古文：岭之西，石崖渐出，高拥于后。
现代文：岭的西边，石崖渐渐出现，高高簇拥在后面。
English: On the west side of the ridge, the rock cliffs gradually appear, clustering high behind.

古文：乃折而北上半里，得碧云寺。
现代文：于是转向北上半里，到碧云寺。
English: So I turned half a mile north to Biyunji.

古文：寺乃北京师诸徒所建，香火杂沓，以慕师而来者众也。
现代文：寺是北京法师的众徒弟所建盖的，香火较旺，因为仰慕法师之名而来的人多。
English: The temple was built by the disciples of the Beijing mage. The incense was very strong, because many people came to admire the name of the mage.

古文：师所栖真武阁，尚在后崖悬嵌处。
现代文：法师所住的真武阁，还在背后悬崖上的凹嵌处。
English: The real castle, where the sorcerer lived, is still embedded in the cliff behind.

古文：乃从寺后取道，宛转上之。半里，入阁，参叩男女满阁中，而不见师。
现代文：于是从寺后取道，曲折而上；半里，进入阁中，满阁中都是参拜叩头的男女，却没见法师。
English: So he took the road from the back of the temple, winding up; half a mile, into the pavilion, the pavilion was full of men and women who came to worship and bow, but they did not see the mage.

古文：余见阁东有台颇幽，独探之。
现代文：我看见阁东有很深幽的台，独自探看。
English: I saw that there was a very deep platform in the east of the pavilion, and I explored it alone.

古文：一老僧方濯足其上，余心知为师也，拱而待之。
现代文：一位老僧正在台上洗脚，我心中明白就是法师了，拱手等待。
English: An old monk was washing his feet on the stage. I knew in my heart that he was a sorcerer, so I waited.

古文：师即跃而起，把臂呼： 同声相应，同气相求。 
现代文：法师立即跳跃而起，握着我的手臂呼叫： 同声相应，同气相求。 
English: The mage immediately jumped to his feet, grasped my arm and called out: "Simultaneous response, simultaneous aspiration."

古文：且诠解详细解释之。
现代文：并且详细解释。
English: And explain it in detail.

古文：手持二袜未穿，且指其胸曰： 余为此中忙甚，袜垢二十年未涤。 
现代文：手里拿着的两只袜子没穿，并指着自己的胸说： 我为此中十分忙，袜子的污垢二十年没洗。 
English: Holding two unworn socks in his hand, he pointed to his chest and said: "I'm very busy with this, I haven't washed the dirt from my socks for 20 years."

古文：方持袜示余，而男妇闻声涌至，膜拜举手加额，长跪而拜不休，台小莫容，则分番迭换。
现代文：正要把袜子拿给我看，而那些男女闻声拥来，不停地膜拜，台小容纳不下，就分批轮换着来。
English: He was about to show me his socks, and those men and women heard his voice and kept coming to worship him. The stage was too small to hold them, so they came in batches.

古文：师与语，言人人殊，及念佛修果，娓娓不竭。
现代文：法师和他们讲话，对一个人和另一个人说得不一样，讲到念佛修果，娓娓而谈，滔滔不绝。
English: The guru spoke to them, speaking differently to one person than to another, rambling on and on about the benefits of chanting.

古文：时以道远，余先辞出。
现代文：当时因为路远，我先告辞出来。
English: At that time, because of the distance, I had to say goodbye first.

古文：见崖后有路可蹑，复攀援其上。
现代文：看见崖后有路可以攀登，又攀援而上。
English: After seeing the cliff, there was a path to climb, and I climbed up to help.

古文：转而东，得一峡上缘，有龛可坐，梯险登之。
现代文：转向东，到达一道峡谷上边，有能坐人的石室，由险梯登上去。
English: Turning east, you reach the upper edge of a canyon, where there is a stone room where you can sit and climb up by a dangerous ladder.

古文：复下碧云庵。
现代文：又下到碧云庵。
English: I went down to Biun-an again.

古文：适慧心在，以返悉檀路遥，留余宿。
现代文：恰巧慧心在，因为返回悉檀寺的路太远，他留我住宿。
English: He was kind enough to let me stay with him as it was too far to walk back to Siddanji.

古文：主寺者以无被难之，盖其地高寒也。
现代文：寺中的主持因没有被子而为难，这里地势高气候寒冷。
English: The head priest of the temple was troubled by the lack of children. The terrain is high and the weather is cold.

古文：余乃亟下。
现代文：我于是急忙下山。
English: So I hurried down the mountain.

古文：南向二里，过白云寺，已暮色欲合。
现代文：往南走二里，经过白云寺，已经是暮色降临。
English: Two miles to the south, past Baiyun Temple, it was already dusk.

古文：从其北傍中支腋行，路渐平而阔。
现代文：从寺北沿着中支山脉侧边走，道路渐渐平坦而宽阔。
English: Walking from the north of the temple along the side of the Zhongshi Mountains, the road gradually becomes flat and wide.

古文：二里，过首传寺，暗中不能物看色。
现代文：二里，经过首传寺，黑暗中不能看到什么。
English: For two miles, past Shou Chuan Temple, nothing can be seen in the darkness.

古文：又东南一里余，过寂光。
现代文：又往东南走一里多，经过寂光寺。
English: Another kilometer to the southeast, past Jakko-ji Temple.

古文：一里，过大觉。
现代文：一里，经过大觉寺。
English: One mile, past Daikaku-ji Temple.

古文：又东一里过西竺，与大道别，行松林间，茫不可见。
现代文：又往东一里经过西竺寺，离开大路，在松林中行走，茫然看不见。
English: Another mile to the east, past Xidi Temple, I left the main road and walked in the pine forest, unable to see.

古文：又二里过悉檀前，几从龙潭外下，回见灯影，乃转觅。
现代文：又走二里经过悉檀寺前，几乎顺龙潭外下去，回头看见灯影，才转回来寻找寺。
English: I walked another two miles past the Siddan Temple, almost down the outside of Longtan, turned around to see the lights and shadows, and then turned back to look for the temple.

古文：抵其门，则前十方堂已早闭不肯启，叩左侧门，乃得入宿焉。
现代文：来到寺门，则前面的十方堂早已关了，不肯打开，敲左侧门，才得以进去住宿。
English: When I arrived at the temple gate, the Shifang Hall in front of me was already closed. I didn't want to open it, so I knocked on the door on the left before I could enter and stay.

古文：二十六日晨起饭。
现代文：二十六日早晨起床吃饭。
English: On the morning of the 26th, I got up to eat.

古文：弘辨言： 今日竖塔心，为吉日，可同往一看。
现代文：弘辨说： 今天竖塔心，是吉日，可以一同去看一看。
English: Koban said, "Today is the auspicious day to see the heart of the vertical tower. You can go and have a look together.

古文：幸定地一处，即可为静闻师入塔。 
现代文：有幸确定一处地方，就可以把静闻师的遗骨入塔。 
English: If we are fortunate enough to identify a place, we will be able to place Jing Huan's remains in the tower.

古文：余喜甚。
现代文：我很高兴。
English: I'm very happy.

古文：弘辨引路前，由龙潭东二里，过龙砂内支。其腋间一穴，在塔基北半里，其脉自塔基分派处中悬而下。
现代文：弘辨在前面带路，顺龙潭往东二里，经过龙砂内支•其侧边有一个洞，在塔基北面半里处，山脉从塔基分开处正正地悬挂下去。
English: Hongbin led the way in front, along the Longtan to the east for two miles, passing through the inner branch of the Longsha. There was a hole on its side, half a mile north of the tower, and the mountains hung straight down from the tower base.

古文：先有三塔，皆本无高弟也。
现代文：早先有三座塔，都是本无法师的高徒。
English: Earlier, there were three towers, all of which were students who could not be taught.

古文：最南一塔，即仙陀、纯白之师。
现代文：最南的一座塔，就是仙陀、纯白的师傅。
English: The southernmost tower is the Cinderella, the pure white master.

古文：师本嵩明籍，仙陀、纯白向亦中表，皆师之甥，后随披薙ｔì，又为师弟。
现代文：法师原是嵩明州籍贯，仙陀、纯白从前也是表兄弟，都是法师的外甥，后跟随法师披僧衣、剃发出家，又成为师傅徒弟。
English: The mage was originally from Songming, and Xindu and Pure White were also cousins in the past. They were both nephews of the mage. Later, they followed the mage to wear monk's robes and shave their hair, and became apprentice to the master.

古文：师归西方，在本无之前，本公为择地于此，而又自为之记。
现代文：法师在本无之前去世，本公为他在这里选择墓地，并且又亲自为他作记。
English: The sorcerer died before he passed away, and the lord chose a cemetery for him here, and personally wrote a memorial for him.

古文：余谓辨公，乞其南为静闻穴。
现代文：我对辨公说，请在南面建静闻坟穴。
English: I said to the judge, please build Jingwen's grave on the south side.

古文：辨公请广择之。
现代文：辨公请我广泛挑选。
English: The judge asked me to make a broad selection.

古文：又有本公塔在岭北，亦惟所命。
现代文：岭北又有本公塔，也听从选择。
English: Lingbei has its own pagoda, and also obeys the choice.

古文：余以其穴近仙陀之师为便，议遂定。
现代文：我认为静闻的墓穴靠近仙陀的师傅为好，于是商议定了。
English: I thought it would be better for Jingwen's tomb to be close to Sendao's master, so we came to an agreement.

古文：静闻是日入窆ｂｉｎ埋葬。
现代文：静闻的遗骨这一天下葬。
English: Jingwen's remains were buried the same day.

