古文：可乎？
现代文： 坚白石 称为 三 行吗？
English: The shopkeeper pleaded with Yang Wei Lang to open his eyes.

古文：曰：不可。
现代文：不行！
English: And they said, We cannot.

古文：曰：二可乎？
现代文：那么称为 二 ，行吗？
English: So let's call it two, okay?

古文：曰：可。
现代文：行。
English: He said, "Yes."

古文：曰：何哉？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：曰：无坚得白，其举也二；无白得坚，其举也二。曰：得其所白，不可谓无白；得其所坚，不可谓无坚。
现代文：因为见不到 坚 而见到 白 时，见到的是白石，而白石是白与石结合在一起的物指，白石是具体的事物，称为 二 ；摸不到 白 而摸到 坚 时，所知道的是坚石，坚石同样是具体的事物，也称为 二 。既然见到了 白 ，便不能说没有白；既然摸到了 坚 ，便不能说没有坚。
English: When you see white because you can't see a stone, what you see is a white stone, and a white stone is a pointer that combines white and stone. A white stone is a concrete thing, called two; when you can't touch white and touch a stone, what you know is a hard stone. A hard stone is also a concrete thing, also called two. Since you have seen white, you can't say there is no white; since you have touched a stone, you can't say there is no stone.

古文：而之石也，之于然也，非三也？
现代文：既然有白又有坚，而这块石，之所以称为坚白石，不正是有了石与坚与白三个东西吗？
English: Since there is white and hardness, and the reason why this stone is called hard white stone, is it not because there are three things, stone, hardness and white?

古文：曰：视不得其所坚而得，其所白者，无坚也；拊不得其所白而得其所坚，得其坚，无白也。
现代文：不能这么说，既然视觉看不到石的坚而只看到石的白，而看到石的白，也就看不到石的坚；既然触觉不能摸到石的白而只摸到石的坚，而摸到石的坚，也就摸不到石的白。
English: This cannot be said, since sight does not see the hardness of the stone, but only sees the whiteness of the stone, and seeing the whiteness of the stone, does not see the hardness of the stone; since touch cannot touch the whiteness of the stone, but only touches the hardness of the stone, and touching the hardness of the stone, does not touch the whiteness of the stone.

古文：曰：天下无白，不可以视石；天下无坚，不可以谓石。
现代文：世界上没有白色，当然谈不上有什么白色的东西而被称为石头；世界上没有坚性，也当然谈不上有什么坚的东西而被称为石头。
English: There is no white in the world, of course, there is no white thing and it is called stone; there is no solidity in the world, of course, there is no solid thing and it is called stone.

古文：坚、白不相外，藏三，可乎？
现代文：坚性、白色、石质不能相脱离，可以说这是藏着 三 样东西吗？
English: Solid, white and stone cannot be separated from each other, can it be said that this is hiding three things?

古文：有自藏也，非藏而藏也。
现代文：所谓藏是见与不见自然互相转移而掩蔽不见，不是离开感觉对象而别有他物隐藏着它。
English: The so-called hiding is that seeing and not seeing naturally transfer to each other and cover up not seeing, not leaving the sensory object and hiding it with something else.

古文：曰：其白也，其坚也，而石必得以相盈，其自藏奈何？
现代文：见到白色、摸到坚性都是与石联系在一起的，石头与白色及坚性渗透融合成一体，坚白石不是藏着坚、白、石这三样东西吗？所谓 自藏 究竟是什么意思呢？
English: Seeing the white and touching the hardness are all connected with the stone, the stone and the white and the hardness are fused into one. Isn't the hard white stone hiding the three things of hardness, white and stone? What does the so-called self-hiding mean?

古文：曰：得其白，得其坚，见与不见谓之离；不见离，一二不相盈，故离。离也者，藏也。
现代文：见到白色的石头，或摸到坚性的石头，都是一个见得到而另一个见不到，过一个摸得着，便另一个摸不着，这就是叫做 离 。不能见到的坚就离开了见到的白石，这也就是 一 不相盈于 二 ，因而 坚 便 离 了。所谓 离 ，就是 藏 。
English: Seeing a white stone or touching a solid stone, one can see it and the other can't, and if one can touch it, the other can't, which is called separation. The solid that can't be seen leaves the white stone that can be seen, which is to say, one doesn't overlap with the other, so the solid is separated. The so-called separation is hiding.

古文：曰：石之白，石之坚，见与不见，二与三，若广修而相盈也。
现代文：见到的白是石的白，触知的坚是石的坚。见到的与见不到的相结合，就是二加一而成为三，坚白石如同物体的长度与宽度相结合在一起而不可分离那样，难道这样说是逻辑错误吗？
English: The white you see is the white of the stone, the hardness of the touch is the hardness of the stone. The combination of the seen and the unseen is two plus one and becomes three. Is it a logical error to say that the hardness of the white stone is like the length and width of the object combined together and cannot be separated?

古文：其非举乎？曰：物白焉，不定其所白；物坚焉，不定其所坚。
现代文：说物的白色，并不限定是哪一物的白色，说物的坚性，并不限定是哪一物的坚性，所谓并不限定，是说它兼通于众多事物，而事物的共性怎能说只限定于石头所仅有呢？
English: To say that something is white is not to say that it is white. To say that something is hard is not to say that it is hard. To say that something is hard is not to say that it is hard. To say that it is hard is to say that it is hard. To say that it is hard is to say that it is hard. To say that it is hard is to say that it is hard.

古文：不定者，兼。恶乎其石也？曰：循石，非彼无石，非石无所取坚白。
现代文：就拿石头的情况来说吧，虽然没有坚白就无石可言，但是没有石也就谈不上有坚白了。
English: Let's take the case of stone. Although it can be said that there is no stone without solid white, there can be no solid white without stone.

古文：不相离也，固乎然，其无已！
现代文：坚白石不相离，本来就是这样，也永远是这样。
English: The two are inseparable, as they always have been and always will be.

古文：曰：于石，一也；坚白，二也，而在于石。
现代文：石，是一；而在石中的坚、白却是 二 。这样，便有摸得着的，有摸不着的；有看得见的，有看不见的。
English: For the stone is one, and the granite is one; but the whiteness, which is in the stone, is two: so then there is that which is seen, and that which is not seen; and there is that which is visible, and that which is invisible.

古文：故有知焉，有不知焉；有见焉，故知与不知相与离，见与不见相与藏。
现代文：因而，摸得着的便与摸不着的互相隐藏着。既然有互相隐藏，怎能说它们互相不可分离呢？因为 藏 就是不见，不见的当然与可见的有区别而可被分析了。
English: Since there is a mutual concealment, how can it be said that they are inseparable? For concealment is invisible, and the invisible is of course distinguishable from the visible and can be analyzed.

古文：藏故，孰谓之不离？曰：目不能坚，手不能白，不可谓无坚，不可谓无白。
现代文：坚不但在坚石中存在着，恶气在一切具有坚性的事物中存在着，虽然不知石物之坚，但并不因此而妨碍坚性的普遍存在。
English: Not only does hardness exist in hard stones, but the evil spirit exists in all things that have hardness. Although the hardness of the stone is not known, it does not hinder the universal existence of hardness.

古文：其异任也，其无以代也。坚白域与石，恶乎离？曰：坚未与石为坚，而物兼，未与为坚而坚必坚。其不坚石物而坚，天下未有若坚而坚藏。白固不能自白，恶能白石物乎？若白者必白，则不白物而白焉。
现代文：共性之坚并不依是否感知个别一物之坚而转移，因为世界上除了某物之坚外，坚尚隐藏在其他具有坚性的事物中。共性的 白 本来就不是一个独立存在的物质实体，它怎能使石或其他事物发 白 呢？如果 白 是独立存在而自 白 的实体，那末它就不必通过各种具体白色的事物而显示其 白 了。
English: The common whiteness does not depend on whether or not we perceive the whiteness of a particular object, because in the world, in addition to the whiteness of something, whiteness is hidden in other things that have whiteness. The common whiteness is not an independently existing material entity, how can it make stone or other things white? If white is an independently existing and self-whitening entity, then it does not have to show its whiteness through various specific white things.

古文：黄、黑与之然。
现代文：黄、黑也是一样。
English: The same goes for yellow and black.

古文：神乎！是之谓离焉。离也者，天下故独而正。
现代文：如果连具体的石头也没有，哪里还会有 坚白石 呢？
English: If there is not even a concrete stone, where will there be a hard white stone?

