古文：天设日月，列星辰，调阴阳，张四时，日以暴之，夜以息之，风以干之，雨露以濡之。
现代文：天上设置日月，陈列星辰，调节阴阳，布设四季。白天由阳光照耀，晚上让它们休息，用风来吹干，用雨露来润湿。
English: The sun and moon are set in the sky, the stars are displayed, the yin and yang are adjusted, and the four seasons are arranged. The sun shines during the day, and they are allowed to rest at night. They are dried with the wind and moistened with rain and dew.

古文：其生物也，莫见其所养而物长；其杀物也，莫见其所丧而物亡。
现代文：上天化育万物，却看不到是怎样养育，但万物倒茁壮成长了；上天杀灭万物，却看不到是怎样杀灭，但万物倒凋落死亡了。
English: The heavens give birth to all things, but we cannot see how they are nurtured, yet all things thrive; the heavens destroy all things, but we cannot see how they are destroyed, yet all things decline and die.

古文：此之谓神明。
现代文：这种无形的生灭手段，叫做神明。
English: This invisible means of birth and death is called the gods.

古文：圣人象之，故其起福也，不见其所由而福起；其除祸也，不见其所以而祸除。
现代文：圣人仿效大自然，所以他在给人们带来福祉时，看不见他有什么行动，但幸福却降临了；他在为人们除去祸害时，看不见他在采取什么措施，但祸害却消除了。
English: The sage imitates nature, so when he brings good to people, he does not see what he is doing, but happiness comes; when he removes evil from people, he does not see what measures he is taking, but the evil is eliminated.

古文：远之则迩，延之则疎；稽之弗得，察之不虚；日计无算，岁计有余。
现代文：这正是远离之却靠近之，延近之却疏远之。稽查它们得不到踪影，观察它们却又不虚妄。每天算计，效果甚微；长年累月则功效卓著。
English: This is what it means to be far away from something but close to it, to be close to something but distant from it, to inspect something but not find any trace of it, and to observe something but not be deceived by it. Calculated daily, the effect is insignificant; accumulated over the years, the effect is outstanding.

古文：夫湿之至也，莫见其形，而炭已重矣；风之至也，莫见其象，而木已动矣。日之行也，不见其移，骐骥倍日而驰，草木为之靡；悬熢未转，而日在其前。
现代文：湿气降临，看不见它的形状，但木炭却已增加了重量；风将吹临，看不见它的形象，但树叶却已摆动了；时光的推移，不留明显的痕迹，但草木却随着时光的推移而枯萎；千里马日夜兼程奔驰传递着，而烽火台上的烽燧并不见它的传递，但传到下一站的时间，总在驿马之前。
English: Moisture falls, its shape is not visible, but the charcoal has gained weight; the wind will blow, its image is not visible, but the leaves have swung; the passage of time does not leave obvious traces, but the grass withers with the passage of time; the horse-drawn carriage travels day and night, and the cocoon on the campfire does not see its transmission, but the time to the next station is always before the horse.

古文：故天之且风，草木未动而鸟已翔矣；其且雨也，阴曀未集而鱼已矣；以阴阳之气相动也。
现代文：所以，天将要起风，草木还没有反应，而鸟儿却已经从树上飞离；天将要降雨，乌云还没有聚集遮盖天空，而鱼儿却已经浮出水面喘气了，这是阴阳二气互动交感的缘故。
English: Therefore, the sky will be windy, the plants have not yet reacted, but the birds have already flown away from the trees; the sky will rain, the dark clouds have not yet gathered to cover the sky, but the fish have surfaced to breathe, which is due to the interaction of yin and yang.

古文：故寒暑燥湿，以类相从；声响疾除，以音相应也。
现代文：因此，寒暑、燥湿，按照类别而相随从；声音回响的疾速、缓慢，按照音类而相呼应。
English: Therefore, cold and heat, dry and wet, follow each other according to their categories; the rapidity and slowness of sound reverberation, echo each other according to their categories.

古文：故《易》曰： 鸣鹤在阴，其子和之。 
现代文：所以《易经》说： 鹤在树荫里鸣叫，它的同类小鹤在附近应和着。 
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" says: "The crane crows in the shade of the trees, and its fellow cranes sing in unison nearby."

古文：高宗谅暗，三年不言，四海之内寂然无声；一言声然，大动天下。
现代文：殷高宗武丁居丧，三年内闭口不言，四海之内随之寂然无声；但一旦他发布号令，便震撼天下，这是遵循天意而使天下像呼和吸那样感应。
English: When Yin Gao Zongwuding passed away, he did not speak for three years, and the world was silent. However, once he issued an order, it shook the world. This was in accordance with the will of heaven and made the world respond as if calling and sucking.

古文：是以天心呿唫者也，故一动其本而百枝皆应，若春雨之灌万物也，浑然而流，沛然而施，无地而不澍，无物而不生。
现代文：所以，一旦触动根本，百枝万叶都会随之摇晃，如同春雨浇灌万物，浑浑然流淌，源源不断地施泽着，没有什么地方不受润滋，没有什么植物不被养育。
English: Therefore, once the root is touched, all the branches and leaves will shake with it, just like the spring rain watering all things, flowing smoothly, and continuously adding luster. There is no place that does not receive moisture, and no plant that is not nurtured.

古文：故圣人者怀天心，声然能动化天下者也。
现代文：所以圣人顺应天意，一出声音就震动天下。
English: Therefore, the saint obeyed the will of heaven and shook the world at the sound of a voice.

古文：故精诚感于内，形气动于天，则景星见，黄龙下，祥凤至，醴泉出，嘉谷生，河不满溢，海不溶波。故《诗》云： 怀柔百神，及河峤岳。 
现代文：因此人的内心世界如果感发起至精至诚的情感，那么他的形体之气就会感化天，随之就会有吉祥的瑞星出现、神龙也会降临、吉祥的凤凰也会翔临、甘泉也会自地涌流、五谷未布而生长、江河不会泛滥、大海不会肆虐。所以《诗经》说： 祭祀安抚众神，并顾及黄河五岳。 
English: Therefore, if a person's inner world is inspired by the most refined and sincere emotions, then the spirit of his body will influence the sky, and then the auspicious star will appear, the divine dragon will descend, the auspicious phoenix will fly, the sweet spring will flow from the ground, the grain will not grow, the river will not flood, and the sea will not rage. Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says: Sacrifices appease the gods, and take into account the Yellow River and the Five Mountains.

古文：逆天暴物，则日月薄蚀，五星失行，四时干乖，昼冥宵光，山崩川涸，冬雷夏霜。《诗》曰： 正月繁霜，我心忧伤。 
现代文：如果违逆天意，暴虐万物，就会出现日食、月食，五星也会偏离它的正常运行轨道，四季就会与时令相违背，白天昏暗、夜晚放光、山峰崩塌、河流枯涸、冬天响雷、夏天打霜。《诗经》上说： 六月繁霜，令我心忧。 
English: If you violate the will of heaven and tyrannize all things, there will be solar eclipses, lunar eclipses, the five stars will deviate from its normal orbit, the four seasons will be contrary to the seasons, the day will be dark, the night will shine, the peaks will collapse, the rivers will dry up, the winter will thunder, and the summer will frost. "Song of Songs" said: "I am worried about the heavy frost in June."

古文：天之与人有以相通也。
现代文：上天和人事，是有相通之处的。
English: The divine and the human have something in common.

古文：故国危亡而天文变，世惑乱而虹蜺见，万物有以相连，精祲有以相荡也。
现代文：所以国家危亡而天象变异，世道混乱则虹霓呈现，万物是相互联系着的，灾异之气是会互相激荡相通的。
English: Therefore, the country is in peril and the celestial phenomenon is changing, the chaos of the world is a rainbow, everything is interconnected, and the spirit of disaster will excite each other.

古文：故神明之事，不可以智巧为也，不可以筋力致也。
现代文：所以神灵之事，是不能凭智巧去做的，是不能靠筋力去力求的。
English: Therefore, the things of the gods cannot be done with cleverness, nor can they be pursued with strength.

古文：天地所包，阴阳所呕，雨露所濡，化生万物，瑶碧玉珠，翡翠玳瑁，文彩明朗，润泽若濡，摩而不玩，久而不渝，奚仲不能旅，鲁般不能造，此之谓大巧。
现代文：天地包容着、阴阳化育着、雨露滋润着，这样便产生万物；那翡翠玳瑁、瑶碧玉珠是文彩明朗、滋润光滑，抚摩它不会损缺，历久而不变形，天成自然是奚仲无法摹仿的，鲁班不能复制的：天地自然造化万物的本领就是这样神奇，我们把此称为 大巧 。
English: Heaven and earth contain, yin and yang nurture, rain and dew moisturize, thus producing all things; the jade and jasper are bright, moist and smooth, stroking it will not be damaged, long-lasting and not deformed, and nature is inimitable and cannot be copied: the ability of heaven and earth to naturally create all things is so magical, we call it great.

古文：宋人有以象为其君为楮叶者，三年而成，茎柯豪芒，锋杀颜泽，乱之楮叶之中而不可知也。
现代文：宋国有人用象牙为国君雕刻了楮树树叶，花了三年时间才雕刻成功，叶的脉络细如微芒，叶子的厚薄、颜色都十分逼真，将它放在真的楮树叶中分不出真假。
English: In the Song Dynasty, someone used ivory to carve eucalyptus leaves for the ruler of the country. It took three years to carve successfully. The veins of the leaves are as thin as a wisp. The thickness and color of the leaves are very realistic. If you put it in a real eucalyptus leaf, you can't tell the true from the false.

古文：列子曰： 使天地三年而成一叶，则万物之有叶者寡矣。 
现代文：列子说： 假若天地自然也要花三年时间才能长成一片树叶的话，那么万物中有叶子的就太少了。 
English: Reiko said, "If it took three years for heaven and earth to grow into a leaf, then there would be too few leaves in all things.

古文：夫天地之施化也，呕之而生，吹之而落，岂此契契哉！
现代文：那天地自然化育万物，抚育它们，它们则很快生长；寒风吹刮它们，它们则很快凋零，哪会像人工雕刻那样费劲辛苦？
English: That heaven and earth naturally nurture all things, nurture them, they grow quickly; the cold wind blows them, they quickly wither, which will be as laborious as artificial sculpture?

古文：故凡可度者，小也；可数者，少也。
现代文：所以凡可以度量的都是微不足道的，凡可以计数的都是有限的。
English: Therefore, what can be measured is insignificant, and what can be counted is limited.

古文：至大，非度之所能及也；至众，非数之所能领也。
现代文：而最大的东西是无法度量的，极多的东西是数字无法统计的。
English: But the biggest things cannot be measured, and most things cannot be counted.

古文：故九州不可顷亩也，八极不可道里也，太山不可丈尺也，江海不可斗斛也。
现代文：所以九州是不能用顷亩来计算的，八极是不能用 道里 来计算的，泰山是无法用丈尺来尺量的，海水是无法用斗斛来量度的。
English: Therefore, Kyushu cannot be calculated using hectares and mu, the eight poles cannot be calculated using kilometers and miles, Mount Tai cannot be measured using a ruler, and seawater cannot be measured using a bucket.

古文：故大人者，与天地合德，日月合明，鬼神合灵，与四时合信。
现代文：所以大气慨的人和天地合德、日月合明、鬼神合灵，并和四季相协调。
English: Therefore, the people who feel the atmosphere are in harmony with heaven and earth, the sun and moon are in harmony, and the ghosts and gods are in harmony with the four seasons.

古文：故圣人怀天气，抱天心，执中含和，不下庙堂而衍四海，变习易俗，民化而迁善，若性诸己，能以神化也。《诗》云： 神之听之，终和且平。 
现代文：所以圣人怀着天一样的气概，有着天一样的心怀，持执着中和之气，不出庙堂便能恩泽施行四海，移风易俗，感化民众使之从善，却像出自他们的本性，这就是精神感化。《诗》中说到： 慎守自然，和顺又平安。 
English: Therefore, the saint has the same temperament as heaven, has the same heart as heaven, and adheres to the spirit of neutrality. Without leaving the temple, he can grant grace to the four seas, change customs, and influence the people to be good, but it seems to come from their nature. This is spiritual influence. "Poem" says: Be careful of nature, be peaceful and peaceful.

古文：夫鬼神视之无形，听之无声，然而郊天望山川，祷祠而求福，雩兑而请雨，卜筮而决事。
现代文：那鬼神，看它不见形体，听它不闻声音，然而每年祭祀上天，祭祀山川，祈求上天、山川之神降福，每逢旱灾，举行雩祭以祈求降雨，消除灾难以占卜来决定事宜。
English: That ghost god, seeing it does not see the shape, hearing it does not hear the sound, but every year they sacrifice to heaven, sacrifice to the mountains and rivers, pray for the blessing of heaven and the gods of the mountains and rivers, and whenever there is a drought, hold a burnt offering to pray for rain. It is difficult to solve the disaster by divination.

古文：《诗》云： 神之格思，不可度思，矧可射思！ 
现代文：《诗》中说： 神灵的到来，是无法揣度的，又怎么可以厌弃神呢？ 
English: In the "Poem" it says: The arrival of the gods is incalculable, and how can you reject God?

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：天至其高，地致其厚，月照其夜，日照其昼，阴阳化，列星朗，非其道而物自然。
现代文：天达到它的高度，地达到它的厚度，月亮照耀着夜空，太阳照耀着白昼，阴阳化生，众星明亮，这些自然现象并不是人有意造成的，而是遵循规律，自然而然这样的。
English: The sky reaches its height, the earth reaches its thickness, the moon shines in the night sky, the sun shines in the daytime, the yin and yang change, the stars are bright, these natural phenomena are not intentionally caused by man, but follow the law, naturally so.

古文：故阴阳四时，非生万物也；雨露时降，非养草木也。
现代文：所以阴阳四时变化，并不是为了生育万物；雨露按时降落，并不是为了养育草木。
English: Therefore, the change of yin and yang at four o'clock is not for the purpose of giving birth to all things; rain and dew falling on time is not for the purpose of nurturing plants and trees.

古文：神明接，阴阳和，而万物生矣。
现代文：神明接触，阴阳融合，万物自然而然产生。
English: Gods come into contact, yin and yang merge, and all things come into being naturally.

古文：故高山深林，非为虎豹也；大木茂枝，非为飞鸟也；流源千里，渊深百侧，非为蛟龙也；致其高崇，成其广大，山居木栖，巢枝穴藏，水潜陆行，各得其所宁焉。
现代文：所以高山深林也不是为着虎豹而设置的；大树繁枝也不是为着飞鸟而生成的；江河千里渊深百仞也不是为着蛟龙而形成的。山达到一定高度，森林长成一定广度，鸟兽们自会在山中居住、在树枝上栖留、在穴巢中安身、在洞穴里藏身、在溪谷里潜泳、在旱陆地行走、各自找到适宜于自身的处所安身生存。
English: Therefore, high mountains and deep forests are not set up for tigers and leopards; large trees and branches are not created for flying birds; rivers and rivers are not formed for dragons. Mountains reach a certain height, forests grow to a certain width, birds and beasts will live in the mountains, perch on branches, nest in caves, hide in caves, swim in valleys, walk on dry land, and find a place suitable for themselves to survive.

古文：夫大生小，多生少，天之道也。
现代文：大的产生小的、多的产生少的，这是天地自然规律。
English: Big things produce small things, and more things produce less things. This is the natural law of heaven and earth.

古文：故丘阜不能生云雨，荥水不能生鱼鳖者，小也。
现代文：所以小山丘不可能兴起云雨，小水坑不可能产生鱼鳖，这是因为它们太小的缘故。
English: Therefore, small hills cannot produce clouds and rain, and small puddles cannot produce fish eggs, because they are too small.

古文：牛马之气蒸生虮虱，虮虱之气蒸不能生牛马。
现代文：牛马身上产生的热气蒸发会生成虱子，但虱子之气蒸发不可能产生牛马。
English: The evaporation of hot gas from a cow or horse will produce lice, but the evaporation of lice's gas cannot produce a cow or horse.

古文：故化生于外，非生于内也。
现代文：所以养育变化是从外而生，不是生成于事物内部。
English: Therefore, nurturing changes are born from the outside, not generated inside things.

古文：夫蛟龙伏寝于渊而卵割于陵，螣蛇雄鸣于上风、雌鸣于下风而化成形，精之至也。
现代文：那蛟龙藏匿于深渊，而它的产卵孵化却在岸上进行；礣蛇雄的在上风鸣叫，而礣蛇雌的却在下风鸣叫便可以受孕孵化成幼蛇，这是精之感应而造成的。
English: The dragon hides in the abyss, but its eggs hatch on the shore; the male boa constrictor croaks in the wind, but the female boa constrictor croaks in the wind, and they can conceive and hatch into baby snakes, which is caused by the spirit.

古文：故圣人养心莫善于诚，至诚而能动化矣。
现代文：所以圣人修养心性没有比修炼精诚更好的了，如达到至精至诚的境界，就能感动化育对象。
English: Therefore, there is no better way for a sage to cultivate his mind than to cultivate sincerity. If he reaches the realm of sincerity, he will be able to move the object of his cultivation.

古文：今夫道者，藏精于内，栖神于心，静漠恬淡，讼缪胸中，邪气无所留滞，四枝节族，毛蒸理泄，则机枢调利，百脉九窍莫不顺比，其所居神者得其位也，岂节柑而毛修之哉！
现代文：现在那得道的人，内身藏着至精至诚，精神栖安于心中，虚静恬淡，胸怀悦穆，邪气就没有滞留的地方。四肢关节协调，全身肌肤蒸发汗污，内脏散泄浊气，这样心脏机枢调和轻松，全身经脉九窍便无不顺畅连通，这是因为精神处在了自己应处的居所，这哪里是关节的抚慰、毛发的保养所能办到的！
English: Now, the person who has attained the Way conceals the essence and sincerity within, and the spirit dwells peacefully in the heart, empty and calm, with a joyful heart, and there is no place for evil spirits to linger. The limbs and joints are coordinated, the skin of the whole body evaporates sweat, and the internal organs dissipate bad breath. In this way, the heart is harmonized and relaxed, and the nine meridians of the whole body are smoothly connected. This is because the spirit is in its proper place of residence, which is where the soothing of the joints and the maintenance of the hair can be done!

古文：圣主在上，廓然无形，寂然无声，官府若无事，朝廷若无人。无隐士，无轶民，无劳役，无冤刑。四海之内莫不仰上之德，象主这指，夷狄之国重译而至。非户辩而家说之也，推其诚心，施之天下而已矣。
现代文：圣明的君王处在君位上，空廓没有形象，寂静没有声响；官府像无事可做，朝廷久无人迹；民间没有隐居之士、没有避世佚民；百姓没有劳役，刑狱没有冤屈；四海之内，没有人不仰慕君王的德行，依照君王的旨意；夷狄这样的国家，通过重重翻译来朝见：这种情景并不是靠挨家挨户地劝说宣传实现的，而是靠君王将精诚之心推广施行于天下来实现的。
English: A saintly king is on the throne, the sky is empty of images, the silence is devoid of sound; the government seems to have nothing to do, the court has long been abandoned; the people have no secluded people, no people who avoid the world; the people have no labor service, there is no grievance in prison; within the four seas, there is no one who does not admire the king's virtue, according to the king's will; a country like Yidi, through repeated translation to the imperial court: this situation is not achieved by persuading and propagandizing from house to house, but by the king's promotion of the sincerity of the heart to the world.

古文：《诗》曰： 惠此中国，以绥四方。 
现代文：《诗》这么说： 恩惠施加给中国本土，这样可以安抚四方的诸侯。 
English: In the poem, it says, "Kyoto is stable and appeases all sides."

古文：内顺而外宁矣。
现代文：内部事情治理顺畅，四方诸侯、夷狄自然安宁。
English: The internal affairs were managed smoothly, and the four principalities and ethnic minorities enjoyed a natural peace.

古文：太王亶父处郧，狄人攻之，杖策而去，百姓携幼扶老，负釜甑，逾梁山，而国乎歧周，非令之所能召也。
现代文：过去太王亶父在邠地的时候，狄人经常来攻打，亶父率家族离开邠地，百姓们携幼扶老，背着锅甑跟随着他，翻越梁山，在岐周建立起周国：这情景不是靠硬性命令所能做到的。
English: In the past, when King Taizong and his father were in Handan, the Di people often came to attack. Handan's father and his family left Handan, and the people followed him with children and old people, carrying pots and pans on their backs, crossing Liangshan and establishing Zhou in Qizhou: This scene cannot be achieved by hard orders.

古文：秦穆公为野人食骏马肉之伤也，饮之美酒，韩之战，以其死力报，非券之所责也。
现代文：秦穆公为了不让山野人吃了骏马肉而伤胃生病，便送好酒给山野人喝，后来在同晋国打仗时，这些山野人就拼死报效秦穆公：这情景就不是像以契约索还债务那样所能做到的。
English: In order to prevent the barbarians from eating horse meat and getting sick, Qin Mu Gong sent good wine to the barbarians to drink. Later, during the war with Jin, these barbarians fought to the death to repay Qin Mu Gong's service: this situation is not like the debt repayment by contract.

古文：密子治直父，巫马期往观化焉，见夜渔者得小即释之，非刑之所能禁也。
现代文：宓子贱治理单父，巫马期前去考察他的教化效果，看见夜晚捕鱼者都将捕到的小鱼放掉：这情景就不是靠刑罚所能禁止的。
English: It is not possible to prohibit this scene by imposing a penalty. For example, it is not possible to punish a person who is a single father, but it is not possible to punish a person who goes fishing at night and releases the small fish he catches.

古文：孔子为鲁司寇，道不拾遗，市贾不预贾，田渔皆让长，而斑白不戴负，非法之所能致也。
现代文：孔子担任鲁国的司寇时，国内道路上没有拾取他人遗失的物件，集市上没有哄抬物价的情况，耕田、捕鱼时人都谦让年长者，老人不用背扛肩负重物：这情景就不是单凭法令所能做到的。
English: When Confucius served as the governor of Lu, there was no picking up lost objects on domestic roads, there was no price-gouging in the market, the elderly were treated with courtesy when farming and fishing, and the elderly did not have to carry heavy loads on their backs: this situation could not be achieved by laws and regulations alone.

古文：夫矢之所以射远贯牢者，弩力也；其所以中的剖微者，正心也。
现代文：那箭之所以射得远并能穿透硬坚物，是靠的弓弩的力量；但箭之所以能射中靶心，则靠的是人的心智。
English: It is by the power of the bow and arrow that the arrow travels far and penetrates hard objects, but it is by the mind that the arrow hits the bull's-eye.

古文：赏善罚暴者，政令也；其所以能行者，精诚也。
现代文：奖赏好人惩罚残暴，要靠政令；但政令之所以能贯彻执行，则是靠执政者的精诚。
English: It is by decree that good men are rewarded and cruelty punished; but it is by the virtue of the magistrate that the decree is carried out.

古文：故弩虽强不能独中，令虽明不能独行，必自精气所以与之施道。
现代文：所以说，弓弩虽然强硬有力，但不能独自来射中目标；法令虽然严明，但不能独自施行：一定得需要精诚之气之神来帮助弓弩、法令发挥它们的作用。
English: Therefore, although the bow and arrow are strong and powerful, they cannot hit the target alone; although the laws are strict, they cannot be enforced alone: it must be necessary to have a god of sincerity to help the bow and arrow and the laws to play their role.

古文：故掳道以被民，而民弗从者，诚心弗施也。
现代文：所以详细地阐明道理要百姓接受，但百姓就是不听从接受，这是由于在上位的人的精诚之心没有施用到百姓身上去。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to explain the truth in detail for the people to accept, but the people do not listen to accept, this is because the sincerity of those in power has not been applied to the people.

古文：天地四时，非生万物也，神明接阴阳和，而万物生之。圣人之治天下，非易民性也，柑循其所有而涤荡之，故因则大，化则细矣。
现代文：天地四时，并不能直接产生万物，神明接交阴阳融合而使万物产生；圣人治理天下，并不是要强行改变人民的品性，而是依从人民已经所具有的品性，涤荡其中的污浊部分，引导他们向好的素质转化。
English: At four o'clock, heaven and earth cannot directly produce all things. Gods produce all things through the fusion of yin and yang. Saints govern the world, not to forcibly change the people's character, but to follow the people's already existing character, purify the dirty part, and guide them to good quality transformation.

古文：禹凿龙门，辟伊阙，决江濬河，东注之海，因水之流也。
现代文：所以因循规律办事，效果就显著；人为操作，不按循规律，收效就细微。夏禹开凿龙门，辟开伊阙，疏导长江黄河，使它们向东流入东海，这是依循水从高处向低处流的水性。
English: Therefore, if you follow the rules, the effect will be significant; if you do not follow the rules, the effect will be slight. Xia Yu opened the gantry, opened the Yili River, diverted the Yangtze River and the Yellow River, and made them flow eastward into the East Sea. This is the nature of water that follows the flow of water from high to low.

古文：后稷垦草发菑，粪土树谷，使五种各得其宜，因地之势也。
现代文：后稷开垦荒地，改良土壤，施肥种谷，让五谷各自得到适宜生长的环境，这是按照土地的地形、肥瘠的特性来做的。
English: After reclamation, the wasteland is reclaimed, the soil is improved, and fertilizer is applied to grow grain, so that each grain can get a suitable growing environment. This is done according to the terrain and the characteristics of the land.

古文：汤、武革车三百乘，甲卒三千人，讨暴乱，制夏、商，因民之欲也。
现代文：商汤、周武王率领兵车三百辆、甲兵三千人，讨伐暴乱，分别制服了夏桀和商纣，这是顺应了人民的愿望来完成的。
English: Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang led three hundred chariots and three thousand armored soldiers to suppress the riots and subdued Xia Yu and Shang Yu respectively. This was done in accordance with the wishes of the people.

古文：故能因，则无敌于天下矣。
现代文：所以能够遵循自然规律，就能无敌于天下。
English: So if you can follow the laws of nature, you can be invincible.

古文：夫物有以自然，而后人事有治也。
现代文：万物都有其自然规律，人只有按客观规律，才能从事治理。
English: All things have their natural laws, and people can only engage in governance according to objective laws.

古文：故良匠不能斵金，巧冶不能烁木，金之势不可斵而木之性不可铄也。
现代文：所以优秀的木匠是不能砍斫金属物的，灵巧的冶工是不能熔毁木材的，这是因为金属的特点决定了不能砍斫，木材的特性决定了不能熔毁。
English: Therefore, an excellent carpenter cannot cut the beak of a metal object, and a deft metallurgist cannot melt wood. This is because the characteristics of the metal determine that the beak cannot be cut, and the characteristics of the wood determine that it cannot be melted.

古文：埏埴而为器，箭木而为舟，铄铁而为刃，铸金而为钟，因其可也。驾马服牛，令鸡司夜，令狗守门，因其然也。
现代文：调和泥土制成陶器、挖空木头做成舟船、熔化金属铸造刀剑、熔铸金属造成钟，这都是依循它们的各自特性而做成的；驾驭牛马拉车、让公鸡报晓、让狗守门护宅，这都是顺应了它们的本能特性。
English: Mixing clay to make pottery, hollowing out wood to make a boat, melting metal to make a sword, and melting metal to make a bell are all made according to their respective characteristics; driving a horse-drawn carriage, letting the rooster announce the dawn, and letting the dog guard the door to protect the house are all in accordance with their instinctive characteristics.

古文：民有好色之性，故有大婚之礼；有饮食之性，故有大飨之谊；有喜乐之性，故有钟鼓管弦之音；有悲哀之性，故有衰经哭踊之节。
现代文：人有情欲的本性，所以制定隆重的婚姻礼节；人有食欲的本性，所以规定了宴请的礼仪；人有喜乐的特性，所以有钟鼓管弦的乐器和音乐；人有悲哀的本性，所以制定服孝哭丧的礼节。
English: People have the nature of lust, so they set up grand marriage etiquette; people have the nature of appetite, so they set up banquet etiquette; people have the nature of joy, so they have the musical instruments and music of the bell and drum orchestra; people have the nature of sorrow, so they set up the etiquette of mourning.

古文：故先王之制法也，因民之所好而为之节文者也。
现代文：所以先王制定法令、礼仪，都是根据人的爱好来节制修饰的。
English: Therefore, the first king enacted laws and etiquette, all of which were tempered and decorated according to people's hobbies.

古文：因其好色而制婚姻之礼，故男女有别；因其喜音而正《雅》《颂》之声，故风俗不流；因其宁家室、乐妻子，教之以顺，故父子有亲；因其喜朋友而教之以悌，赦长幼有序。
现代文：根据人有情欲的本性，制定了婚礼，因而界定男女有别；根据人有喜乐的特性，制定了雅颂之音，因而风俗不至于放荡；根据人民珍惜家室安宁、妻儿快乐的愿望特点，教导人们和睦孝顺，因而父子间有亲情；根据人有喜交朋友的特点，教导人们敬重长者，因而长幼有序。
English: According to the nature of people's passion, the wedding ceremony was formulated, thus defining the difference between men and women; according to the characteristics of people's joy, the sound of chanting was formulated, so that the custom would not be debauched; according to the characteristics of people's desire to cherish the tranquility of the home and the happiness of their wives and children, people were taught to be harmonious and filial, so that there was affection between father and son; according to the characteristics of people's joy in making friends, people were taught to respect the elderly, so that the growth of children was orderly.

古文：然后修朝聘以明贵贱，飨饮习射以明长幼，时搜振旅以习用兵也，入学痒序以修人伦。
现代文：在做到上述这些以后，再制定朝见天子聘礼诸侯的礼节，用以分别贵贱；规定宴酒习射的礼节，用以明确长幼次序；定时检阅车马、整顿军队，来学习军事；让子弟进学堂学习，来提高人伦道德修养。
English: After accomplishing the above-mentioned, he then formulated the etiquette for the princes to meet the emperor and the emperor's son, which was used to distinguish between the noble and the lowly; stipulated the etiquette for the banquet and the practice of shooting, which was used to clarify the order of the eldest and youngest; regularly inspected the chariots and horses and rectified the army, to study military; and let the children go to school to study, to improve the moral and ethical cultivation of the people.

古文：此皆人之所有于性，而圣人之所匠成也。
现代文：这些做法全都是依循人的特性来制定的，然后再由圣人来加以教导培养，使人能成才。
English: All of these practices are based on human characteristics, and then they are taught and cultivated by sages to empower people.

古文：故无其性，不可教训；有其性，无其养，不能尊道。
现代文：所以如果人没有这方面的本性，就难以加以教导；而人有了这方面的本性而没有对此加以教养引导，也不能使人走上正道。
English: Therefore, if people do not have this kind of nature, it is difficult to teach them; and if people have this kind of nature and do not educate and guide them, they cannot lead people to the right path.

古文：茧之性为丝，然非得工女煮以热汤而抽其统纪，则不能成丝。卵之化为雏，非慈雌呕暖覆伏，累日积久则不能为雏。
现代文：这就好像蚕茧有抽丝的特性，但不经过女工的煮熬、牵丝，就不能成为丝线；这也好像禽卵孵化成雏，如不经过雌禽长时间的孵抱温暖，就不能变成雏。
English: It is as if the cocoon of a silkworm has the property of drawing silk, but it cannot become a silk thread without being boiled and drawn by a female worker; it is also as if a bird's egg hatches into a chick, and it cannot become a chick without being incubated and warmed by a female bird for a long time.

古文：人之性有仁义之资，非圣人为之法度而教导之，则不可使乡方。
现代文：这就说明人具有仁义的天性，就非得要经过圣人立出法度来加以教导，否则就不能使他们归入正道。
English: This shows that people have the nature of benevolence and righteousness, and they must be taught through the establishment of laws by sages, otherwise they cannot be led to the right path.

古文：故先王之教也，因其所喜以劝善，因其所恶以禁奸，故刑罚不用而威行如流，政令约省而化耀如神。
现代文：所以先王进行教化，是依循人们喜善的特点来引导勉励人们向善行善；是依循人们厌恶的特点来禁绝奸邪；因此刑罚不动用，威势就能畅行如流水；政令简约，感化照耀如神灵。
English: Therefore, the former king carried out enlightenment by following the characteristics of people's likes and dislikes to guide and encourage people to be good and do good; by following the characteristics of people's dislikes to prohibit adultery and evil; therefore, if the punishment is not used, the power can flow like water; the government order is simple, and the influence shines like a god.

古文：故因其性则天下听从，拂其性则法县而不用。
现代文：所以，依循人的天性则天下人就听从；违逆人的本性则法令公布都无济于事。
English: Therefore, according to human nature, the whole world will obey; contrary to human nature, the promulgation of laws will not help.

古文：昔者，五帝三王之莅政施教，必用参五。
现代文：过去五帝三王临朝执政实行教化，一定要采用 参五 的方法。
English: In the past, the Five Emperors and Three Kings ruled the Lin Dynasty to carry out the indoctrination, so we must adopt the method of "sang five."

古文：何谓参五？
现代文：什么叫 参五 呢？
English: What is "shengwu"?

古文：仰取象于天，俯取度于地，中取法于人，乃立明堂之朝，行明堂之令，以调阴阳之气，以和四时之节，以辟疾病之曹。
现代文：上效法天象、下效法地理、中取法人事。于是就设立明堂朝廷，颁布明堂政令，以调阴阳之气，协和四时之节，辟除疾病之灾。
English: So, he established the Myeongdong Imperial Court and issued the Myeongdong Decree, in order to adjust the yin and yang, harmonize the four seasons, and eliminate the scourge of disease.

古文：俯视地理，以制度量，察陵陆水泽肥墩高下之宜，立事生财，以除饥寒之患。
现代文：俯视地理，制定度量制度，考察山岗平原水域及土地肥沃贫瘠高低各种条件以适宜种植何种谷物，安排生产创造财富，以消除饥寒之祸患。
English: He surveyed the geography, worked out a measurement system, examined the mountainous and plain waters and the various conditions of land fertility and poverty to determine what kind of grain was suitable for planting, and arranged production to create wealth in order to eliminate the scourge of hunger and cold.

古文：中考乎人德，以制礼乐，行仁义之道，以治人伦而除暴乱之祸。
现代文：中考核人的品德，以制定礼乐，推行仁义之道，理顺人与人之间的伦理关系，从而清除暴乱的祸根。
English: The moral character of the people is examined in the middle, with the aim of formulating ritual music, promoting the way of benevolence and righteousness, and rationalizing the ethical relationship between people, thus eliminating the root cause of riots.

古文：乃澄列金木水火土之性，故立父子之亲而成家；别清浊五音六律相生之数，以立君臣之义而成国；察四时季孟之序，以立长幼之礼而成官；此之谓参。
现代文：还阐明金木水火土的特性，来确立父子之情从而建立家庭；分辨清浊五音六律相生的原则，来确立君臣之义从而形成国家；审察四时季孟的先后次序，来确立长幼间的礼节从而设置百官等级：以上三方面的考察及制定叫做 参 。
English: It also clarified the characteristics of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, to establish the father-son relationship and thus establish a family; to distinguish the principle of clear-cut, five-tone, six-law, to establish the righteousness of monarchs and ministers and thus form a country; to examine the order of succession of the four seasons, to establish the etiquette between elders and children, and thus set the rank of centurions: the above three aspects of investigation and formulation are called 参.

古文：制君臣之义，父子之亲，夫妇之辨，长幼之序，朋友之际，此之谓五。
现代文：规定君臣之间的节义、父子之间的亲情、夫妇之间的区别、长幼之间的次序、朋友之间的交际原则，这就叫做 五 。
English: It is called the Five Precepts, which stipulate the righteousness of the ruler and the subject, the affection between father and son, the difference between husband and wife, the order between the elder and the younger, and the principles of social intercourse between friends.

古文：乃裂地而州之，分职而治之，筑城而居之，割宅而异之，分财而衣食之，立大学而教诲之，夙兴夜寐而劳力之。此治之纲纪也。
现代文：还分割土地使民众分属各州、分派职官治理、修筑城市让人们居住、划分宅地区分不同的地域和家族、分配财物使民众有穿有吃、设置学堂教育子弟，让他们早晚勤于民事：这是治理天下的纲纪。
English: He also divided the land so that the people belonged to the states, assigned officials to govern, built cities for people to live in, divided the residential areas into different regions and families, distributed property so that the people had clothes and food, set up schools to educate children, and let them work in civil affairs sooner or later: this is the discipline of governing the world.

古文：然得其人则举，失其人则废。
现代文：然而这些纲纪要有适当的人才来推行贯彻才行，如用人不当就会废驰纲纪。
English: However, these disciplines require appropriate talent to implement and implement, and if the person is improperly employed, the discipline will be scrapped.

古文：尧治天下，政教平，德润洽。在位七十载，乃求所属天下之统，令四岳扬侧陋。
现代文：尧帝治理天下，政教平和，德泽滋润融洽人民，他在君位七十年，便开始物色寻求能继承帝统君位的人，命令掌管四方的诸侯举荐那些处在卑微地位而有才德的人。
English: Emperor Xian governed the world, there was political and religious peace, and the people were nourished by virtue and harmony. After he had been on the throne for seventy years, he began to search for people who could inherit the imperial throne, and ordered the lords in charge of the four directions to recommend those who were in a lowly position and had talent.

古文：四岳举舜而荐之尧，尧乃妻以二女，以观其内，任以百官，以观其外。
现代文：于是四方诸侯举荐了舜，并把舜推荐给尧帝。尧帝就将自己的两位女儿娥皇、女英许配给舜作妻子，以考察他治家理家的能力和态度；还把管理百官的重任交给他，来考察他治国外交的才能。
English: As a result, the princes of the four directions recommended Zhai, and Zhai was recommended to Emperor Zhao. Emperor Zhao gave his two daughters, Empress Zhao and Empress Zhou, to Zhai as wives, in order to examine his ability and attitude to manage his family; he also gave him the important task of managing a hundred officials, in order to examine his talent for governing the country and diplomacy.

古文：既入大麓，烈风雷雨而不迷，乃属以九子，赠以昭华之玉，而传天下焉。
现代文：又派舜深入林麓之中，狂风雷雨也没使舜迷失方向和道路。于是尧帝就将自己的九个儿子托付给舜，并赠给舜昭华美玉，正式将君位传授给舜。
English: Emperor Yao sent Yao deep into the foothills of the forest, and the stormy winds and thunderstorms did not cause Yao to lose his direction and path. Therefore, Emperor Yao entrusted his nine sons to Yao, and presented Yao with the precious gems, officially passing the throne to Yao.

古文：以为虽有法度，而朱弗能统也。夫物未尝有张而不弛，成而不毁者也，惟圣人能盛而不衰，盈而不亏。
现代文：尧帝如此慎重地挑选继承者，是因为尧认识到虽然自己制定了不少法度，但自己的儿子丹朱因不贤凶顽仍难以胜任统治天下的重任。事物没有只张不驰、只成不毁的，唯有圣人的事业能够长盛不衰、盈满不亏。
English: Emperor Xuan carefully chose his successor because he realized that although he had established many laws and regulations, his son, Emperor Dan Zhu, was incompetent and vicious and could not fulfill the important task of ruling the world. There is no such thing as things that cannot be changed, only things that cannot be destroyed. Only the cause of a saint can continue to flourish and prosper.

古文：神农之初作琴也，以归神；及其淫也，反其天心。夔之初作乐也，皆合六律而调五音，以通八风；及其衰也，以沉湎淫康，不顾政治，至于灭亡。
现代文：神农氏最初发明琴是为了集聚归化人心于神明，杜绝性情的淫乱；但到了后来，有人就沉迷于享乐，不知返归本性，淫而好色，以至于亡国。夔当初创作音乐，都符合五音、六律，并和八风相通；但到了后来衰世时期，人就沉湎于过度的欢乐享受中，不顾政事以至于灭亡。
English: Shennong originally invented the piano in order to gather and naturalize the hearts of the people to the gods, and to prevent the adultery of the temperament; but later, some people indulged in pleasure, did not know how to return to nature, and were lewd and lascivious, to the point of ruining the country. At the beginning of the creation of music, they all conformed to the five tones and six laws, and were in communication with the eight winds; but later, in the period of decline, people indulged in excessive joy and enjoyment, and disregarded political affairs to the point of extinction.

古文：苍颉之初作书，以辩治百官，领理万事，愚者得以不忘，智者得以志远；至其衰也，为好刻伪书，以解有罪，以杀不辜。
现代文：苍颉最初创造文字，用来管理官吏，处理各种日常事务，使愚笨者不至于望事，聪明者能记录下久远的事情；但到了后来衰世时期，就有人利用文字私自刻写伪造骗人的文书，为有罪的人开脱，捏造虚假的文字以杀害无辜的人。
English: Heron originally created writing to manage officials and deal with all kinds of daily affairs, so that the stupid would not be frustrated and the wise could record long-term events; but later, in the era of decline, some people used writing to secretly write forged and deceitful documents to absolve the guilty and fabricate false words to kill innocent people.

古文：汤之初作囿也，以奉宗庙鲜轿之具，简士卒，习射御，以戒不虞；及至其衰也，驰骋猎射以夺民时，罢民之力。
现代文：汤当初建造园囿，是为了供奉宗庙祭祀用的鲜肉干肉祭品，以及训练士兵射箭和驾御以防不测事件；但等到后来衰世时期，这园囿就被贵族用来驰骋猎射，以至耽误百姓的农时，使人精疲力竭。
English: Originally, the garden pavilion was built to offer fresh and dried meat as a sacrifice to the ancestral temple, as well as to train soldiers in archery and driving to prevent accidents; but later, during the period of decline, the garden pavilion was used by the aristocracy to ride and shoot, thus delaying the people's farming time and exhausting them.

古文：尧之举禹、契、后稷、皋陶，政教平，奸宄息，狱讼止而衣食足，贤者劝善而不肖者怀其德；及至其末，朋党比周，各推其与，废公趋私，内外相推举，奸人在朝而贤者隐处。
现代文：尧帝推举禹、契、后稷、皋陶，使政事教化平和，消除奸邪恶人，诉讼的事也不发生，人民丰衣足食，贤能的人勉力向善，不贤者也被君王的德政所感化；但到了末世，人们就开始结党营私，各自推举同党占据要位，废弃公心而追逐私利，朝廷内外，同党互相吹捧抬举，这时奸邪掌握朝政，贤只能隐居山林德的人。
English: Emperor Qian promoted Yu, Qi, Houyi, and Jintao to pacify political affairs, eliminate traitors and evil-doers, and no lawsuits occurred. The people were well-fed and clothed. The virtuous people tried their best to be good, and the non-virtuous people were also influenced by the monarch's moral government. However, in the last days, people began to form parties, occupy important positions, abandon public-mindedness, and pursue selfish interests. Both inside and outside the imperial court, the same party praised each other. At that time, the traitors and evil-doers controlled the imperial government, and the virtuous people could only live in seclusion.

古文：故《易》之失也卦，《书》之失也敷，乐之失也淫，《诗》之失也辟，礼之失也责，《春秋》之失也刺。天地之道，极则反，盈则损，五色虽朗，有时而渝；茂木丰草，有时而落；物有隆杀，不得自若。
现代文：所以，天地自然运行的规律总是这样的：凡物发展到极点就会走向反面、凡物盈满了就会有亏损。五光十色虽然明亮，但时间一长就要消褪；茂盛的草木，到一定的季节就要凋零；凡物都有它的兴与衰，不可能老是一个样子。
English: Therefore, the law of the natural operation of heaven and earth is always like this: when everything is developed to the extreme, it will go to the opposite side, and when everything is full, there will be a loss. Although the colors are bright, they will fade over time; lush plants will wither in a certain season; everything has its rise and fall, it is impossible to always be the same.

古文：故圣人事穷而更为，法弊而改制，非乐变古易常也，将以救败扶衰，黜淫济非，以调天地之气，顺万物之宜也。
现代文：所以圣人在事情实在行不通时总要改弦易辙，法规弊旧时就要改革，这并不是他们喜欢改变古制和常规，而是因时世变了只有通过改革才能挽救破败振兴衰落、革除淫邪纠正错误，来调整天地社会之气氛，使万事万物在适宜的生存环境下得以生存发展。
English: Therefore, sages always want to change the course of things when things really do not work, and reform laws and regulations when they are old. This is not because they like to change the old system and routine, but because the times have changed. Only through reform can we save the dilapidated, revitalize the decline, eliminate the evil, correct the mistakes, adjust the atmosphere of heaven and earth and society, and enable everything to survive and develop in a suitable living environment.

古文：圣人天覆地载，日月照，阴阳调，四时化，万物不同，无故无新，无疏无亲，故能法天。
现代文：圣人如同天覆地载，如同日月照耀，如同阴阳调和，如同四季变化，对于各种不同的事物，不分新旧、不论亲疏，都能一视同仁、温暖普照，所以圣人是效法天道。
English: The sage is like the sky covering the earth, like the sun and the moon shining, like the yin and yang harmonizing, like the four seasons changing, for all kinds of different things, regardless of old and new, regardless of familiarity, can be treated equally, warm and shining, so the sage is to follow the heavenly way.

古文：天不一时，地不一利，人不一事，是以绪业不得不多端，趋行不得不殊方。
现代文：天时不可能只有一个季节，大地也不可能只有一种利益，人也不可能只有一种本事，因此圣人的事业不能不是头绪繁多，旨趣行为不能不是多方面的。
English: The sky and time cannot have only one season, the earth cannot have only one benefit, and people cannot have only one ability. Therefore, the cause of a saint cannot but have many clues, and the acts of interest cannot but be multifaceted.

古文：五行异气而皆适调，六艺异科而皆同道。
现代文：代表着五行的不同气质，尽管相异但都适宜协调；不同门类的六艺，尽管不同但它的本质是一致的。
English: It represents the different temperaments of the five elements, although different, but all suitable for coordination; the six arts of different categories, although different, but its essence is consistent.

古文：温惠柔良者，《诗》之风也；淳庞敦厚者，《书》之教也；清明条达者，《易》之义也；恭俭尊让者，《礼》之为也；宽裕简易者，《乐》之化也；刺几辩义者，《春秋》之靡也。
现代文：温惠柔良，是《诗》的风格；淳庞敦厚，是《书》所教诲的；清明条达，是《易》的要义；恭俭尊让，是《礼》的行为准则；宽裕简易，是《乐》的教化；刺讥辩义，是《春秋》的优点。
English: Gentle and gentle is the style of "Poetry"; upright and dignified is the teaching of "Book"; clear and orderly is the essence of "Easy"; respectful and frugal is the code of conduct of "Rite"; broad and simple is the enlightenment of "Music"; and sarcastic and argumentative is the advantage of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：故《易》之失鬼，《乐》之失淫，《诗》之失愚，《书》之失拘，《礼》之失忮，《春秋》之失訾。
现代文：所以《易》的过失是在于隐秘难测；《乐》的失误是在于导致淫逸；《诗》的过失是在于使人怨愚；《书》的失误是在于使人拘泥旧法；《礼》的过失是在于使卑尊者互相嫉恨；《春秋》的失误是在于使人互相诋毁。
English: Therefore, the fault of "Yi" is that it is secret and difficult to fathom; the mistake of "Le" is that it leads to lasciviousness; the mistake of "Poetry" is that it makes people grudge; the mistake of "Book" is that it makes people stick to the old law; the mistake of "Rite" is that it makes the lowly respectable people hate each other; the mistake of "Spring and Autumn" is that it makes people slander each other.

古文：六者，圣人兼用而财制之。
现代文：但这六种经典圣人却是兼取并用，通过剪裁取其精华。
English: However, these six classic sages are combined and used, and their essence is extracted through tailoring.

古文：失本则乱，得本则治。其美在调，其失在权。
现代文：失去本旨就会混乱，掌握本旨就能得到治理；这其中的精华在于协调好各种关系，而其失误在于权变本旨和要义。
English: If the original intention is lost, there will be chaos, and if the original intention is grasped, there will be governance; the essence of this lies in the coordination of various relationships, and its failure lies in the power to change the original intention and essence.

古文：水火金木土谷异物而皆任，规矩权衡准绳异形而皆施，丹青胶漆不同而皆用，各有所适，物各有宜。
现代文：水火金木土和谷，属于不同的物类，但却都可被利用；规矩权衡和准绳，形制各异而都能适用于对象；丹青和胶漆性质不同，但各有各的用途：这说明事物均有它适用的范围和对象。
English: Water, fire, gold, wood, earth, and grain, belong to different kinds of things, but they can all be used; rules, weights, and yardsticks, with different shapes, can all be applied to objects; damask and glue paint are different in nature, but each has its own use: this shows that things have its applicable scope and object.

古文：轮圆舆方，辕从衡横，势施便也。
现代文：车轮是圆的，车厢则是方的，车辕是直的，车衡则是横的：形状不同但均出于使用的方便。
English: The wheels are round, the carriages are square, the axles are straight and the scales are horizontal: different shapes but all for ease of use.

古文：骏欲驰，服欲步，带不厌新，钩不厌故，处地宜也。
现代文：骖马喜欢奔跑，服马喜爱缓行，带不厌新，钩不厌旧：这是因为它们所处的环境地位的不同的缘故。
English: Horses like to run, clothes horses like to walk slowly, they are not tired of the new, and the hooks are not tired of the old: this is because of the different status of the environment they are in.

古文：关雎兴于鸟，而君子美之，为其雌雄之不乖居也；鹿鸣兴于兽，君子大之，取其见食而相呼也。
现代文：《关雎》篇以鸟鸣起兴，君子从中得到美感，这是因为雎鸠鸟雌雄有别不杂居；《鹿鸣》篇用鹿鸣起兴，君子从中得到尊崇美，这是因为鹿群有发现食物互相呼唤共同享用的美德。
English: In the chapter of "Guanzhang," birdsong was used as a source of inspiration, and the gentleman gained a sense of beauty from it, because the male and female ostriches live together. In the chapter of "Deer Song," deer song was used as a source of inspiration, and the gentleman gained a sense of beauty from it, because the deer herd has the virtue of finding food and calling to each other for mutual enjoyment.

古文：泓之战，军败君获，而《春秋》大之，取其不鼓不成列也；宋伯姬坐烧而死，《春秋》大之，取其不逾礼而行也。
现代文：在泓水之战中，宋军惨败，宋襄公被俘，但《春秋》却尊崇宋襄公，这是因为看重宋襄公不攻击还没排好阵列的军队的仁义思想；宋伯姬坐在堂前不下堂而被火活活烧死，《春秋》仍然尊崇宋伯姬，这是因为看重宋伯姬不超越礼节行事的品行。
English: In the Battle of Surabaya, the Song army suffered a crushing defeat, and Song Xianggong was captured, but "Spring and Autumn" still reveres Song Xianggong, this is because it values Song Xianggong's benevolent thoughts of not attacking the army that has not yet lined up; Song Boji sat in front of the hall and was burned alive. "Spring and Autumn" still reveres Song Boji, this is because it values Song Boji's moral conduct of not exceeding etiquette.

古文：成功立事，岂足多哉，方指所言而取一概焉尔。
现代文：成就事业，建立功名，哪里用得着做很多事情，只须抓着本旨根本就行。
English: Achieving a career, building a reputation, where you need to do a lot of things, you only need to grasp the essence.

古文：王乔、赤松去尘埃之间，离群慝之纷，吸阴阳之和，食天地之精，呼而出故，吸而入新，虚轻举，乘云游雾，可谓养性矣，而未可谓孝子也。
现代文：典籍所记载的也只是某人某事的某方面而已。王乔、赤松子远离尘世，脱离人间邪恶纠纷，吸取阴阳融和之气，食取天地之精华，吐故纳新，踏虚升飞，乘云游雾，可以称为养性者，但是不能称为孝子。
English: Wang Qiao and Akamatsu Zi are far away from the world, away from the evil disputes among people, absorbing the harmony of yin and yang, absorbing the essence of heaven and earth, embracing the new, stepping on the clouds, and can be called nurturers, but can not be called filial sons.

古文：周公诛管叔、蔡叔，以平国饵乱，可谓忠臣也，而未可谓弟也。
现代文：周公诛管叔、蔡叔，以安定国家、平息叛乱，可以称为忠臣，但是不能算是爱护兄弟。
English: Zhou Gonglian and Cai Jian, in order to stabilize the country and quell the rebellion, can be called loyal subjects, but they cannot be regarded as loving brothers.

古文：汤放桀，武王伐纣，以为天下去残除贼，可谓惠君，而未可谓忠臣矣。
现代文：商汤放逐夏桀，武王讨伐纣王，为天下铲除残暴奸贼，可以称为仁惠的君主，但不能算是忠臣。
English: Shangtang banished Xia Yao, King Wu fought against King Yao, and eradicated brutal thieves for the whole world. He can be called a benevolent monarch, but he cannot be considered a loyal subject.

古文：乐羊攻中山，未能下，中山烹其子而食之以示威，可谓良将，而未可谓慈父也。
现代文：乐羊攻打中山城，久攻不下，中山人烹了他的儿子，乐羊竟尝了中山人送来的他儿子的肉羹，以显示自己的威武强势，这可称得上良将，但是不能算作是慈父。
English: Le Yang attacked Zhongshan City, but was unable to conquer it for a long time. The people of Zhongshan cooked his son, and Le Yang actually tasted his son's meat soup sent by the people of Zhongshan to show his mighty strength. This can be called a good general, but it cannot be counted as a loving father.

古文：故可乎可，而不可乎不可；不可乎不可，而可乎可。
现代文：所以，事物均有多面性，要肯定值得肯定的一面，否定不值得肯定的一面；否定值得否定的一面，肯定值得肯定的一面。
English: Therefore, all things are multi-faceted. It is necessary to affirm what is worthy of affirmation, and deny what is not worthy of affirmation; deny what is worthy of denial, and affirm what is worthy of affirmation.

古文：舜、许由异行而皆圣，伊尹、伯夷异道而皆仁，箕子、比干异趋而皆贤。
现代文：虞舜和许由的行为尽管各异，但均是圣人；伊尹和伯夷走的道路尽管不同，但都是仁者；箕子和比干的行动尽管不一样，但都是贤者。
English: Although the actions of Gu Yu and Xu Yu are different, they are all saints; although the paths of Yi Yin and Bo Yi are different, they are all benevolent; although the actions of Xun Zi and Bi Gan are different, they are all wise.

古文：故用兵者，或轻或重，或贪或廉，此四者相反，而不可一无也。
现代文：所以将士中有的轻捷、有的重缓、有的贪心、有的清廉，这四种将士的性格特点各异，但在战争打仗中缺一不可。
English: Therefore, among the soldiers, some are light, some are heavy, some are greedy, and some are incorruptible. These four kinds of soldiers have different personality characteristics, but they are indispensable in war.

古文：轻者欲发，重者欲止，贪者欲取，廉者不利非其有。
现代文：轻捷者好动，重缓者好静，贪心者好取，清廉者则不贪求非分的利益。
English: The quick-witted are active, the slow-witted are calm, the greedy are greedy, and the unscrupulous are not greedy for profit.

古文：故勇者可令进斗，而不可令持牢；重得可令埴固，而不可令凌敌；贪者可令进取，而不可令守职；廉者可令守分，而不可令进取；信者可令持约，而不可令应变。
现代文：所以勇猛敏捷者可让他们冲锋搏击，而不可让他们固守；重缓者可让他们固守，倒不适宜让他们冲锋搏击；贪心者可让他们积极攻取，而不可让他们安守本职；清廉者可让他们安守本职，倒不适宜让他们积极攻取；忠诚守信者可让他们持守约定联盟，而不能要他们也随机应变。
English: Therefore, the brave and agile can let them charge, but not let them hold; the slow can let them hold, but it is not appropriate to let them charge; the greedy can let them actively attack, but not let them keep their duties; the clean and honest can let them keep their duties, but it is not appropriate to let them actively attack; the loyal and trustworthy can let them keep the agreed alliance, but they cannot be asked to change at random.

古文：五者相反，圣人兼用而财使之。
现代文：这五种人的性格相反，但圣人却能对他们兼容并蓄而用之。
English: These five types of people have opposite personalities, but the sage can use them in a compatible way.

古文：夫天地不包一物，阴阳不生一类。
现代文：这说明天地自然不只是容纳一种事物，阴阳两气的交融也不只能产生一种物类。
English: This shows that heaven and earth do not naturally contain only one kind of thing, nor does the intermingling of yin and yang produce only one kind of thing.

古文：海不让水潦以成其大，山不让土石以成其高。
现代文：海水只有不推辞小的积水才能成就它的博大；山只有不拒绝土石才能成就它的崇高。
English: The sea can achieve its vastness only if it does not reject small accumulated water; the mountain can achieve its sublimity only if it does not reject earth and stone.

古文：夫守一隅而遗万方，取一物而弃其余，则得者者鲜，而所治者浅矣。
现代文：如果持守一角就会抛弃遗漏万方世界，如果取用一物就会舍弃其他事物，这样就必定获得的很少，所能治理的范围也一定很浅窄。
English: If you hold on to one corner, you will abandon the world of omissions, and if you use one thing, you will abandon other things. In this way, you will certainly gain little, and the scope of what you can control will also be very narrow.

古文：治大者道不可以小，地广者制不可以狭，位高者事不可以烦，民众者教不可以苛。
现代文：治理大国的治术不能琐碎，国土辽宽的管理制度不能偏狭；处在高位的人处事不能烦琐，百姓众多的政治教化不能苛细。
English: The governance of a large country cannot be trivial, the management system of a vast country cannot be narrow; the people in high positions cannot be cumbersome, and the political education of a large number of people cannot be harsh.

古文：夫事碎，难治也；法烦，难行也；求多，难澹也。
现代文：事务琐碎就难以治理，法令烦杂就难以推行，欲求多就难以满足。
English: Trivial affairs are difficult to manage, complicated laws and regulations are difficult to enforce, and many desires are difficult to satisfy.

古文：寸而度之，至丈必差；铣而称之，至石必过；石秤丈量，径而寡失；简丝数米，烦而不察。
现代文：一寸一寸地量，量到一丈时就一定会有误差出现；一铢一铢地称，称到一石时就一定会有差错出现。反之用石和丈为单位来称量，既简单又少失误。挑选丝头、细数米粒，是既麻烦又不精确。
English: When measuring one inch by one inch, there will definitely be an error when measuring to one meter; when weighing one stone, there will definitely be an error when weighing to one stone. On the other hand, using stone and length as a unit to weigh is simple and error-free. Selecting a silk head and fine rice grains is both troublesome and inaccurate.

古文：故大较易为智，曲辩难为慧。
现代文：所以从大的方面入手就容易运用智慧，纠缠于细曲枝节就难以发挥智慧。
English: Therefore, it is easy to apply wisdom when starting from a large aspect, and it is difficult to exert wisdom when entangled in fine twigs and branches.

古文：故无益于治而有益于烦者，圣人不为；无益于用而有益于费者，智者弗行也。
现代文：所以对那些无益于治理，只会增添麻烦的事，圣人是不会去做的；对那些不实用，只会浪费精力的事，聪明人是不会去做的。
English: Therefore, for those things that are not conducive to governance and will only add trouble, sages will not do it; for those that are not practical and will only waste energy, smart people will not do it.

古文：故功不厌约，事不厌省，求不厌寡。功约，易成也；事省，易治也；求寡，易澹也。
现代文：所以要做成大事只有简约，要做好大事也只有俭省，欲求要满足只有欲求少；这说明功业简约则容易完成，事情俭省容易办到，欲求寡少容易满足。
English: Therefore, to accomplish great things, there is only simplicity, to do great things well, there is only frugality, and to satisfy desires, there is only less desire. This shows that it is easy to accomplish simple tasks, it is easy to do things frugally, and it is easy to satisfy few desires.

古文：众易之，于以任人，易矣！
现代文：容易办成的事情，拿来交给人家办理，也就容易办成。
English: Things that are easy to accomplish are also easy to accomplish when entrusted to others.

古文：孔子曰： 小辩破言，小利破义，小艺破道，小见不达，必简。 
现代文：孔子说： 太烦琐的论证辩说只会损害真理，太计较蝇头小利只会妨害大义，太卖弄雕小技艺只会破坏大道术，太小的见识是无法产生通达观念的；要想通达大度，就必须要简约。 
English: Confucius said: Too tedious argumentation will only damage the truth, too petty profit will only obstruct the great justice, too ostentatious carving and small skills will only destroy the art of the road, too little insight can not produce a comprehensive concept; if you want to achieve generosity, you must be concise.

古文：河以逶蛇，故能远；山以陵迟，故能高；道以优游，故能化。
现代文：黄河因为曲折连绵，所以能流向远方；高山因为绵延深长，所以能既高又大；大道因为悠游，所以能化育万物。
English: The Yellow River, because of its continuous twists and turns, can flow far and wide; the mountains, because of their length and depth, can be both high and large; the boulevards, because of their leisurely pace, can nurture all things.

古文：夫彻于一事，察于一辞，审于一技，可以曲说，而未可广应也。
现代文：只通晓一类事，明了一种说法，掌握一门技艺，可以对某些事物有精到的认识，但不可能广泛应对所有事物。
English: Only know one kind of thing, know one kind of saying, master one skill, you can have a good understanding of some things, but it is impossible to deal with all things extensively.

古文：蓼菜成行，翩瓯有，秤薪而爨，数米而炊，可以治小，而未可以治大也。
现代文：办事处事像蓼菜成行那样有条不紊，像甂瓯有底座那样稳当可靠，秤着柴来烧灶，数着米来做饭，这样谨小慎微的人只能做些小事情，而做不了大事情。
English: Office affairs are as orderly as the preparation of stew, as steady and reliable as a plow with a base, weighing wood to cook, counting rice to cook, so cautious people can only do some small things, but can not do big things.

古文：员中规，方中矩，动成兽，止成方，可以愉舞，而不可以陈军涤杯而食，洗爵而饮，盥而后馈，可以养少，而不可以飨众。
现代文：圆符合圆规的要求，方符合矩尺的要求，行动起来能仿效兽类，停止下来能相当文静，能够指挥这样列队的人可以愉舞娱乐，但不能指挥军队。洗洁杯子再盛食物，洗好酒器再盛酒，洗净手后摆食品，这样的人可以负责几个人的饮食，但不能管理三军的伙食。
English: A circle conforms to the requirements of a compass, a square conforms to the requirements of a ruler, an animal can be imitated when it moves, and it can be quite calm when it stops. A person who can command such a procession can enjoy dancing and entertainment, but cannot command an army. Wash the cup before serving food, wash the wine container before serving wine, and wash the food behind the hand. Such a person can be responsible for the diet of several people, but cannot manage the food of three armies.

古文：今夫祭者，屠割烹杀，剥狗烧豕，调平五味者，庖也；陈簠簋，列樽俎，设笾豆者，祝也；齐明盛服，渊默而不言，神之所依者，尸也。
现代文：现在祭祀的时候，屠宰烹煮、杀狗烧猪、调和滋味，这是厨师的事；陈设簠簋、排列樽俎、放置笾豆，这是巫祝的事情；斋戒严肃、穿着礼服、仪态深沉、闭口不谈，神灵以此为代表，这是尸主的任务。
English: Now, at the time of sacrifice, it is the chef's job to slaughter and cook, kill dogs and burn pigs, and to adjust the flavor; it is the witch's job to set up the urns, arrange the barrels, and place the peas; it is the corpse owner's task to fast seriously, wear ceremonial clothes, have a profound demeanor, and not talk. The gods are represented by this.

古文：宰、祝虽不能，尸不越樽俎而代之。
现代文：厨师和巫祝即使不称职，尸主也不能越过樽俎去代替他们。
English: Even if the cooks and sorcerers are incompetent, the owner of the corpse cannot go over the barrel to replace them.

古文：故张瑟者，小弦急而大弦缓；立事者，贱者劳而贵者逸。
现代文：所以弹瑟的时候，总是小弦急促而大弦舒缓；处理事务则是贱者劳碌而贵者闲逸。
English: Therefore, when playing the flute, the small strings are always fast and the large strings are slow; when dealing with affairs, the lowly are laborious and the noble are idle.

古文：舜为天子，弹五弦之琴，歌《南风》之诗，而天下治。
现代文：舜当天子时，只是弹奏着五弦琴，歌唱着《南风》诗，天下就得到了治理。
English: In ancient times, just by playing the five-stringed fiddle and singing the "Southern Wind" poem, the world was governed.

古文：周公肴孺不收于前，钟鼓不解于悬，而四夷服。
现代文：周公饭菜摆在案前，钟鼓悬挂在架上伴奏，四方异族就归顺降服了。
English: Zhou Gong's meal was placed in front of the case, the bell and drum hung on the rack to accompany the music, and the four different ethnic groups surrendered.

古文：赵政昼决狱而夜理书，御史冠盖接于郡县，复稽趋留，戍五岭以备越，筑修城以守胡，然奸邪萌生，盗贼群居，事愈烦而乱愈生。
现代文：秦始皇赵政白天判断案子，夜里处理文书，还派出监察御史到各个郡县视察，忙忙碌碌，又派兵戍守五岭以防越人，修筑长城以防胡人，但是奸邪还是不断产生，盗贼成群结队，这正是政务越烦杂乱子就越多。
English: Zhao Zheng, the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty, judged cases during the day and dealt with documents at night. He also sent inspectors to inspect various counties and counties. He was very busy. He also sent soldiers to guard the Wuling Mountains to prevent people from crossing, and built the Great Wall to prevent Hu people from crossing. However, treachery still continued to occur, and thieves swarmed in droves. This is precisely why the more troublesome government affairs are, the more chaotic they become.

古文：故法者，治之具也，百非所以为治也。而犹弓矢，中之具，而非所以中也。
现代文：所以法只是治国的工具，而不是治国的根本，就像弓和箭，只是射中目标的工具，而不是射中靶的关键。
English: Therefore, the law is only a tool for governing the country, but not the foundation of governing the country. Just like the bow and arrow, it is only a tool for hitting the target, but not the key to hitting the target.

古文：黄帝曰： 芒芒昧昧，因天之威，与元同气。 
现代文：黄帝说： 茫茫昧昧，凭借着上天的神威，与天地元气相通。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said: He is vague and vague, relying on the divine power of heaven, and communicating with the local spirit of heaven.

古文：故同气者帝，同义者王，同力者霸，无一焉者亡。
现代文：所以与元气同一相通者可以称帝、与道义同一者可以称王、与强力同一者可以称霸，这三方面都不具备的，就只能灭亡。
English: Therefore, a person with the same vitality can be called an emperor, a person with the same morality can be called a king, and a person with the same strength can be called a ruler. If you do not have these three aspects, you can only perish.

古文：故人主有伐国之志，邑犬群嗥，雄鸡夜呜，库兵动而戎马惊。
现代文：所以国君如有侵犯征伐别国之心，邑城里的狗便会成群吠叫，雄鸡就会半夜啼鸣，兵库里的器械就会响动，战马就会躁动震惊。
English: Therefore, if the sovereign invades and conquers the heart of another country, the dogs in the city will bark in groups, the roosters will crow in the middle of the night, the instruments in the arsenal will ring, and the horses will be restless and shocked.

古文：今日解怨惬兵，家老甘卧，巷无聚人，妖菑不生。非法之应也，精气之动也。
现代文：一旦和敌国消除仇怨，停止战争，家中的父老乡亲就能睡得香甜，巷里就没有聚集的人群议论纷纷，妖害就不会产生：这不是法令施行的效果，而是精诚之气感化的结果。
English: Once the enmity with the enemy country is eliminated and the war is stopped, the parents and fellow countrymen at home will be able to sleep sweetly, there will be no crowds gathered in the alley, and there will be no evil spirits: this is not the effect of the implementation of the law, but the result of the influence of the spirit of sincerity.

古文：故不言而信，不施而仁，不怒而威，是以天心动化者也。施而仁，言而信，怒而威，是以精诚感之者也。施而不仁，言而不信，怒而不威，是以外貌为之者也。
现代文：所以不用言说便显示诚信、不施恩惠就显示仁慈、不必动怒就显示威严，这是以天之心来感动变化的；施舍恩惠才体现仁慈、言说以后才显示诚信、发怒了才显示威严，这是用人之精诚来感化的；施舍了恩惠还不显仁慈、信誓旦旦还不显诚信、大发雷霆还无威严，这是做表面文章造成的。
English: Therefore, it is not necessary to speak to show sincerity, it is not necessary to do favors to show benevolence, it is not necessary to be angry to show majesty, which is to be moved by the heart of heaven; it is only to show benevolence to show benevolence, it is only to show sincerity after speaking, it is only to show majesty when angry, which is to be inspired by human sincerity; it is not merciful to show benevolence, it is not honest to swear, and it is not dignified to be angry, which is caused by making a superficial article.

古文：故有道以统之，法虽少，虽以化矣；无道以行之，法虽众，足以乱矣。
现代文：所以用 道 来统帅，法令即使很少，也足以感化民众；没有以 道 来统帅，法令即使很多，也不足以安定民众，反而不断地出乱子。
English: Therefore, with the use of the way to command, even if there are few laws, it is enough to influence the people; without the use of the way to command, even if there are many laws, it is not enough to stabilize the people, but it is constantly out of order.

古文：治身，太上养神，其次养形；治国，太上养化，其次正法。
现代文：修身，最重要的是修养精神，其次才是修养形体；治理国家，最重要的是形成感化，其次才是严明法令。
English: To cultivate the body, the most important thing is to cultivate the spirit, and the second is to cultivate the body; to govern the country, the most important thing is to form influence, and the second is to make strict laws.

古文：神清志平，百节皆宁，养性之本也；肥肌肤，充肠腹，供嗜欲，养生之未也。
现代文：精神清明，心志平和，全身血脉都安顺，这才是养性的根本；养得肌肤肥胖、脂膏满腹还嗜欲不断，这是养生的末节。
English: A clear spirit, a peaceful mind, and a healthy blood flow throughout the body are the fundamentals of good health. Having a fat skin, a fat stomach, and a constant craving is the end of good health.

古文：民交让争处卑，委利争受寡，力事争就劳，日化上迁善而不知其所以然，此治之上也。利赏而劝善，畏刑而不为非，法令正于上而百姓服于下，此治之未也。
现代文：人民互相谦让、争处卑下地位、分配利益时争着拿少的一份，并努力工作争着做辛苦的事，每天向善上进却不知怎么变化的，这才是上等的统治；用物质利益来激励人，并经常宣传说教劝人向善，使百姓畏惧刑法而不敢妄为，上面执法严明，下面百姓服服帖帖，这是下等的统治术。
English: The people are humble to each other, fight for a lower position, fight for a smaller share when distributing benefits, and work hard to do hard things. They strive to be good every day, but they do not know how to change. This is the superior rule. Use material benefits to inspire people, and constantly promote preaching and persuading people to be good. So that the people fear the criminal law and do not dare to do anything rash. The upper level strictly enforces the law, and the people below obey the law. This is the lower level of governance.

古文：上世养本而下世事未，此太平之所以不起也。
现代文：上古时代注重养性根本，而末世则注重枝末细节，这就是太平世道难以重现的根本原因。
English: In ancient times, people paid attention to the fundamentals of nutrition, while in the last days they paid attention to the smallest details. This is the fundamental reason why the Taiping Tao is difficult to reproduce.

古文：夫欲治之主不世出，而可与兴治之臣不万一，以万一求不世出，此所以干岁不一会也。
现代文：想治理好社会的圣主并不是每个世代都会出现的，而那些能够辅佐圣主治理社会的贤臣也是万人中难觅一个；万人中难觅一个的贤臣要想碰上不是每世代都出现的圣主，那就更困难了，所以说贤臣和圣主的结合真的是千载难逢。
English: The Lord who wants to govern society well does not appear in every generation, and those sages who can assist the Lord in governing society are hard to find among thousands of people; if a sage who is hard to find among thousands of people wants to meet the Lord who does not appear in every generation, it will be more difficult, so the combination of sages and the Lord is really a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：水之性，淖以清，穷谷之污，生以青苔，不治其性也。
现代文：水性柔和而清澈，那些幽谷中不流动的积水会长满青苔，这是因为没有疏理水的本性而造成的。
English: The water is soft and clear, and the stagnant water in those deep valleys will be covered with moss, which is caused by the nature of the untreated water.

古文：掘其所流而深之，茨其所决而高之，使得循势而行，乘衰而流，虽有腐髊流渐，弗能污也。
现代文：如果挖深谷口水道，使之通畅，并用土堵塞不必要的水潭，使之不让积水，这样，谷水就能顺高势向下流动，这样即使有杂物和腐骨浸泡，也不会使水质污染。
English: If the deep valley mouth waterway is dug to make it smooth, and the unnecessary pond is blocked with soil to prevent water from accumulating, then the grain water can flow downhill, so that even if there are debris and rotting bones soaked, it will not pollute the water quality.

古文：其性非异也，通之与不通也。
现代文：水的本性没有改变，这水的混浊变质和水的清澈甘甜，其原因在于这水是流通还是不流通。
English: The nature of water does not change, the turbidity of water and the clear sweetness of water are due to whether the water is circulated or not.

古文：风俗犹此也。
现代文：社会风俗也是如此。
English: So are social mores.

古文：诚决其善志，防其邪心，启其善道，塞其奸路，与同出一道，则民性可善，风俗可美也。
现代文：如果开导疏通民众的善良天性，堵塞人们萌生邪恶的念头，开启他们向善从善的正道，堵塞其邪道，使之朝着一条正道上发展前进，这民性就会善良，社会风气就美好。
English: If the enlightened dredge up the good nature of the people, block the evil thoughts of the people, open the right path for them to follow the good, block their evil ways, and make them develop and advance on a right path, this people's nature will be good and the social atmosphere will be beautiful.

古文：所以贵扁鹊者，非贵其随病而调药，贵其擪息脉血，知病之所从生也。
现代文：因此人们之所以看重扁鹊，不是看重扁鹊根据病情调配药方，而是看重扁鹊他的切脉息而了解病因知道病根。
English: Therefore, the reason why people attach importance to flatworms is not to adjust the prescription according to the condition of the disease, but to understand the cause of the disease and know the root of the disease.

古文：所以贵圣人者，非贵随罪而鉴刑也，贵其知乱之所由起也。
现代文：同样，人们之所以看重圣人，不是看重圣人根据罪行来量刑，而是看重圣人了解这产生动乱祸害的缘由这一点。
English: In the same way, the importance of a saint is not that he punishes according to the crime, but that he understands the cause of the calamity.

古文：若不修其风俗，而纵之淫辟，乃随之以刑，绳之以法，虽残贼天下，弗能禁也。
现代文：如果不治理社会风气培养良好风尚，放纵邪恶泛滥，而到了邪恶泛滥之时再动用所谓的刑法去惩治，这刑法即使能铲除奸贼邪恶，但仍无法从根子上禁绝邪恶。
English: If we do not control the social atmosphere, cultivate good customs, and allow evil to flourish, and then use the so-called criminal law to punish when evil is rampant, even if this criminal law can eradicate the evil of traitors, it will still not be able to ban evil from the root.

古文：禹以夏王，桀以夏亡；汤以殷王，纣以殷亡；非法度不存也，纪纲不张，风俗坏也。
现代文：禹用了夏朝的法度，称王天下；桀也是用了夏朝的法度，却遭灭亡；汤用了殷代的法度，称王天下；纣王也用了殷代的法度，却遭灭亡：这不是因为法度有还是没有的原因，而是纪纲没有得以伸张，社会风俗已经败坏的原因。
English: Yu used the laws of the Xia Dynasty to become the king of the world; Zou also used the laws of the Xia Dynasty, but was destroyed; Tang used the laws of the Yin Dynasty to become the king of the world; King Zou also used the laws of the Yin Dynasty, but was destroyed: This is not because of the existence or non-existence of laws, but because the discipline has not been able to expand, and social customs have been corrupted.

古文：三代之法不亡，而世不治者，无三代之智也。六律具存，而莫能听者，无师旷之耳也。
现代文：夏、商、周三代的法度并没有亡佚，但后来的世道却不能治理好，这是因为以后没有三代圣王那样的智慧；音乐中的六律仍然存在，但没人能够听得懂，这是因为没有师旷那样的耳朵。
English: The laws of Xia, Shang and San did not die out, but the subsequent world order could not be governed well, because there was no wisdom like the three generations of holy kings; the six laws in music still exist, but no one can understand them, because there is no ear like Shi Ku.

古文：故法虽在，必待圣而后治；律虽具，必待耳而后听。
现代文：所以，法度虽然存在，但一定得等到圣人出现以后才能治理好天下；音律虽然没有变，但一定得由名乐师去辨别它。
English: Therefore, although the law exists, it must wait until a saint appears before the world can be governed well; although the melody has not changed, it must be distinguished by a famous musician.

古文：故国之所以存者，非以有法也，以有贤人也；其所以亡者，非以无法也，以无贤人也。
现代文：所以国家之所以存在，并不是没有法，而是社会中有了贤人；国家之所以灭亡，也并不是没有法，而是社会中没有贤人。
English: Therefore, the reason why the state exists is not because there is no law, but because there are wise people in the society; the reason why the state perishes is also not because there is no law, but because there are no wise people in the society.

古文：晋献公欲伐虞，宫之奇存焉，为之寝不安席，食不甘味，而不敢加兵焉。
现代文：晋献公想讨伐虞国，但宫之奇在那里，晋献公为此寝食不安，因而不敢轻易派兵攻打虞国。
English: Jin Xian Gong wanted to fight against the State of Yu, but the Palace of Wonders was there, and Jin Xian Gong was uneasy about this, so he did not dare to easily send troops to attack the State of Yu.

古文：赂以宝玉骏马，宫之奇谏而不听，言而不用，越疆而去，荀息伐之，兵不血刃，抱宝牵马而去。
现代文：后来晋献公用宝玉和骏马来贿赂虞国国君，向虞国借路讨伐虢，宫之奇知道其中有诈，劝谏虞君，虞君贪宝玉和骏马不听宫之奇的劝谏。宫之奇见自己的劝阻无效，就越出国境逃走了。荀息在灭掉了虢国以后顺路又将虞国灭掉了，这样兵不血刃又将宝玉和骏马带回晋国。
English: Later, Jin offered to bribe Yu Guo Guo's prince with precious stones and horses, and borrowed from Yu Guo to fight the war, but Guo Zhiqi knew that this was a trick, and advised Yu Guo, who was greedy for precious stones and horses, not to listen to Guo Zhiqi's advice. Guo Zhiqi thought that his dissuasion was ineffective, so he fled abroad. Xixi destroyed Yu Guo after eliminating Yu Guo, and then destroyed Yu Guo along the way, so the soldiers brought the precious stones and horses back to Jin without bloodshed.

古文：故守不待渠而固，攻不待冲降而成拔，得贤之与失贤也。
现代文：所以防守不仅仅依靠壕堑的坚固，攻城不单单凭借冲车的高大，而是取决于是否得到贤人来辅佐。
English: Therefore, the defense does not rely solely on the solidity of the trench, and the attack does not rely solely on the height of the rush, but depends on whether it is assisted by wise men.

古文：故臧武仲以其智存鲁，而天下莫能亡也；璩伯玉以其仁宁卫，而天下莫能危也。
现代文：因此，臧武仲用他的智慧保住了鲁国，使天下诸侯无法灭掉鲁国；蘧伯玉用他的仁爱安宁了卫国，使天下诸侯无法危害卫国。
English: Therefore, Zeng Wuzhong used his wisdom to protect Lu, so that the princes of the world could not destroy Lu; Zibo Yu used his benevolence to pacify the defense of the country, so that the princes of the world could not endanger the defense of the country.

古文：《易》曰： 丰其屋，蔀其家，窥其户，阅其无人。 
现代文：《易经》说： 空旷一间屋，草席盖顶，从门缝往里看，空寂无人。 
English: "I Ching" says: An empty room, a straw mat to cover the roof, looking through the cracks in the door, empty and deserted.

古文：无人者，非无众庶也，言无圣人以统理之也。
现代文：所谓 无人 ，并不是说没有普通百姓，而是说没有圣人统理。
English: The so-called "no one" does not mean that there are no ordinary people, but that there is no sage leadership.

古文：民无廉耻，不可治也；非修礼义，廉耻不立。
现代文：民众如果没有廉耻之心，就无法治理他们；如果不修治礼义，廉耻之心就无法树立起来。
English: If the people do not have a sense of shame, they cannot be governed; if they do not practice civility, a sense of shame cannot be established.

古文：民不知礼义，法弗能正也；非崇善废丑，不向礼义。
现代文：民众不知礼义，法令也无法使他们走正道。不推崇好的风尚，废除丑恶现象，民众就不会遵循礼义。
English: The people do not know the etiquette, and the law cannot make them follow the right path. Without promoting good customs and abolishing ugly phenomena, the people will not follow the etiquette.

古文：无法不可以为治也。不知礼义不可以行法。
现代文：没有法当然难以治理国家，但民众不懂礼义，这法也无法推行实施。
English: Of course, it is difficult to govern a country without laws, but the people do not understand the meaning of etiquette, and this law cannot be implemented.

古文：法能杀不孝者，而不能使人为孔、曾之行。法能刑窃盗者，而不能使人为伯夷之廉。
现代文：刑法能杀掉不孝之人，但却不能使人像孔子、曾子那样讲孝道；刑法能惩治偷盗者，但却不能使人做得像伯夷那样廉洁。
English: Criminal law can kill people who are not filial, but it cannot make people preach filial piety like Confucius and Zengzi; criminal law can punish thieves, but it cannot make people as clean as Bo Yi.

古文：孔子弟子七十，养徒三千人，皆入孝出梯，言为文章，行为仪表，教之所成也。
现代文：孔子的弟子中有贤人七十人，学生有三千人，这些人都是在家讲孝道、出门讲敬爱的，言辞都符合礼义法度，行为都规规矩矩可作表率的，这些都是教育形成的。
English: Among the disciples of Confucius, there are seventy sages and three thousand students. These people all preach filial piety at home and respect at home. Their words are in line with etiquette and laws, and their behavior is exemplary. All of this is the result of education.

古文：墨子服役者百八十人，皆可使赴火蹈刃，死不还踵，化之所致也。
现代文：墨子有门徒一百八十人，都能够为义赴火蹈刃，义无反顾，这些都是教化造成的。
English: Mozi had one hundred and eighty disciples, all of whom were able to go through fire and sword for righteousness, and never looked back. All of this was the result of enlightenment.

古文：夫刻肌肤，镵皮革，被创流血，至难也，然越为之，以求荣也。
现代文：刻肌肤、刺皮肉、受伤流血，是最难做到的，可是越人就以刻字文身来求得荣耀。
English: Engraving skin, piercing flesh, injuries and bleeding are the most difficult to achieve, but Yue people seek glory by engraving tattoos.

古文：圣王在上，明好恶以示之，经诽誉以导之，亲贤而进之，贱不肖而退之，无被创流血之苦，而有高世尊显之名，民孰不从？
现代文：圣王处君位，明确好恶的是非标准并公布于众，规定诽誉的标准并加以引导，亲近贤才并举用他们，轻视不贤者并黜退他们，人们没有受伤流血的痛苦，而有出人头地、尊贵显达的名声，这谁不想听从呢？
English: Who wouldn't want to follow a holy king on the throne, who makes clear the standards of likes and dislikes and announces them to the public, who sets the standards of slander and guides them, who is close to the wise and uses them, who despises the unwise and repels them, who doesn't have the pain of injury and bloodshed, but has a reputation for excellence and dignity?

古文：古者法设而不犯，刑错而不用，非可刑而不刑也，百工维时，庶绩咸熙，礼义修而任贤德也。
现代文：古时候法令颁布，却无人去触犯它，刑罚设置，却无人去使用它，这不是本该用刑而不去用刑，而是因为百官都想着做好自己的本职工作，使各项工作都兴盛成功，礼得以建立并任用贤能有德之士，使刑法没有可用之处。
English: In ancient times, laws were promulgated, but no one violated them, and punishments were established, but no one used them. This was not because punishment should have been used, but because officials did not want to use it. Rather, it was because they all wanted to do their jobs well, so that all kinds of work could flourish and succeed, so that etiquette could be established and people of ability and virtue could be appointed, so that there was no use for criminal law.

古文：故举天下之高以为三公，一国之高以为九卿，一县之高以为二十七大夫，一乡之高以为八十一元士。
现代文：所以推举天下的高才来担任三公，举荐一国的高才来担当九卿，选举一县的高才来做二十七大夫，推荐一乡的高才为八十一元士。
English: Therefore, the world's talents are recommended to serve as the three princes, the talents of one country are recommended to serve as the nine lords, the talents of one county are recommended to serve as the 27 chiefs, and the talents of one township are recommended to serve as the 81 princes.

古文：故智过万人者谓之英，千人者谓之俊，百人者谓之豪，十人者谓之杰。
现代文：因此，智慧超过万人的称之为 英 、智慧超过千人的称之为 俊 、智慧超过百人的称之为 豪 、智慧超过十人的称之为 杰 。
English: Therefore, wisdom exceeding ten thousand is called Ying, wisdom exceeding one thousand is called Jun, wisdom exceeding one hundred is called Gao, and wisdom exceeding ten is called Jie.

古文：明于天道，察于地理，通于人情，大足以容众，德足以怀远，信足以一异，知足以知变者，人之英也。
现代文：明了天道、审察地理、通晓人情，心胸博大足以容纳众人、德行足以使远方的人归附、诚信足以统一差异、智慧足以应付变通，这种人就是人中的 英 。
English: To know the heavens, to survey the earth, to understand human nature, to be large-hearted enough to contain multitudes, virtuous enough to bring the far-off home, honest enough to unite differences, wise enough to cope with the fickle, such a man is the Englishman among men.

古文：德足以教化，行足以隐义，仁足以得众，明足以照下者，人之俊也。
现代文：德行足以实施教化、行为足以暗合道义、仁慈足以得人爱戴、英明足以照耀下层，这种人就是人中的 俊 。
English: Virtuous enough to educate, moral enough to act, benevolent enough to be loved, wise enough to enlighten the lower classes, such a man is the best of men.

古文：行足以为仪表，知足以决嫌疑，廉足以分财，信可使守约，作事可法，出言可道者，人之豪也。
现代文：行为足以为人师表、智慧足以决断疑难、廉洁足以公平分配财物、诚信足以遵守信约，做事值得效法、说话合符道理，这种人就是人中的 豪 。
English: Such a person is a hero among men, whose behavior is sufficient to set an example, whose wisdom is sufficient to solve problems, whose integrity is sufficient to distribute wealth fairly, whose honesty is sufficient to keep a promise, whose work is worthy of imitation, and whose speech is consistent with reason.

古文：守职而不废，处义而不比，见难不苟免，见利不苟得者，人之杰也。
现代文：坚守本职工作而不荒废、为人正义而不结党营私、遇见危难而不苟且躲避、看到利益而不贪得，这种人就是人中的 杰 。
English: Those who stick to their jobs and don't waste, who are just and don't play favorites, who are met with danger and avoid it, and who see benefits and don't covet them are the best people.

古文：英俊豪杰，各以小大之材处其位，得其宜，由本流未，以重制轻，上唱而民和，上动而下随，四海之内，一心同归，背贪鄙而向义理，其于化民也，若凤之摇草木，无之而不靡。
现代文：英、俊、豪、杰各以他们自己的才能大小安处在恰当的位置，各得所宜。这样就能由本流末、以重制轻，在上位的倡导什么、下面的民众就应和什么、上面行动什么、下面的民众就追随什么，四海之内，人心所向，背弃贪鄙而向往义理，这样来教化民众，就如同风吹草木，草木随之伏倒一样。
English: The handsome, the handsome, the brave, and the brave, each with their own talents and abilities, are placed in the right position, according to their own needs. In this way, it is possible to change from the mainstream to the bottom, from the heavy to the light, from what the people at the top advocate to what the people at the bottom should advocate, from what the people at the top act to what the people at the bottom should follow, and from what the people at the top act to what the people at the bottom should follow. Within the four seas, the people's hearts aspire to, abandoning greed and yearning for righteousness. In this way, it is possible to educate the people, just

古文：今使愚教知，使不肾临贤，虽严刑罚，民弗从也；小不能制大，弱不能使强也。
现代文：现在反过来让愚者去教化民众、让不贤者凌驾贤者之上，即使刑法酷严，民众也不会服帖，因为小不能制大、弱不能使强。
English: Now, on the other hand, let the fools educate the people, let the unwise prevail over the wise, even if the criminal law is harsh, the people will not obey, because small can not control big, weak can not make strong.

古文：故圣主者举贤以立功，不肖主举其所与同。
现代文：所以，圣明的君王举用贤能者来建立功业，无能的君主则任用和自己一样的人。
English: Therefore, a wise king appoints wise men to build his work, while an incompetent ruler appoints people like himself.

古文：文王举大公望、召公爽而王，桓公任管仲、隰朋而霸，此举贤以立功也，夫差用太宰嚭而灭，秦任李斯、赵高而亡，此举所与同。
现代文：周文王举用太公望、召公奭而称王天下；齐桓公任用管仲、隰朋而称霸天下：这都是举用贤能建立功绩的事例。夫差信用太宰礱而招致亡国，秦帝王任用李斯、赵高而导致灭亡，这就是任用与自己相同类型的奸佞之徒的例子。
English: Zhou Wen Wang's use of too much public prestige and summoning public officials to become king of the world; Qi Huan's appointment of Guanzhong and Zibo to dominate the world: these are all examples of the use of merit to build merit. The husband's bad credit with Dazai Zibo led to the death of the country, and the Qin Emperor's appointment of Li Si and Zhao Gao led to his death. This is an example of the appointment of the same type of traitors as himself.

古文：故观其所举，而治乱可见也；察其党与，而贤不肖可论也。
现代文：所以只要看帝王君主举用何种人才就可知道社会治乱的状况了，只要观察这些人和何种人结党就可知道他们是贤还是不贤了。
English: Therefore, as long as you look at what kind of talents the emperor and monarch use, you can know the situation of social chaos, and as long as you observe these people and what kind of people form a party, you can know whether they are virtuous or not.

古文：夫圣人之屈者，以求伸也；枉者，以求直也；故虽出邪辟之道，行幽昧之涂，将欲以直大道，成大功。犹出林之中不得直道，拯溺之人不得不儒足也。
现代文：圣人常常是以曲求伸、以枉求直的。所以有时候他们尽管行走在邪僻幽暗的路上，但那是为了振兴大道、完成事业，这就如同穿过深山密林不能走直道、拯救落水者不能不打湿脚一样。
English: The sages often seek the right path by twists and turns, so sometimes, although they walk on the path of evil and darkness, it is in order to revitalize the avenue and complete the cause, just as it is impossible to walk a straight path through the deep mountain forest, and it is impossible to save a drowning person without getting wet feet.

古文：伊尹忧天下之不治，调和五味，负鼎俎而行，五就架，五就汤，将欲以浊为清，以危为宁也。
现代文：伊尹忧虑天下不安宁，于是充当起厨师，调和五味，背着鼎锅和砧板四处奔波，曾五次去见桀、五次去见商汤，为的是要把混浊的世界变得清澈起来、将危亡的社会变得安定起来。
English: Yi Yin worried that the world was not peaceful, so he acted as a chef, reconciled the five flavors, and ran around with a pot and a cutting board. He had five times to see the cocoon and five times to see the merchant soup, in order to make the turbid world clear and the endangered society stable.

古文：周公股肱周室，辅翼成王，管叔、蔡叔奉公子禄父而欲为乱，周公诛之以定天下，缘不得已也。
现代文：周公作为周王朝的股肱大臣，辅佐成王，管叔和蔡叔协同纣王之子禄父图谋作乱，周公为了捍卫王室，诛杀了他们以平天下，这当然是出于不得已。
English: Zhou Gong, as the minister of the capital of the Zhou Dynasty, assisted Cheng Wang, Guan Uncle and Cai Uncle, together with the son of the king, Lu Father, plotted to create turmoil. In order to defend the royal family, Zhou Gong killed them to pacify the world. Of course, this was out of necessity.

古文：管子忧周室之卑，诸侯之力征，夷狄伐中国，民不得宁处，故蒙耻辱而不死，将欲以忧夷狄之患，平夷狄之乱也。
现代文：管仲担忧周王室衰败，诸侯国之间互相攻打，夷狄异族侵犯中原，人民不得安生，所以他蒙受囚禁的耻辱而不自杀，是因为担忧夷狄异族的祸患和想要平定夷狄异族的暴乱。
English: Guanzhong worried about the decline of the Zhou royal family, the war between the states, the invasion of the Central Plains by the Yidi people, and the people could not live in peace. Therefore, he suffered the shame of imprisonment without committing suicide, because he was worried about the scourge of the Yidi people and wanted to quell the riots of the Yidi people.

古文：孔子欲行王道，东西南北七十说而无所偶，故因卫夫人、弥子暇而欲通其道。
现代文：孔子要想实行王道，东南西北地不停奔走，游说了七十位君王都没有一个愿意采纳他的主张，所以想通过卫灵公夫人南子和卫灵公宠臣弥子瑕的门路来实行自己的主张。
English: If Confucius wanted to practice the royal way, he would run around the world, lobbying seventy kings, but none of them were willing to adopt his ideas. Therefore, he wanted to implement his ideas through the path of Nanzo, the wife of Wei Ling, and Yiziko, Wei Ling's favorite vassal.

古文：此皆欲平险除秽，由冥冥至招诏，动于权而统于善者也。
现代文：他们这些人都是想要平定危亡、铲除污秽、使冥暗社会走向光明，所以行为尽管属于变通的，但都以美好的理想作统帅的。
English: All of them wanted to put an end to danger, eradicate filth, and bring the dark society into the light. Therefore, although their behavior was flexible, they were all guided by a beautiful ideal.

古文：夫观逐者于其反也，而观行者于其终也。
现代文：观察赛跑的人，要看他返回时的状况；考察行走的人，要看他到达终点的样子。
English: If you watch a runner, watch how he returns; if you watch a walker, watch how he reaches the end.

古文：故舜放弟，周公杀兄，犹之为仁也；文公树木，曾于架羊，犹之为知也。
现代文：虞舜尽管流放了兄弟、周公尽管杀掉了兄长，但他们仍不失为仁者；晋文公尽管闹过种米而欲长苗的笑话、曾子尽管做过给羊戴枷不让牴人的蠢事，但他们仍不失为智者。
English: Although Yu Xuan exiled his brother, and Zhou Gong killed his elder brother, they were still benevolent; although Jinwen Gong made jokes about planting rice and wanting to grow seedlings, and although Zengzi did stupid things such as shackling sheep to prevent them from grazing, they were still wise.

古文：当今之世，丑必托善以自力解，邪必蒙正以自为辟。
现代文：当今世界上，丑恶的人必定假托善行来为自己辩解、邪僻的人必定披上正直的外衣来为自己开脱。
English: In today's world, the ugly people must rely on good deeds to justify themselves, and the evil people must put on the cloak of honesty to justify themselves.

古文：游不论国，仕不择官，行不辟污，曰 伊尹之道也。 
现代文：他们游说不看是什么国家，求官不论是什么官职，行为也从不避污浊，还说这是符合伊尹之道。
English: No matter what country they are lobbying for, no matter what position they are seeking, they never shy away from dirty deeds, and say that this is in line with the way of Yin Yang.

古文：分别争财，亲戚兄弟搆怨，骨肉相贼，曰 周公之义也。 
现代文：分家时争夺财物，亲戚兄弟为此结怨，骨肉互相残害，还说这是符合周公之义。
English: During the separation of families, relatives and brothers fought over property and grudges, and killed each other. It was also said that this was in line with Zhou Gongru's righteousness.

古文：行无廉耻，辱而不死，曰 管子之趋也。 
现代文：行动不讲廉耻，为了活着宁愿受辱，还说这是符合管仲志向。
English: He said that his actions were shameless and that he would rather be humiliated in order to survive, adding that this was in line with Guan Zhong's aspirations.

古文：行货赂，趣势门，立私废公，比周而取容，曰 孔子之术也 。
现代文：施行贿赂，巴结权势，立私废公，结党拉派，博取上层欢心以求宠幸，还说这是符合孔子之术。
English: He also said that it was in line with Confucius's art to practice bribery, to curry favor with those in power, to promote private interests over public interests, to form parties and factions, and to win the favor of the upper class.

古文：此使君子小人纷然淆乱，莫知其是非者也。
现代文：这样就使君子、小人界限混淆不清，无法弄清谁是谁非。
English: In this way, the boundaries between the gentleman and the villain are confused, and it is impossible to figure out who is to blame.

古文：故百川并流，不注海者不为川谷；趋行蹐驰，不归善者不为君子，故善言归乎可行，善行归乎仁义。
现代文：所以百川并流，不能东注入海的就不能算河流；都在经营忙碌，不归善良的就不能算君子。所以好的理论是看它是否能实践，好的行为是看它是否合仁义。
English: Therefore, all rivers flow together, and those that do not flow eastward into the sea cannot be considered rivers; they are all busy in business, and those who are not good cannot be considered gentlemen. Therefore, a good theory is to see if it can be practiced, and a good behavior is to see if it is benevolent and righteous.

古文：田子方、段于木轻爵禄而重其身，不以欲伤生，不以利累形。
现代文：田子方、段干木轻视爵禄而珍重自身，不因嗜欲而伤害生命、不以利益而拖累身形。
English: Tagokata and Danganki despise peerage and cherish themselves, do not harm life because of greed, do not drag the body with profit.

古文：李克竭股肱之力，领理百官辑穆万民，使其君生无废事，死无遗忧，此异行而归于善者。
现代文：李克竭尽全力辅佐国君，统领管理百官，使万民和穆，使国君活着时没有废弃不办的事、死后也没有遗留的忧虑。这就是具体行为各异而目的都想归向善道的事例。
English: Li Ke made every effort to assist the sovereign, presided over the management of all officials, and made all the people feel at ease, so that the sovereign did not abandon things when he was alive, and did not have worries left behind after his death. This is an example of how specific behaviors are different and the purpose is to return to a good path.

古文：张仪、苏秦家无常居，身无定君，约从衡之事，为倾覆之谋，浊乱天下，挠滑诸侯，使百姓不逞启居，或从或横，或合众弱，或辅富强，此异行而归于丑者也。
现代文：张仪、苏秦家庭没有固定的住处，自身也没有固定的君王来事奉，干出的是合纵连横、颠覆他国的事情和阴谋，将社会搞得翻天覆地、乌烟瘴气、混浊不堪，使诸侯晕头转向、无方向，使人民百姓无法安生休息。或者合纵，或者连横，或者联合众多弱小国家，或者辅佐几个富强的国家。这些具体做法不同，但归属于邪恶则是相同的。
English: The Zhang Yi and Su Qin families did not have a fixed residence, nor did they themselves have a fixed monarch to serve. They did things and conspiracies to unite and subvert other countries, turning society upside down, smoky and turbulent, making the princes dizzy and directionless, and making it impossible for the people to live and rest. Or to unite and subdue, or to unite and subdue, or to unite many weak and small countries, or to assist several rich and strong countries. These specific practices are different, but the attribution to evil is the same.

古文：故君子之过也，犹日月之蚀，何害于明！
现代文：所以君子的过失，就像日月亏蚀，怎么能伤害其本身的光明呢！
English: So how can the fault of a gentleman, like the eclipse of the sun and moon, harm his own light!

古文：小人之可也，犹狗之昼吠，鸱之夜见，何益于善！
现代文：小人也有可取之处，但这就像狗在白天吠叫、猫头鹰黑夜能看见，这对善行有什么益处！
English: There is merit in a villain, but it is like a dog that barks in the daytime and an owl that can see in the dark, what good does it do for a good deed!

古文：夫知者不妄发，择善而为之，计义而行之，故事成而功足赖也，身死而名足称也。
现代文：所以智者不盲目行动，选择了善事去做，考虑到合义才去行动，所以事情办成功后这功效足以依赖，人死去后这名声足以能称道。
English: Therefore, the wise do not act blindly, but choose to do good deeds, and only act after considering righteousness. Therefore, after the success of the matter, this effect is enough to rely on, and after the death of the person, this reputation is enough to praise.

古文：虽有知能，必以仁义为之本，然后可立也。
现代文：所以即使有聪明才智，也必定得以仁义为根本，然后才能发挥聪明才智干出一番事业来。
English: Therefore, even if you have cleverness and talent, you must take benevolence and righteousness as the foundation, and then you can make use of your cleverness and talent to do some business.

古文：知能蹐驰，百事并行，圣人一以仁义为之准绳，中之者谓之君子，弗中者谓之小人。
现代文：聪明能干的人都在经营忙碌，种种事情纷纷涌现，而圣人只能拿仁义作唯一标准来衡量这些人和事，符合的叫做君子，不符合的称作小人。
English: Clever and capable people are busy running their businesses, and all kinds of things are springing up, but sages can only use benevolence and righteousness as the only standard to measure these people and things. Those who meet the standard are called gentlemen, and those who do not meet the standard are called villains.

古文：君子虽死亡，其名不灭，小人虽得势，其罪不徐。
现代文：是君子的即使死去，他的名声都不会灭破；是小人的即使得势，他的罪恶都无法抹去。
English: Even if a gentleman dies, his reputation will not be destroyed; even if a villain gains power, his sins cannot be erased.

古文：使人左据天下之图而右刎喉，愚者不为也，身贵于天下也。
现代文：假若让人左手拿着天下的版图，而右手拿着刀刎颈自杀，这样即使是傻子都不会去做，因为生命远比据有天下来得珍贵。
English: If someone were to hold the map of the world in his left hand and kill himself with a knife in his right hand, even a fool would not do it, because life is far more precious than it ever was.

古文：死君亲之难，视死若归，义重于身也。
现代文：但是如果有人为了君亲之难而牺牲生命、视死如归的话，那又是值得称道的，因为道义比生命更珍贵。
English: But if someone sacrifices his or her life for the sake of his or her relatives, it is praiseworthy, because morality is more precious than life.

古文：天下，大利也，比之身则小；身之重也，比之义则轻。
现代文：据有天下这利益与生命相比，这利益又显得相当小；生命是贵重的，但与道义相比，这生命又显得相当轻。
English: According to the world, this benefit is relatively small compared to life; life is precious, but compared to morality, this life is relatively light.

古文：义，所全也。
现代文：人们敢于抛弃生命，正是为了保全道义。
English: People dare to give up their lives in order to preserve morality.

古文：《诗》曰： 恺悌君子，求福不回。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 平易近人的君子，追求幸福不违背正道。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: An approachable gentleman, the pursuit of happiness does not violate the right path.

古文：言以信义为准绳也。
现代文：说的就是君子要以诚信正义来作为处世的准绳。
English: What is said is that a gentleman should take honesty and justice as the criterion for his conduct in life.

古文：欲成霸王之业者，必得胜者也。
现代文：想要完成霸王功业的人，必定是能获得胜利的人。
English: The person who wants to complete the work of the overlord must be the one who can win.

古文：能得胜者，必强者也。
现代文：能获得胜利的人，必定是个强者。
English: He who can win must be strong.

古文：能强者，必用人力者也。
现代文：能有强大力量的人，必定是善于利用人力的人。
English: A person who can have great power must be a person who is good at using human power.

古文：能用人力者，必得人心者也。
现代文：善于利用人力的人，必定是个得人心的人。
English: A person who is good at using human resources must be a person who wins people's hearts.

古文：能得人心者，必自得者也。
现代文：能够得人心的人，必定是个自身修养有收获的人。
English: A person who can win people's hearts must be a self-cultivated and rewarding person.

古文：故心者，身之本也；身者，国之本也。
现代文：所以人心性的修养是自我修养的根本，自我修养又是治国平天下的根本。
English: Therefore, the cultivation of the human heart is the foundation of self-cultivation, and self-cultivation is the foundation of governing the country.

古文：未有得己而失人者也，未有失己而得人者也。
现代文：世上没有自我修养有所收获而失去人心的，也没有放弃自我修养却得人心的。
English: There is no self-cultivation in the world that gains something and loses people's hearts, nor does it give up self-cultivation but gains people's hearts.

古文：故为治之本，务在宁民；宁民之本，在于足用；足用之本，在于勿夺时；勿夺时之本，在于省事，省事之本，在于节用；节用之本，在于反性。
现代文：所以治国的根本，务必在于安定民生；安定民生的根本又在于使人民财物充足；而财物充足的根本在于不能侵夺农时；不侵夺农时取决于减少徭役兴建之类的事；而减少这类的事又取决于人的节欲观念。
English: Therefore, the foundation of governing the country must lie in stabilizing the people's livelihood; the foundation of stabilizing the people's livelihood lies in making the people's wealth sufficient; and the foundation of sufficient wealth lies in not encroaching on the agricultural time; not encroaching on the agricultural time depends on reducing things such as labor and construction; and reducing such things depends on people's concept of abstinence.

古文：未有能摇其本而静其末，浊其源而清其流者也。
现代文：而节欲观念的形成建筑于人对清淡恬静天性的返归。没有摇动了树的根部而树梢却静止的事，也没有弄浑浊了水源而让流水清澈的事。
English: But the formation of the concept of abstinence is based on the return of people to the light and quiet nature. There is no shaking of the roots of the tree while the treetops are still, and there is no muddying of the water source to make the running water clear.

古文：故知性之情者，不务性之所无以为；知命之情者，不忧命之所无奈何。
现代文：所以了解人性真情的人是不会去做人性所不允许做的事；懂得命运实情的人是不会忧虑命运中无可奈何的东西的。
English: Therefore, people who understand the true feelings of human nature will not do things that are not allowed by human nature; people who understand the reality of fate will not worry about what is unavoidable in fate.

古文：故不高官室者，非爱木也；不大钟鼎者，非爱金也。直行性命之情，而制度可以为万民仪。
现代文：所以不修建高大宫室，原因不是爱惜木材；不铸造大型钟鼎，原因不是珍惜铜铁等金属，只不过是遵循天性命运的真情来做事而已，这样的制度就可以成为万民的榜样。
English: Therefore, the reason for not building a tall palace chamber is not to cherish wood; the reason for not casting a large bell tower is not to cherish metals such as copper and iron, but to do things in accordance with the true feelings of natural destiny. Such a system can become a model for all people.

古文：今目悦五色，口嚼滋味，耳淫五声，七窍交争以害其性，日引邪欲而浇其身夫调，身弗能治，奈天下何！
现代文：现在人是眼睛爱看五色、嘴巴爱尝五味、耳朵沉溺于五音，这眼、耳、鼻、口争着享受、舒服，以至伤损了人的本然天性，每天产生邪念来摧残自己的身体。自己身体都治理修养不好，又能把天下怎么样？
English: Nowadays, people's eyes love to see the five colors, their mouths love to taste the five flavors, and their ears are addicted to the five tones. This eye, ear, nose, and mouth fight for enjoyment and comfort, and even damage people's innate nature, producing evil thoughts every day to destroy their bodies. Their bodies are not well-governed and cultivated, and what can they do to the world?

古文：故自养得其节，则养民得其心矣。
现代文：所以将自身的修养掌握好了，那么教化民众就可以得民心。
English: Therefore, if you have mastered your own cultivation, then you can enlighten the people and win their hearts.

古文：所谓有天下者，非谓其履势位、受传籍、称尊号也，言运天下之力而得天下之心。
现代文：所谓拥有天下，不是说只拥有天子君位权势、得到传国玉玺和图籍、获得帝王之尊号，而是说还要能够充分运用天下的力量并得到民众的支持。
English: The so-called possession of the world does not mean only possessing the power of the throne of the son of heaven, receiving the imperial regalia and the imperial title, but also being able to make full use of the power of the world and get the support of the people.

古文：纣之地，左东海，右流沙，前交趾，后幽都，师起容关，至浦水，士亿有余万，然皆倒矢而身，傍戟而战。
现代文：纣王掌握的地域国土，东到东海，西至流沙，南到交趾，北至幽都，军队从容关可以布防到浦水，士卒达十万之多，可是这些士兵最终调转弓箭、倒戟攻打纣王。
English: The territory of the territory controlled by the king of Qi, east to the East Sea, west to the quicksand, south to Jiaozuo, north to Youtu, the army can be deployed from Rongguan to Pushui, and there are as many as 100,000 soldiers, but these soldiers eventually turn their bows and arrows and hammers to attack the king of Qi.

古文：武王左操黄铀、右执白旄以麾之，则瓦解而走，遂土崩而下。
现代文：周武王左手握着黄钺，右手掉动白旄指挥士兵，纣王的部队就土崩瓦解，败逃投降。
English: King Zhou Wu held the yellow scepter in his left hand and the white scepter in his right hand to command the soldiers. The troops of King Zhou collapsed and surrendered.

古文：纣有南面之名，而无一人之德，此失天下也。
现代文：纣王徒有南面称王的虚名，却无王者君主应有之德，这就是纣王失去天下的原因。
English: The king-hunters have the false name of the king in the south, but the kingless monarch should have the virtue. This is the reason why the king lost the world.

古文：故桀、纣不为王，汤、武不为放。
现代文：所以站在这个角度看，桀、纣算不上是真正的王，汤、武赶他们下台也不算是放纵犯上。
English: Therefore, from this point of view, Yu and Zou are not the real kings, and Tang and Wu's ousting them from power is not an act of indulgence.

古文：周处酆镐之地，方不过百里，而誓纣牧之野，入据殷国，朝成汤之庙，表商容之间，封比干之墓，解箕子之囚，乃折抱毁鼓，僵五兵，纵牛马，搢笏而朝天下，百姓歌沤而乐之，诸侯执禽而朝之，得民心也。
现代文：周国处在酆、镐之地，面积不过百里，可是在牧野誓师讨伐纣王，攻占殷都朝歌，朝拜成汤的庙堂，旌表商容的故里，修固比干的坟墓，将箕子从囚禁中释放出来，推翻纣王的统治以后就折断鼓槌、毁坏战鼓、收起各种兵器，放走从军的战马和解放运输的牛，使之能用到生产劳动中去，插上笏板而治理天下，老百姓纵情歌唱庆贺，诸侯带着珍禽前来朝贡，这就是由于周武王得民心的缘故。
English: Zhou Guo is located in the land of Zhai and Zhai, with an area of less than a hundred miles, but it is in the hometown of Makino Zheishi that Zhou Guo fought against Zhai Wang, conquered the Yindu morning song, the temple that worshiped into soup, and the Zhai watch merchant, repaired the grave of Bikan, released the mule from captivity, broke the drumstick, destroyed the war drums, and collected various weapons after overthrowing the rule of Zhai Wang, released the war horses from the army and the cattle transported for liberation, so that they could be used in production labor, and inserted the seesaw to govern the world. The common people sang

古文：阖闾伐楚，五战入郧，烧高府之粟，破九龙之钟，鞭荆平王之墓，舍昭王之宫。
现代文：吴王阖闾征伐楚国，五次攻入楚都郢城，焚烧粮仓中的粟米，砸破刻有九龙的编钟，鞭打楚平王的坟墓，阖闾还住进了楚昭王的宫殿。
English: King Wu of the State of Wu conquered the State of Chu, invaded the city of Chu Tuo five times, burned the corn in the granary, smashed the bell engraved with Kowloon, whipped the tomb of King Chu Ping, and lived in the palace of King Chu Zhao.

古文：昭王奔随，百姓父兄携幼扶老而随之，乃相率而为至勇之寇，皆方命奋臂而为之斗。
现代文：昭王随之逃亡随国，国内的百姓父老兄弟们扶老携幼跟着昭王逃难，于是大家互相鼓励与敌人吴军对抗，同心协力为昭王拼命战斗。
English: Zhao Wang then fled the country, and the people of the country, fathers and brothers, followed Zhao Wang to escape. Therefore, everyone encouraged each other to fight against the enemy Wu Army, and worked together to fight hard for Zhao Wang.

古文：当此之时，无将卒以行列之，各致其死，却吴兵，复楚地。
现代文：在这个时候，没有将领来统帅布阵指挥，百姓们都各自拼死搏击，最终击退吴军，收复失地。
English: At this time, there was no general to command the troops, and the people all fought to the death to finally repel the Wu army and recover the lost land.

古文：灵工作章华之台，发乾黔之役，外内搔动，百姓罢敝，弃疾乘民之怨而立公子比，百姓放臂而去之，饿于乾谿，食莽饮水，枕块而死。
现代文：楚灵王修筑章华台，发动乾谿战役，引起国内外震动，百姓疲惫不堪，王子弃疾利用了百姓怨声载道的机会，拥立公子比为楚王，百姓们都甩手背离了楚灵王，楚灵王在乾谿挨饿，只得吃野草、喝路边的污水，最终倒在田野里死去。
English: King Chuling built Zhanghuatai, launched the Battle of Qianlong, causing shock at home and abroad, the people were exhausted, the prince abandoned the disease and took advantage of the opportunity to carry the people's grievances, supported the prince as King Chuling, and the people all turned away from King Chuling. King Chuling was starving in Qianlong, had to eat wild grass and drink roadside sewage, and eventually died in the field.

古文：楚国山川不变，土地不易，民性不殊，昭王则相率而殉之，灵王则倍畔而去之，得民之与失民也。
现代文：楚国的江山没有改变，土地面积也没有缩小，百姓的性情也无大的改变，在楚昭王统治时代，人们愿为昭王这样的君主献身，但在灵王统治时期，人们却背弃了灵王离开了他，这是因为一个得民心一个不得民心的缘故。
English: The mountains and rivers of Chu have not changed, the land area has not shrunk, and the temperament of the people has not changed much. In the reign of King Zhao of Chu, people were willing to sacrifice themselves for a monarch like King Zhao, but during the reign of King Ling, people turned their backs on King Ling and left him. This is because one won the hearts of the people and one did not.

古文：故天子得道，守在四夷；天子失道，守在诸侯。
现代文：所以如果天子得道，这边远的四夷都成为天子的藩卫；如果天子失道，就以诸侯国为边防了。
English: Therefore, if the Son of Heaven gains the Way, these four distant barbarians will all become the guards of the Son of Heaven; if the Son of Heaven loses the Way, they will use the vassal states as border guards.

古文：诸侯得道，守在四邻：诸侯失道，守在四境。
现代文：如果诸侯得道，四周的邻国也都会保护他；如果诸侯失道，就只能以自己的边境为边防了。
English: If a vassal succeeds, the surrounding neighbors will also protect him; if a vassal fails, he can only use his own border as a border defense.

古文：故汤处毫七十里，文王处酆百里，皆令行禁止于天下。
现代文：所以商汤处在亳这个地方时，土地方圆只有七十里，文王处在酆这个地方时，面积不过百里，但他们都能使天下人令行禁止。
English: Therefore, when Shang Tang was in this place, the land area was only seventy miles, and when King Wen was in this place, the area was only a hundred miles, but they could make the world order and prohibit.

古文：周之衰也，戎伐凡伯于楚丘以归。
现代文：到了周王室衰败的时候，戎族敢在楚丘攻打凡伯，并掳劫凡伯而去。
English: When the Zhou royal family fell into decline, the Eunuchs dared to attack Fan Bo in Chuqiu and carried him away.

古文：故得道则以百里之地令于诸侯，失道则以天下之大畏于冀州。
现代文：所以得道的君王能凭借仅有的百里地盘对诸侯发号施令；失道的君王就是占据整个天下还会害怕像冀州这样的一个州的诸侯。
English: Therefore, the king of the road can give orders to the princes with only a hundred miles of land; the king of the road is to occupy the whole world and will be afraid of the princes of a state like Jizhou.

古文：故曰：无恃其不吾夺也，恃吾不可夺。
现代文：所以说：别指望人家不侵夺你的天下，如自己站稳了，你所治理的社会就不易被人侵夺。
English: Therefore, he said: Don't expect others not to invade your world. If you stand firm, the society you govern will not be easily invaded by others.

古文：行可夺之道而非篡拭之行，无益于持天下矣。
现代文：反过来说，你自己走的是一条通向绝亡的道路，却还要非议别人的反抗行为是篡位弑君作乱，这对保护天下到底有何益处呢？
English: On the other hand, you yourself are walking a path that leads to extinction, but you still want to accuse other people's acts of resistance of usurping the throne and creating turmoil. How is this beneficial to the protection of the world?

古文：凡人之所以生者，衣与食也。
现代文：人所以能生存，是依赖于衣和食。
English: People depend on food and clothing to survive.

古文：今囚之冥室之中，虽养之以刍豢，衣之以绮绣，不能乐也。
现代文：现在将一个人囚禁在一间黑暗的房间里，即使用美味佳肴来供养他，用绣丽的衣服给他穿，他也不会欢乐，因为他眼睛看不到任何东西，耳朵也听不到任何声音，寂寞无聊。
English: Now imprison a man in a dark room, even if you use delicious food to feed him and dress him in embroidered clothes, he will not be happy, because his eyes cannot see anything, his ears cannot hear any sound, he is lonely and bored.

古文：以目之无见，耳之无闻，穿隙穴，见雨零，则快然而叹之，况开户发脯，从冥冥见炤炤乎！
现代文：假若在黑暗的房间里挖个小孔，能让他看见外面下雨的雨点滴落，他都会快乐地笑起来，更何况敞开房门打开窗户，让他能看到光明世界呢！
English: If a small hole were dug in a dark room so that he could see the drops of rain falling outside, he would laugh with joy, not to mention opening the door and opening the window so that he could see the bright world!

古文：从冥冥见炤炤，犹尚肆然而喜，又况出室坐堂，见日月光乎！
现代文：从原本一片黑暗中看到外界的光明世界都喜不自胜，更何况让他从黑暗的房间里走出来到敞亮的厅堂上，看到日月的光辉呢！
English: He was overjoyed to see the bright world outside from the original darkness, let alone let him walk out of the dark room into the bright hall and see the brilliance of the sun and moon!

古文：见日月光，旷然而乐，又况登泰山，履石封，以望八荒，视天者若盖，江河若带，又况万物在其间者乎？其为乐岂不大哉！
现代文：见到日月的光辉都心情开朗快乐，更何况登上泰山，站在石封上，眺望八方极远的地方，仰望犹如车盖的天穹，俯视犹如彩带的江河，万物尽收眼底，这样的快乐难道不是更大么！
English: Seeing the brilliance of the sun and the moon makes us feel cheerful and happy, not to mention climbing Mount Tai, standing on the stone seal, looking at places far away in all directions, looking up at the sky like a car cover, looking down at the river like a ribbon, and everything in sight. Isn't such happiness even greater?

古文：且聋才，耳形具而无能闻也；盲者目形存而无能见也。
现代文：那聋子，长着耳朵却不能听见声响；那盲人，生有眼睛却看不到物形。
English: The deaf have ears, but cannot hear; the blind have eyes, but cannot see.

古文：夫言者，所以通己于人也；闻者，所以通人于己也。
现代文：语言，是用来向别人传达自己思想情感的；听闻，是让自己了解他人思想情感的。
English: Language is used to convey one's thoughts and emotions to others; hearing is used to understand the thoughts and emotions of others.

古文：瘖者不言，聋者不闻，既瘖且聋，人道不通，故有瘖聋之病者，虽破家求医，不顾其费。
现代文：哑巴不能说话，聋子听不见声响，又哑又聋，就无法和人们交流沟通。所以患有聋哑病的人，即使是倾家荡产出钱求医也在所不惜。
English: Mutes can't speak, deaf people can't hear sounds, and if you're both deaf and mute, you can't communicate with people. So people with deaf-mute disease don't hesitate to leave home, earn money, and seek medical treatment.

古文：岂独形骸有瘖聋哉，心志亦有之。
现代文：难道现在只有身体上的聋哑者吗？不，实际上人的心志思想上也有聋哑的表现。
English: Are only the physically deaf and dumb now? No, in fact, there are also manifestations of deafness and dumbness in people's hearts and minds.

古文：夫指之拘也，莫不事申也，心之塞也，莫知务通也，不明于类也。
现代文：手指痉挛弯曲，没有人不想将它弄直的；可是有些人心眼思想上有堵塞、聋哑，却没有人设法将它打通：这种人就是不知道以类相推的方法。
English: No one wants to straighten out a crooked knuckle, but there are people whose mind, eyes, and thoughts are clogged, deaf, and dumb, and no one has managed to get through: such people just don't know how to use analogies.

古文：夫观六艺之广崇，穷道德之渊深，达乎元上，至乎无下，运乎无极，翔乎无形，广于四海，崇于太山，富于江河，旷然而通，昭然而明，天地之间无所系戾，其所以监观，岂不大哉！
现代文：观察研究六艺的广博崇高，又详细穷尽道德的深邃妙旨，让自己的思想境界达到无上顶点，下至无底的界限，远达无际的极限，翱翔在无形之中，比四海广宽，比泰山崇高，比江河更丰富，旷然而通，昭然而明，天地间无所乖隔，怀着这样的胸襟眼界来看世界，哪能不伟大！
English: Observe and study the vastness and sublimity of the six arts, and exhaust the profound meaning of morality in detail. Let your thought realm reach the topless peak, down to the bottomless boundary, far reaching the limit of infinity, soar in the invisible, wider than the four seas, loftier than Mount Tai, richer than the rivers, vast and transparent, clear and bright, and there is no separation between heaven and earth. Looking at the world with such a broad mind, how can it not be great!

古文：人之所知者浅，而物变无穷，曩不知而今知之，非知益多也，问学之所加也。
现代文：人所知道的事情很肤浅，而事物的变化又是无穷的，以前不知道的事情现在知道了，这并不是智慧增长的缘故，而是通过学问增加知识的缘故。
English: The things that are known are shallow, but the changes in things are endless, and things that were not known before are now known. This is not because of the growth of wisdom, but because of the increase of knowledge through learning.

古文：夫物常见则识之，常为则能之，故因其患则造其备，犯其难则得其便。
现代文：事情经常见到就能认识它，事情经常做就可以学会它。所以经常被祸患所困扰就懂得如何防范它，经常遭受困难就知道如何处理它。
English: If you see something often, you can recognize it; if you do something often, you can learn it. Therefore, if you are often plagued by disasters, you will know how to prevent it; if you often suffer from difficulties, you will know how to deal with it.

古文：夫以一世之寿，而观千岁之知，今古之论虽未尝更也，其道理素具，可不谓有术乎！
现代文：一个人能够在短暂的一生里学到千年的知识、通达古今，虽然这些知识从未改变过、历来如此，但是我们能够说这些掌握千年知识、通达古今者是没有道术的人？
English: A person can learn the knowledge of a thousand years and the knowledge of ancient times and modern times in a short life. Although this knowledge has never changed and has always been so, can we say that these people who have the knowledge of a thousand years and the knowledge of ancient times and modern times are people without virtue?

古文：人欲知高下而不能，教之用管准则悦；欲知轻重而无以，予之以权衡则喜；欲知远近而不能，教之以金目则快射；又况知应无方而不穷哉！犯大难而不慑，见烦缨而不惑，晏然自得，其为乐也，岂直一说之快哉！
现代文：人想知道高低但又无法知道高低，这时你教他使用管状水平仪来测量高低，他就会很高兴；人想知道轻重但又无法知道轻重，这时你教他使用秤来称轻重，他就会很高兴；人想知道远近但又无法知道远近，这时你教他使用望远镜，他就会很快活；更何况能应付万方而不穷尽、遇到大难而不惧怕、碰到烦缪而不迷惑，晏然自在，这样的快乐高兴，又哪里是一丁点的快乐所能比拟的。
English: If a person wants to know the height but cannot know the height, and you teach him to use a tubular level to measure the height, he will be happy; if a person wants to know the weight but cannot know the weight, and you teach him to use a scale to weigh the weight, he will be happy; if a person wants to know the distance but cannot know the distance, and you teach him to use a telescope, he will be very happy; moreover, he will be able to cope with all directions without exhaustion, encounter difficulties without fear, encounter annoyance without confusion, and be at ease, such happiness is happy, and where is a little happiness can be compared.

古文：夫道，有形者皆生焉，其为亲亦戚矣；享谷食气者皆受焉，其为君亦惠矣；诸有智者皆学焉，其为师亦博矣。
现代文：那 道 ，有形的事物都由它产生，它如同万物之父母，与物关系密切；世上吃谷、食气者都受 道 的支配，它如同明君，给予的恩惠实在是多；诸多的聪明人都学习 道 ，它如同良师，给人的知识实在渊博。
English: That way, tangible things are all produced by it, it is like the parent of all things, it is closely related to things; those who eat grain and gas in the world are all dominated by the way, it is like a prince, it gives a lot of grace; many smart people learn the way, it is like a good teacher, it gives people a lot of knowledge.

古文：射者数发不中，人教之以仪则喜矣，又况生仪者乎！
现代文：射箭者多次射箭都射不中，这时人教他使用瞄准仪，他就会很愉快，更何况制造生产仪器的人呢！
English: An archer who repeatedly misses archery will be happy when he is taught to use a sighting device, not to mention the person who makes the production device!

古文：人莫不知学之有益于己也，然而不能者，嘻戏害人也。
现代文：人没有谁不知道学习是有好处的，但就是不去做，这是因为平时的嬉戏娱乐害成这样子。
English: There is no one who does not know that learning is good, but just does not do it, this is because the usual playful entertainment is harmful.

古文：人皆多以无用害有用，故智不博而日不足。
现代文：人又大都以无用的事来妨害有用的事，所以才智无法广博且一天天贫乏起来。
English: And men for the most part hinder the useful with the useless, so that there is no breadth to the wisdom, but it grows poorer every day.

古文：以凿观池之力耕，则田野必辟矣。以积土山之高修堤防，则水用必足矣。以食狗马鸿雁之费养士，则名誉必荣矣。以戈猎博弈之日诵诗读书，闻识必博矣。
现代文：如果用开凿养鱼池的力气去耕辟田地，这田野也一定会开辟得很好；如果用堆土积山，修筑高台的功夫去修建堤防，这水也一定会治理得很好；如果以饲养狗马鸿雁的巨资来供养士人，这名声也一定相当荣耀；如果以平时射猎博弈的时间来诵读《诗》《书》，这学问知识一定相当广博。
English: If you use the power of digging a fish pond to cultivate a field, this field will also be well developed; if you use the effort of piling up mountains and building high platforms to build dikes, this water will also be well managed; if you raise dogs, horses and wild geese with huge funds to support scholars, this reputation will also be quite glorious; if you read "poetry" and "books" at the usual time of shooting games, this knowledge must be quite extensive.

古文：故不学之与学也，犹瘖聋之比于人也。
现代文：所以说，学习与不学习相比，就像正常人和聋哑人相比一样，差距甚大。
English: Therefore, there is a big gap between learning and not learning, just as there is between normal people and deaf-mutes.

古文：凡学者能明于天人之分，通于治乱之本，澄心清意以存之，见其终始，可谓知略矣。
现代文：凡是学习的人都能够明白天人关系，通晓治乱之根本，用平和的心态、清静的头脑来思考，观察事物的来龙去脉，这样也可谓掌握了事物的要略了。
English: Anyone who studies can understand the relationship between man and nature, be familiar with the fundamentals of dealing with chaos, think with a peaceful attitude and a clear mind, and observe the ins and outs of things. In this way, it can be said to have mastered the essentials of things.

古文：天之所为，禽兽草木；人之所为，礼节制度，构而为宫室，制而为舟舆是也。
现代文：天地自然所营造化育的是禽兽草木；人类社会所制定的是礼节制度，还建造了房屋宫室，制作了舟船车辆一类的器具。
English: What nature has created and nurtured are animals and plants; what human society has established is a system of etiquette, built houses and palaces, and made vessels and vehicles.

古文：治之所以为本者，仁义也；所以为未者，法度也。
现代文：作为治国的根本是仁义；作为统治的枝末则是法度。
English: As the foundation of governance, benevolence and righteousness; as the branch of governance, the rule of law.

古文：凡人之所以事生者，本也；其所以事死者，未也。
现代文：凡是人们用来求得生存的是根本，而那些促使人们走向衰败的则是枝末。
English: All that people use to survive is the root, and those that drive people to decay are the branches.

古文：本末，一体也；其两爱之，一性也。
现代文：本和末是建成一体的，对两者都珍惜是人之天性。
English: It is human nature to cherish both the present and the past.

古文：先本后末，谓之君子；以未害本，谓之小人。
现代文：将 本 放在首要地位，把枝末放在次要位置的人可算是君子；而用枝末的东西损害根本的东西的人称之为小人。
English: The man who puts the essentials first and the ends of the branches second is a gentleman; the man who uses the ends of the branches to undermine the essentials is a villain.

古文：君子与小人之性非异也，所在先后而已矣。
现代文：君子和小人在其天性上没什么差别，不同的只是一个 先本后末 ，一个则是 以末害本 。
English: There is no difference between a gentleman and a villain in their natures, the only difference is the beginning, the middle, and the end, and the one is the last and the worst.

古文：草木，洪者为本，而杀者为未。禽兽之性，大者为首，而小者为尾。
现代文：草木常常以粗大的为根本，细小的为枝末；禽兽又常常以大的为头、小的为尾。
English: Grasses and trees often have large roots and small branches; animals often have large heads and small tails.

古文：末大于本则折，尾大于要则不掉矣。
现代文：草木如果枝末比根本粗大，就会折断；禽兽如果尾大于腰，这尾巴就摇摆不动。
English: If the branch of a plant is thicker than its trunk, it will break; if the tail of an animal is larger than its waist, the tail will not move.

古文：故食其口而百节肥，灌其本而枝叶美，天地之性也。
现代文：所以动物从口中进食就会全身肥壮；草木灌溉它们的根部，就会枝繁叶茂。
English: Therefore, when an animal eats from its mouth, its whole body becomes fat; when a plant irrigates its roots, its branches and leaves become luxuriant.

古文：天地之生物也有本末，其养物也有先后。人之于治也，岂得无终始哉？
现代文：天地自然化育万物是有本有末，养育它们又是有先有后，人对于社会的治理难道就能够没有头绪？
English: Heaven and earth naturally nurture all things, and nurture them first and last. Can people have no clue about the governance of society?

古文：故仁义者，治之本也。今不知事修其本，而务治其未，是释其根而灌其枝也。
现代文：所以仁义是治国安民的根本，现在如果人们不懂得致力于根本，却致力于枝末的话，那就等于是放弃对树根的浇灌而去浇灌枝叶，做的是一件蠢事。
English: Therefore, benevolence and righteousness are the fundamentals of governing the country and ensuring the safety of the people. Now, if people do not know how to be committed to the fundamentals, but are committed to the ends of the branches, it is tantamount to abandoning the watering of the roots of the tree and watering the branches and leaves, which is a stupid thing to do.

古文：且法之生也，以辅仁义。今重法而弃义，是贵其冠履而忘其头足也。
现代文：再说法度的产生是用来辅助仁义的，现在如果我们看重法度而轻视仁义，那就好像看重鞋子帽子而忘记头足，做的也是一件蠢事。
English: Furthermore, it is said that the law was created to assist benevolence. Now, if we value the law and despise benevolence, it is like valuing shoes and hats and forgetting the head and feet. It is also a foolish thing to do.

古文：故仁义者，不厚基者也。不益其厚而张其广者毁，不广其基而增其高者覆。
现代文：所以仁义是治国安民的厚实基础，想不加厚基础就扩建房屋，这房屋是要毁坏的；想不加宽基础就增高房屋，这房屋是要倾倒的。
English: Therefore, benevolence and righteousness are the solid foundation for governing the country and keeping the people safe. If you want to expand a house without strengthening the foundation, the house will be destroyed; if you want to increase the height of a house without widening the foundation, the house will be toppled.

古文：赵政不增其德而累其高，故灭；智伯不行仁义而务广地，故亡其国。
现代文：秦始皇赵政不增强德政却在一些枝末事上积累加码，所以被推翻；智伯不施行仁义却致力于拓展地盘，所以也被消灭。
English: Zhao Zheng, the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty, was overthrown because he did not strengthen German politics, but accumulated extra points in some trivial matters; Zhibo did not practice benevolence, but was committed to expanding the territory, so he was also eliminated.

古文：语曰： 不大其栋，不能任重。
现代文：《国语》上说： 不加强它的栋梁，就承受不住重压。
English: "Kokugo" said: Without strengthening its pillars, it cannot withstand the pressure.

古文：重莫若国，栋莫若德。 
现代文：没有比国家更重的了，也没有比德更大的栋梁。 
English: There is nothing heavier than the country, and there is no greater pillar than Germany.

古文：国主之有民也，犹城之有基，木之有根。根深则本固，基美则上宁。
现代文：一国君主和他的臣民的关系，就像城墙和墙基的关系，又像树木和根基的关系，根扎得深这树木就牢固，墙基砌得好这城墙就坚实。
English: The relation of a sovereign to his subjects is like that of a wall to its foundation, or of a tree to its roots. The deeper the roots, the stronger the tree; the better the foundation, the stronger the wall.

古文：五帝三王之道，天下之纲纪，治之仪表也。
现代文：五帝三王的治国之道，是普天下适用的法则，是治国的准绳。
English: The Five Emperors and Three Kings' way of governing the country is the law applicable to the whole world, and is the criterion for governing the country.

古文：今商鞅之启塞，申子之三符，韩非之孤愤，张仪苏秦之从衡，皆掇取之权，一切之术也，非治之大本，事之恒常，可博闻而世传者也。
现代文：现在看来，商鞅的《启塞》，申不害的 三符 ，韩非子的《孤愤》，张仪、苏秦的纵横说，都是一些随手捡取的权宜之术，适用于一时，不是治国统治的根本方针、不反映社会世事的一般规律，也无法被人广博采纳和广泛流传的。
English: It now appears that Shangyu's "Qi Jie" and Shen Nihong's "San Fu" and Han Feizi's "Lonely Rage" and Zhang Yi's and Su Qin's vertical and horizontal narratives are all opportunistic tricks that can be picked up at random and applied for a while. They are not the fundamental principles of governing the country, do not reflect the general laws of social affairs, and cannot be widely adopted and widely spread.

古文：子囊北而全楚，北不可以为庸；弦高诞而存郑，诞不可以为常。
现代文：楚国令尹子囊以败逃保全了楚国，但是败逃不能成为保全国家的一般规律；弦高以欺诈保全了郑国，但欺诈不能成为保卫国家的常用手法。
English: Chu Guo ordered Yin Zibao to save Chu Guo by defection, but defection cannot be the general rule of saving the country; Zheng Gao saved Zheng Guo by deception, but deception cannot be a common method of defending the country.

古文：今夫《雅》《颂》之声，皆发于词，本于情，故君臣以睦，父子以亲。
现代文：现在那《雅》《颂》等诗歌，其诗的辞言都是人在真纯情感基础上抒发写成的，所以君臣学习它们便能和睦相处，父子学习它们便能亲密相处。
English: Nowadays, the words of poems such as "Ya" and "Ode" are all written by people on the basis of true and pure emotions, so when princes and ministers learn them, they can live in harmony, and when fathers and sons learn them, they can live in intimacy.

古文：故《韶》《夏》之乐也，声浸乎金石，润乎草木。
现代文：所以那《韶》《夏》等古乐，其乐声浸泽金石、滋润草木。
English: Therefore, the ancient music such as "," "夏" and so on, its music soaks the stone and moisturizes the grass.

古文：今取怨思之声，施之于弦管、闻其音者，不淫则悲，淫则乱男女之辩，悲则感怨思之气，岂所谓乐哉？
现代文：现在如果取用怨思之声，用管弦乐器弹奏出来，听的人就会不是淫乱就是悲凄。这样淫乱就打乱了男女界限、悲凄就感染了悲思气氛，这哪里好称得上是音乐呢！
English: Now, if you take the voice of bitterness and play it with an orchestral instrument, the listener will be either lewd or sad. In this way, lewdness disrupts the boundaries between men and women, and sadness infects the atmosphere of sadness. How can this be called music?

古文：赵王迁流于房陵，思故乡，作为《山水》之呕，闻者莫不殒涕。
现代文：赵王迁被俘虏后流放到房陵深山中，因思念故乡而创作了《山木》这首诗歌，听了这诗歌的人无不落泪流涕。
English: After being captured, Zhao Wangqian was exiled to a tomb deep in the mountains. Because he missed his hometown, he composed the poem "Mountain Tree." Everyone who heard this poem shed tears.

古文：荆轲西刺秦王，高渐离、宋意为击筑而歌于易水之上，闻者莫不瞑目裂毗，发植穿冠。
现代文：荆轲西去秦国行刺秦始皇，高渐离、宋意为他击筑，在易水之滨慷慨悲歌，听的人无不两眼圆睁、怒发冲冠。
English: Jing Xuanxi went to Qin to assassinate Qin Shi Huangdi, Gao Zhanyuan and Song Yi built for him, and sang a generous tragic song on the banks of the Yishui River. The listeners were all wide-eyed and furious.

古文：因以此声为乐而入宗庙，岂古之所谓乐哉！
现代文：如果因此就将这类诗歌作为乐歌在宗庙里演唱，这哪里算是古代说的雅乐呢！
English: If, for this reason, such poems are sung as music in the ancestral temple, how can this be called ancient music?

古文：故弃冕铬舆，可服而不可好也；太羹之和，可食而不可嗜也；朱弦漏越，一唱而三叹，可听而不可快也。
现代文：所以皮弁冠冕和大车，可以使用而不宜过分喜爱；大羹的味道，可以食用但不宜过分嗜好；红色丝弦穿底的琴瑟弹奏出的乐曲，一唱而三叹，可以听而不宜沉浸在欢快之中。
English: Therefore, the flapper crown and the chariot can be used but should not be loved too much; the taste of the soup can be eaten but should not be indulged in too much; the music played by the red silk-stringed zither can be heard but should not be immersed in joy.

古文：故无声者，正其可听者也；其无味者，正其足味者也。吠声清于耳，兼味快于口，非其贵也。
现代文：所以无声的乐音是用来修正悦耳的乐曲的；无味的清水是用来调和味重的食品的；淫荡的音乐虽然听起来悦耳清新，美味的食品虽然吃起来爽口舒服，但这些都不值得珍贵。
English: Therefore, the sound of silent music is used to modify the melody of pleasant music; tasteless water is used to adjust the taste of heavy food; although the lascivious music sounds pleasant and fresh, and although the delicious food is refreshing and comfortable to eat, these are not precious.

古文：故事不本于道德者，不可以为仪；言不合乎先王者，不可以为道；音不调乎《雅》《颂》者，不可以为乐。
现代文：所以不以道德为本的事，是不能拿来做榜样仪表的；不符合先王之道的言论，是不能拿来作真理的；和《雅》《颂》不协调的音乐，是不能当作正乐的。
English: Therefore, things that are not based on morality cannot be used as examples and symbols; words that do not conform to the way of the former king cannot be used as truth; and music that is not in harmony with "Ya" and "Ode" cannot be regarded as proper music.

古文：故五子之言，所以便说掇取也，非天下之通义也。
现代文：所以商鞅、申不害、韩非子、张仪、苏秦五位先生的言论，只是一些便于巧辩而随手拾取的、适宜一时的权宜之术，算不上放之四海而皆准的通义。
English: Therefore, the remarks of the five gentlemen, Shang Qi, Shen Fuxi, Han Feizi, Zhang Yi, and Su Qin, are just some convenient and opportunistic tactics that are easy to pick up, and are not universal.

古文：圣王之设政施教也，必察其终始，其县法立仪，必原其本末，不苟以一事备一物而已矣。
现代文：圣明的君主在实施政治教化时，必定审察事情的来龙去脉。在颁布法令确立规范时，也必定弄清事物的本末关系，不只是依据一事防备一物就算了。
English: When carrying out political indoctrination, the enlightened monarch must examine the ins and outs of the matter. When promulgating laws and regulations to establish norms, he must also clarify the relationship between things, not just rely on one thing to prevent one thing.

古文：见其造而思其功，观其源而知其流，故博施而不竭，弥久而不垢。
现代文：看到事物的开始就考虑到它的成功，观察到事物的源头就掌握它的流变，所以能够广泛实施而不会枯竭，又历时久远而不受污损。
English: Seeing the beginning of things and considering its success, observing the source of things and grasping its flow, so that it can be widely implemented without being exhausted, and lasting for a long time without being tarnished.

古文：夫水出于山而入于海，稼生于田而藏于仓，圣人见其所生，则知其所归矣。
现代文：河水发源于山中而流入大海，庄稼生于田野而储藏在仓库，圣人看见事物的产生便知道了它们的归宿了。
English: Rivers flow from the mountains to the sea, crops are grown in the fields and stored in warehouses, and sages know where things come from when they see them.

古文：故舜深藏黄金于崭岩之山，所以塞贪鄙之心也。
现代文：所以虞舜把黄金深藏在险峻的山里，是为了堵塞人们贪婪卑鄙的欲念。
English: Therefore, Yujing hid the gold deep in the steep mountains in order to block people's greedy and despicable desires.

古文：仪狄为酒，禹饮而甘之，遂。疏仪狄而绝旨酒，所以遏流而之行也。
现代文：仪狄酿造出酒，禹品尝以后觉得味道甘美，于是放逐了仪狄并且禁绝美酒，禹王这样做是为了制止沉溺美酒的风气流行。
English: Yi Di brewed the wine, and after tasting it, Yu Yu felt that the taste was sweet, so he banished Yi Di and forbade fine wine. Yu Wang did this to stop the trend of indulging in fine wine.

古文：师延为平公鼓朝歌北鄙之音，师旷曰： 此亡国之乐也。 大息而抚之，所以防淫辟之风也。
现代文：师涓为晋平公演奏朝歌北鄙的歌曲，师旷听了在一旁说： 这是纣王时的亡国之音 ，并叹息着按住师涓的手不让继续弹奏下去，这是为了防止淫邪风气的流传。
English: Shifeng played a song of the Northern Song Dynasty for King Jinping. Shiguang listened and said: "This is the sound of the country's downfall at the time of King Gong," and sighed and held Shifeng's hand to prevent him from continuing to play. This was to prevent the spread of the adulterous culture.

古文：故民知书而德衰，知数而厚衰，知券契而信衰，知械机而实衰也。
现代文：所以人民读懂了书、道德就会衰败，懂得了术数、纯厚就会变薄，知道利用券契、信用就会衰退，掌握了智巧、诚恳就会衰亡。
English: Therefore, when the people read and understand books, morality will decline; when they understand the number of operations, purity and thickness will become thinner; when they understand the use of vouchers, credit will decline; and when they master cleverness and sincerity, they will decline and die.

古文：巧诈藏于胸中，则纯白不备，而神德不全矣。
现代文：巧诈藏于胸中，纯白洁净的品性就不完备、神圣清静的德行就不完整。
English: Deceit is hidden in the chest, the pure white and clean character is incomplete, and the holy and quiet virtue is incomplete.

古文：琴不呜，而二十五弦各以其声应；轴不运，而三十轴各以其力旋。
现代文：琴瑟本身不发乐声，但它的二十五根弦则各按自己的音调而应和；车轴自己不运转，但车轮的三十根辐条则各用自己的力量使车轮运转。
English: The lyre does not play itself, but the twenty-five strings of the harp play in harmony, each to its own tune; the axle does not turn by itself, but the thirty spokes of the wheel turn by their own power.

古文：弦有缓急小大然后成曲，车有劳逸动静而后能致远。
现代文：琴瑟的弦有它的粗细紧松，这样才能弹奏出动听的乐曲；车子的各部位有它的劳逸动静的功效，这样才能使车子长时期运转。
English: The strings of the lute have their thickness and tightness, so that they can play a beautiful music; the various parts of the car have their labor and movement effect, so that the car can run for a long time.

古文：使有声者乃无声者也，能致千里者乃不动者也。
现代文：使琴弦奏出声音的是不发声的琴身，使车子运转于千里之外的是不转动的车轴。
English: It is the silent body of the violin that makes the strings sound, and the non-rotating axle that makes the car move thousands of miles away.

古文：故上下异道则治，同道则乱。
现代文：以此推理到社会，君臣异道各司其职，这国家就得以治理；君臣同道职责不分，这社会就会混乱。
English: By this reasoning, in a society where the monarch and the ministers of different sects each perform their duties, the country can be governed; if the monarch and the ministers of the same sect do not divide their duties, the society will be chaotic.

古文：位高而道大者从，事大而道小者凶。
现代文：地位高道术深的，臣民就服从；责任重道术浅的，就有凶险。
English: If the position is high and the way is deep, the subjects will obey; if the responsibility is heavy and the way is shallow, there will be danger.

古文：故小 快害义，小慧害道，小辩害治，苛削伤德。
现代文：所以贪图小的快乐伤害义，玩弄小的聪明损害道，小的巧辩危害治，苛刻凶狠伤害德。
English: Therefore, coveting small pleasures harms righteousness, playing with small cleverness harms virtue, small clever arguments harm the rule of law, and being harsh and fierce harms virtue.

古文：大政不险，故民易道；至治宽裕，故下不相贼；至忠复素，故民无匿情。
现代文：而伟大的德政无凶险，所以百姓民众容易遵循；最好的统治宽松缓裕，所以下层百姓不相争斗残害；最精诚的忠实返回朴素，所以民众不奸邪。
English: And the great moral government is without danger, so the people are easy to follow; the best rule is loose and easy, so the lower people do not fight and destroy; the most sincere faithful return to simplicity, so the people do not commit evil.

古文：商鞅为秦立相坐之法，而百姓怨矣；吴起为楚减爵禄之令，而功臣畔矣。
现代文：商鞅为秦国设置犯罪株连的法令，因而百姓们怨声载道；吴起为楚国制定削减爵禄的法令，因而功臣们纷纷背叛。
English: Shang Qi issued a decree to set up a criminal stock company for Qin, which caused the people to complain loudly; Wu Qi issued a decree to reduce the stipend for Chu, which caused the heroes to betray one after another.

古文：商鞅之立法也，吴起之用兵也。天下之善者也。
现代文：商鞅之立法、吴起之用兵都是天下最杰出的。
English: The legislation of the Commercial Code and the use of troops by Wu Qi are the most outstanding in the world.

古文：然商秧之法亡秦，察于刀笔之迹，而不知治乱之本也；吴起以兵弱楚，习于行陈之事，而不知庙战之权也。
现代文：但就是商鞅的严刑苛法使秦王朝灭亡，这是因为商鞅只知道依靠法令的条条框框这样的文字来执法，而不懂得治与乱的根本之所在。同样，就是吴起的军事用兵削弱了楚国，这是因为吴起只熟悉布阵打仗的事，而不懂得宫廷的权谋。
English: But it was Shang Pi's harsh punishments that brought about the downfall of the Qin dynasty, because Shang Pi only knew how to enforce the law by relying on the letter of the law, but did not understand the fundamentals of governance and chaos. Similarly, it was Wu Qi's military use of soldiers that weakened the state of Chu, because Wu Qi was only familiar with the deployment of troops for war, but did not understand the palace's power strategy.

古文：晋献公之伐俪，得其女，非不善也，然而史苏叹之，见其四世之被祸也。
现代文：晋献公攻打骊戎得到他的女儿，这骊姬不是不美艳，但史苏就为此事而感叹，这是因为他已预见到晋国四代将要蒙难。
English: Jin Xian Gong attacked and defeated Gong Rong to get his daughter, this Gong Ji is not unattractive, but Shisu laments this matter, because he has foreseen that the four generations of Jin will suffer.

古文：吴王夫差破齐艾陵，胜晋黄池，非不捷也，而于肯忧之，见其必擒于越也。
现代文：吴王夫差在艾陵打败齐国，又在黄池战胜晋国，这不能不算捷报频传，但伍子胥就为此忧虑，这是因为他预见到夫差必被越王所擒获。
English: Wu Wangfuchai defeated Qi in Ailing, and defeated Jin in Huangchi, which was reported frequently, but Wu Zixuan was worried about this, because he foresaw that he would be captured by Yue Wang.

古文：小白奔宫，重耳奔曹，非不困也，而鲍叔、咎犯随而辅之，知其可与至于霸也。
现代文：齐国公子小白逃亡莒城，晋公子重耳流亡曹国，不能不算困窘，可鲍叔跟着小白，咎犯跟随重耳，并辅助他们，这是因为鲍叔和咎犯知道小白和重耳终有一天能称霸诸侯。
English: Xiao Bai, the prince of Qi, fled to Lucheng, and Jin Chong Er, the prince of Jin, went into exile in Cao. It must have been embarrassing, but Uncle Bao followed Xiao Bai, and the culprits followed Chong Er, and assisted them. This was because Uncle Bao and the culprits knew that Xiao Bai and Chong Er would one day dominate the princes.

古文：勾践栖于会稽，修政不殆，谟虑不休，知祸之为福也。
现代文：越王勾践退守栖身会稽山修政处事毫不松懈，谋划复兴从不停止，这是因为勾践知道祸会向福转化。
English: King of Yue and King of Gu practice retreating and retreating, and the mountaineering and political work of the Jianshan Reform Association is unrelenting, and the planning of revival never stops. This is because the practice knows that misfortune will be transformed into blessing.

古文：襄子再胜而有忧色，畏福之为祸也。
现代文：赵襄子伐狄连胜两场却面露忧色，这是因为襄子担忧这福会转变成祸。
English: Zhao Xiangzi won two games in a row, but his face was sad, because he was worried that this blessing would turn into a disaster.

古文：故齐桓公亡汶阳之田而霸，智伯兼三晋之地而亡。
现代文：所以齐桓公丢失汶阳却反而称霸，智伯兼并晋国却反遭败灭。
English: Therefore, Qigong lost Wenyang, but gained hegemony, while Zhibo annexed Jin, but was defeated.

古文：圣人见祸福于重闭之内，而虑患于九拂之外者也。
现代文：圣人能从重重叠叠的现象背后看到祸福的转化，并能考虑到曲折乖戾处的祸患。
English: The sage can see the transformation of misfortune and good fortune from the phenomenon of overlapping phenomena, and can take into account the misfortune of twists and turns.

古文：原蚕一岁再收，非不利也，然而王法禁之者，为其残桑也。
现代文：原蚕一年可以收获两次，这不是说不想两次获利，但国家法令明文规定禁止这样做，因为两次收获会影响桑树的正常生长。
English: Raw silkworms can be harvested twice a year, which is not to say that you do not want to make a profit twice, but the national law expressly prohibits this, because two harvests will affect the normal growth of mulberry.

古文：离先稻熟，而农无褥之，不以小利伤大获也。
现代文：离谷比稻谷先成熟，但是农夫就是锄掉它们，这是因为不要因获小利而影响大的收获。
English: The stalks ripen before the rice, but the farmer just plucks them, because he doesn't want the small profit to affect the big harvest.

古文：家老异饭而食，殊器而享，子妇跳而上堂，跪而斟羹，非不费也，然而不可省者，为其害义也。
现代文：家里老人吃不同的饭菜，用不同的餐具进食，小辈儿媳赤脚送食物到厅堂，跪着给老人长者斟倒羹汤，这样做不是不费功夫，但就是不省略这些礼节，这是因为省略这些礼节就会伤害义理。
English: The elderly in the family eat different meals and use different utensils to eat, the younger generation's daughter-in-law sends food barefoot to the hall, kneels to pour soup for the elderly. Doing so is not effortless, but it does not omit these etiquettes, because omitting these etiquettes will hurt the giri.

古文：待媒而结言，聘纳而取妇，初絻而亲迎，非不烦也，然而不可易者，所以防淫也。
现代文：由媒人说媒订婚约，男女双方聘纳礼品后才能娶走媳妇，男方家人还得穿着礼服去迎亲，这样做不是不烦琐，但就是不能变更这些礼仪，这是因为用这些礼仪来防止淫乱的。
English: The betrothal contract is made by the matchmaker, and both men and women can marry their daughter-in-laws only after accepting gifts. The man's family members also have to wear ceremonial clothes to welcome their relatives. It is not without trouble to do so, but it is impossible to change these etiquettes. This is because these etiquettes are used to prevent fornication.

古文：使民居处相司，有罪相觉，于以举奸，非不掇也，然而伤和睦之心，而构仇讐之怨。
现代文：让百姓们互相暗中监视，谁犯法便马上报告，用这种方法来举报案情，这样的做法不是不好采用，但就是不采用这种方法，这是因为采用这种方法会损伤到百姓间的和睦关系，并使仇怨由此结下而无法解开。
English: It is not a bad practice to let the common people spy on each other, and immediately report anyone who breaks the law, and use this method to report the case. However, this method should not be used, because using this method will damage the harmonious relationship between the common people, and make the hatred be tied up and unable to be untied.

古文：故事有凿一孔而生百隙，材一物而生万叶者，所凿不足以为便，而所开足以为败；所树不足以为利，而所生足以为秽。
现代文：所以有些事情一旦开凿一小孔就会导致由此产生的百处缝隙，这就好像种下一树苗便会长出千枝万叶来一样。开凿出一小孔不足以会引出什么事来，但随之引出的百余处缝隙就足以将整个事情搞坏；栽下一树苗不足以有什么收益，但随之生出的繁枝则足以引起麻烦。
English: Therefore, for some things, once a small hole is drilled, it will lead to hundreds of gaps, just like planting a sapling will grow thousands of leaves. Drilling a small hole is not enough to lead to something, but the resulting hundreds of gaps are enough to ruin the whole thing; planting a sapling is not enough to make a profit, but the resulting branches are enough to cause trouble.

古文：愚者惑于小利，而忘其大害，昌羊去蚤虱而人弗库者，为其来岭穷也；狸执鼠而不可脱于庭者，为搏鸡也。
现代文：愚蠢者常常被小利所迷惑，从而忘记有可能带来的祸害。菖蒲虽然能除去跳蚤和虱子，但人们不用它来编席子，因为它会招引蛉穷虫；狸猫能捉老鼠，但人们不会让它在院子里挣脱跑开，因为它会吃掉鸡子。
English: Fools are often so captivated by the lure of small profits that they forget the harm they can do. Although the thistle can get rid of fleas and lice, people don't use it to make mats, because it attracts maggots; the civet cat can catch mice, but people won't let it run loose in the yard, because it will eat the chickens.

古文：故事有利于小而害于大，得于此而亡于彼者。
现代文：所以有些事利小而危害大，有些事是这里有所得而那里有所失。
English: Therefore, some things are of little benefit and great harm, and some things are gained here and lost there.

古文：故行棋者，或食两而路穷，或予踦而取胜。
现代文：因此有时候下棋，贪吃了对方两子，反而使自己无路可走，但有时候让对方一着棋，反而取胜了。
English: Therefore, sometimes when playing chess, they covet each other's two sons, but make themselves have no way to go, but sometimes let the other side play chess, but win.

古文：偷利不可以为行，而智术不可以为法。
现代文：贪利占小便宜的行为是不可以算作德行的，同样，依靠智巧心计办事也不能算作法则的。
English: It is not virtuous to be greedy and take advantage of others, just as it is not virtuous to rely on cleverness.

古文：故仁知，人材之美者也。
现代文：所以仁和智是人的美好资质。
English: Therefore, benevolence and wisdom are good qualities of a person.

古文：所谓仁者，爱人也；所谓知者，知人也。
现代文：所谓仁，就是爱人；所谓智，就是了解人。
English: The so-called benevolence is to love people; the so-called wisdom is to understand people.

古文：爱人则无虐刑矣，知人则无乱政矣。
现代文：爱人，就不可能滥用酷刑；知人，就不易引发动乱。
English: If you love someone, it is impossible to abuse torture; if you know someone, it is not easy to cause turmoil.

古文：治由文理，则无悸谬之事矣；刑不侵滥，则无暴虐之行矣。
现代文：根据礼仪法度治国，就不会发生荒谬之事；不滥用刑法，就不会有暴虐的行为。
English: If the state is governed according to the code of etiquette, there will be no absurdity; if the criminal law is not abused, there will be no tyranny.

古文：上无烦乱之治，下无怨望之心，则百残除而中和作矣，此三代之所昌。
现代文：上面没有烦琐杂乱的管理，下面没有怨声载道的情绪，那么社会各种灾害容易被消除，而中正平和的局面就会兴起。这就是三代昌盛的原因。
English: If there is no cumbersome and chaotic management at the top and no grumbling mood at the bottom, then all kinds of social disasters will be easily eliminated, and the situation will be peaceful. This is the reason for the prosperity of the three generations.

古文：故《书》曰： 能哲且惠，黎民怀之。何忧讙兜，何迁有苗。 
现代文：所以《书》说： 能够既圣明又惠仁，黎民百姓就缅怀追随他，哪用为讙兜忧虑，哪用迁徙有苗！ 
English: Therefore, the "Book" said: If it is possible to be both holy and benevolent, the people of Li will remember and follow him. What is the use of worry, what is the use of migration?

古文：智伯有五过人之材，而不免于身死人手者，不爱人也。
现代文：智伯有五种过人的才能，但仍免不了死在他人手里，这是因为他对人不仁爱。
English: Zhibo has five extraordinary talents, but he still inevitably dies at the hands of others. This is because he is unkind to others.

古文：齐王建有三过人之巧，而身虏于秦者，不知贤也。
现代文：齐王建有三种过人的技巧，但仍被秦国俘虏，这是因为他不了解贤能。
English: Qi Wangjian had three outstanding skills, but he was still captured by Qin, because he did not understand virtue.

古文：故仁莫大于爱人，知莫大于知人。二者不立，虽察慧捷巧，劬禄疾力，不免于乱也。
现代文：所以没有比爱人更伟大的，智没有比了解他人更大的；仁和智都不具备，即使审察聪慧敏捷灵巧，勤劳辛苦，也不免出乱子。
English: Therefore, there is nothing greater than to love others, and there is no greater wisdom than to understand others; there is neither benevolence nor wisdom, and even if one is discerning, clever, quick-witted, and diligent, he is not exempt from disorder.

