古文：名贤郭林宗李膺徐孺子郑玄蔡邕崔仁师张文瓘虞世南马周员半千严安之萧颖士萧嵩于休烈李廙郑絪独孤郁赵逢
现代文：名贤郭林宗李膺徐孺子郑玄蔡邕崔仁师张文瓘虞世南马周员半千严安之萧颖士萧嵩于休烈李廙郑絪独孤郁赵逢
English: The great sages Guo Linzong, Li Xun, Xu Xunzi, Zheng Xuan, Cai Qi, Cui Ren, Zhang Wenzhong, Yu Shi, Nan Ma, Zhou, Yan An, Xiao Ying, Xiao Song, Yu Xuryi, Li Qian, Zheng Xuan, Cai Qi, Cui Ren, Zhang Wenzhong, Yu Shi, Yan An, Xiao Ying, Xiao Song, Yu Xuryi, Li Qian, Zheng Qian, Yu Yu, Zhao Feng

古文：讽谏晏子优旃东方朔简雍斛斯丰乐高季辅李景伯苏颋黄幡绰李绛
现代文：讽谏晏子优旃东方朔简雍斛斯丰乐高季辅李景伯苏颋黄幡绰李绛
English: 讽刺子优东方朔简雍斯丰乐高季輔李景伯苏黄幡绰李

古文：名贤
现代文：名贤
English: Notable Men

古文：郭林宗
现代文：郭林宗
English: Guo Linzong

古文：郭林宗来游京师，当还乡里，送车千许乘，李膺亦在焉。
现代文：郭林宗来到京城游玩，要回故乡的那一天，前来送行的官员、车子有一千多辆，李膺也来了。
English: Guo Linzong came to Beijing to visit, and on the day he wanted to go back to his hometown, more than a thousand officials and cars came to see him off, and Li Yao also came.

古文：众人皆诣大槐客舍而别，独膺与林宗共载，乘薄笨车，上大槐坂。观者数百人，引领望之，眇若松乔之在霄汉。
现代文：众人都只送到大槐旅店便告别回去了，只有李膺和郭林宗同乘一辆破旧的车子，一直登上大槐坡顶，有好几百人伸着脖子观看，就像观看赤松子和王子乔两位神仙行进在高高的天上。
English: Everyone just went back to the Dalat Inn to say goodbye. Only Li Jun and Guo Linzong rode in a dilapidated car all the way to the top of the Dalat slope. Hundreds of people craned their necks to watch. It was like watching the two immortals, Red Pine and Prince Qiao, marching in the high sky.

古文：李膺
现代文：李膺
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李膺恒以疾不送迎宾客，二十日乃一通客。
现代文：李膺因为有病，总是不迎送客人，他们家平均二十天方才接迎一回。
English: Because of her illness, Li Yao always does not receive guests. It takes an average of 20 days for her family to receive a guest.

古文：唯陈仲弓来，辄乘舆出门迎之。
现代文：惟独陈仲弓来作客，李膺总是乘坐车子到大门外迎接。
English: However, when Chen Zhongyun came as a guest, Li Yao always took a car to meet him outside the gate.

古文：李元礼谡谡如劲松下风。
现代文：李元礼像劲松迎风挺立。
English: Li Yuanli stands tall like a strong pine tree facing the wind.

古文：膺居阳城时，门生在门下者，恒有四五百人。膺每作一文出手，门下共争之，不得堕地。
现代文：李膺居住在阳城的时候，门下总有四五百个学生，李膺每当写完一篇文章，学生们都争着阅读，传来传去不会落到地上，陈仲弓叫大儿子陈元方来拜李膺。
English: When Li Yao lived in Yangcheng, there were always four or five hundred students under his tutelage. Whenever Li Yao finished writing an article, the students all competed to read it. It would not fall to the ground. Chen Zhongyu called his eldest son Chen Yuanfang to pay homage to Li Yao.

古文：陈仲弓初令大儿元方来见，膺与言语讫，遣厨中食。
现代文：李膺同他谈完话以后，让他到厨房去吃饭。陈元方心中暗喜，认为自己使李膺感到满意，收下他做学生。
English: After Li Yao finished talking with him, he asked him to go to the kitchen to eat. Chen Yuanfang secretly rejoiced in his heart, thinking that he had made Li Yao feel satisfied and accepted him as a student.

古文：元方喜，以为合意，当复得见焉。
现代文：李膺同一个县的聂李宝，出身低微，不敢来见李膺。
English: Li Bao, a commoner from the same county as Li Yao, was from a humble background and did not dare to meet Li Yao.

古文：膺同县聂季宝，小家子，不敢见膺。
现代文：杜周甫知道聂季宝科举考试不会被录取，将他的情况告诉李膺。
English: Du Zhoufu knew that he would not be admitted to the Xiji Bao Science Examination, and told Li Xuan about his situation.

古文：杜周甫知季宝，不能定名，以语膺。
现代文：李膺同聂季宝会面，坐在台阶下为牛御寒的蓑衣上面。
English: Li Yu met with Yu Ji Bao and sat on the top of the cow's winter coat under the steps.

古文：呼见，坐置砌下牛衣上。一与言，即决曰：此人当作国士。
现代文：李膺同聂季宝谈了一次话，便断定说：这个人将来会成为国家的栋梁之才。
English: After a conversation with Gong Ji Bao, Li Yan concluded that this man would become a pillar of the country in the future.

古文：卒如其言。
现代文：后来果然如李膺所预料的一样。
English: Later, it turned out to be just as Li Yao had expected.

古文：膺为侍御史。青州凡六郡，唯陈仲举为乐安，视事，其余皆病。七十县并弃官而去。
现代文：李膺出任负责监察的侍御史，青州六郡的太守，只有陈仲举一人照常在官署处理政务，其余的几个人都称病在家，有七十个县的县令弃官而去。
English: Li Xi served as the attendant governor responsible for supervision, the governor of six counties in Qingzhou, only Chen Zhongzhi, one person, handled government affairs at the government office as usual, the rest of the people said they were sick at home, and the county magistrates of seventy counties resigned.

古文：其威风如此。
现代文：李膺竟有这样大的威风！
English: Li Yao actually has such great prestige!

古文：膺坐党事，与杜密、荀翊同系新汲县狱。
现代文：李膺受到朋友的牵连而遭受迫害，同杜密、荀翊一起被关押在新汲县监狱。
English: Implicated by a friend, Li Yao was persecuted and detained together with Du Mi and Yao in Xinqu County Prison.

古文：时岁日，翊引杯曰：正朝从小起。
现代文：过年这一天，荀翊举酒杯说：国家的基业必须一点一点才能积累起来。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, Zou raised his glass and said: The national inheritance must be accumulated little by little.

古文：膺谓曰：死者人情所恶，今子无吝色者何？
现代文：李膺对他说：死是谁也不愿意的事情，你现在还有什么要办的事情？
English: Li Yao said to him, "Death is something no one wants. What else do you have to do now?"

古文：翊曰：求仁得仁，又谁恨也？
现代文：荀翊说：追求仁义，得到仁义，还有什么可遗憾的！
English: Zou said: the pursuit of righteousness, get righteousness, there is nothing to be sorry for!

古文：膺乃叹曰：汉其亡矣，汉其亡矣！
现代文：李膺感叹地说：汉朝要灭亡了！汉朝要灭亡了！
English: "The Han Dynasty is about to perish! The Han Dynasty is about to perish!

古文：夫善人天地之纪，而多害之，何以存国？
现代文：有道德的人是天地国家的基石，而如今都遭到了迫害，还以什么来维护保存国家呢？
English: Moral people are the foundation of the kingdom of heaven and earth, and now they are all persecuted. How can the country be maintained and preserved?

古文：徐孺子
现代文：徐孺子
English: Xu Yanzi

古文：陈仲举雅重徐孺子。为豫章太守，至，便欲先诣之。
现代文：陈仲举平素很看重徐孺子，他被任命为豫章太守，刚一到任，就要去看望徐孺子。
English: Chen Zhongjiao always thought highly of Xu Rongzi. He was appointed as the governor of Yuzhang, and as soon as he took office, he went to visit Xu Rongzi.

古文：主簿曰：群情欲令府君先入拜。
现代文：主簿对他说：大家都希望太守您先举行交接参拜仪式。
English: The chief clerk said to him, "Everyone hopes that you, the governor-general, will hold the handover ceremony first."

古文：陈曰：武王轼商容之闾，席不暇暖，吾之礼贤，有何不可？
现代文：陈仲举说：周武王没等坐暖席子，就急着去拜访商容，我礼贤下士，有什么不可以呢？
English: Chen Zhongzhu said: Zhou Wu Wang did not wait for the seat to be warm, he hurried to visit Shang Rong, I am a corporal, what is not allowed?

古文：徐孺子年九岁，尝月下戏。
现代文：徐孺子九岁的时候，一次在月亮下面玩耍。
English: When Xu Yanzi was nine years old, she was playing under the moon.

古文：人语之：若令月无物，极当明邪？
现代文：有人对他说：如果月亮里没有月宫和桂树等物体，那么一定会更加明亮。
English: Someone said to him: If there were no objects such as the Moon Palace and the Katsura tree in the moon, then it would definitely be brighter.

古文：徐曰：不尔，譬如人眼中有童子，无此如何不暗。
现代文：徐孺子说：不是这样，就像人的眼睛里面的瞳仁。如果没有瞳仁，将会更加黑暗。
English: "It's not like that, it's like the pupil in a person's eye. If there is no pupil, it will be darker," Xu Yanzi said.

古文：郑玄
现代文：郑玄
English: Zheng Xuan

古文：郑玄在徐州，孔文举时为北海相，欲其返郡，敦清恳恻，使人继踵。
现代文：孔融任北海相的时候郑玄在徐州，他很想请郑玄回到北海郡。派人连续多次去徐州请郑玄回来。
English: When Kong Rong was Minister of the North Sea, Zheng Xuan was in Xuzhou. He was very eager to invite Zheng Xuan back to Beihai County. He sent people to Xuzhou several times in a row to invite Zheng Xuan back.

古文：又教曰：郑公久游南夏，今艰难稍平，傥有归来思，无寓人于室。毁伤其藩垣林木，必缮治墙宇以俟还。
现代文：孔融还说：郑玄长时间旅居南方，如今刚刚安定下来。倘若有回来的意思，没有居住的房屋，被毁坏的篱笆围墙和花园树木一定要妥善修理，然后再还给他。
English: Kong Rong also said: Zheng Xuan has been living in the south for a long time and has just settled down. If he has the intention to return, the uninhabited houses, destroyed fences and garden trees must be properly repaired and then returned to him.

古文：及归，融告僚属，昔周人尊师，谓之尚父，今可咸曰郑君，不得称名也。
现代文：郑玄回来以后，孔融告诉手下的官员说：当初周朝的人尊敬老师，称老师为 尚父 ，也就是可尊敬的父亲。如今大家可称他郑君，不许直接叫他的名字。
English: After Zheng Xuan's return, Kong Rong told the officials under his command: At the beginning, the people of the Zhou Dynasty respected teachers and called teachers "Shang father," that is, "respectable father." Nowadays, everyone can call him "Zheng Jun" and are not allowed to call him by his name directly.

古文：袁绍一见玄，叹曰：吾本谓郑君东州名儒，今乃是天下长者。
现代文：袁绍见到郑玄后感叹地说：我本以为郑玄只是东州著名的学者，今天一见才知道，他还是重厚自尊的长者。
English: After seeing Zheng Xuan, Yuan Shao said with regret: I thought Zheng Xuan was just a famous scholar in Dongzhou. Today, I knew at a glance that he was still an elderly man with a strong sense of self-esteem.

古文：夫以布衣雄世，斯岂徒然哉？
现代文：他以平民百姓的身份在当今之世，受天下人崇敬，并不是没有道理的。
English: It is not without reason that he is revered by the world as a commoner in today's world.

古文：及去，绍饯之城东，必欲玄醉。
现代文：郑玄要走了，袁绍在城东摆酒宴为他饯行，千方百计想让他喝醉。
English: Zheng Xuan was about to leave, and Yuan Shao held a banquet for him in the east of the city, trying his best to get him drunk.

古文：会者三百人，皆使离席行觞。
现代文：参加宴会的有三百人，他叫每个人都离席向郑玄敬酒。
English: There were three hundred people at the banquet, and he asked everyone to leave the table to make a toast to Zheng Xuan.

古文：自旦及暮，计玄可饮三百余杯，而温克之容，终日无怠。
现代文：从早晨到傍晚，郑玄一共喝了三百多杯酒，但是他温文尔雅的表情和风度整天都没有变化失态。
English: From morning to evening, Zheng Xuan drank a total of more than three hundred glasses of wine, but his mild-mannered expression and demeanor did not change throughout the day.

古文：蔡邕
现代文：蔡邕
English: Cai Xuan

古文：张衡死月，蔡邕母始怀孕。
现代文：张衡死的那个月，正是蔡邕母亲怀孕的时候。
English: The month of Zhang Heng's death was when Cai Wei's mother was pregnant.

古文：此二人才貌甚相类。时人云：邕是衡之后身。
现代文：他们两个人的相貌和才能非常相似，人们说蔡邕是张衡所托生的。
English: The two of them are very similar in appearance and talent, and people say that Cai Qi was born under the care of Zhang Heng.

古文：初司徒王允，数与邕会议，允词常屈，由是衔邕。
现代文：当初司徒王允好几次同蔡邕辩论，王允经常理屈词穷，因此而怨恨蔡邕。
English: At first, Wang Yun, a scholar, debated with Cai Qi several times. Wang Yun was often poor at reasoning, so he resented Cai Qi.

古文：及允诛董卓，并收邕，众人争之不能得。
现代文：后来王允诛杀了董卓，并且拘捕了蔡邕。
English: Later, Wang Yunxuan killed Dong Zhuo and arrested Cai Yongxuan.

古文：太尉马日磾谓允曰：伯喈忠直，素有孝行。
现代文：太尉马日磾对王允说：蔡邕忠厚正直，素来有忠孝的名声，况且又是旷世奇才。
English: Lieutenant Ma Rijuan said to Wang Yun: Cai Rijuan is loyal and honest. He has always had a reputation for loyalty and filial piety. Moreover, he is an extraordinary talent.

古文：且旷世逸才，才识汉事，当定十志。今子杀之，海内失望矣。允曰：无蔡邕独当，无十志何损？
现代文：目前刚刚恢复了汉朝的事业，应该整理律历、礼乐、刑法等十项基本制度，在这个时候将蔡邕杀了，恐怕会令天下的人失望。王允说：没有蔡邕就难以独挡一面？
English: At present, the cause of the Han Dynasty has just been restored, and it is necessary to sort out ten basic systems such as the legal calendar, ceremonial music, and criminal law. At this time, killing Cai Xuan will probably disappoint people around the world. Wang Yun said: Without Cai Xuan, it is difficult to stand alone?

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：不能写定十项基本制度有什么妨碍？
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：东国宗敬邕，不言名，咸称蔡君。
现代文：于是把邕杀了。邕国宗的尊敬，所以不叫他的名字，都称为蔡君。
English: Therefore, he killed the toad. Out of respect for Shing Kunzong, the toad did not call him by his name, but was called Cai Jun.

古文：兖州陈留，并图画蔡邕形象而颂之曰：文同三闾，孝齐参、骞。
现代文：兖州的陈留还画了蔡邕的画像来颂扬他，说他的文章同三闾大夫屈原一样好，忠孝与曾参和张骞齐名。
English: Chen Liu from Zhangzhou also drew a picture of Cai Xuan to praise him, saying that his article was as good as that of Qu Yuan, the doctor of the Three Kingdoms, and his loyalty and filial piety were as famous as those of Zeng Zhan and Zhang Xuan.

古文：崔仁师
现代文：崔仁师
English: Choe In Seong

古文：唐崔仁师为度支郎中，奏财物数千言，手不执本，太宗怪之，令杜正伦赍本对唱。
现代文：唐朝的崔仁师是度支郎中，他向皇帝汇报财务收支情况几千笔，手里不拿帐本。太宗皇帝怪罪他，命令杜正伦拿着帐本同他所报的数字相对照。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Cui Renshi was a middle-ranking official. He reported several thousand financial receipts and expenditures to the emperor without holding a ledger in his hand. Emperor Taizong blamed him and ordered Du Zhenglun to take the ledger and compare it with the figures he reported.

古文：一无所误。
现代文：竟没有一笔错误。
English: There wasn't a single mistake.

古文：张文瓘
现代文：张文瓘
English: Zhang Wenyi

古文：宰相以政事堂供馔弥美，议减之，张文瓘曰：此食天子所重，以机务待贤才，吾辈若不任其职，当自陈乞，以避贤路。
现代文：宰相在政事堂准备的饭菜非常丰盛，有人议论说应该节俭一点。张文瓘说：这顿饭是皇帝所重视的，因为有军政大事等着大臣们去处理。我们若不是担任现在的职务，自然可以陈述节俭的道理，以避开贤士进取的道路。
English: The meal prepared by the prime minister in the government hall was very rich, and some people argued that we should be frugal. Zhang Wenyi said: This meal is valued by the emperor, because there are military and political events waiting for the ministers to deal with. If we do not hold our current positions, we can naturally state the principle of frugality to avoid the path of the wise men.

古文：不宜减削公膳，以邀求名誉，国家所费，不在于此，苟有益于公道，斯亦不为多也。
现代文：不适合削减工作餐的标准，以换取个人的名誉。国家所浪费地方，不在这里。只要有道理，这也不算多。
English: It is not proper to reduce the standard of working meals in exchange for personal honor. The country wastes space, not here. As long as it makes sense, it is not much.

古文：虞世南
现代文：虞世南
English: Yu Shennan

古文：太宗尝出行，有司请载副书以从。
现代文：太宗皇帝有一次出行，有一个官员请示要将书籍、公文的副本装到车上带着。
English: On one of Emperor Taizong's trips, an official asked him to take copies of books and official documents with him in the car.

古文：帝曰：不须。虞世南在，此行秘书也。
现代文：皇帝说：有虞世南在，就是此行的秘书。
English: The emperor said, "Yu Shennan is here, he is the secretary of this trip."

古文：太宗称世南，博闻、德行、书翰、词藻、忠直，一人而兼是五善。
现代文：太宗皇帝称虞世南博文多见、品质高尚、读书广博、词汇丰富、忠诚正直，一个人具备五种长处。
English: Emperor Taizong said that Yu Shennan was well-read, of high quality, widely read, had a rich vocabulary, was loyal and honest, and possessed five kinds of strengths.

古文：太宗闻世南薨，哭之恸曰：石渠东观之中，无复人矣。
现代文：太宗皇帝听说虞世南死了，伤心地哭着说：宫里藏书和著书之处，再也没有人能比得上虞世南了！
English: When Emperor Taizong heard that Yushinan had died, he wept bitterly and said, "There is no one who can match Yushinan in the collection and writing of books in the palace!

古文：世南之为秘书，于省后堂，集群书中事可为文用者，号为《北堂书抄》。
现代文：虞世南当秘书期间，在省后堂将群书中可以在今后写文章时引用的重要事物摘录编纂在一起，叫作《北堂书抄》。
English: During Yu Shennan's time as secretary, he compiled excerpts of important things in the group of books that could be cited in future articles in the back hall of the ministry, called "Beidang Shisho."

古文：今此堂犹存，而书盛行于代。
现代文：如今省后堂还在，《北堂书抄》也流行于世。
English: Today, the provincial hall is still there, and the "Beidou Shisho" is also popular in the world.

古文：马周
现代文：马周
English: Ma Zhou

古文：马周西行长安，至新丰，宿于逆旅。
现代文：马周西行去长安，中途走到新丰，住在一家旅店里。
English: Ma Zhou went west to Chang'an, halfway to Xinfeng, and stayed in a hotel.

古文：主人唯供诸商贩而不顾周，遂命酒悠然独酌。主人翁深异之。
现代文：店主人只顾招待照顾一些有钱的商人，而顾不上照顾马周。马周便要了酒菜，悠然自得地独自喝酒，店主人感到他是个很奇怪的人。
English: The owner of the store only cared about entertaining and taking care of some rich businessmen, but he did not care about taking care of Ma Zhou. Ma Zhou then asked for wine and vegetables and drank alone at his own leisure. The store owner felt that he was a very strange person.

古文：及为常何陈便宜二十余事，太宗怪其能。
现代文：后来他协助常何处理了二十多件积压已久，很难处理的公务。
English: Later, he assisted Changhe to deal with more than 20 backlogged and difficult-to-handle official duties.

古文：问何，何答曰：此非臣发虑，乃臣家客马周也。
现代文：太宗皇帝觉得常何很能干，常何说：这不是我的功劳，而是我们家的食客马周协助处理的。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Chang Ho was very capable, and Chang Ho said: "This is not my achievement, but our family's diner Ma Zhou helped to deal with it."

古文：太宗即日召之。未至间，遣使使催促者数四。
现代文：太宗皇帝当天就急着召见马周，马周没有及时赶到，太宗皇帝接连派了四个人前去催促。
English: On the same day, Emperor Taizong hurriedly summoned Ma Zhou to see him. Ma Zhou did not arrive in time, and Emperor Taizong sent four people in succession to urge him.

古文：及谒见，语甚悦，授监察御史。
现代文：见面以后，太宗皇帝对马周的谈话非常满意，任命他为监察御史。
English: After the meeting, Emperor Taizong was very satisfied with Ma Zhou's conversation and appointed him as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：奏罢传呼，置鼓，每击以惊众，时人便之。
现代文：太宗皇帝命令摆上鼓乐庆贺。每一下鼓乐的敲击声，都震惊了众人，大家都知道了这件事。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the drums to be set up to celebrate. Every time the drums were beaten, everyone was shocked, and everyone knew about it.

古文：迁中书令。周病消渴，弥年不瘳。时驾幸翠微宫，敕求胜地，为周起宅，名医内使，相望不绝。
现代文：马周任中书令以后，得了糖尿病，一年多也没有治好，一次皇帝到翠微宫，命令选一块好地方给马周建一座住宅，并且派名医和使臣不断去探望马周。
English: After Ma Zhou assumed the post of the middle secretary, he got diabetes and was not cured for more than a year. Once the emperor went to the Tsuiwei Palace and ordered to choose a good place to build a house for Ma Zhou, and sent famous doctors and envoys to visit Ma Zhou.

古文：每令常食以御膳供之，太宗躬为调药，皇太子临问。
现代文：皇帝还派人将皇宫里的饭菜送去给马周吃。太宗皇帝还曾经亲自为马周调药，皇太子也经常亲临问安。
English: The emperor also sent someone to bring food from the imperial palace to Ma Zhou to eat. Emperor Taizong also personally adjusted the medicine for Ma Zhou, and the crown prince often came to say hello in person.

古文：员半千
现代文：员半千
English: half a thousand

古文：员半千本名余庆，与王义方善。
现代文：员半千本来名字叫员余庆，他同王义方的关系很好。
English: The half-thousand member was originally named member Yuqing, and he had a good relationship with Wang Yifang.

古文：谓曰：五百年一贤，足下当之矣。
现代文：王义方对他说：五百年出一个品德才能出众的贤人，你当之无愧。
English: Wang Yifang said to him, "Five hundred years have produced a sage with outstanding moral qualities. You deserve it.

古文：遂改为半千。
现代文：从此称他为半千。
English: From then on, he was known as the "Half-Thousand."

古文：高宗御武成殿，召举人，问天阵地阵人阵如何？
现代文：高宗皇帝在武成殿召集举人问如何运用天阵、地阵和人阵？
English: Emperor Gaozong gathered people in Wucheng Hall and asked them how to use the heavenly, earthly, and human armies.

古文：半千曰：师出以义，有若时雨，天阵也；兵在足食，且耕且战，地阵也；卒乘轻利，将帅和睦，人阵也。
现代文：员半千说：出师要顺应形势，主持正义，就像天上下雨，顺应天时，这就是天阵；兵马的粮食要充足，并且应该一边耕种，一边打仗，这就是地阵；士兵要车马轻便，作战勇敢，统帅和将军要齐心协力，和睦相处，这就是人阵。
English: The half-thousand members said: the division should conform to the situation and preside over justice, just as the sky rains, and conform to the weather, which is the heavenly array; the soldiers and horses should have sufficient food, and should cultivate and fight at the same time, which is the ground array; the soldiers should have light horses and chariots, and fight bravely, and the commander and general should work together and get along well, which is the human array.

古文：上奇之，充土蕃使。
现代文：皇帝对他的才能感到惊奇，任命他为出使吐蕃的使臣。
English: The emperor was amazed by his talent and appointed him as an envoy to Tibet.

古文：则天即位，留之曰：境外不足烦卿。
现代文：武则天即位以后对他说：边境以外事不必麻烦你去处理。
English: After Emperor Wu Zetian ascended the throne, he said to him, "Don't trouble yourself with matters other than the border.

古文：撰明堂新礼上之。又撰封禅坛碑十二首。迁正谏大夫，兼控鹤供奉。
现代文：让他撰写新建成的明堂的典礼仪式上宣读的文章，又让他撰写封禅坛的碑文十二首，然后任命他为正谏大夫兼任负责侍卫的控鹤供奉。
English: He asked him to write an article to be read at the ceremony of the newly built Myeongdong, and he also asked him to write twelve inscriptions for the seal of the Zen altar, and then appointed him as the chief priest and the chief guard.

古文：半千以古无此名，又授者皆薄徒，请罢之。
现代文：员半千认为以前没有这个官职，又因为负责这项工作的都是些浅薄轻浮的人，所以请武则天收回控鹤供奉这项任命。
English: Half a thousand members thought that there was no such official position before, and because the people in charge of this work were all shallow and frivolous, they asked Wu Zetian to withdraw the control crane for this appointment.

古文：由是忤旨。
现代文：由此而违抗了皇帝的旨意。
English: In doing so, he defied the emperor's will.

古文：严安之
现代文：严安之
English: Yan Anzhi

古文：玄宗御勤政楼，大酺，纵士庶观看。
现代文：玄宗皇帝在勤政楼大摆酒宴，同时上演各种剧目，让百官和老百姓共同观看。
English: Emperor Xuanzong held a grand wine banquet in the Gongzheng Building, and various plays were staged at the same time, allowing hundreds of officials and ordinary people to watch them together.

古文：百戏竟作，人物填咽，金吾卫士白棒雨下，不能制止。
现代文：老百姓把道路和广场都塞满了，仪仗队的卫士们用棍棒像雨点一样殴打老百姓，也无法制止。
English: The people filled the roads and squares, and the guards of honor could not stop beating the people with sticks like raindrops.

古文：上患之，谓高力士曰：吾以海内丰稔，四方无事，故盛为宴，欲与百姓同欢。不知下人喧乱如此。汝有何方止之？
现代文：皇帝很忧虑，对高力士说：我因为全国各地都丰收了，四方又没有战乱，所以排摆酒宴，要和老百姓同乐，没想到老百姓如此喧闹混乱，你有什么办法制止？
English: The emperor was very worried and said to Gao Lixiong, "Because the harvest is plentiful all over the country and there is no war in the four directions, I have arranged a wine banquet to have fun with the common people. I did not expect the common people to be so noisy and chaotic. What can you do to stop it?

古文：力士奏曰：臣不能也。
现代文：高力士说：我没有办法。
English: "There's nothing I can do," he said.

古文：陛下试召严安之，处分打场。
现代文：皇帝把严安之找来试一试，必定很好看。
English: The emperor tried to find Yan'an, and it must be very beautiful.

古文：以臣所见，必有可观也。上从之。安之至，则周行广场。以手板画地，示众人，约曰：窬此者死。
现代文：皇帝同意了，严安之来了以后，围着广场走了一圈，用上朝时手里拿的手板在地上画了一条线，然后对众人说：超过这条线的人处死！
English: The emperor agreed, and after Yan An's arrival, he walked around the square in a circle, drew a line on the ground with the tablet he held in his hand when he became emperor, and then said to everyone: Anyone who crosses this line will be put to death!

古文：以是终五日酺宴。咸指其画曰：严公界，无一人敢犯者。
现代文：由此摆了五天酒宴，演了五天戏剧，老百姓都指着那条线说：严公界！没有一个人敢于超越。
English: As a result, a five-day wine banquet was held and a five-day play was performed, and the common people all pointed to the line and said: Strict public sphere! No one dared to go beyond.

古文：萧颖士
现代文：萧颖士
English: Xiao Yingshi

古文：萧颖士，文章学术，俱冠词林，负盛名而洇沈不遇。
现代文：萧颖士的学问和文章，都在文人学者中名列第一，享有盛名，但一直被埋没而没有当官的机会。
English: Xiao Yingshi's scholarship and articles are ranked first among literary scholars and enjoy a high reputation, but they have been buried and have no chance of becoming officials.

古文：常有新罗使至，云：东夷士庶，愿请萧夫子为国师。
现代文：曾经有一个朝鲜半岛新罗国的使臣来到中原请求说：东方民族的官员和百姓想请萧颖士去作国师。
English: There was once an envoy from Silla, a country on the Korean Peninsula, who came to the Central Plains to make a request: Officials and people of the Oriental nation wanted to invite Xiao Yingzhu to become a national teacher.

古文：事虽不行，其声名远播如此。
现代文：这件事虽然没有办成，但却由此可以看出，萧颖士的名声竟传播得那么远。
English: Although this matter was not settled, it can be seen from this that Xiao Yingshi's reputation has spread so far.

古文：萧嵩
现代文：萧嵩
English: Xiao Song

古文：萧嵩为相，引韩休同列。及在相位，稍与嵩不协，嵩因乞骸骨。
现代文：萧嵩当宰相，推荐韩休也当了宰相，等到韩休当了宰相，便与萧嵩产生了矛盾。萧嵩因此而辞官。
English: When Xiao Song became the prime minister, he recommended Han Xiu to become the prime minister. When Han Xiu became the prime minister, there was a conflict with Xiao Song. As a result, Xiao Song resigned.

古文：上慰嵩曰：朕未厌卿，卿何庸去乎？
现代文：皇帝安慰萧嵩说：我没有讨厌你，你何必要走呢？
English: The emperor comforted Xiao Song and said, "I don't hate you, why do you have to go?

古文：嵩俯伏曰：臣待罪宰相，爵位已极。幸陛下未厌臣，得以乞身。
现代文：萧嵩趴在地上说：我做了宰相，官当到了顶点，幸好皇帝没有讨厌我，我才能辞官。
English: Xiao Song prostrated himself on the ground and said, "I have become the prime minister, and I have reached the pinnacle of officialdom. Fortunately, the emperor did not hate me, and I was able to resign.

古文：如陛下厌臣，臣首领不保，又安得自遂。
现代文：如果皇帝讨厌我，我脑袋不保，又怎么能够自己选择去留呢？
English: If the emperor hates me and my head is not safe, how can I choose to stay?

古文：因殒涕。
现代文：说着流下了眼泪。
English: She shed tears as she spoke.

古文：上为之动容曰：卿言切矣。朕思之未决，卿归私第，至夕当有使。
现代文：皇帝受了感动说：你说得很实在，我没有考虑好怎样决定，你回家去，到晚上应该有使臣去。
English: The emperor was moved and said, "What you said is very true. I didn't think about how to decide. You should go home, and the envoys should go in the evening."

古文：如无使，旦日宜如常朝谒。
现代文：如果没有使臣去，早晨你像往常一样来上朝。
English: If there are no envoys, you will go to court in the morning as usual.

古文：及日暮，命力士诏嵩曰：朕惜卿，欲固留。
现代文：等到黄昏，皇帝命令力士将萧嵩找来对他说：我很爱惜你，想要挽留你。
English: At dusk, the emperor ordered the wrestlers to find Xiao Song and say to him: "I love you very much and want to keep you.

古文：而君臣终始，贵全大义，亦国家之美事也。
现代文：而君臣始终如一，遵守大义，也是国家的一件好事。
English: And it is also a good thing for the country that the monarchs and ministers are consistent and abide by the great justice.

古文：今除卿右丞相。
现代文：今天任命你为右丞相。
English: Today, I am appointing you to the post of Minister of the Right.

古文：是日，荆州始进黄柑，上以素罗帕包其二以赐之。
现代文：正好有当天荆州进贡的黄柑。皇帝用素罗帕包了两个赏给了萧嵩。
English: There happened to be mandarin oranges brought as tribute from Jingzhou that day. The emperor rewarded Xiao Song with two of them wrapped in suropa.

古文：于休烈
现代文：于休烈
English: Yu Xurei

古文：于休烈，至性真悫，机鉴敏悟。
现代文：于休烈的本性真诚朴实。机警聪明。
English: Yu Shurei's nature is sincere and unpretentious. He is alert and clever.

古文：肃宗践祚，休烈自中都赴行在，拜给事中，迁太常少卿，知礼仪使。
现代文：肃宗即位当了皇帝，于休烈从中都赶到京城被任命为给事中，后来又改任为太常少卿兼知礼仪使。
English: Su Zong was enthroned as emperor, and Yu Xue Lai arrived in Beijing from Zhongdu and was appointed to be in charge of affairs. Later, he was reappointed as the Tai Chang Shao Jie and the Secretary of Ceremonies.

古文：中原荡覆，文物未备。休烈献五代论，肃宗甚嘉之。
现代文：中原遭到战乱破坏，文物书籍损失严重，于休烈将自己收藏的《五代论》献给国家，肃宗皇帝很满意，任命他为工部侍郎。
English: Zhongyuan was devastated by the war, and the loss of cultural relics and books was serious. Yu Xue Lai dedicated his collection of "Five Generations" to the country. Emperor Suzong was very satisfied and appointed him as a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：迁工部，在朝凡三十余年，历掌清要，家无担石之蓄。
现代文：于休烈在朝中任职三十多年，担任过许多重要显赫的官职，但家中却没有什么积蓄。
English: Yu Xueliang served in the imperial court for more than 30 years and held many important and prominent official positions, but his family had no savings.

古文：恭俭温仁，未尝见喜愠于颜色。
现代文：一直保持正直俭朴，温文尔雅，从来也不将喜怒显示在脸上，他礼贤下士，鼓励提拔年轻人。
English: He has always been honest and frugal, mild-mannered, and never shows anger or joy on his face. He is a courteous corporal and encourages the promotion of young people.

古文：而亲贤下士，推毂后进，虽位重年高，曾无倦色，笃好书籍，手不释卷。
现代文：虽然他官位高责任大，但工作勤奋，不知疲倦。他非常爱好读书，手中整天都拿着书本。
English: Although he has a high position and great responsibility, he is hard-working and tireless. He is very fond of reading and has books in his hands all day long.

古文：李廙
现代文：李廙
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：尚书左丞李廙，有清德。其妹刘晏妻也。
现代文：尚书左丞李廙具有廉洁的品德，他的妹妹是刘晏的妻子。
English: His younger sister is Liu Yao's wife.

古文：晏方秉权，尝造廙。延至寝室，见其帘甚弊，乃令潜度广狭，以竹织成，不加缘饰，将以赠广。
现代文：刘晏刚刚当官掌权，经常去拜访李廙，他看到李廙寝室的门帘非常简陋破旧，便暗中叫人用竹子编织了一个门帘，边缘上不加装饰，准备送给李廙。
English: Liu Wei, who had just assumed power as an official, often visited Li Wei. He saw that the door curtain of Li Wei's bedroom was very simple and shabby, so he secretly asked someone to weave a door curtain with bamboo, with no decoration on the edge, ready to give it to Li Wei.

古文：三携至门，不敢发言而去。
现代文：他三次带着门帘来到李廙的门口，都没敢进去说明，最后还是带了回去。
English: He brought the door curtain to Li Yao's door three times, but did not dare to go inside to explain, and finally took it back.

古文：郑絪
现代文：郑絪
English: Zheng Wei

古文：顺宗风噤不言，太子未立，牛美人有异志。
现代文：顺宗皇帝对立谁为太子的各种意见不说话表态，牛美人对此有自己的谋略。
English: Emperor Shunzong did not speak out against the various opinions on who should be crown prince, and Niu Bijin had her own strategy for this.

古文：上乃召学士郑絪于小殿，令草立储宫德音。
现代文：皇帝将郑絪，找到小殿，命令他起草确立太子的文书。
English: The emperor sent Zheng Qi to find Xiaodong and ordered him to draft a document to establish the prince.

古文：絪搦管不请，而书立嫡以长四字，跪而呈上。
现代文：郑絪拿着笔不加请示，在纸上写了立嫡亲长子几个字，跪着呈送给皇帝。
English: Zheng Yao took a pen and, without being asked, wrote a few words about the eldest son of the founding father on a piece of paper, kneeling down to present it to the emperor.

古文：顺宗深然之，乃定。
现代文：顺宗皇帝深受感动，认为很有道理，于是便将这件事确定下来。
English: Emperor Shunzong was deeply moved and thought it was very reasonable, so he decided on the matter.

古文：独孤郁
现代文：独孤郁
English: Alone and depressed

古文：独孤郁，权相之子婿也。历掌内外纶诰，有美名。
现代文：独孤郁是当朝宰相李德舆的女婿，负责管理皇帝的诏书公文，名誉很好。
English: Du Guoyu was the son-in-law of the prime minister of the dynasty, Li Deyu, and was in charge of managing the emperor's imperial rescript. He had a good reputation.

古文：宪宗叹曰：我女婿不如德舆女婿。
现代文：宪宗皇帝感叹地说：我的女婿不如李德舆的女婿。
English: Emperor Gensong sighed and said, "My son-in-law is not as good as Li Deyu's son-in-law."

古文：赵逢
现代文：赵逢
English: Zhao Feng

古文：太傅致仕赵逢，仕唐及梁，薨于天成中。
现代文：曾经做到最高官职太傅的赵逢，在唐朝和后梁两个朝代任职，死于天成年间。
English: Zhao Feng, who once held the highest official post of Taifu, served in two dynasties, the Tang Dynasty and the Later Liang Dynasty, and died when he was an adult.

古文：文字德行，风神秀异，号曰玉界尺。
现代文：他的文章和品德，达到了很高的造诣和境界，被人们称为玉界尺，就是选拔人才和评价的标准。
English: His articles and moral character have reached a high level of accomplishment and realm, and are known as the jade ruler, which is the standard for selecting talents and evaluation.

古文：扬历台省，入翰林御史中丞，梁时同平章事。
现代文：他在唐朝时担任尚书，入翰林任御史中丞，后梁时任中书门下平章事。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, he served as Shangshu, entered Hanlin and was appointed to the position of Goshi Chujo, while Houliang was appointed to the position of Chushumon Shimo Pingzhangji.

古文：时以两登廊庙，四退丘园，缙绅仰之。
现代文：两个朝代都出任朝廷的重要官职，四次放弃隐退的机会，被官员和贵族们所敬佩。
English: Both dynasties held important official positions in the imperial court, gave up the opportunity to retire four times, and were admired by officials and nobles.

古文：讽谏
现代文：讽谏
English: Irony

古文：晏子
现代文：晏子
English: Dice

古文：齐景公时，有一人犯众怒，令支解。曰：有敢救者诛。
现代文：齐景公的时候，有一个人使众人生气，齐景公命令割下他的四肢，并且说：有敢于求情解救的人处死。
English: During the reign of King Qi Jing, there was a man who made many people angry. King Qi Jing ordered his limbs to be cut off and said, "Anyone who dares to plead for help will be put to death."

古文：晏子遂左手提犯者头，右手执刀，仰问曰：自古圣主明君，支解人从何而始？
现代文：晏子左手握着那个人的头发，右手握着刀问齐景公：自古以来英明的君王，分割人的四肢这种酷刑是从谁那里开始实行的？
English: The executioner held the man's hair in his left hand and a knife in his right, and asked King Qi Jing: "Since ancient times, wise king, from whom did this torture of splitting people's limbs begin?

古文：公遽曰：舍之，寡人过也。
现代文：齐景公立刻说：放了他，这是我的过错。
English: Lord Qi Jing immediately said, "It's my fault for letting him go."

古文：优旃
现代文：优旃
English: 优

古文：秦优旃善为笑言，然合于道。
现代文：秦朝的优旃很擅于说笑话，但是他说的笑话都符合一定的道理。
English: Qin Dynasty's Youjun was very good at telling jokes, but the jokes he told all fit a certain pattern.

古文：始皇尝议欲大苑囿，东至函谷，西至陈仓。
现代文：秦始皇想要建立一个从函谷关到陈仓县的饲养动物的大园子。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang wanted to build a large zoo for rearing animals from Hanyu Pass to Chencang County.

古文：优旃曰：善。多纵禽兽于其中，寇贼从东方来，令麋鹿触之足矣。
现代文：优旃说：这个想法很好，多放些野兽在园子里，敌人如果从东方来，就让麋鹿用犄角把他们顶回去。
English: Yuxuan said, "This idea is very good. Put more beasts in the garden. If the enemy comes from the east, let the elk push them back with its horns."

古文：始皇乃止。
现代文：于是秦始皇打消了这个想法。
English: So Qin Shihuang discarded this idea.

古文：即欲漆之，极易，难为荫室。
现代文：等到秦二世即位以后，想要给城墙刷上油漆。优旃说：好！
English: After the enthronement of Qin II, he wanted to paint the city wall. Youjun said, "Good!

古文：二世笑而止之。
现代文：虽然老百姓会因此而加重负担，但是这件事大有好处，将城墙刷上油漆，宽广而平滑，敌人来了爬不上去，应该马上就办，这是件很容易的事情。秦二世笑着放弃了这个计划。
English: Although this would increase the burden on the common people, it would be of great benefit. It would be easy to paint the city walls, which are broad and smooth. If the enemy came, they would not be able to climb up. It should be done immediately. Qin II laughed and abandoned the plan.

古文：优旃侍始皇立于殿上。
现代文：优旃侍候秦始皇站在大殿上。
English: The eunuch waited on Emperor Qin standing on the main hall.

古文：秦法重，非有诏不得辄移足。
现代文：秦朝的法律严肃，没有命令，卫士们不允许随便移动脚步。
English: The laws of the Qin Dynasty were serious, there were no orders, and the guards were not allowed to move their feet.

古文：时天寒雨甚，武士被楯，立于庭中。
现代文：当时天气寒冷，正下着大雨，武士们披着铠甲站在院子里。
English: It was cold and raining heavily at the time, and the samurai were standing in their armor in the courtyard.

古文：优旃欲救之，戏曰：被楯郎，汝虽长，雨中立；我虽短，殿上幸无湿。
现代文：优旃想要解救他们，便同他们开玩笑说：披着铠甲的汉子，你虽然长得高大，但是却在雨中站着，我虽然长得矮小，却在殿上不致于被雨湿。
English: Yuxuan wanted to save them, so he joked with them: "You, a man wearing armor, although you are tall, are standing in the rain. Although I am short, I will not get wet in the temple.

古文：始皇闻之，乃令徙立于庑下。
现代文：秦始皇听到了，便命令武士们转移到屋檐下面。
English: When Qin Shihuang heard this, he ordered the samurai to move below the eaves.

古文：东方朔
现代文：东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：汉武帝欲杀乳母，母告急于东方朔。
现代文：汉武帝要杀死自己的奶妈，奶妈着急地向东方朔求救。
English: Emperor Hanwu wanted to kill his wet nurse. The wet nurse urgently appealed to Dongfang Shuo for help.

古文：曰：帝怒而傍人言，益死之速耳。
现代文：东方朔说：皇帝正发怒，别人再来劝，你死得更快了。
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "The emperor is angry. If others come to persuade you, you will die sooner."

古文：汝临去，但屡顾，我当设奇以激之。
现代文：你临刑时，只要屡屡回头，我会想办法刺激他。
English: When you're on death row, as long as you keep coming back, I'll find a way to stimulate him.

古文：乳母如其言。朔在帝侧曰：汝宜速去，帝今已大，岂念汝乳哺之时恩耶？
现代文：奶妈按照他的话去做了，东方朔在汉武帝身旁对奶妈说：你应该赶快去死，皇帝如今已经长大了，怎么还会记得你当初给他喂奶时的恩情呢？
English: The wet nurse did as he said. Dongfang Shuo said to the wet nurse next to Emperor Hanwu, "You should hurry up and die. The emperor has grown up now. How can he still remember the kindness you showed him when you were breastfeeding him?"

古文：帝怆然，遂赦之。
现代文：汉武帝受了感动，赦免了奶妈的死罪。
English: Emperor Hanwu was so moved that he pardoned the nurse's capital crime.

古文：简雍
现代文：简雍
English: Jian Yong

古文：蜀简雍，少与先主有旧，随从周旋，为昭德将军。
现代文：西蜀的简雍，从小和先主刘备的关系很好，一直跟随在先主的左右，被任命为昭德将军。
English: West Shu's Jian Yong, who had a good relationship with Liu Bei since he was a child, always followed at his side and was appointed as Zhao De's general.

古文：时天旱禁酒，酿者刑。
现代文：审理这个案子的人要把藏酒酿具的人和造酒的人一同治罪处罚。
English: The people hearing the case want to punish the person who hid the brewing equipment along with the person who made the alcohol.

古文：吏于人家索得酿具，论者欲令与造酒者同罚。
现代文：一天简雍和先主一同去道观游玩。看到一个男子在路上走。
English: One day, Jian Yong went to visit a Taoist temple with his master and saw a man walking on the road.

古文：雍从先主游观，见一男子路中行，告先主曰：彼人欲淫，何以不缚？先主曰：卿何以知之？
现代文：简雍指着那名男子对先主说：他要淫乱，为什么不把他抓起来？先主说：你怎么知道？
English: Jian Yong pointed to the man and said to the Lord, "He wants to fornicate, why not arrest him?" The Lord said, "How do you know?"

古文：雍对曰：彼有媱具，与欲酿何殊？
现代文：简雍回答说：他有淫乱的器官，与想要酿酒的人有什么不同？
English: Jianyong replied, "He has sexual organs. How is he different from someone who wants to make wine?"

古文：先主大笑，而原舍酿者罪。
现代文：先主大笑，于是免除了想要酿酒的人的罪刑。
English: The lord laughed and absolved the man who wanted to make wine.

古文：斛斯丰乐
现代文：斛斯丰乐
English: 斯丰乐

古文：北齐高祖尝宴群臣。酒酣，各令歌乐。
现代文：北齐的高祖皇帝曾经有一次设酒宴招待文武百官，酒喝到畅快的时候，高祖叫大家喝酒助兴。
English: Emperor Gaozu of Northern Qi once held a wine banquet to invite scholars and military officials. When the wine was well drunk, Gaozu asked everyone to drink to add to the fun.

古文：武卫斛斯丰乐歌曰：朝亦饮酒醉，暮亦饮酒醉。日日饮酒醉，国计无取次。
现代文：武卫士斛斯丰乐唱歌说：早晨也喝醉酒，晚上也喝醉酒，天天都喝醉酒，国家大事没有时间去商量。
English: Wu defender Song Shifengle sang: "I am drunk in the morning, I am drunk in the evening, I am drunk every day, I have no time to discuss national affairs.

古文：上曰：丰乐不謟，是好人也。
现代文：高祖说：丰乐不奉承说好话，是个好人。
English: Gao Zu said: Feng Le does not flatter and say good words, he is a good person.

古文：高季辅
现代文：高季辅
English: Gao Jifu

古文：唐高季辅切陈得失，大宗特赐钟乳一剂，曰：卿进药石之言，故以药石相报。
现代文：唐朝的高委辅向皇帝陈述分析现行政策的优点和缺点，太宗皇帝赏给他一块钟乳石说：你向我讲了像治病的药石一样的话，我赏给你药石作为回报。
English: The high-ranking committee of the Tang Dynasty made a supplementary report to the emperor, analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of the current policy. Emperor Taizong gave him a stalactite and said: You told me words like a healing stone, and I gave you a healing stone in return.

古文：寻更赐金背镜一面，以表其清鉴。
现代文：接着又赏给他一面背面是金子做成的镜子，以表扬他高明的鉴别能力。
English: He was then given a mirror with a gold back in recognition of his skillful discrimination.

古文：李景伯
现代文：李景伯
English: Li Jingbo

古文：景龙中，中宗游兴庆池，侍宴者递起歌舞，并唱下兵词，方便以求官爵。
现代文：景龙年间，中宗皇帝到兴庆池游玩。陪酒的官员争着起来跳舞，并唱下兵词，以讨好皇帝，求得加官进爵。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinglong, Emperor Zhongzong visited Xingqing Pool. The officials accompanying him danced and sang military songs to please the emperor and gain promotion to higher ranks.

古文：给事中李景伯亦唱曰：回波尔时酒卮，兵儿志在箴规。
现代文：给事中李景伯也唱歌说：池中的水就像杯中的酒，我们有责任提出劝告的意见。
English: During the event, Li Jingbo also sang: "The water in the pool is like the wine in the glass. It is our responsibility to offer advice.

古文：侍宴已过三爵，喧哗窃恐非宜。
现代文：陪宴已经酒过三巡。继续作乐恐怕不太适宜。
English: Three rounds of drinks have already passed at the banquet. I'm afraid it's not appropriate to continue making music.

古文：于是乃罢坐。
现代文：于是结束了宴会。
English: So the banquet came to an end.

古文：苏颋
现代文：苏颋
English: Su Shi

古文：玄宗时，以林邑国进白鹦鹉，慧利之性，特异常者。
现代文：唐玄宗的时候，林邑国进贡了一只白鹦鹉，这只鹦鹉非常聪明奇特。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Linyi Province paid tribute to a white parrot. This parrot was very clever and peculiar.

古文：因暇日，以金笼饰之，示于三相，上再三美之。
现代文：遇到一个没有公事的日子，玄宗皇帝将白鹦鹉装到金笼里，拿给三位宰相看，并且再三称赞这只鹦鹉。
English: On an off-duty day, Emperor Xuanzong put the white parrot in a golden cage, showed it to the three prime ministers, and repeatedly praised the parrot.

古文：时苏颋初入相，每以忠谠励己，因前进曰：诗云，鹦鹉能言，不离飞鸟。
现代文：当时苏颋刚刚当上宰相，经常勉励自己要忠诚正直，走上前去说：诗里面说，鹦鹉能言，不离飞鸟。
English: At that time, Su Shi had just become the prime minister, and he often encouraged himself to be loyal and honest. He stepped forward and said, "The poem says that the parrot can speak and does not leave the bird.

古文：臣为陛下，深以为志。
现代文：我以为陛下应该牢牢记住这两句诗。
English: I thought Your Majesty would do well to remember these two lines.

古文：黄幡绰
现代文：黄幡绰
English: Huangbanpo

古文：唐玄宗问黄幡绰，是勿儿得怜？
现代文：唐玄宗问黄幡绰：什么样的儿子让人喜爱？
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked Huang Banzhuo: What kind of son is loved?

古文：对曰：自家儿得人怜。
现代文：玄宗听了幡绰的话，低头沉思好久。
English: Xuanzong listened attentively and bowed his head in contemplation for a long time.

古文：李绛
现代文：李绛
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：宪宗时，中官吐突承璀，有恩泽，欲为上立德政碑。碑屋已成，磨砻石讫，请宣索文。时李绛为翰林学士，奏曰：大人者，与天地合其德，日月合其明，无立碑纪美之事。
现代文：唐宪宗的时候，中官吐突承璀受到皇帝的恩惠，要为皇帝立一座德政碑，以颂扬皇帝的政绩，碑屋已经建成，碑石也已经打磨完毕，请皇帝下命令征集碑文，当时李绛为翰林学士，他对皇帝说：德行高尚的人，功绩与天地同在，与日月同辉，用不着立碑来记录政绩，这样做会被天下人耻笑。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty, Lieutenant General Tu Tu Chuncheng was favored by the emperor and wanted to erect a monument to the emperor to praise the emperor's political achievements. The monument hall had already been built and the monument stone had been polished. He asked the emperor to order the collection of inscriptions. At that time, Li Qian was a scholar of Hanlin. He said to the emperor: Virtuous and noble people, achievements are the same as heaven and earth, with the same glory as the sun and the moon. There is no need to erect a monument to record political achievements. Doing so would be laughed at by the world.

古文：恐取笑夷夏。上深然之，遽命拆屋废石。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得非常有道理，立即命令拆毁碑屋，废弃石料。
English: The emperor thought that his words were very reasonable, and immediately ordered the monument house to be demolished and the stone to be discarded.

古文：承璀奏：碑屋用功极多，难便毁拆。
现代文：吐突承璀向皇帝请示说：碑屋花费了很长时间才建成，不容易立即拆除。
English: Tu Tu Chengyu petitioned the emperor, saying, "It took a long time to build the monument house, and it is not easy to dismantle it immediately.

古文：欲坚其请。
现代文：还想坚持立碑的请求。
English: I also want to insist on the request to erect a monument.

古文：上曰：急索牛拽倒。
现代文：宪宗皇帝说：立即找来牛将碑屋拽倒。
English: Emperor Gensong said: immediately find a cow to pull down the stele.

古文：其纳谏如此。
现代文：皇帝听取意见的态度竟如此诚恳坚决。
English: The emperor's attitude of listening to opinions was so sincere and resolute.

