古文：图宅术曰 宅有八术，以六甲之名，数而第之，第定名立，宫商殊别。宅有五音，姓有五声。
现代文：图宅术说： 选择住宅有八术，按六十甲子来推算和排列，住宅的次序排定了，它有关甲子的名称也就确定了，与住宅相关的五音也就区别开了。
English: There are eight techniques for choosing a house, which are calculated and arranged according to the sixty Chinese characters, the order of the house is arranged, the name related to the Chinese character is determined, and the five sounds related to the house are distinguished.

古文：宅不宜其姓，姓与宅相贼，则疾病死亡，犯罪遇祸。 
现代文：住宅的方位与五音有关，宅主的姓氏与五音也有关。住宅方位与主人的姓氏不适宜，姓氏与住宅方位相伤害，那么宅主就会疾病死亡，犯罪遇祸。 
English: The location of the house is related to the five syllables, and the surname of the owner is also related to the five syllables. If the location of the house is not suitable for the owner's surname, and the surname is harmful to the location of the house, then the owner will die of illness or be involved in a crime.

古文：诘曰：夫人之在天地之间也，万物之贵者耳。
现代文：责问说：人在天地之间，不过是万物中最尊贵的罢了。
English: Interrogator: Between heaven and earth, man is only the noblest of all things.

古文：其有宅也，犹鸟之有巢，兽之有穴也。
现代文：人有住宅，如同鸟有窝，兽有穴一样。
English: A man has a house as a bird has a nest, and as a beast has a hole.

古文：谓宅有甲乙，巢穴复有甲乙乎？
现代文：说住宅有甲乙的排列顺序，鸟窝兽穴也有甲乙的排列顺序吗？
English: Are you saying that a house has a ranking order of A-B, and a bird's nest or a beast's den also has a ranking order of A-B?

古文：甲乙之神，独在民家，不在鸟兽何？
现代文：甲乙之神，为什么只存在于民宅而不存在于鸟窝兽穴呢？
English: The gods of A and B, why do they only exist in people's homes and not in bird's nests and animal dens?

古文：夫人之有宅，犹有田也，以田饮食，以宅居处。
现代文：人有住宅，就同有田一样，靠田获得食物，靠住宅来居住。
English: A man with a house is like a man with a field; he depends on the field for food and on the house for shelter.

古文：人民所重，莫食最急，先田後宅，田重於宅也。
现代文：老百姓所看重的，没有比饮食更迫切的了，所以先治田后修住宅，田比住宅更重要。
English: For the common people, nothing is more important than food and drink. Therefore, it is more important to cultivate fields than to build houses.

古文：田间阡陌，可以制八术，比土为田，可以数甲乙，甲乙之术独施於宅，不设於田，何也？
现代文：田间的小路纵横交错，可以根据它来制定八术，耕地相连成片，可以推算甲乙顺序了。推算甲乙顺序的方术，唯独施行于住宅，而不施行于田，这是为什么呢？
English: The paths in the fields are criss-crossed, and the eight skills can be formulated according to it. The cultivated land is connected into pieces, and the order of A and B can be calculated. The calculation of the order of A and B is only carried out in the house, but not in the field. Why is this?

古文：府廷之内，吏舍比属，吏舍之形制，何殊於宅，吏之居处，何异於民，不以甲乙第舍，独以甲乙数宅，何也？
现代文：官府里面，官吏的住宅一间连一间，官吏住宅的形状结构，与百姓的住宅有什么不同呢？官吏居住的地方，与老百姓有什么不同呢？不用甲乙顺序来排列官吏住宅，却唯独用甲乙顺序来推算老百姓的住宅，这是为什么呢？
English: In government offices, government officials' residences are one room after another. What is the difference between the shape and structure of government officials' residences and ordinary people's residences? What is the difference between the places where government officials live and ordinary people? Why is it that government officials' residences are not arranged in the order of A and B, but ordinary people's residences are only calculated in the order of A and B?

古文：民间之宅，与乡亭比屋相属，接界相连。
现代文：民间的住宅，与乡亭的房屋一所挨着一所，接界连成一片。
English: The houses of the common people, side by side with the houses of the village pavilion, are connected to each other.

古文：不并数乡亭，独第民家。
现代文：不把乡、亭也按甲乙顺序排列，却唯独排列老百姓的住宅。
English: Instead of arranging the townships and pavilions in the order of A to B, they only arranged the residences of the common people.

古文：甲乙之神，何以独立於民家也？
现代文：甲乙之神，为什么偏偏只存于老百姓家呢？
English: Why do the gods of A and B only exist in the homes of ordinary people?

古文：数宅之术行市亭，数巷街以第甲乙。
现代文：推算住宅的方术，也应该施行于市亭，推算巷街以排列甲乙顺序。
English: The method of calculating residences should also be implemented in the city pavilion, and the streets should be calculated in the order of A to B.

古文：入市门曲折，亦有巷街。人昼夜居家，朝夕坐市，其实一也，市肆户何以不第甲乙？
现代文：进入市门曲折曼回，也有大街小巷，人昼夜在家中居住，早晚在市上做事，其实是一样的，做买卖的人家为什么不按甲乙顺序排列呢？
English: Entering the city gate is tortuous, and there are also streets and alleys. People live in their homes day and night, and work in the market in the morning and evening. In fact, it is the same. Why are the homes of people who do business not arranged in order of A to B?

古文：州郡列居，县邑杂处，与街巷民家何以异？
现代文：州、郡的官府排列相居，县、邑的衙门混杂相处，与大街小巷中老百姓的住宅有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between the government offices of the state and county living side by side, and the government offices of the county and town living side by side, and the houses of ordinary people in the streets?

古文：州郡县邑何以不数甲乙也？
现代文：州郡县邑的官府，为什么不按甲乙顺序推算呢？
English: Why don't the government offices of prefectures and counties be calculated in the order of A to B?

古文：天地开辟有甲乙邪？
现代文：天地开避之时就有了甲乙呢？
English: When heaven and earth avoid each other, will there be A and B?

古文：後王乃有甲乙。
现代文：还是后代才有甲乙呢？
English: Or is it only the next generation that gets A and B?

古文：如天地开辟本有甲乙，则上古之时，巢居穴处，无屋宅之居、街巷之制，甲乙之神皆何在？
现代文：候如天地开避之时原本就有甲乙，那么上古时代，人类巢居穴处，没有房屋居住、街巷构成，甲乙之神都在哪里去了呢？
English: In ancient times, when heaven and earth avoided each other, there were originally two gods, A and B. Then, in ancient times, when humans lived in caves, there were no houses to live in, and streets and alleys were formed, where did the gods of A and B go?

古文：数宅既以甲乙，五行之家数日亦当以甲乙。
现代文：推算住宅吉凶既然用甲乙，那么五行之家推算日子也应当用甲乙来定吉凶。
English: Since the calculation of the auspicious and inauspicious days of the residence is done with the Ka-B, then the calculation of the days of the Five Elements House should also be done with the Ka-B to determine the auspicious and inauspicious.

古文：甲乙有支干，支干有加时。
现代文：推算日子的甲乙是用天干地支相配，天干地支又用在时辰上。
English: The calculation of the days of A and B is made by matching the heavenly and earthly branches, and the heavenly and earthly branches are also used in the hour.

古文：支干加时，专此者吉，相贼者凶。
现代文：天干地支用在时辰上，天干地支上下相生之日就是吉日；相克之日就是凶日。
English: The heavenly dry land is used in the hour, the day when the heavenly dry land branches up and down is a good day; the day of conflict is a bad day.

古文：当其不举也，未必加忧辱也。
现代文：如果正遇上人们没有办事情，那么未必会给人们带来灾难。
English: If people don't do things when things happen, it won't necessarily bring disaster to people.

古文：事理有曲直，罪法有轻重，上官平心，原其狱状，未有支干吉凶之验，而有事理曲直之效，为支干者何以对此？
现代文：事理有曲有直，罪法有轻有重，长官本着公正的态度审核罪状，没有用干支来推断吉凶的应验，却有判明事理曲直的效果，利用干支推断吉凶的人怎样解释这种情况呢？
English: The facts are complicated and straight, the crimes are light and heavy, the magistrate examines the charges in a fair manner, and does not use the stem expenditure to infer the fulfillment of good luck and bad luck, but has the effect of determining the facts. How do people who use the stem expenditure to infer good luck and bad luck explain this situation?

古文：武王以甲子日战胜，纣以甲子日战负，二家俱期，两军相当，旗帜相望，俱用一日，或存或亡。
现代文：周武王在甲子日取得战争胜利，殷纣王却在甲子日战败，双方同时，两军相遇，旗帜相望，都在同一天，有的胜利而有的败亡。
English: King Zhou Wu won the war on the Day of the Goat, but King Yin Xi was defeated on the Day of the Goat. Both sides at the same time, the two armies met, the flags looked at each other, all on the same day, some were victorious and some were defeated.

古文：且甲与子专比，昧爽时加寅，寅与甲乙不相贼，武王终以破纣，何也？
现代文：况且甲与子相生，天刚亮时属寅时，寅与甲子不相克，武王终于在甲子日寅时打败纣王，是什么原因呢？
English: Moreover, A and Zi are born together. At the break of dawn, Zi is Tora, and Tora does not compete with Zi. King Wu finally defeats King Yao at the time of Tora. What is the reason for this?

古文：日，火也，在天为日，在地为火。
现代文：太阳就是火，在天上是太阳，在地上是火。
English: The sun is fire, in the sky it is the sun, on the ground it is fire.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：阳燧乡日，火从天来。
现代文：用阳燧对着太阳，火就从天上取下来。
English: He opposes the sun with a thunderbolt, and fire comes down from the sky.

古文：由此言之，火，日气也。
现代文：由此说来，火就是日气。
English: Therefore, fire is the breath of the sun.

古文：日有甲乙，火无甲乙？
现代文：日子有甲乙等名称，为什么火没有甲乙等名称呢？
English: The sun has the names of A and B, so why doesn't fire have the names of A and B?

古文：何日十而辰十二，日辰相配，故甲与子连。
现代文：日子有十个名称而时辰有十二个名称，日子与时辰相配，所以甲与子等名称就相连接。
English: The day has ten names and the hour has twelve names. The day matches the hour, so the names A and Z are connected.

古文：所谓日十者，何等也？
现代文：所谓日有十个名称，指的是什么呢？
English: What does it mean that a day has ten names?

古文：端端之日有十邪，而将一有十名也？
现代文：是圆圆的太阳有十个呢？还是一个太阳有十个名称呢？
English: Are there ten round suns, or is it one sun with ten names?

古文：如端端之日有十，甲乙是其名，何以不徒言甲乙，必言子丑？
现代文：如果圆圆的太阳有十个，甲乙等是它的名称，为什么不只是称为甲日、乙日等，而必须提到子、丑等名称呢？
English: If there are ten round suns, and A, B, etc. are their names, why not just call them A-day, B-day, etc., but must mention Zi, Ug and other names?

古文：何日廷图甲乙有位，子丑亦有处，各有部署，列布五方，若王者营卫，常居不动今端端之日中行，旦出东方，夕入西方，行而不已，与日廷异，何谓甲乙为日之名乎？
现代文：日廷图上甲乙等有位置，子丑等也有位置，各有部署，排列分布在东、南、西、北、中五个方位，就像人间的君王四周的护卫一样，所处的位置没有变动。现在圆圆的太阳在天上运行，清晨出于东方，傍晚落于西方，运行不止，与日廷图上的太阳不一样，为什么说甲乙等是太阳的名称呢？
English: On the diagram of the sun and the moon, there are positions for A, B, and so on, and there are also positions for Zi and Q, and they are arranged in five directions, east, south, west, north, and center, just like the guards around the kings of the world, and their positions have not changed. Now, the round sun moves in the sky, rising in the east in the morning and setting in the west in the evening, and it keeps moving. It is different from the sun on the diagram of the sun and the moon. Why is A, B, and so on called the sun?

古文：术家更说日甲乙者，自天地神也。日更用事，自用甲乙胜负为吉凶，非端端之日名也。
现代文：术家又会说： 称呼日子用甲乙等名称，甲乙等本身就是天上的神，它们每天轮流主事，自身按照天干和五行相配相生相克的道理来显示吉凶，并不是圆圆的太阳的名称。 
English: The conjurer will also say: The days are called by names such as A and B. A and B are themselves the gods of the sky. They take turns in leading the affairs of the day, and they themselves show good and bad fortune according to the principle of the heavenly body and the five elements matching each other. This is not the name of the round sun.

古文：夫如是，於五行之象，徒当用甲乙决吉凶而已，何为言加时乎？
现代文：如此说来，对于五行之家只须用甲乙等来推断吉凶就可以了，为什么要说那些把干支用在时辰上的话呢？
English: In this way, for the Five Elements family, it is enough to use A, B, etc. to deduce the auspicious and inauspicious, so why say those words that use the stem and branch on the hour?

古文：案加时者，端端之日加也。
现代文：考察干支用在时辰上的原因，是根据圆圆的太阳的不同方位而用的。
English: Investigate the reason why the zodiac signs are used on the clock. They are used according to the different positions of the round sun.

古文：端端之日安得胜负？
现代文：圆圆的太阳怎么会相生相克呢？
English: How can a round sun compete with a round earth?

古文：五音之家，用口调姓名及字，用姓定其名，用名正其字。
现代文：五音之家，根据发音来使姓、名、字协调而不出现相克的情况，根据姓的发音来确定名，又根据名的发音制定表字。
English: According to the pronunciation of the family of five tones, the surname, the name and the word are coordinated without conflict, the name is determined according to the pronunciation of the surname, and the table word is formulated according to the pronunciation of the name.

古文：口有张歙，声有外内，以定五音宫商之实。
现代文：发音时口有开合，声音分外音和内音，根据口的开合和音的内外来确定某个属于五音中的某个音。
English: When pronouncing, the mouth is open and closed, and the sound is divided into external sound and internal sound. According to the opening and closing of the mouth and the inside and outside of the sound, a certain sound belonging to one of the five sounds is determined.

古文：夫人之有姓者，用禀於天。
现代文：人之所以有姓，是由于承受了自然之气。
English: The reason why people have surnames is because they have borne the breath of nature.

古文：天得五行之气为姓邪？
现代文：人是以获得五行之气来定姓呢？
English: Is one's surname determined by acquiring the five elements?

古文：以口张歙、声外内为姓也？
现代文：还是以口的开合、音的内外来定姓呢？
English: Or is the family name determined by the opening and closing of the mouth, the inside and outside of the sound?

古文：如以本所禀於天者为姓，若五谷万物禀气矣，何故用口张歙、声内外定正之乎？
现代文：如果是根据原来从自然承受的气来定姓，就像五谷万物承受自然之气一样了，为什么要用口的开合、音的内外来制定姓呢？
English: If surnames are determined according to the air originally received from nature, just as all things receive the air of nature, why use the opening and closing of the mouth, the inside and outside of the sound to formulate surnames?

古文：古者因生以赐姓，因其所生赐之姓也。
现代文：古时候，根据人的出生来赐姓，是根据他出生的情况来给他赐姓。
English: In ancient times, a person's surname was given according to the circumstances of his or her birth.

古文：若夏吞薏苡而生，则姓苡氏；商吞燕子而生，则姓为子氏；周履大人迹，则姬氏。
现代文：例如夏禹是由于他母亲吃了薏苡怀孕而生的。就姓苡；契是由于他母亲吃了燕卵怀孕而生的，他的姓就为子；弃是由于他母亲踩了巨人的脚印怀孕而生的，他的姓就为姬。
English: For example, Xia Yu was born as a result of his mother being pregnant after eating tadpoles, so his surname is Zhu; Qi was born as a result of his mother being pregnant after eating turtle eggs, so his surname is Zi; Qian was born as a result of his mother being pregnant after stepping on the footprints of a giant, so his surname is Ji.

古文：其立名也，以信、以像、以假、以类。
现代文：取名是根据信、义、像、假、类这几种情况来取的。
English: Names are chosen according to the following conditions: sincerity, righteousness, likeness, falsehood, and similarity.

古文：以生名为信，若鲁公子友生，文在其手曰 友 也。
现代文：根据出生时的特征来取名这叫 信 ，如鲁公子友生下来的时候，手纹有 友 字所以取名叫友。
English: According to the characteristics at the time of birth, this is called letter. For example, when Lu Gongzi You was born, his handprint had the character of friend, so he was named friend.

古文：以德名为义，若文王为昌、武王为发也。
现代文：根据德行来取名这叫 义 ，像周文王取名为昌、周武王取名为发。
English: According to virtue, this is called righteousness, just as King Zhou Wen took the name Chang and King Zhou Wu took the name Fang.

古文：以类名为像，若孔子名丘也。
现代文：根据类似的东西来取名这叫 像 ，像孔子取名为丘。
English: The image is named after something similar, like Confucius named a hill.

古文：取於物为假，若宋公名杵臼也。
现代文：借用器物的名称来取名这叫 假 ，像宋昭公取名为杵臼。
English: Borrowing the name of a utensil to take a name is called "fake," like Song Zhaogong taking the name of a mortar.

古文：取於父为类，有似类於父也。
现代文：根据类似父亲之处来取名这叫 类 ，因为有类似于父亲的地方。
English: It's called a class based on its resemblance to the father, because there are places that resemble the father.

古文：其立字也，展名取同义，名赐字子贡，名予字子我。
现代文：人们取表字，是把名转成的它的同义词来取的，端木名赐取字叫子贡，宰名予取字叫子我。
English: People take the Chinese character for "table" as a synonym of the Chinese character for "name." The Chinese character for "name" is called "zigong," and the Chinese character for "name" is called "ziwa."

古文：其立姓则以本所生，置名则以信、义、像、假、类，字则展名取同义，不用口张歙、外内。
现代文：人们取姓是根据原来出生的情况来取的，取名则根据信、义、像、假、类这几种情况来取，取字则是把名转成同义词，并不是根据口的开合、发音的内外来取的。
English: People take surnames according to the circumstances of their original birth, take names according to the circumstances of letter, meaning, image, false, and class, and take words to turn names into synonyms, not according to the opening and closing of the mouth and the inside and outside of pronunciation.

古文：调宫商之义为五音术，何璩见而用？
现代文：根据协调宫、商等五音的道理而产生的 五音术 ，有什么根据而值得采用呢？
English: What is the basis for the pentatonic scale, which is based on the principle of harmonizing the five tones of the palace, merchant and so on, and is worth adopting?

古文：古有本姓，有氏姓，陶氏、田氏，事之氏姓也；上官氏、司马氏，吏之氏姓也；孟氏、仲氏，王父字之氏姓也。
现代文：古时侯姓有本姓，有氏姓。陶氏、田氏，是根据职业制定的氏姓；上官氏、司马氏，是根据官职制定的氏姓；孟氏、仲氏，是根据他们祖父的字制定的氏姓。
English: In ancient times, there was a given family name and a surname. Tao and Tian were family names based on their occupations; Shangguan and Sima were family names based on their official positions; and Meng and Zhong were family names based on the names of their grandfathers.

古文：氏姓有三：事乎！
现代文：制定氏姓有三种情况：根据职业、根据官职、根据祖父的字。
English: There are three situations for establishing a family name: according to occupation, according to official position, according to the grandfather's name.

古文：吏乎！王父字乎！以本姓则用所生，以氏姓则用事、吏、王父字，用口张歙调姓之义何居？
现代文：制定本姓则根据出生时的情况，制定氏姓则根据职业、官职和祖父的字，根据口的开合协调姓的道理在哪里呢？
English: What is the reason for formulating this surname according to the situation at birth, formulating the surname according to the occupation, official position and grandfather's name, and coordinating the surname according to the opening and closing of the mouth?

古文：匈奴之俗，有名无姓字，无与相调谐，自以寿命终，祸福何在？
现代文：匈奴的习俗，有名而没有姓、字，没有什么来与名调谐，照样活到老才死，祸福又表现在哪里呢？
English: The custom of the Xiongnu is that they are famous but have no surname or name, and there is nothing to harmonize with the name. They still live until they die, so where is the evil and good manifested?

古文：礼： 买妾不知其姓则卜之。 
现代文：《礼记》说： 买妾不知道她的姓就用占卜求问她的姓。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: If a buyer of a concubine does not know her surname, he should use divination to ask for her surname.

古文：不知者，不知本姓也。
现代文：所谓不知道，就是不知道她的本姓。
English: "I don't know" means that I don't know her real surname.

古文：夫妾必有父母家姓，然而必卜之者，父母姓转易失实，礼重取同姓，故必卜之。
现代文：妾必然有父母家的姓，然而一定要占卜她的姓，是妾的本性可能由于她被辗转变卖而不确实了，《礼记》上把娶同姓的女子看作是严重的事，所以必须占卜她是否与自己同姓。
English: A concubine must have the family name of her parents, but her family name must be divined. It is the nature of a concubine that may not be certain due to her being sold. The Book of Rites regards the marriage of a woman with the same family name as a serious matter, so it is necessary to divine whether she has the same family name as herself.

古文：姓徒用口调谐姓族，则礼买妾何故卜之？
现代文：如果仅仅用发音来调谐姓族，那么《礼记》上为什么规定买妾要占卜她的本姓呢？
English: If only the pronunciation is used to tune the family name, then why does the "Li Ji" stipulate that the buyer of a concubine should divine her real surname?

古文：图宅术曰： 商家门不宜南向，徵家门不宜北向。 
现代文：图宅术说： 姓属商音的人家门不宜朝南开，姓属徵音的人家门不宜朝北开。 
English: Tu Zhaoju said: It is not appropriate to open the door to the south for a person with the surname of Shangyin, and it is not appropriate to open the door to the north for a person with the surname of Xuanyin.

古文：则商金，南方火也；徵火，北方水也。
现代文：这是因为 商 属 金 ，南方属火； 徵 属 火 ，北方属 水 。
English: This is because commerce is gold and the south is fire; taxation is fire and the north is water.

古文：水胜火，火贼金，五行之气不相得，故五姓之宅，门有宜向。
现代文：水胜火，火克金，五行之气相互不协调，所以五姓的住宅，开门各有合适的方向。
English: Water trumps fire, fire trumps gold, and the five elements do not harmonize with each other. Therefore, the houses of the five families each have a suitable direction for opening the door.

古文：向得其宜，富贵吉昌；向失其宜，贫贱衰耗。
现代文：谁家门向与姓氏适宜，就会富裕尊贵，吉祥昌盛；谁家门向与姓氏不适宜，就会贫穷低贱，衰弱破败。
English: Whoever's family is suitable for the surname will be rich and noble, auspicious and prosperous; whoever's family is not suitable for the surname will be poor and lowly, weak and ruined.

古文：夫门之与堂何以异？
现代文：门与厅堂有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between a door and a hall?

古文：五姓之门，各有五姓之堂，所向无宜何？
现代文：有五姓的门，就有五姓的厅堂，为什么厅堂的朝向没有适宜不适宜的问题呢？
English: If there is a door with five surnames, there will be a hall with five surnames. Why is there no question of whether the direction of the hall is appropriate or inappropriate?

古文：门之掩地，不如堂庑，朝夕所处，於堂不於门。
现代文：门所遮盖的地方，不如厅堂、走廊占的地方大，人朝夕居住的地方，在厅堂而不在门。
English: The place covered by the door is not as large as the hall and corridor. The place where people live in the morning and evening is in the hall and not in the door.

古文：图吉凶者，宜皆以堂。
现代文：用图宅术推断吉凶的人，应当都根据厅堂来推断树。
English: People who use the picture house technique to deduce good luck and bad luck should all deduce the tree according to the hall.

古文：如门，人所出入，则户亦宜然。
现代文：如果说大门是人所出入的应该规定朝向，那么旁门也应该是这样才行。
English: If it is said that the direction of the front door should be specified for people to enter and exit, then the side door should be the same.

古文：孔子曰： 谁能出之由户？ 
现代文：孔子说： 谁能够不经过屋门走出屋外去呢？ 
English: Confucius said: Who can go out of the house without passing through the door?

古文：言户不言门。
现代文：孔子只说屋门而不说大门。
English: Confucius only said door, not gate.

古文：五祀之祭，门与户均。
现代文：对五种神的祭祀中，门神与户神是同样的。
English: In the worship of the five gods, the door god and the door god are the same.

古文：如当以门正所向，则户何以不当与门相应乎？
现代文：如果应该以大门来确定住房的方向，那么屋门为什么不该和大门相应用来确定方向呢？
English: If the door should be used to determine the direction of the house, then why should not the door and the door be used to determine the direction?

古文：且今府廷之内，吏舍连属，门向有南北；长吏舍传，闾居有东西。
现代文：况且现在官府之内，官员的房屋一间接一间，门的朝向有南有北；长官的宿舍，门所处的方向有东有西。
English: Moreover, within the government offices, the officials' houses are arranged one behind the other, with doors facing south and north; the officials' dormitories have doors facing east and west.

古文：长吏之姓，必有宫商，诸吏之舍必有徵羽。
现代文：长官的姓，一定有属于宫音、商音的；一般官吏的宿舍，一定有姓属徵音、羽音的人居住。
English: The surnames of senior officials must belong to the Guoying and Shangyin; the dormitories of general officials must be inhabited by people whose surnames belong to the Xuanming and Huaning.

古文：安官迁徙，未必角姓门南向也；失位贬黜，未必商姓门北出也。
现代文：官职稳定官位提升，不一定是因为姓属于徵音的人门朝南开；丢掉官职，被降职罢官，不一定是因为姓属商音的人门朝南开。
English: The promotion of a stable official position is not necessarily because the door of a person with a surname belonging to solicitation opens to the south; the loss of an official position, the demotion and dismissal is not necessarily because the door of a person with a surname belonging to solicitation opens to the south.

古文：或安官迁徙，或失位贬黜何？
现代文：有的人官职稳定官位提升，有的人丢掉官职，被降职罢官是为什么呢？
English: Why are some people promoted to a stable official position, while others lose their official position, are demoted or dismissed?

古文：姓有五音，人之性质亦有五行。
现代文：姓分属于五音，人的气质特征也具有属于五行中的某一特性。
English: Surnames belong to the pentatonic scale, and people's temperamental characteristics also have a characteristic belonging to the pentatonic scale.

古文：五音之家，商家不宜南向门，则人禀金之性者，可复不宜南向坐、南行步乎？
现代文：按照五音之家的说法，姓属商音的人家不适宜朝南方开门，那么禀性属金的人，是否又不能朝南坐、朝南走呢？
English: According to the saying of the five-sound family, it is not suitable for the family of a person with the surname of Shangyin to open the door to the south, so can a person with the temperament of gold not sit southward and walk southward?

古文：一曰：五音之门，有五行之人。假令商姓口食五人，五人中各有五色，木人青，火人赤，水人黑，金人白，土人黄。
现代文：我要驳斥说：有姓属五音人家的门，就有具有五行特征的人，如果一个姓属商音的人家有五口人，五个人就有五种面部气色，禀木性的人脸色是青的，禀火性的人脸色是红的，禀水性的人脸色是黑的，禀金性的人脸色是白的，禀土性的人脸色是黄的。
English: I want to refute that: if there is a door of a family with a surname of five tones, there will be a person with five characteristics. If there are five people in a family with a surname of commercial sounds, the five people will have five facial features. The face of the person with the wood is blue, the face of the person with the fire is red, the face of the person with the water is black, the face of the person with the gold is white, and the face of the person with the earth is yellow.

古文：五色之人，俱出南向之门，或凶或吉，寿命或短或长。凶而短者未必色白，吉而长者，未必色黄也。五行之家，何以为决？
现代文：有五种气色的人，都从朝南的门出来，有的遇凶有的遇吉，有的寿命短有的寿命长，遇凶而短命的不一定是脸色白的人，遇吉而长寿的不一定是脸色黄的人，五行之家根据什么来作出判断呢？
English: There are five types of people, all of whom come out of the south-facing door. Some meet with misfortune and good fortune, some have a short life and some have a long life. Those who meet with misfortune and a short life are not necessarily white-faced, and those who meet with good fortune and a long life are not necessarily yellow-faced. What is the basis for the Five Elements House to make judgments?

古文：南向之门，贱商姓家，其实如何？
现代文：朝南开的门，伤害姓属商音的人家，它的真实情况怎样呢？
English: What is the real situation of the south-facing door that harms people with the surname of Shangyin?

古文：南方，火也，使火气之祸，若火延燔，径从南方来乎？则虽为北向门犹之凶也。
现代文：南方属火，如果火气造成的祸害，就像烈火曼延一样直接从南方来，那么即使是朝北开的门，也同样要遭受凶祸，要说火气造成的祸害，就像夏天的热气一样遍及四方吗？
English: The south is fire. If the calamity caused by fire comes directly from the south like a raging fire, then even if the door opens to the north, it will also suffer the same evil. Shall we say that the calamity caused by fire spreads like summer heat?

古文：火气之祸，若夏日之热，四方洽浃乎，则天地之间皆得其气，南向门家何以独凶？南方火者，火位南方，一曰其气布在四方，非必南方独有火，四方无有也，犹水位在北方，四方犹有水也。
现代文：那么天地之间都要受到热气之害，为什么唯独朝南开门的人家遭凶害呢？南方属于火，是因为火位在南方。驳斥说：夏天的热气分布在四方，未必仅仅南方才有火，四方就没有火。如同水位在北方，四方仍然有水一样。
English: Then both heaven and earth would be harmed by the heat, so why is it that only people who open their doors to the south are harmed? The south belongs to fire, because the fire level is in the south. Refuted: The summer heat is distributed in the four directions, it is not necessary that only the south has fire, there is no fire in the four directions. Just as the water level is in the north, there is still water in the four directions.

古文：火满天下，水辨四方。火或在人之南，或在人之北。
现代文：火布满天下，水流遍四方，火有时在人的南面，有时在人的北面。
English: Fire spreads all over the world, water flows in all directions, and fire is sometimes to the south and sometimes to the north of man.

古文：谓火常在南方，是则东方可无金，西方可无木乎？
现代文：如果说火经常在南方，照北说来东方可以说没有金，西方可以说没有木吗？
English: If fire is often said to be in the south, according to the north, can the east be said to have no gold, and the west no wood?

