古文：韩世忠韩世忠，字良臣，延安人。
现代文：韩世忠，字良臣，延安人。
English: Han Shizhong, the so-called good minister, was from Yan'an.

古文：风骨伟岸，目瞬如电。
现代文：他身材伟岸，目光如电。
English: He's a giant of a man, and his eyes are electric.

古文：早年鸷勇绝人，能骑生马驹。
现代文：早年勇猛过人，能骑没有驯熟的马驹。
English: In his early years, he was very brave and could ride an untamed foal.

古文：家贫无产业，嗜酒尚气，不可绳检。
现代文：韩世忠家境贫寒，没有产业。他嗜酒，崇尚豪气，不受约束。
English: Han Shizhong's family is poor and has no industry. He is an alcoholic, an advocate of courage, and is not constrained.

古文：日者言当作三公，世忠怒其侮己，殴之。
现代文：有人说他将官至三公，他感到气愤，认为这是在侮辱自己，将那人痛打一顿。
English: He got angry when someone said that he was a third-class official, and he thought it was an insult to himself, so he beat the person up.

古文：年十八，以敢勇应募乡州，隶赤籍，挽强驰射，勇冠三军。
现代文：韩世忠十八岁时，以胆大勇敢参加乡州招募，隶属于兵籍。他挽强弓骑马射箭，勇冠三军。
English: At the age of eighteen, Han Shizhong bravely participated in the township recruitment with courage and bravery, and was affiliated with the military. He strengthened his bow, rode a horse and shot arrows, and won the three armies.

古文：崇宁四年，西夏骚动，郡调兵捍御，世忠在遣中。
现代文：崇宁四年，西夏骚扰边境，延安郡调兵进行抵御，韩世忠即在所调派的军中。
English: In the fourth year of Chongning, Western Xia harassed the border, Yan'an County transferred troops to resist, and Han Shizhong was in the transferred army.

古文：至银州，夏人婴城自固，世忠斩关杀敌将，掷首陴外，诸军乘之，夏人大败。
现代文：到达银州，西夏人环城固守，韩世忠冲破关卡，斩杀敌将，将其首级掷于城墙外，诸军乘机发动进攻，西夏人大败。
English: Arriving in Yinzhou, the Xixia people surrounded the city and held fast. Han Shizhong broke through the checkpoint, killed the enemy general, and threw his head outside the city wall. The troops took the opportunity to launch an attack, and the Xixia people were defeated.

古文：既而以重兵次蒿平岭，世忠率精锐鏖战，解去。
现代文：之后敌人以重兵屯驻蒿平岭，韩世忠率精兵与夏人拼战，夏人撤兵而去。
English: After that, the enemy stationed a large number of troops in Suipingling. Han Shizhong led the elite soldiers to fight against the Xia people, and the Xia people withdrew.

古文：俄复出间道，世忠独部敢死士珠死斗，敌少却，顾一骑士锐甚，问俘者，曰： 监军驸马兀〈口移〉也。 跃马斩之，敌众大溃。
现代文：不久，西夏人又在小路出现，韩世忠独率敢死队与夏人殊死战斗，敌人被迫稍稍后撤。战斗中敌营有一个骑士非常勇猛，韩世忠问俘虏这人是谁，俘虏说 ：他是监军驸马兀口移。 韩世忠跃马上前，将兀口移斩首，敌兵溃散。
English: Soon, the Western Xia people appeared on the path again. Han Shizhong led the death squad in a desperate battle with the Xia people, and the enemy was forced to withdraw a little later. During the battle, there was a very brave knight in the enemy camp. Han Shizhong asked the prisoner who this man was, and the prisoner said: He is the overseer of the horse. Han Shizhong immediately leapt forward, beheaded the horse, and the enemy soldiers dispersed.

古文：经略司上其功，童贯董边事，疑有所增饰，止补一资，众弗平。
现代文：经略司上报韩世忠的战功，童贯主管边事，他怀疑经略司的上报有所夸大，便只给韩世忠加升一级，众军士得知都感到愤愤不平。
English: After reporting Han Shizhong's war exploits to the division commander, Tong Guan, who was in charge of peripheral affairs, suspected that the report of the division commander was exaggerated, so he only gave Han Shizhong a one-level promotion. All the sergeants were indignant when they learned this.

古文：从刘延庆筑天降山砦，为敌所据，世忠夜登城斩二级，割护城毡以献。
现代文：韩世忠随从刘延庆前去筑天降山砦，前进的道路被敌人所把守，韩世忠乘夜登城斩杀敌人两名士兵，并割下护城毡献给刘延庆。
English: Han Shizhong followed Liu Yanqing to build the Tianlian Mountain Fort. The way forward was guarded by the enemy. Han Shizhong went to the city at night to kill two enemy soldiers and cut down the city wall to dedicate it to Liu Yanqing.

古文：继遇敌佛口砦，又斩数级，始补进义副尉。
现代文：部队继续前进中碰到敌人的佛口砦，韩世忠又登城斩杀敌人数名，由此开始补为进义副尉。
English: As the troops continued to advance, they encountered the enemy's Fort of Fo Guang, and Han Shizhong went to the city to kill a number of enemies, and thus began to fill in as Jin Yi's second lieutenant.

古文：至藏底河，斩三级，转进勇副尉。
现代文：到达藏底河时，韩世忠又斩杀三名敌人，因功转升为进勇副尉。
English: When he reached the Tibet River, Han Shizhong killed three more enemies, and was promoted to Vice-Lieutenant Jin Yong.

古文：宣和二年，方腊反、江、浙震动，调兵四方，世忠以偏将从王渊讨之。
现代文：宣和二年，方腊造反，江、浙震动，朝廷从四方调兵，韩世忠作为偏将随从王渊前去讨伐。
English: In the second year of the declaration of peace, Fangla rebelled, Jiangsu and Zhejiang were shaken, the imperial court transferred troops from four directions, and Han Shizhong, as a partial commander, followed Wang Yuan to fight.

古文：次杭州，贼奄至，势张甚，大将惶怖无策。
现代文：部队驻扎在杭州，贼兵蜂拥而至，来势很猛，大将惊恐不知所措。
English: The troops were stationed in Hangzhou, and the robber soldiers were swarming in. The situation was very violent, and the general was terrified and at a loss.

古文：世忠以兵二千伏北关堰，贼过，伏发，众蹂乱，世忠追击，贼败而遁。
现代文：韩世忠领兵二千人埋伏在北关堰，贼兵经过时，伏兵发动攻击，贼众大乱，相互蹂躏，韩世忠率兵追击，贼兵败逃。
English: Han Shizhong led two thousand soldiers to lie in ambush at the Beiguan Weir. When the bandits passed by, the ambush launched an attack. The bandits were in chaos and ravaged each other. Han Shizhong led the soldiers to pursue, and the bandits fled.

古文：渊叹曰： 真万人敌也。 尽以所随白金器赏之，且与定交。
现代文：王渊叹服说 ：这真是一人敌万人。 于是将所携带的白金器具全部赏给韩世忠，并且与韩世忠定下交情。
English: Wang Yuan sighed and said, "This is truly a battle of one against ten thousand." He then gave all the platinum equipment he was carrying to Han Shizhong, and established a friendship with Han Shizhong.

古文：时有诏能得腊首者，授两镇节钺。
现代文：当时朝廷有诏凡能得到方腊的首级者，授为两镇节度使。
English: At that time, the imperial court had decreed that anyone who could get the head rank of Fangla would be awarded as the two towns' festival envoy.

古文：世忠穷追至睦州清溪峒，贼深据岩屋为三窟，诸将继至，莫知所入。
现代文：韩世忠穷追至睦州青溪峒，贼兵分据三窟，藏在深峒里严密把守，诸将陆续赶到，都不知道从什么地方进入。
English: Han Shizhong chased them all the way to Qingxi Pass in Muzhou. The soldiers of the thieves were divided into three caves, hidden in the depths and closely guarded. The soldiers arrived one after another, and they didn't know where to enter.

古文：世忠潜行溪谷，问野妇得径，即挺身仗戈直前，渡险数里，捣其穴，格杀数十人，禽腊以出。
现代文：韩世忠暗中在溪谷中寻找，通过问山妇得知路径，于是便持剑挺身径直深入，越过险阻，行走几里，直捣贼穴，格杀几十人，将方腊擒出峒。
English: Han Shizhong secretly searched in the valley, and learned the path by asking the mountain woman, so he went straight in with his sword, crossed the obstacles, walked several miles, went straight to the thief's hole, killed dozens of people, and dragged Fang La out.

古文：辛兴宗领兵截峒口，掠其俘为己功，故赏不及世忠。
现代文：辛兴宗领兵堵住峒口，抢去俘虏据为己功，因此韩世忠未能受赏。
English: Xin Xingzong led the soldiers to block the gate and took the prisoners as his own, so Han Shizhong could not receive the award.

古文：别帅杨惟忠还阙，直其事，转承节郎。
现代文：别帅杨惟忠回朝后，将真相告诉了皇上，韩世忠被升为承节郎。
English: After Yang Weizhong returned to the imperial court, he told the emperor the truth, and Han Shizhong was promoted to the position of Jie Jie Lang.

古文：三年，议复燕山，调诸军，至则皆溃。
现代文：宣和三年，朝廷决定恢复燕山，调动各路军马，但到达燕山时都被击溃。
English: Three years after the proclamation of peace, the imperial court decided to restore Yanshan, mobilizing all military horses, but they were all defeated when they reached Yanshan.

古文：世忠往见刘延庆，与苏格等五十骑俱抵滹沱河。
现代文：韩世忠前去见刘延庆，与苏格等五十个骑兵一齐抵达滹沱河。
English: Han Shizhong went to see Liu Yanqing, and arrived at Luohe together with fifty cavalrymen including Su Ge.

古文：逢金兵二千余骑，格失措，世忠从容令格等列高冈，戒勿动。属燕山溃卒舟集，即命舣河岸，约鼓噪助声势。
现代文：碰上金兵二千余人，苏格惊慌失措，韩世忠从容地命令苏格等站列在高冈上，告诫他们不要动，并令从燕山前线溃散下来的士卒聚集船上，停靠河岸，约定他们呐喊鼓噪以助声势。
English: Han Shizhong calmly ordered Suge and others to line up on the hill, warning them not to move, and ordered the soldiers who had scattered from the Yanshan front line to gather on the boat, dock on the riverbank, and arrange for them to shout and drum to help the momentum.

古文：世忠跃马薄敌，回旋如飞。
现代文：韩世忠跃马与敌人拼战，转动如飞。
English: Han Shizhong leapt onto his horse and fought with the enemy, spinning like a top.

古文：敌分二队据高阜，世忠出其不意，突二执旗者，因奋击，格等夹攻之，舟卒鼓噪，敌大乱，追斩甚众。
现代文：敌人分成两队占据高冈，韩世忠出其不意，冲击两名打旗的人，奋力搏击，苏格等人进行夹击，在船上的士卒呐喊鼓噪，敌人大乱，韩世忠进行追击，斩杀很多。
English: The enemy divided into two teams to occupy Takaoka, Han Shizhong caught them by surprise, hit two flag-wavers, fought hard, Suge and others clamped down, the soldiers on the ship shouted and drummed, the enemy was in chaos, Han Shizhong chased and killed a lot.

古文：时山东、河北盗贼蜂起，世忠从王渊、梁方平讨捕，禽戮殆尽，积功转武节郎。
现代文：当时山东、河北盗贼蜂起，韩世忠随从王渊、梁方平进行讨捕，将盗贼或擒或斩，基本平定。
English: At that time, thieves in Shandong and Hebei revolted, and Han Shizhong followed Wang Yuan and Liang Fangping to investigate and arrest them. The thieves were either beaten or beheaded, and the situation was basically stabilized.

古文：钦宗即位，从梁方平屯浚州。
现代文：因前后功劳，韩世忠被升为武节郎。钦宗即位，韩世忠随梁方平屯驻浚州。
English: Due to his merits, Han Shizhong was promoted to Busetshiro. When Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, Han Shizhong followed Liang Fang Pingtun and settled in Jiuzhou.

古文：金人压境，方平备不严，金人迫而遁，王师数万皆溃。
现代文：金人入侵，梁方平防备不严，迫于金人兵势而逃溃，王军几万人都溃散。
English: The Jin invaded, Liang Fangping's defense was not strict, he was forced to flee by the Jin army, and tens of thousands of the king's army were dispersed.

古文：世忠陷重围中，挥戈力战，突围出，焚桥而还。
现代文：韩世忠陷于敌人重围之中，他挥刀力战，突围而出，焚烧桥梁而回。
English: Han Shizhong was besieged by the enemy. He fought with all his might, broke out of the encirclement, burned the bridges and returned.

古文：钦宗闻，召对便殿，询方平失律状，条奏甚悉。
现代文：钦宗得知，在便殿召对韩世忠，询问有关梁方平违反军纪的情况，韩世忠汇报非常详细。
English: Qinzong learned that Han Shizhong was summoned to the hall to inquire about Liang Fangping's violation of military discipline, and Han Shizhong reported in great detail.

古文：转武节大夫。
现代文：因此被迁武节大夫。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the post of martial arts doctor.

古文：诏诸路勤王兵领所部入卫，会金人退，河北总管司辟选锋军统制。
现代文：钦宗下诏各路勤王兵入京保卫，恰逢金人退兵，河北总管司选拔锋军统制。
English: Under Emperor Qinzong, it was decreed that soldiers loyal to the king would enter Beijing to defend the capital. This coincided with the withdrawal of the Jin soldiers, and the Hebei Governor-in-Chief ordered the selection of the vanguard army.

古文：时胜捷军张师正败，宣抚副使李弥大斩之，大校李复鼓众以乱，淄、青之附者合数万人，山东复扰。
现代文：当时胜捷军张师正战败，宣抚副使李弥大将他斩首，大校李复鼓动士兵叛乱，淄州和青州的响应者合起来有几万人，山东又不得安宁。
English: At that time, Zhang Shih of the victorious victorious army was losing the battle. Li Yida, the vice-minister of propaganda, beheaded him, and Li Fu, the senior colonel, encouraged soldiers to rebel. There were tens of thousands of responders in Zhangzhou and Qingzhou combined, and Shandong was not at peace.

古文：弥大檄世忠将所部追击，至临淄河，兵不满千，分为四队，布铁蒺藜自塞归路，令曰： 进则胜，退则死，走者命后队剿杀。 于是莫敢返顾，皆死战，大破之，斩复，余党奔溃。
现代文：李弥大檄令韩世忠率所部进行追击，至临淄河，兵不满千人，韩世忠将他们分为四队，并布下铁蒺藜自断后路，然后下令说： 前进则胜，后退则死，逃跑者由后队剿杀。 由此没有人敢回头，都拼死战斗，大破贼兵，斩杀李复，李复的余党奔溃。
English: When Han Shizhong's army of less than a thousand soldiers reached the Linyi River, he divided them into four groups and ordered them to cut their own way back. Then he said, "To advance is to win, to retreat is to die, and to flee is to be killed by the rearguard." As a result, no one dared to turn back, and they fought to the death, smashing the enemy soldiers, killing Li Fu, and the rest of Li Fu's party fled.

古文：乘胜逐北，追至宿迁，贼尚万人，方拥子女椎牛纵酒。
现代文：韩世忠乘胜向北追击，追至宿迁，贼兵还有万人，正抱着子女椎牛纵情喝酒。
English: Han Shizhong chased northward with the victory, chased to Suqian, and there are still tens of thousands of thieves, who are indulging in drinking while holding their children's cattle.

古文：世忠单骑夜造其营，呼曰： 大军至矣，亟束戈卷甲，吾能保全汝，共功名。 贼骇粟请命，因跪进牛酒。
现代文：韩世忠单骑夜至贼营，大声呼喊说： 大军到了，迅速卷甲收戈，我能保全你们性命，与你们共享功名。 贼兵惊恐求饶，并跪着向韩世忠敬牛酒。
English: Han Shizhong rode alone to the bandits' camp at night and shouted loudly, "The big army has arrived, quickly roll up your armor and collect your pay, I can save your lives and share the glory with you." The bandits were terrified and begged for mercy, and knelt to toast Han Shizhong.

古文：世忠下马解鞍，饮啖之尽，于是众悉就降。
现代文：韩世忠下马解鞍，一饮而尽，于是贼众都投降。
English: Han Shizhong dismounted and unsaddled his horse, and the thieves all surrendered.

古文：黎明，见世忠军未至，始大悔失色。
现代文：至黎明，发现韩世忠大军没有到达，贼人开始大为后悔。
English: At dawn, when they discovered that Han Shizhong's army had not arrived, the thieves began to regret it.

古文：以功迁左武大夫、果州团练使。
现代文：韩世忠因功迁升为左武大夫、果州团练使。
English: For his service, Han Shizhong was promoted to the post of Zuo Wu Doctor and the post of Guozhou Regiment Training Officer.

古文：诏入朝，授正任单州团练使，屯滹沱河。
现代文：朝廷诏令韩世忠入朝，授任他为单州团练使，屯守滹沱河。
English: The imperial court ordered Han Shizhong to enter the imperial court and appointed him as a training envoy for the single-province regiments to keep watch over the Li River.

古文：时真定失守，世忠知王渊守赵，遂亟往。
现代文：当时真定失守，韩世忠得知王渊守赵，于是立即前去。
English: At that time, he was sure to lose, and Han Shizhong learned that Wang Yuan was guarding Zhao, so he immediately went forward.

古文：金人至，闻世忠在，攻益急，粮尽援绝。
现代文：金人到，听说韩世忠在，进攻更加猛烈。
English: When the gold arrived, and they heard that Han Shizhong was there, they attacked even more fiercely.

古文：人多勉其溃围去，弗听。
现代文：韩世忠粮尽援绝，身边的人大多劝他突围而去，韩世忠不听。
English: Han Shizhong did his best to help, and most of the people around him advised him to break out of the encirclement, but Han Shizhong did not listen.

古文：会大雪，夜半，以死士三百捣敌营。
现代文：恰逢天降大雪，半夜时光，韩世忠派敢死之士三百人直捣敌营。
English: As heavy snow fell in the middle of the night, three hundred daredevils of the Han Shizhong faction stormed the enemy camp.

古文：敌惊乱，自相击刺，及旦尽遁。
现代文：敌人惊恐大乱，相互刺杀，到天明全部逃遁了。
English: The enemy panicked, stabbed each other, and fled by dawn.

古文：后有自金国来者，始知大酋是日被创死，故众不能支。
现代文：后来有人从金国来，才知道金兵首领在这天晚上受伤而死，士兵不能支持才逃溃。
English: Later, someone came from the gold country, only to learn that the leader of the gold soldiers was injured and died that night. The soldiers could not support him and fled.

古文：迁嘉州防御使。
现代文：韩世忠被调迁为嘉州防御使。
English: Han Shizhong was transferred to the Jiazhou Defense Force.

古文：还大名，赵野辟为前军统制。
现代文：韩世忠返回大名，赵野任命他为前军统制。
English: Han Shizhong returned to daimyo, and Zhao Ye appointed him as the former military governor.

古文：时康王如济州，世忠领所部劝进。
现代文：当时康王前往济州，韩世忠率所部劝康王即位。
English: At that time, King Kang went to Jeju, and Han Shizhong led the department to persuade King Kang to ascend the throne.

古文：金人纵兵逼城，人心忷惧，世忠据西王台力战，金人少却。
现代文：金人出兵疯狂攻城，人心恐慌，韩世忠占据西王台力战，金人稍稍后撤。
English: Jinren sent troops to frantically attack the city, causing panic in the hearts of the people. Han Shizhong occupied Xiwangdai and fought hard, while Jinren withdrew a little later.

古文：翌日，酋帅率众数万至，时世忠戏下仅千人，单骑突入，斩其酋长，遂大溃。
现代文：第二天，敌帅率几万人到，而这时韩世忠手下只有千人，他单骑杀入敌营，杀死敌帅，金人于是溃散。
English: The next day, the enemy commander arrived with tens of thousands of men, while Han Shizhong had only a thousand men at this time. He single-handedly entered the enemy camp, killed the enemy commander, and the Jin people dispersed.

古文：康王即皇帝位，授光州观察使、带御器械。
现代文：康王即皇帝位，任韩世忠为光州观察使、带御器械。
English: Kang Wang was the emperor, and Han Shizhong was appointed as the Gwangju observation envoy and took his instruments with him.

古文：世忠请移都长安，下兵收两河，时论不从。
现代文：韩世忠请求将都城移至长安，然后出兵收复两河地区，他的意见未被采纳。
English: Han Shizhong's request to move the capital to Chang'an and then send troops to recover the two rivers was not accepted.

古文：初建御营，为左军统制。
现代文：朝廷刚建御营司时，韩世忠为左军统制。
English: When the imperial court had just established the Imperial General Headquarters, Han Shizhong became the commander of the left army.

古文：是岁，命王渊、张俊讨陈州叛兵，刘光世讨黎驿叛兵，乔仲福讨京东贼李昱，世忠讨单州贼鱼台。
现代文：这年，朝廷命王渊、张俊讨伐陈州的叛兵，刘光世讨伐黎驿的叛兵，乔仲福讨伐京东的叛贼李昱，韩世忠讨伐单州叛贼鱼台。
English: In this year, the imperial court ordered Wang Yuan and Zhang Jun to fight the rebels in Chenzhou, Liu Guangshi to fight the rebels in Lijiang, Qiao Zhongfu to fight the traitor Li Gan in Jingdong, and Han Shizhong to fight the traitor Yutai in Shanzhou.

古文：世忠已破鱼台，又击黎驿叛兵，败之，皆斩以献。
现代文：韩世忠攻破鱼台之后，又击败黎驿的叛兵，并将李昱和黎驿叛兵首领的首级献给朝廷。
English: After Han Shizhong conquered Yutai, he defeated the rebels of Lihong and presented the heads of Lihong and Lihong's rebel leaders to the imperial court.

古文：于是群盗悉平，入备宿卫。
现代文：盗贼就这样全部被平定，平定盗贼后，韩世忠入朝廷宿卫。
English: The thieves were all subdued in this way. After subduing the thieves, Han Shizhong joined the imperial palace guards.

古文：而河北贼丁顺、杨进等皆赴招抚司，宗泽收而用之。
现代文：河北的盗贼丁顺、杨进等人都前往招抚司，宗泽将他们都加以收用。
English: The thieves from Hebei, Ding Shun, Yang Jin and others, all went to the solicitor's office, and Soze recruited them all.

古文：建炎二年，升定国军承宣使。
现代文：建炎二年，韩世忠升任定国军承宣使。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, Han Shizhong was promoted to the position of the designated national army's envoy.

古文：帝如扬州，世忠以所部从。
现代文：皇上前往扬州，韩世忠率所部随从。
English: The emperor went to Yangzhou, with Han Shizhong leading the entourage.

古文：时张遇自金山来降，抵城下，不解甲，人心危惧，世忠独入其垒，晓以逆顺，众悉听命。
现代文：这时张遇从金山来投附，抵达扬州城下时，不解衣甲，人心惊恐。韩世忠独自一人前往张遇营中，讲明归顺和叛逆的利弊，张遇部众表示愿意听命。
English: At this time, Zhang Rong came from Jinshan to invest, and when he arrived at the foot of Yangzhou Castle, he could not undo his clothes, and people were terrified. Han Shizhong went to Zhang Rong's camp alone to explain the pros and cons of surrender and rebellion, and Zhang Rong's subordinates expressed their willingness to follow orders.

古文：李民众十万亦降，比至，有反覆状。
现代文：李民也率十万人来投降，等到达时，有反悔的迹象。
English: Li Min also led a hundred thousand people to surrender, and when they arrived, there were signs of remorse.

古文：王渊遣世忠谕旨，世忠知其党刘彦异议，即先斩彦，驱李民出，缚小校二十九人，送渊斩之。
现代文：王渊派韩世忠前去告谕利害道理，韩世忠了解到李民的部将刘彦持有异议，于是先将刘彦斩首，并将李民殴打一顿赶走，捆缚二十九个小校，送王渊斩首。
English: Wang Yuan sent Han Shizhong to tell him what was at stake. When Han Shizhong learned that Li Min's subordinate Liu Yan had objections, he first beheaded Liu Yan, beat Li Min to death, tied up 29 schoolboys and sent Wang Yuan to be beheaded.

古文：事定，授京西等路捉杀内外盗贼。
现代文：事情平定后，韩世忠被授命在京西等路捉杀内外盗贼。
English: After the matter was settled, Han Shizhong was ordered to catch and kill thieves at home and abroad in the west of Beijing.

古文：金人再攻河南，翟进合世忠兵夜袭悟室营，不克，反为所败。
现代文：金人再次攻打河南，翟进与韩世忠合兵夜袭悟室兵营，没有攻下，反被悟室所败。
English: The Jin attacked Henan again, and together with Han Shizhong, raided the Woshu camp at night. They did not capture it, but were defeated by the Woshu.

古文：会丁进失期，陈思恭先遁，世忠被矢如棘，力战得免。
现代文：由于丁进误期，陈思恭先逃跑，韩世忠被金人射击，弓箭如雨，韩世忠力战才幸免于死。
English: Due to Ding Jin's delay, Chen Siqiong fled first, Han Shizhong was shot by the Jin people, bows and arrows rained down, Han Shizhong only survived the battle.

古文：还汴，诘一军之先退者皆斩，左右惧。
现代文：回到汴京，韩世忠追究军中先行逃跑者之罪，将他们斩首，左右惊恐。
English: Back in Beijing, Han Shizhong investigated the crimes of those who had fled ahead of the army, beheaded them, and left and right were terrified.

古文：进由是与世忠有隙，寻以叛诛。
现代文：丁进由此与韩世忠有怨，但不久因为叛乱被杀。
English: As a result, Ding Jin had a grudge against Han Shizhong, but he was soon killed for his rebellion.

古文：召世忠还，授鄜延路副总管，加平寇左将军，屯淮阳，会山东兵拒敌。
现代文：朝廷召韩世忠回朝，授任为延路副总管，加平寇左将军，屯守淮阳，联合山东兵抵御敌人。
English: The imperial court summoned Han Shizhong to return to the North, and he was appointed as the deputy chief administrator of Yanlu, General Ga Ping Koza, stationed in Huaiyang, and united with Shandong soldiers to resist the enemy.

古文：粘罕闻世忠扼淮阳，乃分兵万人趋扬州，自以大军迎世忠战。世忠不敌，夜引归，敌蹑之，军溃于沐阳，閤门宣赞舍人张遇死之。
现代文：粘罕听说韩世忠扼守淮阳，于是分兵万人赴扬州，自己亲领大军迎战韩世忠，韩世忠抵挡不住，乘夜引兵回撤，敌人追击，韩世忠军在沭阳溃散，门宣赞舍人张遇战死。
English: Mu Han heard that Han Shizhong was defending Huaiyang, so he sent a detachment of ten thousand soldiers to Yangzhou. He personally led a large army to fight against Han Shizhong. Han Shizhong could not resist, withdrew at night, the enemy pursued, Han Shizhong's army broke up in Shuyang, and Zhang Xuancheng was killed in battle.

古文：三年，帝召诸将议移跸，张俊、辛企宗请往湖南，世忠曰： 淮、浙富饶，今根本地，讵可舍而之他？
现代文：建炎三年，皇上召诸将商议转移皇帝居所之事，张俊、辛企宗请求前往湖南，韩世忠说： 淮、浙富饶，作为国家的根本之地，怎么能舍弃淮、浙而到其他地方去呢？
English: In the third year of Jianyan, the emperor summoned Zhu to discuss the transfer of the emperor's residence. Zhang Jun and Xin Qizong requested to go to Hunan. Han Shizhong said: Huai, Zhejiang rich and fertile, as the fundamental place of the country, how can we abandon Huai and Zhejiang and go to other places?

古文：人心怀疑，一有退避，则不逞者思乱，重湖、闽岭之遥，安保道路无变乎？
现代文：现在人心不稳，皇上一有退避，则不满者图谋叛乱，两湖、闽岭，路途遥远，怎么能够保证道路上不出现什么变故呢？
English: At present, people's hearts are not stable. If the emperor retreats, the dissatisfied will plot a rebellion. The two lakes and the Jialing Mountains are far away. How can we ensure that there will be no changes on the road?

古文：淮、江当留兵为守，车驾当分兵为卫，约十万人，分半扈江、淮上下，止余五万，可保防守无患乎？ 在阳城收合散亡，得数千人，闻帝如钱塘，即繇海道赴行在。
现代文：江、淮应该留兵守御，车驾应该分兵保卫，朝廷有兵约十万人，分一半守御江、淮上下，剩余只有五万人，能够确保防守没有祸患吗？ 韩世忠在阳城收集散亡士兵，得几千人，他听说皇上去了钱塘，便从海道赶赴朝廷。
English: Jiang and Huai should be guarded by soldiers, and the car should be guarded by soldiers. The imperial court has about 100,000 soldiers, half of which guard the upper and lower reaches of the Yangtze River and Huai River, and the remaining only 50,000, can it ensure that there is no disaster in the defense? Han Shizhong collected scattered soldiers in Yangcheng, and got a few thousand. He heard that the emperor went to Qiantang, so he rushed to the imperial court from the sea.

古文：苗傅、刘正彦反，张浚等在平江议讨乱，知世忠至，更相庆慰，张俊喜跃不自持。
现代文：苗傅、刘正彦谋反，张浚等在平江商议讨伐叛乱，得知韩世忠到，相互庆慰，张俊高兴得不能自控。
English: Miao Fu, Liu Zhengyan plotted rebellion, Zhang Jun and others discussed fighting the rebellion in Pingjiang. When they learned that Han Shizhong had arrived, they congratulated each other. Zhang Jun was so happy that he could not control himself.

古文：世忠得俊书，大恸，举酒酹神曰： 誓不与此贼共戴天！ 士卒皆奋。
现代文：韩世忠收到张俊的书信，极度悲愤，他举酒祭神说 ：誓与此贼不共戴天！ 士卒都十分振奋。
English: When Han Shizhong received Zhang Jun's letter, he was extremely sad and angry. He raised his wine and made an offering to the gods, saying, "I swear that I will not share heaven with this thief!" The soldiers were very excited.

古文：见浚曰： 今日大事，世忠愿与张俊身任之，公无忧。 欲即进兵。
现代文：韩世忠见张浚，说： 今日的大事，韩世忠我愿意与张俊担任，公不要担忧。 韩世忠想立即进兵。
English: Han Shizhong saw Zhang Jun and said: Today's big event, Han Shizhong, I am willing to serve with Zhang Jun, don't worry, Han Shizhong wants to join the army immediately.

古文：浚曰： 投鼠忌器，事不可急，急则恐有不测，已遣冯轓甘言诱贼矣。 
现代文：张浚说： 投鼠忌器，事不可急，急则恐怕有不测之祸，我们已派遣冯车番前去用甜言诱降叛贼了。 
English: Zhang Jun said, "Don't be in a hurry. If you are in a hurry, there may be an accident. We have sent Feng Cheban to use sweet words to lure the traitors to surrender.

古文：三月戊戌，以所部发平江。
现代文：建炎三年三月戊戌，韩世忠率所部从平江出发。
English: In March of the third year of Jianyan, Han Shizhong and his party set out from Pingjiang.

古文：张俊虑世忠兵少，以刘宝兵二千借之。
现代文：张俊担心韩世忠兵少，将刘宝的二千兵借给他。
English: Zhang Jun was worried that Han Shizhong was short of soldiers, so he lent him Liu Bao's two thousand soldiers.

古文：舟行载甲士，绵互三十里。
现代文：船载着武装士兵，绵延三十里。
English: Carrying armed soldiers, it stretches for 30 miles.

古文：至秀州，称病不行，造云梯，治器械，傅等始惧。
现代文：到达秀州，韩世忠称病不行，制造云梯，修治器械，苗傅等害怕。
English: When he arrived in Xiuzhou, Han Shizhong said that he was not able to be ill, and he was afraid of making cloud ladders, treatment devices, seedlings, and so on.

古文：初，傅、正彦闻世忠来，檄以其兵屯江阴。
现代文：起初，苗傅、刘正彦听说韩世忠到来，檄令他屯兵江阴。
English: At first, Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyuan heard that Han Shizhong had arrived and ordered him to stay in Jiangyin.

古文：世忠以好语报之，且言所部残零，欲赴行在。
现代文：韩世忠用好言回报，并且说自己所部残零，想前往朝廷所在地。
English: Han Shizhong reciprocated with kind words, and said that he had nothing left and wanted to go to the seat of the imperial court.

古文：傅等大喜，许之，至矫制除世忠及张俊为节度使，皆不受。
现代文：苗傅等非常高兴，许诺等韩世忠到达后，授任他和张俊为节度使，韩世忠和张俊都不接受。
English: Miao Fu and others were very happy. They promised that after Han Shizhong arrived, he and Zhang Jun would be appointed as festival envoys. Both Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun would not accept this.

古文：时世忠妻梁氏及子亮为傅所质，防守严密。
现代文：当时韩世忠之妻梁氏及子韩亮被苗傅作为人质，看守严密。
English: At that time, Han Shizhong's wife, Ms. Liang, and son, Han Liang, were taken hostage by Miao Fu and closely guarded.

古文：朱胜非绐傅曰： 今白太后，遣二人慰抚世忠，则平江诸人益安矣。 于是召梁氏入，封安国夫人，俾迓世忠，速其勤王。
现代文：朱胜非哄骗苗傅说 ：已经告诉了皇太后，如果派梁氏及韩亮二人前去慰抚韩世忠，则平江的各位将臣会更加安心。 于是将梁氏召入朝内，封为安国夫人，让她去迎接韩世忠，要韩世忠迅速前来勤王。
English: Zhu Shengfei tricked Miao Fu and said, "I have already told the Empress Dowager that if you send Mr. Liang and Mr. Han Liang to comfort Han Shizhong, then the generals in Pingjiang will be more at ease." He then summoned Ms. Liang to the imperial court and made her the wife of An Guo, and asked her to meet Han Shizhong and for Han Shizhong to quickly come to pay his respects to the king.

古文：梁氏疾驱出城，一日夜会世忠于秀州。
现代文：梁氏急忙骑马出城，一日一夜赶到秀州与韩世忠相会。
English: Mr. Liang hurriedly rode out of the city and arrived in Xiuzhou overnight to meet with Han Shizhong.

古文：未几，明受诏至，世忠曰： 吾知有建炎，不知有明受。 斩其使，取诏焚之，进兵益急。
现代文：不久，明受的诏书到，韩世忠说 ：我知道有建炎，不知道有明受。 斩杀其使者。取出其诏书焚烧掉，并更为加紧进兵。
English: Soon after the edict was issued, Han Shizhong said, "I know there is a fire, but I don't know if there is an edict. I will kill the messenger, take out the edict and burn it, and I will step up the recruitment of soldiers."

古文：傅等大惧。
现代文：苗傅等十分恐惧。
English: Miao Fu and others are very afraid.

古文：次临平，贼将苗翊、马柔吉负山阻河为阵，中流植鹿角，梗行舟。
现代文：韩世忠驻军临平，贼将苗翊、马柔吉依山阻河进行拒战，并在河的中流设置鹿角，堵塞舟船行驶。
English: Han Shizhong's army was stationed in Linping, and the thieves took Miao Wei and Ma Rongji to the mountains to block the river to resist the war, and set antlers in the middle of the river to block the boat.

古文：世忠舍舟力战，张俊继之，刘光世又继之。
现代文：韩世忠弃船力战，张俊紧接其后，刘光世再随其后。
English: Han Shizhong abandoned the naval war, Zhang Jun followed, and Liu Guangzhe followed.

古文：军少却，世忠复舍马操戈而前，令将士曰： 今日当以死报国，面不被数矢者皆斩。 于是士皆用命。
现代文：由于贼军借地势顽抗，韩世忠等军被迫稍稍后撤，韩世忠又弃马操戈向前，他命令将士说： 今日当以死报国，凡是身上没有中数箭者都斩首。 于是士兵都拼命战斗。
English: As the bandits' army stubbornly resisted, Han Shizhong and other soldiers were forced to retreat a little later. Han Shizhong also abandoned his horse and rode forward. He ordered his soldiers to say: "Today, you should serve the country with death. Anyone who does not have a medium number of arrows on his body will be beheaded." So the soldiers fought hard.

古文：傅、正彦拥精兵二千，开涌金门以遁。
现代文：贼兵并列拉满神臂弓以待，韩世忠瞠目大呼，挺刀向前冲入，贼兵纷纷躲避，来不及发箭便败散了。
English: The bandits lined up and waited with their bows at full stretch. Han Shizhong shouted loudly, lunged forward with his sword, the bandits ducked one after another, and were defeated before they could fire their arrows.

古文：世忠驰入，帝步至宫门，握世忠手恸哭曰： 中军吴湛佐逆为最，尚留朕肘腋，能先诛乎？ 世忠即谒湛，握手与语，折其中指，戮于市，又执贼谋主王世修以属吏。
现代文：苗傅、刘正彦领精兵二千，打开涌金门逃跑了。韩世忠骑马奔入朝廷，皇上步行到宫门，握着韩世忠的手恸哭说： 中军吴湛支持逆贼最积极。他尚留在朕的身边，能够先将他杀了吗？ 韩世忠即去见吴湛，握着手和他讲话，并就此将他的中指折断，然后公开斩首示众。韩世忠又抓住贼臣的谋士王世修交给官府处罪。
English: Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan led two thousand elite soldiers, opened the gate of Yongjin and fled. Han Shizhong rode into the imperial court, the emperor walked to the palace gate, held Han Shizhong's hand and cried and said: The Chinese army Wu Zhan supports the traitors most actively. He is still with me, can I kill him first? Han Shizhong immediately went to see Wu Zhan, held his hand and spoke to him, and broke his middle finger, and then publicly beheaded him. Han Shizhong also caught the adviser of the traitor Wang Shishu and handed him over to the government for punishment.

古文：诏授武胜军节度使御营左军都统制。
现代文：皇上下诏授韩世忠为武胜军节度使、御营左军都统制。
English: Han Shizhong was appointed by imperial edict to be the military commander of the victorious army and the commander of the left army.

古文：请于帝曰： 贼拥精兵，距瓯、闽甚迩，傥成巢窟，卒未可灭，臣请讨之。 于是以为江、浙制置使，自衢、信追击，至渔梁驿，与贼遇。
现代文：韩世忠向皇上请求说： 逆贼拥有精兵，瓯、闽离朝廷很远，倘若让他们建成巢穴，则最终不能消灭，臣请求前往讨伐。 于是以韩世忠为江、浙制置使，从衢、信追击贼兵，至渔梁驿，与贼兵相遇。
English: Han Shizhong pleaded with the emperor, saying, "The traitors have elite soldiers, and Yunnan and Shandong are far away from the imperial court. If they are allowed to build a lair, they will not be able to be eliminated in the end. The vassal requested to go on a crusade. Therefore, Han Shizhong was appointed as the envoy of the Jiang and Zhejiang armies to pursue the traitors from Yunnan and Xinjiang to Yuliang and encounter the traitors.

古文：世忠步走挺戈而前，贼望见，咋曰： 此韩将军也！ 皆惊溃。
现代文：韩世忠以步代马，挺戈向前，贼兵望见，咋舌说： 这是韩将军！ 都惊恐溃散。
English: Han Shizhong stepped in to take his place, and marched forward. When the thief soldiers saw him, they exclaimed, "This is General Han!" They were all terrified and scattered.

古文：擒正彦及傅弟翊送行在，傅亡建阳，追禽之，皆伏诛。
现代文：韩世忠擒获刘正彦及苗傅的弟弟苗翊，送往行朝在，苗傅逃往建阳，韩世忠进行追击，将他擒获，苗傅等都被斩首。
English: Han Shizhong captured Liu Zhengyuan and Miao Fu's younger brother Miao Fu and sent them to Xing Chaozhe, Miao Fu fled to Jianyang, Han Shizhong pursued and captured him, and Miao Fu and others were beheaded.

古文：世忠初陛辞，奏曰： 臣誓生获贼，为社稷刷耻，乞殿前二虎贲护俘来献。 至是，卒如其言。
现代文：韩世忠起初向皇上辞行时，曾上奏说 ：臣发誓活捉逆贼，为社稷洗刷耻辱，请求派殿前两虎贲前去押送俘虏来献给皇上。 
English: At first, when Han Shizhong resigned to the emperor, he wrote: "I swear to catch the traitor alive, wash the shame for the society, and request to send the first two tigers to escort the prisoner to the emperor.

古文：帝手书 忠勇 二字，揭旗以赐。
现代文：到这时，其结果真的如韩世忠所说。皇上亲手书写 忠勇 二字，镶在旗上，赐给韩世忠。
English: At this time, the result was really as Han Shizhong said. The emperor personally wrote the word "loyalty" and put it on the flag and gave it to Han Shizhong.

古文：授检校少保、武胜昭庆军节度使。
现代文：韩世忠被授任为检校少保、武胜昭庆军节度使。
English: Han Shizhong was appointed as the school inspector, and Wu Sheng was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhaoqing Army.

古文：兀术将入侵，帝召诸将问移跸之地，张俊、辛企宗劝自鄂、岳幸长沙，世忠曰： 国家已失河北，山东，若又弃江、淮，更有何地？ 于是以世忠为浙西制置使，守镇江。
现代文：兀将入侵，皇上召集诸将问居所转移之地，张俊、辛企宗劝皇上从鄂州、岳州巡幸长沙，韩世忠说： 国家已经失掉了河北、山东，如果再放弃江、淮，将还有什么地方呢？ 皇上于是以韩世忠为浙西制置使，守镇江。
English: The emperor summoned the generals to visit the place where the residence was transferred. Zhang Jun and Xin Qizong advised the emperor to visit Changsha from Ezhou and Yuezhou. Han Shizhong said: The country has already lost Hebei and Shandong. If we give up the Jiang and Huai, where will there be left? The emperor then appointed Han Shizhong as the envoy to western Zhejiang to guard the Zhenjiang River.

古文：既而兀术分道渡江，诸屯皆败，世忠亦自镇江退保江阴。
现代文：不久兀分路渡过长江，各地屯守之军都失败，韩世忠也从镇江退保江阴。
English: Soon, Shibuan Road crossed the Yangtze River, the garrison troops of various regions were defeated, and Han Shizhong also withdrew from the Zhenjiang River to protect Jiangyin.

古文：杜充以建康降敌，兀术自广德破临安，帝如浙东。
现代文：杜充以建康投降敌人，兀从广德攻破临安，皇上前往浙东。
English: Du Chong surrendered to the enemy with Jiankang, Zou broke through Lin'an from Guangde, and the emperor went to East Zhejiang.

古文：世忠以前军驻青龙镇，中军驻江湾，后军驻海口，俟敌归邀击之。
现代文：韩世忠以前军驻青龙镇，中军驻江湾，后军驻海口，等敌人回撤时进行拦击。
English: Han Shizhong's former army was stationed in Qinglong Town, the Chinese army was stationed in Jiangwan, and the latter army was stationed in Haikou. When the enemy retreated, they intercepted them.

古文：帝召至行在，奏： 方留江上截金人归师，尽死一战。 帝谓辅臣曰： 此吕颐浩在会稽，尝建此策，世忠不谋而同。 赐亲札，听其留。
现代文：皇上召韩世忠到行在，韩世忠奏说： 臣正留在长江边上截击回撤的金兵，决心拼死一战。 皇上对辅臣说 ：以前吕颐浩在会稽时，曾提出过这个策略，与韩世忠不谋而合。 皇上亲赐手札给韩世忠，同意他截击金兵。
English: The emperor summoned Han Shizhong to the palace, and Han Shizhong said: My vassal is staying on the edge of the Yangtze River to intercept the retreating gold soldiers, determined to fight to the death. The emperor said to the assistant vassal: In the past, Lyu Binhao had proposed this strategy at the meeting, and it coincided with Han Shizhong. The emperor himself gave Han Shizhong a hand card and agreed to him intercepting the gold soldiers.

古文：会上元节，就秀州张灯高会，忽引兵趋镇江。
现代文：到了上元节，韩世忠先在秀州城张灯庆贺，然后突然引兵直奔镇江。
English: When it came to the Lantern Festival, Han Shizhong first put up lights to celebrate in Xiuzhou City, and then suddenly led the troops straight to Zhenjiang.

古文：及金兵至，则世忠军已先屯焦山寺。
现代文：等金兵到达时，韩世忠军已先屯驻在焦山寺了。
English: When the gold soldiers arrived, Han Shizhong's army was already stationed in Jiaoshan Temple.

古文：金将李选降，受之。
现代文：金将李选投降，韩世忠受降。
English: Kim surrenders Lee Seong and Han Shih Chung accepts the surrender.

古文：兀术遣使通问，约日大战，许之。
现代文：兀派遣使者通问，约定时间大战，韩世忠同意。
English: Han Shizhong agreed to send an envoy to ask questions and set a time for the war.

古文：战将十合，梁夫人亲执桴鼓，金兵终不得渡。
现代文：双方大战近十个回合，梁夫人亲执鼓棒击鼓，金兵最终不能渡过长江。
English: The two sides fought nearly ten rounds, Mrs. Liang personally played the drums, and the golden soldier was ultimately unable to cross the Yangtze River.

古文：尽归所掠假道，不听；请以名马献，又不听。
现代文：兀表示愿意归还这次入侵所占据的全部地方以求借道撤军，韩世忠不听；兀献名马，请求韩世忠让路，韩世忠仍不听。
English: Han Shizhong did not listen to Yu, who expressed his willingness to return all the places occupied by this invasion in order to find a way to withdraw the troops; Yu offered a famous horse and asked Han Shizhong to give way, but Han Shizhong still did not listen.

古文：挞辣在濰州，遣孛堇太一趋淮东以援兀术，世忠与二酋相持黄天荡者四十八日。
现代文：挞懒在潍州，派孛堇太一赶赴淮东支援兀，韩世忠与二位敌将在黄天荡相持四十八天。
English: Han Shizhong and the two enemies will hold out against each other under the yellow sky for 48 days.

古文：太一孛堇军江北，兀术军江南，世忠以海舰进泊金山下，预以铁绠贯大钩授骁健者。
现代文：孛堇太一驻军江北，兀军在江南，韩世忠用海舰驻泊在金山下，预先用铁绳套上大钩交给骁健的士兵在舰上等候。
English: Han Shizhong stationed a naval ship at the foot of the Jinshan Mountain, and waited on the ship with soldiers who had been given large hooks with iron cords in advance.

古文：明旦，敌舟噪而前，世忠分海舟为两道出其背，每缒一绠，则曳一舟沉之。
现代文：第二天一早，敌船鼓噪而来，韩世忠将海船分为两路绕到敌船背后，用铁索大钩套钩敌船，每一钩出，则钩沉一只敌船。
English: In the morning of the next day, the enemy ship came roaring. Han Shizhong divided the ship into two and went around to the back of the enemy ship. He hooked the enemy ship with a large set of iron hooks. With each hook out, he hooked and sank an enemy ship.

古文：兀术穷蹙，求会语，祈请甚哀。
现代文：兀穷蹙不知所措，请求对话，十分悲哀。
English: It's very sad to see how desperate they are, begging for dialogue.

古文：世忠曰： 还我两宫，复我疆土，则可以相全。 兀术语塞。
现代文：韩世忠说 ：还我徽、钦二帝，恢复我疆土，则可以满足你们的要求。 
English: Han Shizhong said, "If you return my emblem, Emperor Qin, and restore my territory, then I will be able to meet your demands."

古文：又数日求再会，言不逊，世忠引弓欲射之，亟弛去，谓诸将曰： 南军使船欲如使马，奈何？ 募人献破海舟策。
现代文：兀无言以对。又过几天兀再次请求对话，出言不逊，韩世忠挽弓想射他，兀急忙骑马而去，他对诸将说： 南军使船如使马，怎么办？ 兀募人献攻破海船的计策。
English: After a few days, Han Shizhong again asked for dialogue, and Han Shizhong drew his bow to shoot him. Han Shizhong hurriedly rode away. He said to the generals, "What if the Southern Army makes the ship look like a horse?" Han Shizhong recruited people to attack the strategy of breaking the ship.

古文：闽人王某者，教其舟中载土，平版铺之，穴船版以棹桨，风息则出江，有风则勿出。
现代文：闽人王某，教他们在船上装土，平铺在船板上，船穴铺上木桨，等风停时出长江，有风时则不出。
English: He told them to fill the boat with soil, spread the mud on the board, and put a wooden paddle in the hole of the boat. When the wind stops, the Yangtze River will come out, but not when there is wind.

古文：海舟无风，不可动也。
现代文：海船没有风，是不能动的。
English: A ship cannot move if there is no wind.

古文：又有献谋者曰： 凿大渠接江口，则在世忠上流。 兀术一夕潜凿渠三十里，且用方士计，刑白马，剔妇人心，自割其额祭天。
现代文：又有人献计说： 凿一条大河连接长江，则船行大河时处于韩世忠的上游。 兀一夜暗中开凿了河渠三十里，并且采用方士的建议，杀白马，挖妇人的心，还自己割破自己的额头祭天。
English: Another person offered a plan: "If you dig a large river to connect the Yangtze River, you will be in the upper reaches of Han Shizhong when navigating the large river.  He secretly dug a thirty-mile river channel overnight, and used the advice of the magicians to kill the white horse, dig out the woman's heart, and cut his own forehead to sacrifice to heaven.

古文：次日风止，我军帆弱不能运，金人以小舟纵火，矢下如雨。
现代文：第二天风停，韩世忠军因风力不够不能运动，金人用小船放火，矢如雨下。
English: The wind died down the next day, and Han Shizhong's army was unable to move because of the lack of wind. The Jin set small boats on fire, and it rained.

古文：孙世询、严允皆战死，敌得绝江遁去。
现代文：孙世询、严允都战死，敌人渡江逃去。
English: Sun Shizhen and Yan Yun both died in the battle, and the enemy fled across the river.

古文：世忠收余军还镇江。
现代文：韩世忠收集余军返回镇江。
English: Han Shizhong collected the remaining troops and returned to Zhenjiang.

古文：初，世忠谓敌至必登金山庙，观我虚实。
现代文：起初，韩世忠认为敌人来后必定会登金山庙，观察我军的虚实。
English: At first, Han Shizhong thought that after the enemy came, he would certainly climb the Jinshan Temple to observe the reality of our army.

古文：乃遣兵百人伏庙中，百人伏岸浒，约闻鼓声，岸兵先入，庙兵合击之。
现代文：于是派兵百人埋伏在庙中，另派百人埋伏在水边，相约听到鼓声，埋伏在水边的兵先攻入，埋伏在庙中的兵进行夹击。
English: So he sent a hundred soldiers to lie in ambush in the temple, and another hundred to lie in ambush on the water's edge. They heard the sound of drums, and the soldiers lying in ambush on the water's edge were the first to attack, and the soldiers lying in ambush in the temple were the first to attack.

古文：金人果五骑闯入，庙兵喜，先鼓而出，仅得二人。
现代文：金人果然有五人骑马闯入庙中，躲在庙中的兵一时高兴，先击鼓冲击，仅仅抓获两人。
English: The goldsmith did indeed have five people riding into the temple, and the soldiers hiding in the temple were momentarily happy, beating the drums first, and only two people were captured.

古文：逸其三，中有绛袍玉带、既坠而复驰者，诘之，乃兀术也。
现代文：有三人逃掉，其中有一个穿绛袍玉带的人，在掉下马后又上马逃跑了，通过审问俘虏得知，他就是兀。
English: Three of them escaped, including a man wearing a long robe and a jade belt. After falling off his horse, he got back on and ran away. After interrogating the prisoners, they learned that he was a baboon.

古文：是役也，兀术兵号十万，世忠仅八千余人。
现代文：这一战，兀号称兵十万，韩世忠只有八千多人。
English: In this battle, Han Shizhong had only more than eight thousand soldiers.

古文：帝凡六赐札，褒奖甚宠。
现代文：皇上前后共六次赐手札给韩世忠，褒奖很重。
English: The emperor gave Han Shizhong a total of six hand cards, and the reward was very heavy.

古文：拜检校少保、武成感德军节度使，神武左军都统制。
现代文：韩世忠被拜为检校少师，武成感德军节度使、神武左军都统制。
English: Han Shizhong was worshipped as the junior school inspector, Wu Chengxin as the German military commander, and Shenwu Zuo as the military commander.

古文：建安范汝为反，辛企宗等讨捕未克，贼势愈炽。
现代文：建安范汝为造反，辛企宗等前去讨捕没有成功，贼势越来越盛。
English: Jian An Fan Ru rebelled, Xin Qizong and others went to arrest him without success, and the bandits became more and more powerful.

古文：以世忠为福建、江西、荆湖宣抚副使，世忠曰： 建居闽岭上流，贼沿流而下，七郡皆血肉矣。 亟领步卒三万，水陆并进。
现代文：朝廷以韩世忠为福建、江西、荆湖宣抚副使，韩世忠说 ：建安位于闽岭的上流，反贼如沿流而下，岭下七郡都将遭受掠杀。 立即领步兵三万人，水陆并进。
English: The imperial court appointed Han Shizhong as the vice-envoy of Fujian, Jiangxi and Jinghu. Han Shizhong said, "Jian'an is located in the upper reaches of the Fuling Mountains. If the rebels go down the river, the seven counties in the lower reaches of the mountains will be plundered." He immediately led 30,000 infantrymen and advanced by land and sea.

古文：次剑潭，贼焚桥，世忠策马先渡，师遂济。
现代文：驻扎在剑潭，反贼烧焚桥梁，韩世忠策马抢先渡过河，军队跟着也渡过了河。
English: Stationed in Jiantan, the anti-thieves burned bridges, Han Shizhong's horse crossed the river first, and the army followed.

古文：贼尽塞要路拒王师，世忠命诸军偃旗仆鼓，径抵凤凰山，頫瞰城邑，设云梯火楼，连日夜并攻，贼震怖叵测。
现代文：贼兵占据所有要道堵截王军，韩世忠命令各军偃旗息鼓，直抵凤凰山，俯瞰建安城，建造云梯火楼，连日连夜进行攻城，反贼惊恐不知韩世忠的意图。
English: The robber soldiers occupied all the important roads to block and cut off the king's army. Han Shizhong ordered all the armies to hold their banners and hold their breath. They reached the Phoenix Mountain, overlooking the Jian'an City, built a fire tower, and attacked the city day and night. The anti-thieves were terrified and did not know Han Shizhong's intention.

古文：五日城破，汝为窜身自焚，斩其弟岳、吉以徇，禽其谋主谢向、施逵及裨将陆必强等五百余人。
现代文：五日后城被攻破，范汝为自焚而死，韩世忠斩杀范汝为的弟弟范岳、范吉以为警戒，擒获范汝为的谋士谢向、施逵及裨将陆必强等五百余人。
English: Five days later, the city was breached and Fan Ru died of self-immolation. Han Shizhong killed Fan Ru's younger brothers, Fan Yue and Fan Ji, as a warning, and captured Fan Ru's advisers, Xie Xiang, Shi Xuan and Lu Biqiang, as well as more than 500 others.

古文：世忠初欲尽诛建民，李纲自福州驰见世忠曰： 建民多无辜。 世忠令军士驰城上毋下，听民自相别，农给牛谷，商贾驰征禁，胁从者汰遣，独取附贼者诛之。
现代文：韩世忠起初想全部杀灭建安的百姓，李纲从福州赶去见韩世忠说： 建安的百姓大多无辜。 韩世忠下令军士在城上而不得下城，听从百姓自相离别，务农者给予牛谷，经商者减轻赋绢，放松禁令，胁从者遣散，只将依附反贼者处死。
English: At first, Han Shizhong wanted to kill all the people of Jian'an. Li Gang rushed from Fuzhou to see Han Shizhong and said: Most of the people of Jian'an are innocent. Han Shizhong ordered the sergeants to stay on the city and not to go out of the city, to listen to the people to separate from each other, to give cattle to the farmers, to reduce the taxes to the merchants, to relax the ban, to dismiss the followers, and to execute only those who adhered to the anti-thieves.

古文：民感更生，家为立祠。
现代文：百姓感激韩世忠让他们再生，家家为他立祠。
English: The people are grateful to Han Shizhong for letting them regenerate, and families have built shrines for him.

古文：捷闻，帝曰： 虽古名将何以加。 赐黄金器皿。
现代文：捷报传来，皇上说： 即使是古时的名将也不如韩世忠。 赐给韩世忠黄金器皿。
English: When news of the victory came, the emperor said, "Even the great generals of ancient times were not as good as Han Shizhong.

古文：世忠因奏江西、湖南寇贼尚多，乞乘胜讨平。
现代文：韩世忠借势上奏说江西、湖南寇贼还很多，请求乘胜加以讨平。
English: Taking advantage of the situation, Han Shizhong said that there were still many bandits in Jiangxi and Hunan, and requested that they be defeated.

古文：广西贼曹成拥余众在郴、邵。
现代文：广西盗贼曹成拥残兵占据郴州、邵州。
English: The Guangxi thief Cao Cheng supported the remnants to occupy Zhangzhou and Shaozhou.

古文：世忠既平闽寇，旋师永嘉，若将就休息者。
现代文：韩世忠平定闽寇后，马上移兵永嘉，装作好像要休兵整顿的样子。
English: After Han Shizhong had subdued the Qiang and Qiang, he immediately moved his troops to Yongjia, pretending that he wanted to take a rest and reorganize.

古文：忽由处、信径至豫章，连营江滨数十里，群贼不虞其至，大惊。
现代文：忽然由处州、信州径直奔豫章，在江滨扎营，连绵几十里，贼寇没有想到韩世忠军到达，大惊。
English: Suddenly, they rushed straight to Yuzhang from Zhanzhou and Xinshou and camped on the riverbank for dozens of miles. The bandits did not expect the arrival of Han Shizhong's army and were shocked.

古文：世忠遣人招之，成以其众降，得战士八万，遣诣行在。
现代文：韩世忠派人招降，曹成领众投降，得战士八万，韩世忠将他们发送到行在。
English: Han Shizhong sent people to recruit and surrender, Cao Cheng led the people to surrender, and gained 80,000 soldiers. Han Shizhong sent them to Xingye.

古文：遂移师长沙。
现代文：接着移兵长沙。
English: The troops then moved to Changsha.

古文：时刘忠有众数万，据白面山，营栅相望。
现代文：于是与贼兵对垒，下棋饮酒，坚壁不动，大家都不知道其中的用意。
English: As a result, they play chess and drink alcohol against the robber soldiers, but the walls do not move, and no one knows what they are up to.

古文：世忠始至，欲急击，宣抚使孟庾不可，世忠曰： 兵家利害，策之审矣，非参政所知，请期半月效捷。 遂与贼对垒，弈棋张饮，坚壁不动，众莫测。
现代文：一天晚上，韩世忠与苏格并骑穿过敌营，站岗的人呵问，韩世忠事先得知了贼军的暗语，使随声应对，将贼营详细观察了一遍后才出营，高兴地说： 这是天赐良机。 
English: One evening, Han Shizhong and Suge rode through the enemy camp together. The guards asked questions. Han Shizhong had learned the code words of the thief army in advance, so he responded with a voice. After observing the thief camp in detail, he went out of the camp and said happily: This is a heaven-sent opportunity.

古文：一夕，与苏格联骑穿贼营，候者呵问，世忠先得贼军号，随声应之，周览以出，喜曰： 此天锡也。 夜伏精兵二千于白面山，与诸将拔营而进，贼兵方迎战，所遣兵已驰入中军，夺望楼，植旗盖，传呼如雷，贼回顾惊溃，麾将士夹击，大破之，斩忠首，湖南遂平。授太尉，赐带、笏，仍敕枢密以功颁示内外诸将。
现代文：连夜埋伏二千精兵在白面山，然后与诸将一齐拔营进兵。贼兵正迎战时，埋伏在山中的精兵已冲入中军，夺望楼，树旗盖，喊声如雷，贼兵回头惊慌逃溃，韩世忠指挥将士夹击，大败贼兵，刘忠被斩首，湖南于是平定。韩世忠被授为太尉，皇上赐给他玉带、笏，还敕令枢密院将韩世忠的功劳颁示朝廷内外的各位将领。
English: Two thousand elite soldiers ambushed Baimen Mountain overnight, and then marched into the battalion together with the generals. When the thief soldiers were facing the war, the elite soldiers ambushed in the mountains had rushed into the Chinese army, captured the watchtower, the tree flag cover, shouted like thunder, the thief soldiers turned back in panic and fled, Han Shizhong commanded the generals to clamp down, defeated the thief soldiers, Liu Zhong was beheaded, and Hunan was thus pacified. Han Shizhong was awarded the rank of lieutenant, and the emperor gave him a jade belt and sash, and also ordered the Privy Council to present Han Shizhong

古文：师还建康，置背嵬军，皆勇鸷绝伦者。
现代文：韩世忠军返回建康，成立背嵬军，个个都是勇猛绝伦。
English: Han Shizhong's army returned to Jiankang and set up a rearguard. They were all very brave.

古文：九月，为江南东、西路宣抚使，置司建康。
现代文：九月，韩世忠任江南东、西路宣抚使，宣抚司设于建康。
English: In September, Han Shizhong was appointed as the special envoy to the south-east and west of the Yangtze River, and the Special Envoy Office was established in Jiankang.

古文：三年三月，进开府仪同三司，充淮南东、西路宣抚使，置司泗州。
现代文：绍兴三年三月，韩世忠升为开府仪同三司，充任淮南东、西路宣抚使，在泗州置司。
English: In March of the third year of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was promoted to the third division of Kaifu Yidong, and served as the envoy of Huainan East and West Road, and set up a division in Zhangzhou.

古文：时闻李横进师讨伪齐，议遣大将，以世忠忠勇，故遣之。
现代文：当时听说李横出兵讨伐伪齐，朝廷商议派遣大将，由于韩世忠忠诚勇敢，因此派遣他去。
English: At that time, it was heard that Li Yang sent troops to fight against the pseudo-Qi, and the imperial court discussed sending a general. Because Han Shizhong was loyal and brave, he was sent.

古文：仍赐广马七纲，甲千副，银二万两，帛二万匹；又出钱百万缗，米二十八万斛，为半岁之用。
现代文：皇上赐给他两广的马匹七纲，铠甲千副，银二万两，帛二万匹；还拿出钱百万缗，米二十八万斛，作为半年的费用。
English: The emperor gave him two hundred horses of the seven classes, a thousand pairs of armor, twenty thousand taels of silver, and twenty thousand mules; he also gave him one million taels of money and two hundred and eighty thousand taels of rice as half a year's expenses.

古文：命户部侍郎姚舜明诣泗州，总领钱粮；仓部郎官孙逸如平江府、常秀饶州，督发军食。
现代文：朝廷命令户部侍郎姚舜明到泗州，总领钱粮；命仓部郎官孙逸到平江府、常州、秀州、饶州，督促发运军粮。
English: The imperial court ordered the steward of the household department, Yao Yiming, to go to Bozhou to receive the general money grain; the steward of the storehouse department, Sun Yat, went to Pingjiang, Changzhou, Xiuzhou, and Raozhou to urge the shipment of military grain.

古文：李横兵败还镇，世忠不果渡淮。
现代文：李横兵败回师，韩世忠结果没有渡过淮河。
English: Li Hengfei was defeated and Han Shizhong failed to cross the Huai River.

古文：四年，以建康、镇江、淮东宣抚使驻镇江。
现代文：绍兴四年，韩世忠任建康、镇江、淮东宣抚使，驻守镇江。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was appointed as the envoy of Jiankang, Zhenjiang and Huaidong, stationed in Zhenjiang.

古文：是岁，金人与刘豫合兵，分道入侵。
现代文：这年，金人与刘豫合兵，分路南侵。
English: In this year, Jin people and Liu Yu joined forces to invade the south.

古文：帝手札命世忠饬守备，图进取，辞旨恳切。
现代文：皇上亲笔致书韩世忠，命他整饬防备，图谋进取，言辞恳切。
English: Song Gaozong personally issued an edict, ordering Han Shizhong to be on high alert, and hoped that Han Shizhong would be able to advance.

古文：世忠受诏，感泣曰： 主忧如此，臣子何以生为！ 遂自镇江济师，俾统制解元守高邮，候金步卒；亲提骑兵驻大仪，当敌骑，伐木为栅，自断归路。
现代文：韩世忠接受诏书，感动地说： 主上忧虑如此，臣子怎敢偷生！ 于是领兵从镇江渡江，让统制解元守高邮，守候金步兵；自己亲自指挥骑兵驻大仪，抵挡敌人骑兵，韩世忠令士兵砍树木筑栏栅，自己断绝自己的退路。
English: Han Shizhong accepted the imperial edict and said with emotion, "The Lord is so worried, how dare a courtier steal his life!" So he led the soldiers from the Zhenjiang River to the Yangtze River, and asked the government to dissolve the former guard Gaoyou and guard the waiting gold infantry; he personally commanded the cavalry stationed in the Great Hall to resist the enemy cavalry. Han Shizhong ordered the soldiers to cut down trees and build fences, and he cut off his own escape route.

古文：会遣魏良臣使金，世忠撤炊爨，绐良臣有诏移屯守江，良臣疾驰去。
现代文：碰上朝廷派魏良臣出使金国，韩世忠撤掉炊具，哄骗魏良臣说已接到诏令移守长江，魏良臣急忙离去。
English: When the imperial court sent Wei Liangcheng to Jin Guo, Han Shizhong removed the cooking utensils and tricked Wei Liangcheng into saying that he had received the imperial order to move to the Yangtze River. Wei Liangcheng hurriedly left.

古文：世忠度良臣已出境，即上马令军中曰： 眡吾鞭所向。 于是引军次大仪，勒五阵，设伏二十余所，约闻鼓即起击。
现代文：韩世忠估计魏良臣已离境，便立即上马，对将士下令说 ：看我的鞭子行事。 于是引大军屯驻大仪，布下五阵，在二十多处设埋伏，相约听到鼓声即发动攻击。
English: Han Shizhong thought that Wei Liangchen had already left the country, so he immediately mounted his horse and ordered his soldiers, "Watch my whip, and act accordingly." He then led a large army to camp at Dayi, spread out in five lines, set up ambushes in more than twenty places, and launched an attack as soon as they heard the sound of drums.

古文：良臣至金军中，金人问王师动息，具以所见对。
现代文：魏良臣到金军中，金人问王军的动静，魏良臣详细告诉了所见到的情况。
English: Wei Liangchen went to the gold army, the gold people asked the movement of the king's army, Wei Liangchen told in detail what he saw.

古文：聂儿孛堇闻世忠退，喜甚，引兵至江口，距大仪五里；别将挞孛也拥铁骑过五阵东。
现代文：聂儿孛堇听说韩世忠撤退，非常高兴，引兵到江口，离大仪五里；别将挞孛也率铁骑从韩世忠所布下的五阵的东边经过。
English: Hearing of Han Shizhong's retreat, Zou Erju was very happy. He led his troops to the mouth of the river, five miles from the Great Hall of the People. Don't let Zou Erju and his cavalry pass by the eastern side of the five lines laid out by Han Shizhong.

古文：世忠传小麾鸣鼓，伏兵四起，旗色与金人旗杂出，金军乱，我军迭进。
现代文：韩世忠挥旗鸣鼓，伏兵四起，韩世忠军旗的颜色与金人的旗帜相混杂，金军混乱，我军不断推进。
English: Han Shizhong waved the flag and beat the drum, the ambushes were everywhere, the colors of Han Shizhong's flag mixed with the flags of the Jin people, the Jin army was confused, and our army continued to advance.

古文：背嵬军各持长斧，上揕人胸，下斫马足。
现代文：背嵬军各持长斧，上砍人胸，下砍马足。
English: Each of the soldiers holding a long axe slashed the man's chest from above and the horse's feet from below.

古文：敌被甲陷泥淖，世忠麾劲骑四面蹂躏，人马俱毙，遂擒挞孛也等二百余人。
现代文：敌人披甲陷入泥潭，韩世忠指挥精骑兵四面践踏，将金人人马都踩死，俘获挞孛也等二百余人。
English: The enemy, wearing armor, fell into a quagmire, and Han Shizhong, commanding the elite cavalry, trampled them on all sides, trampled all of Jinren's horses to death, and captured more than two hundred people such as Yao.

古文：所遣董旼亦击金人于天长县之鵶口，擒女真四十余人。
现代文：韩世忠派遣的董日文也在天长县的亚鸟口攻击金人，擒获四十余名女真人。
English: Dong Nichimen, dispatched by Han Shizhong, also attacked Jinren in Yajikou, Tianchang County, and captured more than forty Jianzhenren.

古文：解元至高邮，遇敌，设水军夹河阵，日合战十三，相拒未决。
现代文：解元到高邮，碰上敌人，他布下水军夹河阵，一天与金人战十三回合，双方相持不下。
English: When Xie Yuan went to Gaoyou and encountered the enemy, he led his navy into a skirmish and fought thirteen rounds with the Jin people in one day. The two sides could not stand each other.

古文：世忠遣成闵将骑士往援，复大战，俘生女真及千户等。
现代文：韩世忠派成闵率奇兵前去救援，再次与金人大战，俘获生女真及千户等。
English: Han Shizhong sent Cheng Xun and his marvelous soldiers to the rescue, and once again fought against the Jin people, capturing Zeng Nien Zhen and Qianhu.

古文：世忠复亲追至淮，金人惊溃，相蹈藉，溺死甚众。
现代文：韩世忠还亲自追到淮水，金人惊慌溃逃，相互践踏，溺死者很多。
English: Han Shizhong also personally chased them to Huai Shui. The Jin people panicked and fled, trampling each other, and many drowned.

古文：捷闻，群臣入贺，帝曰： 世忠忠勇，朕知其必能成功。 沈与求曰： 自建炎以来，将士未尝与金人迎敌一战，今世忠连捷以挫其锋，厥功不细。 帝曰： 第忧赏之。 于是部将董旼、陈桷、解元、呼延通等皆峻擢有差。
现代文：捷报传来，群臣表示庆贺，皇上说： 韩世忠忠勇，朕知道他必定能够成功。 沈与求说： 自建炎以来，将士未曾与金人迎战一次，现在韩世忠连连获胜，挫伤了敌人的锐气，其功不小。 皇上说： 应该依次给予奖赏。 于是部将董日文、陈桷、解元、呼延通等都分别受到不同程度的提拔。
English: When the news of victory came, the group of courtiers expressed their congratulations, and the emperor said: Han Shizhong is loyal and brave, I know that he will surely succeed. Shen and Xu said: Since Jianyan, the soldiers have not fought against the Jin people once, and now Han Shizhong has won again and again, and has dampened the enemy's spirit, which is no small achievement. The emperor said: It should be rewarded in turn. As a result, the generals Dong Nichiwen, Chen Jun, Xie Yuan, Huyan Tong, etc. were promoted to different degrees.

古文：论者以此举为中兴武功第一。
现代文：论者认为这是中兴武功第一。
English: Commentators believe that this is ZTE's first military achievement.

古文：时挞辣屯泗州，兀术屯竹塾镇，为世忠所扼，以书币约战，世忠许之，且使两伶人以橘、茗报聘。
现代文：这时挞辣屯驻泗州，兀屯驻竹塾镇，被韩世忠所阻扼，他们派人送书信和钱币向韩世忠约战，韩世忠表示同意，并且派两名优伶带上橘和茶叶回报。
English: At this time, 辣屯 stationed in Bozhou and 屯 stationed in Zhujuku Town were blocked by Han Shizhong. They sent people to send letters and coins to Han Shizhong to arrange a battle. Han Shizhong agreed, and sent two high-ranking officials to bring oranges and tea leaves in return.

古文：会雨雪，金馈道不通，野无所掠，杀马而食，蕃汉军皆怨。
现代文：碰上天降雨雪，金人粮道不通，野无剩余粮食可掠，只好杀马当食，蕃汉兵无不怨恨。
English: When it rains and snows, there is no way for the Jin people to get food, and there is no surplus grain in the field to be plundered, so they had to kill horses for food, which made the Han soldiers resentful.

古文：兀术夜引军还，刘麟、刘猊弃辎重遁。
现代文：兀乘夜引兵撤走，刘麟、刘猊也弃辎重逃跑。
English: Gong took the night to withdraw the troops, Liu Lin and Liu Wei also abandoned their posts and fled.

古文：五年，进少保。
现代文：绍兴五年，韩世忠进为少保。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was promoted to Junior Security Officer.

古文：六年，授武宁安化军节度使、京东淮东路宣抚处置使，置司楚州。
现代文：绍兴六年，韩世忠被授为武宁安化军节度使、京东淮东路宣抚处置使，在楚州置司。
English: Six years after the founding of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was awarded the title of the Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Wu Ning Anhua Army and the Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Jingdong Huai Dong Road, and set up a division in Chuzhou.

古文：世忠披草莱，立军府，与士同力役。
现代文：韩世忠斩除草莱，建造军府，与士兵同劳动。
English: Han Shizhong cut down weeds, built a military headquarters, and worked with soldiers.

古文：夫人梁亲织薄为屋。
现代文：其夫人梁氏亲自纺织。
English: His wife, Ms. Liang, does the weaving herself.

古文：将士有怯战者，世忠遗以巾帼，设乐大宴，俾妇人妆以耻之，故人人奋厉。
现代文：将士有怯战的，韩世忠赠给他们妇女衣服，设乐大宴，让妇女化装以耻笑他们，因此人人发奋。
English: Han Shizhong gave women's clothes to soldiers who were war-weary, held a grand banquet, and had the women dress up to make fun of them, so everyone was excited.

古文：抚集流散，通商惠工，山阳遂为重镇。
现代文：韩世忠招集流亡，鼓励工商，山阳由此变为重镇。
English: Han Shizhong recruited exiles and encouraged industry and commerce, and Shanyang became an important town.

古文：刘豫兵数入寇，辄为世忠所败。
现代文：刘豫兵数次入侵，都被韩世忠打败。
English: Liu Yuebing invaded several times and was defeated by Han Shizhong.

古文：时张浚以右相视师，命世忠自承、楚图淮阳。
现代文：当时张浚以右相的身份视察军事，令韩世忠从承、楚攻取淮阳。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun inspected the military in the capacity of the right phase and ordered Han Shizhong to conquer Huaiyang from Zongcheng and Chu.

古文：刘豫方聚兵淮阳，世忠即引军渡淮，旁符离而北，至其城下。为贼所围，奋戈一跃，溃围而出，不遗一镞。
现代文：刘豫正聚兵在淮阳，韩世忠领兵渡过淮河，从符离之边向北，到达淮阳城下，被贼兵围困，韩世忠指挥士兵奋力拼战，突围而出，没有留下一个箭头。
English: Liu Yu Zheng gathered the soldiers in Huaiyang, Han Shizhong led the soldiers across the Huai River, from the edge of Fuyi to the north, reached the bottom of Huaiyang City, and was besieged by the thief soldiers. Han Shizhong commanded the soldiers to fight hard, break out of the encirclement, and did not leave a single arrow.

古文：呼延通与金将牙合孛堇搏战，扼其吭而禽之，乘锐掩击，金人败去。
现代文：呼延通与金将牙合孛堇拼战，扼其喉咙，将他擒获，韩世忠军乘胜掩击，金人败去。
English: Huyan Tong fought tooth and nail with Jin Zhaojun, strangled him, and captured him. Han Shizhong's army took advantage of the victory to cover up, and the Jin people were defeated.

古文：既而围淮阳，贼坚守不下，约曰： 受围一日，则举一烽。 至是，六烽具举，兀术与刘猊皆至。
现代文：不久围困淮阳，贼兵坚守，攻城不下，贼兵预先与金人相约说 ：受围一天，则举烽火一只 ，到这时，六只烽火都举起来了，兀与刘猊都到达。
English: Soon after, Huaiyang was besieged. The robber soldiers held fast and were unable to attack the city. The robber soldiers made an agreement with the Jin people in advance, saying that if they were besieged for one day, they would hold a bonfire. By this time, all six bonfires had been held up, and Zhai and Liu Bei had arrived.

古文：世忠求援于张俊，俊以世忠有见吞意，不从。
现代文：韩世忠向张俊求援，张俊认为韩世忠有吞并自己的意图，没有应援。
English: Han Shizhong asked Zhang Jun for help. Zhang Jun thought that Han Shizhong had the intention of annexing himself and did not offer any help.

古文：世忠勒阵向敌，遣人语之曰： 锦衣骢马立阵前者，韩相公也。 或危之，世忠曰： 不如是，不足以致敌。 敌果至，杀其导战二人，遂引去。
现代文：韩世忠与敌军对阵，他派人对敌兵说： 穿锦衣骑青白马站在阵前的，便是韩相公。 有人提醒韩世忠像这样做危险，韩世忠说 ：不这样，不能将敌人引来。 敌人果然来到，韩世忠杀死其领战的二人，敌人于是退去。
English: Han Shizhong was facing off against the enemy army, and he sent a man to say to the enemy soldiers: It is Han Sang-gong who is standing in front of the battle in a brocade dress and riding a blue-and-white horse. Someone reminded Han Shizhong of the danger of doing so, and Han Shizhong said: Otherwise, it is impossible to attract the enemy. The enemy did come, Han Shizhong killed the two leading his battle, and the enemy then retreated.

古文：寻诏班师，复归楚州，淮阳之民，从而归者以万计。
现代文：不久，朝廷下诏班师，韩世忠又回到楚州，淮阳百姓随韩世忠而归者，数以万计。
English: Soon, Han Shizhong returned to Chuzhou under the imperial edict, and tens of thousands of Huaiyang people returned with him.

古文：三月，除京东、淮东宣抚处置使兼节制镇江府，仍楚州置司。
现代文：绍兴六年三月，韩世忠被任命为京东、淮东宣抚处置使兼节制镇江府，仍然在楚州置司。
English: In March of the sixth year of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was appointed as the Jingdong and Huadong Proclamation and Disposition Envoy and the Zhenjiang Prefecture, and still had a division in Chuzhou.

古文：四月，赐号 扬武翊运功臣 ，加横海、武宁、安化三镇节度使。
现代文：四月，韩世忠被赐给 扬武翊运功臣 称号，加授横海、武宁、安化三镇节度使。
English: In April, Han Shizhong was given the title of Yangwu Shengjun Hero, and was also awarded the title of Yanghai, Wu Ning, and Anhua Three Towns Festival Envoy.

古文：九月，帝在平江，世忠自楚州来朝。
现代文：九月，皇上在平江，韩世忠从楚州来朝。
English: In September, the emperor was in Pingjiang, and Han Shizhong came from Chuzhou.

古文：十月，边报急，刘光世欲弃庐州还太平，张俊亦请益兵。
现代文：绍兴六年十月，边报紧急，刘光世想放弃庐州返回太平，张俊也请求增兵。
English: In October of the sixth year of Shaoxing, there was an urgent report that Liu Guangshi wanted to give up Zhangzhou and return to Taiping, and Zhang Jun also requested an increase in troops.

古文：都督张浚曰： 今日之事，有进击，无退保。 于是世忠引兵渡淮，与金将讹里也力战。
现代文：都督张浚说 ：今日之事，只能前进出击，不能后退保守。 于是韩世忠引兵渡过淮河，与金将讹里也力战。
English: The governor Zhang Jun said, "In today's situation, we can only advance and attack, but we cannot retreat and be conservative," so Han Shizhong led his troops across the Huai River and fought hard against the Kim general Baoli.

古文：刘猊将寇淮东，为世忠兵扼，不得进。
现代文：刘猊准备进犯淮东，被韩世忠兵所阻扼，不能前进。
English: Liu Bei was preparing to invade Huadong, but he was blocked by Han Shih's loyal soldiers and could not advance.

古文：七年，筑高邮城，民益安之。
现代文：绍兴七年，建筑高邮城，百姓更加感到安定。
English: Shaoxing has been building a high-speed postal city for seven years, and the people feel more stable.

古文：初，世忠移屯山阳，遣间结山东豪杰，约以缓急为应，宿州马秦及太行群盗，多愿奉约束者。
现代文：起初，韩世忠移屯山阳，派间谍联络山东豪杰，相约缓急相互应援。宿州的马秦以及太行山的诸盗贼，大多愿意遵从约定。
English: At first, Han Shizhong moved to Tun Sanyang, sent spies to liaise with Shandong heroes, and agreed on mutual assistance. Ma Qin in Suzhou and the thieves in Taihang Mountain were mostly willing to comply with the agreement.

古文：金人废刘豫，中原震动，世忠谓机不可失，请全师北讨，招纳归附，为恢复计。
现代文：金人废掉刘豫，中原震动，韩世忠认为机不可失，请求率领大军北讨，招纳归附之人，以为恢复故土之计。
English: The Jin people abolished Liu Yu, the Central Plains were shaken, and Han Shizhong thought that the opportunity could not be lost. He requested to lead a large army to the north and recruit people to join him, thinking that it was a plan to restore the motherland.

古文：会秦桧主和议，命世忠徙屯镇江。
现代文：由于秦桧主张和议，命令韩世忠移屯镇江。
English: As Qin Hui advocated peace talks, Han Shizhong was ordered to move to Tunzhenjiang.

古文：世忠言： 金人诡诈，恐以计缓我师，乞留此军蔽遮江、淮。 又力陈和议之非，愿效死节，率先迎敌；若不胜，从之未晚。
现代文：韩世忠说： 金人诡诈，恐怕他们用缓兵之计，请求将这支军队留下掩护江、淮。 又极力陈说和议之不对，愿意效死节，率先迎击敌人；如果不胜，再听从敌人和议不晚。
English: Han Shizhong said: The Chinese are cunning, I'm afraid they'll use a delaying tactic to request that this army be left behind to cover the Huai River and the Yangtze River, and they'll try their best to say that peace talks are wrong, and they're willing to meet the enemy head-on on the Day of the Dead; if they don't win, it's not too late to listen to the enemy and negotiate.

古文：又言王伦、蓝公佐交河南地界，乞令明具无反覆文状为后证。
现代文：还说王伦、蓝公佐交涉河南地界，请求下令明确写下不得反悔的文据以做以后的证据。
English: He also said that Wang Lun and Lan Gongzuo negotiated the land boundary of Henan Province, and asked for an order to clearly write down the non-repudiation document to serve as future evidence.

古文：章十数上，皆慷慨激切，且请单骑诣阙面奏，帝率优诏褒答。
现代文：韩世忠上了十几道奏章，都慷慨激切，并且还请求单骑到朝廷面奏，皇上大多优礼给予答复。
English: Han Shizhong played more than a dozen pieces, all of which were generous and passionate, and he also asked to ride alone to the imperial court to play, and the emperor mostly responded with courtesy.

古文：后金果渝盟，咸如其言。
现代文：后来金人果然违背盟约，都如韩世忠所言。
English: Later, Jinren did indeed violate the covenant, just as Han Shizhong had said.

古文：金使萧哲之来，以诏谕为名，世忠闻之，凡四上疏言： 不可许，愿举兵决战，兵势最重处，臣请当之。 又言： 金人欲以刘豫相待，举国士大夫尽为陪臣，恐人心离散，士气凋沮。 且请驰驿面奏，不许。
现代文：金派使者萧哲来，以诏谕为名，韩世忠听说，共上了四道奏疏，说 ：不能接受金的诏谕，希望发兵进行决战，敌人兵势最强的地方，请让臣来担当。 又说： 金人想将我们与刘豫同等相待，让全国的士大夫都为陪臣，恐怕人心离散，士气凋落。 并且还请求入朝面奏，未获许可。
English: Kim sent an envoy, Xiao Zhe, in the name of an edict, and according to Han Shizhong, he recited a four-part sermon, saying, "I cannot accept Kim's edict, I hope to send troops for a decisive battle, and where the enemy's troops are strongest, please let the vassals take charge." He also said, "The Kim people want to treat us equally with Liu Yu, and have all the country's scholars and chiefs as their vassals, so I'm afraid that people's hearts will be scattered and morale will decline." He also requested to perform a sermon in front of the North Korean government,

古文：既而伏兵洪泽镇，将杀金使，不克。
现代文：后来韩世忠在洪泽镇设伏兵，准备杀死金使，没有成功。
English: Later, Han Shizhong set up an ambush in Hongze Town, preparing to kill the envoy, without success.

古文：九年，授少师。
现代文：绍兴九年，韩世忠被授为少师。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was awarded the title of junior teacher.

古文：十年，金人败盟，兀术率撒离曷、李成等破三京，分道深入。
现代文：绍兴十年，金人背弃盟约，兀率撒离曷、李成等攻破三京，分路侵入。
English: In the 10th year of Shaoxing, the Jin people reneged on the covenant, the Jin forces scattered away from the Qin, and Li Cheng and others broke through the Sanjing and invaded the branch line.

古文：八月，世忠围淮阳，金人来救，世忠迎击于泇口镇，败之。
现代文：八月，韩世忠围攻淮阳，金人来救，韩世忠在氵加口镇迎击，将金人打败。
English: In August, Han Shizhong besieged Huaiyang, and the Jin people came to the rescue. Han Shizhong counterattacked in the town of Zhangjiakou and defeated the Jin people.

古文：又遣解元击金人于潭城，刘宝击于千秋湖，皆捷。
现代文：韩世忠又派遣解元在潭城迎击敌人，刘宝在千秋湖攻击敌人，都取得了胜利。
English: Han Shizhong also sent Xie Yuan to meet the enemy in Tancheng, and Liu Bao attacked the enemy in Qianqiu Lake, both of which achieved victory.

古文：亲随将成闵从统制许世安夺淮阳门而入，大战门内。
现代文：亲随将成闵随统制许世安夺淮阳城门进入，大战于门内。
English: He personally entered the gate of Huaiyang City with the general Xu Shian, and the great battle took place inside the gate.

古文：世安中四矢，闵被三十余创，复夺门出。
现代文：许世安中四箭，成闵三十余处受伤，又夺门而出。
English: Xu Shi'an received four arrows in middle school, and was injured in more than 30 places, and went out of the gate.

古文：世忠奏其功，擢武德大夫，闵由是知名。
现代文：韩世忠奏报他们的战功，他们都被提升为武德大夫，成闵由此知名。
English: Han Shizhong reported their war exploits, and they were all promoted to Dr. Wu Defu, thus becoming famous.

古文：世忠进太保，封英国公，兼河南、北诸路招讨使。
现代文：韩世忠进为太保，封为英国公，兼河南、河北诸路招讨使。
English: Han Shizhongjin was awarded the title of Tai Po, the title of British public official, and the envoy of Henan and Hebei provinces.

古文：十一年，兀术耻顺昌之败，复谋再入，诏大合兵于淮西以待。
现代文：绍兴十一年，兀耻于顺昌之败，筹谋再次入侵，皇上诏令集合大军在淮西迎敌。
English: In the eleventh year of Shaoxing, ashamed of Shunchang's defeat and planning to invade again, the emperor issued an imperial edict to gather a large army to meet the enemy in Huaixi.

古文：既而金败于柘皋，复围濠州。
现代文：不久金人在柘皋被打败，又围攻濠州。
English: Not long after, the Jin people were defeated in Handan and besieged Handan again.

古文：世忠受诏救濠，以舟师至招信县，夜以骑兵击金人于闻贤驿，败之。
现代文：韩世忠受诏救援濠州，他派水军到招信县，又派骑兵乘夜在闻贤驿袭击金人，将金人打败。
English: Han Shizhong was ordered to rescue Bozhou. He sent a naval force to Zhaoxin County, and also sent cavalry to attack Jinren at Wenshen Pass at night, defeating Jinren.

古文：金人攻濠州，五日而破。
现代文：金人攻打濠州，五日后城破。
English: The Jin people attacked Bozhou, and the city was defeated five days later.

古文：破三日，世忠至，杨沂中军已南奔。
现代文：破城后三日，韩世忠到达，杨沂中军已经南逃了。
English: Three days after the city was breached, Han Shizhong arrived, and Yang Pi's Chinese army had already fled south.

古文：世忠与金人战于淮岸，夜遣刘宝溯流将劫之，金人伐木塞赤龙洲，扼其归路，世忠知之，全师而还。
现代文：韩世忠与金人战于淮河岸边，他派刘宝夜晚逆流而上，准备劫击金人，金人砍伐树木堵塞龙洲，扼住其退路，韩世忠得知，全师而回。
English: Han Shizhong and Jinren fought on the banks of the Huai River. He sent Liu Bao upstream at night to prepare to ambush Jinren. Jinren cut down trees to block Longzhou and choke off its escape route. When Han Shizhong learned of this, the whole division turned back.

古文：金人自涡口渡淮北去，自是不得入侵。
现代文：金人从涡口渡淮河北去，从此不再入侵。
English: The Jin people crossed the Huaihe River from Turukou to the north, and never invaded again.

古文：世忠在楚州十余年，兵仅三万，而金人不敢犯。
现代文：韩世忠在楚州十余年，兵数只有三万，但金人不敢侵犯。
English: Han Shizhong has been in Chuzhou for more than ten years, with only thirty thousand soldiers, but the Jin people dare not invade.

古文：秦桧收三大将权，四月，拜枢密使，遂以所积军储钱百万贯，米九十万石，酒库十五归于国。
现代文：秦桧收三大将兵权，绍兴十一年四月，拜韩世忠为枢密使，将他军中所积存的钱百万缗，米九十万石，酒库十五座收归国有。
English: In April of the eleventh year of Shaoxing, Bai Han Shizhong became the envoy of the Privy Council, and nationalized the money accumulated in his army of one million baht, nine hundred thousand koku of rice, and fifteen breweries.

古文：世忠既不以和议为然，为桧所抑。
现代文：韩世忠不赞成和议，被秦桧所阻抑。
English: Han Shizhong did not approve of the peace talks and was blocked by Qin Yu.

古文：及魏良臣使金，世忠又力言： 自此人情消弱，国势委靡，谁复振之？
现代文：魏良臣使金时，韩世忠又力言： 从此人情淡薄，国势委靡，由谁再来振兴它呢？
English: When Wei Liangchen sent gold, Han Shizhong also said: From now on, the people are weak, the country is in a bad situation, who will revitalize it?

古文：北使之来，乞与面议。 不许，遂抗疏言桧误国。
现代文：等金使来时，请求让我与他面谈。 未获许可，于是抗疏指说秦桧误国。
English: When the envoy arrived, he asked me to interview him, but I didn't get permission, so I resisted and said that Qin Nan was in the wrong country.

古文：桧讽言者论之，帝格其奏不下。
现代文：秦桧指使言官弹劾韩世忠，皇帝将其奏书留置于宫中。
English: Qin Yu instructed the spokesman to impeach Han Shizhong, and the emperor kept his report in the palace.

古文：世忠连疏乞解枢密柄，继上表乞骸。
现代文：韩世忠连连上疏请求去枢密使之职，接着又上表请求辞职归乡。
English: Han Shizhong repeatedly requested to be transferred to the Privy Council, and then requested to resign and return to his hometown.

古文：十月，罢为醴泉观使、奉朝请，进封福国公，节钺如故。
现代文：十月，韩世忠被罢为醴泉观使，奉朝请，进封福国公，仍为节度使。
English: In October, Han Shizhong was ousted as the envoy to observe the Spring Festival, but he was still the envoy to the Spring Festival.

古文：自此杜门谢客，绝口不言兵，时跨驴携酒，从一二奚童，纵游西湖以自乐，平时将佐罕得见其面。
现代文：韩世忠自此闭门谢客，绝口不谈兵事，时常骑着驴、提着酒，和一、二个女童做伴，纵游于西湖以自乐，平时将官很少能见到他的面。
English: Since then, Han Shizhong has been thanking guests behind closed doors, never talking about military affairs, often riding a donkey, carrying wine, and being accompanied by one or two girls, swimming the length of the West Lake to enjoy himself. In normal times, generals rarely see his face.

古文：十二年，改潭国公。
现代文：绍兴十二年，改为潭国公。
English: In the twelfth year of Shaoxing, it was changed to Tan Guogong.

古文：显仁皇后自金还，世忠诣临平朝谒。
现代文：显仁皇后从金返回，韩世忠到临平朝见。
English: Empress Hsien-jen returned from Jin, and Han Shizhong went to Linping to see the emperor.

古文：后在北方闻其名，慰问者良久。
现代文：皇后在北方即听说过他的名字，对他不停给予安慰。
English: The queen, who had heard his name in the north, was constantly consoling him.

古文：十三年，封咸安郡王。
现代文：绍兴十三年八月，韩世忠被封为咸安郡王。
English: In August of the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, Han Shizhong was crowned King of Xi'an County.

古文：十七年，改镇南、武安、宁国节度使。
现代文：绍兴十七年，改为镇南、武安、宁国节度使。
English: In the 17th year of Shaoxing, it was changed to Zhenan, Wu'an and Ningguo Festival Envoy.

古文：二十一年八月薨，进拜太师，追封通义郡王。
现代文：绍兴二十一年八月，韩世忠死，进拜为太师，追封为通义郡王。
English: On August 21st, Han Shizhong died in Shaoxing. He was promoted to the position of Grand Master and crowned as the King of Tongyi County.

古文：孝宗朝，追封蕲王，谥忠武，配飨高宗庙庭。
现代文：孝宗即位，追封为蕲王，谥忠武，置于高宗庙庭中祭祀。
English: Takamune ascended to the throne, was enthroned as the king of Shinshu, and Shintotamune was placed in the courtyard of Takamune's temple for worship.

古文：世忠初得疾，敕尚医视疗，将吏卧内问疾，世忠曰： 吾以布衣百战，致位王公，赖天之灵，保首领没于家，诸君尚哀其死邪？ 及死，刚朝服、貂蝉冠、水银、龙脑以敛。
现代文：韩世忠开始生病时，皇上诏令御医检查治疗，将领和官吏入卧室探视病情，韩世忠说 ：我出身平民，经过百战，得到王公之位，仰赖上天保佑，能够保全尸首于家中，诸君还为我的死悲哀吗？ 韩世忠死后，皇上赐给朝服、貂蝉冠、水银、龙脑装殓。
English: When Han Shizhong began to fall ill, the emperor ordered his doctor to examine and treat him, and generals and officials came into the bedroom to visit his condition. Han Shizhong said: I was born a commoner, after a hundred battles, I was given the throne of the prince, relying on God's blessing, I can keep the corpse at home, are you still sad about my death? After Han Shizhong died, the emperor gave him a court uniform, a cicada crown, mercury, and dragon's brain decoration.

古文：世忠尝戒家人曰： 吾名世忠，汝曹毋讳 忠 字，讳而不言，是忘忠也。 性戆直，勇敢忠义，事关庙社，必流涕极言。
现代文：韩世忠曾告诫家人说 ：我的名字叫世忠，你们不要讳 忠 字，讳而不言，这是忘忠。 韩世忠性憨直，勇敢忠义，凡事关宗社国家，必流泪极言。
English: Han Shizhong once admonished his family members, saying, "My name is Shizhong, and you should not hide the word 'loyalty,' hiding without saying it is a betrayal of loyalty. Han Shizhong is straightforward, brave and loyal, and he is concerned about the country in all matters, and he will shed tears when he speaks out.

古文：岳飞冤狱，举朝无敢出一语，世忠独撄桧怒，语在《桧传》。
现代文：岳飞遭受冤狱，举朝没有人敢说一个非字，唯独韩世忠直言触怒秦桧，其言语在《秦桧传》。
English: Yue Fei was unjustly imprisoned. No one in the imperial court dared to say a non-word, except for Han Shizhong, whose outspokenness angered Qin Yu. His words are in the "Qin Yu Biography."

古文：又抵排和议，触桧尤多，或劝止之，世忠曰： 今畏祸苟同，他日瞑目，岂可受铁杖于太祖殿下？ 时一二大将，多曲徇桧苟全，世忠与桧同在政地，一揖外未尝与谈。
现代文：他又抑制和议，触怒秦桧之处尤其为多，有人劝阻他，韩世忠说： 现在畏祸苟同，他日死后，岂可受铁杖于太祖殿下？ 当时的一、二位大将，大多依附秦桧以求苟全，韩世忠与秦桧同在政府，但见面后除作一揖外，未曾与秦桧交谈过。
English: Han Shizhong said: "Now I fear the same fate. After his death, will he be able to receive the iron scepter from his great-great-grandfather? At that time, one or two generals mostly depended on Qin Hui to seek perfection. Han Shizhong and Qin Hui were together in the government, but after they met, they never talked to Qin Hui except for one meeting.

古文：嗜义轻财，锡赍悉分将士，所赐田输租与编户等。
现代文：韩世忠好义轻财，皇上的赏赐全部分给将士，所受赐的田地与编户同等交租。
English: Han Shizhong was fond of charity and frivolity. The emperor's rewards were all given to soldiers, and the fields he received were leased at the same rate as the landlords.

古文：持军严重，与士卒同甘苦，器仗规画，精绝过人，今克敌弓、连锁甲、狻猊鍪，及跳涧以习骑，洞贯以习射，皆其遗法也。
现代文：他治军严肃，与士兵同甘苦，器仗规划，精绝过人，现在的克敌弓、连锁甲、狻猊鍪，以及通过跳涧练习骑马，通过穿洞以练习射击，都是他所遗留下的方法。
English: He ruled the army seriously, shared the joys and sorrows with the soldiers, planned and perfected the tools of war, and the current methods of defeating the enemy bow, chain armor, halberd, as well as practicing horse riding by jumping, and practicing shooting by piercing holes, are all methods he left behind.

古文：尝中毒矢入骨，以强弩括取之，十指仅全四，不能动，刀痕箭瘢如刻画。
现代文：他曾中毒箭入骨，用强弩括取，十个手指只剩下四个，不能动，在他身上，刀痕箭伤如蛛网密布。
English: He had been poisoned with arrows to the bone, taken with a strong hook, ten fingers left only four, can not move, on his body, knife and arrow wounds like a spider's web.

古文：然知人善奖用，成闵、解元、王胜、王权、刘宝、岳超起行伍，秉将旄，皆其部曲云。
现代文：然而他知人善用，成闵、解元、王胜、王权、刘宝、岳超起于行伍，直到挥将旗指挥，都是他的部下。
English: However, he knew how to make good use of people. Cheng Xuan, Xie Yuan, Wang Sheng, Wang Quan, Liu Bao, and Yue Chao were all his subordinates from the time they joined the army until they commanded the flag.

古文：解兵罢政，卧家凡十年，澹然自如，若未尝有权位者。晚喜释、老，自号清凉居士。
现代文：他解除兵权，罢去官职，卧家共十年，淡然自如，好像未曾身居权门，晚年喜好佛、老，自号清凉居士。
English: He was discharged from the military, dismissed from his official position, and lived at home for a total of ten years. He was easy-going, as if he had never lived in a place of power. In his later years, he liked Buddha and old people, and called himself a cool householder.

古文：子彦直、彦质、彦古，皆以才见用。
现代文：韩世忠之子韩彦直、韩彦质、韩彦古，都以才能被用。
English: The sons of Han Shizhong, Han Yan Zi, Han Yan Jie, and Han Yan Gu, were all used for their talents.

古文：彦古户部尚书。
现代文：彦古官至户部尚书。
English: Hikokokan to the head of the household.

