古文：杨播杨播，字延庆，自云恆农华阴人也。
现代文：杨播，字延庆，自称是恒农华阴人。
English: Yang Bi, alias Yanqing, claims to be a Hengnong Huayin person.

古文：高祖结，仕慕容氏，卒于中山相。
现代文：高祖杨结，在慕容氏政权中任职，卒于中山相任上。
English: Yang Jie, the founder of Gaozhou, served in the Murong regime and died after being appointed by Sun Yat-sen.

古文：曾祖珍，太祖时归国，卒于上谷太守。
现代文：曾祖杨珍，太祖时到了皇魏，卒于上谷太守。
English: Yang Zhen, the great-grandfather, came to the imperial Wei dynasty, and died in Shanggu Dazhong.

古文：祖真，河内、清河二郡太守。
现代文：祖杨真，河内、清河二郡太守。
English: Zou Yangzhen, the governor of Hanoi and Qinghe counties.

古文：父懿，延兴末为广平太守，有称绩。
现代文：父亲杨懿，延兴末年任广平太守，有政绩。
English: His father, Yang Hui, was the Guangping governor of Yanxing at the end of his life, and had some political achievements.

古文：高祖南巡，吏人颂之，加宁远将军，赐帛三百匹。
现代文：高祖南巡，吏人称赞他的治绩，朝廷加授他为宁远将军，赐给帛三百匹。
English: Gao Zu toured the south, officials praised his performance, the court awarded him the title of Ningyuan General, and gave him three hundred horses.

古文：征为选部给事中，有公平之誉。
现代文：后又被朝廷征为选部给事中，有公平之誉。
English: Later, he was appointed by the imperial court as a member of the selection committee, and he had a reputation for fairness.

古文：除安南将军、洛州刺史，未之任而卒。
现代文：除任安南将军、洛州刺史，没有到任便死了。
English: In addition to serving as General Annan, Lozhou stabbed history, and died before taking office.

古文：赠以本官，加弘农公，谥曰简。
现代文：朝廷赠他本官，加授弘农公，谥称简。
English: The imperial court presented him with his own post, and he was given the additional title of Hongnongguo (弘农公). He was nicknamed "Jane."

古文：播本字元休，太和中，高祖赐改焉。
现代文：杨播本字元休，太和年间，高祖赐改字延庆。
English: Yang Bi's original name was Xiu, but during the reign of Emperor Taizu, Emperor Gaozhu changed the name to Yanqing.

古文：母王氏，文明太后之外姑。
现代文：母亲王氏，文明太后的外婆。
English: His mother, Wang, was the grandmother of the Empress Dowager Wenming.

古文：播少修整，奉养尽礼。
现代文：杨播少年时代即仪表不凡，奉养双亲竭尽礼度。
English: As a boy, Yang Bo's appearance was extraordinary, and he was raised by his parents with the utmost courtesy.

古文：擢为中散，累迁给事，领中起部曹。
现代文：朝廷擢任他为中散，累迁给事，领中起部曹。
English: The imperial court appointed him as Zhongshan, and he was successively transferred to various posts.

古文：以外亲，优赐亟加，前后万计。
现代文：因是皇帝外戚，朝廷累加优赐，前后达万计。
English: Because he was the emperor's maternal relative, the imperial court gave him many privileges.

古文：进北部给事中。
现代文：后进官北部给事中。
English: The post of junior official in charge of the northern region is under review.

古文：诏播巡行北边，高祖亲送及户，戒以军略。
现代文：皇帝下诏让杨播巡视北部边疆，高祖亲自送他到家，告诉他军略大计。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let Yang Bo on a tour of the northern frontier. Gaozu personally took him home and told him the general plan of the army.

古文：未几，除龙骧将军、员外常侍，转卫尉少卿，常侍如故。
现代文：不久，除任龙骧将军、员外常侍，转任卫尉少卿，常侍官职仍旧。
English: Soon, in addition to serving as General Longyu and non-commissioned regular attendant, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, but he still held the position of regular attendant.

古文：与阳平王颐等出漠北击蠕蠕，大获而还。
现代文：杨播与阳平王元颐等人领兵到漠北出击柔然，大胜而归。
English: Yang Bi and Yang Ping Wang Yuanxuan and others led the troops to the north of the desert to strike softly and returned with a great victory.

古文：高祖嘉其勋，赐奴婢十口。
现代文：高祖嘉许他的功劳，赐给他奴婢十人。
English: Gao Zu praised his service and gave him ten slaves.

古文：迁武卫将军，复击蠕蠕，至居然山而还。
现代文：又迁任武卫将军，又领兵打击柔然，到居然山兵还。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the post of General Wuwei, and he led the soldiers to strike softly, to the point that the mountain soldiers were surprised.

古文：除左将军，寻假前将军。
现代文：朝廷除任他为左将军，不久又加前将军。
English: The imperial court dismissed him as a left-wing general, and he was soon promoted to ex-general.

古文：随车驾南讨，至钟离。
现代文：跟随皇帝车驾向南讨伐，到钟离。
English: He followed the emperor's carriage and drove south to Zhongli.

古文：师回，诏播领步卒三千、骑五百为众军殿。
现代文：大军回撤，皇帝下诏让杨播统领步兵三千、骑兵五百为大军殿后。
English: The large army retreated, and the emperor issued an edict to let Yang Biao lead 3,000 infantrymen and 500 cavalrymen to the rear of the large army.

古文：时春水初长，贼众大至，舟舰塞川。
现代文：当时春水初涨，敌人蜂涌而至，撤还的船只塞住江川。
English: At that time, the spring water was just beginning to rise, the enemy was swarming, and the withdrawn ships blocked the river.

古文：播以诸军渡淮未讫，严陈南岸，身自居后。
现代文：杨播考虑大军仍未全部渡过淮河，自己统兵严守南岸，亲身处后。
English: Yang Bi considered that the army had not yet completely crossed the Huai River, and he kept his troops on the south bank and stayed behind.

古文：诸军渡尽，贼众遂集，于是围播。
现代文：大军渡完，敌人也到了，于是围住了杨播兵马。
English: After the great army crossed the river, the enemy also arrived, so they surrounded Yang Bo's horse.

古文：乃为圆陈以御之，身自搏击，斩杀甚多。
现代文：杨播把士兵摆成圆阵以抵御敌人，亲身冲入敌阵，斩敌很多。
English: Yang Bi arranged the soldiers into a circle to fend off the enemy, personally rushed into the enemy's line, and killed many enemies.

古文：相拒再宿，军人食尽，贼围更急。
现代文：两军相持了两个昼夜，杨播部下粮草已尽，敌人围攻更加凶猛。
English: The two armies held each other for two days and nights. Yang Bo's subordinates had run out of grain and grass, and the enemy's siege was even more ferocious.

古文：高祖在北而望之，既无舟船，不得救援。
现代文：魏高祖在北岸观望，自己又没有船只，无法救援。
English: Wei Gaozu watched from the north bank. He had no boat and was unable to help.

古文：水势稍减，播领精骑三百，历其舟船，大呼曰： 今我欲渡，能战者来！ 
现代文：淮河水势稍减，杨播自领三百名精锐骑兵登上船只，大叫说： 现在我要渡河，能战的就上前来。 
English: When the water level of the Huai River decreased slightly, Yang Bo led three hundred elite cavalrymen onto the boats and shouted: "Now I want to cross the river. Those who can fight should come forward."

古文：贼莫敢动，遂拥众而济。
现代文：敌人不敢行动，于是杨播带领军马渡过淮河。
English: The enemy did not dare to act, so Yang Bi led the horses across the Huai River.

古文：高祖甚壮之，赐爵华阴子，寻除右卫将军。
现代文：高祖十分称赞他的壮举，赐爵华阴子，不久又除任右卫将军。
English: Gaozu highly praised his feat, bestowed a peerage on Hua Yinzi, and soon removed him from his post as the right guard general.

古文：后从驾讨崔慧景、萧衍于邓城，破之，进号平东将军。
现代文：后来，杨播又跟随皇驾讨伐崔慧景、萧衍于邓城，破了敌人，朝廷进其号为平东将军。
English: Later, Yang Bi also followed the emperor to fight against Cui Huijing and Xiao Yan in Dengcheng, defeated the enemy, and was given the title of Pingdong General by the imperial court.

古文：时车驾耀威沔水，上巳设宴，高祖与中军、彭城王勰赌射，左卫元遥在勰朋内，而播居帝曹。
现代文：当时皇帝车驾在沔水上显威，皇上已摆下宴席，魏高祖与中军、彭城王元勰赌射箭，左卫元遥在元勰一边，而杨播在皇帝一边。
English: At that time, the emperor was driving a car on the Surabaya River, and the emperor had already set up a banquet. Wei Gaozu played archery with the Chinese army and Pengcheng Wangyuan, and Zuo Weiyuan was on the side of Yuan Yu, while Yang Bi was on the side of the emperor.

古文：遥射侯正中，筹限已满。
现代文：元遥射中靶心，筹限已满。
English: The bull's-eye is in the middle of the original remote shooting, and the limit has been reached.

古文：高祖曰： 左卫筹足，右卫不得不解。 
现代文：高祖说： 左卫筹限已满，右卫也只好作罢了。 
English: Gao Zu said: The limit for the left guard has been reached, and the right guard has no choice but to quit.

古文：播对曰： 仰恃圣恩，庶几必争。 
现代文：杨播回答说： 仰凭圣恩，必须一争。 
English: Yang Bi replied: Relying on the grace of God, we must fight.

古文：于是弯弓而发，其箭正中。
现代文：于是弯弓发射，也正中靶心。
English: As a result, the curved bow fired, also hitting the bull's-eye.

古文：高祖笑曰： 养由基之妙，何复过是。 
现代文：高祖笑着说： 过去养由基神射妙处，大概也不过如此吧。 
English: Gaozu smiled and said, "In the past, I was raised to shoot from the base, so I guess that's just how it is."

古文：遂举卮酒以赐播曰： 古人酒以养病，朕今赏卿之能，可谓今古之殊也。 
现代文：于是拿着酒杯赐酒杨播说： 古人以酒养病，朕今天犒赏卿的才能，可以说是古今不同了。 
English: So Yang Bo said, holding a wine glass and giving out wine: The ancients used wine to cure diseases, but today I appreciate the talent of the nobles. It can be said that the past and the present are different.

古文：从到悬瓠，除太府卿，进爵为伯。
现代文：从车驾到悬瓠，除授他为太府卿，晋爵为伯。
English: From driving a car to hanging a banner, he was awarded the title of Dafu-kyo, and the title of Shinshaku was conferred on him.

古文：景明初，兼侍中，使恆州，赡恤寒乏。
现代文：景明初年，兼任侍中，出使恒州，赈寒济饥。
English: In the first year of Jingming, he also served as a chamberlain and was sent to Hengzhou to relieve the cold and hunger.

古文：转左卫将军。
现代文：转任左卫将军。
English: Turn left, General Zou.

古文：播弟椿，字延寿，本字仲考，太和中与播俱蒙高祖赐改。
现代文：杨播弟杨椿，字延寿，本字仲考，太和年间与杨播一起都蒙高祖赐改。
English: Yang Huan's younger brother, Yang Cun, whose family name was Yan Shou, and whose middle name was Hon Zi Kao, together with Yang Huan were all reformed by their great-great-grandfathers during the Tahe period.

古文：性宽谨。初拜中散、典御厩曹。以端慎小心，专司医药，迁内给事，与兄播并侍禁闱。
现代文：杨椿性情宽容谨慎，开始被拜授为中散，典掌皇家马匹，因端慎小心，专管医药，迁任内给事，与兄杨播一起侍奉宫室。
English: Yang Tsun's disposition was tolerant and prudent, and he began to be worshipped as a middle-ranking official and the pawn of the royal horses. Because of his prudence and caution, he was in charge of medicine, and he served the palace together with his brother Yang Bi.

古文：又领兰台行职，改授中部曹，析讼公正，高祖嘉之。
现代文：杨椿又领兰台行职，改授中部曹，杨椿析查诉讼很是公正，高祖赞扬他。
English: Yang Tsubaki also led the Lantai to perform duties, and was awarded the title of Chubu Cao. Yang Tsubaki's analysis of the lawsuit was very fair, and Gaozu praised him.

古文：及文明太后崩，高祖五日不食。
现代文：等到文明太后逝世，高祖悲痛得五天都没进食。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Wenming, Gao Zu was so grief-stricken that he didn't eat for five days.

古文：椿进谏曰： 陛下至性，孝过有虞，居哀五朝，水浆不御，群下惶灼，莫知所言。
现代文：杨椿进谏说： 陛下性情淳笃，孝心超过有虞，居哀五天，水浆不进，臣子们着急惊恐，不知说什么好。
English: Yang Chunjin said: His Majesty's disposition is pure, his filial piety surpasses the danger, he mourned for five days, the water did not enter, his courtiers were worried and frightened, and they did not know what to say.

古文：陛下荷祖宗之业，临万国之重，岂可同匹夫之节，以取僵仆。
现代文：陛下您担负祖宗传下的大任，身居君临万国之重，在这件事情上哪可与凡夫俗子一样，居丧以取僵仆晕倒呢。
English: Your Majesty, you bear the great responsibility handed down by your ancestors, and you are the ruler of the world. In this matter, how can you, like an ordinary person, be stunned and stunned?

古文：且圣人之礼，毁不灭性，纵陛下欲自贤于万代，其若宗庙何！ 
现代文：况且圣人的礼制，毁不灭性，纵使陛下想自贤于万代，但这样下去，列祖列宗的庙社将如何是好！ 
English: Moreover, the ritual system of saints, the indestructibility, even if His Majesty wants to be virtuous for all generations, but if this continues, how will the temples and shrines of the ancestors be good!

古文：高祖感其言，乃一进粥。
现代文：高祖为他的一番话所感动，于是开始进粥。
English: Moved by his words, Gaozu began to eat porridge.

古文：转授宫舆曹少卿，加给事中。
现代文：朝廷转授他为宫舆曹少卿，加授给事中。
English: The Imperial Court awarded him the title of Junior Master of the Imperial Household, and he is in the process of receiving additional awards.

古文：出为安远将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：出任安远将军、豫州刺史。
English: He was appointed as General Anyuan, and became the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：高祖自洛向豫，幸其州馆信宿，赐马十匹、缣千匹。
现代文：高祖自洛向豫，到他的州馆驿舍下榻，赐给他马十匹、缣帛千匹。
English: Gaozu traveled from Luo to Xiangyuan to stay at his state pavilion. He was given ten horses and a thousand donkeys.

古文：迁冠军将军、济州刺史。
现代文：又提拔他为冠军将军、济州刺史。
English: He also promoted him to champion general, Jeju stabbing history.

古文：高祖自钟离趣鄴，至碻磝，幸其州馆，又赐马二匹、缣千五百匹。
现代文：魏高祖自钟离到邺城，至郂，幸临其州馆，又赐给马二匹，缣帛一千五百匹。
English: Wei Gao Zu went from Zhongli to Shicheng, to Shicheng, and was fortunate enough to visit its state pavilion. He was also given two horses and 1,500 donkeys.

古文：坐为平原太守崔敞所讼，廷尉论辄收市利，费用官炭，免官。
现代文：因此被平原太守崔敞所讼诉，廷尉论其收取市利、费损官炭，免除了他的官职。
English: As a result, he was taken to court by the court of the Plain's governor, Choi Chang, and the court officer dismissed him from his official post, accusing him of taking city profits and wasting official coal.

古文：后降为宁朔将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：后又降为宁朔将军、梁州刺史。
English: Later, he was demoted to Ningshuo General and Liangzhou Senior.

古文：初，武兴王杨集始为杨灵珍所破，降于萧鸾。
现代文：当初，武兴王杨集始被杨灵珍所破，降归萧鸾。
English: At first, King Yang Ji of Wuxing was defeated by Yang Lingzhen and relegated to Xiao Qi.

古文：至是，率贼万余自汉中而北，规复旧土。
现代文：到现时，率领敌贼万余人自汉中向北，企图恢复旧土。
English: Up to now, he has led more than 10,000 traitors from Hanzhong to the north in an attempt to restore the old country.

古文：椿领步骑五千出顿下辨，贻书集始，开以利害。
现代文：杨椿率领骑步兵二千人出兵驻守下辨，送了封信给杨集始，向他陈述利害。
English: Yang Tsubaki led 2,000 cavalry and infantry soldiers to garrison the castle and sent a letter to Yang Jizhi, explaining the situation to him.

古文：集始执书对使者曰： 杨使君此书，除我心腹之疾。 
现代文：杨集始拿着信对使者说： 杨使君椿这封信，除却了笼罩在我心头的疑云。 
English: Yang Jizhi took the letter and said to the messenger, "Yang Zi Junqin, this letter removes the cloud of doubt that has been hanging over my heart.

古文：遂领其部曲千余人来降。
现代文：于是领着其部下一千多人前来投降。
English: He then led more than a thousand of his subordinates to surrender.

古文：寻以母老，解还。
现代文：不久杨椿以母亲年老，解职还家。
English: Soon after, Yang Tsubaki was relieved of his duties and returned home with his elderly mother.

古文：后武都氐杨会反，假椿节、冠军将军、都督西征诸军事、行梁州刺史，与军司羊祉讨破之。
现代文：后来，武都氐人杨会造反，假杨椿持节、冠军将军、都督西征诸军事、行梁州刺史，与军司羊祉一起讨伐破灭了敌人。
English: Later, the people of Yanghui, the capital of Wu, rebelled, and the false Yangzhu, the champion general, the governor of the west, was conscripted into the military, and went to Liangzhou to make history, and together with the military secretary and the shepherds, they fought and destroyed the enemy.

古文：于后梁州运粮，为群氐劫夺，诏椿兼征虏将军，持节招慰。
现代文：后来梁州运粮，被一群氐人劫夺而去，帝诏杨椿兼任征虏将军，持节招慰。
English: Later, the Liangzhou grain transport was hijacked by a group of bandits and taken away. Emperor Yang Tsubaki also served as a conscript general, and held a festival to solicit consolation.

古文：寻以氐叛，拜光禄大夫、假平西将军、督征讨诸军事以讨之。
现代文：不久因氐人叛乱，拜授他为光禄大夫，假平西将军，督征讨诸军事讨伐氐人。
English: Soon, due to the rebellion of the Yi people, he was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the fake general of Pingxi, and the commander of the military campaign against the Yi people.

古文：还，兼太仆卿。
现代文：还朝之后，兼任太仆卿。
English: Later, he also served as Taiko-kyo.

古文：秦州羌吕苟兒、泾州屠各陈瞻等聚众反，诏椿为别将，隶安西将军元丽讨之。
现代文：秦州羌人吕苟儿、泾州屠各陈瞻等聚众造反，帝诏杨椿为别将，隶属安西将军元丽讨伐叛军。
English: Qinzhou's Xingren Luguo and Xingzhou's Tu Chenzhan and others rallied the masses to rebel. Emperor Yang Zhan was the other general, and he was subordinate to Anxi's General Yuan Li to fight the rebels.

古文：贼入陇，守蹊自固。
现代文：贼进入陇中，形成犄角之势互相守护。
English: Thieves enter the cocoon, form a cocoon, and protect each other.

古文：或谋伏兵山径，断其出入，待粮尽而攻之；或云斩除山木，纵火焚之，然后进讨。
现代文：讨伐诸军将领有的说在山路上埋伏军马，截断其出入之路，等到敌人粮草完竭之后再攻打他们；有的说斩除山木，放火烧敌，然后进军讨伐。
English: Some of the generals of the crusading armies said that they would ambush the horses on the mountain road, cut off their way in and out, and wait until the enemy ran out of grain and grass before attacking them; some said that they would cut down the mountain trees, set fire to the enemy, and then march into the crusade.

古文：椿曰： 并非计也。
现代文：杨椿说： 这都不是好办法。
English: Yang Tsubaki said, "This is not a good way.

古文：此本规盗，非有经略，自王师一至，无战不摧，所以深窜者，正避死耳。
现代文：这些人本就是常规的盗贼，没有什么战略计划，我们王家大军一到，无战不摧，敌人之所以深窜，正说明他们怕死。
English: These people are nothing more than common thieves. There is no strategic plan. Once our royal army arrives, it is invincible. The fact that the enemy is so deep means that they are afraid of death.

古文：今宜勒三军，勿更侵掠，贼必谓我见险不前，心轻我军，然后掩其不备，可一举而平矣。 
现代文：现在我们应勒止三军，不要轻举妄动，敌人必然会说我们见险徘徊不前，心中轻视我军，我们然后掩其不备，就可一举平定了。 
English: Now we should hold back the three armies and not make any rash moves. The enemy will inevitably say that we saw the danger and hesitated to move forward, despising our army in our hearts. If we then cover up their unpreparedness, we can be leveled at one stroke.

古文：乃缓师不进，贼果出掠，乃以军中驴马饵之，不加讨逐。
现代文：于是缓师不进，敌人果然纵出掠抢，我军放出些军中驴马引诱敌人，不加讨逐。
English: As a result, the delaying division did not advance, and the enemy actually went on a looting spree. Our army released some donkeys and horses from the army to lure the enemy, but did not pursue them.

古文：如是多日，阴简精卒，衔枚夜袭，斩瞻传首。
现代文：像这样持续了多天，暗地里挑选精兵，衔枚夜袭，斩杀陈瞻等人头颅。
English: It went on like this for many days, secretly selecting elite soldiers, carrying out night raids, and decapitating Chen Zhan and others.

古文：入正太仆卿，加安东将军。
现代文：杨椿入授正太仆卿，加授安东将军。
English: Yang Tsubaki was awarded the title of Zhengda Minion, and General Anton was awarded the additional title of General.

古文：初，显祖世有蠕蠕万余户降附，居于高平、薄骨律二镇。太和之末，叛走略尽，惟有一千余家。
现代文：开始，显祖时有柔然部落万余户降附魏廷，居住在高平、薄骨律两镇，太和末年，叛逃得差不多了，只剩下一千多家。
English: At the beginning, when Xianzu, there were more than ten thousand families of Zhuoran hordes who were attached to Wei Ting, living in two towns of Gaoping and Weak Bone Law. At the end of the year, the number of defectors was almost the same, with only more than one thousand remaining.

古文：太中大夫王通、高平镇将郎育等，求徙置淮北，防其叛走。
现代文：太中大夫王通、高平镇将郎育等，请求朝廷把他们迁到淮北居住，防备他们再逃走。
English: Wang Tong and Gaoping Zhen requested the imperial court to relocate them to Huaibei to prevent them from escaping again.

古文：诏许之，虑不从命，乃使椿持节往徙焉。
现代文：帝下诏同意，但担心他们不听安排，便命杨椿持节前往执行。
English: Emperor Dahal agreed, but fearing that they would not listen to the arrangement, he ordered Yang Tsiming to go to the execution.

古文：椿以为徙之无益，上书曰： 臣以古人有言：裔不谋夏，夷不乱华。
现代文：杨椿认为迁移他们是没用的，上书说： 臣因古人有言：边裔不谋华夏，蛮夷不乱华土。
English: Yang Tsubaki thought it was useless to relocate them, and said in his petition: "Officer, because the ancients said: Foreigners do not seek China, barbarians do not disturb China.

古文：荒忽之人，羁縻而已。
现代文：荒僻之人，招服而已。
English: It's just a way of attracting people from out of the way places.

古文：是以先朝居之于荒服之间者，正以悦近来远，招附殊俗，亦以别华戎、异内外也。
现代文：所以先朝居之荒服之间的意图，正是为了悦乐近者招来远人，也是为了区别华夏戎夷，别异内外。
English: Therefore, the intention between the first imperial residence and the wild clothes is precisely to attract people from afar for the pleasure of those who are close, and also to distinguish between the Chinese and the barbarians, and to be different inside and outside.

古文：今新附者众，若旧者见徙，新者必不安。
现代文：而今新归附的人很多，如果旧附之人被迁徙，新附的人必然会内心不安。
English: Now there are a lot of people who have been newly annexed. If the people who were formerly annexed are moved, the newly annexed people will inevitably feel uneasy inside.

古文：不安必思土，思土则走叛。
现代文：不安必定思归其土，思念故土就会叛逃。
English: Anxious people are bound to think of returning to their homeland, and those who miss their homeland will defect.

古文：狐死首丘，其害方甚。
现代文：狐死首丘，其害甚大。
English: Fox death's head mound, its harm is very great.

古文：又此族类，衣毛食肉，乐冬便寒。
现代文：又加上这些人，衣毛食肉，喜欢天寒地冻的天气。
English: Add to this the fact that these people are furry, carnivorous and love freezing weather.

古文：南土湿热，往必将尽。
现代文：而南方潮湿暑热，把他们移居到那必定会全部逃走。
English: But the south is humid and hot, and moving them there would surely cause them all to flee.

古文：进失归伏之心，退非籓卫之益。
现代文：我们如那样做，便会进失归服之心，退丢藩卫之益。
English: If we do that, we will lose the spirit of submission and lose the benefits of defending the domain.

古文：徙在中夏，而生后患。愚心所见，谓为不可。 
现代文：把他们迁居中夏，必会生出后患，愚心所见，认为不能这样做。 
English: Relocating them in the middle of summer is bound to create future problems, and the foolish heart sees that it cannot be done.

古文：时八座议不从，遂徙于济州，缘河居之。
现代文：当时众官商议没有采纳他的意见，于是把柔然迁到济州沿黄河居住。
English: At that time, the officials did not accept his opinion, so he moved to Jeju along the Yellow River.

古文：冀州元愉之难，果悉浮河赴贼，所在抄掠，如椿所策。
现代文：冀州元愉劫难，这些人果然渡过黄河奔赴叛贼，所在劫掠，果然像杨椿所说的那样。
English: The Jizhou Yuan Dynasty was taken by surprise, and these people did indeed cross the Yellow River to go to the rebels, where they plundered, just as Yang Qin said.

古文：永平初，徐州城人成景俊以宿豫叛，诏椿率众四万讨之，不克而返。
现代文：永平初年，徐州城人成景隽在宿豫谋反，帝诏杨椿率领四万兵马讨伐敌人，无功而返。
English: In the first year of Yongping, the Xuzhou citizen Cheng Jingyao plotted a rebellion in Sukuyuan, and the emperor Yang Zhan led 40,000 soldiers and horses to fight the enemy, but returned without success.

古文：久之，除都督朔州抚冥武川怀朔三镇三道诸军事、平北将军、朔州刺史。
现代文：很久以后，朝廷除授他为朔州的抚冥、武川、怀朔三镇三道诸军事、平北将军、朔州刺史。
English: After a long time, the imperial court awarded him the military titles of Fushun, Wuchuan, and Waixu three towns and three provinces in Shuozhou, the title of General of Pingbei, and the title of General of Shuozhou.

古文：在州，为廷尉奏椿前为太仆卿日，招引细人，盗种牧田三百四十顷，依律处刑五岁。
现代文：在州，被廷尉奏陈他任太仆卿的时候，招引百姓，盗种牧田三百四十顷，朝廷依律判处他五年徒刑。
English: In the prefecture, when he was appointed as the servant of the emperor by the imperial officer, the imperial court sentenced him to five years in prison for stealing 340 hectares of pastureland.

古文：尚书邢峦，据《正始别格》奏椿罪应除名为庶人，注籍盗门，同籍合门不仕。
现代文：尚书邢峦，依据《正始别格》奏陈按杨椿的罪行应该把他除名为庶人，注籍盗门，与他同籍的合门不准做官。
English: Shang Shuxuan, according to the "Beginning of the Beginning," the crime of playing Chen by Yang Chin should be removed from his name as a commoner, registered as a thief, and his compatriots were not allowed to work as officials.

古文：世宗以新律既班，不宜杂用旧制，诏依寺断，听以赎论。
现代文：魏世宗以新刑律既已颁布，不应再杂以旧制，下诏依从廷尉所断，听以赎论。
English: Wei Shizong said that since the new criminal law had been promulgated, it should not be mixed with the old system, and the next edict should follow the decision of the courtier and listen to the theory of redemption.

古文：寻加抚军将军，入除都官尚书，监修白沟堤堰。
现代文：不久加授他为抚军将军，入除都官尚书，监修白沟堤堰。
English: Soon, he was awarded the title of General of the Fuzhou Army, and he supervised the repair of the Baigou dyke.

古文：复以本将军除定州刺史。
现代文：又以本将军除授定州刺史。
English: He was also awarded the title of General in addition to the award of state history.

古文：自太祖平中山，多置军府，以相威摄。
现代文：自从太祖平定中山之后，多置军府，以谋求相互制摄。
English: Since Emperor Taizu conquered Zhongshan, more military headquarters have been built to seek mutual cooperation.

古文：凡有八军，军各配兵五千，食禄主帅军各四十六人。
现代文：共有八军，每军各配置兵卒五千，食禄主帅军各为四十六人。
English: There are a total of eight armies, each with five thousand soldiers, and each army has forty-six commanders who receive a salary.

古文：自中原稍定，八军之兵，渐割南戍，一军兵才千余，然主帅如故，费禄不少。
现代文：自中原渐定，八军之兵，渐渐割归南境戍府，一军兵力才千余人，但是主帅人数照旧，以致费禄不少。
English: From the Central Plains, the soldiers of the Eight Armies were gradually assigned to the southern border of Shifu. The strength of one army was only more than a thousand people, but the number of commanders remained the same, resulting in a lot of fees.

古文：椿表罢四军，减其帅百八十四人。
现代文：杨椿上表请罢四军，减少其帅一百八十四人。
English: Yang Tsubaki asked the four armies on the table to strike, reducing their number to one hundred and eighty-four.

古文：州有宗子稻田，屯兵八百户，年常发夫三千，草三百车，修补畦堰。
现代文：每州有宗子稻田，屯田兵士八百户，每年常发民夫三千、草三百车，修补田畦渠堰。
English: In each prefecture, there are 800 households with rice paddies and soldiers stationed in rice paddies. Every year, 3,000 people and 300 carts of grass are often sent to repair weirs in rice paddies.

古文：椿以屯兵惟输此田课，更无徭役，及至闲月，即应修治，不容复劳百姓，椿亦表罢。
现代文：杨椿以屯兵只是务此田课，再无别的徭役，等到了农闲的月份，就应该自修田堰，不能再去劳扰百姓，杨椿也上表请罢除其他劳役。
English: Yang Tsin and his soldiers are just doing this field lesson, there is no other labor service. When it comes to the idle month, they should repair the field weir themselves, they can no longer bother the people. Yang Tsin also asked the table to stop other labor service.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷接受了他的意见。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：椿在州，因治黑山道余功，伐木私造佛寺，役使兵力，为御史所劾，除名为庶人。
现代文：杨椿在州，因治黑山道余功，伐木私造佛寺，役使兵力，被御史所弹劾，除名为庶人。
English: Yang Tsubaki was impeached by the Imperial Historical Research Institute and stripped of his title as a commoner because of his achievements in governing the Black Mountain region, logging trees to build a Buddhist temple, and dispatching troops.

古文：正光五年，除辅国将军、南秦州刺史。
现代文：正光五年，除授辅国将军、南秦州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Zhengguang, he was awarded the title of General of the Auxiliary State, and the history of Southern Qin State.

古文：时南秦州反叛，路又阻塞，仍停长安。
现代文：当时南秦州反叛朝廷，赴任的路线又被阻塞，杨椿只好停滞长安。
English: At that time, the Southern Qin State rebelled against the imperial court, the route to the post was blocked again, and Yang Cam had no choice but to stop in Chang'an.

古文：转授岐州，复除抚军将军、卫尉卿。
现代文：转授岐州，复除授抚军将军、卫尉卿。
English: He was transferred to Qizhou, and was removed from the post of General of the General Staff and Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：转左卫将军，又兼尚书右仆射，驰驿诣并肆，赍绢三万匹，募召恆朔流民，拣充军士。
现代文：转任左卫将军，又兼任尚书右仆射，驰驿到并、肆二州，备绢三万匹，募召恒、朔二州流民，挑选他们充当军人。
English: He was transferred to the post of General of the Left Division, and concurrently served as the commander of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards. He galloped to Gyeongbokgung and Gyeongbokgung and prepared 30,000 horses. He recruited the refugees from Gyeongbokgung and Gyeongbokgung and selected them to serve as soldiers.

古文：不行。
现代文：杨椿不去。
English: Yang Chin is not going.

古文：寻加卫将军，出除都督雍南豳二州诸军事、本将军、雍州刺史，又进号车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：不久加授左卫将军，出除都督雍南豳二州诸军事、本将军、雍州刺史，又进号车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Left Division, and the military, the general, and the historian of Yongzhou, the governor of Yongnan and the two states, were expelled. He was also promoted to General of the Cavalry, and the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：萧宝夤、元恆芝诸军为贼所败，恆芝从渭北东渡，椿使追之，不止。
现代文：萧宝夤、元恒芝诸军被敌人打败，元恒芝从渭水北面东渡黄河，杨椿派人追赶，不能制止。
English: The armies of Xiao Baojun and Yuan Hengzhi were defeated by the enemy. Yuan Hengzhi crossed the Yellow River from the north of Surabaya to the east, and Yang Tsubaki sent people to chase him, but they could not stop him.

古文：宝夤后至，留于逍遥园内，收集将士，犹得万余，由是三辅人心，颇得安帖。
现代文：萧宝夤后到，杨椿把他收留于逍遥园内，自己收集残败将士，还得到万余人马，由此三辅人心，颇得安贴。
English: After Xiao Baojun arrived, Yang Chin took him into custody in the Happy Garden, collected the defeated soldiers himself, and also got more than ten thousand people and horses. As a result, the three auxiliary people were quite comfortable.

古文：于时，泾岐及豳悉已陷贼，扶风以西，非复国有。
现代文：这时，泾州、岐州以及豳州都已被敌人攻陷，扶风以西，不再属我魏所有。
English: At this time, Ganzhou, Qizhou and Ganzhou have all been conquered by the enemy, and the west of Fufeng is no longer owned by Wei.

古文：椿乃鸠募内外，得七千余人，遣兄子录事参军侃率以防御。
现代文：杨椿于是收集内外兵士，得到七千余人，派兄子录事参军杨侃率领他们防御敌寇。
English: Yang Chin then gathered soldiers from home and abroad, got more than seven thousand people, and sent his brother and son to join the army. Yang Kan led them to defend against the enemy.

古文：诏椿以本官加侍中、兼尚书右仆射为行台，节度关西诸将，其统内五品已下、郡县须有补用者，任即拟授。
现代文：帝诏杨椿以本官加授侍中、兼尚书右仆射为行台，节度关西诸将，其统辖之内五品官职以下，郡县必须补用的官员，他任命了朝廷即行拟授。
English: Emperor Yang Tsun took as his platform the promotion of his own officials to the rank of attendant-middle-rank and concurrently the promotion of his own officials to the rank of secretary-general and the promotion of his subordinates to the rank of vice-premier, and the appointment of generals in Kansai, as well as the appointment of officials below the rank of five-rank officer within his jurisdiction, who must be reappointed by the county, and he appointed the imperial court to carry out the promotion immediately.

古文：椿遇暴疾，频启乞解。
现代文：杨椿得了暴病，频频启奏皇上乞求解职。
English: Yang Chin fell violently ill and frequently petitioned the emperor to be relieved of his duties.

古文：诏许之，以萧宝夤代椿为刺史、行台。
现代文：帝下诏答应了，以萧宝夤代替杨椿为刺史、行台。
English: Emperor Yao agreed, and Xiao Baojun replaced Yang Tsubaki as the storyteller and storyteller.

古文：椿还乡里，遇子昱将还京师，因谓曰： 当今雍州刺史亦不贤于萧宝夤，但其上佐，朝廷应遣心膂重人，何得任其牒用？
现代文：杨椿还归乡里，遇子杨昱准备还归京城，杨椿对他说： 当今雍州刺史亦不贤于萧宝夤，但其乃是朝廷上佐之州，朝廷应该派遣心腹重人，怎么能够凭一纸文书便加以任命？
English: Yang Chun also returned to his hometown, and when he met his son Yang Hui, he was preparing to return to Beijing. Yang Chun said to him: Today, the history of Yongzhou is not as good as that of Xiao Baojun, but it is a state of the imperial court. The imperial court should send a person with a heavy heart. How can it be appointed with a piece of paper?

古文：此乃圣朝百虑之一失。
现代文：这是圣朝百虑之一失。
English: This is a great loss for the Holy See.

古文：且宝夤不藉刺史为荣，吾观其得州，喜悦不少。至于赏罚云为，不依常宪，恐有异心，关中可惜。
现代文：况且萧宝夤不借刺史为荣，我观其得州之后，喜悦非常，至于赏罚之类事情，他都不依常宪，我担心他有异心。
English: Moreover, Xiao Baojun is not proud of his record. I was very happy to see him leave the state. As far as rewards and punishments are concerned, he does not follow the Constitution. I am worried that he has other intentions.

古文：汝今赴京，称吾此意，以启二圣，并白宰辅，更遣长史、司马、防城都督。
现代文：关中这些事情的发生，实在令人惋惜。你今天赴京，说明我的意思，以之启奏二圣，并面陈宰相，让他们更派长史、司马、防城都督。
English: It's really regrettable that these things happened in Guanzhong. You should go to Beijing today and explain what I mean, and use it as a prelude to the two saints, as well as the prime minister, so that they can send more Changshi, Sima, and the defense governor.

古文：欲安关中，正须三人耳。
现代文：要想安定关中，正需要这三个人。
English: These three people are exactly what is needed to stabilise the situation.

古文：如其不遣，必成深忧。 
现代文：如不派遣，必会成为朝廷大患。 
English: If it is not dispatched, Xiao Baoying will surely become a deep-rooted problem for the imperial court.

古文：昱还，面启肃宗及灵太后，并不信纳。
现代文：杨昱还京，面启肃宗及灵太后，二圣都不相信采纳。
English: When Yang Hui returned to Beijing, he was greeted by Su Zong and the Empress Dowager Ling. Neither of the two saints believed that he would be accepted.

古文：及宝夤邀害御史中尉郦道元，犹上表自理，称为椿父子所谤。
现代文：等到萧宝夤邀害御史中尉郦道元，他还在上表申述，称自己被杨椿父子所诽谤。
English: By the time Xiao Baojun invited Lieutenant Gong Dogen, he was still on the petition, saying that he was slandered by Yang Tsubaki and his son.

古文：诏复除椿都督雍岐南豳三州诸军事、本将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史、讨蜀大都督。
现代文：帝又下诏除授杨椿都督雍、岐、南豳三州诸军事、本将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史、讨蜀大都督。
English: The emperor also decreed the removal of Yang Chin, the military governor of the three states of Yong, Qi, and Nanxi, from the military, the general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of Shu.

古文：椿辞以老病，不行。
现代文：杨椿以自己年老多病为由，不去就任。
English: Yang Tsubaki did not take up the post, citing his old age and illness.

古文：建义元年，迁司徒公。
现代文：建义元年，迁任司徒公。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was transferred to the post of Stukong.

古文：尔朱荣东讨葛荣，诏椿统众为后军，荣擒葛荣，乃止。
现代文：尔朱荣东讨葛荣，帝下诏让杨椿统领兵马为后军，尔朱荣擒葛荣，此事作罢。
English: Let Zhu Rongdong fight Ge Rong, the emperor decreed that Yang Qin should lead the troops and horses as the rear army, let Zhu Rongdong fight Ge Rong, and let the matter be over.

古文：永安初，进位太保、侍中，给后部鼓吹。
现代文：永安初年，进位太保、侍中，赐给后部鼓吹。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he was promoted to the rank of Taibo and Samurai Junior Middle Officer, and was given the post of Rear Propaganda Officer.

古文：元颢入洛，椿子征东将军昱出镇荥阳，为颢所擒。
现代文：元颢入洛阳，杨椿儿子杨昱为征东将军出镇荥阳，被元颢所擒。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, Yang Zhen, the son of Yang Chun, came out of Luoyang as a general to conquer the East and was captured by Yuan Shao.

古文：又椿弟顺为冀州刺史，顺子仲宣正平太守，兄子侃、弟子遁并从驾河北，为颢嫌疑。
现代文：又杨椿弟弟杨顺任冀州刺史，杨顺儿子仲宣任正平太守，兄子杨侃、弟子杨遁都跟从皇驾到河北，被元颢所猜疑。
English: In addition, Yang Chun's brother, Yang Shun, was appointed as the governor of Jizhou, Yang Shun's son, Zhong Xuan, was appointed as the governor of Zhengping, and his elder brother, Yang Kan, and his disciple, Yang Hui, followed the emperor to Hebei and were suspected by Yuan Shao.

古文：以椿家世显重，恐失人望，未及加罪。
现代文：因杨椿家世显重，他担心会失去民心，没有加罪于他们。
English: Because of the high reputation of the Yang Tsiming generation, Yuan Xuan was afraid of losing people's trust in him, so he did not punish Yang Tsiming.

古文：时人助其忧怖，或有劝椿携家避祸。
现代文：当时人也担心元颢会加害杨家，有人劝杨椿携家避祸。
English: At that time, people were also worried that Yuan Shao would harm the Yang family, and some people advised Yang Zhan to take the family to avoid disaster.

古文：椿曰： 吾内外百口，何处逃窜？
现代文：杨椿说： 我家内外有百口之多，能逃到哪里？
English: Yang Tsubaki said, "There are a hundred visitors in and out of my home. Where can I hide?

古文：正当坐任运耳。 
现代文：只有坐居听凭命运安排罢。 
English: You just have to wait for fate to take its course!

古文：庄帝还宫，椿每辞逊，不许。
现代文：魏庄帝还归帝宫，杨椿每每辞逊官职，庄帝不答应。
English: Emperor Wei Zhuang returned to the imperial palace, but Emperor Yang refused to accept Emperor Zhuang's resignation.

古文：上书频乞归老，诏曰： 椿国之老成，方所尊尚，遽以高年，愿言致仕，顾怀旧德，是以未从。
现代文：杨椿频频上书乞归家养老，帝诏曰： 杨椿是老成之臣，正当尊崇推尚，而他屡以年高，请求退休，朕顾念怀思旧德，没有答应他的要求。
English: Yang Cam frequently wrote begging to return home to retire, and the emperor issued an edict saying: Yang Cam is an old-fashioned vassal, justly respected and promoted, and he repeatedly asked to retire at an advanced age. I missed the old morality and did not agree to his request.

古文：但告谒频烦，辞理弥固，以兹难夺，又所重违，今便允其雅志。
现代文：但是他上表频繁，辞理坚决，朕以其志趣难夺，不忍相违，今天就答应他的请求。
English: But he is a frequent visitor to the table, his words are resolute, I am hard to win with my ambition, I can't bear to contradict him, and I will agree to his request today.

古文：可服侍中朝服，赐服一具、衣一袭、八尺床帐、几杖，不朝，乘安车，驾驷马，给扶，传诏二人，仰所在郡县，时以礼存问安否。
现代文：归家之后，他可着侍中朝服，朕赐他朝服一套、衣一套、八尺床帐、桌杖，不必上朝，乘坐安车，驾驭驷马之车，给扶持之人，传诏者二人，跟随他到所在郡县，地方官员要时时给他问候请安。
English: After returning home, he can wear the court uniform. I will give him a set of court uniform, a set of clothes, an eight-foot bedspread, and a table cane. He does not have to go to the morning, take a safe car, drive a horse-drawn carriage, give support to a person, two heralds, follow him to his county, and local officials should always give him greetings.

古文：方乖询访，良用怃然。 
现代文：为朕不能时时谘访，内心着实凄凉。 
English: Because I can't visit him all the time, my heart is really desolate.

古文：椿奉诏于华林园，帝下御座执椿手流泪曰： 公，先帝旧臣，实为元老，今四方未宁，理须谘访。
现代文：杨椿在华林园奉诏，庄帝走下御座拉着杨椿的手流着泪说： 公，先帝旧臣，实为元老，而今四方未宁，朕按理当时时询访于您。
English: When Emperor Zhuang stepped down from the throne, he took the hand of Emperor Yang in tears and said, "Your Excellency, the former emperor's old vassal is indeed a veteran, but things are not going well in the four directions. It was only natural for me to visit you at this time.

古文：但高尚其志，决意不留，既难相违，深用凄怆。 
现代文：但卿其志高远，决意不留，您的志趣既难相违，朕也只有深深悲凉的份了！ 
English: However, he has high aspirations and is determined not to stay. Your aspirations are difficult to contradict, and I only have a deeply sad part!

古文：椿亦嘘唏，欲拜，庄帝亲执不听。
现代文：杨椿也欷不已，想行拜礼，庄帝亲执其手不让。
English: Yang Camellia was also impatient, and wanted to perform a prayer, but Emperor Zhuang personally refused to let him.

古文：于是赐以绢布，给羽林卫送，群公百僚饯于城西张方桥。行路观者，莫不称叹。
现代文：于是帝赐给他绢布，调拨羽林军护送其还家，群公百僚在城西张方桥与他饯别，行路观看的人，没有不啧啧称叹杨椿的。
English: As a result, the emperor gave him a piece of silk, dispatched the Ulin Army to escort him back home, and a group of government officials bade farewell to him at Zhangfang Bridge in the west of the city. Those who traveled to watch the procession could not help but admire Yang Tsving.

古文：椿临行，诫子孙曰：我家入魏之始，即为上客，给田宅，赐奴婢马牛羊，遂成富室。
现代文：杨椿临行时，告诫其子孙说： 我家刚入魏廷时，就是朝中上客，朝廷赐给田宅、奴婢、马牛羊，成为富裕人家。
English: When Yang Tsin was about to leave, he admonished his children and grandchildren, saying, "When my family first entered the Wei court, we were guests of the imperial court. The court gave us a farmhouse, servants, horses, cattle and sheep, and we became a wealthy family.

古文：自尔至今二十年，二千石方伯不绝，禄恤甚多。
现代文：从那至今二十年，二千石爵禄、方伯职位连续不绝，所受禄恤很多。
English: Since then, for the past twenty years, he has continuously received the 2,000 koku stipend and the position of provincial governor, as well as many other benefits.

古文：至于亲姻知故，吉凶之际，必厚加赠襚；来往宾僚，必以酒肉饮食。
现代文：至如姻亲知故，家有吉凶的时候，朝廷必厚加赠予；来往宾僚，我们必以酒肉款待。
English: Just as the in-laws know the circumstances, when the family is lucky or unlucky, the court will be generous with gifts; visiting guests, we will entertain with wine and meat.

古文：是故亲姻朋友无憾焉。
现代文：所以亲姻朋友都没有缺憾。
English: That's why friends and relatives have no regrets.

古文：国家初，丈夫好服彩色。
现代文：国家之初，丈夫喜好服彩色。
English: In the early days of the country, men liked to wear clothes made of brightly colored silk.

古文：吾虽不记上谷翁时事，然记清河翁时服饰，恆见翁著布衣韦带，常约敕诸父曰： 汝等后世，脱若富贵于今日者，慎勿积金一斤、彩帛百匹已上，用为富也。 
现代文：我虽不记得上谷翁时的事了，然而还记得清河翁时的服饰，经常见到老者穿着布衣皮带，经常告诫诸父说： 你们的后代，假如有比今日富贵的话，谨记住不要积金一斤以上，彩帛百匹以上，用为富也。 
English: Although I don't remember the events of Shangguan Weng's time, I still remember the clothes of Qinghe Weng's time. I often saw the old man wearing a cloth belt, and I often admonished the fathers saying: Your descendants, if they are richer than today, should remember not to accumulate more than one kilo of gold and more than one hundred colored horses, and use them to become rich.

古文：又不听治生求利，又不听与势家作婚姻。
现代文：既不让治生求利，又不让与权势之家结成姻亲。
English: They are not allowed to seek profit from the government, nor are they allowed to marry into a powerful family.

古文：至吾兄弟，不能遵奉。
现代文：至于我的兄弟，不能遵从。
English: We, a few brothers, cannot comply with this request.

古文：今汝等服乘，以渐华好，吾是以知恭俭之德，渐不如上世也。
现代文：而今你们衣服乘坐，都很华丽，吾由此知道恭俭之德，已渐渐不如上代了。
English: But now your clothes are gorgeous, and I know from this that the virtue of frugality has gradually become inferior to the previous generation.

古文：又吾兄弟若在家，必同盘而食；若有近行，不至，必待其还，亦有过中不食，忍饥相待。
现代文：又我们兄弟，如果在家，必定同盘而食，如有人出门不远，没有回来，大家必定等他回来，也有时间过了中午，仍未吃饭的事情，大家忍饥等待。
English: And we brothers, if we are at home, must eat together. If someone goes out not far and does not return, we must wait for him to come back. There is also a time after noon when we still have not eaten, and we wait patiently.

古文：吾兄弟八人，今存者有三，是故不忍别食也。
现代文：我们兄弟八人，而今健在的有三人，仍然不忍别居而食。
English: There were eight of us brothers, and now there are three still alive, so I can't bear to eat alone.

古文：又愿毕吾兄弟世，不异居、异财，汝等眼见，非为虚假。
现代文：又念我们兄弟这一辈子，大家不异居、不异财，你们眼中也见到了，这都不是假话。
English: I also remember our brothers in this lifetime, we do not live separately, do not have different wealth, you have also seen it in your eyes, this is not a lie.

古文：如闻汝等兄弟，时有别斋独食者，此又不如吾等一世也。
现代文：如我听说你们兄弟，经常有别居而食的情况，这又不如我们这一代了。
English: As I have heard from your brothers, you often live apart from each other, which is not like our generation.

古文：吾今日不为贫贱，然居住舍宅不作壮丽华饰者，正虑汝等后世不贤，不能保守之，方为势家所夺。
现代文：我今天也说不上贫贱，但我的居宅不搞那些华丽的装饰，正是考虑到如果你们这些后代不贤敏，不能守住这产业，装饰豪华了反而被权势之家夺去了。
English: I can't say that I'm poor today, but I don't decorate my house with those ornate decorations, precisely because if your descendants aren't sensible, they won't be able to keep this property, and if it's decorated with luxury, it will be taken away by the powerful family.

古文：北都时，朝法严急。
现代文： 帝都在北边时，朝廷法律严急。
English: When the country did not move south, the imperial court was very strict.

古文：太和初，吾兄弟三人并居内职，兄在高祖左右，吾与津在文明太后左右。
现代文：太和初年，我们兄弟三人都居内职，兄在高祖左右，我和杨津在文明太后左右。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, all three of our brothers were in the inner circle. My brother was around Emperor Gao, and I and Yang Jin were around Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：于时口敕，责诸内官，十日仰密得一事，不列便大瞋嫌。
现代文：当时皇帝口授，交付内官办理，十日仰密得一事，如不列二圣便大发脾气。
English: At that time, the emperor dictated and handed it over to the inner official to handle, and on the tenth day, the matter became so complicated that if it was not canonized, he would lose his temper.

古文：诸人多有依敕密列者，亦有太后、高祖中间传言构间者。
现代文：诸人多有依敕秘密列位的，也有太后、高祖中间传言离间的。
English: Most of the courtiers secretly relayed the Emperor's and Empress Dowager's orders to the Foreign Minister, and there were also people who passed messages between Empress Dowager and Emperor Gaozong, severing their mother-son relationship.

古文：吾兄弟自相诫曰： 今忝二圣近臣，母子间甚难，宜深慎之。
现代文：我们兄弟自相告诫说： 现今我们忝居为二圣近臣，位处母子二圣之间很是困难，宜极为谨慎。
English: Our brothers admonished each other, saying, "Nowadays, we live as the second-highest vassals. It is very difficult to be the second-highest vassal between a virgin mother and son. We should be extremely cautious."

古文：又列人事，亦何容易，纵被瞋责，慎勿轻言。 
现代文：又列掌人事，谈何容易，即使为二圣谴责，也不要轻易说什么。 
English: It's easy to talk about it, but don't say anything, even if it's to condemn the two saints.

古文：十余年中，不尝言一人罪过，当时大被嫌责。
现代文：十余年中，不曾说过一个人的罪过，当时大被二圣嫌恶责备。
English: For more than ten years, he never said anything about a person's sin, and he was severely rebuked by the two holy men at that time.

古文：答曰： 臣等非不闻人言，正恐不审，仰误圣听，是以不敢言。 
现代文：我们回答说： 为臣并不是不听人们议论，臣担心对其不审慎，会仰误圣德，所以不敢说什么。 
English: We replied: "Being a minister does not mean not listening to people's discussions. A minister is afraid of not being prudent about it, and of betraying the sacredness, so he does not dare to say anything.

古文：于后终以不言蒙赏。
现代文：以后终于还是以不轻易说什么而蒙受赏赐。
English: Later, he was finally rewarded for not saying anything easily.

古文：及二圣间言语，终不敢辄尔传通。
现代文：二圣之间的话，我们终不敢随便传通。
English: Between the two saints, we dare not communicate casually.

古文：太和二十一年，吾从济州来朝，在清徽堂豫宴。
现代文：太和二十一年，我从济州来到朝廷，在清徽堂参加宴会。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Taisho era, I came to Beijing from Jeju to attend a banquet at Qinghui Hall.

古文：高祖谓诸王、诸贵曰： 北京之日，太后严明，吾每得杖，左右因此有是非言论。
现代文：高祖对诸王、诸贵说： 北都之时，太后严明，我每每被太后所杖罚，左右因此有些是非言语。
English: Gao Zu said to the kings and nobles: When I was in the northern capital, the empress dowager was strict, and I was punished by the empress dowager with a cane every time, so there are some right and wrong words.

古文：和朕母子者唯杨椿兄弟。 
现代文：协和我们母子的只有杨椿兄弟。 
English: In addition to our mother and son, there are only the Yangchun brothers.

古文：遂举赐四兄及我酒。
现代文：于是赐给四兄及我酒。
English: He then gave my four brothers and me some wine.

古文：汝等脱若万一蒙时主知遇，宜深慎言语，不可轻论人恶也。
现代文：你们如果万一蒙受时主知遇，必须深深慎于言语，不可轻易评论别人的坏处。
English: If you happen to be in the right place at the right time, you must be very careful with your words and not easily comment on the bad points of others.

古文：吾自惟文武才艺、门望姻援不胜他人，一旦位登侍中、尚书，四历九卿，十为刺史，光禄大夫、仪同、开府、司徒、太保，津今复为司空者，正由忠贞，小心谨慎，口不尝论人过，无贵无贱，待之以礼，以是故至此耳。
现代文： 我自思文武才艺、门第姻援不如他人，一旦位登侍中、尚书，四历九卿，十任刺史，任过光禄大夫、仪同、开府、司徒、太保等职，杨津今天又任司空，正是由于他忠诚贞正，小心谨慎，口中从来不谈论别人过失，不论他人贵贱，一律以礼相待，由于这个原因他才有今天这个位置。
English: I thought to myself that I was not as talented as others in literature, martial arts, and family and marital support. Once I was a courtier, a scholar, a four-year-old, a nine-year-old, and a ten-year-old, and I served as a doctor of honor, a courtier, a governor, a magistrate, and a grand tutor. Today, Yang Jin is also a magistrate. It is precisely because he is loyal and upright, careful and prudent, and never talks about others' faults, regardless of whether they are high or low, and treats everyone with courtesy. For this reason, he has this position today.

古文：闻汝等学时俗人，乃有坐而待客者，有驱驰势门者，有轻论人恶者，及见贵胜则敬重之，见贫贱则慢易之，此人行之大失，立身之大病也。
现代文：我听说你们学当时一般俗人，于是有坐在那里接待客人的，有奔驰显贵豪门的，有随便议论别人善恶的，见到显贵则敬重他们，看见贫贱的人则怠慢人家，这是为人品行的大过失，立身的极大毛病。
English: I heard that at that time you learned from the common people, so there were those who sat there to receive guests, there were the Mercedes Benzes of the rich and powerful, there were those who casually talked about the good and evil of others, when they saw the rich and powerful, they respected them, and when they saw the poor and lowly, they neglected others. This is a great fault in one's character and a great fault in one's standing.

古文：汝家仕皇魏以来，高祖以下乃有七郡太守、三十二州刺史，内外显职，时流少比。
现代文：我们家仕官皇魏以来，高祖以上乃有七郡太守、三十二州刺史，内外身居显要职位的，世人罕能与比。
English: Since our family became an official in the Wei Dynasty, a total of seven people from Gao Zu on down have served as county governors, and thirty-two people have served as prefectural governors. They have held prominent positions both inside and outside the imperial court, which few ordinary people can match.

古文：汝等若能存礼节，不为奢淫骄慢，假不胜人，足免尤诮，足成名家。
现代文：你们如果能够保存我家良好的礼节，不务奢淫骄慢，即使不比别人强，也足以免于讥诮，足够成为名家。
English: If you can preserve the etiquette of our family, do not be arrogant, arrogant and rude, be tolerant and humble to others, you can be free from the criticism and ridicule of others, and you can become a person with expertise and reputation.

古文：吾今年始七十五，自惟气力，尚堪朝觐天子，所以孜孜求退者，正欲使汝等知天下满足之义，为一门法耳，非是苟求千载之名也。
现代文：我今年已七十五岁，自思自己气力，还能够朝见天子，之所以孜孜求退，正是为了让你们知道 满足 二字的含义，以立一门法式耳，这并不是为了苟求千载之名。
English: I am seventy-five years old this year, I think about my strength, I can still see the Son of God, the reason why I diligently ask for retreat is precisely to let you know the meaning of the word "satisfy," to establish a French ear, this is not to ask for the name of a thousand years.

古文：汝等能记吾言，百年之后，终无恨矣。
现代文：你们如果能记住我的话，我百年之后，终也没有什么遗憾的了。 
English: If you can remember me, after a hundred years, I will have no regrets.

古文：椿还华阴逾年。普泰元年七月，为尔朱天光所害，年七十七，时人莫不冤痛之。
现代文：杨椿还归华阴过了一年，普泰元年七月，被尔朱天光所害，年七十七岁，当时人无不为之冤痛。
English: A year after Yang Tsubaki returned to Huayin, in July of the first year of Putai, he was victimized by Er Zhu Tianguang, seventy-seven years old. At that time, everyone was pained.

古文：太昌初，赠都督冀定殷相四州诸军事、太师、丞相、冀州刺史。
现代文：太昌初年，朝廷赠为都督冀、定、殷、相四州诸军事、太师、丞相、冀州刺史。
English: In the first year of Taichang, the imperial court presented the military, grand masters, prime ministers, and the history of Jizhou to the four prefectural governors of Jie, Ding, Yin, and Sang.

