古文：起阏逢摄提格，尽屠维协洽七月，凡五年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢摄提格，尽屠维协洽七月，凡五年有奇。
English: Every five years, there is a strange occurrence in the month of July.

古文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝中之下
现代文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝中之下
English: Emperor Wenzhong and Emperor Wenzhong

古文：大历九年甲寅，公元七七四年
现代文：唐代宗大历九年春季，正月壬寅，田神功在京师去世。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Tang Dynasty, in the first month of Ren Yin, Tian Sheng Gong died in Beijing.

古文：春，正月，壬寅，田神功薨于京师。澧朗镇遏使杨猷自澧州沿江而下，擅出境至鄂州，诏听入朝。
现代文：澧朗镇遏使杨猷从澧州沿长江而下，擅自出境到鄂州，代宗下诏听凭他入朝。
English: The town of Hulang restrained Yang Jie from going down the Yangtze River from Bozhou, and he went to Ezhou without permission, and the emperor issued an edict to let him enter the imperial court.

古文：猷遂溯汉江而上，复州、郢州皆闭城自守，山南东道节度使梁崇义发兵备之。
现代文：于是杨猷溯汉江而上，沿途的复州、郢州都关闭城门自守，山南东道节度使梁崇义也调遣军队防备杨猷。
English: As a result, Yang Hui sailed up the Han River. Along the way, Fuzhou and Zhangzhou closed their gates to protect themselves. Shannan hosted the festival, so Liang Chongyi also dispatched troops to protect Yang Hui.

古文：二月，辛未，徐州军乱，刺史梁乘逾城走。
现代文：二月辛未，徐州的军队发生哗变，刺史梁乘翻越城墙逃走。
English: In late February, the army of Xuzhou mutinied, and Zhang Shiliang escaped by climbing over the city wall.

古文：谏议大夫吴损使吐蕃，留之累年，竟病死虏中。
现代文：谏议大夫吴损出使吐蕃，在那里滞留多年，最后病死在吐蕃。
English: Dr. Wu Jia, who was in charge of the negotiations, sent his envoy to Tubo, where he stayed for many years, and finally died of illness in Tubo.

古文：庚辰，汴宋兵防秋者千五百人，盗库财溃归，田神功薨故也。
现代文：庚辰，汴宋去防御吐蕃的军队一千五百人盗窃府库财物后溃逃回汴州，这是因为田神功去世的缘故。
English: Gengchen, Song and Song went to defend the army of Tubo, 1,500 people stole the treasury and fled back to Ganzhou. This was due to the death of Tian Sheng.

古文：己丑，以神功弟神玉知汴宋留后。
现代文：己丑，代宗任命田神功的弟弟田神玉为汴宋留后。
English: The daimyō appointed Tian Sheng Kung's younger brother, Tian Shengyu, to be the successor of Emperor Song.

古文：癸巳，郭子仪入朝，上言： 朔方，国之北门，中间战士耗散，什才有一。
现代文：癸巳，郭子仪入朝，进言说： 朔方是国家的北大门，那里的兵员消耗散失，仅仅剩下十分之一。
English: As soon as Guo Ziyi entered the country, he said: "Shuo Fang is the northern gate of the country. The soldiers there have been depleted and scattered, with only one-tenth remaining.

古文：今吐蕃兼河、陇之地，杂羌、浑之众，势强十倍。
现代文：如今吐蕃吞并河西、陇右地区，混杂着羌族、吐谷浑的部众，势力强大十倍。
English: Nowadays, Tubo has annexed the west of the river and the right side of the river, mixed with the followers of the Yao people and the Tubo Huns, and is ten times more powerful.

古文：愿更于诸道各发精卒，成四、五万人，则制胜之道必矣。 
现代文：我希望各道轮流分别派遣精壮士兵，组成四五万人的军队，那么一定能够克敌制胜。 
English: I hope that each province will take turns to send strong soldiers separately, forming an army of 450,000 people, then we will surely be able to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：三月，戊申，以皇女永乐公主许妻魏博节度使田承嗣之子华。
现代文：三月戊申，代宗将皇女永乐公主许配给魏博节度使田承嗣的儿子田华。
English: In March, the Daizong betrothed the princess Yongle to Tian Hua, the son of Wei Bo's regent Tian Heishi.

古文：上意欲固结其心，而承嗣益骄慢。
现代文：代宗的目的是想以恩惠与他交心，但田承嗣却更加骄横傲慢。
English: Daizong's aim was to win favor with him, but Tian Chengzhi was even more arrogant.

古文：戊午，以澧朗镇遏使杨猷为洮州刺史、陇右节度兵马使。
现代文：戊午，代宗任命澧朗镇遏使杨猷为洮州刺史、陇右节度兵马使。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st lunar month, the Daizong appointed Yang Yang, the governor of Yilan Town, as the governor of Yizhou and the commander of the right section of the 2nd lunar month.

古文：夏，四月，甲申，郭子仪辞还邠州，复为上言边事，至涕泗交流。
现代文：夏季，四月甲申，郭子仪向代宗辞行回州时，又向代宗谈到边疆大事，以至涕泪俱下。
English: In the summer, in April of Jiaxing, when Guo Ziyi went back to Daizong to return to the state, she also talked to Daizong about the major events in the frontier, with tears in her eyes.

古文：壬辰，赦天下。
现代文：壬辰，大赦天下。
English: Imjin, amnesty to the world.

古文：五月，丙午，杨猷自澧州入朝。
现代文：五月丙午，杨猷从澧州入朝。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of May, Yang Hui entered the imperial court from Zhangzhou.

古文：泾原节度使马璘入朝，讽将士为己表求平章事。
现代文：泾原节度使马入朝，他暗示将士们为他上表要求平章事的职位。
English: He hinted that he would ask the generals to give him the position of the above table.

古文：丙寅，以璘为左仆射。
现代文：丙寅，代宗任命马为左仆射。
English: Cui Yin, the daizong appointed Ma as a left-handed shot.

古文：六月，卢龙节度使硃泚遣弟滔奉表请入朝，且请自将步骑五千防秋；上许之，仍为之先筑大第于京师以待之。
现代文：六月，卢龙节度使朱派遣弟弟朱滔带来奏表，请求入朝，并且请求让他亲自率领五千步骑兵去防御吐蕃。代宗表示同意，还在京师为他预先修建大宅来等待他的到来。
English: In June, the Lulong Festival made Zhu send his younger brother Zhu Tao to bring a petition to the emperor, requesting entry into the imperial court, and asking him to personally lead five thousand infantry and cavalry to defend Tubo. The daizong agreed, and also built a large house for him in advance in Beijing to await his arrival.

古文：癸未，兴善寺胡僧不空卒，赠开府仪同三司、司空，赐爵肃国公，谥曰大辩正广智不空三藏和尚。
现代文：癸未，兴善寺胡僧不空去世。代宗追封他为开府仪同三司、司空，赐爵肃国公；谥号大辩正广智不空三藏和尚。
English: Soon after, the male monk of Xingzen Temple passed away. The daimong posthumously awarded him the title of Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Siku, and conferred the title of Su Guogong; his posthumous title was Daian Zheng Guangzhi, Siku San Zang Monk.

古文：京师旱，京兆尹黎幹作土龙祈雨，自与巫觋更舞。
现代文：京师干旱，京兆尹黎干制作土龙来祈求雨水，自己与男女巫师交替舞蹈求雨。
English: The capital is suffering from drought, and the mayor, Yin Li Gang, is making clay dragons to pray for rain. He and the male and female sorcerers are dancing to pray for rain.

古文：弥月不雨，又祷于文宣王。
现代文：整整一月不见下雨，黎干又在文宣王孔子像前祈祷。
English: It didn't rain for a whole month, and Likan prayed in front of the statue of Confucius.

古文：上闻之，命撤土龙，减膳节用。
现代文：代宗听说后，下令撤掉土龙，减少膳食，节约费用。
English: After hearing of this, the daimyō ordered the removal of the clay dragons, the reduction of meals, and the saving of expenses.

古文：秋，七月，戊午，雨。
现代文：秋季，七月戊午，天才下雨。
English: In autumn, in the afternoon of July 4th, it rained.

古文：硃泚入朝，至蔚州，有疾，诸将请还，俟间而行。
现代文：硃泚入朝，途经蔚州时得了病，诸位将领请朱回去，等病情好转后再动身。
English: In the morning, when passing through Ulshu, he fell ill. The generals asked Zhu to go back and wait for his condition to improve before leaving.

古文：泚曰： 死则舆尸而前！ 
现代文：硃泚说 我死了就抬尸体前去朝廷！ 
English: If you say I'm dead, carry my body to the imperial court!

古文：诸将不敢复言。
现代文：诸位将领不敢再提此事。
English: Your generals dare not mention the matter again.

古文：九月，庚子，至京师，士民观者如堵。
现代文：九月庚子，硃泚到达京师，围观朱的百姓象人墙一样。
English: In September, Geng Zi,  arrived in Beijing, and the people surrounding Zhu were like a human wall.

古文：辛丑，宴泚及将士于延英殿，犒赏之盛，近时未有。
现代文：辛丑，代宗在延英殿宴请朱及其将士，犒劳和赏赐的盛大，是近年来所没有的。
English: Sinfully, the daimyosong invited Zhu and his soldiers to a banquet at the Yan Ying Palace, and the reward and reward were grand, which was unprecedented in recent years.

古文：壬寅，回纥擅出鸿胪寺，白昼杀人，有司擒之；上释不问。
现代文：壬寅，回纥人擅自离开鸿胪寺，白天杀人，被有关部门抓获，代宗释放了他们，没有问罪。
English: In Renin, Uighur people left Hongye Temple without permission and killed people during the day. They were caught by the relevant departments, and the dean released them without being charged.

古文：甲辰，命郭子仪、李抱玉、马璘、硃泚分统诸道防秋之兵。
现代文：甲辰，代宗命令郭子仪、李抱玉、马和朱分别统率各道防御吐蕃的军队。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the daizong ordered Guo Zi Yi, Li Baoyu, Ma and Zhu to separately lead the troops defending Tubo.

古文：冬，十月，壬申，信王瑝薨。
现代文：冬季，十月壬申，信王李去世。
English: In winter, in October in Jinshin, Xin Wang Li passed away.

古文：大历十年乙卯，公元七七五年
现代文：乙亥，梁王李去世。魏博节度使田承嗣诱使昭义的将领官吏叛乱。大历十年
English: Yi Hai, Liang Wang Li passed away. Wei Bo Festival made Tian Heji induce Shao Yi's generals and officials to rebel. The tenth year of the Great Calendar

古文：春，正月，丁酉，昭义兵马使裴志清逐留后薛萼，帅其众归承嗣。
现代文：春季，正月丁酉，昭义兵马使裴志清驱逐留后薛，率领部众投靠田承嗣。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Dingwu, after the expulsion of Pei Zhiqing by the Shouyi soldiers and horses, he stayed in Xue and led the troops to support Tian Chengzhi.

古文：承嗣声言救援，引兵袭相州，取之。
现代文：田承嗣声称救援，带兵袭击和夺取了相州。
English: Tian Chengzi claimed to be a rescuer and led his troops to attack and capture the city of Xiangzhou.

古文：崿奔洺州，上表请入朝，许之。
现代文：薛逃奔州，上表请求入朝，代宗同意了。
English: Xue fled to Benshu, and petitioned to enter the imperial court, which the daimyō agreed to.

古文：辛丑，郭子仪入朝。
现代文：辛丑，郭子仪入朝。
English: Xin Ugly, Guo Zi Yi enters the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，寿王瑁薨。
现代文：壬寅，寿王李瑁去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the birthday king, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：乙巳，硃泚表请留阙下，以弟滔知幽州、卢龙留后，许之。
现代文：乙巳，朱上表请求留在朝廷，让弟弟朱滔担任幽州、卢龙留后，代宗表示同意。
English: At this time, Zhu Shangbei requested to stay in the imperial court, and after letting his brother Zhu Tao stay as Yuzhou and Lulong, the daimyō agreed.

古文：昭义裨将薛择为相州刺史，薛雄为卫州刺史，薛坚为洺州刺史，皆薛嵩之族也。
现代文：昭义副将薛择担任相州刺史，薛雄担任卫州刺史，薛坚担任州刺史，他们都是薛嵩的族人。
English: Shouyi Vice-General Xue Zhao served as the Sanzhou chief historian, Xue Xiong served as the Weizhou chief historian, and Xue Jian served as the state chief historian. They were all Xue Song's relatives.

古文：戊申，上命内侍孙知古如魏州谕田承嗣，使各守封疆；承嗣不奉诏，癸丑，遣大将卢子期取洺州，杨光朝攻卫州。
现代文：戊申，代宗命令内侍魏知古到魏州去劝告田承嗣，让他们各守自己的疆界；田承嗣不接受皇上的诏令，癸丑，派遣大将卢子期攻取州，杨光朝进攻卫州。
English: Wushin, the daimyō ordered the palace attendant Wei Zhigu to go to Weizhou to advise Tian Chengzhi to let them each keep their own borders; Tian Chengzhi did not accept the emperor's edict and sent the general Lu Ziqi to capture the state, and Yang Guang attacked the state of Weizhou.

古文：乙卯，西川节度使崔宁奏破吐蕃数万于西山，斩首万级，捕虏数千人。
现代文：乙卯，西川节度使崔宁奏报说，在西山击败了吐蕃数万人的军队，杀一万人，俘虏数千人。
English: On the other hand, the West River Festival made Cui Ning report that he defeated the army of tens of thousands of Tujue in the West Mountain, killed ten thousand people, and captured thousands of people.

古文：丙辰，诏： 诸道兵有逃亡者，非承制敕，无得辄召募。
现代文：丙辰，代宗颁发诏书说： 各道都有士兵逃亡，没有接到朕的制敕，不得随意召募。 
English: Hsin-Chen, the daimyō, issued an edict saying, "Soldiers have fled from every province. If they have not received my command, they must not be recruited at will.

古文：二月，乙丑，田承嗣诱卫州刺史薛雄，雄不从，使盗杀之，屠其家，尽据相、卫四州之地，自置长吏，掠其精兵良马，悉归魏州；逼孙知古与共巡磁、相二州，使其将士割耳剺面，请承嗣为帅。
现代文：二月乙丑，田承嗣引诱卫州刺史薛雄造反，薛雄不从，田承嗣便派强盗杀掉薛雄，屠杀他的家属，占据相州、卫州等四州的全部地区，自行设置长吏，将那里的精兵良马全都掳掠到魏州。田承嗣逼迫魏知古与他一起巡视磁州、相州，又让他的将士割耳划脸，请田承嗣担任主帅。
English: In February, the second month of the year, Tian Chengzhi lured the governor of Weizhou, Xue Xiong, to rebel. When Xue Xiong refused to comply, Tian Chengzhi sent bandits to kill Xue Xiong, slaughtered his family, occupied all regions of the four states, including Xiangzhou and Weizhou, set up their own officials, and abducted all the fine soldiers and horses there to Weizhou. Tian Chengzhi forced Wei Zhigu to patrol the magnetic state and Xiangzhou with him. He also had his soldiers cut off their ears and faces, and asked Tian Chengzhi to be the commander.

古文：辛未，立皇子述为睦王，逾为郴王，连为恩王，遘为鄜王，迅为随王，造为忻王，暹为韶王，运为嘉王，遇为端王，遹为循王，通为恭王，达为原王，逸为雅王。
现代文：辛未，代宗立皇子李述为睦王，李逾为郴王，李连为恩王，李遘为王，李迅为随王，李造为忻王，李暹为韶王，李运为嘉王，李遇为端王，李为循王，李通为恭王，李达为原王，李逸为雅王。
English: According to Xin Wei, Emperor Zongli's son Li Shu was the King of Goodwill, Li Xiao was the King of Goodwill, Li Lian was the King of Grace, Li Yu was the King, Li Xun was the King of Conformity, Li Zou was the King of Goodwill, Li Siem was the King of Goodwill, Li Yun was the King of Goodwill, Li Yu was the King of Goodwill, Li Tong was the King of Goodwill, Li Da was the King of Goodwill, Li Yan was the King of Goodwill, Li Yi was the King of Goodwill, Li Yun was the King of Goodwill, Li Yu was the King of Goodwill

古文：丙子，以华州刺史李承昭知昭义留后。
现代文：丙子，代宗任命华州刺史李承昭为昭义留后。
English: On the other hand, the daimyō appointed Li Chengzhao, the governor of Huazhou, as the successor of Shao Yi.

古文：河阳三城使常休明，苛刻少恩。其军士防秋者归，休明出城劳之，防秋兵与城内兵合谋攻之，休明奔东都；军士奉兵马使王惟恭为帅，大掠，数日乃定。
现代文：河阳三城使常休明对待部下十分苛刻，又缺少恩惠，部下防御吐蕃归来，常休明出城慰劳，防秋的士兵和城内的士兵便合谋进攻他，常休明逃往东都；士兵们拥戴兵马使王惟恭为帅，在城中大肆掠夺，几天后才安定。
English: He treated his subordinates very harshly and lacked favor. When his subordinates returned from the defense of Tubo, he went out of the city to comfort them. The soldiers who were guarding against the autumn and the soldiers in the city conspired to attack him. He fled to Dongdu. The soldiers supported the soldiers and horses of Wang Weigong and plundered the city. It was only after a few days that the situation stabilized.

古文：上命监军冉庭兰慰抚之。
现代文：代宗命令监军冉庭兰去慰问和安抚他们。
English: The deputy emperor ordered the military overseer Ran Tinglan to go and console and pacify them.

古文：三月，甲午朔，陕州军乱，逐兵马使赵令珍。
现代文：三月甲午，陕州军队发生哗变，驱逐兵马使赵令珍。
English: On the afternoon of March 1st, a mutiny occurred in the army of Shaanxi Province, and the military commander Zhao Lingzhen was expelled.

古文：观察使李国清不能禁，卑辞，遍拜将士，乃得脱去。
现代文：观察使李国清无法制止他们，便说谦恭话，并一一求拜将士，才得以脱身离开。
English: Observing that Li Guoqing was unable to stop them, he said a few words of courtesy and begged the soldiers one by one before he was able to get away.

古文：军士大掠库物。
现代文：士兵们大肆掠夺府库财物。
English: The soldiers plundered the treasury.

古文：会淮西节度使李忠臣入朝，过陕，上命忠臣按之。
现代文：恰好淮西节度使李忠臣入朝，路过陕州，代宗命令李忠臣去制止他们。
English: It just so happened that the Huaixi Festival brought Li Zhongchen into the imperial court, passing through Shaanxi Province. The daimyō ordered Li Zhongchen to stop them.

古文：将士畏忠臣兵威，不敢动。
现代文：将士们慑于李忠臣的军威，不敢妄动。
English: The generals were intimidated by the military power of Li Zhongcheng and did not dare to act rashly.

古文：忠臣设棘围，令军士匿名投库物，一日，获万缗，尽以给其从兵为赏。
现代文：李忠臣用荆棘围成一个圈子，命令士兵们无记名将所掠府库的财物投放到圈子中，一天就收了一万缗钱，全部给了他的随从，作为奖赏。
English: Li Zhongchen encircled a circle with thorns and ordered the soldiers to secretly throw the looted treasury's property into the circle. One day, he collected ten thousand baht and gave it all to his entourage as a reward.

古文：乙巳，薛萼、常休明皆诣阙请罪，上释不问。
现代文：乙巳，薛、常休明都进宫请罪，代宗宽恕他们，不加追究。
English: Immediately, Xue and Jokyu both entered the palace to plead guilty, and the daimyō pardoned them without further investigation.

古文：初，成德节度使李宝臣、淄青节度使李正己，皆为田承嗣所轻。
现代文：从前，成德军节度使李宝臣和淄青节度使李正己，都被田承嗣所瞧不起。
English: In the past, the Chengde Army commander Li Baochen and the Jiaqing Army commander Li Zhenggi were both looked down upon by Tian Chengshi.

古文：宝臣弟宝正娶承嗣女，在魏州，与承嗣子维击球，马惊，误触维死；承嗣怒，囚宝正，以告宝臣。
现代文：李宝臣的弟弟李宝正娶田承嗣的女儿，在魏州与田承嗣的儿子田维打马球，马受了惊，误将田维踢死。田承嗣恼怒，囚禁了李宝正，然后告诉李宝臣。
English: Li Baochen's younger brother, Li Baozheng, married Tian Chengzhi's daughter and played polo with Tian Chengzhi's son, Tian Wei, in Weizhou. The horse was startled and accidentally kicked Tian Wei to death. Tian Chengzhi was angry and imprisoned Li Baozheng, and then told Li Baozhen.

古文：宝臣谢教敕不谨，封杖授承嗣，使挞之；承嗣遂杖杀宝正，由是两镇交恶。
现代文：李宝臣以管教不严表示歉意，将封闭的棍棒交给田承嗣，让他杖责李宝正。于是田承嗣打死李宝正，从此两镇结了怨仇。
English: Li Baochen apologized for his lax discipline and handed a closed club to Tian Chengzhi, asking him to beat Li Baozheng. As a result, Tian Chengzhi killed Li Baozheng, and the two towns have been feuding ever since.

古文：及承嗣拒命，宝臣、正己皆上表请讨之，上亦欲因其隙讨承嗣。
现代文：及至田承嗣拒从皇命，李宝臣和李正己都上表请求讨伐他，代宗也打算趁他们有裂痕时进行讨伐。
English: When Tian Chengzhi refused to obey the imperial order, Li Baochen and Li Zhengji both requested to fight him, and the daizong also planned to fight him when they had a rift.

古文：夏，四月，乙未，敕贬承嗣为永州刺史，仍命河东、成德、幽州、淄青、淮西、永平、汴宋、河阳、泽潞诸道发兵前临魏博，若承嗣尚或稽违，即令进讨；罪止承嗣及其侄悦，自馀将士弟侄苟能自拔，一切不问。
现代文：夏季，四月乙未，代宗下敕贬田承嗣为永州刺史，仍旧下令河东、成德、幽州、淄青、淮西、永平、汴宋、河阳、泽潞各道调动军队前去魏博，假如田承嗣还拖延违抗，即命令他们进军讨伐；只惩治田承嗣和他的侄子田悦的罪行，其余将士、弟侄假如能自拔，概不追究。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Taizong's vicar-general still ordered the armies of the provinces of Hedong, Chengde, Yuzhou, Handan, Huaxi, Yongping, Handan, Hebei, and Zhejiang to go to Weibo. If Tian Chengzhi still delayed in resisting, he ordered them to march into battle. Only the crimes of Tian Chengzhi and his nephew Tian Yue were punished, and the remaining soldiers and nephews would not be investigated if they could help themselves.

古文：时硃滔方恭顺，与宝臣及河东节度使薛兼训攻其北，正己与淮西节度使李忠臣等攻其南。
现代文：那时硃滔很恭顺，他与李宝臣及河东节度使薛兼训从北面进攻，李正己与淮西节度使李忠臣等人从南面进攻。
English: At that time, Gongtao was very obedient. He and Li Baoshen and Hedong Jiedu sent Xue Canxun to attack from the north, and Li Zhengji and Huaxi Jiedu sent Li Zhongchen and others to attack from the south.

古文：五月，乙未，承嗣将霍荣国以磁州降。
现代文：五月乙未，田承嗣的部将霍荣国献出磁州向朝廷投降。
English: On the second day of May, Tian Chengzhi's army surrendered Huorong Province to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，李正己攻德州，拔之。
现代文：丁未，李正己进攻德州，并将德州攻克。
English: Ding Wei, Li Zhengji attacked Texas and conquered Texas.

古文：李忠臣统永平、河阳、怀、泽步骑四万进攻卫州。
现代文：李忠臣统率永平、河阳、怀、泽等道四万步、骑兵进攻卫州。
English: Li Zhongchen led the Yongping, Heyang, Huai, Ze and other roads up to 40,000 paces, and the cavalry attacked Weizhou.

古文：六月，辛未，田承嗣遣其将裴志清等攻冀州，志清以其众降李宝臣。
现代文：六月辛未，田承嗣派遣他的部将裴志清等人进攻冀州，裴志清却率领他的部下投降了李宝臣。
English: In late June, Tian Chengzhi sent his general Pei Zhiqing and others to attack Jizhou, but Pei Zhiqing led his men to surrender to Li Baochen.

古文：甲戌，承嗣自将围冀州，宝臣使高阳军使张孝忠将精骑四千御之，宝臣大军继至；承嗣烧辎重而遁。
现代文：甲戌，田承嗣亲自率军围攻冀州，李宝臣派高阳军使张孝忠率领精锐骑兵四千人前去抵御，李宝臣的大部队随后到达，田承嗣烧毁辎重逃跑。
English: Armor, Tian Chengzhi personally led the army to besiege Jizhou, Li Baoshen sent Gaoyang army envoy Zhang Xiaozhong to lead 4,000 elite cavalry to resist, Li Baoshen's large force arrived later, Tian Chengzhe burned and fled.

古文：孝忠，本奚也。
现代文：张孝忠本是奚族人。
English: Zhang Xiaodong is originally from the Qiang ethnic group.

古文：田承嗣以诸道兵四合，部将多叛而惧，秋，八月，遣使奉表，请束身归朝。
现代文：田承嗣因为各道军队四面合力进攻，他的部将又多叛变，心中恐惧，秋季，八月，派遣使者上表，请求约束自身归顺朝廷。
English: Because the armies of various provinces were attacking from all directions, and many of his subordinates had mutinied out of fear, Tian Chengzhi sent envoys to the emperor in autumn and August to ask him to restrain himself and submit to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，郭子仪还邠州。
现代文：辛巳，郭子仪返回州。
English: Soon after, Guo Ziyi returned to the state.

古文：子仪尝奏除州县官一人，不报，僚佐相谓曰： 以令公勋德，奏一属吏而不从，何宰相之不知体！ 
现代文：郭子仪曾经奏请任命一名州县官员，没有得到答复，僚属们相互议论说： 以郭令公的功勋和德行，上奏任命一名从属官员而没有得到批准，宰相就这么不知礼！ 
English: Guo Ziyi once petitioned for the appointment of a state and county official, but received no reply. His colleagues and subordinates argued with each other, saying: "With Guo Lingguo's merits and virtues, he petitioned for the appointment of a subordinate official without approval. The prime minister is so rude!"

古文：子仪闻之，谓僚佐曰： 自兵兴以来，方镇武臣多跋扈，凡有所求，朝廷常委曲从之；此无他，乃疑之也。
现代文：郭子仪听说后，跟僚属们说： 自从兵兴以来，方镇武臣多飞扬跋扈，凡是他们所求的，朝廷经常委曲求全，满足他们的要求，这不是别的，是对他们抱有疑虑。
English: After hearing this, Guo Ziyi said to his colleagues and subordinates: "Since the rise of the military, the military leaders of Fangzhen have been more and more prominent. Whatever they asked for, the imperial court would often bend over backwards to meet their demands. This is nothing more than having doubts about them.

古文：今子仪所奏事，人主以其不可行而置之，是不以武臣相待而亲厚之也；诸君可贺矣，又何怪焉！ 
现代文：如今我所奏的事，皇上认为行不通而搁置起来，是不用对待武臣的方法来对待我，而是亲近信任我；各位应当祝贺，又有什么可责怪的呢！ 
English: What I am doing now, which the Emperor thought would not work and put on hold, is not to treat me like a vassal, but to trust me closely; you should congratulate yourselves, what is there to blame!

古文：闻者皆服。
现代文：僚属都很叹服。
English: Colleagues and relatives were very impressed.

古文：己丑，田承嗣遣其将卢子期寇磁州。
现代文：己丑，田承嗣派遣他的部将卢子期进犯磁州。
English: Disgusted with himself, Tian Chengzhi dispatched his subordinate Lu Ziqi to invade the Magnetic Province.

古文：九月，戊申，回纥白昼刺市人肠出，有司执之，系万年狱；其酋长赤心驰入县狱，斫伤狱吏，劫囚而去。
现代文：九月戊申，回纥人大白天将买卖人刺得流出肠子，有关部门将他们抓住，关进万年县监狱；回纥酋长赤心驰马进入县城监狱，砍伤狱吏，劫去囚犯。
English: In September in Wushin, Uygur people stabbed a trader to the guts in broad daylight. The relevant departments caught them and put them in the Wanli County Prison; Uygur chief Chetsin galloped into the county prison, slashed prison officers and kidnapped prisoners.

古文：上亦不问。
现代文：代宗也不追究。
English: Nor was the heir to the throne investigated.

古文：壬子，吐蕃寇临泾，癸丑，寇陇州及普润，大掠人畜而去；百官往往遣家属出城窜匿。
现代文：壬子，吐蕃进犯临泾，癸丑，又进犯陇州和普润，大肆虏掠人口牲畜而去，百官往往遣送家属出城躲藏。
English: Jinsi, Tubo invaded Linyi, Shugu, and also invaded Luzhou and Purun, plundering people and livestock, and the officials often sent their families out of the city to hide.

古文：丙辰，凤翔节度使李抱玉奏破吐蕃于义宁。
现代文：丙辰，凤翔节度使李抱玉上奏说在义宁打败吐蕃军队。
English: Xing Chen, Feng Xiang, and Li Baoyu made Li Baoyu say that he defeated the Tubo army in Yining.

古文：李宝臣、李正己会于枣强，进围贝州，田承嗣出兵救之。
现代文：李宝臣和李正己在枣强县会师，进而围攻贝州，田承嗣出兵援救贝州。
English: Li Baochen and Li Zhengji formed a division in Zaoqiang County, and then besieged Bechu. Tian Chengzi sent troops to rescue Bechu.

古文：两军各飨士卒，成德赏厚，平卢赏薄；既罢，平卢士卒有怨言，正己恐其为变，引兵退，宝臣亦退。
现代文：李宝臣和李正己两军分别犒赏士兵，成德军犒赏丰厚，平卢军犒赏微薄；犒赏完毕，平卢军士兵颇有怨言，李正己害怕他们哗变，率军撤退，李宝臣也退兵。
English: The two armies of Li Baochen and Li Zhengqi rewarded their soldiers separately, the Chengde army was richly rewarded, the Pinglu army was poorly rewarded; after the reward was completed, the soldiers of the Pinglu army complained a lot, Li Zhengqi was afraid of their mutiny, led the army to retreat, and Li Baochen also retired.

古文：李忠臣闻之，释卫州，南度河，屯阳武。
现代文：李忠臣听说后，放弃围攻卫州，南渡黄河，驻守阳武。
English: After hearing this, Li Zhongcheng gave up the siege of Weizhou, traveled south to the Yellow River, and garrisoned Yangwu.

古文：宝臣与硃滔攻沧州，承嗣从父弟庭玠守之；宝臣不能克。
现代文：李宝臣与朱滔进攻沧州，田承嗣的堂弟田庭镇守沧州，李宝臣未能攻克。
English: Li Baochen and Zhu Tao attacked Cangzhou. Tian Tian, a cousin of Tian Chengzhi, guarded Cangzhou. Li Baochen failed to conquer Cangzhou.

古文：吐蕃寇泾州，泾原节度使马璘破之于百里城。
现代文：吐蕃进犯泾州，泾原节度使马在百里城将他们打败。
English: Tubo invaded Bozhou, and Shenyuan Jiedu defeated them in Baili City.

古文：戊午，命卢龙节度使硃泚出镇奉天行营。
现代文：戊午，代宗命令卢龙节度使朱出镇奉天行营。
English: In the afternoon, the Daizong ordered the Lulong Festival to make Zhu leave the town and go to the camp.

古文：冬，十月，辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月辛酉朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：卢子期攻磁州，城几陷；李宝臣与昭义留后李承昭共救之，大破子期于清水，擒子期至京师；斩之。
现代文：卢子期进攻磁州，州城几乎被攻陷，李宝臣与昭义留后李承昭共同援救磁州，在清水县大败卢子期，将他擒获，送到京师斩首。
English: Lu Zi attacked Gwangju, and the city of Gwangju was almost captured. After Li Baochen and Shou Yi stayed behind, Li Chengzhao jointly rescued Gwangju, defeated Lu Zi in Shimizu County, captured him, and sent him to Beijing to be beheaded.

古文：河南诸将又大破田悦于陈留；田承嗣惧。
现代文：河南诸将又在陈留大败田悦，田承嗣恐惧。
English: Henan generals again defeated Tian Yue in Chenliu, and Tian Chengzhe was afraid.

古文：初，李正己遣使至魏州，承嗣囚之，至是，礼而遣之，遣使尽籍境内户口、甲兵、谷帛之数以与之，曰： 承嗣今年八十有六，溘死无日，诸子不肖，悦亦孱弱，凡今日所有，为公守耳，岂足以辱公之师旅乎！ 
现代文：当初，李正己派遣使者到魏州，田承嗣将使者囚禁，到此时，他对使者优礼并放他走，将境内的户口、军队、粮食、布帛的数量全部登记后交给使者，说道： 我今年八十六岁，离死不远，儿子们都不肖，田悦也柔弱无能，凡是我今天所有的东西，只不过在替李公看守而已，难道还值得劳李公兴师动众吗？ 
English: At first, Li Zhengji sent an envoy to Weizhou, and Tian Chengzhi took the envoy prisoner. By this time, he was courteous to the envoy and let him go. After registering the number of household registration, army, grain, and cloth in the territory, he handed it to the envoy, saying: I am eighty-six years old, not far from death, my sons are not handsome, Tian Yue is also weak and incompetent. Everything I have today is just guarding for Li Gong. Is it still worth it to motivate the people?

古文：立使者于廷，南向，拜而授书；又图正己之像，焚香事之。
现代文：田承嗣让李正己的使者立在庭中，自己面向南方，伏拜后授给使者书信，又画李正己的肖像，焚香供奉。
English: Tian Chengzhi had Li Zhengji's messenger stand in the courtyard, facing south. After prostrating himself, he gave the messenger a letter, painted Li Zhengji's portrait, and burned incense to offer.

古文：正己悦，遂按兵不进。
现代文：李正己十分高兴，于是按兵不动。
English: Li Zhengyi was very happy, so he did not move.

古文：于是河南诸道兵皆不敢进。
现代文：因此，河南各道军队也都不敢进兵。
English: As a result, the armies of all provinces in Henan do not dare to enter the army.

古文：承嗣既无南顾之虞，得专意北方。
现代文：田承嗣既然没有南顾之忧，便一心一意对付北方的军队。
English: Since Tian Chengzhi did not have to worry about the south, he single-mindedly dealt with the northern army.

古文：上嘉李宝臣之功，遣中使马承倩赍诏劳之；将还，宝臣诣其馆，遣之百缣，承倩诟詈，掷出道中，宝臣惭其左右。
现代文：代宗嘉许李宝臣的功劳，派遣中使马承倩携带诏书前去慰劳；马承倩即将返回时，李宝臣来到他下榻的馆舍，送他一百匹丝织品。马承倩臭骂他一顿，将东西扔到路中，李宝臣看了看身边的人，自己感到很惭愧。
English: The daimyō praised the merits of Li Baochen, and sent Ma Chengyu to comfort him with an edict; when Ma Chengyu was about to return, Li Baochen came to the mansion where he was staying and gave him a hundred pieces of silk fabric. Ma Chengyu cursed him and threw things into the road. Li Baochen looked at the people around him and felt very ashamed.

古文：兵马使王武俊说宝臣曰： 今公在军中新立功，竖子尚尔，况寇平之后，以一幅诏书召归阙下，一匹夫耳，不如释承嗣，以为己资。 
现代文：兵马使王武俊劝李宝臣说： 今天你在军中新立战功，宫中小人尚且这样待你，更何况荡平田承嗣之后，如以一纸诏书召你回到宫中，你就仅仅是一个匹夫而已，不如停止攻击田承嗣，作为自己的资本。 
English: Wang Wujun, the commander of the troops and horses, advised Li Baochen, saying, "Today, you have made new war achievements in the army, but the people in the palace still treat you like this. What's more, after Hirata Inheritance, if you are called back to the palace with a piece of paper, you are just a servant. It's better to stop attacking Tian Inheritance as your own capital.

古文：宝臣遂有玩寇之志。
现代文：李宝臣便有了放过田承嗣的意图。
English: Li Baochen then had the intention of letting Tian Chengzhe go.

古文：承嗣知范阳宝臣乡里，心常欲之，因刻石作谶云： 二帝同功势万全，将田为侣入幽燕。 
现代文：田承嗣得知范阳是李宝臣的故乡，内心常想着攻取范阳。因而在石头上刻下预言未来凶吉得失的文字： 二帝同功势万全，将田为侣入幽燕。 
English: When Tian Chengzhi learned that Fanyang was the hometown of Li Baochen, he often thought about conquering Fanyang. Therefore, he engraved the words predicting the future evil fortune and misfortune on the stone: The two emperors have made great achievements together, and will make Tian a couple.

古文：密令瘗宝臣境内，使望气者言彼有王气，宝臣掘而得之。
现代文：密令部下将石头埋在李宝臣的境内，让阴阳先生说那里有帝王之气，李宝臣便掘得此石。
English: He secretly ordered his subordinates to bury the stone in Li Baochen's territory, and let Mr. Yin and Yang say that there was the spirit of the emperor there. Li Baochen then dug up this stone.

古文：又令客说之曰： 公与硃滔共取沧州，得之，则地归国，非公所有。
现代文：田承嗣又命令说客去劝李宝臣说： 您与朱滔共同攻取沧州，如果攻克，那么该地归国所有，而非你所有。
English: Tian Chengzhi also ordered the lobbyist to persuade Li Baochen to say: You and Zhu Tao will jointly conquer Cangzhou. If you conquer, then the land will be owned by the country, not by you.

古文：公能舍承嗣之罪，请以沧州归公，仍愿从公取范阳以自效。公以精骑前驱，承嗣以步卒继之，蔑不克矣。 
现代文：如你能放弃田承嗣的罪，请他将沧州让给你，他仍然愿意跟从你攻取范阳，亲自为你效劳，你率领精锐骑兵先行，田承嗣率领步兵随后赶到，没有攻不破的。 
English: If you can give up Tian Heihe's sin, ask him to cede Cangzhou to you, he is still willing to follow you to capture Fanyang and personally serve you. You will lead the elite cavalry first, and Tian Heihe will lead the infantry to arrive later. There is no invincible.

古文：宝臣喜，谓事合符谶，遂与承嗣通谋，密图范阳，承嗣亦陈兵境上。
现代文：李宝臣欢喜，说这件事与石头上刻的预言相吻合，于是与田承嗣互相串通，秘密图谋范阳，田承嗣也陈兵边境。
English: Li Baochen was delighted, saying that the event coincided with the prophecy carved on the stone, so he and Tian Chengzhi colluded with each other to secretly plot Fanyang, and Tian Chengzhi also sent soldiers to the border.

古文：宝臣谓滔使者曰： 闻硃公仪貌如神，愿得画像观之。 
现代文：李宝臣跟朱滔的使者说： 听说朱公容仪如同神仙一般，我希望看看他的画像。 
English: Li Baochen said to Zhu Tao's emissary: I heard that Zhu Gong Rong Yi is like a god, I would like to see his picture.

古文：滔与之。
现代文：朱滔给了他画像。
English: Zhu Tao gave him a picture.

古文：宝臣置于射堂，与诸将共观之，曰： 真神人也！ 
现代文：李宝臣将画像挂在习射堂，与各位将领一起观赏，说道： 这真是神人啊！ 
English: Li Baochen hung the picture in the practice shooting hall, watched it with the generals, and said: This is really a godman!

古文：滔军于瓦桥，宝臣选精骑二千，通夜驰三百里袭之，戒曰： 取貌如射堂者。 
现代文：朱滔在瓦桥驻扎，李宝臣挑选二千精锐骑兵，通宵驰骋三百里，偷袭朱滔，李宝臣告诫士兵说： 杀掉那个相貌与习射堂画像一样的人。 
English: Zhu Tao was stationed at the tile bridge. Li Baochen selected two thousand elite cavalry and rode three hundred miles all night to attack Zhu Tao. Li Baochen warned the soldiers: "Kill the person who looks like the image of the shooting gallery."

古文：时两军方睦，滔不虞有变，狼狈出战而败，会衣他服得免。
现代文：当时两军刚和睦，朱滔没有料到情况有变，狼狈出战，遭到失败，恰好朱滔身穿别的衣服才得以幸免。
English: At that time, the two armies had just been reconciled. Zhu Tao did not expect the situation to change. He went into battle in a panic and was defeated. It just so happened that Zhu Tao was wearing different clothes and was spared.

古文：宝臣欲乘胜取范阳，滔使雄武军使昌平刘怦守留府。
现代文：李宝臣想乘胜攻取范阳，朱滔派雄武军使昌平人刘怦镇守节度留府。
English: Li Baochen wanted to take advantage of the victory to capture Fanyang, Zhu Tao sent a strong military force to make the Changping people Liu Xizhen guard the festival and stay in the capital.

古文：宝臣知有备，不敢进。
现代文：李宝臣知道朱滔已有防备，不敢再进兵。
English: Li Baochen knew that Zhu Tao was already prepared and did not dare to enter the army again.

古文：承嗣闻幽、恒兵交，即引军南还，使谓宝臣曰： 河内有警，不暇从公，石上谶文，吾戏为之耳！ 
现代文：田承嗣听说幽州、恒州二军交战，当即率军南归，他派人告诉李宝臣说： 河内有紧急情况，无暇跟从你出战范阳，石头上的预言文字，是我做游戏刻的！ 
English: When Tian Chengzhi heard that the two armies of Yuzhou and Hengzhou were at war, he immediately led his army back to the south. He sent someone to tell Li Baochen: There is an emergency in Hanoi, I have no time to follow you to fight Fan Yang. The prophetic words on the stone were carved by me as a game!

古文：宝臣惭怒而退。
现代文：李宝臣又惭愧又愤怒，退兵离去。
English: Embarrassed and angry, Li Baochen left the army.

古文：宝臣既与硃滔有隙，以张孝忠为易州刺史，使将精骑七千以备之。
现代文：李宝臣既然与朱滔有了裂痕，便让张孝忠担任易州刺史，由他率领七千精锐骑兵来防备朱滔。
English: Since Li Baochen had a rift with Zhu Tao, he asked Zhang Xiaozhong to serve as the governor of Yizhou, and he led seven thousand elite cavalry to guard Zhu Tao.

古文：丙寅，贵妃独孤氏薨，丁卯，追谥贞懿皇后。
现代文：丙寅，贵妃独孤氏去世，丁卯，代宗追赠她谥号为贞懿皇后。
English: Cui Yin, Guifei Doko died, and Ding Wu, the regent, gave her the posthumous title of Empress Zhenyao.

古文：十一月，丁酉，田承嗣将吴希光以瀛州降。
现代文：十一月丁酉，田承嗣的部将吴希光率瀛州投降朝廷。
English: In November of Dingwu, Tian Chengzhi's subordinate Wu Xiguang led Zhangzhou to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：岭南节度使路嗣恭擢流人孟瑶、敬冕为将，讨哥舒晃。
现代文：岭南节度使路嗣恭提拔被流放的孟瑶、敬冕为将领，讨伐哥舒晃。
English: During the Lingnan Festival, Lu Xiqiong promoted the exiled Meng Yao to the rank of general, and promoted his brother-in-arms Shu Xuan to the rank of general.

古文：瑶以大军当其冲，冕自间道轻入，丁未，克广州，斩哥舒晃及其党万馀人。
现代文：孟瑶率领大部队占据交通要冲，敬冕从小路轻装进军，丁未，攻克广州，杀掉舒晃及其同伙一万多人。
English: Meng Rong led a large force to occupy the traffic key, Jing Rong marched from the road lightly loaded, Ding Wei conquered Guangzhou, and killed more than 10,000 people of Shu Huan and his associates.

古文：嗣恭之讨晃也，容管经略使王翃遣将将兵助之；西原贼帅覃问乘虚袭容州，翃伏兵击擒之。
现代文：路嗣恭讨伐哥舒晃时，容管经略使王派遣将领率军援助。西原蛮贼首领覃问乘虚袭击容州，王设下伏兵进击，将覃问抓获。
English: When the prince was fighting against the warlord Shukang, the governor of Yunnan sent the king to send a general to lead the army to help. The leader of the barbarian bandits of the Western Plains, Qian Qian, took advantage of the situation to attack Yongzhou. The king set an ambush to attack and captured Qian Qian.

古文：十二月，回纥千骑寇夏州，州将梁荣宗破之于乌水。郭子仪遣兵三千救夏州，回纥遁去。
现代文：十二月，回纥一千骑兵进犯夏州，夏州将领梁荣宗在乌水打败回纥骑兵，郭子仪派遣三千士兵援救夏州，回纥骑兵逃跑。
English: In December, a thousand Uighur cavalry invaded Xiazhou. Liang Rongzong, the general of Xiazhou, defeated the Uighur cavalry in Wushui. Guo Ziyi sent three thousand soldiers to rescue Xiazhou, and the Uighur cavalry fled.

古文：元载、王缙奏魏州盐贵，请禁盐入其境以困之。
现代文：元载、王缙上奏说魏州的盐很贵，请求禁止将盐运入魏州境内以困住田承嗣。
English: In the first month of the year, Wang Qian reported that salt in Weizhou was very expensive and requested a ban on transporting salt into the territory of Weizhou in order to trap Tian Chengzhi.

古文：上不许，曰： 承嗣负朕，百姓何罪！ 
现代文：代宗不同意，说道： 田承嗣辜负朕，老百姓有什么罪！ 
English: The daimyō disagreed, saying: Tian Chengzhi let me down, what is the fault of the common people!

古文：田承嗣请入朝，李正己屡为之上表，乞许其自新。
现代文：田承嗣请求入朝，李正己多次为他上表，恳求允许他悔过自新。
English: Tian Chengzhi requested to enter the imperial court, and Li Zhengji repeatedly petitioned for him, pleading that he be allowed to repent and reform.

古文：春，正月，壬辰，遣谏议大夫杜亚使魏州宣慰。
现代文：大历十一年春季，正月壬辰，代宗派遣谏议大夫杜亚出使魏州安抚田承嗣。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, in the first month of Imjin, the daizong dispatched the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy.

古文：辛亥，西川节度使崔宁奏破吐蕃四节度及突厥、吐谷浑、氐、羌群蛮众二十馀万，斩首万馀级。
现代文：辛亥，西川节度使崔宁奏称打败了吐蕃的四节度和突厥、吐谷浑、氐、羌等蛮族二十多万人，斩首一万多人。
English: Xinhai, the West River Festival made Cui Ning play that he defeated the four festivals of Tubo and more than 200,000 barbarians such as Turks, Tubo Huns, Mongols, and Mongols, and beheaded more than 10,000 people.

古文：二月，庚辰，田承嗣复遣使上表，请入朝。
现代文：二月庚辰，田承嗣再次派遣使者上表，请求入朝。
English: In February, at the time of Geng Chen, Tian Chengzhi once again sent an envoy to the emperor, requesting entry into the imperial court.

古文：上乃下诏，赦承嗣罪，复其官爵，听与家属入朝，其所部拒朝命者，一切不问。
现代文：代宗颁下诏书，赦免田承嗣之罪，恢复官爵，允许他与家属入朝，他的部下抗拒过朝廷命令的人，概不追究。
English: The daimyō issued an imperial edict, pardoning the crime of Tanetsugu, restoring his official title, allowing him and his family to enter the imperial court, and his subordinates who had resisted the imperial order would not be prosecuted.

古文：辛巳，增朔方五城戍兵，以备回纥。
现代文：辛巳，增加戍守朔方五城的军队，以防备回纥。
English: Soon, the troops garrisoning the five cities of the Shuo side were increased in preparation for the counterattack.

古文：三月，戊子，河阳军乱，逐监军冉庭兰出城，大掠三日。
现代文：三月戊子，河阳军队发生哗变，驱逐监军冉庭兰出城，大肆掠夺三天。
English: In March, there was a mutiny in the Hebei-Yangzhou army, and the supervising troops drove Ran Tinglan out of the city and plundered the city for three days.

古文：庭兰成备而入，诛乱者数十人，乃定。
现代文：冉庭兰重整旗鼓，攻入城中，杀掉数十名作乱的士兵，才得以安定。
English: Ran Tinglan regrouped, broke into the city, killed dozens of rioting soldiers, and was able to stabilize.

古文：五月，汴宋留后田神玉卒。
现代文：五月，汴宋留后田神玉去世。
English: In May, Tian Shengyu passed away after staying in the Song Dynasty.

古文：都虞候李灵曜杀兵马使、濮州刺史孟鉴，北结田承嗣为援。
现代文：都虞候李灵曜杀死兵马使、濮州刺史孟鉴，向北勾结田承嗣作为后援。
English: The governor of the capital, Li Lingyang, killed the envoy of the army and the cavalry, Zhangzhou assassinated Shi Mengjian, and colluded with Tian Chengzhe to the north as a backup.

古文：癸巳，以永平节度使李勉兼汴、宋等八州留后。
现代文：癸巳，代宗任命永平节度使李勉兼汴宋等八州留后。
English: Soon after, the daimyosong appointed Yongping Secto to make Li Tsunwen and Gong Song and other eight states stay behind.

古文：乙未，以灵曜为濮州刺史，灵曜不受诏。
现代文：乙未，代宗任命李灵曜为濮州刺史，李灵曜不接受诏令。
English: However, the daimyō appointed Li Linyao as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Li Linyao did not accept the edict.

古文：六月，戊午，以灵曜为汴宋留后，遣使宣慰。
现代文：六月戊午，代宗任命李灵曜为汴宋留后，派遣使者安抚李灵曜。
English: In the afternoon of June, the daimyō sent an envoy to appease Li Lingyou after he had appointed Li Lingyou to stay in the Song Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，田承嗣遣兵寇滑州，败李勉。
现代文：秋季，九月，田承嗣派遣军队进犯滑州，打败李勉。
English: In the autumn, in September, Tian Chengzhi sent an army to attack the city of Nanzhou, defeating Li Tian.

古文：吐蕃寇石门，入长泽川。
现代文：吐蕃进犯石门，进入长泽川。
English: Tubo entered the stone gate and entered the Nagasawa River.

古文：八月，丙寅，加卢龙节度使硃泚同平章事。
现代文：八月丙寅，代宗加封卢龙节度使朱为同平章事。
English: In August, Emperor Xizong and Emperor Lulong conferred Zhu with the title of Tongping.

古文：李灵曜既为留后，益骄慢，悉以其党为管内八州刺史、县令，欲效河北诸镇。
现代文：李灵曜既然担任留后，更加骄横傲慢，让他的党羽全部出任管内八州刺史和县令，想要效仿河北各镇。
English: Since Li Linyou has remained in office, he has become even more arrogant and haughty, letting all his party members serve as the governor and county magistrate of the eight states within his jurisdiction, and wanting to follow the example of towns in Hebei.

古文：甲申，诏淮西节度使李忠臣、永平节度使李勉、河阳三城使马燧讨之。
现代文：甲申，代宗诏令淮西节度使李忠臣、永平节度使李勉、河阳三城使马燧前去讨伐。
English: Gao Shen, the daimyō, ordered Li Zhongchen to go to the Huaixi Festival, Li Tian to go to the Yongping Festival, and Ma Jun to go to the Heyang Festival.

古文：淮南节度使陈少游、淄青节度使李正己皆进兵击灵曜。
现代文：淮南节度使陈少游、淄青节度使李正己都进兵攻击李灵曜。
English: The Huainan Sect sent Chen Shaoyou and the Jiaqing Sect sent Li Zhengyi to attack Li Lingyou.

古文：汴宋兵马使、摄节度副使李僧惠，灵曜之谋主也。
现代文：汴宋兵马使、代理节度副使李僧惠是李灵曜的主谋人。
English: Li Lingyang was the mastermind behind Li Sanghui, the envoy to the Song Dynasty and acting deputy envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：宋州牙门将刘昌遣曾神表潜说僧惠；僧惠召问计，昌为之泣陈逆顺。
现代文：宋州牙门将刘昌派遣和尚神表偷偷去功说李僧惠，李僧惠召见刘昌询问对策，刘昌哭着陈述违背和顺从朝廷的利害关系。
English: Liu Chang, the gatekeeper of Songzhou, sent the monk Shen Yi to secretly visit Li Sang Hui, Li Sang Hui summoned Liu Chang to inquire about the countermeasures, Liu Chang cried and stated the interests of violating and obeying the imperial court.

古文：僧惠乃与汴宋牙将高凭、石隐金遣神表奉表诣京师，请讨灵曜。
现代文：李僧惠便与汴宋牙将高凭、石隐金派遣神表携带奏表到京师，请求征讨李灵曜。
English: Li Xianghui then sent Gao Biao and Shi Ying Jin to Beijing together with Gao Songya to request the collection of money for Li Lingyou.

古文：九月，壬戌，以僧惠为宋州刺史，凭为曹州刺史，隐金为郓州刺史。
现代文：九月壬戌，代宗任命李僧惠为宋州刺史，高凭为曹州刺史，石隐金为郓州刺史。
English: In September, the Daizong appointed Li Sanghui as the prefect of Songzhou, Gaopeng as the prefect of Caozhou, and Shi Yingjin as the prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙丑，李忠臣、马燧军于郑州，灵曜引兵逆战；两军不意其至，退军荥泽，淮西军士溃去者什五六。
现代文：乙丑，李忠臣、马燧驻军郑州，李灵曜率军迎战，李忠臣、马燧两军都没有料到他们会突然到达，于是退守荥泽，淮西的士兵十分之五六都溃逃了。
English: Second Ugly, Li Zhongcheng and Ma Jun garrisoned Zhengzhou, and Li Lingyou led the army to meet the battle. Li Zhongcheng and Ma Jun did not expect that they would suddenly arrive, so they retreated to Heze. Fifty-six out of ten soldiers in Huaxi fled.

古文：郑州士民皆惊，走入东都。
现代文：郑州的士人平民都很吃惊，纷纷逃入东都。
English: Zhengzhou's nobles and commoners were very surprised and fled to Dongdu.

古文：忠臣将归淮西，燧固执不可，曰： 以顺讨逆，何忧不克？奈何自弃功名！ 
现代文：李忠臣想要撤军回淮西。马燧坚持认为不行，说道： 用正义来讨伐叛逆，何必担心不能战胜敌人，为什么自己要放弃功名呢！ 
English: Li Zhongchen wanted to withdraw his troops back to Huaxi. Ma Jun insisted that it was not possible, saying: Use justice to fight the rebellion, why worry about not being able to defeat the enemy, why should you give up your fame!

古文：坚壁不动。
现代文：他坚守壁垒不动。
English: He held fast to the ramparts.

古文：忠臣闻之，稍收散卒，数日皆集，军势复振。
现代文：李忠臣听说后，逐渐收集散兵，几天时间全部聚集，军队的声势又重新振作起来。
English: After hearing this, Li Zhongcheng gradually gathered the scattered soldiers and gathered them all in a few days, and the army's momentum was reinvigorated.

古文：戊辰，李正己奏克郓、濮二州。
现代文：戊辰，李正己奏称攻克郓州和濮州。
English: In Wucheng, Li Zhengxi made a speech saying that he would conquer Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：壬申，李僧惠败灵曜兵于雍丘。
现代文：壬申，李僧惠在雍丘打败李灵曜的军队。
English: In Jinshin, Li Sanghui defeated Li Lingyou's army in Yongqiu.

古文：冬，十月，李忠臣、马燧进击灵曜，忠臣行汴南，燧行汴北，屡破灵曜兵；壬寅，与陈少游前军合，与灵曜大战于汴州城西，灵曜败，入城固守。
现代文：冬季，十月，李忠臣、马燧进攻李灵曜，李忠臣在汴州城南行动，马燧在汴州城北行动，多次打败李灵曜的军队；壬寅，他们与陈少游的前军会合，在汴州城西与李灵曜大战，李灵曜兵败，入汴州城固守。
English: In winter, in October, Li Zhongchen and Ma Jun attacked Li Lingyou. Li Zhongchen operated south of Luzhou City, while Ma Jun operated north of Luzhou City, defeating Li Lingyou's army many times. Ren Yin, who met Chen Shaoyou's former army, fought against Li Lingyou in the west of Luzhou City. Li Lingyou was defeated and held on to Luzhou City.

古文：癸卯，忠臣等围之。
现代文：癸卯，李忠臣等人包围汴州。
English: Shao Wu, Li Zhongchen and others surrounded Zhangzhou.

古文：田承嗣遣田悦将兵救灵曜，败永平、淄青兵于匡城，乘胜进军汴州，乙巳，营于城北数里。
现代文：田承嗣派遣田悦率军援救李灵曜，在匡城打败永平、淄青的军队，乘胜进军汴州，在汴州城北几里的地方安营。
English: Tian Chengzi dispatched Tian Yue and his army to rescue Li Lingyou, defeat Yongping and Jiaqing's army in Kuangcheng, take advantage of the victory to march into Zhangzhou, and camp a few miles north of Zhangzhou.

古文：丙午，忠臣遣裨将李重倩将轻骑数百夜入其营，纵横贯穿，斩数十人而还，营中大骇；忠臣、燧因以大军乘之，鼓噪而入，悦众不战而溃，悦脱身北走，将士死者相枕藉，不可胜数。
现代文：丙午，李忠臣派遣副将李重倩率领数百名轻装骑兵夜间突入田悦的营地，驰骋纵横，斩杀数十人后回师，田悦营中一片惊骇，李忠臣、马燧于是乘机率领大部队击鼓呐喊突入敌营，田悦的部众不战而溃。田悦脱身向北逃走，死去的将士相互枕藉，数都数不清。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Li Zhongchen dispatched Vice-General Li Chongzhen to lead hundreds of light cavalry into Tian Yue's camp at night, galloping across and around, killing dozens of people, and then returning to the division. Tian Yue's camp was shocked. Li Zhongchen and Ma Jun then took the opportunity to lead a large force of drumming and shouting into the enemy camp. Tian Yue's subordinates collapsed without a fight. Tian Yue escaped to the north and fled. The dead soldiers were lying next to each other, and the numbers were countless.

古文：灵曜闻之，开门夜遁，汴州平。
现代文：李灵曜听说田悦兵败，打开城门，连夜逃跑，汴州平定。
English: Li Lingyang heard that Tian Yue's army was defeated, opened the city gate, fled overnight, and Quzhou was pacified.

古文：重倩，本奚也。
现代文：李重倩本是奚族人。
English: Li Jiuyong is originally from the Yi ethnic group.

古文：丁未，灵曜至韦城，永平将杜如江擒之。
现代文：丁未，李灵曜逃到韦城，被永平军将领杜如江抓获。
English: Ding Wei and Li Lingyang fled to Weicheng and were captured by Du Rujiang, the general of the Yongping Army.

古文：燧知忠臣暴戾，以己功让之，不入汴城，引军西屯板桥。
现代文：马燧知道李忠臣为人粗暴强横，便将自己的功劳让给他，不进入汴城，而率领军队向西驻扎在板桥。
English: Knowing that Li Zhongcheng was a rude and domineering person, Ma Yu gave him his credit and did not enter Lucheng, but led the army westward and stationed it in Banqiao.

古文：忠臣入城，果专其功；宋州刺史李僧惠与之争功，忠臣因会击杀之；又欲杀刘昌，昌遁逃得免。
现代文：李忠臣进入汴城，果然将功劳据为己有。宋州刺史李僧惠与他争功，李忠臣便乘会面之机将他杀掉；又想杀刘昌，刘昌逃跑才得以幸免。
English: Li Zhongcheng entered Shicheng and took the credit for himself. Songzhou assassin Li Sanghui competed with him for credit, and Li Zhongcheng took the opportunity to kill him; he also wanted to kill Liu Chang, but Liu Chang was able to escape.

古文：甲寅，李勉械送李灵曜至京师；斩之。
现代文：甲寅，李勉将戴上枷锁的李灵曜送到京师，朝廷杀掉李灵曜。
English: A Yin, Li Mian sent the shackled Li Linyou to the Beijing division, and the court killed Li Linyou.

古文：十二月，丁亥，李正己、李宝臣并加同平章事。
现代文：十二月丁亥，代宗同时加封李正己、李宝臣为同平章事。
English: In December of Dinghai, Daizong also sealed Li Zhengyi and Li Baochen as equals.

古文：泾原节度使马璘疾亟，以行军司马段秀实知节度事，付以后事。
现代文：泾原节度使马病重，他让行军司马段秀实执掌节度使的事务，将后事托付给他。
English: He let the marshal, Ma Duan Hsiu-sheng, take charge of the affairs of the marshal, entrusting him with the aftermath.

古文：秀实严兵以备非常，丙申，璘薨，军中奔哭者数千人。喧咽门屏，秀实悉不听入。
现代文：段秀实整肃兵马以防不测，丙申，马去世，军中数千人奔走号哭，节度府的门庭屏墙外一切哀哭声，段秀实都不让他们进去。
English: Duan Xiushi cleaned up the soldiers and horses to prevent accidents, but when the horse died, thousands of people in the army ran and cried, and all the sad cries outside the screen wall of the courtyard of the Festival House, Duan Xiushi did not let them enter.

古文：命押牙马頔治丧事于内，李汉惠接宾客于外，妻妾子孙位于堂，宗族位于庭，将佐位于前，牙士卒哭于营伍，百姓各守其家。
现代文：段秀实命令押牙马在里面办理丧事，李汉惠在外面接待宾客，妻妾子孙位居堂中，宗族父老位居庭内，高级将领位居堂前，衙内亲兵在营中哭泣，百姓分别在家守候。
English: Duan Hsiu-sheng ordered Otsuma Ma to handle the funeral inside, Li Han-hui received the guests outside, his wife, concubine and grandchildren were in the hall, the patriarchs were in the court, the senior generals were in front of the hall, the soldiers in the camp were crying, and the people were waiting at home.

古文：有离立偶语于衢路，辄执而囚之；非护丧从行者无得远送。
现代文：如果二个人在通衢要道偶然说话，就将他们抓住，囚禁起来；不是护送灵柩出丧的人不得远送。
English: If two men happen to speak on the way to the funeral, they will be seized and imprisoned; those who do not escort the coffin must not be sent away.

古文：致祭拜哭，皆有仪节，送丧近远，皆有定处，违者以军法从事。
现代文：吊唁哭拜都有仪式和礼节，送丧远近都有规定，违者依军法处治。
English: There are ceremonies and etiquettes for condolences and mourning, and there are regulations for sending off the dead, and violators will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：都虞候史廷幹、兵马使崔珍、十将张景华谋因丧作乱，秀实知之，奏廷幹入宿卫，徙珍屯灵台，补景华外职，不戮一人，军府晏然。
现代文：都虞候史廷干、兵马使崔珍、十将张景华图谋在治丧时作乱，段秀实知道后，奏报朝廷让史廷干入朝宿卫；崔珍移军驻守灵台，将张景华补任外职，不杀一人，节度军府安然无恙。
English: After Duan Xiushi learned of the plot, he reported to the imperial court to have Shi Ding join the imperial guards; Cui Zhen moved his army to guard the funeral hall and appointed Zhang Jinghua to fill the vacant post, without killing a single person, and the military headquarters was safe and sound.

古文：璘家富有无算，治第京师，甲于勋贵，中堂费二十万缗，他室所减无几，其子孙无行，家资寻尽。
现代文：马家境富有，资产多得无法估算，京师所建的宅第，在功臣权贵中首屈一指，修建中堂花费二十万缗，其它居室也所减无几。马的子孙没有德行，不久家产就用尽了。
English: Ma's family was wealthy, with more assets than can be estimated. The residence built by the Grand Master of the Capital was second to none among the meritorious and powerful. The construction of the nave cost two hundred thousand baht, and the other rooms were not much less. Ma's children and grandchildren were not virtuous, and the family property was soon exhausted.

古文：戊戌，昭义节度使李承昭表称疾笃，以泽潞行军司马李抱真兼知磁、邢两州留后。
现代文：戊戌，昭义节度使李承昭上表自称病重；代宗让泽潞行军司马李抱真兼任磁、邢两州留后。
English: At the Wuyi and Zhao Yi festivals, Li Chengzhao was forced to announce that he was seriously ill; the acting emperor had the marching sergeant Ma Li Baozhen stay behind in the two states of Zhao and Zhao.

古文：庚戌，加淮西节度使李忠臣同平章事，仍领汴州刺史，徙治汴州。
现代文：庚戌，代宗加封淮西节度使李忠臣为同平章事，仍兼任汴州刺史，治所设在汴州。
English: Geng Zong, Daizong and Huai Xi Jie Du made Li Zhongchen a peer, and he still served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the administrative center was located in Zhangzhou.

古文：大历十二年丁巳，公元七七七年
现代文：大历十二年
English: 12th year of the lunar calendar

古文：春，三月，乙卯，兵部尚书、同平章事、凤翔、怀泽潞、秦陇节度使李抱玉薨，弟抱真仍领怀泽潞留后。
现代文：春季，三月乙卯，兵部尚书、同平章事及凤翔、怀泽潞、秦陇节度使李抱玉去世，弟弟李抱真仍兼任怀泽潞留后。
English: In the spring, in the second half of March, the war department Shangshu, Tongping Zhang and Fengxiang, Huai Ze and Qin Hui festivals caused Li Baoyu's death, while his brother Li Baozhen remained in charge of Huai Ze.

古文：癸亥，以河东行军司马鲍防为河东节度使。
现代文：癸亥，代宗任命河东行军司马鲍防为河东节度使。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the Daizong appointed Ma Baobo, the secretary of the Eastern Military Expedition, as the envoy of the Eastern Festival.

古文：防，襄州人也。
现代文：鲍防是襄州人。
English: Bao Bao is from Xiangzhou.

古文：田承嗣竟不入朝，又助李灵曜，上复命讨之。
现代文：田承嗣始终没有入朝，又帮助李灵曜，代宗再次命令讨伐他。
English: Tian Chengzhi never entered the imperial court, but he helped Li Lingyou, and the daimyō once again ordered a crusade against him.

古文：承嗣乃复上表谢罪。
现代文：田承嗣便再次上表谢罪。
English: Tian Chengzhi once again expressed his remorse.

古文：上亦无如之何，庚午，悉复承嗣官爵，仍令不必入朝。
现代文：代宗也对他无可奈何，庚午，恢复田承嗣的全部官爵，还命令他不必入朝。
English: The daimyō also had no choice but to reinstate all of Chikafusa's titles, and ordered him not to enter the imperial court.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事元载专横，黄门侍郎、同平章事王缙附之，二人俱贪。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事元载十分专横，黄门侍郎、同平章事王缙依附元载，二人都很贪婪。
English: Zhongshu's attendant, Tongping Zhang, was very domineering, while Huangmen's attendant, Tongping Zhang, was very greedy.

古文：载妻王氏及子伯和、仲武，缙弟、妹及尼出入者，争纳贿赂。
现代文：元载的妻子王氏和儿子元伯和、元仲武，王缙的弟弟、妹妹和出入王门的尼姑，都争相收纳贿赂。
English: Mr. Wang's wife, Ms. Wang, and his sons, Mr. Yuan Bohe and Mr. Yuan Zhongwu, as well as Mr. Wang's brother and sister, and the nuns entering and leaving Wangmen, all competed to collect bribes.

古文：又以政事委群吏，士之求进者，不结其子弟及主书卓英倩等，无由自达。
现代文：元载、王缙又将政务委托官吏们办理，求取功名的士人，如果不巴结他们的子弟和主书卓英倩等人，就无法进入仕途。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Qian entrusted the government affairs to the officials, and the scholars who sought fame could not enter the career if they did not flatter their children and the main writer Zhuo Yingyao and others.

古文：上含容累年，载、缙不悛。
现代文：代宗多年来包涵宽容，但元载、王缙仍不悔改。
English: Daizong has been tolerant for many years, but Yuan Zai and Wang Xi still do not repent.

古文：上欲诛之，恐左右漏泄，无可与言者，独与左金吾大将军吴凑谋之。
现代文：代宗想杀掉他们，害怕左右泄露消息，没有可以商谈的人，唯独与左金吾大将军吴凑谋划此事。
English: Daizong wanted to kill them, afraid of leaking information left and right. There was no one to negotiate with, but he planned the matter together with Zuo Kingu General Wu.

古文：凑，上之舅也。
现代文：吴凑是代宗的舅舅。
English: Wu Qian is Daizong's uncle.

古文：会有告载、缙夜醮图为不轨者，庚辰，上御延英殿，命凑收载、缙于政事堂，又收仲武及卓英倩等系狱。
现代文：恰巧有人控告元载、王缙夜里举行祷神的祭礼，图谋不轨。庚辰，代宗驾临延英殿，命令吴凑在政事堂逮捕元载、王缙，又将元仲武及卓英倩等逮捕入狱。
English: It so happened that someone accused Yuan Zhe and Wang Xi of holding a ritual of praying to the gods at night, and of scheming to commit misconduct. Geng Chen, acting on behalf of the emperor, drove to Yan Ying's palace and ordered Wu Bin to arrest Yuan Zhe and Wang Xi in the government hall, and to arrest and imprison Yuan Zhongwu and Zhuo Yingxi.

古文：命吏部尚书刘晏与御史大夫李涵等同鞫之，问端皆出禁中，仍遣中使诘以阴事，载、缙皆伏罪。
现代文：代宗命令吏部尚书刘晏和御史大夫李涵等人共同审讯他们，起诉文书都出自宫中，还派遣宦官使者责问他们的秘密勾当，元载、王缙全都服罪。
English: The daimyō ordered the clerk, Shangshu Liu Jun, and the imperial historian, Li Han, to jointly interrogate them. The indictment documents all came from the palace. He also sent eunuch emissaries to interrogate them about their secret activities. Yuan Zai and Wang Jun all pleaded guilty.

古文：是日，先杖杀左卫将军、知内侍省事董秀于禁中，乃赐载自尽于万年县。
现代文：当天，代宗先在宫中将左卫将军、掌管内侍省事务的董秀杖打而死，后又赐元载在万年县自杀。
English: On the same day, Daizong first beat General Zuo Wei and Dong Xiu Jian, who was in charge of the affairs of the Inner and Outer Provinces, to death in the palace, and then he ordered Yuan Zhao to commit suicide in Wannian County.

古文：载请主者： 愿得快死！ 
现代文：元载请求主管官员说： 我希望死得快些！ 
English: He reportedly pleaded with the officer in charge, saying: "I hope I die quickly!"

古文：主者曰： 相公须受少污辱，勿怪！ 
现代文：主管官员说： 你应该受些小的污辱，请别见怪！ 
English: The official in charge said, "You should be insulted a little, please don't be surprised!"

古文：乃脱秽袜塞其口而杀之。
现代文：于是脱下臭袜子塞进元载嘴里将他杀掉。
English: So he took off his smelly socks and stuffed them into Yuanchao's mouth, killing him.

古文：王缙初亦赐自尽，刘晏谓李涵等曰： 故事，重刑覆奏，况大臣乎！
现代文：开始王缙也被赐自尽，刘晏跟李涵等人说： 按昭惯例，施用重刑应当审查上奏，何况大臣呢！
English: At the beginning, Wang Qian was also given the right to commit suicide, and Liu Qian and Li Han and others said: According to the practice of Zhao, the application of heavy punishment should be reviewed, let alone the minister!

古文：且法有首从，宜更禀进止。 
现代文：而且法律上有首犯和从犯之别，应当再次禀报皇上听候处理。 
English: Moreover, according to the law, there is a difference between the first offender and the accomplice, and it should be reported to the emperor again for disposition.

古文：涵等从之。
现代文：李涵等人同意。
English: Li Han and others agree.

古文：上乃贬缙括州刺史。
现代文：于是代宗将王缙贬为栝州刺史。
English: As a result, the daizong relegated Wang Yao to the status of a provincial official.

古文：载妻王氏，忠嗣之女也，及子伯和、仲武、季能皆伏诛。
现代文：元载妻王氏，即王忠嗣的女儿，以及儿子元伯和、元仲武和元季能全都伏法。
English: His ex-wife Wang Zhe, the daughter of Wang Zhongzhi, and his sons Yuan Bohe, Yuan Zhongwu, and Yuan Sui Neng were all Fufang.

古文：有司籍载家财，胡椒至八百石，它物称是。
现代文：有关部门没收了元载的家产，仅胡椒就达八百石，其他财物也与此相称。
English: Relevant departments have confiscated the family property of Yuan Zai. Pepper alone amounts to 800 kilos, and other property is also commensurate with this.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，以太常卿杨绾为中书侍郎，礼部侍郎常衮为门下侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：夏季，四月壬午，代宗任命太常卿杨绾为中书侍郎，礼部侍郎常为门下侍郎，同任同平章事。
English: In the summer, in April, the daimyō appointed Yang Jiong, the Taijōkyō, as the Chusho-sajiro, and the Reibu-sajiro as the Denshita-sajiro, both of which were equivalent to Shoji.

古文：绾性清简俭素，制下之日，朝野相贺。
现代文：杨绾生性清廉简朴，任命颁布之日，朝野相互祝贺。
English: Yang Xinsheng's nature is pure, honest and simple. On the day of the announcement of his appointment, the Asano congratulated each other.

古文：郭子仪方宴客，闻之，减坐中声乐五分之四。
现代文：郭子仪正在宴请宾客，听说此事，便将在座助兴的声乐队减去五分之四。
English: Guo Ziyi was entertaining guests. When she heard about this, she reduced the number of singers in the orchestra by four-fifths.

古文：京兆尹黎幹，驺从甚盛，即日省之，止存十骑。
现代文：京兆尹黎干出行时侍从很多，即日裁减，只留下十骑。
English: When Jing Zhao and Yin Li Gan were traveling, there were many attendants, but they were reduced on the same day, leaving only ten horsemen.

古文：十丞崔宽，第舍宏侈，亟毁撤之。
现代文：中承崔宽的宅第宏伟奢侈，也赶紧毁除。
English: The magnificent and extravagant house of the middle heir, Cui Guang, was also hurriedly demolished.

古文：癸未，贬吏部侍郎杨炎、谏议大夫韩洄、包佶、起居舍人韩会等十馀人，皆载党也。
现代文：癸未，代宗将吏部侍郎杨炎、谏议大夫韩洄、包佶、起居舍人韩会等人贬官，他们都是元载的党羽。
English: At the same time, the daimyō demoted Yang Yan, the attendant of the cadre department, Han Han, the chief of the discussion department, Bao Han, and Han Hui, who lived in the residence, all of whom were party members in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：炎，凤翔人。
现代文：杨炎是凤翔人。
English: Yang Yan is a Fengxiang person.

古文：载常引有文学才望者一人亲厚之，异日欲以代己，故炎及于贬。
现代文：元载常延引一位有文学才望的人，予以亲近和厚待，打算以后用此人代替自己，所以杨炎被贬了官。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Yang Yan was demoted because he often invited a person with literary talent to be close to him and treated him kindly, intending to use this person to replace himself in the future.

古文：洄，滉之弟。
现代文：韩洄是韩的弟弟。
English: Han Min is Han's younger brother.

古文：会，南阳人也。
现代文：韩会是南阳人。
English: Han Hui is from Nanyang.

古文：上初欲尽诛炎等，吴凑谏救百端，始贬官。
现代文：起初，代宗想将杨炎等人全部杀掉，吴凑百般劝谏解救，他们才仅被贬官。
English: At first, Daizong wanted to kill all of Yang Yan and the others, and Wu Bin tried his best to save them, but they were only demoted.

古文：丁酉，吐蕃寇黎、雅州；西川节度使崔宁击破之。
现代文：丁酉，吐蕃进犯黎州、雅州，西川节度使崔宁将他们击败。
English: Ding Rong and Tu Rong invaded Lishu and Yashu, and Xichuan Jiedu led Cui Ning to defeat them.

古文：元载以仕进者多乐京师，恶其逼己，乃制俸禄，厚外官而薄京官，京官不能自给，常从外官乞贷。
现代文：元载因为进入仕途的人多喜欢在京师任官，讨厌他们逼迫自己，便在订立俸禄制度时规定：出任外官的俸禄丰厚，而京官的俸禄微薄。京官生活不能自给，经常向外官乞求借贷。
English: Because many people who entered the career liked to serve as officials in Beijing and disliked them to persecute themselves, the Yuan Dynasty stipulated in the establishment of the salary system: the salary of the foreign official was rich, while the salary of the Beijing official was meager. The Beijing official could not support himself and often begged for loans from the foreign official.

古文：杨绾、常衮奏京官俸太薄；己酉，诏加京官俸，岁约十五万六千馀缗。
现代文：杨绾、常上奏说京官俸禄太少。己酉，唐代宗下诏增加京官的俸禄，每年约十五万六千多缗。
English: Yang Xuan and Chang Shangxu said that the salary of officials in Beijing was too low. However, the Emperor of Tang Dynasty decreed that the salary of officials in Beijing should be increased to about 156,000 baht per year.

古文：五月，辛亥，诏自都团练使外，悉罢诸州团练守捉使。
现代文：五月辛亥，代宗下诏，除都团练使以外，将各州团练守捉使全部取消。
English: In May, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to abolish all the regimental guards in all prefectures except the regimental guards in the capital.

古文：又令诸使非军事要急，无得擅召刺史及停其职务，差人权摄。
现代文：又下令各使，非军事紧急不得擅自召见刺史及停其职务，派人暂时代理。
English: He also ordered the envoys not to summon him without authorization in a non-military emergency and suspend his duties, but to send someone as a temporary deputy.

古文：又定诸州兵，皆有常数，其召募给家粮、春冬衣者，谓之 官健 ；差点土人，春夏归农、秋冬追集、给身粮酱菜者，谓之 团结 。
现代文：又规定各州的军队都有一定数额，各州召募的由官府供给家人粮食、春冬二季衣服的士兵，称之为 官健 ；选择当地人服兵役，春夏二季解甲归田，秋冬二季召集训练，官府供给本人粮食和酱菜的称之为 团结 。
English: It also stipulates that the army of each state has a certain amount. The soldiers recruited by each state from the government to supply their families with food and clothes in the spring and winter are called "Kangjian"; the local people are selected for military service, the spring and summer are disarmed and returned to the field, and the autumn and winter are called for training, and the government supplies their own food and sauces are called "Solidarity."

古文：自兵兴以来，州县官俸给不一，重以元载、王缙随情徇私，刺史月给或至千缗、或数十缗，至是，始定节度使以下至主簿、尉俸禄，掊多益寡，上下有叙，法制粗立。
现代文：自从兵兴以来，州县官吏的俸禄供给不一，加以元载、王缙任意徇私，刺史月薪有的多达一千缗，有的仅数十缗，到这时候，才规定从节度使以下到主薄、县尉俸禄的数额，减多补少，上下次序分明，法令制度初步确立。
English: Since the rise of the military, the salaries of officials in counties and prefectures have been unevenly distributed, with some receiving as much as 1,000 baht per month and others receiving only a few dozen baht. It was only at this time that the amount of the salary of officials in counties and prefectures, from the lowest to the highest, was determined, and the order was clear, and the legal system was initially established.

古文：庚午，上遣中使发元载祖父墓，斫棺弃尸，毁其家庙，焚其木主。
现代文：庚午，代宗派遣中使挖掘元载祖父的坟墓，劈开棺材，扔掉尸体，拆毁他的家庙，焚烧庙中的木制牌位。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the emissary of the Daizong ordered the excavation of the grave of the grandfather of Yuan Zai, split the coffin, threw away the body, demolished his family temple, and burned the wooden plaques in the temple.

古文：戊寅，卓英倩等皆杖死。
现代文：戊寅卓英倩等都被杖打而死。
English: Both Ms. Wu and Ms. Zhuo were beaten to death with canes.

古文：英倩之用事也，弟英璘横于乡里。
现代文：卓英倩当权时，他的弟弟卓英在乡里横行霸道。
English: When Zhuo Yingtao was in power, his younger brother Zhuo Yingtao ran amok in the countryside.

古文：及英倩下狱，英璘遂据险作乱；上发禁兵讨之，乙巳，金州刺史孙道平击擒之。
现代文：等到卓英倩入狱，卓英便凭借险要作乱。代宗调禁军去征讨，乙巳，金州刺史孙道平进击并将他抓获。
English: When Zhuo Yingxuan went to prison, Zhuo Yingxuan used the threat to start a riot. Daizong dispatched the imperial army to investigate, and at that moment, Sun Daoping, the governor of Jinzhou Province, attacked and captured him.

古文：上方倚杨绾，使厘革弊政，会绾有疾，秋，七月，己巳，薨。
现代文：代宗刚刚依靠杨绾，让他改革朝政的弊病，恰好杨绾患病，秋季，七月己巳去世。
English: The daimyō had just relied on Yang Hui to reform the ills of imperial government when Yang Hui fell ill and passed away in the fall of July.

古文：上痛悼之甚，谓群臣曰： 天不欲朕致太平，何夺朕杨绾之速！ 
现代文：代宗十分悲痛地哀悼杨绾，他跟大臣们说： 苍天不想让朕招致天下太平，为什么这样快从朕手中夺走了杨绾！ 
English: Daizong mourned Yang Hui with great sorrow. He said to the ministers, "Heaven does not want me to bring about world peace. Why did they take Yang Hui away from me so quickly?

古文：八月，癸未，赐东川节度使鲜于叔明姓李氏。
现代文：八月癸未，代宗赏赐东川节度使鲜于叔明姓李氏。
English: On the last day of August, the Daizong awarded the Dongchuan Festival to Shun Yu Shuming, surnamed Li.

古文：元载、王缙之为相也，上日赐以内厨御馔，可食十人，遂为故事。
现代文：元载、王缙担任宰相时，代宗每天赏赐他们宫厨所做的佳肴，可供十人食用，于是成为惯例。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, when Wang Zhe served as prime minister, the daizong rewarded them with delicacies made by the palace chef every day, which could be eaten by ten people, so it became customary.

古文：癸卯，常衮与硃泚上言： 餐钱已多，乞停赐馔。 
现代文：癸卯，常和朱对代宗说： 餐费开支已经很多，恳求停止赏赐御用食品。 
English: Zou, Chang and Zhu said to Daizong, "We have already spent a lot of money on meals. Please stop giving us royal food.

古文：许之。
现代文：代宗表示同意。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：衮又欲辞堂封，同列不可而止。
现代文：常又想辞掉自己的堂封，同僚认为不行，这才了事。
English: I often want to resign from my position, but my colleagues think it's not possible, and that's it.

古文：时人讽衮，以为 朝廷厚禄，所以养贤，不能，当辞位，不当辞禄。 
现代文：当时有人讥笑常，认为： 朝廷丰厚的俸禄是用来供养贤人的。如果不行，应当辞职，而不应当辞掉俸禄。 
English: At that time, some people often scoffed and thought that: The rich salary of the imperial court is used to support the wise. If it is not possible, one should resign, but should not give up the salary.

古文：臣光曰： 君子耻食浮于人；衮之辞禄，廉耻存焉，与夫固位贪禄者，不犹愈乎！
现代文：臣司马光曰：君子以多受人家的食禄为耻；常辞掉俸禄，表明他还知廉耻，与那些巩固自己的地位而贪图俸禄的人相比，难道不好些吗！
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "A gentleman is ashamed of receiving more food allowance from others; he often resigns his salary, showing that he knows shame, compared to those who consolidate their position and covet salaries. Isn't it better?

古文：诗云： 彼君子兮，不素餐兮！ 
现代文：《诗经》说： 那些大人先生啊，还不是不劳而食。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Those grown-up gentlemen, they don't eat for free.

古文：如衮者，亦未可以深讥也。
现代文：象常这样的人，也不可以过份地讽刺。
English: As usual with such people, one should not be too sarcastic.

古文：杨绾、常衮荐湖州刺史颜真卿，上即日召还；甲辰，以为刑部尚书。
现代文：杨绾、常向代宗推荐湖州刺史颜真卿，代宗当天召颜真卿回京。甲辰，任命他为刑部尚书。
English: Yang Hui and Chang Zong recommended Yan Zhenqing from Huzhou to the Daizong, and the Daizong called Yan Zhenqing back to Beijing on the same day. Ji Chen, appointed him as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：绾、衮又荐淮南判官汲人关播，擢为都官员外郎。
现代文：杨绾、常又向唐代宗推荐淮南判官汲县人关播，将他提拔为都官员外郎。
English: Yang Xi, often recommended Guan Bao, the Huainan magistrate, to the Tang Dynasty, and promoted him to be the foreign minister of the capital officials.

古文：九月，辛酉，以四镇、北庭行营兼泾原、郑颍节度副使段秀实为节度使。
现代文：九月辛酉，代宗任命四镇、北庭行营兼泾原、郑颍节度副使段秀实为节度使。
English: At the end of September, the Daizong appointed four towns, Beiting Xingying and Yuyuan, and the deputy festival envoy of Zheng He, Duan Xiushi, as festival envoys.

古文：秀实军令简约，有威惠，奉身清俭，室无姬妾，非公会，未尝饮酒听乐。
现代文：段秀实军令简单扼要，有威望，对部下有恩惠，以清廉节俭为生活准则，家无姬妾，不是因公聚会，从不饮酒听乐。
English: Duan Xiushi's military orders were simple and concise. He had prestige, favored his subordinates, lived a clean and frugal life, had no concubines, did not hold business gatherings, and never drank alcohol or listened to music.

古文：吐蕃八万众军于原州北长泽监，己巳，破方渠，入拔谷；郭子仪使裨将李怀光救之，吐蕃退。
现代文：吐蕃八万人马驻扎在原州北部长泽监，己巳，攻破方渠县，进入拔谷；郭子仪派副将李怀光前去救援，吐蕃撤退。
English: The 80,000 men of the Tuyn garrisoned in Zechuan, the northernmost province of the Yuan Prefecture, broke through Fangqu County and entered Baju; Guo Ziyi sent Vice Admiral Li Huai Guang to the rescue, and the Tuyn retreated.

古文：庚午，吐蕃寇坊州。
现代文：庚午，吐蕃进犯坊州。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Tubo entered Guanzhongzhou.

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，西川节度使崔宁奏大破吐蕃于望汉城。
现代文：冬季，十月乙酉，西川节度使崔宁奏报在望汉城大败吐蕃军队。
English: In the winter, in October, at the time of the West River Festival, Cui Ning reported that he had defeated the Tubo army in the city of Seoul.

古文：先是，秋霖，河中府池盐多败。
现代文：起先，秋雨绵绵，河中府的池盐大多坏了。
English: At first, the autumn rain was incessant, and most of the pool salt in Hechu Prefecture was ruined.

古文：户部侍郎判度支韩滉恐盐户减税，丁亥，奏雨虽多，不害盐，仍有瑞盐生。
现代文：户部侍郎兼管度支事务的韩害怕盐户减少纳税，丁亥，奏称秋雨虽多，但并不损坏池盐，仍然有好盐出产。
English: Han, the head of the household department and in charge of budgetary affairs, was afraid that salt producers would reduce their taxes. Dinghai said that although there was a lot of autumn rain, it did not damage the pool salt, and there was still good salt production.

古文：上疑其不然，遣谏议大夫义兴蒋镇往视之。
现代文：代宗怀疑韩所奏不属实，派遣谏议大夫义兴人蒋镇前去视察。
English: The daimyō suspected that Han's report was not true, and dispatched Jiang Zhen, a doctor of Yixing, to inspect the situation.

古文：吐蕃寇盐、夏州，又寇长武；郭子仪遣将拒却之。
现代文：吐蕃进犯盐州、夏州，又进犯长武城；郭子仪调兵遣将前去抵抗，使吐蕃后退。
English: Tubo invaded Yanzhou and Xiazhou, and also attacked Changwu City; Guo Ziyi sent troops to resist and made Tubo retreat.

古文：以永平军押牙匡城刘洽为宋州刺史。
现代文：代宗任命永平军押牙匡城人刘洽为宋州刺史。
English: The daimyō appointed Liu Cai, a native of the Yongping Army's Oshagan city, to write the history of Songzhou.

古文：仍以宋、泗二州隶永平军。
现代文：宋州、泗州仍隶属永平军。
English: Songzhou and Zhangzhou still belong to the Yongping Army.

古文：京兆尹黎幹奏秋霖损稼，韩滉奏幹不实；上命御史按视，丁未，还奏， 所损凡三万馀顷。 
现代文：京兆尹黎干奏报说秋雨连绵，损坏庄稼，韩则上奏说黎干所说与事实不符，代宗命令御史前去视察核实。丁未，御史回报说： 所损坏的庄稼约三万多顷。 
English: Jing Zhao reported to Yin Li Gang that the autumn rains were continuous and damaged crops. Han Zhe reported that what Li Gang said did not match the facts, and the deputy emperor ordered the historian to inspect and verify. Ding Wei, the historian replied: The damaged crops are about more than thirty thousand hectares.

古文：渭南令刘澡阿附度支，称县境苗独不损；御史赵计奏与澡同。上曰 霖雨溥溥，岂得渭南独无！ 
现代文：渭南县令刘澡奉承依附度支韩，声称唯独渭南县境内的禾苗没有损坏；御史赵计所奏也与刘澡相同，代宗说： 大雨连绵，分布区域又广，难道单单渭南没有！ 
English: The magistrate of Yinan County, Liu Dou, flattered by the degree of dependence on Han, claimed that only the seedlings in Yinan County were not damaged; the magistrate Zhao Keisho also played the same role as Liu Dou, and the daizong said: Heavy rain is continuous, the distribution area is wide, isn't there any in Yinan alone!

古文：更命御史硃敖视之，损三千馀顷。
现代文：再命令御史朱敖去视察，渭南实际上受损庄稼三千多顷。
English: He also ordered the Imperial Historian Zhu Xi to inspect the damage to more than 3,000 hectares of crops in southern Anhui Province.

古文：上叹息久之，曰： 县令，字人之官，不损犹应言损，乃不仁如是乎！ 
现代文：代宗长长地叹息，说道： 县令是抚养人民的父母官，无损坏还应该说有损坏，但他们竟不仁到这种地步！ 
English: Daizong sighed for a long time and said, "County magistrates are the parents who raise the people. If there is no damage, it should be said that there is damage, but they are so unkind!

古文：贬澡南浦尉，计澧州司户，而不问滉。
现代文：将刘澡贬为南浦县尉，赵计贬为澧州司户，但不问韩罪。
English: Liu Dou was demoted to Nampo County Lieutenant, and Zhao Jie was demoted to Zhangzhou Secretary, but they did not question Han's crime.

古文：十一月，壬子，山南西道节度使张献恭奏破吐蕃万馀众于岷州。
现代文：十一月壬子，山南西道节度使张献恭奏报说，在岷州打败吐蕃一万多人。
English: In November, Zhang Xianqiong reported that he had defeated more than 10,000 people from Tubo in Ganzhou during the West Shannan Festival.

古文：内辰，蒋镇还，奏 瑞盐实如韩滉所言 ，仍上表贺，请宣付史臣，并置神祠，锡以嘉名。
现代文：丙辰，蒋镇视察归来，奏报说： 正如韩所说，那里仍有好盐出产。 还上书祝贺，请求交付史官，给盐池赐个美称。
English: Upon returning from the inspection of Binchen and Jiangzhen, the report said: As Han said, there is still good salt production there. He also wrote a letter of congratulations, requested that it be handed over to the historian, and gave the salt pond a beautiful name.

古文：上从之，赐号宝应灵庆池。
现代文：代宗同意了，赐名为宝应灵应池。
English: The daimyō agreed, and the pond was given the name Baoying Lingye Pond.

古文：时人丑之。
现代文：当时的人们认为这种做法很不光彩。
English: People at the time thought it was disgraceful.

古文：十二月，丙戌，硃泚自泾州还京师。
现代文：十二月丙戌，朱从泾州返回京师。
English: In December, Zhu returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou.

古文：丁亥，崔宁奏破吐蕃十馀万众，斩首八千馀级。
现代文：丁亥，崔宁奏报说，打败吐蕃十多万人，杀死八千多人。
English: Dinghai defeated more than 100,000 people in Tubo and killed more than 8,000 people, according to the Triningsuo Newspaper.

古文：庚子，以硃泚兼陇右节度使，知河西、泽潞行营。
现代文：庚子，代宗让朱兼任陇右节度使，执掌河西、泽潞行营事务。
English: Geng Zi, the vicar of Zhu Zong, concurrently served as the right-hand sectional envoy, in charge of the affairs of Hexi and Zeyu.

古文：平卢节度使李正己先有淄、青、齐、海、登、莱、沂、密、德、棣十州之地，及李灵曜之乱，诸道合兵攻之，所得之地，各为己有，正己又得曹、濮、徐、兗、郓五州，因自青州徙治郓州，使其子前淄州刺史纳守青州。
现代文：平卢节度使李正己起先占有淄、青、齐、海、登、莱、沂、密、德和棣等十州地区，等到李灵曜叛乱，各道合兵进攻，所得的地都各自据为己有，李正己又得到曹、濮、徐、和郓等五州，因而将治所从青州迁到郓州，派他的儿子前淄州刺史李纳镇守青州。
English: The Pinglu Festival made Li Zhengyi first occupy the ten prefectures of Min, Qing, Qi, Hai, Deng, Lai, Min, Mi, De and Yao. When Li Lingyou rebelled and the armies of all the prefectures attacked, the lands obtained were all appropriated. Li Zhengyi also obtained five prefectures including Cao, Min, Xu and Yao. As a result, he moved the administrative center from Qingzhou to Zhangzhou and sent his son, the former prefect of Zhangzhou, Li Nazhen, to guard Qingzhou.

古文：癸卯，以纳为青州刺史。正己用刑严峻，所在不敢偶语；然法令齐一，赋均而轻，拥兵十万，雄据东方，邻籓皆畏之。
现代文：李正己使用严酷的刑法，当地人们都不敢相对私语，但他法令统一，赋税平均而不繁重，拥有十万军队，雄据东方，邻近的藩镇都害怕他。
English: Li Zheng himself used harsh criminal law, and local people did not dare to whisper against him, but his laws were unified, taxes were average and not onerous, he had a hundred thousand troops, he was strong in the East, and the neighboring towns were afraid of him.

古文：是时田承嗣据魏、博、相、卫、洺、贝、澶七州，李宝臣据恒、易、赵、定、深、冀、沧七州，各拥众五万；梁崇义据襄、邓、均、房、复、郢六州，有众二万；相与根据蟠结，虽奉事朝廷而不用其法令，官爵、甲兵、租赋、刑杀皆自专之，上宽仁，一听其所为。
现代文：此时，田承嗣占据魏、博、相、卫？贝和澶等七州，李宝臣占据恒、易、赵、定、深、冀和沧等七州，名自拥有五万军队；梁崇义占据襄、邓、均、房、复和郢等六州，拥有二万军队。他们互相依靠勾结，虽然拥戴朝廷，但不用朝廷的法令，官爵、士兵、租赋和刑杀都由自己掌握。代宗宽宏仁厚，听任他们为所欲为。
English: At this time, Tian Chengzhi occupied seven states including Wei, Bo, Sang, Wei, Pei, and Zhou; Li Baochen occupied seven states including Heng, Yi, Zhao, Ding, Sheng, Hebei, and Cang, with a nominal army of fifty thousand; Liang Chongyi occupied six states including Xiang, Deng, Jun, Fang, Fu, and Zhou, with an army of twenty thousand. They relied on each other's collusion. Although they supported the imperial court, they did not need the imperial court's decrees. They controlled officials, soldiers, rents, and executions. Emperor Daizong was magnanimous and benevolent, and allowed

古文：朝廷或完一城，增一兵，辄有怨言，以为猜贰，常为之罢役；而自于境内筑垒、缮兵无虚日。
现代文：朝廷有时修补一城，增加一兵，他们就有怨言，认为朝廷怀疑他们有二心，朝廷往往因此而罢役。而他们自己在境内天天修筑堡垒，整治军队。
English: The imperial court sometimes repairs a city and adds a soldier, and they complain that the imperial court suspects that they are double-minded, and the imperial court often strikes because of this, while they themselves build fortresses in the territory every day and rectify the army.

古文：以是虽在中国名蕃臣，而实如蛮貊异域焉。
现代文：因此，他们名为中国藩臣，实际同境外蛮貊一样。
English: Therefore, they are called Chinese vassals and are actually the same as foreign barbarians.

古文：大历十三年戊午，公元七七八年春，正月，辛酉，敕毁白渠支流碾硙以溉田。
现代文：大历十三年春季，正月辛酉，代宗敕令毁掉白渠支流上的水磨，用以灌溉田地。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year of the lunar calendar, in the first month of the new year, Emperor Daizong ordered the destruction of the water mill on the tributary of the White Canal to irrigate the fields.

古文：升平公主有二硙，入见于上，请存之。
现代文：升平公主有二部水磨，她入宫面见皇上，请求保留。
English: Princess Shouhei had two watermills. When she entered the palace, she went to see the emperor and asked to keep them.

古文：上曰： 吾欲以利苍主，汝识吾意，当为众先。 
现代文：代宗对她说： 我想为百姓谋利，而你懂得我的意图，应当为大家作表率。 
English: The daimyō said to her, "I want to benefit the people, and you should set an example for everyone by understanding my intentions."

古文：公主即日毁之。
现代文：公主当天就毁掉水磨。
English: The princess destroyed the mill the same day.

古文：戊辰，回纥寇太原，河东押牙泗水李自良曰： 回纥精锐远来求斗，难与争锋；不如筑二垒于归路，以兵戍之。
现代文：戊辰，回纥进犯太原，河东押牙泗水人李自良说： 回纥精锐部队远道前来求战，难以与他们交锋，不如在他们的归途中修筑二个堡垒，用兵戍守。
English: Li Ziliang, a returnee from the Uygur Empire who came to Taiyuan from the Uygur Empire in ancient times, said: "The Uygur elite troops have come a long way to fight, and it is difficult to fight with them. It is better to build two fortresses on their way back and guard them with soldiers."

古文：虏至，坚壁勿与战，彼师老自归，乃出军乘之。
现代文：敌军到来，则坚守壁垒不与他们交战，他们的军队就会士气低落，自行撤退，这时便可乘机出兵。
English: When the enemy army arrives, they will hold fast to the barrier and not engage with them. Their army will be demoralized and withdraw on their own. At this time, they can take the opportunity to send troops.

古文：二垒抗其前，大军蹙其后，无不捷矣。 
现代文：二个堡垒抵抗敌军前锋，大部队进迫他们的后部，没有不胜的。 
English: Two strongholds against the enemy's front, a large force against their rear, no one is invincible.

古文：留后鲍防不从，遣大将焦伯瑜等逆战；癸酉，遇虏于阳曲，大败而还，死者万馀人。
现代文：留后鲍防不听，派遣大将焦伯瑜等人迎战。癸酉，在阳曲县与敌军遭遇，结果大败而归，死了一万多人。
English: After staying behind, Bao Fang did not listen and sent General Jiao Boyu and others to fight. However, they encountered the enemy army in Yangqu County, and as a result, they were defeated, and more than 10,000 people died.

古文：回纥纵兵大掠。
现代文：回纥放纵士兵，大肆掠夺。
English: The rebels let the soldiers go and plundered the country.

古文：二月，代州都督张光晟击破之于羊武谷，乃引去。
现代文：二月，代州都督张光晟在羊武谷击败敌军，敌军这才退去。
English: In February, Zhang Guangya, the governor of Daizhou, defeated the enemy army in Yangwu Valley, and the enemy army retreated.

古文：上引去。上亦不问回纥入寇之故，待之如初。
现代文：代宗也不追究回纥入侵的缘故，仍如以前厚待他们。
English: The Daizong did not investigate the reasons for the invasion of the Uighurs, and continued to treat them kindly as before.

古文：己亥，吐蕃遣其将马重英帅众四万寇灵州，塞填汉、御史、尚书三渠水口以弊屯田。
现代文：己亥，吐蕃派遣将领马重英率领四万大军进犯灵州，夺取了填汉、御史和尚书三渠的出水口，以此破坏唐朝的屯田。
English: At the same time, Tubo dispatched a 40,000-strong army led by general Ma Chongying to invade Lingzhou, capturing the outlets of the three canals of Han, Gushi and Shangshu, thereby destroying the Tang Dynasty's military camps.

古文：三月，甲戌，回纥使还，过河中，朔方军士掠其辎重，因大掠坊市。
现代文：三月甲戌，回纥使者回国，路过河中，朔方士兵掠夺了他的辎重，于是回纥人大肆掠夺街坊市井。
English: In March, when the envoy of the Uighurs returned to China, passing through the middle of the river, the soldiers of the Shuo side plundered his baggage, so the Uighurs plundered the neighborhoods and cities.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，吐蕃寇灵州，朔方留后常谦光击破之。
现代文：夏季，四月甲辰，吐蕃进犯灵州，朔方留后常谦光将他们击败。
English: In the summer, at the first hour of April, Tubo invaded Lingzhou, and after the Shuo side stayed, Chang Qianguang defeated them.

古文：六月，戊戌，陇右节度使硃泚献猫鼠同乳不相害者以为瑞；常衮帅百官称贺。
现代文：六月戊戌，陇右节度使朱向皇上进献同乳而不相伤害的猫鼠，以此为祥瑞；常率领大臣们祝贺。
English: In June, during the Spring Festival, Zhu presented the emperor with a cat and a mouse, which had the same milk but did not hurt each other, as a gift of good luck; he often led the ministers in their congratulations.

古文：中书舍人崔祐甫独不贺，曰： 物反常为妖，猫捕鼠，乃其职也，今同乳，妖也。何乃贺为！
现代文：唯独中书舍人崔甫不肯祝贺，他说： 事物反常，这是妖异。猫捕老鼠是猫的职责，如今同乳，则是妖怪，为什么还要祝贺呢？
English: However, Cui Fu, a scholar at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, refused to congratulate him, saying: "Things are abnormal, this is strange. It is a cat's duty to catch mice, but now it is a monster, why should we congratulate it?

古文：宜戒法吏之不察奸、边吏之不御寇者，以承天意。 
现代文：应当告诫那些不察奸情的执法官和不抵御敌寇的边防官，以顺应上天的意志。 
English: Those unscrupulous magistrates and unresisting frontier officers should be admonished to yield to the will of Heaven.

古文：上嘉之。
现代文：代宗嘉奖他。
English: The Emperor was very appreciative.

古文：祐甫，沔之子也。
现代文：崔甫是崔沔的儿子。
English: Cui Fu is the son of Cui Yao.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，以祐甫知吏部选事。
现代文：秋季，七月，代宗让崔甫执掌吏部选官事宜。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Daizong put Cui Fu in charge of the selection of officials for the cadre department.

古文：祐甫数以公事与常衮争，由是恶之。
现代文：崔甫多次因为公事与常发生争执，因此，常很讨厌他。
English: Cui Fu often quarreled with Chang Rong because of business, so she often disliked him.

古文：戊午，郭子仪奏以回纥犹在塞上，边人恐惧，请遣邠州刺史浑瑊将兵镇振武军，从之。
现代文：戊午，郭子仪奏称，因为回纥人仍在塞上，边地百姓恐惧，请求派遣州刺史浑率军镇守镇武军，代宗同意。
English: In the afternoon, Guo Ziyi made a speech, saying that because the Uighurs were still encamped, the people in the border areas were afraid, and requested the dispatch of the state army led by Shihun to guard the town, and the delegate agreed.

古文：回纥始去。
现代文：回纥这才离去。
English: It was only then that he left.

古文：辛未，吐蕃将马重英二万众寇盐、庆二州，郭子仪遣河东朔方都虞候李怀光击却之。
现代文：辛未，吐蕃将领马重英率二万大军进犯盐州、庆州，郭子仪派遣朔方都虞候李怀光击退了他们。
English: Shortly after Xin Wei, Tu Wei's general Ma Chongying led a 20,000-strong army to invade Yanzhou and Gyeongju. Guo Ziyi sent Shuo Fangduyu to wait for Li Huai Guang to repel them.

古文：八月，乙亥，成德节度使李宝臣请复姓张，许之。
现代文：八月乙亥，成德节度使李宝臣请求让他恢复张姓，代宗准许。
English: In August of Yihai, the Chengde Festival made Li Baochen request him to restore Zhang surname, which was approved by the Daizong.

古文：吐蕃二万众寇银、麟州、略党项杂畜，郭子仪遣李怀光等击破之。
现代文：吐蕃二万大军进犯银州、麟州，掠夺党项人的各种牲畜，郭子仪派遣李怀光将他们击败。
English: Guo Ziyi dispatched Li Huai Guang to defeat the 20,000-strong army of Tuxun that invaded Yinzhou and Linzhou and plundered all kinds of livestock belonging to party members.

古文：上悼念贞懿皇后不已，殡于内殿，累年不忍葬；丁酉，始葬于庄陵。
现代文：代宗对贞懿皇后悼念不已，将灵柩停放在内殿，多年不忍心埋葬；丁酉，才埋葬在庄陵。
English: Daizong mourned the death of Empress Zhenya for a long time. He placed her coffin in the inner hall and did not want to bury her for many years. It was only after the death of Dingya that she was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：九月，庚午，吐蕃万骑下青石岭，逼泾州；诏郭子仪、硃泚与段秀实共却之。
现代文：九月庚午，吐蕃一万骑兵从青石岭下来，进逼泾州。代宗下诏命令郭子仪、朱和段秀实共同使吐蕃后退。
English: On the afternoon of the ninth month, ten thousand cavalrymen from Tuyun came down from Qingshi Ridge to force their way into Bozhou. The daimong issued an edict ordering Guo Ziyi, Zhu and Duan Husi to jointly make Tuyun retreat.

古文：冬，十二月，丙戌，以吏部尚书、转运、盐铁等使刘晏为左仆射，知三铨及使职如故。
现代文：冬季，十二月丙戌，代宗让吏部尚书、转运及盐铁等使刘晏担任左仆射，但掌管三铨和使职不变。
English: In the winter, in December, the vicar general asked the personnel department of Shangshu, Transshipment and Salt and Iron to make Liu Jie the left-hand man, but he was in charge of the three departments and the duties remained unchanged.

古文：郭子仪入朝，命判官京兆杜黄裳主留务。
现代文：郭子仪入朝，任命判官京兆人杜黄裳主持留府事务。
English: Guo Ziyi entered the imperial court and appointed the magistrate of Beijing, Zhu Huangmo, to preside over the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：李怀光阴谋代子仪，矫为诏书，欲诛大将温儒雅等。
现代文：李怀光图谋取代郭子仪，诈称有皇上诏书，想杀掉大将温儒雅等。
English: Li Huaguang plotted to replace Guo Ziyi, falsely claimed to have an imperial edict, wanted to kill General Wen Rugao, and so on.

古文：黄裳察其诈，以诘怀光；怀光流汗伏罪。
现代文：杜黄裳察觉有诈，因此责问李怀光。李怀光掠慌得汗流浃背，表示服罪。
English: Du Huangxiang noticed that there was fraud, so he reprimanded Li Huaguang. Li Huaguang was so panicked that he was sweating profusely, saying that he was guilty.

古文：于是诸将之难制者，黄裳矫子仪之命，皆出之于外，军府乃安。
现代文：于是杜黄裳假托郭子仪的命令，将难于控制的将领派到外地去，节度使军府才得安定。
English: As a result, Du Huangxiang faked the order of Guo Ziyi to send the difficult-to-control generals to other places, and the military government was stabilized by the festival.

古文：以给事中杜亚为江西观察使。
现代文：代宗任命给事中杜亚为江西观察使。
English: Daizong appointed Duya as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：上召江西判官李泌入见，语以元载事，曰： 与卿别八年，乃能除此贼。
现代文：代宗召江西判官李泌入朝相见，与他谈起元载的事情，说道： 与你分别八年，才能够杀掉此贼。
English: On behalf of the Zong, he summoned the judge of Jiangxi Province, Li Xiu, to meet him in the DPRK, talked to him about the incident of the Yuan Zai, and said: It took me eight years to kill this thief.

古文：赖太子发其阴谋，不然，几不见卿。 
现代文：幸亏太子发觉他的阴谋，不然的话几乎见不到你了。 
English: It is fortunate that the crown prince discovered his plot, otherwise I would hardly see you.

古文：对曰： 臣昔日固尝言之。陛下知群臣有不善，则去之；含容太过，故至于此。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 我过去曾经说过，陛下如果知道有居心不良的大臣，那就将他们除掉；陛下包容太过，所以到这种地步。 
English: Li Xiu replied: I have said in the past that if Your Majesty knew that there were ministers with bad intentions, then they would be eliminated; Your Majesty has been too tolerant, which is why it has come to this.

古文：上曰： 事亦应十全，不可轻发。 
现代文：代宗说： 考虑事情也应该周全，不可轻举妄动。 
English: Daizong said, "Things should be well-considered, and no rash moves should be made.

古文：上因言： 朕面属卿于路嗣恭，而嗣恭取载意，奏卿为虔州别驾。
现代文：代宗就势又说： 朕当面将你嘱托给路嗣恭，然而路嗣恭却顺着元载的意思，上奏让你担任虔州别驾。
English: The daimyō took up the situation and said, "I entrusted you to Ritsugakyo in person, but Ritsugakyo followed the meaning of the sutra and made you the leader of Kyoshu.

古文：嗣恭初平岭南，献琉璃盘，径九寸，朕以为至宝。
现代文：路嗣恭初次平定岭南，献琉璃盘，直径九寸，朕以为是最珍贵的宝物。
English: For the first time, Lu Shigong conquered Lingnan, presenting a glass dish with a diameter of nine inches, which I considered to be the most precious treasure.

古文：及破载家，得嗣恭所遗载琉璃盘，径尺。
现代文：等到抄元载的家，查获了路嗣恭送给元载的琉璃盘，直径却有一尺。
English: When they arrived at the home of the copyist Yuan Zai, they found the glass dish that Lu Zi Gong had given to Yuan Zai, but it was only one foot in diameter.

古文：俟其至，当与卿议之。 
现代文：等他到京后，应当跟你议一议怎么处理他这件事。 
English: When he arrives in Beijing, we should discuss with you how to deal with him.

古文：泌曰： 嗣恭为人，小心，善事人，畏权势，精勤吏事而不知大体。
现代文：李泌回答说： 路嗣恭为人小心谨慎。善于侍奉人，害怕有权有势的人，做官精明勤恳但不识大体。
English: Li Xiu replied: "Lu Xiqiong is careful and prudent. He is good at serving others, afraid of the powerful and influential, and is a shrewd and diligent official, but he does not know the big picture.

古文：昔为县令，有能名。陛下未暇知之，而为载所用，故为之尽力。
现代文：过去担任县令，有能干的名声，陛下没顾上了解他，而被元载所用，所以路嗣恭为他尽力。
English: In the past, he served as a county magistrate, with a reputation for ability. His Majesty did not care to understand him, and was used by Yuan Zai, so Lu Ziguang did his best for him.

古文：陛下诚知而用之，彼亦为陛下尽力矣。
现代文：陛下如果真正了解并且重用他，他也会为陛下尽力的。
English: If His Majesty really knows and uses him, he will do his best for His Majesty.

古文：虔州别驾，臣自欲之，非其罪也。
现代文：虔州别驾是我自己想当的，不是他的罪过。
English: It's not his fault that I want to be the next Kyeongju.

古文：且嗣恭新立大功，陛下岂得以一琉璃盘罪之邪！ 
现代文：况且路嗣恭新近立下大功，陛下岂能因为一件琉璃盘而向他问罪吗？ 
English: What's more, Lu Zhi Gongxin has recently made great achievements. Can His Majesty find fault with him because of a glass plate?

古文：上意乃解，以嗣恭为兵部尚书。
现代文：代宗心中原有的疙瘩解开了，任命路嗣恭为兵部尚书。
English: The original rift in Daizong's heart was resolved, and he appointed Lu Shigong as the head of the military department.

古文：郭子仪以朔方节度副使张昙性刚率，谓其以武人轻己，衔之；孔目官吴曜为子仪所任，因而构之。
现代文：郭子仪因为朔方节度副使张昙性格刚强直率，曾说郭子仪身为武将轻视自己，心中怀恨。孔目官吴曜被郭子仪所信任，因而挑拔离间。
English: Guo Ziyi once said that Guo Ziyi despised himself as a military commander and held a grudge against Guo Ziyi because of Guo Ziyi's strong and forthright personality. Connoisseur Wu You was trusted by Guo Ziyi, thus creating a rift.

古文：子仪怒，诬奏昙扇动军众，诛之。
现代文：郭子仪十分恼怒，诬奏张昙煽动军队造反，将他杀掉。
English: Guo Ziyi was very angry, falsely accused Zhang Ye of inciting the army to rebel, and killed him.

古文：掌书记高郢力争之，子仪不听，奏贬郢猗氏丞。
现代文：掌书记高郢据理力争，郭子仪不听，奏请将高郢贬为猗氏县丞。
English: Guo Ziyi did not listen to Gao Yao's argument, and asked that Gao Yao be demoted to the position of county magistrate.

古文：既而僚佐多以病求去，子仪悔之，悉荐之于朝，曰： 吴曜误我。 
现代文：不久僚属们纷纷托病请求离职，郭子仪十分后悔，将他们全部推荐给朝廷，说道： 吴曜误了我。 
English: Guo Ziyi regretted very much and recommended all of them to the imperial court, saying, "Wu You missed me."

古文：遂逐之。
现代文：于是将吴曜赶走。
English: So he took father-in-law Wenbo away from home.

古文：常衮言于上曰： 陛下久欲用李泌，昔汉宣帝欲用人为公卿，必先试理人，请且以为刺史，使周知人间利病，俟报政而用之。 
现代文：常对代宗说： 陛下早就想重用李泌，过去汉宣帝想用人担任公卿大臣，必定先试他治理百姓的才能，请陛下暂且让他担任刺史，让他广泛了解人间的利病，等到上报政绩之后再重用他。 
English: He often said to the daimyō, "Your majesty has long wanted to use Li Xiu again. In the past, when Emperor Han Xuan wanted to appoint someone to the post of court noble and minister, he must first test his ability to govern the people. I would like to ask your majesty to let him serve as a historian for the time being, so that he can have a broad understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of the human world, and wait until his performance is reported before re-employing him."

古文：大历十四年己未，公元七七九年
现代文：大历十四年春季，正月壬戌，代宗任命李泌为澧州刺史。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of the great lunar calendar, in the first month of the year, the Daizong appointed Li Xiu as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：春，正月，壬戌，以李泌为澧州刺史。二月，癸未，魏博节度使田承嗣薨。
现代文：二月癸未，魏博节度使田承嗣去世。
English: On the last day of February, Wei Bo died.

古文：有子十一人，以其侄中军兵马使悦为才，使知军事，而诸子佐之。
现代文：田承嗣有十一个儿子，因为他的侄子中军兵马使田悦有才干，所以让他执掌军务，而让儿子们辅佐他。
English: Tian Chengzhi had eleven sons, and because his nephew, a soldier in the army, made Tian Yue talented, he put him in charge of military affairs, and let his sons assist him.

古文：甲申，以悦为魏博留后。
现代文：甲申，代宗任命田悦为魏博留后。
English: Gao Shin, the acting emperor appointed Tian Yue as Wei Bo's successor.

古文：淮西节度使李忠臣，贪残好色，将吏妻女美者，多逼淫之，悉以军政委妹婿节度副使张惠光。
现代文：淮西节度使李忠臣贪婪残暴，又好女色，将吏的妻子女儿中貌美的，多遭他逼迫奸淫，他将军政事务全部委托妹夫节度使副使张惠光掌管。
English: Huaxi Jietuo made Li Zhongcheng greedy, cruel and womanizing. He often forced the beautiful wives and daughters of generals to commit adultery. He entrusted all military and political affairs to his brother-in-law Jietuo and put the deputy envoy Zhang Huiguang in charge.

古文：惠光挟势暴横，军州苦之。
现代文：张惠光依仗权势，残暴专横，军州颇受其苦。
English: Zhang Huiguang relied on power and was tyrannical, and the military region suffered a lot.

古文：忠臣复以惠光子为牙将，暴横甚于其父。
现代文：李忠臣又让张惠光的儿子担任牙将，他残暴专横，胜过他父亲。
English: Li Zhongcheng also made Zhang Huiguang's son, who was more tyrannical than his father, the chief dentist.

古文：左厢都虞候李希烈，忠臣之族子也，为众所服。
现代文：左厢都虞候李希烈是李忠臣族侄，为众人所信服。
English: Many people are convinced that Li Xilei, the left-wing Dugu, is the nephew of Li Zhongshen.

古文：希烈因众心怨怒，三月，丁未，与大将丁暠等杀惠光父子而逐忠臣。
现代文：李希烈凭借众人的怨愤心情，于三月丁未与大将丁等人杀掉张惠光父子，赶走了李忠臣。
English: Relying on the resentment of the masses, Li Xili killed Zhang Huiguang and his son in March with Ding Wei and General Ding, and drove away Li Zhongchen.

古文：忠臣单骑奔京师，上以其有功，使以检校司空、同平章事留京师；以希烈为蔡州刺史、淮西留后。
现代文：李忠臣单骑逃奔京师。代宗因为他有功劳，让他留在京师担任检校司空、同平章事，又任命李希烈为蔡州刺史、淮西留后。
English: Li Zhongchen fled to Beijing Division alone. The daimyō, because of his merits, let him stay in Beijing Division to serve as the inspector of the school, and also appointed Li Xilei as the secretary of Caizhou and the secretary of Huaxi.

古文：以永平节度使李勉兼汴州刺史，增领汴、颖二州，徙镇汴州。
现代文：代宗让永平节度使李勉兼任汴州刺史，增加汴州、颍州，让他治理，并将治所移到汴州。
English: The Daizong asked Yongping Jiedu to make Li Mian concurrently serve as the governor of Zhangzhou, adding Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, allowing him to govern, and moving the administrative center to Zhangzhou.

古文：辛酉，以容管经略使王翃为河中少尹、知府事。
现代文：辛酉，代宗让容管经略使王担任河中少尹，主持府中事务。
English: At that time, the daimyosong let Rong Guan Jing slightly send Wang to serve as the junior vice-prefect of the Middle Court to preside over the affairs of the Middle Court.

古文：河东副元帅留后部将凌正暴横，翃抑之。
现代文：河东副元帅留后的部将凌正残暴专横，王就抑制他。
English: Vice-Marshal Hedong's second-in-command, Ling Zheng, was brutally domineering, and Wang restrained him.

古文：正与其徒乘夜作乱，翃知之，故缩漏水数刻以差其期，贼惊，溃走，擒正，诛之，军府乃安。
现代文：凌正与他的追随者想乘黑夜作乱，王知道后，故意缩短漏水记时器数刻钟，以此错开他们谋乱的时间，叛贼十分吃惊，纷纷溃逃，王抓住凌正，将他杀掉，节度使军府才得以安定。
English: Ling Zheng and his followers wanted to take advantage of the night to make trouble. When the king found out, he deliberately shortened the water-leak timer by several quarters of an hour, in order to stagger the time of their trouble-making. The traitors were very surprised and fled in droves. The king caught Ling Zheng and killed him, and the military government was stabilized.

古文：成德节度使张宝臣既请复姓，又不自安，更请赐姓；夏，四月，癸未，复赐姓李。
现代文：成德节度使张宝臣已经请求恢复原姓，但心里又感到不安，便再次请求皇上赐姓；夏季，四月癸未，代宗再次赐给他李姓。
English: During the Chengde Festival, Zhang Baochen had already requested to restore his original surname, but he felt uneasy, so he once again asked the emperor to give him a surname; in the summer, in April, the emperor again gave him the surname Li.

古文：五月，癸卯，上始有疾，辛酉，制皇太子监国。
现代文：五月癸卯，代宗开始患病，辛酉，下诏让皇太子代行处理国政。
English: At the end of May, Daizong began to fall ill, and it was decided to let the crown prince handle state affairs on his behalf.

古文：是夕，上崩于紫宸之内殿，遗诏以郭子仪摄冢宰。
现代文：当夜，代宗在紫宸殿的内殿中驾崩。遗诏让郭子仪总摄群臣，辅助朝政。
English: On the same night, Daizong passed away in the inner hall of Shiju-den. His last will and testament called for Guo Ziyi to be the chief photographer of all the courtiers and assist in the administration of the imperial court.

古文：癸亥，德宗即位，在谅阴中，动遵礼法；尝召韩王迥食，食马齿羹，不设盐、酪。
现代文：癸亥，唐德宗即位，在居丧之所服丧，一切行动都遵照丧礼规定。德宗曾经召韩王李迥进餐，吃马齿羹，不放盐和乳酪。
English: In the Heian period, Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne and held a funeral at the funeral home. All actions were in accordance with the funeral regulations. Emperor Dezong once invited King Lihong of Han Dynasty to dine, eat horse tooth soup, and did not put salt and cheese.

古文：常衮性刚急，为政苛细，不合众心。
现代文：常性格刚强急躁，为政苛求细枝末节，不合大家的心愿。
English: He is often stubborn and impetuous, demanding details for politics, and does not meet everyone's wishes.

古文：时群臣朝夕临，衮哭委顿，从吏或扶之。
现代文：当时大臣们早晚都来哀哭，常已经哭得疲惫不堪，随从官吏有人去扶他。
English: At that time, ministers came to mourn in the morning and evening. They were often too exhausted to cry. Some officials accompanied him to help him.

古文：中书舍人崔祐甫指以示众曰： 臣哭君前，有扶礼乎！ 
现代文：中书舍人崔甫指着他们让大家看，说道： 大臣在圣上灵前痛哭，有搀扶的礼节吗？ 
English: Cui Fu, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, pointed to them for everyone to see and said, "The minister is weeping bitterly in front of the Holy Spirit. Is there any etiquette for helping him?

古文：衮闻，益恨之。
现代文：常听到后更加恨他。
English: Hate him even more after hearing it so many times.

古文：会议群臣丧服，衮以为： 礼，臣为君斩衰三年。
现代文：恰巧商议大臣们服丧的事，常认为： 按丧礼，大臣为圣上服丧三年。
English: Coincidentally, when discussing the matter of ministers attending funerals, it is often said that: According to the funeral rites, it takes three years for a minister to attend the funeral of a saint.

古文：汉文帝权制，犹三十六日。
现代文：汉文帝临时制定的丧制，也还有三十六天。
English: The mourning system temporarily established by Emperor Hanwen still has thirty-six days to go.

古文：高宗以来，皆遵汉制。
现代文：高宗以来都遵循汉代丧制。
English: Since Gaozong, the Han Dynasty funeral system has been followed.

古文：及玄宗、肃宗之丧，始服二十七日。
现代文：等到玄宗、肃宗治丧时，才开始服丧二十七天。
English: It was not until the time of the funeral of Xuanzong and Su Zong that the twenty-seven-day mourning began.

古文：今遗诏云： 天下吏人，三日释服。 
现代文：如今圣上遗诏说： 天下官吏百姓，三日之后除丧。 
English: Now, the holy imperial edict says, "Officials and commoners of the world, the funeral will be held in three days."

古文：古者卿大夫从君而服，皇帝二十七日而除，在朝群臣亦当如之。 
现代文：古代卿大夫服丧随从君王，皇上二十七天除丧，在朝群臣也应当如此。 
English: The ancient lords and doctors followed the king in mourning, the emperor mourned for twenty-seven days, and the same should be true for the courtiers in the court.

古文：祐甫以为： 遗诏，无朝臣、庶人之别。
现代文：崔甫认为： 在遗诏中没有朝臣和百姓的区别。
English: Cui Fu believes: There is no distinction between courtiers and commoners in the will.

古文：朝野中外，莫非天下，凡百执事，孰非吏人！
现代文：朝野内外，难道不是一个天下！凡是担任各种事务的，谁不是官吏百姓！
English: Isn't there one world inside and outside the palace and the court? Whoever is in charge of various affairs is not an official but a commoner!

古文：皆应三日释服。 相与力争，声色陵厉。
现代文：都应该除丧。 他们相互力争，声色俱厉。
English: They should all be put out of their misery.

古文：衮不能堪。乃奏祐甫率情变礼，请贬潮州刺史；上以为太重，闰月，壬申，贬祐甫为河南少尹。
现代文：常忍受不住，就上奏崔甫任意改变丧礼，请求德宗将他贬为潮州刺史。德宗认为处分太重，闰五月壬申，将崔甫贬为河南少尹。
English: Unable to bear it any longer, he appealed to Cui Fu to arbitrarily change the funeral rite, and asked Dezong to demote him to Chaozhou Shishi. Dezong thought the punishment was too heavy, and demoted Cui Fu to Henan Shao Yin.

古文：初，肃宗之世，天下务殷，宰相常有数人，更直决事，或休沐各归私第，诏直事者代署其名而奏之，自是踵为故事。
现代文：从前肃宗时期，天下事务繁重，宰相常常有几个人，轮流值班处理日常事务，有时宰相休假各自回到家中，诏令值班宰相代他们签署名字上奏，从此成为惯例。
English: Formerly, during the reign of Emperor Suzong, the affairs of the country were heavy, and there were often several prime ministers, who took turns on duty to deal with daily affairs. Sometimes, when the prime ministers went home on vacation, the prime ministers on duty signed their names on their behalf, which has since become a common practice.

古文：时郭子仪、硃泚虽以军功为宰相，皆不预朝政，衮独居政事堂，代二人署名奏祐甫。
现代文：当时，郭子仪、朱虽然以军功出任宰相，但都不参预朝政，常独居政事堂，代他们二人签名奏告崔甫。
English: At that time, although Guo Ziyi and Zhu served as prime ministers due to their military achievements, they did not participate in pre-imperial politics and often lived alone in the government hall. On behalf of the two of them, they signed a report to Cui Fu.

古文：祐甫既贬，二人表言其非罪，上问： 卿向言可贬，今云非罪，何也？ 
现代文：崔甫贬官后，郭、朱二人上书说他无罪，德宗问道： 你们原先说可以贬官，今天又说无罪，为什么？ 
English: After Cui Fu was demoted, Guo and Zhu both wrote a letter saying that he was not guilty. Dezong asked: You originally said that he could be demoted, but today you say that he is not guilty. Why?

古文：二人对，初不知。
现代文：二人回答说，当初不知道。
English: They replied that they did not know at first.

古文：上初即位，以衮为欺罔，大骇。
现代文：德宗刚即位便以为常欺骗蒙蔽他，十分震惊。
English: As soon as Emperor Dezong ascended the throne, he was shocked to find that he had been deceived.

古文：甲戌，百官衰绖，序立于月华门，有制，贬衮为潮州刺史，以祐甫为门下侍郎、同平章事，闻者震悚。
现代文：甲辰，大臣们身着丧服，排列有序站在月华门前，德宗颁发诏书，将常贬为潮州刺史，任命崔甫为门下侍郎、同平章事，听到这个消息的人都感到震惊和恐惧。
English: At that time, the ministers, dressed in mourning clothes, stood in an orderly line in front of the Yuehua Gate. Emperor Dezong issued an edict, relegating Chang to the position of Choshu scribe, and appointing Cui Fu as a subordinate attendant and a peer of the emperor. Everyone who heard this news was shocked and frightened.

古文：祐甫至昭应而还。
现代文：崔甫到达昭应县后就返回京师。
English: After arriving in Zhaoying County, Cui Fu returned to the capital.

古文：既而群臣丧服竟用衮议。
现代文：不久，大臣们还是采纳常的建议服丧。
English: Soon after, the ministers followed the usual advice and went into mourning.

古文：上时居谅阴，庶政皆委于祐甫，所言无不允。
现代文：德宗当时住在服丧的地方，各种政务都委托崔甫处理，对他所说的事没有不同意的。
English: At that time, Dezong lived in a place of mourning, and all kinds of government affairs were entrusted to Cui Fu, and there was no disagreement with what he said.

古文：初，至德以后，天下用兵，诸将竞论功赏，故官爵不能无滥。
现代文：当初，在至德年间以后，天下用兵，诸位将领竟相论功邀赏，所以官爵不可能不滥。
English: At first, after the Zhi De era, the whole country used soldiers, and the generals actually discussed the merits and invited rewards, so it was impossible for the official peerage not to be extravagant.

古文：及永泰以来，天下稍平，而元载、王缙秉政，四方以贿求官者相属于门，大者出于载、缙，小者出于卓英倩等，皆如所欲而去。
现代文：等到永泰年间以来，天下稍稍太平，然而元载、王缙执政，四面八方向他们行贿求官的人盈于门庭。官大的出自元载、王缙，官小的出自卓英倩等人，他们都如愿以偿地走了。
English: Since the Yongtai era, the world has been a little more peaceful. However, when Yuan Zai and Wang Pi came to power, people from all over the world bribed them to get them into office. The high-ranking officials came from Yuan Zai and Wang Pi, and the low-ranking officials came from Zhuo Yingtao and others. They all got what they wanted.

古文：及常衮为相，思革其弊，杜绝侥幸，四方奏请，一切不与；而无所甄别，贤愚同滞。
现代文：等到常担任宰相，想革除这个弊端，杜绝人们侥幸得官的途径，对各地上奏请求，一概不予考虑，然而由于不加甄别，贤能和蠢才都被遗落。
English: When he became prime minister, he wanted to get rid of this defect and prevent people from getting into office by chance. He did not consider any requests from all over the country. However, due to the lack of screening, both the talented and the stupid were left behind.

古文：崔祐甫代之，欲收时望，推荐引拔，常无虚日；作相未二百日，除官八百人，前后相矫，终不得其适。
现代文：崔甫取代常出任宰相，想收罗当时有声望的人，于是引荐推举的人每天不断。担任宰相不到二百天，就任命了八百名官员。常、崔二人前后相互纠正，终究没有找到适当的尺度。
English: Cui Fu, who replaced Chang as prime minister, wanted to recruit people who had a reputation at the time, so the people who were recommended and nominated continued every day. After serving as prime minister for less than 200 days, he appointed 800 officials. Chang and Cui corrected each other back and forth, but in the end they did not find an appropriate measure.

古文：上尝谓佑甫曰： 人或谤卿，所用多涉亲故，何也？ 
现代文：德宗曾经对崔甫说： 有人指责你，说你所任用的官员多沾亲带故，为什么？ 
English: Dezong once said to Cui Fu, "Some people accuse you of appointing officials with close family ties. Why?

古文：对曰： 臣为陛下选择百官，不敢不详慎，苟平生未之识，何以谙其才行而用之。 
现代文：崔甫回答说： 我为陛下选择官员，不敢不审慎。假如平时不认识，我怎么能知道他的才干德行而任用他呢？ 
English: Cui Fu replied, "I dare not be careless in choosing an official for Your Majesty. If I don't know him, how can I know his talent and virtue and appoint him?

古文：上以为然。
现代文：德宗认为这是正确的。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：臣光曰：臣闻用人者，无亲疏、新故之殊，惟贤、不肖之为察。
现代文：臣司马光曰：我听说用人者，没有亲疏、新故之别，只考察贤能和不肖。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: I have heard that employers do not distinguish between the familiar and the new, but only examine the virtuous and the unscrupulous.

古文：其人未必贤也，以亲故而取之，固非公也；苟贤矣，以亲故而舍之，亦非公也。
现代文：有的人未必是贤人，如果以亲朋故友的关系而被录用，这当然是不公道的；假如是贤人，因为亲朋故友关系被舍去，也是不公道的。
English: Some people are not necessarily wise, and if they are hired on the basis of family, friends and old friends, this is of course unfair; if they are wise, it is also unfair to give up because of family, friends and old friends.

古文：夫天下之贤，固非一人所能尽也，若必待素识熟其才行而用之，所遗亦多矣。
现代文：天下的贤人，当然不是一个人所能收尽的，如果一定等待平素认识，熟知他的才干德行再录用，那么所遗漏的贤人也就很多了。
English: The sages of the world, of course, are not exhaustible by one person. If one must wait for plain knowledge, familiar with his talents and virtues before being hired, then there are many sages left out.

古文：古之为相者则不然，举之以众，取之以公。
现代文：古代担任宰相的就不是这样。他让公众来推举，以公正来录用。
English: This was not the case with the prime minister in ancient times, who was elected by the public and appointed fairly.

古文：众曰贤矣，己虽不知其详，姑用之，待其无功，然后退之，有功则进之；所举得其人则赏之，非其人则罚之。
现代文：公众说这是贤人，自己虽然不了解详细情况，但暂时任用他，等到他没有功绩再将他辞退，有功绩就提拔。所推举的是贤人就奖赏他，不是贤人就惩罚他。
English: The public said that this was a wise man, although they did not know the details, but appointed him temporarily, and waited until he had no merit before dismissing him, and promoted him if he had merit. What was elected was a wise man to reward him, not a wise man to punish him.

古文：进退赏罚，皆众人所共然也，己不置豪发之私于其间。
现代文：晋升和辞退，奖赏和惩罚，都是大家所公认的，自己在中间没有丝毫的隐私。
English: Promotions and dismissals, rewards and punishments, are all recognized by everyone, and there is not the slightest privacy among them.

古文：苟推是心以行之，又何遗贤旷官之足病哉！
现代文：假如以这样的用心付诸行动，又有什么遗漏贤人和缺官的毛病呢！
English: If we act with this kind of intention, what is the problem of missing sages and missing officials?

古文：诏罢省四方贡献之不急者，又罢梨园使及乐工三百馀人，所留者悉隶太常。
现代文：德宗下诏取消各地贡献不急需的物资，又取消梨园使及乐师三百多人，所留下来的乐师都归属太常寺管理。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict to cancel the contributions of materials that were not urgently needed from all over the country, and also to cancel more than three hundred musicians and musicians. The remaining musicians all belong to the management of Taiji Temple.

古文：郭子仪以司徒、中书令领河中尹、灵州大都督、单于、镇北大都护、关内、河东副元帅、朔方节度、关内支度、盐池、六城水运大使、押蕃部并营田及河阳道观察等使，权任既重，功名复大，性宽大，政令颇不肃，代宗欲分其权而难之，久不决。
现代文：郭子仪以司徒、中书令的身份出任河中尹、灵州大都督、单于及镇北大都护、关内及河东副元帅、朔方节度、关内支度和盐池及六城水运大使、押蕃部并营田及河阳道观察等使。权力职责既重，功名又大，而他生性宽宏，行政法令颇不严，代宗想分他的权力，但又感到为难，久拖不决。
English: Guo Ziyi, in his capacity as a scholar and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, served as the envoy of Yin in the middle of the river, the grand governor of Lingzhou, the guardian of the capital cities of Shan and Zhenbei, the vice-marshal of Guanai and Hedong, the governor of Shuo, the governor of Guanai, and the ambassador of water transportation in Yanchi and the six cities, the overseer of Yingtian and the observation of the road to Heyang. Although his power and responsibilities were heavy and his achievements were great, he was generous by nature, and the administrative laws were rather lax. The emperor wanted to

古文：甲申，诏尊子仪为尚父，加太尉兼中书令，增实封满二千户，月给千五百人粮、二百马食，子弟、诸婿迁官者十馀人，所领副元帅诸使悉罢之；以其裨将河东、朔方都虞候李怀光为河中尹、邠、宁、庆、晋、绛、慈、隰节度使，以朔方留后兼灵州长史常谦光为灵州大都督、西受降城、定远、天德、盐、夏、丰等军州节度使，振武军使浑瑊为单于大都护、东、中二受降城、振武、镇北、绥、银、麟、胜等军州节度使，分领其任。
现代文：甲申，德宗下诏尊崇郭子仪为尚父，加封为太尉兼中书令，将实封增加到二千户，每月供给一千五百人的粮食，二百匹马的饲料，他的子弟女婿们升官的有十多人，郭子仪担任的副元帅和各种使职全部罢免；让他的副将河东、朔方都虞候李怀光担任河中尹及、宁、庆、晋、绛、慈、隰节度使，朔方留后兼灵州长史常谦光担任灵州大都督及西受降城、定远、天德、盐、夏、丰等军州节度使，振武军使浑担任单于大都护、东和中二受降城及振武、镇北、绥、银、麟、胜等军州节度使，分别执掌郭子仪的职务。
English: Gao Sheng, the German Emperor's second-in-command, honored Guo Ziyi as his father-in-law, and Gaofeng as the first lieutenant and the second-in-command, increased the number of real fiefs to two thousand, and provided food for fifteen hundred people and fodder for two hundred horses every month. More than ten of his sons and sons-in-law were promoted to higher posts, and Guo Ziyi's position of vice-marshal and various posts were all removed. He had his vice-commander of Hedong and Shuo Fangdu, Li Huaiguang, serve as the envoy of Yin, Ning

古文：丙戌，诏曰： 泽州刺史李鷃上《庆云图》。
现代文：丙戌，德宗颁发诏书说： 泽州刺史李献《庆云图》。
English: On the other hand, Emperor Dezong issued an edict saying: "Zezhou engraved Li Xian's "Celebration Cloud Map."

古文：朕以时和年丰为嘉祥，以进贤显忠为良瑞，如卿云、灵芝、珍禽、奇兽、怪草、异木，何益于人！
现代文：朕认为时局和平年年丰收为吉祥，大臣们推举贤能表现忠心为好兆头，而如庆云、灵芝、珍禽、奇兽、怪草、异木，对人有什么好处！
English: I think that the current situation and the year-on-year bumper harvest are auspicious, and the ministers' nomination of virtuous people to show their loyalty is a good sign, but such as Qingyun, Ganoderma lucidum, rare birds, strange beasts, strange grasses, and strange trees, what are the benefits to people!

古文：布告天下，自今有此，无得上献。 
现代文：通告天下，从今以后有这一类东西，不许向上贡献。 
English: Announce to the world that from now on there is such a thing, and it is not allowed to contribute upwards.

古文：内庄宅使上言诸州有官租万四千馀斛，上令分给所在充军储。
现代文：内庄宅使对德宗说各州有一万四千多斛官租，德宗下令分给当地充当军粮储备。
English: Uchisho no Yakushi told Dezong that there were more than fourteen thousand eunuch rents in each prefecture, and Dezong ordered that they be distributed to localities to serve as military grain reserves.

古文：先是，诸国屡献驯象，凡四十有二，上曰： 象费豢养而违物性，将安用之！ 
现代文：起先，各国多次进献驯象，大约有四十二头，德宗说： 豢养驯象花费很大，而且违背了动物的本性，将有何用呢！ 
English: At first, various countries repeatedly donated tamed elephants, about forty-two, and Dezong said: It costs a lot to raise a tamed elephant, and it goes against the nature of the animal, so what's the use?

古文：命纵于荆山之阳，及豹、貀、斗鸡、猎犬之类，悉纵之；又出宫女数百人。
现代文：下令将驯象放到荆山南麓，豹？斗鸡、猎犬之类的动物也都放掉。德宗又让数百名宫女出宫。
English: He ordered that the trained elephants be placed at the southern foot of Mount Jing, and animals such as leopards, fighting cocks, and hunting dogs were also released.

古文：于是中外皆悦，淄青军士，至投兵相顾曰 明主出矣，吾属犹反乎！ 
现代文：于是朝廷内外都很高兴，淄青的士兵甚至扔掉兵器，互相看着说： 明君出现了，我们还造反吗！ 
English: As a result, both inside and outside the imperial court were delighted. The soldiers even threw away their weapons, looked at each other and said: "Ming Jun has appeared, shall we still rebel?"

古文：戊子，以淮西留后李希烈为节度使。
现代文：戊子，德宗任命淮西留后李希烈为节度使。
English: Bo Zi, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Xilai as the regent after Huaxi's stay.

古文：辛卯，以河阳镇遏使马燧为河东节度使。
现代文：辛卯，德宗任命河阳镇遏使马燧为河东节度使。
English: Xinwu, Dezong appointed Heyang Town to send Ma Jun as the festival envoy to Hedong.

古文：河东承百井之败，骑士单弱，燧悉召牧马厮役，得数千人，教之数月，皆为精骑。
现代文：河东的军队因在百井遭到惨败，骑兵势单力薄，马燧便征召牧马奴仆，共得数千人，教练数月，都成为精锐骑兵。
English: Due to the disastrous defeat of the army of Hedong in Momii, the cavalry force was weak, and the stallion conscripted the wranglers, a total of several thousand people, and the coach for several months, all became elite cavalry.

古文：造甲必为长短三等，称其所衣，以便进趋。
现代文：制造的铠甲都分长短三等，使他们穿上合身，以便适应快速进军的需要。
English: The armor they made was divided into three classes of length and shortness, so that they could be fitted to fit the needs of a quick march.

古文：又造战车，行则载兵甲，止则为营陈，或塞险以遏奔冲；器械无不精利。
现代文：马燧又制造战车，行军时就用以运载武器军备，停止时就用以布列军阵，有时又用车堵住险要道口，以遏止敌军奔突冲击。各种器械没有一件不精良锋利的。
English: The Horse Guards also made chariots, which were used to carry weapons and armaments when marching, to spread out the army when stopped, and sometimes to block dangerous roads with cars to stop the enemy's rushing attack.

古文：居一年，得选兵三万。
现代文：马燧在河东住了一年，选得了三万士兵。
English: Ma Jun lived in Hedong for a year and won the election of thirty thousand soldiers.

古文：辟兗州人张建封为判官，署李自良代州刺史，委任之。
现代文：马燧又征召州人张建封出任判官，让李自良出任代州刺史，都委以重任。
English: Ma Wei also conscripted Zhang Jianfeng from the prefecture to serve as a judge, and Li Ziliang to serve as the deputy prefect of the prefecture, both of which were entrusted with important duties.

古文：兵部侍郎黎幹，狡险谀佞，与宦官特进刘忠翼相亲善。
现代文：兵部侍郎黎干狡猾阴险，善于阿谀奉承，与宦官特进刘忠翼亲密。
English: The attendant of the military department, Li Gan, is cunning and insidious, good at flattery, and is close to the eunuch special envoy Liu Zhongyi.

古文：忠翼本名清潭，恃宠贪纵。
现代文：刘忠翼本名叫刘清潭，仗着皇上的宠幸，贪婪放纵。
English: Liu Zhongyi, whose real name was Liu Qingtan, took advantage of the emperor's favor and indulged in greed.

古文：二人皆为众所恶。
现代文：二人都为大家所厌恶。
English: Both are loathed by everyone.

古文：时人或言幹、忠翼尝劝代宗立独孤贵妃为皇后，妃子韩王迥为太子。
现代文：当时的人有的说黎干、刘忠翼曾经劝过代宗立独孤贵妃为皇后，贵妃的儿子韩王李迥为太子。
English: Some people at that time said that Li Gan and Liu Zhongyi had once persuaded the emperor to establish a separate line of empresses, and the empress's son, Han Wang Lijun, became the crown prince.

古文：上即位，幹密乘舆诣忠翼谋事；事觉，丙申、幹、忠翼并除名长流，至蓝田，赐死。
现代文：德宗即位后，黎干乘辇到刘忠翼那里密谋策划。事情败露，丙申，德宗将黎干、刘忠翼一起削除名籍流放边地，他们到蓝田时，又将他们赐死。
English: After Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, Li Gan traveled to Liu Zhongyi to conspire and plot. The plot was uncovered, and it was revealed that Emperor Dezong had Li Gan and Liu Zhongyi both stripped of their noble titles and exiled to the outskirts of the country. When they arrived in Lantian, they were put to death.

古文：以户部侍郎判度支韩滉为太常卿，以吏部尚书刘晏判度支。
现代文：德宗任命户部侍郎兼度支韩为太常卿，吏部尚书刘晏判度支。
English: Emperor Dezong appointed the steward of the household, Han Du Shi, as Tai Changqing, and the clerk of the household, Liu Xi, as Du Shi.

古文：先是晏、滉分掌天下财赋，晏掌河南、山南、江淮、岭南，滉掌关内，河东、剑南，至是，晏始兼之。
现代文：起先刘晏、韩分管天下财物赋税，刘晏掌管江南、山南、江淮、岭南，韩掌管关内、河东、剑南，到这时，才由刘晏一人兼管。
English: At first, Liu Bei and Han Han were in charge of the taxation of the world's wealth. Liu Bei was in charge of Jiangnan, Shannan, Jianghuai, and Lingnan, and Han Han was in charge of Guanzhong, Hedong, and Jiannan. It was only at this time that Liu Bei was also in charge.

古文：上素闻滉掊克过甚，故罢其利权，寻出为晋州刺史。
现代文：德宗早就听说韩搜刮民财过度，所以罢免了他的财政大权，不久让他出任晋州刺史。
English: Dezong had long heard that Han had been excessively raiding the people's money, so he removed him from his financial power and soon made him the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：至德初，第五琦始榷盐以佐军用，及刘晏代之，法益精密，初岁入钱六十万缗，末年所入逾十倍，而人不厌苦。
现代文：至德初年，第五琦开始实行食盐专卖，以补充军事费用，到刘晏取代他后，食盐专卖法更加精密完备。开始一年收入钱六十万缗，到末年收入超过十倍，而百姓并不厌苦。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the salt monopoly began to be implemented in the fifth year to supplement military expenses. After Liu Bei replaced him, the salt monopoly method was more precise and complete. At the beginning, the annual income was 600,000 baht, and by the end of the year, the income was more than ten times, and the people were not tired of suffering.

古文：大历末，计一岁征赋所入总一千二百万缗，而盐利居其太半。
现代文：大历末年统计一年所收入的钱总数达一千二百万缗，而盐的收入就占一大半。
English: According to the statistics of the last year of the lunar calendar, the total amount of money earned in one year reached 12 million baht, and the income from salt accounted for more than half of it.

古文：以盐为漕佣，自江、淮至渭桥，率万斛佣七千缗，自淮以北，列置巡院，择能吏主之，不烦州县而集事。
现代文：将盐的收入用于漕运雇工，从长江、淮河至东渭桥，大抵一万斛盐雇工费七千缗，自淮河以北，沿路设置巡院，挑选能力强的官吏主事，不烦劳州县就能完成漕运事务。
English: From the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River to the East Fenqiao Bridge, up to 10,000 baht of salt will be used to employ 7,000 baht of labor. From the north of the Huaihe River, patrol stations will be set up along the road, and officials with strong ability will be selected to be in charge. Laozhou County will be able to complete the transportation business without bothering.

古文：六月，己亥朔，赦天下。
现代文：六月己亥朔，大赦天下。
English: June has just come, and the world is at peace.

古文：西川节度使崔宁、永平节度使李勉并同平章事。
现代文：西川节度使崔宁、永平节度使李勉同时担任同平章事。
English: The Nishikawa Sect sent Choi Ning, and the Yongping Sect sent Li Tsuen, both of whom served as Tongping Sect members.

古文：诏： 天下冤滞，州府不为理，听诣三司使，以中丞、舍人、给事中各一人，日于朝堂受词。
现代文：德宗下诏说： 天下冤案积留很多，州府不予受理，听任人们去找三司使，让御史中丞、中书舍人、给事中各一人每天在朝堂接受讼词。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict saying, "There are many unjust cases remaining in the world, and the prefectural government will not accept them. Let the people go to the three commissioners, and let one person each from the Imperial Historian's Office, the Chinese Calligrapher's Office, and the Court Clerk's Office receive the pleadings in the court every day.

古文：推决尚未尽者，听挝登闻鼓。
现代文：还不能推究决断的，听任他们敲击登闻鼓。
English: If they can't make a decision, let them beat the drum.

古文：自今无得复奏置寺观及请度僧尼。 
现代文：今后不许再上奏设置寺观以及请求剃度和尚、尼姑。 
English: In the future, it will no longer be allowed to set up a view of the temple, or to request that monks and nuns shave.

古文：于是挝登闻鼓者甚众。
现代文：于是敲登闻鼓的人很多。
English: As a result, there are a lot of people banging the drum.

古文：右金吾将军裴谞上疏，以为： 讼者所争皆细故，若天子一一亲之，则安用吏理乎！ 
现代文：右金吾将军裴上书认为： 投诉者所争论的都是鸡毛蒜皮的事，如果天子一一亲自过问，那么哪里还用得着官吏治理呢？ 
English: In his letter to the Emperor, General Pei wrote: The matters disputed by the complainants are all trivial matters. If the Son of Heaven personally investigates each and every case, then what need is there for government officials?

古文：上乃悉归之有司。
现代文：于是德宗全部交给有关部门处理。
English: As a result, all of Dezong was handed over to the relevant departments for processing.

古文：制： 应山陵制度，务从优厚，当竭帑藏以供其费。 
现代文：德宗下制： 一应帝陵修造制度，务必从优从厚，应当竭尽国库来供给修陵的花费。 
English: German imperial system: According to the imperial mausoleum construction system, it is necessary to proceed from the best to the thickest, and the national treasury should be exhausted to supply the cost of mausoleum repair.

古文：刑部员外郎令孤峘上疏谏，其略曰： 臣伏读遗诏，务从俭约，若制度优厚，岂顾命之意邪！ 
现代文：刑部员外郎令狐上书劝谏，内容大概是说： 我拜读遗诏，先帝要求修陵务必俭省节约，如果制度优厚，难道是先帝临终遗命的意思吗？ 
English: Gao Lang, a member of the criminal investigation department, sent a letter to the fox to persuade him, the content of which was probably to say: I read the last will and testament, the former emperor demanded that the mausoleum must be repaired with frugality and economy. If the system is generous, is it the meaning of the former emperor's dying wish?

古文：上答诏，略曰： 非唯中朕之病，抑亦成朕之美，敢不闻义而徙！ 
现代文：德宗书面答复他，大概是说： 这不仅仅说中了朕的痛处，也能成朕之美，朕哪敢不听从大道理而改变先帝的遗愿！ 
English: Dezong replied to him in writing, probably saying: This not only hit my sore spot, it can also become my beauty. How dare I not listen to the truth and change the last wish of the former emperor!

古文：峘，德棻之玄孙也。
现代文：令狐是令狐德的玄孙。
English: Ling Foo is Ling Foo's great-great-grandson.

古文：庚子，立皇子诵为宣王，谟为舒王，谌为通王，谅为虔王，详为肃王。
现代文：庚子，德宗册封皇子李诵为宣王，李谟为舒王，李谌为通王，李谅为虔王，李详为肃王。
English: Geng Zi, the son of Emperor Dezong, made Li Chao the king of Xuan, Li Mu the king of Shu, Li Xi the king of Tong, Li Qian the king of Qian, and Li Zhe the king of Su.

古文：乙巳，立皇弟乃为益王，傀为蜀王。
现代文：乙巳，册封皇弟李为益王，李傀为蜀王。
English: At this time, the younger brother of the emperor, Li Guo, was crowned as the King of Shu and the younger brother, Li, as the King of Yi.

古文：丙午，举先天事故，六品以上清望官，虽非供奉、侍卫之官，日令二人更直待制，以备顾问。
现代文：丙午，德宗采用先天年间旧例，六品以上清望官，虽然不是供奉官和侍卫官，但命令每天必须有二人轮流值班等候诏令，以备皇上随时顾视问讯。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Dezong adopted the old practice from the previous year, appointing six or more court guards. Although it was not a courtier and an attendant, he ordered that two people must take turns on duty every day to wait for the imperial edict, so that the emperor could watch and ask questions at any time.

古文：庚戌，以硃泚为凤翔尹。
现代文：庚戌，德宗任命朱为凤翔尹。
English: Geng Zong, Dezong appointed Zhu as Feng Xiang Yin.

古文：代宗优宠宦官，奉使四方者，不禁其求取。
现代文：代宗特别宠幸宦官，奉命出使各地的宦官，都不禁止他们求取财物。
English: The daimyō was especially fond of eunuchs, and he was ordered to send eunuchs from all over the country, but they were not prohibited from seeking wealth.

古文：尝遣中使赐妃族，还，问所得颇少，代宗不悦，以为轻我命。
现代文：代宗曾经派遣中使去赏赐妃子的家族，回来后一问，宦官所得的财物较少，代宗很不高兴，以为鄙视自己的命令。
English: The daimyō had once sent an envoy to reward the concubine's family, but when he returned, he was told that eunuchs received fewer possessions. The daimyō was very displeased and thought he had disdained his order.

古文：妃惧，遽以私物偿之。
现代文：妃子很害怕，马上用自己的东西进行补偿。
English: The concubine is very scared and immediately compensates with her own things.

古文：由是中使公求赂遗，无所忌惮。
现代文：因此，宦官使者公开求取贿赂和馈赠，无所顾忌。
English: Therefore, the eunuch emissary openly solicited bribes and gifts without any scruples.

古文：宰相尝贮钱于阁中，每赐一物，宣一旨，无徒还者；出使所历州县，移文取货，与赋税同，皆重载而归。
现代文：宰相都曾经将钱存放在橱柜中，宦官每次来赏赐一件东西，宣读一次圣旨，没有空手回去的。宦官出使地方，所经州县，发放公文，收取财物，如同征收赋税一样，都满载而归。
English: The chancellors used to keep their money in a cupboard, and the eunuchs used to reward one thing each time they came, read out the sacred edict once, and did not return empty-handed. Where the eunuchs were sent, they went through the prefectures, issued official documents, and collected property, just like collecting taxes. They all returned with a full load.

古文：上素知其弊。
现代文：德宗平素就知道这个弊病。
English: Desong has always been aware of this problem.

古文：遣中使邵光超赐李希烈旌节；希烈赠之仆、马及缣七百匹，黄茗二百斤。
现代文：他派遣宦官使者邵光超赏赐给李希烈旌节，李希烈赠给邵光超奴仆、马匹以及七百匹细绢，二百斤黄茗。
English: He sent eunuch emissary Shao Guangchao to reward Li Xilai's feast day, and Li Xilai gave Shao Guangchao slaves, horses, seven hundred fine horses, and two hundred pounds of yellow horses.

古文：上闻之，怒，杖光超六十而流之。
现代文：德宗听说后，很恼火，打了邵光超六十大板，然后将他流放。
English: After hearing this, Dezong was very angry and slapped Shao Guang with an ultra-sixty-ten board, and then exiled him.

古文：于是中使之未归者，皆潜弃所得于山谷，虽与之，莫敢受。
现代文：于是出使未归的宦官都偷偷地把所得的东西扔在山谷中，虽然给他们东西，他们都不敢接受。
English: So the eunuchs who had been sent out and had not returned secretly threw the things they had received into the valley. Although they were given things, they did not dare to accept them.

古文：甲子，以神策都知兵马使、右领军大将军王驾鹤为东都园苑使，以司农卿白琇珪代之，更名志贞。
现代文：甲子，德宗任命神策都知兵马使、右领军大将军王驾鹤为东都园苑使，让司农卿白接替他的职务，白改名为白志贞。
English: At the same time, Emperor Dezong appointed Wang Jiehe, the right-hand man of the general who led the right-hand army, as the envoy to the eastern capital, and asked Bai, the minister of agriculture, to take over his duties. Bai changed his name to Bai Zhizhen.

古文：驾鹤典禁兵十馀年，权行中外，诏下，上恐其生变；崔祐甫召驾鹤与语，留连久之，琇珪已视事矣。
现代文：王驾鹤执掌禁军十多年，朝廷内外都害怕他的权势，德宗担心他叛变朝廷，于是崔甫召见王驾鹤，跟他谈话，故意拖延了很长时间，这时白已经到任了。
English: Wang Jiehe had been in charge of the imperial army for more than ten years. Both inside and outside the imperial court were afraid of his power. Dezong was worried that he would rebel against the imperial court. So Cui Fu summoned Wang Jiehe, talked to him, and deliberately delayed for a long time. By this time Bai had already taken office.

古文：李正己畏上威名，表献钱三十万缗；上欲受之，恐见欺，却之则无辞。
现代文：李正己畏惧皇上的声威，上表贡献三十万缗线；德宗打算接受又害怕被欺骗，拒绝又没有理由。
English: Li Zheng himself was afraid of the emperor's prestige and offered 300,000 baht on the table; Dezong intended to accept and was afraid of being deceived, and there was no reason to refuse.

古文：崔祐甫请遣使慰劳淄青将士，因以正己所献钱赐之，使将士人人戴上恩；又诸道闻之，知朝廷不重货财。
现代文：崔甫请求派遣使者慰劳淄青的将士，利用李正己贡献的钱赏赐给他们，这样使将士们人人都对皇上感恩戴德；同时，各道节度使听说后，都知道朝廷不看重财物。
English: Cui Fu requested that an envoy be sent to comfort the exhausted young soldiers and reward them with the money contributed by Li Zhengtu, so that the soldiers would all be grateful to the emperor. At the same time, after hearing about the festival, all the emissaries knew that the imperial court did not value property.

古文：上悦，从之。
现代文：德宗很满意，同意了他的建议。
English: Xuanzong was very happy and obeyed Li Linfu's words.

古文：正己大惭服。
现代文：李正己十分惭愧，也十分信服。
English: Li Zheng is very ashamed, but also very convinced.

古文：天下以为太平之治，庶几可望焉。
现代文：天下百姓认为太平之治，也许可以看到了。
English: The people around the world think that the rule of Taiping, perhaps we can see.

古文：秋，七月，戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月戊辰朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：礼仪使、吏部尚书颜真卿上言： 上元中，政在宫壸，始增祖宗之谥。玄宗末，奸臣窃命，累圣之谥，有加至十一字者。
现代文：礼仪使、吏部尚书颜真卿进言说： 上元年间，武后专政，才增加祖宗谥号的字数，玄宗末期，奸臣当权，历朝皇帝的谥号有增加到十一字的。
English: Shang Shuxuan Zhenqing, the etiquette envoy and head of the personnel department, said: In the first year of the 21st century, the dictatorship of Empress Wu only increased the number of characters of the ancestor's nickname. At the end of the Xuanzong Dynasty, when treacherous vassals were in power, the nickname of emperors throughout the dynasties increased to eleven characters.

古文：按周之文、武，言文不称武，言武不称文，岂盛德所不优乎？
现代文：按周朝的文王和武王，称文就不称武，称武也就不称文，难道他们的大德就不崇高了吗？
English: According to King Wen and King Wu of the Zhou Dynasty, if you praise Wen, you don't praise Wu, and if you praise Wu, you don't praise Wen. Isn't their great virtue noble?

古文：盖群臣称其至者故也。
现代文：大概由于大臣们认为文、武是最高的称呼的缘故。
English: Probably because the ministers thought that "Wen" and "Wu" were the highest titles.

古文：故谥多不为褒，少不为贬。
现代文：所以谥号字多并不是赞扬，字少也不是贬低。
English: Therefore, the number of characters in the nickname is not a praise, and the number of characters is not a disparagement.

古文：今累圣谥号太广，有逾古制，请自中宗以上皆从初谥，睿宗曰圣真皇帝，玄宗曰孝明皇帝，肃宗曰宣皇帝，以省文尚质，正名敦本。 
现代文：如今历朝皇帝谥号太长，违背了古代的制度，请求从中宗以上各皇帝都按最初的谥号，睿宗称圣真皇帝，玄宗称孝明皇帝，肃宗称宣皇帝，以节省文字，崇尚质朴，辨正名分，注重根本。 
English: Nowadays, the imperial surnames of the emperors of all dynasties are too long, which violates the ancient system. It is requested that all emperors above Zhongzong should follow the original surnames, Ruizong called Shenzhen Emperor, Xuanzong called Xiaoming Emperor, Su Zong called Xuan Emperor, in order to save words, advocate simplicity, distinguish legitimate names, and pay attention to fundamentals.

古文：上命百官集议，儒学之士，皆从真卿议；独兵部侍郎袁傪，官以兵进，奏言： 陵庙玉册、木主皆已刊勒，不可轻改， 事遂寝。
现代文：德宗下令百官集思广议，儒学之士都赞同颜真卿的建议。唯独兵部侍郎袁，因掌握军队而进官，上奏说： 陵庙中的玉册、牌位都已经刊刻，不可轻易改动。 
English: Emperor Dezong ordered hundreds of officials to gather and discuss, and Confucian scholars all agreed with Yan Zhenqing's suggestion. However, Yuan, the attendant of the military department, who was promoted to an official position due to his command of the army, said in his report: The jade books and plaques in the mausoleum have already been engraved, and cannot be easily changed.

古文：不知陵中玉册所刻，乃初谥也。
现代文：于是此事便告终止。殊不知皇陵中玉册所刻的就是最初的谥号。
English: As a result, the matter was brought to an end. However, it was not known that the initial nickname was engraved on the jade scroll in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：初，代宗之世，事多留滞，四夷使者及四方奏计，或连岁不遣，乃于右银台门置客省以处之；及上书言事孟浪者、失职未叙者，亦置其中，动经十岁。
现代文：从前在代宗时期，许多事情都被搁置起来，四夷使者以及各地奏报计划的人，有的一连几年都不遣返，就在右银台门设置客省安置他们；还有上书论事和失职未再任者也安置在那里，动辄十年。
English: In the past, during the Daizong period, many things were put on hold. The Four Emissaries to the East and those who reported plans from various regions, some of whom were not repatriated for several years, were resettled in the guest province set up at the right bank of the Yangtze River; there were also those who had not been reappointed, and those who had not been reappointed, were also resettled there, often for ten years.

古文：常有数百人，并部曲、畜产动以千计，度支廪给，其费甚广。
现代文：常常有几百人，以及数以千计的随从、牲畜，由度支供给食粮，这笔费用很大。
English: There are often several hundred people, as well as thousands of attendants and livestock, who are provided with food by the dowry, which is very expensive.

古文：上悉命疏理，拘者出之，事竟者遣之，当叙者任之，岁省谷万九千二百斛。
现代文：德宗下令全面整治，放出被拘禁的人，遣返办完事的人，任命应当再任官的人，这样一年就节省粮食一万九千二百斛。
English: Dezong ordered a comprehensive rectification, releasing those who had been detained, repatriating those who had completed the work, and appointing those who should be reappointed, thus saving 19,200 baht of grain a year.

古文：壬申，毁元载、马璘、刘忠翼之第。
现代文：壬申，拆毁元载、马、刘忠翼的宅第。
English: In Jinshin, the homes of Yuan Zai, Ma, and Liu Zhongyi were demolished.

古文：初，天宝中，贵戚第舍虽极奢丽，而坦屋高下，犹存制度，然李靖家庙已为杨氏马厩矣。
现代文：从前，在天宝中期，皇亲贵戚的宅第虽然极其奢侈华丽，但房屋的高低还遵循制度，然而李靖的家庙已成为杨氏的马厩了。
English: Once upon a time, in the mid-Tempoh period, although the residences of the imperial relatives were extremely luxurious and gorgeous, the height of the houses still followed the system. However, Li Jing's family temple had become the stables of the Yang clan.

古文：及安、史乱后，法度堕弛，大臣、将帅、宦官竞治第舍，各穷其力而后止，时人谓之木妖。
现代文：到安史之乱后，法令制度松弛败坏，大臣将帅竞相修造宅第，各自竭尽财力，才停止经营，当时人们都称其为木妖。
English: After the Anshi Rebellion, the legal system became lax and deteriorated, and ministers and generals competed to build mansions, each exhausting their financial resources before ceasing operations. At that time, people called them wood demons.

古文：上素疾之，故毁其尤者，仍命马氏献其园，隶宫司，谓之奉成园。
现代文：德宗向来痛恨这种事，所以拆毁其中违反制度最为突出的宅第，接着命令马氏献出他的园林，归属宫廷园苑部门掌管，取名为奉成园。
English: Emperor Dezong always hated this kind of thing, so he tore down the house that was the most prominent violation of the system, and then ordered Mr. Ma to donate his garden, which was under the control of the palace garden department and was named Fengcheng Garden.

古文：癸丑，减常贡宫中服用锦千匹、服玩数千事。
现代文：癸丑，德宗削减平常供给宫中服用的一千匹丝织品、数千件衣服和玩物。
English: As a result, Emperor Dezong reduced the usual supply of 1,000 pairs of silk fabrics and thousands of pieces of clothing and toys used in the palace.

古文：庚辰，诏回纥诸胡在京师者，各服其服，无得效华人。
现代文：庚辰，德宗下诏，命令在京师的回纥等各族胡人，各自穿本族的衣服，不许仿效汉人。
English: Emperor Gaotian and Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering the Hu people of all ethnic groups, including the Hui of Beijing, to wear their own clothes and not imitate the Han people.

古文：先是回纥留京师者常千人，商胡伪服而杂居者又倍之，县官日给饔饩，殖资产，开第舍，市肆美利皆归之，日纵暴横，吏不敢问。
现代文：起先留在京师的回纥人常有一千人，而穿着汉服与汉人杂居的经商胡人又多一倍，县官每天供给生熟食品。他们添置资产，修建宅第，市场上获高利的行业都归他们经营，日益放纵而贪婪横暴，官吏不敢过问。
English: At the beginning, there were often 1,000 Uighurs who stayed in Beijing, and twice as many merchants who wore Hanfu and mixed with Han people. The county officials supplied raw and cooked food every day. They bought more assets, built houses, and the high-profit industries in the market were all run by them. They were increasingly indulgent and greedy, and the officials did not dare to question them.

古文：或衣华服，诱取妻妾，故禁之。
现代文：有的人身着汉服，引诱汉人，娶为妻妾，所以德宗下了禁令。
English: Some people dressed in Hanfu, lured Han people, and married them as wives and concubines, so the German Emperor issued a ban.

古文：辛卯，罢天下榷酒收利。
现代文：辛卯，德宗取消官府专利卖酒和征收酒税。
English: To make matters worse, the Tokugawa shogunate revoked the government's patent on the sale of alcohol and the collection of alcohol taxes.

古文：上之在东宫也，国子博士河中张涉为侍读，即位之夕，召涉入禁中，事无大小皆咨之；明日，置于翰林为学士，亲重无比。
现代文：德宗在东宫的时候，国子博士河中人张涉担任侍读，德宗即位的那天傍晚，将张涉召入宫中，事无大小都征询他的意见。第二天，将他安置在翰林院担任学士，对他无比亲近和器重。
English: When Emperor Dezong was in the East Palace, Dr. Kuniko Kawachuhito called Zhang Zhan into the palace in the evening of the day of Emperor Dezong's enthronement to consult him on all matters, large and small. The next day, he was placed in Hanlin Academy as a bachelor, and he was extremely close to him and held in high esteem.

古文：乙未，以涉为右散骑常侍，仍为学士。
现代文：乙未，德宗任命张涉为右散骑常侍，仍然担任学士。
English: At the same time, Dezong appointed Zhang Zhan as the right cavalryman, and he still served as a bachelor.

