古文：邢群李重王坤苏太玄房千里韦氏子李浔段成式鬼葬董汉勋
现代文：邢群李重王坤苏太玄房千里韦氏子李浔段成式鬼葬董汉勋
English: Li Qun, Li Chong Wang, Kun Su, Tai Xuan Fang, Qian Liwei's son, Li Xuan Duan, and Dong Han Xun

古文：邢群
现代文：邢群
English: Grasshopper swarm

古文：刑部员外邢群，大中二年，以前歙州刺史居洛中，疾甚。
现代文：在刑部担任员外郎官职的邢群，在唐宣宗大中二年时因前任歙州刺史的关系住在洛中。
English: Gong Qun, who served as a member of the Criminal Investigation Department, lived in Luochu when he was a second-year student at Tang Xuan Zong University due to the relationship with his predecessor, Gongzhou Jishi.

古文：群素与御史朱琯善。
现代文：有一次，他得了重病在家中休养。那时，他和当御史的朱琯是好朋友。
English: On one occasion, he was seriously ill and recuperating at home. At that time, he was good friends with Zhu Xi, who was the imperial historian.

古文：时琯自淮河从事罢居伊洛，病卒，而群未知。
现代文：邢群生病的时候，朱琯已经被免去了淮海从事的官位在伊水洛水一带，不久就病死了，可是邢群并不知道好友朱琯的死讯。
English: At the time of Gongqun's illness, Zhu Yao had already been removed from the official post he held in Huaihai, and died of illness soon after, but Gongqun did not know about the death of his friend Zhu Yao.

古文：尝昼卧，忽闻扣门者。令视之，见琯骑而来，群即延入坐。
现代文：有一天，邢群在家里躺着，忽然听见敲门声，让人开门看，原来是朱琯骑马来到门前，邢群非常高兴地请朱琯进屋坐下。
English: One day, Xing Qun was lying at home. Suddenly, she heard a knock on the door and asked someone to open the door. It turned out to be Zhu Yao riding a horse to the door. Xing Qun was very happy to invite Zhu Yao to come in and sit down.

古文：先是群闻琯病，及见来，甚喜，曰：向闻君疾，亦无足忧。
现代文：邢群曾听说朱琯生了病，现在见他来了很高兴地说：听说你曾生了病，看你现在这样，我就无忧无虑了。
English: Hao Qun had heard that Zhu Xi was ill, and now that he had seen him, he was happy to say: I heard that you had been ill, and seeing you now, I have no worries.

古文：琯曰：某尝病，今则愈矣。
现代文：朱琯说，我是生过病，现在已经好了。
English: Zhu Xi said, "I have been ill, but now I am well."

古文：然君之疾，亦无足忧，不一二日，当闻耳。言笑久之，方去。
现代文：你这个病也不用愁，一两天就会痊愈的。两个人谈笑了半天，朱琯才告辞。
English: You don't have to worry about this illness, it will get better in a day or two. The two of them talked and laughed for half a day before Zhu Xi said goodbye.

古文：琯访群之时，乃琯卒也。
现代文：事后才知道，朱琯来看过邢群的时候，正是他刚刚死去的时候。
English: It was only later that I learned that when Zhu Xi visited the herd of egrets, it was when he had just died.

古文：李重
现代文：李重
English: Li Jie

古文：大中五年，检校郎中知盐铁河阴院事李重罢职，居河东郡。
现代文：唐宣宗大中五年时，李重被免去了检校郎中、知盐铁和河阴院事等本、兼各职，住在河东郡。
English: When he was five years old at Tang Xuan Zong University, Li Chong was exempted from the school inspection, and he lived in Hedong County.

古文：被疾，旬日益甚，沈然在榻。
现代文：有一次他生了病，十多天以后病情更加沉重。
English: Once he fell ill, and his condition worsened after more than ten days.

古文：一夕，告其仆曰：我病不能起矣。
现代文：一天晚上他对仆人说：我病得起不来床，你去把门都关好吧。
English: One evening he said to his servant: "I am too ill to get into bed. Go and shut the door."

古文：又有一人，衣白叠衣，在其后。重与行己善，即惊曰：蔡侍御来。
现代文：这时他忽然听见庭院里有动静，仔细一看，来了一位红袍的官员，原来是他的好友河西县令蔡行己，身后还跟着个穿白衣的人。李重惊喜地说：原来是蔡侍御到了！
English: At this time, he suddenly heard movement in the courtyard. On closer inspection, a red-robed official came out. It turned out to be his friend, Hexi County magistrate Cai Xingji, followed by a man in white. Li Chong said in surprise: It turned out to be Cai Zhi Gui!

古文：因命延上，与白衣者俱坐。
现代文：说罢忙请蔡行己和那位白衣人上座。
English: Saying, "Let's hurry up," he invited Cai Xingji and the man in white to take their seats.

古文：顷之，见行己身渐长，手足口鼻，亦随而大焉。
现代文：片刻之间，只见蔡行己身材突然长高起来，手脚口鼻也随着长大。
English: In a matter of moments, Cai Xing suddenly grew taller, and his hands, feet, mouth and nose also grew.

古文：细视之，乃非行己也。
现代文：仔细看竟不是蔡行己了。
English: A closer look reveals that it is not Cai Xingji.

古文：重心异也，然因以侍御呼焉，重遂觉身稍可举，即负壁而坐，问曰：某病旬月矣，今愈甚。得不中于此乎？
现代文：李重心里非常奇怪，暗想：是不是我一叫他 蔡侍御 他就长高了呢？这时，又觉得自己身体不那么沉重了，就挣扎着靠墙坐了起来，向那人道：我已经病了不少天了，现在越来越重，是不是快死了呢？
English: Li Chong felt very strange, and thought to himself: Did he grow taller as soon as I called him Cai Shangguo? At this time, he felt that his body was not so heavy, so he struggled to sit up against the wall, and said to the man: I have been ill for many days, and now I am getting heavier and heavier, am I about to die?

古文：其人曰：君之疾当间矣。
现代文：那个高大的人说，不，你的病该好了。
English: The tall man said, no, your illness should be cured.

古文：即指白衣者：吾之季弟，善卜。
现代文：说着指了指那个白衣人说：这是我的小弟弟，他非常善于算卦。
English: "This is my little brother," he said, pointing to the man in white. "He's very good at counting."

古文：乃命卜重。
现代文：然后就让白衣人算上一卦。
English: Then let the person in white do the math.

古文：白衣者于袖中出一小木猿，置榻上。既而其猿左右跳踯，数四而定。
现代文：白衣人从衣袖里拿出一个小木制猿猴放在床上，那小猿猴立刻在床上又蹦又跳，半天才停下来。
English: The man in white took out a small wooden monkey from his sleeve and put it on the bed. The little monkey immediately jumped up and down on the bed, and didn't stop for half a day.

古文：白衣者曰：卦成矣，郎中之病，固无足忧。当至六十二，然亦有灾。
现代文：白衣人说，卦已算出来了，你的病不用担心，你可以活到六十二岁，但你还会有灾。
English: The man in white said, "The prediction has been made. You don't have to worry about your illness. You can live to be sixty-two years old, but you will still have disasters."

古文：重曰：侍御饮酒乎？
现代文：李重说，侍御喝点酒不？
English: Li Chong said, will the waiter drink some wine?

古文：曰：安敢不饮。
现代文：那人说，喝就喝点吧。
English: The man said, "Just drink some water."

古文：重遂命酒，以杯置于前。
现代文：李重就让仆人备酒，将酒杯放在那人面前。
English: Li Chong asked the servant to prepare the wine and placed the glass in front of the man.

古文：朱衣者曰：吾自有饮器。
现代文：那人说，我自带着酒具呢。
English: The man said, "I brought my own drinks."

古文：乃于衣中出一杯，初似银，及既酌，而其杯翻翻不定。细视，乃纸为者。
现代文：说着就从身上拿出一只杯子，刚一看像是银杯，但倒上酒后，杯子晃动很厉害，再仔细看，原来是一只纸杯。
English: As he spoke, he took out a glass from his body. At first glance, it looked like a silver cup, but after pouring the wine, the glass was shaking violently. Look more closely, and it turns out to be a paper cup.

古文：二个各尽二杯，已而收其杯于衣中。
现代文：两个人各自喝了两盅酒后，那红衣人又把杯子揣回怀中。
English: After the two men had each drunk two glasses of wine, the man in red took the glass back into his arms.

古文：将去，又诫重曰：君愈之后，慎无饮酒，祸且及矣。
现代文：两人将要离去时，红衣人又告诫李重说，你病好之后，千万不要再喝酒，否则会有祸事临头。
English: When the two were about to leave, the man in red warned Li Chung again, saying, "After you recover from your illness, don't drink any more alcohol, or something bad will happen to you."

古文：重谢而诺之，良久遂去。
现代文：李重拜谢并答应一定不喝酒。
English: Li Chong said thanks and promised not to drink.

古文：至庭中，乃无所见，视其外门，扃键如旧。
现代文：过了半天，那两个人就走了。他们刚走到院子里，就消失了。李重察看大门，大门仍然是锁着的。
English: Half a day later, the two men left. As soon as they walked into the courtyard, they disappeared. Li took a closer look at the gate, which was still locked.

古文：又见其榻前，酒在地，盖二鬼所饮也。
现代文：再看床前的地上，酒都泼在那里，这才知道喝酒的是两个鬼怪。
English: Looking again at the floor in front of the bed, where the wine had been spilled, I realized that it was the two ghosts who had been drinking.

古文：重自是病愈，既而饮酒如初，其年，谪为杭州司马。
现代文：后来李重病愈之后，没管那一套，照样喝酒。果然，这一年李重被贬为杭州司马。
English: Later, after Li Chong recovered from his illness, he did not care about that and continued to drink. Sure enough, this year Li Chong was demoted to Hangzhou Sima.

古文：王坤
现代文：王坤
English: Wang Kun

古文：太原王坤，大中四年春为国子博士。
现代文：太原人王坤在唐宣宗大中四年春上当了国子监的忖士。
English: Wang Kun, a native of Taiyuan, became a magistrate of the State Children's Supervisor in the spring of the fourth year of Tang Xuan Zong University.

古文：有婢轻云，卒数年矣。
现代文：他有个婢女名叫轻云，已经死了好几年了。
English: He had a servant girl named Gaoyun, who has been dead for several years.

古文：一夕，忽梦轻云至榻前。
现代文：有天晚上，王坤忽然梦见轻云来到她的床前。
English: One night, Wang Kun suddenly dreamed that a light cloud came to her bedside.

古文：坤甚惧，起而讯之，轻云曰：某自不为人数年矣，尝念平生时，若絷而不忘解也。
现代文：王坤很害怕，就起身问她怎么回事。轻云说：我已离开人世好几年了，回想我活着的时候，就像被绳索捆系着身子和你难分难解。
English: Wang Kun was very scared, so he got up and asked her what was going on. Xiaoyun said, "I have been dead for several years, and when I think back to when I was alive, it's as if I was tied to you with ropes.

古文：今夕得奉左右，亦幸会耳。
现代文：今天我能再来到你身边，真算得上是大幸了。
English: It's a blessing to be with you again today.

古文：坤懵然若醉。不寤为鬼也。
现代文：王坤被她的柔情感动得如痴如醉，竟忘了她是鬼这码事了。
English: Wang Kun was so moved by her tender feelings that he forgot that she was a ghost.

古文：轻云即引坤出门，门已扃鐍，隙中导坤而过，曾无碍。
现代文：轻云领着王坤往外走，虽然大门紧锁，但王坤随着轻云从门缝中一下就钻出去了。
English: Guan Yun led Wang Kun to go outside. Although the gate was locked, Wang Kun followed Guan Yun and got out of the gate.

古文：行至衢中，步月徘徊，久之，坤忽饥，语于轻云，轻云曰：里中人有与郎善者乎？
现代文：他们一同来到街上，在月光下徘徊游荡了很久。后来王坤忽然觉得很饿，就告诉了轻云。轻云说：邻里中有和你不错的朋友吧？
English: They came to the street together and wandered around in the moonlight for a long time. Later, Wang Kun suddenly felt very hungry and told Gao Yun. Gao Yun said, "Do you have any good friends in the neighborhood?"

古文：可以诣而求食也。
现代文：可以去向他们要些东西吃。
English: You can go and ask them for something to eat.

古文：坤素与太学博士石贯善，又同里居，坤因与偕行。至贯门，而门已键闭，轻云叩之。
现代文：王坤想起自己和太学博士石贯挺好，又是邻里，就领着轻云来到石贯家门口，一看大门紧闭，轻云就上前敲门。
English: Wang Kun thought of himself and Dr. Tai Xue, that Shichan was a good neighbor, so he led Light Cloud to Shichan's door. When he saw the door was closed, Light Cloud knocked on the door.

古文：有顷，阍者启扉曰：向闻叩门，今寂无覩，何也？
现代文：敲了半天，守门人才打开了门，一看门外没有人，奇怪地说，我刚刚明明听见敲门，怎么没有人呢？
English: After knocking for half a day, the doorkeeper only opened the door, and when he saw that there was no one outside the door, he said strangely, I just clearly heard a knock on the door, why is there no one there?

古文：因阖扉，轻云又扣之，如是者三，阍者怒曰：厉鬼安得辄扣吾门！且唾且骂之。
现代文：说着就又把门关上了。
English: He closed the door again.

古文：轻白坤云：石生已寝，固不可诣矣。
现代文：轻云又敲，守门人开门看还是没人。
English: The light cloud knocks again, the gatekeeper opens the door, but still no one is there to see.

古文：愿郎更诣他所。时有国子监小吏，亦同里，每出，常经其门。
现代文：这样反复了好几次，守门人在里面大怒地嚷叫，哪儿来的恶鬼一再地敲我家大门？
English: This was repeated several times, and the doorkeeper shouted angrily inside, "Where did the evil spirits come from that keep knocking on my door?"

古文：吏与主月俸及条报除授，坤甚委信之，因与俱至其家。
现代文：一面骂一面朝地上吐唾沫。轻云就对王坤说，你的朋友石贯已经睡了，不要找他了，我随你去找别的人家吧。
English: While cursing and spitting on the ground, Light Cloud said to Wang Kun, "Your friend Shizhang is already asleep, don't look for him, I'll go and look for someone else."

古文：方见启扉，有一人持水缶，注入衢中。轻云曰：可偕入。既入，见小吏与数人会食。初，坤立于庭，以为小吏必降阶迎拜。
现代文：当时，国子监里有个小官员也和王坤是邻居，王坤去时必要经过小官员的门口，小官员也常常给王坤捎来每月的薪金或文件，因此王坤很信任他。
English: At that time, there was a petty official in the National Children's Prison who was also a neighbor of Wang Kun. When Wang Kun went there, he had to pass through the door of the petty official. The petty official often gave Wang Kun a monthly salary or documents, so Wang Kun trusted him very much.

古文：既而小吏不礼，俄见一婢捧汤饼登阶，轻云即殴婢背，遽仆于阶，汤饼尽覆。
现代文：于是王坤领着轻云一同来到那小官员家的门外，刚要敲门，见门内有个人提着水罐出门倒水，轻云对王坤说，咱们趁此机会进去吧。
English: So Wang Kun led Light Cloud outside the door of the minor official's house. Just as they were about to knock on the door, they saw a man inside the door carrying a pitcher and pouring water. Light Cloud said to Wang Kun, "Let's take this opportunity to go inside."

古文：小吏与妻奴俱起，惊曰：中恶。
现代文：这时那小官员带着妻子奴仆从屋里跑出来，惊恐地大喊：中了邪啦！
English: At that moment, the little official ran out of the house with his wife and servant, crying out in horror: "I've been possessed!"

古文：即急召巫者，巫曰：有一人，朱祓银印，立于庭前。
现代文：然后马上就请来一名巫师。巫师看了看说，庭院前来了一位神怪，头戴有缨穗的帽子，胸前佩着银制的官印！
English: Then a wizard was immediately summoned. The wizard looked around and said that a monster had come to the courtyard, wearing a hat with a skull and crossbones and a silver seal on his chest!

古文：因祭之，坤与轻云俱就坐，食已而偕去。
现代文：于是巫师就领着大家一块祭祀祷告，轻云和王坤趁机钻进屋里坐下大吃了一顿，吃完就一块走了。
English: So the sorcerer led everyone in a group sacrifice and prayer. Guan Yun and Wang Kun took the opportunity to get into the house, sat down and had a big meal. After eating, they left together.

古文：女巫送到门，焚纸钱于门侧。
现代文：那巫师在后面送他们出门，并在大门旁烧了些纸。
English: The wizard ushered them out the back and burned some paper by the front door.

古文：轻云谓坤曰：郎可偕某而行。
现代文：轻云对王坤说，你现在就跟我走吧。
English: Xiaoyun said to Wang Kun, come with me now.

古文：坤即随出里中，望启夏而去。
现代文：王坤就跟着轻云走出街道，直奔启夏门而云。
English: Wang Kun followed the light cloud out of the street and went straight to the summer gate.

古文：至郊野数十里，见一墓，轻云曰：此妾所居，郎可随而入焉。
现代文：他们出城走了几十里后来到一座坟墓前，轻云说，我就住在里面，你随我进去吧。
English: After they had walked dozens of miles out of the city, they came to a grave, and Guan Yun said, "I live in it, you can follow me inside."

古文：坤即俯首曲躬而入，墓口曛黑不可辨。忽悸然惊寤，背汗股栗。
现代文：王坤就低头弯腰往墓穴里钻，只见墓内一片漆黑，心里一怕，就突然惊醒了，原来刚才是一场梦。
English: Wang Kun bent his head down and drilled into the grave, only to see that the grave was pitch black. He was afraid and suddenly woke up. It had just been a dream.

古文：时天已晓，心恶其梦，不敢语于人。
现代文：王坤越想越怕，双腿战抖得冒冷汗，看看天已破晓，但是没敢把这恶梦告诉任何人。
English: The more Wang Kun thought about it, the more afraid he became. His legs trembled and he broke into a cold sweat. He could see that it was dawn, but he didn't dare to tell anyone about this nightmare.

古文：是日，因召石贯。既坐，贯曰：昨夕有鬼扣吾门者三，遣视之，寂无所覩。
现代文：这天，王坤请来他的好友石贯，石贯刚一坐下就对王坤说，昨天夜里有个鬼三次敲我家大门，我让人去看，什么也没看见。
English: On this day, Wang Kun invited his friend Shizhang. As soon as Shizhang sat down, he said to Wang Kun, "Last night, a ghost knocked on my door three times. I had someone look, but I didn't see anything."

古文：至晓，过小吏，则有焚纸钱迹，即立召小吏，讯其事。小吏曰：某昨夕方会食，忽有婢中恶。巫云，鬼为祟。由是设祭于庭，焚纸于此。
现代文：到了早上王坤造访那小官员家，见他家门边有一堆烧纸钱的痕迹，我就立刻找他，问他为什么烧纸钱，小吏说：昨晚和朋友们会餐时，忽然有个丫环中了邪，当即请来了巫师，巫师说是鬼在作怪，于是在院中进行了祭祀，又在门边烧了纸钱。
English: In the morning, Wang Kun visited the minor official's house and saw a pile of burnt paper money on the doorstep of his house. I immediately looked for him and asked him why he was burning paper money. The minor official said, "Last night, when I was having dinner with friends, a maidservant suddenly fell under the influence of evil. A sorcerer was immediately invited. The sorcerer said that a ghost was at work, so they performed a ritual in the courtyard and burned paper money on the doorstep.

古文：尽与坤梦同。坤益惧，因告妻孥。
现代文：王坤一听，这些情况和自己梦中的事完全一样，心里更加恐惧，就把这件事告诉了家里的亲人们。
English: As soon as Wang Kun heard that these situations were exactly the same as the things in his dream, he was even more afraid and told his relatives at home.

古文：是岁冬，果卒。
现代文：这年冬天，王坤果然死了。
English: This winter, Wang Kun really died.

古文：苏太玄
现代文：苏太玄
English: Su Taixuan

古文：阳朔人苏太玄，农夫也，其妻徐氏，生三子而卒。
现代文：广西桂林阳朔有个叫苏太玄的农夫，他妻子徐氏生了三个儿子后死去了。
English: There was a farmer named Su Taixuan in Yangshuo, Guilin, Guangxi Province. His wife, Ms. Xu, died after giving birth to three sons.

古文：既葬，忽一日还家，但闻语而不见形，云：命未合终，冥司未录。
现代文：埋葬以后不久，徐氏忽然回家来了。但是，苏太玄只能听到徐氏的声音，看不见她本人。徐氏说，我的阳寿期限未到，阴间不收留我。
English: Shortly after the burial, Ms. Xu suddenly came home. However, Su Taixuan could only hear Ms. Xu's voice, and could not see her. Ms. Xu said, "I have not yet reached my birthday, and the underworld will not accept me."

古文：每至，必怜抚其子，为之纫补。
现代文：徐氏每一次回家来，都对自己的孩子十分疼爱，还为孩子们缝缝补补。
English: Every time Mr. Xu comes home, he is very fond of his children, and he also makes up for the children.

古文：经旬月，邻仵乃知，或占卜吉凶，述善恶，一一符验，有乡人在府充职，被疾，其家请卜之。
现代文：天长日久，邻居们就都知道了，纷纷来向徐氏求卦或问吉凶祸福，徐氏也就告诉他们，而且十分应验。有一个在府里作事的人生了病，家人请徐氏给算一算吉凶。
English: For a long time, the neighbors knew about it, and they came to ask Mr. Xu for advice or good luck, and Mr. Xu also told them, and it was very fulfilled. There was a person who worked in the government who was ill, and the family asked Mr. Xu to calculate the good luck.

古文：俄顷云：至凉风馆南，地名柘木林。遇虎当道，不敢过，遂却回。
现代文：不一会儿徐氏就说，我已经走到凉风馆以南的柘木林，前面有一只猛虎挡住了去路，过不去，于是就回来了。
English: After a while, Mr. Xu said that I had walked to the maple forest south of the Cool Breeze Pavilion. In front of me, there was a fierce tiger blocking the way. I couldn't get past it, so I came back.

古文：卜者请逼，因请再往。
现代文：病人的家人恳求徐氏再去一趟。
English: The patient's family implored Mr. Xu to visit again.

古文：俄顷曰：至府，见所疾已愈。
现代文：又过了片刻，徐氏说：到了府里看到他的病已经好了。
English: After a while, Mr. Xu said, "When I got to the government office, I saw that his illness had been cured.

古文：疑其不实，遂问其所居坊曲，病人形貌。
现代文：家中人还担心徐氏说的不准确，就向徐氏询问他们家的住址和病人的相貌。
English: The family members were also worried that what Mr. Xu said was not accurate, so they asked Mr. Xu for the address of their home and the appearance of the patient.

古文：徐氏先不曾至府，又未识病者，一一言之，无差异。
现代文：徐氏生前根本没去过那病人家，也不认识病人，但说出来的情况一点也不差。
English: Mr. Xu had never been to the patient's home before his death, nor did he know the patient, but what he said was not bad at all.

古文：又有人来卜，谢无物奉酬，深为不足。
现代文：后来，又有一个人来求徐氏给占卦，并事先说明没有钱物答谢，请徐氏谅解。
English: Later, another person came to ask Mr. Xu for a fortune-telling, and explained in advance that there was no money to thank him, and asked for Mr. Xu's understanding.

古文：徐氏曰：公家三斗粟在西房，何得称无？
现代文：徐氏说，你们家西屋明明有三斗粮食放着，你怎么说你家什么也没有呢？
English: Mr. Xu said, your West House clearly has three barrels of grain, how can you say that your home has nothing?

古文：卜者请取之。
现代文：那人说，你说我家有粮，你就去取来好了。
English: The man said, "If you say there is grain in my house, go and get it.

古文：忽一旦，言帝舜发兵讨蛮，有人求至驿，助擎熟食，更一两日当远。
现代文：不大一会儿，徐氏果然把粮食给背来了，大家一看都十分惊讶。有一天，徐氏突然说舜帝兴兵讨伐蛮狄，有人来求她随军作饭，一两天就能回来。
English: One day, Ms. Xu suddenly said that Emperor Xing's soldiers were fighting against the barbarians, and someone came to ask her to cook with the army, and she would be back in a day or two.

古文：如期而归。将一分细食，致夫前曰：此饭曷若人间过军者。
现代文：两天后徐氏果然回来了，还把一份点心给丈夫说，你尝尝比人间犒劳军队的食物怎样？
English: Two days later, Ms. Xu returned and gave her husband a snack, saying, "How would you like to taste the food of the world's hard-working army?"

古文：夫尝之，倍珍于他食。
现代文：丈夫一尝，果然比人间食物好吃。
English: When my husband tasted it, it was indeed better than human food.

古文：又一旦泣告曰：无端泄阴事，获罪被追。此去难再还，好看儿女。
现代文：又过了几天，徐氏忽然哭着对丈夫说，我由于泄漏了阴间的事将被问罪，这一去怕是再不能回来了。我去后，你可要好好照看儿女们啊！
English: A few days later, Ms. Xu suddenly burst into tears and said to her husband, "I'm going to be charged with a crime because I leaked what happened in the underworld, and I'm afraid I won't be able to come back. After I go, you'll have to take good care of your children!"

古文：泣别遂绝。
现代文：洒泪而别以后，再也见不到她了。
English: After a tearful goodbye, she was never seen again.

古文：房千里
现代文：房千里
English: House thousands of miles away

古文：春州南门外有仙署馆，馆中有卢公亭。
现代文：广东春州南门外有座仙署馆，馆中有个卢公亭。
English: Outside the south gate of Chunzhou, Guangdong, there is a hall of the Department of Immortals. There is a pavilion of Lu Gongting in the hall.

古文：房千里贬官，寻医于斯州，太守馆之于是。
现代文：房千里被贬官后到这个州求医，春州太守请房千里住进了仙署馆。
English: After being demoted, Fang Qianli went to this prefecture to seek medical treatment. The Chunzhou daimyo invited Fang Qianli to live in the Xiandian Pavilion.

古文：东厢有内室，仆夫假寐，忽有朱衣人，甚魁伟，直来其前。仆辈惊走，告千里。
现代文：有一天，仆人正在仙署馆的东厢房内室里睡午觉，忽然来了一个十分魁伟穿红衣的人，仆人们都吓跑了，告诉了房千里。
English: One day, a servant was taking a nap in the inner room of the East Wing of the Department of Immortals, when suddenly a very large man in a red robe came. The servants were scared away and told the house thousands of miles.

古文：既一二夕，又然。
现代文：过了一两天，那红衣大汉又来了。
English: A day or two later, the big man in red came again.

古文：千里不信，然不复置于室内。后累月，徒居溪亭。
现代文：房千里虽然不信鬼神，也不再在馆里住了，迁居在溪亭。
English: Although Fousenri did not believe in ghosts and gods, he no longer lived in the pavilion and moved to Keiting.

古文：复有假掾吏寄与东室，昼日，见一男子披纱裳，屣履而来，曰：若无久驻此。
现代文：后来又有一位当掾吏的人借住在仙署馆的东屋。有一天，掾吏忽然看见一个男人披着纱衣穿着拖鞋走进来说：你不许在这里长住！
English: Later, there was another bailiff who lived in the East Wing of the Sendai Building. One day, the bailiff suddenly saw a man wearing a gauze robe and slippers walk in and say, "You're not allowed to live here any longer!"

古文：掾惊出户，俱以状白于僚吏。
现代文：那掾吏吓得跑了出去，把这情形告诉同僚们。
English: The bailiff ran out in fright and told his colleagues what had happened.

古文：有老牙门将陆建宗曰：元和中，诛李师道，其从事陆行俭流于是州，赐死于是。
现代文：有位曾在府衙当过门将的陆建宗说，唐宪宗元和年间，朝廷诛杀李师道时，曾经给李师道当从事官的陆行俭流放到这个州，并在这里赐死。
English: One Lu Jianzong, who had been a goalkeeper in Fuzhou, said that when the imperial court tried to kill Li Shidao in the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, Lu Xingjian, who had been Li Shidao's official, was exiled to this state and died here.

古文：掾所白之状，果省不谬。
现代文：那掾吏所说的样子和陆行俭一点不差。
English: What the eunuch said was no different from what Lu Zhouzhen said.

古文：韦氏子
现代文：韦氏子
English: Wei's son grows up

古文：京兆韦氏子，举进士，门阅甚盛。
现代文：京城有个姓韦的人参加进士科试，门庭十分显赫。
English: There is a person surnamed Wei in Beijing who is taking part in the entrance examination, and his entrance is very prominent.

古文：尝纳妓于洛，颜色明秀，尤善音律。
现代文：韦氏在洛阳时曾蓄养了一名妓女，这妓女容貌秀美，尤其精通诗词音律。
English: When Wei was in Luoyang, he kept a prostitute, who was beautiful and especially good at poetry and melody.

古文：韦曾令写杜工部诗，得本甚舛，妓随笔改正，文理晓然。是以韦颇惑之。
现代文：韦氏曾经让妓女抄写一部杜甫的诗集，原本上错误很多，妓女在抄录时都一一改正过来了，文理十分通顺，韦氏感到很奇怪。
English: Wei once asked a prostitute to copy a collection of Du Fu's poems. There were a lot of mistakes in the original, but the prostitute corrected them one by one when copying. The literary theory was very clear, and Wei felt very strange.

古文：年二十一而卒，韦悼痛之，甚为羸瘠。
现代文：那妓女二十一岁时就死了，韦氏十分痛苦。
English: The prostitute died when she was twenty-one, and Mr. Wei was heartbroken.

古文：弃事而寐，意其梦见。
现代文：由于思念她，身体都消瘦了很多，经常扔下要做的事就去睡觉希望能梦见她。
English: As a result of missing her, my body has lost a lot of weight. I often drop what I have to do and go to sleep hoping to dream about her.

古文：一日，家僮有言嵩山任处士者，得返魂之术。
现代文：有一天，韦氏听家里的仆人说，嵩山有位姓任的隐者能为死者招魂，韦氏就把任某请来了，请他为妓女招魂。
English: One day, Wei heard from a family servant that there was a hermit in Songshan with the surname Ren who could summon the spirits of the dead. Wei invited Ren and asked him to summon the spirits of prostitutes.

古文：韦召而求其术，任命择日斋戒，除一室，舒帏于室，焚香。仍须一经身衣以导其魂，韦搜衣笥，尽施僧矣。惟余一金缕裙，任曰：事济矣。
现代文：任某让韦氏选了个日子净心吃素，安排了一个房间，在屋里挂上帐幕，烧上了香，然后向韦氏要一件妓女生前穿过的衣服好召她的魂。韦氏翻找衣箱，妓女的衣服都已施舍给僧人了，只剩一件金缕裙，任某说，这就可以了。
English: Mr. Ren asked Mr. Wei to choose a day to be a pure vegetarian, arranged a room, hung a tent in the house, burned incense, and then asked Mr. Wei for a dress worn by a prostitute to summon her soul. Mr. Wei rummaged through the wardrobe, the prostitute's clothes had been donated to the monk, only one gold skirt was left, Mr. Ren said, that was enough.

古文：是夕，绝人屏事，且以暱近悲泣为诫。
现代文：这天晚上，任某让韦氏断绝一切人事杂念，并告诫说到时候绝不许和妓女的魂灵亲近，也不许哭。
English: That evening, Ren asked Wei to cut off all personal thoughts, and warned that when the time came, he must not get close to the prostitute's soul, and must not cry.

古文：燃蜡炬于香前，曰：覩烛燃寸，即复去矣。
现代文：任某在香前点了一支蜡烛说，蜡烧到一寸时，我就走了。
English: Ren lit a candle in front of the incense and said that when the wax burned to one inch, I would leave.

古文：韦洁服敛息，一禀其诲。
现代文：韦氏连大气也不敢出，牢记着任某的告诫。
English: Wei did not even dare to come out, keeping in mind Ren's admonition.

古文：是夜，万籁俱止，河汉澄明。任忽长叹，持裙面帏而招。如是者三，忽闻吁叹之声。俄顷，蚑帏微出，斜睇而立，幽芳怨态，若不自胜。
现代文：这天夜里，万籁无声，星河闪烁，任某忽然长长地叹了口气，手里举着那件裙子朝着帐子招魂，反复了几次后，忽然听见女子悲叹接着就见那女子从帐中露出了一点身子，含泪凝视，似怨似悲，好像悲伤得不能自持的样子。
English: On this night, there was no sound and the stars were twinkling. Ms. Ren suddenly let out a long sigh. She held the dress in her hand and looked at the curtain to summon the spirit. After repeating this several times, she suddenly heard the woman's lament and then saw the woman's body peeking out of the curtain. She was staring with tears in her eyes, as if she was grieving, as if she couldn't contain her sadness.

古文：韦惊起泣，任曰：无庸恐迫，以致倏回。
现代文：韦氏顿时又惊又悲哭了起来，任某立刻提醒说，你千万不要惊动她，不然她立刻就会回去了！
English: Ms. Westin was shocked and cried in grief at the same time. Ms. Ren immediately reminded her that you must not alarm her, otherwise she would immediately go back!

古文：生忍泪揖之，无异平生。
现代文：韦氏只好强忍哭泣向那女子拜礼。
English: Mr Wei had to hold back his tears and bow to the woman.

古文：或与之言，颔首而已。
现代文：看她那模样，和活着时完全相同，韦氏和她说话，她只是点点头而已。
English: She looks exactly the same as she did when she was alive, and when he talks to her, she just nods.

古文：逾刻，烛尽及期。欻欲逼之，纷然而灭。
现代文：过了一会，蜡烛快要燃尽，那女子的归期就要到了，韦氏忙扑上前去，女子就突然消失了。
English: After a while, the candle was about to burn out, the woman's return time was about to arrive, Wei rushed forward, and the woman suddenly disappeared.

古文：生乃捧帏长恸，既绝而苏。
现代文：韦氏就捧着帐幕痛哭起来，哭昏过去又苏醒过来。
English: Ms. Wei held the tent and wept bitterly. She fainted from crying and then woke up.

古文：任生曰：某非猎食者，哀君情切，故来奉救。
现代文：任某对韦氏说，我不是用召魂术挣钱的那种人，由于被你的真情所感动，所以才来帮你一把。
English: Ren told Wei, "I'm not the kind of person who uses spiritism to make money. I came to help you because I was moved by your sincerity."

古文：沤沫槿艳，不必置怀。
现代文：其实男女之情就像水上的波浪树上的鲜花，转眼就会消失，你不必这样挂在心上。
English: In fact, the love between men and women is like the flowers on the wave tree on the water, it will disappear in the blink of an eye, you don't have to be so attached to your heart.

古文：韦欲酬之，不顾而别。
现代文：韦氏想好好酬谢任某，任某不受，头也不回地就走了。
English: Mr. Wei wanted to reward and thank Mr. Ren, but Mr. Ren did not accept, and he left without looking back.

古文：韦尝赋诗曰：惆怅金泥簇蝶裙，春来犹见伴行云。
现代文：后来，韦氏曾为这事写了一首诗：惆怅金泥簇蝶裙，春来犹见伴行云。
English: Later, Mr. Wei wrote a poem about this event: "In the spring, I saw a cloud of butterflies accompanied by clouds.

古文：不教布施刚留得，浑似初逢李少君。
现代文：不教布施刚留得，浑似初逢李少君。
English: It's like meeting Li Shaojun for the first time.

古文：悼亡甚多，不备录。
现代文：韦氏悼念的诗写了很多，这里不一一记载了。
English: Mr. Wei wrote a lot of poems to mourn, and they are all recorded here.

古文：韦自此郁郁不怿，逾年而殁。
现代文：后来韦氏一直郁郁寡欢，第二年就死去了。
English: Later, Mr. Wei remained depressed and died the following year.

古文：李浔
现代文：李浔
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：咸通中，中牟尉李浔，寓居圃田别墅。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通年间，河南中牟县的县尉李浔住在郊园中的别墅里。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Xizong of the Han Dynasty, Li Yu, the county official of Zhongmu County in Henan Province, lived in a villa in the countryside.

古文：性刚戾，不以鬼神为意。
现代文：李浔性格刚毅，脾气暴躁，从来不信鬼神。
English: Li Yao was a strong-willed person with a quick temper. He never believed in ghosts and gods.

古文：每见人酹酒，必怒而止之。
现代文：每当他看到有人向鬼神祭酒，就会很生气地制止。
English: Whenever he sees someone offering wine to the spirits, he angrily stops them.

古文：一旦，暴得风眩，方卧于庑下，忽有田父立于榻前，云：邻伍间欲来省疾。
现代文：有一天，他突然得了中风病，在房檐下躺着，就见几个农夫来到床前说，邻居们听说你病了，特地来看你。
English: One day, when he suddenly had a stroke and was lying under the eaves, he saw several farmers come to the bed and say, "The neighbors heard you were sick and came to see you."

古文：见数人，形貌尪劣，服饰或紫或青。有矮仆，提酒两壶，历阶而上。
现代文：李浔看这几个人相貌丑陋不堪，有的穿紫有的穿青，又见一个很矮的仆人提着两壶酒沿着庭院的台阶走上来，但这些人李浔身旁的家人都看不见。
English: Li Qian looked at these several people with ugly faces, some wearing purple and some wearing blue, and saw a very short servant carrying two jugs of wine along the steps of the courtyard, but these people could not see Li Qian's family members next to him.

古文：左右妻子，悉无所睹。
现代文：那矮仆说，你平时特别固执，瞧不起我们。
English: The dwarf said, you are usually very stubborn and look down on us.

古文：谓浔曰：尔常日负气，忽于我曹。
现代文：别人敬我们点酒，你也阻挡制止。
English: If someone offers us a toast, you stop them.

古文：醪醴之间，必为他人爱惜。
现代文：今天我带来几斗好酒，大家和你一起喝个痛快吧！
English: Today I've brought several barrels of good wine. Let's all have a good drink together!

古文：今有醇酎数斗，众欲为君一醉。俄以巨杯，满酌饮浔，两壶俱尽，余沥满席。
现代文：说着就拿来一个很大的酒杯，倒满了酒给李浔，把两壶酒都倒光了，地上还洒了很多的酒。
English: Saying this, he brought a large wine glass, filled it with wine and gave it to Li Yao. He poured out both jugs of wine, and also spilled a lot of wine on the ground.

古文：谓浔曰：何以常时惜酒也耶？
现代文：那矮仆又对李浔说，你看我们可不像你平时那么珍惜酒吧？
English: The dwarf servant said to Li Yao, "You see, we don't value the bar as much as you do?

古文：自尔百骸昏悴，如宿宿酲惙然，数月方愈。
现代文：李浔这次被鬼怪们灌得醉成了一滩泥，总是醉醺醺的又昏又乏，过了几个月才好。
English: This time, Li Yao was so drunk by the ghosts that he turned into a puddle of mud. He was always drunk, dizzy and tired, and only got better after a few months.

古文：段成式
现代文：段成式
English: Sectional staircase

古文：太常卿段成式，相国文昌子也，与举子温庭筠亲善。
现代文：任太常卿的段成式，是相国段文昌的儿子，他和举人温庭筠是好友。
English: Ren Taizongqing's Duan Chengxing was the son of Duan Wenchang, who was from the same country. He and the leader, Wen Tingyu, were good friends.

古文：咸通四年六月卒。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通四年六月，段成式去世了，当时温庭筠正在京城闲住。
English: In June of the fourth year of the reign of Tang Xizong of the Han Dynasty, Duan Chengxiang passed away. At that time, Wen Tingxuan was idling in Beijing.

古文：庭筠居闲辇下，是岁十一月十三日冬至，大雪，凌晨有扣门者。
现代文：这年十一月十三日冬至这一天，下起了大雪。一大早有人敲温庭筠的门。
English: On November 13 of that year, the day of the winter solstice, there was a heavy snowfall. Early in the morning, someone knocked on the door of Onniwadae.

古文：仆夫视之；乃隔扉授一竹筒，云：段少常送书来。
现代文：仆人去开门时，隔着门送进一只竹筒，外面的人说是段成式送信来了。
English: When the servant went to open the door, he sent a bamboo tube through the door, and the people outside said that the segmented transmission had come.

古文：庭筠初谓误，发筒获书，其上无字。开之，乃成式手札也。
现代文：温庭筠起初以为听错了，打开竹筒拿出信札，上面没有字，再把信札展开，果然是段成式手写的笔迹。
English: At first, Wen Tingyao thought he had misheard. He opened the bamboo tube and took out a letter, but there was no writing on it. Then he unfolded the letter, and sure enough, it was a handwritten paragraph.

古文：庭筠大惊，驰出户，其人已灭矣。
现代文：温庭筠大吃一惊，飞跑出门，送信人已经不见了。
English: Wen Tingyao was taken aback and ran out of the door. The sender had disappeared.

古文：乃焚香再拜而读，但不谕其理，辞曰：恸发幽门，哀归短数。
现代文：温庭筠烧上香，再三叩拜后才把信拿来看，然而却看不懂上面的意思。信上写道：我悲痛的进了阴府之门，哀叹我的寿数太短促了！
English: Aunting burned incense, and after repeated bows, she took the letter and read it. However, she did not understand the above meaning. The letter said: I entered the gates of the underworld in sorrow, lamenting that my life span was too short!

古文：慷慨所深，力占难尽。
现代文：我这一生是完了，后辈还有什么可说的呢？
English: My life is over, what can the younger generation say?

古文：不具。
现代文：何况男子为黄叶飘零而悲叹，女子为春深而心惊，自从在陕西杜陵分别之后，继之而来的人成群结队，真是院中井栏上流鹦飞翔，庭上的鹄鸟伴着钟声起舞，而我们这样的老朋友，却永远断绝了情谊。想到这些，我真是感慨万端，写也写不尽啊，就说到这里吧。
English: What's more, the men lamented the wafting of the yellow leaves, and the women were shocked by the depth of spring. Since the separation in the Shaanxi Tuling, the people who followed have come in droves. It's true that a high-pitched parrot flew over the well in the hospital, and the ostriches in the yard danced with the bells, but an old friend like us has broken off the friendship forever. Thinking about these, I'm really full of emotion, and I can't write it all down, so let's say it here.

古文：荆州牧段成式顿首。
现代文：荆州牧段成式再拜。
English: The Jingzhou pasture section has been completed.

古文：自后寂无所闻。
现代文：从这次以后，就再也没听到段成式的消息了。
English: After this, nothing more was heard of Duancheng.

古文：书云覠字，字书所无，以意读之，当作群字耳。
现代文：那封信中的覠字，任何书里都没有，按照大意去读，应该是个群字。
English: The swastika in that letter is not found in any book, and if you read it according to its meaning, it should be a group of letters.

古文：温段二家，皆传其本。
现代文：温家和段家一直流传着那封信的原本。
English: The Wen family and the Duan family have been circulating the original of the letter.

古文：子安节，前沂王傅，乃庭筠婿也，自说之。
现代文：儿子安节，曾为沂王的太傅，乃是温庭筠的女婿，这些事都是他亲口说的。
English: His son, Anjie, who was the great-grandfather of King Min and the son-in-law of Emperor Wen, said these things himself.

古文：鬼葬
现代文：鬼葬
English: Ghost burial

古文：辰州溆浦县西四十里，有鬼葬山。
现代文：湖南辰州溆浦县城西四十里，有一个鬼葬山。
English: Forty miles west of the city in Minoura County, Chenzhou, Hunan Province, there is a ghost burial mountain.

古文：黄闵《沅川记》云，其中岩有棺木，遥望可长十余丈，谓鬼葬之墟。
现代文：黄闵所著的《沅川记》中说，这山的中部岩石中有一个巨大的棺木，远看有十几丈长，那就是葬鬼的废墟。
English: According to Huang Qi's "Diary of the Xingchuan River," there is a huge coffin in the central rock of this mountain, which looks more than a dozen feet long from a distance, and it is the ruins of the burial of ghosts.

古文：故老云，鬼造此棺，七日昼昏，唯闻斧凿声。
现代文：当地老人们说，鬼们制造这只棺木时，连着七天都是大白日天昏地暗，只听见山上传来斧凿声，很多人家的木匠工具都不翼而飞。
English: Local old people said that when the ghosts made this coffin, it was day and night for seven days in a row. They only heard the sound of axes being chiseled in the mountains, and many people's carpentry tools were gone.

古文：人家不觉失器物刀斧，七日霁，所失之物，悉还其主，铛斧皆有肥腻腥臊。
现代文：七天后，天晴了，那些丢失的工具又都自己回到主人家里，斧子凿子上都沾上了腥臊的气味。
English: Seven days later, the weather cleared, and the lost tools returned to their owners on their own. The axes and chisels were stained with the smell of mothballs.

古文：见此棺俨然，横据岸畔。
现代文：再看山上，就出现了那口横在岩畔的棺木。
English: Looking back up the mountain, I saw the coffin lying on the edge of the cliff.

古文：董汉勋
现代文：董汉勋
English: Dong Hanxun

古文：汝坟部将董汉勋，善骑射，力兼数人，矫捷能斗。
现代文：镇守河南汝水大堤的部将董汉勋，骑术箭术都很高超，而且臂力过人，矫健善斗。
English: Dong Hanxun, the commander of the town guard of Ruxu Dam in Henan Province, excelled in horsemanship and archery, and his arm strength was superior, and he was good at fighting.

古文：累戍于西北边，羌人惮之。
现代文：他曾多次在西北边疆镇守，羌族人都很怕他。
English: He had been a town guard in the northwest frontier many times, and the Yi people were very afraid of him.

古文：乾符丙申岁，为汝之龙兴镇将。忽一日，谓其妻曰：来日有十余故人相访，可丰备酒食。
现代文：乾符丙申年，董汉勋镇守汝州的龙兴，有一天他对妻子说：明天将有十几个老朋友来看我，你可多准备好酒好菜。
English: In the year of the monkey, Dong Hanxun was in charge of Longxing in Ruzhou. One day, he said to his wife: "Tomorrow, more than a dozen old friends will come to see me. You can prepare more wine and good food."

古文：其家以为常客也，翌日，盛设厅事。
现代文：第二天，他在大厅中摆好了盛筵。
English: The next day, he set up a feast in the hall.

古文：至辰巳间，汉勋束带，出镇门，向空连拜，或呼行第，或呼字，言笑揖让而登厅。
现代文：午前，他装束整齐，出了营门，向空中不断地连连礼拜，嘴里不住地叫着一些人的名字或排行，说笑着向大厅里让着客人。
English: In the morning, he dressed neatly and went out of the camp gate, continuously praying to the sky, constantly calling out the names or ranks of some people, and laughing and letting guests into the hall.

古文：其家大愕，具酒食，若陈祭焉。
现代文：家里人都十分惊讶，不断地往大厅里端上酒菜，像祭祀上供一样。
English: The family members were very surprised and kept bringing wine and vegetables into the hall, as if it were a sacrificial offering.

古文：既罢，其妻诘之，汉勋曰：皆曩日边上阵没同侪也，久别一来耳，何异之有？
现代文：汉勋的妻子问他，他说，他们都是我在边疆打仗时阵亡的朋友，分别很久了，来看看我，有什么奇怪的呢？
English: Han Xun's wife asked him, he said, they are all my friends who died in the war on the frontier, separated for a long time, come and see me, what's so strange?

古文：后汉勋终亦无恙。
现代文：后来汉勋始终没有出什么事。
English: Later, nothing happened to Han Xun.

古文：至明年秋八月晦，青土贼王仙芝数万人奄至。
现代文：第二年秋天八月最后的一天，王仙芝带着数万人突然杀来。
English: The following autumn, on the last day of August, Wang Xianzhi suddenly arrived with tens of thousands of people.

古文：时承平之代，郡国悉无武备。
现代文：当时天下太平，州、郡没有驻扎大量军队。
English: At that time, the country was at peace, and there were no large numbers of troops stationed in any state or county.

古文：是日，郡选锐卒五百人，令勇将爨洪主之。出郡东二十里苦慕店，尽为贼所擒，唯一骑走至郡。
现代文：这天，郡里派出五百名精兵，由一名叫爨洪的勇将率领，到郡城东二十里的苦慕店迎敌，但出师不利，全部被王仙芝的军队俘获了，只有一个人骑马返回郡城。
English: On this day, the county sent five hundred elite soldiers, led by a brave general named Su Hong, to meet the enemy at Bitter Shop, twenty miles east of the county seat. However, they were outnumbered and all of them were captured by Wang Xianzhi's army. Only one man returned to the county seat on horseback.

古文：郡人大惊，遂闭门登陴，部分固守。汉勋以五百人据此门。
现代文：城里人大惊，赶快关了城门上了城墙，准备守城，董汉勋带着五百人把守城门。
English: The people in the city were shocked. They quickly closed the city gate and climbed the city wall, preparing to defend the city. Dong Hanxun took five hundred people to guard the city gate.

古文：九月朔旦，贼至合围，一鼓而陷南门，执太守王镣。
现代文：九月初一早晨，贼兵围城，一举攻陷了南门，抓住了太守王镣。
English: On the morning of the first day of September, the robber soldiers besieged the city, captured the south gate in one fell swoop, and captured the governor Wang Yao.

古文：汉勋于北门，乘城苦战。
现代文：董汉勋在北门据城苦战，拉弓猛射，每射必中，贼兵数十人被射死。
English: Dong Hanxun fought hard at the north gate of the city, drawing a bow and shooting fiercely. Dozens of thieves were shot dead.

古文：中矢者皆应弦饮羽，所杀数十人，矢尽，贼已入。汉勋运剑，复杀数十人。
现代文：后来董汉勋箭射完了，贼兵终于攻进城门，汉勋又拔剑杀了几十名贼兵。
English: Later, after Dong Hanxun finished shooting arrows, the bandits finally broke into the city gate, and Hanxun drew his sword and killed dozens of bandits.

古文：剑既折，乃抽屋椽击之，又杀数十人。
现代文：后来剑也砍断了，就抽了一根屋椽搏斗，又打死数十人，一直战到精疲力竭，终于被杀。
English: Later, when his sword was also cut off, he pulled out a piece of roofing material to fight, and killed dozens of people. He fought until he was exhausted, and was finally killed.

古文：日上饥疲，为兵所殪，贼帅亦嗟异焉。
现代文：后来贼兵的统帅也十分惊异赞叹。
English: Later, the commander of the robber soldiers was also very surprised and impressed.

