古文：进字先之。
现代文：翟进字先之，河南伊阳人。
English: First of all, people from Iyang, Henan Province.

古文：以捕盗劳补下班殿侍，累功充京西第一将。
现代文：因捉捕强盗的功劳补下班殿侍，累官充任京西第一将。
English: For his efforts in catching the robber, he was appointed as the first general of the western part of Beijing.

古文：坐熙河帅刘法泾原战失利，降官停任，寻叙复。
现代文：因熙河主帅刘法泾原战役失利牵连，降官停职，不久恢复原有官资，收叙任用。
English: Due to the implication of the defeat in the battle of Xihe, Liu Fahui, the head coach of Xihe, was demoted and suspended. Soon, he was reinstated and promoted.

古文：女真归故地，改河北第四将。
现代文：女真归还故地，改任河北第四将。
English: Nyanzhen returned to her hometown and was appointed as the fourth general of Hebei Province.

古文：往至遂城，会契丹兵奄至，都统制刘延庆以进为先锋，与契丹战于幽州石料冈、卢沟河皆捷。
现代文：前往任职到遂城时，适逢契丹军队忽然到来，都统制刘延庆以翟进为先锋，与契丹战于幽州石料冈、卢沟河，都取得胜利。
English: When he went to Suicheng to take up the post, the Khitan army suddenly arrived, and Liu Yanqing, with Xunjin as the vanguard, took control of the capital and fought against the Khitan in Yuzhou Stone Hill and Lugou River, both of which were victorious.

古文：又与契丹大将遇于峰山，力战弥日，契丹溃去。
现代文：又与契丹大将在峰山遭遇，力战整天，契丹溃败离去。
English: He also encountered the Khitan general in Fengshan. They fought all day, and the Khitan was defeated and left.

古文：金人犯京师，朝廷密诏西道总管王襄会兵三万赴京城，至叶县，襄欲引兵而南，进谏止之，因分军遣进持书而西。
现代文：金人进犯京师，宋朝廷密召西道总管王襄合兵三万人前往京城。到叶县，王襄打算带领军队南下，翟进进谏阻止他，因而分军派翟进拿着书信向西进发。
English: The Jin people attacked the Beijing division, and the Song court secretly summoned the general manager of the West Road, Wang Xiang, and 30,000 soldiers to go to Beijing. In Ye County, Wang Xiang planned to lead the army to the south, and Xing Jin Bao stopped him, so the division sent Xing Jin to take the letter and go west.

古文：时经略使范致虚已合五路军马次潼关，以进统河南民兵，收复西京。
现代文：当时经略使范致虚已经集合五路军马驻扎在潼关，以翟进统领河南民兵，收复西京。
English: At that time, the magistrate's envoy Fan Zhihu had already gathered five army horses stationed in Shaoguan to lead the Henan militia into Shaoguan and recapture West Beijing.

古文：进至福昌，遣兵袭金营。
现代文：翟进到达福昌县，派兵袭击金兵营垒。
English: He marched into Fuchang County and sent troops to attack the camp of Jin soldiers.

古文：时金游骑往来外邑，进设伏擒之。
现代文：当时金国游骑在郊区来来往往，翟进设置埋伏擒获他们。
English: At that time, the Jin Guo Rangers came and went in the suburbs, setting up ambushes to catch them.

古文：金人逼灵山砦，进父子兄弟与之战，溃围至高都，集乡兵七百人，夜行昼伏，五日至洛城，夜半破关入，擒高世由。
现代文：金人进逼灵山寨，翟进父子兄弟与金人展开战斗，突破包围到达高都县，纠集乡兵七百人，夜晚行军白天埋伏，五天到达洛阳城，夜半时分破关入城，擒获高世由。
English: Jinren marched into the village of Xiling, Shujin and his father and son brothers fought with Jinren, broke through the encirclement to reach Gaodu County, gathered seven hundred local soldiers, marched at night and ambushed during the day, reached Luoyang City in five days, broke into the city at midnight, and captured Gao Shiyu.

古文：再捷于伊阳白草坞。
现代文：又在伊阳白草坞取得胜利。
English: It also won a victory in the Iyang Bai Cao dock.

古文：都总管孙昭远至洛阳，以进戍渑池界，授武义大夫、阁门宣赞舍人。
现代文：都总管孙昭远到洛阳，以翟进戍守渑池边界，被授予武义大夫、阁门宣赞舍人。
English: Sun Zhaoyuan, the chief administrator of the capital, went as far as Luoyang to enter and guard the border of Dianchi, and was awarded the title of Dr. Wuyi and the title of the Gate of Heaven.

古文：金人犯白浪隘，将渡河，进破之。
现代文：金人进犯白浪隘，将要渡过黄河，翟进攻破敌人。
English: The Jin people will invade the Bai Lang Pass, cross the Yellow River, and attack and defeat the enemy.

古文：未几，洛阳再陷，进在伊阳，裒散亡才千人。
现代文：不久，洛阳再次陷落，翟进在伊阳聚集散亡才一千人。
English: Soon, Luoyang fell again, and only a thousand people gathered and dispersed in Yiyang.

古文：金人犯薛封，进选精锐三百人，夜纵火斫其营，焚死者甚众。
现代文：金人进犯薛封，翟进挑选精锐三百人，晚上纵火摧毁金人营寨，烧死的人很多。
English: The goldsmiths attacked Xuefeng. He marched in and selected 300 elite soldiers. At night, he set fire to the goldsmiths' camp and destroyed it. Many people were burned to death.

古文：又战于驴道堰，生擒金将翟海，追至梅花谷。
现代文：又战于驴道堰，活捉金将翟海，追到梅花谷。
English: They also fought in the weir of the donkey road, catching the gold alive and chasing it to the Bohai Sea and the Meihua Valley.

古文：贼冀德、韩清啸聚南阳，进间道击之，德降，继斩清于艾蒿平。
现代文：盗贼冀德、韩清在南阳互相呼召，聚集成群，翟进从小路攻击他们，冀德降服，既而在艾蒿平斩杀韩清。
English: Thieves Ji De and Han Qing called out to each other in Nanyang, gathered into a group, attacked them from a side road, Ji De surrendered, and killed Han Qing in Ai Yuping.

古文：勒兵抵龙门，屡与金人夹河战，乘胜入洛阳。
现代文：翟进统率军队抵达龙门，多次与金人隔黄河战斗，乘胜开进洛阳。
English: Hao Jin Ting and his army arrived at Longmen, fought against the Jin people across the Yellow River many times, and entered Luoyang with victory.

古文：或曰： 彼砦尚固，城未可守。 不听。
现代文：有人说： 他们的营寨还坚固，城不可守。 翟进不同意。
English: Some people said: Their camp is still strong, the city cannot be defended. Xunjin did not agree.

古文：金人聚怀、卫、蒲、孟数州之众薄城下，斧诸门入，进率士卒巷战，次子亮死之。
现代文：金人聚集怀、卫、蒲、孟几州的军队逼近城下，用斧头砍开诸门入城，翟进率领士兵在里巷战斗，他的次子翟亮在这场战斗中死去。
English: The Jin people gathered the armies of Huai, Wei, Pu and Meng Kizhou, approached the city, cut open the doors with an axe and entered the city, and led the soldiers to fight in the alley. His second son, Hao Liang, died in this battle.

古文：迁武功大夫、阁门宣赞舍人，充京西北路兵马都钤辖，寻授马步军副总管，升本路制置使，兼知河南府。
现代文：升任武功大夫、阁门宣赞舍人，充任京西北路兵马都钤辖，不久被任命为马步军副总管，升任本路制置使，兼知河南府。
English: He was promoted to the post of doctor of military exploits, and was appointed as the commander of the Beijing Northwest Road Military Horse Corps. Soon, he was appointed as the deputy commander of the Horse Infantry Corps, and was promoted to the position of the road construction commissioner, and he also knew Henan Province.

古文：沙市距城才十五里，南阻蜀江，北倚江陵，地势险固，为舟车之会，恃水为防。
现代文：恰逢东南留守杜充所招纳的大盗杨进号称 没角牛 的，拥兵几万，在汝州、洛阳之间残害百姓。
English: At the same time, the bandit Yang Jin, who was recruited by Du Chong, the governor of Southeast China, and who was known as "the cow with no horns," recruited tens of thousands of soldiers and killed people between Ruzhou and Luoyang.

古文：德祐元年，湖水忽涸，北兵横遏中道，乘南风纵火，都统程文亮逆战于马头岸，制置使高达束手不援，文亮降。
现代文：翟进认为他的兄长翟兴想奋力除掉杨进。适逢杨进派几百骑兵越水进犯翟进营寨，翟进乘他渡到半路途中攻击，追逐杨进几十里，毁掉杨进四个营寨，因马受惊翟进坠落壕沟，被杨进所杀害。
English: Hao Jin thought that his brother Hao Xing was trying to get rid of Yang Jin. At the right time, Yang Jin sent several hundred cavalry across the water to attack Hao Jin's camp. Hao Jin took him to the middle of the road to attack, chased Yang Jin for dozens of miles, destroyed four of Yang Jin's camps, and because his horse was frightened, he fell into a trench and was killed by Yang Jin.

古文：梦求朝服望阙再拜，自经死。林空斋，永福人，失其名。
现代文：宋朝廷赠翟进为左武大夫、忠州刺史，以他的后代五人为官。林空斋，永福人，佚失他的名字。
English: The Song Dynasty court presented He Jin with the titles of Zuo Wu Daifu and Zhongzhou Zhishi, with five of his descendants serving as officials. Lin Kuzhai, a man of eternal good fortune, lost his name.

古文：父同，官至监丞。
现代文：父亲林同，官至监丞。
English: His father, Lin Tong, was a high-ranking official.

古文：空斋举进士，历知县，解官家居。
现代文：空斋考中进士，历任知县，辞官在家居住。
English: Graduates of the school entrance examination, successively appointed magistrates, and retired magistrates live at home.

古文：益王立，张世杰围泉州，乃率乡人黄必大、刘仝祖即其家开忠义局，起义兵，复永福县。
现代文：益王即皇帝位，张世杰包围泉州，林空斋就率领乡人黄必大、刘仝祖在他的家里开设忠义局，起义兵，收复永福县。
English: King Yi was the emperor, Zhang Shijie encircled Quanzhou, and Lin Kuzhai led the villagers Huang Bida and Liu Yuzhu to set up a loyalty bureau in his home, raise a rebel army, and recover Yongfu County.

古文：时王积翁以福安送款世杰，然实密约北兵。
现代文：当时王积翁以福安奉赠张世杰，但实际上秘密约定元兵。
English: At that time, Wang Zhiweng presented Zhang Shijie with Fu'an, but in fact secretly agreed with the general.

古文：兵至，屠永福，必大、仝祖等走它邑。
现代文：元兵到，在永福县毁掉城市，杀害居民，黄必大、刘仝祖等人逃往其他县。
English: When the Yuan soldiers arrived, they destroyed the city and killed residents in Yongfu County. Huang Bida, Liu Yuzhu and others fled to other counties.

古文：空斋盛服坐堂上，啮指血书壁云： 生为忠义臣，死为忠义鬼。
现代文：林空斋将衣服穿戴整齐坐在大厅上，咬破指头用血在墙壁上书写道： 生为忠义臣，死为忠义鬼。
English: Lin Kuanzhai put on his clothes and sat neatly on the hall. He bit his finger and wrote in blood on the wall: "Born as a loyal subject, died as a loyal ghost."

古文：草间虽可活，吾不忍为尔。
现代文：草野间虽然可以活命，但我不忍心这样做。
English: I could live in the fields, but I don't want to.

古文：诸君何为者，自古皆有死。 俄见执，不屈而死。
现代文：诸君为什么这样做？
English: Why are you guys doing this?

古文：得以死报朝廷，夫何憾。 竟不屈，遂见杀。
现代文：自古以来人都有一死。 一会儿林空斋被捉，不屈服而死。
English: Since ancient times, all people have one death. One moment, Lin Kucai was caught, and he died without giving in.

