古文：易称 男正位乎外，女正位乎内；男女正，天地之大义也 。
现代文：《易经》中说： 男子守着正道处理外务，女子守着正道处理家事，男女都守着正道，这是天地间的大道理。 
English: In the I Ching, it says, "Men keep to the right path in handling foreign affairs, women keep to the right path in handling domestic affairs, and both men and women keep to the right path. This is the great principle between heaven and earth."

古文：古先哲王，莫不明后妃之制，顺天地之德。
现代文：古代贤明圣德的君主，没有不明确制定后妃的礼仪制度的，顺应天地间的道德秩序。
English: Ancient wise and saintly monarchs did not formulate the etiquette system of the empress, conforming to the moral order of heaven and earth.

古文：故二妃嫔妫，虞道克隆；任、姒配姬，周室用熙。
现代文：所以尧帝的两个女儿娥皇、女英嫁给虞舜为妃，使舜的事业兴隆昌盛；太任、太姒两位女子嫁给姬氏，周王朝此得以兴盛。
English: Therefore, Emperor Zhou's two daughters, Empress E and Empress Ying, married to Princess Yuxuan, making the cause of Yuxuan prosperous and flourishing; the two women, Empress Taizhong and Empress Taizhong, married to the Ji clan, and the Zhou Dynasty was able to flourish.

古文：废兴存亡，恒此之由。
现代文：由此可见，一个国家的兴衰存亡，确实是会跟后妃女子有着莫大的关系。
English: From this it can be seen that the rise and fall of a country's existence is indeed closely related to its empress.

古文：春秋说云天子十二女，诸侯九女，考之情理，不易之典也。
现代文：《春秋》中说天子可以有十二个后妃，诸侯有九个，从情理上探究，确实是一个不该改变的制度。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," it is said that the emperor can have twelve concubines, and the princes can have nine. From the perspective of reason, it is indeed a system that should not be changed.

古文：而末世奢纵，肆其侈欲，至使男女怨旷，感动和气；惟色是崇，不本淑懿，故风教陵迟而大纲毁泯，岂不惜哉！
现代文：但各王朝处于末世之时，君主总是奢侈放纵，肆意沉溺声色，使得有些夫妻长期处于分离之中，损伤天地间的和睦之道；使得天下女子只追求美貌，不将德行风范作为修身的要领，导致国家的教化风气渐渐凋敝，纲常伦理也日益被损毁，怎么不令人感到痛心呢！
English: However, when the dynasties are in the last days, the monarchs are always extravagant and indulgent, indulging in wantonness, causing some couples to be separated for a long time, damaging the way of harmony between heaven and earth; making the women of the world only pursue beauty, not taking morality as the essentials of self-cultivation, leading to the gradual decline of the country's civilized culture, and the systematic ethics are also increasingly destroyed, how can one not feel sad!

古文：呜呼，有国有家者，其可以永鉴矣！
现代文：唉，天下间身为君主的人，都应该永远引以为鉴啊！
English: Alas, those who are monarchs in the world should always take this as a lesson!

古文：汉制，帝祖母曰太皇太后，帝母曰皇太后，帝妃曰皇后，其馀内官十有四等。
现代文：依汉朝制度，皇帝的祖母称太皇太后，皇帝的母亲称皇太后，皇帝的正妻称皇后，其余的女官、妃嫔又分为十四个等级。
English: According to the Han Dynasty system, the emperor's grandmother is called the Grand Empress Dowager, the emperor's mother is called the Empress Dowager, the emperor's lawful wife is called the Empress, and the remaining court ladies and concubines are divided into fourteen grades.

古文：魏因汉法，母后之号，皆如旧制，自夫人以下，世有增损。
现代文：魏朝沿袭汉代制度，太皇太后、皇太后、皇后等称号都与汉代一样，但从夫人以下的设置与称呼，各时期都有所不同。
English: The Wei Dynasty followed the system of the Han Dynasty. Titles such as grand empress dowager, empress dowager, and empress were the same as in the Han Dynasty, but the setting and address from the wife down were different in each period.

古文：太祖建国，始命王后，其下五等：有夫人，有昭仪，有婕妤，有容华，有美人；文帝增贵嫔、淑媛、脩容、顺成、良人。
现代文：太祖建国的时候，册封了王后，王后以下嫔妃分为夫人、昭仪、婕妤、容华、美人五等；文帝时增加了贵嫔、淑媛、修容、顺成、良人等称谓。
English: At the time of the founding of the country, the great-great-grandfather was crowned queen, and the queens and concubines below the queen were divided into five categories: wife, Zhaoyi, Yao, Yonghua, and beauty; when Emperor Wen was crowned, the titles of noblewoman, lady, beauty, Shuncheng, Shuncheng, and lover were added.

古文：明帝增淑妃、昭华、脩仪；除顺成官。
现代文：明帝时期增加了淑妃、昭华和修仪三等，但除掉了顺成这一等。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, the third class was added for Shu Fei, Zhao Hua, and Xi Yi, but the first class was removed for Shuncheng.

古文：太和中始复命夫人，登其位於淑妃之上。
现代文：太和年间又开始册立夫人，品阶地位在淑妃之上。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, the registration of concubines began again, with the rank status above that of concubines.

古文：自夫人以下爵凡十二等：贵嫔、夫人，位次皇后，爵无所视；淑妃位视相国，爵比诸侯王；淑媛位视御史大夫，爵比县公；昭仪比县侯；昭华比乡侯；脩容比亭侯；脩仪比关内侯；婕妤视中二千石；容华视真二千石；美人视比二千石；良人视千石。
现代文：从夫人之下分爵号共十二等：贵嫔、夫人，地位仅在皇后之下，爵位是其他妃嫔不能相比的；淑妃的地位等同相国，爵号等同于诸侯王；淑媛地位等同于御史大夫，爵号和县公相同；昭仪爵号与县侯等同；昭华爵号与乡侯等同于；修容爵号与亭侯等同；修仪爵号关内侯等同；婕妤爵号的用度比照中二千石，容华爵号的用度比照真二千石；美人爵号的用度比照比二千石；良人的爵号的用度比照千石。
English: There are a total of 12 titles below the title of madam: noble, lady, the status is only below the empress, the title is not comparable to other concubines; the status of the concubine is equivalent to the country, the title is equivalent to the prince; the status of the lady is equivalent to the imperial secretary, the title is the same as the county magistrate; the title of the knight of the Shou Yi is equivalent to the county prince; the title of the knight of the Shou Hua is equivalent to the village prince; the title of the knight of the Shou Yong is equivalent to the prince of the pavilion; the title of the knight of the

古文：武宣卞皇后，琅邪开阳人，文帝母也。
现代文：武宣皇后卞氏，是琅邪开阳人，文帝的母亲。
English: Empress Wu Xuan, the mother of Emperor Wen, was a virtuous and virtuous woman.

古文：本倡家，年二十，太祖於谯纳后为妾。
现代文：原本出生在倡优家庭，二十岁的时候，太祖在谯县将她纳为妾室。
English: Originally, she was born into a privileged family. When she was twenty years old, her great-grandfather took her as a concubine in Min County.

古文：后随太祖至洛。
现代文：后来一直跟随太祖到洛阳。
English: Later, he followed his grandfather all the way to Luoyang.

古文：及董卓为乱，太祖微服东出避难。
现代文：在董卓作乱的时候，太祖身穿便服向东出逃避难。
English: When Dong Zhuo started a riot, the great-grandfather dressed in civilian clothes and headed east to escape.

古文：袁术传太祖凶问，时太祖左右至洛者皆欲归，后止之曰： 曹君吉凶未可知，今日还家，明日若在，何面目复相见也？
现代文：袁术四处造谣传播太祖的死讯，当时跟随太祖到洛阳的侍从都想要回故乡，卞皇后劝阻他们说： 现在曹公的生死还没有确切的消息，各位现在返回故乡，明日如果曹公回来，我们有什么脸面来面对他呢？
English: Yuan Zhi spread rumours everywhere about the death of the great-grandfather. At that time, the attendants who followed the great-grandfather to Luoyang all wanted to return to their hometown. The Empress Dowager tried to dissuade them, saying, "There is no definite information about the life and death of Cao Gong at this time. You should return to your hometown now. If Cao Gong returns tomorrow, what kind of face will we have to face him?"

古文：正使祸至，共死何苦！ 遂从后言。
现代文：就算祸患将要到来，我们一起面对，共同赴死，有什么痛苦的呢？ 
English: Even if the calamity is about to come, we will face it together, we will die together, what is the pain?

古文：太祖闻而善之。
现代文：那些侍从都听从了卞皇后的话。
English: The attendants all obeyed the Empress Dowager.

古文：建安初，丁夫人废，遂以后为继室。
现代文：后来太祖听说了这件事，非常赞赏她。建安初年，丁夫人被废，太祖就以卞氏为继室。
English: Later, the great-grandfather heard about this and admired her very much. In the first year of Jianan, Mrs. Ding was abolished, and the great-grandfather took Ms. Zou as his successor.

古文：诸子无母者，太祖皆令后养之。
现代文：那些母亲去世的儿子，太祖都让卞氏抚养他们。
English: The sons of those mothers who died, the great-grandfathers all let Mr. Zou raise them.

古文：文帝为太子，左右长御贺后曰： 将军拜太子，天下莫不欢喜，后当倾府藏赏赐。 
现代文：后来太祖将文帝册立为太子，太祖和皇后身边的宫女侍从都来祝贺她说： 将军被册立为太子，天下人都非常欣喜，王后您应该把宫中收藏的珍奇宝物都拿出来赏赐。 
English: Later, the great-grandfather made Emperor Wen the crown prince, and the palace maids around the great-grandfather and the queen came to congratulate her, saying, "The general has been made the crown prince, and the whole world is very happy. The queen should take out all the rare treasures from the palace collection to reward him."

古文：后曰： 王自以丕年大，故用为嗣，我但当以免无教导之过为幸耳，亦何为当重赐遗乎！ 
现代文：卞皇后说： 君主是因为曹丕已经年长，才把他定位继承人，我只应该庆幸我对曹丕的教导没有什么大的过错，又怎么能大肆赏赐表示高兴呢？ 
English: Empress Zou said, "The sovereign positioned Cao Zou as the heir because he was already old. I should only be glad that I did not make any major mistakes in Cao Zou's teachings. How can I express my happiness with lavish rewards?

古文：长御还，具以语太祖。
现代文：宫人们回去将卞皇后的话详细地告诉太祖。
English: The palace people went back and told the words of the Empress Dowager Cixi to the Grandfather in detail.

古文：太祖悦曰： 怒不变容，喜不失节，故是最为难。 
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 生气的时候不改变容色，高兴的时候没有得意忘形，这是最难的了。 
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "It is the most difficult thing not to change my appearance when I am angry, and not to lose my shape when I am happy."

古文：二十四年，拜为王后，策曰： 夫人卞氏，抚养诸子，有母仪之德。
现代文：建安二十四年，卞氏被册封为王后，太祖下诏说： 夫人卞氏，抚育教养各位王子，有母仪天下的德行。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of the Jian'an era, the Zou clan was canonized as the queen, and the great-grandfather issued a decree saying: Mrs. Zou, raise and educate the princes, have the motherly virtues of the world.

古文：今进位王后，太子诸侯陪位，群卿上寿。
现代文：现在晋位为王后，太子和各位诸侯都应在旁陪坐，朝廷文武百官都应表示祝贺。
English: Now that she has ascended to the throne as the queen, the prince and all the princes should be present, and all the officials of the imperial court should express their congratulations.

古文：减国内死罪一等。 
现代文：天下囚徒犯死罪的都减刑一等。 
English: Prisoners around the world who have committed capital crimes have their sentences reduced by one grade.

古文：二十五年，太祖崩，文帝即王位，尊后曰王太后。
现代文：建安二十五年，太祖病逝，曹丕继承王位，尊王后为王太后。
English: In the 25th year of Jian'an, the great-grandfather died of illness, Cao Pi succeeded to the throne, and his wife became the queen mother.

古文：及践阼，尊后曰皇太后，称永寿宫。
现代文：等到正式登上帝位，尊王太后为皇太后，居住的宫殿称为永寿宫。
English: When she officially ascends to the throne, she will be known as the Empress Dowager, and the palace where she lives will be called the Palace of Eternal Life.

古文：明帝即位，尊太后曰太皇太后。
现代文：等到明帝登基，又尊皇太后为太皇太后。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, the Empress Dowager became the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：黄初中，文帝欲追封太后父母，尚书陈群奏曰： 陛下以圣德应运受命，创业革制，当永为后式。
现代文：文帝黄初年中，文帝想要追封皇太后的父母，尚书陈群上奏说： 陛下您因为贤明圣德，承天受命，开创天下基业，制定的各种制度，也应当流传后世让后代都沿袭。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wen's reign, Emperor Wen wanted to pursue the parents of the empress dowager, so he wrote to Chen Qun and said: Your Majesty, because of your wisdom and virtue, you have been ordered by heaven to create the world's foundation, and the various systems you have established should also be passed down to future generations so that future generations can follow suit.

古文：案典籍之文，无妇人分土命爵之制。
现代文：根据历代的典章制度，并没有因妇人而得以封王拜侯的先例。
English: According to the historical award system, there is no precedent for a woman to be given the title of prince.

古文：在礼典，妇因夫爵。秦违古法，汉氏因之，非先王之令典也。 
现代文：根据礼仪典制，妇人只是依靠夫君的爵位高升而显得尊贵秦代违背了古代的礼法，汉代又沿袭秦朝的做法，这些都不是先王所规定的。 
English: According to the etiquette and ceremony system, a woman only relies on her husband's high rank to appear noble. The Qin Dynasty violated the ancient etiquette, and the Han Dynasty followed the practice of the Qin Dynasty. These are not stipulated by the former king.

古文：帝曰： 此议是也，其勿施行。
现代文：文帝说： 这些话说得很对，我前面的决定就不要执行了。
English: Wen Di said: These words are very correct, I do not want to implement the previous decision.

古文：以作著诏下藏之台阁，永为后式。 
现代文：将这份奏疏写下来，将内容形成诏书，收藏在台阁，永远流传后世作为制度。 
English: It was written down, the contents of which were compiled into an edict, which was kept in a cabinet and passed down to future generations as a system.

古文：至太和四年春，明帝乃追谥太后祖父广曰开阳恭侯，父远曰敬侯，祖母周封阳都君及敬侯夫人，皆赠印绶。
现代文：到了太和四年，明帝才追谥太皇太后的祖父卞广为开阳恭侯，父亲卞远为开阳敬侯，祖母周氏为阳都君及敬侯夫人，并且都赠予了绶带。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Emperor Ming tracked down Empress Dowager Cixi's grandfather, Yu Guang, to pay tribute to Empress Dowager Cixi, her father, Yu Yuan, to pay tribute to Empress Dowager Cixi, and her grandmother, Zhou, to pay tribute to Empress Dowager Cixi and Empress Dowager Cixi, and presented them with the sash.

古文：其年五月，后崩。
现代文：这一年五月，太皇太后驾崩。
English: In May of that year, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：七月，合葬高陵。
现代文：七月，跟太祖合葬在高陵。
English: In July, he was buried together with his grandfather in Goryo Mausoleum.

古文：初，太后弟秉，以功封都乡侯，黄初七年进封开阳侯，邑千二百户，为昭烈将军。
现代文：当初，卞太后的弟弟卞秉，因为有功被封为都乡侯，在文帝黄初七年时候又晋封为开阳侯，享有一千二百户的食邑，同时又被封为昭烈将军。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Zou's younger brother, Zou Bing, was awarded the title of "Tu Xiang Hou" because of his meritorious service. In the seventh year of Emperor Wen's reign, he was promoted to "Kaiyang Hou" and enjoyed the food of 1,200 households. At the same time, he was also awarded the title of "Fierce General."

古文：秉薨，子兰嗣。
现代文：卞秉去世后，他的儿子卞兰继承他的爵位。
English: After the death of Yu Bing, his son Yu Lan inherited his title.

古文：少有才学，为奉车都尉、游击将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：卞兰年少时就才能和学问，担任了奉车都尉、游击将军，又加散骑常侍。
English: When he was young, Ulan's talent and knowledge led him to serve as a military commander, a guerrilla general, and a samurai.

古文：兰薨，子晖嗣。
现代文：卞兰去世后，他的儿子卞晖承袭了卞兰的爵位。
English: After Ulan's death, his son Zou inherited Ulan's peerage.

古文：又分秉爵，封兰弟琳为列侯，官至步兵校尉。
现代文：朝廷又将卞秉的爵位分给他的其他儿子，封卞兰的弟弟卞琳为列侯，授予步兵校尉的官职。
English: The imperial court also gave the peerage of Yu Bing to his other sons, named Yu Lan's brother Yu Lin as a vassal, and granted Yu the official post of infantry captain.

古文：兰子隆女为高贵乡公皇后，隆以后父为光禄大夫，位特进，封睢阳乡侯，妻王为显阳乡君。
现代文：卞兰的儿子卞隆的女儿是高贵乡公的皇后，卞隆就以皇后父亲的身份担任了广禄大夫，赐位特进，被封为睢阳乡侯，他的妻子王氏也被封为显阳乡君。
English: The daughter of Bailan's son, Bailong, was the empress of a noble township. As the father of the empress, Bailong served as the doctor of Guanglu, was given a special promotion, and was named the mayor of Shuyang Township. His wife, Wang, was also named the mayor of Xianyang Township.

古文：追封隆前妻刘为顺阳乡君，后亲母故也。
现代文：朝廷因为卞隆的前妻刘氏是皇后的生母，也追封她为顺阳乡君。
English: The imperial court also crowned her as Shunyang Xiangjun, because Gonglong's ex-wife Liu was the queen's biological mother.

古文：琳女又为陈留王皇后，时琳已没，封琳妻刘为广阳乡君。
现代文：后来卞琳的女儿又被册立为陈留王的皇后，但但是卞琳已经去世，就封卞琳的妻子刘氏为广阳乡君。
English: Later, Yulin's daughter was also registered as the queen of Chen Liu Wang, but Yulin had passed away, so Yulin's wife, Liu, was named the Guangyang Xiangjun.

古文：文昭甄皇后，中山无极人，明帝母，汉太保甄邯后也，世吏二千石。
现代文：文昭甄皇后，是中山无极人，是明帝的生母，汉太保甄邯的后代，家中世代承袭有二千石俸禄的官职。
English: Empress Wen Zhaozhen is a native of Zhongshan Wuji, the birth mother of Emperor Ming, and a descendant of Han Taibo Zhenqi. Generations of her family have inherited official posts with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：父逸，上蔡令。后三岁失父。
现代文：甄皇后的父亲甄逸，曾经担任上蔡令，但在甄皇后三岁时甄逸就去世了。
English: Queen Zhen's father, Zhen Yi, once served as Shang Cai Ling, but Zhen Yi died when Queen Zhen was three years old.

古文：后天下兵乱，加以饥馑，百姓皆卖金银珠玉宝物。
现代文：后来天下战火蔓延，动乱不安，庄稼又连年歉收，百姓都变卖家中的各种金银宝物。
English: Later, the world was engulfed in war, unrest was rife, crops failed year after year, and people sold all kinds of gold and silver treasures in their homes.

古文：时后家大有储谷，颇以买之。
现代文：当时甄皇后家中储存了大量谷物，趁机收购了一些珠玉珍宝。
English: At that time, Queen Zhen stored a large amount of grain in her home and took the opportunity to acquire some precious gems.

古文：后年十馀岁，白母曰： 今世乱而多买宝物，匹夫无罪，怀璧为罪。
现代文：甄皇后当时才十几岁，告诉她的母亲说： 现在世道混乱，而我们却买很多值钱物品，就像一个人本来没有过错，但拥有珍宝就可能成为他的罪过。
English: Queen Zhen, who was only a teenager at the time, told her mother: "The world is in chaos, but we buy a lot of valuable things. It's like a person has no fault, but possessing precious things may become his sin.

古文：又左右皆饥乏，不如以谷振给亲族邻里，广为恩惠也。 
现代文：现在周围很多人都处于饥饿之中，我们不如把粮食拿出来赈济救助亲友邻居，将善行传播得更远。 
English: Now that many people around us are starving, we might as well take the grain out to help our relatives, friends, and neighbors, and spread the good deed further.

古文：举家称善，即从后言。建安中，袁绍为中子熙纳之。
现代文：全家人都认为她的话有道理，于是就向甄皇后说得那样将家中粮食拿出来救济百姓。建安年间，袁绍为他的次子袁熙聘娶了甄皇后。
English: The whole family thought that her words were reasonable, so they took the grain out of the house to help the people, as they had told Empress Zhen. During the Jianan era, Yuan Shao married Empress Zhen for his second son Yuan Xi.

古文：熙出为幽州，后留养姑。
现代文：袁熙后来出京到幽州担任刺史，甄后留在邺城奉养婆婆。
English: Yuan Xi later went from Beijing to Yuzhou to work as a historian, and stayed in Lucheng to take care of his mother-in-law.

古文：及冀州平，文帝纳后于邺，有宠，生明帝及东乡公主。
现代文：等到冀州平定，文帝在邺城见到了甄后，将她收为自己的后妃，对她大加宠爱，她也生下了明帝和东乡公主。
English: When Jizhou was pacified, Emperor Wen met Zhenhou in Handan, took her as his concubine, and favored her greatly. She also gave birth to Emperor Ming and Princess Dongxiang.

古文：延康元年正月，文帝即王位，六月，南征，后留邺。
现代文：延康元年正月，文帝承袭了王位，六月，亲自率军南征，甄后又留在邺城。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yan Kang, Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne. In June, he personally led the army to the south, and then stayed in Lucheng.

古文：黄初元年十月，帝践阼。
现代文：黄初元年十月，汉献帝将皇位禅让给文帝。
English: In October of the first year of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Han Xian ceded the imperial throne to Emperor Wen.

古文：践阼之后，山阳公奉二女以嫔于魏，郭后、李、阴贵人并爱幸，后愈失意，有怨言。
现代文：文帝正式登基称帝以后，改封为山阳公的汉献帝献上自己的两个女儿，还有郭皇后和李、阴两位贵人都受到文帝的宠爱，甄后也因此在后宫不得意，开始有了一些怨言。
English: After Emperor Wen formally ascended to the throne and was named emperor, he changed his title to Han Xian Di, the Prince of Shanyang, and presented his two daughters, as well as Empress Guo and Li and Yin, both of whom were favored by Emperor Wen. As a result, Emperor Wen was disappointed in the harem and began to have some complaints.

古文：帝大怒，二年六月，遣使赐死，葬于邺。
现代文：文帝听到这些怨言后震怒，黄初二年六月，派使者将她赐死，死后葬在邺城。
English: Emperor Wen was furious after hearing these complaints. In June of the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, he sent an envoy to have her put to death, and after her death, she was buried in Lucheng.

古文：明帝即位，有司奏请追谥，使司空王朗持节奉策以太牢告祠于陵，又别立寝庙。
现代文：明帝继承皇位之后，主持礼乐祭祀的礼官上奏请求追谥甄皇后，于是明帝派司空王朗持符节和诏书，到甄皇后的陵寝，以三牲之礼祭祀她，又另外为她修建陵寝。
English: After the Ming Emperor succeeded to the throne, the etiquette officer who presided over the ritual music and sacrifice made a request to track down the Empress Yan Zhen. Therefore, the Ming Emperor sent the Sikuo Wang Lang to the tomb of the Empress Yan Zhen, holding the rites and the imperial edict, to sacrifice her with the ritual of the three sacrifices, and also to build a tomb for her.

古文：太和元年三月，以中山魏昌之安城乡户千，追封逸，谥曰敬侯；適孙像袭爵。
现代文：太和元年三月，明帝以中山国魏昌县安城乡的一千户追封甄后的父亲甄逸，谥号为敬候；他的孙子甄像承袭了他的爵位。
English: In March of the first year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming used one thousand households in Ancheng Township, Weichang County, Zhongshan Province to pursue and seal Zhen's father, Zhen Yiyi. His nickname was Respect; his grandson, Zhen Fang, inherited his title.

古文：四月，初营宗庙，掘地得玉玺，方一寸九分，其文曰 天子羡思慈亲 ，明帝为之改容，以太牢告庙。
现代文：四月，明帝下令修建宗庙，挖地的时候发现了一块玉玺，大小一寸九分，上面有文字 天子羡思慈亲 ，明帝看到这些字也有所触动，就下令以三牲之礼到宗庙祭祀告慰祖先。
English: In April, Emperor Ming ordered the construction of the ancestral temple. While digging, a piece of jade ingot was found, measuring one inch and nine minutes in size, with the words "Heavenly Son Envies Compassionate Relatives" written on it. Seeing that these words also touched him, Emperor Ming ordered the three sacrificial gifts to be brought to the ancestral temple for sacrifice to console the ancestors.

古文：又尝梦见后，於是差次舅氏亲疏高下，叙用各有差，赏赐累钜万；以像为虎贲中郎将。
现代文：明帝还曾经梦到甄皇后，于是将甄皇后家的各位舅父按照亲疏远近排序，对他们都按照次序给予官职，赏赐的财宝达到数百万；并且任命甄像为虎贲中郎将。
English: Emperor Ming also had a dream about Queen Zhen, so he ranked the uncles of Queen Zhen's family in order of closeness and distance, gave them all official positions in order, and rewarded them with millions of treasure; and appointed Zhen as the vice-commander of the Tiger Clan.

古文：是月，后母薨，帝制緦服临丧，百僚陪位。
现代文：就在这个月，甄后的母亲去世，明帝穿着丧服参加了葬礼，文武百官都陪同祭祀。
English: Just this month, after the screening, his mother died, and Emperor Ming attended the funeral in mourning clothes, accompanied by hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：四年十一月，以后旧陵庳下，使像兼太尉，持节诣邺，昭告后土，十二月，改葬朝阳陵。
现代文：太和四年十一月，明帝认为甄后的陵寝低矮简陋，就派甄像兼任太尉，持符节到邺城祭告土神，将甄后改葬在朝阳陵。
English: In November of the 4th year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming thought that Zhen's mausoleum was too low and simple, so he sent Zhen's image to serve as a lieutenant, and he went to Lucheng to hold a festival to worship the soil god, and buried Zhen in the Mausoleum of the Rising Sun.

古文：像还，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：甄像完成使命回京，被提升为散骑常侍。
English: Zhen Rong completed his mission and returned to Beijing. He was promoted to the rank of straggler.

古文：青龙二年春，追谥后兄俨曰安城乡穆侯。
现代文：青龙二年春天，明帝下诏追谥甄后的兄长甄俨为安城乡穆侯。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Qing Long Dynasty, Emperor Ming issued an edict to pursue Zhen Zhen's elder brother, Zhen Zhen, who became the mayor of Ancheng Township.

古文：夏，吴贼寇扬州，以像为伏波将军，持节监诸将东征，还，复为射声校尉。
现代文：夏天，东吴军队侵扰扬州，朝廷任命甄像为伏波将军，持符节监督朝廷各路军队东征，班师回朝后，再任命他为射声校尉。
English: In the summer, the East and West armies invaded Yangzhou. The imperial court appointed Zhen as the general of Fubo. He supervised the eastward march of the imperial army with the festival of symbols. After the team returned to the imperial court, he was reappointed as the captain of Yixing.

古文：三年薨，追赠卫将军，改封魏昌县，谥曰贞侯；子畅嗣。
现代文：青龙三年，甄像去世，朝廷追赠他为卫将军，将封地改在魏昌县，谥号为魏昌县贞侯；甄像的儿子甄畅继承了他的爵位。
English: In the third year of Qinglong, Zhenzang died, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Wei general. He changed his fief to Weichang County, and his posthumous name was Weichang County Zhenzhou. Zhenzang's son Zhenchang inherited his title.

古文：又封畅弟温、〈革韦〉、艳皆为列侯。
现代文：又将甄畅的弟弟甄温、甄韦华、甄艳都封为为列侯。
English: Zhen Chang's younger brothers Zhen Wen, Zhen Wei Hua and Zhen Yan were also made princes.

古文：四年，改逸、俨本封皆曰魏昌侯，谥因故。
现代文：青龙四年，明帝下诏将甄逸、甄俨原来安城乡侯的封号改为魏昌县侯，谥号与从前敬侯、穆侯一样。
English: In the fourth year of Qinglong, Emperor Ming issued an edict to change the seal names of Zhenyi and Zhenyu from Ancheng Township to Weichang County, and their posthumous names were the same as those of Jinghou and Muhou.

古文：封俨世妇刘为东乡君，又追封逸世妇张为安喜君。
现代文：同时加封甄俨的世妇刘氏为东乡君，追封甄逸的世妇张氏为安喜君。
English: At the same time, Liu, the concubine of Zhenya, is Dongxiangjun, and Zhang, the concubine of Zhenya, is Anxijun.

古文：景初元年夏，有司议定七庙。
现代文：景初元年夏，朝中负责礼仪祭祀的官员商讨定下七座宗庙排列的顺序。
English: In the summer of 1861, officials in charge of rituals in the Imperial Court discussed the order in which the seven temples should be arranged.

古文：冬，又奏曰： 盖帝王之兴，既有受命之君，又有圣妃协于神灵，然后克昌厥世，以成王业焉。
现代文：冬天，官员又上奏说： 君主伟业的兴盛，既有承受先帝嘱托的原因，也仰赖于后妃与神灵的帮助，所以才能子孙昌盛振兴江山，成就伟业。
English: In the winter, the official made another report, saying: The prosperity of the great cause of the monarch is not only due to the reason of receiving the entrustment of the former emperor, but also depends on the help of the empress and the gods. Therefore, only the descendants of Changsheng can revitalize the country and achieve a great cause.

古文：昔高辛氏卜其四妃之子皆有天下，而帝挚、陶唐、商、周代兴。
现代文：从前高辛氏通过占卜得知他四个妃子的儿子都可以掌握天下，果然他的儿子都使得帝挚、陶唐、商、周各代都很兴盛。
English: Once upon a time, through divination, Gao Xin learned that the sons of his four concubines could control the world. As it turned out, his sons made the generations of the emperor, Tao Tang, merchants, and Zhou prosperous.

古文：周人上推后稷，以配皇天，追述王初，本之姜嫄，特立宫庙，世世享尝，周礼所谓 奏夷则，歌中吕，舞大濩，以享先妣 者也。
现代文：后来，周的百姓共同推举后稷为王，认为他的贤明圣德可配上天，又追续他的祖先，发现他的母亲是姜嫄，于是就为他的母亲修建宫殿祭庙，让她世代得以受到祭祀朝拜，这就是周礼所说的 奏响夷则之乐，歌中吕，跳大濩之舞，来祭祀亡故的母亲 了。
English: Later, Zhou's people jointly elected Hou Yi as king, believing that his wisdom and virtue could be worthy of heaven, and followed his ancestors. They found out that his mother was Jiang Chen, so they built a palace and temple for his mother, so that her generation could be worshiped. This is what Zhou Li called "playing the music of Yizi, singing the song of Lü, and dancing the dance of Daxing" to worship his deceased mother.

古文：诗人颂之曰： 厥初生民，时维姜嫄。 
现代文：也有诗人写诗称颂说： 当时先民能出生，就是因为姜嫄 。
English: There is also a poet who wrote a poem praising and saying: At that time, the first people were able to be born because of ginger.

古文：言王化之本，生民所由。
现代文：这明确地指出了周朝和周朝百姓的起源。
English: This clearly indicates the origin of the Zhou Dynasty and the Zhou people.

古文：又曰： 閟宫有侐，实实枚枚，赫赫姜嫄，其德不回。 
现代文：又有诗人写到： 深闭的郊庙清净肃穆，但也坚固又细密，想起伟大的姜嫄，她的品德高尚毫无奸邪。 
English: Another poet wrote: The secluded suburban temple is pure and solemn, but it is also solid and delicate, reminiscent of the great Jiang Chen, her character is noble without evil.

古文：诗、礼所称姬宗之盛，其美如此。大魏期运，继于有虞，然崇弘帝道，三世弥隆，庙祧之数，实与周同。今武宣皇后、文德皇后各配无穷之祚，至於文昭皇后膺天灵符，诞育明圣，功济生民，德盈宇宙。开诸后嗣，乃道化之所兴也。
现代文：现在皇上为文昭皇后修建寝庙并以礼祭祀，这和周人为始祖母姜嫄修建宗庙的原因是一样的，但皇上却没有明文诏告文昭皇后的寝庙要世代接受祭祀和保护，这样的话，文昭皇后的功绩和皇上您对文昭皇后的报答，子孙后代也许不会评论到的，这就不能向后人彰显您的孝义了。
English: Now the emperor is building a temple for Empress Wenzhao and holding a ritual sacrifice. This is the same reason that Zhou built the ancestral temple for the first grandmother Jiang Chen. However, the emperor did not issue a clear edict that Empress Wenzhao's temple should receive sacrifices and protection from generation to generation. In this case, the achievements of Empress Wenzhao and the emperor's reward to Empress Wenzhao may not be commented on by future generations, which will not be able to show your filial piety to future generations.

古文：寝庙特祀，亦姜嫄之閟宫也，而未著不毁之制，惧论功报德之义，万世或阙焉，非所以昭孝示后世也。
现代文：臣等奏请皇上恩准，文昭皇后的寝庙应世代享受祭祀奏乐之礼，和祖先宗庙相同，并由朝廷颁布文书诏告天下，来弘扬文昭皇后与皇上的圣贤德善。 
English: The vassals requested the emperor's approval for the performance, and the sleeping temple of Empress Wenzhao should enjoy the ritual performance of music for generations, the same as the ancestral ancestral temple, and the imperial court issued a document to announce to the world, to promote the wisdom and virtue of Empress Wenzhao and the emperor.

古文：文昭庙宜世世享祀奏乐，与祖庙同，永著不毁之典，以播圣善之风。 於是与七庙议并勒金策，藏之金匮。
现代文：于是明帝下诏宣布文昭皇后的寝庙和另外七座宗庙享受同等祭祀礼仪，并将诏书刻在金策上，将它收藏在金柜中。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming issued an edict declaring that the sleeping temple of Empress Wenzhao and the other seven ancestral temples enjoyed the same sacrificial rituals, and engraved the edict on the gold and stored it in a gold cabinet.

古文：帝思念舅氏不已。
现代文：明帝对他的舅舅们思念不已。
English: Emperor Ming missed his uncles very much.

古文：畅尚幼，景初末，以畅为射声校尉，加散骑常侍，又特为起大第，车驾亲自临之。
现代文：甄畅当时年纪还小，景初末年，明帝就任命他为射声校尉，加散骑常侍官职，又特地为他修建了一座豪华府邸，明帝还亲自驾临查看。
English: At that time, Yan Chang was still young. At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Emperor Ming appointed him to the post of lieutenant of the sound of gunshots, as well as the post of attendant of the cavalry, and specially built a luxurious mansion for him. Emperor Ming also came to inspect it in person.

古文：又於其后园为像母起观庙，名其里曰渭阳里，以追思母氏也。
现代文：又下令他在府邸的后园为甄像的母亲修建一座观庙，命名为渭阳里，意为寄托对母亲的思念。
English: He also ordered him to build a viewing temple for Zhen's mother in the back garden of the mansion, which was named Shanyangli, meaning to cherish the memory of his mother.

古文：嘉平三年正月，畅薨，追赠车骑将军，谥曰恭侯；子绍嗣。
现代文：嘉平三年正月，甄畅去世，被追赠为车骑将军，谥号为恭侯，他的儿子甄绍承袭了他的爵位。
English: In the first month of the third year of Jiaping, Zhen Chang died and was posthumously awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry. His nickname was Gong Hou, and his son Zhen Shao inherited his title.

古文：太和六年，明帝爱女淑薨，追封谥淑为平原懿公主，为之立庙。
现代文：太和六年，明帝宠爱的女儿曹淑去世，明帝追封她为平原懿公主，并未她修建了庙宇祭祀。
English: In the sixth year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming's favorite daughter, Cao Shu, passed away. Emperor Ming made her the princess of Pingyuan County, but she did not build a temple for worship.

古文：取后亡从孙黄与合葬，追封黄列侯，以夫人郭氏从弟德为之后，承甄氏姓，封德为平原侯，袭公主爵。
现代文：并让甄皇后已故的堂孙甄黄和公主合葬，追封他为黄列侯，又让夫人郭氏的堂弟郭德过继为他们的儿子，让郭德改掉原来的姓氏随公主甄姓，封他为平原侯，继承公主的爵位。
English: And let Queen Zhen's deceased cousin Zhen Huang and Princess Mao be buried together, posthumously appoint him as the Yellow Marquis, and let Lady Guo's cousin Guo De be their son, let Guo De change his original surname with Princess Zhen's surname, and appoint him as the Marquis of the Plain to inherit the princess's title.

古文：青龙中，又封后从兄子毅及像弟三人，皆为列侯。
现代文：青龙年间，明帝又下诏封赏甄皇后堂兄的儿子甄毅和甄像的三个弟弟，都封为列侯。
English: During the Qinglong Dynasty, Emperor Ming also issued an imperial edict awarding Zhen Yi, the son of Queen Zhen's cousin, and Zhen Zi's three younger brothers, all of whom were made princes.

古文：毅数上疏陈时政，官至越骑校尉。
现代文：甄毅多次上奏陈述国家政事并提出建议，后来官拜越骑校尉。
English: Zhen Yi repeatedly submitted reports on state affairs and made suggestions, and later he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：嘉平中，复封畅子二人为列侯。
现代文：嘉平年间，明帝又下诏封甄畅的两个儿子为列侯。
English: During the Jiaping era, Emperor Ming also issued an imperial edict to make two of Yan Chang's sons princes.

古文：后兄俨孙女为齐王皇后，后父已没，封后母为广乐乡君。
现代文：甄皇后的兄长甄俨的孙女被册立为齐王曹芳的皇后，甄皇后的父亲已经去世，朝廷就将她的母亲封为广乐乡君。
English: The granddaughter of Queen Zhen's elder brother, Zhen Yi, was registered as the queen of King Cao Fang of Qi. Queen Zhen's father had passed away, and the court named her mother as Guangle Township's ruler.

古文：文德郭皇后，安平广宗人也。
现代文：文德郭皇后，是安平广宗人。
English: Empress Wende Guo is a descendant of Anping Guangzong.

古文：祖世长吏。
现代文：祖父曾经做过县级官吏。
English: My grandfather was once a county-level official.

古文：后少而父永奇之曰： 此乃吾女中王也。 
现代文：郭皇后年少的时候，她的父亲就因为她的聪慧感到惊奇，还说： 这是我的女儿中为王的一个。 
English: When Empress Guo was young, her father marveled at her intelligence and said, "This is the king of my daughters."

古文：遂以女王为字。
现代文：就为她起字为 女王 。
English: They started to call her the Queen.

古文：早失二亲，丧乱流离，没在铜鞮侯家。
现代文：郭皇后早年就父母双亡，在战乱中漂泊流离，后来被收养在铜鞮侯家。
English: Empress Guo lost both her parents at an early age, wandered away during the war, and was later adopted by a Tongluo family.

古文：太祖为魏公时，得入东宫。
现代文：太祖还是魏公的时候，将她召入宫中。
English: When the great-grandfather was Wei Gong, he invited her to the palace.

古文：后有智数，时时有所献纳。
现代文：由于她聪慧有智谋，所以时常向曹公提出建议。
English: Because she is clever and resourceful, she often makes suggestions to Cao Gong.

古文：文帝定为嗣，后有谋焉。
现代文：文帝被定为曹公的继承人，其中也有郭皇后的功劳。
English: Emperor Wen was designated as Cao Gong's successor, and Empress Guo was also given credit for this.

古文：太子即王位，后为夫人，及践阼，为贵嫔。
现代文：等到被册立为太子的文帝承袭王位，封郭皇后为夫人，等到正式登基之后，就封她为贵嫔。
English: When Emperor Wen, who was made a crown prince, succeeded to the throne, the Empress Guo became his wife, and when she officially ascended to the throne, she was made a noblewoman.

古文：甄后之死，由后之宠也。
现代文：甄皇后之所以被文帝赐死，就是因为文帝太过宠幸郭皇后。
English: The reason why Empress Zhen was given death by Emperor Wen is because Emperor Wen was too fond of Empress Guo.

古文：黄初三年，将登后位，文帝欲立为后，中郎栈潜上疏曰： 在昔帝王之治天下，不惟外辅，亦有内助。
现代文：黄初三年，文帝想要册立她为皇后，中郎栈潜上奏说： 从前明君治理天下，不只依靠宫外朝臣的辅佐，也有后宫妃子的贤惠的原因。
English: In the third year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen wanted to appoint her as empress, and the middle-ranking eunuch sneaked up and said: In the past, Emperor Ming ruled the world, not only relying on the assistance of courtiers outside the palace, but also because of the virtuousness of the concubines in the harem.

古文：治乱所由，盛衰从之。
现代文：天下的战乱安定，盛世衰微都与这二者有关系。
English: The world's war, chaos and stability, prosperity and decline are all related to these two.

古文：故西陵配黄，英娥降妫，并以贤明，流芳上世。
现代文：所以从前黄帝迎娶了西陵氏的女儿，尧帝的两个女儿娥皇和女英嫁给虞舜，他们都因为贤明圣德而流芳后世。
English: That is why the former Yellow Emperor married the daughter of the Xiling clan, and the two daughters of Emperor Zhao, Empress E and Empress Ye, married Emperor Yu, both of whom are revered by posterity for their wisdom and virtue.

古文：桀奔南巢，祸阶末喜；纣以炮烙，怡悦妲己。
现代文：但夏桀亡国逃往南巢，祸患根源就在宠爱末喜；商纣王用炮烙的酷刑对待朝臣百姓，只是为了取悦妲己。
English: However, the root cause of the calamity lies in his love for Muxi; the merchant king used the torture of cannon fire to treat the courtiers and commoners, just to please himself.

古文：是以圣哲慎立元妃，必取先代世族之家，择其令淑以统六宫，虔奉宗庙，阴教聿修。易曰： 家道正而天下定。 
现代文：所以贤君明主在册立皇后的事情上都格外谨慎，一定会在世族大家中选择贤良淑德的女子来统领六宫，虔诚地祭祀宗庙，还会不断修养德行。《易经》中说： 家道中正，天下才能安定。 
English: Therefore, the wise men and sages were extremely cautious in the matter of appointing a queen, and they would certainly choose a wise, virtuous and virtuous woman from among the world's people to rule the six palaces, piously worship the ancestral temple, and constantly cultivate virtue. "I Ching" says: The family way is correct, and the world can be stable.

古文：由内及外，先王之令典也。
现代文：所以由宫内到宫外，由小到大的道理，是先王们定下的法规啊。
English: Therefore, the principle of going from inside the palace to outside the palace, from small to large, is a rule set down by the ancient kings.

古文：春秋书宗人衅夏云，无以妾为夫人之礼。
现代文：《春秋》中说不要用正妻的礼节来对待妾室。
English: "Spring and Autumn" says that you should not treat your concubine with the etiquette of a legitimate wife.

古文：齐桓誓命于葵丘，亦曰 无以妾为妻 。
现代文：齐桓公在葵丘接受爵位时，也说过 不要将妾室当成正妻 。
English: When Prince Qi Kuan accepted his title in Kwai Chung, he also said, "Don't take your concubine as your lawful wife."

古文：今后宫嬖宠，常亚乘舆。
现代文：现在后宫中有些受宠的嫔妃，经常仗着您的宠爱乘坐帝王的轿辇。
English: Now there are some favored concubines in the harem, who often ride in the emperor's sedan chair by virtue of your favor.

古文：若因爱登后，使贱人暴贵，臣恐后世下陵上替，开张非度，乱自上起也。 文帝不从，遂立为皇后。
现代文：如果皇上因为宠爱而将他册立为皇后，使低贱的人突然贵重起来，臣担忧后世会出现上下身份失序，纲纪混乱，人心轻慢不守礼法的情况，这难道不是由上面引起的乱子吗？ 文帝没有听从他的意见，还是将郭氏册立为皇后。
English: If the emperor made Guo Shizhu the empress because he was fond of her, making the lowly people suddenly valuable, the vassal worried that the future generations would see the disorder of the upper and lower status, the confusion of the system of discipline, and the people's contemptuous non-observance of the etiquette. Isn't this a disorder caused by the above? Emperor Wen didn't listen to his opinion, but still made Guo Shizhu the empress.

古文：后早丧兄弟，以从兄表继永后，拜奉车都尉。
现代文：郭皇后早年的时候就失去了兄长和弟弟，她的父亲就将郭皇后的堂兄过继为儿子，郭表被封为奉车都尉。
English: In her early years, Empress Guo lost her elder brother and younger brother. Her father adopted Empress Guo's cousin as his son, and Guo Yu was made a lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：后外亲刘斐与他国为婚，后闻之，敕曰： 诸亲戚嫁娶，自当与乡里门户匹敌者，不得因势强与他方人婚也。 
现代文：郭皇后的外亲刘斐要与外族女子通婚，郭皇后听说了这件事，下令说： 家里各位亲戚的婚配嫁娶，应该选择门当户对的乡里门户，不允许仗着权势勉强人家通婚。 
English: Liu Fei, a relative of Empress Guo, wanted to marry a woman of foreign ethnicity. Empress Guo heard about this and issued an order: All relatives in the family who want to get married should choose the village portal that is closest to their home. It is not allowed to use power to force people to marry.

古文：后姊子孟武还乡里，求小妻，后止之。
现代文：郭皇后姐姐的儿子孟武回到乡里，想要娶小妾。郭皇后下令阻止了。
English: Meng Wu, the son of Empress Guo's sister, returned to the countryside and wanted to marry a concubine. Empress Guo ordered him to stop.

古文：遂敕诸家曰： 今世妇女少，当配将士，不得因缘取以为妾也。
现代文：后来又下令告诉家里人说： 现在天下战乱，妇女比较少，应当将他们许配给将士们为妻，不能娶为妾室。
English: Later, he also ordered his family members to be told: "Nowadays, the world is at war, and there are relatively few women. They should be betrothed to soldiers as wives, and cannot be married off as concubines.

古文：宜各自慎，无为罚首。 
现代文：大家在这件事上应该慎重，不要成为那个被处罚的人。 
English: Everyone should be careful in this matter and not be the one who is punished.

古文：五年，帝东征，后留许昌永始台。
现代文：黄初五年，文帝亲自率军东征，郭皇后留在许昌永始台。
English: In the first five years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen personally led the Eastern Expedition, while Empress Guo stayed in Xu Changyong.

古文：时霖雨百馀日，城楼多坏，有司奏请移止。
现代文：当时大雨连下了一百多天，城墙门楼大多都被毁坏，相关官员上奏请求皇后转移到其他地方。
English: At that time, heavy rain fell for more than a hundred days in a row, most of the gate towers of the city wall were destroyed, and relevant officials appealed to the queen to move to other places.

古文：后曰： 昔楚昭王出游，贞姜留渐台，江水至，使者迎而无符，不去，卒没。
现代文：郭皇后说： 从前楚昭王出游，他的妻子贞姜留守在渐台，后来江水涌来，侍从在匆忙中迎接王后到安全地方，但忘了带上楚昭王的信符，王后因此坚决不离开，最后淹没在洪水中。
English: Empress Guo said: Once upon a time, King Chu Zhao went on a trip, and his wife, Zhen Jiang, stayed behind in Zhantai. Later, the river flooded. The attendants hurried to welcome the queen to a safe place, but forgot to bring King Chu Zhao's letter, so the queen resolutely did not leave, and finally drowned in the flood.

古文：今帝在远，吾幸未有是患，而便移止，奈何？ 
现代文：现在皇上在外远征，我并没有遇上与贞姜相似的危急情况，我又怎么可以转移到其他地方呢？ 
English: Now that the emperor is on an expedition abroad, I have not encountered a critical situation similar to that of Zhenjiang. How can I be transferred to other places?

古文：群臣莫敢复言。
现代文：朝臣们就没有敢再这样说的了。
English: The courtiers no longer dared to say so.

古文：六年，帝东征吴，至广陵，后留谯宫。
现代文：黄初六年，文帝再次征东吴，军队开赴广陵，郭皇后留守在谯宫。
English: In the sixth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen once again conquered Eastern Wu, the army went to Guangling, and Empress Guo stayed at the Summer Palace.

古文：时表留宿卫，欲遏水取鱼。
现代文：当时郭表也留下负责值宿宫禁及警卫工作，想要堵住河水捉鱼。
English: At that time, Guo also left the table to be responsible for the duty of the palace ban and security work, and wanted to block the river to catch fish.

古文：后曰： 水当通运漕，又少材木，奴客不在目前，当复私取官竹木作梁遏。
现代文：郭皇后说： 这河水应当是连通运送军粮的河道的，堵塞河水所需要的木材你这里又不够，自己的家财也不在近前，就只能暗中取用公家的木材来修建水坝。
English: Empress Guo said, "This river is supposed to be a connecting channel for transporting army rations. The wood you need to block the river is not enough here, and your own family wealth is not near, so you can only secretly use public timber to build dams.

古文：今奉车所不足者，岂鱼乎？ 
现代文：现在你这位奉车将军所缺少的难道是鱼吗？ 
English: Now, is it fish that you, General Fong Che, are missing?

古文：明帝即位，尊后为皇太后，称永安宫。
现代文：明帝登基后，尊郭皇后为皇太后，她居住的宫殿称为永安宫。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Empress Song Guo became the empress dowager, and the palace she lived in was called Yongan Palace.

古文：太和四年，诏封表安阳亭侯，又进爵乡侯，增邑并前五百户，迁中垒将军。
现代文：太和四年，明帝下诏封郭表为安阳亭侯，不久又晋爵为乡侯，增加食邑连同以前所封的一共五百户，又提升为中垒将军。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict to make Guo Biao the lord of Anyangting, and he was soon promoted to the peerage as the lord of the township, and the food villages were added, together with a total of five hundred households that had been previously sealed, and he was also promoted to the general of the middle bastion.

古文：以表子详为骑都尉。
现代文：还任命他的儿子郭详为骑都尉。
English: He also appointed his son Guo Zhao as a cavalry captain.

古文：其年，帝追谥太后父永为安阳乡敬侯，母董为都乡君。
现代文：这一年，明帝下诏追谥皇太后的父亲郭永为安阳乡敬侯，母亲董氏为都乡君。
English: In that year, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict to pursue the empress dowager's father, Guo Yong, to Anyang Township, and her mother, Dong, to the capital township.

古文：迁表昭德将军，加金紫，位特进，表第二子训为骑都尉。
现代文：又提升郭表为昭德将军，加金章紫绶，赐位特进，任命郭表的次子郭训为骑都尉。
English: He also promoted Guo Biao to General Zhao De, added the Gold Medal of the Purple Ribbon to him, gave him a special promotion, and appointed Guo Biao's second son, Guo Xun, as a cavalry captain.

古文：及孟武母卒，欲厚葬，起祠堂，太后止之曰： 自丧乱以来，坟墓无不发掘，皆由厚葬也；首阳陵可以为法。 
现代文：后来孟武的母亲去世，明帝想要以礼厚葬，并修建祠堂，郭太后听说后制止说： 自从天下陷入战乱以来，王公贵族的墓地没有不被人发掘盗窃的，都是因为厚葬；我们现在安葬逝者应该参照文帝的首阳陵，实行薄葬。 
English: Later, Mengwu's mother died, and Emperor Ming wanted to have a ceremonial funeral and build an ancestral hall. After hearing this, Empress Dowager Guo put a stop to it, saying, "Since the world was engulfed in war, the tombs of the princes and nobles have not been unearthed and stolen, all because of heavy burials. Those who are buried peacefully now should follow the example of Emperor Wen's Shouyang Mausoleum and have a thin burial."

古文：青龙三年春，后崩于许昌，以终制营陵。
现代文：青龙三年春，郭太后在许昌驾崩，朝廷以皇太后葬礼的规格为她修建陵寝。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Qing Long Dynasty, Empress Dowager Guo died in Xuchang, and the imperial court built a mausoleum for her according to the specifications of the empress dowager's funeral.

古文：三月庚寅，葬首阳陵西。
现代文：三月十一日，郭太后被安葬在文帝首阳陵的西面。
English: On March 11, Empress Dowager Guo was buried on the west side of Emperor Wen's Mausoleum.

古文：帝进表爵为观津侯，增邑五百，并前千户。
现代文：明帝下诏提升郭表的爵位，为观津侯，增加食邑五百户，连同之前的一共一千户。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict elevating Guo Biao to the peerage of Guanzhong, increasing the number of households to 500, up from the previous total of 1,000.

古文：迁详为驸马都尉。
现代文：又提升郭详为驸马都尉。
English: He also promoted Guo Zhao to lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：四年，追改封永为观津敬侯，世妇董为堂阳君。追封谥后兄浮为梁里亭戴侯，都为武城亭孝侯，成为新乐亭定侯，皆使使者奉策，祠以太牢。
现代文：青龙四年，明帝下诏改封追赠郭太后的父亲郭永为观津敬侯，母亲董氏为堂阳君；追封皇太后的哥哥郭浮为梁里亭戴侯，郭都为武城亭孝侯，郭成为新乐亭定侯，都由朝廷派出使者捧着文书，以三牲之礼进行祭祀。
English: In the 4th year of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict to change the titles of Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father of Guo Guo's father, Guo Yong, the father

古文：表薨，子详嗣，又分表爵封详弟述为列侯。
现代文：后来郭表去世，他的爵位传给了他儿子郭详，又将郭表的爵位封号分给郭详的弟弟郭述，郭述就被封为列侯。
English: Later, Guo Biao died, and his title was passed on to his son Guo Zhao, and the title of Guo Biao was given to Guo Zhao's brother Guo Shu, who was made a prince.

古文：详薨，子钊嗣。
现代文：后来郭详去世，他的儿子郭钊承袭了他的爵位。
English: Later, Guo Zhe passed away, and his son Guo Jun inherited his title.

古文：明悼毛皇后，河内人也。
现代文：明悼毛皇后，是河内人。
English: In memory of Empress Mao, a native of Hanoi.

古文：黄初中，以选入东宫，明帝时为平原王，进御有宠，出入与同舆辇。
现代文：文帝黄初年间，被选入东宫，明帝当时还是平原王，对她很是宠爱，出入都与她一起同乘轿辇。
English: In the early years of Emperor Wenhuang, she was elected to the East Palace. Emperor Ming, who was still the king of the plains at the time, was very fond of her and rode in and out of the limousine with her.

古文：及即帝立，以为贵嫔。
现代文：等到明帝登基即位，就封她为贵嫔。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, she was made a noblewoman.

古文：太和元年，立为皇后。
现代文：太和元年，将她册立为皇后。
English: In the first year of the Taiwa era, she was enthroned as empress.

古文：后父嘉，拜骑都尉，后弟曾，郎中。
现代文：毛皇后的父亲毛嘉，被任命为骑都尉，她的弟弟毛曾，被任命为郎中。
English: Queen Mao's father, Mao Jia, was appointed captain of the cavalry, and her brother, Mao Zeng, was appointed second-in-command.

古文：初，明帝为王，始纳河内虞氏为妃，帝即位，虞氏不得立为后，太皇卞太后慰勉焉。
现代文：当初明帝还是平原王，曾经娶了河内虞氏为王妃。等到登基为帝，虞氏没有被册立为皇后，太皇太后卞氏对她多加安慰勉励。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming was still the king of the plains, and he once married the princess of Hanoi, Lady Yu. When he ascended to the throne as emperor, Lady Yu was not crowned as the empress, and the Empress Dowager, Lady Zou, gave her much comfort and encouragement.

古文：虞氏曰： 曹氏自好立贱，未有能以义举者也。
现代文：虞氏说： 曹氏向来喜欢将低贱的人立为皇后，从来没有以德行评论的时候。
English: Mr. Yu said: Mr. Cao has always liked to make a lowly person the empress, and has never commented on virtue.

古文：然后职内事，君听外政，其道相由而成，苟不能以善始，未有能令终者也。
现代文：但是身为皇后，掌管后宫之事，皇上掌管天下之事，二者本来应该是相辅相成的，所以如果没有好的开端，自然也不会有好的结果。
English: But as the empress, in charge of the harem, and the emperor in charge of the world, the two should have been mutually complementary, so if there is no good beginning, there will naturally be no good result.

古文：殆必由此亡国丧祀矣！ 
现代文：江山社稷的危亡恐怕就从这里开始了！ 
English: I'm afraid the perilous demise of the country's society began here!

古文：虞氏遂绌还邺宫。
现代文：虞氏因此被废黜封号送回邺城宫中。
English: As a result, the Yu clan was dethroned and sent back to the Shicheng Palace.

古文：进嘉为奉车都尉，曾骑都尉，宠赐隆渥。
现代文：明帝下诏提升毛嘉为奉车都尉，毛曾为骑都尉，对他们越加恩宠。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict elevating Mao Jia to the rank of lieutenant in charge of chariots, and Mao Zeng to the rank of lieutenant in charge of cavalry, bestowing more and more favor on them.

古文：顷之，封嘉博平乡侯，迁光禄大夫，曾驸马都尉。
现代文：不久，明帝又加封毛嘉为博平乡侯，提升为光禄大夫，任命毛曾为驸马都尉。
English: Not long after, Emperor Ming also granted Mao Jia the title of Boping Township Mayor, promoted him to Guanglu Doctor, and appointed Mao Zeng as Xi Ma Duifeng.

古文：嘉本典虞车工，卒暴富贵，明帝令朝臣会其家饮宴，其容止举动甚蚩騃，语辄自谓 侯身 ，时人以为笑。
现代文：毛嘉本来是在典虞从事车工行业的人，突然间富贵之极，明帝下令朝臣们到毛嘉府中举行宴饮，但在过程中毛嘉的言行举止都非常粗鲁，言语中都以 侯身 自称，当时的人都以他为笑柄。
English: Mao Jia was originally a person engaged in the wheelwright industry in Danggu. Suddenly, he became extremely wealthy. Emperor Ming ordered the courtiers to hold a banquet in Mao Jia's residence. However, in the process, Mao Jia's words and deeds were very rude. In his speech, he always referred to himself as "Hoshin," and people at the time made fun of him.

古文：后又加嘉位特进，曾迁散骑侍郎。
现代文：后来明帝又加封毛家位特进，擢升毛曾为散骑常侍。
English: Later, Emperor Ming also granted Mao the title of "special promotion" and promoted him to the rank of "regular attendant of horseback riding."

古文：青龙三年，嘉薨，追赠光禄大夫，改封安国侯，增邑五百，并前千户，谥曰节侯。
现代文：青龙三年，毛家去世，朝廷追赠为光禄大夫，又将爵位改封为安国侯，食邑增加五百户，连同之前的食邑一个一千户，谥号为节侯。
English: In the third year of Qinglong, Mao Jia passed away, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Guanglu Doctor, and changed his title to An Guo Guo, adding five hundred households to the food village, together with the previous one thousand households in the food village. His posthumous name was Jie Hou.

古文：四年，追封后母夏为野王君。
现代文：青龙四年，朝廷追封毛皇后的母亲夏氏为野王君。
English: In the 4th year of the Qing Long Dynasty, the mother of Empress Mao, Xia, was crowned the Wild King by the imperial court.

古文：帝之幸郭元后也，后爱宠日弛。
现代文：后来明帝宠爱郭皇后，对毛皇后的宠爱渐渐减少。
English: Later, Emperor Ming favored Empress Guo, and the favor of Empress Mao gradually decreased.

古文：景初元年，帝游后园，召才人以上曲宴极乐。
现代文：景初元年，明帝在后园游览，召集后宫中才人以上的嫔妃参加宴饮，极尽享乐。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Jing Dynasty, Emperor Ming toured the backyard, gathered the concubines who were more talented in the harem to participate in the banquet, and enjoyed themselves to the fullest.

古文：元后曰 宜延皇后 ，帝弗许。
现代文：郭皇后说 应该邀请皇后 ，明帝没有统一。
English: Empress Guo said that the empress should be invited, but Emperor Ming was not unified.

古文：乃禁左右，使不得宣。
现代文：并且还告诉左右的侍从，严禁他们去请皇后。
English: And he also told the attendants on both sides that they were strictly forbidden to invite the queen.

古文：后知之，明日，帝见后，后曰： 昨日游宴北园，乐乎？ 
现代文：毛皇后还是听闻了这件事，第二天，明帝见到皇后，皇后说： 皇上昨天在北苑宴饮游乐，还开心吗？ 
English: Empress Mao still heard about this matter. The next day, Emperor Ming saw the empress, and the empress said: The emperor had a banquet and entertainment in the North Garden yesterday. Is he still happy?

古文：帝以左右泄之，所杀十馀人。
现代文：明帝认为是左右侍从将事情告诉了毛皇后，杀掉了十几个近身侍从。
English: Emperor Ming believed that the left and right attendants told the matter to Empress Mao, and killed more than a dozen close attendants.

古文：赐后死，然犹加谥，葬愍陵。
现代文：后来赐死了毛皇后，但还是给她加了谥号，将她安葬在愍陵。
English: She was later given the posthumous title of Empress Mao, but she was still given a posthumous name and was buried in Fuling.

古文：迁曾散骑常侍，后徙为羽林虎贲中郎将、原武典农。
现代文：后来明帝下令提升毛曾为散骑常侍，又任命为羽林虎贲中郎将、原武典农中郎将。
English: Later, Emperor Ming decreed that Mao Zeng be promoted to the rank of knight-errant, and he was also appointed as the vice-commander of the Ulin Tiger Regiment and the vice-commander of the Genbu-Dynasty Peasants' Regiment.

古文：明元郭皇后，西平人也，世河右大族。
现代文：明元郭皇后，是西平人，家中世代都是河右的大族。
English: Empress Mingyuan Guo is from Xiping, and her family has been from the same clan for generations.

古文：黄初中，本郡反叛，遂没入宫。
现代文：黄初年间，西平郡叛变，朝廷平定了叛乱，郭皇后也因此被收入宫中。
English: During the first year of the Yellow Emperor, Xiping County rebelled, and the rebellion was quelled by the imperial court. As a result, Empress Guo was brought into the palace.

古文：明帝即位，甚见爱幸，拜为夫人。
现代文：等到明帝登基后，对她非常宠爱，封她为夫人。
English: After Emperor Mingdi ascended to the throne, he was very fond of her and made her his wife.

古文：叔父立为骑都尉，从父芝为虎贲中郎将。
现代文：并任命她的叔父郭立为骑都尉，伯父郭芝为虎贲中郎将。
English: He also appointed her uncle Guo Li as a cavalry captain, and her uncle Guo Zhi as a vice-commander of the Tiger Army.

古文：帝疾困，遂立为皇后。
现代文：等到明帝病重的时候，下诏将她册立为皇后。
English: When Emperor Ming became seriously ill, he issued a decree to make her empress.

古文：齐王即位，尊后为皇太后，称永宁宫，追封谥太后父满为西都定侯，以立子建绍其爵；封太后母杜为郃阳君。
现代文：等到齐王曹芳登基，尊她为皇太后，以永宁宫代称，又追封她的父亲郭满为西都定侯，让郭立的儿子子郭建承继他的爵位；封她的母亲杜氏为郃阳君。
English: When King Cao Fang of Qi ascended to the throne, he honored her as the empress dowager and called her the representative of Yongning Palace. He also crowned her father Guo Man as the prince of Xidoding, and let Guo Li's son Guo Jian succeed to his title; and crowned her mother Du Shi as the princess of Shenyang.

古文：芝迁散骑常侍、长水校尉，立，宣德将军，皆封列侯。
现代文：又提升她的伯父郭芝为散骑常侍、长水校尉，叔父郭立为宣德将军，都封为列侯。
English: In addition, her uncle Guo Zhi was promoted to straggler, Changshui lieutenant, and her uncle Guo Li was promoted to Xuande general, both of whom were knighted.

古文：建兄德，出养甄氏。
现代文：郭建的兄长郭德，是由甄氏收养的。
English: Guo Jian's older brother, Guo De, was adopted by Zhen.

古文：德及建俱为镇护将军，皆封列侯，并掌宿卫。
现代文：郭德和郭建都担任镇护将军，都被封为列侯，执掌京城的警卫工作。
English: Guo De and Guo Jian both served as town guard generals. They were both made lords of the manor and were in charge of guarding the capital.

古文：值三主幼弱，宰辅统政，与夺大事，皆先咨启於太后而后施行。
现代文：又遇上明帝以后的三位皇帝都年幼势弱，由各位宰辅大臣主持朝中大事，遇上重大情况需要定夺时，都会先禀告太后然后才决定如何实施执行。
English: In addition, the three emperors after the Ming Emperor were all young and weak, and the vice-ministers presided over the major events of the DPRK and China. In the event of a major situation that needed to be decided, they would first inform the Empress Dowager before deciding how to implement it.

古文：毌丘俭、锺会等作乱，咸假其命而以为辞焉。
现代文：毋丘俭、钟会等人拥兵造反，都是假借郭太后的名义发布命令，然后发兵平叛。
English: However, those who supported the soldiers' rebellion, such as Qiu Qian and Zhong Hui, issued orders under the guise of the empress dowager Guo, and then sent troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：景元四年十二日崩，五年二月，葬高平陵西。
现代文：元帝景元四年十二月，郭太后驾崩。次年二月，安葬在明帝高平陵西侧。
English: In December of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jing Yuan, Empress Dowager Guo passed away. In February of the following year, she was buried on the west side of the Ming Emperor Gaoping Mausoleum.

古文：评曰：魏后妃之家，虽云富贵，未有若衰汉乘非其据，宰割朝政者也。
现代文：评曰：魏氏政权的后妃，家中虽然都享受富贵，但却没有像汉朝末年一样趁着天子年幼无力掌管朝政之时，分裂朝政。
English: The commentary said: Although the empress dowager of the Wei regime enjoyed wealth and luxury at home, she did not take advantage of the emperor's young age and inability to control the imperial government to split the imperial government, as was the case at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：鉴往易轨，於斯为美。
现代文：鉴于前代的教训，魏氏的后妃实在是值得称赞的。
English: Given the lessons of the previous generation, the Wei empress is really commendable.

古文：追观陈群之议，栈潜之论，適足以为百王之规典，垂宪范乎后叶矣。
现代文：而回看文帝时期陈群的建议，栈潜的进奏，也足以成为规范君主帝王的法则，成为后世遵循的典范。
English: And looking back at the suggestions of Chen Qun during the Emperor Wen period, the forward march of the stacked submarine is also enough to become the rule for regulating the monarchs and emperors, and to become a model for future generations.

