古文：张致远，字子猷，南剑州沙县人。
现代文：张致远字子猷，南剑州沙县人。
English: Zhang Zhiyuan, born in Shaxian County, South Jianzhou.

古文：宣和三年，中进士第。
现代文：宣和三年，中进士及第。
English: Three years after the declaration of peace, the junior high school students were promoted to the first and second grades.

古文：宰相范宗尹荐其才，召对，擢为枢密院计议官。
现代文：宰相范宗尹向朝廷推荐他的才能，召他入对，擢升为枢密院计议官。
English: Prime Minister Fan Zongyin recommended his talent to the imperial court, called him into the pair, and promoted him to the Privy Council.

古文：建寇范汝为已降，犹怀反侧，而招安官谢向、陆棠受贼赂，阴与之通。
现代文：建州贼寇范汝为投降之后，依然怀有反叛意图，但招安官员谢向、陆棠接受贼寇贿赂，暗中同贼寇相通。
English: After the Jianzhou bandit Fan Ru surrendered, he still harbored the intention of rebellion, but the recruiting officers Xie Xiang and Lu Tong accepted the bandit's bribe and secretly communicated with the bandit.

古文：致远谒告归，知其情，还白执政，请锄其根枿，于是捕响、棠及制置司属官施宜生付狱。
现代文：张致远请假回家，了解到这些情况，回朝后报告执政，请求铲除其根本，于是将谢向、陆棠及制置司属官施宜生逮捕交付监狱。
English: Zhang Zhiyuan took a leave of absence to go home, learned about these circumstances, reported to the government after returning to China, and requested that the root cause be eradicated. Therefore, he arrested Xie Xiang, Lu Tang, and Shi Yisheng, a subordinate official of the Construction and Installation Department, and sent them to prison.

古文：诏参知政事孟庾为福州宣抚使讨贼，韩世忠副之，辟致远为随军机宜文字。
现代文：诏令参知政事孟庾任福州宣抚使讨伐贼寇，韩世忠为副使，张致远任随军机宜文字。
English: The imperial edict appointed Meng Wei, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, as the Fuzhou propaganda envoy to fight the bandits, Han Shizhong as the deputy envoy, and Zhang Zhizhong as the military envoy.

古文：贼平，除两浙转运判官，改广东转运判官。
现代文：贼寇平定之后，张致远被任命为两浙转运判官，改任广东转运判官。
English: After the bandits were subdued, Zhang Zhiyuan was appointed as the judge of the two Zhejiang transshipment, and was reappointed as the judge of the Guangdong transshipment.

古文：招抚剧盗曾兖等，贼众悉降。
现代文：招抚势力强大的盗贼曾衮等人，贼众全部投降。
English: The powerful thief Zeng Yao and others were brought in, and the thieves all surrendered.

古文：绍兴四年，以监察御史召。
现代文：绍兴四年，朝廷以监察御史的职务召张致远回朝。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxing, the imperial court summoned Zhang Zhiyuan back to the imperial court with the duty of supervising the imperial historian.

古文：未至，除殿中侍御史。
现代文：没有到任，又被任命为殿中侍御史。
English: He did not take up the post, but was appointed as the palace's chamberlain-historian.

古文：时江西帅胡世将请增和买绢折纳钱，致远上疏言： 折纳绢钱本欲少宽民力，而比旧增半，是欲乘民之急而厚其敛也。 从之。
现代文：当时江西将领胡世将请求增加和买折纳钱，张致远上疏说： 折纳绢钱本来是想稍微宽解民力，但如果比原来增加一半，这是想乘民众危急时加重征敛。 
English: At that time, Jiangxi General Hu Shiyou requested to increase and buy discounted money. Zhang Zhiyuan said: The discounted money was originally intended to ease the people's power slightly, but if it was increased by half compared to the original, it was intended to take advantage of the people in times of crisis to increase the collection.

古文：金人与刘豫分道入寇，宰相赵鼎劝高宗亲征，朝士尚以为疑，白鼎审处。
现代文：朝廷听从了他的意见。金军同刘豫分路南下入侵，宰相赵鼎劝说高宗亲征，朝廷人士存在不少疑虑，报告赵鼎慎重处理。
English: The imperial court listened to his opinion. The Jin army invaded the south together with Liu Yu, and the prime minister Zhao Ding persuaded Gao Zong to personally lead the invasion. People in the imperial court had many doubts, and Zhao Ding handled the report carefully.

古文：致远入对，独赞其决。
现代文：张致远入朝答对，独自赞成赵鼎的决定。
English: Zhang Zhiyuan entered the morning to answer yes, and independently approved of Zhao Ding's decision.

古文：迁侍御史。
现代文：迁任侍御史。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：言： 聚财养兵，皆出民力，善理财者，宜固邦本。
现代文：他说 ：聚集钱财供养军队，都是出自民众的力量，善于理财的人，应该巩固国家的根本。
English: He said, "Gathering money and resources to support the military comes from the power of the people. People who are good at managing money should consolidate the foundation of the country."

古文：请罢榷福建盐，精择三司使、副，以常平茶盐合为一官，令计经常，量入为出，先务省节，次及经理。 诏户部讲究。
现代文：请求罢免福建榷盐，精心选拔三司使、副使等官员，将常平茶盐合并为一官，让他经常筹划，量入为出，先求节省开支，其次是经营管理。 诏令户部研究他的建议。
English: He asked for the removal of Fujian Jinshan, carefully selected the three envoys, deputy envoys and other officials, and merged Changping Jinshan into one official, so that he would constantly plan, live within his means, first seek to save expenses, followed by business management. He ordered the household department to study his suggestion.

古文：五年，除户部侍郎，进吏部侍郎，寻复为户部侍郎。
现代文：绍兴五年，张致远任户部侍郎，进为吏部侍郎，不久又任户部侍郎。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Zhang Zhidong was appointed as the steward of the household department, the steward of the administrative department, and the steward of the household department.

古文：言： 陛下欲富国强兵，大有为于天下，愿诏大臣力务省节，明禁僣侈，自宫禁始，自朝廷始。
现代文：他说 ：陛下要富国强兵，大有作为于天下，希望诏令大臣力求节省，明令禁止奢侈浪费，从宫中开始，从朝廷开始做起。
English: He said: His Majesty wants a rich country and strong soldiers, and great achievements in the world. I hope that the Emperor will order the ministers to strive to save money, and expressly prohibit extravagant waste, starting from the palace and the imperial court.

古文：额员可减者减之，司属可并者并之。
现代文：官员数量能减少的就减少，官府机构可以合并的就合并。
English: If the number of officials can be reduced, it will be reduced, and if government agencies can be merged, they will be merged.

古文：使州县无妄用，归其余于监司；监司无妄用，归其余于朝廷；朝廷无横费，日积月聚，惟军须是虑，中兴之业可致也。 除给事中。
现代文：使各地州县不要妄用经费，将剩余部分上交监司；监司不要妄用，将剩余部分上交朝廷；朝廷不要铺张浪费，这样日积月累，只考虑军费需要，中兴大业就能达到。 被任命为给事中。
English: So that the various prefectures and counties should not make excessive use of funds, and the remaining part should be submitted to the supervision department; the supervision department should not make excessive use of funds, and the remaining part should be submitted to the imperial court; the imperial court should not be extravagant and wasteful, so that over time, only considering the needs of military expenditure, ZTE's great cause can be achieved.

古文：寻以老母丐外，以显谟阁待制知台州。
现代文：不久因事奉年迈的母亲请求外任，以显谟阁待制身份出知台州。
English: Not long after, at the request of his elderly mother, he was sent to Taizhou as a guest of the State Council.

古文：朝廷以海寇郑广未平，改知福州。
现代文：朝廷因海上盗寇郑广没有平定，任命张致远改知福州。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhang Zhiyuan to govern Fuzhou after failing to subdue the sea robber Zheng Guang.

古文：六年八月，广等降，致远选留四百人，置营城外，余遣还业。
现代文：绍兴六年八月，郑广等人投降，张致远选留其中的四百人，置于营城之外，其余的遣回归业。
English: In August of the sixth year of Shaoxing, Zheng Guang and others surrendered. Zhang Zhiyuan chose to keep four hundred of them and placed them outside the camp. The rest were repatriated.

古文：复遣广讨他郡诸盗，数月悉平。
现代文：又派郑广征讨其他州郡的盗贼，数月之后全部平定。
English: He also sent Zheng Guang to recruit thieves from other states and counties, and after a few months, they were all subdued.

古文：八年正月，再召为给事中。
现代文：绍兴八年正月，朝廷再次任命张致远为给事中。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Shaoxing, the imperial court once again appointed Zhang Zhiyuan to be in charge.

古文：出知广州。
现代文：出朝知广州。
English: Out of the morning comes Guangzhou.

古文：寻以显谟阁待制致仕。
现代文：不久以显谟阁待制身份退休。
English: He soon retired as a member of the Hsien Moo Cabinet.

古文：十七年卒，年五十八。
现代文：绍兴十七年去世，时年五十八岁。
English: Shaoxing died 17 years ago, at the age of 58.

古文：晚家居贫甚，秦桧讽令求郡，良贵曰： 从臣除授合辞免，今求之于宰相，辞之于君父，良贵不敢为也。 其谏疏多焚稿，仅存杂著十五卷，新安朱熹为之序。吕本中字居仁，元祐宰相公著之曾孙、好问之子。
现代文：张致远为人耿直磊落有学识，历任台省、侍从，言论谏议都卓然可观。赵鼎曾对宾客说： 自从我再次担任丞相，除政府外，随从属官如张致远、常同、胡寅、张九成、潘良贵、吕本忠、魏虹等人都有人望，他日操守当不会改变。 有识之士认为赵鼎能够识人。吕本中字居仁，元年间宰相吕公著的曾孙、吕好问的儿子。
English: Zhang Zhiyuan was a man of great learning, and the speeches and discussions of successive ministers of Taiwan Province and attendants were remarkable. Zhao Ding once said to the guests: Since I served as the prime minister again, in addition to the government, subordinate officials such as Zhang Zhiyuan, Changdong, Hu Yin, Zhang Jiucheng, Pan Lianggui, Lü Benzhong, Wei Hong and others are promising, and the other day's behavior will not change. People of insight believe that Zhao Ding can recognize people. Lü Benzhong Jiujin, the great-grandson of Prime Minister Lü Gongzhi in the first year of the year, is the son of Lü

古文：幼而敏悟，公著奇爱之。
现代文：年幼时聪明敏悟，吕公著十分喜爱他。
English: When he was young, he was bright and alert. Lu Gongzhou loved him very much.

古文：公著薨，宣仁太后及哲宗临奠，诸童稚立庭下，宣仁独进本中，摩其头曰： 孝于亲，忠于君，儿勉焉。 
现代文：吕公著去世时，宣仁太后和哲宗亲临祭奠，众多孩童立于庭下，宣仁太后独自让吕本中进见，抚摸着他的头说 ：孝于亲，忠于君，孩儿当以此自勉。 
English: When Lü Gongzhu died, Empress Dowager Xuanren and Zhezong came to pay their respects in person, and many children stood in the court. Empress Dowager Xuanren alone let Lü Benzhong see him, stroked his head and said, "Be filial to your relatives and loyal to your parents. Children should use this to motivate themselves."

古文：祖希哲师程颐，本中闻见习熟。
现代文：祖父吕希哲从师于程颐，吕本中见闻都很熟悉。
English: Lu Xizhe's grandfather was a student of Cheng Yu, and he was very familiar with Lu's writings.

古文：少长，从杨时、游酢、尹焞游，三家或有疑异，未尝苟同。
现代文：稍长，与杨时、游酢、尹火享交游，三人中或有疑异，吕本中未曾苟同。
English: Slightly longer, with Yang Shi, Yu Zi, Yin Huo Jie, there may be doubts among the three, and there has never been any agreement among the three.

古文：以公著遗表恩，授承务郎。
现代文：因吕公著遗表恩泽，被授予承务郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Jengyurang due to his expression of gratitude after the death of Lü Gong.

古文：绍圣间，党事起，公著追贬，本中坐焉。
现代文：绍圣年间，党争兴起，吕公著被追贬官，吕本中也受到牵连。
English: During the years of Shaosheng, the party struggle arose, Lü Gongzhu was persecuted and demoted, and Lü Ben was also implicated.

古文：元符中，主济阴簿、秦州士曹掾，辟大名府帅司干官。
现代文：元符年间，任济阴主簿、秦州士曹掾，辟举为大名府帅司干官。
English: During the Yuanfu era, Cao Pi, who was appointed as the main bookkeeper of Jieyin and the Qin state magistrate, was promoted to the post of daimyo (feudal lord) of the prefecture.

古文：宣和六年，除枢密院编修官。
现代文：宣和六年，任枢密院编修官。
English: Six years after the declaration of peace, he was appointed editor of the Privy Council.

古文：靖康改元，迁职方员外郎，以父嫌奉祠。
现代文：靖康改元，迁任职方员外郎，因避父亲嫌疑奉祠。
English: Yasuko changed the era name, moved the post to Wairo, a government official, and was suspected of serving the shrine to avoid her father.

古文：丁父忧，服除，召为祠部员外郎，以疾告去。
现代文：父亲去世，为之守丧，守丧完毕，召任祠部员外郎，因病请求离职。
English: When his father passed away, he held a memorial service for him. After the memorial service was over, he was called to serve as a member of the ancestral shrine, and he requested to leave his job due to illness.

古文：再直秘阁，主管崇道观。
现代文：再直秘阁，主管崇道观。
English: Then it was straight to the secret cabinet, headed by a Taoist monk.

古文：绍兴六年，召赴行在，特赐进士出身，擢起居舍人兼权中书舍人。
现代文：绍兴六年，召赴朝廷，特赐他进士出身，擢任起居舍人兼权中书舍人。
English: Six years later, he was summoned to the imperial court in Shaoxing. He was specially awarded the title of "Junior Scholar" and promoted to the position of "Rising Scholar" and "Middle Scholar."

古文：内侍李琮失料历，上以潜邸旧人，不用保任特给之。
现代文：太监李琮失掉料历，高宗因为他是原王府旧人，不用保任特给他。
English: Since the eunuch Li Xi lost his records, Gao Zong did not have to give him a special appointment because he was an old man of the former royal court.

古文：本中言： 若以异恩别给，非所谓 宫中府中当为一体 者。 上见缴还，甚悦，令宰臣谕之曰： 自今有所见，第言之。 
现代文：吕本中说： 如果因异恩别给，不是所谓 宫中府中当为一体 。 高宗见命令被收回，很高兴，令宰臣对他说： 自今以后有什么意见，只管说。 
English: Lv Ben said, "If it is not given due to special favor, it is not the so-called "the palace and the government should be integrated." Gao Zongyan was very happy that the order was withdrawn, and ordered the vice-minister to say to him, "From now on, if you have any opinion, just say it."

古文：监阶州草场苗亘以赃败，有诏从黥，本中奏： 近岁官吏犯赃，多至黥籍，然四方之远，或有枉滥，何由尽知？
现代文：阶州草场监官苗亘因贪赃败露，诏令处以黥刑，吕本中上奏： 近来官吏犯法贪污，多被处以黥刑，但四方遥远，其中不免冤枉，怎么能够全部知道？
English: Chaozhou Grassland Supervisor Miao Wang was exposed for corruption and sentenced to caning by imperial edict. This is a play on words: Recently, government officials have been punished with caning for violating the law on corruption, but they are far away from each other, and some of them are not innocent. How can they know everything?

古文：异时察其非辜，虽欲抆拭，其可得乎？
现代文：以后觉察他是无辜，即使想平反，又怎么能做到呢？
English: If you later find out that he is innocent, even if you want to rehabilitate him, how can you do it?

古文：若祖宗以来此刑尝用，则绍圣权臣当国之时，士大夫无遗类久矣。
现代文：如果祖宗以来曾用此刑，那么绍圣权臣当政之时，士大夫死无遗类已经很久了。
English: If this punishment had been used since the time of the ancestors, then when Shao Shengquan was in power, it would have been a long time since the Shidafu died out.

古文：愿酌处常罚，毋令奸臣得以藉口于后世。 从之。
现代文：希望斟酌用常刑处罚，不要让奸臣以后世为藉口。 朝廷听从了他的意见。
English: He hoped that the imperial court would listen to his opinion and consider imposing a long prison sentence, and not allow the traitor to use his later life as an excuse.

古文：七年，上幸建康，本中奏曰： 当今之计，必先为恢复事业，求人才，恤民隐，讲明法度，详审刑政，开直言之路，俾人人得以尽情。
现代文：绍兴七年，高宗巡幸建康，吕本中上奏说： 当今的计策，必须先从事恢复故土的大业，求取人才，宽恤民隐，讲明法度，详审刑政，广开直言之路，使人人得以尽情上达。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, Gaozong Junxing Jiankang and Luben Zhongzheng said: Today's strategy must first engage in the great cause of restoring the motherland, recruit talents, be sympathetic to the privacy of the people, clarify laws and regulations, review criminal policy in detail, and open up the road of straight talk, so that everyone can enjoy themselves.

古文：然后练兵谋帅，增师上流，固守淮甸，使江南先有不可动之势，伺彼有衅，一举可克。
现代文：然后训练军队选拔将帅，增军上游，固守淮甸，使江南先有不能动摇之势，伺敌有隙，可一举而克。
English: Then, the army was trained to select a general, increase the number of troops in the upstream, and firmly defend Huai Tien, so that the south of the Yangtze River first had an unshakable momentum, and the enemy had a gap, which could be overcome at one stroke.

古文：若徒有恢复之志，而无其策，邦本未强，恐生他患。
现代文：如果只有恢复大业的志向，而没有相应的对策，国家根本未强大，恐怕会产生其他祸患。
English: If there is only the aspiration to restore the great cause, but no corresponding countermeasures, the country is not strong at all, and I am afraid that other disasters will occur.

古文：今江南、两浙科须日繁，闾里告病，倘有水旱乏绝，奸宄窃发，未审朝廷何以待之？
现代文：现在江南、两浙地区赋税日益增加，乡里疲敝，倘若遭到水旱之灾，坏人起而发难，不知道朝廷怎样对付？
English: At present, taxes in the south of the Yangtze River and the two Zhejiang regions are increasing day by day, and the countryside is exhausted. If it is affected by floods and droughts, bad people will rise up and start trouble, and the imperial court does not know how to deal with it?

古文：近者臣庶劝兴师问罪者，不可胜数，观其辞固甚顺，考其实不可行。
现代文：近来臣僚中劝说兴师问罪讨伐金朝的，不可胜数，看他的言辞固然十分理直气壮，但考察实际却难以实行。
English: There are countless ministers who have recently persuaded Xing Shi to sue and fight against the Kim dynasty. His words are indeed very righteous and strong, but it is difficult to carry out the investigation.

古文：大抵献言之人，与朝廷利害绝不相侔，言不酬，事不济，则脱身而去。
现代文：大概进言的人，同朝廷的利害绝不相等，言论没有实现，事情没有成功，便脱身离去。
English: It is likely that the person who made the suggestion did not have the same interests as the imperial court. If the proposal did not come to fruition, or if things did not work out, the person would leave.

古文：朝廷施设失当，谁任其咎？
现代文：朝廷设施失当，谁能承担责任？
English: Misuse of court facilities, who can be held responsible?

古文：鸷鸟将击，必匿其形，今朝廷于进取未有秋毫之实，所下诏命，已传贼境，使之得以为备，非策也。 又奏： 江左形势如九江、鄂渚、荆南诸路，当宿重兵，临以重臣。
现代文：鸷鸟将要出击时，必先隐藏形迹，现在朝廷对于进取没有丝毫之实，所下诏命，已传到敌境，使敌人得以事先准备，这不是办法。 又上奏 ：江左形势险要之地如九江、鄂渚、荆南各路，应当驻屯重兵，选派重臣。
English: When the ostrich is about to attack, it must first hide its tracks. At present, there is not the slightest evidence of the imperial court's foray. The imperial command has been transmitted to the enemy's territory, so that the enemy can prepare in advance, which is not the way to go. Once again: In places where the situation along the Yangtze River is critical, such as Jiujiang, Hunan, and Jingnan, heavy troops should be stationed and senior ministers should be selected.

古文：吴时谓西陵、建平，国之藩表，愿精择守帅，以待缓急，则江南自守之计备矣。 
现代文：吴时说西陵、建平，是国家的藩篱门户，希望精择守将，以备紧急，那么江南自守之计就齐备了。 
English: Wu Shi said that Xiling and Jianping are the gateways of the country. He hoped that the guards would be carefully selected in case of emergency, and then the plan for self-defense in the south of the Yangtze River would be ready.

古文：内侍郑谌落致仕，得兵官。
现代文：太监郑谌退休时特命复出，得到掌管军队的官职。
English: When the eunuch Zheng Qi retired, he was specially ordered to return and was given the official position of controlling the army.

古文：本中言： 陛下进临江浒，将以有为，今贤士大夫未能显用，岩穴幽隐未能招致，乃起谌以统兵之任，何邪？ 命遂寝。
现代文：吕本中说 ：陛下进临江浒，将有所作为，现在贤士大夫没有得到重用，隐藏山林的能人没有招至，反而用郑谌为统兵官，这是为什么？ 
English: Lv Ben said, "Your Majesty's entry into the Linjiang Yangtze River will make a difference. Now, the sage doctor has not been reused, and the capable person from the hidden mountains and forests has not been invited. Instead, Zheng Yi has been appointed as the commander-in-chief. Why is this?

古文：引疾乞祠，直龙图阁、知台州，不就，主管太平观。
现代文：命令于是作罢。吕本中以疾病请求奉祠，直龙图阁、知台州，没有到任，主管太平观。
English: The order was then rescinded. Lübben junior high school students requested to dedicate a shrine due to illness, while those from Zhilong, Tukou, and Zhitaizhou did not show up for duty, and the superintendent of Taiping was fired.

古文：召为太常少卿。
现代文：召任太常少卿。
English: Appointed as Taijo Shokei.

古文：八年二月，迁中书舍人。
现代文：绍兴八年二月，吕本中任中书舍人。
English: In February of the 8th year of Shaoxing, Lv Ben was appointed as a middle school teacher.

古文：三月，兼侍讲。
现代文：三月，兼侍讲。
English: In March, he became an assistant speaker.

古文：六月，兼权直学士院。
现代文：六月，兼权直学士院。
English: In June, he became a part-time member of the Academy.

古文：金使通和，有司议行人之供，本中言： 使人之来，正当示以俭约，客馆刍粟若务充悦，适启戎心。
现代文：金派使者前来讲和，有关部门计议接待礼品，吕本中说： 使节前来，正当表示俭朴节约，客馆供应如果务求充裕欢悦，正好引发敌人侵我之心。
English: When the envoys came, they justifiably showed frugality and thrift. If the supply of guest houses is to ensure plenty of joy, it will just cause the enemy to invade my heart.

古文：且成败大计，初不在此，在吾治政得失，兵财强弱，愿诏有司令无乏可也。 
现代文：况且成败大计，本不在此，关键在于我政治得失，兵财强弱，希望诏令有关部门让供应不要缺乏就行了。 
English: Moreover, the success or failure of the overall plan is not here, the key lies in my political gains and losses, military and financial strength, I hope that the relevant departments will order the supply not to be lacking.

古文：初，本中与秦桧同为郎，相得甚欢。
现代文：当初，吕本中同秦桧同做郎官，两人相交甚欢。
English: At first, Lv Benzhong and Qin Yu were both vassals, and the two enjoyed each other's company.

古文：桧既相，私有引用，本中封还除目，桧勉其书行，卒不从。
现代文：秦桧担任丞相之后，私自引用官员，吕本中封还除目，秦桧指示他依照画字认可，吕本中最终没有听从。
English: After Qin Hui assumed the post of prime minister, he privately quoted officials. Lü Benzhong was also demoted. Qin Hui instructed him to follow the approval of calligraphy, but Lü Benzhong ultimately did not obey.

古文：赵鼎素主元祐之学，谓本中公著后，又范冲所荐，故深相知。
现代文：赵鼎一向主张元学说，认为吕本中为吕公著后代，又为范冲推荐，所以深相知许。
English: Zhao Ding has always advocated the theory of Yuan, and believes that Lu Benzhong is a descendant of Lu Gong, and is also recommended by Fan Chong, so they know each other well.

古文：会《哲宗实录》成，鼎迁仆射，本中草制，有曰： 合晋、楚之成，不若尊王而贱霸；散牛李之党，未如明是以去非。 桧大怒，言于上曰： 本中受鼎风旨，伺和议不成，为脱身之计。 风御史萧振劾罢之。
现代文：恰逢《哲宗实录》写成，赵鼎任仆射，吕本中草拟制书，其中有句说： 合晋、楚之成，不如尊王而贱霸；解散牛、李之党，不如明是而去非。 秦桧大怒，对高宗说： 吕本中接受赵鼎指使，看到和议不成，自为脱身之计。 指使御史萧振弹劾罢免他。
English: Coinciding with the writing of the "Philosopher's Record," Zhao Ding was appointed as a flunky, and a book was drafted in Lü's book. One of the sentences said: "To join Jin and Chu is not as good as to honor the king, but to be a low-ranking tyrant; to dissolve the Niu and Li parties is not as good as to go to the wrong side." Qin Yu was furious and said to Gao Zong: "In Lü's book, he accepted Zhao Ding's instruction, saw that peace talks could not be achieved, and made a plan to escape. He instructed the governor Xiao Zhen to impeach

古文：提举太平观，卒。
现代文：提举太平观，去世。
English: Taiping Guan was promoted and passed away.

古文：学者称为东莱先生，赐谥文清。
现代文：学者称呼他为东莱先生，赐谥号 文清 。
English: Scholars called him Mr. Donglai and gave him the nickname Wenqing.

古文：有诗二十卷得黄庭坚陈师道句法，《春秋解》一十卷、《童蒙训》三卷、《师友渊源录》五卷，行于世。
现代文：著有诗二十卷，深得黄庭坚、陈师道笔法，《春秋解》十一卷、《童蒙训》三卷、《师友渊源录》五卷，流传于世。
English: He is the author of 20 volumes of poems, and is well versed in Huang Tingjian's and Chen Shidao's methods of writing, the 11th volume of "Spring and Autumn Solution," the 3rd volume of "Children's Teaching," and the 5th volume of "Shiyu Yuan Yuan Yuan Lu," which have been passed down to the world.

