古文：谢哲萧乾谢嘏张种王固孔奂萧允弟引
现代文：谢哲字颖豫，陈郡阳夏人。祖父谢脞，在梁朝任司徒。
English: Xie Zhe Zi Ying Yu was born in Yangxia, Chen County. His grandfather, Xie Yao, was a scholar in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：谢哲，字颖豫，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：父亲谢譓，在梁朝任右光禄大夫。
English: His father, Xie Yao, served as Uguanglu's doctor during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：祖朏，梁司徒。父譓，梁右光禄大夫。哲美风仪，举止酝藉，而襟情豁然，为士君子所重。起家梁秘书郎，累迁广陵太守。
现代文：谢哲有美好的风度仪表，举止宽容含蓄，而胸怀豁达，为品行高尚的士人所推重。以出任梁塑秘书郎起家，连续升任至广陵太守。
English: Xie Zhe had a beautiful demeanor, a tolerant and reserved demeanor, and an open mind, and was highly regarded as a gentleman of high moral character. He started his career as a secretary of Liang Shuo and was successively promoted to Guangling Taishu.

古文：侯景之乱，以母老因寓居广陵，高祖自京口渡江应接郭元建，哲乃委质，深被敬重。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，因为母亲年老便居住在广陵，高祖从京旦渡过旦辽接应堑五建，邀蜇于是归顺直担，很受直担敬重。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, because his mother lived in Guangling due to her old age, Gao Zu passed from Beijing to Liaoning to join the Five Dynasties, and was invited to join the Five Dynasties, and was highly respected by the Five Dynasties.

古文：高祖为南徐州刺史，表哲为长史。
现代文：产担任尘途业刺史，上书朝廷任用谢踅为长史。
English: It has been a long history for the production to serve as the dust path of the industry, and it has been a long history for the imperial court to appoint Xie Qi.

古文：荆州陷，高祖使哲奉表于晋安王劝进。
现代文：型业失陷，产担派谢蜇献书给置塞王劝他登上帝位。
English: When the model business failed, the production manager sent Xie Jun to present a letter to King Jisei to persuade him to ascend to the throne.

古文：敬帝承制征为给事黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉。
现代文：敬童禀承皇帝的旨意征召他为给事黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉。
English: In accordance with the emperor's will, Jing Tong was conscripted to serve as an attendant of the Yellow Gate and a captain of the infantry.

古文：贞阳侯僭位，以哲为通直散骑常侍，侍东宫。
现代文：贞阳侯僭越登位，任用邀堑为通直散骑常侍，侍奉东宫。
English: Zhengyang Hou Xuan Yue ascended the throne, and appointed Zhaoyuan as a non-commissioned officer, serving the East Palace.

古文：敬帝即位，迁长兼侍中。
现代文：敬帝登位，升任长兼侍中。
English: Emperor Kei ascended to the throne and was promoted to the post of chancellor and chamberlain.

古文：高祖受命，迁都官尚书、豫州大中正、吏部尚书。
现代文：高祖承受天命称帝，升任都官尚书、逸业大中正、吏部尚书。
English: Gao Zu received the heavenly mandate to be emperor, and was promoted to the post of the governor of the capital, the vice-president of Yingye University, and the vice-president of the personnel department.

古文：出为明威将军、晋陵太守，入为中书令。
现代文：调出朝廷任用为明威将军、登陆太守，进入朝廷任中书令。
English: He was transferred out of the imperial court and appointed as Mingwei general, the governor of the landing, and entered the imperial court.

古文：世祖嗣位，为太子詹事。
现代文：世担继承帝位，任太子詹事。
English: He was in charge of the succession to the imperial throne, and was named Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：出为明威将军、衡阳内史，秩中二千石。
现代文：调出朝廷任明威将军、堑盐内史，官职品级是中二千石。
English: The imperial court appointed Ming Wei as general and Zou Yan as internal historian, and the official rank grade was 2,000 koku.

古文：迁长沙太守，将军、加秩如故。
现代文：升任长沙太守，将军的职务、增加的品级依旧保留。
English: He was promoted to the governor of Changsha, but his general's position and increased rank were still retained.

古文：还除散骑常侍、中书令。
现代文：回到朝廷任命为散骑常侍、中书令。
English: Returning to the Imperial Court, he was appointed as a strolling equerry and chushirei.

古文：废帝即位，以本官领前将军。
现代文：废帝登位，谢哲以本官领前将军。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and Xie Zhe became the former general in his own right.

古文：高宗为录尚书，引为侍中、仁威将军、司徒左长史。
现代文：产塞任录尚书时，引进谢哲任侍中、仁威将军、司徒左长史。
English: When the appointment of Sanzi was recorded in the records, Xie Zhe was introduced as an attendant, General Ren Wei and Sitou Zuo Changshi.

古文：未拜，光大元年卒，时年五十九。
现代文：尚未就任，光大元年去世，当时年纪五十九岁。
English: He had not yet taken office when he died in 1891, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：赠侍中、中书监，谥康子。
现代文：赠给侍中、中书监的官衔，谧号叫做康子。
English: He was given the official title of Samurai Junior High School and Junior High School Librarian, and his posthumous name was Yasuko.

古文：萧乾，字思惕，兰陵人也。
现代文：萧乾字思惕，兰陵人。
English: Xiao Qian, think carefully, Lanling people.

古文：祖嶷，齐丞相豫章文献王。
现代文：祖父赵，是齐的丞相豫章文献王。
English: Grandfather Zhao was the chancellor of Qi and the king of literature.

古文：父子范，梁秘书监。
现代文：父亲萧子范，在梁朝任秘书监。
English: His father, Xiao Zifan, served as secretary-superintendent in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：乾容止雅正，性恬简，善隶书，得叔父子云之法。
现代文：萧干仪表举止高雅端正，性格安静诚实，擅长隶体书法，得到叔父萧子云传授的书法。
English: Xiao Gan's manners are elegant and upright, his personality is quiet and honest, and he is good at subordinate style calligraphy, which was taught by his uncle Xiao Ziyun.

古文：年九岁，召补国子《周易》生，梁司空袁昂时为祭酒，深敬重之。
现代文：年纪九岁时，受召补为国子学学习《周易》的学生，梁朝的司空袁昂当时任国子学祭酒，非常敬重他。
English: At the age of nine, he was called to supplement the students studying "Zhou Yi" as a son of the state. Yuan Ang, the Secretary of the Liang Dynasty, was the son of the state at that time, and he was highly respected.

古文：十五，举明经。
现代文：十五岁时，因通晓经术被推荐。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was recommended for his knowledge of the scriptures.

古文：释褐东中郎湘东王法曹参军，迁太子舍人。
现代文：脱去平民布衣换上官服出任束中郎湘束王法曹参军，升任太子舍人。
English: He took off his civilian clothes and put on his official uniform to join the army as the middle son of Prince Shōzoku, and was promoted to the position of Crown Prince.

古文：建安侯萧正立出镇南豫州，又板录事参军。
现代文：建安侯萧正立出镇南豫州，又任用萧干为绿事参军。
English: Jian'an Hou Xiao Zhengli went out of town to Nan'yuzhou, and appointed Xiao Gan to join the army for green affairs.

古文：累迁中军宣城王中录事谘议参军。
现代文：连续升任中军宣城王中录事谘议参军。
English: He was successively promoted to the position of Xuancheng Wang of the Central Military Commission.

古文：侯景平，高祖镇南徐州，引乾为贞威将军、司空从事中郎。
现代文：侯景被平定后，高祖镇守南徐州，引进萧干任用为贞威将军、司空从事中郎。
English: After Houjing was subdued, Gaozouzhen guarded the south of Xuzhou, introduced Xiao Gan and appointed him as General Zhenwei, and Sikuo was engaged in the middle.

古文：迁中书侍郎、太子家令。
现代文：升任中书侍郎、太子家令。
English: He was promoted to Chusho-sajiro (chamberlain) and became a member of the Prince's household.

古文：永定元年，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：永定元年，任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：是时熊昙朗在豫章，周迪在临川，留异在东阳，陈宝应在建、晋，共相连结，闽中豪帅，往往立砦以自保，高祖甚患之，乃令乾往使，谕以逆顺，并观虚实。
现代文：遣时熊昙朗在豫章，周迪在临川，留异在束阳，陈实应在建、晋，一起互相连结，闽中有势力的军事首领，往往设立栅栏营垒以保全自己，高祖非常忧虑这种情况，于是命令萧干作为使者前去，告知叛逆和归顺的道理，并观察情况的虚实。
English: During the time of the envoys, Xiong Yulang was in Yuzhang, Zhou Di was in Linchuan, Ruoyi was in Sakuyang, and Chen Shi should be in Jian and Jin, and they were connected to each other. Powerful military leaders in Yunnan often set up fences to protect themselves. Gaozu was very worried about this situation, so he ordered Xiao Gan to go as an envoy to tell the truth of rebellion and surrender, and to observe the truth of the situation.

古文：将发，高祖谓乾曰： 建、晋恃险，好为奸宄，方今天下初定，难便出兵。
现代文：将要出发时，高祖对萧干说： 建、晋一带的人依恃险要，常为非作歹，现在国家刚安定，难于立刻出兵。
English: When they were about to set out, Gao Zu said to Xiao Gan: People in the Jian and Jin regions cling to danger and often do bad things. Now that the country is stable, it is difficult to send troops immediately.

古文：昔陆贾南征，赵佗归顺，随何奉使，黥布来臣，追想清风，仿佛在目。
现代文：从前陆贾往南远行，使得趟他归顺，随何奉命出使，说服黥布前来称臣，追想古人俊逸的风采，好像就在眼前。
English: He traveled far south from Qianlu Jia to make him submit, and sent envoys as he was ordered, persuading Zibo to come and praise the minister, recalling the handsome style of the ancients, as if it were right in front of him.

古文：况卿坐镇雅俗，才高昔贤，宜勉建功名，不烦更劳师旅。 
现代文：何况你安坐而能镇定雅士俗人，才能高于从前的贤人，应该勉力建树功名，不至于烦劳军队。 
English: Moreover, if you can calm down the aristocrats and commoners by sitting quietly, your ability will be higher than that of the sages in the past. You should strive to build a reputation, so as not to bother the army.

古文：乾既至，晓以逆顺，所在渠帅并率部众开壁款附。
现代文：萧干到达后，说明叛逆归顺的道理，那些地方的军事首领都率部众开壁垒诚心归附。
English: After the arrival of Xiao Gan, the military leaders of those places all led the people to open the barriers and sincerely adhere to the principle of surrendering.

古文：其年，就除贞威将军、建安太守。
现代文：这年，就任贞威将军、建安太守。
English: In the same year, he was appointed General Zhenwei and Jianan Governor.

古文：天嘉二年，留异反，陈宝应将兵助之，又资周迪兵粮，出寇临川，因逼建安。
现代文：天嘉二年，留异反叛，陈宝应派兵去援助他，又接济周迪兵粮，派兵出征侵犯临川，因此逼近建安。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, when a dissident rebelled, Chen Bao sent troops to aid him. He also supplied grain to Zhou Di's troops and sent troops to invade Linchuan, thus approaching Jian'an.

古文：乾单使临郡，素无士卒，力不能守，乃弃郡以避宝应。
现代文：萧干一个人作为朝廷使臣来到郡中，一直没有军队，力量上不能防守，于是放弃郡城以躲避堕宣尘。
English: Xiao Gan came to the county as an envoy of the imperial court, but he did not have an army and could not defend himself, so he abandoned the county seat to avoid falling into the dust of Xuancheng.

古文：时闽中守宰，并为宝应迫胁，受其署置，乾独不为屈，徙居郊野，屏绝人事。
现代文：当时盟主的地方官，都被速宣尘威胁逼迫，受他任用，萧干惟独不被屈服，迁居郊野之处，隐居断绝人事交往。
English: At that time, the local officials of the commander-in-chief were all threatened and persecuted by Su Xuan dust. Appointed by him, Xiao Gan was the only one who did not give in, moved to the countryside, secluded himself and cut off personnel exchanges.

古文：及宝应平，乃出诣都督章昭达，昭达以状表闻，世祖甚嘉之，超授五兵尚书。
现代文：到陈实应被平定后，便出来到达都督章昭达处，章昭达把他的情况上书让朝廷知道，世祖非常赞赏他，越级提拔任命为五兵尚书。
English: After Chen Shida was subdued, he came out to the office of the governor Zhang Zhaoda. Zhang Zhaoda wrote a letter to the court to let the court know about his situation. The patriarch greatly appreciated him, and he was promoted beyond his rank and appointed as the five soldiers of Shangshu.

古文：光大元年卒，谥曰静子。
现代文：光大元年去世，谧号叫做静子。
English: Kōdai died in the first year of the Meiji era, and her nickname was Shizuko.

古文：谢嘏，字含茂，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：谢嘏字含茂，陈郡阳夏人。
English: The characters of Xie Xuan include Mao and Yang Xia from Chen County.

古文：祖，齐金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父谢潇，在齐朝任金紫光禄大夫。
English: Grandfather Xie Xiao served as a doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父举，梁中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：父亲谢举，在梁朝任中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: His father, Xie Jiu, served as the General of the Middle Guards and the Third Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：嘏风神清雅，颇善属文。
现代文：谢嘏风度神采高洁文雅，非常会写文章。
English: Xie Yao's demeanor is refined and elegant, and she is very good at writing articles.

古文：起家梁秘书郎，稍迁太子中庶子，掌东宫管记，出为建安太守。
现代文：以出任梁朝秘书郎起家，逐渐提升任太子中庶子，担任束宫管理文牍的职务，调出朝廷任建安太守。
English: He started his career as a secretary of the Liang Dynasty, and was gradually promoted to the position of an illegitimate son of the crown prince, served as the administrator of the Sok Palace, and was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as the governor of Jian'an.

古文：侯景之乱，嘏之广州依萧勃，承圣中，元帝征为五兵尚书，辞以道阻，转授智武将军。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，谢嘏去到广州依附萧勃，承圣年间，元帝征召他任命为五兵尚书，以道路阻隔不通为理由推辞，改而任命为智武将军。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Xie Jun went to Guangzhou to attach himself to Xiao Bo. During the consecration year, Emperor Yuan summoned him to be appointed as the five soldiers of Shangshu, but he declined on the grounds that the road was blocked, and was instead appointed as the general of Zhiwu.

古文：萧勃以为镇南长史、南海太守。
现代文：萧勃任用他为镇南长史、南海太守。
English: Xiao Bo appointed him as the mayor of Zhenan and the governor of Nanhai.

古文：勃败，还至临川，为周迪所留。
现代文：萧勃失败，谢嘏回到临川，为周迪所挽留。
English: Xiao Bo failed, Xie Yao returned to Linchuan and was retained by Zhou Di.

古文：久之，又度岭之晋安依陈宝应，世祖前后频召之，嘏崎岖寇虏，不能自拔。
现代文：时间久了，又过岭去到晋安依附陈宝应，世祖前后屡次征召他，谢嘏身陷叛贼之中道路险阻，不能自拔。
English: After a long time, he went across the ridge to Jin'an to cling to Chen Baoying. The ancestor repeatedly conscripted him, and Xie Yu was trapped in the middle of the traitors. He could not extricate himself.

古文：及宝应平，嘏方诣阙，为御史中丞江德藻所举劾，世祖不加罪责，以为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：到陈实应被平定，谢嘏才前往朝廷，被御史中丞江德藻检举弹劾，世祖没有问罪责罚，任命他为给事黄门侍郎。
English: It was not until Chen Shih was subdued that Xie Jun went to the imperial court and was impeached by the imperial historian Jiang Demao. The ancestor did not ask for punishment, but appointed him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：寻转侍中，天康元年，以公事免，寻复本职。
现代文：接着改任侍中，天康元年，因为公事被免职，接着恢复本来官职。
English: Then he was reappointed as an attendant, and in the first year of Tian Kang, he was removed from his post because of official business, and then he resumed his original official post.

古文：光大元年，为信威将军、中卫始兴王长史。
现代文：光大元年，任信威将军、中卫始兴王长史。
English: In the first year of the Guangda period, he was appointed as the general Xinwei and the middle guard Shi Xing Wang Changshi.

古文：迁中书令、豫州大中正、都官尚书，领羽林监，中正如故。
现代文：升任中书令、豫州大中正、都官尚书，领羽林监，中正的职务依旧担任。
English: He was promoted to the posts of the middle secretary, the vice-president of Yuzhou University, the vice-governor of the capital, and the leader of the forestry inspectors. He still holds the position of the vice-president.

古文：太建元年卒，赠侍中、中书令，谥曰光子。
现代文：太建元年去世，赠给侍中、中书令的官衔，谧号叫做光子。
English: Tai Jian died in the first year of the year, and was given the official title of Samurai, and the official title of Chushirei. His nickname was "Photon."

古文：有文集行于世。
现代文：谢嘏着有文集流行于世间。
English: He has a collection of essays that are popular around the world.

古文：二子俨、伷。
现代文：谢嘏有两个儿子谢俨、谢佃。
English: Xie Rong has two sons, Xie Rong and Xie Rong.

古文：俨官至散骑常侍、侍中、御史中丞、太常卿，出监东扬州。
现代文：谢俨官做到散骑常侍、侍中、御史中丞、太常卿，调出朝廷监理束扬州政事。
English: Xie Yukan managed to send out the imperial court supervisors and Yangzhou government officials, including the imperial equerry, the chamberlain, the secretary of state, and the grand secretary of state.

古文：祯明二年卒于会稽，赠中护军。
现代文：祯明二年去世于会稽，赠给中护军的官衔。
English: He died two years after the Ming Dynasty and was presented with the official title of Middle Protector.

古文：张种，字士苗，吴郡人也。
现代文：张种字士苗，吴郡人。
English: Zhang Zongzhi Miao, a native of Wuxi County.

古文：祖辩，宋司空右长史、广州刺史。
现代文：祖父张辩，在宋朝任司空右长史、广州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Yan, served as the Secretary of the Song Dynasty and the Governor of Guangzhou.

古文：父略，梁太子中庶子、临海太守。
现代文：父亲张略，在梁朝任太子中庶子、临海太守。
English: His father, Zhang Liang, was an illegitimate son of the crown prince of the Liang Dynasty and the governor of Linhai.

古文：种少恬静，居处雅正，不妄交游，傍无造请，时人为之语曰： 宋称敷、演，梁则卷、充。
现代文：张种少年时性格淡泊安静，平日的仪容举止典雅方正，不随意舆人交游，也不去拜访别人，当时的人评论他说： 宋代称颂敷、演，梁代则有卷、充。
English: When Zhang Jie was a young boy, his personality was light and quiet. On weekdays, his appearance and demeanor were elegant and upright. He did not mingle with people at will, nor did he visit others. People at the time commented on him, saying, "In the Song Dynasty, there were eulogies and performances, while in the Liang Dynasty, there were rolls and performances.

古文：清虚学尚，种有其风。 
现代文：清净虚无学识卓越，张种有他们的风格。 
English: Pure and unadulterated, uneducated and brilliant, the Zhangs have their own style.

古文：仕梁王府法曹，迁外兵参军，以父忧去职。
现代文：张种出仕时任梁朝王府法曹，升任外兵参军，因父亲去世不担任官职。
English: Zhang Zong was the legal assistant of the royal court of the Liang Dynasty when he entered the service. He was promoted to a foreign soldier and joined the army, but did not hold an official position due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，为中军宣城王府主簿。
现代文：服丧期满，任中军宣城王王府主簿。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of the Central Army's Xuancheng Wangwang Palace.

古文：种时年四十馀，家贫，求为始豊令，入除中卫西昌侯府西曹掾。
现代文：张种当时年纪四十多岁，家中贫穷，请求任始丰县令，调入朝廷任命为中卫西旦屋府的西曹掾。
English: Zhang Zong was in his forties at the time, and his family was poor. He requested to be appointed as the governor of Shifeng County, and was transferred to the imperial court to be appointed as the middle guard of Xidan House.

古文：时武陵王为益州刺史，重选府僚，以种为征西东曹掾，种辞以母老，抗表陈请，为有司所奏，坐黜免。
现代文：当时武建王任益刺史，重新选择王府属吏，任用张种为征西束曹掾，张种以母亲年老推辞，给朝廷上书直言陈述自己的请求，被有司奏劾，张种获罪被罢免。
English: At that time, Wu Jian Wang Ren Yik stabbed history, re-selected officials belonging to the royal court, appointed Zhang Zeng as the Western Zhao Cao, Zhang Zeng took his mother's old age as an excuse, wrote a letter to the court to frankly state his request, was impeached by a scribe, Zhang Zeng was convicted and dismissed.

古文：侯景之乱，种奉其母东奔，久之得达乡里。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，张种侍奉自己的母亲往东逃奔，许久得以到达家乡。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Zhang Zong served his mother and fled to the east, and was able to reach his hometown after a long time.

古文：俄而母卒，种时年五十，而毁瘠过甚，又迫以凶荒，未获时葬，服制虽毕，而居处饮食，恒若在丧。
现代文：不久母亲去世，张种当时年纪五十岁，因哀伤过度而消瘦得很厉害，又受战乱荒年的逼迫，没办法在当时下葬，服丧的时间虽然满了，而他的起居饮食，一直像在服丧。
English: Not long after, his mother passed away. Zhang Zeng was 50 years old at the time. He was severely emaciated due to excessive grief, and was also persecuted during the war-torn years. He was unable to be buried at that time. Although the time for mourning was over, his living and eating always felt like he was mourning.

古文：及景平，司徒王僧辩以状奏闻，起为贞威将军、治中从事史，并为具葬礼，葬讫，种方即吉。
现代文：到侯景被平定后，司徒王僧辩把他的情况报告皇上，起用张种为贞威将军、治中从事史，并为他备办葬礼，安葬完了，张种才除去丧服。
English: After Houjing was subdued, the King of Sidu and his monks reported his situation to the emperor, appointed Zhang Zeng as the general of Zhenwei, engaged in history in the middle of the reign, and prepared a funeral for him. After the burial, Zhang Zeng removed the funeral clothes.

古文：僧辩又以种年老，傍无胤嗣，赐之以妾，及居处之具。
现代文：王僧辩又因为张种年老，别无后人，赐给他妾，以及生活用具。
English: Wang Sangye also gave Zhang Zicheng a concubine and household utensils because he was old and had no heirs.

古文：贞阳侯僭位，除廷尉卿、太子中庶子。
现代文：贞阳侯僭越登帝位，任命张种为廷尉卿、太子中庶子。
English: Zhengyang Hou Rong Yue ascended to the throne, and appointed Zhang Zeng as a courtier and the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：敬帝即位，为散骑常侍，迁御史中丞，领前军将军。
现代文：敬帝登位，张种任散骑常侍，升任御史中丞，领前军将军。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, and Zhang Zetian was appointed as a knight-errant, promoted to the post of Vice-Minister of History, and became the leader of the former army.

古文：高祖受禅，为太府卿。
现代文：高祖接受禅让后。张种任太府卿。
English: After Gaozu accepted Zen's resignation, Zhang Zetian was appointed as Taifu-kyo.

古文：天嘉元年，除左民尚书。
现代文：天嘉元年，任命为左民尚书。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was appointed as the leader of the Leftists.

古文：二年，权监吴郡，寻征复本职。
现代文：天嘉二年，暂时监理吴郡政事，接着征召回朝廷恢复本来官职。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he temporarily supervised the political affairs of Wu County, and then was called back to the imperial court to resume his original official position.

古文：迁侍中，领步兵校尉，以公事免，白衣兼太常卿，俄而即真。
现代文：升任侍中，领步兵校尉，因为公事被免职，以平民身份代理太常卿，不久授给实职。
English: He was promoted to the position of chamberlain, leading infantry captain, but because of his official duties, he was relieved of his duties, acting as a civilian, and was soon given a full-time position.

古文：废帝即位，加领右军将军，未拜，改领弘善宫卫尉，又领扬、东扬二州大中正。
现代文：废帝登位，加官为领右军将军，尚未就任，改为领弘善宫卫尉，又领扬、束扬两个州的大中正。
English: After the dethroned emperor ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of general leading the right army. He has not yet assumed the position, but has been changed to the position of lieutenant leading the Hongzheng Palace, and he has also been promoted to the position of grand vice-premier of two provinces.

古文：高宗即位，重为都官尚书，领左骁骑将军，迁中书令，骁骑、中正并如故。
现代文：高宗登位，重新任用为都官尚书，领左骁骑将军，升任中书令，骁骑、中正的职务都依旧担任。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, and was reappointed as the official of the capital, Shang Shu, leading the left-hand cavalry general, and was promoted to the position of the middle secretary, and still held the positions of the cavalry and the middle general.

古文：以疾授金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：因病任命为金紫光禄大夫。
English: Due to illness, he was appointed as Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor.

古文：种沈深虚静，而识量宏博，时人皆以为宰相之器。
现代文：张种性格深沉虚静，而见识气量恢宏博大，当时人们都认为他是担任宰相的人才。
English: Zhang Zong's personality was deep and quiet, and his insight was magnificent. At that time, people thought he was a talent to serve as prime minister.

古文：仆射徐陵尝抗表让位于种曰： 臣种器怀沈密，文史优裕，东南贵秀，朝庭亲贤，克壮其猷，宜居左执。 
现代文：仆射徐陵曾上书朝廷直言让位给张种说： 臣张种才具和胸怀深沉严密，文史知识丰富，是东南地方重要的优秀人才，朝廷亲信德才兼备之士，能实现大的事业，张种适合官居左丞相。 
English: Xu Ling, a courtier, wrote to the imperial court to give way to Zhang Zenglu, saying: Zhang Zenglu is a talented person with a deep and rigorous mind, rich in literary and historical knowledge. He is an important outstanding talent in the southeastern region, a close friend of the imperial court, and a person with both talent and virtue. He can achieve a great cause. Zhang Zenglu is suitable for the post of minister of the left.

古文：其为时所推重如此。
现代文：他为当时的人所推重就像这样。
English: That's how important he was to people at the time.

古文：太建五年卒，时年七十，赠特进，谥曰元子。
现代文：太建五年去世，当时年纪七十岁，赠给特进的官衔，谧号叫做元子。
English: Tai Jian died five years later, at the age of seventy, and was given the official title of "Special Advancement" and the nickname "Moto Zi."

古文：种仁恕寡欲，虽历居显位，而家产屡空，终日晏然，不以为病。
现代文：张种为人仁厚宽恕寡欲，虽然历居显贵的官职，而家中产业屡次亏空，他终日安逸，不为此忧虑。
English: Zhang Zeng is kind, forgiving and not greedy. Although he has held a high-ranking official position, and his family's industry has repeatedly been in deficit, he is at ease all day long and does not worry about it.

古文：太建初，女为始兴王妃，以居处僻陋，特赐宅一区，又累赐无锡、嘉兴县侯秩。
现代文：左建初年，垂种的女儿做了舱星王的妃子，因为他的住所偏僻简陋，特赐给住宅一处，又累次赐给躯堡、台里逊的官职。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jian, the daughter of the drooping seed became the concubine of the cabin star king. Because his residence was remote and simple, he was given a special residence, and he was repeatedly given the official post of Sampo and Telison.

古文：尝于无锡见有重囚在狱，天寒，呼出曝日，遂失之，世祖大笑，而不深责。
现代文：张捶曾在筮垦看见有一个判了重罪的犯人关在狱中，天气寒冷，叫出来晒太阳，就丢失了这个犯人，世祖知道后大笑，而不深加责备。
English: Zhang Ye once saw a felon in prison in Handan. The weather was cold, and he was called out to bask in the sun, and he lost the prisoner. The patriarch laughed when he found out, but did not rebuke him.

古文：有集十四卷。
现代文：彊种着有文集十四卷。
English: There are fourteen volumes in the anthology.

古文：种弟棱，亦清静有识度，官至司徒左长史，太建十一年卒，时年七十，赠光禄大夫。
现代文：张种的弟弟张台，也心怀高洁有见识气度，官做到司徒左长史，基建十一年去世，当时年纪七十岁，赠给光禄大夫的官衔。
English: Zhang Zeng's younger brother, Zhang Tai, also had a noble and insightful spirit. He had a long history as a government official. He died at the age of seventy in the eleventh year, and was given the official title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：种族子稚才，齐护军冲之孙。
现代文：张种同族的侄子张稚才，是齐朝护军张冲的孙儿。
English: Zhang Zhicai, the nephew of Zhang Zong, was the grandson of Zhang Chong, a Qi dynasty escort.

古文：少孤介特立，仕为尚书金部郎中。
现代文：少年时就方正耿直有独到见地而不随流俗，出仕时任尚书金部郎中。
English: When he was a boy, Fang Zheng Geng Zhi had a unique insight and did not follow the fashion. When he entered the service, he was appointed as a junior of Shang Shuxin's finance department.

古文：迁右丞，建康令、太府卿、扬州别驾从事史，兼散骑常侍。
现代文：升任右丞，建康县令、太舟卿、扬州别驾从事史，兼任散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted to ujo, Jiankang County magistrate, Taizhou lord, Yangzhou governor, and also served as samurai.

古文：使于周，还为司农、廷尉卿。
现代文：出使于周朝，回来后任司农、廷尉卿。
English: He was sent to the Zhou Dynasty, and after his return, he served as a farmer and courtier.

古文：所历并以清白称。
现代文：历任官职都以清白著称。
English: Successive officials are known for their innocence.

古文：王固，字子坚，左光禄大夫通之弟也。
现代文：王固字子坚，左光禄大夫王通的弟弟。
English: Wang Gu Zi Jian is the younger brother of Dr. Wang Tong.

古文：少清正，颇涉文史，以梁武帝甥封莫口亭侯。
现代文：少年时为人处世高洁正直，非常广泛地涉猎文史知识，因为是梁武帝的外甥封为莫口亭侯。
English: When he was a boy, he was a clean and honest person, and he was very widely involved in the knowledge of literature and history, because he was the nephew of Emperor Liangwu and was given the title of Mokuting.

古文：举秀才。
现代文：荐举为秀才。
English: He was recommended as an outstanding talent.

古文：起家梁秘书郎，迁太子洗马，掌东宫管记，丁所生母忧去职。
现代文：出任梁朝秘书郎起家，升任太子洗马，掌管东宫信札文牍的工作，因母亲去世服丧而离职。
English: He served as the secretary of the Liang Dynasty, was promoted to the prince of the prince, and was in charge of the work of the East Palace, and left the post due to the death of his mother.

古文：服阕，除丹阳尹丞。
现代文：服丧期满，任命为丹阳尹丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as Danyang Yinzheng.

古文：侯景之乱，奔于荆州，梁元帝承制以为相国户曹属，掌管记。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，逃到荆州，梁元帝禀承皇帝的旨意任用他为相国户曹属，掌管信札文牍。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, he fled to Jingzhou. Emperor Liang Yuan, in accordance with the emperor's will, appointed him as a relative of Cao Zhen, in charge of letters and documents.

古文：寻聘于西魏，魏人以其梁氏外戚，待之甚厚。
现代文：接着出使于西魏，西魏的人因为他是梁区王朝的外戚，对他的接待非常优厚。
English: Then he was sent to the Western Wei Dynasty. Because he was a relative of the Liang dynasty, the Western Wei people received him very well.

古文：承圣元年，迁太子中庶子，寻为贞威将军、安南长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：承圣元年，升任太子中庶子，接着任贞威将军、安南长史、寻阳太守。
English: In the first year of the succession to the throne, he was promoted to the position of the prince's middle child, followed by the positions of General Zhen Wei, Annan Changshi, and Huan Yang Daju.

古文：荆州陷，固之鄱阳，随兄质度东岭，居信安县。
现代文：荆州失陷，王固到鄱阳，随同哥哥王质越过束岭，居住在信安县。
English: After the fall of Jingzhou, Wang Gu went to Fenyang. Together with his brother Wang Qian, he crossed the Shuoling Mountains and lived in Xin'an County.

古文：绍泰元年，征为侍中，不就。
现代文：绍泰元年，征召回朝廷任侍中，没有去上任。
English: In the first year of Shao Tai, he was called back to the imperial court to serve as a chamberlain, but he did not take up the post.

古文：永定中，移居吴郡。
现代文：永定年间，移居吴郡。
English: During the Yongding years, he moved to Wuxi County.

古文：世祖以固清静，且欲申以婚姻。
现代文：世祖因为王固心地高洁，表示愿意联姻。
English: Because the king was steadfast and noble, the patriarch expressed his willingness to enter into marriage.

古文：天嘉二年，至都，拜国子祭酒。
现代文：天嘉二年，王固到京城，任命为国子祭酒。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, Wang Gu came to Beijing and was appointed as the national son's festival wine.

古文：三年，迁中书令。
现代文：天嘉三年，升任中书令。
English: In the third year of Tian Jia, he was promoted to the position of Zhongshirong.

古文：四年，又为散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
现代文：天嘉四年，又任散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
English: In the 4th year of the Tenka era, he was also appointed as a horseback riding attendant and a Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer.

古文：其年，以固女为皇太子妃，礼遇甚重。
现代文：逭年，以王固的女儿为皇太子妃，以礼相待非常隆重。
English: In the year of the rooster, Wang Gu's daughter was crowned crown princess, and the ceremony was very grand.

古文：废帝即位，授侍中、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：废帝登位，任命为侍中、金紫光禄大夫。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne and was appointed a chamberlain and doctor of the Golden Purple Light.

古文：时高宗辅政，固以废帝外戚，妳媪恒往来禁中，颇宣密旨，事泄，比将伏诛，高宗以固本无兵权，且居处清洁，止免所居官，禁锢。
现代文：当时直塞辅佐朝政，王厘因为是庆查外戚，乳母一直往来于宫廷之中，多次宣示秘密的旨意，事情泄露，将受死刑，高宗因为王固本来没有兵权，而且行为举止没有嫌疑之处，衹免去他所任官职，禁止他再做官。
English: At that time, he was a direct assistant to the imperial government. Wang Li, because he was a maternal relative of Qingcha and his wet nurse had been coming and going in the court, repeatedly declared his secret intention, the matter was leaked, and he would be sentenced to death. Gao Zong, because Wang Gu originally had no military power, and there was no suspicion in his behavior, removed him from his official position and prohibited him from serving as an official.

古文：太建二年，随例为招远将军、宣惠豫章王谘议参军。
现代文：太建二年，按照惯例任用王固为招远将军、宣惠豫章王谘议参军。
English: In the second year of Tai Jian, in accordance with the usual practice, Wang Gu was appointed as the recruiting general, and Xuan Hui Yu Zhang Wang was consulted to join the army.

古文：迁太中大夫、太常卿、南徐州大中正。
现代文：升任太中大夫、太常卿、南徐州大中正。
English: He was promoted to Taizhong Dafu, Taizhong Jie and Nanxuzhou Daizhong Zheng.

古文：七年，卒官，时年六十三。
现代文：太建七年，死于任官期间，当时年纪六十三岁。
English: Tai Jian was only seven years old when he died in office, at the age of 63.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：赠给金紫光禄大夫的官街。
English: The official street presented to Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：丧事所须，随由资给。
现代文：办丧事所需财物，随所用予以资助供给。
English: Funeral needs, supply on demand.

古文：至德二年改葬，谥曰恭子。
现代文：至德二年改葬，谧号叫做恭子。
English: He was reburied two years later, and his posthumous name was changed to Kyoko.

古文：固清虚寡欲，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：王固性格清虚寡欲，服丧时以孝著称。
English: Wang Gu's character was pure and austere, and he was known for his filial piety when attending funerals.

古文：又崇信佛法，及丁所生母忧，遂终身蔬食，夜则坐禅，昼诵佛经，兼习《成实论》义，而于玄言非所长。
现代文：又崇敬信仰佛法，到为亲生母亲服丧时，便开始吃素食以至终生，夜晚则坐禅，白天就读佛经，又学习《成实论》所讲的道理，然而对于精微深奥的道理的领会非其所长。
English: He also revered and believed in Buddhism. When he was in mourning for his biological mother, he began to eat vegetarian food for the rest of his life. At night, he would meditate. During the day, he would study Buddhist scriptures and learn the principles of "Theory of Becoming a Reality." However, understanding the subtle and profound principles was not his forte.

古文：尝聘于西魏，因宴飨之际，请停杀一羊，羊于固前跪拜。
现代文：王固曾出使于西魏，在宴会进餐的时候，请求停止杀一只羊，羊在王固前跪拜。
English: Wang Gu once sent an envoy to the West Wei Dynasty. During a banquet meal, he asked to stop killing a sheep. The sheep knelt before Wang Gu.

古文：又宴于昆明池，魏人以南人嗜鱼，大设罟网，固以佛法咒之，遂一鳞不获。
现代文：又赴宴于昆明池，西魏的人因为南方人喜欢吃鱼，就大设罟网捕鱼，王固用佛法祷告，于是一条鱼也没有捕到。
English: They also went to a banquet at Kunming Pond. Because people in the south like to eat fish, the people of the Western Wei Dynasty set up a large net to catch fish. Wang Gu prayed with Buddhism, but did not catch a single fish.

古文：子宽，官至司徒左史、侍中。
现代文：王固的儿子王宽，官做到司徒左长史、侍中
English: Wang Gu's son, Wang Guang, was appointed to the official position of Sitou Zuo Changshi, and served as a chamberlain

古文：孔奂，字休文，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：孔奂字休文，会稽山阴人。
English: Confucius, Confucius, Confucius.

古文：曾祖琇之，齐左民尚书、吴兴太守。
现代文：曾祖父孔璘之，在齐朝任左民尚书、吴兴太守。
English: His great-grandfather, Kong Xizhi, served as Zuomin Shangshu and Wu Xing Taishu in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：祖臶，太子舍人、尚书三公郎。
现代文：祖父孔臶，任太子舍人、尚书三公郎。
English: His grandfather, Kong Xi, was crown prince and the third prince of Shangshu.

古文：父稚孙，梁宁远枝江公主簿、无锡令。
现代文：父亲孔稚孙，在梁朝任宁远枝江公主簿、无锡县令。
English: His father, Kong Chih-sun, was appointed Ningyuan, Shijiang, and Wuxi County magistrate during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：奂数岁而孤，为叔父虔孙所养。
现代文：孔奂才几岁时就成了孤儿，为叔父孔虔孙所抚养。
English: When he was just a few years old, Kong Quan became an orphan and was raised by his uncle, Kong Qiansun.

古文：好学，善属文，经史百家，莫不通涉。
现代文：他爱好学习，善于写文章，经书史籍诸子百家的著作，没有不通晓涉猎的。
English: He loves to learn and is good at writing articles. He has read and studied hundreds of books on history and scriptures.

古文：沛国刘显时称学府，每共奂讨论，深相叹服，乃执奂手曰： 昔伯喈坟素悉与仲宣，吾当希彼蔡君，足下无愧王氏。 
现代文：沛国人刘显当时号称学问渊博，每次和孔奂一起讨论，对他深为赞叹佩服，便拉着孔奂的手说： 从前蔡伯喈的古代典籍都给了王仲宣，我则希望做那个蔡昼，您可以做工压而不必有愧。 
English: At that time, Liu Xian, a native of Pei, was reputed to be very knowledgeable. Every time he discussed with Confucius, he was deeply impressed and admired by him. He took the hand of Confucius and said: Once upon a time, the ancient classics of Cai Biao were all given to Wang Zhongxuan. I hope to be that Cai Rong, you can work hard without being ashamed.

古文：所保书籍，寻以相付。
现代文：塑呓所保藏的书籍，不久就赠给孔奂。
English: The books preserved by the Sculpture Museum were soon presented to Confucius.

古文：州举秀才，射策高第。
现代文：州中荐举王速为秀才，他考试得到优秀成绩。
English: The state middle school recommended Wang Su as an outstanding talent, and he got excellent results in the examination.

古文：起家扬州主簿、宣惠湘东王行参军，并不就。
现代文：以任命为扬州主簿、宣惠湘东王行参军起家，都没有就任。
English: He was appointed as the chief accountant of Yangzhou, but he did not take office.

古文：又除镇西湘东王外兵参军，入为尚书仓部郎中，迁仪曹侍郎。
现代文：又任命为镇西湘束王外兵参军，调入朝廷任尚书仓部郎中，升任仪曹侍郎。
English: He was also appointed as a foreign soldier to join the army of Zhenxi Xiangzhuo, transferred to the imperial court as a junior clerk of the book storage department, and promoted to the position of a chamberlain.

古文：时左民郎沈炯为飞书所谤，将陷重辟，事连台阁，人怀忧惧，奂廷议理之，竟得明白。
现代文：当时左民郎沈炯为匿名信所诽谤，将陷于重罪。事情牵连到台阁大臣，人们心中感到忧虑恐惧，壬速在朝廷议论时申辩此事，终于得以弄明白。
English: At that time, Zuo Min Lang Shen Yi was slandered by an anonymous letter, and he would be caught in a serious crime. The matter involved a cabinet minister, and people felt anxious and fearful. I immediately argued the matter in the court discussion, and finally I was able to understand.

古文：丹阳尹何敬容以奂刚正，请补功曹史。
现代文：且屋尹鱼董主容因为王乙鱼刚正，请求将他补为功曹史。
English: Moreover, because Wang Yiguo was upright, the chairman of Yin Yu Dong requested that Wang Yiguo be added as a meritorious person.

古文：出为南昌侯相，值侯景乱，不之官。
现代文：调出朝廷任南昌侯相，正遇侯景叛乱，没有赴任。
English: He was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as the prince minister of Nanchang, but he did not take up the post because he was facing the rebellion of Prince Jing.

古文：京城陷，朝士并被拘絷，或荐奂于贼帅侯子鉴，子鉴命脱桎梏，厚遇之，令掌书记。
现代文：京城失陷，朝廷官员都被拘禁。有人推荐孔奂给叛贼统帅侯子鉴，侯子鉴下令解除拘禁，优厚地对待他，命令他掌管书记职务。
English: The capital had fallen, and all the officials of the imperial court were detained. Someone recommended Confucius to the commander of the traitors, Hou Zi Jian. Hou Zi Jian ordered him to be released from detention, treated him generously, and ordered him to take charge of the secretarial duties.

古文：时景军士悉恣其凶威，子鉴景之腹心，委任又重，朝士见者，莫不卑俯屈折，奂独敖然自若，无所下。
现代文：当时侯景的军士都肆意逞其凶威，侯子鉴是侯景的心腹亲信，委任又重，朝廷官员见到他的人，没有不卑躬屈膝的，惟独孑奂傲然自若，不曾显得卑下。
English: At that time, Hou Jing's sergeants were reckless in their ferocity. Hou Zijian was a close confidant of Hou Jing, and his appointment was important. When the court officials saw him, there was no one who did not bow down, but he was proud and did not appear humble.

古文：或谏奂曰： 当今乱世，人思苟免，獯羯无知，岂可抗之以义？ 
现代文：有人劝谏孔奂说： 现在是乱世，人们都想苟且以求得免除祸害，獯羯没有知识，难道可以用道义对抗他们? 
English: Some people advised Gong Kongjun to say, "Nowadays, it is a chaotic world. People are anxious to be spared from harm. Without knowledge, can we use morality to oppose them?"

古文：奂曰： 吾性命有在，虽未能死，岂可取媚凶丑，以求全乎？ 
现代文：孔奂说： 我的性命还存在，虽未能去死，难道可以取媚于凶恶的丑类，以求得保全性命吗? 
English: Confucius said, "My life still exists, and although I cannot die, can I still flatter the evil monsters in order to save my life?

古文：时贼徒剥掠子女，拘逼士庶，奂每保持之，得全济者甚众。
现代文：当时贼徒剥削掠夺男人和女子，拘禁逼迫士人和庶民，孔奂总是保护他们，得以保全而度过危难的人非常多。
English: At that time, robbers exploited and plundered men and women, detained and persecuted scholars and common people. Confucius always protected them, and there were a lot of people who were saved and survived the danger.

古文：寻遭母忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：不久遭遇母亲去世的不幸，孔奂居丧哀伤的程度超过了礼制的规范。
English: Soon after, he suffered the misfortune of his mother's death, and the extent of his grief exceeded the norms of etiquette.

古文：时天下丧乱，皆不能终三年之丧，唯奂及吴国张种，在寇乱中守持法度，并以孝闻。
现代文：当时天下死丧祸乱，人们都不能服满三年的丧期，衹有孑和吴国人张种，在寇贼祸乱的环境中坚守礼法制度，都以尽孝著称。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, and people were unable to complete the three-year mourning period. Zhang Yuxuan and Zhang Zong, a native of Wu, adhered to the etiquette and law system in the turbulent environment, and were known for their filial piety.

古文：及景平，司徒王僧辩先下辟书，引奂为左西曹掾，又除丹阳尹丞。
现代文：到侯景被平定，司徒王僧辩先下征召的文书，引进孔奂任左西曹掾，又任命为丹阳尹丞。
English: When Houjing was subdued, King Sidu and the monks argued over who should be conscripted first, and Kong Xi was brought in as Zuoxi Cao Pi, and he was also appointed as Danyang Yin Rong.

古文：梁元帝于荆州即位，征奂及沈炯并令西上，僧辩累表请留之。
现代文：梁元帝在荆州登上帝位，征召孔奂和沈炯命令他们一起西上，王僧辩接连不止一次上书朝廷请求留下他们。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan ascended to the throne in Jingzhou, conscripted Kong Yu and Shen Yu and ordered them to go west together. Wang Sangye repeatedly petitioned the imperial court to keep them.

古文：帝手敕报僧辩曰： 孔、沈二士，今且借公。 
现代文：梁元帝亲手写诏书回答王僧辩说： 孔、沈两位士人，现在暂且从王公处借用。 
English: Emperor Liang Yuan wrote an edict in his own hand to reply to Wang Sang's argument, saying: "Kong and Shen, the two officials, are now temporarily borrowed from Wang Gong.

古文：其为朝廷所重如此。
现代文：他为朝廷所看重就像这样。
English: That's how important he was to the court.

古文：仍除太尉从事中郎。
现代文：于是任命为太尉从事中郎。
English: As a result, he was appointed as a captain to be engaged as a churo.

古文：僧辩为扬州刺史，又补扬州治中从事史。
现代文：王僧辩任扬州刺史，又将孔奂补为扬州治中从事史。
English: Wang Sofen was appointed as Yangzhou's chief historian, and he also appointed Kong Qianfu as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：时侯景新平，每事草创，宪章故事，无复存者，奂博物强识，甄明故实，问无不知，仪注体式，笺表书翰，皆出于奂。
现代文：当时侯景刚被平定，每件事都在创始阶段，旧日的典章制度，没有保存下来的，孑奂见闻广博强于记忆，辨别清楚典故出处，问题没有不知道的，礼节制度体制格式，呈送皇上的章奏和书札，都出于孔奂。
English: At that time, Hou Jing had just been subdued, everything was in the initial stage, the old ceremonial system had not been preserved, the anecdotes were widely known and stronger than memory, the sources of allusions were clearly distinguished, there were no unknowns, the etiquette system and system format, and the emperor's chapter music and book tags were presented.

古文：高祖作相，除司徒右长史，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：高祖担任宰相，任命孔奂为司徒右长史，升任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Gaozu served as prime minister, appointed Kong Hao as chief historian of the State Council, and promoted him to the position of attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：齐遣东方老、萧轨等来寇，军至后湖，都邑搔扰，又四方壅隔，粮运不继，三军取给，唯在京师，乃除奂为贞威将军、建康令。
现代文：齐朝派遣东方老、萧轨等前来侵犯，敌军到了后湖，都城骚乱，通往四方的道路又被堵塞隔断，粮食运输不能跟上，三军取用供给，衹在京城，于是任命孔奂为贞威将军、建康县令。
English: Qidong sent Dongfanglao, Xiao Liao, etc. to invade, the enemy army reached Houhu, the capital city was in turmoil, the roads leading to the four directions were blocked and cut off, grain transportation could not keep up, the three armies used the supplies and stayed in Beijing, so they appointed Kong Wei as General Zhenwei and Jiankang County Commander.

古文：时累岁兵荒，户口流散，勍敌忽至，征求无所，高祖克日决战，乃令奂多营麦饭，以荷叶裹之，一宿之间，得数万裹，军人旦食讫，弃其馀，因而决战，遂大破贼。
现代文：当时接连几年战乱，百姓的家庭人口流离丧失，强大的敌人忽然来到，没有地方征集粮食，高祖限定日期进行决战，于是命令孔奂多做麦饭，用荷叶包裹麦饭，一夜之间，做得几万包，军人天明时吃完，丢下多余的麦饭，因此而能决战，于足大败敌人。
English: At that time, there were several years of war, the people's family population was displaced and lost, a powerful enemy suddenly came, there was no place to collect grain, Gao Zu limited the date for the decisive battle, so he ordered Kong Xuan to make more wheat rice and wrap the wheat rice with lotus leaves. Overnight, he made tens of thousands of packages. The soldiers finished eating at dawn and left the extra wheat rice. Therefore, they were able to fight a decisive battle and defeated the enemy.

古文：高祖受禅，迁太子中庶子。
现代文：高祖接受禅让后，孔奂升任太子中庶子。
English: After Gaozu accepted Zen's resignation, Kong Yao was promoted to the position of the Prince's middle child.

古文：永定二年，除晋陵太守。
现代文：永定二年，任命为晋陵太守。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was appointed as the supreme governor of Jinling.

古文：晋陵自宋、齐以来，旧为大郡，虽经寇扰，犹为全实，前后二千石多行侵暴，奂清白自守，妻子并不之官，唯以单船监郡，所得秩俸，随即分赡孤寡，郡中大悦，号曰 神君 。
现代文：晋陵自从宋、齐以来，一直就是大郡，虽经过敌寇的侵扰，还是保全了富庶，前后担任郡中太守的大多进行凶恶的掠夺，孔奂以清白自守，妻和子都不到他任官的地方，孔奂衹用一只船来到郡中，所得的官俸，随即分送救济孤儿寡妇，郡中的人非常高兴，给孔奂一个名称叫做 神君 。
English: Since the Song Dynasty and Qi Dynasty, Jinling has always been a large county. Although it was invaded by enemy raiders, it still preserved the rich and poor. Before and after serving as the county's daimyo, most of them carried out vicious looting. Kong Xi defended himself with innocence. His wife and son did not go to the place where he was appointed. Kong Xi used a boat to come to the county, and the official salary he earned was immediately distributed to the relief of orphans and widows. The people in the county were very happy, and gave Kong Xi a name called Shen Jun.

古文：曲阿富人殷绮，见奂居处素俭，乃饷衣一袭，氈被一具。
现代文：曲阿的一个富人殷绮，见孔奂的生活俭节朴素，便馈赠一件衣服，一具毡被。
English: A wealthy man in Qu'ao, seeing Kong Yao's frugal and simple life, gave him a piece of clothing and a quilt.

古文：奂曰： 太守身居美禄，何为不能办此，但民有未周，不容独享温饱耳。
现代文：孔奂说： 太守身有优厚的俸禄，怎么会不能备办这些，但百姓生活有不足，不容我独自享受温饱呀。
English: Confucius said, "The bodyguard has a generous salary, how could he not prepare these things, but the people's life is insufficient, and I am not allowed to enjoy food and clothing alone.

古文：劳卿厚意，幸勿为烦。 
现代文：有劳您深厚的情意，希望不要麻烦。 
English: Thank you for your kindness. I hope you don't mind.

古文：初，世祖在吴中，闻奂善政，及践祚，征为御史中丞，领扬州大中正。
现代文：起初，世祖在吴中，听说孔奂擅长政务，到登上帝位后，征召他任御史中丞，领扬州大中正。
English: At first, Shizu was in Wuzhong Middle School. He heard that Kong Xi was good at government affairs. After he ascended to the throne, he recruited him to serve as Vice-President of History and Vice-President of Yangzhou University.

古文：奂性刚直，善持理，多所纠劾，朝廷甚敬惮之。
现代文：孔奂性情刚直，善于掌握道理，多次举发弹劾官员的过失，朝廷上人们非常敬畏他。
English: Kong Qian had a straightforward temperament and was good at grasping the truth. He repeatedly reported the faults of impeached officials. People in the imperial court were very much in awe of him.

古文：深达治体，每所敷奏，上未尝不称善，百司滞事，皆付奂决之。
现代文：孔奂能深入地通晓治理国事的根本，每次陈述奏进，皇上没有不说好的，各个部门积滞的事务，都交给孔奂判决。
English: Confucius was able to thoroughly understand the fundamentals of governing state affairs. Every time a report was submitted, the emperor did not have to say yes, and the backlog of affairs in various departments were handed over to Confucius for judgment.

古文：迁散骑常侍，领步兵校尉，中书舍人，掌诏诰，扬、东扬二州大中正。
现代文：孔奂升任散骑常侍，领步兵校尉，任中书舍人，掌管诏诰的撰写，任扬、束扬两个州的大中正。
English: Kong Qian was promoted to the position of straggler's equerry, led the infantry as captain, held the position of middle school librarian, was in charge of writing the imperial edict, and served as the senior middle school principal of two states.

古文：天嘉四年，重除御史中丞，寻为五兵尚书，常侍、中正如故。
现代文：天嘉四年，重新任命为御史中丞，接着任五兵尚书，常侍、中正的职务依旧担任。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Jia, he was re-appointed as the Vice-President of History, and then as the Vice-President of the Five Armies. He still held the positions of the regular attendant and the vice-president.

古文：时世祖不豫，台阁众事，并令仆射到仲举共奂决之。
现代文：当时世祖生病，尚书省各种事情，都命令仆射到仲举和孔奂共同决定。
English: At that time, the ancestor was ill, and Shang Shuzhou ordered all kinds of matters to be jointly decided by the two of them.

古文：及世祖疾笃，奂与高宗及仲举并吏部尚书袁枢、中书舍人刘师知等入侍医药。
现代文：到世祖病重，孔奂和高宗以及到仲举加上吏部尚书袁枢、中书舍人刘师知等入宫侍候医药。
English: When the founder of the world fell seriously ill, Kong Xi and Gao Zong, as well as Shangshu Yuan Zu, the secretary of the General Office, and Liu Shizhi, the secretary of the General Office of the People's Republic of China, came to the palace to wait for medicine.

古文：世祖尝谓奂等曰： 今三方鼎峙，生民未乂，四海事重，宜须长君。
现代文：世祖曾经对孔奂等人说： 现在三方鼎足对峙，生民不能得到治理太平无事，天下的事务重大，应当要一个成年的君主。
English: The founder of the world once said to Confucius and others: Now the three parties are in a standoff, the people cannot be governed peacefully, the world's affairs are serious, we should have an adult monarch.

古文：朕欲近则晋成，远隆殷法，卿等须遵此意。 
现代文：朕要近则效法晋成，远则尊崇殷法，你们必须遵守这个意旨。 
English: I want to follow the law of Jincheng in the near future, and respect the law of Yin in the distant future. You must abide by this intention.

古文：奂乃流涕歔欷而对曰： 陛下御膳违和，痊复非久，皇太子春秋鼎盛，圣德日跻，安成王介弟之尊，足为周旦，阿衡宰辅，若有废立之心，臣等愚诚，不敢闻诏。 
现代文：孑奂便流泪哀叹抽泣着对答： 陛下饮食失调而致病，不要太久就会痊愈康复，皇太子年纪正当兴盛之时，圣人的品德日益提高，安成王以陛下弟弟的尊严，完全可成为周旦，辅导帝王主持国政，如果陛下有废除皇太子另立继承人的想法，臣等竭尽忠诚而不明事理，不敢听从诏令。 
English: To this, Toad replied with tears, lamentation and sobs: His Majesty's illness was caused by an eating disorder, and it would not take too long for him to recover. When the crown prince was at the right age and flourishing, the saint's moral character was improving day by day. King Ancheng, with the dignity of His Majesty's younger brother, could completely become Zhou Dan and advise the emperor to preside over state affairs. If His Majesty had the idea of abolishing the crown prince and appointing another successor, his ministers would be loyal to the end and would not know the reason, and would not dare to obey the edict.

古文：世祖曰： 古之遗直，复见于卿。 
现代文：世祖说： 古代直道而行的遣风，又在你身上看到了。 
English: The ancestor said, "I see in you the wind of the ancient straight path.

古文：天康元年，乃用奂为太子詹事，二州中正如故。
现代文：天康元年，便任用孔奂为太子詹事，两个州中正的职务依旧担任。
English: In the first year of Tian Kang, he appointed Confucius as the prince of Zhanji, and still held the positions of the two states.

古文：世祖崩，废帝即位，除散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
现代文：世祖崩，废帝登位，任命为散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
English: The founder of the world passed away, the deposed emperor ascended the throne, and he was appointed as a knight errant, and the national son's sacrificial wine was made.

古文：光大二年，出为信武将军、南中郎康乐侯长史、寻阳太守，行江州事。
现代文：光大二年，调出朝廷任信武将军、南中郎尘乐侯长史、寻阳太守，管理江州政事。
English: In the second year of Guangda University, the imperial court appointed General Xinwu, Nanzhongro Chenle, Marquis Changshi, and Guanyang Dazhu to manage the political affairs of Jiangzhou.

古文：高宗即位，进号仁威将军、云麾始兴王长史，馀并如故。
现代文：高宗登位，加封号仁威将军、云麾始兴王长史，其余职务都依旧担任。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and was given the additional titles of General Ren Wei and Wang Changshi, and the remaining positions were still held.

古文：奂在职清俭，多所规正，高宗嘉之，赐米五百斛，并累降敕书殷勤劳问。
现代文：孔奂在任职中清廉俭约，许多政务有所改正，高宗赏识他，赐给米五百斛，并且多次下达诏令心意深厚地给予慰劳问候。
English: During his term of office, Confucius was frugal and thrifty, and many government affairs were improved. Gao Zong appreciated him, gave him 500 baht of rice, and repeatedly issued imperial edicts to express his sincere condolences.

古文：太建三年，征为度支尚书，领右军将军。
现代文：太建三年，征召到朝廷任度支尚书，领右军将军。
English: In the third year of the Tai Jian era, he was called to the imperial court to serve as a general leading the right-wing army.

古文：五年，改领太子中庶子，与左仆射徐陵参掌尚书五条事。
现代文：太建五年，改为领太子中庶子，和左仆射徐陵共同参与掌管尚书五条事。
English: In the fifth year of Tai Jian, it was changed to the middle child of the crown prince, and the left servant shot Xu Ling to jointly participate in the management of the five matters of Shangshu.

古文：六年，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：太建六年，升任吏部尚书。
English: After six years of Tai Jian, Shang Shu was promoted to the position of cadre.

古文：七年，加散骑常侍。
现代文：基建七年，加官散骑常侍。
English: After seven years of construction, the official horseback riding attendants have arrived.

古文：八年，改加侍中。
现代文：太建八年，改为加官侍中。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：时有事北讨，克复淮、泗，徐、豫酋长，降附相继，封赏选叙，纷纭重叠，奂应接引进，门无停宾。
现代文：当时有事往北进行征讨，用武力征服淮、回，途、逸等地方首领，投降归附的接连不断，分封赏赐选拔任用的工作，杂乱重叠，孔奂应接推荐，门前没有停留的宾客。
English: At that time, there were things to go to the north to carry out the requisition, use force to conquer local leaders such as Huai, Hui, Tu, and Yue, the succession of surrender and annexation was continuous, the work of dividing and rewarding the selection and appointment was messy and overlapping, Kong Yu responded to the recommendation, and there were no guests staying in front of the door.

古文：加以鉴识人物，详练百氏，凡所甄拔，衣冠缙绅，莫不悦伏。
现代文：加以明识人物，熟悉众多的氏族，凡是孔奂甄别而荐举使用的人才，士大夫们没有不喜悦佩服的。
English: The scholar-officials could not help but admire those who were well-informed, familiar with numerous clans, and who were recommended by Confucius to be used.

古文：性耿介，绝请托，虽储副之尊，公侯之重，溺情相及，终不为屈。
现代文：王鱼性情耿直，拒绝私相嘱托，虽有皇储身份的尊严，公侯地位的显贵，涉及到感情沉湎其中的事，终究不为身份地位尊严显贵的人所屈服。
English: The kingfish has a straightforward nature and refuses to be dictated to. Although it has the dignity of the status of the crown prince and the nobility of the status of the prince, it involves things that are emotionally involved. After all, it is not a dignified person with a dignified status.

古文：始兴王叔陵之在湘州，累讽有司，固求台铉。
现代文：垣玺王陈叔陵在周业时，屡次婉言请托担任有关职务的官员，坚持请求任宰相重臣。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, King Qian Shuling of the Qianlong Dynasty repeatedly and politely asked officials to be entrusted with the relevant positions, and insisted on being appointed as the prime minister and senior minister.

古文：奂曰： 衮章之职，本以德举，未必皇枝。 
现代文：孔奂说： 台辅三公的职务，本来依据道德标准选择任用，未必就是皇室宗支。 
English: Confucius said: The positions of the three princes of Taiwan, originally selected and appointed according to ethical standards, may not necessarily be the royal family.

古文：因抗言于高宗。
现代文：因此高声对高宗表明。
English: Therefore, he shouted to Gao Zong.

古文：高宗曰： 始兴那忽望公，且朕儿为公，须在鄱阳王后。 
现代文：直塞说： 蛆璺王怎么希望出任宰相，况且朕的儿子担任宰相，必须在鄱阳王担任此职之后。 
English: He said: "How can King Min hope to become prime minister? Moreover, my son's position as prime minister must come after King Poyang's.

古文：奂曰： 臣之所见，亦如圣旨。 
现代文：壬堕说： 臣的看法，也如同圣上的旨意。 
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche said, "A minister's view is the same as God's will.

古文：后主时在东宫，欲以江总为太子詹事，令管记陆瑜言之于奂。
现代文：鲈当时在东宫，想任用江总为太子詹事，命令管记陆逾告诉壬兔造件事。
English: At that time, Zou was in the East Palace, and he wanted to appoint Jiang Zong as Prince Zhan's secretary, and ordered the secretary Lu Xiao to tell Jinshu about the matter.

古文：奂谓瑜曰： 江有潘、陆之华，而无园、绮之实，辅弼储宫，窃有所难。 
现代文：王乙色对陆逾说： 丝塑有、坠机的文采，然而没有东园公、绮里垂的德行，辅正太子，我私下认为有困难。 
English: Wang Yixi said to Lu Xiaoqiao, "Silk sculpture has the literary flair of a crashing plane, but it does not have the virtue of Dongyuan Gong and Zhilitai, Fu Zheng Taizi, I privately think there are difficulties.

古文：瑜具以白后主，后主深以为恨，乃自言于高宗。
现代文：陆逾把王速的话告诉厘圭，篮王深以为恨，于是自己在直塞跟前说明。
English: Lu Yue told Li Gui about Wang Hao's words, and the basketball king thought it was hateful, so he explained in front of him.

古文：高宗将许之，奂乃奏曰： 江总文华之人，今皇太子文华不少，岂藉于总！
现代文：直塞将要同意造件事，孔奂便进言说： 辽缠衹是文章华丽的人，现在皇太子文华并不缺少，难道要藉助于江总!
English: Just as the emperor was about to agree to the construction of the monument, Kong Yu said: "Liao Tangyu is a magnificent person, now the crown prince Wenhua is not lacking, do you want to use the help of Jiang Zong!

古文：如臣愚见，愿选敦重之才，以居辅导。 
现代文：按照臣愚拙的看法，希望选用敦厚稳重的人才，用他担任辅佐引导的职责。 
English: According to the view of the minister, it is hoped to select a strong and stable talent and use him as an assistant guide.

古文：帝曰： 即如卿言，谁当居此？ 
现代文：高宗说： 就按照您说的，谁适合担任这个职务? 
English: Gao Zong said: According to what you said, who is suitable for this position?

古文：奂曰： 都官尚书王廓，世有懿德，识性敦敏，可以居之。 
现代文：孔奂说： 都官尚书王廓，世代有美德，心性敦厚聪慧，可以担任这个职务。 
English: Kong Yu said: The metropolitan government official is still a scholar, he has been virtuous for generations, he is kind-hearted and intelligent, and he can hold this position.

古文：后主时亦在侧，乃曰： 廓王泰之子，不可居太子詹事。 
现代文：后主当时也在旁边，于是说： 王廓是王泰的儿子，不可以担任太子詹事。 
English: The lady-in-waiting was also nearby at the time, so she said, "Wang Kuo is the son of Wang Tai, and he is not allowed to serve as the prince's attendant.

古文：奂又奏曰： 宋朝范晔即范泰之子，亦为太子詹事，前代不疑。 
现代文：孔奂又进言说： 宋朝范晕就是范泰的儿子，也担任太子詹事，前代用人不疑。 
English: Kong Yu also said: Fan Huan of the Song Dynasty was the son of Fan Tai, and he also served as the prince of Zhanji, and the previous employer was no doubt.

古文：后主固争之，帝卒以总为詹事，由是忤旨。
现代文：后主坚持争辩这件事，高宗最终任用江总为太子詹事，孔奂因此违背了皇帝的意旨。
English: The latter insisted on arguing the matter, and Gaozong finally appointed Jiang Zong as Prince Zhan. Therefore, Kong Xi violated the emperor's will.

古文：其梗正如此。
现代文：他的耿直就像这样。
English: His integrity is like this.

古文：初，后主欲官其私宠，以属奂，奂不从。
现代文：起初，后主想任用他私心宠信的人做官，因而嘱托孔奂，孑乙奂不听从。
English: At first, the late master wanted to appoint someone he liked and trusted to be an official, so he entrusted the post to Kong Yao, but Gao Yao did not listen.

古文：及右仆射陆缮迁职，高宗欲用奂，已草诏讫，为后主所抑，遂不行。
现代文：到右仆射陆缮升职时，高宗想任用孔奂为右仆射，已经草拟完诏书，被后主所阻止，便不执行。
English: When Gaozong's right-hand man Lu Xun was promoted, Gaozong wanted to appoint Kong Yao as his right-hand man Lu Xun. He had already drafted the edict, but was stopped by his successor and did not carry it out.

古文：九年，迁侍中、中书令、领左骁骑将军、扬、东扬、豊三州大中正。
现代文：太建九年，升任侍中、中书令、领左骁骑将军、扬束扬丰三个州的大中正。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiken era, he was promoted to Samurai Junior High School, Junior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior High School Senior.

古文：十一年，转太常卿，侍中、中正并如故。
现代文：太建十一年，转任太常卿，侍中、中正的职务依旧担任。
English: In the eleventh year of Tai Jian, he was transferred to the post of Tai Changqing, and still held the posts of Chamberlain and Vice Admiral.

古文：十四年，迁散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，领前军将军，未拜，改领弘范宫卫尉。
现代文：太建十四年，升任散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，领前军将军，尚未就任，改为领弘范宫卫尉。
English: In the 14th year of Tai Jian, he was promoted to the position of straggler, doctor of the gold and purple light, and general of the vanguard army. He had not yet taken office, but was changed to lieutenant of the vanguard of Hongfan Palace.

古文：至德元年卒，时年七十。
现代文：至德元年去世，当时年纪七十岁。
English: He died in the first year of the German Empire, at the age of seventy.

古文：赠散骑常侍，本官如故。
现代文：赠给散骑常侍的官衔，本来的官衔依旧保存。
English: He was given the official title of straggler's equerry, but his original official title was still preserved.

古文：有集十五卷，弹文四卷。
现代文：有著作集十五卷，弹文四卷。
English: There are fifteen volumes of collected works and four volumes of music.

古文：子绍薪、绍忠。
现代文：孔奂有儿子绍薪、绍忠。
English: Kong Lan has sons Shao Tuo and Shao Zhong.

古文：绍忠字孝扬，亦有才学，官至太子洗马、仪同鄱阳王东曹掾。
现代文：孔绍忠字孝扬，也有才能学问，官做到太子洗马、仪同鄱阳王东曹掾。
English: Kong Shao was loyal and filial, and he also had the ability to learn. He was able to become the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince.

古文：萧允，字叔佐，兰陵人也。
现代文：萧允字叔佐，兰陵人。
English: Xiao Yun Zi's uncle, Lanling people.

古文：曾祖思话，宋征西将军、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射，封阳穆公。
现代文：曾祖父萧思话，在宋朝任征西将军、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射，封阳穆公的爵位。
English: Great-grandfather Xiao Siwei, in the Song Dynasty, was appointed as General of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shang Shuxu Yu Fu Sha, and was given the title of Yang Mu Gong.

古文：祖惠蒨，散骑常侍、太府卿、左民尚书。
现代文：祖父萧惠蓓，任散骑常侍、太府卿、左民尚书。
English: His grandfather, Xiao Huiyan, was appointed as a knight-errant, grand prefect, and left-wing politician.

古文：父介，梁侍中、都官尚书。
现代文：父亲萧介，任梁朝侍中、都官尚书。
English: His father, Shousuke, was appointed as a courtier to Emperor Liang, and also became a magistrate.

古文：允少知名，风神凝远，通达有识鉴，容止酝藉，动合规矩。
现代文：趸龛少年就为时人所知，风度神情庄重脱俗，通达有见识，形貌举止宽容含蓄，行动合乎规矩。
English: It was well known at the time that the boy had a dignified and refined demeanor, was knowledgeable and insightful, had a tolerant and reserved demeanor, and acted in accordance with the rules.

古文：起家邵陵王法曹参军，转湘东王主簿，迁太子洗马。
现代文：以出任邵陵王法曹参军起家，转任湘东王主簿，升任太子洗马。
English: He started his career as a legal assistant to King Shao Ling when he joined the army, and was later promoted to the position of chief accountant to the King of Shandong, and then to the position of prince of Saima.

古文：侯景攻陷台城，百僚奔散，允独整衣冠坐于宫坊，景军人敬而弗之逼也。
现代文：侯景攻陷台城后，百官逃散，萧允独自整理衣冠坐在宫廷别屋中，侯景的军人敬仰而没有逼迫他。
English: After Hou Jing's capture of Taicheng, hundreds of officials fled. Xiao Yun sat alone in the palace villa, sorting clothes and crowns. Hou Jing's soldiers admired him but did not persecute him.

古文：寻出居京口。
现代文：接着萧允出来居住在京旦。
English: Then Xiao Yun came to live in Beijing.

古文：时寇贼纵横，百姓波骇，衣冠士族，四出奔散，允独不行。
现代文：当时寇贼纵横，百姓惊扰震动，士大夫世家大族，四出逃散，萧允独自不走。
English: At that time, the bandits were everywhere, the people were alarmed and shaken, the great family of scholars and doctors fled in all directions, and Xiao Yun did not go alone.

古文：人问其故，允答曰： 夫性命之道，自有常分，岂可逃而获免乎？
现代文：有人间他原因，萧允回答说： 性命的道理，自有一定的缘分，难道可以逃走而避免祸害吗?
English: When someone asked him the reason, Xiao Yun replied: The principle of life itself has a certain fate. Is it possible to escape and avoid the disaster?

古文：但患难之生，皆生于利，苟不求利，祸从何生？
现代文：衹是患难的产生，都产生于求利，如果不求利，祸害从何处产生?
English: is the origin of suffering, all arise from the pursuit of profit, if not the pursuit of profit, where does the scourge come from?

古文：方今百姓争欲奋臂而论大功，一言而取卿相，亦何事于一书生哉？
现代文：现在百姓争着想振臂而起论定大功，一句话而获取卿相的职位，对于一个书生还有什么事呢?
English: Now the common people are vying to raise their arms and declare great achievements, in a word, to obtain the position of noble consort, what else is there for a scholar?

古文：庄周所谓畏影避迹，吾弗为也。 
现代文：庄周所说的畏影避迹，我不会这样做的。 
English: I won't do what Zhuang Zhou called "avoiding the shadow."

古文：乃闭门静处，并日而食，卒免于患。
现代文：于是闭门静处，两日衹吃一日的粮食，终于免除了患难。
English: So he shut the door quietly, and for two days he ate only one day's worth of food. Finally, he was freed from his troubles.

古文：侯景平后，高祖镇南徐州，以书召之，允又辞疾。
现代文：侯景被平定后，高祖镇守南徐州，用书信召他前往，萧允又以有病推辞。
English: After Houjing was subdued, Gao Zu Zhen, the governor of South Xuzhou, sent him a letter to invite him to go, but Xiao Yun declined, saying he was ill.

古文：永定中，侯安都为南徐州刺史，躬造其庐，以申长幼之敬，天嘉三年，征为太子庶子。
现代文：永定年中，侯安都任南徐州刺史，亲自造访他的住所，以表明长幼之间的尊敬。天嘉三年，征召入朝任太子庶子。
English: In the middle of the Yongding year, Hou Andu was appointed as the crown prince of South Xuzhou, and personally visited his residence to show the respect between the eldest and youngest. In the third year of Tianjia, the prince's illegitimate son was drafted into the court.

古文：三年，除棱威将军、丹阳尹丞。
现代文：玉台三年，任命为棱威将军、昼阳尹丞。
English: In the third year of Yutai, he was appointed as General Ren Wei and General Hiyang Yin.

古文：五年，兼侍中，聘于周，还拜中书侍郎、大匠卿。
现代文：天嘉五年，兼任侍中，出使于北周，回到朝廷任命为中书侍郎、大匠卿。
English: In the fifth year of Tian Jia, he also served as a chamberlain, was sent to Northern Zhou, and returned to the imperial court to be appointed as the secretary of the Central Office and the master craftsman.

古文：高宗即位，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：高宗登位后，升任黄门侍郎。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of Yellow Gate chamberlain.

古文：五年，出为安前晋安王长史。
现代文：太建五年，调出朝廷任安前晋安王长史。
English: In the fifth year of the Tai Jian era, Wang Changshi, a former prince of Jian'an, was appointed to the imperial court.

古文：六年，晋安王为南豫州，允复为王长史。
现代文：太建六年，晋安王任卢速业刺史，芦龛又任置叁王长史。
English: Six years after the founding of Taijian, the king of Jin'an was appointed as the governor of Luzhou, and the king of Lushan was appointed as the governor of Shandong.

古文：时王尚少，未亲民务，故委允行府州事。
现代文：当时置室王尚年少，没有亲自管理民政事务，因此委托萧允代理府州政事。
English: At that time, King Okimuro was still young and did not personally manage the civil affairs, so he entrusted Xiao Yun to be the agent of the prefectural government.

古文：入为光禄卿。
现代文：调入朝廷任光禄卿。
English: He was transferred to the Imperial Court as Kōroku-kyō.

古文：允性敦重，未尝以荣利干怀。
现代文：萧允性情敦厚稳重，不曾以荣誉利益牵涉胸怀。
English: Xiao Yun's temperament is dignified and steady, and he has never been concerned with honor and interests.

古文：及晋安出镇湘州，又苦携允，允少与蔡景历善，景历子徵修父党之敬，闻允将行，乃诣允曰： 公年德并高。国之元老，从容坐镇，旦夕自为列曹，何为方复辛苦在外！ 
现代文：到晋安王出镇翅业时，又坚持要带盖垒同去，芦垒少年时和蔡景历友好，墓星历的儿子墓征有尊敬父亲朋友的修养，听到芦盒将要远行，于是拜访芦允说： 公年纪和德行都高，是国家的元老，安逸地坐守，早晚自会成为朝廷中分职治事的官署中的长官，为什么又要辛苦在外! 
English: When the King of Jin'an went out to the town to engage in wing-making, he insisted on bringing a fortification with him. When he was a young man, the fortification was friendly with Cai Jinglian. The son of Tomb Star Lian, Tomb Star Lian, had the training to respect his father's friends. When he heard that the casket was going to travel far and wide, he visited Lu Yun and said, "You are a man of great age and virtue. You are the elder of the country. You sit comfortably and watch. Sooner or later, you will become the chief of the administrative office in the imperial court. Why do you have to work hard outside?

古文：允答曰： 已许晋安，岂可忘信。 
现代文：萧允回答说： 已经许诺置耋玉，难道可以失信。 
English: Xiao Yun replied: I have already promised to place the Orbs, how can I break my promise?

古文：其恬于荣势如此。
现代文：他对荣耀势利的淡泊就像这样。
English: His disdain for glory snobbery goes like this.

古文：至德三年，除中卫豫章王长史，累迁通直散骑常侍、光胜将军、司徒左长史、安德宫少府。
现代文：至德三年，任命为中卫速童工长史，接连升任通直散骑常侍、光胜将军、司徒左长史、安德宣少府。
English: Three years later, he was appointed as the Long History of the Middle Guards and the Long History of the Children's Laborers, and was successively promoted to the Long History of the Horse Guards, the General Guang Sheng, the Long History of the Seduction of the Left, and the Young Prefect of the Andes.

古文：镇卫鄱阳王出镇会稽，允又为长史，带会稽郡丞。
现代文：镇卫鄱阳王出镇盒稽时，盖龛又任长史，兼任盒擅郡丞。
English: When the town guard, Shanyang Wang, went out of the town to inspect the boxes, Gaizhou was also appointed as the chief historian, and concurrently served as the county magistrate.

古文：行经延陵季子庙，设萍藻之荐，托为异代之交，为诗以叙意，辞理清典。
现代文：赴任途中行经延陵的季子庙时，萧龛备办苹藻前往祭祀，作为不同时代的朋友，写诗以叙述自己的心意，辞理高洁典雅。
English: When passing through the Ji Zi Temple in Yanling on his way to the post, Xiao Yao prepared to go to the sacrificial rites. As a friend from different eras, he wrote poems to describe his thoughts, and his rhetoric was pure and elegant.

古文：后主尝问蔡徵曰： 卿世与萧允相知，此公志操何如？ 
现代文：后圭曾经问蓝堂说： 你们父子两代和萧允互相了解，此公志节操行怎样? 
English: Hou Gui once asked Lan Tang: Your father and son two generations and Xiao Yun understand each other, how do you conduct this Public Interest Day?

古文：徵曰： 其清虚玄远，殆不可测，至于文章，可得而言。 
现代文：蔡征说： 他这人清净虚无深远，几乎不可推测度量，至于他的文章，可以得到而加以评论。 
English: Cai Zheng said: He is pure and profound, and it is almost impossible to predict the measurement. As for his article, it can be obtained and commented on.

古文：因诵允诗以对，后主嗟赏久之。
现代文：因而对后主朗诵萧允的诗，垒王听了叹赏很久。
English: Therefore, when Xiao Yun's poem was recited to the empress dowager, Yao Wang listened with admiration for a long time.

古文：其年拜光禄大夫。
现代文：这年任命为光禄大夫。
English: That year, he was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：及隋师济江，允迁于关右。
现代文：到隋朝军队渡过长江后，萧允迁居于关右。
English: After the Sui Dynasty army crossed the Yangtze River, Xiao Yun moved to Guanzhong.

古文：是时朝士至长安者，例并授官，唯允与尚书仆射谢伷辞以老疾，隋文帝义之，并厚赐钱帛。
现代文：这时朝廷官员到垦塞的人，按例都授予官职，衹有芦盒和尚书仆射谢地以年老有病推辞，堕塞童认为他们讲道义，都优厚地赐给钱帛。
English: At this time, the imperial officials who came to Fuxi, as usual, were all awarded official positions, and the monks and clerks who had reed boxes were gratefully dismissed as old and sick, and the children who had fallen into the trap thought that they were preaching morality. They were all generously given to Qian Ye.

古文：寻以疾卒于长安，时年八十四。
现代文：不久因病在垦室去世，当时年纪八十四岁。
English: He died of illness in his bedchamber shortly afterwards, at the age of 84.

古文：弟引。
现代文：弟弟叫芦型。
English: His younger brother is called Reigata.

古文：引字叔休。
现代文：萧引字叔休。
English: Xiao Hui wrote Uncle Hui.

古文：方正有器局，望之俨然，虽造次之间，必由法度。
现代文：为人端干正直有才识和度量，看上去矜持庄重，虽是仓猝之间，做事必按法律制度。
English: He is honest, talented, and measured. He seems to be reserved and dignified. Although he is in a hurry, he must do things according to the legal system.

古文：性聪敏，博学，善属文。
现代文：天性聪慧敏达，博学，擅长做文章。
English: Naturally intelligent and sensitive, erudite, good at writing articles.

古文：释褐著作佐郎，转西昌侯仪同府主簿。
现代文：脱去平民布衣穿上官服出任著作佐郎，转任西昌侯仪同府主簿。
English: He took off his civilian clothes and put on his official uniform to take up the post of Shososaro, and was transferred to the post of Xichang Houyi, the chief bookkeeper of the prefecture.

古文：侯景之乱，梁元帝为荆州刺史，朝士多往归之。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，梁元帝任荆州刺史，朝廷官员大多前往归附他。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Emperor Liang Yuan was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, and most of the court officials went to join him.

古文：引曰： 诸王力争，祸患方始，今日逃难，未是择君之秋。
现代文：萧引说： 诸王尽力争夺，祸患刚开始，今日逃难，不是选择君主的时候。
English: Xiao Qian said: The kings are trying their best to compete, the disaster has just begun, today is a difficult day, it is not the time to choose a monarch.

古文：吾家再世为始兴郡，遗爱在民，正可南行以存家门耳。 
现代文：我家两代有人做过始兴郡的地方长官，留下的慈惠及于后世还在百姓中，正可前往南边以保存家门。 
English: Some members of my family have served as local governors of Shixing County for two generations, and the benevolence left behind is still among the people in future generations, so they can go to the south to preserve the family.

古文：于是与弟彤及宗亲等百馀人奔岭表。
现代文：于是和弟弟萧彤以及宗族亲属等一百余人逃往岭表。
English: As a result, more than a hundred people, including his younger brother Xiao Yao and relatives of the clan, fled to Lingbo.

古文：时始兴人欧阳頠为衡州刺史，引往依焉。
现代文：当时始兴人欧阳愿任衡州刺史，芦型前往依附。
English: At that time, Ouyang, the founder of Xinxing, was willing to go to Hengzhou to make history and go to the reed.

古文：頠后迁为广州，病死，子纥领其众。
现代文：欧阳顿后来调任卢业刺史，病死，欧阳愿的儿子欧阳纥统领他的部众。
English: Ouyang Tong was later transferred to Lu Ye, who died of illness, leaving Ouyang Zhen's son Ouyang Xuan to lead his subordinates.

古文：引每疑纥有异，因事规正，由是情礼渐疏。
现代文：萧引常怀疑欧阳纥有异心，因而加以规劝纠正，因此两人在情礼上渐渐疏远。
English: Xiao Yan often suspected Ouyang Yao of having an ulterior motive, and thus persuaded him to correct it. As a result, the two gradually drifted apart in terms of love.

古文：及纥举兵反，时京都士人岑之敬、公孙挺等并皆惶骇，唯引恬然，谓之敬等曰： 管幼安、袁曜卿亦但安坐耳。
现代文：到欧阳纥兴兵造反，当时京都籍的士人岑之敬、公孙挺等一起都惶恐害怕，衹有萧引安然如故，对岑之敬等说： 管幼窒、室堕型也衹是安坐哩。
English: At the time of the rebellion in Ouyang, the Kyoto-born nobles, including Tsuchizuki Takeru and his grandson Tsuyoshi, were all terrified and afraid. They said to Tsuchizuki Takeru and his grandson Tsuchizuki Tsuyoshi, "Even if you are a minor or a commoner, you should sit quietly."

古文：君子正身以明道，直己以行义，亦复何忧惧乎？ 
现代文：君子修身以申明道理，使自己正直以显操行和道义，还有什么可忧虑畏惧的呢? 
English: A gentleman cultivates himself by affirming the truth, and makes himself honest by showing conduct and morality. What else is there to worry about and fear?

古文：及章昭达平番禺，引始北还。
现代文：到章昭达平定番禺后，萧引才往北回来。
English: It was only after Zhang Zhaoda conquered Panyu that Xiao Yan returned to the north.

古文：高宗召引问岭表事，引具陈始末，帝甚悦，即日拜金部侍郎。
现代文：高宗召见萧引询问岭表的事情，萧引完整地陈述了事情始末，高宗十分喜悦，即日任命萧引为金部侍郎。
English: Gao Zong summoned Xiao Bing to inquire about the Ling table. Xiao Bing gave a complete account of the matter. Gao Zong was very pleased and appointed Xiao Bing as the attendant of the gold department on the same day.

古文：引善隶书，为当时所重。
现代文：萧引擅长隶书，为当时的人所推重。
English: Xiao Bing was good at writing in calligraphy, which was highly valued by the people at that time.

古文：高宗尝披奏事，指引署名曰： 此字笔势翩翩，似鸟之欲飞。 
现代文：高宗曾披板他所奏之事，指着萧引的署名说： 逭字笔势翩翩，像鸟要飞起来。 
English: Gao Zong once described the piece he played, pointing to Xiao Yan's signature and saying: "The brush strokes are so powerful, it's like a bird wants to fly."

古文：引谢曰： 此乃陛下假其羽毛耳。 
现代文：萧引道谢说： 这是陛下借给它羽毛哩。 
English: Xiaoqin said thankfully, "This is the feather that His Majesty lent to it."

古文：又谓引曰： 我每有所忿，见卿辄意解，何也？ 
现代文：高宗又对萧引说： 我常有气忿，看见你那种心情便会解释消除，为什么呢? 
English: Gao Zong also said to Xiao Qian: I often feel angry. Seeing you in that kind of mood would explain the elimination. Why?

古文：引曰： 此自陛下不迁怒，臣何预此恩。 
现代文：蔻圣说： 这自是陛下不迁怒于他人，臣哪襄和这恩惠有关系。 
English: Zou Sheng said, "This is because His Majesty does not take his anger out on others, and it has something to do with this favor.

古文：太建七年，加戎昭将军。
现代文：太建七年，加官戎昭将军。
English: In the seventh year of Tai Jian, he was promoted to General Rong Zhao.

古文：九年，除中卫始兴王咨议参军，兼金部侍郎。
现代文：太建九年，任命为中卫始兴王谘议参军，兼任金部侍郎。
English: In the ninth year of the Tai Jian era, he was appointed as the middle guard to advise and advise the king to join the army, and also served as the attendant of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：引性抗直，不事权贵，左右近臣无所造请，高宗每欲迁用，辄为用事者所裁。
现代文：萧引性格坦率耿直，不媚事权贵，皇帝身边的近臣，不曾去拜访，高宗常要提拔任用他，总被当权的人阻碍。
English: Xiao Qi's character was frank and straightforward, and he did not like the powerful. The emperor's close vassals did not visit him. Gao Zong often wanted to promote and appoint him, but was always hindered by those in power.

古文：及吕梁覆师，戎储空匮，乃转引为库部侍郎，掌知营造弓弩槊箭等事。
现代文：到吕梁之战全军覆灭，军需储备空虚匮乏，于是转而任用萧引为库部侍郎，掌管制造弓弩稍箭等事。
English: By the time of the Battle of Luliang, the entire army had been wiped out, and the military reserves were empty and scarce. Therefore, Xiao Ying was appointed as the secretary of the treasury, in charge of the manufacture of bows, crossbows and arrows.

古文：引在职一年，而器械充牣。
现代文：萧引在职一年，而器械充足。
English: Xiao Ying has been in office for one year, and the equipment is sufficient.

古文：频加中书侍郎、贞威将军、黄门郎。
现代文：多次加官为中书侍郎、贞威将军、黄门郎。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of Chusho-ziriroro, General Zhenwei, and Huangmenro.

古文：十二年，吏部侍郎缺，所司屡举王宽、谢燮等，帝并不用，乃中诏用引。
现代文：太建十二年，吏部侍郎一职空缺，有关官员屡次举荐王宽、谢燮等人，高宗都不用，而是亲自下诏令任用萧引。
English: In the 12th year of the Tai Jian period, the post of the secretary of the cadre department was vacant, and the relevant officials repeatedly recommended Wang Guang, Xie Qi and others. Gao Zong did not use them, but personally issued an edict to appoint Xiao Yan.

古文：时广州刺史马靖甚得岭表人心，而兵甲精练，每年深入俚洞，又数有战功，朝野颇生异议。
现代文：当时广州刺史马靖在岭表非常得人心，而且军队精强干练，每年深入俚洞，又有几次战功，朝廷和民间产生了许多异议。
English: At that time, Ma Jing, the ruler of Guangzhou, was very popular in the Ling Dynasty, and the army was strong and capable. Every year, it went deep into the caves, and there were several war feats. The imperial court and the people had many objections.

古文：高宗以引悉岭外物情，且遣引观靖，审其举措，讽令送质。
现代文：高宗因为萧引熟悉岭外情况，就派萧引去看马靖，观察他的举措，委婉地令他送人质。
English: Because Gao Zong was familiar with the situation outside the Ling, he sent Xiao Ying to see Ma Jing, observed his actions, and gently ordered him to release the hostages.

古文：引奉密旨南行，外托收督赕物。
现代文：萧引奉密旨南行，对外托辞是监督接受南方少数民族为赎罪缴纳的财物。
English: Xiao Yan went to the south with a secret mission, and the external excuse was to supervise the acceptance of the property paid by the southern ethnic minorities for atonement.

古文：既至番禺，靖即悟旨，尽遣儿弟下都为质。
现代文：已到番禺，马靖就领悟了高宗旨意，遣送全部儿子和弟弟去都城做人质。
English: Having arrived in Panyu, Ma Jing realized the high purpose and sent all his sons and younger brother to the capital as hostages.

古文：还至赣水，而高宗崩，后主即位，转引为中庶子，以疾去官。
现代文：返回至濑水时，高宗崩，后主登位，改任萧引为中庶子，因为有病离开官职。
English: When he returned to Surabaya, Gao Zong passed away, his successor ascended to the throne, and he was replaced by Xiao Ying as the middle son, because he was sick and left the official post.

古文：明年，京师多盗，乃复起为贞威将军、建康令。
现代文：第二年，京城裹出现许多盗贼，于是又起用萧引为贞威将军、建康县令。
English: In the second year, many thieves appeared in Beijing, so Xiao Bing was appointed as General Zhenwei and Jiankang County Governor.

古文：时殿内队主吴璡，及宦官李善度、蔡脱儿等多所请属，引一皆不许。
现代文：当时宫殿内的队主吴珑，以及宦官李善度、蓝胆显等人多次有所请托，盖型都不准许。
English: At that time, the team leader in the palace, Wu Gan, as well as the eunuchs, Li Shandu and Lan Yixian, repeatedly asked for permission, and the cover type was not allowed.

古文：引族子密时为黄门郎，谏引曰： 李、蔡之势，在位皆畏惮之，亦宜小为身计。 
现代文：盖型同宗族的子弟萧密当时任黄门郎，规劝萧引说： 李、蔡的势力，在位的官员都畏惧，也应该稍微为自身着想。 
English: Gaige's younger brother Xiao Min, who belonged to the same clan, was Huangmen Lang at that time, and he advised Xiao Qian to say: Li and Cai's forces are feared by the officials in power, and they should also think about themselves a little.

古文：引曰： 吾之立身，自有本末，亦安能为李、蔡改行。
现代文：萧引说： 我立身处世，自有主次，难道能为李、蔡改变操行。
English: Xiao Qian said: I stand in the world, I have my own priorities, can I change my behavior for Li and Cai?

古文：就令不平，不过解职耳。 
现代文：就是使他们不舒服，不过解除我的职务罢了。 
English: It's just to make them uncomfortable, but to remove me from my post.

古文：吴璡竟作飞书，李、蔡证之，坐免官，卒于家，时年五十八。
现代文：吴珑竟然写匿名信，李、蔡为此作证，萧引获罪免除官职，死于家中，当时年纪五十八岁。
English: Wu Gan actually wrote an anonymous letter, Li and Cai testified to this, Xiao was exonerated and died at home, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：子德言，最知名。
现代文：他的儿子萧德言，非常有名为当世所知。
English: His son, Xiao Deyan, is very famous and known in the world.

古文：引宗族子弟，多以行义知名。
现代文：萧引同宗族的子弟，大多因为操行与道义而为世人所知。
English: Most of Xiao Bing's children of the same clan are known to the world for their conduct and morality.

古文：弟彤，以恬静好学，官至太子中庶子、南康王长史。
现代文：弟弟萧彤，因为恬静好学，官做到太子中庶子、南康王长史。
English: Xiao Yao's younger brother, because of Yao Jing's eagerness to learn, became the prince's illegitimate son, Nankang Wang Changshi.

古文：密字士机，幼而聪敏，博学有文词。
现代文：萧密字士机，幼年时就聪明敏达，博学擅长撰写文章。
English: Xiao Mi is a typewriter. She was smart and sensitive when she was young, and she is good at writing articles.

古文：祖琛，梁特进。
现代文：祖父萧琛，在颦邀任特进。
English: Grandfather Xiao Wei was invited to be a special envoy.

古文：父游，少府卿。
现代文：父亲芦游，任少府卿。
English: His father, Lu Yu, was appointed as a minor prefect.

古文：密太建八年，兼散骑常侍，聘于齐。
现代文：芦蜜在立建八年，兼任散骑常侍，出使于齐朝。
English: In the eight years since it was built, Lumi also served as a knight errant, and was dispatched to the Qi Dynasty.

古文：历位黄门侍郎、太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
现代文：历任黄门侍郎、太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
English: Successive attendants of the Yellow Gate, an illegitimate son of the Prince, and a straggler.

古文：史臣曰：谢、王、张、萧，咸以清净为风，文雅流誉，虽更多难，终克成名。
现代文：史臣曰：谢、王、巫、盖，都以心地洁净不受外物干扰为作风，善于艺文礼乐而流传着好名声，虽然经历许多艰难，终于能够成名。
English: Shichen said: Xie, Wang, Wu and Gai all have the style of being pure of heart and not being disturbed by foreign objects. They are good at art, literature and music and have a good reputation. Although they have experienced many difficulties, they have finally been able to become famous.

古文：奂謇谔在公，英飙振俗，详其行事，抑古之遗爱矣。
现代文：孔奂正直为公，杰出的举措振动习俗，审察他做事，则直道而行有古之遣风呀。
English: Confucius is an upright public servant, and his outstanding measures vibrate customs. If you examine his work, you will find an ancient style of doing things in a straightforward manner.

古文：固之蔬菲禅悦，斯乃出俗者焉，犹且致絓于黜免，有惧于倾覆。
现代文：王固一向蔬果粗食心神怡悦，这是超出世俗的人，尚且招致阻碍而被黜免官职，有被杀害的恐惧。
English: Wang Gu has always been a picky eater of fruits and vegetables. This is a person who is beyond the world, yet he has been obstructed and removed from office, and he is afraid of being killed.

古文：是知上官、博陆之权势，阎、邓、梁、窦之震动，吁可畏哉！
现代文：于是知道了上官桀、博陆侯霍光的权柄势力，阎颢、邓鹭、梁冀、窦宪的震动作用，真可怕啊!
English: So I learned about the power of Shangguan Xuan, Bo Lu, Hou Houguang, Yan Xuan, Deng Xuan, Liang Jie, Dou Xian's shaking effect, it's really terrible!

