古文：孝义李棠柳桧杜叔毗荆可秦族皇甫遐张元
现代文：在天地四海之中最为重要的，惟一就是孝了；立下大功劳名声显于世间的，惟一就是义了。为什么呢?
English: Of all the things in heaven and on earth, the most important is filial piety. Of all the things in the world, the most important is righteousness. Why?

古文：夫塞天地而横四海者，其唯孝乎；奉大功而立显名者，其唯义乎。
现代文：孝起始就是事奉亲人，而后以此使天下得以治理；义在于人际间相互亲密讲求合适相宜，是人依靠这来成全仁德的。
English: The beginning of filial piety is to serve one's relatives, and then the world can be governed by this; the meaning is that people should be intimate with each other and seek what is appropriate. People rely on this to achieve benevolence.

古文：何则？孝始事亲，惟后资于致治；义在合宜，惟人赖以成德。
现代文：比较突出的智能之士禀承的是自然之性，一般的人也有这种美好的希望。
English: The more eminent intellects are the inheritors of the nature of nature, and ordinary people also have this beautiful hope.

古文：上智禀自然之性，中庸有企及之美。其大也，则隆家光国，盛烈与河海争流；授命灭亲，峻节与竹俱茂。
现代文：如果是做大事业的，就可以使家和国都兴盛光隆，名声功绩可以如同江河大海一样奔流长存；接受使命不能顾及亲人，峻烈气节像竹柏一样共同茂盛。
English: If you do a great deed, you can make your home and country prosperous and brilliant, and your reputation and achievements can last as long as the rivers and seas; if you accept the mission, you can't take care of your relatives, and the harsh seasons will flourish together like bamboo and cypress.

古文：其小也，则温枕扇席，无替于晨昏；损己利物，有助于名教。
现代文：比较小的事，也可以温暖扇风于枕席之间，不必计较曰日夜夜早晨黄昏；自己损失而能对事物有利，就是对名教的帮助。
English: Relatively small things can also warm the fan between the pillow seats. You don't have to worry about day and night, morning and evening. If you can lose yourself and be beneficial to things, it is a help to the famous religion.

古文：是以尧舜汤武居帝王之位，垂至德以敦其风；孔墨荀孟禀圣贤之资，弘正道以励其俗。
现代文：所以帝尧帝舜商汤周武作为帝王，行使最好的仁德来促进良好的风气；孔子墨子荀子孟子禀承了圣贤的资质，弘扬正义之道激励民俗。
English: Therefore, Emperor Zhaozhouwu, as an emperor, exercised the best benevolence to promote a good culture; Confucius, Mozi, Shanzi, Mencius, inherited the qualifications of sages, promoted the way of justice and inspired folk customs.

古文：观其所由，在此而已矣。
现代文：观察一下这些，都在于这个方面了。
English: Observe its cause, it is only the implementation of filial piety.

古文：然而淳源既往，浇风愈扇。
现代文：但是淳朴风气已是往昔的事了，浮薄的风气越来越盛。
English: However, the austere style is a thing of the past, and the frivolous style is becoming more and more popular.

古文：礼义不树，廉让莫修。
现代文：礼义不能树立，廉让不能修成。
English: Courtesy cannot be established, honesty cannot be cultivated.

古文：若乃绾银黄，列钟鼎，立于朝廷之间，非一族也，其出忠入孝，轻生蹈节者，则盖寡焉。
现代文：如同披银挂金，宴席钟鸣鼎食的，在朝廷任官，不衹是一族，其中在职忠心回家孝顺的，漠视生死信守节操的，却很少。
English: Just as those who are clothed in silver and adorned with gold, and who feast at the ringing of the dinner bell, and who serve as officials in the imperial court, are all members of the same family. Among them, there are very few who are loyal and dutiful when they return home from duty, and who are indifferent to life and death, and who abide by the principle of discipline.

古文：积龟贝，实仓廪，居于闾巷之内，非一家也，其悦礼敦诗，守死善道者，则又鲜焉。
现代文：积聚钱财，聚敛大批财物粮食，在街坊中居住宅第的，不衹是一家人，但是讲求礼仪认真学习，一生一世追求道义的人，却是很难见到。
English: It is not uncommon to see a family that accumulates money and wealth, amasses a large number of wealth and grain, and lives in a house in a neighborhood, but it is difficult to see a person who insists on etiquette, earnestly studies, and pursues morality for a lifetime.

古文：斯固仁人君子所以兴叹，哲后贤宰所宜属心。
现代文：这也就是仁人君子所以感叹的原因，贤哲人士有眼光的大臣所应注意的事情。
English: This, of course, is the reason why the benevolent gentleman sighs with joy, and is the concern of the saintly monarch and the wise vassal.

古文：如令明教化以救其弊，优爵赏以劝其善，布恳诚以诱其进，积岁月以求其终，则今之所谓少者可以为多矣，古之所谓为难者可以为易矣。
现代文：如果下令宣明教化以拯救弊端，提高爵位和俸禄待遇来鼓励人从善，广布诚恳心意使人上进，累积岁月时间以取得结果，则如今认为稀少的人可以多起来，古代认为难以做到的可以变得容易做到。
English: If enlightenment and enlightenment are ordered to save the evils, if titles and salaries are raised to encourage people to do good, if sincerity is spread to make people advance, and if years and time are accumulated to achieve results, then people who are now considered scarce can increase, and what was considered difficult in ancient times can become easy to do.

古文：故博采异闻，网罗遗逸，录其可以垂范方来者，为孝义篇云。
现代文：所以广泛地采纳异闻，收集遗失的往事，着录能成为当世和后人模范的人物事迹，作为孝义篇。
English: Therefore, it extensively adopts anecdotes, collects lost past events, and records people's deeds that can become models for the present and future generations, as filial piety.

古文：李棠字长卿，勃海蓨人也。
现代文：李棠字长卿，勃海蓨人。
English: Li Tang Zi Changqing, a person from Bo Hai.

古文：祖伯贵，魏宣武时官至鲁郡守。
现代文：祖皑，魏宣武帝时官至鲁郡守。
English: Zhu Xi, the governor of Lu County during the reign of Emperor Xuanwu of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：有孝行，居父丧，哀戚过礼，遂以毁卒。
现代文：有孝行，为父守丧，过分哀戚，因而损伤身体而去世。
English: He had filial piety, mourned for his father, and grieved excessively. As a result, he injured his body and passed away.

古文：宣武嘉之，赠勃海相。
现代文：宣亘瞳称赞他，追赠赵渔相。
English: Emperor Xuanwu praised him and posthumously awarded him the title of Zhao Yuxiang.

古文：父元冑，员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：父：趋，员外散骑侍郎。
English: Father: Cheng, non-commissioned officer riding horseback.

古文：棠幼孤，好学，有志操。
现代文：李棠幼年丧父，喜好学习，有志向节操。
English: Li Tang lost his father at an early age, likes to study, and has the will to be a disciplinarian.

古文：年十七，属尔朱之乱，与司空高干兄弟，举兵信都。
现代文：十七岁时，正值尔朱氏作乱，遂与司空高干兄弟于信都举兵。
English: At the age of seventeen, at a time when the Er Zhu clan was in revolt, he raised an army with the brothers Sikuo and Gao Gan in Xindu.

古文：魏中兴初，辟卫军府功曹参军。
现代文：魏中兴初年，征召为卫军府功曹参军。
English: In the first year of Wei Zhongxing, he was called up to join the army as a meritorious member of the Imperial Guard.

古文：太昌中，以军功除征虏将军，行东莱郡事。
现代文：太昌年间，以军功授征虏将军，代理东莱郡事。
English: During the Taichang period, he was awarded the title of General of Conscription for Military Merit and acted as the representative of Donglai County.

古文：魏孝武西迁，棠时在凹北，遂仕东魏。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁时，李棠当时在凹北，于是在束魏做官。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, Li Tang was in the north of Aube, so he became an official in Shu Wei.

古文：及高仲密为北豫州刺史，请棠为掾。
现代文：当高仲密任北豫州刺史时，请李棠任为掾。
English: When Gao Zhongmi was appointed to be the governor of North Henan Province, he asked Li Tang to be his deputy.

古文：先是，仲密与吏部郎中崔暹有隙。
现代文：原先，仲密与吏部郎中崔暹有矛盾。
English: Originally, there was a conflict between Zhongmi and Choi Siem, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：暹时被齐文襄委任，仲密恐其构己，每不自安，将图来附。时东魏又遣镇城奚寿兴典兵事，仲密但知民务而已。
现代文：崔暹此时受到齐文襄帝的委任，仲密害怕其陷害自己，直不安心，图谋来归附此时束魏又委任镇城奚寿兴典掌兵事，仲密衹是管理民务。
English: At this time, Cui Siam was appointed by Emperor Qibun Xiang, and Zhong Mi was afraid that he would frame himself. He was worried and plotted to take over. At this time, Sok Wei also appointed Zhencheng Shou Xing Dian to be in charge of military affairs, while Zhong Mi was in charge of civil affairs.

古文：既至州，遂与棠谋执寿兴以成其计。
现代文：到了州中，遂与李棠密谋执获寿兴以成全其计谋。
English: When he arrived at the middle school, he plotted with Li Tang to seize Shuxing to complete his scheme.

古文：仲密乃置酒延寿兴，阴伏壮士，欲因此执之。
现代文：仲密设置宴席宴请寿兴，秘密布置壮士，欲因此擒获。
English: He secretly set up a banquet to invite Shou Xing, secretly arranged strong men, and wanted to win a role.

古文：寿兴辞而不赴。
现代文：寿兴推辞不来。
English: Shuxing's resignation did not come.

古文：棠遂往见之曰： 君与高公，义符昆季。
现代文：李棠因而前去见他说： 君与高公，义如兄弟。
English: Li Tang therefore went to see him and said: "You and Gao Gong are like brothers.

古文：今日之席，以公为首。
现代文：今日的酒席，以公为首。
English: Today's banquet will be led by Gong.

古文：岂有宾客总萃，而公无事不行？
现代文：岂有宾客全都到了，而公无事却不到?
English: Have all the guests arrived and nothing has happened?

古文：将恐远近闻之，窃有疑怪。 寿兴遂与俱赴，便发伏执之。
现代文：恐怕远近听闻，或有其他想法。 寿兴便同他去赴宴，随即突发伏兵将其擒获。
English: I'm afraid he heard about it from far and wide, or had other ideas. Shuxing went to the banquet with him, and was caught in a sudden ambush.

古文：乃帅其士众据城，遣棠诣阙归款。
现代文：因而率领士众占据城池，派遣李棠到朝廷表示归附。
English: Therefore, he led the soldiers to occupy the city and sent Li Tang to the imperial court to express his allegiance.

古文：太祖嘉之，拜棠卫将军、右光禄大夫，封广宗县公，邑一千户。
现代文：太祖称赞他，拜李棠为卫将军、右光禄大夫，封广宗县公爵位，食邑一千户。
English: The great-grandfather praised him, named Li Tang as the general of Wei, the doctor of Uguanglu, the duke of Guangzong County, and a thousand households of food villages.

古文：棠固辞曰： 臣世荷朝恩，义当奉国。
现代文：李棠固辞说： 臣世代荷受国恩，义当奉国。
English: Li Tang said firmly: The vassal generation should be grateful to the country and serve the country.

古文：而往者见拘逆命，不获陪驾西巡。
现代文：前些时间见拘逆命，无法陪驾西巡。
English: Some time ago, I was so worried about my life that I couldn't accompany him on his western tour.

古文：今日之来，免罪为幸，何敢以此微庸，冒受天爵。 如此者再三，优诏不许。
现代文：今方才来到，免罪已属万幸，怎敢以此微功，冒受天爵。 如此者再三，优诏不许。
English: I have only just arrived, and to be exonerated is already a great fortune, how dare I use this small achievement to take on the emperor.

古文：俄迁给事黄门侍郎，加车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：不久迁任给事黄门侍郎，加车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, and given the additional posts of chariot and cavalry general, ceremonial secretary, and horseback riding attendant.

古文：魏废帝二年，从魏安公尉迟迥伐蜀。
现代文：魏废帝二年，随从魏安公尉迟迥征伐蜀地。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's dethronement, he followed Wei's aide-de-camp Wei An to conquer Shu.

古文：蜀人未即降，棠乃应募，先使谕之。
现代文：蜀人未立即投降，李棠应募，前往晓谕。
English: Shu people did not immediately surrender, Li Tang was recruited and went to the oracle.

古文：既入成都，萧撝问迥军中委曲，棠不对。
现代文：进入成都，萧据问尉迟迥军中情况，李棠不予回答。
English: Entering Chengdu, Xiao reportedly asked Li Tang about the situation in the army, but Li Tang did not answer.

古文：撝乃苦笞辱之，冀获其实。
现代文：萧揭因而百般鞭笞侮辱。想获得实情。
English: Xiao Jie lashed out and insulted him in all sorts of ways. He wanted to get the truth.

古文：棠曰： 尔亡国余烬，不识安危。
现代文：李棠说： 你已是亡国的余烬，尚不知安危。
English: Li Tang said: You are already the embers of a ruined country, and you don't know whether you are safe or not.

古文：奉命谕尔，反见踬顿。
现代文：我奉命劝谕你，反而受此危难。
English: I was ordered to advise you, but instead I am suffering from this peril.

古文：我王者忠臣，有死而已，义不为尔移志也。 撝不能得其要指，遂害之。
现代文：我是王者的忠臣，有死而已，义不会为你而移志。 萧捣达不到目的，因此将他杀害。
English: I am a loyal vassal of the king, death is the only thing, righteousness will not change its mind for you. Xiao Rui could not achieve his goal, so he killed him.

古文：子敞嗣。
现代文：其子李敞继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son Xu Chang.

古文：柳桧字季华，秘书监虬之次弟也。
现代文：柳桧字季华，是秘书监柳虬的次弟。
English: Yanukovych's son, Jihua, is the second brother of secretary-supervisor Yanukovych.

古文：性刚简任气，少文，善骑射，果于断决。
现代文：性格刚烈任气，读书不多，善于骑射，果于决断。
English: He has a strong-willed and headstrong personality, does not read much, is good at riding and shooting, and is good at making decisions.

古文：年十八，起家奉朝请。
现代文：十八岁时，出仕任为奉朝请。
English: At the age of eighteen, he was appointed to serve the Emperor.

古文：居父丧，毁瘠骨立。
现代文：居父丧，过哀而形销骨立。
English: My father is in mourning, and I'm grieving and grieving.

古文：服阕，除阳城郡丞、防城都督。
现代文：服丧结束后，被拜为阳城郡丞、防城都督。
English: After the funeral, he was revered as the Yangcheng county magistrate and defense governor.

古文：大统四年，从太祖战于河桥，先登有功。
现代文：大统四年，随从太祖参加河桥战役，先登有功。
English: In the fourth year of unification, he followed his great-grandfather to take part in the Battle of the River Bridge, and was the first to achieve meritorious service.

古文：授都督，镇鄯州。
现代文：授都督，镇守鄯州。
English: He was appointed the governor of the capital and the town guard of Bozhou.

古文：八年，拜湟河郡守，仍典军事。
现代文：八年，拜湟河郡守，并典掌军事。
English: In eight years, he was the governor of Baishuhe County, and a military leader.

古文：寻加平东将军、太中大夫。
现代文：不久加平束将军、太中大夫。
English: He was soon promoted to General Hiratsuka and Grand Vice Admiral.

古文：吐谷浑入寇郡境，时桧兵少，人怀忧惧。
现代文：吐谷浑侵犯郡境，当时柳桧兵太少，人人都十分忧惧。
English: When the Tuyuhun invaded the borders of the county, there were too few Liu Ye soldiers, and everyone was very worried.

古文：桧抚而勉之，众心乃安。
现代文：柳桧抚勉他们，众心乃安。
English: The willow-wren caresses them, and all hearts are at peace.

古文：因率数十人先击之，溃乱，余众乘之，遂大败而走。
现代文：因而率领数十人先击之，敌人溃乱，众人趁机进攻，吐谷浑大败而走。
English: As a result, he led dozens of people to strike first, the enemy was routed, everyone took advantage of the opportunity to attack, and Tugu was defeated.

古文：以功封万年县子，邑三百户。
现代文：以此功封为万年县子爵位，食邑三百户。
English: With this conferment, he was given the title of 10,000-year-old county viscount, and 300 households in Shokui were uplifted.

古文：时吐谷浑强盛，数侵疆埸。
现代文：当时吐谷浑力量强盛，经常侵犯边境。
English: At that time, the Tugu Hun was very powerful and frequently violated the border.

古文：自桧镇鄯州，屡战必破之。
现代文：自从柳桧镇守鄯州，每次进犯都被击败。
English: Since Liuye Town has been guarding Luzhou, every attack has been defeated.

古文：数年之后，不敢为寇。
现代文：数年之后，不敢侵犯。
English: A few years later, dared not encroach.

古文：十四年，迁河州别驾，转帅都督。
现代文：十四年，迁任河州别驾，转任帅都督。
English: Fourteen years later, he was transferred to the position of Hezhou Beihei, and then to the position of Shuai Tudou.

古文：俄拜使持节、抚军将军、大都督。
现代文：不久拜使持节、抚军将军、大都督。
English: Soon after, he was made an envoy, a general of the army, and the grand governor.

古文：居三载，征还京师。
现代文：三年之后，征还京师
English: Three years later, he was conscripted back to the capital.

古文：时桧兄虬为秘书丞,弟庆为尚书左丞。
现代文：当时柳桧兄柳虬任秘书丞，弟柳庆任尚书左丞。
English: At that time, Yanukovych's elder brother, Yanukovych, held the post of secretary-general, and his younger brother, Yanukovych, held the post of secretary-general.

古文：桧尝谓兄弟曰： 兄则职典简牍，褒贬人伦；弟则管辖群司，股肱朝廷。
现代文：柳桧曾经对兄弟们说： 兄则职典简牍，评论褒贬人物；弟则管辖群司，为朝廷的股肱。
English: Liu Bei once said to his brothers: "The elder brother is responsible for the classification of professions, and comments on the praiseworthy and demeaning characters; the younger brother is responsible for the group of departments, and is the leader of the imperial court.

古文：可谓荣宠矣。
现代文：可以说够荣宠了。
English: You could say it's quite an honor.

古文：然而四方未静，车书不一，桧唯当蒙矢石，履危难，以报国恩耳。 顷之，太祖谓桧曰： 卿昔在鄯州，忠勇显著。
现代文：但是四方尚未安静，天下还没统一，我柳桧衹能冒矢石，履危难，用以报答国恩。 不久，太祖对柳桧说： 卿往昔在鄯州，忠勇显著。
English: But the four quarters had not yet been pacified, and the country had not yet been unified. I, Liu Bei, could take the initiative and brave the perils to repay the nation's kindness. Before long, the great-grandfather said to Liu Bei: Sir, in the past in Zhangzhou, you were remarkably loyal and brave.

古文：今西境肃清，无劳经略。
现代文：如今西境已经肃清，不用再过分考虑。
English: Now that the western region has been cleared, there is no need to think about it too much.

古文：九曲，国之东鄙，当劳君守之。 遂令桧镇九曲。
现代文：丑堕，是国家东方边境，当劳君去镇守。 于是令柳桧镇守九曲。
English: Ugly is the country's eastern border, when Laojun went to guard the town. So he ordered Liu Ye to guard the town of Jiuqu.

古文：寻从大将军王雄讨上津、魏兴，平之，即除魏兴、华阳二郡守。
现代文：不久随从大将军王雄征讨上津、魏兴，将其平定，即任命为魏兴、华阳二郡守。
English: Soon after, he followed the great general Wang Xiong to conquer Shangjin and Wei Xing and subdued them, and was appointed the governor of Wei Xing and Huayang.

古文：安康人黄众宝谋反，连结党与，攻围州城。
现代文：安康人黄众宣谋反，联合同党，攻打州城。
English: Huang Zong, a healthy person, declared a rebellion, united with the party, and attacked the state capital.

古文：乃相谓曰： 尝闻柳府君勇悍，其锋不可当。
现代文：相互之间说道： 听说柳府君十分勇悍其锋不可当。
English: They said to each other: I've heard that Yanagifukun is very brave.

古文：今既在外，方为吾徒腹心之疾也，不如先击之。 遂围桧郡。
现代文：如今既然在外，是我们的心腹之患，不如先攻打他。 因而围攻柳桧任守的郡。
English: Now that he's out of the country, he's a threat to our inner circle, so it's better to attack him first, and thus besiege the county where Liu Ye is in charge.

古文：郡城卑下，士众寡弱，又无守御之备。
现代文：郡城地势低下，士众少而弱，又没有防守的准备。
English: The county seat was in a low-lying area, with few and weak warriors, and there was no preparation for defense.

古文：连战积十余日，士卒仅有存者，于是力屈城陷，身被十数创，遂为贼所获。
现代文：连续战斗十余日，士卒死伤殆尽，于是力竭而城池陷落，全身受伤十余处，因而被贼擒获。
English: After more than ten days of continuous battle, the soldiers were exhausted and exhausted, so they exhausted themselves and the city fell, injuring more than ten parts of the body, and were captured by thieves.

古文：既而众宝等进围东梁州，乃缚桧置城下，欲令桧诱说城中。
现代文：接着众宝等人进围束梁州，将柳桧缚于城下，欲令柳桧向城中劝降。
English: Then, the treasure-hunters besieged Zhuliangzhou, chained Liu Bei under the city, and tried to persuade Liu Bei to surrender to the city.

古文：桧乃大呼曰： 群贼乌合，粮食已罄，行即退散，各宜勉之！ 众宝大怒，乃临桧以兵曰： 速更汝辞！
现代文：柳桧乃大声呼叫说： 群贼是乌合之众，已经没有粮食，很快就会败散，你们要战斗到底! 众宝大怒，以兵刃对着柳桧说： 马上改变你的言辞!
English: Liu Xuan cried out in a loud voice, "The bandits are a rabble, there is no more food, they will soon be defeated, you must fight to the end!" The treasures were furious and said to Liu Xuan with their swords, "Change your words at once!"

古文：不尔，便就戮矣。 桧守节不变。
现代文：不然。马上杀掉你。 柳桧守节不变。
English: Otherwise, I'll kill you right away. The Willow Festival remains unchanged.

古文：遂害之，弃尸水中。
现代文：因而被害，将尸体抛弃于水中。
English: He then dumped the body in the water.

古文：城中人皆为之流涕。
现代文：城中人都为他落泪。
English: Everyone in the city shed tears for him.

古文：众宝解围之后，桧兄子止戈方收桧尸还长安。
现代文：众实解围之后，椁桧兄子止戈方才收柳桧的尸体还长安。
English: After the siege was effectively lifted, Yan's elder brother Du Ge only received Liu Ye's body in Chang'an.

古文：赠东梁州刺史。
现代文：追赠束梁州刺史。
English: A posthumous gift of a bunch of Liangzhou thorny history.

古文：子斌嗣。
现代文：其子柳斌继嗣。
English: His son, Liu Bin, succeeded him.

古文：斌字伯达。
现代文：堑噬字值达。
English: 噬 word value reached.

古文：年十七，齐公宪召为记室。
现代文：十七岁时，蛮公室这毖征召为记室。
English: At the age of seventeen, he was conscripted into the military as a recorder.

古文：早卒。
现代文：早年去世。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：斌弟雄亮，字信诚。
现代文：翅遮弟握睦，字值越。
English: The fancier the wings, the higher the word value.

古文：幼有志节，好学不倦。
现代文：自幼便有志向气节，勤奋学习。
English: Since childhood, he has been ambitious and diligent in his studies.

古文：年十二，遭父艰，几至灭性。
现代文：十二岁时父亲去世，因过度悲哀几乎丧命。
English: When he was twelve years old, his father died, and he almost lost his life due to excessive grief.

古文：终丧之后，志在复雠。
现代文：丧期结束之后，志在复仇。
English: After the period of mourning is over, they want revenge.

古文：柱国、蔡国公广钦其名行，引为记室参军。
现代文：柱国、蔡国公宇文广钦佩他的名声品行，征为记室参军。
English: Uwenguang, the pillar of the state and Cai Guogong, admired his reputation and conduct, and was enlisted in the army as a recorder.

古文：年始弱冠，府中文笔，颇亦委之。
现代文：方才成年，府中的文书，往往交付他完成。
English: He has just come of age, and the paperwork in the office is often handed over to him to complete.

古文：后竟手刃众宝于京城。朝野咸重其志节，高祖特恕之。
现代文：后来于京城亲手刺杀众宝。朝野都钦服他的志节，高祖特意赦免他。
English: Later, he personally assassinated many treasures in Kyoto. The court and the emperor both admired his will, and Emperor Kozu specifically pardoned him.

古文：由是知名。
现代文：因此而知名。
English: Yin Jun is famous for this.

古文：大象末，位至宾部下大夫。
现代文：大象末年，位至宾部下大夫
English: At the end of his life, he was promoted to the rank of guest doctor

古文：杜叔毗字子弼。
现代文：挞赵皿字王迩。
English: Zhao Sar Zi Wang Yao.

古文：其先，京兆杜陵人也，徙居襄阳。
现代文：其原籍是塞韭挂堕，后来徙居塞屋。
English: He was originally from Tsuru, Saitama Prefecture, and later moved to Tsuruya.

古文：祖干光，齐司徒右长史。
现代文：祖皇选，查曲时任司徒右长史。
English: It was selected by the ancestor emperor, and when the piece was examined, he was appointed to the post of Stutsu U no Choshi.

古文：父渐，梁边城太守。
现代文：父杜逝，凿塑边球太守。
English: His father Du passed away, and he became the goalkeeper.

古文：叔毗早岁而孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：拯皿早年丧父，服侍母亲以孝顺闻名。
English: He lost his father at an early age and was known for his filial piety in serving his mother.

古文：性慷慨有志节。
现代文：性格慷慨而有志节。
English: Generous and ambitious.

古文：励精好学，尤善左氏春秋。
现代文：勤奋学习，特别精通《左氏春秋》。
English: Studied hard and was particularly proficient in "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：仕梁，为宜丰侯萧循府中直兵参军。
现代文：在凿塑为官，任宣呈塑芦钟府中直兵参军。
English: In the chiseling and sculpting as an official, he was allowed to join the army in the middle of the proclamation and the sculpture of the bell.

古文：大统十七年，太祖令大将军达奚武经略汉州。
现代文：左面十七年，鼓旦令大将军达要武掠夺迈州。
English: In the seventeenth year on the left, Drum Tan ordered the general to take up arms to plunder Maizhou.

古文：明年，武围循于南郑。
现代文：第二年，达罢茎于亩塑围攻萧妪。
English: In the second year, they besieged Xiao Qi at Mu Shi.

古文：循令叔毗诣阙请和。
现代文：芦循令赵腿至朝廷请和。
English: Lu Xun ordered Zhao Shixin to go to the imperial court to sue for peace.

古文：太祖见而礼之。
现代文：左担接见时十分礼待。
English: The left-hander received a very courteous reception.

古文：使未反，而循中直兵参军曹策、参军刘晓谋以城降武。
现代文：出使未回，而萧面的中直兵参军萱箠、参军塑胪密谋以城降于达；叁迪。
English: The envoys did not return, and the despondent Zhong Zhi soldiers joined the army and plotted to bring the city down to Dadu.

古文：时叔毗兄君锡为循中记室参军，从子映录事参军，映弟晰中直兵参军，并有文武材略，各领部曲数百人。
现代文：此时扭腿兄昼塑任萧循的中记室参军，侄子挂继任录事参军，挂速弟挂逝任中直兵参军，都有文武才略，各自领有数百军队。
English: At this time, Xiao Xun's elder brother, Li Xiaozhuang, joined the army from the Central Records Office, his nephew joined the army from the Succession Records Office, and his younger brother joined the army from the Immediate Records Office. All of them were talented in literature and martial arts, and each had hundreds of troops.

古文：策等忌之，惧不同己，遂诬以谋叛，擅加害焉。
现代文：曹策等人忌怕，恐怕他们不与自己同谋，因而诬告他们谋反，将其杀害。
English: Cao Ze and others were afraid that they would not conspire with them, so they falsely accused them of plotting a rebellion and killed them.

古文：循寻讨策等，擒之，斩晓而免策。
现代文：不久萧循讨伐曹策等人，将其擒获，将刘晓斩首而免去了曹策的死罪。
English: Soon after, Xiao Xun fought against Cao Ce and others, captured him, and beheaded Liu Xiao to avoid Cao Ce's death sentence.

古文：及循降，策至长安。
现代文：到萧循归降时，曹策来到长安。
English: By the time of Xiao Xun's abdication, Cao Ce had come to Chang'an.

古文：叔毗朝夕号泣，具申冤状。
现代文：叔毗朝夕号泣，申诉冤状。
English: Uncle Fei cried loudly morning and evening, complaining about grievances.

古文：朝议以事在归附之前，不可追罪。
现代文：朝议认为是在归附之前出的事，没有理由追加其罪过。
English: The court held that it was a matter that occurred before the annexation, and there was no reason to add to his guilt.

古文：叔毗内怀愤惋，志在复雠。
现代文：叔毗内心十分愤怨，志在复仇。
English: Uncle Vi was very angry and wanted to take revenge.

古文：然恐违朝宪，坐及其母，遂沉吟积时。
现代文：但又恐怕违反朝廷法制，累及其母，于是很长时间没有什么行动。
English: However, I am afraid that it would violate the imperial legal system and burden his mother, so there was no action for a long time.

古文：母知其意，谓叔毗曰： 汝兄横罹祸酷，痛切骨髓。
现代文：其母知道他的意思，对叔毗说： 你兄长横罹祸酷，使人痛心彻骨。
English: His mother knew what he meant, and said to Uncle Vi: "Your brother's wickedness is so terrible that it makes one's heart ache.

古文：若曹策朝死，吾以夕殁，亦所甘心。
现代文：如果曹策朝死，我就是夕亡，也心甘情愿。
English: If Cao Cao dies in the morning, I will die in the evening, and I am willing to do so.

古文：汝何疑焉。 叔毗拜受母言，愈更感励。
现代文：你不必犹豫。 叔毗拜受母亲之言，愈为激励。
English: You don't have to hesitate. Uncle Bibi was inspired by his mother's words.

古文：后遂白日手刃策于京城，断首刳腹，解其肢体。
现代文：此后于白亲手将曹策杀死于京城之中，断首刳腹，解其肢体。
English: After that, Yu Bai personally killed Cao Ce in the middle of the capital, beheaded him, disemboweled him, and dismembered his body.

古文：然后面缚，请就戮焉。
现代文：然后反绑双手，请求伏诛。
English: Then they tied his hands behind his back and asked him to surrender.

古文：太祖嘉其志气，特命赦之。
现代文：太祖称赞他的志气，特别下令赦免。
English: The great-grandfather praised his spirit and specially ordered a pardon.

古文：寻拜都督、辅国将军、中散大夫。
现代文：不久拜为都督、辅国将军、中散大夫。
English: He soon became the governor of the capital, the general of the auxiliary province, and the doctor of Zhongshan.

古文：遭母忧，哀毁骨立，殆不胜丧。
现代文：遭母丧，由于过度悲伤而形销骨立，几乎不能完成丧事。
English: After her mother's death, she was too grief-stricken to grieve properly and could barely complete the funeral.

古文：服阕，晋公护辟为中外府乐曹参军，加授大都督，迁使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，行义归郡守。
现代文：服丧完了之后，晋公宇文护征召他为中外府乐曹参军，加授大都督，迁任为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，代理义归郡守。
English: After the funeral service was over, Jin Gong Uwenguo conscripted him to join the army as the Central and Foreign Prefectural Musician, awarded him the title of Grand Governor, and transferred him to be the Envoy of the Festival, the General of the Chariot and Cavalry, the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Acting Governor of Yiguigu County.

古文：自君锡及宗室等为曹策所害，犹殡梁州，至是表请迎丧归葬。
现代文：自从君锡及宗室为曹策所害，殡葬于梁州，至此时上表请求迎丧归葬。
English: Since Junxi and his family were killed by Cao Cao and buried in Liangzhou, at this time, the above request was made for the funeral and burial.

古文：高祖许之，葬事所须，诏令官给。
现代文：高祖允许，葬事所需，韶令由有关官衙付给。
English: With Gao Zu's permission, the relevant officials will pay the funeral expenses as required.

古文：在梁旧田宅经外配者，并追还之，仍赐田二百顷。
现代文：在梁朝的旧有田宅被外配给他人的，全都追回，另赐田二百顷。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, all the old rice fields that had been allocated to others were recovered, and another 200 hectares of rice fields were given.

古文：寻除硖州刺史。
现代文：不久授陕州刺史。
English: He was soon awarded the title of Shaanxi Provincial Historian.

古文：天和二年，从卫国公直南讨，军败，为陈人所擒。
现代文：玉翅二年。随从卫国公宇文直南讨，军队失败，为迷人擒获。
English: In the second year of the Jade Wing, he went to the south to discuss with Uwen, a follower of the defense minister, but the army failed, and he was captured by Charming.

古文：陈人将降之，叔毗辞色不挠，遂被害。
现代文：迷人劝其归降，扭邀坚决不从，因而被杀害。
English: Charming persuades him to surrender, but he refuses and is killed.

古文：子廉卿。
现代文：其子是廉卿。
English: His son is Lord Lamson.

古文：荆可，河东猗氏人也。性质朴，容止有异于人。
现代文：曲互，是眯适压人。性情质朴，容貌举止都异于他人。
English: The temperament is simple, the appearance and behavior are different from others.

古文：能苦身勤力，供养其母，随时甘旨，终无匮乏。
现代文：能够苦身勤力，供养其母亲，各时各节的甘旨，从不缺乏。
English: Able to work hard and provide for his mother, he never lacks the sweetness of every season.

古文：及母丧，水浆不入口三日。
现代文：当其母去世时，三天未曾饮食。
English: When his mother died, he did not eat for three days.

古文：悲号擗踊，绝而复苏者数四。
现代文：悲号不止捶胸顿足，多次昏死过去。
English: More than beating his chest and stamping his feet, he fainted several times.

古文：葬母之后，遂庐于墓侧。昼夜悲哭，负土成坟。
现代文：葬母之后，就在坟墓旁建一草庐，日夜悲哭，负土成坟。
English: After burying his mother, he built a straw bale next to the grave, wept bitterly day and night, and turned the soil into a grave.

古文：蓬发不栉沐，菜食饮水而已。
现代文：蓬头垢面而不梳洗，饮食衹是喝水吃菜。
English: Unkempt and dirty without combing, eating and drinking water and eating vegetables.

古文：然可家旧墓，茔域极大，榛芜至深，去家十余里。
现代文：但是周》家中的旧墓，墓地极大，野草丛生，离家十余里。
English: But the old grave in Zhou's home is a huge cemetery, overgrown with weeds, more than ten miles away from home.

古文：而可独宿其中，与禽兽杂处。哀感远近，邑里称之。
现代文：克可自己一人居住其中，与禽兽为伍哀感远近，邑里都加以称赞。
English: Keke himself lives in one of them, and feels close to the animals. The town praises him.

古文：大统中，乡人以可孝行之至，足以劝励风俗，乃上言焉。
现代文：太筮年间，乡里众人以翅玺孝行至极，足可以劝励风俗，因此上言。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, the people in the village were extremely filial, so they could encourage the customs. Therefore, they were elevated to nobility.

古文：太祖令州县表异之。
现代文：太祖下令州县表彰。
English: Taizu ordered the state and county awards.

古文：及服终之后，犹若居丧。
现代文：至服丧期满之后，还是如服丧时一样。
English: After the mourning period is over, it will be the same as during the mourning period.

古文：大冢宰、晋公护闻可孝行，特引见焉。
现代文：大冢宰、晋公宇文护闻知荆可的孝行，特意接见。
English: Dajian Zhai and Jin Gong Uwen Bao heard about the filial piety of Jing Ke and specially met with him.

古文：与可言论，时有会于护意。
现代文：与荆可谈论，荆可常常能使宇文护满意。
English: You can talk to Jing, and Jing can often make Yu Wenguo satisfied.

古文：而护亦至孝，其母阎氏没于敌境，不测存亡。
现代文：宇文护也是十分孝顺之人，其母阎氏沦陷于敌境，不知生死。
English: Uwenguo was also a very dutiful person. His mother Yan fell into enemy territory and did not know whether she would live or die.

古文：每见可，自伤久乖膝下。
现代文：每次见到荆可，自己哀伤未能服侍母亲。
English: Every time I see Jing Ke, I feel sad for not being able to serve my mother.

古文：重可至性。
现代文：看重荆可的品性。
English: Value Jing Ke's character.

古文：及可卒之后，护犹思其纯孝，收可妻子于京城，恒给其衣食。
现代文：当荆可去世之后，字文濩犹思虑其纯孝，将荆可妻子儿女接到京城，一直供给衣食。
English: When Jing Ke passed away, Zhiwen Yao still thought about his pure filial piety and brought Jing Ke's wife and children to Beijing, providing them with food and clothing.

古文：秦族，上郡洛川人也。
现代文：秦族，是上郡洛人。
English: The Qin people are from Shangguanluo.

古文：祖白、父雚，并有至性，闻于闾里。
现代文：祖秦白、父秦藿，都有至性，在间里有名气。
English: The ancestor, Qin Bai, and the father, Qin Hui, both had supreme qualities and were famous among the people.

古文：魏太和中，板白颍州刺史。
现代文：魏太和年间，授任秦白为颖州刺史。
English: During the Wei and Taiping dynasties, Qin Bai was appointed as the chief historian of Yingzhou.

古文：大统中，板雚鄜城郡守。
现代文：大统年间，授任秦萑为鄘城郡守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Qin Hui was appointed as the governor of Licheng County.

古文：族性至孝，事亲竭力，为乡里所称。
现代文：秦族性情特别孝顺，服侍双亲十分尽力，为乡里所称赞。
English: The Qin people are particularly filial, and they do their best to serve their parents, which is praised by the villagers.

古文：及其父丧，哀毁过礼，每一痛哭，酸感行路。
现代文：为父服丧之时，哀毁遇礼，每次痛哭，都感动路人。
English: At the time of mourning for my father, every time I cried, I moved passers-by.

古文：既以母在，恒抑割哀情，以慰其母意。
现代文：以母亲尚在，所以常抑制自己的哀情，以安慰其母心意。
English: Because his mother is still alive, he often suppresses his sorrow to comfort his mother's heart.

古文：四时珍羞，未尝匮乏。
现代文：四时的珍馐，从来没有匮乏。
English: The four o'clock delicacy, there is never a shortage.

古文：与弟荣先，复相友爱，闺门之中，怡怡如也。
现代文：与弟弟荣先，非常友爱，在家中相敬相爱。
English: He and his younger brother, Rong Xian, were very friendly and respected each other at home.

古文：寻而其母又没，哭泣无时，唯饮水食菜而已。
现代文：不久其母又去世，一直哭泣，仅仅饮水食菜而已。
English: Soon after, her mother passed away. She cried all the time and only drank water and ate vegetables.

古文：终丧之后，犹蔬食，不入房室二十许年。
现代文：服丧完结，还是蔬食，二十多年不入房室。乡里都叹服惊异。
English: After the funeral, he still eats vegetables and hasn't set foot in his room for more than 20 years. The villagers are amazed.

古文：乡里咸叹异之。其邑人王元达等七十余人上其状，有诏表其门闾。
现代文：其邑人王元达等七十余人将他的行状上告，诏书下令表彰其门板。
English: More than 70 people, including Wang Yuanda, a resident of his hometown, appealed against his actions, and the imperial edict ordered that he be commended.

古文：荣先亦至孝。
现代文：荣先亦十分孝顺。
English: Ronsen is also very filial.

古文：遭母丧，哀慕不已，遂以毁卒。
现代文：母亲丧亡之后，哀伤思念不已，为此而去世。
English: After the death of his mother, he grieved and yearned for her, and died as a result.

古文：邑里化其孝行。
现代文：乡里都认为他孝行过人。
English: Everyone in the village thinks he is a very good son.

古文：世宗嘉之，乃下诏曰： 孝为政本，德乃化先，既表天经，又明地义。
现代文：世宗给予表彰，下诏书说： 孝为政之本，德为化之先，既能表明天经，又可明显地义。
English: Sejong gave a commendation, and the next imperial edict said: Filial piety is the foundation of politics, and virtue is the precursor of transformation. It can not only show the scripture, but also clearly show the meaning.

古文：荣先居丧致疾，至感过人，穷号不反，迄乎灭性。
现代文：荣先居丧而得疾病，确实感人，痛哭不已，以至于丧生。
English: It's really moving to hear of someone who died of an illness that came after a great victory, and wept so much that he lost his life.

古文：行标当世，理镜幽明。
现代文：行标当世，理镜幽明。
English: In this day and age, it's all smoke and mirrors.

古文：此而不显，道将何述。
现代文：如此而不能显扬，将如何阐述道。
English: How to do this without being conspicuous will be explained.

古文：可赠沧州刺史，以旌厥异。 
现代文：可追赠沧州刺史，以旌表异行人士。 
English: Cangzhou's history can be traced back to the time of the Han Dynasty.

古文：皇甫遐字永览，河东汾阴人也。
现代文：皇甫遐字永览，是河东汾阴人。
English: Wangfujing, also known as Yongzhan, was a member of the Qin Dynasty in eastern China.

古文：累世寒微，而乡里称其和睦。
现代文：世代寒微，而乡里称赞其和睦。
English: The generation is waning, but the countryside praises its harmony.

古文：遐性纯至，少丧父，事母以孝闻。
现代文：皇甫遐性情纯真，少年丧父，服事母亲以孝闻名。
English: Emperor Fuxi was known for his pure nature, a boy lost his father, and a serving mother was known for filial piety.

古文：保定末，又遭母丧，乃庐于墓侧，负土为坟。
现代文：保定末年，其母又去世，在墓侧结庐居住，负土为坟。
English: In the last years of Baoding, his mother died again, and he lived in a coffin next to the grave, and the earth was used as a grave.

古文：后于墓南作一禅窟，阴雨则穿窟，晴霁则营墓，晓夕勤力，未尝暂停。
现代文：后来在墓南营造一个禅窟，阴雨天则建窟，晴天则建墓，朝夕勤奋努力，从未停止。
English: Later, a Zen grotto was built in the south of the tomb. On cloudy and rainy days, a grotto was built, and on sunny days, a tomb was built. The diligent efforts in the morning and evening never stopped.

古文：积以岁年，坟高数丈，周回五十余步。
现代文：数年之后，坟高达数丈，周围五十多步之大。
English: A few years later, the grave was several stories high, and the area around it was more than fifty paces wide.

古文：禅窟重台两匝，总成十有二室，中间行道，可容百人。
现代文：禅窟重台两匝，共有十二室，中间行道，可以容纳百人。
English: There are twelve rooms in total in the two-tiered main hall of the Zen Grotto, with a walkway in between, and it can accommodate a hundred people.

古文：遐食粥枕块，栉风沐雨，形容枯悴，家人不识。
现代文：皇甫遐食粥枕土块，栉风沐雨，形容枯槁，以至于家人都不认识他。
English: Emperor Fu ate porridge with a pillow of soil, felt the wind and the rain, and was described as withered, so much so that his family did not know him.

古文：当其营墓之初，乃有鸱乌各一，徘徊悲鸣，不离墓侧，若助遐者，经月余日乃去。
现代文：当他开始营造坟墓时，有鹃乌各一只，徘徊悲鸣，不离墓侧，像是帮助皇甫遐一样，经过一月多方才离去。
English: When he began to build the tomb, there was a dragonfly each, lingering and wailing, not leaving the side of the tomb, as if to help the emperor, and it took a month to leave.

古文：远近闻其至孝，竞以米面遗之。
现代文：远近的人间其至孝，都争相送给他米面。
English: People near and far are competing to give him rice noodles.

古文：遐皆受而不食，悉以营佛斋焉。
现代文：皇甫遐接受之后却不食，全都用以礼佛供斋。
English: However, the emperor did not eat after receiving the offering, but used it all to make offerings to Buddha.

古文：郡县表上其状，有诏旌异之。
现代文：郡县将他的行状表上，诏令予以旌表。
English: The county put him on the list and ordered him to be expelled.

古文：张元字孝始，河北芮城人也。祖成，假平阳郡守。
现代文：张互字垄篮，是亚芭越人。祖退盛，代理垩垦眯守。
English: Zhang Jiu Zi Rong Hao was an Aba Viet. His ancestor was Fu Sheng, who acted as his guardian.

古文：父延隽，仕州郡，累为功曹、主簿。
现代文：父亘巡，在州郡为官，历任功曹、主簿。
English: His father, Wataru Wataru, was a government official in Shoushu County, and served as a meritorious officer and chief accountant.

古文：并以纯至，为乡里所推。
现代文：都以纯真为乡里所称赞。
English: All of them were praised by the villagers for their innocence.

古文：元性谦谨，有孝行。
现代文：张元性情谦虚谨慎，有孝行。
English: Zhang Yuan is modest and prudent, and has filial piety.

古文：微涉经史，然精修释典。
现代文：微涉经史着作，却精通佛教典籍。
English: He is familiar with Buddhist classics, although he has written a few books on history.

古文：年六岁，其祖以夏中热甚，欲将元就井浴。
现代文：六岁的时候，其祖父以夏天太热，想带张元到井边沐浴。
English: When he was six years old, his grandfather thought the summer was too hot and wanted to take Zhang Yuan to the well to bathe.

古文：元固不肯从。
现代文：张元怎么也不肯去。
English: Zhang Yuan did not want to go.

古文：祖谓其贪戏，乃以杖击其头曰： 汝何为不肯洗浴？ 元对曰： 衣以盖形，为覆其亵。
现代文：其祖父认为他贪玩，以杖打他的头说： 你为什么不肯洗澡? 张元回答说： 衣服用来盖住形体，遮覆其亵。
English: His grandfather thought he was being playful and hit him on the head with a cane, saying: "Why won't you take a shower?" Zhang Yuan replied: "Clothes are used to cover the body, to cover its shame.

古文：元不能亵露其体于白日之下。 祖异而舍之。
现代文：张元不能在光天化日之下暴露形体。 其祖认为他与众不同而不再勉强他。
English: Zhang Yuan can't expose his body in broad daylight, and his ancestors no longer force him to do so because they think he's different.

古文：南邻有二杏树，杏熟，多落元园中。
现代文：南邻有二棵杏树，杏子熟后，很多都掉落于张元家的庭院之中。
English: There are two apricot trees in the southern neighborhood. After the apricots ripen, many of them fall into the courtyard of Zhang Yuan's house.

古文：诸小儿竞取而食之；元所得者，送还其主。
现代文：各位小儿争相取食；张元所得到的，都送还其主人。
English: The children scrambled for food; whatever Zhang Yuan got was given back to his master.

古文：村陌有狗子为人所弃者，元见，即收而养之。
现代文：村边有被人抛弃的小狗，张元见到后，将之收养起来。
English: When Zhang Yuan saw an abandoned puppy on the edge of the village, he decided to adopt it.

古文：其叔父怒曰： 何用此为？ 将欲更弃之。
现代文：其叔父发怒说： 要它何用? 准备将其抛弃。
English: His uncle said angrily: "What's the use of it? I'm going to throw it away."

古文：元对曰： 有生之类，莫不重其性命。
现代文：张元回答说： 生灵之类，都重其性命。
English: Zhang Yuan replied, "All living things value their lives.

古文：若天生天杀，自然之理。
现代文：如果是天生天杀，是自然之理。
English: If you are born of heaven and die of heaven, that is the law of nature.

古文：今为人所弃而死，非其道也。
现代文：如今此小狗被人抛弃而死，就不合其道。
English: Now it is against the law to be abandoned and die.

古文：若见而不收养，无仁心也。
现代文：如果见到而不收养，便无仁心。
English: If you see that and don't adopt, then you don't have a heart of love.

古文：是以收而养之。 叔父感其言，遂许焉。
现代文：所以要收养它。 叔父被他的话所感动，于是允许他收养。
English: His uncle was so moved by his words that he allowed him to adopt her.

古文：未几，乃有狗母衔一死兔，置元前而去。
现代文：不久，有一母狗衔来一只死免，置于张元面前而去。
English: Not long after, a female dog came with a dead horse and left Zhang Yuan.

古文：及元年十六，其祖丧明三年，元恒忧泣，昼夜读佛经，礼拜以祈福佑。
现代文：当张元十六岁时，其祖父失明三年，张元一直哭泣，曰日夜夜诵读佛经，礼拜而祈求福佑。
English: When Zhang Yuan was 16 years old, his grandfather had been blind for three years. Zhang Yuan cried all the time, recited Buddhist scriptures day and night, and prayed for blessings.

古文：后读药师经，见盲者得视之言，遂请七僧，然七灯，七日七夜，转药师经行道。
现代文：后来读《药师经》，看到盲者得视之言，因而请来七位僧人，点燃了七盏灯，七日七夜，转《药师经》行道。
English: Later, he read the "Pharmacist's Sutra" and saw that the blind could see, so he invited seven monks, lit seven lamps, and walked the path of the "Pharmacist's Sutra" for seven days and seven nights.

古文：每言： 天人师乎！
现代文：经常说： 天人师乎!
English: Everyone said: "Heavenly teacher!"

古文：元为孙不孝，使祖丧明。
现代文：张元为孙不孝，致使祖父失明。
English: Zhang Yuan, as an unfilial grandson, caused his grandfather to go blind.

古文：今以灯光普施法界，愿祖目见明，元求代闇。 如此经七日。
现代文：今天以灯光普施法界，希望祖父恢复光明，张元请求替祖父失明。 如此经过了七天。
English: Today, the lights were used to illuminate the Dharma Realm, hoping that his grandfather would regain his eyesight, and Zhang Yuan asked to be blinded in his grandfather's place.

古文：其夜，梦见一老公，以金鎞治其祖目。
现代文：在夜中，梦见一位老公公，以金钗替其祖父治眼。
English: In the middle of the night, I dreamed of an old man who used a gold hoop to cure his grandfather's eyes.

古文：谓元曰： 勿忧悲也，三日之后，汝祖目必差。 元于梦中喜跃，遂即惊觉，乃遍告家人。
现代文：对张元说： 不必悲伤，三天之后，你祖父的眼就会好了。 张元在梦中特别高兴，因而惊醒，于是遍告家人。
English: He said to Zhang Yuan, "Don't be sad, after three days, your grandfather's eyes will be better." Zhang Yuan was very happy in the dream, so he woke up and told his family.

古文：居三日，祖果目明。
现代文：遇了三天，其祖父眼病果然好了。
English: After three days, his grandfather's eye disease was cured.

古文：其后祖卧疾再周，元恒随祖所食多少，衣冠不解，旦夕扶侍。
现代文：其后祖父再次卧病，张元总是细心照料其饮食，不解衣冠，日夜服侍。
English: After that, his grandfather fell ill again, and Zhang Yuan always carefully took care of his diet, never taking off his clothes, and served him day and night.

古文：及祖殁，号踊，绝而复苏。
现代文：当其祖父去世，号哭顿足，昏晕过去。
English: When his grandfather died, he burst into tears and fainted.

古文：复丧其父，水浆不入口三日。
现代文：接着父亲去世，三日三夜连水浆都没有入口。乡里都十分叹服。
English: Then his father died, and for three days and three nights there was not even a water supply. The whole village was stunned.

古文：乡里咸叹异之。县博士杨轨等二百余人上其状，有诏表其门闾。
现代文：县博士杨轨等二百多人联名申报他的孝行，诏令表彰其门闾。
English: More than 200 people, including the county doctor Yang Rail, jointly declared his filial piety, and the imperial edict commended his disciple.

古文：史臣曰：李棠、柳桧并临危不挠，视死如归，其壮志贞情可与青松白玉比质也。
现代文：史臣曰：李棠、柳桧都是临危不挠，视死如归，这样的壮志贞情可以与青松白玉的质地相比较。
English: Shichen said: Li Tang and Liu Xuan were both tenacious in the face of danger, and regarded death as inevitable. Such dedication and chastity can be compared to the texture of blue pine and white jade.

古文：然桧恩隆加等，棠礼阙饰终，有周之政，于是乎偏矣。
现代文：不过柳桧恩隆加等，李棠却有所不及，似乎有周之政，不是那么全面。
English: However, Liu Xuan and Enlongga are at the top, but Li Tang is not as good, it seems to have Zhou's policy, not so comprehensive.

古文：雄亮衔戴天之痛，叔毗切同气之悲，援白刃而不顾，雪家冤于辇毂。
现代文：雄亮身衔不共戴天之仇，叔毗切于同气的悲痛，持利刃而不顾，报家仇于京师。
English: The title of the hero is not to bear the enemy of heaven, the uncle is close to the grief of the same spirit, to hold the blade regardless, to report the family's revenge to the Beijing division.

古文：观其志节，处死固为易也。
现代文：观其志节，面对死亡本为易事。
English: Looking at his will, it is easy to face death.

古文：荆可、秦族之徒，生自陇亩，曾无师资之训，因心而成孝友，乘理而蹈礼节。
现代文：荆可、秦族等人，在乡村长大，所受老师教训亦有限，因心而成孝友，顺理而蹈礼节。
English: Jing Ke, Qin Zi and others grew up in the countryside and received limited lessons from teachers. They became filial pals from the bottom of their hearts and followed the etiquette as a matter of course.

古文：如使举世若兹，则羲、农何远之有。
现代文：若举世都如此，则羲、农又有多远呢。
English: If this is the case all over the world, how far away are farmers and farmers?

古文：若乃诚感天地，孝通神明，见之于张元矣。
现代文：至于诚感天地，孝通神明，观看张元的事迹就可以了。
English: As for the sincerity of heaven and earth, filial piety, it is enough to watch Zhang Yuan's deeds.

