古文：十年春，王二月。
现代文：思念春季，周历二月。
English: I miss the spring, but the calendar says February.

古文：邾子益来奔。
现代文：邾隐公逃到鲁国。
English: Yan Ying Gong fled to Lu Province.

古文：公会吴伐齐。
现代文：哀公与吴国一起攻打齐国。
English: Aiko and Wu attacked Qi together.

古文：三月戊戌，齐侯阳生卒。
现代文：三月戊戌日，齐侯阳去世。
English: On March 30, Qi Houyang passed away.

古文：夏，宋人伐郑。
现代文：夏季，宋国人攻打郑国。
English: In the summer, the Song people attacked Zheng.

古文：晋赵鞅帅师侵齐。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅率军攻打齐国。
English: Zhao Jun of Jin attacked Qi with his army.

古文：五月公至自伐齐。
现代文：五月，哀公从攻打齐国的战场回来。
English: In May, Aigong returned from the battlefield where he had attacked Qi.

古文：葬齐悼公。
现代文：安葬齐悼公。
English: The funeral and public mourning are over.

古文：卫公孟彄自齐归于卫。
现代文：卫国的公孟彄从齐国回到卫国。
English: The public protector of the country, Meng Xuan, returned to the country from Qi.

古文：薛伯夷卒。
现代文：薛惠公去世。
English: Xue Huigong passed away.

古文：秋，葬薛惠公。
现代文：秋季，安葬薛惠公。
English: In autumn, the funeral of Xue Huigong took place.

古文：冬，楚公子结帅师伐陈。
现代文：冬季，楚国的公子结率领军队攻打陈国。
English: In the winter, the prince of Chu led an army to attack Chen.

古文：吴救陈。
现代文：吴国援救陈国。
English: Wu rescues Chen.

古文：十年春，邾隐公来奔，齐甥也，故遂奔齐。
现代文：十年春季，邾隐公逃亡到鲁国来，他是齐国的外甥，因此就再逃亡到齐国。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Emperor Qianyin fled to the State of Lu. He was a nephew of the State of Qi, so he fled again to the State of Qi.

古文：公会吴子、邾子、郯子伐齐南鄙，师于鄎。
现代文：哀公会合吴王、邾子、郯子攻打齐同南部边境，军队驻扎在鄎地。
English: Wu Wang, Zizi and Zizi attacked the southern border at the same time, and the army was stationed in Handi.

古文：齐人弑悼公，赴于师。
现代文：齐国人杀死齐悼公，向联军发了讣告。
English: The people of Qi killed Qi Wei Gong and sent an obituary notice to the allied forces.

古文：吴子三日哭于军门之外。
现代文：吴王在军门外边号哭三天。
English: King Wu cried for three days outside the military gate.

古文：徐承帅舟师，将自海入齐，齐人败之，吴师乃还。
现代文：徐承率领水军打算从海上进入齐国。齐国人把他打败了，吴军就退兵回国。
English: Xu Cheng led a naval force intending to enter Qi from the sea. The Qi people defeated him, and the Wu army retreated back to the country.

古文：夏，赵鞅帅师伐齐，大夫请卜之。赵孟曰： 吾卜于此起兵，事不再令，卜不袭吉，行也。 
现代文：夏季，赵鞅领兵攻打齐国，大夫请求占卜，赵鞅说： 我为对齐国出兵占卜过，事情不能再卜，占卜也不一定再次吉利，起行！ 
English: In the summer, Zhao Wei led the troops to attack Qi, the doctor asked for divination, Zhao Wei said: I have divined for the alignment of the country, things can not be divined, divination is not necessarily auspicious again, let's go!

古文：于是乎取犁及辕，毁高唐之郭，侵及赖而还。
现代文：因此占取了犁地和辕地，拆毁了高唐的外城，侵袭到赖地然后回去。
English: As a result, they occupied Yanchi and Yanchi, demolished the outer city of Gaotang, invaded Laiji and then returned.

古文：秋，吴子使来复儆师。
现代文：秋季，吴王派人到鲁国来，再次通知出兵。
English: In the autumn, King Wu sent someone to Lu to announce the dispatch of troops once again.

古文：冬，楚子期伐陈。吴延州来季子救陈，谓子期曰： 二君不务德，而力争诸侯，民何罪焉？
现代文：冬季，楚国的子期进攻陈国，吴国的延州来季子救援陈国，对子期说： 两国的国君不致力于德行，而用武力争夺诸侯，百姓有什么罪过呢？
English: In the winter, Zi Zi of Chu attacked Chen, and Zi Zi of Yanzhou of Wu came to Zi Zi to rescue Chen, and said to Zi Zi: The sovereigns of the two countries are not committed to virtue, but use force to compete for princes. What is the fault of the people?

古文：我请退，以为子名，务德而安民。 
现代文：我请求撤退，以此使您得到好名声，请您致力于德行而安定百姓。 
English: I ask you to withdraw, so that you can gain a good reputation, and please devote yourself to virtue and stabilize the people.

古文：乃还。
现代文：于是就撤兵回国。
English: So I came back.

