古文：十有三年春二月，公会纪侯、郑伯。
现代文：十三年春季二月，桓公与纪侯、郑伯会面。
English: In February of the spring of the 13th year, Prince Kan met with Ji Hou and Zheng Bo.

古文：己巳，及齐侯、宋公、卫侯、燕人战。
现代文：己巳日，鲁国军队与齐侯、宋公、卫侯、燕国人的军队交战。
English: On the same day, the Lu army fought against the armies of Qi Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou and Yan Guozhong.

古文：齐师、宋师、卫师、燕师败绩。
现代文：齐国、宋国、卫国、燕国战败。
English: Qi, Song, Wei and Yan were defeated.

古文：三月，葬卫宣公。
现代文：三月，安葬卫宣公。
English: In March, he was given a state funeral.

古文：夏，大水。
现代文：夏季，鲁国发大水。
English: In summer, there is a lot of water in Lu.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋天七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬十月。
现代文：冬天十月，无事。
English: Winter, October, nothing.

古文：十三年春，楚屈瑕伐罗，鬥伯比送之。
现代文：十三年春季，楚国的屈瑕进攻罗国，鬥伯比为他送行。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Chu attacked Luo, and Duobobobi saw him off.

古文：还，谓其御曰： 莫敖必败，举趾高，心不固矣。 
现代文：回来时，对他的御者说： 莫敖一定失败。走路把脚抬得很高，表明他的心神不稳定了。 
English: When he came back, he said to his driver, "You must have failed." When he walked, he raised his feet very high, indicating that his mind was unstable.

古文：遂见楚子曰： 必济师。 
现代文：于是进见楚武王，说： 一定要增派军队！ 
English: So he went to see King Chuwu and said, "We must send more troops!"

古文：楚子辞焉。入告夫人邓曼。
现代文：楚武王拒绝了，回宫告诉夫人邓曼。
English: King Chuwu refused and returned to the palace to tell his wife, Dunman.

古文：邓曼曰： 大夫其非众之谓，其谓君抚小民以信，训诸司以德，而威莫敖以刑也。
现代文：邓曼说： 大夫鬥伯比的意思不在人数的多少，而是说君王要以诚信来镇抚百姓，以德义来训诫官员，而以刑法来使莫敖畏惧。
English: Dunman said: "Dr Bobby's point is not about numbers, it's about the king using honesty to calm the people, morality to discipline officials and criminal law to instil fear.

古文：莫敖狃于蒲骚之役，将自用也，必小罗。
现代文：莫敖已经满足于蒲骚这一次战功，他会自以为是，必然轻视罗国。
English: Mo Yan has been satisfied with Puxao's war exploits this time. He will be self-righteous and will inevitably despise Luo Guo.

古文：君若不镇抚，其不设备乎。
现代文：君王如果不加控制，不是等于不设防范吗！
English: If the monarch does not exercise control, is it not tantamount to failing to take precautions?

古文：夫固谓君训众而好镇抚之，召诸司而劝之以令德，见莫敖而告诸天之不假易也。
现代文：鬥伯比所说的请君王训诫百姓而好好地安抚督察他们，召集官员们而勉之以美德，见到莫敖而告诉他上天对他的过错是不会宽恕的。
English: To which Bobby replied, "Ask the king to admonish the people and pacify them well, to inspect them, to summon the officials and encourage them to virtue, and to tell him that heaven will not forgive his faults."

古文：不然，夫岂不知楚师之尽行也。 
现代文：不是这样，鬬大夫难道不知道楚国军队已经全部出发了？ 
English: Isn't that right? Doesn't Dr. Zou know that all the Chu troops have already left?

古文：楚子使赖人追之，不及。
现代文：楚王派赖国人追赶屈瑕，没有追上。
English: The king of Chu sent his compatriots to catch up with Qu, but they did not catch up.

古文：莫敖使徇于师曰： 谏者有刑。 
现代文：莫敖派人在军中通告： 敢于进谏的人要受刑罚！ 
English: Mo Yan sent someone to announce in the army: Those who dare to enter the castle will be punished!

古文：及鄢，乱次以济。
现代文：到达鄢水，楚军由于渡河而次序大乱。
English: Arriving at Surabaya, the Chu army crossed the river and caused a great disturbance.

古文：遂无次，且不设备。
现代文：全军乱七八糟毫无秩序，而且又不设防。
English: The whole army was in disarray, without order, and unguarded.

古文：及罗，罗与卢戎两军之。大败之。
现代文：到达罗国，罗国和卢戎的军队从两边夹攻楚军，把楚军打得大败。
English: The armies of Dada Luo, Luo and Lu Rong attacked the Chu army from both sides and defeated the Chu army.

古文：莫敖缢于荒穀，群帅囚于冶父以听刑。
现代文：莫敖吊死在荒谷，其他将领们被囚禁在冶父，等待处罚。
English: Mo Yan was hanged to death in a barren valley, and the other generals were imprisoned in Yechu, awaiting punishment.

古文：楚子曰： 孤之罪也。 
现代文：楚武王说： 这是我的罪过。 
English: King Chu Wu said: This is my fault.

古文：皆免之。
现代文：把将领们都赦免了。
English: He pardoned the generals.

古文：宋多责赂于郑，郑不堪命，故以纪、鲁及齐与宋、卫、燕战。
现代文：宋国多次向郑国索取财货，郑国实在不能忍受，所以率领纪、鲁两国的军队和齐、宋、卫、燕四国的军队交战。
English: Song repeatedly demanded money and goods from Zheng, which Zheng could not bear, so he led the armies of Ji and Lu to fight against the armies of Qi, Song, Wei and Yan.

古文：不书所战，后也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载战争的地点，是由于桓公迟到了。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record the location of the war, due to Huan Gong's late arrival.

古文：郑人来请修好。
现代文：郑国派人来鲁国，请求重修旧好。
English: Zheng Guo sent a man to Lu Guo to ask him to restore the old friendship.

