古文：◎世宗上世宗光天兴运文德武功圣明仁孝皇帝，讳雍，本讳乌禄，太祖孙，睿宗子也。
现代文：世宗光天兴运文德武功圣明仁孝皇帝，讳名雍，本名叫乌禄，是太祖的孙子，睿宗的儿子。
English: Emperor Shizong Guangtian Xingyun Wende Wu Gong Sheng Ming Ren Xiao, alias Yong, real name Ulu, is the grandson of the great-grandfather, the son of Ruizong.

古文：母曰贞懿皇后李氏。
现代文：他的母亲是贞懿皇后李氏。
English: His mother was Empress Zhengyi of the Yi Dynasty.

古文：天辅七年癸卯岁，生于上京。
现代文：天辅七年，乌禄诞生在上京。
English: In the seventh year of Tenshu, Uroku was born in Kyoto.

古文：体貌奇伟，美须髯，长过其腹，胸间有七子如北斗形。
现代文：乌禄身体伟岸，相貌奇特，须髯很美，长过腹部。他的胸部有七个颗粒状的痣，排列好像北斗七星的形状。
English: Ulu has a great body and a strange appearance. His beard is very beautiful and grows over his belly. His chest has seven granular moles, arranged in the shape of the Big Dipper.

古文：性仁孝，沉静明达。
现代文：乌禄生性仁爱孝悌，沉静明达。
English: Oroku is benevolent, filial and calm.

古文：善骑射，国人推为第一，每出猎，耆老皆随而观之。
现代文：他善于骑马射箭，国内人民推崇他为第一，每次他出去打猎，老年人都跟随去看他打猎。
English: He is good at horse riding and archery, the people of the country respect him as the first, and every time he goes hunting, the elderly follow him to watch him hunt.

古文：皇统间，以宗室子例授光禄大夫，封葛王，为兵部尚书。
现代文：皇统年间，乌禄以宗室子弟的身份按惯例被授予光禄大夫，封葛王、兵部尚书。
English: During the period of imperial rule, Uroku, as a son of the imperial family, was awarded the title of doctor of Guanglu, the title of King of Ge, and the title of Hyobusho.

古文：天德初，判会宁牧。
现代文：天德初年，兼会宁牧。
English: In the first year of Tiande, Ningmu will also be held.

古文：明年，判大宗正事，改中京留守，俄改燕京，未几，为济南尹。
现代文：第二年，兼大宗正事，又改任中京留守，很快又改燕京留守，没过多久，出任济南府尹。
English: In the second year, he was also in charge of a large number of important matters, and he was transferred to stay in central Beijing, and soon he was transferred to stay in Yanjing, and not long after that, he was appointed as Yin of Jinan.

古文：贞元初，为西京留守，三年，改东京，进封赵王。
现代文：贞元初年，是西京留守，三年，改任东京留守，进封赵王。
English: In the first year of Sadamoto, he stayed in Saikyo, and in the third year, he was transferred to stay in Tokyo, and became Zhao Wang.

古文：正隆二年，例降封郑国公，进封卫国。
现代文：正隆二年，照例降封郑国公，进封卫国。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, he was, as usual, demoted from the title of Zheng Guogong and promoted to the title of Wei Guo.

古文：三年，再任留守，徙封曹国。
现代文：三年，再次出任留守，迁徙封曹国。
English: Three years later, he was absent again and moved to Cao.

古文：六年五月，居贞懿皇后丧。
现代文：六年五月，处在贞懿皇后丧期。
English: In May of the sixth year, during the period of the death of Empress Zhengyi.

古文：一日方寝，有红光照室，及黄龙见寝室上。
现代文：一天，正在就寝，有红光照射室内，以及有黄龙出现在寝室上。
English: One day, while sleeping, there was a red light shining in the room, and a yellow dragon appeared in the bedroom.

古文：又尝夜有大星流入留守第中。
现代文：又曾经在夜间大大的星星流进留守府第中。
English: There was also a time when large stars streamed into the middle of the palace at night.

古文：是岁，东梁水涨溢，暴至城下，水与城等，决女墙石罅中流入城，湍激如涌，城中人惶骇，上亲登城，举酒酹之，水退。
现代文：就在这一年，东梁水涨满溢出来，流到城下，水位和城高相等，冲决女墙石缝从中流进城来，水流湍激汹涌，城里的人们惶恐骇怕，乌禄亲自登上城，举酒祭祷，大水退去。
English: In the same year, the Dongliang water overflowed and flowed under the city. The water level was equal to the height of the city. It broke through the stone cracks of the female wall and flowed into the city. The water flowed furiously. The people in the city were terrified. Ulu personally climbed the city, offered wine and prayed, and the water receded.

古文：海陵南伐，天下骚动。
现代文：海陵向南攻伐，天下骚动。
English: Hailing attacked to the south, the whole world was in an uproar.

古文：是时，籍契丹部人丁壮为兵，部人不愿行，以告使者，使者燥合畏海陵不以告，部人遂反。
现代文：当时，征集契丹部落人壮丁当兵，该部人不愿前往，让使者报告这种情况。使者燥合畏惧海陵不给报告，契丹部人于是造反。
English: At that time, soldiers from the Khitan tribe were being recruited as soldiers, but the members of the department did not want to go, so they asked the emissary to report the situation. The emissary was afraid of the sea and did not report, and the members of the Khitan department then rebelled.

古文：至是，咸平府谋克括里陷韩州，据咸平，将犯东京。
现代文：到这时候，咸平府谋克括里攻陷韩州，占据咸平，将要进犯东京。
English: By this time, Hampyeong was planning to invade Korea, occupy Hampyeong, and attack Tokyo.

古文：八月，起复东京留守。
现代文：八月，乌禄遭逢父母丧事，丧期未满，应召任东京留守。
English: In August, Uroku's parents passed away, and before the period of mourning was over, he was called to stay in Tokyo.

古文：婆速路兵四百来会讨括里，复得城中子弟愿为兵者数百人。
现代文：婆速路军队四百人来会合讨伐括里，又得城中子弟愿意当兵的几百人。
English: Four hundred members of the mother expressway army gathered to fight against the bracket, and several hundred children in the city were willing to be soldiers.

古文：帝舅兴中少尹李石以病免，家居辽阳。
现代文：乌禄的舅舅、兴中少尹李石因为有病免除职务，在辽阳家中闲居。
English: Ulu's uncle, Xingzhong's younger brother Yin Lishi, was relieved of his duties due to illness and is now idle at home in Liaoyang.

古文：戊午，发东京，以石主留务。
现代文：十八日，从东京发兵，让李石主持留守事务。
English: On the 18th, he sent troops from Tokyo to let Li Shi preside over matters while he was away.

古文：贼觇者闻鼙鼓声震天，见旌旗蔽野，傅言国公兵十万且至，贼众至渖州，遁去。
现代文：反贼窥看消息的人听见鼙鼓声震天，看见旌旗遮蔽了田野，回去报说国公的军队十万人将要到了。反贼众人到沈州，逃遁了。
English: The anti-thieves who were spying on the news heard the sound of gongs and drums that shook the sky, saw the banners covering the fields, and went back to report that the prince's army of 100,000 was about to arrive. The anti-thieves all fled to Shenzhou.

古文：会乌延查剌等败贼兵，还至常安县，海陵使婆速路总管完颜谋衍来讨贼，以兵属之。
现代文：会合乌延查剌等打败敌兵，返回到常安县，海陵派遣婆速路总管完颜谋衍来讨伐反贼，把军队归属他领导。
English: He met with Wu Yanchao and others, defeated the enemy soldiers, and returned to Chang'an County. Hailing dispatched the general manager of the expressway to fight against the anti-thieves, and assigned the army to his leadership.

古文：九月，至东京。
现代文：九月，乌禄到东京。
English: In September, Uroku went to Tokyo.

古文：副留守高存福，其女在海陵后宫，海陵使存福伺起居。
现代文：副留守高存福，他的女儿在海陵的后宫，海陵让存福窥伺乌禄的起居活动。
English: Vice-resident Gao Cunfu, his daughter in the harem of Hailing, Hailing let Cunfu spy on Ulu's living activities.

古文：适以造兵器余材造甲数十，存福宣言，留守何为造甲，密使人以白海陵，遂与推官李彦隆托为击球，谋不利。
现代文：当时正好拿造兵器剩余的材料造了数十副铠甲，高存福宣扬说 ：留守为什么要打造铠甲？ 暗中派人把这事报告了海陵，于是乌禄和推官李彦隆假托是打球，谋划准备应付不利。
English: At that time, Gao Cunfu made dozens of suits of armor with the leftover materials from weapons production. Gao Cunfu preached: "Why stay behind to make armor?" He secretly sent someone to report this to Hailing, so Ulu and the commander Li Yanlong pretended to play ball, planning and preparing to deal with the unfavorable situation.

古文：存福家人以其谋来告，平定知军李蒲速越亦言其事。
现代文：存福家人把乌禄的谋划情况报告给海陵，平定知军李蒲速越也来说这件事。
English: Cunfuku's family members reported the situation of the Ulu's planning to Hailing, and Li Pusha Yue, a member of the Peacemaking Intellectuals' Army, also reported the matter.

古文：海陵尝闻上有疾，即使近习来观动静，至是，又使谋良虎图淮北诸王，上知之，心常隐忧。
现代文：海陵曾经听说乌禄有憎恶情绪，就派亲信近臣前来观察动静，到这时候，又派谋良虎与淮北诸王谋划，乌禄知道了这情况，心中常常暗暗忧虑。
English: Hailing once heard that Ulu had a hateful mood, so he sent his close friends and courtiers to come and observe the situation. At this time, he also sent Miao Lianghu to plan with the kings of Huaibei. Ulu knew this situation and was often worried in his heart.

古文：及讨括里还至清河，遇故吏六斤乘传自南来，具言海陵杀其母，杀兄子檀奴、阿里白及枢密使仆散忽土等，又曰： 且遣人来害宗室兄弟矣！ 
现代文：等讨伐括里后返回清河，遇到乘坐驿站车马从南方来的过去的部下小吏六斤，具体说到海陵杀他的母亲，杀他兄长的儿子檀奴、阿里白以及枢密使仆散忽土等人，又说： 将要派人来杀害宗室兄弟了。 
English: When he returned to Qinghe after the crusade, he met his former subordinate, Xiaoli Liujin, who had come from the south on a stagecoach. He specifically mentioned that Hailing had killed his mother, his brother's son, Dangnu, Alibai, and the confidential envoy, Dousan Kuidou, and said, "Someone will be sent to kill my brothers-in-law."

古文：上闻之，益惧。
现代文：乌禄听说这些，更加恐惧。
English: When Ulu heard this, he was even more afraid.

古文：及闻存福图己，事且有迹，李石劝上早图之。
现代文：及至听说存福谋划陷害自己，事情并且有迹象，李石劝告乌禄早些谋划对付这些事。
English: When he heard that Cunfu planned to frame himself, and there were signs of things, Li Shi advised Ulu to plan to deal with these things earlier.

古文：于是，以议备贼事，召官属会清安寺，彦隆先到，存福累召始来，并于座上执之。
现代文：于是，以讨论防备叛贼的事为理由，召集官员僚属在清安寺聚会，彦隆先到，存福被屡次招呼才来，就在座位上逮捕了他。
English: Therefore, on the grounds of discussing the prevention of traitors, officials, colleagues and subordinates were summoned to gather at Cheonan Temple. Yanlong arrived first, and Cunfu was repeatedly invited to come, and he was arrested at his seat.

古文：是月，复有云来自西，黄龙见云中。
现代文：当月，又有祥云从西天而来，黄龙在云中显现。
English: In the same month, another auspicious cloud came from the west, and a yellow dragon appeared in the cloud.

古文：十月辛丑，南征万户完颜福寿、高忠建、卢万家奴等自山东率所领兵二万，完颜谋衍自常安率兵五千皆来附。
现代文：十月二日，南征万户完颜福寿、高忠建、卢万家奴等人率领所辖军队二万人，完颜谋衍从常安率领军队五千人都来南京归附。
English: On October 2, Fu Shou, Gao Zhong Jian, Lu Wan Jia Nong and others, who had led the Southern Expedition of 10,000 households, led the army of 20,000 people under their jurisdiction, and Yan Muyan, who had led the army of 5,000 people from Chang'an, came to Nanjing to annex.

古文：谋衍即以臣礼上谒。
现代文：谋衍当时就以臣礼拜见。
English: At that time, Muyan paid a courtesy call on him.

古文：乙巳，诸军入城，共击杀存福等。
现代文：六日，各路军队进入南京城，共同击杀高存福等人。
English: On the 6th, troops from all directions entered Nanjing City and jointly killed Gao Cunfu and others.

古文：是夜，诸军被甲环卫皇城。
现代文：当天夜间，诸军披甲防卫皇城。
English: On the night of the same day, the troops put on armor to defend the imperial city.

古文：丙午，庆云见，官属诸军劝进，固让良久，于是亲告天太祖庙，还御宣政殿，即皇帝位。
现代文：七日，吉庆的祥云出现，官属各路军队劝谏，完颜雍坚决推让好长时间，终于亲自到太祖庙祭告，返回皇家宣政殿，登上皇帝宝座，自立为帝。
English: On the seventh day, the auspicious cloud of auspiciousness appeared, and the officials and troops of all roads were persuaded, after which Yan Yong firmly pushed for a long time, and finally he personally went to the Great Ancestor's Temple to make a proclamation, returned to the Royal Proclamation Hall, ascended the emperor's throne, and became an emperor.

古文：以完颜谋衍为右副元帅，高忠建元帅左监军，完颜福寿右监军，卢万家奴显德军节度使。
现代文：任命完颜谋衍为右副元帅，高忠建是元帅左监军，完颜福寿是右监军，卢万家奴是显德军节度使。
English: He appointed Guanyan Muyan as the right deputy marshal, Gao Zhongjian as the left marshal, Guanyan Fushou as the right marshal, and Lu Wanjian as the commander of the Xian German Army.

古文：丁未，大赦，改元大定。
现代文：九日，大赦天下，改年号为 大定 。
English: On the 9th, there was a general amnesty, and the name of the year was changed to Dading.

古文：下诏暴扬海陵罪恶数十事。
现代文：下诏书暴露揭示海陵罪恶几十条。
English: The following edict exposes and reveals dozens of crimes committed by Hai Ling.

古文：己酉，飨将士，赐官赏各有差，仍给复三年。
现代文：十一日，犒赏将士，赐予不同等级的奖赏，并予以免除三年徭役。
English: On the 11th day of the month, soldiers were rewarded with different levels of rewards and exempted from three years of military service.

古文：会宁、胡里改、速频等路南伐诸军，会尚书省，奏请以从军来者补诸局司承应人及官吏阙员。
现代文：会宁、胡里改、速频等路南伐的各部队，会合在尚书省，禀奏请求把随从军队来的人，补充到各局司担任承应人以及官吏的缺员。
English: The troops of Huning, Hulicai, Suifen and other southern-marching troops gathered in Shangshu Province, and requested that the people who came from the army should be added to the departments to serve as officers and officials.

古文：上曰： 旧人南征者即还，何以处之。
现代文：皇上说 ：原有的人参加南征就要回来，怎样安排他们呢？
English: The emperor said, "The original people who took part in the Southern Expedition are about to return, so how should we arrange for them?"

古文：必不可阙者，量用新人可也。 
现代文：必不可缺的，考虑使用新人还是可以的。 
English: indispensable, it is still possible to consider using a new person.

古文：辛亥，以利涉军节度使独吉义为参知政事。
现代文：十三日，任命利涉军节度使独吉义为参知政事。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Lishangjun Jiedu to make Du Jiyi a member of the Council of State.

古文：中都留守、西北面行营都统完颜彀英将兵三万驻归化，以为左副元帅。
现代文：中都留守、西北面行营都统完颜彀英率领三万军队驻扎在归化，任命他当左副元帅。
English: Yan Xingying led 30,000 troops stationed in the naturalization and appointed him as the left deputy marshal.

古文：丁巳，出内府金银器物赡军，吏民出财物佐官用者甚众。
现代文：十九日，拿出内府金银器物供养军队，官民献出财物辅佐官用的人很多。
English: On the 19th, gold and silver wares from the inland prefectures were brought out to support the troops, and many people from both the public and private sectors donated goods and materials to be used by the auxiliary officers.

古文：壬戌，以前临潢尹晏为左丞相。
现代文：二十四日，任命前临潢府尹晏为左丞相。
English: On the 24th, former Linyi governor Yin Qi was appointed as minister of the left.

古文：癸亥，诏谕南京太傅、尚书令张浩。
现代文：二十五日，诏谕南京太傅、尚书令张浩。
English: On the 25th, Nanjing Taifu and Shang Shuling ordered Zhang Hao to leave.

古文：甲子，兴平军节度使张玄素上谒。
现代文：二十六日，兴平军节度使张玄素拜谒皇上。
English: On the 26th, the Xingping Army Festival made Zhang Xuan Su pay homage to the emperor.

古文：尚书省奏： 正隆军兴之余，进钱粟者宜量授以官。 
现代文：尚书省禀奏，正隆年兴兵之余，对进献钱、粮的人应该酌情授给他们官职，皇上采纳了他们的意见。
English: According to the imperial edict, after the army was raised in the Year of the Dragon, those who contributed money and grain should be given official posts as appropriate, and the emperor accepted their opinion.

古文：从之。诏遣移剌札八招契丹诸部为乱者。
现代文：诏令派遣移剌札八去招抚契丹诸部作乱的人。
English: The imperial edict ordered the dispatch of eight emissaries to instigate the troublemakers in various departments of the Khitan Empire.

古文：以前肇州防御使神土懑为元帅右都监。
现代文：任命前肇州防御使神土懑为元帅右都监。
English: The appointment of the former Zhaozhou defense made Shen Dujuan the marshal of the right.

古文：十一月己巳朔，以左丞相晏兼都元帅。
现代文：十一月一日，任命左丞相晏兼都元帅。
English: On November 1st, he was appointed as the Minister of the Left, and the Marshal of Japan.

古文：辛未，以户部尚书李石为参知政事。
现代文：三日，任命户部尚书李石为参知政事。
English: On the third day, the head of the household, Shangshu Li Shih, was appointed as the co-governor.

古文：己卯，诏调民间马充军用，事毕还主，死者给价。
现代文：十一日，诏令征调民间马匹补充军用，战事完毕归还原主，战死的给予赔偿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict ordered the requisition of civilian horses to supplement military horses, the return of horses to their original owners after the war, and the payment of compensation for those killed in the war.

古文：阿琐、璋杀同知中都留守事沙离只，阿琐自称中都留守，璋自称同知留守事，使石家奴等来上表贺。
现代文：阿琐、璋杀死同知中都留守事沙离只，阿琐自称中都留守，璋自称同知留守事，派石家奴等人前来上表朝贺。
English: Azo and Zou killed their classmates and left everything behind. Azo claimed to have left everything behind, Zou claimed to have left everything behind, and sent Shijiazhuang slaves and others to come to the table for morning greetings.

古文：辛巳，以如中都期日诏群臣。
现代文：十三日，把前往中都的日期诏告群臣。
English: On the 13th, the date of the trip to the capital was announced to the ministers.

古文：壬午，诏中都转运使左渊曰： 凡宫殿张设毋得增置，无役一夫以扰百姓，但谨围禁，严出入而己。 
现代文：十四日，诏令中都转运使左渊说： 凡是宫殿中的陈设不得增加设置，不要使用一个役夫以免打扰百姓，只是要谨慎围禁、严格出入罢了。 
English: On the fourteenth day of the month, the edict was sent to Zuoyuan, saying, "All the furnishings in the palace must not be added to, and you must not use a servant so as not to disturb the people, but you must be careful not to encircle them, and you must enter and leave the palace strictly."

古文：以尚书右司员外郎完颜兀古出为诏谕高丽使。癸未，遣权元帅左都监吾札忽、右都监神土懑、广宁尹仆散浑坦讨契丹诸部。
现代文：任命尚书右司员外郎完颜兀古出当诏谕高丽使，十五日，派遣权元帅左都监吾札忽、右都监神土懑、广宁尹仆散浑坦讨伐契丹诸部。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Koryo envoy was dispatched with the authority to dispatch the marshal of the left capital, Gusaku, the marshal of the right capital, Dosa, and the marshal of the broad capital, Yin, to fight against the Khitan provinces.

古文：甲申，追尊皇考幽王为皇帝，谥简肃，庙号睿宗，皇妣蒲察氏曰钦慈皇后，李氏曰贞懿皇后。
现代文：十六日，追尊皇帝的父亲豳王为皇帝，谥号叫简肃，庙号是睿宗；皇帝的母亲蒲察氏叫钦慈皇后，李氏叫贞懿皇后。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the emperor's father, Shao Wang, was crowned emperor. His posthumous name was Jian Su, and his temple name was Ruizong. The emperor's mother was called Empress Qin Ci by the Bucha clan, and Empress Zhengyi by the Li clan.

古文：群臣上尊号曰仁明圣孝皇帝。
现代文：群臣赠上尊号叫仁明圣孝皇帝。
English: He was given the honorific title of Emperor Ninmyeongseonghyang by his vassals.

古文：乙酉，追复东昏王帝号，谥武灵，庙号闵宗，诏中外。
现代文：十七日，追补、恢复东昏王的帝号，谥号为武灵，庙号是闵宗，诏告中外。
English: On the 17th, the imperial title of Dongguan King was supplemented and restored. His posthumous name was Wuling, and his temple name was Shanzong. This was announced to the world.

古文：封子实鲁剌为许王，胡土瓦为楚王。
现代文：封皇子实鲁剌为许王，胡土瓦为楚王。
English: The crown prince, Shiluba, became King Xu, and Hutuva became King Chu.

古文：戊子，辞谒太祖庙及贞懿皇后园陵。
现代文：二十日，拜谒太祖庙和贞懿皇后园陵，告辞。
English: On the 20th, he paid his last respects at the Grand Ancestor's Temple and the Tomb of Empress Zhengyi.

古文：己丑，如中都。
现代文：二十一日，往中都进发。
English: On the twenty-first day, they all set out for the middle.

古文：次小辽口。使中都留守宗宪先往。
现代文：到小辽口，派中都留守宗宪先往中都去。
English: In Xiaoliakou, all the members of the middle faction stayed behind to defend the constitution, and all the members of the middle faction went there first.

古文：壬辰，次梁鱼务。枢密副使，北面行营都统白彦敬、南京留守北面行营副统纥石烈志宁以所统军数来上。
现代文：二十四日，到梁鱼务，枢密副使、北面行营都统白彦敬、南京留守北面行营副都统纥石烈志宁带领所统军队几次来朝见。
English: On the 24th, at Liangyu, the vice-secretary of the privy council, Bai Yanjing, the deputy commander of the Northern Expeditionary Army, and Shishi Retshinin, the deputy commander of the Northern Expeditionary Army, who stayed in Nanjing, led the unified army to visit the imperial court several times.

古文：安武军节度使爽来归。
现代文：安武军节度使爽前来归附。
English: The Anwu army came to attach it.

古文：乙未，完颜元宜等弑海陵于扬州。
现代文：二十七日，完颜元宜等人在扬州杀了海陵。二十八日，到义州。
English: On the 27th, Gan Yan Yuan Yi and others killed Hailing in Yangzhou. On the 28th, they went to Yizhou.

古文：丙申，次义州。丁酉，宋人破陕州，防御使折可直降，同知防御使事李柔立死之。
现代文：二十九日，宋人攻破陕州，防御使折可直投降了宋人，同知防御使李柔立死于这场战争。
English: On the 29th, the Song people invaded Shaanxi Province. The Song people surrendered to the defense of the Song people, and the defense of the Song people caused Li Ruling to die in this war.

古文：十二月乙卯，次三河县，左副元帅完颜彀英来朝。
现代文：十二月十七日，到三河县，左副元帅完颜彀英来朝见。
English: On December 17th, in Mikawa County, the Left Vice-Marshal Kanen Shouying came to the Imperial Court.

古文：丙辰，次通州，延安尹唐括德温来朝。
现代文：十八日，到通州，延安府尹唐括德温来朝见。
English: On the 18th, he went to Tongzhou, Yan'an, and met with Yin Tang and Dewen.

古文：丁巳，至中都。
现代文：十九日，到达中都。
English: On the 19th, they arrived in the capital.

古文：戊午，谒太祖庙。
现代文：二十日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 20th, he visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：巳未，御贞元殿，受群臣朝。
现代文：二十一日，御临贞元殿，接受群臣朝拜。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Empress Dowager Shogen came to the Imperial Palace to receive a group of courtiers for morning worship.

古文：庚申，以元帅左监军高忠建等为报谕宋国使。
现代文：二十二日，派元帅左监军高忠建等人出任报谕宋国使。
English: On the 22nd, Gao Zhongjian, Marshal of the Left Supervision Army, and others were sent to serve as envoys to the Song Dynasty.

古文：壬戍，诏军士自东京扈从至京师者复三年。
现代文：二十四日，诏令军士中从东京护驾到达京师的予以免除三年徭役。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that the sergeants who escorted the division from Tokyo to Kyoto would be exempted from three years of military service.

古文：同知河间尹高昌福上书陈便宜，上览之再三。
现代文：同知河间尹高昌福上书陈述应该斟酌处理的事宜，皇上阅览多遍。
English: The Emperor read the letter of Kawama Yin Gao Changfu several times, as he knew the matter should be handled with discretion.

古文：诏内外大小职官陈便宜。
现代文：诏令内外大小职员官吏陈述建议。
English: The edict ordered officials of all ranks and positions to submit their proposals.

古文：丙寅，诏左副元帅完颜彀英规措南边及陕西等路事。
现代文：二十八日，诏令左副元帅完颜彀英规划筹措南部边疆以及陕西等路的事情。
English: On the 28th, he ordered the left deputy marshal to complete the planning and financing of the southern border and Shaanxi and other roads.

古文：二年正月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：大定二年正月初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the second year of Dading.

古文：伐鼓用币，上彻乐减膳，不视朝。
现代文：用钱币敲鼓。皇上撤掉娱乐减缩膳食，不临朝处理政务。
English: Using coins to beat a drum, the emperor removed entertainment and reduced the size of meals, and dealt with government affairs without coming to the imperial court.

古文：庚午，上谓宰相曰： 进贤退不肖，宰相之职也。
现代文：初三，皇上对宰相说 ：推荐贤才，退黜不贤的人，这是宰相的职责。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the emperor said to the prime minister, "It is the prime minister's duty to recommend those who are virtuous and reject those who are not."

古文：有才能高于己者，或惧其分权，往往不肯引置同列，朕甚不取。
现代文：有才能比自己高的人，有时害怕他分权，往往不肯引荐安置在与自己平行的位置，这种做法朕不能接受。
English: I can't accept that people who are more talented than I am are sometimes afraid of his decentralization and often refuse to be promoted and placed in a position parallel to my own.

古文：卿等毋以此为心。 
现代文：卿等不要在这种做法上用心。 
English: Sir, don't worry about it.

古文：以前翰林学士承旨致仕翟永固为尚书左丞，济南尹仆散忠义为右丞。
现代文：任命承旨辞官的前翰林学士翟永固当尚书左丞，济南府尹仆散忠义当右丞。
English: Former Hanlin Scholar Zou Yonggu Dang Shangshu, left, and Jinan Prefecture official Yin Duan Zhongyi, right, were appointed as judges.

古文：都统斜哥、副统完颜布辉坐擅易置中都官吏，斜哥除名，布辉削两阶，罢之。
现代文：都统斜哥、副统完颜布辉因为擅自更换中都的官吏而犯罪，斜哥被除名，布辉被削去两级官职，解除了副统职务。
English: Yanbu Hui, the brother and deputy leader of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, committed a crime because he changed the officials of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China without authorization. Yanbu Hui was expelled from the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Bu Hui was stripped of his two-level official position, and he was relieved of his deputy leadership position.

古文：辛未，御太和殿，宴百官，宗戚命妇赐赉有差。
现代文：初四，驾临太和殿，宴请百官，对宗室亲戚命妇各有不同等级的赏赐。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, they arrived at the Palace of the Empress Dowager and held a banquet for hundreds of officials. The wives of the relatives of the imperial family received different levels of rewards.

古文：壬申，敕御史台检察六部文移，稽而不行，行而失当，皆举劾之。
现代文：初五，命令御史台检查六部转交的文件，拖延而不实行的、实行但却失当的，都要对它们举报弹劾。
English: On the fifth day of the month, he ordered the History Channel to examine the six transferred documents, and if they were delayed and not implemented, or implemented but improperly, they should be reported for impeachment.

古文：甲戌，除迎赛神佛禁令。
现代文：初七，发布免除迎赛神佛的禁令。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, a ban on exempting gods and Buddhas from the competition was issued.

古文：乙亥，如大房山。
现代文：初八，往大房山去。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, go to Dafang Mountain.

古文：丙子，献享山陵，礼毕，欲猎而还，左丞相晏等谏曰： 边事未宁，不宜游幸。 
现代文：初九，向山陵献上祭祀的物品，礼仪完毕，想打猎返回，左丞相晏等人劝谏道 ：边境的战事没有安宁，不适合游玩打猎。 
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, they offered sacrificial items to the mountain mausoleum. After the ceremony was over, they wanted to return to hunting, but they were dissuaded by the Minister of the Left, Yao, and others, who said that the war on the border was not peaceful and it was not suitable to go hunting.

古文：戊寅，还宫。
现代文：十一日，返回宫中。
English: On the 11th day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：因谕晏等曰： 朕常慕古之帝王，虚心受谏。
现代文：皇上告诉晏等人说： 朕常常羡慕古代的帝王，虚心接受谏议。
English: The emperor told Zou and the others, "I often envy the emperors of ancient times, and I humbly accept their criticism.

古文：卿等有言即言，毋缄默以自便。 
现代文：卿等有话就说，不要沉默不语来使自己方便。 
English: Sir, when you have something to say, say it. Don't be silent to make yourself comfortable.

古文：辛巳，以兵部尚书可喜等谋反，伏诛，诏中外。
现代文：十四日，因为兵部尚书可喜等阴谋造反，按法处他死刑，并诏告中外。
English: On the 14th, he was sentenced to death in accordance with the law for conspiring and rebelling against the Ministry of Military Affairs, and was denounced both at home and abroad.

古文：是日，赐扈从猛安谋克甲士下至阿里喜有差。
现代文：当天，对扈从猛安谋克甲士往下直到阿里喜给予不同的赏赐。
English: On the same day, different rewards were given to students from Meng'an to Kacheng to Alixi.

古文：遣左副点检蒲察阿孛罕等赏赉河南将士。
现代文：派遣左副点检蒲察阿孛罕等人去表彰赏赐河南将士。
English: Send the deputy left point inspector Pucha Ajhan and others to commend and reward the Henan soldiers.

古文：以前劝农使移剌元宜为御史大夫。
现代文：任命前劝农使移剌元宜为御史大夫。
English: Before the appointment, he advised the agricultural envoy to move to Gyeongbuk to become a doctor of history.

古文：诏前工部尚书苏保衡、太子少保高思廉振赐山东百姓粟帛，无妻者具姓名以闻。
现代文：诏令前工部尚书苏保衡、太子少保高思廉赈济赐予山东百姓粮食布帛，对没有娶妻的登记具体姓名上报。
English: The edict ordered the former Ministry of Industry to give grain and cloth to the people of Shandong Province, and to report the specific names of those who did not marry.

古文：庚寅，行纳粟补官法。
现代文：二十三日，施行纳粟补官法。
English: On the 23rd, the Law of Naxos Supplementing Official came into effect.

古文：遣右副元帅完颜谋衍率师讨萧窝斡。
现代文：派遣右副元帅完颜谋衍率领军队讨伐萧窝斡。
English: Right Vice-Marshal Guan Yan Muyan was dispatched to lead the army to fight against Xiao Wo.

古文：壬辰，上谓宰执曰： 朕即位未半年，可行之事甚多，近日全无敷奏。
现代文：二十五日，皇上对宰执说： 朕即位不到半年，可办的事务很多，近日完全没有禀报陈述事情的奏章。
English: On the 25th, the emperor said to the vice-regent: I have been on the throne for less than half a year, there are many things that can be done, and recently there has been no report to report things.

古文：朕深居九重，正赖卿等赞襄，各思所长以闻，朕岂有倦怠。 
现代文：朕居住在九重宫院以内，正依赖卿等协助，各自的考虑经常说给朕知道，朕难道敢有倦怠？ 
English: I live within the confines of the Imperial Palace, and I am dependent on the assistance of my lord and others. Their respective considerations often tell me, "How dare I get tired?"

古文：癸巳，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲午，上谓宰执曰： 卿等当参民间利害，及时事之可否，以时敷奏。
现代文：二十七日，皇上对宰执说 ：卿等应当检查民间的利和害，以及时事的是可以还是不可以，按时禀奏陈述。
English: On the 27th, the emperor said to the vice-regent: Sirs, you should examine the benefits and harms of the people, as well as whether the current affairs are acceptable or not, and make a statement on time.

古文：不可公余辄从自便，优游而已。 
现代文：不可以在公事之余就自由自在，悠闲游玩而已。 
English: It is not possible to be free and easy and just have a leisurely stroll outside of work.

古文：命河北、山东、陕西等路征南步军并放还家。
现代文：命令将河北、山东、陕西等路征南步军一并发放返回家园。
English: The order was issued to the troops of the Southern Expeditionary Force sent to conquer the provinces of Hebei, Shandong and Shaanxi to return home together.

古文：咸平、济州军二万入屯京师。
现代文：咸平、济州的军队两万人进入京城驻扎戍守。
English: Twenty thousand troops from Hampyeong and Jeju entered the capital to garrison it.

古文：丙申，以西南路招讨使完颜思敬、兵部尚书阿邻督北边将士。
现代文：二十九日，命令西南路招讨使完颜思敬、兵部尚书阿邻去督统北部边疆的将士。
English: On the 29th, he ordered the Southwest Road to solicit soldiers from Yan Sijie and Shangshu Aqiang of the Military Department to govern the northern frontier.

古文：二月己亥，前翰林待制大颖以言盗贼忤海陵，杖而除名，起为秘书丞。
现代文：二月二日，前翰林待制大颖因为说盗贼的话触怒了海陵，被杖笞并且除名，现在起用当秘书丞。
English: On February 2nd, the former Hanlin Da Ying, who had angered Hailing by saying that he was a thief, was caned and expelled, and is now working as a secretary.

古文：补阙马钦以谄事海陵得幸，除名。
现代文：马钦因为谄媚海陵而得到宠爱，原来补充缺员，现在予以除名。
English: Machin, who was favored because of his affinity for Hai Ling, was originally appointed to fill a vacancy, but has now been removed from the list.

古文：庚子，诏前户部尚书梁钅求、户部郎中耶律道安抚山东百姓。
现代文：三日，诏令前户部尚书梁钅求、户部郎中耶律道去安抚山东百姓。
English: On the third day, the emperor ordered former head of the household, Shang Shuliang, to go to appease the people of Shandong.

古文：招谕盗贼或避贼及避徭役在他所者，并令归业，及时农种，无问罪名轻重，并与原免。
现代文：招抚告诉盗贼，或者逃避盗贼以及躲避徭役在其他地方的人，一并命令他们归家从事原来的职业，及时务农播种，不问罪名轻重，和原来的罪名一起免掉。
English: Those who have told the thieves, or those who have escaped from the thieves and those who have escaped from the guards in other places, are also ordered to return home and engage in their original occupation, timely do farming and sowing, regardless of the severity of the crime, and are exempted together with the original crime.

古文：壬寅，太傅、尚书令张浩来见。
现代文：五日，太傅、尚书令张浩来朝见。
English: On the fifth day, the Taifu and Shang Shuling ordered Zhang Hao to come to see them in the morning.

古文：癸卯，以上初即位，遣辽阳主簿石抹移迭、东京曲院都监移剌葛补招契丹叛人，为白彦敬、纥石烈志宁所害，并赠镇国上将军，令其家各食五品俸，仍收录其子。
现代文：六日，因为皇上刚即位的时候，派遣辽阳主簿石抹移迭、东京麴院都监移剌葛补去招抚契丹族叛变的人，但这二人被白彦敬、纥石烈志宁所害，同时赠谥他们二人为镇国上将军，命令他们的家属各按五品俸禄待遇，并且收留录用他们的儿子当官。
English: On the 6th, because when the emperor had just ascended to the throne, he sent Liaoyang's chief magistrate Shi Mianzhong and Tokyo's capital magistrate Shiyin Gaozhu to appease the rebels of the Khitan people. However, these two were victimized by Bai Yanjing and Shiyi Leshining. At the same time, he presented them both with the title of Zhenguo Shangzhen, ordered their families to be treated according to the five-star salary, and hired their sons as officials.

古文：甲辰，以张浩为太师，尚书令如故，御史大夫移剌元宜为平章政事。
现代文：七日，任命张浩当太师，保留原来的尚书令职务。任命御史大夫移剌元宜为平章政事。
English: On the 7th, Zhang Hao was appointed as the Grand Master, retaining the original post of Shang Shuling. The appointment of the Grand Historian was transferred to the Political Affairs Department.

古文：辛亥，定世袭猛安谋克迁授格。
现代文：十四日，规定世袭猛安谋克迁授格。
English: On the 14th, it was stipulated that hereditary and violent amnesty would be granted.

古文：壬子，以太保、左领军大都督奔睹为都元帅，太保如故。
现代文：十五日，任命太保、左领军大都督奔睹为都元帅，保留原任太保职务。
English: On the fifteenth day, he appointed Taiho, the leader of the left-wing army, and the grand marshal of the capital, retaining his original position as Taiho.

古文：癸丑，诏降萧玉、敬嗣晖、许霖等官，放归田里。
现代文：十六日，诏令释放投降的萧玉、敬嗣辉、许霖等官员，让他们回归乡里。
English: On the 16th, Xiao Yu, Jing Zhi Hui, Xu Lin and other officials who had surrendered were released and allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：甲寅，复用进士为尚书省令史。
现代文：十七日，再用进士为尚书省令史。
English: On the seventeenth day, Jinji was used again to write the history of the provincial government.

古文：丙辰，嵩州刺史石抹术突刺等败宋兵于寿安县。
现代文：十九日，嵩州刺史石抹术突剌等人在寿安县打败宋国军队。
English: On the 19th, Song Zhou and others defeated the Song army in Shou'an County.

古文：丁巳，郑州防御使蒲察世杰取陕州。
现代文：二十日，郑州防御使蒲察世杰攻取陕州。
English: On the 20th, the defense of Zhengzhou allowed Putsa Shijie to capture Shaanxi.

古文：甲子，诏都元帅奔睹开府山东，经略边事。
现代文：二十七日，诏令都元帅奔睹到山东创建州府，经管治理边疆事务。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict ordered the general to rush to Shandong to set up a prefectural government to administer border affairs.

古文：泽州刺史特末哥及其妻高福娘伏诛。
现代文：泽州刺史特末哥以及他的妻高福娘因为犯罪被杀。
English: The youngest brother of the Zezhou assassin Stern and his wife, Gao Fu's daughter, were killed for their crimes.

古文：闰月甲戌，上谓宰臣曰： 比闻外议言，奏事甚难。
现代文：闰二月七日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 最近听到外面有人议论，说禀报事情很难。
English: On February 7th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Recently, I have heard some people outside say that it is difficult to report things falsely.

古文：朕于可行者未尝不从。
现代文：朕对于可行的谏议不曾有不听从的。
English: I have never disobeyed a workable suggestion.

古文：自今敷奏勿有所隐，朕固乐闻之。 
现代文：从今天起陈述奏议不要有所隐瞒，朕本来高兴听这些。 
English: I would have been happy to hear that from today, the presentation of motions should not be secretive.

古文：戊子，上谓宰臣曰： 臣民上书者，多敕尚书省详阅，而不即具奏，天下将谓朕徒受其言而不行也。
现代文：二十一日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 大臣和平民上书奏事的，多数令上书省详细阅览，然而不立刻全部禀奏，天下人将会说朕白听这些意见而不去实行。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Ministers and commoners who have submitted their reports should be ordered by the majority to read the reports in detail, but they should not submit them all at once. The people of the world will say that I did not listen to these opinions and did not implement them.

古文：其亟条具以闻。 
现代文：要立即分条目全部拿来让我知道。 
English: You'll have to break it all down and let me know.

古文：庚寅，诏平章政事移剌元宜泰州路规措边事。
现代文：二十三日，诏令平章政事移剌元宜到泰州路规划筹措边境的事情。
English: On the 23rd, Pingzhang issued an edict to transfer the government affairs and Yuan Yi to Taizhou Road to plan and raise the border.

古文：辛卯，太和、厚德殿火。
现代文：二十四日，太和殿和厚德殿失火。
English: On the 24th, the Taihe-den and the Hōtoku-den went up in flames.

古文：乙未，尚书兵部侍郎温敦术突剌等与窝斡战，败于胜州。
现代文：二十八日，尚书兵部侍郎温敦术突剌等人与窝斡交战，在胜州打了败仗。
English: On the 28th, Shang Shuxu's attendant of the military department, Wyndon Shuchuan, and others fought with Wo Yuxuan and lost the battle in Shengzhou.

古文：三月癸亥，参知政事独吉义罢。
现代文：三月七日，免去参知政事独吉义官职。
English: On March 7, he was removed from the post of vice-premier.

古文：元帅左都监徒单合嘉败宋将吴璘于德顺州。
现代文：元帅左都监徒单合喜在德顺州打败宋将吴瞞。
English: The marshal Zuodou inmate Shan Hexi defeated Song general Wu Xie in Deshunzhou.

古文：甲辰，追削李通官职。
现代文：八日，削去已故的李通官职。
English: On the 8th, the late Li Tong was removed from his post.

古文：乙巳，免南京正隆丁夫贷役钱。
现代文：九日，免除南京正隆年间丁夫贷役钱。
English: On the 9th, he exempted Dingfu Loan Service Money from Nanjing Zhenglong.

古文：辛亥，以廉平诫谕中外官吏。
现代文：十五日，用廉政清平的道理告诫晓谕朝廷内外官员。
English: On the 15th, officials inside and outside the imperial court were admonished with the principle of clean government.

古文：癸亥，诏河南、陕西、山东，昨因捕贼，良民被虏为贼者，厘正之。
现代文：二十七日，诏令河南、陕西、山东，往日因为捕贼，而有良民误被当贼捕抓的，予以订正。
English: On the 27th, the edict of Henan, Shaanxi and Shandong was revised, stating that in the past, because of catching thieves, some good people were mistakenly arrested as thieves.

古文：四月己巳，右副元帅完颜谋衍等败窝斡于长泺。
现代文：四月三日，右副元帅完颜谋衍等在长泊打败窝斡。
English: On April 3rd, the Right Vice-Marshal, Guan Yan Muyan, and others defeated Hou Yu in Changbo.

古文：辛未，降废帝亮为海陵郡王。
现代文：五日，追降废帝海陵叫海陵郡王。
English: On the fifth day, the pursuit of the dethroned Emperor Hailing was called Hailing County King.

古文：乙亥，诏减御膳及宫中食物之半。
现代文：九日，诏令减少御膳以及宫中食物的一半。
English: On the 9th, the Emperor decreed that the Imperial Diet and the food in the Imperial Palace should be reduced by half.

古文：夏国遣使来贺即位，及进方物，及贺万春节。
现代文：夏国派遣使者来祝贺即位，不但进献土产品，而且庆贺万寿节。
English: Xia sent an envoy to congratulate the enthronement, not only to donate soil products, but also to celebrate the longevity festival.

古文：右副元帅完颜谋衍复败窝斡于霿河。
现代文：右副元帅完颜谋衍在駒雨松河再次打败窝斡。
English: The Right Vice-Marshal, Guan Yan Muyan, once again defeated Wo Shuo at the Koman U Songhe River.

古文：辛巳，宴夏使贞元殿。
现代文：十五日，在贞元殿设宴款待夏国使者。
English: On the fifteenth day, a banquet was held at the Sadamoto-den to entertain the emissaries from the Summer Kingdom.

古文：故事，外国使三节人从皆坐庑下赐食。
现代文：按照过去的规矩，外国三个持节使者跟随前来的人都坐在殿堂周围廊下赐予食物。
English: According to the rules of the past, the three foreign emissaries who came to celebrate the festival were sitting in the corridor around the hall to give food.

古文：上察其食不精腆，曰： 何以服远人之心。 
现代文：皇上察看他们的食物不精致丰美，说： 这怎么能让远方的人心服呢！ 
English: The emperor observed that their food was not exquisite and rich, and said, "How can this satisfy people from far away?"

古文：掌食官皆杖六十。
现代文：把掌食官都打了六十杖。
English: He beat the officials in charge of food and drink with sixty canes.

古文：癸未，夏使朝辞，乞互市，从之。
现代文：十七日，夏国使节清早告辞，乞请互通贸易，皇上答应了。
English: On the 17th, the envoy of Xia Guo left early in the morning, begging for mutual trade, and the emperor agreed.

古文：己丑，以左丞相晏为太尉。
现代文：二十三日，任命左丞相晏为太尉。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Zuo Zheng, the Minister of the Left, to the rank of Second Lieutenant.

古文：壬辰，诏征契丹部将士曰： 应契丹与大军未战而降者，不得杀伤，仍安抚之。
现代文：二十六日，诏令征讨契丹部族的将士说： 承诺契丹和大军不战而投降的，不得杀伤，仍然要安抚他们。
English: On the 26th, he issued an edict to recruit soldiers from the Khitan tribe, saying: "If you promise the Khitan and the army to surrender without a fight, they must not be killed or injured, and you must still appease them."

古文：后招诱来降者，除奴婢以已虏为定，其亲属使各还其家，仍官为赎之。 
现代文：后来招抚诱使来投降的，除奴婢外以是否俘虏来划定，让他们亲属各自返回他们的家乡，仍然由官府替他们赎回。 
English: Later, those who were enticed to surrender, except for slaves, were determined by whether they were captives, and their relatives were allowed to return to their hometowns. The government still ransomed them.

古文：五月丁酉朔，以曷速馆节度使白彦敬为御史大夫。
现代文：五月一日，任命曷速馆节度使白彦敬为御史大夫。
English: On the first day of May, Shirahiko Takeru was appointed as the chief historian of the Shihokukan.

古文：戊戌，遣元帅左监军高忠建会北征将帅讨契丹。
现代文：二日，派遣元帅左监军高忠建会合北征将帅讨伐契丹。
English: On the second day, Marshal Gao Zhongjian of the Northern Expeditionary Force was dispatched to fight against the Khitan.

古文：己亥，以临海军节度使纥石烈志宁为元帅右监军。
现代文：三日，任命临海军节度使纥石烈志宁为元帅右监军。
English: On the third day, the appointment of the Lin navy festival made Zou Shi Leshining the marshal of the right supervision army.

古文：右副元帅完颜谋衍、元帅右监军完颜福寿坐逗遛，召还京师，皆罢之。
现代文：右副元帅完颜谋衍、元帅右监军完颜福寿因为逗留误事，被召回京城，都被罢了官。
English: Right Vice-Marshal Guan Yan Muyan and Marshal Guan Yan Fu Shou, the right supervisor of the army, were recalled to the capital because they stayed there by mistake. They were both dismissed.

古文：壬寅，立楚王允迪为皇太子，诏中外。
现代文：六日，立楚王允迪为皇太子，诏告中外。
English: On the 6th, the king of Chu, Yundi, was proclaimed crown prince, and the news spread far and wide.

古文：丁巳，押军万户裴满按剌、猛安移剌沙里剌败宋兵于华州。
现代文：二十一日，押军万户裴满按剌、猛安移剌沙里剌在华州打败宋兵。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the troops led by Wanyu Pei, Manmin Zhang, and Meng'an Miao, defeated the Song soldiers in Huazhou.

古文：六月戊辰，命御史大夫白彦敬西北路市马。
现代文：六月三日，命令御史大夫白彦敬到西北路购买马匹。
English: On June 3, he ordered the chief historian, Bai Yanjing, to go to the Northwest Road to buy horses.

古文：庚午，以尚书右丞仆散忠义为平章政事兼右副元帅，经略契丹。
现代文：五日，任命尚书右丞仆散忠义为平章政事兼右副元帅，管理契丹。
English: On the 5th, Shangshu's right-hand man, San Zhongyi, was appointed as Pingzhang's political officer and right-hand deputy marshal to manage the Khitan army.

古文：诏出内府金银给征契丹军用。
现代文：诏令从内府拨出金银给征伐契丹的军队使用。
English: The imperial edict allocated gold and silver from Naifu to be used by the army to conquer Khitan.

古文：戊寅，诏居庸关、古北口讥察契丹奸细，捕获者加官赏。
现代文：十三日，诏令居庸关、古北口识别察访契丹奸细，对捕获奸细的人加官封赏。
English: On the 13th, the emperor ordered Juyongguan and Gubeikou to identify and inspect the Qitan spies, and reward those who caught the spies.

古文：己卯，诏守御古北口及石门关。
现代文：十四日，诏令防守古北口以及石门关。
English: On the 14th, the imperial order to defend the Old North Gate and the Stone Gate was issued.

古文：庚辰，宋遣使贺即位。
现代文：十五日，宋国派遣使者前来祝贺皇帝即位。
English: On the 15th, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor on his accession to the throne.

古文：壬午，右副元帅仆散忠义与窝斡战于花道。
现代文：十七日，右副元帅仆散忠义和窝斡在花道交战。
English: On the 17th, the Right Vice-Marshal's henchmen, San Zhongyi and Wo Rong, clashed in Huadu.

古文：戊子，以南京留守纥石烈良弼为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十三日，任命南京留守纥石烈良弼为尚书右丞。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Zou Shishi Liangyao, who had stayed in Nanjing, as his second-in-command.

古文：庚寅，右副元帅仆散忠义大败窝斡于袅岭西陷泉。获其弟袅。
现代文：二十五日，右副元帅仆散忠义在袅岭西部的陷泉把窝斡杀得大败，擒获了窝斡的弟弟袅。
English: On the 25th, the Right Vice-Marshal's henchman, San Zhongyi, defeated Wo Tao's younger brother, Zou, in the trap spring in the western part of Fuling.

古文：壬辰，以西南路招讨使完颜思敬为元帅右都监。
现代文：二十七日，任命西南路招讨使完颜思敬为元帅右都监。
English: On the 27th, Yan Sijian was appointed as the marshal of the right capital.

古文：七月丁酉，复取原州。
现代文：七月二日，再次攻取原州。
English: On July 2nd, they re-conquered Wonju.

古文：丙午，宋主傅位于子甗。
现代文：十一日，宋主高宗传位给他的儿子礨。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Gaozong, the Lord of Song, passed the throne to his son Yao.

古文：甲寅，诏谕契丹。
现代文：十九日，诏告契丹。
English: On the 19th, the message was sent to Khitan.

古文：丁巳，速频军士术里古等诬完颜谋衍子斜哥寄书其父谋反，并以其书上之。
现代文：二十二日，速频军士术里古等人诬告完颜谋衍的儿子斜哥寄信给他父亲谋划造反，把斜哥的书信呈给皇上。
English: On the 22nd, the fast-frequency sergeant Zhuligu and others falsely accused Yan Muyan's son, Xiang Ge, of sending a letter to his father to plot a rebellion, and presented Xiang Ge's letter to the emperor.

古文：上览书曰： 此诬也，止讯告者。 
现代文：皇上看信说： 这是诬陷，只审讯告状的！ 
English: The emperor looked at the letter and said: This is a frame-up, only the indictment is being tried!

古文：讯之，果诬也。
现代文：审问术里古等人，果然是诬告。
English: The interrogation of Ligu and others was indeed a false accusation.

古文：术里古伏诛。
现代文：术里古伏法被杀。
English: Shuli Gufu was killed.

古文：庚申，太尉、尚书左丞相晏致仕。
现代文：二十五日，太尉、尚书左丞相晏辞去官职。
English: On the 25th, First Lieutenant and Vice-Minister of the Left Sho Sho resigned from their posts.

古文：壬戌，诏发济州会宁府军在京师者，以五千人赴北京都统府。
现代文：二十七日，诏令发送济州会宁府的军队在京城的部分人马，把五千人派赴北京都统府。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict sent part of the troops of the Jeju-Ningfu army in Beijing, and sent five thousand people to the Beijing Capital.

古文：陕西都统璋败宋将吴璘于张义堡。
现代文：陕西都统璋在张义堡打败宋将吴瞞。
English: Shaanxi Duoduo defeated Song general Wu Shizhen in Zhangyi Fort.

古文：八月乙丑朔，奚抹白谋克徐列等降。
现代文：八月一日，奚抹白谋克徐列等人投降。
English: On August 1st, Zou Mupai and others surrendered.

古文：左监军高忠建破奚于栲栳山，及招降旁近奚六营，有不降者，攻破之。尽杀其男子，以其妇女童孺分给诸军。
现代文：左监军高忠建在栲栳山攻破奚抹白部，招降奚部附近的六座兵营的人，有不投降的，就攻破它，杀尽其中的男子，把他们的妇女童孺分给诸军。
English: Gao Zhong, the left supervisor of the army, set up in Shaoshan to break through the white part of the map, and recruited the people of six military camps near the white part. If some did not surrender, they would break through it, kill all the men in it, and distribute their women and children to the armies.

古文：丁卯，永兴县进嘉禾。
现代文：三日，永兴县进献优质稻禾。
English: On the third day, Yongxing County donated high-quality rice.

古文：壬申，万户温迪罕阿鲁带与奚战于古北口，败焉，诏同判大宗正事完颜谋衍等御之。
现代文：八日，万户温迪罕阿鲁带和奚在古北口交战，失败了。诏令同判大宗正事完颜谋衍等人抵御奚。
English: On the eighth day, Wendi Han Aru led the ten thousand households to fight with the Yao in the ancient Beikou, but failed. The Yao ordered the people to resist the Yao.

古文：癸酉，上谓宰臣曰： 百姓上书陈时政，其言犹有所补。卿等位居机要，略无献替，可乎？
现代文：九日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 百姓上书陈述当前政事，上面说的还是有所补益的，卿等位子处在机要的地方，几乎没有进献可以替代这些的意见，可以吗？
English: On the 9th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "The people have submitted a letter stating the current political situation. The above is still beneficial. The position of Sir is in an important place, and there are almost no contributions that can replace these opinions. Is that okay?

古文：夫听断狱讼，簿书期会，何人不能？
现代文：听断官司诉讼，记载书写日期，什么人不能干？
English: Hearing a lawsuit, recording the date of writing, who can't do it?

古文：唐、虞之圣，犹务兼览博照，乃能成治。
现代文：唐、虞之所以是圣贤，还必须多方考察广泛对照，才能达到大治。
English: The reason why Tang and Yu are sages is that they must be examined and compared extensively by multiple parties in order to achieve a great cure.

古文：正隆专任独见，故取败亡。
现代文：正隆年间专横独断，所以自取灭亡。
English: During the reign of Zheng Long, he was domineering and arbitrary, so he brought about his own demise.

古文：朕早夜孜孜，冀闻谠论，卿等宜体朕意。 
现代文：朕从早晨到夜晚孜孜以求，希望听到正直的言论，卿等应该理解朕的用意。 
English: I have sought from morning till night, hoping to hear honest words, and you, sir, should understand my intention.

古文：诏： 百司官吏，凡上书言事或为有司所抑，许进表以闻，朕将亲览，以观人材优劣。 
现代文：诏令 百司官吏，凡是上书言事而有被有司所压抑的，允许进表来报，朕将亲自阅览，来考察人才的优劣 。
English: The Imperial Edict ordered that officials of the Hundred Departments, who have been suppressed by the Departments, are allowed to submit their reports. I will personally read them and examine the merits and demerits of talents.

古文：夏国遣使贺尊号。
现代文：夏国派遣使者来祝贺皇上获得尊号。
English: Xia sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor on receiving the honorary title.

古文：丁丑，免齐国妃、韩王亨、枢密忽土、留守赜等家亲属在宫籍者。
现代文：十三日，免去齐国妃、韩王亨、枢密忽土、留守赜等家亲属原有宫籍。
English: On the 13th, Princess Qi, Han Wangheng, Privy Councilor Hu Tuo, and other relatives of the family were exempted from the original palace registration.

古文：诏元帅右都监完颜思敬以所部军与大军会讨窝斡。
现代文：诏令元帅右都监完颜思敬带领所属军队和大军会合去讨伐窝斡。
English: The imperial edict ordered the marshal of the right to supervise the completion of Yan Si Kei and lead the affiliated army and the great army to meet to fight against the encampment.

古文：乙酉，诏左谏议大夫石琚、监察御史冯仲廉察河北东路。
现代文：二十一日，诏令左谏议大夫石琚、监察御史冯仲尹检查访问河北东路。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zuoying ordered Zuoying's doctor Shijun and inspector Feng Zhongyin to visit the East Road of Hebei Province.

古文：丁亥，诏御史台曰： 卿等所劾，惟诸局行移稽缓，及缓于赴局者耳，此细事也。
现代文：二十三日，诏令御史台说： 卿等所弹劾的，只是各局行动拖延迟缓，以及赴局办事迟缓的人而已，这都是细节小事。
English: On the 23rd, the Prefect of the Imperial Household Agency said, "What you and others have impeached is only the delay in the action of the various bureaus and the delay in going to the bureaus. These are minor details.

古文：自三公以下，官僚善恶邪正，当审察之。
现代文：自三公以下，官员及其僚属的善恶邪正，应当审视考察这些。
English: From the Third Prince on down, officials and their subordinates should examine and investigate the good, the evil and the righteous.

古文：若止理细务而略其大者，将治卿等罪矣！ 
现代文：如果仅仅停止在料理细务上而忽略了那些小事，将要治卿等的罪。 
English: If you just stop at the details of cooking and ignore the little things, you will be guilty of the sin of chivalry.

古文：契丹老和尚降。
现代文：契丹的老和尚投降。
English: The old monk of Khitan surrenders.

古文：辛卯，罢诸关征税。
现代文：二十七日，免除各关征税。
English: On the 27th, all customs duties will be exempted.

古文：九月甲午朔，完颜谋衍擒奚猛安合住。
现代文：九月一日，完颜谋衍擒获奚猛守合住。
English: On the first day of September, the completion of Yan Muyan won the fierce defense and cohabitation.

古文：元帅左都监徒单合喜大败宋将吴璘于德顺州。
现代文：元帅左都监徒单合喜在德顺州把宋将吴瞞打得大败。
English: In Deshun Prefecture, the marshal and Zuodou overseer Shan Hexi defeated the Song general Wu Shide.

古文：乙未，诏尚书右丞纥石烈良弼以便宜招抚奚、契丹之叛者。
现代文：二日，诏令尚书右丞纥石烈良弼自行选择有利时机招抚奚、契丹的叛变者。
English: On the second day, the emperor ordered Shang Shuyuan and Shi Leliang to choose a favorable time to entice the mutineers from Khitan.

古文：庚子，元帅右都监完颜思敬获契丹窝斡，余众悉平。
现代文：七日，元帅右都监完颜思敬擒获契丹的窝斡，其余众人全部平定。
English: On the seventh day, after the marshal completed the supervision of the right capital, Yan Sijing won the support of Khitan, and the rest of the people were all pacified.

古文：以尚书左司员外郎完颜正臣为夏国生日使。
现代文：派尚书左司员外郎完颜正臣当夏国生日使。
English: He sent Shangshu Zuozhong, Wairo Kanen, and Masaomi as envoys for Xia Guo's birthday.

古文：壬寅，猎于近郊。
现代文：九日，皇上到近郊打猎。
English: On the 9th, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：乙巳，以移剌窝斡平，诏中外。
现代文：十二日，把平复移剌窝斡的事诏告中外。
English: On the 12th, the matter of Pingfu's relocation to Xiwu was officially announced to China and the world.

古文：庚戌，改葬睿宗皇帝。
现代文：十七日，改葬睿宗皇帝。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Ruizong's funeral was rescheduled.

古文：壬子，以元帅右都监完颜思敬为右副元帅。
现代文：十九日，任命元帅右都监完颜思敬为右副元帅。
English: On the 19th, Marshal Yan Sijing, the Right Supervisor of the Capital, was appointed as the Right Vice-Marshal.

古文：戊午，诏思敬经略南边。
现代文：二十五日，诏令思敬谋划治理南部边疆。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict on the governance of the southern frontier was issued.

古文：辛酉，奉迁睿宗皇帝梓宫于磐宁宫。
现代文：二十八日，奉迁睿宗梓宫到磐宁宫。
English: On the 28th, the Ruizong Zi Palace was moved to the Banning Palace.

古文：癸亥，元帅左监军徒单合喜等败宋兵于德顺州。
现代文：三十日，元帅左监军徒单合喜等人在德顺州打败宋兵。
English: On the 30th, Marshal Zuo Jian's troops, including Tu Shan He Xi, defeated the Song soldiers in Deshun Prefecture.

古文：河南统军使宗尹复取汝州。
现代文：河南统军使宗尹又攻取汝州。
English: The Henan United Army sent Zong Yin to invade Ruzhou again.

古文：十月丁卯，以左副元帅完颜彀英为平章政事。
现代文：十月四日，任命左副元帅完颜彀英为平章政事。
English: On October 4th, the Left Vice-Marshal Guan Yan Xingying was appointed as the Vice-Governor.

古文：戊辰，如山陵，谒睿宗皇帝梓宫，哭尽哀。
现代文：五日，到山陵去，拜谒睿宗皇帝梓宫，哭泣十分悲哀。
English: On the fifth day, he went to the mountains to pay homage to Emperor Zizong of the Zizong Dynasty, weeping very sadly.

古文：平章政事、右副元帅仆散忠义等还自军，上谒。
现代文：平章政事、右副元帅仆散忠义等从军中返回，拜见皇上。
English: Taira no Shosho, Right Vice-Marshal Hidehisa Tadayoshi and others returned from the army to visit the Emperor.

古文：丙戌，以仆散忠义为尚书右丞相、元帅左监军纥石烈志宁为左副元帅。
现代文：二十三日，任命仆散忠义为尚书右丞相、元帅左监军纥石烈志宁为左副元帅。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed his servant, San Tadayoshi, as the Vice-Minister of the Right, and the Marshal of the Left, Shoseki Reshinin, as the Vice-Marshal of the Left.

古文：戊子，葬睿宗皇帝于景陵，大赦。
现代文：二十五日，把睿宗皇帝安葬在景陵，大赦天下罪人。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Ruizong was buried in Jingling Mausoleum, pardoning all the sinners in the world.

古文：己丑，诏左副元帅纥石烈志宁经略南边。
现代文：二十六日，诏令左副元帅纥石烈志宁筹划治理南部边疆。
English: On the 26th, the left deputy marshal Zou Shi Leshining was ordered to plan the governance of the southern border.

古文：壬辰，华州防御使蒲察世杰、丹州刺史赤盏胡速鲁改败宋兵于德顺州。
现代文：二十九日，华州防御使蒲察世杰、丹州刺史赤盏胡速鲁改在德顺州打败宋兵。
English: On the 29th, the defense of Huazhou enabled Putsa Shijie and Danzhou Zhishi Chakkan Hu Sauru to defeat Song soldiers in Deshunzhou.

古文：十一月癸巳朔，诏右丞相仆散忠义伐宋。
现代文：十一月一日，诏令右丞相仆散忠义攻伐宋国。
English: On November 1st, the Emperor issued an edict ordering the Minister of the Right, San Zhongyi, to invade Song.

古文：丁酉，第职官，廉能、污滥、不职各为三等而黜陟之。
现代文：五日，把在职官员划分等次，廉能、污滥、不称职各是三个等级，按标准决定是罢黜还是留任。
English: On the fifth day, the officials in office were divided into three levels, including the corrupt, the corruptible and the incompetent. According to the standards, it was decided whether they would be dismissed or remain in office.

古文：十二月乙酉，遣尚书刑部侍郎刘仲渊等廉察宣谕东京、北京等路。
现代文：十二月二十三日，派遣尚书刑部侍郎刘仲渊等检查访问东京、北京等路。
English: On December 23rd, Liu Zhongyuan, Shangshu's attendant of the Criminal Law Department, and others were sent to inspect and visit Tokyo, Beijing and other cities.

古文：三年正月壬辰朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定三年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Daejeon era, Korea and South Korea sent envoys to congratulate the new year.

古文：庚子，太白昼见。
现代文：九日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 9th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬子，遣客省使乌居仁赏劳河南军士。
现代文：二十一日，派遣客省使乌居仁犒赏慰劳河南军士。
English: On the 21st, the guest province sent Wu Jiren to reward and comfort the Henan sergeant.

古文：癸丑，复取德顺州。
现代文：二十二日，再次攻取德顺州。
English: On the 22nd, it once again captured Deshun Prefecture.

古文：二月甲子，诏太子少詹事杨伯雄等廉问山西路。
现代文：二月三日，诏令太子少詹事杨伯雄等人检查访问山西路。
English: On February 3, Yang Buxiong and others visited Shanxi Road for inspection.

古文：庚午，上谓宰相曰： 湾州饥民，流散逐食，甚可矜恤。
现代文：九日，皇上对宰相说 ：滦州的饥民，流浪四方寻找食物，很需要怜悯抚恤。
English: On the 9th, the emperor said to the prime minister: "The starving people of Ganzhou, wandering in all directions in search of food, are in great need of compassion and alms.

古文：移于山西，富民赡济，仍于道路计口给食。 
现代文：让他们迁移到山西，富有的人民赡养救济他们，并在沿途道路上按人口计算发给食物。 
English: Let them migrate to Shanxi, the rich people will support and help them, and distribute food according to population along the way.

古文：壬申，诏抚谕陕西。
现代文：十一日，诏令安抚告诉陕西。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Emperor issued an order to pacify Shaanxi.

古文：庚辰，太保、都元帅奔睹薨。
现代文：十九日，太保、都元帅奔睹逝世。
English: On the 19th, the Taiho and Do Marshal passed away.

古文：丙戌，赵景元等以乱言伏诛。
现代文：二十五日，赵景元等因为胡言乱语伏罪被杀。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Jingyuan and others were killed for the crime of lying in ambush.

古文：庚寅，高丽、夏遣使来贺万春节。
现代文：二十九日，高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺万春节。
English: On the 29th, Korea and South Korea sent envoys to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：高丽遣使贺即位。
现代文：高丽派遣使者来祝贺即位。
English: Goryeo sent an envoy to congratulate him on his enthronement.

古文：东京僧法通以妖术乱众，都统府讨平之。
现代文：东京的僧人法通用妖术使群众作乱，都统府讨伐平定了法通之乱。
English: The monks of Tokyo caused a riot with their witchcraft, and the prefectural government fought to quell the riot.

古文：三月丙申，中都以南八路蝗，诏尚书省遣官捕之。
现代文：三月五日，中都以南八路发生蝗灾，诏令尚书省派遣官吏去捕蝗虫。
English: On March 5, a locust plague occurred on the eighth road south of Zhongdu, and Shangshu Province was ordered to send officials to catch locusts.

古文：壬寅，诏户部侍郎魏子平等九人，分诣诸路猛安谋克，劝农及廉问。
现代文：十一日，诏令户部侍郎魏子平等九人，分别到诸路猛安谋克那里，鼓励兴农并且检查访问。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered nine people, including Wei Zi, the head of the Household Division, to go to Zhulu Meng'an to encourage farmers and inspect the farm.

古文：诏临潢汉民遂食于会宁府济、信等州。
现代文：诏令临潢汉民到会宁府济、信两州追寻食物。
English: The imperial edict ordered the Han people in Linyi to gather in Ningfu, Jin and Xin provinces to look for food.

古文：庚戌，诏免去年租税。
现代文：十九日，诏令免除去年的租税。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict exempted the tax of the previous year.

古文：四月辛酉朔，右副元帅完颜思敬罢。
现代文：四月一日，免除右副元帅完颜思敬职务。
English: On April 1st, the Right Vice-Marshal was relieved of his duties.

古文：丁卯，平章政事完颜彀英、御史大夫白彦敬罢。
现代文：七日，平章政事完颜彀英、御史大夫白彦敬被罢免官职。
English: On the 7th, after the political affairs of the Taira clan were completed, Yan Xingying and Goshi Daibu Bai Yanjing were dismissed from their official positions.

古文：以参知政事李石为御史大夫。
现代文：任命参知政事李石为御史大夫。
English: Li Shih, a member of the Council of State, was appointed to the post of imperial historian.

古文：丁丑，诏吏犯赃罪，虽会赦不叙。
现代文：十七日，诏令官吏犯贪污罪，虽然会遇到赦免的机会，但不能再按规定授官或给奖励。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict decreed that officials who commit the crime of corruption, although they will encounter the opportunity to be pardoned, but they can no longer be awarded or rewarded according to regulations.

古文：己卯，以引进使韩纲为横赐高丽使。
现代文：十九日，派引进使韩纲当横赐高丽使。
English: On the 19th, the Koryo envoy was given to the Korean envoy.

古文：乙酉，赈山西路猛安谋克贫民，给六十日粮。
现代文：二十五日，赈济山西路猛安谋克贫民，发给六十天的粮食。
English: On the 25th, Meng'an on the west road of Mount Qizhi made a plan to help the poor and distributed food for 60 days.

古文：是月，取商、虢、环州，宋所侵一十六州至是皆复。
现代文：当月，攻取商、虢、环州，宋国所侵占的十六个州到这时候全部收复。
English: In the same month, the 16 states occupied by the Song Dynasty, including Shang, Min and Huan, were all recovered by this time.

古文：五月辛卯朔，右丞相仆散忠义朝京师。
现代文：五月一日，右丞相仆散忠义来京城朝见皇上。
English: On May 1, San Tadayoshi, a servant of the Minister of the Right, came to the capital to see the Emperor.

古文：乙未，以重五，幸广乐园射柳，命皇太子、亲王、百官皆射，胜者赐物有差。
现代文：五日，因为是重五，皇上驾临广乐园射柳，命令皇太子、亲王、百官都射，获得胜利的人赐给不同的礼物。
English: On the 5th day, because it was the 5th day of the month, the emperor arrived at the vast park to shoot willows, and ordered the crown prince, princes, and officials to shoot, and those who won the victory were given different gifts.

古文：上复御常武殿，赐宴击球。
现代文：皇上又御临常武殿，赐宴并击球游戏。
English: The emperor also visited the Imperial Household Agency to give a banquet and play a game of batting.

古文：自是岁以为常。
现代文：从这时起年景是正常的。
English: Since then, the situation has been normal.

古文：丙申，宋人攻破灵璧、虹县。
现代文：六日，宋人攻破灵璧、虹县。
English: On the 6th, the Song people broke through Lingbi and Hongxian.

古文：己亥，罢河南、山东、陕西统军司，置都统、副统。
现代文：九日，罢除河南、山东、陕西统军司，设置都统、副都统。
English: On the 9th, the unified military departments of Henan, Shandong, and Shaanxi were dismissed, and unified cities and deputy unified cities were established.

古文：以太子詹事完颜守道从皇太子，上召谕守道曰： 卿任执政，所责非轻，自今毋从行。 
现代文：因为太子詹事完颜守道跟从皇太子，皇上召见守道并告诉他说： 卿的任务是执掌政务，所担负的责任不轻，从今天起不要跟从他走。 
English: Since Prince Zhan had followed the crown prince, the emperor summoned Prince Zhan and told him: "Your duty is to take charge of government affairs. The responsibility you bear is not light. From today, do not follow him."

古文：辛丑，以右丞相仆散忠义兼都元帅。
现代文：十一日，任命右丞相仆散忠义兼任都元帅。
English: On the 11th, San Tadayoshi, a vassal of the Minister of the Right, was appointed Marshal of the Capital.

古文：癸卯，仆散忠义还军。
现代文：十三日，仆散忠义返回军队。
English: On the 13th, Dousan loyally returned to the army.

古文：河南路都统奚挞不也叛入于宋。
现代文：河南路都统奚挞不也叛变进入了宋国。
English: Henan Lu Du Tong also rebelled and entered the Song Dynasty.

古文：丙午，宋人攻破宿州。
现代文：十六日，宋人攻破宿州。
English: On the 16th, the Song people conquered Suzhou.

古文：辛亥，更定出征军逃亡法。
现代文：二十一日，修改制订出征军逃亡法。
English: On the 21st, the Draft Evasion Law was amended and enacted.

古文：尚书省请籍天德间被诛大臣诸奴隶及从窝斡乱者为军，上以四方甫定，民意稍苏，而复签军，非长策，不听。
现代文：尚书省请求登记天德年间被诛杀的大臣的奴隶们以及随从窝斡叛乱的人当兵，皇上认为四方刚才安定，民意开始朝向，然而又征兵，不是长久之计，所以不同意这样做。
English: Shangshu Province requested to register the slaves of the ministers who were killed during the Tiande era, as well as those who followed the rebellion of Wo Wei, as soldiers. The emperor thought that the four sides were stable just now, the public opinion was beginning to move, but conscription was not a long-term solution, so he did not agree to do so.

古文：癸丑，诏谕契丹余党蒲速越等，如能自新，并释其罪。
现代文：二十三日，诏告契丹余党蒲速越等人，如果能自新，一并免除他们的罪行。
English: On the 23rd, he issued an edict to the remaining members of the Khitan Party, such as Puhayue and others, that if they could reform themselves, they would be absolved of their crimes.

古文：若执蒲速越父子以来者，仍官赏之。
现代文：如果有能抓到蒲速越父子献来的，仍然封官嘉赏他们。
English: If anyone can catch the crabs presented by the Puhayue father and son, they will still be rewarded with an official award.

古文：左副元帅纥石烈志宁复取宿州，河南副统孛术鲁定方死于阵。
现代文：左副元帅纥石烈志宁又攻取宿州，河南副统孛术鲁定方在作战中阵亡。
English: Left Vice-Marshal Zou Shi Retshining also captured Suzhou, and Henan Vice-Regent Shu Luding was killed in the battle.

古文：乙卯，以北京留守完颜思敬复为右副元帅。
现代文：二十五日，任命北京留守完颜思敬再次出任右副元帅。
English: On the 25th, Yan Siqing was appointed to serve as Vice Marshal of the Right after returning from Beijing.

古文：中都蝗。诏参知政事完颜守道按问大兴府捕蝗官。
现代文：中都发生蝗灾，诏令参知政事完颜守道巡行查问大兴府捕蝗官员。
English: Locust plagues occurred in Zhongdu, and Daxing prefecture's locust-catching officials were interrogated by the prefectural government.

古文：六月庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月一日，有日食发生。
English: On June 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：以刑部尚书苏保衡为参知政事。
现代文：任命刑部尚书苏保衡为参知政事。
English: Appointed the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Su Baoheng, as a member of the cabinet.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 正隆之末，济州路逃回军士为中都军所邀杀者，官为收葬。 
现代文：十七日，诏令说 ：正隆末年，济州路逃回军士中是被官军所邀集杀死的，由官府为他们收葬。 
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict said: In the last years of Zhenglong, the soldiers who fled back to Jeju Road were invited by the government army to collect and kill them, and the government buried them.

古文：己卯，观稼于近郊。
现代文：二十日，到近郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 20th, he went to the suburbs to inspect the crops.

古文：甲申，太师、尚书令张浩罢。
现代文：二十五日，太师、尚书令张浩被罢官。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Hao, the Grand Master, was dismissed.

古文：以宿直将军阿勒根和衍为横赐夏国使。
现代文：任命宿直将军阿勒根和衍充当横赐夏国使。
English: He appointed General Allegan He Yan as the envoy to Xia.

古文：七月庚戌，太白昼见。
现代文：七月二十一日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On July 21st, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：以太子太师宗宪为平章政事。
现代文：任命太子太师宗宪为平章政事。
English: The Crown Prince and Grand Master Munenori was appointed to the post of Taira no Shoji.

古文：以孔总为袭封衍圣公。
现代文：正式确定孔总是袭封衍圣公。
English: It was officially determined that Kong always succeeded to the title of Yang Sheng Gong.

古文：八月丙寅，太白经天。
现代文：八月八日，太白金星从天上经过。
English: On August 8th, the too-white Venus passed through the sky.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 祖宗时有劳效未曾迁赏者，五品以上奏闻，六品以下及无职事者尚书省约量升除。 
现代文：十二日，皇帝下诏说： 祖宗时候，有功劳事迹没有升官封赏的人，五品以上的禀奏上来，六品以下以及没有职务的，由尚书省根据情况予以升迁授官。 
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: In the time of our ancestors, those who had meritorious deeds but were not promoted and rewarded, those with five or more awards, those with six or less awards and those without positions, would be promoted and awarded by the Ministry of Education and Culture according to the situation.

古文：甲戌，诏参知政事完颜守道招抚契丹余党。
现代文：十六日，诏令参知政事完颜守道招安抚定契丹余党。
English: On the 16th, the party of Ding Qidan Yu was pacified by the imperial edict of "participating in political affairs, preserving the image of the country, and upholding the law."

古文：戊寅，诏罢契丹猛安谋克，其户分隶女直猛安谋克。
现代文：二十日，诏令罢免契丹猛安谋克，原属契丹猛安谋克的户分别隶属于女真猛安谋克。
English: On the 20th, the edict dismissed the Khitan Meng'an Moke, and the households that were originally part of the Khitan Meng'an Moke were separately subordinated to the Jianzhen Meng'an Moke.

古文：命诸官员年老者，许存马一二匹，余并括买入官。
现代文：命令众官员中年老的人，允许保留马一、二匹，其余的一并官府买下。
English: He ordered the middle-aged and elderly officials to allow one or two horses to be kept, and the rest to be bought by the government.

古文：敕殿前都点检唐括德温： 重九出猎，国朝旧俗。
现代文：勒令殿前都点检唐括德温 ：重九外出打猎，是国家朝政的旧俗。
English: It is an old custom in the country's dynastic politics to go out hunting on the 9th day of the month.

古文：今扈从军二千，能无扰民？
现代文：现在有护驾侍从军士二千人，能不搅扰百姓吗？
English: Now there are two thousand soldiers and sergeants escorting and escorting, can we not disturb the people?

古文：可严为约束，仍以钱万贯分赐之。 
现代文：可以严格约束，仍然拿万贯钱分别赏赐他们。 
English: You can be strict and still reward them with a lot of money.

古文：乙酉，如大房山。
现代文：二十七日，到大房山去。
English: On the 27th, I went to Dafang Mountain.

古文：丁亥，荐享于睿陵。
现代文：二十九日，在睿陵献上祭物。
English: On the 29th, offerings were made at the Rui Mausoleum.

古文：戊子，还宫。
现代文：三十日，返回宫中。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：九月癸巳，以宿直将军仆散习尼列为夏国生日使。
现代文：九月五日，派宿直将军仆散习尼列充任夏国生日使。
English: On September 5th, Zang Xi Nirei, a general's servant, was appointed as the envoy for Xia Guo's birthday.

古文：丁酉，秋猎。
现代文：九日，进行秋季围猎。
English: On the 9th, the autumn hunting was carried out.

古文：以重九，拜天于北郊。
现代文：因为是重九，在北郊拜天子。
English: Because it is the 9th month of the lunar calendar, they worship the Son of Heaven in the northern suburbs.

古文：丙午，诏翰林待制刘仲诲等廉问车驾所经州县。
现代文：十八日，诏令翰林待制刘仲诲等访问检查皇帝车驾所经过州县的情况。
English: On the 18th, Liu Zhongyun and others visited the imperial palace to inspect the situation of the emperor's car driving through the prefectures.

古文：乙卯，还宫。
现代文：二十七日，返回宫中。
English: On the second day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：十月甲子，大享于太庙。
现代文：十月七日，在太庙展开大的祭献活动。
English: On October 7th, a large-scale sacrificial activity was carried out in Taimiao.

古文：丙寅，以许王府长史移剌天佛留为高丽生日使。
现代文：九日，派许王府长史移剌天佛留充任高丽生日使。
English: On the 9th, the governor of Goryeo, King Ho, dispatched the Birthday Envoy of Goryeo.

古文：癸酉，冬猎。
现代文：十六日，开始冬季打猎活动。
English: On the 16th, the winter hunting activities began.

古文：十一月庚寅，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：十一月三日，太白金星白天显现，经达天空。
English: On November 3rd, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime and reached the sky.

古文：壬辰，还都。
现代文：五日，返回京都。
English: On the fifth day, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：戊申，诏： 求仕官辄入权要之门，追一官，仍降除。
现代文：二十一日，诏令 寻求当官就要进入权要之门，追一官，仍降除。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the imperial edict decreed that anyone seeking to become an official had to enter the gate of a dignitary, chase an official and still be demoted.

古文：以请求有所馈献及受之者，具状奏裁。 
现代文：把请求当官而有所贡献已经接受了的，写明具体情况禀报上来 。
English: If you have already accepted the official's request and made some contribution, please state the specific situation and report it.

古文：庚戌，百官请上尊号，不允。
现代文：二十三日，文武百官请世宗上尊号，世宗不接受。
English: On the 23rd, hundreds of civil and military officials came to ask for the title of Shoson, but Shoson did not accept.

古文：诏： 中都、平州及饥荒地并经契丹剽掠，有质卖妻子者，官为收赎。 
现代文：诏令 中都、平州及闹饥荒和被契丹掳掠的地方，有典卖妻子儿女的，官府出钱替其赎回 。
English: According to the edict, in Zhongdu, Pingzhou, famine-stricken areas and areas that were plundered by the Khitan, if there is a decree to sell wives and children, the government will pay money to redeem them.

古文：壬子，尚书左丞翟永固罢。
现代文：二十五日，尚书左丞翟永固被罢免官职。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Shang Shuzhe Zuozhong Yu Yonggu was removed from office.

古文：癸丑，罢贡金线段匹。
现代文：二十六日，取消进贡金线缎匹。
English: On the 26th, the tribute gold line horse race was cancelled.

古文：甲寅，以尚书右丞纥石烈良弼为左丞，吏部尚书石琚为参知政事。
现代文：二十七日，任命尚书右丞纥石烈良弼为左丞，吏部尚书石琚为参知政事。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Shangshu Yu Rong and Shi Lerong Liang to be the vice-presidents, and Shangshu Shi Rong to be the vice-governor.

古文：十二月丁丑，腊，猎于近郊。以所获荐山陵，自是岁以为常。
现代文：十二月二十一日，到近郊打猎，把猎获的禽兽祭献山陵，从此每年这样做成了常规。
English: On December 21st, they went hunting in the suburbs and sacrificed the animals they hunted to the mountain, and this has become a regular practice every year since then.

古文：诏流民未复业，增限招诱。
现代文：诏令流浪平民没有恢复工作的，增加期限招抚劝导。
English: If the wandering civilians did not resume their work, the period of time for persuasion and persuasion should be extended.

古文：己卯，参知政事苏保衡至自军，辛巳，以为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十三日，参知政事苏保衡从军队中前来朝见。二十五日，任命苏保衡为尚书右丞。
English: On the 23rd, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, Su Baoheng, came from the army to see the emperor, and on the 25th, Su Baoheng was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：四年正月丁亥朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定四年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使节来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Daejeon era, Korea and Korea sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：戊子，罢路府州元日及万春节贡献。
现代文：初二，免除路府州元旦以及万寿节贡献。
English: On the second day of the new year, the contribution of the New Year's Day and the All-Year-Round Festival will be exempted.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 秦王宗翰有功于国，何乃无嗣？ 
现代文：皇上对侍臣说： 秦王宗翰对国家有功，为什么没有子嗣？ 
English: The emperor said to his courtiers, "Qin Wang Zonghan has made great contributions to the country. Why doesn't he have any children?

古文：皆未知所对。
现代文：侍臣们都不知道怎么回答。
English: The courtiers didn't know what to say.

古文：上曰： 朕尝闻宗翰在西京坑杀丐者千人，得非其报耶？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：朕曾经听说宗翰在西京活埋乞丐上千人，能说不是他的报应吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "I once heard that Zonghan buried a thousand beggars alive in West Beijing. Can I say that this was not his retribution?

古文：癸巳，百官复请上尊号，不允。
现代文：初七，百官再次请求皇上加尊号，皇上不允许。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the centurion once again asked the emperor to grant him the honorific title, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：丁酉，如安州春水。
现代文：十一日，到安州春水去。
English: On the 11th day, I went to Anzhou Chunshui.

古文：壬寅，至安州。
现代文：十六日，到达安州。
English: On the 16th, they arrived in Anzhou.

古文：大雪。
现代文：天下大雪。
English: Heavy snow is falling.

古文：诏扈从人舍民家者，人日支钱一百与其主。
现代文：诏令护驾侍从人员住在百姓家里的，每人每天支付一百钱给房主。
English: According to the edict, the guards and attendants living in the homes of the common people should pay 100 yuan per person per day to the owners of the houses.

古文：甲辰，元帅府言： 宋遣审议官胡昉致尚书右仆射书，来议和好。
现代文：十八日，元帅府说道： 宋国差遣审议官胡窻寄给尚书右仆射书信，来商议和好。
English: On the 18th, the marshal's office said: Song State sent a letter to Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shao, to negotiate a reconciliation.

古文：以其言失信，拘昉军中，以书答之。 
现代文：因为他们言而失信，所以把胡窻拘留在军中，拿书信回答他。 
English: Because their words were not trustworthy, they detained Hu Yao in the army and took his letters to answer him.

古文：及以书进，上览之曰： 宋之失信，行人何罪？
现代文：及至把书呈给皇上，皇上阅览后说： 宋国失去信义，送信的人有什么罪？
English: When it came to presenting the book to the emperor, the emperor said after reading it: Song lost its credibility. What was the crime of the sender?

古文：当即遣还。
现代文：立即差遣他回去。
English: Send him back immediately.

古文：边事令元帅府从宜措画。 
现代文：边事问题命令元帅府根据情况筹划。 
English: The marshal's office was ordered to plan for border issues according to the situation.

古文：乙巳，尚书省奏： 徐州民曹圭讨贼江志，而子弼亦在贼中，并杀之。
现代文：十九日，尚书省禀奏 徐州平民曹皀讨伐贼寇江志，而他的儿子弼也在贼寇中间，曹皀把他们一块儿杀了。
English: On the 19th, Cao Qi, a commoner from Xuzhou, was killed by the bandits in the battle against the bandits. Cao Qi's son was also among the bandits, and Cao Qi killed them together.

古文：法当补二官，叙杂班。 
现代文：按法应当补他两级官职，安排在杂班 。
English: According to the law, he should be compensated for his two-level official post and placed in a miscellaneous class.

古文：上以所奏未当，进一官，正班用之。
现代文：皇上认为尚书省所禀奏的意见不恰当，改为进一级官职，放在正班使用他。
English: The emperor thought that the opinion voiced by Shang Shuxu was not appropriate, so he changed it to a first-class official post and put him in the regular class.

古文：辛亥，获头鹅。遣使荐山陵，自是岁以为常。
现代文：二十五日，获得一只领头的鹅，派人祭献山陵，从此以后每年这样做成了常规。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, they obtained a leading goose and sent someone to sacrifice it to the mountain, and since then it has become a regular practice to do so every year.

古文：二月丁巳，免安州今年赋役，及保塞县御城边吴二村凡扈从人尝止其家者，亦复一年。
现代文：二月二日，免去安州今年赋役，以及保塞县的御城、边吴两座村子凡是护驾侍从人员曾经在他家里居住过的，也免去一年的徭役。
English: On February 2, Anzhou was exempted from this year's forced labor, and the two villages of Ocheng and Bianwu in Bosei County, where escort attendants once lived in his home, were also exempted from one year's forced labor.

古文：辛酉，猎于高阳之北。
现代文：六日，在高阳的北部打猎。
English: On the sixth day, they went hunting in the northern part of Goyang.

古文：庚午，还都。
现代文：十五日，返回都城。
English: On the 15th, he returned to the capital.

古文：庚辰，以北京粟价踊贵，诏免今年课甲。
现代文：二十五日，因为北京粮食价格上涨很贵，诏令免去今年国家规定征收的赋税。
English: On the 25th, because the rise in grain prices in Beijing is very expensive, the imperial decree exempted this year's tax imposed by the state.

古文：三月丙戌朔，万春节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：诏免北京岁课段匹一年。
现代文：皇帝诏令免去北京一年国家规定数目的赋税。
English: The emperor's edict exempted Beijing from paying a certain amount of taxes for one year.

古文：庚子，京师地震。
现代文：十五日，京师发生地震。
English: On the 15th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：壬寅，百官复请上尊号，不允。
现代文：十七日，百官再次请求为皇上加尊号，皇上不允许。
English: On the seventeenth day, the centurion once again requested the emperor to grant him the honorific title, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：四月丁巳，平章政事完颜元宜罢。
现代文：四月三日，平章政事完颜元宜被罢免官职。
English: On April 3, Yan Yuanyi was removed from his post after the end of the Pingzhang government.

古文：甲戌，出宫女二十一人。
现代文：二十日，放出宫女二十一人。
English: On the twentieth day, the twenty-one maids of honor were released.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，天气干旱。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：癸卯，敕有司审冤狱，禁宫中音乐，放球场役夫。
现代文：十九日，命令有司审冤狱，禁止宫中奏音乐，释放场拘役的人员。
English: On the 19th, he ordered that there should be a magistrate to judge the unjust imprisonment, prohibit the playing of music in the palace, and release the staff of the detention center.

古文：乙巳，诏礼部尚书王竞祷雨于北岳。
现代文：二十一日，诏令礼部尚书王竞到北岳祈祷降雨。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shang Shou Wang of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies went to Beidake to pray for rain.

古文：己酉，命参知政事石琚等于北郊望祭祷雨。
现代文：二十五日，命令参知政事石琚等人到北郊祭祀山川祈祷降雨。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the party secretary of the governor, Seiji Ishizaki, and others to go to the northern suburbs to worship the mountains and rivers and pray for rain.

古文：壬子，雨。
现代文：二十八日，天下雨。
English: On the 28th, it rained.

古文：窝干余党蒲速越伏诛。
现代文：窝斡的余党蒲速越伏法被杀。
English: The remaining faction of the pro-Beijing faction was killed.

古文：六月甲寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月一日，有日食发生。
English: On June 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：壬戌，尚书左丞纥石烈良弼至自征南元帅府。
现代文：九日，尚书左丞纥石烈良弼从征南元帅府回到朝廷。
English: On the 9th, Shang Shuzhu Zuorong (尚書左丞) and Shi Lerong (石烈良) returned to the imperial court from the Southern General Headquarters.

古文：甲子，以雨足，命有司祭谢岳镇海渎于北郊。
现代文：十一日，因为雨水充足，命令有司在北郊祭谢岳镇入海的大河。
English: On the 11th day, because the rain was plentiful, a magistrate was ordered to hold a festival in the northern suburb of Xieyue, a large river that flows into the sea.

古文：己巳，幸东宫，视皇太子疾。
现代文：十六日，皇上驾临东宫，探视皇太子的疾病。
English: On the 16th, the emperor drove to the East Palace to visit the crown prince's illness.

古文：庚午，初定祭五岳四渎礼。
现代文：十七日，开始定下祭献五岳四渎的礼品。
English: On the seventeenth day, they began to determine the gifts for the offering of the five mountains and four rivers.

古文：辛未，观稼于近郊。
现代文：十八日，到近郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 18th, he went to the suburbs to inspect the crops.

古文：庚辰，诏谕元帅府曰： 所请伐宋军万五千，今以骑三千，步四千赴之。 
现代文：二十七日，诏告元帅府说 ：所申请的攻伐宋国的军队一万五千人，现在先以三千骑兵、四千步兵奔赴前线。 
English: On the 27th, he issued an edict to the marshal's office, saying, "The army of 15,000 men requested for the attack on Song is now leaving for the front with 3,000 cavalrymen and 4,000 infantrymen.

古文：诏陕西元帅府议入蜀利害以闻。
现代文：诏令陕西元帅府研究进入蜀地的利害关系上报。
English: He ordered the Shaanxi Marshal's Office to study and report on the interests of entering Shu.

古文：七月壬辰，故卫王襄妃及其子和尚以妖妄伏诛。
现代文：七月九日，前卫王襄的妃子及其儿子和尚因为邪恶不正派而被诛杀。
English: On July 9th, the concubine of Wang Xiang of the avant-garde and her son and monk were killed because of evil and injustice.

古文：庚子，以尚书左丞纥石烈良弼为平章政事。
现代文：十七日，任命尚书左丞纥石烈良弼为平章政事。
English: On the 17th, he appointed Shangshu Zuojiao and Shi Lerong Liangyao to be the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：辛丑，大风雷雨，拔木。
现代文：十八日，大风雷雨，大树连根拔起。
English: On the 18th, a strong wind and thunderstorm uprooted large trees.

古文：八月甲寅朔，诏征南元帅府曰： 前所请收复旧疆，乞候秋凉进发，今已秋凉，复俟何时？ 
现代文：八月一日，下诏给征南元帅府说： 以前你们请求收复旧疆，乞请秋天凉爽出发。现在已是秋凉，又等到什么时候？ 
English: On August 1, the following edict was issued to the General Staff of the Southern Expeditionary Army: "In the past, you asked for the recovery of the old territory, and begged for a cool autumn to set out. Now it is already cool in the autumn, but until when?

古文：戊午，以参知政事完颜守道为尚书左丞，大兴尹唐括安礼为参知政事。
现代文：五日，任命参知政事完颜守道为尚书左丞，大兴府尹唐括安礼为参知政事。
English: On the fifth day, Kanen Shudo was appointed to the post of Vice-governor for political affairs, and Daxingfu Yin Tang and Anli were appointed to the post of Vice-governor for political affairs.

古文：壬申，上谓宰臣曰： 卿每奏皆常事，凡治国安民及朝政不便于民者，未尝及也。
现代文：十九日，皇上对宰相大臣们说： 卿等每次禀奏的都是平常事，凡是有关治国安民以及朝政大事不便于人民的，不曾涉及。
English: On the 19th, the emperor said to the prime ministers and ministers: Sirs, every time you play the harp, it is an ordinary matter. Anything related to the governance of the country and the safety of the people, as well as the political events of the dynasty that are inconvenient for the people, have not been involved.

古文：如此，则宰相之任谁不能之？ 
现代文：像这样，那么宰相的职责谁人不能承当？ 
English: As such, who cannot assume the duties of the Prime Minister?

古文：己卯，如大房山。
现代文：二十六日，皇上去大房山。
English: On the 26th, the emperor went to Mount Ofusa.

古文：辛巳，致祭于山陵。
现代文：二十八日，在山陵致祭。
English: On the 28th, a memorial service was held at the mausoleum.

古文：九月癸未朔，还都。
现代文：九月一日，皇帝回到京都。
English: On September 1, the emperor returned to Kyoto.

古文：乙酉，上谓宰臣曰： 形势之家，亲识诉讼，请属道达，官吏往往屈法徇情，宜一切禁止。 
现代文：三日，皇帝对宰相大臣说 ：形势之家，亲识诉讼，亲属到达，官吏往往屈法徇情，应该禁止这一切。 
English: On the third day, the emperor said to the prime minister: "In a time of crisis, familiar lawsuits, and relatives arriving, officials often bend the law to suit their own interests. All of this should be banned."

古文：己丑，上谓宰臣曰： 北京、懿州、临潢等路尝经契丹寇掠，平、蓟二州近复蝗旱，百姓艰食，父母兄弟不能相保，多冒鬻为奴，朕甚闵之。
现代文：七日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 北京、懿州、临潢等路曾经被契丹侵掠过，平、蓟二州近来又遭受蝗灾和旱灾，百姓吃饭艰难，父母兄弟之间互相不能保护，许多人为吃饭卖身为奴。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor said to the prime minister: Beijing, Zhangzhou, Linyi and other areas were once invaded and plundered by the Khitan, and Ping and Zhangzhou have recently suffered locust plagues and droughts. The people have difficulty eating, parents and brothers cannot protect each other, and many people sell themselves into slavery for food.

古文：可速遣使阅实其数，出内库物赎之。 
现代文：朕很是怜悯他们。可以快些派人查看落实卖身的人数，从内库拨出财物赎出他们。 
English: I feel very sorry for them. I can quickly send someone to check the number of people who have sold themselves, and allocate money from the internal treasury to redeem them.

古文：乙未，幸鹰房，主者以鹰隼置内省堂上，上怒曰： 此宰相听事，岂置鹰隼处耶？ 
现代文：十四日，皇帝驾临鹰房，主管鹰房的人把鹰隼放在内省堂上，皇上发怒道： 这是宰相听事的地方，难道是放置鹰隼的地方吗？ 
English: On the 14th, the emperor arrived at the eagle room. The person in charge of the eagle room placed the eagle beak on the introspection hall. The emperor was angry and said: This is the place where the prime minister listens, is it the place where the eagle beak is placed?

古文：痛责其人，俾置他所。
现代文：狠狠地斥责了这个主管人，让他把鹰隼放到别的地方。
English: He berated the supervisor and told him to put the eagle's beak somewhere else.

古文：己亥，以宿直将军乌里雅为夏国生日使。
现代文：十八日，任命宿直将军乌里雅为夏国生日使。
English: On the 18th, General Uriya was appointed as the envoy for the birthday of Xia Guo.

古文：辛亥，以太子少詹事乌古论三合为高丽生日使。
现代文：三十日，派出太子少詹事乌古论三合为高丽生日使。
English: On the 30th, Crown Prince Zhan Zhiwu sent three envoys to celebrate the birthday of the Republic of Korea.

古文：十月癸丑朔，猎于密云县。
现代文：十月一日，皇帝到密云县打猎。
English: On October 1, the emperor went hunting in Miyun County.

古文：丙寅，还都。
现代文：十四日，回京都。
English: On the 14th, I returned to Kyoto.

古文：己卯，命泰宁军节度使张弘信等二十四人分路通检诸路物力。
现代文：二十七日，命令泰宁军节度使张弘信等二十四人分路通检诸路物力。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the commander of the Taining Army to send Zhang Hongxin and twenty-four others to divide the roads and check the material resources.

古文：十一月乙酉，征南都统徒单克宁败宋兵，取楚州。
现代文：十一月四日，征南都统徒单克宁打败宋兵，攻取楚州。
English: On November 4, the Southern Expeditionary Army led by Shan Kening defeated the Song soldiers and captured Chuzhou.

古文：己丑，封子永功为郑王。
现代文：八日，皇上册封皇子永功为郑王。
English: On the 8th, the emperor conferred the title of Zheng Wang on Prince Yonggong.

古文：辛卯，冬猎。
现代文：十日，实行冬猎。
English: On the tenth day, the winter hunt was carried out.

古文：乙未，诏进师伐宋。
现代文：十四日，诏令进军攻伐宋国。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict ordered the army to invade Song.

古文：戊戌，次河间府。
现代文：十七日，到河间府。
English: On the 17th, I went to Kawama Prefecture.

古文：辛丑，尚书省火。
现代文：二十日，尚书省失火。
English: On the 20th, fire broke out in Shangshu Province.

古文：甲辰，次清州。
现代文：二十三日，到清州。
English: On the 23rd, I arrived in Cheongju.

古文：闰月壬子朔，还都。
现代文：闰十一月一日，皇帝返回京都。
English: On November 1, the emperor returned to Kyoto.

古文：十二月丁亥，尚书省奏都统高景山取商州。
现代文：十二月七日，尚书省禀告都统高景山攻取商州。
English: On December 7th, Shangshu Province issued an obituary to the capital Gaojingshan to capture Shangzhou.

古文：己丑，腊，猎于近郊。
现代文：九日，举行冬祭大典，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 9th, the grand winter festival was held, and the goose was hunted in the suburbs.

古文：辛卯，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：十一日，太白金星白天显现，经过天空。
English: On the 11th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, passing through the sky.

古文：是岁，大有年。
现代文：这一年，是大丰收年。
English: This year was a bumper harvest.

古文：断死罪十有七人。
现代文：判死罪十七人。
English: Seventeen people were sentenced to death.

古文：五年正月辛亥朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定五年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Daejeon era, Korea and South Korea sent envoys to offer congratulations.

古文：乙卯，诏泰州、临潢接境设边堡七十，驻兵万三千。
现代文：五日，皇帝诏令在泰州与临潢相接的境地，设置边防堡垒七十座，屯驻军队一万三千人。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor issued a decree to set up 70 border fortresses and station 13,000 troops in Taizhou and Linyi.

古文：己未，宋通问使魏杞等以国书来。书不称 大 ，称 侄宋皇帝 ，称名 再拜奉书于叔大金皇帝 。
现代文：九日，宋国通问使魏杞等人拿着国书前来，书中不称 大 ，称 侄宋皇帝 ，称名字，说 再拜奉书于叔大金皇帝 。
English: On the 9th, Song asked Wei Wei and others to come with the national book. In the book, they didn't call him Da, they called him the nephew of Emperor Song, they called him by name, and said that they would worship the book in the uncle of Emperor Daqin.

古文：岁币二十万。
现代文：年贡献钱币二十万。
English: The annual contribution amounts to 200,000 coins.

古文：辛未，诏中外。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝诏告中外。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor issued a proclamation to the people at home and abroad.

古文：复命有司，旱、蝗、水溢之处，与免租赋。
现代文：又命令有司，对遭受旱灾、蝗灾、水灾的地方，免去租税。
English: And he commanded the governors to grant tax exemptions to the regions afflicted by drought, locusts, and floods.

古文：癸酉，命元帅府诸新旧军以六万人留戍，余并放还。
现代文：二十三日，命令元帅府各新军、旧军都拿出六万人留下戍守，其余的人一并放他们回去。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered all the new and old troops of the marshal's office to take out 60,000 people to stay behind, and let the rest of them go back together.

古文：以宋国岁币悉赏诸军。
现代文：把宋国年贡献的钱币全部赏赐给各路军队。
English: All the money and coins contributed by the Song Dynasty were awarded to the armies of various countries.

古文：二月壬午，以左副都点检完颜仲等为宋报问使。
现代文：二月三日，让左副都点检完颜仲等人当宋国报问使。
English: On February 3, Yan Zhong and others were sent to Song to report and interrogate the envoy.

古文：壬寅，罢纳粟补官令。
现代文：二十三日，罢免交粮补官令。
English: On the 23rd, the order to pay grain supplement was revoked.

古文：戊申，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：二十九日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 29th, it was the Spring Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate each other.

古文：三月壬申，群臣奉上尊号曰应天兴祚仁德圣孝皇帝，诏中外。
现代文：三月二十三日，群臣奉献给皇上尊号，叫应天兴祚仁德圣孝皇帝，并诏告中外。
English: On March 23rd, a group of courtiers dedicated the honorific title to the emperor, calling him Emperor Ying Tianxing and Emperor Shengxiao, and issued an edict to China and abroad.

古文：四月癸卯，西京留守寿王京谋反，狱成，特免死，杖之，除名，岚州安置。
现代文：四月二十五日，西京留守寿王京阴谋造反，关进狱中，特赦免他死罪，用杖刑，后除名，安置在岚州。
English: On April 25, Shou Wangjing, a resident of West Beijing, plotted to rebel and was imprisoned. He was pardoned from the death penalty and was punished with a cane. He was later expelled from the party and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：乙巳，右副元帅完颜思敬罢。
现代文：二十七日，免去完颜思敬右副元帅官职。
English: On the 27th, Yan Si Kei was relieved of his duties as Vice Marshal of the Right.

古文：丁未，右丞相、都元帅仆散忠义还自军。
现代文：二十九日，右丞相、都元帅仆散忠义从军队回还。
English: On the 29th, the Minister of the Right, Marshal Dousan Tadayoshi, returned from the army.

古文：五月壬子，左副元帅纥石烈志宁以召入见。
现代文：五月四日，左副元帅纥石烈志宁因为皇帝召见入朝。
English: On May 4, Vice-Marshal of the Left Zou Shi Retshinin went to the imperial court because the emperor had summoned him.

古文：丁巳，以仆散忠义为尚书左丞相，纥石烈志宁为平章政事，还军。
现代文：九日，任命仆散忠义为尚书左丞相，纥石烈志宁为平章政事，返回军中。
English: On the 9th, he appointed his servant, San Zhongyi, as Shang Shuxu, the minister of the left, and Zou Shi, Li Shining, as the minister of the right, and returned to the army.

古文：乙丑，以平章政事宗宪为尚书右丞相。
现代文：十七日，任命平章政事宗宪为尚书右丞相。
English: On the 17th, Taira no Shosho was appointed as the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs.

古文：癸酉，罢山东路都统府，以其军各隶总管府。
现代文：二十五日，罢除山东路都统府，把原所属军队分别归属总管府。
English: On the 25th, the Shandong Provincial Government was abolished, and the former military forces were transferred to the General Administration of the People's Republic of China.

古文：六月甲辰，芝产大安殿柱。丙午，京师地震，雨毛。
现代文：六月二十七日，大安殿柱上产出灵芝，二十九日，京城发生地震，细雨蒙蒙。
English: On June 27th, Ganoderma lucidum was produced on the pillar of the Da'an Hall, and on the 29th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and it rained heavily.

古文：七月戊申朔，京师地复震。
现代文：七月一日，京城再次发生地震。
English: On July 1, another earthquake hit Kyoto.

古文：罢陕西都统府，复置统军司京兆，徙陕西元帅府河中。
现代文：撤销陕西都统府，重新设置统军司京兆，把陕西元帅府迁移到河中。
English: Revoke the Shaanxi General Headquarters, re-establish the Jingzhao General Headquarters, and relocate the Shaanxi Marshal Headquarters to Hezhong.

古文：八月己卯，前宿州防御使乌林答剌撒以与宋李世辅交通，伏诛。
现代文：八月三日，前宿州防御使乌林答剌撒因为和宋国李世辅勾结，伏法被诛杀。
English: On August 3, the defense of Maeshu Prefecture caused Ulin to answer Caesar for colluding with Li Shifu of the Song Dynasty, and Fufa was killed.

古文：癸巳，宋、夏遣使贺尊号。
现代文：十九日，宋、夏两国分别派遣使者来祝贺皇上获得尊号。
English: On the 19th, Song and Xia separately sent envoys to congratulate the emperor on receiving the honorary title.

古文：九月丁未朔，以吏部尚书高衎等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：九月一日，让吏部尚书高絗等人当贺宋生日使。
English: On September 1st, Shangshu Gaoqi and others from the Personnel Department were appointed as He Song's birthday envoys.

古文：戊申，秋猎。
现代文：二日，开始秋季打猎活动。
English: On the second day, the autumn hunting activities began.

古文：庚戌，以宿直将军术虎蒲查为夏国生日使。
现代文：四日，让宿直将军术虎蒲查当夏国生日使。
English: On the fourth day, he asked General Sukuzunao to investigate the birthday of Xia Guo.

古文：甲戌，还都。
现代文：二十八日，返回京都。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：十月丁丑朔，地震。
现代文：十月一日，发生地震。
English: On October 1, an earthquake occurred.

古文：辛巳，以大宗正丞璋为高丽生日使。
现代文：五日，派遣大宗正丞璋当高丽生日使。
English: On the 5th, Daizong Zhengzheng was dispatched as a birthday envoy to Korea.

古文：乙未，冬猎。
现代文：十九日，开展冬猎。
English: On the 19th, the winter hunt began.

古文：辛丑，还都。
现代文：二十五日，返回京都。
English: On the 29th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：十一月丙午朔，上谓宰臣曰： 朕在位日浅，未能遍识臣下贤否？全赖卿等尽公举荐。
现代文：十一月一日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕在位时间不长，还没有完全了解臣下是否贤能，完全依靠众卿秉公举荐。
English: On November 1st, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: I have not been on the throne for long, so I do not fully understand whether my vassals are capable or not. I fully rely on the recommendations of the nobles.

古文：今六品以下殊乏人材，何以副朕求贤之意。 
现代文：现在六品以下官员特别缺乏人才，怎样才能满足朕求贤的心愿？ 
English: At present, officials below the sixth grade are particularly lacking in talent. How can we satisfy our desire for excellence?

古文：癸丑，幸东宫。
现代文：八日，皇上驾临东宫。
English: On the eighth day, the Emperor arrived at the East Palace.

古文：戊午，以右副都点检乌古论粘没曷为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十三日，委派右副都点检乌古论粘没曷充当贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 13th, he appointed his right-hand deputy, Du Dangjian, to act as the envoy of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：癸亥，立诸路通检地土等税法。
现代文：十八日，确立诸路通检地土等第税法。
English: On the 18th, the Land and Resources Tax Law of the People's Republic of China was established.

古文：癸酉，大雾。
现代文：二十八日，天降大雾，白天阴暗。
English: On the 28th, a heavy fog descended from the sky, and the daytime was gloomy.

古文：昼晦。十二月己丑，猎于近郊。高丽遣使贺尊号。
现代文：十二月十四日，在近郊打猎。高丽派遣使者来祝贺皇上获得尊号。
English: On December 14, while hunting in the nearby countryside, Goryeo sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor on receiving the honorific title.

古文：六年正月丙午朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定六年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国分别派使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Taiding era, Song, Goryeo, and Hsia separately sent envoys to offer congratulations.

古文：庚午，敕有司： 宫中张设毋以涂金为饰。 
现代文：二十五日，命令有司，宫中陈设不要用涂金来装饰。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, a magistrate ordered that the furnishings in the palace should not be decorated with gold.

古文：二月丁亥，尚书左丞相兼都元帅沂国公仆散忠义薨。
现代文：二月十三日，尚书左丞相兼都元帅沂国公仆散忠义逝世。
English: On February 13th, Shangshu Zuozhong Minister and Marshal of the Capital and Public Servant of the State, San Zhongyi, passed away.

古文：壬寅，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：二十八日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: On the 28th, it was the Spring Festival. Song, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：三月甲寅，上如西京。
现代文：三月十一日，皇上到西京去。
English: On March 11th, the Emperor left for Saikyo.

古文：庚申，次归化州，西京留守唐括德温上谒。
现代文：十七日，到了归化州，西京留守唐括德温拜谒皇上。
English: On the 17th, when he arrived in the naturalized state, he stayed in West Beijing to pay homage to the Tang Dynasty Emperor Dewen.

古文：戊辰，至西京。
现代文：二十五日，皇上到达西京。
English: On the twenty-fifth, the emperor arrived in Saikyo.

古文：庚午，朝谒太祖庙。
现代文：二十七日，朝拜太祖庙。
English: On the 27th, they paid their respects at Taizu Temple.

古文：壬申，击球，百姓纵观。
现代文：二十九日，打球，百姓围着观看。
English: On the 29th, they played ball and the people gathered around to watch.

古文：四月甲戌朔，诏月朔禁屠宰。
现代文：四月一日，诏令每月初一禁止屠宰。
English: On April 1, the edict banned slaughter on the first day of every month.

古文：戊戌，以尚书右司郎中移剌道为横赐高丽使，宿直将军斜卯掴剌为横赐夏国使。
现代文：二十五日，派尚书右司郎中移剌道充当横赐高丽使，宿直将军斜卯掴剌充当横赐夏国使。
English: On the 25th, he sent Shangshu's right-hand man, Zhongyi Xingdao, to act as the envoy to Korea, and the retired general, Xie Wupiao, to act as the envoy to Xia.

古文：辛丑，太白昼见。
现代文：二十八日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：五月戊申，幸华严寺，观故辽诸帝铜像，诏主僧谨视之。
现代文：五月六日，皇上驾临华严寺，观看故辽国各位帝王的铜像，诏令寺中主持僧人小心看护它们。
English: On May 6, the emperor drove to Huayan Temple to see the bronze statues of the emperors of the former Liao Dynasty. He ordered the monks in charge of the temple to take good care of them.

古文：壬子，诏云中大同县及警巡院给复一年。
现代文：十日，诏令免去云中大同县以及警巡院一年的赋税。
English: On the 10th, the edict exempted Datong County in Yunnan Province and the police station from paying taxes for one year.

古文：壬戌，诏将幸银山，诸扈从军士赐钱五万贯，有敢损苗稼者，并偿之。
现代文：二十日，诏告将要驾临银山，赐给诸侍从军士钱五万贯，如果有胆敢损害庄稼青苗的，全数赔偿。
English: On the 20th, the emperor announced that he would visit Yinshan and give the attendants and sergeants fifty thousand yuan. If anyone dared to damage the young seedlings of crops, he would be fully compensated.

古文：六月辛巳，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：六月十日，太白金星白天显现，经过天空。
English: On June 10th, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, passing through the sky.

古文：丙戌，发自西京。
现代文：十五日，皇上从西京出发。
English: On the 15th, the emperor set off from Saikyo.

古文：庚子，猎于银山。
现代文：二十九日，在银山打猎。
English: On the 29th, I went hunting in Yinshan.

古文：七月辛酉，次三叉口。
现代文：七月二十日，到三叉口。
English: July 20th, to the three-way intersection.

古文：八月辛未朔，次凉陉。
现代文：八月一日，到凉陉。
English: On August 1st, I went to Lengyi Mountain.

古文：庚辰，猎于望云之南山。
现代文：十日，在望云的南山打猎。
English: On the 10th, I went hunting in the Nanshan Mountains of the Wangyun Mountains.

古文：九月辛丑朔，至自西京。
现代文：九月一日，从西京归来。
English: On September 1, I returned from Saikyo.

古文：丁未，以户部尚书魏子平为贺宋生日使。
现代文：七日，任命户部尚书魏子平作为贺宋生日使。
English: On the 7th, Wei Ziping, the head of the Household Division, was appointed as He Song's birthday envoy.

古文：辛亥，以翰林待制移剌熙载为夏国生日使。
现代文：十一日，任命翰林待制移剌熙载担任夏国生日使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hanlin was appointed as the birthday envoy of Xia.

古文：泽州刺史刘德裕等以盗用官钱伏诛。
现代文：泽州刺史刘德裕等因为盗用官钱伏法被诛杀。
English: Liu Deyu, the governor of Zhejiang Province, and others were beaten to death for embezzling government funds.

古文：壬子，太白昼见。
现代文：十二日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 12th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸丑，尚书右丞相宗宪薨。
现代文：十三日，尚书右丞相宗宪逝世。
English: On the 13th, Vice-Minister of the Right Sho Sho Sho passed away.

古文：丙辰，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：十六日，太白金星白天显现，划过天空。
English: On the 16th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, streaking across the sky.

古文：十月己卯，以尚书兵部侍郎移剌按答为高丽生日使。
现代文：十月九日，派尚书兵部侍郎移剌按答为高丽生日使。
English: On October 9th, he dispatched Shang Shuheibun's equerry, Ipyeong, as the envoy to celebrate the birthday of the Republic of Korea.

古文：甲申，朝享于太庙。诏免雄、莫等州今年租。
现代文：十四日，在太庙朝拜祭祀，诏令免去雄、莫等州今年的租子。
English: On the 14th, there was a worship service at the Imperial Temple, and the imperial edict exempted Xiong, Mo and other states from this year's rent.

古文：壬辰，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：二十二日，太白金星白天显现，经过天空。
English: On the 22nd, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, passing through the sky.

古文：丁酉，如安肃州。冬猎。
现代文：二十七日，到安肃州，开展冬猎。
English: On the 27th, they went to Anshu to carry out winter hunting.

古文：十一月丙午，还都。
现代文：十一月六日，返回京都。
English: On November 6, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：癸丑，以右副都点检乌古论元忠为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十三日，派遣右副都点检乌古论元忠为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 13th, he dispatched his right-hand deputy to inspect the ancient city of Wuzhen, Yuan Zhong, as an envoy of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 朝官当慎选其人，庶可激励其余，若不当，则启觊觎之心。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：朝廷任命官员应当慎重挑选这些人，还可以激励其余的人努力向上，如果选择不当，那么其余的人会产生不轨的心思。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister: The officials appointed by the Imperial Court should carefully select these people. They can also encourage the rest of the people to work hard. If the choice is not right, then the rest of the people will have wrong thoughts.

古文：卿等必知人才优劣，举实才用之。 
现代文：卿等一定要了解人才的优劣，推举有真才实学的人任用他们。 
English: Sirs and others must understand the merits and demerits of talents, and nominate people with real talent and real learning to appoint them.

古文：庚申，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：二十日，太白金星白天显现，经过天空。
English: On the 20th, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, passing through the sky.

古文：丁卯，参知政事石琚以母忧罢。
现代文：二十七日，参知政事石琚因为母亲丧事免除官职。
English: On the 27th, the councillor-governor, Seiji Ishizaki, was removed from office because of his mother's funeral.

古文：十二月甲戌，诏有司，每月朔望及上七日毋奏刑名。
现代文：十二月五日，诏令有司，每月的初一日以及上旬的七日不要禀奏刑名。
English: On December 5th, the imperial edict was issued that the first day of each month, as well as the first seven days of the month, should not contain the name of the offender.

古文：戊子，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：十九日，太白金星白天显现，经天。
English: On the 19th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime and moved across the sky.

古文：甲午，泰州民合住谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十五日，泰州人合住阴谋造反，伏法被诛。
English: On the 25th, the people of Taizhou conspired to rebel, and Fuba was arrested.

古文：丙申，以平章政事纥石烈良弼为尚书右丞相，纥石烈志宁为枢密使。
现代文：二十七日，任命平章政事纥石烈良弼为尚书右丞相，纥石烈志宁为枢密使。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Taira no Shosho as the Minister of State, and Shiraishi no Retsuyoshi as the Privy Councilor.

古文：七年正月庚子朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定七年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：辛亥，石琚起复参知政事。
现代文：十一日，石琚服丧未满又被任命为参知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shikotsu was appointed to the post of councillor.

古文：壬子，上服衮冕，御大安殿，受尊号册宝礼。
现代文：十二日，皇上穿着礼服及礼冠，御临大安殿，受尊号册宝礼。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor, wearing ceremonial robes and a ceremonial crown, arrived at the Da'an Palace and received the honorable title.

古文：癸丑，大赦，庚申，以元帅左监军徒单合喜为枢密副使。
现代文：十三日，大赦天下。二十日，任命元帅左监军徒单合喜为枢密副使。
English: On the 13th, the emperor pardoned the whole country. On the 20th, he appointed the marshal of the Left Supervisor Army, To Shan He Xi, as the Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：二月庚寅，尚书右丞苏保衡薨。
现代文：二月二十一日，尚书右丞相苏保衡逝世。
English: On February 21st, Su Baoheng, Minister of the Right, passed away.

古文：丙申，以参知政事石琚为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十七日，任命参知政事石琚为尚书右丞。
English: On the 27th, he appointed the political advisor to the governor, Seiji Ishizaki, as his successor.

古文：三月己亥朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：四月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月一日，发生日食。
English: On April 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：壬辰，以御史大夫李石为司徒，大夫如故。
现代文：二十五日，任命御史大夫李石为司徒，并保留原大夫职务。
English: On the 25th, he appointed the imperial historian Dr. Li Shih as a member of the Council of Elders, and retained his former position as a doctor.

古文：五月丙午，大兴府狱空，诏赐钱三百贯为宴乐之用，以劳之。
现代文：五月九日，大兴府讼事全部处理完毕，皇上诏令赐钱三百贯作为他们宴乐的开支，以表示慰劳他们。
English: On the 9th of May, after the Daxingfu litigation was completely settled, the emperor issued an imperial edict to give 300 yuan as the expense of their banquet to show their consolation.

古文：甲寅，以北京留守耨碗温敦兀带为参知政事。
现代文：十七日，任命北京留守耨碗温敦兀带为参知政事。
English: On the 17th, he appointed the Beijing left-behind bowl, Wyndun 带, as a political advisor.

古文：六月癸酉，命地衣用龙文者罢之。
现代文：六月七日，命令罢免用龙文做地衣的人。
English: On June 7, an order was issued to dismiss those who made lichens with dragon patterns.

古文：七月戊申，禁服用金线，其织卖者，皆抵罪。
现代文：七月十三日，下令禁止衣服用金线装饰，那些织这种衣服卖的人，都按罪论处。
English: On July 13th, it was decreed that clothing adorned with gold thread would be banned, and those who knit and sell such clothing would be prosecuted.

古文：丙辰，幸东宫。
现代文：二十一日，驾临东宫。
English: On the 21st, they arrived at the East Palace.

古文：己未，幸东宫视皇太子疾。
现代文：二十四日，驾临东宫探视皇太子病情。
English: On the 24th, he visited the East Palace to inspect the Crown Prince's condition.

古文：闰月丁卯，观稼于近郊。
现代文：闰七月二日，在近郊察看庄稼。
English: On July 2nd, I went to look at the crops in the suburbs.

古文：戊辰，许王永中进封越王，郑王永功封随王，永成封审王。
现代文：三日，将许王永中进封为越王，郑王永功封为随王，永成封为沈王。
English: On the third day, Xu Wang Yongzhong was enthroned as the king of Yue, Zheng Wang Yonggong was enthroned as the king of Sui, and Yongcheng was enthroned as the king of Shen.

古文：甲戌，诏遣秘书监移剌子敬经略北边。
现代文：九日，诏令派遣秘书监移剌子敬经略北部边疆。
English: On the 9th, the imperial edict dispatched a secretary to supervise the transfer of troops to the northern border.

古文：戊寅，幸东宫。
现代文：十三日，驾临东宫。
English: On the eighth day, they arrived at the East Palace.

古文：己卯，庆云环日。
现代文：十四日，吉祥的云彩环绕太阳。
English: On the 14th, auspicious clouds surround the sun.

古文：壬午，观稼于近郊。
现代文：十七日，皇上在近郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 17th, the emperor inspected the crops in the suburbs.

古文：戊子，观稼于北郊。
现代文：二十三日，在北郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 23rd, he inspected crops in the northern suburbs.

古文：八月辛亥，庆云环日。
现代文：八月十七日，吉祥的云彩环绕太阳。
English: On August 17th, auspicious clouds circled the sun.

古文：癸丑，尚书右丞相监修国史纥石烈良弼进《太宗实录》，上立受之。
现代文：十九日，尚书右丞相监修国史纥石烈良弼进献《太宗实录》，皇上起立接受它。
English: On the 19th, the Minister of the Right, Shang Shujo, and the Supervisor of the State Historian, Shishile Liangyao, presented "The Record of Emperor Taizong," and the Emperor stood up to receive it.

古文：己未，如大房山。
现代文：二十五日，到大房山去。
English: On the 15th, I went to Mt. Ofusa.

古文：壬戌，致祭睿陵。
现代文：二十八日，向睿陵祭献。
English: On the 28th, offerings were made to Rui Ling.

古文：九月乙丑朔，还宫。
现代文：九月一日，返回皇宫。
English: On September 1, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：己巳，右三部检法官韩赞以捕蝗受赂，除名。
现代文：五日，右三部检法官韩赞因为捕杀蝗虫期间受赂，被除名。
English: On the fifth day, Han Zan, a procurator of the Third Department of the Right, was removed from the list because he was bribed during the killing of locusts.

古文：诏吏人但犯赃罪，虽会赦，非待旨不叙。
现代文：皇上诏令：官员凡是犯了贪污罪，虽然可以赦免，但是除非有特旨，一般不再有被授官和被奖励的机会。
English: The Emperor's edict: although officials who have committed the crime of corruption can be pardoned, unless there is a special order, they generally no longer have the opportunity to be awarded and rewarded.

古文：以劝农使蒲察莎鲁窝等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：派劝农使蒲察莎鲁窝等人为贺宋生日使。
English: He sent the farmer's envoy Putsasaluwo and others to be the envoys for He Song's birthday.

古文：辛未，参知政事唐括安礼罢。
现代文：七日，免除参知政事唐括安礼的官职。
English: On the seventh day, the official position of the political secretary of the Tang Dynasty was exempted.

古文：乙亥，以宿直将军唐括鹘鲁为夏国生日使。
现代文：十一日，派宿直将军唐括鹘鲁为夏国生日使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he dispatched General Tang Xuanlu to be the envoy for the birthday of Xia Guo.

古文：庚辰，地震。
现代文：十六日，发生地震。
English: On the 16th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：辛巳，以都水监李卫国为高丽生日使。
现代文：十七日，派都水监李卫国为高丽生日使。
English: On the 17th, Li Weiguo, the water conservator of the capital, was sent as an envoy to celebrate the birthday of Goryeo.

古文：乙酉，秋猎。
现代文：二十一日，开始秋季打猎活动。
English: On the 21st, the autumn hunting activities began.

古文：庚寅，次保州。
现代文：二十六日，到保州。
English: On the 26th, to Hozhou.

古文：诏修起居注王天祺察访所经过州县官。
现代文：诏令撰修起居注的王天祺察访所经过州县的官员的情况。
English: Wang Tianyao, who wrote the commentary on the edict, inspected the situation of officials passing through the prefectures and counties.

古文：十月乙未朔，上谓侍臣曰： 近闻朕所幸郡邑，会宴寝堂宇，后皆避之，此甚无谓，可宣谕，令仍旧居止。 
现代文：十月一日，皇上对侍臣说： 近来听说朕所驾临的郡邑，曾经在堂宇设宴就寝，后来又都回避这件事，这很无所谓，可以宣告，下令仍旧居住在那里。 
English: On October 1st, the Emperor said to his courtiers, "I have recently heard that in the county town I am visiting, there was a banquet held in a hall and people slept there, but later they all avoided the matter. It doesn't matter, I can announce that I have ordered them to still live there.

古文：戊申，还都。
现代文：十四日，返回京都。
English: On the 14th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：丁巳，上谓宰臣曰： 海陵不辨人才优劣，惟徇己欲，多所升擢。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：海陵不辨人才优劣，只是屈从自己的欲望的，大多予以提升。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Hailing does not discriminate between superior and inferior talent, but those who succumb to their own desires are mostly promoted."

古文：朕即位以来，以此为戒，止取实才用之。
现代文：朕即位以来，拿这事作为借鉴，仅只是选取有实际才能的人任用他们。
English: Since my accession to the throne, taking this as a reference, I have only selected people with real talent and appointed them.

古文：近闻蠡州同知移剌延寿在官污滥，询其出身，乃正隆时鹰房子。
现代文：近来听说蠡州同知移剌延寿在任上贪污没有节制，询问他的出身，是正隆年间鹰房的人。
English: Recently, I heard that Yan Shou, Zhengzhou's comrade-in-arms, had engaged in unbridled corruption during his term of office. I asked him about his background. He was a person from Yingfang during Zhenglong's reign.

古文：如鹰房、厨人之类，可典城牧民耶？
现代文：像鹰房人、厨人之类，可以掌管城市大权管理百姓吗？
English: Like the eagle's housekeeper and the cook, can they manage the city's power to manage the people?

古文：自今如此局分，不得授以临民职任。 
现代文：从今天起像这样区分辨别人才，不得授给他们管理百姓的职任。 
English: From this day forth, no one who distinguishes himself in this way is to be entrusted with the government of the people.

古文：以御史中丞孟浩为参知政事。
现代文：任命御史中丞孟浩为参知政事。
English: Appointed Meng Hao, the Vice-Minister of History, as a member of the Council of State.

古文：是日，参知政事耨碗温敦兀带薨。
现代文：当天，参知政事耨碗温敦兀带逝世。
English: On the same day, the senator and politician, Wyndon Cordon, passed away.

古文：辛酉，敕有司于东宫凉楼前增建殿位，孟浩谏曰： 皇太子虽为储贰，宜示以俭德，不当与至尊宫室相俟。 
现代文：二十七日，下令有司在东宫凉楼前增建殿位，孟浩劝说道 ：皇太子虽然是储副，应该让他看到勤俭的道德，不应当让他的宫室和至尊宫室相齐等。 
English: On the 27th, some officials ordered the construction of an additional throne in front of the East Palace's pavilion, and Meng Hao advised: Although the crown prince is the reserve deputy, he should be shown the morality of diligence and frugality, and his palace room should not be equal to the supreme palace room.

古文：乃罢之。
现代文：于是这件事就作罢了。
English: So the matter was dropped.

古文：十一月乙丑朔，上谓宰臣曰： 闻县令多非其人，其令吏部察其善恶，明加黜陟。 
现代文：十一月一日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 听说县令大多不称职，那么让吏部考察他是善是恶，明确加以罢黜或留任。 
English: On November 1st, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: I have heard that most county magistrates are incompetent, so let the cadre department investigate whether he is good or evil, and clearly dismiss him or keep him in office.

古文：辛未，以河间尹徒单克宁等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：七日，派河间尹徒单克宁等人作为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the seventh day, he sent Yintu Shankening and others to serve as envoys of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：壬申，太白昼见。
现代文：八日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁丑，岁星昼见。
现代文：十三日，岁星白天显现。
English: On the 13th, the year star appears in the daytime.

古文：丁亥，枢密副使徒单合喜罢。
现代文：二十三日，免去徒单合喜枢密副使职务。
English: On the 23rd, he was relieved of his duties as Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：十二月戊戌，东京留守徒单合喜、北京留守完颜谋衍、肇州防御使蒲察通朝辞，赐通金带，谕之曰： 卿虽有才，然用心多诈，朕左右须忠实人，故命卿补外。
现代文：十二月五日，东京留守徒单合喜、北京留守完颜谋衍、肇州防御使蒲察通入朝辞行，皇帝赏赐御金带，告诉他们说： 卿虽然有才干，然而用心多诡诈，朕左右须有忠实可靠的人，所以命令卿去补外职。
English: On December 5th, when the Tokyo stay-behinds, Shan Hexi, Beijing stay-behinds, Yan Muyan, and Zhaozhou defense made Pucha pass into the DPRK and resign, the emperor rewarded him with a gold belt and told him, "Sir, although you are talented, your intentions are deceitful. I must have loyal and reliable people around me, so I ordered you to fill in for me.

古文：赐卿金带者，答卿服劳之久也！ 
现代文：赐给御金带的原因，是酬答卿长期服侍的辛劳。 
English: The reason for giving the gold belt was to reward the long service of the lord.

古文：又顾谓左宣徽使敬嗣晖曰： 如卿不可谓无才，所欠者纯实耳！ 
现代文：又转过脸对左宣徽使敬嗣辉说： 像卿这样的人不能说没有才干，所欠缺的是纯朴诚实罢了。 
English: He also turned his face to the left of Xuan Hui and said, "People like Xuan Hui cannot be said to lack talent. What they lack is simple honesty."

古文：甲辰，以北京留守完颜思敬为平章政事。
现代文：十一日，任命北京留守完颜思敬为平章政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yan Sijian was appointed as the political affairs of Pingzhang after leaving Beijing.

古文：是岁，断死囚二十人。
现代文：当年，判死囚二十人。
English: Twenty people were sentenced to death that year.

古文：八年正月甲子朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定八年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia separately sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：乙丑，上谓宰臣曰： 朕治天下，方与卿等共之，事有不可，各当面陈，以辅朕之不逮，慎毋阿顺取容。
现代文：初二，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕治理天下，才和卿等人共事，事有不可行的，卿等人应该各自当面陈述，来辅助朕的不周到，谨记不要阿谀顺从取悦朕。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor said to the prime minister: "I am the ruler of the world, so I have to work with you and others. There are things that cannot be done. You and others should each make a statement in person to help me with my carelessness, and remember not to obey me to please me."

古文：卿等致位公相，正行道扬名之时，苟或偷安自便，虽为今日之幸，后世以为何如？ 
现代文：卿等官高至于公侯宰相，正是处在行道扬名的时候，如果苟且偷安只顾自己方便，虽然是今日的幸运，然而后代人会怎样看你？ 
English: Sirs and other high-ranking officials, as for the prince and prime minister, it is precisely at the time when the streets are famous. If you steal the peace and only care about your own convenience, although it is today's luck, how will future generations look at you?

古文：群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：群臣都称颂万岁。
English: The courtiers in the hall cheered loudly.

古文：辛未，谓秘书监移剌子敬等曰： 昔唐、虞之时，未有华饰，汉惟孝文务为纯俭。
现代文：八日，皇上对秘书监移剌子敬等人说 ：往昔唐、虞时代，不曾有豪华的装饰，汉代只有孝文帝重视纯朴节俭。
English: On the 8th, the emperor said to his secretary, Jianzhi Shanzi Jing and others, "In the past, during the Tang and Yu dynasties, there was no luxurious decoration. During the Han Dynasty, only Emperor Xiaowen valued simplicity and frugality.

古文：朕于宫室惟恐过度，其或兴修，即损宫人岁费以充之，今亦不复营建矣！
现代文：朕对于皇宫庭室的装饰只恐怕过度，如果要兴建或者修缮，就减掉宫人的岁钱来充费用，现在也不再营造修缮了。
English: I am afraid that the decoration of the palace garden room is just excessive. If it is to be built or repaired, the palace people's income will be deducted to charge the cost, and now it will no longer be built or repaired.

古文：如宴饮之事，近惟太子生日及岁元尝饮酒，往者亦止上元、中秋饮之，亦未尝至醉。
现代文：再比如宴饮的事，近来只在太子生日及每年元日饮酒，从前也只是在上元、中秋节饮酒，也不曾到喝醉的地步。
English: For example, when it comes to banquets, people only drink alcohol on the prince's birthday and New Year's Day recently. Previously, they only drank alcohol on the Shangyuan and Mid-Autumn Festival, and never to the point of getting drunk.

古文：至于佛法，尤所未信。
现代文：至于佛法，尤其不曾迷信。
English: As far as Buddhism is concerned, it has never been superstitious.

古文：梁武帝为同泰寺奴，辽道宗以民户赐寺僧，复加以三公之官，其惑深矣！ 
现代文：梁武帝当同泰寺奴，辽道宗拿民户赐给寺僧，又给寺僧加三公的官衔，他们迷信佛法是很深的。 
English: Emperor Liangwu treated the monks of Tongtai Temple as his slaves, and the monks of Liao Dao sect were given the title of monks, and the monks were also given the official title of the Three Princes. Their superstitious belief in Buddhism was very deep.

古文：庚辰，行皇太子册礼。
现代文：十七日，施行皇太子册封的礼仪。
English: On the 17th, the crown prince's investiture ceremony took place.

古文：二月甲午朔，制子为改嫁母服丧三年。
现代文：二月一日，裁定作为儿子要为改嫁的母亲服丧三年。
English: On February 1, it was ruled that as a son, he should mourn his remarried mother for three years.

古文：上谕左宣徽使敬嗣晖曰： 凡为人臣，上欲要君之恩，下欲干民之誉，必亏忠节，卿宜戒之！ 
现代文：皇上告诉左宣徽使敬嗣辉说 ：凡是作为君王的臣子的，对上想要得到君的恩宠，对下想要干涉百姓的赞誉，一定是缺忠节，卿应该戒备这些。 
English: The emperor told Zuo Xuan Hui to tell Jing Shi Hui: "Anyone who, as a vassal of the king, wants to gain the favor of the prince, and wants to interfere with the praise of the people, must be a lack of loyalty, and the lord should be wary of these.

古文：三月癸亥朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：己巳，命以职官子补令史。
现代文：七日，命令给职官的儿子补令史。
English: On the seventh day, the son of the official was ordered to supplement the order history.

古文：丁丑，命护卫亲军百户、五十户，非直日不得带刀入宫，己丑，太白昼见。
现代文：十五日，命令护卫亲军百户、五十户，不是值日不得带刀进宫。二十七日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ordered the guards to escort 100 to 50 households of pro-army families, and if they were not on duty, they were not allowed to bring swords into the palace. On the twenty-seventh day, Taibai Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：四月丙午，诏曰： 马者军旅所用，牛者农耕之资，杀牛有禁，马亦何殊，其令禁之。 
现代文：四月十五日，皇帝下诏说： 马是军旅所使用的工具，牛是农耕的资本，对于杀牛有禁令，马也不能特殊，要下令禁止杀马。 
English: On April 15th, the emperor issued an edict saying: Horses are tools used by the military, cattle are agricultural capital, there is a ban on killing cows, and horses cannot be special, it is necessary to order a ban on killing horses.

古文：戊申，击球常武殿，司天马贵中谏曰： 陛下为天下主，系社稷之重，又春秋高，围猎击球危事也，宜悉罢之。 
现代文：十七日，皇上在常武殿打球，司天马贵中劝谏说： 陛下是天下君主，身系社稷的重任，又年龄也高了，围猎、打球是有危险的活动，应该完全作罢。 
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor was playing ball at the Jōmu-den. Sitenmagui persuaded him by saying, "Your majesty is the monarch of the world, you have a heavy social responsibility, and you are old. Hunting and playing ball are dangerous activities, and should be completely abandoned."

古文：上曰： 朕以示习武耳！ 
现代文：皇上说 ：朕参加这些活动不过是来示范习武罢了。 
English: The emperor said, "My participation in these activities is just a demonstration of martial arts.

古文：五月甲子，北望淀大震、风、雨雹，广十里，长六十里。
现代文：五月三日，北望淀发生大地震，天刮大风、降雨和冰雹，范围在宽十里、长六十里方圆。
English: On May 3rd, a major earthquake occurred in Bukhobodian, with strong winds, rain and hail. The area was ten miles wide and sixty miles long.

古文：诏户、工两部，自今宫中之饰，并勿用黄金。
现代文：皇上诏令户部和工部，从今天起宫中的装饰，一并不要用黄金。
English: The emperor decreed that the household and the work department, from today, do not use gold in the decoration of the palace.

古文：乙丑，上如凉陉。
现代文：四日，皇上到凉陉去。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor went to Liangyao.

古文：丁卯，岁星昼见。
现代文：六日，岁星白天显现。
English: On the sixth day, the year star appears in the daytime.

古文：庚寅，改旺国崖曰静宁山，曷里浒东川曰金莲川。
现代文：二十九日，改旺国崖叫静宁山，曷里浒东川改叫金莲川。
English: On the 29th, the Changwang National Cliff was renamed Jingning Mountain, and the Balidong River was renamed Jinlian River.

古文：六月，河决李固渡，水入曹州。
现代文：六月，黄河在李固渡决口，水漫进曹州。
English: In June, the Yellow River broke through Li Guodu, flooding Caozhou.

古文：七月甲子，制盗群牧马者死，告者给钱三百贯。
现代文：七月五日，判盗群马的牧马人死刑，奖给告发的人三百贯钱。
English: On July 5th, the wrangler who stole a herd of horses was sentenced to death, and the person who reported the crime was awarded three hundred crowns.

古文：戊辰，上谓平章政事完颜思敬等曰： 朕思得贤士，寤寐不忘。
现代文：九日，皇上对平章政事完颜思敬等人说 ：朕思念得到贤士，睡觉时也不忘。
English: On the 9th, the emperor said to the people of Pingzhang: "I miss the wise men, and I do not forget them when I sleep.

古文：自今朝臣出外，即令体访外任职官廉能者，及草莱之士可以助治者，具姓名以闻。 
现代文：从现在起朝臣外出，即命令他们察访在外任职官员中的廉洁能干的人，以及草莽之士可以帮助治理的人，把他们的姓名全部报来让朕知道。 
English: From now on, when courtiers go abroad, they should be ordered to visit the honest and capable officials in foreign posts, as well as those who can help the government, and report their names to me.

古文：甲戌，秋猎。
现代文：十五日，开始秋猎活动。
English: On the fifteenth day, the autumn hunting activities began.

古文：己卯，次三叉口。
现代文：二十日，到达三叉口。
English: On the 20th, we arrived at the crossroads.

古文：上谕点检司曰： 沿路禾稼甚佳，其扈从人少有蹂践，则当汝罪。 
现代文：皇上告谕点检司说 ：沿路庄稼长势很好，如果随从人员稍有损害践踏，则应当治你的罪。 
English: The emperor told the inspector that the crops along the road were growing well, and if any of his attendants did any damage by trampling on them, they should be punished.

古文：八月乙卯，至自凉陉。
现代文：八月二十六日，从凉陉回到京都。
English: On August 26, he returned to Kyoto from Ryozen.

古文：九月辛酉，上谕尚书右丞石琚、参政孟浩曰： 闻蔚州采地蕈，役夫数百千人，朕所用几何？
现代文：九月三日，皇上告诉尚书右丞石琚、参政孟浩说： 听说蔚州采蘑菇，役夫数百千人，朕所需要才多少？
English: On September 3rd, the emperor told Shang Shujuan, Shijuan, and Meng Hao: I have heard that hundreds of thousands of people work in Ulshu to pick mushrooms. How many do I need?

古文：而扰动如此。
现代文：然而搅扰百姓到这种地步。
English: However, disturbing the people to such an extent.

古文：自今差役凡称御前者，皆须禀奏，仍令附册。 
现代文：从今以后凡是称为御前差役的，都必须禀奏，仍然命令他们登记入册。 
English: From now on, anyone who is called a gozen shakiyaku must play the harp, and they are still ordered to register.

古文：癸亥，以右宣徽使移剌神独斡等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：五日，派遣右宣徽使移剌神独斡等人充当贺宋生日使。
English: On the fifth day, the Right Herald of the Annunciation sent the Emissary of the Emissary of the Emissary of the Emissary of the Emissary of the Annunciation and the Emissary of the Emissary of the Emissary of the Birthday of He Song.

古文：己巳，以引进使高希甫为夏国生日使。
现代文：十一日，派遣引进使高希甫充当夏国生日使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Gao Xifu was dispatched to act as the birthday envoy of Xia Guo.

古文：庚午，上幸东宫。
现代文：十二日，皇上驾临东宫。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor arrived at the East Palace.

古文：癸酉，上谕宰臣曰： 卿等举用人材，凡己所知识，必使他人举奏，朕甚不喜。
现代文：十五日，皇上告谕宰相大臣说 ：卿等推举选用人才，凡是自己所认识的，一定要让别人举荐禀奏，朕很是不高兴。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Emperor told the Prime Minister, "Sir, I am not happy that you are choosing and selecting people. If you know someone, you must have them recommended by someone else.

古文：如其果贤，何必以亲疏为避忌也。 
现代文：如果这人果真贤能，何必拿亲疏作为回避忌讳的标准呢！ 
English: If this person is truly virtuous, why take familiarity as the standard for avoiding taboos!

古文：以户部尚书魏子平为参知政事。
现代文：任命户部尚书魏子平为参知政事。
English: Appointed the head of the household, Wei Ziping, as a member of the Council of State.

古文：辛巳，上谓御史大夫李石曰： 台宪固在分别邪正，然内外百司岂谓无人？
现代文：二十三日，皇上对御史大夫李石说 ：台宪固在分别邪恶，然而内外百司怎么能说无人。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor said to the imperial historian Li Shih: Taiwan's Constitution is firmly evil in separation, but how can one hundred departments at home and abroad say that there is no one.

古文：惟见卿等劾人之罪，不闻举善。
现代文：只见卿等弹劾有罪，听不到推举好人好事。
English: We only see the impeachment of guilty people, such as Sir, and do not hear the nomination of good people and good things.

古文：自今宜令监察御史分路刺举善恶以闻。 
现代文：从今以后命令监察御史分头去察访善或恶，并把情况报告我知道。 
English: From now on, I order the inspector general to investigate the good and the bad, and report the situation to me.

古文：上尝命左卫将军大磐访求良弓，而磐多自取，护卫娄室以告，上命点检司鞫磐。
现代文：皇上曾经命令左卫将军大磐探访寻求良弓，而大磐大多将良马良弓自己留下了，护卫娄室把这件事报告了，皇上命令点检司审查大磐。
English: The emperor once ordered General of the Left Division Oban to visit and search for good bows, but Oban left most of the good horses and bows by himself. The guard's office reported the matter, and the emperor ordered the inspector to examine Oban.

古文：磐妹为宝林，磐属内侍僧儿言之宝林，宝林以闻，命杖僧儿百，出磐为陇州防御使。
现代文：大磐的妹妹是宝林，大磐所属内侍僧儿把这件事告诉了宝林，宝林又告诉皇上，皇上命令打僧儿一百杖，把大磐调出当陇州防御使。
English: Oban's younger sister was Paulin, and Oban's attendant priest Naru told this to Paulin, who in turn told the emperor, who ordered the monk to be beaten with a hundred rods and sent Oban to serve as the defense envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：十月己丑朔，以戒谕官吏贪墨，诏中外。
现代文：十月一日，把戒谕官吏贪污的事，诏告中外。
English: On October 1st, it issued an edict warning officials against corruption, and announced it both at home and abroad.

古文：乙未，命涿州刺史兼提点山陵，每以朔望致祭，朔则用素，望则用肉，仍以明年正月为首。
现代文：七日，命令涿州刺史兼提点山陵，每当每月的初一和十五日祭祀山陵，初一用素的，十五用肉，仍然从明年正月开始。
English: On the seventh day, he ordered that the history of Zhangzhou be engraved and the mountains and hills be mentioned. Whenever the first day and the 15th day of each month, the mountains and hills should be sacrificed. If the first day of the month is used for vegetables, and the 15th day is used for meat, it will still start from the first month of the next year.

古文：及命图画功臣於太祖庙，其未立碑者立之。
现代文：并且命令在太祖庙画出功臣画像，那些还没立碑的要给他们立碑。
English: He also ordered that the images of heroes and heroines be painted in the Taizu Temple, and those who have not yet erected a monument should erect a monument for them.

古文：以翰林待制靖为高丽生日使。
现代文：派遣翰林待靖作为高丽生日使。
English: Sending Hanlin Taejing as a birthday envoy to Korea.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 海陵时，修起居注不任直臣，故所书多不实。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣们说： 海陵在位时，撰修起居注不委任值班大臣，所以所写的许多不真实。
English: The emperor said to the prime ministers and ministers: When Hailing was on the throne, he did not appoint a minister on duty to write the commentary, so much of what was written was untrue.

古文：可访求得实，详而录之。 
现代文：可以访问求得真实的情况，详细记录下来。 
English: You can access the real situation and record it in detail.

古文：参政孟浩进曰： 良史直笔，君举必书，自古帝王不自观史，意正在此。 
现代文：参政孟浩进谏说： 良史直笔，君举必书。自古帝王不自己观看历史，用意正在这里。 
English: Meng Hao Jinjun, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, said: "A good history must be written by the emperor. Since ancient times, emperors did not watch history themselves.

古文：辛亥，诏罢复州岁贡鹿筋。
现代文：二十三日，诏令免去复州每年进贡鹿筋。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict exempted Fuzhou from paying annual tribute to Deer Valley.

古文：十一月乙丑，幸东宫。
现代文：十一月八日，驾临东宫。
English: On November 8th, they arrived at the East Palace.

古文：以同签大宗正事辟合土等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：派遣同签大宗正事辟合土等人作为贺宋正旦使。
English: He also dispatched Daizong Zhengji (大宗正事) and others as envoys of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：十二月戊子朔，遣武定军节度使移剌按等招谕阻珝。
现代文：十二月一日，派遣武定军节度使移剌按等人招抚阻卜。
English: On December 1st, the Wu Ding Army was dispatched to the festival to persuade the displaced people to stay away.

古文：九年正月戊午朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定九年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：辛酉，上与宣徽使敬嗣晖、秘书监移剌子敬论古今事，因曰： 亡辽日屠食羊三百，亦岂能尽用，徒伤生耳！
现代文：初四，皇上和宣徽使敬嗣晖、秘书监移剌子敬谈古论今，皇上说： 已经灭亡的辽国从前每天屠宰供吃的羊三百只，难道能全部吃完？白白地伤害生灵罢了。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor He and Emperor Xuanzong asked Emperor Jing and his secretary, Emperor Jianzhong, to talk about the past and the present. The emperor said, "The Liao Dynasty, which has since perished, used to slaughter 300 sheep for food every day. Could they have eaten them all? They would only have harmed sentient beings in vain."

古文：朕虽处至尊，每当食，常思贫民饥馁，犹在己也。
现代文：朕虽然处在至尊的地位，每当吃饭的时候，常常挂念贫民在挨饿，责任还是在于自己。
English: Although I am in the highest position, whenever I eat, I often worry that the poor are starving, and the responsibility lies with myself.

古文：彼身为恶而口祈福，何益之有？
现代文：他们以身作恶而却追求口福，有什么好处呢？
English: For what profit is it to a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul?

古文：如海陵以张仲轲为谏议大夫，何以得闻忠言。
现代文：像海陵那样让张仲轲当谏议大夫，怎么得到忠言？
English: If Zhang Zhongyao is allowed to act as an advisor, as Hai Ling did, how can he get loyal advice?

古文：朕与大臣论议一事，非正不言，卿等不以正对，岂人臣之道也！ 
现代文：朕和大臣讨论一件事，不是正确的不说，卿等人不拿正确的回答我，难道符合做人臣的道理吗？ 
English: If I discuss a matter with a minister and do not say that it is not correct, and my lord and others do not give me a correct answer, is it consistent with the principle of being a minister?

古文：庚午，诏诸州县和籴，毋得抑配百姓。
现代文：十三日，诏令诸州县和气买进粮食，不得对百姓压制摊派。
English: On the 13th, Zhuzhou County and Huaxi were ordered to buy grain, and they were not allowed to suppress the apportionment of the people.

古文：戊寅，契丹外失剌等谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：二十一日，契丹外失剌等人谋划造反，伏法被诛。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Khitan, who had been dethroned, and others plotted a rebellion, and Fuba was arrested.

古文：丙戌，制汉人、渤海兄弟之妻，服阕归宗，以礼续婚者，听。
现代文：二十九日，裁断汉人、渤海兄弟的妻子，服阕归宗，以礼续婚的，听凭她们。
English: On the 29th, the wives of the Han Chinese and Bohai brothers were judged, and those who returned to their families and continued their marriage with ceremony were left to their own devices.

古文：二月庚寅，制妄言边关兵马者，徒二年。
现代文：二月三日，裁断谎说边关军情的，判二年徒刑。
English: On February 3, he was sentenced to two years in prison for lying about the military situation at the border.

古文：丙申，诏改葬汉二燕王于城东。
现代文：九日，诏令改葬汉二燕王到城东。
English: On the 9th, it was decided to move the funeral of Han Eryan Wang to the east of the city.

古文：庚子，以中都等路水，免税，诏中外。
现代文：十三日，因为中都等路遭受水灾，免税，并诏告中外。
English: On the 13th, because Zhongdu and other roads were flooded, it was exempted from tax and announced to the public.

古文：又以曹、单二州被水尤甚，给复一年。
现代文：又因为曹州、单州受水尤其严重，免去赋税一年。
English: In addition, because Caozhou and Shanzhou are particularly affected by water, they are exempt from tax for one year.

古文：甲寅，诏女直人与诸色人公事相关，只就女直理问。
现代文：二十七日，诏令女真人和各族人公事发生矛盾，只就女真人理问。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict caused a conflict between Jianzhen and people of all ethnic groups in public affairs, and only Jianzhen was questioned.

古文：三月丁巳朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：丁卯，以尚书省定网捕走兽法，或至徒，上曰： 以禽兽之故而抵民以徒，是重禽兽而轻民命也，岂朕意哉！
现代文：十一日，因为尚书省规定 网捕走兽法 ，有的甚至要判徒刑，皇上说： 因为禽兽的缘故而让平民抵偿以至判刑，是重看禽兽而轻贱民命，难道符合朕的意愿吗？
English: On the 11th day, because Shangshu Province stipulated that the law of catching and taking away animals by net, and some even had to be sentenced to imprisonment, the emperor said: Is it in line with my will to have civilians pay compensation and even be sentenced for the sake of animals, is it to value animals and despise the lives of ordinary people?

古文：自今有犯，可杖而释之。 
现代文：从今往后有犯这一条的，可以杖笞之后放了他。 
English: From now on, if anyone violates this rule, he can be beaten with a cane and then released.

古文：诏御史中丞移剌道廉问山东、河南。
现代文：诏令御史中丞移剌道考察山东、河南廉政情况。
English: He ordered the Grand Historian Zhongzheng to go to Shandong Province to investigate the situation of corruption in Shandong and Henan.

古文：辛未，禁民间称言 销金 ，条理内旧有者，改作 明金 字。
现代文：十五日，在民间禁止说 销金 ，整理宫内旧有的字，改作 明金 字。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, it was forbidden for people to say "purchase money," and the old characters in the palace were reorganized and changed to "purchase money."

古文：辛巳，以大名路诸猛安民户艰食，遣使发仓廪减价出之。
现代文：二十五日，因为大名路各猛安民户吃饭艰难，派遣使者前往开仓减价放粮。
English: On the 25th, because it was difficult for all Meng'an households on Daya Road to eat, an envoy was sent to open warehouses to reduce prices and distribute grain.

古文：四月己丑，谓宰臣曰： 朕观在位之臣，初入仕时，竞求声誉以取爵位，亦既显达，即徇默苟容为自安计，朕甚不取。
现代文：四月三日，对宰相大臣说： 朕观察在位的大臣，开始进入仕途的时候，竞相追求声誉来取得爵位，到已经显达的时候，就把沉默、容忍当成保护自己安稳的计策，朕认为这种做法很不可取。
English: On April 3, he said to the Prime Minister: "I have observed that incumbent ministers, when they begin their careers, compete for reputation to obtain a knighthood, and when they have already achieved it, they use silence and tolerance as a strategy to protect their stability. I think this approach is very undesirable.

古文：宜宣谕百官，使知朕意。 
现代文：应当向百官宣布，让他们知道朕的意思。 
English: It should be announced to the officials so that they know what I mean.

古文：癸巳，遣翰林修撰蒲察兀虎、监察御史完颜鹘沙分诣河北西路、大名、河南、山东等路劝猛安谋克农。
现代文：七日，派遣翰林修撰蒲察兀虎、监察御史完颜鹘沙分别到河北西路、大名、河南、山东等路劝说猛安谋克搞好农业。
English: On the 7th, Han Lin Xiu sent Pu Zhaozhu, Pu Zhaozhu, and Guan Yan Baosha, respectively, to the west road of Hebei, Daming, Henan, Shandong and other roads to persuade Meng'an Moke to do a good job in agriculture.

古文：五月丙辰朔，以符宝郎徒单怀贞为横赐高丽使，宿直将军完颜赛也为横赐夏国使。
现代文：五月一日，派符宝郎徒单怀贞充任横赐高丽使，宿直将军完颜赛也充任横赐夏国使。
English: On the first day of May, he appointed Baibao Langtangtanghuai Zhengtong as the envoy to Korea, and the retired general Kanyansai as the envoy to Xia.

古文：戊辰，尚书省奏越王永中、隋王永功二府有所兴造，发役夫。
现代文：十三日，尚书省禀奏越王永中、隋王永功二府有所兴造，征招役夫。
English: On the 13th, Wang Yongzhong of Yue and Wang Yonggong of Sui were invited to be conscripts.

古文：上曰： 朕见宫中竹有枯瘁者，欲令更植，恐劳人而止。
现代文：皇上说： 朕看见宫中竹子有干枯憔悴的，想让人更换种植，又恐怕烦劳人家而罢了。
English: The emperor said, "I saw that the bamboo in the palace had withered, and I wanted to have it replanted, but I'm afraid it would be too much trouble.

古文：二王府各有引从人力，又奴婢甚多，何得更役百姓。
现代文：二王府各有引从人力，加上奴婢很多，怎么还要让百姓服役！
English: The two royal courts each had their own manpower, plus many slaves and maidservants, so how could they make the people serve!

古文：尔等但以例为请，海陵横役无度，可尽为例耶！
现代文：你们但以先例为请，海陵当时随便使用差役没有限度，可以当成先例吗？
English: But please take this as a precedent. At that time, there was no limit to the use of dispatched workers by Hailing. Can this be taken as a precedent?

古文：自今在都浮役，久为例者仍旧，于并官给佣直，重者奏闻。 
现代文：从今天起在京都滥用役夫，久为例者仍旧，其余的一并由官府发给酬金，严重的要报告给我知道。 
English: As of today, the abuse of domestic servants in Kyoto will still be limited to those who have been in the position for a long time, and the rest will be paid by the government. Serious cases should be reported to me.

古文：六月庚寅，冀州张和等反，伏诛。
现代文：六月五日，冀州张和等造反，伏法被诛。
English: On June 5, Zhang He and others in Jizhou rebelled and were arrested.

古文：戊戌，以久旱，命宫中毋用扇。
现代文：十三日，因为长时间干旱，命令宫中不要用扇子。
English: On the 13th, because of the long drought, the palace was ordered not to use fans.

古文：庚子，雨。
现代文：十五日，降雨。
English: On the 10th, it rained.

古文：七月乙卯朔，罢东北路采珠。
现代文：七月一日，免去东北路采集珍珠。
English: On July 1, the Northeast Road was exempted from collecting pearls.

古文：壬申，观稼于近郊。
现代文：十八日，在近郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 18th, he inspected crops in the suburbs.

古文：八月甲申朔，有司奏日食，以雨不见，伐鼓用币如常礼。
现代文：八月一日，有司禀奏发生日食，因为天下雨看不见，遵循往常礼数敲鼓用币。
English: On the first day of August, there was a priest playing the eclipse, because the rain could not be seen, following the usual ritual of beating the drum with coins.

古文：九月甲寅朔，以刑部尚书高德基等为贺宋生日使，宿直将军仆散守中为夏国生日使，提点司天台马贵中为高丽生日使。
现代文：九月一日，派遣刑部尚书高德基等人充当贺宋生日使，宿直将军仆散守中充当夏国生日使，提点司天台马贵中充当高丽生日使。
English: On September 1, the Ministry of Justice dispatched Shangshu Gao Deji and others to act as the birthday envoy of He Song, the general's servant Sanzhong to act as the birthday envoy of Xia Guo, and the Tiantai Maguizhong to act as the birthday envoy of Goryeo.

古文：罢皇太子月料，岁给钱五万贯。
现代文：免去皇太子月料，每年给钱五万贯。
English: The monthly fee for the crown prince will be waived, and the annual payment will be increased to 50,000 yuan.

古文：上谓台臣曰： 比闻朝官内有揽中官物以规贷利者，汝何不言？ 
现代文：皇上对台臣说 ：最近听说朝廷官员中有强揽中级官员的物品而分划货利的，你们为什么不说？ 
English: The emperor said to the courtiers, "Recently, I heard that some officials of the imperial court were forcibly taking the goods of mid-level officials and dividing the profits, why didn't you say so?

古文：皆对曰： 不知。 
现代文：这些台臣都回答说 ：不知道。 
English: All these ministers replied: I don't know.

古文：上曰： 朕尚知之，汝有不知者乎？
现代文：皇上说 ：朕尚且知道这件事，你们能有不知道的吗？
English: The emperor said, "Even though I know about this, how can you not know about it?

古文：朕若举行，汝将安用！ 
现代文：如果朕举报处置，那么要你们有什么用？ 
English: If I report the case, what is the use of asking you?

古文：壬戌，秋猎。
现代文：九日，开始秋季打猎活动。
English: On the 9th, the autumn hunting activities began.

古文：十月丁亥，还都。辛丑，以尚书右丞相纥石烈良弼为左丞相，枢密使纥石烈志宁为右丞相。
现代文：十月五日，皇上返回京都，任命尚书右丞相纥石烈良弼为左丞相，枢密使纥石烈志宁为右丞相。
English: On October 5th, the Emperor returned to Kyoto and appointed Shosho's right-hand minister, Shoseki Ryoryaku, as his left-hand minister, and his confidential envoy, Shoseki Ryoshinin, as his right-hand minister.

古文：诏宗庙之祭，以鹿代牛，著为令。
现代文：诏令宗庙的祭祀活动，用鹿代替牛，写出书面命令。
English: He ordered that the sacrificial activities of the ancestral temple should use deer instead of cattle, and issued a written order.

古文：丙午，大享于太庙。
现代文：二十四日，在太庙展开大的祭献活动。
English: On the 24th, a large-scale sacrificial activity was carried out in Taimiao.

古文：辛亥，以平章政事完颜思敬为枢密使。
现代文：二十九日，任命平章政事完颜思敬为枢密使。
English: On the 29th, Pingzhang Zhengyan Shijian was appointed as the Privy Envoy.

古文：十一月己未，以尚书左丞完颜守道为平章政事，右丞石琚为左丞，参知政事孟浩为右丞。
现代文：十一月七日，任命尚书左丞完颜守道为平章政事，右丞石琚为左丞，参知政事孟浩为右丞。
English: On November 7th, he appointed Shangshu's left senator, Kanen Shudo, as Taira no Shosho, the right senator, Shizuka, as the left senator, and the senator, Meng Hao, as the right senator.

古文：庚申，上幸东宫。
现代文：八日，皇上驾临东宫。
English: On the eighth day, the Emperor arrived at the East Palace.

古文：辛酉，以京兆尹毅等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：九日，派遣京兆尹毅等人为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 9th, he dispatched Jing Zhao, Yin Yi and others as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：壬戌，冬猎。
现代文：十日，开始冬季打猎活动。
English: On the 10th, the winter hunting activities began.

古文：丙子，还都。
现代文：二十四日，返回京都。
English: On the 24th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：十二月丙戌，诏赈临潢、泰州、山东东路，河北东路诸猛安民。
现代文：十二月五日，诏令赈济临潢、泰州、山东东路、河北东路各猛安民。
English: On December 5, the imperial edict was issued to help the people of Linyi, Taizhou, Shandong East Road, and Hebei East Road.

古文：以东京留守徒单合喜为平章政事。
现代文：任命东京留守徒单合喜为平章政事。
English: Appointed a Tokyo left-behind student, Shan Hexi, as a high-ranking government official.

古文：丁酉，太白昼见。
现代文：十六日，太白金星白日显现。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛丑，猎于近郊。
现代文：二十日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 20th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：丙午，制职官犯公罪，在官已承伏者，虽去官犹论。
现代文：二十五日，裁判有职位官员犯公罪，在官位时已经承认罪行伏法的，虽然离职仍然要论处。
English: On the 25th, the court ruled that a high-ranking official had committed a public crime. While in office, he had admitted to the crime of subverting the law, although he still had to be dealt with after leaving office.

古文：十年正月壬子朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of Dading, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the new year.

古文：甲子，命宫中元宵无得张灯。
现代文：十三日，命令宫中元宵节不得张灯。
English: On the 13th, it was ordered that no lanterns could be displayed in the palace during the Lantern Festival.

古文：甲戌，以司徒、御史大夫李石为太尉、尚书令。
现代文：二十三日，任命司徒、御史大夫李石为太尉、尚书令。
English: On the 23rd, Li Shi, a scholar and goshi taifu, was appointed to the rank of taifu (second lieutenant) and Shang Shuling.

古文：二月甲午，安化军节度使徒单子温、副使老君奴以赃罪，伏诛。
现代文：二月十三日，安化军节度使徒单子温、副使老君奴因为贪污罪，伏法被诛。
English: On February 13th, Shan Zi Wen, an apostle of the Anhua Army, and Laojun Niu, a vice-envoy of the Anhua Army, were arrested for corruption.

古文：戊申，上谓近臣曰： 护卫以后皆是治民之官，其令教以读书。 
现代文：二十七日，皇上对近臣说： 护卫以后都是治民的官，要下令教他们读书。 
English: On the 27th, the Emperor said to his courtiers, "From now on, the guards are civil servants. I will order that they be taught to read."

古文：三月壬子朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: On March 1, it was the Spring Festival, and Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：丙辰，上因命护卫中善射者押赐宋使射弓宴，宋使中五十，押宴者才中其七，谓左右将军曰： 护卫十年出为五品职官，每三日上直，役亦轻矣，岂徒令饱食安卧而已！
现代文：五日，皇上赐给宋国使者射弓宴，命令护卫中善射的人押宴，宋国使者射中五十箭，押宴的只射中七箭，皇上对左右将军说： 护卫干十年就要出任五品职官，每三天值一次班，劳役也够轻松了。难道白让他们饱食安卧就行了？
English: On the fifth day, the emperor gave the Song emissaries a bow-shooting banquet and ordered the best shooters among the guards to host the banquet. The Song emissaries shot fifty arrows, while those who hosted the banquet only shot seven arrows. The emperor said to the left and right generals: The guards must serve as five-grade officials for ten years, they are on duty once every three days, and the labor service is easy enough. Isn't it enough to let them have enough to eat and sleep?

古文：弓矢不习，将焉用之？ 
现代文：弓矢的本领不练习，打算怎么使用他们？ 
English: If you don't practice your bow and arrow skills, how are you going to use them?

古文：戊午，以河南统军使宗叙为参知政事。
现代文：七日，任命河南统军使宗叙为参知政事。
English: On the 7th, Zongxu, the envoy of the United Front of Henan Province, was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：庚午，上谓参政宗叙曰： 卿昨为河南统军时，言黄河堤埽利害，甚合朕意。
现代文：十九日，皇上对参政宗叙说 ：卿以前任河南统军的时候，说黄河护堤工事的利和害，很合乎朕的想法。
English: On the 19th, the emperor said to Sanzheng Zongxu: "When you were in charge of the Henan United Army, you said that the benefits and harms of the Yellow River berm construction were very much in line with my thoughts.

古文：朕每念百姓差调，官吏互为奸弊，不早计料，临期星火率敛，所费倍蓰，为害非细。
现代文：朕经常思虑百姓调动不足，官吏互相为奸作弊，不及早计划预测，临到紧急关头再去处理收敛，所要花费的是五倍的精力，为害不小。
English: I often think about the lack of mobilization of the people, the officials cheating each other, the failure to plan and predict in advance, and the need to deal with convergence at the critical moment. It takes five times the energy, which is not a small harm.

古文：卿既参朝政，皆当革弊，择利行之。 
现代文：卿既然参予朝政，就应当革除弊端，选择对国家有利的措施去实行。 
English: Sir, since you are participating in the government of the dynasty, you should eliminate the drawbacks and choose measures that are beneficial to the country.

古文：又谕左丞石琚曰： 女直人径居达要，不知闾阎疾苦。
现代文：又告诉左丞石琚说 ：女真人一直处在通达显要的地位，不知道平民百姓的疾苦。
English: He also told Zuoxing Shiqian: "Ning Zhenren has always been in a prominent position and does not know the sufferings of the common people.

古文：汝等自丞簿至是，民间何事不知，凡有利害，宜悉敷陈。 
现代文：你们自从掌管丞相大权到现在，民间发生的什么事你们不知道？凡是事关重大的，应当全都汇报清楚。 
English: Since you have been in charge of the power of the prime minister until now, do you not know what has happened to the people? Everything that is important should be reported clearly.

古文：四月丁酉，制命妇犯奸，不用夫荫以子封者，不拘此法。
现代文：四月十七日，判定朝廷命妇如果犯奸情罪，凡是不用丈夫庇护而是因为儿子被加封的，不受有关法令制裁。
English: On April 17th, the court ruled that if a court-ordered wife commits adultery, she will not be subject to the sanctions of the relevant laws and regulations if she is not protected by her husband, but is sealed because of her son.

古文：五月乙卯，如柳河川。
现代文：五月五日，到柳河川去。
English: On May 5th, I went to Liuhe River.

古文：闰月庚辰，夏国任得敬胁其主李仁孝，使上表，请中分其国。
现代文：闰五月一日，夏国的任得敬胁迫他的主子李仁孝，让他上表，奏请平分国家。
English: On the first day of the leap month of May, Xia Guo's master Li Renxiao was coerced by his subordinate Yan Zhuo to go to the table and ask for an equal division of the country.

古文：上问宰臣李石，石等以为事系彼国，不如许之。
现代文：皇上问宰臣李石，李石等人认为这是别国的事，不如答应他。
English: The emperor asked the vice-minister, Li Shih. Li Shih and others thought it was a matter for other countries, so it was better to agree with him.

古文：上曰： 彼劫于权臣耳！ 
现代文：皇上说： 那个国家要被权臣劫持了。 
English: The emperor said: That country is about to be hijacked by vassals.

古文：诏不许，并却其贡物。
现代文：诏令不许分国，并推辞了李仁孝进献的贡物。
English: The imperial edict forbade splitting the country, and rejected the tribute offered by Li Renxiao.

古文：七月壬午，秋猎。
现代文：七月四日，开始秋季打猎活动。
English: On the 4th of July, the fall hunting season begins.

古文：戊戌，放围场役夫。
现代文：二十日，在围场安排役夫。
English: On the 20th, they arranged for a porter in the paddock.

古文：诏扈从粮食并从官给。
现代文：诏令随从护侍的口粮一并从官府拨给。
English: According to the imperial edict, the rations for the attendants were all allocated from the government.

古文：乙巳，敕扈从人纵畜牧蹂践禾稼者，杖之，仍偿其直。
现代文：二十七日，勒令对随从护侍人员中放纵牲畜蹂躏践踏庄稼的，施以杖刑，并赔偿损失。
English: On the 27th, it was ordered to give a cane punishment to the attendants who indulged in animal abuse and trampled on crops, and to compensate for the losses.

古文：八月己未，至自柳河川。
现代文：八月十二日，皇上从柳河川回到朝中。
English: On August 12th, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Court from Liuhe River.

古文：壬申，遣参知政事宗叙北巡。
现代文：二十五日，派遣参知政事宗叙到北部巡查。
English: On the 25th, it dispatched a special envoy of the governor, Zheng Jizong, to the north for inspection.

古文：九月庚辰，尚书左丞相纥石烈良弼丁忧，起复如故。
现代文：九月庚辰，尚书左丞相纥石烈良弼服丧，期未满又起任原职。
English: In September, Geng Chen, Shangshu Zuozhong, the Minister of the Left, and Shi Lerong, the Minister of the Right, passed away, and before the expiration of his term, he took up his original post.

古文：壬午，以签书枢密院事移剌子敬为贺宋生日使。
现代文：壬午，派签书枢密院事移剌子敬做贺宋生日使。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Privy Council sent a signed letter to the Emperor, inviting the Emperor to send an envoy to celebrate the birthday of He Song.

古文：庚寅，以户部郎中夹谷阿里补为夏国生日使。
现代文：庚寅，派户部郎中夹谷阿里补当夏国生日使。
English: Geng Yin dispatched the head of the household department, the middle son, Jipetan Ali, to serve as the birthday envoy of Xia Guo.

古文：十月己酉，以大宗正丞糺为高丽生日使。
现代文：十月三日，派大宗正丞礣充当高丽生日使。
English: On October 3, he sent Daizong Zhengzheng to serve as the envoy for the birthday of Goryeo.

古文：甲寅，如霸州，冬猎。
现代文：八日，到霸州去，开始冬季打猎活动。
English: On the eighth day, I went to Bozhou to start the winter hunting activities.

古文：乙丑，上谓大臣曰： 比因巡猎，闻固安县令高昌裔不职，已令罢之。
现代文：十九日，皇上对大臣说： 近日因为巡猎，听说固安县令高昌裔不称职，已经下令罢免了他的职务。
English: On the 19th, the emperor said to the minister: Recently, because of the patrol, I heard that the Gaochang-descended governor of Gu'an County was incompetent, and I have ordered him to be removed from his post.

古文：霸州司候成奉先奉职谨恪，可进一阶，除固安令。 
现代文：霸州司候成奉先任职谨慎忠于职守，可以进升一级，拜为固安县令。 
English: The secretary-general of Bazhou, Cheng Bongxian, is cautious and loyal to his duties, and can be promoted to the first level and become the Guan County magistrate.

古文：辛未，上谓宰臣曰： 朕凡论事有未能深究其利害者，卿等宜悉心论列，无为面从而退有后言。 
现代文：二十五日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：朕凡是在论事时有不能深入研究其利害关系的，卿等应该尽心论证罗列，不要当面顺从而退下去背后又有看法。 
English: On the 25th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Whenever I am discussing a matter and cannot study its interests in depth, my lords, I should do my best to present a reasoned argument. I should not resign myself to the fact that there are other opinions behind me.

古文：十一月辛巳，制盗太庙物者与盗宫中物论同。
现代文：十一月五日，判定盗窃太庙中物品的罪犯与盗窃皇宫中物品的罪犯同罪。
English: On November 5th, the criminal who stole items from the Grand Temple was convicted of the same crime as the criminal who stole items from the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲申，上幸东宫。
现代文：八日，皇上驾临东宫。
English: On the eighth day, the Emperor arrived at the East Palace.

古文：丁亥，以太子詹事蒲速察蒲越等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一日，派太子詹事蒲察蒲速越等人做贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 11th day, he sent Prince Zhan Zhi, Pu Zha, Pu Su Yue and others as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：癸巳，夏国以诛任得敬遣使来谢，诏慰谕之。
现代文：十七日，夏国因为诛杀了任得敬而派遣使者来道谢，皇上诏令安慰他们。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Xia sent an envoy to thank them for their honorable service. The emperor sent an imperial edict to comfort them.

古文：十二月丙寅，上谓宰臣曰： 比体中不佳，有妨朝事。
现代文：十二月二十一日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：近来身体不佳，对处理朝政有妨碍。
English: On December 21st, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Recently, I have been in poor health, which has been a hindrance in handling the affairs of the Imperial Court.

古文：今观所奏事，皆依条格，殊无一利国之事。
现代文：今天看所禀奏的事情，都是依照条律报的，没有一件是特殊的于国有利的事。
English: From what I saw today, all the events were reported in accordance with regulations, and none of them were particularly beneficial to the country.

古文：若一朝行一事，岁计有余，则其利博矣！
现代文：如果一天实行一件有利的事，一年统计下来，那么获利就很广博了。
English: If you do one beneficial thing a day and count it over the course of a year, the benefits will be far-reaching.

古文：朕居深宫，岂能悉知外事？
现代文：朕居住在深宫里，怎么能知道全部外面的事？
English: I live in the Deep Palace, how can I know everything outside?

古文：卿等尤当注意。 
现代文：卿等人尤其应当注意这一点。 
English: Sirs and others should take particular note of this.

古文：十一年正月丙子朔，宋、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定十一年正月初一，宋国、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of Dading, Song and Xia states respectively sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：丁丑，封子永升为徐王，永蹈为滕王，永济为薛王。
现代文：初二，皇上封儿子永升为徐王、永蹈为滕王、永济为薛王。
English: On the second day of the new year, Emperor Feng's sons Yongsheng became King Xu, Yongbai became King Teng, and Yongji became King Xue.

古文：壬午，诏职官年七十以上致仕者，不拘官品，并给俸禄之半。
现代文：初六，诏令有职位的官员年满七十辞官的，不限官的品位高低，一并发给原俸禄的一半。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：丙申，命赈南京屯田猛安被水灾者。
现代文：二十日，命令赈济南京屯田猛安遭受水灾的人。
English: On the 20th, the people who suffered from floods in Tonden Meng'an in Nanjing were ordered to leave the city.

古文：戊戌，尚书省奏汾阳军节度副使牛信昌生日受馈献，法当夺官。
现代文：二十二日，尚书省禀奏汾阳军节度副使牛信昌在过生日时接收馈赠和献礼，按法应当罢免他的官职。
English: On the 22nd, Niu Xinchang, deputy commander of the Song and Yang military festival in Shangshu Province, received gifts and presents on his birthday. According to the law, he should be removed from his official post.

古文：上曰： 朝廷行事苟不自正，何以正天下。
现代文：皇上说 ：朝廷行事尚且自己不端正，怎么能让天下端正？
English: The emperor said, "If the imperial court acts improperly and is itself improper, how can the world be made proper?"

古文：尚书省、枢密院生日节辰馈献不少，此而不问，小官馈献即加按劾，岂正天下之道？
现代文：尚书省、枢密院生日节辰接受馈献的情况不少，这些不去过问，小官接受馈献就加以禀奏弹劾，难道这是治天下的办法吗？
English: There are many cases of the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Privy Council accepting gifts on their birthdays. These should not be ignored. If minor officials accept gifts, they should be impeached. Is this the way to rule the world?

古文：自今宰执枢密馈献亦宜罢去！ 
现代文：从今天起宰执枢密接受馈献也要罢免职务。 
English: From today, the person in charge of accepting gifts must also be removed from office.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 往岁清暑山西，近路禾稼甚广，殆无畜牧之地，因命五里外乃得耕垦。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说： 往年到山西避暑，附近各路庄稼占地很广阔，几乎没有畜牧的地方，所以命令五里地之外才可以开垦耕种。
English: The emperor said to the prime minister: In the past, people went to Shanxi to spend the summer. The crops in the vicinity cover a very wide area, and there is almost no place for animal husbandry. Therefore, it was ordered that only five miles away could be cultivated.

古文：今闻民皆去之他所，甚可矜悯，其令依旧耕种。
现代文：现在听说百姓离乡背井到别的地方去了，很叫人怜悯，要让他们依旧耕种。
English: Now that I hear that people have left their hometowns and gone to other places, it is very pitiful, and they should still be allowed to farm.

古文：事有类此，卿等宜即告朕。 
现代文：如果再有这类事情，卿等应该立即报告给朕。 
English: If there's any more of this sort of thing, sir, you should report it to me immediately.

古文：三月乙亥朔，万春节，宋、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋国、夏国派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, the Song and Xia dynasties sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：辛巳，命有司以天水郡公旅榇依一品礼葬于巩洛之原。
现代文：七日，命令有司把寄居的天水郡公的棺材按一品官员礼葬在巩洛之原。
English: On the seventh day, an official was ordered to bury the coffin of the public official of Tianshui County, who was living in exile, in Gonglu.

古文：四月丁未，归德府民臧安儿谋反，伏诛。
现代文：四月三日，归德府平民臧安儿阴谋造反，伏法被杀。
English: On April 3rd, a civilian who had returned to Defu, Zou An'er, plotted to rebel, and Fufa was killed.

古文：大理卿李昌图以廉问真定尹徒单贞、咸平尹石抹阿没剌受赃不法，既得罪状，不即黜罢，杖之四十。
现代文：大理卿李昌图考察廉政情况发现真定府尹徒单贞、咸平府尹石抹阿没剌贪污不法，已经拿到罪状，不马上罢免，笞以四十杖。
English: Li Changtu, the Secretary of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, inspected the situation of political integrity and found that Yin Tuxanzhen of Zhending Prefecture and Yin Shimao of Hamping Prefecture had illegally engaged in corruption. They have been charged, immediately dismissed, and sentenced to forty strokes of the cane.

古文：癸亥，参知政事魏子平罢。
现代文：十九日，参知政事魏子平罢官。
English: On the 19th, Wei Ziping, a political advisor to the governor, was dismissed.

古文：高丽国王晛弟皓，废其主自立，诈称让国，遣使以表来上。
现代文：高丽国王日见的弟弟鰑，废掉他的君主而自立为王，诈称是 让国 ，派遣使者拿表来呈上。
English: King Goryeo's younger brother, Sun Myung, deposed his monarch and declared himself king, falsely claiming to be ceding the country and sending an envoy with a watch to present it.

古文：五月辛卯，诏遣吏部侍郎靖使高丽问故。
现代文：五月十七日，诏令派遣吏部侍郎靖出使高丽询问 让国 的缘故。
English: On May 17th, the imperial edict dispatched an envoy to Goryeo to inquire about the reason for the surrender.

古文：癸巳，以南京留守移剌成为枢密副使。
现代文：十九日，任命南京留守移剌成为枢密副使。
English: On the 19th, he was appointed as a Privy Vice-Envoy to Nanjing.

古文：六月己酉，诏曰： 诸路常贡数内，同州沙苑羊非急用，徒劳民尔，自今罢之。
现代文：六月六日，皇帝下诏说： 各种按常例进贡数额里面，同州沙苑的羊不是急用的，白白有劳百姓而已，从今天起免去这一项。
English: On June 6th, the emperor issued an edict saying, "Among the various amounts of tribute paid according to the usual practice, the sheep of Tongzhou Sha Yuan are not urgent, they are just free laborers, and this item will be exempted from today.

古文：朕居深宫，劳民之事岂能尽知？
现代文：朕居住在深宫，烦劳人民的事情哪里能够全部知道？
English: I live in Shamong, where can I know all the things that bother people?

古文：似此当具以闻。 
现代文：像这样的事情应当具体报告我知道。 
English: Things like this should be specifically reported I know.

古文：戊午，观稼于近郊。
现代文：十五日，在近郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 15th, he inspected crops in the suburbs.

古文：甲子，平章政事徒单合喜薨。
现代文：二十一日，平章政事徒单合喜逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Pingzhang Zhengjiutuan passed away.

古文：七月甲申，参知政事宗叙薨。
现代文：八月一日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On August 1st, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月癸卯朔，太白昼见。诏朝臣曰： 朕尝谕汝等，国家利便，治体遣阙，皆可直言。
现代文：诏令朝臣说： 朕曾经告诉你们，对国家有利方便的事，治理政事有遗漏的事，都可以直说。
English: The imperial edict told the courtiers: "I once told you that you can speak frankly about things that are beneficial and convenient for the country, and things that are lacking in the governance of politics.

古文：外路官民亦尝言事，汝等终无一语。
现代文：外路官民也曾经说些事情，而你们始终没有一句话。
English: Foreign officials and ordinary people have also said some things, but you have never said a word.

古文：凡政事所行，岂能皆当？
现代文：凡是施行的政事，哪里能够全部恰当？
English: Where can all the policies that are being implemented be carried out properly?

古文：自今直言得失，毋有所隐。 
现代文：从今天起你们要直接说出政事的得失，不要有所隐瞒。 
English: From today, you must directly tell the pros and cons of politics, do not hide anything.

古文：乙巳，上谓宰臣曰： 随朝之官，自谓历一考则当得某职，两考则当得某职。
现代文：三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 在朝的官员，自称经过一次考试就应当得到某个职位，经过两次考试就应当得到某个职务。
English: On the third day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: Officials in the DPRK claim that they should get a certain post after passing one examination, and they should get a certain post after passing two examinations.

古文：第务因循，碌碌而已。
现代文：第务因循，碌碌而已。
English: It's just a matter of doing things in the right way.

古文：自今以外路官与内除者，察其公勤则升用之，但苟简于事，不须任满，便以本品出之。
现代文：从今以后把外路官吏和内廷官员一视同仁，考察他们的公勤情况而迁升任用，但是如果办事怠慢，不必等到任期满，便可以把原有品级罢免。
English: From now on, the external officials and the officials of the Inner Court will be treated equally, and their public service will be examined and promoted. However, if they are negligent, they do not have to wait until the end of their term of office, and the original rank can be removed.

古文：赏罚不明，岂能劝勉。 
现代文：如果赏罚不明，官员怎么能够勤勉？ 
English: How can officials be diligent if rewards and punishments are not clear?

古文：庚戌，诏曰： 应因窝斡被掠女直及诸色人未经刷放者，官为赎放。
现代文：八日，皇帝下诏说： 因为窝斡的原因而被掠夺的女真人及其他各族人没有得到释放的，官府要为他们赎放。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor issued an edict saying: If the Jurchens and other people of all ethnic groups who were plundered for the reason of harboring were not released, the government should ransom them.

古文：隐匿者，以违制论。
现代文：如果有隐藏不放的，按违抗法制论处。
English: If there is anything hidden, it will be dealt with according to the principle of defying the legal system.

古文：其年幼不能称说住贯者，从便住坐。 
现代文：那些年纪幼小不能说出原住处籍贯的，随他们的愿望安排住处。 
English: For those who are too young to say where they come from, they will be accommodated according to their wishes.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 五品以下阙员甚多，而难于得人。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：五品以下官职缺员很多，然而又难以得到人才。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "There are many vacancies in government posts below the Fifth Rank, but it is difficult to find talented people.

古文：三品以上朕则知之，五品以下不能知也。
现代文：三品以上官员朕是了解的，五品以下朕不能了解。
English: I can understand officials with three or more medals, but I cannot understand those with less than five.

古文：卿等会无一言见举者。
现代文：卿等不曾有一句话是举荐人才的。
English: Sir, there has never been a sentence to recommend talent.

古文：欲画久安之计，兴百姓之利，而无良辅佐，所行皆寻常事耳，虽日日视朝，何益之有。
现代文：想筹划长治久安的大计，振兴对百姓有利的事业，而没有良才辅佐，所实行的都是一般化的措施罢了，虽然天天亲临朝政，又有什么用处呢！
English: If you want to plan a long-term peace and stability plan and revitalize a cause that is beneficial to the people, but you don't have good talents to assist you, the measures you implement are just generalized measures. Although you are in the government every day, what is the use?

古文：卿等宜勉思之。 
现代文：卿等应该督促自己思考这些。 
English: Sirs and others should challenge themselves to think about this.

古文：己巳，以尚书刑部侍郎乌林答天锡等为贺宋生日使，近侍局使刘珫为夏国生日使。
现代文：二十七日，派尚书刑部侍郎乌林答天锡等为贺宋生日使，近侍局使刘糵为夏国生日使。
English: On the 27th, Shangshu's attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, Ulin Taotianxi, and others were sent as the birthday envoys for He Song, and the Attendant Bureau sent Liu Wei as the birthday envoy for Xia Guo.

古文：九月癸未，猎于横山。
现代文：九月十二日，在横山打猎。
English: September 12th, hunting in Yokoyama.

古文：庚寅，还都。
现代文：十九日，返回京都。
English: On the 19th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：十月壬寅朔，以左宣徽使敬嗣晖为参知政事。
现代文：十月一日，任命左宣徽使敬嗣晖为参知政事。
English: On October 1st, he appointed Zuo Xuan Hui's envoy, Keizhi Zhou, as a member of the Council of State.

古文：甲寅，上谓宰臣曰： 朕已行之事，卿等以为成命不可复更，但承顺而已，一无执奏。
现代文：十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕已下令实行的事，卿等认为是成命不可再更改，只是承顺而已，一概没有拿出意见禀奏。
English: On the thirteenth day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "What I have ordered to be carried out, Your Excellency and others believe that it is an order that cannot be changed, but it is only obedient, and no opinion has been expressed.

古文：且卿等凡有奏，何尝不从。
现代文：卿等凡是有意见上奏，何尝不听从呢？
English: Sirs and all, if you have an opinion on the play, why not listen to it?

古文：自今朕旨虽出，宜审而行，有未便者，即奏改之。
现代文：从今天起朕的旨意虽然发出，应该审视而行，有不利于实行的，就奏明改正它。
English: From today, although my will is issued, it should be examined and carried out, and if it is not conducive to implementation, it will be reported and corrected.

古文：或在下位有言尚书省所行未便，亦当从而改之，毋拒而不从。 
现代文：或者居于下位的有提出尚书省所施行的事情不适当的，也应当听从而改正，不要拒绝而不听取意见。 
English: Or, if a lower-ranking official suggests that something implemented by the Ministry of Education and Culture is inappropriate, he should also listen and correct it, and should not refuse to listen to opinions.

古文：丙寅，尚书左丞相纥石烈良弼进《睿宗实录》。
现代文：二十五日，尚书左丞相纥石烈良弼进献《睿宗实录》。
English: On the 25th, Shangshu Zuozhong, Minister of the Left, Shi Lerong, presented the "Real Record of Ruizong."

古文：戊辰，上谓宰臣曰： 衍庆宫图画功臣，已命增为二十人。
现代文：二十七日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：衍庆宫为功臣画像，已经命令他们增加到二十人。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: Yanqing Palace is the image of heroes, and has ordered them to increase to twenty.

古文：如丞相韩企先，自本朝兴国以来，宪章法度，多出其手。
现代文：比如丞相韩企先，自从本朝兴国以来，宪章法度，大多出自他的手笔。
English: For example, since the founding of the country by the late Prime Minister Han Kui, most of the charter laws have come from his hand.

古文：至于关决大政，但与大臣谋议，终不使外人知觉。
现代文：至于关系到大政方针的决策，只是和大臣谋划商议，始终不让外人知道觉察。
English: As for the decision-making related to major policies, it is only planned and discussed with the minister, and it is always kept from outsiders.

古文：汉人宰相，前后无比，若褒显之，亦足示劝，慎无遗之。 
现代文：汉族人做宰相，前后没人可比，如果褒奖显示他的画像，也足以宣示规劝后人，要慎重不要遗漏他。 
English: If the award shows his picture, it is also enough to declare and exhort future generations to be careful not to leave him out.

古文：十一月丁丑，以西南路招讨使宗宁等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一月七日，派西南路招讨使宗宁等当贺宋正旦使。
English: On November 7th, he sent Zongning, the envoy of the southwestern route, and Song Zhengdan, the envoy of the eastern route.

古文：戊寅，幸东宫。
现代文：八日，驾临东宫。
English: On the eighth day, they arrived at the East Palace.

古文：上谓皇太子曰： 吾儿在储贰之位，朕为汝措天下，当无复有经营之事。
现代文：皇上对皇太子说： 吾儿在皇储的位置上，朕为你筹措天下，应当不再有经营的事。
English: The emperor said to the crown prince: My son, in the position of crown prince, I am raising the world for you, there should be no more business.

古文：汝惟无忘祖宗纯厚之风，以勤修道德为孝，明信赏罚为治而已。
现代文：你只有不忘祖宗纯厚之风，以勤修道德为孝，明信赏罚为治而已。
English: You only have to remember the pure and profound spirit of your ancestors, be diligent in cultivating morality, and believe in reward and punishment.

古文：昔唐太宗谓其子高宗曰： 吾伐高丽不克终，汝可继之。 
现代文：往昔唐太宗对他的儿子高宗说 ：我讨伐高丽最终不克，你可要继承这件事。 
English: In the past, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty said to his son Gao Zong: "I will not give up the fight against Goryeo, you should inherit this matter."

古文：如此之事，朕不以遗汝。
现代文：像这样的人事，朕不把它交给你。
English: I won't leave it to you in a personnel matter like this.

古文：如辽之海滨王，以国人爱其子，嫉而杀之，此何理也。
现代文：比如辽国的海滨王，因为国人热爱他的儿子，他嫉妒而杀了自己的儿子，这是什么道理？
English: For example, the coastal king of Liao, because the people loved his son, he was jealous and killed his own son, what is the reason for this?

古文：子为众爱，愈为美事，所为若此，安有不亡。
现代文：自己的儿子被众人爱戴，是件美事，海滨王这样做事，哪有不亡国的道理？
English: It is a beautiful thing for one's son to be loved by everyone. If the Seaside King does such a thing, what is the reason for not losing the country?

古文：唐太宗有道之君，而谓其子高宗曰： 尔于李绩无恩。
现代文：唐太宗是有道的君王，然而却对他的儿子高宗说： 你对李责力没有恩德。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang was a virtuous monarch, yet he said to his son Gaozong: "You are not kind to Li Baili.

古文：今以事出之，我死，宜即授以仆射，彼必致死力矣。 
现代文：今天我因为出了事，死了，应该授予仆射，他们必定拼死效力。 
English: Today, because something happened to me and I died, it should be awarded to the pukes. They must have worked hard.

古文：君人者，焉用伪为。
现代文：当君王的怎么能用虚假的行为？
English: How can a king act falsely?

古文：受恩于父，安有忘报于子者乎？
现代文：从父亲那里承受恩德，难道有忘记回报在儿子身上的吗？
English: Is it possible to receive a blessing from the father and forget to return the favor to the son?

古文：朕御臣下，惟以诚实耳。 
现代文：朕统领臣下，只有 诚实 二字而已。 
English: Honesty is the only word I have for you, my lord.

古文：群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：群臣都称万岁。
English: The courtiers in the hall cheered loudly.

古文：丙戌，朝享于太庙。
现代文：十六日，到太庙朝拜祭祀。
English: On the 16th, they went to the Imperial Temple for worship.

古文：丁亥，有事于圆丘，大赦。
现代文：十七日，在园丘有事，大赦。
English: On the seventeenth day, there was an incident on the garden hill, and an amnesty was declared.

古文：癸巳，群臣奉上尊号曰应天兴祚钦文广武仁德圣孝皇帝。
现代文：二十三日，群臣奉献皇上尊号叫应天兴祚钦文广武仁德圣孝皇帝。
English: On the 23rd, a group of courtiers dedicated the emperor's honorific title and called him Emperor Ying Tianxing      .

古文：乙未，诏中外。
现代文：二十五日，诏告中外。
English: On the 25th, it was announced to the public.

古文：十二月癸卯，冬猎。
现代文：十二月三日，开始冬季打猎活动。
English: On December 3, the winter hunting season began.

古文：乙卯，还宫。
现代文：十五日，返回宫廷。
English: On the second day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丙辰，参知政事敬嗣晖薨。
现代文：十六日，参知政事敬嗣晖逝世。
English: On the 16th, Sanchi Politician Keijiro passed away.

古文：辛酉，进封越王永中赵王，随王永功曹王，沈王永成豳王，徐王永升虞王，滕王永蹈徐王，薛王永济滕王。
现代文：二十一日，越王永中被进封为赵王，随王永功进封为曹王，沈王永成进封为豳王，徐王永升进封为虞王，滕王永蹈进封为徐王，薛王永济进封为滕王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yue Wang Yong was enthroned as King Zhao, followed by Wang Yong Gong as King Cao, Shen Wang Yongcheng as King Shao, Xu Wang Yongsheng as King Yu, Teng Wang Yongbai as King Xu, and Xue Wang Yongji as King Teng.

古文：乙丑，赵王永中、曹王永功俱授猛安，仍命永功亲治事，以习为政。
现代文：二十五日，赵王永中、曹王永功同时被授猛安之职，仍然命令永功亲自处理事务，来学习为政之道。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Wang Yongzhong and Cao Wang Yonggong were simultaneously awarded the position of Meng'an, but still ordered Yonggong to personally handle affairs and learn the way of politics.

