古文：冯忌请见赵王，行人见之。
现代文：冯忌请求拜见赵王，掌管外交事务的官员让他拜见了赵王。
English: Fengqi asked to see Zhao Wang, and the official in charge of foreign affairs let him see Zhao Wang.

古文：冯忌接手免首，欲言而不敢。
现代文：冯忌拱手低头，想要说话而不敢。
English: Feng Hui bowed his head, not daring to speak.

古文：王问其故，对曰： 客有见人于服子者，已而请其罪。
现代文：赵王问他是什么原因。冯忌回答说： 有个客人向宓子推荐一个人，不久他问宓子这人有什么过错。
English: Zhao Wang asked him what was the reason. Feng Hui replied: A guest recommended a person to Zou Zi, and soon he asked Zou Zi what was wrong with this person.

古文：服子曰： 公之客独有三罪：望我而笑，是狎也；谈语不称师，是倍也；交浅而言深，是乱也。 
现代文：宓子说： 您的客人有三条过错，看着我笑，这是轻视我；谈话不称我为老师，这是背叛我；交情浅而言语深，这是在迷惑我。 
English: The cripple said, "Your guest is guilty of three things: looking at me and laughing is belittling me; talking to me without calling me teacher is betraying me; and making friends with me is deceiving me.

古文：客曰： 不然。
现代文：客人说： 不是这样。
English: The guest said: That's not true.

古文：夫望人而笑，是和也；言而不称师，是庸说也；交浅而言深，是忠也。
现代文：看着人笑，这是和蔼；言谈不称呼老师，因为老师是平常的称呼；交情浅而言语深，这是忠诚。
English: Looking at people and smiling, this is amiability; talking and not calling the teacher, because the teacher is an ordinary name; friendship is shallow and deep, this is loyalty.

古文：昔者尧见舜于草茅之中，席陇亩而荫庇桑，阴移而授天下传。
现代文：从前尧在草茅之中会见舜，在田野设席坐在桑树的阴凉下：树阴移动舜接受了尧禅让的天下。
English: Once upon a time,  met  in the middle of the thatch, set up a seat in the field and sat in the shade of the mulberry tree: the shade moved  accepted the world of  Zen.

古文：伊尹负鼎俎而干汤，姓名未著而受三公。
现代文：伊尹背着鼎俎谒见商汤，姓名还不清楚就接受了三公的职位。
English: With the imperial edict behind him, Yi Yin went to Shang Tang. His name was not yet clear, so he accepted the position of the Three Princes.

古文：使夫交浅者不可以深谈，则天下不传，而三公不得也。 
现代文：如果交情浅就不可以深谈，那么天下就无法禅让，并且三公的职位也不可能得到。 
English: If it is not possible to have in-depth discussions if the friendship is shallow, then the world will not be able to make concessions, and it will not be possible to obtain the position of the three princes.

古文：赵王曰： 甚善。 
现代文：赵王说： 太好了。 
English: Zhao Wang said: That's great.

古文：冯忌曰： 今外臣交浅而欲深谈，可乎? 
现代文：冯忌说： 如今外来的臣子交情浅而想深谈，可以吗？ 
English: Feng said, "Nowadays, foreign courtiers have shallow friendships and want to talk in-depth, is that okay?

古文：王曰： 请奉教。 
现代文：赵王说： 请您多多教导。 
English: Zhao Wang said: Please teach me a lot.

古文：于是冯忌乃谈。
现代文：于是冯忌才谈了自己的意见。
English: It was only then that Feng Yi voiced his opinion.

