古文：太宗纪太宗明元皇帝，讳嗣，太祖长子也，母曰刘贵人，登国七年生于云中宫。
现代文：太宗明元皇帝，名托跋嗣，是太祖的长子，母亲是刘贵人，登国七年出生于云中宫。
English: Emperor Taizong Mingyuan, the eldest son of Emperor Taizong Mingyuan, was born in Yunzhong Palace in the seventh year of his reign. His mother was Liu Guijin.

古文：太祖晚有子，闻而大悦，乃大赦天下。
现代文：太祖晚年得子，听说后很高兴，于是大赦天下。
English: My great-grandfather had a son in his later years, and he was very happy to hear about it, so he pardoned the whole world.

古文：帝明睿宽毅，非礼不动，太祖甚奇之。
现代文：皇帝聪明通达，宽厚刚毅，不合礼法不行动。太祖十分奇异。
English: The emperor was intelligent and knowledgeable, generous and strong-willed, and did not act out of propriety. Taizu was very strange.

古文：天兴六年，封齐王，拜相国，加车骑大将军。
现代文：天兴六年，被封为齐王，任相国，加授车骑大将军。
English: Tianxing for six years, was named the king of Qi, served as the country's minister of education, and was awarded the rank of general of cavalry.

古文：初，帝母刘贵人赐死，太祖告帝曰： 昔汉武帝将立其子而杀其母，不令妇人后与国政，使外家为乱。
现代文：当初，皇帝的母亲刘贵人被赐自杀，太祖告诉皇帝说： 从前漠武帝将要立他的儿子而杀儿子的母亲，不使妇人后来参与国政，导致外戚作乱。
English: At first, the emperor's mother, Liu Guigui, was given permission to commit suicide. The great-grandfather told the emperor, "Once upon a time, Emperor Mo Wu was going to appoint his son to kill his son's mother, and later he would not allow the woman to participate in state affairs, which led to unrest among the maternal relatives.

古文：汝当继统，故吾远同汉武，为长久之计。 
现代文：你应继承皇统，所以我远远地效仿漠武帝，作长久的打算。 
English: You should succeed to the throne, so I follow the example of Emperor Mowu from afar and make a long-term plan.

古文：帝素纯孝，哀泣不能自胜，太祖怒之。
现代文：皇帝一向至孝，哀痛之至，太祖对他发怒。
English: The emperor, who had always been the most filial, was deeply saddened, and his great-grandfather was furious with him.

古文：帝还宫，哀不自止，日夜号泣。
现代文：皇帝回宫，哀伤不能自制，日夜地号哭。
English: When the emperor returned to the palace, he was inconsolable and cried day and night.

古文：太祖知而又召之。
现代文：太祖知道后又召唤他。
English: The great-grandfather knew and summoned him.

古文：帝欲入，左右曰： 孝子事父，小杖则受，大杖避之。
现代文：皇帝想要进宫，左右的人说： 孝子奉事父亲，小拷打就接受，大拷打就躲避。
English: When the emperor wanted to enter the palace, the people around him said: "A filial son serves his father. He accepts minor torture and avoids major torture."

古文：今陛下怒盛，入或不测，陷帝于不义。
现代文：现在陛下怒气大，进宫恐怕有不可预测的事，会陷皇帝于不义。
English: Now that His Majesty is very angry, I'm afraid that something unpredictable will happen when he enters the palace, and the emperor will be caught up in injustice.

古文：不如且出，待怒解而进，不晚也。 
现代文：不如暂且出去，待陛下怒气消后再进宫，并不算晚。 
English: It's not too late to go out and wait until His Majesty's anger has subsided before re-entering the palace.

古文：帝惧，从之，乃游行逃于外。
现代文：皇帝畏惧，听从建议，就出行逃到了外面。
English: The emperor was afraid, heeded the advice, and fled outside.

古文：天赐六年冬十月，清河王绍作逆，太祖崩。
现代文：天赐六年冬十月，清河王元绍作乱，太祖逝世。
English: By the grace of God, in the winter of October of the sixth year, King Yuan Shao of Qinghe made a disturbance, and the great-grandfather died.

古文：帝入诛绍。
现代文：皇帝进宫诛杀元绍。
English: The emperor entered the palace and killed Yuan Shao.

古文：壬申，即皇帝位，大赦，改年为永兴元年。
现代文：壬申，即皇帝位，大赦天下，改年号为永兴元年。
English: Jinshin, that is, the emperor's throne, was amnestied by the world, and the year name was changed to the first year of Yongxing.

古文：追尊皇妣为宣穆皇后。
现代文：追尊皇妣为宣穆皇后。
English: Emperor Suizong was crowned as Empress Xuanmu.

古文：公卿大臣先罢归第不与朝政者，悉复登用之。
现代文：原先罢归宅第不参与朝政的公卿大臣，又全都录用。
English: The court nobles and ministers who had previously resigned and not participated in court politics were all re-hired.

古文：诏南平公长孙嵩、北新侯安同对理民讼，简贤任能，彝伦攸叙。
现代文：韶令南平公长孙嵩、北新侯安同共同处理民众诉讼，挑选贤士任用有能力的人，归于常道。
English: He ordered Sun Song, the governor of Nanping, and Bei Xin Hou'an to jointly deal with people's lawsuits, select sages and appoint capable people, and return to the normal way.

古文：闰十月丁亥，朱提王悦谋反，赐死。
现代文：闰十月丁亥，朱提王元悦图谋反叛，被赐自杀。
English: In the intercalary month of October, Dinghai, Zhu Ti Wang Yuan Rong attempted to rebel and was given the power to commit suicide.

古文：诏郑兵将军、山阳侯奚斤巡行诸州，问民疾苦，抚恤穷乏。
现代文：诏令郑兵将军、山阳侯奚斤巡视各州，询问民间疾苦，安抚赈济贫穷困苦的人。
English: He ordered General Zheng Bing and Shanyang Hou Xujin to inspect all the states, inquire about the hardships of the people, and pacify and help the poor and needy.

古文：十有二月戊戌，封卫王仪子良为南阳王，阴平公元烈进爵为王，高凉王乐真改封平阳王。
现代文：十二月戊戌，封街王元仪的儿子元良为南阳王，阴平公元烈晋爵位为王，高凉王乐真改封平阳王。
English: At the end of December, Yuan Liang, the son of the feudal street king Yuan Yi, became the Nanyang King, Yin Ping, the son of the legendary warrior Jin, became the king, and Gao Liang, the son of the legendary king Le Zhen, became the Pingyang King.

古文：己亥，帝始居西宫，御天文殿。
现代文：己亥，皇帝开始住在西宫，到天文殿。
English: On the 16th, the emperor moved into the West Palace and sat in the Astronomical Hall to listen to the government.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：蠕蠕进犯边塞。
English: Creep creep invade the border.

古文：是岁，乞伏乾归据金城自称秦王。
现代文：这一年，乞伏干归占据金城自称秦王。
English: In the same year, a beggar named Qin Wang occupied Jincheng.

古文：高云为海夷冯跋所灭，跋僭号，自称大燕天王。
现代文：高云被海夷冯跋消灭，冯跋僭用尊号，自称大燕天王。
English: Gao Yun was annihilated by Haiyi Feng Biao, and Feng Biao used the title of honor and called himself the King of the Swallows.

古文：二年春正月甲寅朔，诏南平公长孙嵩等北伐蠕蠕。
现代文：二年春正月甲寅初一，韶令南平公长孙嵩等人北伐蠕蠕。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Nanping Prince Sun Song and others were ordered to go to the north.

古文：平阳民黄苗等，依汾自固，受姚兴官号。
现代文：乎阳民众黄苗等人，凭藉汾水白守，接受姚兴的官号。
English: Huang Miao and others from the people of Khuyang accepted Yao Xing's official title with the help of Surabaya Bai Shou.

古文：并州刺史元六头讨平之。
现代文：并州刺史元六头讨伐平定了他。
English: He was defeated in the Six-headed Crusade led by the statesman Shi Yuan.

古文：二月癸未朔，诏将军于栗磾领步骑一万镇平阳。
现代文：二月癸未初一，诏令将军于栗殚率领步兵骑兵一万人镇守平阳。
English: On the first day of the second month of the year, he ordered the general to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry to defend Pingyang.

古文：夏五月，长孙嵩等自大漠还，蠕蠕追围之于牛川。
现代文：夏五月，长孙嵩等人从大沙漠返回，蠕蠕将他们追击围困在牛川。
English: In summer and May, Chosun Song and others returned from the great desert, and the Cree pursued and besieged them in the Niuchuan River.

古文：壬申，帝北伐。
现代文：壬申，皇帝北伐。
English: Jinshin, the Emperor's Northern Expedition.

古文：蠕蠕闻而遁走，车驾还幸参合陂。
现代文：蠕蠕听说后逃走，皇帝返回到达参合陂。
English: When Dum Dum heard of this, he fled, and the emperor returned to Dazhonghe.

古文：秋七月丁巳，立马射台于陂西，仍讲武教战。
现代文：秋七月丁巳，在坡的西面设立马射台，随之练习武艺教战法。
English: In the autumn and July, a horse shooting range was set up on the west side of the slope, and martial arts training methods were practiced.

古文：乙丑，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：乙丑，皇帝从北伐前线返回。
English: B Ugly, the emperor returned from the front of the Northern Expedition.

古文：八月，章武民刘牙聚众反。
现代文：八月，章武百姓刘牙聚集民众反叛。
English: In August, Liu Ya, the people of Zhangwu, gathered the people to rebel.

古文：山阳侯奚斤讨平之。
现代文：山阳侯奚斤讨伐平定了他。
English: He was defeated by the Sanyang hosannins.

古文：九月甲寅，葬太祖宣武皇帝于盛乐金陵。
现代文：九月甲寅，将太祖宣武皇帝安葬在盛乐的金陵。
English: In September, Jia Yin buried his great-grandfather Emperor Xuanwu in the Golden Mausoleum.

古文：冬十有二月辛己，诏将军周观率众诣西河离石，镇抚山胡。
现代文：冬十二月辛巳，诏令将军周观率领军队前往西河的离石，镇守抚绥山胡。
English: In the winter of December, General Zhou Guan led the army to the West River's Liaoshi, and the town guard, Fuxi Shanhu, was removed.

古文：是岁，司马德宗将刘裕，灭慕容超于广固。
现代文：这一年，司马德宗的将领刘裕，在广固消灭慕容超。
English: In this year, Liu Yu, the general of Sima Dezong, annihilated Murong Chao in Guanggu.

古文：三年春二月戊戌，诏曰： 衣食足，知荣辱。
现代文：三年春二月戊戌，下诏说： 衣食充足，知道荣辱。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, the emperor issued the following edict: Sufficient food and clothing, know honor and disgrace.

古文：夫人饥寒切己，唯恐朝夕不济，所急者温饱而已，何暇及于仁义之事乎？王教之多违，盖由于此也。
现代文：人受饥寒逼迫时，惟恐早晚接济不上，所著急的祇是温饱而已，哪有闲暇顾及仁义的事呢圣王教化的诸多违背，大概是由于这个缘故。
English: When people are persecuted by hunger and cold, they are afraid that they will not be able to get help sooner or later. The only thing they are worried about is food and clothing. How can they have leisure time to care about benevolence and righteousness? The many violations of the teachings of the holy king are probably due to this reason.

古文：非夫耕妇织，内外相成，何以家给人足矣。
现代文：不男耕女织，内外相辅相成，凭什么家给人足呢?
English: Men and women are not the same, and they complement each other both inside and outside. How can a family provide enough for its members?

古文：其简宫人非所当御及执作伎巧，自余悉出以配鳏民。 
现代文：现检查不当临幸的宫女以及役使的艺人，全部放出去配给无妻子的人。 
English: Now, the palace maids and entertainers who have served the emperor inappropriately are being checked, and all of them are being sent out to be distributed to people without wives.

古文：己亥，诏北新侯安同等持节循行并、定二州及诸山居杂胡、丁零，问其疾苦，察举守宰不法；其冤穷失职、强弱相陵、孤寒不能自存者，各以事闻。
现代文：己亥，诏令北新堡叁回等人持节巡视差、宣二州以及各山所居杂塱、工零，询问他们的疾苦，纠察举奏不守法的郡守县令；凡冤枉穷困而失去职业、强弱相欺凌、孤独贫寒不能自己养活的，各以事实上奏。
English: At the same time, it is ordered that the people of Beixinbao District and the surrounding areas who hold festivals should inspect the poor, the poor in Xuanwuzhou, and the miscellaneous peasants and laborers living in the mountains, inquire about their illnesses, picket and report the county governors and county magistrates who do not abide by the law; those who are unjustly impoverished and lose their jobs, strong and weak are bullied, and the lonely poor and the poor cannot support themselves should report the facts.

古文：昌黎、辽东民二千余家内属。三月己未，诏侍臣常带剑。
现代文：旦整、民众二千多家归附。三月己未，韶令侍卫的臣属时常带剑。
English: Immediately, more than two thousand people joined. It was not yet March, and the subordinates of the imperial guards were often armed with swords.

古文：夏四月戊寅，河东蜀民黄思、郭综等率营部七百余家内属。
现代文：夏四月戊寅，河东蜀民黄思、郭综等人率领营部七百多家归附。
English: In the summer of April, Wu Yin, Shou Min Huang Si, Guo Xi and others from Hedong Province led more than 700 people from the camp to join.

古文：五月丁卯，车驾谒金陵于盛乐。
现代文：五月丁卯，皇帝到盛乐拜谒金陆。
English: In May Dingwu, the emperor went to Shengle to pay homage to Jinlu.

古文：己巳，昌黎王慕容伯兒谋反，伏诛。
现代文：己巳，昌黎王慕容伯儿图谋反叛，被处死。
English: On the 24th, Murong Bo'er, the king of Changli, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：六月，姚兴遣使来聘。
现代文：六月，姚兴派遣使者前来聘问。
English: In June, Yao Xing sent an envoy to come for an interview.

古文：西河胡张贤等率营部内附。
现代文：西河胡退置等人率领营部归附。
English: The camp was annexed under the leadership of Xihe Hu Fu Jie and others.

古文：秋七月戊申，赐卫士酺三日、布帛各有差。
现代文：秋七月戊申，赏赐卫士聚饮三天、布帛多少不等。
English: In autumn and July, when the moon is waxing gibbous, the guards are rewarded with three days of drinking together, with the amount of cloth varying.

古文：辛酉，赐附国大人锦罽衣服各有差。
现代文：辛酉，赏赐依附国大人锦缎毛织品衣服多少不等。
English: It's hard to say, but depending on the country, adults are rewarded with varying amounts of brocade wool fabric clothes.

古文：八月戊寅，诏将军、束州侯尉古真统兵五千，镇西境太洛城。
现代文：八月戊寅，诏令将军、束州侯尉古真统领五千兵士，镇守西部边境太洛城。
English: In August, Wu Yin, General Zhairei, and Sokzhou Houyi Guzhen led five thousand soldiers to defend the western border of the city of Tai Luo.

古文：冬十二月甲戌，蠕蠕斛律宗党吐牴于等百余人内属。
现代文：冬十二月甲戌，蠕蠕斛律的宗族同党吐纸王等一百多人归附。
English: In the winter of December, more than a hundred people from the same clan as the paper king and others joined.

古文：甲午，诏南平公长孙嵩、任城公嵇拔、白马侯崔玄伯等坐朝堂，录决囚徒，务在平当。
现代文：甲午，诏令南平公长孙嵩、任越公游远、白马侯崔玄伯等人坐在朝堂，讯视判决囚徒，务必公平适当
English: In the afternoon of the same day, the emperor ordered Nanping Prince Sun Song, Ren Yue Prince Youyuan, Baima Prince Cui Xuanbo and others to sit in the court hall and watch the prisoners being sentenced. It must be fair and appropriate

古文：四年春二月癸未，登虎圈射虎；赐南平公长孙嵩等布帛各有差。
现代文：四年春二月癸未，登上虎圈射虎；赏赐南平公长孙嵩等人布帛多少不等。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in February, he went to the tiger enclosure to shoot tigers; the rewards given to Nanping Gongchang Sun Song and others varied.

古文：夏四月乙未，宴群臣于西宫，使各献直言。
现代文：夏四月乙未，在西宫宴请群臣，使各人进献直言。
English: In April of the following summer, he invited a group of ministers to a banquet at the Western Palace, and had each of them make a speech.

古文：秋七月己巳朔，东巡。
现代文：秋七月己巳初一，向东巡视。
English: Autumn and July are the first day of the year, patrol to the east.

古文：置四厢大将，又放十二时，置十二小将。
现代文：设置四厢大将，又仿照十二时辰，设置十二小将。
English: Set up a four-way general, and according to the twelve o'clock, set up twelve minor generals.

古文：以山阳侯奚斤、元城侯元屈行左右丞相。
现代文：任命山阳堡罢丘、元城侯五屋代理左右丞相。
English: Appointed Sanyo Castle Bageoka, former Marquis Goya acting left and right chancellors.

古文：己卯，大狝于石会山。
现代文：己卯，在石会山大举狩猎。
English: I went on a hunting trip to Ishikai Mountain.

古文：戊子，临去畿陂观渔。
现代文：戊子，到去畿陂观看捕鱼。
English: On the 20th, I went to Gyeongbokgung to watch fishing.

古文：庚寅，至于濡源。
现代文：庚寅，到达迁逊。
English: Geng Yin, arrived at Qianxun.

古文：西巡，幸北部诸落，赐以缯帛。
现代文：向西巡视，部各部落，赏赐给缯帛。
English: To the west patrol, the various tribes of the Department, the award to the cormorant.

古文：八月庚戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月庚戌，皇帝回宫。
English: In August, Geng Zi, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：壬子，幸西宫，临板殿，大飨群臣将吏，以田猎所获赐之，命民大酺三日。
现代文：壬子，前往西宣，到握毖，盛宴招待群臣将吏，把狩猎所获野兽赏赐给他们，命民众聚饮三天。
English: He went to Xixuan and held a banquet at Jiaozuo, where he invited a group of ministers and generals, presented them with the animals they had hunted, and ordered the people to gather and drink for three days.

古文：乙卯，赐王公以下至宿卫将士布帛各有差。
现代文：乙卯，赏赐王公以下直至守卫将士布帛多少不等。
English: Second, the reward varies from the prince down to the guards.

古文：冬十有一月乙丑，赐宗室近属南阳王良已下至于缌麻之亲布帛各有差。
现代文：冬十一月乙丑，赏赐宗室近亲南阳王元良以下直至远亲布帛多少不等。
English: In the winter, in November, the second month of the year, the family of the nearest relative, Nanyang Wang Yuanliang or below, and the distant relative, Bu Xun, were awarded.

古文：十有二月丁巳，车驾北巡，至长城而还。
现代文：十二月丁巳，皇帝向北巡视，到达旦越而返回。
English: In December, the emperor went on a tour to the north, arriving in Dan Yue and returning.

古文：是年，乞伏乾归为兄子公府所杀，子炽磐立。
现代文：这一年，乞伏干归被哥哥的儿子公府杀死，儿子：皑即位。
English: In the same year, Kuwabukanketsu was killed by his brother's son, Kofu, and his son succeeded to the throne.

古文：沮渠蒙逊自称河西王。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊自称为回酉王。
English: Despondent, Monsoon calls himself the king of the Uighurs.

古文：五年春正月己巳，大阅，畿内男子十二以上悉集。
现代文：五年春正月己巳，大阅兵，京城以内十二岁以上的男子全部会集。
English: On the first day of spring in the fifth year, there was a large military parade, and all men over the age of twelve in the capital gathered.

古文：己卯，幸西宫。
现代文：己卯，前往酉宣。
English: On the 13th, I went to Nishinomiya.

古文：頞拔大、渠帅四十余人诣阙奉贡，赐以缯帛锦罽各有差。
现代文：宝邀大、魁首四十多人到宫廷奉事贡献，赏赐给他们缯帛锦缎毛织品多少不等。
English: He invited more than forty people to the court to serve and contribute, and rewarded them with varying amounts of brocade and woolen fabrics.

古文：乙酉，诏诸州六十户出戎马一匹。
现代文：乙酉，诏令各州每六十户出战马一匹。
English: In response, the emperor ordered each state to send one war horse for every sixty households.

古文：庚寅，大阅于东郊，部署将帅。
现代文：庚寅，在东郊大阅兵，安排将帅。
English: Geng Yin arranged a grand military parade in the eastern suburbs.

古文：以山阳侯奚斤为前军，众三万；阳平王熙等十二将，各一万骑；帝临白登，躬自校览焉。
现代文：以山阳侯奚斤为前锋，部众三万人，阳平王元熙等十二将领，各一万骑兵；皇帝到白登，亲自查核观看。
English: With Shanyang Hou Rongjin as the vanguard, there were 30,000 troops, and 12 generals, including Yangping Wang Yuanxi, with 10,000 cavalry each; the emperor went to Baidu to inspect and watch in person.

古文：二月戊申，赐阳平王熙及诸王、公、侯、将士布帛各有差。
现代文：二月戊申，赏赐阳乎王元熙和各王、公、侯、将士布帛多少不等。
English: In February, King Yuanxi and all the kings, princes, lords and generals were awarded varying amounts of cloth.

古文：庚戌，幸高柳川。
现代文：庚戌，前往高柳川。
English: Geng Yao, go to Gaoyang River.

古文：甲寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：甲寅，皇帝回宫。
English: Kato, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：癸丑，穿鱼池于北苑。
现代文：癸丑，在北苑穿凿鱼池。
English: The ugly fish pond in the North Garden.

古文：庚午，姚兴遣使来聘。
现代文：庚午，姚兴派遣使者前来聘问。
English: In the afternoon, Yao Xing sent an envoy to come and ask questions.

古文：诏分遣使者巡求俊逸，其豪门强族为州闾所推者，及有文武才干、临疑能决，或有先贤世胄、德行清美、学优义博、可为人师者，各令诣京师，当随才叙用，以赞庶政。
现代文：下韶分派使者巡视访求俊秀出众的人，为州郡推举的豪门大族，以及有文武才干、遇疑难能决断的人，或者有先贤世家、德行清尚美好、学问优异义理博赡、可以做人老师的，令各自前往京城，将依据才能任用，以辅佐政事。
English: He dispatched emissaries to the Lower Yangtze River to inspect and visit those who were outstanding in their talents, such as those who were the best of the powerful families nominated by the prefectures and counties, and those who had literary and military talents and could make a decision in case of doubt, or those who came from a family of sages, were virtuous and virtuous, had excellent knowledge and understanding of heterodoxy, and could be a teacher, and ordered each of them to go to Beijing and be appointed according to their talents to assist in government affairs.

古文：夏四月，河东民薛相率部内属。
现代文：夏四月，迥塞百姓叠赵率部属归附。
English: In the summer of April, the people of Yansai piled up and led the troops to be annexed.

古文：乙巳，上党民劳聪、士臻群聚为盗，杀太守令长，相率外奔。
现代文：乙巳，上基百姓莹曌、蠢聚集成伙作乱，杀死太守县官，相继向外逃奔。
English: At this time, the people of Shangji, including Yingqian and Wugu, gathered in a group to create a disturbance, killed the county magistrate, and fled abroad one after another.

古文：乙卯，车驾西巡，诏前军奚斤等先行，讨越勤部于跋那山。
现代文：乙卯，皇帝向西巡视，诏令前锋翼丘等人先出发，到腿巫山讨伐堑塑部。
English: One by one, the emperor went on a tour to the west, and he ordered the vanguard, Wing Chiu and the others, to set out first and go to the foot of Wushan Mountain to fight against the Zou Plastic Department.

古文：夏五月乙亥，行幸云中旧宫之大室。
现代文：夏五月乙亥，前往云中旧宫的大室。
English: Summer, May and autumn, go to the great room of the old palace in Yunzhong.

古文：丙子，大赦天下。
现代文：丙子，大赦天下。
English: Bongzi, amnesty to the whole world.

古文：西河张外、建兴王绍，自以所犯罪重，不敢解散。
现代文：西河人张外、建兴人王绍，自认为所犯罪恶深重，不敢解散部众。
English: Zhang Wai, from the West River, and Wang Shao, from Jianxing, considered the crimes they had committed to be so serious that they did not dare to disband the group.

古文：庚戍，遣元城侯元屈等率众三千镇并州。
现代文：庚戌，派遣元城侯元屈等人率领三千人马镇守并州。
English: Geng Yao, sent Yuan Cheng Hou, Yuan Qu and others to lead three thousand Ma Zhen guards to annex the state.

古文：乙卯，诏会稽公刘洁、永安侯魏勤等率众三千镇西河。
现代文：乙卯，诏令会稽公刘洁、永安侯魏勤等人率领三千人马镇守西河。
English: At the same time, Liu Jie, Yongan Hou Wei Qin and others led 3,000 men to guard the West River.

古文：六月，西幸五原，校猎于骨罗山，获兽十万。
现代文：六月，向西到五原，在骨罗山狩猎，擒获野兽十万头。
English: In June, he went west to the Wuhuan and hunted in the Jiao Luo Mountains, obtaining 100,000 wild beasts.

古文：濩泽刘逸自号征东将军、三巴王，王绍为署置官属，攻逼建兴郡。
现代文：濩泽人刘逸自称为征束将军、三巴王，王绍为他设置官府属员，攻打围困建兴郡。
English: Liu Yat, a native of Heze, called himself a conscript general and the king of Sanba. Wang Shao set up government officials for him to attack and besiege Jianxing County.

古文：元屈等讨平之。
现代文：元屈等人讨伐平定了他们。
English: They were subdued by the counterattack of Yuan Qu and others.

古文：秋七月己巳，还幸薄山。
现代文：秋七月己巳，返回到薄山。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, I came back and arrived in Wushan.

古文：帝登观太祖游幸刻石颂德之处，乃于其旁起石坛而荐飨焉。
现代文：皇帝登山观看太祖游览时刻石碑颂功德的地方，就在旁边垒起石坛而献上祭品。
English: At the time of the emperor's visit to the mountain to watch the great ancestors, the stone monument to praise the merits of the place, and the stone altar was built next to it to offer sacrifices.

古文：赐从者大酺于山下。
现代文：赏赐随从的人在山下聚饮。
English: Those who rewarded their followers gathered at the foot of the mountain to drink.

古文：奚斤等破越勤倍泥部落于跋那山西，获马五万匹，牛二十万头，徙二万余家于大宁，计口受田。
现代文：奚斤等人在跋那山西部打败越勤倍泥部落，获取马五万匹，牛二十万头，迁徙二万多家到大宁，按人口授受田地。
English: Xing Jin and others defeated the Yueqin Baili tribe in the western part of Mount Bawana, acquired fifty thousand horses and two hundred thousand head of cattle, migrated more than twenty thousand people to Daning, and granted and received fields according to population.

古文：河西胡曹龙、张大头等，各领部，拥众二万人，来入蒲子，逼胁张外于研子垒。
现代文：河西胡曹龙、张大头等人，各自统领部落，拥有部众二万人，来到蒲子，在研子垒逼迫威胁张外。
English: Hexi Hu Caolong, Zhang Datong and others, each of whom led a tribe with 20,000 members, came to Puzi to force and threaten Zhang Wei at Yan Zi Rong.

古文：外惧，给以牛酒，杀马盟誓，推龙为大单于，奉美女良马于龙。
现代文：张外畏惧，供给牛酒，杀马盟誓，推举曹龙为大单于，送美女好马给曹龙。
English: Zhang Gao was afraid of him, so he supplied him with cow wine, swore to kill the horse, elected Cao Long as the grand vizier, and sent a beautiful horse to Cao Long.

古文：丙戌，车驾自大室西南巡诸部落，赐其渠帅缯帛各有差。
现代文：丙戌，皇帝从大室向西南巡视各部落，赐给魁首缯帛多少不等。
English: The emperor inspected the tribes from Omuro to the southwest, and gave varying amounts of money to the chiefs.

古文：遂南次定襄大落城，东逾十岭山，田于善无川。
现代文：于是向南停驻定襄大落城，往东翻遇十岭山，在善无川狩猎。
English: As a result, he stopped at the southern end of the city of Jangda in Dingding, and turned east to encounter Shiling Mountain and hunted in Zhenwu River.

古文：八月癸卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月癸卯，皇帝回宫。
English: On August 11, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：癸丑，奚斤等班师。
现代文：癸丑，奚斤等人凯旋而归。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Hao Jin waited for the coach to return.

古文：甲寅，帝临白登，观降民，数军实。
现代文：甲寅，皇帝到白登，观看投降的民众，估量军事物资。
English: Jia Yin, the emperor, went to Baden to watch the surrendering people and assess the military supplies.

古文：曹龙降，执送张外，斩之。
现代文：曹龙投降，捆送张外到来，杀了他。
English: Cao Long surrendered, bundled Zhang Gai and killed him.

古文：辛未，赐征还将士牛、马、奴婢各有差。
现代文：辛未，赏赐出征归来的将士牛、马、奴婢多少不等。
English: In Xinwei, the number of cattle, horses, male and female slaves rewarded to soldiers returning from the war varied.

古文：置新民于大宁川，给农器，计口受田。
现代文：安置新归附的民众在大宁，供给农器，按人口授受田地。
English: The newly-annexed people were resettled in Danying, supplied with farm tools, and given and received fields according to their population.

古文：丁丑，幸犲山宫。
现代文：丁丑，前往豺山宫。
English: Ding Yuxi, go to Lushan Palace.

古文：癸未，车驾还宫。
现代文：癸未，皇帝回宫。
English: Soon after, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：冬十月丁巳，将军元屈、会稽公刘洁、永安侯魏勤等，击吐京叛胡，失利，洁被伤，勤死之。
现代文：冬十月丁巳，将军元屈、会稽公刘洁、永安侯魏勤等人，攻打吐京叛变的胡人，失败，刘洁受伤，魏勤战死。
English: In the winter of October, General Yuan Qu, Auditor Liu Jie, Yongan Hou Wei Qin and others attacked the Hu people who had rebelled against Beijing. They failed, Liu Jie was injured, and Wei Qin died in battle.

古文：十一月癸酉，大飨于西宫。
现代文：十一月癸酉，在西宫大宴群臣。
English: In November, a large banquet was held in the West Palace, attended by a large number of ministers.

古文：姚兴遣使朝贡，来请进女，帝许之。
现代文：姚兴派遣使者入朝贡奉，前来请求献上女儿，皇帝答应了他。
English: Yao Xing sent an emissary to pay tribute to the imperial court, and came to request that his daughter be presented to the emperor, and the emperor agreed.

古文：神瑞元年正月辛酉，以祯瑞频集，大赦，改元。
现代文：神瑞元年春正月辛酉，因祯祥频繁聚集，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：辛巳，幸繁畤。
现代文：辛巳，前往繁时。
English: Hsin-mi, let's go to the store.

古文：赐王公已下至于士卒百工布帛各有差。
现代文：赏赐王公以下直到士卒工匠布帛多少不等。
English: The rewards given to artisans of cloth ranging from princes and below to apprentices.

古文：二月戊戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二月戊戌，皇帝回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the second month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：是月，赫连屈孑入寇河东蒲子，杀掠吏民。三城护军张昌等要击走之。
现代文：这月，赫连屈孑进犯河东蒲子，杀害掳掠官吏民众，三城护军张昌等人拦腰攻击赶走了他们。
English: In this month, Kherian Ketsu invaded Pudong, east of the river, killing and kidnapping officials and people. Zhang Chang, the guardian of the three cities, and others attacked and drove them away.

古文：庚戌，幸犲山宫。
现代文：庚戌，前往豺山宫。
English: Geng Yao, go to Lushan Palace.

古文：西河胡曹成、吐京民刘初原攻杀屈孑所置吐京护军及其守三百余人。
现代文：西河胡曹成、吐京百姓刘初原进攻杀死屈孑所设置的吐京护军以及守卫的三百多人。
English: Hu Caocheng of the West River and Liu Huchuehara, a citizen of Tujing, attacked and killed more than three hundred people of the Tujing escort and guards set up by Qu Wei.

古文：乙卯，起丰宫于平城东北。夏五月辛酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：乙卯，在乎城东北修建丰宫。夏五月辛酉，皇帝回宫。
English: Emperor Wu was concerned about the construction of Fenggu in the northeast of the city. Summer and May were busy, and the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：六月，司马德宗冠军将军、太山太守刘研弟，辅国将军、领东平太守阳平赵鸾，广威将军、平昌太守罗卓，斗城那种各帅张文兴等，率流民七千余家内属。
现代文：六月，司马德宗的冠军将军、泰山太守刘研弟，辅国将军、领东平太守阳平人趟鸾，广威将军、平昌太守罗卓，斗城屠各头领张文兴等人，率领流民七干多家归附。
English: In June, the champion general of Sima Dezong, the governor of Taishan, Liu Kendi, the governor of Fu Guo, the governor of Dongping, Yang Pingren, the governor of Wudao, the governor of Guangwei, the governor of Pyeongchang, Luo Zhuo, the governor of Toecheng, Zhang Wenxing, and others led more than seven dozen exiles to annexation.

古文：河西胡酋刘遮、刘退孤率部落等万余家，渡河内属。
现代文：河西胡首领刘遮、刘退孤率领部落等一万多家，渡过黄河来归附。
English: More than ten thousand people, including the tribes led by Liu Zha, the leader of the Western Heze Hu, and Liu Tiekang, crossed the Yellow River to join.

古文：戊申，幸犭才山宫。
现代文：戊申，前往豺山宫。
English: Wushin, go to Lushan Palace.

古文：丁亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：丁亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：秋八月戊子，诏马邑侯元陋孙使于姚兴。
现代文：秋八月戊子，诏令墨旦堡元迺逐出使地兴。
English: In the autumn and August of the same year, the imperial edict ordered the expulsion of the emperor's envoy Motonari from Modanbaku to Jixing.

古文：辛丑，遣谒者悦力延扶慰蠕蠕，于什门招谕冯跋。
现代文：辛丑，派遣谒者恒赵王安抚慰问蠕蟋，王仕旦招降遇虽。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, it was Wang Zhidang who was dispatched to appease and console Hun Sen, despite the fact that Wang Shidan had been forced to abdicate.

古文：诏平南将军、相州刺史尉古真与司马德宗太尉刘裕相闻，使博士王谅假平南参军将命焉。
现代文：诏令平南将军、垄必刺史尉直真与塱屋德塞的太尉型发相交往，派博士王盏代理平南参军前往传命。
English: The emperor ordered General Pingnan and the lieutenant Naozhen to meet with the eunuch-like eunuch of Xingya Desai, and sent Dr. Wang Jian to join the army on behalf of Pingnan.

古文：姚兴遣使来聘。
现代文：挑兴派遣使者前来聘问。
English: Taoxing sent an envoy to ask questions.

古文：冬十一月壬午，诏使者巡行诸州，校阅守宰资财，非自家所赍，悉簿为赃。
现代文：冬十一月壬午，韶令使者巡视各州，考校查实郡守县令的资产，不是自家携带的，全登记为脏物。
English: On the 26th day of the 11th month of winter, the emissary of the imperial edict went on a tour of the states to inspect the assets of the local daimyos and county magistrates. The assets were not owned by their families, and all the book registrations were considered stolen property.

古文：诏守宰不如法，听民诣阙告言之。
现代文：诏令郡守县令不依法行事，准许民众前往宫廷上告。
English: The county magistrate did not act in accordance with the law and allowed the people to go to the court to appeal.

古文：十二月丙戌朔，蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：十二月丙戌初一，鳄蟋侵犯边塞。
English: On the first day of December, the Cree invaded the border.

古文：丙申，帝北伐蠕蠕。
现代文：丙申，皇帝北伐蠕蠕。
English: Bishen, the emperor of the Northern Expedition.

古文：河内人司马顺宰自号晋王。
现代文：河内人司马顺宰自称为晋王。
English: Sima Shunzai, a native of Hanoi, called himself the King of Jin.

古文：太守讨捕不获。
现代文：太守讨伐搜捕没有擒获。
English: There were no arrests in the Tai Shou crusade.

古文：是岁，秃发傉檀为乞付炽磐所灭。
现代文：这一年，秃发雇檀被乞伏炽磐消灭。
English: This year, the Bald-faced Sandpiper was wiped out by the Beggar Blazing Rock.

古文：二年春正月丙辰，车驾至自北伐，赐从征将士布帛各有差。
现代文：二年春正月丙辰，皇帝从北伐前线归来，赏赐随从征伐的将士布帛多少不等。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor returned from the front line of the Northern Expedition, and rewarded the soldiers who followed the expedition with varying amounts of cloth.

古文：二月丁亥，大飨于西宫，赐附国大、渠帅朝岁首者缯帛金罽各有差。
现代文：二月丁亥，在西宫大宴群臣，赐给岁首朝见的依附国家大人、魁首缯帛黄金毛织品多少不等。
English: In February of Dinghai, at the grand banquet of the Western Palace, the courtiers gave the dependent adults of the country, the leaders, and the golden woolen fabrics they had seen at the beginning of the year.

古文：司马德宗琅邪太守刘朗，率二千余家内属。
现代文：司马德宗的琅邪太守刘朗，率领二千多家归附。
English: Liu Lang, the eccentric abbot of the Sima De sect, led more than two thousand people to annexation.

古文：庚子，河西胡刘云等，率数万户内附。
现代文：庚子，河西胡刘云等人，率领几万户归附。
English: Geng Zi, Hexi Hu Liu Yun and others led tens of thousands of households to annexation.

古文：甲辰，立太祖庙于白登之西。
现代文：甲辰，在白登的西面建立太祖庙。
English: Jia Chen, built the Great Ancestor's Temple on the west side of Mount Paiden.

古文：三月，诏曰： 刺史守宰，率多逋慢，前后怠惰，数加督罚，犹不悛改。
现代文：三月，下韶说： 刺史郡守县令，大多不守法度，前后懈怠懒惰，多次加以督察惩罚，还不改正。
English: In March, the lower court said: "Most of the county magistrates of Zhishi County do not abide by the law, are lazy and lazy, and have been punished by inspectors many times, but have not been corrected.

古文：今年赀调悬违者，谪出家财充之，不听征发于民。 
现代文：今年拖欠资调的，罚出家中财产充当，不准向民众征发。 
English: Those who are in arrears of capital transfer this year will be fined and their family property will be used to repay the debt, and they will not be allowed to solicit funds from the public.

古文：河西饥胡屯聚上党，推白亚栗斯为盟主，号大将军，反于上党，自号单于，称建平元年，以司马顺宰为之谋主。
现代文：河西饥荒的胡人聚集在上党，推举白亚栗斯为盟主，称大将军，在上党反叛，自称单子，称建平元年，以司马顺宰为主要谋士。
English: The Hu people, who were starving in the west of the river, gathered in Shangdang and elected Bai Yagurs as their leader, calling him the great general. They rebelled in Shangdang, calling themselves Shan Zi, saying that it was the first year of Jianping, with Sima Shunzai as the main strategist.

古文：夏四月，诏将军公孙表等五将讨之。
现代文：夏四月，诏令将军公孙表等五个将领讨伐白亚栗斯。
English: In the summer of April, five generals, including the general Gongsun Bo, were ordered to fight against the White Chestnuts.

古文：河南流民二千余家内属。
现代文：黄河南的流民二千多家归附。
English: More than 2,000 displaced people in the south of the Yellow River have been reunited.

古文：众废栗斯而立刘虎，号率善王。
现代文：众人废黜栗斯而立刘虎，称率善王。
English: The people dethroned Li Shuling and set up Liu Hu, calling him the King of Good Leadership.

古文：司马德宗遣使朝贡。
现代文：司马德宗派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Sima Dezong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：己卯，车驾北巡。
现代文：己卯，皇帝向北巡视。
English: Meanwhile, the emperor went on a tour to the north.

古文：五月丁亥，次于参合，东幸大宁。
现代文：五月丁亥，停驻在参合陂，柬到大宁。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, it reached Sangao and went as far east as Daning.

古文：丁未，田于四岬山。
现代文：丁未，在四岬山狩猎。
English: On the 25th, I went hunting in the Four Capes Mountains.

古文：六月戊午，幸去畿陂，观渔。
现代文：六月戊午，前往去畿陂，观看捕鱼。
English: At noon in June, I went to Gyeongbokgung to watch the fishing.

古文：辛酉，次于濡源，筑立蜯台。
现代文：辛酉，停驻在濡源，筑蟑台。
English: Xinzhuang, stationed in Wenyuan, and Zhukongdai.

古文：射白熊于颓牛山，获之。
现代文：在颓牛山射白熊，捕获了它。
English: Shooting a white bear in the Snail Mountain and capturing it.

古文：丁卯，幸赤城，亲见长老，问民疾苦，复租一年。
现代文：丁卯，前往赤城，亲自会见年长的人，询问民众疾苦，免除一年田租。
English: Dingwu, go to Akagi, meet the elderly in person, ask the people about their hardships, and waive the one-year farm rent.

古文：南次石亭，幸上谷，问百年，访贤俊，复田租之半。
现代文：往南停驻石亭，前往上谷，询问百岁老人，访求贤明俊秀人才，免除一半的田租。
English: They went south to Shitei, to the upper valley, to offer condolences to centenarians, to seek out virtuous people, and to reduce and waive half of the farm rent.

古文：壬申，幸涿鹿，登桥山，观温泉，使使者以太牢祠黄帝庙。
现代文：壬申，前往涿鹿，登上桥山，观看温泉，派使者用太牢祭祀黄帝庙。
English: Jinshin, went to Menglu, ascended Qiaoshan, watched the hot springs, and sent an envoy to worship the Yellow Emperor's Temple in the dungeon.

古文：至广宁，登历山，祭舜庙。
现代文：到达广宁，登上历山，祭祀舜庙。
English: Reached Guangning, climbed Mount Leshan, and made a sacrifice at the Temple of Heaven.

古文：秋七月，还宫，复所过田租之半。
现代文：秋七月，回宫，免除所经过之处一半的田租。
English: In autumn and July, when he returned to the palace, he was exempted from paying half of the field rent wherever he went.

古文：九月，阙有差。
现代文：九月，阙多少不等。
English: In September, it varies somewhat.

古文：河南流民，前后三千余家内属。
现代文：黄河南的流民，前后有三千多家归附。
English: More than three thousand refugees from the south of the Yellow River have been repatriated.

古文：京师民饥，听出山东就食。
现代文：京城民众发生饥荒，听任到太行山以东就地求食。
English: The people of Beijing suffered from famine and were forced to go to the east of Taihang Mountain to look for food.

古文：冬二月壬子，姚兴使散骑常侍、东武侯姚敞，尚书姚泰，送其西平公主来，帝以后礼纳之。
现代文：冬十月王子，姚兴派散骑常侍、束武侯姚敞，尚书姚泰，送他的西平公主前来，皇帝以皇后的礼节接纳她。
English: In the winter of October, the prince, Yao Xing, sent his horseback riding attendants, Zokuwu Hou, Yao Zhan, and Shangshu Yao Tai, to send his Xiping Princess to come, and the emperor received her with the etiquette of the queen.

古文：辛酉，行幸沮洳城。
现代文：辛酉，前往沮洳城。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Deguan City.

古文：癸亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：癸亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On the 13th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 古人有言，百姓足则君有余，未有民富而国贫者也。
现代文：丙寅，下诏说： 古人说遇，百姓充足君主就会有余，没有民众富裕而国家贫穷的。
English: He Yin, the next emperor, said: The ancients said that if the people were sufficient, the monarch would have more than enough, and if the people were not rich, the country would be poor.

古文：顷者以来，频遇霜旱，年谷不登，百姓饥寒不能自存者甚众，其出布帛仓谷以赈贫穷。 
现代文：近年以来，频繁遇到大霜旱灾，庄稼不丰收，百姓饥寒不能养活自己的很多，现支出布帛和库藏谷粟来赈济贫苦穷困的人。 
English: In recent years, frequent frosts and droughts have been encountered, crops have not been plentiful, and many people are hungry and cold and cannot feed themselves. They are now spending cloth and stored corn to help the poor and needy.

古文：十有一月丁亥，幸犲山宫。
现代文：十一月丁亥，前往过山宣。
English: November Dinghai, go to the mountain Xuan.

古文：庚子，车驾还宫。
现代文：庚子，皇帝回宫。
English: Geng Zi, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：泰常元年春正月甲申，行幸犲山宫。
现代文：泰常元年春正月甲申，前往豺山宫。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：戊子，车驾还宫。
现代文：戊子，皇帝回宫。
English: Empress Dowager, the emperor has returned to court.

古文：三月己丑，长乐王处文薨。
现代文：三月己丑，长乐王处文逝世。
English: On March 13, Changle Wang Duwen passed away.

古文：常山民霍秀，自言名载图谶，持一黑石以为天赐玉印，诳惑聚党，入山为盗。
现代文：常山百姓霍季，自称名字记载在图谶中，拿一块黑石作为天赐的玉印，诳骗诱惑聚集党羽，进山作乱。
English: Hoji, a citizen of Changshan, who claimed that his name was recorded in the map, took a black stone as a heaven-given jade seal, tricked and tempted to gather party members and go into the mountains to make trouble.

古文：州郡捕斩之。
现代文：州郡逮捕杀了他。
English: State and county troopers captured and killed him.

古文：夏四月壬子，大赦，改元。
现代文：夏四月壬子，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Summer, April, Renzi, amnesty for the world, change the year.

古文：庚甲，河间王羒薨。
现代文：庚申，河间王元脩逝世。
English: Koshin, Kawama Wang Yuanjun passed away.

古文：六月丁巳，车驾北巡。
现代文：六月丁巳，皇帝向北巡视。
English: In June, the emperor went on a tour to the north.

古文：秋七月甲申，帝自白鹿陂西行，大狝于牛川。登釜山，临殷繁水而南，观于九十九泉。
现代文：秋七月甲申，皇帝从白鹿陂向西行进，在牛大规模狩猎，登上釜山，临近殷繁水而向南，观看九十九泉。
English: In the autumn and July of Jiaxing, the emperor marched westward from Baekdu, hunted cattle on a large scale, ascended Busan, approached Yin abundant water and went south to see the 99 Springs.

古文：戊戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：戊戌，皇帝回宫。
English: On the 23rd, they drove back to the palace.

古文：九月戊午，前并州刺史叔孙建等大破山胡。
现代文：九月戊午，前并州刺史叔孙建等人大败山胡。
English: In the afternoon of September, Sun Jian and others, who had previously merged with Shizhi Shuzhou, were defeated.

古文：刘虎渡河东走，至陈留，为从人所杀，司马顺宰等皆死。司马德宗相刘裕，溯河伐姚泓，遣其部将王仲德为前锋，从陆道至梁城。
现代文：刘虎渡过黄河向东逃走，到达陈留，被跟从的人杀死，司马顺宰等人都死了司马德宗的宰相刘裕，逆黄河而上讨伐姚泓，派遣他的部将王仲德为前锋，从陆路到选越。
English: Liu Hu crossed the Yellow River to the east and fled to Chenliu, where he was killed by his followers. Sima Shunzai, the prime minister of Sima Dezong, Liu Yu, went up the Yellow River to fight against Yao Xuan, and sent his general Wang Zhongde as a forward, from the land to Xuan Yue.

古文：兗州刺史尉建畏懦，弃州北渡，王仲德遂入滑台。
现代文：查业刺史塑叁畏惧怯懦，丢下城渡河，王仲德于是进入造台。
English: Afraid of cowardice, he left the city to cross the river, and Wang Zhongde then entered the construction site.

古文：诏将军叔孙建等渡河，耀威滑台，斩尉建于城下。
现代文：诏令将军拯茎建等人渡过茎河，向滑台炫耀军威，在城下斩杀尉建。
English: He ordered General Zheng Kejian and others to cross the Kejian River, show off their military prowess on the slide, and kill Fei Jian at the foot of the city.

古文：冬十月壬戌，幸犲山宫。
现代文：冬十月壬戌，前往豺山宫。
English: Winter in October, to Shaoshan Palace.

古文：徒何部落库傉官斌先降，后复叛归冯跋。
现代文：徒何部落库俦官邀原先投降，后又叛变归附冯跋。
English: At the invitation of Tu Ho, the official of the Ku Klux Klan, he initially surrendered, but later mutinied and joined the Fengba.

古文：骁骑将军延普渡濡水讨击，大破之，斩斌及冯跋幽州刺史渔阳公库傉官昌、征北将军、关内侯库傉官提等首，生擒库傉官女生，缚送京师。
现代文：骁骑将军延普渡过逻丞讨伐攻打，大败他们，斩下官斌和冯跋的幽业刺史、渔阳公库僻官昌，征北将军；关内侯库俦官提等人首级，生擒库僻宫女生，绑送京城。
English: The general Yan Pu rode across the Luo Zheng to fight and attack, defeated them, cut off the yuye of Guan Bin and Feng Bao, the Yuyang Public Treasury and the secluded Guan Chang, the Northern General; Guanai Hukou and Guan Ti were the first level, and the girl from the secluded palace of Guan Guo was kidnapped and sent to Beijing.

古文：幽州平。十一月甲戌，车驾还宫，筑蓬台于北苑。
现代文：幽业平定十一月甲戌，皇帝回宫，在北苞建筑蓬台。
English: In November, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Palace, and built a pavilion in Beilun.

古文：十二月，南阳王良薨。
现代文：十二月，南阳王元良逝世。
English: In December, Nanyang King Tuoba Liang passed away.

古文：是岁，姚兴卒，子泓立。
现代文：这一年，姚兴去世，儿子姚泓即位。
English: In this year, Yao Xing died, and his son Yao Tong ascended to the throne.

古文：二年春二月丙午，诏曰： 九州之民，隔远京邑，时有壅滞，守宰至不以闻。
现代文：二年春二月丙午，下诏说： 九州的民众，远离京城，时常有不如意的事，郡守县令不以实情报告。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of February in the spring of the second year, the following edict was issued: The people of Kyushu, far away from the capital, often have unsatisfactory things, and the county magistrate does not report the truth.

古文：今东作方兴，或有贫穷失农务者。
现代文：当今春耕刚开始，或许有贫穷耽误农田耕作的。
English: Today, spring ploughing has just begun. Poverty may have delayed the ploughing of farmland.

古文：其遣使者巡行天下，省诸州，观民风俗，问民疾苦，察守宰治行。
现代文：现在派遣使者巡视天下，察看各州，观察民间风俗，询问民众疾苦，考察郡守县令的政绩。
English: Now they send emissaries to tour the world, inspect the states, observe folk customs, inquire about the hardships of the people, and examine the political achievements of county governors and county magistrates.

古文：诸有不能自申，皆因以闻。 
现代文：凡有不能自己表达心意的，都通过使者禀报。 
English: If anyone is not able to express himself, he must do so through a messenger.

古文：辛酉，司马德宗荥阳守将傅洪，遣使诣叔孙建，请以虎牢降，求军赴接。德宗谯王司马文思遣使王良诣阙上书，请军讨刘裕。
现代文：辛酉，司马德宗的荣阳守将傅洪，派遣使者到叔孙建那裹，请求献虎牢投降，请求派军队赶赴接应；德宗的谯王司马文思派遣使者王良到宫廷上书，请求出兵讨伐刘裕。
English: Xin Xuan, the Rongyang governor Fu Hong of the Sima De sect, sent an envoy to his uncle and grandson Jian Nawai, requesting him to surrender and request that an army be sent to meet him; Sima Wensi, the king of Shao of the German sect, sent an envoy Wang Liang to the court to write a letter, requesting that troops be sent to fight Liu Yu.

古文：诏司徒长孙嵩率诸军邀击刘裕，战于畔城，更有负捷。
现代文：韶令司徒长孙嵩率领各军截击刘裕，在畔城交战，互有胜负。
English: He ordered Sun Song, the head of the Sifu, to lead the army to intercept Liu Yu, and they fought in Hencheng, with both sides winning and losing.

古文：帝诏止诸军，不克。
现代文：皇帝诏令各军停止下来，不能取胜。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered the troops to halt, unable to win.

古文：夏四月丁未，榆山丁零翟蜀率营部遣使通刘裕。
现代文：夏四月丁未，榆山丁零翟蜀率领营部派使者联络刘裕。
English: In the summer of April, Dingwei, Shaoshan, Dingzhu and Shu led the battalion to send an envoy to contact Liu Yu.

古文：冯跋使人王特兒等通于司马德宗，章武太守捕特兒等，囚送京师。
现代文：冯跋的使者王特儿等人与司马德宗交往，章武太守捉住特儿等人，囚禁送到京城。
English: Fengba's emissary Wang Ter and others interacted with Sima Dezong, Zhang Wu caught Ter and others, and sent them to the capital.

古文：丁巳，幸高柳。
现代文：丁巳，前往高柳。
English: Ding, let's go to Takayanagi.

古文：壬戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：壬戌，皇帝回宫。
English: The emperor has returned to the palace.

古文：五月，汝南民胡譁等万余家相率内属。
现代文：五月，汝南百姓胡哗等一万多家相继归附。
English: In May, more than 10,000 people, including the people of Huludao in the south of the country, were successively annexed.

古文：乙未，司马德宗齐郡太守王懿来降。
现代文：乙未，司马德宗的齐郡太守王懿前来投降。
English: Soon after, Wang Yao, the governor of Qi County and a member of the Sima De sect, came to surrender.

古文：车驾西巡，至于云中，遂济河，田于大漠。
现代文：皇帝向西巡视，到达云中，于是渡过黄河，在大沙漠中狩猎。
English: The emperor inspected the west, reached the clouds, then crossed the Yellow River and hunted in the desert.

古文：秋七月，作白台于城南，高二十丈。
现代文：秋七月，在平城南修建白台，高二十丈。
English: In autumn and July, a white platform was built in the south of Pingcheng, with a height of 20 meters.

古文：司马顺之入常山，流言惑众，称受天帝命，年二十五应为人君，遂聚党于封龙山。
现代文：司马顺之进入常山，散布谣言迷惑群众，声称接受天帝的命令，年纪二十五岁时应成为君主，于是在封龙山聚集党羽。
English: Sima Shunzhi entered Changshan, spread rumors to confuse the masses, claimed to accept the emperor's order to become a monarch at the age of twenty-five, and then gathered party members in Fenglongshan.

古文：赵郡大盗赵德执送京师，斩之。
现代文：趟郡大盗贼赵德捉住他送到京城，杀了他。
English: County grand thief Zhao De caught him, took him to Beijing, and killed him.

古文：八月，刘裕灭姚泓。
现代文：八月，刘裕消灭姚泓。
English: In August, Liu Yu eliminated Yao Xi.

古文：九月癸酉，司马德宗平西将军、荆州刺史司马休之，息谯王文思，章武王子司马国璠、司马道赐，辅国将军温楷，竟陵内史鲁轨，荆州治中韩延之、殷约，平西参军桓谧、桓璲及桓温孙道子，勃海刁雍，陈郡袁式等数百人来降。
现代文：九月癸酉，司马德宗的平西将军、荆州刺史司马休之，儿子谯王文思，章武王的儿子司马国墦、司马困，辅国将军温揩，直座内史台轨，翅州治中韩延之、殷约，平西参军桓谧、桓琏以及桓温的孙子道子，勃海人刁雍，陈郡人袁式等几百人前来投降。
English: At the end of September, several hundred people came to surrender, including the Pingxi general of the Sima De sect, the Jingzhou sentinel Sima Huizhi, the son of the Sima Wang Wensi, the son of the Zhangwu king, Sima Guozhang, Sima Sui, the general of the Auxiliary State, Wen Qi, the straight-seated Inner History Trajectory, the Wing Zhou ruler Han Yan and Yin Ying, the Pingxi army members Huan Yu, Huan Yu and Huan Wen's grandson Tao Zi, the Bohai people Huan Yong, and the Chen County people Yuan Shih.

古文：姚泓匈奴镇将姚成都与弟和都举镇来降。
现代文：姚泓的匈奴镇将姚成都和弟弟和都献出镇所前来投降。
English: The Xiongnu town of Yao Wei offered Yao Chengdu and his younger brother He both came out of the town to surrender.

古文：冬十月己酉，诏司徒长孙嵩等还京师，遣叔孙建镇鄴。
现代文：冬十月己酉，韶令司徒长孙嵩等人回京城派遣拯逐建镇守邺越。
English: In the winter of October, Sun Song, the chief of the imperial guard, and others were dispatched back to Beijing to rescue the besieged town of Shengyue.

古文：癸丑，豫章王夔薨。
现代文：癸丑，逸童工五塑逝世。
English: Ugly, child laborer Yi Wuxu passed away.

古文：十有一月，司徒长孙嵩等诸军至乐平。
现代文：十一月，司徒长孙嵩等各军到达乐平。
English: In November, the armies led by Sun Song, the head of the Stuarts, arrived at Leping.

古文：诏嵩遣娥清、周几特等与叔孙建讨西山丁零翟蜀、洛支等，悉灭余党而还。
现代文：诏令长孙嵩派遣娥清、周几等人和叔孙建讨伐西山丁零星过、盗墓等，全部消灭他们的残余势力后返回。
English: He ordered his eldest son, Sun Song, to send his uncles and grandsons, such as E Qing, Zhou Qi and others, to fight in the Western Mountains, and to destroy all of their remaining forces.

古文：复诸州租税。
现代文：免除各州的租税。
English: Exemption from state taxes.

古文：十有二月己酉，诏河东、河内有姚泓子弟播越民间，能有送致京师者赏之。
现代文：十二月己酉，韶令河东、凡流亡到民间的挑巡子弟，能有送到京城的给予赏赐。
English: In December, it was decreed that the sons and daughters of those who had been exiled to the countryside should be sent to the capital as a reward.

古文：庚申，田于西山。
现代文：庚申，在西山狩猎。
English: Goshun, hunting in the western mountains.

古文：癸亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：癸亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On the 13th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：氐豪徐騃奴、齐元子等，拥部落三万于雍，遣使内附。诏将军王洛生及河内太守杨声等西行以应之。
现代文：区族豪强邀趣、变五王等人，聚集部落三万家在壅逊，派遣使者归附，诏令将军王洛生和回迪太守扰壁等人西进去接应他们。
English: The local patriots invited Zhu Qu, Zeng Wu Wang and others, gathered 30,000 tribal families in Jiaoxun, sent envoys to annex, and ordered General Wang Lousheng and Hui Di Taishou Zhaibai and others to go west to meet them.

古文：壬申，幸大宁长川。
现代文：壬申，前往大宁的垦川。
English: From Jinshin, head to Jecheon in Daning.

古文：姚泓尚书、东武侯姚敞，敞弟镇远将军僧光，右将军姚定世自洛来奔。
现代文：继迅的尚书、束武侯挑邀，她邀的弟弟镇远将军灯光，右将军继宣世从困前来投奔。
English: Following Xun's Shangshu, Sokwu invited Choi, her invited brother Zhenyuan invited General Guangming, and the Right General Xuansei came to flee from the difficulties.

古文：是年，李暠卒，子歆立，遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，李嵩去世，儿子李歆即位，派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Li Song died and his son Li Xi ascended the throne, sending an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：三年春正月丁酉朔，帝自长川诏护高车中郎将薛繁率高车丁零十二部大众北略，至弱水，降者二千余人，获牛马二万余头。
现代文：三年春正月丁酉初一，皇帝从长川诏令护高车中郎将薛繁率领高车丁零十二部大人的部众向北攻取，到达弱水，投降的有二千多人，缴获牛马二万多头。
English: On the first day of the third year of the Spring and the first month of the Ding Dynasty, the emperor ordered Gao Che Zhong Lang to protect Gao Che Zhong Lang from the Yangtze River, and he led Xue Shiang and the members of Gao Che Ding and the 12th Division to attack the north, reaching Weak Water. More than 2,000 people surrendered, and more than 20,000 heads of cattle and horses were captured.

古文：河东胡、蜀五千余家相率内属。
现代文：河东胡、蜀五千多家相继归附。
English: More than 5,000 people from Hu and Shu Provinces in Hedong Province were successively annexed.

古文：三月，司马德宗遣使来贡。
现代文：三月，司马德宗派遣使者前来贡献。
English: In March, Sima Dezong sent an envoy to make a contribution.

古文：庚戌，幸西宫。
现代文：庚戌，皇帝前往西宫。
English: On the 15th, to the West Palace.

古文：以范阳去年水，复其租税。
现代文：因范阳去年发生水灾，免除租税。
English: Due to the flooding in Fanyang last year, it was exempted from tax.

古文：夏四月己巳，徙冀、定、幽三州徒何于京师。
现代文：夏四月己巳，迁徙冀、定、幽三州的徒何到京城。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the summer, some students from Jizhou, Dingzhou and Yuzhou moved to Kyoto.

古文：五月丙午，诏叔孙建镇广阿。
现代文：五月丙午，诏令叔孙建镇守广阿。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month, he ordered his uncle Sun Jian to take over the town of Guang'a.

古文：壬子，车驾东巡，至于濡源及甘松。
现代文：壬子，皇帝向东巡视，到达濡源和甘松。
English: The emperor went on an inspection tour to the east, arriving at Nureyuan and Amatsu.

古文：遣征东将军长孙道生、给事黄门侍郎奚观率精骑二袭冯跋，又命骁骑将军延普自幽州北趋辽西为声势，帝自突门岭待之。
现代文：派遣征束将军长孙道生、给事黄门侍郎奚观率领精锐的骑兵二万人袭击冯跋，又命令骁骑将军延普从幽州向北急赴辽西作为声援，皇帝从突门岭等待他们。
English: He dispatched the conscript general Sun Daosheng, the head of the general staff, and the Yellow Gate attendant Zhenguan, who led 20,000 elite cavalrymen to attack Fengba. He also ordered the cavalry general Yan Pu to rush north from Yuzhou to Liaoxi as a show of solidarity. The emperor was waiting for them from Tumenling.

古文：道生至龙城，徙其民万余家而还。
现代文：道生到达龙城，迁徙那裹的民众一万多家而返回。
English: Dousheng arrived in Longcheng, and more than ten thousand people who had migrated there returned.

古文：六月乙酉，车驾西返。
现代文：六月乙酉，皇帝向西返回。
English: In June, the emperor returned to the west.

古文：秋七月戊午，至于京师。
现代文：秋七月戊午，到达京城。
English: Autumn and July arrived in the capital at noon.

古文：八月，雁门、河内大雨水，复其租税。
现代文：八月，雁门、河内降大暴雨，免除租税。
English: In August, when Yanmen and Hanoi suffered serious floods, the two regions were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：九月甲寅，诏诸州调民租，户五十石，积于定、相、冀三州。
现代文：九月甲寅，诏令各州调发民众租谷，每家五十石，聚积在定、相、冀三州。
English: In September, Emperor Zhao ordered all states to dispatch people to rent valleys, with each family receiving 50 koku, accumulating in the three states of Ding, Sang and Hebei.

古文：冬十月戊辰，筑宫于西苑。
现代文：冬十月戊辰，在西苑建筑宫室。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, the palace room was built in the west courtyard.

古文：是岁，司马德宗卒，弟德文僭位。
现代文：这一年，司马德宗去世，弟弟德文僭越登位。
English: In the same year, Sima Dezong died, and his younger brother, Devin Yue, ascended to the throne.

古文：赫连屈丐僭称皇帝。
现代文：赫连屈丐僭越称皇帝。
English: He even called himself emperor.

古文：四年正月壬辰朔，车驾临河，大搜于犊渚。
现代文：四年春正月壬辰初一，皇帝到黄河边，在犊渚大阅兵。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the emperor went to the Yellow River and held a grand military parade in Shanzhu.

古文：癸卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：癸卯，皇帝回宫。
English: On the 25th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：三月癸丑，筑宫于蓬台北。
现代文：三月癸丑，在蓬台北建筑宫室。
English: The March of the Ugly, set in the Palace Room of the PengTaipei Building.

古文：司马德文宁朔将军、平阳太守、匈奴护军薛辩及司马楚之、司马顺明、司马道恭，并遣使请降。
现代文：司马德文的宁朔将军、平阳太守、匈奴护军薛辩和司马楚之、司马顺明、司马道恭，都派遣使者请求投降。
English: Sima Dewen's General Ningshuo, the Governor of Pingyang, Xue Fen of the Xiongnu Protectorate, and Sima Chuzhi, Sima Shunming, and Sima Daogong all sent envoys to request surrender.

古文：夏四月庚辰，车驾有事于东庙，远籓助祭者数百国。
现代文：夏四月庚辰，皇帝在束庙祭祀，远方藩国助祭的有几百个。
English: In summer, in April, at the time of Geng Chen, the emperor held a religious service at the Zoku Temple, and there were hundreds of assistant priests from distant domains and countries.

古文：辛巳，南巡，幸雁门。
现代文：辛巳，向南巡视，前往雁门。
English: Xin Si, patrol to the south and go to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：赐所过无出今年租赋。
现代文：赏赐所经过地区不交纳今年的租赋。
English: The regions through which the award passes will not pay this year's rent.

古文：五月庚寅朔，观渔于氵垒水。
现代文：夏五月庚寅初一，在漫丞观看捕鱼。
English: On the first day of the summer in May, Geng Yin watched the fishing in the manseo.

古文：己亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：己亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On the 14th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：复所过一年租赋。
现代文：免除所经过地区一年的租赋。
English: One year's rent allowance will be exempted for the areas passed through.

古文：六月，司马德文建威将军、河西太守、冯翊羌酋党道子遣使内属。
现代文：六月，司马德文的建威将军、河西太守、冯翊羌族首领党道子派遣使者归附。
English: In June, Sima Dewen's General Jian Wei, the Empress Dowager of Hexi, and the leader of the Fenghuang people, Party Daozi, sent envoys to annex it.

古文：秋八月辛未，东巡。
现代文：秋八月辛未，向东巡视。
English: In the autumn and August, he went on a tour to the east.

古文：遣使祭恆岳。
现代文：派遣使者祭祀恒山。
English: Send emissaries to worship Hengshan.

古文：甲申，车驾还宫。
现代文：甲申，皇帝回宫。
English: Jiaxin, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：所过复一年田租。
现代文：所经过地区免除一年的田租。
English: The regions they pass through are exempt from paying rice field rent for one year.

古文：九月，筑宫于白登山。
现代文：九月，在白登山建筑宫室。
English: In September, in the palace room of the White Mountaineering Building.

古文：冬十有二月癸亥，西巡，至云中，逾白道，北猎野马于辱孤山。
现代文：冬十二月癸亥，向西巡视，到达云中，翻越白道，向北在辱孤山捕猎野马。
English: In winter and December, he went to the west to inspect, reached the clouds, crossed the white road, and went north to hunt wild horses in the lonely mountains.

古文：至于黄河，从君子津西渡，大狩于薛林山。
现代文：到达黄河，从君子津向西渡河，在薛林山大规模狩猎。
English: Arrive at the Yellow River, cross the river from Junzijin to the west, and go on a large-scale goose hunt in Xuelin Mountain.

古文：五年春正月丙戌朔，自薛林东还。至于屋窦城，飨劳将士，大酺二日，班禽兽以赐之。己亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：五年春正月丙戌初一，从薛林向东返回，到达屋窦城，犒劳将士，大饮两天，分发禽兽赏赐他们己亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, he returned eastward from Xuelin and arrived at Yadoucheng. He made the soldiers work hard, drank heavily for two days, distributed animals and rewarded them with boars, and the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：三月丙戌，南阳王意文薨。
现代文：三月丙戌，南阳王意文逝世。
English: On the second day of March, Nanyang Wang Yiwen passed away.

古文：夏四月，河西屠各帅黄大虎、羌酋不蒙娥等遣使内附。
现代文：夏四月，河西屠各头领黄大虎、羌族首领不蒙娥等人派遣使者归附。
English: In the summer of April, Huang Daohu, the leader of the Tu people in Hexi, and Bu Meng'e, the leader of the Yi people, sent envoys to annex it.

古文：丙寅，起氵垒南宫。
现代文：丙寅，修建漫南宫。
English: Cui Yin, build the Man'nan Palace.

古文：五月乙酉，诏曰： 宣武皇帝体道得一，天纵自然，大行大名未尽盛美，非所以光扬洪烈、垂之无穷也。
现代文：五月乙酉，下诏说： 宣武皇帝体仁道而得精髓，出白上天所授，逝世后的大名没有完全表达他盛大的美德，不足以宣扬宏伟的功业，传之久远。
English: At the end of May, the following imperial edict was issued: Emperor Xuanwu received the essence of the benevolent way from the body, which was given by heaven, and the daimyo after his death did not fully express his grand virtue, and was not enough to promote the magnificent work, which has been passed down for a long time.

古文：今因启纬图，始睹尊号，天人之意，焕然著明。
现代文：现在因事打开图纬，才看到尊号，天人的意向，清楚明白。
English: Now, because of the incident, I opened the chart to see the sign of honor, the intention of heaven and man, clearly understood.

古文：其改 宣 曰 道 ，更上尊谥曰道武皇帝，以彰灵命之先启，圣德之玄同。
现代文：现改 宣 为 道，另上尊贵的谧号为道武皇帝，来彰明他首先开启威灵的国运，德行与天地万物混同。
English: He changed his title to "Dao" and his honorific nickname to "Dao Wu Emperor" to show that he was the first to start the national movement of Wei Ling, and that virtue was confused with all things in heaven and earth.

古文：告祀郊庙，宣于八表。 
现代文：祭祀郊庙，宣告八方之外。 
English: The suburb temple was declared out of bounds.

古文：庚戌，淮南侯司马国璠、池阳侯司马道赐等谋反伏诛。
现代文：庚戌，淮南侯司马国墦、池阳侯司马道赐等人谋反被处死刑。
English: Geng Yao, Huainan Housema Guozhen, Chiyang Housema Daozhi and others were sentenced to death for plotting rebellion.

古文：六月丙寅，行幸翳犊山。
现代文：六月丙寅，前往翳犊山。
English: In June, he went to Shaoshan.

古文：秋七月丁酉，西至于五原。
现代文：秋七月丁酉，向西到达五原。
English: In the autumn and July, Dingyao started to move westward and reached Wuhuan.

古文：丁未，幸云中大室，赐从者大酺。
现代文：丁未，前往云中的大室，赏赐随从者聚饮。
English: On the 25th, Omuro, who lives in the clouds, gave his entourage a drink.

古文：八月癸亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月癸亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On August 11, the emperor drove back to the palace.

古文：闰月甲午，阴平王烈薨。
现代文：闰月甲午，阴平王元烈逝世。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month, Yinping Wang Rong passed away.

古文：冬十有一月，诏骁骑将军延普城乾城。
现代文：冬十一月，诏令骁骑将军延普建筑干城。
English: In the winter of November, the imperial edict ordered the general Yanpu to construct Gancheng.

古文：十有二月丁亥，杏城羌酋狄温子率三千余家内附。
现代文：十二月丁亥，杏城羌族首领狄温子率领三千多家归附。
English: In December of Dinghai, the leader of the Xingcheng Yao people, Di Wenzi, led more than three thousand people to annexation.

古文：是岁，刘裕废杀其主司马德文，僭自称皇帝，号宋。
现代文：这一年，刘裕废黜杀害他的主子司马德文，僭越自称皇帝，国号为宋。
English: In the same year, Liu Yu deposed and killed his master Sima Dewen, and Xing Yue proclaimed himself emperor, with the country name of Song.

古文：李歆为沮渠蒙逊所灭，歆弟恂自立于敦煌。
现代文：李歆被沮渠蒙逊消灭，李歆的弟弟李恂在敦煌自立称王。
English: Li Qian was eliminated by Meng Xun, Li Qian's brother Li Qian became king in Dunhuang.

古文：六年春正月辛未，行幸公阳。
现代文：六年春正月辛未，前往公阳。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Xinwei went to Gongyang.

古文：二月，调民二十户输戎马一匹、大牛一头。
现代文：二月，调发民众每二十户出战马一匹、大牛一头。
English: In February, every 20 households were ordered to send one war horse and one ox.

古文：三月甲子，阳平王熙薨。
现代文：三月甲子，阳平王元熙逝世。
English: Yangping Wangxi passed away on March 16.

古文：乙亥，制六部民，羊满百口输戎马一匹。
现代文：乙亥，规定六部民众，凡羊满一百口出战马一匹。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the people of six provinces were required to provide one war horse for every 100 sheep.

古文：发京师六千人筑苑，起自旧苑，东包白登，周回三十余里。
现代文：征发京城六千人建筑苑囿，起自于旧苑，东面围住白登，周围三十多里。
English: Beijing's six-thousand-people architectural garden plan was issued, starting from the old garden, surrounded by Baidu in the east, and more than 30 miles around.

古文：夏六月乙酉，北巡，至蟠羊山。
现代文：夏六月乙酉，向北巡视，到达蟠羊山。
English: In the summer and June, he went on a tour to the north and arrived at Qiangyang Mountain.

古文：秋七月，西巡，猎于柞山，亲射虎，获之，遂至于河。
现代文：秋七月，向西巡视，在柞山狩猎，亲自射虎，捕获了虎，于是到黄河。
English: In autumn and July, he inspected the west, hunted in Lushan, personally shot a tiger, captured a tiger, and then went to the Yellow River.

古文：八月庚子，大狝于犊渚。
现代文：八月庚子，在犊渚大规模狩猎。
English: In August, Genko went on a large-scale hunting trip in Shibasugi.

古文：九月庚戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月庚戌，皇帝回宫。
English: On the fifth day of the ninth month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：壬申，刘裕遣使朝贡。
现代文：壬申，刘裕派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Jinshin, Liu Yu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月己亥，行幸代。
现代文：冬十月己亥，前往代郡。
English: In winter, on October 24th, the parade went to Daigun.

古文：十有二月丙申，西巡狩，至于云中。
现代文：十二月丙申，向西巡视，到达云中。
English: In December, he went on a tour to the west and arrived in Yunzhong.

古文：是岁，沮渠蒙逊灭李恂。
现代文：这一年，沮渠蒙逊消灭李恂。
English: This year, the monsoon destroyed the Li Gang.

古文：七年春正月甲辰朔，自云中西行，幸屋窦城，赐从者大酺三日，蕃渠帅缯帛各有差。
现代文：七年春正月甲辰初一，从云中向西行进，到屋窦城，赏赐随从者聚饮三天、藩属魁首缯帛多少不等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the year, he marched westward from the middle of the clouds to the city of Yatou, and rewarded his followers with three days of drinking, and the leaders of the domain with various amounts of money.

古文：二月丙戌，车驾还宫，赐从者布帛各有差，大飨于西宫。
现代文：二月丙戌，皇帝回宫，赏赐随从者布帛多少不等，在西宫大宴群臣。
English: In February, when the emperor returned to the palace, he rewarded his attendants with varying amounts of cloth, starting with a grand banquet for the courtiers in the West Palace.

古文：三月乙丑，河南王曜薨。
现代文：三月乙丑，河南王元曜逝世。
English: On March 23, Wang You of Henan Province passed away.

古文：夏四月甲戌，封皇子焘为泰平王，焘，字佛厘，拜相国，加大将军；丕为乐平王，加车骑大将军；狝为安定王，加卫大将军；范为乐安王，加中军大将军；健为永昌王，加抚军大将军；崇为建宁王，加辅国大将军；俊为新兴王，加镇军大将军；献怀长公主子嵇敬，封长乐王，拜大司马、大将军。
现代文：夏四月甲戌，封皇子托跋焘为泰平王，托跋焘，字佛厘，被任命为相国，加授大将军；元丕为乐平王，加授车骑大将军；元弥为安定王，加授卫大将军；元范为乐安王，加授中军大将军；元健为永昌王，加授抚军大将军；元崇为建宁王，加授辅国大将军；元俊为新兴王，加授镇军大将军；献怀长公主的儿子彊堑，封旦碧逗，被任命为大司马、大将军。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Gaozong's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taiping's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Fuli's son, was appointed as the King of Taiping's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Taobao's son, Emperor Ta

古文：初，帝素服寒食散，频年动发，不堪万机，五月，诏皇太子临朝听政。
现代文：当初，皇帝素来服用寒食散，连年药性发作，不能承受纷繁政务，五月，诏令皇太子临朝处理政事。
English: At first, the emperor had been taking cold medicine for years and could not bear the heavy workload of government affairs. In May, he ordered the crown prince to come to the imperial court to deal with government affairs.

古文：是月，泰平王摄政。
现代文：这月，耋垩王代行政事。
English: This month, He Wangde was appointed to the post of chief administrative officer.

古文：刘裕卒，子义符僭立。
现代文：型堑去世，儿子盏笪僭越即位。
English: Kataoka died, and his son Mariko ascended the throne.

古文：秋九月，诏假司空奚斤节，都督前锋诸军事，为晋兵大将军、行扬州刺史，交址侯周几为宋兵将军、交州刺史，安固子公孙表为吴兵将军、广州刺史，前锋伐刘义符。
现代文：秋九月，诏令司空奚斤为假节，都督前锋诸军事务，担任晋兵大将军、代理扬州刺史，交耻侯周几担任宋兵将军、交州刺史，安固子公孙壶担任昱兵将军、庐业刺史，充当前锋讨伐型盏签。
English: In the autumn and September, the emperor decreed that Sikyong Shujin was the false festival, and the governor of the capital was the vanguard of the military affairs, serving as the general of the Jin soldiers and acting as the representative of the Yangzhou stabbing history, Jiao Shihou Zhouqi served as the general of the Song soldiers and the stabbing history of the Jiaozhou, and Anguzi Gongsun Jiu served as the general of the Xiong soldiers and the stabbing history of the Xiongye, and served as the spearhead of the frontline.

古文：乙巳，幸氵垒南宫，遂如广宁。
现代文：乙巳，前往漫龃，于是到卢空。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, they went to the South Palace and then to Guangning.

古文：己酉，诏泰平王率百国以法驾田于东苑，车乘服物皆以乘舆之副。
现代文：己酉，诏令泰平王率领各国用皇帝车驾在东苑狩猎，车辆服饰都用皇帝的备用品。
English: He ordered King Taiping to lead all countries to use the emperor's car to go hunting in Dongyuan, and the vehicles and clothing were all made of the emperor's spare parts.

古文：辛亥，筑平城外郭，周回三十二里。
现代文：辛亥，修筑平城外城，周围三十二里。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the outer city of Pingcheng was built, with a circumference of 32 miles.

古文：辛酉，幸桥山，遣使者祠黄帝、唐尧庙。
现代文：辛酉，前往桥山，派遣使者祭祀茎童、卢毫庙。
English: Xin Yao, went to Qiaoshan, sent an emissary to offer sacrifices to the Stem Child and the Temple of Lu Zhao.

古文：因东幸幽州，见耆年，问其所苦，赐爵号。
现代文：于是束到幽业，会见老年人，询问他们的疾苦，赐予爵号。
English: So he went to Youye, met with the elderly, asked about their ailments, and gave them a title.

古文：分遣使者循行州郡，观察风俗。
现代文：分派使者巡视州郡，观察各地风俗。
English: Envoys were dispatched to inspect counties and prefectures to observe local customs.

古文：冬十月甲戌，车驾还宫，复所过田租之半。
现代文：冬十月甲戌，皇帝回宫，免除所经过地区一半的田租。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, driving back to the palace, half of the land rent of the place passed by the reduction and exemption.

古文：奚斤伐滑台不克，帝怒，议亲南讨，为其声援。
现代文：奚斤征伐滑台不能取胜，皇帝发怒，商议亲自南讨，作为奚斤的声援。
English: The Emperor was furious because he could not win the bid to conquer the southern plateau, so he decided to go to the southern plateau himself as a show of support for the southern plateau.

古文：壬辰，车驾南巡，自出天门关，逾恆岭。
现代文：壬辰，皇帝向南巡视，出天门关，越过恒岭。
English: In Imjin, the emperor went on a tour to the south, went out of Tianmen Pass, and crossed the Hengling.

古文：四方蕃附大人各率所部从者五万余人。
现代文：四方附庸国大人各率所部跟从有五万多人。
English: There are more than fifty thousand people in each of the four vassal states.

古文：十有一月，泰平王亲统六军出镇塞上，安定王弥与北新公安同居守。
现代文：十一月，泰平王亲自统领六军出去镇守边塞，安定王元弥和北新公安同留守。
English: In November, King Taiping personally led the six armies to go out to guard the border fortress, and Wang Yuanya and Beixin Public Security stayed behind.

古文：丙午，曲赦司州殊死已下。
现代文：丙午，赦免司州死刑以下囚犯。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, he pardoned the prisoners below the death penalty in Sizhou.

古文：刘义符东郡太守王景度弃滑台走。
现代文：刘义符的束郡太守王景度放弃滑台逃走。
English: Liu Yifu's Sucs County Governor Wang Jiedu abandons the slide and runs away.

古文：诏成皋侯元苟兒为兗州刺史，镇滑台。
现代文：诏令成皋侯元苟儿担任兖州刺史，镇守滑台。
English: He ordered that Chengyu Houyuan Goro serve as the governor of Zhangzhou and the town guard of the slide.

古文：十有二月，遣寿光侯叔孙建等率众自平原东渡，徇下青、兗诸郡。
现代文：十二月，派遣寿光侯叔孙建等人率领部众从平原向东渡河，攻下青州、兖州各郡。
English: In December, he sent Shouguang Houshu, Sun Jian and others to lead the troops from the plain to the east to cross the river and capture the counties of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：刘义符兗州刺史徐琰闻渡河，弃守走，叔孙建遂东入青州。
现代文：刘义符的兖州刺史徐琰听说叔孙建渡过董回，放弃守备逃跑，扭邈叁于是向东进入青州。
English: Liu Yifu's Zhangzhou clerk Xu Yao heard that his uncle Jian Du had crossed the Dong Hui River, abandoned his guard and fled, and then turned eastward into Qingzhou.

古文：司马爱之、秀之先聚党济东，皆率众来降。
现代文：司马爱之、秀之原先聚集党羽在济水束，都率领部众前来投降。
English: Sima Aizhi and Xiuzhi, who had previously gathered their followers in Jishuzuka, both led their followers to surrender.

古文：八年正月丙辰，行幸鄴，存恤民俗。
现代文：八年正月丙辰，前往邺城，慰问抚恤民众。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, he went to Shicheng to offer condolences to the people receiving pensions.

古文：司空奚斤既平兗豫，还围虎牢。刘义符守将毛德祖距守不下。
现代文：司空墨丘平定查业邀业后，回军包围虚空，型盏筐的守将毛德祖固守不降。
English: After the investigation and invitation of Siku Moku, the returning troops surrounded the void, and the keeper of the basket would stick to Mao Zedzu.

古文：河东蜀薛定、薛辅率五千余家内属。
现代文：回趋整童、壁面率领五千多家归附。
English: More than five thousand people, led by the returning rectification children and the wall, have been added.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯边塞。
English: Creep creep invade the border.

古文：二月戊辰，筑长城于长川之南，起自赤城，西至五原，延袤二千余里，备置戍卫。
现代文：二月戊辰，在匡川的南面修筑长城，开始于赤城，西到互愿，绵延二千多里，设置守备警卫。
English: On the first day of February, the Great Wall was built in the south of Nagakawa, starting from Akagi, west to Gohara, extending more than two thousand miles, and guard troops were set up.

古文：三月乙巳，帝田于鄴南韩陵山，幸汲郡，至于枋头。
现代文：三月乙巳，皇帝在邺城南的韩陵山狩猎。前往汲郡，到达拉题。
English: In the second month of March, the emperor went hunting in Hanling Mountain, south of Lucheng. He went to Kyu County and arrived in Latchi.

古文：乙卯，济自灵昌津，幸陈留、东郡。
现代文：乙卯，渡过灵昌津。前往速鱼、塞郡。
English: Otsu, crossed Lingchangjin. Headed for Suyu, Sai County.

古文：乙丑，济河而北，西之河内，造浮桥于冶坂津。
现代文：乙丑，渡过茎回向北行进，西到河内，在冶坂津造浮桥。
English: Second Ugly, crossed the stem back to the north, traveled west to Hanoi, and built a pontoon bridge in Ye Sakatsu.

古文：夏四月丁卯，幸成皋城，观虎牢。
现代文：夏四月丁卯，前往成皋城，观望虎牢。
English: In the summer of April, I went to Chengyu City to see the tiger's prison.

古文：而城内乏水，悬绠汲河。
现代文：城内缺水，垂下绳索汲取董周水。
English: There is a shortage of water in the city, so a rope is lowered to draw water from Dong Zhou.

古文：帝令连舰上施贲辒，绝其汲路，又穿地道以夺其井。
现代文：皇帝命令在连接的船只上施放攻城车，断绝城内汲水的路线，又挖地道去夺占水井。
English: The emperor ordered to launch siege engines on the connected ships, cut off the route for drawing water in the city, and dug tunnels to seize wells.

古文：遂至洛阳，观《石经》。
现代文：于是到洛阳，观看《石经》。
English: So I went to Luoyang to watch "The Stone Sutra."

古文：蛮王梅安，率渠帅数千人来贡方物。
现代文：蛮王檀塞，率领魁首几千人来贡纳地方物产。
English: The barbarian king, Dansai, led several thousand people to the local property in Gunna.

古文：闰月己未，还幸河内，北登太行，幸高都。
现代文：闰四月己未，回到蚰。北登立王仙，到直都。
English: It's not even April yet, and I'm back in Handan. I've climbed Mount Beidong, built Wangxian, and arrived in Zhidu.

古文：虎牢溃，获刘义符冠军将军、司州刺史、观阳伯毛德祖，冠军司马、荥阳太守翟广，建威将军窦霸，振武将军姚勇错，振威将军吴宝之，司州别驾姜元兴，治中窦温。
现代文：虚空守军溃散，擒获刘义符的冠军将军、司州刺史、塑腥伯王壁担，冠军司马、荣阳太守翟广，建威将军宜玺，振武将军毖垩铐，振威将军吴宝之，业别驾差五兴，治中宣温。
English: The defenders of the empty space broke up, and the champion generals who won the Liu Yi Fu, the champion Sima, the champion Rongyang Taishu Gongguang, the champion Jian Wei general Yixing, the general Zhenwu Gong, and the general Zhenwei Wu Baozhi were captured, the champion Sima and the champion Rongyang Taishu Gongguang were captured, the champion Sima and the champion Rongyang Taishuong were captured, the champion Sima and the champion Rongyang Taishu Gongguang were captured, the champion Sima and the champion Sima and the champion Rongyang Taishu Gongguang were captured,

古文：士众大疫，死者十二三。
现代文：士卒中出现大瘟疫，死亡的有十之二三。
English: A great plague broke out in the army, and two-thirds of the soldiers died of the disease.

古文：辛酉，帝还至晋阳。
现代文：辛酉，皇帝回到晋肠。
English: Hsinchu, the emperor returned to Jinxi.

古文：班赐从官，王公已下逮于厮贱，无不沾给。
现代文：颁赐随从官员，王公以下直到仆役，无不遍及。
English: Awards were given to attendant officials, from princes down to servants, without exception.

古文：五月丙寅，还次雁门。
现代文：五月丙寅，返回停驻雁门。
English: In May, Hsin-Yin returned and stopped at the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：皇太子率留台王公迎于句注之北。
现代文：皇太子率领留台的王公到句注的北面迎接。
English: The crown prince led the crown prince of Ryuudai to the north side of the junction to meet.

古文：庚寅，车驾至自南巡。
现代文：庚寅，皇帝结束南巡返回。
English: On the 25th, the emperor drove south and returned.

古文：六月己亥，太尉、宜都公穆观薨。
现代文：六月已亥，太尉、宜都公继逝世。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Taijun and Yidukong Muqun passed away.

古文：丙辰，北巡，至于参合陂，游于蟠羊山。
现代文：丙辰，向北巡视，到达参合陂，在竖兰山游玩。
English: Bing Chen, patrolling to the north, arrived at Sanghejing, and played in Zhailan Mountain.

古文：秋七月，幸三会屋侯泉，诏皇太子率百官以从。
现代文：秋七月，前往三会的屋侯泉，诏令皇太子率领百官随从。
English: In autumn and July, the procession went to Sankaiya Hosen, and the crown prince led a retinue of a hundred officials.

古文：八月，幸马邑，观于氵垒源。
现代文：八月，前往马邑，游览漫源。
English: In August, arrived in Mayeup to watch the dragonfly source.

古文：九月乙亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月乙亥，皇帝回宫。
English: On September 11, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：诏司空奚斤还京师，昌平侯娥清、交址侯周几等镇枋头。
现代文：诏令司空奚斤回京城，昌平侯娥清、交趾侯周几等人镇守枋头。
English: The edict ordered Sikuo Shujin to return to the capital, and Changping Hou E Qing, Koji Hou Zhou Qi and others to guard Shantou.

古文：刘义符颖川太守李元窃入许昌，诏周几击之，元德遁走。
现代文：刘义符的颖川太守李元德偷袭进入许昌，诏令周几攻打他，李元德逃走。
English: Liu Yifu's Yingchuan governor Li Yuande sneaked into Xuchang, ordered Zhou Qi to attack him, and Li Yuande fled.

古文：几平许昌，还军枋头。
现代文：周几平定许吕，回军到枋头。
English: Zhou Jianping ordered Xu Lv to return to Shantou.

古文：冬十月癸卯，广西宫，起外垣墙，周回二十里。
现代文：冬十月癸卯，扩建西宫，修外垣墙，周围二十里。
English: In winter and October, the West Palace was expanded, and the outer wall was repaired. The surrounding area is 20 li.

古文：十有一月己巳，帝崩于西宫，时年三十二。
现代文：十一一月己巳，皇帝在西宫逝世，时年三十二岁。
English: In November, the emperor died at the Western Palace at the age of thirty-two.

古文：遗诏以司空奚斤所获军实赐大臣，自司徒长孙嵩已下至士卒各有差。
现代文：遗诏以司空奚斤所获取的军用物资赏赐大臣，从司徒长孙嵩以下到士兵多少不等。
English: The posthumous edict rewarded the minister with the military supplies obtained by Siku, which ranged from Satoru Choson Sunseung to soldiers.

古文：十有二月庚子，上谥曰明元皇帝，葬于云中金陵，庙称太宗。
现代文：十二月庚子，上谧号为明元皇帝，安葬在云中的金陵，庙号称太宗。
English: December Geng Zi, whose posthumous name was Emperor Mingyuan, was buried in Jinling in the clouds, and his temple was called Taizong.

古文：帝礼爱儒生，好览史传。以刘向所撰《新序》、《说苑》于经典正义多有所阙，乃撰《新集》三十篇，采诸经史，该洽古义，兼资文武焉。
现代文：皇帝尊重喜爱儒生，喜好读史书传记，认为刘向所撰《新序》、《说苑》在经典正义方面缺略颇多，于是撰写《新集》三十篇，取材于经史，广博合于古义，才能可谓文武兼备。
English: The emperor respected and liked Confucianism, liked to read history books and biographies, and thought that Liu Xiang's "New Order" and "Saying Garden" lacked a lot in terms of classic justice. Therefore, he wrote 30 "New Collection" articles, which were based on the history of the scriptures, and combined with the ancient meaning. In this way, he could be said to have both literary and military skills.

古文：史臣曰：太祖英雄，北驱朔漠，末年内多衅隙。
现代文：史臣曰：太祖英勇杰出，北方驱使沙漠地带，晚年内部多有裂痕。
English: Shichen said: the great ancestor was brave and outstanding, the north drove the desert zone, and there were many cracks in his later years.

古文：明元抱纯孝之心，逢枭镜之祸，权以济事，危而获安，隆基固本，内和外辑。
现代文：明元帝抱有淳孝的心意，遇上内奸的祸难，以变通方法行事，危难中获得安全，隆兴基业巩固根本，内部和睦外部安宁。
English: Emperor Mingyuan cherished the spirit of filial piety, encountered the calamity of a mole, acted in a flexible manner, gained safety in danger, strengthened the foundation of the foundation, and achieved internal harmony and external peace.

古文：以德见宗，良无愧也。
现代文：以德行受到尊崇，实在是没有惭愧的。
English: It is nothing to be ashamed of to be respected for one's virtue.

