古文：凡兵之所以先争，圣人贤士，不为爱尊爵。道术知能，不为爱官职。巧伎勇力，不为爱重禄。聪耳明目，不为爱金财。
现代文：举凡用兵先要争取具备的条件是：圣人贤士不为贪图尊高的爵位，有道术能力的人不为贪图国家的官职，有武艺勇力的人不为优厚的俸禄，到敌方侦查的人员不为金钱和财货。
English: The conditions that all soldiers should strive for are as follows: saints and sages should not covet noble titles, people with moral ability should not covet government posts, people with martial arts courage should not covet generous salaries, and people who investigate the enemy should not covet money and goods.

古文：故伯夷叔齐，非于死之日而后有名也，其前行多修矣。武王非于甲子之朝而后胜也，其前政多善矣。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐不是饿死以后才有名的，因为以前就注重修德；周武王不是在甲子那天以后取胜的，因为以前就多行善政。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi did not become famous after starving to death, because they had previously focused on cultivating virtue; King Zhou Wu did not win after the day of Jia Zi, because he had previously done more good governance.

古文：故小征千里遍知之，筑堵之墙，十人之聚，日五闲之。
现代文：所以，小规模的征战，要了解千里地的情况。就是一墙之隔，十人之聚集，也要每天侦查五次。
English: Therefore, for a small-scale expedition, it is necessary to know the situation thousands of miles away. Even if there is a wall between us and a gathering of ten people, it is necessary to investigate five times a day.

古文：大征遍知天下。
现代文：至于大规模的征战，那就要了解天下的情况了。
English: As for large-scale conscription, it is necessary to understand the situation in the world.

古文：日一闲之。散金财，用聪明也，故善用兵者，无沟垒而有耳目。
现代文：所谓每日频繁地侦查五次，就是要花钱购买耳目的意思。所以，善用兵者，即使没有沟垒工事，也要有从事侦查的耳目。
English: The so-called frequent reconnaissance five times a day means spending money to buy eyes and ears. Therefore, those who make good use of soldiers, even if there is no dike construction, must have eyes and ears for reconnaissance.

古文：兵不呼儆，不茍聚，不妄行，不强进，呼儆则敌人戒。
现代文：兵不可高声呼警，不可草率集合，不可徒劳行军，不可勉强进攻。
English: Soldiers must not shout loudly, must not hastily assemble, must not march in vain, and must not attack reluctantly.

古文：茍聚则众不用。妄行则群卒困，强进则锐士挫，故凡用兵者，攻坚则軔乘瑕则神，攻坚则瑕者坚乘瑕则坚者瑕。
现代文：高声呼警，则敌人知所警惕；草率集合出动，则兵众不肯效力；徒劳行军，则士卒困乏；勉强进攻，则精兵受挫。所以，用兵的人，攻坚则容易受挫，攻弱则收得神效。攻坚，其薄弱环节也会变得坚固；攻弱，其坚固部分也会变得薄弱。
English: If you shout loudly, the enemy will be alerted; if you hastily assemble and launch, the soldiers will refuse to work; if you march in vain, the soldiers will be exhausted; if you attack reluctantly, the elite soldiers will be frustrated. Therefore, those who use soldiers will be easily frustrated when attacking strong points, and will be effective when attacking weak points. When attacking strong points, their weak links will also become strong; when attacking weak points, their strong parts will also become weak.

古文：故坚其坚者，瑕其瑕者。
现代文：所以要稳住其坚固环节，削弱其薄弱环节。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to stabilize its strong links and weaken its weak links.

古文：屠牛坦朝解九牛，而刀可以莫铁，则刃游闲也。
现代文：屠牛坦一天割解九只牛而屠刀还能削铁，就是因为刀刃总是在空隙间活动的原故。
English: A butcher's knife can carve nine oxen in a day, and a butcher's knife can also sharpen iron, because the blade always moves between the gaps.

古文：故天道不行，屈不足从。人事荒乱，以十破百。器备不行，以且击倍。故军争者不行于完城，有道者不行于无君。
现代文：所以，在天道不顺的时候，敌人穷屈，也不宜追逐；敌国人事荒乱，就可以以十破百；敌国兵器不备，就可以以半击倍，所以，军事争夺不打坚固的城池，有道义的不打无君的国家。
English: Therefore, when the weather is not favorable, it is not appropriate to pursue the enemy if the enemy is weak; if the enemy's personnel is in disarray, it can be broken by ten; if the enemy's weapons are not prepared, it can be doubled by half. Therefore, military competition does not fight a solid city, and a moral country does not fight a country without a ruler.

古文：故莫知其将至也，至而不可圉。莫知其将去也，去而不可止。
现代文：要使人不知其将要来到，到了就无法防御；要使人不知其将要离去，去了便不能阻止。
English: If a man does not know when he is coming, when he comes he cannot be defended; if he does not know when he is going, when he is gone he cannot be stopped.

古文：敌人虽众，不能止待。
现代文：敌人虽多，也是不能阻拦和防御的。
English: Although there are many enemies, they cannot be stopped or defended against.

古文：治者所道富也，而治未必富也，必知富之事，然后能富。
现代文：治，可以导致国富，但治未必就是富，必须懂得富国的生产，然后才能富。
English: Governance can lead to national wealth, but governance is not necessarily wealth. We must understand the production of a rich country before we can become rich.

古文：富者所道强也，而富未必强也，必知强之数，然后能强。
现代文：富，可以导致国强，但富未必就是强，必须懂得强国的措施，然后才能强。
English: Wealth can lead to a strong country, but wealth is not necessarily strong. You must understand the measures of a strong country before you can be strong.

古文：强者所道胜也，而强未必胜也，必知胜之理；然后能胜。
现代文：强，可以导致胜利，但强未必就能胜，必须懂得胜利的正理，然后才能胜。
English: Strength can lead to victory, but strength does not necessarily lead to victory. You must understand the truth of victory before you can win.

古文：胜者所道制也，而胜未必制也，必知制之分，然后能制。
现代文：胜，可以导致控制天下，但胜未必就能控制，必须懂得控制天下的纲领，然后才能控制。
English: Winning can lead to controlling the world, but winning does not necessarily lead to control. You must understand the program of controlling the world before you can control it.

古文：是故治国有器，富国有事，强国有数，胜国有理，制天下有分。
现代文：所以，使国治要有军备，使国富要有生产，使国强要有措施，使国胜要有理，控制天下则要有纲领。
English: Therefore, in order to rule the country, there must be armaments, in order to make the country rich, there must be production, in order to make the country strong, there must be measures, in order to make the country victorious, there must be reason, and in order to control the world, there must be a program.

