古文：耶律希亮耶律希亮，字明甫，楚材之孙，铸之子也。
现代文：耶律希亮，字明甫，耶律楚材的孙子，耶律铸的儿子。
English: Jeruchiliang, also known as Mingfu, was the grandson of Jeruchu and the son of Jeruchu.

古文：初，六皇后命以赤帖吉氏归铸，生希亮于和林南之凉楼，曰秃忽思，六皇后遂以其地名之。
现代文：当初六皇后命令把赤帖吉氏归铸，在和林以南之凉楼生希亮，命名秃忽思，六皇后以地名命人名。
English: At that time, the Six Empresses ordered that the Akechi Chieji clan be castrated, and in the south of Warin, Liang Lou was born and named Xiliang, and the Six Empresses named people according to place names.

古文：宪宗尝遣铸核钱粮于燕，铸曰： 臣先世皆读儒书，儒生俱在中土，愿携诸子，至燕受业。 
现代文：宪宗曾派铸在燕核实钱粮，铸说： 我们的先辈都读儒书，儒生都在中原地区，我愿携带诸子到燕学习。 
English: The Jianzhong sect of Confucianism once sent money and grain to Yan, saying, "Our forefathers all read Confucianism, and all Confucians live in the Central Plains region. I would like to take you all to Yan to study."

古文：宪宗从之，乃命希亮师事北平赵衍。时方九岁，未浃旬，已能赋诗。
现代文：宪宗听取了这个意见，就命希亮以北平赵衍为师，当时希亮年仅九岁，不到百日就能赋诗。
English: After listening to this opinion, Emperor Xianzong ordered Xiliang to take Beiping Zhao Yan as his teacher. At that time, Xiliang was only nine years old and could compose poems in less than 100 days.

古文：岁戊午，宪宗在六盘山，希亮诣行在所。
现代文：宪宗六年，帝召铸回和林，希亮独留燕。宪宗八年，帝在六盘山，希亮随行。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the emperor was summoned to cast back to Warim, and Xi Liang stayed in Yan alone. In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the emperor was in Liupanshan, and Xi Liang accompanied him.

古文：已而铸扈从南伐，希亮亦在行。
现代文：不久铸跟随南伐，希亮也随行。
English: Soon the cast followed the Southern Expedition, accompanied by Xiliang.

古文：明年，宪宗崩于蜀，希亮将辎重北归陕右。
现代文：第二年，宪宗在蜀驾崩，希亮将辎重运回陕右。
English: The following year, after the death of Emperor Xianzong in Shuxi, Xiliang transported the treasure back to Shaanxi.

古文：又明年，为中统元年，世祖即位，阿里不哥反，遣使召主将浑都海。
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位，阿里不哥反叛，派使臣召主将浑都海等人。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, but Ali's younger brother rebelled and sent envoys to summon the lord of Hunduhai and others.

古文：铸说浑都海等入朝，皆不从，则弃其妻子，挺身来归。
现代文：耶律铸说浑都海等人入朝没有人听从他，他便弃妻、子，挺身投向世祖。
English: Jerod said that no one listened to him when Hunduhai and the others came to the court, so he abandoned his wife and son and stood up for his ancestor.

古文：阿里不哥遣大将阿蓝答儿自和林帅师至焉支山，希亮见之。阿蓝答儿问： 而父安在？ 
现代文：不久，浑都海知道铸走了，大怒，遣百名骑士追赶铸，未能赶上。便派百人监视希亮母子，并强迫希亮母子随他而行，西至甘州。阿里不哥遣大将阿蓝答儿从和林帅军至焉克山。阿蓝答儿问 ：你父亲在哪？ 
English: Before long, Hunduhai knew that Shih Tzu had left, and he was furious. He sent a hundred knights to chase Shih Tzu, but they could not catch up. He then sent a hundred men to watch Hsiao Liang's mother and son, and forced Hsiao Liang's mother and son to follow him west to Ganzhou. Hunduhai sent General Alan Diao from the Warring States Army to Yan Keshan. Alan Diao asked: Where is your father?

古文：希亮曰： 不知，与吾父同任事者宜知之。 
现代文：希亮说 ：不知道，与我父亲一同任事的人应该知道。 
English: Sheeran said: "I don't know, someone who works with my father should know."

古文：浑都海怒，诟曰： 我焉得知之，其父今亡命东见皇帝矣！ 
现代文：浑都海恼怒着、骂着说： 我怎么知道他，你父亲逃命东去见皇帝了。 
English: Angry and cursing, Hunduhai said, "How do I know him? Your father fled for his life to the East to see the emperor."

古文：希亮曰： 若然，则何谓不知！ 
现代文：希亮说 ：这怎么能说不知道呢？ 
English: Sheeran said: "How can you say you don't know?

古文：阿蓝答儿熟视浑都海曰： 此言深有意焉。 
现代文：阿蓝答儿仔细看着浑都海说 ：这话很有远意。 
English: Alan replied, looking carefully at the sea of clouds, "That's very far-sighted.

古文：诘希亮甚急。希亮曰： 使吾知之，亦从而去，安得独留！ 
现代文：追问希亮很急，希亮说： 假如我知道，也会跟着去，怎会独留此处呢？ 
English: The follow-up question to Xiliang was very urgent. Xiliang said, "If I knew, I would go with you. How could I stay here alone?"

古文：阿蓝答儿以为实，免其监莅。
现代文：阿蓝答儿认为这是实话，免去监视。
English: Alan replied that he thought it was true and that he was free from surveillance.

古文：既而阿蓝答儿、浑都海为大兵所杀，其残卒北走，众推哈剌不花为帅。
现代文：不久阿蓝答儿、浑都海被大兵杀死，其残卒北逃，众推哈剌不花为帅。
English: Not long after, Alangdar and Hunduhai were killed by the soldiers, and their remaining followers fled north. The crowd praised Harun as a great man.

古文：希亮潜匿甘州北黑水东沙陀中。
现代文：希亮潜藏于甘州北、黑水东的沙陀中。
English: Xiliang lurks in the sand dunes north of Ganzhou and east of Heishui.

古文：殿兵已过十余里，有寻马者适至，老婢漏言，众奄至，驱至肃州。
现代文：走在最后面的军队已过去十多里了，有个寻马的来了，老婆婆泄露了希亮潜藏的地方，追兵突然来到，把希亮押至肃州。
English: The army that was at the end of the line had already gone more than ten miles. A searcher came. The old woman revealed where Hiliang was hiding. The pursuers suddenly arrived and drove Hiliang to Suzhou.

古文：哈剌不花与铸有婚姻之好，又哈剌不花在蜀时，尝疾病，铸召医视之，遗以酒食，因释希亮缚，谓曰： 我受恩于汝父，此图报之秋也。 
现代文：哈剌不花与铸有姻亲，且在四川生病时受到铸的照顾，因而将希亮释放，对希亮说 ：我受恩于你的父亲，现在正是报答的时候。 
English: Harun, who is related by marriage to Shou and was taken care of by Shou when he fell ill in Sichuan, released Xiliang and said to him, "I am indebted to your father. Now is the time to repay him."

古文：及抵沙州北川，希亮与兄弟徒步负任，不火食者数日。
现代文：希亮抵沙州北川，与兄弟徒步行军，几天都没有熟食。
English: Xiliang arrived in Beichuan, Shazhou, with his brother's foot soldiers, and had no cooked food for several days.

古文：是冬，涉雪逾天山，至北庭都护府。
现代文：这年冬天，涉雪过天山，至北庭都护府。
English: In the winter of that year, the snow drifted over Tianshan Mountain and reached Beitingduofu.

古文：二年，至昌八里城。
现代文：第二年到昌八里城。
English: The next year, he went to Changbali City.

古文：夏，逾马纳思河，抵叶密里城，乃定宗潜邸汤沐之邑也。
现代文：夏天过马纳思河，到叶密里城，这原是定宗做太子时的汤沐之邑。
English: In the summer, we crossed the Manas River to Yemili City, which was once the home of Emperor Dingzong when he was crown prince.

古文：且无功受赏，于礼尤不可。 
现代文：当时六皇后之妹与宗王火忽都要东去朝见皇帝。希亮的母亲携亮入见，没结果。冬天到火孛。
English: At that time, the younger sister of the six queens and King Soong Ho Ho were all going to the emperor's court. Hsiao Liang's mother went to see the emperor with Hsiao Liang, but there was no result. They went to Fuxing in winter.

古文：王又解金束带遗之，且曰： 系此，于遗体宜无伤。 
现代文：中统三年，定宗幼子大名王同情他们不能回归，赠给币帛鞍马，又跟随大名王至忽只儿的地方，后又回到叶密里城。
English: Three years after the unification of Korea, Daming Wang, the youngest son of Dingzong, sympathized with them for not being able to return, and gave them a pommel horse. He also followed Daming Wang to the place of Hukudaer, and then returned to Yemili City.

古文：五月，又为阿里不哥兵所驱，西行千五百里，至孛劣撒里之地。
现代文：五月又被阿里不哥驱赶向西行一千五百里，至孛劣撒里之地。
English: In May, he was driven by Ali Beg to travel 1500 miles to the west, to the land of the inferior Sarri.

古文：六月，又西至换紥孙之地。
现代文：六月又向西至换扎孙之地。
English: In June, they headed west again, to the land of their grandchildren.

古文：又从至不剌城。
现代文：又至不剌城。
English: It's time to return to the city of Buyeo.

古文：又西行六百里，至彻彻里泽剌之山，后妃辎重皆留于此，希亮母及兄弟亦在焉。希亮单骑从行二百余里，至出布儿城。
现代文：又西行六百里至彻彻里泽剌之山，后妃、辎重与希亮母及兄弟都留在此地。希亮单骑从行二百多里，到出布儿城。
English: They also rode six hundred miles westward to the mountain of Chercheri, where the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, Hsiao Chung, Hsiao Liang's mother and brothers all stayed. Hsiao Liang rode alone for more than two hundred miles to the city of Debul.

古文：又百里，至也里虔城，而哈剌不花之兵奄至，希亮又从二王兴师，还至不剌城，与哈剌不花战，败之，尽歼其众。二王乃函其头，遣使报捷。
现代文：又行百里至也里虔城，哈剌不花的兵突然来到，希亮随二王回到不剌城，与哈剌不花战，歼灭其部属，用匣子装了他的头，遣使报捷。
English: After traveling another hundred miles to the city of Yiliqian, the soldiers of Harun the Flower suddenly arrived. Xiliang, along with the two kings, returned to the city of Harun, fought with Harun the Flower, annihilated his subordinates, put his head in a box, and sent messengers to report the victory.

古文：十月，至于亦思宽之地。四年，至可失哈里城。四月，阿里不哥兵复至，希亮又从征，至浑八升城。
现代文：十月至亦思宽，四年至可失哈里城，四月阿里不哥的兵又来了，希亮又从征，至浑八升城。
English: From October to October, he also thought about the width, from four years to four years, he could lose Harry's city, in April, Ali's soldiers came again, and Hiliang went to the city.

古文：先是，铸尝言于世祖： 臣之妻子皆在北边。 至是，世祖遣不华出至二王所，因以玺书召希亮，驰驿赴阙。六月，由苦先城至哈剌火州，出伊州，涉大漠以还。八月，入觐世祖于上都之大安阁，备陈边事，及羁旅困苦之状。
现代文：这时希亮的母亲随后妃在阿体八升山避暑。这时世祖派不华出至二王处，用玺书召希亮赶赴朝廷，六月由苦先城至哈剌火州，出伊州，经大沙漠而回。八月在上都的大阁朝拜见世祖，陈述边境上的事态及旅途困苦的情况。
English: At that time, Shiliang's mother and then his wife were spending the summer on Mount Athi. At that time, Shizao sent Buhua to the two kings and summoned Shiliang to rush to the imperial court with an imperial edict. In June, Shiliang went from Kuxian City to Hanzhou, from Izhou, and back through the great desert. In August, Shiliang paid homage to Shiliang at Dagu in Shangdu, and reported the state of affairs on the border and the hardships of the journey.

古文：世祖怜之，赐钞千锭、金带一、币帛三十，命为速古儿赤、必阇赤。
现代文：世祖赐钞千锭、金带一、币帛三十。至元八年授奉训大夫、符宝郎。
English: The founder of the dynasty gave him a thousand baht in banknotes, one gold belt, and thirty baht in coins. He was awarded the title of "training doctor" and "treasure hunter" in the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：至元八年，授奉训大夫、符宝郎。十二年，既平宋，世祖命希亮问诸降将，日本可伐否。夏贵、吕文焕、范文虎、陈奕等皆云可伐。希亮奏曰： 宋与辽、金攻战且三百年，干戈甫定，人得息肩，俟数年，兴师未晚。 
现代文：十三年平定宋后，世祖命希亮问诸降将可否伐日本，都说可伐。希亮奏： 宋与辽、金攻战三百年，战争才停，人得休息，停几年兴兵不晚。 
English: In the thirteenth year after the suppression of the Song Dynasty, the founder of the Song Dynasty, Xi Liang, asked the generals whether they would be able to invade Japan, and they all said that they would. Xi Liang said: Song Dynasty fought against Liao Dynasty and Jin Dynasty for three hundred years, and the war only stopped. People need to rest, and it's not too late to stop for a few years and raise an army.

古文：世祖然之。
现代文：世祖同意他的意见。
English: The patriarch agreed with him.

古文：十三年，太府监令史卢贽言于监官： 各路所贡布长三丈，唯平阳加一丈，诸怯薛歹以故争取平阳布。
现代文：十三年太府监令卢贽对监官说： 各路贡布长三丈，唯独平阳多一丈，所以都争要平阳布。
English: In the 13th year of Taifu, Lu Wei, the superintendent, said to the superintendent: All roads are three meters long, except for Pingyang, which is one meter longer, so they are all competing for Pingyang cloth.

古文：十四年，转嘉议大夫、礼部尚书，寻迁吏部尚书。
现代文：帝问监官，监官仓皇中不知该怎么回答，把罪过都推到卢贽身上，帝命斩贽。
English: The emperor asked the overseer, and the overseer, Cang Guanzhong, did not know how to answer. He put the blame on Lu Yao, and the emperor had him beheaded.

古文：帝驻跸察纳儿台之地，希亮至，奏对毕，董文用问大都近事。希亮曰： 囹圄多囚耳。 
现代文：贽将冤告之希亮，希亮将实情入奏，终于释放了卢贽。十四年迁职嘉议大夫、礼部尚书，不久升吏部尚书。帝到察纳儿台，希亮随到，董文用问大都近况，希亮说 ：监狱中囚犯多。 
English: Xie Liang, who had been falsely accused by Zou, finally released Lu Zou after Xie Liang recounted the truth. After 14 years, he was transferred to the post of doctor of recommendation, minister of etiquette, and soon promoted to minister of personnel. When the emperor came to Cannanerdai, Xie Liang came with him. Dong Wen asked him about the current situation in the capital. Xie Liang said, "There are many prisoners in the prison."

古文：世祖方欹枕而卧，忽寤，问其故。希亮奏曰： 近奉旨：汉人盗钞六文者杀。
现代文：世祖正倾斜枕头而卧，忽然醒来问什么原因，希亮奏： 近来奉旨：汉人盗钞六文者杀。
English: The founder of the world was lying with his head tilted on the pillow, when he suddenly woke up and asked what the reason was.

古文：以是囚多。 
现代文：因而囚多。 
English: As a result, there are more prisoners.

古文：帝惊问： 孰传此语？ 
现代文：帝惊问 ：谁传此话？ 
English: Emperor's startled question: Who is spreading this rumor?

古文：省臣曰： 此旨实脱儿察所传。 
现代文：省臣说： 这实在是脱儿察传的。 
English: The provincial minister said, "This is really from the children's observation."

古文：脱儿察曰： 陛下在南坡，以语蒙古儿童。 
现代文：脱儿察说： 是陛下在南坡，把这告诉蒙古儿童的。 
English: Tutorcha said, "It was Your Majesty who went to Nanpo and told Mongolian children about this.

古文：帝曰： 前言戏耳，曷尝著为令式？ 
现代文：帝说： 那是戏言，为何写成命令？ 
English: The emperor said, "That was a joke, why was it written as an order?"

古文：乃罪脱儿察。
现代文：于是要办脱儿察的罪。
English: So the crime of child spying had to be dealt with.

古文：希亮因奏曰： 令既出矣，必明其错误，以安民心。 
现代文：希亮奏 ：令已经出去了，一定要宣布它是错误的，这样才安民心。 
English: Xiliangsao: The order has already gone out, we must announce that it is wrong, so that the people's hearts can be reassured.

古文：帝善其言，即命希亮至大都，谕旨中书。
现代文：帝认为说得很好，即命希亮到大都，下旨给中书。
English: The emperor thought it was very well said, that is, the order was to be sent to the capital, and the order was given to Zhongshu.

古文：十七年，希亮以跋涉西土，足病痿挛，谢事而去，退居惣阳者二十余年。
现代文：十七年希亮因足病辞职，退居阳二十多年。
English: Seventeen years ago, Xiliang resigned due to a foot disease and retired for more than 20 years.

古文：至大二年，武宗访求先朝旧臣，特除翰林学士承旨、资善大夫，寻改授翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
现代文：至大二年，武宗访求先朝老臣，特授翰林学士承旨、资善大夫，不久改授翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
English: In his second year of college, Wuzong visited the former emperor and was specially awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar and the title of Doctor of Letters. Soon, he was re-awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar and the title of Doctor of Letters. He also studied the history of the country.

古文：希亮以职在史官，乃类次世祖嘉言善行以进，英宗取其书，置禁中。
现代文：希亮因职务在史官，将世祖的一些嘉言善行分类纂集呈进皇帝，英宗拿了这本书放在宫中。
English: Because of his position as a historian, Xiliang presented the Emperor with a compilation of the classification of the virtuous deeds of his ancestor, and Emperor Yingzong took the book and placed it in the palace.

古文：久之，闲居京师，四方之士多从之游。
现代文：希亮久在京师闲住，四方之士多来与他交游。
English: For a long time, Xi Liang idled in Beijing, and people from all over the country came to visit him.

古文：泰定四年卒，年八十一。
现代文：泰定四年卒，年八十一岁。
English: He was 81 years old and a fourth-year student at the University of Yasuda.

古文：希亮性至孝，困厄遐方，家赀散亡已尽，仅藏祖考画像，四时就穹庐陈列致奠，尽诚尽敬。
现代文：希亮天性孝道，他虽困厄远方，家产散失已尽，仅藏祖父画像，但每年四季还是陈列祭奠，尽诚尽敬。
English: Xiliang has a natural filial piety. Although he is far away from poverty and misfortune, and his family's property has been lost, he only keeps his grandfather's picture. However, he still holds a memorial service every four seasons to show his sincere respect.

古文：祖按竺迩，幼孤，鞠于外大父术要甲，讹为赵家，因氏为赵；骁勇善骑射，从太祖征伐，有功，为蒙古汉军征行大元帅，镇蜀，因家成都。
现代文：即使有病，也要坚持读书。所写的诗文及从军纪行录三十卷，名《愫轩集》。赠推忠辅义守正功臣、资善大夫、集贤学士、上护军，追封漆水郡公，谥号忠嘉。赵世延，字子敬，祖先雍古族人，住云中北边。曾祖黑旦公，在金为群牧使，祖父按竺迩，年幼丧父，由外祖父术要甲抚养，讹为赵家，故姓赵。按竺迩骁勇善骑射，随太祖征伐，有功，为蒙古汉军征行大元帅，镇守蜀地，因而家在成都。
English: Zhao Shiyan, Zizi Jing, ancestor of the Yonggu people, lived in the north of Yunzhong. Zhao Shiyan's great-grandfather, He Datang, was a herdsman in the Jin Dynasty. His grandfather, Zhao Shiyan, lost his father at a young age and was raised by his maternal grandfather, Zhujia. Zhao's family name was Zhao. Zhao Shiyan was a brave horseman and participated in the conquest of Mongolia with his great-grandfather.

古文：父黑梓，以门功袭父元帅职，兼文州吐蕃万户达鲁花赤。
现代文：父亲赵黑梓，因功袭父元帅职兼文州吐蕃万户达鲁花赤。
English: His father, Zhao Heizi, succeeded to his father's post of marshal due to his merits, and also became a household name in Wenzhou.

古文：世延天资秀发，喜读书，究心儒者体用之学。
现代文：世延天资聪慧，朝气蓬勃，喜爱读书，专心推究儒家关于本体与现象的学说。
English: Ze Yan was gifted with intelligence, vigorous, loved to read, and devoted himself to studying the Confucian doctrine of noumena and phenomena.

古文：弱冠，世祖召见，俾入枢密院御史台肄习官政。至元二十一年，授承事郎、云南诸路提刑按察司判官，时年二十有四。
现代文：二十岁时世祖召见，入枢密院御史台学习官政，至元二十一年授承事郎、云南诸路提刑按察司判官，年仅二十四岁。
English: At the age of twenty, he was summoned by his ancestor and entered the Privy Council's Office of the Historian to study government affairs. He was only twenty-four years old when he was awarded the post of secretary, and became the judge of Yunnan Province at the age of twenty-four.

古文：乌蒙蛮酋叛，世延会省臣以军讨之，蛮兵大溃，即请降。
现代文：乌蒙蛮酋叛乱，世延与省臣讨伐，蛮兵大溃请降。
English: Umong barbarian chiefs rebelled, Shiyan fought with provincial officials, and the barbarians were routed and asked to surrender.

古文：二十六年，擢监察御史，与同列五人劾丞相桑哥不法。中丞赵国辅，桑哥党也，抑不以闻，更以告桑哥。于是五人者悉为其所挤，而世延独幸免。
现代文：二十六年提拔为监察御史，与同列五人弹劾桑哥，中丞赵国辅是桑哥同党，他没将弹劾的奏章上报皇帝，而是告诉桑哥，于是五人被排挤，世延独免。
English: In 1926, he was promoted to inspector of imperial history, and impeached Sango with the same five people. Vice-Commander Zhao Guo-Fu was a party member of Sango. He did not report the impeachment report to the emperor, but told Sango, so the five people were ousted, and only Shien was exempted.

古文：奉旨按平阳郡监也先忽都赃巨万，鞫左司郎中董仲威杀人狱，皆明允。
现代文：奉旨审查也先忽都贪赃巨款，审判董仲威杀人，都很公正。
English: According to the directive, the examination also included the corruption of huge sums of money, and the murder trial of Dong Zhongwei, all of which were fair.

古文：二十九年，转奉议大夫，出佥江南湖北道肃政廉访司事。
现代文：二十九年调迁奉议大夫，出任江南湖北道肃政廉访司佥事。
English: In 1929, he was transferred to the post of doctor of consultation, and served as the secretary of the Department of Investigation of Political Corruption in Hubei Province of Jiangnan Province.

古文：敦儒学，立义仓，撤淫祠，修澧阳县坏堤，严常、澧掠卖良民之禁，部内晏然。
现代文：勉力儒学，设立义仓，撤毁淫祠，修建澧阳县坏堤，严禁常、澧掠卖良民，因而境内安然无事。
English: Confucianism, the establishment of a charity warehouse, the demolition of a temple, the construction of a bad dike in Fenyang County, and the prohibition of robbing and plundering the good people, so there is no problem in the territory.

古文：元贞元年，除江南行御史台都事，丁内艰，不赴。
现代文：元贞元年，授江南行御史台都事，由于亲丧，未赴任。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, he was given the task of traveling south of the Yangtze River to visit the historical capital. Due to a personal bereavement, he did not take up the post.

古文：大德元年，复除前官。三年，移中台都事，俄改中书左司都事。
现代文：大德元年再授前官，三年调中台都事，不久改任中书左司都事。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, he was awarded the position of vice-minister again, and transferred to the Central and Taiwan Affairs Office for three years. He was soon appointed to the Central and Taiwan Affairs Office.

古文：台臣奏，仍为都事中台。六年，由山东肃政廉访副使改江南行台治书侍御史。
现代文：六年由山东肃政廉访司副使改江南行台治书侍御史。
English: In the sixth year, the deputy envoy of the Shandong Su Zheng Lian Visiting Division changed the history of the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：十年，除安西路总管。
现代文：十年授安西路总管。
English: Ten years as the general manager of Anxi Road.

古文：安西，故京兆省台所治，号称会府，前政壅滞者三千牍。世延既至，不三月，剖决殆尽。
现代文：安西过去是京兆行省与御史台衙门所在地，号称会府，前任官积压公文三千件，世延到任不出三个月，全部处理完毕。
English: In the past, Anxi was the location of the provincial capital of Jingzhaogang and the imperial capital of Shijiazhuang. It was known as the assembly hall. The previous official had a backlog of three thousand official documents. It took less than three months for him to take office, and all of them were dealt with.

古文：陕民饥，省台议请于朝赈之，世延曰： 救荒如救火，愿先发廪以赈，朝廷设不允，世延当倾家财若身以偿。 
现代文：陕民闹饥荒，省台决定请求朝廷赈救，世延说： 救灾如救火，应先开仓赈济，以后朝廷如不同意，我愿倾家产偿还。 
English: When the people of Shaanxi Province and Taiwan Province were suffering from famine, they decided to ask the imperial court for help. Shiyan said, "If disaster relief is like firefighting, we should first open a warehouse to provide aid. If the imperial court does not agree, I am willing to pay back my family's property."

古文：省台从之，所活者众。
现代文：省台听从了他的意见，救活的人很多。
English: Taiwan Province followed his advice, and many people were saved.

古文：至大元年，除绍兴路总管，改四川肃政廉访使。
现代文：至大元年授绍兴路总管，又改四川肃政廉访使。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, he was appointed as the head of Shaoxing Road, and he was also appointed as the special envoy of Sichuan to crack down on political corruption.

古文：朝廷第当选重臣知治体者，付以边寄，兵宜止勿用。 
现代文：现在右丞阿忽台继续用兵，世延提出改用羁縻政策，不用兵征讨。
English: Now, U.S.S.R. Akutai continues to use soldiers, and Seyan proposes to switch to a policy of detention without conscription.

古文：事闻，枢密院臣以为用兵国家大事，不宜以一人之言为兴辍。世延闻之，章再上，事卒罢。
现代文：枢密院臣认为这是国家大事，不能只听一个人的话。世延第二次上奏，终于停止出兵。
English: Privy Councillors believed that this was a matter of national importance, and that it was not possible to listen to just one person. After the second appeal, the dispatch of troops was finally stopped.

古文：皇庆二年，拜江浙行省参知政事，寻召还，拜侍御史。
现代文：皇庆二年授江浙行省参知政事，不久召回，授侍御史。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Councillor for Political Affairs. He was soon recalled and awarded the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：延祐元年，省臣奏： 比奉诏汉人参政用儒者，赵世延其人也。 
现代文：延元年省臣奏： 近奉诏汉人参政用儒生，赵世延为适当人选。 
English: In the year of Yan Yuan, the provincial minister said: Zhao Shiyan is a suitable candidate as he is a Confucian scholar who has recently issued an edict for Han people to participate in politics.

古文：帝曰： 世延诚可用，然雍古氏非汉人，其署宜居右。 
现代文：帝说： 世延是儒生可以用，但他祖先雍古氏，不是汉人，其官职应该居右。 
English: The emperor said, "Seyan is a Confucian and can be used, but his ancestor, the Yonggu clan, is not Han, and his official position should be at the top.

古文：遂拜中书参知政事。
现代文：于是授中书参知政事。
English: As a result, he was awarded a high school diploma and became a governor.

古文：居中书二十月，迁御史中丞。
现代文：他任中书二十个月后，调迁御史中丞。
English: Twenty months after his appointment as chushin, he was transferred to goshi chujo.

古文：有旨省臣自平章以下，率送之官。其礼前所无有，由是为权臣所忌，乃用皇太后旨，出世延为云南行省右丞。陛辞，帝特命仍还御史台为中丞。
现代文：有旨省臣自平章以下，一律到本府视事，这种规定是过去没有的，因此为权臣忌恨，借太后懿旨，调世延出京任云南行省右丞，临行向皇上告别，帝特命回京任御史中丞。
English: There was no such regulation in the past, so it was a taboo for the powerful vassals to do so. By the Empress Dowager's order, he was transferred from Beijing to Yunnan to serve as the provincial right-hand man, and when he went to bid farewell to the emperor, he was ordered by the emperor to return to Beijing to serve as the imperial historian.

古文：三年，世延劾奏权臣太师、右丞相帖木迭儿罪恶十有三，诏夺其官职。
现代文：三年世延弹劾帖木迭儿十三条罪恶，诏夺其官职。
English: Three years later, Tetsuko Dier was impeached for 13 crimes and stripped of her official position.

古文：寻升翰林学士承旨，兼御史中丞，世延固辞，乃解中丞。
现代文：不久升翰林学士承旨，兼御史中丞，世延坚决辞官，解除中丞职务。
English: Soon after, Hanlin was promoted to the rank of Baccalaureate, and also to the position of Imperial Historian, and Seyan resolutely resigned and was relieved of his position as Imperial Historian.

古文：五年，进光禄大夫、昭文馆学士，守大都留守，乞补外，拜四川行省平章政事。
现代文：五年升为光禄大夫、昭文馆学士、守大都留守，请求出任京外官，于是授四川省平章政事。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, Zhaowen Academy Bachelor, and stayed away from the capital, requesting to serve as Beijing Foreign Minister, and was then awarded the title of Pingzhang of Sichuan Province.

古文：世延议即重庆路立屯田，物色江津、巴县闲田七百八十三顷，摘军千二百人垦之，岁得粟万一千七百石。
现代文：世延在重庆路屯田，开垦江津、巴县闲田七百八十三顷，选取一千二百军人开垦，一年得粟一万一千七百石。
English: In Chongqing Road Tun Tian, 783 hectares of idle land in Jiangjin and Ba County were reclaimed, 1,200 soldiers were selected to reclaim the land, and 11,700 koku of millet was obtained in one year.

古文：明年，仁宗崩，帖木迭儿复居相位，锐意报复，属其党何志道，诱世延从弟胥益儿哈呼诬告世延罪，逮世延置对，至夔路，遇赦。
现代文：第二年，仁宗驾崩，帖木迭儿又复相位，其党羽诬告并逮捕世延，至夔路遇赦。
English: The following year, after the death of Nanzong and the reinstatement of Tegucigalpa, his followers falsely accused and arrested Shiyan, and he was pardoned.

古文：帖木迭儿在上京，闻世延出狱，索省牍视之，怒曰： 此左丞相罔上所为也。 
现代文：世延因病抵荆门就医。帖木迭儿遣使强迫他至京师治罪，适逢有旨，终于赦免。帖木迭儿又以其他事向皇帝诬告，世延又被囚两年，逼他自杀未成。中书左丞相拜住屡次说世延无罪，得旨出狱，回家养病。
English: Because of his illness, Seyan resisted going to Jingmen to seek medical treatment. He was forced to go to Beijing by the envoy of Tetsuko Dai'er to plead guilty, and finally he was pardoned. Tetsuko Dai'er also falsely accused the emperor of other things, and Seyan was imprisoned for another two years to force him to commit suicide. The chancellor of the Left Division of the Central Secretariat, Baizhu, repeatedly said that Seyan was not guilty, and he was released from prison and went home to recuperate.

古文：事闻，帝语之曰： 此朕意耳。 未几，帖木迭儿死，事乃释。
现代文：英宗也认为帖木迭儿对世延是公报私仇。直到帖木迭儿死，这件事才罢休。
English: Yingzong also believed that Tehmu Tsering's hatred of Shiyan was a personal vendetta. The affair did not end until Tehmu Tsering's death.

古文：世延出居于金陵。
现代文：世延出居金陵。
English: Ze Yan retired to Jinling.

古文：泰定元年，召还朝，除集贤大学士。
现代文：泰定元年召回朝廷，授集贤大学士。
English: He was recalled to the imperial court in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, and was awarded the title of "Professor of Xian University."

古文：明年，出为江南行台御史中丞。
现代文：第二年，出任江南行台御史中丞。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the Vice-President of the History of the Southern Yangtze River.

古文：四年，入朝，复为御史中丞，又迁中书右丞。
现代文：四年入朝，任御史中丞，升迁中书右丞。
English: Four years after entering the imperial court, he was appointed to the position of goshi chujo, and later promoted to chujo.

古文：明年，有旨：赵世延顷为权奸所诬，中书宜遍移天下，昭雪其非辜，仍加翰林学士承旨、光禄大夫。
现代文：第二年，有旨赵世延被权奸诬陷，中书应该到全国各地为他昭雪，并加翰林学士承旨、光禄大夫。
English: In the second year, Zhao Shiyan was framed by the usurper, the Chinese book should go to all over the country to clear up the snow for him, and add Hanlin Baccalaureate and Guanglu Doctor.

古文：经筵开，兼知经筵事，选拣劝讲者，皆一时名流。
现代文：开经筵，兼知经筵事，他所选讲官，都是当时名流。
English: He opened the sutras, knew the sutras, and the lecturers he chose were all famous at the time.

古文：又加同知枢密院事。
现代文：又加同知枢密院事。
English: He was also made a privy councillor.

古文：泰定帝崩，燕铁木儿与宗王大臣议：武宗二子周王、怀王，于法当立；周王远在朔漠，而怀王久居民间，备尝艰险，民必归之，天位不可久虚，不如先迎怀王，以从民望。八月，即定策，迎之于江陵，怀王即位，是为文宗。
现代文：泰定帝崩，燕铁木儿与宗王大臣商议迎怀王即位，这就是文宗。
English: After Emperor Taiding's death, Emperor Yan Tiemu'er and King Zong's minister discussed welcoming King Huai to the throne. This is the story of Emperor Wenzong.

古文：当是时，世延赞画之功为多。文宗即位，世延仍以御史中丞兼翰林学士承旨，以疾乞归田里，诏不允。
现代文：世延仍以御史中丞兼翰林学士承旨，因病乞求回家乡，不允。
English: Seiyan still holds the title of Imperial Historian and Hanlin Scholar, and begs to return to his hometown due to illness, but is not allowed.

古文：天历二年正月，复除江南行台御史中丞；行次济州，三月，改集贤大学士；六月，又加奎章阁大学士；八月，拜中书平章政事。
现代文：天历二年正月又授江南行台御史中丞，到济州；三月改任集贤大学士；六月加任奎章阁大学士；八月，授中书平章政事。
English: In the first month of the second year of the lunar calendar, he was also awarded the title of Jiangnan Xingtai Mi Shi Zhongzheng, and went to Jeju; in March, he was reappointed as a scholar of Jixian University; in June, he was reappointed as a scholar of Quizhangge University; in August, he was awarded the title of Shuhei Zhang Zhengji.

古文：冬，世延至京，固辞不允，诏以世延年高多疾，许乘小车入内。
现代文：冬天，世延到京坚决辞官，仍未应允，因世延年高多病，允许乘小车入内。
English: In winter, Shiyan went to Beijing to resign his post, but was still not allowed to do so. Due to Shiyan's advanced age and illness, he was allowed to enter the palace by car.

古文：至顺元年，诏世延与虞集等纂修《皇朝经世大典》，世延屡奏： 臣衰老，乞解中书政务，专意纂修。 
现代文：至顺元年世延与虞集等人纂修《皇朝经世大典》，世延屡奏： 臣衰老，乞求解除中书政务，专意纂修。 
English: In the first year of the Shun era, Ze Yan and Gu Ji and others compiled and revised the "Imperial Dynasty's Grand Textbook," and Ze Yan repeatedly played: the vassal was getting old, he begged to be relieved of the administrative affairs of the book, and he devoted himself to compiling and revising.

古文：帝曰： 老臣如卿者无几，求退之言，后勿复陈。 
现代文：帝说 ：老臣中像你这样的人才没几个了，求退的话以后不要再说了。 
English: The emperor said, "There are not many people like you among the old ministers. If you want to withdraw, don't say it again."

古文：四月，仍加翰林学士承旨，封鲁国公。
现代文：四月仍加翰林学士承旨，封鲁国公。
English: In April, he was still awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar, and became the Duke of Hulun.

古文：秋，以疾，移文中书致其事，明日即行，养疾于金陵之茅山。诏征还朝，不能行，二年，改封凉国公。
现代文：秋因病写出公文给中书谈到辞去官职的事，第二天就动身，在金陵茅山养病，诏征回朝，不能行走，二年改封凉国公。
English: Due to illness, Qiu wrote an official document to Zhongshu and talked about resigning from his official post. The next day, he set off to recover from illness in Jinling Maoshan. He was conscripted back to the imperial court, unable to walk, and changed his title to Prince of Liangguo two years later.

古文：元统二年，诏赐世延钱凡四万缗。
现代文：元统二年诏赠世延钱四万缗。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial edict bestowed on the world the extension money of forty thousand baht.

古文：至元改元，仍除奎章阁大学士、翰林学士承旨、中书平章政事、鲁国公。
现代文：至元改元，仍授奎章阁大学士、翰林学士承旨、中书平章政事、鲁国公。
English: In the new era, he was still awarded the title of Quizhangge University Scholar, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi, Zhongshu Pingzhang Political Affairs, and Lu Guogong.

古文：明年五月，至成都，十一月卒，享年七十有七。
现代文：第二年五月至成都，十一月卒，享年七十七岁。
English: He lived in Chengdu from May to November of the following year, and died at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：至正二年，赠世忠执法佐运翊亮功臣、太保、金紫光禄大夫、上柱国，追封鲁国公，谥文忠。
现代文：至正二年赠世忠执法佐运翊亮功臣、太保、金紫光禄大夫、上柱国，追封鲁国公，谥号文忠。
English: In the second year of the Shosho era, Shizhong gave Shizhong law enforcement Sanyun Shiliang hero, Taibo, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, Shangzhu Guo, Tsui Lu Guo Guo, and the nickname Wenzhong.

古文：次月鲁，江浙行省理问官。伯忽，夔州路总管，天历初，囊加台据蜀叛，死于难，特赠推忠秉义效节功臣、资善大夫、中书右丞、上护军，追封蜀郡公，谥忠愍。
现代文：世延历经九朝，任省台五十多年，有经世济民的才能，以忠义为本，坚守清廉，文章博学，凡军国利弊，与百姓休戚相关的事，都能知无不言，对儒家名教，更是诚心诚意。其文波澜浩瀚，理贯全文，曾校定律令，汇编《风宪宏纲》，流行于世。
English: He has lived through nine dynasties and served as the governor of Taiwan for more than 50 years. He has the ability to help the world and the people, takes loyalty as the basis, adheres to integrity, and is well-read. He knows everything about the advantages and disadvantages of the military state and the things related to the people's solidarity. He is sincere about the famous Confucianism. His writings are vast, logical and full-text, once the school's laws and decrees, and the compilation of the "Confucian Constitution," which is popular in the world.

古文：孔思晦孔思晦，字明道，孔子五十四世孙也。
现代文：孔思晦字明道，孔子五十四世孙。
English: Kong Si Hui Zi Ming Dao, the 54th generation grandson of Confucius.

古文：资质端重，而性简默，童丱时，读书已识大义。
现代文：资质端重，性格沉默寡言，孩童时读书已能通晓大义。
English: He is highly qualified and has a taciturn personality. As a child, he was able to read and understand the Great Principles.

古文：及长，授业于导江张，讲求义理，于词章之习，薄而弗为。
现代文：稍长，拜导江张须立为师，讲求义理，对词章认为浅薄而不讲求。
English: Slightly longer, he sought guidance from Jiang Zhangsuling as a teacher, lectured on the meaning, and thought the lyrics were shallow and did not pay attention to them.

古文：家贫，躬耕以为养，虽剧寒暑，而为学未尝懈，远近争聘为子弟师。
现代文：家中贫困，亲自耕种以自养，即使严寒酷暑，学习也从不懈怠，远近人家都争着聘请他做子弟的老师。
English: His family was poor, and he cultivated his own land to support himself. Even when it was extremely cold and hot, he never slacked off in his studies. People from near and far competed to hire him as a teacher for their children.

古文：大德中，游京师，祭酒耶律有尚欲荐之，以母老，辞而归。
现代文：大德中游京师，祭酒耶律有尚想举荐他，他以母老辞而归。
English: A great scholar of the middle reaches of the capital, Yerut still wanted to recommend him for the sacrificial wine, but he turned down the offer.

古文：母卧疾，躬进药饵，衣不解带。
现代文：母卧病，亲自为母亲进送汤药。居丧五天勺水不入口。
English: My mother was bedridden, and I personally brought soup medicine for her. For five days after her death, I did not take a spoonful of water.

古文：居丧，勺水不入口者五日。至大中，举茂才，为范阳儒学教谕。
现代文：至大年间，举荐思晦任范阳儒学教谕。
English: During his time at the university, he was recommended to become a Fan Yang Confucian scholar.

古文：延祐初，调宁阳学。
现代文：延初年，调宁阳。
English: In the first year of the extension, Ningyang was changed.

古文：先是，两县校官率以廪薄不能守职，而思晦以俭约自将，教养有法，比代去，学者皆不忍舍之。
现代文：以前两县的校官大概都因为收入微薄而不能坚守职责，可是思晦能俭省节约自养，教养有法，学生都不忍心离开他。
English: In the past, the school officials of the two counties were probably unable to stick to their duties because of their meager income, but Siyu can be frugal and self-sufficient, and he has the right upbringing. The students can't bear to leave him.

古文：于是孔氏族人相与议：思晦嫡长且贤，宜袭封爵，奉祠事。
现代文：这时孔氏族人相互议论：思晦是嫡长子且贤德，应该承袭封爵，侍奉祠事。
English: At this time, the Kong clan members discussed with each other: Siyi is the eldest son and virtuous, he should inherit the knighthood and serve the ancestral shrine.

古文：状上政府，事未决。
现代文：上报政府，但无结果。
English: It was reported to the government, but to no avail.

古文：仁宗在位，雅崇尚儒道，一日，问： 孔子之裔今几世，袭爵为谁？ 
现代文：仁宗在位时，很崇尚儒道，有天问孔子的后裔现在是几世了，承袭爵位的是谁？
English: When Rinzong was on the throne, he was a great admirer of Confucianism. One day, he asked how many generations of descendants of Confucius there were now, and who was the heir to the title of nobility?

古文：廷臣具对曰： 未定。 
现代文：廷臣回答说 ：未定。 
English: The courtier replied: undecided.

古文：帝亲取孔氏谱牒按之，曰： 以嫡应袭封者，思晦也，复奚疑！ 
现代文：帝亲自拿出孔氏谱牒来看说 ：应该承袭封爵位的是思晦，还怀疑什么？ 
English: The emperor himself took out Kong's transcript to see and said: It is the obscure who should inherit the knighthood, what is there to doubt?

古文：特授中议大夫，袭封衍圣公，月俸百缗，加至五百缗，赐四品印。
现代文：特授中议大夫，袭封衍圣公，月俸由一百缗加到五百缗，并赐四品印。
English: He was specially awarded the title of Doctor of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, inherited the title of Yang Sheng Gong, and his monthly salary was increased from one hundred to five hundred baht, and he was given four seals of approval.

古文：泰定三年，山东廉访副使王鹏南言： 袭爵上公，而阶止四品，于格弗称，且失尊崇意。 
现代文：泰定三年，山东廉访副使王鹏南说 ：承袭爵位，而官阶只四品，与规格不相称，也失去尊崇之意。 
English: In the third year of Taiding, Wang Pengnan, deputy envoy of Shandong Independent Investigation Bureau, said: inheriting a knighthood, but only four official ranks, is not commensurate with the specifications, and has lost the meaning of respect.

古文：明年，升嘉议大夫。
现代文：第二年，升嘉议大夫。
English: The following year, he was promoted to doctor of medicine.

古文：至顺二年，改赐三品印。
现代文：至顺二年改赐三品印。
English: Until the second year of Shun, it was changed to grant three prizes.

古文：思晦以宗祀责重，恒惧弗胜，每遇祭祀，必敬必慎。
现代文：思晦因宗祀责任重大，经常害怕不能胜任，每遇祭祀，一定恭敬谨慎。
English: Because of the great responsibility of religious worship, Shigui is often afraid of being incompetent. Whenever there is a religious service, he must be respectful and cautious.

古文：初，庙毁于兵，后虽苟完，而角楼围墙未备，思晦竭力营度，以复其旧。
现代文：当初因战争庙遭毁坏，后来虽然经过修复，但角楼围墙未修完备，思晦竭力经营，以恢复原来的面貌。
English: At first, the temple was destroyed due to the war. Later, although it was repaired, the corner building enclosure wall was not fully repaired, and the management tried their best to restore the original appearance.

古文：金丝堂坏，又一新之，祭器礼服，悉加整饬。
现代文：金丝堂坏了，修复一新，祭器礼服一一整饬。
English: The gold silk hall was broken, repaired and renewed, and the sacrificial vessels and dresses were all repaired.

古文：又以尼山乃毓圣之地，故有庙，已毁，民冒耕祭田且百年，思晦复其田，且请置尼山书院，以列于学官，朝廷从之。
现代文：又因尼山是孔圣人生长之地，原有庙，后遭毁坏，百姓冒犯耕种祭田已百年了，思晦恢复祭田，并请求设置 尼山书院 ，列入学官，朝廷接受了这个建议。
English: In addition, because Mount Nisan was the place where the sage Kong grew up, the original temple was destroyed, and the people were offended by the cultivation of the sacrificial field for a hundred years. They thought about restoring the sacrificial field, and requested the establishment of the Nisan Academy, which was included in the academician. The court accepted this proposal.

古文：三氏学旧有田三千亩，占于豪民，子思书院旧有营运钱万缗，贷于民取子钱，以供祭祀，久之，民不输子钱，并负其本，思晦皆理而复之。
现代文：三氏学原有田三千亩，后被豪民霸占； 子思书院 原有经营周转的钱万缗，借贷给百姓收取息钱，以供祭祀用，时间长了，都不交息钱，还要亏本钱，思晦都整理恢复原样。
English: Sanji Gakuin originally had 3,000 mu of farmland, which was later occupied by powerful people; Zisi Gakuin originally had a huge amount of money for operating turnover, and borrowed money from the people to collect interest for use in sacrifices. After a long time, they did not pay interest, but also lost capital, and they had to sort out and restore everything.

古文：圣父旧封齐国公，思晦言于朝曰： 宣圣封王，而父爵犹公，愿加褒崇。 
现代文：孔子父亲过去封为齐国公。思晦对朝廷说 ：宣圣封为王，而父亲的爵位是公，希望能赞扬推重。 
English: Confucius's father had been made the prince of Qi. Sigao said to the imperial court, "The emperor has been proclaimed as the king, but my father's title is that of a prince. I hope you will give me more praise."

古文：乃诏加封圣父启圣王，圣母王夫人。
现代文：于是诏加封圣父为启圣王，圣母为启圣王夫人。
English: Therefore, the Holy Father was canonized as the Holy Prince and the Holy Mother was canonized as the Holy Queen.

古文：五季时，孔末之后方盛，欲以伪灭真，害宣圣子孙几尽，至是，其裔复欲冒称宣圣后。思晦以为： 不早辨则真伪久益不可明，彼与我不共戴天，乃列于族，与共拜殿庭，可乎？ 
现代文：五代是思想混乱时代，儒家学说真伪难辨，有人冒称宣圣的后代。思晦认为 ：不早辨别真伪，时间长了，更不清楚，他与我不共戴天，将他们也列于族内，而共同朝拜，可以吗？ 
English: The Five Dynasties was an era of ideological confusion, when it was difficult to distinguish the truth from falsehood in Confucian doctrine, and some people pretended to be the descendants of the propagandists. Siyu thought: It's too early to distinguish the truth from falsehood, it's been a long time, and it's even more unclear, he and I don't share the same belief in heaven, and they are also included in the tribe, but can we worship together?

古文：遂会族人，稽典故斥之，既又重刻宗谱于石，而孔氏族裔益明矣。
现代文：于是会集族人，考核典故斥责他们，以后又在石头上重刻宗谱，孔氏族谱更加明确了。
English: As a result, they gathered the tribesmen, examined the allusions and rebuked them, and later re-engraved the genealogy on the stone, making the Kong genealogy more clear.

古文：元统元年卒，年六十七。
现代文：元统元年卒，享年六十七岁。
English: He graduated in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty and died at the age of 67.

古文：至正中，朝廷加赠其官，而赐谥曰文肃。
现代文：至正中，朝廷加赠其官，赐谥号文肃。
English: In the middle of the reign, the imperial court bestowed the title of Bunsu (文肃) on him.

