古文：二十有二年春，王正月，公至自会。
现代文：二十二年春季，周历正月，襄公从诸侯会晤的地方回国。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Prince Xiang returned to China from the place where the princes met.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季，十月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋七月辛酉，叔老卒。
现代文：秋季七月辛酉日，鲁国大夫叔老去世。
English: On a bitterly cold day in the autumn of July, Dr. Lu Guoda passed away.

古文：冬，公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子于沙随。
现代文：冬季，襄公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在沙随会晤。
English: In winter, Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Qi, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Zheng, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Xue, Prince Zibo, and Princess Zizi in Shazhu.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：襄公从诸侯会晤的地方回来。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：楚杀其大夫公子追舒。
现代文：楚国杀掉自己的大夫公子追舒。
English: Chu killed his own doctor to pursue Shu.

古文：二十二年春，臧武仲如晋，雨，过御叔。
现代文：二十二年春季，臧武仲到晋国去，下雨，去看望御叔。
English: In the spring of 1922, Zou Wuzhong went to Jin Province to visit his uncle in the rain.

古文：御叔在其邑，将饮酒，曰： 焉用圣人！
现代文：御叔在自己的封邑里，准备喝酒，说： 哪里用得着圣人？
English: My uncle, in his fiefdom, about to drink, said: "What use is a saint?

古文：我将饮酒而已。雨行，何以圣为？ 
现代文：我准备喝酒，而他自己冒着雨而来，聪明有什么用？ 
English: I'm ready to drink, and he comes in the rain. What's the use of being clever?

古文：穆叔闻之曰： 不可使也，而傲使人，国之蠹也。 
现代文：穆叔听到了，说： 他不配出使反而对使者骄傲，这是国家的蛀虫。 
English: When Mu'awiya heard this, he said, "He is not worthy of being an envoy, but he is proud of being an envoy. This is the maggot of the country."

古文：令倍其赋。
现代文：命令把他的赋税增加一倍。
English: He was ordered to double his taxes.

古文：夏，晋人征朝于郑，郑人使少正公孙侨对曰： 在晋先君悼公九年，我寡君于是即位。
现代文：夏季，晋国人让郑国人前去朝见。郑国人派少正公孙侨回答，说： 在晋国先君悼公九年，我寡君在这个时候即了位。
English: In the summer, the people of Jin asked the people of Zheng to go to the imperial court. The people of Zheng sent Shao Zheng Gong to reply to Sun Qiao, saying, "In the nine years of mourning for the first prince of Jin, I was widowed at this time.

古文：即位八月，而我先大夫子驷从寡君以朝于执事。执事不礼于寡君，寡君惧。
现代文：即位八个月，我国的先大夫子驷跟从寡君来向执事朝见，执事对寡君不加礼遇，寡君恐惧。
English: Eight months into his reign, our country's first dauphin, Zi Zhu, followed the oligarch to see the deacon. The deacon did not treat the oligarch with courtesy, and the oligarch was afraid of him.

古文：因是行也，我二年六月朝于楚，晋是以有戏之役。
现代文：由于这一趟，我国二年六月就向楚国朝见，晋国因此有了戏地这一役。
English: As a result of this trip, in June of the second year of our country, we met with the court of Chu, and Jin therefore had the role of the stage.

古文：楚人犹竞，而申礼于敝邑。
现代文：楚国人还很强大，但对敝邑表明了礼仪。
English: The people of Chu are still very powerful, but they have shown etiquette to Ganyu.

古文：敝邑欲从执事而惧为大尤，曰晋其谓我不共有礼，是以不敢携贰于楚。
现代文：敝邑想要跟从执事，而又害怕犯下大罪，说， 晋国恐怕认为我们不尊敬有礼仪的国家 ，因此不敢对楚国有二心。
English: Zouyi wants to follow the deacon, but is afraid of committing a great sin, saying, Jin probably thinks we don't respect countries with etiquette, so we don't dare to be ambivalent about Chu.

古文：我四年三月，先大夫子又从寡君以观衅于楚，晋于是乎有萧鱼之役。
现代文：我国四年三月，先大夫子?又跟从寡君到楚国观察他们有没有空子可钻，晋国因此有了萧鱼这一役。
English: In March of the fourth year of our country's founding, the first doctor? followed the widower to the state of Chu to observe whether they had any loopholes to be drilled. As a result, the state of Jin had the role of a dead fish.

古文：谓我敝邑，迩在晋国，譬诸草木，吾臭味也，而何敢差池？
现代文：我们认为敝邑靠近晋国，譬如草木，我们不过是散发出来的气味，哪里敢有不一致？
English: We think that Jinyu is close to Jin Province, such as plants and trees, we are just the smell emitted, where dare there be inconsistencies?

古文：楚亦不竞，寡君尽其土实，重之以宗器，以受齐盟。
现代文：楚国逐渐衰弱，寡君拿出了土地上的全部出产，加上宗庙的礼器，来接受盟约。
English: The state of Chu gradually weakened, and the widower took out all the produce of the land, plus the ceremonial objects of the ancestral temple, to accept the covenant.

古文：遂帅群臣随于执事以会岁终。
现代文：于是就率领下臣们随着执事到晋国，参加年终的会见。
English: As a result, he led his subordinates to Jin Province along with the deacon to attend the year-end meeting.

古文：贰于楚者，子侯、石盂，归而讨之。
现代文：敝邑偏向楚国，是子侯和石盂，回去以后就讨伐了他们。
English: Yaoyuan was biased towards the State of Chu, and it was Zi Hou and Shijie who led the way. After they returned, they fought against them.

古文：湨梁之明年，子蟜老矣，公孙夏从寡君以朝于君，见于尝酎，与执燔焉。
现代文：湨梁会盟的第二年，子?已经告老退休了，公孙夏跟从寡君向君王朝见，在尝祭的时候拜见君王，参与了祭祀，饮酒吃肉。
English: In the second year of the Qiliang Association, the son had already retired. Gongsun Xia followed the widower to the royal dynasty, met the king when tasting the sacrifice, participated in the sacrificial rites, drank alcohol and ate meat.

古文：间二年，闻君将靖东夏，四月又朝，以听事期。
现代文：隔了两年，听说君王要安定东方，四月，又向君王朝见以听取结盟的日期。
English: After two years, they heard that the king wanted to stabilize the East, and in April, they met with the royal dynasty to hear the date of the alliance.

古文：不朝之间，无岁不聘，无役不从。
现代文：在没有朝见的时候，没有一年不聘问，没有一次事情不跟从。
English: When there is no morning meeting, there is no year without interviewing, and there is no time when things do not follow.

古文：以大国政令之无常，国家罢病，不虞荐至，无日不惕，岂敢忘职。
现代文：由于大国的政令没有定准，国家和家族都很困乏，意外的事情不断发生，没有一天不恐惧，岂敢忘掉自己的职责？
English: Since the decrees of the great powers are not set in stone, the country and the family are very tired, unexpected things keep happening, and there is not a day without fear, how dare they forget their duties?

古文：大国若安定之，其朝夕在庭，何辱命焉？
现代文：大国如果安定敝邑，我们自己会来朝见，哪里用得着命令呢？
English: If a big country is stable and stable, we will come to the court ourselves. Why do we need an order?

古文：若不恤其患，而以为口实，其无乃不堪任命，而翦为仇雠，敝邑是惧。其敢忘君命？
现代文：如果不体恤敝邑的忧患，反而把它作为借口，那就恐怕不能忍受大国的命令，而被大国丢弃成为仇敌了。敝邑害怕这样的后果，岂敢忘记贵君的命令？
English: If you do not sympathize with the sorrows of Ye, but instead use it as an excuse, then I am afraid that you will not be able to endure the orders of the great powers, and will be abandoned by the great powers as an enemy. Ye is afraid of such consequences, do you dare to forget the orders of your lord?

古文：委诸执事，执事实重图之。 
现代文：一切托付给执事，执政深思一下。 
English: Entrust everything to the deacon, and give the government a second thought.

古文：秋，栾盈自楚適齐。
现代文：秋季，栾盈从楚国去到齐国。
English: In autumn, Zou Ying went from Chu to Qi.

古文：晏平仲言于齐侯曰： 商任之会，受命于晋。
现代文：晏平仲对齐庄公说： 商任的会见，接受了晋国的命令。
English: Zou Pingzhong said to Qizhuang Gong: I met with Shangren and accepted the order to advance to the country.

古文：今纳栾氏，将安用之？
现代文：现在接纳栾氏，准备怎么任用他？
English: Now that you have accepted Mr. Zou, how do you plan to appoint him?

古文：小所以事大，信也。失信不立，君其图之。 
现代文：小国所用来事奉大国的，是信用，失去信用，不能立身立国。
English: What a small country uses to serve a big country is trust. If it loses trust, it will not be able to stand up and build a country.

古文：弗听。
现代文：君王还是考虑一下。 
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：退告陈文子曰： 君人执信，臣人执共，忠信笃敬，上下同之，天之道也。
现代文：齐庄公不听。晏平仲退出以后告诉陈文子说： 做人君主的保持信用，做人臣下的保持恭敬。忠实、信用、诚笃、恭敬，上下共同保持它，这是上天的常道。
English: After Gong Pingzhong withdrew, he told Chen Wenzi: "To be a monarch, maintain trust; to be a subject, maintain respect; to be faithful, trustworthy, sincere, and respectful, and to maintain it from top to bottom, this is the common way of heaven.

古文：君自弃也，弗能久矣！ 
现代文：国君自暴自弃，不能长久在位了。 
English: The sovereign abdicated and cannot long remain on the throne.

古文：九月，郑公孙黑肱有疾，归邑于公。召室老宗人立段，而使黜官薄祭。
现代文：九月，郑国公孙黑肱有病，把封邑归还给郑简公，召来家臣之长、宗人立了段为后嗣，而且让他减省家臣、祭祀从简。
English: In September, Zheng Guogong's grandson, Heihe Xi, fell ill. He returned the fief to Zheng Jian, summoned the head of the vassals, Zongren, and set up Duan as the heir, and asked him to reduce the number of vassals and sacrifices.

古文：祭以特羊，殷以少牢。足以共祀，尽归其馀邑。曰： 吾闻之，生于乱世，贵而能贫，民无求焉，可以后亡。
现代文：通常的祭祀用羊一只，盛祭有羊和猪，留下足以供给祭祀的土地，其余的全部归还给郑简公，说： 我听说，生在乱世，地位尊贵但能够守贫，不向百姓求取什么，这就能够在别人之后灭亡。
English: The usual sacrificial offering used a sheep, and the grand offering had a sheep and a pig, leaving enough land to supply the sacrificial offering, and the rest was all returned to Zheng Jiang. He said, "I heard that if you are born in a chaotic world and have a noble status but can keep yourself poor and do not ask the people for anything, then you can perish after others.

古文：敬共事君，与二三子。
现代文：恭敬地事奉国君和几位大夫。
English: The sovereign and several doctors served him respectfully.

古文：生在敬戒，不在富也。 
现代文：生存，在于警戒，不在于富有。 
English: Survival lies in vigilance, not in wealth.

古文：己巳，伯张卒。
现代文：二十五日，公孙黑肱死。
English: On the 25th, Gongsun Heihe died.

古文：君子曰： 善戒。
现代文：君子说： 公孙黑肱善于警戒。
English: The gentleman said, "Kongsun Heihe is good at vigilance.

古文：《诗》曰： 慎尔侯度，用戒不虞。 郑子张其有焉。 
现代文：《诗》说： 谨慎地使用你公侯的法度，用以警戒意外 ，郑国的公孙黑肱恐怕是做到了吧！ 
English: "Poetry" says: Use your prince's law carefully to guard against accidents, Zheng Guo's grandson Heihe I'm afraid has done it!

古文：冬，会于沙随，复锢栾氏也。栾盈犹在齐，晏子曰： 祸将作矣！
现代文：冬季，鲁襄公和晋平公、齐庄公、宋平公、卫侯、郑简公、曹武公、莒子、邾子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在沙随会见，这是为了再次禁锢栾氏。栾盈还是在齐国住着。晏子说： 祸乱将要起来了。
English: In winter, Lu Xiang and Jin Ping, Qi Zhuang, Song Ping, Wei Hou, Zheng Jian, Cao Wu, Zizi, Zizi, Xue Bo, Zibo, and Xiao Zizi met in Shazhu, which was to imprison the Zou clan again. Hao Ying was still living in Qi. Zizi said: The disaster is about to happen.

古文：齐将伐晋，不可以不惧。 
现代文：齐国将会进攻晋国，不能不使人害怕。 
English: Qi will attack Jin, which is very scary.

古文：楚观起有宠于令尹子南，未益禄，而有马数十乘。
现代文：楚国的观起受到令尹子南的宠信，没有增加俸禄，而有能驾几十辆车子的马匹。
English: Guanzhi of Chu was favored by Yin Ziminan, and there was no increase in salary, but there were horses that could drive dozens of cars.

古文：楚人患之，王将讨焉。
现代文：楚国人担心这种情况，楚康王打算诛戮他们。
English: The people of Chu were worried about this situation, and King Chu Kang planned to kill them.

古文：子南之子弃疾为王御士，王每见之，必泣。
现代文：子南的儿了弃疾做楚康王的御士，楚康王每次见到他，一定哭泣。
English: Zonan's son gave up his illness to become the prince of King Chu Kang. Every time King Chu Kang saw him, he would cry.

古文：弃疾曰： 君三泣臣矣，敢问谁之罪也？ 
现代文：弃疾说： 君王三次向下臣哭泣了，谨敢请问是谁的罪过？ 
English: Abandoning his illness, he said, "The king cried to his vassal three times. I dare to ask, whose fault is it?"

古文：王曰： 令尹之不能，尔所知也。
现代文：楚康王说： 令尹的不善，这是你所知道的。
English: King Chu Kang said, "You know that Ling Yin is not good.

古文：国将讨焉，尔其居乎？ 
现代文：国家打算诛戮他，你还是住着不逃走吗？ 
English: The state is planning to kill him. Will you stay and not run away?

古文：对曰： 父戮子居，君焉用之？
现代文：弃疾回答说： 父亲被诛戮儿子住着不逃走，君王哪里还能加以任用？
English: Abandoning his illness, he replied, "If a father who has been beaten by his son lives and does not run away, where else can the king appoint him?"

古文：洩命重刑，臣亦不为。 
现代文：泄露命令而加重刑罚，下臣也不会这么做的。 
English: A subordinate would not have leaked the order to increase the punishment.

古文：王遂杀子南于朝，轘观起于四竟。
现代文：楚康王就把子南杀死在朝廷上，把观起车裂，并把尸体在国内四方示众。
English: King Chu Kang then killed Zinan in the imperial court, drove away the observer, and displayed the corpse to the public in all four corners of the country.

古文：子南之臣谓弃疾，请徙子尸于朝，曰： 君臣有礼，唯二三子。 
现代文：子南的家臣对弃疾说： 请求让我们在朝廷上把子南的尸体搬出来。 
English: Zi Nan's vassal said to the abandoner: Please let us take Zi Nan's body out of the court.

古文：三日，弃疾请尸，王许之。
现代文：弃疾说： 君臣之间有规定的礼仪，这只有看他们诸位大臣怎么办了。 过了三天，弃疾请求收尸。
English: "There are rules of etiquette between officials and ministers, so it's up to them to decide what to do with their ministers," he said.Three days later, he asked for the body to be collected.

古文：既葬，其徒曰： 行乎！ 
现代文：楚康王答应了。安葬完毕后，他的手下人说： 出走吗？ 
English: King Chukang agreed. After the burial, his men said, "Are you leaving?"

古文：曰： 吾与杀吾父，行将焉入？ 
现代文：弃疾说： 我参与杀我父亲的预谋，出走，有什么地方可以去？ 
English: "I participated in the premeditated killing of my father, I ran away, where can I go?

古文：曰： 然则臣王乎？ 
现代文：手下人说： 那么还是做君王的臣下吗？ 
English: And his servants said, Is it lawful for us to be the king's servants?

古文：曰： 弃父事仇，吾弗忍也。 
现代文：弃疾说： 丢掉父亲事奉仇人，我不能忍受这么做。 
English: He said, "I can't bear to lose my father and serve the enemy.

古文：遂缢而死。
现代文：弃疾就上吊死了。
English: He gave up his illness and hanged himself.

古文：复使薳子冯为令尹，公子齮为司马，屈建为莫敖。
现代文：楚康王再次派薳子冯做令尹，公子齮做司马，屈建做莫敖。
English: King Chu Kang once again sent his son Feng to be Ling Yin, his son Zou to be Sima, and his son Qu Jian to be Mo Yan.

古文：有宠于薳子者八人，皆无禄而多马。
现代文：受到薳子冯宠信的有八个人，都没有俸禄而马匹很多。
English: There are eight people who have received the letter from the mule Feng Doting, but they have no salary and many horses.

古文：他日朝，与申叔豫言。弗应而退。
现代文：过了些日子，薳子冯上朝，和申叔豫说话，申叔豫不答应而退走。
English: After a few days, Zongzi Feng went to the emperor and spoke with Shen Shuyuan. Shen Shuyuan did not agree and left.

古文：从之，入于人中。
现代文：薳子冯跟着他走，申叔豫走进人群中。
English: Zongzi Feng followed him, and Shen Shuyuan walked into the crowd.

古文：又从之，遂归。
现代文：又跟着他走，申叔豫就回家了。
English: He followed him again, and Shen Shuyuan went home.

古文：退朝见之，曰： 子三困我于朝，吾惧，不敢不见。
现代文：薳子冯退朝，进见申叔豫，说： 您在朝廷上三次不理我，我害怕，不敢不来见您。
English: Feng Xunzi retreated from the imperial court and went to see Shen Shuyuan. He said, "You have ignored me three times at the imperial court. I am afraid and dare not not come to see you.

古文：吾过，子姑告我。何疾我也？ 
现代文：我有过错，您不妨告诉我，为什么嫌弃我呢？ 
English: I am at fault, you may tell me, why do you reject me?

古文：对曰： 吾不免是惧，何敢告子？ 曰： 何故？ 
现代文：申叔豫回答说： 我害怕的是不能免于罪，哪里敢告诉您？ 薳子冯说： 什么缘故？ 
English: Shen Shuyuan replied, "What I'm afraid of is that I can't be absolved of my sins. How dare I tell you?" Zangzi Feng said, "For what reason?"

古文：对曰： 昔观起有宠于子南，子南得罪，观起车裂。何故不惧？ 
现代文：申叔豫回答说： 从前观起受子南的宠信，子南有了罪过，观起被车裂，为什么不害怕？ 
English: Shen Shuyuan replied: From the past, Guan Yu was favored by Zi Nan, Zi Nan had a sin, Guan Yu was hit by a car, why not be afraid?

古文：自御而归，不能当道。
现代文：薳子冯自己驾着车子回去，车子都不能走在正道上。
English: Zou Zi Feng drove the car back by himself, and the car could not walk on the right road.

古文：至，谓八人者曰： 吾见申叔夫子，所谓生死而肉骨也。
现代文：到家，对那八个人说： 我进见申叔，这个人就是所谓能使死者复生，使白骨长肉的人啊。
English: When he got home, he said to the eight people, "I went to see Uncle Shin. This man is the so-called one who can bring the dead back to life and make white bones grow flesh.

古文：知我者，如夫子则可。不然，请止。 
现代文：能够了解我像这个人一样的就可以留下，否则请就此罢休。 
English: If you can understand that I am like this person, you can stay, otherwise please stop.

古文：辞八人者，而后王安之。
现代文：辞退了这八个人，楚康王才对他放心。
English: It was only after dismissing these eight people that King Chu Kang felt at ease with him.

古文：十二月，郑游眅将归晋，未出竟，遭逆妻者，夺之，以馆于邑。
现代文：十二月，郑国的游眅将要回到晋国去，没有出国境，遇到迎娶妻子的人，游眅夺走了他的妻子，就在那个城里住下。
English: In December, Zheng's peregrine falcon was about to return to Jin. Without leaving the country, he met a man who was going to marry his wife. The peregrine falcon took his wife and went to live in that city.

古文：丁巳，其夫攻子明杀之，以其妻行。
现代文：十二月某一天，那个女人的丈夫攻打游眅，并杀死了游眅，带着他的妻子走了。
English: One day in December, the woman's husband attacked and killed a peregrine falcon and took his wife away.

古文：子展废良而立大叔，曰： 国卿，君之贰也，民之主也，不可以苟。
现代文：子展废掉了良而立了太叔，说： 国卿，是君主的副手，百姓的主人，不能随便的。
English: He said: "The secretary of state is the deputy of the monarch, the master of the people, and cannot do as he pleases.

古文：请舍子明之类。 
现代文：请舍弃游眅之流的人。 
English: Please abandon those who follow the stream of wandering gulls.

古文：求亡妻者，使复其所。使游氏勿怨，曰： 无昭恶也。 
现代文：派人寻求丢失妻子的人，让他回到他的乡里，让游氏不要怨恨他，说： 不要宣扬邪恶了。 
English: Send someone to look for the man who lost his wife, let him go back to his village, let the You clan not hold a grudge against him, and say: Don't preach evil.

