古文：李时勉，名懋，以字行，安福人。
现代文：李时勉，名懋，字以行，安福人。
English: Li Shih-chun, a famous poet, was a good-luck charm.

古文：成童时，冬寒，以衾裹足纳桶中，诵读不已。
现代文：童年时期，曾在寒冬季节用棉被将脚裹起来塞进桶中，坚持读书。
English: During his childhood, he used to wrap his feet in a quilt and stuff them into a bucket during the cold winter season, and he insisted on reading.

古文：中永乐二年进士。选庶吉士，进学文渊阁，与修《太祖实录》。
现代文：永乐二年中进士，被选为庶吉士，入文渊阁学习，参与编修《太祖实录》。
English: Yongle was promoted to junior high school in the second year, and was selected as a junior auspicious person, entered the Wen Yuan Pavilion to study, and participated in the editing of "Grandfather's Record."

古文：授刑部主事，复与重修《实录》。
现代文：后被授予刑部主事，又参与重修《实录》。
English: Later, he was assigned as the head of the Criminal Law Department, and participated in the revision of the "Real Record."

古文：书成，改翰林侍读。
现代文：书成后，改任翰林侍读。
English: After the book was completed, he was transferred to the position of Hanlin reading room attendant.

古文：性刚鲠，慨然以天下为己任。
现代文：他个性梗直，慷慨激昂地表示以天下为己任。
English: He has a straightforward personality and passionately expresses that he takes the world as his responsibility.

古文：十九年，三殿灾，诏求直言。
现代文：十九年，三殿失火，皇上下诏征求直言。
English: In 1919, the third hall of the palace caught fire, and the emperor issued an imperial edict demanding an explanation.

古文：条上时务十五事。
现代文：时勉上书评论时事计十五项。
English: A total of 15 items were submitted for comment.

古文：成祖决计都北京，时方招徕远人。
现代文：成祖当时已决定迁都北京，正在招来远方的人民。
English: Chengzu had already decided to move the capital to Beijing at that time and was attracting people from far away.

古文：而时勉言营建之非，及远国入贡人不宜使群居辇下。
现代文：而时勉却说营建北京不合适，并说外国来进贡的人不宜让他们群居在皇帝身边。
English: However, Shi Mian said that it was not appropriate to build Beijing, and that it was not appropriate for foreigners to pay tribute and let them live in groups around the emperor.

古文：忤帝意。
现代文：这些话都忤逆了皇上的意志。
English: All these words were contrary to the Emperor's will.

古文：已，观其他说，多中时病，抵之地；复取视者再，卒多施行。
现代文：皇上接着往下看他的其他建议，大都切中时病，皇上气得几次将他的奏章扔到地下，但又都忍不住地捡起来再看，结果许多建议都得以施行。
English: The emperor then went on to look at his other suggestions, most of which were ill-timed. The emperor was so angry that he threw his report into the ground several times, but he couldn't help but pick it up and look at it again. As a result, many of the suggestions were implemented.

古文：寻被谗下狱。
现代文：不久时勉被诬陷入狱。
English: Soon after, he was falsely imprisoned.

古文：岁余得释，杨荣荐复职。
现代文：一年多后获释，得到杨荣的推荐，官复原职。
English: He was released after more than a year and was recommended by Yang Rong to be reinstated.

古文：洪熙元年复上疏言事。
现代文：洪熙元年，时勉又上疏议论政事。
English: In the first year of the Hongxi Dynasty, Emperor Jimin once again made a speech on political affairs.

古文：仁宗怒甚，召至便殿，对不屈。
现代文：仁宗非常愤怒，将他召到便殿，但时勉在答辩中毫不退让。
English: Rinzong was very angry and called him to the latrine, but Shigemitsu did not back down in his defense.

古文：命武士扑以金瓜，胁折者三，曳出几死。
现代文：皇上气得命武士用金瓜击打他，时勉三根肋骨被打断，抬出去时都快死了。
English: The emperor was so enraged that the samurai hit him with a golden melon, breaking three of his ribs, and he was on the verge of death when he was carried out.

古文：明日，改交阯道御史，命日虑一囚，言一事。
现代文：第二天，改任为交趾道御史，命他每天审查一件狱案，提交一份议政报告。
English: The next day, he was reappointed as Koji-do Imperial Historian, and was ordered to review one prison case every day and submit a political report.

古文：章三上，乃下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：时勉上奏了几次，于是被投进锦衣卫监狱。
English: He barely played a few times, so he was thrown into the Jinlingwei Prison.

古文：时勉于锦衣千户某有恩，千户适莅狱，密召医，疗以海外血竭，得不死。
现代文：时勉曾有恩于锦衣卫千户某某，这位千户正好来视察监狱，便偷偷地请来医生，用海外进口的血竭药给他疗伤，时勉才得以不死。
English: Shi Mian was once indebted to Jin Yi Wei Chifu So-and-so, who happened to visit the prison, and secretly invited a doctor to treat his wounds with blood-draining medicine imported from overseas, so that Shi Mian could not die.

古文：仁宗大渐，谓夏原吉曰： 时勉廷辱我。 
现代文：仁宗病情加重，对夏原吉说： 李时勉在朝廷上侮辱我。 
English: As Rinzong's condition worsened, he said to Xia Yuanji: Li Shimin insulted me at the imperial court.

古文：言已，勃然怒，原吉慰解之。
现代文：说完，他勃然大怒，原吉忙安慰劝解。
English: After saying this, he flew into a rage, and Harukichi hurried to console and persuade him.

古文：其夕，帝崩。
现代文：这天晚上，皇上逝世。
English: That evening, the Emperor passed away.

古文：宣帝即位已逾年，或言时勉得罪先帝状。
现代文：宣宗即位已过了一年，有人谈到时勉得罪先帝的情形。
English: A year has passed since Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and some people have spoken about the situation of the emperor's reluctance to offend.

古文：帝震怒，命使者： 缚以来，朕亲鞫，必杀之。 
现代文：皇上大怒，命令使者说 ：去把他捆来，朕要亲自审问他，非把他杀了不可。 
English: The emperor was furious and ordered the messenger to say: "Go and tie him up, I will interrogate him myself, I must kill him."

古文：已，又令王指挥即缚斩西市，毋入见。
现代文：过了一会儿，又命令王指挥马上把他绑到西市斩首，不用带来相见了。
English: After a while, he also ordered Commander Wang to immediately tie him to Xicheng and behead him, without bringing him to meet him.

古文：王指挥出端西旁门，而前使者已缚时勉从端东旁门入，不相值。
现代文：王指挥走出端西旁门，而前面的使者已绑着时勉从端东旁门进来了，两人没有碰上。
English: Commander Wang walked out of the west side gate, while the envoy in front of him entered the east side gate while he was still tied up. The two did not meet.

古文：帝遥见骂曰： 尔小臣敢触先帝！
现代文：皇上遥见时勉，骂道： 你这小臣胆敢触犯先帝！
English: Emperor Shigemitsu, who was watching from afar, scolded him, saying, "You little vassal, how dare you offend the former emperor!

古文：疏何语？
现代文：你在奏疏中说了什么？快说！ 
English: What did you say in the recital? Say it!

古文：趣言之。 时勉叩头曰： 臣言谅暗中不宜近妃嫔，皇太子不宜远左右。 
现代文：时勉叩头说道 ：臣说在居丧守孝期间不宜亲近嫔妃，不宜让皇太子远离于左右。 
English: He bowed his head reluctantly and said, "The vassal said that it is not appropriate to be close to the Empress Dowager during the period of mourning and filial piety, and it is not appropriate to keep the crown prince away from the right and left.

古文：帝闻言，色稍霁。
现代文：皇上听说后，脸色稍有和缓。
English: Upon hearing this, the Emperor's face softened slightly.

古文：徐数至六事止。
现代文：时勉又从容谈到第六件事时停住了。
English: Shi Mian calmly talked about the sixth thing, and then paused.

古文：帝令尽陈之。
现代文：皇上命他全部说出来。
English: By the Emperor's command, he will tell everything.

古文：对曰： 臣惶惧不能悉记。 
现代文：时勉答道 ：臣惶惧不能全部记住。 
English: Tokitomi replied, "I can't remember all of my fears."

古文：帝意益解，曰： 是第难言耳，草安在？ 
现代文：皇上怒意更消除了，说： 这是难为你了，草稿在哪里？ 
English: The Emperor calmed his anger even more, saying: "This is difficult for you, where is the draft?

古文：对曰： 焚之矣。 
现代文：时勉答道 ：已经烧了。 
English: Tokimune replied, "It's already burned."

古文：帝乃太息，称时勉忠，立赦之，复官侍读。
现代文：皇上为之叹息，称赞时勉忠诚，马上赦免了他，恢复侍读的官衔。
English: The emperor sighed for him, praised him for his loyalty, immediately pardoned him, and restored his title of attendant.

古文：比王指挥诣狱还，则时勉已袭冠带立阶前矣。
现代文：等王指挥从监狱回来，时勉已经冠带整齐地站立在阶前了。
English: When Wang Xiang returned from prison, Shi Mian was already standing neatly in front of the steps with his crown on.

古文：宣德五年修《成祖实录》成，迁侍读学士。
现代文：宣德五年，《成祖实录》修成，升为侍读学士。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande, "Cheng Zu Shih Lu" was completed, and he was promoted to an attendant bachelor.

古文：帝幸史馆，撒金钱赐诸学士。
现代文：皇上幸临史馆，把金钱撒到地上赐给学士们。
English: The emperor blessed the history museum, sprinkled money on the ground and gave it to the scholars.

古文：皆俯取，时勉独正立。
现代文：众人都俯身拾取，唯独时勉站着不动。
English: All of them bent down to pick it up, but only one of them managed to stand still.

古文：帝乃出余钱赐之。
现代文：皇上于是把剩下的钱都赐给了他。
English: The emperor then gave him the rest of the money.

古文：正统三年以《宣宗实录》成，进学士，掌院事兼经筵官。
现代文：正统三年，因《宣宗实录》修成，升为学士，主管院事兼经筵官。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, due to the completion of the "Proclamation of the True Faith," he was promoted to a bachelor, and was in charge of academician and eunuch.

古文：六年代贝泰为祭酒。
现代文：六年取代贝泰任祭酒。
English: Six years later, it replaced Beitai Ren Festival Liquor.

古文：八年乞致仕，不允。
现代文：八年请求退休，皇上不批准。
English: After eight years of requesting retirement, the emperor did not approve.

古文：初，时勉请改建国学。
现代文：当初，时勉请改建国子学。
English: At first, he was reluctant to change it to Kuniko-gaku.

古文：帝命王振往视，时勉待振无加礼。
现代文：皇上命王振去视察，时勉接待王振的礼仪不够隆重。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Zhen to go to inspect, but the etiquette of receiving Wang Zhen was not grand enough.

古文：振衔之，廉其短，无所得。
现代文：王振怀恨在心，便搜集时勉的短处，竟一无所得。
English: Wang Zhen harbored hatred in his heart, so he collected the shortcomings of Shih Yan, but got nothing.

古文：时勉尝芟彝伦堂树旁枝，振遂言时勉擅伐官树入家。
现代文：时勉曾经折断彝伦堂前一棵树的枝条，王振于是说时勉擅自砍伐官木回家。
English: Wang Zhen then said that Shi Mian once broke the branch of a tree in front of Yulun Hall, and that Shi Mian cut down the official tree without permission and went home.

古文：取中旨，与司业赵琬、掌馔金鉴并枷国子监前。
现代文：王振拿着圣旨，将时勉和司业赵琬、掌馔金鉴一起枷在国子监门前。
English: Wang Zhen, holding the sacred edict, handcuffed Shi Tian together with Shibei Zhao Yao and Shabu Jin Jian in front of the gate of Guozi Prison.

古文：官校至，时勉方坐东堂阅课士卷，徐呼诸生品第高下，顾僚属定甲乙，揭榜乃行。
现代文：当时官校到来时，时勉正坐在东堂批阅学生们的试卷，他从容不迫地宣布学生们的成绩，让僚属们定出甲乙等级，放榜公布，这才出来受刑。
English: At that time, when the official school arrived, Shi Yan was sitting in the east hall to approve the students' examination papers. He calmly announced the students' grades, let his colleagues determine the A and B grades, and released the list. Only then did he come out to be punished.

古文：方盛署，枷三日不解。
现代文：当时正当盛暑，枷锁三天不解。
English: It was the height of summer at the time, and the shackles did not come off for three days.

古文：监生李贵等千余人诣阙乞贷。
现代文：国子监学生李贵等一千多人到宫门前请求宽恕时勉。
English: More than a thousand people, including Li Gui, a student of the Imperial Household Agency, came to the front gate of the palace to ask forgiveness from Shimin.

古文：有石大用者，上章愿以身代。
现代文：有个叫石大用的，上奏情愿自己代替受刑。
English: There was a man named Shi Dafu, who was willing to take his place as a prisoner.

古文：诸生圜集朝门，呼声彻殿庭。
现代文：学生们围聚在朝廷门口，呼声响彻殿庭。
English: The students gathered at the entrance to the Imperial Court, their voices ringing out across the palace grounds.

古文：振闻诸生不平，恐激变。
现代文：王振听说学生们不平，恐怕激出变故。
English: When Wang Zhen heard that the students were dissatisfied, he was afraid of provoking a revolution.

古文：及通政司奏大用章，振内惭。
现代文：到通政司将石大用的奏章呈上去后，王振内心有愧。
English: Wang Zhen felt guilty after the Secretary of State for Political Affairs presented the official report of Shida to him.

古文：助教李继请解于会昌侯孙忠。
现代文：助教李继请求会昌侯孙忠调解。
English: Assistant Professor Li Jie requested the mediation of Changhou Sunzhong.

古文：忠，皇太后父也。
现代文：孙忠是皇太后的父亲。
English: Sun Zhong is the father of the empress dowager.

古文：忠生日，太后使人赐忠家。
现代文：孙忠生日那天，太后派人到孙忠家赐给礼物。
English: On the day of Sun Zhong's birthday, the Empress Dowager sent someone to Sun Zhong's home to give him a gift.

古文：忠附奏太后，太后为言之帝。
现代文：孙忠便附带奏报太后，太后又为他向皇上说明了情况。
English: Sun Zhong also sent a report to the empress dowager, who explained the situation to the emperor for him.

古文：帝初不知也，立释之。
现代文：皇上开始并不知道这件事，这时马上将时勉释放了。
English: The emperor did not know about this at first, but he immediately released Shimen.

古文：继不拘检柙，时勉尝规切之。
现代文：李继为人放荡不羁，时勉曾经恳切地规劝过他。
English: Li Jizhi was a libertine, and Shi Mian had earnestly advised him against it.

古文：继不能尽用，然心感时勉言，至是竟得其助。
现代文：但李继不能完全接受，不过他内心很感激时勉，所以这时出来帮助了他。
English: But Li Jie could not fully accept it, but he was very grateful to Shi Mian in his heart, so he came out to help him.

古文：大用，丰润人。朴鲁，初不为六馆所知，及是名动京师。
现代文：石大用是丰润人，质朴愚鲁，当初并不为六馆的人所知，这时却名震京师。
English: Shi Dayong was an affluent man, simple and stupid. At first, he was not known to the people of the Sixth Pavilion, but at that time he was known as Zhenjing Shi.

古文：明年中乡试，官至户部主事。
现代文：第二年他考中乡试举人，后来官做到户部主事。
English: In the second year, he won the examination of the middle township, and later became the head of the household department.

古文：九年，帝视学。
现代文：九年，皇上视察国子学。
English: In the ninth year, the Emperor inspected the education of the Imperial Prince.

古文：时勉进讲《尚书》，辞旨清朗。
现代文：时勉为皇上讲解《尚书》，讲得透彻清楚。
English: Shigemitsu explained "Shoshu" to the emperor, and he spoke very clearly.

古文：帝悦，赐予有加。
现代文：皇上很高兴，给了他许多赏赐。
English: The emperor was delighted and gave him many gifts.

古文：连疏乞致仕，不允。
现代文：时勉一连上书请求退休，都不批准。
English: Shigemitsu submitted a series of letters requesting retirement, but they were not approved.

古文：十二年春乃得请。
现代文：十二年春才获得批准。
English: It was only approved in the spring of 2012.

古文：朝臣及国子生饯都门外者几三千人，或远送至登舟，候舟发乃去。
现代文：朝臣和国子监学生近三千人到都门外为他饯行，有的还一直把他送到船上，等船走后才离开。
English: Nearly three thousand courtiers and students of the Imperial Household Agency came to pay their respects to him outside the gates of the capital, and some even carried him to the ship, waiting until the ship had left.

古文：英宗北狩，时勉日夜悲恸。
现代文：英宗北狩期间，时勉日夜都非常悲痛。
English: During the Northern Expedition of Emperor Yingzong, Shizun was very sad day and night.

古文：遣其孙骥诣阙上书，请选将练兵，亲君子，远小人，褒表忠节，迎还车驾，复仇雪耻。
现代文：他派孙子骥到朝廷上书，请求选将练兵，亲近君子，疏远小人，褒扬忠诚而有气节之士，迎回英宗，复仇雪耻。
English: He sent his grandson Yao to the imperial court to submit a letter, requesting the selection of generals to train soldiers, to be close to gentlemen, to alienate villains, to praise loyal and virtuous men, to welcome back Yingzong, and to avenge the disgrace.

古文：督令读书，灯火达旦，吟诵声不绝，人才盛于昔时。始，太祖以宋讷为祭酒，最有名。
现代文：景泰元年代宗发圣旨给予褒奖，而时勉却已经去世了，终年七十七岁。谥号文毅。成化五年，听从他的孙子的请求，改谥忠文，赠礼部侍郎。当初，太祖任宋讷为祭酒，他最有名气。
English: During the reign of King Tae Won, the patriarch issued a sacred edict to give out awards, but King Jimin passed away at the age of 77. He was given the posthumous name of Munyi. He was born five years later, and he changed his name to Zhongwen at the request of his grandson. He was a waiter in the gift-giving department. At the beginning, King Tae Won was given Song Ne as a sacrificial wine, and he was the most famous.

古文：其后宁化张显宗申明学规，人比之讷。
现代文：后来宁化人张显宗申明学规，人们把他比作宋讷。
English: Later, the Ninghua person Zhang Xianzong affirmed the school regulations, and people compared him to Song Na.

古文：而胡俨当成祖之世，尤称人师。
现代文：而胡俨在成祖之世，更被人称颂为人师。
English: In the world of Cheng Zu, Hu Yao was even more praised as a teacher.

古文：然以直节重望为士类所依归者，莫如时勉。
现代文：但论正直而有节操，德高望重而为士大夫们所依归的，都不如时勉。
English: But when it comes to being honest and having integrity, which is highly respected and relied on by scholars, they are not as diligent as they used to be.

古文：英国公张辅暨诸侯伯奏，愿偕诣国子监听讲。
现代文：英国公张辅与各侯、伯上奏，愿意一起到国子监听时勉讲学。
English: The British official Zhang Fu, together with the local lords and nobles, was willing to go to Guozi to listen to the lecture.

古文：帝命以三月三日往。
现代文：皇上命他们三月三日前往。
English: The emperor ordered them to leave on March 3.

古文：时勉升师席，诸生以次立，讲《五经》各一章。
现代文：时勉升坐师席，学生们都依次站在下面，时勉讲解了《五经》各一章。
English: Shi Mian rose to sit at the teacher's desk, and the students all stood below in turn. Shi Mian explained each chapter of the Five Classics.

古文：毕事，设酒馔，诸侯伯让曰： 受教之地，当就诸生列坐。 
现代文：讲课结束后设酒席，各侯、伯推让说 ：这是我们受教的地方，应当与其他学生坐在一起。 
English: After the lecture, a reception was held, and the governors and the mayor said: This is the place where we are taught, we should sit together with other students.

古文：惟辅与抗礼。
现代文：只有张辅与时勉执平礼。
English: Only Zhang Fu and Shi Min adhered to the formalities.

古文：诸生歌《鹿鸣》之诗，宾主雍雍，尽暮散去，人称为太平盛事。
现代文：学生们唱起《鹿鸣》这首诗，宾主和谐融洽，直到天黑才各自散去。人们把这件事称作太平盛事。
English: The students sang the poem "Deersong" and the guests were in harmony until they dispersed at nightfall. People called it the Taiping Festival.

古文：陈敬宗，字光世，慈溪人。
现代文：陈敬宗，字光世，慈溪人。
English: Chen Jingzong, a man of letters and light, from Cixi.

古文：永乐二年进士。选庶吉士，进学文渊阁，与修《永乐大典》。
现代文：永乐二年，中进士，被选为庶吉士，进文渊阁学习，参与编修《永乐大典》。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he was promoted to junior high school, and was selected as an offshoot of Jixi. He studied at Jinwen Yuange, and participated in the editing of "Yongle Grand Text."

古文：书成，授刑部主事。
现代文：书成之后，被授予刑部主事。
English: After the book was completed, he was given the post of the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：又与修《五经四书大全》，再修《太祖实录》，授翰林侍讲。
现代文：又参与编修《五经四书大全》，再编修《成祖实录》，被授予翰林侍讲。
English: He also participated in the compilation of the "Summary of the Four Books of the Five Classics" and the compilation of the "True Record of the Founding Fathers," and was awarded the Hanlin Assistant Lecturer.

古文：内艰归。
现代文：遭母丧归家。
English: He returned home after his mother's death.

古文：宣德元年起修两朝实录。
现代文：宣德元年，起用他编修两朝实录。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was appointed to compile a historical record of the two dynasties.

古文：明年转南京国子监司业。
现代文：第二年他转任南京国子监司业。
English: In the following year, he was transferred to the post of Nanjing State Children's Supervisor.

古文：帝谕之曰： 侍讲，清华之选；司业，师儒之席。
现代文：皇上对他说： 侍讲，是清华之选；司业，是师儒之席。
English: The emperor said to him: "To be a lecturer is the choice of the Qing Dynasty; to be a scholar is the seat of the master."

古文：位虽不崇，任则重矣。 
现代文：地位虽然不高，但责任重大。 
English: Although the position is not high, the responsibility is great.

古文：九年，秩满，选祭酒，正统三年上书言： 旧制，诸生以在监久近，送诸司历事。
现代文：九年，他任满，进升为祭酒。正统三年，他上书说： 旧制规定，学生以在国子监时间的长短，送到各部门中去任职。
English: Nine years after his term of office ended, he was promoted to the position of sacrificial wine. After three years of orthodoxy, he submitted a letter saying: According to the old system, students were sent to various departments according to the length of their time in the state kindergarten.

古文：比来，有因事予告者，迁延累岁，至拨送之期始赴，实长奸惰，请以肄业多寡为次第。
现代文：近年以来，有的学生因事请假离去，长达几年，到了发送之期才返回，请根据学生实际在校学习的多寡划分等级。
English: In recent years, some students have taken leave of absence due to various reasons and left for several years, only to return at the time of sending. Please divide the grades according to the number of students actually studying at the school.

古文：又近有愿就杂职之例，士风卑陋，诚非细故，请加禁止。 
现代文：另外，近来有的学生愿意任杂职。士风卑陋，诚不是小事，请加以禁止。 
English: In addition, some students have recently been willing to take on menial jobs. This is not a small matter, but please prohibit it.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：敬宗美须髯，容仪端整，步履有定则，力以师道自任。
现代文：敬宗须髯很美，容貌端正，步履从容稳定，努力以师道自任。
English: Keizong Shuxuan is very beautiful, her appearance is neat, her gait is calm and steady, and she strives to do her best as a teacher.

古文：立教条，革陋习。
现代文：他订立教学规章，革除陋习。
English: He set up teaching regulations to eradicate bad habits.

古文：六馆士千余人，每升堂听讲，设馔会食，整肃如朝廷。
现代文：六馆学生一千多人，每次升堂听讲，以及设饮食会餐，都整肃如朝廷。
English: There are more than a thousand students in the six halls, and every time they go up to the hall to listen to lectures, as well as set up a meal, they are as clean as the imperial court.

古文：稍失容，即令待罪堂下。
现代文：仪容稍有不整，即令他到堂下待罪。
English: If his appearance is slightly out of order, he will be made to stand trial.

古文：僚属惮其严，诬以他事，讼之法司。
现代文：属官害怕他的威严，以别的事情诬陷他，状告到司法部门。
English: Afraid of his authority, his subordinates framed him for something else and filed a complaint with the judicial authorities.

古文：周忱与敬宗善，曰： 盍具疏自理。 
现代文：周忱与敬宗友善，说： 何不上疏为自己辩解？ 
English: Zhou Zhen was friendly with Keizong and said, "Why don't you go out of your way to defend yourself?

古文：为属草，辞稍迁就。
现代文：便为他起好草稿，用辞稍有迁就。
English: So I prepared a draft for him, with a slightly more accommodating wording.

古文：敬宗惊曰： 得无诳君耶？ 
现代文：敬宗惊道： 这样说不是欺骗君主吗？ 
English: Keizong said in surprise, "Isn't it deceiving the sovereign to say that?"

古文：不果上，事亦竟白。
现代文：他没有奏上来，而事情也得弄清了。
English: He didn't play and things have to be cleared up.

古文：满考，入京师，王振欲见之，令忱道意。
现代文：任满之后，敬宗入京师，王振想见他，令周忱传达自己的愿望。
English: Wang Zhen wanted to meet with Keizong after he had completed his term of office and conveyed his wishes to him.

古文：敬宗曰： 吾为诸生师表，而私谒中贵，何以对诸生？ 
现代文：敬宗说： 我为学生师表，而私下拜谒宦官，将来怎么面对学生？ 
English: Jingzong said: I am a teacher for students, but I worship eunuchs in private. How will I face students in the future?

古文：振知不可屈，乃贻之文锦羊酒，求书程子《四箴》，冀其来谢。
现代文：王振知道无法使他屈服，便送给他文锦、羊肉和酒，求他写程子的《四箴》，希望他来答谢。
English: Wang Zhen knew that he couldn't make him give in, so he gave him some calligraphy, mutton and wine, and asked him to write down Cheng Zi's "Four Precepts," hoping that he would thank him.

古文：敬宗书讫，署名而已。返其币，终不往见。
现代文：敬宗写完以后，署上名字而已，送回所给的礼物，终不去见他。
English: After Jingzong finished writing, he only signed his name, sent back the gift he had given, and finally did not go to see him.

古文：王直为吏部尚书，从容谓曰： 先生官司成久，将荐公为司寇。 
现代文：王直任吏部尚书，从容对他说 ：先生在部门中任职年久，我将推荐您为司寇。 
English: Wang Zhizhong, the head of the administrative department, calmly said to him: Sir, you have served in the department for a long time, I will recommend you as the director.

古文：敬宗曰： 公知我者，今与天下英才终日论议，顾不乐耶？ 
现代文：敬宗说： 您是了解我的，我现在与天下英才终日讨论，难道不很快乐吗？ 
English: Keizong said: You understand me, I am now in discussions with the world's top talents all day long, aren't you happy?

古文：性善饮酒，至数斗不乱。
现代文：敬宗性喜饮酒，数斗不醉。
English: He likes to drink alcohol, but he is not drunk after a few drinks.

古文：襄城伯李隆守备南京，每留饮，声伎满左右。
现代文：襄城伯李隆守备南京，常常留他饮酒，左右站满了声妓美女。
English: Xiangcheng peasant Li Long guarded Nanjing, often leaving him to drink, and the streets were full of beautiful call girls.

古文：竟日举杯，未尝一盼。
现代文：敬宗终日举杯，不曾顾盼一眼。
English: Keizong raised his glass all day long, never looking up.

古文：其严重如此。
现代文：他就是这么庄重。
English: That's how dignified he is.

古文：十二年冬乞休，不允。
现代文：十二年冬，他请求退休，皇上不许。
English: In the winter of 1812, he asked to retire, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：景泰元年九月与尚书魏骥同引年致仕。
现代文：景泰元年九月，他与尚书魏骥一同以年老退休。
English: In September of the first year of Jing Tai, he retired together with Shang Shu Wei Wei.

古文：家居不轻出。
现代文：家住不轻易出门。
English: It's not easy to go out when you live at home.

古文：有被其容接者，莫不兴起。
现代文：有受到他接待的人，无不非常兴奋。
English: Everyone who was received by him was very excited.

古文：天顺三年五月卒，年八十三。
现代文：天顺三年五月去世，终年八十三岁。
English: Tenshun passed away in May of the third year, at the age of eighty-three.

古文：后赠礼部侍郎，谥文定。
现代文：后来赠予他礼部侍郎，谥文定。
English: It was later given to him by his etiquette attendant, 文定.

古文：初，敬宗与李时勉同在翰林，袁忠彻尝相之。曳二人并列曰： 二公他日功名相埒。 
现代文：当初，敬宗与李时勉同在翰林院，袁忠彻曾为他俩看相，把他们拉到一起说： 二公将来功名相当。 
English: At the beginning, Jingzong and Li Shimin were together in the Hanlin Academy. Yuan Zhongche had been the best man for both of them and brought them together, saying, "The merits of the two princes will be equal."

古文：敬宗仪观魁梧，时勉貌稍寝，后二人同时为两京祭酒。
现代文：敬宗仪容魁梧，李时勉容貌稍差。后来两人同时任两京祭酒。
English: Keizong had a burly appearance, while Li Shichen was slightly less handsome. Later, the two of them served as the chief brewers of the two capital festivals.

古文：时勉平恕得士，敬宗方严。
现代文：时勉以宽恕平和得士，敬宗则比较严厉。
English: When he begged for forgiveness, he was granted peace, but Keizong was more severe.

古文：终明世称贤祭酒者，曰南陈北李。
现代文：终明之世，世人说贤祭酒的，有南陈北李之说。
English: In the last days of the Ming Dynasty, people said that the wise men offered wine, and Nan Chen and Bei Li said it was the best.

古文：刘铉，字宗器，长洲人。
现代文：刘铉，字宗器，长洲人。
English: Liu Xuan, the founder of Chinese characters, was born in Changzhou.

古文：生弥月而孤。
现代文：生下来刚满月父亲就去世了。
English: His father died just a month after he was born.

古文：及长，刲股疗母疾。
现代文：长大后，曾割下大腿肉为母亲治病。
English: After growing up, he once cut off his mother's thigh to cure her illness.

古文：母卒，哀毁，以孝闻。
现代文：母亲去世时，他因哀伤过度，容貌尽毁，以孝闻名。
English: When his mother died, he was overcome with grief and his appearance was ruined. He was known for his filial piety.

古文：永乐中，用善书征入翰林，举顺天乡试，授中书舍人。
现代文：永乐年间，他因擅长书法被征入翰林院。后来考中顺天府乡试，被授予中书舍人。
English: During the Yongle years, he was recruited into the Hanlin Academy for his proficiency in calligraphy. Later, he passed the Shun Tianfu Township Examination in the middle school examination and was awarded the title of Chinese Calligrapher.

古文：宣德时，预修成祖、仁宗《实录》，迁兵部主事，仍供事内廷。
现代文：宣德时期，参预编修《成祖实录》和《仁宗实录》，升为兵部主事，仍在内廷供事。
English: During the Xuande period, he participated in the pre-editing of "Chengzu Record" and "Ninsong Record," rose to the head of the military department, and still served in the Inner Court.

古文：正统中，再修《宣宗实录》，进侍讲。
现代文：正统年间，又参与编修《宣宗实录》，升为侍讲。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, he also participated in the compilation of the "Proclamation Record" and was promoted to assistant lecturer.

古文：以学士曹鼐等荐，与修撰王振教习庶吉士。
现代文：因学士曹鼐的推荐，与修撰王振教导庶吉士。
English: Due to the recommendation of the bachelor Cao Zhen, he was taught by the master Wang Zhen.

古文：景帝立，进侍讲学士，直经筵。
现代文：景帝即位后，他进升为侍讲学士，在讲经筵当值。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing, he was promoted to attendant lecturer, and was in charge of lecturing on the classics.

古文：三年，以高谷荐，迁国子祭酒。
现代文：三年，因高谷的推荐，他升为国子监祭酒。
English: Three years later, because of Takaya's recommendation, he was promoted to the position of Kuniko Jisai sake brewer.

古文：时以国计不足，放遣诸生，不愿归者停其月廪。
现代文：当时因国家用度不足，朝廷把太学生遣放回去，不愿回去的便停给月粮。
English: At that time, due to insufficient state expenditure, the imperial court sent the students back, and those who did not want to go back were given monthly rations.

古文：铉言： 养才，国家急务。
现代文：刘铉说 ：培养人才是国家当急之务。
English: Liu Wei said: cultivating talents is the urgent task of the country.

古文：今仓廪尚盈，奈何靳此？ 
现代文：现在仓库还充盈，为什么吝啬这一点财物？ 
English: Now the warehouse is still full, why be stingy with this piece of property?

古文：遂得复给。
现代文：结果得恢复太学生月粮。
English: As a result, we had to reinstate the monthly food rations for students.

古文：又今甄别六馆生，年老貌寝，学艺疏浅者，斥为民。
现代文：皇上又令甄别六馆的学生，年纪过老、长相较差以及学艺疏浅的人，都要斥退为民。
English: The emperor also ordered the students of the sixth hall to be screened, and those who were too old, poor in looks, and shallow in their studies were to be expelled.

古文：铉言： 诸生荷教泽久，岂无片长？
现代文：刘铉说： 学生们受教年久，怎能没有某些长处？
English: Liu Wei said: Students have been taught for a long time, how can they not have certain strengths?

古文：况离亲戚，弃坟墓，艰苦备至，一旦被斥，非朝廷育才意。
现代文：况且他们离开亲人，放弃祖宗坟墓，十分艰苦，现在突然被斥退回去，这样做不是朝廷育才之意。
English: Moreover, it was very difficult for them to leave their relatives and abandon their ancestral graves, and now they are suddenly being forced back. This is not the intention of the imperial court to nurture talent.

古文：乞拣年貌衰而有学者，量授之官。 
现代文：请选择那些年貌衰老而有学问的人，量才任官。 
English: Please choose those who are old-looking and learned. Only the best can be appointed.

古文：帝可其奏。
现代文：皇上批准了他的奏请。
English: The patriarch approved his suggestion.

古文：寻以母丧归。
现代文：不久他因母亲去世归家。
English: He soon returned to his hometown after his mother's death.

古文：服阙，赴都，陈询已为祭酒。
现代文：守孝期满后，刘铉赴京，陈询已经被任为祭酒。
English: After the expiration of the filial piety period, Liu Ye went to Beijing, and Chen Zhen has been appointed as the sacrificial wine.

古文：帝重铉，命与询并任。
现代文：皇上敬重刘铉，命他与陈询并任祭酒。
English: The emperor respected Liu Ye and ordered him to serve as the sacrificial wine.

古文：天顺初，改少詹事，侍东宫讲读。
现代文：天顺初年，他改任少詹事，侍奉东宫太子读书。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was reassigned to a minor official, serving the East Palace Prince to study.

古文：明年十月卒。
现代文：第二年十月去世。
English: He died in October of the following year.

古文：帝及太子皆赐祭，赙赠有加。
现代文：皇上和太子都给他赐祭，赠给财物治丧。
English: Both the emperor and the crown prince gave him offerings and gifts of property for his funeral.

古文：宪宗立，赠礼部侍郎，谥文恭。
现代文：宪宗即位后，赠予他礼部侍郎，谥文恭。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, he was presented with a ceremonial attendant, Zang Wenyong.

古文：铉性介特，言行不苟。
现代文：刘铉个性独特，言行不苟。
English: Liu Ye has a unique personality and is scrupulous in his words and deeds.

古文：教庶吉士及课国子生，规条严整，读书至老弥笃。
现代文：在教庶吉士和课国子生读书时，他制定有严整的规章。喜好读书，至老弥笃。
English: He had strict rules when he was teaching reading to Shobukichi and Kuniko. He loved to read and was an avid reader.

古文：仲子瀚以进士使南方。濒行，阅其衣箧。
现代文：他的次子刘瀚以进士身份出使南方，临行前刘铉检查他的衣箱。
English: His second son, Liu Han, was sent to the south as an envoy. Before leaving, Liu Yao checked his suitcase.

古文：比还，箧如故，乃喜曰： 无玷吾门矣。 
现代文：回来后，箱中所装的还是那些东西，刘铉于是高兴地说： 没有玷污我的家门。 
English: After returning, the box was still filled with those things, and Liu Wei said happily: It did not tarnish my home.

古文：瀚官终副使，能守父训。
现代文：刘瀚最后任到副使，能遵守父训。
English: Liu Han eventually became a vice-envoy and was able to follow his father's teachings.

