古文：贞观初，有上书请去佞臣者，太宗谓曰： 朕之所任，皆以为贤，卿知佞者谁耶？ 
现代文：贞观初年，有人上书请求斥退皇帝身边那些佞邪的小人，唐太宗对上书的人说： 我任用的人，都认为他是贤臣，你知道佞臣是谁吗？ 
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, someone submitted a petition asking for the expulsion of those evil villains around the emperor. Tang Taizong said to the person who submitted the letter: The people I appointed all think he is a wise minister. Do you know who a wise minister is?

古文：对曰： 臣居草泽，不的知佞者，请陛下佯怒以试群臣，若能不畏雷霆，直言进谏，则是正人，顺情阿旨，则是佞人。 
现代文：那人回答说： 我住在民间，的确不知道谁是佞臣。请陛下假装发怒，来试一试身边的大臣们，如果谁不怕雷霆之怒，直言进谏，那就是正直的人。如果谁一味依顺陛下，不分曲直地迎合皇上的意见，那就是佞邪的人。 
English: The man replied, "I live among the common people, and I really don't know who is a vassal. Please, Your Majesty, feign your anger and test the ministers around you. If anyone is not afraid of the wrath of thunder and speaks forthrightly, then he is an honest person. If anyone is blindly obedient to Your Majesty and panders to the Emperor's opinions without distinction, then he is a person who is evil.

古文：太宗谓封德彝曰： 流水清浊，在其源也。
现代文：唐太宗回头对封德彝说： 流水是否清浊，关键在于源头。
English: Tang Taizong turned to Feng Dejun and said: The key to whether the running water is clear lies in the source.

古文：君者政源，人庶犹水，君自为诈，欲臣下行直，是犹源浊而望水清，理不可得。
现代文：君主是施政的源头，臣民就好比流水，君主自行欺诈妄为，却要臣下行为正直，那就好比是水源浑浊而希望流水清澈，这是根本办不到的。
English: The monarch is the source of governance, and the subjects are like flowing water. If the monarch deceives himself, but wants his subjects to act honestly, it is like the source of the water is muddy and wants the flowing water to be clear, which is fundamentally impossible.

古文：朕常以魏武帝多诡诈，深鄙其为人，如此，岂可堪为教令？ 
现代文：我常常认为魏武帝曹操言行多诡诈，所以很看不起他的为人，现在如果让我也这么做，不是让我效仿他吗？
English: I often think that Emperor Cao Cao's words and deeds are very deceitful, so I despise him as a person. Now if I do the same, won't I be imitating him?

古文：谓上书人曰： 朕欲使大信行于天下，不欲以诈道训俗，卿言虽善，朕所不取也。 
现代文：这不是实行政治教化的办法！ 于是，唐太宗又对上书的人说： 我要使诚信行于天下，不想用诈骗的行为损坏社会风气，你的话虽然很好，但我不能采纳。 
English: This is not the way to carry out political indoctrination! Therefore, Tang Taizong also said to the person who submitted the letter: I want to make honesty prevail in the world, and I don't want to damage the social ethos with fraudulent behavior. Although your words are good, I can't accept them.

古文：贞观十年，魏征上疏曰：
现代文：贞观十年，魏徵上疏说：
English: In the 10th year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng Shang Zuo said:

古文：臣闻为国之基，必资于德礼，君之所保，惟在于诚信。
现代文：臣听说国家的基础，在于道德和礼教；国君地位的保障，在于诚实信用。
English: The vassal heard that the foundation of the country lies in morality and etiquette; the guarantee of the sovereign's status lies in honesty and trust.

古文：诚信立则下无二心，德礼形则远人斯格。
现代文：有了诚信，就不会产生二心。实行德政，边远的人民也会来归顺。
English: If there is good faith, there will be no double-mindedness. If a virtuous government is implemented, the people in remote areas will also come to submit.

古文：然则德礼诚信，国之大纲，在于君臣父子，不可斯须而废也。
现代文：由此可见，德、礼、诚、信是国家的纲领，贯穿在君臣、父子关系中，一刻也不能偏废。
English: From this, it can be seen that virtue, courtesy, sincerity, and faith are the state's program, and they run through the relationship between monarch and subject, and father and son, and cannot be neglected for a moment.

古文：故孔子曰： 君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 君王以礼对待臣子，臣子以忠心侍奉君王。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "The king treats his vassal with courtesy, and the vassal serves the king with loyalty."

古文：又曰： 自古皆有死，民无信不立。 
现代文：还说： 一个人终有一死，得不到人民的信任，国家就无法存立。 
English: He also said: A person has to die eventually, and without the trust of the people, the country cannot exist.

古文：文子曰： 同言而信，信在言前；同令而行，诚在令外。 
现代文：文子说： 说出话来能够使人相信，是因为说话之前已经取信于人，发出令来能够得到执行，是因为命令之中含有诚意。 
English: Fumiko said, "Speaking words can make people believe because you have gained people's trust before speaking, and issuing orders can be carried out because there is sincerity in the order.

古文：然而言而不信，言无信也；令而不从，令无诚也。
现代文：说了却不做，是言而无信，接受了命令却不执行，是没有诚意，如果是君王，就会败坏名声，如果是臣下，就会危及生命。
English: To speak and not to act is to speak and not to believe, to receive orders and not to carry them out is to lack sincerity, to be a king is to ruin one's reputation, to be a vassal is to endanger one's life.

古文：不信之言，无诚之令，为上则败德，为下则危身，虽在颠沛之中，君子之所不为也。自王道休明，十有余载，威加海外，万国来庭，仓廪日积，土地日广，然而道德未益厚，仁义未益博者，何哉？
现代文：因此，即使身不由己，处境艰难，君子也不会做有失诚信的事情。自从陛下登基，实行王道，已有十多年了，神威遍及四方，各国使者前来朝拜，国家粮仓日益充实，国土日益宽广。然而，我认为如今道德和仁义仍然不笃厚，为什么呢？
English: Therefore, even if he cannot help himself and the situation is difficult, a gentleman will not do anything dishonest. It has been more than ten years since His Majesty ascended the throne and practiced the royal way. His majesty has spread to all four directions, emissaries from various countries have come to worship, the national granary has become more and more abundant, and the country has become more and more extensive. However, I think that morality and benevolence are still not strong enough. Why?

古文：由乎待下之情未尽于诚信，虽有善始之勤，未睹克终之美故也。
现代文：因为朝廷对侍臣子的态度还不够诚信，虽然陛下在贞观初期勤于政务，有一个好的开头，但却没能做到善始善终。
English: Because the attitude of the imperial court towards the courtier is not honest enough, although His Majesty was diligent in government affairs in the early days of chastity and had a good beginning, he failed to achieve a good beginning and a good end.

古文：昔贞观之始，乃闻善惊叹，暨八九年间，犹悦以从谏。
现代文：贞观初年，陛下听到好的意见就很惊喜，到贞观八、九年间，仍然乐于接受意见。
English: In the first year of chengguan, His Majesty was very surprised to hear good opinions. Eight or nine years into chengguan, he is still willing to accept opinions.

古文：自兹厥后，渐恶直言，虽或勉强有所容，非复曩时之豁如。
现代文：可是，从那之后，陛下您渐渐讨厌直言，有时即使勉强接受，也不像早年那般纳谏如流了。
English: But since then, Your Majesty, you have grown weary of plain speaking, and sometimes, even if you accept it grudgingly, you are not as accommodating as you were in your early years.

古文：謇谔之辈，稍避龙鳞；便佞之徒，肆其巧辩。
现代文：因此，忠正的大臣，逐渐为了避免触犯您不敢直言；而那些奸邪之人，正好大肆发挥他们巧舌如簧的本领。
English: Therefore, the loyal ministers, in order to avoid offending you, gradually dare not speak frankly; and those who are treacherous, just give full play to their ability to speak fluently.

古文：谓同心者为擅权，谓忠谠者为诽谤。
现代文：他们诬陷与朝廷同心同德的人是滥用职权，中伤直言进谏的人是在诽谤朝政。
English: They falsely accuse people who share the same ideals as the imperial court of abusing their powers, while those who slander outspoken people are slandering the imperial government.

古文：谓之为朋党，虽忠信而可疑；谓之为至公，虽矫伪而无咎。
现代文：说一个人结党营私，即使他忠诚中正也会让人觉得可疑；说一个人大公无私，即使他弄虚作假也不会遭受责备。
English: To say that a man is disinterested, even if he is loyal, is suspect; to say that a man is disinterested, even if he is dishonest, is blameless.

古文：强直者畏擅权之议，忠谠者虑诽谤之尤。
现代文：所以刚强正直的人害怕玩忽职守的罪名，忠诚正直的人担心诽谤朝廷的恶名。
English: Therefore, strong and honest people are afraid of being accused of dereliction of duty, and loyal and honest people are worried about defaming the reputation of the imperial court.

古文：正臣不得尽其言，大臣莫能与之争。
现代文：于是正直的忠臣不能完全陈述自己的想法，朝中重臣也不能与之争辩是非。
English: As a result, an honest loyal retainer could not fully state his thoughts, nor could a senior cabinet minister argue with him.

古文：荧惑视听，郁于大道，妨政损德，其在此乎？
现代文：圣上被迷惑视听，破坏了治政的原则，妨政害德的原因就在这里吧？
English: Is this the reason why the sacred was confused with the visual and auditory, undermined the principle of governance, hindered politics and harmed morality?

古文：故孔子曰 恶利口之覆邦家者 ，盖为此也。
现代文：因此孔子说： 厌恶那些口齿伶俐毁灭国家和家庭的人。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: "Abhor those who are glib and destroy the country and the family."

古文：且君子小人，貌同心异。
现代文：大概说的正是如今的情形啊。况且君子和小人，外表一致，内心不一。
English: This is probably the situation today. Moreover, a gentleman and a villain are the same on the outside, but not on the inside.

古文：君子掩人之恶，扬人之善，临难无苟免，杀身以成仁。
现代文：君子宽容别人的缺点，表扬别人的优点，危难之时绝不苟且偷生，即使牺牲生命也要成就仁义的美德。
English: A gentleman is tolerant of other people's shortcomings, praises other people's merits, and is absolutely meticulous and stealthy in times of danger. Even if he sacrifices his life, he must achieve the virtue of benevolence.

古文：小人不耻不仁，不畏不义，惟利之所在，危人自安。
现代文：小人不知羞耻，不讲仁德，不知敬畏，不守信义，只知唯利是图，诬陷别人于危险境地自己却苟安于世。
English: The villain knows no shame, no benevolence, no fear, no loyalty, only profit. He frames others in a dangerous situation, but remains at peace with the world.

古文：夫苟在危人，则何所不至？
现代文：如果将危险推给别人，那么他还有什么事情做不出来。
English: If he passes the risk on to someone else, then there is nothing he can do.

古文：今欲将求致治，必委之于君子；事有得失，或访之于小人。
现代文：现在，朝廷治理国家，将重任委托给君子，可是如果政务有所偏差，就向小人打探情况。
English: Now, the imperial court governs the country, entrusting important tasks to gentlemen, but if there is a deviation in government affairs, it will inquire about the situation from villains.

古文：其待君子也则敬而疏，遇小人也必轻而狎。
现代文：对待君子，尊敬却很疏远。对待小人，轻视却又亲近。
English: Treat a gentleman with respect but keep him at a distance. Treat a villain with contempt but keep him close.

古文：狎则言无不尽，疏则情不上通。
现代文：亲近小人，那么小人就会口蜜腹剑；疏远君子，那么朝廷就得不到实情。
English: If you get close to a villain, then the villain will have a sword in his mouth; if you alienate a gentleman, then the court will not get the truth.

古文：是则毁誉在于小人，刑罚加于君子，实兴丧之所在，可不慎哉！
现代文：所以对人诋毁赞誉的权利实际掌握在小人手中，而受到刑罚处置的总是君子，这关系到国家的安危，陛下能不慎重对待吗？
English: Therefore, the right to defame and praise people is actually in the hands of villains, and it is always gentlemen who are punished. This is related to the safety of the country. Can Your Majesty not be cautious?

古文：此乃孙卿所谓 使智者谋之，与愚者论之，使修洁之士行之，与污鄙之人疑之，欲其成功，可得乎哉？ 
现代文：诚如孙卿所说的： 让有智能的人谋划，那么愚蠢的人就会议论；让品行高洁的人实行，那么卑鄙的人就会怀疑，要想事情成功，怎么可能呢？ 
English: As Sun Tzu said, "Let the wise make plans, and the stupid discuss; let the virtuous carry them out, and the wicked doubt." How is it possible for things to succeed?

古文：夫中智之人，岂无小惠？
现代文：具有中等智能的人，他们也有自己的能力。
English: People with average intelligence also have their own abilities.

古文：然才非经国，虑不及远，虽竭力尽诚，犹未免于倾败；况内怀奸利，承颜顺旨，其为祸患，不亦深乎？
现代文：可是他们非治国之才，缺乏深谋远虑，即使竭尽全力，仍然难免失败。更何况心怀奸邪私利，处处阿谀逢迎的小人呢，这些人难道不是国家的祸患吗？
English: However, they are not good at governing the country, they lack foresight, and even if they try their best, they will still inevitably fail. What's more, they are small people with treachery and selfishness in their hearts, and they are surrounded by flatterers. Aren't these people the scourge of the country?

古文：夫立直木而疑影之不直，虽竭精神，劳思虑，其不得亦已明矣。
现代文：竖立直木，却怀疑它的影子不直，即使耗尽脑力也不能看到歪斜的影子，这是很明白的事。
English: It is clear that if you erect a straight tree and suspect that its shadow is not straight, you will not be able to see the crooked shadow even if you exhaust your mental energy.

古文：夫君能尽礼，臣得竭忠，必在于内外无私，上下相信。
现代文：如要君王尊礼，臣下尽忠，就必须内外无私，君臣之间相互信任。
English: If the king is to be respected and his vassals are to be loyal, they must be selfless at home and abroad, and they must trust each other.

古文：上不信，则无以使下，下不信，则无以事上，信之为道大矣。昔齐桓公问于管仲曰： 吾欲使酒腐于爵，肉腐于俎，得无害霸乎？ 管仲曰： 此极非其善者，然亦无害于霸也。 桓公曰： 如何而害霸乎？ 
现代文：信任对于治理国家至关重要。过去，齐桓公对管仲说： 我想使酒在酒器中变坏，肉在锅中腐烂，这样做对治国无害吧？ 管仲说： 这样做不好，但对治国也无害。 齐桓公问： 那么什么会危害国家呢？ 
English: Trust is essential for governing the country. In the past, Prince Qi Huan said to Guanzhong: I want to make the wine go bad in the wine container and the meat rot in the pot, is this harmful to governing the country? Guanzhong said: This is not good to do, but it is not harmful to governing the country. Prince Qi Huan asked: So what will harm the country?

古文：管仲曰： 不能知人，害霸也；知而不能任，害霸也；任而不能信，害霸也；既信而又使小人参之，害霸也。 
现代文：管仲说： 不能识别人才有损于霸业；知道是人才而不能恰当地任用有损于霸业；任用了又不肯信任有损于霸业；信任而又让小人从中掺和有损于霸业。 
English: Guanzhong said: Failure to recognize others is detrimental to hegemony; knowing that it is a talent and failing to appoint properly is detrimental to hegemony; appointing and refusing to trust is detrimental to hegemony; trusting and letting villains mix in is detrimental to hegemony.

古文：晋中行穆伯攻鼓，经年而弗能下，馈间伦曰： 鼓之啬夫，间伦知之。
现代文：晋国的中行穆伯攻打鼓这个地方，一年都攻克不下，馈间伦说： 鼓这个地方的百姓，我是知道的。
English: In the middle of Jin Province, Mubo attacked and beat the drums of this place, and could not conquer it for a year. Fei Ma Lun said: I know the people of this place.

古文：请无疲士大夫，而鼓可得。 
现代文：不必兴师动众、出兵打仗，我就可以攻下鼓这个地方。 
English: I don't have to rouse the troops and go to war, I can conquer this place.

古文：穆伯不应，左右曰： 不折一戟，不伤一卒，而鼓可得，君奚为不取？ 
现代文：穆伯不理他，左右的官员说： 不用一兵一卒，而鼓就可以得到，为什么不听馈间伦的意见呢？ 
English: Mubo ignored him, and officials on both sides said, "You don't need a single soldier, but you can get a drum. Why not listen to Miron's opinion?"

古文：穆伯曰： 间伦之为人也，佞而不仁，若使间伦下之，吾可以不赏之乎？
现代文：穆伯说： 馈间伦的为人，奸诈不仁义。如果他夺取了鼓地，我可以不赏他吗？
English: Mubo said, "The man who gave the drum to Mima Lun is treacherous and unkind. If he took the drum, should I not reward him?"

古文：若赏之，是赏佞人也。
现代文：如果赏赐了他，不是在赏赐奸邪小人吗？
English: If they rewarded him, wouldn't they be rewarding a traitor?

古文：佞人得志，是使晋国之士舍仁而为佞。
现代文：如果让小人得志，那就是让晋国的人放弃仁义而宣扬奸邪。
English: If the villains are allowed to achieve their goals, it means that the people of Jin Province will give up benevolence and righteousness and promote evil.

古文：虽得鼓，将何用之？ 
现代文：即使得到了鼓地，又有什么用呢？ 
English: What's the use of playing the drums, even if you get the drumsticks?

古文：夫穆伯，列国之大夫，管仲，霸者之良佐，犹能慎于信任、远避佞人也如此，况乎为四海之大君，应千龄之上圣，而可使巍巍至德之盛，将有所间乎？
现代文：穆伯，是战国时的大夫，管仲，是霸主的得力助手，他们尚且能够如此的被重视信用，疏远小人，更何况陛下是德冠千古的圣明君主，怎能有损于巍巍盛德呢？
English: Mubo was a doctor during the Warring States period, and Guanzhong was the right-hand man of the overlord. They were able to be valued and trusted so much, and alienated the villains. Not to mention that His Majesty is the sacred monarch of the ages, how can it be detrimental to Gong Shengde?

古文：若欲令君子小人是非不杂，必怀之以德，待之以信，厉之以义，节之以礼，然后善善而恶恶，审罚而明赏。
现代文：要使君子小人判然有别，是非分明，君王必须用恩德来安抚他们，用诚信来对待他们，用道义来勉励他们，用礼仪来节制他们，然后表扬善行，摒除劣迹，谨慎处罚，明白赏赐。
English: In order to distinguish between a gentleman and a ruffian, and to distinguish between right and wrong, the king must appease them with grace, treat them with honesty, encourage them with morality, restrain them with etiquette, and then praise good deeds, eliminate bad deeds, carefully punish, and reward them.

古文：则小人绝其私佞，君子自强不息，无为之治，何远之有？
现代文：如果这样做，小人就会无处藏身，君子就会自强不息，推行无为而治的治国方针，就为期不远了。
English: If this is done, the villain will have nowhere to hide, the gentleman will be self-reliant, and the implementation of the policy of doing nothing to govern the country will not be far off.

古文：善善而不能进，恶恶而不能去，罚不及于有罪，赏不加于有功，则危亡之期，或未可保，永锡祚胤，将何望哉！
现代文：如果表扬善行却不能发扬善行，摒弃劣迹却不能杜绝恶行，刑罚不加于有罪的人，赏赐不加于有功之臣，那么危亡之期，也许保不久就要到来，永远使子孙后代享受昌盛国运、永享太平，还有什么指望呢？
English: If praising good deeds does not promote good deeds, abandoning bad deeds does not stop bad deeds, punishing the guilty does not punish the guilty, and rewarding the meritorious does not reward the meritorious, then the time of peril may be coming soon, and future generations will always enjoy prosperity and peace. What hope is there?

古文：太宗览疏叹曰： 若不遇公，何由得闻此语！ 
现代文：唐太宗看了奏疏，感叹道： 如果不遇到魏徵，我怎么可能听到这样的肺腑之言呢？ 
English: When Tang Taizong read the Song of Songs, he lamented, "If I hadn't met Wei Zheng, how could I have heard such profound words?

古文：太宗尝谓长孙无忌等曰： 朕即位之初，有上书者非一，或言人主必须威权独任，不得委任群下；或欲耀兵振武，慑服四夷。
现代文：唐太宗对长孙无忌等大臣说： 我刚刚即位的时候，有许多人上书建议，他们有的要我独揽大权，不要重用臣下；有的要我加强兵力，以使四方少数民族威慑臣服。
English: Tang Taizong said to his eldest grandson Mujie and other ministers: When I had just ascended the throne, many people wrote to me with suggestions. Some of them wanted me to monopolize power and not to make heavy use of vassals; others wanted me to strengthen the armed forces so that the ethnic minorities in the four directions would be intimidated into submission.

古文：惟有魏征劝朕 偃革兴文，布德施惠，中国既安，远人自服 。
现代文：只有魏徵劝我 减少武功，提倡文治，广施道德仁义，他说只要中原安定了，远方异族自然会臣服 。
English: Only Wei Zheng advised me to reduce martial arts, advocate the rule of law, and widely promote morality and benevolence. He said that as long as the Central Plains was stable, the distant foreign peoples would naturally submit.

古文：朕从此语，天下大宁，绝域君长，皆来朝贡，九夷重译，相望于道。
现代文：我听从了他的建议，终于使天下赢得了太平，边远地区异族的首领都前来朝贡，各个少数民族派人前来源源不断。
English: I followed his advice and finally brought peace to the world. The leaders of foreign ethnic groups in remote areas all came to pay tribute, and there was a steady stream of people from various ethnic minorities.

古文：凡此等事，皆魏征之力也。朕任用岂不得人？ 
现代文：这一切都是魏徵的功劳。我难道不是用人有道吗？ 
English: All of this is the merit of Wei Zheng. Isn't it right for me to employ people?

古文：征拜谢曰： 陛下圣德自天，留心政术。实以庸短，承受不暇，岂有益于圣明？ 
现代文：魏徵拜谢说： 这是因为陛下圣德，用心政务所致，我才疏学浅，承受圣意尚且力不从心，怎么会对您有这么大的帮助呢？ 
English: Wei Zhubai Xie said, "It is because of Your Majesty's holiness and diligent governance that I am not well-educated, and I am not able to receive the Holy Spirit. How can I be of such great help to You?"

古文：贞观十七年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 《传》称 去食存信 ，孔子曰： 民无信不立。 
现代文：贞观十七年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 《论语》上说： 宁可不要粮食也要保持百姓对国家的信任 ，孔子说： 百姓不信任国家，便不能立国。 
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his attendant ministers: "Confucius said in the Analects: 'It is better to have no grain than to maintain the people's trust in the state.' Confucius said: 'If the people do not trust the state, then the state cannot be established.'

古文：昔项羽既入咸阳，已制天下，向能力行仁信，谁夺耶？ 
现代文：从前，楚霸王项羽攻入咸阳，已经控制了天下，如果他能够努力推行仁政，那么谁能和他争夺天下呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, Chu Emperor Xiang Yu invaded Xianyang and already controlled the world. If he can work hard to implement benevolent politics, then who can compete with him for the world?

古文：房玄龄对曰： 仁、义、礼、智、信，谓之五常，废一不可。能勤行之，甚有裨益。
现代文：房玄龄回答说： 仁、义、礼、智、信，称为五常，废弃任何一项都不行，如果能够认真推行这五常，对国家是大有益处的。
English: Fang Xuanling replied, "Humanity, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith are called the five constants. It is not possible to abandon any of them. If we can earnestly implement these five constants, it will be of great benefit to the country.

古文：殷纣狎侮五常，武王夺之；项氏以无信为汉高祖所夺，诚如圣旨。 
现代文：殷纣王违反五常，被周武王灭掉，项羽因为无信，被汉高祖夺了天下。
English: King Yin Xuan violated the Five Precepts and was eliminated by King Zhou Wu, while King Xiang Yu, because of his lack of faith, was usurped by the founder of the Han Dynasty.

