古文：荀淑子爽孙悦韩韶钟皓陈寔子纪荀淑字季和，颍川颍阴人，荀卿十一世孙也。
现代文：◆荀淑传，荀淑字季和，颍川郡颍阴人，荀卿十一世孙。
English: ◆淑传,淑字季和,川郡阴人,卿十一世世孫.

古文：少有高行，博学而不好章句，多为俗儒所非，而州里称其知人。
现代文：年轻时有高尚的德行，学问渊博，不喜欢雕章琢句，徒在文字上用功，不注重实际的学识。
English: When he was young, he had noble virtues and profound knowledge. He didn't like to carve words and phrases. He only worked hard on writing and didn't pay attention to practical knowledge.

古文：安帝时，征拜郎中，后再迁当涂长。
现代文：因此，常常被俗儒看不起。但州里却称他有知人之明。安帝时，征召任为郎中，后来再升当涂长。
English: As a result, he was often looked down upon by laymen. However, the prefectural government claimed that he was well-known. When Emperor An was in power, he was conscripted as a junior vassal, and later he was promoted to the position of chief vassal.

古文：去职还乡里。
现代文：离职还乡里。
English: After leaving office, he returned to his hometown.

古文：当世名贤李固、李膺等皆师宗之。
现代文：当世名贤李固、李膺等都尊崇他为师。
English: The world-famous sages such as Li Gu and Li Xi all revered him as their teacher.

古文：及梁太后临朝，有日食地震之变，诏公卿举贤良方正，光禄勋杜乔、少府房植举淑对策，讥刺贵幸，为大将军梁冀所忌，出补朗陵侯相。
现代文：梁太后临朝理政，有日食、地震的变异，下诏公卿举贤良方正，光禄勋杜乔、少府房植举荀淑回答皇上的提问，荀淑讥讽指责皇上的贵戚及宠幸的人，遭到大将军梁冀的忌妒，把他调出补朗陵侯相。
English: When the Empress Dowager Liang came to the throne to administer the government, there was a solar eclipse and an earthquake. The following edict was issued to promote Xian Liang Fang Zheng to the rank of court noble, and to promote Gu Rong Du Qiao to the rank of honorable knight, and to promote Shao Fu Fong Zhi to the rank of court noble to answer the emperor's questions. Shao Fong Zhi mocked and accused the emperor's noble relatives and favorites, and was envied by the general Liang Ji, who transferred him to be the court noble of Sui Lang.

古文：莅事明理，称为神君。
现代文：到职处事正直，明于治理，称为 神君 。
English: If he is honest in his duties and good at governing, he is called a god.

古文：顷之，弃官归，闲居养志。
现代文：没有多久，辞官回家，闲居养志。
English: Before long, the dictionary officer went home, idling to refresh himself.

古文：产业每增，辄以赡宗族知友，年六十七，建和三年卒，李膺时为尚书，自表师丧。
现代文：家产增加了，就分给宗族和好朋友。年六十七，建和三年卒。李膺这时任尚书，自己上表，服心丧三年。
English: When the family's property increased, it was distributed to the clan and good friends. In the year 67, Jianhe graduated in three years. At that time, Li Xi was still a scholar, he was on the watch, and he was in mourning for three years.

古文：二县皆为立祠。
现代文：二县都立祠。
English: There are two prefectural capital shrines.

古文：有子八人：俭、绲、靖、焘、汪、爽、肃、专，并有名称，时人谓之 八龙 。
现代文：有子八人：俭、绲、靖、焘、汪、爽、肃、专，都有名，当时的人叫他们为 八龙 。
English: There were eight sons: Jian, Yao, Jing, Yao, Wang, Shuang, Su and Zeng, all of whom were famous. People at the time called them the eight dragons.

古文：初，荀氏旧里名西豪，颍阴令勃海苑康以为昔高阳氏有才子八人，今荀氏亦有八子，故改其里曰高阳里。
现代文：起先，荀氏旧里叫西豪，颍阴令勃海苑康认为从前高阳氏有才子八人，今荀氏也有八子，所以改其旧里为高阳里。
English: At first, the former village of the Gong clan was called Xihao, and the ruler of the Gong dynasty, Bo Haiyuan Kang, thought that the former Goyang clan had eight talented sons, and the current Gong clan also had eight sons, so he changed his former village to Goyang village.

古文：靖有至行，不仕，年五十而终，号曰玄行先生。
现代文：荀靖有德行，不做官，年五十而死，号 玄行先生 。
English: He died at the age of fifty, and was called Mr. Xuanying.

古文：淑兄子昱字伯条，昙字无智。
现代文：荀淑的儿子荀昱字伯条，荀昙字元智。
English: The son of Yu Shu, Yu Zi Bojie, and Yu Zi Yuan Zhi are the stars.

古文：昱为沛相，昙为广陵太守。
现代文：荀昱为沛相，荀昙为广陵太守。
English: is Pei Xiang,  is Guangling Taishu.

古文：兄弟皆正身疾恶，志除阉宦。
现代文：兄弟都正身痛恨邪恶，有志铲除宦官。
English: All the brothers hated evil and wanted to get rid of the eunuchs.

古文：其支党宾客有在二郡者，纤罪必诛。
现代文：宦官的支党宾客有在二郡的，虽小小的罪过，也诛杀无赦。
English: The eunuch's party guests in the two counties, although small sins, also fought and killed without mercy.

古文：昱后共大将军窦武谋诛中官，与李膺俱死。
现代文：荀昱后来与大将军窦武谋杀宦官，与李膺同死。
English: Later, he and the general Dou Wu murdered a eunuch and died together with Li Yan.

古文：昙亦禁锢终身。
现代文：荀昙也被禁锢，终身不用。
English: He was also imprisoned and banned for life.

古文：爽字慈明，一名谞。
现代文：◆荀爽传，爽字慈明，一名。
English: ◆Gong Shuang Chuan, Shuang Zi Ciming, one.

古文：幼而好学，年十二，能通《春秋》、《论语》。
现代文：从小好学，十二岁，就读懂了《春秋》、《论语》。
English: Since childhood, he was eager to learn, and at the age of twelve, he read and understood "Spring and Autumn" and "Analects."

古文：太尉杜乔见而称之，曰 可为人师 爽遂耽思经书，庆吊不行，征命不应。
现代文：太尉杜乔见了他称赞说 ：可以作人的老师。 荀爽於是益发深思经书，乡里有喜庆丧吊，他不参加，国家有征召，他也不应。
English: When Captain Du Qiao saw him, he praised him and said, "You can be a teacher of human beings." He became more and more excited and began to think deeply about the scriptures. There were festivals and funerals in the village, but he did not attend. The country had a call-up, and he should not.

古文：颍川为之语曰 荀氏八龙，慈明无双 
现代文：颍川流行这样一句话 ：荀氏八龙，慈明无双。 
English: There is a popular saying in Jechuan: "The eight dragons of the Jie clan are second to none."

古文：延熹九年，太常赵典举爽至孝，拜郎中。
现代文：延熹九年，太常赵典推举荀爽为至孝，拜郎中。
English: In the ninth year of the Yan Dynasty, Emperor Taizang Zhao promoted Zhuang Shuang to the position of filial son and adopted him as an adopted son.

古文：对策陈便宜曰：臣闻之于师曰 汉为火德，火生于木，木盛于火，故其德为孝，其象在《周易》之《离》 夫在地为火，在天为日。
现代文：他回答策问陈述了他认为国家应办的事宜说： 我听老师说： 汉为火德，火生于木，本盛于火。火，木之子；夏，火之位。木至夏而盛，所以为孝。其象在《周易》之《离》。 在地为火，在天为日。
English: He answered the questions and stated what he thought the country should do, saying: I heard the teacher say: Han is the virtue of fire, fire is born in wood, the principle prevails in fire. Fire, the son of wood; summer, the place of fire. Wood prevails in summer, so it is filial piety. Its image is in "Leaving" in "Zhou Yi." In the earth it is fire, in the sky it is day.

古文：在天者用其精，在地者用其形。
现代文：在天的，用其精，在地的，用其形。
English: In the sky, use its essence, in the earth, use its shape.

古文：夏则火王，其精在天，温暖之气，养生百木，是其孝也。
现代文：夏天是火王的时候，其精在天。温暖之气，生长百木，这就是孝。
English: When summer is the king of fire, its essence is in the sky. The warmth, the growth of trees, this is filial piety.

古文：冬时则废，其形在地，酷烈之气，焚烧山林，是其不孝也。
现代文：冬天衰败，其形在地，酷烈之气，焚烧山林，这就是不孝。
English: Winter decay, its shape is on the ground, fierce spirit, burning mountain forests, this is not filial piety.

古文：故汉制使天下诵《孝经》，选吏举孝廉。
现代文：所以汉朝的制度使天下的人都诵读《孝经》，选官吏也是推举孝廉。
English: Therefore, the system of the Han Dynasty made everyone in the world recite the "Filial Piety Sutra," and elected officials were also selected by filial piety.

古文：夫丧亲自尽，孝之终也。
现代文：亲死自尽，用尽悲痛。
English: He took his own life, exhausted by grief.

古文：今之公卿及二千石，三年之丧，不得即去，殆非所以增崇孝道而克称火德者也。
现代文：现在公卿及二千石，三年之丧不满，就去做官，这大概不能叫做崇尚孝道克称火德吧？
English: Now, a noble with 2,000 koku, dissatisfied with three years of mourning, goes to work as an official. This can't be called advocating filial piety, can it?

古文：往者孝文劳谦，行过乎俭，故有遗诏以日易月。
现代文：过去孝文勤劳谦让，操行过于俭朴，所以遗诏以日易月。
English: In the past, Xiaowen was diligent and humble, and his behavior was too frugal. Therefore, his last will and testament was written in days and months.

古文：此当时之宜，不可贯之万世。
现代文：这在当时合适，不可万世遵行的。
English: It was the right thing to do at the time, but it can't be done forever.

古文：古今之制虽有损益，而谅暗之礼未尝改移，以示天下莫遗其亲。
现代文：古今的各种制度，虽然有时增加一些，有时减掉一些，惟有居丧的礼没有改变，就是告诉天下的人，不要忘记了自己的父母。
English: The various systems of ancient and modern times, although sometimes increased, sometimes reduced, only the funeral rites have not changed, that is, to tell people around the world not to forget their parents.

古文：今公卿群寮皆政教所瞻，而父母之丧不得奔赴。
现代文：现在公卿百官都是老百姓的榜样，而父母逝世了，也不回去居丧尽孝。
English: Nowadays, nobles and officials are role models for the common people, and when their parents pass away, they do not return home to pay their respects.

古文：夫仁义之行，自上而始。敦厚之俗，以应乎下。
现代文：本来，仁义之行，要从上面开始做起，敦实纯朴的风俗才能传到下面响应。
English: Originally, the practice of benevolence and righteousness should start from the top, and the solid and simple customs can be passed down to the next.

古文：传曰 丧祭之礼阙，则人臣之恩薄，背死忘生者众矣 曾子曰 人未有自致者，必也亲丧乎 《春秋传》曰 上之所为，民之归也 夫上所不为而民或为之，故加刑罚。
现代文：传说： 丧祭的礼废缺，人臣的恩情就薄，死不吊生不养的人就多了。 
English: Legend: The funeral rites are lacking, the gratitude of the courtiers is thin, and there are more people who do not want to die.

古文：若上之所为，民亦为之，又何诛焉。
现代文：曾子说 ：人没有自尽的，如果有的话，只有死了父母才有呢。 《春秋传》说： 上面所作所为，老百姓一定要跟着走的。 
English: Zengzi said, "People don't commit suicide, and if they do, it's only because their parents are dead." "The Spring and Autumn Annals" said, "People must go along with the above behavior."

古文：昔丞相翟方进，以自备宰相，而不敢逾制。
现代文：至于上面没有做，老百姓有的做了，那就要处以刑罚；如果上面做了，老百姓也跟着做，那怎么能加以刑罚呢？
English: If the above did not do it, but the common people did it, then they should be punished; if the above did it, and the common people followed suit, then how can they be punished?

古文：至遭母忧，三十六日而除。
现代文：以前丞相翟方进认为自己是宰相，不敢破坏制度。母亲死了，服丧三十六日才恢复工作。
English: In the past, the chancellor, Min Fangjin, considered himself to be the prime minister and dared not undermine the system. His mother died, and he only resumed work after 36 days of mourning.

古文：夫失礼之源，自上而始。
现代文：失礼的根源在上面。
English: Rudeness has its roots above.

古文：古者大丧三年不呼其门，所以崇国厚俗笃化之道也。
现代文：古大丧三年不呼其门，是为了推崇国家的礼制，厚风俗，重教化啊。
English: The ancient Great Funeral does not call its door for three years, in order to promote the country's etiquette, thick customs, and heavy indoctrination.

古文：事失宜正，过勿惮改。
现代文：事情做错了，应该改正，有了过错要不怕改过。
English: If you do something wrong, you should correct it. If you make a mistake, you should not be afraid to correct it.

古文：天下通丧，可如旧礼。臣闻有夫妇然后有父子，有父子然后有君臣，有君臣然后有上下，有上下然后有礼仪。礼义备，则人知所厝矣。
现代文：天下一般的丧事，可以照以前的礼制办理。 我听说有夫妇然后有父子，有父子然后有君臣，有君臣然后有上下，有上下然后有礼义，礼义完备了则人人就知道如何行事了。
English: I have heard that there are couples and then there are fathers and sons, and then there are fathers and sons, and then there are princes and ministers, and then there are princes and ministers, and then there are superiors and inferiors, and then there is etiquette, and when etiquette is complete, everyone will know how to behave.

古文：夫妇人伦之始，王化之端，故文王作《易》，上经首《乾》、《坤》，下经首《咸》、《恒》孔子曰 天尊地卑，乾坤定矣 夫妇之道，所谓顺也。
现代文：夫妇为人与人之间关系的开始，也是君王德化的基础。所以文王作《易》，上经首《乾》、《坤》，下经首《咸》、《恒》。孔子说： 天高地卑，乾坤定矣。 夫妇间的关系，在于顺。
English: The beginning of the relationship between husband and wife is also the foundation of the king's moralization. Therefore, King Wen wrote "Yi," the first chapter of the upper scripture "Ken" and "Kun," and the first chapter of the lower scripture "Ham" and "Heng." Confucius said: "Heaven is high and earth is low, and what is done is done." The relationship between husband and wife is smooth.

古文：《尧典》曰 釐降二女于妫汭，嫔于虞 降者下也，嫔者妇也。
现代文：《尧典》说： 矨降二女于妫，嫔于虞。 降是下，嫔即妇。
English: "The Analects of Confucius" says: "If two women descend from heaven, they descend to earth; if two women descend from hell, they descend to heaven; if two women descend from heaven, they descend to hell."

古文：言虽帝尧之女，下嫁于虞，犹屈体降下，勤修妇道。
现代文：是说帝尧的女，下嫁与虞，还要恭恭敬敬，勤修妇道。
English: It is said that the empress's daughter, who marries a commoner, must also be respectful and diligent in practicing the women's way.

古文：《易》曰 帝乙归妹，以祉元吉 妇人谓嫁曰归，言汤以娶礼归其妹于诸侯也。
现代文：《易》说： 帝乙归妹，以祉元吉。 妇人去嫁叫归，是说汤按娶礼归他的妹妹于诸侯。
English: "Yi" said: "If the emperor returns to his sister, it is good luck. If a woman marries, it is good luck. If a woman marries, it is good luck. If a woman marries, it is good luck. If a woman marries, it is good luck.

古文：《春秋》之义，王姬嫁齐，使鲁主之，不以天子之尊加于诸侯也。
现代文：《春秋》的大义，王姬嫁齐，使鲁主持，这是不以天子的尊贵加于诸侯。
English: According to the great justice of "Spring and Autumn," Wang Ji married all of them and made Lu preside over them. This is not to impose the dignity of the Son of Heaven on the princes.

古文：今汉承秦法，设尚主之仪，以妻制夫，以卑临尊，违乾坤之道，失阳唱之义。
现代文：现在汉继承了秦朝的礼法，设尚主的礼制，用妻子控制丈夫，用卑下对付高上，违背了乾坤天高地卑的规律，失去了阳唱阴和的意义。
English: Now, the Han Dynasty has inherited the Qin Dynasty's etiquette, set up the Lord's etiquette, used the wife to control the husband, used the inferior to deal with the superior, violated the law of heaven and earth, and lost the meaning of yin and yang.

古文：孔子曰 昔圣人之作《易》也，仰则观象于天，俯则察法于地，睹鸟兽之文，与地之宜。
现代文：孔子说 ：以前圣人作《易》，高则向天观象，下则于地察法，看鸟兽的文采，与地之所宜。
English: Confucius said: In the past, sages wrote "I Ching," with the top referring to the heavenly view and the bottom to the earthly view, looking at the beauty of the birds and beasts and what is suitable for the earth.

古文：近取诸身，远取诸物，以通神明之德，以类万物之情 今观法于天，则北极至尊，四星妃后。察法于地，则昆山象夫，卑泽象妻。
现代文：近的，取之于本身，远的，取之于物，用以通神明之德，达万物之情。 今观法于天，就是北辰至尊，四星妃后，察法于地，就是高山像夫，卑泽像妻。
English: Near, taken from oneself, far, taken from things, used to channel the divine virtue, to reach the feelings of all things. Now the observation of the law in the sky is the North Star Supreme, the four-star queen, the observation of the law on the ground is the mountain like a husband, the humble like a wife.

古文：睹鸟兽之文，鸟则雄者鸣鸲，雌则顺服。
现代文：看鸟兽的文采，鸟则雄鸟鸲，雌鸟顺服。
English: Look at the beauty of birds and beasts, the male bird is shy, and the female bird is obedient.

古文：兽则牡为唱导，牝乃相从。
现代文：兽则牡的倡导，母的相从。
English: The beast is the advocate of the male, and the mother is the follower.

古文：近取诸身，则乾为人首，坤为人腹。
现代文：近的取之于身，则乾为人的头脑，坤为人的肚腹。
English: If it is taken close to the body, it will become the person's head and the body will become the person's stomach.

古文：远取诸物，则木实属天，根荄属地。
现代文：远的取于物，则树木的果实属天，草根属地。
English: Far away from things, the fruits of trees belong to heaven, and the roots of grass belong to the earth.

古文：阳尊阴卑，盖乃天性。
现代文：阳的崇高，阴的卑下，这大概是事物的本性。
English: The sublimity of the yang, the inferiority of the yin, this is probably the nature of things.

古文：且《诗》初篇实首《关雎》。《礼》始《寇》、《婚》，先正夫妇。
现代文：并且《诗》的第一篇是《关睢》，《礼》始于《冠》、《婚》，先正夫妇。
English: Moreover, the first chapter of "Poetry" is "Closure," and "Rite" begins with "Crown," "Marriage," and the first couple.

古文：天地《六经》，其旨一揆。
现代文：天地、六经，道理是一样的。
English: Heaven and earth, the Six Classics, the principle is the same.

古文：宜改尚主之制，以称乾坤之性。
现代文：应该改变尚主的制度，以符合乾坤之本性。
English: The honours system should be changed to reflect the nature of the job.

古文：昔者圣人建天地之中而谓之礼，礼者，所以兴福祥之本，而止祸乱之源也。
现代文：遵法尧、汤，取法周公、孔子，符合天地的法则而无错误，问于鬼神也无疑惑。我们行事能够这样，那就瑞兆自天而降，符验自地而来。 五是 来备，各有次序了。 从前圣人不偏不倚建于天地之中叫做礼。礼，是兴福祥的根本，堵塞祸乱源流的。
English: If we can act in this way, then auspicious signs will descend from the heavens and auspicious signs will come from the earth. The fifth is preparation, each in its own order. In the past, when sages were impartially established in heaven and earth, it was called rite. Rite is the foundation of prosperity and good fortune, and it blocks the source of calamity.

古文：人能枉欲从礼者，则福归之。顺情废礼者，则祸归之。
现代文：一个人能够丢掉私欲依礼而行，福就来了；顺情废礼，祸就来了。
English: If a person can discard his selfish desires and follow the etiquette, blessing will come; if he is willing to discard the etiquette, misfortune will come.

古文：故天子娶十二，天之数也。
现代文：研究祸福的反应，就可以知道兴废的所以产生。
English: By studying the reactions to misfortune and good fortune, we can know the reasons for the rise and fall of things.

古文：诸侯以下各有等差，事之降也。
现代文：在众多的礼仪中，婚姻的礼仪第一。所以天子娶十二，是天数如此，诸侯以下各有等差。事物的品级如此。
English: Among the many etiquettes, the etiquette of marriage is the first. Therefore, the heavenly son marries twelve, the number of days is such, and there is a difference between the princes. The grade of things is such.

古文：阳性纯而能施，阴体顺而能化，以礼济乐，节宣其气。故能丰子孙之祥，致老寿之福。
现代文：阳性纯，因而能够施展；阴体顺，因而能够化。用礼调济音乐，气得以宣导和节制之，所以能够多子多孙，健康长寿。
English: The masculine is pure, so it can be exerted; the feminine is smooth, so it can be transmuted; music is provided with etiquette, and qi can be preached and controlled, so it can have many children and grandchildren, and live a long and healthy life.

古文：及三代之季，淫而无节。瑶台、倾宫，陈妾数百。
现代文：到了三代的后期，好色无度，瑶台、倾宫，妻妾数百。
English: In the latter half of the third generation, there were hundreds of wives and concubines.

古文：阳竭于上，阴隔天下。
现代文：阳气耗竭於上，阴气阻隔在下。
English: The yang is exhausted at the top and the yin is blocked at the bottom.

古文：故周公之戒曰 不知稼穑之艰难，不闻小人之劳，惟耽乐之从，时亦罔或克寿 是其明戒。
现代文：所以周公戒之说： 不晓得农业劳动的艰苦，不晓得劳动者是怎么劳动的，只知道享乐，这也不会长寿的。 这是明诫。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gongkai said: "If you do not know the hardship of agricultural labor, do not know how laborers work, and only know pleasure, you will not live long." This is a clear commandment.

古文：后世之人，好福不务其本，恶祸不易其轨。
现代文：后来的人，好福不从根本上下工夫，恶祸不知道改邪归正。
English: Later people, good fortune does not work from the bottom up, and evil does not know how to change evil.

古文：传曰 截趾适屦，孰云其愚。
现代文：《传》说： 砍掉脚趾穿鞋，谁说他愚蠢！
English: "Legend" says: Cutting off toes to wear shoes, who says he is stupid!

古文：何与斯人，追欲丧躯 诚可痛也。
现代文：哪能比得这个人，纵欲以丧躯呢？ 实在可痛啊！
English: What can be compared to this man, who indulges in killing? It's really painful!

古文：臣窃闻后宫采女五六千人，从官侍使复在其外。
现代文：我听说后宫美女有五六千人，从官服侍的还不计算。
English: I've heard that there are five or six thousand beautiful women in the harem, not counting those who work for the government.

古文：冬夏衣服，朝夕禀粮，耗费缣帛，空竭府藏，征调增倍，十而税一，空赋不辜之民，以供无用之女，百姓穷困于外，阴阳隔塞于内。
现代文：冬天夏天的衣服，早晚的粮食，耗费缣帛，使国家的府库空虚，以至加倍征收赋税，十分的收一分，尽量征取无罪的老百收的钱财，供无用的宫女花耗。百姓穷困于外，阴阳隔塞于内。
English: Clothes in winter and summer, food in the morning and in the evening, all consume money, leaving the state treasury empty, so much so that taxes are doubled, one-tenth of a cent is collected, and as much as possible the money and wealth of the innocent old hundred is collected for the consumption of useless courtesans. The people are impoverished outside, and the yin and yang are kept inside.

古文：故感动和气，灾异屡臻。
现代文：因此感动和气，灾异屡降。
English: As a result, we are moved by the spirit of harmony, and the frequency of disasters has decreased.

古文：臣愚以为诸非礼聘未曾幸御者，一皆遣出，使成妃合。
现代文：我认为那些不是礼聘而又没宠幸过的宫女，要统统遣散出去，使她们结婚成家。
English: I think that all those courtesans who are not courtesans and have not been favored should be sent away so that they can get married and start a family.

古文：一曰通怨旷，和阴阳。二曰省财用，实府藏。三曰修礼制，绥眉寿。
现代文：这样，一、怨夫旷女之情通，阴阳之气得和；二、节省开支，使府库充实；三、修礼制，长寿。
English: In this way, one, the resentful husband and the harlot are in harmony, and the yin and yang are in harmony; two, the expenses are saved, and the government treasury is enriched; three, the ritual system, and longevity.

古文：四曰配阳施，祈螽斯。五曰宽役赋，安黎民。
现代文：四、配阳施，祈多子多孙；五、减赋省役，使百姓安居乐业。
English: Fourth, match the sun, pray for more children and grandchildren; Fifth, reduce the provincial service, so that the people can live and work in peace.

古文：此诚国家之弘利，天人之大福也。夫寒热晦明，所以为岁。
现代文：这是国家的大利，天下人的大福啊！ 寒热晦明，所以成为岁，尊卑奢俭，所以成礼。
English: This is a great benefit for the country and a great blessing for the people of the world! Cold and hot weather are obscure, so become old, honor and humility are extravagant, so become polite.

古文：尊卑奢俭，所以为礼：故以晦明寒暑之气，尊卑侈约之礼为其节也。
现代文：因此，把晦明寒暑之气，尊卑侈约之礼作为大节，不得违反。《易》说： 天地节而四时成。 
English: Therefore, it must not be violated to regard the cold and hot weather of the twilight, and the honor of the inferiority as a major festival. "Yi" said: The heaven and earth festival is at four o'clock.

古文：《易》曰 天地节而四时成 《春秋传》曰 唯器与名不可以假人 《孝经》曰 安上治民，莫善于礼 礼者，尊卑之差，上下之制也。
现代文：《春秋传》曰： 只有车服与爵号不可以假借别人。 《孝经》说 ：安上治民，没有比礼更好的了。 礼，是分别尊卑的等差，定上下制度的。
English: "The Spring and Autumn Annals" says: Only the car uniform and the title cannot be borrowed from others. "The Filial Piety Sutra" says: There is nothing better than etiquette when governing the people.

古文：昔季氏八佾舞于庭，非有伤害困于人物，而孔子犹曰 是可忍也，孰不可忍 《洪范》曰 惟辟作威，惟辟作福，惟辟玉食 凡此三者，君所独行而臣不得同也。
现代文：从前季氏八佾舞于庭，没有损害什么人和物，而孔子还说： 这也可以容忍，还有什么不可以容忍的呢。 《洪范》说 ：只有君能作威，只有君能作福，只有君才能吃好的。 
English: Once upon a time, the Eight Immortals of the Fourth Dynasty danced in the courtyard without harming anyone or anything, and Confucius also said: This can also be tolerated, what else should not be tolerated? "Hong Fan" said: Only you can command, only you can do good, and only you can eat well.

古文：今臣僭君服，下食上珍，所谓害于而家，凶于而国者也。
现代文：这三件，是君主所独行臣子不得与君相同的，现在臣子穿君主的衣服，下面的人吃只有上面的能吃的珍贵的东西，这是叫做害于尔家，为祸于尔国啊！
English: These three things are the sovereign's sole prerogative, and his vassals are not allowed to be the same as him. Now the vassals wear the monarch's clothes, and the people below eat only the precious things that the people above can eat. This is called harming the family and harming the country!

古文：宜略依古礼尊卑之差，及董仲舒制度之别，严督有司，必行其命。此则禁乱善俗足用之要。
现代文：应当大致依照古礼尊卑等级，及董仲舒制度上下的区别，严厉命令官吏，遵照执行，这是禁止紊乱，善风俗，财用足用大要。 
English: It should be roughly in accordance with the hierarchy of the ancient rites, and the difference between the upper and lower levels of the Dongzhongshu system, strictly order the officials to comply with the implementation, which is the prohibition of disorder, good customs, and the use of financial resources.

古文：奏闻，即弃官去。
现代文：奏送上去后，就弃官走了。
English: After the report was sent up, he resigned and left.

古文：后遭党锢，隐于海上，又南遁汉滨，积十馀年，以著述为事，遂称为硕儒。
现代文：后遭李膺等与宦官斗争的祸乱，隐居海上，再南逃到汉滨，共十几年，以著书为事，被称为大儒。
English: Afterward, he was plagued by the calamity of the struggle with the eunuchs led by Li Yu and others, lived in seclusion at sea, and then fled south to Hanbin for a total of more than ten years, writing books, and was known as a great scholar.

古文：党禁解，五府并辟，司空袁逢举有道，不应。
现代文：党禁解除之后，五府都征召他，司空袁逢以有道推举他，不应。
English: After the party ban was lifted, all five prefectures conscripted him. Siku Yuanfeng should not have chosen him.

古文：及逢卒，爽制服三年，当世往往化以为俗。
现代文：到袁逢逝世，荀爽为之服丧三年。当时人往往效法他，成为风俗。
English: When Yuan Feng died, it took three years to mourn for him. At that time, people often imitated him and it became a custom.

古文：时人多不行妻服，虽在亲忧犹有吊问丧疾者，又私谥其君父及诸名士，爽皆引据大义，正之经典，虽不悉变，亦颇有改。
现代文：当时的人，妻子死了，多不行服，虽然父母死了，也还有吊丧问疾的。又私自为其君父及一些名士死后立名。荀爽都引经据典论其正误，虽说不能都依他的改变，也有一些改了的。
English: At that time, most people could not accept that their wives had died. Although their parents had died, there were also those who mourned and asked for illness. They also privately established their names after the death of their fathers and some famous people. They all quoted scriptures to discuss their rights and wrongs. Although they could not all change according to him, there were also some who changed.

古文：后公车征为大将军何进从事中郎。
现代文：后公车征召为大将军何进从事中郎。
English: After the bus, he was conscripted into the middle ranks as the general He Jin.

古文：进恐其不至，迎荐为侍中，及进败而诏命中绝。
现代文：何进怕他不去，迎荐为侍中，到何进败，诏命中断了。
English: No matter how far he advanced, he would not go. He was recommended as a chamberlain. No matter how far he advanced or failed, the edict was suspended.

古文：献帝即位，董卓辅政，复征之。
现代文：献帝即位，董卓辅政，又征召他。
English: When Emperor Xian ascended to the throne, Dong Zhuo assisted the government, and then conscripted him.

古文：爽欲遁命，吏持之急，不得去，因复就拜平原相。
现代文：荀爽想逃避征命，吏催迫得紧，不得不去，因此就拜平原相。
English: Hao Shuang wanted to escape the death penalty, but the officials pressed him so hard that he had to go, so he bowed to the plain.

古文：行至宛陵，复追为光禄勋。
现代文：走到宛陵，又追为光禄勋。
English: When he went to Wanling, he was also pursued by Guang Rukun.

古文：视事三日，进拜司空。
现代文：视事三天，进升司空。
English: Three days after the incident, the flight was grounded.

古文：爽自被征命及登台司，九十五日。
现代文：荀爽自被征召的命令到登台司，才九十五日。
English: It has only been ninety-five days since Hao Shuang was ordered to report to the stationmaster.

古文：因从迁都长安。
现代文：因跟着迁都长安。
English: Due to the subsequent relocation of the capital to Chang'an.

古文：爽见董卓忍暴滋甚，必危社稷，其所辟举皆取才略之士，将共图之，亦与司徒王允及卓长史何颙等为内谋。会病薨，年六十三。
现代文：荀爽见董卓十分残暴，一定要倾覆国家，他所推举都是一些有智谋的人才，准备与他们一起图谋大事。也与司徒王允及董卓长史何等为内谋，因病逝世，年六十三。
English: Hao Shuang saw that Dong Zhuo was very cruel and was determined to overthrow the country. He selected a number of clever people and prepared to conspire with them. He also conspired with Wang Yun and Dong Zhuo Changshi. He died of illness at the age of sixty-three.

古文：著《礼》、《易传》、《诗传》、《尚书正经》、《春秋条例》，又集汉事成败可为鉴戒者，谓之《汉语》。又作《公羊问》及《辩谶》，并它所论叙，题为《新书》。
现代文：荀爽著《礼》、《易传》、《诗传》、《尚书正经》、《春秋条例》；又收集汉朝历史其成败可为鉴戒的，叫做《汉语》；又作《公羊问》及《辩谶》，加上其他论叙，题为《新书》。
English: He also collected the history of the Han Dynasty, the successes and failures of which can be used as a warning, called "Chinese Language"; he also wrote "Question of the Ram" and "Argumentation," plus other essays, entitled "New Book."

古文：凡百馀篇，今多所亡缺。
现代文：共百余篇，现在好多都损缺不全了。
English: A total of more than a hundred articles, many of which are now incomplete.

古文：兄子悦、彧并知名。
现代文：兄子荀悦、荀都有名。
English: His elder brothers, Ha Yue and Hao, are also famous.

古文：彧自有传。
现代文：荀另有传。
English: There is another legend about the dragonfly.

古文：论曰：荀爽、郑玄、申屠蟠俱以儒行为处士，累征并谢病不诣。
现代文：史官评论说：荀爽、郑玄、申屠蟠都因儒行，居家为处士。朝廷累次征召，都称病不去。
English: The historian commented, "Hao Shuang, Zheng Xuan, and Shen Tuoqi were all Confucianism practitioners, and they worked as clerks at home. They were repeatedly called up by the imperial court, but they all said they were too sick to go.

古文：及董卓当朝，复备礼召之。
现代文：到董卓当权，再次用礼征召他们。
English: When Dong Zhuo came to power, he summoned them again with courtesy.

古文：蟠、玄竟不屈以全其高。
现代文：申屠蟠、郑玄终于不屈保全了他们高风亮节。
English: Shen Tuoqi and Zheng Xuan finally preserved their high winds and bright festival.

古文：爽已黄发矣，独至焉，未十旬而取卿相。
现代文：荀爽其时头发已经黄了，一个人去了，不到十天做了卿相。
English: At that time, Gao Shuang's hair had already turned yellow. He went alone and became a high-ranking official in less than ten days.

古文：不然，何为违贞吉而履虎尾焉。观其逊言迁都之议，以救杨、黄之祸。
现代文：有人怀疑他如此进退，是不对的。我探讨荀爽的思想，认为出而用世，退而家居隐处这是君子为人的大节。天下太平，固然应该弘扬大道以实现自己的怀抱，世乱，也应该投身问世以匡救时弊，荀爽的急急自励，岂不是君子所应有的大节吗？
English: Some people doubt that he is so advanced and backward, which is not right. I explore the thought of the gentleman, and think that it is the gentleman's great festival to go out and use the world, and retreat to the home. The world is peaceful, of course, we should promote the road to achieve our own embrace, the world is in turmoil, and we should devote ourselves to the world to save the time and evil, and the gentleman's urgent self-improvement, isn't it the gentleman's great festival?

古文：及后潜图董氏，几振国命，所谓 大直若屈 ，道故逶迤也。
现代文：不然，为什么要舍平安的坦途不走而去踩虎尾巴呢？看他不谈迁都，救杨彪、黄琬之祸，以及后来潜图董卓，国命几乎得到振兴。所谓 大直若屈 ，道路本来是曲折的。
English: Otherwise, why not take the smooth path of peace and walk on the tiger's tail? Look at him not talking about moving the capital, saving Yang Biao, the scourge of Huangpi, and later the hidden picture of Dong Zhuo, the national life has almost been revitalized. The so-called straight and narrow, the road was originally tortuous.

古文：悦字仲豫，俭之子也。
现代文：◆荀悦传，荀悦字仲豫，荀俭的儿子。
English: ◆ He is the son of Zou Yue Chuan, Zou Yue Zi Zhong Yu and Zou Jian.

古文：俭早卒。
现代文：荀俭死得早。
English: Hao Jian died early.

古文：悦年十二，能说《春秋》。
现代文：荀悦十二岁时，能够解说《春秋》。
English: When Mu Yue was twelve years old, she was able to interpret "Spring and Autumn."

古文：家贫无书，每之人间，所见篇牍，一览多能诵记。
现代文：家穷没有书籍，往往去别人家，看到篇章书牍，过目大多能够背诵。
English: The poor have no books at home, so they often go to other people's homes. When they see a chapter of a book, most of them can recite it.

古文：性沉静，美姿容，尤好著述。
现代文：性情沉着好静，长相漂亮，特别爱好著书立说。
English: Her temperament is calm and quiet, her looks are beautiful, and she is particularly fond of writing.

古文：灵帝时阉官用权，士多退身穷处，悦乃托疾隐居，时人莫之识，唯从弟彧特称敬焉。
现代文：灵帝时，宦官用权，读书人一般不出来做官，退身穷处，荀悦于是托病隐居，当时人不认识他是怎样的一个人，只有堂弟荀特别称赞他，敬重他。
English: At the time of Lingdi, eunuchs used their power, and readers generally did not come out to work as officials. They retreated to poverty, and Miao Yue took sick leave to live in seclusion. At that time, people did not know what kind of person he was. Only his cousin Miao especially praised him and respected him.

古文：初辟镇东将军曹操府，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：开始被推举为镇东将军曹操府，升黄门侍郎。
English: He was first promoted to Zhendong General Cao Caofu, and then to Huangmen Chamberlain.

古文：献帝颇好文学，悦与彧及少府孔融侍讲禁中，旦夕谈论。
现代文：献帝爱好文学，荀悦与荀及少府孔融侍讲宫中，早晚谈论。
English: Emperor Xian loved literature, and Ma Yue and Zou and Shoufu Kong Rong attended the palace and talked about it morning and night.

古文：累迁秘书监、侍中。
现代文：累升秘书监、侍中。
English: He rose through the ranks to become a secretary supervisor and a chamberlain.

古文：时，政移曹氏，天子恭己而已。
现代文：当时政权移于曹操手中，天子不问政治，大权旁落，不过空在其位罢了。
English: At that time, the political power was transferred to Cao Cao, the heavenly son did not care about politics, and the great power fell by the wayside, but it was empty in its place.

古文：悦志在献替，而谋无所用，乃作《申鉴》五篇。
现代文：荀悦有志诤言进谏，但所谋皇上不用，于是作《申鉴》五篇。
English: Zou Yue had the ambition to enter the imperial court, but the emperor did not need it, so he wrote five "Recommendations."

古文：其所论辩，通见政体，既成而奏之。
现代文：所议论通达为政的体要。书写成之后，上奏天子。
English: What has been discussed is the essentials of political communication. After the book is written, it will be read aloud.

古文：其大略曰：夫道之本，仁义而已矣。
现代文：内容大略说：大道的根本，仁义二字可以概括。
English: The outline of the content is as follows: The foundation of the boulevard can be summed up by the two words "benevolence and righteousness."

古文：五典以经之，群籍以纬之，咏之歌之，弦之舞之，前监既明，后复申之。
现代文：五典以它为经，群书以它为纬，吟咏歌诵，谱之音乐，形之舞蹈，前鉴既明，后再申述。
English: The five classics take it as the scripture, the group of books take it as the latitude, the chanting and singing, the music of the score, the dance of the form, the forerunner is clear, and then the appeal.

古文：故古之圣王，其于仁义也，申重而已。
现代文：所以古时候先圣先王，对于仁义，总是一讲再讲以至三讲的。
English: That is why, in ancient times, the first kings always spoke about benevolence and righteousness one after another, up to three times.

古文：致政之术，先屏四患，乃崇五政。
现代文：为政之术，首要除去四患，然后才注重五政。
English: In the art of politics, the first thing to do is to eliminate the four evils, and then focus on the five politics.

古文：一曰伪，二曰私，三曰放，四曰奢。
现代文：所谓四患：一叫伪，二叫私，三叫放，四叫奢。
English: The so-called four diseases: one is called pseudo, two is called I, three is called release, and four is called luxury.

古文：伪乱俗，私坏法，放越轨，奢败制。
现代文：伪诈就乱风俗，自私就坏败法纪，放荡就没有轨则，奢侈就不能制约。
English: Fraud leads to disorderly customs, selfishness leads to bad laws and regulations, debauchery has no rules, and extravagance cannot be controlled.

古文：四者不除，则政末由行矣。
现代文：这四者不除去，国家的政治就无办法推行了。
English: If these four are not removed, the country's politics will not be able to move forward.

古文：夫俗乱则道荒，虽天地不得保其性矣。法坏则世倾，虽人主不得守其度矣。轨越则礼亡，虽圣人不得全其道矣。制败则欲肆，虽四表不得充其求矣。
现代文：风俗乱了，大道就不得而行，虽然是天地也不能保其本性；国家的法纪坏败，社会就不得安宁，虽然是国君也不能坚持他的准则了；胡作非为，人们的行为失去约束，虽然是圣人也不能保全他的操守了；人欲横流，没有控制，虽然是四表之大，也不能满足他的要求了。
English: When customs are disordered, the road cannot be traveled; when heaven and earth cannot preserve their nature; when the country's laws and regulations are corrupt, society cannot be tranquil; when the ruler cannot uphold his standards; when people's behavior is unrestrained, people's conduct cannot be preserved even if they are saints; when people's desires are rampant and uncontrolled, people's demands cannot be met even if they are the greatest.

古文：是谓四患。
现代文：这是叫做四患。
English: This is called the four plagues.

古文：兴农桑以养其生，审好恶以正其俗，宣文教以章其化，立武备以秉其威，明赏罚以统其法。
现代文：兴农桑使老百姓的生活过得好；分别好坏使风俗纯美；宣扬文化教育阐明德治敷洽；建立军事保持威慑力量；赏罚严明，统一法纪。
English: The rejuvenation of agriculture and rural areas has enabled the people to live a better life; the separation of good and bad has made customs pure and beautiful; the promotion of culture and education has clarified the principles of morality; the establishment of the military has maintained deterrence; the rewards and punishments are strict, and the law and discipline have been unified.

古文：是谓五政。
现代文：这是叫做五政。
English: This is called the Five Principles.

古文：人不畏死，不可惧以罪。人不乐生，不可劝以善。
现代文：有的人不怕死，不可以犯罪来恐吓他；为人不以生为乐，不可劝他为善。
English: Some people are not afraid of death, you can't threaten them with crime. If you don't enjoy life, you can't persuade them to be good.

古文：虽使契布五教，皋陶作士，政不行焉。
现代文：对这些人，虽然使契实行君臣、父子、兄弟、夫妇、朋友五种教育，使皋陶为吏，政治也不能推行。
English: For these people, although the envoys carry out five kinds of education, including monarchs and ministers, fathers and sons, brothers, husbands and wives, and friends, they cannot carry out politics.

古文：故在上者先丰人财以定其志，帝耕籍田，后桑蚕宫，国无游人，野无荒业，财不贾用，力不妄加，以周人事。
现代文：所以做君主的首先要使财用丰足，安定他们的情绪。古时候帝王亲耕田，后妃亲事蚕桑，国内无游手好闲的人，四野没有荒弃的产业，财用自给，不随便使用劳力，以济人事。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, the first thing to do is to make ample use of wealth and stabilize their emotions. In ancient times, emperors cultivated fields, empresses were familiar with silkworms, there were no idlers in the country, there were no abandoned industries in the four fields, and they were self-sufficient in financial use and did not use labor arbitrarily to save personnel.

古文：是谓养生。
现代文：这是叫做养生。
English: It's called a regimen.

古文：君子之所以动天地，应神明，正万物而成王化者，必乎真定而已。
现代文：君子所以能感动天地，验应神明，正万物而成就王者的教化，行事一定真切而符合实际。
English: That is why a gentleman can move heaven and earth, test the gods, and rectify all things to achieve the enlightenment of the king. His actions must be genuine and in line with reality.

古文：故在上者审定好丑焉。
现代文：所以为君主的可借以审定好坏。
English: Therefore, it can be used by the monarch to judge good and bad.

古文：善恶要乎功罪，毁誉效于准验。
现代文：善恶要见于功罪，毁誉要经过考验期于准确。
English: Good and evil are to be seen in merits and demerits, and dishonor is to go through a trial period to be accurate.

古文：听言责事，举名察实，无惑诈伤，以荡众心。
现代文：听人家谈话，要以事实来核对，据名察实，不要被欺诈虚伪所迷惑，以致摇动人心。
English: Listen to other people's conversation, check with the facts, check the facts according to the name, and don't be confused by fraud and hypocrisy, so as to shake people's hearts.

古文：故事无不核，物无不切，善无不显，恶无不章，俗无奸怪，民无淫风。
现代文：所以事实没有不确实的，事物没有不贴切的，善行没有不显明的，罪恶没有不外露的。这样，风俗淳朴，老百姓没有作乱之风。
English: Therefore, there is no fact that is not accurate, no thing that is not appropriate, no good deed that is not obvious, and no sin that is not exposed. In this way, the customs are simple, and the people do not have the style of chaos.

古文：百姓上下睹利害之存乎己也，故肃恭其心，慎修其行，内不回惑，外无异望，则民志平矣。是谓正俗。
现代文：百姓上下看到了利害关系自己，所以思想上战战兢兢，行为上谨慎检点，内心不迷惑，对外界也不存非分的想法，这样，百姓的心平正了，这叫正俗。
English: People at all levels saw their own interests at stake, so they trembled in their thoughts, carefully checked their behavior, did not confuse their hearts, and did not have any negative thoughts to the outside world. In this way, the people's hearts were calm, which is called normal.

古文：君子以情用，小人以刑用。荣辱者，赏罚之精华也。
现代文：对君子用情，小人用刑。荣光羞辱是赏罚的标准。
English: Use affection for a gentleman, use punishment for a villain. Glory and humiliation are the standard of reward and punishment.

古文：故礼教荣辱，以加君子，化其情也。桎梏鞭扑，以加小人，化其刑也。
现代文：所以礼教荣辱对待君子，为的是感化他们的情志；桎梏鞭扑对待小人，为的是以刑使他们改邪归正。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to treat the gentlemen with honor and disgrace in order to influence their sentiments; and to treat the villains with whips and lashes in order to reform them with punishment.

古文：君子不犯辱，况于刑乎。
现代文：君子耻于受辱，何况犯刑呢！
English: A gentleman is ashamed to be humiliated, let alone to be punished!

古文：小人不忌刑，况于辱乎。
现代文：小人不畏刑，何况是受辱呢！
English: Small people do not fear punishment, let alone humiliation!

古文：若教化之废，推中人而坠于小人之域。教化之行，引中人而纳于君子之涂。是谓章化。
现代文：如果废弃德化教育，是把中等人推入小人一伙；推行德化教育，是把中等人引入君子的行列，这叫做明化。
English: If moral education is abandoned, it will push the middle-class people into a group of villains; if moral education is promoted, it will bring the middle-class people into the ranks of gentlemen. This is called "clarification."

古文：小人之情，缓则骄，骄则恣，恣则怨，怨则叛，危则谋乱，安则思欲，非威强无以惩之。
现代文：小人的本性，对他放松一些，就骄傲起来，骄傲就要妄为，妄为就要生怨，就要反叛；遇到危难，就谋作乱，安逸就胡思乱想。没有强制的手段，就不能惩罚他们。
English: If the nature of the villain is relaxed towards him, he will become proud; if he is proud, he will act rashly; if he acts rashly, he will create resentment and rebel; if he is in danger, he will plot chaos; if he is at ease, he will think out of the box. Without coercive means, it is impossible to punish them.

古文：故在上者，必有武备，以戒不虞，以遏寇虐。
现代文：所以作君主的一定要掌握军事，以防发生意外，制止暴虐。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, he must master the military to prevent accidents and stop tyranny.

古文：安居则寄之内政，有事则用之军旅。
现代文：安居时寄军事于内政之中，一旦有事动用武力。
English: When they live in peace, they send in the military in the midst of domestic affairs, and in the event of an emergency, they use force.

古文：是谓秉威。
现代文：这叫秉威。
English: This is called upholding one's dignity.

古文：赏罚，政之柄也。
现代文：赏与罚，是为政的手段。
English: Reward and punishment are political means.

古文：明赏必罚，审信慎令，赏以劝善，罚以惩恶。
现代文：赏要明，罚要必，说了算数。不要轻听偏信，不要朝令夕更，要做到审慎二字。赏是为了奖善，罚是为了惩恶。
English: Reward should be clear, punishment should be necessary, said the arithmetic. Don't listen to prejudice, don't order more in the morning and evening, and be prudent. Reward is to reward good, punishment is to punish evil.

古文：人主不妄赏，非徒爱其财也，赏妄行则善不劝矣。
现代文：人主不随便行赏，不仅仅是为了爱惜财物，因为随便地行赏，不能起到劝人为善的作用。
English: The Lord does not reward people arbitrarily, not only for the sake of valuing wealth, but because rewarding people arbitrarily cannot play the role of persuading people to do good.

古文：不妄罚，非矜其人也，罚妄行则恶不惩矣。
现代文：不随便实行惩罚，不是为了爱人，因为随便地惩罚人，不能起到惩治坏人的作用。
English: Do not arbitrarily impose punishment, not for the sake of love, because arbitrarily punishing people cannot play a role in punishing bad people.

古文：赏不劝谓之止善，罚不惩谓之纵恶。
现代文：赏不能勉励人为善叫做止善，罚不能惩治坏人叫做纵恶。
English: Rewarding those who cannot encourage others to be good is called stopping goodness, and punishing those who cannot punish evildoers is called indulging in evil.

古文：在上者能不止下为善，不纵下为恶，则国法立矣。是谓统法。
现代文：做君主的能够做到不阻止在下的人为善，不放纵在下的人为恶，国家的法纪就树立起来了，这叫统法。
English: When a monarch is able not to prevent the people below from doing good and not to indulge the people below in doing evil, the country's legal discipline will be established. This is called unification of laws.

古文：四患既蠲，五政又立，行之以诚，守之以固，简而不怠，疏而不失，无为为之，使自施之，无事事之，使自交之。
现代文：四患已经除掉，五政又建立起来，还要真抓实干，坚持不懈，简要而不怠慢，疏略而无所失，无为而治，任其自然，无事为事，德自归之。
English: The four evils have been eliminated, and the five policies have been re-established. It is also necessary to work hard, persevere, be concise but not negligent, be careless but not negligent, do nothing but govern, let nature take its course, do nothing, and return to virtue.

古文：不肃而成，不严而化，垂拱揖让，而海内平矣。
现代文：不肃而自然成，不严而自然化，君主垂衣拱手，天下太平无事。
English: Not solemn but natural, not strict but naturalized, the monarch hangs up his robe, the world is peaceful.

古文：是谓为政之方。
现代文：这叫为政的方略。
English: It's called politics.

古文：又言：尚主之制非古。
现代文：又说：娶公主为妻的制度不是古已有之的。
English: He also said: "The system of marrying a princess is not an ancient one.

古文：厘降二女，陶唐之典。
现代文：下嫁二女，这是唐尧的制度。
English: Marrying off two daughters, this is Tang Xuan's system.

古文：归妹元吉，帝乙之训。王姬归齐，宗周之礼。
现代文：嫁妹大吉，这是商代君主帝乙的教诲，王姬归齐，这是周代的礼仪。
English: Daichi, the sister-in-law, this is the teaching of Emperor B, the monarch of the Shang Dynasty, and Wang Ji, the sister-in-law, this is the etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：以阴乘阳违天，以妇陵夫违人。
现代文：把阴胜阳，违反了自然规律，把妇女凌驾在丈夫之上，这是违反了人伦的关系。
English: To put yin before yang is to violate the laws of nature, and to place women above their husbands is to violate human relations.

古文：违天不祥，违人不义。
现代文：违反自然规律不吉祥，违反人伦关系不义。
English: Violation of the laws of nature is ominous, violation of the laws of man is unjust.

古文：又古者天子诸侯有事，必告于庙。
现代文：又古时候天子诸侯有事，一定要先告于庙。
English: In ancient times, if the prince of a province had a problem, he must first report it to the temple.

古文：庙有二史，左史记言，右史书事。
现代文：朝廷里设有史官二人，左史记言，右史记事。
English: There are two historians in the imperial court, the left historian and the right historian.

古文：事为《春秋》，言为《尚书》。
现代文：事载《春秋》，言载《尚书》。
English: The article was published in "Spring and Autumn" and the speech was published in "Shangshu."

古文：君举必记，善恶成败，无不存焉。
现代文：君主的一举一动，一定要记录，善恶成败，都保存无遗。
English: The monarch's every move must be recorded, good and evil, success and failure, all preserved.

古文：下及士庶，苟有茂异，咸在载籍。
现代文：以至士人百姓，如有卓异的事实，都载入书籍。
English: Even ordinary people, if there are extraordinary facts, are recorded in books.

古文：或欲显而不得，或欲隐而名章。得失一朝，而荣辱千载。
现代文：有人想显达而不能得到，有人想隐逸而名气反而远扬，得失一朝，或荣或辱垂之千载。
English: Some people want to be famous, but can't get it. Others want to be obscure, but their fame spreads far and wide. One day's gain or loss, a thousand years of honor or disgrace.

古文：善人劝焉，淫人惧焉。
现代文：好人受到奖励，罪人因而恐惧。
English: The good are rewarded and the guilty are feared.

古文：宜于今者备置史官，掌其典文，纪其行事。
现代文：适宜于今天的一切都由史官记录，保管典章文艺，记录其行事。
English: Everything that is appropriate for today is recorded by the historian, the custodian of literature and art, and the record of his actions.

古文：每于岁尽，举之尚书。
现代文：一年终了，报告尚书。
English: At the end of the year, the report is still being written.

古文：以助赏罚，以弘法教。
现代文：作为赏罚的根据，以弘扬教化。
English: As the basis of reward and punishment, it is necessary to promote enlightenment.

古文：帝览而善之。
现代文：帝看了认为很好。
English: The emperor praised the performance after watching it.

古文：帝好典籍，常以班固《汉书》文繁难省，乃令悦依《左氏传》体以为《汉纪》三十篇，诏尚书给笔札。
现代文：帝好读书籍，曾经认为班固《汉书》篇幅太繁，不好看，于是命令荀悦依《左氏传》体裁作《汉纪》三十篇，令尚书给悦笔札。
English: The emperor was fond of reading books, and once thought that Ban Gu's "Hanshu" was too voluminous and unsightly, so he ordered Zou Yue to write 30 "Hanji" in the style of "The Biography of Zuo," and ordered Shang Shu to give Yue a writing pad.

古文：辞约事详，论辨多美。
现代文：荀悦所作《汉纪》辞句简要，事实写得详细，议论精美。
English: The words and sentences of the "Han Dynasty" made by Mu Yue are brief, the facts are written in detail, and the discussion is exquisite.

古文：其序之曰：昔在上圣，惟建皇极，经纬天地，观象立法，乃作书契，以通宇宙，扬于王庭，厥用大焉。
现代文：《汉纪》的序言说 ：从前，圣人创建帝王治国的准则，经纬天地，观察自然以立法，于是创造文字，以通宇宙，传播于王庭，用处大得很啊。
English: The preface of the "Hanji" says: Once upon a time, sages created the rules for the rule of the emperor, the warp and woof of heaven and earth, observed nature to legislate, and then created words to pass through the universe and spread to the royal court. It is very useful.

古文：先王光演大业，肆于时夏。
现代文：先王为了发扬大业，求美德之士而任用之，故陈于是夏。
English: In order to carry forward the great cause, the previous king appointed him to be a man of virtue, so Chen became Xia.

古文：亦惟厥后，永世作典。
现代文：也是想后世永远作为典则。
English: It is also intended to serve as a model for future generations.

古文：夫立典有五志焉：一曰达道义，二曰章法式，三曰通古今，四日著功勋，五曰表贤能。
现代文：建立典章制度，有五志：一叫达道义，二叫章法式，三叫通古今，四叫著功勋，五叫表贤能。
English: The establishment of the award system has five aspirations: one is to achieve morality, the second is to award the French style, the third is to connect the ancient and the modern, the fourth is to award merit, and the fifth is to honor merit.

古文：于是天人之际，事物之宜，粲然显著，罔不备矣。
现代文：这样，天人的关系，事物的权衡，明明白白，都包括其中了。
English: In this way, the relationship between heaven and man, the weighing of things, are clearly included.

古文：世济其轨，不陨其业。
现代文：世世代代守了这个典范，大业就不会陨坠了。
English: If this model is upheld from generation to generation, the great cause will not collapse.

古文：损益盈虚，与时消息。臧否不同，其揆一也。
现代文：增加或减少，保持盈虚平衡，要与时代相消长，好坏不同，而量好坏的尺度，只能是一个。
English: Increase or decrease, maintain the balance of surplus and deficit, it is necessary to keep up with the times, good and bad are different, and the measure of good and bad can only be one.

古文：汉四百有六载，拨乱反正，统武兴文，永惟祖宗之洪业，思光启乎万嗣。
现代文：汉朝四百零六载，拨乱反正，继武兴文，永远想到祖宗的洪业，想到万世发扬光大。
English: The Han Dynasty has lasted for four hundred and six years. After Wu Xingwen, we should always think of our ancestors' Hongye, and carry forward the glory forever.

古文：圣上穆然，惟文之恤，瞻前顾后，是绍是继，阐崇大猷，命立国典。
现代文：皇上默然深思，雅爱文事，瞻前顾后，继往开来，阐明远大的宏图，命立国家大典。
English: The emperor thought deeply in silence, loved literature, looked ahead, looked back, went forward, clarified the ambitious plan, and ordered the national grand ceremony.

古文：于是缀叙旧书，以述《汉纪》。
现代文：于是搜罗整理旧书，写成《汉纪》。
English: As a result, he collected and organized old books and wrote "The Han Dynasty."

古文：中兴以前，明主贤臣得失之轨，亦足以观矣。
现代文：中兴以前，明主贤臣得失的轨迹，都可一目了然。 
English: Prior to ZTE, the trajectory of the gains and losses of Ming masters and wise men could be seen at a glance.

古文：又著《崇德》、《正论》及诸论数十篇。
现代文：又著《崇德》、《正论》及诸论数十篇。
English: He is also the author of "Zhongde" and "Zhengyuan" as well as dozens of other essays.

古文：年六十二，建安十四年卒。
现代文：年六十二，建安十四年逝世。
English: He died at the age of sixty-two in the fourteenth year of Jianan.

古文：韩韶字仲黄，颍川舞阳人也。
现代文：◆韩韶传，韩韶字仲黄，颍川郡舞阳县人。
English: ◆Han Yu Chuan, Han Yu Zi Zhonghuang, a native of Wuyang County, Beichuan County.

古文：少仕郡，辟司徒府。
现代文：年轻时在郡里做官，征召司徒府。
English: When he was young, he worked as an official in the county and was conscripted to Stowe.

古文：时，太山贼公孙举伪号历年，守、令不能破散，多为坐法。
现代文：这时太山贼公孙举称伪号有几年了，守令无能力破灭或驱散他，经常犯法。
English: At this time, the mountain thief Gongsun has been using a fake name for several years. The guards are unable to break or disperse him, and he often breaks the law.

古文：尚书选三府掾能理剧者，乃以韶为赢长。
现代文：尚书省挑选三府掾中能理治烦乱的人，来解决这个问题。于是任命韩韶为赢县长。
English: In order to solve this problem, the Ministry of Education and Culture selected people who could manage the turmoil in the three prefectures to solve the problem. Therefore, Han Wei was appointed as the head of Ying County.

古文：贼闻其贤，相戒不入赢境。
现代文：太山贼听说韩韶是个好官，就彼此约束不入赢县境内。
English: The mountain bandits heard that Han Wei was a good official, so they restrained each other from entering the territory of Win County.

古文：余县多被寇盗，废耕桑，其流入县界求索衣粮者甚众。
现代文：但是其他各县就更多地遭到他们的侵扰，闹得男的不能耕田，女的不能养蚕桑，因而逃亡到赢县讨乞的人很多。
English: However, other counties were more affected by their intrusion, causing men to be unable to farm and women to be unable to raise silkworms. As a result, many people fled to Win County to beg.

古文：韶愍其饑困，乃开仓赈之，所禀赡万馀户。
现代文：韩韶可怜他们饥不得食，于是开仓救济他们，分得粮食的有一万多户人家。
English: Han Zheng felt sorry for them because they were too hungry to eat, so he opened a warehouse to help them. More than 10,000 households received food.

古文：主者争谓不可。
现代文：县里的主管都争着说不行。
English: The supervisors in the county are all arguing that it is not possible.

古文：韶曰 长活沟壑之人，而以此伏罪，含笑入地矣 太守素知韶名德，竟无所坐。
现代文：韩韶说 ：救活这些将死于沟壑的人，如果因此获罪，死了也是高兴的。 太守平日知道韩韶的品德，终于没有处理他。
English: Han Xuan said, "I'm glad to have saved the lives of these people who were going to die in the ravine, and if I'm punished for it, I'm also glad to be dead." The Great Guardian knew Han Xuan's character, and finally didn't deal with him.

古文：以病卒官。
现代文：因病死在任上。
English: He died in office due to illness.

古文：同郡李膺、陈寔、杜密、荀淑等为立碑颂焉。
现代文：同郡李膺、陈萛、杜密、荀淑为他立碑赞美他。
English: In the same county, Li Ying, Chen Ying, Du Mi, and Yan Shu set up a monument to praise him.

古文：子融，字无长。
现代文：儿子韩融字元长。
English: His son, Han Rong Zi Yuan, became the leader.

古文：少能辩理而不为章句学。声名甚盛，五府并辟。
现代文：年轻时能论辩名理不作词章的学问，名气大，五府都征召他。
English: When he was young, he was famous for his ability to discuss arguments and theories without writing lyrics. He was called up by five prefectures.

古文：献帝初，至太仆。
现代文：献帝初年，官至太仆。
English: In the first year of the emperor's enthronement, he rose to the rank of eunuch.

古文：年七十卒。
现代文：年七十逝世。
English: He died at the age of 70.

古文：同郡陈寔，年不及皓，皓引与为友。
现代文：◆钟皓传，钟皓字季明，颍川郡长社县人。
English: ◆Zhong Yao Chuan, Zhong Yao Zi Ji Ming, a native of Chosha County, Beichuan County.

古文：皓为郡功曹，会辟司徒府，临辞，太守问 谁可代卿者 皓曰 明府欲必得其人，西门亭长陈寔可 寔闻之，曰 钟君似不察人，不知何独识我 皓顷之自劾去。
现代文：是郡里的大姓，世世代代精通法律。钟皓年轻时以敦厚笃实为人称道，公府连续征召，因为二兄没有出仕做官，他就隐居密山，讲作诗格律教授学生一千多人。同郡陈萛，比钟皓年纪小，钟皓与他结为朋友。钟皓任郡功曹，遇上征召司徒府，临走时，太守问他： 哪一个可以代替您？ 钟皓说 ：太守如果一定要得适当的人，西门亭长陈萛可以。 陈萛听说了，说 ：钟君似乎没有认真考察人，不知为什么独看起了我？ 钟皓没过多久自请辞职。
English: He was a great family name in the county and was well versed in the law for generations. When Zhong Xi was young, he was praised for his bravery and sincerity. He was continuously drafted by the government. Because his second brother did not serve as an official, he lived in seclusion in Mishan and taught more than a thousand students as a professor of poetic law. He was friends with Chen Xi, who was younger than Zhong Xi. Zhong Xi served as the county's meritorious serviceman. When he was called to Szufu, when he was about to leave, the grand marshal asked him: Which one can replace you? Zhong Xi said: If the grand marshal must

古文：前后九辟公府，征为廷尉正、博士、林虑长，皆不就。
现代文：前后九次被公府征召，征为廷尉正、博士、林虑长，都不就。
English: He was called up by the government nine times in succession, and it was not enough for him to be called up as a court lieutenant, doctor, and Lin Qianchang.

古文：时，皓及荀淑并为士大夫所归慕。
现代文：当时钟皓与荀淑都为士大夫所向往崇拜的人。
English: At that time, Zhong Kui and Mi Shu were both people whom the scholar-official yearned to worship.

古文：李膺常叹曰 荀君清识难尚，钟君至德可师 
现代文：李膺曾经叹息说 ：荀君清识不易同他比量，钟君至德可为师法。 
English: Li Yao once said with a sigh: "It is not easy to match Zou Jun's clarity with him. Zhong Jun's virtue is the best teacher."

古文：皓兄子瑾母，膺之姑也。
现代文：钟皓的侄子钟瑾的母亲是李膺的姑姑。
English: Jonghyun's nephew Jonghyun's mother is Rihyun's aunt.

古文：瑾好学慕古，有退让风，与膺同年，俱有声名。
现代文：钟瑾好学慕古道，谦虚退让，与李膺同年，都有名气。
English: Zhongyao is good at learning the ancient way, modestly conceding, and the same year as Li Yao, both are famous.

古文：膺祖太尉脩，常言 瑾似我家性，邦有道不废，邦无道免于刑戮 复以膺妹妻之。
现代文：李膺的祖父太尉李修曾说 ：钟瑾像我家人的气质，国家有道能用其才，国家无道可以免于刑戮。 又把李膺的妹妹嫁给了他。
English: Li Xi's grandfather, Second Lieutenant Li Xiu, once said: "Zhong Xi is like my family's temperament, the country has the right to use his talent, the country has no right to be free from torture." He also married Li Xi's sister to him.

古文：瑾辟州府。未尝屈志。
现代文：钟瑾征召州府，没有俯屈过自己的意志。
English: Zhong Rong conscripted the prefectural government and did not bend to his will.

古文：膺谓之曰 孟子以为人无是非之心，非人也。
现代文：李膺对他说 ：孟子认为 人无是非之心，就不能算人 。
English: Li Yan said to him: Mencius believed that if a person does not have a heart of right and wrong, he cannot be considered a human being.

古文：弟何期不与孟轲同邪 瑾常以膺言白皓。
现代文：你为什么不与孟轲所说的相同呢？ 钟瑾曾将李膺这话告诉钟皓。
English: Why don't you do the same as what Meng Jun said? Zhong Jun had told Li Jun this to Zhong Jun.

古文：皓曰 昔国武子好昭人过，以致怨本。
现代文：钟皓说 ：从前齐国的大夫国武子喜欢揭发别人的罪过，以致招来怨恨。
English: Zhong Qi said: In the past, the doctor of Qi State, Guo Takezi, liked to expose the sins of others, causing resentment.

古文：卒保身全家，尔道为贵 其体训所安，多此类也。
现代文：最终保全身家，还是你的谦虚退让为贵。 他体认古人教训不尚教条，惟求行之适当。
English: In the end, it is your modesty and compromise that will save you. He recognized that the teachings of the ancients are not dogmatic, but they are appropriate for practice.

古文：年六十九，终于家。
现代文：多属这种情形。年六十九，死在家里。
English: He died at home at the age of 69.

古文：诸儒颂之曰 林虑懿德，非礼不处。
现代文：诸儒歌颂他： 林虑美德，非礼不处。
English: The Confucianists sang his praises: "He regards virtue, and is free from impropriety."

古文：悦此诗书，弦琴乐古。
现代文：爱好诗书，弦歌乐古。
English: Likes poetry books, stringed music.

古文：五就州招，九应台辅。
现代文：五就州台，九应台辅，迟疑王命，终岁容与。 
English: Five on the state platform, nine on the supporting platform, hesitating about the king's life, and the end of the year.

古文：逡巡王命，卒岁容与 皓孙繇，建安中为司隶校尉。
现代文：钟皓孙子钟繇，建安中任司隶校尉。
English: Zhong Xuan's grandson, Zhong Xuan, was a lieutenant of Jian'an Middle School.

古文：陈寔字仲弓，颍川许人也。
现代文：◆陈寔传，陈寔字仲弓，颍川郡许县人。
English: ◆Chen Yu Chuan, Chen Yu Zi Zhongyu, a native of Xu County, Beichuan County.

古文：出于单微。
现代文：出身卑贱。
English: He came from humble beginnings.

古文：自为儿童，虽在戏弄，为等类所归。
现代文：儿童时，虽在顽耍，也为儿童们所拥护。
English: When they were children, although they were playing hard, they were also supported by children.

古文：少作县吏，常给事厮役，后为都亭佐。
现代文：年轻时，作县吏，曾经为县里的一些奴仆干事，后来为都亭佐。
English: When he was young, he worked as a county official, and was once a servant of some officials in the county, and later he was a deputy of the prefectural governor.

古文：而有志好学，坐立诵读。
现代文：有志好学，坐立诵读不辍。
English: If you are eager to learn, you can sit, stand, chant and read without stopping.

古文：县令邓邵试与语，奇之，听受业太学。
现代文：县令邓邵试着和他谈话，认为不是一般的小吏，让他去太学学习。
English: Deng Shao, the county magistrate, tried to talk to him, thinking that he was not an ordinary petty official, and asked him to go to Taishu to study.

古文：后令复召为吏，乃避隐阳城山中。
现代文：后来的县令再召他为吏，他于是逃避隐居阳城山中。
English: Later, the county magistrate summoned him again as an official, and he escaped to live in seclusion in the mountains of Yangcheng.

古文：时有杀人者，同县杨吏以疑寔，县遂逮系，考掠无实，而后得出。
现代文：这时有杀了人的，同县杨吏怀疑是陈萛，县里逮捕了他。拷打审讯，没有事实根据，因此得以释放出来。
English: At this time, someone was killed, and Yang Li of the same county suspected that it was Chen Qi, and the county arrested him. The torture and interrogation had no factual basis, so he was released.

古文：乃为督邮，乃密托许令，礼召杨吏。
现代文：后来陈寔作了督邮，秘密托咐许令，用礼召见杨吏。
English: Later, Chen Zhe acted as postmaster, secretly entrusted the order, and summoned Yang Li with courtesy.

古文：远近闻者，咸叹服之。
现代文：远近的人听说，都惊叹敬佩他。
English: People near and far have heard of him and are amazed and admire him.

古文：家贫，复为郡西门亭长，寻转功曹。
现代文：陈萛家贫，再作郡西门亭长，不久，调为功曹。
English: Chen Yao was born in a poor family, and later became the head of Ximen County. Soon, he was promoted to gong cao.

古文：时中常侍侯览托太守高伦用吏，伦教署为文学掾。
现代文：这时，中常侍侯览托太守高伦用吏，高伦教令代理文学掾。
English: At this time, the middle-ranking attendant, Houchen, was appointed by the eunuch Gao Lun as the official, and Gao Lun was appointed as the agent of literature.

古文：寔知非其人，怀檄请见。言曰 此人不宜用，而侯常侍不可违。
现代文：陈萛知道这个人不合适，把高伦的教书之于檄，怀檄见高伦说： 这个人不宜用，然侯常侍的命令不可违抗。
English: Chen Yao knew that this man was not suitable, and he took Gao Lun's teaching to Zhai. When Huai Yao saw Gao Lun, he said, "This man is not suitable. Therefore, you must not disobey the order of the Lord Chamberlain."

古文：寔乞从外署，不足以尘明德 伦从之。
现代文：我请在外署官，这样不会有损明德。 高伦听了他的。
English: I asked for an external agent so as not to offend Mingde, and Gao Lun listened to him.

古文：于是乡论怪其非举，寔终无所言。
现代文：于是舆论责怪陈萛所举不得人，陈萛始终没有说什么。
English: As a result, the public opinion blamed Chen Qi for being an incompetent person, but Chen Qi never said anything.

古文：伦后被征为尚书，郡中士大夫送至轮氏传舍。
现代文：高伦后来被征召为尚书，郡中士大夫送到轮氏旅社。
English: Galen was later conscripted as a cadet and sent by the county sergeant-major to the Wheel Inn.

古文：伦谓众人言曰 吾前为侯常侍用吏，陈君密持教还，而于外白署。
现代文：高伦对大家说 ：我以前为侯常侍用吏，陈君秘密持教返还，在外地白署。
English: Gao Lun said to everyone, "I used to be an attendant of Hou Chang, Chen Jun secretly taught and returned, and I was stationed in the field.

古文：比闻议者以此少之，此咎由故人畏惮强御，陈君可谓善则称君，过则称己者也 寔固自引愆，闻者方叹息，由是天下服其德。
现代文：近来听说有人拿这一点责怪陈萛，这是由于我害怕强暴，陈君可以说是好的推到君身上，有过则归自己的人。 然而陈萛仍坚决引咎，听说的人才叹息陈萛的为人，从此天下都敬佩他的德行。
English: Recently, I heard that some people blamed Chen Xi for this, which was because I was afraid of violence, Chen Jun can be said to be good to push on you, and if there is, it belongs to his own people. However, Chen Xi still firmly blamed, and the people who heard about it sighed Chen Xi's person, and from then on, the whole world admired his virtue.

古文：司空黄琼辟选理剧，补闻喜长，旬月，以期丧去官。
现代文：司空黄琼征召能治烦剧的人才，以陈萛补闻喜长。不到一个月，陈萛因有一年的丧服，去官。
English: Siku Huang Qiong called for talents who could handle the troubling drama, with Chen Hao as a supplement to Wen Xichang. Less than a month later, Chen Hao left the office due to a year of mourning.

古文：复再迁除太丘长。
现代文：再升授太丘长。
English: He was promoted to Taiyaku-cho again.

古文：修德清静，百姓以安。
现代文：讲求德化，清静无为，百姓安居乐业。
English: Emphasis is placed on virtue, tranquility and inaction, and the people live and work in peace.

古文：邻县人户归附者，寔辄训导譬解，发遣各令还本司官行部。吏虑有讼者，白欲禁之。
现代文：邻县人户来归附太丘的，陈寔对他们训导解释，遣送回去。吏耽心有人告状，告诉陈寔，想把这些人拘禁起来。
English: When people from neighboring counties came to attach themselves to Taiyau, Chen Xi explained to them the discipline and sent them back. The officials were worried that someone would sue, and told Chen Xi that they wanted to detain these people.

古文：寔曰 讼以求直，禁之理将何申。
现代文：陈寔说： 告状是为了求得公正，拘禁起来，他们的道理怎能申诉？
English: Chen Yao said: The accusation is to seek justice, they are detained, how can they appeal?

古文：其勿所拘 司官闻而叹息曰 陈君所言若是，岂有怨于人乎 亦意无讼者。
现代文：不要拘禁他们。 主管领导听说，为之叹息： 陈君所说如此，难道还有人怨他吗？ 终究没有人告他的状。
English: Don't detain them. The leaders in charge heard about this and sighed: Chen Jun said this, does anyone still blame him? After all, no one has filed a complaint against him.

古文：以沛相赋敛违法，乃解印绶去，吏人追思之。
现代文：因沛相征收赋税违法，解印绶回家，吏人很怀念他。
English: Because of Pei's illegal tax collection, he went home after unsealing the stamp. The officials missed him very much.

古文：及后逮捕党人，事亦连寔。
现代文：后来逮捕党人，牵连陈萛。
English: Later, party members were arrested, implicating Chen Qi.

古文：馀人多逃避求免，寔曰 吾不就狱，众无所恃 乃请囚焉。
现代文：不少人都逃避求免，陈萛说： 我不进监狱，大家无靠。 于是自请囚禁。
English: Many people evaded and begged to be released. Chen Yao said, "If I don't go to prison, no one can help me," so he asked to be imprisoned.

古文：遇赦得出。
现代文：碰上朝廷行赦，出狱。
English: He was pardoned by the imperial court and released from prison.

古文：灵帝初，大将军窦武辟以为掾属。
现代文：灵帝初，大将军窦武征召为掾属。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Ling's reign, the general Dou Wu was conscripted into the imperial army.

古文：时中常侍张让权倾天下。让父死，归葬颍川，虽一郡毕至，而名士无往者，让甚耻之，寔乃独吊焉。
现代文：当时中常侍张让权势极大，张让的父亲死了，送归颍川埋葬，虽然全郡的人都去了，但是有名气的士大夫，一个也没有去，张让觉得自己没有面子，很是羞耻，陈萛却一个人去吊了丧。
English: At that time, Zhang Jang's father died and was sent back to Shichuan for burial. Although everyone in the county went to the funeral, none of the famous scholars and magistrates went. Zhang Jang felt that he had no face and was very ashamed. Chen Yao, however, went to the funeral alone.

古文：及后复诛党人，让感寔，故多所全宥。
现代文：后来再次诛杀党人，张让感激陈萛作吊之情，好多人得到了原宥，保全了身家性命。
English: Later, he killed a party member again. Zhang Zang was grateful to Chen Zhe for hanging him. Many people were pardoned and their lives were spared.

古文：寔在乡闾，平心率物。
现代文：陈萛在乡里，以公正作表率。
English: In the countryside, Chen Yao set an example of fairness.

古文：其有争讼，辄求判正，晓譬曲直，退无怨者。
现代文：有争讼的，求到正确的判断，说清是非曲直，回去后，都无怨言。
English: If there is a dispute, seek the correct judgment, clarify the rights and wrongs, and go back, there are no complaints.

古文：至乃叹曰 宁为刑罚所加，不为陈君所短 时、岁荒民俭，有盗夜入其室，止于梁上。
现代文：有的甚至叹息说： 宁愿受刑罚，不要被陈萛说不是。 这时是个饥荒年成，百姓困苦，有个盗窃分子进入他的室里，停在梁上。
English: Some even sighed and said, "I'd rather be punished than be told no by Chen Xi." At this time, the famine was in full swing, the people were suffering, and a thief entered his room and stopped on the beam.

古文：寔阴见，乃起自整拂，呼命子孙，正色训之曰 夫人不可不自勉。不善之人未必本恶，习以性成，遂至于此。
现代文：陈寔偷偷地看见了，于是起床整理卧具，打扫卫生，然后把子孙叫到一块，正色训诫说： 人不可不自勉，不好的人不一定本来就坏，习惯因本性而成，以至到了这个地步。 梁上君子 就是这种人啊！ 
English: Chen Yao secretly saw this, so he got up, put his bedding in order, cleaned up, and then called his children and grandchildren together. He gave them a positive admonition, saying, "One must not be too hard on oneself. People who are not good are not necessarily inherently bad. Habits are formed by nature, and have reached this point. Liang Shang Junzi is such a person!

古文：梁上君子者是矣 盗大惊，自投于地，稽颡归罪。寔徐譬之曰 视君状貌，不似恶人，宜深克己反善。
现代文：盗窃分子大惊，自己跪到地上，叩头请罪，陈萛慢慢地晓谕他说： 看你的样子，不像一个坏人，应该深刻反省，做个好人。
English: The burglar was so shocked that he knelt down on the ground and begged for forgiveness. Chen Yao slowly said to him, "Looking at you, you don't look like a bad person. You should deeply reflect and be a good person."

古文：然此当由贫困 令遗绢二匹。
现代文：然而，这次当是因为贫困才干这事的。 命令家人送绢二匹给他。
English: This time, however, poverty got in the way, and he ordered his family to give him two donkeys.

古文：自是一县无复盗窃。
现代文：自此之后，全县就再没有人盗窃了。
English: Since then, there have been no more thefts in the county.

古文：太尉杨赐、司徒陈耽，每拜公卿，群僚毕贺，赐等常叹寔大位未登，愧于先之。及党禁始解，大将军何进、司徒袁隗遣人敦寔，欲特表以不次之位。
现代文：太尉杨赐、司徒陈耽，每次新任公卿，百官都来祝贺，杨赐等常叹陈萛未登大位，自己感到惭愧，等到党禁解除，大将军何进、司徒袁隗派人劝陈萛，想特别上表破格给陈萛以大位。
English: Every time a new court noble was appointed, hundreds of officials came to congratulate him. Yang Jie and others often lamented that Chen Qi did not ascend to the throne, feeling ashamed of themselves. When the party ban was lifted, General He Jin and Sifu Yuan Qi sent people to persuade Chen Qi, and wanted to make a special appearance to give Chen Qi the throne.

古文：寔乃谢使者曰 寔久绝人事，饰巾待终而已 时，三公每缺，议者归之，累见征命，遂不起，闭门悬车，栖迟养老。
现代文：陈萛谢绝使者说 ：我久已不想人间的事了，整饰衣巾，等待死而已。 这时三公每出缺，大家都想到陈萛，多次征召，不去，关着门，车子也挂起来，游息养老。
English: Chen Jiejie said to the messenger, "I have long ceased to care about human affairs, I only dress up my clothes and wait for death. At this time, every time there is a vacancy in the Three Kings, everyone thinks of Chen Jiejie. He has been conscripted many times, he does not go, he closes the door, he hangs up his car, and he is retired.

古文：中平四年，年八十四，卒于家。
现代文：中平四年，年八十四，卒于家。
English: He died at home in 1984, four years after the end of the Heian period.

古文：何进遣使吊祭，海内赴者三万馀人，制衰麻者以百数。
现代文：何进派使者吊祭，海内去吊唁的三万多人，穿着丧服的以百计。
English: He Jin sent an envoy to hold a memorial service, and more than thirty thousand people went to the sea to offer condolences, with hundreds of people wearing mourning clothes.

古文：共刊石立碑，谥为文范先生。
现代文：共同刻石立碑，谥为 文范先生 。
English: They jointly carved a stone monument and named it after Mr. Wen Fan.

古文：有六子，纪、谌最贤。
现代文：有六个儿子，陈纪、陈谌最好。
English: There are six sons, Chen Ji and Chen Yao are the best.

古文：纪字元方，亦以至德称。
现代文：陈纪字元方，也以德行为人称道。
English: Chen Ji, also known as Yuan Fang, was also praised for his moral conduct.

古文：兄弟孝养，闺门雍和，后进之士皆推慕其风。
现代文：兄弟孝养，妇女和睦，乡里的晚辈都羡慕他的家风好。
English: Brotherly filial piety, harmony with women, the younger generation in the village are envious of his good family style.

古文：及遭党锢，发愤著书数万言，号曰《陈子》。
现代文：遭党锢，于是发愤著书数万言，叫做《陈子》。
English: He was reprimanded by the Party, so he wrote tens of thousands of words in anger, called "Chen Zi."

古文：党禁解，四府并命，无所屈就。
现代文：党禁解除，四府都争任命，他都不应。
English: The party ban has been lifted, and all four prefectures are vying for the appointment, and he should not be.

古文：遭父忧，每哀至，辄欧血绝气，虽衰服已除，而积毁消瘠，殆将灭性。
现代文：父亲逝世，哀痛至极，往往呕血绝气，虽然服丧期满，仍然悲痛过度，致使身体消瘦，仅剩下几根骨头，成了死人一般。
English: When my father passed away, I was extremely sad, I often vomited blood and lost my breath. Although the mourning period was over, I was still overwhelmed with grief, which caused my body to waste away, leaving only a few bones, and I became like a dead person.

古文：豫州刺史嘉其至行，表上尚书，图象百城，以厉风俗。
现代文：豫州刺史认为陈纪这种至行，难能可贵，上表尚书，豫州百城皆图画陈纪等形象，以劝励风俗。
English: According to the history of Yuzhou, it is difficult to value Chen Ji's performance. The above table is a book, and all the cities in Yuzhou have pictures of Chen Ji and other images to encourage customs.

古文：董卓入洛阳，乃使就家拜五官中郎将，不得已，到京师，迁侍中。
现代文：董卓进入洛阳，派使者到他家，授五官中郎将，不得已，到京师，升为侍中。
English: Dong Zhuo entered Luoyang, sent an envoy to his home, conferred five official middlemen, and, as a last resort, went to Beijing to be promoted to a chamberlain.

古文：出为平原相，往谒卓，时欲徙都长安，乃谓纪曰 三辅平敞，四面险固，土地肥美，号为陆海。
现代文：调出为平原相，去谒董卓，这时董卓想迁都长安，对陈纪说 ：三辅平敞，四面形势险要坚固，土地肥美，叫做 陆海 。
English: When he wanted to move the capital to Chang'an, he said to Chen Ji: Sanfu is spacious, the situation on all sides is almost solid, the land is fertile, and it is called the land and sea.

古文：今关东起兵，恐洛阳不可久居。
现代文：现在关东兵起作乱，恐怕洛阳不可久居。
English: Now that the Kanto soldiers are rioting, I'm afraid I won't be able to stay in Luoyang for long.

古文：长安犹有宫室，今欲西迁何如 纪曰 天下有道，守在四夷。
现代文：长安那里宫室是现成的，今想西迁长安，怎么样？ 陈纪说： 天下有道，要使四夷归服。
English: Chang'an, where the imperial palace is ready-made, now want to move west to Chang'an, how about it? Chen Ji said: There is a way under heaven to make the barbarians submit.

古文：宜修德政，以怀不附。
现代文：这就需要贤明的政治，以安抚他们。
English: It will take clever politics to placate them.

古文：迁移至尊，诚计之末者。
现代文：迁移皇上，这是最次的主意。
English: Relocating the Emperor, that was the last idea.

古文：愚以公宜事委公卿，专精外任。
现代文：我认为，您应当把事务交给公卿们去办，自己集中精力对付外面的问题。
English: I think you should leave the affairs to the nobles and concentrate on your own problems.

古文：其有违命，则威之以武。
现代文：如果有违抗命令的，就用武力处理。
English: If anyone disobeys the order, they will be dealt with by force.

古文：今关东兵起，民不堪命。
现代文：现在关东起兵，老百姓无法活命。
English: Now Kanto has raised an army, and the common people cannot survive.

古文：若谦远朝政，率师讨伐，则涂炭之民，庶几可全。
现代文：如果您谦让朝政，率师讨伐关东乱兵，那么，水深火热中的老百姓，庶几可以保全。
English: If you humbly concede to the imperial government and lead your army to fight against the mutinous soldiers in the Kanto region, then the people in desperate straits can be saved.

古文：若欲徙万乘以自安，将有累卵之危，峥嵘之险也 卓意甚忤，而敬纪名行，无所复言。
现代文：如果想迁皇帝以图自安，那好比累卵，越高就越有破灭的危险啊！ 董卓听了，非常不快意，因为敬佩陈纪的名声与德行，就再没有说什么了。
English: If you want to move the emperor in order to reassure yourself, it's like dragging an egg, the higher it is, the more it is in danger of breaking! Dong Zhuo listened, very unhappy, because he admired Chen Ji's reputation and virtue, so he didn't say anything more.

古文：时议欲以为司徒，纪见祸乱方作，不复辨严，即时之郡。
现代文：当时朝廷有人想任命陈纪为司徒，陈纪看到祸乱将起，不办行装，马上回到郡里。
English: At that time, someone in the imperial court wanted to appoint Chen Ji as a magistrate. Chen Ji saw that the disaster was about to begin, and immediately returned to the county without doing any preparations.

古文：玺书追拜太仆，又征为尚书令。
现代文：诏书追授太仆，又征召为尚书令。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taibu, and was also conscripted as Shosho Rei.

古文：建安初，袁绍为太尉，让于纪。纪不受，拜大鸿胪。
现代文：建安初，袁绍为太尉，他让给陈纪，陈纪不受，任为大鸿胪。
English: At the beginning of the construction of Jian'an, Yuan Shao was a captain, he gave it to Chen Ji, but Chen Ji did not accept it, and he was appointed as a great leader.

古文：年七十一，卒于官。
现代文：年七十一，死在任所。
English: He died in office at the age of 71.

古文：子群，为魏司空。
现代文：子陈群，为魏司空。
English: His son, Chen Qun, became Wei Siku.

古文：天下以为公惭卿，卿惭长。
现代文：天下认为公有愧于卿，卿有愧于长。
English: The world thinks that the public is not worthy of the lord, and the lord is not worthy of the chief.

古文：弟谌，字季方。与纪齐德同行，父子并著高名，时号三君。
现代文：弟陈谌，字季方，与陈纪的道德操行和父亲一样有名，当时叫 三君 。
English: Chen Qi's younger brother, named Qifang, was as famous for his moral conduct as his father. At that time, he was called Sanjun.

古文：每宰府辟召，常同时旌命，羔雁成群，当世者靡不荣之。
现代文：每次宰府征召，常同时受命，执羔执雁成群地朝见天子，当时没有不以他们为荣的。
English: Every time they were called up by the imperial court, they were often ordered at the same time to bring flocks of geese and geese to see the emperor. At that time, there was no one who was not proud of them.

古文：谌早终。论曰：汉自中世以下，阉竖擅恣，故俗遂以遁身矫洁放言为高。士有不谈此者，则芸夫牧竖已叫呼之矣。
现代文：史官评论说：汉朝自从中世以下，宦官专权，所以风俗就以隐身不仕，假装高尚，放言无制为高，一般士人如果不谈论这些，就要遭到普通人的讥笑。
English: The historian commented, "Since the Han Dynasty, from the Middle Ages onward, eunuchs had absolute power, so the custom was to conceal oneself, pretend to be noble, and speak without restraint. If ordinary scholars did not talk about these things, they would be ridiculed by ordinary people.

古文：故时政弥惛，而其风愈往。
现代文：所以时政更加昏暗，这种风气也更加厉害。
English: Therefore, the current political situation is darker, and this culture is more severe.

古文：唯陈先生进退之节，必可度也。
现代文：只有陈先生进退之节，昭然可纪。
English: Only Mr. Chen can enter and leave the festival.

古文：据于德故物不犯，安于仁故不离群，行成乎身而道训天下，故凶邪不能以权夺，王公不能以贵骄，所以声教废于上，而风俗清乎下也。
现代文：心怀大德，所以外物不能侵犯他；以仁相处，故不脱离人群；德行修成在身，教训传于天下，所以凶邪奸猾之徒，不能用他们的权势来侵夺，王公大人不能用他们的富贵来相骄傲。是以声教虽然在朝廷已经废弃了，清廉的风俗却在民间保存着。
English: He has great virtue in his heart, so foreign things cannot encroach on him; he gets along with benevolence, so he does not break away from the crowd; virtue is cultivated in his body, and the teachings are passed down to the world, so the wicked and treacherous cannot use their power to encroach, and princes cannot use their wealth to be proud of each other. Although Ison Shinto has been abandoned at the court, the clean customs are preserved among the people.

