古文：陈胡公满者，虞帝舜之后也。
现代文：陈胡公满，是虞帝舜的后代。
English: Chen Hu Gongman is a descendant of Emperor Wu.

古文：昔舜为庶人时，尧妻之二女，居于妫汭，其后因为氏姓，姓妫氏。
现代文：当初舜还是一个平民时，尧把自己的两个女儿嫁给了他，住在妫汭，他的后代就借此地名当姓氏，姓了妫氏。
English: At first, when he was still a commoner, Gong married his two daughters to him and lived in Gong. His descendants used this place as a surname and took the surname Gong.

古文：舜已崩，传禹天下，而舜子商均为封国。
现代文：舜去世后，把天下传给禹，舜的儿子商均则被封为诸侯。
English: After Yao's death, the kingdom was passed down to Yu, while Yao's son Shangjun was made a vassal.

古文：夏后之时，或失或续。
现代文：夏朝后期，舜后人的侯位时断时续。
English: In the late Xia Dynasty, the succession of empresses was intermittent.

古文：至于周武王克殷纣，乃复求舜后，得妫满，封之于陈，以奉帝舜祀，是为胡公。
现代文：周武王战胜殷纣王以后，又再次寻找舜的后人，找到妫满，把他封在陈地，以供奉舜帝的岁时祭祀，这就是胡公。
English: After King Zhou Wu defeated King Yin Zang, he once again searched for the descendants of Zang Zang, found Zang Man, and sealed him in Chen Di to offer sacrifices to Emperor Zang when he was of age. This was King Hu.

古文：胡公卒，子申公犀侯立。
现代文：胡公去世，他的儿子申公犀侯继位。
English: Prince Hu passed away, and his son Prince Shen succeeded to the throne.

古文：申公卒，弟相公皋羊立。
现代文：申公去世，他的弟弟相公皋羊继位。
English: Prince Shen died, and his younger brother, Prince Xiang, succeeded to the throne.

古文：相公卒，立申公子突，是为孝公。
现代文：相公去世，又立起申公之子突为君，就是孝公。
English: When his father-in-law passed away, Shin's son suddenly became his father-in-law, i.e. Takahiro.

古文：孝公卒，子慎公圉戎立。
现代文：孝公去世，他的儿子慎公圉戎继位。
English: After the death of Prince Takakuni, his son, Shinkong Rong, succeeded to the throne.

古文：慎公当周厉王时。
现代文：慎公时正当周厉王之朝。
English: The reign of King Sheng was the reign of King Zhou Li.

古文：慎公卒，子幽公宁立。
现代文：慎公去世，他的儿子幽公宁继位。
English: Shinkong died and was succeeded by his son, Yugongning.

古文：幽公十二年，周厉王奔于彘。
现代文：幽公二十年，周厉王逃到彘地。
English: In his twenties, Zhou Li Wang fled to Handan.

古文：二十三年，幽公卒，子厘公孝立。
现代文：二十三年，幽公去世，他的儿子厘公孝继位。
English: In 233, Yugong died, and his son, Li Gongxiao, succeeded to the throne.

古文：厘公六年，周宣王即位。
现代文：厘公六年，周宣王即位。
English: Six years after Li Gong, King Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne.

古文：三十六年，厘公卒，子武公灵立。
现代文：三十六年，厘公去世，他的儿子武公灵继位。
English: Thirty-six years later, Li Gong died, and his son Wu Gongling succeeded to the throne.

古文：武公十五年卒，子夷公说立。
现代文：武公在位十五年去世，他的儿子夷公说继位。
English: Wu Gong died fifteen years into his reign, and his son Yi Gong said that he would succeed him.

古文：是岁，周幽王即位。
现代文：这年，周幽王即位。
English: In this year, King Zhou Yu ascended to the throne.

古文：夷公三年卒，弟平公燮立。
现代文：夷公在位三年去世，他的弟平公燮继位。
English: Yigong died three years into his reign, and was succeeded by his younger brother, Ping Gongjun.

古文：平公七年，周幽王为犬戎所杀，周东徙。
现代文：平公七年，周幽王被犬戎杀死，周王朝首都东迁洛邑。
English: In the seventh year of King Ping, King Zhou Yu was killed by a dog, and the capital of the Zhou Dynasty was moved east to Luoyang.

古文：秦始列为诸侯。
现代文：秦国开始成为诸侯。
English: Qin began to be listed as a vassal.

古文：二十三年，平公卒，子文公圉立。
现代文：二十三年，平公去世，他的儿子文公圉继位。
English: In 233, Tingong died, and his son, Wen Gongjun, succeeded to the throne.

古文：文公元年，取蔡女，生子佗。
现代文：文公元年，娶了蔡国之女为妇，生下儿子佗。
English: In the year of Wen, he married the daughter of Cai Guo and gave birth to a son, Ren.

古文：十年，文公卒，长子桓公鲍立。
现代文：十年，文公去世，他的长子桓公鲍继位。
English: Ten years later, Wenguang died, and his eldest son Huan Gong Bao succeeded to the throne.

古文：桓公二十三年，鲁隐公初立。
现代文：桓公二十三年，鲁隐公即位。
English: In the 23rd year of the reign of Emperor Kan, Emperor Ruyin ascended to the throne.

古文：二十六年，卫杀其君州吁。
现代文：二十六年，卫人杀死卫君州吁。
English: In twenty-six years, the guards killed Wei Jun Zhou Wu.

古文：三十三年，鲁弑其君隐公。
现代文：三十三年，鲁人杀死鲁隐公。
English: In 333, Lu killed Lu Yinggong.

古文：三十八年正月甲戌己丑，桓公鲍卒。
现代文：三十八年正月甲戌日或己丑日，桓公鲍去世。
English: In the first month of the 38th year, on Armor Day or Ugly Day, King Huan Bao passed away.

古文：桓公弟佗，其母蔡女，故蔡人为佗杀五父及桓公太子免而立佗ó，是为厉公。
现代文：由于他弟弟佗的母亲是蔡国人，因此蔡国人为了佗而杀了五父和桓公的太子免，拥立佗继位，便是厉公。
English: Since his younger brother Yao's mother was from Cai Guozhong, Cai Guozhong killed his five fathers and Prince Huan for Yao's sake. The crown prince who supported Yao's succession was Liguo.

古文：桓公病而乱作，国人分散，故再赴。
现代文：桓公病重的时侯内乱就发生了，国民纷纷离散，因此再次发来讣告。
English: When Prince Kan was gravely ill, civil unrest broke out and the people scattered, so an obituary notice was once again sent.

古文：厉公二年，生子敬仲完。
现代文：厉公二年，生下儿子敬仲完。
English: Two years later, she gave birth to her son, Kinchokan.

古文：周太史过陈，陈厉公使以《周易》筮之，卦得《观》之《否》： 是为观国之光，利用宾于王。
现代文：正值周太史经过陈国，陈厉公让他用《周易》为儿子算卦，得到的卦象是《观卦》变《否卦》，周太史说： 这叫做能看到国家的荣光，利于做天子之宾。
English: Just as Zhou Taishi passed through Chen Guo, Chen Liguang asked him to use "Zhou Yi" for his son to calculate divination, and the resulting divination was like "viewing divination" changing to "denying divination." Zhou Taishi said: This is called being able to see the glory of the country, and is conducive to being a guest of the Son of Heaven.

古文：此其代陈有国乎？
现代文：他大概会取代陈国而自己据有国家吧？
English: Does this mean that he will take the throne of Chen Guojun and own the country?

古文：不在此，其在异国？
现代文：不是在陈国，大概是在别的国家吧？
English: Not in Chen Guo, probably in another country, right?

古文：非此其身，在其子孙。
现代文：这事不会发生在他本人之世，大概是发生在他子孙之时吧？
English: It's not going to happen in his lifetime, it's probably going to happen in his children's lifetime, right?

古文：若在异国，必姜姓。
现代文：如发生在别国，一定是在姜姓国家。
English: If it is in another country, it must be a country with the surname Jiang.

古文：姜姓，太岳之后。
现代文：因为姜姓是太岳的后代。
English: Because the surname Jiang is a descendant of Taiyue.

古文：物莫能两大，陈衰，此其昌乎？ 
现代文：事物不能在两个方面都充分发展，大概要等到陈国衰亡，他的后代就要昌盛了吧？ 
English: It is impossible for two things to be strong at the same time. After the decline of Chen Guo, his group will flourish!

古文：厉公取蔡女，蔡女与蔡人乱，厉公数如蔡淫。
现代文：陈厉公娶蔡国女子为妻，蔡女与蔡国一个人通奸，陈厉公也屡次去蔡国与其他女人淫乱。
English: Chen Liguo married a woman from Cai Guo. Cai Guo and Cai Liguo committed adultery. Chen Liguo also repeatedly went to Cai Guo to have sexual relations with other women.

古文：七年，厉公所杀桓公太子免之三弟，长曰跃，中曰林，少曰杵臼，共令蔡人诱厉公以好女，与蔡人共杀厉公而立跃，是为利公。
现代文：七年，被厉公所杀的桓公太子免的三个弟弟，大的叫跃，二的叫林，小的叫杵臼，一同让蔡人用美女引诱厉公，然后三人与蔡人一起杀掉厉公，而立跃为国君，就是利公。
English: In the seventh year, the three younger brothers of Prince Huan who were killed by Liguo, the big one called Yue, the second one called Lin, and the small one called Zou Mu, together let Cai Man seduce Liguo with a beautiful woman. Then the three of them killed Liguo together with Cai Man, and Liguo became the ruler of the country, which is Liguo.

古文：利公者，桓公子也。
现代文：利公是桓公的儿子。
English: Riko is the son of Kan.

古文：利公立五月卒，立中弟林，是为庄公。
现代文：利公即位后五个月就死了，二弟林继位，就是庄公。
English: Five months after Li Gong ascended the throne, he died, and his second brother Lin succeeded to the throne, that is, Zhuang Gong.

古文：庄公七年卒，少弟杵臼立，是为宣公。
现代文：庄公在位七年去世，最小的弟弟杵臼继位，就是宣公。
English: Prince Zhuang died seven years into his reign, and his youngest brother, Jiusu, succeeded to the throne. That was the proclamation.

古文：宣公三年，楚武王卒，楚始强。
现代文：宣公三年，楚武王去世，楚国开始强大。
English: Three years after the proclamation, King Chuwu died, and the state of Chu became powerful.

古文：十七年，周惠王娶陈女为后。
现代文：十七年，周惠王娶陈君之女为王后。
English: In the seventeenth year, King Zhou Hui married Chen Jun's daughter and made her his queen.

古文：二十一年，宣公后有嬖姬生子款，欲立之，乃杀其太子御寇。
现代文：二十一年，宣公后来有宠爱之姬生一子名款，宣公想立他为太子，就杀掉了原来的太子御寇。
English: In the twenty-first year, Xuan Gong later had a favorite daughter-in-law and a son, Xuan Gong wanted to make him the prince, so he killed the original prince, Miko.

古文：御寇素爱厉公子完，完惧祸及己，乃奔齐。
现代文：御寇一直喜欢厉公之子完，完害怕祸连自己，就逃到齐国。
English: The robber has always liked the son of Liguang, and when he was afraid of being caught, he fled to Qi.

古文：齐桓公欲使陈完为卿，完曰： 羁旅之臣，幸得免负檐，君之惠也，不敢当高位。 
现代文：齐桓公想让陈完做卿，陈完说： 我作为寄居在外的臣子，有幸能不做劳苦之役，就是您给我的恩惠了，我不敢担任高官。 
English: Prince Qi Kuan wanted to make Chen Guan a lord. Chen Guan said, "As a courtier living abroad, I am fortunate not to have to do hard labor. This is the favor you have given me. I dare not hold a high-ranking position."

古文：桓公使为工正。
现代文：桓公就让他做工正之官。
English: Lord Qi Kuan appointed him as the foreman to manage the hundred workers.

古文：齐懿仲欲妻陈敬仲，卜之，占曰： 是谓凤皇于飞，和鸣锵锵。
现代文：齐懿仲想把自己的女儿嫁给陈完，先算一卦，卦辞说： 夫妻好比雄雌凤凰双双飞翔，鸣叫应和响亮清脆。
English: When Qi Yuzhong wanted to marry his daughter to Chen Yu, he first calculated a riddle. The riddle said: "Husbands and wives are like male and female phoenixes, they both fly, and their song should be loud and clear.

古文：有妫之后，将育于姜。
现代文：妫姓的后人，将在姜姓之国蕃育昌盛。
English: Descendants with the surname of Jiang will bring prosperity to the country with the surname of Jiang.

古文：五世其昌，并于正卿。
现代文：五代以后就能够昌盛，地位与正卿并驾齐驱。
English: After five generations, it will be prosperous, the same as the status of Zhengqing.

古文：八世之后，莫之与京。 
现代文：八代以后，无人能与之相比。 
English: After eight generations, no one can be higher than him.

古文：三十七年，齐桓公伐蔡，蔡败；南侵楚，至召陵，还过陈。
现代文：三十七年，齐桓公讨伐蔡国，蔡国战败；齐兵趁势侵入楚国境内，向南直至召陵，军队返齐时经过陈国。
English: In the thirty-seventh year, Qi Huan Gong fought against Cai Guo, Cai Guo was defeated; Cai soldiers took advantage of the situation to invade the territory of Chu Guo and went south to Zhaoling. When the army returned to Cai Guo, it passed through Chen Guo.

古文：陈大夫辕涛涂恶其过陈，诈齐令出东道。
现代文：陈国大夫辕涛涂嫌齐军过境骚扰，就骗齐桓公说由东路沿海返齐更好。
English: Dr. Chen Guo-tao, suspecting that the Qi army was harassing the transit, deceived Qi Huan-gong that it would be better to return to Qi from the east coast.

古文：东道恶，桓公怒，执陈辕涛涂。
现代文：而东边的道路十分险恶，齐桓公明白真相后大怒，把辕涛涂抓了起来。
English: However, the road to the east was very treacherous. After Qi Huan Gong understood the truth, he was furious and arrested Baotao.

古文：是岁，晋献公杀其太子申生。
现代文：这一年，晋献公逼死自己的太子申生。
English: In the same year, Prince Jinxian forced his own son, Prince Shen Sheng, to die.

古文：四十五年，宣公卒，子款立，是为穆公。
现代文：四十五年，宣公去世，他的儿子款继位，就是穆公。
English: Forty-five years later, Emperor Xuankuang died and was succeeded by his son, Emperor Mu.

古文：穆公五年，齐桓公卒。
现代文：穆公五年，齐桓公去世。
English: In the fifth year of Mu Gong, Qi Kuan Gong passed away.

古文：十六年，晋文公败楚师于城濮。
现代文：十六年，晋文公在城濮大败楚军。
English: Sixteen years later, Emperor Jinwen defeated the Chu army in Chenghuang.

古文：是岁，穆公卒，子共公朔立。
现代文：这一年，陈穆公去世，他的儿子共公朔继位。
English: In the same year, Chen Mukong died, and his son, Gonggong Shuo, succeeded to the throne.

古文：共公六年，楚太子商臣弑其父成王代立，是为穆王。
现代文：陈共公六年，楚国太子商臣杀死父亲楚成王，自立为君，就是楚穆王。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Chen, the prince of Chu, a merchant, killed his father, King Chu Cheng, and became king himself. This was King Chu Mu.

古文：十一年，秦穆公卒。
现代文：十一年，秦穆公去世。
English: In the eleventh year, Qin Mu Gong passed away.

古文：十八年，共公卒，子灵公平国立。
现代文：十八年，陈共公去世，他的儿子灵公平国继位。
English: In 18 years, Chen Gonggong passed away, and his son Ling Rongguo succeeded to the throne.

古文：灵公元年，楚庄王即位。
现代文：陈灵公元年，楚庄王即位。
English: In the year of Chen Ling, the king of Chu Zhuang ascended to the throne.

古文：六年，楚伐陈。
现代文：六年，楚国征伐陈国。
English: In the sixth year, Chu conquered Chen.

古文：十年，陈及楚平。
现代文：十年，陈国与楚国媾和。
English: Ten years later, Chen and Chu made peace.

古文：十四年，灵公与其大夫孔宁、仪行父皆通于夏姬，衷其衣以戏于朝。
现代文：十四年，陈灵公和陈国大夫孔宁、仪行父都与夏姬通奸，而且贴身穿着夏姬的衣服在朝中嬉笑。
English: In the 14th year, Chen Linggong, Chen Guotai's doctor Kongning, and Yi Xingfu all committed adultery with her, and they all dressed up in her clothes to have fun in the court.

古文：泄冶谏曰： 君臣淫乱，民何效焉？ 
现代文：大夫泄冶劝谏说： 国君和大臣如此淫乱，让人民如何效法？ 
English: Doctor Qie Ye advised Zou: The sovereign and the minister are so lewd, how can the people follow suit?

古文：灵公以告二子，二子请杀泄冶，公弗禁，遂杀泄冶。
现代文：陈灵公把此话告诉孔宁、仪行父二人，二人要求杀死泄冶，陈灵公也不禁止他们，于是二人果然杀死了泄治。
English: Chen Linggong told this to the two men, Kongning and Yi Xingfu, and the two men demanded that they kill Jie Ye, but Chen Linggong did not forbid them, so the two men did indeed kill Jie Ye.

古文：十五年，灵公与二子饮于夏氏，公戏二子曰： 征舒似汝。 
现代文：十五年，陈灵公和孔宁、仪行父在夏姬家饮酒取乐。陈灵公对二人开玩笑说： 夏徵舒长得像你们。 
English: Fifteen years ago, Chen Linggong and Kong Ning, Yi Xingfu's father, were drinking and having fun at Xia Ji's house. Chen Linggong joked to the two: Xia Zheshu looks like you.

古文：二子曰： 亦似公。 
现代文：二人反唇相讥说： 他长得也像您。 
English: They retorted, "He looks like you, too."

古文：征舒怒。
现代文：夏徵舒听了十分生气。
English: Xia Zhenshu was very angry.

古文：灵公罢酒出，征舒伏弩厩门射杀灵公。
现代文：灵公喝完酒出来，夏徵舒藏在马棚门口用箭射杀灵公。
English: After drinking the wine, Lingong came out. Xia Zhenshu hid in the doorway of the stable and shot Lingong with an arrow.

古文：孔宁、仪行父皆奔楚，灵公太子午奔晋。
现代文：孔宁、仪行父吓得逃到楚国，灵公太子午也逃往晋国。
English: Kong Ning and Yi Xingfu were so scared that they fled to Chu Province, and Ling Gong also fled to Jin Province.

古文：征舒自立为陈侯。
现代文：夏徵舒自立为陈侯。
English: Xia Qingshu volunteered as Chen Hou.

古文：征舒，故陈大夫也。
现代文：夏徵舒过去是陈国大夫。
English: Xia Zhenshu used to be Dr. Chen Guo.

古文：夏姬，御叔之妻，舒之母也。
现代文：夏姬是御叔之妻、夏徵舒之母。
English: She is the wife of my uncle and the mother of Xia Zhenshu.

古文：成公元年冬，楚庄王为夏征舒杀灵公，率诸侯伐陈。
现代文：陈成公元年冬天，楚庄王以夏徵舒杀死陈灵公为由，带诸侯之兵讨伐陈国。
English: In the winter of the year of Chencheng in the year of AD, the king of Chu Zhuang, on the grounds that Xia Zhoshu had killed Chen Linggong, led the soldiers of the princes to fight Chen Guo.

古文：谓陈曰： 无惊，吾诛征舒而已。 
现代文：并且对陈国人说： 别害怕，我只是诛杀夏徵舒而已。 
English: And he said to the people of Chen, "Don't be afraid, I'm just trying to kill Xia Zhoshu."

古文：已诛征舒，因县陈而有之，群臣毕贺。
现代文：可是杀了夏徵舒之后，借势就把陈国吞并，作为楚国的一个县而占有了，楚国群臣都为此向楚庄王祝贺。
English: However, after he killed Xia Zhoshu, he took advantage of the situation to annex Chen Guoru and occupy it as a county of Chu. The ministers of Chu all congratulated Chu Zhuang Wang for this.

古文：申叔时使于齐来还，独不贺。
现代文：这时申叔时从齐国出使回来，独独不表示祝贺。
English: At this time, Uncle Shin returned from his mission to Qi, but did not express his congratulations.

古文：庄王问其故，对曰： 鄙语有之，牵牛径人田，田主夺之牛。
现代文：楚庄王问他为什么这样，申叔时回答说： 俗语说得好，有人牵牛抄近路，踩坏别人庄稼地，田地主人追过来，把牛抢来归自己。
English: When the king of Chu Zhuang asked him why this was so, Uncle Shen replied, "The saying is well said. Some people lead cattle to take a shortcut and trample on other people's crops. The owner of the field chases after them and steals the cattle for himself.

古文：径则有罪矣，夺之牛，不亦甚乎？
现代文：抄近路踩人田确实有罪，可是因此就把他的牛夺来，不也太过分了吗？
English: It is indeed a crime to take a shortcut and trample on people's fields, but is it not too much to take away his cow for this reason?

古文：今王以征舒为贼弑君，故征兵诸侯，以义伐之，已而取之，以利其地，则后何以令于天下！
现代文：现在大王以夏徵舒杀君为不义，因此征集诸侯军队，讨伐夏徵舒以申张正义，可是事毕之后却占有陈国，贪图人家土地，那么今后还怎么号令天下！
English: Now the great king regards the killing of the prince by Xia Zhenshu as an injustice, so he gathers the armies of the princes, fights against Xia Zhenshu to claim justice, but after the event, he occupies Chen's country and covets other people's land, so how can he command the world in the future!

古文：是以不贺。 
现代文：所以我不祝贺。 
English: That's why I don't congratulate him.

古文：庄王曰： 善。 
现代文：楚庄王听后说： 讲得好！ 
English: After listening, Chu Zhuang Wang said: Well spoken!

古文：乃迎陈灵公太子午于晋而立之，复君陈如故，是为成公。
现代文：于是从晋国接回陈灵公的太子妫午，立为陈君，象过去一样治理陈国，就是陈成公。
English: As a result, Prince Gong Ro, who took over Chen Linggong from Jin, became Chen Jun, and governed Chen Province as in the past, that is, Chen Chenggong.

古文：孔子读史记至楚复陈，曰： 贤哉楚庄王！
现代文：孔子在读历史时看到楚国恢复陈国主权一段，说： 楚庄王真可谓贤德。
English: When reading the history, Confucius saw that the sovereignty of the State of Chu was restored to the State of Chen, and said, "The King of Chu Zhuang is truly virtuous."

古文：轻千乘之国而重一言。 
现代文：轻视千乘之国而看重一句有益之言。 
English: They despise the country of a thousand Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, but value a single helpful word.

古文：八年，楚庄王卒。
现代文：八年，楚庄王去世。
English: Eight years later, King Chu Zhuang died.

古文：二十九年，陈倍楚盟。
现代文：二十九年，陈国背叛与楚国的盟约。
English: In 29, Chen rebelled against the treaty with Chu.

古文：三十年，楚共王伐陈。
现代文：三十年，楚共王征伐陈国。
English: Thirty years have passed since the Communist King of Chu conquered the State of Chen.

古文：是岁，成公卒，子哀公弱立。
现代文：这一年，陈成公去世，他的儿子哀公弱继位。
English: That year, Chen Chenggong died, and his son, Ai Gongwen, succeeded to the throne.

古文：楚以陈丧，罢兵去。
现代文：楚王因陈国有丧事，罢兵回国。
English: Due to Chen Guo's funeral, King Chu withdrew his troops and returned to China.

古文：哀公三年，楚围陈，复释之。
现代文：哀公三年，楚兵包围陈国，后来又饶了陈国。
English: In the three years of mourning, Chu soldiers surrounded Chen Guo, and later spared Chen Guo.

古文：二十八年，楚公子围弑其君郏敖自立，为灵王。
现代文：二十八年，楚国公子围杀死楚王郏敖自立为楚王，就是楚灵王。
English: In the 28th year, the princes of Chu surrounded and killed King Chu, and he became King Chu, that is, King Chuling.

古文：三十四年，初，哀公娶郑，长姬生悼太子师，少姬生偃。
现代文：三十四年，起初，陈哀公从郑国娶妻，长姬生下悼太子师，少姬生下儿子偃。
English: At the beginning of the 34th year, Chen Aigong married a wife from Zheng Guo, Chang Ji gave birth to Prince Miao, and Shao Ji gave birth to a son, Yao.

古文：二嬖妾，长妾生留，少妾生胜。
现代文：哀公又有两名宠幸的妾，长妾生子名叫留，少妾生子名叫胜。
English: Aigong also had two favorite concubines. The eldest concubine's son was named Rem, and the younger concubine's son was named Sheng.

古文：留有宠哀公，哀公属之其弟司徒招。
现代文：哀公最宠爱留，把他托付给自己的弟弟司徒招来照顾。
English: Aigong was most fond of Zhou, and entrusted him to his younger brother, Sutou, to take care of.

古文：哀公病，三月，招杀悼太子，立留为太子。
现代文：哀公病了以后，三月，招杀死了悼太子，把留立为太子。
English: After Aigong fell ill, in March, Zhao killed the Crown Prince and made Rui Liang the Crown Prince.

古文：哀公怒，欲诛招，招发兵围守哀公，哀公自经杀。
现代文：哀公很生气，想杀掉招，招发兵包围哀公，哀公自缢而死。
English: Aigong was very angry, wanted to kill Zha, sent soldiers to surround Aigong, and Aigong hanged himself and died.

古文：招卒立留为陈君。
现代文：最后招还是把留立为国君。
English: The last move was to make Ryuretsu the sovereign.

古文：四月，陈使使赴楚。
现代文：四月，陈国派使节去楚国报告丧信。
English: In April, Chen Guo sent an envoy to Chu to report the death.

古文：楚灵王闻陈乱，乃杀陈使者，使公子弃疾发兵伐陈，陈君留奔郑。
现代文：楚灵王闻说陈国内乱，就杀掉陈国使者，派公子弃疾举兵征伐陈国，陈君留逃往郑国。
English: When King Chuling heard that there was a civil war in Chen, he killed Chen's envoy and sent his son to raise an army to invade Chen. Chen Jun stayed behind and fled to Zheng.

古文：九月，楚围陈。
现代文：九月，楚兵围陈。
English: In September, Chu soldiers surrounded Chen.

古文：十一月，灭陈。
现代文：十一月，灭掉陈国。
English: In November, eliminate Chen Guo.

古文：使弃疾为陈公。
现代文：命楚公子弃疾做陈公。
English: The man of destiny abandoned his illness to become Chen Gong.

古文：招之杀悼太子也，太子之子名吴，出奔晋。
现代文：招杀死悼太子时，悼太子的儿子叫吴，出逃投奔晋国。
English: When Zhao killed the Crown Prince, the Crown Prince's son, Wu, fled to Jin.

古文：晋平公问太史赵曰： 陈遂亡乎？ 
现代文：晋平公问太史赵说： 陈国真的要灭亡了吗？ 
English: Jin Ping Gong asked Zhao Taishi: Is Chen Guo really going to perish?

古文：对曰： 陈，颛顼之族。
现代文：太史赵回答说： 陈国，是颛顼的后代。
English: Taishi Zhao replied, "Chen Guo is a descendant of Yao.

古文：陈氏得政于齐，乃卒亡。
现代文：待陈氏在齐国得到政权时，最终才会灭亡。
English: Only when the Chen clan gains power in Qi will it finally perish.

古文：自幕至于瞽瞍ǒ，无违命。
现代文：陈国祖先从幕一直传到瞽瞍，都没有违抗天命。
English: Chen Guo's ancestors have been passed down from the Edo period to the Kamakura period, and they have never defied God's will.

古文：舜重之以明德。
现代文：舜注重发扬明德。
English: Emphasis on the development of virtue.

古文：至于遂，世世守之。
现代文：到了遂，世代恪守其道。
English: In the end, generations stick to their path.

古文：及胡公，周赐之姓，使祀虞帝。
现代文：到胡公时期，周天子赐姓氏给他，命他祭祀虞帝舜。
English: During the reign of King Hu, Zhou Tianzi gave him his surname and ordered him to worship Emperor Wu.

古文：且盛德之后，必百世祀。
现代文：而且盛德的帝王后代，必定会相传至百世。
English: Moreover, the descendants of the emperors of Shengde will surely be passed down to the next generation.

古文：虞之世未也，其在齐乎？ 
现代文：虞舜的世系还未到百世，也许会在齐国继续发展吧？ 
English: The lineage of the yakitori has not yet reached the hundredth generation, perhaps it will continue to develop in Qi Province?

古文：楚灵王灭陈五岁，楚公子弃疾弑灵王代立，是为平王。
现代文：楚灵王灭陈后第五年，楚国公子弃疾杀死灵王自立为楚王，就是平王。
English: In the fifth year after the death of King Chu Ling Chen, the prince of the State of Chu renounced his illness, killed King Ling and became King Chu himself, that is, King Ping.

古文：平王初立，欲得和诸侯，乃求故陈悼太子师之子吴，立为陈侯，是为惠公。
现代文：平王刚刚即位，想友睦以获得诸侯的拥护和支持，就找到过去陈国悼太子师的儿子吴，立他为陈侯，就是陈惠公。
English: King Ping had just ascended to the throne, and he wanted to be friendly in order to gain the support and support of the princes, so he found Wu, the son of the prince who had been mourned by Chen Guo, and appointed him as Chen Hou, that is, Chen Huigong.

古文：惠公立，探续哀公卒时年而为元，空籍五岁矣。
现代文：惠公即位后，上溯到哀公死的那年来接续陈国纪年作为元年，此时惠公的在位时间其实空借了五年。
English: After the enthronement of Huigong, Chen Guojian was successively used as the first year, going back to the year of the death of Yigong. At this time, Huigong's reign actually borrowed five years.

古文：十年，陈火。
现代文：惠公十年，陈国发生火灾。
English: In the tenth year of Emperor Huigong, a fire broke out in Chen Province.

古文：十五年，吴王僚使公子光伐陈，取胡、沈而去。
现代文：十五年，吴王僚命公子光攻打陈国，攻取胡、沈二地后返回。
English: In the fifteenth year, Wu Wangliang ordered his son to attack Chen Province, and after conquering Hu and Shen, he returned.

古文：二十八年，吴王阖é闾ǘ与子胥败楚入郢。
现代文：二十八年，吴王阖庐与伍子胥打败楚国攻进郢都。
English: In the 28th year, Wu Wangyao and Wu Ziyao defeated the State of Chu and invaded Shidu.

古文：是年，惠公卒，子怀公柳立。
现代文：这一年，陈惠公去世，他的儿子怀公柳继位。
English: That year, Chen Huigong died, and his son Huai Gongliu succeeded him.

古文：怀公元年，吴破楚，在郢，召陈侯。
现代文：怀公元年，吴王攻破楚国后，驻扎郢都，召见陈怀公。
English: In the year of Huai, after King Wu conquered the state of Chu, he stationed himself in the capital and summoned Chen Huai.

古文：陈侯欲往，大夫曰： 吴新得意；楚王虽亡，与陈有故，不可倍。 
现代文：怀公想要前去，陈国大夫说： 吴王最近志得意满，可是楚王虽然逃走，但与陈国是旧交，不能背叛陈、楚之交。 
English: When Huai Gong wanted to go forward, Dr. Chen Guo said, "Wu Wang has recently been full of ambition, but although King Chu has fled, he is an old friend of Chen Guo and cannot betray the friendship between Chen and Chu.

古文：怀公乃以疾谢吴。
现代文：怀公就以身体有病为借口推辞了会见。
English: Huai Gong used his illness as an excuse to decline the meeting.

古文：四年，吴复召怀公。怀公恐，如吴。
现代文：四年，吴王又召见怀公，怀公害怕，只得前往吴国。
English: In the fourth year, the king of Wu summoned Huai Gong again. Huai Gong was afraid, so he had to go to Wu.

古文：吴怒其前不往，留之，因卒吴。
现代文：吴王生气上次陈怀公不来，扣留了他，终于死在吴国。
English: The king of Wu was angry that Chen Huai Gong did not come the last time, detained him, and finally died in Wu.

古文：陈乃立怀公之子越，是为愍公。
现代文：陈国于是立怀公之子越为君，就是湣公。
English: Therefore, Chen Guo decided that the more sons he had, the more he would be the king.

古文：愍公六年，孔子适陈。
现代文：湣公六年，孔子至陈国。
English: Six years after the birth of Confucius, Confucius came to China.

古文：吴王夫差伐陈，取三邑而去。
现代文：吴王夫差征伐陈国，攻取三城而归。
English: Wu Wangfu led a punitive expedition against the State of Chen, capturing three cities and returning home.

古文：十三年，吴复来伐陈，陈告急楚，楚昭王来救，军于城父，吴师去。
现代文：十三年，吴国又来征伐陈国，陈国向楚国告急求救，楚昭王带兵来援救，驻军城父，吴军撤兵。
English: In the thirteenth year, the State of Wu came to conquer the State of Chen again, the State of Chen sent an urgent appeal to the State of Chu for help, the King of Chu and Zhao brought troops to the rescue, and the garrison city was abandoned by the Wu army.

古文：是年，楚昭王卒于城父。
现代文：此年，楚昭王死在城父。
English: In the same year, King Chu Zhao died in Chengdu.

古文：时孔子在陈。
现代文：当时孔子仍在陈国。
English: At that time, Confucius was still in the State of Chen.

古文：十五年，宋灭曹。
现代文：十五年，宋国灭掉曹国。
English: In the fifteenth year, Song wiped out Cao.

古文：十六年，吴王夫差伐齐，败之艾陵，使人召陈侯。
现代文：十六年，吴王夫差北伐齐国，在艾陵大败齐兵，又派人召见陈侯。
English: Sixteen years later, Wu Wangfu led the Northern Expedition against Qi, defeated Qi's army in Ailing, and sent someone to summon Chen Hou.

古文：陈侯恐，如吴。
现代文：陈湣公害怕，前往吴国。
English: Chen Yigong was afraid and fled to the State of Wu.

古文：楚伐陈。
现代文：楚国因此征伐陈国。
English: As a result, Chu conquered Chen.

古文：二十一年，齐田常弑其君简公。
现代文：二十一年，齐国大夫田常杀死齐简公。
English: In 1921, Dr. Tian Chang of Qi Province killed Qi Jian Gong.

古文：二十三年，楚之白公胜杀令尹子西、子綦，袭惠王。
现代文：二十三年，楚国的白公胜杀死令尹子西、子綦，袭击楚惠王。
English: In 233, Bai Gongsheng of Chu killed Yin Zixi and Zi Yao and attacked King Chu Hui.

古文：叶公攻败白公，白公自杀。
现代文：楚国叶公击败白公，白公自杀。
English: Chu Guo Ye Gong defeated Bai Gong, and Bai Gong committed suicide.

古文：二十四年，楚惠王复国，以兵北伐，杀陈愍公，遂灭陈而有之。
现代文：二十四年，楚惠王复国，举兵北伐，杀死陈湣公，于是灭掉陈国占为楚有。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, King Chu Hui restored the country, raised an army to the north, killed Chen Yigong, and then eliminated Chen Guozhan as Chu You.

古文：是岁，孔子卒。
现代文：这一年，孔子去世。
English: In the same year, Confucius passed away.

古文：杞东楼公者，夏后禹之后苗裔也。
现代文：杞国东楼公，是夏代大禹的后代子孙。
English: Donglou Gong of the State of Min is a descendant of the descendants of Dayu of the Xia Dynasty.

古文：殷时或封或绝。
现代文：商朝时其封国时断时续。
English: At the time of the Shang Dynasty, its sealing of the country was intermittent.

古文：周武王克殷纣，求禹之后，得东楼公，封之于杞，以奉夏后氏祀。
现代文：周武王战胜殷纣之后，寻找禹的后代。找到东楼公，封他在杞，以供奉夏后氏的祭祀。
English: After King Zhou Wu defeated Yin Xi, he searched for Yu's descendants. He found Dongluo and had him enshrined in the imperial palace to offer sacrifices to the Xiaguo clan.

古文：东楼公生西楼公，西楼公生题公，题公生谋娶公。
现代文：东楼公生子西楼公，西楼公生子题公，题公生子谋娶公。
English: The son of Donglou, the son of Xilu, the son of Xilu, the son of Tie, the son of Tie, the son of Tie, the son of Tie, the son of Tie, the son of Tie, the son of Tie.

古文：谋娶公当周厉王时。
现代文：谋娶公在位时正值周厉王时代。
English: The time when she planned to marry the prince was during the reign of King Zhou Liang.

古文：谋娶公生武公。
现代文：谋娶公生子武公。
English: She is plotting to marry the prince's son, Takegō.

古文：武公立四十七年卒，子靖公立。
现代文：武公在位四十七年去世，他的儿子靖公继位。
English: Emperor Wu died in the 47th year of his reign and was succeeded by his son, Emperor Jing.

古文：靖公二十三年卒，子共公立。
现代文：靖公在位二十三，他的儿子共公继位。
English: Yasuko was on the throne for 23 years, and his son, Tomoharu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：共公八年卒，子德公立。
现代文：共公在位八年去世，他的儿子德公继位。
English: He died eight years into his reign, and his son, De Gong, succeeded him.

古文：德公十八年卒，弟桓公姑容立。
现代文：德公在位十八年去世，他的弟弟桓公姑容继位。
English: De Gong died in the eighteenth year of his reign, and his younger brother Huan Gong Gu Rong succeeded him.

古文：桓公十七年卒，子孝公匄立。
现代文：桓公在位十七年去世，他的弟弟孝公丐继位。
English: Prince Kan died 17 years into his reign and was succeeded by his younger brother, Prince Takakuni.

古文：孝公十七年卒，弟文公益姑立。
现代文：孝公在位十七年去世，他的弟弟文公益姑继位。
English: In the seventeenth year of his reign, Prince Xiaogong died, and his younger brother, Princess Wen, succeeded to the throne.

古文：文公十四年卒，弟平公郁立。
现代文：文公在位十四年去世，他的弟弟平公郁继位。
English: Wenguang died 14 years into his reign and was succeeded by his younger brother, Ping Gongyu.

古文：平公十八年卒，子悼公成立。
现代文：平公在位十八年去世，他的儿子悼公成继位。
English: TAIRA no Kimi died 18 years into his reign and was succeeded by his son MUKI no Kimi.

古文：悼公十二年卒，子隐公乞立。
现代文：悼公在位十二年去世，他的儿子隐公乞继位。
English: In the twelfth year of his reign, Eiko died, and his son, Hidehiko, succeeded him.

古文：七月，隐公弟遂弑隐公自立，是为厘公。
现代文：七月，隐公的弟弟遂杀死隐公自立为君，就是厘公公。
English: In July, Hinkō's younger brother killed Hinkō, and Hinkō became his own master, Lihongō.

古文：厘公十九年卒，子愍公维立。
现代文：厘公在位十九年去世，他的儿子厘公维继位。
English: Li Gong died 19 years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Li Gongwei.

古文：愍公十五年，楚惠王灭陈。
现代文：愍公在位十五年，楚惠王灭掉了陈国。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Shigong, King Chu Hui destroyed the Chen Kingdom.

古文：十六年，愍公弟阏路弑愍公代立，是为哀公。
现代文：十六年，愍公的弟弟阏路杀死愍公自立为君，就是哀公。
English: Sixteen years later, Shigong's younger brother, Kushiro, killed Shigong and took his own life. This was the beginning of the mourning for Shigong.

古文：哀公立十年卒，愍公子敕立，是为出公。
现代文：哀公在位十年去世，愍公的儿子敕继位，就是出公。
English: Aiko died ten years into his reign, and Shoko's son, Shoko, succeeded to the throne, that is, he became a prince.

古文：出公十二年卒，子简公春立。
现代文：出公在位十二年去世，他的儿子简公春继位。
English: He died twelve years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Jian Gongchun.

古文：立一年，楚惠王之四十四年，灭杞。
现代文：简公即位一年，即楚惠王之四十四年，楚灭掉杞国。
English: In the year of Jian Gong's accession to the throne, that is, the forty-fourth year of King Chu Hui, Chu wiped out the State of Min.

古文：杞后陈亡三十四年。
现代文：杞国比陈国晚灭亡三十四年。
English: It was thirty-four years after the fall of the State of Min.

古文：杞小微，其事不足称述。舜之后，周武王封之陈，至楚惠王灭之，有世家言。禹之后，周武王封之杞，楚惠王灭之，有世家言。
现代文：舜的后代，周武王封于陈，到楚惠王时被灭掉，有《世家》记载。禹的后代，周武王封于杞，楚惠王灭掉它，有《世家》记载。
English: Yu's descendant, King Zhouwu, sealed it in Chen, and it was destroyed when he came to King Chu Hui, as recorded in "Sejia." Yu's descendant, King Zhouwu, sealed it in Handan, and King Chu Hui destroyed it, as recorded in "Sejia."

古文：契之后为殷，殷有本纪言。
现代文：契的后代是殷商王族，有《本纪》记载。
English: The descendants of Qi were the Yin Shang royal family, as recorded in the "Analects."

古文：殷破，周封其后于宋，齐愍王灭之，有世家言。
现代文：殷朝灭亡后，周朝封其后代于宋，齐湣王灭掉宋，有《世家》记载。
English: After the demise of the Yin Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty sealed its descendants in the Song Dynasty, and King Qian of Qi eliminated the Song Dynasty, as recorded in "The Family."

古文：伯翳之后，至周平王时封为秦，项羽灭之，有本纪言。
现代文：后稷的后代是周朝王族，秦昭王灭掉周，有《本纪》记载。
English: The descendants of Houyi were the royal family of the Zhou Dynasty. Qin Zhaowang exterminated the Zhou Dynasty, as recorded in "The Analects."

古文：垂、益、夔í、龙，其后不知所封，不见也。
现代文：皋陶的后代，有的被封在英、六之地，楚穆王灭掉它们，没有谱牒记载。伯夷的后代，在周武王时又被封于齐，叫做太公望，陈氏灭了它，有《世家》记载。
English: Some of the descendants of Juntao were sealed in Ying and Liu, and King Chu Mu eliminated them, but there is no record of the genealogy. The descendants of Bo Yi, who were sealed in the time of King Zhou Wu, were called Taigongwang, and the Chen clan eliminated it, as recorded in "The Family."

古文：右十一人者，皆唐虞之际名有功德臣也；其五人之后皆至帝王，余乃为显诸侯。
现代文：垂、益、夔、龙，他们的后代不知封于何地，没有听说过他们。以上十一个人，都是尧、舜时著名的功德之臣；其中五人的后代都当过帝王，其余的则是著名诸侯。
English: These eleven people were all famous meritorious vassals at the time of Emperor Zhou and Empress Dowager Cixi; five of their descendants became emperors, and the rest were famous princes.

古文：滕、薛、驺，夏、殷、周之间封也，小，不足齿列，弗论也。
现代文：滕、薛、驺，是夏、商、周三代时所封之国，很小，不足挂齿，就不论列了。
English: Teng, Xue, and Handan are the countries that Xia, Shang, and San sealed during their reigns. They are small and insignificant, so they are not included.

古文：周武王时，侯伯尚千余人。
现代文：周武王时，封侯封伯的还有一千多人。
English: At the time of King Zhouwu, there were more than a thousand people who were given the title of vassal.

古文：及幽、厉之后，诸侯力攻相并。
现代文：等到周幽王周厉王以后，诸侯以力相攻互相吞并。
English: After Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang ascended the throne, the princes attacked and annexed each other by force.

古文：江、黄、胡、沈之属，不可胜数，故弗采着于传云。
现代文：江、黄、胡、沈之类的小国，数不胜数，因此就不采录于史传之中。
English: There are countless small countries like Jiang, Huang, Hu and Shen, so they are not recorded in history.

古文：太史公曰：舜之德可谓至矣！
现代文：太史公曰：舜的道德可谓达到极点了！
English: Tai Shikong said: "The morals of the cormorants have reached an extreme!

古文：禅位于夏，而后世血食者历三代。
现代文：将帝位禅让给了夏禹，而后代经历了夏、商、周三代仍然能够享受祭祀。
English: The imperial throne of Zen was ceded to Xia Yu, and the descendants experienced Xia, Shang, and the third generation can still enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：及楚灭陈，而田常得政于齐，卒为建国，百世不绝，苗裔兹兹，有土者不乏焉。
现代文：楚国灭掉陈国之后，田常又取得了齐国政权，终于还是一个封国，百代不绝，后代子孙著盛，被封赐土地的人很多。
English: After the State of Chu eliminated the State of Chen, Tian Chang also obtained the State of Qi. Finally, it is still a feudal state, which has lasted for hundreds of generations, and the descendants of the descendants have prospered. There are many people who have been granted land.

古文：至禹，于周则杞，微甚，不足数也。
现代文：至于禹，在周时其后代就是杞国之君，很弱小，不值得一说。
English: As for Yu, in Zhou's time, his descendant was the ruler of Shandong Province. He was too weak and insignificant to be worth mentioning.

古文：楚惠王灭杞，其后越王句践兴。
现代文：楚惠王灭掉杞以后，禹的后代越王勾践就振兴起来。
English: After King Chu Hui eliminated the yakuza, Yu's descendants, the Yue kings, revived the yakuza.

