古文：慕容延钊，太原人。
现代文：慕容延钊是太原人。
English: Murong Yanqi is from Taiyuan.

古文：父章，襄州马步军都校、领开州刺。
现代文：其父慕容章，任襄州马步军都校、兼任开州刺史。
English: His father, Murong Zhang, served as the headmaster of the Xiangzhou Horse Cavalry School and also served as the secretary of the Xiangzhou Horse Cavalry School.

古文：延钊少以勇干闻。
现代文：延钊年轻时以勇敢闻名。
English: When he was young, Yan Xun was famous for his bravery.

古文：汉祖之兴也，周祖为其佐命，以延钊隶帐下。
现代文：汉祖起兵时，周祖辅助他，把延钊收用在军中。
English: When Han Zu raised an army, Zhou Zu assisted him and recruited Yan Kun into the army.

古文：周广顺初，补西头供奉官，历尚食副使、铁骑都虞候。
现代文：后周广顺初年，补官任西头供奉官，历任尚食副使、铁骑都虞候。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun, he was appointed as the supplementing official of Xitou offering official, and successively served as the vice-envoy of Shang Cuisine and the iron cavalry.

古文：世宗即位，为殿前散指挥使都校、领溪州刺史。
现代文：周世宗即位，任命他为殿前散指挥使都校、兼溪州刺史。
English: When Zhou Shizong ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the prefect of the palace, the commander of the capital school, and the governor of Xizhou.

古文：高平之战，督左先锋，以功授虎捷左厢都指挥使、领本州团练使；迁殿前都虞候、领睦州防御使。
现代文：高平战役，任左先锋，因功授任虎捷左厢都指挥使、兼任本州团练使；升任殿前都虞候、兼任睦州防御使。
English: In the Gaoping Campaign, he served as the left vanguard, and was awarded the post of commander of the left compartment of the Tiger-Jets, and also served as the Honshu regimental training envoy; he was promoted to the front of the palace, and also served as the defense envoy of Mutsu Province.

古文：从征淮南，改龙捷左厢都校、沿江马军陪署。
现代文：跟从周世宗征伐淮南，改任龙捷左厢都校、沿江马军都部署。
English: Following Zhou Shizong's conquest of Huainan, he was assigned to Long Jie Zuo Feng Du College and deployed along the Yangtze River.

古文：归朝，复为殿前都虞候，出为镇淮军都部署。
现代文：回到京师，仍任殿前都虞候，出京任镇淮军都部署。
English: Returning to Beijing, the division was still stationed in front of the Great Hall of the People, and after leaving Beijing, the troops were deployed in all the towns.

古文：显德五年，世宗在迎銮江口，闻吴人舟数艘泊东〈氵布〉洲，即命延钊与右神武统军宋延渥讨之。
现代文：显德五年，世宗在迎銮江口，听说吴人有数百只船停泊在东氵布洲，立即下令延钊与右神武统军宋延渥讨伐他们。
English: In the fifth year of Xiande, when Shizong was at the mouth of the Yinglu River, he heard that the Wu people had hundreds of ships anchored in Donglu Buzhou, and immediately ordered Yan Xun and the Right Divine Martial United Army of Song Yan Wu to fight them.

古文：延钊以骁骑由陆进，延渥督舟师沿江继进，大破之。
现代文：延钊带领骁骑由陆路挺进，延渥督率水师沿江继进，大败敌人。
English: Yan Wu led the cavalry to advance by land, Yan Wu led the sailors to advance along the river, and defeated the enemy.

古文：淮南平，迁殿前副都指挥使、领淮南节度。
现代文：淮南平定后，升任殿前副都指挥使、兼任淮南节度。
English: After Huainan was pacified, he was promoted to the former vice-commander of the capital and concurrently served as the governor of Huainan.

古文：恭帝即位，改镇宁军节度，充殿前副都点检，复为北面行营马步军都虞候。
现代文：恭帝即位，改任镇宁军节度，充任殿前副都点检，又任北面行营马步军都虞候。
English: With the enthronement of Emperor Gong, he was appointed as the commander of the Zhenning Army, the vice-commander of the palace inspection, and the commander of the horse-mounted infantry in the north.

古文：太祖即位，延钊方握重兵屯真定，帝遣使谕旨，许以便宜从事。
现代文：宋太祖即位，延钊正掌握重兵驻在真定，太祖派遣使者宣谕圣旨，允许他随机处理事务。
English: Song Taizu ascended the throne, and Yan Xun was in charge of the heavy troops stationed in Zhending. Taizu sent an envoy to proclaim the holy will and allowed him to randomly handle affairs.

古文：延钊与坤率所部兵按治边境，以镇静闻。
现代文：延钊与韩令坤率领部队巡治边境，以镇静闻名。
English: Yan Rong and Han Ling Kun led troops to patrol the border and were known for their calmness.

古文：太祖嘉之，加殿前都点检、同中书门下二品，避其父名故也。
现代文：太祖深为高兴，加任他为殿前都点检、同中书门下二品，不称平章是为了避讳其父名。
English: The great-great-grandfather was deeply pleased, and he was appointed to be an inspector of all points in front of the palace and a second-class scholar of the same school. He did not call himself Pingzhang in order to avoid his father's name.

古文：郴筠叛，初命与王全斌由东路会兵进讨，俄为行营都部署、知潞州行府事；及平，加兼侍中，诏还澶州。
现代文：李筠叛乱，开始命他与王全斌由东路会兵进讨，不久任行营都部署，知潞州行府事；事态平定后，加兼侍中，诏令回到澶州。
English: When Li Yu rebelled, he began to order him and Wang Quanbin to advance from the East Road Association of Soldiers to discuss, and soon all the battalions were deployed to carry out the affairs of the government in Zhangzhou; after the situation was settled, he was added as an attendant and ordered to return to Zhangzhou.

古文：建隆二年，长春节来朝，赐宅一区。
现代文：建隆二年，长春节来朝见，赐给他住宅一栋。
English: In the second year of Jianlong's reign, he came to see the emperor on the Spring Festival and was given a house.

古文：表解军职，徙为山南东道节度、西南面兵马都部署。
现代文：上表请求解除军中职务，迁任山南东道节度、西南面兵马都部署。
English: The above table requests that he be relieved of his duties in the military and transferred to Shannan Host Festival and deployed to the southwestern Terracotta Army.

古文：是冬大寒，遣中使赐貂裘、百子毡帐。
现代文：这个冬天非常寒冷，太祖派遣中使赐给他貂裘、百毡帐。
English: This winter was very cold, and the emissary sent by the great-grandfather gave him a gourd and a hundred-baht bill.

古文：四年春，命师南征，以延钊为湖南道行营前军都部署。
现代文：建隆四年春天，太祖命令部队南征，任命延钊为湖南道行营前军都部署。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Emperor Jianlong, Emperor Taizu ordered the troops to march south, and appointed Yancheng as the commander of the advance army in Hunan Province.

古文：时延钊被病，诏令肩舆即戎事。
现代文：当时延钊染病，诏令用轿抬着他指挥军事。
English: At that time, Yan Xun fell ill, and the emperor ordered that he be carried in a sedan chair to command the military.

古文：贼将汪端与众数千扰朗州，延早擒之，磔于市。
现代文：贼将汪端率部队数千人侵扰朗州，延钊擒俘了他，在市中斩首。
English: The thieves invaded Lanzhou with thousands of troops led by Wang Duan, captured him, and beheaded him in the city.

古文：荆、湘既平，加检校太尉。
现代文：荆、湘平定后，加官检校太尉。
English: After Jing and Xiang were purged, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：是冬，卒，年五十一。
现代文：这年冬天，去世，终年五十一岁。
English: He died this winter, aged fifty-one.

古文：初，延钊与太祖友善，显德末，太祖任殿前都点检，延钊为副，常兄事延钊；及即位，每遣使劳问，犹以兄呼之。
现代文：当初，延钊与太祖友善，显德末年，太祖任殿前都点检，延钊任副都点检；太祖常以兄礼待延钊；即位后，每次派遣使者慰问，还以兄称呼他。
English: At first, Yan Xun was friendly with his great-grandfather. In the last years of Emperor Xiande, Yan Xun checked Yan Xun before he was appointed to the throne, and Yan Xun checked Yan Xun after he was appointed vice-president. Yan Xun often treated Yan Xun with brotherly courtesy. After he ascended the throne, whenever he sent an envoy to offer condolences, he also called him his brother.

古文：洎寝疾，御封药以赐，闻其卒，恸哭久之。
现代文：自从延钊有病，御封药物赐给他，听说他去世，太祖痛哭了很久。
English: Ever since Yan Xun fell ill and was given medicine by the emperor, hearing that he had passed away, the great-grandfather cried bitterly for a long time.

古文：赠中书令，追封河南郡王，录其子弟授官者四人。
现代文：追赠中书令，追封为河南郡王，录用他的子弟授予官职的有四人。
English: There are four people who have been posthumously awarded the title of county king of Henan Province, and his sons have been appointed to official positions.

古文：子德业、德丰、德钧。
现代文：他的儿子分别叫德业、德丰、德钧。
English: His sons are named Deye, Defeng and Dejun respectively.

古文：德业至卫州刺史，德钧至尚食副使。
现代文：德业官至卫州刺史，德钧官至尚食副使。
English: Deye official to the governor of Weizhou, Deye official to the vice-envoy of Shangshui.

古文：延钊弟延忠，历内殿直、供奉西头官都知，至磁州刺史；延卿至虎捷军都指挥使。
现代文：延钊弟弟延忠，历任内殿直、供奉西头官都知，官至磁州刺史；延卿官至虎捷军都指挥使。
English: Yan Zheng's younger brother Yan Zhong, successively held the post of Inner Courtier, and served as the West Head official, and was known as the official to the magnetic state; the official of Yan Jing and the commanding officer of the Tiger Army.

古文：延卿子德琛。
现代文：延卿的儿子名德琛。
English: Nobunaga's son, Nadezaki, was born.

