古文：世谷所患，患言事增其实；著文垂辞，辞出溢其真，称美过其善，进恶没其罪。
现代文：一般人犯毛病，毛病在于说事情夸大事实，写文章著书，文辞超过真实情况，赞扬美的超过好处，批评坏的超过过失。
English: Ordinary people make mistakes. The problem is that they exaggerate the truth, write articles and books, exaggerate the truth, praise the beauty more than the benefit, and criticize the bad more than the fault.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：俗人好奇。不奇，言不用也。
现代文：因为一般人好奇，不奇，话没人听。
English: Because ordinary people are curious, strange, nobody listens.

古文：故誉人不增其美，则闻者不快其意；毁人不益其恶，则听者不惬於心。
现代文：所以称赞人不夸大他好的地方，那么听的人心里不痛快；诽谤人不增加他的过错，那么听的人心里不满足。
English: Wherefore he that commends a man, and magnifies not his goodness, the same is not acceptable; and he that reproves a man, and adds not unto his wickedness, the same is not acceptable.

古文：闻一增以为十，见百益以为千。使夫纯朴之事，十剖百判；审然之语，千反万畔。
现代文：听说一要夸大成十，看见百要增加成千，这使那些很简单的事，分成十种、百种复杂的事；很明白的话，变成千种、万种相互背离的说法。
English: Hearing that one should be exaggerated to ten, and seeing that a hundred should be increased to a thousand, this causes those simple things to be divided into ten kinds, a hundred kinds of complicated things; to be very clear, into a thousand and ten thousand kinds of mutually contradictory sayings.

古文：墨子哭於练丝，杨子哭於歧道，盖伤失本，悲离其实也。
现代文：墨子哭练丝，杨子哭歧道，大概伤心失去根本，悲痛得离开了事实。
English: Mo Zi cried and practiced silk, Yang Zi cried and went astray, probably sad to lose the root, sad to leave the fact.

古文：蜚流之言，百传之语，出小人之口，驰闾巷之间，其犹是也。
现代文：流言蜚语，众人传说的话，出至小人的口，流传在街头巷尾之间，都是这样的。
English: This is the way gossip and popular legend spread from the mouths of villains to the corners of the streets.

古文：诸子之文，笔墨之疏，贤所著，妙思所集，宜如其实，犹或增之。
现代文：各家学说的文章，各种各样的解释，都是贤人写的，精妙思想集粹，应该符合事实了，然而有的地方还是夸大。
English: The articles of various doctrines, various interpretations, are written by wise men, exquisite thought concentrated, should be consistent with the facts, however, some places are still exaggerated.

古文：傥经艺之言，如其实乎？
现代文：也许儒家经书上的话符合实际吧？
English: Maybe the words in the Confucian scriptures are true?

古文：言审莫过圣人，经艺万世不易，犹或出溢，增过其实。
现代文：说话慎重莫过于圣人，儒家经书万代不变，然而有的还说过了头，夸大了事实。
English: No one speaks more carefully than a sage, and the Confucian scriptures have remained unchanged for thousands of years. However, some have spoken out of turn and exaggerated the truth.

古文：增过其实，皆有事为，不妄乱误以少为多也？
现代文：夸大事实都有目的，不会胡乱地、错误地把少的说成多的。
English: There is a purpose in exaggerating the facts, and one should not wildly and erroneously say that less is more.

古文：然而必论之者，方言经艺之增与传语异也。
现代文：然而一定要评论，正是为了说明经书上的夸大跟传说的夸张是不一样的。
English: However, it must be commented on, precisely to show that the exaggeration of scripture is not the same as the exaggeration of legend.

古文：经增非一，略举较著，令怳惑之人，观览采择，得以开心通意，晓解觉悟。
现代文：经书上的夸大不是少数，略举比较明显的，让模糊迷惑的人，观读采纳，能够开通思想，理解觉悟。
English: The exaggeration in the scriptures is not a few, a few examples are more obvious, so that people who are confused and confused can open their minds, understand and realize.

古文：《尚书》曰： 协和万国 ，是美尧德致太平之化，化诸夏并及夷狄也。
现代文：《尚书·尧典》上说： 尧能使万国和睦相处 ，这是赞美尧道德崇高能导致天下太平的教化，教化施及中原各族和边远民族。
English: "Shangshu·Shanxian" said: "Shanxian can make all nations live in harmony," which is a praise of "Shanxian's lofty morality can lead to the enlightenment of world peace, and the enlightenment is applied to all ethnic groups in the Central Plains and remote ethnic groups.

古文：言协和方外，可也；言万国，增之也。
现代文：说能与边远地区和睦相处，是可能的；说有万国，是夸大。
English: To say that it is possible to live in harmony with remote regions is an exaggeration; to say that there are nations is an exaggeration.

古文：夫唐之与周，俱治五千里内。
现代文：尧与西周，都治理着五千里内的土地。
English: Both Handan and Xizhou govern the land within 5,000 miles.

古文：周时诸侯千七百九十三国，荒服、戎服、要服及四海之外不粒食之民，若穿胸、儋耳、焦侥、跋踵之辈，并合其数，不能三千。
现代文：西周时有一千七百九十三个诸侯国，加上要服、荒服地区和所有海外不吃五谷的人，像穿胸、儋耳、焦侥、跂踵之类，合拢这些数目，不到三千。
English: At the time of the Western Zhou Dynasty, there were 1,793 princely states, plus subject and non-subject regions, and all overseas people who did not eat the five grains, such as pierced chest, pierced ear, pierced heel, and so on. The total number of these was less than 3,000.

古文：天之所覆，地之所载，尽於三千之中矣。
现代文：天覆盖到的地方，地上拥有的地方，全在三千之内。
English: The area covered by the sky and the area owned by the earth are all within three thousand.

古文：而《尚书》云万国，褒增过实以美尧也。
现代文：而《尚书·尧典》说 万国 ，夸耀超过事实，是用它来赞美尧。
English: However, "Shangshu·Yongxuan" says that all nations, boasting more than the fact, use it to praise Ying.

古文：欲言尧之德大，所化者众，诸夏夷狄，莫不雍和，故曰万国。
现代文：想说尧的道德崇高，教化的人很多，中原和边远的民族，没有不和睦的，所以称 万国 。
English: I would like to say that the morality of Yao is lofty, there are many educated people, and there is no disharmony between the Central Plains and the outlying ethnic groups, so it is called the world.

古文：犹《诗》言 子孙千亿 矣，美周宣王之德能慎天地，天地祚之，子孙众多，至於千亿。
现代文：像《诗经·大雅·假乐》上说周宣王时 子孙千亿 一样，是赞美周宣王德高能敬重天地，天地保佑他，子孙众多，直到千亿。
English: Just as it is said in the "Book of Poetry, Elegance, and Music" that Zhou Xuan Wang had one hundred billion descendants, it is to praise Zhou Xuan Wang for his high moral character, respect for heaven and earth, heaven and earth to bless him, and numerous descendants, up to one hundred billion.

古文：言子孙众多，可也；言千亿，增之也。
现代文：说子孙众多，是可能的；说有千亿，是夸大。
English: To say that there are many descendants is possible; to say that there are a hundred billion is an exaggeration.

古文：夫子孙虽众，不能千亿，诗人颂美，增益其实。
现代文：子孙即使众多，不可能到千亿，这是作诗的人颂美宣王，过分夸大实际情况。
English: Even if there are many descendants, it is impossible to reach a hundred billion, which is the poet's glorification of King Bi Xuan and excessive exaggeration of the actual situation.

古文：案后稷始受邰封，讫於宣王，宣王以至外族内属，血脉所连，不能千亿。
现代文：考察一下，从后稷开始受封于邰起，到宣王，以至宣王的外族内属，凡有血缘关系的，也不到千亿。
English: Let's take a look. From Houyi to Xuanqi, to Xuanwang, and even to Xuanwang's foreign relatives, those who are related by blood are less than 100 billion.

古文：夫千与万，数之大名也。万言众多，故《尚书》言万国，《诗》言千亿。
现代文：千与万，是数目的大数。 万 是说很多很多，所以《尚书·尧典》说 万国 ，《诗经·大雅·假乐》说 千亿 。
English: "Thousand and ten thousand" is a large number. "Ten thousand" means many and many, so "Shangshu·Shanxi" says "All Nations" and "Shijing·Daya·Fake Music" says "One hundred billion."

古文：《诗》云： 鹤鸣九皋，声闻於天。 
现代文：《诗经·小雅·鹤鸣》上说： 白鹤在沼泽深处长声鸣叫，声音在天上都能听到。 
English: "Shijia Crane Song" says: The white crane sings a long song in the depths of the swamp, and the sound can be heard in the sky.

古文：言鹤鸣九折之泽，声犹闻於天，以喻君子修德穷僻，名犹达朝廷也。
现代文：是说白鹤在曲折深奥的沼泽长声鸣叫，声音就像在天上听到一样，用它来比喻君子在穷乡僻壤修养德行，名声就像上达了朝廷一样。
English: It is said that the white cranes in the tortuous and profound marshes chirp in a long voice, the sound is as if heard in the sky, and it is used as a metaphor for a gentleman to cultivate virtue in the remote countryside, and the reputation is like reaching the court.

古文：其闻高远，可矣；言其闻於天，增之也。
现代文：说听见声音高远，可以；说在天上听到，是夸张。
English: To say that a voice is heard on high is true, but to say that it is heard in heaven is an exaggeration.

古文：彼言声闻於天，见鹤鸣於云中，从地听之，度其声鸣於地，当复闻於天也。
现代文：诗人说声音在天上能听到，这是因为看见白鹤在云中叫，从地面能听到它的声音。因此推测它在地上鸣叫，应当也在天上听得到。
English: The poet says that the voice can be heard in the sky because he saw the white crane calling in the clouds and heard its voice from the ground, so he assumed that it was calling on the ground and could be heard in the sky.

古文：夫鹤鸣云中，人闻声仰而视之，目见其形。
现代文：白鹤在云中鸣叫，人听到声音抬头看它，眼睛看见了它的形状。
English: A white crane chirps in the clouds. You hear the sound and look up at it. Your eyes see its shape.

古文：耳目同力，耳闻其声，则目见其形矣。
现代文：耳朵和眼睛能力相同，耳朵能听到它的声音，那么眼睛就能看见它的形状。
English: The ear and the eye are equally capable, the ear can hear its sound, then the eye can see its shape.

古文：然则耳目所闻见，不过十里，使参天之鸣，人不能闻也。
现代文：然而耳朵能听到的，眼睛能看见的，不超过十里，即使它在天上鸣叫，人不可能听见。
English: However, what the ear can hear and what the eye can see are no more than ten li, and even if it were to sing in the sky, it would be impossible for people to hear it.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：天之去人以万数远，则目不能见，耳不能闻。
现代文：天离人有几万里远，那眼睛不能看见，耳朵不能听到。
English: The sky is tens of thousands of miles away from people, and their eyes can't see and ears can't hear.

古文：今鹤鸣从下闻之，鹤鸣近也。
现代文：如今白鹤鸣叫从下面听得见，它叫声很近。
English: Now the white crane's call can be heard from below, it is very close.

古文：以从下闻其声，则谓其鸣於地，当复闻於天，失其实矣。
现代文：因为从下面听到它的叫声，于是就说它在地上鸣叫，应当也在天上听得到，这不符合实际情况。
English: Because its call is heard from below, it is said that it calls on the ground and should also be heard in the sky, which is not the case.

古文：其鹤鸣於云中，人从下闻之，如鸣於九皋。人无在天上者，何以知其闻於天上也？
现代文：那白鹤在云中鸣叫，人是从下面听见的；如果在沼泽深处鸣叫，人没有在天上，怎么知道在天上能听到呢？
English: The white crane crows in the clouds, and man hears it from below; if it crows in the depths of the swamp, and man is not in the sky, how does he know that it can be heard in the sky?

古文：无以知，意从准况之也。
现代文：无法知道，那么这种想法只是从类比中得出的。
English: There's no way to know, so the idea comes from an analogy.

古文：诗人或时不知，至诚以为然；或时知而欲以喻事，故增而甚之。
现代文：作诗的人或许不知道。还诚心诚意认为如此；或许知道是想拿它来比喻其他事情，所以夸张得很厉害。
English: The poet may not know it, or sincerely believe it, or know that he is trying to use it as a metaphor for something else, and therefore exaggerating.

古文：《诗》曰： 维周黎民，靡有孑遗 是谓周宣王之时，遭大旱之灾也。
现代文：《诗经·大雅·云汉》说： 周的百姓，没有一个人留下。 这是说周宣王的时候，遇到严重的旱灾。
English: "Shijing·Daya·Yunhan" said: Zhou's people, no one left. This is to say that when Zhou Xuan Wang, encountered a severe drought.

古文：诗人伤早之甚，民被其害，言无有孑遗一人不愁痛者。
现代文：诗人悲伤旱灾太严重，人民深受其害，说剩下来的百姓，没有一个人不感到忧愁痛苦的。
English: The poet grieved that the drought was too severe and the people were suffering from it. He said that there was not a single person among the remaining people who did not feel sorrow and pain.

古文：夫早甚，则有之矣；言无孑遗一人，增之也。
现代文：旱灾很严重，那是有的；说没有一个人留下，则是夸大。
English: Severe drought, yes; no one left, exaggerated.

古文：夫周之民，犹今之民也。
现代文：周的百姓，跟今天的百姓一样。
English: The people of Zhou were just like the people of today.

古文：使今之民也，遭大旱之灾，贫羸无蓄积，扣心思雨；若其富人，谷食饶足者，廪囷不空，口腹不饥，何愁之有？
现代文：如果今天的百姓，遇上严重的旱灾，由于贫穷瘦弱没有积蓄，肯定急得捶胸盼雨。但像那些富人粮食富足，粮仓满满的，肚子不饿，还会有什么忧愁呢？
English: If today's people, encountering a severe drought, due to poverty, thinness and lack of savings, will certainly be anxious and anxious for rain. But like those rich people, who have plenty of grain, full granaries, and are not hungry, what sorrow will there be?

古文：天之旱也，山林之间不枯，犹地之水，丘陵之上不湛也。
现代文：天大旱，山林里草木不会全枯萎，就像地上发大水，丘陵的高处不会全淹没一样。
English: If the sky is very dry, the plants and trees in the mountains and forests will not completely wither, just as if there is a large amount of water on the ground, the high places of the hills will not be completely flooded.

古文：山林之间，富贵之人，必有遣脱者矣，而言靡有孑遗，增益其文，欲言旱甚也。
现代文：天大旱，山林里的草木，富贵的人，一定有遗留逃脱的，而说没有一个人留下，是过分夸张的文辞，是想说旱灾太严重了。
English: The sky is very dry, the vegetation in the mountains and forests, and the rich people must have left some to escape, but to say that there is no one left is an over-exaggerated rhetoric, trying to say that the drought is too serious.

古文：《易》曰： 丰其屋，蔀其家，窥其户，阒其无人也。 
现代文：《周易·丰卦》说： 大大的房子，遮盖住家，从门缝里看，静悄悄地像没有人一样。 
English: "Zhou Yi Feng Gua" said: A large house, covering the house, looking through the cracks of the door, quietly like no one.

古文：非其无人也，无贤人也。《尚书》曰： 毋旷庶官。 
现代文：不是那里没有人，而是没有贤人。《尚书·皋陶谟》说： 不要空设各种官位。 
English: It's not that there are no people there, but that there are no wise men. "Shangshu Xitangmo" said: Don't leave vacant all kinds of official positions.

古文：旷，空；庶，众也。
现代文：旷，是空设、虚设的意思；庶，是众多，各种的意思。
English: 旷, is the meaning of empty set, empty set;庶, is the meaning of many, various.

古文：毋空众官，置非其人，与空无异，故言空也。
现代文：不要虚设各种官职，是说安置无能的人，跟空设没有两样，所以说是空官。
English: Do not set up all kinds of official posts in vain, that is to say, the placement of incompetent people is no different from setting up empty posts, so it is called empty officials.

古文：夫不肖者皆怀五常，才劣不逮，不成纯贤，非狂妄顽嚚，身中无一知也。
现代文：不贤的人也都心存五常，只是才能低下达不到，没有成为完美的贤人，并非狂妄愚蠢得身上没有一点道德和才能。
English: Even those who are not virtuous keep the Five Precepts in mind, but their ability is too low to attain them, they have not become perfect sages, and they are not so arrogant and stupid that they do not have a bit of morality and talent.

古文：德有大小，材有高下，居官治职，皆欲勉效在官。
现代文：道德有高下，才能有大小，做官供职，都想在职努力效劳。
English: Morality has its ups and downs, talent has its ups and downs, and when serving as an official, everyone wants to work hard on the job.

古文：《尚书》之官，《易》之户中，犹能有益，如何谓之空而无人？
现代文：《尚书·皋陶谟》所说的那些无用的官，《周易》所说的那些房子里的人，还是能够有点用处的，怎么能说空空的没有人呢？
English: Those useless officials mentioned in "Shangshu Zhentaumu" and those people in the house mentioned in "Zhou Yi" can still be somewhat useful. How can you say that there is no one in the empty space?

古文：《诗》曰： 济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：《诗经·大雅·文王》说： 众多有才能的人，周文王依靠他们使国家安宁。 
English: "Poetry" said: Many people, King Wen borrowed tranquility.

古文：此言文王得贤者多而不肖者少也。
现代文：这是说文王获得的贤人多，不贤的人少。
English: This means that King Wen gained more wise men and fewer unwise men.

古文：今《易》宜言 阒其少人 ，《尚书》宜言 无少众官 。
现代文：现在看来，《周易》应该说 静悄悄的人很少 ，《尚书·皋陶谟》应该说 各种官职中不要只安置很少几个起作用的 。
English: Now it seems that "Zhou Yi" should say that there are very few quiet people, and "Shangshu Zhituo" should say, "Do not place only a few effective people in various official positions."

古文：以少言之，可也；言空而无人，亦尤甚焉。
现代文：用 很少有人 来形容，是可以的；说 空空 得没有一个人，也太过分了。
English: To describe it as "few people" is fine; to say that it is "empty" and "devoid of people" is too much.

古文：五谷之於人也，食之皆饱。
现代文：五谷对于人，吃了它们都会感到饱足。
English: Gotani: For humans, eating them will make you feel full.

古文：稻粱之味，甘而多腴。
现代文：稻谷的味道，甘甜很鲜美。
English: The taste of rice is sweet and delicious.

古文：豆麦虽粝，亦能愈饥。
现代文：豆、麦虽然粗糙，但也能充饥。
English: Although beans and wheat are coarse, they can also satisfy hunger.

古文：食豆麦者，皆谓粝而不甘，莫谓腹空无所食。
现代文：吃豆、麦的人，都说它们粗糙不甘甜，却不会说肚子空空没有吃的东西。
English: People who eat beans and wheat all say that they are coarse and not sweet, but they do not say that their stomachs are empty and they have nothing to eat.

古文：竹木之杖，皆能扶病。
现代文：竹子和木头的拐杖，它们能扶持病人。
English: Bamboo and wooden crutches, they can support the patient.

古文：竹杖之力，弱劣不及木。
现代文：竹拐杖的支撑力，弱小赶不上木头的。
English: The support of bamboo crutches is weak and cannot keep up with that of wood.

古文：或操竹杖，皆谓不劲，莫谓手空无把持。
现代文：有人拿着竹拐杖，说不刚劲有力，却不会说手空空的没有扶持的东西。
English: Some people hold bamboo crutches and say that they are not strong and powerful, but they will not say that they are empty-handed and unsupported.

古文：夫不肖之臣，豆麦、竹杖之类也。
现代文：不贤的臣子，就像豆、麦、竹杖之类。
English: Dishonest vassals are like beans, wheat, bamboo canes and the like.

古文：《易》持其具臣在户，言无人者，恶之甚也。
现代文：《周易》的作者明知道备位充数的官吏在家，却说屋里没有人，这是厌恶他们得很。
English: The author of "Zhou Yi" clearly knew that there was a sufficient number of officials at home, but said that there was no one in the room, which disgusted them very much.

古文：《尚书》众官，亦容小材，而云无空者，刺之甚也。《论语》曰： 大哉！尧之为君也。
现代文：《尚书·皋陶谟》说到的各种官员，也包括多少有点才能的人，却说不要空设官职，这讥刺得太厉害了。《论语·泰伯》说： 尧作为君主，真太伟大了！
English: It is a bitter irony that the various officials mentioned in the Shangshu Zhitaumu, including some with some talent, said that there should be no vacancies in government posts. The Analects of the Tibetans said: "He is so great as a monarch!

古文：荡荡乎民无能名焉。 
现代文：他的德行浩大无边，老百姓竟不知道怎么称赞他。 
English: His virtues are so vast and boundless that the common people do not know how to praise him.

古文：传曰： 有年五十击壤於路者，观者曰： 大哉！尧德乎！ 
现代文：传书上说： 有个五十岁的老头在路上玩击壤的游戏，旁观的人说： 尧的功德真伟大！ 
English: The biography said: There was a fifty-year-old man on the road playing a game of backgammon. An onlooker said: "What a great feat by the baboon!

古文：击壤者曰： 吾日出而作，日入而息，凿井而饮，耕田而食，尧何等力！ 
现代文：玩击壤的老头则说： 我太阳升起就劳动，太阳落山才休息，凿井喝水，耕田吃饭，这里边尧有什么样的力量！  
English: The old man, who was playing with the soil, said: "I work when the sun rises, and rest when the sun sets. I dig wells to drink water, and cultivate fields to eat. What kind of strength does Bentham have here!

古文：此言荡荡无能名之效也。
现代文：这种说法是要证明尧的功德浩大无边，没有一个人能说得出来。
English: This statement is to prove that Gong's merits are vast and boundless, and no one can say it.

古文：言荡荡，可也；乃欲言民无能名，增之也。
现代文：说他功德广大，可以；要说老百姓竟不知道怎么称赞他，是夸大。
English: To say that his merits are vast is acceptable; to say that the people do not know how to praise him is an exaggeration.

古文：四海之大，万民之众，无能名尧之德者，殆不实也。
现代文：四海浩大，万民众多，竟没有一个人能说出尧的功德，恐怕不是事实。
English: It is probably not true that in the vastness of the four seas and the many thousands of people, there is not a single person who can speak of the merits of the dragonfly.

古文：观者曰： 大哉！尧之德乎！ 此何等民者，犹能知之。
现代文：其实，玩击壤游戏的人说： 尧有什么样的力量呢 ，是想说老百姓竟不知道该怎么称赞他。旁观的人说： 尧的功德，真伟大啊 ，这是什么样的老百姓，就能知道尧的功德伟大。
English: In fact, the person playing the game of striking the ground said, "What kind of power does the earthworm have?," trying to say that the people don't know how to praise him. The onlookers said, "The earthworm's merit is really great, what kind of people are these, they can know the greatness of the earthworm's merit."

古文：实有知之者，云无，竟增之。
现代文：实际上确有知道尧功德伟大的，却说没有，全是夸张。
English: In fact, it is true that some people know the great merits of Gong, but it is an exaggeration to say that they do not.

古文：儒书又言： 尧、舜之民，可比屋而封。 
现代文：儒者的书上又说： 尧、舜时的百姓，可以挨家挨户被封官。 
English: The book of the Confucians also says: The common people of the time of  and  can be sealed from house to house.

古文：言其家有君子之行，可皆官也。
现代文：这是说他们家家户户有君子的德行，可以都做官。
English: This means that every member of their family has the virtues of a gentleman and can be an official.

古文：夫言可封，可也；言比屋，增之也
现代文：说能被封官，可以；要说是挨家挨户都可以，就是夸大。
English: To say that it is possible to be arrested is true; to say that it is possible to go from house to house is an exaggeration.

古文：人年五十为人父，为人父而不知君，何以示子？
现代文：人五十岁作父亲，作父亲而不知道君主的功德，拿什么来教育子女呢？
English: If a man becomes a father at the age of fifty and does not know the merits of a monarch, how can he educate his children?

古文：太平之世，家为君子，人有礼义，父不失礼，子不废行。
现代文：太平社会，家家是君子，人人懂礼义，父亲不会丧失礼义，子女不会舍弃德行。
English: In a peaceful society, every family is a gentleman, everyone understands propriety, fathers will not lose propriety, and children will not abandon virtue.

古文：夫有行者有知，知君莫如臣，臣贤能知君，能知其君，故能治其民。
现代文：有德行的人有识别能力，能识别君主的莫过于臣子，贤臣最能理解君主，能理解君主，所以能治理老百姓。
English: A virtuous person has the ability to recognize, and there is nothing better than a vassal who can recognize the monarch. A wise vassal can best understand the monarch, and can understand the monarch, so he can govern the people.

古文：今不能知尧，何可封官？
现代文：如今他们不曾知道尧的功德，怎么能被封官呢？
English: Now that they do not know the merits of Gong, how can they be banned?

古文：年五十击壤於路，与竖子未成人者为伍，何等贤者？
现代文：五十岁还在路上玩击壤的游戏，跟小孩和未成年的人混在一起，算什么贤者呢？
English: Who is a wise man at the age of fifty, when he is still playing on the road, mixing with children and minors?

古文：子路使子羔为郈宰，孔子以为不可：未学，无所知也。
现代文：子路要子羔做郈的长官，孔子认为不行，因为他没有学好，无知识。
English: Confucius thought it was impossible for Zilu to make Zi Lam the commander of the imperial eunuch, because he did not study well and had no knowledge.

古文：击壤者无知，官之如何？
现代文：玩击壤的人没有知识，怎么能做官呢？
English: How can someone who plays at striking the ground be an official if he has no knowledge?

古文：称尧之荡荡，不能述其可比屋而封；言贤者可比屋而封，不能议让其愚。
现代文：称赞尧的功德浩大无边而没有人说得出来，那么就不能说尧的百姓能挨家挨户被封官；要说贤者能挨家挨户被封官，就不能议论和指责玩击壤的人愚昧而不知道怎样来称赞尧的功德。
English: If no one can say how to praise the great and boundless merits of Zhai, then it cannot be said that the people of Zhai can go from house to house to be appointed as officials; if it can be said that the wise can go from house to house to be appointed as officials, then it cannot be said that those who play the game of knocking down walls are ignorant and do not know how to praise the merits of Zhai.

古文：而无知之，夫击壤者，难以言比屋，比屋难以言荡荡。二者皆增之，所由起，美尧之德也。《尚书》曰： 祖伊谏纣曰：今我民罔不欲丧。 
现代文：既然有 击壤者 这样愚昧的人存在就不能说挨家挨户被封官，要是挨家挨户被封官就不能说尧舜功德浩大无边得没有人能说得出来，看来这二者都是夸张。夸张之所以产生，都是为了要赞美尧的功德。《尚书·西伯戡黎》说： 祖伊进谏纣王说： 现在我们的百姓没有一个不希望你灭亡的。  
English: Since there are such foolish people, it cannot be said that they were banished from house to house. If they were banished from house to house, it cannot be said that their merits were so great and boundless that no one could tell. It seems that both of these are exaggerations. The reason for the exaggeration is to praise their merits. "The Book of Zohar" says: King Zuijin said: Now there is no one among our people who does not want you to perish.

古文：罔，无也；我天下民无不欲王亡者。
现代文：罔，是无的意思，祖伊是说我们天下的百姓没有一个不希望纣王灭亡的。
English: , means nothing. Zui is saying that there is not a single person in the world who does not wish for the death of King Zhao.

古文：夫言欲王之亡，可也；言无不，增之也。
现代文：说希望纣王灭亡，是可能的；说没有一个不希望，则是夸大。
English: To say that it is possible to hope for the death of the king is an exaggeration; to say that no one hopes for it is an exaggeration.

古文：纣虽恶，民臣蒙恩者非一，而祖伊增语，欲以惧纣也。
现代文：纣王即使罪大恶极，老百姓和大臣们蒙受他恩惠的不止一个，而祖伊夸张的话，是想用这话让纣王有所畏惧。
English: Even if the king's crime is extremely evil, the people and ministers have received more than one of his favors, and Zui's exaggerated words are intended to make the king afraid.

古文：故曰：语不益，心不惕；心不惕，行不易。
现代文：所以说：说话不夸大，人心不会惧怕；人心不惧怕，德行不会改变。
English: Therefore, it is said: If you don't exaggerate, your heart won't be afraid; if your heart isn't afraid, your virtue won't change.

古文：增其语欲以惧之，冀其警悟也。
现代文：把话夸大，是想用它使人畏惧，希望它能使人警戒觉悟。
English: To exaggerate the words is to use it to frighten people, hoping that it will make people alert and aware.

古文：苏秦说齐王曰： 临淄之中，车毂击，人肩磨，举袖成幕，连衽成帷，挥汗成雨。 
现代文：苏秦以齐宣王说： 临菑城中，车碰车，人挤人，抬起衣袖能成幕，连起衣襟能成帷，挥洒汗水能成雨。 
English: Su Qin with Qi Xuan Wang said: In the city of Linyi, cars bump into each other, people crowd together, lifting up the sleeves can become a curtain, lifting up the lapels can become a curtain, and sweating can become rain.

古文：齐虽炽盛，不能如此。
现代文：齐国即使繁荣昌盛，也不会如此。
English: This will not be the case even if the country prospers.

古文：苏秦增语，激齐王也。
现代文：苏秦夸张的话，是在激励齐宣王。
English: If Su Qin is exaggerating, he is encouraging Qi Xuanwang.

古文：祖伊之谏纣，犹苏秦之说齐王也。
现代文：祖伊进谏纣王，就像苏秦说服齐宣王一样。
English: Zu Yi's persuasion of King Gong is just like Su Qin's persuasion of King Qi Xuan.

古文：贤圣增文，外有所为，内未必然。
现代文：圣贤夸张文辞，对外有目的，内心未必这样。
English: The saints and sages exaggerated their words and had an external purpose, but this was not necessarily the case in their hearts.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么知道呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：夫《武成》之篇，言武王伐纣，血流浮杵。助战者多，故至血流如此。
现代文：《尚书·武成》说周武王讨伐纣王，鲜血流得能漂起杵来，可见帮助纣王作战的人很多，所以流血如此之多。
English: "Shangshu · Wucheng" said that King Zhou Wu fought against King Gong, and the blood flowed so much that it could float. It can be seen that there were many people who helped King Gong fight, so there was so much bloodshed.

古文：皆欲纣之亡也，土崩瓦解，安肯战乎？
现代文：如果老百姓都希望纣王灭亡，军队会土崩瓦解，怎么肯作战呢？
English: If the common people all hope that the warlord will perish and the army will collapse, how can they fight?

古文：然祖伊之言民无不欲，如苏秦增语。
现代文：然而祖伊说 老百姓没有一个不想纣灭亡的 ，这就像苏秦夸张的话一样。
English: However, Zui said that there is no one among the common people who does not want to perish, which is just like Su Qin's exaggerated words.

古文：《武成》言血流浮杵，亦太过焉。
现代文：《尚书·武成》说血流得能漂起杵来，也太过分了。
English: "Shangshu · Wucheng" said that the blood flowed so much that it could float, it was too much.

古文：死者血流，安能浮杵？
现代文：战死者流的血，怎么能漂起杵来呢？
English: How can the blood shed by the war dead rise to the surface?

古文：案武王伐纣於牧之野。河北地高，壤靡不干燥。兵顿血流，辄燥入土，安得杵浮？
现代文：考察周武王是在牧野讨伐纣的，黄河以北地势高，土壤都很干燥，士兵被砍伤血流出来，就会渗入干燥的土里，怎么能漂起杵来呢？
English: According to the investigation, King Zhou Wu was fighting badgers in the pasture. The land north of the Yellow River is high and the soil is very dry. If soldiers are cut and bleed, it will seep into the dry soil. How can badgers float?

古文：且周、殷士卒，皆赍盛粮，无杵臼之事，安得杵而浮之？
现代文：何况周与殷的士兵，都带足了粮食，不可能有用杵臼的事，怎么会有杵漂起来呢？
English: What's more, Zhou and Yin's soldiers had brought enough grain with them, so they couldn't have used a millstone. How could there be a ripple?

古文：言血流杵，欲言诛纣，惟兵顿士伤，故至浮杵。
现代文：说血流得把杵漂起来，是想说讨伐纣的时候，由于士兵死伤的很多，以至到了能把杵漂起来的地步。
English: To say that the blood flowed so much that it made the cocoon float is to say that when fighting the cocoon, the soldiers were killed and wounded so much that they were able to float the cocoon.

古文：《春秋》 庄公七年：夏四月辛卯，夜中恆星不见，星霣如雨。 
现代文：《春秋·庄公七年》： 夏四月初五，晚上不见恒星，星星像雨一样落下来。 
English: "Spring and Autumn, the 7th year of Zhuang Gong": On the 5th day of the 4th month in summer, there are no stars in the evening, and the stars fall down like rain.

古文：《公羊传》曰： 如雨者何？
现代文：《公羊传》说： 像雨一样的东西是什么？
English: The Ram says: What is the rain-like thing?

古文：非雨也。
现代文：不是雨。
English: It's not rain.

古文：非雨则曷为谓之如雨？
现代文：不是雨却为什么说它像雨一样呢？
English: It's not rain, but why is it said to be like rain?

古文：不修《春秋》曰：雨星，不及地尺而复。
现代文：没有修订过的《春秋》说：星星像雨一样落下来，在不到地面一尺时，就回升上去。
English: "Spring and Autumn," which has not been revised, says: "Stars fall down like rain, and when they are less than one foot from the ground, they rise back up."

古文：君子修之， 星如雨 。 
现代文：君子把它修订成，星星像雨一样落下来。 
English: The gentleman amended it to the stars falling like rain.

古文：不修《春秋》者，未修《春秋》时《鲁史记》，曰 雨星不及地尺如复 。
现代文：没有修订过的《春秋》，指没有修订《春秋》时鲁国史官的记载，上面说 星星像雨一样落下来，在不到地面一尺时，就回升上去 。
English: "Spring and Autumn," which has not been revised, refers to the record of the Lu state historian who did not revise "Spring and Autumn," which says that the stars fall like rain, and when they are less than one foot from the ground, they rise back up.

古文：君子者，谓孔子也。
现代文：君子，讲的是孔子。
English: Sir, we are talking about Confucius.

古文：孔子修之， 星如雨 。
现代文：孔子把它修订成， 星星像雨一样落下来 。
English: Confucius revised it to, Stars fall down like rain.

古文：如雨者，如雨状也。山气为云，上不及天，下而为雨。
现代文：像雨一样的意思，是像下雨的样子一样，山里的气形成云，上升未到天，就降下来成为雨。
English: The meaning of "like rain" is that, like the appearance of rain, the air in the mountains forms clouds, which rise before reaching the sky, and then fall down to become rain.

古文：星陨不及地，上复在天，故曰如雨。
现代文：星星像雨般落下来，它们落下还没到地上，又回升上夭，所以说像雨一样。
English: Stars fall down like rain, but before they reach the ground, they rise up again, so they look like rain.

古文：孔子正言也。
现代文：这是孔子订正了的说法。
English: This is a revised statement by Confucius.

古文：夫星霣或时至地，或时不能，尺丈之数难审也。
现代文：其实，星星落下来有时到了地上，有时又没有到地上，离地几尺几丈，很难考查清楚。
English: In fact, the stars sometimes fall to the ground, and sometimes do not reach the ground, leaving the ground a few feet high, which is difficult to investigate clearly.

古文：《史记》言尺，亦以太甚矣。
现代文：鲁国史官记载说 一尺 ，也太过分了。
English: According to the records of the historian of the State of Lu, one foot was too much.

古文：夫地有楼台山陵，安得言尺？
现代文：地上有楼台和高山丘陵，怎么能一概说是离地一尺呢？
English: There are high-rise buildings and high mountains and hills on the ground, how can it be said that it is a foot away from the ground?

古文：孔子言如雨，得其实矣。
现代文：孔子说像下雨一样，符合实际。
English: What Confucius said is as true as rain.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，故正言如雨。
现代文：孔子写《春秋》，于是订正说像下雨一样。
English: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," so he revised it to say "like rain."

古文：如孔子不作，不及地尺之文，遂传至今。
现代文：如果孔子不写《春秋》， 星星像雨一样落下来，不到离地一尺 的文辞，就会流传到今天。
English: If Confucius hadn't written "Spring and Autumn," the stars would have fallen like rain, and his words, which are less than a foot from the ground, would have been passed down to this day.

古文：光武皇帝之时，郎中汝南贲光上书言： 孝文皇帝时居明光宫，天下断狱三人。 
现代文：汉光武皇帝的时候，郎中汝南人贲光上书，说汉文帝时住在明光宫，整个国家只判了三个人的刑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Guangwu, his son-in-law, the Southern Han people's Gong Guang, wrote a letter saying that Emperor Han Wen lived in the Mingguang Palace, and the whole country sentenced only three people.

古文：颂美文帝，陈其效实。
现代文：这是在称颂赞美汉文帝，陈述他的功绩。
English: This is praising and praising Emperor Hanwen and stating his merits.

古文：光武皇帝曰： 孝文时不居明光宫，断狱不三人。 
现代文：光武皇帝说： 孝文的时候不住明光宫，全国判刑也不只三个人。 
English: Emperor Guangwu said: When Xiaowen was alive, he did not live in the Mingguang Palace, and there were not only three people sentenced nationwide.

古文：积善修德，美名流之，是以君子恶居下流。
现代文：积善事修德行，美名传扬，这是因为君子讨厌处在众人所指的地位。
English: It is because a gentleman does not like to be in a position that is referred to by many people that he accumulates good deeds, cultivates virtue, and spreads his good name.

古文：夫贲光上书於汉，汉为今世，增益功美，犹过其实，况上古帝王久远，贤人从後褒述，失实离本，独已多矣。
现代文：贲光上书在汉朝，汉朝就是当代，夸讲功德称颂美名，尚且超过事实，何况上古的帝王离现在久远，都是贤人从后代对他们进行赞扬陈述，不符合实际脱离本来情况的，当然就更多了。
English: Gongguang was written in the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty is contemporary, praising the merits and praising the reputation, even more than the fact, not to mention the ancient emperors are far away from now, are sages from future generations to praise them, does not conform to the actual situation, of course, there are more.

古文：不遭光武论，千世之後，孝文之事，载在经艺之上，人不知其增，居明光宫，断狱三人，而遂为实事也。
现代文：要是不遭到光武皇帝的驳斥，若干代之后，汉文帝居明光宫，天下断狱三人的事记载在儒家的经典上，人们不知道它是被夸张的，那么汉文帝住在明光宫，全国只有三人被判刑的事，就终于会成为真实事情了。
English: If Emperor Guangwu did not refute it, several generations later, Emperor Hanwen lived in the Mingguang Palace, and the story of three people being released from prison was recorded in the Confucian classics. People did not know that it was exaggerated. Then the story of Emperor Hanwen living in the Mingguang Palace, and only three people being sentenced across the country, would finally become a reality.

