古文：梦休征下张镒楚实杨炎窦参李逢吉王播豆卢署韦词皇甫弘杜牧
现代文：梦休征下张镒楚实杨炎窦参李逢吉王播豆卢署韦词皇甫弘杜牧
English: Meng Huan, Zhang Xuan, Chu Shih, Yang Yan, Dou Zhan, Li Fengji, Wang Huan, Zhu Lu, Wei Zhi, Wang Fuhong, Du Mu

古文：高元裕杨敬之卢贞犹子国子监明经薛义郑光宋言曹确刘仁恭唐僖宗刘檀晋少主辛夤逊何致雍郭仁表王玙谢谔崔万安江南李令毛贞辅
现代文：高元裕杨敬之卢贞犹子国子监明经薛义郑光宋言曹确刘仁恭唐僖宗刘檀晋少主辛夤逊何致雍郭仁表王玙谢谔崔万安江南李令毛贞辅
English: Gao Yuan, Yu Yang, Lu Zhen, Yu Zi, Guo Zi, Guan Zi, Guan Ming, Xue Yi, Zheng Guang, Song Qian, Cao Qi, Liu Rengong, Tang Qizong, Liu Dan Jin, Shanshu Xin, Sun He, Yong Guo, Ren, Wang Xie, Cui Wan'an, Jiangnan Li Ling, Mao Zhenfu

古文：梦休征下
现代文：梦休征下
English: Under the command of Meng Hui

古文：张镒
现代文：张镒
English: Zhang Ye

古文：张镒，大历中守工部尚书判度支，因奏事称旨，代宗面许宰相，恩泽甚厚。
现代文：张镒于唐大历年间，在朝廷任工部尚书判度支，因为奏事称职，代宗皇帝当面许诺要封他为宰相。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Ye served in the imperial court as a member of the Shangshu Judgement Branch of the Ministry of Works. Because he was competent in reporting, the emperor promised in person to appoint him as prime minister.

古文：张公日日以冀，而累旬无信。
现代文：从此，代宗待他特别好。张镒天天盼望着下诏书，但几十天过去也没有消息。
English: From then on, the vicar general treated him particularly well. Zhang Ye looked forward to the next imperial edict every day, but there was no news from him for dozens of days.

古文：忽夜梦有人自门遽入，抗声曰：任调拜相。
现代文：忽一日，他晚上梦见有人推门急忙而入，大声说道：恭喜你调任拜相了！
English: Suddenly, one day, he had a dream in the evening that someone rushed in through the door and said loudly, "Congratulations on your appointment as the new prime minister!"

古文：张公惊寤，思中外无其人，寻译不解。
现代文：张镒惊醒，想屋里屋外都没人，这是怎么回事呢？
English: Zhang Qi suddenly woke up, thinking that there was no one inside or outside the house. What was going on?

古文：有外甥李通礼者，博学善智。张公因召面示之，令研其理。
现代文：他有个外甥叫李通礼，博学多才，十分聪明，张镒便将他招呼来，当面讲出自己的梦，让他琢磨一下其中的奥妙。
English: He had a nephew named Li Tongli, who was well-read, versatile and very intelligent. Zhang Ye invited him to come and tell him his dream in person, and let him ponder the mystery of it.

古文：李生沉思良久，因贺曰：舅作相矣。
现代文：李通礼沉思良久，祝贺道：舅舅要作宰相了！
English: After pondering for a long time, Li Tongli congratulated: My uncle is going to be the prime minister!

古文：张公即诘之，通礼答曰：任调反语饶甜，饶甜无逾甘草，甘草独为珍药，珍药反语，即舅名氏也。
现代文：张镒当即又问了一句何以见得？通礼回答说：任调的反语是饶甜，饶甜不能超过甘草，甘草独自为一种珍药。珍药的反语就是舅舅的名氏了！
English: Zhang Ye immediately asked another question, "How did you know that?" Tong Li replied, "The irony of any tune is sweetness, sweetness cannot exceed licorice, licorice alone is a rare medicine. The irony of rare medicine is my uncle's famous name!"

古文：公甚悦。
现代文：张镒大喜。
English: Zhang Ye was overjoyed.

古文：俄有走马吏报曰：白麻下。
现代文：有顷，有走马吏来报告说：诏书下。
English: Suddenly, a horseman came to report: "The imperial edict has been issued.

古文：公拜中书侍郎平章事。
现代文：张镒果然被封为中书侍郎平章事，也就是拜相了！
English: Zhang Ye was indeed appointed to the post of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, that is to say, he became the prime minister!

古文：楚实
现代文：楚实
English: Chusit

古文：著作佐郎楚实，大历中，疫疠笃重，四十日低迷不知人。
现代文：唐大历年间，楚实任著作佐郎，掌撰拟文字。忽一日，他染上疾病病得很历害，四十多天低烧昏迷，不省人事。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Chu Shizhen was in charge of writing, and one day, he caught a disease and was very ill. He was in a low-grade fever for more than forty days and was unconscious.

古文：后一日，忽梦见黄衣女道士至实前，谓之曰：汝有官禄，初未合死。
现代文：后来有一天，他忽然梦见一个黄衣女道士来到面前，对他说：你有官禄之命，现在还不该死。
English: Later, one day, he suddenly dreamed that a yellow-robed female Taoist came to him and said, "You have been appointed to an official position. You don't deserve to die just yet."

古文：因呼范政将药来。
现代文：随即唤范政把药端上来。
English: He then called for Fan Zheng to bring the medicine.

古文：忽见小儿，持琉璃瓶，大角碗泻药。
现代文：这时忽然看见一个小孩儿，拿着琉璃瓶，和一大角碗泻药。
English: At this time, I suddenly saw a child holding a glass bottle and a large bowl of laxative.

古文：饮毕便愈。
现代文：楚实喝完便好了。
English: Once you've finished drinking, it's good to go.

古文：及明，许叔冀令送药来。
现代文：天亮之后，许叔冀派人送药来。
English: After dawn, Xu Shuji sent someone to deliver the medicine.

古文：实疾久困，初不开目。
现代文：楚实病时间太久颇困倦，开始连眼睛也睁不开。
English: After suffering from the disease for a long time, Chu Shicheng felt drowsy and couldn't even open his eyes.

古文：见小儿及碗药，皆昨夜所见，因呼小儿为范政。问之信然。
现代文：当他看见小孩儿和药碗时，都与梦里见到的一样。他喊小孩儿为范政，再一问果然不错。
English: When he saw the child and the medicine bowl, they were just like the ones he had seen in his dream. He called the child a model politician, and it was good to ask again.

古文：其疾遂愈。
现代文：他的病立刻就好了。
English: He was instantly cured.

古文：杨炎
现代文：杨炎
English: Yang Yan

古文：故相国杨炎未仕时，尝梦陟高山之巅，下瞰人境，杳不可辨。
现代文：死去的老宰相杨炎未当官时，曾梦见自己登上高山之顶，俯视人间，茫茫一片，什么也分不清。
English: When Yang Yan, the deceased former prime minister, was not in office, he once dreamed of climbing to the top of a high mountain, looking down on the world, a vast expanse, unable to distinguish anything.

古文：仰而视之，见瑞日在咫尺，红光赫然，洞照万里。
现代文：他抬头看去，见太阳就在眼前，红光闪烁，普照万里。
English: He looked up and saw the sun right in front of his eyes, glowing red and shining for miles around.

古文：公因举左右手以捧之，炎燠之气，如热心目。
现代文：杨炎于是举起双手把它捧起来。那太阳滚烫滚烫的，一直热到他的心中。
English: Yang Yan then raised his hands and held it up. The sun was scorching hot, hot all the way to his heart.

古文：久而方寤，视其手，尚沥然而汗。
现代文：好长时间他才醒来。他看看自己的手，还直冒汗呢。
English: It took him a long time to wake up. He looked at his hands and they were sweating profusely.

古文：公异之，因语于人，有解者曰：夫日者，人君像也。
现代文：杨炎感到惊异，便告诉了别人。有人解梦说：太阳，本来是帝王的象征。
English: Yang Yan was surprised and told others. Someone interpreted the dream and said: The sun was originally a symbol of the emperor.

古文：今梦登山以捧日，将非登相位而辅人君乎？
现代文：他如今梦见自己登山捧日，这不是要当宰相辅佐皇帝吗？
English: He now dreamed that he was a mountain climber. Wasn't he supposed to be the prime minister and assistant to the emperor?

古文：其后杨公周历清贯，遂登相位，果叶捧日之祥也。
现代文：后来，杨炎官运亨通，终于拜相。果然验证梦见登山捧日是很吉祥的呵。
English: Later, Yang Yan's government career was successful, and he finally met his match. It is indeed very auspicious to dream of holding the sun on a mountain.

古文：窦参
现代文：窦参
English: Sinus ginseng

古文：贞元中，相国窦参为御史中丞。
现代文：唐贞元年间，窦参为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of Tang Zhengyuan, Dou Sang was appointed to the position of Goshi Chujo.

古文：尝一夕梦德宗召对于便殿，问以经国之务。
现代文：他曾梦见德宗皇帝召他来到便殿，问他治国之道。
English: He had a dream that Emperor Dezong called him to his study and asked him how to govern the country.

古文：上喜，因以锦半臂赐之。
现代文：听了他的回答，皇帝大喜，于是赐给他半臂锦缎。
English: Hearing his answer, the emperor was overjoyed and gave him half an armful of brocade.

古文：及寤，奇其梦，默而念曰：臂者庇也，大邑所以庇吾身也。
现代文：窦参醒来，觉得奇怪，默默地念叨着：臂者庇护呵，大权才所以落在我的身上。
English: Dou Guan woke up, felt strange, and silently chanted: "Bearer of protection, that's why the great power fell on me."

古文：今梦半臂者，岂上以我叨居显位，将给半俸，俾我致政乎？
现代文：今梦见半臂，难道说皇帝看我身居显位，将要给一半俸禄，对我执政不放心吧？
English: Now that I dream of half an arm, does it mean that the emperor sees me in a prominent position, will give me half the salary, and is not at ease with my ruling?

古文：蹙然久之。
现代文：他十分忧虑，后来把这梦告诉了别人。
English: He was so worried that he later told others about the dream.

古文：因以梦话于人，客有解曰：公之梦祥符也。且半臂者，盖被股肱之衣也。
现代文：有人为他解梦说：你的梦是个祥兆呵！半臂锦缎，也就是裹胳膊和大腿的衣服；胳膊和大腿常被视为得力助手。
English: Someone interpreted his dream for him and said: "Your dream is a good omen! Half-arm brocade, that is, clothing that wraps the arms and thighs; the arms and thighs are often seen as the right-hand helpers.

古文：今公梦天子赐之，岂非上将以股肱之位而委公乎？
现代文：今天你梦见皇帝赐半臂锦缎，这不是说他要将最得力助手一职委任于你吗？
English: Today you dreamed that the emperor gave half-arm brocade to you. Isn't it true that he wants to appoint you as his most capable assistant?

古文：明日，果拜中书侍郎平章事。
现代文：第二天，窦参果然被封为中书侍郎平章事，拜了相。
English: The next day, Dou San was indeed appointed as the attendant of the Chinese book, Ping Zhang, and bowed to the emperor.

古文：李逢吉
现代文：李逢吉
English: Li Fengji

古文：李逢吉未掌纶诰前，家有老婢好言梦，后多有应。
现代文：李逢吉未被封官之前，家中有个老婢女好谈论梦，后来大多很灵验。
English: Before Li Fengji was banned, there was an old maid at home who liked to talk about dreams. Later, most of them were very effective.

古文：李公久望除官，因访于婢。
现代文：李逢吉总想做官，常常向老婢女请教。
English: Li Fengji always wanted to be an official and often asked the old maid for advice.

古文：一日，婢至惨然，公问故，曰：昨夜与郎君作梦不好，意不欲说。
现代文：一天，老婢女唉声叹气地走来，李逢吉问她为什么，她说：我昨晚作了个梦，很不好。她本不想说，李逢吉逼她讲。
English: One day, the old maid came groaning. Li Fengji asked her why, and she said, "I had a bad dream last night. She didn't want to tell me, but Li Fengji forced her to tell me."

古文：公强之，婢曰：梦有人舁一棺至堂后。云： 且置在此。
现代文：老婢女说：我梦见有人抬一口棺材来到屋后说， 暂时放在这吧。
English: The old maid said, "I dreamed that someone came to the house carrying a coffin and said, 'Let's put it here for a while.'

古文：不久即移入堂中。
现代文：不久，又挪到屋内。
English: Soon, they moved indoors again.

古文：此梦恐非佳也。
现代文：这梦恐怕不是什么好事。
English: I'm afraid it's not a good dream.

古文：公闻甚喜，俄尔除中书舍人，后知贡举，未毕而入相。
现代文：李逢吉听罢却大喜。不久，他便出任中书舍人，主持向皇帝推荐贤能，很快就拜了相。
English: Li Fengji was overjoyed to hear this. Soon, he was appointed as the scribe, presiding over the recommendation of talents to the emperor, and soon bowed to the emperor.

古文：王播
现代文：王播
English: Wang Biao

古文：王播少贫贱，居扬州，无人知识。
现代文：王播少年时十分贫苦，住在扬州，没有人知道他。
English: Wang Bo was very poor as a young boy. He lived in Yangzhou and no one knew him.

古文：唯一军将常接引供给，无不罄尽。
现代文：只有一个军官常来接济他，每次都吃得干干净净。
English: Only one officer often came to help him, and he always ate cleanly.

古文：杜仆射亚在淮南。
现代文：当时，一位姓杜名亚的仆射来在淮南。
English: At that time, a servant named Du Mingya came to Huainan.

古文：端午日，盛为竟渡之戏，诸州征伎乐，两县争胜负。
现代文：端午节那天，举行盛大的赛龙舟表演，各州均征招参赛人员，两个县争胜负。
English: On the day of the Dragon Boat Festival, a grand dragon boat race performance was held. All states recruited participants, and two counties competed for victory.

古文：采楼看棚，照耀江水，数十年未之有也。
现代文：各种颜色的棚子鲜艳夺目，照耀着江水，几十年都没这么热闹过。
English: Sheds of all colors are bright and dazzling, shining on the river. It hasn't been this busy in decades.

古文：凡扬州之客，无贤不肖尽得预焉。
现代文：凡旅居扬州的外地人，无论是有才还是无德无能之辈都尽得其乐，只有王播无人理睬。
English: All the foreigners living in Yangzhou, whether they were talented or incompetent, enjoyed themselves to the full. Only Wang Huan was ignored.

古文：唯王公不招，惆怅自责。
现代文：他不由得一阵怅然，自责不已。
English: He couldn't help but choke up and beat himself up.

古文：宗人军将曰：某有棚，子弟悉在，八郎但于棚内看，却胜居盘筵间也。
现代文：同族的那位军官说：我有棚子，家里人都在，你进去坐着看吧，这不胜过酒宴吗？
English: The officer, a member of the same family, said: "I have a shed, my family are all here, why don't you go in, sit down and watch. Wouldn't that be better than a drinking party?

古文：王公曰：唯。遂往棚。
现代文：王播说声好，便进了棚子。
English: Wang Bo said it was a good idea and went into the shed.

古文：时夏，初日方照，宗人令送法酒一榼。
现代文：当时正值夏天，太阳刚刚升起来。同族那位军官让人送来一榼酒，说，这酒很不错，刚叫人办来你快点喝吧。
English: It was summer and the sun had just risen. The officer, a member of the same tribe, had a bottle of wine brought to him and said, "This wine is very good. I've just had someone bring it to you, hurry up and drink it."

古文：曰：此甚好，适令求得。
现代文：王播心中烦闷，自斟自饮，把那一榼酒都快喝光了。
English: Wang Bo was bored in his heart. He poured himself a drink and almost drank the whole bottle.

古文：王公方愤懑，自酌将尽。棚中日色转热，酒浓昏惫，遂就枕。
现代文：太阳渐渐升高，酒劲也显得浓起来，使王播疲惫欲睡，当即就躺在枕头上。
English: The sun gradually rose, and the strength of the wine became stronger. Wang Bo was tired and wanted to sleep, so he immediately lay down on the pillow.

古文：才睡，梦身在宴处，居杜之坐。判官在下，多于杜公近半。
现代文：刚睡，他便梦见自己身在筵席上，坐在杜仆射的座位上，判官坐在下面，数目比杜亚的多一半。
English: As soon as he fell asleep, he dreamed that he was at a banquet, sitting on the seat of the eunuch, and the judge was sitting below, more than half the number of the dua.

古文：良久惊觉，亦不敢言于人。
现代文：过了很久，王播惊醒了，也不敢告诉别人。
English: After a long time, Wang Bo woke up with a start and did not dare to tell others.

古文：后为宰相，将除淮南，兼盐铁使。
现代文：后来他作了宰相，将兼任淮南盐铁使。
English: Later, he became the prime minister and concurrently served as the Huainan Salt and Iron Envoy.

古文：敕久未下，王公甚闷，因召旧从事在城者语之曰：某淮南盐铁，此必定矣。
现代文：可诏书好长时间也没有下来。他更加沉闷，便召集老部下对他们说：我的淮南盐铁使是当定了。
English: But the edict did not come down for a long time. He was even more bored, so he gathered his old subordinates and said to them: My Huainan Salt and Iron Company is a sure thing.

古文：当时梦中判官，数多一半，此即并盐铁从事也。
现代文：当时我梦见的判官，数目就多出一半。这就是说我要做盐铁从事。
English: At that time, the number of judges I dreamed of was more than half. That is to say, I want to do salt and iron.

古文：数日果除到。
现代文：几天之后，果然送来了诏书。
English: A few days later, the imperial rescript was indeed delivered.

古文：后偶临江宴会，宾介皆在。
现代文：后来，他在临江大摆筵席，客人们都在。
English: Later, he held a grand banquet in Linjiang, and all the guests were there.

古文：公忽觉如已至者，思之，乃昔年梦。
现代文：王播忽然觉得这地方好像来过似的，一想，就是当年那个梦呵。
English: Wang Huan suddenly felt as if he had been to this place before, and thought, "That was the dream I had that year."

古文：风景气候，无不皆同。
现代文：风景气候等，没有跟梦中不一样的。
English: The scenery, climate, etc. are not different from those in the dream.

古文：时五月上旬也。
现代文：当时正是五月上旬。
English: It was early May.

古文：豆卢署
现代文：豆卢署
English: the Department of Economic Affairs

古文：豆卢署，本名辅贞，少年旅于衢州。
现代文：豆卢署这个人，本名辅贞，少年流落到衢州。
English: This person, whose real name is Fu Zhen, was a juvenile who was exiled to Zhangzhou.

古文：刺史郑式瞻厚苻之。
现代文：衢州刺史郑式瞻对他很器重，处处照顾他。
English: Zheng Shizhan, the governor of Zhangzhou, was very kind to him and took care of him everywhere.

古文：谓曰：子复姓，不宜二名，吾为子易之。
现代文：一日对他说：你是复姓，不宜取两个字的名，我为你改改吧。
English: One day I said to him, "You have a double-barrelled surname. It's not appropriate to have a two-character name. Let me change it for you."

古文：又曰：君后二十年牧兹郡。
现代文：便写了署、著、助三个字给他，又说：我怕与你们家族中的人取的名字相同，你自己选择吧。
English: So I wrote the three words "署," "著" and "助" to him, and said, "I'm afraid I have the same name as someone in your family. You can choose for yourself."

古文：又指一方地曰：此处可建亭台。既寤，因改名署。
现代文：当夜，豆卢署梦见老父亲告诉他说：我听说刺史大人给你改了名字，这样一来你四次应考就可以中举，署字上面这个四字很好呵。
English: That night, he dreamed that his father told him: "I heard that Mr. Shishi changed your name, so that you can take the exam four times. The four characters above the signature are very good."

古文：后已再下第，又二举，后复不第。
现代文：又说，你二十年之后便可以管理此郡。接着，他又指着一块地说，这地方可以建一个亭子。
English: He also said that in twenty years you will be able to manage this county. Then, pointing to a piece of land, he said that a pavilion could be built here.

古文：又二举，乃成名。
现代文：这时豆卢署醒了。
English: At this time, the Doulu police woke up.

古文：盖自改名后四举也。
现代文：由于他改了名字，一连三次应试均未考取，而第四次终于中举。
English: Because he changed his name, he failed to pass the entrance examination for three times in a row, and the fourth time he was finally promoted.

古文：后二十年，果为衢州刺史，于所梦之地立征梦亭。
现代文：二十年之后，他果然出任衢州刺史，在他所梦见的那块地上修了一座征梦亭。
English: Twenty years later, he did indeed serve as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and built a Dream Pavilion on the land he had dreamed of.

古文：韦词
现代文：韦词
English: Wei Zi Zong

古文：元和六年，京兆韦词为宛陵廉使房武从事。
现代文：唐代元和六年，京兆韦词在宛陵廉使房武处从事。
English: In the first six years of the Yuan and Tang Dynasties, Jing Zhaowei was engaged in the office of Wanling Lianji Fangwu.

古文：秋七月，微雨，词于公署，因昼寝。忽梦一人投刺，视之了然。见题其字曰：李故言。
现代文：初秋七月，细雨微微，他由于疲倦白天就睡着了，忽然梦见一个人送来一张名片，上面清清楚楚写着李故言三个字。
English: At the beginning of autumn, in July, when it was drizzling, he fell asleep during the day due to tiredness, and suddenly dreamed that a person sent him a business card, on which the three words of Li Kuo Yuan were clearly written.

古文：俄于恍惚间，空中有人言：明年及第状头。
现代文：一会儿，韦词在恍恍惚惚中听见空中有人说：明年及第的头名状元呵。
English: For a moment, Wei Zihu was in a trance when he heard someone in the air say: "Next year's first and second place winners."

古文：是时元和初，有李顾言及第，意甚讶其事。为名中少有此故字者，焉得复有李故言哉？
现代文：元和初年，有个李顾言中了状元。韦词十分惊讶：在人们取的名字当中，很少有用故字的，难道说还能再有一个李故言吗？
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year, there was a Li Guyan in the first place. Wei Zi was very surprised: among the names people take, the old characters are rarely used. Can there be another Li Guyan?

古文：秋八月，果有取解举人具名投刺，一如梦中，但故为固耳，即今西帅李公也。
现代文：仲秋八月，果然有位取得乡试头名的举人送来张名片，正如梦中一样，但中间故字为固，他便是西帅的李公。
English: In mid-autumn in August, a person who won the top name of the township examination sent a business card, just like in a dream, but the middle word was fixed, he was Li Gong of Xishuai.

古文：词閟梦中之事不泄，乃曰：足下明年必擢第，仍居众君之首。
现代文：韦词隐瞒梦中之事不泄露，说：你明年殿试一定能够及第，仍为众人之首。
English: Wei Zi concealed the dream and said, "You will surely pass the entrance examination next year, and you will still be the first among everyone."

古文：是冬，兵部侍郎许孟容知举，果擢为榜首。
现代文：这年冬天，兵部侍郎许孟容主持殿试，李固言果然列为榜首。
English: This winter, the attendant of the military department, Xu Meng Rong, presided over the entrance examination, and Li Guyan was indeed ranked first.

古文：初固言尝梦著宋景衣。
现代文：当初，李固言曾梦见自己穿上了宰相宋景的衣裳。
English: At first, Li Guogan had a dream that he was wearing Prime Minister Song Jing's clothes.

古文：元和十年已后，景甚著，时望籍甚，有拜大宪之耗。
现代文：元和十年之后，宋景的名气大起来了，人们寄希望于他，有拜他作大官的消息。
English: Ten years after the Yuan Dynasty, Song Jing's fame grew, people pinned their hopes on him, and there was news that he would be made a grand official.

古文：及景自司刑郎中知杂，出为泽州刺史，寻又物故。
现代文：然而等到他从司刑郎中知杂，出任泽州刺史时，很快就死了。
English: However, he soon died when he was appointed to the post of the governor of Zezhou from the position of the secretary.

古文：固言心疑其梦。
现代文：李固言对这个梦十分疑虑。
English: Li Guogan is very doubtful about this dream.

古文：长庆初。
现代文：长庆初年，穆宗皇帝有事来到圆丘。
English: In the first year of Changqing, Emperor Mu Zong came to the round hill.

古文：穆宗有事于圆丘，时固言居左拾遗。
现代文：这时李固言任左拾遗。
English: At this time, Li Guoyan left to pick up the remains.

古文：旧例：谏官从驾行礼者，太常各颁礼衣一袭。
现代文：按老规矩，跟随皇帝出行的官员给皇帝行礼，太常每个人要发一件礼服。
English: According to the old rules, officials traveling with the emperor salute the emperor, and everyone is often given a gown.

古文：固言所服，因褰衣观其下，乃见书云：左补阙宋景衣。
现代文：李固言拿起发给自己的那件衣服一看，只见上面写着：左补阙宋景衣。
English: Li Guoyan picked up the dress that was given to him, and saw that it said: "Left side of Song Jingyi's dress."

古文：因言自说于班行。
现代文：他便把这件事跟同行者们说了。
English: He told his companions about it.

古文：皇甫弘
现代文：皇甫弘
English: Kōhōhiro

古文：皇甫弘应进士举，华州取解。
现代文：皇甫弘在华州考取解元，准备参加殿试考取进士。
English: Wang Fuhong took the entrance examination in Huazhou to prepare for the entrance examination.

古文：酒忤于刺史钱徽，被逐出。
现代文：不料，酒后失态，得罪了刺史钱徽，被赶了出来。
English: Unexpectedly, after drinking, he made a gaffe, offending Shishi Qianhui, and was kicked out.

古文：至陕州求解讫，将越城关，闻钱自华知举，自知必不中第，遂东归。
现代文：他来到陕州求考，刚过城关就听说钱徽从华州到陕州主持殿试的考试，知道自己必定考不上了。随即东归。
English: He came to Shaanxi to take the exam. As soon as he passed the city gate, he heard that Qian Hui was going from Huazhou to Shaanxi to preside over the entrance exam. He knew that he would not pass the exam. He immediately returned to the East.

古文：行数程，因寝，梦其亡妻乳母曰：皇甫郎方应举，今欲何去。
现代文：走了一段路程，睡觉时梦见死去的妻子乳母说：皇甫郎去应试，怎么往回走呢？
English: After walking for some distance, while sleeping, he dreamed of his dead wife, and his nurse said, "Imperial Father is going to take an exam, how can I go back?"

古文：具言主司有隙。乳母曰：皇甫郎须求石婆神。
现代文：皇甫弘把事情原原本本地说了，乳母说：皇甫郎应该去求教一下石婆神。
English: The nurse said, "Kohfuhiro should go and ask the stone god for advice."

古文：乃相与去店北，草间行数里，入一小屋中，见破石人。
现代文：于是就带皇甫弘去店北，荒野里行了好几里路，走进一间小屋中，看见一个石头人。
English: So he took Wang Fuhong to the north of the store, walked several miles in the wilderness, walked into a hut, and saw a stone man.

古文：生拜之。
现代文：皇甫弘跪下便拜。
English: Emperor Hong Hong knelt down and bowed.

古文：乳母曰：小娘子婿皇甫郎欲应举，婆与看得否？
现代文：乳母说：我家小娘子的夫婿皇甫郎想去应考，老婆婆你看他能否考得上？
English: The nurse said, "My little daughter's husband, the Emperor's son-in-law, wants to take the entrance exam. Grandmother, do you think he can pass?"

古文：石人点头曰：得。
现代文：石头人点头说：考得上。
English: The stone man nodded and said, "I passed the exam."

古文：乳母曰：石婆言得，即必得矣。他日莫望报赛。
现代文：乳母对他说：石婆神说能考得上，就一定能考得上，将来别忘报恩还愿哟！
English: The nanny said to him, "If you can pass the exam, you will definitely pass the exam. In the future, don't forget to repay the favor!"

古文：生即拜石妇谢。
现代文：皇甫弘急忙拜射。
English: Empress Dowager Houhong hurriedly bowed.

古文：乳母却送至店门。
现代文：乳母又把他送回旅店。
English: The nanny took him back to the hotel.

古文：遂惊觉曰：吾梦如此分明，安至无验？
现代文：皇甫弘随即醒来，吃了一惊说：我的梦如此清楚，怎么会不灵验呢？
English: Emperor Hohohong woke up immediately, was taken aback and said: My dream is so clear, how could it fail?

古文：乃却入城应举。
现代文：就进城应考。钱徽想整治他。
English: He went to the city to take the exam. Qian Hui wanted to discipline him.

古文：钱侍郎意欲挫之。
现代文：所有的考卷都交上来了，钱徽一一过目。
English: All the examination papers have been handed in, and the money badges have been examined one by one.

古文：放杂文过，侍郎私心曰：人皆知我怒弘，今若庭辱之，即不可。
现代文：他暗想：人们都知道我生皇甫弘的气，今天如果当众羞辱他是不行的，而不让他考取还是可以的。
English: He thought to himself, "People all know that I am angry with Emperor Hohongong. Today, if I humiliate him in public, it won't work, but if I don't let him take the exam, it's still okay."

古文：但不予及第即得。
现代文：他让下人将榜拿上来，那皇甫弘竟然名列前茅。
English: He let his subordinates bring up the list, and that Emperor Hohongong actually came out on top.

古文：又令帖经。及榜成将写，钱心恐惧，欲改一人换一人，皆未决。
现代文：他不由一阵恐惧，打算把皇甫弘的名字划掉，换上另一个人。
English: In a moment of fear, he decided to cross out the name of Emperor Hohongong and replace it with another person.

古文：反复筹度，近至五更不睡，谓子弟曰：汝试取次，把一帙举人文章来。
现代文：他反复思量，怎也拿不定主意，到五更天还没有睡。他对家人说：你把考卷拿来，挑一篇最好的文章给我。
English: He couldn't make up his mind and didn't sleep for five days. He said to his family, "Bring me the exam papers and pick out the best essay for me."

古文：既开，乃皇甫文卷。
现代文：家人照办，钱徽打开一看，是皇甫弘的考卷！
English: The family members did as they were told. When they opened the money emblem, they saw that it was Emperor Hohongong's examination paper!

古文：钱公曰：此定于天也。
现代文：钱徽叹口气说：这都是天定的呵！
English: Qian Hui sighed and said: This is all predetermined!

古文：遂不改移。
现代文：便没有把皇甫弘的名字划掉。
English: He did not cross out the name of Emperor Hohongong.

古文：及第东归，至陕州，问店人曰：侧近有石婆神否？
现代文：皇甫弘及第东归，走到陕州，向旅店店主打听，附近有没有一位石婆神？
English: Wang Fuhong and Dai Donggui walked to Shaanxi and asked the innkeeper if there was a stone god nearby.

古文：皆笑曰：郎君安得知？
现代文：店里人都笑了，说：你怎么知道呢？
English: Everyone in the store laughed and said, "How did you know?"

古文：本顽石一片，牧牛小儿，戏为敲琢，似人形状，谓之石婆耳。只在店二三里。
现代文：那本是一块顽石，放牛郎们经常敲它玩，像人的样子，所以人们称它石婆婆，只离此店二三里远。
English: Originally, it was a rock. The cowherds used to knock on it and play with it. It looked like a human being, so people called it the "rock granny." It was only a few miles away from the shop.

古文：生乃具酒脯，与店人共往，皆梦中经历处。
现代文：皇甫弘便备了酒肉，随店小二一起来到里，一切都象梦中经历的一样。
English: Wang Fuhong prepared the meat and wine, and came to the village with the store's second-year students. Everything was just like he had experienced in his dream.

古文：奠拜石妇而归。
现代文：他祭拜石婆婆之后便回去了。
English: He went back after paying homage to the stone grandmother.

古文：杜牧
现代文：杜牧
English: Dumu town

古文：杜牧顷于宰执求小仪，不遂；请小秋。
现代文：杜牧拜见宰执大人，想求个掌管吉凶礼制的小曹仪当，未成。
English: Du Mu asked to see the headmaster, but was unsuccessful in his request to see Xiao Cao Yi Dang, who was in charge of the auspicious and inauspicious rituals.

古文：又不遂。尝梦人谓曰：辞春不及秋。昆脚与皆头。
现代文：又想求个掌管刑狱的秋官做，又未成。他在梦中梦见有人对他说：辞别春天未到秋天， 昆 字底与 皆 字头呵。
English: He also wanted to ask for an autumn official in charge of the prison, but was unsuccessful. In his dream, he dreamed that someone said to him: "Say goodbye to the spring before the autumn, Kun 字底 and 皆 字头."

古文：后果得比部员外。
现代文：后来，他果然到刑部任了个员外郎。
English: Later, he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department as a special assistant.

古文：高元裕
现代文：高元裕
English: Takamoto Yutaka

古文：襄阳节度使高元裕，大和三年，任司勋员外郎，寓宿南宫。
现代文：襄阳节度使高元裕，在唐代太和三年的时候任司勋员外郎，寄宿在南宫里。
English: The Xiangyang Festival made Gao Yuanyu leave, and when he was three years old in the Tang Dynasty, he served as a knight's brother, and lodged in the Southern Palace.

古文：昼梦有人告曰：十年作襄刺史。
现代文：一天，他白日梦见有人对他说：你十年之后作襄阳刺史。
English: One day, he had a daydream in which someone said to him, "Ten years from now, you will write the history of Xiangyang."

古文：既寤，仿佛仪质，盖伟秀士也。
现代文：随即醒来，梦中那挺拔的美男子仪表堂堂，好像还在面前。
English: Then I woke up, and the tall handsome man in my dream was still in front of me.

古文：私异之，因援毫，以隐语记于厅之东楹，掩映之处，曰：大三寤襄刺十年。
现代文：他暗自惊异，拿起笔，用隐语把这梦记在厅堂东边的门柱上。这里花草掩映，不易被发现。他写下这样几个字：大三寤襄刺十年。
English: Secretly surprised, he picked up a pen and wrote the dream in code on the gatepost on the east side of the hall. It was hidden by flowers and plants, so it was not easy to find. He wrote the following words: "Ten years since my junior high school graduation.

古文：洎开成三年，为御史中丞，既渝前梦，遂谓梦固虚耳。
现代文：到了开成三年，他任御史中丞，改变了梦中的职务，于是他说梦是不真实的。
English: In the third year of the kaisei era, he was appointed to the post of goshi chujo, changing the position in the dream, so he said that the dream was not true.

古文：是后出入中外，扬历贵位，清望硕德，冠冕时流，海内倾注，伫升鼎铉，视刺襄，乃优贤士之举耳。
现代文：这以后，他从朝廷到地方，历任各种显要官职，德高望重，名冠一时，举国注目，升为三公之一。站在这个位置上，他才觉得只有优秀的贤良之士才能够出任襄阳刺史呵。
English: After that, he rose from the imperial court to the local level, successively holding various prominent official positions, highly respected, famous for a while, attracting national attention, and promoted to one of the three princes. Standing in this position, he felt that only outstanding and virtuous people could serve as Xiangyang sashishi.

古文：大中二年，由天官尚书，授钺汉南，去前梦二十年矣。
现代文：大中二年，他由天官尚书被授兵权镇守汉南，离前梦已经二十年了。
English: In the second year of high school, he was given the right to guard Hannan by the heavenly officer Shangshu. It has been twenty years since his previous dream.

古文：公谓楹上之字，无复存也，因话其事于都官韦。
现代文：他以为门柱上的字已不复存在，便将此事告诉了一韦姓都官。
English: Thinking that the words on the gatepost no longer existed, he reported the matter to a city official surnamed Ipwe.

古文：好奇之士，往诣求焉。
现代文：一些好奇者纷纷前去观看。
English: Curious onlookers flocked to watch.

古文：自公题记后，廨署补葺亦屡矣，而毫翰焕然独存。非神灵扶持而明征于今日耶！
现代文：自他题字之后，这房子已修过数次，但那行字赫然尚存；不是神灵帮助怎能让它留到现在呢？
English: The house has been rebuilt several times since he inscribed it, but the line still stands; how else could it have survived?

古文：公因屈指，以今之年，加曩之十，乃二十年矣。
现代文：高元裕于是屈指一算，加上从前十年共二十年。
English: Takamoto Yu is therefore one of the best, plus the previous ten years, a total of twenty years.

古文：何阴骘之显晦微婉，及期而郎悟之如此哉。
现代文：苍天默默地佑护下民是相当微妙的，到这时候他终于恍然大悟。
English: Heaven silently blesses the people is quite subtle, by this time he finally realized.

古文：杨敬之
现代文：杨敬之
English: Yang Jingzhi

古文：杨敬之生江西观察使戴。
现代文：杨敬之的儿子就是江西的观察使。
English: Yang Jingzhi's son is Jiangxi's observation envoy.

古文：江西应举时，敬之年长，天性尤切。
现代文：江西应举时，杨敬之年龄大了，心中十分急切。
English: At the time of the Jiangxi provincial election, Yang Jingshi was old and very anxious.

古文：时已秋暮，忽梦新榜四十进士，历历可数。
现代文：这时正值晚秋，他忽然梦见新榜上公布的四十名进士，历历可数。
English: At this time, it was late autumn, and he suddenly dreamed of the forty new recruits announced on the new list.

古文：寓目及半，其子在焉。
现代文：他刚看了一半，便见到了自己儿子的名字。
English: Halfway through, he saw his son's name.

古文：其邻则姓濮阳，而名不可别。
现代文：儿子后面的那个姓濮阳，而名字看不清。
English: The one behind the son is surnamed Shenyang, but the name is not clear.

古文：即寤大喜，访于词场，则云有濮阳愿者，为文甚高，且有声誉。
现代文：他醒来之后大喜，寻访于读书人集中的地方，人们说有个叫濮阳愿的人，文章写得特别好，且颇有名气。
English: After he woke up, he was overjoyed and visited a place where there was a concentration of readers. People said that there was a person named Zhai Yangyan, whose articles were particularly well written and quite famous.

古文：时搜访草泽方急，雅在选中。
现代文：当时朝廷急于遍访山林草泽的高人逸士，早已经是被选入试的秀才了。
English: At that time, the imperial court was in a hurry to visit every nook and cranny of the mountains and forests to recruit outstanding scholars, who had already been selected for the examination.

古文：遂寻其居，则曰闽人，未至京国。
现代文：于是，杨敬之找到他住的地方，那人说自己是福建人，从未到过京城。
English: As a result, Yang Jingzhi found out where he lived. The man said he was from Fujian and had never been to Beijing.

古文：杨公诫其子。令听之。俟其到京，与之往来，以应斯梦。
现代文：杨敬之嘱咐儿子说：你听好了，等你到了京城，要和他往来交朋友，我的那个梦才能应验。
English: Yang Jingzhi told his son: "Listen, when you get to Beijing, you should make friends with him. Only then will my dream come true."

古文：一日。杨公祖客灞上，客未至间，休于逆旅。
现代文：杨敬之在灞上送客，客人还没到，在旅馆里休息。
English: Yang Jingzhi was on the raft to see the guests off. The guests had not yet arrived and were resting in the hotel.

古文：有目远来者，试命询之，乃贡士也。
现代文：这时，有个人从远方而来，杨敬之试探着询问，才知道他是个贡士。
English: At this time, a person came from afar, and Yang Jingzhi probed and inquired, only to find out that he was a gongshi.

古文：侦所自，曰：自闽。
现代文：又问他从哪里来，回答说福建。你贵姓？
English: He also asked him where he was from, to which he replied Fujian. What is your surname?

古文：问其娃，曰：濮阳。
现代文：我姓濮阳。
English: My surname is Shenyang.

古文：审其名，曰：愿。
现代文：你叫什么名字？我叫愿。
English: What's your name? My name is Zheng.

古文：杨公曰：吁！斯天启也。
现代文：杨敬之长叹一声道：真是苍天有灵呵。
English: Yang Jingzhi let out a long sigh and said, "It's true that heaven has a spirit."

古文：安详有既梦于彼，复遇于此哉。
现代文：不然，怎么会做了那样的梦，就遇到了这样的事呢？
English: Otherwise, how could I have had such a dream and encountered such a thing?

古文：遂命相见。
现代文：随即让儿子来见。
English: He then asked his son to come and see him.

古文：濮阳逡巡不得让，执所业以见。
现代文：濮阳有些顾虑尚犹豫不决时，杨敬之之子杨戴已经带着书本进来了。
English: When Fenyang hesitated with some misgivings, Yang Dai, the son of Yang Jing, came in with a book.

古文：始阅其人，眉宇清朗；次与之语，词气安详；终阅其文，体理精奥；问其所抵，则曰：今将僦居。
现代文：他开始观察濮阳其人，只见他眉清目秀；再谈话，只见他谈吐稳健。最后，又翻阅了他的文章，写得十分精妙。
English: He began to observe Shenyang's person, only to see his clear eyebrows; then conversation, only to see him speak steadily. Finally, he reviewed his article, which was very well written.

古文：杨公令尽驱所行，置于庠序，命江西与之朝夕同处。
现代文：杨敬之问他准备到什么地方去，回答说就准备住在这里。杨敬之把他的随从都打发走了，将他安置在学校里，命儿子跟他朝夕相处。
English: Yang Jingzhi asked him where he was going, and he replied that he was going to live here. Yang Jingzhi sent his entourage away, placed him in a school, and ordered his son to get along with him morning and evening.

古文：是冬，大称濮阳艺学于公卿间，人情翕然，升第必矣。
现代文：这年冬天，杨敬之称赞濮阳学问高深，完全可以与公卿们相比，如果天理和人情相合，他一定能够及第。
English: This winter, Yang Jingzhi praised Shenyang for its high level of learning, which can be completely compared with the nobles. If the heavenly principle and human nature are compatible, he will definitely be able to reach the first place.

古文：试期有日，而生一夕暴卒。
现代文：不料，就在考试前几天，濮阳却在一天晚间暴病而死。
English: Unexpectedly, just a few days before the exam, Fenyang died of a violent illness one evening.

古文：杨公惋痛嗟骇，搜囊其贫，乡路且远，力为营辨，归骨闽间。
现代文：杨敬之又是惋惜又是惊骇。在整理遗物时，杨敬之才发现濮阳几乎一无所有，而且离家乡又相当远，经过一番奔走，才将他的遗骨送回了福建。
English: Yang Jingzhi was both saddened and shocked. When sorting out the relics, Yang Jingzhi found that there was almost nothing left in Fenyang, and it was quite far from his hometown. After a lot of running around, he sent his remains back to Fujian.

古文：仍谓其子曰：我梦无征，汝之一名，亦不可保。
现代文：然后，他对儿子说：我的梦不灵，你的这一名，恐怕也保不住了！
English: Then he said to his son: "My dream is dead, and I'm afraid this name of yours won't survive either!"

古文：明年，其子及第，而同年无濮阳者。
现代文：第二年，他的儿子考中了进士，而没有濮阳的名字。
English: The next year, his son passed the entrance examination, but without the name of Shenyang.

古文：夏首，将关送于吏部。时宰相有言：前辈重族□望，轻官职。
现代文：初夏，将公文送到吏部之后，宰相说道：前辈重族有名望，声名显赫，轻官职的。
English: In early summer, after the official document was sent to the Personnel Department, the prime minister said: The predecessors of the heavy clan are famous, renowned, and light official positions.

古文：竹林七贤，曰陈留阮籍、沛国刘伶、河间向秀，得以言高士矣。
现代文：号称竹林七贤，如陈留的阮籍，沛国的刘伶，河间的向秀等，才被人称为高士呵。
English: The so-called Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, such as Chen Rui's Ruan Zi, Pei Guo's Liu Wei, and Kawama's Xiang Xiu, are only known as Gao Shi.

古文：是岁慈恩寺题名，咸以族望。
现代文：当年，到慈恩寺题名，每个中举的人都写的是自己的族望。
English: In those days, when the names of people were inscribed on the walls of Cien Temple, each person inscribed his or her own family name.

古文：题毕，杨闲步塔下，仰视之曰：弘农杨戴，濮阳吴当。恍然如梦中所见。
现代文：题完之后，杨敬之在塔下散步，抬头看了一眼后说：弘农县的杨戴，濮阳县的吴当，真是恍然如当年梦见的一样呵！
English: After finishing the question, Yang Jingzhi took a walk under the tower, looked up and said: Yang Dai of Hongnong County, Wu Dang of Poyang County, it was just like the dream I had that year!

古文：卢贞犹子
现代文：卢贞犹子
English: Lu Zhenyu Zi

古文：太子宾客卢尚书贞，犹子为僧。
现代文：太子宾客尚书卢贞，他的侄子作过僧人。
English: The prince's guest was Shangshu Luzhen, whose nephew had been a monk.

古文：会昌中，沙汰僧徒，斥归家，以荫补光王府参军。
现代文：唐会昌年间，遭淘汰，被斥责回到家中，借祖上之荫做了光王府的参军。
English: During the Tang and Huichang dynasties, he was eliminated, rebuked, returned home, and took advantage of the shadow of his ancestors to join the army of Guangwangfu.

古文：一夕，梦为僧时所奉师来慰，问其出处。
现代文：一天晚上，梦见自己当和尚时的师傅来抚慰他。问他现在何处？
English: One night, his master, who dreamed of being a monk, came to comfort him. He asked him where he was now.

古文：再三告以佛氏沦破，已无所归。今为一官，徒遣旦夕。
现代文：便再三诉说，由于佛事日趋没落，自己无处可归，只好当了一个官，庸庸碌碌地打发时光。
English: He repeatedly complained that since Buddhism was on the decline, he had nowhere to return to, so he had no choice but to become an official and pass his time in a mediocre way.

古文：期再落顶上发，方毕志愿。
现代文：真期望再次削发为僧，才能实现自己的志愿。
English: He really hopes to become a monk again so that he can realize his dream.

古文：且泣且诉之。良久曰，若我志果遂与佛法。语未竟，见八面屯兵，千乘万骑，旌旗日月，衣裳锦绣，仪卫四合，真天子大驾。
现代文：他边泣边诉，最后又说：如果我能够按照自己的愿望献身佛法话未说完，忽见四周被士兵们包围了，千军万马，旌旗猎猎，围拢过来，就象皇帝的大驾来到跟前。
English: He cried and complained, and finally said: "If I can devote myself to the Buddha Dharma according to my own wishes, I will not have finished saying the Dharma. Suddenly, I saw that I was surrounded by soldiers, thousands of soldiers, thousands of horses, hunting with flags, surrounding me, just like the emperor's chauffeur came to me.

古文：军中人喧喧，言迎光王。
现代文：人群中发出一阵阵欢呼，并说是迎接光王的。
English: The crowd erupted in cheers, saying they were there to welcome the king of light.

古文：部整行列，以次前去。
现代文：说罢，他们整队排列，依次进入府中。
English: With that, they all lined up and entered the government office one by one.

古文：卢方骇愕不能测，遽惊觉，魂悸流汗，久之方能言，卒不敢泄于人。
现代文：卢贞的侄子惊醒过来，且心有余悸，汗水把衣服都溻湿了，过好长时间才能够讲话。他不敢把这个梦泄露出去。
English: Lu Zhen's nephew woke up with a start and was very nervous. His clothes were soaked with sweat, and it took him a long time to be able to speak. He did not dare to divulge the dream.

古文：无几，宣宗自光邸践祚，录王府属吏。
现代文：没有几天，宣宗皇帝自光王府即位。光王府的人被录用不少，卢贞的侄子也在其列。
English: Within a few days, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne from Guangwangfu. Many people from Guangwangfu were hired, including Lu Zhen's nephew.

古文：卢以例，不拘常调格迁叙，自是稍稍兴起释教。
现代文：打破常规，不拘一格，被录用者均得到了升迁。
English: Breaking the norm and being eclectic, all those who were hired were promoted.

古文：寺宇僧尼旧制，一契梦中语。
现代文：从此之后，佛教又渐兴盛起来，寺庙，僧尼，一切如梦中师傅所期望的那样，都恢复了原状。
English: Since then, Buddhism has gradually flourished again, temples, monks and nuns, everything has been restored to its original state, as the dream master expected.

古文：卢校梦中所谓本师，盖参军事府主。
现代文：卢贞的侄子梦见的所谓师傅，其实就是参军事府主呵。
English: The so-called master that Lu Zhen's nephew dreamed of is actually a military governor.

古文：近师弟子，故以为冥兆。
现代文：接近他师傅的弟子们说这是冥兆。
English: Disciples close to his master said it was an omen.

古文：岂神之意，以是微而显乎。
现代文：此是神的旨意，它虽然很隐蔽但也是很明显的呵。
English: This is God's will, although it is very hidden, it is also very obvious.

古文：国子监明经
现代文：国子监明经
English: Kuniko Jimmo Sutra

古文：柳璟知举年，有国子监明经，失姓名，昼梦依徙于监门。
现代文：柳璟主持会考那年，最高学府国子监有位中明经科的学生，不知道姓名，白天梦见自己留连徘徊于国子监门口。
English: In the year when Liu Wei presided over the entrance examination, there was a middle school student of Chinese classics at the highest school, who did not know his name. During the day, he dreamed that he was lingering at the entrance of the kindergarten.

古文：有一人。
现代文：这时，有一个背着衣囊的人问他的姓氏。
English: At this time, a man with a backpack asked his last name.

古文：负衣囊，访明经姓氏，明经语之，其人笑曰：君来春及第。
现代文：就跟他说了。
English: I told him.

古文：明经遂邀入长兴里毕罗店，常所过处。
现代文：那人一听笑着说：你明年春就能考上。那人随即邀请他来到长兴里毕罗店。这地方他经常来。
English: The man smiled and said, "You'll be able to take the entrance exam next spring." The man then invited him to the Biro store in Changxing. He often comes to this place.

古文：店外有犬竞，惊曰：差矣。
现代文：忽然，店外有狗打架，就惊呼：不好！
English: Suddenly, there is a dog fight outside the store, and he exclaims: Not good!

古文：梦觉，遽呼邻房数人，语其梦。
现代文：他从梦中醒来，急忙招呼隔壁的几个人，把梦中的事情讲给他们听。
English: He woke up from the dream and quickly called a few people next door and told them what had happened in the dream.

古文：忽见长兴店子入门曰：郎君与客食毕罗，计二斤，何不计直而去也？
现代文：这时，忽见长兴里毕罗店的店小二进门来说：你与客人到我们那吃了二斤毕罗，怎么不算帐就走呢？
English: At this time, I suddenly saw a junior high school student enter the store of the Changxingli Biro store and said: You and your guests came to our place and ate two kilos of Biro, why don't you leave without paying?

古文：明经大骇，解衣质之，且随验所梦，相其榻器，省如梦中。
现代文：明经科生十分惊骇，脱下衣服抵饭钱，并且进一步验证梦中所见，看到床铺等器物好象梦中看见的一样。
English: The student was so shocked that he took off his clothes to pay for the meal, and further verified that what he saw in his dream, such as the bed, was just like what he saw in his dream.

古文：乃谓店主曰：我与客俱梦中至是，客岂食乎？店主惊曰：初怪客前毕罗悉完，疑其嫌置蒜也。
现代文：接着他又对店主说：我和客人都是在梦中来你这里的，店主也吃惊道：开始，我还奇怪客人面前的毕罗全都完好，疑心他嫌放蒜太多了。
English: Then he said to the shopkeeper: "Both I and the guest came here in a dream. The shopkeeper was also surprised: At first, I was surprised that the Biro in front of the guest was all intact. I suspected that he didn't like to put too much garlic.

古文：来春，明经与邻房三人中所访者，悉上第。
现代文：第二年春天，科生和隔壁三位梦中所访者，全部考取了进士。
English: In the spring of the following year, the science student and the three dream visitors next door were all awarded the prize.

古文：薛义
现代文：薛义
English: Xue Yi

古文：秘省校书河东薛义，其妹夫崔秘者，为桐庐尉。
现代文：河东的薛义在秘书省任校书。他的妹夫叫崔秘，为桐庐县尉。
English: Hedong's Xue Yi is a schoolteacher in the secretarial department. His brother-in-law is named Cui Bi, a Tonglu County lieutenant.

古文：义与叔母韦氏为客，在秘家。
现代文：薛义和叔母韦氏在妹夫家作客，时间一长，他便患上了疟疾。
English: Xue Yi and Aunt Wei were guests at her brother-in-law's house. After a long time, he fell ill with malaria.

古文：久之，遇痁疾，数月绵辍，几死。
现代文：几个月过去，身体日见虚弱，几乎要死了。
English: As the months passed, he became increasingly frail and almost died.

古文：韦氏深忧，夜梦神人白衣冠袷单衣。
现代文：韦氏深感忧虑，晚上梦见一个仙人，穿着白色的夹单衣，戴着白色的帽子。
English: Deeply worried, Wei dreamed of a fairy in the evening, wearing a white jacket and a white hat.

古文：韦氏因合掌致敬，求理义病。
现代文：韦氏急忙向他合掌致敬，并请他为薛义治病。
English: Mr. Wei hurriedly clapped his hands in tribute to him and asked him to treat Xue Yi.

古文：神人曰：此久不治，便成勃疟，则不可治矣。
现代文：仙人说：这种病时间长了治不好，就成了勃疟，就不能治了。
English: The hermit said, "If this disease takes a long time to be cured, it will turn into puerperal fever and cannot be cured.

古文：因以二符兼咒授韦氏，咒曰： 勃疟勃疟，四山之神，使我来缚，六丁使者，五道将军，收汝精气，摄汝神魂。速去速去，免逢此人，急急如律令。
现代文：所以我把两帖符和咒语传给你。这咒语说： 勃疟勃疟，四山之神，使我来缚，六丁使者，五道将军，收汝精气，摄汝神魂，速去速去，免遭此人，急急如律令。
English: So I gave you the two talismans and a spell. The spell said: "Brahma, Brahma, the god of the four mountains, bind me, the six messengers, the five generals, gather your energy, absorb your soul, go quickly, avoid this person, urgent as the law."

古文：但疾发，即诵之，及持符，其疾便愈。
现代文：往后，只要他一犯病，你就念此咒语，把符拿在手中，这病便会好的。
English: From then on, whenever he fell ill, you would recite this spell and hold the charm in your hand, and the illness would be cured.

古文：是时韦氏少女，年七岁，亦患痁疾。旁见一物，状如黑犬而蚝毛。
现代文：这时，韦氏的小女儿才七岁，也患了疟疾，旁边看见一个东西，长得像一只黑狗，浑身爬满毛虫。
English: At this time, Wei's little daughter was only seven years old and also suffered from malaria. Beside her, she saw something that looked like a black dog, crawling with caterpillars.

古文：神云：此正病汝者，可急擒杀之，汝疾必愈。
现代文：仙人说：正是它给你们带来的病呵，你应该立即把它捉住杀掉，这样病就会好的。
English: The sage said, "It is the disease that it has brought to you, you should immediately catch it and kill it, so that the disease will be cured."

古文：不尔，汝家二小婢，亦当患疟。
现代文：不然，你家的两个小婢女也会染上这病。
English: Otherwise, your two little maids will also get the disease.

古文：韦氏梦中杀犬。
现代文：韦氏在梦中便把那狗杀死了。
English: Mr Wei killed the dog in his dream.

古文：及觉，传咒于义，义至心持之，疾遂愈。
现代文：等她醒来之后，把咒语传给薛义，薛义在心里念叨着，病很快就好了。
English: After she woke up, she passed the spell to Xue Yi. Xue Yi recited it in his heart, and his illness soon improved.

古文：韦氏女子亦愈。
现代文：韦氏的小女儿也好了。
English: Mr. Wei's young daughter is also doing well.

古文：皆如其言也。
现代文：这些都跟梦里说的一样。
English: It was all just as the dream had said.

古文：郑光
现代文：郑光
English: Zheng Guang

古文：淄青郑尚书光，会昌六年春，梦自御牛车，车中载瑞日，光烛天地。
现代文：尚书郑光是淄青人。唐会昌六年的春天，他梦见自己驾御着一辆牛车，车上载着一轮太阳，光照天地。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Tang Huichang, he dreamed that he was driving an ox cart, carrying a round sun on the cart, illuminating the world.

古文：自执靷，行通衢中。
现代文：他亲自攥着靷带，行进在大道中央。
English: He personally tied the umbilical cord and marched in the middle of the avenue.

古文：俄而惊寤，且奇叹。
现代文：他一会惊醒过来，感到奇怪。
English: He woke up with a start and felt strange.

古文：后月余，宣宗即位。
现代文：一个多月之后，宣宗皇帝即位。
English: More than a month later, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne.

古文：以元舅之故，累拜尚书淄青节度。果契前梦。
现代文：因为元房舅舅的缘故，宣宗累封郑光为尚书、淄青节度使，果然契合了前面的梦。
English: For the sake of his uncle Yuanfang, Xuanzong sent Zheng Guang to serve as Shangshu (尚書) and Jiaqing Jiedu (青節度使) and the dream came true.

古文：宋言
现代文：宋言
English: Song Yan

古文：宋言，近十举而名未播。
现代文：宋言本名岳，考了快十次也没有中举。
English: Song Yan's real name is Yue, but he failed the entrance examination ten times.

古文：大中十一年，将取府解。
现代文：唐大中十一年，府里又要举行各乡的解元考试了。
English: In the eleventh year of the Tang Dynasty Middle School, the prefectural government is going to hold the settlement examination in each township.

古文：本名岳，因昼寝，似有人报云：宋秀才若头上戴山，无因成名。
现代文：他白天作梦，好象有个人对他说：宋秀才如果头上顶着个山，便无法成名了。
English: He had a dream during the day, as if someone had said to him: Song Xiucai can't become famous if he has a mountain on his head.

古文：但去之，自当通泰。
现代文：但只要把这个山去掉，则会平步青云。
English: But as long as this mountain is removed, it will be smooth sailing.

古文：觉来便思去之，不可名狱，遂去二犬，乃改为言。
现代文：醒来之后，他便想把自己名上的山字去掉。不过，不能叫狱字，便去掉两个犬字，改名为言。
English: After he woke up, he wanted to remove the Chinese character for mountain from his name. However, he couldn't call it the Chinese character for prison, so he removed the two Chinese characters for dog and changed it to "言."

古文：及就府试，冯涯侍郎作掾而为试官，以解首送也。
现代文：等到府试的时候，侍郎冯涯为主考官，他把头名解元送给了宋言。
English: When it came time for the prefectural examination, the chief examiner was the chamberlain Feng Lai, who gave the first name, Jie Yuan, to Song Yan.

古文：时京兆尹张毅夫以冯参军解送举人有私，奏谴澧州司户。
现代文：当时，京兆尹张毅夫认为冯涯在解送举人一事上有舞弊行为，便上奏一本，谴谪冯为澧州司户。
English: At that time, Jing Zhaoyin Zhang Yifu believed that Feng Lai had acted fraudulently in the matter of dismissing and raising a person, so he made a report and reprimanded Feng Zhaoyin as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：再次，退解头为第六十五人。
现代文：其次，把宋言从第一名退到第六十五名。
English: Secondly, Song Yan was relegated from the first place to the sixty-fifth.

古文：知闻来唁，宋曰：来春之事，甘已参差。
现代文：朋友们听到消息赶来慰问。宋言说：起落都没有关系，明年春天再见。
English: When friends heard the news, they came to offer their condolences. Song Yan said, "The ups and downs don't matter, I'll see you next spring."

古文：及李潘舍人放榜，言第四人及第。
现代文：第二年春天，舍人李潘发榜时，宋言以第四名考上了进士。
English: In the spring of the next year, when Li Pan, a layman, made a list, Song Yan was admitted to the fourth place.

古文：曹确
现代文：曹确
English: Cao Zhengyi

古文：曹确判度支，亦有台辅之望。
现代文：判度支曹确，还有出任台辅的希望。
English: There is still hope that he will be appointed as a Taiwanese assistant.

古文：或梦剃发为僧，心甚恶之。
现代文：一天梦见自己削发作了和尚，心中非常厌恶。
English: One day, he dreamt that he had become a monk. He was disgusted.

古文：有一士，云占梦多验。
现代文：有一学士说自己会解梦，而且颇灵验。
English: One bachelor said he could interpret dreams, and he was quite good at it.

古文：确召之，具以所梦话之。
现代文：曹确招呼他进屋，把那梦讲给他听。
English: Cao Zhengyi invited him into the house and told him about the dream.

古文：此人曰：前贺侍郎，旦夕必登庸。
现代文：这学士说：我向侍郎贺喜，你很快就会得到重用！
English: The scholar said, "I congratulate the waiter, you will soon be promoted!"

古文：出家者号剃度也。
现代文：因为出家人称和尚为 剃度 ，你的官运就该应在 杜 字上。
English: Since monks are referred to as 剃度 by monks, your official rank should be in Du.

古文：无何，杜相出镇江西，而相国大拜。
现代文：没过多久，杜相国出镇江西，就拜曹确为台辅了。
English: It didn't take long for Du Xianguo to leave Jiangxi Province, and Baizhao did indeed become a Taiwanese auxiliary.

古文：刘仁恭
现代文：刘仁恭
English: Liu Renkong

古文：梁刘仁恭微时，曾梦佛幡于手指飞出，占者曰：君年四十九，必有旌幢之贵。
现代文：南北朝梁代，刘仁恭还是平民百姓的时候，曾梦见佛幡从自己手中飞出去，算卦的人对他说：你四十九岁那一年，一定能够做指挥千军万马的大官。
English: When Liu Rengong was still a commoner in the Liang Dynasty of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, he once dreamed that the Buddha banner flew out of his hands. The fortune-teller said to him: In the year when you are forty-nine years old, you will certainly be able to be a great officer commanding thousands of troops.

古文：后如其说，果为幽帅焉。唐僖宗
现代文：后来正像他说的那样，果然出任幽州的大元帅。唐僖宗
English: Later, just as he said, he was appointed grand marshal of Yuzhou.

古文：僖宗自晋王即位，幼而多能，素不晓棋。
现代文：唐僖宗自从晋王登基以来，年幼多才，聪明无比，他从来不会下棋。
English: Tang Yanzong was young, talented and extremely clever since he ascended to the throne. He never played chess.

古文：一夕，梦人以棋经三卷焚而使吞之。
现代文：一天晚上，梦见有人把三卷棋书烧成灰让他吞下去。
English: One night, he dreamed that someone had burned three volumes of chess books into ashes for him to swallow.

古文：及觉，命待诏观棋，凡所指划，皆出人意。
现代文：醒来之后，让待诏来看他下棋，他的一招一式，均大出人的意料。
English: After waking up, let's wait to see him play chess, his every move is unexpected.

古文：刘檀
现代文：刘檀
English: Liu Tan

古文：王蜀员外郎刘檀本名审义，忽梦一孝子，引令上檀香树，而谓曰：君速登。
现代文：王蜀员外郎刘檀本名叫审义。一日，他忽然梦见一个孝子领着自己爬檀香树，并对他说：你快点上！
English: One day, he suddenly dreamed that a filial son was leading him to climb a sandalwood tree, and said to him, "Hurry up!

古文：刘乃登。
现代文：刘就往上爬。
English: Liu climbed up.

古文：遂向怀内出绯衣，令服之。
现代文：那人又从怀中拿出件红衣服，让他穿上。
English: And he took out of his bosom a scarlet robe, and put it on him.

古文：觉，因改名檀。
现代文：醒来之后，他就改名刘檀了。
English: After he woke up, he changed his name to Liu Tan.

古文：未及一年，蜀郡牧请一杜评事充倅职，奏授殿中侍御史内供奉，赐绯。
现代文：不到一年，蜀郡守请一位姓杜的评事充任副职，奏请皇帝授予他殿中侍御史内供奉，并赐红衣服。
English: Less than a year later, the governor of Shu County invited a commentator surnamed Du to serve as deputy, and asked the emperor to grant him the title of palace attendant, and to give him red clothes.

古文：敕下，杜丁忧不行。杜遂举刘于郡侯。
现代文：诏书下，杜评事因父母之丧，不能就职，就把刘檀推荐给郡守。
English: According to the edict, Du Hanjie, unable to take office due to the death of his parents, recommended Liu Dan to the county governor.

古文：郡侯乃奏檀，而所授官与杜先奏拟无别。
现代文：郡守又为刘檀重新奏请皇帝，官职等项均未变。
English: The county governor also invited the emperor for Liu Dan again, and the official ranks remained unchanged.

古文：是时刘方闲居力困，杜因遗刘新绯公服一领。果征梦焉。
现代文：这时，刘檀闲居家中且有些困顿，杜某送来红色的新公服一件，果然应了那个梦。
English: At this time, Liu Dan was idle at home and somewhat troubled. Du Mou sent a new red official uniform, which really fulfilled that dream.

古文：晋少主
现代文：晋少主
English: Promoted to Junior Master

古文：开运甲辰岁暮冬，晋帝遣中使至内署，宣问诸学士云：朕昨夜梦一玉盘，中有一玉碗及一玉带，皆有碾文，光荧可爱，是何征也？
现代文：开运甲辰年冬末，后晋皇帝派中使到内署，宣旨向各位大学士发问道：皇帝昨夜梦见一只玉盘，上面有一只玉碗和一条玉带，都有碾文，光闪闪的，十分可爱，这是什么征兆？
English: At the end of winter in the year of Jia Chen, the Emperor of the Later Jin Dynasty sent an envoy to the Inner Court to issue an edict to the university scholars and asked: the Emperor dreamed of a jade plate last night, on which there was a jade bowl and a jade belt, all of which were crimped, shiny, and very lovely. What was the sign?

古文：宜即奏来。
现代文：请马上奏来。
English: Please play it at once.

古文：承旨李慎仪与同僚并表奏贺，以为玉者帝王之宝也，带者有誓功之兆，盘盂者乃守器之象，为吉梦，不敢有他占。
现代文：承旨之后，李慎仪和众学士联名向皇帝祝贺，都认为玉者是皇帝之宝，带者是有大军功之兆，盘者则是江山永固之象，这是个吉梦，不能作其他理解。
English: After the signing of the imperial edict, Li Shenyi and all the scholars jointly congratulated the emperor. They all believed that the jade is the treasure of the emperor, the bearer is the sign of great military service, and the plate is the symbol of the eternal stability of the country. This is an auspicious dream and cannot be understood in any other way.

古文：辛夤逊
现代文：辛夤逊
English: Shin Hye Sun

古文：孟蜀翰林学士辛夤逊，顷年在青城山居。
现代文：孟蜀之地的翰林学士辛夤逊，常年住在青城的大山里。
English: Xin Yuxun, a scholar of Hanlin in the land of Mengshu, lived in the mountains of Qingcheng for many years.

古文：其居则古道院，在一峰之顶，内塑像皇姑，则唐玄宗之子也。
现代文：他住的地方是一座古旧的道院，在一座山峰的顶上，里头塑着皇姑的像，这皇姑则是唐玄宗的女儿。
English: The place where he lived was an old Taoist temple, on the top of a mountain, with a statue of the empress dowager, the daughter of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang.

古文：一夕，梦见皇姑召之，谓曰：汝可食杏仁，令汝聪利，老而弥壮，心力不倦，亦资于年寿矣。
现代文：一天晚上，辛夤逊梦见皇姑召见他，并对他说：你应该吃杏仁呵。它可以使你聪明，老来更健壮，心力永不疲倦，也是追求长寿的资本呵。
English: One night, Xin Yuxiong dreamed that his aunt called him and said to him: "You should eat almonds. It can make you smart, more robust in old age, never tired, and is also the capital for pursuing longevity."

古文：汝有道性，不久住此，须出佐理当代。
现代文：你有道性，不能长久住在这里，应该辅佐当代天子治理国家。
English: You have a moral character, you can't live here for a long time, and you should assist the current emperor in governing the country.

古文：夤逊梦中拜请法制，则与申天师怡神论中者同。
现代文：辛夤逊在梦中向她请教有什么好的办法和主张，皇姑只说这和申天师的《怡神论》是相同的。
English: In her dream, Xin Yuxun asked her what good methods and suggestions she had. The Empress Dowager only said that it was the same as Shen Tianshi's "Theory of the Pleasure of God."

古文：夤逊遂日日食之，令老而轻健，年愈从心，犹多著述。
现代文：接着，辛夤逊便天天吃这种药，越老越显得年轻康健，从未有力不从心之感，还写了许多著作。
English: Next, Xin Yuxun took this medicine every day. The older he got, the younger and healthier he looked. He never had a strong feeling of not being able to do it, and he also wrote many books.

古文：又梦掌中草不绝，后来内制草数年。
现代文：他又梦见自己掌上生草，怎么也拔不尽。
English: He also dreamed that he had grass growing on his palms, which he couldn't pull out.

古文：复掌选，心力不倦。因知申天师怡神论中仙方。
现代文：后来果然在内侍省起草文书数年，后又掌管殿试大权，心力不倦，因为他知道申天师《怡神论》的药方。
English: Later, he did indeed draft documents for several years in the Ministry of the Interior, and later he was in charge of the Great Hall of the People, and he never tired of his efforts, because he knew the prescription of the Deacon of Heaven's "Theory of the Pleasure of God."

古文：尽可验矣。
现代文：梦真的应验了。
English: It really is a dream come true.

古文：何致雍
现代文：何致雍
English: He Zhiyong

古文：何致雍者，贾人之子也。幼而爽俊好学。
现代文：何致雍是商人的儿子，少年时爽朗英俊勤奋好学。
English: He Zhiyong is the son of a businessman. When he was a boy, he was handsome, studious and eager to learn.

古文：尝从其叔，泊舟皖口。
现代文：他曾经跟着叔父，行船在皖口。
English: He used to follow his uncle, sailing on the estuary.

古文：其叔夜梦一人若官吏，乘马从数仆，来往岸侧。遍阅舟船人物之数。
现代文：他的叔叔晚上梦见一个人，像个官吏，骑在马上，后头跟着不少随从，来到岸边，仔细清点水中船只和人员的数量。
English: His uncle dreamed at night that a man, like an official, on horseback, followed by a number of attendants, came to the shore and carefully counted the number of ships and people in the water.

古文：复一人自后呼曰：何仆射在此，勿惊之。
现代文：这时，又有一人从后而喊到：何仆射在这里，不要惊扰他！
English: At this time, another person shouted from behind: "Why is he here, don't disturb him!"

古文：对曰：诺，不敢惊。
现代文：回答说：是的，不敢惊扰。
English: "Yes," he replied, "I don't want to alarm you."

古文：既寤，遍访邻舟之人，皆无姓何者。
现代文：他随即醒来，把周围船上的人都问遍了，也没有一个姓何的。
English: He immediately woke up and asked everyone on the boat around him, and no one had a last name.

古文：乃移舟入深浦中。
现代文：于是，他们就把船驶入水深处。
English: So they took the boat deeper into the water.

古文：翌日，大风涛，所泊之舟皆没，唯何氏存。
现代文：第二天，风涛大作，所停泊的船只全都沉没了，只有他们何家的船幸免遇难。
English: The next day, there was a great storm, and all the anchored ships sank. Only some of their ships were spared.

古文：叔父乃谓致雍曰：我家世贫贱，吾复老矣，何仆射必汝也！
现代文：叔叔对何致雍说：我家道穷苦，又老了，何仆射一定是你了！
English: The uncle said to He Zhiyong, "My family is poor and old, how lucky you must be!

古文：善自爱。
现代文：你可要自爱自强呵！
English: You have to love yourself and be strong!

古文：致雍后从知于湖南，为节度判官。
现代文：何致雍后来到湖南求学读书，做了个节度判官。
English: After He Zhiyong came to Hunan to study, he became a festival judge.

古文：会楚王殷自称尊号，以致雍为户部侍郎翰林学士。
现代文：到五代楚王马殷时自称尊号时，被封为户部侍郎翰林学士。
English: When the fifth king of Chu, Ma Yin, claimed the title of honor, he was named the Household Attendant Hanlin Scholar.

古文：致雍自谓当作相，而居师长之任。
现代文：他自己则认为可以作宰相，而居师长之任。
English: He himself thinks that he can be the prime minister, but stay in the position of the head teacher.

古文：后楚王希范嗣立，复去帝号，以致雍为节度判官检校仆射。
现代文：后来楚王马希范登基，复去帝号，封何致雍为节度判官检校仆射。
English: Later, King Ma Xifan of Chu ascended to the throne, restored the imperial title, and appointed He Zhiyong as the judge of the festival and inspector of the school.

古文：竟卒于任。
现代文：他最后死于任上。
English: He eventually died in office.

古文：郭仁表
现代文：郭仁表
English: Guo Ren watch

古文：伪吴春坊吏郭仁表居冶城北。
现代文：五代时，吴国有个春坊吏家住在冶城城北。
English: In the fifth generation, there was a Chunfang official family in Wuxi that lived in the north of Yecheng.

古文：甲寅岁，因得疾沉痼，忽梦道士衣金花紫帔，从一小童，自门入，坐其堂上。
现代文：甲寅年，患重病久治不愈。一日，忽然梦见有位道士披着一件金花紫帔，跟着一位小童，走进门来，坐在堂上。
English: In the year of Jia Yin, he was seriously ill for a long time and could not be cured. One day, he suddenly dreamed that a Taoist monk wearing a gold and purple robe, followed by a child, walked into the door and sat in the hall.

古文：仁表初不甚敬，因问疾何时可愈。
现代文：郭仁表开始不很客气，开口就问自己的病何时能好。
English: Guo Ren was not very polite at the beginning. He asked when his illness would get better.

古文：道士色厉曰：甚则有之。
现代文：那道士厉色说：你只能越来越重！
English: The Taoist said sharply, "You can only get heavier and heavier!"

古文：即寤，疾甚。
现代文：当即醒来，他的病真的加重了。
English: When he woke up, his condition had actually worsened.

古文：数夜，复梦前道士至，因叩头逊谢。
现代文：几夜之后，郭仁表又梦见那位道士来了，使急忙叩头谢罪。
English: A few nights later, Guo Ren again dreamt that the Taoist priest had come, and he hurriedly bowed down and repented.

古文：久之，道士色解，索纸笔。
现代文：过了一会儿，道士的脸色渐渐好转，向他要笔和纸。
English: After a while, the Taoist's face gradually improved, and he asked for a pen and paper.

古文：仁表以为将疏方，即跪奉之。
现代文：他以为道士要开药方，当即跪下将笔纸奉上。
English: He thought that the priest wanted to write a prescription, and immediately knelt down and handed him the pen and paper.

古文：道士书而授之，其辞曰：飘风暴雨可思惟，鹤望巢门敛翅飞。吾道之宗正可依，万物之先数在兹，不能行此欲何为？
现代文：道士写完送给他，只见纸上写道：飘风暴雨可思惟，鹤望巢门敛翅飞，吾道之宗正可依，万物之先数在兹，不能行此欲何为？
English: When the Taoist monk had finished writing, he gave it to him. On the paper was written: "The wind and storm can be contemplated, the crane watches the door of the nest and gathers its wings to fly, our way of life can be followed, and the beginning of all things is here. If you can't do this, what do you want?

古文：梦中不晓其义，将问之，童子摇手曰：不可。
现代文：郭仁表梦中不知道这诗的意义，想问问，那童子却摆摆手说：不行。
English: Guo Ren didn't know the meaning of the poem in his dream. He wanted to ask, but the boy waved his hand and said, "No."

古文：拜谢，道士自西北而去。
现代文：他只好揖手拜谢，看着那道士向西北方向而去。
English: He had no choice but to shake his hand in thanks and watch the Taoist leave in a northwesterly direction.

古文：因尔疾愈。
现代文：醒来之后，他的病就好了。
English: When he woke up, he was fine.

古文：王玙
现代文：王玙
English: Wang Yao

古文：伪吴鄂帅王玙少为小将，从军围颍州，夜梦道士告之曰：旦有流星堕地，能避之，当至将相。
现代文：五代十国时，吴国鄂州的主帅王玙少年就是一员小将。他随军攻打颍州，晚上梦见一位道士告诉他说：明天早晨有流星坠落于地，你如果能避开，就能够官至将相。
English: At the time of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, the commander of Ezhou in the State of Wu, Wang Qianru, was a young general. He followed the army to attack Bozhou. In the evening, he dreamed of a Taoist priest who told him: "Tomorrow morning, a meteor will fall to the ground. If you can avoid it, you will be able to be the official."

古文：明日，众军攻城，城中矢石如雨。
现代文：第二天，众军开始攻城，城中的箭和石头像雨点一般压下来。
English: The next day, the army began to attack the city, and the arrows and stones in the city fell like raindrops.

古文：玙仗剑，倚栅木而督战。
现代文：王玙举着长剑，倚在木栅栏上督战。
English: Wang Yao, holding a long sword, leaned on the wooden fence to supervise the battle.

古文：俄有大石，正中其栅木及玙。
现代文：突然，有一块大石头正好击中栅栏和王玙。
English: Suddenly, a large stone hit the fence and the king's gate.

古文：铠甲之半皆糜碎，而玙无伤。
现代文：身上的铠甲都砸碎了一半，而他却没有受伤。
English: His armor was smashed in half, but he was unhurt.

古文：因叹曰：流星正尔耶。
现代文：于是，他感叹不已，说：那流星看来就是它了。
English: Then he sighed and said, "That's what the meteor looks like."

古文：由是自负，卒至大官。
现代文：从此，他很自负，终于当上了大官。
English: From then on, he was very conceited and finally became a high-ranking official.

古文：谢谔
现代文：谢谔
English: Xie Yao

古文：进士谢谔，家于南康，舍前有溪，常游戏之所也。
现代文：进士谢谔家住在南康，房前有一条小溪，他常常在那里戏水。
English: Officer Xie Jun's family lived in Nankang. There was a stream in front of the house, where he often went for a swim.

古文：谔为儿时。尝梦浴溪中，有人以珠一器遗之曰：郎吞此，则明悟矣。
现代文：谢谔小的时候，曾梦见自己正在溪水里洗澡，有人把一盒珍珠送给他说：你吞下它，就可以使自己变得聪明起来，甚至大彻大悟。
English: When Xie Jun was a child, he dreamed that he was taking a bath in a stream. Someone gave him a box of pearls and said, "If you swallow it, you can make yourself smart and even fully enlightened."

古文：谔度其大者不可吞，即吞细者六十余颗，及长，善为诗。
现代文：谢谔觉得那大的吞不下去，就吞下六十多颗小珍珠。等他长大之后，诗写得相当好。
English: Xie Yao felt that he could not swallow that big pearl, so he swallowed more than sixty small pearls. When he grew up, he wrote poetry quite well.

古文：进士裴说为选其善者六十余篇，行于世。
现代文：进士裴说为选了他最好的诗六十余篇，传播于世。
English: Jin Shi Pei said that he had selected more than sixty of his best poems and spread them to the world.

古文：崔万安
现代文：崔万安
English: Cui Wan'an

古文：江南司农少卿崔万安，分务广陵。
现代文：江南司农少卿崔万安，分管广陵郡。
English: Jiangnan Secretary of Agriculture Choi Wan'an, in charge of Guangling County.

古文：常病苦脾泄，困甚。
现代文：由于他经常患病，消化不良，十分窘困。
English: Due to his frequent illness, indigestion, he was very distressed.

古文：其家祷于后土祠。
现代文：家里人到后土庙为他祈祷。
English: Family members went to the local temple to pray for him.

古文：是夕，万安梦一妇人，珠珥珠履，衣五重，皆编贝珠为之。
现代文：当天晚上，崔万安梦见一个女人，穿着很华丽衣服，头上戴的脚上穿的全是珍珠。
English: That night, Cui Wan'an had a dream about a woman who was dressed in gorgeous clothes, with pearls all over her head and feet.

古文：谓万安曰：此疾可治。今以一方相与，可取青木香肉豆蔻等分，枣肉为丸，米饮下二十丸。
现代文：她对崔万安说：你的病是可以治好的，今天送你一个药方：可以取来青木香肉豆蔻等分，用枣肉来和药丸，像吃饭那样饮下二十丸。
English: She said to Cui Wan'an, "Your illness can be cured. Today, I will give you a prescription for cucumbers. You can take equal parts of Aoki incense and nutmeg, mix the pills with jujube pulp, and drink 20 pills as if you were eating.

古文：又云：此药太热，疾平即止。
现代文：又说：此药太热，病好了就不要再服。
English: He also said, "This medicine is too hot. If you get better, don't take it again."

古文：如其言服之，遂愈。
现代文：醒后，他按照这女人的话去服此药，病很快就好了。
English: After he woke up, he followed the woman's advice and took the medicine. He soon recovered.

古文：江南李令
现代文：江南李令
English: Jiangnan Li Ling

古文：江南有李令者，累任大邑，假秩至评事。
现代文：江南有个叫李令的人，连任数城要职，后来做到代理评事。
English: In Jiangnan Province, there was a man named Li Ling, who was re-appointed to several important positions, and later became an acting commentator.

古文：世乱年老，无复宦情，筑室于广陵法云寺之西，为终焉之计。
现代文：由于世道乱，年纪大，他再也没有当官的心了，便在广陵法云寺西边修起一座房子，以度晚年。
English: Due to the turmoil in the world and his old age, he no longer had the heart of an official, so he built a house on the west side of Guangling Foyun Temple to spend his old age.

古文：尝梦束草加首，口衔一刀，两手各持一刀，入水而行。
现代文：不久，他做了一个梦，梦见自己头上插了一把草，口中叼着一把刀，两只手还各拿一把刀，入水而行。
English: Soon after, he had a dream in which he was walking into the water with a blade of grass on his head, a knife in his mouth, and a knife in each hand.

古文：意甚异之。
现代文：他醒后感到十分惊异。
English: When he woke up, he was very surprised.

古文：俄而孙儒陷广陵，儒部将李琼屯兵于法云寺。
现代文：不久，孙儒攻陷了广陵，他的部将李琼把兵马驻扎在法云寺。
English: Soon after, Sun Ru conquered Guangling, and his subordinate Li Qiong stationed his soldiers and horses at Fayun Temple.

古文：恒止李令家，父事令。
现代文：李琼经常到李令家来，待李令像父亲一样孝敬。
English: Li Qiong often came to Li Ling's home and treated Li Ling like a father.

古文：及儒死，宣城裨将马殷、刘建封辈，率众南走。
现代文：后来孙儒死了，宣城的副将马殷、刘建封之辈，率兵马南去。
English: Later, Sun Ru died, and the vice-commanders of Xuancheng, Ma Yin and Liu Jianfeng, led the soldiers to Manan.

古文：琼因强令俱行。
现代文：李琼就强迫李令一起走。
English: Li Qiong forced Li Ling to go with him.

古文：及殷据湖南，琼为桂管观察使。用令为荔浦令。
现代文：后来马殷等占踞湖南，李琼任桂管观察使，他让李令做荔浦县令。
English: Later, Ma Yin and others occupied Hunan, and Li Qiong served as the Gui Guan observation envoy. He asked Li Ling to be the county magistrate of Lipu.

古文：则前梦之验也。
现代文：前梦果然应验了。
English: My previous dream has come true.

古文：毛贞辅
现代文：毛贞辅
English: Mao Zhenyu

古文：伪吴毛贞辅，累为邑宰。
现代文：五代时，吴国有位毛贞辅，连做县令。
English: At the time of the fifth generation, Mao Zhenfu was in charge of the state of Wuzhou, and Ren was the county magistrate.

古文：应选之广陵，梦吞日。
现代文：一年，他到广陵应选，图朝廷量才授官。
English: A year later, he went to Guangling to stand for election, but he was only appointed to the post by the imperial court.

古文：既寤，腹犹热。
现代文：晚上梦见自己把太阳吞下去了，当即惊醒，腹部还热乎乎的。
English: In the evening, I dreamed that I had swallowed the sun. I immediately woke up, and my abdomen was still warm.

古文：以问侍御史杨廷式。杨曰：此梦至大，非君所能当。
现代文：他问侍御史杨廷式这是何征兆，杨廷式说：这梦至关重大，不是你所能担当得起的。
English: He asked the waiter Shi Yang Ting Shih what the omen was. Yang Ting Shih said, "This dream is very important, it's more than you can handle."

古文：若以君而言，当得赤乌场官也。
现代文：如果就你而言，应该任赤乌场官呵。
English: If it's up to you, you should be a red-black field officer.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：后来，果然像他说的这样，毛贞辅做了赤乌场官。
English: He really nailed it.

