古文：李纲上李纲，字伯纪，邵武人也，自其祖始居无锡。
现代文：李纲，字伯纪，邵武人，从其祖父起开始在无锡居住。
English: Li Gang, also known as Bo Ji and Shao Wu Ren, has lived in Wuxi since his grandfather.

古文：父夔，终龙图阁待制。
现代文：其父李夔，最高官至龙图阁待制。
English: His father, Li Xi, was the highest-ranking official to be detained at Longtu Ge.

古文：纲登政和二年进士第，积官至监察御史兼权殿中侍御史，以言事忤权贵，改比部员外郎，迁起居郎。
现代文：政和二年李纲中进士，积官至监察御史兼殿中侍御史，因为上书言事得罪权贵，被改为比部员外郎，后又迁为起居郎。
English: In the second year of the Meiji period, Li Gang was promoted to junior high school, and he was promoted to the position of inspector of history and attendant of history in the palace. Because he offended the powerful by writing a letter, he was changed to a member of the foreign affairs department, and later he was moved to the living quarters.

古文：宣和元年，京师大水，纲上疏言阴气太盛，当以盗贼外患为忧。
现代文：宣和元年，京城发大水，李纲上书说阴气太重，应该注意考虑防止盗贼和外患出现。
English: In the first year of the Xuanhe era, the capital was flooded, and Li Gang wrote that the gloomy atmosphere was too heavy, and care should be taken to prevent the appearance of thieves and outsiders.

古文：朝廷恶其言，谪监南剑州沙县税务。
现代文：朝廷厌恨其言，将他贬至南剑州沙县监管税务。
English: The imperial court hated his words and relegated him to supervising taxation in Shaxian County, Southern Jianzhou.

古文：七年，为太常少卿。
现代文：宣和七年，李纲任太常少卿。
English: Seven years after the declaration of peace, Li Gang was promoted to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：时金人渝盟，边报狎至，朝廷议避敌之计，诏起师勤王，命皇太子为开封牧，令侍从各具所见以闻。
现代文：当时金人背弃盟约，边防警报频传，朝廷议论避敌之计，下诏各地起兵勤王，任命皇太子为开封长官，并让侍从官上书各陈所见。
English: At that time, the Jin people reneged on the treaty, border alarms were frequently transmitted, the imperial court discussed the strategy of avoiding the enemy, issued an edict to raise troops in all regions to serve the king, appointed the crown prince as the governor of Kaifeng, and let the attendants see the letters.

古文：纲上御戎五策，且语所善给事中吴敏曰： 建牧之议，岂非欲委以留守之任乎？
现代文：李纲上书献御戎五策，并且对其好友给事中吴敏说 ：命皇太子为开封长官为之议，难道不是要委以留守之任吗？
English: Li Gang wrote a book to present his five strategies, and said to his friend Wu Min, who was in charge of the matter, "The crown prince has been appointed to be the governor of Kaifeng. Shouldn't he be left in charge?"

古文：巨敌猖獗如此，非传以位号，不足以招徕天下豪杰。
现代文：大敌如此猖獗，如果不传以帝位，则不足以招来天下豪杰。
English: The great enemy is so rampant, if it is not transmitted to the throne, it is not enough to attract the world's heroes.

古文：东宫恭俭之德闻于天下，以守宗社可也。
现代文：你以进献言论为职，为什么不向皇上极力言说这件事呢？ 吴敏说 ：监守国家行吗？ 
English: You are in charge of making speeches, why don't you try to tell the emperor about this? Wu Min said: Is it good to supervise the country?

古文：公以献纳论思为职，曷不为上极言之。 敏曰： 监国可乎？ 纲曰： 肃宗灵武之事，不建号不足以复邦，而建号之议不出于明皇，后世惜之。
现代文：李纲说 ：唐肃宗灵武之事，不建帝号则不能恢复国家，但建号之议不是出自明皇，后世感到惋惜。
English: Li Gang said: In the spiritual and military affairs of the Tang and Su Dynasties, it is impossible to restore the country without building an imperial title, but the idea of building a title did not come from the Ming Emperor, which was regretted by later generations.

古文：主上聪明仁恕，公言万一能行，将见金人悔祸，宗社底宁，天下受其赐。 翌日，敏请对，具道所以，因言李纲之论，盖与臣同。
现代文：今皇上明达仁恕，你的建议如果万一被采纳，则将会使金人后悔兴兵造祸，宗社安宁，天下受其恩惠。 第二天，吴敏请求朝对，详细陈说了其想法，并就势说李纲的意见与自己基本一致。
English: The next day, Wu Min made a request to the North Korean government, detailed his thoughts, and said that Li Gang's opinions were basically the same as his own.

古文：有旨召纲入议，纲刺臂血上疏云： 皇太子监国，典礼之常也。
现代文：徽宗传旨召李纲入朝议论，李纲刺破手臂，以血写书上奏说： 皇太子监国，是通常的典礼。
English: Huizong sent an order to call Li Gang into the imperial court to discuss the matter. Li Gang pierced his arm and wrote in blood, "The crown prince supervises the country. This is the usual ceremony."

古文：今大敌入攻，安危存亡在呼吸间，犹守常礼可乎？
现代文：现大敌入侵，安危存亡在于呼吸之间，仍然保守常礼行吗？
English: Now that the great enemy is invading, and survival depends on breathing, do you still maintain the ritual?

古文：名分不正而当大权，何以号召天下，期成功于万一哉？
现代文：名分不正而掌握大权，凭什么号召天下，以期望取得万一的成功呢？
English: What is the basis for calling out the whole world in the hope of achieving success?

古文：若假皇太子以位号，使为陛下守宗社，收将士心，以死捍敌，天下可保。 疏上，内禅之议乃决。
现代文：如果给皇太子以位号，让他为陛下守宗社，收拢将士之心，让他们以死抗敌，则天下可以保住。 奏疏陈上，徽宗禅位之议于是决定。
English: If you give the crown prince a rank, let him keep the ancestral shrine for his majesty, gather the hearts of the soldiers, and let them resist the enemy with death, then the world can be saved.

古文：钦宗即位，纲上封事，谓： 方今中国势弱，君子道消，法度纪纲，荡然无统。
现代文：钦宗即位，李纲上书言事，说 ：当今宋朝国势衰弱，君子之道不存，法度紊乱，纲纪不正。
English: When Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, Li Gang made a written speech, saying: Today, the Song Dynasty is weak, the way of the gentleman does not exist, the law is disorderly, and the discipline is not correct.

古文：陛下履位之初，当上应天心，下顺人欲。
现代文：陛下即位之初，应该上应天心，下顺民愿。
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, it is necessary to respond to the will of Heaven above and the wishes of the people below.

古文：攘除外患，使中国之势尊；诛锄内奸，使君子之道长，以副道君皇帝付托之意。 召对延和殿，上迎谓纲曰： 朕顷在东宫，见卿论水灾疏，今尚能诵之。 李邺使金议割地，纲奏： 祖宗疆土，当以死守，不可以尺寸与人。 钦宗嘉纳，除兵部侍郎。
现代文：攘除外敌入侵之患，振兴宋朝国势；清除内奸，增长君子之道，以符合道君皇帝托付之意。 钦宗将李纲召到延和殿，并主动迎上去对李纲说 ：我不久前在东宫，看见你论水灾的奏疏，现在还能够背得出来。 李邺出使金朝谈判割地之事，李纲上奏说： 祖宗的疆土，应该以死保守，不能以一尺一寸割让别人。 钦宗赞赏并接纳了李纲的话，将他提升为兵部侍郎。
English: He called Li Gang to Yanhe Hall, and took the initiative to meet Li Gang, saying, "I recently saw your lecture on floods at the East Palace, and I can still recite it. When Li Lan sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to negotiate the issue of land allocation, Li Gang said in his lecture, "The ancestral territory should be preserved by death, and cannot be ceded to others by one foot and one inch." The Emperor appreciated and accepted Li Gang's words, and promoted him to the position of the attendant of the military department.

古文：靖康元年，以吴敏为行营副使，纲为参谋官。
现代文：靖康元年，任命吴敏为行营副使，李纲为参谋官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, Wu Min was appointed deputy envoy and Li Gang was appointed staff officer.

古文：金将斡离不兵渡河，徽宗东幸，宰执议请上暂避敌锋。
现代文：金将斡离不领兵渡过黄河，徽宗往东边去了，宰执大臣议请钦宗暂时躲避一下敌人的锋芒。
English: Kim Jong Il crossed the Yellow River without leading troops, and Huizong went to the east. The prime minister asked Qinzong to temporarily avoid the enemy's edge.

古文：纲曰： 道君皇帝挈宗社以授陛下，委而去之可乎？ 上默然。
现代文：李纲说 ：道君皇帝将宗社国家交给陛下，弃而离去行吗？ 钦宗默不作声。
English: Li Gang said, "Is it alright for Emperor Daojun to abandon the country of his ancestral home and leave it to His Majesty?" Qin Zong remained silent.

古文：太宰白时中谓都城不可守，纲曰： 天下城池，岂有如都城者，且宗庙社稷、百官万民所在，舍此欲何之？ 上顾宰执曰： 策将安出？ 纲进曰： 今日之计，当整饬军马，固结民心，相与坚守，以待勤王之师。 上问谁可将者，纲曰： 朝廷以高爵厚禄崇养大臣，盖将用之于有事之日。
现代文：太宰白时中认为京城不能守，李纲说： 天下城池，哪有和都城能相比的呢，况且都城是宗庙社稷、百官臣民之所在，离弃它将到哪里去呢？ 钦宗看着宰执大臣说 ：到底如何决定？ 李纲进言说： 今日之计，应该整顿军马、团结稳定民心，使他们相互坚守，以等待勤王军队的到来。 皇上问谁可以为将，李纲说： 朝廷以高爵厚禄养着大臣，就是为了用之于有事之日，白时中、李邦彦等虽然不一定知道兵事，但凭借其职位，率领将士抵抗敌人兵锋，是他们的职责。 
English: Dazai Bai Shizhong thought that the capital city could not be defended, Li Gang said: What city in the world can be compared to the capital city, and what's more, the capital city is the home of the imperial family, temples and shrines, and hundreds of officials and subjects, where will it go if it is abandoned? Qin Zong looked at the prime minister and said: How should it be decided? Li Gang said: Today's plan is to rectify the army and horses, unite and stabilize the people's hearts, and make them stick to each other to wait for the arrival of the royal army. The emperor asked who could be the general, Li Gang said: The

古文：白时中、李邦彦等虽未必知兵，然籍其位号，抚将士以抗敌锋，乃其职也。 时中忿曰： 李纲莫能将兵出战否？ 纲曰： 陛下不以臣庸懦，傥使治兵，愿以死报。 乃以纲为尚书右丞。
现代文：白时中不满地说 ：莫非李纲能够领兵出战？ 李纲说 ：如果陛下不以我懦弱无能，让我领兵，愿意以死相报。 于是以李纲为尚书右丞。
English: Bai Shizhong was dissatisfied and said, "Isn't Li Gang capable of leading troops into battle?" Li Gang said, "If His Majesty doesn't consider me to be weak and incapable and let me lead the troops, he is willing to pay me back with his death." So Li Gang became the rightful heir.

古文：宰执犹守避敌之议。
现代文：宰执大臣仍然坚持躲避敌人的主张。
English: The Prime Minister still insists on the idea of evading the enemy.

古文：有旨以纲为东京留守，纲为上力陈所以不可去之意，且言： 明皇闻潼关失守，即时幸蜀，宗庙朝廷毁于贼手，范祖禹以为其失在于不能坚守以待援。
现代文：朝廷传旨以李纲为东京留守，李纲极力向皇上陈述不能离去的理由，并且说 ：唐明皇听说潼关失守，立即到蜀地去，宗庙朝廷被贼人毁掉，范祖禹认为其过失就在于不能坚守以等待救援。
English: The imperial court sent an order to Li Gang to stay in Tokyo. Li Gang tried his best to explain to the emperor the reasons why he could not leave, and said: Tang Ming Emperor heard that Shaoguan was lost and immediately went to Shu Di. His ancestral temple and the imperial court were destroyed by thieves. Fan Zuyu thought that his fault was that he could not stay and wait for rescue.

古文：今四方之兵不日云集，陛下奈何轻举以蹈明皇之覆辙乎？ 上意颇悟。
现代文：现在各地之兵几天内即可聚集，陛下为什么要轻举妄动以重蹈唐明皇之覆辙呢？ 皇上很是省悟。
English: Now soldiers from all over the country can be assembled within a few days. Why would His Majesty want to repeat the mistakes of Emperor Tang Ming? The Emperor was very thoughtful.

古文：会内侍奏中宫已行，上色变，仓卒降御榻曰： 朕不能留矣。 纲泣拜，以死邀之。
现代文：恰逢内侍入奏说中宫已经动身了，皇上脸上顿时变色，慌忙降下御床，说： 我不能留了。 李纲哭泣着跪拜，以死请求皇上留下。
English: Just as the chambermaid entered to announce that the middle court had departed, the emperor's face suddenly changed color, and he hurriedly lowered the throne, saying, "I can't stay." Li Gang wept and knelt down, pleading with the emperor to stay.

古文：上顾纲曰： 朕今为卿留。
现代文：皇上看着李纲说： 我今天为你留下。
English: The emperor looked at Li Gang and said, "I'll stay for you today."

古文：治兵御敌之事，专责之卿，勿令有疏虞。 纲皇恐受命。
现代文：治兵御敌之事，专由你负责，不要有所疏误。 李纲慌忙接受命令。
English: Li Gang hurriedly accepted the order, "You are solely responsible for leading the troops against the enemy, so don't make any mistakes."

古文：未几，复决意南狩，纲趋朝，则禁卫擐甲，乘舆已驾矣。
现代文：不久，钦宗又决定到南方去，李纲赶到朝廷，只见禁卫军已经穿上衣甲，皇帝乘坐的马车已经驾好。
English: Soon after, Emperor Qinzong decided to go to the south. Li Gang rushed to the imperial court, only to find that the imperial guards had already put on their coats of armor, and the carriage the emperor was riding in had already been driven.

古文：纲急呼禁卫曰： 尔等愿守宗社乎，愿从幸乎？ 皆曰： 愿死守。 纲入见曰： 陛下已许臣留，复戒行何也？
现代文：李纲急忙对着禁卫军高喊道： 你们是愿意坚守宗社，还是愿意跟随皇上到南方去？ 都回答说： 愿意死守。 李纲入宫中见钦宗说： 陛下已答应我留下，为什么又戒令准备离去呢？
English: Li Gang hurriedly shouted to the guards: "Are you willing to stick to the ancestral shrine, or are you willing to follow the emperor to the south?" They all replied: "I am willing to die." Li Gang entered the palace and said to Qinzong: "Your Majesty has promised me to stay, so why did you order me to leave?

古文：今六军父母妻子皆在都城，愿以死守，万一中道散归，陛下孰与为卫？
现代文：现在六军将士的父母妻子儿女都在京城，都愿意死守，如果万一他们半途逃回来，将由谁来保卫陛下呢？
English: Now the parents, wives and children of the soldiers of the Sixth Army are all in the capital, all willing to defend it to the death. If by any chance they escape halfway back, who will defend His Majesty?

古文：敌兵已逼，知乘舆未远，以健马疾追，何以御之？ 上感悟，遂命辍行。
现代文：敌人已经逼近，知道皇上走得不远，如果用快马追赶，将用什么来抵御呢？ 皇上省悟，于是下令停止南行。
English: The enemy was already approaching, and the emperor knew that he could not go far. If he chased them with his fast horse, what would he use to defend himself? The emperor thought about it, and ordered to stop heading south.

古文：纲传旨语左右曰： 敢复有言去者斩！ 禁卫皆拜伏呼万岁，六军闻之，无不感泣流涕。
现代文：李纲传旨对钦宗左右的人说 ：有谁敢再说离去就斩首！ 禁卫军将士都拜伏于地喊万岁，六军听说这个消息，无不感动流泪。
English: Li Gang sent a message to the people around Qin Zong, saying, "If anyone dares to say that he is leaving, he will be beheaded! The soldiers of the Imperial Guard all bowed to the ground and shouted, "Long live!" When the six armies heard this news, they were all moved to tears.

古文：命纲为亲征行营使，以便宜从事。
现代文：钦宗任命李纲为亲征行营使，遇事可以不经请示而随机处置。
English: Emperor Qinzong appointed Li Gang as his personal envoy for the campaign. In the event of an emergency, Li Gang could be disposed of at random without any request.

古文：纲治守战之具，不数日而毕。
现代文：李纲修治战守器具，几天便完成了。
English: Li Gang repaired the equipment and finished it in a few days.

古文：敌兵攻城，纲身督战，募壮士缒城而下，斩酋长十余人，杀其众数千人。
现代文：敌兵攻打开封城，李纲亲自督战，他招募健壮勇士从城上用绳子吊下去发动袭击，杀死敌人酋长十余人，士兵数千。
English: When the enemy soldiers attacked and opened the city, Li Gang personally supervised the battle. He recruited strong warriors to hang from the city with a rope to launch an attack, killing more than ten enemy chiefs and thousands of soldiers.

古文：金人知有备，又闻上已内禅，乃退。
现代文：金人知道城中已有防备，又听说徽宗已传位给钦宗，于是便撤兵了。
English: Knowing that the city had been fortified, and hearing that Huizong had passed the throne to Qinzong, the Jin withdrew their troops.

古文：求遣大臣至军中议和，纲请行。
现代文：朝廷物色大臣准备派往金军中议和，李纲请求前去。
English: The imperial court was looking for a minister to be sent to the Golden Army to discuss peace, and Li Gang asked him to come.

古文：上遣李棁，纲曰： 安危在此一举，臣恐李棁怯懦而误国事也。 上不听，竟使棁往。
现代文：皇上派遣李去，李纲说： 国家安危在此一举，我担心李怯懦而误国家大事。 皇上不听，仍然派李前去。
English: When the emperor sent Li, Li Gang said, "The safety of the country is at stake here. I'm worried that Li will be cowardly and miss a national event. The emperor didn't listen and still sent Li.

古文：金人须金币以千万计，求割太原、中山、河间地，以亲王、宰相为质。
现代文：金人提出需要金币以千万两计，要求宋割让太原、中山、河间等地，并且要宋派亲王和宰相做人质。
English: The goldsmiths asked for ten million gold coins and demanded that Song cede Taiyuan, Zhongshan, and Hema, and that Song send the prince and the prime minister as hostages.

古文：棁受事，自不措一辞，还报。
现代文：李接受金人的各项要求，不做任何辩驳，回宋朝禀报。
English: Li accepted all of Jinren's demands and did not make any rebuttal, replying to the Song Dynasty's report.

古文：纲谓： 所需金币，竭天下且不足，况都城乎？
现代文：李纲说 ：金人所需要的金币，即使穷尽全国之力也不够，何况一个都城呢？
English: Li Gang said: The gold coins needed by the goldsmiths are not enough even if they exhaust the strength of the whole country, let alone a capital city.

古文：三镇，国之屏蔽，割之何以立国？
现代文：三镇，是国家的屏障，割让了它们凭什么立国？
English: The three towns are a barrier to the country. If they are ceded, on what basis will the country be founded?

古文：至于遣质，即宰相当往，亲王不当往。
现代文：至于派遣人质，宰相应该去，亲王不应该去。
English: As for sending hostages, the prime minister should go, the crown prince should not go.

古文：若遣辩士姑与之议所以可不可者，宿留数日，大兵四集，彼孤军深入，虽不得所欲，亦将速归。
现代文：如果派遣能言善辩之士暂时和金人谈判什么能行什么不能行及其理由，住留几天，等勤王的大军从四面八方聚集，他金军孤军深入，虽然得不到所要求的，也将迅速离去。
English: If you send a well-spoken person to negotiate with the Chinese for a while about what can be done and what cannot be done, and the reasons for it, and stay for a few days, when a large army of loyalists gathers from all directions, he will go deep into the Chinese army alone, and although he does not get what he asked for, he will also leave quickly.

古文：此时而与之盟，则不敢轻中国，而和可久也。 宰执议不合，纲不能夺，求去。
现代文：这时再与他订立盟约，则他不敢轻视我中国，和好可以长久。 宰相的意见不一致，李纲不能说服他们，请求离职，皇上安慰他说 ：你只管治理兵事，这件事，可以慢慢商议。 
English: If he signed a treaty with him at this time, he would not dare to despise China, and the reconciliation could last a long time. The opinions of the prime ministers did not coincide, Li Gang could not convince them, and he asked to leave the post. The emperor consoled him, saying, "You only need to manage the military affairs. This matter can be discussed slowly."

古文：上慰谕曰： 卿第出治兵，此事当徐议之。 纲退，则誓书已行，所求皆与之，以皇弟康王、少宰张邦昌为质。
现代文：李纲不再坚持这件事而这时宋朝已将求和的誓书送往了金军，金人所提出的要求全部给予满足，并派皇帝的弟弟康王和少宰张邦昌前去作人质。
English: Li Gang no longer insisted on this matter, and by this time the Song Dynasty had sent the oath of peace to the Jin Army, satisfied all the demands made by the Jin people, and sent the emperor's brother, Kang Wang, and the minor general, Zhang Bangchang, to serve as hostages.

古文：时朝廷日输金币，而金人需求不已，日肆暑掠。
现代文：当时朝廷每天给金人送金币，但金人的要求仍不休止，天天大肆屠杀抢掠。
English: At that time, the imperial court sent gold coins to the Jin people every day, but the demands of the Jin people still did not stop, and massacres and robberies were carried out every day.

古文：四方勤王之师渐有至者，种师道、姚平仲亦以泾原、秦凤兵至。
现代文：各地的勤王军慢慢有到达的，种师道、姚平仲也率领泾原、秦凤兵到达。
English: The royalist troops from all over the country slowly arrived, and Yao Pingzhong also led the Qin and Qinfeng soldiers to arrive.

古文：纲奏言： 金人贪婪无厌，凶悖已甚，其势非用师不可。
现代文：李纲上奏说 ：金人贪婪无厌，非常凶残无理，其势非用军队不可。
English: Li Gang said in his report: The Jin people are insatiably greedy, very cruel and unreasonable, and their power cannot be defeated without using the army.

古文：且敌兵号六万，而吾勤王之师集城下者已二十余万；彼以孤军入重地，犹虎豹自投槛阱中，当以计取之，不必与角一旦之力。
现代文：而且敌兵号称六万，但我们已集聚到开封城下的勤王兵有二十多万；他金人以孤军深入重地，好比如虎豹自投栅栏，应该用计谋俘获他，而没有必要和他拼一时的气力。
English: Moreover, the enemy soldiers are said to be sixty thousand, but we have gathered more than two hundred thousand royalist soldiers under the Kaifeng city. If he is a man of gold who goes deep into the heavy ground with a lone army, such as a tiger and a leopard throwing themselves over the fence, we should use strategies to capture him, but there is no need to fight with him.

古文：若扼河津，绝饷道，分兵复畿北诸邑，而以重兵临敌营，坚壁勿战，如周亚夫所以困七国者。
现代文：如果占据黄河渡口，断绝粮道，分兵收复开封以北的各州县，派重兵逼近金军大营，坚壁清野，不予出战，就像周亚夫围困七国军队一样。
English: If you occupy the Yellow River ferry, cut off the grain route, and the detachment of troops recovers the counties north of Kaifeng, send heavy troops to approach the gold army camp, the walls are clear, and you will not go to war, just like Zhou Yafu besieged the troops of the seven countries.

古文：俟其食尽力疲，然后以一檄取誓书，复三镇，纵其北归，半渡而击之；此必胜之计也。 上深以为然，约日举事。
现代文：等到他的粮尽力疲，然后再发出讨伐檄文，收回誓书，收复三镇，放金兵北撤，等他们从黄河渡过一半时再发动攻击，这是必胜的计策。 皇上表示非常赞同，决定约定日期行动。
English: It was a sure-fire strategy to wait until his grain supply was exhausted, then issue a declaration of truce, revoke the oath, recover the three towns, send the gold soldiers northward, and wait until they had crossed half of the Yellow River before launching an attack. The emperor expressed his strong approval and decided to set a date for action.

古文：姚平仲勇而寡谋，急于要功，先期率步骑万人，夜斫敌营，欲生擒干离不及取康王以归。
现代文：姚平仲勇猛但缺乏谋略，急着要争功，在约定时间之前率领步兵和骑兵上万人，冲入敌营砍杀，想活捉斡离不，救回康王。
English: Yao Pingzhong was brave but lacked strategy. He was in a hurry to compete for merit. Before the agreed time, he led tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry, stormed into the enemy camp, cut and killed, and wanted to catch and leave alive, and rescue King Kang.

古文：夜半，中使传旨论纲曰： 姚平仲已举事，卿速援之。 纲率诸将旦出封丘门，与金人战幕天坡，以神臂弓射金人，却之。
现代文：半夜时，中使传旨告诉李纲说： 姚平仲已经行动了，你立即支援他。 李纲率领众大将清晨从封丘门出城，在幕天坡与金人大战，李纲用神臂弓射击金人，打退金兵。
English: At midnight, the Chinese envoy sent a message to Li Gang, saying: Yao Pingzhong has already taken action, you should immediately support him. Li Gang led the generals out of the city from Fengqiu Gate in the morning, and fought against the Jin people in Makutianpo. Li Gang shot the Jin people with a divine arm bow and beat back the Jin soldiers.

古文：平仲竟以袭敌营不克，惧诛亡去。
现代文：姚平仲由于袭击敌人兵营没有成功，害怕杀头，逃走了。
English: Since Yao Pingzhong's attack on the enemy's barracks was unsuccessful, he was afraid of being beheaded and fled.

古文：金使来，宰相李邦彦语之曰： 用兵乃李纲、姚平仲，非朝廷意。 遂罢纲，以蔡懋代之。
现代文：金人派使者来，宰相李邦彦对他说： 派兵袭击是李纲、姚平仲所为，不是朝廷的意思。 于是将李纲罢职，由蔡懋代替他。
English: The goldsmiths sent an envoy, and the prime minister Li Bangyan told him: "The attack by sending troops was done by Li Gang and Yao Pingzhong, not by the imperial court," and Li Gang was removed from his post and replaced by Cai Qi.

古文：太学生陈东等诣阙上书，明纲无罪。
现代文：太学生陈东等人到朝廷上书，指明李纲无罪。
English: Chen Dong, a student, and others sent a letter to the imperial court, stating that Li Gang was not guilty.

古文：军民不期而集者数十万，呼声动地，恚不得报，至杀伤内侍。
现代文：军民不约而同相聚到一起，人数达几十万，呼声震动天地，由于得不到朝廷的答复，军民愤怒之极，将内侍杀伤。
English: Hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians gathered together, their voices shaking the heavens and the earth. Unable to get a response from the imperial court, the soldiers and civilians were so enraged that they killed and injured the palace attendant.

古文：帝亟召纲，纲入见，泣拜请死。
现代文：皇上立即召见李纲，李纲入宫见皇上，跪拜于地，泪流不止，请求赐死。
English: The emperor immediately summoned Li Gang, Li Gang entered the palace to see the emperor, kneeled on the ground, tears flowed, and begged for death.

古文：帝亦泣，命纲复为尚书右丞，充京城四壁守御使。
现代文：皇上也哭，重新任命李纲为尚书右丞，具体负责京城四面的守御事务。
English: The emperor was also moved to tears and reappointed Li Gang as Shang Shuyujo, specifically responsible for the protection of all four sides of the capital.

古文：始，金人犯城者，蔡懋禁不得辄施矢石，将士积愤，至是，纲下令能杀敌者厚赏，众无不奋跃。
现代文：起先，金兵进攻京城，蔡懋禁止士兵不得随便向金人射箭砸石块，将士在心中都十分气愤，到这时，李纲下令凡是能够杀敌人者给予重赏，将士都非常兴奋踊跃。
English: At first, the Jin soldiers attacked the capital, and Cai Xuan forbade the soldiers from shooting arrows and throwing stones at the Jin people. The soldiers were very angry in their hearts. At this time, Li Gang ordered to reward anyone who could kill the enemy. The soldiers were very excited.

古文：金人惧，稍稍引却，且得割三镇诏及亲王为质，乃退师。
现代文：金人害怕，往后撤退了一点，由于已经得到割让三镇的诏书和亲王作人质，所以就撤兵了。
English: The goldsmiths were afraid and retreated a little further, but since they had already received the edict to cede the three towns and the prince as a hostage, they withdrew.

古文：除纲知枢密院事。
现代文：钦宗提升李纲为知枢密院事。
English: Emperor Qinzong elevated Li Gang to the position of the Privy Councillor.

古文：纲奏请如澶渊故事，遣兵护送，且戒诸将，可击则击之。
现代文：李纲上奏，请求像当年澶渊之盟时一样，派兵护送金兵撤退，并且还告诫各位大将，如果在护送时对金人有机会进行袭击就加以袭击。
English: Li Gang began to play, and requested that troops be sent to escort the gold soldiers to retreat, as was the case during the Alliance of the Abyss, and also warned the generals that if there was an opportunity to attack the gold soldiers during the escort, they should attack.

古文：乃以兵十万分道并进，将士受命，踊跃以行。
现代文：于是派兵十万分道并进，将士接受命令，争着出发。
English: So he sent out a hundred thousand soldiers, marching side by side. The soldiers accepted the order and started to fight.

古文：先是，金帅粘罕围太原，守将折可求、刘光世军皆败；平阳府义兵亦叛，导金人入南北关，取隆德府，至是，遂攻高平。
现代文：在这之前，金帅粘罕围攻太原，守将折可求、刘光世所率之军都被打败；平阳府的义兵也叛变投敌了，引导金人进入南北关，攻占隆德府，到这时，又向高平发动攻击。
English: Prior to this, the Jin general Gui Han besieged Taiyuan, and the army led by Liu Guangshi was defeated; the loyalist soldiers of Pingyang Prefecture also mutinied and joined the enemy, leading the Jin people into the North-South Pass and capturing the Lund Prefecture. At this time, they also launched an attack on Gaoping.

古文：宰相咎纲尽遣城下兵追敌，恐仓卒无措，急征诸将还。
现代文：宰相责怪李纲将京城城下的士兵全部派去追击敌人，担心万一京城有什么变故将措手不及，急忙将诸将召回。
English: The prime minister blamed Li Gang for sending all the soldiers from the capital city to chase the enemy. He was worried that if anything happened in the capital, he would be caught off guard, so he hurriedly recalled all the soldiers.

古文：诸将已追及金人于刑、赵间，遽得还师之命，无不扼腕。
现代文：诸位大将已经领兵追击金兵到了邢、赵地界，突然得到回师的命令，无不扼腕叹息。
English: The generals had already led the troops to chase the gold soldiers to the border of Zhao and Zhao, and suddenly received the order to return to the division, all of them sighed.

古文：比纲力争，复追，而将士解体矣。
现代文：等李纲据理极力争取，同意重新派兵追击金兵时，将士都已经解散了。
English: By the time Li Gang tried his best to win the argument and agreed to send the soldiers back to chase the gold soldiers, the soldiers had all been disbanded.

古文：诏议迎太上皇帝还京。
现代文：钦宗下诏商议讨论迎接太上皇回京城之事。
English: Emperor Qin issued an edict to discuss the matter of welcoming the retired emperor back to the capital.

古文：初，徽宗南幸，童贯、高俅等以兵扈从。
现代文：起初，徽宗到南方去巡游，童贯、高俅等带兵护从。
English: At first, Huizong went on a tour to the south, escorted by Tongran, Gao Yao and other soldiers.

古文：既行，闻都城受围，乃止东南邮传及勤王之师。
现代文：出发后，听说都城被围困，于是便停止了东南地区的驿道通信和勤王之军。
English: After setting out, he heard that the capital was besieged, so he stopped the communication between the south-eastern region and the army of the king.

古文：道路籍籍，言贯等为变。
现代文：道路上一片混乱，都在传说童贯等发动了叛乱。
English: There was chaos on the roads, with rumours that children had started a rebellion.

古文：陈东上书，乞诛蔡京、蔡攸、童贯、朱勔、高俅、卢宗原等。
现代文：陈东上书，请求将蔡京、蔡攸、童贯、朱面力、高俅、卢宗原等人斩首。
English: Chen Dong submitted a letter, requesting the beheading of Cai Jing, Cai You, Tong Gan, Zhu Mengli, Gao Wei, Lu Zongyuan and others.

古文：议遣聂山为发运使往图之，纲曰： 使山所图果成，震惊太上，此忧在陛下。
现代文：朝廷议论决定派聂山为发运使前去设法执行，李纲说： 如果聂山真的成功了，则惊动了太上皇，令陛下不安。
English: The imperial court deliberated and decided to send Lushan as the dispatching envoy to try to implement it. Li Gang said: If Lushan is really successful, it will alarm the emperor and make his majesty uneasy.

古文：万一不果，是数人者，挟太上于东南，求剑南一道，陛下将何以处之？
现代文：如果万一不成功，则这几个人，在东南地区挟制太上皇，要求割占剑南一道之地，陛下将怎么办？
English: If, by any chance, they do not succeed, what will His Majesty do if these few people succeed in blackmailing His Majesty the Emperor in the southeastern region and demand to occupy a piece of land in southern Kyonan?

古文：莫若罢山之行，请于太上去此数人，自可不劳而定。 上从其言。
现代文：不如停止派聂山前去执行，而向太上皇请求将这几个人去掉，自然就可以不费辛劳而达到目的。 皇上听从了他的建议。
English: It would be better to stop sending Shaoshan to carry out the order, and to ask the emperor to remove these people, which would naturally achieve the goal without much effort.

古文：徽宗还次南都，以书问改革政事之故，且召吴敏、李纲。
现代文：徽宗回京城，停驻在南都，派人送书询问朝廷改革政事的原因，并且召见吴敏、李纲。
English: Huizong returned to Beijing, stationed in the south of the capital, sent people to send letters to inquire about the reasons for the reform of government affairs in the imperial court, and summoned Wu Min and Li Gang.

古文：或虑太上意有不测，纲请行，曰： 此无他，不过欲知朝廷事尔。 纲至，具道皇帝圣孝思慕，欲以天下养之意，请陛下早还京师。
现代文：有人担心太上皇可能有什么意料不到的打算，李纲请求前去，他说： 这没有别的意思，只不过想知道朝廷的事情罢了。 李纲到后，详细地对徽宗说明了钦宗皇帝圣明忠孝，非常思念太上皇，想治理和保护好国家，早日迎接太上皇回京城等情况。
English: Some people were worried that the retired emperor might have some unexpected plans. Li Gang asked him to go, saying, "This has no other meaning, but I just want to know about the affairs of the imperial court." After Li Gang arrived, he explained in detail to Huizong that Emperor Qinzong Shengming was loyal and filial, that he missed the retired emperor very much, that he wanted to govern and protect the country well, and that he wanted to welcome the retired emperor back to Beijing as soon as possible.

古文：徽宗泣数行下，问： 卿顷以何故去？ 纲对曰： 臣昨任左史，以狂妄论列水灾，蒙恩宽斧钺之诛，然臣当时所言，以谓天地之变，各以类应，正为今日攻围之兆。
现代文：徽宗哭泣落泪，问： 你不久前为什么离职？ 李纲回答说： 臣原先任左史，因为狂妄论及水灾而获罪，承蒙皇上恩赐，只是免职，没有杀身，不过臣当时所说的，认为天地之变化，都相互有所感应，正是今天金人围攻京城的先兆。
English: Huizong cried and shed tears and asked, "Why did you leave your post not long ago?" Li Gang replied, "My father-in-law used to be a left-wing historian, and he was convicted for his arrogant theories and floods. He received a gift from the emperor, but he was only relieved of his duties and did not commit suicide. However, what my father-in-law said at that time, that the changes in heaven and earth are all mutually influenced, is exactly the precursor to today's siege of the capital by the Jin people.

古文：夫灾异变故，譬犹一人之身，病在五脏，则发于气色，形于脉息，善医者能知之。
现代文：灾害变化，就好比如一个人的身体，病在五脏时，在气色上会有所表现，在筋脉上也会有所反映，善于医治的人能够看得出来。
English: Disaster changes, just like a person's body, when the disease is in the viscera, it will be reflected in the appearance, and it will also be reflected in the sinews. People who are good at healing can see it.

古文：所以圣人观变于天地，而修其在我者，故能制治保邦，而无危乱之忧。 徽宗称善。
现代文：所以圣人通过天地的变化观测政治的变化，找出属于自己的原因加以整治，因此能够维护统治，保住国家，而没有危乱的祸患。 徽宗称赞李纲说得好。
English: Therefore, sages observe political changes through the changes of heaven and earth, find out their own reasons and rectify them, so they can maintain their rule and preserve the country without the scourge of crisis.

古文：又询近日都城攻围守御次第，语渐浃洽。
现代文：徽宗又问近几天都城的守御安排，话语渐渐投机。
English: In recent days, Huizong also asked about the capital's defense arrangements, and the discourse gradually became speculative.

古文：徽宗因及行宫止递角等事，曰： 当时恐金人知行宫所在，非有他也。 纲奏： 方艰危时，两宫隔绝，朝廷应副行宫，亦岂能无不至者，在圣度烛之耳。 且言： 皇帝仁孝，惟恐有一不当太上皇帝意者，每得诘问之诏，辄忧惧不食。
现代文：徽宗接着谈及行宫说： 当时只是怕金人知道行宫所在的地方，没有其他的原因。 李纲说 ：正当艰难危急时，两宫隔绝，朝廷对于行宫的要求，怎么能不给予满足呢。 并且还说 ：皇帝仁义忠孝，惟恐有一样事不符合太上皇帝的心意，每次收到责问的诏书，都忧虑害怕，不吃饭。
English: Huizong went on to talk about the palace visit, saying: At that time, there was no other reason than the fear of the Jin people knowing the location of the palace visit. Li Gang said: In a time of hardship and crisis, when the two palaces are isolated, how can the imperial court's request for the palace visit not be satisfied. And he also said: The emperor is benevolent, loyal and filial, but if there is something that does not meet the emperor's intention, every time he receives a letter of reprimand, he is worried and afraid, and does not eat.

古文：臣窃譬之，家长出而强寇至，子弟之任家事者，不得不从宜措置。
现代文：臣打个比方，就比如家长外出后强盗来了，在家中管事的子弟，不得不相机处置。
English: To use an analogy, for example, if a robber comes after the parents go out, the child who is in charge at home has to dispose of the camera.

古文：长者但当以其能保田园大计而慰劳之，苟诛及细故，则为子弟者，何所逃其责哉？
现代文：家长只应对他能够行大计，保住家园给予慰劳，如果苛求细节，则作为子弟，怎么能够免去其责任呢？
English: Parents should only give him consolation if he can make a big plan and keep his home. If he is demanding details, as a child, how can he be relieved of his responsibility?

古文：皇帝传位之初，陛下巡幸，适当大敌入攻，为宗社计，庶事不得不小有更革。
现代文：皇帝刚传位时，陛下外出巡游，正好碰上大敌入侵，为了宗社国家考虑，对于小事不得不稍微做一些变更。
English: When the emperor was about to be enthroned, his majesty was out on a tour and happened to encounter a great enemy invasion. For the sake of the country, he had to make some changes to small things.

古文：陛上回銮，臣谓宜有以大慰安皇帝之心，勿问细故可也。 徽宗感悟，出玉带、金鱼、象简赐纲，曰： 行宫人得卿来皆喜，以此示朕意，卿可便服之。 且曰： 卿辅助皇帝、捍守宗社有大功，若能调和父子间，使无疑阻，当遂书青史，垂名万世。 纲感泣再拜。
现代文：陛下回到朝廷，臣认为应该准备对皇帝好好加以慰劳，而不要追究一些细微末节。 徽宗领会其意，拿出玉带、金鱼、象简赐给李纲，并且说 ：行宫里的人听说卿来了都非常高兴，现借这些东西表示一下朕的心意，卿可以随便使用。 还说： 卿辅助皇帝，捍卫宗社，立有大功，如果能够调和我们父子的关系，不让相互之间有所隔阂、猜疑，则应该全部写进青史，垂名万世。 李纲感动落泪，反复再拜。
English: When his majesty returned to the court, the vassal thought that he should prepare to comfort the emperor well, and not pursue some minor details. Huizong understood his meaning, and took out the jade belt, goldfish, and elephant to give to Li Gang, and said: The people in the palace are very happy to hear that the lord has come. Now, I can use these things to express my heart's desire. The lord can use them at will. He also said: The lord assisted the emperor, defended the patriarchal society, and accomplished great feats. If we can reconcile the relationship between our father and son, and not let there be any estrangement and suspicion between each other, then

古文：纲还，具道太上意。
现代文：李纲回到京城，将太上皇的意思原原本本地告诉了钦宗。
English: Li Gang returned to Beijing and told Emperor Qinzong the meaning of the emperor's words.

古文：宰执进迎奉太上仪注，耿南仲议欲屏太上左右，车驾乃进。
现代文：宰相献上有关迎接太上皇回京的礼仪，根据耿南仲的意思是想先排除太上皇身边的侍从大臣，才能让太上皇的车驾进入京城。
English: The prime minister presented the etiquette for welcoming the emperor back to Beijing. According to Geng Nanzhong, he wanted to exclude the attendant ministers around the emperor before allowing the emperor's car to enter the capital.

古文：纲言： 如此，是示之以疑也。
现代文：李纲说 ：像这样做，是向他们表示猜疑。
English: Li Gang said: Like this, it is to show suspicion to them.

古文：天下之理，诚与疑、明与暗而已。
现代文：天下的道理，无非就在于诚信与猜疑、明达与昏暗而已。
English: The reason for the world is nothing more than good faith and suspicion, knowledge and darkness.

古文：自诚明而推之，可至于尧、舜；自疑暗而推之，其患有不可胜言者。
现代文：就诚信和明达而言，可以追溯到尧、舜；而如果以猜疑和昏暗行事，则将祸患无穷。
English: As far as integrity and knowledge are concerned, it can be traced back to, ; and if you act with suspicion and dimness, you will be plagued with endless troubles.

古文：耿南仲不以尧、舜之道辅陛下，乃暗而多疑。 南仲怫然曰： 臣适见左司谏陈公辅，乃为李纲结士民伏阙者，乞下御史置对。 上愕然。
现代文：耿南仲不用尧舜的诚明之道辅佐陛下，却昏暗而多疑。 耿南仲气忿地说 ：臣刚才见到左司谏陈公辅，他就是为李纲联结士民跪伏于朝廷之前请愿的人，请将他送到御史台问罪。 皇上感到惊愕。
English: Geng Nanzhong did not have to be coaxed into the path of sincerity to assist His Majesty, but he was dim and suspicious. Geng Nanzhong angrily said, "Minister, I just saw the Left Secretary Chen Gongyu, he is the one who kneeled before the Imperial Court to petition for Li Gang to unite the people, please send him to the Historian's Office for questioning." The Emperor was taken aback.

古文：纲曰： 臣与南仲所论，国事也。
现代文：李纲说 ：臣与耿南仲所争论的只是国家大事。
English: Li Gang said: What the minister and Geng Nanzhong are arguing about is just a national event.

古文：南仲乃为此言，臣何敢复有所辨？
现代文：耿南仲却说这种话，臣怎么敢再进行辩论呢？
English: But Geng Nanzhong said such a thing, how dare the minister have a debate?

古文：愿以公辅事下吏，臣得乞身待罪。 章十余上，不允。
现代文：希望将李公辅的事送到御史台，臣也请求去职等待治罪。 连上十几份奏章，钦宗不同意。
English: He hoped that the matter of Li Gongyu would be sent to the Imperial Historian's Office, and the minister also requested to leave his post to await the punishment.

古文：太上皇帝还，纲迎拜国门。
现代文：太上皇返回京城，李纲在国门迎接。
English: When the emperor returned to the capital, Li Gang met him at the gate of the country.

古文：翌日，朝龙德宫，退，复上章恳辞。
现代文：第二天，李纲入龙德宫朝见，朝见完后，又上了一道奏书坚持请求去职。
English: The next day, Li Gang went to the Longde Palace for a morning meeting. After the morning meeting, he wrote another letter to insist on his request to resign.

古文：上手诏谕意曰： 乃者敌在近郊，士庶伏阙，一朝仓猝，众数十万，忠愤所激，不谋同辞，此岂人力也哉？
现代文：皇上亲自修一份诏书告谕李纲说 ：当时敌人在京城的近郊，士民跪伏于朝廷前请愿，是出于仓猝之间，人数达到几十万，都是被忠诚义愤所激，事先没有预谋却要求一致，这怎么是有人故意联结而成的呢？
English: The emperor personally issued an edict to Li Gang, saying: At that time, the enemy was in the suburbs of Beijing, and the scholars and the people knelt in front of the imperial court to petition. It was out of haste, and the number reached hundreds of thousands. They were all inspired by loyalty and righteous indignation, and they did not plan in advance, but they demanded unanimity. How did someone deliberately connect them?

古文：不悦者造言，致卿不自安，朕深谅卿，不足介怀。
现代文：不高兴的人制造谣言，致使卿心里不安，朕非常理解卿，不要放在心里。
English: Unhappy people create rumors, causing Sir to feel uneasy. I understand Sir, don't take it to heart.

古文：巨敌方退，正赖卿协济艰难，宜勉为朕留。 纲不得已就职。
现代文：大敌刚退，正要依靠卿同心协力，共度艰难，卿应该尽量为朕留下来。 李纲无法，只好就职。
English: The great enemy had just retreated, and we were about to rely on you to work together and get through the difficulties together. You should try to stay for me. Li Gang could not, and had no choice but to take office.

古文：上备边御敌八事。
现代文：李纲呈上有关防卫边疆，抵御敌人的八件事。
English: Li Gang presented eight things about defending the frontier and resisting the enemy.

古文：时北兵已去，太上还宫，上下恬然，置边事于不问。
现代文：当时金兵已经退去，太上皇回到宫中，朝廷上下一派安然，不再关心边防之事。
English: At that time, the gold soldiers had already retreated, the emperor had returned to the palace, and the upper and lower echelons of the imperial court were safe and no longer concerned about border defense.

古文：纲独以为忧，与同知枢密院事许翰议调防秋之兵。
现代文：唯独李纲仍担忧边防，他与同知枢密院事许翰商议调兵进行秋防。
English: However, Li Gang was still worried about the border defense, and he and fellow Privy Councillor Xu Han discussed the transfer of troops for the autumn defense.

古文：吴敏乞置详议司检详法制，以革弊政，诏以纲为提举官，南仲沮止之。
现代文：吴敏请求设置详议司审查整理法律制度，以革除弊政，钦宗下诏以李纲为提举官，耿南仲进行阻止。
English: Wu Min requested the establishment of a detailed discussion department to review and sort out the legal system in order to eliminate maladministration, under the Qinzong, Li Gang was appointed as the nominating officer, and Geng Nanzhong was blocked.

古文：纲奏： 边患方棘，调度不给，宜稍抑冒滥，以足国用。
现代文：李纲上奏说 ：边境祸患正紧急，关于边防的各方面的调度不充足，应该稍微抑制一下在官吏和财政上的混乱，以充足国用。
English: Li Gang said in his report: The border disaster is urgent, and the dispatching of all aspects of border defense is not sufficient. It is necessary to slightly curb the chaos in officials and finances to make sufficient use of the state.

古文：谓如节度使至遥郡刺史，本以待勋臣，今皆以戚里恩泽得之；堂吏转官止于正郎，崇、观间始转至中奉大夫，今宜皆复旧制。 执政揭其奏通衢，以纲得士民心，欲因此离之。
现代文：例如从节度使到边远州郡的刺史，本来是用来授与给功臣的，现在都被亲戚旧友通过恩泽占据了。原来由堂吏转为官最高只能转为正郎，从崇宁、大观年间开始转到了中奉大夫，现在应该都恢复旧制。 宰相将他的奏书贴榜在交通要道，因为李纲得士民之心，想以此离间他们。
English: For example, from the time of the Emperor's visit to the outlying prefectures and counties, the posts that were originally awarded to meritorious soldiers are now occupied by relatives and old friends through the grace of the Emperor. Originally, the highest-ranking official could only be promoted to the highest-ranking official, and the highest-ranking official could only be promoted to the highest-ranking official, and the highest-ranking official could only be promoted to the highest-ranking official, and the highest-ranking official could only be promoted to the highest-ranking official, and the highest-ranking official could only be promoted to the highest-ranking official, and the highest-ranking official could only be promoted to the highest-

古文：会守御司奏补副尉二人，御批有 大臣专权，浸不可长 语。
现代文：恰逢守御司奏请补充二名副尉，钦宗的亲手批字中有 大臣专权，不可增长这个风气 等话。
English: At the same time, two vice lieutenants were requested to be added to the shogunate's Mishi-so, and Emperor Kinzong's personal criticism was that ministers had exclusive power, and that this culture should not be allowed to grow, and so on.

古文：纲奏： 顷得旨给空名告敕，以便宜行事。
现代文：李纲上奏说 ：臣不久前得圣旨给予空白告敕，遇事可以不经请示而相机行事。
English: Li Gang said in his report: The minister recently received the holy will to give a blank notice, and in the event of an emergency, the camera can act without a request.

古文：二人有劳当补官，故具奏闻，乃遵上旨，非专权也。 
现代文：这两个人有功劳应该补官，因此将有关情况奏上给皇帝知道，是遵照皇上的旨意，不是专权。 
English: These two people had the merit to be promoted, so reporting the relevant situation to the emperor was in accordance with the emperor's will, not an absolute right.

古文：时太原围未解，种师中战没，师道病归，南仲曰： 欲援太原，非纲不可。 上以纲为河东、北宣抚使。
现代文：当时太原之围没有解，种师中战死，种师道因病回去了，耿南仲说： 想援助太原，非李纲不可。 皇上任李纲为河东、河北宣抚使。
English: At that time, the siege of Taiyuan had not been resolved, and Geng Nanzhong said: "If you want to help Taiyuan, you have to help Li Gang." Li Gang was appointed by the emperor as the envoy of Hengtong and Hebei.

古文：纲言： 臣书生，实不知兵。
现代文：李纲说： 臣是一个书生，确实不懂兵事。
English: Li Gang said: "The minister is a scholar, he really does not understand military affairs.

古文：在围城中，不得已为陛下料理兵事，今使为大帅，恐误国事。 因拜辞，不许。
现代文：在京城被围时，不得已才为陛下料理兵事，现在让臣为大帅，恐怕误国家大事。 于是推辞，钦宗不同意。
English: When the capital was besieged, he had no choice but to prepare military affairs for His Majesty, and now he is letting a vassal be the commander-in-chief, which I am afraid is a mistake of national importance.

古文：退而移疾，乞致仕，章十余上，不允。
现代文：退朝后称病，请求去职，连上十多份奏书，钦宗都不同意。
English: After retiring from the imperial court, he claimed to be ill and requested to leave his post. Even after more than ten written requests, Qinzong did not agree.

古文：台谏言纲不可去朝廷，上以其为大臣游说，斥之。
现代文：台谏官说李纲不能离开朝廷，皇上认为这是为大臣游说，加以斥责。
English: When the Taiwanese eunuch said that Li Gang could not leave the imperial court, the emperor considered this to be lobbying for the minister and reprimanded him.

古文：或谓纲曰： 公知所以遣行之意乎？
现代文：有人对李纲说 ：公知道为什么派公出任宣抚使吗？
English: Someone said to Li Gang: Do you know why you were sent to serve as a propaganda envoy?

古文：此非为边事，欲缘此以去公，则都人无辞耳。
现代文：这不是为了边防之事，而是想借此去掉公，则京城之人无话可说罢了。
English: This is not for the sake of border defense, but to take advantage of this to get rid of the public, then the people of Beijing have nothing to say.

古文：公坚卧不起，谗者益肆，上怒且不测，奈何？ 许翰书： 杜邮 二字遗纲，纲皇恐受命。
现代文：公坚持卧病不起，说谗言的人会更加放肆，皇上是否发怒还测料不到，怎么办？ 许翰写上 杜邮 二字送给李纲，李纲惊恐之中慌忙受命。
English: Publicly insisting that he was bedridden, and that those who spoke ill of him would be more presumptuous, and that it was impossible to predict whether the emperor would be angry, what should be done? Xu Han wrote the word "Du Po" and sent it to Li Gang, and Li Gang received the order in a panic.

古文：上手书《裴度传》以赐，纲言： 吴元济以区区环蔡之地抗唐室，与金人强弱固不相侔，而臣曾不足以望裴度万分之一。
现代文：皇上亲自抄写《裴度传》赐给李纲，李纲说： 吴元济以蔡州周围的小小地方与唐室相抗衡，这与金人力量的强弱自然是不能相比的，而臣未曾奢望比得上裴度的万分之一。
English: The emperor personally copied the "Biography of Pei Du" and gave it to Li Gang. Li Gang said: Wu Yuanji used the small places around Caizhou to compete with the Tang Dynasty. Naturally, this cannot be compared with the strength and weakness of gold manpower, and the minister has never had the luxury of hoping to match one ten thousandth of Pei Du.

古文：然寇攘外患可以扫除，小人在朝，蠹害难去。
现代文：然而外寇入侵之患可以攘除，但让小人在朝，大害却难以去掉。
English: However, the danger of invasion by foreign invaders can be eliminated, but it is difficult to eliminate the great harm caused by letting the villain be in power.

古文：使朝廷既正，君子道长，则所以捍御外患者，有不难也。 因书裴度论元稹、魏洪简章疏要语以进，上优诏答之。
现代文：如果朝廷有了正气，使君子之道长，则抵御外敌入侵并不难。 接着将裴度论元稹、魏洪简的奏疏中的关键话语抄下来呈给皇上，皇上以礼回答了李纲。
English: If the imperial court had the right spirit and made the road of the gentleman long, it would not be difficult to resist the invasion of foreign enemies.Then, he copied down the key words in the recitation of Pei Du on Yuan Xuan and Wei Hongjian and presented them to the emperor.The emperor responded to Li Gang with courtesy.

古文：宣抚司兵仅万二千人，庶事未集，纲乞展行期。
现代文：宣抚司统属的兵只有一万二千人，尚未聚集到一起，李纲请求推迟启程期限。
English: Li Gang requested to postpone the departure deadline, as there were only 12,000 soldiers under the leadership of the Generalissimo and they had not yet gathered together.

古文：御批以为迁延拒命，纲上疏明其所以未可行者，且曰： 陛下前以臣为专权，今以臣为拒命，方遣大帅解重围，而以专权、拒命之人为之，无乃不可乎？
现代文：钦宗亲自批字，认为李纲是拖延时间，抗拒命令，李纲上书说明之所以不能启程的原因，并且说： 陛下先前认为臣专权，现在又说臣是抗拒命令，本打算派遣大帅去解重围，却以专权、抗命之人担任大帅，恐怕不行吧？
English: Qinzong personally approved the letter, and thought that Li Gang was delaying time and resisting orders. Li Gang wrote a letter explaining the reason why he could not leave, and said: His Majesty previously thought that the minister had exclusive power, and now he said that the minister was resisting orders. He had planned to send a general to relieve the heavy siege, but I'm afraid it's not possible to have a person with exclusive power and disobedience as a general?

古文：愿乞骸骨，解枢管之任。 上趣召数四，曰： 卿为朕巡边，便可还朝。 纲曰： 臣之行，无复还之理。
现代文：希望能够批准臣解去枢密使之职。 皇上召见他三、四次，说 ：卿替朕巡视完边防，就可以返回朝廷。 李纲说： 臣这次出行，没有再返回朝廷之理。
English: The Emperor summoned him three or four times and said, "Your Excellency, after you have inspected the frontier for me, you may return to the Imperial Court." Li Gang said, "My Excellency, there is no reason for me to return to the Imperial Court after this trip.

古文：昔范仲淹以参政出抚西边，过郑州，见吕夷简。
现代文：过去范仲淹以参知政事的身份去安抚西部边疆地区，经过郑州，见到吕夷简。
English: In the past, Fan Zhongyun went to pacify the western border region as a political adviser to the governor. After passing through Zhengzhou, he met Lü Yizhen.

古文：夷简曰： 参政岂可复还！ 
现代文：吕夷简说 ：参知政事怎么能够再回来呢？ 
English: Lü Yijian said: "How can a member of the government come back again?

古文：其后果然。
现代文：后来果然如此。
English: This later proved to be true.

古文：今臣以愚直不容于朝，使既行之后，进而死敌，臣之愿也。
现代文：现在臣因为愚蠢和直率不被朝廷容纳，如果臣出行，则与敌拼死于战场，是臣的愿望。
English: Now the vassal is not accepted by the imperial court because of his stupidity and straightforwardness. If the vassal travels, it is the vassal's wish to die on the battlefield fighting with the enemy.

古文：万一朝廷执议不坚，臣当求去，陛下宜察臣孤忠，以全君臣之义。 上为之感动。
现代文：万一朝廷的决议不坚定，则臣应当请求去职，陛下应该明察臣的忠心，以保持君臣之间的情义。 皇上被他的话感动。
English: In the unlikely event that the Imperial Court's decision is not firm, then the vassal should ask the vassal to resign, and His Majesty should inspect the loyalty of the vassal, in order to maintain the relationship between the sovereign and the vassal.

古文：及陛辞，言唐恪、聂山之奸，任之不已，后必误国。
现代文：到辞行时，李纲谈到唐恪、聂山的奸诈，认为如果继续任用他们，以后肯定会误害国家。
English: At the time of his resignation, Li Gang talked about the treachery of Tang Ke and Shaoshan, and believed that if they continued to be appointed, they would certainly harm the country in the future.

古文：进至河阳，望拜诸陵，复上奏曰： 臣总师出巩、洛，望拜陵寝，潸然出涕。
现代文：李纲领兵进发到达河阳，拜祭了各个陵墓，又上奏说： 臣领兵经过巩县、洛阳，拜祭了陵墓，不禁落泪。
English: Li Guanzhong's soldiers marched to Kheyang and paid homage to the various mausoleums, and reported: "The vassal leader passed through Gongxian and Luoyang, paid homage to the mausoleums, and could not help but shed tears.

古文：恭惟祖宗创业守成，垂二百年，以至陛下。
现代文：想到祖宗创业守成，达二百年，传到陛下。
English: I thought of my ancestor's business, Shoucheng, which lasted for 200 years and was passed down to His Majesty.

古文：适丁艰难之秋，强敌内侵，中国势弱，此诚陛下尝胆思报，厉精求治之日，愿深考祖宗之法，一一推行之。进君子，退小人，益固邦本，以图中兴，上以慰安九庙之灵，下为亿兆苍生之所依赖，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：正逢艰难之时，强敌入侵，中国势力衰弱，这确实是陛下该卧薪尝胆，力图报国，励精图治之时，希望陛下仔细考究祖宗之法，一一加以推行，重用君子，斥退小人，稳固国家根本，以图谋中兴，上以安慰九朝先祖的灵魂，下以作为亿万生民的依靠，能如此则是天下的大幸！ 
English: At a difficult time, when a strong enemy is invading and China's power is weakening, this is indeed the time for His Majesty to lie down and take courage, strive to serve the country, and work hard to govern. I hope that His Majesty will carefully study the ancestral law, implement it one by one, re-use the gentleman, repel the villain, and strengthen the country's foundation, in an attempt to rejuvenate, to comfort the souls of the ancestors of the nine dynasties, and to serve as the reliance of hundreds of millions of people. If this can be done, it will be a great blessing to the world!

古文：行次怀州，有诏罢减所起兵纲奏曰： 太原之围未解，河东之势甚危，秋高马肥，敌必深入，宗社安危，殆未可知。
现代文：李纲驻扎在怀州，钦宗诏令解散宣抚司所集结的军队，李纲上奏说： 太原之围没有解除，河东的形势非常危急，秋高气爽，战马肥壮，敌人必定会深入进攻，国家是安是危，还不可知。
English: Li Gang was stationed in Waizhou. Emperor Qin Zong issued an edict to disband the army assembled by the Propaganda Department. Li Gang reported: The siege of Taiyuan has not been lifted. The situation in Hedong is very critical. The autumn is high and the horses are strong. The enemy will certainly attack deeply. Whether the country is safe or dangerous is still unknown.

古文：使防秋之师果能足用，不可保无敌骑渡河之警。
现代文：即使进行秋防军队真的充足，也不能保证没有敌人骑兵渡过黄河的危险。
English: Even if the autumn defense army is really sufficient, it cannot guarantee that there is no danger of enemy cavalry crossing the Yellow River.

古文：况臣出使未几，朝廷尽改前诏，所团结之兵，悉罢减之。
现代文：况且臣出使的时间不长，朝廷就完全改变原来的诏令，将所聚结的军队，全部解散。
English: Moreover, the envoys were not sent for a long time, and the imperial court completely changed the original imperial decree and disbanded all the assembled troops.

古文：今河北、河东日告危急，未有一人一骑以副其求，甫集之兵又皆散遣，臣诚不足以任此。
现代文：现在河北、河东天天告急，没有派一兵一马去支援他们，刚刚集结的士兵又都要遣散，臣确实担当不了这个任务。
English: Now Hebei and Hedong are in a state of emergency every day, and we have not sent a single soldier to support them. The soldiers who have just been assembled are to be demobilized. The minister really cannot take on this task.

古文：且以军法勒诸路起兵，而以寸纸罢之，臣恐后时有所号召，无复应者矣。 疏上，不报。
现代文：而且用军法勒令各路发兵，却又以寸纸之文遣散他们，臣担心以后如果有所号召，不再有人响应了。 奏疏呈上，没有得到回答。
English: Moreover, Farah ordered the army to send troops in all directions, but dismissed them with a piece of paper. The vassal feared that if there was a call in the future, no one would respond. The report was submitted, but there was no answer.

古文：御批日促解太原之围，而诸将承受御画，事皆专达，宣抚司徒有节制之名。
现代文：钦宗批示催促解除太原之围，但各位将领又被特别交待，凡事直接听命于朝廷，宣抚司空有统领之名。
English: Qinzong issued an order to urge the lifting of the siege of Taiyuan, but the generals were also given special treatment, directly following the orders of the imperial court in all matters, and proclaiming the name of the commander.

古文：纲上疏，极谏节制不专之弊。
现代文：李纲上书，极力谏说对各位将领统领不专一的弊害。
English: Li Gang wrote a letter, trying his best to point out the drawbacks of not being specific to the generals.

古文：时方议和，诏止纲进兵。
现代文：当时正在议和，朝廷诏令李纲停止进兵。
English: At that time, peace was being negotiated, and the imperial court ordered Li Gang to stop the advance of troops.

古文：未几，徐处仁、吴敏罢相而相唐恪，许翰罢同知枢密院而进聂山、陈过庭、李回等，吴敏复谪置涪州。
现代文：不久，徐处仁、吴敏被罢免宰相而任唐恪为相，许翰被罢去同知枢密院而起用聂山、陈过庭、李回等人，吴敏又被贬谪到涪州安置。
English: Soon after, Xu Duanren and Wu Min were dismissed from the post of prime minister, and Tang Jia was appointed as the new prime minister. Xu Han was dismissed from the Tongzhi Privy Council, and others such as Shaoshan, Chen Guotian and Li Hui were appointed. Wu Min was also demoted and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：纲闻之，叹曰： 事无可为者矣！ 即上奏丐罢。
现代文：李纲得知，叹息说： 什么事也干不成了！ 于是上书请求免职。
English: When Li Gang learned of this, he sighed and said, "I can't get anything done!" He then submitted a letter requesting to be relieved of his duties.

古文：乃命种师道以同知枢密院事领宣抚司事，召纲赴阙。
现代文：朝廷任命种师道以同知枢密院事的身份接管宣抚司，召令李纲回朝。
English: The imperial court appointed So Shi Dao to take over the Propaganda Department as a Tongzhi Privy Councillor and summoned Li Gang to return to the imperial court.

古文：寻除观文殿学士、知扬州，纲具奏辞免。
现代文：不久，授任李纲为观文殿学士、知扬州，李纲上奏推辞。
English: Soon after, Li Gang was appointed as a scholar of the Confucian Academy of Literature and Literature, Zhiyang, and Li Gang submitted his resignation.

古文：未几，以纲专主战议，丧师费财，落职提举亳州明道宫，责授保静军节度副使，建昌军安置；再谪宁江。
现代文：又不久，朝廷借口李纲专门主张抗战，丧师费财，将他削职贬为提举亳州明道宫，责授保静军节度副使，在建昌军安置；后又贬谪到宁江。
English: Not long after, the imperial court used the excuse that Li Gang specifically advocated the anti-Japanese war, lost his teacher and spent a lot of money, demoted him to the promotion of the Bozhou Mingdao Palace, assigned him to the deputy envoy of the Baoding Army, and placed him in the Jianchang Army. Later, he was demoted to Ningjiang.

古文：金兵再至，上悟和议之非，除纲资政殿大学士，领开封府事。
现代文：金兵再次入侵，皇上省悟到和议之错，任命李纲为资政殿大学士，负责主管开封府事务。
English: The Jin soldiers invaded again, and the emperor realized the mistake of negotiating a peace treaty and appointed Li Gang as the vice-president of the palace, responsible for the affairs of Kaifeng.

古文：纲行次长沙，被命，即率湖南勤王之师入援，未至而都城失守。
现代文：李纲在前往宁江途中停驻在长沙，接到命令，便立即率领湖南的勤王之军赶赴京城救援，还未到达，都城就已经失守了。
English: On his way to Ningjiang, Li Gang stopped in Changsha. Upon receiving the order, he immediately led the army of Hunan to rush to the capital for rescue. Before he arrived, the capital had already been lost.

古文：先是，康王至北军，为金人所惮，求遣肃王代之。
现代文：在这之前，康王到金军中作人质，被金人所恐吓，请求派肃王代替他。
English: Prior to this, King Kang went to the Jin army as a hostage, was threatened by the Jin people, and asked for King Su to be sent in his place.

古文：至是，康王开大元帅府，承制复纲故官，且贻书曰： 方今生民之命，急于倒垂，谅非不世之才，何以协济事功。
现代文：到这时，康王建立大元帅府，恢复李纲的旧官，并发书给李纲说： 当今生民涂炭，非常危急，料想不是绝世之才，不能协助取得事业的成功。
English: At this time, King Kang established the Grand Marshal's Office, restored Li Gang's old post, and issued a letter to Li Gang saying: Today's people are very critical, and it is not expected to be a great talent, and can not help to achieve business success.

古文：阁下学穷天人，忠贯金石，当投袂而起，以副苍生之望。 
现代文：阁下学问穷究天下，忠诚可以打开金石，应该卷袖而起，主持大事，以实现生民的愿望。 
English: Your Excellency, you are a scholar of the world. Loyalty can open the precious stone. You should roll up your sleeves and preside over major events in order to realize the wishes of the people.

古文：高宗即位，拜尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，趣赴阙。
现代文：高宗即位后，任命李纲为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，诏令他赶赴朝廷。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, he appointed Li Gang as his right-hand man and attendant, and ordered him to rush to the imperial court.

古文：中丞颜岐奏曰： 张邦昌为金人所喜，虽已为三公、郡王，宜更加同平章事，增重其礼；李纲为金人所恶，虽已命相，宜及其未至罢之。 章五上，上曰： 如朕之立，恐亦非金人所喜。 岐语塞而退。
现代文：中丞颜岐进言说： 张邦昌受金人喜爱，虽然已经官至三公、郡王，应该再加封他为同平章事，以增高他的地位；李纲被金人所厌恨，虽然已经被任命为宰相，应该趁他没有到朝廷之前将他罢免。 颜岐连上了五道奏书，皇上说： 像朕即大位，恐怕金人也不喜爱。 颜岐无言以对，只有作罢。
English: Yanqi, a middle-ranking courtier, said: Zhang Bangchang is loved by the Jin people, although he has been promoted to the rank of the third prince and the county king, he should be awarded the title of the same level to increase his status; Li Gang is hated by the Jin people, although he has been appointed as the prime minister, he should be removed before he arrives at the imperial court. Yanqi linked to the Five-Way Testimony, the emperor said: I am afraid that the Jin people do not like me, even though I am a high-ranking official. Yanqi was speechless, he had no choice but to act.

古文：岐犹遣人封其章示纲，觊以沮其来。
现代文：颜岐还将他的奏章封起来送给李纲看，企图阻止李纲到朝廷来。
English: Yanqi also sealed up his score and gave it to Li Gang to look at, in an attempt to prevent Li Gang from coming to the imperial court.

古文：上闻纲且至，遣官迎劳，锡宴，趣见于内殿。
现代文：皇上听说李纲即将到达，派官员迎接慰劳，并设宴招待，还将李纲召到内殿相见。
English: When the emperor heard that Li Gang was about to arrive, he sent officials to greet him and set up a banquet. He also summoned Li Gang to meet him in the inner hall.

古文：纲见上，涕泗交集，上为动容。
现代文：李纲见到皇上，激动得涕泪齐下，皇上也被感动。
English: When Li Gang saw the emperor, he was so excited that he shed tears. The emperor was also moved.

古文：因奏曰： 金人不道，专以诈谋取胜，中国不悟，一切堕其计中。
现代文：李纲趁机说道： 金人不讲道德，专门以欺诈取胜，中国没有省悟，以致中其奸计。
English: Li Gang took advantage of the opportunity to say: Gold people do not talk about morality, they only use fraud to win. China did not reflect, so that they were caught in their treachery.

古文：赖天命未改，陛下总师于外，为天下臣民之所推戴，内修外攘，还二圣而抚万邦，责在陛下与宰相。
现代文：好在上天之命没有改变，陛下统领大军在外，受到全国臣民的拥戴，在内整理政治，对外抗击金人，以后迎回二位先帝，安抚周邻各邦，其责任就在于陛下和宰相。
English: Fortunately, God's order has not changed. His Majesty is leading a large army abroad and is supported by the subjects of the whole country. He is sorting out politics internally and fighting against the money people externally. In the future, he will welcome back the two former emperors and pacify the surrounding states. The responsibility lies with His Majesty and the Prime Minister.

古文：臣自视阙然，不足以副陛下委任之意，乞追寝成命。
现代文：臣自知有许多不足，不能胜任陛下的委任，请求追回成命。
English: The vassal knew that he had many shortcomings and was not competent to carry out His Majesty's appointment, so he asked for his life back.

古文：且臣在道，颜岐尝封示论臣章，谓臣为金人所恶，不当为相。
现代文：另外臣在来朝廷的途中，颜岐曾将他对臣的奏章封后派人送给臣看过，说臣被金人所厌恨，不应该任宰相。
English: In addition, when the vassal was on his way to the imperial court, Yanqi had sealed his letter to the vassal and sent someone to show it to the vassal, saying that the vassal was hated by the Jin people and should not be appointed prime minister.

古文：如臣愚蠢，但知有赵氏，不知有金人，宜为所恶。
现代文：像臣这样愚蠢只知道姓赵的，不知道金人，应该是被金人所厌恨。
English: If a stupid person like the minister only knows the surname Zhao and does not know the Jin people, he should be hated by the Jin people.

古文：然谓臣材不足以任宰相则可，谓为金人所恶不当为相则不可。 因力辞。
现代文：不过，如果说臣的才能不能胜任宰相之职，是可以的，但如果说因为臣被金人所厌恨因而不能任宰相，则不行。 说完极力推辞就任宰相。
English: However, it is acceptable to say that a vassal's talent is not sufficient for the post of prime minister, but it is not acceptable to say that a vassal cannot be appointed prime minister because he is hated by the goldsmiths.

古文：帝为出范宗尹知舒州。颜岐与祠。
现代文：皇帝为了安抚李纲，将范宗尹从朝廷调出任舒州知州，并让颜岐一起去舒州做祠官。
English: In order to appease Li Gang, the emperor transferred Fan Zongyin from the imperial court to Shuzhou Chizhou, and let Yan Qi go to Shuzhou to work as an ancestral official.

古文：纲犹力辞，上曰： 朕知卿忠义智略久矣，欲使敌国畏服，四方安宁，非相卿不可，卿其勿辞。 纲顿首泣谢，云：
现代文：李纲仍然极力推辞，皇上说： 朕早就知道卿的忠义智略，想让敌国害怕服从，让全国安宁，非卿出任宰相不可，卿不要推辞了。 李纲点头流泪表示感谢，说：
English: Li Gang still tried his best to refuse, and the emperor said, "I have long known about your loyalty and wisdom, and I want the enemy countries to be afraid to obey, and I want the whole country to be peaceful. If you are not the prime minister, then you should not refuse." Li Gang nodded and shed tears to express his gratitude, saying,

古文：臣愚陋无取，荷陛下知遇，然今日扶颠持危，图中兴之功，在陛下而不在臣。
现代文： 臣愚蠢粗陋而无才能，承蒙陛下了解和信任，不过，现在挽救国家危难，保持国家安定，以图复兴大宋，其重任在于陛下而不在于臣。
English: The minister is stupid, crude and incompetent. He has gained the understanding and trust of His Majesty. However, it is His Majesty's responsibility, not the minister's, to save the country from danger and maintain national stability in order to revive the Great Song Dynasty.

古文：臣无左右先容，陛下首加识擢，付以宰柄，顾区区何足以仰副图任责成之意？
现代文：臣以前没有什么辉煌的经历，陛下首次发现并加以提拔，授予臣宰相大权，只是臣是一个区区的小人物，怎么能够担当得起辅佐陛下完成复兴大业的重任呢？
English: The vassal did not have any brilliant experience before. His Majesty first discovered and promoted the vassal, and granted the vassal the power of the prime minister. However, the vassal is a petty person. How could he be able to take on the heavy responsibility of assisting His Majesty to complete the great cause of revival?

古文：然 靡不有初，鲜克有终 。
现代文：不过 万事都有开头，但很少有能够善终的 。
English: But everything has a beginning, and few things have a happy ending.

古文：臣孤立寡与，望察管仲害霸之言，留神于君子小人之间，使得以尽志毕虑，虽死无憾。
现代文：臣孤身一个，朋友不多，希望陛下明察管仲批评诸侯盟主的言论，注意区分君子和小人，使臣能够尽心尽力，则虽死而无憾。
English: A vassal is all alone and has few friends. I hope that His Majesty will pay close attention to the words of the mediator criticizing the leaders of the states, pay attention to the distinction between a gentleman and a villain, and if the envoy can do his best, he will have no regrets even if he dies.

古文：昔唐明皇欲相姚崇，崇以十事要说，皆中一时之病。
现代文：过去唐明皇想任姚崇为宰相，姚崇列举了十件大事，都道中了当时的弊端。
English: In the past, Emperor Ming of Tang wanted to appoint Yao Chong as prime minister. Yao Chong listed ten major events, all of which had the drawbacks of the time.

古文：今臣亦以十事仰干天听，陛下度其可行者，赐之施行，臣乃敢受命。
现代文：现在臣也列举十件事说给陛下听，请陛下考虑其中可以施行的，诏令施行，臣才敢接受任命。
English: Now the minister also listed ten things to say to His Majesty, asking His Majesty to consider which can be implemented, the edict implemented, and the minister dared to accept the appointment.

古文：一曰议国是。
现代文： 一是关于国家大事。
English: The first is about national affairs.

古文：谓中国之御四裔，能守而后可战，能战而后可和，而靖康之末皆失之。
现代文：即指中国对周边少数民族政权的防御，只有在能够守的基础上才能够战，在能够战的基础上才能够讲和，可是在靖康末年这些都没有。
English: That is to say, China's defense against the surrounding ethnic minority regimes can only fight on the basis of being able to defend, and can only make peace on the basis of being able to fight, but there was none of this in the last years of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：今欲战则不足，欲和则不可，莫若先自治，专以守为策，俟吾政事修，士气振，然后可议大举。
现代文：现在想战却力量不足，想讲和又不成，不如先在国内进行治理，专门进行防守，等我们治理好了政事，振奋了士气，然后才能考虑发动进攻，复兴国家。
English: If we want to fight now, but our strength is insufficient, and if we want to talk about peace but fail, it would be better to first govern the country and focus on defense. Once we have governed the country well and boosted morale, then we can consider launching an attack and reviving the country.

古文：二曰议巡幸。
现代文： 二是关于巡幸。
English: The second is about the parade.

古文：谓车驾不可不一到京师，见宗庙，以慰都人之心，度未可居，则为巡幸之计。
现代文：是说皇上的车驾必须到京城去一下，拜祭拜祭宗庙，安慰安慰都城的人心，考虑到京城不能居住，所以只作为巡幸打算。
English: That is to say, the emperor's car must go to the capital city, pay homage to the ancestral temple, and comfort the hearts of the people in the capital city. Considering that the capital city cannot be inhabited, it is only planned as a sightseeing tour.

古文：以天下形势而观。长安为上，襄阳次之，建康又次之，皆当诏有司预为之备。
现代文：从全国的形势看，能够由皇上居住的，以长安为最好，襄阳其次，建康再其次，这些地方都应该诏令当地的官府事先作好准备。
English: From the perspective of the national situation, Chang'an is the best place for the emperor to live, followed by Xiangyang and Jiankang. These places should order the local government to make preparations in advance.

古文：三日议赦令。
现代文： 三是关于赦令。
English: The third is about the pardon order.

古文：谓祖宗登极赦令，皆有常式。
现代文：是说祖宗登基即位赦书，都有固定的格式。
English: That is to say, there is a fixed format for the letters of pardon for the enthronement of the ancestors.

古文：前日赦书，乃以张邦昌伪赦为法，如赦恶逆及罪废官尽复官职，皆泛滥不可行，宜悉改正以法。
现代文：前天陛下的赦书，是效法张邦昌的伪赦书的。例如赦免犯恶逆罪者以及将罪当免官的人全部恢复旧官，都显得比较泛滥而不能实行，应该全部加以改正，以效法祖宗的成法。
English: His Majesty's letter of pardon the day before yesterday is a copy of Zhang Bangchang's pseudo-pardon letter. For example, pardoning those who have committed evil and treason, and reinstating all those who have been dismissed from their posts, all appear to be rather excessive and cannot be implemented. They should all be corrected in order to follow the law of the ancestors.

古文：四曰议僣逆。
现代文： 四是关于僭逆。
English: The fourth is about the opposite.

古文：谓张邦昌为国大臣，不能临难死节，而挟金人之势易姓改号，宜正典刑，垂戒万世。
现代文：是说张邦昌作为国家的大臣，在国家危难之时不拼死保持气节，却借金人的势力改姓换号，另立政权，应该明正典刑，以警戒后世。
English: It is said that Zhang Bangchang, as a minister of the country, did not fight to maintain his dignity in a time of national crisis, but changed his surname and changed his name by borrowing the power of the people, and established a different regime. It should be clear and formal punishment to warn future generations.

古文：五曰议伪命。
现代文： 五是关于伪命。
English: The fifth is about false life.

古文：谓国家更大变，鲜仗节死义之士，而受伪官以屈膝于其庭者，不可胜数。
现代文：是说在国家遭受劫难之后，很少有仗义而死的人，但接受伪政府的官爵，在伪朝廷委曲求全的人却不计其数。
English: It is said that after the country suffered a catastrophe, there were very few people who died fighting for justice, but there were countless officials and nobles who accepted the pseudo-government and sought perfection in the pseudo-Imperial Court Committee.

古文：昔肃宗平贼，污为伪者以六等定罪，宜仿之以励士风。
现代文：以前肃宗在平定贼寇以后，对于接受伪朝廷任命者定六等罪，应该仿效肃宗的做法鼓励士大夫风气。
English: In the past, after Su Zong quelled the banditry, those who accepted the pseudo-imperial court appointees were sentenced to the sixth degree of crime. It is necessary to follow Su Zong's example and encourage the style of the scholar-official.

古文：六曰议战。
现代文： 六是关于战。
English: The sixth is about war.

古文：谓军政久废，士气怯惰，宜一新纪律，信赏必罚，以作其气。
现代文：是说国家的军事已经废弛很久了，士兵胆小懒惰，应该重新统一制定新的军纪，信赏必罚，以振作士气。
English: It is said that the country's military has been weak for a long time, and soldiers are timid and lazy. It is necessary to re-unify and formulate a new military discipline, and reward and punish in order to boost morale.

古文：七曰议守。
现代文： 七是关于守。
English: The seventh is about defense.

古文：谓敌情狡狯，势必复来，宜于沿河、江、淮措置控御，以扼其冲。
现代文：是说敌人狡诈，必定会再次入侵，应该在黄河、长江、淮河沿线构筑防御设施，扼住敌人入侵的要道。
English: That is to say, the enemy is cunning and will certainly invade again. It is necessary to build defense facilities along the Yellow River, Yangtze River and Huaihe River to stifle the enemy's invasion.

古文：八曰议本政。
现代文： 八是关于本政。
English: The eighth is about real politics.

古文：谓政出多门，纪纲紊乱，宜一归之于中书，则朝廷尊。
现代文：是指朝廷政出多门、纪纲紊乱，应该将政权统一收归中书省，这样才能保持朝廷的崇高地位。
English: It refers to the fact that there are many branches of government in the imperial court, and the discipline is disordered. The power should be unified and transferred to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, so as to maintain the high status of the imperial court.

古文：九曰议久任。
现代文： 九是关于久任。
English: Nine are about his long tenure.

古文：谓靖康间进退大臣太速，功效蔑著，宜慎择而久任之，以责成功。
现代文：是说在靖康年间任免大臣太频繁，效果很差，对大臣应该慎重选择而长久任用，以督促他取得成绩。
English: He said that the appointment and removal of ministers during the Yasukuni and Kamakura eras was too frequent and had a poor effect, and that ministers should be carefully selected and appointed for a long time in order to urge them to achieve results.

古文：十曰议修德。
现代文： 十是关于修德。
English: The tenth is about cultivating virtue.

古文：谓上始膺天命，宜益修孝悌恭俭，以副四海之望，而致中兴。
现代文：是说皇上刚接受天命，应该更加讲求孝悌，注意恭俭，以不辜负全国百姓的期望，实现复兴大业。 
English: It is said that the emperor has just accepted the fate of heaven, and should pay more attention to filial piety, pay attention to frugality, so as to live up to the expectations of the people across the country and realize the great cause of rejuvenation.

古文：翌日，班纲议于朝，惟僣逆、伪命二事留中不出。
现代文：第二天，高宗在朝廷公布了李纲的建议，只将其中关于僭逆、伪命两条保留下来没有公开。
English: The next day, Gaozong announced Li Gang's proposal in the imperial court, but only kept the two articles on treason and perjury and did not make them public.

古文：纲言：二事乃今日政刑之大者。
现代文：李纲说 ：这两件事是当今政治和法律中的两件大事。
English: Li Gang said: These two events are two major events in today's politics and law.

古文：邦昌当道君朝，在政府者十年，渊圣即位，首擢为相。
现代文：张邦昌在道君皇帝朝，在政府中任职十年，渊圣皇帝即位后，他首先被选拔为宰相。
English: Zhang Bangchang served in the government for ten years during the reign of Emperor Daojun. After Emperor Yuancheng ascended to the throne, he was the first to be selected as prime minister.

古文：方国家祸难，金人为易姓之谋，邦昌如能以死守节，推明天下戴宋之义，以感动其心，敌人未必不悔祸而存赵氏。
现代文：当国家遭受祸难之时，金人制造改姓的阴谋，张邦昌如果能够宁死保持气节，表明天下拥戴赵宋的道理，感动金人的心，敌人不一定不会对其发动战争制造祸害感到后悔，因而将赵氏政权保留下来。
English: When the country suffered a calamity, the Jin people made a plot to change the family name. If Zhang Bangchang could rather die than keep his dignity, it would show that the world supported the principle of Zhao Song and moved the hearts of the Jin people. The enemy would not necessarily regret starting a war to create a calamity, thus retaining the Zhao regime.

古文：而邦昌方自以为得计，偃然正位号，处宫禁，擅降伪诏，以止四方勤王之师。
现代文：可张邦昌却自以为得计，安然地登上大位，确立国号，居在宫廷之中，擅自颁布伪诏书，停止各地的勤王的军队。
English: Zhang Bangchang, however, thought he had the upper hand, safely ascended to the throne, established the country's name, lived in the court, issued a false edict without authorization, and stopped the troops of royalists from all over the country.

古文：及知天下之不与，不得已而后请元祐太后垂帘听政，而议奉迎。
现代文：等到他知道百姓臣民都不拥护他时，才迫不得已请元太后出来垂帘听政和决定迎奉陛下回朝。
English: When he knew that the people and subjects did not support him, he had no choice but to ask the Empress Dowager to come out to listen to politics and decide to welcome His Majesty back to the country.

古文：邦昌僣逆始末如此，而议者不同，臣请备论而以《春秋》之法断之。
现代文：张邦昌僭逆的前后经过就是这样，可对张邦昌是否应该定罪处刑，有人持不同看法，臣请求将各种意见集中起来再根据《春秋》的有关规定来决断。
English: This is what happened before and after Zhang Bangchang's rebellion. Some people hold different views on whether Zhang Bangchang should be convicted and sentenced. The minister requested that all opinions be collected and then decided according to the relevant provisions of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：夫都城之人德邦昌，谓因其立而得生，且免重科金银之扰。
现代文： 都城的百姓感激张邦昌，认为正是张邦昌的僭位才使自己保全了性命，而且还免去了交纳金银的沉重负担。
English: The people of the capital were grateful to Zhang Bangchang, believing that it was Zhang Bangchang's ascension to the throne that saved his life, and also relieved him of the heavy burden of paying gold and silver.

古文：元帅府恕邦昌，谓其不待征讨而遣使奉迎。
现代文：元帅府饶恕张邦昌，认为他在元帅府发兵征讨之前能够主动派使迎接皇上回朝。
English: The marshal's office spared Zhang Bangchang, believing that he could take the initiative to send an envoy to welcome the emperor back to the North before the marshal's office sent troops to recruit.

古文：若天下之愤嫉邦昌者，则谓其建号易姓，而奉迎特出于不得已。
现代文：至于说到天下愤恨张邦昌的人，则认为张邦昌已经僭位改号，而他之所派遣使者迎奉皇上只是出于迫不得已。
English: As for those who said that the whole world resented Zhang Bangchang, they believed that Zhang Bangchang had already abdicated and changed his name, and the envoy he sent to meet the emperor was only out of necessity.

古文：都城德之，元帅府恕之，私也，天下愤嫉之，公也。
现代文：都城百姓感激张邦昌，元帅府饶恕张邦昌，是出于私心；天下人愤恨张邦昌，是出于公心。
English: The people of the capital are grateful to Zhang Bangchang, and the Marshal's Office forgives Zhang Bangchang out of selfishness; people around the world resent Zhang Bangchang out of public-spiritedness.

古文：《春秋》之法，人臣无将，将而必诛；赵盾不讨贼，则书以杀君。
现代文：《春秋》写道，人臣不得专权，专权则必定杀头；赵盾不讨伐叛贼，就被记载为弑君。
English: "Spring and Autumn" wrote that vassals must not have absolute power, and absolute power must kill heads; if Zhao Dun did not fight against traitors, he was recorded as a traitor.

古文：今邦昌已僣位号，敌退而止勤王之师，非特将与不讨贼而已。
现代文：现在张邦昌已经僭位改号，敌人撤退时还不准勤王的军队追击，他不仅仅是专权和不讨伐叛贼的问题。
English: Now that Zhang Bangchang has been enthroned and renamed, the enemy is not allowed to pursue the army of the king when retreating. This is not just a matter of dictatorship and not fighting against traitors.

古文：刘盆子以汉宗室为赤眉所立，其后以十万众降光武，但待之以不死。
现代文： 刘盆子以汉宗室的身份被赤眉军立为皇帝，后来他率十万人投降光武帝，光武帝对他只是免去一死。
English: Liu Bon Zi was made emperor by the Red Eyebrows as the Han dynasty's heir. Later, he led 100,000 people to surrender to Emperor Guangwu, who only spared him one death.

古文：邦昌以臣易君，罪大于盆子，不得已而自归，朝廷既不正其罪，又尊崇之，此何理也？
现代文：张邦昌以臣子的身份僭位为君，其罪行大于刘盆子，他只是迫不得已才主动表示归顺，朝廷对他既不定罪，反而还给予尊崇，这是什么道理呢？
English: Zhang Bangchang ascended to the throne as a courtier. His crime was greater than that of Liu Bonzi. He only voluntarily surrendered under duress. The imperial court did not convict him, but gave him respect. What is the reason for this?

古文：陛下欲建中兴之业，而尊崇僣逆之臣，以示四方，其谁不解体？
现代文：陛下想建立复兴大业，却尊崇僭逆的臣子，让世人知道，有谁还会死心踏地地捍卫朝廷呢？
English: His Majesty wants to establish the great cause of rejuvenation, but he reveres the rebellious vassals, letting the world know, who will defend the imperial court with all his heart?

古文：又伪命臣僚，一切置而不问，何以厉天下士大夫之节？
现代文：张邦昌还任命伪臣僚，对于这一切都置之不问，凭什么去激励士大夫的气节呢？ 
English: Zhang Bangchang also appointed pseudo-ministers, and he did not question all of this. How could he motivate the morale of the scholar-officials?

古文：时执政中有论不同者，上乃召黄潜善等语之。
现代文：当时在执政大臣中有人持不同的意见，皇上于是将黄潜善等人召来把李纲的意见告诉他们。
English: At that time, some of the ruling ministers held different opinions, and the emperor then summoned Huang Kuanzhen and others to tell them Li Gang's opinions.

古文：潜善主邦昌甚力，上顾吕好问曰： 卿昨在围城中知其故，以为何如？ 好问附潜善，持两端，曰： 邦昌僣窃位号，人所共知，既已自归，惟陛下裁处。 纲言： 邦昌僣逆，岂可使之在朝廷，使道路指目曰 此亦一天子 哉！ 因泣拜曰： 臣不可与邦昌同列，当以笏击之。
现代文：黄潜善极力为张邦昌说话，皇上看着吕好问说： 卿当时在被围困的城中，知道详细情况，卿认为该怎样？ 吕好问附和黄潜善，不置可否，说： 张邦昌僭位改号，人所共知，他已经主动归顺，请陛下裁断处置。 李纲说： 张邦昌僭逆，怎么能让他呆在朝廷，让路人指着他说： 这是一个天子 呢！ 于是便跪拜于地，流着泪对皇上说： 臣不能和张邦昌在一起共事，如果在一起，应当用手板打他。
English: The emperor looked at Lyu Hao and asked: Sir, you were in the besieged city at the time, you know the details, what do you think should be done? Lyu Hao asked, echoing Huang Xunshan, non-committal, saying: Zhang Bangchang changed his title, it is well known that he has voluntarily surrendered, please let His Majesty decide the disposition. Li Gang said: Zhang Bangchang is rebellious, how can he stay in the court, let passers-by point to him and say: This is a son of heaven! So he bowed down to the ground, shed tears and said to the emperor: The minister cannot work with Zhang Bangchang, if

古文：陛下必欲用邦昌，第罢臣。 上颇感动。
现代文：陛下一定任用张邦昌，就先罢免了臣。 皇上十分感动。
English: His Majesty must have appointed Zhang Bangchang and dismissed the minister first. The Emperor was very moved.

古文：伯彦乃曰： 李纲气直，臣等所不及。 乃诏邦昌谪潭州，吴幵、莫俦而下皆迁谪有差。纲又言： 近世士大夫寡廉鲜耻，不知君臣之义。
现代文：汪伯彦说： 李纲刚直有气节，臣等所不如。 于是下诏将张邦昌贬谪到潭州，从吴千干、莫俦以下曾接受过张邦昌任命的臣僚都分别受到不同程度的贬谪。李纲又说 ：近来的士大夫寡廉鲜耻，不知君臣之间的道义。
English: Wang Bohian said, "Li Gang had a straightforward temperament, which was inferior to that of other ministers, so he issued an edict to demote Zhang Bangchang to Tanzhou, and the ministers who had been appointed by Zhang Bangchang from Wu Qiangan and Mokou were all demoted to different degrees. Li Gang also said, "Recently, there have been many corrupt and shameless officials, and they do not know the morality between the emperor and his ministers.

古文：靖康之祸，能仗节死义者，在内惟李若水，在外惟霍安国，愿加赠恤。 上从其请，仍诏有死节者，诸路询访以闻。
现代文：靖康之难，能够为保持气节而死者，在朝廷之内只有李若水，在朝廷之外只有霍安国，希望对他们加以抚恤。 皇上接受了他的请求，并且还下诏让各路询访其他有为气节而死者，上报给朝廷。
English: The emperor accepted his request, and also issued an edict that all parties should inquire about other people who had died for the sake of the qi festival and report to the imperial court.

古文：上谓纲曰： 卿昨争张邦昌事，内侍辈皆泣涕，卿今可以受命矣。 纲拜谢。
现代文：皇上对李纲说： 卿先前争论有关张邦昌的事，内侍们得知都流泪，卿现在可以接受任命吧？ 李纲跪拜表示感谢。
English: The emperor said to Li Gang, "Your Excellency previously argued about the matter of Zhang Bangchang, and when the chamberlains learned about it, they all shed tears. Can your Excellency accept the appointment now? Li Gang knelt down to express his gratitude.

古文：有旨兼充御营使。
现代文：李纲接到旨令由他兼任御营使。
English: When Li Gang received the order, he also served as the imperial envoy.

古文：入对，奏曰：
现代文：李纲入朝，对皇上说：
English: When Li Gang entered the imperial court, he said to the emperor:

古文：今国势不逮靖康间远甚，然而可为者，陛下英断于上，群臣辑睦于下，庶几靖康之弊革，而中兴可图。
现代文： 现在的国力远远不及靖康时期，然而值得欣慰的是，上有陛下英明果断，下有群臣和睦团结，应该说靖康时期的弊端可以革除，复兴大业可以实现。
English: The current national strength is far less than that of the Jingkang period. However, it is gratifying that His Majesty is wise and decisive on the one hand, and the ministers are harmonious and united on the other. It should be said that the drawbacks of the Jingkang period can be eliminated and the great cause of rejuvenation can be realized.

古文：然非有规模而知先后缓急之序，则不能以成功。
现代文：不过，如果不具有一定的国力和不知道行动的先后缓急顺序，也是不能够取得成功的。
English: However, if you do not have a certain national strength and do not know the order of priority of actions, you will not be able to succeed.

古文：夫外御强敌，内销盗贼，修军政，变士风，裕邦财，宽民力，改弊法，省冗官，诚号令以感人心，信赏罚以作士气，择帅臣以任方面，选监司、郡守以奉行新政，俟吾所以自治者政事已修，然后可以问罪金人，迎还二圣，此所谓规模也。
现代文： 对外抵御强敌，在内消除盗贼，治理军政，改变士风，充实国家财力，减轻百姓负担，革除弊法，裁减冗官，明确号令以感动人心，信赏必罚以振作士气，挑选帅臣委托他们一方面的重任，选择监司、郡守让他们执行新政，等我们能够依靠自己进行治理的政事已经治理好，而后才能向金人问罪，迎回我二位先帝，这就是所说的规模。
English: Defending against a strong enemy from the outside, eliminating thieves from within, governing military affairs, changing the warrior ethos, enriching the country's financial resources, reducing the burden on the people, eliminating bad laws, reducing redundant officials, giving clear orders to move people's hearts, rewarding and punishing to boost morale, selecting generals to entrust them with heavy responsibilities, selecting supervisors and county governors to let them implement the New Deal, and waiting for the political affairs that we can rely on ourselves to govern have been well governed, and then we can ask the people of Jin for their sins and welcome back my two past emperors. This is the scale.

古文：至于所当急而先者，则在于料理河北、河东。
现代文：至于当务之急，则是在于处理河北、河东两路的事务。
English: As for the urgent tasks, it is to deal with the affairs of Hebei and Hedong.

古文：盖河北、河东者，国之屏蔽也。
现代文：因为河北、河东，是国家的屏障。
English: Because Hebei and Hedong are national barriers.

古文：料理稍就，然后中原可保，而东南可安。
现代文：将河北、河东的事务处理得差不多，中原才能保住，东南才能安宁。
English: If the affairs of Hebei and Hedong are handled in a similar way, the Central Plains can be preserved, and the Southeast can be peaceful.

古文：今河东所失者忻、代、太原、泽、潞、汾、晋，余郡犹存也。
现代文：现在河东路失去了忻、代、太原、泽、氵路、汾、晋等郡，其他的郡还保存着。
English: Now, Hedong Road has lost counties including Handan, Dayi, Taiyuan, Ze, Kushiro, Handan and Jin, while other counties are still preserved.

古文：河北所失者，不过真定、怀、卫、浚四州而已，其余三十余郡，皆为朝廷守。
现代文：河北路失去的只有真定、怀、卫、浚四个州，其余的二十多个州都还由朝廷把守着。
English: Hebei lost only four provinces: Zhending, Huai, Wei, and Jiu. The remaining twenty-odd provinces were still protected by the imperial court.

古文：两路士民兵将，所以戴宋者，其心甚坚，皆推豪杰以为首领，多者数万，少者亦不下万人。
现代文：两路的士民兵将之所以拥戴宋朝，是因为他们的心里非常坚定、踏实，他们都会推拥豪杰作为首领形成抗金的组织，多的人数达到几万，少的也不下万人。
English: The reason why the taxi militias on both sides support the Song Dynasty is because their hearts are very firm and down-to-earth. They will all support the hero as the leader to form a resistance organization. The number of people reaches tens of thousands, and the number of people is not less than ten thousand.

古文：朝廷不因此时置司、遣使以大慰抚之，分兵以援其危急，臣恐粮尽力疲，坐受金人之困。
现代文：朝廷不趁这个时候设置司，派遣使者对他们进行抚慰，分别派兵援救他们的危急，臣担心他们粮尽力竭以后，坐受金人围困。
English: The imperial court did not take advantage of this time to set up a division, send emissaries to comfort them, and separately send soldiers to rescue their critical situation. The vassals feared that after they had exhausted their grain, they would be besieged by the gold people.

古文：虽怀忠义之心，援兵不至，危迫无告，必且愤怨朝廷，金人因得抚而用之，皆精兵也。
现代文：他们虽然怀有忠义之心，但援兵不到，遇到危急无处求援，必将怨恨朝廷，金人借机加以抚慰和利用，他们都会成为金人的精兵。
English: Although they have a loyal heart, they can't get reinforcements and have nowhere to turn for help in a crisis. They will resent the imperial court, and the Jin people will take the opportunity to comfort and use them. They will all become the elite soldiers of the Jin people.

古文：莫若于河北置招抚司，河东置经制司，择有材略者为之使，宣论天子恩德、所以不忍弃两河于敌国之意。
现代文： 不如在河北设置招抚使，在河东设置经制使，选择有才略的人作为使，去宣扬皇上的恩德和朝廷不忍心舍弃两河地区给敌国的心意。
English: It would be better to set up an envoy in Hebei Province to appeal to the emperor, and an envoy in the eastern part of Hebei Province to appeal to the emperor, and select a talented person as an envoy to promote the emperor's benevolence and the imperial court's unwillingness to give up the two river regions to the enemy country.

古文：有能全一州、复一郡者，以为节度、防御、团练使，如唐方镇之制，使自为守。非惟绝其从敌之心，又可资其御敌之力，使朝廷永无北顾之忧，最今日之先务也。
现代文：谁能够保全一州，恢复一郡，就让他作为节度使、防御使、团练使，就像唐代的方镇制度，让他们各自防守，不仅可以杜绝他们归顺敌人之心，还可以增加他们抵御敌人的力量，使朝廷永远没有北顾之忧，这是当今最先最急的事务。 
English: Whoever is able to preserve a prefecture and restore a county, let him serve as the governor, defense minister, and regimental drill sergeant, just like the Fangzhen system in the Tang Dynasty. Let them defend themselves separately. This will not only prevent them from surrendering to the enemy's heart, but also increase their strength to resist the enemy, so that the court will never have to worry about the north. This is the first and most urgent matter today.

古文：上善其言，问谁可任者，纲荐张所、傅亮。
现代文：皇上称赞李纲的建议，并且问谁可以选任为使，李纲推荐张所、傅亮。
English: The emperor praised Li Gang's suggestion and asked who could be appointed as envoy. Li Gang recommended Zhang So and Fu Liang.

古文：所尝为监察御史，在靖康围城中，以蜡书募河北兵，士民得书，喜曰： 朝廷弃我，犹有一张察院能拔而用之。 应募者凡十七万人，由是所之声震河北。
现代文：张所曾经任监察御使，在靖康年间都城被围时，他用蜡书招募河北的士兵，河北的士民看到蜡书，高兴地说： 朝廷抛弃我们，还有一个张察院能够选拔和任用我们。 应募的人总共有十七万人，通过这张所的声名响震河北。
English: Zhang's institute once served as the imperial envoy of supervision. During the siege of the capital during the Qing dynasty, he used wax books to recruit soldiers from Hebei. When the Hebei people saw the wax books, they said with joy: The imperial court has abandoned us, and there is still a Zhang's institute that can select and appoint us. There were a total of 170,000 applicants, and the fame of this institute shook Hebei.

古文：故纲以为招抚河北，非所不可。
现代文：因此，李纲认为招抚河北，非张所不可。
English: Therefore, Li Gang believes that it is imperative to woo Hebei.

古文：傅亮者，先以边功得官，尝治兵河朔。
现代文：傅亮，开始因为在边防中立有战功而获得官职，曾经在河朔治兵。
English: Fu Liang, who was initially given an official position because he had distinguished himself in the border defense, was once a soldier in Heshuo.

古文：都城受围时，亮率勤王之兵三万人，屡立战功。
现代文：京城被围困时，傅亮率领三万人前去勤王，多次立有战功。
English: When the capital was besieged, Fu Liang led 30,000 people to pay homage to the king, and repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：纲察其智略可以大用，欲因此试之。
现代文：李纲发现他的智略可以加以重用，想借这个机会试一试他。
English: Li Gang found that his strategy could be reused and wanted to take this opportunity to try it out.

古文：上乃以所为河北招抚使，亮为河东经制副使。
现代文：皇上于是任命张所为河北招抚使，傅亮为河东经略副使。
English: The emperor then appointed Zhang So as the envoy of Hebei Province and Fu Liang as the deputy envoy of Hedong Province.

古文：皇子生，故事当肆赦。
现代文：皇子出生，按照惯例应该大赦。
English: When a prince is born, it is customary to grant an amnesty.

古文：纲奏： 陛下登极，旷荡之恩独遗河北、河东，而不及勤王之师，天下觖望。
现代文：李纲上奏说： 陛下即皇位，博大之恩唯独没有给予河北、河东，而且也没有赐给勤王之兵，天下人感到遗憾。
English: Li Gang said in his report: Your Majesty is the throne, and the great grace has not been given to Hebei and Hedong, and it has not been given to the soldiers who are devoted to the king. The whole world feels regret.

古文：夫两路为朝廷坚守，而赦令不及，人皆谓已弃之，何以慰忠臣义士之心？
现代文：河北、河东为朝廷坚守疆土，却没有对他们颁布赦令。百姓都说自己被抛弃了，怎么能安慰忠臣义士之心呢？
English: Hebei and Hedong defended their territory for the imperial court, but no pardon was issued for them. The people all said that they had been abandoned. How could they comfort the hearts of loyal subjects and righteous men?

古文：勤王之师在道路半年，擐甲荷戈，冒犯霜露，虽未效用，亦已劳矣。
现代文：勤王之兵在道路上跋涉了半年，穿着铠甲，扛着武器，冒着霜露，虽然没有被使用，但也已经疲劳了。
English: The diligent soldier has been trekking on the road for half a year, wearing armor, carrying weapons, and braving frost and dew. Although he has not been used, he is already tired.

古文：加以疾病死亡，恩恤不及，后有急难，何以使人乎？
现代文：加上疾病死亡，如果不给予恩泽抚恤，以后朝廷有什么急难，怎么能够让人再听从调遣呢？
English: In addition to illness and death, if we don't grant a grace pension, what kind of emergency will the imperial court have in the future, and how can we make people listen to the dispatcher again?

古文：愿因今赦广示德意。 上嘉纳。
现代文：希望借这次大赦之机对他们普遍表示感激抚慰之意。 皇上称赞并采纳了李纲的意见。
English: It is hoped that this amnesty will be used as an opportunity to express gratitude and consolation to them in general.The Emperor praised and adopted Li Gangru's opinion.

古文：于是两路知天子德意，人情翕然，间有以破敌捷书至者。
现代文：通过这，河北、河东两路知道皇帝的感激和抚慰之意，大家团结一心，从两路不断有打败敌人的捷报传到朝廷。
English: Through this, the two provinces of Hebei and Hedong knew the emperor's gratitude and consolation, and everyone was united as one. From the two provinces, the news of defeating the enemy was constantly transmitted to the imperial court.

古文：金人围守诸郡之兵，往往引去。
现代文：金人围困各郡的，不时有撤退的。
English: The Jin besieged the counties, but from time to time they retreated.

古文：而山砦之兵，应招抚、经制二司募者甚众。
现代文：山砦的兵民响应招抚、经制两司招募的人很多。
English: There are many soldiers and civilians in the mountain fortress who have responded to the recruitment of the two divisions.

古文：有许高、许亢者，以防河而遁，谪岭南，至南康谋变，守倅戮之。
现代文：有名叫许高、许亢的两个人，受命防守黄河却逃跑了，被贬谪到岭南，到南康时阴谋策划叛乱，一名守城士卒将他们杀了。
English: There were two men named Xu Gao and Xu Yao. They were ordered to guard the Yellow River, but they ran away. They were banished to Lingnan. When they arrived in Nankang, they plotted and planned a rebellion. A guard killed them.

古文：或议其擅杀，纲曰： 高、亢受任防河，寇未至而遁，没途劫掠，甚于盗贼。
现代文：有人认为这是擅杀，李纲说： 许高、许亢受命防守黄河，敌人未到却先逃跑了，并且沿途抢劫，超过了盗贼。
English: Some people think that this was an unauthorized killing, Li Gang said: Xu Gao and Xu Yao were ordered to defend the Yellow River, but the enemy fled before they arrived, and robbed along the way, surpassing the thieves.

古文：朝廷不能正军法，而一守倅能行之，真健吏也。
现代文：朝廷没有将他们执行军法，一个守城士兵代为执行了，这真是一个好守吏。
English: The imperial court did not order them to enforce military law, but a soldier guarding the city did so on their behalf. This was truly a good guard.

古文：使受命捍贼而欲退走者，知郡县之吏皆得以诛之，其亦少知所戒乎！ 上以为然，命转一官。
现代文：让受命抵御敌人而想逃跑的人，知道郡县官吏都可以杀死他们，他们应该略微有些警戒吧？ 皇上认为李纲说得对，诏令将这个守城士卒转官职。
English: Shouldn't those who were ordered to defend against the enemy and wanted to escape be a little wary, knowing that county officials could kill them? The emperor thought Li Gang was right, and ordered the transfer of this guard to another post.

古文：开封守阙，纲以留守非宗泽不可，力荐之。
现代文：开封府长官缺位，李纲认为留守非宗泽不可，极力举荐他。
English: Since the position of the governor of Kaifeng was vacant, Li Gang thought that it was essential for Zongze to stay and strongly recommended him.

古文：泽至，抚循军民，修治楼橹，屡出师以挫敌。
现代文：宗泽到达开封后，抚慰引导军民，修治城墙船只，多次出兵打败敌人。
English: After arriving in Kaifeng, Soze comforted and guided the soldiers and civilians, repaired the city walls and ships, and repeatedly sent troops to defeat the enemy.

古文：纲立军法，五人为伍，伍长以牌书同伍四人姓名。
现代文：李纲制定军法，以五人为一伍，伍长用牌子写上同伍其余四人的姓名。
English: Li Gang formulated the military law, with five people as a team, and the team leader wrote the names of the remaining four members of the team with a sign.

古文：二十五人为甲，甲正以牌书伍长五人姓名。
现代文：二十五人为一甲，甲正用牌子写上其属下五位伍长的姓名。
English: Twenty-five people are one A. A is using a sign to write the names of the five corporals under him.

古文：五百人为部，部将以牌书队将正副十人姓名。
现代文：一百人为一队，队将用牌子写上其所属的四位甲正的姓名。
English: One hundred people make up a team, and the team will write the names of the four A-level students they belong to on a sign.

古文：二千五百人为军，统制官以牌书部将正副十人姓名。
现代文：五百人为一部，部将用牌子写上其属下十位正副队将的姓名。
English: Five hundred people were a part, and the captain wrote the names of his ten subordinate captains and lieutenants on a sign.

古文：命招置新军及御营司兵，并依新法团结，有所呼召、使令，按牌以遣。
现代文：还下令招募成立新军和御营司兵，都按新的军法建制，有什么使唤和任务，根据牌子上的记载差遣。
English: He also ordered the recruitment and establishment of the new army and the officers of the battalion, all of which are organized according to the new military law, and are dispatched according to the records on the sign.

古文：三省、枢密院置赏功司，受赂乞取者行军法，遇敌逃溃者斩，因而为盗贼者，诛及其家属。
现代文：另在三省、枢密院内设立赏功司，有受贿索贿者以军法论处，对于遇敌逃跑者斩首，由逃兵变为盗贼者，株连其家属。
English: In addition, meritorious service awards were established in the three provinces and the Privy Council, and those who had taken bribes or solicited bribes were punished by military law, those who had run away from the enemy were beheaded, those who had turned from deserters into thieves were beheaded, and their families were also beheaded.

古文：凡军政申明改更者数十条。
现代文：李纲宣布对军政的改革总共达几十条。
English: Li Gang announced a total of dozens of military and political reforms.

古文：又奏步不足以胜骑，骑不足以胜车，请以车制颁京东、西，制造而教阅之。
现代文：李纲还上奏认为步兵战不过骑兵，骑兵战不过车兵，请求将有关制造战车的要求颁发到京东、京西路，进行制造和教练。
English: Li Gang also submitted a request that the requirements for the manufacture of chariots should be issued to Jingdong and Jingxi Road for manufacturing and training, arguing that the infantry battle is only a cavalry battle and the cavalry battle is not a cavalry battle.

古文：又奏造战舰，募水军，及询访诸路武臣材略之可任者以备用。
现代文：李纲还奏请制造战舰，招募水军，并在各路询访有才略可以任用的武臣，以备选用。
English: Li Gang also requested to manufacture warships, recruit naval forces, and visit various provinces to inquire about talented samurai who could be appointed as an alternative.

古文：又进三疏：一曰募兵，二曰买马，三曰募民出财以助兵费。
现代文：他还向皇上连上了三道奏疏 ：一是招兵，二是买马，三是向百姓募集财物以资助军费。 
English: He also made three appeals to the emperor: one was to recruit soldiers, the second was to buy horses, and the third was to collect money from the people to finance military expenses.

古文：谏议大夫宋齐愈闻而笑之，谓虞部员外郎张浚曰： 李丞相三议，无一可行者。 浚问之，齐愈曰： 民财不可尽括；西北之马不可得，而东南之马不可用；至于兵数，若郡增二千，则岁用千万缗，费将安出？
现代文：谏议大夫宋齐愈得知后嘲笑李纲，他对虞部员外郎张浚说： 李丞相二三条建议，没有一件可以实行。 张浚问为什么，宋齐愈回答说： 百姓的财富不能搜括干净；西北的马买不到，东南的马不能用；至于兵数，如果每一部增加二千人，则每一年的费用需千万缗，费用从哪里来？
English: Song Qiyu, who was a doctor of public opinion, ridiculed Li Gang after learning about it. He said to Zhang Jun, a member of the Foreign Affairs Department of the State Council, "There are two or three suggestions of Premier Li, but none of them can be implemented." Zhang Jun asked why, Song Qiyu replied: The wealth of the people cannot be collected cleanly; horses in the northwest cannot be bought, and horses in the southeast cannot be used; as for the number of soldiers, if each department increases by two thousand, the annual cost will be ten million baht, where will the cost come from?

古文：齐愈将极论之。 浚曰： 公受祸自此始矣。 
现代文：齐愈我将尽力辩论这件事。 张浚说 ：公惹祸就从这件事开始。 
English: I will do my best to debate this matter.Zhang Jun said: public mischief begins with this matter.

古文：时朝廷议遣使于金，纲奏曰： 尧、舜之道，孝悌而已，孝悌之至，可以通神明。
现代文：当时朝廷正在议论派遣使者去金朝，李纲上奏说： 尧、舜所主张的道德，在于孝和悌，孝悌达到极至，可以通神明。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing the dispatch of an envoy to the Kim dynasty, and Li Gang delivered a report saying: "The morality advocated by Zou and Zou is filial piety. Filial piety has reached the extreme, and it can lead to divine enlightenment.

古文：陛下以二圣远狩沙漠，食不甘味，寝不安席，思迎还两宫，致天下养，此孝悌之至，而尧、舜之用心也。
现代文：陛下因为二位先帝不幸被金人劫掠到遥远的北方沙漠，吃不香，睡不安，想着迎回二位先帝，使二位先帝受到天下的奉养，这就是孝悌达到了极至，正是尧、舜的用心之所在。
English: Your Majesty, because the two first emperors were unfortunately plundered by the Jin people to the distant northern deserts, do not eat fragrant, sleep uneasily, thinking of welcoming back the two first emperors, so that the two first emperors are supported by the world, this is the filial piety reached the extreme, it is the intention of the brothers and sisters.

古文：今日之事，正当枕戈尝胆，内修外攘，使刑政修而中国强，则二帝不俟迎请而自归。不然，虽冠盖相望，卑辞厚礼，恐亦无益。
现代文：目前的形势，正应该枕戈待旦，卧薪尝胆，内修政治，外攘敌人，使法律和政治得到治理，国家变得强大，则二位先帝不等到朝廷去迎接而金人会自动将他们送回来，否则，即使派遣的使者在路上络绎不绝，对金人卑恭屈膝，奉献厚礼，恐怕也无济于事。
English: In the current situation, when it is necessary to wait for the end of the war, try one's patience, repair the internal politics, and drive out the external enemies, so that the law and politics can be governed and the country can become strong, the two former emperors will not wait for the court to welcome them, and the Jin people will automatically send them back. Otherwise, even if the emissaries sent are constantly on the road, bowing to the Jin people and giving them gifts, I am afraid it will not help.

古文：今所遣使，但当奉表通问两宫，致思慕之意可也。 上乃命纲草表，以周望、傅雱为二圣通问使，奉表以往。
现代文：现在派遣使者，只应当奉表问候二位先帝，传达陛下的思念之情就可以了。 皇上于是命令李纲起草问候词，以周望、傅蚞为二帝通问使，带着问候的表书去金朝。
English: Now, to send an envoy, it is only necessary to send greetings to the two former emperors on a form, and it is enough to convey the thoughts of His Majesty. The emperor then ordered Li Gang to draft a greeting, with Zhou Wang and Fu Xi as the two emperors' envoys, and go to the Jin Dynasty with a greeting form.

古文：且乞降哀痛之诏，以感动天下，使同心协力，相与扶持，以致中兴。
现代文：李纲还请求颁降诏书表示哀痛，以感动天下之人，让全国上下同心协力，互相支持，完成复兴大业。
English: Li Gang also requested that the imperial edict of abdication be issued to express sorrow, so as to move people around the world, let the whole country work together, support each other, and complete the great cause of rejuvenation.

古文：又乞省冗员，节浮费。
现代文：李纲还请求裁减冗员，节制浪费。
English: Li Gang also requested to reduce redundancy and control waste.

古文：上皆从其言。
现代文：皇上都接受了他的意见。
English: Emperor Takemune adopted all of his opinions.

古文：是时，四方溃兵为盗者十余万人，攻劫山东、淮南、襄汉之间，纲命将悉讨平之。
现代文：这时，各地被金兵打散的士兵为盗贼的达十多万人，他们在山东、淮南、襄汉之间进行劫掠抢夺，李纲命令将领领兵将他们全部剿灭。
English: At this time, there were more than one hundred thousand soldiers scattered by the gold soldiers all over the country who were thieves. They carried out robberies and looting between Shandong, Huainan and Xianghan. Li Gang ordered the generals and soldiers to exterminate them all.

古文：一日，论靖康时事，上曰： 渊圣勤于政事，省览章奏，至终夜不寐，然卒致播迁，何耶？ 纲曰： 人主之职在知人，进君子而退小人，则大功可成，否则衡石程书，无益也。 因论靖康初朝廷应敌得失之策，且极论金人两至都城，所以能守不能守之故；因勉上以明恕尽人言，以恭俭足国用，以英果断大事。
现代文：一天，李纲和皇上谈论靖康时的事情，皇上说： 渊圣皇帝勤于政事，阅览奏章，甚至通宵不睡，然而最终还是不幸被金人掳掠而去，为什么呢？ 李纲说： 人主的职责在于知人，如果能做到任用君子，斥退小人，则可以成就大功了，否则即使埋头于案牍文书，也没有用。 李纲接着还谈论靖康初年朝廷在应付敌人的策略上的得失，并且详细分析了金兵两次围攻都城之所以能够守住和不能够守住的原因。说完李纲借此劝勉皇上要明达宽恕，让臣下充分发表意见，要谦恭节俭以增加国用，要英明果断以处理大事。
English: One day, Li Gang and the emperor were talking about the time of Jing Kang. The emperor said: Yuan Sheng, the emperor, was diligent in political affairs, read the transcripts, and even stayed up all night. However, he was eventually kidnapped by the Jin people. Why? Li Gang said: The duty of the ruler is to know people. If you can appoint a gentleman and expel a villain, you can achieve great success. Otherwise, even if you bury your head in the case documents, it is useless. Li Gang then talked about the gains and losses of the imperial court in dealing with the enemy's strategy in the first year of Jing Kang, and analyzed in detail the reasons why the Jin

古文：上皆嘉纳。
现代文：皇上都表示称赞并予以采纳。
English: Both the Emperor and Empress expressed their praise and accepted it.

古文：又奏： 臣尝言车驾巡幸之所，关中为上，襄阳次之，建康为下。
现代文：李纲又上奏说： 臣曾经谈到过皇上巡幸的地方，以关中为最上策，襄阳其次，建康为下策。
English: Li Gang also said in his report: The minister once talked about the places where the emperor went on a tour, with Guanzhong as the top strategy, Xiangyang as the second, and Jiankang as the next strategy.

古文：陛下纵未能行上策，犹当且适襄、邓，示不忘故都，以系天下之心。
现代文：陛下纵然不能实行上策，也应该到襄阳和邓州，表示不忘记故都，以维系天下人的心。
English: Even if His Majesty cannot implement the best policy, he should go to Xiangyang and Dengzhou to show that he will not forget the old capital, so as to maintain the hearts of the people around the world.

古文：不然，中原非复我有，车驾还阙无期，天下之势遂倾不复振矣。 上为诏谕两京以还都之意，读者皆感泣。
现代文：否则，中原将不再归我所有，皇上返回朝廷也不知等到什么时日，天下的形势就此衰败而不能再振兴了。 皇上为此颁布诏书告谕两京以表明返回都城之意，看到诏谕的人无不感动流泪。
English: Otherwise, the Central Plains would no longer belong to me, the Emperor would not know when to return to the Imperial Court, and the situation in the world would deteriorate and could not be revived. To this end, the Emperor issued an edict to the two capitals to indicate his intention to return to the capital, and everyone who saw the edict was moved to tears.

古文：未几，有诏欲幸东南避敌，纲极论其不可，言： 自古中兴之主，起于西北，则足以据中原而有东南，起于东南，则不能以复中原而有西北。
现代文：不久，高宗下诏想到东南去躲避敌人，李纲极力说明这样不行，他说 ：自古以来的中兴之主，从西北兴起的，足以占据中原而控有东南；由东南兴起的，却不能恢复中原而控有西北。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gao Zong issued an edict that Southeastern China should avoid the enemy. Li Gang tried his best to explain that this was not possible. He said, "Since ancient times, the Lord of Zhongxing, rising from the northwest, is enough to occupy the Central Plains and control Southeastern China; rising from the southeast, however, cannot restore the Central Plains and control the Northwest.

古文：盖天下精兵健马皆在西北，一旦委中原而弃之，岂惟金人将乘间以扰内地；盗贼亦将蜂起为乱，跨州连邑，陛下虽欲还阙，不可得矣，况欲治兵胜敌以归二圣哉？
现代文：因为天下的精兵健马都在西北，一旦放弃中原，不仅金人将乘机侵扰内地，盗贼也将蜂起作乱，他们占据的地盘跨州连县，到时陛下即使想返回朝廷，也不行了，何况还想治兵打败敌人以迎回二位先帝呢？
English: Because the world's best soldiers and horsemen are in the northwest, once the Central Plains are abandoned, not only will the gold people take the opportunity to invade the inland, but the thieves will also rise up and make trouble. The territory they occupy is across the states and counties. At that time, even if His Majesty wants to return to the imperial court, it will not work. What's more, do you want to defeat the enemy with soldiers to welcome back the two former emperors?

古文：夫南阳光武之所兴，有高山峻岭可以控扼，有宽城平野可以屯兵；西邻关、陕，可以召将士；东达江、淮，可以运谷粟；南通荆湖、巴蜀，可以取财货；北距三都，可以遣救援。
现代文：南阳是汉光武帝兴起的地方，有高山峻岭可以把守，有宽广的城市和广阔的平原可以屯兵；它西边邻近关、陕，可以招募将士；东边通达长江、淮河，可以运送谷粟；南边通往荆湖、巴蜀，可以取得财物；北边与三都相望，可以派兵救援。
English: Nanyang is the place where Emperor Han Guangwu arose. It has high mountains and steep ridges that can be guarded, wide cities and vast plains that can be garrisoned. To the west, it is close to Guan and Shaanxi, and can recruit soldiers; to the east, it has access to the Yangtze River and Huaihe River, and can transport millet; to the south, it leads to Jinghu and Bashu, and can obtain property; to the north, it faces the three cities, and can send soldiers to rescue.

古文：暂议驻跸，乃还汴都，策无出于此者。
现代文：暂时考虑在南阳居住，以后再回汴京，这是最好的策略。
English: It is the best strategy to consider living in Nanyang for the time being, and returning to Beijing later.

古文：今乘舟顺流而适东南，固甚安便，第恐一失中原，则东南不能必其无事，虽欲退保一隅，不易得也。
现代文：现在想乘船顺流到东南去，固然非常安全、方便，只是怕一失掉中原，则东南不能保证必定安宁无事，虽然想退保一隅，也不容易实现。
English: Now, if you want to go to the southeast by boat, it is very safe and convenient, but if you are afraid of losing the Central Plains, the southeast cannot guarantee peace and tranquility, although it is not easy to retreat to a corner.

古文：况尝降诏许留中原，人心悦服，奈何诏墨未干，遽失大信于天下！ 上乃许幸南阳，而黄潜善、汪伯彦实阴上巡幸东南之议。
现代文：况且陛下曾经下诏许诺留在中原，人心悦服，为什么诏书的笔墨没有干，就马上失大信于天下呢？ 皇上于是同意巡幸南阳，但黄潜善、汪伯彦实际上暗中主张巡幸东南。
English: Moreover, His Majesty once issued an imperial edict promising to stay in the Central Plains, which was well received by the people, so why did the imperial edict lose all credibility as soon as the ink was dry? The Emperor then agreed to go on a tour of Nanyang, but Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian actually secretly advocated a tour of Southeast Asia.

古文：客或有谓纲曰： 外论汹汹，咸谓东幸已决。 纲曰： 国之存亡，于是焉分，吾当以去就争之。 初，纲每有所论谏，其言虽切直，无不容纳，至是，所言常留中不报。
现代文：有位客人对李纲说： 外面的舆论汹汹，都说已经决定巡幸东南。 
English: A guest said to Li Gang: The public opinion outside is turbulent, they all say that it has been decided to inspect the southeast.

古文：已而迁纲尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，黄潜善除右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：李纲说： 国家存亡，由此见分晓，我应该就去向问题进行力争。 
English: Li Gang said: The survival of the country is clear from this, I should go to the problem and struggle.

古文：张所乞且置司北京，俟措置有绪，乃渡河。
现代文：起初，李纲每每有所议论和劝谏，虽然说得恳切和率直，没有不被容纳的，到这时，李纲的意见常常被留在宫中不予答复。
English: At the beginning, Li Gang was always arguing and persuading, although he spoke earnestly and frankly, he was not accepted, and at this time, Li Gang's opinions were often left in the palace without reply.

古文：北京留守张益谦，潜善党也，奏招抚司之扰，又言自置司河北，盗贼益炽。
现代文：之后李纲被任命为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，黄潜善被任命为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。张所请求在北京设置招抚司，等到准备工作做得差不多，再渡过黄河。北京留守张益谦，是黄潜善的党羽，他上书指责招抚司的侵扰，还说自从在河北设置招抚司，盗贼更加猖獗。
English: After that, Li Gang was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man and servant, and Huang Kuanzhen was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and servant. Zhang requested to set up a recruiting office in Beijing, and after the preparation work was almost done, he crossed the Yellow River. Zhang Yiqian, who stayed in Beijing, was a party member of Huang Kuanzhen. He wrote a letter accusing the recruiting office of intrusion, and said that since the recruiting office was set up in Hebei, the thieves were more rampant.

古文：纲言： 所尚留京师，益谦何以知其扰？
现代文：李纲说 ：张所留在京城，张益谦怎么知道他的侵扰？
English: Li Gang said: Zhang stayed in Beijing, how did Zhang Yiqian know about his intrusion?

古文：河北民无所归，聚而为盗，岂由置司乃有盗贼乎？ 
现代文：河北的百姓找不到归属，便聚集成为盗贼，怎么是因为设置招抚司才有盗贼呢？ 
English: The people of Hebei can't find a place to belong to, so they gather to become thieves. How is it that thieves only exist because of the establishment of the Fostering Department?

古文：有旨令留守宗泽节制傅亮，即日渡河。
现代文：朝廷传旨命令留守宗泽节制傅亮，当天就渡过黄河。
English: The imperial court issued an order to stay in Soze, and Fu Liang crossed the Yellow River on the same day.

古文：亮言： 措置未就而渡河，恐误国事。 纲言： 招抚、经制，臣所建明，而张所、傅亮，又臣所荐用。
现代文：傅亮说 ：准备工作未完就渡过黄河，恐怕误害国家大事。 李纲说： 招抚司、经制司，是臣建议设置的；而张所、傅亮，又是臣所推荐任用的。
English: Fu Liang said, "If you cross the Yellow River before the preparatory work is completed, I am afraid you will harm national affairs." Li Gang said, "It was the minister's suggestion to set up the Ministry of Guidance and the Ministry of Economic Affairs; and Zhang So and Fu Liang were also recommended by the minister.

古文：今潜善、伯彦沮所及亮，所以沮臣。
现代文：现在黄潜善、汪伯彦和张所、傅亮过不去，就是和臣过不去。
English: Now Huang Kuanzhen, Wang Bohian and Zhang So and Fu Liang can't get along, that is, they can't get along with the minister.

古文：臣每览靖康大臣不和之失，事未尝不与潜善、伯彦议而后行，而二人设心如此，愿陛下虚心观之。 既而诏罢经制司，召亮赴行在。
现代文：臣每每有鉴于靖康时大臣不和的害处，所以凡事未尝不与潜善、伯彦商议后才施行，可是这两人却存心如此，希望陛下冷静判断一下这件事。 不久诏令撤销经制司，召令傅亮回朝。
English: In view of the harm caused by the discord between the ministers during the reign of Yasukuni, the vassals thought that everything should be carried out only after consultation with Kuken Son and Hōhiko, but the two men intended to do so, and hoped that His Majesty would calmly judge the matter. Soon after, the Imperial Edict revoked the position of the Chief Editor and summoned Fu Ryo back to the Imperial Court.

古文：纲言： 圣意必欲罢亮，乞以御笔付潜善施行，臣得乞身归田。 纲退，而亮竟罢，乃再疏求去。
现代文：李纲说 ：皇上一定要罢免傅亮的话，请亲手书写诏令交给黄潜善执行，臣则请求解职归田。 李纲退下来后，傅亮最后还是被罢职了，李纲于是再次上书请求解职。
English: Li Gang said, "If the emperor must dismiss Fu Liang, please hand-write the imperial edict and give it to Huang Kuanzhen to execute, and the vassal will request that he be dismissed to return to the field." After Li Gang stepped down, Fu Liang was finally dismissed, and Li Gang then wrote again to request dismissal.

古文：上曰： 卿所争细事，胡乃尔？ 纲言： 方今人材以将帅为急，恐非小事。
现代文：皇上说： 卿所争的是小事，何必这样呢？ 李纲说 ：当今的人才中以将帅为最急，恐怕不是小事。
English: The emperor said, "What you are disputing is a small matter, why do you have to do this?" Li Gang said, "Among today's talents, being a general is the most urgent, I am afraid it is not a small matter."

古文：臣昨议迁幸，与潜善、伯彦异，宜为所嫉。
现代文：臣先前所主张的改变巡幸去所，与黄潜善、汪伯彦不同，应该被他们所嫉恨。
English: The change in the location of the inspection tour, which was previously advocated by the minister, is different from Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian, and should be envied by them.

古文：然臣东南人，岂不愿陛下东下为安便哉？
现代文：然而臣是东南人，怎么不希望陛下东下以求安宁和方便呢？
English: However, I am from the southeast, so why would I not want His Majesty to go to the east for peace and convenience?

古文：顾一去中原，后患有不可胜言者。
现代文：只是想到一离开中原，将后患无穷。
English: Just the thought of leaving the Central Plains would cause endless suffering.

古文：愿陛下以宗社为心，以生灵为意，以二圣未还为念，勿以臣去而改其议。
现代文：希望陛下以国家为心，以生民为意，以二位先帝为念，不要因为臣去职而改变原来的决定。
English: I hope that His Majesty, with the country in mind, the people in mind, and the two former emperors in mind, will not change his original decision because of the minister's resignation.

古文：臣虽去左右，不敢一日忘陛下。 泣辞而退。
现代文：臣虽然离开陛下左右，但不敢一日忘记陛下。 说罢流泪告辞而退。
English: Although the vassal left His Majesty's side, he did not dare to forget His Majesty for a single day.

古文：或曰： 公决于进退，于义得矣，如谗者何？ 纲曰： 吾知尽事君之道，不可，则全进退之节，患祸非所恤也。
现代文：有人说 ：公在进退之间做出决定，虽然得到了道义，可如何对付得了说谗言的人呢？ 李纲说 ：我知道我已尽了心力服侍君主，达不到愿望，就保全进退之节，没有考虑祸患。 
English: Some people said, "The emperor makes a decision between advancing and retreating, and although he has gained moral authority, how can he deal with someone who can speak ill of him?" Li Gang said, "I know that I have done my best to serve the emperor, and if I cannot achieve my wish, I will keep the festival of advancing and retreating, without considering the disaster."

古文：初，二帝北行，金人议立异姓。
现代文：起初，徽、钦二帝被金人掳掠北去后，金人打算挟立非赵姓的人做皇帝。
English: At first, after Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin were captured and taken to the north by the Jin people, the Jin people planned to make a non-Zhao person the emperor.

古文：吏部尚书王时雍问于吴幵、莫俦，二人微言敌意在张邦昌，时雍未以为然。
现代文：吏部尚书王时雍问吴千干、莫俦，吴、莫二人暗示敌人的意思在于张邦昌，王时雍没有表示赞同。
English: Wang Shiyong asked Wu Qiangan and Mo Xuan for advice. Wu and Mo suggested that the enemy was Zhang Bangchang, but Wang Shiyong did not agree.

古文：适宋齐愈自敌所来，时雍又问之，齐愈取片纸书 张邦昌 三字，时雍意乃决，遂以邦昌姓名入议状。
现代文：恰逢宋齐愈从敌营中回来，王时雍又问宋齐愈，宋齐愈取一张纸在上面写上 张邦昌 三个字，王时雍才做出决定，将张邦昌的姓名写进了呈交给金人的奏状上。
English: Just as Song Qiyu returned from the enemy camp, Wang Shiryong asked Song Qiyu again. Song Qiyu took out a piece of paper and wrote Zhang Bangchang on it. It took Wang Shiryong three words to make a decision and write Zhang Bangchang's name into the petition submitted to Jinren.

古文：至是，齐愈论纲三事之非，不报。
现代文：到这时，宋齐愈弹劾李纲有三件事做得不对，朝廷没有给予答复。
English: By this time, Song Qiyu's impeachment of Li Gang had done three things wrong, and the court did not give a reply.

古文：拟章将再上，其乡人嗛齐愈者，窃其草示纲。
现代文：宋齐愈又草拟了一份奏章准备再次呈上，有一位和宋齐愈有过节的他的同乡，将宋齐愈的奏章偷给李纲看了。
English: Song Qiyu also drafted a score to be presented again. One of his countrymen, who had a quarrel with Song Qiyu, stole Song Qiyu's score and showed it to Li Gang.

古文：时方论僣逆附伪之罪，于是逮齐愈，齐愈不承，狱吏曰： 王尚书辈所坐不轻，然但迁岭南，大谏第承，终不过逾岭尔。 齐愈引伏，遂戮之东市。
现代文：当时朝廷正在清查和处理僭逆以及曾经附从过伪朝廷的人的罪行，宋齐愈因此被逮捕了，宋齐愈不招认，狱吏说 ：王尚书等人所犯罪行不轻，然而也只是贬谪到岭南。宋大谏只管招认了，最多也就是被贬谪到岭南。 宋齐愈招认了，结果被在东市斩首。
English: At that time, the imperial court was investigating and dealing with the crimes of treason and those who had once been affiliated with the fake imperial court. Song Qiyu was arrested for this. Song Qiyu did not confess. The prison officials said: Wang Shangshu and others committed serious crimes, but they were only relegated to Lingnan. Song Daju only confessed, at most he was relegated to Lingnan. Song Qiyu confessed, and as a result he was beheaded in Dongshi.

古文：张浚为御史，劾纲以私意杀侍从，且论其买马招军之罪。
现代文：张浚为御史，弹劾李纲出于私心诛杀了侍从，并且还弹劾李纲招兵买马的罪行。
English: Zhang Jun, as imperial historian, impeached Li Gang for killing a servant out of selfishness, and also impeached Li Gang for the crime of recruiting soldiers.

古文：诏罢纲为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：高宗下诏将李纲罢为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: Gao Zong issued an edict to promote Li Gang to a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and promoted Dongxiao Palace.

古文：尚书右丞许翰言纲忠义，合之无以佐中兴。
现代文：尚书右丞许翰说李纲为人忠义，罢免了他将无人能够辅佐完成中兴大业。
English: Shang Shuyuan Xu Han said that Li Gang is a loyal person, and if he is dismissed, no one will be able to assist in completing ZTE's great cause.

古文：会上召见陈东，东言： 潜善、伯彦不可任，纲不可去。 东坐诛。
现代文：正好皇上召见陈东，陈东说： 黄潜善、汪伯彦不能任用，李纲不能罢免。 
English: Just as the emperor summoned Chen Dong, Chen Dong said: Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian cannot be appointed, and Li Gang cannot be dismissed.

古文：翰曰： 吾与东皆争李纲者，东戮都市，吾在庙堂，可乎？ 遂求去。
现代文：陈东被治罪斩首。许翰说： 我和陈东都是为李纲争辩的人，陈东被斩首于东市，我能在朝廷呆下去吗？ 于是请求解职。
English: Xu Han said: "I and Chen Dong are both people who argue for Li Gang. Chen Dong was beheaded in Dongshi. Can I stay in the imperial court? So I asked to be dismissed.

古文：后有旨，纲落职居鄂州。
现代文：后来朝廷传旨，将李纲罢职送鄂州居住。
English: Later, the imperial court sent an order to dismiss Li Gang and send him to live in Ezhou.

古文：自纲罢，张所以罪去，傅亮以母病辞归，招抚、经制二司皆废。
现代文：李纲被罢职后，张所也被治罪解职，傅亮因为母亲生病辞职回家了，招抚、经制二司都被废除。
English: After Li Gang was removed from office, Zhang So was also punished and dismissed, Fu Liang resigned because his mother was ill and went home, and the two departments of solicitation and management were abolished.

古文：车驾遂东幸，两河郡县相继沦陷，凡纲所规画军民之政，一切废罢。
现代文：皇上还是到东南去了，河东、河北地区二郡县相继沦陷，凡是李纲所主张和实施的军政民政措施，全部被废除。
English: The emperor still went to the southeast, and two counties in the areas of Hedong and Hebei successively fell, and all the military, political and civil measures advocated and implemented by Li Gang were abolished.

古文：金人攻京东、西，残毁关辅，而中原盗贼蜂起矣。
现代文：金人攻掠京东、京西地区，在京城一带大肆进行破坏，而中原地区的盗贼也蜂拥而起了。
English: The goldsmiths attacked and plundered the eastern and western regions of Beijing, wreaking havoc in and around the capital, while the thieves in the Central Plains also swarmed.

