古文：汪澈，字明远，自新安徙居饶州浮梁。
现代文：汪澈字明远，他家从新安迁居饶州浮梁。
English: Wang Chieh's family moved from Xin'an to Fu Liang in Raozhou.

古文：第进士，教授衡州、沅州。
现代文：汪澈考中进士后，被授职为衡州、沅州教授。
English: After he was promoted to a professor in Wangchuk Middle School, he was appointed as a professor in Hengzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：用万俟卨荐，为秘书正字、校书郎。
现代文：由于万俟的推荐，他被任命为秘书正字、校书郎。
English: As a result of Manju's recommendation, he was appointed secretary and school librarian.

古文：轮对，乞令帅臣、监司、侍从、台谏各举将帅，高宗善之，行其言。
现代文：轮到他进宫回答皇上的提问，汪澈请求皇上令帅臣、监司、侍从、台谏各自推举将帅，高宗认为很好，按他的意见办了。
English: When it was his turn to enter the palace to answer the emperor's questions, Wang Che asked the emperor to order the suitors, supervisors, attendants, and courtiers to each nominate a suitor. Gao Zong thought it was good and did it according to his opinion.

古文：除监察御史，进殿中侍御史，特赐鞍马。
现代文：汪澈拜官监察御史，提为殿中侍御史，皇上特别赐给他一匹带鞍的马。
English: Wang Chepai was appointed as the inspector of history, and was named the attendant of history in the palace. The emperor specially gave him a horse with a saddle.

古文：时和戎岁久，边防浸弛，澈陈养民养兵、自治豫备之说，累数千言。
现代文：当时与少数民族结盟友好很多年了，边防的警戒慢慢松弛，汪澈向皇上陈述了养民养兵、自我治理、预备战事的意见，其奏章累积达数千字。
English: At that time, the alliance and friendship with the ethnic minorities had lasted for many years, and the vigilance of the border guards had gradually relaxed. Wang Chieh presented to the emperor his opinions on raising the people, raising soldiers, self-governance, and preparing for war. His report accumulated to several thousand words.

古文：显仁皇后攒宫讫役，议者欲广四隅，士庶坟在二十里内皆当迁，命澈按视。
现代文：显仁皇后的攒宫完工，议事者想扩大攒宫面积，士庶的家坟在二十里以内的都要迁走，命令汪澈巡视负责。
English: Queen Henrietta's mortuary palace was completed, and the councilors wanted to expand the area of the mortuary palace. The family graves of nobles and commoners within twenty miles had to be moved, and Wang Chie was ordered to be in charge of the inspection.

古文：还奏： 昭慈、徽宗、显肃、懿节四陵旧占百步，已数十年，今日何为是纷纷？
现代文：汪澈回宫后奏道 ：昭慈、徽宗、显肃、懿节四座陵墓过去占地百步，已达数十年之久，今天为何要兴师动众扩大陵墓面积？
English: After Wang Che returned to the palace, he said, "The four mausoleums of Zhao Ci, Huizong, Xian Su and Xie Jie have occupied hundreds of square meters in the past, which has lasted for decades. Why do you want to encourage people to expand the mausoleum area today?"

古文：汉长乐、未央宫夹樗里疾墓，未尝迁。
现代文：汉代长乐、未央二宫夹着木雩里疾墓，未曾把它迁走。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the tombs of Changle and Weiyang Ergu, which were located in the middle of the woodpile, were never moved.

古文：国朝宫陵仪制，在封堠界内，不许开故合祔，愿迁出者听，其意深矣。 高宗大悟，悉如旧。
现代文：国家朝廷的宫陵仪礼制度规定，在被封的领地内，不许挖开旧墓合葬，愿意迁出旧墓的人听其自便，其意义深远啊。 高宗顿悟，令一切照旧。
English: The imperial mausoleum ritual system of the state imperial court stipulates that in the sealed territory, it is not allowed to dig up the old tomb and bury it together, and those who are willing to move out of the old tomb can do so at their own convenience. Its significance is far-reaching. Gaozong had an epiphany and left everything as usual.

古文：叶义问使金还，颇知犯边谋，澈言： 不素备，事至仓卒，靖康之变可鉴。
现代文：叶义问出使金国回朝，对敌人侵边的计谋颇有了解，汪澈说： 平时没有做好准备，事情发生后仓卒应付，靖康之祸可作为借鉴。
English: Asked by Ye Yi about the return of Jin to the North, Wang Che said that he had a good understanding of the enemy's strategy of encroaching on the border. Wang Che said: In normal times, we are not prepared, we have to deal with things after they happen, and the disaster of Jingkang can be used as a reference.

古文：今将骄卒惰，宜加搜阅，使有斗心。
现代文：今天将骄兵惰，应加强检阅，使他们有战斗的信心。
English: Today, the soldiers will be proud and lazy. It is necessary to strengthen the inspection, so that they have the confidence to fight.

古文：文武职事务选实才，不限资格。 除侍御史。
现代文：文武官员务必选出有实际才能的人充任，不必拘限于资格。 汪澈拜官侍御史。
English: Civil and military officials must choose people with real talent to fill the post, and do not have to be limited to qualifications.

古文：左相汤思退不协人望，澈同殿中侍御史陈俊卿劾罢，又论镇江大将刘宝十罪，诏夺节予祠。
现代文：左相汤思退有负众望，汪澈同殿中侍御史陈俊卿弹劾罢免他，又论述镇江大将刘宝的十条罪状，皇上诏令夺取他的权力，让他主管一祠观。
English: Tang Siwei, the left consort, failed to live up to everyone's expectations. Wang Che, the attendant of Chen Junqing, the president of the palace, impeached and dismissed him. He also discussed the ten crimes of Zhenjiang General Liu Bao. The emperor issued a decree to seize his power and put him in charge of an ancestral hall.

古文：三十一年，上元前一夕，风雷雨雪交作，澈言《春秋》鲁隐公时大雷震电，继以雨雪，孔子以八日之间再有大变，谨而书之。
现代文：绍兴三十一年，上元节的前一天，风雷雨雪交替出现，汪澈说《春秋》载鲁隐公时天上雷鸣电闪，又雨雪交加，孔子认为八天内还有大变化，便仔细地记下来了。
English: On the 31st year of Shaoxing, the day before the Lantern Festival, the wind, thunder, rain and snow appeared alternately. Wang Che said that "Spring and Autumn" contained thunder and lightning in the sky during Luyin's reign, and rain and snow were added. Confucius thought that there would be a big change within eight days, so he carefully wrote it down.

古文：今一夕间二异交至，此阴盛之证，殆为金人。
现代文：今天一夕之间二种异象交替发生，这是阴盛的征兆，大概是指金人要南侵。
English: Two types of visions alternated overnight today. This is a sign of gloom and doom, probably indicating that the Kimians want to invade the south.

古文：今荆、襄无统督，江海乏备御，因陈修攘十二事。
现代文：现在荆、襄二州没有统督，江海缺乏防备抵御力量，汪澈于是陈述了修明朝政、抵御外敌的十二件事。
English: Now, there is no governor-general in Jing and Xiang states, and the rivers and seas lack the power of defense and resistance. Therefore, Wang Che made a statement on the twelve matters of reforming the Ming Dynasty's politics and resisting foreign enemies.

古文：殿帅杨存中久握兵权，内结阉寺，王十朋、陈俊卿等继论其罪，高宗欲存护使去，澈与俊卿同具奏，存中始罢。
现代文：殿帅杨存中久握兵权，在宫中勾结宦官，王十朋、陈俊卿等相继论述他的罪行，高宗想庇护他让他离朝，汪澈与陈俊卿一起上奏，杨存中才被罢职。
English: The courtier Yang Cunzhong held military power for a long time and colluded with eunuchs in the palace. Wang Shifeng, Chen Junqing and others successively discussed his crimes. Gao Zong wanted to shelter him and let him leave the dynasty. Wang Chieh and Chen Junqing played together. Yang Cunzhong was only dismissed.

古文：会金使高景山来求衅端，澈言： 天下之势，强弱无定形，在吾所以用之。
现代文：正遇金使高景山来寻找挑衅的事端，汪澈说： 天下的形势，谁强谁弱是不能确定的，在于我们充分掌握好时机。
English: On the occasion of Gao Jingshan's provocation by Kim, Wang Che said: The situation in the world, who is strong and who is weak cannot be determined, it is up to us to fully grasp the opportunity.

古文：陛下屈己和戎，厚遗金缯，彼辄出恶言，以撼吾国。
现代文：陛下屈己讲和，厚赠钱币、丝织品，他们口出恶言，来挑衅我国。
English: His majesty bowed down to make peace and generously gave them money and silk goods. They used bad language to provoke our country.

古文：愿陛下赫然睿断，益兵严备，布告中外，将见上下一心，其气百倍矣。 除御史中丞。
现代文：希望陛下盛气凛然做出英明的决定，增加兵力严加防备，布告中外人民，将可看到上下一心，人民的信心百倍增加。 汪澈拜官御史中丞。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will have the courage to make a wise decision, increase the number of troops and make strict preparations, and announce to the people at home and abroad that he will be able to see the heart of the people, and the confidence of the people will increase a hundredfold.

古文：寻遣马帅成闵以所部三万人屯荆、襄，以澈为湖北、京西宣谕使，诏凡吏能否、民利病悉以闻。
现代文：不久皇上派骑兵统帅成闵以所属三万人驻屯于荆、襄二州，以汪澈为湖北、京西宣谕使，诏令所有有关官吏是否有才能、百姓的好坏的情况全部报告上来。
English: Not long after, the emperor sent cavalry commander Cheng Yu with 30,000 troops stationed in Jing and Xiang Erzhou, and Wang Chie as envoy to Hubei and West Beijing, and ordered all relevant officials to report on whether they were talented and whether the people were good or bad.

古文：过九江，王炎见澈论边事，辟为属，偕至襄阳抚诸军。
现代文：汪澈经过九江，王炎见他谈论边防之事，很有见地，召他为属官，让他随同到襄阳安抚诸军。
English: When Wang Che passed through the Jiujiang River, Wang Yan saw him talking about border defense and, with great insight, summoned him as a subordinate officer and asked him to accompany him to Xiangyang to pacify the troops.

古文：鄂帅田师中老而怯，立奏易之。
现代文：鄂帅田师中年老又胆小，汪澈立即奏请换下他。
English: Hsai Tian is middle-aged and timid. Wang Chieh, please replace him immediately.

古文：时欲置襄守荆南，澈奏： 襄阳地重，为荆楚门户，不可弃。 敌将刘萼拥众十万，扬声欲取荆南，又欲分军自光、黄捣武昌。
现代文：当时想放弃襄阳守荆南，汪澈奏道： 襄阳的地理位置很重要，是荆楚的门户，不可以放弃。 敌将刘萼拥兵十万，扬言要取荆南，又想分兵从光、黄二州直捣武昌。
English: At that time, he wanted to give up Yangyang to defend Jingnan, and Wang Chetsong said: The geographical location of Yangyang is very important, it is the gateway to Jingchu, and it cannot be given up. The enemy general Liu Cai had 100,000 soldiers, threatened to take Jingnan, and wanted to divide the troops from the two states of Guang and Huang to directly attack Wuchang.

古文：朝廷以敌昔由此入江南，令吴拱严护武昌津渡。
现代文：朝廷认为敌人过去从这里进入江南，令吴拱严守武昌津渡。
English: The imperial court believed that the enemy had entered the south of the Yangtze River from here in the past, and ordered Wu Gong to strictly guard Wuchang-Tsingdu.

古文：拱将引兵加鄂，澈闻之，驰书止拱，而自发鄂之余兵戍黄州，俾拱留襄。
现代文：吴拱将要率兵回鄂，汪澈听说后，立即写信制止吴拱，而自己发鄂州的余兵戍守黄州，使吴拱留在襄阳。
English: After hearing that Wu Gong was going to lead his soldiers back to Hubei, Wang Che immediately wrote a letter to stop Wu Gong, while he sent the remaining soldiers from Hubei to defend Huangzhou, so that Wu Gong would stay in Xiangyang.

古文：敌骑奄至樊城，拱大战汉水上，敌众败走。
现代文：敌人的骑兵突然来到樊城，吴拱与他们大战于汉水之上，敌军败逃。
English: The enemy cavalry suddenly came to Lucheng, and Wu Gong fought with them on the Han River. The enemy army was defeated and fled.

古文：时唐、邓、陈、蔡、汝、颍相次归职方。
现代文：当时唐、邓、陈、蔡、汝、颍相继归职方官统管。
English: At that time, Tang, Deng, Chen, Cai, Ru, and Zou were successively placed under the control of officials of the party.

古文：未几，金主亮死，澈乞出兵淮甸，与荆、襄军夹击其归师。
现代文：不久，金主完颜亮死，汪澈乞求出兵淮甸，与荆、襄二州的军队夹击金国败回的军队。
English: Not long after, the gold owner died, and Wang Che begged to send troops to Huai Tien, and the troops of Jing and Xiang Erzhou clamped down on the defeated troops of the gold country.

古文：未报，而金新主罢兵请和，召澈入为参知政事，与宰相陈康伯同赞内禅。
现代文：未得到回音，而金新即位的君主罢兵求和，皇上召汪澈进宫为参知政事，与宰相陈康伯一同辅佐孝宗。
English: When no response was received, the newly enthroned monarch called for a truce and peace, and the emperor summoned Wang Chieh to the palace to participate in government affairs, and together with the prime minister Chen Kangbo, he assisted Takamune.

古文：孝宗即位，锐意恢复，首用张浚使江、淮，澈以参豫督军荆、襄，将分道进讨。
现代文：孝宗即位，锐意恢复国土，首先用张浚出使江、淮，汪澈参与督军荆、襄，将分路进讨敌军。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended the throne, he was determined to restore the country. He first used Zhang to dredge out the Jijiang and Huai rivers, and Wangchuk to participate in the supervision of the Jing and Xiang armies, and divided the road to attack the enemy army.

古文：赵撙守唐，王宣守邓，招皇甫倜于蔡。
现代文：赵扌尊守唐州，王宣守邓州，招皇甫倜守蔡州。
English: Zhao Qizhong guarded Tangzhou, Wang Xuan guarded Dangzhou, and Zhao Huangguo guarded Caizhou.

古文：襄、汉沃壤，荆棘弥望，澈请因古长渠筑堰，募闲民、汰冗卒杂耕，为度三十八屯，给种与牛，授庐舍，岁可登谷七十余万斛，民偿种，私其余，官以钱市之，功绪略就。
现代文：襄、汉土地肥沃，荆棘丛生，汪澈请求按照过去的长渠修筑堤堰，招募闲民和被淘汰的多余的士兵一起耕种，划分为三十八屯，给种子与牛，给庐舍，每年可收谷子七十万余斛，百姓偿还了种子，私下还有些余粮，官府用钱买来，对襄、汉的经营初见成效。
English: The land of Xiang and Han was fertile and bristling with thorns. Wang Che requested that a dike be built in accordance with the long canal of the past. The idle people were recruited to farm together with the redundant soldiers who had been eliminated. It was divided into thirty-eight townships, and they were given seeds, cattle, and straw houses. More than 700,000 mu of grain could be collected each year. The people repaid the seeds, and there was some surplus grain in private, which the government bought with money. The management of Xiang and Han was effective for the first time.

古文：隆兴元年，入奏，还武昌，而张浚克期大举，诏澈出师应之。
现代文：隆兴元年，汪澈进宫奏言，回到武昌，而张浚定下时间准备大举进伐敌人，皇上诏令汪澈派军接应。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, Wang Chieh entered the palace to deliver a speech and returned to Wuchang, while Zhang Jun set the time to prepare for a large-scale invasion of the enemy, and the emperor ordered Wang Chieh to send troops to meet him.

古文：澈以议不合，乞令浚并领荆、襄。
现代文：汪澈以意见不合，乞求皇上令张浚一起兼管荆、襄二州。
English: Wang Che, with a difference of opinion, begged the emperor to order Zhang Jun to take charge of Jing and Xiang Erzhou.

古文：谏议大夫王大宝论澈 无制胜策，皇甫倜以忠义结山砦，扼敌要冲，澈不能节制，坐视孤军堕敌计。
现代文：谏议大夫王大宝说汪澈 没有制敌取胜的策略，皇甫倜结忠义之士组织山寨，扼守敌人的要冲，汪澈不能节制，坐视孤军陷入敌人的计谋。
English: Wang Dabao said that Wang Chieh did not have a strategy to defeat the enemy and win. Wang Chieh could not restrain himself and watched the lone army fall into the enemy's scheme.

古文：赵撙以千五百人救方城，败散五百余人，澈漫不加省。
现代文：赵扌尊派一千五百人救方城，失败后逃散士兵五百多人，汪澈漫不经心不予过问，乞求罢黜他。 
English: Zhao Yuzhong sent fifteen hundred men to save Fangcheng, and more than five hundred soldiers fled after the defeat. Wang Che casually ignored the question and begged to dismiss him.

古文：乞罢黜。 澈亦请祠，除资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：汪澈也请求管理一祠观，皇上令他拜官资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: Wang Che also asked for the management of an ancestral hall, and the emperor ordered him to become a scholar of the Palace of Councillors and the Palace of State, and to be promoted to the Palace of Heaven.

古文：大宝疏再上，落职，仍祠禄。
现代文：王大宝再次上疏，汪澈失去职位，仍享有祠禄。
English: Wang Dabao was once again demoted, while Wang Che lost his position, but still enjoyed the ancestral home stipend.

古文：明年，知建康府，寻除枢密使。
现代文：第二年，汪澈为建康府知府，不久拜官枢密使。
English: The following year, Wang Che became the governor of Jiankang Prefecture, and soon became a privy councilor.

古文：在位二年，以观文殿学士奉洞霄祠，寻知鄂州兼安抚使。
现代文：在这个位子上二年后，他以观文殿学士之位管理洞霄宫，不久为鄂州知州兼安抚使。
English: After two years in this position, he managed the Dongxiao Palace as an academician of the Guanwen Hall, and soon became the Ezhou chizhou and pacifying envoy.

古文：孝宗访边事，澈奏： 向者我有唐、邓为藩篱，又皇甫倜控扼陈、蔡，敌不敢窥襄。
现代文：孝宗问访边境之事，汪澈奏道： 向来我们有唐、邓二州为藩篱，又有皇甫倜控扼陈、蔡二州，敌人不敢窥视襄阳。
English: When asked about the border visit by Xiaozong, Wang Qiao said: We have always had Tang and Deng's two prefectures as a barrier, and the emperor controlled Chen and Cai's two prefectures, and the enemy did not dare to peep into Xiangyang.

古文：既失两郡，倜复内徙，敌屯新野，相距百里尔。臣令赵撙、王宣筑城储粮，分备要害，有以待敌。
现代文：现已失去了两郡，皇甫倜又内迁，敌人屯兵新野，与我相距仅百里之遥，我已命赵扌尊、王宣筑城储粮，分别备在要害之处，以便待敌。
English: Now, two counties have been lost, the Imperial Household Agency has moved inland again, and the enemy has stationed troops in Sapporo, which is only a hundred miles away from me. I have ordered Zhao Yanzhong and Wang Xuan to build grain storehouses and prepare them separately in key locations in order to wait for the enemy.

古文：至于机会之来，难以豫料。 孝宗善之。
现代文：至于什么时候金人南侵，难以预料。 孝宗认为很对。
English: As for when the North Koreans will invade the South, it is difficult to predict.

古文：时议废江州军，澈言不可。
现代文：当时议事者想废去江州的军队，汪澈说不行。
English: At that time, the deliberators wanted to abolish the army in Jiangzhou, but Wang Che said it was impossible.

古文：知宁国府，改福州、福建安抚使，复请祠。
现代文：汪澈为宁国府知府，皇上改任他为福州、福建安抚使，汪澈又请求管理一祠观。
English: Wang Chie was the prefect of Ning Guofu, the emperor appointed him as the pacifying envoy of Fuzhou and Fujian, and Wang Chie also requested to manage an ancestral hall.

古文：寻致仕。卒，年六十三。
现代文：不久，汪澈退休，去世，终年六十三岁。
English: Not long after, Wang Che retired and passed away, at the age of 63.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫，谥庄敏。
现代文：皇上赠给他金紫光禄大夫之职，谥号 庄敏 。
English: The emperor gave him the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and his nickname was Zhuo Min.

古文：澈为殿中日，荐陈俊卿、王十朋、陈之茂为台官，高宗曰： 名士也，次第用之矣。 在枢府，孝宗密访人材，荐百有十八人。
现代文：汪澈为殿中侍御史时，推荐陈俊卿、王十朋、陈之茂为台谏官，高宗说 ：他们都是名士，依次选用他们。 汪澈在枢密院府时，孝宗秘求人才，汪澈推荐了一百一十八人。
English: When Wang Che was serving as the palace historian, he recommended Chen Junqing, Wang Shihong and Chen Zhimo as Taiwanese eunuchs. Gao Zong said, "They are all famous people, so I chose them one after another." When Wang Che was at the Privy Council, Xiaozong secretly solicited talents, and Wang Che recommended 118 people.

古文：再提举洞霄宫，卒。芾始以言边事结上知，不十年间致相位，终以不能任兵事受责，岂优于论议而劣于事功欤？
现代文：他曾上奏说 ：我出身低微而被提拔重用，所以报效国家只有无私奉献而不欺瞒君主。 他自己奉行清静、俭约，即使显贵了还像平时一样。
English: He once made a report saying, "I am from a lowly background and have been promoted to a high position, so the only way to serve the country is to make selfless contributions without deceiving the monarch. He himself pursues tranquility and frugality, even if he is distinguished, it is still the same as usual.

古文：叶颙，字子昂，兴化军仙游人。
现代文：汪澈著有文集二十卷、奏议二十卷。叶颙字子昂，兴化军仙游人。
English: Wang Che wrote 20 volumes of anthologies and 20 volumes of speeches. He was nicknamed "Ip Chun" (叶), "Zi Ang" (字子昂) and "Xinghua" (兴化軍).

古文：登绍兴元年进士第，为广州南海县主簿，摄尉。
现代文：绍兴元年，叶颙考中进士，被任命为广州南海县主簿，代理县尉。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, Mr. Ye was promoted to a junior high school student, and was appointed as the chief accountant of Nanhai County, Guangzhou, and the acting county lieutenant.

古文：盗发，州檄巡、尉同捕，巡检获盗十余人，归其劳于颙，颙曰： 掠美、欺君、幸赏，三者皆罪，不忍为也。 帅曾开大善之。
现代文：南海县发生盗寇事件，知州檄令巡、尉一同追捕盗寇，巡检抓获盗寇十多人，他把功劳归于叶颙，叶颙说： 掠取荣誉、欺骗君主、侥幸得赏，三者都是有罪的，我不愿这么做。 将帅曾开很高兴。
English: An incident of banditry occurred in Nanhai County. Chizhou's commanding officer and lieutenant chased the bandits together, and the patrol captured more than ten bandits. He attributed the credit to Ye Xuan. Ye Xuan said: "To plunder honor, to deceive the monarch, and to get a reward by chance, all three are guilty. I don't want to do it. General Zeng Kai was very happy."

古文：知信州贵溪县。
现代文：叶颙被任命为信州贵溪县知县。
English: Ye Jun was appointed as the top official of Shinshu Guixi County.

古文：时诏行经界，郡议以上中下三等定田税，颙请分为九等，守从之，令信之六邑以贵溪为式。
现代文：当时皇上诏令实行经界法，郡府商议按上中下三等定田税，叶颙请求把田分为九等，郡守听从了他的意见，令信州的六个县以贵溪所行的经界法为模式。
English: At that time, the Emperor issued a decree to implement the meridian boundary law. The county government deliberated on the three-class fixed field tax according to the upper, middle and lower classes. Ye Xi requested that the fields be divided into nine classes. The county governor listened to his opinion and ordered the six counties in Shinshu to use the meridian boundary law implemented by Guixi as a model.

古文：知绍兴府上虞县。
现代文：叶颙为绍兴府上虞县知县。
English: Yeqi is the county seat of Shangyu County, Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：凡繇役，令民自推货力甲乙，不以付吏，民欣然皆以实应。
现代文：凡是徭役，叶颙命令百姓自己排列物力高下，不再由官吏分派，百姓都欣然如实呈报财产数目。
English: When it came to civil servants, Ye Gan ordered the common people to arrange their resources by themselves, and no longer be assigned by officials. The common people were happy to truthfully report the amount of their property.

古文：摧租各书其数与民，约使自持户租至庭，亲视其入，咸便之。
现代文：叶颙又令催租时分别写清名目交给百姓，约定时间让他们按照规定的数目自己到县庭交纳户租，叶颙亲自看守着百姓交入，对此百姓都认为很方便。
English: Ye Xi also ordered that when the rent was demanded, the names should be clearly written and handed over to the people, and the time should be arranged for them to pay the household rent to the county court according to the prescribed number. Ye Xi personally watched over the people's payment, which the people all thought was very convenient.

古文：帅曹泳令今岁夏租先期送什之八，颙请少纾其期，泳怒。
现代文：将帅曹泳命令百姓提前交纳今年夏租的十分之八，叶颙请求稍稍宽限期限，曹泳大怒。
English: General Cao Yong ordered the people to pay eight-tenths of this summer's rent in advance. Ye Ye requested a slightly longer grace period. Cao Yong was furious.

古文：及麦大熟，民输租反为诸邑最，泳大喜，许荐于朝，颙固辞。
现代文：等到麦子丰收时，上虞县百姓交纳的租税反而是各县数量之最，曹泳十分高兴，许诺向朝廷推荐叶颙，叶颙坚决拒绝了。
English: By the time of the wheat harvest, the taxes paid by the people of Shangyu County were the highest of all counties. Cao Yong was very happy and promised to recommend Ye Xuan to the imperial court. Ye Xuan firmly refused.

古文：贺允中荐颙静退，遂召见，颙论国仇未复，中原之民日企銮舆之返，其语剀切，高宗嘉纳。
现代文：贺允中向朝廷推荐叶颙，说他静肃、谦让，皇上于是召见叶颙。叶颙论述国仇未报，中原之民每天企盼着皇上返回，其言语十分恳切，高宗很高兴地接受了。
English: He Yunzhong recommended Ye Kun to the imperial court, saying that he was quiet and humble, and the emperor then summoned Ye Kun. Ye Kun discussed the unreported national enmity, and the people of the Central Plains looked forward to the emperor's return every day. His words were very sincere, and Gaozong gladly accepted.

古文：除将作监簿。
现代文：叶颙拜官将作监簿。
English: Ye Yibai will be the supervisor.

古文：知处州，青田令陈光献羡余百万，颙以所献充所赋。
现代文：叶颙为处州知州，青田县令陈光献上剩余的钱一百万，叶颙把他所献的钱充当所应当交纳的赋税。
English: Ye Ye is a resident of Zhizhou, Aota County ordered Chen Guang to donate the remaining one million yuan, and Ye Ye used the donated money as the tax that should be paid.

古文：汤思退之兄居处州，家奴屠酤犯禁，一绳以法，思退不悦。
现代文：汤思退的哥哥住在处州，其家奴屠杀牲口并买酒喝，触犯了禁令，叶颙以法论处，汤思退很不高兴。
English: Tong Siwei's brother lived in Wenzhou. His family slave slaughtered livestock and bought and drank alcohol, violating the ban. Ye Xuan was punished by the law. Tong Siwei was very unhappy.

古文：属常州逋缗钱四十万，守坐免，移颙知常州。
现代文：适值常州拖欠缗钱四十万，郡守被牵连免职，叶颙被调到常州任知州。
English: Changzhou owed 400,000 yuan in arrears, the county governor was implicated and removed from office, and Ye Xi was transferred to Changzhou to serve as governor.

古文：金犯边，高宗视师建康，道毗陵，颙赐对舟次，因言： 恢复莫先于将相，故相张浚久谪无恙，是天留以相陛下也。 颙初至郡，无旬月储，未一年余缗钱二十万。
现代文：金侵犯宋边境，高宗到建康视察军队，经过毗陵，叶颙被恩赐上船上对话，于是他说： 恢复国土莫如先选用将相，旧相张浚被贬很久没有发生什么意外，这是天意让他留下来辅佐陛下呀。 叶颙刚到常州郡时，郡内没有十天、一个月的储蓄，没有一年余下缗钱二十万。
English: Jin invaded the Song border, Gaozong went to Jiankang to inspect the army, and after passing through Viling, Ye Gan was given the gift of a dialogue on the ship, so he said: To restore the land, it is necessary to first select a general, the old general Zhang Jun was demoted for a long time without any accident, this is the will of heaven to let him stay and assist His Majesty. When Ye Gan first arrived in Changzhou County, there was no ten-day or one-month savings in the county, and there was no annual surplus of 200,000 yuan.

古文：或劝献羡，颙曰： 名羡余，非重征则横敛，是民之膏血也，以利易赏，心实耻之。 
现代文：有人劝他献出余款，叶颙说： 这些钱名义是剩余的，实际上不是重征就是横敛来的，这是百姓的膏血呀，以百姓的利益来换取赏赐，我们心中实在感到耻辱。 
English: Some people advised him to donate the remaining money, but Ye Zhen said, "This money is surplus in name, but in fact, it is either from heavy taxation or from hoarding. This is the blood of the people. We really feel shame in our hearts for exchanging the interests of the people for rewards.

古文：召为尚书郎，除右司。
现代文：皇上召叶颙为尚书郎，拜他为右司。
English: The emperor called Ye Xi to be his disciple, and worshiped him as his right-hand man.

古文：诏求直言，颙上疏谓： 陛下以手足之至亲，付州郡之重寄，是利一人害一方也。 人称其直。
现代文：皇上诏令求直言，叶颙上疏说： 陛下以手足之情对待至亲，交给他们州郡的重任，这是有利于一人而害了一方呀。 人们称赞叶颙正直。
English: The Emperor's edict called for frankness, and Ye Xuan said: "Your Majesty treats your relatives as brothers and sisters and entrusts them with important state and county duties, which benefits one person but harms the other." People praised Ye Xuan's honesty.

古文：除吏部侍郎，复权尚书。
现代文：叶颙拜官吏部侍郎，又为权尚书。
English: Ye Yibai was a waiter in the government official's office, and he was also a high-ranking official.

古文：时七司弊事未去，上疏言选部所以为弊，乃与郎官编七司条例为一书，上嘉之，令刻板颁示。
现代文：当时七个部门的弊病未除，叶颙上疏说明选部之所以产生弊病的原因，于是他与郎官编写了七个部门的条例为一书，皇上很高兴，命令把它刻在板上对外颁行。
English: At that time, the ills of the seven departments had not been eliminated. Ye Xuan Shang Zuo explained the reasons for the ills of the election department, so he and his vassal compiled the regulations of the seven departments into one book. The emperor was very pleased and ordered it to be engraved on the board and issued to the public.

古文：除端明殿学士，拜参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：叶颙拜官端明殿学士，又为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: Ye Yibai was an official of the Ming Dynasty and a scholar, as well as a member of the Council of State and the Privy Council.

古文：武臣梁俊彦请税沙田、芦场，帝以问颙，对曰： 沙田乃江滨地，田随沙涨而出没不常，芦场则臣未之详也。
现代文：武臣梁俊彦请求对沙田、芦场收税，皇上问叶颙的意见，叶颙回答说： 沙田是江边的土地，田随着沙的涨落而出没不定，至于芦场我不清楚。
English: The warrior-vassal Liang Toshihiko requested that taxes be collected from Shatian and the reed field. The emperor asked Ye Xuan for his opinion. Ye Xuan replied: Shatian is land by the river, and the fields are not stable as the sand rises and falls. As for the reed field, I do not know.

古文：且辛巳军兴芦场田租并复，今沙田不胜其扰。 上曰： 诚如卿言。 颙至中书，召俊彦切责之曰： 汝言利求进，万一为国生事，斩汝不足以塞责。 俊彦皇恐汗下。
现代文：况且绍兴三十一年战火兴起，芦场田租一并恢复，今天沙田已不堪其扰。 皇上说 ：正如你所说的。 叶颙到中书堂，召见梁俊彦并恳切地指责他说： 你言利以求进升，万一因此而惹起事端，杀了你也不足以负起责任。 梁俊彦惶恐不安，大汗淋漓。
English: Moreover, war broke out in Shaoxing on the 31st of the year, and the Lujiaotian lease was restored at the same time, and today Shatin is already unbearable. The emperor said: As you said. Ye Xuan went to the middle school library, summoned Liang Toshihiko and earnestly accused him, saying: You are seeking promotion by your words and deeds, and in the unlikely event that this causes an accident, killing you is not enough to take responsibility. Liang Toshihiko was anxious and sweating profusely.

古文：是日，诏沙田、芦场并罢。
现代文：当天，皇上诏令沙田、芦场的租税一起免去。
English: On the same day, the emperor issued an imperial edict exempting Sha Tin and Lubao from taxes.

古文：御史林安宅请两淮行铁钱，颙力言不可，安宅不能平，既入枢府，乃上章攻颙云： 颙之子受宣州富人周良臣钱百万，得监镇江大军仓。 御史王伯庠亦论之。
现代文：御史林安宅请求在两淮流通铁钱，叶颙极力说不行，林安宅内心愤愤不平，他入枢府后，就上书攻击叶颙说： 叶颙之子接受宣州富人周良臣的钱一百万，使周良臣得以监守镇江大军仓。 御史王伯庠也这样说他。
English: After he entered the capital, he wrote a letter attacking Ye Xuan, saying: Ye Xuan's son accepted one million dollars from Zhou Liangcheng, a rich man from Xuanzhou, so that Zhou Liangcheng could keep an eye on the Zhenjiang Armory.

古文：颙乞下吏辩明，乃以资政殿学士提举洞霄宫。
现代文：叶颙乞求派官吏调查清楚，同时他以资政殿学士之职提举洞霄宫。
English: Ye Xuan begged to send officials to investigate clearly, and at the same time, he promoted Dongxiao Palace to the post of Vice-President.

古文：上下其事临安府，时王炎知临安，上令炎亲鞫置对，无秋毫迹。
现代文：皇上把这件事下派到临安府调查核实，当时王炎为临安府知府，皇上令王炎亲自审理此事，结果未发现叶颙之子贪赃的丝毫迹象。
English: The emperor sent the matter to Lin'an Prefecture to investigate and verify. At that time, Wang Yan was the prefect of Lin'an Prefecture. The emperor ordered Wang Yan to personally investigate the matter. As a result, there was not the slightest sign of corruption in Ye Xuan's son.

古文：狱奏，上以安宅、伯庠风闻失实，并免所居官，仍贬安宅筠州，召颙赴阙。
现代文：审理结果上报后，皇上认为林安宅、王伯庠所报失实，一起免去他们的官职，仍贬林安宅到筠州去，召叶颙进宫。
English: After the results of the trial were reported, the emperor believed that Lin Anzhu and Wang Boqin's report was untrue, and dismissed them from their official posts together. Lin Anzhu still went to Zhangzhou to call Ye Kun into the palace.

古文：入见，上劳之曰： 卿之清德自是愈光矣。 
现代文：叶颙进宫拜见皇上，皇上安慰他说： 你的清白德行从此更加醒目了。 
English: Ye Xuan entered the palace to meet the emperor, who consoled him by saying, "Your innocence and virtue have become more conspicuous since then."

古文：除知枢密院事，未拜，进尚书左仆射兼枢密使。
现代文：叶颙拜官知枢密院事，未上任，又被提为尚书左仆射兼枢密使。
English: Ye Zhibai was an official of the Privy Council, and before he took office, he was also promoted to Shangshu Zuoxi and Privy Envoy.

古文：颙首荐汪应辰、王十朋、陈良翰、周操、陈之茂、芮晔、林光朝等，可备执政、侍从、台谏，上嘉纳。
现代文：叶颙首先推荐汪应辰、王十朋、陈良翰、周操、陈之茂、芮晔、林光朝等人，认为他们可作为执政、侍从、台谏官的后备人选，皇上很高兴地采纳了他的意见。
English: Ye Ye first recommended Wang Yingchen, Wang Shifeng, Chen Lianghan, Zhou Xiu, Chen Zhimo, Zou, Lin Guangchong and others, believing that they could serve as reserve candidates for ruling, attendants, and Taiwan eunuchs. The emperor was pleased to accept his opinion.

古文：又言： 自古明君用人，使贤使愚，使奸使盗，惟去泰甚。 上曰： 固然。
现代文：叶颙又说 ：自古以来聪明的君主用人，士无论贤愚都可得到进用，但对于奸恶之徒，则必欲除之而后快。 皇上说 ：固然是这样。
English: Ye Xuan also said, "Since ancient times, the wise servants of the sovereign, whether they are wise or foolish, can be promoted, but for those who are traitors, they must be eliminated." The emperor said, "Of course this is so."

古文：虞有禹、皋，亦有共、驩；周有旦、奭，亦有管、蔡，在用不用。 颙曰： 诚如圣训，但今日在朝虽未见有共、驩、管、蔡，然有窃弄威福者，臣不敢隐。 上问为谁，颙以龙大渊对，语在《陈俊卿传》。
现代文：虞有禹、皋，也有共、颙；周有旦、颙，也有管、蔡，关键在于用还是不用。 叶颙说： 正如圣上所说，但今天在朝中虽未看见有共、颙、管、蔡之类的大奸之人，然而也有窃取威福、玩弄权术之人，我不敢隐瞒。 皇上问是谁，叶颙回答说是龙大渊，具体陈词见《陈俊卿传》。
English: The key is whether to use it or not. Ye Jun said, "As the Holy Father said, although today in the imperial court there are no great traitors such as the Communist Party, the Kuomintang, the Kuomintang, and the Kuomintang, there are also those who steal fortunes and play power games, and I dare not hide it. When the Emperor asked who they were, Ye Jun replied that they were dragons, and the specific words are in "The Biography of Chen Junqing."

古文：上以国用未裕，诏宰相兼国用使，参政同知国用事，颙乃言： 今日费财养兵为甚，兵多则有冗卒虚籍，无事则费财，有事则不可用。
现代文：皇上由于国家用度不足，诏令宰相兼为国用使，参政同知国用使，叶颙于是说 ：今天费财养兵最严重，兵多那么就有冗兵，虚占兵籍之人，没有战事就已浪费很多钱财，一有战事他们又不堪使用。
English: As the Emperor was short of funds, he decreed that the Prime Minister should also be an envoy of the state and participate in politics as well as an envoy of a foreign country. Ye Xi then said: Today, it is most serious to spend money to raise soldiers. If there are too many soldiers, there will be redundant soldiers and people who falsely occupy military ranks. If there is no war, a lot of money has been wasted. If there is a war, they will not be able to be used.

古文：虽曰汰之，旋即招之，欲足国用，当严于汰、缓于招可也。
现代文：以往虽然说淘汰他们，但不久又都招回，想使国用充足，应当严于汰兵，缓于招兵才行。
English: In the past, although they were said to be eliminated, they were soon called back. If you want to make the country sufficient, you should be strict in recruiting and slow in recruiting.

古文：孔子曰： 节用而爱人 。盖节用，则爱人之政自行于其间，若欲生财，祗费民财尔。 上曰 ：此至言也。 上曰： 建康刘源尝赂近习，朕欲遣王抃廉其奸。 颙曰： 臣恐廉者甚于奸者。 乃止。
现代文：于是皇上下令停发此令。
English: As a result, the Emperor issued an order to stop issuing this order.

古文：乾道三年冬至，上亲郊而雷，颙引汉故事上印绶，提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：乾道三年冬至，皇上参加郊祀而天上雷鸣，叶颙引用汉代的事例呈上印绶，皇上令他提举太平兴国宫。
English: On the winter solstice three years ago, the emperor attended a suburban ritual and the sky thundered. Ye Ye cited the example of the Han Dynasty to submit the seal, and the emperor ordered him to nominate Taiping Xingguo.

古文：归至家，不疾而薨，年六十八。
现代文：叶颙回到家，不久去世，终年六十八岁。
English: Ye Xi returned home and died soon after, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：以观文殿学士致仕，赠特进，谥正简。
现代文：叶颙以观文殿学士之职退休，皇上赠他特进之职，封谥号 正简 。
English: Ye Xuan retired as an academician of the Confucian Academy, and the emperor gave him the post of special promotion, and the seal number was Zheng Jian.

古文：颙为人简易清介，与物若无忤，至处大事毅然不可夺。
现代文：叶颙为人简单随便，清高耿直，对一般的小事似乎无可无不可，至于处理大事就坚定自己的意见不可改变。
English: Ye Xuan is a simple and easy-going person, clear and straightforward, and seems to be indispensable for general trifles. As for dealing with major events, he is firm and his opinions cannot be changed.

古文：友人高登尝上书讥切时相，名捕甚急。
现代文：友人高登曾上书讥讽当时的宰相，朝廷点名追捕他很是急迫。
English: Gao Deng, a friend, had written a letter mocking the then-prime minister, and it was urgent for the imperial court to pursue him by name.

古文：颙与同邸，擿令逸去，登曰： 不为君累乎？ 颙曰： 以获罪，固所愿也。 即为具舟，舟移乃去。
现代文：叶颙与他住在同一地方，叶颙告之了朝廷的命令要他赶快逃走，高登说： 这不是连累了你吗？ 叶颙说 ：我因此而被定罪，是我心甘情愿的。 于是为高登备船，直到船开了才离去。
English: Ip Man lived in the same place with him, and Ip Man reported the order of the court to him to quickly escape, Gao Deng said: Isn't this what has been bothering you? Ip Man said: I was convicted because of this, and I did it willingly. So I prepared a boat for Gao Deng, and I didn't leave until the boat started moving.

古文：自初仕至宰相，服食、僮妾、田宅不改其旧。
现代文：叶颙从刚当官一直到任宰相之职，其服饰、饮食、僮妾、田宅都没有改变旧有的习惯和数目。
English: From the time he first became an official to the time he assumed the post of prime minister, Ye Xuan's clothing, diet, concubines, and farmhouses did not change the old habits and numbers.

