古文：陈执中，字昭誉，以父恕任，为秘书省正字，累迁卫尉寺丞、知梧州。
现代文：陈执中字昭誉，因父亲陈恕在任，为秘书省正字，累迁卫尉寺丞、梧州知州。
English: Chen Rongzhong was a well-known person, and because his father Chen Zhou was in office, he was the secretary of the provincial government, and he was successively transferred to the provincial governor of Wuzhou and Wuzhou.

古文：上《复古要道》三篇，真宗异而召之。
现代文：上呈《复古要道》三篇，真宗感到惊异而召见他。
English: When he submitted three essays on "Retro Essentials," Shinso was surprised and summoned him.

古文：帝属疾，春秋高，大臣莫敢言建储者，执中进《演要》三篇，以蚤定天下根本为说。
现代文：真宗患病，年岁已高，大臣没人敢说立太子，执中进献《演要》三篇，以早早决定天下根本为论点。
English: Emperor Jinzong was ill and old, and no minister dared to say that the crown prince should be appointed. He presented three articles of "Outline" in the middle of the meeting, arguing that the world should be decided at an early date.

古文：翌日，帝以他疏示辅臣，皆赞曰 善 。
现代文：第二天，真宗把其他奏疏出示给辅佐大臣，都称赞说 好 。
English: The next day, Shinso showed the other pieces to the vice-minister, and they all praised and said it was good.

古文：帝指其袖中曰： 又有善于此者。 出之，乃《演要》也。
现代文：真宗指着衣袖中说 ：还有比这更好的。 取出《演要》。
English: Pointing at his sleeve, Masamune said, "There is something better than this," and took out the Summary.

古文：因召对便殿，劳问久之，擢右正言。
现代文：因而召执中在便殿应对，真宗垂问了很长时间，提升他为右正言。
English: As a result, in the middle of the summoning, he had to deal with it in the hall, and the True Sect asked him for a long time to elevate him to the right sermon.

古文：逾月，遂立皇太子。
现代文：过了一个月，就立皇太子。
English: A month later, the crown prince was appointed.

古文：明年，坐考御试进士卷差谬，贬卫尉寺丞、监岳州酒务。
现代文：第二年，因考试御试进士卷子差谬，贬为卫尉寺丞、监岳州酒务。
English: The following year, he was demoted to the rank of a temple guard and a supervisor of the Yue Prefecture's liquor department due to an error in his entrance exam paper.

古文：稍复殿中丞、通判抚州，复右正言。
现代文：逐渐恢复殿中丞、抚州通判，恢复右正言。
English: He gradually restored the posts of Don Chujo and Fuzhou Tsuchiban, and resumed the post of Ujishogen.

古文：曹利用婿卢士伦除福建运使，惮远不行，利用为请，乃改京东。
现代文：曹利用的女婿卢士伦被任命为福建转运使，害怕路程遥远不去赴任，曹利用替他请求，于是改任京东转运使。
English: Cao Rong's son-in-law, Lu Shulun, was appointed as the Fujian transshipment envoy. He was afraid of the long journey and did not want to go to the post. Cao Rong asked for him, so he was appointed as the Jingdong transshipment envoy.

古文：执中尝劾奏之，利用挟私忿，出执中知汉阳军。
现代文：执中曾弹劾他，曹利用怀私人怨恨，出执中为汉阳军知军。
English: Cao Cao used his personal grudge to impeach him during the trial. Cao Cao became the commander of the Hanyang Army during the trial.

古文：及利用得罪，乃召为群牧判官、权三司盐铁判官、知谏院、提举诸司库务，以尚书工部员外郎兼御史知杂、同判流内铨，迁三司户部副使。
现代文：等到曹利用获罪，就召执中为群牧判官、权三司盐铁判官、知谏院、提举诸司库务，以尚书员外郎的身份兼任御史知杂、同判流内铨，升任三司户部副使。
English: When Cao Rong was found guilty, he was summoned to serve as the judge of the herdsmen, the judge of the three departments of salt and iron, the judge of the three departments of justice, and the treasurer of the treasury, and he also served as the secretary of the secretary and the judge of the same department, and was promoted to the vice-minister of the three departments of the household.

古文：明道中，安抚京东，进天章阁待制。
现代文：明道年中，执中安抚东京，进升天章阁待制。
English: In the middle of the Ming Dynasty, he pacified Tokyo and was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun.

古文：使还，知应天府，徙江宁府、扬州，再迁工部郎中，改龙图阁直学士、知永兴军，拜右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事。
现代文：出使回来，任应天知府，移任江宁府、扬州，再升工部郎中，改龙图阁学士、知永兴军，拜右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事。
English: After returning from the mission, he was appointed to Tianchi Prefecture, transferred to Jiangning Prefecture and Yangzhou, and then promoted to Junior Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and then became a bachelor of Longtou Geology, Zhiyong Xingjun, Bai Yuanyi Doctor, and Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：元昊寇延州，手诏咨访辅臣攻守方略，执中既上对，退，复奏疏曰： 元昊乘中国久不用兵，窃发西垂，以游兵困劲卒、甘言悦守臣，一旦连犯亭障，延安几至不保。
现代文：元昊侵犯延州，皇帝亲手写诏书向辅佐大臣咨询访求攻守方略，执中既上对策，退后又上奏陈述说： 元昊趁中国久不用兵，偷偷在西部边陲发难，用游兵困住劲兵、甜言蜜语取悦守臣，有朝一日接连侵犯边疆堡垒，延安就差不多不能自保。
English: When Yuan Hao invaded Yanzhou, the emperor personally wrote an imperial edict to consult with the Vice-Minister of Defense on the strategy of attack and defense. While implementing the countermeasures, he retreated and made a statement saying: Yuan Hao took advantage of the fact that China had not needed soldiers for a long time, secretly made difficulties on the western border, trapped strong soldiers with guerrillas, and pleased the vassals with sweet words. One day, Yan'an would be almost unable to protect itself from the continuous invasion of the frontier fortress.

古文：此盖范雍纳诡说，失于戒严；刘平轻躁，丧其所部。
现代文：这里由于范雍采纳欺诈的意见，失于戒严；刘平轻率急躁，丧其所部。
English: Here, because Fan Yong adopted fraudulent opinions, he lost to martial law; Liu Ping was rash and impatient, and lost his position.

古文：上下纷攘，远近震骇。
现代文：上下纷乱侵夺，远近震动惊骇。
English: Up and down, chaos invades, far and near are shocked.

古文：自金明李士彬族破，而并边篱落皆大坏。
现代文：自从金明李士彬族被击破，而沿边屏障都大坏。
English: Since the Jinming Li Shibin tribe was defeated, the barriers along the border have been badly damaged.

古文：塞门、金明相距二百里，宜列修三城，城屯兵千人，益募弓箭手。
现代文：塞门、金明相距二百里，应并列修建三城，每城驻兵一千人，增加招募弓箭手。
English: Saimen and Jinming are two hundred miles apart, and three cities should be built side by side, with one thousand soldiers stationed in each city, and more archers recruited.

古文：寇大至则退保，小至则出斗。
现代文：敌人大规模来到就退保城塞，小规模来到就出战。
English: When the enemy comes on a large scale, the citadel will be surrendered, and when they come on a small scale, they will go to war.

古文：选阁门祗候以上为寨主、都监，以诸司使为卢关一路都巡检，以兵二千属之，使为三砦之援。
现代文：选择门祗候以上的官员为寨主、都监，以诸司使为卢关一路都巡检，把二千军队隶属于它，使它成为三砦的应援。
English: He chose the officials at or above the gate to be the chiefs and supervisors of the walled city, and the officers and envoys to patrol all the way to Luguan, subordinated two thousand troops to it, and made it the support of the three forts.

古文：熟羌居汉地久者，委边臣拊存之；反覆者，破逐之。
现代文：熟羌久住汉地的，委托边臣安慰存问；反复无常的，击破驱逐。
English: If you are familiar with the Han Dynasty and have lived there for a long time, you can entrust your consolation to the border guards; if you are capricious, you will be broken up and expelled.

古文：至于新拊黠羌，如泾原康奴、灭臧、大虫族，久居内地，常有叛心，不肆剪除，恐终为患。
现代文：至于刚刚归附的黠羌，如泾原康奴、灭臧、大虫族，久居内地，常常有叛乱之心，不尽加剪除，恐怕终为祸患。
English: As for the newly-acquired centipedes, such as the ancestral centipede, the exterminated centipede, and the large insect family, they have lived in the inland for a long time, often have a rebellious heart, and if they are not completely eliminated, I am afraid that they will eventually become a disaster.

古文：今军须之出，民已愁叹，复欲遍修城池如河北之制，及夏须成，使神运之犹恐不能，民力其堪此乎？ 陕西地险，非如河北，惟泾州、镇戎军势稍平易，若不责外守而劳内营，非策之上也。
现代文：现在军需之出，百姓已经发愁叹息，再想遍修城池像河北的建制，到夏天必须修成，即使是神仙运输还恐怕不能够，民力怎么能堪此呢？陕西地势险恶，不像河北，只有泾州、镇戎军地势稍稍平易，如果不责外面防守而烦费内部营造，这不是上策。
English: Now that there is a need for military supplies, the people are already worried and sighing, and they want to rebuild the city like Hebei's system, which must be completed by the summer. Even if it is a mythical transport, it may not be able to do it. How can the people bear it? Shaanxi's terrain is dangerous. Unlike Hebei, only Zhangzhou and Zhenren's terrain is slightly easier. If you do not charge for external defense and spend time on internal construction, this is not the best strategy.

古文：宜修并边城池，其次如延州之鄜、同，环庆之邠、宁，不过五七处，量为营葺，则科率减、民力苏矣。
现代文：应修建沿边城池，其次像延州的、同，环庆的、宁州，不过五七个地方，估量来营造修葺，那么科赋减少、民力苏复了。
English: It should be built along the edge of the city, followed by Yanzhou, Tongzhou, Huanqing, Ningzhou, but five or seven places should be built and repaired, then the scientific endowment will be reduced and the people's power will be restored.

古文：今贼势方张，宜静守以骄其志，蓄锐以挫其锋，增土兵以备守御，省骑卒以减转饷。
现代文：现在敌人气势正张大，应冷静防守以骄其志，养精蓄锐以挫败其锋锐，增加士兵以备守御，减少骑兵以减粮饷转运。
English: Now that the enemy's momentum is growing, we should calmly defend with pride, keep our energy sharp to defeat their sharpness, increase the number of soldiers to prepare for defense, and reduce the number of cavalry to reduce grain and transport.

古文：然后徐议荡平，改张节度，更须主张，将臣横议不入，则忠臣尽节而捐躯矣。 
现代文：然后慢慢议论荡平敌人，调整指挥，更改主张，将臣放纵恣肆的言论不被采纳，那么忠臣就会尽节而捐躯了。 
English: Then slowly discuss how to defeat the enemy, adjust the command, change the proposition, and make the minister indulge in arbitrary speech is not accepted, then the loyal minister will die.

古文：既而议刺土兵，久不决，罢知青州。
现代文：不久议论招纳土兵，很长时间没有决断，罢为青州知州。
English: Soon there was talk of enlisting local soldiers, but no decision was made for a long time, and Qingzhou became Chizhou.

古文：又以资政殿学士知河南府，改尚书工部侍郎、陕西同经略安抚招讨使。
现代文：又以资政殿学士的身份知河南府，改任尚书工部侍郎、陕西同经略安抚招讨使。
English: He also visited Henan Province as a scholar of the Academy of the House of Councillors, and was appointed as a chamberlain of the Department of Calligraphy, and a recruiting envoy of the Shaanxi Tongjingliao.

古文：与夏竦同知永兴军，议边事多异同，诏令互出巡边，乃屯泾州，令诸部曰： 寇籍吾水草，钞边图利，不除，且复至。 命悉焚之。
现代文：与夏竦一起知永兴军，议论边事意见多不相同，诏令他们互出巡边，执中就屯驻泾州，命令各部说 ：敌人凭借我们的水草，抄掠边地图谋利益，不除掉，又会再来。 
English: He and Xia Yao got to know the Yongxing Army and discussed how different their opinions were on border affairs. He ordered them to patrol each other's borders, and stationed them in Bozhou during the enforcement. He ordered each department to say: "The enemy uses our aquatic plants, copies the border map for profit, and will come again if they are not eliminated."

古文：表解兵柄，以为兵尚神密，千里禀命，非所以制胜，宜属四路各保疆圉。
现代文：命令把水草全部焚烧。上表请解除兵权，认为兵贵神秘，千里禀承命令，不是用来制胜的办法，应嘱托四路各自保卫边疆。
English: The order was to burn all the aquatic plants. The above table asked for the disbandment of the armed forces, believing that military nobility was a mystery, that following orders was not a way to win, and that each of the four directions should be entrusted with the defense of the frontier.

古文：朝议善之，就知陕州，复徙青州。
现代文：朝廷赞同他的意见。就地任陕州知州，再移任青州知州。
English: The imperial court agreed with his opinion. He was appointed to Chizhou, Shaanxi Province, and then to Chizhou, Qingzhou Province.

古文：于是请城傅海诸州，朝廷重兴役，有诏不许。
现代文：于是请求筑城傅海各州，朝廷重新兴起工役，有诏命不准许。
English: Therefore, he requested the states of Fujai to build the city and the imperial court to re-establish the labor service, but was ordered not to do so.

古文：执中不奉诏，卒城之。
现代文：执中没有奉行诏命，终于筑成城池。
English: However, he did not carry out the imperial edict, and the castle was finally built.

古文：明年，沂卒王伦叛，趣淮南，执中遣巡检傅永吉追至采石矶，捕杀之。
现代文：第二年，沂州士兵王伦反叛，趋向淮南，执中派巡检傅永吉追到采石矶，捕杀王伦。
English: In the second year, Wang Lun, a soldier from Zhangzhou, rebelled and headed for Huainan. The Central Government sent inspector Fu Yongji to chase him to Jieshi, where he was caught and killed.

古文：召拜参知政事。
现代文：召授参知政事。
English: He was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：谏官孙甫、蔡襄极论不可，帝遣使驰赐敕告。
现代文：谏官孙甫、蔡襄极力论述不可以，皇帝派使者疾驰赐予敕告。
English: The eunuchs Sun Fu and Cai Xiang tried their best to argue that it was impossible, and the emperor sent an envoy to rush to give an obituary.

古文：逾年，拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士兼枢密使。
现代文：过了一年，授执中同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士兼枢密使。
English: A year later, he was awarded the title of Shih Ping Zhangji, Jixianden University Scholar and Privy Councilor.

古文：西夏纳款，与宰相贾昌朝请解枢密。
现代文：西夏投诚，执中与宰相贾昌朝请求解除枢密院的职务。
English: Xi Xia casts his vote of confidence, and together with Prime Minister Jia Changchao, requests the dismissal of the Privy Council.

古文：七年春，旱，昌朝罢，执中降给事中。
现代文：庆历七年春天，贾昌朝被罢免，执中被降为给事中。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the lunar calendar, Jia Chang was removed from his post, and was demoted to the rank of middle-ranking official.

古文：已而加昭文馆大学士、监修国史，逾月复官。
现代文：不久加官昭文馆大学士、监修国史，过了一个月恢复官职。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Shobunkwan University scholar, supervising the study of national history, and resumed his official duties a month later.

古文：皇祐初，以足疾辞位，自陈不愿为使相、大学士，学士孙抃当制，遂以尚书左丞知陈州。
现代文：皇初年，执中因脚疾辞去职位，自己陈述不愿意为使相、大学士，学士孙扌卞执掌制书，于是以尚书左丞的身份知陈州。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, Zhi Zhong resigned from his post due to a foot ailment, stating that he did not want to be an envoy, a university bachelor, and a bachelor Sun Qian to be in charge of book production, so he knew Chenzhou as a scholar.

古文：宰相文彦博、宋庠以为礼薄，帖麻改兵部尚书。
现代文：宰相文彦博、宋庠认为礼数轻了，用黄白麻纸写成文告改兵部尚书。
English: Prime Minister Fumihiko Fumihiko and Prime Minister Song Hyun thought that the number of courtesies was too light, so they wrote a notice on yellow-and-white hemp paper to change it into a military book.

古文：迁吏部、观文殿大学士。
现代文：升吏部尚书、观文殿大学士。
English: He was promoted to Shoryo-bu Shosho and became a scholar at the University of the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：久之，拜集庆军节度使、同平章事、判大名府。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，授集庆军节度使、同平章事、判大名府。
English: After a long period of time, the Qingjun Festival Envoy, Tongping Award, and Daming Prefecture were awarded.

古文：河决商胡，走大名，程琳欲为堤，不果成而去。
现代文：黄河在商胡决口，趋向大名，程琳打算修筑堤防，最终没有成功而离去。
English: The Yellow River at the Shanghu mouth, tending to daimyo, Cheng Lin planned to build a dike, but ultimately did not succeed and left.

古文：执中乘年丰调丁夫增筑二十里，以障横溃。
现代文：执中趁年丰调征民夫增筑二百里，以障蔽横溢溃决的河水。
English: During his administration, he took advantage of the year's bountiful harvest to recruit people to build an additional two hundred miles to block the overflowing river.

古文：以吏部尚书复拜同平章事、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：以吏部尚书的身份又被授予同平章事、昭文馆大学士。
English: He was also awarded the Tongping Zhengji and the Shobunkwan University Scholarship in his capacity as a cadre of Shangshu.

古文：每朝退，闭中书东便门，以防漏泄。
现代文：每次上朝退出，关闭中书东便门，以防止泄漏。
English: Every morning before leaving, close the door to prevent leakage.

古文：三司勾当公事及监场务官，权势所引者，皆奏罢之，内外为之肃然。
现代文：三司勾当公事及监场务官，凡因权势所引荐的，执中都奏请罢免，朝廷内外为之肃然。
English: The three departments acted as public affairs and supervisory officials, and all those who were recommended by the authorities were asked to be removed from office, which caused consternation both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：会张贵妃薨，治丧皇仪殿，追册为后。
现代文：恰逢张贵妃去世，在皇仪殿治丧，追册封为皇后。
English: Coinciding with the death of Zhang Guifei, she held a funeral at the Imperial Palace and was posthumously crowned as empress.

古文：王洙、石全彬务以非礼导帝意，执中随辄奉行，至以洙为员外翰林学士，全彬领观察使，给留后奉。
现代文：王洙、石全彬致力于以不符合礼仪之事引导皇帝的心意，执中随即奉行，以致以王洙为员外翰林学士，石全彬掌领观察使，给予留后的俸禄。
English: Wang Hui and Shi Quanbin devoted themselves to guiding the emperor's mind with things that are not in line with etiquette, and immediately followed it, so that Wang Hui was a member of the Foreign Hanlin Scholar, and Shi Quanbin was in charge of the observation envoy, and was given a salary for staying behind.

古文：久之，嬖妾笞小婢出外舍死，御史赵抃列八事奏劾执中，欧阳修亦言之。
现代文：过了很长时间，执中的宠妾鞭笞小婢出外舍死亡，御史赵扌卞列举八件事奏劾执中，欧阳修也加以弹劾。
English: After a long time had passed, the favorite concubine and whipping maidservant of the executioner died outside the house, and the magistrate Zhao Yao listed eight things to impeach the executioner, and Ouyang Xiu also impeached them.

古文：至和三年春，旱，谏官范镇言： 执中为相，不病而家居。
现代文：至和三年春天，旱灾，谏官范镇说： 执中为宰相，没有生病而闲居在家。
English: In the spring of the 3rd year of the Heian period, when there was a drought, eunuch Fan Zhen said: I was the prime minister in the middle of the year, but I did not get sick and stayed idle at home.

古文：陛下欲弭灾变，宜速退执中，以快中外之望。 既而御史中丞孙抃与其属郭申锡、毋湜、范师道、赵抃请合班论奏，诏令轮日入对，卒罢执中为镇海军节度使、同平章事、判亳州。
现代文：陛下想要消除灾变，应赶快贬退执中以快中外的心愿。 不久御史中丞孙扌卞，与其属官郭申锡、毋氵是、范师道、赵扌卞请求联合论奏，诏令按日轮流入对，终于罢免执中为镇海军节度使、同平章事、判亳州。
English: If His Majesty wanted to eliminate the disaster, he should quickly dismiss the wishes of the township's naval commander, Sun Yat-sen, and his subordinate officers, Guo Shenxi, Bo Xie, Fan Shidao, and Zhao Ying, and request a joint discussion. The imperial edict flowed in daily, and finally the township's naval commander, Tong Ping Zhang Ji, was dismissed and sentenced to Shanzhou.

古文：逾年辞节，改尚书左仆射、观文殿大学士，封英国公，徙河南府，又徙曹州，皆不赴。
现代文：过了一年，执中辞谢节度使职务，改任尚书左仆射、观文殿大学士，封英国公，移任河南府，又移任曹州，都没有前往。
English: After a year, he resigned from the post of the chief of the middle school, was transferred to the post of the secretary of the festival, was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university, was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university, was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university, was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university, was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university, was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university, and was transferred to the post of the vice-president of the university.

古文：过都，以疾赐告，就第拜司徒、岐国公致仕，卒，赠太师兼侍中。
现代文：经过都城，因病赐予诰命，于居所授任司空、岐国公退休，去世，赠太师兼侍中。
English: After passing through the capital, he was given a short life due to illness, retired at his residence as Siku and Kikokuko, passed away, and was given the title of grand master and chamberlain.

古文：执中在中书八年，人莫敢干以私，四方问遗不及门，惟殿前都指挥使郭承祐数至其家，为御史所言，遂诏中书、枢密自今非聚厅无见宾客。
现代文：执中在中书省八年，人们不敢以私事求取，四方问候赠送不到门庭，只有殿前都指挥使郭承几次到他家，被御史所言论，于是诏命中书省、枢密院从今以后不是聚厅议政不要接见宾客。
English: During his eight-year tenure at the Central Book Ministry, people did not dare to use private affairs to seek favors, and they could not receive greetings from all directions. Only the palace commander sent Guo Cheng to his home several times, and he was criticized by the imperial historian. Therefore, the imperial edict ordered the Central Book Ministry and the Privy Council not to receive guests from now on.

古文：及议谥，礼官韩维曰： 执中以公卿子，遭世承平，因缘一言，遂至贵显。
现代文：等到讨论谥号，礼官韩维说： 执中以公卿子弟，遭逢承平之世，因为一句话的缘故，于是至于尊贵显赫。
English: Waiting for the discussion of the nickname, the etiquette officer Han Wei said: "The son of a nobleman was chosen as the winner in the middle of the competition, but he was defeated by the world because of a sentence, so as for the honorable and distinguished.

古文：天子以后宫之丧，问所以葬祭之礼，执中位上相，不能总率群司考正仪典，知治丧皇仪非嫔御之礼，追册位号于宫闱有嫌，建庙用乐逾祖宗旧制，皆白而行之，此不忠之大者。
现代文：天子因后宫的丧礼，询问用来葬祭之礼，执中位居宰相，不能统率众多机构考正仪典，知道在皇仪殿治丧违反嫔御之礼，在后宫追册位号有嫌疑，建庙使用礼乐超越祖宗旧制，都报告而实行，这是最大的不忠。
English: It is the greatest disloyalty that the heavenly son, because of the funeral rites of the imperial palace, inquired about the rites used for funerals and festivals, held the position of prime minister in the middle, could not lead many institutions to correct the ceremony, knew that it was against the imperial etiquette to hold a funeral in the imperial hall, suspected of tracking the number in the imperial palace, and built a temple using ceremonial music beyond the old system of the ancestors, all reported and implemented.

古文：闺门之内，礼分不明，夫人正室疏薄自绌，庶妾贱人悍逸不制，其治家无足言者。
现代文：闺门之内，礼分不明，夫人正室疏薄自绌，庶妾贱人凶悍懒散不能制止，其治家之道不足以说。
English: In the boudoir, the etiquette is unclear, the wife's regular room is sparse and self-deprecating, the concubine's slut is fierce and lazy and cannot be stopped, and the way to manage the family is not enough to say.

古文：宰相不能秉道率礼，正身齐家，方杜门深居，谢绝宾客，曰： 我无私也，我不党也。
现代文：宰相不能秉承道德遵循礼节，正身齐家，才杜门深居，谢绝宾客，说： 我没有私心，我没有偏私。 
English: The prime minister can't uphold morality and follow etiquette. He must be a member of the same family before he can live in the same house. He declined the guests, saying, "I have no selfishness, I have no partiality."

古文：岂不陋哉？
现代文：难道不丑陋吗？
English: Isn't it ugly?

古文：谥法： 宠禄光大曰荣 ， 不勤成名曰灵 。
现代文：按谥法 ：宠禄光大曰荣  ，不勤成名曰灵 。
English: According to the method of : Doting oneself with great glory is called Rong, and becoming famous without hard work is called Ling.

古文：执中出入将相，以一品就第，宠禄光大矣；得位行政，贤士大夫无述焉，不勤成名矣；请谥曰荣灵。 后改谥恭襄，诏谥曰恭。
现代文：执中出入将相，以一品辞官，宠禄光大了；得到职位实行政治，贤士大夫没有述说，是不勤成名了。请谥号叫荣灵。 后改谥恭襄，诏命谥号叫恭。
English: When a general was in and out of office, he was given the title of "dictator," and his popularity soared; when he was given a position to carry out politics, the sage-doctor did not mention that he had become famous through hard work. His posthumous name was Rongling. Later, he changed it to Gongxiang, and the edict ordered his posthumous name to be Gongxiang.

古文：其后希范遁归，谋为乱，欲杀伸己，岭外骚然，议者皆罪伸己焉。贾昌朝，字子明，真定获鹿人。
现代文：皇帝用篆书书写他的墓碑叫 褒忠之碑 。儿子世儒，官至国子博士，妻子李氏与众婢女杀死世儒的生母，世儒参与谋划，都被在闹市执行死刑，并将尸体暴露街头。贾昌朝字子明，真定获鹿人。
English: The emperor wrote his tombstone, called "The Monument of Praising Loyalty," in cursive script. His son Shiru, a government official and doctor, his wife Li and all the maidservants killed Shiru's birth mother. Shiru took part in the planning. They were all executed in the downtown area and their bodies were exposed on the street. Jia Chang was known as the son of the emperor, but he was really the son of a deer.

古文：晋史官纬之曾孙也。
现代文：他是后晋史官贾纬的曾孙。
English: He was the great-grandson of the post-Jin historian Jia Wei.

古文：天禧初，真宗尝祈谷南郊，昌朝献颂道左，召试，赐同进士出身，主晋陵簿。
现代文：天禧初年，真宗曾经在南郊祈祷五谷，昌朝在路旁进献颂词，召他应试，赐同进士出身，为晋陵县主簿。
English: In the first year of the Jubilee of Heaven, when the True Sect was praying for prosperity in the southern suburb of Jinling, the Chang Dynasty gave a eulogy on the side of the road, called him to take the exam, and gave him the title of Jinling County Master.

古文：赐对便殿，除国子监说书。
现代文：皇帝在便殿赐对，被任命为国子监说书。
English: The emperor bestowed the right to be appointed as the son-in-law of the state on Benden.

古文：孙奭判监，独称昌朝讲说有师法。
现代文：孙判国子监，独称赞昌朝讲说有师法。
English: Sun Zhan, the state's son and son-in-law, praised the Chang dynasty for teaching that there is a teacher.

古文：他日书路随、韦处厚传示昌朝曰： 君当以经术进，如二公。 为颍川郡王院伴读。
现代文：后来孙书写《路随》、《韦处厚传》给昌朝说： 您应以经术进用，像路、韦二公一样。 任颍川郡王院伴读。
English: Later, Sun wrote "Lu Sui" and "Wei Chuang Hou Chuan" to Chang Chao, saying, "You should use the teachings of the scriptures, just like Lu and Wei Er Gong.

古文：再迁殿中丞，历知宜兴、东明县。
现代文：又升殿中丞，历任宜兴、东明知县。
English: He was also promoted to the position of Junior Middle Officer, and successively held posts in Yixing and Dongming County.

古文：奭侍读禁中，以老辞，荐昌朝自代，召试中书，寻复国子监说书。
现代文：孙侍读禁中，因年老辞谢，推荐昌朝代替自己，召试中书省，不久恢复国子监说书的职务。
English: When Sun Zhi was in the middle of his reading ban, he resigned in gratitude due to old age, recommending Chang Cha to take his place. He was summoned to the Ministry of Literature during the examination, and soon resumed his duties as the State Children's Supervisor of Literature.

古文：上言： 礼，母之讳不出于宫。
现代文：上书说： 按礼制，母之名讳不出于宫。
English: The letter said: According to the rite system, the name of the mother does not come from the palace.

古文：今章献太后易月制除，犹讳父名，非尊宗庙也。 诏从之。
现代文：现在章献太后易月制命除官，还忌讳父名，这不是尊重宗庙。 诏令听从他的意见。
English: Now Zhang Xian has ordered the Empress Dowager Yi Yue to be removed from office, and he has also forbidden the use of his father's name, which is not respectful of the ancestral temple.

古文：景祐中，置崇政殿说书，以授昌朝。
现代文：景年中，设置崇政殿说书，来授予昌朝。
English: In the middle of the reign of King Gyeongjo, a proclamation was issued to award the throne to the Choson Dynasty.

古文：诵说明白，帝多所质问，昌朝请记录以进，赐名《迩英延义记注》，加直集贤院。
现代文：昌朝朗诵讲说明白，皇帝多所质问，昌朝请求记录以进献，赐名《迩英延义记注》，加昌朝官直集贤院。
English: The Chang dynasty recited the explanation clearly, the emperor asked many questions, the Chang dynasty requested the record to be presented, the name "Xingying Yenyi Jie Note" was given, and the Chang dynasty officials directly collected the Xianyuan.

古文：太平兴国寺灾，是夕，大雨震雷。
现代文：太平兴国寺发生灾变，当晚，下大雨雷声震天。
English: A disaster occurred at the Taiping Xingguo Temple. That night, it rained heavily and thunder shook the sky.

古文：朝廷议修复，昌朝上言： 《易·震》之象曰： 洊雷震，君子以恐惧修省。
现代文：朝廷议论修复，昌朝上言： 《易？震》的卦象叫： 一次又一次雷震响，君子因恐惧修身省过。 
English: The imperial court discussed the restoration, and the Chang dynasty made the following comment: "Easy? Quake" of the Gua Zhao shouted: Time and time again, thunder and tremors sounded, and the gentleman calmed down out of fear.

古文：近年寺观屡灾，此殆天示警告，可勿缮治，以示畏天爱人之意。 西域僧献佛骨、铜像，昌朝请加赐遣还，毋以所献示中外。
现代文：近年寺观接连发生灾变，这大概是上天出示警告，可以不加修缮治理，以示畏天爱人的意思。 西域僧人献佛骨、铜像，昌朝请朝廷增加赐予遣送回去，不要以其所献示中外。
English: In recent years, successive disasters have occurred in the view of the temple, which is probably a warning from heaven that it can be managed without repair to show the meaning of fearing God and loving people. Western monks offered Buddhist bones and bronze statues, and the Chang dynasty asked the court to increase the gift and send it back, and not to show it to China and abroad.

古文：悉行其言。
现代文：他的言论得到全部实行。
English: His words have been fully implemented.

古文：天章阁置侍讲，亦首命昌朝。
现代文：天章阁设置侍讲，也首先任命昌朝。
English: Tian Zhangge set up an assistant speaker, and first appointed the Chang dynasty.

古文：累迁尚书礼部郎中、史馆修撰。
现代文：昌朝累迁尚书礼部郎中、史馆修撰。
English: He was a member of the Shosho Rites and Ceremonies Department during the reign of the Shogunate, and wrote about it for the history museum.

古文：刘平为元昊所执，边吏诬平降贼，议收其家。
现代文：刘平被元昊所擒捉，边吏诬陷刘平投降敌人，建议拘押他的家人。
English: Liu Ping was captured by Yuan Hao. The border officials framed Liu Ping as a surrendering enemy and suggested that his family members be detained.

古文：昌朝曰： 汉族杀李陵，陵不得归，而汉悔之。
现代文：昌朝说： 汉朝族诛李陵，李陵不能归，而汉朝后悔。
English: The Chang dynasty said: Han dynasty people stole Li Ling, Li Ling cannot be returned, and the Han dynasty regrets it.

古文：先帝厚抚王继忠家，终得继忠用。
现代文：先帝优厚抚恤王继忠家，终于得王继忠效力。
English: The previous emperor generously supported Wang Jizhong's family, and finally Wang Jizhong became effective.

古文：平事未可知，使收其族，虽平在，亦不得还矣。 乃得不收。
现代文：刘平的事情还不清楚，派人拘押他的族人，即使刘平在世，也不能回来了。 于是得以不拘押其家。
English: Liu Ping's case is still unclear, and even if Liu Ping is still alive, he cannot return to his family members who were sent to detain him, so he was able to get his family out of detention.

古文：擢知制诰、权判吏部流内铨兼侍讲。
现代文：昌朝被提升为知制诰、权判吏部流内铨兼侍讲。
English: Chang Chao was promoted to the position of chihsei (administrative magistrate) and kenjin (judge) of the Inner Court of the Ministry of Justice, as well as an attendant lecturer.

古文：初，铨法，县令奉钱满万二千，乃举令。
现代文：开始，按照铨选法，县令的俸禄钱满一万二千，才荐举县令。
English: At the beginning, according to the election method, the salary of the county magistrate should reach 12,000 before recommending the appointment of the county magistrate.

古文：昌朝曰： 法如此，则小县终不得善令。 请概举令，而与之奉如大县。 
现代文：昌朝说： 法令这样，那么小县终于不能得到好县令。请求一律荐举县令，而且给与像大县一样的俸禄。 
English: Changchao said, "The law is like this, so small counties can't get good county ordinances. We request that all county ordinances be recommended, and they are given the same salary as large counties.

古文：进龙图阁直学士、权知开封府，迁右谏议大夫、权御史中丞兼判国子监。
现代文：进升龙图阁直学士、权知开封府。升右谏议大夫、权御史中丞兼判国子监。
English: He was promoted to the post of the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, and the post of the governor of Guanzhi. He was also promoted to the post of the right-hand man of the councilor, the vice-president of Guanzhi, and the state overseer.

古文：议者欲以金缯啖契丹使攻元昊，昌朝曰： 契丹许我有功，则责报无穷矣。 力止之。
现代文：议论的人打算用精美的丝织品利诱契丹使他们攻打元昊，昌朝说： 契丹应允我有功，那么责求报答无穷了。 极力制止这样做。
English: The gossips intended to use the fine silk products to lure the Khitan into attacking Yuan Hao, and Chang Zhao said: "If the Khitan agrees to my deed, then the demands and rewards will be endless.

古文：乃上言曰： 太祖初有天下，监唐末五代方镇武臣、土兵牙校之盛，尽收其威权，当时以为万世之利。及太宗时，将帅率多旧人，犹能仗威灵，禀成算，出师御寇，所向有功。
现代文：于是上言说： 太祖开始有天下，鉴于唐末五代方镇武臣、土兵将校的强大，全部收其威势和权柄，当时认为是万世之利，等到太宗时，将帅大概多为旧人，还是能够依仗威力，禀承已定的计划，出师抵御敌人，所向有功。
English: Therefore, the epitaph said: "From the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizu, in view of the strength of the five generations of Fangzhen warriors, warriors and officers at the end of the Tang Dynasty, all of them regained their power and authority. At that time, it was considered to be the benefit of all ages. When Emperor Taizong came, the generals were probably mostly old men, but they were still able to rely on their power, follow the plan that had been decided, and defend themselves against the enemy. They did a good job.

古文：近岁恩幸子弟，饰厨传，钓名誉，多非勋劳，坐取武爵，折冲攻守，彼何自而知哉？
现代文：近年来受到优待和宠幸的子弟，修饰供应过客食住和车马的馆舍，沽名钓誉，多不是功勋劳绩，坐着取得武官爵位，抵御攻打防守，他从什么地方而知道呢？
English: In recent years, favored and favored children, decorated houses that have provided guests with food, accommodation, and horses and chariots, have been famous for their fishing reputation, but not for their meritorious achievements, have been awarded the title of military attaché, and have resisted attacks and defenses. How does he know?

古文：然边鄙无事，尚得自容。
现代文：但边境无事，还能自容。
English: But there is nothing wrong with the border, and they can behave themselves.

古文：自西羌之叛，士不练习，将不得人，以屡易之将驭不练之士，故战则必败。
现代文：自从西羌反叛，士兵不训练，将领不得其人，以屡次更换的将领驾驭没有训练的士兵，因此战则必败。
English: Since the Xidi rebellion, soldiers do not train, generals do not lead their men, and soldiers without training are led by generals who have been replaced many times, so the war is bound to fail.

古文：此削方镇太过之弊也。
现代文：这是削弱藩镇太过分了的弊病。
English: This is a malady that weakens han towns too much.

古文：况亲旧、恩幸，出即为将，素不知兵，一旦付以千万人之命，是驱之死地矣。
现代文：况且亲近旧人、恩宠之人，出即为将领，素来不懂军事，有朝一日交付给他千万人的生命，这是驱之死地了。
English: Moreover, a person who is close to the old people and favored by them, who is a general right away, who has never understood military affairs, and who will one day be entrusted with the lives of tens of thousands of people, is a place of death.

古文：此用亲旧、恩幸之弊也。
现代文：这是任用亲近的人、恩宠之人的弊病。
English: This is the drawback of appointing someone who is close to you, someone who is favored.

古文：今杨崇勋、李昭亮尚任边鄙，望速选士代之。
现代文：现在杨崇勋、李昭亮还在任事边地，希望迅速选派士人代替他们。
English: Now Yang Chongxun and Li Zhaoliang are still on the sidelines, hoping to quickly select and send scholars to replace them.

古文：方镇守臣无数更易，刺史以上，宜慎所授，以待有功。
现代文：藩镇守臣无数更易，刺史以上的，应该审慎授予，以待有功。
English: Countless domain and town governors and retainers have been promoted to higher ranks than those in history, and they should be awarded with caution in order to be meritorious.

古文：此救弊之一端也。 又上备边六事：
现代文：这是挽救弊病的一个方面。 又上呈备边六事：
English: This is one aspect of remedying the ills, and there are six aspects:

古文：其一曰驭将帅。
现代文：其一叫驾驭将帅。
English: One of them is called "driving the general."

古文：自古帝王，以恩威驭将帅，赏罚驭士卒，用命则军政行而战功集。
现代文：自古以来的帝王，用恩典和威权驾驭将帅，用奖赏惩罚驾驭士兵，服从命令则军政实行而且战功成就。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have used grace and authority to control generals, rewards and punishments to control soldiers, and obedience to orders to implement military government and achieve military achievements.

古文：太祖脱裘帽赐王全斌曰： 今日居此幄，尚寒不可御，况伐蜀将士乎？ 此驭之以恩也。
现代文：太祖脱下裘帽赐给王全斌说： 今天居住在这帐幄里，还觉得寒冷不可抵抗，何况征伐蜀地的将士呢？ 这是用恩典驾驭的例子。
English: The great-grandfather took off his straw hat and gave it to Wang Quanbin, saying, "Today, living in this tent, I still feel the cold is unbearable, and what about the soldiers who conquered Shu? This is an example of driving with grace."

古文：曹彬、李汉琼讨江南，太祖召彬至前，立汉琼等于后，授以剑曰： 副将以下，不用命者得专戮之。 汉琼等股栗而退，此驭之以威也。
现代文：曹彬、李汉琼讨伐江南，太祖召曹彬到跟前，让李汉琼等人站在后面，授剑给曹彬说： 副将以下，不服从命令的可以专杀之。 李汉琼等人两腿发抖而退，这是用威权驾驭的例子。
English: Cao Bin and Li Han Qiong were fighting in the south of the Yangtze River. The great-grandfather called Cao Bin to the front, let Li Han Qiong and others stand behind, and gave a sword to Cao Bin, saying: "Deputy general, those who do not obey orders can be killed. Li Han Qiong and others trembled and retreated, which is an example of using authority to control.

古文：太祖虽削武臣之权，然一时赏罚及用财集事，皆听其专，有功则赏，有败则诛。
现代文：太祖虽然削去武臣的权柄，但一时赏罚和用财集事，都听任其专任，有功就奖赏，有败就诛杀。
English: Although the great-great-grandfather stripped the authority of warriors, he allowed them to be in charge of rewards and punishments as well as collecting money. They were rewarded for their achievements and killed for their defeats.

古文：今每命将帅，必先疑贰，非近幸不信，非姻旧不委。
现代文：现在每每任命将帅，必定首先猜疑，不是亲信不用，不是姻亲故旧不任。
English: Now, whenever a general is appointed, the first thing to do is to be suspicious. If it is not a close relative, it is not necessary. If it is a relative by marriage, it is not allowed.

古文：今陕西四路，总管而下，钤辖、都监、巡检之属，悉参军政，谋之未成，事已先漏，甲可乙否，上行下戾，主将不专号令，故动则必败。
现代文：现在陕西四路，总管以下，钤辖、都监、巡检这些官员，全都参预军政，谋划还没有形成，事情已先泄漏，甲认为可以乙认为不行，上行下戾，主将不专号令，因此动则必败。
English: At present, all the officials in the four provinces of Shaanxi, including the general manager, the magistrate, the city supervisor, and the inspector, are all involved in the pre-military government. The plan has not yet been formed, the matter has been leaked first, A thinks it is possible, B thinks it is not possible, up is up, down is down, the master will not give special orders, so the movement is bound to fail.

古文：请自今命将，去疑贰，推恩惠，务责以大效，得一切便宜从事。
现代文：请求从今以后任命将领，去掉疑忌，推与恩惠，务必责以大成效，得一切全权处理。
English: The request is to appoint generals from now on, remove suspicions, promote favors, and be sure to achieve great results and have full power to deal with everything.

古文：偏裨有不听令者，以军法论，此驭将之道也。
现代文：副将有不听从命令的，以军法论处，这是驾驭将领的办法。
English: Second lieutenants who disobey orders will be punished by military law, which is a way to control generals.

古文：其二曰复土兵。
现代文：其二叫恢复土兵。
English: The second is to restore the local troops.

古文：今河北河东强壮、陕西弓箭手之类，土兵遗法也。
现代文：现在河北河东强壮军、陕西弓箭手之类，这是土兵遗留下来的办法。
English: Nowadays, the strong army in the east of Hebei and the archers in Shaanxi are the methods left behind by the local soldiers.

古文：河北乡兵，其废已久，陕西土兵，数为贼破，存者无几。
现代文：河北乡兵，被废除已经很久，陕西土兵，几次被敌人击破，存在下来的没有多少。
English: Hebei township soldiers have been abolished for a long time, and Shaanxi local soldiers have been defeated by the enemy several times, and there are not many left.

古文：臣以谓河北、河东强壮，已召近臣详定法制，每乡为军。
现代文：我认为河北、河东强壮军，已经召近臣详细制定法令制度，每乡成军。
English: I think that the strong army of Hebei and Hedong has called on their vassals to work out the legal system in detail, and every township has become an army.

古文：其材能绝类者，籍其姓名递补之。
现代文：那些才能独特相似的人，登记其姓名递补。
English: Those whose talents are uniquely similar should register their names as alternates.

古文：陕西蕃落弓箭手，贪召募钱物，利月入粮奉，多就黥涅为营兵。
现代文：陕西蕃落弓箭手，贪图招募钱物，贪月入粮食俸禄之利，多就地在脸上刺字染黑为营兵。
English: In Shaanxi Province, there are a lot of archers who are greedy to recruit money and goods, greedy for the profits from the grain stipend, and most of them tattoo their faces and dye their hair black to become soldiers.

古文：宜优复田畴，使力耕死战，世为边用，可以减屯戍、省供馈矣。
现代文：应优先免除已耕田亩的税收，使其力耕死战，世代为边地效力，可以减少屯戍，节省供应物资了。
English: Priority should be given to exempting the taxes on the cultivated mu, so that they can work hard and fight to the death, and the generation can be effective for the marginal land, and the settlement can be reduced, and the supply materials can be saved.

古文：内地州县，增置弓手，如乡军之法而阅试之。
现代文：内地州县，增加设置弓手，按乡军之法而检阅他们。
English: In inland prefectures, the number of archers will be increased, and they will be inspected according to the law of the township army.

古文：其三曰训营卒。
现代文：其三叫训练营兵。
English: The third is called the training battalion.

古文：太祖朝，令诸军毋得食肉衣帛，营舍有粥酒肴则逐去，士卒有服缯彩者笞责之。
现代文：太祖朝时，命令诸军不得吃肉穿丝帛，营舍有卖酒菜的就赶走，士兵有人穿彩色丝绸的鞭打谴责。
English: At the time of the Taizu Dynasty, the troops were ordered not to eat meat dressed in silk coats, those who sold wine and vegetables in the camp were driven away, and soldiers who wore colored silk were whipped.

古文：异时被铠甲、冒霜露，战胜攻取，皆此曹也。
现代文：以后披铠甲、冒霜露，战胜攻取，都是这些人。
English: In the future, these are the people who put on armor, braved frost and dew, and defeated and captured.

古文：今营卒骄惰，临敌无勇。
现代文：现在营兵骄横懒惰，面对敌人没有勇气。
English: Now the soldiers are arrogant and lazy, and have no courage to face the enemy.

古文：旧例三年转员，谓之落权正授，虽未能易此制，即不必一例使为总管、钤辖，择有才勇可任将帅者授之。
现代文：按照原有的成例三年转员，叫作落权正授，虽然不能改变这一制度，但不必一律使其成为总管、钤辖，挑选有才能勇敢可以任将帅的人授给。
English: According to the original precedent of three-year transfer of personnel, it is called the power of appointment. Although this system can not be changed, it is not necessary to make it the general manager and superintendent. It is necessary to select talented and brave people who can be appointed as superintendent.

古文：况今之兵仗制造，殊不适用。
现代文：况且现在的兵器制造，很不适用。
English: Moreover, the current manufacturing of weapons is quite unsuitable.

古文：宜按八阵、五兵之法，以时教习。
现代文：应按照八阵、五兵的法则，按时教习。
English: It should be taught on time according to the rules of eight formations and five soldiers.

古文：使启殿有次序、左右有形势，前却相附，上下相援，令之曰： 失一队长，则斩一队。 何虑众不为用乎？
现代文：使其先后有次序、左右有阵势，前进退却相附，上下相援，命令他们说： 失去一个队长，就斩一队。 为什么担心众人不为效力呢？
English: He ordered them to form ranks one after another, to have positions on the right and left, to advance and retreat together, to support each other, and ordered them to say: "If you lose one captain, you will cut off one team.

古文：其四曰制远人。
现代文：其四叫控制外族人。
English: The fourth is to control foreigners.

古文：今四夷荡然与中国通，在北则臣契丹，其西则臣元昊，二国合从，有掎角中国之势。
现代文：现在四夷动摇与中国交通，在北方就臣服契丹，在西部就臣服元昊，二国联合，有夹击中国之势。
English: At present, four provinces are wavering in their relations with China. In the north, they have submitted to Khitan, in the west, they have submitted to Yuan Hao, and the two countries are united. There is a trend of pinching China.

古文：借使以岁币羁縻之，臣恐不可胜算。
现代文：假使用岁币管束他们，我担心不能制胜。
English: I'm worried that I won't be able to win if I use the year coin to bind them.

古文：古之备边，西有金城、上郡，北则云中、雁门。
现代文：古代防备边疆，西边有金城、上郡，北边是云中、雁门。
English: An ancient fortified frontier, with Jincheng and Shangxun in the west, and Yunzhong and Ganmen in the north.

古文：今自沧之秦，绵亘数千里，无山河之阻，独恃州县镇戍尔。
现代文：现在从沧州到秦州，绵延横亘几千里，没有山川江河的险阻，仅仅凭借州县镇戍而已。
English: Now from Cangzhou to Qinzhou, stretching for thousands of miles, there are no mountains and rivers, only by virtue of county towns.

古文：岁所供赡，又不下数千万，一谷不熟，或至狼狈。
现代文：每年所供赡给，又不少于几千万，一旦谷物不丰收，或许至于狼狈。
English: Every year, no less than tens of millions of cranes are supported, and in the event of a poor grain harvest, there may be a wolf attack.

古文：契丹近岁兼用燕人治国，建官一同中夏。
现代文：契丹近年兼用燕人治理国家，设置官员一如中国。
English: In recent years, Khitan has also used Yan people to govern the country, setting up officials just like China.

古文：元昊据河南列郡而行赏罚，此中国患也。
现代文：元昊占据河南列郡而实行赏罚，这是中国的祸患。
English: Yuan Hao occupied the counties of Henan Province and imposed rewards and punishments. This is the scourge of China.

古文：宜度西方诸国如沙州、唃厮、明珠、灭臧之族，近北如黑水女真、高丽、新罗之属，旧通中国，募人往使，诱之使归我，则势分而衅生，体解而瓦裂矣。
现代文：应估量西边各国如沙州、口角厮、明珠、灭臧的部族，接近北国的如黑水女真、高丽、新罗之类属，过去与中国交往，招募人前去出使，诱使他们归附我朝，那么势力分散而事端发生，体解而瓦裂了。
English: It should be estimated that the tribes of the western countries, such as the states of Shazhou, Jiuquan, Pearl, and Hanzhong, and the tribes of the northern countries, such as the Black Water Nymphs, Goryeo, and Silla, have interacted with China in the past, recruited people to go to the envoys, and induced them to join our dynasty. Then the forces were dispersed and accidents occurred, and the system disintegrated and fell apart.

古文：其五曰绥蕃部。
现代文：其五叫安抚蕃部。
English: The fifth is to soothe the crotch.

古文：属户者，边垂之屏翰也。
现代文：归属户，是边地的卫国屏障。
English: Belonging to a household is a barrier to the defense of the motherland in remote areas.

古文：延有金明，府有丰州，皆戎人内附之地。
现代文：延有金明，府有丰州，都是外族人内附的地方。
English: Jinming Province and Fuzhou Province are places where foreigners are attracted.

古文：朝廷恩威不立，强敌迫之，塞上诸州，藐焉孤垒，蕃部既坏，土兵亦衰，破敌之日，未可期也。
现代文：朝廷没有树立恩典和威严，强敌逼近，边塞上的各州，像孤单的堡垒一样弱小，蕃部既坏，土兵也衰败，击破敌人的日子，是不能够期盼的。
English: The imperial court has not established grace and majesty, a strong enemy is approaching, the states on the border fortress are as weak as a lonely fortress, the defense is bad, the local soldiers are also decaying, and the day of defeating the enemy cannot be expected.

古文：臣请陕西缘边诸路，守臣皆带 安抚蕃部 之名，择其族大有劳者为酋帅，如河东折氏之比，庶可为吾藩篱之固也。
现代文：我请求陕西沿边各路，守臣都带 安抚蕃部 的名头，挑选其族大有劳绩的人为酋帅，例如河东折氏之类，希望可以作为我屏障的保证。
English: I request that along all the roads in Shaanxi Province, the guardsmen should carry the name of "Peacemaker" and select people with great achievements from their ethnic groups as chiefs, such as the Hedong Ori clan, hoping that they can serve as a guarantee for my barrier.

古文：其六曰谨觇候。
现代文：其六叫谨慎观察敌情。
English: The sixth is to carefully observe the hostile situation.

古文：古者守封疆，出师旅，居则有行人之觇国，战则有前茅之虑无，其谨如此。
现代文：古代人防守封疆，出军队，平居就有使者观察国运，打仗就有先头部队戒备意外，其谨慎如此。
English: The ancients defended and sealed their territories. When they went out of the army, there would be an emissary to observe the national movement, and when they went to war, there would be a vanguard force to guard against accidents. This is how cautious they were.

古文：太祖命李汉超镇关南，马仁瑀守瀛州，韩令坤镇常山，贺惟忠守易州，何继筠领棣州，郭进控山西，武守琪戍晋阳，李谦溥守隰州，董遵诲屯环州，王彦升守原州，冯继业镇灵武。
现代文：太祖命令李汉超镇守关南，马仁王禹防守瀛州，韩令坤镇守常山，贺惟忠防守易州，何继筠掌领棣州，郭进控制山西，武守琪戍守晋阳，李谦溥防守隰州，董遵诲驻守环州，王彦升防守原州，冯继业镇守灵武。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Li Hanchao to guard Guannan, Ma Ren Wang Yu to defend Luzhou, Han Lingkun to guard Changshan, He Weizhong to defend Yizhou, He Jizhe to lead Luzhou, Guo Jin to control Shanxi, Wu Shou Qi to guard Jinyang, Li Qianqian to defend Luzhou, Dong Zunyi to guard Huanzhou, Wang Yansheng to defend Yuanzhou, Feng Jiye to guard Lingwu.

古文：筦榷之利，悉输之军中，听其贸易，而免其征税。
现代文：管理专卖的利益，全部输往军队中，听任其贸易，而且免征其赋税。
English: The monopoly's profits are all funneled to the military, which is allowed to trade freely and is exempt from paying taxes.

古文：边臣富于财，得以为间谍，羌夷情状，无不预知。
现代文：边臣钱财充足，得以使用间谍，羌夷的情况，没有不预先知道。
English: There was no way for a vassal with enough money to be able to use spies and embezzlers without knowing about it in advance.

古文：二十年间，无外顾之忧。
现代文：二十年间，没有外顾之忧。
English: For twenty years, there were no worries.

古文：今日西鄙任边事者，敌之情状与山川、道路险易之势，绝不通晓。
现代文：现在西边担任重任的人，对敌人的情况与山川、道路险阻平易的地势，绝对不通晓。
English: Those who are now in charge in the west have absolutely no understanding of the enemy's situation and the terrain of mountains, rivers, roads, and obstacles.

古文：使蹈不测之渊，入万死之地，肝脑涂地，狼狈相藉，何以破敌制胜耶？
现代文：致使踏入不能预料的深渊，进入非死不可的地方，肝脑涂地，狼狈相藉，怎样来破敌制胜呢？
English: How can we defeat the enemy and win victory when we have been plunged into an unpredictable abyss, into a place where death is inevitable, and we are in a state of confusion?

古文：愿监艺祖任将帅之制，边城财用悉以委之。
现代文：希望借鉴艺祖任用将帅的制度，边城财用全部委托给边臣。
English: He hopes to learn from the system of appointing generals from the ancestors, and entrust all the financial use of the border town to the border minister.

古文：募敢勇之士为爪牙，临阵自卫，无杀将之辱；募死力为觇候，而望敌知来，无陷兵之耻。
现代文：招募勇敢的士人为武臣，临阵自卫，没有杀将的耻辱；招募效死力的人来观察敌情，而望见敌人知道未来，没有陷兵的耻辱。
English: There is no shame in recruiting brave soldiers to be warriors, to fight in self-defense, and there is no shame in killing generals; there is no shame in recruiting men of death to observe the enemy situation, and to see that the enemy knows the future, and there is no shame in trapping.

古文：书奏，多施行之。
现代文：书奏上，大多得到施行。
English: In terms of calligraphy, most of them have been implemented.

古文：昌朝请度经费，罢不急。
现代文：昌朝请求估计经费，罢去不急之费。
English: Changchong asked for an estimate of the costs, which were not urgent.

古文：诏与三司合议，岁所省缗钱百万。
现代文：诏令与三司一起商议，一年所节省的缗钱有一百万。
English: The decree was jointly negotiated with the three departments, and the annual savings were one million yuan.

古文：又言： 朝臣七十，筋力衰者，宜依典故致仕，有功状可留者勿拘。 因疏耄昏不任事者八人，令致仕。
现代文：昌朝又说 ：朝廷大臣七十岁，精力衰弱的人，应依照已有的成例辞官，有功状可以留用的不限。 因而疏陈年老昏花不任事的八人，令其辞官退休。
English: Changchao also said: "Ministers of the Imperial Court who are 70 years old and have weak energy should follow the existing practice of resigning, and those who have meritorious deeds can be retained indefinitely. Therefore, eight people who are too old and weak to do their jobs were retired as resigners.

古文：庆历三年，拜参知政事。
现代文：庆历三年，昌朝被授任参知政事。
English: In the third year of Qing Lian, Chang Chao was awarded the post of vice-governor.

古文：上言： 用兵以来，天下民力颇困。
现代文：上言： 用兵以来，天下民力很困乏。
English: Preamble: Since the introduction of conscription, the world has been suffering from a shortage of manpower.

古文：请诏诸路转运使，毋得承例折变科率，须科折者，悉听奏裁。
现代文：请朝廷诏令各路转运使，不得承袭旧例折变科率，必须科率折变的，全部听从上奏裁决。
English: I would like to ask the Imperial Court to issue an edict to all transport companies that they must not follow the old practice of changing the inspection rate, and if they must change the inspection rate, they must all obey the above ruling.

古文：虽奉旨及三司文移，于民不便者，亦以上闻。 
现代文：即使奉诏旨以及三司文书，对百姓不适宜的，也要把它向上级报告。 
English: Even if the imperial edict and the documents of the three departments are not suitable for the people, they should report it to their superiors.

古文：以工部侍郎充枢密使，寻拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，仍兼枢密使。
现代文：昌朝以工部侍郎的身份充任枢密使，不久拜授同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，仍然兼任枢密使。
English: Masatomo served as a Privy Councilor in the capacity of a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, and was soon awarded the title of Shitahira Shokuji and Shikenden Daigaku Shoshi of the same school, while still serving as a Privy Councilor.

古文：居两月，拜昭文馆大学士，监修国史。
现代文：居官二个月，又拜授昭文馆大学士、监修国史。
English: After two months in office, he was awarded a bachelor's degree from the Shobunkwan University and supervised the study of national history.

古文：元昊归石元孙，议赐死。昌朝独曰： 自古将帅被执，归者多不死。 元孙由是得免。
现代文：元昊归还石元孙，议论赐死，昌朝独自一人说 ：自古以来将帅被捉，返归的人多没有死。 石元孙由于这样得免一死。
English: When Yuan Hao returned Shih Wansun, he talked about giving him death, but Chang Chao was the only one who said, "Since ancient times, generals have been captured, but many of those who returned did not die.

古文：诏有司议升祔奉慈庙三后，有司论不一。
现代文：诏令官员讨论升附祭奉慈庙三个太后，官员议论不一致。
English: Officials discuss the three queens of the temple of the three queens of the temple of the three queens of the temple of the three queens of the temple, and officials' discussions are inconsistent.

古文：昌朝曰： 章献母仪天下，章懿诞育圣躬，宜如详符升祔元德皇后故事。
现代文：昌朝说 ：章献太后母仪天下，章懿太后生养圣体，应像祥符年中升附祭元德皇后的旧例。
English: Chang Chao said, "Chang Xian, the empress dowager, is the mother of the world, and the empress dowager's giving birth to the holy body should be like the old example of the German empress's mid-year ascension ceremony.

古文：章惠于陛下有慈保之恩，当别享奉慈庙如故。 乃奉二后神主，升祔真宗庙。
现代文：章惠太后于陛下有慈保之恩，应另外享祭奉慈庙如故。 于是尊奉二后神位，升附祭真宗庙。
English: The Empress Dowager Zhang Hui had the grace of mercy from His Majesty, and she should also enjoy the offerings to the Temple of Mercy as before. Therefore, she revered the second empress deity and ascended to the Temple of the True Parents.

古文：密诏迁中外官一等，优赐诸军，昌朝与同列力疏，乃止。
现代文：密诏升中外官员一等，优厚赐与各军，昌朝与同僚极力疏陈，才停止。
English: Ming Zhao was promoted to the first grade of Chinese and foreign officials, and was generously given to the army. Chang Zhao and his colleagues tried their best to dissuade him, but he stopped.

古文：又诏迁二府官，益固辞。
现代文：又诏令升中书、枢密二府官，更加坚决辞谢。
English: He also issued a decree to promote him to the position of chusho and privy councillor of the second prefectural government, and he more resolutely resigned.

古文：元昊既款附，请宰相罢兼枢密使。
现代文：元昊既投诚归附，昌朝请求宰相罢免兼任的枢密使。
English: Yuan Hao had already transferred his allegiance, and the Chang dynasty requested the prime minister to remove the concurrently appointed envoy.

古文：六年，日食。
现代文：庆历六年，发生日食。
English: In the sixth year of the lunar calendar, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：帝谓昌朝等曰： 谪见于天，愿归罪朕躬。
现代文：仁宗对昌朝等人说： 谴责见于上天，希望归罪朕自己。
English: Rinzong said to Chang Chao and others, "Condemnation is seen in the heavens, I hope to condemn myself.

古文：卿宜究民疾苦，思所以利安之。 昌朝对曰： 陛下此言，足以弭天变，臣敢不夙夜孜孜以奉陛下。 帝又曰： 人主惧天而修德，犹人臣畏法而自新也。 昌朝因顿首谢。
现代文：你应推求百姓疾苦，思考用来有利安定百姓的办法。 昌朝回答说： 陛下这话，足以消除天变，我怎敢不日夜孜孜以事奉陛下。 仁宗又说 ：人主畏天而修德，就像人臣害怕法令而自己改正错误。 昌朝因而下跪拜谢。
English: You should pray for the hardships of the people and think about the methods to be used for the benefit and stability of the people.Chang Zong replied, "Your Majesty, these words are enough to eliminate the changes of the heavens, how dare I not serve Your Majesty day and night."Ren Zong also said, "Those who fear the heavens and cultivate virtue are like those who are afraid of the law and correct their own mistakes."Chang Zong therefore knelt down and gave thanks.

古文：明年春，旱，帝避正寝，减膳。
现代文：第二年春天，旱灾，仁宗回避治事的地方，减少膳食。
English: In the spring of the following year, due to a drought, Rinzong avoided the government and cut down on meals.

古文：昌朝引汉灾异册免三公故事，上表乞罢。
现代文：昌朝援引汉代发生灾异时册封罢免三公的成例，上表奏请求免职。
English: Citing the precedent of the Han Dynasty, when a natural disaster occurred, the three princes were formally dismissed, and the petition was filed to remove them from office.

古文：参知政事吴育数与昌朝争议上前，论者多不直昌朝。
现代文：参知政事几次与昌朝在皇帝面前争议，论者多认为昌朝不公正。
English: Sangchong Zhengji had several disputes with the Chang Dynasty in front of the emperor. Most commentators believed that the Chang Dynasty was unfair.

古文：有向绶者知永静军，疑通判谮己，诬以事，迫令自杀。
现代文：有人叫向绶为永静军知军，怀疑通判说自己的坏话，以事情诬陷通判，强迫命令其自杀。
English: Some people called Xiang Yu to be the commander of Yongjing Army, suspected Tong Zhan of saying bad words about himself, framed Tong Zhan with things, and forced him to commit suicide.

古文：高若讷知审刑院，附昌朝议，欲从轻坐。
现代文：高若讷知审刑院，附和昌朝意见，打算从轻处理。
English: The Gao Ruo Na Zhi Criminal Court, supported by the opinion of the Chang Dynasty, intends to deal with the case lightly.

古文：吴育力争，绶卒减死一等。
现代文：吴育力争，向绶最终减死一等。
English: Wu Yu fought hard, and eventually reduced the death of Xiang Yao to the first class.

古文：未几，若讷为御史中丞，言大臣廷争不肃，故雨不时若，遂罢育，而除昌朝武胜军节度使、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事、判大名府兼北京留守司、河北安抚使。
现代文：不久，高若讷为御史中丞，说大臣在朝堂争辩不严肃，所以下雨不及时，于是罢免吴育，而任命昌朝为武胜军节度使、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事、判大名府兼北京留守司、河北安抚使。
English: Soon after, Gao Ruonae was appointed as the vice-president of the imperial history, saying that the minister's argument in the imperial court was not serious, so the rain was not timely, so Wu Yu was dismissed, and Chang Chao was appointed as the secretary of the festival of the victorious army, the chief of the inspection of schools, the secretary of the book gate of the imperial history, the chief of the court of fame and the Beijing resident, and the pacifying envoy of Hebei Province.

古文：帝赐银饰肩舆。
现代文：仁宗赐给他银饰轿子。
English: Rinzong gave him a silver-decorated palanquin.

古文：寻以讨贝州贼有功，移山南东道节度使。
现代文：不久以讨伐贝州贼人有功，移任山南东道节度使。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Shannan Host Festival Envoy with the achievement of fighting against Beizhou bandits.

古文：杨偕言贼发昌朝部中，不当赏。
现代文：杨偕说贼人发于昌朝部下中，不应奖赏。
English: Yang Hui said that if a thief is found among the subordinates of the Chang Dynasty, he should not be rewarded.

古文：弗从。
现代文：朝廷没有采纳杨偕的意见。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：契丹聚亡卒勇伉者，号 投来南军 。
现代文：契丹聚集勇敢高大的逃兵，号称 投来南军 。
English: Khitan gathered brave and tall deserters, claiming that they were defecting to the Southern Army.

古文：边法，卒亡自归者死。
现代文：按照边法，士兵逃亡自己返归者死。
English: According to the border law, a soldier who escapes and returns is to be put to death.

古文：昌朝除其法，归者辄迁补，于是来者稍众，因廉知契丹事。
现代文：昌朝废除这一法令，返归的就升任补官，于是归来的逐渐多起来，因而查访知道契丹的情况。
English: The Chang Dynasty abolished this decree, and those who returned were promoted to assistant officials. As a result, the number of returnees gradually increased, and the situation in Khitan became known to the inspectors.

古文：契丹遂拒亡卒，黜南军不用。
现代文：契丹于是拒绝逃兵，黜退南军不用。
English: Khitan then refused to desert, and there was no need for him to withdraw from the Southern Army.

古文：边人以地外质，契丹故稍侵边界。
现代文：边人把地向外抵押，契丹因此逐渐侵占边界。
English: The border people mortgaged the land to the outside, so the Khitan gradually occupied the border.

古文：昌朝为立法，质地而主不时赎，人得赎而有之，岁余，地悉复。
现代文：昌朝为之建立法令，抵押土地而地主不按时赎回，人们可以赎而且占有它，一年多时间，土地全部恢复。
English: The Chang Dynasty established a law for this purpose. If land is mortgaged and the landowner does not redeem it on time, people can redeem and occupy it. After more than a year, the land is fully restored.

古文：三司使叶清臣移用河北库钱，昌朝格诏不与，清臣论列不已，遂出清臣河阳，徙昌朝判郑州。
现代文：三司使叶清臣移用河北库钱，昌朝纠正诏书不批准，叶清臣论列不停，于是出叶清臣到河阳，流放昌朝判郑州。
English: The Third Division ordered Ye Qingchen to transfer the use of Hebei treasury money, the Chang Dynasty did not approve the correction of the edict, and Ye Qingchen argued incessantly. Therefore, Ye Qingchen went to Heyang and exiled Chang Dynasty to Zhengzhou.

古文：过阙入觐，留为祥源观使，拜尚书右仆射、观文殿大学士、判尚书都省，朝会班中书门下，视其仪物。
现代文：过阙入觐皇帝，留用为祥源观使。拜授尚书右仆射、观文殿大学士、判尚书都省，朝会时班次中书门下，视其仪物。
English: He was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, a scholar of the Academy of Confucius, and the provincial governor of Shang Shuxu. He was also appointed as a disciple of Shang Shuxu during the time of the Imperial Court Council, which was considered to be his honor.

古文：岁中求外，复除山南东道节度使、右仆射、检校太师兼侍中、判郑州。
现代文：这年中昌朝请求外任，又被任命为山南东道节度使、右仆射、检校太师兼侍中、判郑州。
English: This year, at the request of the Central Chang Dynasty, he was appointed as an external official, and was also appointed as the Shannan host festival envoy, the right-hand man of the shooting, the inspector of the school and the attendant, and the judge of Zhengzhou.

古文：固辞仆射、侍中，改同中书门下平章事。赐中谢，自昌朝始也。
现代文：坚决辞谢仆射、侍中，改同中书门下平章事，赐中辞谢，从昌朝开始。
English: Resolutely resigned as a footman and a chamberlain, changed to the same as in the middle of the book, and gave the middle resignation, starting from the Chang Dynasty.

古文：母丧去位，服除，判许州。
现代文：母亲去世，昌朝离开职位，守丧期满，判许州。
English: After his mother's death, Chang Chao left his post, the mourning period was over, and he was awarded the title of prefect.

古文：召对迩英阁，帝问《乾卦》，昌朝上奏曰： 《乾》之上九称： 亢龙有悔。
现代文：皇帝在迩英阁召他应对，皇帝问《乾卦》，昌朝上奏说： 《乾》的上九称 ：亢龙有悔。 
English: The emperor summoned him to answer questions at the Shunying Pavilion. When the emperor asked about "Kenga," Chang Zhaoxu said: "The first nine words of "Kenga" are: 龙有悔.

古文：悔者，凶灾之萌，爻在亢极，必有凶灾。
现代文：悔者，是凶灾的萌芽，爻在极盛处，必定有凶灾。
English: The penitent is the bud of disaster, and in the full bloom, there must be disaster.

古文：不言凶而言悔者，以悔有可凶可吉之义，修德则免悔而获吉矣。用九，见群龙无首，吉 。
现代文：不说凶而说悔，因为悔有能凶能吉之义，修养道德就免去后悔而获得吉祥了。 用九，见群龙无首，吉祥。 
English: Do not say evil, but say repentance, because repentance has the power of evil and the power of good. Cultivate morality to avoid regret and gain auspiciousness. With nine, see the headless dragon, auspicious.

古文：圣人用刚健之德，乃可决万机。
现代文：圣人用刚健的道德，就可以决断万机。
English: A sage, with a strong moral foundation, can break through all obstacles.

古文：天下久盛，柔不可以济，然亢而过刚又不能久。
现代文：天下长久繁盛，阴柔不可以成功，但亢直而过于刚强又不能长久。
English: The world prospers for a long time, the effeminate cannot succeed, but the upright are too strong and cannot last long.

古文：独圣人外以刚健决事，内以谦恭应物，不敢自矜为天下首，乃吉也。 手诏优答。
现代文：只有圣人对外以刚健决断事情，对内以谦让恭俭应对万物，不敢自夸为天下第一，这才是吉祥。 
English: Only sages are able to make tough decisions for the outside world and respond to all things with modesty and frugality for the inside. They dare not boast that they are the best in the world. This is auspicious.

古文：又言： 汉、唐都雍，置三辅内翼京师，朝廷都汴，而近京诸郡皆属他道，制度不称王畿。
现代文：皇帝亲手写诏书赞美他的回答。昌朝又说： 汉代、唐代以雍州为都城，设置三辅在内羽翼京师，朝廷以汴州为都城，但临近京城诸郡都隶属其他道，按制度不称王畿。
English: The Chang dynasty also said: In the Han and Tang dynasties, Yongzhou was the capital city, and the Three Auxiliary Provinces were set up in the inner wings of the capital, and the imperial court was the capital city, but the counties adjacent to the capital city were subordinated to other provinces, and according to the system, they were not called Wang Gui.

古文：请析京东之曹州，京西之陈、许、滑、郑，皆隶开封府，以四十二县为京畿。 帝纳之。
现代文：请分京东的曹州，京西的陈、许、滑、郑州，都隶属开封府，以四十二县为京畿。 皇帝采纳了他的建议。
English: Please divide Caozhou in the east of Beijing, and Chen, Xu, Nian and Zhengzhou in the west of Beijing, all of which are subordinate to Kaifeng Prefecture, with forty-two counties as Gyeonggi. The emperor accepted his suggestion.

古文：将行，命讲读官饯于资善堂。
现代文：将要去赴任，命令讲读官在资善堂为他饯行。
English: When he was about to leave for his new post, he ordered the reader to perform the ceremony for him at Shisen-do Hall.

古文：复判大名府兼河北安抚使。
现代文：再判大名府兼河北安抚使。
English: He was also awarded the title of Daimyo-fu and Hebei Pacifying Envoy.

古文：时河决商胡，昌朝请复故道，不从。
现代文：当时黄河在商胡决口，昌朝请求恢复原先的河道，没有得到同意。
English: At that time, the Yellow River was at the Shanghu mouth, and the Chang Dynasty requested the restoration of the original river channel, but did not receive consent.

古文：语在《河渠志》。
现代文：详见《河渠志》。
English: For details, see the "History of Rivers and Canals."

古文：六塔功败，滨、棣、德、博民多水死，昌朝振救之甚力。
现代文：六塔工程失败，滨、棣、德、博州百姓多溺死，昌朝赈救很得力。
English: The six-tower project failed, and many people from Binh, Quan, De and Bozhou drowned. Chang Zhaohui was very effective in rescuing them.

古文：内侍刘恢往视，还，言河决赵征村，与帝名嫌为不祥，时皆谓昌朝使之以摇当国者。
现代文：内侍刘恢前往省视，回朝说黄河在赵征村决口，对于皇帝的名讳为不吉祥，当时都认为昌朝使之以动摇当权的人。
English: Liu Hui, the palace attendant, went to the provincial government and returned to the emperor saying that the Yellow River was at the mouth of Zhao Zecheng Village, which was an unlucky name for the emperor. At that time, it was believed that the Chang Dynasty used it to destabilize those in power.

古文：嘉祐元年，进封许国公，又兼侍中，寻以同中书门下平章事为枢密使。
现代文：嘉元年，进封许国公，又兼任侍中，不久以同中书门下平章事的身份为枢密使。
English: In the first year of the Jia dynasty, he was appointed to the court of Xu Guogong, and also served as an attendant, and soon became a privy envoy in the capacity of a subordinate official of the same school.

古文：三年，宰相文彦博请罢，谏官、御史恐昌朝代彦博，乃相与言昌朝建大第，别创客位以待宦官，宦官有矫制者，枢密院释不治。
现代文：嘉三年，宰相文彦博请求罢官，谏官、御史担心昌朝代替文彦博的宰相职位，于是相与说昌朝建造大宅，另外创立客位以待宦官，宦官有人假造诏书，枢密院释放不予治罪。
English: In the third year of the Jia, the prime minister, Fumihiko, requested to be dismissed, the eunuchs and the historian were worried that the Chang dynasty would replace Fumihiko's position as prime minister, so they agreed to say that the Chang dynasty would build a large house and create a guest seat to wait for the eunuchs. The eunuchs had forged the imperial edict, and the Privy Council would not punish the crime.

古文：遂以镇安军节度使、右仆射、检校太师、侍中兼充景灵宫使，出判许州。
现代文：于是昌朝以镇安军节度使、右仆射、检校太师、侍中兼充景灵宫使的身份，出判许州。
English: As a result, the court of the Chang Dynasty issued the verdict of Xu Province with the status of the Zhenan Army's festival envoy, the right-hand man of the shooting, the school inspector, and the attendant who also served as the envoy of the Jingling Palace.

古文：又以保平军节度、陕州大都督府长史移大名府兼安抚使。
现代文：又以保平军节度、陕州大都督府长史的身份移任大名府兼安抚使。
English: He was also transferred to the post of daimyofu and pacifying envoy in the capacity of Baoping Army commander and the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：英宗即位，徙凤翔节度使，加左仆射、凤翔尹，进封魏国公。
现代文：英宗即皇帝位，昌朝移任凤翔节度使，加官左仆射、凤翔尹，进封魏国公。
English: Yingzong became emperor, and the Chang Dynasty transferred Fengxiang to the post of the festival envoy, and promoted Zuoxia and Fengxiangyin to the posts of Wei Guogong.

古文：治平元年，以侍中守许州，力辞弗许。
现代文：治平元年，以侍中的身份守许州，极力辞谢没有得到准许。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he guarded Heshou as a chamberlain, but was not allowed to leave.

古文：明年，以疾留京师，乃以左仆射、观文殿大学士判尚书都省，卒，年六十八，谥曰文元。
现代文：第二年，因病留在京城，就以左仆射、观文殿大学士的身份判尚书都省，去世，终年六十八岁，谥号叫文元。
English: In the second year, he stayed in Beijing due to illness, and he judged Shang Shudu Province with the status of Zuofu shooting and Guanwenden University. He passed away at the age of 68, and his nickname was Wen Yuan.

古文：御书墓碑曰 大儒元老之碑 。
现代文：皇帝亲自写墓碑叫 大儒元老之碑 。
English: The emperor himself wrote a tombstone called the Monument to the Great Confucianism.

古文：所著《群经音辨》、《通纪》、《时令》、《奏议》、《文集》百二十二卷。
现代文：所著《群经音辨》、《通纪》、《时令》、《奏议》、《文集》一百二十二卷。
English: He is the author of "Gunjyo Onban," "Tongji," "Season," "Proposal" and "Collection," all 122 volumes.

古文：昌朝在侍从，多得名誉。
现代文：昌朝在任侍从官时，多得名誉。
English: During his time as an attendant, the Chang dynasty gained a lot of honor.

古文：及执政，乃不为正人所与，而数有攻其结宦官、宫人者。
现代文：等到执掌朝政，于是不被正人君子所亲附，而且几次有人攻击他交结宦官、宫人。
English: He waited until he was in charge of the imperial government, and then he was not favored by the righteous, and he was attacked several times for his friendship with eunuchs and courtiers.

古文：初，昌朝侍讲时，同王宗道编修资善堂书籍，其实教授内侍，谏官吴育奏罢之。
现代文：开始，昌朝侍讲皇帝时，同王宗道编修资善堂书籍，实际上是教授内侍，谏官吴育奏请罢免他。
English: At the beginning, when the Chang Dynasty's attendant was lecturing the emperor, he was actually the professor's personal attendant, and the eunuch Wu Yuso asked him to dismiss him.

古文：及张方平留唐询，而询谮育，世以为昌朝指也。
现代文：等到张方平留用唐询，但唐询说吴育的坏话，世人认为是昌朝指使。
English: When Zhang Fangping retained Tang Enquirer, but Tang Enquirer said bad things about Wu Yu, the world thought that he was an emissary of the Chang Dynasty.

古文：然言者谓昌朝释宦官矫制，后验问无事实云。
现代文：然而言者认为昌朝释免宦官假造诏书之罪，后来验证没有事实根据。
English: However, the speaker believed that the Chang dynasty released and pardoned the eunuch for the crime of forging the imperial edict, but later verified that there was no factual basis.

古文：子章，馆阁校勘，蚤世。
现代文：儿子贾章，馆阁校勘，早年去世。
English: His son, Jia Zhang, who was a student of Guanqiao School, died at an early age.

古文：青，朝请大夫。
现代文：贾青，朝请大夫。
English: Jia Qing, see a doctor in the morning.

古文：弟昌衡。
现代文：弟弟昌衡。
English: His younger brother, Changheng.

