古文：祖逖将韩潜与后赵将桃豹分据陈川故城，相守四旬。
现代文：原文晋朝名将祖逖手下的将领韩潜和后赵的将领桃豹，分别据守陈川的旧城，双方相持了四十多天。
English: The original text: Han Xuan, a general under the famous general Zu Xi of the Jin Dynasty, and Taobao, a general of the Zhao Dynasty, respectively defended the old city of Chenchuan, and the two sides held each other for more than forty days.

古文：逖以布囊盛土，使千余人运以馈。
现代文：祖逖于是用布袋填上泥土，命令一千多名士兵搬运这些土袋，装作是从外地运来的支援的粮食。
English: Zu Rong then filled bags with dirt and ordered more than a thousand soldiers to carry the bags, pretending they were food aid from other regions.

古文：潜又使数人担米息于道，豹兵逐之，即弃而走，豹兵久饥，以为逖士众丰饱，大惧，宵遁。
现代文：另外又暗中派人背负米粮，故意在路旁休息，等到桃豹的士兵进攻的时候，就故意丢弃米袋逃跑。桃豹的士兵已经长时间缺粮了，认为祖逖军中的粮食充足，大为恐惧，就连夜撤兵离开了。
English: In addition, they secretly sent people to carry rice grain on their backs, deliberately resting on the side of the road, and when the soldiers of the Taobao attacked, they deliberately threw away the rice bags and fled. The soldiers of the Taobao had been short of grain for a long time, and they thought that the grain in the Zuyu army was sufficient, and they were very afraid, so they withdrew the soldiers overnight.

古文：宋檀道济伐魏，累胜。
现代文：南北朝时期，南朝宋将檀道济讨伐北魏，多次取胜。
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, the Southern Song Dynasty fought against the Northern Wei Dynasty and won many times.

古文：至历城，魏以轻骑邀其前后，焚烧谷草。
现代文：至历城以后，魏军以骑兵时而攻击檀道济的先锋部队，又时而突袭殿后的士兵，另外魏军也焚烧了城中的粮草。
English: After reaching Licheng, the Wei army, led by cavalry, sometimes attacked the vanguard troops of Dangdozhi, and sometimes raided the soldiers behind the palace. In addition, the Wei army also burned the grain and grass in the city.

古文：道济军食尽，引还。
现代文：檀道济军粮将要耗尽，只好撤军。
English: They had no choice but to withdraw, as they were about to run out of food.

古文：有卒亡降魏，具告之。魏人追之，众洶惧将溃。
现代文：有一名投降魏军的士兵，把檀道济的窘境告诉了魏军，魏人出兵追击，宋军害怕，快要溃败。
English: There was a soldier who surrendered to the Wei army and told the Wei army about the predicament of Dangdaoji. The Wei sent troops to chase the Song army, which was afraid and about to be routed.

古文：道济夜唱筹量沙，以所余少米覆其上。
现代文：檀道济于是在夜晚命人高声地用筹数着量米的数量，实际上里面却是沙子来代替米，另外用仅剩下的米，覆盖在沙堆上面。
English: So, in the night, he ordered a man to count the amount of rice loudly, but in fact, there was sand inside to replace the rice, and only the remaining rice was used to cover the sand pile.

古文：及旦，魏兵见之，谓道济资粮有余，以降者为妄而斩之，道济全军以归。
现代文：第二天天亮的时候魏军看到了，以为檀道济营中粮食充足，而被降兵骗了，就斩了那名降兵，而檀道济也全军而退。
English: When the Wei army saw it at dawn the next day, they thought that there was plenty of grain in the camp of Dando, but they had been deceived by the soldiers who had been sent down, so they beheaded the soldier who had been sent down, and Dando and his whole army retreated.

古文：岳飞奉诏招抚岭表贼曹成，不从，乃上奏： 群盗力强则肆横，力屈则就招，不加剿而遽议招，未易也。 
现代文：岳飞奉了皇帝的诏命招抚岭表贼人曹成，曹成不答应。岳飞奏报说： 盗匪一旦得势，就会肆意妄为，等到穷途末路的时候，才容易招抚。
English: Yue Fei was ordered by the emperor to appease Cao Cheng, a thief from the Ling Dynasty, but Cao Cheng did not agree. Yue Fei's report said: Once the bandits gain power, they will act recklessly, and it will be easy to appease them when they are at the end of their rope.

古文：遂率兵入。会得成谍者，缚之帐下。
现代文：现在如果不先围剿那些贼匪，突然对他们进行招抚，他们是不会轻易接受的。 于是就派兵进行围剿。
English: Now, if we don't encircle those bandits first and suddenly appease them, they won't accept it easily, so we sent troops to encircle them.

古文：飞出帐，调兵食。吏白曰： 粮尽矣，奈何？ 
现代文：正好曹成所派来的间谍，被俘虏绑缚在帐下，岳飞走出帐外，向当地官员征调军粮，官员说： 粮食快吃完了，这该怎么办呢？ 
English: Just at that time, the spy sent by Cao Cheng was bound by the captives under the tent. Yue Fei walked out of the tent and asked the local officials for military food. The officials said: "The food is almost finished, what should we do?"

古文：边批：飞使之。飞阳曰： 且反茶陵。 
现代文：岳飞故意说： 看来只好先回到茶陵了。 
English: Yue Fei deliberately said, "It looks like I have to go back to the teahouse first."

古文：已而顾谍作失意状，顿足而入。
现代文：接着在间谍面前流露出失望的样子，跺脚进入了大帐中。
English: Then, with a look of disappointment on the spy's face, Lame entered the big time.

古文：阴令逸之，计谍归告，成必来追。
现代文：一面下令故意制造出机会让间谍逃脱。
English: An order was given to deliberately create an opportunity for the spy to escape.

古文：即下令蓐食，潜趣绕岭。未明，已逼贼垒。
现代文：岳飞料定间谍一定会将所见所闻告诉给曹成，而曹成一定会借机攻击官兵，因此下令全军天不亮就吃饭，悄悄绕过了山岭。
English: Yue Fei decided that the spy would surely tell Cao Cheng what he had seen and heard, and Cao Cheng would surely take the opportunity to attack the officers and soldiers, so he ordered the whole army to eat before dawn and quietly bypassed the mountains.

古文：出不意，惊呼曰： 岳家军至矣! 
现代文：第二天天还没有亮，岳飞就已经到达了贼营，贼人大感意外，惊呼道： 岳家军来了! 
English: The next day, before dawn, Yuefei had already arrived at the thieves' camp. The thieves were greatly surprised and exclaimed, "Yue's army is coming!"

古文：飞乘之，遂大溃。自是连夺其险隘。
现代文：岳飞乘机攻击，贼人溃散逃逸，岳飞连连夺下贼人所据守的险要，贼人被逼得走投无路。
English: Yuefei took advantage of the opportunity to attack, the thieves scattered and fled, Yuefei repeatedly seized the key points defended by the thieves, and the thieves were cornered.

古文：贼穷，飞乃曰： 招今可行矣。 
现代文：岳飞说： 现在可以进行招抚了。
English: Yuefei said: Now you can caress her.

古文：孙膑强而示之弱，虞诩弱而示之强，祖逖、檀道济饥而示之饱，岳忠武饱而示之饥。
现代文：孙膑故意隐藏本身的实力来引诱敌人，虞诩却夸张自身的实力来恫吓对手，祖逖、檀道济都是以仅剩的米粮示敌，来掩饰粮食用尽的窘境，岳飞故意用缺粮作为诱敌之计谋，引贼人上当。
English: Sun Yat-sen purposely hid his own strength to lure the enemy, while Gu Yat-sen exaggerated his own strength to intimidate his opponent. Zu Yat-sen and Dang Tao Zi both used the only remaining grain to show the enemy and hide the predicament of running out of grain. Yue Fei purposely used the lack of grain as a trick to lure the enemy and lure the thief.

