古文：何谓五伦？
现代文：什么叫做五伦？
English: What is "Wulun"?

古文：君臣、父子、兄弟、夫妇、朋友。
现代文：就是君臣、父子、夫妇、兄弟、朋友。
English: They are princes and ministers, fathers and sons, husbands and wives, brothers and friends.

古文：何谓九族？
现代文：什么称为九族？
English: What are the nine tribes?

古文：高、曾、祖、考、己身、子、孙、曾、玄。
现代文：就是高祖、曾祖、祖父、父亲、自己、儿子、孙子、曾孙、玄孙。
English: That is, his great-grandfather, great-grandfather, grandfather, father, himself, son, grandson, great-grandson, and great-great-grandson.

古文：始祖曰鼻祖，远孙曰耳孙。
现代文：家族的始祖称鼻祖，远代的孙子叫耳孙。
English: The progenitor of the family is called the progenitor, and the grandson of the distant generation is called the grandson.

古文：父子创造，曰肯构肯堂；父子俱贤，曰是父是子。
现代文：父子创业由儿子继承叫做肯构肯堂；父子都有贤名叫是父是子。
English: The father-son entrepreneurship is called "Kenjieken-tang" which is inherited by the son; the father-son entrepreneurship is called "father-son."

古文：祖称王父，父曰严君。
现代文：祖父又称作王父，父亲也可称为严君。
English: His grandfather was also called Wang Fader, and his father could also be called Yan Jun.

古文：父母俱存，谓之椿萱并茂；子孙发达，谓之兰桂腾芳。
现代文：父母都健在称做椿萱并茂；子孙都发达，譬如芝兰桂树先后散发芬芳。
English: Both parents are still alive and well; their children and grandchildren are well-developed. For example, the geranium tree has successively emitted the fragrance of cucumbers.

古文：桥木高而仰，似父之道；梓木低而俯，如子之卑。
现代文：子肖其父，桥树高而上仰，好似做父亲的尊严，梓木低而下俯，如同做儿子的卑恭。
English: The son resembles his father, the bridge tree is tall and uplifted, as if it were the father's dignity, and the tree is low and bent down, as if it were the son's humility.

古文：不痴不聋，不作阿家阿翁；得亲顺亲，方可为人为子。
现代文：不装聋作哑就不能当公公婆婆；顺从父母的心意，得到父母的赞许，才称得上尽了为人子的本分。
English: You can't be a father-in-law or a mother-in-law without pretending to be deaf and dumb; only when you obey your parents' wishes and get their approval can you be said to have fulfilled your duty as a son.

古文：盖父愆，名为干蛊；育义子，乃曰螟蛉。
现代文：掩饰父亲的过失叫做干蛊，养育别人生的儿子叫做螟蛉。
English: A son who conceals his father's faults is called a good son, but a son who brings up someone else's faults is called a bad son.

古文：生子当如孙仲谋，曹操羡孙权之语；生子须如李亚子，朱温叹存勖之词。
现代文：生子当如孙仲谋这是曹操赞羡孙权的话；生子须如李亚子，这是朱温感慨自己儿子不如李存勖的话。
English: A son should be like Sun Zhongpu, this is the words of Cao Cao admiring Sun Quan; a son should be like Li Yazi, this is the words of Zhu Wen feeling that his son is not as good as Li Cunxu.

古文：菽水承欢，贫士养亲之乐；义方是训，父亲教子之严。
现代文：用菽水来博取尊亲的欢喜，让老人颐养天年，这是贫穷人家奉养父母的天伦之乐。训以义方，父亲应当教育子女做人的法则规矩，这是贤父爱护儿子的心意。
English: It is the joy of the poor to support their parents. The father should teach his children the rules and regulations of being a man. This is the will of a wise father to love and care for his son.

古文：绍箕裘，子承父业；恢先绪，子振家声。
现代文：绍箕裘是说继承父辈的事业，才能够昌盛后嗣，把先辈的事业发扬光大，方不辱父母的声名。
English: Shaoxing Qiu said that inheriting the career of one's parents is the only way for one's heirs to prosper, to carry forward the career of one's forefathers, and not to disgrace the reputation of one's parents.

古文：具庆下，父母俱存；重庆下，祖父俱在。
现代文：具庆下是父母都健在的代称；重庆下是祖父母及父母皆在堂的意思。
English: Guqing means that both parents are alive; Chongqing means that both grandparents and parents are in the hall.

古文：燕翼贻谋，乃称裕后之祖；克绳祖武，是称象贤之孙。
现代文：善为子孙计谋，称为燕翼；能继承先贤的子孙叫做象贤。
English: Those who are good at planning for their children and grandchildren are called "swallow wings"; those who can inherit from the ancestors are called "elephant sages."

古文：称人有令子，曰鳞趾呈祥；称宦有贤郎，曰凤毛济美。
现代文：夸奖别人有佳儿称为麟趾呈祥，如同麒麟有趾，显出他仁厚的祥瑞；赞扬官宦有贤郎称为凤毛济美，家中有了佳儿，好像凤凰的羽毛，可以助文彩的华美。
English: It is said that praising others for having a good daughter is called "having a good unicorn toe," just as a good unicorn has a good toe, showing his benevolent auspiciousness; praising officials for having a wise man is called "having a good phoenix feather," and having a good daughter at home is like a phoenix's feather, which can help the beauty of literature.

古文：弑父自立，隋杨广之天性何存；杀子媚君，齐易牙之人心何在。
现代文：杨广杀了自己的父亲而登上皇位，他的天性何在？易牙烹了自己的儿子给齐桓公吃，他的人心何在？
English: Yang Guang killed his own father and ascended to the throne. What is his nature? Iga cooked his own son for King Qi Huan to eat. What is his human heart?

古文：分甘以娱目，王羲之弄孙自乐；问安惟点颔，郭子仪厥孙最多。
现代文：王羲之牵子抱孙，每有美味食品，都分给儿孙们吃，常享天伦之乐；郭子仪孙子众多不能尽识，每次问安只能点头示意。
English: Wang Qizhi's children and grandchildren, every delicious food, are distributed to the children and grandchildren to eat, often enjoy the joy of family reunion; Guo Ziyi's many grandchildren can not fully understand, every time they ask for greetings, they can only nod.

古文：和丸教子，仲郢母之贤；戏彩娱亲，老莱子之孝。
现代文：为了教育儿子，柳仲郢的母亲和熊胆为丸，使仲郢夜嚼以佐勤苦，她的贤德于此可见。为使双亲愉悦，老莱子七十多岁了，还穿着五彩衣服做婴儿状，他的孝心实在可感。
English: In order to educate her son, Liu Zhongyao's mother and Xiong Yan became friends, making Zhongyao work hard at night, her virtue can be seen here. In order to make the parents happy, Laizi is more than seventy years old, still wearing colorful clothes to look like a baby, his filial piety is really felt.

古文：毛义捧檄，为亲之存；伯俞泣杖，因母之老。
现代文：毛义捧着仕官的公文而高兴，为的是使母亲快乐；韩伯俞受了杖责忽然哭泣，这是因为母亲年老体衰，打在身上不觉得痛。
English: Mao Yi is holding the official's official document and is happy, in order to make his mother happy; Han Bo Rong is punished with a cane and suddenly cries, this is because his mother is old and weak and does not feel pain when she is beaten.

古文：慈母望子，倚门倚闾；游子思亲，陟岵陟屺。
现代文：慈母盼儿归来，有时站在门口有时站在巷口张望等候；游子思念亲人，屡屡登山眺望故乡。
English: A mother longs for the return of her child, sometimes standing at the door, sometimes standing at the corner of the alley, waiting; a wanderer misses his relatives, and often climbs mountains to look over his hometown.

古文：爱无差等，曰兄子如邻子；分有相同，曰吾翁即若翁。
现代文：对晚辈的关爱应该没有差别，自己兄长的儿子和邻居的儿子要一样对待；对长辈的名分应当相同，所以刘邦对项羽说：我的父亲就是你的父亲。
English: There should be no difference in caring for the younger generation. The son of one's elder brother should be treated the same as the son of one's neighbor. The name of the elder should be the same. Therefore, Liu Bang said to Xiang Yu, "My father is your father."

古文：长男为主器，令子可克家。
现代文：家中的长男才能主管祭祀的礼器，家中有了佳儿，才能承继祖先的事业。
English: Only the eldest son of a family can be in charge of the sacrificial vessels, and only if there is a daughter in the family can he succeed the cause of his ancestors.

古文：子光前曰充闾，子过父曰跨灶。
现代文：父亲望他的儿子光宗耀祖可以称为充闾；儿子的才能胜过他的父亲称为跨灶。
English: The father hoped that his son, Guangzong Yao Zu, could be called a full-fledged; the son's talent was better than his father's, called a cross-cooker.

古文：宁馨英畏，皆是羡人之儿；国器掌珠，悉是称人之子。
现代文：宁馨、英畏都是用来称羡别人的儿子超凡脱俗；国器、掌珠都是用来赞美别人的儿子才能卓著极受钟爱。
English: Ningxing and Yingyi are both used to praise other people's sons for being extraordinary; the national instrument and the palm bead are both used to praise other people's sons for being outstanding and extremely beloved.

古文：可爱者子孙之多，若螽斯之蛰蛰；堪羡者后人之盛，如瓜瓞之绵绵。
现代文：最可爱的是子孙众多，好像螽斯一样，团团集聚在一起。赞美子孙昌盛繁衍，好像瓜瓞一样绵绵滋生。
English: The loveliest thing of all is the multitude of offspring, like a lotus, gathered together in groups. Praise the offspring for flourishing and multiplying, like a melon seedling.

