古文：逸《书》、逸《诗》，虽篇名或存，既亡其辞，则其义不复可考。
现代文：散失的《尚书》、散失的《诗经》，虽然有些篇名留存着，但既然它的内容亡佚了，那么它的意义就不再能够考证了。
English: The lost "Song of Songs" and the lost "Song of Songs," although some titles remain, but since its content is lost, then its meaning can no longer be verified.

古文：而孔安国注《尚书》，杜预注《左传》，必欲强为之说。
现代文：可是孔安国注《尚书》，杜预注《左传》，一定要想给它们作出解释。
English: However, Kong An Guo's annotation of "Shang Shu" and Du Yu's annotation of "Zhu Chuan" must want to explain them.

古文：《书》 汨作 注云 言其治民之功 ， 咎单作《明居》 注云： 咎单，主土地之官。作《明居》，民法 ，《左传》 国了赋辔之柔矣 注云 义取宽政以安诸侯，若柔辔之御刚马 ，如此之类。
现代文：《尚书》的 泪作 ，孔安国注释说， 这是说他治理百姓功劳  咎单作《明居》 ，注解说： 咎单，是管理土地的官，写了《明居》，是关于民法的 ，《左传》中 国子赋髻之柔矣 ，杜预注解道： 它的意义在于，要用宽松的政治来使诸侯安定，就象柔软的缓绳驾驭刚烈的骏马一样。 
English: The tears in "Shang Shu" were made by Kong An Guo, who commented that this was his achievement in governing the people; Gui Shan made "Ming Ju," the commentary said: Gui Shan, the official in charge of land management, wrote "Ming Ju," which was about civil law; in "Zhu Chuan," it was about the gentleness of Guo Zi; Du Yu commented: Its significance lies in the fact that it is necessary to use loose politics to make the princes stable, just like a soft bridle steers a strong horse.

古文：予顷教授福州日，林之奇少颖为《书》学谕，讲 帝厘下土 数语，曰： 知之为知之，《尧典》《舜典》之所以可言也；不知为不知，《九共》、《槁饫》略之可也。 
现代文：象这一类的很多。我不久前在福州任儒学教授时，林之奇做了《尚书》学的教谕，在讲 帝厘下土 几句的时候，他说： 知道就是知道，这就是《尧典》、《舜典》可以解说的道理；不知道就是不知道，《九共》、《槁饫》略去它也是可以的。 
English: When I was a professor of Confucianism in Fuzhou not long ago, Lin Zhiqi made an instruction on the study of "Shang Shu." When he spoke a few words about the foundation of Dili, he said: To know is to know, which is the reason why "Shu Xuan" and "Shu Xuan" can be explained; not to know is not to know, and it is also possible to omit "Jiu Gong" and "Shu Xuan."

古文：其说最纯明可嘉，林君有《书解》行于世，而不载此语，故为表出之。
现代文：这种观点是最精纯明白值得表彰的，林之奇有《书解》流行在社会上，可是没有写上这几句话，因此我为他发表出来。
English: This view is the most pure and clear and worthy of commendation. Lin Zhiqi's "Book Commentary" is popular in society, but he did not write these few words, so I published it for him.

