古文：辛雄族祖琛琛子术术族子德源杨机高道穆兄谦之綦俊山伟宇文忠之费穆孟威辛雄，字世宾，陇西狄道人也。
现代文：辛雄，字世宾，陇西狄道人。
English: Xin Xiong, known as the world's guest, is a disciple of Xidi Taoism.

古文：父暢，汝南、乡郡二郡太守。
现代文：父亲辛畅，任汝南、乡郡二郡太守。
English: His father, Xin Chang, served as the governor of two counties in the south of Ryukyu, a township.

古文：雄有孝性，居父忧，殆不可识。
现代文：辛雄很重孝道，替父亲守丧，因过于伤心而消瘦变形，人们几乎无法将他认出。
English: Xin Xiong was very filial, he mourned for his father, and because he was too sad, he was emaciated and deformed, and people could hardly recognize him.

古文：清河王怿为司空，辟为左曹。
现代文：清河王元怿任司空，征请他任左曹。
English: King Yuan of Qinghe appointed Siku as his subordinate and recruited him as his left-hand man.

古文：怿迁司徒，仍授左曹。
现代文：元怿任司徒，仍请他任左曹。
English: He still invited him to serve as his left-hand man.

古文：雄用心平直，加以闲明政事，经其断割，莫不悦服。
现代文：他心地坦荡，加上对政务十分熟悉，所以，经他处理的事情，人们无不心悦诚服。
English: He has an open mind and is very familiar with government affairs, so people are very pleased with the things he deals with.

古文：怿每谓人曰： 必也无讼，辛雄有焉。 
现代文：元怿常对别人说： 有辛雄在，就一定没有讼案。 
English: Yuan Xuan often said to others: If there is a hard man, there must be no lawsuit.

古文：历尚书驾部、三公郎。
现代文：他历任尚书驾部、三公郎。
English: He has successively held the posts of Shoshidoke-be and Sanko-ro.

古文：会沙汰郎官，唯雄与羊深等八人见留，余悉罢遣。
现代文：适逢朝廷淘汰郎官，惟有他与羊深等八人留任，其余的人全部被罢职遣归。
English: The time came for the imperial court to weed out the vassals. Only he and eight others, including Yoshinobu, remained in office. All the others were dismissed and repatriated.

古文：先是，御史中丞、东平王匡复欲舆棺谏诤，尚书令、任城王澄劾匡大不敬，诏恕死。
现代文：早先，御史中丞、东平王元匡又想抬着棺木进宫，向皇帝进谏，尚书令、任城王元澄弹劾他对天子不尊重，朝廷下诏饶恕他的死罪。
English: Earlier, Gishi Chujo and Dongping Wang Yuanqun also wanted to carry the coffin into the palace and present it to the emperor. Shang Shuling and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng impeached him for disrespecting the emperor, and the court pardoned his capital crime.

古文：雄奏理匡曰： 窃惟白衣元匡，历奉三朝，每蒙宠遇，谔谔之性，简自帝心。
现代文：辛雄替元匡申辩，陈奏说 ：元匡原为布衣，立官三朝，常蒙受先帝的恩宠。他正直无私的性格，很得先帝们的称赞。
English: Xin Xiong argued on behalf of Yuan Kuang, and Chen Suo said: Yuan Kuang was originally a clothier, established three dynasties, and was often favored by the former emperor. His honest and selfless character was highly praised by the former emperors.

古文：故高祖锡之以匡名，陛下任之以弹纠。
现代文：所以，高祖孝文帝赐给他匡这个名字，陛下您命他负责弹劾的重任。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen gave him the name Kuang, and Your Majesty ordered him to be in charge of the important task of impeachment.

古文：当高肇之时，匡造棺致谏，主圣臣直，卒以无咎。
现代文：高肇专权时，他就抬着棺木向朝廷谏诤。那时，天子圣明，大臣正直，朝廷始终没有怪罪他。
English: When Gao Zhao was in power, he carried the coffin to the imperial court. At that time, the emperor was a saint, the ministers were honest, and the imperial court never blamed him.

古文：假欲重造，先帝已容之于前，陛下亦宜宽之于后。 
现代文：假如他又要重新抬棺上殿，先帝原先已经原谅了他，陛下您也应宽厚地对待他。 
English: If he wants to carry the coffin to the palace again, the former emperor has already forgiven him, Your Majesty, you should also treat him generously.

古文：未几，匡除平州刺史。
现代文：不久，元匡被任命为平州刺史。
English: Soon after, Yuan Kuang was appointed as the governor of Pingzhou.

古文：右仆射元钦称雄之美，左仆射萧宝夤曰： 吾闻游仆射云： 得如雄者四五人共省事，足矣 今日之赏，何其晚哉！ 
现代文：右仆射元钦称赞辛雄品格高尚，左仆射萧宝夤说： 我听游仆射说： 如能得到像辛雄这样的四五个人才来处理省台的事务，就足够了。 今天才认识他，真是太晚了呀！ 
English: His right-hand man, Ya Yuanqin, praised Xin Xiong for his high moral character, while his left-hand man, Ya Xiao Baojun, said: I heard Ya said: If we could get four or five people like Xin Xiong to handle the affairs of the province, that would be enough. I just met him today, it's really too late!

古文：初，廷尉少卿袁翻以犯罪之人，经恩竞诉，枉直难明。
现代文：开初，廷尉少卿袁翻考虑到犯罪的人经恩准可以上诉，但是非曲直却难以判明。
English: At the beginning, the courtier, Yuan Fu, took into account that the person who committed the crime could appeal, but it was difficult to determine the rights and wrongs.

古文：遂奏曾染风闻者，不问曲直，推为狱成，悉不断理。
现代文：便奏请朝廷，凡是靠道听途说，不问是非，推成狱案的，一概不予受理。
English: He then appealed to the Imperial Court, saying that any case that relied on hearsay, without asking about the rights and wrongs, and was pushed into a prison case, would not be accepted.

古文：诏门下、尚书、廷尉议之。
现代文：朝廷下诏让门下、尚书、廷尉共同议论。
English: The imperial court issued an edict to let disciples, scholars and courtiers discuss the matter together.

古文：雄议曰： 《春秋》之义，不幸而失，宁僭不滥。
现代文：辛雄说 ：《春秋》中的大义，现在不幸而失去了，处理狱案，宁宽勿严。
English: Xin Xiong said: The great justice in "Spring and Autumn" is now unfortunately lost, and it is better to be lenient than strict when dealing with prison cases.

古文：僭则失罪人，滥乃害善人。
现代文：宽则会让犯罪的人逃脱惩罚；严则会使好人受害。
English: Broadly, it will allow criminals to escape punishment; strictly, it will make good people suffer.

古文：今议者不忍罪奸吏，使出入纵情，令君子小人，薰莸不别，岂所谓赏善罚恶，殷勤隐恤者也？
现代文：现在，人们不忍心加罪于奸恶贪婪的官吏，使他们为所欲为，使得道德高尚的君子，与行为卑劣的小人，香臭不分，怎么能说是赏善罚恶、殷勤地替那些受冤屈的人着想呢？
English: Now, how can it be said that rewarding good and punishing evil, diligently thinking about those who are wronged, when people do not have the heart to add guilt to the treacherous and greedy officials and let them do whatever they want, so that the moral gentleman and the despicable villain cannot be distinguished?

古文：古人唯患察狱之不精，未闻知冤而不理。 
现代文：古人常担心处理案件不精细，没有听说知道冤枉而不处理的。 
English: The ancients often worried that the handling of cases was not refined, and they did not hear that they had been wronged and did not deal with it.

古文：诏从雄议。
现代文：朝廷下诏按他的意见办。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to do as he suggested.

古文：自后每有疑议，雄与公卿驳难，事多见从。
现代文：从此，朝廷每遇到疑难问题，他与朝臣发生分歧，大多听从他的意见。
English: From then on, whenever the imperial court encountered difficult problems, he disagreed with the courtiers and mostly followed his advice.

古文：于是公能之名甚盛。
现代文：于是，他的公正能干的名声传播开来。
English: As a result, his reputation for fairness and competence spread.

古文：又为《禄养论》，称仲尼陈五孝，自天子至于庶人，无致仕之文。
现代文：他写了《禄养论》，说孔子陈述的五孝中，上自天子，下至庶民百姓，没有不让做官这种说法。
English: He wrote "The Theory of Reward and Upbringing" and said that among the five filial piety stated by Confucius, from the Son of Heaven to the common people, there is no such thing as not being allowed to be an official.

古文：《礼记》：八十，一子不从政；九十，家不从政。
现代文：《礼记》上说：年纪八十岁，一个儿子不从政，专门侍奉他；年纪九十岁，全家都不从政，专门侍奉他。
English: "Li Ji" said: At the age of eighty, one son does not engage in politics, but serves him exclusively; at the age of ninety, the whole family does not engage in politics, but serves him exclusively.

古文：郑玄注云： 复除之。 
现代文：郑玄注释说： 可以再任命他。 
English: Zheng Xuan commented: He can be reappointed.

古文：然则止复庶人，非公卿士大夫之谓。
现代文：然则，这些只对庶民百姓，不是针对公卿大臣说的。
English: However, these were said only to the common people, not to the noble minister.

古文：以为宜听禄养，不约其年。
现代文：他认为应该允许用俸禄奉养老人，不限制年纪界限。
English: He believes that it should be allowed to use salary to support the elderly, without restricting the age limit.

古文：书奏，孝明纳之。
现代文：奏章上达，孝明帝采纳了他的建议。
English: When the score was submitted, Emperor Xiaoming accepted his suggestion.

古文：后除司空长史。
现代文：后来，他被任命为司空长史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Chief of the Air Staff.

古文：时诸公皆慕其名，欲屈为佐，莫能得也。
现代文：各公卿大臣都仰慕他的声望，想让他担任自己的助手，却不能如愿以偿。
English: All the nobles and ministers admired his reputation and wanted him to be their assistant, but they could not get what they wanted.

古文：时诸方贼盛，而南寇侵境，山蛮作逆，孝明欲亲讨，以荆州为先。
现代文：当时，各方盗贼强盛，南朝又侵犯边境，山蛮聚众作乱，孝明帝想亲自讨伐，把荆州作为第一个目标。
English: At that time, thieves on all sides were flourishing, the Southern Dynasty was encroaching on the border, and the mountain barbarians were gathering to make trouble. Emperor Xiaoming wanted to personally fight them, and Jingzhou was the first target.

古文：诏雄为行台左丞，与临淮王彧东趣叶城；别将裴衍，西通鸦路。
现代文：朝廷下诏命辛雄为行台左丞，与临淮王元，向东进至叶城；别将裴衍，向西打通亚鸟地一带的道路。
English: The imperial court ordered Xin Xiong to be the left-hand man of the line, and to march with Lin Huai Wang Yuan to the east to Yecheng; do not be Pei Yan, and to the west to open the road around Yadochi.

古文：衍稽留未进，议师已次汝滨。
现代文：裴衍犹豫观望，没有进发。
English: Baeyan hesitantly watched and did not go in.

古文：逢北沟求救，议以处分道别，不欲应之。
现代文：元的军队已到达汝河之滨，适逢北沟的魏军向他求救，元认为在路途中不宜分兵管别的事，所以不想应允。
English: Yuan's army had reached the banks of the Ye River, when the Wei army in Beigou asked him for help. Yuan thought that it was not appropriate to divide the army to deal with other matters on the way, so he did not want to agree.

古文：雄曰： 王执麾阃外，唯利是从，见可而进，何必守道？ 
现代文：辛雄劝他说： 您在朝廷以外指挥军队，怎么有利就怎么办，有合适的机会就进攻，何必墨守成规？ 
English: Xin Xiong advised him, "You are commanding an army outside the imperial court, so what should you do if you have an advantage? If there is a suitable opportunity, you should attack. Why should you stick to the rules?

古文：彧恐后有得失之责，要雄符下。
现代文：元害怕事后朝廷对他进行责罚，要求辛雄给他军符。
English: Yuan was afraid that the imperial court would punish him afterwards, and asked Xin Xiong to give him a military badge.

古文：雄以车驾将亲伐，蛮夷必怀震动，乘彼离心，无往不破，遂符彧军，令速赴击。
现代文：他认为天子目前要亲自征讨，蛮夷必大受震动，趁着他们惊慌失措，可无往而不胜。便把军符给了元的军队，让他们迅速出击。
English: He thought that Heaven's Son was about to personally invade, and that the barbarians would be greatly shaken, taking advantage of their panic. He gave the military insignia to Yuan's army and told them to attack quickly.

古文：贼闻，果自走散。
现代文：敌人听到后，果然逃散。
English: Upon hearing this, the enemy fled.

古文：在军上疏曰： 凡人所以临坚陈而忘身，触白刃而不惮者，一则求荣名，二则贪重赏，三则畏刑罚，四则避祸难。
现代文：他在军旅中给朝廷上疏说 ：人之所以能在军阵中舍身忘我，身触白刃而毫不畏惧的原因，一是为了追求美好的名声，二是为了获得优厚的奖赏，三是畏惧严厉的刑罚，四是为了杀死敌人，保护自己。
English: During his military tour, he told the court: The reason why a person can forget himself in the army and touch the blade without fear is, first, to pursue a good reputation, second, to obtain a generous reward, third, to fear severe punishment, and fourth, to kill the enemy and protect himself.

古文：非此数事，虽圣王不能劝其臣，慈父不能厉其子。
现代文：如果离开这四条，虽然是圣明的君主也不能劝动他的大臣，慈祥的父亲也不能驱使他的儿子。
English: Without these four, even a saintly prince cannot persuade his ministers, nor a benevolent father his son.

古文：明主深知其情，故赏必行，罚必信，使亲疏贵贱，勇怯贤愚，闻钟鼓之声，见旍旗之列，莫不奋激，竞赴敌场。
现代文：英明的天子深深了解其中的道理，所以赏必行，罚必信，使那关系亲的，关系远的，地位高的，地位低的，勇敢的，怯懦的，聪明的，愚蠢的，一听到进军的号角钟鼓，一看到猎猎飘扬的军旗，无不感奋激扬，竞相冲入敌阵。
English: The wise heavenly son deeply understands the reason for this, so reward must be done, punishment must be believed, so that those who are related, distant, high-ranking, low-ranking, brave, cowardly, clever, stupid, when they hear the marching horns, bells and drums, and see the hunting flags flying, all feel excited and compete to rush into the enemy's camp.

古文：岂厌久生而乐早死也？
现代文：难道是厌恶活的太久而愿意早死吗？
English: Is it an aversion to living too long and a willingness to die early?

古文：利害县于前，欲罢不能耳。
现代文：是利害摆在他的面前，欲罢不能啊！
English: The stakes are in front of him, and he just can't stop!

古文：自秦、陇逆节，将历数年，蛮左乱常，稍已多载。凡在戎役，数十万人，三方之师，败多胜少，迹其所由，不明赏罚故也。
现代文：自从秦、陇一带发生变乱，已历经数年；南方的蛮族骚扰，已有几载；前后参加讨伐的士兵，共有数十万人；参与这三个方面作战的军队，却失败的多，胜利的少，究其原因，是赏罚不明造成的。
English: It has been several years since the upheavals occurred in the Qin and Qiang regions; the barbarians in the south have been harassing them for several years; hundreds of thousands of soldiers have participated in the crusade before and after; the armies involved in these three aspects of the war have suffered many failures and few victories. The reason for this is that the rewards and punishments are unknown.

古文：陛下欲天下之早平，愍征夫之勤悴，乃降明诏，赏不移时。
现代文：陛下如果想早日平定天下，应同情将士们的辛勤劳瘁，降下明诏，奖赏决不拖延。
English: If His Majesty wants to pacify the world as soon as possible, he should sympathize with the soldiers' hard work, issue a clear edict, and reward them without delay.

古文：臣闻必不得已，去食就信，以此推之，信不可斯须废也。
现代文：然而，过去将士们的功勋，迟迟不予奖励；在战阵上逃跑的兵卒，安安稳稳地在家住着，使得那些重气节，忘生死的人得不到鼓励，庸陋卑劣的人无所畏惧。
English: However, the merits of the soldiers in the past have not been rewarded; the soldiers who ran away from the battlefield have lived safely and steadily at home, so that those who are heavy-hearted and forgetful of life and death are not encouraged, and the vulgar and despicable people are not afraid.

古文：赏罚，陛下之所易，尚不能全而行之；攻敌，士之所难，欲其必死，宁可得也？ 
现代文：奋勇杀敌，死了奖赏却一再拖延；临阵逃脱，身体得以保全而不受惩罚，这就是士卒所以望风逃窜、不肯奋力进击的原因啊！
English: Kill the enemy bravely, but the reward is delayed again and again; escape from the battlefield, the body can be preserved without punishment, this is the reason why the soldiers are fleeing and unwilling to fight hard!

古文：后为吏部郎中。及尔硃荣入洛，河阴之难，人情未安，雄潜窜不出。
现代文：如果重新下达诏命，更换赏罚的标准，军威一定能够大振，敌人一定可以被扫除。 后来，朝廷任他为吏部郎中。尔朱荣率军占据洛阳，在河阴大肆杀戮朝臣，人心惶惶，辛雄藏匿不出。
English: If the imperial decree is reissued and the standard of rewards and punishments are changed, the military prestige of Zhu Rong will surely be greatly enhanced, and the enemy will surely be eliminated. Later, the imperial court appointed him as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. Er Zhu Rong led the army to occupy Luoyang, killing courtiers in Heyin. People were panicked, and Xin Xiong could not hide.

古文：孝庄欲以雄为尚书，门下奏曰： 辛雄不出，存亡未知。 
现代文：孝庄帝想命他为尚书，门下省奏报说： 辛雄没有出来，是死是活，还不知道。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang wanted to kill him, but the provincial report said, "Xin Xiong did not come out. Whether he is dead or alive is still unknown."

古文：孝庄曰： 宁失亡而用之，可失存而不用也？ 
现代文：孝庄帝说 ：就是他死了也要用他，怎么能活着而不用呢？ 
English: Xiaozhuangdi said: Even if he is dead, he should be used. How can you live without using him?

古文：遂除度支尚书。
现代文：便任命他为度支尚书。
English: He was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：后以本官兼侍中、关西尉劳大使。
现代文：后来，他又兼任侍中、关西慰劳大使。
English: Later, he also served as an aide-de-camp and Kansai Consolation Ambassador.

古文：将发，请事五条：一言逋悬租调，宜悉不征；二言简罢非时徭役，以纾人命；三言课调之际，使丰俭有殊，令州郡量检，不得均一；四言兵起历年，死亡者众，或父或子，辛酸未歇，见存耆老，请假板职，悦生者之意，慰死者之魂；五言丧乱既久，礼仪罕习，如有闺门和穆，孝悌卓然者，宜旌其门闾。
现代文：即将出发，他向朝廷请求五件事：一是过去所欠的租调，应全部免征；二是省简和废除不合时节的徭役，以舒缓百姓的生计；三是征收调绢的时候，要让丰收和歉收的地方有区别，让各州郡量力而行，不得强求一样；四是历年兵连祸结，死亡无数，有的失去父亲，有的失去儿子，辛酸伤悲，至今犹存，活着的老人，请求授予官职，让幸存的人感到高兴，死去的人灵魂得到安慰；五是社会动乱已久，礼仪荒废，如果阖门和睦，孝顺父母，团结兄弟，事迹突出的，应在他们的家门口悬挂匾额，予以表彰。
English: When he was about to set out, he asked the imperial court for five things: First, all the rents and duties owed in the past should be exempted; second, the government should simplify and abolish the out-of-season corvee service to ease the livelihood of the people; third, when levying rents and duties, there should be a difference between places with good harvests and places with poor harvests, and let the states and counties do their best, and not force the same; fourth, soldiers over the years have been plagued with misfortune, countless deaths, some have lost their fathers, some have lost their sons, bitterness and sorrow, still exist today, living

古文：庄帝从之，因诏：人年七十者授县，八十授郡，九十加四品将军，百岁从三品将军。
现代文：孝庄帝同意他的建议，因而下诏，命给七十岁的老人授县级官职，八十岁的老人授郡级官职，九十岁的加封为四品将军，百岁老人封为从三品的将军。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang agreed to his suggestion and issued an edict, ordering the 70-year-old to be given a county-level official post, the 80-year-old to be given a county-level official post, the 90-year-old to be awarded the title of four-star general, and the 100-year-old to be awarded the title of three-star general.

古文：永熙三年，兼吏部尚书。
现代文：永熙二年，他兼任吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, he also served as the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：时近习专恣，雄惧其谗匿，不能守正，论者颇讥之。
现代文：这时，天子渐至专断恣肆，辛雄惧怕他受谗言产生邪念，所以，不像过去那样坚守正道。人们议论起来颇有讥讽。
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven gradually became arbitrary and reckless, and Xin Xiong feared that he would be criticized and produce evil thoughts, so he did not stick to the right path as in the past. People talked about it with a lot of irony.

古文：孝武南狩，雄兼左仆射，留守京师。
现代文：孝武帝到南方巡游，辛雄兼任左仆射，留守京城。
English: Emperor Xiaowu went on a tour of the south, while Xinxiong stayed in the capital as a concurrent left-hand man.

古文：永熙末，兼侍中。
现代文：永熙末年，他兼任侍中。
English: In the last years of Yongxi, he also served as a chamberlain.

古文：帝入关右，齐神武至洛，于永宁寺大集朝士，责雄及尚书崔孝芬、刘廞、杨机等曰： 为臣奉主，匡危救乱。
现代文：孝武帝被迫西入长安，齐神武帝高欢来到洛阳，在永宁寺聚集所有的朝臣，责怪辛雄和尚书崔孝芬、刘貵、杨机等人说 ：作为大臣的侍奉君主，要匡扶危机，救治祸乱。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was forced westward into Chang'an, and Emperor Gaohuan of Qi Shenwu came to Luoyang and gathered all the courtiers in Yongning Temple, blaming Xinxiong and the monks Cui Xiaofeng, Liu Bei, Yang Jie and others, saying: As a minister serving the monarch, we must support the crisis and cure the disaster.

古文：祖敬宗，父树宝，并代郡太守。琛少孤，曾过友人，见其父母无恙，垂涕久之。
现代文：如果在朝廷内不去进谏劝阻，天子外出又不陪驾随往，天下太平则邀幸取宠，出现祸乱便争相逃跑，大臣的节操到哪里去了？ 便将他们诛杀。辛琛，字僧贵。从小失去父亲，曾到友人那里，见人家的父母都安然无恙，很感伤心，涕泪良久。
English: If you don't go to the imperial court to dissuade them, if you don't accompany the emperor when he goes out, if the world is peaceful, you will be lucky to get favors. If there is a calamity, they will scramble to escape. Where did the minister's discipline go? They will kill them. Xin Yao, the word monk. He lost his father when he was a child. He once went to a friend's house and saw that his parents were safe and sound. He was very sad and shed tears for a long time.

古文：释褐奉朝请、荥阳郡丞。
现代文：出仕后，任奉朝请、荥阳郡丞。
English: After leaving the service, he was appointed as a courtier to the emperor and the county magistrate of Shenyang.

古文：太守元丽性颇使酒，琛每谏之。
现代文：太守元丽好使酒任性，辛琛常常劝阻他。
English: Grand Empress Dowager Yuan Li liked to make wine capricious, Hsin Yao often dissuaded him.

古文：丽后醉，辄令闭阁，曰： 勿使丞入也。 
现代文：元丽醉酒后常令从人关上房子的门说 ：不要让郡丞辛琛进来看见了。 
English: After getting drunk, Yuan Li often ordered someone to close the door of the house and said, "Don't let Guanzhao Xin Rong come in to see."

古文：孝文南征，丽从舆驾，诏琛曰： 委卿郡事，如太守也。 
现代文：孝文帝南征，元丽跟着一道去，他对辛琛说 ：我托你管理郡中的事务，你就像太守一样。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowen went on the Southern Expedition, Yuan Li went with him. He said to Xin Yao, "I entrust you to manage the affairs of the county. You are just like the governor."

古文：景明中，为扬州征南府长史。刺史李崇，多事产业，琛每谏折，崇不从，遂相纠举，诏并不问。
现代文：景明时，辛琛任扬州征南府的长史，刺史李崇大量置办家产，他常常劝谏，李崇不听，他便纠察举劾他，朝廷下诏不予追究。
English: At the time of Jingming, Xin Rong was in charge of the long history of Yangzhou's conquest of Nanfu, and he often advised Li Chong to purchase a large amount of family property. Li Chong did not listen, so he picketed and impeached him. The imperial court did not investigate.

古文：后加龙骧将军、南梁太守。
现代文：后来，朝廷加封他为龙骧将军、南梁太守。
English: Later, the imperial court appointed him as the general of Longjing and the governor of Nanliang.

古文：崇因置酒谓琛曰： 长史后必为刺史，但不知得上佐何如人耳。 
现代文：李崇因而置办酒席为他饯行，问他： 长史你将来也一定能升任刺史，但不知道你选择什么样的人任长史？ 
English: Li Chong therefore arranged a banquet for him and asked him: "Long history, you will certainly be able to be promoted to the post of chief historian in the future, but I don't know what kind of person you will choose to be the chief historian?

古文：琛对曰： 若万一叨忝，得一方正长史，朝夕闻过，是所愿也。 
现代文：他回答说 ：如果我万一任刺史，要选择一个端方正直的人任长史，天天让他批评我的过失，这是我的愿望啊！ 
English: He replied: "If I were to make history, I would choose an honest man to write it, and let him criticize my mistakes every day. That's my wish!"

古文：崇有惭色。
现代文：李崇面有愧色。
English: Li Chongmen is ashamed.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：辛琛死在太守任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：琛宽雅有度量，涉猎经史，喜愠不形于色。
现代文：他宽厚文雅，很有度量，广泛涉猎经书史集，喜怒不形于色。
English: He is generous and elegant, very measured, extensively dabbles in the history of the collection of scriptures, and is indifferent to joy and anger.

古文：当官奉法，所在有称。
现代文：当官奉公守法，所到之处都有美称。
English: Officials are law-abiding and have a good reputation everywhere they go.

古文：长子悠，字元寿，早有器业，为侍御史，监扬州军。
现代文：他的长子辛悠，字元寿，很小就器度不凡。任侍御史，监察扬州的军队。
English: His eldest son, Xin Yu (辛悠), also known as Yuan Shou (字元寿), was very young and had an extraordinary talent. He served as an attendant to the emperor and oversaw Yangzhou's army.

古文：还京，于荥阳为人所劫害。
现代文：敌人被平定，起草立功人的奏书。
English: The enemy has been subdued, and a report on those who have rendered meritorious service is being drafted.

古文：赠东秦州刺史。
现代文：当时，李崇还任刺史，想写上辛悠的名字，辛悠不同意。
English: At that time, Li Chong was still a historian and wanted to write Xin Yu's name, but Xin Yu did not agree.

古文：俊弟术。术字怀哲，少明敏，有识度，解褐司空胄曹参军。
现代文：李崇说： 我过去遇上正直的父亲，现在又碰上了正直的儿子。 辛术，字怀哲，从小聪明敏锐，遇事颇有见解，脱去布衣入仕，任司空胄曹参军。
English: Li Chong said: In the past, I met an honest father, and now I have met an honest son. Xin Zhi, Zi Huai Zhe, has been clever and keen since childhood, has a lot of opinions in times of trouble, took off his clothes and joined the army, and was allowed to join the army.

古文：与仆射高隆之共典营构鄴都宫室。术有思理，百工克济。
现代文：与仆射高隆之共同负责建筑邺城的宫殿，他处事明白畅达，工匠们都尽心尽力。
English: He was jointly responsible for the construction of the palace in Shicheng with the sculptor Gao Longzhi. His work was clear and smooth, and the craftsmen did their best.

古文：再迁尚书右丞，出为清河太守，政有能名。
现代文：再迁任为尚书右丞，出任清河太守，为政有能员的名声。
English: He was reappointed as Shoshu Ujo, appointed as the governor of Qinghe, and gained a reputation as a capable politician.

古文：追授并州长史，遭父忧去职。
现代文：朝廷命他为并州长史，因遭父丧离职。
English: The imperial court appointed him to be the governor of Hefei, but he resigned due to the death of his father.

古文：清河父老数百人，诣阙上书，请立碑颂德。
现代文：清河的父老乡亲数百人到宫廷上书，请求为他立碑歌功颂德。
English: Hundreds of people from Qinghe's hometown wrote to the court, requesting that a monument be erected in his honor.

古文：齐文襄嗣事，与尚书左丞宋游道、中书侍郎李绘等并追诣晋阳，俱为上客。
现代文：齐文襄帝高澄掌管朝廷大事，他与尚书左丞宋游道、中书侍郎李绘等追随高澄至晋阳，都成为高澄的座上宾。
English: Emperor Gaocheng of the Western Qi Dynasty was in charge of the major events of the imperial court. He, along with Shang Shuzheng, Song Youdao, and Li Peng, the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, followed Gaocheng to Jinyang and became Gaocheng's guests.

古文：累迁散骑常侍。
现代文：他多次升迁，官至散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted several times, and rose to the rank of straggler.

古文：武定六年，侯景叛，除东南道行台尚书，封江夏县男。
现代文：东魏孝静帝武定六年，侯景叛乱。朝廷任辛术为东南道行台尚书，封为江夏县男。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wuding of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhing, Houjing rebelled. The imperial court appointed Xin Shu as the Southeastern Road Gangtai Shangshu, and he was awarded the title of Jiangxia County Man.

古文：与高岳等破侯景，禽萧明。迁东徐州刺史，为淮南经略使。
现代文：他与高岳等人一起打败侯景，捉获萧明，迁任东徐州刺史，任淮南经略使。
English: Together with Gao Yue and others, he defeated Hou Jing, captured Xiao Ming, and was transferred to the post of East Xuzhou Provincial Historian and the post of Huainan Provincial Secretary.

古文：齐天保元年，侯景徵江西租税，术率诸军度淮断之，烧其稻数百万石。
现代文：北齐天保元年，侯景征收江西的租税，辛术率领军队渡过淮河断绝他的归路，焚烧侯景征收的稻谷数万石。
English: In the first year of the Northern Qi Tianbo, Hou Jing levied taxes in Jiangxi, and Xin Zhi led the army to cross the Huai River to cut off his way back, and burned tens of thousands of kilos of rice collected by Hou Jing.

古文：还镇下邳，人随术北度淮者三千余家。
现代文：然后北还镇守下邳，淮南人随辛术渡过淮水的有三千多家。
English: Then, the North also guarded the Lower Yangtze River, and more than 3,000 people from South Huai passed through Huai Shui with great difficulty.

古文：东徐州刺史郭志杀郡守，文宣闻之，敕术自今所统十余州地，诸有犯法者，刺史先启听报；以下先断，后表闻。
现代文：东徐州刺史郭志杀死郡守，文宣帝听到奏报后，命令辛术 ：从今天起，郭志统率的十多个州县，所有犯法的，刺史先汇报给你，你再下决断，然后奏报朝廷。 
English: East Xuzhou assassin Guo Zhi killed the county magistrate. After Emperor Wenzhong heard the report, he ordered Xin Zhi: From today, the more than ten counties and prefectures where Guo Zhi was in charge, all of which have broken the law, will report the assassination to you first. You will then make a decision, and then report it to the imperial court.

古文：齐代行台兼总人事，自术始也。
现代文：北齐的行台长官兼管一方人事，就从辛术这里开始。
English: Northern Qi's stationmaster, who is also in charge of one side of the personnel, starts from Xinzhu here.

古文：安州刺史、临清太守、盱眙蕲城二镇将犯法，术皆案奏杀之。
现代文：安州刺史、临清太守、盱眙和蕲城两地的镇将犯法，辛术都将案情奏闻朝廷将他们处死。
English: The towns of Anzhou Zishi, Linqing Dazhong, Handan and Handan will violate the law, and Xinzhu will report the case to the court and put them to death.

古文：睢州刺史及所部郡守，俱犯大辟，朝廷以其奴婢百口及赀财尽赐术。
现代文：睢州刺史及所辖的郡守，都因犯法受大辟的处治。朝廷把他们的奴婢一百多口以及资财家产都赐给了辛术。
English: The imperial court gave more than a hundred slaves and maidservants, as well as their wealth and property, to Xinzhu.

古文：三辞不见许，术乃送诣所司，不复以闻。
现代文：他多次拒绝，却不被朝廷同意。他便将犯官的家口和资财送到司法部门，并不让他们报告朝廷知道。
English: He repeatedly refused, but was not approved by the court. He then sent the criminal official's family and assets to the judicial department, without letting them report to the court.

古文：邢邵闻之，遗术书曰： 昔钟离意云：孔子忍渴于盗泉，便以珠玑委地。
现代文：邢邵听说了，写信给他，说： 过去钟离意说：孔子在盗泉旁边忍受干渴，便把珠玑委之于地。
English: Zou Shao heard about it and wrote to him, saying: In the past, Zhong Liangyi said: Confucius endured thirst next to the stolen spring, and then put Zhu Xi on the ground.

古文：足下今能如此，可谓异代一时。 
现代文：您今天能做到这样，真可以说与孔夫子异代而道德相同啊！ 
English: If you can do this today, you can truly say that you are of the same generation as Confucius and have the same morals!

古文：及王僧辨破侯景，术招携安抚，城镇相继款附，前后二十余州。
现代文：王僧辩打败侯景，辛术前去招纳安抚。侯景占据的城镇相继归附，前后共有二十多个州郡。
English: Wang Sangye defeated Hou Jing, and Xin Xiu went to recruit and pacify him. The towns occupied by Hou Jing were successively annexed, with a total of more than twenty states and counties before and after.

古文：于是移镇广陵，获传国玺送鄴，文宣以玺告于太庙。
现代文：于是，他转而镇守广陵，得到一颗传国玉玺，派人送到邺城。文宣帝把玉玺送至太庙祷告。
English: As a result, he turned to guarding Guangling, got a jade urn that was handed down to the country, and sent someone to Lucheng. Emperor Wenzhong sent the jade urn to the Great Temple to pray.

古文：此玺即秦所制，方四寸，上纽交盘龙，其文曰： 受命于天，既寿永昌。 
现代文：这颗玉玺为秦代刻制，周有四寸，上端的纽有盘龙相交，上面文字是： 受命于天，既寿永昌。 
English: This jade figurine was carved in the Qin Dynasty. It has a circumference of four centimeters, and the top knot is intersected by a dragon. The inscription above reads: "By order of heaven, both life and death are eternal."

古文：二汉相传，又历魏、晋；晋怀帝败，没于刘聪；聪败，没于石氏；石氏败，晋穆帝永和中，濮阳太守戴僧施得之，遣督护何融送于建业；历宋、齐、梁；梁败，侯景得之；景败，侍中赵思贤以玺投景南衮州刺史郭元建，送于术，故术以进焉。
现代文：西汉时代代相传；又历经魏、晋两朝；晋怀帝失败，玉玺流落在刘聪手里；刘聪失败，又归于石勒；石勒失败，晋穆帝永和年间，濮阳太守戴僧施得到了它，派都护何融送到建邺，历经宋、齐、梁三朝；梁失败后，侯景得到了它；侯景失败，侍中赵思贤把玉玺送给侯景的南兖州刺史郭元建，郭元建又送给辛术。
English: It was passed down from generation to generation during the Western Han Dynasty; it also passed through the Wei and Jin Dynasties; after the defeat of the Emperor Huai of Jin, the Jade Urn fell into the hands of Liu Cong; after the defeat of Liu Cong, it was returned to Shi Le; after the defeat of Shi Le, during the reign of the Emperor Mu Yonghe of Jin, the Yang Daju of Dai Sangshi obtained it, and sent it to the Jianlong Emperor, after the defeat of the Song, Qi and Liang Dynasties; after the defeat of the Liang Emperor, it was given to the Houjing Emperor; after the defeat of the Houjing Emperor, the

古文：寻徵为殿中尚书，领太常卿。
现代文：所以，辛术进奉给天子。不久，他被授命为殿中尚书，又领任太常卿。
English: Soon, he was appointed to be the chief scribe in the palace, and he was also appointed to the position of Taijōkyō.

古文：仍与朝贤，议定律令。
现代文：便与朝中贤士商议律令。
English: He then discussed the ritsuryo with the sages of the court.

古文：迁吏部尚书，食南衮州梁郡干。
现代文：又升任为吏部尚书，食俸于南兖州梁郡。
English: He was also promoted to the post of the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and received his salary in Liang County, South Luzhou.

古文：迁鄴以后，大选之职，知名者数四，互有得失，未能尽美。
现代文：迁都邺城以后，吏部尚书一职，继任者知名的就有三四个，但各有长短得失，不能尽善尽美。
English: After the relocation of the capital to Handan City, the position of the Secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs was vacant. There were three or four well-known successors, but each had their own merits and demerits, and they could not be perfect.

古文：文襄少年高朗，所弊也疏；袁叔德沈密谨厚，所伤者细；杨愔风流辨给，取士失于浮华；唯术性尚贞明，取士以才以器，循名责实，新旧参举，管库必擢，门阀不遗。
现代文：高澄年轻放达疏阔，他的缺点也在于疏阔；袁叔德沉稳周严，谨慎宽厚，缺陷在于过分细密；杨忄音风流潇洒，取士有失于浮华不实。惟有辛术性情高洁清明，取士注重才能器识，根据名声探求真实，把他们的今天与昨天相参考。
English: Gao Cheng is young and broad-minded, and his shortcomings also lie in his broad-mindedness; Yuan Shude is calm and circumspect, cautious and generous, and his defect lies in being too meticulous; Yang Xuan is elegant and dashing, and Tuo Si is not flashy and not real. However, Tuo Si's temperament is high and clear, and Tuo Si pays attention to talent and knowledge, and searches for truth according to fame, and refers to their today and yesterday.

古文：考之前后铨衡，在术最为折衷，甚为当时所称举。
现代文：掌管仓库的小官吏只要有能力，也必定被提拔；豪族大姓的人也不会遗漏。考察这一时期铨选人才的情况，辛术最为公正，很被当时所称道。
English: As long as the minor officials in charge of the warehouse have the ability, they will certainly be promoted; people with big surnames from the local ruling families will not be left out. Examining the situation of selecting talents in this period, Xinxu was the most fair and was highly praised at the time.

古文：天保末，文宣尝令术选百员官，参选者二三千人，术题目士子，人无谤讟，其所旌擢，后亦皆致通显。
现代文：天保末年，文宣帝曾命他选拔一百名官吏，而参选的人多达二三千人。他列出的士子名单，人们没有不满意的；他所选拔出来的，后来都官位显赫。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenxuan ordered him to select one hundred officials, and as many as two or three thousand people participated in the election. The list of scholars he listed was not unsatisfactory; those he selected later held prominent positions.

古文：术清俭寡嗜欲，勤于所职，未尝暂懈，临军以威严，牧人有惠政。
现代文：他廉洁俭约，没有别的嗜好。勤于职守，从没有过少许的松懈。统率军队施以威仪，管理地方多有惠政。
English: He is honest and frugal, and has no other hobbies. He is diligent in his duties, and has never been a little slack. He leads the army with dignity, and there are many favorable policies in local management.

古文：少爱文史，晚更勤学，虽在戎旅，手不释卷。
现代文：少年时爱好文学和历史，晚年更加勤奋学习，虽然身在戎马军旅，仍然手不释卷。
English: When he was a boy, he loved literature and history. In his later years, he studied even more diligently. Even though he was in the army, he still couldn't put the book down.

古文：及定淮南，凡诸赀物，一毫无犯。
现代文：平定淮南后，对所有的财物秋毫不犯，惟有大量收集典章册籍。
English: After the pacification of Huainan, there was no crime against all the property, only a large number of collection of ordinance books.

古文：唯大收典籍，多是宋、齐、梁时佳本，鸠集万余卷，并顾、陆之徒名画，二王已下法书，数亦不少。
现代文：这些书大多是宋、齐、梁三朝的精本。他共得到一万多卷图书，以及顾恺之、陆探微之徒的名画，王羲之、王献之以下名家的书法，数量也很不少。
English: Most of these books are the fine books of the Song, Qi and Liang dynasties. He has obtained more than 10,000 volumes of books, as well as famous paintings by Gu Xizhi and Lu Xunwei, and calligraphy by famous masters such as Wang Xizhi and Wang Xian. The number is also quite large.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、洛州刺史，谥曰恭。
现代文：这些都不上交公府，而归个人所有。
English: These are not handed over to the public authorities, but are owned by individuals.

古文：子悫，武定末，开府铠曹参军。杨机，字显略，天水冀人也。
现代文：回到朝廷之后，他用这些书画馈赠给重臣权要，人们议论起来因此有些微词。天保十年去世，终年六十岁。杨机，字显略，天水冀人。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he used these paintings and calligraphy to give gifts to senior ministers and dignitaries, which caused some controversy. Tenpo died ten years ago, at the age of sixty. Yangji, words clearly, Tianshui Ji Ren.

古文：祖伏恩，徙居洛阳，因家焉。
现代文：祖父杨伏恩，移居到洛阳，因而在那里安了家。
English: His grandfather, Yang Fuen, moved to Luoyang and made his home there.

古文：机少有志节，为士流所称。
现代文：杨机从小就有志气节操，被读书人所称道。
English: Yang Jie has had the spirit of self-restraint since childhood, and has been praised by readers.

古文：河南尹李平、元晖，并召署功曹。晖尤委以郡事。
现代文：河南尹李平、元晖，一起召请他任功曹，元晖还把郡中的政务交给他处理。
English: Yin Liping of Henan Province and Yuan Shao jointly summoned him to serve as a meritorious scholar, and Yuan Shao also handed over the county's government affairs to him.

古文：或谓晖曰： 弗躬弗亲，庶人弗信，何得委事于机，高卧而已。 
现代文：有人对元晖说： 不亲自处理政务，也不要相信庶民出身的人。为什么把郡中的事情交给杨机办理，您自己却高卧不起，讨取清闲呢？ 
English: Some people said to Yuan Xuan, "You don't personally handle government affairs, and don't trust people from the common people. Why do you let Yang Jie handle the affairs of the county, while you lie on your back and seek leisure?

古文：晖曰： 吾闻君子劳于求士，逸于任贤，吾既委得其才，何为不可？ 
现代文：元晖答道： 我听说君子们在选拔人才时非常辛苦，一旦人才被发现和使用，他就变得很清闲了。我既然得到一个人才，为什么不使用他呢？ 
English: Yuan Xuan replied, "I have heard that gentlemen work very hard to select talents. Once a talent is discovered and used, it becomes very idle. Since I have obtained a talent, why not use him?

古文：由是声名更著。
现代文：从此，杨机的名声更大。
English: Since then, the fame of Yangji has become even greater.

古文：时皇子国官多非其人，诏选清直之士，机见举为京兆王愉国中尉，愉甚敬惮之。
现代文：这时，皇帝的儿子们的封国内官吏大多不称职，朝廷下诏选拔清廉正直的人才。杨机被举荐任京兆王元愉封国的中尉，元愉对他既尊重又害怕。
English: At this time, most of the domestic officials of the emperor's sons were incompetent, and the imperial court issued an edict to select clean and honest talents. Yang Jie was recommended to be the lieutenant of the Jing Zhao King, Yuan Yu, who was both respected and feared by Yuan Yu.

古文：后为洛阳令，京辇伏其威风。
现代文：后来，他任洛阳令，京城内都畏服他的威严。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Luoyang, and everyone in the capital was awed by his majesty.

古文：诉讼者一经其前，后皆识其名姓，并记其事理。
现代文：告状的人从他面前走一趟，以后他都能叫出他们的名字，并记住了他们的案情。
English: His accusers would walk in front of him, and then he could call out their names and remember their cases.

古文：历司州别驾、清河内史、河北太守，并有能名。
现代文：他历任司州别驾、清河内史、河北太守，都得到卓有才能的名声。
English: His successively held posts of Secretary of State, Secretary of Hanoi History in the Qing Dynasty, and Governor of Hebei Province have all gained a reputation for outstanding talent.

古文：永熙中，除度支尚书。
现代文：永熙时，被朝廷任命为度支尚书。
English: At the time of Yongxi, he was appointed by the imperial court to be the leader of Duozhi Shangshu.

古文：机方直之心，久而弥厉，奉公正己，为时所称。
现代文：他的端方正直之心，时间越长就越坚定，一心奉公，严于律己，被世人所称颂。
English: His honest heart, the longer the time, the more firm, dedicated to public service, strict with self-discipline, and praised by the world.

古文：家贫无马，多乘小犊车，时论许其清白。
现代文：家里贫穷，没有马骑，大多坐小牛犊拉的车外出，人们都认为他十分清廉。
English: His family was poor, he didn't ride a horse, and most of the time he went out in a car pulled by a calf. People thought he was very clean.

古文：与辛雄等并为齐神武所诛。
现代文：他与辛雄等人，一起被高欢杀害。
English: He, along with Xin Xiong and others, was killed by high rollers.

古文：高恭之，字道穆，自云辽东人也。
现代文：高恭之，字道穆，自称是辽东人。
English: Gao Gongzhi, also known as Daomu, claims to be a native of Liaodong Province.

古文：祖潜，献文初，赐爵阳关男。
现代文：祖父高潜，献文初年，被赐爵为阳关男。
English: Grandfather Gao Jian, the first year of dedication, was awarded the title of Yangguan Man.

古文：诏以沮渠牧犍女赐潜为妻，封武威公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：天子下诏把沮渠牧腱的女儿赐给他为妻，牧腱的女儿又被封为武威公主，高潜被封为驸马都尉。
English: The son of heaven decreed that the daughter of the disheartened canal herdsman be given to him as his wife, and the herdsman's daughter was named the Princess Wuwei, and Gao Jian was named the Captain of the Horse.

古文：父崇，字积善，少聪敏，以端谨称。
现代文：高道穆的父亲高崇，字积善，从小聪明敏捷，以端正谨慎出名。
English: Gao Daomu's father, Gao Chong, was good at writing, clever and quick from an early age, and was famous for his neatness and prudence.

古文：家资富厚，而崇志尚俭素。
现代文：虽然家资丰厚，而他却崇尚节俭。
English: Although his family was wealthy, he was a great believer in frugality.

古文：初，崇舅氏坐事诛，公主痛本生绝胤，遂以崇继牧犍后，改姓沮渠。
现代文：他的舅父曾获罪被诛杀，武威公主为他们这一家绝了后代而痛哭，便把高崇送给沮渠家继承族业，他因而改姓沮渠。
English: His uncle had been beaten to death for a crime, and Princess Wuwei, weeping bitterly over the fact that their family had no descendants, gave Gao Chong to the Deshu family to inherit the family estate, and he changed his surname to Deshu.

古文：景明中，启复本姓，袭爵，除洛阳令。
现代文：景明时，他又向朝廷奏请恢复原来的高姓，袭承父亲的爵位。
English: At the time of Jingming, he also appealed to the court to restore the original high surname and inherit his father's title.

古文：为政清断，吏人畏其威风，发扌适不避强御，县内肃然。
现代文：任洛阳令，为政清廉，颇有决断，官吏百姓都害怕他的威严。发奸摘伏，不避强权大族，县内因此一片肃然。
English: Ren Luoyangling was politically incorruptible and quite decisive, and the officials and people were afraid of his majesty. He committed treason and subversion, and did not shy away from powerful big families, so the county was in awe.

古文：卒，赠沧州刺史，谥曰成。
现代文：去世后，朝廷追赠他为沧州刺史，谥号为成。
English: After his death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Cangzhou historian, and his nickname became Mao.

古文：道穆以字行于世，学涉经史，所交皆名流俊士。
现代文：高道穆以书法驰名于世。他博览经书史籍，结交的都是一代名流和豪迈秀雅之士。
English: Gao Daumu is well-known in the world for his calligraphy. He is well-versed in books on the history of calligraphy and has made friends with a generation of famous and heroic people.

古文：幼孤，事兄如父。
现代文：从小失去父亲，对待长兄就像对父亲一样尊重。
English: Having lost his father at a young age, he treats his eldest brother with the same respect as his father.

古文：每谓人曰： 人生厉心立行，贵于见知，当使夕脱羊裘，朝佩珠玉。
现代文：他常对人说 ：人一生专心致志，奋力做事，贵在被世人了解。所以应当使自己晚上脱去羊裘皮衣，早晨佩带珠玉，富贵而又显赫。
English: He often said to people, "If you devote yourself to your life and work hard, you will be appreciated by the world. Therefore, you should take off your sheepskin coat at night and wear jewels in the morning, rich and prominent."

古文：若时不我知，便须退迹江海，自求其志。 
现代文：如果世人不知道我，就应当隐蔽在江湖山林，以保持自己高洁远大的志向。 
English: If the world does not know me, it should hide in the jungle to maintain its lofty and lofty aspirations.

古文：御史中尉元匡高选御史，道穆奏记求用于匡，匡遂引为御史。
现代文：御史中尉元匡奉命选拔御史，他上奏章向元匡自荐，元匡推荐他为御史。
English: On being ordered to select Goshi, Lieutenant Goshi Motokata recommended himself to Goshi, and Goshi recommended him to Motokata.

古文：其所纠扌适，不避权豪。
现代文：他纠举弹劾，不回避那些权奸巨豪。
English: He raised impeachment and did not shy away from those treacherous giants.

古文：正光中，出使相州。
现代文：正光时，出使相州。
English: When the sun is shining, the envoys are sent out.

古文：前刺史李世哲，即尚书令崇之子，多有非法，逼买人宅，广兴屋宇，皆置鸱尾，又于马埒堠上为木人执节。
现代文：前刺史李世哲，是尚书李崇的儿子，干了很多违背法律的事情。他强行买下别人的家宅，扩建自家的房舍，在屋脊上都装上只有宫殿上才能安装的鸱尾，又在马桴堠上装上持着节仗的木人。
English: Li Shizhe, the son of Shangshu Li Chong, did a lot of things against the law. He forcibly bought other people's homes, expanded his own houses, and installed on the roofs of the houses the shackles that can only be installed on palaces, and on the stirrups the wooden men holding the ceremonial swords.

古文：道穆绳纠，悉毁去之，并表发其赃货。
现代文：高道穆弹劾他，将这些非份使用的装饰全部去掉。又上表抄没他的赃物。
English: Gao Daomu impeached him, removed all the decorations that were not used, and confiscated his stolen goods.

古文：尔硃荣讨蠕蠕，道穆监其军事，荣甚惮之。
现代文：尔朱荣讨伐蠕蠕族，高道穆负责监察他的军事。尔朱荣很畏惧他。
English: Lr Chu Rong fought against the Cum Cum people, Gao Da Mu was in charge of supervising his military. Lr Chu Rong was very afraid of him.

古文：萧宝夤西征，以为行台郎中，委以军机之事。
现代文：萧宝夤西征，他任行台郎中，萧宝夤把军机大事全都委托给他。
English: During Xiao Baojun's Westward Expedition, he served as a general's aide, and Xiao Baojun entrusted him with all the important military affairs.

古文：后属兄谦之被害，情不自安，遂托身于孝庄。
现代文：后来，他的哥哥高谦之被灵太后处死，他心里很不安稳，便倾身于孝庄帝。
English: Later, when his brother Gao Qianzhi was executed by the Empress Dowager Ling, he was very uneasy in his heart, so he devoted himself to Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：孝庄时为侍中，深相保护。
现代文：孝庄帝命他为侍中，对他深加保护。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed him as a chamberlain and gave him deep protection.

古文：及即位，赐爵龙城侯，除太尉长史，领中书舍人。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，赐给他龙城侯的爵位，授予他太尉长史的职位，兼领中书舍人。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended the throne, bestowed upon him the title of Marquis of Longcheng, and granted him the position of First Lieutenant of Long History, as well as the title of Second Lieutenant of Long History.

古文：及元颢逼武牢，或劝帝赴关西者，帝以问道穆，道穆言关中残荒，请车驾北度，循河东下。帝然之。
现代文：元颢逼近武牢关，有人劝孝庄帝避向关西，孝庄帝征询高道穆的意见，他说关中残破荒芜，圣驾应该北渡黄河，再沿黄河东下，孝庄帝接受了他的建议。
English: When Yuan Shao was approaching Wudang Pass, someone advised Emperor Xiaozhuang to avoid going to the west of Kansai. Emperor Xiaozhuang asked Gao Daomu for advice. He said that Kansai was deserted and that the holy man should cross the Yellow River to the north and then go east along the Yellow River. Emperor Xiaozhuang accepted his suggestion.

古文：其夜到河内郡北，帝命道穆烛下作诏书，布告远近，于是四方知乘舆所在。
现代文：当夜到达河内郡的北部，孝庄帝命他在烛光下起草诏书，以布告天下。于是，四方的官吏百姓都知道皇帝在哪里。
English: Arriving in the northern part of Hanoi County that night, Emperor Xiaozhuang ordered him to draft an edict by candlelight and announce it to the world. As a result, officials and people in all four directions knew where the emperor was.

古文：寻除给事黄门侍郎、安喜县公。
现代文：不久，他被任命为给事黄门侍郎、安喜县公。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Huangmen waiter and Anxi county magistrate.

古文：于时尔硃荣欲回师待秋，道穆谓曰： 大王拥百万之众，辅天子而令诸侯，此桓、文之举也。
现代文：这时，尔朱荣想撤回军队，等到秋天再进攻元颢。道穆劝他说： 大王您拥有百万之众，辅助天子，号令诸侯。这是桓温、文聘的壮举啊。
English: At this time, Er Zhurong wanted to withdraw the army and wait until the autumn to attack Yuan Shao. Daomu advised him: "Great King, you have a million people, assist the Son of Heaven, and command the princes. This is the feat of Kanwen and Wenbei.

古文：今若还师，令颢重完守具，可谓养虺成蛇，悔无及矣。 
现代文：现在如果撤兵，让元颢重新布置防线，真可谓是养虺成蛇，后悔莫及啊。 
English: If we withdraw our troops now and let the Yuan Shao rearrange the defense line, it will really be like raising a snake into a snake, and we will regret it in no time.

古文：荣深然之。
现代文：尔朱荣认为他讲的很有道理。
English: Le Zhu Rong thought that what he said was very reasonable.

古文：及孝庄反政，因宴次谓尔硃荣曰： 前若不用高黄门计，社稷不安，可为朕劝其酒，令醉。 
现代文：孝庄帝返回京城，在宴会上对尔朱荣说： 先前如果不采纳高黄门的建议，国家就不安定。你可替我劝他喝酒，让他喝醉。 
English: Xiaozhuang returned to Beijing and said to Zhu Rong at the banquet: If you do not accept Gao Huangmen's suggestion, the country will not be stable. You can persuade him to drink for me and let him get drunk.

古文：荣因陈其作监军时，临事能决，实可任用。
现代文：尔朱荣借机陈说高道穆任他的监军时，遇事很有决断，实在可以重用。
English: Le Zhurong took the opportunity to say that when Gao Daomu was appointed as his supervisor, he was very decisive in dealing with things and could really be reused.

古文：寻除御史中尉，仍兼黄门。
现代文：不久，朝廷任命道穆为御史中尉，仍然兼任黄门侍郎。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Domo as a lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency, and he continued to serve as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：道穆外执直绳，内参机密，凡是益国利人之事，必以奏闻，谏争尽言，无所顾惮。
现代文：高道穆对外用法律绳量百官，对内参与朝廷机密大事的商议，凡是利国利民的事情，他必定奏报朝廷。进谏时畅所欲言，无所畏惧。
English: Gao Daumu was the most powerful official in terms of applying the law to the outside world, and he participated in the deliberation of the confidential events of the imperial court. He would certainly report to the imperial court all the things that were beneficial to the country and the people. When he entered the palace, he was free to say whatever he wanted, without fear.

古文：选用御史，皆当世名辈，李希宗、李绘、阳休之、阳斐、封君义、邢子明、苏淑、宋世良等三十人。
现代文：选用的御史，都是当代的知名人物，如李希宗、李绘、阳休之、阳斐、封君义、邢子明等三十人。
English: The selected emperors are all famous contemporary figures, such as Li Xizong, Li Miao, Yang Xiu Zhi, Yang Fei, Feng Jun Yi, Zang Zi Ming and other thirty people.

古文：于时用钱稍薄，道穆表曰： 百姓之业，钱货为本，救弊改铸，王政所先。
现代文：当时，使用的钱币比较薄，他上表说 ：百姓们立业，以钱货为根本。改铸新币，拯救时弊，这是朝廷为政的急务。
English: At that time, the coins used were relatively thin, he said on the table: The people have established a business, with money and goods as the foundation. It is an urgent task for the imperial court to change the minting of new coins and save the bad times.

古文：自顷以来，私铸薄滥，官司纠绳，挂网非一。
现代文：最近以来，私人铸造的钱币又薄又多，官府依法清理，漏网的不是一个两个。
English: Recently, coins minted by private individuals have been thin and numerous, and the government has been cleaning them up in accordance with the law, with only one or two leaking.

古文：在市铜价，八十一文得铜一斤，私铸薄钱，斤余二百。
现代文：市面上铜的价格，八十一文钱可以买一斤。私人铸造的薄钱，每斤铜可铸二百多。
English: The price of copper on the market, eighty-one cents can buy a kilo. Privately minted thin money, each kilo of copper can cast more than two hundred.

古文：既示之以深利，又随之以重刑，得罪者虽多，奸铸者弥众。
现代文：这种情况既表明私铸铜钱可获厚利。所以，虽然国家施之以重刑，犯罪受惩处的人虽然很多，而非法铸造的人数却在不断增加。
English: This situation not only shows that there are huge profits to be made from illegally minting copper coins. Therefore, although the state imposes heavy penalties and many people are punished for crimes, the number of people illegally minting is constantly increasing.

古文：今钱徒有五铢之文，而无二铢之实，薄甚榆荚，上贯便破，置之水上，殆欲不沈。
现代文：现在的铜钱纵有五铢钱的标志，却没有二铢的重量，薄得超过榆荚，一穿上绳子就破裂，放到水上，几乎不往下沉。
English: Today's copper money, even though it has the symbol of the five-baht coin, does not have the weight of two baht. It is so thin that it is thinner than the bait, and it breaks as soon as it is put on the rope. When it is put on the water, it hardly sinks.

古文：因循有渐，科防不切，朝廷失之，彼复何罪。
现代文：这种弊端前后因循沿袭，越来越严重，而限制查禁却很不得力。朝廷放弃不管，私铸钱的人又有什么罪呢？
English: This kind of malpractice is becoming more and more serious as time goes by, and the restrictions and prohibitions are very weak. Regardless of the abandonment of the imperial court, what is the crime of the people who minted money?

古文：昔汉文帝以五分钱小，改铸四铢。
现代文：过去汉文帝因嫌五分钱太小，改铸四铢钱。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen was reluctant to mint five-cent coins because they were too small, so he minted four-cent coins instead.

古文：至武帝复改三铢为半两。
现代文：汉武帝时又将三铢钱改成半两。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, it was changed to half and half.

古文：此皆以大易小，以重代轻也。
现代文：这都是以大易小，以重代轻。
English: It's a case of less is more.

古文：论今据古，宜改铸大钱，文载年号，以记其始。
现代文：根据往古讨论今天，应该改铸成大钱，铸上年号，以记下它的起始。
English: According to the ancient discussion today, it should be recast into big money, casting the previous year's number to record its beginning.

古文：则一斤所成，止七十六文。
现代文：一斤铜铸成的钱只有六七十文。
English: A kilo of copper minted into money is only worth sixty or seventy mon.

古文：铜价至贱，五十有余，其中人功，食料、锡炭、铅钞，纵复私营，不能自润。
现代文：铜价非常便宜，每斤只值五十多文。其中铸钱时的人工、原料、锡炭、铅砂，纵然再让他私自铸造，也得不到什么利润。
English: The price of copper is very cheap, only worth more than fifty yuan per kilo. Among them, the labor, raw materials, tin charcoal, and lead sand used to cast money, even if he were to cast it himself, he would not get any profit.

古文：直置无利，自应息心，况复严刑广设也。
现代文：无利可图，他们自然就会死心，更何况还有严刑峻法呢？
English: If there is no profit, they will naturally lose heart, and what's more, there will be severe punishments?

古文：以臣测之，必当钱货永通，公私获允。 
现代文：按我的意见，应当让钱与货卖相通，公私铸钱，一概允许。 
English: In my opinion, money should be linked to the sale of goods, and both public and private minting of money should be allowed.

古文：后遂用杨侃计，铸永安五铢钱。
现代文：后来，朝廷采用杨侃的建议，铸造了永安五铢钱。
English: Later, the imperial court adopted Yang Kan's suggestion and minted Yong'an five-baht coins.

古文：仆射尔硃世隆当朝权盛，因内见，衣冠失仪，道穆便即弹纠。
现代文：仆射尔朱世隆独揽朝廷大权，到内廷拜见天子，他的衣着打扮失去君臣的礼仪，道穆便立即弹劾他。
English: His servant, Zhu Shilong, monopolized the power of the imperial court and went to the Inner Court to meet the emperor. His dress lost the etiquette of a prince and a minister, and Daomu immediately impeached him.

古文：帝姊寿阳公主行犯清路，执赤棒卒呵之不止，道穆令卒棒破其车。
现代文：孝庄帝的姐姐寿阳公主出行，违犯了清道的规矩，拿着红色木棒的兵卒呵斥人，她的车子一直向前走。
English: When Princess Shouyang, the sister of Emperor Xiaozhuang, was traveling, she violated the rules of the clear road. A soldier with a red wooden stick yelled at people, and her car kept moving forward.

古文：公主深恨，泣以诉帝。
现代文：高道穆命军卒用木棒将她坐的车子打坏。
English: Gao Daomu's soldiers beat the car she was riding in with a wooden stick.

古文：帝曰： 高中尉清直人，彼所行者公事，岂可私恨责之也？ 
现代文：公主十分恼恨，哭着告诉了孝庄帝，孝庄帝说： 高中尉是一个清廉正直的人，他所履行的是公事，我怎么可以因私恨去责怪他呢？ 
English: The princess was very angry and told Emperor Xiaozhuang in tears. Emperor Xiaozhuang said, "Lieutenant Gao is a clean and honest person. He is performing his official duties. How can I blame him for my selfish hatred?"

古文：道穆后见帝，帝曰： 一日家姊行路相犯，深以为愧。 
现代文：道穆后来见孝庄帝，孝庄帝说： 有一天我姐姐出行冒犯了你，深感惭愧。 
English: Later, Da Mu met Emperor Xiaozhuang. Emperor Xiaozhuang said, "One day, my sister's trip offended you, and I feel deeply ashamed.

古文：道穆免冠谢，帝曰： 朕以愧卿，卿反谢朕！ 
现代文：道穆脱下帽子跪下谢罪，孝庄帝说： 我有愧于你，你怎么反过来向我谢罪？ 
English: Daumu took off his hat and knelt down to apologize. Xiao Zhuangdi said, "I am ashamed of you. How can you apologize to me in return?"

古文：寻敕监仪注。
现代文：不久，命他监修朝廷的礼仪制度。
English: Soon, he was ordered to supervise the etiquette system of the imperial court.

古文：又诏： 秘书图籍及典书缃素，多致零落，可令道穆总集帐目，并牒儒学之士，编比次第。 
现代文：又下诏说： 皇家的图书典籍，以及各种典章的文本，大多零乱残败，可令高道穆收集汇总登记，并选饱学儒士编排顺序。 
English: He also said: The royal books and classics, as well as the texts of various ordinances, are mostly scattered and incomplete, which can be collected and registered by Gao Daomu, and the order of arrangement can be chosen by the Confucian scholars.

古文：道穆又上疏曰： 高祖太和之初，置廷尉司直，论刑辟是非，虽事非古始，交济时要。窃见御史出使，悉受风闻，虽时获罪人，亦不无枉滥。
现代文：他又上疏说： 高祖孝文帝太和初年，让廷尉设置司直，讨论死罪判得是否恰当。事情虽然不是古代就有，也不是为了安排朝廷重臣，我认为御史们出去巡查，都根据所闻奏事，虽然不断纠举出犯罪的人，也不免会出现冤枉和滥刑。
English: He went on to say, "In the first year of Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen's reign, the imperial lieutenant was asked to set up a committee to discuss whether the death penalty was appropriate. Although the matter did not originate in ancient times, nor was it for the purpose of arranging high-ranking courtiers, I believe that the imperial historians went out to inspect based on what they had heard. Although people who committed crimes were constantly being punished, it was inevitable that there would be injustice and excessive punishment.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：得尧之罚，不能不怨。
现代文：就是受到像尧这样圣明的帝王的惩罚，也不能不产生怨恨。
English: Even if you are punished by a saintly emperor like Yu, you cannot help but feel resentment.

古文：守令为政，容有爱憎，奸猾之徒，恆思报恶，多有妄造无名，共相诬谤。
现代文：地方长官们处理政务，总会有情绪上的爱憎。那些奸恶刁滑之徒，常想着报复他受到的责罚，因而，任意编造没有根据的罪状，一起诋毁攻击。
English: There is always an emotional love-hate between the magistrates in the administration of the government, and the treacherous and mischievous ones, ever desirous of revenge for the punishment inflicted on him, freely fabricate groundless charges and join in the slanderous attack.

古文：御史一经检究，耻于不成，杖木之下，以虚为实。
现代文：御史一经受理查究，总怕案犯构不成大罪，在严刑拷打之下，假的也变成了真的。
English: Once the case is thoroughly investigated, it is always feared that the perpetrator of the crime will not commit a serious crime. Under severe torture, the false also becomes true.

古文：无罪不能自雪者，岂可胜道哉！
现代文：没有过失受罚，而又不能申雪的，哪里能数得完呢！
English: Who can count the number of people who have not been punished for wrongdoing and yet cannot utter a single word?

古文：臣虽愚短，守不假器，绣衣所指，冀以清肃。
现代文：我虽然愚蠢短浅，却守职不凭借外物。御史们弹劾，固然是希望肃清政治。
English: Although I am stupid and short-sighted, I do not rely on external things to keep my job. The impeachment of the historians is, of course, a hope to clean up politics.

古文：若仍更踵前失，或伤善人，则尸禄之责，无所逃罪。
现代文：但如果仍重蹈过去的过失，伤害好人，那么尸位其政的罪责是无法逃脱的。
English: But if it still repeats the mistakes of the past and harms good people, then it will be unable to escape the guilt of being a corrupt government.

古文：如臣鄙见，请依太和故事，还置司直十人，名隶廷尉，秩以五品，选历官有称，心平性正者为之。
现代文：按我的看法，请按太和年间的旧例，仍设置司直十人，隶属廷尉，给予五品官职，选拔卓有政绩，心气公正平和者充任。
English: According to my opinion, please follow the old practice during the Taichung era, still set up ten officers, subordinate to the court officers, give five official positions, select those with outstanding political achievements, and are fair and peaceful.

古文：御史若出纠劾，即移廷尉，令知人数。
现代文：御史如出京举劾，立即告知廷尉，让他们知道外出御史的人数。
English: If the imperial historian goes to Beijing to lodge an impeachment, he should immediately inform the imperial lieutenant, so that they know the number of imperial historians going out.

古文：廷尉遣司直与御史俱发。所到州郡，分居别馆。
现代文：廷尉派司直与御史一起出发，到州郡后，他们要分开馆驿住下。
English: The courtier sent Shizinao and Mishi to set out together. After arriving in Shuzhou County, they were to separate and stay in the pavilion.

古文：御史检了，移付司直。司直覆问事讫，与御史俱还。
现代文：御史纠举的案件要交付司直审查，司直审查完毕，再与御史一起回京。
English: The cases that are referred to the court by the magistrate are to be submitted to the magistrate for review. Once the magistrate's review is complete, the case is to be returned to Beijing together with the magistrate.

古文：中尉弹闻，廷尉科案，一如旧式。
现代文：中尉负责奏闻朝廷，廷尉负责调查案件，完全按前代旧制去做。
English: The lieutenant is responsible for reporting to the imperial court, and the court lieutenant is responsible for investigating the case, which is done completely according to the previous old system.

古文：庶使狱成罪定，无复稽宽，为恶取败，不得称枉。
现代文：这样，可以使狱成定案后，不再会量刑过宽；作恶被惩处，也不会喊冤。
English: In this way, it can be ensured that after the prison is finalized, the sentencing will no longer be too broad; the evil will be punished, and there will be no vindication.

古文：若御史、司直纠劾失实，悉依所断狱罪之。
现代文：如果御史和司直纠劾失实，就按他们断案错误的大小予以处罚。
English: If the corrections made by Goshi and Sisho are untrue, they will be punished according to the size of their error in dismissing the case.

古文：听以所检，迭相纠发。
现代文：允许纠举的对象检举他们，也允许他们互相揭发。
English: Allow the subject of the complaint to report them, and allow them to report each other.

古文：如二使阿曲，有不尽理，听罪家诣门下通诉，别加案检。
现代文：如果这两个使者歪曲案件真相，处理得不合情理，允许被弹劾的罪犯到门下省控诉，另外再派人复审检察。
English: If these two emissaries distort the truth of the case and deal with it unreasonably, allow the criminal to be impeached to go to the province to lodge a complaint, and then send someone else to review and inspect.

古文：如此，则肺石之傍，怨从可息；聚棘之下，受罪吞声者矣。 诏从之，复置司直。
现代文：这样一来，在朝廷大门外设置的让鸣冤者敲击的石头旁，告状的人就会止息；在带刺的枣树枝的抽打之下，那些受刑者因罪证确凿，只能忍气吞声。 朝廷下诏采纳他的建议，重新设置了司直。
English: In this way, the accusers would stop at the stone set up outside the palace gate for the complainers to strike; under the beating of the thorny jujube branch, those who were tortured could only swallow their breath because the crime was conclusive. The imperial edict adopted his suggestion and re-established the justice.

古文：及尔硃荣死，帝召道穆，付赦书，令宣于外，谓曰： 今当得精选御史矣。 
现代文：尔朱荣被处死后，孝庄帝召见他，交给他一份诏书，让他向朝臣们宣读，对他说 ：现在应当精心选拔御史了。 
English: After Er Zhu Rong was executed, Emperor Xiaozhuang summoned him and gave him an imperial edict to read out to his courtiers, telling him: "It is time to carefully select the imperial historian."

古文：先是，荣等常欲以其亲党为御史，故有此诏。
现代文：原先，尔朱荣等人常想把自己的党羽安插为御史，所以，孝庄帝才下了这一道诏书。
English: Originally, Er Zhu Rong and others often wanted to install their own party leaders as imperial historians, so Emperor Xiaozhuang only issued this edict.

古文：及尔硃世隆等战于大夏门北，道穆受诏督战。
现代文：尔朱世隆在大夏门北面与魏军作战时，高道穆奉命督战。
English: When Er Zhu Shilong fought against the Wei army on the north side of the Daxia Gate, Gao Daomu was ordered to supervise the battle.

古文：又赞成太府卿李苗断桥之计，世隆等于是北遁。
现代文：他又支持李苗提出的切断桥梁的建议，于是，尔朱世隆向北逃窜。
English: He also supported Li Miao's proposal to cut off the bridge, so Er Zhu Shilong fled to the north.

古文：加卫将军、大都督，兼尚书右仆射、南道大行台。
现代文：朝廷加封他为卫将军、大都督，兼任尚书右仆射、南道大行台。
English: The imperial court awarded him the titles of Wei general and grand governor, and he also held the posts of Shang Shuxu Yuhusa and Southern Daigongdae.

古文：时虽外托征蛮，而帝恐北军不利，欲为南巡之计。
现代文：当时，朝廷虽然对外说是要南征蛮族，而孝庄帝真正忧虑的是北部的战事不利，想以南巡作借口乘机躲避。
English: At that time, although the imperial court said to the outside world that they wanted to invade the barbarians in the south, Emperor Xiaozhuang was really worried that the war in the north would be unfavorable, and wanted to take the opportunity to avoid the south as an excuse.

古文：子士镜袭爵，为北豫州刺史。
现代文：还没有出发，尔朱兆已经攻入洛阳。
English: Before setting off, Lzhu Zhao had already entered Luoyang.

古文：道穆兄谦之。
现代文：高道穆为了远祸保身，借口有病辞去官职。
English: Gao Daumu resigned from his post on the pretext of illness in order to protect himself from further misfortune.

古文：谦之字道让，少事后母以孝闻。
现代文：尔朱世隆因为他忠于孝庄帝，也将他杀害。高谦之，字道让，高道穆的哥哥。少年以侍奉后母孝顺闻名。
English: Because he was loyal to Emperor Xiaozhuang, Zhu Shilong also killed him. Gao Qianzhi, also known as Daojuan, was Gao Daomu's older brother. The boy was famous for serving his stepmother, Xiaozhun.

古文：专意经史，天文、算历、图纬之书，多所该涉。
现代文：他专心致志地学习经典史籍，对于天文、算术、历法、占卜图谶之类的书籍，也多有涉猎。
English: He devoted himself to studying classic historical books, and also dabbled in astronomy, arithmetic, calendars, divination charts and other books.

古文：好文章，留心《老》、《易》。
现代文：喜好写文章，又留心于《老子》、《易经》。
English: He likes to write articles, and pays attention to "Lao Zi" and "I Ching."

古文：袭父爵。
现代文：后来他继承了父亲的爵位。
English: He later succeeded to his father's title.

古文：孝昌中，行河阴令。
现代文：孝昌年间，他代理河阴县令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he acted as the deputy governor of Heyin County.

古文：先是有人囊盛瓦砾，指作钱物，诈市人马，因而逃去。
现代文：原先，有一个人用布袋装上瓦砾片，诈称是钱币，到集市上骗买别人的马匹，然后逃去。
English: Originally, there was a person who loaded rubble with a cloth bag, falsely claiming that it was money, went to the market to buy other people's horses, and then fled.

古文：诏令追捕，必得以闻。
现代文：朝廷下诏命地方追捕罪犯，一定要将案情报告朝廷。
English: The imperial edict ordered the local authorities to hunt down the criminals, and they must report the case to the imperial court.

古文：谦之乃伪枷一囚，立于马市，宣言是前诈市马贼，今欲刑之。
现代文：谦之便将一名在押旧犯戴上枷锁，让他站到马市上示众，说这就是前些时候诈骗马匹的骗子，今天想对他施以大刑。
English: He then put an old criminal in custody in shackles and made him stand in the horse market to demonstrate to the public, saying that this was the swindler who had defrauded horses earlier and wanted to impose a heavy sentence on him today.

古文：密遣腹心，察市中私议者。有二人相见，忻然曰： 无复忧矣！ 
现代文：然后他派心腹查访集市上私下议论的人们，有两个人见面非常高兴，说： 我们不用再担忧了。 
English: Then he sent an aide to check on the people who were talking privately in the bazaar. Two people were very happy to see him and said, "We don't have to worry anymore."

古文：执送案问，悉获其党。
现代文：心腹把他们扭送到衙门审问，将他们所有的同伙全部抓获，并查出窝藏赃物的地方。
English: The informant dragged them to the police station for interrogation, arrested all their accomplices, and found out where the stolen goods were hidden.

古文：并出前后盗处，失物之家，各得其本物，具以状告。
现代文：丢东西的人家，都找回了丢失的东西，他把案件处理的情况报告给朝廷。
English: He reported the status of the handling of the case to the Imperial Court.

古文：寻正河阴令。
现代文：不久，正式任他为河阴县令。
English: Soon, he was officially appointed as the county magistrate of Heyin County.

古文：在县二年，损益政体，多为故事。
现代文：在县任职三年，革新政治，大多采用历史上有益的旧例。
English: He served in the prefecture for three years and innovated politics, mostly using historically beneficial old examples.

古文：时道穆为御史，亦有能名，世美其父子兄弟并著当官之称。
现代文：这时，他的兄弟高道穆任御史，也博得美好的名声，人们称赞他们父子兄弟都享有当官的美好声誉。
English: At this time, his brother Gao Daoming also won a good reputation, and people praised that both their father and son brothers enjoyed a good reputation as officials.

古文：旧制，二县令得面陈得失。
现代文：旧制规定，京郊的两位县令可以当面向皇帝陈奏当地政治得失。
English: According to the old system, two prefectural governors in the suburbs of Kyoto could discuss local political gains and losses in front of the emperor.

古文：时佞幸之辈，恶其有所发闻，遂共奏罢。
现代文：当时，由于受宠幸的佞臣害怕他们的劣迹被揭发，便一起奏报朝廷，要废除这项规定。
English: At that time, because the favored courtiers were afraid that their bad deeds would be exposed, they jointly reported to the imperial court to abolish this regulation.

古文：谦之乃上疏曰： 臣以无庸，谬宰神邑，实思奉法不挠，称是官方。酬朝廷无赀之恩，尽人臣守器之节。
现代文：高谦之上奏朝廷说： 我没有才能，侥幸管理河阴县，实在想着奉公守法，不屈不挠，尽职尽责，以酬报朝廷对我无法估量的恩德，尽到我做臣子为国家守土安民的职责。
English: Gao Qian played the imperial court and said: I have no talent, I was lucky to manage Hexin County, I really want to be obedient to the law, unyielding, and do my duty, and reward the imperial court for my immeasurable kindness, and fulfill my duties as a vassal to protect the country and the people.

古文：但豪家支属，戚里亲媾，缧绁所及，举目多是。
现代文：但是，那些豪门大姓的旁支近亲，帝王与外戚们的亲戚朋友，盘根错节，到处都是。
English: However, the collateral close relatives of those great families, the relatives and friends of emperors and their relatives, are intertwined and everywhere.

古文：皆有盗憎之色，咸起恶上之心。
现代文：他们都有邪恶之人憎恶正直人的面色，有蔑视上官的傲慢之心。
English: They all have the look of evil men hating honest men, and the insolence of despising their superiors.

古文：县令轻弱，何能克济？
现代文：县令职轻力弱，怎能制服他们？
English: County magistrates are weak and feeble, how can they be subdued?

古文：先帝昔发明诏，得使面陈所怀。
现代文：先帝过去曾明确下诏，允许县令当面陈奏。
English: In the past, the former emperor had issued a clear edict, allowing the prefectural governor to make a speech in person.

古文：臣亡父先臣崇之为洛阳令，常得入奏是非，所以朝贵敛手，无敢干政。
现代文：我已去世的父亲高崇曾任洛阳县的县令，常常入宫陈奏地方上的政情，所以，朝廷的王公贵族都自我约束，不敢干涉该县的政事。
English: My deceased father, Gao Chong, was once the county magistrate of Luoyang County. He often went to the palace to report on the local political situation. Therefore, the princes and nobles of the imperial court were self-restrained and did not dare to interfere in the county's political affairs.

古文：近年已来，此制遂寝，致使神宰威轻，下情不达。
现代文：近几年以来，这条规定已经废除，所以，使得天下首县威望降低，下情不能上达。
English: In recent years, this provision has been abolished, so the prestige of the world's first county has been reduced, and the situation cannot be improved.

古文：今二圣远遵尧、舜，宪章高祖，愚臣亦望策其驽蹇，少立功名。
现代文：现在，太后和皇帝遵循尧、舜的治国之道，按照高祖孝文帝的典章制度管理朝政，愚臣我也希望尽自己的微薄之力，为国家多少树立些功名。
English: Now that the empress dowager and the emperor are following the wise and prudent way of governing the country and administering the imperial government in accordance with the ceremonial system of Emperor Gao Zuo Xiaowen, I also hope to do my best to establish some merit for the country.

古文：乞行新典，更明往制，庶奸豪知禁，颇自屏心。 
现代文：请求在实行新制度的同时，也能恢复过去一些有益的规定。这样，那些奸恶豪纵之徒就会自我约束，更加小心谨慎。 
English: It is hoped that the implementation of the new system will be accompanied by the restoration of some of the beneficial provisions of the past, so that those who indulge in malign activities will restrain themselves and be more cautious.

古文：诏付外量闻。
现代文：朝廷下诏交付外廷讨论。
English: The imperial edict was delivered to the court for discussion.

古文：谦之又上疏，以为： 自正光以来，边城屡扰，命将出师，相继于路。
现代文：高谦之又上疏言事，认为： 自从正光年以来，边境城镇多次被骚扰，受命出师征讨的军队，在路途上往来不断。
English: Gao Qianzhi once again refrained from commenting, saying: Since the Zhengguang era, the border towns have been harassed many times, and the army, which was ordered to go out to collect, kept coming and going on the road.

古文：但诸将帅，或非其才，多遣亲者，妄称入募，唯遣奴客充数而已。
现代文：但是，将帅们有些并非是能打仗的人才，大多派遣他们的亲属，妄称是应征入伍，实际上是他们的亲属又派自己的家丁奴仆充数罢了。
English: However, some of the generals were not able to fight, and most of them sent their relatives, falsely claiming that they were conscripts. In fact, their relatives sent their own servants to fill the ranks.

古文：对寇临敌，略不弯弓。
现代文：一旦与敌人对垒，连弓都拉不开。
English: Once you face the enemy, you can't even draw your bow.

古文：则是王爵虚加，征夫多阙，贼虏何可殄除，忠贞何以劝诫也？
现代文：这样，实则是让朝廷空封了一些王爵，征战的士卒又大多缺失，敌人怎么能被消灭？勇敢忠贞的人又怎么能够被劝诫鼓舞呢？
English: Thus, the truth is that the imperial court has left some dukedoms vacant, and most of the soldiers are missing. How can the enemy be eliminated? How can brave and loyal people be exhorted and encouraged?

古文：且近习侍臣，戚属朝士，请托官曹，擅作威福。
现代文：况且，接近天子的侍臣，向朝臣们推荐自己的亲属，请托官员替自己办事，擅自作威作福。
English: Moreover, courtiers who are close to the Son of Heaven recommend their relatives to courtiers, ask officials to do things for them, and do things for themselves without permission.

古文：如有清贞奉法，不为回者，咸共谮毁，横受罪罚。
现代文：如果有清廉贞洁，不替他们回护或不接受请托的，他们就一起攻击诋毁，使人家横遭罪名和惩罚。
English: If there is a man of integrity and chastity who does not intercede on their behalf or accept their request, they will attack and defame him together, and he will be accused and punished.

古文：在朝顾望，谁肯申闻？
现代文：朝臣们为此胆怯徘徊，谁还敢向朝廷奏闻？
English: The courtiers are timidly hovering around this, who would dare to report it to the imperial court?

古文：蔽上拥下，亏风损政。使谗谄甘心，忠谠息义。
现代文：欺上瞒下，败坏风气，危害朝政，使得谗言害人者为所欲为，忠贞诚实的人压抑着自己的满腔正义。
English: It deceives and conceals, corrupts morals, and endangers the imperial government, causing those who slander and harm others to do as they please, and those who are loyal and honest to suppress their fullness of righteousness.

古文：且频年以来，多有征发，人不堪命，动致流离。苟保妻子，竞逃王役，不复顾其桑井，惮此刑书。
现代文：另外，多年以来，常常征兵讨伐，人民不堪忍受，动不动就背井离乡，以保全妻子儿女的性命，竞相逃脱国家的劳役，不再种植桑田，都是由于害怕刑律的制裁。
English: In addition, for many years, military conscription has often been carried out, and the people are unbearable, leaving their hometowns at every turn to save the lives of their wives and children, competing to escape state labor service, and no longer planting mulberry fields, all due to fear of criminal sanctions.

古文：正由还有必困之理，归无自安之路。
现代文：所以，他们回来，还会被困难滋扰，没有一条能自我保全的道路。
English: Therefore, when they come back, they will be plagued by difficulties, and there is no way for them to save themselves.

古文：若听归其本业，徭役微甄，则还者必众，垦田增辟，数年之后，大获课入。
现代文：如果允许他们归来从事原来的职业，重新甄别，并减轻他们的徭役，那么，回来的人一定很多，被开垦的土地也会增加，数年之后，国家就会收到大量的租税。
English: If they were allowed to return to their former occupations, re-screened, and relieved of their duties, there would be many returnees, more land would be reclaimed, and after a few years, the state would receive a large amount of taxes.

古文：今不务以理还之，但欲严符切勒，恐数年之后，走者更多。
现代文：现在，不按照情理让他们还乡，只想凭着严格的命令逼迫他们，恐怕几年之后流失的人口更多。
English: Now, instead of letting them return to their hometowns according to reason, they only want to persecute them with strict orders. I am afraid that after a few years, the population loss will be even greater.

古文：故有国有家者，不患人不我归，唯患政之不立；不恃敌不我攻，唯恃吾不可侮。
现代文：所以，有国有家，就不担心人家不归顺我们，只担心我们的政治不清明；不要侥幸地想着敌人不进攻我们，而要依赖我们强不可侮。
English: Therefore, if you are a state-owned enterprise, do not worry that others will not submit to us, only worry that our politics are not clear; do not think that the enemy will not attack us, but rely on our strength.

古文：此乃千载共遵，百王一致。
现代文：这是千百年来共同遵守、百代帝王认识一致的道理。
English: This is a principle that has been observed for thousands of years and has been recognized by hundreds of emperors.

古文：伏愿少垂览察。 
现代文：谨望能稍有垂览省察。 
English: I hope to be able to take a closer look.

古文：灵太后得其疏，以责左右近侍，诸宠要者由是疾之。乃启太后，云谦之有学艺，除为国子博士。
现代文：灵太后看到他的奏章，借此责备左右侍臣。这些受宠的政要们因此非常妒恨他，便启奏灵太后，说他很有学问，便将他从河阴县调离，任命为国子博士。
English: When the Empress Dowager saw his transcript, she used it to reproach the attendants around him. These favored dignitaries were so jealous of him that they told the Empress Dowager that he was very learned, and they transferred him from Heyin County and appointed him as a doctor of the country.

古文：谦之与袁翻、常景、郦道元、温子升之徒，或申款旧。好施赡恤，言诺无亏。
现代文：高谦之与袁翻、常景、郦道元、温子升等人都喜欢恪守过去的典章制度，对贫穷无告的人喜好布施抚恤，讲究信义，允诺的事情从不落空。
English: Gao Qianzhi, Yuan Fu, Changjing, Xing Dao Yuan, Wen Zi Sheng and others all like to abide by the past award system, prefer to give subsidies to the poor and the unsuspecting, pay attention to credibility, and promise things never fail.

古文：居家僮隶，对其兒不挞其父母，生三子便免其一世。
现代文：对待家里的奴仆，从不当着儿女的面去鞭打他们的父母。生三个儿子的奴仆，便免去他们奴仆的身份。
English: You shall not beat your father or your mother in the presence of their children; and if a man have three sons, they shall go out of his house.

古文：无愆黥奴婢，常称： 俱禀人体，如何残害？ 
现代文：从不对奴婢施行髡刑和黥刑，常常说： 都是人的身体，为什么要加以残害？ 
English: They never flogged or whipped their male and female slaves, and they always said, "They are all human bodies, why should they be mutilated?"

古文：谦之以父舅氏沮渠蒙逊曾据凉土，国书漏阙，乃修《凉书》十卷，行于世。
现代文：他因五舅父沮渠蒙逊曾据守凉州一带，而国书上却没有记载，便撰写了《凉书》十卷，刊行于世。
English: Due to the fact that his great-great-uncle Qiuqiu Mengxun once held sway in the Liangzhou region, which was not recorded in the state book, he wrote ten volumes of "The Liangshu" and published them.

古文：凉国盛事佛道，为论贬之，称佛是九流之一家。
现代文：凉国盛行佛教，他写文章贬斥，称佛教是九流中的一家。
English: Buddhism was prevalent in Liangguo, and he wrote an article denouncing it, saying that Buddhism was one of the nine schools.

古文：当世名流，竞以佛理来难，谦之还以佛义对之，竟不能屈。
现代文：当世的名流学士，竞相用佛理向他发难诘问，他也用佛教的义理来应付，论敌竟不能使他屈服。
English: The world's famous scholars tried to use the Buddha's teachings to challenge him, but he also used the Buddhist principles to deal with them, but his opponents couldn't make him give in.

古文：以时所行历多未尽善，乃更改元修者撰，为一家之法。
现代文：因为当时流行的历法不尽完善，他便重新修改撰写，成为独立一家的历法。
English: Because the popular calendar at that time was not perfect, he revised and rewrote it to become an independent calendar.

古文：虽未行于世，识者叹其多能。
现代文：虽然没有在社会上流行传播，懂行的人都佩服他具有多方面的才能。
English: Although it has not been popularized in society, people who know the ropes admire his multi-faceted talent.

古文：时朝议铸钱，以谦之为铸钱都将长者史，乃上表求铸三铢钱，曰：
现代文：这时，朝廷商讨铸造钱币的事，便命高谦之为铸钱都将长史。他便上表请求铸造三铢钱，说：
English: At this time, the imperial court discussed the issue of minting coins, and it was decided that the minting of money would have a long history. He went up to the table to request the minting of three coins, saying:

古文：盖钱货之立，本以通有无，便交易，故钱之轻重，世代不同。
现代文： 钱币的出现，本来是用它作媒介使交换双方互通有无，方便交易。所以，钱币分量的轻重，各个朝代都不相同。
English: The appearance of coins was originally to use it as a medium to enable the exchange of both parties to exchange goods and facilitate transactions. Therefore, the weight of coins is different in each dynasty.

古文：太公为周置九府圜法。
现代文：姜太公为周创立了使财帛流通的九府圜法。
English: Jiang Taigong created the nine-branch method of circulating money for Zhou.

古文：至景王时，更铸大钱。
现代文：到了东周景王姬贵时，进一步铸造较大的金属币。
English: When Zhou Jing Wang Jigui came to the East, he further minted larger metal coins.

古文：秦兼海内，钱重半两。
现代文：秦朝统一中国，铸造的钱有半两重。
English: When the Qin Dynasty unified China, the minted money was twice as heavy as before.

古文：汉兴，以秦钱重，改铸榆荚钱。
现代文：汉朝建立，因秦代的钱币太重，改铸为重量较轻的榆荚钱。
English: Established in the Han Dynasty, the Qin Dynasty coins were too heavy, so they were recast as lighter money.

古文：至文帝五年，复为四铢。
现代文：到了孝文帝五年，又铸造四铢钱。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the mint produced another four yuan coins.

古文：孝武时悉复销坏，更铸三铢。
现代文：孝武帝刘彻时，又全部销毁，改铸为三铢钱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu Liu Che, all of them were destroyed and changed to three-baht coins.

古文：至无狩中，变为五铢。又造赤仄之钱，以一当五。
现代文：到汉武帝元狩年间，又变成了五铢钱，并铸造了赤仄钱，以一当五。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuan of the Han Dynasty, it was changed to five-baht money, and red money was minted, with a value of five.

古文：王莽摄政，钱有六等：大钱重十二铢，次九铢，次七铢，次五铢，次三铢，次一铢。
现代文：王莽当政，钱币分为六等，大钱重十二铢，其他依次为七铢、五铢、三铢、一铢。
English: When Wang Mang was in power, coins were divided into six grades, with large coins weighing 12 baht, and others weighing 7 baht, 5 baht, 3 baht, and 1 baht.

古文：魏文帝罢五铢钱，至明帝复立。
现代文：魏文帝废除了五铢钱，明帝曹睿重又恢复。
English: Emperor Wei Wen abolished the five-baht coin, and Emperor Ming Cao Ruizhong restored it.

古文：孙权江左铸大钱，一当五百。
现代文：孙权在江东铸造重量很大的钱，以一当五百。
English: Sun Quan minted money of great weight in the east of the Yangtze River, with a value of five hundred.

古文：权赤乌年，复铸大钱，一当千。
现代文：孙权赤乌年间，又铸造大钱，以一当千。
English: During the reign of Sun Quan, Sun Quan also minted a large amount of money, to the tune of one thousand.

古文：轻重大小，莫不随时而变。
现代文：钱的轻重和大小，无不随着朝代的变化而变化。
English: The weight and size of money have always changed with the change of dynasties.

古文：窃以食货之要，八政为首，聚财之贵，诒训典文。
现代文： 我认为理财的要旨，要把国家施政必不可少的八个方面放在首位。聚集财富的重要，都保留在经典著作中。
English: I believe that the essence of financial management is to put the eight essential aspects of national governance in the first place. The importance of gathering wealth is preserved in classic works.

古文：是以昔之帝王，乘天地之饶，御海内之富，莫不腐红粟于太仓，藏朽贯于泉府。
现代文：所以，古代的帝王借着天地赐予的丰饶的条件，驾驭着天下的财富，无不在太仓中贮存上足够的粮食，在钱库里存放着充足的货币。
English: Therefore, the emperors of ancient times, taking advantage of the rich conditions bestowed by heaven and earth, controlled the wealth of the world, always storing enough grain in the warehouse and storing enough money in the treasury.

古文：储畜既盈，人无困弊，可以宁谧四海，如身使臂者矣。
现代文：储蓄既然充盈，人民就不会困苦，这样就使四海安静无事，就像自己的身体挥动胳膊那样方便。
English: Since savings are plentiful, the people will not be distressed, thus making the four seas quiet and peaceful, just as it is convenient for one's own body to wave its arms.

古文：今群妖未息，四郊多垒，徵税既烦，千金日费，仓储渐耗，财用将竭，诚杨氏献税之秋，桑兒言利之日。
现代文： 现在，天下寇乱没有平息，四方的边境战争不断，赋税烦苛，日费千金。仓库的储蓄渐渐耗尽，国家的财用行将枯竭，实在是到了杨氏献税、桑儿言利的时候了。
English: Now, the world's subversive turmoil has not subsided, the four-sided border war continues, taxation is tedious, and it costs a lot of money every day. The warehouse's savings are gradually exhausted, and the country's financial resources are about to dry up. It is really time for Yang to pay taxes and Sonny to talk about profits.

古文：夫以西京之盛，钱犹屡改，并行大小，子母相权。
现代文：以西京的兴盛，前代铸钱还屡次改动，大的和小的，重的和轻的都一起流行。
English: With the prosperity of Xijing, the previous generation of minted money has been repeatedly changed. Large and small, heavy and light coins are all popular.

古文：臣今此铸，以济交乏，五铢之钱，任使并用，行之无损，国得其益。
现代文：更何况现今敌寇没有被消灭，州郡沦丧，人民疲敝，国家和军队的开支越来越紧，另外铸造小钱，可以增加钱的数量，对朝廷有什么损失，对百姓有什么妨害呢？
English: What's more, today the enemy raiders have not been eliminated, the states and counties have fallen into ruin, the people are exhausted, the expenses of the country and the army are getting tighter and tighter. In addition, the minting of small money can increase the amount of money, what is the loss to the court, and what is the obstacle to the people?

古文：诏将从之。事未就，会卒。初，谦之弟道穆，正光中为御史，纠相州刺史李世哲事，大相挫辱，其家恆以为憾。
现代文：况且，国家兴盛不是因为钱铸造得大，国家衰败也不是因为钱铸造得小，最重要的是公私各得其所，政治教化不受影响。这种办法古代既然能够通行，也应该在今天产生作用。 朝廷将下诏按他的建议去办，事情还没有实行，他就去世了。早先，谦之的弟弟道穆在正光时任御史，曾弹劾相州刺史李世哲，颇使李世哲遭到打击，他全家对此都怀恨在心。
English: Moreover, the country's prosperity is not due to the large amount of money minted, and the country's decline is not due to the small amount of money minted. The most important thing is that the public and private sectors have their own place, and political indoctrination is not affected. Since this method can be used in ancient times, it should also have an effect today. The court will issue a decree to do as he suggested, but the matter has not yet been implemented, and he has passed away. Earlier, Qian Zhi's brother, Daomu, was appointed as the president at the time of Zheng Guang, and he had impeached Li Shizhe, the governor of the

古文：至是世哲弟神轨为灵太后深所宠任，会谦之家僮诉良，神轨左右之，入讽尚书，判禁谦之于廷尉。
现代文：这时，李世哲的兄弟李神轨被灵太后重用，恰巧，谦之的家僮诬告主人，李神轨将家僮控制，到尚书那里告了高谦之一状，因而将他关进廷尉的监狱。
English: At this time, Li Shizhe's brother, Li Shenglu, was recruited by the Empress Dowager. It so happened that Qian Zhi's housekeeper falsely accused his master. Li Shenglu took control of the housekeeper and went to Shang Shu to sue Gao Qian. As a result, Gao Qian was put in the courtier's prison.

古文：时将赦，神轨乃启灵太后，发诏于狱赐死。
现代文：将要释放，李神轨又奏报灵太后，下诏在监狱里赐他自尽。
English: When he was about to be released, Li Shenlu reported to the Empress Dowager and ordered him to commit suicide in prison.

古文：嗜酒好色，无行检，卒。
现代文：朝臣们无不为他悲哀。他写的文章有一百多篇，另有文集。
English: His courtiers were all sad for him. He wrote more than a hundred articles, as well as a collection of essays.

古文：山伟，字仲才，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：永安年间，追赠他为营州刺史，谥号为康。山伟，字仲才，河南洛阳人。
English: During the Yong'an era, he was posthumously awarded the title of Yingzhou Shishi, and his nickname was Kang. He was also known as Shanwei, Zhongcai, and Luoyang, Henan.

古文：其先居代。
现代文：他的祖先居住代地。
English: His ancestors lived on the site.

古文：祖强，美容貌，身长八尺五寸，工骑射，弯弓五石，为奏事中散。
现代文：祖父山强，仪表丰伟，身长八尺五寸，善于骑马射箭，可拉开五石大弓。任奏事中散。
English: Grandfather Shanqiang, with a magnificent appearance and a height of eight feet five inches, was good at horse riding and archery, and could draw a five-stone bow.

古文：从献文猎方山，有两狐起于御前，诏强射之，百步内，二狐俱获。位内行长。
现代文：曾跟随献文帝到方山打猎，有两只狐狸在皇帝的面前奔跑，献文帝命他射杀，一百步内，两只狐狸都被射获，被任命为内行长。
English: He once followed Emperor Xianwen to Fangshan to go hunting. There were two foxes running in front of the emperor. Emperor Xianwen ordered him to shoot them. Within a hundred paces, both foxes were shot and he was appointed Inner Governor.

古文：父幼之，位金明太守。
现代文：山伟的父亲山幼之，任金明太守。
English: Shanwei's father, Shan Yu Zhi, was appointed as the governor of Jinming.

古文：伟涉猎文史，孝明初，元匡为御史中尉，以伟兼侍御史。
现代文：山伟广泛涉猎文学史书。孝明帝初年，元匡任御史中尉，任命他为兼侍御史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoming, Yuan Kuang was appointed as a lieutenant of the Imperial Historian, and he was also appointed as an attendant of the Imperial Historian.

古文：入台五日，便遇正会，伟司神武门。
现代文：到御史台上任才五天，便遇上孝明帝元旦朝会群臣。
English: It was only five days after he took office at the Imperial Historian's Office that he met the ministers of Emperor Xiaoming's New Year's Day meeting.

古文：其妻从叔为羽林队主，挝直长于殿门，伟即劾奏。
现代文：他负责神武门的监察，他妻子的从叔任羽林队主，在殿门前鞭打直长，他立即奏报。
English: He was responsible for the supervision of the Shenwu Gate, and his wife's uncle, who was the head of the Yulin team, whipped the captain in front of the hall door, and he immediately reported it.

古文：匡善之，俄然奏正，帖国子助教，迁员外郎、廷尉评。
现代文：元匡很是称赞他，不久即奏请朝廷，任他为正侍御史，又由国子助教升任为员外郎、廷尉评。
English: He was highly praised by Yuan Kuang, who soon invited him to the imperial court, appointed him as the official attendant of the Emperor, and promoted him from the position of assistant professor to the position of courtier and courtier.

古文：时天下无事，进仕路难，代迁之人，多不沾预。
现代文：这时，天下太平无事，在仕途上升迁非常困难。由代地迁至洛阳的人，大多不被起用。
English: At this time, the world was at peace, and it was very difficult to move up in the career. Most of the people who moved to Luoyang from other places were not employed.

古文：及六镇、陇西二方起逆，领军元叉欲用代来寒人为传诏，以慰悦之，而牧守子孙投状求者百余人。
现代文：到六镇、陇西两个地方叛乱时，领军元叉想任用代地出身寒微的人为传诏，以安慰他们。仅州郡牧守的子孙们来投递个人情状，要求任职的就有一百多人。
English: When there were rebellions in six towns and two places in western Shaanxi, the leader of the army, Yuan Xuan, wanted to appoint someone from a humble background as a herald to comfort them. Only the descendants of the governor of Shuzhou County came to submit their personal situation, and there were more than a hundred people who wanted to serve.

古文：叉因奏立勋附队，令各依资出身。
现代文：元叉因而奏请建立勋附队，准备按照他们各自的资历给予职务。
English: Yuan Xuan therefore requested the establishment of an honor guard, ready to give them positions according to their respective qualifications.

古文：自是北人，悉被收叙。
现代文：从此，北边来的人全部被录用。
English: From then on, everyone who came from the north was hired.

古文：伟遂奏记，赞叉德美。
现代文：山伟便将这件事奏报，赞扬元叉的美德。
English: Shanwei then reported the matter to the press, praising the virtue of Yuan Xuan.

古文：叉素不识伟，访侍中安丰王延明、黄门郎元顺，顺等因是称荐之。
现代文：元叉从来不认识山伟，向侍中安丰王元廷明、黄门郎元顺询问，元顺等人因此称颂和推荐他。
English: Yuan Zha never knew Shan Wei, so he asked the attendants Anfeng Wang, Yuan Tingming and Huangmen Lang, Yuan Shun, who praised and recommended him.

古文：叉令仆射元钦引伟兼尚书二千石郎，后正名士郎，修起居注。
现代文：元叉让仆射元钦推荐山伟兼任尚书二千石郎。以后又正名为士郎，参与纂修皇帝的起居注。
English: Yuan Zha asked his servant, Yuan Shao, to recommend Shan Wei to serve concurrently as Shoshu, 2,000 kilos. Later, he was also officially named Shiro, and participated in compiling the Emperor's living notes.

古文：仆射元顺领选，表荐为谏议大夫。
现代文：仆射元顺负责选拔官吏，又上表推荐山伟任谏议大夫。
English: The servant, Yuan Shun, was in charge of selecting officials, and also recommended that Shan Wei be appointed as the chief adviser.

古文：尔硃荣之害朝士，伟时守直，故免祸。
现代文：尔朱荣在河阴杀害朝臣，山伟正巧在朝廷值班，所以得以免除杀身之祸。
English: Er Zhu Rong killed a courtier in Hekin, and Shan Wei happened to be on duty at the imperial court, so he was able to avoid the scourge of suicide.

古文：及孝庄入宫，仍除伟给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：孝庄帝即位入宫，任命他为给事黄门侍郎。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne and appointed him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：先是伟与仪曹郎袁升、屯田郎李延考、外兵郎李奂、三公郎王延业方驾而行，伟少居后。
现代文：早先，他与仪曹郎袁升、屯田郎李廷考、外兵郎李奂、三公郎王廷业四人骑着马并排而行，山伟在他们的后面。
English: Earlier, he rode side-by-side on horseback with four people: Yi Cao Lang Yuan Sheng, Tonden Lang Li Tingkao, Foreign Soldier Lang Li Xi, and Third Prince Wang Tingye, with Shan Wei behind them.

古文：路逢一尼，望之叹曰： 此辈缘业，同日而死。 
现代文：路上遇到一个尼姑，看见他们四人叹息说： 你们机缘相同，会在同一天死去。 
English: On the way, a nun saw the four of them and sighed, "You have the same chance, you will die on the same day."

古文：谓伟曰： 君方近天子，当作好官。 
现代文：又对山伟说 ：你正接近天子，可以做一个好官。 
English: He also said to Sanwei, "You are close to the Son of Heaven, you can be a good official."

古文：而升等四人皆于河阴遇害，果如其言。
现代文：袁升等四个人都在河阴被尔朱荣杀害，果然应了尼姑的话。
English: Yuan Sheng and the other four people were all killed by Er Zhu Rong in Hebei Province, and they certainly obeyed the nun's words.

古文：俄领著作郎，节闵帝立，除秘书监，仍著作。
现代文：不久任著作郎，节闵帝即皇帝位，任他为秘书监，仍任著作郎。
English: He was soon appointed as a scribe, and when Emperor Jiejing ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a secretary supervisor, and still served as a scribe.

古文：初，尔硃兆入洛，官守奔散，国史典书高法显密埋史书，故不遗落。
现代文：开初，尔朱兆领兵进入洛阳，官吏们四处逃散。国史典书高法显秘密埋藏史书经典，所以图书没有损失。
English: At the beginning of the year, Er Zhu Zhao led the troops into Luoyang, and the officials fled everywhere. The National History Book Gao Fa Xian secretly buried the history book classics, so there was no loss of books.

古文：伟自以为功，诉求爵赏。
现代文：山伟自认为有功，向朝廷诉说请求封赏。
English: Sanwei considered himself to be meritorious and appealed to the imperial court to request a reward.

古文：伟挟附世隆，遂封东阿县伯，而法显止获男爵。伟寻进侍中。
现代文：他依附尔朱世隆，被封为东阿县伯，而高法显只获得男的爵位，山伟不久又晋升为侍中。
English: He adhered to Zhu Shilong and was awarded the title of Donga County Mayor, while Gao Faxian only received the title of baron, and Shan Wei was soon promoted to chamberlain.

古文：孝静初，除卫大将军，中书令，监起居。
现代文：东魏孝静帝初年，他任卫大将军、中书令，负责监修起居注。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the General of the Guards and the Commander of the Chinese Calligraphy, responsible for supervising the calligraphy.

古文：后以本官复领著作，卒官。
现代文：后来，又以本官领任著作一事。
English: Later, he took on the task of writing the book himself.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督、幽州刺史，谥曰文贞公。
现代文：死在位上，追赠为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督、幽州刺史，谥号为文贞公。
English: When he died on the throne, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Horse, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Governor of the Capital, and Governor of Yuzhou, and his posthumous name was Munzheng.

古文：国史自邓彦海、崔深、崔浩、高允、李彪、崔光以还，诸人相继撰录。
现代文：国史自从邓彦海、崔深、崔浩、高允、李彪、崔光以来，很多人相继记录撰写。
English: Since the national history of Deng Yanhai, Cui Sheng, Cui Hao, Gao Yun, Li Biao, Cui Guang, many people have successively recorded and written.

古文：綦俊及伟等谄悦上党王天穆及尔硃世隆，以为国书正应代人修缉，不宜委之余人，是以綦、伟等更主大籍。
现代文：綦俊和山伟等人趋奉上党王元天穆和尔朱世隆，认为国书应该由代地人修撰，不应该委任其他人，所以綦俊、山伟等人代替南边的人主持这部重要著作的修撰。
English: Gong Jun, Shan Wei and others tended to worship the party kings Yuan Tianmu and Er Zhu Shilong, and believed that the national anthem should be written by local people, and no one else should be appointed. Therefore, Gong Jun, Shan Wei and others presided over the writing of this important work instead of the people from the south.

古文：守旧而已，初无述著，故自崔鸿死后，迄终伟身，二十许载，时事荡然，万不记一。
现代文：他们只是守持旧制，并没有著述。所以，自从崔鸿死后，到山伟已有二十多年，时事荡然失落，已是万不记一。
English: They only kept the old system, and did not write. Therefore, since Cui Hong's death, it has been more than 20 years to Shanwei, and current affairs have been lost, and it is impossible to remember.

古文：后人执笔，无所凭据，史之遗阙，伟之由也。
现代文：后人再执笔补写，却没有史料作依据。这段历史的缺漏，是由山伟造成的。
English: Subsequent generations have rewritten it, but there is no historical material to base it on. This historical omission was caused by Shanwei.

古文：外示沈厚，内实矫竞。
现代文：他外表深沉厚重，而内心实则矫饰竞奋。
English: On the outside, he is deep and heavy, but on the inside, he is really a pretentious and competitive person.

古文：与綦俊少甚相得，晚以名位之间，遂若水火。
现代文：与綦俊从小就很投合，晚年为了名位，两人较长竞短，形同水火。
English: He and Hao Jun hit it off from a young age. In their later years, the two of them jockeyed for position, and were like fire and water.

古文：与宇文忠之之徒代人为党，时贤畏恶之。
现代文：他与宇文忠之一类代地人结成党羽，当时的贤士对他们既畏惧又厌恶。
English: He formed a faction with one of Umenchu's surrogates, whom the sages of the time both feared and loathed.

古文：而爱尚文史，老而弥笃。
现代文：他酷好文学历史，越老兴致越高。
English: He is very fond of literature and history, and the older he gets, the more interested he is.

古文：伟弟少亡，伟抚寡训孤，同居二十余载，恩义甚笃。
现代文：他的弟弟从小死去，他就抚养寡居的弟媳，训教失去父亲的侄儿，养育他们母子二十多年，恩义十分深厚。
English: Since his younger brother died when he was a child, he has raised his widowed sister-in-law, trained his nephew who lost his father, and raised their mother and son for more than twenty years. His gratitude is very deep.

古文：不营产业，身亡之后，卖宅营葬，妻女不免飘泊，士友叹愍之。
现代文：他不经营家产，去世之后，家人卖掉房产安葬他，妻子儿女不免飘泊无依，朋友们都感叹和可怜他们。
English: He did not manage the family property. After his death, his family sold the property to bury him. His wife and children were left homeless, and his friends all lamented and pitied them.

古文：长子昂袭爵。宇文忠之，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：宇文忠之，河南洛阳人。
English: Yu Wenzhong, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：其先南单于之远属，世据东部，后居代都。
现代文：他的祖先是南单于的远支，世代居住东部，后来移居到代都。
English: His ancestor was a distant branch of Nan Dan Yu, who lived in the east for generations, and later moved to Cangdu.

古文：父侃，卒于书侍御史。
现代文：父亲宇文侃，死在书侍御史任上。
English: His father, Uvenkan, died while he was serving as the Grand Historian.

古文：忠之涉猎文史，颇有笔札，释褐太学博士。
现代文：他广泛涉猎文史经典，颇有文采。脱去布衣进入仕途，任太学博士。
English: He extensively dabbled in the classics of literary history, quite literary. Stripped of his clothes, he entered his career as a doctor of theology.

古文：天平初，除中书侍郎。
现代文：天平初年，任中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, he became a secretary.

古文：裴伯茂与之同省，常侮忽之，以忠之色黑，呼为 黑宇 。
现代文：裴伯茂与他同在中书省供职，常常轻侮他，因他的皮肤颜色黑，所以喊他 黑宇 。
English: Pei Bomao served with him in the Central Book Ministry, and often belittled him, calling him Heyu because of his dark skin.

古文：后敕修国史。
现代文：后来，奉命修撰国史。
English: Later, he was ordered to write a national history.

古文：元象初，兼通直散骑常侍，副郑伯猷，使梁。
现代文：元象初年，任兼通直散骑常侍，作为郑伯猷的副手，出使梁国。
English: In the first year of Yuan Xiang, he was appointed as the equerry of Zheng Boqi, and as the deputy of Zheng Boqi, he dispatched Liang Guo.

古文：武定初，为尚书右丞，仍修史。
现代文：武定初年，任尚书右丞，仍修撰国史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wuding, he was appointed as the right-hand man to Emperor Shang, and he was still compiling the national history.

古文：未几，以事除名。
现代文：不久，因犯罪被免官。
English: He was soon removed from office for his crimes.

古文：忠之好荣利。自为中书郎六七年矣，遇尚书省选右丞，预选者皆射策，忠之试焉。既获丞职，大为忻满，志气嚣然，有骄物之色。识者笑之。
现代文：宇文忠之喜好名利，他任了六七年中书郎，遇上尚书省选拔右丞，参与预选的人都要抽题应试，他参加了考试，被选取任右丞的职务后，大为欣喜意满，志气嚣然逼人，有傲物蔑世的神色，认识他的人都嘲笑他。
English: Yu Wenzhong was fond of fame and fortune. He was appointed as the best junior high school secretary in 1967 and 1967. When he was selected as the junior high school secretary by the Ministry of Education and Culture, all the participants in the pre-selection had to take an exam. He took the exam. After he was selected as the junior high school secretary, he was very happy and satisfied. He was full of ambition and had a haughty and contemptuous look. Everyone who knew him laughed at him.

古文：既失官爵，怏怏发疾，卒于君山。
现代文：丢失官爵后，却怏怏不快，疾病发作，因而去世。
English: After losing his title, he was unhappy, fell ill, and died as a result.

古文：费穆，字朗兴，代人也。
现代文：费穆，字朗兴，代地人。
English: Fei Mu, Zi Lang Xing, the local representative.

古文：祖于，位商贾二曹令、怀州刺史，赐爵松阳男。
现代文：祖父费于，官至商贾二曹令、怀州刺史，赐爵为松阳男。
English: Grandfather Feiyu, official and merchant Jia Er Cao Ling, Huai Zhou Zhishi, was knighted as a Songyang man.

古文：父万袭爵，位梁州镇将，赠冀州刺史。
现代文：父亲费万继承爵位，官至梁州镇将，去世后追赠为冀州刺史。
English: His father, Fei Wan, inherited the title of nobility, and became the official of Liangzhou Town. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Jizhou Historian.

古文：穆性刚烈，有壮气，颇涉文史，好尚功名。
现代文：费穆性情刚烈，颇有胆气，涉猎文史经典，喜好功业名位。
English: Fei Mu is strong-willed, quite courageous, dabbles in literary and historical classics, and likes to be famous for his achievements.

古文：宣武初，袭爵，稍迁泾州平西府长史。
现代文：宣武帝初年，继承父爵，升任为泾州平西府长史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanwu, he inherited his father's title and was promoted to the post of governor of Binxi Prefecture, Zhangzhou.

古文：时刺史皇甫集，灵太后之元舅，恃外戚之亲，多为非法。穆正色匡谏，集亦惮之。
现代文：当时的刺史皇甫集，是灵太后的大舅，常倚仗着外戚的身份，干些违法乱纪的事情，费穆面色严肃地向他进谏，他也害怕费穆。
English: At that time, Emperor Fuxi, who was the great-uncle of Empress Dowager Ling, often relied on his status as a foreign relative to do some illegal and undisciplined things. Feimu approached him with a serious face. He was also afraid of Feimu.

古文：后蠕蠕主婆罗门自凉州归降，其部众因饥侵掠边邑。诏穆衔旨宣慰，莫不款附。
现代文：后来，蠕蠕族的首领婆罗门从凉州归降北魏，他的部下因饥饿抢掠北魏边境城镇，朝廷命费穆领旨前去安抚慰问，婆罗门的部下无不归顺。
English: Later, Brahman, the leader of the Cree-Cree people, returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty from Liangzhou. His men were starving and looting the border towns of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The court ordered Feimu to go to appease and comfort them. All of Brahman's men had to surrender.

古文：明年复叛，入寇凉州。
现代文：第二年又发生叛乱，进攻凉州。
English: The next year, another rebellion broke out and attacked Liangzhou.

古文：除穆兼尚书右丞、西北道行台，仍为别将，往讨之。
现代文：朝廷命费穆为兼尚书右丞、西北道行台，作为别将，前往征讨。
English: The imperial court ordered Fei Mu to go to the battlefield as a second-in-command, as well as Shang Shuyuan and Xiangyang Dao Xingtai.

古文：穆至凉州，蠕蠕遁走。
现代文：他率军到达凉州，蠕蠕族叛兵逃走。
English: He led the army to Liangzhou, and the rebels of the Demu-Demu ethnic group fled.

古文：穆谓其所部曰： 夷狄兽心，见敌便走，若不令其破胆，终恐疲于奔命。 
现代文：他便对部下说： 这些夷族像野兽一样狡猾，遇见我军就逃走。如果不让他们胆破心寒，恐怕我们会被他们弄得疲于奔命。 
English: He then said to his subordinates: "These barbarians are as cunning as wild beasts. When they meet our army, they run away. If they don't break our hearts, I'm afraid they'll make us run for our lives."

古文：乃简练精骑，伏于山谷，使羸劣之众为外营，以诱之。
现代文：便挑选精锐骑兵，埋伏在山谷里，派老弱无力的兵卒作外营，以引诱叛兵。
English: He selected elite cavalry to lie in wait in the valley, and sent old and weak soldiers as an outpost to lure the rebels.

古文：贼骑觇见，俄而竞至，伏兵奔击，大破之。
现代文：敌人的骑兵看到魏军老弱，不大一会儿竞相来攻。这时，伏兵突起，发起进攻，将叛兵打得大败。
English: The enemy cavalry saw that the Wei army was old and weak, and soon raced to attack. At this time, the ambush sprang up, launched an attack, and defeated the rebels.

古文：及六镇反叛，穆为别将，隶都督李崇北伐。都督崔暹失利，崇将议班师。
现代文：六镇叛乱时，他任别将，隶属都督李崇参加北伐，都督崔暹作战失利，李崇准备班师返回。
English: When the Six Towns rebelled, he was appointed as General of Division. He was subordinate to the Governor Li Chong and participated in the Northern Expedition. The Governor, Cui Siam, lost the battle, and Li Chong returned to prepare his division.

古文：以朔州是白道之冲，贼之咽喉，若不全，则并、肆危，选将镇捍，佥议举穆。
现代文：因朔州是白道的要冲，敌兵的咽喉，如不保全，则并州、肆州都会危急，便决定挑选将领镇守捍御，大家推举费穆。
English: Because Shuozhou is the key point of Bai Dao, if the throat of the enemy soldiers is not preserved, then both Shuozhou and Wuzhou will be in danger, it was decided to select generals to defend the town, and everyone recommended Feimu.

古文：崇乃请穆为朔州刺史。
现代文：李崇请求朝廷任命他为朔州刺史。
English: Li Chong asked the imperial court to appoint him as the governor of Shuozhou.

古文：寻改云州刺史。
现代文：不久，改任云州刺史。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Yunnan chief historian.

古文：穆招集离散，颇得人心。
现代文：他招集离散的士兵百姓，颇得大家的称许。
English: He has been widely praised for rallying the scattered soldiers and civilians.

古文：北境州镇皆没，唯穆独存。
现代文：北部的州镇都被叛兵攻陷，惟独他坚守的州城得以保全。
English: The northern state towns were all captured by the rebels, but the state town he held on to was saved.

古文：久之，援军不至，穆乃弃城南走，投尔硃荣于秀容。
现代文：过了很久援军不到，他便弃城南走，到秀容投奔尔朱荣。
English: After a long time, when reinforcements did not arrive, he abandoned the southern part of the city and went to Xiurong to join Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：既而诣阙请罪，诏原之。
现代文：不久，回到朝廷请求处罚，朝廷下诏原谅了他。
English: Soon after, he returned to the imperial court to request punishment, and the imperial court issued an edict forgiving him.

古文：孝昌中，以都督讨平二绛反蜀，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：孝昌时，他以都督的身份率兵讨平二绛在蜀地的反叛，被封为散骑常侍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he led the troops to quell the rebellion of the Erhu in Shudi as the governor of the city, and was appointed as the imperial equestrian attendant.

古文：后妖贼李洪于阳城起逆，连结蛮左，诏穆兼武卫将军击破之。
现代文：后来，妖贼李洪在阳城叛乱，勾结蛮族，朝廷下诏命费穆兼武卫将军，率兵进讨，将他击破。
English: Later, the monster thief Li Hong rebelled in Yangcheng, colluded with the barbarians, and the imperial court ordered General Fei Mu and Wu Wei to lead the army to attack and defeat him.

古文：及尔硃荣向洛，灵太后徵穆，令屯小平。
现代文：尔朱荣率兵向洛阳进发，灵太后调费穆回洛，命他驻扎在小平。
English: Le Zhu Rong led the troops to Luoyang, and the Empress Dowager sent Fei Mu back to Luo and ordered him to stay in Xiaoping.

古文：荣推奉孝庄，穆遂先降。
现代文：尔朱荣推举孝庄帝即位，费穆首先投降。
English: Zhu Rong chose Emperor Xiaozhuang to succeed to the throne, and Fei Mu was the first to surrender.

古文：荣素知穆，见之甚悦。
现代文：尔朱荣一向了解他，看到他十分高兴。
English: Le Zhu Rong has always known him and is very happy to see him.

古文：穆潜说荣曰： 公士马不出万人，长驱向洛，前无横陈者。
现代文：他暗中劝说尔朱荣： 您的人马不超过一万人，是因为拥立新帝，顺应人心的缘故。
English: He secretly persuaded Er Zhu Rong: Your manpower is no more than ten thousand, because you support the new emperor and conform to the will of the people.

古文：政以推奉主上，顺人心故。今以京师之众，百官之盛，一知公之虚实，必有轻侮之心。
现代文：现在，京城内驻扎着很多军队，朝廷文武百官威势强盛，一旦知道您力量的虚实，必然会产生轻慢的心情。
English: Now, there are many troops stationed in the capital, and the imperial court and military officials are powerful. Once you know the truth of your strength, you will inevitably have a light-hearted mood.

古文：若不大作讨罚，更树亲党，公还北之日，恐不得度太行而内难行矣。 
现代文：如果不对朝廷中旧有的势力大举镇压，重新树立自己的亲信朋党，恐怕您一北还，越不过太行山朝廷内就会发生变故呀。 
English: If you do not vigorously suppress the old forces in the imperial court and re-establish your own cronies and friends, I am afraid that if you do nothing, there will be a change in the imperial court in Taihang Mountain.

古文：荣心然之，于是有河阴之事。
现代文：尔朱荣心里认为他说得很对，于是，发生了在河阴滥杀朝臣的事件。
English: In his heart, Le Zhurong thought that he was right, and so the incident of the indiscriminate killing of courtiers in Hebei happened.

古文：天下闻之，莫不切齿。
现代文：天下人听说后，无不切齿痛恨。
English: After hearing about it, people all over the world gritted their teeth and hated it.

古文：荣入洛，穆为吏部尚书、鲁县侯，进封赵平郡公。
现代文：尔朱荣进入京城，费穆任吏部尚书、鲁县侯，晋封为赵平郡公。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Beijing, Fei Mu was appointed as the head of the cadre department of Shangshu, Lu County, and was promoted to Zhao Ping County.

古文：为侍中、前锋大都督，与大将军元天穆讨平邢杲。
现代文：朝廷又任命他为侍中、前锋大都督，与大将军元天穆讨伐邢杲。
English: The imperial court also appointed him as a chamberlain and vanguard grand governor to fight against the great general Yuan Tianmu.

古文：时元颢入京师，穆与天穆既平齐地，将击颢。
现代文：这时，元颢率南朝军队占据洛阳，费穆与元天穆已经平定齐地，准备进攻元颢。
English: At this time, the Southern Dynasty army led by Yuan Shao occupied Luoyang. Feimu and Yuan Tianmu had already settled down and were preparing to attack Yuan Shao.

古文：穆围武牢，将拔，属天穆北度，既无后继，穆遂降颢。
现代文：他带兵围攻武牢关，即将攻克，元天穆北渡黄河，他失去了后援部队，便投降了元颢。
English: He led his troops to besiege Wudongguan and was about to conquer it. When Yuan Tianmu crossed the Yellow River, he lost his backup troops and surrendered to Yuan Shao.

古文：颢以河阴酷滥，事起于穆，引入诘让，杀之。
现代文：元颢因河阴残酷地杀害百官的事是由他引起的，便在提审时责备他，将他处死。
English: He was the one who had caused the brutal killing of hundreds of officials by Geng Yao, who blamed him at the arraignment and put him to death.

古文：孝庄还宫，赠侍中、司徒公，谥曰武宣。
现代文：孝庄帝平定元颢的军队后回到洛阳，追赠他为侍中、司徒公，谥号为武宣。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang returned to Luoyang after defeating Yuan Shao's army, posthumously awarding him the titles of chamberlain and tutor. His posthumous name was Wu Xuan.

