古文：天文二晋惠帝元康二年二月，天西北大裂。
现代文：晋惠帝元康二年二月，天西北大裂。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Jingu's reign, the Northwest Divide occurred.

古文：按刘向说： 天裂，阳不足；地动，阴有余。 
现代文：刘向说： 天裂表示阳不足；地动表示阴有余。 
English: Liu Xiang said: The sky crack indicates that the yang is insufficient; the earth movement indicates that the yin is more than enough.

古文：是时人主拱默，妇后专制。
现代文：当时帝拱手无言听命于人，妇后专制。
English: At that time, the emperor silently obeyed orders, and the empress was despotic.

古文：元康三年四月，荧惑守太微六十日。
现代文：元康三年四月，火星守于太微垣六十天。
English: In April of the 3rd year of the Yuan Kang, Mars will stay in Taifeng for 60 days.

古文：占曰： 诸侯三公谋其上，必有斩臣。 
现代文：占辞说： 诸侯、三公图谋皇上，必有大臣被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: If the lords and the three princes conspire against their prince, there will surely be a minister who will be killed.

古文：一曰： 天子亡国。 
现代文：另一说： 此天象预示天子将亡国。 
English: Another way of putting it is: the Son of God lost his country.

古文：是春，太白守毕，至是百余日。
现代文：同年春天，金星守毕宿百余曰。
English: In the spring of the same year, Jin Xing Shou stayed for more than a hundred days.

古文：占曰： 有急令之忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有急难之忧。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that there will be a great calamity.

古文：一曰： 相亡。
现代文：另一说： 宰相将死。
English: Another said: "The prime minister is about to die."

古文：又为边境不安。 
现代文：又表示边境将不安宁。 
English: It also portends the rise of unrest on the border.

古文：是年，镇、岁、太白三星聚于毕昴。
现代文：同年，土星、木星、金星聚于毕宿、昴宿。
English: In the same year, Saturn, Jupiter and Venus gathered at Bi-juku and Bi-juku.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战乱。
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：毕昴，赵地也。 
现代文：毕昴二宿与趟地对应。 
English: Bi is the star of Yin, corresponding to Zhao Di.

古文：后贾后陷杀太子，赵王废后，又杀之，斩张华、裴頠，遂篡位，废帝为太上皇。
现代文：后来贾后陷害杀死太子，赵王废买后后又杀之，斩张华、裴頠，接着篡夺皇位，废惠帝为太上皇。
English: Later, Empress Jia framed and killed the prince, Zhao Wang bought and killed Zhang Hua and Pei Yao, then usurped the throne, and deposed Emperor Hui as the last emperor.

古文：天下从此遘乱连祸。
现代文：天下从此祸乱不断。
English: Since then, the world has been in constant turmoil.

古文：元康五年四月，有星孛于奎，至轩辕、太微，经三台、大陵。
现代文：元康五年四月，有彗星出现于奎宿，后到达轩辕、太微垣，经过三台星、大陵星。
English: In April of the fifth year of the Yuan Kang, a comet appeared in Kuishuku, and then reached Xuanwu and Taiwaki, passing through Sandai and Daling.

古文：占曰： 奎为鲁，又为库兵，轩辕为后宫，太微天子廷，三台为三司，大陵有积尸死丧之事。 
现代文：占辞说： 奎代表鲁地，同时又代表武库兵器，轩辕代表后宫，太微代表天子之廷，三台代表三公，彗星过大陵表示将有大量人员死亡及丧乱发生。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Kui represents Ludi, and at the same time represents the arsenal of weapons, Xuan Zang represents the harem, Taimiao represents the court of the heavenly son, Sandai represents the three princes, and the comet passing over the Great Mausoleum indicates that there will be a large number of deaths and casualties.

古文：明年，武库火，西羌反。
现代文：明年，武器库失火，西羌反叛。
English: Next year, the arsenal misfires and Xidi rebels.

古文：后五年，司空张华遇祸，贾后废死，鲁公贾谧诛。
现代文：后五年，司空张茎被杀，置后被废后又被杀，鲁公买谧被杀。
English: Five years later, the flight attendant Zhang Hua was killed, Jia Hou was deposed and sentenced to death, and Lu Gong Jia Jun was killed.

古文：又明年，赵王俭篡位。
现代文：又一年，叠迗司马伦篡夺皇位。
English: Another year, another Sima Lun usurped the throne.

古文：于是三王兴兵讨伦，士民战死十余万人。
现代文：当时三王兴兵，讨伐赵王司马伦，士民因战而死者十余万人。
English: At that time, the three kings raised an army to fight Zhao Wang Simaren, and more than 100,000 people died as a result of the war.

古文：元康六年六月丙午夜，有枉矢自斗魁东南行。
现代文：元康六年六月丙午之夜，有枉矢出现于斗魁而向东南方向运行。
English: On the night of June 6th, the 6th year of the Kangxi Dynasty, there was an arrow that appeared in the leader and ran in the southeast direction.

古文：按占曰： 以乱伐乱。
现代文：考查占辞说： 此为将有乱臣相互征伐之征兆。
English: The examination of fortune-telling said: This is a sign that there will be chaotic vassals fighting each other.

古文：北斗主执杀，出斗魁，居中执杀者不直象也。 
现代文：北斗星掌管执法杀戮之事，枉矢出斗魁表示掌管执法刑杀之臣不公正。 
English: The Big Dipper is in charge of the law enforcement killings, and the leader of the fight has made an unjust statement that the minister in charge of the law enforcement killings is not fair.

古文：十月，太白昼见。
现代文：十月，金星白天出现。
English: In October, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：后赵王杀张、裴，废贾后，以理太子之冤，因自篡盗，以至屠灭。
现代文：后来赵王杀张华、裴颢，废买后，以伸太子被杀之冤，因此而自己篡夺盗取皇位，最后也被消灭。
English: Later, Zhao Wang killed Zhang Hua and Pei Yao, and after he was deposed, he took advantage of the prince's death to usurp and steal the imperial throne, and was finally eliminated.

古文：以乱伐乱，兵丧臣强之应也。
现代文：乱臣相伐即战争、国乱及臣强的应验。
English: The chaotic succession of vassals means war, national turmoil and the fulfillment of vassal power.

古文：元康九年二月，荧惑守心。
现代文：元康九年二月，火星守心宿。
English: In February of the ninth year of the Yuan Kang, Mars Shushin stayed.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象王者交恶。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：八月，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：八月，火星入羽林。
English: In August, Mars enters the feather forest.

古文：占曰： 禁兵大起。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示禁兵将有大的行动。 
English: Divination says: The Imperial Guard will rise up on a large scale.

古文：后二年，惠帝见废为太上皇，俄而三王起兵讨伦。伦悉遣中军兵，相距累月。
现代文：后二年，惠帝被废为太上皇。不久三王起兵讨伐司马伦，司马伦派遣所有的中军兵与之相拒多月。
English: Two years later, Emperor Hui was dethroned as the last emperor. Soon, the three emperors raised an army to fight Sima Lun, and Sima Lun dispatched all the Chinese soldiers to oppose them for many months.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年三月，妖星见南方，中台星坼，太白昼见。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年三月，妖星出现于南方，中台星分裂，金星白天出现。
English: In March of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang, the monster star appeared in the south, the central star split, and Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：占曰： 妖星出，天下大兵将起。
现代文：占辞说： 妖星出现预示将有人规模军事行动。
English: The soothsayer said: A monster star will appear, and a world war will break out.

古文：台星失常，三公忧。
现代文：台星失常则三公有忧患。
English: If the planet is out of kilter, the three kingdoms will be in trouble.

古文：太白昼见为不臣。 
现代文：金星白天出现预示有反叛之臣。 
English: The appearance of Venus during the day portends a rebellious retainer.

古文：是月，贾后杀太子，赵王伦寻废杀后及司空张华，又废帝自立。
现代文：当月，贾后杀太子，赵王司马伦不久废杀贾后及司空亟萎，又废帝自立。
English: In the same month, Empress Jia killed the crown prince, and Zhao Wang Simarun soon dethroned Empress Jia and Sikuo, and the dethroned emperor became independent.

古文：于是三王并起，迭总大权。
现代文：于是三王起兵，更迭总揽国家大权。
English: As a result, the three kings raised an army to take over the supreme power of the country.

古文：永康元年五月，荧惑入南斗。
现代文：永康元年五月，火星入南斗。
English: In May of the first year of Yongkang, Mars entered the Southern Cross.

古文：占曰： 宰相死，兵大起。
现代文：占辞说： 此预示宰相将死，将有大规模军事行动。
English: The soothsayer said: The prime minister will die, and a large-scale war will break out.

古文：斗又吴分也。 
现代文：斗宿又舆吴地对应。 
English: It corresponds to dooshuku and mingwudi.

古文：是时赵王伦为相，明年篡位，三王兴师诛之。
现代文：当时趟王司马伦为宰相，第二年篡皇位，被三王起兵诛杀。
English: At that time, Wang Sima Lun was the prime minister. The next year, he usurped the throne and was killed by the three kings.

古文：太安二年，石冰破扬州。
现代文：太安二年，石冰攻破扬蛆。
English: In the second year of Taian, Shi Bing conquered Sumo.

古文：永康元年八月，荧惑入箕。
现代文：永康元年八月，火星入箕宿。
English: In August of the first year of the Yongkang era, the planet Mars entered the pagoda.

古文：占曰： 人主失位，兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 皇帝将失去皇位，将有军事行动。 
English: Divination says: When the monarch is dethroned, war will break out.

古文：十二月，彗出牵牛之西，指天市。
现代文：十二月，彗星出于牵牛的西面而指向天市。
English: In December, the comet emerged from the west side of the cow's tail and pointed toward Tianshi.

古文：占曰： 牛者七政始，彗出之，改元易号之象也。 
现代文：占辞说： 牵牛属七政之始，彗星从中出现是王位变更的天象。 
English: The soothsayer said: "Taurus is the place where the five stars of the sun, moon and stars begin, and comets appear from the constellation, which is the sign of the changing era and title."

古文：天市一名天府，一名天子禖，帝座在其中。
现代文：天市称为天府又称为天子梅，帝座包含于其中。
English: Tianshi is also known as Tianfu or Tianzimei, and Teiza is included in it.

古文：明年，赵王篡位，改元，寻为大兵所灭。
现代文：第二年，赵玉篡夺皇位，改变年号，不久被三工大兵所灭。
English: The following year, Zhao Yu usurped the imperial throne, changed the era name, and was soon exterminated by the soldiers of the Third Industrial Revolution.

古文：永康二年二月，太白出西方，逆行入东井。
现代文：永康二年二月，金星出现于西方，再逆行入束井之宿。
English: In February of the second year of Yongkang, Venus appeared in the west, and then retrograde into the inn of Sokui.

古文：占曰： 国失政，臣为乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示国政混乱，臣作乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadowed the chaos of national politics and the unrest caused by vassals.

古文：四月，彗星见齐分。
现代文：四月，彗星出现于与齐地对应之处。
English: In April, the comet appeared in a position corresponding to the zenith.

古文：占曰： 齐有兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示查地将有战争及丧乱。 
English: Zhan said, "All over the country there is war and death.

古文：是时齐王冏起兵讨赵王伦。
现代文：当时齐王司马冈起兵讨伐鱼丝司马伦。
English: At that time, the king of Qi, Sima Gang, raised an army to fight the fisherman, Sima Lun.

古文：伦灭，冏拥兵不朝，专权淫侈，明年诛死。
现代文：丑区俭被消灭后，司马同拥兵而不朝见皇帝，专权淫奢，第二年被处死。
English: After Ugly Guozhen was eliminated, Sima was executed the following year for supporting the troops without meeting with the emperor, and for abusing his power.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年，自正月至于闰月，五星互经天。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年，从正月到闰月之间，五大行星交互南北。
English: In the first year of the Yongning Emperor, from the first month to the leap month, the five planets interacted north and south.

古文：《星传》曰： 日阳，君道也。
现代文：《星传》上说： 太阳属阳，代表君道。
English: "Star Legend" said: The sun is yang, representing the way of the king.

古文：星阴，臣道也。
现代文：星属阴代表臣道。
English: The yin and yang of the stars represent the path of the vassal.

古文：日出则星亡，臣不得专也。
现代文：太阳出则星消失，表示臣子不得专权。
English: When the sun comes out, the stars disappear. The minister cannot have absolute power.

古文：昼而星见午上者为经天，其占为不臣，为更王。
现代文：行星白天出现于午之上被称为经天，预示将有反叛之臣及王位更替。
English: The appearance of a planet during the day, in the afternoon, is called a transit, and indicates that there will be rebellious vassals and a change of throne.

古文：今五星悉经天，天变所未有也。 
现代文：现在五大行星全部经天是以前没有出现过的反常天象。 
English: Now all the five stars are moving across the sky, which is unprecedented in the history of celestial changes.

古文：石氏说曰： 辰星昼见，其国不亡，则大乱。 
现代文：石氏说： 水星白天出现，国不亡则有大乱。 
English: Ishii said, "Mercury appears during the day, but if the country does not perish, there will be great turmoil.

古文：是后台鼎方伯，互秉大权。二帝流亡，遂至六夷强，迭据华夏，亦载籍所未有也。
现代文：此后三公、诸侯互掌大权，二帝流亡，遂使得少数民族变强，交替占据华夏，这是历史上所没有出现过的事情。
English: After that, the three princes and princes held power, and the two emperors went into exile. As a result, the ethnic minorities became stronger and occupied China alternately. This is something that has never happened before in history.

古文：永宁元年五月，太白昼见。
现代文：永宁元年五月，金星白天出现。
English: In May of the first year of Yongning, Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：占同前条。
现代文：其占辞同前条。
English: Its meaning is the same as in the previous article.

古文：七月，岁星守虚危。
现代文：七月，木星守虚、危二宿。
English: In July, Jupiter resides in the house of falsehood, the house of danger.

古文：占曰： 木守虚危，有兵忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 木星守虚、危二宿预示将有战争之忧。 
English: The soothsayer said: Jupiter dwells in the house of falsehood, the house of danger, the house of war.

古文：一曰： 守虚饥；守危徭役烦，下屈竭。 
现代文：另一说： 木星守虚宿预示将有饥荒；守危宿预示徭役烦多，民众财力竭尽。 
English: Another said, "Jupiter guarding an empty house foretells that there will be a famine; guarding a dangerous house foretells that there will be a lot of trouble, and people's financial resources will be exhausted."

古文：辰星入太微。
现代文：水星入太微。
English: Mercury is too faint.

古文：占曰： 为内乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为内乱之兆。 
English: Divination says: There will be civil unrest.

古文：一曰： 群臣相杀。 
现代文：另一说： 为群臣相互残杀之兆。 
English: Another said: A sign for the vassals to kill each other.

古文：太白守右掖门。
现代文：金星守右掖门。
English: Venus guards the right-hand gate.

古文：占曰： 为兵，为乱，为贼。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争、内乱及反贼。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be war, civil unrest and anti-thieves.

古文：八月戊午，镇星犯左执法，又犯上相。
现代文：八月戊午，土星先犯左执法星，后又犯上相之星。
English: In August at noon, Saturn first violated the left law enforcement star, and then violated the phase star.

古文：占曰： 上相忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 上相有忧患。 
English: Zhan said: "There are troubles in the upper echelons.

古文：荧惑守昴。
现代文：火星守昴宿。
English: Mars is guarding Pengshu.

古文：占曰： 赵、魏有灾。 
现代文：占辞说： 此是赵、魏之地将有灾的征兆。 
English: Fortune-telling said: This is a sign of disaster in the land of Zhao and Wei.

古文：辰星守舆鬼。
现代文：水星守舆鬼宿。
English: Mercury guarding the ghost house.

古文：占曰： 秦有灾。 
现代文：占辞说： 此秦地将有灾之兆。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This Qin land will have signs of disaster.

古文：九月丁未，月犯左角。
现代文：九月丁未，月犯左角。
English: In September, the moon will collide with the left-hand star.

古文：占曰： 人主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此君主将有忧患之征兆。 
English: Divination says: The monarch is in trouble.

古文：一曰： 左将军死，天下有兵。 
现代文：另一说： 此预示左将军将死，天下将有战争。 
English: Another said, "This indicates that General Zuo will die and there will be war in the world."

古文：二年四月癸酉，岁星昼见。
现代文：二年四月癸酉，木星白天出现。
English: In April of the second year, Jupiter appeared in the daytime.

古文：占曰： 为臣强。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象表示臣太强。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends that the minister will be strong.

古文：十月，荧惑太白斗于虚危。
现代文：十月，火星与金星斗于虚宿、危宿。
English: In October, Mars and Venus clash in the house of falsehood, the house of danger.

古文：占曰： 大兵起，破军杀将。
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有大的军事行动，军队被打败将领被杀。
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a large-scale war, the army will be defeated, and the generals will be killed.

古文：虚危，又齐分也。 
现代文：虚、危二宿又与齐地对应。 
English: In the case of a dangerous lodging, the place of the field is the same.

古文：十二月，荧惑袭太白于营室。
现代文：十二月，火星袭金星于营室。
English: In December, a fluorescent planet encroached on a white dwarf star near Yingmuro.

古文：占曰： 天下兵起，亡君之戒。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为天下将有军事行动，君主将亡的警戒。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This is a warning that there will be military operations all over the world, and the monarch will die."

古文：一曰： 易相。 
现代文：另一说： 将变更宰相。 
English: He also said that the country's minister would have to be replaced.

古文：初齐王冏定京都，因留辅政，遂专慠无君。
现代文：起初齐王司马同子定京都，因而留下辅政，遂专权傲慢、目中无君。
English: At first, the king of Qi, Sima Tongzong, decided on Kyoto, thus leaving a vice-regime, resulting in autocratic arrogance and no ruler in sight.

古文：是月，成都、河间檄长沙王乂讨之。冏、乂交战，攻焚宫阙。
现代文：同月，盛趟王、河间王传檄长沙王司马义讨伐变王司马同、丛交战，进攻焚烧宫阙。
English: In the same month, Wang Shibatai, Wang Chuanqian, Wang Sima Yi of Changsha fought against Wang Sima Tong and Cong, attacking and burning the imperial palace.

古文：冏兵败夷灭，又杀其兄上军将军实以下二十余人。
现代文：司马同兵败被消灭，又杀其兄上军将军司马洼以下二十余人。
English: Sima's defeated soldiers were eliminated, and more than twenty people, including his brother, the general Sima Wa, were killed.

古文：太安二年，成都攻长沙，于是公私饥困，百姓力屈。
现代文：左塞二年，盛都王进攻昼业主，当时朝野饥困，百姓力竭。
English: In the second year of Taian, the king of Chengdu attacked the king of Changsha. As a result, the public and private sectors were in trouble, and the people were exhausted.

古文：晋惠帝太安二年二月，太白入昴。
现代文：晋惠帝太安二年二月，金星入昴宿。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Taian's reign, Venus entered the mansion.

古文：占曰： 天下扰，兵大起。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示天下被扰乱，战争纷起。 
English: Divination says: The world is in turmoil, and large-scale wars are on the rise.

古文：三月，彗星见东方，指三台。
现代文：三月，彗星出现于东方，指向三台之星。
English: In March, the comet appeared in the east, pointing to the three stars.

古文：占曰： 兵丧之象。
现代文：占辞说： 此为预示将有战争及丧乱的天象。
English: The oracle said, "This is the sign of war, of death and destruction.

古文：三台为三公。 
现代文：三台星代表三公。 
English: The three pedestals symbolize the three kings.

古文：七月，荧惑入东井。
现代文：七月，火星入东井之宿。
English: In July, Mars entered Tsukii-juku.

古文：占曰： 兵起国乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有战事、国家变乱。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This is a sign of war and national upheaval."

古文：是秋，太白守太微上将。
现代文：同年秋，金星守太微垣上将星。
English: In the autumn of the year of the rooster, Venus resides in Taibigaki Admiral.

古文：占曰： 上将将以兵亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 国之上将将因战争而死。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The head of the country will die as a result of the war.

古文：是年冬，成都、河间攻洛阳。
现代文：同年冬天，成都王、河间王进攻洛阳。
English: This winter, the King of Chengdu and the King of Kawama conquered Luoyang.

古文：三年正月，东海王越执长沙王乂，张方又杀之。
现代文：三年正月，束海王司马越抓获长沙王司马义，接着被张方所杀。
English: In the first month of the third year, Sokha Wang Sima Yue detained Changsha Wang Sima Yi, and Zhang Fang killed him.

古文：太安二年八月，长沙王奉帝出距二王，庚午，舍于玄武馆。
现代文：太安二年八月，长沙王侍奉惠帝一起领兵出而拒二王，庚午日，宿于玄武馆。
English: In August of the 2nd year of Taian, Changsha Wang served Hui Di and led the troops out together, but refused the two kings. On the morning of the 7th day, he stayed at the Xuanwu Pavilion.

古文：是日，天中裂为二，有声如雷。
现代文：当日，天从中裂而为二，有声如雷。
English: On that day, the sky split in two with a loud noise.

古文：三占同元康，臣下专僭之象也。
现代文：占辞同元康年间，即臣下专权僭越的天象。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, that is, the phenomenon of vassals overstepping their authority.

古文：是时长沙王擅权，后成都、河间、东海又迭专威命，是其应也。
现代文：当时长沙王专权，后来成都王、河间王、束海王又交替专权即为其应验。
English: At that time, the king of Changsha had the exclusive right, and later the king of Chengdu, the king of Kawama, and the king of Sokai also had the exclusive right.

古文：太安二年十一月辛巳，有星昼陨中天，北下有声如雷。
现代文：太安二年十一月辛巳，有星白天从中天向北陨落且有声如雷。
English: In November of the second year of the Taian era, a star fell from the middle of the sky to the north during the day and thundered loudly.

古文：按占： 名曰荧首，营首所在，下有大兵流血。 
现代文：考查占书可知： 其名为营首，营首所在之下有大的战争流血事件发生。 
English: An examination of the records shows that the name comes from the fact that a major war bloodshed took place below the camp's headquarters.

古文：明年，刘渊、石勒攻略并州，多所残灭。
现代文：明年，刘渊、石勒进攻掠夺并州，残酷屠杀甚多。
English: The next year, Liu Yuan and Shi Le attacked, plundered and annexed the state, and there were many brutal massacres.

古文：王浚起燕、代，引鲜卑攻掠鄴中，百姓涂地。
现代文：王浚起兵于燕、代之地，引鲜卑攻掠邺中，使得百姓死亡、极端困苦。
English: Wang Jun raised an army in the place of Yan and Dai, and made the people die and suffer extreme hardships.

古文：有声如雷，怒之象也。
现代文：有声如雷，即为发怒的象征。
English: Making a thunderous noise is a sign of anger.

古文：太安二年十一月庚辰，岁星入月中。
现代文：太安二年十一月庚辰，木星入月中。
English: In November of the second year of Taian, Geng Chen, Jupiter entered the moon.

古文：占曰： 国有逐相。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示国家将有放逐宰相之事。 
English: Divination says: There are signs of exile in the country.

古文：十二月壬寅，太白犯月。
现代文：十二月壬寅，金星犯月。
English: December, the day of the moon, is the month of the moon.

古文：占曰： 天下有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天下将有战争的天象。 
English: Divination says: There will be war.

古文：太安三年正月己卯，月犯太白，占同青龙。
现代文：太安三年正月己卯，月犯金星，占辞同壹垄年间相应的天象。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Taian era, the moon offends Venus, which is the corresponding celestial object in the year of divination.

古文：荧惑入南斗，占同永康。
现代文：火星入南斗，其占辞与丞尘年间相同。
English: When Mars enters the Southern Cross, its divination is the same as when it enters the Eastern Cross.

古文：是月，荧惑又犯岁星。
现代文：同月，火星又犯木星。
English: In the same month, Mars also trumps Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 有大战。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有大的战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This is a sign that there will be a great war."

古文：七月，左卫将军陈率众奉帝伐成都，六军败绩，兵逼乘舆。
现代文：七月，左卫将军陈畛率军侍奉塞壶讨伐盛壹旺，六军大败，敌兵逼近惠童。
English: In July, the General of the Left Division, Chen Xi, led by Hui Di, fought against the King of Chengdu. The army was defeated, and the enemy soldiers approached the Emperor's chariot.

古文：九月，王浚又攻成都于鄴，鄴溃，成都王由是丧亡。
现代文：九月，王逡又进攻盛都王于邺，邺崩溃，盛昼眨因此丧亡。
English: In September, Wang Hui attacked the Sheng capital, Wang Yucheng, and Sheng collapsed, leading to his death in the middle of the day.

古文：帝还洛，张方胁如长安。
现代文：蛊壶想回盗屋却被亟立胁迫到垦玄。
English: He wanted to go back to the burglar's house, but was forced by the police to go to Xuan.

古文：是时天下盗贼群起，张昌尤盛。
现代文：当时天下强盗反贼蜂拥而起，张昌尤为猖獗。
English: At that time, the world was swarming with robbers and anti-thieves, and Zhang Chang was particularly rampant.

古文：后二年，惠帝崩。
现代文：后二年，惠帝逝世。
English: Two years later, Hui Di passed away.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年五月，客星守毕。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年五月，客星守毕宿。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing, Hakka Xingshu passed away.

古文：占曰： 天子绝嗣。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示天子绝后。 
English: Divination says: The Son of Heaven has no heir.

古文：一曰： 大臣有诛。 
现代文：另一说： 大臣有被诛杀者。 
English: Another said: "A minister was killed."

古文：七月庚申，太白犯角、亢，经房、心，历尾、箕。
现代文：七月庚申，金星犯角宿、亢宿，经房宿、心宿，历尾宿、箕宿。
English: In July, according to the lunar calendar, Venus will be in Capricorn, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Pisces.

古文：九月，入南斗。
现代文：九月，入南斗之宿。
English: In September, he joined Nanto.

古文：占曰： 犯角，天下大战；犯亢，有大兵，人君忧；入房、心，为兵丧；犯尾，将军与民人为变；犯箕，女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 金星犯角宿则天下有大战；犯亢宿则将有大兵起，君主有忧患；入房宿、心宿则预示将有战争及国丧；犯尾宿则将有将军与民众变乱；犯箕宿则女主有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If Venus is in the cuckoo's nest, there will be a great war in the world; if it is in the pigeon's nest, there will be a great army, and the monarch will be in trouble; if it is in the house, and in the heart, there will be a war and a national mourning; if it is in the tail, there will be a general and the people in turmoil; if it is in the pigeon's nest, the hostess will be in trouble.

古文：一曰： 天下乱。
现代文：另一说： 天下将乱。
English: Another said: "There will be chaos."

古文：入南斗，有兵丧。 
现代文：入南斗预示将有战争及国丧。 
English: Enter Nanto, there is war, death.

古文：一曰： 将军为乱。 
现代文：又一说： 将军将作乱。 
English: Another way of putting it is: The general is creating a disturbance.

古文：其所犯守，又兗、豫、幽、冀、扬州之分也。
现代文：金星所犯所守之宿又属兖、豫、幽、冀、荡州之地的分野。
English: The inns guarded by Venus also belong to the fields of Yu, Yu, Yu, Hebei and Lingshou.

古文：是年七月，有荡阴之役。
现代文：同年七月，有荡阴之战。
English: In July of that year, there was a battle of the shadows.

古文：九月，王浚杀幽州刺史和演，攻鄴，鄴溃。
现代文：九月，王逡杀堂妙刺史扭演，进攻邺，邺崩溃。
English: In September, Wang Xizhidang staged a dramatic twist in history, attacking and collapsing.

古文：于是兗、豫为天下兵冲。
现代文：当时兖、豫二州为天下兵家必争之地。
English: At that time, Shandong and Henan were the two states that the world's soldiers had to fight for.

古文：陈敏又乱扬土，刘渊、石勒、李雄等并起微贱，跨有州郡。
现代文：陈敏又乱扬州之地，刘渊、石勒、李雄等并起于微贱而占有州郡。
English: Chen Min and Yangzhou, Liu Yuan, Shi Ler, Li Xiong, and so on, have risen from humble beginnings to occupy the state and county.

古文：皇后羊氏数被幽废。
现代文：皇后羊氏多次被幽禁废弃。
English: The Empress Yang clan has been banned and abandoned many times.

古文：光熙元年，惠帝崩，终无继嗣。
现代文：光熙元年，惠帝逝世，终无继嗣之子。
English: In the first year of Guangxi Dynasty, Hui Di died, and there was no son to succeed him.

古文：永兴元年七月乙丑，星陨有声。
现代文：永兴元年七月乙丑，有星陨落且伴随着声音。
English: In July of the first year of the second month of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the

古文：二年十月，星又陨有声。
现代文：二年十月，又有星陨落且有声。
English: In October of the second year, another star fell and made a sound.

古文：按刘向说，民去其土之象也。
现代文：按刘向的观点，这是民众离开其家乡的象征。
English: According to Liu Xiang, this is a symbol of people leaving their hometown.

古文：是后遂亡中夏。
现代文：此后晋室果然失去中夏。
English: After that, Jinshitsu did indeed lose Nakanatsu.

古文：永兴元年十二月壬寅夜，赤气亘天，砰隐有声。
现代文：永兴元年十二月壬寅之夜，赤气横贯天空且砰隐有声。
English: In December of the first year of Yongxing, on the night of Ren Yin, the red gas streaked across the sky and was faintly audible.

古文：二年十月丁丑，赤气见在北方，东西竟天。
现代文：二年十月丁丑，有赤气在北方出现，东西竞天。
English: In October of the second year of Ding Qiu, a red gas appeared in the north, and the east and west competed for the sky.

古文：占曰： 并为大兵。
现代文：占辞说： 此都预示将有大的战争。
English: The soothsayer said: All this portends a large-scale war.

古文：砰隐有声，怒之象也。 
现代文：砰隐有声乃是愤怒的征兆。 
English: A hoarse voice is a sign of anger.

古文：是后四海云扰，九服交兵。
现代文：此后天下纷扰，各地割据者相互交战。
English: Since then, the world has been in turmoil, and separatists in various regions have been fighting each other.

古文：永兴二年四月丙子，太白犯狼星。
现代文：永兴二年四月丙子，金星犯狼星。
English: In April of the second year of Yongxing, Cixi, Venus and Wolf star.

古文：占曰： 大兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有大的军事行动。 
English: The oracle said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：九月，岁星守东井。
现代文：九月，木星守柬井之宿。
English: In September, Jupiter resides in the Higashii-juku.

古文：占曰： 有兵。
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争。
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：井又秦分也。 
现代文：井宿又属秦地分野。 
English: Ijuku also belongs to the Qin and Qin territory.

古文：是年，苟晞破公师籓，张方破范阳王虓，关西诸将攻河间王颙，颙奔走，东海王迎杀之。
现代文：同年，苟晞破公师藩，张方破范阳王司区游，挝酉诸将进攻河间王剧巨，司马颇逃奔，被束海王迎战并将其杀死。
English: In the same year, Goguryeo defeated Gongshi Domain, Zhang Fang defeated Fanyang Wang Zi Guo Yu, Lao Zi Zhu attacked Kawama Wang He Ju, Sima Po fled, and was confronted and killed by Sokai Wang.

古文：永兴二年八月，星孛于昴、毕。
现代文：永兴二年八月，彗星出现在昴、毕二宿。
English: In August of the second year of Yongxing, the comet appeared in Zou and Bi Erjuku.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争及丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：昴、毕，又赵、魏分也。
现代文：昴宿、毕宿又属赵、魏之地分野。
English: Zhaozhuang and BiZhuang also belong to the Zhao and Wei areas.

古文：十月丁丑，有星孛于北斗。
现代文：十月丁丑，有彗星出现在北斗之宿。
English: In October, Ding Chou, a mysterious star appears in the Big Dipper.

古文：占曰： 璇玑更授，天子出走。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示皇位更替，天子被迫出走。 
English: The soothsayer said, "If you change the teaching, the heavenly son will flee."

古文：又曰： 强国发兵，诸侯争权。 
现代文：又说： 强国发兵，诸侯争权。 
English: He also said: The powerful vassal states sent troops, and the vassals fought for power.

古文：是后皆有其应。
现代文：此后都有应验。
English: Since then, all have been fulfilled.

古文：明年，惠帝崩。
现代文：明年，惠帝逝世。
English: The following year, Hui Di passed away.

古文：晋惠帝光熙元年四月，太白失行，自翼入尾、箕。
现代文：晋惠帝光熙元年四月，金星不按常规运行，从翼宿入尾宿、箕宿。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, the planet Venus did not follow the usual course, but moved from the wing to the tail and then to the beak.

古文：占曰： 太白失行而北，是谓返生。
现代文：占辞说： 金星不按常规运行且向北称为返生。
English: The horoscope says: Venus does not follow the usual pattern and moves northward, which is called rebirth.

古文：不有破军，必有屠城。 
现代文：没有军队被击破，必有屠城之事。 
English: If there is not a defeated army, there must be a massacre of the people in the city.

古文：五月，汲桑攻鄴，魏郡太守冯嵩出战大败，桑遂害东燕王腾，杀万余人，焚烧魏时宫室皆尽。
现代文：五月，汲桑进攻邺，魏郡太守冯嵩出战大败，返垩遂杀塞游王司马腾及万余人，烧尽魏时宫室。
English: In May, the Kuisang attacked Shandong, and Feng Song, the governor of Wei County, suffered a great defeat in the battle. After returning to Shandong, he killed Wang Sima Teng and more than 10,000 people, and burned down the palace of Wei Shigu.

古文：光熙元年五月，枉矢西南流。
现代文：帝光熙元年五月，有枉矢向西南流。
English: In May of the year of Guang Zi, the Yalong River flowed to the southwest.

古文：占曰： 以乱伐乱之象也。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为叛乱者相互征伐之象。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This is the sign of the rebels fighting each other.

古文：是时司马越西破河间，奉迎大驾。
现代文：当时司马越向西攻破河间王，奉迎置壹。
English: At that time, Sima Yue broke through the King of Kawama to the west, and received a welcome.

古文：寻收缪胤、何绥等，肆其无君之心，天下恶之。
现代文：不久收伏缪胤、何绥等，放纵其无君之心而为天下人厌恶。
English: He soon subdued Muyin, He Yao and others, indulging their tyrannical hearts and disgusting the world.

古文：死而石勒焚其尸柩，是其应也。
现代文：死后石勒焚烧其尸体灵柩，即其应验。
English: After his death, Shiller incinerated his coffin, which is his fulfillment.

古文：光熙元年九月丁未，荧惑守心。
现代文：光熙元年九月丁未，火星守心宿。
English: In September of Guangxi in the first year of Guangxi, Dingwei, Mars guard the heart.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象于王者不利。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：己亥，填星守房、心，又犯岁星。
现代文：己亥，土星守房、心二宿，又犯木星。
English: Self-conceit, Saturn guarding the house, the heart in the second house, and Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 土守房，多祸丧。
现代文：占辞说： 土星守房宿则多有祸乱丧事。
English: Fortune-telling says: If Saturn stays in your house, there will be a lot of misfortune.

古文：守心，国内乱，天下赦。 
现代文：守心宿则国有内乱，天下赦。 
English: In the case of Shoshin-juku, if there is a civil war in the country, there will be no mercy.

古文：又曰： 填与岁合为内乱。 
现代文：又说： 土星与木星合则有内乱。 
English: He also said: The conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter brings civil unrest.

古文：是时司马越秉权，终以无礼破灭，内乱之应也。
现代文：当时旦墨越专权，终因无礼被灭，此即内乱之应。
English: At that time, the Dangmo-Viet dictatorship was finally extinguished due to rudeness, which was the reason for the civil war.

古文：十一月，惠帝崩，怀帝即位，大赦天下。
现代文：十一月，塞童去世，面即位，大赦天下。
English: In November, Saido died, ascended the throne, and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：光熙元年十二月癸未，太白犯填星。
现代文：光熙元年十二月癸未，金星犯土星。
English: At the end of December in the first year of Guangxi Dynasty, Venus collided with Saturn.

古文：占曰： 为内兵，有大战。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示国内有兵相争，有大战。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be civil unrest in the country and a large-scale war.

古文：是后河间王为东海王越所杀。
现代文：此后河间王被束海王司马越所杀。
English: After that, King Kawama was killed by King Yue of the East Sea.

古文：明年正月，东海王越杀诸葛玫等。
现代文：明年正月，塞违王司马越杀诸葛玫等。
English: In the first month of the second year, Wang Yue of the East Sea killed Zhuge Mei and others.

古文：五月，汲桑破冯嵩，杀东燕王。
现代文：五月，垩破驴。杀塞游王。八月，苞肿大破。
English: In May, Kuisang defeated Feng Song's troops and killed Dongyan Wang.

古文：八月，苟晞大破汲桑。光熙元年十二月甲申，有白气若虹，中天北下至地，夜见五日乃灭。占曰： 大兵起。 
现代文：光熙元年十二月甲申，有像虹一样的白气从中天北下至地，夜裹出现，五天后消失。占辞说： 此预示将有大的战事。 
English: In December of the first year of the Guangxi Dynasty, Jiaxing, there was a rainbow-like white gas from the middle of the sky to the north and down to the earth. It appeared at night and disappeared five days later. The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be a big war.

古文：明年，王弥起青、徐，汲桑乱河北，毒流天下。
现代文：明年，王弥起兵于青、徐二州，汲桑乱河北，毒流天下。
English: In the next year, Wang Ya raised an army in Qing and Xu Erzhou, Kuisang in Hebei Province, and the poison spread all over the world.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉元年九月辛亥，有大星自西南流于东北，小者如升相随，天尽赤，声如雷。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉元年九月辛亥，有大星从西南流于东北且有小如升者与之相随，天尽赤有声如雷。
English: Xiao Huai Emperor Yongjia in September of the first year of Xinhai, there are big stars flowing from the southwest to the northeast, and there are small ones like ascending, and the sky is red and the sound is like thunder.

古文：占曰： 流星为贵使。 
现代文：占辞说： 流星代表贵使。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The shooting star represents the noble messenger.

古文：是年五月，汲桑杀东燕王腾，遂据河北。
现代文：当年五月，汲桑杀墓基王司马腾，遂占据周韭。
English: In May of the year of the Rooster, the Rooster killed the King of the Eastern Swallow, Tanyu Lu, and then occupied the north of Dongbei.

古文：十一月，始遣和郁为征北将军镇鄴，而田甄等大破汲桑，斩于乐陵。
现代文：十一月，帝派遣翅郁为征北将军镇守邺，而田甄等大破汲桑，斩之于碧避。
English: In November, the emperor dispatched Feng Yu to guard the capital for the Northern Expeditionary Force, while Tian Zhen and others broke the mulberry tree and cut it down in Biyuan.

古文：于是以甄为汲郡太守，弟兰钜鹿太守。
现代文：于是以旦题为逛逊太守，其弟旦菌为堑尘太守。
English: As a result, he appointed Tan Zhen as the governor of Yunnan Province, and his brother Tan Lan as the governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：小星相随，小将别帅之象也。
现代文：小星相随代表小将别帅。
English: Small stars follow each other to represent small stars.

古文：司马越忿魏郡以东，平原南，皆党于桑，悉以赏甄等，于是侵略赤地，有声如雷，怒之象也。
现代文：司马越愤恨秀鳄以东与卫愿以南都阿附于，所以在坦垩战败被杀后把这些地方都赏赐给田甄等人，当时相互攻杀，血流染红大地，有声如雷即为愤怒之兆。
English: Sima grew more and more resentful of the fact that both the eastern part of Xiuhuacao and the southern part of Weiweng were attached to A. Therefore, after the defeat of Tanggu and the killing, these places were awarded to Tian Zhen and others. At that time, they attacked and killed each other, the blood flow dyed the earth red, and the thunderous sound was a sign of anger.

古文：永嘉元年十二月丁亥，星流震散。
现代文：永嘉元年十二月厂亥，有星流且震散。
English: In December of the first year of Yongjia, there was a meteor shower and earthquake.

古文：案刘向说： 天官列宿，在位之象，小星无名者，庶民之类。
现代文：考查塑咆的观点： 天上的星官列宿代表在位的王公大臣，无名的小星则代表一般的老百姓。
English: Examining Shurao's point of view: the celestial star officials are the representatives of the reigning princes and ministers, and the nameless little stars are the representatives of ordinary people.

古文：此百官庶民将流散之象也。 
现代文：这是百官及民众将流散之象。 
English: This is a sign that hundreds of officials and citizens will be dispersed.

古文：是后天下大乱，百官万民，流移转死矣。
现代文：后来天下大乱，百官万民流离辗转，死者众多。
English: Later, the world was in turmoil, with hundreds of officials and citizens displaced, and many people died.

古文：永嘉二年正月庚午，太白伏不见。
现代文：永嘉二年正月庚午，金星伏而不出现。
English: In the afternoon of the first month of the second year of Yongjia, Venus retreated and did not appear.

古文：二月庚子，始晨见东方。
现代文：二月庚子，早晨出现于东方。
English: February Geng Zi, appeared in the morning in the east.

古文：是谓当见不见，占同上条。其后破军杀将，不可胜数。
现代文：这称为应当出现而不出现，占辞与前面相应的天象相同。其后破军杀将，不可尽数。
English: This is called should appear but does not appear, the divination is the same as the corresponding celestial object in front.

古文：帝崩虏庭，中夏沦覆。
现代文：帝逝世于胡虏之庭，中夏沦落倾覆于异族。
English: The emperor died in the court of the Khuriks, and the decline of the Middle Xia was overturned by a foreign race.

古文：永嘉三年正月庚子，荧惑犯紫微。
现代文：永嘉三年正月庚子，火星犯紫微。
English: In the first month of the third year of Yongjia, Geng Zi, the Mars offender Zi Wei.

古文：占曰： 当有野死之王。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有死于京都之外的帝王。
English: The fortune-teller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that an emperor will die outside of Kyoto."

古文：又为火烧宫。 
现代文：又有皇宫被烧。 
English: Another imperial palace was burned down.

古文：是时太史令高堂冲奏，乘舆宜迁幸，不然必无洛阳。
现代文：当时太史令毫堂冲奏请帝应迁幸，否则必失洛阳。
English: At that time, the Taishi ordered the miller to rush to ask the emperor to relocate, otherwise Luoyang would be lost.

古文：五年六月，刘曜、王弥入京都，烧宫庙，帝崩于平阳。
现代文：五年六月，刘曜、王弥入京都洛阳，焚烧宫室、宗庙，帝崩逝于平阳。
English: In June of the fifth year, Liu You and Wang Ya entered Kyoto Luoyang, burned the palace room and the ancestral temple, and the emperor died in Pingyang.

古文：永嘉三年，镇星久守南斗。
现代文：永嘉三年，土星长时间守南斗之宿。
English: In the third year of Yongjia, Saturn stayed at Nandou for a long time.

古文：占曰： 镇星所居者，其国有福。 
现代文：占辞说： 土星所居处对应之国有福。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Saturn's residence corresponds to the national blessing.

古文：是时安东琅邪王始有扬土。
现代文：当时安束琅邪王始有扬州之地。
English: At that time, the king of evil, Anzac, began to occupy the land of Yangzhou.

古文：其年十一月，地动，陈卓以为是地动应也。
现代文：同年十一月，地震，陈卓认为地震应验了上面的天象。
English: In November of the same year, an earthquake occurred, which Chen Zhuo believed to be the result of ground movement.

古文：永嘉三年十二月乙亥，有白气如带出东南北方各二，起地至天，贯参伐。
现代文：永嘉三年十二月乙亥，各有两条如带子一样的白气在南北方向出现，下起于地而延至天，贯参伐之宿。
English: In December of the third year of Yongjia, two white streaks like a ribbon appeared in the north-south direction, rising from the ground and extending to the sky, running through the camp.

古文：占曰： 天下大兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 天下将有大的战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: A world-wide large-scale war will occur.

古文：四年三月，司马越收缪胤、缪播等；又三方云扰，攻战不休。
现代文：四年三月，司马越收伏缪胤、缪播等；同时三方扰乱，相互攻战不休。
English: In March of the fourth year, Sima Yue subdued Miao Tan, Miao Bo, etc.; at the same time, the three sides disturbed each other and fought each other incessantly.

古文：五年三月，司马越死于宁平城，石勒攻破其众，死者十余万人。
现代文：五年三月，司马越死于宁平城，石勒打败其部众，死者十余万人。
English: In March of the fifth year, Sima Yue died in Miping City, Shi Le defeated his army, and more than one hundred thousand people died.

古文：六月，京都焚灭，帝劫虏庭。
现代文：六月，京都被焚毁，晋帝被异族劫持。
English: In June, Kyoto was burned to the ground, and Emperor Jin was abducted by an alien race.

古文：永嘉五年十月，荧惑守心。
现代文：永嘉五年十月，火星守心宿。
English: In October of the fifth year of Yongjia, Mars guard the heart.

古文：后二年，帝崩于虏庭。
现代文：后二年，帝死于胡。
English: Two years later, Emperor Hu died.

古文：永嘉六年七月，荧惑、岁星、镇星、太白聚牛女之间，裴回进退。
现代文：永嘉六年七月，火星、木星、土星、金星聚于牛宿、女宿之间，徘徊进退。
English: In July of the sixth year of Yongjia, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and Venus gathered between the Cow Inn and the Women's Inn, wandering in and out.

古文：按占曰： 牛，扬州分。 
现代文：考查占书可知： 牛宿与扬州对应。 
English: Examination of the account book shows that: Ushijuku corresponds to Yangzhou.

古文：是后两都倾覆，而元帝中兴扬土，是其应也。
现代文：后来两都倾覆，而元帝中兴于扬州之地，此为其应验。
English: Later, both were overthrown, and the Yuan Dynasty flourished in the land of Yangzhou, which was its fulfillment.

古文：愍帝建武元年五月癸未，太白荧惑合于东井。
现代文：愍帝建武元年五月癸未，金星与火星合于束井之宿。
English: On the morning of May in the first year of Emperor Jianwu, Venus and Mars met at the Sokai Inn.

古文：占曰： 金火合曰烁，为丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 金与火合被称为烁，代表丧乱。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The combination of gold and fire is called a scintillation, and it is an omen of death."

古文：是时帝虽劫于平阳，天下犹未敢居其虚位，灾在帝也。
现代文：当时帝虽然被虏于平阳，天下还无他人敢称帝，所以灾在愍帝身上。
English: At that time, although the emperor was captured in Pingyang, there was no one else in the world who dared to call himself an emperor, so the disaster fell on Emperor Zou.

古文：六月丁卯，太白犯太微。
现代文：六月丁卯，金星犯太微垣。
English: Jun Dingwu, Venus Guilty of Being Too Weak.

古文：占曰： 兵入天子廷，王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示兵进入天子之廷，王者交恶。 
English: The soothsayer said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that soldiers will enter the court of the Son of Heaven, and the king will fall into evil.

古文：七月，愍帝崩于寇庭，天下行服大临。
现代文：七月，愍帝死于胡，天下孝服哀祭。
English: In July, Emperor Gao died of Hu, and the whole world paid tribute to him.

古文：晋元帝太兴元年七月，太白犯南斗。
现代文：晋元帝太兴元年七月，金星犯南斗之宿。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin Dynasty, Venus committed Nandou.

古文：占曰： 吴、越有兵，大人忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示吴、越之地将有战争，王公大臣有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This foretells that there will be a war in the land of Wu and Yue, and that the prince and minister will be troubled."

古文：二年二月甲申，荧惑犯东井。
现代文：二年二月甲申，火星犯束井。
English: In February of the second year of Koshin, Mars collided with Higashii-juku.

古文：占曰： 兵起，贵臣相戮。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有军事行动，贵臣相互杀戮。 
English: The soothsayer said: When war breaks out, the high-ranking ministers will kill each other.

古文：八月己卯，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：八月己卯，金星犯轩辕大星。
English: In August, Venus will collide with the great star of Capricorn.

古文：占曰： 后宫忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 后宫将有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The harem is in trouble.

古文：乙未，太白犯岁星，在翼。
现代文：乙未，金星犯木星，在翼宿。
English: Eta Aquarii, Venus and Jupiter, in the constellation of Aquila.

古文：占曰： 为兵乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有车队作乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends war.

古文：三年四月壬辰，枉矢出虚、危，没翼、轸。
现代文：三年四月壬辰，枉矢出于虚、危二宿而消失于翼、轸二宿。
English: In April of the 3rd year of the Ninth month of the Ninth month of the 3rd year of the Ninth month of the 3rd year of the Ninth month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the Ninth month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of

古文：占曰： 枉矢所触，天下之所伐。
现代文：占辞说： 枉矢所对应之地即为军队征伐所在。
English: The soothsayer said: The place touched by the arrow is the place fought by the whole world.

古文：翼、轸，荆州之分也。 
现代文：翼、轸二宿与荆州对应。 
English: 翼 and 二宿 correspond to Jingzhou.

古文：五月戊子，太白入太微，又犯上将。
现代文：五月戊子，金星入太微垣，又犯上将星。
English: May Boshi, Venus enters the too small wall, and commits the general star.

古文：占曰： 天子自将，上将诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 天子将亲自统率部队，上将被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The Son of Heaven will personally lead the army, and the commander will be killed.

古文：六月丙辰，太白与岁星合于房。
现代文：六月丙辰，金星与木星合于房宿。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, Venus and Jupiter move into your house.

古文：占曰： 为兵饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为兵饥之兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends a famine in the army.

古文：九月，太白犯南斗，占同元年。
现代文：九月，金星犯南斗，占辞与太兴元年天象相同。
English: In September, Venus made the Southern Cross, which is the same as the celestial phenomenon in the first year of Taixing.

古文：十月己亥，荧惑在东井，居五诸侯南，踟蹰留止，积三十日。
现代文：十月己亥，火星在柬井之宿，居于五诸侯之南，徘徊不进，积三十天。
English: At the end of October, Mars was in Kamdei, in the south of the Five Provinces, and stayed there for thirty days.

古文：占曰： 荧惑守井二十日以上，大人忧；守五诸侯，诸侯有诛者。 
现代文：占辞说： 如果火星守井宿二十天以上，则王公大臣有忧患；守五诸侯，则诸侯有被杀者。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If the Mars stays for more than twenty days, then the prince-minister will be in trouble; if the Mars stays for five lords, then the lords will be killed.

古文：十二月己未，太白入月，在斗。
现代文：十二月己未，金星在斗宿入月。
English: It's not even December yet, and Venus is setting in the crescent moon.

古文：郭景纯曰： 月属坎，阴府法象也。
现代文：郭景纯认为： 月属坎，是阴曹地府的象征。
English: Guo Jingshun believes that: The moon is a can, a symbol of the underworld.

古文：太白金行而来犯之，天意若曰刑理失中，自毁其法也。 
现代文：金星运行而犯之，天意是说国家、刑理失之偏颇，自毁法则。 
English: If Venus moves and commits a crime, the will of heaven is said to be biased by the state, the punishment is unreasonable, and the law is self-destructive.

古文：四年十二月丁亥，月犯岁星在房。
现代文：四年十二月丁亥，月在房宿犯木星。
English: In December of the 4th year of Dinghai, the moon roosted in Jupiter's house.

古文：占曰： 其国兵饥，民流亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家兵饥，民流亡。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The national soldiers are starving, and the people are in exile.

古文：永昌元年三月，王敦率江、荆之众，来攻京都，六军距战，败绩。
现代文：永昌元年三月，王敦率江、荆之军进攻京都，六军拒战而大败。
English: In March of the first year of the Yongchang era, Wang Dun led the armies of Jiang and Jing to attack Kyoto, but the Six Armies refused to fight and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：于是杀护军将军周顗、尚书令刁协，骠骑将军刘隗出奔。
现代文：于是王敦杀护军将军周题、尚书令刁协，骠骑将军刘隗逃亡。
English: As a result, Wang Dun killed the general of the escort army Zhou Qi, Shang Shuling and Yan Xie, and led the cavalry general Liu Qi to flee.

古文：四月，又杀湘州刺史谯王承、镇南将军甘卓。
现代文：四月，又杀湘州刺史谯王司马承、镇南将军甘卓。
English: In April, Wang Sima Cheng and Zhenan General Gan Zhuo were also killed in Xiangzhou.

古文：闰十二月，元帝崩。
现代文：闰十二月，元帝去世。
English: On leap December, Emperor Yuan died.

古文：间一年，敦亦枭夷，枉矢触翼之应也。
现代文：一年后王敦亦被杀，此乃枉矢触翼宿的应验。
English: A year later, Wang Dun was also killed, which was the fulfillment of the wish.

古文：十月，石他入豫州，略城父、霡二县民以北，刺史祖约遣军追之，为其所没，遂退守寿春。
现代文：十月，石他进入豫州，掠夺城丝、绖二县民众向北，刺史祖约遣军追之而为其所败，遂退守寿春。
English: In October, he entered Yuzhou, plundered the city and the people of Shiji County to the north, stabbed Shizuo about sending troops to chase him and was defeated, and then retreated to Shuchun.

古文：明帝太宁三年正月，荧惑逆行入太微。
现代文：明帝太宁三年正月，火星逆行入太微。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, Mars entered retrograde.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧，王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象王者交恶，预示将有战争、国丧。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The emperor hates this kind of star, for it portends war and death."

古文：闰八月，帝崩。
现代文：闰八月，帝去世。
English: In late August, Emperor Ming died.

古文：咸和二年，苏峻反，攻宫室，太后以忧逼崩，天子幽劫于石头，远近兵乱，至四年乃息。
现代文：盛和二年，鏊哩反叛，进攻宫室，太后因忧逼而死，天子被幽禁于五垩，远近兵乱，到四年才子息。
English: In the second year of the Shenghe era, Baili rebelled and attacked the palace. The empress dowager died of grief. Tianzi was imprisoned in Wuzhen. There was a war nearby. He died four years later.

古文：成帝咸和四年七月，有星孛于西北，二十三日灭。
现代文：成帝咸和四年七月，有彗星出现于西北方向，二十三天后消失。
English: In July of the 4th year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, a comet appeared in the northwest direction and disappeared after 23 days.

古文：占曰： 为兵乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为战乱之兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends war.

古文：十二月，郭默杀江州刺史刘胤，荆州刺史陶侃讨默，明年，斩之。
现代文：十二月，郭逖杀红州刺史刘皿，翅业刺史迪惺征讨整默，明年，斩整麸。
English: In December, Guo Wei killed the Red State's chief clerk Liu Sara, and the wing industry's chief clerk Di Wei was silenced. Next year, the chief clerk will be executed.

古文：是时，石勒又始僭号。
现代文：当时亘勤始僭越自立为王。
English: At that time, Guoqin Shihong Yue Yue independently became king.

古文：咸和六年正月丙辰，月入南斗。
现代文：咸和六年正月丙辰，月入南斗之宿。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Haman and Heian dynasties, the moon entered the Nanto no Yado.

古文：占曰： 有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：一曰： 有大赦。 
现代文：另一说： 有大赦。 
English: Another is: there will be an amnesty.

古文：是月胡贼杀略娄、武进二县民，于是遣戍中洲。
现代文：当月胡贼杀掠娄、娄进二县民众，于是遣军戍守中洲。
English: That month, the Hu bandits killed, plundered, and invaded the people of the two counties, so they sent troops to defend Zhongzhou.

古文：明年，胡贼又略南沙、海虞民。
现代文：明年，胡贼又掠南沙、海虞民众。
English: The next year, the Hu bandits again plundered the people of Nansha and Haiyu.

古文：是年正月，大赦，伐淮南，讨襄阳，平之。
现代文：同年正月，大赦，征伐淮南，讨伐襄阳而平定之。
English: In the first month of the same year, the amnesty, the conquest of Huainan, and the conquest of Xiangyang were completed.

古文：咸和六年十一月，荧惑守胃、昴。
现代文：咸和六年十一月，火星守胃、昴二宿。
English: In November of the 6th year of the Heian period, Mars guarded the stomach and ruled the second house.

古文：占曰： 赵、魏有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示赵、魏之地将有战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be war in the land of Zhao and Wei.

古文：八年七月，石勒死，石虎自立，多所残灭。
现代文：八年七月，石勒死，石虎自立，残杀甚多。
English: In July of the eighth year, Shi strangled to death, and Shihu became independent and killed many people.

古文：是时虽勒、虎僭号，而其强弱常占于昴，不关太微紫宫也。
现代文：当时石勒、石虎虽自立为王，但其强弱变化常与昴宿天象有关，而不涉及太微、紫微二宫。
English: At that time, although Shi Le and Shi Hu were independent kings, their strength and weakness changes were often related to the Pleiades, and did not involve the Taimiao and Zi Wei Er Gong.

古文：咸和八年三月己巳，月入南斗，与六年占同。
现代文：咸和八年三月己巳，月入南斗，与咸和六年时的占辞相同。
English: In March of the eighth year of the Haman period, the sun rose, and the moon entered the south, which was the same as the divination in the sixth year of the Haman period.

古文：其年七月，石勒死，彭彪以谯，石生以长安，郭权以秦州，并归从。
现代文：同年七月，石勒死，彭彪以谯，石生以长安，郭权以秦州一并归顺束晋。
English: In July of the same year, Shi strangled to death, and Peng Biao went to Shunzhu, Shi Sheng to Chang'an, and Guo Quan to Qinzhou.

古文：于是遣督护高球率众救彪，彪败球退。
现代文：当时派遣督护高球率军救援彭彪，彭彪战败而高球撤退。
English: At that time, the high-ball team led by the high-ball team leader was dispatched to rescue Peng Biao. Peng Biao was defeated and the high-ball team withdrew.

古文：又石虎、石斌攻灭生、权。
现代文：又石虎、石斌攻灭石生、郭权。
English: In addition, Shihu and Shi Bin defeated Shi Sheng and Guo Quan.

古文：咸康元年正月，大赦。
现代文：咸康元年正月，大赦。
English: In the first month of Xiankang in the first year of the Heian period, there was an amnesty.

古文：咸和八年七月，荧惑入昴。
现代文：咸和八年七月，火星入昴宿。
English: In July of the eighth year of the Heian period, the planet Mars entered the pagoda.

古文：占曰： 胡王死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示胡王将死。 
English: The soothsayer said: King Hu will die.

古文：石虎多所攻灭。
现代文：石虎攻减甚多。
English: There are a lot of stone tigers.

古文：八月，月犯昴。
现代文：八月，月犯昴宿。
English: In August, the month-long detention ended.

古文：占曰： 胡不安。 
现代文：占辞说： 胡不安宁。 
English: Divination says: The forest is restless.

古文：九年六月，月又犯昴。
现代文：九年六月，月又犯昴宿。
English: In June of the ninth year, he was arrested again.

古文：是时石弘虽袭勒位，而石虎擅威暴横。
现代文：当时互丛虽然承袭互勤的王位，而五卢作威暴戾蛮横。
English: At that time, although Mutsu inherited the throne of Mutsukin, Wu Lu was a tyrannical and violent ruler.

古文：十月，废弘自立，遂幽杀之。
现代文：十月，废石弘自立，接着秘密杀死石弘。
English: In October, he overthrew Ishihiro and then secretly killed him.

古文：咸和九年三月己亥，荧惑入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：咸和九年三月己亥，火星入舆鬼之宿，犯积尸。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Heian period, Mars entered the home of the ghosts, and the corpses piled up.

古文：占曰： 兵在西北，有没军死将。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示战争在西北方向。有军队陷没将领死亡之事发生。 
English: The fortuneteller said: The battle took place in the northwest, there were destroyed troops and dead generals.

古文：四月，镇西将军、雍州刺史郭权始以秦州归从，寻为石斌所灭，徙其众于青、徐。
现代文：四月，镇西将军、壅业刺史堑护起初以豢业归从置，不久被互避消灭，迁徙其部众于青、徐二州。
English: In April, the Zhenxi General and the Xie Zhishi Yinggu were initially subordinated to the Xie, but were soon eliminated by mutual avoidance, and their subordinates were relocated to Qing and Xu Erzhou.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年二月己亥，太白犯昴。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年二月己亥，金星犯昴宿。
English: Jincheng Emperor Hamkang died in February of the first year of the Heian period, and Jinxing committed suicide.

古文：占曰： 兵起，岁大旱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有军事行动，本年大旱。 
English: The fortuneteller said: This indicates that there will be military action, and this year there will be a drought.

古文：四月，石虎掠骑至历阳。
现代文：四月，互虚率骑兵至压屋。
English: In April, the cavalry's abandonment rate rose to a record high.

古文：朝廷虑其众也，加司徒王导大司马，治兵动众。
现代文：朝廷考虑到其人数众多，加封司徒工遵为大司马，整治军队。
English: The imperial court, taking into account the large number of its members, appointed Zong as the grand steward to rectify the army.

古文：又遣慈湖、牛渚、芜湖三戍。五月乃罢。
现代文：又派兵戍卫茎溯、生渣、墓迩。五月乃罢。
English: They also sent soldiers to guard the stalks, slag and tombstones. This was in May.

古文：是时胡贼又围襄阳，征西将军庾亮遣宁距退之。六月，旱。
现代文：当时胡贼又围塞盐，被征西将军座壹派遣座空拒退。六月，旱。
English: At that time, the Ku Klux Klan besieged and blockaded Salt Lake City, and was sent back empty-handed by the Western Conquest Army. In June, there was a drought.

古文：咸康元年八月戊戌，荧惑入东井。
现代文：咸康元年八月戊戌，火星入东井之宿。
English: In August of the first year of Hamkang, the planet Mars entered the inn of Higashii.

古文：占曰： 无兵兵起；有兵兵止。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示：如果当时没有军事行动则将有军事行动；如果有军事行动则将停止。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates: if there is no military action at that time, there will be military action; if there is military action, it will stop.

古文：是年夏，发众列戍。
现代文：当年夏天，发军守戍。
English: In the summer of that year, troops were dispatched to defend the city.

古文：加王导大司马，以备胡贼。
现代文：加封旦遵为大司马，以防备胡贼。
English: Dan Zun was given the additional title of grand steward to prevent him from becoming a traitor.

古文：咸康元年三月丙戌，月入昴。
现代文：咸康元年三月丙戌，月入昴宿。
English: In the first year of Xiankang, in March of the year of the pig, the moon entered the pig's house.

古文：占曰： 胡王死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示翅王将死。 
English: The soothsayer said: King Hu will die.

古文：十一月，月犯昴。
现代文：十一月，月犯昴宿。
English: In November, the moon collided with Shibuya.

古文：二年八月，月又犯昴。
现代文：二年八月，月又犯昴宿。
English: In August of the following year, Tsuki committed seppuku again.

古文：占同。
现代文：占辞同上。
English: The same applies to fortune-telling.

古文：咸和三年，石虎发众七万，四年二月，自袭段辽于蓟，辽奔败。
现代文：咸和三年，石虎发兵七万，四年，亲自袭击壁辽于蓟，段辽奔逃。
English: In the third year of Xianhe, Shihu sent an army of seventy thousand. In the fourth year, he personally attacked the wall of Liao Yu, and Duan Liao fled.

古文：又攻慕容皝于棘城，不克引退。皝追之，杀数百人。
现代文：又进攻慕容铣于夔继，不克而退，被慕容铣追杀数百人。
English: He also attacked Murong Yao in Shiji, but he retreated and was chased by Murong Yao and killed hundreds of people.

古文：虎留其将麻秋屯令支，皝破秋，并虏辽杀之。
现代文：亘虚留其部将庭挞屯于全直，被蔓容铣所破，并虏获段辽而杀之。
English: Watanabe left his subordinate, Ting Yaotun, in Quanzhi. He was defeated by Cang Rong Yao and captured by Duan Liao, who killed him.

古文：咸康二年正月辛巳，彗星夕见西方，在奎。
现代文：咸康二年正月辛巳，彗星傍晚时出现于西方之奎宿。
English: In the first month of the second lunar month, the comet appeared in the west in the evening and stayed in Kuishuku.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争及丧乱。
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：奎又为边兵。 
现代文：奎宿又表示边境有战事。 
English: Kuijuku also said that there was fighting on the border.

古文：四年，石虎伐慕容皝不克，皝追击之，又破麻秋。
现代文：四年，石虎征伐慕容铣不克，反被追击，又破其部将麻秋。
English: In four years, Shihu conquered Murong Qibai, but was chased and defeated by his subordinate, Maqiu.

古文：时皝称蕃，边兵之应也。
现代文：当时慕容就称臣于晋，所以上述战争又为边境有战事的应验。
English: At that time, Murongwu claimed to be a feudal state, which was the fulfillment of the frontier soldiers.

古文：咸康二年正月辛卯，月犯房南第二星。
现代文：咸康二年正月辛卯，月犯房宿南第二星。
English: In the first month of the second year of Xiankang, Xinwu, the second star of the monthly criminal room accommodation in the south.

古文：占曰： 将相有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将相有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be sorrow.

古文：五年七月，丞相王导薨。
现代文：五年七月，丞相王导去世。
English: In July of the same year, the Prime Minister Wang Tao passed away.

古文：八月，太尉郗鉴薨。
现代文：八月，太尉郗鉴去世。
English: In August, Taifu Shokan died.

古文：六年正月，征西大将军庾亮薨。
现代文：六年正月，征西大将军庾亮去世。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, the general of the Western Expedition, Zou Liang, died.

古文：咸康二年九月庚寅，太白犯南斗，因昼见。
现代文：咸康二年九月庚寅，金星犯南斗，接着白天出现。
English: In September of the second year of Xiankang, Geng Yin, Venus committed Nan Dou, and then appeared during the day.

古文：占曰： 斗为宰相，又扬州分，金犯之，死丧象。
现代文：占辞说： 斗宿代表宰相，又与扬州对应，金星犯之，乃是死丧的天象。
English: Fortune-telling said: Doujuan represents the prime minister, and corresponds to Yangzhou, and Venus is the fallen angel.

古文：昼见为不臣，又为兵丧。 
现代文：白天出现表示有反臣，又预示将有战争、丧乱。 
English: Appearing during the day indicates that there are enemies, and also foretells that there will be war and chaos.

古文：三年，石虎僭称天王。
现代文：三年，石虎僭越自称天王。
English: In the third year, Shi Hu Rong Yue began to call himself the Heavenly King.

古文：四年，虎灭段辽而败于慕容皝。
现代文：四年，石虎消灭段辽而败于慕容凯。
English: In four years, Shihu eliminated Duan Liao and lost to Murong Kai.

古文：皝，国蕃臣。
现代文：慕窒铣乃晋国之藩臣。
English: Munitsune was a vassal of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：五年，王导薨。
现代文：五年，王导去世。
English: Five years later, Wang Du passed away.

古文：咸康三年六月辛未，有流星大如二斗魁，色青，赤光耀地，出奎中，没娄北。
现代文：咸康三年六月辛未，有流星与二斗魁一样大，色青，红光耀地，出于奎宿之中而消失于娄宿之北。
English: In June of the 3rd year of Xiankang, there was a meteor as big as the Big Dipper. It was bluish and reddish in color, and it disappeared from the middle of Kuijuku to the north of Xingjuku.

古文：案占为饥，五谷不藏。
现代文：考查占书可知，此天象表示将有饥荒，五谷不收。
English: Examination of the account book shows that this celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be famine and grain will not be harvested.

古文：是月，大旱。
现代文：当月大旱。
English: There was a severe drought that month.

古文：咸康三年八月，荧惑入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：咸康三年八月，火星入舆鬼宿，犯积尸。
English: In August of the third year of Xiankang, Mars entered the public haunted house, committing the accumulation of corpses.

古文：占曰： 贵人忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示尊贵之人将有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that the noble person is in distress.

古文：三年八月甲戌，月犯东井距星。
现代文：三年八月甲戌，月犯束井宿之距星。
English: In August of the third year, the distance star of the monthly criminal Sakui-juku.

古文：占曰： 国有忧，将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家将有忧患，将军死。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The country will have sorrow, the general will die.

古文：三年九月戊子，月犯建星。
现代文：三年九月戊子，月犯建星。
English: In September of the third year, Bosi, a moon criminal, became a star.

古文：占曰： 易相。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将变换丞相。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the prime minister will be replaced.

古文：一曰： 大将死。 
现代文：另一说： 大将死。 
English: Another said: "The general is dead."

古文：五年，丞相王导薨，庾冰代辅政。
现代文：五年，丞相王遵去世，座述代为辅政。
English: Five years later, the chancellor, Wang Zun, passed away, and Zassu took over as vice-governor.

古文：太尉郗鉴、征西大将军庾亮薨。
现代文：太尉郗鉴、征西大将军庾亮去世。
English: Second Lieutenant Hao Jian and General of the Western Expedition Hao Liang passed away.

古文：咸康三年十一月乙丑，太白犯岁星。
现代文：咸康三年十一月乙丑，金星犯木星。
English: In November of the third year of Xiankang, the second ugly, Venus offends Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 为兵饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象代表战争、饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends a famine in the army.

古文：四年二月，石虎破幽州，迁其人万余家。
现代文：四年二月，石虎攻破幽丛，迁徙民众万余家。
English: In February of the fourth year, the stone tiger broke through the jungle, and more than 10,000 people migrated.

古文：李寿杀李期。
现代文：李寿杀李期。
English: Li Shou killed Li Jie.

古文：五年，胡众五万寇沔南，略七千余家而去。
现代文：五年，胡兵五万侵掠沔南，掠走七干余家。
English: In five years, Hu's army of fifty thousand invaded and plundered southern Anhui, taking away more than seven hundred families.

古文：又骑二万围陷邾城，杀略五千余人。
现代文：又骑兵二万围陷邾城，杀死掠走共五千余人。
English: He also led twenty thousand cavalrymen to besiege and capture Lucheng, killing and robbing more than five thousand people.

古文：咸康四年四月己巳，太白昼见在柳。
现代文：咸康四年四月己巳，金星白天在柳宿出现。
English: In April of the 4th year of Hamkang, Venus appeared in Yanagiyado during the day.

古文：占曰： 为兵，为不臣。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争及反臣。 
English: Divination says: It portends war and ministers not following the path of a vassal.

古文：七月乙巳，月掩太白。
现代文：七月乙巳，月掩金星。
English: July is half over, the moon hides Venus.

古文：占曰： 王者亡地，大兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示王者失地将有大规模军事行动。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be a large-scale military operation.

古文：明年，胡贼大寇沔南，陷邾城，豫州刺史毛宝、西阳太守樊峻皆弃城投江死。
现代文：明年，胡入侵掠迺南，攻陷邾城，豫州刺史毛实、西阳太守樊峻皆弃城投江而死。
English: In the next year, Hu invaded and plundered the southern part of Yunnan, captured the city of Yunnan, and the governor of Yuzhou, Shishi Moushi, and the governor of Xiyang, Shichun, all abandoned the city and died in the river.

古文：于是内外戒严，左卫桓监、匡术等诸军至武昌，乃退。
现代文：于是内外戒严，左卫桓监、匡术等各军进至武昌，胡兵才退走。
English: As a result, martial law was imposed both at home and abroad, and the armies of the Left Guards, Kuangshu, and others marched into Wuchang, while Hu's soldiers retreated.

古文：七年，慕容皝自称为燕王。
现代文：七年，慕容姚自称燕王。
English: For seven years, Murongyao called himself the King of Swallows.

古文：咸康四年五月戊午，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：咸康四年五月戊午，火星犯右执法星。
English: On the afternoon of May 4th in the year of Ham Kang, the Mars criminal right law enforcement star appeared.

古文：占曰： 大臣死，执政者忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有大臣死，执政之人有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The minister is about to die, and the ruler is troubled.

古文：九月，太白犯右执法。
现代文：九月，金星犯右执法星。
English: In September, Jin Xing, a right-wing criminal, became a star in law enforcement.

古文：案占， 五星灾同，金火尤甚。 
现代文：考查占书可知， 五大行星犯执法星所预示的灾害相同，如果犯执法星的是金星火星，情况就更严重 。
English: Examination of astrological books shows that the disasters foreshadowed by the five major planets are the same, and if the offending planet is Venus or Mars, the situation is even more serious.

古文：十一月戊子，太白犯房上星。
现代文：十一月戊子，金星犯房宿上星。
English: In November, Bo Zi and Jin Xing rushed to live in the star's house.

古文：占曰： 上相忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示上相有忧患。 
English: Zhan said: "There are troubles in the upper echelons.

古文：五年七月己酉，月犯房上星，亦同占。
现代文：五年七月己酉，月犯房宿上星，占辞同上。
English: In July of the fifth year, he committed suicide, and his monthly accommodation was on the star, and his fortune-telling was the same as above.

古文：是月庚申，丞相王导薨。
现代文：当月庚申，丞相王导去世。
English: In the same month of Koshin, the chancellor Wang Tao passed away.

古文：咸康五年四月辛未，月犯岁星，在胃。
现代文：咸康五年四月辛未，月在胃宿犯木星。
English: In April of the fifth year of Xiankang, the moon was in the stomach of Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 国饥民流。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示国家有饥荒，民众流亡。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there is famine in the country and people are fleeing.

古文：乙未，月犯毕距星。
现代文：乙未，月犯毕宿距星。
English: B, the moon is a distant star.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：是夜，月又犯岁星，在昴。
现代文：当夜，月又于昴宿犯木星。
English: On the same night, the moon also invaded Jupiter in Poyang.

古文：及冬，有沔南、邾城之败，百姓流亡万余家。
现代文：冬天，有沔南、邾城之败，百姓流亡者万余家。
English: By the winter, the defeat of the southern part of Handan and Handan City had occurred, and more than ten thousand families had been exiled.

古文：咸康六年二月庚午朔，流星大如斗，光耀地，出天市，西行入太微。
现代文：咸康六年二月庚午，即当月朔日，有流星如斗一样大，光亮照耀大地，出于天市垣而向西运行入太微垣。
English: In the late afternoon of February in the sixth year of Xiankang, that is, on the new moon day of that month, a meteor as big as a dipper, shining brightly on the earth, came out of the celestial city wall and moved westward into the cosmic city wall.

古文：占曰： 大人当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 王公大臣应遣天象预示的灾祸。 
English: The soothsayer said: The venerable one should bear the results foretold by this star.

古文：乙未，太白入月。
现代文：乙未，金星入月。
English: In the evening, Venus enters the moon.

古文：占曰： 人主死。 
现代文：占辞说： 君主将死。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Death is certain."

古文：四月甲午，月犯太白。
现代文：四月甲午，月犯金星。
English: On the afternoon of April 1st, the moon interfered with the white star.

古文：占曰： 人主恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示君主交恶。 
English: The soothsayer said: "More than a human master is evil."

古文：八年六月，成帝崩。
现代文：八年六月，成帝去世。
English: In June of the eighth year, Emperor Cheng died.

古文：咸康六年三月甲寅，荧惑从行犯太微上将星。
现代文：盛咸六年三月甲寅，火星纵向运行犯太微上将星。
English: In the 6th year of Sheng Xian, in March of the Year of the Goat, the longitudinal movement of Mars was a minor planet.

古文：占曰： 上将忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示上将有忧患。 
English: The diviner said, "There will be trouble on the mountain."

古文：四月丁丑，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：四月丁丑，火星犯右执法星。
English: April Ding ugly, Mars impact criminal right law enforcement star.

古文：占曰： 执法者忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示执法大臣有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the Minister of Law Enforcement is in trouble.

古文：六月乙亥，月犯牵牛中央星。
现代文：六月乙亥，月犯牵牛宿中央星。
English: In June, the moon collides with the central star of the constellation Taurus.

古文：占曰： 大将忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示大将有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be great sorrow.

古文：是时尚书令何充为执法，有谴欲避其咎，明年，求为中书令。
现代文：当时尚书令何查为执法之人，被谴责而想逃避其罪责，因此第二年请求为中书令。
English: At that time, he was accused of being a law enforcer and wanted to evade his culpability, so he applied for a Chinese writ the following year.

古文：建元二年，庾冰薨，皆大将执政之应也。
现代文：建元二年，庾冰去世，这些都是大将、执政大臣有忧患的应验。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, Hao Bing passed away. These were the fulfillment of the worries of the general and the ruling minister.

古文：是岁正月，征西将军庾亮薨。
现代文：当年正月，征西将军座亳去世。
English: In the first month of that year, the general of the Western Expedition, Za Zong, passed away.

古文：三月，而荧惑犯上将。
现代文：三月而火星犯上将星。
English: In March, Mars will be in the ascendant.

古文：九月，石虎大将夔安死。
现代文：九月，亘虚大将夔室死。
English: In September, General Wataka died in his room.

古文：庾冰后积年方薨。
现代文：厘逮多年后才死。
English: He died many years after his arrest.

古文：岂冰能修德，移祸于夔安乎？
现代文：这难道是因座速能修德，所以上天移祸于夔安吗?
English: Is this due to the fact that it is so easy to cultivate virtue, so that the heavens will bring misfortune to Jian'an?

古文：咸康六年四月丙午，太白犯毕距星。
现代文：咸康六年四月丙午，金星犯毕宿距星。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month of the sixth year of Xian Kang, Venus passed the star.

古文：占曰： 兵革起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有战争。 
English: Divination says: War is coming.

古文：一曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：另一说： 皇后有忧患。 
English: Another saying is: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：六月乙卯，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：六月乙卯，金星犯轩辕大星。
English: In June, Venus will collide with the great star of Capricorn.

古文：占曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示皇后有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：七年三月，皇后杜氏崩。
现代文：七年三月，皇后杜氏去世。
English: In March of the seventh year, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：咸康七年三月壬午，月犯房。
现代文：咸康七年三月壬午，月犯房宿。
English: Xiankang seven years in March at noon, the monthly lodging.

古文：占曰： 将相忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 遣天象预示将相有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The general and the prime minister are in trouble."

古文：八年六月，荧惑犯房上第二星。
现代文：八年六月，火星犯房宿上第二星。
English: In June of the eighth year, Mars collided with the second star on the roost.

古文：占曰： 次相忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 副丞相有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The secondary aspect is sorrow.

古文：建元二年，车骑将军江州刺史庾冰薨。
现代文：建元二年，车骑将军江州刺史庾冰去世。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, the chariot and cavalry general Jiangzhou Jishi Bingling passed away.

古文：是时骠骑将军何充居内，冰为次相也。
现代文：当时骠骑将军何充居内掌管政事，庾冰为副相。
English: At that time, the cavalry general Ho Chung-ju was in charge of government affairs, and Hao Bing was the deputy minister.

古文：咸康七年四月己丑，太白入舆鬼。
现代文：咸康七年四月己丑，金星入舆鬼之宿。
English: In April of the seventh year of Xiankang, he was ugly, and Venus entered the ghost's lodging.

古文：占曰： 兵革起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有战争。 
English: Divination says: War is coming.

古文：五月，太白昼见。
现代文：五月，金星白天出现。
English: In May, Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：以晷度推之，非秦、魏，则楚也。
现代文：按其出现时晷上度数推算，金星当时不是与秦、魏之地对应，而与楚地对应。
English: According to the calculation of the number of degrees above the horizon, its position is not in the corresponding starry sky of Qin and Wei, but in Chu.

古文：占曰： 为臣强，为有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此表示臣太强，将有战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the minister is too strong and there will be a war.

古文：八月辛丑，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：八月辛丑，月犯舆鬼宿。
English: August is gloomy, and the moon crashes into the haunted house.

古文：占曰： 人主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 君主有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The monarch is in trouble.

古文：八年六月，成帝崩。
现代文：八年六月，成帝去世。
English: In June of the eighth year, Emperor Cheng died.

古文：咸康八年八月壬寅，月犯毕赤星。
现代文：处康八年八月壬寅，月犯毕宿之赤星。
English: In August of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year.

古文：占曰： 下犯上，兵革起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示下犯上，将有军事行动。 
English: Divination says: When the crime is committed, the war begins.

古文：十月，月又掩毕赤星，占同。
现代文：十月，月又掩毕宿赤星。占辞同上。
English: In October, the moon will once again cover the planet of the same name.

古文：己酉，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：己酉，金星犯火星。
English: Self-flagellation, Venus offending Mars.

古文：占曰： 大兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有大的军事行动。 
English: The oracle said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：其后庾翼大发兵谋伐胡，专制上流，朝廷惮之。
现代文：其后座玺大发兵图谋讨伐超军，专门控制长江上流，朝廷忌惮。
English: After that, Emperor Gao sent a large army to fight against the superior army, specifically to control the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, which the imperial court was afraid of.

古文：康帝建元元年正月壬午，太白入昴。
现代文：康帝建元元年正月壬午，金星入昴宿。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the year of Kangdi Jianyuan, Venus entered Xizhu.

古文：占曰： 赵地有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 造天象预示赵地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be wars everywhere."

古文：又曰： 天下兵起。 
现代文：又说： 天下将有军事行动。 
English: He also said: Wars will break out all over the world.

古文：四月乙酉，太白昼见。
现代文：四月乙酉，金星白天出现。
English: April acetylene, Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：八月丁未，太白犯岁星。
现代文：八月丁未，金星犯木星。
English: August Tingwei, Venus offends Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 有大兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有大战。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：是年，石虎杀其太子遂及其妻子徒属二百余人。
现代文：同年，互虐杀其太子互邃及其妻子部属共二百余人。
English: In the same year, Prince Mutsuhito and his wife Mutsuhiro brutally killed more than two hundred of their subordinates.

古文：又遣将刘宁寇没狄道，又使将张举将万余人屯蓟东，谋慕容皝。
现代文：又派遣部将刘宁侵占狄道，使部将张举率万余人屯于蓟束以图谋征伐慕容铣。
English: He also dispatched Liu Ning to invade and occupy Di Dao, and dispatched Zhang to lead more than ten thousand people to settle in Yingzhu in an attempt to conquer Murongye.

古文：建元元年十一月六日，彗星见亢，长七尺，尾白色。
现代文：建五元年十一月六日，有彗星出现于亢宿，其长七尺，尾白色。
English: On November 6th, a comet appeared in Oshuku. It was seven feet long and had a white tail.

古文：占曰： 亢为朝廷，主兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 亢宿代表朝廷，掌管战争及丧乱。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Shuku is a symbol of the imperial court, and its main functions are war and death."

古文：二年九月，康帝崩。
现代文：二年九月，康帝去世。
English: In September of the second year, Kang Di passed away.

古文：建元元年，岁星犯天关。
现代文：建五元年，木星犯天关。
English: In the year of Jianwu Yuan, Jupiter invaded the celestial pass.

古文：安西将军庾翼与兄冰书曰： 岁星犯天关，占云： 关梁当涩。 
现代文：安西将军庾翼在给其兄座逃的信上说： 木星犯天关，占书上说： 这预示关口桥梁将不通畅。 
English: In a letter to his brother Za Fu, Anxi General Zou Ying said, "Jupiter is at the gate of heaven," and in a fortune-telling book, he said, "This indicates that the bridge at the gate will not be smooth."

古文：比来江东无他故，江道亦不艰难；而石虎频年再闭关不通信使，此复是天公愦愦无皁白之征也。 
现代文：近来江束没有其他事故，匡红水道也很畅通；而石虎这些年来一再闭关不通信使，这又是天公糊涂而是非不分的征兆。 
English: In recent years, there have been no other accidents in Jiangzhu, and the Kuanghong waterway is also very smooth; and the stone tiger has repeatedly closed the gate without communication over the years, which is again a sign that the sky is confused but not indifferent.

古文：建元二年闰月乙酉，太白犯斗。
现代文：建元二年闰月乙酉，金星犯斗宿。
English: In the second year of the founding of the Republic of China, the intercalary moon Acetylene and the planet Venus had a quarrel.

古文：占曰： 为丧，天下受爵禄。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示丧事，天下将封爵加俸禄。 
English: Divination says: If there is a funeral, everyone in the world will receive a knighthood.

古文：九月，康帝崩，太子立，大赦赐爵也。
现代文：九月，处童去世，太子继位，天下大赦，加官进爵。
English: In September, the boy died, the prince succeeded to the throne, there was a general amnesty, and he was promoted to the peerage.

古文：晋穆帝永和元年正月丁丑，月入毕。
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年正月丁丑，月入毕宿。
English: In the first month of the first year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, Ding Ug, the moon entered the end of the month.

古文：占曰： 兵大起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有大规模军事行动。 
English: The soothsayer said: The army will rise up.

古文：戊寅，月犯天关。
现代文：戊寅，月犯天关。
English: Wu Yin, the moon crashes into the heavens.

古文：占曰： 有乱臣更天子之法。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示有乱臣变更天子的法规。 
English: Divination says: A turbulent minister will change God's laws.

古文：五月辛巳，太白昼见，在东井。
现代文：五月辛巳，金星白天在束井宿出现。
English: It's mid-May, and Venus appears in broad daylight. She's staying at Higashii-juku.

古文：占曰： 为臣强，秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此表示臣太强，秦地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister's power is strong, and there is war in Qin.

古文：六月辛丑，入太微，犯屏西南。
现代文：六月辛丑，入太微垣，犯屏西南星。
English: June is harsh and ugly, it enters the too small wall, and the southwest star of the screen is broken.

古文：占曰： 辅臣有免罢者。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示辅佐大臣有被罢免者。 
English: Divination says: The assistant minister has been removed from office.

古文：七、八月，月皆犯毕。
现代文：七、八月，月皆犯毕宿。
English: In July and August, everyone stays overnight.

古文：占同正月。
现代文：占辞与同年正月时相同。
English: The fortune-telling is the same as in the first month of the same year.

古文：己未，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：己未，月犯舆鬼宿。
English: Before I knew it, the moon crashed into my haunted house.

古文：占曰： 大臣有诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示大臣有被杀者。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister has been killed.

古文：九月庚戌，月又犯毕。
现代文：九月庚戌，月又犯毕宿。
English: In September, the moon is full again.

古文：是年初，庾翼在襄阳，七月，翼疾将终，辄以子爰之为荆州刺史，代己任；爰之寻被废。
现代文：同年初，庾翼在襄阳，七月，庾翼发病将死，擅自以自己的儿子庾爰之接替自己的荆州刺史之职，但不久被废。
English: At the beginning of the same year, Zou Ying was in Yangyang. In July, when Zou Ying was on the verge of death due to illness, he arbitrarily appointed his son, Zou Zi, to take over his position as the chief historian of Jingzhou. However, the appointment was soon annulled.

古文：明年，桓温又辄率众伐蜀，执李势，送至京都。
现代文：明年，桓温又擅自率众征伐蜀地，捕李势送至京都。
English: The following year, Kuan Wen led his army to attack Shu again, captured Li Xiang, and sent him to Kyoto.

古文：蜀本秦地也。
现代文：蜀本属秦地。
English: Shu was originally part of Qin territory during the Warring States period.

古文：永和二年二月壬子，月犯房上星。
现代文：永和二年二月壬子，月犯房宿上星。
English: In February of the second year of Yonghe, Renzi, a monthly offender, moved to Shangxing.

古文：四月丙戌，月又犯房上星。
现代文：四月丙戌，月又犯房宿上星。
English: In April, he was arrested, and the next month, he committed a crime and was sent to Shangxing.

古文：占同前。
现代文：占辞与前面相同。
English: The same applies to divination.

古文：八月壬申，太白犯左执法。
现代文：八月壬申，金星犯左执法星。
English: August Jinshin, Venus impact left law enforcement star.

古文：是岁，司徒蔡谟被废。
现代文：同年，司徒蔡谟被废黜。
English: In the same year, Szeto Czajmo was deposed.

古文：永和三年正月壬午，月犯南斗第五星。
现代文：永和三年正月壬午，月犯南斗第五星。
English: On the morning of the first month of the third year of Yonghe, the fifth star of the month-long Nantou.

古文：占曰： 将军死，近臣去。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将军死，亲近之臣离去。 
English: Divination says: The general is about to die, the close minister is about to leave.

古文：五月壬申，月犯南斗第四星，因入魁。
现代文：五月壬申，月犯南斗第四星，接着入魁。
English: In May, Jinshin, the moon collided with the fourth star of the Southern Cross, and then entered Kuishuku.

古文：占曰： 有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有战乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：一曰： 有大赦。 
现代文：另一说： 有大赦。 
English: Another is: there will be an amnesty.

古文：六月，月犯东井距星。
现代文：六月，月犯束井宿距星。
English: In June, the moon collided with a distant star.

古文：占曰： 将死，国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭天象预示将军死，国有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The thunder and lightning foretell the general's death, and the country is in distress."

古文：戊戌，月犯五诸侯。
现代文：戊戌，月犯五诸侯。
English: Wuzhen, the moon criminal five provinces.

古文：占曰： 诸侯有诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示诸侯有被杀者。 
English: Divination says: Princes have been killed.

古文：九月庚寅，太白犯南斗第五星。
现代文：九月庚寅，金星犯南斗第五星。
English: In September, Geng Yin and Venus collided with the fifth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：占曰： 为丧兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有丧乱战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be a disastrous war.

古文：四年七月丙申，太白犯左执法。
现代文：四年七月丙申，金星犯左执法星。
English: In July of the same year, Jin Xing, a left-wing law enforcement star, was arrested for assault.

古文：甲寅，月犯房。
现代文：甲寅，月犯房宿。
English: A-Tam, Venus impacting the roost.

古文：丁巳，月入南斗犯第二星。
现代文：丁巳，月入南斗犯其第二星。
English: Ding Si, the second star of the month into the South Dou.

古文：乙丑，太白犯左执法。
现代文：乙丑，金星犯左执法星。
English: The second ugly, Venus impacting the left law enforcement star.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞各与前面相应的天象相同。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：十月甲戌，月犯亢。
现代文：十月甲戌，月犯亢宿。
English: October armour, monthly crime lodging.

古文：占曰： 兵起，军将死 。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有战争，军中之将死。 
English: The fortuneteller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that there will be a war, and those in the army will die.

古文：十一月戊戌，犯上将星。
现代文：十一月戊戌，犯上将星。
English: In November, the general was arrested.

古文：三年六月，大赦。
现代文：三年六月，大赦。
English: In June 2003, there was a general amnesty for the guilty.

古文：是月，陈逵征寿春，败而还。
现代文：同月，速逵征伐画画，失败而回。
English: This month, Chen Yu attacked Shuchun and came back after defeat.

古文：七月，氐蜀余寇反乱益土。
现代文：七月，氐蜀余寇反叛而乱益业之地。
English: In July, the remnants of the Kuomintang rebelled in Shushou, leading to chaos in the Yixing area.

古文：九月，石虎伐凉州，不克。
现代文：九月，石虎征伐凉州，没有攻克。
English: In September, Shihhu invaded and besieged Liangzhou, but failed to conquer it.

古文：永和四年四月，太白入昴。
现代文：永和四年四月，金星入昴宿。
English: In April of the 4th year of the Yonghe era, Venus entered the pagoda.

古文：五月，荧惑入娄，犯镇星。
现代文：五月，火星入娄宿，犯土星。
English: In May, Mars enters Pleiades, trumps Saturn.

古文：七月，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：七月，金星犯轩辕。
English: In July, Venus invades the sign of Virgo.

古文：占在赵，及为兵丧，女主忧。
现代文：按占书灾应在赵地，将有战乱，皇后有忧患。
English: According to the book, the disaster should be in Zhao, there will be war, and the queen will be in trouble.

古文：其年八月，石虎太子宣杀弟韬，宣亦死。
现代文：同年八月，石虐的太子亘亘杀弟互鳃，亘宣亦被杀。
English: In August of the same year, the brutal Prince Watanabe killed his younger brother Mochizuki, and Watanabe was also killed.

古文：五年正月，石虎僭称皇帝，寻病死。
现代文：五年正月，互虚僭越自称皇帝，不久病死。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Hu Huo-huo proclaimed himself emperor and died soon after.

古文：是年，褚裒北伐丧众，又寻薨，太后素服。
现代文：同年，褚哀北伐失败丧师，不久后去世，太后因此而穿丧服。
English: In the same year, the Empress Dowager mourned the defeat of the Northern Expedition, and died soon after. Therefore, the Empress Dowager wore mourning clothes.

古文：六年正月，朝会废乐。
现代文：六年正月，取消朝会时的音乐。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, the music at the morning meeting was cancelled.

古文：永和五年四月丁未，太白犯东井。
现代文：永和五年四月丁未，金星犯束井之宿。
English: On the evening of April in the fifth year of the Yonghe era, the jinxing perpetrator entered the inn in Sokui.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示秦地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：九月戊戌，太白犯左角。
现代文：九月戊戌，金星犯左角。
English: September is waxing gibbous, and Venus is colliding with the left-hand star.

古文：占曰： 为兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 遣预示将有战争。 
English: Divination says: The main battle is coming.

古文：十月，月犯昴。
现代文：十月，月犯昂宿。
English: In October, the moon crashes into Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 朝廷有忧，军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示朝廷有忧患，军中之将死。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "This foretells that the imperial court is in distress and that someone in the army is about to die."

古文：十一月乙卯，彗星见于亢，芒西向，色白，长一丈。
现代文：十一月乙卯，有彗星出现于亢宿，其光芒指向西，色白，长一丈。
English: On the second day of November, a comet appeared in Oshuku. Its light pointed to the west, and it was white and long.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示将有战争及丧乱。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：是年八月，褚裒北征兵败。
现代文：同年八月，褚裒北征失败。
English: In August of the year of the rooster, the northern expedition of the rooster, the army failed.

古文：十月，关中二十余壁举兵归从，石遵攻没南阳。
现代文：十月，关中二十余处坚壁自保者投归晋室，互遵攻陷直墨。
English: In October, more than 20 self-protectionists in Guanzhong surrendered to the Jin dynasty, and they followed each other's orders.

古文：十一月，冉闵杀石遵，又尽杀胡十余万人，于是中土大乱。
现代文：十一月，蛊理杀死互遵，接着又屠杀胡官员及军民十余万人，于是中原大乱。
English: In November, Ran Zheng killed Shizhong and more than one hundred thousand Hu people, and the Central Plains War broke out.

古文：十二月，褚裒薨。
现代文：十二月，褚塞去世。
English: In December, Zou Weiping died.

古文：八年，刘显、苻健、慕容俊并僭号。
现代文：八年，刘显、苻健、慕容俊都自立为王。
English: In eight years, Liu Xian, Hao Jian, and Murong Jun have exceeded their duty together.

古文：殷浩北伐败，见废。
现代文：殷浩北伐失败而被罢免。
English: Yin Hao was dismissed after the failure of the Northern Expedition.

古文：永和六年二月辛酉，月犯心大星。
现代文：永和六年二月辛酉，月犯心宿大星。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghe, the month of February was harsh, and the month of crime was a great star.

古文：占曰： 大人忧。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示王公大臣有忧患。
English: Divination says: A high-ranking person has worries.

古文：心豫州分也。 
现代文：心宿与豫州对应。 
English: Xinjuku corresponds to Yuzhou.

古文：丁丑，月犯房。
现代文：丁丑，月犯房宿。
English: Ding ugly, the moon crashing into the room.

古文：占曰： 将相忧。 三月戊戌，荧惑犯岁星。
现代文：占辞说： 此表示将相有忧患 三月戊戌，火星犯木星。
English: The fortune-teller said, "This sign will be accompanied by sorrow; March will be gloomy, and Mars will offend Jupiter."

古文：占曰： 为战。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：六月己丑，月犯昴。
现代文：六月已丑，月犯昴宿。
English: The month of June is over, and the month of crime is over.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占辞同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：乙未，月犯五诸侯。
现代文：乙未，月犯五诸侯。
English: In the evening, the moon will collide with the Five Princes.

古文：占同三年。
现代文：占辞舆永和三年时天象相同。
English: The astrological omens are the same as they were three years ago.

古文：七月壬寅，月始出西方，犯左角。
现代文：七月壬寅，月始出于西方，犯左角星。
English: In July, the moon begins to appear from the west, colliding with the left-hand star.

古文：占曰： 大将军死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此表示大将军将死。 
English: The soothsayer said: The great general is dead.

古文：一曰： 天下有兵。 
现代文：另一说： 天下将有战争。 
English: Another way to say it is: There's a war on.

古文：丁未，月犯箕。
现代文：丁未，月犯箕宿。
English: Ding Wei, the moon crashes into the mansion.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示军中之将死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：丙寅，荧惑犯钺星。
现代文：丙寅，火星犯钹星。
English: He Yin, Mars collides with the iron star.

古文：占曰： 大臣有诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示大臣有被杀者。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister has been killed.

古文：八月辛卯，月犯左角，太白昼见，在南斗。
现代文：八月辛卯，月犯左角星，金星白天出现在南斗，月犯右执法星。
English: August Xinwu, monthly criminal left star, Venus appears in the daytime in the Southern Cross, monthly criminal right law enforcement star.

古文：月犯右执法，占并同上。七年二月，太白犯昴，占同上。
现代文：占辞各自与前面相应天象一样。七年二月。金星犯昂宿。占辞同上面相同天象一样。
English: Each of the horoscopes is the same as the corresponding celestial object in the foreground. In February of the seventh year, Venus is in the ascendant. The horoscope is the same as the same celestial object above.

古文：乙卯，荧惑舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：乙卯，火星入舆鬼宿犯积尸。
English: Ouch, Mars enters my mind, ghosts haunt me, bodies pile up.

古文：占曰： 贵人忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示贵人有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that the noble person is in distress.

古文：五月乙未，荧惑犯轩辕大星。
现代文：五月乙未，火星犯轩辕大星。
English: In May, Mars will collide with the great star of Virgo.

古文：占曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示皇后将有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：太白入毕口，犯左股。占曰： 将相当之。 
现代文：金星入毕宿之。犯左股占辞说： 预示将相有灾祸。 
English: Venus enters the last house. The criminal left-shouldered fortune-teller said: The omen will be a disaster.

古文：六月乙亥，月犯箕。
现代文：六月乙亥，月犯箕宿。
English: In June, at the time of the Year of the Boar, the moon crashes into Shishuku.

古文：丙子，月犯斗。
现代文：丙子，月犯斗宿。
English: Son of a bitch, the moon is in conflict with the sun.

古文：丁丑，荧惑入太微，犯右执法。
现代文：丁丑，火星入太微垣犯右执法星。
English: Ding Ugly, Mars enters the too small wall, impinging on the right law enforcement star.

古文：八月庚午，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：八月庚午，金星犯轩辕星。
English: On the afternoon of the second day of August, Venus will invade the sign of Virgo.

古文：戊子，太白犯右执法。
现代文：戊子，金星犯右执法星。
English: Bo Zi, Venus, the star of right-wing law enforcement.

古文：占悉同上。七年，刘显杀石祗及诸胡帅，中土大乱，戎、晋十万数，各还旧土，互相侵略及疾疫死亡，能达者十二三。
现代文：占辞各自与前面相应天象一样七年，型题杀亘抵及诸翅将帅，中原大乱，戎、置民众数十万各还归家乡，因互相侵掠及疾病瘟疫而死亡很多，能到达目的地者仅十分之二三而已。
English: Each of the seven years is the same as that of the corresponding celestial elephant in front of it, and the type of killing lasts for seven years, including the arrival of the winged generals and generals, the Central Plains War, and hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians returned to their hometowns. Many died due to mutual predation and diseases and plagues, and only two or three out of ten could reach their destination.

古文：是年，桓温辄以大众求浮江入淮北伐，朝廷震惧。
现代文：同年，但周擅自以大军过长江而进入淮地北伐，朝廷上下震惊恐惧。
English: In the same year, however, Zhou crossed the Yangtze River with a large army and entered the Northern Expedition of Huai Di. The imperial court was shocked and frightened.

古文：八年，豫州刺史谢尚讨张遇，为苻雄所败。
现代文：八年，豫州刺史谢尚讨伐张遇，被苻雄打败。
English: In the eighth year, the Yuzhou assassin, Xie Shang, fought against Zhang Yu and was defeated by Shao Xiong.

古文：殷浩北伐败，被废。
现代文：殷浩北伐失败被废。
English: Yinhao Northern Expedition failed and was scrapped.

古文：十年，桓温伐苻健，不克而还。
现代文：十年，桓温征伐苻健，不克而回。
English: Ten years later, Kuan-Wen subdued Jian Jian, but he did not go back.

古文：永和八年三月戊戌，月犯轩辕大星。
现代文：永和八年三月戊戌，月犯轩辕大星。
English: In March of the eighth year of Yonghe, the monthly criminal Xuan Xuan became a big star.

古文：癸丑，月入南斗犯第二星。
现代文：癸丑，月入南斗犯其第二星。
English: 丑,月入南斗犯 its second star.

古文：五月，月犯心星。
现代文：五月，月犯心星。
English: In May, the moon strikes the heart star.

古文：四月癸酉，月犯房。
现代文：四月癸酉，月犯房宿。
English: April is here, and the month-long stay is over.

古文：六月辛巳，日未入，有流星如三斗魁，从辰巳上东南行。
现代文：六月辛巳，太阳未入而有如三斗魁一样的流星从辰巳的上方向东南运行。
English: In June, before the sun sets, a meteor like the three-headed dragon flies southeast from the direction of the rising sun.

古文：晷度推之，在箕、斗之间，盖燕分也。
现代文：以当时晷上的度数推算，此流星应在箕、斗二宿之间，与燕地对应。
English: Based on the degree of turbidity, it can be surmised that there is a rough correspondence between the swan's nest and the fight nest.

古文：案占为营首，营首之下，流血滂沲。
现代文：考查占书可知其为营首，营首对应之地，血流成河。
English: Examination of the account book shows that it is the camp head, the place corresponding to the camp head, and the blood flows into the river.

古文：七月壬子，岁星犯东井距星。
现代文：七月壬子，木星犯东井宿距星。
English: July Imago, Jupiter impinging on the distant star.

古文：占曰： 内乱兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 遣天象预示将有内乱、战争。 
English: Zhan said: domestic unrest, war will rise.

古文：八月戊戌，荧惑入舆鬼。
现代文：八月戊戌，火星入舆鬼宿。
English: In August, Mars enters Scorpio.

古文：占曰： 忠臣戮死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示忠臣被杀。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This foretells that a loyal retainer will be killed."

古文：丙辰，太白入南斗，犯第四星。
现代文：丙辰，金星入南斗犯其第四星。
English: B star, Venus enters the Southern Cross, impacting the fourth star.

古文：占曰： 将为乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示将军作乱。 
English: The diviner said: The general is making a disturbance.

古文：一曰： 丞相免。 
现代文：另一说： 丞相被罢免。 
English: Another way of putting it is: the chancellor was removed from office.

古文：九年二月乙巳，入南斗，犯第三星。
现代文：九年二月乙巳，入南斗犯其第三星。
English: In February of the ninth year, his third star came from entering Nandou.

古文：三月戊辰，月犯房。
现代文：三月戊辰，月犯房宿。
English: In March, when the moon is waning, people rush to their lodgings.

古文：八月，岁星犯舆鬼东南星。
现代文：八月，木星犯舆鬼宿东南星。
English: In August, Jupiter collides with the south-eastern star of the constellation of Imps.

古文：占： 东南星主兵，兵起 。
现代文：由占书可知 舆鬼东南星掌管军事，将有战争 。
English: From the fortune-telling book, it is known that the ghost of public opinion Southeast Star is in charge of the military and there will be war.

古文：十二月，月在东井，犯岁星。
现代文：十二月，月在束井之宿犯木星。
English: December, the month of Jupiter's sojourn in Sakui.

古文：占曰： 秦饥民流。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示秦地饥民流亡。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This foretells that the starving people of Qin will go into exile."

古文：是时帝主幼冲，母后称制，将相有隙，兵革连起。
现代文：当时晋帝年幼，母后掌政，将相不和，战争连起。
English: At that time, Emperor Jin was young, and his mother was in power. They were at odds with each other, and a war broke out.

古文：慕容俊僭称大燕，攻伐无已，故灾异数见，殷浩见废也。
现代文：慕容俊僭越自称大燕皇帝，攻伐不停，所以灾异多次出现，殷浩被黜免。
English: Murong Junyue claimed to be the Emperor of the Big Swallow, and the attack was incessant. Therefore, disasters occurred many times, and Yinhao was spared.

古文：永和十年正月乙卯，月食昴。
现代文：永和十年正月乙卯，月食于昴宿。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of the Edo period, a lunar eclipse occurred in Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 赵、魏有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示赵、魏之地有战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be war in the land of Zhao and Wei.

古文：癸酉，填星奄钺星。
现代文：癸酉，土星掩绒星。
English: Saturn eclipses the hungry star.

古文：占曰： 斧钺用。 
现代文：占辞说： 将动用酷刑。 
English: Divination says: Weapons will be used.

古文：二月甲申，月犯心大星。
现代文：二月甲申，月犯心宿大星。
English: February Jiaxin, the moon will collide with the great star.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象王者交恶。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：四月癸未，流星大如斗，色赤黄，出织女，没造父，有声如雷。
现代文：四月癸未，有流星大如斗，色赤黄，出于织女星而消失于造父，伴有如雷之声。
English: In the twilight of April, there was a meteor as big as a dipper, reddish-yellow in color, which was caused by the planet Vega and disappeared from the sky, accompanied by a thunderous sound.

古文：占曰： 燕、齐有兵，民流。 
现代文：占辞说： 此表示燕、齐之地将有战争，民众流散。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This indicates that the land of Yan and Qi will have war, and the people will be scattered."

古文：戊午，月犯心大星。七月庚午，太白昼见。
现代文：戊午，月犯心宿大星七月庚午，金星白天出现。
English: In July, the moon appears in the afternoon, and Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：晷度推之，灾在秦、郑。
现代文：以晷上度数推算，灾在秦、郑之地。
English: According to the calculation based on the frequency above the fold, the disaster occurred in Qin and Zheng.

古文：九月辛酉，太白犯左执法。
现代文：九月辛酉，金星犯左执法星。
English: September is a tough month, and Venus is the star of the left law enforcement.

古文：十一月，月奄填星，在舆鬼。
现代文：十一月，月在舆鬼宿掩土星。
English: In November, the moon occults Saturn in the House of the Spirits.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示塞地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：十一年三月辛亥，月奄轩辕。
现代文：十一年三月辛亥，月掩轩辕星。
English: In March of the 11th year of Xinhai, the moon covers the stars of the constellation of Virgo.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占辞同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：四月庚寅，月犯牛宿南星。
现代文：四月庚寅，月犯牛宿南星。
English: In the fourth year of the Go-in, the moon collided with the South Star of the Cow Inn.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：八月己未，太白犯天江。
现代文：八月己未，金星犯天江。
English: It's not even August yet, and Venus is crashing into the Milky Way.

古文：占曰： 河津不通。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示黄河渡口不通。 
English: Divination says: The Yellow River crossing is impassable.

古文：十二年六月庚子，太白昼见，在东井，占如上。
现代文：十二年六月庚子，金星白天在东井之宿出现。
English: In June of the 12th year of Geng Zi, Venus appeared in the daytime at Dongjing's inn.

古文：己未，月犯钺星。
现代文：占辞同上。己未，月犯钹星。
English: Before long, the moon collides with the hungry star.

古文：七月丁卯，太白犯填星，在柳。
现代文：七月丁卯，金星在柳宿犯土星。
English: In July, Venus will overtake Saturn.

古文：占曰： 周地有大兵。 八月癸酉，月奄建星。
现代文：占辞说： 遣天象预示周地有大战争 八月癸酉，月掩建星。
English: The fortune-teller said, "The appearance of the constellations foretells that there will be a great war around the world.

古文：九月戊寅，荧惑入太微，犯西蕃上将星。
现代文：九月戊寅，火星入太微垣犯西蕃上将星。
English: In September, Mars enters the Great Wall of China and collides with the Star of Admiral Xidi.

古文：十一月丁丑，荧惑犯太微东蕃上相。
现代文：十一月丁丑，火星犯太微垣东蕃上相星。
English: In November, Ding Ugly, Mars Guilty of Being Too Weak, Dongqi, Shangshou Star.

古文：十年四月，桓温伐苻健，破其尧柳众军。
现代文：十年四月，桓温征伐苻健，破其蛲柳众军。
English: In April of the tenth year, Kuanwen led a military expedition to subjugate the Jianjian and defeated the Jianliu army.

古文：健壁长安，温退。
现代文：苻健筑壁于长安而桓温撤退。
English: Zou Jian builds a wall in Chang'an and Kanwen withdraws.

古文：十二月，慕容恪攻齐。
现代文：十二月，慕容恪进攻齐国。
English: In December, Murong Ke attacked.

古文：十二年八月，桓温破姚襄于伊水，定周地。
现代文：十二年八月，桓温在伊水破姚襄，平定周地。
English: In August of the 12th year, Kuan Wen defeated Yao Xiang in Yishui and pacified Zhou.

古文：十一月，齐城陷，执段龛，杀三千余人。
现代文：十一月，齐城被攻陷，抓获段龠，杀死三千余人。
English: In November, Qicheng was invaded, and Duan Er was captured, killing more than three thousand people.

古文：永和末，鲜卑侵略河、冀，升平元年，慕容俊遂据临漳，尽有幽、并、青、冀之地。
现代文：永和末年，鲜卑侵犯河、冀之地，升平元年，慕容俊据于临漳，占有幽、并、青、冀四州之地。
English: At the end of the Yonghe era, Xianbei invaded the lands of He and Ji, and in the first year of the Shangping era, Murongjun settled in Linyi, occupying the lands of Yu, Bian, Qing and Ji.

古文：缘河诸将渐奔散，河津隔绝矣。
现代文：沿黄河各将先后逃散，黄河渡口遂隔绝。
English: People along the Yellow River fled one after another, and the Yellow River crossings were cut off.

古文：三年，会稽王以郗昙、谢万败绩，求自贬三等。
现代文：三年，会稽王因为郗昙、谢万大败，请求自贬三等。
English: Three years later, the King of the Board of Censors asked to be demoted to the third class because of the great defeat of Shun and Xie Wan.

古文：是时权在方伯，九服交兵，故谴象仍见。
现代文：当时权力掌握在各方诸侯之手，天卜战乱，所以多次出现表示谴责的天象。
English: At that time, the power was in the hands of the princes of all parties, and the war was raging, so the angels appeared many times to express their condemnation.

古文：晋穆帝升平元年四月壬子，太白入舆鬼。
现代文：晋穆帝升平元年四月壬子，金星入舆鬼之宿。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu, Jinzi, Venus entered the ghost's lodging.

古文：丁亥，月奄东井南辕西头第二星。
现代文：丁亥，月掩束井宿南辕西头第二星。
English: Dinghai, Tsukiyakusai, the second star of Nanlu West Head.

古文：占曰： 秦地有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示秦地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：一曰： 将死。 
现代文：另一说： 将领死亡。 
English: Another said: "The general is dead."

古文：六月戊戌，太白昼见，在轸，占同上。
现代文：六月戊戌，金星白天在轸宿出现。占辞同上。
English: In June, Venus appears during the day in Oshuku.

古文：轸，楚分也。
现代文：轸宿与楚地对应。
English: Shishuku corresponds to Chu.

古文：壬子，月犯毕。
现代文：壬子，月犯毕宿。
English: Imoko, the moon is beating down on you.

古文：占曰： 为边兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示边境有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be war in the borderlands."

古文：七月辛巳，荧惑犯天江。
现代文：七月辛巳，火星犯天江。
English: July is just around the corner, and Mars is about to collide with the Milky Way.

古文：占曰： 河津不通。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示黄河渡口不通。 
English: Divination says: The Yellow River crossing is impassable.

古文：十一月，岁星犯房。
现代文：十一月，木星犯房宿。
English: In November, Jupiter hits your house.

古文：壬午，月奄岁星，在房。
现代文：壬午，月在房宿掩木星。
English: At noon, the moon hides behind Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 民饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示民饥。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows famine.

古文：一曰： 豫州有灾。 
现代文：另一说： 此预示豫州有灾。 
English: He also said: There is a disaster in Yuzhou.

古文：二年二月辛卯，填星犯轩辕大星。
现代文：二年二月辛卯，土星犯轩辕大星。
English: In February of the second year of Xinwu, Saturn collided with the great star Xuanwu.

古文：甲午，月犯东井。
现代文：甲午，月犯东井宿。
English: At 1:00 a.m., the moon hits Higashii-juku.

古文：闰月乙亥，月犯岁星，在房。
现代文：闰月乙亥，月于房宿犯木星。
English: The intercalary month is in the year of the boar, and the moon is in the house of Jupiter.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞各同前面相应天象。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：五月丁亥，彗出天船，在胃度中。
现代文：五月丁亥，彗星出于天船。在胃宿之中。
English: In May, Dinghai, the comet came out of the spaceship.

古文：彗为兵丧，除旧布新，出天船，外夷陵。
现代文：彗星代表战争及丧乱，除旧布新，出天船表示外夷入侵。
English: The comet represents war and turmoil, the old cloth is replaced with a new one, and the celestial ship indicates the invasion of the barbarians.

古文：一曰： 为大水。 
现代文：另一说： 这天象预示有大水。 
English: Another way to say it is: "Foreshadowing the flood."

古文：六月辛酉，月犯房。
现代文：六月辛酉，月犯房宿。
English: June is hot, and the moon is beating against the house.

古文：八月戊午，荧惑犯填星，在张。
现代文：八月戊午，火星在张宿犯土星。
English: In August at noon, Mars will collide with Saturn in Zhangjiakou.

古文：占曰： 兵大起。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示将有大规模军事行动。
English: The soothsayer said: The army will rise up.

古文：张，三河分。 
现代文：张宿与三河对应。 
English: Zhangjuku corresponds to the three rivers.

古文：十月己未，太白犯哭星。
现代文：十月己未。金星犯哭星。
English: It's not even October yet, and Venus is the breakout star.

古文：十二月，枉矢自东南流于西北，其长半天。
现代文：十二月，有枉矢从东南落于西北，其长半天。
English: In December, there is an arrow falling from the southeast to the northwest, its length is half a day.

古文：三年正月壬辰，荧惑犯楗闭。
现代文：三年正月壬辰，火星犯楗闭。
English: In the first month of the third year of Imjin, Mars was closed.

古文：案占： 人主忧。 
现代文：考查占书可知， 这天象预示君主有忧 。
English: Examination of the account book shows that this celestial phenomenon indicates that the monarch is worried.

古文：三月乙酉，荧惑逆行犯钅句钤。
现代文：三月乙酉。火星逆行犯钩钤。
English: In March, acetylene. Mars retrograde makes hooks.

古文：案占： 王者恶之。 
现代文：考查占书可知， 这天象对王者不利 。
English: Ke Xingzhan said: The emperor hates this kind of constellation.

古文：月犯太白，在昴。
现代文：月犯金星于昴宿。
English: Monthly offender Venus wakes up in Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 人君死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示君主将死。 
English: The soothsayer said: People die.

古文：一曰： 赵地有兵，朝廷不安。 
现代文：另一说： 赵地将有战争，朝廷不安宁。 
English: Another said: "There will be war in Zhao, and the imperial court will not be at peace."

古文：六月，太白犯东井。
现代文：六月，金星犯东井之宿。
English: In June, Venus collided with Kamii-juku.

古文：七月乙酉，荧惑犯天江。
现代文：七月乙酉，火星犯天江。
English: July acetylene, Mars impinges on the Tianjiang.

古文：丙戌，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：丙戌，金星犯舆鬼之宿。
English: A haunted house haunted by the ghost of Venus.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞与前面相应天象相同。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：戊子，月犯牵牛中央大星。
现代文：戊子，月犯牵牛之宿中央大星。
English: Boson, the moon collides with the central star of the constellation Taurus.

古文：占曰： 牵牛，天将也。
现代文：占辞说： 牵牛代表天将。
English: The fortune-teller said: The cowherd represents the future.

古文：犯中央星，大将军死。 
现代文：犯中央大星表示大将军死。 
English: The large star at the center of the crime indicates that the general is dead.

古文：八月丁未，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：八月丁未，金星犯轩辕大星。
English: In August, Venus will collide with the great star of Capricorn.

古文：甲子，月犯毕大星。
现代文：甲子，月犯毕宿大星。
English: Ah, the moon impinging on the great star.

古文：占曰： 为边兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示边地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be war in the borderlands."

古文：一曰： 下犯上。 
现代文：另一说： 这预示以下犯上。 
English: Another said: "This is a sign of things to come."

古文：庚午，太白犯填星，在太微中。
现代文：庚午，金星犯土星于太微垣之中。
English: In the late afternoon, Venus and Saturn are in the middle of a too-faint wedge.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象对王者不利。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：二年五月，关中氐帅杀苻生立坚。
现代文：二年五月，关中氐族帅杀苻生而立苻坚。
English: In May of the second year, Guanzhong Yao Shuai killed his son and established the Jianjian.

古文：十二月，慕容俊入屯鄴。
现代文：十二月，慕容俊入屯于邺。
English: In December, Murong Jun settled in Handan.

古文：八月，安西将军、豫州刺史谢奕薨。
现代文：八月，安西将军、豫州刺史谢奕死。
English: In August, Anxi General and Yuzhou Assassin Xie Yi passed away.

古文：三年十月，诸葛攸舟军入河，败绩。
现代文：三年十月，诸葛攸率水军进入黄河，大败。
English: In October of the third year, Zhuge Yu led the navy into the Yellow River and was defeated.

古文：豫州刺史谢万入颍，众溃而归，除名为民。
现代文：豫州刺史谢万进入颖，军队溃败而归，被解除官籍为百姓。
English: Xie Wan, the governor of Yuzhou, entered Ying, the army was defeated and returned, and he was stripped of his official registration as a commoner.

古文：十一月，司徒会稽王以二镇败，求自贬三等。
现代文：十一月，司徒会稽王因二镇兵败而请求自贬三等。
English: In November, because of the defeat of the soldiers in two towns, the King of the Stuarts requested to be demoted to the third class.

古文：四年正月，慕容俊死，子暐代立。
现代文：四年正月，慕容俊死，其子慕容啤继位。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Murong Jun died, and his son Murong Beer succeeded to the throne.

古文：慕容恪杀其尚书令阳鹜等。
现代文：慕容恪杀其尚书令阳骛等。
English: Murong Ke killed his Shang Shuling impotence and so on.

古文：五月，天下大水。
现代文：五月，天下大水。
English: In May, the whole country was flooded.

古文：五年五月，穆帝崩。
现代文：五年五月，穆帝去世。
English: In May of the fifth year, Mudi passed away.

古文：升平四年正月乙亥，月犯牵牛中央大星。
现代文：升平四年正月乙亥，月犯牵牛中央大星。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Heian period, the first month of the Heian period, the month of the first month of the Heian period, the month of the first month of the Heian period, the month of the first month of the Heian period.

古文：占曰： 大将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示大将死。 
English: The fortuneteller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the general's death.

古文：六月辛亥，辰星犯轩辕。
现代文：六月辛亥，水星犯轩辕星。
English: In June, Mercury enters Capricorn.

古文：占曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示皇后有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：己未，太白入太微右掖门，从端门出。
现代文：己未，金星入太微垣之右掖门，从端门出。
English: Before long, Venus entered the right side door of the wall and came out from the end door.

古文：占曰： 贵夺势。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示显贵者的权势被剥夺。 
English: The diviner said: The nobles have lost their power.

古文：一曰： 有兵。 
现代文：另一说： 将有战争。 
English: Another way of saying it is: There is a war on.

古文：又曰： 出端门，臣不臣。 
现代文：又说： 金星出端门则臣反叛。 
English: He also said: From the end of the gate, the minister does not keep the vassal road.

古文：八月戊申，太白犯氐。
现代文：八月戊申，金星犯氐宿。
English: August Boshin, Venus rushes to attack Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：丙辰，荧惑犯太微西蕃上将。
现代文：丙辰，火星犯太微垣西蕃上将星。
English: Hsin-Chen, Mars is guilty of being too weak, and Xi-Huan is a general.

古文：九月壬午，太白入南斗口，犯第四星。
现代文：九月壬午，金星入南斗之口而犯其第四星。
English: In September, at noon, Venus entered the Southern Dipper and collided with the fourth star.

古文：占曰： 为丧，有赦，天下受爵禄。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有丧事，有大赦，天下加封爵禄。 
English: Divination says: When there is a funeral, when there is a pardon, the minister receives a knighthood and a salary.

古文：十月庚戌，天狗见西南。
现代文：十月庚戌，天狗出现于西南。
English: In October Geng Zi, Tengu appeared in the southwest.

古文：占曰： 有大兵流血。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示将有大的流血战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This portends a great and bloody war.

古文：十二月甲寅，荧惑犯房。
现代文：十二月甲寅。火星犯房宿。
English: In December, Jupiter and Mars collide in your house.

古文：丙寅，太白昼见。
现代文：丙寅，金星白天出现。
English: He Yin, Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：庚寅，月犯楗闭。
现代文：庚寅，月犯楗闭。
English: Geng Yin, a month-long criminal confinement.

古文：占曰： 人君恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象对君主不利。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This day is unfavorable to the monarch.

古文：五年正月乙巳，填星逆行犯太微。
现代文：五年正月乙巳。土星逆行犯太微垣。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Saturn retrograde was too weak.

古文：乙丑辰时，月在危宿奄太白。
现代文：乙丑日辰时，月在危宿掩金星。
English: At the time of the second ugly sun, the moon is in danger of hiding Venus.

古文：占曰： 天下民靡散。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示天下民众将流散。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the dispersion of the people around the world.

古文：三月丁未，月犯填星在轸。
现代文：三月丁未，月在轸宿犯土星。
English: In March, Ting Wei, the month of Saturn in Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 为大丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有大丧。 
English: Divination says: Nichidai's demise is imminent.

古文：五月壬寅，月犯太微。
现代文：五月壬寅，月犯太微垣。
English: In May, the moon is too faint to be seen.

古文：庚戌，月犯建星。
现代文：庚戌，月犯建星。
English: Geng Yao, the moon impinged on Jian Xing.

古文：占曰： 大臣相谮。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示大臣相害。 
English: The fortune-teller said: 造 indicates that the minister will be harmed.

古文：辛亥，月犯牵牛宿。
现代文：辛亥，月犯牵牛宿。
English: Xinhai, the cowherd's home of the month.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：五年正月，北中郎将郗昙薨。
现代文：五年正月，北中郎将整昙死。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Kitanakura died.

古文：五月，穆帝崩，哀帝立，大赦赐爵，褚后失势。
现代文：五月，穆帝去世，哀帝继位，大赦且赐爵位，褚后失势。
English: In May, Mu Di passed away, and Emperor Paidei succeeded to the throne. He was pardoned and given a title of nobility, but lost power after his death.

古文：七月，慕容恪攻冀州刺史吕护于野王，拔之，护奔荥阳。是时桓温以大众次宛，闻护败乃退。
现代文：七月，慕容恪攻克曲刺史腿于蜓，鲢逃奔到曲。当时桓温大军驻于宛，听说吕护战败后撤退。
English: In July, Murong attacked and defeated Qu and fled to Qu. At that time, Kuan-Wen's large army was stationed in Wan, but it is said that they retreated after the defeat of Lvgu.

古文：升平五年六月癸酉，月奄氐东北星。
现代文：升平五年六月癸酉，月掩氐宿东北星。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the Heian period, the moon occulted the northeast star.

古文：占曰： 大将当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 大将应此兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: The general will assume the results of the horoscope.

古文：九月乙酉，奄毕。
现代文：九月乙酉，掩毕宿。
English: In September, the acetylene fire destroyed the inn.

古文：占曰： 有边兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示边地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be war in the borderlands."

古文：十月丁卯，荧惑犯岁星，在营室。
现代文：十月丁卯，火星犯木星于营室。
English: October ding dong, Mars offends Jupiter in the camp room.

古文：占曰： 大臣有匿谋。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示大臣有阴谋。 
English: Divination says: The minister has a hidden agenda.

古文：一曰： 卫地有兵。 
现代文：另一说： 卫地有战争。 
English: He also said, "There is war in the North."

古文：丁未，月犯毕赤星。
现代文：丁未，月犯毕宿赤星。
English: Ding Wei, a monthly offender, stayed at the Akaboshi.

古文：占曰： 下犯上。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示下犯上。 
English: Divination says: The inferior offends the superior.

古文：又曰： 有边兵。 
现代文：又说： 边地有战争。 
English: And he said, There is a great war in the land.

古文：八月，范汪废。
现代文：八月，范汪被废黜。
English: In August, Fan Wang was removed from his post.

古文：隆和元年，慕容暐遣傅末波寇河阴，陈佑危逼。
现代文：隆和元年，慕容帏派遣傅末波进攻河阴，陈佑危急。
English: In the first year of the Long Peace, Murong Han dispatched Fu Mianbo to attack Heyin, and Chen You was in a critical situation.

古文：晋哀帝兴宁元年八月，星孛大角亢，入天市。
现代文：晋哀帝兴宁元年八月，有彗星出现于大角与亢宿之间，入天市垣。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Xingning's reign, a comet appeared between Taihaku and Oshuku and entered the sky.

古文：按占： 为兵丧 。
现代文：考查占书可知： 这天象预示战乱 。
English: An examination of the account books shows that this celestial phenomenon foreshadowed the outbreak of war.

古文：三年正月，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：三年正月，皇后王氏去世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Empress Wang died.

古文：二月，哀帝崩。三月，慕容恪攻洛阳，沈劲等战死。
现代文：二月，哀帝去世、三月，慕容恪进攻洛阳，沈劲等战死。
English: In February, Emperor Aye passed away, in March, Murong Ke attacked Luoyang, Shen Jin and others died in battle.

古文：兴宁元年十月丙戌，月奄太白，在须女。
现代文：兴宁元年十月丙戌，月在须女之宿掩金星。
English: In October of the first year of Xingning, the moon occulted Venus in the inn of Su Niang.

古文：占曰： 天下民靡散。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天下民众流散。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the dispersion of the people around the world.

古文：一曰： 灾在扬州。 
现代文：另一说： 灾祸发生在扬州。 
English: He also said: The disaster occurred in Yangzhou.

古文：三年，洛阳没。
现代文：三年，洛阳陷落。
English: Three years later, Luoyang fell.

古文：其后桓温倾扬州资实，讨鲜卑败绩，死亡太半。及征袁真，淮南残破。
现代文：其后桓温动用扬州全部物力、财力征讨鲜卑而大败，死亡大半，等到征讨袁真时淮南已残破不堪。
English: Later, Kuan Wen mobilized all the material and financial resources of Yangzhou to fight the Xianbei, but was defeated and most of them died. By the time Yuan Zhen was defeated, Huainan was in ruins.

古文：后氐及东胡侵逼，兵役无已。
现代文：后来氐族及东胡侵逼，连年征役不停。
English: Later, the Qiang and Eastern Hu invaded and forced them, and they were conscripted year after year.

古文：兴宁三年正月乙卯，月奄岁星，在参。
现代文：兴宁三年正月乙卯，月在参宿掩木星。
English: In the first month of the third year of Xingning, the moon occulted Jupiter in Betelgeuse.

古文：参，益州分也。
现代文：参宿与益业对应。
English: Banshuku corresponds to yakitori.

古文：六月，镇西将军、益州刺史周抚薨。
现代文：六月，镇西将军、益州刺史周抚去世。
English: In June, Zhenxi General and Yizhou Jishi Zhou Fu passed away.

古文：十月，梁州刺史司马勋入益州以叛，硃序率众助刺史周楚讨平之。
现代文：十月，莹出刺史司马勋入董业反叛，被塞庄率军帮助刺史周楚平定。
English: In October, the Yingde assassin, Sima Xun, joined the Dongye rebellion and was subdued by Zhaozhuang and his army to help the assassin, Zhou Chu.

古文：兴宁三年七月庚戌，月犯南斗。
现代文：兴宁三年七月庚戌，月犯南斗。
English: In July of the third year of Xingning, Geng Yao was arrested, and Nan Dou was arrested.

古文：占曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭天象预示皇后有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：岁星犯舆鬼。
现代文：木星犯舆鬼宿。
English: Jupiter offends the devil.

古文：占曰： 人君忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示君主有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The monarch is in trouble.

古文：十月，太白昼见，在亢。
现代文：十月，金星白天在亢宿出现。
English: In October, Venus appears in the daytime and resides in Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 亢为朝廷，有兵丧，为臣强。 
现代文：占辞说： 亢宿代表朝廷，将有战争及丧乱，臣太强。 
English: The soothsayer said: Shibuya is a sign of the imperial court, there will be war, death, and the minister will hold power.

古文：哀帝是年二月崩，其灾皆在海西也。
现代文：直查当年二月去世，灾祸都应在避酉年间。
English: Direct inspection died in February of that year, the disaster should be in the years of avoidance.

古文：明年五月，皇后庾氏崩。
现代文：第二年五月，皇后庾氏去世。
English: In May of the following year, Empress Shun passed away.

古文：晋海西太和元年二月丙子，月奄荧惑，在参。
现代文：晋海西太和元年二月丙子，月在参宿掩火星。
English: In the west of the Jinhai Sea and the Pacific Ocean in February of the first year of the year, the crab rose, and the moon occulted Mars in Betelgeuse.

古文：占曰： 为内乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为内乱的征兆。 
English: Divination says: There will be civil unrest.

古文：一曰： 参，魏地。 
现代文：另一说： 参宿与魏地对应。 
English: He also said: "Banshuku, corresponding to Wei."

古文：二年正月，太白入昴。
现代文：二年正月，金星入昴宿。
English: In the first month of the second year, Venus entered the mansion.

古文：五年，慕容暐为苻坚所灭，司、冀、幽、并四州并属氐。
现代文：万年，慕容啤被登坚消灭，司、冀、幽、差四州全部归属于氐族。
English: In ten thousand years, Murong Beer was wiped out by Deng Jian, and the four states of Si, Hebei, Yu and Za all belonged to the Yi people.

古文：太和二年八月戊午，太白犯岁星，在太微。
现代文：太和二年八月戊午，金星在太微垣犯木星。
English: In the afternoon of August of the 2nd year of Taihei, Venus attacks Jupiter in the Taiko-gaki.

古文：三年六月甲寅，太白奄荧惑，在太微端门中。
现代文：三年六月甲寅，金星于太微垣端门之中犯火星。
English: In June of the third year, on the day of Jia Yin, the white star covered the fluorescent planet, in the middle of the gate.

古文：六年，海西公废。
现代文：六年，海西公被废黜。
English: Six years later, Haixi Gong was abolished.

古文：太和四年二月，客星见紫宫西垣，至七月乃灭。
现代文：太和四年二月，客星出现在紫宫西垣，到七月才消失。
English: In February of the same year, a guest star appeared in the west wall of the Purple Palace, only to disappear in July.

古文：占曰： 客星守紫宫，臣杀主。 
现代文：占辞说： 客星守紫宫预示臣杀君。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The guest star guarding the Purple Palace foretells that the vassal will kill you.

古文：闰月乙亥，月晕轸，复有白晕贯月，北晕斗柄三星。
现代文：闰月乙亥，月晕于轸宿，再有白晕贯月，向北晕斗柄三星。
English: The intercalary month is in the second month of the Chinese lunar calendar, and the moon is eclipsed at Shichijuku. There is also a white eclipsed crescent moon, and the northward eclipsed crescent moon is three stars.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象对王者不利。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：六年，桓温废帝。
现代文：六年，桓温废黜晋帝。
English: Six years later, Emperor Kuanwen deposed Emperor Huai.

古文：太和四年十月壬申，有大流星西下，声如雷。
现代文：太和四年十月壬申，有大流星向西落下，有声如雷。
English: In October of the 4th year of Taihei and Jinshin, a large meteor fell to the west, with a thunderous sound.

古文：按占： 流星为贵使，星大者使大。 
现代文：考查占书可知： 流星代表贵使，星大则使命也大。 
English: The examination of the account book shows that: the meteor represents the honorable envoy, and the great star has a great mission.

古文：明年，遣使免袁真为庶人。
现代文：第二年，派遣使者黜免袁真为百姓。
English: The following year, Yuan Zhen was pardoned from being a commoner by an envoy.

古文：桓温征寿春，真病死，息瑾代立，求救于苻坚，温破氐军。
现代文：但担征伐画画，童真病死而其子直瑾继位，求救于苻坚，但苻坚救援部队被桓温所破。
English: However, Tong Zhen, who was in charge of conscription, felling and painting, died of illness and was succeeded by his son, Naosuke, who sought help from Shujian, but Shujian's rescue force was defeated by Kuan Wen.

古文：六年，寿春城陷，声如雷，将士怒之象也。
现代文：六年，画画城被攻陷，声如雷，表示将士愤怒的预兆。
English: In the sixth year, the painting city was captured, and it was loud, indicating the foreshadowing of the soldiers' anger.

古文：太和六年闰月，荧惑守太微端门。
现代文：太和六年闰月，火星守太微垣端门。
English: In the leap month of the sixth year of the Taihei era, the Mars was too close to the gate.

古文：占曰： 天子亡国。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示天子亡国。 
English: Divination says: The Son of Heaven has lost his country.

古文：又曰： 诸侯三公谋其上。 
现代文：又说： 诸侯三公固谋皇上。 
English: He also said: The three great lords conspire against their sovereign.

古文：一曰： 有斩臣。 
现代文：又一说： 有臣被斩杀。 
English: Another version is: A minister was beheaded.

古文：辛卯，月犯心大星。
现代文：辛卯，月犯心宿大星。
English: Xinwu, the moon impinged on the heart of the great star.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 造天象对王者不利。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：十一月，桓温废帝，并奏诛武陵王，简文不许，温乃徙之新安。
现代文：十一月，担湿废黜置童，并奏请诛杀逮陵王，因简文童不同意，所以但温把武陵王迁徙至新安。
English: In November, he deposed and dethroned Wuling Wang, and requested to kill and arrest Wuling Wang. Since Jianwen did not agree, Dan Wen moved Wuling Wang to Xin'an.

