古文：王丞相拜司空，桓廷尉作两髻、葛群、策杖，路边窥之，叹曰： 人言阿龙超，阿龙故自超。 
现代文：丞相王导受任为司空，就任的时候，廷尉桓彝梳起两个发髻，穿着葛裙，拄着拐杖，在路边观察他。赞叹说： 人们都说阿龙出众，阿龙确实出众！ 
English: When the chancellor Wang Du was appointed as the secretary of the sky, when he took office, the courtier Huan Yao combed up two hair buns, wore a georgette skirt, carried a cane, and observed him on the roadside. He said with admiration: People say that A Long is outstanding, A Long is indeed outstanding!

古文：不觉至台门。
现代文：不知不觉跟随到官府大门口。
English: Unconsciously, I followed him to the gate of the government office.

古文：王丞相过江，自说昔在洛水边，数与裴成公、阮千里诸贤共谈道。
现代文：丞相王导到江南后，谈论起自己以前在洛水岸边，经常和裴裴成公、阮千里等贤士一起谈道。
English: After being led to the south of the Yangtze River, Wang Du, the prime minister, talked about how he used to be on the shore of Luoshui and often talked with Pei Pei Chenggong, Ruan Qianli and other sages.

古文：羊曼曰： 人久以此许卿，何须复尔？ 
现代文：羊曼说： 人们早就因为这件事称赞你，哪里还需要再说呢！ 
English: The shepherd said: People have already praised you for this, what more needs to be said!

古文：王曰： 亦不言我须此，但欲尔时不可得耳！ 
现代文：王导说： 也不是说我需要这个，只是想到那样的时光不会再有了啊！ 
English: Wang Du said, "It's not that I need this, it's just that I thought there would never be a time like that again!"

古文：王右军得人以兰亭集序方金谷诗序，又以已敌石崇，甚有欣色。
现代文：王羲之在知道人们把《兰亭集序》和《金谷诗序》并列后，认为自己和石崇相当，感到欣喜万分。
English: Wang Xizhi was overjoyed to know that people ranked "Lanting Sequence" and "Golden Valley Sequence" side by side, and thought that he was equal to Shizong.

古文：王司州先为庾公记室参军，后取殷浩为长史。
现代文：司州刺史王胡之最开始担任庾亮的记室参军，后来庾亮又调殷浩来任长史。
English: Wang Hu Zhi, the governor of Shizhou Province, initially served as the recorder of Xingliang and joined the army. Later, Xingliang and Yinhao were transferred to serve as long-term historians.

古文：始到，庾公欲遣王使下都。王自启求住曰： 下官希见盛德，渊源始至，犹贪与少日周旋。 
现代文：殷浩刚到的时候，庾亮想派王胡之带使命到京都，王胡之表明心中意愿，希望能够留下来，说： 下官很少见到德高望重的人，渊源刚来，我还想能够和他叙谈几天呢。 
English: When Yin Hao had just arrived, Yao Liang wanted to send Wang Huzhi to Kyoto with a mission. Wang Huzhi expressed his heart's desire to stay, saying, "Lower officials rarely see people of high moral standing. Yuan Yuan has just arrived, and I still want to be able to talk with him for a few days."

古文：郗嘉宾得人以己比符坚，大喜。
现代文：郗嘉宾得知人们把自己比做苻坚，心中非常高兴。
English: The guests were very happy to learn that people were comparing themselves to Yan Jian.

古文：孟昶未达时，家在京口。
现代文：孟昶还没有显贵时，住京口。
English: When Meng Xuan was not yet a prominent person, he lived in Jingkou.

古文：尝见王恭乘高舆，被鹤氅裘。
现代文：有一次看见王恭坐着高车，穿着鹤氅裘。
English: On one occasion, Wang Qiong was seen sitting on a cart, dressed in a crane costume.

古文：于时微雪，昶于篱间窥之，叹曰： 此真神仙中人！ 
现代文：当时下着零星小雪，孟昶在竹篱后偷着看他，赞叹说： 这真是神仙中人！ 
English: At that time, it was snowing sporadically. Meng Yao peeked at him from behind a bamboo hedge and said with admiration: This is truly a man of the gods!

