古文：宣皇帝讳懿，字仲达，河内温县孝敬里人，姓司马氏。
现代文：宣皇帝名懿，字仲达，河南温县孝敬里人，姓司马氏。
English: Emperor Xuan's great-great-grandson, surnamed Zhongda, from Xiaojing Village, Wenzhou County, Henan Province, surnamed Sima.

古文：其先出自帝高阳之子重黎，为夏官祝融，历唐、虞、夏、商，世序其职。
现代文：他的祖先是帝高阳之子重黎的后代，即夏官祝融。经历了唐、虞、夏、商各朝，承袭这一官职。
English: His ancestor was a descendant of Emperor Gaoyang's son Chongli, that is, Xia official Zhu Rong. He experienced the Tang, Yu, Xia and Shang dynasties and inherited this official post.

古文：及周，以夏官为司马。其后程柏休父，周宣王时，以世官克平徐方，锡以官族，因而为氏。
现代文：在周宣王时期，担任夏官司马的是一个叫做程柏休父的人，由于他以世官的身份攻克平定了徐方，被恩赐司马作族姓。
English: During the reign of King Zhou Xuan, a man named Cheng Baixiu, who conquered and pacified Xufang as a secular official, was given the surname of Sima.

古文：楚汉间，司马卬为赵将，与诸侯伐秦。
现代文：因此塱墨就成了他们的姓氏。楚、汉之际，司马卬是壹回的将领，与诸侯军一起讨伐塞国。
English: Therefore, Shumo became their surname. During the time of Chu and Han, Sima Yi was a general for the first time, fighting against Serbia together with the armies of the princes.

古文：秦亡，立为殷王，都河内。
现代文：秦国灭亡后，被立为：目逗，立王都于弛。
English: After the fall of the Qin Dynasty, it was established as a joke, and the kings were all weak.

古文：汉以其地为郡，子孙遂家焉。
现代文：龃把其地定为郡，于是子孙后代就长住于此。
English: He designated the area as a county, and his descendants have lived there ever since.

古文：自仰八世，生征西将军钧，字叔平。
现代文：从司马，以下第八世孙，出了位征西将军司马钩，字叔平。
English: From Sima, the following eighth-generation grandson, came out of the Western General Sima hook, the word Shu Ping.

古文：钧生豫章太守量，字公度。
现代文：司马钩生邀童太守旦垦量，字公仅。
English: Sima Huangsheng invited Donta Shou to attend the ceremony, but he did not attend.

古文：量生颍川太守俊，字元异。
现代文：旦旦量生垣贝太守旦垦垡，字五垦。
English: Gakibeta, the guardian deity, is depicted with a five-pointed star.

古文：俊生京兆尹防，字建公。
现代文：司压垡生塞逃尹司垦堕，字建公。
English: Siping Jian Sheng fled and Yin Jian Sheng fell, hence the name Jian Gong.

古文：帝即防之第二子也。
现代文：宣帝就是司压堕的第二个儿子。
English: Emperor Xuan is the second son of the fallen emperor.

古文：少有奇节，聪明多大略，博学洽闻，伏膺儒教。
现代文：宣帝年轻时就有非凡的气节，聪明豪放而多有远大的志向，博学多闻，倾心儒教。
English: When he was young, Emperor Xuan had an extraordinary temperament. He was clever, bold, and ambitious. He was well-read and devoted to Confucianism.

古文：汉末大乱，常慨然有忧天下心。
现代文：汉末天下大乱，宣帝常常感慨而有忧天下之心。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, and Emperor Xuan was often overwhelmed with emotion and worried about the world.

古文：南阳太守同郡杨俊名知人，见帝，未弱冠，以为非常之器。
现代文：同郡人南阳太守荡鱼以善于识别人才闻名，见到了宣帝，当时宣帝尚未成年，他认为宣帝是不同寻常的栋梁之材。
English: Fellow county resident Nanyang Taizhu Wangyu, known for his ability to recognize talent, saw Emperor Xuan, who was not yet an adult at the time, and thought that Emperor Xuan was an unusual pillar.

古文：尚书清河崔琰与帝兄朗善，亦谓朗曰： 君弟聪亮明允，刚断英特，非子所及也。 
现代文：担任尚书的清河人崔琰舆宣帝的哥哥司马朗是朋友，也曾对司马朗说： 您弟弟聪颖而明哲诚信，处事果断才能出众，不是一般人能比得上的。 
English: Sima Lang, the elder brother of the Qinghe man Cui Yu Xuan Di, who served as Shang Shu, was a friend, and once said to Sima Lang: Your brother is clever and honest, and his ability to deal with things decisively is outstanding, which is not comparable to ordinary people.

古文：汉建安六年，郡举上计掾。
现代文：濩建室六年，郡中推举上计掾的人选。
English: Six years after the construction of the building, the county elected the best candidate.

古文：魏武帝为司空，闻而辟之。
现代文：当时盐亘造萱邀任司空，听说了宣帝的名声就征召他。
English: At that time, Yanagihara was invited to serve as a steward, and when he heard of Emperor Xuan's reputation, he was conscripted.

古文：帝知汉运方微，不欲屈节曹氏，辞以风痹，不能起居。
现代文：宣帝明白濩的命运正值衰微，不愿意失节屈从笪荡，就以有风痹病不能正常饮食起居为由而推辞。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan understood that the fate of the empress dowager was on the wane. Unwilling to lose his temper and succumb to her debauchery, he dismissed her on the grounds that she was suffering from rheumatism and was unable to eat and live normally.

古文：魏武使人夜往密刺之，帝坚卧不动。
现代文：魏亘堕派入夜间秘密前去刺探情况，宣帝一动不动地躺在床上。
English: Wei Wei sent into the night secretly to spy on the situation, Xuan Di lying motionless on the bed.

古文：及魏武为丞相，又辟为文学掾，敕行者曰： 若复盘桓，便收之。 
现代文：魏武帝任丞相时，又召宣帝为文学掾，并对派去的人命令道： 如果他再藉辞推托，就把他收监入狱。 
English: When Emperor Weiwu was serving as chancellor, he also summoned Emperor Xuan for a literary banquet, and ordered the person who was sent: If he makes excuses again, put him in prison.

古文：帝惧而就职。
现代文：宣帝害怕而任职。
English: Emperor Xuan was afraid and resigned.

古文：于是，使与太子游处，迁黄门侍郎，转议郎、丞相东曹属，寻转主簿。
现代文：从此魏武帝命宣帝随时陪伴太子，升任黄门侍郎，又改任议郎、丞相束曹属，不久转任主簿。
English: From then on, Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty ordered Emperor Xuan to accompany the prince at all times, and he was promoted to the position of Huangmen waiter, and he was also appointed as the speaker, the minister of justice, and the secretary, and soon he was appointed as the chief accountant.

古文：从讨张鲁，言于魏武曰： 刘备以诈力虏刘璋，蜀人未附而远争江陵，此机不可失也。
现代文：宣帝跟随曹操去讨伐张鲁，对魏武帝进言道： 刘备以欺诈和武力俘虏了刘璋，蜀人尚未归附就出兵远方去争夺江陵，这个机会不能错过。
English: Emperor Xuan followed Cao Cao to fight against Zhang Lu, and said to Emperor Wu of Wei: Liu Bei captured Liu Bei by fraud and force, and the Shu people had not yet been annexed and sent troops to fight for Jiangling. This opportunity should not be missed.

古文：今若曜威汉中，益州震动，进兵临之，势必瓦解。
现代文：现在如果我们到汉中去陈兵显威，益州就会惊慌，乘机进军兵临城下，势必土崩瓦解。
English: Now, if we go to Hanzhong to display our military might, Yizhou will panic, take the opportunity to march troops under the city, and is bound to collapse.

古文：因此之势，易为功力。
现代文：由此之势，很容易建立功业。
English: From there, it's easy to build momentum.

古文：圣人不能违时，亦不失时矣。 
现代文：圣人不能违逆天时，也不能丧失时机。 
English: A saint cannot go against the times, nor can he lose the opportunity.

古文：魏武曰： 人苦无足，既得陇右，复欲得蜀！ 
现代文：魏武帝说： 人就苦于没有满足，已经夺取了陇西，还想得到蜀! 
English: Emperor Wei Wudi said: People suffer from not being satisfied, they have already captured Shaanxi, and still want to get Shu!

古文：言竟不从。
现代文：最终没有听从宣帝的意见。
English: In the end, he did not listen.

古文：既而从讨孙权，破之。
现代文：不久宣帝又随从曹操去征讨孙权，大破孙军。
English: Soon, Emperor Xuan followed Cao Cao to fight for Sun Quan and defeated Sun Quan's army.

古文：军还，权遣使乞降，上表称臣，陈说天命。
现代文：军旅凯旋，孙权派使者来乞求归顺，奉上奏表称臣，并陈述这是天命所归。
English: After the triumphant return of the military expedition, Sun Quan sent an envoy to beg for submission, presented a report card praising his subordinates, and stated that this was the will of heaven.

古文：魏武帝曰： 此兒欲踞吾著炉炭上邪！ 
现代文：魏武帝说： 这个小子是想把我放在炉火上烤啊! 
English: Wei Wudi said, "This boy wants to roast me on the fire!"

古文：答曰： 汉运垂终，殿下十分天下而有其九，以服事之。
现代文：宣帝回答说： 汉的国运已经临近终结，而丞相拥有十分之九的天下，并据此事奉天子。
English: Emperor Xuan replied: The national movement of the Han Dynasty is nearing its end, and the prime minister has nine-tenths of the world, and according to this, he is the son of heaven.

古文：权之称臣，天人之意也。
现代文：孙权称臣，正是天人共同的意愿。
English: It is the common will of heaven and earth that Sun Quan should be a minister.

古文：虞、夏、殷、周不以谦让者，畏天知命也。 
现代文：虞、夏、殷、周各朝之所以不谦让推辞的原因，正是由于敬畏上天而知天意啊。 
English: The reason why Yu, Xia, Yin, and Zhou did not humbly concede was precisely because they feared heaven and knew the will of heaven.

古文：魏国既建，迁太子中庶子。
现代文：魏国建立之后，宣帝升任为太子中庶子。
English: After the establishment of the state of Wei, Emperor Xuan was promoted to the position of the prince's middle child.

古文：每与大谋，辄有奇策，为太子所信重，与陈群、吴质、硃乐号曰四友。
现代文：每当参与重大决策，总有良谋，得到太子的信任器重，与陈群、吴质、朱铄号称四友。
English: Whenever he was involved in major decision-making, he always had a good strategy and was able to gain the trust of the prince. He was known as the four friends with Chen Qun, Wu Chien and Zhu Xi.

古文：迁为军司马，言于魏武曰： 昔箕子陈谋，以食为首。
现代文：宣帝升任军司马，对魏武帝说： 古代箕子论及治国之计，提出民以食为天。
English: Emperor Xuan, who was promoted to the position of military commander, said to Emperor Wu of Wei: In ancient times, when discussing the strategy of governing the country, the emperor Xunzi proposed that the people should make food their god.

古文：今天下不耕者盖二十余万，非经国远筹也。
现代文：现在全国不从事农业生产的人大约有二十多万，这不是治国的长远之计。
English: At present, there are about more than 200,000 people who are not engaged in agricultural production across the country. This is not a long-term strategy for governing the country.

古文：虽戎甲未卷，自宜且耕且守。 
现代文：虽然战事尚未平息，但也应该一边种地一边戍守。 
English: Although the war has not yet subsided, it is also necessary to cultivate the land and defend it.

古文：魏武纳之，于是务农积谷，国用丰赡。
现代文：魏武帝采纳了这个意见，从此致力于务农积粮，国家的财物丰富充足。
English: Emperor Wei Wu adopted this opinion, and from then on, he devoted himself to farming to accumulate grain, and the country's wealth became abundant.

古文：帝又言荆州刺史胡修粗暴，南乡太守傅方骄奢，并不可居边。
现代文：宣帝又上奏指出荆州刺史胡脩对民残暴，南乡太守傅方骄逸奢侈，都不可任官居边防。
English: Emperor Xuan also pointed out that Jingzhou Zishi Huchen was cruel to the people, and Nanxiang Dazhu Fu Fang was arrogant and extravagant, and both were not allowed to serve as border guards.

古文：魏武不之察。
现代文：魏武帝没有查处他们。
English: Emperor Wei Wu did not investigate them.

古文：及蜀将羽围曹仁于樊，于禁等七军皆没，修、方果降羽，而仁围甚急焉。
现代文：等到蜀国大将关羽在樊地围困了曹仁，于禁等七军全军覆没，胡脩、傅方果然投降了关羽，致使曹仁被围更加危急。
English: When Guan Yu, the general of Shu, besieged Cao Ren in Shantian, the whole army of the seven armies including Guan Yu and Fu Fang surrendered to Guan Yu, which made Cao Ren's siege even more critical.

古文：是时汉帝都许昌，魏武以为近贼，欲徙河北。
现代文：这时汉帝以许昌为国都，魏武帝认为许昌距敌太近，希望迁到黄河以北。
English: At this time, the Han Emperor chose Xuchang as the national capital. Emperor Wu of Wei thought that Xuchang was too close to the enemy and hoped to move north of the Yellow River.

古文：帝谏曰： 禁等为水所没，非战守之所失，于国家大计未有所损，而便迁都，既示敌以弱，又淮沔之人大不安矣。
现代文：宣帝劝谏道： 于禁等部被水所败，并不是作战防守失策，遣对于国家的大局没有损害，而轻率迁都，不但向敌人显现出我们软弱，而且还会造成淮河、沔水一带军民的极度不安。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan advised: The defeat by water of the Huaihe and other provinces was not a failure in combat and defense, and there was no damage to the overall situation of the country. However, the rash relocation of the capital not only showed our weakness to the enemy, but also caused extreme anxiety among the military and civilians along the Huaihe River and Surabaya.

古文：孙权、刘备，外亲内疏，羽之得意，权所不愿也。
现代文：孙权、刘备，外表亲近而内心疏离，关羽胜利得志，正是孙权所不希望的。
English: Sun Quan and Liu Bei were outwardly close but inwardly estranged. Guan Yu's victory was exactly what Sun Quan did not want.

古文：可喻权所，令掎其后，则樊围自解。 
现代文：可以向孙权说明，让他牵制住关羽的后方，那么樊地的围困自然就解除了。 
English: He could explain to Sun Quan that if he restrained Guan Yu's rear, then the siege of Handan would naturally be lifted.

古文：魏武从之。
现代文：魏武帝听从了这一意见。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei heeded this advice.

古文：权果遣将吕蒙西袭公安，拔之，羽遂为蒙所获。
现代文：孙权果然派大将吕蒙向西进袭公安，攻占了公安后，关羽终于被吕蒙所害。
English: Sun Quan sent General Lv Meng to the west to attack the public security. After capturing the public security, Guan Yu was finally killed by Lv Meng.

古文：魏武以荆州遗黎及屯田在颍川者逼近南寇，皆欲徙之。
现代文：魏武帝认为荆州地方的遣民和在颖川屯田戍边的百姓太靠近南敌，想把他们全部迁走。
English: Emperor Wei Wudi thought that the repatriated people from Jingzhou and the people from Tonden in Yingchuan were too close to the southern enemy and wanted to move them all away.

古文：帝曰： 荆楚轻脱，易动难安。
现代文：宣帝说： 荆楚之人轻率，容易骚动而难以安抚。
English: Emperor Xuan said: The people of Jingchu are imprudent, easily agitated and difficult to pacify.

古文：关羽新破，诸为恶者藏窜观望。
现代文：关羽刚被击溃，各种为非作歹之徒藏匿逃窜观望。
English: Guan Yu had just been defeated, and all kinds of criminals were hiding and watching.

古文：今徙其善者，既伤其意，将令去者不敢复还。 
现代文：现在命令那些良善之辈迁徙，不仅伤害了他们的感情，也将使那些逃亡在外的人不敢回归故里。 
English: Ordering those good people to migrate now will not only hurt their feelings, but will also make those who fled abroad afraid to return home.

古文：从之。
现代文：魏武帝听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：其后诸亡者悉复业。
现代文：这以后流亡者都回乡从事本业。
English: After that, the exiles all returned to their hometowns to pursue their careers.

古文：及魏武薨于洛阳，朝野危惧。
现代文：魏武帝在洛阳去世时，朝野惊惧。
English: When Emperor Wu of Wei died in Luoyang, the court was shocked.

古文：帝纲纪丧事，内外肃然。
现代文：宣帝主持丧事，使朝廷内外肃然有序。
English: Emperor Xuan presided over the funeral, bringing order inside and outside the court.

古文：乃奉梓宫还鄴。
现代文：便亲奉灵柩回到邺。
English: He then returned to Handan with the coffin.

古文：魏文帝即位，封河津亭侯，转丞相长史。
现代文：魏文帝即位之后，封宣帝为河津亭侯，又转为丞相长史。
English: After Emperor Weiwen ascended to the throne, Emperor Xuan was given the title of Prince of Kawazu, and also became the Prime Minister of Joseon.

古文：会孙权帅兵西过，朝议以樊、襄阳无谷，不可以御寇。
现代文：适值孙权领兵向西进军，朝廷商讨认为樊、襄阳没有积粮，不能以此地抵御敌人。
English: At the right time, Sun Quan led the army to march westward, and the imperial court deliberated that Xing and Xiangyang had no grain reserves and could not resist the enemy in this way.

古文：时曹仁镇襄阳，请召仁还宛。
现代文：当时曹仁镇守襄阳，希望把曹仁召回宛地。
English: At that time, Cao Ren was stationed in Xiangyang, hoping to recall Cao Ren to his destination.

古文：帝曰： 孙权新破关羽，此其欲自结之时也，必不敢为患。
现代文：宣帝说： 孙权最近击败了关羽，这正是他想主动交结的时候，一定不敢侵犯。
English: Emperor Xuan said: Sun Quan recently defeated Guan Yu, this is exactly the time when he wants to take the initiative to make contact, he must not dare to encroach.

古文：襄阳水陆之冲，御寇要害，不可弃也。 
现代文：襄阳是水陆交通的要道，抵御敌人的要害之地，不能放弃。 
English: Xiangyang is an important route for land and water transportation, and a key place to resist the enemy. It cannot be given up.

古文：言竟不从。
现代文：最终没听从。
English: In the end, he did not listen.

古文：仁遂焚弃二城，权果不为寇，魏文悔之。
现代文：于是曹仁焚烧放弃了两城，孙权果然没侵犯，魏文帝很后悔。
English: So Cao Ren burned and gave up the two cities. Sun Quan did not invade, and Emperor Wei regretted it.

古文：及魏受汉禅，以帝为尚书。
现代文：垫接受汉的禅让之后，任命宣帝为尚书。
English: After accepting the Han's surrender, Mat appointed Emperor Xuan as Shangshu.

古文：顷之，转督军、御史中丞，封安国乡侯。
现代文：不久，又改任督军、御史中丞，封为安国乡侯。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the military governor and the vice-commander of the imperial court, and was given the title of An Guo Xiang Hou.

古文：黄初二年，督军官罢，迁侍中、尚书右仆射。
现代文：茎翅二年，罢免了督军的职务，升任侍中、尚书右仆射。
English: In two years, he was removed from the post of military governor and was promoted to the position of chamberlain and the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：五年，天子南巡，观兵吴疆。
现代文：五年，天子南巡，在吴国边境检阅军队。
English: Five years later, Emperor Tianzi was on a southern inspection tour, inspecting the troops at the border of Wu.

古文：帝留镇许昌，改封向乡侯，转抚军、假节，领兵五千，加给事中、录尚书事。
现代文：宣帝留下镇守羞旦，改封为血塑堡，改授抚军、假节，统领五千士卒，加给事中、录尚书事。
English: Emperor Xuan left the town of Shitan, changed its name to Blood Castle, and gave it the title of Fuzhou Army, the title of Fuzhou Festival, and the command of five thousand soldiers.

古文：帝固辞。
现代文：宣帝坚决推辞。
English: Emperor Xuan firmly refused.

古文：天子曰： 吾于庶事，以夜继昼，无须臾宁息。
现代文：天子说： 我因为众多琐事，日以继夜，没有片刻安宁休息。
English: The Son of Heaven said: Because of my many trifles, I have been working day and night without a moment's peace and rest.

古文：此非以为荣，乃分忧耳。 
现代文：这并不是荣耀，是替我分忧而已。 
English: It's not an honour, it's just a relief for me.

古文：六年，天子复大兴舟师征吴，复命帝居守，内镇百姓，外供军资。
现代文：六年，天子又大兴水军征讨吴国，又命令宣帝留守，内镇抚百姓，外供给军用物资。
English: In the sixth year, Emperor Taizong again raised a naval force to conquer Wu, and ordered Emperor Xuan to stay at home, pacify the people at home, and supply military supplies abroad.

古文：临行，诏曰： 吾深以后事为念，故以委卿。
现代文：临出发时，下诏书说： 我深深担忧后方之事，所以委托给你。
English: At the time of departure, the following edict said: I am deeply concerned about the situation in the rear, so I entrust it to you.

古文：曹参虽有战功，而萧何为重。
现代文：曹参虽有战功，但萧何更为重要。
English: Although Cao San has war exploits, Xiao He is more important.

古文：使吾无西顾之忧，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：能让我没有后顾之忧，不是很好吗! 
English: Wouldn't it be great to have no worries?

古文：天子自广陵还洛阳，诏帝曰： 吾东，抚军当总西事；吾西，抚军当总东事。 
现代文：天子从广陵返回洛阳，命令宣帝道： 我在东边，你应该总管西边之事；我在西边，你应该总管东边之事。 
English: Tianzi returned to Luoyang from Guangling and ordered Xuan Di: I am in the east, you should be in charge of the west; I am in the west, you should be in charge of the east.

古文：于是帝留镇许昌。
现代文：于是宣帝留下镇守许昌。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuan left the town guard Xu Chang behind.

古文：及天子疾笃，帝与曹真、陈群等见于崇华殿之南堂，并受顾命辅政。
现代文：天子病重，宣帝舆曹真、陈群等人在崇华殿的南堂拜见天子，一起接受临终遣命辅政。
English: Tianzi was seriously ill, and Emperor Xuanzang, Caozhen, Chen Qun, and others visited Tianzi in the south hall of the Chonghua Hall, and together they accepted the end-of-life appointment to assist the government.

古文：诏太子曰： 有间此三公者，慎勿疑之。 
现代文：诏令太子说： 有离间逭三位大人的话，千万不要起疑心。 
English: The imperial edict told the prince: "If there is a rift among the three great men, don't be suspicious.

古文：明帝即位，改封舞阳侯。
现代文：明帝即位之后，改封宣帝为舞阳侯。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he changed his title from Emperor Xuan to Prince Muyang.

古文：及孙权围江夏，遣其将诸葛瑾、张霸并攻襄阳，帝督诸军讨权，走之。
现代文：孙权围困江夏，派遣大将诸葛瑾、张霸一起攻打襄阳，宣帝督领各军讨伐孙权，打退了吴军。
English: Sun Quan besieged Jiangxia, sent generals Zhuge Li and Zhang Ba to attack Xiangyang together, and Emperor Xuan led the army to fight Sun Quan and beat back the Wu army.

古文：进击，败瑾，斩霸，并首级千余。
现代文：进军追击，又打败了诸葛瑾，杀死了张霸，共杀死一千多敌军将士。
English: He marched in pursuit, defeated Zhuge Liang, killed Zhang Ba, and killed more than a thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：迁骠骑将军。
现代文：宣帝改任骠骑将军。
English: Emperor Xuan was reappointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：太和元年六月，天子诏帝屯于宛，加督荆、豫二州诸军事。
现代文：太和元年六月，天子令宣帝在宛地驻守，加都督荆州、豫州二州诸军事。
English: In June of the first year of the Taizu era, Emperor Xuan stationed himself at the destination, and the military of the two states of Jingzhou and Yuzhou came to the capital.

古文：初，蜀将孟达之降也，魏朝遇之甚厚。
现代文：当初，蜀将孟达投降之时，魏朝待他非常优厚。
English: Initially, when Shu surrendered Mengda, the Wei Dynasty treated him very generously.

古文：帝以达言行倾巧，不可任，骤谏，不见听，乃以达领新城太守，封侯，假节。
现代文：宣帝认为孟达的言行狡诈不可信任，屡次进谏不被接受，就任命孟达为新城太守，封侯爵，假节。
English: Emperor Xuan believed that Mengda's words and deeds were devious and could not be trusted, and his repeated advances were not accepted, so he appointed Mengda as the governor of Xincheng, made him a marquis, and set up a fake festival.

古文：达于是连吴固蜀，潜图中国。
现代文：孟达于是连吴安蜀，图谋中原。
English: Meng Da then joined Wu Anshu and plotted the Central Plains.

古文：蜀相诸葛亮恶其反覆，又虑其为患。
现代文：蜀丞相诸葛亮讨厌他反覆无常，又担心他为祸患。
English: Zhuge Liang, the minister of Shu, hated his capriciousness and feared him as a scourge.

古文：达与魏兴太守申仪有隙，亮欲促其事，乃遣郭模诈降，过仪，因漏泄其谋。
现代文：孟达舆魏兴太守申仪有矛盾，诸葛亮想让他兴兵举事，就派郭模假装投降，到申仪那襄，泄露孟达的阴谋。
English: Meng Da believed that there was a conflict between Meng Da and Xing Ta, the guardian of Shen Yi. Zhuge Liang wanted him to raise an army, so he sent Guo Meng to pretend to surrender and go to Shen Yi to reveal Meng Da's plot.

古文：达闻其谋漏泄，将举兵。
现代文：盂达知道自己的计谋已经泄露，就准备举兵作乱。
English: Knowing that his plot had been exposed, Sunda prepared to raise an army to cause trouble.

古文：帝恐达速发，以书喻之曰： 将军昔弃刘备，讬身国家，国家委将军以疆埸之任，任将军以图蜀之事，可谓心贯白日。
现代文：宣帝恐怕孟达马上发兵，就写信晓谕他说： 将军从前背弃了刘备，托身于国家，国家把守卫边防的重任交付给你，把谋取蜀国的大事委派给你，可以说此心舆太阳一样光明磊落。
English: Emperor Xuan was afraid that Mengda would immediately send troops, so he wrote a letter to him, saying: The general once betrayed Liu Bei and entrusted himself to the state. The state entrusted you with the important task of guarding the border and assigned you the important task of seeking Shu. It can be said that this heart is as bright as the sun.

古文：蜀人愚智，莫不切齿于将军。
现代文：蜀人中不论是愚笨的还是聪明的，没有不切齿痛恨将军的。
English: Among the Shuxiong people, no matter whether they are stupid or clever, there is no one who does not hate the general.

古文：诸葛亮欲相破，惟苦无路耳。
现代文：诸葛亮想打垮我们，苦于没有办法。
English: Zhuge Liang wanted to defeat us, but there was nothing he could do.

古文：模之所言，非小事也，亮岂轻之而令宣露，此殆易知耳。 
现代文：郭护所说的话，不是小事，厘姜亮岂能轻易泄露，这是很容易明白的。 
English: What Guo You said is not a small matter. It is easy to see how Li Jiangliang could easily leak it.

古文：达得书大喜，犹与不决。
现代文：孟达收到信后非常高兴，举兵之事犹豫不决。
English: Meng Da was very happy after receiving the letter and hesitated to raise an army.

古文：帝乃潜军进讨。
现代文：宣帝于是秘密发兵前去征讨。
English: Emperor Xuan then secretly sent an army to collect them.

古文：诸将言达与二贼交构，宜观望而后动。
现代文：将军们认为孟达与二敌勾结，应该先观望然后再行动。
English: The generals thought Mengda was colluding with the two enemies and should wait and see before acting.

古文：帝曰： 达无信义，此其相疑之时也，当及其未定促决之。 
现代文：宜帝说： 孟达不讲信义，现在正是他们彼此怀疑之时，应该趁他没有下决心之前促使他下决心。 
English: Yi Di said: Meng Da doesn't care about loyalty. Now is the time when they are suspicious of each other. He should be made to make up his mind before he doesn't.

古文：乃倍道兼行，八日到其城下。
现代文：于是加快速度，日夜兼程，八天就赶到他的城下。
English: So he sped up, driving day and night, and reached his hometown in eight days.

古文：吴蜀各遣其将向西城安桥、木阑塞以救达，帝分诸将距之。
现代文：吴、蜀各自派遣将士前往西城安桥、木阑塞来援救孟达，宣帝分派诸将抵抗。
English: Wu and Shu each dispatched soldiers to Xicheng Anqiao and Muxuxi to rescue Mengda, while Emperor Xuan dispatched soldiers to resist.

古文：初，达与亮书曰： 宛去洛八百里，去吾一千二百里，闻吾举事，当表上天子，比相反覆，一月间也，则吾城已固，诸军足办。
现代文：当初，孟达给诸葛亮写信说： 宛离洛八百里，离我一千二百里，听到我准备举兵的消息，他应该先上奏天子，这样来回往返，就得一个月的时间，那时我城已坚固，军马足可以对付。
English: At first, Mengda wrote to Zhuge Liang, saying: "Wan is eight hundred miles away from Luo, twelve hundred miles away from me, and when he heard the news that I was preparing to raise an army, he should first go to Song Son, so it would take a month to go back and forth. At that time, my city was already strong, and my army could deal with it.

古文：则吾所在深险，司马公必不自来；诸将来，吾无患矣。 
现代文：而且我逭裹偏远险阻，司马公肯定不会亲自来；其他将领来，我就不怕了。 
English: Moreover, I live in a remote and dangerous area, Sima Gong will certainly not come in person; I am not afraid of other generals coming.

古文：及兵到，达又告亮曰： 吾举事，八日而兵至城下，何其神速也！ 
现代文：等到大军已到，孟达又通报诸葛亮说： 我兴兵举事仅八天，而敌已兵临城下，怎么这么神速啊! 
English: When the large army had arrived, Mengda also informed Zhuge Liang, saying: "I have raised an army for only eight days, but the enemy has troops under the city, how can it be so fast!

古文：上庸城三面阻水，达于城外为木栅以自固。
现代文：上庸城三面临水，孟达在城外修建木栅自守。
English: Shangyongcheng 3 faces the water, and Mengda has built a wooden fence outside the city to protect itself.

古文：帝渡水，破其栅，直造城下。
现代文：宣帝人马渡河，攻进木栅，直逼城下。
English: Emperor Xuan's cavalry crossed the river, broke through the wooden grate, and drove straight under the city.

古文：八道攻之，旬有六日，达甥邓贤、将李辅等开门出降。
现代文：分八路人马攻城，打了十六天，孟达的外甥邓贤、大将李辅等人打开城门出来投降。
English: Mengda's nephew Deng Xian, General Li Yu and others opened the city gate and surrendered after an eight-way siege that lasted 16 days.

古文：斩达，传首京师。
现代文：宣帝杀了孟达，把首级送到京师。
English: Emperor Xuan killed Meng Da and sent his head to the capital.

古文：俘获万余人，振旅还于宛。
现代文：俘获了一万多人，收军返回到宛。
English: He captured more than ten thousand people, gathered his forces and returned to Tsuwan.

古文：乃劝农桑，禁浮费，南土悦附焉。
现代文：于是鼓励农耕养蚕，禁止奢侈浪费，南方很高兴地归附。
English: As a result, farming and silkworm rearing were encouraged, extravagant waste was prohibited, and the south was happy to join.

古文：初，申仪久在魏兴，专威疆埸，辄承制刻印，多所假授。
现代文：当初，申仪长时间地驻守在魏兴，在边境专权，动辄就说秉承旨意而私刻印章，都是非正式委任。
English: At first, Shen Yi was stationed in Weixing for a long time, and he had exclusive power over the border. He often said that he had engraved the seal according to his will, which was an unofficial appointment.

古文：达既诛，有自疑心。
现代文：孟达被杀之后，自己已有疑心。
English: After Meng Da was killed, he began to have doubts.

古文：时诸郡守以帝新克捷，奉礼求贺，皆听之。
现代文：当时各郡守臣因为宣帝新得胜，纷纷送礼表示祝贺，都收下了。
English: At that time, because of Emperor Xuan's new victory, the county retainers sent gifts one after another to express their congratulations, and all of them were accepted.

古文：帝使人讽仪，仪至，问承制状，执之，归于京师。
现代文：宣帝让人劝导申仪，申仪来到之后，询问假传圣旨的情况，将他拘捕，送到京师。
English: Emperor Xuan sent someone to persuade Shen Yi. After Shen Yi arrived, he inquired about the false transmission of the imperial edict, arrested him, and sent him to the capital.

古文：又徙孟达余众七千余家于幽州。
现代文：又将孟达余众七千多家流放到幽州。
English: He also exiled more than seven thousand Mengda Yuans to Yuzhou.

古文：蜀将姚静、郑他等帅其属七千余人来降。
现代文：蜀将姚静、郑他等统领部下七千多人前来投降。
English: More than seven thousand subordinates of Shu's generals, including Yao Jing and Zheng, came forward to surrender.

古文：属帝朝于京师，天子访之于帝。
现代文：当时边境各郡刚归顺，大多没有户籍名簿，魏朝想加以核实，嘱托宣帝来京城朝见。
English: At that time, the border counties had just returned to Shun, and most of them did not have a household registration list. The Wei Dynasty wanted to verify this and asked Emperor Xuan to come to Beijing for a meeting.

古文：帝对曰： 贼以密网束下，故下弃之。
现代文：天子向宣帝询问，宣帝答道： 敌方用严法统治百姓，所以百姓背弃了他。
English: The heavenly son asked Emperor Xuan, and Emperor Xuan replied: The enemy used harsh laws to rule the people, so the people turned their backs on him.

古文：宜弘以大纲，则自然安乐。 
现代文：应该根据大法加以宽待，自然可安居乐业。 
English: They should be treated leniently according to Dafa, and they can naturally live and work in peace.

古文：又问二虏宜讨，何者为先？
现代文：又问二敌都应该征讨，以何国为先?
English: He also asked whether both enemies should be conquered, and which country should be conquered first.

古文：对曰： 吴以中国不习水战，故敢散居东关。
现代文：回答说： 吴国认为中原之人不习水战，所以敢散居在束关。
English: He replied, "Wu Guo believed that people in the Central Plains were not used to naval warfare, so they dared to live scattered in Sokuan.

古文：凡攻敌，必扼其喉而摏其心。
现代文：凡是攻击敌人，一定要扼其咽喉捣其心脏。
English: Whenever you attack the enemy, you must strangle his throat and beat his heart.

古文：夏口、东关，贼之心喉。
现代文：夏口、束关，是吴的心脏咽喉。
English: Xiakou and Sokuan are the heart and throat of Wu.

古文：若为陆军以向皖城，引权东下，为水战军向夏口，乘其虚而击之，此神兵从天而坠，破之必矣。 
现代文：如果派遣陆军向皖城进发，引孙权束下，再派遣水战军进军夏，乘虚攻打他们，这就像是神兵从天而降，一定能打败他们。 
English: If you send an army to advance on Lucheng, bring Sun Quan under control, and then send a naval force to march into Xia and attack them in vain, it will be like a divine soldier descending from the sky, and you will surely defeat them.

古文：天子并然之，复命屯于宛。
现代文：天子都认为很有道理，又命令宣帝屯兵于宛。
English: Emperor Tianzi thought it was very reasonable, and ordered Emperor Xuan to send troops to Yuan.

古文：四年，迁大将军，加大都督、假黄钺，与曹真伐蜀。
现代文：四年，升大将军，加大都督、假黄钹，与曹真一起讨伐玺厘。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the rank of general, became the governor of the capital, and the false Huang Di, and fought against Bali together with Cao Zhen.

古文：帝自西城斫山开道，水陆并进，溯沔而上，至于朐，拔其新丰县。
现代文：宣帝从酉越劈山开道，水陆两军并进，逆沔水而上，直到朐腮，攻下新丰县。
English: Emperor Xuan cut a path through the mountains from Yunnan, and the two armies marched side by side, upstream of Yunnan and downstream of Yunnan, until they reached Shandong and captured Xinfeng County.

古文：军次丹口，遇雨，班师。
现代文：部队驻屯丹口，碰上大雨，回军。
English: Troops stationed in Tanggu, encountering heavy rain, returned to the army.

古文：明年，诸葛亮寇天水，围将军贾嗣、魏平于祁山。
现代文：第二年，诸葛亮进犯天水，把将军贾嗣、魏平围困在祁山。
English: In the second year, Zhuge Liang invaded Tianshui and besieged the generals Jia Ci and Wei Ping in Lushan.

古文：天子曰： 西方有事，非君莫可付者。 
现代文：天子说： 西方有了战事，除了你没有可以托付的人。 
English: The son of heaven said, "There is a war in the West, and you have no one to entrust with it but yourself.

古文：乃使帝西屯长安，都督雍、梁二州诸军事，统车骑将军张郃、后将军费曜、征蜀护军戴凌、雍州刺史郭淮等讨亮。
现代文：于是让宣帝向西驻守在长安，都督雍州、凉州诸军事，率领车骑将军张郃、后将军费曜、征蜀护军戴浚、雍州刺史郭淮等人讨伐诸葛亮。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuan was stationed westward in Chang'an, and the military of the governors of Yongzhou and Liangzhou were at the forefront, leading the chariot and cavalry general Zhang Qian, the rear admiral Fei You, the Shu escort army Dai Jun, and the Yongzhou assassin Guo Huai to fight Zhuge Liang.

古文：张郃劝帝分军往雍、郿为后镇，帝曰： 料前军独能当之者，将军言是也。
现代文：张郃劝宣帝分军驻屯在雍、郡在后指挥，宣帝说： 如果料知前军能独自抵挡住敌军，将军你的意见很对。
English: Zhang Ye advised Emperor Xuan to station a detachment of his army in Yong, with Gu leading the rear. Emperor Xuan said, "If you knew that the front army could resist the enemy army on its own, General, your opinion is very right.

古文：若不能当，而分为前后，此楚之三军所以为黥布禽也。 
现代文：如果不能抵挡，而兵分为前后两部，造就是楚的三军之所以被黥布所消灭的原因。 
English: If it is not possible to resist, and the soldiers are divided into two parts, this is the reason why Chu's three armies were destroyed by the cloth.

古文：遂进军隃麋。
现代文：于是进军喻麋。
English: So they marched into Cidade Velha.

古文：亮闻大军且至，乃自帅众将芟上邽之麦。
现代文：诸葛亮听说大军就要到了，就亲自率领众将士收割上邦的小麦。
English: When Zhuge Liang heard that the large army was about to arrive, he personally led the soldiers to harvest the wheat in Shangpang.

古文：诸将皆惧，帝曰： 亮虑多决少，必安营自固，然后芟麦。吾得二日兼行足矣。 
现代文：各位将领都很害怕，宣帝说： 诸葛亮多顾虑而少决断，一定会安营自守，然后割麦，我们有两天时间日夜兼程就足够了。 
English: All the generals were afraid, Emperor Xuan said: Zhuge Liang is more cautious and less decisive, he will definitely camp and defend himself, and then cut the wheat. We have two days and nights to make the journey, which is enough.

古文：于是卷甲晨夜赴之。亮望尘而遁。
现代文：于是轻装前进日夜行军，诸葛亮望尘而逃。
English: As a result, they marched lightly day and night, and Zhuge Liang fled.

古文：帝曰： 吾倍道疲劳，此晓兵者之所贪也。
现代文：宣帝说： 我们兼程行军十分疲劳，这是通晓军事的人所希望的。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "We are very tired from marching all the way, which is what people who understand military affairs hope for.

古文：亮不敢据渭水，此易与耳。 
现代文：厘姜台不敢占据沮塞，这很容易对付。 
English: Lin Jiangtai did not dare to occupy the depression, which is easy to deal with.

古文：进次汉阳，与亮相遇，帝列阵以待之。
现代文：进军驻于汉阳，与诸葛亮相遇，宣帝列阵迎战蜀军。
English: He marched into Hanyang, where he met Zhuge Liang. Emperor Xuanzong lined up to meet the Shu army.

古文：使将牛金轻骑饵之，兵才接而亮退，追至祁山。
现代文：派大将牛金以轻骑兵引诱蜀军，两军刚一交战诸葛奎就撤退，追到空汕。
English: He sent the general Niu Jin to lure the Shu army with light cavalry. As soon as the two armies clashed, Zhuge Kui retreated and chased them to a clearing.

古文：亮屯卤城，据南北二山，断水为重围。
现代文：谴姜台屯兵卢塑，占据了南北二山，截断了水源作包围圈。
English: Jiang Tai sent troops to Lu Pu, occupied the north and south of the two mountains, cut off the water source as an encirclement.

古文：帝攻拔其围，亮宵遁。追击，破之，俘斩万计。
现代文：宣帝进攻突破了他的包围圈，诸葛亮趁夜逃跑，又追击打败了他，俘获斩杀一万多人。
English: Emperor Xuan's attack broke through his encirclement, Zhuge Liang took advantage of the night to escape, and defeated him in pursuit, capturing and killing more than 10,000 people.

古文：天子使使者劳军，增封邑。
现代文：天子派人慰劳军队，增加封邑。
English: The Son of Heaven sent a consolation army and increased the number of fiefs.

古文：时军师杜袭、督军薛悌皆言，明年麦熟，亮必为寇，陇右无谷，宜及冬豫运。
现代文：当时军师杜袭、督军薛悌都说明年麦熟时，盗墓毫一定会进犯，胧西没有粮食，应该在冬季预先运去。
English: At that time, the military strategist Du Gao and the military commander Xue Qi both said that when the wheat was ripe next year, the grave robbers would definitely attack, there was no grain in the west, and it should be transported in advance in winter.

古文：帝曰： 亮再出祁山，一攻陈仓，挫衄而反。
现代文：宣帝说： 诸葛亮再出祁山，一攻陈盒，挫败而返回。
English: Emperor Xuan said: Zhuge Liang went out of Shaoshan again, attacked Chen Box, was defeated and returned.

古文：纵其后出，不复攻城，当求野战，必在陇东，不在西也。
现代文：即使他以后再来，也不会攻城，肯定希望野战，一定在陇束，不会在西。
English: Even if he comes back later, he will not attack the city. He definitely wants to have a field battle. He will definitely be in Hsinchu, not in the west.

古文：亮每以粮少为恨，归必积谷，以吾料之，非三稔不能动矣。 
现代文：诸葛亮常常因为粮食不足而无可奈何，回去后肯定会积攒粮食，根据我的推测，不经过三年他不会有行动。 
English: Zhuge Liang is often helpless because of the shortage of grain, and he will certainly accumulate grain after returning. According to my speculation, he will not act for at least three years.

古文：于是表徙冀州农夫佃上邽，兴京兆、天水、南安监冶。
现代文：于是上奏把冀州的农夫迁到上邦，加强京兆、天水、南安的监督和管理。
English: As a result, Shangso moved the farmers from Jizhou to Shangbang and strengthened the supervision and management of Beijing, Tianshui and Nan'an.

古文：青龙元年，穿成国渠，筑临晋陂，溉田数千顷，国以充实。
现代文：壹违元年，凿通了成国渠，修筑了堕置压，灌溉了数千顷土地，国库由此而富足充实。
English: In the first year of the year, the Chengguo Canal was chiseled and built, and thousands of hectares of land were irrigated. As a result, the national treasury was enriched.

古文：二年，亮又率众十余万出斜谷，垒于郿之渭水南原。
现代文：二年，诸葛亮又率领十多万军队出斜谷，在鄘地的渭水以南平原屯兵。
English: In the second year, Zhuge Liang led more than a hundred thousand troops out of the valley and set up a garrison in the plain south of Surabaya.

古文：天子忧之，遣征蜀护军秦朗督步骑二万，受帝节度。
现代文：天子很担心，派遣征蜀护军秦朗督领步兵骑兵两万人，接受宣帝的指挥。
English: Tianzi was very worried and dispatched Qin Langdu, commander of the Shu Protectorate, to lead 20,000 infantry and cavalry and accept Emperor Xuan's command.

古文：诸将欲住渭北以待之，帝曰： 百姓积聚皆在渭南，此必争之地也。 
现代文：诸将想在渭北迎战，宣帝说： 百姓都在遭南聚集，这裹是必争之地。 
English: The generals wanted to go to war in northern Shandong. Emperor Xuan said, "The people are gathering in southern Shandong. This is a place that must be fought for."

古文：遂引军而济，背水为垒。
现代文：于是率军渡水，背水为营。
English: As a result, he led the army across the water and made the backwater into a camp.

古文：因谓诸将曰： 亮若勇者，当出武功依山而东，若西上五丈原，则诸军无事矣。 
现代文：接着对诸将说： 诸葛亮若是勇敢的人，应该从武功出发，顺着山势向东进军。如果西上五丈原，那么各路军马就都平安。 
English: Then he said to the generals: "If Zhuge Liang is a brave man, he should start from martial arts and march eastward along the mountain. If he goes west to Wuzhongyuan, then all the horses will be safe.

古文：亮果上原，将北渡渭，帝遣将军周当屯阳遂以饵之。
现代文：诸葛亮果然上了平原，准备北渡渭水，宣帝派遣将军周当在阳遂引诱蜀军。
English: Zhuge Liang went to the plains and prepared to cross the river to the north. Emperor Xuan sent the general Zhou Dang Ziyang to lure the Shu army.

古文：数日，亮不动。
现代文：一连几天，诸葛亮没有动静。
English: For several days, Zhuge Liang did not move.

古文：帝曰： 亮欲争原而不向阳遂，此意可知也。 
现代文：宣帝说： 诸葛亮想争夺平原而不去阳遂，他的意图可以知道了。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Zhuge Liang wants to fight for the plains without going to Yang Sui, his intention can be known.

古文：遣将军胡遵、雍州刺史郭淮共备阳遂，与亮会于积石，临原而战，亮不得进，还于五丈原。
现代文：派遣将军胡遵、雍州刺史郭淮共同警戒阳遂，和诸葛亮在积石相遇。临近平原开战，诸葛亮无法前进，返回到五丈原。
English: He dispatched General Hu Zun and the Yongzhou chief of staff Guo Huai to jointly guard Yang Sui, and they met Zhuge Liang at Jishan. When they went to war at Jin Pingyuan, Zhuge Liang was unable to advance and returned to Wuzhongyuan.

古文：会有长星坠亮之垒，帝知其必败，遣奇兵掎亮之后，斩五百余级，获生口千余，降者六百余人。
现代文：碰上有彗星坠落在诸葛亮的营内，宣帝知道他一定会失败，派遣奇兵牵制诸葛亮的后部，斩杀五百多人，活捉一千余人，投降的有六百余人。
English: When a comet crashed into Zhuge Liang's camp, Emperor Xuan, knowing that he would certainly fail, dispatched soldiers to hold Zhuge Liang's rear, killing more than 500 people, capturing more than 1,000 people alive, and surrendering more than 600 people.

古文：时朝廷以亮侨军远寇，利在急战，每命帝持重，以候其变。
现代文：当时朝廷认为诸葛亮是侨居江南的远敌，利于速战速决，常令宣帝要持重，以等待其变化。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that Zhuge Liang was a distant enemy of the expatriates living in the south of the Yangtze River, which was conducive to quick war and quick decision, and often ordered Emperor Xuan to hold weight to wait for its change.

古文：亮数挑战，帝不出，因遗帝巾帼妇人之饰。
现代文：诸葛亮多次挑战，宣帝均不出战，于是诸葛亮送给宜帝女人的衣饰。
English: Zhuge Liang challenged many times, but Emperor Xuan did not go to war, so Zhuge Liang gave Emperor Yi women's clothing.

古文：帝怒，表请决战，天子不许，乃遣骨鲠臣卫尉辛毗杖节为军师以制之。
现代文：宣帝大怒，上表请求决战，天子不同意，派正直之臣卫尉辛毗手持符节任军师来制止宣帝。
English: Emperor Xuan was enraged. He asked for a decisive battle, but Tianzi did not agree. He sent his honest vassal, Lieutenant Sin Pi, armed with a rune, to stop Emperor Xuan.

古文：后亮复来挑战，帝将出兵以应之，毗杖节立军门，帝乃止。
现代文：后来诸葛亮又来挑战，宣帝准备出兵应战，辛毗手持符节立于军门，宣帝才罢休。
English: Later, Zhuge Liang came to challenge again, Emperor Xuan was ready to send troops to fight, Xin Pi stood at the gate of the army with a rune in his hand, and Emperor Xuan finally gave up.

古文：初，蜀将姜维闻毗来，谓亮曰： 辛毗杖节而至，贼不复出矣。 
现代文：当初，蜀将姜维听说辛毗前来，对诸葛亮说： 辛毗持节前来，敌寇不会再出战了。 
English: At first, Jiang Wei, the general of Shu, heard that Xin Pi was coming, and said to Zhuge Liang: "If Xin Pi comes to celebrate the festival, the enemy bandits will not fight again."

古文：亮曰： 彼本无战心，所以固请者，以示武于其众耳。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 他本来就没有出战之意，所以坚决请战的原因，不过是在其兵众面前显示他的勇猛罢了。
English: Zhuge Liang said: He had no intention of going to war in the first place, so the reason why he resolutely went to war was just to show his bravery in front of his soldiers.

古文：将在军，君命有所不受，苟能制吾，岂千里而请战邪！ 
现代文：大将在军中，君命是可以不接受的，如果真能对付我，岂用远隔千里去请战呢! 
English: As a general in the army, the king's order is unacceptable. If you can really deal with me, why would you go thousands of miles away to fight?

古文：帝弟孚书问军事，帝复书曰： 亮志大而不见机，多谋而少决，好兵而无权，虽提卒十万，已堕吾画中，破之必矣。 
现代文：宣帝的弟弟司马孚写信请教军事，宣帝回信道： 诸葛亮志向远大而没有机遇，多谋少决断，喜好用兵但没有权，虽然率领十万士卒，但已堕入到我的圈套之中，打败他们必定无疑。 
English: Emperor Xuan's brother Sima Fu wrote a letter to ask for military advice. Emperor Xuan replied: Zhuge Liang's ambition is great but there is no opportunity, he is more resourceful but less decisive, he likes to use soldiers but has no authority. Although he leads 100,000 soldiers, he has fallen into my trap. There is no doubt that they will be defeated.

古文：与之对垒百余日，会亮病卒，诸将烧营遁走，百姓奔告，帝出兵追之。
现代文：与诸葛亮对峙了一百多天，适逢诸葛亮生病去世，诸将焚烧营垒悄悄逃走，百姓奔走相告，宣帝出兵追击。
English: He confronted Zhuge Liang for more than a hundred days. When Zhuge Liang fell ill and died, the generals burned the camp and quietly fled, the people ran to tell each other, and Emperor Xuan sent troops to chase them.

古文：亮长史杨仪反旗鸣鼓，若将距帝者。
现代文：诸葛亮的长史杨仪反转军旗鸣鼓进军，好像是要迎战宣帝的样子。
English: Zhuge Liang's Long Shi Yang Yi reverses the army banner and marches into the army, as if he is going to meet Emperor Xuan.

古文：帝以穷寇不之逼，于是杨仪结阵而去。
现代文：宣帝认为穷寇不宜追，于是杨仪结阵而去。
English: Emperor Xuan thought that it was not appropriate to chase poor robbers, so Yang Yi left in a body.

古文：经日，乃行其营垒，观其遗事，获其图书、粮谷甚众。帝审其必死，曰： 天下奇才也。 
现代文：遇了几天，宣帝来到诸葛亮的营垒，察看他们遣下的东西，缴获了很多图书、粮草。宣帝确定诸葛亮死了，说： 真是天下的奇才。 
English: A few days later, Emperor Xuan came to Zhuge Liang's camp, inspected what they had sent, and seized a lot of books, grain and grass. Emperor Xuan determined that Zhuge Liang was dead and said, "He is truly a wonder of the world."

古文：辛毗以为尚未可知。
现代文：辛毗认为还不能确定。
English: Xinwei believes that it is not yet certain.

古文：帝曰： 军家所重，军书密计、兵马粮谷，今皆弃之，岂有人捐其五藏而可以生乎？
现代文：宣帝说： 军家所重视的，是军事文书和机密、兵马粮草，现在都丢弃了，难道有丢弃了自己的五脏还能活着的人吗?
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Military documents and secrets, soldiers and horses, grain and grass, all of which were valued by military men, have now been discarded. Is there anyone who can still live after discarding their own internal organs?

古文：宜急追之。 
现代文：应该马上追击。 
English: We should go after them now.

古文：关中多蒺藜，帝使军士二千人著软材平底木屐前行，蒺藜悉著屐，然后马步俱进。
现代文：关中多蒺藜，宣帝命二千军士穿着软底平跟的木屐前进，蒺藜全扎在木屐上，然后骑兵步兵一起进发。
English: In the middle of the pass there was a lot of thunder, and 2,000 soldiers wearing flat-heeled, soft-soled wooden rafts advanced to proclaim the emperor's life. The rafts were all tied to the rafts, and then the cavalry and infantry advanced together.

古文：追到赤岸，乃知亮死。
现代文：追到赤岸，知道了诸葛亮去世的确实消息。
English: Chased to the Red Bank and learned the true news of Zhuge Liang's death.

古文：审问，时百姓为之谚曰： 死诸葛走生仲达。 
现代文：当时百姓对此事编了谚语说： 死诸葛亮吓跑活司马仲达。 
English: At that time, the common people made up a proverb about this matter, saying: "The death of Zhuge Liang scared away the living Ma Zhongda."

古文：帝闻而笑曰： 吾便料生，不便料死故也。 
现代文：宣帝听后笑着说： 因为我善于料知其生，不善于料知其死之故。 
English: After listening, Emperor Xuan laughed and said: Because I am good at predicting his life, but not good at predicting his death.

古文：先是，亮使至，帝问曰： 诸葛公起居何如，食可几米？ 
现代文：在此之前，诸葛亮曾派使者来，宣帝问道： 诸葛公生活起居怎么样?能吃多少饭? 
English: Prior to this, Zhuge Liang had sent an envoy to ask Emperor Xuan: How does Zhuge Gong live? How many meals can he eat?

古文：对曰： 三四升。 
现代文：回答说： 能吃三四升。 
English: He replied: I can eat three or four litres of oysters.

古文：次问政事，曰： 二十罚已上皆自省览。 
现代文：然后又问政事，回答说： 凡处罚二十以上的都要亲自过问。 
English: Then he asked about political affairs, and answered, "Anyone who has punished more than twenty people should be personally investigated."

古文：帝既而告人曰： 诸葛孔明其能久乎！ 
现代文：宣帝后来对别人说： 诸葛孔明怎么能活得长久呢! 
English: Emperor Xuan later said to others: "How can Zhuge Confucius live for so long?

古文：竟如其言。
现代文：最后如他所言。
English: In the end, he did as he said.

古文：亮部将杨仪、魏延争权，仪斩延，并其众。
现代文：诸葛亮的部将杨仪、魏延争权，杨仪杀了魏延，吞并了他的军队。
English: Zhuge Liang's general Yang Yi and Wei Yan fought for power. Yang Yi killed Wei Yan and annexed his army.

古文：帝欲乘隙而进，有诏不许。
现代文：宣帝想乘机进军，诏令不允许。
English: Emperor Xuanzong wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to advance, but the imperial edict did not allow him to do so.

古文：三年，迁太尉，累增封邑。
现代文：三年，宣帝升太尉，增加封邑。
English: In three years, Emperor Xuan was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and his fief was increased.

古文：蜀将马岱入寇，帝遣将军牛金击走之，斩千余级。
现代文：蜀将马岱入侵，宣帝派遣将军生金击退了他们，斩杀一千余人。
English: Shu invaded Ma'an, and Emperor Xuan dispatched the general Sheng Jin to repel them, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：武都氐王苻双、强端帅其属六千余人来降。
现代文：武都氐王苻双、强端率领部下六千余人前来投降。
English: More than six thousand of his subordinates came forward to surrender, led by the military commanders Wang Shanshu and Qiangdu.

古文：关东饥，帝运长安粟五百万斛于京师。
现代文：阖东饥荒，宣帝从长安往京师运送了五百万斛粮食。
English: During the famine in eastern Shandong Province, Xuan Di transported five million baht of grain from Chang'an to Beijing.

古文：四年，获白鹿，献之。
现代文：四年，宣帝得白鹿，献给天子。
English: In four years, Emperor Xuan obtained the White Deer, dedicated to the Son of Heaven.

古文：天子曰： 昔周公旦辅成王，有素雉之贡。
现代文：天子说： 从前且公旦辅佐厘廷，曾进献白雉。
English: The heavenly son said, "Once upon a time, there was a public official named Zuo Liting, who used to offer egrets.

古文：今君受陕西之任，有白鹿之献，岂非忠诚协符，千载同契，俾乂邦家，以永厥休邪！ 
现代文：现在你管理陕西，又献上白鹿，这难道不是忠诚不二协同顺和，千年同心，共治邦国，使之吉祥万年吗! 
English: Now that you are governing Shaanxi and have presented the white deer, isn't this loyalty, cooperation and harmony, a thousand years of unity, co-governing the country, and making it auspicious for a thousand years!

古文：及辽东太守公孙文懿反，征帝诣京师。
现代文：辽东太守公孙文懿谋反时，征调宣帝到京师。
English: When the governor of Liaodong, Gongsun Wenzhong, plotted a rebellion, he summoned Emperor Xuan to Beijing.

古文：天子曰： 此不足以劳君，事欲必克，故以相烦耳。
现代文：天子说： 原本不值得劳烦你，但此事一定得取胜，所以要烦扰你了。
English: The son of heaven said, "It wasn't worth bothering you in the first place, but this matter must be won, so I want to bother you.

古文：君度其行何计？ 
现代文：你认为他会有什么打算? 
English: What do you think he's up to?

古文：对曰： 弃城预走，上计也。
现代文：回答说： 放弃城池而预先离开，这是上策。
English: He replied: It is best to abandon the city and leave beforehand.

古文：据辽水以距大军，次计也。
现代文：占据遥水而抗拒大军，这是中策。
English: To occupy distant waters and resist a large army is the middle course.

古文：坐守襄平，此成擒耳。 
现代文：坐地镇守塞垩，就肯定会被擒捉。 
English: If you sit on the fence, you're sure to get caught.

古文：天子曰： 其计将安出？ 
现代文：天子问： 那将有何良策? 
English: Tenshi asked: What good will that do?

古文：对曰： 惟明者能深度彼己，豫有所弃，此非其所及也。
现代文：回答说： 明察的人能深刻考虑敌我双方，预先有所放弃，遣不是他所能做到的。
English: He replied, "A discerning person can deeply consider both the enemy and ourselves, and give up something in advance, which is not something he can do.

古文：今悬军远征，将谓不能持久，必先距辽水而后守，此中下计也。 
现代文：现在他孤军深入，涉远征伐，肯定不能持久，一定会先占据辽水而坚守，这是中、下之策。 
English: Now he is going deep alone, involving an expedition, which will certainly not last. He will first occupy Liao Shui and stick to it. This is the middle and bottom strategy.

古文：天子曰： 往还几时？ 
现代文：天子说： 往返需要多长时间? 
English: Tianzi said: How long does it take to go there and back?

古文：对曰： 往百日，还百日，攻百日，以六十日为休息，一年足矣。 
现代文：回答说： 去一百天，回一百天，攻打一百天，用六十天作为休整，一年足够了。 
English: And he answered, A hundred days' journey, and a hundred days' return, and a hundred days' fighting, and threescore days' preparation, and a year is sufficient.

古文：是时大修宫室，加之以军旅，百姓饥弊。
现代文：当时正大规模修建宫室，加上军队征战，百姓饥荒凋敝。
English: At that time, the palace was being built on a large scale, coupled with the army's war, and the people were starving.

古文：帝将即戎，乃谏曰： 昔周公营洛邑，萧何造未央，今宫室未备，臣之责也。
现代文：宣帝正准备用兵，就劝谏说： 从前周公曾营建洛邑，萧何曾修造未央宫，现在宫室尚未完备，这是我的责任。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan was preparing to use troops, so he persuaded Yao to come and say: Previously, Zhou Gong had built Luoyang, and Xiao He had built Weiyang Palace, but now the palace is not yet complete. This is my responsibility.

古文：然自河以北，百姓困穷，外内有役，势不并兴，宜假绝内务，以救时急。 
现代文：然而自黄河以北，百姓穷苦困窘，内外都有劳役，其势不能同时并兴，应该暂且停止兴造，以解救一时之急。 
English: However, since the north of the Yellow River, the people are poor and destitute, and there are laborers both at home and abroad. The situation cannot be simultaneous, and construction should be temporarily stopped to relieve the urgency of the moment.

古文：景初二年，帅牛金、胡遵等步骑四万发自京都。
现代文：景初二年，宣帝率牛金、胡遵等步兵骑兵四万，从京都出发。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Emperor Xuan led 40,000 infantry and cavalry, including Niu Jin and Hu Zun, and set out from Kyoto.

古文：车驾送出西明门。诏弟孚、子师送过温，赐以谷帛牛酒，敕郡守典农以下皆往会焉。
现代文：天子送出西明门，下韶其弟司马孚、其子司马师送过温水，赐给谷帛牛酒，敕令郡守典农以下官吏都去拜会宣帝。
English: Tianzi sent out the Ximing Gate, sent down his brother Sima Fu, and his son Sima Shi sent warm water, gave the valley yakitori wine, and the officials from the county governor to the farmers all went to visit Emperor Xuan.

古文：见父老故旧，宴饮累日。
现代文：宣帝会见父老故旧，宴饮好几天。
English: Emperor Xuan met with his father and feasted for several days.

古文：帝叹息，怅然有感，为歌曰： 天地开辟，日月重光。
现代文：宣帝很慨叹，怅然有感，咏诗道： 开天辟地，曰月重光。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan sighed deeply, and was deeply moved. He recited a poem: "The heavens and the earth were created, and the moon was heavy with light."

古文：遭遇际会，毕力遐方。
现代文：恰逢时机，全力远征。
English: When the time was right, the expedition was launched with full force.

古文：将扫群秽，还过故乡。
现代文：将扫群敌，回军过乡。
English: He will sweep away the enemies and return to the countryside.

古文：肃清万里，总齐八荒。
现代文：肃清万里，统一四方。
English: Eliminate thousands of miles and unify the four directions.

古文：告成归老，待罪舞阳。 
现代文：功成身退，待罪舞阳。 
English: He retires with success, and waits for punishment.

古文：遂进师，经孤竹，越碣石，次于辽水。
现代文：于是进军，经过孤竹，越过碣石，屯兵辽水。
English: So they marched on, passing through Lone Bamboo, over Jinshi, and made camp at Liao Shui.

古文：文懿果遣步骑数万，阻辽隧，坚壁而守，南北六七十里，以距帝。
现代文：文懿果然派遣步兵骑兵几万，在辽隧阻击，坚壁固守，南北六七十里，来抗拒宣帝。
English: Wen Xuan sent tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to resist Emperor Xuan in the Liao Tunnel and hold the fortified wall for sixty or seventy miles from north to south.

古文：帝盛兵多张旗帜，出其南，贼尽锐赴之。
现代文：宣帝重兵大张旗鼓出击其南，贼寇集中精锐前来迎战。
English: Emperor Xuan's heavy army attacked its south with great fanfare, and the elite bandits came to fight.

古文：乃泛舟潜济以出其北，与贼营相逼，沈舟焚梁，傍辽水作长围，弃贼而向襄平。
现代文：宣帝用船暗渡大军出击其北，与贼寇的营垒相近，沉掉船只烧毁桥梁，顺着壁水修筑长围，舍掉敌军而向襄平进发。
English: Emperor Xuan used ships to secretly cross the vast army to attack its north, close to the camp of thieves and robbers, sank ships, burned bridges, built a long enclosure along the wall water, abandoned the enemy army and set off for Xiangping.

古文：诸将言曰： 不攻贼而作围，非所以示众也。 
现代文：诸将说： 不攻打贼军而设围，不是告知众军的好办法。 
English: The generals said, "It is not a good way to inform the troops to set up a perimeter without attacking the bandits."

古文：帝曰： 贼坚营高垒，欲以老吾兵也。
现代文：宣帝说： 贼寇加固营垒，想以此来使我军疲困。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "The bandits want to make our army exhausted by fortifying the camp.

古文：攻之，正入其计，此王邑所以耻过昆阳也。
现代文：进攻他们，正中了他们的诡计，这正是王邑之所以耻于过昆阳的原因。
English: Attacking them means falling for their tricks, which is exactly why Wangyue is ashamed of Kunyang.

古文：古人曰，敌虽高垒，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也。
现代文：古人说，敌虽高筑壁垒，却不得不与我们交战的原因，是因为攻击了他们必须解救的地方。
English: The ancients said that the reason why the enemy had to fight us, despite the high walls they had built, was because they attacked the place where they had to be rescued.

古文：贼大众在此，则巢窟虚矣。
现代文：贼寇大军聚集在此，他们的老巢就会空虚。
English: The army of thieves and robbers gather here, and their nest will be empty.

古文：我直指襄平，则人怀内惧，惧而求战，破之必矣。 
现代文：我们直攻襄平，敌人就会心怀恐惧，恐惧而求战，必然打败他们。 
English: If we directly attack Xiangping, the enemy will have fear in their hearts, seek war out of fear, and will inevitably defeat them.

古文：遂整阵而过。
现代文：于是整列行阵而去。
English: So they marched away in a line.

古文：贼见兵出其后，果邀之。
现代文：贼军看到我军出现在他们后面，果然进行截击。
English: When the bandits saw our troops appear behind them, they launched an interception.

古文：帝谓诸将曰： 所以不攻其营，正欲致此，不可失也。 
现代文：宣帝对诸将说： 所以不攻打他们军营，正希望造成这种局面，不可以失掉这个机会。 
English: Emperor Xuan said to the generals: Therefore, we should not attack their camp, we are hoping to create such a situation, we must not lose this opportunity.

古文：乃纵兵逆击，大破之，三战皆捷。贼保襄平，进军围之。
现代文：于是挥军回击，大败敌军，三战三捷，贼军退保襄平，宣帝进军包围襄平。
English: As a result, the army waved back, defeated the enemy army, fought three wars and achieved three victories, the thief army withdrew to Yangping, and Emperor Xuan marched to encircle Yangping.

古文：初，文懿闻魏师之出也，请救于孙权。
现代文：当初，文艺听到魏军出发的消息时，曾向孙攫求救。
English: At first, when the literati heard the news of the departure of the Wei army, they asked Sun Yat-sen for help.

古文：权亦出兵遥为之声援，遗文懿书曰： 司马公善用兵，变化若神，所向无前，深为弟忧之。 
现代文：茎攫也出兵远远地给他声援，并给文懿写信说： 司马公善于用兵，变化如神，所向无敌，我深为你担忧。 
English: Zhu Xi also sent soldiers to support him from afar, and wrote a letter to Wen Qi saying: Sima Gong is good at using soldiers, changes like a god, and is invincible. I am deeply worried about you.

古文：会霖潦，大水，平地数尺，三军恐，欲移营。
现代文：恰逢连绵大雨，平地积水数尺，三军将士恐慌，想转移营地。
English: It coincided with continuous heavy rain, with several feet of standing water on the flat ground. The three soldiers panicked and wanted to move the camp.

古文：帝令军中敢有言徙者斩。
现代文：宣帝下令军中有敢说迁徙的人斩首。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered that anyone in the army who dared to speak of migration be beheaded.

古文：都督令史张静犯令，斩之，军中乃定。
现代文：都督令史张静违犯军令，被斩首，军心安定下来。
English: The governor ordered Shi Zhang Jing to violate the military order and was beheaded, and the military spirit settled down.

古文：贼恃水，樵牧自若。
现代文：贼军依仗水势，伐薪放牧安然自若。
English: The bandit army relies on the water potential, cutting firewood and grazing peacefully.

古文：诸将欲取之，皆不听。
现代文：诸将想去捉他们，宣帝都没有同意。
English: The generals wanted to capture them, but Emperor Xuan did not agree.

古文：司马陈圭曰： 昔攻上庸，八部并进，昼夜不息，故能一旬之半，拔坚城，斩孟达。
现代文：司马陈珪说： 以前进攻上庸，八部同时进军，昼夜不停，所以能在五六天之间，攻陷了坚固的守城，杀了孟达。
English: Sima Chen Yao said: In the past, we attacked Shangyong and marched into eight provinces at the same time, day and night, so we were able to capture the fortified city and kill Mengda in five or six days.

古文：今者远来而更安缓，愚窃惑焉。 
现代文：现在从远方来却更加安宁缓怠，我很不明白。 
English: I don't understand why it's so much more relaxed and easygoing when you come from far away.

古文：帝曰： 孟达众少而食支一年，吾将士四倍于达而粮不淹月，以一月图一年，安可不速？
现代文：宣帝说： 孟达兵众少而食物却能支持一年，我方将士人数四倍于孟达而粮食不足一月，用能支持一个月的兵力去对付能支持一年的兵力，怎么能不速战呢?
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Mengda has a small number of soldiers, but enough food to last a year. We have four times as many soldiers as Mengda, but less than a month's worth of food. How can we use troops that can last a month to fight troops that can last a year? How can we not fight quickly?"

古文：以四击一，正令半解，犹当为之。
现代文：用四对一，即使分成一半，也应当这样做。
English: With four to one, even if split in half, it should do the same.

古文：是以不计死伤，与粮竞也。
现代文：所以不考虑死伤多少，是在与粮食竞赛。
English: Therefore, regardless of the number of deaths and injuries, we are in a race with grain.

古文：今贼众我寡，贼饥我饱，水雨乃尔，功力不设，虽当促之，亦何所为。
现代文：现在敌众我寡，贼饥我饱，雨又下得这样，功效无法施展，虽然应当加速进行，又能做些什么。
English: Now that the enemy is few and far between, the thieves are hungry and full, and the rain is falling again, the effect cannot be exerted, although it should be accelerated, but what can be done.

古文：自发京师，不忧贼攻，但恐贼走。
现代文：从京师出发以来，不担心贼军进攻，怕的是贼军逃走。
English: Since the departure of the Beijing Division, they are not worried about the Kleptocratic Army attacking, but are afraid of the Kleptocratic Army fleeing.

古文：今贼粮垂尽，而围落未合，掠其牛马，抄其樵采，此故驱之走也。
现代文：现在贼军粮草将尽，而我军尚未合围，抢夺他们的牛马，抄缴他们的柴禾，这是要故意驱赶他们逃走。
English: Now the bandit army is running out of grain and grass, and our army has not yet encircled them, robbed their cattle and horses, and confiscated their firewood. This is to deliberately drive them away.

古文：夫兵者诡道，善因事变。
现代文：用兵讲究诡诈之术，善于随时变化。
English: The use of soldiers emphasizes the art of deception, and is good at changing at any time.

古文：贼凭众恃雨，故虽饥困，未肯束手，当示无能以安之。
现代文：贼兵依靠人多又有大雨，所以虽然又饥又困，也不肯束手就擒，我们应当表现出无能来使他们安心。
English: The bandits depend on a large number of people and heavy rain, so although they are hungry and tired, they do not want to go to bed, we should show our inability to reassure them.

古文：取小利以惊之，非计也。 
现代文：谋取小利而惊动了他们，不是好主意。 
English: It's not a good idea to startle them for a quick profit.

古文：朝廷闻师遇雨，咸请召还。
现代文：朝廷听说军队遇上大雨，都奏请召他们返回。
English: When the imperial court heard that the troops had encountered heavy rain, they all appealed to them to return.

古文：天子曰： 司马公临危制变，计日擒之矣。 
现代文：天子说： 司马公能临危应变，不久就能擒住贼寇。 
English: Tianzi said: Sima Gong is able to cope with emergencies, and will soon be able to stop the bandits.

古文：既而雨止，遂合围。
现代文：不久雨停，于是合围。
English: Soon the rain stopped, so they gathered around.

古文：起土山地道，楯橹钩橦，发矢石雨下，昼夜攻之。
现代文：修筑土山地道，准备了盾橹钩车，箭石如雨，昼夜攻打。
English: They built a dirt mountain road, prepared a shield-hook cart, and attacked day and night.

古文：时有长星，色白，有芒鬣，自襄平城西南流于东北，坠于梁水，城中震慑。
现代文：当时有颗彗星，白色，有光亮的尾巴，从襄平城西南向东北方坠落下去，掉在梁水，城中之人震惊惶恐。
English: At that time, a comet, white with a bright tail, fell from the southwest to the northeast of Xiangping City and fell into the Liangshui River. People in the city were shocked and frightened.

古文：文懿大惧，乃使其所署相国王建、御史大夫柳甫乞降，请解围而缚。
现代文：文懿非常害怕，让他的部下相国王建、御史大夫柳甫乞求投降，请求解除围困自己束手归顺。
English: Fumimaro was so afraid that he asked his subordinates, the ministers King Jianzhong and Goshi-taifu Liufu, to beg for surrender and request that the siege be lifted.

古文：不许，执建等，皆斩之。
现代文：宣帝没有同意，扣留了王建等人，全部杀掉。
English: Emperor Xuan did not agree, detained Wang Jian and others, and killed them all.

古文：檄告文懿曰： 昔楚郑列国，而郑伯犹肉袒牵羊而迎之。
现代文：以檄文告示文懿说： 从前楚、郑是平等的国家，郑伯还脱去上衣，手牵活羊而迎候楚军。
English: In his message, Wen Rong said: In the past, Chu and Zheng were equal countries. Zheng Bo also took off his shirt and held a live sheep in his hand to welcome the Chu army.

古文：孤为王人，位则上公，而建等欲孤解围退舍，岂楚郑之谓邪！
现代文：我身为天子大臣，位在上公，而王建等人却想让我解除围困撤退军队，遣不是成了楚与郑的关系!
English: I, as the son of Heaven's minister, was in the position of Shangguo, but Wang Jian and others wanted me to lift the siege and withdraw the army. Wasn't this the relationship between Chu and Zheng?

古文：二人老耄，必传言失旨，已相为斩之。
现代文：这两个人老糊涂了，一定是传话歪曲了你的意思，已经帮你杀掉。
English: These two are clueless. They must have distorted your message and killed you.

古文：若意有未已，可更遣年少有明决者来。 
现代文：如果你还有话要说，可重新派个年轻明断的人前来。 
English: If you still have something to say, send someone young and assertive again.

古文：文懿复遣侍中卫演乞克日送任。
现代文：文懿又派了侍中卫演前来乞求限期送交质子。
English: Wen Jiabao also sent an attendant, Zhongwei Yuan, to beg for a deadline to deliver the proton.

古文：帝谓演曰： 军事大耍有五，能战当战，不能战当守，不能守当走，余二事惟有降与死耳。
现代文：宣帝对卫演说： 军事要旨有五条：能战应当战，不能战应当守，不能守应当撤，剩下的两条路就是投降和死了。
English: Emperor Xuan said in his speech to the guards: There are five military principles: if you can fight, you should fight; if you can't fight, you should defend; if you can't defend, you should retreat; the other two paths are surrender and death.

古文：汝不肯面缚，此为决就死也，不须送任。 
现代文：你不肯束手面缚而降，造就是要决一死战，用不着送来质子。 
English: If you don't want to surrender with your hands tied, then it's a fight to the death, you don't need to send protons.

古文：文懿攻南围突出，帝纵兵击败之，斩于梁水之上星坠之所。
现代文：文懿攻击南面的围军突出包围，宣帝挥军将他打败，在坠落彗星的地方将他斩首。
English: Wen Xuan attacked and encircled the encircling army protruding from the south, and Emperor Xuan's army defeated him and beheaded him at the place where the comet fell.

古文：既入城，立两标以别新旧焉。
现代文：入城之后，建立了两个标志用以区别新旧。
English: After entering the city, two signs were set up to distinguish the old from the new.

古文：男子年十五已上七千余人皆杀之，以为京观。
现代文：十五岁以上的七千多男子全部杀掉，将尸体封土筑成高冢。
English: They killed all of the more than seven thousand men over the age of fifteen and sealed the bodies into stilts.

古文：伪公卿已下皆伏诛，戮其将军毕盛等二千余人。
现代文：公卿以下伪官全部处死，斩了将军毕盛等二千余人。
English: The false officials below the court noble were all executed, and more than two thousand people, including General Bi Sheng, were beheaded.

古文：收户四万，口三十余万。
现代文：收编四万户，人三十余万。
English: Forty thousand households and more than three hundred thousand people were enrolled.

古文：初，文懿篡其叔父恭位而囚之。
现代文：当初，文鲸篡夺了他叔父公孙恭的权位并将他囚禁。
English: At first, Wenqi usurped the power of his uncle Gongsun Qiong and imprisoned him.

古文：及将反，将军纶直、贾范等苦谏，文懿皆杀之。
现代文：等到准备谋反之时，将军纶直、贾范等人苦苦劝谏，文懿把他们都杀了。
English: When the time came to prepare for a rebellion, the generals Zhi Zhi, Jia Fan and others tried hard to dissuade him, but Wenyi killed them all.

古文：帝乃释恭之囚，封直等之墓，显其遗嗣。
现代文：宣帝释放了公孙恭，并给纶直等人修建了坟墓，表彰他们的后人。
English: Emperor Xuanzong released Gongsunqong, and built a tomb for Gongzhi and others to commend their descendants.

古文：令曰： 古之伐国，诛其鲸鲵而已，诸为文懿所诖误者，皆原之。
现代文：下令说： 古代讨伐一个国家，仅杀其特别凶恶的人而已。各位被文懿所连累的人，全部宽恕。
English: The order said: "In ancient times, when a country was attacked, only its most vicious people were killed. All of you who have been implicated by Wen Jiabao are pardoned.

古文：中国人欲还旧乡，恣听之。 
现代文：中原人愿意返回故乡的，各随己愿。 
English: If the Central Plains people are willing to return to their hometowns, they can do so as they wish.

古文：时有兵士寒冻，乞襦，帝弗之与。
现代文：当时有的士兵身感寒冷，请求发给短袄，宣帝不给他们。
English: At that time, some soldiers felt cold and asked to be given short coats, but Emperor Xuan did not give them any.

古文：或曰： 幸多故襦，可以赐之。 
现代文：有人说： 原有许多旧的短袄，可以赐给他们。 
English: Some said, "There are plenty of old bags that can be given to them."

古文：帝曰： 襦者官物，人臣无私施也。 
现代文：宣帝说： 短袄是公家的，作为人臣不能私自施舍给人。 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Tang Yao is a public official. As a courtier, he cannot give alms to people in private.

古文：乃奏军人年六十已上者罢遣千余人，将吏从军死亡者致丧还家。
现代文：于是上奏朝廷将六十岁以上的军人遣散了一千多人，将吏中在战争中死亡的为他们回家治丧。
English: As a result, more than a thousand soldiers over the age of sixty were dismissed, and the officials who died in the war were sent home to mourn.

古文：遂班师。
现代文：然后班师。
English: Then the class teacher came out.

古文：天子遣使者劳军于蓟，增封食昆阳，并前二县。
现代文：天子派人到蓟犒劳大军，给宣帝增封昆阳，舆已封的两县一起作为食邑。
English: The Son of Heaven sent someone to the great army of laborers to give Emperor Xuan the additional fief of Kunyang, and the two counties that I had already fenced together as food towns.

古文：初，帝至襄平，梦天子枕其膝，曰： 视吾面。 
现代文：原先，宣帝到襄平时，曾梦见天子枕着自己的膝盖说： 看我的脸。 
English: Originally, when Emperor Xuan arrived in Xiangping, he had a dream in which he saw the Son of Heaven kneeling on his knees and saying, "Look at my face."

古文：俯视有异于常，心恶之。
现代文：低下头去看发现天子舆平时不一样，很害怕。
English: When I looked down, I found that the sky was different from usual, and I was very scared.

古文：先是，诏帝便道镇关中；及次白屋，有诏召帝，三日之间，诏书五至。
现代文：在此之前，曾诏令宣帝从便道去镇守关中；等到了白屋，诏令宣召宣帝，在三天之内，来了五道诏书。
English: Prior to this, there was a decree to proclaim the emperor from the road to the town of Shouguan. When they arrived at the white house, the decree proclaimed the emperor, and within three days, there were five decrees.

古文：手诏曰： 间侧息望到，到便直排阁入，视吾面。 
现代文：手诏说： 最近常恐惧不安地盼望你的到来，到了之后就直接推门进来，看我的脸。 
English: The sign said: "Recently, I've been anxiously awaiting your arrival. When you arrive, just push the door open and look at my face.

古文：帝大遽，乃乘追锋车昼夜兼行，自白屋四百余里，一宿而至。
现代文：宣帝非常惊慌，就乘轻便驿车日夜兼程，从白屋出发四百余里路，一天就赶到了。
English: Xuan Di was very panicked, so he took a minibus day and night, and drove more than 400 miles from Baiya, arriving in one day.

古文：引入嘉福殿卧内，升御床。
现代文：进到嘉福殿卧室，走到御床前。
English: Enter the bedroom of Jiafu Hall and walk to the throne room.

古文：帝流涕问疾，天子执帝手，目齐王曰： 以后事相托。
现代文：宣帝流着眼泪问候病情，天子拉着宣帝的手，看着齐王说： 把后事托付给你。
English: Emperor Xuan saluted his illness with tears. Heavenly Son took Emperor Xuan's hand, looked at King Qi and said, "I will entrust the future to you."

古文：死乃复可忍，吾忍死待君，得相见，无所复恨矣。 
现代文：死居然还是可以控制的。我忍死等你，得以相见，再没有什么遣恨了。 
English: Death can actually still be controlled. I can't wait for you to see each other, there's nothing to be angry about.

古文：与大将军曹爽并受遗诏辅少主。
现代文：宣帝舆大将军曹爽接受遣诏辅佐少主。
English: Cao Shuang, a general of Xuan Diwu University, accepted the post of deputy assistant major.

古文：及齐王即帝位，迁侍中、持节、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，与爽各统兵三千人，共执朝政，更直殿中，乘舆入殿。
现代文：齐王继承帝位之后，宣帝升迁为侍中、持节、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，和曹爽各自统兵三千，共同执掌朝政，轮流在殿中值班，可以坐舆上殿。
English: After King Qi's succession to the throne, Emperor Xuan was promoted to attendant, ceremonial head, and military governor of the armies at home and abroad, recorded in the records. He and Cao Shuang each commanded three thousand soldiers, jointly presided over the imperial government, took turns on duty in the hall, and could sit in the upper hall.

古文：爽欲使尚书奏事先由己，乃言于天子，徙帝为大司马。
现代文：曹爽想让尚书上奏事情先通过自己，就向天子进言，改任宣帝为大司马。
English: Cao Shuang wanted to let Shang Shuxuan play things through himself first, so he suggested to Tianzi that he be reassigned to Xuandi as the chief steward.

古文：朝议以为前后大司马累薨于位，乃以帝为太傅。入殿不趋，赞拜不名，剑履上殿，如汉萧何故事。
现代文：朝中商议认为前后大司马全都死在位上，于是任命宣帝为太傅，进入殿内不用小步快走，朝见天子行礼不用报姓名，上殿时可以佩剑穿鞋，一切如同汉萧何的旧例。
English: According to the discussion between the DPRK and the PRC, it was believed that all the great emperors had died on the throne, so Emperor Xuan was appointed as the Taifu, and he did not have to walk quickly to enter the hall, he did not have to report his name when he bowed to the emperor, and he could wear a sword and shoes when he went to the hall, all of which was the same as the old example of Han Xiao He.

古文：嫁娶丧葬取给于官，以世子师为散骑常侍，子弟三人为列侯，四人为骑都尉。
现代文：宣帝家婚嫁丧葬之事的费用全部由官府供给，任命世子司马师为散骑常侍，子弟三人为列侯，四人为骑都尉。
English: The expenses for the wedding and funeral of Emperor Xuan's family were all provided by the government, and the heir, Sima Shi, was appointed as a cavalryman, three of his children were princes, and four were cavalry captains.

古文：帝固让子弟官不受。
现代文：宣帝坚决辞让了子弟们的官衔没有接受。
English: Emperor Xuancheng resolutely refused to accept the official titles of his sons.

古文：魏正始元年春正月，东倭重译纳贡，焉耆、危须诸国，弱水以南，鲜卑名王，皆遣使来献。
现代文：正始元年春正月，东倭的使节经辗转翻译前来纳贡，焉耆、危须各国，弱水以南，鲜卑人名声显赫之王，都派遣使者前来献纳。
English: At the beginning of the spring and the first month of the first year of the year, the envoys of Eastern Wa came to pay tribute after being transferred and translated, and all countries in crisis, south of the Weak Water, and famous kings, all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：天子归美宰辅，又增帝封邑。
现代文：天子把功劳归于宰相，又增加了宣帝的封邑。
English: The emperor gave the credit to the prime minister and increased the fief of Emperor Xuan.

古文：初，魏明帝好修宫室，制度靡丽，百姓苦之。
现代文：起初，魏明帝喜好修筑宫室，规模都豪华壮丽，百姓深以为苦。
English: At first, Emperor Wei Ming liked to build palace rooms, the scale of which was luxurious and magnificent, and the people were deeply distressed.

古文：帝自辽东还，役者犹万余人，雕玩之物动以千计。
现代文：宣帝从辽东归来时，服劳役的还有一万多人，玩赏物品动辄数以千计。
English: When Emperor Xuan returned from Liaodong, there were still more than ten thousand people in forced labor, and there were thousands of things to play with.

古文：至是皆奏罢之，节用务农，天下欣赖焉。
现代文：到此时都奏请停止，节约费用使役者回去种田，天下欣慰仰赖。
English: At this time, they all said please stop, and the cost savings made the actors go back to farming. The whole world was pleased and relied on them.

古文：二年夏五月，吴将全琮寇芍陂，硃然、孙伦围樊城，诸葛瑾、步骘掠柤中，帝请自讨之。
现代文：正始二年夏五月，吴国将全琮侵犯芍陂，朱盘、茎俭围困!泌，诸葛瑾、楚鲎在担史掳掠，宣帝请求亲自讨伐。
English: At the beginning of the summer and May of the second year, the State of Wu invaded and besieged Zhupan and Zhujian, and Zhuge, Zhuge and Chu were in the process of carrying out historical plunder, and Emperor Xuan personally requested a crusade.

古文：议者咸言，贼远来围樊，不可卒拔。
现代文：议论者都说，贼寇远来围困叁芝球，不可能很快占领该城。
English: Commentators all said that the bandits had come from far away to besiege Handan Zhibu, and it was impossible to occupy the city quickly.

古文：挫于坚城之下，有自破之势，宜长策以御之。
现代文：让他们在城下受到挫折，就会有自破之势，可用良策抵抗。
English: Let them be frustrated under the castle, they will have the potential to self-destruct, and they can use good measures to resist.

古文：帝曰： 边城受敌而安坐庙堂，疆场骚动，众心疑惑，是社稷之大忧也。 
现代文：宣帝说： 边城受侵犯却安坐在朝廷之上，边疆不安定，百姓心中就会产生疑惑，这是国家的大忧患。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: If a border city is encroached upon but sits on top of the imperial court, the border is unstable, and doubts will arise in the hearts of the people. This is a great sorrow for the country.

古文：六月，乃督诸军南征，车驾送出津阳门。
现代文：六月，统率各路军马南征，天子送出津阳盟。
English: In June, he led the troops in the Manan Expedition and sent the Tianzi out of the Tsuyang Alliance.

古文：帝以南方暑湿，不宜持久，使轻骑挑之，然不敢动。
现代文：宣帝因为南方天气炎热潮湿，不宜持久，就命轻骑兵前去挑战，朱然不敢冒然出动。
English: Because of the hot and humid weather in the south, Emperor Xuan ordered the light cavalry to challenge, Zhu Ran did not dare to venture out.

古文：于是休战士，简精锐，募先登，申号令，示必攻之势。
现代文：于是休整战士，精选精锐之师，招募率先登城的勇士，严明号令，显示一定要攻打之势。
English: As a result, the recuperating soldiers, selected the best division, recruited the first warriors to enter the city, and issued a strict order, showing that they must attack.

古文：吴军夜遁走，追至三州口，斩获万余人，收其舟船军资而还。
现代文：吴军夜间逃走，直追到三州口，斩杀俘获了一万余人，收缴了敌军的船只物资返回。
English: The Wu army fled during the night and chased them all the way to Sanshoukou. They killed and captured more than 10,000 people, seized the enemy's ships and materials, and returned.

古文：天子遣侍中常侍劳军于宛。
现代文：天子派遣侍中常侍在宛犒劳大军。
English: The Son of Heaven has sent forth a vast army of attendants.

古文：秋七月，增封食郾、临颍，并前四县，邑万户，子弟十一人皆为列侯。
现代文：秋七月，给宣帝增加郾、临颖封邑，与以前的四个县合在一起，食邑共有万户，子弟有十一人为列侯。
English: In autumn and July, Xuan Di was given the additional counties of Xuan and Lin Ying, which were combined with the previous four counties. There were a total of 10,000 households in the counties, and eleven of his children were princes.

古文：帝勋德日盛，而谦恭愈甚。
现代文：宣帝的功勋声望日益增高，却更加谦卑恭让。
English: Emperor Xuan's merits and reputation are increasing day by day, but he is more humble and courteous.

古文：以太常常林乡邑旧齿，见之每拜。
现代文：因为太常常林是同乡中有德望的长者，每次见到他都要下拜。
English: Because too often Lin is a respected elder in the same village, every time I see him, I have to bow down.

古文：恆戒子弟曰： 盛满者道家之所忌，四时犹有推移，吾何德以堪之。
现代文：常告诫子弟说： 骄傲自满是道家所忌讳的，四时还有推移变化，我有什么德能来承受这些。
English: He often admonished his son, saying, "Pride and complacency are taboo in the Taoist family. At four o'clock, there are transitions and changes. How can I bear these?

古文：损之又损之，庶可以免乎？ 
现代文：谦逊再谦逊，大概可以免灾吧! 
English: Humble and more humble, you can probably avoid disaster!

古文：三年春，天子追封，谥皇考京兆尹为舞阳成侯。
现代文：正始三年春，天子追封宜帝先父京兆尹司马防为舞阳成侯。
English: At the beginning of the spring of the third year, Tianzi chased after Emperor Yi's forefather, Jing Zhao Yin Sima Bao, to become the prince of Muyang.

古文：三月，奏穿广漕渠，引河入汴，溉东南诸陂，始大佃于淮北。
现代文：三月，宣帝奏请凿通广漕渠，引黄河之水流入汴河，灌溉东南大片坡地，开始在淮河以北大面积耕种。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong requested that a wide canal be dug to divert water from the Yellow River into the Min River, irrigate a large area of southeastern slope land, and began to cultivate a large area north of the Huai River.

古文：先是，吴遣将诸葛恪屯皖，边鄙苦之，帝欲自击恪。
现代文：在此之前，吴国派遣大将诸葛恪驻守于皖，边境城镇深受其害，宣帝想亲自去攻打诸葛恪。
English: Prior to this, the State of Wu had sent the general Zhuge Ke to stay in Handan. The border towns suffered greatly from this, and Emperor Xuan wanted to personally attack Zhuge Ke.

古文：议者多以贼据坚城，积谷，欲引致官兵，今悬军远攻，其救必至，进退不易，未见其便。
现代文：朝中议者大多认为敌据守着坚固之城，屯积了粮食，就是想把官军引诱来。现在孤军去远攻，他们的救兵一定会赶来，我军进退很难，不能战胜。
English: Most of the members of the Central Committee of the Korean People's Army believed that the enemy was defending a strong city and had stockpiled grain in order to lure the government army. If a lone army went to attack far away, their rescuers would certainly arrive. Our army would have a hard time advancing and retreating and could not be defeated.

古文：帝曰： 贼之所长者水也，今攻其城，以观其变。
现代文：宣帝说： 敌所擅长的是水战，现在攻打他们的城池，以此来观察其变化。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "The enemy is good at naval warfare, and now we are attacking their cities to observe their changes.

古文：若用其所长，弃城奔走，此为庙胜也。
现代文：如果发挥他们的长处，弃城逃跑，这正是朝廷取胜之计。
English: If they play to their strengths and abandon the city and flee, this is exactly the way for the imperial court to win.

古文：若敢固守，湖水冬浅，船不得行，势必弃水相救，由其所短，亦吾利也。 
现代文：如果敌敢固守，湖水冬天浅，船无法行驶，势必会放弃水战而自救，这是他们的短处，也对我们有利。 
English: If the enemy dares to hold out, the lake water is shallow in winter, and the ship cannot sail, they are bound to give up the water battle and save themselves. This is their shortcoming, but it is also to our advantage.

古文：四年秋九月，帝督诸军击诸葛恪，车驾送出津阳门。
现代文：四年秋九月，宣帝督领各路人马进击诸葛恪，天子送出津阳门。
English: In the autumn and September of the fourth year, Emperor Xuan led all the people and horses to attack Zhuge Ke, and Tianzi sent out the Tsuyang Gate.

古文：军次于舒，恪焚烧积聚，弃城而遁。
现代文：军队到舒，诸葛恪焚烧了积蓄的财物，弃城逃跑。
English: When the army arrived in Shu, Zhuge burned his accumulated wealth, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：帝以灭贼之耍，在于积谷，乃大兴屯守，广开淮阳、百尺二渠，又修诸陂于颍之南北，万余顷。
现代文：宣帝认为消灭敌人的关键，在于积蓄粮食，于是大规模屯田，拓宽了淮阳、百尺两条水渠，又修整了颖水南北的坡地，有一万多顷。
English: Emperor Xuan believed that the key to eliminating the enemy was to accumulate grain, so he built large-scale farmlands, widened Huaiyang and two hundred-foot canals, and repaired the north-south slope of Yingshui, more than 10,000 hectares.

古文：自是淮北仓庾相望，寿阳至于京师，农官屯兵连属焉。
现代文：从此，淮北地区到处有粮仓，从寿阳到京城，农官和屯田的军队连接。
English: From then on, there were grain silos everywhere in the Huaibei region, from Shouyang to Beijing, connecting the agricultural officials and the military in the rural areas.

古文：五年春正月，帝至自淮南，天子使持节劳军。
现代文：五年春正月，宣帝从淮南回到京城，天子派人持符节慰劳大军。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Emperor Xuan returned to Beijing from Huainan, and the Son of Heaven sent an army of soldiers to comfort the laborers.

古文：尚书邓扬、李胜等欲令曹爽建立功名，劝使伐蜀。
现代文：尚书邓飏、李胜等人想让曹爽建立功名，劝他去讨伐蜀国。
English: Shangshu, Deng Wei, Li Sheng and others wanted Cao Shuang to build up his reputation and advised him to invade Shu.

古文：帝止之，不可，爽果无功而还。
现代文：宣帝劝阻他，不听从，曹爽果然无功而返。
English: Emperor Xuan dissuaded him, but he did not listen, and Cao Shuang returned without success.

古文：六年秋八月，曹爽毁中垒中坚营，以兵属其弟中领军羲，帝以先帝旧制禁之不可。
现代文：六年秋八月，曹爽取消了中垒中坚营，把兵力归属弟弟中领军曹羲。宣帝认为这是先帝旧有的军制而制止他，未成功。
English: In the autumn and August of the sixth year, Cao Shuang cancelled the middle stronghold and assigned the troops to his brother, the middle leader Cao Pi. Emperor Xuan considered this to be the old military system of the former emperor and tried to stop him, without success.

古文：冬十二月，天子诏帝朝会乘舆升殿。
现代文：冬十二月，天子下韶书命令宣帝朝见时可以乘舆上殿。
English: In the winter of December, Emperor Taishi issued an imperial edict ordering Emperor Xuan to use Myo to go up to the palace when meeting the emperor.

古文：七年春正月，吴寇柤中，夷夏万余家避寇北渡沔。
现代文：七年春正月，吴军进犯祖中，内地各族居民万余家为避敌北渡沔水。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the Wu army invaded the Zu, and more than 10,000 residents of all ethnic groups in the mainland went to the north to avoid the enemy.

古文：帝以沔南近贼，若百姓奔还，必复致寇，宜权留之。
现代文：宣帝认为沔南近敌，如果百姓跑回去，一定还会招致敌祸，应该暂且把百姓留住。
English: Emperor Xuan believed that southern Fujian was close to the enemy, and if the people ran back, they would surely bring disaster to the enemy, so it was necessary to temporarily keep the people back.

古文：曹爽曰： 今不能修守沔南而留百姓，非长策也。 
现代文：曹爽说： 现在不能很好地守卫沔水以南地区而把百姓留住，不是长远之计。 
English: Cao Shuang said: It is not a long-term plan to keep the people by failing to guard the areas south of Surabaya.

古文：帝曰： 不然。
现代文：宣帝说： 不对。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "That's not right."

古文：凡物致之安地则安。危地则危。
现代文：大凡事物放在安全的地方就安全，放在危险的地方就危险。
English: If you put ordinary things in a safe place, they will be safe, but if you put them in a dangerous place, they will be dangerous.

古文：故兵书曰 成败，形也；安危，势也 。
现代文：所以兵书上说 成和败，在于形；安与危，在于势 。
English: Therefore, it is said in the military manual that success and defeat lie in the form; safety and danger lie in the situation.

古文：形势，御众之要，不可以不审。
现代文：形与势，是驾御众人的纲，不可以不认真对待。
English: Form and potential are the guiding principles for everyone, and must be taken seriously.

古文：设令贼以二万人断沔水，三万人与沔南诸军相持，万人陆梁柤中，将何以救之？ 
现代文：假如让敌人用二万兵力截断了沔水，用三万兵力与沔水以南的各路兵马相对峙，一万兵力在相中横行，将用什么办法解救呢? 
English: If we allow the enemy to cut off Surabaya with 20,000 troops, use 30,000 troops to confront soldiers and horses from all directions south of Surabaya, and 10,000 troops to run amok in the phase, what will be the means of rescue?

古文：爽不从，卒令还南。
现代文：曹爽不同意这个意见，最终还是命百姓返回南边。
English: Cao Shuang disagreed with this opinion and eventually ordered the people to return to the south.

古文：贼果袭破柤中，所失万计。
现代文：敌军果然袭击并攻占了祖中，损失以万计。
English: The enemy attacked and captured Zu Zhong, with tens of thousands of casualties.

古文：八年夏四月，夫人张氏薨。
现代文：八年夏四月，夫人张氏去世。
English: In April of the summer of the eighth year, Mrs. Zhang passed away.

古文：曹爽用何晏、邓扬、丁谧之谋，迁太后于永宁宫，专擅朝政，兄弟并典禁兵，多树亲党，屡改制度。
现代文：萱塞用包昙、塑艳、工箠的计谋，把太后迁到丞壑宣，把持朝政，兄弟几人都掌管禁兵，安置了许多亲信党羽，多次修改制度。
English: Using stratagems of entrapment, plasticity, and manipulation, Yu Xie transferred the empress dowager to Zhao Xuanxuan and took control of the imperial government. Several brothers were in charge of the forbidden soldiers, installed many trusted party members, and revised the system many times.

古文：帝不能禁，于是与爽有隙。
现代文：宣帝无法禁止，于是和曹爽之间产生了矛盾。
English: Xuan Di could not be banned, so a conflict arose between him and Cao Shuang.

古文：五月，帝称疾不与政事。
现代文：五月，宣帝称病不再参与朝政大事。
English: In May, Emperor Xuan announced that he was no longer able to participate in the important affairs of state due to his illness.

古文：时人为之谣曰： 何、邓、丁，乱京城。 
现代文：当时有人编了一首歌谣说： 何、邓、丁，祸乱京城。 
English: At that time, someone made up a folk song saying: Ho, Deng, Ding,祸乱京城.

古文：九年春三月，黄门张当私出掖庭才人石英等十一人，与曹爽为伎人。
现代文：九年春三月，黄门张当私自放出掖庭后宫才人互墓等十一人，送给堕塞充当歌女。
English: In the spring and March of the ninth year, Huangmen Zhang Dangzhi voluntarily released eleven people from the court's harem to the tomb, and gave them to the deceased to act as a song girl.

古文：爽、晏谓帝疾笃，遂有无君之心，与当密谋，图危社稷，期有日矣。
现代文：萱塞、鱼昙认为宣帝病得很厉害，于是就产生了废除君主的想法，与堡赏密谋，企图篡夺皇位，已经计划好时间。
English: Yu Xie and Yu Yao thought that Emperor Xuan was very ill, so they came up with the idea of abolishing the monarch, conspired with Fortunato, attempted to usurp the throne, and planned the time.

古文：帝亦潜为之备，爽之徒属亦颇疑帝。
现代文：宣壹也在秘密作准备，曹爽的部属也很疑心宣帝。
English: Xuan I was also secretly making preparations, and Cao Shuang's subordinates were also suspicious of Xuan Di.

古文：会河南尹李胜将莅荆州，来候帝。
现代文：恰逢迎尘尹奎蹬将去型业，前来看望宣帝。
English: It just so happened that Yin Kuijun was leaving the modeling industry and came to visit Emperor Xuan.

古文：帝诈疾笃，使两婢侍，持衣衣落，指口言渴，婢进粥，帝不持杯饮，粥皆流出霑胸。
现代文：宣帝假称病得很重，让两个使女侍候，拿衣服衣服掉地，指着嘴说口渴，使女捧上粥，宣帝不自己拿着碗喝，粥都流出洒在胸上。
English: Emperor Xuan pretended to be very ill and had two maids wait on him. He took off his clothes and fell to the ground. He pointed to his mouth and said that he was thirsty. The maids served him porridge, but Emperor Xuan did not take the bowl and drink it himself. The porridge ran out and spilled on his chest.

古文：胜曰： 众情谓明公旧风发动，何意尊体乃尔！ 
现代文：李胜说： 大家认为明公旧病发作，没想到身体竟是这样！ 
English: Li Sheng said: Everyone thought that Ming Gong had an attack of an old disease, but I didn't expect my body to be like this!

古文：帝使声气才属，说 年老枕疾，死在旦夕。
现代文：宣帝故意上气不接下气，用微弱的声音说： 年老卧病，死在旦夕。
English: Xuan Di deliberately held his breath, and said in a weak voice: "I am old and sick, and I will die soon."

古文：君当屈并州，并州近胡，善为之备。
现代文：你将要去并州，并州靠近胡人，要很好地戒备。
English: You're going to the Andes, and the Andes are close to the Hu people, so be on your guard.

古文：恐不复相见，以子师、昭兄弟为托。 
现代文：恐怕不能再见面了，把儿子司马师、司马昭两兄弟托付给你。 
English: I'm afraid we won't see each other again, so I'm entrusting you with my son Sima Shi and Sima Zhao's two brothers.

古文：胜曰： 当还忝本州，非并州。 
现代文：奎坠说： 我是要到本州任职，并不是并州。 
English: "I want to serve my state, not annex it," Mr. Kuijper said.

古文：帝乃错乱其辞曰： 君方到并州。 
现代文：宣帝故意把话搞乱了说： 你是刚到并州。 
English: Xuan Di deliberately confused the words and said: You have just arrived in Bianzhou.

古文：胜复曰： 当忝荆州。 
现代文：李胜又说： 是到荆州。 
English: Li Sheng also said: It is to Jingzhou.

古文：帝曰： 年老意荒，不解君言。
现代文：宣帝说： 年纪已老，昏愤荒谬，没明白你的话。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "I'm old, I'm irritable, and I don't understand what you're saying.

古文：今还为本州，盛德壮烈，好建功勋！ 
现代文：现在还是到本州来，德高年壮，正好建立功勋! 
English: It's still time to come to Honshu, be virtuous, and build up your merits!

古文：胜退告爽曰： 司马公尸居余气，形神已离，不足虑矣。 
现代文：李胜回去后告诉曹爽说： 司马公将死仅剩一口气，形与神已经分离，不值得担心了。 
English: After Li Sheng returned, he told Cao Shuang: Sima Gong will die with only one breath left, the form and the god have been separated, it is not worth worrying about.

古文：他日，又言曰： 太傅不可复济，令人怆然。 
现代文：过了几天，又说道： 太傅不可能再发挥什么作用了，令人伤感。 
English: A few days later, he added: "It's sad that Taifu can no longer play any role.

古文：故爽等不复设备。
现代文：因此曹爽等人不再防范戒备。
English: Therefore, Cao Shuang and others are no longer on the alert.

古文：嘉平元年春正月甲午，天子谒高平陵，爽兄弟皆从。
现代文：嘉平元年春正月甲午，天子谒祭高平陵，曹爽兄弟都跟从前往。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jiaping, Cao Shuang and his brothers went to Gaoping Mausoleum for the Tianzi Gong Festival.

古文：是日，太白袭月。
现代文：当天，太白金星遮住了月亮。
English: On the same day, a too-white Venus occluded the moon.

古文：帝于是奏永宁太后，废爽兄弟。
现代文：宣帝于是上奏永宁太后罢废曹爽兄弟。
English: Emperor Xuan then appealed to Empress Dowager Yongning to abandon Cao Shuang's brothers.

古文：时景帝为中护军，将兵屯司马门。
现代文：当时景帝任中护军，率领兵马屯兵司马门。
English: At that time, Emperor Jing was in charge of the Middle Protection Force, led by Sima Men.

古文：帝列阵阙下，经爽门。
现代文：宣帝在城阙下列阵，经过曹爽的门前。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan marched down the battlements and passed in front of Cao Shuang's gate.

古文：爽帐下督严世上楼，引弩将射帝，孙谦止之曰： 事未可知。 
现代文：曹爽的帐下督严世登上城楼，拉开弓箭准备射宣帝，孙谦阻止他说： 事情还没全明白。 
English: Cao Shuang's subordinate, Governor Yan Shih, went up to the city tower and drew his bow and arrow ready to shoot Emperor Xuan. Sun Qian stopped him and said, "We still don't understand everything.

古文：三注三止，皆引其肘不得发。
现代文：三次搭箭三次被阻止，每次都是拉着他的胳膊使他无法射箭。
English: Three times he was prevented from taking up archery, and each time his arm was pulled to prevent him from shooting.

古文：大司农桓范出赴爽，蒋济言于帝曰： 智囊往矣。 
现代文：大司农桓范出城投奔曹爽，蒋济对宣帝说： 智囊去了。 
English: Chief Secretary Nong Huan Fan left the city to join Cao Shuang. Jiang Ji said to Emperor Xuan, "The brain is gone."

古文：帝曰： 爽与范内疏而智不及，驽马恋栈豆，必不能用也。 
现代文：宣帝说： 曹爽舆桓范内心粗疏而智谋又不够，笨拙的马贪恋马房中的豆料，他一定不会重用桓箠。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Cao Shuangming Huanfan's heart is coarse and his wisdom is not enough. The clumsy horse is greedy for the beans in the stable. He will definitely not reuse the cane.

古文：于是假司徒高柔节，行大将军事，领爽营，谓柔曰： 君为周勃矣。 
现代文：于是给司徒直至符节，行使大将军的职权，接管茎爽的部队，对高柔说： 你就是周勃了。 
English: So he gave him until the day of the festival to exercise the authority of the general and take over the troops of the stem, and said to Gao Rong: You are Zhou Bo.

古文：命太仆王观行中领军，摄羲营。
现代文：命令太仆王观任中领军，接管曹羲的部队。
English: He ordered his manservant Wang Guan to take charge of Cao Pi's troops.

古文：帝亲帅太尉蒋济等勒兵出迎天子，屯于洛水浮桥，上奏曰： 先帝诏陛下、秦王及臣升于御床，握臣臂曰 深以后事为念 。
现代文：宣帝亲自率领太尉蒋济等领兵出来迎接天子，屯军洛水浮桥上，上奏说： 先帝诏令陛下、秦王和我来到御床前，握着我的手说： 深为后事担忧。 
English: Emperor Xuan personally led the leading soldiers such as Lieutenant Jiang Ji to come out to meet the heavenly son. On the pontoon bridge of Luoshui, he said: The previous emperor ordered His Majesty, King Qin and I to come to the imperial bed, shook my hand and said: I am deeply worried about the future.

古文：今大将军爽背弃顾命，败乱国典，内则僭拟，外专威权。
现代文：现在大将军曹爽背弃了先帝临终之命，败乱了国家的典章制度，内则僭越妄为，外则专权跋扈。
English: Now, the great general Cao Shuang has reneged on the deathbed promise of the former emperor and disrupted the country's medal system. On the one hand, he is arrogant and arrogant, and on the other hand, he is authoritarian.

古文：群官耍职，皆置所亲；宿卫旧人，并见斥黜。
现代文：各种官职要位，都安排了他的亲信；皇帝旧有的禁军宿卫，也遭到驱逐废弃。
English: His cronies were placed in all important official positions; the emperor's former imperial guards were also expelled and abandoned.

古文：根据盘牙，纵恣日甚。
现代文：他们盘根错节互相勾结，一天比一天为所欲为。
English: They are intertwined and collude with each other, and day by day they do whatever they want.

古文：又以黄门张当为都监，专共交关，伺候神器。
现代文：又以宦官张当为都监，专门用于勾结串通，窥伺国家权力。
English: Zhang Dang, a eunuch, was appointed as the city supervisor, specifically for colluding and spying on state power.

古文：天下汹汹，人怀危惧。
现代文：天下动荡不安，人人自危。
English: The world is in turmoil, and everyone is at risk.

古文：陛下便为寄坐，岂得久安？
现代文：陛下居于客位，怎么能长治久安呢?
English: How can His Majesty reign long and prosper when he is in the guest seat?

古文：此非先帝诏陛下及臣升御床之本意也。
现代文：这不是先帝韶令陛下和我到御床前的本意。
English: This was not the intention of the Emperor when he ordered His Majesty and I to come to his bedside.

古文：臣虽朽迈，敢忘前言。
现代文：我虽年老体弱，不敢忘记先帝遗言。
English: Although I am old and weak, I dare not forget the last words of the former emperor.

古文：昔赵高极意，秦是以亡；吕霍早断，汉祚永延。
现代文：从前赵产恣意横行，台厘因此而亡；旦筮和霍旦还两位皇后的行为早受禁止，汉就得到长久延续。
English: Once upon a time, Zhao Zang acted arbitrarily, and Tai Li died as a result; the behavior of the two queens, Dang Xuan and Horan, was banned long ago, and the Han Dynasty continued for a long time.

古文：此乃陛下之殷鉴，臣授命之秋也。
现代文：这就是陛下可以借鉴的前朝之事，也是我拼命效忠的时机。
English: This is the precedent His Majesty can learn from, and it is also the time for me to be fiercely loyal.

古文：公卿群臣皆以爽有无君之心，兄弟不宜典兵宿卫；奏皇太后，皇太后敕如奏施行。
现代文：公卿群臣都认为曹爽有摒弃君主之心，兄弟不宜领兵守卫宫禁；上奏皇太后，皇太后下令按奏行事。
English: The court nobles and courtiers all believed that Cao Shuang had abandoned the heart of the monarch, and that brothers should not lead soldiers to guard the palace ban; the Queen Mother was summoned, and the Queen Mother ordered to act accordingly.

古文：臣辄敕主者及黄门令罢爽、羲，训吏兵各以本官侯就第，若稽留车驾，以军法从事。
现代文：我即令主管人和黄门解除了曹爽、曹薹、萱剀的兵权，各人以原任官职免职回家。如果扣留天子，按军法处治。
English: I immediately ordered the person in charge and Huangmen to relieve Cao Shuang, Cao Yao and Yao Zhuo of their military powers, and each of them was dismissed from his post and sent home. If Tianzi is detained, he will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：臣辄力疾将兵诣洛水浮桥，伺察非常。 
现代文：我全力迅速领兵到洛丞浮桥，侦察异常情况。 
English: I did my best to quickly lead the soldiers to the Luocheng pontoon to investigate the abnormal situation.

古文：爽不通奏，留车驾宿伊水南，伐树为鹿角，发屯兵数千人以守。
现代文：曹爽不通报宣帝的奏书，扣留天子停宿在伊水以南，砍伐树木充当鹿角阻挡通道，征发屯田之兵几千人守卫。
English: Cao Shuang did not notify Emperor Xuan's report, detained Tianzi and stopped in the south of Yishui, cut down trees to act as antlers to block the passage, and conscripted several thousand soldiers from the Tonden to guard.

古文：桓范果劝爽奉天子幸许昌，移檄征天下兵。
现代文：桓范果然劝说萱垂让天子到并旦，移文征调全国兵马。
English: Kanfan was able to persuade Shidare to let Tenshi come to Byotan, and the transfer of documents to conscript soldiers and horses from all over the country.

古文：爽不能用，而夜遣侍中许允、尚书陈泰诣帝，观望风旨。
现代文：萱塞没有采纳，却趁夜派遣侍中许允、尚书陈泰到宣帝这裹，观察宣帝的动向。
English: Xie Xie did not accept, but took advantage of the night to send the attendants Xu Yun and Shangshu Chen Tai to Xuan Di to observe the movement of Xuan Di.

古文：帝数其过失，事止免官。
现代文：宣帝数说他的过失，处罚限于免去官职。
English: Xuan Dicai said that his fault, the punishment is limited to removal from office.

古文：泰还以报爽劝之通奏。
现代文：陈泰返回报告曹爽，劝他通报奏书。
English: Chen Tai returned the report to Cao Shuang and advised him to report the report.

古文：帝又遣爽所信殿中校尉尹大目谕爽，指洛水为誓，爽意信之。
现代文：宣帝又派萱塞所信任的殿中校尉尹左旦向他讲明，指荡丞发誓，萱塞信任宣帝。
English: Emperor Xuanxi also sent the palace lieutenant colonel Yin Zuotan, who was trusted by Xuanxie, to explain to him and swear that Xuanxie trusted Emperor Xuanxi.

古文：桓范等援引古今，谏说万端，终不能从。乃曰： 司马公正当欲夺吾权耳。
现代文：担箠等人援引古今事例，百般劝说。曹爽最终也没有听从，说： 塱昼公不过是想剥夺我的权力罢了。
English: Citing examples from ancient times to the present, Danzhao and others tried all kinds of persuasion. Cao Shuang ultimately did not listen, saying: "The Duke of Liao only wanted to deprive me of my power."

古文：吾得以侯还第，不失为富家翁。 
现代文：我得以侯爵辞官回家，仍不失为富家翁。 
English: I was able to return home a marquis and still a rich man.

古文：范拊膺曰： 坐卿。灭吾族矣！ 
现代文：但笆捶着胸说道： 受君连累，我要被灭族了! 
English: But he said, clutching his chest, "I've been implicated by you, I'm going to be exterminated!"

古文：遂通帝奏。既而有司劾黄门张当，并发爽与何晏等反事，乃收爽兄弟及其党与何晏、丁谧、邓扬、毕轨、李胜、桓范等诛之。
现代文：于是通报了宣帝的奏书，接着主管部门弹劾宦官张赏，并揭发了萱塞和鱼垒等人图谋造反之事，于是逮捕了苴枣兄弟及其党徒皿垩、卫厘、盗昙、里轨、奎媵、但箍全部处死。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuan's report was announced, and then the competent authorities impeached the eunuch Zhang Bao, and exposed the fact that the prevaricator and the fisherman and others were plotting to rebel, so they arrested the brothers and their party members, and executed them all.

古文：蒋济曰： 曹真之勋，不可以不祀。 
现代文：蓝擅说： 萱真的功勋，不能不祭祀。 
English: Lan Shuxuan said, "You can't but worship Zou Zhen's real merits.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：宣帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：初，爽司马鲁芝、主簿杨综斩关奔爽。及爽之将归罪也，芝、综泣谏曰： 公居伊周之任，挟天子，杖天威，孰敢不从？
现代文：起初，苴塞的司马叠芝、主簿荡表斩杀守关之兵投奔萱玺，等到萱垄准备自首认罪时，鲁茎、扰壁哭着劝谏说： 公居于伊尹、周公的地位，扶持天子，依仗天威，谁敢不服从?
English: At first, the prevaricating Sima Yuanzhi and the master of the book of records rushed to Yancheng to kill the soldiers guarding the pass. When Yancheng was ready to surrender, Lu Zhu and Zhai Wei cried and persuaded Yancheng to say: Publicly live in the status of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, support the son of heaven, rely on the will of heaven, who dares to disobey?

古文：舍此而欲就东市，岂不痛哉！ 
现代文：扔掉这些而想主动走向刑场，怎能不让人痛心! 
English: How can it not be heartbreaking to throw these away and want to go to the execution site on your own initiative?

古文：有司奏收芝、综科罪，帝赦之，曰： 以劝事君者。 
现代文：官吏奏请逮捕叠艺、荡签判罪，宣壹赦免了他们，说： 以此来鼓励效忠君主之人。 
English: The officials petitioned for the arrest and sentencing of the stampers, and Xuan Yi pardoned them, saying, "This is to encourage those who are loyal to the monarch."

古文：二月，天子以帝为丞相，增封颍川之繁昌、鄢陵、新汲、父城，并前八县，邑二万户，奏事不名。
现代文：二月，天子任宣帝为丞相，增加颉川的繁旦、画蜒、墓球为封邑，连同以前封的共有八个县，二万户，上奏时不用自报姓名。
English: In February, Emperor Taishi appointed Emperor Xuan as chancellor, and increased the fiefs of Fuchuan to include Fudan, Gaiming, and Tomb Ball. Together with the previous fiefs, there were a total of eight counties and 20,000 households, and there was no need to report the names of the fiefs.

古文：固让丞相。
现代文：宣帝坚决推辞丞相之职。
English: Emperor Xuan Di resolutely resigned from the post of chancellor.

古文：冬十二月，加九锡之礼，朝会不拜。
现代文：冬十二月，又加九锡的礼遇，朝会时可以不拜。
English: In winter and December, the courtesy of Jiuxi is also added, and it is possible not to bow when meeting the emperor.

古文：固让九锡。
现代文：宣帝坚决推辞九锡。
English: Emperor Xuan firmly rejected Jiu Xi.

古文：二年春正月，天子命帝立庙于洛阳，置左右长史，增掾属、舍人满十人，岁举掾属任御史、秀才各一人，增官骑百人，鼓吹十四人，封子肜平乐亭侯，伦安乐亭侯。
现代文：二年春正月，天子命宣帝在洛阳建立宗庙，设左右长史，增加了官属、舍人满十人，每年从官属中推举一人任御史，一人为秀才，增加官骑一百人，吹鼓手十四人，封其子司马肜为平乐亭堡，亘屋俭为室銮台堡。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, Emperor Tianzi proclaimed the establishment of a family temple in Luoyang, set up a left and right long history, increased the number of officials and subordinates to ten, annually selected one person from the officials and subordinates to be the official historian, one person to be an outstanding talent, increased the number of officials and horsemen to one hundred, and the number of trumpeters to fourteen, and made his son Sima Qian the fortress of Pingle Pavilion, and Wuya Qian the fortress of Murodai.

古文：帝以久疾不任朝请，每有大事，天子亲幸第以谘访焉。
现代文：宣帝因为长久患病不能上朝奏请，每有大事，天子亲自到宣帝住宅来询问。
English: Emperor Xuan was unable to attend the morning recital due to a long-term illness. Whenever there was an important event, the Heavenly Son personally went to Emperor Xuan's residence to inquire.

古文：兗州刺史令狐愚、太尉王凌贰于帝，谋立楚王彪。
现代文：兖州刺史令狐愚、太尉王棱对宣帝怀有二心，阴谋立楚王曹彪为天子。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi ordered Gu Gu and Lieutenant Wang Ren to have two minds about Emperor Xuan, and conspired to set up King Chu Cao Biao as the Son of Heaven.

古文：三年春正月，王凌诈言吴人塞涂水，请发兵以讨之。
现代文：三年春正月，王浚谎报吴国人堵塞了涂水，请求派遣军队去征讨。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Wang Jun falsely reported that the people of Wu had blocked the water supply, and requested that troops be sent to collect water.

古文：帝潜知其计，不听。
现代文：宣帝暗中知道他的阴谋，没有答应。
English: Emperor Xuan secretly knew of his plot and did not agree.

古文：夏四月，帝自帅中军，泛舟沿流，九日而到甘城。
现代文：夏四月，宣帝亲自统率中军，乘船沿水前进，九天就到了甘城。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Xuan personally led the Chinese army, marched along the water by boat, and arrived in Gancheng in nine days.

古文：凌计无所出，乃迎于武丘，面缚水次，曰： 凌若有罪，公当折简召凌，何苦自来邪！ 
现代文：王浚没有办法，于是到武丘迎接，自缚于水旁，说： 王浚如果有罪，您当折简为信召唤我，何苦要亲自来呢! 
English: Wang Jun had no choice, so he went to Wuqiu to meet him, tied himself to the water, and said: "If Wang Jun is guilty, you should call me by letter, why do you have to come in person!

古文：帝曰： 以君非折简之客故耳。 
现代文：宣帝说： 因为你不是可以折简为信之人呀。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Because you are not someone who can be reduced to a letter.

古文：即以凌归于京师。
现代文：就带着王浚一起回到京城。
English: He took Wang Jun with him back to Beijing.

古文：道经贾逵庙，凌呼曰： 贾梁道！
现代文：途中经过买逵庙，王浚大叫道： 买梁道!
English: On the way, Wang Jun shouted: "Kai Liang Road!

古文：王凌是大魏之忠臣，惟尔有神知之。 
现代文：王浚是大魏的忠臣，衹有神灵明白这一点。 
English: Wang Jun was a loyal vassal of the Great Wei Dynasty. No deity understands this.

古文：至项，仰鸩而死。
现代文：到了项，服毒而死。
English: At the end of the period, he took poison and died.

古文：收其余党，皆夷三族，并杀彪。
现代文：逮捕了他的余党，全都杀三族，并斩杀了曹彪。
English: They arrested the rest of his party, killed all three ethnic groups, and killed Cao Biao.

古文：悉录魏诸王公置于鄴，命有司监察，不得交关。
现代文：把魏室的各位王公全都集中在邺，命有关部门看管，不能随便串通往来。
English: The princes of the Wei dynasty were all concentrated in Shao, and the relevant departments were ordered to take care of them, and they could not casually come and go.

古文：天子遣侍中韦诞持节劳军于五池。
现代文：天子派遣侍中韦诞持符节在五池慰劳大军。
English: The Son of Heaven dispatched an army of attendants to celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival in Wuchi.

古文：帝至自甘城，天子又使兼大鸿胪、太仆庾嶷持节，策命帝为相国，封安平郡公，孙及兄子各一人为列侯，前后食邑五万户，侯者十九人。
现代文：宣帝从甘城到达之后，天子又命兼大鸿胪、太仆庾嶷手持符节，策命宣帝为相国，封安平郡公，孙子和哥哥的儿子各一人封为列侯，前后封邑五万户，族中为侯的有十九人。
English: After Emperor Xuancheng arrived from Gancheng, Tianzi also ordered Da Hongzhu and Taibo Zhao to hold the rune festival, and ordered Emperor Xuancheng to be the father of the country, to be the Anping County governor, and to have one grandson and one elder brother's son each to be vassals, and to have fifty thousand households in the surrounding vassal towns, with nineteen vassals as vassals.

古文：固让相国、郡公不受。
现代文：宣帝坚决辞退了相国和郡公没有接受。
English: Emperor Xuan firmly declined the offer and the county magistrate did not accept it.

古文：六月，帝寝疾，梦贾逵、王凌为祟，甚恶之。
现代文：六月，宣帝卧病不起，梦见买逵、王浚为祟作怪，非常厌恶。
English: In June, Emperor Xuan was bedridden due to illness. He dreamt of buying a plough and of Wang Jun as a bogeyman, which disgusted him very much.

古文：秋八月戊寅，崩于京师，时年七十三。
现代文：秋八月戊寅，在京师去世，当年七十三岁。
English: Autumn August, Wu Yin, died in Beijing, aged seventy-three.

古文：天子素服临吊，丧葬威仪依汉霍光故事，追赠相国、郡公。
现代文：天子身穿素服亲临吊唁，丧葬的规格仿照汉霍光的旧制，追赠为相国、郡公。
English: The heavenly son, dressed in plain clothes, came in person to offer condolences, and the funeral specifications were modeled on the old system of Han Huoguang. He was posthumously awarded the title of fatherland and county magistrate.

古文：弟孚表陈先志，辞郡公及韫辌车。
现代文：其弟司马孚上表陈述宣帝生前的意愿，推辞掉郡公和韫椋车。
English: His younger brother, Sima Fu, made a written statement of Emperor Xuan's wishes during his lifetime, refusing to be a county magistrate and to drive a carriage.

古文：九月庚申，葬于河阴，谥曰文贞，后改谥文宣。
现代文：九月庚申，葬在河阴，谧号文，后来又改为宣塞。
English: In September, Goshun, buried in Heyin, was given a posthumous name, which was later changed to Xuanjie.

古文：先是，预作终制，于首阳山为土藏，不坟不树；作顾命三篇，敛以时服，不设明器，后终者不得合葬。
现代文：在此之前，宣壶预先嘱咐了后事，要在苴阳山土葬，不起坟，不树碑；作《顾命》三篇，用当时的服装装殓，不设随葬品，后死的人不能合葬。
English: Prior to this, Xuan Jiu had ordered in advance the follow-up, to be buried in the Poyang Mountain, without a grave, without a monument; to write "Gu Mu" three times, decorated with the clothing of the time, without funeral goods, and those who died later could not be buried together.

古文：一如遗命。
现代文：一切都依照他的遣命。
English: Everything is in accordance with his mission.

古文：晋国初建，追尊曰宣王。
现代文：晋国刚建立时，追尊宣帝为宣王。
English: When Jin was first established, Emperor Xuanzong was crowned as King Xuanzang.

古文：武帝受禅，上尊号曰宣皇帝，陵曰高原，庙称高祖。
现代文：主童接受禅让之后，尊称为宣皇帝，陵墓叫作高原，庙号为高祖。
English: After the main child accepted Zen, he was called Emperor Xuan, the mausoleum was called the plateau, and the temple was called Gaozhu.

古文：帝内忌而外宽，猜忌多权变。
现代文：宣壶内心猜忌而外表宽厚，好猜疑而有权术。
English: Xuan Jue is suspicious at heart but kind on the outside, suspicious but powerful.

古文：魏武察帝有雄豪志，闻有狼顾相。欲验之。
现代文：瑟武帝觉察到宣帝有雄心壮志，听说他能像狼一样回头看人，想检验一下。
English: Emperor Siwu sensed that Emperor Xuanzong was ambitious. He had heard that he could look back at people like a wolf, and wanted to check it out.

古文：乃召使前行，令反顾，面正向后而身不动。
现代文：就召来让他向前走，又令他回头看，宣帝脸正面向后而身子却不动。
English: He summoned him to walk forward and made him look back. Emperor Xuan's face was facing backwards, but his body did not move.

古文：又尝梦三马同食一槽，甚恶焉。
现代文：武帝又曾梦见三匹马同在一个马槽吃料，心中十分厌恶。
English: Emperor Wu also had a dream that three horses were eating together in a manger, and he was very disgusted.

古文：因谓太子丕曰： 司马懿非人臣也，必预汝家事。 
现代文：对太子曹丕说： 司马懿不是甘心做人臣的人，一定会干预国家大事。 
English: To Prince Cao Pi, he said: Sima Pi is not a person who is willing to be a vassal, he will certainly intervene in national affairs.

古文：太子素与帝善，每相全佑，故免。
现代文：太子一向与宣帝很好，总是成全保护他，所以能幸免。
English: The prince had always been on good terms with Emperor Xuan, and had always protected him, so he was spared.

古文：帝于是勤于吏职，夜以忘寝，至于刍牧之间，悉皆临履，由是魏武意遂安。
现代文：宣帝于是在职位上十分勤勉，夜以继，下至割草放牧这样的小事，全都亲自过问，因此魏武帝才放心。
English: Emperor Xuan then worked very diligently at his post, night after night, and personally went over every little thing, down to cutting grass and grazing, so Emperor Wei was reassured.

古文：及平公孙文懿，大行杀戮。
现代文：等到平定公孙文懿之时，大肆屠杀。
English: When Sun Yat-sen rose to power, there was a large-scale massacre.

古文：诛曹爽之际，支党皆夷及三族，男女无少长，姑姊妹女子之适人者皆杀之，既而竟迁魏鼎云。
现代文：诛杀曹爽之际，他的党羽都被夷杀三族，不分男女老幼，连已经嫁人的姑姊妹等也全都杀掉，随后终于篡夺了魏的政权。
English: At the time of the assassination of Cao Shuang, his party members were all killed and the three ethnic groups, regardless of men, women, and children, were all killed, even his sister-in-law who had already married, and then finally usurped Wei's power.

古文：明帝时，王导侍坐。
现代文：晋明帝时，王导在旁侍坐。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinming, Wang Du was sitting next to him.

古文：帝问前世所以得天下，导乃陈帝创业之始，用文帝末高贵乡公事。
现代文：明帝问起前世所以取得天下之事，王导就陈述宣帝开始创业之时，以及文帝末年高贵乡公的事情。
English: Emperor Ming asked Wang Du about the reason why he gained the world in his previous life. Wang Du stated the time when Emperor Xuan started his business, as well as the noble hometown in the last years of Emperor Wen.

古文：明帝以面覆床曰： 若如公言，晋祚复安得长远！ 
现代文：明帝把脸贴在床上说： 如果真像你说的那样，晋的天下岂能长远呢! 
English: Emperor Ming put his face to the bed and said, "If it's really like you said, then Jin's reign will not last long!"

古文：迹其猜忍，盖有符于狼顾也。
现代文：分析他的疑忌残忍的原因，大概是符合狼回头看的特性。
English: Analyzing the reasons for his suspicion of cruelty is probably consistent with the wolf's backward-looking nature.

古文：制曰：夫天地之大，黎元为本。邦国之贵，元首为先。
现代文：制曰：天地之大，黎民百姓为本；国家所尊贵的，是国家元首。
English: The system says: Heaven and earth are great, and the people are the foundation; the head of state is the most honorable person in the country.

古文：治乱无常，兴亡有运。
现代文：和平和战乱变幻无常，兴盛衰亡却是有时运的。
English: Peace and war are fickle, but prosperity and decline are not.

古文：是故五帝之上，居万乘以为忧；三王已来，处其忧而为乐。
现代文：所以五帝以上，统治万乘之国而以此为忧；三王以来，身处忧患却以此为乐。
English: Therefore, the Five Emperors and above, who ruled the country of Manjushri, worried about it; since the Three Kings, they have enjoyed it when they are in trouble.

古文：竞智力，争利害，大小相吞，强弱相袭。
现代文：比赛智力，争权夺利，大国小国之间相互吞并，强国弱国之间彼此侵袭。
English: Competition intelligence, competition for power and profit, annexation between big countries and small countries, and invasion between strong countries and weak countries.

古文：逮乎魏室，三方鼎峙，干戈不息，氛雾交飞。
现代文：直至魏时，三国鼎立相峙，战争连年不息，到处一片混乱。
English: Until the Wei Dynasty, the three countries stood face to face, the war continued year after year, and there was chaos everywhere.

古文：宣皇以天挺之姿，应期佐命，文以缵治，武以棱威。
现代文：宣帝以卓越的天姿才能，顺应时运辅佐帝王，文能治政，武能克敌。
English: Emperor Xuan, with his outstanding natural talent, assisted the emperor in accordance with the time, the ability to govern, and the ability to defeat the enemy.

古文：用人如在己，求贤若不及；情深阻而莫测，性宽绰而能容，和光同尘，与时舒卷，戢鳞潜翼，思属风云。
现代文：用人就像用自己，求贤惟恐不及；情感深沉不可测，性格宽厚能容人。随俗而处不露锋芒，顺应时势，屈伸舒缓，敛鳞藏翼蓄志待时，随时关注风云变幻。
English: Employing people is like employing oneself, seeking virtue but not being afraid of it; emotions are deep and unfathomable, and a generous personality can accommodate people. Go with the flow and do not show sharpness everywhere, conform to the current situation, flex and stretch slowly, and keep an eye on changes in the wind and clouds at any time.

古文：饰忠于已诈之心，延安于将危之命。
现代文：把狡诈之心装扮成忠诚的样子，在危难之中求得平安。
English: He disguises his cunning heart as loyalty and seeks peace in the midst of danger.

古文：观其雄略内断，英猷外决，殄公孙于百日，擒孟达于盈旬，自以兵动若神，谋无再计矣。
现代文：雄才大略决断于内，英明策划决断于外，在百日之内消灭了公孙文懿，用十天左右活捉了垂达，自认为用兵如神，计谋无比。
English: Xiong Cai made a rough decision internally, and made a wise plan externally. He eliminated Gongsun Wenyi within 100 days, and captured Treda alive in about 10 days. He thought that using soldiers was like a god, and his stratagem was incomparable.

古文：既而拥众西举，与诸葛相持。
现代文：随后率领大军西讨，舆诸葛亮相持。
English: Subsequently, he led a large army to the West, and Muzhuge showed up.

古文：抑其甲兵，本无斗志，遗其巾帼，方发愤心。
现代文：控制其军队，本不想打仗，诸葛亮送给他女人的服饰，这才下了争斗的决心。
English: Zhuge Liang gave him women's clothing to control his army, but he did not want to fight, so he decided to fight.

古文：杖节当门，雄图顿屈，请战千里，诈欲示威。
现代文：使者持节在门前阻挡，雄心抱负顿时收回，千里之外求战，无非是想显示军威。
English: The envoys hold a festival in front of the door to block, the ambitions are suddenly withdrawn, and the thousands of miles away to fight, is nothing more than to show military power.

古文：且秦蜀之人，勇懦非敌，夷险之路，劳逸不同，以此争功，其利可见。
现代文：况且秦、蜀之地的人，勇猛强悍和胆小怯懦无法相战，道路子坦和险恶、劳苦和安逸各不相同，以此来争功取胜，有利之处很明显。
English: Moreover, the people in the lands of Qin and Shu are unable to fight against the brave and strong and the timid and cowardly, and their paths are different from each other, and they are different from each other, and they are different from each other, and they are different from each other, and they are different from each other, and they are different from each other, and they are different from each other.

古文：而返闭军固垒，莫敢争锋，生怯实而未前，死疑虚而犹遁，良将之道，失在斯乎！
现代文：然而却闭营不出加固工事，不敢出战，活着时因惧怕而不敢前进，死之后怀疑其虚假而退走，优秀将帅的谋略，在此而丧失!
English: However, he did not close the camp for reinforcement work, did not dare to go to war, did not dare to advance when he was alive because of fear, and retreated after his death, suspecting that it was false. The strategy of an excellent general was lost!

古文：文帝之世，辅翼权重，许昌同萧何之委，崇华甚霍光之寄。
现代文：文帝之世，辅佐朝廷而权重，在许昌受到了同当年萧何一样的重托，在崇华殿上得到了超过霍光所得到遇的信赖。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen, he played an important role in supporting the imperial court. In Xu Chang, he was entrusted with the same heavy responsibility as Xiao He in the same year, and he gained more trust than Huo Guang at the Chonghua Palace.

古文：当谓竭诚尽节，伊傅可齐。
现代文：如果竭尽忠诚义节，可与伊尹、傅说齐名。
English: If you exhaust the loyalty festival, you can be on a par with Yi Yin and Fu Sheng.

古文：及明帝将终，栋梁是属，受遗二主，佐命三朝，既承忍死之托，曾无殉生之报。
现代文：及至魏明帝临终之时，把国家大事相嘱托，接受了两位君主的遣诏，辅佐了三代，既然承受了临终前的重托，却没有以身相报。
English: And when Wei Mingdi was on his deathbed, he entrusted the national affairs to the two monarchs, accepted the dispatch of the two monarchs, and assisted the three generations. Since he received the heavy entrustment before his death, he did not repay it in kind.

古文：天子在外，内起甲兵，陵土未乾，遽相诛戮，贞臣之体，宁若此乎！
现代文：天子身在京城之外，而城内兴起战事，君主的墓土未干，立刻就相互诛杀，忠贞大臣的行为，难道如此!
English: The heavenly son is outside the capital, but war breaks out in the city. The monarch's grave soil is not dry, and they immediately fight each other. Is this the behavior of a loyal minister?

古文：尽善之方，以斯为惑。
现代文：尽善尽美的准则，对此疑惑不解。
English: The question of the criterion of perfection is puzzling.

古文：夫征讨之策，岂东智而西愚？
现代文：其征讨的策略，难道不是在束聪明而在西愚蠢?
English: Isn't their strategy of conquest clever in the West, but stupid in the East?

古文：辅佐之心，何前忠而后乱？
现代文：辅佐君主之心，为什么前忠而后叛?
English: The heart of a monarch's aide, why does loyalty come before treachery?

古文：故晋明掩面，耻欺伪以成功；石勒肆言，笑奸回以定业。
现代文：所以晋明帝掩面而听，以其用欺伪诈骗获得成功而感到耻辱；石勒大胆地讲述，嘲笑他用奸诈邪恶的方法奠定了帝业。
English: So Emperor Jinming hid his face and listened, feeling humiliated by his success with deception and fraud; Shi Le boldly recounted, ridiculing him for using treacherous and evil methods to establish an empire.

古文：古人有云： 积善三年，知之者少，为恶一日，闻于天下。 
现代文：古人说过： 积累三年善行，知道的人很少；做了一天坏事，天下都能传遍。 
English: The ancients said: If you accumulate three years of good deeds, few people will know about it; if you do one day of bad deeds, it will spread all over the world.

古文：可不谓然乎！
现代文：不是如此吗!
English: Isn't that the truth!

古文：虽自隐过当年，而终见嗤后代。
现代文：虽然能在当时隐瞒过去，但最终还是在后世受到嗤笑。
English: Although able to conceal the past at the time, it ended up being ridiculed in later generations.

古文：亦犹窃钟掩耳，以众人为不闻；锐意盗金，谓市中为莫睹。
现代文：也就如掩耳盗铃，以为众人听不见；专心致志想偷盗钱财，认为集市之人都看不见。
English: It is like a robber who covers his ears and thinks no one can hear him, or a man intent on stealing money who thinks no one in the market can see him.

古文：故知贪于近者则遗远，溺于利者则伤名；若不损己以益人，则当祸人而福己。
现代文：所以说贪恋于眼前定会丢失掉长远的，沉溺于利一定会损害名声。如果不想损己利人，就一定会损人利己。
English: Therefore, it is said that covetousness in the present will certainly lose the long-term, and indulging in profit will certainly damage the reputation. If you do not want to harm yourself and others, you will certainly harm others and yourself.

古文：顺理而举易为力，背时而动难为功。
现代文：顺应天理而动容易成事，违背时运而动难以成功。
English: It is easy to accomplish things by acting in accordance with the laws of nature, but it is difficult to succeed by acting contrary to the times.

古文：况以未成之晋基，逼有余之魏祚？
现代文：何况以并未完成晋的基业，逼迫尚有余运的魏国。
English: Moreover, he did not complete the foundation of Jin and forced Wei, which still had some luck, to withdraw.

古文：虽复道格区宇，德被苍生，而天未启时，宝位犹阻，非可以智竞，不可以力争，虽则庆流后昆，而身终于北面矣。
现代文：即使是道行感动了四方，恩德遍布于众生，但是上天尚未开启时机，天子宝位还有阻碍，不能用智慧去竞争，不能用强力去夺取，虽然是福泽流传于后代，但自身却一直北面称臣。
English: Even if Taoism has moved the four quarters, and benevolence has spread to all beings, but heaven has not yet opened the opportunity, and there are obstacles to the throne of the Son of Heaven. It is not possible to compete with wisdom, and it is not possible to seize it by force. Although it is a blessing that has been passed down to future generations, it has always been praised by the north.

