古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同四年
现代文：起，止，一共七年。梁武帝大同四年
English: a total of seven years. Emperor Liangwu died in the same year

古文：春，正月，辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月，辛酉朔，发生日食。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the new moon, a solar eclipse.

古文：东魏砀郡获巨象，送鄴。
现代文：东魏的砀郡捕获到一头巨象，将它送往国都邺城。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, a giant elephant was captured in Jixian County and sent to Juxian City, the national capital.

古文：丁卯，大赦，改元元象。
现代文：丁卯，孝静帝下令大赦天下，并把年号改为 元象。 
English: However, Emperor Xiao Jing ordered a general amnesty and changed the era name to Yuan Zhao.

古文：二月，己亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：西魏扶风王元孚去世。
English: West Wei Fu Feng Wang Yuan Fu passed away.

古文：东魏大都督善无贺拔仁攻魏南汾州，刺史韦子粲降之，丞相泰灭子粲之族。
现代文：东魏大都督善无人贺拔仁攻打西魏南汾州，南汾州刺史韦子粲向贺拔仁投降，西魏丞相宇文泰听到这一消息后，屠杀了韦子粲的全部家族。
English: He Bajin, the great governor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, attacked the southern Bozhou of the Western Wei Dynasty, and the southern Bozhou stabbed Wei Zixuan to surrender to He Bajin. After hearing this news, the Western Wei Minister Yu Wentai slaughtered Wei Zixuan's entire family.

古文：东魏大行台侯景等治兵于虎牢，将复河南诸州，魏梁回、韦孝宽、赵继宗皆弃城西归。
现代文：东魏大行台侯景等人在虎牢整顿部队，准备收复黄河以南的各州，看到势头不对，西魏的梁迥、韦孝宽、赵继宗都放弃他们所守的城跑回西部地区。
English: The Eastern Wei general Tai Houjing and others were working hard to reorganize the troops and prepare to recover the states south of the Yellow River. Seeing that the momentum was not right, the Western Wei Liang Jun, Wei Xiaokuan, and Zhao Jizong all abandoned the city they were defending and ran back to the western region.

古文：侯景攻广州，数旬，未拔，闻魏救兵将至，集诸将议之，行洛州事卢勇请进观形势。乃帅百骑至大隗山，遇魏师。
现代文：侯景攻打广州，没有取得成功，他听说西魏的救兵将要赶到，就召集全体将领一道商议对策。兼管洛州事务的卢勇请求去前方观察形势，在征得侯景同意后，他便带领一百名骑兵来到大隗山，在这里，他们遇上了西魏的部队。
English: Hou Jing attacked Guangzhou, but was not successful. He heard that the West Wei relief troops were about to arrive, so he called all the generals together to discuss a countermeasure. Lu Yong, who was also in charge of the affairs of Luozhou, asked to go to the front to observe the situation. After obtaining Hou Jing's consent, he led a hundred cavalrymen to Dafu Mountain, where they met the West Wei troops.

古文：日已暮，勇多置幡旗于树颠；夜，分骑为十队，鸣角直前，擒魏仪同三司程华，斩仪同三司王征蛮而还。
现代文：当时已是黄昏时刻，卢勇叫人在树木的顶端插上许多旗帜，表示兵力很多，等到夜里，他把手下的骑兵分成十队，大家吹着号角直向前冲去，抓获了西魏的仪同三司程华，杀死了仪同三司王征蛮，然后返回。
English: At that time, it was already dusk. Lu Yong ordered people to plant a lot of flags at the top of the trees, indicating a lot of troops. In the night, he divided his cavalry into ten teams. Everyone rushed forward with a horn, captured the West Wei's Yi Tong and Cheng Hua, and killed the Yi Tong and Wang Zheman, and then returned.

古文：广州守将骆超遂以城降东魏，丞相欢以勇行广州事。
现代文：广州的守将骆超于是打开城门向东魏投降，东魏的丞相高欢下令让卢勇再兼管广州的事务。
English: Luo Chao, the warden of Guangzhou, then opened the city gate and surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, ordered Lu Yong to take charge of the affairs of Guangzhou.

古文：勇，辩之从弟也。
现代文：卢勇是卢辩的堂弟。
English: Lu Yong is Lu Yuan's cousin.

古文：于是南汾、颍、豫、广四州复入东魏。
现代文：从此，南汾、颖、豫、广这四个州重新划入东魏的版图。
English: From then on, the four states of Nanlu, Ying, Yu and Guang were redrawn into the territory of Eastern Wei.

古文：初，柔然头兵可汗始得返国，事魏尽礼。
现代文：当初，柔然国的头兵可汗刚被放回国的时候，对北魏毕恭毕敬，礼仪周全。
English: At first, when Khan, the head soldier of Rouran, was just released back to the country, he was very respectful to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and his etiquette was perfect.

古文：及永安以后，雄据北方，礼渐骄倨，虽信使不绝，不复称臣。
现代文：到了永安年间之后，头兵可汗在他所占据的北方开始称雄，于是对北魏渐渐地变得傲慢起来，虽然仍旧和北魏保持书信与使者来往，但是不再自己称臣了。
English: After the Yongan era, the head soldier Khan began to dominate in the north he occupied, so he gradually became arrogant towards the Northern Wei Dynasty. Although he still maintained correspondence and emissaries with the Northern Wei Dynasty, he no longer praised himself as a minister.

古文：头兵尝至洛阳，心慕中国，乃置侍中、黄门等官；后得魏汝阳王典签淳于覃，亲宠任事，以为秘书监，使典文翰。
现代文：头兵可汗曾经到过洛阳，心里仰慕中原，就按照北魏的官制设置了侍中、黄门等官职；后来他得到了北魏汝阳王的典签淳于覃，非常亲近宠信，十分重用，委任为秘书监，使其主管文书。
English: The head soldier Khan had been to Luoyang and admired the Central Plains in his heart, so he set up the official positions of attendant and Yellow Gate in accordance with the official system of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Later, he got the signature of the Northern Wei Dynasty King Ruyang Junyu, very close to the favorite, very important, appointed as a secretary supervisor, and made him in charge of paperwork.

古文：及两魏分裂，头兵转不逊，数为边患。
现代文：在北魏分裂成东魏、西魏之后，头兵可汗变得更加傲慢放肆，多次在边境地区制造事端。
English: After the Northern Wei Dynasty split into the Eastern Wei Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty, the head soldier Khan became more arrogant and presumptuous, repeatedly creating troubles in the border areas.

古文：魏丞相泰以新都关中，方有事山东，欲结婚以抚之，以舍人元翌女为化政公主，妻头兵弟塔寒。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰考虑到刚在关中地区建立新都，同时正和东魏发生摩擦，就想用联姻的办法来安抚头兵可汗。请文帝将舍人元翌的女儿封为化政公主，让她嫁给头兵可汗的弟弟塔寒为妻。
English: Taking into account that a new capital had just been established in the Guanzhong region, and that friction was occurring with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the Western Wei chancellor, Uwen Tai, wanted to use the method of marriage to appease the head soldier Khan. He asked Emperor Wen to crown the daughter of the second son of the first son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of the first son of the second son of

古文：又言于魏主，请废乙弗后，纳头兵之女。
现代文：宇文泰又劝说文帝，请他废掉乙弗皇后，娶头兵可汗的女儿。
English: U Ventai also persuaded Emperor Wen, asking him to abolish the Queen of Yifu and marry the daughter of the head soldier Khan.

古文：甲辰，以乙弗后为尼，使扶风王孚迎头兵女为后。
现代文：甲辰，文帝叫乙弗皇后削发为尼，又派遣扶风王元孚去迎接头兵可汗的女儿来当西魏的新皇后。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen asked Empress Yifu to cut off her hair, and sent Fu Feng Wang Yuanfu to welcome the daughter of the head soldier Khan to become the new empress of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：头兵遂留东魏使者元整，不报其使。
现代文：头兵可汗于是扣留了东魏的使者元整，不派使者回报。
English: The head soldier, Khan, then detained the envoy of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Yuan Zheng, and did not send the envoy back.

古文：三月，辛酉，东魏丞相欢以沙苑之败，请解大丞相，诏许之；顷之，复故。
现代文：三月，辛酉，东魏的丞相高欢由于沙苑战役失利，请求解除他的大丞相职务，孝静帝颁下诏书，表示同意；没过多久，高欢又重新担任大丞相。
English: In March, the Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan requested to be relieved of his duties as grand chancellor due to the defeat in the Battle of Sha Yuan. Emperor Xiaojing issued an imperial decree to express his consent; not long after, Gao Huan resumed his duties as grand chancellor.

古文：柔然送悼后于魏，车七百乘、马万匹、驼二千头。
现代文：柔然国终于将悼后送往西魏，陪嫁品有七百辆车、一万匹马、二千头骆驼。
English: Zhu Ran finally sent the mourners to the West Wei Dynasty, accompanied by seven hundred cars, ten thousand horses, and two thousand camels.

古文：至黑盐池，遇魏所遣卤簿仪卫。
现代文：到达黑盐池的时候，遇上了西魏派来迎接新皇后的仪仗队与侍卫队。
English: When they arrived at the Black Salt Pond, they met the honor guard and bodyguards sent by the Western Wei Dynasty to welcome the new empress.

古文：柔然营幕，户席皆东向，扶风王孚请正南面，后曰： 我未见魏主，固柔然女也。魏仗南面，我自东向。 
现代文：柔然人宿营时，门户与席子都朝向东方，扶风王元孚请他们朝向正南方，悼后说道： 我还没有见到魏主，依然算是柔然国的女子，你们魏国的仪仗队面向南方，我自己面向东方。 
English: When the Juran people camped, the gate and the seat were facing the east. Fu Feng Wang Yuan Fu asked them to face the south. After mourning, he said: I haven't seen Lord Wei yet, I'm still a woman from Juran. Your honor guard from Wei faces the south, I myself face the east.

古文：丙子，立皇后郁久闾氏。
现代文：丙子，文帝正式册封郁久闾氏为皇后。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wen officially crowned Ikuhisao as empress.

古文：丁丑，大赦。
现代文：丁丑，大赦天下。
English: Ding Chuxi, amnesty to the world.

古文：以王盟为司徒。
现代文：封王盟为司徒。
English: Wang Meng was awarded the title of scholar.

古文：丞相泰朝于长安，还屯华州。
现代文：丞相宇文泰来到长安朝拜文帝之后，又返回华州屯兵。
English: After chancellor Umentai came to Chang'an to pay homage to Emperor Wen, he returned to the Huazhou garrison.

古文：夏，四月，庚寅，东魏高欢朝于鄴；壬辰，还晋阳。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚寅，东魏的高欢来到邺城朝拜孝静帝。壬辰，高欢返回晋阳。
English: In the summer, in April, Gao Yin, Gao Huan of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, came to Licheng to pay homage to Emperor Xiao Jing. In September, Gao Huan returned to Jinyang.

古文：五月，甲戌，东魏遣兼散骑常侍郑伯猷来聘。
现代文：五月，甲戌，东魏派遣兼散骑常侍郑伯猷到梁朝聘问。
English: In May, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched Zheng Boqin, an equestrian, to Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：秋，七月，东魏荆州刺史王则寇淮南。
现代文：秋季，七月，东魏荆州刺史王则侵犯淮河以南地区。
English: In the autumn and July of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the king of Jingzhou invaded the area south of the Huai River.

古文：癸亥，诏以东冶徒李胤之得如来舍利，大赦。
现代文：癸亥，由于东治的犯人李胤之得到了如来佛的舍利，梁武帝颁下诏书，大赦天下。
English: In the year of the boar, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict of amnesty to the world, because the prisoner Li Yanzhi of Tongzhi had received the Buddha's mercy.

古文：东魏侯景、高敖曹等围魏独孤信于金墉，太师欢帅大军继之；景悉烧洛阳内外官寺民居，存者什二三。
现代文：东魏的侯景、高敖曹等人在金墉包围了西魏的独孤信，太师高欢率领大军跟在后头；侯景放火焚烧了洛阳城内外所有的官衙与居民住宅，只有十分之二三的房子得以幸存。
English: Eastern Wei's Hou Jing, Gao Bing Cao and others surrounded Western Wei's Dukuxin in Jinlu, and Grand Master Gao Huan led a large army to follow. Hou Jing set fire to all official residences and residents' residences inside and outside Luoyang City, and only two-thirds of the houses survived.

古文：魏主将如洛阳拜园陵，会信等告急，遂与丞相泰俱东，命尚书左仆射周惠达辅太子钦守长安，开府仪同三司李弼、车骑大将军达奚武帅千骑为前驱。
现代文：西魏的文帝正要去洛阳祭拜列祖列宗的园陵，刚好收到独孤信等人的告急文书，就和丞相宇文泰一道东行。文帝命令尚书左仆射周惠达辅佐太子元钦守卫长安，又令开府仪同三司李弼、车骑大将军达奚武率领一千名骑兵作为先头部队。
English: Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty was on his way to the Luoyang Festival to pay homage to the mausoleums of his ancestors. Just as he received the urgent petition from Du Guoxin and others, he went east together with the prime minister, Wu Wentai. Emperor Wen ordered Shang Shu's left-hand servant, Zhao Zhou Hui Da Fu, and the prince's son, Yuan Qin, to guard Changwei An, and also ordered Kaifu Yi to lead a thousand cavalry as the vanguard, together with the third secretary, Li Jie, and the general of cavalry and cavalry, Dagong Wu.

古文：八月，庚寅，丞相泰至谷城，侯景等欲整陈以待其至，仪同三司太安莫多娄贷文请帅所部击其前锋，景等固止之。
现代文：八月，庚寅，西魏丞相宇文泰到达城，侯景等人准备排列好军阵等待宇文泰前来，仪同三司太安人莫多娄贷文请求带领自己的部属去袭击宇文泰的先遣部队，侯景等人坚决阻止了他。
English: In August, Geng Yin and Western Wei chancellor U Ventai arrived in the city, and Hou Jing and others prepared to line up the army to wait for U Ventai to come. Yi Tong and the three Tai'an people asked Modo Guiwen to lead his subordinates to attack U Ventai's advance force, and Hou Jing and others resolutely stopped him.

古文：贷文勇而专，不受命，与可硃浑道元以千骑前进。
现代文：莫多娄贷文生性勇敢而执拗，不接受上司的命令，和可朱浑道元两人领着一千名骑兵向前方进发。
English: Modo Shanyu Wensheng was brave and persistent, did not accept the orders of his superiors, and led a thousand cavalry to march forward with Zhu Hun Do Yuan.

古文：夜，遇李弼、达奚武于孝水。
现代文：夜间，他们在孝水遇见了李弼、达奚武。
English: During the night, they met Li Qian and Da Qianwu in Xiaoshui.

古文：弼命军士鼓噪，曳柴扬尘，贷文走，弼追斩之，道元单骑获免，悉俘其众送恒农。
现代文：李弼命令士兵们擂鼓呐喊，在地上拖树枝扬起尘土，莫多娄贷文以为对方是大部队，转身逃跑，李弼追上去杀掉了他。可朱浑道元单人匹马逃了回去，手下的人都被俘虏，被送往恒农。
English: Li Qian ordered the soldiers to beat drums and shout, dragging branches on the ground to raise dust. Modo Qianwen thought that the other side was a large army, turned and fled, Li Qian chased him and killed him. But Zhu Hun Dogen fled back alone, his men were all captured and sent to Heng Nong.

古文：泰进军瀍东，侯景等夜解围去。
现代文：宇泰进军水东部地区，侯景等人在夜里解除了金墉之围离去。
English: Utai marched into the eastern water area, and Hou Jing and others broke the siege of Jinju in the night and left.

古文：辛卯，泰帅轻骑追景至河上，景为陈，北据河桥，南属邙山，与泰合战。
现代文：辛卯宇文泰统率轻装骑兵追击侯景直到黄河边上，侯景布置军阵，在北面占据了河桥，在南面连接邙山，与宇文泰交战。
English: Xinwu Uwentai led his light cavalry to chase Houjing all the way to the edge of the Yellow River. Houjing set up an army formation, occupied the river bridge in the north, connected Lushan in the south, and fought with Uwentai.

古文：泰马中流矢惊逸，遂失所之。
现代文：宇文泰的战马中了流箭，受了惊，于是胡乱地狂奔起来。
English: Wu Wentai's horse was hit by a stray arrow and was startled, so it ran wildly.

古文：泰坠地，东魏兵追及之，左右皆散，都督李穆下马，以策抶泰背骂曰： 笼东军士！尔曹主何在，而独留此？ 
现代文：宇文泰从马上跌了下来，东魏的士兵追到跟前，身边的人都逃散了。都督李穆见到这种情景，跳下马来，挥鞭抽打宇文泰的后背，骂道： 你这狼狈不堪的小兵，你们的头子在哪里，为什么你一个人呆在这儿？ 
English: Wu Wentai fell from his horse, the soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty chased after him, and everyone around him fled. Seeing this scene, the governor Li Mu jumped off his horse, whipped Wu Wentai's back, and scolded him: "You poor little soldier, where is your leader, why are you staying here alone?

古文：追者不疑其贵人，舍之而过。
现代文：追赶的东魏兵也就没想到宇文泰是贵人，放弃了他从旁边过去。
English: The pursuing East Wei soldiers did not think that Uven Tai was a noble, and abandoned him to pass by.

古文：穆以马授泰，与之俱逸。
现代文：李穆将自己的马让宇文泰骑上，两人一起逃掉了。
English: The soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty passed by quickly and left without any suspicion. Li Mu then gave his horse to Yu Wentai and ran away with him.

古文：魏兵复振，击东魏兵，大破之，东魏兵北走。
现代文：部队重新振作之后，又向东魏的部队发起了攻击，东魏遭到了惨败，将士们纷纷逃往北方。
English: After the troops were re-energized, they launched an attack on the troops of the Eastern Wei Dynasty. The Eastern Wei Dynasty suffered a crushing defeat, and the soldiers fled to the north.

古文：京兆忠武公高敖曹，意轻泰，建旗盖以陵陈，魏人尽锐攻之，一军皆没，敖曹单骑走投河阳南城。
现代文：京兆忠武公高敖曹心里轻视宇文泰，他树起旗盖以显示军阵的威风，西魏的将士们都迅猛地攻过去，打得对方全军覆没，高敖曹单人匹马跑去投奔河阳南城。
English: Gao Bing Cao, a loyal warrior of Beijing Zhao, despised Yu Wentai in his heart. He raised the banner to show the grandeur of the army formation. The soldiers of West Wei all attacked quickly and violently, destroying the other side's entire army. Gao Bing Cao ran alone and on horseback to the southern city of Heyang.

古文：守将北豫州刺史高永乐，欢之从祖兄子也，与敖曹有怨，闭门不受。
现代文：该城的守将北豫州刺史高永乐，是高欢族兄的儿子，与高敖曹有怨仇，关紧城门不放高敖曹进去。
English: Gao Yongle, the keeper of the city, was the son of a brother of the Gaohuan people. He had a grudge against Gao Rong Cao, and closed the city gate tightly to prevent Gao Rong Cao from entering.

古文：敖曹仰呼求绳，不得，拔刀穿阖未彻而追兵至。
现代文：高敖曹仰头大喊要求上面放一根绳子下来，见不被理睬，就拔出腰刀凿门，可是门还没有凿开，追兵就赶到了，高敖曹只好趴到桥的下面。
English: Gao Yu Cao raised his head and shouted for a rope to be lowered from above. Seeing that he was ignored, he pulled out his knife and chiseled a door. However, the door had not yet been chiseled open when the pursuers arrived, and Gao Yu Cao had to lie down under the bridge.

古文：敖曹伏桥下，追者见其从奴持金带，问敖曹所在，奴指示之。
现代文：追赶的西魏兵看见他的奴仆手里拿着一条金带，就问高敖曹的下落，奴仆指出了主人藏的地方。
English: The pursuing West Wei soldiers saw his manservant holding a gold band in his hand, and asked Gao Xuan Cao about his whereabouts. The manservant pointed out the place where his master was hiding.

古文：敖曹知不免，奋头曰： 来！
现代文：高敖曹知道自己已无法免除一死，便昂起脑袋对追兵说道： 来吧！
English: Gao Bing Cao knew that he could not avoid death, so he raised his head and said to the pursuing soldiers: Come on!

古文：与汝开国公。 
现代文：送给你一个当开国公的机会。 
English: I'm giving you a chance to be the founding father.

古文：追者斩其首去。
现代文：追兵砍下他的脑袋离去了。
English: The pursuers cut off his head and left.

古文：高欢闻之，如丧肝胆，杖高永乐二百，赠敖曹太师、大司马、太尉。
现代文：高欢听到这个噩耗，好象丧失了肝胆一样，打了高永乐二百大棍，又追封高敖曹为太师、大司马、太尉。
English: Hearing this bad news, Gao Huan, as if he had lost his heart, hit Gao Yongle with two hundred big sticks, and also chased Gao Yao Cao to be the grandmaster, grand steward, and first lieutenant.

古文：泰赏杀敖曹者布绢万段，岁岁稍与之，比及周亡，犹未能足。
现代文：宇文泰奖赏杀高敖曹的人一万段布匹与绢帛，每年给他一部分，一直到北周灭亡的时候，还没有给足。
English: Uwentai rewarded the person who killed Gao Bing Cao with ten thousand pieces of cloth and cocoons, giving him a portion every year, until the time of the death of North Zhou.

古文：魏又杀东魏西兗州刺史宋显等，虏甲士万五千人，赴河死者以万数。
现代文：西魏的部队又杀死了东魏西兖州的刺史宋显等人，俘虏士兵一万五千人，至于淹死在黄河里的东魏兵更是数以万计。
English: The troops of the Western Wei Dynasty also killed Song Xian and others of the Eastern Wei Dynasty in Xishuanzhou, and captured fifteen thousand soldiers. As for the Eastern Wei soldiers who drowned in the Yellow River, there were tens of thousands of them.

古文：初，欢以万俟普尊老，特礼之，尝亲扶上马。
现代文：当初，高欢因为万俟普爵位高年龄大，所以给予他特殊的礼遇，曾经亲自扶他上马。
English: At first, Gao Huan gave him a special courtesy because he was a high-ranking and old man, and once personally helped him onto the horse.

古文：其子洛免冠稽首曰： 愿出死力以报深恩。 
现代文：万俟普的儿子万俟洛摘下帽子向高欢叩头，说： 我愿出死力来报答您的大恩大德。 
English: Wanyanpu's son, Wanyu Luo, took off his hat and bowed to Gao Huan, saying, "I am willing to do my best to repay your great kindness."

古文：及邙山之战，诸军北度桥，洛独勒兵不动，谓魏人曰： 万俟受洛干在此，能来可来也！ 
现代文：在邙山战役中，其他部队都跨过河桥向北方逃跑，唯独万俟洛命令自己的部属停留在原地，他对西魏的将士们喊道： 我万俟受洛干在此，你们能过来的就来吧！ 
English: During the Battle of Lushan, all other troops crossed the river bridge and fled to the north. However, Wan Ronglu ordered his subordinates to stay where they were. He shouted to the West Wei soldiers: "I Wan Ronglu is here, come when you can!"

古文：魏人畏之而去，欢名其所营地为回洛。
现代文：西魏的将士都感到害怕，离开了。后来，高欢将万俟洛安营扎寨的地方命名为回洛。
English: The soldiers of the Western Wei Dynasty were all afraid and left. Later, Gao Huan named the place where Wanju Luoan camped as Huiluo.

古文：是日，东、西魏置陈既大，首尾悬远，从旦至未，战数十合，氛雾四塞，莫能相知。
现代文：这一天，东、西魏布置的军阵都非常庞大，头尾相距很远，从早晨到晚上，双方一共交战了几十次，直打得烟雾尘土四处弥漫，相互都看不清楚。
English: On this day, the army lines arranged by the Eastern and Western Wei Dynasties were very large, and the front and rear were far apart. From morning to evening, the two sides fought a total of dozens of times, and the smoke and dust were everywhere, and they could not see each other clearly.

古文：魏独孤信、李远居右，赵贵、怡峰居左，战并不利；又未知魏主及丞相泰所在，皆弃其卒先归。
现代文：西魏的独孤信、李远处在右面，赵贵、怡峰处在左面，交战过程中都失利了；他们又不知道文帝与丞相宇文泰在哪里，于是都扔下了自己率领的士兵先跑回来。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty's Duxunxin, Li Yuan on the right, Zhao Gui and Yifeng on the left, all lost in the course of the war; they did not know where Emperor Wen and Prime Minister Yu Wentei were, so they all abandoned the soldiers they led and ran back first.

古文：开府仪同三司李虎、念贤等为后军，见信等退，即与俱去。
现代文：开府仪同三司李虎、念贤等人属于后续部队，看到独孤信等人退却，就和他们一道离开了战场。
English: Kaifu Yi, along with the Third Division's Li Hu and Nian Xian, belonged to the follow-up troops. When he saw Du Guoxin and others retreating, he left the battlefield with them.

古文：泰由是烧营而归，留仪同三司长孙子彦守金墉。
现代文：宇文泰因此只好烧掉营帐返回，留下仪同三司长孙子彦镇守金墉。
English: Therefore, Uwentai had no choice but to burn down the camp and return, leaving Yi and the third chief, Sun Tzu Yan, to defend Jinlong.

古文：王思政下马，举长槊左右横击，一举辄踣数人。
现代文：王思政跳下马来，举起长矛左右出击，一抬手就得倒下几个人。
English: Wang Sizheng jumped down from his horse and raised his spear to attack from the left and right. Several people fell down as soon as he raised his hand.

古文：陷陈既深，从者尽死，思政被重创，闷绝。
现代文：慢慢地，他陷入敌人的军阵已经很深，跟随着他的人都死光了，他自己也身受重伤，昏迷过去。
English: Gradually, he fell deep into the enemy's line of battle, all his followers were killed, and he himself was seriously wounded and fell into a coma.

古文：会日暮，敌亦收兵。
现代文：此刻已临近夜晚，敌人也开始收兵了。
English: By this time, night had fallen and the enemy had begun to fall back.

古文：思政每战常著破衣弊甲，敌不知其将帅，故得免。
现代文：王思政每一次打仗都穿着破旧的衣袍与盔甲，敌人看不出他是将帅，因此他幸免于难。
English: Every time Wang Sizheng fought, he wore worn-out clothes and armor. The enemy could not see that he was a general, so he survived.

古文：帐下督雷五安于战处哭求思政，会其已苏，割衣裹创，扶思政上马。夜久，始得还营。
现代文：他的帐下督雷五安在战场上哭着寻找他，刚好他也已经苏醒过来，雷五安就从衣服上割下一块布，为他包扎好伤口，然后扶他上马，入夜很久了，他们才返回营地。
English: His subordinate, Lei Wu'an, was crying and looking for him on the battlefield. Just as he had woken up, Lei Wu'an cut a piece of cloth from his clothes, bandaged his wound, then helped him onto the horse. It was late at night before they returned to the camp.

古文：平东将军蔡祐下马步斗，左右劝乘马以备仓猝，祐怒曰： 丞相爱我如子，今日岂惜生乎！ 
现代文：平东将军蔡跳下马徒步格斗，身边的部属都劝他再上马，以便遇上紧急情况时赶紧离开，蔡怒气冲冲地说道： 宇文丞相就象爱他自己的儿子一样爱我，今天我怎么能在乎自己的性命！ 
English: Pingdong General Cai jumped off his horse to fight on foot, and the subordinates around him advised him to get back on his horse so that he could leave quickly in case of an emergency. Cai said angrily: Minister Yu Wenzheng loves me as much as he loves his own son, how can I care about my life today!

古文：帅左右十馀人合声大呼，击东魏兵，杀伤甚众。
现代文：说罢，他带着身边的十几个人齐声大喊着，向东魏的将士冲击，杀伤了许多人。
English: Having said that, he shouted in unison with more than a dozen people around him and attacked the East Wei soldiers, killing and wounding many of them.

古文：东魏人围之十馀重，祐弯弓持满，四面拒之。
现代文：东魏的部队把他们围了足足十几层，蔡拉弓搭箭，抵抗四面八方的敌人。
English: The troops of the Eastern Wei Dynasty encircled them more than a dozen layers, Cai pulled the bow and arrows, resisting the enemy in all directions.

古文：东魏人募厚甲长刀者直进取之，去祐可三十步，左右劝射之，祐曰： 吾曹之命，在此一矢，岂可虚发！ 
现代文：东魏出重金悬赏，身穿厚甲手持长刀的人一直向前猛冲，想要捉住他们，大约只有三十步远了，蔡身边的部属都劝他放箭，蔡回答说： 我们的性命，全在这一枝箭上头，怎么可以随便射出去？ 
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty offered a heavy bounty. A man wearing thick armor and holding a long knife kept rushing forward, trying to catch them. He was only about thirty paces away. Cai's subordinates all advised him to shoot an arrow. Cai replied: Our lives are all over this arrow, how can we just shoot it out?

古文：将至十步，祐乃射之，应弦而倒，东魏兵稍却，祐徐引还。
现代文：直到敌人离他只有十步远的时候，蔡才将箭射出，随着弓弦一动，打头的东魏兵倒在地上，后面的人向后退了一些，蔡慢慢地带领自己的部下返回营地。
English: It wasn't until the enemy was only ten paces away from him that Cai fired his arrow. With a single movement of the bow string, the Eastern Wei soldier who had fired the first shot fell to the ground, the people behind him retreated a little, and Cai slowly led his men back to the camp.

古文：魏主至恒农，守将已弃城走，所虏降卒在恒农者相与闭门拒守，丞相泰攻拔之，诛其魁首数百人。
现代文：西魏的文帝来到恒农的时候，守将已经放弃该城逃跑了，城里原来被西魏俘虏的东魏兵一同关闭城门，进行抵抗，西魏丞相宇文泰攻下了该城，杀掉了几百名领头的人。
English: When Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty came to Hengnong, the governor had already abandoned the city and fled. The Eastern Wei soldiers who were originally captured by the Western Wei closed the city gate together and resisted. The Western Wei chancellor Yu Wentai captured the city and killed hundreds of leaders.

古文：蔡祐追及泰于恒农，夜，见泰，泰曰： 承先，尔来，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：到处寻找宇文泰的蔡一直追到了恒农，在晚上终于见到宇文泰，宇文泰叫着蔡的表字说道： 承先，你一来，我就没有什么可忧虑的了。 
English: Cai, who had been looking everywhere for Uwentai, chased him all the way to Hengnong. In the evening, he finally saw Uwentai. Uwentai called out Cai's name and said, "Son, when you come, I won't have anything to worry about."

古文：泰惊不得寝，枕祐股，然后安。
现代文：宇文泰由于受到惊吓无法入睡，枕了蔡的大腿之后才平静地进入梦乡。
English: Unable to fall asleep due to the fright, Yu Wentai calmly fell asleep after he put his head on Cai's thigh.

古文：祐每从泰战，常为士卒先。战还，诸将皆争功，祐终无所言。
现代文：蔡每次跟随宇文泰作战，总是身先士卒，打仗回来，其他将领都争着邀功请赏，而蔡不说一句表现自己的话。
English: Every time Cai follows Yu Wentai in battle, he always leads the way and comes back from battle. Other generals are vying for credit and reward, but Cai does not say a word to show himself.

古文：泰每叹曰： 承先口不言勋，我当代其论叙。 
现代文：宇文泰常常感慨地说： 承先嘴里不提自己的功劳，可我应当替他把一切谈明白。 
English: Uwentai often said with emotion, "He does not mention his own merits, but I should clarify everything for him."

古文：泰留王思政镇恒农，除侍中、东道行台。
现代文：宇文泰留下王思政镇守恒农，任命他为侍中、东道行台。
English: Wu Wentai left Wang Sizheng as the town guard of Hengnong and appointed him as the chamberlain and host.

古文：魏之东伐也，关中留守兵少，前后所虏东魏士卒散在民间，闻魏兵败，谋作乱。
现代文：西魏这次东伐，在关中地区留守的兵员很少，前前后后俘虏的东魏士兵都被分散在民间，他们一听说西魏的部队遭到了失败，纷纷图谋作乱。
English: During the Western Wei's Eastern Expedition, there were very few soldiers left in the Guanzhong area. The captured Eastern Wei soldiers were scattered among the civilians. As soon as they heard that the Western Wei's troops had been defeated, they tried to make trouble.

古文：李虎等至长安，计无所出，与太尉王盟、仆射周惠达等奉太子钦出屯渭北。
现代文：李虎等人来到长安，想不出好的对策，便和太尉王盟、仆射周惠达等人侍奉太子元钦出城，到渭北地区驻防。
English: When Li Hu and others came to Chang'an, they couldn't think of a good countermeasure, so they went out of the city with Lieutenant Wang Meng and Footman Zhou Huida, who were serving the Crown Prince Yuan Qin, and stationed in the north of Anhui Province.

古文：百姓互相剽掠，关中大扰。
现代文：百姓们相互掠夺，关中地区惊扰得非常厉害。
English: The peasants plundered each other, and the Guanzhong area was very badly disturbed.

古文：于是沙苑所虏东魏都督赵青雀、雍州民于伏德等遂反，青雀据长安子城，伏德保咸阳，与咸阳太守慕容思庆各收降卒以拒还兵。
现代文：在沙苑战役中被俘虏的东魏都督赵青雀，雍州的百姓于伏德等人趁机造反，占据了长安所属的小城，于伏德又占有了咸阳，与咸阳太守慕容思庆各自召集东魏的降兵，以便抵抗从战场上返回的西魏将士。
English: The East Wei governor Zhao Qingzhao, who was captured in the Battle of Sha Yuan, the people of Yongzhou in Yufude and others took advantage of the opportunity to rebel and occupied the small city belonging to Chang'an. In Yufude, they also occupied Xianyang. They and Xianyang's governor, Murong Siqing, each called for the East Wei troops to surrender in order to resist the West Wei soldiers returning from the battlefield.

古文：长安大城民相帅以拒青雀，日与之战。
现代文：长安主城中的百姓互相组织起来，共同抵抗赵青雀，每天同他交战。
English: The people in the main city of Chang'an organized themselves to jointly resist Zhao Qingzhar and fought with him every day.

古文：大都督侯莫陈顺击贼，屡破之，贼不敢出。
现代文：大都督侯莫陈顺袭击了东魏的那些降兵，多次打败他们，吓得降兵们不敢出城。
English: The great governor Hou Mo Chen Shun attacked the Eastern Wei's soldiers who had surrendered and defeated them many times. The soldiers were so scared that they did not dare to leave the city.

古文：顺，崇之兄也。
现代文：侯莫陈顺是侯莫陈崇的兄长。
English: Hou Mo Chen Shun is the elder brother of Hou Mo Chen Chong.

古文：扶风公王罴镇河东，大开城门，悉召军士谓曰： 今闻大军失利，青雀作乱，诸人莫有固志。王罴受委于此，以死报恩。
现代文：镇守河东的扶风公王罴大开城门，叫来所有的将士，对他们说道： 今天我听说咱们的大部队在前线失利，赵青雀在京城作乱，许多人已经丧失了信心，而我王罴受委托守卫河东，决心以死来报答皇上与宇文丞相的恩德。
English: Wang Qian, the prince of Fu Feng, who guarded the eastern part of the river, opened the gate wide, called all the soldiers and said to them: Today I heard that our large army lost the battle at the front, Zhao Qingzhao made trouble in the capital, many people have lost confidence, and I, Wang Qian, was entrusted with guarding the eastern part of the river, and I am determined to repay the kindness of the emperor and the prime minister with my death.

古文：有能同心者可共固守；必恐城陷，任自出城。 
现代文：你们中间能够跟我同心协力的人可以和我一道坚守此城；实在害怕本城陷落的可以随便出城。 
English: Those of you who are able to work with me can stand with me and hold the city; those who are really afraid of the fall of the city can leave the city at will.

古文：众感其言，皆无异志。
现代文：大家都被他的话感动了，就一心与他守城。
English: Everyone was moved by his words and joined him in defending the city.

古文：魏主留阌乡。
现代文：西魏的文帝留在阌乡。
English: Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty stayed in Xiangxiang.

古文：丞相泰以士马疲弊，不可速进，且谓青雀等乌合，不能为患，曰： 我至长安，以轻骑临之，必当面缚。 
现代文：丞相宇文泰考虑到士兵与马匹都已经疲惫不堪，不再能快速前进，并且认为赵青雀等人不过是一群乌合之众，不会成为大的祸患，就说道： 我到达长安，让轻装的骑兵直冲进去，赵青雀这些人一定会自缚而降，向我当面请罪。 
English: Taking into account that the soldiers and horses were exhausted and could no longer advance quickly, and considering that Zhao Qingzhao and others were just a group of rabble and would not become a big disaster, Prime Minister Yu Wentai said: When I arrived in Chang'an and let the lightly armed cavalry rush straight in, Zhao Qingzhao and these people would certainly surrender themselves and plead guilty to me in person.

古文：通直散骑常侍吴郡陆通谏曰： 贼逆谋久定，必无迁善之心。蜂虿有毒，安可轻也！
现代文：通直散骑常侍吴郡人陆通劝告说： 那些奸贼很久之前就已图谋叛乱，一定没有改恶从善的心意，蜂、蝎是有毒的，怎么可以轻视？
English: "Those traitors have plotted rebellion for a long time, they must not have changed evil into good. Bees and scorpions are poisonous, how can they be despised?

古文：且贼诈言东寇将至，今若以轻骑临之，百姓谓为信然，益当惊扰。
现代文：况且那些贼寇欺骗百姓，说东魏人将要到达，我们现在如果派轻装骑兵冲进城去，老百姓就会觉得情况真的象那些贼寇说的那样，于是就会更加惊慌不安。
English: Moreover, those bandits deceived the people, saying that the East Wei people were about to arrive. If we now send light cavalry to rush into the city, the people will feel that the situation is really like those bandits said, so they will be even more panicked.

古文：今军虽疲弊，精锐尚多。以明公之威，总大军以临之，何忧不克！ 
现代文：眼下我们的部队虽然已经疲劳，但是精锐兵马还比较多，凭着您的威望，带着大部队进长安城，哪里用得着忧虑打败不了敌人呢？ 
English: Right now, although our troops are fatigued, there are still more elite soldiers and horses. With your prestige, with a large army entering Chang'an City, where can you not defeat the enemy with worry?

古文：泰从之，引兵西入。
现代文：宇文泰听从了陆通的意见，带领部队向西入城。
English: Uwentai listened to Lu Tong's advice and led the troops westward into the city.

古文：父老见泰至，莫不悲喜，士女相贺。
现代文：城里的父老们看见宇文泰回来了，没有一个不是悲喜交加，男男女女们都相互庆贺。
English: When the fathers and grandfathers in the city saw that Uwentai had returned, there was not a single one who was not filled with joy and sorrow. Both men and women were celebrating with each other.

古文：华州刺史宇文导引兵袭咸阳，斩思庆，擒伏德。南度渭，与泰会攻青雀，破之。
现代文：华州刺史宇文导带领人马攻进咸阳，杀掉了慕容思庆，捉住了于伏德，又南渡渭河，与宇文泰汇合，然后向赵青雀发起了进攻，挫败了对方。
English: Yu Wenzhong, the governor of Huazhou, led his troops and horses into Xianyang, killed Murong Siqing, captured Yu Fude, crossed the Yangtze River to the south, and met with Yu Wenzhong, and then launched an attack on Zhao Qingzhao, defeating the other side.

古文：太保梁景睿以疾留长安，与青雀通谋，泰杀之。
现代文：西魏的太保梁景睿因病留在长安，与赵青雀一同密谋叛乱，宇文泰杀掉了他。
English: Liang Jingrui, the Western Wei emperor's bodyguard, stayed in Chang'an due to illness and plotted a rebellion with Zhao Qingzhao. Yu Wentai killed him.

古文：东魏太师欢自晋阳将七千骑至孟津，未济，闻魏师已循，遂济河，遣别将追魏师至崤，不及而还。
现代文：东魏的太师高欢带领七千名骑兵从晋阳赶到孟津，还没有开始渡黄河，就听说西魏的部队已经逃走，于是立即渡过黄河，又派遣其他将领追击西魏的兵马，一直追到崤县还没有赶上，这才返回。
English: The Eastern Wei general Gao Huan led seven thousand cavalrymen from Jinyang to Mengjin. Before crossing the Yellow River, he heard that the Western Wei troops had fled, so he immediately crossed the Yellow River and sent other generals to chase the Western Wei soldiers and horses. He chased them all the way to Jixian and did not catch up before returning.

古文：欢攻金墉，长孙子彦弃城走，焚城中室屋俱尽，欢毁金墉而还。
现代文：高欢向金墉发起了进攻，长孙子彦放弃该城逃跑，临行前把城里的房屋烧得干干净净，高欢拆毁了金墉城之后回到东魏。
English: Gao Huan launched an attack on Jinlu. The eldest grandson, Zihang, abandoned the city and fled. Before leaving, he burned the houses in the city to the ground. Gao Huan demolished Jinlu and then returned to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：东魏之迁鄴也，主客郎中裴让之留洛阳。独孤信之败也，让之弟诹之随丞相泰入关，为大行台仓曹郎中。
现代文：东魏将国都迁往邺城的时候，主客郎中裴让之留在洛阳；独孤信在邙山之战中失败以后，裴让之的弟弟裴诹之跟随西魏的丞相宇文泰进入关中，被任命为大行台仓曹郎中。
English: When the Eastern Wei Dynasty moved the capital of the country to Lushan, the host and guest, Rong Rong Pei Janzhi, stayed in Luoyang; after Du Guoxin's defeat in the Battle of Lushan, Pei Janzhi's younger brother, Pei Janzhi, followed the Western Wei Dynasty's chancellor, Yu Wentai, into Guanzhong, and was appointed as the vice-chancellor of Dagangdaicang.

古文：欢囚让之兄弟五人，让之曰： 昔诸葛亮兄弟，事吴、蜀各尽其心，况让之老母在此，不忠不孝，必不为也。
现代文：高欢囚禁了裴让之兄弟五人，裴让之对高欢说： 昔日诸葛亮兄弟二人，一个帮助吴国，一个为蜀国服务，各自都尽心尽力。何况我裴让之还有老母亲在这里，不忠不孝之事我是绝对不会干的。
English: Gao Huan imprisoned five of Pei Jang's brothers. Pei Jang said to Gao Huan: In the past, there were two Zhuge Liang brothers, one helped the State of Wu and the other served the State of Shu, and each of them did their best. Besides, I, Pei Jang Zhi, have an old mother here, and I would never do anything disloyal or unfilial.

古文：明公推诚待物，物亦归心；若用猜忌，去霸业远矣。 欢皆释之。
现代文：您要是诚心诚意地对待一个人，他自然也会把心交给您；如果您喜欢猜疑人，那么就很难建立起霸业。 高欢听罢，将裴让之兄弟都释放了。
English: If you treat a person with sincerity, he will naturally give his heart to you; if you like to suspect people, then it is difficult to establish a domineering business.

古文：九月，魏主入长安，丞相泰还屯华州。
现代文：九月，西魏文帝返回长安，丞相宇文泰也回到华州屯兵。
English: In September, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty returned to Chang'an, and the prime minister, Yu Wentei, also returned to the Huazhou garrison.

古文：东魏大都督贺拔仁击邢磨纳、卢仲礼等，平之。
现代文：东魏的大都督贺拔仁袭击并消灭了邢磨纳、卢仲礼等人的兵马。
English: Eastern Wei's Grand Dictator He Bajin attacked and annihilated the soldiers and horses of Qimana, Lu Zhongli and others.

古文：卢景裕本儒生，太师欢释之，召馆于家，使教诸子。
现代文：卢景裕本是一位读书人，太师高欢释放他之后，把他叫到家里，让他开设书塾，教自己的几个儿子。
English: Lu Jingyubon was a reader. After Grand Master Gao Huan released him, he called him to his home and asked him to open a school and teach his sons.

古文：景裕讲论精微，难者或相诋诃，大声厉色，言至不逊，而景裕神采俨然，风调如一，从容往复，无际可寻。
现代文：卢景裕的讲解议论精辟入微，和他辩论的人有的诋毁呵斥他，大声嚷嚷，表情严厉，言语很不礼貌，但是卢景裕依然神情庄严，风度不变，从容不迫地辩论，看不出一点情绪受到影响的痕迹。
English: Lu Jingyu's explanations and arguments are incisive, and some people who argue with him denigrate him, shout loudly, look stern, and speak very impolite words, but Lu Jingyu still looks solemn, his demeanor remains unchanged, he debates unhurriedly, and there is no trace of emotional influence.

古文：性清静，历官屡有进退，无得失之色；弊衣粗食，恬然自安，终日端严，如对宾客。
现代文：他生性喜欢清静，为官生涯中多次被提升或降职，可从来不表露出得意或失意的样子；平时，他穿劣质的衣服，吃粗陋的食物，恬淡安然，整天端庄严肃，好象老在面对宾客一样。
English: He likes to be calm by nature. He has been promoted or demoted many times in his career as an official, but he never shows his pride or disappointment. Usually, he wears inferior clothes, eats coarse food, is light and calm, and is dignified and serious all day long, as if he is always facing guests.

古文：冬，十月，魏归高敖曹、窦泰、莫多娄贷文之首于东魏。
现代文：冬季，十月，西魏将高敖曹、窦泰、莫多娄贷文的头颅归还给东魏。
English: In the winter, in October, the West Wei Dynasty returned the heads of Gao Bing Cao, Dou Tai, and Moduo Jianwen to the East Wei Dynasty.

古文：散骑常侍刘孝仪等聘于东魏。
现代文：梁朝散骑常侍刘孝仪等人到东魏聘问。
English: Liang's equerry Liu Xiaoyi and others went to the Eastern Wei Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：十二月，魏是云宝袭洛阳，东魏洛州刺史王元轨弃城走。
现代文：十二月，西魏的是云宝向洛阳发起攻击，东魏洛州刺史王元轨丢弃该城逃跑了。
English: In December, Yunbao of the Western Wei attacked Luoyang, and Wang Yuanlu of the Eastern Wei attacked Luozhou, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：都督赵刚袭广州，拔之。
现代文：都督赵刚袭击广州并攻克了该城。
English: Governor Zhao Gang attacked Guangzhou and conquered it.

古文：于是自襄、广已西城镇复为魏。
现代文：于是，襄州、广州以西的城镇重新归属西魏。
English: As a result, the towns west of Xiangzhou and Guangzhou reverted to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏自正光以后，四方多事，民避赋役，多为僧尼，至二百万人，寺有三万馀区。
现代文：北魏自从正光年间之后，四面八方经常发生各种事端，百姓为了躲避赋税与徭役，许多人出家当了和尚与尼姑。整个国家的出家人达到二百万，寺庙也足有三万多处。
English: Since the Zhengguang era of the Northern Wei Dynasty, various incidents have often occurred in all directions. In order to avoid taxes and forced labor, many people have become monks and nuns. The number of monks and nuns in the whole country has reached two million, and there are more than thirty thousand temples.

古文：至是，东魏始诏 牧守、令长擅立寺者，计其功庸，以枉法论。 
现代文：到此时，东魏颁下诏书给各级地方官，凡是擅自建立寺庙的，根据所花费劳工的多少，以枉法论处。
English: At this time, the Eastern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to local officials at all levels. Anyone who built a temple without authorization would be punished according to the amount of labor spent.

古文：初，魏伊川土豪李长寿为防蛮都督，积功至北华州刺史。
现代文：当初，西魏伊川的当地豪强李长寿出任防蛮都督，后来积累了不少功劳，被提升为北华州刺史。
English: At the beginning, Li Changshou, a local strongman from Yichuan in West Wei, served as the governor of anti-barbarism. Later, he accumulated a lot of merits and was promoted to the top of North China's history.

古文：孝武帝西迁，长寿帅其徒拒东魏，魏以长寿为广州刺史。
现代文：孝武帝西迁的时候，李长寿率领手下的步兵抵抗东魏的部队，西魏又任命他为广州刺史。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the West, Li Changshou led his infantry to resist the forces of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and the Western Wei Dynasty appointed him as the ruler of Guangzhou.

古文：侯景攻拔其壁，杀之。
现代文：侯景攻克了他的营垒，杀掉了他。
English: Hou Jing attacked his camp and killed him.

古文：其子延孙复收集父兵以拒东魏，魏之贵臣广陵王欣、录尚书长孙稚等皆携家往依之，延孙资遣卫送，使达关中。
现代文：他的儿子李延孙重新召集起他父亲的人马，继续抗拒东魏，西魏显贵的大臣广陵王元欣、录尚书长孙稚等人都携带了家眷前去投靠他，李延孙送给他们钱财，又派了卫队护送，使他们安全到达关中。
English: His son, Li Yansun, rallied his father's men and continued to resist the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Western Wei's prominent minister, Guangling Wang Yuanxin, and the chief of the Records of the Grand Historian, Sun Wuchang, all brought their families to join him. Li Yansun gave them money and sent guards to escort them safely to Guanzhong.

古文：东魏高欢患之，数遣兵攻延孙，不能克。
现代文：东魏的高欢对李延孙的存在感到忧虑，多次派遣部队攻打他，都没有取得功。
English: Gao Huan of the Eastern Wei Dynasty was worried about the existence of Li Yansun, and sent troops to attack him many times, but they did not succeed.

古文：魏以延孙为京南行台、节度河南诸军事、广州刺史。
现代文：西魏任命李延孙为京南行台、节度河南诸军事、广州刺史。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Li Yansun as the governor of Jingnan Province, the military governor of Henan Province, and the military governor of Guangzhou Province.

古文：延孙以澄清伊、洛为己任，魏以延孙兵少，更以长寿之婿京兆韦法保为东洛州刺史，配兵数百以助之。
现代文：李延孙将平定伊、洛地区作为自己的责任，西魏朝廷认为他的兵力不足，又委派李长寿的女婿、京兆人韦法保任东洛州刺史，配置数百名士兵来帮助李延孙。
English: Li Yansun regarded the pacification of the Ili and Luo regions as his own responsibility. The Western Wei Dynasty court considered his troop strength to be insufficient, and appointed Li Changshou's son-in-law, Wei Fa Bao, a man of Jing Zhao, as the governor of East Luo, assigning hundreds of soldiers to help Li Yansun.

古文：法保名祐，以字行，既至，与延孙连兵置栅于伏流。
现代文：韦法保的本名叫韦，通常以表字相称。他到达东洛州之后，与李延孙把各自的部队合到一块，在伏流城安营扎寨。
English: Wei Fabao's real name was Wei, and he was usually referred to by his first name. After he arrived in Dongluozhou, he and Li Yansun combined their respective troops and set up camp in Furuicheng.

古文：独孤信之入洛阳也，欲缮修宫室，使外兵郎中天水权景宣帅徒兵三千出采运。
现代文：独孤信进入洛阳的时候，曾经打算修缮已经荒废的宫殿，他派遣外兵郎中天水人权景宣带领三千名步兵出去采伐树木，然后运入洛阳城。
English: When Du Guoxin entered Luoyang, he had planned to renovate the palace, which had fallen into disrepair. He sent the foreign soldier Zhong Tianshui and the human rights advocate Jing Xuan to lead three thousand infantrymen out to cut down trees, and then transported them into Luoyang City.

古文：会东魏兵至，河南皆叛，景宣间道西走，与李延孙相会，攻孔城，拔之，洛阳以南寻亦西附。
现代文：不久，东魏的部队赶到，河南各州郡都反叛了，权景宣抄小路向西逃跑，与李延孙会师。他们一同攻打并占领了孔城，洛阳以南的州郡也都连续不断地归附西魏。
English: Soon, the troops of the Eastern Wei Dynasty arrived, and all the prefectures and counties in Henan rebelled. Guan Jing Xuan fled westward along a small road and joined Li Yansun's division. Together, they attacked and occupied Kongcheng. The prefectures and counties south of Luoyang were also continuously annexed to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：丞相泰即留景宣守张白坞，节度东南诸军应关西者。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰随即留下权景宣镇守张白坞，让他统管东南地区的军队中响应关西的人马。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, immediately left the town of Quan Jing Xuan to guard Zhang Bai dock, and let him take charge of the troops in the southeastern region to respond to the Kansai people.

古文：是岁，延孙为其长史杨伯兰所杀，韦法保即引兵据延孙之栅。
现代文：这一年，李延孙被他手下的长史杨伯兰杀害，韦法保马上指挥部队占据了李延孙的营盘。
English: In the same year, Li Yansun was killed by his subordinate Yang Bolan, and Wei Fabao immediately commanded the troops to occupy Li Yansun's camp.

古文：东魏将段琛等据宜阳，遣阳州刺史牛道恒诱魏边民。
现代文：东魏将领段琛等人占据着宜阳，他们派遣阳州刺史牛道恒去引诱西魏边境地带的百姓。
English: Eastern Wei generals such as Duan Yu and others occupied Yiyang. They sent Yangzhou's chief historian, Niu Dao Heng, to lure the people of the West Wei border area.

古文：魏南兗州刺史韦孝宽患之，乃诈为道恒与孝宽书，论归款之意，使谍人遗之于琛营，琛果疑道恒。
现代文：西魏南兖州刺史韦孝宽对此感到忧虑，就伪造了一封牛道恒给自己的信，其中谈到有归附西魏的意思，又派间谍故意将信遗留在段琛的营地，段琛果然对牛道恒产生了怀疑。
English: The Southern Wei governor of Ganzhou, Shi Wei Xiaokuan, was worried about this, so he forged a letter from Niu Daoheng to himself, in which he talked about the intention to join the Western Wei Dynasty, and sent spies to deliberately leave the letter in Duan Yan's camp. Duan Yan indeed had doubts about Niu Daoheng.

古文：孝宽乘其猜阻，出兵袭之，擒道恒及琛，崤、渑遂清。
现代文：韦孝宽趁他胡乱猜疑的时候，出兵袭击宜阳，活捉了牛道恒和段琛，于是崤山与渑水地区都得以平定。
English: Wei Xiaokuan took advantage of his wild suspicions and attacked Yiyang with troops, capturing Niu Dao Heng and Duan Qi alive. As a result, the Lushan and Surabaya regions were pacified.

古文：东道行台王思政以玉壁险要，请筑城，自恒农徙镇之，诏加都督汾、晋、并州诸军事、并州刺史，行台如故。
现代文：东道行台王思政认为玉壁地势险要，请求在那里修筑新城，并要求从恒农前去镇守，文帝颁下诏书，加封他为都督汾、晋、并州诸军事，并州刺史，原先担任的行台职务不变。
English: The host, the governor of Taiwan, Wang Shizheng, thought that the situation of the Jade Wall was precarious, and requested that a new city be built there. He also requested that Heng Nong go to the town guard, and Emperor Wen issued an edict, adding him as the governor of the capital, Jin, and the military of the state, and the history of the state, and the original position of the governor of Taiwan remained unchanged.

古文：东魏以高澄摄吏部尚书，始改崔亮年劳之制，铨擢贤能；又沙汰尚书郎，妙选人地以充之。
现代文：东魏委任高澄代理吏部尚书的职务，他开始改变崔亮制定的按待选年限提拔官员的制度，根据品德与才能提拔官职，又淘汰原有的尚书郎，精选出门第才能合适的人来充当。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Cheng was appointed as the acting official of Shang Shu, and he began to change the system of promoting officials according to the number of years to be elected, which was established by Cui Liang, and promoted officials according to their moral character and ability. He also eliminated the original Shang Shu, and carefully selected people with the right talent to serve.

古文：凡才名之士，虽未荐擢，皆引致门下，与之游宴、讲论、赋诗，士大夫以是称之。
现代文：凡是有才能与声望的人士，即使没有推荐提拔，他娨捕及阉钦兄碌阶约旱拿畔拢胨且坏烙未σ疲倒诺澜瘢词鞲常士族官员因此都称赞他。
English: He was praised by all able and reputable officials, even if they did not recommend him for promotion, he was praised by his subordinates and subordinates, and he was praised by his subordinates and subordinates.

古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同五年
现代文：五年
English: Five years

古文：春，正月，乙卯，以尚书左仆射萧渊藻为中卫将军，丹杨尹何敬容为尚书令，吏部尚书张缵为仆射。
现代文：春季，正月，乙卯，梁武帝任命尚书左仆射萧渊藻为中卫将军，丹阳尹何敬容为尚书令，吏部尚书张缵为仆射。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Liangwu appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Xiao Yuanmao as the middle guard general, Danyang Yin He Jingrong as Shangshu's deputy, and Shangshu's clerk Zhang Jie as his subordinate.

古文：缵，弘策之子也。
现代文：张缵是张弘策的儿子。
English: Zhang Rong is the son of Zhang Hongze.

古文：自晋、宋以来，宰相皆以文义自逸，敬容独勤簿领，日旰不休，为时俗所嗤鄙。
现代文：从晋、宋以来，凡是担任宰相的，都以文章、义理而自娱，唯独何敬容勤勉于各种文书，日夜不停，受到当时的嗤笑鄙视。
English: Since the Jin and Song dynasties, all prime ministers have amused themselves with articles and doctrines, but He Jingrong diligently worked on various documents, day and night, and was ridiculed and despised at the time.

古文：自徐勉、周舍既卒，当权要者，外朝则何敬容，内省则硃异。
现代文：自从徐勉、周去世以后，掌握国家大权的，在三公、卿、监、尚书这些外朝官员中要算何敬容，在门下省里则是朱异。
English: Since the death of Xu and Zhou, the Three Princes, the Three Generals, the Three Supervisors, and Shangshu, who have held the power of the state, have been the most respected among the foreign officials, and the least respected among the subordinate provincial officials.

古文：敬容质悫无文，以纲维为己任；异文华敏洽，曲营世誉。
现代文：何敬容本性忠厚而缺少文才，以维护国家的法纪作为自己的责任；朱异文思敏捷，见多识广，善于用各种手段，博得世间的赞誉。
English: He Jingyong is loyal by nature but lacks literary talent, and takes it as his responsibility to safeguard the country's law and discipline; Zhu Yixin is quick-witted, knowledgeable, and good at using various means to win the praise of the world.

古文：二人行异而俱得幸于上。
现代文：他们两个人的品行不同，但是都得到梁武帝的宠信。
English: Their two characters are different, but both are favored by Emperor Liangwu.

古文：异善伺候人主意为阿谀，用事三十年，广纳货赂，欺罔视听，远近莫不忿疾。
现代文：朱异善于迎合皇帝的意思，进行阿谀奉承，在掌权的三十年里，广泛地收受别人的贿赂，欺上瞒下，远近没有不痛恨他的。
English: Zhu Yixing was good at pandering to the emperor's wishes and flattering him. During his 30 years in power, he accepted a wide range of bribes from others, deceived and concealed, and was hated by almost everyone.

古文：园宅、玩好、饮膳、声色穷一时之盛。
现代文：他的园林住宅的气派，古玩珍宝的华贵、饮食的精致、还有音乐与妻妾的美丽动人，都代表着当时的最高水准。
English: The grandeur of his garden house, the magnificence of his antiques and treasures, the delicacy of his food, as well as the beauty of his music and his wives and concubines, all represented the highest standards of the time.

古文：每休下，车马填门，唯王承、王稚及褚翔不往。
现代文：每到他从省中还家休息的日子，各类车马多得把家门都堵塞住了，只有王承、王稚以及褚翔不去他那里。
English: Every time he returns home from the province for a day of rest, all kinds of carts and horses have to block the door of the house, only Wang Cheng, Wang Zhi and Soaring do not go to him.

古文：承、稚，暕之子；翔，渊之曾孙也。
现代文：王承、王稚是王的儿子；褚翔是褚渊的曾孙子。
English: Wang Cheng and Wang Zhi are the sons of the king; Xiang Xiang is the great-grandson of Yaoyuan.

古文：丁巳，御史中丞参礼仪事贺琛奏： 南、北二郊及藉田，往还并宜御辇，不复乘辂。 
现代文：丁巳，梁朝御史中丞参礼仪事贺琛向梁武帝递上奏折，建议： 皇上往返都城南郊、北郊以及去藉田举行耕种仪式时，应该都乘坐辇而不应乘坐马车。 
English: Ding Si, the chief historian of the Liang Dynasty, submitted a report to Emperor Liang Wudi on the ceremonial event of He Xuan, suggesting that: When the emperor travels to and from the southern suburbs of the capital, the northern suburbs, and when he goes to hold a farming ceremony in a borrowed field, he should take a donkey instead of a carriage.

古文：诏从之，祀宗庙仍乘玉辇。
现代文：梁武帝同意了，去祭祀宗庙时仍旧乘坐玉辇。
English: Emperor Liangwu agreed, and he still rode on the jade palanquin when he went to worship at the ancestral temple.

古文：琛，瑒之弟子也。
现代文：贺琛是贺的侄子。
English: He Xuan is He's nephew.

古文：辛酉，东魏以尚书令孙腾为司徒。
现代文：辛酉，东魏任命尚书令孙腾为司徒。
English: Soon after, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Shang Shuling to make Sun Teng a disciple.

古文：辛未，上祀南郊。
现代文：辛未，梁武帝在南郊祭天。
English: In Xinwei, Emperor Liangwu held a divine service in the southern suburbs.

古文：魏丞相泰于行台置学，取丞郎、府佐德行明敏者充学生，悉令旦治公务，晚就讲习。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰在行台设置了学堂，选拔丞郎、府佐中品德出众、思想灵敏的人充当学生，命令他们全都在白天处理公务，晚上去学堂听讲习。
English: The Western Wei chancellor Umentai set up a school in Xingtai, selected chengren and officials with outstanding moral character and quick thinking to serve as students, and ordered them all to handle official business during the day and go to the school to listen to lectures in the evening.

古文：东魏丞相欢，以徐州刺史房谟、广平太守羊孰、广宗太守窦瑗、平原太守许惇有政绩清能，与诸刺史书，褒称谟等以劝之。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢认为徐州刺史房谟、广平太守羊敦、广宗太守窦瑗、平原太守许政绩显著，廉洁而有能力，特地向各州刺史去信，信中表扬了房谟等人，以便对他们进行鼓励。
English: Gao Huan, the Premier of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, believed that Xuzhou, Guangping, Guanzhong and Pingyuan had made remarkable achievements in politics, and were clean and capable. He sent a letter to the provincial governors, praising Fang Mo and others in order to encourage them.

古文：夏，五月，甲戌，东魏立丞相欢女为皇后；乙亥，大赦。
现代文：夏季，五月，甲戌，东魏孝静帝策立丞相高欢的女儿为皇后；乙亥，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in May, the daughter of Gao Huan, the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing, was crowned as the empress.

古文：魏以开府仪同三司李弼为司空。
现代文：西魏任用仪同三司李弼为司空。
English: The appointment ceremony of the Western Wei Dynasty is the same as that of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division.

古文：秋，七月，魏以扶风王孚为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，又任用扶风王元孚为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Fu Feng Wang Yuan Fu was also appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：九月，甲子，东魏发畿内十万人城鄴，四十日罢。
现代文：九月，甲子，东魏征调了京畿内十万人修筑邺城，四十天完工。
English: In September, the Eastern Wei Dynasty conscripted 100,000 people from Gyeonggi Province to build Yeongseong, which was completed in 40 days.

古文：冬，十月，癸亥，以新宫成，大赦，改元兴和。
现代文：冬季，十月癸亥，由于新的宫殿建成，孝静帝下令大赦天下，并改年号为 兴和 。
English: In the winter, in October, due to the construction of a new palace, Emperor Xiaojing ordered a general amnesty and changed the year name to Xinghe.

古文：魏置纸笔于阳武门外以求得失。
现代文：西魏在阳武门外放置了纸与笔，让人们评论朝廷政治的得失。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty placed paper and pens outside the Yangwu Gate to let people comment on the gains and losses of imperial politics.

古文：十一月，乙亥，东魏使散骑常侍王元景、魏收来聘。
现代文：十一月，乙亥，东魏派遣散骑常侍王元景、魏收出使梁朝。
English: In November, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched roving equerry Wang Yuanjing, and the Wei Dynasty sent envoy Liang to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：东魏人以《正光历》浸差，命校书郎李业兴更加修正，以甲子为元，号曰《兴光历》，既成，行之。
现代文：东魏由于所采用的正光历渐渐出现了误差，就让校书郎李业兴进一步加以修正。新历以甲子为元，命名为《兴光历》，制成之后，就开始实行了。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, due to the gradual error of the positive light calendar adopted, the school scribe Li Ye Xing was asked to further revise it. The new calendar was based on the Chinese Zodiac and named "Xing Guang Li." After it was made, it began to be implemented.

古文：散骑常侍硃异奏： 顷来置州稍广，而小大不伦，请分为五品，其位秩高卑，参僚多少，皆以是为差。 
现代文：梁朝散骑常侍朱异向梁武帝呈上奏折，说道： 近来，州的建置稍微多了一些，而且还不分大小，现在请求皇上把各州分为五个等级，州长官地位俸禄的高低，参佐幕僚人数的多少，都根据各州的等级形成差别。 
English: Zhu Yixuan, a regular attendant of the Liang Dynasty, presented a report to Emperor Liangwu, saying: Recently, the number of prefectures has increased slightly, and regardless of size, it is now requested that the emperor divide the prefectures into five levels. The level of the governor's salary and the number of staff officers are different according to the level of each prefecture.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：梁武帝颁下诏书，表示同意。
English: He complied.

古文：于是上品二十州，次品十州，次品八州，次品二十三州，下品二十一州。
现代文：于是全国的各个州区分成：第一等级二十个，第二等级十个，第三等级八个，第四等级二十三个，第五等级二十一个。
English: Thus the states of the nation were divided into: twenty first class, ten second class, eight third class, twenty-three fourth class, and twenty-one fifth class.

古文：时上方事征伐，恢拓境宇，北逾淮、汝，东距彭城，西开牂柯，南平俚洞，建置州郡，纷纶甚众，故异请分之。
现代文：此时，梁武帝正在进行征战讨伐，收复失土，拓展国境，在北方越过了淮、汝地区，在东方到达彭城，在西方开发了柯，在南方平定了俚洞，情况比较混乱无章，所以朱异请求区分各州的等级。
English: At this time, Emperor Liangwu was in the process of conquering and fighting, recovering lost lands, and expanding the national borders. In the north, he crossed the Huai and Ru regions, reached Pengcheng in the east, developed Ke in the west, and leveled Shantong in the south. The situation was relatively chaotic, so Zhu Ying requested to distinguish the level of each state.

古文：其下品皆异国之人来归附者，徒有州名而无土地，或因荒徼之民所居村落置州及郡县，刺史守令皆用彼人为之，尚书不能悉领，山川险远，职贡罕通。
现代文：第五等州的居民都不是汉人，所以空有州名而没有土地，也有的在僻远蛮荒之地根据百姓所居住的村落设置州以及郡、县，刺史、郡守、县令都让当地的土人担任，尚书无法统管起来，由于山川险峻遥远，赋税贡品很难送到朝廷。
English: The residents of the fifth class of prefectures were not Han Chinese, so they had empty prefectural names but no land. Some prefectures and counties were set up in remote and wild places according to the villages where the people lived, and the local natives were appointed as prefectures, counties, county magistrates, county governors, and county magistrates. Shangshu could not control them, and because the mountains and rivers were steep and far away, it was difficult to send tax tributes to the imperial court.

古文：五品之外，又有二十馀州不知处所。
现代文：在五个等级以外，还有二十个州不知道设在什么地方。
English: Beyond the five tiers, there are twenty states that don't know where they stand.

古文：凡一百七州。
现代文：梁朝共有一百零七个州。
English: The Liang Dynasty had a total of 107 prefectures.

古文：又以边境镇戍，虽领民不多，欲重其将帅，皆建为郡，或一人领二三郡太守，州郡虽多而户口日耗矣。
现代文：又因为在边境地区驻兵守卫，虽然管理的百姓数量不多，但是为了显示对这些地方的的将帅的重视，就把不该建立郡的地方都建成郡，官员中有的一个人就担任两三个郡的太守，州郡虽然多，可是百姓的户口却日益减少了。
English: Also, because of the garrison guards in the border areas, although the number of people managed by them is small, but in order to show the importance of the generals in these places, they have built counties in places where they should not be built. One of the officials served as the governor of two or three counties. Although there are many counties, the number of people's hukou has been decreasing.

古文：魏自西迁以来，礼乐散逸，丞相泰命左仆射周惠达、吏部郎中北海唐瑾损益旧章，至是稍备。
现代文：魏国自从迁到西边成为西魏以来，礼乐制度散失废弃，丞相宇文泰便命令左仆射周惠达、吏部郎中北海人唐瑾对旧的章程进行增减加工，到这时稍为具备。
English: Since the State of Wei moved to the west to become the Western Wei, the ceremonial music system was lost and abandoned, and the prime minister, Yu Wentai, ordered his left-hand man, Zhou Huida, and the leader of the cadres, the North Sea man, Tang Xuan, to increase and decrease the old regulations. At this time, it was slightly ready.

古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同六年春，正月，壬申，东魏以广平公库狄干为太保。
现代文：六年春季，正月，壬申，东魏任命广平公库狄干为太保。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the first month, Jinshin, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Guangping Gong Ku Dikan as Taibo.

古文：丁丑，东魏主入新宫，大赦。
现代文：丁丑，东魏孝静帝迁入新的皇宫，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty moved into the new imperial palace and pardoned the whole world.

古文：魏扶风王孚卒。
现代文：二月，己亥，梁武帝来到藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: In February, Ji Hai, Emperor Liang Wudi came to Yu Tian to hold a cultivation ceremony.

古文：魏铸五铢钱。
现代文：西魏铸造五铢钱。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty minted five-baht coins.

古文：东魏大行台侯景出三鵶，将复荆州，魏丞相泰遣李弼、独孤信各将五千骑出武关，景乃还。
现代文：东魏大行台侯景从三鸦出发，准备收复荆州；西魏丞相宇文泰派遣李弼、独孤信各自率领五千名骑兵驰出武关增援，侯景这才返回。
English: The Eastern Wei general Tai Houjing set out from Sanrao to recapture Jingzhou; the Western Wei chancellor Wu Wentai sent Li Xi and Du Guoxin, each leading five thousand cavalrymen, to reinforce Wu Guan, and Hou Jing only then returned.

古文：魏文后既为尼，居别宫，悼后犹忌之，乃以其子武都王戊为秦州刺史，使文后随之官。
现代文：西魏文后做了尼姑之后，居住在别宫之中，但悼后还妒忌她，于是朝廷就任用文后的儿子武都王元戊为泰州刺史，让她跟随儿子，到任职的地方去。
English: After Xi Weiwen became a nun, she lived in the middle of another palace, but after mourning she was still jealous of her, so the court appointed Wu Du Wang Yuan Wu, the son of Wu Duwen, as the governor of Taizhou, and asked her to follow her son to the place where she worked.

古文：魏主虽限以大计，而恩好不忘，密令养发，有追还之意。
现代文：文帝虽然为了国家大计，废文后而立悼后，但是并没有忘记文后对自己的恩情好处，他悄悄地叫文后留长头发，表现出要把她接回来的意思。
English: Although Emperor Wen, for the sake of the country's grand plan, sent his emissaries to mourn the death of Empress Wen, he did not forget the benefits of Empress Wen's kindness to him. He quietly asked Empress Wen to grow her hair long, showing his intention to bring her back.

古文：会柔然举国度河南侵，时颇有言柔然以悼后故兴师者，帝曰： 岂有兴百万之众为一女子邪！
现代文：此时刚好遇到柔然倾全国兵力都渡过黄河，而向南侵犯，当时不少人都说柔然人是因为悼后的缘故才兴师动众的，文帝听了说道： 哪有为了一个女子而征发百万人的事情呢？
English: At this time, he just happened to meet Zhu Rong, who had crossed the Yellow River and invaded the south. At that time, many people said that Zhu Rong was only able to arouse the masses because of the mourning period. Emperor Wen listened and said: What kind of thing is it to conscript a million people for the sake of one woman?

古文：虽然，致人此言，朕亦何颜以见将帅！ 
现代文：虽然如此，可是让人说出这样的话，我还有什么面目见将帅？ 
English: Even so, if someone were to say such a thing, how could I still be considered handsome?

古文：乃遣中常侍曹宠赍手敕赐文后自尽。
现代文：于是，他就派遣中常侍曹宠将他亲手写的诏书送给文后，叫她自尽。
English: As a result, he dispatched his personal attendant, Cao Zi, to deliver his handwritten edict to Wen Hou, telling her to commit suicide.

古文：文后泣谓宠曰： 愿至尊千万岁，天下康宁，死无恨也！ 
现代文：文后哭对曹宠说道： 愿皇上活千万岁，天下得以平安，如果这一切都能实现，我死了也没有什么怨恨。 
English: After the letter, he cried to Cao Cao and said, "May the emperor live for ten thousand years and the world be at peace. If all this can be achieved, I will have no grudge when I die."

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是便自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：凿麦积崖而葬之，号曰寂陵。
现代文：文帝叫人在麦积崖上凿一个墓穴，将她埋葬了，并命名为寂陵。
English: Emperor Wen ordered someone to dig a tomb on the cliff of barley and buried her, naming it the Tomb of Shaoshan.

古文：夏，丞相泰召诸军屯沙苑以备柔然。
现代文：夏季，西魏丞相宇文泰召集各路大军到沙苑驻守，防备柔然人入侵。
English: In the summer, the Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, called together armies from all directions to garrison Shayuan in preparation for an invasion by the Jurchens.

古文：右仆射周惠达发士马守京城，堑诸街巷，召雍州刺史王罴议之，罴不应召，谓使者曰： 若蠕蠕至渭北者，王罴自帅乡里破之，不烦国家兵马，何为天子城中作如此惊扰！
现代文：右仆射周惠达征调兵马守卫京城，他在大街小巷挖掘壕沟陷井，又叫雍州刺史王罴到长安商议对策，王罴没有服从命令，对使者说道： 如果柔然人真的攻到渭河北面的话，我王罴自己会率领乡里的父老兄弟去打败他们，不用麻烦国家的兵马，为什么要使使京城人心惶惶？
English: His right-hand man, Zhou Huida, conscripted soldiers and horses to guard the capital city. He dug trenches and traps in the streets and alleys, and also called the Yongzhou prince Wang Yao to Chang'an to discuss countermeasures. Wang Yao did not obey the order and said to the messenger: If the people of Zhuoran really attack the north side of the Wei River, I, Wang Yao, will lead the parents and brothers in the countryside to defeat them. Do not bother the soldiers and horses of the country. Why make the people of Beijing panic?

古文：由周家小儿恇怯致此。 
现代文：这完全是因为姓周的小子怯懦才造成这样的局面。 
English: This situation is entirely due to the cowardice of the boy surnamed Zhou.

古文：柔然至夏州而退。
现代文：柔然到达夏州之后开始后退。
English: After gently reaching Xiazhou, it began to retreat.

古文：未几，悼后遇疾殂。
现代文：没有多久，悼后生病去世。
English: Not long after the mourning, he fell ill and passed away.

古文：五月，乙酉，魏行台宫延和、陕州刺史宫延庆降于东魏，东魏以河北马场为义州以处之。
现代文：五月，乙酉，西魏行台宫延河、陕州刺史宫延庆向东魏投降，东魏在黄河之北的马场建立了义州，派他们二人掌管。
English: In May, Yancheng, Yanhe of the Western Wei Dynasty, and Yanqing of the Shishi Dynasty in Shaanxi Province surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. The Eastern Wei Dynasty established Yizhou in the horse farm north of the Yellow River and put them both in charge.

古文：东魏阳州武公高永乐卒。
现代文：东魏的阳州武公高永乐去世。
English: Gao Yongle, the Yangzhou warlord of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, passed away.

古文：闰月，丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰月，丁丑朔，发生日食。
English: The intercalary month, Ding Xi Shuo, the occurrence of a solar eclipse.

古文：己丑，东魏封皇兄景植为宜阳王，皇弟威为清河王，谦为颍川王。
现代文：己丑，东魏的孝静帝封他的哥哥元景植为宜阳王，弟弟元威为清河王，元谦为颍川王。
English: He was so ugly that Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty made his brother Yuan Jingsu the king of Yiyang, his brother Yuan Wei the king of Qinghe, and Yuan Qian the king of Shichuan.

古文：六月，壬子，东魏华山王鸷卒。
现代文：六月，壬子，东魏的华山王元鸷去世。
English: In June, the Eastern Wei Dynasty's Huashan Wang Yuanxuan passed away in Renzi.

古文：秋，七月，丁亥，东魏使兼散骑常侍李象等来聘。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁亥，东魏派遣兼散骑常侍李象等人到梁朝聘问。
English: In the autumn, in July, Dinghai, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched Li Xiang and others to the Liang Dynasty for consultation.

古文：八月，戊午，大赦。
现代文：八月，戊午，梁朝大赦天下。
English: In August, at noon, Liang Chao pardoned the whole country.

古文：九月，戊戌，司空袁昂卒，遗疏不受赠谥，敕诸子勿上行状及立铭志。上不许，赠本官，谥穆正公。
现代文：九月，戊戌，梁朝司空袁昂去世，他留下一份呈给梁武帝的奏折，里面表示死后不接受任何赠谥，他还告诫几个儿子不要向朝廷递交描述他的生平和请求赠谥的材料，也不要立铭树碑；梁武帝没有允许，还是追赠他原来担任的职务，谥为穆正公。
English: In September, Yuan Ang, the Secretary of the Liang Dynasty, died. He left a report to Emperor Liang Wudi, which stated that he would not accept any gifts after his death. He also warned several sons not to submit to the court materials describing his life and requesting gifts, nor to erect a memorial tree monument. Emperor Liang Wudi did not allow him to do so, but still gave him the post he had originally held. He was Mu Zheng Gong.

古文：冬，十一月，魏太师念贤卒。
现代文：冬季，十一月，西魏的太师念贤去世。
English: In winter, in November, the Grand Master of the Western Wei Dynasty, Nian Xian, passed away.

古文：吐谷浑自莫折念生之乱，不通于魏。
现代文：吐谷浑自从莫折念生发动叛乱以来，不再与魏国进行联系。
English: Tuyuhun has not been in contact with Wei since he reluctantly launched the rebellion.

古文：伏连筹卒，子夸吕立，始称可汗，居伏俟城。
现代文：伏连筹去世之后，他的儿子伏夸吕继承了他的位置，开始自称可汗，居住在伏俟城。
English: After the death of Fu Lianqiao, his son Fu Quaru inherited his position and began to call himself a khan, living in the city of Fuxi.

古文：其地东西三千里，南北千馀里，官有王、公、仆射、尚书、郎中、将军之号。是岁，始遣使假道柔然，聘于东魏。
现代文：该国的土地从东到西有三千里，从南到北有一千多里，官职中有王、公、仆射、尚书、娎芍小⒔取庖荒辏遣排汕彩拐呓璧廊崛唬蕉浩肝省
English: The land of the country is three thousand li from east to west, and more than one thousand li from south to north. There are kings, princes, courtiers, scholars, and officials in the country.

古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同七年
现代文：七年春季，正月，辛巳，梁武帝在南郊举行祭天典礼，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, on the first day of the month, Emperor Liang Wudi held a rite in the southern suburbs, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：春，正月，辛巳，上祀南郊，大赦。辛丑，祀明堂。
现代文：辛丑，在明堂举行祭祀典礼。
English: It was so ugly that a memorial service was held in Myodo.

古文：宕昌王梁企定为其下所杀，弟弥定立。
现代文：梁朝的宕昌王梁定被他的下属杀死，他的弟弟梁弥定继承了他的位置。
English: Liang Ding, the Tangchang King of the Liang Dynasty, was killed by his subordinates, and his younger brother Liang Yading inherited his position.

古文：二月，乙巳，以弥定为河、梁二州刺史、宕昌王。
现代文：二月，乙巳，梁武帝任命梁弥定为河、梁二州刺史，并封他为宕昌王。
English: In February, Emperor Liangwu appointed Liang Mi as the governor of He and Liang Erzhou, and made him the king of Tangchang.

古文：辛亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：辛亥，梁武帝来到藉田耕作。
English: In Xinhai, Chen Xuandi held a cultivation ceremony in a rented field.

古文：魏幽州刺史顺阳王仲景坐事赐死。
现代文：西魏的幽州刺史顺阳王元仲景犯罪被文帝命令自杀。
English: Western Wei's Yuzhou assassin Shunyang Wang Yuan Zhongjing committed a crime and was ordered by Emperor Wen to commit suicide.

古文：三月，魏夏州刺史刘平伏据上郡反，大都督于谨讨擒之。
现代文：三月，西魏的夏州刺史刘平伏占据了上郡，在那里发动叛乱，大都督于谨前去讨伐，捉住了他。
English: In March, Liu Pingfu, a member of the Western Wei Dynasty, occupied Shang County, where he launched a rebellion. Grand Duke Yu Zhen went to fight and captured him.

古文：夏，五月，遣兼散骑常侍明少遐等聘于东魏。
现代文：夏季，五月，梁武帝派遣兼散骑常侍明少遐等人到东魏聘问。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Liangwu dispatched Ming Shaoqi and others to the Eastern Wei Dynasty for consultation.

古文：秋，七月，己卯，东魏宜阳王景植卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，己卯，东魏的宜阳王元景植去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, King Yuan Jingshi of Yiyang in the Eastern Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：魏以侍中宇文测为大都督、行汾州事。
现代文：西魏委派侍中宇文测出任大都督，兼管汾州的事务。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty Committee appointed Wu Wenke, a chamberlain, as the grand governor, also in charge of the affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：测，深之兄也，为政简惠，得士民心。
现代文：宇文测是宇文深的兄长，他处理政务时讲究效率、仁慈，受到士人与普通百姓的拥戴。
English: As the elder brother of Uwenshin, Uwensho was known for his efficiency and benevolence in handling government affairs. He was loved by both scholars and ordinary people.

古文：地接东魏，东魏人数来寇抄，测擒获之，命解缚，引与相见，为设酒殽，待以客礼，并给粮饩，卫送出境。
现代文：他管辖的地域与东魏相连接，东魏人多次前来掠夺，宇文测抓住了他们之后，叫人给他们松绑，带他们来和自己见面，专门安排了美酒佳肴，象招待客人一样招待他们，还给他们粮食，派人护送他们出境。
English: The area under his jurisdiction was connected with the Eastern Wei Dynasty. The Eastern Wei people came to plunder the country many times. After Yu Wenmei caught them, he ordered someone to untie them, brought them to meet him, specially arranged fine wine and food, invited them like guests, gave them food, and sent someone to escort them out of the country.

古文：东魏人大惭，不复为寇，汾、晋之间遂通庆吊，时论称之。
现代文：东魏人觉得非常惭愧，不再与宇文测为敌，汾州与晋州两方居民如果遇上喜事或丧事时，还相互前去祝贺或吊丧，当时的舆论给予了好评。
English: The Eastern Wei people felt very ashamed, no longer being enemies with Yu Wenmei, and the residents of Zhangzhou and Jinzhou went to congratulate or mourn each other when they met with happy events or funerals. The public opinion at the time gave a favorable comment.

古文：或告测交通境外者，丞相泰怒曰： 测为我安边，我知其志，何得间我骨肉！ 
现代文：有人控告宇文测交结联系国境以外的人，西魏丞相宇文泰听了愤怒地说： 宇文测替我安定边境地区，我了解他的心意，你怎么能够离间我们骨肉兄弟？ 
English: Someone accused Uwen Zheng of crossing the border to contact people outside the country. Western Wei chancellor Uwen Tai listened and said angrily: Uwen Zheng stabilized the border area for me. I understand his intentions. How can you separate our brothers?

古文：命斩之。
现代文：他下令杀掉了控告者。
English: The order was given to execute them.

古文：魏丞相泰欲革易时政，为强国富民之法，大行台度支尚书兼司农卿苏绰尽其智能，赞成其事，减官员，置二长，并置屯田以资军国。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰想要改革当时的政治，采取有利于国家强盛、人民富裕的制度，大行台度支尚书兼司农卿苏绰想尽自己的才智能力，支持宇文泰的改革，裁减了多余的官员，设置了两个令长，并且实行屯田，以便增加军用开支。
English: Wu Wentai, the Minister of the Western Wei Dynasty, wanted to reform the politics of the time and adopt a system that was conducive to the country's prosperity and the people's prosperity. Su Zhuo, the Grand Duke of Taitai and the Secretary of Agriculture, wanted to do his best to support the reform of Wu Wentai, cut down the superfluous officials, set up two commanders, and implemented the land reclamation in order to increase military expenditure.

古文：又为六条诏书，九月，始奏行之：一曰清心，二曰敦教化，三曰尽地利，四曰擢贤良，五曰恤狱讼，六曰均赋役。
现代文：苏绰又撰写了六条诏书，在九月份经文帝同意后开始付诸实施。这六条诏书的内容是：第一、纯洁心灵，第二、使政教风化归于谆原，第三、发挥土地资源效用，第四、提拔品德高尚的人才，第五、慎重对待刑案诉讼方面的事情，第六、公平地收纳赋税，指派劳役。
English: Su Qiao also wrote six edicts, which began to be implemented after the approval of Emperor Wen in September. The contents of these six edicts are: First, purity of mind, Second, make the political and religious demeanor relegated to the wasteland, Third, play the role of land resources, Fourth, promote talents with high moral character, Fifth, carefully handle criminal litigation matters, Sixth, fairly collect taxes and assign laborers.

古文：泰甚重之，尝置诸坐右，又令百司习诵之，其牧守令长非通六条及计帐者，不得居官。
现代文：宇文泰对这六条诏书非常重视，曾经专门摆在自己座位的右边，又命令各个部门的官员学习背诵，并规定凡是担任牧守令长的，如果不熟悉这六条和户籍情况，不能再担任这些官职。
English: Wu Wentai attaches great importance to these six edicts, once placed them specially on the right side of his seat, and ordered the officials of various departments to learn to recite them, and stipulated that anyone who served as the chief of the herdsmen, if he was not familiar with these six articles and the situation of the household registration, he could no longer hold these official positions.

古文：东魏诏群官于麟趾阁议定法制，谓之《麟趾格》，冬，十月，甲寅，颁行之。
现代文：东魏的孝静帝颁下诏书，叫文武百官在麟趾阁商议制定法律制度，命名为《麟趾格》。冬季，十月，甲寅，新法开始颁布实行。
English: Emperor Xiaojing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty issued an edict, calling on the civil and military officials to discuss and formulate a legal system at Linzi Pavilion, named "Linzi Ge." In winter, in October, the new law began to be promulgated and implemented.

古文：乙巳，东魏发夫五万筑漳滨堰，三十五日罢。
现代文：乙巳，东魏征调五万名民工修筑漳滨堰，三十五天完工。
English: Suddenly, the Eastern Wei Dynasty conscripted and transferred fifty thousand migrant workers to build the Fenbin Weir, which was completed in thirty-five days.

古文：十一月，丙戌，东魏以彭城王韶为太尉，度支尚书胡僧敬为司空。
现代文：十一月，丙戌，东魏任命彭城王元韶为太慰，度支尚书胡僧敬为司空。
English: In November, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun as Taiyong, and Du Zhi Shangshu Hu Sengjing as Sikuo.

古文：僧敬名虔，以字行，国珍之兄孙，东魏主之舅也。
现代文：胡僧敬本名叫胡虔，通常以表字相称，他是胡国珍的兄长的孙子，孝静帝的舅舅。
English: The original name of Hu Xiangjing was Hu Qian, and he was usually referred to by his first name. He was the grandson of Hu Guozhen's elder brother, and the uncle of Emperor Xiaojing.

古文：十二月，东魏遣兼散骑常侍李骞来聘。
现代文：十二月，东魏派遣兼散骑常侍李骞到梁朝聘问。
English: In December, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched its equestrian equerry Li Xi to Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：交趾李贲世为豪右，仕不得志。
现代文：梁朝交趾人李贲一家世世代代都是豪门大族，他本人在仕途上一直不大得志。
English: Li Gang's family, who were Liang's cronies, had been a powerful family for generations. He himself had not been very successful in his career.

古文：有并韶者，富于词藻，诣选求官，吏部尚书蔡撙以并姓无前贤，除广阳门郎；韶耻之。
现代文：有位与他同郡的人叫作并韶，擅长赋诗作文，到吏部求取官职，吏部尚书蔡撙认为姓并有以前从未出过有名望的人，就授予他广阳门郎这样小小的官职，并韶对此感到耻辱。
English: There was a man in the same county as him called Nian Ye, who was good at composing poems and went to the personnel department to apply for an official post. The personnel department's secretary, Cai Ye, thought that there was a person whose surname had never been famous before, and awarded him a small official post such as Guangyang Menro, and he was ashamed of it.

古文：贲与韶还乡里，谋作乱，会交州刺史武林侯咨以刻暴失众心，时贲监德州，因连结数州豪杰俱反。咨输贿于贲，奔还广州。
现代文：李贲与并韶返回家乡时，正赶上交州刺史、武林侯萧谘由于苛刻残暴而失去民心。当时李贲官居德州监，他就联合了几个州的豪杰一起造反；萧谘送给李贲财物之后，跑回了广州。
English: When Li Ying and Nian Ye returned to their hometown, they were just catching up with the history of Jiaozhou, and Wulin Hou Xiao Zhi lost the hearts of the people due to his harsh brutality. At that time, Li Ying's official lived in Texas, and he united with heroes from several states to rebel; Xiao Zhi gave Li Ying's property to him, and then ran back to Guangzhou.

古文：上遣咨与高州刺史孙冏、新州刺史卢子雄将兵击之。
现代文：梁武帝派遣萧谘与高州刺史孙、新州刺史卢子雄一同率领部队攻打李贲。
English: Emperor Liangwu dispatched Xiao Zhi, Gaozhou Zhi Sun and Xinzhou Zhi Shlu Zi Xiong to lead the troops to attack Li Rong.

古文：咨，恢之子也。
现代文：萧谘是鄱阳王萧恢的儿子。
English: Xiao Zhi is the son of King Xiao Guo of Shenyang.

古文：是岁，魏又益新制十二条。
现代文：这一年，西魏又增加了十二条新的制度。
English: In the same year, the Western Wei Dynasty added twelve new systems.

古文：东魏丞相欢以诸州调绢不依旧式，民甚苦之，奏令悉以四十尺为匹。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢发现各个州征调绢帛时，都不按照原来的规定办事，老百姓为此吃了许多苦头，就上书请求孝静帝颁布命令，规定一律以四十尺为一匹。
English: When Gao Huan, the Eastern Wei chancellor, discovered that all the states did not act according to the original regulations when recruiting and transferring horses, the common people suffered a lot of hardships for this reason. He sent a letter requesting Emperor Xiao Jing to issue an order, stipulating that all horses should be forty feet tall.

古文：魏自丧乱以来，农商失业，六镇之民相帅内徙，就食齐、晋，欢因之以成霸业。
现代文：北魏从孝昌年间国内发生动乱以后，农民、商人失业，六镇的百姓相继向内地迁移，到齐、晋之地寻求生路，高欢因此成就了霸业。
English: After the domestic turmoil in the Northern Wei Dynasty from the time of Xiaochang, farmers and merchants lost their jobs, and the people of the six towns successively migrated to the inland to seek a way of life in Qi and Jin, and Gaohuan thus achieved hegemony.

古文：东西分裂，连年战争，河南州郡鞠为茂草，公私困竭，民多饿死。
现代文：北魏分裂成东魏、西魏之后，连年发生战争，在黄河以南的各个州郡，全都变为一片荒芜，公家和个人都贫困不堪，许多老百姓都饿死了。
English: After the Northern Wei Dynasty was divided into the Eastern Wei Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty, war broke out for years on end, and all the states and counties south of the Yellow River were turned into a wasteland. Both the public and private sectors were poverty-stricken, and many ordinary people starved to death.

古文：欢命诸州滨河及津、梁皆置仓积谷以相转漕，供军旅，备饥馑，又于幽、瀛、沧、青四州傍海煮盐。
现代文：高欢命令各州的河岸以及有渡口和桥梁的地方，都设置库储存粮食，然后通过水道转运，供应部队，准备应付饥荒，又在幽、瀛、沧、青四个州的海边煮盐。
English: Gao Huan ordered the riverbanks of each state, as well as places with ferries and bridges, to set up warehouses to store grain, and then transport it through waterways, supply troops, prepare to deal with famine, and boil salt on the seashore of the four states.

古文：军国之费，粗得周赡。
现代文：由于采取了这些措施，军事和行政方面的开支，大致能够周转开了。
English: As a result of these measures, military and administrative expenditures were largely able to be turned around.

古文：至是，东方连岁大稔，谷斛至九钱，山东之民稍复苏息矣。
现代文：到现时，东部地区的庄稼连年好收成，一斛谷子的价格降到了九个钱，崤山以东的百姓在经历了长时间的困顿之后能够稍稍地休生养息了。
English: Up to now, the crops in the eastern region have had good harvests year after year, and the price of a bale of grain has dropped to nine yuan. After experiencing a long period of hardship, the people east of Lushan have been able to rest and recuperate for a while.

古文：东魏尚书令高澄尚静帝妹冯翊长公主，生子孝琬，朝贵贺之，澄曰： 此至尊之甥，先贺至尊。 
现代文：东魏的尚书令高澄与孝静帝的妹妹冯翊长公主结婚，生了一个儿子叫高孝琬，朝中的显贵们纷纷向他祝贺。高澄回答说： 这孩子是皇上外甥，应该先向皇上祝贺。 
English: Eastern Wei's Shang Shuling ordered Gao Cheng to marry Emperor Xiaozhing's younger sister, Princess Feng Yuchang, and they had a son named Gao Xiaozhong. The dignitaries in the imperial court congratulated Gao Cheng. Gao Cheng replied, "This child is the emperor's nephew. You should congratulate the emperor first."

古文：三日，帝幸其第，赐锦彩布绢万匹。
现代文：三天之后，孝静帝来到高澄的家中，赠送给他一万匹织锦、彩缎、绵布与绢帛。
English: Three days later, Emperor Xiaojing came to Gao Cheng's home and presented him with 10,000 pairs of brocade, colored satin, cotton and satin.

古文：于是诸贵竞致礼遗，货满十室。
现代文：于是显贵们竞相前来赠送礼品，货物整整堆满了十个房间。
English: As a result, dignitaries raced to present gifts, and the goods completely filled ten rooms.

古文：东魏临淮王孝友表曰： 令制百家为族，二十五家为闾，五家为比。
现代文：东魏的临淮王元孝友上书给孝静帝说： 规定以一百户人家为一族，二十五户人家为一闾，五家为一比。
English: King Yuan Xiaoyou of the Eastern Wei Dynasty wrote a letter to Emperor Xiaozhing, saying: It is stipulated that one hundred households are one family, twenty-five households are one family, and five households are one family.

古文：百家之内有帅二十五，征发皆免，苦乐不均，羊少狼多，复有蚕食，此之为弊久矣。
现代文：一百户人家里有族帅、闾帅、比帅共二十五人，都免除了兵役、劳役，他们与普通百姓相比苦乐不均，在这种羊少狼多的崐情况下，又有互相蚕食的现象，这一制度造成危害已经很久了。
English: In a hundred families, there are a total of twenty-five people in the family, all of whom are exempt from military service and labor service. Compared with ordinary people, they have unequal bitterness and joy. In this situation of fewer sheep and more wolves, there is also the phenomenon of mutual encroachment. This system has caused harm for a long time.

古文：京邑诸坊，或七八百家唯一里正、二史，庶事无阙，而况外州乎！
现代文：京城的各个坊里，有的是七八百户人家才有一个里正，两个史，日常事务都做得不错，何况京城外的各个州呢？
English: In the various villages of Beijing, there are seven or eight hundred households that have only one village, two histories, and their daily affairs are doing well. What is more, what about the states outside Beijing?

古文：请依旧置三正之名不改，而每闾止为二比，计族省十二丁，赀绢、番兵，所益甚多。 
现代文：请求照旧设置三正，名称不作改动。每个闾只设两个比，算起来一个族就减少十一丁，这样可以增加许多税帛和兵役。 
English: The request is to set up the Sanzheng as before, without changing the name. Only two ratios are set for each family, which means that one family will be reduced by 11 ding, which can increase a lot of taxes and military service.

古文：事下尚书，寝不行。
现代文：孝静帝将此事交给尚书办理，但是没有得到实行。
English: Emperor Xiaojing gave the matter to Shangshu to handle, but it was not implemented.

古文：安成望族刘敬躬以妖术惑众，人多信之。
现代文：安成的名门望族的刘敬躬用妖术迷惑众人，许多人都相信他。
English: Liu Jingwu, a member of the prestigious family of Ancheng, used magic to confuse everyone, and many people believed in him.

古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同八年
现代文：八年
English: Eight years

古文：春，正月，敬躬据郡反，改元永汉，署官属，进攻庐陵，逼豫章。
现代文：春季，正月，刘敬躬占据了安成郡发动叛乱，将年号改为永汉，任命了大小官员，又带兵攻打庐陵，随后逼近豫章。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Liu Jingwu occupied Ancheng County to launch a rebellion, changed the year name to Yonghan, appointed officials of all ranks, and led troops to attack Fuling, and then approached Yuanzhang.

古文：南方久不习兵，人情扰骇，豫章内史张绾募兵以拒之。
现代文：南方地区已经很长时间没有战争，人心惶惶，无法安宁，豫章内史张绾招募士兵进行抵抗。
English: There had been no war in the southern region for a long time. People were panicked and unable to find peace. Zhang Ye recruited soldiers to resist.

古文：绾，缵之弟也。
现代文：张绾是张缵的弟弟。
English: Zhang Rong is Zhang Rong's younger brother.

古文：二月，戊戌，江州刺史湘东王绎遣司马王僧辩、中兵曹子郢讨敬躬，受绾节度。
现代文：二月，戊戌，江州刺史、湘东王萧绎派遣司马王僧辩、中兵曹子郢讨伐刘敬躬，接受张绾的指挥。
English: In February, Emperor Wuzhong of Guizhou and King Xiaoyan of Eastern Hunan dispatched Sima Wang Sofen and Lieutenant Cao Ziqi to fight against Liu Jingwu and accept the command of Zhang Ye.

古文：三月，戊辰，擒敬躬，送建康，斩之。
现代文：二月，戊辰，他们活捉了刘敬躬，把他押送到建康处死了。
English: In February, in Wucheng, they captured Liu Jingmu alive and sent him to Jiankang, where he died.

古文：僧辩，神念之子也，该博辩捷，器宇肃然，虽射不穿札，而志气高远。
现代文：王僧辩是神念的儿子，他学问渊博，辩才敏捷，气度肃然，虽然射箭不能穿透皮甲，但是志气高远，超群出众。
English: Wang Sangyan was the son of Shen Nian. He was well-educated, quick at debate, and had a dignified demeanor. Although his archery could not penetrate leather armor, he had high aspirations and was outstanding.

古文：魏初置六军。
现代文：西魏开始设置六军。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty began to set up six armies.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，东魏使兼散骑常侍李绘来聘。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙寅，东魏派遣兼散骑常侍李绘到梁朝聘问。
English: In the summer, in April, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched the errant horseman Li Peng to the Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：绘，元忠之从子也。
现代文：李绘是李元忠的侄子。
English: Li Pin is the nephew of Li Yuanzhong.

古文：东魏丞相欢朝于鄴。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢到国都邺城朝拜孝静帝。
English: Gao Huan, the Eastern Wei chancellor, went to the national capital, Xi'an, to pay homage to Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：司徒孙腾坐事免；乙酉，以彭城王韶录尚书事，侍中广阳王湛为太尉，尚书右仆射高隆之为司徒。
现代文：司徒孙腾正好工作失误被免去了职务；乙酉，孝静帝任命彭城王元韶为录尚书事，任命侍中、广阳王元湛为太尉，尚书右仆射高隆之为司徒。
English: Sun-teng, the disciple, was removed from his post due to a mistake in his work. In addition, Emperor Xiao Jing appointed Wang Yuanjun of Pengcheng as the secretary, Wang Yuanchan of Guangyang as the first lieutenant, and Gaolong, the right-hand man of the secretary, as the disciple.

古文：初，太傅尉景与丞相欢同归尔硃荣，其妻，欢之姊也，自恃勋戚，贪纵不法，为有司所劾，系狱；欢三诣阙泣请，乃得免死。
现代文：当初，太尉尉景曾经与丞相高欢一同投靠尔朱荣，他的妻子就是高欢的姐姐。尉景依仗自己是国家元勋的亲戚，贪婪放纵，不守法纪，被有关部门弹劾，关进了监狱；高欢连续三次来到宫中向皇帝求情，尉景这才得以免除一死。
English: At the beginning, Taifu Yiqing had once joined with the chancellor Gaohan to support Er Zhu Rong, whose wife was Gaohan's sister. Yiqing relied on himself as a relative of the national founder, was greedy and indulgent, did not abide by the law, was impeached by the relevant departments, and was put in prison; Gaohan came to the palace three times in a row to plead with the emperor, and only then was Yiqing spared from death.

古文：丁亥，降为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁亥，他被降为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Dinghai, he was demoted to the general of the cavalry, and the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：欢往造之，景卧不起，大叫曰： 杀我时趣邪！ 
现代文：高欢来到尉景家中，他正卧床不起，大声喊叫： 杀我的时候快要到了呀！ 
English: Gao Huan came to Li Jing's home. He was bedridden and shouted loudly, "It's almost time to kill me!"

古文：欢抚而拜谢之。
现代文：高欢安慰和拜谢了他。
English: Gao Huan consoled and thanked him.

古文：辛卯，以库狄干为太傅，以领军将军娄昭为大司马，封祖裔为尚书右仆射。
现代文：辛卯，孝静帝任命库狄干为太傅，任命领军将军娄昭为大司马，祖裔为尚书右仆射。
English: Xinwu, Emperor Xiaojing appointed Ku Dickan as Taifu, appointed the leading general Zou Zhao as Daisima, and the progenitor as Shangshu Rongfei.

古文：六月，甲辰，欢还晋阳。
现代文：六月，甲辰，高欢返回晋阳。
English: In June, Jia Chen and Gao Huan returned to Jinyang.

古文：八月，庚戌，东魏以开府仪同三司、吏部尚书侯景为兼尚书仆射、河南道大行台，随机防讨。
现代文：八月，庚戌，东魏任命开府仪同三司、吏部尚书侯景为尚书侯景为尚仆射、河南道大行台，授权让他根据情况自行决定防守或讨伐。
English: In August, Emperor Gaozong of the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Shang Shuhou Jing of the Third Division, Shang Shuhou Jing of the Third Division, Shang Shuhou Jing of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the Fourth Division of the

古文：魏以王盟为太保。
现代文：西魏任命王盟为太保。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Meng as Taibo.

古文：东魏丞相欢击魏，入自汾、绛，连营四十里，丞相泰使王思政守玉壁以断其道。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢带兵攻打西魏，从汾、绛进入西魏的土地，营垒连结起来长达四十里，西魏丞相宇文泰命令王思政守卫玉壁，以便切断高欢的道路崐。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan led troops to attack the Western Wei, entering the land of the Western Wei from Shan and Shan, and the camp was linked up for forty miles. The Western Wei chancellor Yu Wentai ordered Wang Sizheng to guard the Jade Wall in order to cut off Gao Huan's road.

古文：欢以书招思政曰： 若降，当授以并州。 
现代文：高欢写信给王思政，要招抚他，说： 你如果愿意投降的话，我就让你掌管并州。 
English: Gao Huan wrote a letter to Wang Shizheng, trying to cajole him, saying, "If you are willing to surrender, I will let you take control of Anhui Province."

古文：思政复书曰： 可硃浑道元降，何以不得？ 
现代文：王思政回信问道： 可朱浑道元已经向你投降，可他为什么没有得到并州呢？ 
English: Wang Sizheng wrote back and asked: Zhu Hun Dogen has already surrendered to you, but why hasn't he been annexed?

古文：冬，十月，己亥，欢围玉壁，凡九日，遇大雪，士卒饥冻，多死者，遂解围去。
现代文：冬季，十月，己亥，高欢指挥部队包围了玉壁，一共持续了九天，遇上天降大雪，士兵们饥寒交迫，死了许多，于是东魏的部队解除包围撤退了。
English: In winter, October, Jihai, Gao Huan commanded the troops to encircle the Jade Wall, lasted a total of nine days, encountered heavy snowfall, the soldiers were hungry and cold, many died, so the East Wei troops lifted the encirclement and retreated.

古文：魏遣太子钦镇蒲坂。丞相泰出军蒲坂，至皁荚，闻欢退渡汾，追之不及。
现代文：西魏派皇太子元钦镇守蒲坂，丞相宇文泰带领部队赶往蒲坂，到达皂荚的时候，听说高欢已经撤退，正在渡汾河，就下令追赶，结果没有赶上。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty sent the crown prince Yuan Qin Zhen to guard Busan, and the prime minister Yu Wentei led the troops to rush to Busan. When they arrived at Sapporo, they heard that Gao Huan had retreated and was crossing the Yangtze River, so they ordered to catch up, but they did not catch up.

古文：十一月，东魏以可硃浑道元为并州刺史。
现代文：十一月，东魏任命可朱浑道元为并州刺史。
English: In November, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhu Hun Dogen as the leader of the merger.

古文：十二月，魏主狩于华阴，大享将士，丞相泰帅诸将朝之。
现代文：十二月，西魏的文帝在华阴狩猎，安排盛大的酒宴招待将士，丞相宇文泰率领各位将领向文帝朝拜。
English: In December, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty went hunting in Huayin and arranged a grand wine banquet to entertain the generals. Consul-General Yu Wentai led the generals to pay homage to Emperor Wen.

古文：起万寿殿于沙苑北。辛亥，东魏遣兼散骑常侍杨斐来聘。
现代文：在沙苑北部盖起了一座万寿殿。辛亥，东魏派遣兼散骑常侍杨斐到梁朝聘问。
English: In the northern part of Shayuan, a mansion was built. In Xinhai, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched Yang Fei, an equestrian, to the Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：孙冏、卢子雄讨李贲，以春瘴方起，请待至秋；广州刺史新渝侯映不许，武林侯咨又趣之。
现代文：梁朝的孙、卢子雄讨伐李贲，由于时值春天，瘴气正在弥漫，所以他们请求等到秋季再进军；广州刺史、新渝侯萧映不予同意，武林侯谘又催促出征。
English: Lu Zixiong, the grandson of Liang Dynasty, and Lu Zixiong fought against Li Yong. Since it was spring and the sultry atmosphere was pervasive, they asked to wait until the autumn to march; Guangzhou Sashi and Xinwu Hou Xiao Ying did not agree, and Wulin Hou Yi also urged to go to war.

古文：冏等至合浦，死者什六七，众溃而归。
现代文：孙等人到达合蒲时，因为瘴气的侵害，十个人中有六七个死去，部队溃散，只好返回。
English: When Sun and others arrived at Hapu, because of the invasion of radon gas, six or seven out of ten people died, the troops were dispersed, and they had to return.

古文：映，憺之子也。
现代文：萧映是萧的儿子。
English: Xiao Ying is the son of Xiao Wu.

古文：武林侯咨奏冏及子雄与贼交通，逗留不进，敕于广州赐死。
现代文：武林侯萧谘上书梁武帝，说孙与卢子雄跟反贼勾结，逗留在原地不进军，梁武帝下令叫孙、卢子雄在广州自杀。
English: Wulin Hou Xiao wrote a letter to Emperor Liang Wudi, saying that Sun and Lu Zixiong had colluded with the rebels and stayed in place without marching into the army. Emperor Liang Wudi ordered Sun and Lu Zixiong to commit suicide in Guangzhou.

古文：子雄弟子略、子烈、主帅广陵杜天合及弟僧明、新安周文育等帅子雄之众攻广州，欲杀映、咨，为子雄复冤。
现代文：卢子雄的弟弟卢子略、卢子烈，主帅广陵杜天合以及他的弟弟杜僧明，还有周文育新安人等人率领卢子雄的兵马攻打广州，想杀死萧映、萧谘，为卢子雄报仇。
English: Lu Zixiong's younger brothers Lu Ziliu and Lu Zilei, the coach Guangling Du Tianhe and his younger brother Du Sangming, as well as Zhou Wenyu Xin'an and others led Lu Zixiong's soldiers to attack Guangzhou, wanting to kill Xiao Ying and Xiao Zhi and take revenge for Lu Zixiong.

古文：西江督护、高要太守吴兴陈霸先帅精甲三千救之，大破子略等，杀天合，擒僧明、文育。
现代文：西江督护、高要太守吴兴人陈霸先率领三千精锐士兵前来营救，大败卢子略等人，杀掉了杜天合，活捉了杜僧明、周文育。
English: The governor of the Xijiang River and the high-ranking official Wu Xing, Chen Ba, led 3,000 elite soldiers to come to the rescue, defeated Lu Ziliu and others, killed Du Tianhe, and captured Du Mengming and Zhou Wenyu alive.

古文：霸先以僧明、文育骁勇过人，释之，以为主帅。
现代文：陈霸先因为杜僧明、周文育骁勇过人，就释放了他们，让他们担任主帅。
English: Chen Baxian released Du Sangming and Zhou Wen Yuxuan because they were too brave, and let them serve as head coach.

古文：诏以霸先为直阁将军。
现代文：梁武帝颂下诏书，任命陈霸先为直将军。
English: Emperor Liangwu issued an edict, appointing Chen Baxian as General Zhi.

古文：魏丞相泰妻冯翊公主生子觉。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰的妻子冯翊公主生下了儿子宇文觉。
English: The wife of the Western Wei chancellor Uwen Tai, Princess Feng Ye, gave birth to a son, Uwen Jue.

古文：东魏以光州刺史李元忠为侍中。
现代文：东魏任命光州刺史李元忠为侍中。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Li Yuanzhong, an official from Gwangju, as an attendant.

古文：元忠虽处要任，不以物务干怀，唯饮酒自娱。
现代文：李元忠虽然担任着显要的官职，但是并不让各类事务干扰自己的心怀，成天以喝酒自娱。
English: Although Li Yuanzhong holds a prominent official position, he does not let various affairs interfere with his heart, and he amuses himself by drinking all day.

古文：丞相欢欲用为仆射，世子澄言其放达常醉，不可委以台阁。
现代文：丞相高欢想任用李元忠为仆射，他的嫡长子高澄说李元忠行为放纵，常常喝得酩酊大醉，不可以让他入尚书台辅佐皇帝。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan wanted to appoint Li Yuanzhong as a subordinate, and his eldest son Gao Cheng said that Li Yuanzhong was indulgent and often got very drunk, and that he should not be allowed to enter Shang Shudai to assist the emperor.

古文：其子搔闻之，请节酒，元忠曰： 我言作仆射不胜饮酒乐，尔爱仆射，宜勿饮酒。 
现代文：李元忠的儿子李搔听到这句话以后，请求父亲节制喝酒的嗜好，李元忠回答说： 对我来说，当一个仆射可没有喝酒的快活，你喜欢仆射这种职位的话，就应该不喝酒。 
English: After hearing this, Li Yuanzhong's son, Li Wei, asked his father to curb his drinking habit. Li Yuanzhong replied, "For me, there is no pleasure in drinking when you are a pointer. If you like the position of a pointer, you should not drink.

古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同九年
现代文：九年春季，正月，壬戌，东魏大赦天下，改年号为 武定 。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, the first month of the year, the Eastern Wei Dynasty was amnestied, and the year name was changed to Wuding.

古文：春，正月，壬戌，东魏大赦，改元武定。东魏御史中尉高仲密取吏部郎崔暹之妹，既而弃之，由是与暹有隙。
现代文：东魏的御史中尉高仲密娶了吏部郎崔暹的妹妹作妻子，不久之后又将她遗弃了。由于这一原因，高仲密与崔暹之间产生了矛盾。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Zhongmi, a lieutenant of imperial history, married the younger sister of Choi Siem, a bureaucrat, and abandoned her soon after. For this reason, a conflict arose between Gao Zhongmi and Choi Siem.

古文：仲密选用御史，多其亲戚乡党，高澄奏令改选；暹方为澄所宠任，仲密疑其构己，愈恨之。
现代文：高仲密选用的御史，许多是他的亲戚同乡，高澄将这一情况报告给孝静帝，孝静帝下令另外再挑选御史；此时崔暹正受到高澄的宠信，高仲密怀疑是他在罗织陷害自己，对崐他更加痛恨。
English: Gao Zhongmi suspected that Choi Siam was playing a trick on him and hated him even more. Gao Zhongmi reported the situation to Emperor Xiao Jing, who ordered that Choi Siam be selected again. At this time, Choi Siam was a favorite of Gao Zhongmi.

古文：仲密后妻李氏艳而慧，澄见而悦之，李氏不从，衣服皆裂，以告仲密，仲密益怨。
现代文：高仲密后来的妻子李氏美丽而又贤慧，高澄见了很喜欢她，想施行非礼。李氏没有答应，在挣扎过程中衣服都被撕破了，她将这一切都对高仲密说了，高仲密心头的怨恨又深了一层。
English: Gao Zhongmi's future wife, Ms. Li, was beautiful and wise. Gao Chengru liked her very much and wanted to commit indecency. Ms. Li did not agree, and her clothes were torn during the struggle. She told Gao Zhongmi all this, and the resentment in Gao Zhongmi's heart deepened.

古文：寻出为北豫州刺史，阴谋外叛。
现代文：很快他离开京城担任了北豫州刺史，暗中准备叛离。
English: He soon left Beijing to serve as the governor of North Henan Province, secretly preparing to defect.

古文：丞相欢疑之，遣镇城奚寿兴典军事，仲密但知民务。
现代文：丞相高欢对他产生了怀疑，派遣防城都督奚寿兴去主管北豫州的军事，高仲密只能负责一些民政事务。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan became suspicious of him and sent the governor of the city of defense, Gao Shuxing, to be in charge of military affairs in North Henan Province, while Gao Zhongmi was only responsible for some civil affairs.

古文：仲密置酒延寿兴，伏壮士，执之，二月，壬申，以虎牢叛，降魏。
现代文：高仲密安排酒宴与奚寿兴一同喝酒，暗中埋伏了精壮的武士，活捉了奚寿兴。二月，壬申，高仲密占领虎牢反叛，投降了西魏。
English: Gao Zhongmi arranged a banquet to drink with Zou Shuxing, secretly ambushed a strong samurai, and captured Zou Shuxing alive. In February, Jinshin, Gao Zhongmi occupied the tiger stronghold and surrendered to the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏以仲密为侍中、司徒。
现代文：西魏任命高仲密为侍中、司徒。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Gao Zhongmi as a chamberlain and an attendant.

古文：欢以仲密之叛由崔暹，将杀之，高澄匿暹，为之固请，欢曰： 我匄其命，须与苦手。 
现代文：高欢认为高仲密叛变的起因在崔暹身上，准备杀掉崔暹，高澄把崔暹隐藏起来，再三为他求情，高欢回答说： 我可以给他一次活命的机会，但是必须狠狠地打他一顿板子。 
English: Gao Huan thought that Gao Zhongmi's mutiny was caused by Cui Siam, and he planned to kill Cui Siam. Gao Cheng hid Cui Siam and repeatedly pleaded for him. Gao Huan replied, "I can give him a chance to live, but I have to beat him severely."

古文：澄乃出暹，而谓大行台都官郎陈元康曰： 卿使崔暹得杖，勿复相见。 
现代文：高澄这才交出崔暹，但是对大行台都官郎陈元康说道： 你要是让崔暹挨板子的话，那我们就不要再见面了。 
English: It was only then that Gao Cheng handed over Choi Siam, but he said to Chen Yuankang, the governor of Taihang, "If you let Choi Siam go to the dogs, then we won't see each other again."

古文：元康为之言于欢曰： 大王方以天下付大将军，大将军有一崔暹不能免其杖，父子尚尔，况于它人！ 
现代文：陈元康听了这句话，就为高澄而劝高欢说道： 大王您刚刚把天下托付给大将军，大将军有这么一个崔暹，却不能使他免除一顿板子，在人们眼里，你们父亲与儿子之间相处都这样，何况对别人呢？ 
English: When Chen Yuankang heard this, he advised Gao Huan on behalf of Gao Cheng and said: Great King, you have just entrusted the world to the general. The general has such a Cui Siam, but he cannot spare him a meal. In people's eyes, this is how your father and son get along with each other, let alone with others.

古文：欢乃释之。
现代文：于是高欢就释放了崔暹。
English: As a result, Gao Huan released Cui Siam.

古文：高季式在永安戍，仲密遣信报之；季式走告欢，欢待之如旧。
现代文：高季式在永安驻防，高仲密写信给他，叙述了他自己投降的情况。
English: Gao Ji was stationed in Yongan and Gao Zhongmi wrote to him, describing the circumstances of his own surrender.

古文：魏丞相泰帅诸军以应仲密，以太子少傅李远为前驱，至洛阳，遣开府仪同三司于谨攻柏谷，拔之；三月，壬申，围河桥南城。
现代文：高季式跑去告诉了高欢，高欢待他跟以往一样。西魏丞相宇文泰统率各路大军来策应高仲密，让太子少傅李远担任先锋，到达洛阳之后，派遣开府仪同三司于谨攻打柏谷，夺取了该城。三月，壬申，包围了河桥南城。
English: Gao Ji ran to tell Gao Huan, and Gao Huan treated him the same as before. Western Wei chancellor Uwen Taitong led all the armies to strategize with Gao Zhongmi, and let the young prince Fu Liyuan serve as the vanguard. After arriving in Luoyang, he dispatched Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Yu Zhen to attack Baigu and captured the city. In March, Jinshin surrounded the southern city of Heqiao.

古文：东魏丞相欢将兵十万至河北，泰退军瀍上，纵火船于上流以烧河桥。斛律金使行台郎中张亮以小艇百馀载长锁，伺火船将至，以钉钉之，引锁向岸，桥遂获全。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢率领十万人马到达黄河北岸，宇文泰把部队撤到水的上游，从那里放出火船要烧掉河桥；斛律金派行台郎中张亮用一百多只小船装载着长锁链，待火船将要到来，就用钉子钉住它，然后牵拉锁链拖到岸边，桥梁就这样得以保全。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan led a hundred thousand horses to the north bank of the Yellow River, and Wu Wentai withdrew his troops to the upper reaches of the water, from where he released fire ships to burn the river bridge; Zhang Liang, one of the gangsters of the Jin faction, used more than a hundred small boats to load the long chain. When the fire ship was about to arrive, he nailed it, and then dragged the chain to the shore. The bridge was thus preserved.

古文：欢渡河，据邙山为陈，不进者数日。
现代文：高欢渡过黄河，占据了邙山布置军阵，连续几天没有进军。
English: Gao Huan crossed the Yellow River and occupied Lushan to set up a military formation, and did not march for several days.

古文：泰留辎重于瀍曲，夜，登邙山以袭欢。
现代文：宇文泰把辎重留在曲，夜里，指挥部队登上邙山，准备袭击高欢。
English: In the night, the commanding troops ascended Lushan Mountain and prepared to attack Gaohuan.

古文：候骑白欢曰： 贼距此四十馀里，蓐食乾饮而来。 
现代文：了望敌情的骑兵向高欢报告说： 贼兵距离这儿有四十多里，他们是清早吃了一顿干饭之后来的。 
English: The cavalryman, who saw the hostile mood, reported to Gao Huan: The robber soldiers are more than forty miles away from here. They came after eating a dry meal in the early morning.

古文：欢曰： 自当渴死！ 
现代文：高欢说道： 他们一定会渴死的！ 
English: Gao Huan said, "They must be dying of thirst!"

古文：乃正阵以待之。
现代文：接着，他下令摆正阵势等待敌人的到来。
English: He then ordered his men to take up their positions and await the arrival of the enemy.

古文：戊申，黎明，泰军与欢军遇。
现代文：戊申，黎明，宇文泰的部队与高欢的部队遭遇了。
English: At dawn, the troops of Wu Wentai and Gaohuan clashed.

古文：东魏彭乐以数千骑为右甄，冲魏军之北垂，所向奔溃，遂驰入魏营。
现代文：东魏的彭乐率领几千名骑兵作为右翼，冲击西魏部队的北边，冲到哪里，哪里就溃散，于是直驰入西魏的军营。
English: Peng Le of the Eastern Wei Dynasty led several thousand cavalrymen as the right wing, attacked the northern side of the Western Wei forces, and broke up wherever they rushed, so they drove straight into the Western Wei army camp.

古文：人告彭乐叛，欢甚怒。
现代文：有人报告说彭乐反叛了，高欢非常恼怒。
English: Some people reported that Peng Le rebelled and Gao Huan was very angry.

古文：俄而西北尘起，乐使来告捷，虏魏侍中、开府仪同三司、大都督临洮王柬、蜀郡王荣宗、江夏王升、巨鹿王阐、谯郡王亮、詹事赵善及督将僚佐四十八人。
现代文：没多久西北部尘土飞扬，彭乐的使者跑来报捷，说已经俘虏了西魏的侍中、开府仪同三司、大都督、临洮王元柬、蜀郡王元荣宗、江夏王元、钜鹿王元阐、谯郡王元亮、詹事赵善以及督将佐四十八人。
English: Before long, the northwest was covered with dust, and Peng Le's emissaries ran to report their success, saying that they had captured forty-eight West Wei attendants, three officials of the Kaifu Yi Tong, the Grand Governor, Linyi Wang Yuan Kham, Shu County Wang Yuan Rong Zong, Jiangxia Wang Yuan, Elk King Yuan Ling, Linyi County Wang Yuan Liang, Zhan Zhi Zhao Shan, and the governor's aides.

古文：诸将乘胜击魏，大破之，斩首三万馀级。
现代文：将领们乘胜追击西魏的人马，打得敌人一败涂地，共斩首三万多。
English: The generals took advantage of the victory to pursue the West Wei people, defeated the enemy, and beheaded more than 30,000 people.

古文：欢使彭乐追泰，泰窘，谓乐曰： 汝非彭乐邪？
现代文：高欢派彭乐追赶宇文泰，宇文泰的处境越来越危急，他对彭乐说： 你不是彭乐吗？
English: Gao Huan sent Peng Le to chase after Yu Wentai. As the situation of Yu Wentai became more and more critical, he said to Peng Le: Aren't you Peng Le?

古文：痴男子！今日无我，明日岂有汝邪！
现代文：真是痴汉子，今天要是没有我了，明天哪里还会有你！
English: What a crazy man, if there is no me today, there will still be you tomorrow!

古文：何不急还营，收汝金宝！ 
现代文：你为什么不赶快回到营地，收取属于你的金银财宝！ 
English: Why don't you hurry back to camp and collect your gold and silver treasure!

古文：乐从其言，获泰金带一囊以归，言于欢曰： 黑獭漏刃，破胆矣！ 
现代文：彭乐听取了他的意见，就获取了宇文泰遗留下来的一袋子金条返回，他对高欢说道： 宇文黑獭从我的刀刃下漏网，已经吓破胆了！ 
English: After listening to his advice, Peng Le retrieved a bag of gold bars left behind by Yu Wentai and returned it. He said to Gao Huan: "Uwen Hei Yao has slipped through the net under my blade, and I'm scared to death!

古文：欢虽喜其胜而怒其失泰，令伏诸地，亲捽其头，连顿之，并数以沙苑之败，举刃将下者三，噤齘良久。
现代文：高欢虽然对彭乐取胜感到高兴，但同时也恼怒他没将宇文泰捉到手，就命令他趴到地上，自己亲手揪往他的头髻，连连往下磕，并且数落他在沙苑战役中失败的事。
English: Although Gao Huan was pleased with Peng Le's victory, he was also annoyed that he did not catch Wu Wentai, so he ordered him to lie down on the ground and hit him on the head with his own hands, hit him repeatedly, and count his failures in the battle of Sha Yuan.

古文：乐曰： 乞五千骑，复为王取之。 
现代文：高欢越说火气越大，三次举起刀子要向他劈去，直气得咬牙切齿，心中的愤怒持续很长时间不能平息下来。
English: Gao Huan said that the more he said, the more angry he was. He raised his knife three times to cut him. He was so angry that he was gnashing his teeth. The anger in his heart lasted for a long time and could not be calmed down.

古文：欢曰： 汝纵之何意？
现代文：彭乐告饶道： 求您拨给我五千名骑兵，我再去为大王您捉宇文泰。 
English: Peng Le pleaded: Please assign me five thousand cavalrymen, and I will go and capture Wu Wentai for you, the king.

古文：而言复取邪！ 命取绢三千匹压乐背，因以赐之。
现代文：高欢说道： 你放掉他是出于什么目的，怎么现在又对我说要再去捉？ 接着，他叫人拿来三千匹绢压到彭乐的背上，就算是奖给他的。
English: Gao Huan said, "For what purpose did you let him go, and why are you now telling me to go and catch him again?" Next, he asked someone to bring three thousand yakitori to press onto Peng Le's back, even if it was to give him a prize.

古文：明日，复战，泰为中军，中山公赵贵为左军，领军若干惠等为右军。
现代文：第二天，双方又一次交战，宇文泰率领部队居于中间，中山公赵贵指挥左翼部队，领军若于惠等人指挥右翼部队。
English: The next day, the two sides fought again, with Yu Wentai leading the troops in the middle, Zhongshan Gong Zhao Gui commanding the left-wing troops, and leaders such as Ruo Yu Hui commanding the right-wing troops.

古文：中军、右军合击东魏，大破之，悉俘其步卒。
现代文：中间部队与右翼部队联合攻击东魏的部队，狠狠打击了对方，俘虏了它的所有步兵。
English: The middle force and the right wing force jointly attacked the Eastern Wei forces, hit the other side hard, and captured all its infantry.

古文：欢失马，赫连阳顺下马以授欢。欢上马走，从者步骑七人，追兵至，亲信都督尉兴庆曰： 王速去，兴庆腰有百箭，足杀百人。 
现代文：战斗中高欢失去了座骑，赫连阳顺跳下马让高欢骑，高欢跨上马就跑，身后跟随的步、骑兵只有七个人，眼看追兵赶到了，高欢的亲信都督尉兴庆对高欢说： 王爷您快跑，我的腰间还挂着一百枝箭，足可以杀死一百个人。 
English: During the battle, Gao Huan lost his horse. Herenyang Shun jumped off his horse to let Gao Huan ride. Gao Huan stepped on his horse and ran. There were only seven cavalrymen following behind. When he saw the pursuers arrive, Gao Huan's trusted lieutenant Xingqing said to Gao Huan: "Wang Ye, run fast, I still have a hundred arrows around my waist, I can kill a hundred people with my feet."

古文：欢曰： 事济，以尔为怀州刺史；若死，用尔子！ 
现代文：高欢说道： 如果我能摆脱这次劫难，我就任命你为怀州刺史，要是你不幸战死，我就把这个职位给你的儿子。 
English: Gao Huan said, "If I can get out of this calamity, I will appoint you as the chief historian of Waizhou, and if you unfortunately die in battle, I will give this position to your son."

古文：兴庆曰： 儿小，愿用兄！ 
现代文：尉兴庆回答说： 我的儿子年龄还小，您就任用我的兄长吧。 
English: Lieutenant Xingqing replied: My son is still young, you can use my older brother.

古文：欢许之。
现代文：高欢表示同意。
English: Gao Huan agreed.

古文：兴庆拒战，矢尽而死。
现代文：尉兴庆上前抵抗，身上的箭用尽后被追兵杀死。
English: Lieutenant Xingqing came forward to resist, and was killed by the pursuing soldiers after the arrows on his body were exhausted.

古文：东魏军士有逃奔魏者，告以欢所在，泰募勇敢三千人，皆执短兵，配大都督贺拔胜以攻之。
现代文：东魏的将士中有逃跑到西魏部队里去的，他们说出了高欢所在的地方，宇文泰招募了三千名勇敢的壮士，让他们手持短兵器，由大都督贺拔胜率领着攻打高欢。
English: Some of the Eastern Wei soldiers fled to the Western Wei troops. They told them where Gao Huan was located. Wu Wentai recruited three thousand brave men, armed them with short weapons, and led them to attack Gao Huan.

古文：胜识欢于行间，执槊与十三骑逐之，驰数里，槊刃垂及，因字之曰： 贺六浑，贺拔破胡必杀汝！ 
现代文：贺拔胜在队伍中间认出了高欢，就抓起长矛与十三名骑兵一道追赶上去，追了几里路后，长矛的尖头都快要触及到高欢的身体，就喊着高欢的鲜卑名字说： 贺六浑，贺拔破胡一定要杀掉你！ 
English: He Baxing recognized Gao Huan in the middle of the group, so he grabbed a lance and chased him up with thirteen cavalrymen. After a few miles of chasing, the tip of the lance was about to touch Gao Huan's body, so he shouted Gao Huan's humble name and said: He Liuhun, He Baxu must kill you!

古文：欢气殆绝，河州刺史刘洪徽从傍射胜，中其二骑，武卫将军段韶射胜马，毙之。
现代文：高欢吓得几乎背过气去。河州刺史刘洪徽抓起弓箭向贺拔胜射去，射中了他的两名骑兵，武卫将军段韶射死了他的马。
English: Gao Huan was so scared that he almost passed out. Liu Honghui, the governor of Hezhou, grabbed a bow and arrow and shot at He Baxian, hitting two of his cavalrymen, and Wuwei General Duan Er shot and killed his horse.

古文：比副马至，欢已逸去。
现代文：等到贺拔胜的备用马赶到，高欢已经逃跑了。
English: By the time He Pu Sheng's backup horse arrived, Gao Huan had already fled.

古文：胜叹曰： 今日不执弓矢，天也！ 
现代文：贺拔胜叹息道： 今天我没有带弓箭，这是天意呀！ 
English: He Bascheng sighed, "I didn't bring a bow and arrow today, it was God's will!"

古文：魏南郢州刺史耿令贵，大呼，独入敌中，锋刃乱下，人皆谓已死，俄奋刀而还。
现代文：西魏的南郢州刺史耿令贵大声喊叫着，一个人冲进了敌群中，敌人的刀剑向他身上乱砍乱刺，人们都以为他已经死去，可是一会儿功夫之后，他又举着刀返回自己的营地。
English: A man rushed into the enemy group, the enemy's sword slashed at him, and people thought he was dead, but after a while, he returned to his camp with his sword.

古文：如是数四，当令贵前者死伤相继。乃谓左右曰： 吾岂乐杀人！
现代文：象这样来来去去多次，挡在他前头的敌人不断死伤。他对身边的人说道： 我哪里乐意杀人？
English: After many such comings and goings, with the enemy in front of him constantly being killed and wounded, he said to those around him, "Where am I willing to kill?

古文：壮士除贼，不得不尔。
现代文：大丈夫杀贼，不能不这样。
English: It's okay to kill a thief, it has to be done.

古文：若不能杀贼，又不为贼所伤，何异逐坐人也！ 
现代文：如果不能够杀贼，又不能被贼兵打伤，那我跟那此靠舞文弄墨，谈天说地吃饭的人有什么两样？ 
English: If I can't kill a thief, and I can't be wounded by a thief-soldier, then what's the difference between me and those people who rely on dance to make ink, and talk about eating?

古文：左军赵贵等五将战不利，东魏兵复振。泰与战，又不利。
现代文：指挥左翼部队的赵贵等五位将领在战斗中遇到挫折，东魏的兵将又振作起来，宇文泰与他们交战，再次受挫。
English: Five generals, including Zhao Gui, who commanded the left-wing troops, encountered setbacks in the battle. The soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty cheered up again. Wu Wentai fought with them and suffered another setback.

古文：会日暮，魏兵遂遁，东魏兵追之；独孤信、于谨收散卒自后击之，追兵惊扰，魏诸军由是得全。
现代文：恰好天黑下来了，因此西魏的人马撤退逃跑，东魏的将士乘胜追击；独孤信、于谨召集了一批掉队的士兵在东魏部队的后面进行袭击，使这些东魏的追兵受到惊扰，西魏的各路军队因此得以保全。
English: It just happened to be dark, so the West Wei troops retreated and fled, and the East Wei soldiers chased after them. Unbelievably, Yu Zhen gathered a group of stragglers to attack behind the East Wei troops, causing these East Wei pursuers to be disturbed, and the West Wei troops were thus saved.

古文：若于惠夜引去，东魏兵追之；惠徐下马，顾命厨人营食，食毕，谓左右曰： 长安死，此中死，有以异乎？ 
现代文：若于惠在夜间指挥部队逃跑，东魏的人马在后面追赶，若于惠慢慢地从马上下来，回头命令厨师埋锅做饭，吃完之后，他对身边的人说道： 在长安死还是在这里死，有什么不同吗？ 
English: If Yu Hui commanded the troops to flee at night, and the Eastern Wei people chased after them, if Yu Hui slowly got off the horse, turned back and ordered the cook to bury the pot to cook, after eating, he said to the people around him: Is it different to die in Chang'an or to die here?

古文：乃建旗鸣角，收散卒徐还；追骑疑有伏兵，不敢逼。
现代文：于是，他就叫人竖起战旗，吹响号角，聚集起离散的士兵缓缓地返回。追赶的东魏骑兵怀疑路上有埋伏，不敢逼近。
English: As a result, he ordered a battle flag to be raised, a bugle to be blown, and the scattered soldiers to gather and slowly return. The pursuing East Wei cavalry suspected an ambush on the road and dared not approach.

古文：泰遂入关，屯渭上。
现代文：宇文泰于是进入关中，驻扎在渭河边上。
English: Uwentai then entered Guanzhong and stationed himself on the edge of the Fen River.

古文：欢进至陕，泰使开府仪同三司达奚武等拒之。
现代文：欢进至陕，泰遣开府仪同三司达奚武等拒之。
English: Huanjin to Shaanxi, the Taiyuan Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments of Dadu and Wu were rejected.

古文：行台郎中封子绘言于欢曰： 混壹东西，正在今日。
现代文：行台郎中封子绘言于欢曰： 混壹东西，正在今日。
English: Gyotai-ro, Nakafuko, painted a message to Yu Huan, saying, "Mix one thing, it is today."

古文：昔魏太祖平汉中，不乘胜取巴、蜀，失在迟疑，后悔无及。
现代文：昔魏太祖平汉中，不乘胜取巴、蜀，失在迟疑，后悔无及。
English: In the past, Wei Taizu Pinghan, did not take advantage of the victory to win Ba, Shu, lost in hesitation, regret.

古文：愿大王不以为疑。 
现代文：愿大王不以为疑。 
English: May the great king not be suspicious.

古文：欢深然之，集诸将议进止，咸以为 野无青草，人马疲瘦，不可远追。 
现代文：欢深然之，集诸将议进止，咸以为 野无青草，人马疲瘦，不可远追。 
English: With deep joy, the assembled generals concluded their deliberation, thinking that there was no grass in the field, and that the men and horses were exhausted and could not be far behind.

古文：陈元康曰： 两雄交争，岁月已久。
现代文：陈元康曰： 两雄交争，岁月已久。
English: Chen Yuankang said: The two men have been fighting for a long time.

古文：今幸而大捷，天授我也，时不可失，当乘胜追之。 
现代文：今幸而大捷，天授我也，时不可失，当乘胜追之。 
English: Now I am fortunate and successful, I am also gifted, I should not lose time, I should pursue it with victory.

古文：欢曰： 若遇伏兵，孤何以济？ 
现代文：欢曰： 若遇伏兵，孤何以济？ 
English: Huan said, "If you are ambushed, how can you escape?

古文：元康曰： 王前沙苑失利，彼尚无伏；今奔败若此，何能远谋！
现代文：元康曰： 王前沙苑失利，彼尚无伏；今奔败若此，何能远谋！
English: Yuan Kang said: Wang Qian Sha Yuan failed, he still has no surrender; if he fails now, what can he do in the future!

古文：若舍而不追，必成后患。 
现代文：若舍而不追，必成后患。 
English: If you don't pursue it, it will be a hindrance.

古文：欢不从，使刘丰生将数千骑追泰，遂东归。
现代文：欢不从，使刘丰生将数千骑追泰，遂东归。
English: Frustrated, Liu Fengsheng sent thousands of horsemen to chase after Tai, and then returned to the east.

古文：泰召王思政于玉壁，将使镇虎牢，未至而泰败，乃使守恒农。
现代文：宇文泰在玉壁派人去召王思政，准备让他镇守虎牢。王思政还没有赶到，宇文泰已经失败，他就派王思政镇守恒农。
English: In Yubi, Wu Wentai sent someone to summon Wang Sizheng and prepare for him to guard the tiger's stronghold. Wang Sizheng had not yet arrived, and Wu Wentai had already failed, so he sent Wang Sizheng to guard Hengnong.

古文：思政入城，令开门解衣而卧，慰勉将士，示不足畏。
现代文：王思政入城之后，下令打开城门，脱了衣服睡觉，又慰问勉励了将士们一番，表示眼下的情况没什么可怕的。
English: After Wang Sizheng entered the city, he ordered to open the city gate, took off his clothes and went to sleep. He also consoled and encouraged the soldiers, saying that the current situation was not terrible.

古文：后数日，刘丰生至城下，惮之，不敢进，引军还。
现代文：几天以后，刘丰生来到恒农城下，对眼前的一切感到害怕，不敢进去，带着部队回去了。
English: A few days later, Liu Fengsheng came to the foot of Hengnong Castle, was afraid of everything in front of him, did not dare to go in, and went back with the troops.

古文：思政乃修城郭，起楼橹，营农田，积刍粟，由是恒农始有守御之备。
现代文：王思政就下令修筑内城与外城，建起用以侦察、防御的高台，经营农田，屯积草料与粮食，从这个时候起，恒农才开始有了防御设施。
English: Wang Sizheng ordered the construction of the inner city and the outer city, built a high platform for reconnaissance and defense, operated farmland, and stocked grass and grain. From this time, Hengnong began to have defense facilities.

古文：丞相泰求自贬，魏主不许。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰请求降职，文帝没有答应。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, requested a demotion, but Emperor Wen did not agree.

古文：是役也，魏诸将皆无功，唯耿令贵与太子武卫率王胡仁、都督王文达力战功多。
现代文：在这一战役中，西魏的各位将领都没有功劳，只有耿令贵与太子武卫率王胡仁、都督王文达奋力拼搏，立下不少功劳。
English: In this battle, the generals of the Western Wei Dynasty did not have any merit, only Geng Linggui and the prince Wuwei led by Wang Hu Ren and the governor Wang Wenda fought hard and made a lot of merit.

古文：泰欲以雍、岐、北雍三州授之，以州有优劣，使探筹取之。仍赐胡仁名勇，令贵名豪，文达名信，用彰其功。
现代文：宇文泰想把雍、岐、北雍三个州交给他们掌管，因为这三个州有好有坏，就让他们用摸筹的办法决定谁管哪个州，他还分别给他们三人起了新名字，将王胡仁叫作王勇，耿令贵叫作耿豪，王文达叫作王杰，以此来表彰他们的功绩。
English: Wu Wentai wanted to put the three provinces of Yong, Qi and Beiyong under their control, because these three provinces had both good and bad, so he let them decide who would be in charge of which province. He also gave the three of them new names, calling Wang Hu Ren as Wang Yong, Geng Ling Gui as Geng Hao, and Wang Wenda as Wang Jie, in recognition of their achievements.

古文：于是广募关、陇豪右以增军旅。
现代文：于是西魏广泛召募关、陇地区豪门大族的子弟来增强部队的力量。
English: As a result, the Western Wei Dynasty extensively recruited the sons of powerful families in Guan and Handan regions to strengthen the strength of the troops.

古文：高仲密之将叛也，阴遣人扇动冀州豪杰，使为内应，东魏遣高隆之驰驿慰抚，由是得安。
现代文：高仲密准备叛变的时候，暗中派人去煽动冀州的豪杰，让他们响应自己。东魏派遣高隆之骑着驿站的快马赶到那里，对他们进行慰问安抚，这一地区因此得以平安。
English: When Gao Zhongmi was preparing to mutiny, he secretly sent someone to incite the heroes of Jizhou to respond to him. The East Wei Dynasty sent Gao Longzhi to ride there on a fast horse to comfort and pacify them, and the region was thus safe.

古文：高澄密书与隆之曰： 仲密枝党与之俱西者，宜悉收其家属，以惩将来。 
现代文：高澄给高隆之写了一封密信，说道： 高仲密的党徒中，凡是崐跟他一道叛变到西魏的，应该把他们的家属全部扣留，可以惩戒今后。 
English: Gao Cheng wrote a secret letter to Gao Longzhi, saying, "Among Gao Zhongzhi's party members, all those who joined Gao Zhongzhi in defecting to the Western Wei Dynasty should have their entire families detained, so that they can be punished in the future.

古文：隆之以为恩旨既行，理无追改，若复收治，示民不信，脱致惊扰，所亏不细，乃启丞相欢而罢之。
现代文：高隆之认为朝廷表明恩惠的旨意既然已经执行，按理不应该回过头来改变，如果再扣留、处置这些家属，就等于向百姓显示朝廷言而无信，假若因此引起人心动摇，这样损失就大了，于是他在启禀丞相高欢准许后，没按高澄的意思去做。
English: Gao Longzhi believed that since the intention of the imperial court to show favor had already been carried out, it should not be reasonable to go back and change it. If these family members were detained and dealt with again, it would be tantamount to showing the people that the words of the imperial court were not trustworthy. If this caused people's hearts to waver, the loss would be great. Therefore, he did not do what Gao Cheng wanted after the permission of Premier Gao Huan.

古文：以太子詹事谢举为尚书仆射。
现代文：梁朝任命太子詹事谢举为尚书仆射。
English: The Liang Dynasty appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Xie to be Shang Shuxu's footman.

古文：夏，四月，林邑王攻李贲，贲将范修破林邑于九德。
现代文：夏季，四月，梁朝的林邑王攻打李贲，李贲的部将范在九德击败了林邑王。
English: In the summer, in April, King Linyi of the Liang Dynasty attacked Li Yong, and Li Yong's general Fan defeated King Linyi in Jiude.

古文：清水氐酋李鼠仁，乘魏之败，据险作乱；陇右大都督独孤信屡遣军击之，不克。
现代文：清水郡的氐族酋长李鼠仁乘西魏战败之机，占据了险要的地方造反作乱，陇右大都督独孤信多次派遣部队前去攻打，都没有取得成功。
English: Li Ruiren, the chief of the Yao people in Qingshui County, took advantage of the defeat of the Western Wei Dynasty to occupy a critical place to rebel and make trouble. The right-wing governor Du Guoxin repeatedly sent troops to attack, but they were not successful.

古文：丞相泰遣典签天水赵昶往谕之，诸酋长聚议，或从或否；其不从者欲加刃于昶，昶神色自若，辞气逾厉，鼠仁感悟，遂相帅降。
现代文：丞相宇文泰派遣部队前去攻打，都没有取得成功。丞相宇文泰派遣典签天水人赵昶前往清水告谕李鼠仁，各位酋长聚集在一起商议，有的人主张顺从西魏，有的人持否定态度；那些不愿顺从的人想要杀掉赵昶，赵昶表情泰然自若，言辞语气却越来越严厉，李鼠仁觉悟过来，就和别的酋长各自带领人马向西魏投降。
English: The prime minister, Yu Wentai, dispatched troops to attack, but they were not successful. The prime minister, Yu Wentai, sent the signatory, the man from Tianshui, Zhao Wei, to the clear water to tell Li Shiren. The chiefs gathered together to discuss. Some people advocated obeying the West Wei Dynasty, while others held a negative attitude. Those who did not want to obey wanted to kill Zhao Wei. Zhao Wei's expression was calm and self-assured, but the tone of his words became more and more severe. Li Shiren came to his senses and surrendered to the West Wei Dynasty with the other chiefs.

古文：氐酋梁道显叛，泰复遣昶谕降之，徙其豪帅四十馀人并部落于华州，泰即以昶为都督，使领之。
现代文：氐族酋长梁道显反叛了，宇文泰再次派遣赵昶前去劝告招降，并将他手下的部落四千多人连同他们的部落迁到华州，宇文泰随即任命赵昶为都督，让他管理这些氐族人。
English: The chief of the Yi people, Liang Daoxian, rebelled, and Yu Wentai again sent Zhao Yu to persuade him to surrender, and moved more than 4,000 members of his tribe along with their tribe to Huazhou. Yu Wentai immediately appointed Zhao Yu as the governor, and let him manage these Yi people.

古文：泰使谍潜入虎牢，令守将魏光固守。侯景获之，改其书云： 宜速去。 
现代文：宇文泰派遣间谍潜入虎牢，命令守城的将领魏光坚决防守，侯景捉住了这个间谍，把宇文泰的信改成这样： 应该尽快离开。 
English: U Wentai sent a spy to sneak into the tiger's prison and ordered Wei Guang, the general guarding the city, to defend it resolutely. Hou Jing caught this spy and changed U Wentai's letter to this: You should leave as soon as possible.

古文：纵谍入城，光宵遁。
现代文：然后将间谍放进城去，魏光看到信以后连夜逃跑了。
English: He then sent the spy into the city. After Wei Guang saw the letter, he ran away overnight.

古文：景获高仲密妻子送鄴，北豫、洛二州复入于东魏。
现代文：侯景俘虏了高仲密的妻子、儿子，将他们送到邺城，北豫、洛这两个州又重为东魏所有。
English: Hou Jing captured Gao Zhongmi's wife and son and sent them to Lucheng, and the two states of Beiyuan and Luo became the property of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：五月，壬辰，东魏以克复虎牢，降死罪已下囚，唯不赦高仲密家。
现代文：五月，壬辰，东魏由于收复了虎牢，对那些已判为死罪的囚犯作了宽大处理，唯独不赦免高仲密的家人。
English: In May, the Eastern Wei Dynasty restored the tiger prison and gave clemency to those prisoners who had been sentenced to death, but did not pardon Gao Zhongmi's family.

古文：丞相欢以高乾有义勋，高昂死王事，季式先自告，皆为之请，免其从坐。
现代文：丞相高欢考虑到当年高乾在信都起义拥戴自己，高阳战死在河阳，高季式先从永安戍跑来将情况告诉自己，就在孝静帝面前一一替他们说情，没让他们的家人连坐。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan took into account that Gao Qian supported himself in the uprising in Xindu that year, Gao Yang died in battle in Hayao, Gao Ji first ran from Yong'an to tell himself the situation, and he interceded for them one by one in front of Emperor Xiao Jing, and did not let their families sit together.

古文：仲密妻李氏当死，高澄盛服见之，曰： 今日何如？ 
现代文：高仲密的妻子李氏本来应当被处死，高澄衣冠楚楚地接见她，问道： 今日怎么样？ 
English: Gao Zhongmi's wife, Li, was supposed to be executed. Gao Cheng met her in full dress and asked, "How are you today?"

古文：李氏默然，遂纳之。
现代文：李氏默默无语，于是高澄将她收纳为妾。
English: Mr. Li was speechless, so Gao Cheng took her in as a concubine.

古文：乙未，以侯景为司空。
现代文：乙未，东魏任命侯景为司空。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Hou Jing as Sifu.

古文：秋，七月，魏大赦。以王盟为太傅，广平王赞为司空。
现代文：秋季，七月，西魏大赦天下，并任命王盟为太傅，广平王元赞为司空。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Western Wei Dynasty pardoned the world, and appointed Wang Meng as Taifu, and Guangping Wang Yuanzan as Sikuo.

古文：八月，乙丑，东魏以汾州刺史斛律金为大司马。
现代文：八月，乙丑，东魏任命汾州刺史斛律金为大司马。
English: In August, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhangzhou Zhishuo Liujin as the grand steward.

古文：东魏遣兼散骑常侍李浑等来聘。
现代文：东魏派遣兼散常侍李浑等人出使梁朝。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty sent Li Hun and others as envoys to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：冬，十一月，甲午，东魏主狩于西山；乙巳，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十一月，甲午，东魏的孝静帝来到西山狩猎；乙巳，返回皇宫。
English: In the winter, in November, in the afternoon of the first day of the month, the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiaozhun came to the West Mountain to hunt. He then returned to the palace.

古文：高澄启解侍中，东魏主以其弟并州刺史太原公洋代之。
现代文：高澄上书孝静帝，请求解除自己的侍中职务，孝静帝让高澄的弟弟并州刺史、太原公高洋代替他。
English: Gao Cheng wrote to Emperor Xiaozhing to request that he be relieved of his position as an attendant, and Emperor Xiaozhing asked Gao Cheng's younger brother, as well as Shuzhu Zhishi and Taiyuan Gong Gao Yang, to replace him.

古文：丞相欢筑长城于肆州北山，西自马陵，东至土登，四十日罢。
现代文：丞相高欢下令在肆州的北山修建长城，这条长城西面从马陵开始，东面一直到达土，四十天完工。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan ordered the construction of the Great Wall in Beishan, Zhouzhou. The Great Wall started from the horse mausoleum in the west and reached the earth in the east. It took forty days to complete.

古文：魏诸牧守共谒丞相泰，泰命河北太守裴侠别立，谓诸牧守曰： 裴侠清慎奉公，为天下最。
现代文：西魏的各位州郡长官一同去进见丞相宇文泰，宇文泰命令河北太守裴侠单独站出来，并对其他牧守们说： 论清廉、审慎、尽职尽责，裴侠在天崐下可以排在第一位。
English: All the prefects of the states and counties of the Western Wei Dynasty went to see the prime minister, Uwentai, together. Uwentai ordered the governor of Hebei Province, Pei Xiang, to stand up alone and said to the other pastors: In terms of integrity, prudence, and due diligence, Pei Xiang can be ranked first under heaven.

古文：有如侠者，可与俱立！ 
现代文：你们中间要是有跟裴侠一样的人，可以同他站在一起。 
English: If there is anyone among you who is like Baek, you can stand with him.

古文：众默然，无敢应者。
现代文：大家都默不作声，没有一个人敢回答宇文泰的话。
English: Everyone was silent, and no one dared to answer Yu Wentai's words.

古文：泰乃厚赐侠，朝野叹服，号为 独立君 。
现代文：于是宇文泰就给了裴侠优厚的赏赐，朝廷与民间都对此而感叹服气，称裴侠为 独立君 。
English: As a result, Uventai gave Pei Xiangru a generous reward, and both the imperial court and the people were convinced of this, calling Pei Xiangru an independent person.

古文：高祖武皇帝十四大同十年春，正月，李贲自称越帝，置百官，改元天德。
现代文：十年春季，正月，李贲自封为越帝，设置了文武百官，将年号改为 大德 。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, in the first month, Li Yu proclaimed himself the emperor of Vietnam, set up a hundred civil and military officials, and changed the year name to Dade.

古文：三月，癸巳，东魏丞相欢巡行冀、定二州，校河北户口损益，因朝于鄴。
现代文：三月癸巳，东魏的丞相高欢巡视冀州、定州，查点河北地区的户口是增加还是减少了，因而来到邺城朝拜孝静帝。
English: In March, Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, visited Jizhou and Dingzhou to find out whether the number of hukou in Hebei had increased or decreased, and thus came to visit Emperor Xiaojing in Shicheng.

古文：甲午，上幸兰陵，谒建宁陵，使太子入守宫城；辛丑，谒脩陵。
现代文：甲午，梁武帝来到兰陵，拜谒了建宁陵，派太子入守京城；辛丑，又拜谒了陵。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Liangwu came to Lanling, paid homage to Jianning Mausoleum, and sent the crown prince to guard the capital; Xinwu, also paid homage to the Mausoleum.

古文：丙午，东魏以开府仪同三司孙腾为太保。
现代文：丙午，东魏任命开府仪同三司孙腾为太保。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and Sansi Sunteng as Taibo.

古文：己酉，上幸京口城北固楼，更名北顾；庚戌，幸回宾亭，宴乡里故老及所经近县迎候者，少长数千人，各赉钱二千。
现代文：己酉，梁武帝来到京口城的北固楼，将北固楼改为北顾楼；庚戌，又来到回宾亭，宴请家乡的父老乡亲以及所经过的附近县里前来迎接的人，男女老少达几千人，梁武帝赏给每个人两千铜钱。
English: On his own initiative, Emperor Liangwu came to Beigulou in Jingkou City and changed Beigulou to Beigulou; on his own initiative, he came to Huibin Pavilion again and held a banquet for thousands of men, women and children from his hometown and nearby counties. Emperor Liangwu rewarded everyone with two thousand copper coins.

古文：壬子，东魏以高澄为大将军、领中书监，元弼为录尚书事，左仆射司马子如为尚书令，侍中高洋为左仆射。
现代文：壬子，东魏任命高澄为大将军、领中书监，元弼为录尚书事，左仆射司马子如为尚书令，侍中高洋为左仆射。
English: According to the records, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Gao Cheng to be the general and the supervisor of the books in the middle of the line, Yuan Zheng to be the secretary of the records, the left-hand servant of the secretary Ma Zi Ru to be the secretary of the records, and the attendant Gao Yang to be the left-hand servant of the records.

古文：丞相欢多在晋阳，孙腾、司马子如、高岳、高隆之，皆欢之亲旧，委以朝政，鄴中谓之四贵，其权势熏灼中外，率多专恣骄贪。
现代文：丞相高欢大部分时间呆在晋阳，孙腾、司马子如、高岳、高隆之都是高欢的亲信党羽，朝中的政务高欢交给他们去管理，邺城的人称他们为 四贵 。
English: Gao Huan, the chancellor, spent most of his time in Jinyang. Sun Teng, Sima Ziru, Gao Yue, and Gao Longzhi were Gao Huan's trusted party members. Gao Huan was entrusted with the administration of government affairs in the imperial court. People in Lucheng called them the Four Noblemen.

古文：欢欲损夺其权，故以澄为大将军、领中书监，移门下机事总归中书，文武赏罚皆禀于澄。
现代文：这四个人权势在朝廷内外炙手可热，他们大都专横、放肆、骄蛮而又贪婪。高欢想要削弱他们的权力，所以季任高澄为大将军、领中书监，将原来属于门下处理的机要大事统统移交给中书省，对文武百官进行奖赏与惩罚，事先都必须向高澄禀报。
English: The power of these four men was highly coveted both inside and outside the imperial court. Most of them were domineering, arrogant and greedy. Gao Huan wanted to weaken their power, so he appointed Gao Cheng as the general and the chief librarian of the Middle School. He transferred all the important matters that were originally handled by his subordinates to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and rewarded and punished hundreds of civil and military officials, all of which had to be reported to Gao Cheng in advance.

古文：孙腾见澄，不肯尽敬，澄叱左右牵下于床，筑以刀环，立之门外。
现代文：孙腾见高澄时，不愿意表现得毕恭毕敬，高澄便命令左右把孙腾从床上拉下来，用刀环打他，让他立在门外。
English: When Sun Teng saw Gao Cheng, he didn't want to be too respectful, so Gao Cheng ordered him to pull Sun Teng off the bed, beat him with a knife, and make him stand outside the door.

古文：太原公洋于澄前拜高隆之，呼为叔父，澄怒骂之。
现代文：太原公高洋当着高澄的面向高隆之跪拜，称他为叔父；高澄见了愤恕地责骂高洋。
English: In front of Takasumi, Taihara no Kimi, Takahiro bowed to Takahiro and called him uncle; Takasumi scolded Takahiro indignantly.

古文：欢谓群公曰： 儿子浸长，公宜避之。 
现代文：高欢对王公大臣们说道： 我这个儿子渐渐长大了，你们应该避免与他冲突。 
English: Gao Huan said to Wang Gong's ministers: This son of mine is getting older, you should avoid conflicts with him.

古文：于是公卿以下，见澄无不耸惧。
现代文：于是公卿以下的官员见了高澄，无不毛骨耸然感到惧怕。
English: As a result, officials below the rank of nobles saw Takasumi, and all of them were alarmed.

古文：库狄干，澄姑之婿也，自定州来谒，立于门外，三日乃得见。
现代文：高澄的姑父库狄干从定州到邺城来拜谒他，在门外站了三天才得到召见。
English: Takasumi's uncle, Kudikan, came all the way from Dingzhou to Lushan to pay his respects. He stood outside the gate for three days before he was summoned.

古文：澄欲置腹心于东魏主左右，擢中兵参军崔季舒为中书侍郎。
现代文：高澄想在孝静帝的身边安插自己的心腹，就提拔中兵参军崔季舒为中书侍郎。
English: Gao Cheng wanted to place his confidant next to Emperor Xiao Jing, so he promoted Choi Jishu, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA), to the position of junior secretary.

古文：澄每进书于帝，有所谏请，或文辞繁杂，季舒辄修饰通之。
现代文：高澄经常向孝静帝递交奏折，进行劝谏、请示，有时奏折的文辞过于繁杂，崔季舒总是要为他修饰一番，才呈报给皇帝。
English: Gaocheng often sent the Emperor Xiaozhing a symphonic composition, to offer advice and make requests. Sometimes the lyrics of the symphonic composition were too complicated, and Cui Jishu always had to modify it for him before presenting it to the Emperor.

古文：帝报澄父子之语，常与季舒论之，曰： 崔中书，我乳母也。 
现代文：孝静帝回答高澄父子的批复，常和崔季舒一道议论，孝静帝说： 崔中书真是我的乳母啊。 
English: In response to Gao Cheng's and his son's criticism, Xiao Jingdi often discussed with Cui Jishu. Xiao Jingdi said, "Cui Zhongshu is really my nanny."

古文：季舒，挺之从子也。
现代文：崔季舒是崔挺的侄子。
English: Cui Jishu is Cui Ting's nephew.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，上还自兰陵。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙卯，梁武帝从兰陵返回都城。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Liangwu returned to the capital from Lanling.

古文：五月，甲申朔，魏丞相泰朝于长安。
现代文：五月，甲申朔，西魏丞相宇文泰在长安朝拜文帝。
English: In May, Jia Shengshuo and Western Wei chancellor Yu Wentei paid homage to Emperor Wen in Chang'an.

古文：甲午，东魏遣散骑常侍魏季景来聘。
现代文：甲午，东魏派遣散骑常侍魏季景来梁朝聘问。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched the strolling equerry Wei Jiqing to come to Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：季景，收之族叔也。
现代文：魏季景是魏收的同族叔叔。
English: Wei Jiqing is Wei Zhe's uncle from the same family.

古文：尚书令何敬容妾弟盗官米，以书属领军河东王誉；丁酉，敬容坐免官。
现代文：梁朝尚书令何敬容小妾的弟弟盗窃了官家的大米，何敬容写信给领军河东王萧誉说情；丁酉，何敬容受到牵连被免去官职。
English: Liang Shang ordered He Jing Rong's concubine's younger brother to steal the official's rice, and He Jing Rong wrote to the leader of the East River army, King Xiaoyan, to intercede; Ding Xi, He Jing Rong was implicated and removed from his official post.

古文：东魏广阳王湛卒。
现代文：东魏广阳王元湛去世。
English: Eastern Wei Guangyang King Yuan Zhan passed away.

古文：魏琅邪贞献公贺拔胜诸子在东者，丞相欢尽杀之，胜愤恨发疾而卒。
现代文：西魏琅琊贞献公贺拔胜留在东魏的几个儿子，都被丞相高欢杀掉了，贺拔胜愤怒不已，发病而死。
English: Several sons of He Baxian, who stayed in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, were killed by the chancellor Gao Huan. He Baxian was furious and died of illness.

古文：丞相泰常谓人曰： 诸将对敌神色皆动，唯贺拔公临陈如平时，真大勇也！ 
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰常常对人说： 各位将领面对敌人的时候，神色都会有所变化，唯独贺拔胜上战场时就跟平时一样，真可算是大勇啊。 
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, often said to people: When you generals face the enemy, your countenance will change, but when you are victorious on the battlefield, it is the same as usual, it is really a great courage.

古文：秋，七月，魏更权衡度量，命尚书苏绰损益三十六条之制，总为五卷，颁行之。
现代文：秋季，七月，西魏的改革度量衡制度，尚书苏绰受命酌定在原来的二十四条制度的基础上，增补而成的三十六条制度，定为五卷，在全国颁布实行。
English: In the autumn, in July, the reform of the measurement system of the Western Wei Dynasty began, and the Shangshu Suqiao was ordered to decide on the basis of the original twenty-four-article system, and the additional thirty-six-article system was set as five volumes, promulgated and implemented nationwide.

古文：搜简贤才为牧守令长，皆依新制而遣焉。
现代文：同时寻求挑选贤能的人才担任牧、守、令、长等地方官，都是按照新的制度被派遣的。
English: At the same time, they are seeking to select talented people to serve as local officials such as pastors, governors, deputies, and mayors, all of whom will be dispatched according to the new system.

古文：数年之间，百姓便之。
现代文：几年之中，百姓都从中得到了好处。
English: After a few years, the people adapted to the new system.

古文：魏自正光以后，政刑弛纵，在位多贪污。
现代文：北魏自从正光年间以来，政务刑律松懈宽容，在位的官员大都贪污。
English: Since the Zhengguang era of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the government's criminal law was lax and lenient, and most of the officials in power were corrupt.

古文：丞相欢启以司州中从事宋游道为御史中尉，澄固请以吏部郎崔暹为之，以游道为尚书左丞。
现代文：丞相高欢启奏孝静帝，要求任命司州中从事宋道为御史中尉，高澄坚决请求让吏部郎崔暹担任这一职务，让宋道任尚书左丞。
English: The chancellor, Gao Huanqi, appealed to Emperor Xiaojing and requested that Song Dao, who was in charge of Sizhou Middle School, be appointed as a lieutenant of imperial history. Gao Cheng firmly requested that the secretary, Choi Siem, be appointed to this position, and that Song Dao be appointed as the vice-chancellor of imperial history.

古文：澄谓暹、游道曰： 卿一人处南台，一人处北省，当使天下肃然。 
现代文：高澄对崔暹、宋道说道： 你们两人一个在南面的御史台，一个在北面的尚书省，将会使天下安定。 
English: Gao Cheng said to Cui Siam and Song Dao: The two of you, one in the south at the Imperial Palace, and one in the north at Shangshu Province, will make the world stable.

古文：暹选毕义云等为御史，时称得人。
现代文：崔暹挑选了毕义云等人担任御史，当时人称用人得当。
English: At that time, Bi Yiyun and others were selected by Cui Siem to serve as imperial historian.

古文：义云，众敬之曾孙也。
现代文：毕义云是毕众敬的曾孙。
English: Bi Yiyun is the great-grandson of Bi Zhongyan.

古文：澄欲假暹威势，诸公在坐，令暹后至，通名，高视徐步，两人挈裾而入；澄分庭对揖，暹不让而坐，觞再行，即辞去。
现代文：高澄想要树立崔暹的权威，当各位王公大臣在座的时候，他让崔暹后到，按照高澄的吩咐，崔暹通报姓名之后，昂着头慢慢地迈步，两人提着崔暹的衣裾走进大厅，高澄面对面和崔暹互相作揖，崔暹不表示谦让便坐了下来。酒才饮两杯，崔暹便起身告辞离去。
English: Gao Cheng wanted to establish the authority of Choi Siam. When all the princes and ministers were present, he asked Choi Siam to come later. According to Gao Cheng's order, after Choi Siam announced her name, she walked slowly with her head held high. The two walked into the hall holding the hem of Choi Siam's dress. Gao Cheng confronted Choi Siam and teased each other. Choi Siam did not show any humility and sat down. After drinking two glasses of wine, Choi Siam got up and left.

古文：澄留之食，暹曰： 适受敕在台检校。 
现代文：高澄留他吃饭，他回答说： 皇上刚刚下令，要我到御史台查核重要文书。 
English: Takasumi kept him for dinner, and he replied: "The Emperor has just ordered me to go to the Imperial History Museum to check important documents.

古文：遂不待食而去，澄降阶送之。
现代文：于是他不等吃过饭便离去了，高澄降阶相送。
English: So he didn't wait for the meal to be over before he left, and Takasumi stepped down to see him off.

古文：它日，澄与诸公出，之东山，遇暹于道，前驱为赤棒所击，澄回马避之。
现代文：还有一天，高澄与各位王公大臣外出到东山，在路上遇见了崔暹，前面的马被崔暹的随从用红棒击打，高澄马上掉转马头避开。
English: On another day, Gao Cheng and other princes and ministers went out to Dongshan. On the way, they met Cui Siam. The horse in front was beaten by Cui Siam's attendant with a red stick. Gao Cheng immediately turned his horse around to avoid it.

古文：尚书令司马子如以丞相欢故人，当重任，意气自高，与太师咸阳王坦贪黩无厌；暹前后弹子如、坦及并州刺史可硃浑道元等罪状，无不极笔。
现代文：尚书令司马子如因为自己是丞相高欢的老朋友，又肩负重任，就傲慢自大，与担任太师的咸阳王元坦一道无休止地贪污国家的财物。崔暹先后多次弹劾司马子如、元坦以及并州刺史可朱浑道元等人的罪行，每一份奏折语气都很严厉。
English: Shang Shu ordered Sima Zi Ru to be arrogant because he was an old friend of the prime minister Gao Huan and shouldered a heavy responsibility, and together with Xianyang Wang Yuantan, who served as the grandmaster, he endlessly embezzled the country's property. Cui Siam has repeatedly impeached Sima Zi Ru, Yuantan, and Zhu Hongdao Yuan, who was also the state secretary, for their crimes, and each report is very harsh.

古文：宋游道亦劾子如、坦及太保孙腾、司徒高隆之、司空侯景、尚书元羡等。
现代文：宋道也弹劾司马子如、元坦以及太保孙腾、司徒高隆之、司空侯景、尚书元羡等人。
English: Song Dao also impeached Sima Ziru, Yuan Tan, as well as Taibo Sunteng, Sitou Gaolongzhi, Sikuo Houjing, Shangshu Yuan En and others.

古文：澄收子如系狱，一宿，发尽白，辞曰： 司马子如从夏州策杖投相王，王给露车一乘，豢牸牛犊，犊在道死，唯豢角存，此外皆取之于人。 
现代文：高澄将司马子如投入监狱，仅仅一个崐晚上，司马子如的头发就白了，他写信给高澄，说： 我司马子如从夏州拄杖投奔大王，大王给了我一辆上无篷盖，四边无车衣的车子，还有一只弯角的雌牛犊，牛犊在路上死了，只有这只牛犊的弯角我留了下来，除此以外的东西都是我从别人手中拿来的。 
English: When Gao Cheng threw Sima Ziru into prison, Sima Ziru's hair turned white after just one sleepless night. He wrote to Gao Cheng, saying, "When I, Sima Ziru, ran away from Xiazhou to the Great King, the Great King gave me a carriage without a canopy on the top and without a coach on the four sides, and a cornered heifer. The heifer died on the road. I only kept the corner of this heifer. Everything else I took from others.

古文：丞相欢以书敕澄曰： 司马令，吾之故旧，汝宜宽之。 
现代文：丞相高欢写信吩咐高澄： 司马尚书令是我的旧友，你应该对他宽大一些。 
English: The chancellor Gao Huan wrote to Gao Cheng: Sima Shang Shuling is my old friend, you should be more lenient to him.

古文：澄驻马行街，出子如，脱其锁；子如惧曰： 非作事邪？ 
现代文：高澄于是把马停到街上，放出司马子如，打开了他的枷锁；司马子如惶恐地问道： 不是要干掉我吧？ 
English: Gaocheng then stopped his horse in the street, released Sima Ziru and opened his shackles; Sima Ziru asked in fear, "Aren't you going to kill me?"

古文：八月，癸酉，削子如官爵。
现代文：八月，癸酉，朝廷撤销了司马子如的官职与爵位。
English: In August, the imperial court revoked Sima Ziru's official post and peerage.

古文：九月，甲申，以济阴王晖业为太尉；太师咸阳王坦以王还第，元羡等皆免官，其馀死黜者甚众。
现代文：九月，甲申，任命济阳王元晖业为太尉；咸阳王元坦被罢免太师职务后，回到自己的府第只当他的王爷了。
English: In September, Jishen appointed Jiyang's Wang Yuanjunye as the first lieutenant; after Xianyang's Wang Yuantan was removed from the position of the first lieutenant, he returned to his capital to be his prince.

古文：久之，欢见子如，哀其憔悴，以膝承其首，亲为择虱，赐酒百瓶，羊五百口，米五百石。
现代文：元羡等人都失去了官职，其余被处死或被贬官的人很多。过了许久之后，高欢见到司马子如面目憔悴，不禁怜悯起来，用自己的膝盖托住他的头，亲自为他捉虱子，又赐给他一百瓶酒，五百头羊，五百石米。
English: After a long time had passed, Gao Huan saw that Sima Zi's face was disfigured, and he couldn't help but feel pity for him. He put his knee on Sima Zi's head, caught a mule for him, and gave him one hundred bottles of wine, five hundred sheep, and five hundred kilos of rice.

古文：高澄对诸贵极言褒美崔暹，且戒属之。
现代文：高澄在权贵们面前对崔暹赞不绝口，并告诫他们要接受崔暹的支配。
English: In front of the dignitaries, Gao Cheng was full of praise for Choi Siam and warned them to accept Choi Siam's rule.

古文：丞相欢书与鄴下诸贵曰： 崔暹居宪台，咸阳王、司马令皆吾布衣之旧，尊贵亲昵，无过二人，同时获罪，吾不能救，诸君其慎之！ 
现代文：丞相高欢写信给邺城的权贵们，对他们说： 崔暹掌管着御史台，咸阳王、司马尚书令都是我当平民时的老朋友，要论尊贵以及和我的亲密程度，谁也无法超过这两个人，但是他们俩同时犯罪受到处理，而我却不能相救，你们都应该谨慎从事！ 
English: The chancellor Gao Huan wrote to the dignitaries of Lushan, saying to them: Cui Siam is in charge of the imperial history station, King Hamyang and Sima Shang Shuling are my old friends when I was a commoner. No one can surpass these two people in terms of dignity and intimacy with me, but they both committed crimes at the same time, but I can't save them. You should all be careful!

古文：宋游道奏驳尚书违失数百条，省中豪吏王儒之徒并鞭斥之，令、仆已下皆侧目。
现代文：宋道上书孝静帝，列举了尚书省的数百条失误并进行批评，对尚书省强横的吏员王儒之流都加以鞭打，尚书令、仆射以下的官员也都对他侧目而视。
English: Emperor Xiaojing listed hundreds of mistakes made by Shang Shuxuan and criticized them. He whipped Wang Ru, the powerful official of Shang Shuxuan, and the officials below Shang Shuling and Fuchai also looked sideways at him.

古文：高隆之诬游道有不臣之言，罪当死。
现代文：高隆之诬蔑他说过作为臣子不能说的话，犯了死罪。
English: Gao Longzhi slandered him, saying that he had said something that he couldn't say as a courtier, and he committed a capital crime.

古文：给事黄门侍郎杨愔曰： 畜狗求吠；今以数吠杀之，恐将来无复吠狗。 
现代文：给事黄门侍郎杨说道： 养狗就是为了让它叫，现在要是因为一条狗叫了几声便杀掉它，恐怕将来再也没有能叫的狗了。 
English: Yang, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, said: Raising a dog is to make it bark. Now, if you kill a dog because it barked a few times, I'm afraid there will be no more barking dogs in the future.

古文：游道竟坐除名。
现代文：宋道最终还是被革职除名了。
English: Song Dao was eventually removed from his post.

古文：澄谓游道曰： 卿早从我向并州，不尔，彼经略杀卿。 
现代文：高澄对宋道说： 你趁早跟我到并州去，假如不这样的话，他们就会图谋杀掉你。 
English: Gao Cheng said to Song Dao: You should come with me to Anhui Province as soon as possible. If you don't, they will try to murder you.

古文：游道从澄至晋阳，以为大行台吏部。
现代文：宋道跟随高澄来到晋阳，被任命为大行台吏部。
English: Song Dao followed Gao Cheng to Jinyang and was appointed as the head of the general staff.

古文：己丑，大赦。
现代文：己丑，梁朝大赦天下。
English: On the 21st, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：东魏以丧乱之后，户口失实，徭赋不均。
现代文：东魏在经过丧乱之后，国家登记的户口数与实际情况已经不符，徭役与赋税也摊派得不平均。
English: After the Eastern Wei Dynasty passed through the turmoil, the number of households registered by the state did not match the actual situation, and the taxes and taxes were not evenly distributed.

古文：冬，十月，丁巳，以太保孙腾、大司徒高隆之为括户大使，分行诸州，得无籍之户六十馀万，侨居者皆勒还本属。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁巳，朝廷委派太保孙腾、大司徒高隆之出任括户大使，分别到各个州去。经过查访，他们一共找到了六十多万户没有登记的家庭，侨居在外的人被安排回原来所属的地方。
English: In the winter, in October, the imperial court appointed Taiho Sunteng and Daistu Gaolong as envoy to each prefecture. After inspection, they found a total of more than 600,000 unregistered families, and those who lived outside the country were arranged to return to their original place.

古文：十一月，甲申，以高隆之录尚书事，以前大司马娄昭为司徒。
现代文：十一月，甲申，朝廷下令由高隆之为录尚书事，任命前大司马娄昭为司徒。
English: In November, in Jiaxing, the imperial court ordered Gao Longjing to record the records and appointed the former grand secretary Ma Ying Zhao as the steward.

古文：庚子，东魏主祀圜丘。
现代文：庚子，东魏孝静帝在圜丘祭天。
English: Geng Zi, the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing, is seen at the Mengqiu Festival.

古文：东魏丞相欢袭击山胡，破之，俘万馀户，分配诸州。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢派兵袭击山胡，并打败了他们，俘虏了一万多户人家，将他们分配到了各个州。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan sent troops to attack the Sanhu, and defeated them, captured more than ten thousand households, and distributed them to various states.

