古文：起暑维单阏，尽上章执徐，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。汉献帝建安四年
English: Han Xian Di Jianan lasted for four years.

古文：孝献皇帝戊建安四年春，三月，黑山帅张燕与公孙续率兵十万，三道救之。未至，瓚密使行人赍书告续，使引五千铁骑于北隰之中，起火为应，瓚欲自内出战。
现代文：春季，黑山军首领张燕与公孙续率兵十万，分三路援救公孙瓒，张燕的援军还未到，公孙瓒秘密派使者送信给公孙续，让他率五千铁骑到北方低洼地区埋伏，点火作为信号，公孙瓒打算自己出城夹击袁绍围城部队。
English: In the spring, Zhang Yan and Gongsun Dui, the leaders of the Black Mountain Army, led 100,000 soldiers in a three-way rescue of Gongsun Yao. Zhang Yan's reinforcements had not yet arrived, and Gongsun Dui secretly sent an envoy to Gongsun Dui, asking him to ride five thousand iron horses to the low-lying areas in the north to ambush and ignite as a signal. Gongsun Dui planned to go out of the city and attack Yuan Shao's besieging forces.

古文：绍候得其书，如期举火。瓚以为救至，遂出战。
现代文：袁绍的巡逻兵得到这封书信，袁绍就按期举火，公孙瓒以为援军已到，就率军出战。
English: When Yuan Shao's patrol soldiers received this letter, Yuan Shao set fire as scheduled, and Gongsun Yao thought that reinforcements had arrived and led his army into battle.

古文：绍设伏击之，瓚大败，复还自守。
现代文：袁绍的伏兵发动进攻，公孙瓒大败，回城继续坚守。
English: Yuan Shao's ambush launched an attack, Gongsun Yao suffered a crushing defeat and returned to the city to continue to hold out.

古文：绍为地道，穿其楼下，施木柱之，度足达半，便烧之，楼辄倾倒，稍至京中。
现代文：袁绍围城部队挖掘地道，挖到公孙瓒部队固守的城楼下，用木柱撑住，估计已挖到城楼的一半，便纵火烧毁木柱，城楼就倒塌了。
English: Yuan Shao's besieging troops dug a tunnel and reached the lower part of the castle, where Gongsun Qi's troops were holding out. They propped themselves up with wooden pillars. It was estimated that they had dug up half of the castle, and then they set fire to the wooden pillars, causing the castle to collapse.

古文：瓚自计必无全，乃悉缢其姊妹、妻子，然后引火自焚。
现代文：袁绍用这种方法逐渐攻到公孙瓒所住的中京。公孙瓒自料必定不能幸免，就绞死自己的姊妹、妻子儿女，然后放火自焚。
English: Yuan Shao used this method to gradually reach Zhongjing, where Gongsun Yao lived. Gongsun Yao, who could not be spared, hanged his sisters, wife and children, and then set himself on fire.

古文：绍趣兵登台，斩之。
现代文：袁绍催促士兵登上高台，斩公孙瓒。
English: Yuan Shao urged the soldiers to climb the hill and behead Sun Yat-sen.

古文：田楷战死。
现代文：田楷战死。
English: Tabai died in the battle.

古文：关靖叹曰： 前若不止将军自行，未必不济。
现代文：关靖叹息说： 以前，如果不是我阻止将军自己出城，未必没有希望。
English: Guan Jing sighed and said, "In the past, if I hadn't prevented the general from leaving the city on his own, there might have been hope.

古文：吾闻君子陷人危，必同其难，岂可以独生乎！ 
现代文：我听说君子使别人陷入危难时，自己一定与他分担患难，怎么能自己独自逃生呢！ 
English: I have heard that when a gentleman puts someone else in danger, he must share the suffering with him, how can he escape alone!

古文：策马赴绍军而死。
现代文：就骑马冲入袁绍军中而死。
English: He rode into Yuan Shao's army and died.

古文：续为屠各所杀。
现代文：公孙续被匈奴屠各部杀死。
English: Gongsun was killed repeatedly by Tu.

古文：渔阳田豫说太守鲜于辅曰： 曹氏奉天子以令诸侯，终能定天下，宜早从之。 
现代文：渔阳人田豫劝告本郡太守鲜于辅说： 曹操尊奉天子来号令诸侯，最终能够平定天下，应该早早归顺他。 
English: Tian Yu, a fisherman from Yang, advised the county's governor, Xian Yu, saying, "Cao Cao, the son of heaven, has commanded the lords to subdue the world, and we should submit to him as soon as possible.

古文：辅乃率其众以奉王命。
现代文：鲜于辅于是率领部下归附朝廷。
English: Soon after, he led his subordinates to join the imperial court.

古文：诏以辅为建忠将军，都督幽州六郡。
现代文：献帝下诏任命鲜于辅为建忠将军，都督幽州六郡军务。
English: Under the imperial edict of dedicating the emperor, he was appointed as General Jianzhong, the military governor of six counties in Yuzhou.

古文：初，乌桓王丘力居死，子楼班年少，从子蹋顿有武略，代立，总摄上谷大人难楼、辽东大人苏仆延、右北平大人乌延等。
现代文：起初，乌桓王丘力居死后，他的儿子楼班年龄还小，侄儿蹋顿勇武善战，富有谋略，就接替了丘力居的王位，总领上谷大人难楼、辽东大人苏仆延、右北平大人乌延等。
English: At first, after the death of King Wuhuan Qiu Liju, his son Louban, who was still young, and his nephew Qutong, who was brave, good at war, and rich in strategy, succeeded the throne of Qiu Liju. The general leaders were Shangguan adult Nanlu, Liaodong adult Su Fuyan, Right Beiping adult Wuyan and so on.

古文：袁绍攻公孙瓚，蹋顿以乌桓助之。
现代文：袁绍进攻公孙瓒时，蹋顿率领乌桓人帮助袁绍。
English: When Yuan Shao attacked Gongsun Yao, Yao Dong led the Wuhuan people to help Yuan Shao.

古文：瓚灭，绍承制皆赐蹋顿、难楼、苏仆延、乌延等单于印绶；又以阎柔得乌桓心，因加宠慰以安北边。
现代文：公孙瓒灭亡后，袁绍用皇帝的名义对蹋顿、难楼、苏仆延、乌延等都赐予单于印绶。袁绍又因为阎柔受到乌桓人敬重，对阎柔待遇特别优厚，以求得北方连境的安定。
English: After the death of Gongsun Rong, Yuan Shao, in the name of the emperor, bestowed Shandong, Nanluo, Su Puyan, Wuyan, and so on, with Shandong printing money. Yuan Shao, because Yan Rong was respected by the Wuhuan people, treated Yan Rong particularly well, in order to obtain the stability of the northern border.

古文：其后难楼、苏仆延奉楼班为单于，以蹋顿为王，然蹋顿犹秉计策。
现代文：后来，难楼、苏仆延共同尊奉楼班为单于，以蹋顿为王，但实际事务仍由蹋顿掌管。
English: Later, Nanluo and Su Duan jointly honored Louban as a single, with Xington as the king, but the actual affairs were still controlled by Xington.

古文：眭固屯射犬。
现代文：眭固驻军于射犬。
English: The entrenchment of the garrison at Shining Dog.

古文：夏，四月，曹操进军临河，使将军史涣、曹仁渡河击之。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操进军到黄河岸边，派将军史涣、曹仁渡过黄河，进攻眭固。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao marched to the shore of the Yellow River and sent generals Shi Yan and Cao Ren across the Yellow River to attack the fortress.

古文：仁，操从弟也。
现代文：曹仁是曹操的堂弟。
English: Cao Ren is Cao Cao's cousin.

古文：固自将兵北诣袁绍求救，与涣、仁遇于犬城，涣、仁击斩之。
现代文：眭固亲自率军北上向袁绍求援，在犬城与史涣、曹仁相遇，史涣、曹仁进击，杀死眭固。
English: Hao Gu personally led the army north to Yuan Shao for help, and met Shi Yan and Cao Ren in Incheng. Shi Yan and Cao Ren attacked and killed Hao Gu.

古文：操遂济河，围射犬。
现代文：于是曹操亲统大军渡过黄河，围困射犬，射犬投降。
English: As a result, Cao Cao's whole army crossed the Yellow River, besieged Shining Dog, and Shining Dog surrendered.

古文：射犬降，操还军敖仓。
现代文：曹军还驻敖仓。
English: Cao's army was still stationed in Kamakura.

古文：初，操在兗州举魏种孝廉。
现代文：当初，曹操在兖州推荐魏种为孝廉。
English: At first, Cao Cao recommended Wei Zong as a successor to Xiao Lian in Ganzhou.

古文：兗州叛，操曰： 唯魏种且不弃孤。 
现代文：兖州反叛时，曹操说： 只有魏种不会辜负我。 
English: When Bozhou rebelled, Cao Cao said: Only the Wei race will not fail me.

古文：及闻种走，操怒曰： 种不南走越，北走胡，不置汝也！ 
现代文：及至听到魏种逃走的消息，曹操大怒，说： 你魏种不逃到南越、北胡，我就不放过你！ 
English: Upon hearing the news of Wei Zong's escape, Cao Cao flew into a rage and said, "If you, Wei Zong, do not escape to South Vietnam and Beibu, I will not let you go!"

古文：即下射犬，生禽种，操曰： 唯其才也！ 
现代文：攻下射犬以后，生擒魏种，曹操说： 只因为他有才干！ 
English: Cao Cao said, "It's only because he's talented!"

古文：释其缚而用之，以为河内太守，属以河北事。
现代文：解开捆绑他的绳索，任用他为河内郡太守，让他负责黄河以北的事务。
English: Untie the ropes that bind him, appoint him governor of Hanoi County, and put him in charge of affairs north of the Yellow River.

古文：以卫将军董承为车骑将军。
现代文：任命卫将军董承为车骑将军。
English: He appointed Guards General Dong Cheng as the cavalry general.

古文：袁术既称帝，淫侈滋甚，媵御数百，无不兼罗纨，厌粱肉，自下饥困，莫之收恤。
现代文：袁术称帝后，奢靡贪淫的程度比以前更厉害，后宫妃嫔有数百人，无不身穿绫罗绸缎，饱食精美的饭菜。属下将士饥饿困苦，他却毫不并心。
English: Yuan Shou called the empress, the level of extravagance and corruption was more severe than before. There were hundreds of concubines in the harem, all dressed in silk and satiated with exquisite meals. His subordinates were starving and poor, but he did not care.

古文：既而资实空尽，不能自立，乃烧宫室，奔其部曲陈简、雷薄于灊山，复为简等所拒，遂大穷，士卒散走，忧懑不知所为。
现代文：不久，储存的各种物资都已耗尽，自己无法维持，于是烧毁宫殿，去投奔驻在山的部将陈简、雷薄，但又遭到陈简等的拒绝。于是袁术大为困窘，部下士兵不断逃走。
English: Soon, all kinds of stored materials were exhausted, and he could not maintain himself, so he burned down the palace and went to the minister stationed in the mountains, Chen Jian and Lei Bo, but was rejected by Chen Jian and others. So Yuan Shou was very embarrassed, and his soldiers kept fleeing.

古文：乃遣使归帝号于从兄绍曰： 禄去汉室久矣！袁氏受命当王，符瑞炳然。
现代文：他心中忧虑烦闷，无计可施，只好派人把皇帝的尊号送给他的堂兄袁绍，说： 汉朝王室的气数久已尽了，袁氏应当接受天命为君王，符命与祥瑞都显示得很明白。
English: Worried and frustrated, he had no choice but to send someone to give the emperor's honorary title to his cousin Yuan Shao, saying: The Han Dynasty's royal power has long been exhausted, and the Yuan Dynasty should accept the destiny as the king. Both the destiny and the auspiciousness are very clear.

古文：今君拥有四州，人户百万，谨归大命，君其兴之！ 
现代文：如今您拥有四州的地盘，人口一百万户，我谨将上天授予的使命归献给您，请您复兴大业！ 
English: Now that you have the territory of four prefectures, with a population of one million households, I would like to dedicate to you the mission granted by heaven, and ask you to revive the great cause!

古文：袁谭自青州迎术，欲从下邳北过。
现代文：袁谭从青州来迎接袁术，想从下邳北方通过。
English: Yuan Tan came from Qingzhou to meet Yuan Shuxing and wanted to pass through the northern part of Jiaozuo.

古文：曹操遣刘备及将军清河硃灵邀之，术不得过，复走寿春。
现代文：曹操派遣刘备及将军、清河人朱灵率军进行拦截，袁术无法通过，再退回寿春。
English: Cao Cao dispatched Liu Bei and General Zhu Ling, a Qinghe man, to intercept Yuan Shuxu's army. Yuan Shuxu was unable to pass and retreated back to Shuchun.

古文：六月，至江亭，坐箦床而叹曰： 袁术乃至是乎！ 
现代文：六月，袁术到达江亭，坐在只辅着竹席的床上，叹息说： 我袁术竟落到这个地步吗！ 
English: In June, Yuan Shuxu arrived at Jiangting, sat on a bed with only a bamboo seat to support him, and sighed, "I, Yuan Shuxu, have fallen to this level!

古文：因愤慨结病，欧血死。
现代文：气愤感慨成病，吐血而死。
English: As a result of his indignation, Yuan Shuxu became ill, vomited blood and died.

古文：术从弟胤畏曹操，不敢居寿春，率其部曲奉术柩及妻子，奔庐江太守刘勋于皖城。
现代文：袁术的堂弟袁胤害怕曹操，不敢留在寿春，率领部曲带着袁术的灵柩与家眷，投奔驻在皖城的庐江太守刘勋。
English: Yuan Shou's cousin Yuan Tan was afraid of Cao Cao and did not dare to stay in Shuchun. He led the troops to take Yuan Shou's coffin and his family to Liu Xun, the grand marshal of the Li River, who was stationed in Lucheng.

古文：故广陵太守徐璆得传国玺。献之。
现代文：前任广陵郡太守徐得到传国御玺，献给朝廷。
English: Xu, the previous governor of Guangling County, received the Imperial Regalia and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：袁绍既克公孙瓚，心益骄，贡御稀简。
现代文：袁绍消灭公孙瓒后，更加骄横，对朝廷进贡的次数和数量减少。
English: Yuan Shao became even more arrogant after eliminating Gongsun Rong, and the number of tributes paid to the imperial court decreased.

古文：主薄耿包密白绍，宜应天人，称尊号。
现代文：主簿耿包秘密向袁绍建议，应当应天顺民，即位称帝。
English: The chief accountant Geng Bao secretly suggested to Yuan Shao that the emperor should be enthroned in accordance with the will of the people.

古文：绍以包白事示军府。僚属皆言包妖妄，宜诛。
现代文：袁绍把耿包的建议告诉军府的官员，官员们一致认为耿包大逆不道，应该斩首。
English: Yuan Shao told the military officials about Geng Bao's suggestion. The officials agreed that Geng Bao was a traitor and should be beheaded.

古文：绍不得已，杀包以自解。
现代文：袁绍不得已，杀掉耿包以表白自己无意称帝。
English: As a last resort, Yuan Shao killed Geng Bao to show that he had no intention of proclaiming himself emperor.

古文：绍简精兵十万、骑万匹，欲以攻许。
现代文：袁绍挑选了精兵十万，良马万匹，打算攻打许都。
English: Yuan Shao selected one hundred thousand elite soldiers and ten thousand fine horses, intending to attack Xu Du.

古文：沮授谏曰： 近讨公孙瓚，师出历年，百姓疲敝，仓库无积，未可动也。
现代文：沮授劝阻他说： 近来讨伐公孙瓒，连年出兵，百姓疲困不堪，仓库中又没有积蓄，不能出兵。
English: Frustrated, the teacher tried to dissuade him: "Recently, there has been a crackdown on Gongsunye, and troops have been dispatched year after year. The people are exhausted, and there is no savings in the warehouse, so they cannot send troops.

古文：宜务农息民，先遣使献捷天子。
现代文：应当抓紧农业生产，使百姓休养生息。
English: We should pay close attention to agricultural production, so that the people can rest and recuperate.

古文：若不得通，乃表曹操隔我王路，然后进屯黎阳，渐营河南，益作舟舡，缮修器械，分遣精骑抄其边鄙，令彼不得安，我取其逸。如此，可坐定也。 
现代文：先派遣使者将消灭公孙瓒的捷报呈献天子，如果捷报不能上达天子，就可以上表指出曹操断绝我们与朝廷的联系，然后出兵进驻黎阳，逐渐向黄河以南发展。同时多造船只，整修武器，分派精锐的骑兵去骚扰曹操的边境，使他不得安定，而我们以逸待劳，这样，坐着就可以统一全国。 
English: First, send an envoy to present the report of eliminating Gongsun Qian to the heavenly son. If the report cannot reach the heavenly son, you can point out that Cao Cao broke off our contact with the imperial court, then sent troops to Liang and gradually developed south of the Yellow River. At the same time, build more ships, refurbish weapons, and dispatch elite cavalry to harass Cao Cao's borders and make him unstable, while we wait for labor. In this way, we can unify the whole country while sitting.

古文：郭图、审配曰： 以明公之神武，引河朔之强众，以伐曹操，易如覆手，何必乃尔！ 
现代文：郭图、审配说： 以您用兵如神的谋略，统率北方的强兵，去讨伐曹操，易如反掌，何必那样费事？ 
English: Guo Tu, the judge, said: With your strategy of using soldiers like gods, leading the strong soldiers in the north to fight Cao Cao is as easy as pie. Why go to such trouble?

古文：授曰： 夫救乱诛暴，谓之义兵；恃众凭强，谓之骄兵。
现代文：沮授说： 用兵去救乱除暴，被称为义兵；倚仗人多势众，被称为骄兵。
English: Dejected teacher said: Using soldiers to rescue and eliminate violence is called a volunteer soldier; relying on a large number of people is called a proud soldier.

古文：义者无敌，骄者先灭。
现代文：义兵无敌，骄兵先亡。
English: The army of benevolence and righteousness has no opponent, and the proud army will perish first.

古文：曹操奉天子以令天下，今举师南向，于义则违。
现代文：曹操尊奉天子以号令天下，如今我们要是举兵南下，就违背了群臣大义。
English: Cao Cao revered and obeyed the Son of Heaven, and commanded the whole world. Now, if we raise an army and go south, we will violate the great justice of the vassals.

古文：且庙胜之策，不在强弱。
现代文：而且，克敌制胜的谋略，不在于强弱。
English: Moreover, the strategy for defeating the enemy is not based on strength or weakness.

古文：曹操法令既行，士卒精练，非公孙瓚坐而受攻者也。
现代文：曹操法令严明，士兵训练有素，不是公孙瓒那样坐等被打的人。
English: Cao Cao's edicts were strict, and the soldiers were well-trained. They were not like Gongsun Yao, who sat and waited to be beaten.

古文：今弃万安之术而兴无名之师，窃为公惧之！ 
现代文：如今要舍弃万全之计而出动无名之师，我为您担忧！ 
English: Now you want to give up the best-laid plans and go for an unknown teacher, I worry about you!

古文：图、配曰： 武王伐纣，不为不义。况兵加曹操，而云无名？
现代文：郭图、审配说： 周武王讨伐商纣王，并不是不义；何况我们是讨伐曹操，怎么能说是师出无名？
English: Guo Tu, the judge, said: It is not unjust for King Zhou Wu to fight against the merchants and merchants; moreover, we are fighting against Cao Cao, how can it be said that the teacher is unknown?

古文：且以公今日之强，将士思奋，不及时以定大业，所谓天与不取，反受其咎，此越之所以霸，吴之所以灭也。监军之计在于持牢，而非见时知机之变也。 
现代文：而且以您今天的强盛，将士们急于立功疆场，不乘此时机奠定大业，就正像古人所说的： 不接受上天给予的赏赐，就会反受其害。 这正是春秋时期越国所以兴盛，吴国所以灭亡的原因，监军沮授的计策过于持重，不是随机应变的谋略。 
English: Moreover, with today's strong prosperity, the generals are eager to make contributions to the battlefield, and if you do not take this opportunity to lay a great cause, it is just like the ancients said: If you do not accept the reward given by heaven, you will suffer from it. This is precisely the reason why Yue Province flourished and Wu Province perished in the Spring and Autumn Period. The strategy of supervising the army and giving orders is too important, not a strategy of random contingency.

古文：绍纳图言，图等因是谮授曰： 授监统内外，威震三军，若其浸盛，何以制之！
现代文：袁绍采纳了郭图等的意见。郭图等乘机向袁绍讲沮授的坏话，说： 沮授总管内外，威震三军，如果势力逐渐扩张，将怎样控制他！
English: Yuan Shao adopted the opinions of Guo Tu and others. Guo Tu and others took the opportunity to tell Yuan Shao the bad words of De Zhaozhu, saying: De Zhaozhu in and out of the General Administration, the three powerful armies, if the forces gradually expand, how will they control him!

古文：夫臣与主同者亡，此《黄石》之所忌也。
现代文：臣下的权威与君主一样，就一定会灭亡，这是兵书《黄石》指出的大忌。
English: The authority of a subject, like that of a monarch, is sure to perish, which is a taboo pointed out in the military manual "Yellowstone."

古文：且御众于外，不宜知内。 
现代文：而且统军在外的人，不应同时主持内部政务。 
English: Besides, it is not appropriate for a person who commands a foreign army to be involved in domestic affairs.

古文：绍乃分授所统为三都督，使授及郭图、淳于琼各典一军。
现代文：袁绍就把沮授所统领的军队分为三部分，由三位都督指挥，派沮授、郭图与淳于琼各统一军。
English: Yuan Shao divided the army under the command of Deshu into three parts, commanded by three governors, and sent Deshu, Guo Tu and Junyujong to the unified army.

古文：骑都尉清河崔琰谏曰： 天子在许，民望助顺，不可攻也！ 
现代文：骑都尉、清河人崔琰劝阻袁绍说： 天子在许都，民心倾向于那边，不能进攻！ 
English: The captain of the cavalry and the man of the Qinghe River, Cui Yao, dissuaded Yuan Shao, saying, "The Son of Heaven is in the capital, the people's hearts are inclined to that side, we cannot attack!"

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍不听。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：许下诸将闻绍将攻许，皆惧，曹操曰： 吾知绍之为人，志大而智小，色厉而胆薄，忌克而少威，兵多而分画不明，将骄而政令不一，土地虽广，粮食虽丰，适足以为吾奉也。 
现代文：许都的将领们听说袁绍要来进攻，都心中害怕。曹操说： 我知道袁绍的为人，志向很大而智谋短浅，外表勇武而内心胆怯，猜忌刻薄而缺少威信，人马虽多而调度无方，将领骄横而政令不一，他的土地虽然广大，粮食虽然丰足，却正好是为我们预备的。 
English: Cao Cao said, "I know that Yuan Shao is a man of great ambition but shallow wit, brave on the outside but timid on the inside, suspicious and lacking in authority, with a large number of men and horses but no way to manage them, with arrogant generals and inconsistent political orders, and although his land is vast and his grain is plentiful, it is just prepared for us.

古文：孔融谓荀彧曰： 绍地广兵强，田丰、许攸智士也，为之谋；审配、逄纪忠臣也，任其事；颜良、文丑勇将也，统其兵。殆难克乎！ 
现代文：孔融对荀说： 袁绍地广兵强，有田丰、许攸这样的智士为他出谋划策，审配、逢纪这样的忠臣为他办事，颜良、文这样的勇将为他统领军队，恐怕难以战胜吧！ 
English: Kong Rong said to Yao: Yuan Shao has a strong army, wise men such as Arita Feng and Xu You have made suggestions for him, loyal vassals such as Ji and Feng Ji have worked for him, and brave men such as Yan Liang and Wen will lead the army for him. I'm afraid it will be difficult to defeat him!

古文：彧曰： 绍兵虽多而法不整，田丰刚而犯上，许攸贪而不治，审配专而无谋，逄纪果而自用，此数人者，势不相容，必生内变。
现代文：荀说： 袁绍的兵马虽多，但法纪不严。田丰刚直，但昌犯上司；许攸贪婪，又治理无方；审配专权，却没有谋略；逢纪处事果断，但自以为是。这几个人，势必不能相容，一定会生内讧。
English: Zou said: Although Yuan Shao's soldiers and horses are numerous, the legal discipline is not strict. Tian Feng is straightforward, but Chang is the criminal boss; Xu You is greedy, but there is no way to govern; he has the exclusive right to judge, but there is no strategy; he is decisive in dealing with discipline, but he is self-righteous. These several people are bound to be incompatible and will certainly have internal conflicts.

古文：颜良、文丑，一夫之勇耳，可一战而禽也。 
现代文：颜良、文不过是匹夫之勇，一仗就可以捉住他们。 
English: Yan Liang, Wen Jiu, are just the courage of a peacock, and they can be killed in a single battle.

古文：秋，八月，操进军黎阳，使臧霸等将精兵入青州以扞东方，留于禁屯河上。
现代文：秋季，八月，曹操进军黎阳，派臧霸等充领精兵，到青州去保卫东方边境，留于禁驻扎在黄河之畔。
English: In the autumn, in August, Cao Cao marched into Liyang, and sent Yan Bao and other elite soldiers to Qingzhou to defend the eastern border, and remained stationed on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：九月，操还许，分兵守官渡。
现代文：九月，曹操返回许都，分兵驻守官渡。
English: In September, Cao Cao returned to Xudu, and a detachment of soldiers was stationed in Guandu.

古文：袁绍遣人招张绣，并与贾诩书结好。
现代文：袁绍派使者去拉拢张绣，并给张绣的谋士贾诩写信，表示愿与贾诩结交。
English: Yuan Shao sent an envoy to woo Zhang Xiu, and wrote a letter to Zhang Xiu's advisor Jia Jun, expressing his willingness to make friends with Jia Jun.

古文：绣欲许之，诩于绣坐上，显谓绍使曰： 归谢袁本初，兄弟不能相容，而能容天下国士乎！ 
现代文：张绣打算答应袁绍。贾诩在张绣招待袁绍使者时，高声对使者说： 请回去为我们谢谢袁绍的好意，他与兄弟袁术不能相容，而能容天下的英雄豪杰吗！ 
English: Zhang Xiu planned to agree to Yuan Shao. When Zhang Xiu invited Yuan Shao's envoy, Jia Wei said to the envoy in a loud voice: Please go back and thank Yuan Shao's kindness for us. He is incompatible with his brother Yuan Shou, but can he tolerate the world's heroes?

古文：绣惊惧曰： 何至于此！ 
现代文：张绣又惊又怕，说： 怎么至于这样！ 
English: Zhang Xiu was shocked and afraid, and said: "How can this be!

古文：窃谓诩曰： 若此，当何归？ 
现代文：他悄悄地对贾诩说： 像现在这样，咱们应当依靠谁？ 
English: He quietly said to Jia Wei: As it is now, who should we rely on?

古文：诩曰： 不如从曹公。 
现代文：贾诩说： 不如依靠曹操。 
English: Jia Wei said: It is better to follow Cao Gong.

古文：绣曰： 袁强曹弱，又先与曹为仇，从之如何？ 
现代文：张绣说： 袁绍势力雄厚，曹操势单力孤，而且我们以前又与曹操结过怨仇，怎么归附他呢？ 
English: Zhang Xiu said, "Yuan Shao is powerful, Cao Cao is powerless, and we had a grudge with Cao Cao before, how can we attach ourselves to him?

古文：诩曰： 此乃所以宜从也。
现代文：贾诩说： 正因为如此，才应当归附曹操。
English: Jia Wei said: This is the reason why you should cling to him.

古文：夫曹公奉天子以令天下，其宜从一也；绍强盛，我以少众从之，必不以我为重，曹公众弱，其得我必喜，其宜从二也；夫有霸王之志者，固将释私怨以明德于四海，其宜从三也。
现代文：曹操尊奉天子以号令天下，名正言顺，这是应该归附的第一条理由。袁绍强盛，我们以不多的人马去投靠他，必定不会受到重视；而曹操势单力薄，得到我们必然十分高兴，这是应该归附的第二条理由。抱有称霸天下大志的人，一定会抛弃私怨，以向四表明他的恩德，这是应该归附的第三条理由。
English: Cao Cao revered the Son of Heaven and commanded the world with a call, and his name is justified, which is the first reason that should be attached. Yuan Shao is strong, and if we rely on him with a small number of people, we will certainly not be valued; and Cao Cao is weak, and we must be very happy to get it, which is the second reason that should be attached. People who have the ambition to dominate the world will surely abandon personal grudges to show his kindness to the four, which is the third reason that should be attached.

古文：愿将军无疑！ 
现代文：希望将军不要疑虑。 
English: I hope the general will stop hesitating!

古文：冬，十一月，绣率众降曹操，操执绣手，与欢宴，为子均取绣女，拜扬武将军；表诩为执金吾，封都亭侯。
现代文：冬季，十一月，张绣率部投降曹操。曹操握着张绣的手，与他一起欢宴，为儿子曹均娶张绣的女儿为妻。任命张绣为扬武将军；上表推荐贾诩担任执金吾，封都亭侯。
English: In the winter, in November, Zhang Xiu led the troops to surrender to Cao Cao. Cao Cao held Zhang Xiu's hand and feasted with him, and married Zhang Xiu's daughter to his son Cao Jun. Zhang Xiu was appointed as Yangwu General; the above table recommended Jia Jia as the King of Wushu and the Prince of the Capital.

古文：关中诸将以袁、曹方争，皆中立顾望。
现代文：关中地区的将领们看到袁绍与曹操正在争斗，都保持中立，坐观成败。
English: When the generals in Guanzhong saw that Yuan Shao and Cao Cao were fighting, they all remained neutral and watched the battle.

古文：凉州牧韦端使从事天水杨阜诣许，阜还，关右诸将问： 袁、曹胜败孰在？ 
现代文：凉州牧韦端派遣从事、天水人杨阜前往许都，杨阜返回后，关中将领们问他： 袁绍与曹操相争，将会谁胜谁败？ 
English: Liangzhou Muwei Duan dispatched Tianshui people Yang Fu to Xu Du. After Yang Fu returned, the generals of Guanzhong asked him: If Yuan Shao and Cao Cao fight, who will win and who will lose?

古文：阜曰： 袁公宽而不断，好谋而少决；不断则无威，少决则后事，今虽强，终不能成大业。
现代文：杨阜说： 袁公宽容而不果断，好谋而迟疑不决；不果断就没有威信，迟疑不决就会错过时机，如今虽强，但终究不能成就大业。
English: Yang Fu said: Yuan Gong is tolerant but indecisive, he is a good strategist but hesitant; if he is not decisive, he will have no prestige, if he is hesitant, he will miss the opportunity. Although he is strong now, he will not be able to achieve a great cause.

古文：曹公有雄才远略，决机无疑，法一而兵精，能用度外之人，所任各尽其力，必能济大事者也。 
现代文：曹公有雄才大略，当机立断，毫不迟疑，法令统一，兵强马壮，能不拘一格地任用人才，部下各尽其力，一定能成就大业。 
English: Cao Gong has outstanding talent and a far-reaching strategy, there is no hesitation in the timing of this decision, the law is specific and the soldiers are elite, they can reuse talents outside the system, and the appointed people can also do their best. They must be people who can achieve great things.

古文：曹操使治书待御史河东卫觊镇抚关中，时四方大有还民，关中诸将多引为部曲。
现代文：曹操派治书侍御史、河东人卫觊镇抚关中地区。当时有许多难民归来，关中的将领们大多把他们收容下来，作为部曲。
English: Cao Cao sent Zhi Shuxu to attend the history, and the people from the east of the river Wei Wei Town to the Guanzhong area. At that time, many refugees returned, and the generals of the Guanzhong mostly accommodated them as a part of the story.

古文：觊书与荀彧： 关中膏腴之地，顷遭荒乱，人民流入荆州者十万馀家，闻本土安宁，皆企望思归。
现代文：卫觊写信给荀说： 关中土地肥沃，不久前遭受战乱，百姓流入荆州的有十万余家。听说家乡安宁，都盼望返回故乡。
English: Wei Zheng wrote to Zou, saying: Guanzhong has fertile land, and not long ago suffered from war, and more than one hundred thousand people have flowed into Jingzhou. Hearing that their hometown is peaceful, they are all looking forward to returning to their hometown.

古文：而归者无以自业，诸将各竞招怀以为部曲，郡县贫弱，不能与争，兵家遂强，一旦变动，必有后忧。
现代文：但回乡的人无法自立谋生，将领们争相招揽他们，作为部曲。郡、县贫弱，没有力量与将领们抗拒，于是将领们势力扩大，一旦发生变故，必然会有后患。
English: However, the returnees were unable to make a living on their own, and the generals competed to recruit them as subordinates. Counties and counties were poor and weak, and did not have the power to resist the generals. As a result, the generals expanded their power, and in the event of a change of fortune, there would inevitably be subsequent problems.

古文：夫盐，国之大宝也，乱来放散，宜如旧置使者监卖，以其直益市犁牛，若有归民，以供给之，勤耕积粟以丰殖关中，远民闻之，必日夜竞还。
现代文：盐，是国家的重要财富，战乱以来无人管理，应当依照过去的制度，设置使者负责专卖，用专卖的收入去购买农具、耕牛，如果有返乡的百姓，就供应他们，让他们辛勤耕作，广积粮食，使关中富裕起来。流亡远方的百姓知道后，必定不分昼夜地争着归来。
English: Salt is an important national wealth. It has been unmanaged since the war. In accordance with the previous system, envoys should be set up to be in charge of the monopoly, and the income from the monopoly should be used to purchase agricultural tools and cattle. If there are people returning home, they should be supplied, so that they can work hard and accumulate grain to make Guanzhong rich. When the people who have fled far away know this, they will fight to return day and night.

古文：又使司隶校尉留治关中以为之主，则诸将日削，官民日盛，此强本弱敌之利也。 
现代文：还应该让司隶校尉留驻关中，主持关中地区事务。这样，将领们的势力就会日益削弱，官府与百姓就会日益强盛，这是强固根本，削弱敌人的好办法。 
English: He also sent Lieutenant Sisli to stay behind to govern Guanzhong and preside over various affairs, then the generals would gradually be weakened, and the people of the government would gradually prosper. This is the benefit of making oneself strong and the enemy weak.

古文：彧以白操，操从之。
现代文：荀把卫觊的建议报告给曹操，被曹操采纳。
English: Yao reported Wei Yao's suggestion to Cao Cao, who accepted it.

古文：始遣谒者仆射监盐官，司隶校尉治弘农。
现代文：于是开始派遣谒者仆射主管盐政事务，监督专卖，将司隶校尉的官署设在弘农。
English: As a result, they began to send officials to be in charge of salt affairs, supervise the monopoly, and set up the office of the captain of the division in Hongnong.

古文：关中由是服从。
现代文：关中地区从此受到朝廷控制。
English: Since then, the Guanzhong area has been under the control of the imperial court.

古文：袁绍使人求助于刘表，表许之而竟不至，亦不援曹操。
现代文：袁绍派使者向荆州牧刘表请求援助，刘表应许他的请求，但援军始终不到，而他也不帮助曹操。
English: Yuan Shao sent an envoy to Jingzhou Patriarch Liu Biao to request assistance. Liu Biao promised his request, but reinforcements never arrived, and he did not help Cao Cao.

古文：从事中郎南阳韩嵩、别驾零陵刘先说表曰： 今两雄相持，天下之重在于将军。
现代文：从事中郎、南阳人韩嵩和别驾、零陵人刘先劝刘表说： 如今袁绍、曹操两雄相持，天下的重心在于将军。
English: Han Songhe, who was engaged in Zhonglang and Nanyang, and Liu Xian, who was engaged in Beigai and Luling, advised Liu Biao to say: Nowadays, Yuan Shao and Cao Cao are holding each other, and the center of gravity of the world lies in the general.

古文：若欲有为。起乘其敝可也；如其不然，固将择所宜从。
现代文：如果您想有所作为，可以乘他们斗得两败俱伤时起兵；如果没有那个意思，就应当选择所应归附的对象，进行援助。
English: If you want to make a difference, you can take advantage of the fact that they are both defeated and injured; if you do not have that intention, you should choose the object to which you should belong and provide assistance.

古文：岂可拥甲十万，坐观成败，求援而不能助，见贤而不肯归。
现代文：怎么能拥兵十万，坐观成败，遇到求援而不能相助，看见贤能的人而不肯归附！
English: How can you support a hundred thousand soldiers, watch their success or failure, be unable to help them when they ask for help, and refuse to join them when you see a capable person!

古文：此两怨必集于将军，恐不得中立矣。
现代文：这样，双方的怨恨必定都集中到您身上，您恐怕就不能中立了。
English: In this way, the resentment of both sides will be concentrated on you, and I'm afraid you can't be neutral.

古文：曹操善用兵，贤俊多归之，其势必举袁绍，然后移兵以向江、汉，恐将军不能御也。
现代文：曹操善于用兵，贤才俊杰多为他效力，势必战胜袁绍，然后他再进军长江、汉水一带，恐怕将军您抵御不住。
English: Cao Cao is good at using soldiers, and the wise and talented Jun Jiedu has served him well. He is bound to defeat Yuan Shao, and then he will march into the Yangtze River and the Han River area. I am afraid you will not be able to resist the general.

古文：今之胜计，莫若举荆州以附曹操，操必重德将军。长享福祚。垂之后嗣，此万全之策也。 
现代文：如今最好的办法，不如将荆州归附曹操，曹操一定会感激将军，将军就可以长享福运，并可传给后代，这是万全之策。 
English: The best way now is to return Jingzhou to Cao Cao. Cao Cao will surely be grateful to the general, and the general can enjoy good fortune for a long time and pass it on to future generations. This is a perfect solution.

古文：蒯越亦劝之。表狐疑不断，乃遣嵩诣许，曰： 今天下未知所定，而曹操拥天子都许，君为我观其衅。 
现代文：蒯越也劝刘表这样作，刘表犹豫不决，于是派韩嵩前往许都，对韩嵩说： 如今天下不知谁能最后胜利，而曹操拥戴天子，建都于许县，你为我去观察一下那里的形势。 
English: Hao Yue also advised Liu Biao to do so, but Liu Biao hesitated, so he sent Han Song to Xu Prefecture and said to Han Song, "If it is not known who will win the final victory today, and Cao Cao holds the Son of Heaven and builds the capital in Xu County, you should observe the situation there for me."

古文：嵩曰： 圣达节，次守节。
现代文：韩嵩说： 圣人可以通达权变，次者只能严守节操。
English: Han Song said, "A saint can achieve the power of transformation, while a sinner can only strictly abide by the discipline."

古文：嵩，守节者也。夫君臣名定，以死守之。
现代文：我是个守节的人，君臣名分一定，就以死守之。
English: I am a person who keeps the festival, and if I am given a certain title, I will defend it to the death.

古文：今策名委质，唯将军所命，虽赴汤蹈火，死无辞也。
现代文：如今我作为将军的僚属，只服从您的命令，赴汤蹈火，虽死不辞。
English: Now, as a general's subordinate, I only obey your orders and go through fire and water, even if I have to die.

古文：以嵩观之，曹公必得志于天下。
现代文：据我看来，曹操一定会统一天下。
English: In my opinion, Cao Cao will unify the country.

古文：将军能上顺天子，下归曹公，使嵩可也；如其犹豫，嵩至京师，天子假嵩一职，不获辞命，则成天子之臣，将军之故吏耳。
现代文：如果将军能上尊天子，下归曹操，就可以派我出使许都；如果将军犹豫不决，我到京城，万一天子授予我一个官职，又无法辞让，则我就成为天子之臣，只是将军的旧部了。
English: If the general can honor the Son of Heaven and bow down to Cao Cao, he can send me to the capital; if the general hesitates and I go to the capital, in case the son of heaven grants me an official post and I cannot refuse, then I will become a subject of the Son of Heaven, just the old department of the general.

古文：在君为君，则嵩守天子之命，义不得复为将军死也。
现代文：既成为天子的臣属，便遵奉天子的命令，在大义上就不能再为将军效命了。
English: Having become a subject of the Son of Heaven, they obey the Son of Heaven's orders, and can no longer serve the general in righteousness.

古文：惟加重思，无为负嵩！ 
现代文：请您三思，不要辜负了我的一腔忠诚！ 
English: Please think twice, don't betray my loyalty!

古文：表以为惮使，强之。
现代文：刘表以为韩嵩害怕出使到许都，就强迫他去。
English: Liu Biao thought he was afraid to send an envoy and forced him to go.

古文：至许，诏拜嵩侍中、零陵太守。
现代文：韩嵩到达许都，献帝下诏，任命韩嵩为侍中、零陵郡太守。
English: Han Song arrived at Xu Du, presented an imperial edict to the emperor, and appointed Han Song as an attendant and the governor of Luling County.

古文：及还，盛称朝廷、曹公之德，劝表遣子入侍。
现代文：韩嵩从许都返回后，盛赞朝廷与曹操的恩德，劝刘表把儿子送到朝廷做人质。
English: After Han Song returned from Xudu, he praised the benevolence of the imperial court and Cao Cao, and persuaded Liu Biao to send his son to the imperial court as a hostage.

古文：表大怒，以为怀贰，大会寮属，陈兵，持节，将斩之，数曰： 韩嵩敢怀贰邪！ 
现代文：刘表大怒，认为韩嵩有二心，就召集全体僚属，排列武士，手持代表天子权力的符节，打算杀死韩嵩。刘表责问韩嵩说： 韩嵩，你竟敢怀有二心吗！ 
English: Liu Biao was furious and thought that Han Song had two hearts, so he summoned all his colleagues and subordinates, lined up the samurai, holding the symbols of the power of the son of heaven, and planned to kill Han Song. Liu Biao scolded Han Song and said: Han Song, how dare you have two hearts!

古文：众皆恐，欲令嵩谢，嵩不为动容，徐谓表曰： 将军负嵩，嵩不负将军！ 
现代文：大家都为他担心，劝他向刘表谢罪。韩嵩不动声色，态度从容地对刘表说： 是将军辜负了我，我并没有辜负将军！ 
English: Everyone was worried about him and advised him to apologize to Liu Biao. Han Song did not flinch and calmly said to Liu Biao: "The general failed me, I did not fail the general!"

古文：且陈前言。
现代文：就把自己以前说过的话又重复了一遍。
English: He repeated what he had said before.

古文：表妻蔡氏谏曰： 韩嵩，楚国之望也；且其言直，诛之无辞。 
现代文：刘表的妻子蔡氏劝告刘表说： 韩嵩是楚地有名望的人士，而且他的话有理，杀他没有罪名。 
English: Liu Biao's wife, Cai, advised Liu Biao that: Han Song is a famous person in Chu, and his words are reasonable. He is not guilty of murder.

古文：表犹怒，考杀从行者，知无它意，乃弗诛而囚之。
现代文：刘表仍然怒气不息，用重刑拷问跟随韩嵩出使的官员，有的被拷打致死，终于知道韩嵩没有背叛自己的意思，就未杀韩嵩，而把他囚禁起来。
English: Liu Biao was still furious. He used heavy punishment to interrogate the officials who followed Han Song's envoys, and some were tortured to death. Finally, he knew that Han Song had not betrayed his intentions. He did not kill Han Song, but imprisoned him.

古文：扬州贼帅郑宝欲略居民以赴江表，以淮南刘晔，高族名人，欲劫之使唱此谋，晔患之。
现代文：扬州地区叛匪首领郑宝打算裹胁百姓到长江以南，他认为淮南人刘晔出身皇族，本人名望又高，准备劫持刘晔，以刘晔的名义来发动此事，刘晔对此很忧虑。
English: Zheng Bao, the leader of the rebels in the Yangzhou region, intends to threaten the people to the south of the Yangtze River. He believes that Liu Wei, a native of Huainan, who is from the royal family and has a high reputation, is preparing to kidnap Liu Wei and launch the matter in the name of Liu Wei. Liu Wei is very worried about this.

古文：会曹操遣使诣州，有所案问，晔要与归家，宝来候使者，晔留与宴饮，手刃杀之，斩其首以令宝军曰 曹公有令，敢有动者，与宝同罪！ 
现代文：正好曹操派遣使者到扬州来调查一件事情，刘晔就邀请使者同自己一道回家。郑宝前来拜见使者，刘晔留他参加宴会。在宴会上，刘晔亲手用刀杀死郑宝，砍下他的头颅。然后，拿着郑宝的人头，命令郑宝的部下： 曹公有命令，胆敢不服从命令的，与郑宝同罪。 
English: Just as Cao Cao sent an emissary to Yangzhou to investigate a matter, Liu Bei invited the emissary to return home with him. Zheng Bao came to meet the emissary, and Liu Bei kept him to attend a banquet. At the banquet, Liu Bei personally killed Zheng Bao with a knife and cut off his head. Then, holding Zheng Bao's head, he ordered Zheng Bao's subordinates: Cao Gong has orders, and those who dare to disobey orders are guilty of the same crime as Zheng Bao.

古文：其众数千人皆龙言服，推晔为主。
现代文：郑宝部下有数千人，都被镇服，推举刘晔作首领。
English: Zheng Bao had thousands of subordinates, all of whom were subdued and appointed Liu Ye as their leader.

古文：晔以其众与庐江太守刘勋，勋怪其故，晔曰： 宝无法制，其众素以钞略为利。
现代文：刘晔把这数千人交给庐江郡太守刘勋，刘勋很奇怪，询问原因。刘晔说： 郑宝军中没有纪律，部众向来靠抢掠百姓取利。
English: Liu Bei gave these thousands of people to Liu Xun, the grand marshal of Minjiang County. Liu Xun was very surprised and asked why. Liu Xun said: Zheng Bao's army has no discipline, and his subordinates have always relied on robbing the people for profit.

古文：仆宿无资，而整齐之，必怀怨难久，故以相与耳！ 
现代文：我一向没有资才，而又要对他们进行整编，必然会引起怨恨，局面难以持久，所以把这些人交给您管辖。 
English: I've never had the resources, and to reorganize them is bound to cause resentment, and the situation is not sustainable, so I'll put these people under your jurisdiction.

古文：勋以袁术部典众多，不能赡，遣从弟偕求米于上缭诸宗帅，不能满数，偕召勋使袭之。
现代文：刘勋因为收容袁术的部属太多，粮草供应不上，就派遣堂弟刘偕向上缭的宗党首领们征集粮草。上缭宗党首领们未能满足刘偕的要求，刘偕就通知刘勋，请他派兵进行袭击。
English: Since Liu Xun could not supply grain and grass because there were too many of Yuan Shu's subordinates to accommodate, he sent his cousin Liu Xun to collect grain and grass from the leaders of the Shangzhuang sect. When the leaders of the Shangzhuang sect failed to meet Liu Xun's demands, Liu Xun informed Liu Xun and asked him to send troops to attack.

古文：孙策恶勋兵强，伪卑辞以事勋曰： 上缭宗民数欺鄙郡，欲击之，路不便。
现代文：会稽郡太守孙策对刘勋的强大势力颇为忌惮，假装言辞谦卑地对刘勋表示顺服说： 上缭的宗党民众，屡次欺负本郡，我打算进攻他们，但路远不便。
English: Sun Ce, the county magistrate, was quite wary of Liu Xun's powerful forces. He pretended to humbly show obedience to Liu Xun and said: "The arrogant patriarchal party people have repeatedly bullied our county. I plan to attack them, but the road is far from convenient.

古文：上缭甚富实，愿君伐之，请出兵以为外援。 
现代文：上缭很为富庶，希望您进兵讨伐，我愿出兵作为外援。 
English: Shangzhai is very affluent, I hope you will march into battle, I am willing to send troops as foreign aid.

古文：且以珠宝、葛越赂勋。
现代文：并用珠宝和葛布来贿赂刘勋。
English: He also bribed Liu Xun with jewelry and cloth.

古文：勋大喜，外内尽贺，刘晔独否，勋问其故，对曰： 上缭虽小，城坚池深，攻难守易，不可旬日而举也。
现代文：刘勋大喜，内外一致向他祝贺，只有刘晔不以为然。刘勋问他原因，刘晔说： 上缭虽小，但城堡坚固，壕沟深广，易守难攻，不会在十天之内攻克。
English: Liu Xun was overjoyed, and everyone inside and outside the country congratulated him. Only Liu Yao did not agree. When Liu Xun asked him why, Liu Yao said: Although Shangzhai is small, the castle is strong, the trenches are deep and wide, it is easy to defend and difficult to attack, and it will not be conquered within ten days.

古文：兵疲于外而国内虚，策乘虚袭我，则后不能独守。
现代文：大军被困在坚城之下而后方空虚，如果孙策乘虚袭击我们，后方便难于自守。
English: A large army is trapped under a fortified city and the rear is empty. If Sun Ce attacks us by taking advantage of the void, it will be difficult to defend ourselves.

古文：是将军进屈于敌，退无所归，若军必出，祸今至矣。 
现代文：这样，则将军进不能攻陷敌城，退又无家可归。因此，如果大军一定要出，灾祸今天就会到来。 
English: In this way, the general can not invade the enemy city, retreat and become homeless. Therefore, if the great army must go out, the disaster will come today.

古文：勋不听，遂伐上缭；至海昏，宗帅知之，皆空壁逃迁，勋了无所得。
现代文：刘勋不听，于是讨伐上缭。大军到达海昏，宗党首领听到风声，全都赶快逃跑，只留下空城，刘勋什么也没有抢到。
English: Liu Xun did not listen, so he went on a crusade. The great army arrived at the dusk of the sea, the patriarchal party leaders heard the wind, they all quickly fled, leaving only the empty city, Liu Xun did not grab anything.

古文：时策引兵西击黄祖，行及石城，闻勋在海昏，策乃分遣从兄贲、辅将八千人屯彭泽，自与领江夏太守周瑜将二万人袭皖城，克之，得术、勋妻子及部曲三万馀人；表汝南李术为庐江太守，给兵三千人以守皖城，皆徙所得民东诣吴。
现代文：这时，孙策率兵向西进攻黄祖，走到石城，听说刘勋在海昏，就分派堂兄孙贲、孙辅率领八千人驻在彭泽，自己与兼任江夏郡太守的周瑜率领二万人袭击刘勋的根据地皖城，攻克该城，俘虏了袁术与刘勋的家眷以及部曲三万余人。孙策上表推荐汝南人李术担任庐江郡太守，拨给他三千士兵，守卫皖城，把其余被俘的人都东迁到自己控制的吴郡。
English: At this time, Sun Ce led an army to the west to attack Huang Zu and went to Shicheng. Hearing that Liu Xun was in a coma, he dispatched his cousins Sun Pi and Sun Fu to stay in Pengze with eight thousand people. He and Zhou Yu, who was also the governor of Jiangxia County, led twenty thousand people to attack Liu Xun's base in Shicheng, conquered the city, and captured Yuan Shou and Liu Xun's family and more than thirty thousand people. Sun Ce recommended Li Shou, a person from the south of the Yangtze River, as the governor of Shicheng County. He assigned him three thousand soldiers to guard

古文：勋还至彭泽，孙贲、孙辅邀击，破之。
现代文：刘勋率军返回，到达彭泽，受到孙贲、孙辅的截击，大败。
English: Liu Xun led the army back, reached Pengze, was intercepted by Sun Xuan and Sun Fu, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：勋走保流沂，求救于黄祖，祖遣其子射率船军五千人助勋。
现代文：刘勋退守流沂，向黄祖求救，黄祖派儿子黄射率五千水军来援助刘勋。
English: Liu Xun retreated to defend Luling and appealed to Huang Zu for help. Huang Zu sent his son Huang Ying rate of five thousand naval troops to assist Liu Xun.

古文：策复就攻勋，大破之，勋北归曹操，射亦遁走。
现代文：孙策再次前来进攻刘勋，刘勋大败，向北投奔曹操，黄射也逃走了。
English: Sun Ce came to attack Liu Xun again. Liu Xun was defeated and fled north to Cao Cao. Huang Ya also fled.

古文：策收得勋兵二千馀人，船千艘，遂进击黄祖。
现代文：孙策收编了刘勋部下的士兵二千余人，俘获了一千艘船只，乘势进攻黄祖。
English: Sun Ce gathered more than two thousand soldiers under Liu Xun's command, captured a thousand ships, and took advantage of the situation to attack Huang Zu.

古文：十二月，辛亥，策军至沙羡，刘表遣从子虎及南阳韩晞，将长矛五千来救祖。
现代文：十二月，辛亥，孙策进军到沙羡，刘表派遗遣侄子刘虎与大将南阳人韩，率领五千名手持长矛的士兵来救黄祖。
English: In December, Xinhai, Sun Ce marched to Shaqen, and Liu Bei sent his nephew Liu Hu and General Nanyang Han, leading five thousand soldiers armed with spears, to rescue Huang Zu.

古文：甲寅，策与战，大破之，斩晞。
现代文：甲寅，两军会战，孙策大败敌军，斩杀韩。
English: A Yin, the two armies will fight, Sun Ce defeated the enemy army, and killed Han.

古文：祖脱身走，获其妻子及船六千艘，士卒杀溺死者数万人。
现代文：黄祖脱身脱逃走，黄祖的家眷及战船六千艘被孙策俘获，黄祖部下士兵被杀死及淹死的有数万人。
English: Huang Zu escaped and ran away. Huang Zu's family members and six thousand warships were captured by Sun Ce. Tens of thousands of Huang Zu's soldiers were killed and drowned.

古文：策盛兵将徇豫章，屯于椒丘，谓功曹虞翻曰： 华子鱼自有名字，然非吾敌也。
现代文：孙策统大军准备进攻豫章郡，驻扎在椒丘，他对功曹虞翻说： 华歆虽有名望，但不是我的对手。
English: When Sun Tse-tung's army was preparing to attack Yuzhang County and was stationed in Jiaoqiu, he said to Gong Cao Yufu: Although Hua Tuo is famous, he is not my rival.

古文：若不开门让城，金鼓一震，不得无所伤害。
现代文：如果他不开门让城，一旦发动进攻，不会没有死伤。
English: If he does not open the door to let the city, once the attack is launched, it will not be without death and injury.

古文：卿便在前，具宣孤意。 
现代文：请你就在他的面前，讲明我的意思。 
English: Please, in front of him, tell him what I mean.

古文：翻乃往见华歆曰： 窃闻明府与鄙郡故王府君齐名中州，海内所宗，虽在东垂，常怀瞻仰。 
现代文：虞翻就先去拜见华歆，说： 听说您与我郡的前任太守王郎在中原地区都享有盛名，受到海内的一致尊崇，虽然我居住在偏远的东方，心中常常景仰。 
English: Gu Fu first went to see Hua Tuo and said, "I heard that you and Wang Lang, the former eunuch of our county, both enjoy a high reputation in the Central Plains region and are unanimously respected at home. Although I live in the remote East, I often admire you in my heart.

古文：歆曰： 孤不如王会稽。 
现代文：华歆说： 我不如王朗。 
English: Hua Wei said: I am not as good as Wang Lang.

古文：翻复曰： 不早豫章资粮器仗，士民勇果，孰与鄙郡？ 
现代文：虞翻又说： 不知豫章郡的粮草储存，武器装备以及民众的勇敢斗志，比我们会稽郡如何？ 
English: Gu Fu also said, "I don't know if Yuanzhang County's grain and grass storage, weapons and equipment, and the people's brave fighting spirit are better than ours.

古文：歆曰： 大不如也。 
现代文：华歆说： 远远比不上。 
English: Hua Wei said: It is far from being comparable.

古文：翻曰： 明府言不如王会稽，谦光之谭耳；精兵不如会稽，实如尊教。
现代文：虞翻说： 您说名望不如王朗，是谦虚之词；但兵力精强比不上会稽，则正如您的判断。
English: Gu Gu said: You said that the reputation is not as good as that of Wang Lang, which is a word of modesty; but the strength of the army is not as good as that of the meeting, which is just as you judge.

古文：孙讨逆智略超世，用兵如神，前走刘扬州，君所亲见；南定鄙郡，亦君所闻也。
现代文：孙将军智谋出众，用兵如神。以前，他攻破扬州刺史刘繇，是您亲眼所见；再向南平定我们会稽郡，您也一定有耳闻。
English: You have seen General Sun's brilliant strategy and godlike use of troops before, when he defeated the Yangzhou warlord Liu Bei; and you must have heard of him when he went to the south to settle the Weixi County.

古文：今欲守孤城，自料资粮，已知不足，不早为计，悔无及也。
现代文：如今，你要固守孤城，自己已知粮草不足，不早作打算，后悔就来不及了。
English: Nowadays, you have to stick to the lonely city. You know that there is a shortage of grain and grass. If you do not make plans early, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：今大军已次椒丘，仆便还去，明日日中迎檄不到者，与君辞矣。 
现代文：现在孙将军大军已到椒丘，我这就回去，如果明天中牛迎接孙将军的檄文还没送到，我就不能与您再见了。 
English: Now that General Sun's army has arrived at Pepper Hill, I'm going back. If the obituary of Zhong Niu to welcome General Sun tomorrow hasn't been delivered, I won't be able to say goodbye to you.

古文：歆曰： 久在江表，常欲北归；孙会稽来，吾便去也。 
现代文：华歆说： 我久在江南，常想北归家乡，孙将军一到，我就离开。 
English: Hua Wei said: I have been in the south of the Yangtze River for a long time, and I often want to return to my hometown in the north. As soon as General Sun arrives, I will leave.

古文：乃夜作檄，明旦，遣吏赍迎。
现代文：于是，华歆连夜赶写迎接孙策的檄文，第二天一早，就派人送到孙策军前。
English: As a result, Hua Wei hurriedly wrote a eulogy for Sun Ce overnight, and sent someone to meet Sun Ce's army in the morning of the next day.

古文：策便进军，歆葛巾迎策，策谓歆曰： 府君年德名望，远近所归；策年幼稚，宜修子弟之礼。 
现代文：孙策随即领军前进，华歆头戴葛巾，身着便装迎接孙策。孙策对华歆说： 您年高德劭，名满天下，深为远近人心所归；我年幼识浅，应当用子弟拜见长辈的礼节见您。 
English: Sun Ce immediately led the army forward. Hua Jun, wearing a georgette headscarf and dressed in casual clothes, greeted Sun Ce. Sun Ce said to Hua Jun: You are of high moral character, famous all over the world, and deeply loved by people near and far; I am young and inexperienced, and I should greet you with the etiquette of a child greeting an elder.

古文：便向歆拜，礼为上宾。
现代文：于是，孙策按照子弟的礼节拜见华歆，将华歆尊为上宾。
English: As a result, Sun Ce paid his respects to Hua Tuo according to the etiquette of his son and honored Hua Tuo as the chief guest.

古文：孙盛曰：歆既无夷、皓韬邈之风，又失王臣匪躬之操，桡心于邪儒之说，交臂于陵肆之徒，位夺节堕，咎孰大焉！
现代文：孙盛曰：华歆既没有伯夷与商山四皓那样不慕荣利的高风亮节，又失去朝廷大臣尽忠忘私的操守，却屈从邪恶书生的游说，结交孙策那样的横行之徒，官位被夺，气节堕毁，有什么过错比这更大的呢！
English: Sun Sheng said: "Huaqi did not have the high winds and bright festivals that did not yearn for wealth and profit like Bo Yi and Shangshan Siyu, and lost the loyalty and selflessness of the imperial ministers, but succumbed to the lobbying of evil scholars, made friends with rampant criminals like Sun Ce, was deprived of his official position, and his temperament was ruined. What fault is greater than this!

古文：策分豫章为庐陵郡，以孙贲为豫章太守，孙辅为庐陵太守。会僮芝病，辅遂进屯庐陵，留周瑜镇巴丘。
现代文：孙策分豫章郡，另立庐陵郡，委任孙贲为豫章郡太守，孙辅为庐陵郡太守，恰好占据庐陵的僮芝有病，孙辅就进军攻取庐陵，留周瑜镇守巴丘。
English: Sun Ce divided Yuzhang County and set up Fuling County, and appointed Sun Jie as the governor of Yuzhang County, and Sun Fu as the governor of Fuling County. It just so happened that Hezhi, who occupied Fuling, was ill, so Sun Fu marched to capture Fuling, leaving Zhou Yu to defend Baqiu.

古文：孙策之克皖城也，抚视袁术妻子；及入豫章，收载刘繇丧，善遇其家。
现代文：孙策攻克皖城时，安抚照顾袁术的妻子家小；等到他进入豫章，又运送刘繇的棺柩，厚待刘繇的家属。
English: When Sun Ce conquered Lucheng, he pacified and took care of Yuan Shu's wife Jia Xiao; when he entered Yuzhang, he also transported Liu Bei's coffin and treated Liu Bei's family well.

古文：士大夫以是称之。
现代文：士大夫因此而称赞孙策。
English: As a result, the scholar praised Sun Ce.

古文：会稽功曹魏腾尝策意，策将杀之，众忧恐，计无所出。
现代文：会稽郡功曹魏腾曾经得罪孙策，孙策要杀死他，众官员忧虑恐惧，却又无计可施。
English: The county auditor Cao Weiteng had offended Sun Ce, Sun Ce wanted to kill him, the officials were worried and afraid, but there was nothing they could do.

古文：策母吴夫人倚大井谓策曰： 汝新造江南，其事未集，方当优贤礼士，舍过录功。
现代文：孙策的母亲吴夫人倚着大井的栏杆，对孙策说： 你刚刚开创江南的局面，诸事都还没有安顿，正应该礼贤下士，不念过失，只记功劳。
English: Sun Ce's mother, Mrs. Wu, leaning on the railing of the large well, said to Sun Ce: You have just created the situation in the south of the Yangtze River, everything is still not settled, you should be a virtuous corporal, do not remember mistakes, only remember merits.

古文：魏功曹在公尽规，汝今日杀之，则明日人皆叛汝。
现代文：魏功曹在公事上尽职尽责，你今天杀了他，那么明天别人都会背叛你。
English: Wei Gong Cao was diligent in his duties. If you kill him today, others will betray you tomorrow.

古文：吾不忍见祸之及，当先投此井中耳！ 
现代文：我不忍心见到大祸监头，应当先投到这个井里自尽！ 
English: I can't bear to see the overseer of the great calamity, I should first throw myself into this well and commit suicide!

古文：策大惊，遽释腾。
现代文：孙策大惊，赶快释放魏腾。
English: Sun Ce was shocked and quickly released Wei Teng.

古文：初，吴郡太守会稽盛宪举高岱孝廉。许贡来领郡，岱将宪避难于营帅许昭家。
现代文：当初，吴郡太守、会稽人盛宪曾推荐高岱为孝廉，许贡来接管吴郡，高岱就把盛宪藏在营帅许昭家中避难。
English: At first, Sheng Xian, the governor of Wuxi County and the auditor of the association, had recommended Gao Jian as a filial son and Xu Gong to take over Wuxi County. Gao Jian hid Sheng Xian in the home of the battalion commander Xu Zhao to take refuge.

古文：乌程邹佗、钱铜及嘉兴王晟等各聚众万馀或数千人，不附孙策。
现代文：乌程人邹佗、钱铜以及嘉兴人王晟等，每人都拥有部众一万余人或数千人，不肯归附孙策。
English: Wucheng Renju, Qian Tong and Jiaxing Renju Wang Rong, each of whom has more than ten thousand or thousands of followers, refused to join Sun Ce.

古文：策引兵扑讨，皆破之，进攻严白虎。
现代文：本年，孙策进军讨伐，将他们全部击破，就又挥军进讨严白虎。
English: This year, Sun Ce marched into the crusade, defeated them all, and then marched against Yan Baihu.

古文：白虎兵败，奔馀杭，投许昭。
现代文：严白虎战败，逃到余杭，投奔许昭。
English: Yan Baihu was defeated and fled to Yuhang and joined Xu Zhao.

古文：程普请击昭，策曰： 许昭有义于旧君，有诚于故友，此丈夫之志也。 
现代文：孙策部将程普请求进击许昭，孙策说： 许昭对过去的长官有义，对老朋友有诚，这正是大丈夫应有的志气。 
English: Sun Ce asked Cheng Pu to attack Xu Zhao. Sun Ce said: Xu Zhao is loyal to his past superiors and sincere to his old friends. This is exactly the spirit that should prevail.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：于是，没有进军去逼迫许昭。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：曹操复屯官渡。
现代文：曹操又进驻官渡。
English: Cao Cao was stationed in Guandu again.

古文：操常从士徐他等谋杀操，入操帐，见校尉许褚，色变，褚觉而杀之。
现代文：曹操身边的侍卫徐他等策划谋杀曹操。他们进入曹操的营帐，刚想动手，见到校尉许褚，脸色大变。许褚发觉，将徐他等杀死。
English: Cao Cao's bodyguard Xu and others plotted to murder Cao Cao. They entered Cao Cao's camp, and just as they were about to kill him, they saw Lieutenant Xu Yao's face change dramatically. Xu Yao found out and killed Xu and the others.

古文：初，车骑将军董承称受帝衣带中密诏，与刘备谋诛曹操。
现代文：当初，车骑将军董承声称接受了献帝衣带中的密诏，与刘备一起密谋刺杀曹操。
English: At first, the cavalry general, Dong Cheng, claimed to have accepted the secret edict in the emperor's sash, and conspired with Liu Bei to assassinate Cao Cao.

古文：操从容谓备曰： 今天下英雄，惟使君与操耳，本初之徒，不足数也！ 
现代文：一天，曹操从容地对刘备说： 如今天下的英雄，只有您和我罢了，袁绍之流，是算不上数的！ 
English: One day, Cao Cao calmly said to Liu Bei: As the heroes of today, only you and I are left, Yuan Shao's family is too numerous to count!

古文：备方食，失匕箸，值天雷震，备因曰： 圣人云： 迅雷风烈必变 ，良有以也。 
现代文：刘备正在吃东西，匙子和筷子跌落，正遇到天上打雷，刘备乘机说： 圣人说： 遇到迅雷和暴风，使人改变脸色。 真是这样。 
English: Liu Bei was eating, his spoon and chopsticks fell down, and he was encountering thunder in the sky, Liu Bei took the opportunity to say: The sage said: Encountering thunder and storm, people change their face.

古文：遂与承及长水校尉种辑、将军吴子兰、王服等同谋。
现代文：事后，刘备便与董承以及长水校尉种辑、将军吴子兰、王服等一同策划。
English: After the fact, Liu Bei then planned with Dong Cheng and the Changshui Lieutenant's Selection, General Wu Zilan, Wang Fu and others.

古文：会操遣备与硃灵邀袁术，程昱、郭嘉、董昭皆谏曰： 备不可遣也！ 
现代文：这时，曹操派遣刘备与朱录去截击袁术，程昱、郭嘉、董昭等都劝阻曹操，说： 不可派遣刘备率兵外出！ 
English: At this time, Cao Cao sent Liu Bei and Zhu Luo to intercept Yuan Shun. Cheng Yu, Guo Jia, and Dong Zhao all dissuaded Cao Cao, saying, "Don't send Liu Bei to lead soldiers out!

古文：操悔，追之，不及。
现代文：曹操后悔，派人去追，没有追上。
English: Cao Cao regretted it and sent someone to chase him, but he did not catch up.

古文：术既南走，硃灵等还。
现代文：袁术既向南退回寿春，朱灵等班师加朝。
English: Yuan Shuxu had already returned to Shouchun in the south, and Zhu Ling and other class teachers had also returned to the north.

古文：备遂杀徐州刺史车胄，留关羽守下邳，行太守事，身还小沛。
现代文：刘备就杀死徐州刺史车胄，留关羽镇守下邳，代理下邳郡太守，自己回到小沛。
English: Liu Bei killed the Xuzhou assassin Che Zhao, stayed in Guan Yu Town to guard Xiao Zhao, acting as the deputy governor of Xiao Zhao County, and returned to Xiao Pei.

古文：东海贼昌豨及郡县多叛操为备。
现代文：车海乱匪首领昌以及其他郡县多背叛曹操，归附刘备。
English: The leader of the Chekai bandits, Chang, and many other counties and counties betrayed Cao Cao and joined Liu Bei.

古文：备众数万人，遣使与袁绍连兵。
现代文：刘备拥有部众数万人，派使者与袁绍联系会师。
English: Liu Bei had tens of thousands of followers and sent emissaries to contact Yuan Shao.

古文：操遣司空长史沛国刘岱、中郎将扶风王忠击之，不克。
现代文：曹操派遣司空长史、沛国人刘岱和中郎将、扶风人王忠率军进攻刘备，刘贷等失利。
English: Cao Cao dispatched Siku Changshi, Baek Guo's Liu Yao and Zhong Rong Zheng, and Fu Feng's Wang Zhong to lead an army to attack Liu Bei, Liu Gui, and others, but they were defeated.

古文：备谓岱等曰： 使汝百人来，无如我何；曹公自来，未可知耳！ 
现代文：刘备对刘岱等人说： 像你们这样的，来上一百个，也不能把我怎么样；如果曹公亲自来，胜负就难以预料了。 
English: Liu Bei said to Liu Ye and the others: If a hundred people like you come, they can't do anything to me; if Cao Gong comes in person, it will be difficult to predict the outcome.

古文：孝献皇帝戊建安五年
现代文：建安五年
English: Five years of Jianan

古文：春，正月，董承谋泄；壬子，曹操杀承及王服、种辑，皆夷三族。
现代文：春季，正月，董承的密谋败露。壬子，曹操杀死董承和王服、种辑，并将他们的三族全部屠灭。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Dongcheng's plot was exposed. Then, Cao Cao killed Dongcheng, Wangfu, and Shujie, and wiped out all three of their families.

古文：操欲自讨刘备，诸将皆曰： 与公争天下者，袁绍也，今绍方来而弃之东，绍乘人后，若何？ 
现代文：曹操打算亲自出马讨伐刘备，将领们都说： 与您争夺天下的是袁绍，如今袁绍大军压境，而您却向东讨伐刘备，如果袁绍在背后进行攻击，怎么办？ 
English: Cao Cao planned to personally ride out to fight Liu Bei. The generals all said: It is Yuan Shao who is competing with you for the world. Now Yuan Shao's large army is pressing the border, but you are fighting Liu Bei to the east. What if Yuan Shao attacks behind your back?

古文：操曰： 刘备，人杰也，今不击，必为后患。 
现代文：曹操说： 刘备是人中豪杰，如今不进攻他，必定成为后患。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Liu Bei is a hero among men. If we don't attack him now, he will surely become a problem in the future.

古文：郭嘉曰： 绍性迟而多疑，来必不速。
现代文：郭嘉说： 袁绍性情迟钝，而且多疑，即使来进攻，也必定不会很快。
English: Guo Jia said: Yuan Shao's temperament is dull, and he is suspicious. Even if he attacks, it will not be quick.

古文：备新起，众心未附，急击之，必败。 
现代文：刘备刚刚创立基业，人心还没有完全归附，赶快进攻，一定能将刘备击败。 
English: Liu Bei has just founded a foundation, and the hearts of the people have not yet fully subscribed to it. Hurry up and attack, and you will surely be able to defeat Liu Bei.

古文：操师遂东。
现代文：曹操于是挥师东征刘备。
English: Cao Cao then sent Liu Bei on an eastward expedition.

古文：冀州别驾田丰说袁绍曰： 曹操与刘备连兵，未可卒解。公举军而袭其后，可一往而定。 
现代文：冀州别驾田丰劝袁绍说： 曹操与刘备交战，不会立即分出胜负，将军率军袭击他的后方，可以一举成功。 
English: Jizhou Beidou Tianfeng advised Yuan Shao: Cao Cao and Liu Bei will not immediately determine the outcome of the battle. The general will lead the army to attack his rear and can succeed in one fell swoop.

古文：绍辞以子疾，未得行。
现代文：袁绍因儿子患病而推辞，未能出兵。
English: Yuan Shao said that his son was ill, and Tian Feng's plan was not implemented.

古文：丰举杖击地曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：田丰举杖击地说： 唉！
English: Tian Feng raised his cane and said: Alas!

古文：遭难遇之时，而以婴儿病失其会，惜哉，事去矣！ 
现代文：遇到这种难得的机会，却因为婴儿的病而放弃，可惜啊，大事完了！ 
English: To have such a rare opportunity and to have to give it up because of the baby's illness, it's a shame, it's over!

古文：曹操击刘备，破之，获其妻子；进拔下邳，禽关羽；又击昌豨，破之。
现代文：曹操进攻刘备，将刘备打败，俘虏了他的妻子家小。曹操接着攻克下邳，捉住关羽，又击败昌。
English: Cao Cao attacked Liu Bei, defeated Liu Bei, and captured his wife Jia Xiao. Cao Cao then conquered the Lower Ying, captured Guan Yu, and defeated Chang.

古文：备奔青州，因袁谭以归袁绍。
现代文：刘备逃奔青州，通过袁谭投奔袁绍。
English: Liu Bei fled to Qingzhou and through Yuan Tan to Yuan Shao.

古文：绍闻备至，去鄴二百里迎之，驻月馀，所亡士卒稍稍归之。
现代文：袁绍听说刘备来到，出邺城二百里，亲自去迎接刘备。刘备在邺城住了一个多月，被打散的士兵遂渐回到刘备身边。
English: Yuan Shao heard of Liu Bei's arrival and traveled two hundred miles from Shicheng to meet Liu Bei in person. Liu Bei stayed in Shicheng for more than a month, and the scattered soldiers gradually returned to Liu Bei's side.

古文：曹操还军官渡，绍乃议攻许，田丰曰： 曹操既破刘备，则许下非复空虚。
现代文：曹操率军回到官渡，袁绍才开始计议进攻许都。田丰说： 曹操既然击败刘备，则许都已不再空虚。
English: When Cao Cao led his army back to Guandu, Yuan Shao began to consider attacking Xu Du. Tian Feng said, "Since Cao Cao defeated Liu Bei, Xu Du is no longer empty.

古文：且操善用兵，变化无方，众虽少，未可轻也，今不如以久持之。
现代文：而且曹操善于用兵，变化无穷，兵马虽少，却不可轻视。现在，不如按兵不动，与他相持。
English: Moreover, Cao Cao is good at using soldiers, the changes are endless. Although there are few soldiers and horses, they should not be despised. Now, it is better not to move and stand with him.

古文：将军据山河之固，拥四州之众，外结英雄，内修农战，然后简其精锐，分为奇兵，乘虚迭出以扰河南，救右则击其左，救左则击其右，使敌疲于奔命，民不得安业，我未劳而彼已困，不及三年，可坐克也。
现代文：将军据守山川险固，拥有四州的民众，对外结交英雄，对内抓紧农耕，加强战备。然后，挑选精锐之士，分出来组成奇兵，频繁攻击薄弱之处，扰乱黄河以南。敌军救右，我军则击其左；救左，则击其右，使得敌军疲于奔命，百姓无法安心生产，我们没有劳苦，而敌军已经陷入困境，不到三年，就可坐等胜利。
English: The general firmly defended the mountains and rivers, possessed the people of the four states, made friends with heroes abroad, paid close attention to agriculture at home, and strengthened combat readiness. Then, he selected the elite men, separated them to form a special army, frequently attacked the weak points, and disturbed the south of the Yellow River. The enemy army saved the right, and our army hit the left; save the left, and hit the right, making the enemy army exhausted, the people could not produce with confidence, we did not work hard, and the enemy army was already in trouble. In less than three years, we could wait for victory.

古文：今释庙胜之策而决成败于一战，若不如志，悔无及也。 
现代文：现在放弃必胜的谋略，而要以一战来决定成败，万一不能如愿，后悔就来不及了。 
English: Now, we don't have to rely on the strategy of holding onto a winning ticket in the temple to determine success or failure through a war. If we don't get what we want, we won't have time to regret it.

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍没有采纳。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：丰强谏忤绍，绍以为沮众，械系之。
现代文：田丰竭力劝谏，冒犯了袁绍，袁绍认为田丰扰乱军心，给他戴上刑具，关押起来。
English: Tian Feng tried his best to dissuade him, which offended Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao thought that Tian Feng was disturbing the military spirit, so he put a torture device on him and locked him up.

古文：于是移檄州郡，数操罪恶。
现代文：于是，袁绍用公文通告各州、郡，宣布曹操的罪状。
English: As a result, Yuan Shao used official documents to notify each state and county to announce Cao Cao's indictment.

古文：二月，进军黎阳。
现代文：二月，袁绍进军黎阳。
English: In February, Yuan Shao marched into Liyang.

古文：沮授临行，会其宗族，散资财以与之曰： 势存则威无不加，势亡则不保一身，哀哉！ 
现代文：沮授在出军前，召集宗族，把自己的家产分给族人，说： 人势则权威无所不加，失势则连自己性命民保不住，真是可悲！ 
English: Before leaving for the army, Deshitu summoned his clan and distributed his family's property to the members of his clan, saying, "When you have the power, you have all the authority, but when you lose the power, you can't even save your own lives. It's really pathetic!"

古文：其弟宗曰： 曹操士马不敌，君何惧焉？ 
现代文：他弟弟沮宗说： 曹操的兵马比不上我军，您为什么害怕呢？ 
English: His younger brother Dejeong said: Cao Cao's soldiers are not as good as ours, why are you afraid?

古文：授曰： 以曹操之明略，又挟天子以为资，我虽克伯珪，众实疲敝，而主骄将忲，军之破败，在此举矣。
现代文：沮授说： 凭曹操的智慧与谋略，又挟持天子作为资本，我们虽战败公孙瓒，但士兵实际上已经疲惫，加上主上骄傲，将领奢侈，全军复没，就在这一仗了。
English: Dejection said: With Cao Cao's wisdom and strategy, and holding the heavenly son as capital, although we defeated Gongsun Yao, but the soldiers were actually exhausted, coupled with the Lord's pride, the generals' luxury, the whole army disappeared, just in this battle.

古文：扬雄有言： 六国蚩蚩，为嬴弱姬。 
现代文：扬雄曾经说过： 六国纷纷扰扰，只不过是为秦取代周而效劳。 
English: Yang Xiong once said: Six countries have disturbed, but it is to serve Qin to replace Zhou.

古文：其今之谓乎！ 
现代文：这说的是今天啊！ 
English: That's today!

古文：振威将军程昱以七百兵守鄄城。
现代文：振威将军程昱率七百人守鄄城。
English: Zhenwei's general Cheng Yao led seven hundred men to defend Handan City.

古文：曹操欲益昱兵二千，昱不肯，曰： 袁绍拥十万众，自以所向无前，今见昱少兵，必轻易，不来攻。
现代文：曹操打算给他增加二千名士兵，程昱不肯，说： 袁绍拥兵十万，自以为所向无前，看到我兵力溥弱，一定瞧不起，不会来攻。
English: Cao Cao planned to give him an additional two thousand soldiers, but Cheng Rong refused, saying: Yuan Shao has a hundred thousand soldiers, he thinks he is ahead of everyone, but when he sees my weak troops, he will look down on me and not attack.

古文：若益昱兵，过则不可不攻，攻之必克，徒两损其势，愿公无疑。 
现代文：如给我增兵，则袁绍大军经过就不会不进攻，进攻必然攻克，那就白白损失您和我两处的实力，请您不必担心。 
English: If you give me more troops, then Yuan Shao's army will not pass without attacking, and the attack will inevitably be defeated, then you and I will lose our strength in vain, please do not worry.

古文：绍闻昱兵少，果不往，操谓贾诩曰： 程昱之胆，过于贲、育矣！ 
现代文：袁绍听说程昱兵少，果然没去进攻。曹操对贾诩说： 程昱的胆量，超过古代勇士孟贲和夏育了！ 
English: Yuan Shao heard that Cheng Yao's army was small, so he did not attack. Cao Cao said to Jia Yao: Cheng Yao's courage surpasses that of the ancient warriors Meng Yao and Xia Yu!

古文：袁绍遣其将颜良攻东郡太守刘延于白马，沮授曰： 良性促狭，虽骁勇，不可独任。 
现代文：袁绍派大将颜良到白马进攻东郡太守刘延，沮授说： 颜良性情急躁狭隘，虽然骁勇，但不可让他独当一面。 
English: Yuan Shao sent General Yan Liang to Baima to attack the governor of Dong County, Liu Yan. He said: Yan Liang is impatient and narrow-minded. Although he is brave, he should not be left alone.

古文：绍不听。
现代文：袁绍不听。
English: Yuan Shao did not listen to his suggestion.

古文：夏，四月，曹操北救刘延。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操率军向北援救刘延。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao led an army to the north to rescue Liu Yan.

古文：荀攸曰： 今兵少不敌，必分其势乃可。
现代文：荀攸说： 如今我们兵少，不是袁军的对手，只有分散他的兵力才行。
English: Zou You said, "Nowadays, we have fewer soldiers. We are no match for Yuan's army. We can only disperse Yuan's army.

古文：公到延津，若将渡兵向其后者，绍必西应之，然后轻兵袭白马，掩其不备，颜良可禽也。 
现代文：您到延津后，做出准备渡河袭击袁绍后方的样子，袁绍必然向西应战。然后，您率军轻装急进，袭击白马，攻其不备，就可击败颜良。 
English: The lord first led the soldiers to Yanjin, and made it look as if he was going to cross the Yellow River and cut off the enemy's rear path. Yuan Shao would certainly send a detachment of soldiers to the west to fight. At that time, the lord attacked Baima with a light attack force. If he was not prepared, he would certainly be able to capture Yan Liang alive. Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：操从之，绍闻兵渡，即分兵西邀之。
现代文：曹操听从了荀攸的计策。袁绍听说曹军要渡河，就分兵向西阻截。
English: Cao Cao listened to Yu Yu's strategy. Yuan Shao heard that Cao's army wanted to cross the river, so he sent troops to the west to intercept them.

古文：操乃引军兼行趣白马，未至十馀里，良大惊，来逆战。
现代文：曹操于是率军急速向白马挺进，还差十余里，颜良才得到消息，大吃一惊，前来迎战。
English: Cao Cao then led his army to rapidly advance towards the White Horse, still more than ten miles away, until Yan Liang got the news, was taken aback, and came to meet the battle.

古文：操使张辽、关羽先登击之。羽望见良麾盖，策马刺良于万众之中，斩其首而还，绍军莫能当者。
现代文：曹操派张辽、关羽作先锋，关羽望见颜良的旌旗伞盖，策马长驱直入，在万众之中刺死颜良，斩下他的头颅而归，袁绍军中无人能够抵挡。
English: Cao Cao sent Zhang Liao and Guan Yu as the vanguard. Guan Yu looked at Yan Liang's banner umbrella cover, drove his horse straight into it, stabbed Yan Liang to death in the crowd, cut off his head and returned. No one in Yuan Shao's army could resist.

古文：遂解白马之围，徙其民，循河而西。
现代文：于是，解开白马之围，曹操把全城百姓沿黄河向西迁徒。
English: As a result, the siege of the White Horse was lifted, and Cao Cao moved the entire population of the city westward along the Yellow River.

古文：绍渡河追之，沮授谏曰： 胜负变化，不可不详。
现代文：袁绍要渡过黄河进行追击，沮授劝阻他说： 胜负之间，变化无常，不能不慎重考虑。
English: Yuan Shao wanted to cross the Yellow River to pursue him, but the teacher discouraged him, saying, "Between victory and defeat, change is impermanent, and we must carefully consider.

古文：今宜留屯延津；分兵官渡，若其克获，还迎不晚，设其有难，众弗可还。 
现代文：如今应当把大军留驻在延津，分出部分军队去官渡，如果他们告捷，回来迎接大军也不晚，如果大军渡河南下，万一失利，大家就没有退路了。 
English: Now it is necessary to keep the big army in Yanjin and detach a part of the army to go to Guandu. If they succeed, it is not too late to come back to meet the big army. If the big army crosses to the south of the river, in case of defeat, everyone will have no way out.

古文：绍弗从。
现代文：袁绍不听他的劝告。
English: Yuan Shao did not listen to his advice.

古文：授临济叹曰： 上盈其志，下务其功，悠悠黄河，吾其济乎！ 
现代文：沮授在渡河时叹息着说： 主上狂妄自大，下边将领只会贪功，悠悠黄河，我们能成功吗？ 
English: Dejected while crossing the river, he sighed and said: "The Lord is arrogant, the generals below are only greedy for merit, the Yellow River is slow, can we succeed?

古文：遂以疾辞。
现代文：于是，沮授称病辞职。
English: As a result, Zangzi Feng used his illness as an excuse to resign.

古文：绍不许而意恨之，复省其所部并属郭图。
现代文：袁绍不批准，但心中怀恨，就又解除沮授的兵权，把他所率领的军队全部拨归郭图指挥。
English: Yuan Shao did not approve, but with a grudge in his heart, he revoked the military power and assigned all the troops he led to the command of Guo Tu.

古文：绍军至延津南，操勒兵驻营南阪下，使登垒望之，曰： 可五六百骑。 
现代文：袁绍大军到达延津以南，曹操部署军队在南阪下安营，派人登上营垒望。望的人报告说： 敌军大约有五六百骑兵。 
English: When Yuan Shao's army reached the south of Yanjin, Cao Cao deployed troops to set up a camp in the lower part of Nanxanzha, and sent people to climb the camp and watch. The watchers reported: The enemy army is about five or six hundred cavalry.

古文：有顷，复白： 骑稍多，步兵不可胜数。 
现代文：一会儿，又报告说： 骑兵逐渐增多，步兵不可胜数。 
English: A moment later, he reported: "The cavalry is gradually increasing, and the infantry is innumerable.

古文：操曰： 勿复白。 
现代文：曹操说： 不必再报告了。 
English: Cao Cao said, "There is no need to report any more.

古文：令骑解鞍放马。
现代文：命令骑兵解下马鞍，放马休息。
English: Order the cavalry to unsaddle and let the horses rest.

古文：是时，白马辎重就道，诸将以为敌骑多，不如还保营。
现代文：这时，从白马运送的辎重已经上路，将领们认为敌军骑兵多，不如回去守卫营垒。
English: By this time, the baggage from the White Horse was on its way, and the generals decided that since there were too many enemy cavalry, it would be better to go back and guard the camp.

古文：荀攸曰： 此所以饵敌，如何去之！ 操顾攸而笑。
现代文：荀攸说： 这正是引敌上钩，怎么能离开？ 曹操看着荀攸微微一笑。
English: Yao You said, "This is exactly how to lure the enemy onto the hook, how can you leave?" Cao Cao looked at Yao You and smiled faintly.

古文：绍骑将文丑与刘备将五六千骑前后至。诸将复白： 可上马。 
现代文：袁绍的骑兵将领文与刘备率领五六千骑兵先后赶到，曹军将领们都说： 可以上马了。 
English: Yuan Shao's cavalry generals, General Wen and Liu Bei, arrived one after another, leading five or six thousand cavalry. Cao's generals all said, "It's time to mount the horses."

古文：操曰： 未也。 
现代文：曹操说： 还没到时候。 
English: Cao Cao said, "At this time, you can't mount a horse and go into battle."

古文：有顷，骑至稍多，或分趣辎重。操曰： 可矣！ 
现代文：又过了一会儿，袁军的骑兵更多了，有的已分别攻击曹军的辎重车队，曹操说： 时候到了。 
English: After a while, Yuan's cavalry became more numerous, and some of them attacked Cao's heavy cavalry separately. Cao Cao said, "The time has come.

古文：乃皆上马。
现代文：于是曹军全体骑兵上马。
English: At this time, Cao Cao issued an order saying, "You may attack immediately."

古文：时骑不满六百，遂纵兵击，大破之，斩丑。
现代文：当时曹军骑兵不到六百人，曹操挥军猛击，大破袁军，斩杀文。
English: At that time, Cao's cavalry was less than six hundred men. Cao Cao's army struck hard, defeated Yuan's army, and killed Wen.

古文：丑与颜良，皆绍名将也，再战，悉禽之，绍军夺气。
现代文：文与颜良都是袁绍军中有名的大将，两次交战，先后被曹军杀死，袁绍军中士气大衰。
English: Both Wen and Yan Liang were famous generals in Yuan Shao's army. They fought twice and were killed by Cao's army successively. The morale of Yuan Shao's army suffered a great decline.

古文：初，操壮关羽之为人，而察其心神无久留之意，使张辽以其情问之，羽叹曰： 吾极知曹公待我厚；然吾受刘将军恩，誓以共死，不可背之。
现代文：起初，曹操欣赏关羽的为人，但观察关羽的心思，没有久留之意，就派张辽去了解关羽的想法，并羽叹息说： 我十分明白曹公待我情义深厚，但我受刘将军厚恩，已发誓与他同生死，共患难，不能背弃誓言。
English: At first, Cao Cao appreciated Guan Yu as a person, but after observing Guan Yu's thoughts, he did not want to stay long, so he sent Zhang Liao to understand Guan Yu's thoughts, and Yu sighed and said: I fully understand that Cao Gong treats me with deep feelings, but I have been favored by General Liu, and I have sworn to live and die with him, to suffer and suffer together, and I cannot break my oath.

古文：吾终不留，要当立效以报曹公乃去耳。 
现代文：我最终不会留在这里，但要立功报答曹公后才离去。 
English: In the end, I won't stay here, but I want to repay Cao Gong before I leave.

古文：辽以羽言报操，操义之，及羽杀颜良，操知其必去，重加赏赐。
现代文：张辽把关羽的话报告给曹操，曹操佩服他的义气。等到关羽杀死颜良后，曹操知道他一定要去，就重加赏赐。
English: Zhang Liao reported Guan Yu's words to Cao Cao, who was impressed by Guan Yu's loyalty. After Guan Yu killed Yan Liang, Cao Cao knew that Guan Yu had to go, so he increased the reward.

古文：羽尽封其所赐，拜书告辞，而奔刘备于袁军。
现代文：关羽把所有曹操赏赐的东西都封存起来，留下一封拜别的书信向曹操辞行，就到袁绍军投奔刘备。
English: Guan Yu sealed up all of Cao Cao's gifts and left a letter of resignation to Cao Cao. He then joined Yuan Shao's army and went to Liu Bei.

古文：左右欲追之，操曰： 彼各为其主，勿追也。 
现代文：曹操的左右将领要去追赶关羽，曹操说： 他是各为其主，不要去追。 
English: Cao Cao's left and right generals were going to chase Guan Yu. Cao Cao said, "He is his own master. Don't chase him."

古文：操还军官渡，阎柔遣使诣操，操以柔为乌桓校尉。
现代文：曹操回军官渡，阎柔派遣使者拜见曹操，曹操任命阎柔为乌桓校尉。
English: Cao Cao returned to the officer's crossing, Yan Rong sent an envoy to meet Cao Cao, and Cao Cao appointed Yan Rong as Captain Wu Huan.

古文：鲜于辅身见操于官渡，操以辅为右度辽将军，还镇幽土。
现代文：鲜于辅亲自到官渡拜见曹操，曹操任命他为右度辽将军，回去镇守幽州。
English: Little Yu Fu personally went to Guandu to see Cao Cao, and Cao Cao appointed him as the right-hand Liao general to go back and defend Yuzhou.

古文：广陵太守陈登治射阳，孙策西击黄祖，登诱严白虎馀党，图为后害，策还击登，军到丹徒，须待运粮。
现代文：广陵郡太守陈登把郡府设在射阳，孙策向西攻击黄祖，陈登引诱严白虎的余党，准备在孙策后方起事。孙策率军回击陈登，先驻在丹徒，等待运输粮草。
English: Chen Deng, the governor of Guangling County, set up the county government in Shayang. Sun Ce attacked Huang Zu to the west. Chen Deng lured the remaining party of the White Tiger to prepare to rise up behind Sun Ce. Sun Ce led the army to fight back against Chen Deng, first stationed in Dantu, waiting for the transportation of grain and grass.

古文：初，策杀吴郡太守许贡，贡奴客潜民间，欲为贡报仇。
现代文：当初，孙策曾杀死吴郡太守许贡，许贡的家奴和门客藏在民间，打算为许贡报仇。
English: At first, Sun Ce had killed Xu Gong, the governor of Wu County. Xu Gong's servants and clients hid among the common people, intending to take revenge for Xu Gong.

古文：策性好猎，数出驱驰，所乘马精骏，从骑绝不能及，卒遇贡客三人，射策中颊，后骑寻至，皆刺杀之。
现代文：孙策性喜打猎，经常在外追赶野兽，他骑的一匹骏马速度极快，卫士们的马根本追不上。孙策乘马驱驰时，突然遇到许贡的三个门客，他们用箭射中孙策面颊，后面的卫士骑马随即将门客全部刺杀。
English: Sun Tse liked to hunt and often chased wild animals. He rode a fast horse, so fast that the guards' horses could not catch up with him. As Sun Tse rode along, he suddenly encountered three courtiers of Xu Gong. They shot Sun Tse in the cheek with arrows, and the guards on horseback killed all the courtiers.

古文：策创甚，召张昭等谓曰： 中国方乱，以吴、越之众，三江之固，足以观成败，公等善相吾弟！ 
现代文：孙策受伤很重，召唤张昭等人，对他们说： 中原正在大乱，以吴、越的人力，据守三江险要，足以坐观成败。你们一定要好好辅佐我的弟弟！ 
English: Sun Ce was seriously injured, summoned Zhang Zhao and others, and said to them: The Central Plains are in turmoil, and with the manpower of Wu and Yue, the defense of the Three Rivers is crucial, enough to sit and watch the success or failure. You must support my brother well!

古文：呼权，佩以印绶，谓曰： 举江东之众，决机于两陈之间，与天下争衡，卿不如我；举贤任能，各尽其心以保江东，我不如卿。 
现代文：把孙权叫来，把印绶给孙权佩上，对孙权说： 率领江东的人马，决战于疆场，与天下英雄相争，你不如我；遴选贤才，任用能臣，使他们各尽忠心，保守江东，我不如你。 
English: He called for Sun Quan and put the seal on his horse. He said to Sun Quan, "You are not as good as me in leading the men and horses in the east of the Yangtze River, fighting a decisive battle on the battlefield, and competing with the heroes of the world. I am not as good as you in selecting wise men and appointing capable ministers, so that they are all loyal and protect the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：丙年，策卒，时年二十六。
现代文：四月，丙午，孙策去世，当时他二十六岁。
English: In April, on the afternoon of the 3rd, Sun Ce passed away, when he was 26 years old.

古文：权悲号，未视事，张昭曰： 孝廉，此宁哭时邪！ 
现代文：孙权悲痛号哭，没有去主持军政事务。张昭对他说： 孙孝廉，这难道是哭的时候吗？ 
English: Sun Quan cried out in grief and did not preside over military and political affairs. Zhang Zhao said to him: Sun Xiaolian, is this the time to cry?

古文：乃改易权服，扶令上马，使出巡军。
现代文：于是给孙权换好官服，扶孙权上马，要他出去巡视军营。
English: So he gave Sun Quan a change of clothes, helped him onto a horse, and let him go on a tour of the armies.

古文：昭率僚属，上表朝廷，下移属城，中外将校，各令奉职，周瑜自巴丘将兵赴丧，遂留吴，以中护军与张昭共掌众事。
现代文：张昭率领僚属，向朝廷上表奏报孙策的死讯，并通知属下郡、县，命令各地官吏和大小将领都严守岗位。周瑜从巴丘率兵前来奔丧，就留在吴郡，担任中护军，与张昭一起主持军政事务。
English: Zhang Zhao led his subordinates to report the news of Sun Ce's death to the imperial court, and informed his subordinate counties and counties, ordering officials and generals of all regions to strictly observe their posts. Zhou Yu came from Bachu to lead soldiers to the funeral, and stayed in Wuxi County to serve as a middle guard, and presided over military and political affairs with Zhang Zhao.

古文：时策虽有会稽、吴郡、丹杨、豫章、庐江、庐陵，然深险之地，犹未尽从，流寓之士，皆以安危去就为意，未有君臣之固，而张昭、周瑜等谓权可与共成大业，遂委心而服事焉。
现代文：当时孙策虽然已经占有会稽、吴郡、丹阳、豫章、庐江、庐陵这几个郡，但偏远山区，还未全部控制。流亡客居在江南的士大夫，也还怀有暂时避难的想法，与孙策、孙权未建立起稳定的君臣关系。但张昭、周瑜等人认为可以与孙权共同完成大业，于是尽心尽力地为孙权效力。
English: At that time, although Sun Tse had already occupied the counties of Hefei, Wuzhen, Danyang, Yuzhang, Minjiang and Fuling, he had not yet fully controlled the remote mountainous areas. The exiled scholar-officials living in the south of the Yangtze River also harbored the idea of temporary refuge, and had not established a stable monarch-servant relationship with Sun Tse and Sun Quan. However, Zhang Zhao, Zhou Yu and others believed that they could accomplish the great cause together with Sun Quan, so they did their best to serve Sun Quan.

古文：秋，七月，立皇子冯为南阳王；壬午，冯薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，献帝封皇子刘冯为南阳王。壬午，刘冯去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Feng, the son of Emperor Xianfeng, became the king of Nanyang. At noon, Liu Feng died.

古文：汝南黄巾刘辟等叛曹操应袁绍，绍遣刘备将兵助辟，郡县多应之。
现代文：汝南郡的黄巾军首领刘辟等背叛曹操，响应袁绍，袁绍派遣刘备统兵去援助刘辟，周围的郡、县纷纷起来响应。
English: The leader of the Yellow Turban Army in Runan County, Liu Bi, and others betrayed Cao Cao and responded to Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao sent Liu Bei to assist Liu Bi, and the surrounding counties and counties responded in succession.

古文：绍遣使拜阳安都尉李通为征南将军，刘表亦阴招之，通皆拒焉。
现代文：袁绍派使者委任阳安郡都尉李通为征南将军，刘表也暗中派人来招李通，李通一概拒绝。
English: Yuan Shao sent an envoy to appoint Yang'an County Lieutenant Li Tong as a general to conquer the south. Liu Biao also secretly sent someone to recruit Li Tong, but Li Tong refused.

古文：或劝通从绍，通按剑叱之曰： 曹公明哲，必定天下；绍虽强盛，终为之虏耳。
现代文：有人劝李通与袁绍联络，李通手按剑柄叱责说： 曹公明智，必然平定天下；袁绍虽然强盛，终究会败在曹公之手。
English: Some people advised Li Tong to contact Yuan Shao, and Li Tong scolded him with his hand on the hilt of his sword, saying: Cao Gong is wise and will surely pacify the world; although Yuan Shao is strong, he will eventually be defeated by Cao Gong.

古文：吾以死不贰。 
现代文：我誓死不二。 
English: I'd rather die than have second thoughts.

古文：即斩绍使，送印绶诣操。
现代文：随即杀死袁绍使者，把袁绍送来的印绶上交给曹操。
English: He then killed Yuan Shao's emissary and gave the seal of Yuan Shao to Cao Cao.

古文：通急录户调，朗陵长赵俨见通曰： 方今诸郡并叛，独阳安怀附，复趣收其绵绢，小人乐乱，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：李通加紧按户征收绵绢，朗陵县令赵俨去见李通，对他说： 如今其他郡县都已叛变，只阳安仍旧附朝廷。现在又要按户强收绵绢，小人喜欢作乱，这样强行征敛，恐怕不可以吧？ 
English: Li Tong stepped up the collection of money by households. Langling County ordered Zhao Yu to go to Li Tong and told him: Nowadays, other counties and counties have mutinied, only Yang'an is still attached to the imperial court. Now they want to forcibly collect money by households. Villains like to make trouble, so forcibly collect money, I'm afraid it's not allowed?

古文：通曰： 公与袁绍相持甚急，左右郡县背叛乃尔，若绵绢不调送，观听者必谓我顾望，有所须待也。 
现代文：李通说： 曹公与袁绍相持，正在危急时刻，周围郡、县竟然这样背叛，如果不立刻征收绵绢，送到许都，就必定会有人说我坐观成败，有所等待。 
English: Li Tong said: Cao Gong and Yuan Shao are on the same side, it is a critical time, the surrounding counties and counties have betrayed in such a way, if they do not immediately collect the money and send it to Xu Du, there will certainly be people who say that I am watching and waiting.

古文：俨曰： 诚亦如君虑，然当权其轻重。
现代文：赵俨说： 事情确实像您考虑得那样，但是应当区别轻重缓急。
English: Zhao Wei said: Things are indeed as you have considered, but there should be a difference in priorities.

古文：小缓调，当为君释此患。 
现代文：稍稍放松，我来为你消除这个顾虑。 
English: Relax a little, I'll take care of that for you.

古文：乃书与荀彧曰： 今阳安郡百姓困穷，邻城并叛，易用倾荡，乃一方安危之机也。
现代文：赵俨于是给荀写信说： 如今阳安郡百姓穷困，邻近郡县都已叛变，容易受到影响，这正是这一地区安危的关键时刻。
English: Zhao Zhe then wrote to Zhe: Nowadays, the people of Yang'an County are impoverished, and the neighboring counties have all mutinied and are easily influenced. This is a critical time for the safety of this region.

古文：且此郡人执守忠节，在险不贰，以为国家宜垂慰抚。而更急敛绵绢，何以劝善！ 
现代文：而且阳安郡的百姓保持忠节，身处险境而并无二心，我认为国家应该加以慰抚，但却反而加紧征收绵绢，这怎么能劝导百姓一心向善呢？ 
English: Moreover, the people of Yang'an County remain loyal to the festival. They are in a dangerous situation and have no second thoughts. I think the state should comfort them, but on the contrary, it has stepped up the collection of money. How can this persuade the people to be good?

古文：彧即白操，悉以绵绢还民，上下欢喜，郡内遂安。
现代文：荀立刻报告曹操，曹操下令把已征收的绵、绢一律退还能百姓。上下都十分高肖，于是全郡安定。
English: Yao immediately reported to Cao Cao, and Cao Cao ordered that all the cotton and straw that had been collected be returned to the people. Both the upper and lower levels were very high, so the whole county was stable.

古文：通击群贼瞿恭等，皆破之。遂定淮、汝之地。
现代文：李通进攻郡内的地方势力首领瞿恭等，全部击溃他们，平定了淮、汝地区。
English: Li Tong attacked the leaders of local forces in the county, such as Gong Gong, and defeated them all, and pacified the Huai and Ru regions.

古文：时操制新科，下州郡，颇增严峻，而调绵绢方急。
现代文：当时曹操制定了新的法令，颁下州、郡执行，比以前严厉得多，而且征收绵、绢正很急迫。
English: At that time, Cao Cao formulated a new decree, issued by the state and county, which was much stricter than before, and the collection of cotton and straw was very urgent.

古文：长广太守何夔言于操曰： 先王辨九服之赋以殊远近，制三典之刑以平治乱。
现代文：长广郡太守何对曹操说： 古代的君王把赋税分为九等，以距京城的远近作为标准，而且根据归附早晚与治乱的情况订立了轻典、中典、重典三种不同的刑法标准。
English: He, the governor of Changguang County, said to Cao Cao, "Ancient kings divided taxes into nine classes according to the distance from the capital. They also established three different criminal law standards: light, medium, and heavy, according to the circumstances of early and late annexation and control of chaos.

古文：愚以为此郡宜依远域新邦之典，其民间小事，使长吏临时随宜，上不背正法，下以顺百姓之心。
现代文：我认为长广郡应该按照归附较晚的边远地区施行法律，赋税从轻，法令从宽。民间的小事，由地方官员因地制宜，自行处理，上不违背朝廷正法，下可顺应百姓之心。
English: I think that Changguang County should implement laws in accordance with the remote areas that were annexed later. Taxes should be lighter, and laws should be broader. Minor civil matters should be handled by local officials according to local conditions. They should not violate the official law of the imperial court, and they should follow the hearts of the people.

古文：比及三年，民安其业，然后乃可齐之以法也。 
现代文：等到三年以后，百姓安居东业，然后再推行朝廷的统一法令。 
English: Wait until three years later, when people are living peacefully in Dongye, and then implement the unified decree of the imperial court.

古文：操从之。
现代文：曹操批准了这个意见。
English: Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：刘备略汝、颍之间，自许以南，吏民不安，曹操患之。
现代文：刘备率军攻掠汝、颖地区，自许都以南，官民都人心不安，曹操对此很忧虑。
English: Liu Bei led the army to attack and plunder the Ru and Ying regions, south of the self-proclaimed capital. Cao Cao was very worried about this, as both the government and the people were uneasy.

古文：曹仁曰： 南方以大军方有目前急，其势不能相救，刘备以强兵临之，其背叛故宜也。
现代文：曹仁说： 南方认为大将军目前正与袁绍相持到危急关头，势不能去援救，刘备又率强兵压境，所以他们背叛是在所难免的。
English: Cao Ren said: The south side believes that the general is currently at a critical juncture with Yuan Shao, and is unable to rescue, and Liu Bei is leading a strong army to suppress the border, so their betrayal is inevitable.

古文：备新将绍兵，未能得其用，击之，可破也。 
现代文：不过，刘备刚开始率领袁绍的士兵，还不能得心应手，立刻进攻，可以击破刘备。 
English: However, Liu Bei had just begun to lead Yuan Shao's soldiers, and was not yet able to win their hearts. He immediately attacked, and was able to defeat Liu Bei.

古文：操乃使仁将骑击备，破走之，尽复收诸叛县而还。
现代文：曹操就派曹仁率骑兵进攻刘备，刘备兵败溃逃，曹仁全部收复叛变各县后才回军。
English: Cao Cao sent Cao Ren and his cavalry to attack Liu Bei. Liu Bei was defeated and fled. Cao Ren only returned to the army after he had recovered all the rebellious counties.

古文：备还至绍军，阴欲离绍，乃说绍南连刘表。
现代文：刘备回到袁绍军中，暗中打算离开袁绍。于是，他劝说袁绍与荆州的刘表联合。
English: Liu Bei returned to Yuan Shao's army and secretly planned to leave Yuan Shao. Therefore, he persuaded Yuan Shao to unite with Liu Bei in Jingzhou.

古文：绍遣备将本兵复至汝南，与贼龚都等合，众数千人。
现代文：袁绍派刘备率领他原来的部队再到汝南，与盗匪首领龚都等联合，有部众数千人。
English: Yuan Shao sent Liu Bei to lead his original troops to the south of the Yunnan River, and united with the bandit leader Xindu, with thousands of people.

古文：曹操遣将蔡杨击之，为备所杀。
现代文：曹操派部将蔡杨前去进攻，被刘备杀死。
English: Cao Cao sent his troops to attack Cai Yang, who was killed by Liu Bei.

古文：袁绍军阳武，沮授说绍曰： 北兵虽众而劲果不及南，南军谷少而资储不如北；南幸于急战，北利在缓师。
现代文：袁绍驻军阳武，沮授劝袁绍说： 我军数量虽多，但战斗力比不上曹军；曹军粮草短缺，军用物资储备比不上我军。因此，曹操利于速战速决，我军利于打持久战。
English: Yuan Shao stationed troops in Yangwu, and discouraged Yuan Shao, saying: Although the number of our troops is large, their combat effectiveness is not as good as Cao's army; Cao's army is short of grain and grass, and its reserves of military materials are not as good as our army. Therefore, Cao Cao is good at quick war and quick decision, and our army is good at fighting a long war.

古文：宜徐持久，旷以日月。 
现代文：应当作长期打算，拖延时间。 
English: It's best to take a slow, steady approach, taking your time.

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍没有采纳。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：八月，绍进营稍前，依沙塠为屯，东西数十里。
现代文：八月，袁绍大军向前稍作推进，依沙丘扎营，东西达数十里。
English: In August, Yuan Shao's army made a slight advance and set up camp by the sand dunes, covering dozens of miles from east to west.

古文：操亦分营与相当。
现代文：曹操也把部队分开驻扎，与袁绍营垒相对。
English: Cao Cao also stationed his troops separately, opposite Yuan Shao's camp.

古文：九月，庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，庚午朔，出现日食。
English: In September, at the stroke of dawn, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：曹操出兵与袁绍战，不胜，复还，坚壁。
现代文：曹操出兵与袁绍交战，没有取胜，又退回营垒，坚守不出。
English: Cao Cao sent troops to fight with Yuan Shao, but he did not win, and he retreated back to his camp, unable to hold out.

古文：绍为高橹，起土山，射营中，营中皆蒙楯而行。
现代文：袁绍军中制造高楼，堆起土山，居高临下地向曹营射箭，曹军在营中行走，都要用盾牌遮挡飞箭。
English: Yuan Shao built a high watchtower and piled up mounds of earth to shoot arrows at Cao Cao's camp, where soldiers were marching with shields.

古文：操乃为霹雳车，发石以击绍楼，皆破，绍复为地道攻操，操辄于内为长堑以拒之。
现代文：曹操制成霹雳车，发射石块，将袁绍的高楼全都击毁。袁绍又挖地道进攻，曹军在营内挖一道长长的深沟，以抵御袁军从地下来攻。
English: Cao Cao made a carriage and launched stones to destroy all of Yuan Shao's high-rises. Yuan Shao also dug a tunnel to attack, and Cao's army dug a long, deep trench in the camp to resist Yuan's army from attacking from the ground.

古文：操众少粮尽，士卒疲乏，百姓困于征赋，多叛归绍者，操患之，与荀彧书，议欲还许，以致绍师。
现代文：曹操兵少粮尽，士兵疲惫不堪，百姓无法交纳沉重的赋税，纷纷背叛而降附袁绍。曹操大为忧虑，给荀写信，说准备用退回许都的办法，引诱袁军深入。
English: Cao Cao's soldiers were running out of food, the soldiers were exhausted, and the people were unable to pay the heavy taxes, so they betrayed and surrendered to Yuan Shao. Cao Cao was very worried and wrote a letter to Zou, saying that he was preparing to use the method of returning to Xudu to lure Yuan's army deeper.

古文：彧报曰： 绍悉众聚官渡，欲与公决胜败。
现代文：荀回信说： 袁绍集中全部军队到官渡，打算与您一决胜负。
English: He wrote back: "Yuan Shao has concentrated all his troops in Guandu and intends to fight you to a draw.

古文：公以至弱当至强，若不能制，必为所乘，是天下之大机也。
现代文：您以最弱者抵抗最强者，如果不能制敌，就将为敌所制，这正是夺取天下的重要关键。
English: The Lord uses the weakest army to resist the strongest army. If he cannot defeat the enemy, he will be defeated by the enemy. This is the critical moment of success or failure.

古文：且绍，布衣之雄耳，能聚人而不能用。
现代文：而且，袁绍只是布衣中的英雄罢了，能把人才招集在自己身边，却不能任用。
English: Moreover, Yuan Shao is just an ordinary talent. He can gather people, but he can't call them correctly.

古文：以公之神武明哲而辅以大顺，何向而不济！
现代文：以您的神武明智，加上尊奉天子、名正言顺，有谁能阻拦得住！
English: With your divine wisdom, combined with your reverence for the Son of Heaven and your righteous words, who can stop you?

古文：今谷食虽少，未若楚、汉在荥阳、成皋间也。
现代文：如今，粮食虽少，但还没有到楚、汉在荥阳、成对峙时的困境。
English: Today, although there is little food, it has not yet reached the plight of Chu and Han in their confrontation in Shenyang and Chengdu.

古文：是时刘、项莫肯先退者，以为先退则势屈也。
现代文：那时刘邦、项羽谁也不肯先向后撤，是因为先退就会处于劣势。
English: At that time, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu both refused to retreat first, believing that retreating first would break their morale.

古文：公以十分居一之众，画地而守之，扼其喉而不得进，已半年矣。
现代文：您的军队只有袁绍军队的十分之一，但您坚守不动，扼住袁军的咽喉，使袁军无法前进，已长达半年。
English: Now you only rely on a team that is only one-tenth of Yuan Shao's army, and you have been holding Yuan Shao's throat so that he cannot advance for half a year.

古文：情见势竭，必将有变。此用奇之时，不可失也。 
现代文：情势显现，已到终结，必将发生变化，这正是出奇制胜的时机，一定不能放弃。 
English: The situation is emerging, it has come to an end, it will surely change, this is exactly the time for a surprise victory, we must not give up.

古文：操从之，乃坚壁持之。
现代文：曹操听从荀的劝告，于是坚守营垒，与袁绍相持。
English: Cao Cao listened to his advice, so he held fast to the wall and supported Yuan Shao.

古文：操见运者，抚之曰： 却十五日为汝破绍，不复劳汝矣。 
现代文：曹操见到运输粮草的人，安抚他们说： 再过十五天，为你们击败袁绍，就不再辛苦你们运粮了。 
English: Cao Cao saw the people who were transporting grain and grass and reassured them: "In another fifteen days, if we defeat Yuan Shao for you, you will no longer have to carry grain.

古文：绍运谷车数千乘至官渡。荀攸言于操曰： 绍运车旦暮至，其将韩猛锐而轻敌。击，可破也！ 
现代文：袁绍的运粮车数千辆来到官渡，荀攸对曹操说： 袁绍的运送辎重的车队马上就要来了，押运的大将韩猛勇敢而轻敌，进攻他，可以把他击败！ 
English: Thousands of Yuan Shao's grain trucks came to Guandu. Zou You said to Cao Cao: Yuan Shao's heavy convoy is about to arrive. Han Meng, the commander of the convoy, is brave and light-hearted. Attack him and you can defeat him!

古文：操曰： 谁可使者？ 
现代文：曹操说： 派谁去合适？ 
English: Cao Cao said: Who is the right person to send?

古文：攸曰： 徐晃可。 
现代文：荀攸说： 徐晃最合适。 
English: Zou You said: Xu Aking is the most suitable.

古文：乃遣偏将军河东徐晃与史涣邀击猛，破走之，烧其辎重。
现代文：于是，曹操派遣偏将军河东人徐晃与史涣在半路截击韩猛，击退韩猛，烧毁辎重。
English: As a result, Cao Cao dispatched the generals of the east side of the river, Xu and Shi, to intercept Han Meng in the middle of the road, repel Han Meng, and burn the baggage.

古文：冬，十月，绍复遣车运谷，使其将淳于琼等将兵万馀人送人，宿绍营北四十里。
现代文：冬季，十月，袁绍又派大批车辆运粮草，让大将淳于琼等率领一万余人护送，停留在袁绍大营以北四十里处。
English: In the winter, in October, Yuan Shao also sent a large number of vehicles to transport grain and grass, and let the general Chun Yu Qiong and others lead more than 10,000 people to escort, and stay at forty miles north of Yuan Shao's camp.

古文：沮授说绍： 可遣蒋奇别为支军于表，以绝曹操之钞。 
现代文：沮授劝袁绍说： 可派遗蒋奇率一支军队，在运粮队的外围巡逻，以防曹操派军袭击。 
English: He advised Yuan Shao: You can send Jiang Qi to lead an army to patrol the periphery of the grain convoys to prevent Cao Cao from sending troops to attack.

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍不听。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：许攸曰： 曹操兵少而悉师拒我，许下馀守，势必空弱。若分遣轻军，星行掩袭，许可拔也。
现代文：许攸说： 曹操兵少，而集中全力来抵抗我军，许都由剩下的人守卫，防备一定空虚，如果派一支队伍轻装前进，连夜奔袭，可以攻陷许都。
English: Xu You said: Cao Cao's soldiers are few, but they concentrate their efforts to resist our army. Xu Du is guarded by the remaining people, guarding against a certain emptiness. If you send a team to advance lightly and attack overnight, you can capture Xu Du.

古文：许拔，则奉迎天子以讨操，操成禽矣。
现代文：占领许都后，就奉迎天子以讨伐曹操，必能捉住曹操。
English: After the occupation of Xudou, he promised to fight Cao Cao and capture Cao Cao.

古文：如其未溃，可令首尾奔命，破之必也。 
现代文：假如他未立刻溃散，也能使他首尾不能兼顾，疲于奔命，一定可将他击败。 
English: Even if Cao Cao's army did not break up, he could still make them run for their lives, and he would surely defeat Cao Cao.

古文：绍不从，曰： 吾要当先取操。 
现代文：袁绍不同意，说： 我一定要先捉住曹操。 
English: Yuan Shao disagreed, saying: I must catch Cao Cao first.

古文：会攸家犯法，审配收系之，攸怒，遂奔操。
现代文：正在这时，许攸家里有人犯法，留守邺城的审配将他们逮捕，许攸知道后大怒，就投奔曹操。
English: Just at this time, someone in Xu Youyou's family broke the law, and the magistrate who stayed behind in Lushan arrested them. Xu Youyou was furious when he found out, and rushed to Cao Cao.

古文：操闻攸来，跣出迎之，抚掌笑曰： 子卿远来，吾事济矣！ 
现代文：曹操听说许攸前来，等不及穿鞋，光着脚出来迎接他，拍手笑着说： 许子卿，你远道而来，我的大事可成功了！ 
English: When Cao Cao heard that Xu You had come, he couldn't wait to put on his shoes. He went out barefoot to meet him, clapped his hands and smiled, saying, "Lord Xu Zi, you've come a long way, my big event can be a success!"

古文：既入坐，谓操曰： 袁氏军盛，何以待之？
现代文：入座以后，许攸对曹操说： 袁军势大，你有什么办法对付他？
English: After taking his seat, Xu You said to Cao Cao: Yuan Jun is very powerful, what can you do against him?

古文：今有几粮乎？ 
现代文：现在还有多少粮草？ 
English: How much grain and grass is left now?

古文：操曰： 尚可支一岁。 
现代文：曹操说： 还可以支持一年。 
English: Cao Cao said, "We can still support it for another year."

古文：攸曰： 无是，更言之！ 
现代文：许攸说： 没有那么多，再说一次。 
English: Xu You said: Not so much, let me say it again.

古文：又曰： 可支半岁。 
现代文：曹操又说： 可以支持半年。 
English: Cao Cao also said, "We can support it for half a year."

古文：攸曰： 足下不欲破袁氏邪！
现代文：许攸说： 您不想击破袁绍吗？
English: Xu You said, "Don't you want to defeat Yuan Shao?

古文：何言之不实也！ 
现代文：为什么不说实话呢！ 
English: Why not tell the truth!

古文：操曰： 向言戏之耳。其实可一月，为之奈何？ 
现代文：曹操说： 刚才只是开玩笑罢了，其实只可应付一个月，怎么办呢？ 
English: Cao Cao said, "I was only joking just now. In fact, I can only cope for one month. What should I do?

古文：攸曰： 公孤军独守，外无救援而粮谷已尽，此危急之日也。
现代文：许攸说： 您孤军独守，外无救援，而粮草已尽，这是危急的关头。
English: Xu You said: You are a lone soldier, there is no rescue outside, and the grain and grass have been exhausted. This is a critical moment.

古文：袁氏辎重万馀乘，在故市、乌巢，屯军无严备，若以轻兵袭之，不意而至，燔其积聚，不过三日，袁氏自败也。 
现代文：袁绍有一万多辆辎重车，在故市、乌巢，守军戒备不严密，如果派轻装部队袭击，出其不意而来，焚毁他们的粮草与军用物资，不出三天，袁绍大军就会自行溃散。 
English: Yuan Shao had more than ten thousand mule-drawn carts. In the old city and Wuzhong, the defenders were not on high alert. If light troops were sent to attack, they would come out of the blue and burn their grain and grass and military supplies. Within three days, Yuan Shao's army would disperse on its own.

古文：操大喜，乃留曹洪、荀攸守营，自将步骑五千人，皆用袁军旗帜，衔枚缚马口，夜从间道出，人抱束薪，所历道有问者，语之曰： 袁公恐曹操钞略后军，遣军以益备。 
现代文：曹操大喜，于是留下曹洪、荀攸防守大营，亲自率领五千名步骑兵出击。军队一律用袁军的旗号，兵士嘴里衔着小木棍，把马嘴绑上，以防发出声音，夜里从小道出营，每人抱一捆柴草。经过的路上遇到有人盘问，就回答说： 袁公恐怕曹操袭击后方辎重，派兵去加强守备。 
English: Cao Cao was overjoyed, so he left Cao Hong and Yao You to defend the large camp, and personally led five thousand infantry and cavalry to attack. The army all used the banner of the Yuan army, the soldiers carried small wooden sticks in their mouths, tied the horse's mouth to prevent noise, and left the camp at night from the trail, each holding a bundle of firewood. When someone was questioned on the way, he replied: Yuan Gong was afraid that Cao Cao would attack the rear, and sent soldiers to strengthen the defense.

古文：闻者信以为然，皆自若。
现代文：听的人信以为真，全都毫无戒备。
English: The inquirer believed it to be true after hearing it, as if nothing had happened.

古文：既至，围屯，大放火，营中惊乱。
现代文：到达乌巢后，围住袁军辎重，四面放火，袁军营中大乱。
English: After arriving at Wu's lair, Yuan's army encircled Zou Jie and set fire to him on all sides. Yuan's camp was in chaos.

古文：会明，琼等望见操兵少，出陈门外，操急击之，琼退保营，操遂攻之。
现代文：正在这时，天已渐亮，淳于琼等看到曹军兵少，就在营外摆开阵势，曹操进军猛击，淳于琼等抵挡不住，退守营寨，于是曹军开始进攻。
English: At this time, it was already getting light, and when Junyujion and the others saw that Cao's army was short of soldiers, they set up a position outside the camp. Cao Cao marched in and attacked, and Junyujion and the others could not resist and retreated to defend the camp, so Cao's army began to attack.

古文：绍闻操击琼，谓其子谭曰： 就操破琼，吾拔其营，彼固无所归矣！ 
现代文：袁绍听到曹操袭击淳于琼的消息，对儿子袁谭说： 就算曹操攻破淳于琼，我去攻破他的大营，让他无处可归。 
English: Yuan Shao heard the news of Cao Cao's attack on Chun Yu Qiong and said to his son Yuan Tan: Even if Cao Cao attacks Chun Yu Qiong, I will attack his large camp and leave him with nowhere to go.

古文：乃使其将高览、张郃等攻操营。
现代文：于是，派遣大将高览、张去攻打曹军大营。
English: As a result, the general Gaozhan and Zhang were dispatched to attack Cao Jun's camp.

古文：郃曰： 曹公精兵往，必破琼等，琼等破，则事去矣，请先往救之。 
现代文：张说： 曹操亲率精兵前去袭击，必能攻破淳于琼等，他们一败，辎重被毁，则大势已去，请先去救援淳于琼。 
English: Zhang said: Cao Cao's relatives led the elite soldiers to attack, and they will surely be able to break through Chunyu Qiong, etc. Once they are defeated and heavily destroyed, the situation is over. Please go to rescue Chunyu Qiong first.

古文：郭图固请攻操营。
现代文：郭图坚持要先攻曹操营寨。
English: Guo Tu insisted on attacking Cao Cao's camp first.

古文：郃曰： 曹公营固，攻之必不拔。
现代文：张说： 曹操营寨坚固，一定不能攻克。
English: Zhang said: Cao Cao's encampment is solid and cannot be defeated.

古文：若琼等见禽，吾属尽为虏矣。 
现代文：如果淳于琼等被捉，我们都将成为俘虏。 
English: If Jun Yu Qiong and the others are captured, we will all become prisoners.

古文：绍但遣轻骑救琼，而以重兵攻操营，不能下。
现代文：袁绍只是派轻兵去援救淳于琼，而派重兵进攻曹军大营，未能攻下。
English: Yuan Shao only sent light soldiers to rescue Chunyu Qiong, but sent heavy soldiers to attack Cao Jun's camp, but failed to capture it.

古文：绍骑至乌巢，操左右或言： 贼骑稍近，请分兵拒之。 
现代文：袁绍增援的骑兵到达乌巢，曹操左右有人说： 敌人的骑兵逐渐靠近，请分兵抵抗。 
English: Yuan Shao's reinforcements of cavalry arrived at Wuzhong, Cao Cao and others said: The enemy's cavalry is gradually approaching, please detachments to resist.

古文：操怒曰： 贼在背后，乃白！ 
现代文：曹操怒喝道： 敌人到了背后，再来报告！ 
English: Cao Cao shouted angrily: The enemy is behind us, report back!

古文：士卒皆殊死战，遂大破之，斩琼等，尽燔其粮谷，杀士卒千馀人，皆取其鼻，牛马割脣舌，以示绍军，绍军将士皆恟惧。
现代文：曹军士兵都拼死作战，于是大破袁军，斩杀淳于琼等，烧毁袁军全部粮秣。将一千余名袁军士兵的鼻子全都割下，将所俘获的牛马的嘴唇、舌头也割下，拿给袁绍军队看。袁军将士看到后，大为恐惧。
English: The soldiers of Cao's army fought to the death, so they defeated Yuan's army, killed Chun Yu Qiong and others, and burned all the grain sacks of Yuan's army. They cut off the noses of more than a thousand soldiers of Yuan's army, and cut off the lips and tongues of the captured cattle and horses, and showed them to Yuan Shao's army. When the soldiers of Yuan's army saw them, they were very afraid.

古文：郭图惭其计之失，复谮张郃于绍曰： 郃快军败。 
现代文：郭图因自己的计策失败，心中羞愧，就又去袁绍那里诬告张，说： 张听说我军失利，十分幸灾乐祸。 
English: Guo Tu, ashamed of the failure of his stratagem, went to Yuan Shao again to falsely accuse Zhang, saying: Zhang was very happy when he heard that our army had been defeated.

古文：郃忿惧，遂与高览焚攻具，诣操营降。
现代文：张听说后，又恨又怕，就与高览烧毁了攻营的器械，到曹营去投降。
English: After hearing this, Zhang was both disgusted and afraid, so he and Gao Xuan burned the equipment used to attack the camp and went to Cao Ying to surrender.

古文：曹洪疑，不敢受，荀攸曰： 郃计画不用，怒而来奔，君有何疑！ 
现代文：曹洪生怕中计，不敢接受他们投降。荀攸说： 张因为计策不为袁绍采用，一怒之下来投奔，您有什么可怀疑的！ 
English: Cao Hongsheng was afraid of the middle plan and did not dare to accept their surrender. Zou You said: Zhang, because the plan was not adopted by Yuan Shao, flew into a rage and fled. What can you doubt!

古文：乃受之。
现代文：于是接受张、高览的投降。
English: It was only then that Cao Hong accepted them.

古文：于是绍军惊扰，大溃，绍及谭等幅巾乘马，与八百骑渡河。
现代文：于是，袁军惊恐，全面崩溃。袁绍与袁谭等戴着头巾，骑着快马，率领八百名骑士渡过黄河而逃。
English: As a result, Yuan's army panicked and completely collapsed. Yuan Shao and Yuan Tan, wearing turbans and riding fast horses, led eight hundred knights across the Yellow River and fled.

古文：操追之不及，尽收其辎重、图书、珍宝。
现代文：曹军追赶不及，但缴获了袁绍的全部辎重、图书和珍宝。
English: Cao Jun could not catch up, but he captured all of Yuan Shao's treasure, books and treasures.

古文：馀众降者，操尽坑之，前后所杀七万馀人。
现代文：袁军残部投降，全部被曹操活埋掉，先后杀死的有七万余人。
English: The remnants of Yuan's army surrendered and were all buried alive by Cao Cao, killing more than seventy thousand people in succession.

古文：沮授不及绍渡，为操军所执，乃大呼曰： 授不降也，为所执耳！ 
现代文：沮授来不及跟上袁绍渡河逃走，被曹军俘虏，于是他大喊： 我不是投降，只是被擒！ 
English: Dejected, he could not keep up with Yuan Shao's escape across the river and was captured by Cao's army, so he shouted: I am not surrendering, I am just being captured!

古文：操与之有旧，迎谓曰： 分野殊异，遂用圮绝，不图今日乃相禽也！ 授曰： 冀州失策，自取奔北。
现代文：曹操和他是老相识，亲自来迎接他，对他说： 咱们处在不同的地区，一直被隔开不能相见，想不到今天你会被我捉住。 沮授说： 袁绍失策，自取失败。
English: Cao Cao, who had known him for a long time, came to meet him in person and said to him, "We are in different regions and have been separated for so long that we can't see each other. I didn't expect you to be caught by me today." Dejected, he said, "Yuan Shao made a mistake and brought about his own failure."

古文：授知力俱困，宜其见禽。 
现代文：我的才智和能力全都无法施展，该当被擒。 
English: I have limited intellectual ability, so I was naturally caught.

古文：操曰： 本初无谋，不相用计，今丧乱未定，方当与君图之。 
现代文：曹操说： 袁绍缺乏头脑，不能采用你的计策，如今，天下战乱未定，我要与你一同创立功业。 
English: Cao Cao said: Yuan Shao lacks brains and can't use your strategy. Now that the world is in turmoil, I want to create a career with you.

古文：授曰： 叔父、母弟，县命袁氏，若蒙公灵，速死为福。 
现代文：沮授说： 我叔父与弟弟的性命，都控制在袁绍手中。如果蒙您看重，就请快些杀我，这才是我的福气。 
English: "The lives of both my uncle and my brother are in the hands of Yuan Shao. If you value them, then please kill me quickly. This is my blessing."

古文：操叹曰： 孤早相得，天下不足虑也。 
现代文：曹操叹息说： 我如果早就得到你，天下大事都不值得担忧了。 
English: Cao Cao sighed and said, "If I had gotten you earlier, I wouldn't have had enough to worry about."

古文：遂赦而厚遇焉。
现代文：于是，赦免沮授，并给予他优厚待遇。
English: So he pardoned him and treated him well.

古文：授寻谋归袁氏，操乃杀之。
现代文：不久，沮授策划逃回袁绍军中，曹操这才将他杀死。
English: Cao Cao killed him shortly after he planned to escape back to Yuan Shao's army.

古文：操收绍书中，得许下及军中人书，皆焚之，曰： 当绍之强，孤犹不能自保，况众人乎！ 
现代文：曹操收缴袁绍的往来书信，得到许都官员及自己军中将领写能袁绍的信，他将这些信全部烧掉，说： 当袁绍强盛之时，连我都不能自保，何况众人呢！ 
English: Cao Cao confiscated Yuan Shao's correspondence, and obtained many letters from officials in the capital and from his own lieutenant generals who were able to write to Yuan Shao. He burned all these letters, saying: When Yuan Shao was strong, even I couldn't protect myself, let alone everyone else!

古文：冀州城邑多降于操。
现代文：冀州属下的郡县多投降曹操。
English: Most counties and counties under Jizhou surrendered to Cao Cao.

古文：袁绍走至黎阳北岸，入其将军蒋义渠营，把其手曰： 孤以首领相付矣！ 
现代文：袁绍逃到黎阳的黄河北岸，进入部将蒋义渠营中，握着他的手说： 我把脑袋托付给你了。 
English: Yuan Shao fled to the north bank of the Yellow River in Liyang and entered the camp of the Minister, Chiang Yi Qu, shook his hand and said, "I have entrusted you with my head."

古文：义渠避帐而处之，使宣号令。众闻绍在，稍复归之。
现代文：蒋义渠把大帐让给袁绍，让他在内发号施令，袁军残部知道袁绍还在，又逐渐聚集起来。
English: Jiang Yiqu gave the big account to Yuan Shao and let him give orders inside. The remnants of Yuan's army knew that Yuan Shao was still there and gradually gathered again.

古文：或谓田丰曰： 君必见重矣。 
现代文：有人对田丰说： 您一定会受到重用。 
English: Someone said to Tian Feng, "You will definitely be put to good use."

古文：丰曰： 公貌宽而内忌，不亮吾忠，而吾数以至言迕之，若胜而喜，犹能赦我，今战败而恚，内忌将发，吾不望生。 
现代文：田丰说： 袁绍外貌宽厚而内心猜忌，不能明白我的一片忠心，而我屡次因直立相劝而触怒了他，如果他因胜利而高兴，或许能赦免我；现在因战败而愤恨，妒心将要发作，我不指望能活下去。 
English: Tian Feng said: Yuan Shao is generous in appearance but suspicious at heart, he cannot understand my loyalty, and I have repeatedly angered him by standing up and persuading him. If he is happy with the victory, he may be able to forgive me. Now, because of the defeat, resentment and jealousy will occur. I do not expect to live.

古文：绍军士皆拊膺泣曰： 向令田丰在此，必不至于败。 
现代文：袁军将士都捶胸痛哭，说： 假如田丰在这里，一定不至于失败。 
English: Yuan Jun's generals all wept bitterly, saying, "If Tian Feng were here, we would not have failed.

古文：绍谓逄纪曰： 冀州诸人闻吾军败，皆当念吾，惟田别驾前谏止吾，与众不同，吾亦惭之。 
现代文：袁绍对逢纪说： 留在冀州的众人，听到我军失败，都会挂念我；只有田丰以前曾经劝阻我出兵，与众人不同，我也感到心中有愧。 
English: Yuan Shao said to Feng Ji: Everyone who stayed in Jizhou will miss me when they hear about the defeat of our army; only Tian Feng had previously dissuaded me from sending troops. Unlike everyone else, I also feel guilty.

古文：纪曰： 丰闻将军之退，拊手大笑，喜其言之中也。 
现代文：逢纪说： 田丰听说将军失利，拍手大笑，庆幸他的预立实现了。 
English: Feng Ji said: When Tian Feng heard that the general had lost, he clapped his hands and laughed. He was glad that his pre-appointment was realized.

古文：绍于是谓僚属曰： 吾不用田丰言，果为所笑。 
现代文：袁绍于是对僚属说： 我没有用田丰的计策，果然被他取笑。 
English: Yuan Shao then said to his colleague: I didn't use Tian Feng's trick, so he made fun of me.

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：就下令把田丰处死。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：初，曹操闻丰不从戎，喜曰： 绍必败矣。 
现代文：起初，曹操听说田丰没有随军出征，高兴地说： 袁绍必败无疑。 
English: At first, Cao Cao heard that Tian Feng did not go to war with the army, and said happily: Yuan Shao will undoubtedly be defeated.

古文：及绍奔遁，复曰： 向使绍用其别驾计，尚未可知也。 
现代文：到袁绍大败逃跑时，曹操又说： 假如袁绍采用田丰的计策，胜败还难以预料。 
English: When Yuan Shao was defeated and fled, Cao Cao also said: If Yuan Shao adopts Tian Feng's strategy, victory or defeat is still difficult to predict.

古文：审配二子为操所禽，绍将孟岱言于绍曰： 配在位专政，族大兵强，且二子在南，必怀反计。 
现代文：审配的两个儿子被曹军俘虏。袁绍部将孟岱对袁绍说： 审配官居高位，专权独断，家族人丁旺盛，兵马十分精锐，而且他两个儿子都在曹操手中，一定会心生背叛之意。 
English: The two sons of the matchmaker were captured by Cao Cao's army. Yuan Shao's general Meng Yao said to Yuan Shao: The matchmaker holds a high position, has absolute power, has a prosperous family, and his soldiers are very elite. Moreover, both of his sons are in Cao Cao's hands, so he must have had the heart to betray.

古文：郭图、辛评亦以为然。
现代文：郭图、辛评也以为如此。
English: Guo Tu and Xin Hui also thought so.

古文：绍遂以岱为监军，代配守鄴。
现代文：袁绍就委任孟岱为监军，代规审配镇审邺城。
English: Yuan Shao then appointed Meng Jun to supervise the troops and take over the defense of Min County.

古文：护军逄纪素与配不睦，绍以问之，纪曰： 配天性烈直，每慕古人之节，必不以二子在南为不义也。
现代文：护军逢纪一向与审配不和睦，袁绍去征询逢纪的意见，逢纪说： 审配天性刚直，经常仰慕古人的气节，一定不会因为两个儿子在敌人手中而作出不义的事来。
English: The escort Feng Ji had always been at odds with the referee, and Yuan Shao went to consult Feng Ji. Feng Ji said, "The referee has an upright nature and always admires the ancient people. He will never do anything wrong because his two sons are in the hands of the enemy."

古文：愿公勿疑。 
现代文：希望您不要怀疑。 
English: I hope you don't doubt me.

古文：绍曰： 君不恶之邪？ 
现代文：袁绍说： 你不恨他吗？ 
English: Yuan Shao said: Don't you hate him?

古文：纪曰： 先所争者，私情也；今所陈者，国事也。 绍曰： 善！ 
现代文：逢纪说： 以前我与他争执是私人小事，如今我所说的是国家大事。 袁绍说： 好！ 
English: Feng Ji said: Previously, my dispute with him was a private matter, but now I am talking about a national event. Yuan Shao said: Good!

古文：乃不废配，配由是更与纪亲。
现代文：于是，没有罢免审配的职务。自此以后，审配与逢纪的关系日益亲近。
English: As a result, he was not removed from the post of referee. Since then, the relationship between referees and referees has become increasingly close.

古文：冀州城邑叛绍者，绍稍复击定之。
现代文：冀州属下一些背叛袁绍的城邑，袁绍逐渐收复平定。
English: Some cities and towns in Jizhou that had betrayed Yuan Shao were gradually recovered and pacified by Yuan Shao.

古文：绍为人宽雅，有局度，喜怒不形于色，而性矜愎自高，短于从善，故至于败。
现代文：袁绍为人宽厚文雅，有气度，喜怒不形于色，但性格刚愎自用，难于采纳别人的正确意见，所以最终失败。
English: Yuan Shao was a kind and gentle person, with a dignified demeanor, indifferent to emotions, but his character was stubborn and self-serving, and it was difficult to adopt the correct opinions of others, so he ultimately failed.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，有星孛于大梁。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥，有异星出现在大梁星次。
English: In winter, October, Xinhai, there are strange stars appearing in the beam star.

古文：庐江太守李术攻杀扬州刺史严象，庐江梅乾、雷绪、陈兰等各聚众数万在江淮间。
现代文：庐江郡太守李术袭击扬州刺史严象，将严象杀死。庐江人梅乾、雷绪、陈兰等各自聚集数万人，分布于江、淮之间。
English: Li Shou, the governor of Minjiang County, attacked Yan Zi, Yangzhou's chief historian, and killed him. The Minjiang people, including Meikan, Leixu, and Chen Lan, each gathered tens of thousands of people and were distributed between the Jiang and Huai Rivers.

古文：曹操表沛国刘馥为扬州刺史。
现代文：曹操上表推荐沛国人刘馥担任扬州刺史。
English: Cao Cao recommended Liu Ye, a citizen of the State of Pei, to serve as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：时扬州独有九江，馥单马造合肥空城，建立州治，招怀乾、绪等，皆贡献相继。
现代文：当时扬州属下只有九江郡控制在曹操手中，刘馥单人匹马到合肥这座空城来上任，在合肥建立州府，招抚梅乾、雷绪等，他们都相继向朝廷进贡。
English: At that time, only Jiujiang County, which belonged to Yangzhou, was controlled by Cao Cao. Liu Bei rode single-handedly to Hefei, an empty city, to take office, establish the state capital in Hefei, and entice Meigian, Lei Xue, etc. They all paid tribute to the imperial court one after another.

古文：数年中，恩化大行，流民归者以万数。
现代文：数年之中，广施恩德，推行教化，来归附的流民数以万计。
English: Over the past few years, tens of thousands of displaced people have been helped and educated.

古文：于是广屯田，兴陂堨；官民有畜，乃聚诸生，立学校；又高为城垒，多积木石，以修战守之备。
现代文：于是刘馥广开屯田，大修水利官府与百姓都有积蓄。
English: As a result, Liu Bei opened up vast tracts of farmland, and the water conservancy government and the people had savings from the major repairs.

古文：曹操闻孙策死，欲因丧伐之。
现代文：于是召集学生兴建学校。又加高城墙、堡垒，积聚守城用的滚木石块，加强作战和防守的准备。
English: Therefore, students were summoned to build a school, and the city walls and fortresses were raised, and the rolling stones used to defend the city were accumulated to strengthen the preparation for battle and defense.

古文：侍御史张纮谏曰： 乘人之丧，既非古义，若其不克，成仇弃好，不如因而厚之。 
现代文：曹操听到孙策的死讯，打算乘孙权等正在办丧事之机，大举讨伐。侍御史张说： 乘人办丧事进行讨伐，是不符合古代道义的，如果不能攻克，便化友为敌，不如利用这个机会厚待他。 
English: When Cao Cao heard the news of Sun Ce's death, he planned to take advantage of the opportunity that Sun Quan and others were holding funerals to make a large-scale crusade. Zhang Shi, the chamberlain, said: "It is not in line with ancient morals to use people to hold funerals and carry out a crusade. If he cannot conquer, he will turn friends into enemies. It is better to take advantage of this opportunity to treat him well."

古文：操即表权为讨虏将军，领会稽太守。
现代文：于是曹操上表推荐孙权担任讨虏将军，兼任会稽郡太守。
English: As a result, Cao Cao recommended Sun Quan to serve as the general of the crusaders and also as the county magistrate.

古文：操欲令纮辅权内附，及以纮为会稽东部都尉。
现代文：曹操想让张辅佐孙权，劝导孙权归附朝廷，于是，上表推荐张担任会稽郡东部都尉。
English: Cao Cao wanted Zhang Shuo to assist Sun Quan and persuade Sun Quan to return to the imperial court, so the above table recommended Zhang to serve as the eastern captain of the auditing county.

古文：纮至吴，太夫人以权年少，委纮与张昭共辅之。
现代文：张来到吴郡，孙权的母亲吴夫人认为孙权年纪尚轻，委托张与张昭共同辅佐孙权。
English: Zhang came to Wu County. Sun Quan's mother, Mrs. Wu, thought that Sun Quan was still young, and entrusted Zhang and Zhang Zhao to jointly assist Sun Quan.

古文：纮惟补察，知无不为。
现代文：张一心辅政，尽心尽力。
English: Zhang Yixin assisted the government and did his best.

古文：太夫人问扬武都尉会稽董袭曰： 江东可保不？ 
现代文：吴夫人向扬武校尉、会稽人董袭说： 江东能保得住吗？ 
English: Mrs. Wu said to Yangwu, captain of the school, and the auditor of the association, Dong Hao: Can Jiangdong be saved?

古文：袭曰： 江东有山川之固，而讨逆明府恩德在民，讨虏承基，大小用命，张昭秉众事，袭等为爪牙，此地利人和之时也，万无所忧。 
现代文：董袭说： 江东地形险要，易守难攻。
English: Dong Wei said: the terrain of Jiangdong is dangerous, it is easy to defend but difficult to attack.

古文：权遗张纮之部，或以纮本受北任，嫌其志趣不止于此，权不以介意。
现代文：孙策将军的恩德留在民间，孙权将军继承基业，大小官员都拥护他。张昭主持大局。我们这些武将作为爪牙，这正是地利人和之时，万无一失，不必担忧。 
English: General Sun Tse's benevolence remains in the people, General Sun Quan inherits the inheritance, and officials of all sizes support him. Zhang Zhao presides over the overall situation. We, these generals, as minions, this is precisely the time of the local people, foolproof, no need to worry.

古文：鲁肃将北还，周瑜止之，因荐肃于权曰： 肃才宜佐时，当广求其比以成功业。 
现代文：孙权派遣张到会稽郡上任，有人认为张本是朝廷任命的官员，疑心他的志向不仅在此，但孙权并不因此而介意。鲁肃将要返回北方故乡，周瑜劝他留下，并向孙权推荐说： 鲁肃才干出众，应当委以重任，还要多延聘一些他这样的人才，以成就大业。 
English: Sun Quan sent Zhang to Heji County to take office. Some people thought that Zhang Ben was an official appointed by the imperial court. They suspected his ambition not only here, but Sun Quan did not mind. Rusu was going to return to his hometown in the north. Zhou Yu advised him to stay and recommended to Sun Quan that: Rusu's talent is outstanding, he should be entrusted with important tasks, and more talents like him should be hired to achieve great things.

古文：权即见肃，与语，悦之。
现代文：孙权立即接见鲁肃，与他交谈，大为赏识。
English: Sun Quan immediately met with Lu Su and had a conversation with him, which was greatly appreciated.

古文：宾退，独引肃合榻对饮，曰： 今汉室倾危，孤思有桓、文之功，君何以佐之？ 
现代文：等到宾客都告辞后，单独留下鲁肃，把坐榻合在一处，相对饮酒。孙权说： 如今汉王室垂危，我想建立齐桓公、晋文公那样的功业，你有什么办法帮助我？ 
English: After all the guests had left, Sun Quan said, "Nowadays, the Han royal family is in danger. I want to establish a career like that of Prince Qihuan and Prince Jinwen. What can you do to help me?"

古文：肃曰： 昔高帝欲尊事义帝而不获者，以项羽为害也。
现代文：鲁肃说： 从前，汉高祖刘邦打算尊奉义帝，但并未如愿，是因为项羽从中阻碍。
English: Lu Su said: Once upon a time, Liu Bang, the founder of the Han Dynasty, intended to honor the Yidai Emperor, but did not do so because Xiang Yu was in the way.

古文：今之曹操，犹昔项羽，将军何由得为桓、文乎！
现代文：如今的曹操，正象当年的项羽，将军有什么办法去效仿齐桓公、晋文公呢？
English: Today's Cao Cao, just like Xiang Yu of that year, how can the general emulate Lord Qihuan and Lord Jinwen?

古文：肃窃料之，汉室不可复兴，曹操不可卒除，为将军计，惟有保守江东以观天下之衅耳。
现代文：我私下推测，汉朝王室已不能复兴，曹操也不能一下就被消灭掉。为将军打算，只有保守江东，以观察天下大局的变化。
English: I privately surmised that the royal family of the Han Dynasty could not be revived, and Cao Cao could not be eliminated immediately. As a general, I could only guard the East River to observe the changes in the overall situation.

古文：若因北方多务，剿除黄祖，进伐刘表，竟长江所极，据而有之，此王业也。 
现代文：如果能乘曹操在北方用兵，无暇南顾之机，消灭黄祖，进讨刘表，把长江流域全部控制，这就能建立帝王之业。 
English: If Cao Cao can use his troops in the north to eliminate Huang Zu, subdue Liu Biao, and control the entire Yangtze River basin, he will be able to establish the cause of the emperor.

古文：权曰： 今尽力一方，冀以辅汉耳，此言非所及也。 
现代文：孙权说： 如今我尽力经营一方，只是希望辅佐汉王室罢了，你所说的这些我还没有想到。 
English: Sun Quan said: I am doing my best now, but I only hope to assist the Han family. What you said is beyond my ability.

古文：张昭毁肃年少粗疏，权益贵重之，赏赐储偫，富拟其旧。
现代文：张昭诽谤鲁肃年轻、粗疏，但孙权却越发重视鲁肃，赏赐给他财物，使鲁肃的豪富同鲁家当年一样。
English: Zhang Zhao slandered Rusu as being young and uncouth, but Sun Quan paid more and more attention to Rusu and rewarded him with wealth, making the rich people of Rusu the same as the Lu family.

古文：权料诸小将兵少而用薄者，并合之。
现代文：孙权检查属下的低级将领，将部下兵力较少而能力又差的加以合并。
English: Sun Quan inspected the lower-ranking generals under him, and merged those with fewer troops and less ability.

古文：别部司马汝南吕蒙，军容鲜整，士卒练习。权大悦，增其兵，宠任之。
现代文：别部司马、汝南人吕蒙，部下军容整齐，训练有素，孙权大为夸奖，为他增兵，并加以宠任。
English: Sima of the Second Division and Lü Meng of the Southern Ruins, his subordinates were neat and well-trained. Sun Quan highly praised him, increased the number of soldiers for him, and favored him.

古文：功曹骆统劝权尊贤接士，勤求损益，飨赐之日，人人别进，问其燥湿，加以密意，诱谕使言，察其志趣。
现代文：功曹络统劝孙权尊敬贤才，接纳各地士人，勤于征询对自己的意见；在宴会赏赐的日子，个别接见，询问生活起居，以示亲近；鼓励发言，观察他们的能力与志向。
English: Gong Cao Luo advised Sun Quan to respect the talents, accept scholars from all over the country, and be diligent in soliciting opinions about himself; on the day of the banquet, to receive them individually, inquire about their lives and lives to show closeness; encourage them to speak, and observe their abilities and aspirations.

古文：权纳用焉。
现代文：孙权都采纳了。
English: Sun Quan accepted and implemented his suggestion.

古文：统，俊之子也。
现代文：骆统是络俊的儿子。
English: Luo Tong is the son of Luo Jun.

古文：庐陵太守孙辅恐权不能保江东，阴遣人赍书呼曹操。
现代文：庐陵太守孙辅恐怕孙权不能保住江东，暗中派人送信给曹操，请他率军南下。
English: Fearing that Sun Quan would not be able to hold on to the eastern part of the river, Sun Fu, the governor of Fuling, secretly sent a message to Cao Cao, asking him to lead his army south.

古文：行人以告，权悉斩辅亲近，分其部曲，徙辅置东。
现代文：那个送信密使报告了孙权，孙权把孙辅左右的亲信全部处死，分散孙辅的部属，把他迁徒到东部看管起来。
English: The courier reported to Sun Quan. Sun Quan executed all of Sun Fu's close associates, dispersed Sun Fu's subordinates, and moved him to the east for safekeeping.

古文：曹操表征华歆为议郎、参司空军事。
现代文：曹操上表朝廷，征召华歆为议郎，参议司空府的军务。
English: Cao Cao went to the imperial court and summoned Hua Wei to be a councillor to discuss the military affairs of the Kuomintang.

古文：庐江太守李术不肯事权，而多纳其亡叛。
现代文：庐江郡太守李术不肯服从孙权，而且收容孙权部下的叛徒。
English: Li Shou, the governor of Minjiang County, refused to obey Sun Quan and received traitors from Sun Quan's subordinates.

古文：权以状白曹操曰： 严刺史昔为公所用，而李术害之，肆其无道，宜速诛灭。
现代文：孙权把这些情况报告曹操，说： 扬州刺史严象，是您从前任用的，却被李术杀害。李术肆无忌惮地杀害朝廷官员，应当尽早诛灭。
English: Sun Quan reported these circumstances to Cao Cao, saying, "Yangzhou has a grim history. It was used by your predecessor, but it was killed by Li Shou. Li Shou killed imperial officials with impunity and should be exterminated as soon as possible.

古文：今术必复诡说求救。
现代文：如今我出兵征讨，李术必定还会花言巧语，向朝廷求救。
English: Now that I am conscripted, Li Shu will surely resort to rhetoric and appeal to the imperial court for help.

古文：明公居阿衡之任，海内所瞻，愿敕执事，勿复听受。 
现代文：您身负天下重任，一举一动，都会被全国所注意。请求您告诉负责具体事务的官员，不要再听信李术的话。 
English: You are entrusted with the most important task in the world, and every move you make will be noticed by the whole country. I request you to tell the officials in charge of specific affairs to stop listening to Li Shu's words.

古文：因举兵攻术于皖城。
现代文：于是孙权进军皖城，围攻李术。
English: As a result, Sun Quan marched into Shicheng and besieged Li Shu.

古文：术求救于操，操不救。
现代文：李术向曹操求救，曹操不加理睬。
English: Li Shu appealed to Cao Cao for help, but Cao Cao ignored him.

古文：遂屠其城，枭术首。徙其部曲二万馀人。
现代文：于是孙权攻下皖城，放纵士兵屠城，砍下李术的人头示众，把李术的部属二万余人都迁到自己的控制区内。
English: As a result, Sun Quan captured Lucheng, indulged soldiers to massacre the city, cut off the heads of Li Shuxu to show the public, and moved more than 20,000 subordinates of Li Shuxu to his own control area.

古文：刘表攻张羡，连年不下。
现代文：刘表进攻长沙郡太守张羡，连年不能攻克。
English: Liu Biao attacked Changsha County Tai Shou Zhang En, and was unable to defeat him for years.

古文：曹操方与袁绍相拒，未暇救之。
现代文：曹操正与袁绍在官渡对峙，分不出兵力来救张羡。
English: Cao Cao was in confrontation with Yuan Shao at Guandu, and could not allocate troops to rescue Zhang En.

古文：羡病死，长沙复立其子怿。
现代文：张羡病死后，长沙人又拥立他的儿子张怿接替他的职务。
English: After Zhang En's death from illness, the people of Changsha appointed his son, Zhang Ye, to take over his duties.

古文：表攻怿及零、桂，皆平之。
现代文：刘表进攻张怿以及零陵、桂阳两郡，全部平定。
English: Liu Biao attacked Zhangye, as well as the two counties of Jiling and Guiyang, all of which were pacified.

古文：于是表地方数千里，带甲十馀万，遂不供职贡，郊祀天地，居处服用，僭拟乘舆焉。
现代文：从此，刘表拥有土地数千里，军队十余万，便不再向朝廷进贡。他在郊外祭祀天地，住处和衣服器具，都仿照皇帝的式样。
English: From then on, Liu Biao owned thousands of miles of land and more than 100,000 troops, and he no longer paid tribute to the imperial court. He sacrificed heaven and earth in the suburbs, and his residence and clothing and utensils were all modeled after the emperor's style.

古文：张鲁以刘璋暗懦，不复承顺，袭别部司马张修，杀之而并其众。
现代文：张鲁认为刘璋懦弱无能，不再服从刘璋的命令，袭击别部司马张，杀死张而吞并了他的队伍。
English: Zhang Lu thought that Liu Bei was weak and incompetent, and no longer obeyed Liu Bei's orders. He attacked Zhang Ma of the Second Division, killed Zhang and annexed his team.

古文：璋怒，杀鲁母及弟，鲁遂据汉中，与璋为敌。
现代文：刘璋大怒，杀死张鲁的母亲和弟弟，于是张鲁占据汉中地区，与刘璋为敌。
English: Liu Bei flew into a rage and killed Zhang Lu's mother and younger brother, so Zhang Lu occupied the Hanzhong region and became an enemy of Liu Bei.

古文：璋遣中郎将庞羲击之，不克。
现代文：刘璋派中郎将庞羲进攻张鲁，未能取胜。
English: Liu Kun sent Zhongro to attack Zhang Lu with Pang Kun, but failed to win.

古文：璋以羲为巴郡太守，屯阆中以御鲁。
现代文：刘璋委任庞羲为巴郡太守，驻守阆中，抵抗张鲁。
English: Liu Bei appointed Pang Jun as the governor of Ba County and stationed him in Yanzhong to resist Zhang Lu.

古文：羲辄召汉昌賨民为兵，或构羲于璋，璋疑之。
现代文：庞羲未请示刘璋，就召集汉昌的人为兵，有人向刘璋诬告庞羲图谋不轨，刘璋起疑。
English: Without asking Liu Bei, Pang Jun summoned the soldiers of Hanchang. Some people falsely accused Liu Jun of plotting against Pang Jun, and Liu Jun became suspicious.

古文：赵韪数谏不从，亦恚恨。
现代文：赵韪屡次劝告刘璋，刘璋不加理睬，赵韪也怀恨在心。
English: Zhao Yao repeatedly advised Liu Yao, but Liu Yao ignored him. Zhao Yao also held a grudge.

古文：初，南阳、三辅民流入益州者数万家，刘焉悉收以为兵，名曰东州兵。
现代文：当初，南阳及三辅地区的百姓因避难而流亡到益州的有数万家，刘璋的父亲刘焉把他们都收编为部队，称为东州兵。
English: At the beginning, there were tens of thousands of people from Nanyang and Sanshu areas who fled to Yizhou for refuge. Liu Yan's father, Liu Yan, organized them all into a unit called the Dongzhou soldiers.

古文：璋性宽柔，无威略，东州人侵暴旧民，璋不能禁。
现代文：刘璋性格宽厚而仁慈，没有威信，东州兵欺压侵掠益州原有的居民，刘璋不能禁止。
English: Liu Xuan was generous and benevolent. He had no prestige. Dongzhou soldiers bullied and plundered the original residents of Yizhou. Liu Xuan could not be banned.

古文：赵韪素得人心，因益州士民之怨，遂作乱，引兵数万攻璋；厚赂荆州，与之连和。
现代文：赵韪一向深得民心，便利用益州百姓对刘璋的怨恨，起兵反抗，率军数万人进攻刘璋。赵韪还给荆州牧刘表送去厚礼，与他联盟。
English: Zhao Wei had always won the hearts of the people, so he took advantage of the resentment of the people of Yizhou against Liu Wei, raised an army to resist, and led tens of thousands of troops to attack Liu Wei. Zhao Wei also sent a gift to Jingzhou Mu Liu table and allied with him.

古文：蜀郡、广汉、犍为皆应之。
现代文：蜀郡、广汉郡、犍为郡都起来响应赵韪。
English: Shu County, Guanghan County and Handan County all rose up to respond to Zhao Handan.

