古文：王骋之孟襄司马文宣虞德严猛郭庆之薄绍之索万兴郭秀之庾季随申翼之王怀之柳叔伦刘廓王瑶王文明夏侯文规
现代文：王骋之孟襄司马文宣虞德严猛郭庆之薄绍之索万兴郭秀之庾季随申翼之王怀之柳叔伦刘廓王瑶王文明夏侯文规
English: Wang Xizhi, Meng Xiang, Ma Wen, Xuan Yu, Guo Jian, Guo Qing, Bo Shao, Guo Wan Xing, Guo Xiu, Guo Sui, Sui Sheng, Wing Wang, Huai Liu Shulun, Liu Guo, Wang Xi, Wang Qian, Xia Hou, Wen Gui

古文：王骋之
现代文：王骋之
English: Wang Xizhi

古文：琅邪王骋之妻，陈郡谢氏，生一男，小字奴子。
现代文：琅邪王骋之的妻子是陈郡的谢氏，生了个男孩小名叫奴子。
English: The wife of the evil king Luo Zhi is Xie from Chen County. She gave birth to a little boy named Niu Zi.

古文：经年后，王以妇婢招利为妾，谢元嘉八年病终。
现代文：一年后，王骋之娶了谢氏的一个叫招利的使女作小老婆，谢氏元嘉八年病逝。
English: A year later, Wang Xizhi married one of Xie's maids called Zhaoli. Xie Yuanjia died of illness eight years later.

古文：王之墓在会稽，假瘗建康东冈，既窆反虞，舆灵入屋，凭几忽于空中掷地。
现代文：王家的祖坟在会稽，暂时先把谢氏埋在建康的东岗上。落葬后回去要在家祭祀，灵牌入室后，忽从供桌上摔下夹，就听见谢氏恼怒的责怪说：为什么不奏哀乐唱挽歌？
English: The ancestral tomb of the Wang family was under investigation, and Mr. Xie was temporarily buried on the east ridge of Jiankang. After the burial, he had to go back home to make a sacrifice. After the memorial plaque entered the room, he suddenly dropped the clip from the table, and heard Mr. Xie's angry reproach: "Why not play mourning music and sing a dirge?"

古文：便有嗔声曰：何不作挽歌，令我寂寂而行耶？聘之云：非为永葬，故不具仪耳。
现代文：难道就让我这样冷清寂寞的上路吗？王骋之说：这里不是你永久的坟地，只是暂时葬在这里，所以就没有举行葬礼的仪式。
English: Is this really the way to clear my lonely path? Wang Xizhi said, "This is not your permanent grave, you are only temporarily buried here, so there is no funeral ceremony."

古文：孟襄
现代文：孟襄
English: Mengxiang

古文：孟襄，字宝称。元嘉十一年，为吴宁令。其妻蔡氏，在县亡。
现代文：孟襄，字宝称，元嘉十一年时当吴宁县令，他的妻子蔡氏在县里死了。
English: Meng Xiang, Zi Bao said that when Yuan Jia was 11 years old, when he was the county magistrate of Wu Ning County, his wife Cai died in the county.

古文：未几，忽有推窗打户，长啸歌吟，撒掷燥土。复于空中挥运刀矛，状欲加人。
现代文：没过多久，忽然有鬼怪来推门敲窗户，又叫又唱，还从空中往下撒干土，并在空中挥舞刀枪，看样子是要伤害人。
English: Not long after, a ghost suddenly came to the door and knocked on the window, shouting and singing, and also sprinkling dry soil from the air, and waving knives and guns in the air, looking like they wanted to hurt people.

古文：数数起火，或发箱箧之内，衣服焦而外不觉。
现代文：家里还失了好几次火，有时打开衣箱，见箱内的衣物都烧焦了，外面却一点也看不出来。
English: The house also caught fire several times. Sometimes I opened the wardrobe and saw that the clothes inside were charred, but I couldn't see anything on the outside.

古文：因假作蔡氏言语，一如平生。
现代文：有时鬼还模仿蔡氏说话，学得非常像。
English: Sometimes the ghosts also imitate Cai's speech, learning to be very similar.

古文：襄因问曰：卿何以短寿？
现代文：孟襄就问鬼：你为什么活得这么短命？
English: Meng Xiang asked the ghost: Why did you live such a short life?

古文：答曰：是天命耳。
现代文：鬼说，这是我命中注定了的。
English: The ghost said, this is my destiny.

古文：然有一罪，为女时曾宰一鸡，被录到地狱三日。
现代文：不过我曾犯过一个罪，在做姑娘时曾杀过一只鸡。为这罪我被罚，该到地狱里呆三天。
English: But I did commit a crime once, when I was a girl, I killed a chicken, and for that I was punished with three days in hell.

古文：闻人说，铸铜像者可免，因脱金指环一双以助之，故获解免。
现代文：后来听说铸铜像可以免罪，就把一双金指环捐助了，所以才免了下地狱的罪。
English: Later, when he heard that casting a bronze statue could absolve him of his sins, he donated a pair of gold rings, and was thus absolved of the sin of going to hell.

古文：时县有巫觋者，襄令召而看之，鬼即震惧。
现代文：当时县里有巫婆和男巫，孟襄就找来让他们看看是怎么回事。
English: At that time, there were witches and wizards in the county, and Meng Xiang went to find them to see what was going on.

古文：良久，巫者云：见二物，其一如豕，一似雄鸡，两目直监竖。
现代文：鬼一见巫婆和男巫就很害怕。过了半天，两巫说看见了两个怪物，一个像猪，另一个像公鸡，两眼直瞪瞪地。
English: When the ghosts saw the witch and the wizard, they were very scared. Half a day later, the two witches said they saw two monsters, one like a pig and the other like a rooster, their eyes staring at the ground.

古文：作亡人言是鸡形者。
现代文：学死去的蔡氏的，是那只像鸡的怪物。
English: It was the chicken-like monster that had learned from the dead Cai.

古文：时又有慧兰道人，善于呪术，即召之，令诵经呪。
现代文：当时还有个慧兰道人，善于唸咒驱鬼。孟襄就把道人请来，让他诵经唸咒。
English: At that time, there was also a Huilan Taoist who was good at chanting spells to drive away ghosts. Meng Xiang invited the Taoist to chant scriptures and chant spells.

古文：鬼初犹学之，有顷，失所在。
现代文：鬼一开始还学道人唸咒，不一会儿，就消失了。
English: At the beginning, the ghost was still studying Taoism and reciting mantras. Soon, it disappeared.

古文：司马文宣
现代文：司马文宣
English: Sima Wensun

古文：司马文宣，河内人也，颇信佛。
现代文：河内人司马文宣，虔诚地信佛。
English: Sima Wenxuan, a native of Hanoi, devoutly believes in Buddhism.

古文：元嘉元年，丁母艰。
现代文：元嘉元年，他的母亲去世。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, his mother passed away.

古文：弟丧数月，望旦，见其弟在灵座上，不异平日。
现代文：他的弟弟去世几个月后，一个十五的早上，司马文宣看见弟弟在灵座上，和活着时一模一样。
English: A few months after his brother's death, on the morning of the 15th, Sima Wenxuan saw his brother on the throne, exactly the same as when he was alive.

古文：回惶叹咤，讽求饮食。
现代文：弟弟长吁短叹东张西望，并要求给点吃喝。
English: His younger brother, Chang Xu, sighed and looked around, and asked for something to eat and drink.

古文：文宣试与言曰：汝平生勤修行善，若如经言，应得升天，或在人道，何故乃坠此鬼中。
现代文：文宣尝试着和鬼对话，就问他：照你活着时那样积德行善，如果按佛经上说的，应该升天当神仙，或者转世为人，怎么你竟落到当鬼的份上呢？
English: Wen Xuan tried to have a dialogue with the ghost, and asked him, "According to your accumulated virtue and good deeds when you were alive, if according to the Buddhist scriptures, you should ascend to heaven as a god or reincarnate as a human, how did you end up as a ghost?"

古文：即沉吟俯仰，默然无对。
现代文：鬼就哼哼呀呀支吾起来，后来就默默地不回答了。
English: The ghost just hemmed and hawed, hesitated, and then silently didn't answer.

古文：文宣即夕梦见其弟云：生所修善，蒙报生天。
现代文：这天夜里，文宣梦见他弟弟来说：我生前行善积德，已经得到了升天的好因果。
English: That night, Wen Xuan said in a dream to his younger brother: "I have done good deeds and accumulated virtues in my lifetime, and I have obtained the good cause and effect of ascending to heaven.

古文：灵床之鬼，是魔魅耳，非某身也。
现代文：在灵床上的那个鬼，是个妖怪，并不是我。
English: The ghost on the cot is a monster, not me.

古文：恐兄疑怪，故以白兄。
现代文：我怕哥哥你怀疑责怪我，特地来告诉你。
English: I'm afraid, brother, that you suspect that I'm to blame, so I've come specially to tell you.

古文：文宣明旦请僧转《首楞严经》，令人扑击之。
现代文：第二天早上，文宣请来和尚唸《首楞严经》，并叫人打鬼。
English: The next morning, Wen Xuan invited a monk to come and recite the Sutra of the Severed Head, and ordered someone to beat up the ghost.

古文：鬼乃逃入床下。又走户外，形稍丑恶，举家骇惧，詈叱遣之。鬼云：饥乞食耳，经日乃去。
现代文：鬼先是躲在床底下，又逃到门外，形象非常丑恶，把全家人都吓坏了，大家又喊又骂的追赶那鬼，鬼说：我不过是因为饿了来要些吃的罢了。
English: The ghost first hid under the bed, and then fled outside the door. The image was very ugly, and the whole family was terrified. Everyone chased the ghost, shouting and cursing. The ghost said, "I'm just hungry and wanted something to eat."

古文：顷之，母灵床头有一鬼。
现代文：过了几天这个鬼就走了。可是这个鬼刚走，文宣母亲的灵床上又来了一个鬼。
English: After a few days, the ghost left. However, just after the ghost left, another ghost came to the bed of Wen Xuan's mother.

古文：肤体赤色，身甚长壮。
现代文：这个鬼身材粗壮高大，全身都是红色。
English: The ghost is thick and tall, and his whole body is red.

古文：文宣长子孝祖与言，往反答对周悉。
现代文：文宣的大儿子孝祖和这个鬼谈话，向鬼提出些问题鬼都回答得很详细。
English: Wensun's eldest son, Xiao Zu, talked to the ghost and asked it some questions, which the ghost answered in detail.

古文：妆虽恐惧，久稍安习之。
现代文：起初家里人都挺怕这个鬼的，后来时间长了，大家渐渐有点习惯了。
English: At first, everyone in the family was very afraid of this ghost, but as time went on, everyone gradually got used to it.

古文：鬼亦转相附狎，居处出入，殆同家人。
现代文：鬼也变得和大家十分亲近，日常生活出出入入简直成了家里的成员了。
English: Ghosts have also become very close to everyone, entering and exiting daily life has become a member of the family.

古文：于京师转相报告，往来观者，门限迭迹。
现代文：京城里渐渐传开了这件事，就有不少人到文宣家里看这个鬼，把门坎都要踩平了。
English: Word gradually spread about this in the capital, and many people came to see this ghost in Wen Xuan's home, and they all had to step over the threshold.

古文：时南林寺有僧，与灵珠寺僧舍沙门，与鬼言伦，亦甚款曲。
现代文：当时南林寺有个和尚，还有灵珠寺的一个姓舍的和尚，一同来和这鬼谈话，互相间也十分融洽。
English: At that time, there was a monk from Nanlin Temple and a monk from Lingzhu Temple, both surnamed She, who came to talk to the ghost. They also got along well with each other.

古文：鬼云：昔世尝为尊贵，以犯众恶，受报未竞，果此鬼身。
现代文：鬼说：我前世曾是个身份高贵的人，因为在人间犯了不少罪，死后受报应得到的惩罚现在还没有结束，所以现在仍然是个鬼。
English: The ghost said, "In my previous life, I was a high-ranking person, because I committed a lot of sins in the human world. The punishment I should receive after death is not over yet, so I am still a ghost.

古文：云：寅年有四百部鬼，大行疾疠，所应罹灾者。
现代文：又说：寅年时将有四百群鬼到人世间大肆散播瘟疫，到那时凡是不信神拜佛的人都会遭到瘟灾。
English: He also said: In the Year of the Tiger, there will be four hundred groups of ghosts that will spread plagues to the human world. At that time, all those who do not believe in God and worship Buddha will be plagued.

古文：不悟道人耳，而犯横极众，多滥福善，故使我来监察之也，僧以食与之。鬼曰：我自有粮，不得进此食也。
现代文：那时候瘟疫会传播得非常广，不少积德行善的人免不了也会被误伤，所以派我来监督察询这件事。和尚给鬼东西吃，鬼说：我有我自己的粮食，不能吃的东西。
English: At that time, the plague would spread very widely, and many people who had accumulated virtue and did good deeds would inevitably be injured by mistake, so they sent me to supervise and investigate this matter. The monk gave the ghost something to eat, and the ghost said, "I have my own food, something I can't eat."

古文：舍曰：鬼多知，我生来何因作道人。
现代文：舍和尚说：鬼知道的事情多，能不能告诉我，我这辈子怎么成了出家人呢？
English: She Monk said: Ghosts know many things, can you tell me how I became a monk in this life?

古文：答曰：人中来，出家因缘，本誓愿也，问诸存亡生死所趣，略皆答对，具有灵验，条次繁多，故不曲载。
现代文：鬼回答说：出家人本来就是人世间的人，因为你自己的誓愿，你自然就出家修行了。又问了一些生死存亡的道理，鬼都简单扼要的回答了，而且说了一些很灵验的事，这里就不一一记载了。
English: The ghost replied, "A monk is originally a person from the human world, and because of your own vows, you naturally became a monk. I also asked some questions about the principles of life and death, and the ghost gave simple and concise answers, and said some very effective things, which are not recorded here.

古文：舍曰：人鬼道殊，汝既不求食，何为久留。
现代文：舍和尚说：人和鬼是两条不同的路，你到人间既然不是找吃的，怎么呆了这么久呢？
English: She Monk said, "People and ghosts are two different paths. Since you did not come to the human world to look for food, how did you stay so long?"

古文：鬼曰：此间有一女子，应在收捕。
现代文：鬼说：这里有一个女子，应该抓到阴间去。
English: The demon said, "There is a woman here who should be caught and taken to the underworld.

古文：而奉戒精勤，故难可得。
现代文：但这女子行善积德非常诚心，这是很难得的。
English: But it is rare to find a woman who is so sincere in her good deeds.

古文：比日稽留，因此故也。
现代文：我长时间在人间停留，就是因为这件事。
English: That's why I've stayed on earth for so long.

古文：籍乱主人，有愧不少。
现代文：我在这里给主人家添了不少麻烦，真是太抱歉了。
English: I'm so sorry for the trouble I've caused my host family here.

古文：自此以后，不甚见形。
现代文：从此以后，这个鬼就不常现形了。
English: From then on, the ghost did not appear very often.

古文：复往视者，但闻语耳。
现代文：一些到文宣家看鬼的人，只是能听见鬼说话而已。
English: Some people who come to see the ghosts in the Wensun family can only hear the ghosts talking.

古文：时之喜十年也。
现代文：当时是元嘉十年。
English: It was the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：至三月二十八日，语文宣云：暂来寄住，而汝倾家营福，见畏如此，那得久留。
现代文：到了三月二十八那天，鬼对文宣说：我只是暂时在你家住，可是你全家都祈求神的保佑，对我这样敬畏，我怎么能长住下去呢。
English: On the 28th day of March, the ghost said to Wen Xuan, "I'm only living in your house temporarily, but your whole family is praying for God's blessing, and they fear me so much, how can I stay longer?"

古文：孝祖云：听汝寄住，何故据人先亡灵筵耶。
现代文：孝祖说：你尽可以住，但为什么非要占据亡灵供桌上的位置不可呢？
English: Xiao Zu said, "You can live as long as you want, but why do you have to occupy a place on the table for the dead?

古文：答曰：汝家亡者，后有所属，此座空设，故权寄耳。
现代文：鬼回答说：你家死去的人，都有了自己的归属，这个灵座只是空设在那里的，所以我就暂且住下了。
English: The ghost replied, "The dead in your family all have their own place. This chair is just sitting there empty, so I'll stay here for the time being."

古文：于是辞去。
现代文：于是这个鬼就走了。
English: So he said goodbye and left.

古文：虞德严猛
现代文：虞德严猛
English: Yu De Yan Meng

古文：武陵龙阳虞德，流寓益阳，止主人夏蛮舍中。
现代文：武陵龙阳的虞德，旅行列益阳，住在主人夏蛮的家中。
English: Yu De from Wuling Longyang, a traveler from Yiyang, lives in the home of his master Xia Man.

古文：见有白纸一幅，长尺，标蛮女头，乃起扳取。
现代文：他看见有张一尺多长的白纸裹着夏蛮女儿的头，就把它取了下来。
English: He saw a piece of white paper, more than a foot long, wrapped around Xia's daughter's head and took it off.

古文：俄顷，有虎到户而退。
现代文：不一会儿，有一只老虎来到门口又退回去了。
English: Soon, a tiger came to the door and retreated.

古文：寻见何老母摽如初，德又取之，如斯三返。
现代文：顿时又看见何老母把那张纸又裹在夏蛮女儿的头上，虞德就又把纸拿下来，这样重复了几次后，虞德就告诉了夏蛮。
English: Suddenly, he saw how his mother wrapped the piece of paper around Xia Man's daughter's head, and Yu De took the paper off again. After repeating this several times, Yu De told Xia Man.

古文：乃具以语蛮，于是相与执杖侍候，须臾虎至，即共格之。
现代文：夏蛮就和虞德一齐拿着棍子守候在门口。不一会儿老虎又来了，两个人就一起和老虎格斗起来。
English: Xia Man and Yu De waited at the door with a stick. Soon, the tiger came again, and the two of them fought the tiger together.

古文：同县黄期，具说如此。
现代文：同县的黄期很详细的说过这件事。
English: The yellow period of the same county said this matter in detail.

古文：又会籍严猛，妇出采薪，为虎所害。
现代文：还有一件事是，会稽人严猛的妻子出去打柴，被老虎残害了。
English: Another thing is that the wife of a strict auditor went out to collect firewood and was killed by a tiger.

古文：后一年，猛行至蒿中，忽见妻云：君今日行，必遭不善，我当相免也。
现代文：第二年，严猛在草丛中走路时，他的妻子突然出现了，对他说：你今天出门一定会遇到祸事，不过我可以帮你免祸消灾。
English: The next year, when Yan Menglu was walking in the grass, his wife suddenly appeared and said to him: "You will definitely encounter a disaster when you go out today, but I can help you avoid the disaster."

古文：既而俱前，忽逢一虎，跳梁向猛。妇举手指撝，状如遮护。
现代文：说罢两人一起往前走，忽然遇到一只老虎，窜跳着向严猛扑过来，他妻子举起手来分开十指遮护着他的身子。
English: As soon as they said that, the two of them walked forward together. Suddenly, they encountered a tiger, which pounced on Yan with a jump. His wife held up her hand and covered his body with ten fingers.

古文：须臾，有二胡人前过，妇因指之，虎即击胡，婿得无他。
现代文：不一会儿，有两个胡人从面前走过，妻子就指他们，虎立刻扑向两个胡人，严猛终于平安无事。
English: After a while, two Hu people walked past, and the wife pointed at them. The tiger immediately pounced on the two Hu people, and Yan Meng was finally safe.

古文：郭庆之
现代文：郭庆之
English: Guo Qingzhi

古文：黄州治下，有黄父鬼，出则为崇。
现代文：黄州所辖地区有个黄父鬼，这鬼一出现就会作怪。
English: There is a yellow father ghost in the area under the jurisdiction of Huangzhou, and this ghost will do strange things as soon as it appears.

古文：所著衣袷皆黄，至人家，张口而笑，必得疫疠。
现代文：黄父鬼穿一身黄衣服，进了谁家以后就张开嘴笑，这家人就一定会得瘟疫。
English: The yellow father ghost wears yellow clothes, and if he opens his mouth to smile after entering someone's home, this family will definitely get the plague.

古文：长短无定，随篱高下。
现代文：这鬼高矮没有一定，随着住家的篱笆或高或矮。
English: The height of this ghost is not certain. It is as tall or short as the fence of the house.

古文：自不出已十余年，土俗畏怖。
现代文：当地人都非常怕黄父鬼。但这鬼已有十多年没出现了。
English: Locals are very afraid of the yellow father ghost. But this ghost has not appeared for more than ten years.

古文：庐陵人郭庆之，有家生婢，名采薇，年少有色。
现代文：庐陵人郭庆之家有一个仆人生的丫环，名叫采薇，年轻，长得也俊俏。
English: The Guo Qing family of Fuling has a servant maidservant named Cai Wei, who is young and pretty.

古文：宋孝建中，忽有一人，自称山灵。如人裸身，长丈余，臂脑皆有黄色，肤貌端洁。
现代文：宋孝建年间，忽然有一个人，自称是山灵，像人一样但全身赤裸，一丈多高，手臂和脑门上都有黄色，但皮肤洁净，相貌也很端正，说话也很标准。
English: During the Song and Xiao Jian era, there was suddenly a person who claimed to be a mountain spirit. He was like a human, but he was completely naked. He was very tall, with yellow on his arms and forehead, but his skin was clean, his appearance was very neat, and his speech was very standard.

古文：言音周正，土俗呼为黄父鬼。来通此婢，婢云，意事如人。
现代文：这就是当地人称的黄父鬼。这鬼来和丫环采薇私通，据采薇说，这鬼的一切都和人一样。
English: This is what the locals call the Yellow Father Ghost. This ghost came to fornicate with the maiden Tse Wei. According to Tse Wei, everything about this ghost is the same as humans.

古文：鬼遂数来，常隐其身，时或露形。
现代文：这个鬼经常来。
English: This ghost comes often.

古文：形变无常，乍大乍小。
现代文：但经常隐身。
English: But he often goes incognito.

古文：或似烟气，或为石，或作小儿或妇人，或如鸟如兽。
现代文：有时候也现形，但变化无常，有时大有时小，有时像一股烟，有时又变成一块石头。有时变成小孩、女子，有时又变成鸟或兽。
English: Sometimes it appears, but it is changeable, sometimes large, sometimes small, sometimes like a puff of smoke, sometimes it turns into a stone, sometimes it turns into a child or a woman, sometimes it turns into a bird or an animal.

古文：足迹如人，长二尺许，或似鹅迹，掌大如盘。
现代文：黄父鬼的脚印像人，但有二尺长。有时脚印又像鹅掌，有盘子那么大。
English: The yellow father ghost's footprints are human-like, but two feet long. Sometimes the footprints are like goose paws, as big as plates.

古文：开户闭牗，其入如神。与婢戏笑如人。
现代文：这鬼来时，会随意的开门关窗，象神一样不知鬼不觉地就进屋了，和采薇说笑调戏，也和人一样。
English: When the ghost came, it would open and close the doors and windows at will. Like a god, it entered the house unnoticed. It talked and joked with Ze Wei, just like a human.

古文：薄绍之薄绍之尝为减质参军，元嘉二十四年，寄居东府之西宾别宅中。
现代文：薄绍之薄绍之尝为减质参军，元嘉二十四年，寄居东府之西宾别宅中。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Yuan Jia's sojourn in the Xibinbei residence in Dongfu, he joined the army.

古文：与祖法开邻舍。
现代文：与祖法开邻舍。
English: Neighbors with the ancestors.

古文：开母刘，寝疾弥旬，以二十二年五月一日夜半亡。
现代文：开母刘，寝疾弥旬，以二十二年五月一日夜半亡。
English: His mother, Liu, who suffered from a chronic sleep disorder, died in the middle of the night on May 1st, 2002.

古文：二日，绍之见群鼠，大者如豚，鲜泽五色，或纯或驳，或著平上帻，或著笼头。
现代文：二日，绍之见群鼠，大者如豚，鲜泽五色，或纯或驳，或著平上帻，或著笼头。
English: On the second day, Shaozhong saw a group of rats, the largest of which was like a pig, with five colors, either pure or barbed, or with a flat beak, or with a caged head.

古文：大小百数，弥日累夜。
现代文：大小百数，弥日累夜。
English: Hundreds of sizes, day and night.

古文：至十九日黄昏，内屋四檐上有一白鼠，长二尺许，走入壁下，入处起火。
现代文：至十九日黄昏，内屋四檐上有一白鼠，长二尺许，走入壁下，入处起火。
English: At dusk on the 19th, a white rat, about two feet long, walked under the wall on the four eaves of the inner room and started a fire.

古文：以水灌之，火不灭，良久自灭。
现代文：以水灌之，火不灭，良久自灭。
English: If water is poured on it, the fire will not be extinguished, and it will self-extinguish after a long time.

古文：其夜见人，修壮赤色，身光如火，从烧壁中出，径入床下。
现代文：其夜见人，修壮赤色，身光如火，从烧壁中出，径入床下。
English: I saw him at night. He was a well-built, red-haired man with a body like fire. He emerged from the wall and went under the bed.

古文：又出壁外，虽隔一壁，当时光明洞彻，了不觉又隔障。
现代文：又出壁外，虽隔一壁，当时光明洞彻，了不觉又隔障。
English: Out of the wall again, although separated by a wall, at that time the light was too bright, and I was unconsciously separated by a barrier.

古文：四更，复有四人，或与绍之言相佑，或瞋目吐舌。
现代文：四更，复有四人，或与绍之言相佑，或瞋目吐舌。
English: Four more, four more, or with Shao's words, or with his eyes and tongue.

古文：自暮迄旦，后夕复烧屋。
现代文：自暮迄旦，后夕复烧屋。
English: From dusk until dawn, the restaurant is open again in the evening.

古文：有二人，长九尺许，骑马挟弓矢，宾从数十人，呼为将军。
现代文：有二人，长九尺许，骑马挟弓矢，宾从数十人，呼为将军。
English: There were two people, about nine feet long, riding horses with bows and arrows, accompanied by dozens of guests, calling for the general.

古文：绍之问： 汝行何向？ 
现代文：绍之问：汝行何向？
English: Shaozhi asked: Where are you headed?

古文：答云： 被使往东边病人还。 
现代文：答云：被使往东边病人还。
English: A: They were sent to the east to bring back patients.

古文：二十一日，群党又至。
现代文：二十一日，群党又至。
English: On the 21st, the gangs came again.

古文：家先有一白狗，自有鬼怪，暮常失之，至晓辄还。
现代文：家先有一白狗，自有鬼怪，暮常失之，至晓辄还。
English: At first, there was a white dog in the family, a ghost of its own, which was often lost in the twilight, and returned to Xiao Yao.

古文：尔夕试系之，须臾，有一女子来云： 忽系此狗，愿以见乞。 
现代文：尔夕试系之，须臾，有一女子来云：忽系此狗，愿以见乞。
English: On the evening of the test, there was a woman who came up to me and said, "I've just adopted this dog. I'd like to meet him."

古文：答便以相与，投绳竞不敢解，倏然走出。
现代文：答便以相与，投绳竞不敢解，倏然走出。
English: He replied that he agreed with her, but did not dare to solve the problem, and abruptly walked out.

古文：狗于是呻唤垂死，经日不能动。
现代文：狗于是呻唤垂死，经日不能动。
English: The dog then moaned and died, unable to move for days.

古文：有一人披锦袍，弯弧注镞，直向绍之。
现代文：有一人披锦袍，弯弧注镞，直向绍之。
English: One of them was dressed in a brocade robe, bowing and pointing straight ahead.

古文：谓： 汝是妖邪，敢干恐人。
现代文：谓：汝是妖邪，敢干恐人。
English: It means: You are evil and dare to terrorize people.

古文：我不畏汝，汝若不速去，令大道神寻收治汝。 
现代文：我不畏汝，汝若不速去，令大道神寻收治汝。
English: I'm not afraid of you. If you don't go soon, let the highway gods deal with you.

古文：鬼弛弦纵矢。
现代文：鬼弛弦纵矢。
English: The strings of the devil are slackening.

古文：策马而去。
现代文：策马而去。
English: He rode off.

古文：索万兴
现代文：索万兴
English: So Wanxing

古文：敦煌索万兴，昼坐厅事东间斋中，一奴子忽见一人著帻，牵一駾马，直从门入。
现代文：敦煌人索万兴，白天坐在公事房东边的书斋，他的仆人忽然看见一个戴头巾的人，牵着一匹青白杂色马进了大门。
English: The Dunhuang man, Suo Wanxing, was sitting in the study on the east side of the office building during the day, when his servant suddenly saw a man in a turban leading a blue-and-white horse into the gate.

古文：负一物，状如乌皮隐囊，置砌下，便牵马出行。
现代文：马身上驮着一件东西，看上去像一个黑色的皮包。那人把皮包扔一台阶下就牵着马出走了。
English: The horse was carrying something that looked like a black leather bag. The man threw the bag down a flight of steps and led the horse away.

古文：囊自轮转，径入斋中，缘床脚而上，止于兴膝前。
现代文：这时，只见那黑皮色自己转动起来，一直转进了书房，顺着床腿滚上来，停在索万兴的腿上。
English: At this time, I saw the black-skinned toad turning on its own, turning all the way into the study, rolling up along the leg of the bed, and stopping on So Wanxing's leg.

古文：皮即四处卷开，见其中周匝是眼，动瞬甚可憎恶。
现代文：接着，那黑皮包就自动从四边打开，只见里边周围全都是眼睛，每个眼睛都又眨巴又动弹，那样子十分可怕。
English: Then the black leather bag opened automatically on all four sides, and I saw that there were eyes all around inside, and each eye was blinking and moving, which was very scary.

古文：良久，又还更舒合，仍轮转下床，落砌而去。
现代文：过了半天，黑皮包又自动合上，仍然像车轮般骨碌下了床。转到门外台阶下又往西转去。
English: After half a day, the black leather bag closed again automatically, and still rolled down the bed like a wheel. Turned to the steps outside the door and turned west.

古文：兴令奴子逐至司厅事东头灭，恶之，因得疾亡。
现代文：索万兴叫仆人追那怪物，直追到办公房的东头就突然消失了。索万兴越想越憎恶，接着就得了病，很快就死了。
English: So Wanxing told his servants to chase the monster, and when they reached the east end of the office, it suddenly disappeared. So Wanxing hated it more and more, and then he fell ill and soon died.

古文：郭秀之
现代文：郭秀之
English: Guo Xiuzhi

古文：郭秀之，寓居海陵。宋元嘉二十九年，年七十三，病止堂屋。
现代文：郭秀之住在海陵，宋代元嘉二十九年时，他已七十三岁了，生病住在堂屋里。
English: Guo Xiuzhi lived in Hailing. When he was twenty-nine years old in the Song Dynasty, he was already seventy-three years old and lived in a courtyard house.

古文：北有大枣树，高四丈许。
现代文：堂屋北面有棵大枣树，有四丈多高。
English: To the north of the hall is a large jujube tree, more than four stories tall.

古文：小婢晨起，开户扫地，见枣树上有一人，修壮黑色，著皂幞帽，乌韦裤褶，手操弧矢，正立南面。
现代文：一天早晨，小丫环起来开门扫院子，看见枣树上有个人，又高又壮，全身漆黑，头戴黑布帽，穿黑色夹裤，手里拿着弓箭，面朝南直直地站着。
English: One morning, the little maidservant got up, opened the door and swept the yard. She saw a tall, strong man in the jujube tree, all in black, with a black cloth cap on his head, black trousers, and a bow and arrow in his hand, standing upright facing south.

古文：举家出看，见了了。
现代文：全家听说后都出来看，都看得很清楚，也没看出什么名堂。
English: When the whole family heard about it, they all came out to have a look. They all saw it very clearly, and didn't see anything special.

古文：秀之扶杖视之。此人谓秀之曰：仆来召君，君宜速装。
现代文：后来郭秀之从病休床上起来扶着拐棍也出来看，树上那人就对秀之说：我是来召你到阴间去的，你还是快准备行装上路吧。
English: Later, Guo Xiuzhi got up from his sick bed and held his crutch to see what was going on. The man in the tree said to Xiuzhi, "I have come to call you to the underworld. You better get ready to go and pack for the journey."

古文：日出便不复见，积五十三日如此，秀之亡后便绝。
现代文：太阳出来后，那个鬼就不见了，这样过了五十三天，天天如此，直到郭秀之去世，那鬼才不再来了。
English: After the sun came out, the ghost disappeared. This went on for fifty-three days, day after day, until Guo Xiuzhi passed away. The ghost never came back.

古文：庾季随
现代文：庾季随
English: 季随

古文：庾季随，有节概，膂力绝人。
现代文：庾季随是个很有气魄的大丈夫，有过人的力气。
English: He is a very spirited man, with superhuman strength.

古文：宋元嘉中，得疾昼卧。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，他得了病，白天躺在屋里床上。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, he fell ill and lay in bed indoors during the day.

古文：有白气如云，出于室内，高五尺许。
现代文：忽然有一股像云似的白气从屋里冒出来，有五尺多高。
English: Suddenly, a cloud-like white gas emerged from the room, more than five feet high.

古文：有顷，化为雄鸡，飞集别床。
现代文：不大会儿，白气变成了一只公鸡，飞到另外一个床上。
English: Not long after, Baiqi turned into a rooster and flew to another bed.

古文：季随斫之，应手有声，形即灭，地血滂流。
现代文：季随抄起刀向鸡砍去，随着刀声落地，那公鸡不见了，地下顿时鲜血横流。
English: With the sound of the knife falling to the ground, the rooster disappeared, and blood immediately began to flow.

古文：仍闻蛮妪哭声，但呼阿子，自远而来，径至血处。
现代文：接着就听见一个蛮子老妇的哭声，一边哭一边叫她的儿子，哭喊声由远而近，一直来到地上有血的地方。
English: Then came the wailing of a savage old woman, calling for her son as she wept, the wailing coming from far and near, all the way to where there was blood on the ground.

古文：季随复斫，有物类猴，走出户外，瞋目顾视季随，忽然不见。
现代文：季随挥刀又砍，那老妇变成一个像猴的怪物向门外逃去，还不时回头用眼睛瞪季随，突然就不见了。
English: The old woman turned into a monster resembling a monkey and fled out of the door. From time to time, she looked back and stared at Ji, and then suddenly disappeared.

古文：至晡，有二青衣小儿，直从门入，唱云：庾季随杀官！
现代文：到下午三四点钟时，有两个侍从小孩从大门外一直走进屋来，大叫说：庾季随杀了我家官人！
English: By three or four o'clock in the afternoon, two servant children had come into the house from outside the gate, shouting: "He killed my family's official!

古文：俄而有百余人，或黑衣，或朱衣，达屋，齐唤云：庾季随杀官！
现代文：顿时来了一百多人，有的穿黑衣，有的穿红衣，涌进屋后一齐大喊：庾季随杀害了我家官人！
English: Suddenly, more than a hundred people, some dressed in black, some in red, came rushing into the house, shouting in unison: "He killed my family's officials!

古文：季随挥刀大呼，鬼皆走出灭形，还步忽投寺中。
现代文：季随挥舞着刀也大喊大叫，鬼们立刻逃走不见了，很快又都跑进寺庙里了。
English: The ghosts immediately ran away and disappeared, and soon they all ran into the temple again.

古文：子勿失父所在，至寺，见父有鬼逐后，以皮囊收其气。
现代文：庾季随的儿子突然发现父亲没了，急忙赶到庙里去，看见有鬼紧追在他父亲身后，用皮袋子收他父亲的气，没过几天，庾季随就死了。
English: Xing Xizhu's son suddenly discovered that his father was gone, and hurried to the temple. He saw a ghost chasing after his father, and used a leather bag to collect his father's breath. A few days later, Xizhu died.

古文：申翼之
现代文：申翼之
English: Shen Yizhi

古文：广陵盛道儿，元嘉十四年亡，讬孤女于妇弟申翼之。
现代文：广陵人盛道儿，元嘉十四年去世。临死前把唯一的女儿托附给自己的小舅子申翼之。
English: Guangling's son, Sheng Dao, died in the 14th year of Yuan Jia. Before his death, he entrusted his only daughter to his brother-in-law, Shen Yulong.

古文：服阕，翼之以其女嫁北卿严齐息，寒门也，丰其礼赂始成。
现代文：办完丧事服孝期满后，申翼之把盛道儿的女儿嫁给了北卿严齐息。严齐息家境、门第都很寒微，化了大量的财礼贿赂申翼之，这门亲事才成。
English: After the completion of the funeral service and the expiration of the period of filial piety, Shen Yizhi married the daughter of Shen Diao to Beiqing Yan Qi. Yan Qi's family background and lineage were very poor, and a large amount of money and bribes were paid to Shen Yizhi to make this marriage happen.

古文：道儿忽室中怒曰：吾喘唾乏气，举门户以相讬，如何昧利忘义。结婚微族！
现代文：这天，申翼之突然听见死去的姐夫盛道儿在屋里大发脾气嚷道：我临死前只剩一口气的时候，郑重的把女儿托给了你，本指望你给她找一个门当户对的人家。你怎么竟昧着良心，见利忘义，为我女儿结了这么个贫家小户为亲呢？
English: On this day, Shen Yizhi suddenly heard his dead brother-in-law, Sheng Tao'er, lose his temper in the house and shouted, "When I had only one breath left before dying, I solemnly entrusted my daughter to you. I had expected you to find her a suitable family. How could you have such a poor family as a relative for my daughter with a bad conscience, seeing profit and forgetting righteousness?"

古文：翼大惶愧。
现代文：申翼之听了又害怕又惭愧。
English: After listening to Shen Yingzhi, he was both afraid and ashamed.

古文：王怀之
现代文：王怀之
English: Wang Huai Zhi

古文：王怀之，元嘉二十年，丁母忧。
现代文：元嘉二十年，王怀之的母亲去世了。
English: Twenty years after Yuan Jia, Wang Huai Zhi's mother passed away.

古文：葬毕，忽见□树上有妪，头戴大发，身服白罗裙，足不践柯，亭然虚立。
现代文：埋葬以后，忽然看见树上有一个老太婆，头戴大假发，身穿白罗裙，双脚并没有踩在树枝上，而是凌空站着。
English: After the burial, he suddenly saw an old woman in a tree, wearing a big wig and a white robe. Her feet did not step on the branches, but stood in the air.

古文：还家叙述，其女遂得暴疾，面仍变作向树杪鬼状。
现代文：王怀之回家后向家人说这件事后，他的女儿就突然得了急病，面孔变成了刚才树上那个老太婆的样子。
English: After Wang Huaiji went home and told his family about the incident, his daughter suddenly fell ill, and her face turned into that of the old woman on the tree.

古文：乃与麝香服之，寻如常。
现代文：王怀之就拿来一点麝香让女儿吃下去，女儿的面孔才恢复了原来的模样。
English: Wang Huizhi brought some fennel for her daughter to eat, and her daughter's face regained its original appearance.

古文：世云，麝香辟恶，此其验也。
现代文：世间都说麝香能避邪恶，这就是一个很灵验的例证。
English: It is said that musk can ward off evil, and this is a good example.

古文：柳叔伦
现代文：柳叔伦
English: Liu Shulun

古文：宋孝武大明初，太尉柳叔伦，住故衡阳王故第。
现代文：宋代孝武帝大明初年，太尉柳叔伦住在已去世的衡阳王的旧府宅。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign in the Song Dynasty, Lieutenant Liu Shulun lived in the old mansion of the deceased King Hengyang.

古文：大明五年，忽见一脚迹，长二寸。
现代文：大明五年时，有一天柳叔伦忽然在地上看到一个脚印，只有两寸长。
English: When Daming was five years old, one day Liu Shulun suddenly saw a footprint on the ground, only two inches long.

古文：伦有婢细辛，使取水浣衣，空中有物，倾器倒水。
现代文：柳叔伦有个使女叫细辛，当她去打水洗衣服时，听见空中有个怪物把一盆水倒了下来。
English: Liu Shulun had a maid named Xie Xin. When she went to fetch water to wash clothes, she heard a monster in the sky pour down a basin of water.

古文：伦拔刀呼婢，在侧闻有物行声，以刀斫之，觉有所中。
现代文：柳叔伦就抽出刀来招呼使女，就听得身旁有怪物走路的声音，用刀猛砍下去，觉得砍中了。
English: Liu Shulun took out his knife to greet the maidservant, and heard the sound of a monster walking nearby. He slashed down with his knife, feeling that he had hit the mark.

古文：以火照之，流血覆地。
现代文：拿灯来一照，地上全是血。
English: Shine a light on it. There's blood all over the floor.

古文：后二十日，婢病死。
现代文：过了二十天，使女细辛得病死了。
English: After twenty days, the maidservant became so ill that she died.

古文：伦即移尸出外，明日觅尸，不知所在。
现代文：柳叔伦就把细辛的尸体挪到外面去。第二天再去看，尸体却不知哪里去了。
English: Liu Shulun then moved Xie Xin's body outside. He went to see it again the next day, but he didn't know where the body had gone.

古文：刘廓
现代文：刘廓
English: Liu Kuo

古文：宋沈攸之在镇，朱道珍尝为孱陵令，刘廓为荆州户曹，各相并居江陵，皆好围棋，日夜相就。
现代文：宋代时，沈攸之当镇守使，朱道珍曾当孱陵令，刘廓当荆州户曹。这三个官户都住在江陵，都喜欢下围棋，常常不分昼夜的聚在一起下棋。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Shen Youzhi was the town guard, Zhu Daozhen was the governor of Fuling, and Liu Guo was the governor of Jingzhou. These three officials all lived in Jiangling. They all liked to play Go, and often gathered together day and night to play the game.

古文：道珍元徽三年六日亡，至数月，廓坐斋中，忽见一人，以书授廓云，朱孱陵书。
现代文：朱道珍在元徽三年某月六日去世。过了几个月，有一天刘廓在屋里坐着，忽然来了一个人拿着一封信交给刘廓说，这是朱道珍给你的信。
English: Zhu Daozhen died on the 6th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the Yuan Dynasty. A few months later, one day, Liu Kuo was sitting in the house, and suddenly a person came with a letter and handed it to Liu Kuo, saying, "This is Zhu Daozhen's letter to you."

古文：题云：每思棋聚，非意致阔。
现代文：刘廓打开信，见信上写道，经常想起咱们在一起下棋的美好往事，如今我们相隔太远无法实现。
English: Liu Kuo opened the letter and saw that it said, "I often think of the wonderful past when we played chess together, but now we are too far apart to achieve it."

古文：方有来缘，想能近顾。
现代文：但我俩有缘相会，我想最近就能见到你了。
English: But we have a predestined meeting, I think I can see you recently.

古文：廓读毕，失信所在，寝疾寻卒。
现代文：刘廓读完了信，信就忽然消失了。
English: After Liu Kuo finished reading the letter, it suddenly disappeared.

古文：王瑶
现代文：不久刘廓就病死了。
English: Wang Yao

古文：王瑶，宋大明三年，在都病亡。
现代文：王瑶宋朝大明三年，王瑶在京城病故。
English: In the third year of the Song Dynasty, Wang Xi died of illness in Beijing.

古文：瑶亡后，有一鬼，细长黑色，袒著犊鼻褌，恒来其家。
现代文：王瑶死后，有一个鬼，细高个儿，浑身黑色，上身光着，下穿一条犊鼻形裤子。
English: After Wang Yao's death, there was a ghost, a slender man, all in black, with his upper body naked and wearing a pair of beak-shaped trousers.

古文：或歌啸，或学人语。常以粪秽投入食中，又于东邻庾家犯触人。
现代文：这个鬼常常到王瑶家来，有时唱歌，有时大叫，有时学人说话，还常常把粪便等脏东西扔进食物里。后来这鬼又跑到王瑶家的东面邻居庾家去祸害人，和在王家一模一样。
English: This ghost often came to Wang Yao's house, sometimes singing, sometimes shouting, sometimes learning to speak, and often throwing feces and other filth into the food. Later, this ghost ran to Wang Yao's eastern neighbor, the Yao family, to harm people, just like the Wang family.

古文：不异王家时，庾语鬼：以土石投我，了非所畏，若以钱见掷，此真见困。
现代文：庾某就对鬼说：你拿泥土石块打我，我才不怕呢。你要是拿钱打我，那我可真受不了。
English: Yan Mou said to the ghost: "If you hit me with dirt and stones, I won't be afraid. If you hit me with money, then I really can't stand it."

古文：鬼便以新钱数十，飞掷庾额。
现代文：鬼就拿了几十个新钱打下来，正打在庾某的额头上。
English: The ghost then took dozens of new money and knocked it down, hitting Xing Mou on the forehead.

古文：庾复言：新钱不能令痛，唯畏乌钱耳。
现代文：庾某又说，新钱打不痛我，我只怕旧钱。
English: Zou also said that the new money can't hurt me, I'm only afraid of the old money.

古文：鬼以乌钱掷之，前后六七过，合得百余钱。
现代文：鬼就拿旧钱打庾某，前后打了六七次，庾某一共得了一百余钱。
English: The ghost took the old money to hit someone, hit him six or seven times back and forth, and got a total of more than one hundred money.

古文：王文明
现代文：王文明
English: Wang Wenming

古文：王文明，宋太始末江安令。
现代文：王文明，宋代太始末年任江安县县令。
English: Wang Wenming was the county magistrate of Jiang'an County at the end of the first year of the Song Dynasty.

古文：妻久病，女于外为母作粥，将熟，变而为血。
现代文：他的妻子得病已经很久了，他的女儿在外面给母亲作粥。粥快熟的时候，忽然变成了血。
English: His wife had been ill for a long time, and his daughter was outside making porridge for her mother. When the porridge was nearly ready, it suddenly turned into blood.

古文：其后儿女在灵前哭，忽见其母卧灵床上，如平生，诸儿号戚，奄然而灭。
现代文：女儿把血倒掉又重新作粥，粥又变成了血，她母亲很快就死去了。后来，儿女们在母亲的灵前哭丧，忽然看见母亲躺在灵床上，像活着的时候一样。儿女们哭得更悲痛了，但母亲又突然消失。
English: The daughter poured the blood away and made porridge again, and the porridge turned into blood, and her mother soon died. Later, the children cried in front of their mother's spirit, and suddenly saw their mother lying on the spirit bed, as if she were alive. The children cried more sadly, but their mother suddenly disappeared again.

古文：文明先爱其妻所使婢，妊身将产。
现代文：王文明过去曾和他妻子的丫环有私情，丫环已怀了孕将要临产。
English: In the past, Wang Wenming had an affair with his wife's maidservant. The maidservant was pregnant and about to give birth.

古文：葬其妻日，使婢守屋，余人悉诣墓所。
现代文：妻子出殡那天，让丫环看家，其他人都一块到基地去了。
English: On the day of his wife's funeral, he asked the maid to look after the house, and everyone else went to the base together.

古文：部伍始发，妻便入户打婢。
现代文：送殡的人们刚刚走出去，王文明已死的妻子就跑进屋里痛打那丫环。
English: The funeral procession had just left when Wang Fuming's dead wife ran into the house and beat up the maid.

古文：其后诸女为父办食，杀鸡，割洗已竟，鸡忽跳起，轩道长鸣。
现代文：后来，王文明的女儿们为他做饭，杀了鸡之后把鸡都褪净切好了，那鸡竟突然活了，而且跳起来昂首打起鸣来。
English: Later, Wang Wenming's daughters were cooking for him. After killing the chicken, they cut it into pieces. The chicken suddenly came to life and jumped up, head held high, and began to sing.

古文：文明寻卒，诸男相续丧亡。
现代文：王文明很快就死了，他的儿女们也都陆续死去。
English: King Wenming died soon after, and his sons and daughters also died one after another.

古文：夏侯文规
现代文：夏侯文规
English: Xia Hou Wenzhou

古文：夏侯文规居京，亡后一年，见形还家，乘犊车，宾从数十人，自云北海太守。
现代文：住在京城的夏侯文规，死后一年现形回家，坐着牛车，带着几十个随从，自己说已当上了阴界的北海太守。
English: Xia Houwen Gui, who lived in Beijing, returned home one year after his death, sitting in an ox cart, with dozens of followers. He said that he had become the ruler of the North Sea in the underworld.

古文：家设馔，见所饮食，当时皆尽，去后器满如故。
现代文：家里人为他设下了祭祀的酒饭，摆好后不一会儿饭食就光了，等他走后，碗碟里的食物又是满满的了。
English: His family set up a sacrificial feast for him, but soon after it was set up, the food ran out. After he left, the food in the bowl was full again.

古文：家人号泣，文规曰：勿哭，寻便来。
现代文：当时家里的人都悲痛地哭号着，夏侯文规说：别哭，我很快还会再来的。
English: At that time, everyone in the family was crying with grief. Xia Houwen said: "Don't cry, I'll be back soon."

古文：或一月或四五十日辄来，或停半日。
现代文：从此以后，每隔一个月或四五十天，夏侯文规就回家一次，有时来家后能停留半天。
English: From then on, every month or forty or fifty days, Xia Houwen Gui would come home once, and sometimes he could stay for half a day after coming home.

古文：其所将赤衣驺导，形皆短小，坐息篱间及厢屋中，不知文规当去时，家人每呼令起，玩习不为异物。
现代文：他带来的穿红衣服的马夫和开道的侍从个子都十分矮小，坐在篱笆间或厢房里休息。家里人不知道夏侯文规什么时候走，就招呼那些马夫和随从，跟他们在一起游戏玩耍，一点也没把他们当成鬼怪。
English: The red-clad groom and groomsmen he brought with him were all very short, and they sat between the fences or rested in the cabin. The family members did not know when Xia Houwen Gui would leave, so they invited those groomsmen and attendants and played games with them. They did not think of them as ghosts at all.

古文：文规有数岁孙，念之抱来，其左右鬼神抱取以进。
现代文：夏侯文规有一个才几岁的孙子，非常想念，让人抱来看看。他左右的鬼神就把小孙子抱来交给他。
English: Xia Houwen Gui has a grandson who is only a few years old. He misses him very much. Let people hold him and look at him. The ghosts and gods around him hold the little grandson and give it to him.

古文：此儿不堪鬼气，便绝，不复识之，文规索水噀之，乃醒。
现代文：小孙子由于太小受不了鬼的阴气，一下子就断了气，不认得人了，文规就要来水喷了下去，那孩子才苏醒过来。
English: As the little grandson was too young to bear the gloomy air of the ghost, he suddenly lost his breath and did not recognize anyone. The writing was about to be sprayed with water, and only then did the child wake up.

古文：见庭中桃树，乃曰：此桃我所种，子甚美好。
现代文：夏侯文规看见院子里的桃树就说：这棵桃树是我种的，结的桃子很好吃。
English: When Xia Houwen Gui saw the peach tree in the courtyard, he said, "I planted this peach tree, and the peaches are delicious."

古文：其妇曰：人言亡者畏桃，君何为不畏？
现代文：他的妻子就问他：都说鬼最怕桃树，你怎么不怕呢？
English: His wife asked him, "They say ghosts are most afraid of peach trees. Why aren't you afraid?"

古文：答曰：桃东南枝长二尺八寸，向日者憎之，或亦不畏。
现代文：夏侯文规说：桃树上东南朝着太阳的树枝长二尺八寸的，我很讨厌，但不一定害怕。
English: Xia Houwen Gui said: I am disgusted by the two-foot-eight-inch-long branches on the southeast of the peach tree facing the sun, but I am not necessarily afraid.

古文：见地有蒜壳，令拾去之，观其意，似憎蒜而畏桃也。
现代文：夏侯文规看见地上有蒜皮，就让家里人拾起来扔出去。看他的意思，好像是讨厌蒜，也害怕桃树。
English: When Xia Houwen Gui saw the garlic skin on the ground, he asked his family members to pick it up and throw it away. It seems that he hates garlic and is also afraid of peach trees.

