古文：萧、曹、丙、魏、房、杜、姚、宋为汉、唐名相，不待诵说。
现代文：萧何、曹参、丙言、魏相、房玄龄、杜如晦、姚崇、宋璟为汉唐名相，不用歌颂。
English: Xiao He, Cao San, Cui Yan, Wei Xiang, Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao, Yao Chong, and Song Xi are famous emperors of the Han and Tang Dynasties, and there is no need to praise them.

古文：然前六君子皆终于位，而姚、宋相明皇，皆不过三年。
现代文：然前六位君子终身任宰相之职，而姚崇宋璟在唐明皇时任宰相，都不到三年。
English: Of course, the previous six gentlemen held the post of prime minister for life, while Yao Chong Song Yi served as prime minister under Emperor Tang Ming for less than three years.

古文：姚以二子及亲吏受赂，其罢犹有说，宋但以严禁恶钱及疾负罪而妄诉不已者，明皇用优人戏言而罢之，二公终身不复用，宋公罢相时，年才五十八，后十七年乃薨。继之者如张嘉贞、张说、源乾曜、王睃、宇文融、裴光庭、萧嵩、牛仙客，其才可睹矣。
现代文：姚崇因为自己两个儿子及亲信小吏收贿赂被罢相，事出有因。宋璟仅仅因为严厉禁止劣质的钱币及嫉恶如仇，没有停止上诉，唐明皇因优人的一句戏言而罢掉了他的宰相之位，姚崇、宋璟二人终身再没被起用。宋璟罢相时，年仅五十八岁，过了十七年才死去，后继为相的，如张嘉贞、张说、源乾曜、王睃、宇文融、裴光庭、萧嵩、牛仙客，他们的才能显而易见。
English: There was a reason why Yao Chong was ousted from the position of prime minister because his two sons and trusted minor officials took bribes. Song Xi did not stop his appeal only because of the strict prohibition of inferior money and jealousy. Emperor Tang Ming ousted him from the position of prime minister because of a good joke. Yao Chong and Song Xi were not appointed for life. When Song Xi was ousted from the position of prime minister, he was only 58 years old. It took 17 years for him to die. His successors, such as Zhang Jiazhen, Zhang Xie, Yuan Qianyou, Wang Hui, Wu Wenyong, Pei Guangting, Xiao Tong,

古文：唯杜暹、李元纮为贤，亦清介龊龊自守者。
现代文：只有杜暹、李元纮可称为圣贤，也是廉洁奉公、刚正不阿的人。
English: Only Du Siam and Li Yuanjun can be called sages, and they are also people who serve the public with integrity and are upright.

古文：释骐骥而不乘，焉皇皇而更索，可不惜哉！
现代文：放弃骏马而不骑，怎么急急忙忙而改弦更张，真可惜啊！
English: It's a shame to give up the steed and not ride it, and then change tack in a hurry!

古文：萧何且死，所推贤唯曹参；魏、丙同心辅政；房乔每议事，必曰非如晦莫能筹之；姚崇避位，荐宋公自代。
现代文：萧何将死，所推荐的贤人只有曹参；魏相、丙吉同心协力，辅佐国政；房玄龄每次商讨国事，必说没有杜如晦参加不能筹划决策；姚崇退避相位之时，推荐宋璟代替自已。
English: When Xiao He was about to die, only Cao San was recommended as a wise man; Wei Xiang and Bo Jie made concerted efforts to support state affairs; Fang Xuanling discussed state affairs every time, and it must be said that he could not plan decision-making without Du Ruxu; when Yao Chong retreated from the scene, he recommended Song Tao to replace himself.

古文：唯贤知贤，宜后人之莫及也。
现代文：唯贤知贤，后人望之莫及啊！
English: Meritocracy, meritocracy, posterity is beyond hope!

