古文：汉高祖五年，以长沙、豫章、象郡、桂林、南海立番君吴芮为长沙王。
现代文：汉高祖五年的时候，用长沙、豫章、象郡、桂林、南海数郡之地册立番君吴芮作长沙王。
English: When Emperor Gaozu was five years old, he used the land registers of Changsha, Yuzhang, Xiang County, Guilin, and several counties in the South China Sea to establish the king of Changsha.

古文：十二年，以三郡封吴王濞，而豫章亦在其中。又赵佗先有南海，后击桂林、象郡。
现代文：十二年，用包括豫章在内的其中三郡册封了吴王刘濞，又加上赵佗原先有南海，后来又攻占了桂林、象郡。
English: In the twelfth year, Wu King Liu Bei was crowned with three of the counties, including Yu Zhang. In addition, Zhao Bei originally had the South China Sea, and later conquered Guilin and Xiang County.

古文：则芮所有，但长沙一郡耳。
现代文：那么，吴芮所占据之地，仅长沙一郡罢了。
English: So, the place occupied by Wu Gan is only one county in Changsha.

古文：按芮本为秦番阳令，故曰番君。
现代文：据查吴芮本来是秦时番阳县县令，所以称番君。
English: According to the investigation, Wu Yao was originally the county magistrate of Panyang County during the Qin Dynasty, so he was called Banjun.

古文：项羽已封为衡山王，都邾。
现代文：项羽已经把他封为衡山王，建都于邾。
English: Xiang Yu had already made him the king of Hengshan, and the capital was built in Zeng.

古文：邾，今之黄州也。复侵夺其地。故高祖徙之长沙而都临湘，一年薨，则其去番也久矣。
现代文：邾，就是现在的黄州，后来又侵占夺取了他的土地所以汉高祖把他迁移到长沙做了长沙王，都于临湘，一年就死了，那么，他离开番阳已经很久了。
English: So Han Gaozhu moved him to Changsha and made him the king of Changsha. He lived in Linxiang and died a year later. So, it's been a long time since he left Panyang.

古文：今吾邦犹指郡正厅为吴王殿，以谓芮为王时所居。
现代文：可是现在找家乡的人还指认郭府官署的正厅为吴王殿，把它说成是吴芮为王时所居住的。
English: However, people looking for their hometowns now also identify the main hall of the Guofu government office as the Wu Wang Dian, saying that it was where Wu Gan lived when he was king.

古文：牛僧孺《玄怪录》载，唐元和中，饶州刺史齐推女，因止州宅诞育，为神人击死，后有仙官治其事，云： 是西汉鄱阳王吴芮，今刺史宅，是芮昔时所居。 
现代文：牛僧孺《玄怪录》记载：唐代元和年间，饶州刺史齐推的女儿，因为宿止在州府官宅里生小孩，被神人击死，后来有道士办理这件事，说： 这是西汉邹阳王吴芮为祟，现在的刺史官宅，是吴芮过去的居住地。 
English: It is recorded in the "Xuan Wei Lu" that during the Yuan and Zhou dynasties of the Tang Dynasty, the daughter of the governor of Raozhou, Shishi Qidul, was killed by a godman because she had a baby while staying in the official residence of the state government. Later, a Taoist priest handled the matter, saying: This is the curse of the Western Han Dynasty's King Wu Xi, the current official residence of Shishi, is the former residence of Wu Xi.

古文：皆非也。
现代文：这都是错的。
English: It's all wrong.

