古文：海内东北陬以南者。
现代文：海内东经所记载的是东北角以南的地方。
English: It is the area south of the northeast corner that is recorded by the Maritime and Eastern Economic Research Institute.

古文：钜燕在东北陬。
现代文：大燕国在海内的东北角。
English: Dayan is located in the northeast corner of the sea.

古文：国在流沙中者埻端、玺㬇，在昆仑虚东南。
现代文：在流沙中的国家有埻端国、玺㬇国，它们都在昆仑山的东南面。
English: The countries in the quicksand are Shantou and Shandong, both of which are in the southeast of Mount Kunlun.

古文：一曰海内之郡，不为郡县，在流沙中。
现代文：另一种说法认为埻端国和玺㬇国是在海内建置的郡，不把它们称为郡县，是因为处在流沙中的缘故。
English: Another view is that the provinces of Shantang and Shandong are counties built in the sea, and they are not called counties because they are in quicksand.

古文：国在流沙外者，大夏、竖沙、居繇、月支之国。
现代文：流沙以外的国家，有大夏国、竖沙国、居繇国、月支国。
English: In addition to the Quicksand countries, there are the Daxia countries, the Quicksand countries, the Juye countries, and the Yue countries.

古文：西胡白玉山在大夏东，苍梧在白玉山西南，皆在流沙西，昆仑虚东南。
现代文：位于西胡境内的白玉山在大夏的东边，苍梧山在白玉山的西南边，都在流沙的西边，昆仑山的东南边。
English: Baiyushan, located in the territory of Xihu, is on the east side of Daxia Mountain, and Cangwu Mountain is on the southwest side of Baiyushan Mountain. Both are on the west side of Quicksand and on the southeast side of Kunlun Mountain.

古文：昆仑山在西胡西。皆在西北。
现代文：昆仑山在西胡的西边，它们都在西北地区。
English: Kunlun Mountain is west of Xihu, and they are all in the northwest region.

古文：雷泽中有雷神，龙首而人头，鼓其腹。
现代文：雷泽中有一位雷神，长着龙的身子人的脑袋，只要敲击自己的腹部，便会发出雷声。
English: Among the thunderers, there is a thunder god with the head of a man with the body of a dragon. As long as he taps his abdomen, he will emit thunder.

古文：在吴西。
现代文：雷泽在吴地的西面。
English: Reze is in the west of Wudi.

古文：都州在海中。
现代文：都州在海里。
English: The capital is in the sea.

古文：一曰郁州。
现代文：一种说法认为都州叫做郁州。
English: One theory is that the capital city is called Ikushu.

古文：琅邪台在渤海间，琅邪之东。
现代文：琅邪山位于渤海与海岸之间，在琅邪台的东面。
English: Zhiyang Mountain is located between the Bohai Sea and the coast, in the east of Zhiyang Plateau.

古文：其北有山，一曰在海间。
现代文：琅邪台的北面有座山。另一种说法认为琅邪山在海中。
English: There is a mountain to the north of Liyang Mountain. Another view is that Liyang Mountain is in the sea.

古文：韩雁在海中，都州南。
现代文：韩雁在海中，又在都州的南面。
English: The wild goose is in the sea and in the south of the capital.

古文：始鸠在海中，辕厉南。
现代文：始鸠在大海中，位于辕厉的南边。
English: Shiqiao is in the sea, on the south side of Qili.

古文：会稽山在大楚南。
现代文：会稽山位于大楚国的南边。
English: Mount Kechizan is located in the southern part of the Greater Chu Kingdom.

古文：岷三江：首大江出汶山，北江出曼山，南江出高山。
现代文：从岷山中流出三条江，首先长江从汶山流出，再次北江从曼山流出，还有南江从高山流出。
English: Three rivers flow out of the Lushan Mountains. First, the Yangtze River flows out of the Wenshan Mountains, the Beijiang River flows out of the Manshan Mountains, and the Nanjiang River flows out of the Gaoshan Mountains.

古文：高山在城都西。
现代文：高山坐落在城都的西面。
English: Takayama is located in the west of the city.

古文：入海，在长州南。
现代文：三条江水汇合后向东流淌，最终注入大海，入海处在通州的南面。
English: After the confluence of the three rivers, it flows to the east and eventually flows into the sea, entering the sea in the south of Tongzhou.

古文：浙江出三天子都，在其东。在闽西北，入海，余暨南。
现代文：浙浙江发源于三天子都山，位于蛮人居住地的东边，福建的西北，在余暨的南边入海。
English: Zhejiang Zhejiang originated from the Three Sons Mountain, located in the east of the barbarian settlement, northwest of Fujian, and entered the sea in the south of Yujing.

古文：庐江出三天子都，入江，彭泽西。
现代文：庐江发源于三天子都山，在彭泽西边流入长江。
English: The Lijiang River originates from San San Zi Du Mountain and flows into the Yangtze River at the edge of Peng Jie.

古文：一曰天子鄣。
现代文：一说三天子都即天子鄣。
English: It is said that all three sons are sons of heaven.

古文：淮水出馀山，馀山在朝阳东，义乡西，入海淮浦北。
现代文：淮水从馀山发源，馀山坐落在朝阳的东面，义乡的西面。淮水最终注入大海，入海处在淮浦的北面。
English: Huai Water originates from Yu Mountain, which is located in the east of Chaoyang and the west of Yixiang. Huai Water is finally injected into the sea, and it enters the sea in the north of Huai Pu.

古文：湘水出舜葬东南陬，西环之，入洞庭下。
现代文：湘水从帝舜葬地的东南角发源，然后向西环绕流去。湘水最终注入洞庭湖下游。
English: The Honshu water originates from the southeast corner of the Imperial Burial Ground, and then flows around to the west. The Honshu water is finally injected into the lower reaches of Dongting Lake.

古文：一曰东南西泽。汉水出鲋鱼之山，帝颛顼葬于阳，九嫔葬于阴，四蛇卫之。
现代文：汉水发源于鲋鱼山，帝颛顼葬在这座山的阳面，他的九位嫔妃葬在山的阴面，有四条蛇守卫在那里。
English: Han Shui originated from the Eel Mountain. Emperor Qianlong was buried on the sunny side of the mountain, and his nine concubines were buried on the shady side of the mountain, guarded by four snakes.

古文：濛水出汉阳西，入江，聂阳西。
现代文：濛水发源于汉阳的西边，在聂阳的西边流入长江。
English: Surabaya's water originates in the west of Hanyang and flows into the Yangtze River in the west of Surabaya.

古文：温水出崆峒，山在临汾南，入河，华阳北。
现代文：温水发源于崆峒山，位于临汾的南边，在华阳的北边流入黄河。
English: The warm water originates from Lushan, located in the south of Linyi, and flows into the Yellow River in the north of Huayang.

古文：颍水出少室，少室山在雍氏南，入淮西鄢北。
现代文：颍水发源于少室山，少室山在雍氏的南边，颍水在淮河流域的西边、鄢陵的北边流入淮河。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Mount Shomuro. Mount Shomuro is on the south side of Mount Yong. Surabaya's water flows into the Huai River on the west side of the Huai River basin and on the north side of Fuling.

古文：一曰缑氏。
现代文：一说雍氏即缑氏。
English: Saying the Yong clan means the Gong clan.

古文：白水出蜀，而东南注江，入江州城下。
现代文：白水发源于蜀山，向东南流到江南流到江州城下后入长江。
English: Baishui originates from Shushan, flows southeast to the south of the Yangtze River to the city of Jiangzhou and then enters the Yangtze River.

古文：沅水山出象郡镡城西，入东注江，入下隽西，合洞庭中。
现代文：沅水发源于象郡镡城的西边，在下隽的西边流入洞庭湖，向东流入长江。
English: Surabaya's water originates in the west of the city of Surabaya in the county of Xiang, flows into Dongting Lake on the west side of the lower estuary, and flows into the Yangtze River to the east.

古文：肄水出临晋西南，而东南注海，入番禺西。
现代文：肄水发源于临武西南，向东南流经番禺西边后入海。
English: Surabaya's water originates in the southwest of Linwu and flows southeast through the western side of Panyu before entering the sea.

古文：潢水出桂阳西北山，东南注肄水，入敦浦西。
现代文：潢水发源于桂阳西北的山中，向东南流经敦浦西边入肄水。
English: Surabaya Water originates in the mountains northwest of Guiyang and flows southeast through the west side of Dunpu into Surabaya Water.

古文：洛水出洛西山，东北注河，入成皋之西。
现代文：洛河发源于洛阳西部的山，向东北流经成皋的西边入黄河。
English: The Luo River originates from the mountains in the west of Luoyang and flows northeast through the west of Chengdu into the Yellow River.

古文：汾水出上窳北，而西南注河，入皮氏南。
现代文：汾水发源于上窳的北面，向西南流经皮氏的南边入黄河。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the north of Shangri-La and flows to the southwest through the south of Pi into the Yellow River.

古文：沁水出井陉山东，东南注河，入怀东南。
现代文：沁水发源于井陉山的东面，向东南流经怀县的东南入黄河。
English: The Surabaya River originates in the eastern side of the Jinglishan Mountain and flows southeast through the southeast of Huai County into the Yellow River.

古文：济水出共山南东丘，绝钜鹿泽，注渤海，入齐琅槐东北。
现代文：济水发源于共山南面的东丘，穿过巨野泽，流经齐地琅槐的东北入渤海。
English: Jishui originates from the eastern hill in the south of the whole mountain, passes through Konozawa, and flows through the northeast of Qiidi into the Bohai Sea.

古文：潦水出卫皋东，东南注渤海，入潦阳。
现代文：潦水发源于卫皋的东面，向东南流经潦阳入渤海。
English: The Surabaya water originates from the eastern side of the Weihai River and flows southeast through the city of Surabaya into the Surabaya Sea.

古文：虖沱水出晋阳城南，而西至阳曲北，而东注渤海，入越章武北。
现代文：虖沱河发源于晋阳城的南边，西流至阳曲县的北边，再向东流经章武的北边入渤海。
English: The Min River originates in the south of Jinyang City, flows west to the north of Yangqu County, and then flows east through the north of Zhangwu into the Bohai Sea.

古文：漳水出山阳东，东注渤海，入章武南。
现代文：漳河发源于山阳的东面，向东流经章武的南边入渤海。
English: The Lugu River originates in the east of Shanyang and flows eastward through the south of Zhangwu into the Bohai Sea.

