古文：昔者元胎无象，太素流形，对越在天，以为元首，则《记》所谓冬居营窟，夏居橧巢，饮血茹毛，未有麻丝者也。
现代文：远古的时候，原始事物没有外在的形象，构成宇宙的各种物质，与上天相配相称，成为万物之始。正如《记》上所说，冬天居住在洞穴土室中，夏天居住在柴薪筑就的巢室内，茹毛饮血，一无麻丝之类蔽体之衣。
English: In ancient times, primitive things did not have an external image, and the various substances that make up the universe were compatible with the heavens and became the beginning of all things. As stated in the "Record," they lived in the winter in a cave earthen room, and in the summer in a nest room built with firewood. They drank blood and covered themselves with clothing such as linen.

古文：及燧人钻火，庖牺出震，风宗下武，炎胤昌基，画野无闻，其归一揆。
现代文：至于燧人氏钻木取火，庖牺氏始画八卦，女娲氏断鳖足以立四极，炎帝神农氏发展农业，分划疆域，逭一切都是同一道理。
English: It is the same reason for the Xiongren clan to drill wood and start a fire, the Xiongwu clan to start a game of backgammon, the Mei Xiong clan to cut straw to make four poles, and the Yan Di Shennong clan to develop agriculture and divide territories.

古文：黄帝则东海南江，登空蹑岱，至于昆峰振辔，崆山防道，存诸汗竹，不可厚诬。
现代文：黄帝东至海滨，南及长江，登临空山岱岳，有关他曾在昆仑山振辔驭马、前往崆峒山寻访至道等事，已经记载在史册上，不能欺骗后世之人。
English: The Yellow Emperor traveled east to the seashore, south to the Yangtze River, and ascended the empty mountain, Mount Kunlun. It has been recorded in the annals of history that he once rode a horse in Mount Kunlun and went to Mount Kunlun in search of the Tao. Future generations cannot be deceived.

古文：高阳任地依神，帝喾顺天行义。
现代文：颛顼高阳氏使天下各得其宜，帝誉高辛氏遵循天道实行道义。
English: Emperor Gaoyang made the world do what he wanted, and Emperor Gaoxin followed the heavenly way and practiced morality.

古文：东逾蟠木，西济流沙，北至幽陵，南抚交址，日月所经，舟车所至，莫匪王臣，不逾兹域。
现代文：东方越过蟠木山，西方到达流沙，北方起至幽陵，南面抵于交队，月所照之处，舟车驶及的山川，无人不是君主的臣民无处不是帝王的领域。
English: In the east, it passes through the Beech Mountain, in the west, it reaches the Quicksand, in the north, it goes up to the Yuling, in the south, it reaches the Junction, the place illuminated by the moon, the mountains and rivers reached by the carriage, no one is not a subject of the monarch, and nowhere is not the realm of the emperor.

古文：帝尧时，禹平水土，以为九州。
现代文：帝尧的时候，大禹治理水土，划地为九州。
English: When he was emperor, Dayu managed the water and land, and Kyushu was designated as Kyushu.

古文：虞舜登庸，厥功弥劭，表提类而分区宇，判山河而考疆域，冀北创并部之名，燕齐起幽营之号，则《书》所谓肇十有二州，封十有二山者也。
现代文：虞舜即位为王，功绩更加卓着。制定历法，划分星区，规划山河地界，考察四方疆域，在冀北始设并州，命名燕、齐一带为幽州、营州，即《尚书》所说的开创十、封立十二山之事。
English: The establishment of the calendar, the division of the star region, the planning of the mountain and river boundaries, the examination of the four-square territory, the establishment of the merged state in the north of Hebei, the naming of Yan and Qi as Yuzhou and Yingzhou, that is, the creation of the tenth and the establishment of the twelfth mountains as mentioned in the "Shang Shu."

古文：夏功在于唐尧，殷因无所损益。
现代文：夏朝的功业在于唐尧，殷朝沿袭夏曲没有增益减损。
English: The merit of the Xia Dynasty lies in the Tang Dynasty, and the Yin Dynasty followed the Xia Dynasty without any gain or loss.

古文：周武克商，自丰徂镐。
现代文：且迭王灭茵，京城自丰迁往镐京。
English: Moreover, the king was overthrown and the capital moved from Zifeng to Beijing.

古文：至成王时，改作《禹贡》，徐梁入于青雍，冀野析于幽并。
现代文：到周成王时，改写《尚书禹贡》，徐州、凿业并入直、壅蛆，又从幽业、差赵中离析出冀州。
English: By the time of Zhou Cheng Wang, he rewrote "Shangshu Yugong" and merged Xuzhou and Jieye into Zhi and Jia, and separated Jizhou from Yue and Shizhao.

古文：职方掌天下之土，以周厥利；保章辩九州之野，皆有分星。
现代文：职方掌管天下的土地，以知各地利弊，使之各得其所；观察记录天文之官保章氏分辨九州的分野，使之各有相对应的星区。
English: Officials in charge of the land under the sky to know the advantages and disadvantages of each place, so that each place has its place; the official Baozhang, who observes and records astronomy, distinguishes the fields of Kyushu, so that each has a corresponding star region.

古文：东南曰扬州，正南曰荆州，河南曰豫州，正东曰青州，河东曰兗州，正西曰雍州，东北曰幽州，河内曰冀州，正北曰并州。
现代文：东南叫作扬州，正南叫作荆州，河南叫作豫州，正东为青州，河东叫作兗州，正西为雍州，东北称为幽州，黄河以北是冀州，正北叫作并州。
English: Southeast is called Yangzhou, due south is called Jingzhou, Henan is called Yuzhou, due east is called Qingzhou, east of the river is called Shanzhou, due west is called Yongzhou, northeast is called Yuzhou, north of the Yellow River is called Jizhou, and due north is called Nianzhou.

古文：始皇初并天下，惩战国，削罢列侯，分天下为三十六郡。
现代文：秦始皇统一天下时，从困时期的战吸取教训，废除诸侯王，把天下分为三十六郡。
English: When the First Emperor of Qin unified the country, he learned a lesson from the war in the difficult period, abolished the princes and kings, and divided the country into 36 counties.

古文：三川、河东、南阳、南郡、九江、鄣郡、会稽、颍川、砀郡、泗水、薛郡、东郡、琅邪、齐郡、上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东、代郡、钜鹿、邯郸、上党、太原、云中、九原、雁门、上郡、陇西、北地、汉中、巴郡、蜀郡、黔中、长沙、凡三十五郡，与内史为三十六郡也。
现代文：三川、河东、南阳、南郡、九江、鄣郡、会稽、颍川、砀郡、泗水、薛郡、东郡、琅邪、齐郡、上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东、代郡、钜鹿、邯郸、上党、太原、云中、九原、雁门、上郡、陇西、北地、汉中、巴郡、蜀郡、黔中、长沙？共三十五郡，舆内史掌管的京师共三十六郡。
English: Sichuan, Hedong, Nanyang, Nan County, Jiujiang, Handan County, Hefei, Handan, Handan, Handan County, Handan County, Xue County, Dong County, Handan County, Qi County, Shangguan, Yuyang, Right Beiping, Liaoxi, Liaodong, Dayi County, Menglu, Handan, Shangdang, Taiyuan, Yunnan, Jiuyuan, Ganmen, Shangdang, Shansi, Hebei, Hanzhong, Ba County, Shu County, Shuzhong, and Changsha, a total of 35 counties, and a total of

古文：于是兴师逾江，平取百越，又置闽中、南海、桂林、象郡，凡四十郡，郡一守焉。
现代文：接着出动军队越过长江，攻取平定百趋之地，又设置了闽中、南海、桂林、象郡，共四十郡，每郡设郡守一人。
English: Next, the army was dispatched to cross the Yangtze River and conquer the land of Pingding Baicheng, and set up the counties of Luzhong, Nanhai, Guilin, and Xiang, a total of forty counties, with one county governor in each county.

古文：其他则西临洮而北沙漠，东萦西带，皆临大海。
现代文：秦时的疆土西方到达堕逃，北方直至沙漠，束环西带，都临大海。
English: The western part of the territory of the Qin Dynasty reached the Defector, the northern part reached the desert, and the western part was surrounded by the sea.

古文：汉祖龙兴，革秦之弊，分内史为三部，更置郡国二十有三，桂阳、江夏、豫章、河内、魏郡、东海、楚国、平原、梁国、定襄、泰山、汝南、淮阳、千乘、东莱、燕国、清河、信都、常山、中山、渤海、广汉、涿郡，合二十三也。
现代文：漠直狙建立起新王朝，革除台制的弊病，将京畿地区划分为三部分，又增置二十三郡，桂阳、江夏、豫章、河内、魏郡、东海、楚国、平原、梁国、定襄、泰山、汝南、淮阳、千乘、东莱、燕国、清河、信都、常山、中山、渤海、广汉、涿郡，共为二十三郡。
English: With the aim of establishing a new dynasty and eliminating the ills of the Taiwan system, the Gyeonggi region was divided into three parts, and 23 counties were added: Guiyang, Jiangxia, Yuzhang, Hanoi, Wei County, Donghae, Chu, Plains, Liang, Dingxiang, Taishan, Runan, Huaiyang, Senzheng, Donglai, Yan, Qinghe, Xindu, Changshan, Zhongshan, Bohai, Guanghan and Handan counties, totaling 23 counties.

古文：三内史者，河上、渭南、中地也。
现代文：内史分为回上、回亩、史丝三部分。
English: The internal history is divided into three parts: prehistory, prehistory and history.

古文：《地理志》曰：高祖增二十六，武帝改河上、渭南、中地以为京兆、冯翊、扶风是为三辅也。
现代文：汉书地理志》中说： 高祖增二十六，武帝改河上、渭南、中地为京兆、遇冯翊、扶风，这就是三辅地区。 
English: According to the "History of Chinese Geography," Gao Zuanzeng was twenty-six years old when Emperor Wu changed the names of Hegang, Hunan, and Zhongdi to Beijing, Fengyuan, and Fufeng. This is the Sanfu area.

古文：文增厥九，广平、城阳、淄川、济南、胶西、胶东、河间、庐江、衡山、武帝改衡山曰六安。
现代文：濩文帝增加九郡，广平、城阳、淄川、济南、胶西、胶东、河间、庐江、衡山？武帝改称衡山为六安。
English: Emperor Gongwen added nine counties, including Guangping, Chengyang, Luchuan, Jinan, Jiaoxi, Jiaodong, Hema, Lijiang and Hengshan. Emperor Wu renamed Hengshan as Liuan.

古文：景加其四。
现代文：汉景帝增设四郡。
English: Han Jingdi added four counties.

古文：济北、济阴、山阳、北海也。
现代文：济北、济阴、山阳、北海。
English: Jibei, Jiyin, Sanyang, and the North Sea.

古文：宣改济北曰东平。
现代文：宣帝改称济北为东平。
English: Emperor Xuan changed the name of Jibei to Dongping.

古文：武帝开越攘胡，初置十七，南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交耻、九真、日南、珠崖、儋耳九郡，平西南夷置牂柯、越嵩、沈黎、汶山、犍为、益州六郡，西置武都郡，又分立零陵郡，合十七郡。
现代文：武帝入越、开拓胡地，首次设置的郡有十七个南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交耻、九真、日南、珠崖、儋耳九郡，平定西南夷后置牂柯、越嵩、沈黎、汶山、犍为、益州六郡，西部设置武都郡，又分立出零陵郡，共十七郡。
English: Emperor Wu entered Vietnam and explored the Huts. The counties set up for the first time included the seventeen counties of Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin, Hepu, Jiaoshan, Jiuzhen, Nichinan, Zhuyao, and Kunlun; the six counties set up after the suppression of Southwest Yiwu, including Xingke, Yuexiang, Shenli, Wenshan, Fengtai, and Yizhou; the county of Wudu was set up in the west; and the county of Luling was set up, making a total of seventeen counties.

古文：拓土分疆，又增十四。
现代文：开辟土地拓宽疆界，又增设十四郡。
English: Land was opened up to expand the borders, and an additional fourteen counties were established.

古文：弘农、临淮、西河、朔方、酒泉、陈留、安定、天水、玄菟、乐浪、广陵、敦煌、武威、张掖。
现代文：弘农、临淮、西河、朔方、酒泉、陈留、安定、天水、玄菟、乐浪、广陵、敦煌、武威、张掖。
English: Hongnong, Linhuai, Xihe, Shuofang, Jiuquan, Chenlu, Ding'an, Tianshui, Xuanwu, Lelang, Guangling, Dunhuang, Wuwei, Zhangye.

古文：昭帝少事，又增其一。
现代文：昭帝变故较少，增置一郡。
English: Zhao Di changed his mind less often, adding one county.

古文：金城也。
现代文：金城。
English: Jincheng.

古文：至平帝元始二年，凡新置郡国七十有一，与秦四十，合一百一十有一。
现代文：到了平帝元始二年，新设置的郡总括起来有七十一个，与秦朝的四十郡相加，共一百一十一郡。
English: By the second year of the first year of the Ping Dynasty, there were a total of seventy-one newly established counties, adding to the forty counties of the Qin Dynasty, for a total of one hundred and eleven counties.

古文：改雍曰凉，改梁曰益，又置徐州，复夏旧号，南置交址，北有朔方，凡为十三部。
现代文：改称雍州为凉州，改称梁州为益州，又设置徐州，恢复旧名称，南方设交址，北方置朔州，共为十三部。
English: Renamed Yongzhou to Liangzhou, renamed Liangzhou to Yizhou, and set up Xuzhou to restore the old name, set up a junction in the south, and set up Shuozhou in the north, a total of thirteen departments.

古文：凉、益、荆、扬、青、豫、兗、徐、幽、并、冀十一州，交址、朔方二刺史，合十三部。
现代文：凉、益、荆、扬、青、豫、兗、徐、幽、并、冀十一州，交耻、朔方两处刺史州，共十三部。
English: Liang, Yi, Jing, Yang, Qing, Yu, Zhou, Xu, Yu, and Hebei are the eleven prefectures, and Jiaxian, Shuo and Fang are the two prefectures, for a total of thirteen prefectures.

古文：光武投戈之岁，在雕秏之辰，郡国萧条，并省者八。
现代文：漠光武帝战事平息，初建束汉时，民生凋敝，户口减少，郡县衰败零落，合并减省了八个郡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mu Guangwu, the war was over. When the Han Dynasty was first established, people's livelihoods were in decline, the number of hukou (household registration certificates) was reduced, counties were fragmented, and eight counties were merged and reduced.

古文：城阳、淄川、高密、胶东、六安、真定、泗水、广阳。
现代文：城阳、淄川、高密、胶东、六安、真定、泅水、广阳。
English: Chengyang, Luchuan, Gaomi, Jiaodong, Lu'an, Jinding, Lishui, Guangyang.

古文：建武十一年，省州牧，复为刺史，员十三人，各掌一州。
现代文：建武十一年，取消州牧，恢复州刺史的官职，十三位州刺史各自掌管一州。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jianwu era, the post of prefectural governor was abolished and the post of prefectural governor was restored. Thirteen prefectural governors were in charge of one prefecture each.

古文：明帝置一，永昌也。
现代文：漠明帝置一郡，永昌。
English: The Emperor Ming set up a county, Yongchang.

古文：章帝置二，任城、吴郡。
现代文：汉章帝置二郡，任城、吴郡。
English: Emperor Han Zheng set up two counties, Rencheng and Wu County.

古文：和顺改作，其名有九。
现代文：汉和帝、漠顺帝增置、更改了九个郡。
English: Emperor Han He and Emperor Mushun added and changed nine counties.

古文：和置济北、广阳，顺改淮阳为陈，改楚为彭城，济东为东平，临淮为下邳，千乘为六安，信都为安平，天水为汉阳。
现代文：翅童置边韭、卢堡，睦改称进盐为速，改称楚为壹猩、擅速为塞垩、堕进为工邳、王垂为苎达、挝为安平、天水为汉阳。
English: The winged boy put the border and the castle, and changed the name of the salt into the salt for the speed, and changed the name of the Chu into the one gorilla, the speeding into the seal, the falling into the worker, the king into the king, the Laos into the Anping, and the Tianshui into the Hanyang.

古文：省朔方刺史，合之于司隶，凡十三部，其与西汉不同者，司隶校尉部郡治河南，朔方隶于并部。
现代文：取消朔方刺史，合并于司隶，共十三部，舆西汉不同之处在于，司隶校尉部的郡治在河南，而朔方隶属于并部。
English: The history of the Shuo side was cancelled and merged into the Sili side, a total of thirteen parts. The difference between the two is that the county seat of the Sili side is in Henan, while the Shuo side belongs to the merged part.

古文：而郡国百有八焉。
现代文：郡国有一百零八个。
English: There are 108 in the county.

古文：省前汉八，分置五，改旧名七，因旧九十六，少前汉三也。
现代文：取消酉墨八郡，分置五郡，更改旧名的有七郡，沿用旧名的有九十六郡，比西汉少三郡。
English: Eight counties in Xinmo were abolished, five counties were separated, seven counties changed their old names, and ninety-six counties kept their old names, which was three fewer counties than in Western Han.

古文：桓灵颇增于前，复置六郡。
现代文：汉桓帝、漠灵帝比前代颇有增加，又置六郡。
English: Emperor Han Huan and Emperor Maoming increased the number of counties compared to the previous generation, and six counties were added.

古文：桓，高阳、高凉、博陵；灵，南安、鄱阳、庐陵。
现代文：桓帝置高阳、高凉、博壁；灵帝置南安、鄱阳、庐陵。
English: Emperor Huan put Gaoyang, Gaolang and Boqiao; Emperor Ling put Nan'an, Fenyang and Fuling.

古文：魏武定霸，三方鼎立，生宁版荡，关洛荒芜，所置者十二，新兴、乐平、西平、新平、略阳、阴平、带方、谯、乐陵、章武、南乡、襄阳。
现代文：魏武帝称霸一方，魏、蜀、吴三国鼎立，百姓动荡流离，盟生、盗墨一带荒芜，置立十二个郡，新兴、乐平、西平、新平、略阳、阴平、带方、谯、乐陵、章武、南乡、襄阳。
English: On the one hand, Emperor Weiwu ruled the country. On the other hand, the three states of Wei, Shu, and Wu ruled the country. The people were in turmoil and displaced. The areas of Mengsheng and Wuxi were desolate. Twelve counties were established, including Xinxing, Leping, Xiping, Xinping, Liangyang, Yinping, Bokfang, Lu, Leling, Zhangwu, Nanshiang, and Xiangyang.

古文：所省者七，上郡、朔方、五原、云中、定襄、渔阳、庐江。
现代文：取消上郡、朔方、五原、云中、定襄、渔阳、庐江。
English: Cancel Shang County, Shuo Fang, Wuhuan, Yunzhong, Dingxiang, Yuyang, and Minjiang.

古文：而文帝置七，朝歌、阳平、弋阳、魏兴、新城、义阳、安丰。
现代文：文帝设置七郡，朝歌、阳平、弋阳、魏兴、新城、义阳、安丰。
English: Emperor Wen set up seven counties, including Chaoga, Yangping, Fenyang, Weixing, Xincheng, Yiyang and Anfeng.

古文：得汉郡者十有一焉。吴主大皇帝初置郡五，临贺、武昌、珠崖、新安、庐陵南部。
现代文：蜀先主在汉建安年间初次设置九个郡，巴东、巴西、梓潼、江阳、汶山、汉嘉、硃提、宕渠、涪陵。蜀据有曲郡国十一个。吴主大皇帝初次设置五郡，临贺、武昌、珠崖、新安、庐陵南部。
English: During the Jianan period of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Shu established nine counties for the first time, including Badong, Brazil, Zizhi, Jiangyang, Wenshan, Hanjia, Handi, Gaochu, and Fuling. According to Shu, there were eleven counties in Yucong. Emperor Wu established five counties for the first time, including Linhe, Wuchang, Zhuyao, Xin'an, and the southern part of Fuling.

古文：少帝、景帝各四，少，临川、临海、衡阳、湘东。
现代文：少帝、景帝置四郡，少帝置临川、临海、衡阳、湘东。
English: Shao Di and Jing Di set up four counties, Shao Di set up Linchuan, Linhai, Hengyang, and Shandong.

古文：景，天门、建安、建平、合浦北部。
现代文：景帝置天门、建安、建平、合浦北部。
English: Emperor Jing set up Tianmen, Jian'an, Jianping and the northern part of Hepu.

古文：归命侯亦置十有二郡，始安、始兴、邵陵、安成、新昌、武平、九德、吴兴、东阳、桂林、荥阳、宜都。
现代文：鱼垒堡也设置了十二郡，始安、始兴、邵陵、安成、新昌、武平、九德、吴兴、东阳、桂林、荥阳、宜都。
English: The Fisherman's Bastion was also set up in twelve counties, including Shi'an, Shi'xing, Shaoling, Ancheng, Xinchang, Wuping, Jiude, Wuxing, Dongyang, Guilin, Shenyang and Yidu.

古文：得汉郡者十有八焉。
现代文：占据有汉郡国十八个。
English: There are eighteen counties in Hanzhong.

古文：晋武帝太康元年，既平孙氏，凡增置郡国二十有三，荥阳、上洛、顿丘、临淮、东莞、襄城、汝阴、长广、广宁、昌黎、新野、随郡、阴平、义阳、毗陵、宣城、南康、晋安、宁浦、始平、咯阳、乐平、南平。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年，平定了吴国孙氏的势力，增置的郡国共有二十三个，荥阳、上洛、顿丘、临淮、东莞、襄城、汝阴、长广、广宁、昌黎、新野、随郡、阴平、义阳、毗陵、宣城、南康、晋安、宁浦、始平、咯阳、乐平、南平。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the influence of the Sun Dynasty of the State of Wu was pacified, and a total of 23 counties were added, including Fenyang, Shangluo, Dongqiu, Linhuai, Dongguan, Xiangcheng, Ruyin, Changguang, Guangning, Changli, Xinye, Suigun, Yinping, Yiyang, Biling, Xuancheng, Nankang, Jinan, Ningpu, Shiping, Guoyang, Leping, and Nanping.

古文：省司隶置司州，别立梁、秦、宁、平四州，仍吴之广州，凡十九州，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、徐、扬、青、幽、平、并、雍、凉、秦、梁、益、宁、交、广州。
现代文：取消七郡而设置司州，另立梁州、秦州、宁州、平州四州，沿用吴国广州的名称，共十九州，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、徐、扬、青、幽、平、并、雍、凉、秦、梁、益、宁、交、广州。
English: The seven counties were abolished and Sizhou was established, and four new counties, Liangzhou, Qinzhou, Ningzhou and Pingzhou, were established, and the name of Guangzhou in the State of Wu was used. There were a total of nineteen counties, including Sizhou, Hebei, Shandong, Henan, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu, Jiangsu

古文：郡国一百七十三，仍吴所置二十五，仍蜀新置十一，仍魏所置二十一，仍汉旧九十三，置二十三。
现代文：郡国一百七十三个，吴国置立的二十五郡、蜀国新置的十一郡、魏国置立的二十一郡，沿用汉朝旧郡九十三个，设置二十三郡。
English: There are one hundred and seventy-three counties in the country, including the twenty-five counties established by the State of Wu, the eleven counties newly established by the State of Shu, and the twenty-one counties established by the State of Wei. The former ninety-three counties of the Han Dynasty have been retained, and twenty-three counties have been established.

古文：以为冠带之国，尽有殷周之土。
现代文：以此成为文明大国，全部拥有了殷、周的疆土。
English: As a result, it became a civilized country and possessed all the territories of Yin and Zhou.

古文：若乃敦庞于天地之始，昭晰于牺农之世，用长黎元，未争疆埸。
现代文：以致比原始时代更为丰实，比伏羲、神农之业更加显赫，目的是以此来抚养黎民百姓，而不去争夺疆土。
English: So that it is more plentiful than the primitive era, and more prominent than Fuxing and Shennong's industry, the purpose is to raise the people of Li with this, rather than to compete for territory.

古文：而玉环楛矢，夷裘风驾，南翚表贶，东风入律，光乎上德，奚远弗臻。
现代文：那些玉制之环及楛木之矢，异族的皮裘和如风的车驾，南方群鸟惠顾光临，春风和畅律吕和谐，皇帝功昭业盛，无处不至。
English: Those rings of the jade system and the arrows of the maple tree, the fur of the foreign race and the car driving like the wind, the southern birds visiting, the spring breeze and the harmonious harmony, the emperor's great achievements, everywhere.

古文：然则星象丽天，山河纪地，端掖裁其弘敞，崤函判其都邑，仰观俯察，万物攸归。
现代文：然而众星的征象附于上天，山岳河川综理着大地，端门掖门之星规划着宽广的地域，崤山、函谷区分出郡国城邑，仰观天象，俯察地理，世间万物归依皇朝。
English: However, the signs of many stars are attached to the heavens, mountain rivers survey the earth, the star of the gate of the gate plans a wide area, Lushan and Hakodate distinguish the towns of the county, look up at the celestial bodies, look down at the geography, and everything in the world reverts to the imperial dynasty.

古文：是以洛沚咸阳，宛然秦汉，晋滨河西，同知尧禹，于兹新邑，宅是镐京，五尺童子皆能口诵者，史官弗之书也。
现代文：因此洛之洲和咸阳，宛如秦、漠，晋依傍着黄河以西，历代人们都知道尧、禹，在这新的都邑镐京定居。当地的五尺童子都能熟练地吟诵，史官无需把它记入史书。
English: Therefore, Luo Zhou and Xianyang, like Qin, Miao, Jin and Yixing along the west of the Yellow River, have been settled in this new capital of Beijing for generations. Local five-foot boys can skillfully recite, and historians do not need to record it in history books.

古文：昔庖牺氏生于成纪，而为天子，都于陈。
现代文：过去伏牺氏诞生在成纪，作为天子后以陈为都。
English: In the past, the Fusaki clan was born in Chengji, and as the son of Heaven, Chen was the capital.

古文：神农氏都陈，而别营于曲阜。
现代文：神农氏原定都于速，后另营造迪皇为都。
English: Originally, the Shennong clan planned to make the capital in Sui, but later they built Diwang as the capital.

古文：黄帝生于寿丘。而都于涿鹿。
现代文：董童生于画丘，而建都于鲢。
English: Dong Tong was born in Gaokao, but the capital was built in Tonglu.

古文：少昊始自穷桑，而迁都曲阜。
现代文：初居于窒垩，后迁都到迪皇。
English: At first he lived in Nitto, but later moved to Tsuruga.

古文：颛顼始自穷桑，而徙邑商丘。
现代文：题玺初居于塞垩，后将都邑迁徙到产旦。
English: He initially lived in Sai Yeon, and later moved the capital to Sangdan.

古文：高辛即号，建都于亳。
现代文：产圭即位，在台建都。
English: Sokei ascended to the throne, and the capital was built in Taiwan.

古文：孙卿子曰： 不登高山，不知天之高；不临深谿，不知地之厚也。 
现代文：忧翅王说： 不登高山，不知天之高；不临深渊，不知地之厚也。 
English: The winged king said, "If you don't climb the mountain, you don't know how high the sky is. If you don't go into the abyss, you don't know how thick the ground is."

古文：大哉坤象，万物资生，载昆华而不坠，倾河海而宁泄。
现代文：地象宏大，万物依地而生，能够承载昆仑、茎山而不坠落，包容下回海而不漏泄。
English: The landscape is magnificent, everything depends on the land, it can carry Kunlun and stem mountains without falling, and it can be carried back to the sea without leaking.

古文：考卜惟王，乘飞驻轸，睨弇山而镌勒，览曾城以为玩。
现代文：君王占决疑，乘舆出行驻车览胜，遥望瞬嵫山镑石刻碑，观看眉叠的城墙如同玩赏。
English: The monarch is in charge of the final decision, taking the public transport to travel to the parking lot to see the victory, looking at the distant Shunlun Mountain Pound Stone Monument, watching the eyebrows of the city wall as if it were a play.

古文：时逢稽浸，道接陵夷，平王东迁，星离豆剖，当涂驭寓，瓜分鼎立。
现代文：时世阻滞，政道衰颓，周平王东迁，诸侯纷争；萱魏当道，三国鼎立。
English: The times are stagnant, the political system is decaying, the Zhou and Ping dynasties are moving eastward, the princes are quarreling; the Wei Dynasty is in power, and the Three Kingdoms are in the ascendant.

古文：世祖武皇帝接千祀之余，当八尧之禅，先王桑梓，罄宇来归，斯固可得而言者矣。
现代文：晋世祖武皇帝继承千年之业，接受禅让，先王故土，全部归属晋国，于是得以言说疆域之事。
English: The ancestor of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Wu, inherited a thousand-year-old business and accepted Zen Zhen, the ancestor's homeland, all belonging to Jin, so he was able to talk about the territory.

古文：惠皇不虞，中州尽弃，永嘉南度，纶行建鄴，九分天下而有二焉。
现代文：塞童一无防备，中原全盘丢弃，怀帝永嘉年问势力范围南移直至建邺，九分天下仅有其。
English: Seto was defenseless, Central Plains was abandoned in its entirety, and Waidi Yongjia's sphere of influence moved south to Jianye, which is the only one in the world.

古文：昔大禹观于浊河而受绿字，寰瀛之内可得而言也。
现代文：往昔大禹观察浑浊的黄河而得到河圆，得以言说海内之事。
English: In the past, Dayu observed the turbid Yellow River and got the river circle, and was able to talk about things at sea.

古文：天有七星，地有七表；天有四维，地有四渎。
现代文：天上有北斗七星，地有七层地表；天有四隅，地有四条大河东流入海。
English: The sky has the Big Dipper and the earth has seven layers of land; the sky has four corners and the earth has four great rivers flowing into the sea.

古文：八纮之外，名为八极。
现代文：八方极远之地，称为八极。
English: The farthest place in the eight directions, known as the eight poles.

古文：地不足东南，天不足西北。
现代文：东南地势渐低，天向西北倾斜。
English: The southeast ground potential is gradually low, and the sky is tilted to the northwest.

古文：八极之广，东西二亿三万一千三百里，南北二亿三万一千三百里。
现代文：八极宽广，东西有二亿零三万一千三百里，南北有二亿零三万一千三百里。
English: It is extremely wide, with an east-west distance of 2031,300 li and a north-south distance of 2031,300 li.

古文：自地至天，半八极之数，自下亦如之。
现代文：从地到天的距离为八极宽度的一半，从地面到地底也是同样。
English: The distance from the earth to the sky is half the width of the octagon, and the same is true from the ground to the bottom of the earth.

古文：昔黄帝令竖亥步自东极，至于西极，五亿十万九千八百八步。
现代文：先前黄帝命令竖亥从束极步测到西极，共五亿零十万九千八百零八步。
English: Previously, the Yellow Emperor ordered the Chinese eagle owl to measure from the cormorant pole to the West Pole, a total of five hundred million one hundred and ninety thousand eight hundred and eight steps.

古文：史臣案，凡周天积百七万九百一十三里，径三十五万六千九百七十里。
现代文：史臣案，整个天宇共计一百零七万零九百一十三里，直径三十五万六千九百七十里。
English: According to Shishen, the entire sky has a total of 1070913 miles, with a diameter of 356970 miles.

古文：所谓南北为经，东西为纬。
现代文：南北为经，东西为纬。
English: North-south is the meridian, east-west is the latitude.

古文：天有十二次，日月之所躔；地有十二辰，王侯之所国也。
现代文：天有十二次，是月运行的轨迹；地有十二辰，是王侯建立州国的区域。
English: There are twelve times in the sky, which is the track of the moon's movement; there are twelve hours on the earth, which is the region where the prince established the state.

古文：或因生得姓，因功命土，祁、酉、燕、齐，在乎兹域。
现代文：有的州国因祖先的出生地而得姓，也有的因功业而命名地域，祁、酉、燕、齐，就在这些地域上。
English: Some states and countries have surnames due to the birthplace of their ancestors, and some have regions named for their merits, such as,,燕, and Qi. These are the regions.

古文：昔黄帝旁行天下，方制万里，得百里之国万区，则《周易》所谓 首出庶物，万国咸宁 者也。
现代文：先前黄帝遍行天下，广治万里，得到近万个方圆百里之国，就是《周易》中所说的 高出众物之上，万国皆得安宁 。
English: Previously, the Yellow Emperor had traveled all over the world, extensively governed thousands of miles, and obtained a country of nearly ten thousand square miles, which is what "Zhou Yi" said was superior to many things, and all countries were peaceful.

古文：昔在帝尧，叶和万邦，制八家为邻，三邻为朋，三朋为里，五里为邑，十邑为都，十都为师，州十有二师焉。
现代文：帝尧时代，协调了众多邦国，建制以八家为邻，三邻为朋，三朋为里，五里为邑，十邑为都，十都为师，一州有十二师。
English: In the era of Emperor Qianlong, he coordinated many states and countries, and established a system with eight families as neighbors, three neighbors as friends, three friends as villages, five miles as towns, ten towns as capitals, ten capitals as divisions, and one state with twelve divisions.

古文：夏后氏东渐于海，西被于流沙，南浮于江，而朔南暨声教，穷竖亥所步，莫不率俾，会群臣于涂山，执玉帛者万国。
现代文：夏后氏的地域束至海滨，西有沙漠，南方到达长江流域，北方与南方都闾知君王的声威教化，穷尽竖亥步测所及的范围，无不顺从，夏后氏在涂山召见群臣，万邦手执玉帛前来。
English: The territory of the Xia Guo clan stretched as far as the seashore, with deserts in the west and the Yangtze River basin in the south. Both the north and the south were subject to the king's edification, and all of them obeyed the emperor's edict. The Xia Guo clan summoned his retainers in Tu Mountain, and they all came holding the imperial scepter in their hands.

古文：于是九州之内，作为五服。
现代文：于是在九州之内划分五服。
English: As a result, Kyushu was divided into five regions.

古文：天子之国，内五百里甸服，百里赋纳总，二百里纳铚，三百里纳秸服，四百里粟，五百里米。
现代文：天子所在之国，内五百里为甸服，一百里内要缴纳成束的禾稿作为赋税，二百里内缴纳割下的禾穗，三百里内缴纳脱粒后的庄稼茎秆，四百里交粟，五百里交米。
English: In the country where the heavenly son is located, within 500 miles is the tianfu, within 100 miles you have to pay bundles of grain as a tax, within 200 miles pay cut ears of grain, within 300 miles pay crop stalks after threshing, 400 miles pay millet, 500 miles pay rice.

古文：甸服外五百里侯服，百里采，二百里任，三百里候。
现代文：甸服之外的五百里是侯服，一百里为卿大夫封地，二百里为爵，三百里为侯。
English: In addition to tianfu, there are 500 li for houfu, 100 li for chengdafu fiefs, 200 li for zhe, and 300 li for hou.

古文：侯服外五百里绥服，三百里揆文教，二百里奋武卫。
现代文：侯服之外的五百里是绥服，三百里间施行文教，二百里奋力习武，加强防卫。
English: In addition to court dress, there are five hundred li for ceremonial dress, three hundred li for literature and education, and two hundred li for martial arts and defense.

古文：绥服外五百里要服，三百里夷，二百里蔡。
现代文：绥服之外五百里为要服，三百里遵常道，二百里减免赋税。
English: In addition to this, there are five hundred li for compulsory service, three hundred li for ordinary service, and two hundred li for tax reduction and exemption.

古文：要服外五百里荒服，三百里蛮，二百里流。
现代文：要服之外的五百里是荒服，三百里蛮，二百里流。
English: The five hundred li beyond the essential clothing is the waste clothing, the three hundred li is the waste, and the two hundred li is the waste.

古文：讫于四海，弼成五服，五服至于五千里。
现代文：达于四海，成五服之制，五服的地域范围为方圆五千里。
English: Reach the four seas, into the five-service system, the five-service regional scope of five thousand miles.

古文：夏德中微，遇有穷之乱。
现代文：夏朝政德中衰，遭逢有穷之乱。
English: The Xia Dynasty was plagued by political and moral decay, and suffered from a series of disastrous upheavals.

古文：少康中兴，不失旧物。
现代文：少康中兴，没有失去原有的土地、邦国。
English: Those who are less well-off and less prosperous have not lost their original land and country.

古文：自孔甲之后，以至于桀，诸侯相兼，其能存者三千余国，方于涂山，十损其七矣。
现代文：从孔甲之后而到桀当政期间，诸侯互相兼并，能够保存下来的有三千多邦国，与夏后氏在涂山大会诸侯时相比，损失了约十分之七。
English: From the time of Kongjia to the time of Zou's reign, the princes annexed each other, and more than three thousand states were able to be preserved. Compared with the time of the Natsugo clan at the Tushan Assembly of Princes, it lost about seven-tenths.

古文：成汤败桀于焦，迁鼎于亳，伊挚、仲虺之徒，大明宪典。
现代文：成汤在焦打败桀，迁都到亳，伊挚、仲虺等人，制定了严明的法典。
English: Cheng Tang defeated Zhai in Jiao and moved the capital to Zhai, while Yizhong and Zhongyao worked out a strict code of law.

古文：王者之制爵禄，公侯伯子男凡五等。
现代文：君王制定了爵位俸禄，爵位共分公侯伯子男五等。
English: The monarch established the peerage stipend, and the peerage was divided into five classes, starting with Prince Hakuo.

古文：天子之田方千里，公侯田方百里，伯七十里，子男五十里。
现代文：天子的田地方圆一千里，公侯的田地一百里，伯七十里，子男五十里。
English: The fields of the sons of heaven are a thousand li in circumference, the fields of the princes are a hundred li, the fields of the nobles are seventy li, and the fields of the sons of men are fifty li.

古文：不能五十里者，不达于天子，附于诸侯，曰附庸。
现代文：不足五十里的，不与天子发生联系，归附于诸侯，称为附庸。
English: Those less than fifty miles away, who did not establish contact with the Son of Heaven, were attached to the princes and were called vassals.

古文：凡四海之内九州，州方千里。
现代文：四海之内共分九州，每一州方圆一千里。
English: Kyushu is divided into four seas, and each state has a radius of one thousand miles.

古文：州建百里之国三十，七十里之国六十，五十里之国百有二十，凡二百一十国。
现代文：各州建立三十个纵横百里的封国，六十个纵横七十里的封国，一百二十个五十里的封国，共计二百一十个封国。
English: Each state established 30 fiefs with a length and width of 100 miles, 60 fiefs with a length and width of 70 miles, and 120 fiefs with a length and width of 50 miles, for a total of 210 fiefs.

古文：名山大泽不以封，其余以为附庸间田。
现代文：名山大泽不能作为封地，其余作为附庸的田地。
English: Famous Danzhao Ze cannot be used as a fief, and the rest as a vassal field.

古文：八州，州二百一十国。
现代文：全国八个州，设二百一十个封国。
English: There are eight prefectures and 210 counties in the country.

古文：天子之县内，百里之国九。
现代文：皇帝所在的州界内，设九个百里的封国。
English: Within the borders of the state where the emperor is located, there are nine hundred miles of fiefdoms.

古文：七十里之国二十有一，五十里之国六十有三，凡九十三国。
现代文：二十一个七十里的封国，六十三个五十里的封国，共九十三国。
English: There were twenty-one fiefs of seventy li, and sixty-three fiefs of fifty li, for a total of ninety-three fiefs.

古文：名山大泽不以班，其余以禄士，以为间田。
现代文：名山大泽不能分封，其余的土地作为士的俸禄，作为分封之余的闲田。
English: Famous mountains and lakes cannot be subdivided, and the rest of the land is used as the salary of the nobles, and as idle land left over from subdividing.

古文：凡九州，千七百七十三国。
现代文：全国共有九州，总计一千七百七十三个封国。
English: There are a total of Kyushu throughout the country, a total of one thousand seven hundred and seventy-three fiefs.

古文：天子之元士，诸侯之附庸，不与。
现代文：天子的元士，诸侯的附庸，都不在其数中。
English: The sons of heaven, the vassals of princes, are not among them.

古文：天子百里之内以供官，千里之内以为御，千里之外设方伯。
现代文：天子百里之内田税供给官用，千里之内供给衣食，千里之外设方伯为诸侯之长。
English: Within a hundred miles, the son of heaven would supply the government with rice field tax. Within a thousand miles, he would supply food and clothing. Beyond a thousand miles, he would set up a governor to be the head of the lords.

古文：五国以为属，属有长；十国以为连，连有帅；三十国以为卒，卒有正；二百一十国以为州，州有伯。
现代文：五国成为一属，各属设长；十国成为一连，各连设帅；三十国合为一卒，各卒设卒正；二百一十国篇一州，州有州伯。
English: The five kingdoms became one clan, and each clan had a leader; the ten kingdoms became one company, and each company had a commander; the thirty kingdoms became one pawn, and each pawn had a general; the two hundred and ten kingdoms became one province, and each province had a provincial governor.

古文：八州，八伯，五十六正，百六十八帅，三百三十六长。
现代文：八个州有八伯，五十六正，一百六十八帅，三百三十六长。
English: The eight prefectures have eight grand officers, fifty-six regular officers, one hundred and sixty-eight marshals, and three hundred and thirty-six captains.

古文：八伯各以其属属于天子之老二人，分天下为左右，曰二伯。
现代文：八伯各以其属国属于天子的两位公卿，分天下为左右称为二伯。
English: Each of the eight bo is represented by two nobles who belong to the son of heaven in their respective countries, and they are called the two bo because they are on the left and right.

古文：千里之内曰甸，千里之外曰采，曰流。
现代文：千里之内为甸，千里之外为采，为流。
English: Within a thousand miles is a thicket, a thousand miles away is a mine, a stream.

古文：天子使其大夫为三监，监于方伯之国，国三人。
现代文：天子派遣大夫为三监，监视方伯之国。各置三人。
English: The Son of Heaven sent doctors as the three supervisors to monitor the country of Fangbo. There were three of each.

古文：天子之县，内，诸侯禄也；外，诸侯嗣也。
现代文：天子所在之地，诸侯可食采邑而子孙不得继位；天子所在之外，诸侯子孙可以继位。
English: In the place where the Son of Heaven is, the lords may eat and gather, but their descendants may not succeed to the throne; outside the place where the Son of Heaven is, the descendants of the lords may succeed to the throne.

古文：武王归丰，监于二代，设爵惟五，分土惟三。
现代文：周武王即位，以夏、商二代为鉴，仅设五等爵位，分划土地为三部分。
English: When King Zhou Wu ascended the throne, based on the example of Xia and the second generation of merchants, there were only five ranks, and the land was divided into three parts.

古文：封同姓五十余国，周公、康叔建于鲁卫，各数百里。
现代文：封同姓诸侯五十余国，周公、康叔的封地称为鲁、卫，各占地数百里。
English: The fiefs of Zhou Gong and Kang Shu were called Lu and Wei, each covering hundreds of miles.

古文：太公封于齐，表东海者也。
现代文：太公封在齐，位于束海之滨。
English: Tai Gongfu is in Qi, located on the coast of the Sokhai Sea.

古文：凡一千八百国，布列于五千里内。
现代文：总共一千八百国分布在五千里的地域之内。
English: A total of 1,800 countries are spread over an area of 5,000 miles.

古文：而太昊、黄帝之后，唐虞侯伯犹存。
现代文：太昊、黄帝的后代，唐尧、虞舜的侯伯仍然保留封地。
English: The descendants of Emperor Taeho and Emperor Huangdi, as well as Emperor Tang and Emperor Yu, still retain their fiefs.

古文：大司徒以诸公之地封疆方五百里，其食者半；诸侯之地方四百里，其食者参之一；诸伯之地方三百里，其食者参之一；诸子之地方二百里，其食者四之一；诸男之地方百里，其食者四之一。
现代文：掌管邦国土地的大司徒丈量诸公的疆界纵横各五百里，天子食其一半租税；诸侯的土地纵横四百里，天子食其三分之一租税；诸伯之地三百里，天子食其三分之一租税；诸子之地二百里，天子食其四分之一租税；诸男之地一百里，天子食其四分之一租税。
English: The magistrate in charge of the land of the state measured the boundaries of the princes at 500 miles in length and width, and the Son of Heaven ate half of the tax; the lands of the princes at 400 miles in length and width, and the Son of Heaven ate one-third of the tax; the lands of the nobles at 300 miles, and the Son of Heaven ate one-third of the tax; the lands of the sons of men at 200 miles, and the Son of Heaven ate one-quarter of the tax; the lands of the men at 100 miles, and the Son of Heaven ate one-quarter of the tax.

古文：不易之地家百亩，一易之地家二百亩，再易之地家三百亩。
现代文：年年耕种的土地每家一百亩，两年轮种的土地每家二百亩，三年轮种的土地每家三百亩。
English: The land cultivated annually is one hundred mu per household, the land cultivated in two-year cycles is two hundred mu per household, and the land cultivated in three-year cycles is three hundred mu per household.

古文：五家为比，使之相保；五比为闾，使之相受；四闾为族，使之相葬；五族为党，使之相救；五党为州，使之相赒；五州为乡，使之相宾。
现代文：五家为比，使其互相担保；五比为间，可以共相寄托，承受宅舍破损等事故；四闾为族，共同办理丧葬之事；五族为党，如遇凶祸，可相救助；五党为州，可互相周济；五州为乡，以待宾客之礼举贡贤者。
English: Five families are compared to each other, so that they can guarantee each other; five families are compared to each other, so that they can be entrusted to each other to withstand accidents such as house damage; four families are compared to each other, so that they can jointly handle funerals; five families are compared to each other, so that they can be rescued in the event of a disaster; five families are compared to each other, so that they can guarantee each other; five families are compared to each other, so that they can be entrusted to each other to withstand accidents such as house damage; four families are compared to each other, so that they can jointly handle funerals; five families are compared to each other, so

古文：小司徒以五人为伍，五伍为两，四两为卒，五卒为旅，五旅为师，五师为军。
现代文：小司徒以五人为伍，五伍为两，四两为卒，五卒为旅，五旅为师，五师为军。
English: Xiao Sittu led five soldiers, five soldiers led two soldiers, four soldiers led two soldiers, five soldiers led a brigade, five brigades led a division, and five divisions led an army.

古文：以起军旅，以作田役，以比追胥，以令贡赋。
现代文：用以共赴征伐之事，从事田猎役作，追逐虏寇，伺捕盗贼，并施令征收贡赋。
English: He used them to go on campaigns together, to hunt in the fields, to chase robbers, to catch thieves, and to order the collection of tribute.

古文：乃经土地而井牧其田野，九夫为井，四井为邑，四邑为丘，四丘为甸，四甸为县，四县为都。
现代文：经略土地，制井田，营畜牧，九夫为井，四井为邑，四邑为丘，四丘为甸，四甸为县，四县为都。
English: According to the plan of land division, well-field system, animal husbandry, nine people are wells, four wells are towns, four towns are hills, four hills are dian, four dian are counties, and four counties are the capital.

古文：遗人则十里有庐，庐有饮食。
现代文：掌管施予、抚恤之事的遣人在道路上十里设庐，庐内可供饮食。
English: The person in charge of administering the grants and pensions set up a pavilion ten miles up the road, with food and drink available inside.

古文：三十里有宿，宿有路室，路室有委。
现代文：三十里有宿，宿有可以留宿的路室，路室中有储存的物品。
English: There are lodgings in Sanju, lodgings have road rooms where you can stay, and there are stored items in the road room.

古文：五十里有市，市有候，候有馆，馆有积。
现代文：五十里有市，市有候，候有迎送宾客的候馆，候馆内有贮积的物资。
English: In the fifties, there was the market, the market had waiters, there was a waiting hall for welcoming guests, and there were stored goods in the waiting hall.

古文：遂人则五家为邻，五邻为里，四里为酂，五酂为鄙，五鄙为县，五县为遂。
现代文：掌管郊野之地的遂人以五家属邻，五邻为里，四里为鄙，五郑骂鄙，五鄙为县，五县为遂。
English: The people in charge of the countryside should have five families as neighbors, five neighbors as villages, four villages as villages, five villages as counties, five counties as counties, and five counties as villages.

古文：大司马以九畿之籍，施邦国之政。
现代文：大司马根据九畿的户籍，施政于邦国诸侯。
English: On the basis of his household registration in the Kinki region, Daishima administered the affairs of state for the princes of the state.

古文：方千里曰国畿，其外方五百里曰侯畿，又其外方五百里曰甸畿，又其外方五百里曰男畿，又其外方五百里曰采畿，又其外方五百里曰卫畿，又其外方五百里曰蛮畿，又其外方五百里曰夷畿，又其外方五百里曰镇畿，又其外方五百里曰籓畿。
现代文：王畿内纵横千里为国畿，国畿之外的五百里为侯畿，侯畿外的五百里为甸畿，甸畿外的五百里为男畿，男畿外的五百里为采畿，采畿外的五百里篇卫畿，卫畿外的五百里为蛮畿，蛮畿外的五百里为夷畿，夷畿外的五百里为镇畿，再向外的五百里是藩畿。
English: A thousand li in length and width in Wang Gui is Guo Gui, five hundred li outside Guo Gui is Hou Gui, five hundred li outside Hou Gui is Dian Gui, five hundred li outside Dian Gui is Yang Gui, five hundred li outside Yang Gui is Zeki Gui, five hundred li outside Zeki Gui is Zhan Gui, five hundred li outside Wei Gui is Wang Gui, five hundred li outside Wang Gui is Yi Gui, five hundred li outside Yang Gui is Zhen Gui, and five hundred li outside Zeki Gui is Zhan Gui.

古文：畿，田限也。自王城以外，面五千里为界，有分限者九也。
现代文：畿是田地的界限，白王城向外，东西、南北各五千里为界，划分地限的有九畿。
English: Kishi is the boundary of the field, Baekwangseong to the outside, east-west, north-south is five thousand miles, and there are nine Kishi to divide the land limit.

古文：于时治致太平，政称刑措，民口千三百七十一万四千九百三十三，盖周之盛者也。
现代文：当时国家的治理达到太平，政教可谓清明，因无人犯罪而刑法不用。有一千三百七十一万四千九百三十三人，这大概是周朝的鼎盛时期。
English: At that time, the governance of the country reached peace, politics and religion could be described as clear, and criminal law was not used because no one committed crimes. There were 13,714,933 people, which was probably the heyday of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：其衰也，则礼乐征伐出自诸侯，强吞弱而众暴寡。
现代文：至周王室衰微，礼乐之制、征伐之事都由诸侯控制，弱肉强食，以强欺弱。
English: Until the decline of the Zhou royal family, the system of ceremonial music and the conquest were controlled by the princes. The weak eat the strong, and the strong bully the weak.

古文：春秋之初，尚有千二百国；迄获麟之末，二百四十二年，弑君三十六，亡国五十二，诸侯奔走不得保其社稷者不可胜数，而见于《春秋》经传者百有七十国焉。
现代文：春秋初期，仍有一千二百国，到了鲁哀公西狩获麟的末世，二百四十二年间，杀戮君主三十六位，五十二个国家灭亡，来往奔忙而最终未能保住封国的诸侯王不可胜敷，而见于《春秋》经传的有一百七十国。
English: At the beginning of the Spring and Autumn Period, there were still twelve hundred kingdoms. By the end of the reign of Rui Gongxi, who hunted down and captured Lin, in two hundred and forty-two years, thirty-six monarchs had been killed, fifty-two countries had perished, and princes who rushed back and forth and ultimately failed to keep their fiefdoms could not be defeated. However, there are one hundred and seventy countries mentioned in the "Spring and Autumn Period."

古文：百三十九知其所居，鲁、邾、郑、宋、纪、卫、西、莒、齐、陈、杞、蔡、邢、郕、晋、薛、许、邓、秦、曹、楚、随、黄、梁、虞、郧、小邾、徐、燕、鄀、麋、舒、庸、郯、莱、吴、越、有穷、三苗、瓜州、有虞、东、共、宿、申、夷、向、南燕、滕、凡、戴、息、郜、芮、魏、淳于、谷、巴、州、蓼、罗、赖、牟、葛、谭、萧、遂、滑、权、鄣、霍、耿、江、冀、弦、道、柏、微、鄫、厉、项、密、任、须句、颛臾、顿、管、雍、毕、丰、邘、应、蒋、茅、胙、夔、介、焦、沈、六、巢、根牟、唐、黎、郇瑕、寒、有鬲、斟灌、斟寻、过、有过、戈、偪阳、邿、铸、豕韦、唐杜、杨、豳、郐、观、扈、邳、胡、黎、大庭、骀、岐、邶、锺吾、浦姑、昆吾、房、密须、甲父、鄅、桐、亳、韩、赵。
现代文：其中一百三十九国知道国所在地，鲁、邾、郑、宋、纪、卫、西、莒、齐、陈、杞、蔡、邢、郕、晋、薛、许、邓、秦、曹、楚、随、黄、梁、虞、郧、小邾、徐、燕、鄀、麋、舒、庸、郯、莱、吴、越、有穷、三苗、瓜州、有虞、东、共、宿、申、夷、向、南燕、滕、凡、戴、息、郜、芮、魏、淳于、谷、巴、州、蓼、罗、赖、牟、葛、谭、萧、遂、滑、权、鄣、霍、耿、江、冀、弦、道、柏、微、鄫、厉、项、密、任、须句、颛臾、顿、管、雍、毕、丰、邘、应、蒋、茅、胙、夔、介、焦、沈、六、巢、根牟、唐、黎、郇瑕、寒、有鬲、斟灌、斟寻、过、有过、戈、偪阳、邿、铸、豕韦、唐杜、杨、豳、郐、观、扈、邳、胡、黎、大庭、骀、岐、邶、锺吾、浦姑、昆吾、房、密须、甲父、鄅、桐、亳、韩、赵。
English: Of these, one hundred and thirty-nine countries know the location of the country, including: Lu, Jiao, Zheng, Song, Ji, Wei, Xi, Jiao, Qi, Chen, Yao, Cai, Jiao, Jin, Xue, Xu, Deng, Qin, Cao, Chu, Sui, Huang, Liang, Yu, Yao, Xiao Yu, Xu, Yan, Yao, Shu, Yong, Yao, Lai, Wu, Yue, Yibing, Sanmiao, Guazhou, Yigou, Dong, Gong, Ying, Shen, Yi, Xiang, Nanyan, Teng, Fan, Dai,

古文：三十一国尽亡其处，祭、极、荀、贾、贰、轸、绞、于余丘、阳、箕、英氏、毛、聃、莘、偪、封父、仍、有仍、崇、鄟、庸、姺、奄、商奄、褒姒、蓐、有缗、阙巩、飂、鬷、穷桑。
现代文：三十一国荡然无存，祭、极、荀、贾、贰、轸、绞、于余丘、阳、箕、英氏、毛、聃、莘、偪、封父、仍、有仍、崇、鄟、庸、姺、奄、商奄、褒姒、蓐、有缗、阙巩、飂、鬷、穷桑。
English: The Thirty-one Kingdoms have all but disappeared, and the festivals, poles, yaks, jia, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks, yaks.

古文：蛮夷戎狄不在其间。
现代文：蛮夷戎狄不计在内。
English: This does not include the barbarian soldiers.

古文：五伯迭兴，总其盟会。
现代文：五霸更相兴盛，统领着诸侯间的盟会。
English: The five overlords prospered together, leading the alliance between the lords.

古文：陵夷至于战国，遂有七王，韩、魏、赵、燕、齐、秦、楚。
现代文：王室衰微到了战国时代，便产生了七霸，韩、魏、赵、燕、齐、秦、楚。
English: The royal family waned in the Warring States period, giving rise to the Seven Dynasties: Han, Wei, Zhao, Yan, Qi, Qin, and Chu.

古文：又有宋、卫、中山，不断如线，如三晋篡夺，亦称孤也。
现代文：又有宋、卫、中山，不绝如缕，如韩、赵、魏三家分晋，也各自称王。
English: There are also Song, Wei, and Zhongshan, which are incessant, such as Han, Zhao, and Wei, the three families are divided into Jin, and they are also called kings.

古文：《司马法》广陈三代，曰：古者六尺为步，步百为亩，亩百为夫，夫三为屋，屋三为井。
现代文：《司马法》广泛陈述了上古三代的制度，其中说：古代六尺为一步，百步为一亩，百亩为一夫，三夫为一屋，三屋为一井田。
English: "Sima Fa" extensively expounded the system of the three generations of the ancients, which said: in ancient times, six feet was one step, one hundred steps was one mu, one hundred mu was one husband, three husbands were one house, and three houses were one rice field.

古文：井方一里，是为九夫，八家共之。
现代文：井田纵横各一里，即是九夫，由八家共同所有。
English: The eight families jointly own one square kilometer of rice paddies, i.e. nine households.

古文：一夫一妇受私田百亩，公田十亩，是为八百八十亩，余二十亩为庐舍，出入相友，守望相助，疾病相救。
现代文：每对夫妇接受私田一百亩，公田十亩，八家共八百八十亩，其余的二十亩是草庐房舍占用的土地，同一井田的各家平互相关心，邻里相助，遇到疾病凶祸相互援救。
English: Each couple will receive 100 mu of private land, 10 mu of public land, 8 families will receive a total of 880 mu, and the remaining 20 mu will be the land occupied by grass-thatched houses. The families in the same field are concerned about each other, help each other in the neighborhood, and help each other in the event of illness or disaster.

古文：民受田，上田夫百亩，中田夫二百亩，下田夫三百亩，岁受耕之，爰自其处。
现代文：百姓接受田地，上好的田地每个农夫一百亩，中等田地二百亩，下等田地三百亩，每年受田耕种，自己安排更替轮种。
English: The people accept the fields. Each farmer receives one hundred mu of the best fields, two hundred mu of the medium fields, and three hundred mu of the inferior fields. They are cultivated by the fields every year, and they arrange their own replacement rotations.

古文：其家众男为余夫，亦以口受田如此。
现代文：接受田地的农夫，家中其他男子为余夫，也按人数同样接受田地。
English: The farmer who accepts the field, while the other men in the family are the remaining husbands, also accepts the field according to the number of people.

古文：士工商家受田，五口乃当农夫一口。
现代文：士、工、商家庭分配土地，五个人与一个农夫相当。
English: Five people are equal to one farmer.

古文：有赋有税，税谓公田什一及工商衡虞之入也，赋供车马甲兵士从之役。
现代文：有赋有税，税指农夫公田产量的十分之一，工匠、商人、管理山泽的衡虞缴纳各自的利润、产品，赋是指提供车马兵器、服士卒之役。
English: There are taxes and taxes, tax refers to one-tenth of the production of farmers' public land, craftsmen, merchants, and management of the mountains and rivers pay their respective profits and products, and fu refers to the provision of vehicles and weapons, and the service of soldiers.

古文：民年二十受田，六十归田。
现代文：百姓年满二十接受田地，六十岁归还田地。
English: Peasants in their twenties receive their fields, and at the age of sixty they return them.

古文：种谷必杂五种，以备灾旱。
现代文：耕种必须兼种五谷以防备自然灾害。
English: In order to prevent natural disasters, crops must be grown at the same time.

古文：田中不得有树，以妨五谷。
现代文：农田中不能有树，以免妨碍五谷生长。
English: There should be no trees in the farmland, so as not to hinder the growth of crops.

古文：环庐种桑柘，菜茹有畦，瓜瓠果蓏植于疆埸，鸡狗豕无失其时。
现代文：环绕着庐舍要种植桑树柘树，各种蔬菜分畦种植，各类瓜果种在地边，鶸豚狗猪各类家畜不要错过繁殖的时机。
English: Mulberry and eucalyptus trees should be planted around the coop, all kinds of vegetables should be planted separately, all kinds of melons and fruits should be planted on the ground, and all kinds of domestic animals should not miss the opportunity to breed.

古文：闾有序，乡有庠，序有明教，庠以行礼。
现代文：每闾有学校，各乡有学校，间里学校用以教化，乡学教以礼仪。
English: Every county has a school, every township has a school, intermediate schools are used for indoctrination, and township schools teach etiquette.

古文：司马之法，官设六军之众，因井田而制军。
现代文：按照司马之法，官方设立六军，根据井田而制定军令。
English: According to Sima's law, the government established the Six Armies and formulated military orders according to Ida.

古文：令地方一里为井，井十为通，通十为成，成方十里。
现代文：土地纵横一里为井，十井为通，十通为成，成纵横十里。
English: The length and width of the land is one mile for the well, ten wells for the passage, ten passages for the bridge, and ten miles in length and width.

古文：成十为终，终十为同，同方百里。
现代文：十成为终，十终为同，同纵横百里。
English: Ten is the end, ten is the same, and the same is a hundred miles in length and width.

古文：同十为封，封十为畿，畿方千里。
现代文：十同为封，十封为畿，畿纵横千里。
English: Shitong is a seal, Shifeng is a kilometer, and a kilometer is a thousand miles in length and width.

古文：故井四为邑，邑四为丘，丘十六井，有戎马一区，牛三头。
现代文：因此，四井为邑，四邑为丘，每丘十六井，有一匹军马，三头牛。
English: Therefore, the four wells are the towns, the four towns are the hills, and each hill has sixteen wells, one war horse, and three cows.

古文：四丘为甸，甸六十四井也，有戎马四匹，兵车一乘，牛十二头，甲士三人，卒七十二人。
现代文：四丘为甸，每甸六十四井，有四匹军马，一乘兵车，十二头牛，三个甲士，七十二士卒。
English: Four mounds of earth, each containing sixty-four wells, four war horses, a chariot, twelve oxen, three horsemen, and seventy-two foot soldiers.

古文：是谓乘车之制。
现代文：这称作乘车之制。
English: It's called the carpool system.

古文：一同百里，提封万井，除山川、坑岸、城池、邑居、园囿、街路三千六百井，定出赋六千四百井，戎马四百匹，兵车百乘，此卿大夫采地之大者也，是谓百乘之家。
现代文：一同方圆百里，总共一万井，除去山川、沟壑、城池、邑居、园囿、街路三千六百井，规定缴纳赋税的有六千四百井，四百匹军马，百乘兵车，这是卿大夫土地较多的人家，称作百乘之家。
English: There are a total of ten thousand wells within a hundred-mile radius. Excluding mountains, rivers, ravines, cities, villages, gardens, and streets, there are thirty-six hundred wells. There are sixty-four hundred wells, four hundred war horses, and one hundred chariots, which are required to pay taxes. This is a family of people with more land than Jingdafu, and is called a hundred-rider family.

古文：一封三百六十六里，提封十万井，定出赋六万四千井，戎马四千匹，兵车千乘，此谓诸侯之大者也，谓之千乘之国。
现代文：一封方圆三百六十六里，总共十万井，规定缴纳赋税的有六万四千井，四千匹军马，干乘兵车，这是诸侯中的大家，称作千乘之国。
English: A letter has a circumference of 366 li, a total of 100,000 wells, and 64,000 wells, 4,000 horses, and military vehicles are required to pay taxes. This is everyone among the princes, known as the country of thousands of wells.

古文：天子畿内方千里，提封百万井，定出赋六十四万井，戎马四万匹，兵车万乘，戎卒七十二万人，故天子称万乘之主焉。
现代文：天子王畿内方圆千里，总共百万井，规定缴纳赋税的有六十四万井，四万匹军马，万乘兵车，军士七十二万，所以称天子为万乘之主。
English: There are a million wells within a thousand-mile radius of the King of Heaven and Earth, and there are 640,000 wells, 40,000 horses, 10,000 chariots, and 720,000 soldiers who are required to pay taxes. Therefore, the King of Heaven is called the Lord of Manjushri.

古文：秦始皇既得志于天下，访周之败，以为处士横议，诸侯寻戈，四夷交侵，以弱见夺，于是削去五等焉。
现代文：秦始皇掌握天下大权后，寻找固王朝失败的原因，认为是由于处士肆意议论，诸侯好动干戈，四夷交互侵犯，而周王室因衰弱而被削除，于是取消了五等爵位。
English: After Qin Shihuang took control of the world's power, he looked for the reasons for the failure of the Gu dynasty, and believed that it was due to the officials' wanton talk, the princes' willingness to fight, and the four Yi's mutual aggression, while the Zhou royal family was removed due to weakness, so the fifth-class knighthood was canceled.

古文：汉兴，创艾亡秦孤立而败，于是割裂封疆，立爵二等，功臣侯者百有余邑。
现代文：汉朝兴起，接受秦孤立而败的教训，于是分划地界，立二等爵位，功臣封侯者有一百多个采邑。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty, the lessons of the Qin Dynasty's isolation and defeat were learned. As a result, the territorial boundaries were divided, second-class titles were established, and more than a hundred meritorious vassals were given fiefs.

古文：于时民罹秦项，户口凋弊，大侯不过万家，小者五六百户，而尊王子弟，大启九国。
现代文：当时百姓经历了秦王朝统治和楚、坠之争，人口数量衰减，大封国不过一万家，小的仅五六百户，于是汉朝尊崇王室子弟，广泛开拓了九国。
English: At that time, the people experienced the Qin Dynasty's rule and the struggle between Chu and Han, and the population decreased. There were only 10,000 large fiefs and only 5,600 small fiefs. Therefore, the Han Dynasty respected the royal children and extensively explored the Nine Kingdoms.

古文：古者有分土而无分民，若乃大者跨州连郡，小则十有余城，以户口为差降，略封疆之远近，所谓分民自汉始也。
现代文：古代分封土地而不分封人口，以致大的封国跨州连郡，小国则仅十余城，按照户为区别，经略地界的远近，所谓分民是始自垄。
English: In ancient times, land was apportioned without apportioning the population. As a result, large fiefdoms spanned several states and counties, while small fiefdoms had only a dozen or so cities. According to households, the geographical boundaries were roughly defined. The so-called apportionment of the population began with the ridges.

古文：起雁门以东，尽辽阳，为燕代。常山以南，太行左转，渡河济，渐于海，为齐赵。
现代文：从历旦以东到辽昼是遮住。鲎山以南，塞圣地向东延伸，渡过董回、渣丞，直至海滨，是查趟。
English: From the east to Liaocheng is covered. To the south of Lushan Mountain, the sacred land extends eastward, passing through Donghui and Jiezheng, until the seashore, is the inspection.

古文：谷泗以注，奄有龟蒙，为梁楚。
现代文：童眯、泗丞流入之地，包括蛊旦、羞业，是銮楚。
English: The places where Tonglu and Jiezhen flow into, including Shitan and Shiyou, are the best.

古文：东带江湖，薄会稽，为荆吴。
现代文：东面连带着垦辽回庭潮，接近盒擅一带，为型星。
English: In the east, it is accompanied by the Liao-Hui-Ting tidal current, and is close to the Box-Sheng area, and is a type star.

古文：北界淮濒，略庐衡，为淮南。
现代文：北面以进回之滨为界，包括庐冲，为龃。
English: The northern side is bounded by the coast to the east and to the west, including Hunchon.

古文：波汉之阳，亘九疑，为长沙。
现代文：北及坠塞北岸，横亘立星地，为垦涂。
English: The north side and the north bank of the cascading dam, which stretches across the land of the rising stars, are enameled.

古文：诸侯比境，周匝三垂，外接胡越。
现代文：诸侯边境相连，环绕着三面边陲，外部舆胡、垫相邻。
English: The borders of the lordships are connected, surrounding the three sides of the border, and the outer moat and cushion are adjacent.

古文：天子自有三河、东郡、颍川、南阳，自江陵以不西至巴蜀，北至云中，西至陇西，与京师内史，凡十五郡。
现代文：天子自有三但、塞登、题丛、卢坠，自以西至旦蜀，北方至昼史，西部到达胧酉，还有京师三辅地区，共十五郡。
English: Tianzi is divided into three parts: Dan, Sedan, Qizhong and Luhuang. From the west to Danshu, from the north to Nianshi, from the west to Dazhong, and from Beijing to Shizuoka, there are a total of 15 counties.

古文：文帝采贾生之议分齐赵，景帝用朝错之计削吴楚。
现代文：汉文帝采取翼生的建议分划蛮赵，星童运用垦盘的计谋削减呈楚。
English: Han Wendi took the suggestion of Ying Sheng to divide the barbarian Zhao, and the star child used the trick of the gong pan to reduce it.

古文：武帝施主父之册，下推恩之令，使诸侯王得分户邑以封子弟，不行黜陟，而籓国自析。
现代文：亘瞳施行主塞的建议，颁布推恩的诏令，使诸侯王可以把人口、食邑分封给子弟，朝廷不决定升降废黜，由藩国自行处置。
English: Watahito carried out the suggestion of the lord of the castle and issued a decree of grace, so that the princes could distribute the population and food villages to their children. The court did not decide to promote or demote, and it was up to the domain to dispose of it.

古文：自此以来，齐分为七，赵分为六，梁分为五，淮南分为三。
现代文：从此以后，查分为七，趟分为六，凿分为五，淮南分为三。
English: Since then, the inspection has been divided into seven, the trip has been divided into six, the chisel has been divided into five, and Huainan has been divided into three.

古文：皇子始立者大国不过十余城，长沙、燕、代虽有旧名，皆亡南北边矣。
现代文：新封的皇子大封国不超过十多个城邑，长丝、薤、优壁然保留着旧时的名称，都已丧失了南北两边。
English: There are no more than a dozen townships in the newly-fortified Prince Daifu's country, but the old names such as Choshin, Shizuku, and Yubike have been retained. Both the north and south sides have been lost.

古文：自文景与民休息，至平帝元始二年，民户千二百二十三万三千六十二，口五千九百五十九万四千九百七十八，其地东西九千三百二里，南北万三千三百六十八里。
现代文：自文帝、景帝推行休养生息，至平帝豆面二年，共有一千二百二十三万三千零六十二户，五千九百五十九万四千九百七十八人，土地东西九千三百零二里，南北一万三千三百六十八里。
English: From the time Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing promoted rest and recuperation to the second year of Emperor Ping's bean noodles, there were a total of 12,233,062 households, 59,594,978 people, 9,302 miles of land from east to west, and 13,368 miles from north to south.

古文：大率十里一亭，亭有长。
现代文：大抵每十里一亭，有亭长。
English: There is usually one pavilion every ten miles, with a pavilion leader.

古文：十亭一乡，乡有三老，有秩啬夫、游徼各一人。
现代文：十亭一乡，乡有三老，有秩、啬夫、游徼各一人。
English: There are ten pavilions in one township, and there are three elders in the township, each with a rank, a miser, and a wanderer.

古文：县大率方百里，民稠则减，稀则旷，乡、亭亦如之。
现代文：每县大约纵横各百里，人口稠密土地就减少一些，人烟稀少土地就多一些，乡、亭也是这样。
English: Each county is about a hundred miles in length and breadth, with less densely populated land and more sparsely populated land. The same applies to townships and pavilions.

古文：皆秦制也。
现代文：都是秦时的制度。
English: It is all the system of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：光武中兴，不逾前制，东海王疆以去就有礼，故优以大封，兼食鲁郡二十九县，其余称为宠锡者，兼一郡而已。
现代文：莲光亘适中兴，并不逾越前代的制度，东海王型彊因为去留进退的举止合于礼仪，所以优厚地封赏他，兼以叠郡二十九县为食邑，其余因宠幸而封赐的官员，仅仅兼以一郡为食邑而已。
English: Lian Guang Weng Shi Zhongxing did not surpass the previous generation's system. Because the behavior of the King of the East China Sea, Donghai Wang Jiao, was in line with etiquette, he was generously rewarded with the 29 counties of Jiaxing County as food towns. The remaining officials, who were awarded because of their favor, only received one county as food towns.

古文：至桓帝永寿三年，户千六十七万七千九百六十，口五千六百四十八万六千八百五十六，斯亦户口之滋殖者也。
现代文：到了担童丞昼三年，有一千零六十七万七千九百六十户，五千六百四十八万六千八百五十六人，这也是户增长的年代。
English: By the third year of the Tadanojo era, the number of households had increased from 10,677,960 to 56,486,856. This was also an era of household growth.

古文：献帝建安元年拜曹操为镇东将军，封费亭侯。
现代文：献帝建安元年任命笪銮为镇束将军，封费亭侯。
English: In the first year of the Emperor Jian'an, he appointed Zou as the general of Zhenzuc, and gave him the title of Fei Ting Hou.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，初制封王之庶子为乡公，嗣王之庶子为亭侯，公侯之庶子为亭伯。
现代文：魏文帝黄初三年，初次规定受封之王的庶子为乡公，继位之王的庶子为亭侯，公侯的庶子为亭伯。
English: In the third year of Emperor Weiwen's reign, it was first stipulated that the illegitimate son of a king who had received a title of nobility was to be a townsman, the illegitimate son of a king who succeeded to the throne was to be a prince, and the illegitimate son of a prince was to be a prince.

古文：刘备章武元年，亦以郡国封建诸王，或遥采嘉名，不由检土地所出。
现代文：刘备章武元年，也把郡国分封给诸王，有的祇是遥领嘉名，并不核查土地在何处。
English: In the first year of Liu Bei's reign, he also assigned counties and provinces to various kings. Some of them were only given distant territories and did not check where the land was.

古文：其户二十万九十万。
现代文：当时共有二十万户，男女人九十万。
English: At that time, there were a total of 200,000 households, with 900,000 men and women.

古文：孙叔赤乌五年，亦取中州嘉号封建诸王。
现代文：孙权赤乌五年，也采用中州的美名来分封诸王。
English: In the 5th year of Sun Quan's reign, he also used Zhongzhou's good name to divide the kings.

古文：其户五十二万三千，男女口二百四十万。
现代文：当时有五十二万三千户，男女万。
English: At that time, there were 523,000 households, including 10,000 men and women.

古文：晋文帝为晋王，命裴秀等建立五等之制，惟安平郡公孚邑万户，制度如魏诸王。
现代文：置塞童当了置王后，令苤昼等人建立五等封爵制度，惟有安平郡公司马孚的食邑有一万户，规模舆魏诸王相同。
English: Qie Zetong became Qie Wang, and ordered Xing Rong and others to establish a five-class knighthood system. However, Anping County Company Mafu's food village has 10,000 households, the same size as the kings of Wei Dynasty.

古文：其余县公邑千八百户，地方七十五里；大国侯邑千六百户，地方七十里；次国侯邑千四百户，地方六十五里；大国伯邑千二百户，地方六十里；次国伯邑千户，地方五十五里；大国子邑八百户，地方五十里；次国子邑六百户，地方四十五里；男邑四百户，地方四十里。
现代文：其他县公食邑一千八百户，土地纵横各七十五里；大封国侯食邑一千六百户，土地纵横各七十里；次国侯食邑一千四百户，土地纵横各六十五里；大封国伯食邑一千二百户，土地纵横各六十里；次国伯食邑一千户，土地纵横各五十五里；大封国子食邑八百户，土地纵横各五十里；次国子食邑六百户，土地纵横各四十五里；大封国男食邑四百户，土地纵横各四十里；次国男食邑二百户，土地纵横各二十五里。
English: In other counties, there are 1,800 households in public food townships, with a land length and width of 75 miles each; 1,600 households in daifu-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-kokuho-koku

古文：武帝泰始元年，封诸王以郡为国。
现代文：武帝泰始元年，把郡分封诸王作为封国。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, he assigned counties to various kings as fiefs.

古文：邑二万户为大国，置上下中下三军，兵五千人；邑万户为次国，置上军下军，兵三千人；五千户为小国，置一军，兵千五百人。
现代文：食邑二万户为大国，设上中下三军，兵士五千人；食邑万户为次国，设上军和下军，兵士三千人；五千户为小国，设一军，兵士一千五百人。
English: For a large country, twenty thousand households in a food-producing town set up three armies, one at the top, one at the middle and one at the bottom, with five thousand soldiers; for a second country, ten thousand households in a food-producing town set up an army at the top and an army at the bottom, with three thousand soldiers; for a small country, five thousand households set up an army, with fifteen hundred soldiers.

古文：王不之国，官于京师。
现代文：各地之王不到各自的封国去，而在京城任官。
English: The kings of various regions did not go to their respective fiefdoms, but held office in the capital.

古文：罢五等之制，公侯邑万户以上为大国，五千户以上为次国，不满五千户为小国。
现代文：取消五等封爵的制度，公侯食邑一万户以上为大国，五千户以上为次国，不满五千户的为小国。
English: The system of fifth-class knighthoods will be abolished, and more than 10,000 households in princely food villages will be big countries, more than 5,000 households will be second-class countries, and less than 5,000 households will be small countries.

古文：太康元年，平吴，大凡户二百四十五万九千八百四十，口一千六百一十六万三千八百六十三。
现代文：太康元年，平定吴国，大约拥有二百四十五万九千八百四十户，一千六百一十六万三千八百六十三人。
English: In the first year of Taikang, the state of Wu was pacified, with approximately 2,459,840 households and 161,163,863 people.

古文：而江左诸国并三分食一，元帝渡江，太兴元年，始制九分食一。
现代文：而江束各国都取本国土地的三分之一为食邑，元帝渡过长江后，在太兴元年开始规定各封国以九分之一篇食邑。
English: However, all countries along the Yangtze River took one-third of their land as food villages. After the Yuan Emperor crossed the Yangtze River, he began to stipulate that each county should take one-ninth of its land as food villages in the first year of Taixing.

古文：司州。
现代文：司州。
English: Shizuoka Prefecture.

古文：案《禹贡》豫州之地。
现代文：案《禹贡》中所记的豫州之地。
English: The place in Yuzhou described in "Yugong."

古文：及汉武帝，初置司隶校尉，所部三辅、三河诸郡。
现代文：到漠武帝时，初次设置司隶校尉，统领三辅、三河各郡。
English: When Emperor Mengwu came to power, he first set up the position of Shizhi lieutenant colonel to lead the three auxiliary counties and the three counties of the three rivers.

古文：其界西得雍州之京兆、冯翊、扶风三郡，北得冀州分河东、河内二郡，东得豫州之弘农、河南二郡，郡凡七。
现代文：其地界西部有雍州的京兆、冯翊、扶风三郡，北部有冀州的河东、河内二郡，束部包容豫州的弘农、河南二郡，共七郡。
English: In the western part of its territory, there are three counties of Jingzhao, Fenglu and Fufeng in Yongzhou, two counties of Hedong and Hanoi in Jizhou in the north, and two counties of Hongnong and Henan in Yuzhou and Sokube in the south, a total of seven counties.

古文：位望降于牧伯，银印青绶。
现代文：郡守的地位和声望高于州郡牧伯，授予银印青绶。
English: The status and reputation of the county magistrate is higher than that of the county magistrate, and he is awarded the Silver Seal Youth Award.

古文：及光武都洛阳，司隶所部与前汉不异。
现代文：到光武帝定都洛阳时，司隶所统管的范围与西汉相同。
English: By the time Emperor Guangwu established Luoyang as the capital, the scope of the Sili was the same as that of Western Han.

古文：魏氏受禅，即都汉宫，司隶所部河南、河东、河内、弘农并冀州之平阳，合五郡，置司州。
现代文：魏氏接受王位，即以汉皇宫所在地为京城，司隶管辖河南、河东、河内、弘农以及冀州的平阳，共五郡，设置司州。
English: When the Wei Dynasty accepted the throne, the location of the Han imperial palace became the capital city, and the Diocese was placed under the jurisdiction of Henan, Hedong, Hanoi, Hongnong, and Pingyang in Jizhou, a total of five counties, and the Diocese was established.

古文：晋仍居魏都，乃以三辅还属雍州，分河南立荥阳，分雍州之京兆立上洛，废东郡立顿丘，遂定名司州，以司隶校尉统之。
现代文：晋沿用魏都，于是把三辅还属于雍州，分河南郡另立荣阳，分雍州的京兆另立上洛，取消束郡设立顿丘，于是定名司州，以司隶校尉统管。
English: Jinjiang used the Wei capital, so the Sanfu still belonged to Yongzhou, divided the Henan county and set up Rongyang, divided the Yongzhou county and set up Shangluo, canceled the Sok county and set up Dongqiu, so it was named Shizhou, with the Shizhu lieutenant in charge.

古文：州统郡一十二，县一百，户四十七万五千七百。
现代文：州管辖十二郡，一百个县，四十七万五千七百户。
English: The state has jurisdiction over 12 counties, 100 counties, and 475,000 households.

古文：河南郡汉置。
现代文：河南郡汉代设置。
English: Henan County during the Han Dynasty.

古文：统县十二，户一十一万四千四百。
现代文：统管十二县，十一万四千四百户。
English: In charge of 12 counties, with 114,400 households.

古文：置尹。
现代文：置尹。
English: Put Yin in charge.

古文：洛阳置尉。
现代文：洛阳置尉。
English: Luo Yang is promoted to lieutenant.

古文：五部、三市。
现代文：共有五部、三市。
English: A total of five parts and three cities.

古文：东西七里，南北九里。
现代文：东西七里，南北九里。
English: Seven miles east to west, nine miles north to south.

古文：东有建春、东阳、清明三门，南有开阳、平昌、宣阳、建阳四门，西有广阳、西明、阊阖三门，北有大夏、广莫二门。
现代文：东有建春、东阳、清明三门，南有开阳、平昌、宣阳、建阳四门，西有广陨、西明、阗闽三门，北有大夏、广莫二门。
English: There are three gates of Jianchun, Dongyang and Qingming in the east, four gates of Kaiyang, Pyeongchang, Xuanyang and Jianyang in the south, three gates of Guangye, Ximing and Handan in the west, and two gates of Daxia and Guangmo in the north.

古文：司隶校尉、河南尹及百官列城内也。
现代文：司隶校尉、河南尹以及百官聚居城内。
English: Colonel Sisli, Henan Yin and hundreds of officials gathered in the city.

古文：河南周东都王城郏鄏也。
现代文：河南周束都王城郏鄙。
English: Wangcheng, the capital of Henan Province's Zhouzhuang Autonomous Region, is in disrepair.

古文：巩周孝王封周桓公孙惠公于巩，号东周，故战国时有东、西周号。
现代文：巩周孝王封周桓公之孙惠公于巩，号为东周，因而战国时有束周、西周之称。
English: Gong Zhou Xiao Wang, the grandson of Zhou Kuan Gong, was called Dong Zhou, so he was known as Sok Zhou and Xi Zhou during the Warring States period.

古文：芒山、首阳其界也。
现代文：芒山、首阳是它的县界。
English: Mangshan and Shouyang are its county borders.

古文：河阴新安函谷关所居。
现代文：河阴新安函谷关所在地。
English: Located in Hexin Xinyan Hakodate.

古文：成皋有关，郑之武牢。
现代文：成皋有关，是郑的武牢关。
English: It is related to Chengyu, it is related to Zheng's Wudongguan.

古文：缑氏有刘聚，周大夫刘子邑。
现代文：缑氏有刘聚，周大夫刘子的食邑。
English: Mr. Zou's is Liu Ju, and Dr. Zhou's is Liu Zi.

古文：有延寿城、仙人祠。
现代文：有延寿城、仙人祠。
English: There is Enju Castle and a hermit's shrine.

古文：阳城有鄂阪关。
现代文：阳城有鄂阪关。
English: Yangcheng has the Osaka Pass.

古文：此邑是为地中，夏至景尺五寸。
现代文：遣一邑处于大地的中心，夏至时日影为一尺五寸。
English: Located in the center of the earth, the shadow cast by the sun during the summer solstice is one foot and five inches.

古文：有阳城山、箕山，许由墓在焉。
现代文：有阳城山、箕山。尽虫基就在那襄。
English: There are Yangcheng Mountain and Lushan Mountain. All the worms are there.

古文：新城有延寿关。
现代文：绩越有延壹飓。
English: The performance is getting better and better.

古文：故戎蛮子之国。
现代文：先前的卢蛮王之国。
English: The country of the former King of Roumania.

古文：陆浑故蛮子国，楚壮王伐陆浑是也。
现代文：鲤先前的蛮子国，楚庄王伐堕运便是此地。
English: This was the site of the previous barbarian kingdom, Chuzhuang Wangfaw.

古文：梁战国时谓为南梁，别少梁也。
现代文：凿璺回时称为南梁，以区别于少梁。
English: When it is chiseled back, it is called the south beam to distinguish it from the short beam.

古文：阳翟荥阳郡泰始二年置。
现代文：阳翟荣阳郡画丝二年设置。
English: The Rongyang County Impotence Clinic was set up two years ago.

古文：统县八，户三万四千。
现代文：统管八县，三万四千户。
English: It oversees eight counties with 34,000 households.

古文：荥阳地名敖，秦置敖仓者。
现代文：曲地名为邀，台塑建敖仓的地方。
English: The name of the scenic spot invites you to visit the place where Formosa Plastics built its warehouse.

古文：京郑太叔段所居。
现代文：塞整主趣垦居住的地方。
English: Tidying up the place where the main characters live.

古文：密故周畿内。
现代文：蜜原墨王畿内。
English: Mihara Mokwang Kinai.

古文：卷有博浪长沙，张良击秦始皇处。
现代文：鲞困亟有博浪长沙，旦睦进击台并皇的地方。
English: Changsha is in desperate need of relief, and Dangmu has entered a place where Taiwan and the emperor are united.

古文：阳武苑陵中牟六国时，赵献侯都。开封宋蓬池在东北，或曰蓬泽。
现代文：越哇哇主鱼时是赵塞呕的国都。翘鲎塞蓬迤在其东北，也称为蓬攫。
English: It was the national capital of Zhao Sevan when it was the main fish of Yueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyueyue.

古文：弘农郡汉置。
现代文：弘农郡坠设置。
English: Gongnong County is set to fall.

古文：统县六，户一万四千。
现代文：统管六县，一万四千户。
English: It oversees six counties with 14,000 households.

古文：弘农本函谷关。
现代文：丑皇前函谷关。
English: Ugly Emperor's Former Hakodate Pass.

古文：陕故虢国，周分陕东西，二相主之。
现代文：汉武帝迁至面越。邀原称塑，莲亘嘘改称翅。堕原铲鱼，周时把堕划分为东西两部分，由二相主管。
English: Emperor Hanwu moved to Mengyue. Zhaozhou was originally called Shou, while Lianwu was renamed Fang. Pudong was originally spadefish, but Zhou divided Pudong into two parts, East and West, with the two phases in charge.

古文：宜阳黾池华阴华山在县南。
现代文：宜阳阻池华阴华山在华阴县南。
English: Yiyang Dangchi Huayin Huashan is located in the south of Huayin County.

古文：上洛郡泰始二年，分京兆南郡置。
现代文：主越画盘二年划分出塞韭南部而设置。
English: In the second year of the plan, the southern part of Saigon was divided and set up.

古文：统县三，户万七千。
现代文：统管三县，一万七千户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 17,000 households.

古文：上洛峣关在县西北。
现代文：上盗堕飓在县西北。
English: The robbery took place in the northwest of the prefecture.

古文：商秦相卫商鞅邑。
现代文：宜台相街人卖麸的采邑。
English: It is a good choice for those who want to sell yakitori.

古文：庐氏熊耳山在东，伊水所出。
现代文：麈泜毖互山在它的柬边，是鱼丞的发源地。
English: Shuguang Mountain, on its Cambodian side, is the birthplace of fish cake.

古文：平阳郡故属河东，魏分立。
现代文：平阳郡原属迥塞，墓分立。
English: Pingyang County was originally part of Fuxi, and the tombs are separate.

古文：统县十二，户四万二千。
现代文：统管十二县，四万二千户。
English: It oversees 12 counties and 42,000 households.

古文：平阳旧尧都。侯国。
现代文：挝旧袁都。侯国。遥原荡堡国。
English: Laos, the former capital of the Yuan Dynasty. A vassal state. A faraway fortress state.

古文：杨故杨侯国。端氏韩、魏。赵既为诸侯，以端氏封晋君也。
现代文：塑旦整、墓、赵成为诸侯，将鲎旦封给置昼丞璧原垄坦国。
English: Shaping Danzhe, Tomb and Zhao into princes, he gave the Danzhou fief to Jie Rongtang, the original ruler of Danzhou.

古文：永安故霍伯国。
现代文：垄山在其束。渔王狐盏越公国相。
English: The ridges of the mountains are in their bundles. The king of fishermen, the fox, flies over the duchy.

古文：霍山在东。
现代文：缝旦置亘蚣从迪迭迁徙到这襄。
English: Seamstress Watanabe migrated from Ditei to this town.

古文：临汾公国相。
现代文：龌扭越山在西南。龇公围相。
English: 扭越山 in the southwest. 公围 phase.

古文：北屈壶口山在东南。
现代文：韭厘壶口山在东南。
English: Bali's Mount Hukou is in the southeast.

古文：有南屈，故称北。
现代文：有直昼，所以称为：岖。
English: There is no daylight, so it is called: Rugged.

古文：皮氏故耿国。
现代文：卢旦原挞国。
English: Ludangyuan County.

古文：闻喜故曲沃。
现代文：多画设置。统管九县，四万二千五百户。
English: It oversees nine counties with a total of 42,500 households.

古文：晋武公自晋阳徙此。
现代文：尽量昼原迪达。置亘生公从置盐迁徙到遣裹。
English: As far as possible, it should be done in the daytime. Ochi Watanabe migrated from Ochi Salt to Yanbulai.

古文：垣王屋山在东北，沇水所出。
现代文：垣王垦山在东北，边塞的发源地。
English: Mount Kakio is in the northeast, the birthplace of the frontier fortress.

古文：汾阳公国相。
现代文：监公国相。
English: Minister of the Crown.

古文：大阳吴山在西。
现代文：左盐星山在西。
English: Zuo Yan Xing Shan is in the west.

古文：周武王封西周太伯后于此猗氏古猗顿城。
现代文：但茎王封酉眉主垣的后代于此。猹旦古猹塑越。
English: However, the descendants of the main stem of the main stem of the main stem of the main stem are here.

古文：解有盐池。
现代文：蟹有盐池。
English: Crabs have salt ponds.

古文：蒲坂有历山，舜所耕也。
现代文：渔邀有历旦，叠耕作的地方。
English: There are places that have been farmed in layers for generations.

古文：有雷首山，夷齐居其阳，所谓首阳山。
现代文：有重苴山，值童、圭遭曾居住在山南，即所谓苴垦灿。
English: There is a heavy Lushan, and the valedictorian, Gui, once lived in Shannan, that is, the so-called Lushan.

古文：河北
现代文：河北。
English: Hebei Province.

古文：汲郡泰始二年置。
现代文：巡台盘二年设置。
English: The patrol platform will be set up in two years.

古文：统县六，户三万七千。
现代文：统管六县，三莴七千户。
English: It oversees six counties with 37,000 households.

古文：汲有铜关。
现代文：汲有铜板。
English: It has a copper plate.

古文：朝歌纣所都。
现代文：朝歌纣建都的地方。
English: The place where the capital was built in the morning song.

古文：共故国。
现代文：共古国。
English: It is an ancient country.

古文：北山，淇水所出。
现代文：北山，淇水的发源地。
English: Kitayama, the birthplace of kimizu.

古文：林虑获嘉故汲新中乡。
现代文：林虑获嘉原汲新中乡。
English: Lin Qian was awarded the title of Jiayuan Cuixin Middle Township.

古文：汉武帝行过时，获吕嘉首，因改名。
现代文：汉武帝巡行经过这襄时，获吕嘉首级，因而改名。
English: When Emperor Hanwu's procession passed by here, he was awarded the first rank of Lü Jia, and thus changed his name.

古文：修武晋所启南阳，秦改名修武。
现代文：寥武晋开辟的南阳，秦改称修武。
English: Nanyang, which had been opened up by Yanwu Jin, was renamed Xiuwu by Qin.

古文：河内郡汉置。
现代文：河内郡汉设置。
English: Hanoi County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县九，户五万二千。
现代文：统管九县，五万二千户。
English: It oversees nine counties with 52,000 households.

古文：野王太行山在西北。
现代文：野王太行山在西北。
English: Wild King Taihang Mountain is in the northwest.

古文：州故晋邑。
现代文：州原晋邑。
English: Shūhara Jin-eup.

古文：怀平皋邢侯自襄国徙此。
现代文：怀平皋邢侯从襄国迁徙到此。
English: Prince Huai Ping migrated here from Xiangguo.

古文：河阳沁水轵故周原邑。
现代文：河阳沁水软原周原邑。
English: It is located in Zhouyuan County, Luzhuiguan, Heyang.

古文：山阳温故国也，苏忿生封。
现代文：山阳温故国，苏忿生封地。
English: Sanyangwen's homeland, Su Ren Sheng's fiefdom.

古文：广平郡魏置。
现代文：广平郡墓设置。
English: Guangping County Cemetery was established.

古文：统县十五，户三万五千二百。
现代文：统管十五县，三万五千二百户。
English: It oversees 15 counties with 35,200 households.

古文：广平邯郸秦置为郡。
现代文：广平邯郸秦设置为郡。
English: Guangping and Qin were set up as counties.

古文：易阳武安涉襄国故邢侯国都。
现代文：易阳武安涉襄国故邢侯国都。
English: Yiyang Wu'an is the former capital of Xiangyang Province.

古文：南和任曲梁列人肥乡临水广年侯相。
现代文：南和任曲梁列人肥乡临水广年侯相。
English: Nanhe and Renqu Liang were married to each other for a long time in Linshui, Feixiang.

古文：斥漳平恩阳平郡魏置。
现代文：压违至墨阳平郡魏设置。
English: The pressure is contrary to the Wei setting of Moyang Ping County.

古文：统县七，户五万一千。
现代文：统管七县，五万一千户。
English: It oversees seven counties and 51,000 households.

古文：元城汉元后生邑。
现代文：元城汉元后出生的都邑。
English: Yuancheng, the capital city of China, was born after the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：馆陶清泉发干东武阳阳平乐平
现代文：馆陶清泉发干柬武阳阳平乐平
English: Museum pottery clear spring dries up in Cambodia Wuyangyangping Leping

古文：魏郡汉置。
现代文：魏郡汉设置。
English: Wei County Han Dynasty set up.

古文：统县八，户四万七百。
现代文：统管八县，四万零七百户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 40,700 households.

古文：鄴魏武受封居此。
现代文：邺魏武帝受封居住在遣裹。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei was exiled and lived there.

古文：长乐魏斥丘安阳荡阴内黄黄池在西。
现代文：长乐魏斥丘安阳荡阴内黄黄池在其西部。
English: In the western part of Changle, there is the Huanghuang Pond inside the Yin Yang Yang Yang of Weiyuqiu.

古文：黎阳故黎侯国。
现代文：黎阳原黎侯国。
English: Liyang was formerly Lihou Province.

古文：顿丘郡泰始二年置。
现代文：顿丘郡童游二年设置。
English: Dongqiu County Children's Tour Set for Second Year

古文：统县四，户六千三百。
现代文：统管四县，六千三百户。
English: It oversees four counties and has 6,300 households.

古文：顿丘繁阳阴安卫
现代文：顿丘繁阳阴安卫
English: Dongqiu bustling with sun, shade and safety

古文：永嘉之后，司州沦没刘聪。
现代文：永嘉之后，司州沦陷于刘聪。
English: After Yongjia, Sizhou fell to Liu Cong.

古文：聪以洛阳为荆州，及石勒，复以为司州。
现代文：刘聪以洛阳为荆塑，到石勤时，又以洛阳为司州。
English: Liu Cong took Luoyang as Jingzhu, and when he went to Shiquan, he also took Luoyang as Shizhou.

古文：石季龙又分司州之河南、河东、弘农、荥阳，兗州之陈留、东燕为洛州。元帝渡江，亦侨置司州于徐，非本所也。
现代文：石季龙又划分旦业的迥亩、至递、苤荡和童业的速贸、塞恋为盗业。五童渡辽后，也暂把旦业置于徐，并非原所在地。
English: Shi Qilong also divided Danyang's mu, zhi, wang and children's industry into fast trade and stealing. After the five children arrived in Liao, Danyang was temporarily placed in Xu, not the original location.

古文：后以弘农人流寓寻阳者侨立为弘农郡。
现代文：后来因流亡寄居在寻阳的弘农人暂立了弘农郡。
English: Later, the Hongnong people, who lived in exile in Xuanyang, temporarily established Hongnong County.

古文：又以河东人南寓者，于汉武陵郡孱陵县界上明地侨立河东郡，统安邑、闻喜、永安、临汾、弘农、谯、松滋、大戚八县。并寄居焉。
现代文：寄居南方的河东人在汉武陵郡孱陵县界内的上明地方暂立了河东郡，统领安邑、闻喜、永安、临汾、弘农、谯、松滋、大戚八个县，都寄居于当地。
English: The people of Hedong, who lived in the south of the country, temporarily established Hedong County in Shangming, which is within the boundaries of Fuling County, Hanwuling County. The leaders of eight counties, namely, Anyi, Wuxi, Yong'an, Linfen, Hongnong, Handan, Songzhi and Dati, all lived in the area.

古文：永和五年，桓温入洛，复置河南郡，属司州。
现代文：永和五年，桓温入洛，重置河南郡，隶属司州。
English: In the fifth year of Yonghe, Kanwen entered Luo, resetting Henan County, belonging to Shizhou.

古文：兗州。
现代文：兖州。
English: Zhangzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》济河之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》记载中的济河之地，舜设十二牧，此为其一。
English: According to "Yugong," the land of Jihe in the record, there are twelve herdsmen, this is one.

古文：《周礼》： 河东曰兗州。 
现代文：《周礼》： 河东曰兖州。 
English: "Zhou Li": East of the river is called Quzhou.

古文：《春秋元命包》云命： 五星流为兗州。
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 五星流为兖州。
English: "Spring and Autumn Original Life Package" said: The five-star stream is Luzhou.

古文：兗，瑞也，信也。 
现代文：兖，端也，信也。 
English: ,端也,信也.

古文：又云： 盖取兗水以名焉。 
现代文：又说： 取兖水以命名其地。 
English: He also said: Let's take Surabaya's water and name it after the place.

古文：汉武帝置十三州，以旧名为兗州，自此不改。
现代文：汉武童设十一一，据旧名称为查业，从此不再更改。
English: Hanwu Children's Day will be held on the 11th day of the 11th month. According to the old name, it will be called Chagye, and will no longer be changed.

古文：州统郡国八，县五十六，户八万三千三百。
现代文：全州统管八个郡国，五十六县，八万三千三百户。
English: The whole state is in charge of eight counties, fifty-six counties, and 83,300 households.

古文：陈留国汉置。
现代文：陈留国选设置。
English: Chen's country of residence is set.

古文：统县十，户三万。
现代文：统管十县，三万户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 30,000 households.

古文：魏武帝封。
现代文：墓王堕所封。
English: The tomb of the fallen king.

古文：雍丘故杞国。
现代文：龃垦垣原匡塑，壬迂受厄之处。
English: Sculpted by Higakigahara Yasuchika, depicting the place where Imaido suffered misfortune.

古文：尉氏襄邑外黄
现代文：扯原担周。翘旦塞垦处童
English: It's been a long week. It's been a long day.

古文：濮阳国故属东郡，晋初分东郡置。
现代文：濮阳国原属塞登，置初与塞型分置。
English: Fenyang was originally part of Sedan, but was separated from Sedan at the beginning.

古文：统县四，户二万一千。
现代文：统管四县，二万一千户。
English: It oversees four counties with 21,000 households.

古文：濮阳古昆吾国。
现代文：濮阳古昆吾国。
English: Shenyang Gukun is the center of our country.

古文：师延为纣作靡靡之乐，即而投此水。公国相。
现代文：匝丝骂挝作靡靡之乐，随即投身逭条河中。公国相。
English: She scolded Lao for making fun of her, and then threw herself into the middle of the river.

古文：廪丘公国相。
现代文：廪丘公国相。
English: He became the Minister of the Principality of Shizuoka.

古文：有羊角城。
现代文：有羊角城。
English: There is Sheep Point.

古文：白马有瓠子堤。
现代文：白马有瓠子堤。
English: There is a dike in Hakuba.

古文：鄄城公国相。
现代文：鄄城公国相。
English: Minister of the Duchy of Shicheng.

古文：济阴郡汉置。
现代文：济阴郡设置。
English: It is located in Jiyin County.

古文：统县九，户七千六百。
现代文：统管九县，七干六百户。
English: It oversees nine counties, with seven hundred and six hundred households.

古文：定陶汉高祖封彭越为梁王，都此。
现代文：定陶汉高祖封彭越为梁王，以这襄为都邑。
English: Ding Tao Han Gao's ancestor named Peng Yue as the King of Liang, and this became the capital city.

古文：乘氏故侯国。
现代文：垂旦原侯国。
English: It is the former Tottan Province.

古文：句阳离狐宛句己氏成武有楚丘亭。
现代文：己氏成武有楚丘亭。
English: There is a Chukyu-tei for those who want to become samurai.

古文：单父故侯国。
现代文：单父故侯国。
English: His single father, the late Hokoku, died.

古文：城阳舜所渔，尧冢在西。
现代文：城阳舜荡爱捕鱼之处，尧的墓冢在其西。
English: Where the peregrine falcon loves to fish, the cormorant graveyard is to the west.

古文：高平国。故属梁国，晋初分山阳置。
现代文：高平国原属梁国，置初从山阳分置。
English: Gaoping Province was originally part of Liang Province, and was initially separated from Sanyang Province.

古文：统县七，户三千八百。
现代文：统管七县，三干八百尸。
English: In charge of seven counties, with three hundred and eight hundred corpses.

古文：昌邑侯相。
现代文：昌邑侯相。
English: He was the lord chamberlain of Changyi.

古文：有甲父亭。
现代文：有甲父亭。
English: There is Kouchotei.

古文：钜野鲁获麟所。
现代文：钜野鲁获麟的地方。
English: The place where Konno Lu won Rin.

古文：方与金乡湖陆高平侯国。
现代文：方与金乡湖陆高平侯国。
English: Fang and Jinxiang Huludao Gaoping Hou Guo.

古文：南平阳侯国。
现代文：南平阳侯国。
English: Nanpingyang County.

古文：有漆亭。
现代文：有蓬皇。
English: There is a puff of smoke.

古文：任城国汉置。
现代文：任城国汉设置。
English: Rencheng Guohan set up.

古文：统县三，户一千七百。
现代文：统管三县，一千七百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 1,700 households.

古文：任城古任国。
现代文：任城古。真父銮
English: Ren Chenggu. True Father

古文：须昌寿张有蚩尤祠。
现代文：东平国汉设置。统管七县，六千四百户。
English: Dongping Guohan was set up. It oversaw seven counties with a total of 6,400 households.

古文：范无盐富城东平陆刚平
现代文：飓皱有困。范无盐富城东平陆刚平
English: Fan wu salt-free Fucheng Dongping Lu Gangping

古文：济北国汉置。
现代文：济北国汉设置。
English: Jibei Kokuhan set up.

古文：统县五，户三千五百。
现代文：统管五县，三千五百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 3,500 households.

古文：庐扁鹊所生。
现代文：庐扁鹊出生地。
English: It's his birthplace.

古文：县西有石门。
现代文：县西有五置。
English: In the west of the prefecture, there are five locations.

古文：蛇丘有下灌亭。泰山郡汉置。
现代文：临邑东阿谷城越有困。蛇丘有避。泰山郡选设置。
English: Lin'e's Dongatangcheng is in trouble. Snake Hill has to be avoided. Taishan County election is set.

古文：统县十一，户九千三百。
现代文：统管十一县，九千三百户。
English: In charge of 11 counties, with 9,300 households.

古文：奉高西南有明堂。
现代文：台直西南有明堂。
English: There is a Ming Hall in the southwest of Taiwan.

古文：博有龟山。
现代文：坛有皇山。
English: The altar has an imperial crown.

古文：南武阳有颛臾城。
现代文：厦蓖啦龃侯国。有菟裘聚。皿珏旦在其东北。
English: Xiamen is a county with a large number of counties and cities. Its northeast is the most prosperous region.

古文：莱芜有原山。
现代文：勤堡原称垩盐。
English: Qinbao was originally known as Jixing Salt.

古文：东牟故牟国。
现代文：南武阳有幽。
English: Nanbuyang is quiet.

古文：钜平有阳关亭。
现代文：苤芜有愿业。垒原皇玺。
English: There is no such thing as a voluntary act. Emperor Iehara is dead.

古文：惠帝之末，兗州阖境沦没石勒。
现代文：堑垩有碰。惠帝末年，兗州全境沦入互塑手中。
English: At the end of Hui's reign, the whole territory of Zhangzhou fell into the hands of the Mughals.

古文：后石季龙改陈留郡为建昌郡，属洛州。
现代文：后来互垩垄将陈留郡改为建旦登，属于盗业。
English: Later, he changed Chenliu County to Jiandandeng County, which is theft.

古文：是时遗黎南渡，元帝侨置兗州，寄居京口。
现代文：当时遣民南渡，五童借地重置童业，寄居在塞旦。
English: At that time, the repatriated people were sent to Nantou, and the five children leased land to restart their children's studies and lived in Sedan.

古文：明帝以郗鉴为刺史，寄居广陵，置濮阳、济阴、高平、太山等郡。
现代文：旦瞳任整鉴为刺史，寄居在卢医，设置遥盐、遗鉴、矗垩、立山等郡。
English: Tan Hitomi was appointed as the chief historian of the whole collection, and he lived in Lu I, and set up the counties of Distant Salt, Legacy Collection, Handan, and Tateyama.

古文：后改为南兗州，或还江南，或居盱眙，或居山阳。
现代文：后来又改为童宠丛，有的归还红南，有的居于旦逊，有的居于业壁。
English: Later, it was changed to a child's favorite, and some were returned to Hongnan, some lived in Danson, and some lived in Yabai.

古文：后始割地为境，常居广陵，南与京口对岸。
现代文：在此之后才开始割地为境，常居于广陵，南面与京口隔岸相对。
English: It was only after this that they began to live off the land, often living in Guangling, on the opposite side of the river from Kyoguchi to the south.

古文：咸康四年，于北谯界立陈留郡。
现代文：盛尘四年，在韭盏的边界立速鱼璺。
English: For four years, the dust has been piled up, and fish hooks have sprung up at the border of Shizhu.

古文：安帝分广陵郡之建陵、临江、如皋、宁海、蒲涛五县置山阳郡，属南兗州。
现代文：塞童划分出庐医塑的建堕、堕江、皇睦、窒握、渣边五县设山阳郡，属于南兖州。
English: Setong divided the five counties of Jianfudao, Jiaojiang, Wangmugu, Nianjia and Jianbian into Sanyang County, which belongs to South Luzhou.

古文：豫州。
现代文：塑出。
English: molded out.

古文：案《禹贡》为荆河之地。
现代文：案《禹贡》中记载为型塑之地。
English: It is recorded in the novel "Yugong" as a place of molding.

古文：《周礼》： 河南曰豫州。 
现代文：《周礼》： 河南日鱼出。 
English: "Zhou Li": Henan's sunfish is out.

古文：豫者舒也，言禀中和之气，性理安舒也。
现代文：豫就是舒的意思，指受中和之气，情绪和理智安详舒缓。
English: 豫 is the meaning of "shu," which refers to the neutralization of qi, and the tranquility of mood and reason.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 钩钤星别为豫州。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 钩铃星是鱼的分野。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Elements of Life Package" said: the hook star is the fish field.

古文：地界，西自华山，东至于淮，北自济，南界荆山。
现代文：地界西自茎旦，束至塑，北起边塞，南以趔山为界。
English: The geographical boundary in the west is from Zhuodan, Sokou to Shaping, in the north is from the border fortress, and in the south is from Shaoshan.

古文：秦兼天下，以为三川、河东、南阳、颍川、砀、泗水、薛七郡。
现代文：台兼并天下，建置三丛、迥塞、直盐、题丛、蛋、回塞、整七郡。
English: Taiwan annexed the whole country, and built three clusters, two blocks, one block, one block, two blocks, one egg, one block, and seven counties.

古文：后汉章帝改淮阳曰陈郡。魏武分沛立谯郡，魏文分汝南立弋阳郡。
现代文：涂改三丛为迥宜塑，亘造建置十三州，邀业旧名未改，把迥宜、迥塞二郡属于司隶，又把直墨属于克。在此之前，将泅水改称沛郡，噩噩改称凿，整改称叠，分出饥、翅的一部分立迪盐嘤，在垄川分立进旦酗。
English: The three clusters were changed to Changi Plastic, the thirteen prefectures were built and constructed, and the old names of the invited industries were not changed. Changi and the two counties of Fuxi belonged to Sili, and the direct ink belonged to Ke. Prior to this, Surabaya was changed to Pei County, Yungyang was changed to Chisel, rectification was changed to Overlap, a part of Hungry and Wing was separated to Lidi Salt Mine, and it was separated in Renchuan River.

古文：及武帝受命，又分颍川立襄城都，分汝南立汝阴郡，合陈郡于梁国。州统郡国十，县八十五，户十一万六千七百九十六。
现代文：又分题川立襄垣郦，分这亩立汝阴郡，把速塑合并于凿玺。全州统管十个郡国，八十五县，十一万六千七百九十六户。
English: In addition, it was decided to divide the county of Ruyin from the county of Xiangyuan in Sichuan Province, and to merge the rapid plasticizer into the chisel. The whole state is in charge of ten counties, eighty-five counties, and one hundred and sixteen thousand seven hundred ninety-six households.

古文：颍川郡秦置。
现代文：颍川郡台设置。
English: Set up in Shukawa-gun.

古文：统县九，户二万八千三百。
现代文：统管九县，二万八千三百户。
English: In charge of nine counties, with 28,300 households.

古文：许昌汉献帝都许。
现代文：许昌汉献帝定都于此。
English: Xu Changhan dedicated the imperial edict here.

古文：魏禅，徙都洛阳，许宫室武库存焉，改为许昌。
现代文：魏继位，迁都到洛阳，姜保存着宫室武库，改称许昌。
English: When Wei succeeded to the throne and moved the capital to Luoyang, Jiang preserved the imperial arsenal and renamed it Xuchang.

古文：长社颍阴临颍公国相。
现代文：长社颍阴临颍公国相。
English: Choshe Shanyin Linyi became the Minister of the Duchy.

古文：郾邵陵公国相。
现代文：郾邵陵公国相。
English: He was the Minister of Shao Ling Duchy.

古文：鄢陵公国相。
现代文：鄢陵公国相。
English: Minister of the Principality of Fuling.

古文：新汲长平汝南郡汉置。
现代文：新汲长平汝南郡漠设置。
English: Xinqu Changping Runan County is located in the desert.

古文：统县十五，户二万一千五百。
现代文：统管十五县，二万一千五百户。
English: It oversees 15 counties with 21,500 households.

古文：新息南安阳安成侯相。
现代文：新息南安阳安成侯相。
English: The new governor of Nan'an is Yang Ancheng.

古文：慎阳北宜春朗陵阳安故江国。
现代文：慎阳北宜春朗陵阳安故江国。
English: Shenyang, north of Yichun, is the birthplace of Yang'an.

古文：有江亭。
现代文：有江亭。
English: Arie-tei.

古文：上蔡平舆故沈子国。
现代文：上蔡平舆原选王垦。
English: Above, Cai Pingwu was originally elected king.

古文：有沈亭。
现代文：有沈亭。
English: There is Shentei.

古文：定颍灈阳南顿汝阳吴房故房子国。
现代文：定颖、濯阳、南顿、汝阳、吴房原房子国。
English: Jieying, Maoyang, Nantong, Ryuyang, and Wufangyuan are the house countries.

古文：西平故柏国。
现代文：西平原柏国。
English: West Plains of Kashiwa Province.

古文：有龙泉，水可用淬刀剑。
现代文：有龙泉，泉水可用于刀剑淬火。
English: There is a dragon spring, and the spring water can be used to forge swords and light fires.

古文：襄城郡泰始二年置。
现代文：襄城郡泰始二年设置。
English: It was set up in Taizhi, Xiangcheng County, two years ago.

古文：统县七，户一万八千。
现代文：统管七县，一万八千户。
English: It oversees seven counties with 18,000 households.

古文：襄城侯相。
现代文：襄城侯相。
English: Xiangcheng marquis.

古文：有西不羹城。
现代文：有西不羹城。
English: There is a West noodle city.

古文：繁昌魏文受禅于此。
现代文：繁昌魏文帝在此继位。
English: The prosperous Emperor Weiwen succeeded to the throne here.

古文：郏定陵侯相。
现代文：郏定陵侯相。
English: This is the Mausoleum of the Empress Dowager Kading.

古文：父城侯相。
现代文：父城侯相。
English: His father was the mayor of the city.

古文：昆阳公国相。
现代文：昆阳公国相。
English: Minister of Kunyang Principality.

古文：舞阳宣帝始封此邑。
现代文：舞阳宣帝最初封于此邑。
English: Emperor Wuyang Xuan was originally enthroned in this town.

古文：汝阴郡魏置郡，后废，泰始二年复置。
现代文：汝阴郡魏置郡，后废除，泰始二年重置。
English: Ruyin County Wei Jie County, later abolished, Taishi two years reset.

古文：统县八，户八千五百。
现代文：统管八县，八千五百户。
English: It oversees eight counties and 8,500 households.

古文：汝阴故胡子国。
现代文：汝阴旧胡子国。
English: Ruyin is the old beard country.

古文：慎故楚邑。
现代文：慎原楚邑。
English: Shigenohara Choeup.

古文：原鹿固始鲖阳新蔡宋侯相褒信
现代文：原鹿、固始、鲷阳新蔡宋侯相。褒信。
English: Hara deer, Gushi, Shenyang new Cai Song Hou Xiang. A letter of commendation.

古文：梁国汉置。
现代文：梁国汉设置。
English: Liang Guohan set up.

古文：统县十二，户一万三千。
现代文：统管十二县，一万三千户。
English: In charge of 12 counties, with 13,000 households.

古文：睢阳春秋时宋都。
现代文：睢阳春秋时宋都。
English: Shenyang was the capital of the Song Dynasty during the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：蒙虞下邑有阳山，山有文石。
现代文：蒙虞下邑有碣山，山上有纹石。
English: In the lower Mengyu County, there is Lushan Mountain, and the mountain is covered with travertine.

古文：宁陵故葛伯国。
现代文：空堕原锤。
English: An empty hammer.

古文：谷熟陈项长平阳夏武平苦东有赖乡祠，老子所生地。
现代文：垫垫、速、堕旦疆、茎平、苦东有赖乡祠，老子出生地。
English: Cushion, speed, fallen Danzhong, Zhuoping, bitter East Lai Township, Lao Zi's birthplace.

古文：沛国汉置。
现代文：沛国汉设置。
English: "Pei Guohan" was set up.

古文：统县九，户五千九十六。
现代文：统管九县，五千零九十六户。
English: In charge of nine counties, with 5,096 households.

古文：相沛汉高祖所起处。
现代文：相沛汉高祖兴兵之地。
English: It is the place where Han Gao's ancestors raised an army.

古文：丰竺邑符离杼秋汶虹萧
现代文：丰、竺邑、符离、杼秋、汶、虹萧
English: Feng, Guiyu, Fuyi, Jiuqiu, Wen, Hongxiao

古文：谯郡魏置。
现代文：谯郡魏设置。
English: Set up in Wei County, Handan.

古文：统县七，户一千。
现代文：统管七县，一千户。
English: In charge of seven counties, one thousand households.

古文：谯城父酂山桑龙亢蕲铚
现代文：谯、城父、酂、山桑、龙亢、蕲、铚。
English: ,城父,,山桑,龙,,.

古文：鲁郡汉置。
现代文：鲁郡汉设置。
English: Lu County Han Dynasty.

古文：统县七，户三千五百。
现代文：统管七县，三千五百户。
English: It oversees seven counties with 3,500 households.

古文：鲁曲阜之地，鲁侯伯禽所居。
现代文：鲁曲阜是鲁侯伯童年居住的地方。
English: Luqifu is the place where Lu Houbo lived in his childhood.

古文：汶阳卞邹有绎山。
现代文：这汶阳卞邹有绎山。
English: There is a mountain range in the middle of the country.

古文：番故小邾之国。
现代文：姜原旦迈之国。
English: The country of Jiang Yuan Danmai.

古文：薛奚仲所封。
现代文：薛奚仲封地。
English: Xue Yuzhong's fiefdom.

古文：公丘
现代文：公互
English: Public-private partnerships

古文：弋阳郡魏置。
现代文：弋阳郡魏设置。
English: Fenyang County Wei Zong set up.

古文：统县七，户一万六千七百。
现代文：统管七县，一万六干七百户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with a total of sixteen thousand seven hundred households.

古文：西阳故弦子国。
现代文：西阳原幽。
English: Xiyangyuanyuan.

古文：轪蕲春邾西陵期思弋阳
现代文：麸壁画轪、蕲春、邾、西陵、期思、弋阳。
English: The murals depict the Spring Festival, the Summer Solstice, Xiling, Jiuxi and Shenyang.

古文：安丰郡魏置。
现代文：安丰郡魏设置。
English: Anfeng County, Wei set up.

古文：统县五，户一千二百。
现代文：统管五县，一千二百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 1,200 households.

古文：安风雩娄安丰侯相。
现代文：安风、雩娄、安丰侯相。
English: Anfeng, Handan, Anfeng Houxiang.

古文：蓼松滋侯相。
现代文：蓼、松滋侯相。
English: , Matsuzi marquis.

古文：惠帝分汝阴立新蔡，分梁国立陈郡，分汝南立南顿。
现代文：惠帝分这汝阴立新蔡郡，分梁国立陈郡，分汝南立南顿。
English: Hui Di divided this Ruyin to establish Xin Cai County, Liang Guo Chen County, and Ru Nan to establish Nantong.

古文：永嘉之乱，豫州沦没石氏。
现代文：永嘉之乱，豫州沦于互压手中。
English: During the Yongjia Rebellion, Yuzhou fell into the hands of the oppressors.

古文：元帝渡江，以春谷县侨立襄城郡及繁昌县。
现代文：五童渡丝后，借壹凿瑟侨置塞垣璺及凿旦历。
English: After the five children crossed the wire, they borrowed a chisel to set the fence and chisel the calendar.

古文：成帝乃侨立豫州于江淮之间，居芜湖。
现代文：盛童把逸业侨置于匡丝与翅之间，居住在薤翅。
English: Sheng Tong placed Yingye Qiao between Kuang Si and Wing, living in Wing.

古文：时淮南入北，乃分丹阳侨立淮南郡，居于湖。
现代文：当时匡直归入北方，于是划分丹杨侨置淮南郡，处于王邀。
English: At that time, Kuang Zhi fell into the north, so it was divided into Danyang Overseas Chinese and Huainan County, which was located in Wangyi.

古文：又以旧当涂县流人渡江，侨立为县，并淮南、庐江、安丰并属豫州。
现代文：又因原当涂县流民渡辽，侨置赏涂题，与随、庐辽、宝丰同属邀业。
English: In addition, because of the original Dangtu County flow of people to Liao, the overseas Chinese placed the award on the theme of painting, which is the same as that of Sui, Jialiao and Baofeng.

古文：宁康元年，移镇姑孰。
现代文：空尘元年，移镇堑塾。
English: In the first year of the year of the empty dust, the school was moved to the town.

古文：孝武改蕲春县为蕲阳县，因新蔡县人于汉九江王黥布旧城置南新蔡郡，属南豫州。
现代文：耋亘瞳改蓝叠昼为蓝疆瑟，堑茎瑟人在坠九逗基壶的旧城置南新蔡郡，隶属亩邃业。
English: The old city of Nanxin Cai County, which belongs to Mu Yingye, is located in the old city of Zhujiajian, and the old city of Nanxin Cai County belongs to Mu Yingye.

古文：又于汉庐江郡之南部置晋熙郡。
现代文：又在漠庐江郡的南部设置了晋熙郡。
English: In addition, Jinxi County was set up in the southern part of Muxijiang County.

古文：冀州。
现代文：冀业。
English: Ji Ye.

古文：案《禹贡》、《周礼》并为河内之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》、《周礼》所载中都是河内之地，爱建十二牧，冀业是其一。
English: "Yugong" and "Zhou Li" both contain the land of Hanoi, and love to build twelve pastures, and Jiye is one of them.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 昴毕散为冀州，分为赵国。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 昴宿毕宿是冀州的分野，分为赵国。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Elements of Life Package" says: Shishuku Bi-shuku is a sector of Jizhou, which is divided into Zhao country.

古文：其地有险有易，帝王所都，则冀安，弱则冀强，荒则冀丰。
现代文：冀业地势有些地方险峻，有些地方平坦，历代帝王多有在这裹建都的，天下纷乱而冀州安宁，天下贫弱而冀业强盛，天下遭逢灾荒而冀州五谷丰登。
English: The terrain of Jieye is steep in some places and flat in others. Many emperors of all ages have built their capitals here. When the world is in turmoil, Jieye is at peace. When the world is poor and weak, Jieye is strong. When the world is plagued by natural disasters, Jieye is rich and prosperous.

古文：南行唐灵寿九门侯相。
现代文：全州统管十三个郡国，八十三县，三十二万六千户。
English: The whole state is in charge of thirteen counties, eighty-three counties, and three hundred and twenty-six thousand households.

古文：惠帝之后，冀州沦没于石勒。
现代文：惠帝之后，冀州沦入石勒手中。
English: After Hui Di, Jizhou fell into the hands of Shiller.

古文：勒以太兴二年僭号于襄国，称赵。
现代文：石勒于太兴二年在襄国僭位称王，国号为赵。
English: In the second year of Taixing, Shi Le ascended to the throne of Xiang Province, and the country's name was Zhao.

古文：后为慕容俊所灭，慕容氏又为苻坚所灭。
现代文：其后被慕容倘消灭，慕容氏又被苻坚打败。
English: Later, it was wiped out by the Murong Tatas, and the Murong clan was defeated by the Shujian.

古文：孝武太元八年，坚败，其地入慕容垂。
现代文：孝武帝太元八年，苻坚失败，土地归于慕容垂。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Jianjian failed, and the land was transferred to Murongdeli.

古文：垂僭号于中山，是为后燕。
现代文：慕容垂在中山僭位称帝，即是后燕。
English: Murongtang was enthroned as emperor in Zhongshan, that is, Houyan.

古文：后燕卒灭于魏。
现代文：后燕最终为魏所灭。
English: Houyan was eventually eliminated by Wei.

古文：幽州。
现代文：幽州。
English: Yuzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》冀州之域，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》记载中的冀丛地域，舜建十二牧，幽州是其一。
English: According to the records of "Yugong," the Jizang region has 12 villages in Xinjian, and Yuzhou is one of them.

古文：《周礼》 东北曰幽州。 
现代文：《周礼》： 东北日幽州。 
English: "Weekly": Northeastern Yuzhou.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 箕星散为幽州，分为燕国。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 箕星是幽州的分野，分为燕国。 
English: "Spring, Autumn, and New Year's Life Packet" says: "Hui Xing is a field of Yuzhou, which is divided into Yan Guo.

古文：言北方太阴，故以幽冥为号。
现代文：指北方阴气极盛，因此以幽冥来称。
English: It refers to the north, where yin and yang are at their peak, so it is called the gloomy north.

古文：武王定殷，封召公于燕，其后与六国俱称王。
现代文：周武王平殷商，封召公于燕，后来燕与其他六个诸侯国并相称王。
English: Zhou Wu Wang Ping Yin, a merchant, summoned Yan to court, and later Yan became the king of six other principalities.

古文：及秦灭燕，以为渔阳、上谷、右北平、辽西、辽东五郡。
现代文：秦灭燕后，立为渔阳、上谷、右北平、辽西、辽东五郡。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, it was divided into five counties: Yuyang, Shanggu, Right Beiping, West Liaoning and East Liaoning.

古文：汉高祖分上谷置涿郡。
现代文：汉高祖划分上谷另置涿郡。
English: Henkel's ancestors divided the upper valley and set up a separate county.

古文：武帝置十三州，幽州依旧名不改。
现代文：武帝设置十三州，幽州沿用旧名没有改动。
English: Emperor Wu set up thirteen prefectures, and Yuzhou continued to use its old name unchanged.

古文：其后开东边，置玄菟、乐浪等郡，亦皆属焉。
现代文：此后开拓束部，设置了玄菟、乐浪等郡，都隶属于幽州。
English: Since then, Sokube has been developed, and counties such as Xuanzang and Lelang have been set up, all of which are affiliated with Yuzhou.

古文：元凤元年，改燕曰广阳郡。
现代文：元凤元年，燕改称广阳郡。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, Yan was renamed Guangyang County.

古文：幽州所部凡九郡，至晋不改。
现代文：幽州所管辖的共九郡，至晋没有变动。
English: A total of nine counties under the jurisdiction of Yuzhou remained unchanged.

古文：幽州统都国七，县三十四，户五万九千二十。
现代文：幽州统管七个郡国，三十四县，五万九千零二十户。
English: Yuzhou is in charge of seven counties, 34 counties, and 59,020 households.

古文：范阳国汉置涿郡。
现代文：范阳国漠设置涿郡。
English: Fanyang County was set up in the desert of Fanyang Province.

古文：魏文更名范阳郡。
现代文：魏文帝改称范阳郡。
English: Emperor Wei Wen changed the name to Fanyang County.

古文：武帝置国，封宣帝弟子绥为王。
现代文：晋武帝置国，封宣帝弟弟的儿子司马绥为范阳王。
English: Emperor Jinwu established the country, and Sima Yu, the son of Emperor Xuan's younger brother, was crowned King Fanyang.

古文：统县八，户一万一千。
现代文：统管八县，一万一千户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with eleven thousand households.

古文：涿良乡方城长乡遒故安范阳容城侯相。
现代文：涿良乡方城长乡遒故安范阳容城侯相。
English: An Liang Township, Changxiang Township and An Fan Yang Rong Township.

古文：燕国汉置，孝昭改为广阳郡。
现代文：燕国汉设置。孝昭帝改为广阳郡。
English: Yan Guohan was set up. Xiao Zhao Di was changed to Guangyang County.

古文：统县十，户二万九千。
现代文：统管十县，二万九千户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 29,000 households.

古文：蓟安次侯相。
现代文：蓟安次侯相。
English: Gao An, the second prince minister.

古文：昌平军都有关。
现代文：昌平里都有玺整迩。
English: In Changping, there are all kinds of cormorants.

古文：广阳潞安乐国相。
现代文：广阳潞安乐国相。
English: Guangyang Zou Anle, Minister of the State.

古文：蜀主刘禅封此县公。
现代文：蜀主刘禅曾封为安乐公。
English: Liu Zhen, the head of Shu, was once named the Prince of Peace and Happiness.

古文：泉州侯相。
现代文：泉州侯相。
English: He was the prince consort of Quanzhou.

古文：雍奴狐奴
现代文：雍奴狐奴
English: Yongnu Foxtrot

古文：北平郡秦置。
现代文：北平郡秦设置。
English: Located in Qin, Beiping County.

古文：统县四，户五千。
现代文：统管四县，五千户。
English: In charge of four counties, with 5,000 households.

古文：徐无土垠俊靡无终
现代文：徐无土垠俊靡无终
English: Xu Wuzhujun's story is far from over

古文：上谷郡秦置，郡在谷之上头，故因名焉。
现代文：上谷郡秦设置，郡在谷的上头，因而称之。
English: Shanggu County is located in Qin, at the upper end of the valley, hence its name.

古文：统县二，户四千七十。
现代文：统管二县，四千零七十户。
English: It oversees two counties and has 4,070 households.

古文：沮阳居庸
现代文：沮阳居庸
English: Depressed Yang Jiuyang

古文：广宁郡故属上谷，太康中置郡，都尉居。
现代文：广宁郡原属上谷，太康年间设郡，都尉居此。
English: Guangning County was originally part of Shanggu, but it was made into a county during the Taikang era, and the governor lived here.

古文：统县三，户三千九百五十。
现代文：统管三县，三千九百五十户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 3,950 households.

古文：下洛潘涿鹿
现代文：下洛潘涿鹿
English: Lower Lopan elk herd

古文：代郡。秦置。
现代文：代郡秦设置。
English: It was set up in Qin County.

古文：统县四，户三千四百。
现代文：统管四县，三千四百户。
English: It oversees four counties with 3,400 households.

古文：代广昌平舒当城
现代文：代广昌平舒当城
English: On behalf of Guangchangping Shutang City

古文：辽西郡秦置。
现代文：辽西郡秦设置。
English: Located in Qin, West Liao County.

古文：统县三，户二千八百。
现代文：统管三县，二千八百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 2,800 households.

古文：阳乐肥如海阳
现代文：阳乐肥如海阳
English: The sun shines on the manure like the sun on the sea

古文：惠帝之后，幽州没于石勒。
现代文：惠帝之后，幽州沦陷于互勤。
English: After Hui Di, Yuzhou fell into mutual benefit.

古文：及穆帝永和五年，慕容俊僭早于蓟，是为前燕。
现代文：到穆帝永和五年，慕容俊在蓟位称王，称为并基。
English: In the fifth year of Mu Di Yonghe, Murongjun was crowned king in the throne, known as Bianji.

古文：七年，俊移都于鄴。
现代文：七年，慕容俊把都城移到邺。
English: Seven years later, Murongjun moved the capital to Tong.

古文：俊死，子为苻坚所灭。
现代文：摹容迤死后，他的儿子墓容堕被登坚消灭。
English: After the death of Gong Rongjun, his son Tomb Rongpo was eliminated by Deng Jian.

古文：坚败，地复入慕容垂，是为后燕。
现代文：登坚失败后，土地重归墓查垂，称为厘夔。
English: After the failure of the ascent to Jian, the land was returned to the tomb of Zha Dui, known as Lijun.

古文：垂死，宝迁于和龙。
现代文：基昼垩死后，聂容宣迁到扭垄。
English: After the death of Ji Rongjun, Gong Rongxuan moved to Tujiaoguang.

古文：平州。
现代文：平州。
English: Pingzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》冀州之域，于周为幽州界，汉属右北平郡。
现代文：案《禹贡》中记载属冀州地域，在周时在幽丛之内，选时属右北平郡。
English: In the case of "Yugong," it is recorded as belonging to the Jizhou region, in the Zhou period it is within the Yucong, and in the election period it belongs to the right Beiping County.

古文：后汉末，公孙度自号平州牧。及其子康、康子文懿并擅据辽东，东夷九种皆服事焉。
现代文：篷还末期，公茎仅自称王牧，与他的儿子公茎尘、公逐尘的儿子公茎塞懿都擅自占领辽塞，东夷各族都臣服他们。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Gongzi only called himself Wang Mu Rong, and he and his sons Gongzi Chen and Gongzi Jie, the son of Gongzi Chen, occupied Liaosai without authorization. All the Eastern Yi peoples were subject to them.

古文：魏置东夷校尉，居襄平，而分辽东、昌黎、玄菟、带方、乐浪五郡为平州，后还合为幽州。
现代文：垫设束夷校尉，治所在襄平，分割出辽塞、旦垫、宝菟、萤立、銮退五郡为垩丛，后重新合并为幽业。
English: The pads were set up by Captain Sok Yi, and the administrative center was in Yangping, and the five counties of Liaosei, Danzhong, Baodi, Huoling and Fengtai were divided into piles, and then re-combined into Yue.

古文：及文懿灭后，有护东夷校尉，居襄平。
现代文：到塞垫被减之后，有护东夷校尉，治所在襄平。
English: After the plug cushion was reduced, there was the protection of the Dongyi lieutenant, the jurisdiction was in Xiangping.

古文：咸宁二年十月，分昌黎、辽东、玄菟、带方、乐浪等郡国五置平州。
现代文：咸宁二年十月，分出昌黎、辽塞、客菟、萤左、銮退等五郡国建置垩业。
English: In October of the second year of Xianning, five counties including Changli, Liaosei, Hakka, Hluhzuo, and Xingtui were set aside for the construction of the industry.

古文：统县二十六，户一万八千一百。
现代文：统管二十六县，一万八千一百户。
English: It oversees 26 counties with 18,100 households.

古文：昌黎郡汉属辽东属国都尉，魏置郡。
现代文：昌黎郡莲时属辽东属国都尉，盏置郡。
English: Changli County, Lianxi Province, Liaodong Province, Tianji County.

古文：统县二，户九百。
现代文：统管二县，九百户。
English: In charge of two counties, 900 households.

古文：昌黎宾徒
现代文：昌黎宾徒
English: Changli Bintu

古文：辽东国秦立为郡。
现代文：辽东国台立为郡。
English: Liaodong Province of Taiwan was established as a county.

古文：汉光武以辽东等属青州，后还幽州。
现代文：汉光武帝将辽东等属青州，后归幽业。
English: Emperor Guangwu of Han Dynasty made Liaodong and other provinces belong to Qingzhou, and later returned to Youye.

古文：统县八，户五千四百。
现代文：统管八县，五千四百产。
English: It oversees eight counties and 5,400 farms.

古文：襄平东夷校尉所居。
现代文：襄平东夷校尉所在地。
English: It is located in Yangping Dongyi.

古文：汶居就乐就安市西安平新昌力城
现代文：汶居就乐就安市西安平新昌力城
English: Xianping Xinchangli City, Wenju City, Xi'an Province

古文：乐浪郡汉置。
现代文：乐浪郡还设置。
English: Le Lang County is also set up.

古文：统县六，户三千七百。朝鲜周封箕子地。
现代文：统管六县，三千。朝鲜周封给箠王的地方。
English: In total control of six counties, three thousand.

古文：屯有浑弥遂城秦筑长城之所起。
现代文：屯有浑弥遂城秦修筑长城的起点。
English: It was the starting point of Qin's construction of the Great Wall.

古文：镂方驷望
现代文：镂方驷望
English: 方望

古文：玄菟郡汉置。
现代文：玄菟郡莲设置。
English: The lotus of Xuanzang County is set up.

古文：统县三，户三千二百。
现代文：统管三县，三千二百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 3,200 households.

古文：高句丽望平高显
现代文：高句丽望平高显
English: Goguryeo's Wang Ping Gao Xian

古文：带方郡公孙度置。
现代文：带方郡公孙度设置。
English: Take Fang County Gongsundu to set up.

古文：统县七，户四千九百。
现代文：统管七县，四千九百尸。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 4,900 corpses.

古文：带方列口南新长岑提奚含资海冥
现代文：带方列口南新长岑提奚含资海冥
English: South Xinjiang, Changchun, Zhuhai, and Hainan provinces

古文：平州初置，以慕容廆为刺史，遂属永嘉之乱，廆为众所推。及其孙俊移都于蓟。
现代文：平州刚设置时，以慕容廆为刺史，逢丞台之乱时，菱窒廛被众人推为首领，到了慕容庞的孙子摹查垡移都至蓟。
English: When Pingzhou was first established, Murong Pang was chosen as the leader. During the Anzhi Rebellion, Rong Nian Pang was chosen by the people as the leader. When Murong Pang's grandson, Jia Pang, came to power, the capital was moved to An.

古文：其后慕容垂子宝又迁于和龙，自幽州至子庐溥镇以南地入于魏。
现代文：此后基奎垩的儿子薹宣宣又迁到鱼垄，自幽业到庐遵篁以南的地区归于墓。
English: After that, Kikuei's son, Zou Xuanxuan, moved to Yurong, and Ziyuye was buried in the area south of Zongzhung.

古文：慕容熙以幽州刺史镇令支，青州刺史镇新城，并州刺史镇凡城，营州刺史镇宿军，冀州刺史镇肥如。
现代文：基主雪逦身为堂业刺史镇守全直，壹业刺史镇守堑墟，差业刺史镇守且球，营业刺史镇守宣里，冀州刺史镇守胆面。
English: The main foundation of Xueyuan is the dongyeing history of the town guard, the first industry of the town guard, the second industry of the town guard, the third industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fourth industry of the town guard, the fifth industry of the town guard,

古文：高云以幽、冀二州牧镇肥如，并州刺史镇白狼。
现代文：产昼身为幽、冀二州牧镇守里面，茳业刺史镇守皇猩。
English: The birth of the sun is in the past, in the pasture of the two states of Hebei and Shandong, and in the history of the town, the king of the orangutans.

古文：后为冯跋所篡，跋僭号于和龙，是为后燕，卒灭于魏。
现代文：后来遇壁篡权，在扭垄僭位称王，即为后燕，最终被魏所灭。
English: Later, he usurped power when he encountered a wall, and became king in the twisted ridge, that is, Houyan, and was eventually destroyed by Wei.

古文：并州。
现代文：并州。
English: and the state.

古文：案《禹贡》盖冀州之域，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》记载属冀州地域，舜置十二牧，并州是其一。
English: The case "Yugong" records belong to Jizhou region, setting aside twelve herdsmen, and the state is the first.

古文：《周礼》：正北曰并州，其镇曰恆山。
现代文：《周礼》：正北曰并州，其镇曰恒山。
English: "Zhou Li": Zhengbei is called Bianzhou, and its town is called Hengshan.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 营室流为并州，分为卫国。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 室宿是并州的分野，对应卫国。 
English: "Spring, Autumn, New Year's Life Package" says: Muroshuku is a field of annexation, corresponding to the defense of the country.

古文：州不以卫水为号，又不以恆山为称，而云并者，盖以其在两谷之间也。
现代文：本州既不以卫水为名，又不以恒山为称，而称作并的原因，是因为地处两山之间。
English: Honshu is neither named after the Great Wall of China nor Mount Hengshan, but is so called because it is located between the two mountains.

古文：汉武帝置十三州，并州依旧名不改，统上党、太原、云中、上郡、雁门、代郡、定襄、五原、西河、朔方十郡，又别置朔方刺史。
现代文：汉武帝设置十三州，并州沿用旧名没有更改，统辖上党、太原、云中、上郡、雁门、代郡、定襄、五原、西河、朔方十郡，又另置朔方刺史。
English: Emperor Hanwu set up thirteen prefectures, and the old names of the prefectures remained unchanged, with the following ten prefectures under their jurisdiction: Shangdang, Taiyuan, Yunzhong, Shang County, Ganmen, Dai County, Dingxiang, Wuhuan, Xihe, and Shuo Fang, and Shuo Fang Shishi was also set up.

古文：后汉建武十一年，省朔方入并州。
现代文：后漠建武十一年，取消朔方合入并州。
English: Eleven years after the establishment of Jianwu, the merger of Shuo and Fang was cancelled and Shuo was merged into Shuo.

古文：灵帝末，羌胡大扰，定襄、云中、五原、朔方、上郡等五郡并流徙分散。
现代文：灵帝末年，羌人大肆侵扰，定襄、云中、五原、朔方、上郡等五郡百姓流离迁徙，散落他乡。
English: At the end of Lingdi's reign, there was a large-scale invasion by the Xiongnu, and the people of Dingxiang, Yunzhong, Wuhuan, Shuofang, Shanggun and other five counties were displaced and scattered to other townships.

古文：建安十八年，省入冀州。
现代文：建安十八年，取消并州归并入冀州。
English: In the 18th year of Jian'an, it was abolished and merged into Jizhou.

古文：二十年，始集塞下荒地立新兴郡，后又分上党立乐平郡。
现代文：二十年，开始征集塞下荒地建立新兴郡，后又分出上党建立乐平郡。
English: Twenty years ago, it began to collect waste land under the dam to establish a new county, and later it separated from the upper party to establish Leping County.

古文：魏黄初元年，复置并州，自陉岭以北并弃之，至晋因而不改。
现代文：魏黄初元年，重新设置并州，自陉岭以北的地域全部放弃，直至晋朝沿袭不改。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Wei and Huang Dynasties, it was re-established as a unified prefecture, and all the regions north of the Jiaoling Mountains were abandoned until the Jin Dynasty.

古文：并州统郡国六，县四十五，户五万九千二百。
现代文：并州统管六个郡国，四十五县，五万九千三百户。
English: And the state is in charge of six counties, 45 counties, and 59,300 households.

古文：太原国秦置。
现代文：太原国画设置。
English: The Taiyuan National Painting is set in the background.

古文：统县十三，户一万四千。
现代文：统管十三县，一万四千户。
English: It oversees 13 counties with 14,000 households.

古文：晋阳侯相。
现代文：晋阳侯相。
English: Jinyang Hou Xiang.

古文：阳曲榆次于离盂狼孟阳邑大陵祁平陶京陵中都邬
现代文：阳曲榆次于离盂狼孟阳邑大陵祁平陶京陵中都邬
English: Yangqu Mausoleum is second only to the Wolf Mausoleum in Mengyang, Daling Mausoleum in Pingtao, and Zhongdu Mausoleum in Beijing.

古文：上党郡秦置。
现代文：上党郡秦设置。
English: Set up in Qin, Shangdang County.

古文：统县十，户一万三千。
现代文：统管十县，一万三千户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 13,000 households.

古文：潞屯留壶关长子泫氏高都铜鞮涅襄垣武乡
现代文：潞屯留壶关长子泫氏高都铜鞮涅襄垣武乡
English: The eldest son of the Jue clan, Juguan, stayed in Jutun, and the capital of the Jue clan, Tonglu, was moved to Xianggakiwu Township

古文：西河国汉置。
现代文：西河国汉设置。
English: Saigawa Kokuhan is set up.

古文：统县四，户六千三百。
现代文：统管四县，六千三百户。
English: It oversees four counties and has 6,300 households.

古文：离石隰城中阳介休
现代文：离石隰城中阳介休
English: From Shek Kipeng to Zhongyang

古文：乐平郡泰始中置。
现代文：乐平郡泰始年间设置。
English: It was set up during the Taishi era in Leping County.

古文：统县五，户四千三百。
现代文：统管五县，四千三百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 4,300 households.

古文：沾上艾寿阳阳乐平雁门郡秦置。
现代文：沾上艾寿阳阳乐平雁门郡壶设置。
English: Stained with Ai Shouyang Xinyang Leping Yamen County pot set.

古文：统县八，户一万二千七百。
现代文：统管八县，一万二千七百户。
English: In charge of eight counties with 12,700 households.

古文：广武崞氵枉陶平城葰人繁畤原平马邑
现代文：广武崞氵枉陶平城葰人繁畤原平马邑
English: Guangwu District, Taoping City, Yancheng City, Yancheng City, Pingma Township

古文：新兴郡魏置。
现代文：新兴郡设置。
English: Set up in Xinxing County.

古文：统县五，户九千。
现代文：统管五县，九千户。
English: In charge of five counties, nine thousand households.

古文：九原定襄云中广牧晋昌
现代文：九原定襄云中广牧晋昌
English: Jiuhara Dingxiangyun Zhongguangmu Jinchang

古文：惠帝改新兴为晋昌郡。
现代文：惠帝将新兴改为晋昌郡。
English: Huidi changed the emerging county to Jinchang County.

古文：及永兴元年，刘元海僭号于平阳，称汉，于是并州之地皆为元海所有。
现代文：到永兴元年，刘元海在平阳僭位自称为漠，当时并州土地全部属于刘元海所有。
English: By the first year of Yongxing, Liu Yuanhai called himself a desert in Pingyang County. At that time, all the state-owned land belonged to Liu Yuanhai.

古文：元海乃以雍州刺史镇平阳，幽州刺史镇离石。
现代文：刘元海就用雍州刺史镇守平阳、幽州刺史镇守离石。
English: Liu Yuanhai used Yongzhou Zhishi Town Guard Pingyang and Yuzhou Zhishi Town Guard Liishi.

古文：及刘聪攻陷洛阳，置左右司隶，各领户二十余万，万户置一内史，凡内史四十三人，单于左右辅各主六夷。
现代文：到刘聪攻陷洛阳后，设左右司隶，各统领二十余万户，每一万户设一内史，内史共四十三人，单于左右辅各自控制六族夷人。
English: After Liu Cong's capture of Luoyang, there were left and right subordinates, each in charge of more than 200,000 households, and each 10,000 households had one internal historian, with a total of 43 internal historians, who controlled the six ethnic groups of the barbarians on the left and right respectively.

古文：又置殷、卫、东梁、西河阳、北兗五州，以怀安新附。
现代文：又设置殷、卫、东梁、西河阳、北兖五州，用以安抚新近归附的百姓。
English: Yin, Wei, Dongliang, Xiheyang and Beilun were also set up to pacify the newly annexed people.

古文：刘曜徙都长安，其平阳以东地入石勒。
现代文：刘曜迁都到长安，平盐以束的地域归互翅所有。
English: Liu Ye moved the capital to Chang'an, and the region of Pingyan was jointly owned by both sides.

古文：勒平朔方，又置朔州。
现代文：互勤平定塑立，又设置塑州。
English: The mutual work of pacifying and stabilizing the plastic state, and setting up the plastic state.

古文：自惠怀之间，离石县荒废，勒于其处置永石郡，又别置武乡郡。
现代文：在塞童、怀壶期间，盘五逊荒废，五勤在当地设永石郡，又另置武乡郡。
English: During the period of delaying the child and concealing the pot, the five-year plan was abandoned, and the five-year plan set up Yongshi County and Wuxiang County.

古文：及苻坚、姚兴、赫连勃勃，并州并徙置河东，又姚兴以河东为并、冀二州云。雍州。
现代文：到苻坚、姚兴、赫连勃勃时，都把差业移置到河东，一说挑兴把河东分为并、冀二州。雍州。
English: When it came to Su Jian, Yao Xing, and Her Lian Xing, they all moved their business to the east of the river. One said that Zhao Xing divided the east of the river into two states, Hebei and Yongzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》黑水、西河之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》中记载的黑水、西河之地，舜建置十二牧，雍州为其一。
English: In the case of the land of Heishui and the West River recorded in "Yugong," there were twelve pastures built, and Yongzhou was one of them.

古文：以其四山之地，故以雍名焉。
现代文：因为地形四面环山，所以用壅来命名。
English: Because the terrain is surrounded by mountains on all sides, it is named after the cormorant.

古文：亦谓西北之位，阳所不及，阴气雍阏也。《周礼》：西曰雍州。
现代文：也指西北的位置是阳气不能达到、阴气壅塞淤积。《周礼》：西曰雍州。
English: It also refers to the northwest position, which cannot be reached by the yang and is blocked and silted up by the yin. "Zhou Li": The west is called Yongzhou.

古文：盖并禹梁州之地。
现代文：是噩时的凿业之地。
English: It is a place of chiseled karma at the worst of times.

古文：周自武王克殷，都于酆镐，雍州为王畿。
现代文：刮自亘旺克壁后，定都酆筵，壅业属于王畿。
English: After being scraped from the wall of Wang Wangke, the capital of Dingdu was Zhen, and Zhen belonged to Wangji.

古文：及平王东迁洛邑，以岐酆之地赐秦襄公，则为秦地，累世都之，至始皇遂平六国。
现代文：到周平王束迁至盗旦，把堕、壑一带赐予台塞公，从此壅业成为台地，列代以这裹为都城直到秦始皇平定六国。
English: King Zhou Ping moved the capital to Putian, and gave the areas of Putian and Putuo to the Taisei Emperor. From then on, Putian became the capital of the Taisei, and it was used as the capital for generations until the First Emperor of Qin conquered the Six Kingdoms.

古文：秦灭，汉又都之。
现代文：秦朝覆灭，龃目又定都于此。
English: The Qin Dynasty was overthrown and destroyed, and the capital was once again located here.

古文：及武帝置十三州，其地以西偏为凉州，其余并属司隶，不统于州。
现代文：到选亘主童建置十三州，壅业西部的一半土地划归逮业，其余土地都属于司隶，不属州所管辖。
English: By the time the 13 prefectures were selected, half of the land in the western part of Gyeonggyeon belonged to Gyeonggyeon, and the rest of the land belonged to Seongju and was not under the jurisdiction of the prefectures.

古文：后汉光武都洛阳，关中复置雍州。
现代文：后汉光武帝建都洛阳，关中一带重新设置雍州。
English: After Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty built Luoyang as the capital, the Guanzhong area was re-established as Yongzhou.

古文：后罢，复置司隶校尉，统三辅如旧。
现代文：其后取消，又置司隶校尉，舆先前一样统领三辅。
English: Later, it was cancelled, and the rank of lieutenant was added to the rank of captain. As before, I was in command of the three aides.

古文：献帝时又置雍州，自三辅距西域皆属焉。
现代文：献帝时再次置雍州，自三辅至酉球都属于壅业。
English: When the emperor was dedicated, Yongzhou was placed again, and from Sanfu to Shiyan belonged to Shiyan.

古文：魏文帝即位，分河西为凉州，分陇右为秦州，改京兆尹为太守，冯翊、扶风各除左右，仍以三辅属司隶。
现代文：逸塞童即位，划分回西为速业，胧西为童业，改塞韭尹为太守，取消左右翅？医凰，仍以三辅属于司隶。
English: Yize Tong ascended to the throne, divided back to the west for speed industry, west for children's industry, changed Yize Yin for the governor, canceled the left and right wings, and still belonged to the three auxiliary subordinates.

古文：晋初于长安置雍州，统郡国七，县三十九，户九万九千五百。
现代文：晋初在长安置壅蛆，统管七个郡国，三十九县，九万九千五百户。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, he was placed in charge of seven counties, thirty-nine counties, and ninety-nine thousand five hundred households.

古文：京兆郡汉置。
现代文：京兆郡迈设置。
English: It is located in Myeongdong, Gyeongju-gun.

古文：统县九，户四万。
现代文：统管九县，四万户。
English: In charge of nine counties, with 40,000 households.

古文：长安杜陵霸城蓝田高陆万年故栎阳县。
现代文：长安杜陵霸城蓝田高陆万年故栎阳县。
English: Chang'an, Du Ling, Cha Cheng, Lantian, Gaolu, and the late Poyang County.

古文：新丰阴般郑周宣王弟郑桓公邑。
现代文：新丰阴般郑周宣王弟郑桓公邑。
English: Xinfengyin like Zheng Zhouxuan Wang's younger brother Zheng Huan Gong.

古文：冯翊郡汉置，名左冯翊。
现代文：冯翊郡汉设置，称左迩翅。
English: Fengyu County Han Dynasty, called the left wing.

古文：统县八，户七千七百。
现代文：统管八县，七千七百户。
English: It oversees eight counties with 7,700 households.

古文：临晋。故大荔，秦获之，更名。
现代文：临晋原大荔，秦获得此地后改名。
English: Lin Jin Yuan Dali, Qin changed his name after obtaining this place.

古文：有河水祠，祠临晋水，故名。
现代文：有河水祠，祠在置晋水边，因而称之。
English: There is a riverside shrine, and the shrine is on the edge of the waters of the Jiejin River, so it is called the Jiejin River.

古文：下邽秦武公伐邽戎，置有上邽，故加下。
现代文：下邽秦武公征伐邽戎，设有上邽，因而此地加 下 。
English: In the lower bowl, there is a scene of Qin Wukong's expedition to cut down Yunnan, and the upper bowl is set up. Therefore, the lower circle is added here.

古文：重泉频阳秦厉公置，在频水之阳。
现代文：重泉频阳秦厉公置，在曲之北。
English: Shigeizumi Hanyang Qin Liguo is located in the north of Qu.

古文：粟邑莲芍郃阳夏阳故少梁，秦惠文王更名。
现代文：粟邑莲芍郃阳夏阳故少梁，秦惠文王改称。
English: The former Shao Liang, Qin Hui Wen Wang, changed his name to Xia Yang.

古文：梁山在西北。
现代文：梁山在其西北。
English: Liangshan is in the northwest.

古文：扶风郡汉武帝以为主爵都尉，太初中更名右扶风。
现代文：扶风郡汉武帝以此为主爵都尉，越年间改称右扶风。
English: Emperor Hanwu of Fufeng County made him the lord lieutenant of the county, and changed his name to Right Fufeng over the years.

古文：统县六，户二万三千。
现代文：统管六县，二万三千户。
English: It oversees six counties with 23,000 households.

古文：池阳汉惠帝置。
现代文：池阳汉惠帝置。
English: It is owned by Chiyang Han Huidi.

古文：有嶻山。
现代文：有峨驿山。
English: There is Mount Emei.

古文：郿成国渠首受渭。
现代文：压盛朋眯之处。壅侯相。
English: Where there is pressure, there is friendship, and where there is friendship, there is love.

古文：雍侯相。有五畤、太昊、黄帝以下祠三百三所。
现代文：有五畤、太昊、黄帝以下的祠堂三百零三处。
English: There are three hundred and three ancestral halls below Wuzhong, Taihao and Huangdi.

古文：汧吴山在西，古文以为汧山。陈仓美阳岐山在西北，周太王所邑。
现代文：汧吴山在其西，古文中称为汧山陈仓美阳岐山在其西北，是周太王封邑。
English: To its west is the Lushan Wu Mountain, and to its northwest is the Lushan Chencang Miyang Qishan, known in ancient texts as Zhou Taiwang Furui.

古文：安定郡汉置。
现代文：安定郡汉设置。
English: The county seat of Anding was established.

古文：统县七，户五千五百。
现代文：统管七县，五千五百户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 5,500 households.

古文：临泾朝那乌氏都卢鹑觚阴密殷时密国。
现代文：临泾朝那乌氏都卢鹑觚阴密殷的密国。
English: Linyi is a close-knit country with the Wu dynasty as its capital.

古文：西川
现代文：西川
English: Nishikawa

古文：北地郡秦置。
现代文：北地郡台设置。
English: The north county platform is set up.

古文：统县二，户二千六百。
现代文：统管二县，二千六百户。
English: It oversees two counties and has 2,600 households.

古文：泥阳富平
现代文：泥阳富平
English: Deyang Fuping

古文：始平郡泰始二年置。
现代文：始平郡台盘二年设置。
English: Shihei County table set for second year.

古文：统县五，户一万八千。
现代文：统管五县，一万八千户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 18,000 households.

古文：槐里秦曰废丘，汉高帝更名。
现代文：槐里秦时名为废丘，汉高帝改名。
English: At the time of the Qin Dynasty, Baili was called Wasted Hill, but it was renamed by Emperor Gao of Han.

古文：有黄山宫。
现代文：有黄山宫。
English: There is Huangshan Palace.

古文：始平武功太一山在东，古文以为终南。
现代文：始平武功主二业在其东，古文中称为终克。
English: The second career of Shihei's military exploits is to the east, known in ancient texts as Zengke.

古文：鄠古国，夏启所伐。
现代文：鄠古国，夏启征伐过的国家。
English: An ancient country, a country that was conquered by the Xiaqi Dynasty.

古文：蒯城
现代文：蒯城
English: Shencheng

古文：新平郡汉置。
现代文：新平郡壅设置。
English: Xinping County was set up.

古文：统县二，户二千七百。
现代文：统管二县，二千七百户。
English: It oversees two counties with 2,700 households.

古文：漆漆水在西。
现代文：漆漆水在其西。
English: Lacquered water rises to its west.

古文：汾邑
现代文：汾邑
English: Zouyun

古文：惠帝即位，改扶风国为秦国。
现代文：惠帝即位，改扶风国为秦国。
English: Emperor Hui ascended the throne and changed Fufeng Province to Qin Province.

古文：徙都。建兴之后，雍州没于刘聪。
现代文：建兴之后，雍州沦入刘聪手中。
English: After Jianxing, Yongzhou fell into the hands of Liu Cong.

古文：及刘曜徙都长安，改号曰赵，以秦、凉二州牧镇上邽，朔州牧镇高平，幽州刺史镇北地，并州牧镇蒲坂。
现代文：到刘曜时迁都至长安，改称赵，以秦、凉二州牧镇守上邽，朔州牧镇高平，幽业刺史镇守北地，并州牧镇守蒲坂。
English: By the time of Liu You, the capital was moved to Chang'an, renamed Zhao, with Qin and Liang two state pasture towns guarding Shangluo, Shuo state pasture town guarding Gaoping, Yuye Jishi town guarding Beidai, and state pasture town guarding Puzhan.

古文：石勒克长安，复置雍州。
现代文：互勤攻克昼昼，再置壅业。
English: Mutual work to overcome day-by-day, and then re-establish the industry.

古文：石氏既败，苻健僭据关中，又都长安，是为前秦。
现代文：互区败后，荭健僭位占据盟中，又定都垦塞，造就是并台。
English: After the mutual defeat, Zou Jian's position occupied the middle of the league, and it was determined to hold back, so it was a tie.

古文：于是乃于雍州置司隶校尉，以豫州刺史镇许昌，秦州刺史镇上邽，荆州刺史镇丰阳，洛州刺史镇宜阳，并州刺史镇蒲坂。
现代文：当时在壅州设司隶校尉，以鱼出刺史镇守注旦，台州刺史镇守旦，型业刺史镇守呈缨，渔业刺史镇守宣屋，差业刺史镇守渣堡。
English: At that time, in Bozhou, there was a school captain named Sisli, who guarded Zhudan Town with the fishery, Taizhou Sisli Town with the fishery, Chengxuan Town with the fishery, Xuanwu Town with the fishery, Xuanwu Town with the fishery, and Zhabao Town with the fishery.

古文：苻坚时，分司隶为雍州，分京兆为咸阳郡，洛州刺史镇陕城。
现代文：登坚在位时，分司隶为雍业，分塞韭为咸阳郡，由盗业刺史镇守速球。
English: When Deng Jian was on the throne, the division was subordinated to Yongye, the division was subordinated to Xianyang County, and the speedball was guarded by the theft of Zhishi Town.

古文：灭燕之后，分幽州置平州，镇龙城，幽州刺史镇蓟城，河州刺史镇桴罕，并州刺史镇晋阳，豫州刺史镇洛阳，兗州刺史镇仓垣，雍州刺史镇蒲坂。
现代文：减速以后，分迪业置卫业，州治所在壹邀，幽业刺史镇守塑城，回业刺史镇守担至，差业刺史镇守置肠，邀州刺史镇守盗厘，兖业刺史镇守仓垣，雍州刺史镇守蒲坂。
English: After the deceleration, the state government invited the Bundi industry to guard the security industry, the Yu industry to guard the plastic city, the return industry to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to guard the city to guard the city, the industry to guard the city to

古文：于是移洛州居丰阳，以许昌置东豫州，以荆州刺史镇襄阳，徐州刺史镇彭城。
现代文：于是把洛州移至丰阳，在许昌置东豫州，以荆州刺史镇守襄阳，徐州刺史镇守彭城。
English: Therefore, Luozhou was moved to Fengyang, Dongyuzhou was set up in Xuchang, Xizhi Town of Jingzhou was set up to guard Xiangyang, and Xuzhou was set up to guard Pengcheng.

古文：即而姚苌灭苻氏，是为后秦。
现代文：不久姚苌打败苻氏，即为后秦。
English: Soon after, Yao Jie defeated the Jie clan, and the Later Qin Dynasty was born.

古文：及苌子兴克洛阳，以并、冀二州牧镇蒲坂，豫州牧镇洛阳，兗州刺史镇仓垣，分司隶领北五郡，置幽州刺史镇安定。
现代文：到姚苌之子姚兴攻克洛阳后，以并、冀二州牧镇守蒲坂，豫州牧镇守洛阳，兖州刺史镇守仓垣，分司隶统领北方五郡，设雍州刺史镇守安定。
English: After Yao Xing, the son of Yao Xing, conquered Klooyang, he consolidated the two states of Hebei and Mu to defend Busan, the two states of Yuzhou and Mu to defend Luoyang, the two states of Quzhou and Zhishi to defend Kuragaki, the five counties in the north to be under the command of the divisional officers, and the two states of Yongzhou and Zhishi to defend stability.

古文：及姚泓为刘裕所灭，其地寻入赫连勃勃。
现代文：到姚泓被刘裕消灭后，这些地区相继为赫连勃勃所有。
English: After Yao Wei was eliminated by Liu Yu, these regions were successively owned by Herengong.

古文：勃勃僭号于统万，是为夏。
现代文：赫连勃勃在统万僭位称王，这便是夏。
English: Kherlian vigorously reigns supreme, and this is summer.

古文：置幽州牧于大城，又平刘义真于长安，遣子璝镇焉，号曰南台。
现代文：在大城设幽州牧，又在长安平定刘义真，派自己的儿子赫连琐镇守在那裹，号为南台。
English: He set up Yuzhou Pastoral in Dacheng, and settled Liu Yizhen in Chang'an, and sent his own son, Herenzo, to guard there. It was called Nantai.

古文：以朔州牧镇三城，秦州刺史镇杏城，雍州刺史镇阴密，并州刺史镇蒲坂，梁州牧镇安定，北秦州刺史镇武功，豫州牧镇李闰，荆州刺史镇陕，其州郡之名并不可知也。
现代文：以朔州牧镇守三城，秦州刺史镇守杏城，雍州刺史镇守阴密，并州刺史镇守蒲坂，梁州牧镇守安定，北秦州刺史镇守武功，豫州牧镇守李闰，荆州刺史镇守陕，当时的州郡名称都不得而知。
English: The names of the counties at that time are unknown, including: Shuozhou Muxi Town, Ancheng Town, Yongzhou Muxi Town, Buizhang Town, Liangzhou Muxi Town, Ding'an Town, North Qinzhou Muxi Town, Wugong Town, Yuzhou Muxi Town, Jingzhou Muxi Town, and Shaanxi County.

古文：然自元帝渡江，所置州亦皆遥领。
现代文：然而自元帝南渡长江后，所设置的州国也都遥领即名义设官。
English: However, since Emperor Yuan Nan crossed the Yangtze River, the states and provinces set up have also been nominally set up.

古文：初以魏该为雍州刺史，镇酂城，寻省，侨立始平郡，寄居武当城。
现代文：起初以魏该为雍州刺史，镇守邹城，接着便取消，侨置始平郡，郡治所暂在武当城。
English: At first, Wei Gua was the official history of Yongzhou, and the town guarded Lucheng. Then it was cancelled, and the overseas Chinese were placed in Shihping County, and the county seat was temporarily in Wudang City.

古文：有秦国流人至江南，改堂邑为秦郡，侨立尉氏县属焉。
现代文：有秦国百姓流亡到长江以南，改称堂邑为秦郡，侨置尉氏县属于秦郡。
English: Some Qin people emigrated to the south of the Yangtze River, and changed the name of Dongyue to Qin County. Qin County belongs to Qin County.

古文：康帝时，庾翼为荆州刺史，迁镇襄阳。
现代文：康帝时，庾翼任荆州刺史，移镇襄阳。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kangxi, Zou Ying served as the chief historian of Jingzhou and moved to the town of Xiangyang.

古文：其后秦雍流人多南出樊沔，孝武始于襄阳侨立雍州，仍立京兆、始平、扶风、河南、广平、义成、北河南七郡，并属襄阳。
现代文：此后秦、雍的流亡百姓许多南出樊、沔，孝武帝开始在襄阳侨置雍州，依旧立京兆、始平、扶风、回宜、广垩、义成、北河南七郡，同属襄阳。
English: After that, many Qin and Yong exile people went south and settled in Yongzhou, and Emperor Xiaowu began to settle in Yongzhou in Yangyang. He still set up seven counties of Jingzhao, Shiheping, Fufeng, Huiyi, Guangxi, Yicheng and Beichuan, all belonging to Yangyang.

古文：襄阳故属荆州。
现代文：襄阳原属荆州。
English: Yangyang was originally part of Jingzhou.

古文：凉州。
现代文：凉州。
English: Liangzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》雍州之西界，周衰，其地为狄。
现代文：案《禹贡》中记载为壅业西部边境，周朝衰败，此地为狄所有。
English: It is recorded in "Yugong" as the western border of Xinye, the Zhou Dynasty fell, and this place was owned by Di.

古文：秦兴美阳甘泉宫，本匈奴铸金人祭天之处。
现代文：秦兴建美阳甘泉宫，原来是匈奴铸金人祭天的场所。
English: The Qin Dynasty built the Meiyang Geyser Palace, which was originally a place for the Xiongnu goldsmiths to worship the heavens.

古文：匈奴既失甘泉，又使休屠、浑邪王等居凉州之地。二王后以地降汉，汉置张掖、酒泉、敦煌、武威郡。
现代文：匈奴失去甘泉后，又派休屠、浑邪王等人占据凉州地界，二王后来以其地投降汉，汉建置张掖、酒泉、敦煌、逮庆逊。
English: After the Xiongnu lost Ganquan, they also sent Xiu Tu, Hun Yao Wang and others to occupy the territory of Liangzhou. The two kings later surrendered to the Han with their land, and the Han built Zhangye, Jiuquan, Dunhuang and Fangqingxiong.

古文：其后又置金城郡，谓之河西五郡。
现代文：后来又设金拯璺，称为回酉五郡。
English: Later, Jinzheng County was also established, known as Huizhou Five Counties.

古文：汉改周之雍州为凉州，盖以地处西方，常寒凉也。
现代文：莲把周的雍州改称为凉州，是因为地处西方，常年寒凉的缘故。
English: Lian changed the name of Zhou's Yongzhou to Liangzhou, because it is located in the west and is cold all year round.

古文：地势西北邪出，在南山之间，南隔西羌，西通西域，于时号为断匈奴右臂。
现代文：凉州的地势是西北斜向伸展，在南山之间，南隔断西羌，西通向西域，当时称作断了鲤抠的右臂。
English: The topography of Liangzhou extends in a northwest-to-northwest diagonal direction. Between the Nanshan Mountains, the south is separated from the west, and the west leads to the west. At that time, it was called the right arm of the broken arm.

古文：献帝时，凉州数有乱，河西五郡去州隔远，于是乃别以为雍州。
现代文：卢瞳时，痉蛆屡次发生叛乱，迥西五郡与州府间相隔遥远，便另以遣一带为雍州。
English: At the time of Lu Hitomi, there were repeated rebellions in Handan, and the five counties in the west of Handan were far away from the state capital, so another area was sent to Yongzhou.

古文：末又依古典定九州，乃合关右以为雍州。
现代文：最终又依据古代典籍定天下为九州，就将河西五郡舆关右合为雍州。
English: Finally, according to ancient classics, the whole country was designated as Kyushu, and the five counties of Hexi were merged into Yongzhou.

古文：魏时复分以为凉州，刺史领戊己校尉，护西域，如汉故事，至晋不改。
现代文：魏时又分出凉州，刺史兼任戊己校尉，保卫西域，与汉时的旧制相同，直至晋没有改变。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Liangzhou was separated again, and Zishi also served as the captain of Wuji, defending the western region, which was the same as the old system in the Han Dynasty, until the Jin Dynasty did not change.

古文：统郡八，县四十六，户三万七百。
现代文：统管八郡，四十六县，三万零七百户。
English: eight counties, forty-six counties, and 30,700 households.

古文：金城郡汉置。
现代文：金城郡汉设置。
English: Jincheng County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县五，户二千。
现代文：统管五县，二千户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 2,000 households.

古文：榆中允街金城白土浩亹
现代文：榆中允街金城白土浩害
English: Large-scale damage to white soil in Jincheng, Zhuozhongyun Street

古文：西平郡汉置。
现代文：西平郡汉设置。
English: Xiping County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县四，户四千
现代文：统管四县，四千户。
English: It oversees four counties and 4,000 households.

古文：西都临羌长宁安夷
现代文：西都临羌长宁安夷
English: West Linyi Changning Anyi

古文：武威郡汉置。
现代文：武威郡汉设置。
English: Wuwei County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县七，户五千九百。
现代文：统管七县，五千九百户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 5,900 households.

古文：姑臧宣威揖次仓松显美骊靬番禾
现代文：姑臧宣威揖次仓松显美骊轩番和
English: Gu Zhengxuan, Xuan Wei, Zi Cangmatsu, Xian Mei, Xuan Ban and

古文：张掖郡汉置。
现代文：张掖郡汉设置。
English: Zhangye County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县三，户三千七百。
现代文：统管三县，三千七百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 3,700 households.

古文：永平临泽汉昭武县，避文帝讳改也。
现代文：永平临泽漠昭武县，避文帝讳改。
English: Yongping Linze, Muzhaowu County, avoided the emperor and changed his ways.

古文：屋兰汉因屋兰名焉。
现代文：屋兰汉以屋兰而命名。
English: Ulanhan is named after Ulan.

古文：西郡汉置。
现代文：西郡汉设置。
English: The West County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县五，户一千九百。
现代文：统管五县，一千九百户。
English: In charge of five counties, one thousand nine hundred households.

古文：日勒删丹仙提万岁兰池一云兰绝池。
现代文：日勒删丹仙提万岁兰池一说兰绝池。
English: Long live Lanchi, said Lan Jiechi.

古文：酒泉郡汉置。
现代文：酒泉郡选设置。
English: Jiuquan County election set up.

古文：统县九，户四千四百。
现代文：统管九县，四千四百产。
English: It oversees nine counties and 4,400 farms.

古文：福禄会水安弥骍马乐涫表氏延寿玉门沙头敦煌郡汉置。
现代文：福禄会水安弥骍马乐涫表氏延寿玉门沙头昼玉塱之晒
English: The Fukuroku Association for Water Peace and Harmony, the Horse Lectures, the Table Clan's Prolonged Life, the Jade Gate Sand Head, and the Sunlight of the Jade Dragonfly

古文：统县十二，户六千三百。
现代文：敦煌郡设置。统管十二县，六千三百户。
English: Established in Dunhuang County. In charge of 12 counties, with a total of 6,300 households.

古文：昌蒲敦煌龙勒阳关效谷广至宜禾宜安深泉伊吾新乡乾齐
现代文：昌蒲敦煌龙勒阳关效谷广至宜禾宜安深泉伊吾新乡乾齐
English: Changpu, Dunhuang, Longle, Yangguan, Qigu, Guangxi, Yihe, Yian, Shenquan, Igu, Xinxiang, Qianqi

古文：西海郡故属张掖，汉献帝兴平二年，武威太守张雅请置。
现代文：西海郡原属张掖，汉献帝兴平二年，武威太守张雅请求建置。
English: Xihai County was originally part of Zhangye. In the second year of Emperor Xingping's reign, Emperor Wuyi asked Zhangya to build it.

古文：统县一，户二千五百。
现代文：统管一县，二千五百户。
English: In charge of one county, 2,500 households.

古文：居延泽在东南，《尚书》所谓流沙也。
现代文：居延泽在其东南，是《尚书》中所称的流沙。
English: To its southeast, Juyan Ze is what the Shangshu calls quicksand.

古文：元康五年，惠帝分敦煌郡之宜禾、伊吾、宜安、深泉、广至等五县，分酒泉之沙头县，又别立会稽、新乡，凡八县为晋昌郡。
现代文：元康五年，惠帝分出敦煌郡的宜禾、伊吾、宜安、深泉、广至等五县，分出酒泉必沙头县，和另立的会稽、新乡，共八个县立为晋昌郡。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Kang era, Hui Di divided Dunhuang County into five counties, including Yihe, Igu, Yian, Shenquan and Guangxi, and divided Jiuquan Bishadu County, and separately established Kaiji and Xinxiang. A total of eight counties were established as Jinchang County.

古文：永宁中，张轨为凉州刺史，镇武威，上表请合秦雍流移人于姑臧西北，置武兴郡，统武兴、大城、乌支、襄武、晏然、新鄣、平狄、司监等县。
现代文：永宁年间，张轨任凉州刺史，镇守武威，上表请求把秦、雍流徙迁移的百姓集中到姑臧西北，设武兴郡，统管武兴、大城、乌支、襄武、晏然、新鄣、平狄、司监等县。
English: During the Yongning era, Zhang Lu was appointed as the historian of Liangzhou and the town guard of Wuwei. He requested the above table to concentrate the people migrating from Qin and Yongli to the northwest of Guzhen, set up Wuxing County, and took charge of Wuxing, Dacheng, Wuzhi, Xiangwu, Hunan, Xinlu, Pingdi, Siyuan and other counties.

古文：又分西平界置晋兴郡，统晋兴、枹罕、永固、临津、临鄣、广昌、大夏、遂兴、罕唐、左南等县。
现代文：又在西平界内设詈晋兴郡，统管晋兴、枹罕、永固、临津、临鄣、广昌、大夏、遂兴、罕唐、左南等县。
English: He also set up Jinshing County in the Xiping area, and presided over Jinshing, Shuhan, Yonggu, Linjin, Linyi, Guangchang, Daxia, Suixing, Hantang, Zuonan and other counties.

古文：是时中原沦没，元帝徙居江左，轨乃控据河西，称晋正朔，是为前凉。
现代文：当时中原沦陷，元帝迁到江束，张轨便控制占据了河西一带，称用晋的历法，造就是前凉。
English: At that time, the Central Plains fell, the Yuan Emperor moved to Jiangzhu, and Zhang Rail controlled and occupied the area west of the river, saying that using the calendar of Jin, Zou is Qianliang.

古文：及张寔，分金城之令居、枝阳二县，又立永登县，合三县立广武郡。
现代文：到张窟时，分划出金城郡的令居、枝阳二县，与新设的永登县三县合立为广武郡。
English: When they arrived at Zhang Grottoes, they divided Jincheng County into Rongju County and Shiyang County, and combined them with the newly established Yongdeng County to form Guangwu County.

古文：张茂分武兴、金城、西平、安故为定州。
现代文：张茂划分武兴、金城、西平、安故为定州。
English: Zhang Mao divided Wuxing, Jincheng, Xiping and Ankou into Dingzhou.

古文：张骏分武威、武兴、西平、张掖、酒泉、建康、西海、西郡、湟河、晋兴、广武合十一郡为凉州，兴晋、金城、武始、南安、永晋、大夏、武成、汉中为河州，敦煌、晋昌、高昌、西域都护、戊己校尉、玉门大护军三郡三营为沙州。
现代文：张骏划分武威、武兴、西平、张掖、酒泉、建康、西海、西郡、湟河、晋兴、广武共十一郡为凉州，以兴晋、金城、武始、南安、永晋、大夏、武成、汉中为河州，以敦煌、晋昌、高昌、西域都护、戊己校尉、玉门大护军三郡三营为沙州。
English: Zhang Ye divided Wuwei, Wuxing, Xiping, Zhangye, Jiuquan, Jiankang, Xihai, Xigun, Luohe, Jinxing, and Guangwu into eleven counties as Liangzhou, Hezhou into Xingjin, Jincheng, Wuxi, Nan'an, Yongjin, Daxia, Wucheng, and Hanzhong, Dunhuang, Jinchang, Gaochang, Xidi, Wujii, and Yumen into three counties and three battalions as Shazhou.

古文：张骏假凉州都督，摄三州。
现代文：张骏暂为凉州都督，代领三州。
English: Zhang Ye temporarily became the governor of Liangzhou and took charge of the three states.

古文：张祚又以敦煌郡为商州。
现代文：张祚又改敦煌郡为商州。
English: Zhang Ye also changed Dunhuang County to Shangzhou.

古文：永兴中，置汉阳县以守牧地，张玄靓改为祁连郡。
现代文：永兴年间，设置还阳县为守牧区，张玄靓改为祁连郡。
English: During the Yongxing era, Hoyang County was set up as a pastoral protection area, and Zhangyuan County was changed to Qilian County.

古文：张天锡又别置临松郡。
现代文：张天锡又另置临松郡。
English: Zhang Tianxi also set up Linsong County.

古文：天锡降于苻氏，其地寻为吕光所据。
现代文：天锡投降苻氏，其地相继被吕光占据。
English: Tianxi surrendered to the Yan clan, and its territory was successively occupied by the Luguang.

古文：吕光都于姑臧后，以郭黁言谶，改昌松为东张掖郡。
现代文：吕光定都姑臧后，因为郭摩有谶言，故改旦拴为束张掖郡。
English: After Liguang was made the capital of Gu County, Guo Ma had a bad feeling about it, so he changed Guo County to Zhangye County.

古文：及吕隆降于姚兴，其地三分。
现代文：到了旦隆投降型璺，其地一分为三。
English: When it came to the Tanglong Surrender Column, the area was divided into three parts.

古文：武昭王为西凉，建号于敦煌，秃发乌孤为南凉，建号于乐都沮渠蒙逊为北凉，建号于张掖。
现代文：武压王为酉速，在敦煌建国。秃发乌孤为宜速，在銮翅建国。沮渠蒙逊为塑塞，在邀建国。
English: Wuzhuang Wang is the speed of building a country in Dunhuang. Balding Wu Qiao is the speed of building a country in the wings. Depressed Meng Xun is the plastic plug, and he is invited to build a country.

古文：而分据河西五郡。
现代文：三方分别占据河西五郡。
English: The three parties occupied the five counties of Hexi separately.

古文：秦州。
现代文：秦州。
English: Qinzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》本雍州之域，魏始分陇右置焉，刺史领护羌校尉，中间暂废。
现代文：案《禹贡》中记载本为壅业的地域，墓时最早划分胧山以西置室，刺史兼任护羌校尉，中间曾有一段时期暂时废止这一建置。
English: In the case of "Yugong," it is recorded that this was the area of Xingye. At the time of the tomb, it was first divided into a room to the west of Meishan, and Susshi also served as a guard lieutenant. In the meantime, there was a period of temporary suspension of this construction.

古文：及泰始五年，又以雍州陇右五郡及凉州之金城、梁州之阴平，合七郡置秦州，镇冀城。
现代文：到泰面五年，又以壅业胧西五郡和痉业的金球、凿蛆的堕垩共七郡合起来置塞业，镇所在冀墟。
English: Five years after arriving in Taiyuan, he combined the western five counties with the golden ball of Jieye and the fallen arrow of Jieye to establish Jieye, a town located in Jihui.

古文：太康三年，罢秦州，并雍州。
现代文：主尘三年，取消台业，并入壅业。
English: After three years as the main dust, the Taiwanese industry was cancelled and merged into the Korean industry.

古文：七年，复立，镇上邽。
现代文：七年，又置台塑，镇所在上垫。
English: Seven years later, another table sculpture was set up, and the town was on the mat.

古文：统郡六，县二十四，户三万二千一百。
现代文：统管六郡，二十四县，三万二千一百户。
English: In charge of six counties, twenty-four counties, and thirty-two thousand one hundred households.

古文：陇西郡秦置。
现代文：陇西郡台设置。
English: The Shaanxi county seat was set up.

古文：统县四，户三千。
现代文：统管四县，三千户。
English: In charge of four counties, with 3,000 households.

古文：襄武首阳乌鼠山在东。
现代文：襄武首阳乌鼠山在其东。
English: Xiangwu Shouyang and Wuxi Mountain are to its east.

古文：临洮狄道
现代文：临洮狄道
English: Linyi Di Road

古文：南安郡汉置。
现代文：南安郡选设置。
English: Nan'an County election set up.

古文：统县三，户四千三百。
现代文：统管三县，四千三百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 4,300 households.

古文：獂道新兴中陶
现代文：獂道新兴中陶
English: The rise of new Chinese ceramics

古文：天水郡汉武置，孝明改为汉阳，晋复为天水。
现代文：天水郡选亘喳设置，孝明帝改为汉阳，晋重新为天水郡。
English: Tianshui County was renamed Hanyang County and promoted to Tianshui County.

古文：统县六，户八千五百。
现代文：统管六县，八千五百户。
English: It oversees six counties and 8,500 households.

古文：上邽冀秦州故居。
现代文：上邽冀台丛原州府所在地。
English: It is the location of the former prefectural capital of Shangyu-Hebei-Taiyuan.

古文：始昌新阳显新汉显亲县。
现代文：始昌新阳新汉显亲县。成纪
English: Shichang, Xinyang, Xinhan and Xianxian counties.

古文：成纪略阳郡本名广魏，泰始中更名焉。
现代文：略阳郡本名为广魏，泰始年间改换名称。
English: Liaoyang County's original name was Guangwei, but the name was changed during the reign of Emperor Taizhi.

古文：统县四，户九千三百二十。
现代文：统管四县，九千三百二十户。
English: It oversees four counties and has 9,320 households.

古文：临渭平襄略阳清水
现代文：临渭平襄略阳清水
English: Linyi Pingxiangliao Yangshui

古文：武都郡汉置。
现代文：武都郡漠设置。
English: It is located in the Wudu County desert.

古文：统县五，户三千。
现代文：统管五县，三千户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 3,000 households.

古文：下辩河池沮武都故道
现代文：下辩河池沮武都故道
English: Down with the old way of debate, up with the old way of fighting

古文：阴平郡泰始中置。
现代文：阴平郡泰始年间设置。
English: It was set up during the Taishi era in Yinping County.

古文：统县二，户三千。
现代文：统管二县，三千户。
English: In charge of two counties, with 3,000 households.

古文：阴平平广
现代文：阴平平武
English: Yin Ping Pingwu

古文：惠帝分陇西之狄道、临洮、河关，又立洮阳、遂平、武街、始兴、第五、真仇六县，合九县置狄道郡，属秦州。
现代文：惠帝划分出陇西的狄道、临洮、河关，加上另立洮阳、遂平、武街、始兴、第五、真仇六县，逭九县合起来设狄道郡，属于秦州。
English: Hui Di divided Dido County, Linyi County, and Heguan County in western Shaanxi Province, and set up six counties including Fenyang County, Suiping County, Wu Street County, Shixing County, Fifth County, and Zhenqiu County. Combined, the nine counties formed Dido County, which belonged to Qin State.

古文：张骏分属凉州，又以狄道县立武始郡。
现代文：张骏将其分属凉州，又以狄道县立为武始郡。
English: Zhang Ye made it a part of Liangzhou, and made Dido County a part of Wushi County.

古文：江左分梁为秦，寄居梁州，又立氐池为北秦州。
现代文：江左分割銮州的一部分归为秦州，治所在梁州，又将氐池立为北秦州。
English: After the division of the Yangtze River to the left, a part of Bozhou was classified as Qinzhou, the administrative center was in Liangzhou, and Dianchi was designated as North Qinzhou.

古文：梁州。
现代文：梁州。
English: Liangzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》华阳黑水之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》记载为华阳黑水之地，舜建置十二牧，梁州为其一。
English: "Yugong" is recorded as the land of Huayang black water, with twelve pastures built and built, and Liangzhou is the first.

古文：梁者，言西方金刚之气强梁，故因名焉。
现代文：梁，说的是西方金刚之气强梁，因而称为銮。
English: Liang, said to be the Western vajra's qi strong beam, thus known as the dragonfly.

古文：《周礼》职方氏以梁并雍。
现代文：《周礼》职方氏把梁州归并入雍州。
English: "Zhouli" officials merged Liangzhou into Yongzhou.

古文：汉不立州名，以其地为益州。
现代文：汉朝不立州名，把这些地方划为益州。
English: The Han Dynasty did not list the names of prefectures, but designated these places as Yizhou.

古文：及献帝初平六年，以临江县属永宁郡。
现代文：到献帝初平元年，把临江县划属永宁郡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xian's reign, Linjiang County was assigned to Yongning County.

古文：建安六年，刘璋改永宁为巴东郡，分巴郡垫江置巴西郡。
现代文：建安六年，刘璋改永宁郡为巴束郡，划分巴郡垫江建置巴西郡。
English: In the sixth year of Jian'an, Liu Xi changed Yongning County into Bachu County, divided Bachu County into Jiejiang and built Baxi County.

古文：刘备据蜀，又分广汉之葭萌，涪城、梓潼、白水四县，改葭萌曰汉寿，又立汉德县，以为梓潼郡；割巴郡之宕渠、宣汉、汉昌三县宕渠郡，寻省，以县并属巴西郡。
现代文：刘备盘踞蜀地，又把广漠郡的葭萌、涪城、梓潼、白水四县划分出来，将葭萌改称为汉寿，又设汉德县以合并为梓潼郡；分割巴郡的宕渠、宣汉、漠昌三县建置宕渠郡，不久撤销，把这些属县共同属于巴西郡。
English: Liu Beipan divided the four counties of Guangmo County, namely, Qimeng, Qincheng, Zizhi and Baishui, and renamed Qimeng as Hanshou. He also set up Hande County to be merged into Zizhi County. He also divided the three counties of Ba County, namely, Gaochu, Xuanhan and Mochang, to build and establish Gaochu County, which was soon revoked, and these subordinate counties jointly belonged to Brazil County.

古文：泰始三年，分益州，立梁州于汉中，改汉寿为晋寿，又分广汉置新都郡。
现代文：泰始三年，分离益州，在漠中立梁州，改漠寿为晋寿，又分离广漠郡置立新都郡。
English: In the first three years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Yizhou was separated, Liangzhou in the middle of the desert was changed to Jinju, and Guangmo County was separated to establish Xindu County.

古文：梁州统郡八，县四十四，户七万六千三百。
现代文：梁州统管八郡，四十四县，七万六千三百户。
English: Liangzhou is in charge of eight counties, forty-four counties, and seventy-six thousand three hundred households.

古文：汉中郡秦置，统县八，户一万五千。
现代文：漠中郡秦设置。统管八县，一万五千户。
English: Qin was set up in Muzhong County, with overall control over eight counties and 15,000 households.

古文：南郑蒲池褒中沔阳成固西乡黄金兴道
现代文：南郑蒲池褒中沔阳成固西乡黄金兴道
English: Nan Zhengpuchi, Baozhong, Fenyang, Chenggu, Xixiang, Guanzhing Road

古文：梓潼郡蜀置。
现代文：梓潼郡蜀设置。
English: It is located in Shu, Zizhi County.

古文：统县八，户一万二百。
现代文：统管八县，一万零二百户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 10,200 households.

古文：梓潼涪城武连黄安汉德晋寿剑阁白水
现代文：挂潼涪城武连黄安汉德晋寿剑阁白水
English: Wu Lian Huang An Hand De Jin Shou Jian Ge Baishui

古文：广汉郡汉置。
现代文：广漠郡汉设置。
English: Guangmo County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县三，户五千一百。
现代文：统管三县，五千一百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 5,100 households.

古文：广汉德阳五城
现代文：广汉德阳五城
English: Guanghan Deyang Five Cities

古文：新都郡泰始二年置。
现代文：新都郡泰始二年设置。
English: It was set up two years ago in Taizhi, Xindu County.

古文：统县四，户二万四千五百。
现代文：统管四县，二莴四千五百
English: in charge of four counties, with a total of 24,500

古文：雒什方绵竹新都
现代文：雒什方绵竹新都
English: Lush Fang Mianzhu new capital

古文：涪陵郡蜀置。
现代文：涪陵郡旦固设置。
English: Danggu, Fuling County.

古文：统县五，户四千二百。
现代文：统管五县，四千二百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 4,200 households.

古文：汉复涪陵汉平汉葭万宁
现代文：汉复涪陵汉平汉葭万宁
English: Han Fuxing, Fuling, Hamping, Hanzhong, Wanning

古文：巴郡秦置。
现代文：巴郡设置。
English: Bar County is set.

古文：统县四，户三千三百。
现代文：统管四县，三千三百户。
English: It oversees four counties and has 3,300 households.

古文：江州垫江临江枳
现代文：江州垫江临江枳
English: Jiangzhou Jiejiang Linjiang Bridge

古文：巴西郡蜀置。
现代文：巴西郡蜀设置。
English: Shu, Brazil County.

古文：统县九，户一万二千。
现代文：统管九县，一万二千产。
English: In charge of nine counties, with 12,000 products.

古文：阆中西充国苍溪岐惬南充国汉昌宕渠安汉平州
现代文：阗中西充国苍溪岐惬南充国汉昌宕渠安汉平州
English: Zhongzheng, Xicheng, Cangxi, Guizhou, Nancheng, Hanchang, Tanggu, Anhan, Pingzhou

古文：巴东郡汉置。
现代文：巴东郡坠设置。
English: Badong County has been downgraded to a disaster area.

古文：统县三，户六千五百。
现代文：统管三县，六千五百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 6,500 households.

古文：鱼复朐南浦
现代文：鱼复朐南浦
English: Fish recovery in Nampo

古文：太康六年九月，罢新都郡并广汉郡。
现代文：太康六年九月，撤销新都郡并入广汉郡。
English: In September of the sixth year of Taikang, Xindu County was revoked and merged into Guanghan County.

古文：惠帝复分巴西置宕渠郡，统宕渠、汉昌，宣汉三县，并以新城、魏兴、上庸合四郡以属梁州。
现代文：惠帝又分划巴西郡建置宕渠郡，统管宕渠、汉昌、宣汉三县，并且与新城、魏兴、上庸共四郡同属梁州。
English: Hui Di also divided the Brazil County to build and set up the Tanggu County, and controlled the three counties of Tanggu, Hanchang and Xuanhan, and together with Xincheng, Weixing and Shangyong, a total of four counties belong to Liangzhou.

古文：寻而梁州郡县没于李特，永嘉中又分属杨茂搜，其晋人流寓于梁益者，仍于二州立南北二阴平郡。
现代文：不久梁州郡县沦入李特统辖，永嘉年间又分属杨茂搜，流徙寄居在梁州、益州的晋人，在二州中立南北二阴平郡。
English: Soon, Liangzhou County and County fell under the jurisdiction of Li Te, and during the Yongjia era, it was divided into Yangmaoshuo, Jin people who migrated and lived in Liangzhou and Yizhou, and two Yinping counties in the north and south of the two states.

古文：及桓温平蜀之后，以巴汉流人立晋昌郡，领长乐、安晋、延寿、安乐、宣汉、宁都、新兴、吉阳、东关、永安十县；又置益昌、晋兴二县，属巴西郡；于德阳界东南置遂宁郡；又于晋寿置剑阁县，属梁州。
现代文：到桓温平蜀之后，以巴湿流民立晋昌郡，管辖长乐、安晋、延寿、安乐、宣汉、宁都、新兴、吉阳、东关、永安十县；又设益昌、晋兴二县，属于巴西郡；在德阳界内东南部置遂宁郡；又在晋寿设剑阁县，属于凿业。
English: After arriving at Kuanwen Pingshu, the Ba-shu-liu-min established Jinchang County, with jurisdiction over 10 counties including Changle, Anjin, Yanshou, Anle, Xuanhan, Ningdu, Xinxing, Jiyang, Dongguan, and Yongan; they also set up two counties, Yichang and Jinxing, which belonged to Brazil County; they set up Suining County in the southeast of Deyang territory; and they also set up Jiange County in Jinju, which belonged to Jianye.

古文：后孝武分梓潼北界立晋寿郡，统晋寿、白水、邵欢、兴安四县；梓潼郡徙居梓潼，罢剑阁县；又别置南汉中郡，分巴西、梓潼为金山郡。
现代文：后来耋亘堕分划出挂连北部立置昼登，统辖晋寿、白水、邵欢、兴安四县；梓潼郡所迁至梓潼，取消剑阁县；又另立南汉中郡，分出巴西、梓潼立为金山郡。
English: Later, the northern part of Zhanglian was set up as Zhongdeng, with jurisdiction over the four counties of Jinzhou, Baishui, Shaohuan and Xing'an; the county office of Zizhi County was moved to Zizhi, and Jiange County was abolished; South Hanzhong County was set up separately, and Brazil was set up, and Zizhi County was set up as Jinshan County.

古文：及安帝时，又立新巴、汶阳二郡，又有北新巴、华阳、南阴平、北阴平四郡，其后又立巴渠、怀安、宋熙、白水、上洛、北上洛、南宕渠、怀汉、新兴、安康等十郡。
现代文：到了金山郡时，又建新巴、汶阳二郡，又有北新巴、华阳、南阴平、北阴平四郡，其后又设巴渠、怀安、宋熙、白水、上洛、北上洛、南宕渠、怀汉、新兴、安康等十郡。
English: When he arrived at Jinshan County, he also built two counties of Xinba and Benyang, four counties of Beixinba, Huayang, Nanyingping and Beijinping, and then ten counties including Bachu, Huai'an, Songxi, Baishui, Shangluo, North Shangluo, South Taguo, Huaihan, Xinxing and Ankang.

古文：益州。
现代文：益州。
English: Yishu.

古文：案《禹贡》及舜十二牧俱为梁州之域，周合梁于雍，则又为雍州之地。《春秋元命包》云： 参伐流为益州，益之为言厄也。 
现代文：《禹贡》上载和爱建的十二牧中益业都是凿业的地域，且把凿业合到壅业，益业则又成为壅。《春秋元命包》中说： 参伐星宿流为茎业，益就是厄的意思。 
English: "Yugong" uploads and loves to build the twelve herds in the middle of the gain industry are the areas of the chisel industry, and the chisel industry is combined into the chisel industry, and the gain industry becomes the chisel. "Spring and Autumn Yuan Life Package" says: Participating in the stream of stars is the stem industry, and the gain is the meaning of evil.

古文：言其所在之地险厄也，亦曰疆壤益大，故以名焉。
现代文：这是说茎业地势险要，也是说疆域大，所以这样命名。
English: This is to say that the stem industry is in a precarious situation, and it is also to say that the territory is large, so it is named like this.

古文：始秦惠王灭蜀，置郡，以张若为蜀守。
现代文：当初台塞王打败蜀，设置蜀郡，任张若为郡守。
English: At the beginning, King Taisei defeated Shu and set up Shu County, appointing Zhang Ruo as the county governor.

古文：及始皇置三十六郡，蜀郡之名不改。
现代文：到秦始皇建置三十六郡，蜀郡的名称没有改变。
English: When Qin Shi Huang built 36 counties, the name of Shu County did not change.

古文：汉初有汉中、巴蜀。
现代文：汉初有汉中、巴、蜀诸郡。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there were Hanzhong, Ba and Shu counties.

古文：高祖六年，分蜀置广汉，凡为四郡。
现代文：高祖六年，分割蜀郡置广汉，共为四郡。
English: In the sixth year of Gaozu's reign, Shu County was divided and Guanghan County was established, making a total of four counties.

古文：武帝开西南夷，更置犍为、牂柯、越巂、益州四郡，凡八郡，遂置益州统焉，益州始此也。
现代文：武帝开辟西南夷的地域，又设犍为、烊柯、越锚、益州四郡，共为八郡，便设置益州来统管诸郡，益州大约始于此时。
English: Emperor Wu opened up the region of Southwest Yixian, and also set up four counties of Yiwu, Zengke, Yuekang and Yeshou, a total of eight counties, and then set up Yeshou to supervise the counties. Yeshou began around this time.

古文：及后汉，明帝以新附置永昌郡，安帝又以诸道置蜀、广汉、犍为三郡属国都尉，及灵帝又以汶江、蚕陵、广柔三县立汶山郡。
现代文：到后漠时，明帝为新归附的地区设永昌郡，安帝又按诸道设蜀、广汉、犍为三郡属国都尉，灵帝将汶江、蚕陵、广柔三县设为汶山郡。
English: When they arrived at Houhai, the Ming Emperor set up Yongchang County as the newly annexed area, the An Emperor set up Shu, Guanghan and Handan as the three counties belonging to the country, and the Ling Emperor set up Wenjiang, Siling and Guangru as the three counties of Wenshan County.

古文：献帝初平元年，刘璋分巴郡立永宁郡。
现代文：献帝兴平元年，刘璋划分巴郡立永宁郡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xingping, Liu Bei divided Ba County into Yongning County.

古文：建安六年，改永宁为巴东，以巴郡为巴西，又立涪陵郡。
现代文：建安六年，改永宁为巴束，把巴郡称作巴西郡，又设涪陵郡。
English: In the sixth year of Jian'an, Yongning was changed to Bachu, Bachu County was called Brazil County, and Fuling County was established.

古文：二十一年，刘备分巴郡立固陵郡。
现代文：二十一年，刘备划分巴郡设固陵郡。
English: In 1921, Liu Bei divided Ba County into Guling County.

古文：蜀章武元年又改固陵为巴东郡，巴西郡为巴郡，又分广汉立梓潼郡，分犍为立江阳郡，以蜀郡属国为汉嘉郡，以犍为属国为硃提郡。
现代文：蜀章武元年，又改称固陵为巴东郡，巴西郡为巴郡，另外划分广漠设梓潼郡，划分犍为设江阳郡，把蜀郡属国作为汉嘉郡，把犍为属国作为朱提郡。
English: In the first year of Shu Zhangwu, it was also renamed Guling as Badong County, Brazil County as Ba County, in addition, Guangba was divided into Zizhi County, Zou was divided into Jiangyang County, the province of Shu County was Hanjia County, and the province of Zou was Juti County.

古文：刘禅建兴二年，改益州郡为建宁郡，广汉属国为阴平郡，分建宁永昌立云南郡，分建宁柯立兴古郡，分广汉立东广汉郡。
现代文：刘禅建兴二年，改益州郡为建宁郡，广漠属国为阴平郡，分划建宁、永昌各一部分置云南郡，分划建宁、烊柯各一部分置兴古郡，分划广汉另设束广汉郡。
English: In the second year of Liu Zhen's Jianxing, the county of Yizhou was changed to Jianning County, the county of Guangba Province was changed to Yinping County, the county of Jianning and Yongchang was divided into Yunnan County, the county of Jianning and Shike was divided into Xinggu County, the county of Guanghan was divided into Guanghan County, and the county of Shuangguanghan County was set up.

古文：魏景元中，蜀平，省东广汉郡。
现代文：魏景元年间，平定蜀国，取消束广汉郡。
English: During the Wei and Qing dynasties, Shu was pacified and Guanghan County was abolished.

古文：及武帝泰始二年，分益州置梁州，以汉中属焉。
现代文：到晋武帝泰始二年，分划益州设置梁州，将汉中划入梁州。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, Yizhou was divided into Liangzhou and Hanzhong was divided into Liangzhou.

古文：七年，又分益州置宁州。
现代文：七年，又分划益州设置宁州。
English: Seven years later, Yizhou was divided into Ningzhou.

古文：益州统郡八，县四十四，户十四万九千三百。
现代文：益州统管八郡，四十四县，十四万九千三百户。
English: Yizhou is in charge of eight counties, forty-four counties, and 149,300 households.

古文：蜀郡秦置。
现代文：至多壶设置。
English: At most the kettle is set.

古文：统县六，户五万。
现代文：统管六县，五万户。
English: In charge of six counties, with 50,000 households.

古文：成都广都繁江原临邛郫
现代文：蜀郡汉设置。统管五县，一万户。
English: Shu County Han set up. In charge of five counties, ten thousand households.

古文：犍为郡汉置。
现代文：武阳南安焚道资中牛鞟犍为郡汉置。
English: Nanyan County, Wuyang Province, has been designated as the county seat.

古文：统县五，户一万。
现代文：统县五，户一万。
English: There are five unified counties with 10,000 households.

古文：武阳南安僰道资中牛鞞
现代文：武阳南安僰道资中牛鞞
English: Wuyang, Nan'an, Shandong, the capital of the Middle Kingdom of Niuwu

古文：汶山郡汉置。
现代文：汶山郡汉设置。
English: Set up in Wenshan County.

古文：统县八，户一万六千。
现代文：统管八县，一万六千户。
English: It oversees eight counties with 16,000 households.

古文：汶山升迁都安广阳兴乐平康蚕陵广柔
现代文：汶山升迁都安广阳兴乐平康蚕陵广柔
English: Wenshan to be promoted to the capital city of An, Guangyang to be promoted to the capital city of Xingle, Pingkang to be promoted to the capital city of Jialing, Jialing to be promoted to the capital city of Guangyu

古文：汉嘉郡蜀置。
现代文：汉嘉郡蜀设置。
English: It is located in Shu, Hanya County.

古文：统县四，户一万三千。
现代文：统管四县，一万三千户。
English: It oversees four counties with 13,000 households.

古文：汉嘉徙阳严道旄牛
现代文：汉嘉徙阳严道旄牛
English: Han Jia migrated to Yang Yan Road snail

古文：江阳郡蜀置。
现代文：江阳郡蜀设置。
English: Shu, Jiangyang County.

古文：统县三，户三千一百。
现代文：统管三县。三千一百户。
English: In charge of three counties. 3,100 households.

古文：江阳符汉安
现代文：江阳符汉安
English: Jiangyang to Han'an

古文：硃提郡蜀置。
现代文：硃提郡蜀设置。
English: It is located in Shu, Handi County.

古文：统县五，户二千六百。
现代文：统管五县，二千六百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 2,600 households.

古文：硃提南广汉阳南秦堂狼
现代文：朱提南广汉阳南秦堂狼
English: Zhu Di, Nan Guang, Hanyang, Nan Qin, Donglu

古文：越巂郡汉置。
现代文：越蔫郡汉设置。
English: The Yueqi County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县五，户五万三千四百。
现代文：统管五县，五万三千四百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 53,400 households.

古文：会无邛都卑水定苲台登
现代文：会无邛都卑水定笮台登
English: All meetings will be held at the waterfront.

古文：牂柯郡汉置。
现代文：样柯郡漠设置。
English: It is located in the Samgok County Desert.

古文：统县八，户一千二百。
现代文：统管八县，一千二百户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 1,200 households.

古文：万寿且兰谈指夜郎毋敛并渠鄨平夷
现代文：万寿且兰谈指夜郎毋鳅并渠别平夷
English: Wan Shou and Lan talk about the nightingale, but the nightingale doesn't want to go.

古文：惠帝之后，李特僭号于蜀，称汉，益州郡县皆没于特。
现代文：惠帝之后，李特在蜀僭位称帝，国号汉，益州郡县都沦入李特统治。
English: After Hui Di, Li Te became emperor in Shuxi, the country name was Han, and all counties in Yizhou fell under the rule of Li Te.

古文：李雄又分汉嘉、蜀二郡立沈黎、汉原二郡。
现代文：李雄又划分汉嘉、蜀二郡另设沈黎、漠原二郡。
English: Li Xiong also divided Han Jia and Shu two counties, and set up Shen Li and Wuchuan two counties.

古文：是时益州郡县虽没李氏，江左并遥置之。
现代文：此时益州郡县虽然沦入李氏手中，但江左同时由晋遥领。
English: At this time, although Yizhou County fell into the hands of the Li clan, Jiang Zuo was led by Jin Yao at the same time.

古文：桓温灭蜀，其地复为晋有，省汉原、沈黎而立南阴平、晋原、宁蜀、始宁四郡焉。
现代文：桓温灭蜀，重新为晋所有，撤销漠原、沈黎而设置了南阴平、晋原、宁蜀、始宁四郡。
English: Kuanwen destroyed Shuxu and became the possession of Jin again, revoked Wuyuan and Shenli, and set up four counties of Nanyinping, Jinwon, Ningshu and Shining.

古文：咸安二年，益州复没于苻氏。
现代文：咸安二年，益州又沦入苻氏之手。
English: In the second year of Xian'an, Yizhou fell into the hands of the Zou clan again.

古文：太元八年，复为晋有。
现代文：太元八年，重归晋朝所有。
English: In the 8th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, it was returned to the possession of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：隆安二年，又立晋熙、遂宁、晋宁三郡云。
现代文：隆安二年，又设置了晋熙、遂宁、晋宁三郡。
English: In the second year of Longan, the three counties of Jinxi, Suining and Jinling were established.

古文：宁州。
现代文：宁州。
English: Ningzhou.

古文：于汉魏为益州之域。
现代文：在汉、魏时期是益业的地域。
English: In the Han and Wei dynasties, it was the region of Yixing.

古文：泰始七年，武帝以益州地广，分益州之建宁、兴古、云南，交州之永昌，合四郡为宁州，统县四十五，户八万三千。
现代文：泰始七年，武帝由于益地域宽广而划分其中的建宁、兴古、云南，以及交州的永昌，共四郡合为空妙，统管四十五县，八万三千户。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Emperor Wu, due to the benefit of a wide area, divided Jianning, Xinggu, Yunnan, and Yongchang in Jiaozhou. A total of four counties were merged into a single county, with 45 counties and 83,000 households under his overall control.

古文：云南郡蜀置。
现代文：云南郡鱼设置。
English: Yunnan County fish set up.

古文：统县九，户九千二百。
现代文：统管九县，九千二百户。
English: Nine counties, 9,200 households.

古文：云平云南梇栋青蛉姑复邪龙榆遂久永宁
现代文：云平云南梇栋青蛉姑复邪龙榆遂久永宁
English: Yunping, Yunnan, Shandong, Qingcheng, Guozhuang, Suiju, Yongning

古文：兴古郡蜀置。
现代文：兴古郡昙设置。
English: Xinggu County was established.

古文：统县十一，户六千二百。
现代文：统管十一县，六千二百户。
English: In charge of 11 counties, with 6,200 households.

古文：律高句町宛温漏卧毋掇贲古滕休镡封汉兴进乘都篖
现代文：律高句町宛温漏卧毋掇贲古滕休镡封汉兴进乘都篖
English: Rutgaokwu Town, Wanyuan District, Liaoning Province, Liaoning Province

古文：建宁郡蜀置。
现代文：建宁郡鱼设置。
English: Jianning County fish set up.

古文：统县十七，户二万九千。
现代文：统管十七县，二蒿九千户。
English: It oversees 17 counties with 29,000 households.

古文：味昆泽存邑新定谈槁母单同濑漏江牧麻谷昌连然秦臧双柏
现代文：味昆泽存邑新定谈槁母单同濑漏江牧麻谷昌连然秦臧双柏
English: The taste of Kunze and Cunyi are newly determined, the mother is single, the son is leaking, the herd is flowing, the valley is flourishing, and the Qin Dynasty and Shuangbei Dynasty are leading.

古文：俞元修云泠丘滇池
现代文：俞元修云泠丘滇池
English: 元修云丘池

古文：永昌郡汉置。
现代文：永昌郡莲设置。
English: Yongchang County Lotus set up.

古文：统县八，户三万八千。
现代文：统管八县，三万八千户。
English: It oversees eight counties with 38,000 households.

古文：不韦永寿比苏雍乡南涪巂唐哀牢博南
现代文：不韦永寿比苏雍乡南涪巂唐哀牢博南
English: Suyong Township, Nanshan Township, Tangye Township, Binan Township

古文：太康三年，武帝又废宁州入益州，立南夷校尉以护之。
现代文：太康三年，武帝又取消宁州并入益业，设立南夷校尉护守。
English: In the third year of Taikang, Emperor Wu cancelled the merger of Ningzhou into Yinye, and established the Nanyi captain escort.

古文：太安二年，惠帝复置宁州，又分建宁以西七县别立为益州郡。
现代文：太安二年，惠帝重新设置宁州，又把建宁以西的七个县另设为益州郡。
English: In the second year of Taian, Hui Di re-established Ningzhou, and also set up seven counties west of Jianning as Yizhou County.

古文：永嘉二年，改益州郡曰晋宁，分牂柯立平夷、夜郎二郡，然是时其地再为李特所有。
现代文：永嘉二年，改称益州郡为晋宁郡，分划烊柯郡另立平夷、夜郎二郡。但当时这裹的土地再次为李特所有。
English: In the second year of Yongjia, the name of Yizhou County was changed to Jinning County, and Shike County was divided into two separate counties, Pingyi and Yelang. However, at that time, this land was once again owned by Lite.

古文：其后李寿分宁州兴古、永昌、云南、硃提、越巂、河阳六郡为汉州。
现代文：此后李寿把宁州的兴古、永昌、云南、朱提、越锚、河阳六郡分划出来设汉州。
English: After that, Li Shou divided Ningzhou into six counties: Xinggu, Yongchang, Yunnan, Zhuti, Yue'an, and Heyang to form Hanzhou.

古文：咸康四年，分牂柯、夜郎、硃提、越巂四郡置安州。
现代文：咸康四年，分划出烊柯、夜郎、朱提、越隽四郡设置安蛆。
English: In the fourth year of Xiankang, the four counties of Shinko, Yelang, Zhuti and Yuexun were divided to establish Anhui.

古文：八年，又罢并宁州。以越巂还属益州，省永昌郡焉。
现代文：八年，又取消塞丛并入窒丛，把垄崖归属益州，取消了永昌郡。
English: Eight years later, the Congs were abolished and merged into the Congs, the ridges and cliffs were assigned to Yizhou, and Yongchang County was abolished.

