古文：杂器用国子监生姚司马崔珏张秀才河东街吏韦协律兄石从武姜修
现代文：杂器用国子监生姚司马崔珏张秀才河东街吏韦协律兄石从武姜修
English: With miscellaneous tools, the son of a provincial official, Yao Si, the son of a provincial official, Ma Cui, Zhang Xiu Cai, the street official of Hedong, Wei Xie, the brother of a lawyer, Shi Zong, Wu Jiang Xiu

古文：王屋薪者
现代文：王屋薪者
English: The King's House Paymaster

古文：国子监生
现代文：国子监生
English: Kuniko's supervising student

古文：元和中，国子监学生周乙者，尝夜习业。
现代文：唐朝元和年间，国子监学生周乙，曾经夜间温习学业。
English: During the Yuan and Song dynasties of the Tang Dynasty, Zhou Yi, a student of the State Children's Supervisor, used to review his studies at night.

古文：忽见一小儿，鬅鬙头，长二尺余，满颈碎光如星，荧荧可恶。
现代文：忽然看见一个小男孩，头发蓬松杂乱，二尺多高，满脖颈细碎的光亮象星星，荧荧发光，令人厌恶。
English: Suddenly I saw a little boy, his hair shaggy and disheveled, more than two feet tall, with a neck full of tiny shards of light, bright as stars, fluorescent, disgusting.

古文：戏弄笔砚，纷纭不止。
现代文：他随意摆弄周乙的笔和砚，弄得乱七八糟也不停止。
English: He fiddled with Zhou Yi's pen and inkstone at will, creating chaos.

古文：学生素有胆，叱之稍却。
现代文：周乙向来有胆量，呵叱他，他稍微向后退了退，又靠到书桌旁边。
English: Zhou Yi always had the guts to scold him, and he stepped back a little and leaned back against the desk.

古文：复傍书案，因伺其所为。渐逼近，乙因擒之。
现代文：周乙就等着看他要干什么，他渐渐逼近，周乙就把他捉住。
English: Zhou Yi waited to see what he was going to do, he gradually approached, Zhou Yi caught him.

古文：踞坐哀求，辞颇苦切。
现代文：他蹲坐在那里求饶，言辞非常凄苦恳切。
English: He squatted there and begged for forgiveness, his words were very earnest.

古文：天将晓。觉如物折声。
现代文：天要亮的时候，周乙听到好象有什么东西断折声。
English: When it was about to dawn, Zhou Yi heard what sounded like something breaking.

古文：视之，乃弊木构也，其上粘粟百余粒。
现代文：一看，是一把破木勺。那上面粘了一百多个米粒。
English: At first glance, it was a broken wooden spoon with more than a hundred grains of rice stuck to it.

古文：姚司马
现代文：姚司马
English: Yao Sima

古文：姚司马寄居邠州，宅枕一溪。
现代文：姚司马寄住在邠州，住所紧靠一条小溪。
English: Yao Sima lives in Luzhou, close to a small stream.

古文：有二小女，常戏钓溪中，未尝有获。
现代文：他有两个小女儿，常常在溪上钓鱼，不曾有什么收获。
English: He has two young daughters and often goes fishing in the creek, but nothing ever comes of it.

古文：忽挠竿，各得一物，若鳣者而毛，若鳖者而腮。
现代文：忽然有什么弄弯了钓竿，二女各钓到一个东西，一个象鳣而有毛，一个象鳖而长鳃。
English: Suddenly, something bent the fishing rod, and the two women each caught one thing, one with a hairy beak, one with a long beak.

古文：其家异之，养于盆池。
现代文：家里认为这东西奇怪，把它养在盆池中。
English: The family thought it was strange and kept it in a pot.

古文：经夕，二女悉患精神恍惚。
现代文：经过一夜，两个小女孩都有了精神恍惚的毛病。
English: Over the course of one night, both of the little girls went into a trance.

古文：夜常明炷，对作戏。染蓝涅皂，未尝暂息，然莫见其所取也。
现代文：夜里常常点亮灯烛，相对玩耍嬉戏，染蓝的染黑的，不曾有暂时的停歇，但是没见到她们拿取什么。
English: At night, they often lit candles and played with each other. The blue-dyed and black-dyed ones did not have a temporary break, but I did not see them take anything.

古文：时杨元卿在邠州，与姚有旧。姚因从事邠州。
现代文：当时杨元卿在邠州，和姚司马有交情，姚司马就在邠州做事。
English: At that time, Yang Yuanqing was in Ganzhou and had a friendship with Yao Sima. Yao Sima was working in Ganzhou.

古文：又历半年，女病弥甚。
现代文：又过了半年，二女病得更厉害了。
English: After another six months, the second woman became even more ill.

古文：其家尝张灯戏钱，忽见二小手出灯影下。大言曰，乞一钱。
现代文：家里曾经作点灯数钱的游戏，忽然看见两只小手从灯影下伸出来，大声说：请给一个钱！
English: At home they had been playing a game of counting money by lighting a lamp, when suddenly they saw two small hands reach out from under the lampshade and say aloud: "One coin, please!"

古文：家或唾之。
现代文：家里有的人唾骂它。
English: People at home swear by it.

古文：又曰：我是汝家女婿，何敢无礼？
现代文：它又说：我是你家女婿，怎么敢无礼？
English: It also said: I am your son-in-law, how dare you be rude?

古文：一称乌郎。
现代文：其中一个叫乌郎，另一个叫黄郎。
English: One of them is called Uro, and the other is called Huangro.

古文：一称黄郎，后常与人家狎昵。
现代文：后来它们常与家人亲近、玩笑。
English: Later, they were often close to the family, joking around.

古文：杨元卿知之，因为求上都僧瞻。
现代文：杨元卿知道了这件事，于是就为他们请了京城里一个叫瞻的和尚。
English: Yang Yuanqing found out about this, so he invited a famous monk in Beijing to pray for them.

古文：瞻善鬼神部，持念，治病魅者多著效。
现代文：瞻善长鬼神部的法术，念经来整治病魅，大多都有显著的效果。
English: Most of the spells of the Jianzhanzhong Ghost and God Department, which are recited to rectify illness, have significant effects.

古文：瞻至姚家，标釭界绳，印手敕剑，召之。
现代文：瞻和尚来到姚家，用灯作标，用绳划界，用手按出指印，用剑发出敕令，召引它们。
English: Zhan Monk came to Yao's house, used a lamp as a marker, used a rope to draw a boundary, used his hand to press out fingerprints, and used a sword to issue a command to call them.

古文：后设血食盆酒于界外。
现代文：后来又在界外摆设了血食盆酒。
English: Later, a blood-drinking basin was set up outside the precinct.

古文：中夜，有物如牛，鼻于酒上。
现代文：半夜，有一个牛一般的东西，把鼻子放到酒上。
English: In the middle of the night, something bovine put its nose to the wine.

古文：瞻乃匿剑，蹝步大言，极力刺之。
现代文：瞻和尚就藏着剑，趿拉着鞋大声说话，极用力地刺它。
English: The monk hid his sword, pulled his shoe, spoke loudly, and stabbed it with great force.

古文：其物匣刃而步，血流如注。
现代文：那东西带着剑就跑了，流血象灌水一般。
English: The thing ran off with the sword, bleeding profusely.

古文：瞻率左右，明炬索之，迹其血，至后宇角中，见若乌革囊，大可合篑，喘若鞴橐。盖乌郎也。
现代文：瞻和尚率领左右的人们，举着火把追寻。循着它的血迹，来到后屋墙角下，看到一个东西像黑色皮口袋，大小可以包住筐，喘息像风箱一样，大概是乌郎。
English: Following its blood trail, he came to the corner of the back room wall and saw something like a black leather bag, the size of which could wrap around a basket, wheezing like a bellows, probably Uro.

古文：遂毁薪焚杀之，臭闻十余里，一女即愈。
现代文：于是燃柴把它烧死了，臭气飘出去十多里，一个女儿痊愈了。
English: So they burned it to death with firewood, and the stench wafted more than ten miles away. One daughter recovered.

古文：自是风雨夜，门庭闻啾啾。
现代文：从此，风雨夜里，会听到门庭有啾啾的声音。
English: From then on, on stormy nights, you would hear the sound of crickets in the courtyard.

古文：次女犹病。
现代文：另一个女儿还是病着。
English: The other daughter is still sick.

古文：瞻因立于前，举代折罗叱之。
现代文：瞻和尚就站在她面前，举起代替折合的罗综带怒叱它。
English: Zhan Monk stood in front of her and scolded her by holding up the Luo Zhan ribbon instead of the folded one.

古文：女恐怖叩额。
现代文：女吓得叩头。
English: The woman bows her head in fear.

古文：瞻偶见其衣带上有一皂袋子，因令侍奴婢解视之，乃小龠也。
现代文：瞻和尚偶然见她衣带上有一个黑袋子，于是就让侍立一边的奴婢解下来看。一看，是一个叫作龠的乐器。
English: The Monk Zhan happened to see a black bag on her belt, so he asked the attendant to take it off and look at it. At first glance, it was a musical instrument called a gong.

古文：遂搜其服玩，龠勘得一篑，篑中悉是丧家搭帐衣，衣色唯黄与皂耳。
现代文：于是就搜寻她的衣服、玩物，查到了一个筐。筐里全是死人时治丧用的衣服。衣服的颜色只有黄和黑两种。
English: So they searched for her clothes and toys, and found a basket. The basket was full of clothes used for funerals. The clothes were only yellow and black.

古文：瞻假将满，不能已其魅，因归京。
现代文：瞻和尚的假期要满了，不能把他的鬼魅整治完，于是就回京城了。
English: The monk's vacation was about to be over, and he couldn't get his haunting cured, so he went back to the capital.

古文：逾年，姚罢职入京，先诣瞻，为加功治之。
现代文：过了年，姚司马免了官职进京城，先去拜访瞻和尚。瞻和尚为他女儿加强功力治病。
English: A year later, Yao Sima was relieved of his official duties and went to Beijing, first to visit Zhan Monk. Zhan Monk strengthened the strength of his daughter and treated her illness.

古文：涉旬，其女臂上肿起如沤，大如瓜。
现代文：到了十天，他女儿胳膊上肿起来一个瓜那么大的水泡似的包。
English: By the tenth day, his daughter's arm had swollen to a blister-like mass the size of a melon.

古文：瞻禁针刺，出血数合，竟差。
现代文：瞻和尚念咒用针刺那包。包出血几合，病终于好了。
English: The monk recited a mantra and pricked the bursa with a needle. The bursa bled a few times, and the illness was finally cured.

古文：崔珏
现代文：崔珏
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：元和中，博陵崔珏者，自汝郑来，侨居长安延福里。
现代文：唐朝元和年间，博陵人崔珏，从汝郑来，侨居在长安延福里。
English: In the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, Cui Zhen, a native of Boling, came from Ru Zheng to live in Yanfu, Chang'an.

古文：常一日，读书牖下。忽见一童，长不尽尺，露发衣黄，自北垣下，趋至榻前，且谓珏曰：幸寄君砚席。可乎？
现代文：曾经有一天，他在窗下读书，忽然看见一个小童，高不到一尺，披露着头发，穿黄色衣服，从北墙根走到床前，并且对崔珏说：请让我寄住在你的砚台和坐席上可以吗？
English: One day, when he was reading under the window, he suddenly saw a small boy, less than a foot tall, with uncovered hair, wearing yellow clothes, walk from the north wall to the bed, and say to Cui Wei: "Can you let me stay at your booth and seat?"

古文：珏不应。
现代文：崔珏不吱声。
English: Choi Min didn't say a word.

古文：又曰：我尚壮，愿备指使，何见拒之深耶？
现代文：小童又说：我还健壮，愿意等候你指派使用，为什么被你拒绝得这样厉害呢？
English: The child continued: "I am still strong and willing to wait for you to assign me to use it. Why are you rejecting me so violently?

古文：珏又不顾。
现代文：崔珏还是不理睬他。
English: Still, Cui Gan ignored him.

古文：已而上榻。跃然拱立。
现代文：不一会儿他就上了床，蹦蹦跳跳地拱手站着。
English: Soon he was on the bed, bouncing up and down.

古文：良久，于袖中出一小幅文书，致珏前，乃诗也。
现代文：许久，他从袖子里取出一小幅文书，送到崔珏的面前，原来是诗。
English: After a long time, he took out a small document from his sleeve and brought it to Cui Yao. It turned out to be a poem.

古文：细字如粟，历然可辨。
现代文：小字象小米粒儿那么大，但是清析可辨。
English: The small print is the size of a grain of millet, but it is clearly distinguishable.

古文：诗曰：昔荷蒙恬惠，寻遭仲叔投。
现代文：诗云：昔荷蒙恬惠，寻遭仲叔投。
English: Shi Yun: Once upon a time, hormones were a boon, and Uncle Zhong was looking for a way to invest.

古文：夫君不指使，何处觅银钩。
现代文：夫君不指使，何处觅银钩。
English: My husband doesn't tell me where to find silver hooks.

古文：览讫，笑而谓曰：既愿相从，无乃后悔耶？
现代文：崔珏看完，笑着对他说：既然你愿意跟着我，可不要后悔呀？
English: After reading it, Cui Yao smiled and said to him: Since you are willing to follow me, don't regret it?

古文：其僮又出一诗，投于几上。
现代文：小童又拿出来一首诗放到几案上。
English: The child also took out a poem and put it on several cases.

古文：诗曰：学问从君有，诗书自我传。
现代文：诗云：学问从君有，诗书自我传。
English: Shi Yun: Knowledge comes from you, poetry books are self-published.

古文：须知王逸少，名价动千年。
现代文：须知王逸少，名价动千年。
English: Shuchi Wang Yizhong, the nominal price fluctuates a thousand years.

古文：又曰：吾无逸少之艺，虽得汝，安所用？
现代文：崔寻又说：我没有王羲之的技艺，即使得到你，有什么用？
English: Cui Xuan also said, "I don't have Wang Xizhi's skills. Even if I get you, what use would it be?"

古文：俄而又投一篇曰：能令音信通千里，解致龙蛇运八行。
现代文：一会儿又投来一首，说：能令音信通千里，解致龙蛇运八行。
English: After a while, another poem came, saying: "Can make the sound of communication travel thousands of miles, solve the eight lines of dragon and snake transportation."

古文：惆怅江生不相赏，应缘自负好文章。
现代文：惆怅江生不相赏，应缘自负好文章。
English: Lijiang River students do not appreciate each other, it should be a good article.

古文：珏戏曰：恨汝非五色者。
现代文：崔珏开玩笑说：恨你不是五种颜色的。
English: Cui Yao joked: "Hating you is not five colors.

古文：其僮笑而下榻，遂趋北垣，入一穴中。
现代文：那小童笑着下了床，就走向北墙，进入一个洞中。
English: Laughing, the little boy got out of bed and walked to the north wall and into a hole.

古文：珏即命仆发其下，得一管文笔。
现代文：崔珏让仆人挖掘那下面，挖到一管毛笔。
English: Cui Yao asked his servant to dig down there and found a tube of brushes.

古文：珏因取书，锋锐如新，用之月余。
现代文：崔珏就拿起来写字，象新笔一样锋锐。
English: Cui Rong picked it up and began to write, as sharp as a new pen.

古文：亦无他怪。
现代文：用了一个多月，也没有发生别的怪事。
English: It took more than a month, and no other strange things happened.

古文：张秀才
现代文：张秀才
English: Zhang Xiucai

古文：东都陶化里，有空宅。
现代文：东都陶化里，有一处空宅院。
English: In Tofuka, the eastern capital, there is an empty residential compound.

古文：大和中，张秀才借得肄业，常忽忽不安。
现代文：大和年间，张秀才借住这个地方修习学业。他常恍恍惚惚感到不安。
English: During the Yamato period, Zhang Xiucai borrowed this place to study. He often felt uneasy.

古文：自念为男子，当抱慷慨之志，不宜恇怯以自软。
现代文：想到自己身为男子，应该抱有慷慨的大志，不应该害怕而自己软弱。
English: To think of myself as a man, I should have a generous ambition, I should not be afraid and I am weak.

古文：因移入中堂以处之。
现代文：于是就搬到中堂去住。
English: So they moved to Nakado to live.

古文：夜深欹枕，乃见道士与僧徒各十五人，从堂中出。形容长短皆相似，排作六行。
现代文：夜深了躺在枕头上，就看见道士和尚各十五人，从堂中出来，模样高矮都差不多，排成六行。
English: Lying on his pillow late at night, he saw fifteen Taoist monks come out of the hall, all of a similar height, in six rows.

古文：威仪容止，一一可敬。
现代文：他们的威严、仪态、容貌、举止，全都可敬。
English: Their majesty, bearing, appearance, and deportment are all worthy of respect.

古文：秀才以为灵仙所集，不敢惕息，因佯寝以窥之。
现代文：秀才以为这是神仙聚会，不敢大声出气，就假装睡着了偷看。
English: Xiu Cai thought that this was a fairy gathering and did not dare to show his anger out loud, so he pretended to be asleep and peeked in.

古文：良久，别有二物，展转于地。
现代文：许久，另有两个东西，辗转不定地来到地上。
English: After a long time, two more things came tumbling to the ground.

古文：每一物各有二十一眼，内四眼，剡剡如火色。
现代文：每一个东西都有二十一只眼睛，内侧有四只眼，尖尖的，颜色像火。
English: Each thing has twenty-one eyes, four eyes on the inside, pointed, the color of fire.

古文：相驰逐，而目光眩转，砉剨有声。
现代文：两个东西互相追赶，目光耀眼，旋转，有碰撞的声音。
English: Two things chase each other, glaring, spinning, clashing sounds.

古文：逡巡间，僧道三十人，或驰或走，或东或西，或南或北。
现代文：突然间，和尚道士三十多人，有的奔有的跑，有的东有的西，有的南有的北。
English: Suddenly, there were more than thirty monks and Taoists, some running, some running east, some west, some south and some north.

古文：道士一人，独立一处，则被一僧击而去之。
现代文：一个道士独自站在一个地方，就被一个和尚打跑了。
English: A Taoist stood alone in a place and was beaten and run away by a monk.

古文：其二物周流于僧道之中。未尝暂息。
现代文：那两个东西周旋流动在和尚道士之中，不曾有暂时的停歇。
English: The two things circulate and flow among the monks and Taoists, without any temporary pause.

古文：如此争相击搏，或分或聚。
现代文：如此争抢着互相搏斗进击，或者分，或者聚。
English: In this way, they scramble to fight each other and advance, or divide, or gather.

古文：一人忽叫云：卓绝矣！
现代文：有一个人忽然叫道：达到极点啦！
English: One person suddenly shouted: "It's reached the climax!"

古文：秀才乃知必妖怪也，因以枕而掷之。
现代文：和尚道士们默然而止。就见那两个东西互相说：向来和尚们和道士们的法术绝对高妙，然而全靠我们两个成全他们的教令实行罢了。
English: The monks and priests fell silent, and the two things said to each other: The magic of the monks and priests has always been absolutely brilliant, but it is up to the two of us to carry out their orders.

古文：僧道三十人与二物，一时惊走，曰：不速去，吾辈且为措大所使也。
现代文：不然，哪能叫达到极点呢！秀才这才知道这两个东西一定是妖怪，于是就把枕头扔过去，和尚道士三十人和两个东西，同时吓跑了。他们说：不赶快离开，我们将被这个穷酸秀才使用的！
English: Otherwise, how can it be said to have reached its climax! Only then did the scholar know that these two things must be monsters, so he threw the pillow over them, scaring away thirty Buddhist monks and two things at the same time. They said, "Don't leave in a hurry, we will be used by this poor, sour scholar!"

古文：遂皆不见。
现代文：于是全不见了。
English: Then it all disappeared.

古文：明日，搜寻之，于壁角中得一败囊，中有长行子三十个，并骰子一双耳。河东街吏
现代文：第二天，一搜寻，在墙角里找到一个烂口袋，里边有赌戏用的的长行子三十个，并有两只骰子。河东街吏
English: The next day, after a search, they found a rotten bag in a corner of the wall, inside of which there were thirty long ropes used for gambling, and two mules.

古文：开成中，河东郡有吏，常中夜巡警街路。
现代文：唐朝开成年间，河东郡有一个官吏，常常半夜巡察街道。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was an official in Hedong County who often patrolled the streets in the middle of the night.

古文：一夕天晴月朗，乃至景福寺前。
现代文：一天夜里天晴月朗，他来到景福寺前。
English: One night, when the weather was fine, he came to Gyeongbokgung Temple.

古文：见一人俯而坐，交臂拥膝，身尽黑，居然不动。
现代文：他看到一个人俯身低头坐在那里，两手交叉抱住膝盖。这个人身上全是黑的，居然不动。
English: He saw a man sitting with his head down, arms crossed over his knees, all black and motionless.

古文：吏惧，因叱之。
现代文：官吏害怕了，就呵叱他。
English: The officials were afraid and scolded him.

古文：其人俯而不顾。
现代文：那人俯身不理不睬的。
English: The man leaned over and ignored it.

古文：叱且久，即朴其首。
现代文：呵叱了许久，就去击打他的头。
English: After scolding him for a long time, she went to hit him on the head.

古文：忽举视，其面貌及异。
现代文：他忽然抬头看官吏，官吏才看到他的面貌极特别。
English: He suddenly looked up at the officials, who saw that his face was very special.

古文：长数尺，色白而瘦，状甚可惧，吏初惊仆于地，久之，稍能起。
现代文：他几尺高，颜色白而且瘦，样子非常可怕。官吏一开始吓得趴到地上，老半天，渐渐能站起来。
English: He was several feet tall, white and thin, and looked very scary. At first, the officials were so scared that they fell to the ground. After a while, they were able to stand up.

古文：因视之，已亡见矣。
现代文：看他，他已经不见了。
English: Look at him. He's gone.

古文：吏由是惧益甚，即驰归，具语于人。
现代文：官吏因此怕得更厉害，就奔跑回去，详细地告诉了别人。
English: This made the official even more afraid, so he ran back and told the others in detail.

古文：其后因重构景福寺门，发地，得一漆桶，凡深数尺，上有白泥合其首，果街吏所见。
现代文：以后因为重建景福寺门，挖地，挖到一个漆桶，有几尺深，上边有白泥封闭的桶顶，果然是巡街官吏见到的那怪物。
English: Later, because of the reconstruction of the Gyeongbokgung gate, the ground was dug up and excavated to a lacquer bucket, a few feet deep, with a white mud-covered top of the bucket, which was indeed the monster seen by the patrol officers.

古文：韦协律兄
现代文：韦协律兄
English: Wei Xie's brother-in-law

古文：太常协律韦生，有兄甚凶，自云平生无惧惮耳，闻有凶宅，必往独宿之。
现代文：太常官中有一个姓韦的协律郎，他有个哥哥很凶猛，自己说平生没有惧怕的事物，听说哪里有凶恶的宅第，就一定会去独自宿在那里。
English: One of the magistrates had a brother-in-law named Wei. He had a brother who was very fierce. He said that he had never been afraid of anything in his life. When he heard that there was a vicious house, he would definitely go and stay there alone.

古文：其弟话于同官，同官有试之者。且闻延康东北角有马镇西宅，常多怪物，因领送其宅。
现代文：协律郎把这事说给同僚们，同僚中有一个想试试他，听说延康末北角有马镇西宅，常有许多怪物出现，就把协律的哥哥领着送到那宅子里去。
English: He told this to his colleagues, and one of them wanted to put him to the test. He had heard that there was a house in the west of Ma Town in the north corner of Yan'an at the end of the Kangding period, and that many monsters often appeared there. So he took his brother to the house.

古文：具与酒肉，夜则皆去，独留之于大池之西孤亭中宿。
现代文：人们给他准备了酒肉，天黑就全都离开了，只留他自己在大池之西孤亭中过夜。
English: People prepared wine and meat for him, and in the dark they all left, leaving him alone to spend the night in a lonely pavilion west of Oike.

古文：韦生以饮酒且热，袒衣而寝。
现代文：他因为喝了酒身上发热，就袒露着身体睡下了，半夜时分才醒。
English: He had drunk wine and was hot, so he fell asleep naked and woke up in the middle of the night.

古文：夜半方寤，乃见一小儿，长可尺余，身短脚长，其色颇黑，自池中而出，冉冉前来，循阶而上，以至生前，生不为之动。
现代文：他就看到了一个小男孩，能有一尺多高，身短腿长，颜色很黑。小男孩从池中出来，慢慢地向前来，循着台阶而上。小男孩已经来到他面前，他一点儿也没受惊动。
English: He saw a little boy, maybe more than a foot tall, with short, long legs, very dark. The little boy came out of the pool and slowly walked forward, following the steps. The little boy had come to him, and he was not at all alarmed.

古文：乃言曰：卧者恶物，直又顾我耶？
现代文：小男孩就说：躺着的坏东西，只是又来看我吗？
English: The little boy said, "Did that lying, evil thing just come to see me again?"

古文：乃绕床而行。
现代文：于是就绕着床走。
English: So he walked around the bed.

古文：须臾，生回枕仰卧，乃觉其物上床，生亦不动。
现代文：不一会儿，他回过头来仰卧着，就觉得那东西上床了。他也不动。
English: After a while he came round and lay on his back and felt the thing go to bed. He didn't move.

古文：逡巡，觉有两个小脚，缘于生脚上，冷如水铁，上彻于心，行步甚迟。
现代文：突然，他觉得有一双小脚爬到了他脚上，像冰和铁那样凉，直凉透心。那小男孩迈步很慢。
English: Suddenly, he felt a pair of tiny feet crawl onto his, cold as ice and iron, bone-chillingly cold. The little boy walked slowly.

古文：生不动，候其渐行上，及于肚，生乃遽以手摸之，则一古铁鼎子，已欠一脚矣。
现代文：他不动。等到小男孩渐渐走到上边来，走到肚子上，他才急忙用手一摸，原来是一个古代的铁鼎子，已经缺了一脚了。
English: He didn't move. It wasn't until the little boy gradually walked to the upper side, to the stomach, that he hurriedly touched it with his hand. It turned out to be an ancient iron tripod, already missing a foot.

古文：遂以衣带系之于床脚，明旦，众看之，具白其事。
现代文：于是他用衣带把铁鼎子系在床脚上。第二天早晨，众人看到了，他详细地说明了夜间的事，就用铁杵砸碎了铁鼎子。
English: So he tied the iron ring to the foot of the bed with his belt, and the next morning, when all the people saw that he had described the events of the night in detail, he smashed the iron ring with a hammer.

古文：乃以杵碎其鼎，染染有血色。自是人皆信韦生之凶，而能绝宅之妖也。
现代文：铁鼎子上微微透出血色。从此，人们都相信韦协律的哥哥凶猛，而且能除掉宅中的妖怪。
English: From then on, people believed that Wei Xiaru's brother was fierce and could get rid of the monsters in the house.

古文：石从武
现代文：石从武
English: From Stone to Martial Arts

古文：开成中，桂林裨将石从武，少善射，家染恶疾，长幼罕有全者。
现代文：唐朝开成年间，桂林裨将石从武，年轻的时候善长骑射。他家里染上恶病，老少很少有安全无恙的人。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was at its height, Guilin Bozhong was a military man, and when he was young, he was good at riding and shooting. His family was infected with a vicious disease, and there were very few safe and sound people.

古文：每深夜，见一人自外来，体有光耀。
现代文：每到深夜，就能看见一个人从外边进来，这人身上有一闪一闪的光亮。
English: Every night at midnight, you can see a person coming in from outside, and there is a flash of light on this person.

古文：若此物至，则疾者呼吟加甚，医莫能效。
现代文：如果这个怪物到了，那些有病的人就呻吟得更加厉害，医生不能医治。
English: If this monster arrives, those who are sick will moan even more, and doctors will not be able to cure them.

古文：从武他夕，操弓映户，以俟其来。
现代文：另一个晚上，石从武拿着弓箭迎看它，等着那怪物来。
English: On another night, Shi Zengwu took a bow and arrow to face it, waiting for the monster to come.

古文：俄而精物复至，从武射之，一发而中，焰光星散。
现代文：不大一会儿那精物又来了，石从武射它，一箭就射中了，火光像星星散灭了。
English: After a short while, the creature came again. The stone shot it with an arrow, and it was hit, and the light of the fire faded away like a star.

古文：命烛视之，乃家中旧使樟木灯擎，已倒矣。
现代文：让人拿来灯烛一照，原来是家里以前使用的樟木灯架，已经倒了。
English: I asked someone to take a candle and light it. It turned out to be a birch lamp stand that had been used in the house before. It had fallen over.

古文：乃劈而燔之，弃灰河中。
现代文：于是把它劈碎烧了，把灰扔到河里。
English: So he chopped it up and burned it, throwing the ashes into the river.

古文：于是患者皆愈。
现代文：于是有病的人都不治而愈了。
English: So all the sick people were healed.

古文：姜修
现代文：姜修
English: Jiang Xiu

古文：姜修者，并州酒家也。
现代文：姜修，是并州一个开酒店的。
English: Jiang Xiu is the first to open a hotel in Nianzhou.

古文：性不拘检，嗜酒，少有醒时，常喜与人对饮。
现代文：他性情不拘小节不大检点，嗜酒，很少有不醉的，平常喜欢和人家对饮。
English: His temperament is casual and careless, he likes to drink, he is rarely not drunk, and he usually likes to drink with others.

古文：并州人皆惧其淫于酒，或揖命，多避之，故修罕有交友。
现代文：并州人都怕他沉湎于酒，有时他求与人同饮，人大多都躲着他，所以姜修很少有朋友。
English: And the people of the state are afraid of him indulging in wine. Sometimes he asks to drink with people, and most people avoid him, so Jiang Xiu has few friends.

古文：忽有一客。皂衣乌帽，身才三尺，腰阔数围，造修求酒。
现代文：忽然有一位客人，黑衣黑帽，身高才三尺，腰粗几围，到姜修这来要酒喝。
English: Suddenly, a guest, dressed in black and wearing a black hat, only three feet tall, with a thick waist, came to Jiang Xiu to ask for a drink.

古文：修饮之甚喜，乃与促席酌。
现代文：姜修一听说饮酒就特别高兴，就和来客促膝同席而饮。
English: As soon as Jiang Xiu heard about drinking alcohol, he was particularly happy, and he urged the guests to drink at the same table.

古文：客笑而言曰：我平生好酒，然每恨腹内酒不常满。
现代文：客人笑着说：我平生喜欢喝酒，但是常常恨肚子里的酒不能总是满的。
English: The guest smiled and said, "I've always liked to drink, but I often hate that my stomach can't always be full of wine."

古文：若腹满，则既安且乐。
现代文：如果肚子满就既安宁又快乐。
English: If your stomach is full, you will be calm and happy.

古文：若其不满，我则甚无谓矣。
现代文：如果不满，我就非常无聊。
English: If I'm not happy, I'm very bored.

古文：君能容我久托迹乎？
现代文：你能让我长久地托身给你吗？
English: Can you let me entrust myself to you for a long time?

古文：我尝慕君高义，幸吾人有以待之。
现代文：我曾经仰慕你的高尚情义，希望能给我一个报答你的机会。
English: I once admired your noble sentiments, and I hope to be given a chance to repay you.

古文：修曰：子能与我同好，真吾徒也，当无间耳。
现代文：姜修说：你能和我有共同喜好，真是我的好兄弟，我们应该亲密无间啊！
English: Jiang Xiu said, "You and I can have the same likes and dislikes. You are really my good brother. We should be very close!"

古文：遂相与席地饮酒。
现代文：于是和他一块席地而坐喝起来。
English: So he sat down with him and began to drink.

古文：客饮近三石，不醉。修甚讶之，又且意其异人，起拜之，以问其乡闾姓氏焉，复问何道能多饮邪。
现代文：客人喝了将近三石不醉，姜修非常惊讶，而且认为他是异人，起来参拜他，问他家住哪里姓氏名谁，又问他有什么原因能喝这么多。
English: The guest drank nearly three stone and did not get drunk. Jiang Xiu was very surprised and thought he was a stranger. He stood up and bowed to him, asked him where he lived, his surname and name, and asked him why he could drink so much.

古文：客曰：吾姓成，名德器。
现代文：客人说：我姓成，名德器，我的先人大多住在郊野。
English: The guest said: My surname is Cheng, I am a famous moralist, and most of my ancestors lived in the countryside.

古文：其先多止郊野，偶造化之垂恩，使我效用于时耳。我今既老，复自得道，能饮酒。若满腹，可五石也。
现代文：偶然遇上老天降恩，使我有用于当时了。我现在已经老了，又自己修得道行，能喝酒，要装满肚子，得五石。
English: By chance, I encountered God's grace, which enabled me to be of use at that time. I am now old, and I have learned the Tao and the practice on my own, I can drink, I want to fill my stomach, and I have gained five stone.

古文：满则稍安。
现代文：满了就渐渐安静。
English: When it was full, it gradually became quiet.

古文：修闻此语，复命酒饮之。
现代文：姜修听了这话，又摆上酒喝起来。
English: Hearing this, Jiang Xiu put the wine on the table and began to drink.

古文：俄至五石，客方酣醉，狂歌狂舞。
现代文：不一会儿喝到五石，客人才酣醉，发狂地唱歌跳舞。
English: It didn't take long for the guests to drink up to five stone before they were drunk, singing and dancing like mad.

古文：自叹曰：乐哉乐哉！
现代文：他自己叹息说：快乐呀。
English: He himself sighed and said: Let's be happy.

古文：遂仆于地。
现代文：快乐呀，就倒在地上。
English: Rejoice, and fall down on the ground.

古文：修认极醉，令家僮扶于室内。
现代文：姜修认为他醉到极点，让家僮扶他到室内。
English: Jiang Xiu thought he was extremely drunk and asked his family to help him into the room.

古文：至室客忽跃起，惊走而出。
现代文：到了室内客人忽然跳起来，惊慌的跑出来。
English: Once inside, the guest suddenly jumped up and ran out in panic.

古文：家人遂因逐之，见客误抵一石，剨然有声，寻不见。
现代文：家人于是就追赶他，见他误撞到一块石头上，当地一声就找不见了。
English: His family then chased after him and saw that he had accidentally hit a rock and disappeared without a trace.

古文：至晓睹之，乃一多年酒瓮，已破矣。
现代文：到天亮去一看，原来是一个多年的酒瓮，已经破了。
English: When I went to take a look at it in the morning, it turned out to be a wine jar that had been there for many years, and it was already broken.

古文：王屋山有老僧，常独居一茅庵，朝夕持念，唯采药苗及松实食之。
现代文：王屋山有一位老僧人，平常独自住着一所茅草庵，朝夕念经，只采药草和松籽来吃。
English: There is an old monk on Wangyashan. He usually lives alone in a thatched hut. He chants sutras in the morning and evening, and only eats herbs and pine seeds.

古文：每食后，恒必自寻溪涧以澡浴。
现代文：每吃完一顿饭之后，总是要自己寻一处溪涧来洗澡。
English: After every meal, you always have to find a stream to bathe in.

古文：数年在山中，人稍知之。
现代文：他几年里一直住在山里，很少有人了解他。
English: He had been living in the mountains for years, and few people knew much about him.

古文：忽一日，有道士衣敝衣，坚求老僧一宵宿止。
现代文：忽然有一天，有一位穿破旧衣服的道士，坚决要求老僧让他在庵中住一宿。
English: All of a sudden, one day, a Taoist monk wearing worn-out old clothes insisted that the old monk let him stay in the hermitage for one night.

古文：老僧性僻，复恶其尘杂甚，不允。
现代文：老僧性格孤僻，又讨厌道士有很多尘俗之气，不答应。
English: The old monk is a solitary character, and he dislikes the fact that Taoists have a lot of dust and vulgarity, so he does not agree.

古文：道士再三言曰：佛与道不相疏，混沌已来，方知有佛。
现代文：道士再三地说：佛教和道教不疏远，开天辟地以来才知道有佛。
English: Taoists have repeatedly said that Buddhism and Taoism are not alienated, and that the existence of Buddha has only been known since the dawn of time.

古文：师今佛弟子，我今道弟子，何不见容一宵，陪清论耳？
现代文：你现在是佛门弟子，我现在是道家弟子，为什么不能容我一宿，陪伴你清谈呢？
English: You are now a disciple of Buddhism, I am now a disciple of Taoism. Why can't I stay with you for one night and have a clear conversation?

古文：老僧曰：我佛弟子也，故不知有道之可比佛也。
现代文：老僧说：我是佛门弟子，不知道有道家能比上佛家的地方。
English: The old monk said, "I am a disciple of Buddhism, and I don't know of any place where a Taoist family is better than a Buddhist family.

古文：道士曰：夫道者，居亿劫之前，而能生天生人生万物，使有天地，有人，有万物，则我之道也。
现代文：道士说：道，产生在亿劫之前，能生天生人生万物，使人间有了天，有了地，有了万物。这就是我们的道。
English: The Taoist said, "The Tao, which was created billions of years ago, can give birth to all things, and make heaven, earth, and all things among people. This is our Tao."

古文：亿劫之前，人皆知而尊之，而师今不知，即非人也。
现代文：亿劫之前，人都知道它，尊重它，而你现在还不知道，就不是人了！
English: Thousands of years ago, people knew it and respected it, but if you don't know it now, you're not human!

古文：老僧曰：我佛恒河沙劫，皆独称世尊。
现代文：老僧说：我佛在天竺国恒河沙劫之后，人们都称他为世尊。
English: The old monk said, "After my Buddha rose from the sand of the Ganges River in the Heavenly Kingdom, people called him a world deity.

古文：大庇众生，恩普天地，又岂闻道能争衡？
现代文：他广泛地庇护众生，恩泽普及天地，又哪里听说道能和他抗衡？
English: He has widely sheltered all living beings, and his benevolence has spread throughout heaven and earth. What have you heard that can compete with him?

古文：我且述释迦佛世尊，是国王之子。其始也。舍王位，入雪山，乘曩劫之功，证当今之果。
现代文：我暂且说一说释迦佛世尊，他是国王的儿子，当初一开始的时候，他舍弃了王位，进入雪山，趁过去大劫修炼的功夫，证明当今的现实。
English: Let me take a moment to talk about Shaka Buddha, the son of a king. In the beginning, he gave up his throne and went into the snowy mountains to prove the reality of the present by taking advantage of the cultivation efforts of the past.

古文：天上天下，唯我独尊。
现代文：天上地下，只有我为尊。
English: In heaven and on earth, there is only me.

古文：故使外道邪魔，悉皆降伏。
现代文：所以让邪魔外道全都降服。
English: So let's make all the troublemakers surrender.

古文：至于今日。就不闻之。
现代文：到了现在，就不知道他了。
English: To this day, I don't know him.

古文：尔之老君，是谁之子？
现代文：你的太上老君是谁的儿子？
English: Whose son is your father-in-law?

古文：何处修行？
现代文：他在什么地方修行？
English: Where did he train?

古文：教迹之间，未闻有益，岂得与我佛同日而言？
现代文：他的传道事迹中，没听说有好处的，怎能和我佛同日而语？
English: Of all his missionary deeds, how can he be compared to our Buddha if we have not heard anything good about him?

古文：道士曰：老君降生于天，为此劫之道祖，始出于周。
现代文：道士说：太上老君降生在天上，他作为这一劫的道祖，是从周朝开始的。
English: The Taoist priest said, "The high priest Lao Jun was born in the sky. As the founder of Taoism, he started from the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：浮紫气，乘白鹿，人孰不闻？
现代文：他飘浮在紫气之上，骑着白鹿，人谁没听说过？
English: He floats above the purple air, riding a white deer, who hasn't heard of him?

古文：至于三岛之事。十州之景，三十六洞之神仙，二十四化之灵异，五尺童子，皆能知之。岂独师以庸庸之见而敢蔑耶？
现代文：至于三岛之事，十州之景，三十六洞的神仙，二十四化的灵异，五尺的儿童都知道，难道只有你以庸俗的见解就敢蔑视？
English: As for the three islands, the ten prefectures, the thirty-six caves, the twenty-four supernatural beings, the five-foot children all know, is it only you who dare to despise them with vulgar opinions?

古文：若以尔佛，舍父逾城，受穿膝之苦，而与外道角胜，又安足道哉？
现代文：如果要说你佛，他舍弃父亲丢掉城池，受穿透膝盖的痛苦，而又与外道争强斗胜，又哪里值得一说呢？
English: If you were to say of your Buddha that he forsook his father, lost his city, suffered the pain of being pierced through the knee, and yet was victorious in a struggle with outsiders, what would be worth saying?

古文：以此言之，佛只是群魔之中一强梁者耳。
现代文：从这方面讲，佛只是群魔之中的一个强盗罢了。
English: In this respect, the Buddha is just a bandit among demons.

古文：我天地人与万物，本不赖尔佛而生。
现代文：我们的天、地、人以及万物，本不是依靠你的佛而生的。
English: Our heaven, earth, people and all things are not born from your Buddha.

古文：今无佛，必不损天地人之万物也。
现代文：现在没有佛，一定不会给天、地、人以及万物带来什么损失。
English: If there is no Buddha now, it will not bring any loss to heaven, earth, people and all things.

古文：千万勿自言世尊，自言世尊，世必不尊之，无自称尊耳。
现代文：千万不要自己说是世尊。自己说是世尊，世一定不尊，不要自称尊了！
English: Do not call yourself a world-honored one. If you call yourself a world-honored one, the world will not respect you. Do not call yourself a world-honored one!

古文：老僧作色曰：须要此等人。设无此等。即顿空却阿毗地狱矣。
现代文：老僧变了脸色说：须要这样的人，假设没有这样的人，就顿时把空门变成阿毗地狱了。
English: The old monk frowned and said, "Such a person is needed. Assuming that there is no such person, I will immediately turn the Empty Gate into Abi Hell."

古文：道士大怒，伸臂而前，拟击老僧。
现代文：道士非常生气，伸手臂向前，打算打老僧。
English: The Taoist priest was very angry and stretched his arm forward, intending to hit the old monk.

古文：僧但合掌闭目。
现代文：老僧只是合掌闭着眼睛。
English: The old monk just clapped his hands together and closed his eyes.

古文：负薪者攘袂而呵曰：二子俱父母所生而不养，处帝王之土而不臣，不耕而食，不蚕而衣，不但偷生于人间，复更以他佛道争优劣耶。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个背着柴的人路过，见了他二人觉得奇怪，知道是老僧和道士争佛和道的优劣，就捋起袖子呵斥他们说：你们两个都是父母生的，但是不奉养父母；都住在帝王的土地上，但是不对帝王称臣。不耕田而吃饭，不养蚕而穿衣。不但在人世间苟且偷生，而且还要为佛道争优劣吗？
English: After a while, a man carrying firewood passed by. The two of them were surprised to see him. Knowing that it was an old monk and a Taoist who were arguing about the merits and demerits of Buddhism and Taoism, they rolled up their sleeves and shouted at them, saying, "You were both born from parents, but you don't obey your parents. You both live in the land of the emperor, but you don't worship the emperor. You don't cultivate fields to eat, and you don't raise silkworms to wear clothes. Not only do you live secretly in the world, but do you also argue about the merits and demerits of Buddhism?"

古文：无居我山，挠乱我山居之人。
现代文：不要住在我山上，扰乱我居住在山上的人！
English: Don't live on my mountain and disturb my mountain people!

古文：遂遽焚其茅庵，仗伐薪之斧，皆欲杀之。
现代文：于是就迅速烧了那茅庵，拿着砍柴的大斧，要把他们全杀了。
English: So he quickly set fire to the thatched hut and took a big axe to chop wood, intending to kill them all.

古文：老僧惊走入地，化为一铁铮。道士亦寻化一龟背骨，乃知其皆精怪耳。
现代文：老僧吓得跑进地里，变成一个铁铮，道士很快变成一块龟背骨，这才知道他们都是精怪。
English: The old monk was so scared that he ran into the ground and turned into a shovel, and the Taoist quickly turned into a turtle's backbone. Only then did he know that they were both elves.

