古文：察罕察罕，西域板勒纥城人也。
现代文：察罕，西域板勒纥城人。
English: Chahan, a native of Banliao Town in the western region.

古文：父伯德那，岁庚辰，国兵下西域，举族来归。事亲王旭烈，授河东民赋副总管，因居河中猗氏县，后徙解州。
现代文：太祖十五年征西域时，其父伯德那率全族归附，为亲王旭烈效力，授河东民赋副总管，居于河中猗氏县，后迁居解州。
English: When the great-great-grandfather conquered the western region in the 15th year, his father, Bednar, led the whole family to annexation, worked for Prince Xu Rong, and was awarded the title of deputy director of the Eastern Minfu. He lived in Jinshi County, Central China, and later moved to Dezhou.

古文：赠荣禄大夫、宣徽使、柱国、芮国公。
现代文：赠荣禄大夫、宣徽使、柱国、芮国公。
English: He was given the titles of honorable doctor, herald, pillar of the country, and prince of the country.

古文：察罕魁伟颖悟，博览强记，通诸国字书，为行军府奥鲁千户。
现代文：察罕体格魁伟，天资聪慧，博览强记，通晓多国文字，为行军府奥鲁千户。
English: He has a great physique, is talented and intelligent, has a strong sense of reading and writing, and is familiar with many languages. He is the marching prefect of Oulu's thousand households.

古文：奥鲁赤参政湖广，辟为蒙古都万户府知事。
现代文：奥鲁赤为湖广行省参政时，任察罕为蒙古都万户府知事。
English: When Orucak was participating in politics for the province of Houganghang, Chahan was the governor of the Mongolian capital.

古文：奥鲁赤进平章，复辟为理问，政事悉委裁决，且令诸子受学焉。
现代文：奥鲁赤进为平章，任察罕为理问，政事全由察罕裁决，奥鲁赤诸子拜他为师。
English: Oru Chakjin was a member of the Tai chapter, Chakhan was in charge of reasoning, and all political affairs were decided by Chakhan. All of Oru Chak's sons worshipped him as a teacher.

古文：众惑之。察罕曰： 妄也，是必构害仇家者。 
现代文：至元二十四年，随镇南王征安南。大军至泸江，安南王子遣其叔来自陈无罪。镇南王命察罕列举安南王之罪行，并加斥责，使者哑口无言，安南王子率众逃走。
English: In the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Prince Zhenan sent an army to the Li River to conquer Annan. Prince Annan sent his uncle, Chen Mingguo. Zhenan ordered Zhanan to enumerate the crimes of King Annan and reprimanded him. The envoy was speechless, and Prince Annan led the crowd to flee.

古文：核问之，果然。
现代文：二十八年，授察罕行枢密院经历。
English: Twenty-eight years of rare Privy Council experience.

古文：前后从奥鲁赤出入湖广、江西两省，凡二十一年，多著勋绩。
现代文：不久，随奥鲁赤去治理江西。察罕随奥鲁赤出入于湖广、江西两省达二十一年，功劳卓著。
English: Not long after, he went to govern Jiangxi Province with Oluqin. Cahan followed Oluqin in and out of Hunan and Jiangxi provinces for 21 years, and his achievements were outstanding.

古文：成宗大德四年，御史台奏佥湖南宪司事，中书省奏为武昌路治中。
现代文：成宗大德四年，御史台奏请任察罕为湖南省行政长官，中书省则奏举他为武昌路治中。
English: In the fourth year of Chengzong's reign, the Grand Historian's Office requested that Chahan be appointed as the Chief Executive of Hunan Province, while the Central Literature Ministry nominated him as the Wuchang Road Governor.

古文：丞相哈剌哈孙曰： 察罕廉洁，固宜居风宪。然武昌大郡，非斯人不可治。 
现代文：丞相哈剌哈孙说： 察罕为官廉洁，固然应为御史，但武昌是大郡，非此人不能治。 
English: The chancellor, Haji Hasun, said, "Cahan is a clean official, and should be the imperial historian, but Wuchang is a large county, and only this person can rule it.

古文：竟除武昌。
现代文：于是任武昌治中。
English: As a result, he was assigned to Wuchang Middle School.

古文：武宗即位，立仁宗为皇太子，授察罕詹事院判，进佥詹事院事，赐银百两、锦二匹。遣先还大都立院事。仁宗至，谓曰： 上以故安西王地赐我，置都总管府，卿其领之，慎拣僚属，忽以詹事位高不屑此也。
现代文：在武昌路政治清明，远近闻名，升为河南省郎中。成宗崩，武宗即位，河南省平章囊加台向朝廷荐举察罕，因授詹事院判，后升为佥詹事院事。派他先还大都设立詹事院，仁宗后至，对他说 ：皇上把故安西王的地方赐我，置都总管府，由卿主持总管府的事。你要慎重挑选官吏，不要因为你詹事位高，不屑于此任。
English: In Wuchang Road, his politics were clear and well-known far and wide, and he was promoted to the Henan provincial governor. Cheng Zong passed away, Wu Zong ascended to the throne, Henan Province Ping Zhang Cang Tai recommended to the imperial court for investigation, and he was awarded the Janzhong Court, and later promoted to the Janzhong Court. He was first to set up the Janzhong Court, and then Ren Zong came and said to him: The emperor gave me the place of the late King Anxi, and set up the General Administration of the capital, and the general administration of the capital was presided over by the lord. You should carefully select

古文：进卿秩资德大夫。 
现代文：今进卿为资德大夫。 
English: Imajin-kyo is a qualified doctor.

古文：察罕叩头谢曰： 都府之职，敢不恭命，进秩非所敢当。 
现代文：察罕叩谢道： 都府之职，不敢不遵命，但进秩则不敢当。 
English: Cahan bowed in thanks and said, "As a prefectural official, I don't dare to disobey orders, but as a high-ranking official, I don't dare.

古文：固辞，改正奉大夫，授以银印。
现代文：因改为正奉大夫。
English: Due to being promoted to a full-time doctor.

古文：至大元年，阅户口江南诸省，还进太子府正，加昭文馆大学士，迁家令。
现代文：至大元年，察罕核查江南诸省户口回京，升为太子府正，加昭文馆大学士。
English: By the first year of the Taisho era, Chahan checked the household accounts of the provinces in the south of the Yangtze River and returned to Beijing. He was promoted to the position of the Prince's official, and became a scholar of the Zhao Library.

古文：武宗崩，仁宗哀恸不已。
现代文：武宗崩，仁宗即位，拜察罕为中书参知政事，只管大政方针，不管具体事务。
English: Wu Zong passed away, Ren Zong ascended to the throne, and Baichakhan became the chief adviser on political affairs. He was only in charge of the general policy, regardless of specific affairs.

古文：前后赏赉不可胜计。
现代文：有识之士认为大臣应当如此。
English: People with insight believe that this is how a minister should be.

古文：皇庆元年，进荣禄大夫、平章政事、商议中书省事。
现代文：皇庆元年，进荣禄大夫、平章政事、商议中书省事。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Jin Ronglu became a doctor, Ping Zhang was appointed to the government, and the cabinet was discussed.

古文：帝尝问张良何如人，对曰： 佐高帝，兴汉，功成身退，贤者也。 
现代文：他辞官回解州，晚年居德安白云山别墅，自号 白云 ，入朝见皇帝时，仁宗说 ：白云先生来了。 
English: He resigned his post and returned to Jiezhou. In his later years, he lived in the De'an Baiyun Mountain Villa, calling himself Baiyun. When he entered the court to see the emperor, Renzong said, "Mr. Baiyun is here."

古文：又问狄仁杰，对曰： 当唐室中衰，能卒保社稷，亦贤相也。 
现代文：仁宗问他张良为人如何。他说： 张良辅佐高帝，兴建汉朝，功成身退，是位贤人。 又问狄仁杰如何，他说： 唐朝中衰之时，他能保持国家不亡，也是贤人。 
English: When Rinzong asked him how Zhang Liang was, he said: Zhang Liangfu, who assisted Emperor Gao in building the Han Dynasty, was a wise man who retired with great success. When asked how Di Renjie was, he said: When the Tang Dynasty was in decline, he was able to keep the country alive, and he was also a wise man.

古文：因诵范仲淹所撰碑词甚熟。
现代文：察罕背诵范仲淹所撰碑文。
English: Chahan recited the inscription written by Fan Zhongyun.

古文：帝叹息良久曰： 察罕博学如此邪！ 
现代文：仁崇称赞他博学多才。
English: Ren Chong praised him for his erudition and versatility.

古文：尝译《贞观政要》以献。帝大悦，诏缮写遍赐左右。且诏译《帝范》。又命译《脱必赤颜》，名曰《圣武开天纪》，及《纪年纂要》、《太宗平金始末》等书，俱付史馆。
现代文：他曾把《贞观政要》译为蒙文呈献，帝大喜，诏缮写遍赐左右，还命他译《帝范》、《脱必赤颜》，名曰《圣武开天纪》，又译《纪年纂要》、《太宗平金始末》等书，均交给史馆。
English: He once translated "Zhenguan Zhengyao" into Mongolian and presented it to the emperor, who was overjoyed. He also ordered him to translate "Di Fan" and "Debei Chakaian," known as "Shengwu Kai Tianji," as well as "Ji Nian Jiao" and "Taizong Pingjin Shi Matsu" and other books, all of which were handed over to the history museum.

古文：阿礼海牙亦早事武宗、仁宗，为宿卫，以清慎通敏与父兄并见信任。
现代文：曾与仁宗谈及科举及前代帝王赐姓命氏之事，因赐察罕姓白氏。察罕出生时，夜间天气晴朗，月白如昼，蒙古人谓白为察罕，故名察罕。察罕天性孝友，其在河中田宅，都分给众兄弟，释放许多奴婢为民，所以多称他是有德行的人。
English: He had talked with Rinzong about the imperial examination and the previous emperor's granting of the surname Myong, because he gave Chahan the surname Bai. When Chahan was born, the weather was clear at night and the moon was as white as day, so the Mongolians called Bai Chahan, hence the name Chahan. Chahan's natural filial friends, in the middle of the river, were all divided into brothers, releasing many slaves and maidservants into the people, so they mostly called him a virtuous person.

古文：十余年间，敭历华近，入侍帷幄，出践省闼，廷无间言。
现代文：退休后悠闲过了八年，寿终正寝。阿礼海牙，畏吾族，集贤大学士脱列之子。
English: After eight years of leisurely retirement, he died in his sleep. He was the son of Allie Hague, a member of the Daigo ethnic group, and a member of the elite group of university graduates.

古文：帝命复镇汴省。时当艰难之际，阿礼海牙高价籴粟，以峙粮储；命近郡分治戎器，阅士卒，括马民间，以备不虞。
现代文：他很早就侍奉武宗和仁宗，为宿卫。至治年间，历任江浙、湖广、河南、陕西四省平章政事，在各地均实施仁政，汴梁人尤其对他怀念不忘。回朝拜翰林学士承旨，因父亲去世而解官居家中。
English: He had long served the Wuzong and Renzong and was a bodyguard. During his reign, he successively held the title of Pingzhang in the four provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Hubei, Henan and Shaanxi, and implemented the benevolent government in all regions. The people of Qiliang especially remember him. He returned to the imperial court to accept the title of Hanlin Scholar, but was dismissed due to the death of his father and stayed at home.

古文：先是，文宗即位之诏已播告天下，而陕西官府结连靖安王等起兵，东击潼关。
现代文：天历元年秋，文宗即位，复命阿礼海牙治理河南行省。正当时局艰难之际，阿礼海牙以高价收购粮食储存，命近郡修治军械，检阅士卒，在民间征发马匹，以备不虞。在此之前，文宗即位之诏一发布，陕西官府勾结靖安王起兵反对朝廷，东叩潼关。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Heian calendar, Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne and ordered A Lai Haige to govern Henan Province. At that time, when the situation was difficult, A Lai Haige purchased grain stocks at a high price, ordered the county to repair military equipment, inspected the officers and men, and sent horses to the people to prepare for danger. Prior to this, the first edict of Emperor Wenzong's enthronement was issued, and the Shaanxi government colluded with King Jing'an to raise an army to oppose the imperial court and attack Dongbaoguan.

古文：阿礼海牙开府库，量出钞二十五万缗，属诸行省参政河南淮北蒙古军都万户朵列图、廉访副使万家闾犒军河南以御之。
现代文：阿礼海牙打开府库，拿出钞二十五万缗，命行省参政河南淮北蒙古军都万户朵列图、廉访副使万家闾犒劳三军，于河南御敌。
English: Allie Hague opened the government treasury, took out 250,000 baht in banknotes, and ordered the three armies of the province to participate in politics in Henan, Huaibei, and Mongolia, including the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, the capital of the Mongolian army, and the capital of the Mongolian army.

古文：令都镇抚卜伯率军吏巡行南阳、高门、武关、荆子诸隘，南至襄、川二江之口，督以严备。
现代文：令都镇抚卜伯率军官巡视南阳、高门、武关、荆子诸险要关口，南至襄、川两江之口，督军严加防备。
English: He ordered Fubo, the commander of the capital town, and his officers to patrol the Nanyang, Gaomen, Wugang, and Jingzi Passes, as well as the mouths of the Xiang and Sichuan Rivers.

古文：万户博罗守潼关，不能军。是月二十五日，只儿哈率小汪总帅、脱帖木儿万户等之兵，突出潼关，东掠阌乡，披灵宝，荡陕州、新安诸郡邑，放兵四劫，迤逦前进。
现代文：九月二十五日，潼关失守，叛军只儿哈率小汪总帅、脱帖木儿万户等所属军队突出潼关，东掠阌乡，攻破灵宝，扫荡陕州、新安诸郡县，纵兵劫掠，河南告急。
English: On September 25th, Shaoguan fell into the enemy's hands, and the rebel army led by General Xiao Wang and the troops under the command of Wang Hui led by General Xiao Ha and the troops under the command of the troops under the command of Wang Hui led by the troops under the command of Wang Hui led by General Xiao Wang and the troops under the command of Wang Hui led by the troops under the command of General Xiao Wang and the troops under the command of Wang Hui led by the troops under the command of General Xiao Wang and the troops under the command of Wang Hui led by the troops under the command of General Xiao Wang and the troops under the command of

古文：河南告急之使狎至，而朵列图亦以兵寡为言。
现代文：十月一日，阿礼海牙召集河南行省官吏会议，征求御敌长策，均哑口无言。
English: On October 1, Aley Hague convened a meeting of Henan-bound provincial officials to solicit the enemy's best strategy, but all of them were speechless.

古文：十月一日，阿礼海牙集省宪官属，问以长策，无有言者。阿礼海牙曰： 汴在南北之交，使西人得至此，则江南三省之道不通于畿甸，军旅应接何日息乎。
现代文：阿礼海牙说： 汴梁位于南北之交，若叛军至此，则江南三省之道不通京师，战争何日可止。
English: Allie Hague said: "Huliang is located at the intersection of North and South. If the rebel army reaches here, then the three provinces south of the Yangtze River will not pass through the Beijing division, and the war can last for days.

古文：夫事有缓急轻重，今重莫如足兵，急莫如足食。
现代文：事有轻重缓急，今重莫如足兵，急莫如足食。
English: Things have priorities. Now there is no such thing as a foot soldier, and there is no such thing as foot food.

古文：吾征湖广之平阳、保定两翼军，与吾省之邓新翼、庐州、沂、郯炮弩手诸军，以备虎牢；裕州哈剌鲁、邓州孙万户两军，以备武关、荆子口。
现代文：我征调湖广之平阳、保定两翼军，与我省之邓州之新翼军，庐州、沂、郯炮兵、弓箭兵共守虎牢关；裕州哈剌鲁、邓州孙万户两军共守武关、荆子口。
English: I conscripted the two wing armies of Pingyang and Baoding in Hukang, and the new wing army of Denzhou in our province, including the artillerymen and archers from Bozhou, Handan and Handan, to jointly guard the Tiger Pass; and the two armies of Yuzhou Hailu and Denzhou Sun Wanyu jointly guarded Wuguan and Jingzigou.

古文：以属郡之兵及蒙古两都万户、左右两卫、诸部丁壮之可入军者，给马乘赀装，立行伍，以次备诸隘。
现代文：河南省各郡之兵及蒙古两都万户、左右两卫、诸部丁壮之可编为军伍者，给马匹军装，建立编制、以防守各地关口。
English: The soldiers of the counties in Henan Province and the 10,000 households in the two capitals of Mongolia, the left and right defences, and the dingzang of various departments can be organized as military personnel, give military uniforms to horses, establish organization, and guard the gates in various regions.

古文：芍陂等屯兵本自襄、邓诸军来田者，还其军，益以民之丁壮，使守襄阳、白土、峡州诸隘。
现代文：芍陂等地屯兵乃自襄、邓来屯田者，各自回营，与民之壮丁一同守御襄阳、白土、峡州诸要地。
English: The soldiers stationed in such places as  were those who came from Xiangyang and those who came to Xiangyang from Deng, and they returned to their respective camps. Together with the young men of the people, they guarded the important places of Goryangyang, Baidu, and Xiaozhou.

古文：别遣塔海以备自蜀至者，以汴、汝、荆、襄、两淮之马以给之，府库不足，则命郡县假诸殷富之家。
现代文：从四川开到这里防守的军队，塔海负责将汴、汝、荆、襄、两淮的马给予他们，官马不足，则命郡县向殷富士家借用。
English: The army that came from Sichuan to defend here, Tahai was responsible for giving them the horses of Zou, Ryou, Jing, Xiang, and the two Huai horses. When the official horses were not enough, he ordered the county to borrow them from the Yin Fuji family.

古文：安丰等郡之粟，逆黄河运至于陕，籴诸汴、汝，近郡者，则运诸荥阳以达于虎牢。
现代文：安丰等郡的粮食，溯黄河而上运至陕西，在汴、汝收购的粮食，则运到荥阳以支援虎牢关。
English: The grain from counties such as Anfeng was transported up the Yellow River to Shaanxi, while the grain purchased in Min and Ru was transported to Fenyang to support the tigers.

古文：吾与诸军各奋忠义以从王事，宜无不济者。 
现代文：我与诸军都奋力忠于国家，没有办不到的事。 
English: I and all the troops are trying to be loyal to the country. There is nothing we cannot do.

古文：众曰： 唯。 命即日部分行事。
现代文：众人对他的部署安排连连称是，立即各行其事。
English: His deployment was met with a chorus of "go fuck yourselves" from the crowd.

古文：自伯颜不花王以下省都事李元德等，凡省之属吏与有官而家居者，各授以事而出。
现代文：自伯颜不花以下省都事李元德等大小官吏居家者，都出来接受任务。
English: Li Yuande and other big and small officials who live at home came out to accept the task.

古文：廉访使董守中、佥事沙沙在南阳，右丞脱帖木儿、廉访使卜颜在虎牢，分遣兵马以听其调用。
现代文：廉访使董守中、佥事沙沙在南阳，右丞脱帖木儿、廉访使卜颜在虎牢，各整顿兵马，听候调用。
English: In Nanyang, Dong Shoujun and Anji Shasha are in the middle of the investigation, and Timur is on the right, and Bu Yan is in the tiger's prison, each rectifying the soldiers and horses, waiting for the call.

古文：馈饷之行，千车相望，阿礼海牙亲阅实之，必丰必良，信以期会。
现代文：运粮车辆，千车相望，阿礼海牙亲自检查，必须充足，必须是上好粮食，按期运到目的地。
English: The grain transport vehicles, a thousand cars facing each other, are personally inspected by the Hague, must be sufficient, must be good grain, and must be transported to the destination on schedule.

古文：自虎牢之南至于襄、汉，无不毕给。
现代文：自虎牢以南至襄、汉都得到供应。
English: From the southern part of the tiger prison to the southern part of the city, the Han people were all supplied with rice.

古文：盖为粟二十万石，豆如之，兵甲五十五万，刍万万。
现代文：共计粟二十万石、豆二十万石，兵甲五十五万，草料无数。
English: A total of 200,000 koku of millet, 200,000 koku of beans, 550,000 warheads, and countless grasses.

古文：是时，朝廷置行枢密院以总西事。
现代文：这时，朝廷设立行枢密院来总领对付陕西叛乱之事。
English: At this time, the Imperial Court set up the Privy Council to deal with the rebellion in Shaanxi.

古文：襄、汉、荆湖、河南郡县皆缺官，阿礼海牙便宜择材以处之，朝廷皆从其请。
现代文：襄、汉、荆湖、河南郡县皆缺官，阿礼海牙自行择材任用，朝廷都予批准。
English: Xiang, Han, Jinghu, and Henan counties are all vacant, while A Lai and Hague are self-appointed and approved by the imperial court.

古文：是月，西兵逼河南，行院使来报，曰： 西人北行者度河中以趋怀、孟、磁；南行者帖木哥，过武关，掠邓州而残之，直趋襄阳。攻破郡邑三十余，横绝数千里，所过杀官吏，焚庐舍，虏民人妇女财物，贼虐殄尽，西结囊家以蜀兵至矣。 
现代文：十月，陕西叛军逼近河南，行枢密院使报告说： 西人北行者已过河中，趋向怀、孟、磁；向南行的帖木哥已过了武关，掠邓州，直趋襄阳，攻破郡城三十余座，横行数千里，所过之处，杀官吏，焚房屋，掳掠人口、妇女和财物，暴虐至极。他们还勾结囊家，派蜀兵来了。 
English: In October, the Shaanxi rebels approached Henan, and the envoy of the Privy Council reported: The westerners have crossed the middle of the river, heading for Huai, Meng, and Magneto; the southbound Timuko has passed Wuguan, plundered Dengzhou, and headed straight for Xiangyang, breaking through more than 30 county towns, rampaging thousands of miles, killing officials, burning houses, abducting and plundering people, women, and property, and being extremely violent. They also colluded with the instigators and sent Shu soldiers.

古文：阿礼海牙益督饷西行，遣行院官塔海领兵攻帖木哥，而又设备于江、黄，置铁绳于峡口，作舟舰以待战。
现代文：阿礼海牙更加促督粮草西行，派行枢密院官塔海领兵攻帖木哥；又设防于江、黄，置铁链于峡口，造舟舰准备迎战。
English: Allie Hague further urged the governor to go west, and sent the Privy Councillor Tahai to lead the troops to attack Timucao; he also set up defenses in the river and Huang, placed iron chains at the mouth of the gorge, and built boats to prepare for battle.

古文：阿礼海牙前后遣使告于朝，辄为也先捏留不遣，不得朝廷音问已二十日。阿礼海牙亦忧之，亲出行抚其民。
现代文：十九日，阿礼海牙的军队与陕西叛军在巩县之石渡大战，双方死伤相等，但虎牢为叛军所占，阿礼海牙尽其心，民殚其力，所筹集的巨万军备全部损失，行省院与诸军只有收兵退却。二十二日，叛军至汴梁，人民大恐。
English: On the 19th, the army of the Aley Hague and the Shaanxi rebels began the Battle of Shidu in Gong County. Both sides had equal casualties, but the tiger was firmly occupied by the rebels. The Aley Hague did its best, the people did their best, and the huge amount of armaments raised were all lost. The provincial government and the army only withdrew their troops. On the 22nd, the rebels reached Jialiang, and the people were very afraid.

古文：乃修城阙以备冲突，立四门以通往来，戒卒伍以严守卫。时虽甚危急，阿礼海牙朝夕出入，声色不动，怡然如平时，众赖以安。
现代文：阿礼海牙数次向朝廷告急，告急文书为也先捏扣留，故二十天还得不到朝廷回音。阿礼海牙也非常担心，亲自出来安抚百姓，部署防务，令士卒严加守卫。在此危急之时，他自己不动声色，沉着镇静，如平时一般，军民也因此不惊慌失措。
English: Aley Hague made several urgent appeals to the imperial court, but the urgent appeal document was also initially withheld, so the imperial court did not respond for twenty days. Aley Hague was also very worried, personally came out to calm the people, deployed defenses, and ordered his soldiers to guard strictly. At this critical time, he himself was silent and calm, as usual, so the military and civilians were not panicked.

古文：十一月六日，西师逼城将百里而近，阿礼海牙召行院将帅、宪司与凡在官者，而告之曰： 吾荷国厚恩，唯有一死以报上耳。
现代文：十一月六日，叛军进逼省城将近百里，阿礼海牙召集行枢密院将帅和行省官员，对他们宣布： 我受朝厚恩，唯有一死以报答皇上。
English: On November 6, when the rebels had advanced nearly a hundred miles to the provincial capital, Allie Hague called together the generals of the Privy Council and the provincial officials and declared to them: I have been favored by the court, and I have only one death to repay the emperor.

古文：行院之出，唯敌是图，而退保吾城，不亦怯乎？
现代文：行院只有出师抗敌，若退保省城，岂不是胆怯？
English: Isn't it cowardly to go to a military academy only to fight against the enemy, but to withdraw to a provincial town?

古文：然敌亦乌合之众，何所受命而敢犯我乎？
现代文：敌人是一群乌合之众，受谁之命来侵犯我们？
English: The enemy is a rabble, by whose order do they invade us?

古文：且吾甲兵非不坚劲，刍峙非不丰给，而弗利者，太平日久，将校不知兵，吏士不练习，彼所以得披猖至此。
现代文：我们的甲兵不是不坚强，储存粮草不是不丰盛，其所以战而不利，是因为将校不知用兵之法，吏士又缺乏训练，所以敌人得以如此猖獗。
English: It is not that our armored soldiers are not strong, or that our grain and grass reserves are not plentiful, but that the war is unfavorable, because the officers do not know how to use the army, and the officials lack training, so the enemy can be so rampant.

古文：彼诚知我圣天子之命，则众沮而散尔，何足虑乎。
现代文：如果他们知我们是奉圣明天子之命抗击叛逆，必然士气衰落，不遣而散，不必忧虑。
English: If they knew that we were fighting against the rebellion on the orders of the Holy Son of Heaven, their morale would inevitably decline, and they would disperse without further ado. There is no need to worry.

古文：吾今遣使告于朝，请降诏大赦胁从诖误。
现代文：吾现遣使奏请朝廷，降诏大赦那些胁从及有牵连的人。
English: I am now sending an envoy to appeal to the Imperial Court to grant amnesty to those who have been involved in the intimidation.

古文：比诏下，先募士，以即位诏及朝廷招谕之文入其军，明示利害。
现代文：诏书一下，先募一勇士将皇上即位诏书及招安文告送至敌军，晓谕利害。
English: After issuing the imperial rescript, first recruit a warrior to deliver the imperial enthronement rescript and the proclamation of peace to the enemy army and explain the stakes.

古文：吾整大军西向以征之，别遣骁将率精骑数千上龙门，绕出其后，使之进无所投，退无所归，成擒于巩、洛之间必矣。
现代文：同时，我们整顿队伍，向西征讨，另遣骁将率精锐骑兵数千上龙门，绕敌之后，使敌进退两难，必擒其首恶于巩、洛之间。
English: At the same time, we will reorganize the team, march westward to fight, and send thousands of elite cavalry led by the commander to the Dragon Gate. After circling around the enemy, the enemy will be in a dilemma, and the first evil will be between Gong and Luo.

古文：而我军所获陕西官吏，命有司羁而食之，一无所戮。 
现代文：我军所俘陕西官吏，命有关官府好好关押，不杀一人。 
English: The Shaanxi officials captured by our army should be properly detained by the relevant government agencies without killing anyone.

古文：众曰： 诺，唯命。 
现代文：大众表示遵命。
English: The public complied.

古文：即日与行院整兵南薰门外以行。
现代文：当天与行枢密院整兵于南薰门外，准备开拔。
English: On the same day, they marched in formation with the troops of the Privy Council outside the South Gate, preparing to march out.

古文：会有使者自京师还，言齐王已克上都，奉天子宝玺来归，刻日至京矣。
现代文：朝廷从京师遣使来告，齐王已克上都，奉武宗宝玺不日到京。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy from Beijing to report that King Qi had ascended to the capital, and that he had come to Beijing to pay homage to Emperor Wu.

古文：阿礼海牙乃置酒高会于省堂以贺，发书告属郡，报诸江南三省，而募士得兰住者赍书谕之。
现代文：阿礼海牙在省城置酒席祝贺，并把这一消息用书信遍告所属郡县及江南三省，又募得勇士兰住持书去告诫叛军。
English: Allie congratulated Hague on setting up a banquet in the provincial capital, and used letters to spread the news throughout his county and the three provinces south of the Yangtze River. He also recruited the warrior Lan Zhizhi to admonish the rebels.

古文：西人犹搒掠兰住，讯以其实，而朝廷亦遣都护月鲁帖木儿从十余人奉诏放散西军之在虎牢者。
现代文：叛军对兰住加以拷问，得其实情，同时朝廷也遣都护月鲁帖木儿带领十余人奉诏解散虎牢关的叛军。
English: The rebels tortured Lanzhu and found out the truth. At the same time, the imperial court also dispatched the capital's guardian, Lu Tiemu, to lead more than ten people to issue an edict to disband the rebels.

古文：西人杀其从者之半，械都护以送诸荆王所。
现代文：叛军杀都护随从者半数，将月鲁帖木儿押送至荆王处所。
English: The rebels killed half of Du Du's entourage and escorted Yue Luchem to Jing Wang's place.

古文：荆王时在河南之白马寺，以是西人虽未解散，各已骇悟。又闻行省院以兵至，犹豫不敢进。
现代文：当时荆王在河南之白马寺，叛军虽未解散但亦有所觉悟，且又闻河南行省大军逼近，便犹豫徘徊而不敢进。
English: At that time, King Jing was at the White Horse Temple in Henan. Although the rebels had not yet disbanded, they had become aware of the situation, and when they heard that the Henan Provincial Army was approaching, they hesitated and did not dare to advance.

古文：朝廷又使参政冯不花亲谕之，乃信服。
现代文：朝廷又使参政冯不花亲至敌军宣布皇上诏谕，众人信服。
English: The imperial court also sent the politician Feng Fuxian to the enemy army to announce the emperor's edict, and everyone was convinced.

古文：阿礼海牙自始至镇，迨乎告功，居汴省者数月。
现代文：靖安王遣使四人与兰住一同来请求赦免，自己领兵退却，这场叛乱至此平息。
English: King Jing'an sent the four of them together with Ranju to ask for forgiveness. He led his troops to retreat, and the rebellion was thus quelled.

古文：后以功迁陕西行御史大夫，复拜中书省平章政事。
现代文：阿礼海牙解严报捷，将所剩下的物资还于民，将叛军俘去的人遣还其家者数千人，陕西官吏之被俘者也遣还。他自己因功为陕西行省御史大夫，后又拜中书省平章政事。
English: He returned the remaining materials to the people, sent thousands of people who were captured by the rebels back to their families, and also sent back the prisoners of the Shaanxi officials. He himself was the governor of Shaanxi Province for his merits, and later he was the governor of the People's Republic of China.

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁奕赫抵雅尔丁，字太初，回回氏。父亦速马因，仕至大都南北两城兵马都指挥使。
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁，回族人，父亦速马因在元朝官至大都南北两城兵马都指挥使。
English: Yi He arrived in Yalding. He was a member of the Hui ethnic group. His father, Yi Suo Ma, was an officer in the Yuan Dynasty and commanded the troops and horses of the two cities in the north and south of the capital.

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁幼颖悟嗜学，所读书一过目即终身不忘。尤工其国字语。
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁自幼聪明好学，有过目不忘之才，尤其精通蒙古语言。
English: Since he arrived in Yalding, Ikhkh has been bright and eager to learn. He has an eye for detail and is especially proficient in the Mongolian language.

古文：初为中书掾，以年劳授江西行省员外郎。入为吏部主事，不再阅月，固辞。
现代文：初为中书省官员，后出任江西行省员外郎，回朝任吏部主事，然不到两月就辞职了。
English: At first, he was an official of the Ministry of Education and Culture, then he served as a member of the Jiangxi Provincial Foreign Affairs Committee, and returned to the DPRK as the head of the Personnel Department. However, he resigned in less than two months.

古文：擢刑部员外郎。四方所上狱，反复披阅成牍，多所平反。
现代文：后起用，升刑部员外郎，对各地上报案情，反复审阅，冤案多为昭雪。
English: Later, he was promoted to be a member of the Penal Department, reporting cases to various regions and repeatedly reviewing them. Most of the unjust cases were Akiyuki's.

古文：迁陕西汉中道肃政廉访司佥事，不赴。改中书右司员外郎，寻升郎中。
现代文：本调任陕西汉中道肃政廉访司佥事，未赴任，改为中书右司员外郎，不久又升为郎中。
English: He was transferred to Shaanxi Hanzhong Dao Su Zheng Lian Ji Ji An Ji, but before taking up the post, he was changed to the right-hand man of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and soon he was promoted to the assistant secretary.

古文：一日，与同列共议狱，有异其说者，奕赫抵雅尔丁曰： 公等读律，苟不能变通以适事宜。譬之医者，虽熟于方论，而不能切脉用药，则于疾痛奚益哉！ 
现代文：有天，与同僚议论审判案件的事，有持不同意见者，奕赫抵雅尔丁说： 公等熟读法律，但若不能随事实而有所变通，如同一个医生虽熟悉处方，但不能切脉用药，其对疾病如何能治。 
English: One day, when discussing the trial of a case with his colleagues, and there were dissenters, Yi He arrived in Yalding and said: "The public is familiar with the law, but if it cannot adapt to the facts, it is like a doctor who is familiar with the prescription but cannot cut the pulse, how can it cure the disease."

古文：同列虽不平，识者服其为名言。
现代文：虽同僚们不服其说，而有见识的人则认为这是名言。
English: Although his colleagues are unconvinced, those in the know consider it to be a famous quote.

古文：大德八年肆赦，廷议惟官吏因事受赇者不预。
现代文：大德八年朝廷大赦天下，但官吏犯受贿案者不赦。
English: The Imperial Court granted amnesty to the whole world in the 8th year of the Taide era, but officials who committed bribery were not pardoned.

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁曰： 不可。恩如雨露，万物均被，赃吏固可嫉，比之盗贼则有间矣。宥盗而不宥吏，何耶？ 
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁认为： 不可，皇恩为雨露，万物均受其惠，赃官固然可恨，但与盗贼还是不同，赦盗而不赦赃官，为什么？ 
English: Yixhe arrived at Yalding thought: No, the royal grace is the rain and dew, and everything benefits from it. Although eunuchs are hateful, they are still different from thieves. They forgive thieves but not eunuchs. Why?

古文：刑部尝有狱事，上谳既论决，已而丞相知其失，以谴右司主者。
现代文：刑部曾处理一个案件，已经判决，而丞相知此案判决有误，指责刑部主事人。
English: The Criminal Investigation Department had dealt with a case, which had already been adjudicated, and the Minister of Justice, knowing that the case had been adjudicated incorrectly, accused the person in charge of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁初未尝署其案，因取成案阅之，窃署其名于下。
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁未曾参与此案判决，却取判决卷宗审阅，私自署名于下。
English: Yi He arrived in Yalding and did not participate in the judgment of the case, but took the judgment file for review and signed it in person.

古文：或讶之曰： 兹狱之失，公实不与，丞相方谴怒而公反追署其案，何也？ 
现代文：有人惊异问道： 此案判决有误，公实不曾参与，丞相方谴责而公反而在此案判决书上署名，这是为何？ 
English: Some people were surprised and asked: The judgment of this case is wrong, the public and the truth did not participate, the prime minister condemned, but the public signed the judgment of this case. Why is this?

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁曰： 吾偶不署此案耳，岂有与诸君同事而独幸免哉？ 
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁说 ：我只是偶尔未曾参与此案的审判，岂能与诸君同事而独自幸免于外。 
English: When he arrived in Yalding, he said: "I only occasionally did not participate in the trial of this case. I could not have survived alone with my colleagues.

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁遂以王毅、李迪为言，一时舆论莫不称允。
现代文：丞相闻知，称他贤德，同僚也免罪。后调任左司郎中。左司缺一都事，平章梁暗都剌请奕赫抵雅尔丁荐举诚实不欺的人。奕赫抵雅尔丁推荐王毅、李迪二人，舆论都说此二人称职。
English: After he was transferred to the Middle Division of the Left Division, Ping Zhang Liang asked Yi He to come to Yalding to recommend someone who was honest and not deceitful. When Yi He came to Yalding, he recommended Wang Yi and Li Di, and the public opinion said that these two were competent.

古文：又尝论朝士如王仁卿、贾元播、高彦敬、敬威卿、李清臣辈可大用，时诸公处下僚，后皆如其言。
现代文：在议论评价朝廷官员时，奕赫抵雅尔丁认为王仁卿、贾元播、高彦敬、敬威卿、李清臣等人皆可大用。当时这些人都是他的下级，后来如他所言，皆受重用。
English: When discussing the evaluation of officials of the imperial court, Yi He arrived at Yalding and thought that Wang Renqing, Jia Yuanbo, Gao Yanjing, Jing Wei, Li Qingchen and others could be of great use. At that time, these people were his subordinates, and later, as he said, they were all of great use.

古文：迁翰林侍讲学士、知制诰兼修国史，转中奉大夫、集贤大学士。
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁升为翰林侍讲学士、知制诰、兼修国史，又转为中奉大夫、集贤大学士。
English: When Yi He arrived in Yalding, he was promoted to Hanlin Attendant Lecturer Bachelor, Zhisheng Scholar, and also studied national history. He was also transferred to Zhongfeng Doctor and Jixian University Scholar.

古文：未几，除江东建康道肃政廉访使。
现代文：不久，出任江东建康道肃政廉访使。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the Jiangdong Jiankang Road Anti-Corruption Envoy.

古文：始视事，见以狱具陈列庭下甚备，问之，乃前官创制以待有罪者。
现代文：就任之初，见庭下陈列各种刑具，询问才知是前官所用来对付犯人的。
English: At the beginning of his term of office, he saw various instruments of torture on display in the courtroom, and only learned that they had been used by his predecessor to deal with prisoners after making inquiries.

古文：奕赫抵雅尔丁蹙然曰： 凡逮至臬司，皆命官及有出身之吏，廉得其情，则将服罪，狱具毋庸施也。 
现代文：奕赫抵雅尔丁皱一皱眉头说： 凡逮捕来官府的，都是受朝廷任命的官员和出身高贵的官吏，访察得其实情，他们会服罪的，用不着用刑。 
English: Arriving in Yalding, Yi He frowned and said, "All the people who come to the government office to make arrests are officials appointed by the imperial court and officials of noble birth. They visit to find out the facts, and if they can serve their sentence, there is no need to use punishment.

古文：即屏去之。
现代文：命人把这些刑具拿走。
English: Have these instruments of torture removed.

古文：监宪一年，赃吏削迹。
现代文：在他任建康道肃政廉访使的一年内，赃官敛迹。
English: Within a year of his appointment as the visiting envoy of Jiankang Dao, the eunuch disappeared.

古文：至大初元，立尚书省，拜参议尚书省事，召至京师，恳辞不就。
现代文：至大初年，设立尚书省，拜奕赫抵雅尔丁为参议尚书省事，召他回京就职，他恳请辞职不就任。
English: In the first year of the establishment of the Ministry of Education, Bai Yih arrived in Yalding to serve as a councillor for the Ministry of Education, and he was called back to Beijing to take office. He implored to resign and not take office.

古文：改立中书省，复拜参议中书省事，亦以疾辞。
现代文：后改设中书省，再度拜他参议中书省事，又借口有病，辞不就任。
English: Later, it was changed to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and he was once again appointed to advise the Ministry of Education and Culture. He also resigned from the post on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：延祐元年卒，年四十有七。
现代文：延元年卒，年四十七岁。
English: Graduated in 1981, 47 years old.

古文：父阇里赤，性纯正，知读书。
现代文：脱烈海牙，畏吾族人，先祖世代居住于别失拔里地方。
English: Devotees of The Hague, members of the Daigo ethnic group, whose ancestors have lived in the area for generations.

古文：脱烈海牙幼嗜学，警敏绝人。
现代文：太祖西征时，其曾祖阔华八撒术开导其国王归顺太祖。
English: When the great-grandfather went to the West, his great-grandfather, Kuohua, taught his king to submit to the great-grandfather.

古文：性整暇，虽居仓卒，未尝见其急遽。
现代文：祖父八剌术将全家迁居真定，官至帅府镇抚。父名里赤，为人正派，知书达理。
English: His grandfather, Hachikojutsu, moved the whole family to live in Jinding, and rose through the ranks to become the governor of Shuai Prefecture. His father was a red-blooded man, a decent person, and well-read.

古文：喜从文士游，犬马声色之娱，一无所好。
现代文：脱烈海牙自幼好学，机敏绝人，禀性沉着，不急不躁，好与文学之士交游，而不好犬马声色之娱。
English: From a young age, Decheng Hague was eager to learn, extremely quick-witted, tenacious and calm, not impatient, good at mingling with literary figures, but not good at dog-eat-dog entertainment.

古文：由中书宣使出为宁晋主簿。
现代文：他由中书宣使出为宁晋主簿，后改任隆平县达鲁花赤。
English: He was promoted from Zhongshu Xuanqi to become the chief accountant of Ningjin, and later he was transferred to Longping County Daruhana County.

古文：改隆平县达鲁花赤，均赋兴学，劝农平讼，桥梁、水防、备荒之政，无一不举。
现代文：在任隆平县达鲁花赤期间，均赋税，兴学校，劝勉农业，平息诉讼，建桥梁，防水患，储粮备荒等，无一不办。
English: During the Daruhana red period in Renlongping County, all taxes were levied, schools were built, agriculture was encouraged, lawsuits were settled, bridges were built, water-proofing was carried out, grain reserves were prepared for shortages, and so on.

古文：及满去，民勒石以纪其政。
现代文：任满离职后，百姓刻石碑记述其政绩。
English: After leaving office, the people carved a stone monument to record their political achievements.

古文：拜监察御史。时江西胡参政杀其弟，讼久不决，脱烈海牙一讯竟伏其辜。
现代文：后任监察御史时，江西胡参政杀其弟，此案久不能决，脱烈海牙一审，胡参政服罪。
English: Later, when he was inspector of imperial history, Jiangxi Hu Sanzheng killed his brother, the case could not be decided for a long time, and the first trial in The Hague was held, and Hu Sanzheng was found guilty.

古文：出佥燕南道肃政廉访司事，务存大体，不事苛察。
现代文：出任佥燕南道肃政廉访司事，在任六年，革除贪官污吏一百四十人。
English: He served as the visiting secretary for the elimination of corruption in South Yancheng Province. During his six years in office, he purged 140 corrupt officials.

古文：在任六年，黜污吏百四十有奇。召为户部郎中，转右司员外郎，升右司郎中。赞画之力居多。
现代文：任满回京，任户部郎中，转任右司员外郎，再转为右司郎中。每任一职都尽力出谋划策。
English: He returned to Kyoto at the end of his term of office, and was appointed as a junior member of the Household Division, and then as a junior member of the Right Division, and then as a junior member of the Right Division. In each position, he tried his best to devise strategies.

古文：仁宗在东宫，知其嗜学，出秘府经籍及圣贤图像以赐，时人荣之。
现代文：仁宗在东宫知脱烈海牙好学，将宫中珍藏的经书及圣贤图像赐给他，当时人们认为这是莫大荣耀。
English: At that time, it was considered a great honor for people to give him the palace's precious collection of scriptures and images of saints and sages.

古文：母霍氏卒，哀毁骨立，事闻，赐钞五万贯，给葬事。
现代文：母霍氏卒，他辞官服丧，朝廷赐钞五万贯办理丧事。
English: His mother was a disciple of Huo Shi, he resigned from his post to attend the funeral, and the imperial court gave him 50,000 yuan to handle the funeral.

古文：起为吏部尚书，量能叙爵，以平允称。
现代文：后起用为吏部尚书，对官吏量能升降，都认为他处置公平。
English: Later, he was appointed as the head of the personnel department, and it was considered that his disposition was fair to the officials who could be promoted or demoted.

古文：改礼部尚书，领会同馆事。
现代文：改任礼部尚书，管领会同馆事。
English: He was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was in charge of managing the affairs of the museum.

古文：朝议韪之。
现代文：虽先行后奏，朝廷也认为他做得应该。
English: Although it was a case of first come, first served, the Imperial Court also believed that he had done the right thing.

古文：至治三年，迁淮东宣慰使。
现代文：至治三年，调任淮东宣慰使。
English: At the end of three years, he was transferred to the post of Huaidong Xuanyong envoy.

古文：七月，以疾卒于广陵，年六十有七。
现代文：七月，病逝于广陵，年六十七岁。
English: In July, he died of illness in Guangling at the age of 67.

古文：赠通奉大夫、河南江北等处行中书省参知政事、护军，追封恒山郡公。
现代文：赠通奉大夫、河南江北等处行中书省参知政事、护军，追封恒山郡公。
English: He was awarded the title of "Bong-daifu," "Jiangbei of Henan Province" and other titles such as "Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology," "Governor of Henan Province," "Governor of Henan Province" and "Governor of Hengshan County."

