古文：袁粲袁粲，字景倩，陈郡阳夏人，太尉淑兄子也。
现代文：袁粲，字景倩，陈郡阳夏人，是太尉袁淑哥哥的儿子。
English: Yuan Qi, Zi Jing Qi, Chen County Yang Xia Ren, is the son of Lieutenant Yuan Shu's brother.

古文：父濯，扬州秀才，蚤卒。
现代文：父亲袁濯，是扬州秀才，早死。
English: His father, Yuan Maid, was a Yangzhou scholar who died young.

古文：祖母哀其幼孤，名之曰愍孙。
现代文：他祖母同情他过早成为孤儿，给他起名叫愍孙。
English: His grandmother took pity on his premature orphanhood and called him her grandson.

古文：伯叔并当世荣显，而愍孙饥寒不足。母琅邪王氏，太尉长史诞之女也，躬事绩纺，以供朝夕。
现代文：袁顗的伯父叔父都是当世的大官，但是愍孙却饥寒交迫，他母亲王氏是琅笽人，即太尉长史王诞的女儿，亲自纺织，以保障朝夕的供应。
English: Yuan Qi's uncles and uncles were all high-ranking officials of the day, but his grandson was starving and cold. His mother, Wang, was a eunuch, that is, the daughter of the eunuch Wang Shi, who personally weaved to ensure the supply of the morning and evening.

古文：愍孙少好学，有清才，有欲与从兄顗婚者，伯父洵即顗父，曰： 顗不堪，政可与愍孙婚耳。 时愍孙在坐，流涕起出。
现代文：愍孙小时候特别好学，有很好的才能，有人想把自己的女儿嫁给他的堂兄袁顗。他的伯父袁洵便是袁顗的父亲，说袁顗不配，正好可以嫁给愍孙了，当时愍孙正在坐，流着眼泪出去了。
English: When Gongsun was a child, he was very studious and talented. Someone wanted to marry his daughter to his cousin Yuan Qi. His uncle Yuan Qi, who was the father of Yuan Qi, said that Yuan Qi was not worthy and could just marry Gongsun. At that time, Gongsun was sitting and went out in tears.

古文：蚤以操立志行见知。
现代文：少年时代因立志高尚而被当时人所称赞。
English: In his boyhood, he was praised by the people of the time for his high-mindedness.

古文：初为扬州从事，世祖安北、镇军、北中郎行参军，侍中郎主簿。
现代文：开始当扬州从事、世祖安北、镇军、北中郎行参军，南中郎主簿。
English: At the beginning, he was engaged in Yangzhou, the founder of Anbei, the town army, and the north middle-aged man joined the army, and the south middle-aged man was the main book.

古文：世祖伐逆，转记室参军。
现代文：世祖讨伐逆贼刘邵，转官记室参军。
English: Liu Shao, the forefather who fought against the traitor, was transferred to the official records office and joined the army.

古文：及即位，除尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，侍中。
现代文：到世祖当皇帝时，袁愍孙被任为尚书吏部郎、太子右卫率、侍中。
English: When the world's founder became emperor, Yuan Shisun was appointed as the secretary of the imperial secretary, the prince's right guard, and the chamberlain.

古文：孝建元年，世祖率群臣并于中兴寺八关斋，中食竟，愍孙别与黄门郎张淹更进鱼肉食。
现代文：孝建元年，世祖与群臣在中兴寺八关斋戒，吃素，中餐吃完，愍孙另外和黄门郎张淹再弄到鱼肉来吃。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, Shizhu and his retainers fasted and ate vegetarian food at Zhongxing Temple. After eating Chinese food, Shizhu's grandson and Huangmen Lang Zhang Ruan also got fish and meat to eat.

古文：尚书令何尚之奉法素谨，密以白世祖，世祖使御史中丞王谦之纠奏，并免官。
现代文：尚书令何尚之执法非常严谨，暗中把这消息告诉世祖，世祖叫御史中丞王谦之弹劾，都同时免除他们的官职。
English: Shang Shu ordered He Shang's law enforcement to be very strict, and secretly told this news to Shizuo. Shizuo called for the impeachment of Wang Qian, and both of them were relieved of their official duties at the same time.

古文：二年，起为廷尉，太子中庶子，领右军将军。
现代文：二年起用愍孙当廷尉，太子中庶子，兼任右军将军。
English: In the following two years, he appointed his great-grandson as a court lieutenant and the prince's illegitimate son as a general of the right army.

古文：出为辅国将军、西阳王子尚北中郎长史、广陵太守，行兗州事。
现代文：出外当辅国将军。西阳王刘子尚北中郎长史、广陵太守，代管兖州事务。
English: Liu Zi, the king of Xiyang, acted as the vice-governor of the north and the governor of Guangling, and was in charge of the affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：仍为永嘉王子仁冠军长史，将军、太守如故。大明元年，复为侍中，领射声校尉，封兴平县子，食邑五百户，事在《颜师伯传》。
现代文：同时当永嘉王刘子仁冠军长史、将军，太守照旧，大明元年再当侍中，兼领射声校尉，封爵兴平县子，享受五百户租税待遇。此事参见《颜师伯传》。
English: At the same time, he was the champion of Yongjia King Liu Ziren, the long history, the general, the dean as before, and in the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, he was again the chamberlain, and also the captain of the shooting voice, and the son of Xingping County, and enjoyed the tax treatment of 500 households. This matter is referred to in "The Biography of Yan Shibo."

古文：三年，坐纳山阴民丁彖文货，举为会稽郡孝廉，免官。
现代文：三年因为接受山阴百姓丁彖文的贿赂，选举丁为会稽郡孝廉，被免官。
English: He was dismissed from his post three years ago for accepting bribes from Ding Xuanwen, a citizen of Shanyin, and electing Ding as the county auditor.

古文：寻为西阳王子尚抚军长史，又为中庶子，领左军将军。
现代文：不久当西阳王刘子尚抚军长史，又当中庶子，兼领左军将军。
English: Soon after, Liu Zi Shangfuzi, the king of Xiyang, became the commander of the army, and his son, who was an illegitimate child, also became the commander of the left army.

古文：四年，出补豫章太守，加秩中二千石。
现代文：四年，出外补选豫章太守，品级进至中二千石。
English: In four years, he went abroad to supplement the selection of Yu Zhang Taishou, and the grade advanced to the middle two thousand stones.

古文：五年，复还为侍中，领长水校尉，迁左卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：五年，再回来当侍中，兼领长水校尉，迁左卫将军，加官给事中。
English: Five years later, he came back again as a chamberlain, and concurrently held the positions of captain of the water school, general of the rear guard, and was promoted to the middle ranks.

古文：七年，转吏部尚书，左卫如故。
现代文：七年转吏部尚书、左卫将军照旧。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu, but General Zuo was still there.

古文：其年，皇太子冠，上临宴东宫，愍孙劝颜师伯酒；师伯不饮，愍孙因相裁辱。
现代文：当年皇太子加成年冠礼，皇上在东宫举行宴会，愍孙给颜师伯劝酒，颜师伯不喝酒，愍孙于是按规矩罚颜伯，让颜师伯丢脸，颜师伯正被皇上宠待。
English: When the crown prince celebrated his coming of age, the emperor held a banquet in the East Palace. The grandson advised Yan Shibo to drink, but Yan Shibo did not drink. The grandson then punished Yan Shibo according to the rules, making Yan Shibo lose face. Yan Shibo was being pampered by the emperor.

古文：师伯见宠于上，上常嫌愍孙以寒素凌之，因此发怒，出为海陵太守。
现代文：而皇上也常常讨厌愍孙以士族身份凌辱颜师伯，因这事发怒，让愍孙当海陵太守。
English: However, the emperor often disliked the fact that his grandson insulted Yan Shi Bo by using his status as a member of the warrior class. He became angry about this and made his grandson the guardian of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：前废帝即位，除御史中丞，不拜。复为吏部尚书。
现代文：前废帝做皇帝，被任为御史中丞，没有上任，再当吏部尚书。
English: The former deposed emperor became emperor, was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, did not take office, and then became a bureaucrat.

古文：永光元年，徙右卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：永光元年，愍孙转官右卫将军，加官给事中。
English: In the first year of the Yongguang era, his grandson was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division, and he was promoted to the post.

古文：景和元年，复入为侍中，领骁骑将军。
现代文：景和元年，再调宫廷当侍中，兼领骁骑将军。
English: In the first year of the Keiwa era, he was reassigned to the court as an attendant, and also led the cavalry general.

古文：太宗泰始元年，转司徒左长史，冠军将军，南东海太守。
现代文：太宗泰始元年，转官司徒左长史，冠军将军，南东海太守。
English: In the first year of Taizong Tai's reign, the succeeding official, Szeto Zuochangshi, was a champion general and the governor of the South East China Sea.

古文：愍孙清整有风操，自遇甚厚，常著《妙德先生传》以续嵇康《高士传》以自况，曰：
现代文：愍孙风度严整，文雅不凡，格局峻峭，颇为孤芳自赏，曾经写过一篇文章《妙德先生传》接上嵇康的《高士传》以比拟自己，其中一段说：
English: Sun Yat-sen's demeanor was strict, elegant and extraordinary, the pattern was steep, and he was quite lonely. He once wrote an article "The Biography of Mr. Miao De" to compare himself with the "The Biography of Gao Shi" by Xing Kang. One paragraph said:

古文：有妙德先生，陈国人也。气志渊虚，姿神清映，性孝履顺，栖冲业简，有舜之遗风。
现代文：有位妙德先生是陈国人，气质深沉，心思玄远，神态清爽，俊俏照人，性格孝顺，温顺可人，居住恬淡、不营财货，有大舜帝的遗风。
English: There was a Mr. Myaode who was from Chen Guozhong. He had a deep temperament, a profound mind, a crisp demeanor, a handsome appearance, a filial and docile personality, lived a simple life, did not trade in goods, and had the legacy of Emperor Taobao.

古文：先生幼夙多疾，性疏懒，无所营尚，然九流百氏之言，雕龙谈天之艺，皆泛识其大归，而不以成名。
现代文：先生少年时有很多疾病，性格粗疏懒惰，无所钻营，然而九流百家的书籍，经纬纲常谈天论地的技术，一般都能知道其中的大意，而不靠这些成名。
English: When I was a teenager, I had many illnesses, a coarse and lazy personality, and there was nothing I could do about it. However, I could generally find out the gist of hundreds of books and theories about technology without relying on these to become famous.

古文：家贫尝仕，非其好也。混其声迹，晦其心用，故深交或迕，俗察罔识。
现代文：家庭贫困曾经出仕，这不是他的爱好，混迹其中，隐藏他的心思，所以与老朋友或者弄僵了。
English: The family's poverty has been served, this is not his hobby, mingle among them, hide his thoughts, so with old friends or get stiff.

古文：所处席门常掩，三径裁通，虽扬子寂漠，严叟沈冥，不是过也。修道遂志，终无得而称焉。
现代文：世俗舆论不知他的真实才干，住的地方席子做的大门常常掩住，三条小路勉强通行。即使扬子那种安于平淡的人，严子陵那种隐逸，也不会超过这位先生，一直修炼道德、培育志向，终究不能被人称述。
English: Secular public opinion does not know his true talent. The door made of mats is often hidden where he lives, and the three paths are barely passable. Even if Yanzi is a kind of person who is calm and plain, and Yan Ziling is secluded, he will not surpass this gentleman. He has been cultivating morality and nurturing aspirations. After all, he cannot be praised by others.

古文：又尝谓周旋人曰： 昔有一国，国中一水，号曰狂泉。
现代文：愍孙又曾经对交往的人说： 当年有一个国家，国中有一条小河，被称为狂泉。
English: The great-grandson also once said to the people he met: "Once upon a time, there was a country with a small river called Crazy Spring.

古文：国人饮此水，无不狂，唯国君穿井而汲，独得无恙。
现代文：国人喝了这里的泉水，无不发狂。只有国王挖井吃水，得以不疯。
English: When the Chinese people drank the spring water here, they all went mad. Only the king could dig a well and drink the water without going mad.

古文：国人既并狂，反谓国主之不狂为狂。于是聚谋，共执国主，疗其狂疾。火艾针药，莫不毕具。国主不任其苦，于是到泉所酌水饮之，饮毕便狂。
现代文：国人既然都发狂，反而说国王不疯是疯，于是合谋，共同捉住国王，治他的疯病，火烫针砭，无所不至，国王受不了那种痛苦，于是到狂泉饮水，饮完了便发了疯。
English: Now that all the countrymen had gone mad, they said on the contrary that the king was mad if he was not mad, so they conspired together to catch the king and cure him of his madness. The fire was so hot that it touched everything. The king could not bear that kind of pain, so he went to the mad spring to drink water. When he had finished drinking, he went mad.

古文：君臣大小，其狂若一，众乃欢然。
现代文：大小君臣疯狂如一人，国人于是欢欣喜跃。
English: The great and small lords and gentlemen were as mad as one, and the people of the country rejoiced and exulted.

古文：我既不狂，难以独立，比亦欲试饮此水。 
现代文：我既然不疯，难以独立抗拒，近来想试着喝这种泉水。 
English: Since I'm not crazy, it's hard to resist independently, recently I want to try drinking this spring water.

古文：愍孙幼慕荀奉倩之为人，白世祖，求改名为粲，不许。
现代文：愍孙幼时敬慕荀奉倩的为人，告诉世祖，请求改名为粲，没有被允许。
English: When he was a child, his grandson, who revered Zou as a person who served Zou, told his grandfather that his request to change his name to Zou was not allowed.

古文：至是言于太宗，乃改为粲，字景倩焉。
现代文：这时他又告诉太宗，于是改名为粲，字景倩。
English: At this time, he also told Taizong, so he changed his name to, 字景.

古文：二年，迁领军将军，仗士三十人入六门。
现代文：二年，迁官领军将军，手握仪仗的三十人进守六门。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, he was transferred to the leading general, and thirty guardsmen could enter the six gates.

古文：其年，徙中书令，领太子詹事，增封三百户，固辞不受。
现代文：当年，他转官中书令，兼领太子詹事，增封三百户，坚持不接受。
English: In that year, he transferred to the post of middle-ranking official, and concurrently received the title of Prince Zhanji, with an additional 300 households, and insisted on not accepting it.

古文：三年，转尚书仆射，寻领吏部。
现代文：三年，转官尚书仆射，不久兼领吏部尚书。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to Shang Shufu, and soon he was also in charge of the administrative department.

古文：五年，加中书令，又领丹阳尹。
现代文：五年，加官中书令，又兼任丹阳尹。
English: For five years, he held the post of Chushiro, and also served as Danyang Yin.

古文：六年，上于华林园茅堂讲《周易》，粲为执经。又知东宫事，徙为右仆射。
现代文：六年，皇上在华林园茅堂讲《周易》，袁粲为他拿着经书，又管东宫事，再转为右仆射。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor gave a lecture on "Zhou Yi" in the Mao Hall of Huarinyuan Garden. Yuan Qi held the scriptures for him, managed the affairs of the eastern palace, and then became his right-hand man.

古文：七年，领太子詹事，仆射如故。
现代文：七年，任太子詹事，仆射照旧。
English: For seven years, Prince Zhan served as Crown Prince.

古文：未拜，迁尚书令，丹阳尹如故。
现代文：还未拜官，便升官尚书令，丹阳尹照旧。
English: Before he became an official, Danyang Yin was promoted to the rank of Shang Shuling. Danyang Yin remained the same.

古文：坐前选武卫将军江柳为江州刺史，柳有罪，降为守尚书令。
现代文：因为先前选举武卫将军江柳当江州刺史，江柳有罪，袁粲降职为守尚书令。
English: Because of the previous election of Wuwei General Jiang Liu as the governor of Jiangzhou, Jiang Liu was found guilty, and Yuan Qi was demoted to the position of Shou Shang Shuling.

古文：太宗临崩，粲与褚渊、刘勔并受顾命，加班剑二十人，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：太宗弥留之际，袁粲和褚渊、刘面力都受明帝的重托，加班剑二十人，赏给鼓吹一部。
English: On the occasion of Taizong's death, Yuan Yu, Gong Yuan, and Liu Mianli were all entrusted by the Ming Emperor. Twenty people worked overtime, and were rewarded with a part of the propaganda.

古文：后废帝即位，加兵五百人。
现代文：后废帝即位，加兵卫五百人。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended the throne, five hundred soldiers were assigned to him.

古文：帝未亲朝政，下诏曰： 比元序愆度，留熏耀晷，有伤秋稼，方贻民瘼。
现代文：废帝还未亲揽朝政，下一道诏书说： 近来太阳照得太过猛烈，加上时间又长，伤害了庄稼，给人民带来了痛苦。
English: The next imperial edict said, "Recently, the sun has been shining too fiercely and for too long, which has damaged crops and brought suffering to the people.

古文：朕以眇疚，未弘政道，囹圄尚繁，枉滞犹积，晨兢夕厉，每恻于怀。尚书令可与执法以下，就讯众狱，使冤讼洗遂，困弊昭苏。颁下州郡，咸令无壅。 
现代文：我因为眼病，一直没有革新政治，监狱犯人还很多，冤枉的案子累积很多，朝夕担心，心中不忘，尚书令可以和执法官员和下司，考察各个案件，听冤枉诉讼洗清，困苦弊端昭雪复苏，这个命令颁下各州郡让所有人不要有弊塞的事发生。 
English: Because of my eye disease, I have not innovated politics, there are still many prisoners, many unjust cases have accumulated, I am worried every morning and evening, and I do not forget in my heart that Shang Shuling can, together with law enforcement officials and subordinates, examine each case, listen to unjust lawsuits, and clear up, and the hardships and evils have been revived. This order is issued by the states and counties to let everyone not have any evil things happen.

古文：元徽元年，丁母忧，葬竟，摄令亲职，加卫将军，不受。
现代文：元徽元年，为去世的母亲守孝一段时间，安葬完毕，叫他仍然管理尚书事务，加号卫将军，袁粲没有接受。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, after his mother's funeral and burial, he was summoned to work and appointed as a guard general, but he did not accept.

古文：敦逼备至，中使相望，粲终不受。
现代文：废帝反复逼迫，宫中使者一个接一个，袁粲最终不接受。
English: The deposed emperor repeatedly persecutes the emissaries of the imperial court one after another, and Yuan Shao finally does not accept them.

古文：性至孝，居丧毁甚，祖日及祥变，常发诏卫军断客。
现代文：他的性格非常孝顺，在守孝期间，悲伤过度。祖父忌辰，皇帝常下诏书卫军部门截住客人。
English: His character was very filial, and during the period of filial piety, he was overwhelmed with grief. When his grandfather passed away, the emperor often ordered the guard department to intercept the guests.

古文：二年，桂阳王休范为逆，粲扶曳入殿，诏加兵自随，府置佐史。
现代文：二年，桂阳王刘休范造反，袁粲牵扶进入宫殿。下诏书给他增加兵士随从他。
English: Two years later, King Liu Xuan of Guiyang rebelled, and Yuan Shifu dragged him into the palace. The next edict gave him more soldiers to follow him.

古文：时兵难危急，贼已至南掖门，诸将意沮，咸莫能奋。
现代文：建立府属设置门下官吏。当时正当战乱危急，敌人已到南掖门，将领们非常恐惧，都无法激励奋起。
English: At that time, the soldiers were in a critical situation, the thief army had already arrived at the South Gate, and the generals were frustrated and did not dare to rise up to fight.

古文：粲慷慨谓诸将帅曰： 寇贼已逼，而众情离沮。
现代文：袁粲慷慨陈词，他对将领们说： 敌人已经逼迫过来，但是人心害怕。
English: Yuan Xuan made a generous speech, he said to the generals: The enemy has been forced to come, but the people are afraid.

古文：孤子受先帝顾托，本以死报，今日当与褚护军同死社稷！ 
现代文：我蒙受先帝顾托大恩，本来是要以死报答的。今天应该和褚护军同时为国捐躯。 
English: I received a great favor from the late Emperor Gutho, and I was supposed to repay it with my death. Today, I should sacrifice my life for the country together with my bodyguards.

古文：因命左右被马，辞色哀壮。
现代文：于是叫左右的人牵马过来，神情悲壮。
English: He then ordered the people around him to get their horses ready, looking sad.

古文：于是陈显达等感激出战，贼即平殄。
现代文：这时陈显达等人都被感动，奋勇出击，很快就平定了叛军。
English: As a result, Chen Xianda and others gratefully went to war, and the bandit army was wiped out.

古文：事宁，授中书监，即本号开府仪同三司，领司徒，以扬州解为府，固不肯移。
现代文：朝廷安宁后，袁粲被授予中书监的官职，以本来职位开府仪同三司，兼领司徒，以扬州府台作为他的个人府门，袁粲坚决不同意移动。
English: After the pacification of the imperial court, Yuan Qi was awarded the official position of the Central Book Supervisor. He used his original position to open the government ceremony with the three departments and concurrently led the magistrates. He used the Yangzhou government as his personal government gate. Yuan Qi firmly disagreed with the move.

古文：三年，徙尚书令，卫军、开府如故，并固辞，服终乃受。加侍中，进爵为侯，又不受。时粲与齐王、褚渊、刘秉入直，平决万机，时谓之 四贵 。粲闲默寡言，不肯当事，主书每往谘决，或高咏对之，时立一意，则众莫能改。
现代文：三年，转官尚书令，卫军将军、开府照旧，袁却坚决辞让，守孝三年满期才接受，加官侍中增进爵位为侯，又不接受，当时袁粲和齐王、褚渊、刘秉到宫中轮流值班，决定国家大事，当时人称他们为 四贵 ，袁粲沉默寡言，不肯管事，秘书们每次前往请他决策，袁粲或者高声歌咏诗对着别人，或者想出一个新鲜主意，则众人无法增补。
English: In the third year, the transfer of officials was decreed, the general of the guard and the head of the government remained the same, but Yuan resolutely resigned, and the three-year period of filial piety was accepted. At that time, Yuan Shao and King Qi, Yu Yuan and Liu Bing took turns on duty in the palace to decide on national affairs. At that time, people called them the four precious ones. Yuan Shao was taciturn and refused to take care of affairs. Secretaries asked him to make decisions every time he went. Yuan Shao or singing poetry to others in a high voice, or coming up with a new idea, could not be added by everyone.

古文：宅宇平素，器物取给。好饮酒，善吟讽，独酌园庭，以此自适。居负南郭，时杖策独游，素寡往来，门无杂客。
现代文：家宅简朴，器皿平常，喜欢喝酒，会吟诗，经常在花园中自个喝酒，因为这而自得其乐，家在城南，时时拄着拐杖独自漫游，很少来往的人，门庭中没有庞杂客人。
English: The house is simple, the utensils are ordinary, he likes to drink, he can sing, he often drinks alone in the garden, because this gives him pleasure, the house is in the south of the city, he always roams alone on crutches, there are few people who come and go, there are no huge guests in the courtyard.

古文：及受遗当权，四方辐凑，闲居高卧，一无所接，谈客文士，所见不过一两人。
现代文：到了接受明帝临终托付，掌管朝政，四方官员都集中到他的门下。而袁粲则闲居家中，动不动便长卧着不起来，宾客一个也不接待，常和他谈话的，不过一两个而已。
English: When it came to accepting the Ming emperor's last-minute commission and taking charge of the government, officials from all four directions gathered at his door. Yuan Shao, on the other hand, idled at home, lying motionless and unable to get up. He didn't receive a single guest, and only one or two people often talked to him.

古文：顺帝即位，迁中书监，司徒、侍中如故。
现代文：顺帝即位，袁粲迁官中书监，司徒侍中照旧。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, Yuan Shun was transferred to the post of librarian, while the post of secretary to the emperor remained unchanged.

古文：时齐王居东府，故使粲镇石头。
现代文：当时齐王住在东府，所以派袁粲镇守石头城，袁粲一向恬静。
English: At that time, King Qi was living in Dongfu, so he sent Yuan Shizhen to guard Stone Town, and Yuan Shizhen always kept quiet.

古文：粲素静退，每有朝命，多不即从，逼切不得已，然后方就。
现代文：每次有朝廷命令，多数没有马上遵循。逼迫不得已的，然后才执行。
English: Whenever there was an order from the imperial court, most people didn't follow it right away. If they were forced to, they only carried it out later.

古文：及诏移石头，即便顺旨。
现代文：到诏书叫他移往石头城，便马上按命令实行。
English: When the imperial edict ordered him to move the stone city, he immediately obeyed the edict.

古文：有周旋人解望气，谓粲曰： 石头气甚乖，往必有祸。 
现代文：身边有一个能望气的对袁粲说： 石头城的气象很糟糕，你去了必然有灾难。 
English: Around him, a hopeful person said to Yuan Shao: The weather in Stone Town is very bad. If you go there, you are sure to have a disaster.

古文：粲不答。
现代文：袁粲没有回答。
English: Yuan Qi did not answer.

古文：又给油络通宪车，仗士五十人入殿。
现代文：宫中又供给袁粲油络通巾宪车，允许手握节仗的卫兵五十人进入宫殿。
English: The palace also provided a gendarme car to Yuan Shao, and allowed fifty guards holding festival banners to enter the palace.

古文：时齐王功高德重，天命有归，粲自以身受顾托，不欲事二姓，密有异图。丹阳尹刘秉，宋代宗室；前湘州刺史王蕴，太后兄子，素好武事，并虑不见容于齐王，皆与粲相结。
现代文：当时齐王萧道成功高德重，宋国政权已被他掌握，袁粲因为亲自接受明帝临死前的托付重任，不想再做另一姓的臣子，暗中有自己的图谋，丹阳尹刘秉，是宋国同宗国戚；前湘州刺史王蕴，是太后兄长的儿子，一向喜欢军事，都担心不被萧道成容纳，于是便和袁粲相互联络。
English: At that time, Xiao Dao, the king of Qi, was successful and highly moral, and the Song regime was already under his control. Yuan Qi, because he personally accepted the important task entrusted to him by the Ming Emperor before his death, did not want to be a courtier of another surname, and secretly had his own plot. Danyang Yin Liu Bing was a relative of the same nationality in Song; the former Hunan prince Wang Yun, the son of the empress dowager's elder brother, had always liked military affairs. Both were worried about not being accommodated by Xiao Dao Cheng, so they contacted each other with Yuan Qi.

古文：将帅黄回、任候伯、孙昙瓘、王宜兴、彭文之、卜伯兴等，并与粲合。
现代文：将帅中的黄回、任候伯、孙昙馞、王宜兴、彭文之、卜伯兴等，也和袁粲等一同谋划。
English: The generals Huang Hui, Ren Xubo, Sun Ying, Wang Yixing, Peng Wenzhi, Bu Boxing and others also plotted with Yuan Shao.

古文：升明元年，荆州刺史沈攸之举兵，齐王自诣粲，粲称疾不见。
现代文：升明元年，荆州刺史沈攸之举兵起义。萧道成亲自拜访袁粲，袁粲称病不见。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Jing Zhou assassinated Shen Yue in a military uprising. Xiao Daocheng personally visited Yuan Shao, but Yuan Shao claimed to be ill and disappeared.

古文：粲宗人通直郎袁达以为不宜示异同，粲曰： 彼若以主幼时艰，与桂阳时不异，劫我入台，便无辞以拒。
现代文：袁粲的同宗族人通直郎袁达认为不应该显示不同立场，袁粲说： 他如果因为皇上幼弱，时事艰难，和桂阳王造反时一样，逼我到宫中去。我便无话可以拒绝。
English: Tongzhirong Yuan Dacru, a member of the same clan as Yuan Qi, thought that it was inappropriate to show a different position. Yuan Qi said: If he forces me to go to the palace because the emperor is young and weak and the current situation is difficult, just like when King Guiyang rebelled, then I have nothing to refuse.

古文：一如此，不复得出矣。 
现代文：现在他这样做，我再也不出去了。 
English: Now that he's doing this, I don't go out anymore.

古文：时齐王入屯朝堂，秉从父弟领军将军韫入直门下省，伯兴为直阁，黄回诸将皆率军出新亭。
现代文：当时萧道成到朝廷宫殿中驻扎，刘秉堂弟领军将军刘韫在门下省值班，卜伯兴在阁中值班，黄回等将领都带兵驻扎在新亭。
English: At that time, Xiao Daocheng was stationed in the palace of the imperial court, Liu Bingru's cousin, the leading general Liu Ye, was on duty in the province next door, Bu Boxing was on duty in the cabinet, and Huang Hui and other generals were stationed with soldiers in Xinting.

古文：粲谋克日矫太后令，使韫、伯兴率宿卫兵攻齐王于朝堂，回率军来应。
现代文：袁粲打算当天假传太后命令，叫刘韫、卜伯兴率领警卫部队在朝廷宫殿中攻打萧道成，黄回率军回来响应。
English: On the same day, Yuan Shao planned to falsely transmit the Empress Dowager's order, asking Liu Wei and Bu Boxing to lead the guard troops to attack Xiao Daocheng in the imperial palace, and Huang Hui led the troops back to respond.

古文：秉、候伯等并赴石头，本期夜发。
现代文：刘秉、任候伯等人都奔赴石头城。本来是约定在夜中行动。
English: Liu Bing, Ren Xubo and others all rushed to Stone Town. It was originally agreed to take action in the middle of the night.

古文：其日秉恇扰不知所为，晡后便束装，未暗，载妇女席卷就粲，由此事泄。
现代文：当天刘秉怕得不知做什么好，午后便穿好衣服，天还未黑，便装着妇女席卷投靠袁粲。因此阴谋泄露。
English: On that day, Liu Bing was so scared that he did not know what to do. In the afternoon, he put on his clothes. Before it was dark, he pretended to be a woman and rushed to Yuan Shao's aid. As a result, the plot was exposed.

古文：先是，齐王遣将薛渊、苏烈、王天生等领兵戍石头，云以助粲，实御之也。
现代文：先前齐王派手下将领薛渊、苏烈、王天生等率兵戍守石头城，说是为了帮助袁粲，其实是防卫他的。
English: Previously, King Qi had sent his generals, including Xue Yuan, Sulei, and Wang Tian Sheng, to guard Stone Town, saying that it was to help Yuan Shao, but it was actually to defend him.

古文：又令腹心王敬则为直阁，与伯兴共总禁兵。
现代文：又叫心腹王敬则在宫内值班、和卜伯兴共同管理禁兵。
English: He also had his confidant Wang Jing on duty in the palace, and together with Bu Bo Xing, they jointly managed the ban on soldiers.

古文：王蕴闻秉已奔，叹曰： 今年事败矣！ 
现代文：王蕴听说刘秉逃跑，叹着说： 今年大事不好了。 
English: Wang Yun heard that Liu Bing had run away and said with a sigh: This year is not good.

古文：时齐王使蕴募人，已得数百，乃狼狈率部曲向石头。
现代文：当时齐王叫王蕴招募兵士，已得到几百人，于是也狼狈地率部众逃向石头城。
English: At that time, King Qi asked Wang Yun to recruit soldiers, and he had already obtained several hundred people, so he also led the people to flee to Stone Town in dismay.

古文：本期开南门，时已暗夜，薛渊等据门射之，蕴谓粲已败，即便散走。
现代文：本来约好是开南门，当时已是漆黑的夜晚，薛渊等人在门上向下射箭，王蕴以为袁粲已失败，便马上逃窜。
English: The original agreement was to open the south gate. It was already dark at that time, and Xue Yuan and others were shooting arrows at the gate. Wang Yun thought that Yuan Shao had failed, so he immediately fled.

古文：齐王以报敬则，率所领收蕴杀之，并诛伯兴。又遣军主戴僧静向石头助薛渊，自仓门得入。
现代文：齐王马上告知王敬则，率领他的部下抓到王蕴杀掉，也杀了卜伯兴，又派军主戴僧静进向石头城帮助薛渊从仓门进去。
English: King Qi immediately informed Wang Jingzhe, who led his men to capture Wang Yun and kill him, and also killed Bu Bo Xing. He also sent the commander Dai Zangjing to Stone Town to help Xue Yuan enter through the barn door.

古文：时粲与秉等列兵登东门，僧静分兵攻府西门。
现代文：当时袁粲和刘秉等人排好队伍登上石头东门，戴僧静分兵攻击袁府西门，袁粲和刘秉想回到府内，下得城墙，点好一排蜡烛照着自己。
English: At that time, Yuan Xuan and Liu Bing and others lined up to climb the stone east gate, and the soldiers of Dai Sojing attacked the west gate of Yuanfu. Yuan Xuan and Liu Bing wanted to return to the capital, get off the city wall, and light a row of candles to illuminate themselves.

古文：粲与秉欲还赴府，既下城，列烛自照，僧静挺身暗往，粲子最觉有异人，以身卫粲，僧静直前斩之，父子俱殒，左右各分散。
现代文：戴僧静暗中挺身而前，袁粲的儿子袁最觉得有其他人，以自己的身体遮蔽袁粲。戴僧静向前砍击，袁氏父子同时蒙难，左右人员同时逃窜四周。
English: Daizong Jing stepped forward in the dark, and Yuan Shao's son Yuan Shan felt that someone else was shielding Yuan Shao with his own body. Daizong Jing slashed forward, and Yuan Shao and his son were both injured, and people on both sides fled at the same time.

古文：粲死时，年五十八。
现代文：袁粲死时五十八岁。
English: Yuan Shao was 58 years old at the time of his death.

古文：任候伯等其夜并乘轻舸，自新亭赴石头，闻粲败，乃驰还；其后并诛。
现代文：任候伯等人当夜乘坐小舰从新亭赶赴石头城，听说袁粲已失败，连忙又跑回来，后来都被杀。
English: That night, Ren Xubo and others took a small ship from Xinting to Stone Town. Hearing that Yuan Shao had failed, they hurried back and were all killed later.

古文：秉事在《宗室传》。
现代文：刘秉的事参见《宗室传》。
English: For Liu Bing's story, see "Family Tree."

古文：齐永明元年，诏曰： 昔魏矜袁绍，恩给丘坟；晋亮两王，荣覃余裔。
现代文：齐朝永明元年，齐武帝下诏说： 当年魏国哀悼袁绍，恩泽惠及坟墓。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era of the Qi Dynasty, Emperor Qiwu issued an edict saying: In that year, the State of Wei mourned Yuan Shao, and his grave was blessed.

古文：斯盖怀旧流仁，原心兴宥，二代弘义，前载美谈。
现代文：晋朝体会二王的忠诚，把光荣赏给他们的后代，这大概是怀念旧情，流播仁义，推究他们的心意而加以宽恕。先前两朝的仁义举动，成为先朝佳话。
English: The Jin dynasty experienced the loyalty of the two kings and rewarded the glory to their descendants. This is probably a nostalgia for the old feelings, spreading benevolence, investigating their intentions and forgiving them. The benevolence of the previous two dynasties has become a fairy tale of the previous dynasty.

古文：袁粲、刘秉，并与先朝同奖宋室；沈攸之于景和之世，特有乃心，虽末节不终，而始诚可录。
现代文：袁粲、刘秉都和先君同时辅助宋朝，沈攸之在景和年间，也有这样的忠诚义心，虽然晚节不保，但开始的忠诚应该被记住。
English: Yuan Zheng, Liu Bing and his predecessors assisted the Song Dynasty at the same time, and Shen Youzhi also had such loyalty and righteousness during the Qing Dynasty. Although the late festival is not guaranteed, the loyalty at the beginning should be remembered.

古文：岁月弥往，宜沾优隆。
现代文：岁月过去这么多年，他们应该受到表扬。
English: As the years go by, they should be given preferential treatment.

古文：粲、秉前年改葬，茔兆未修，材官可为经略，粗合周礼。
现代文：袁粲、刘秉前年已改葬，坟墓还未修整。有关部门应好好处理，以便合乎礼节。
English: Yuan Qi and Liu Bing were reburied the year before last, but their graves have not yet been repaired. The relevant departments should properly handle the matter so that it is in line with etiquette.

古文：攸之及其诸子丧柩在西，可符荆州以时致送，还反旧墓，在所营葬事。 
现代文：沈攸之和他的儿子的灵柩在西方。应命令荆州官员在恰当时候，送回故乡旧坟，所在的官员们加以经营安排下葬事务。 
English: The caskets of Shen Youzhi and his son are in the west. Jingzhou officials should be ordered to send the caskets back to their hometown at an appropriate time. The local officials will manage and arrange the burial affairs.

