古文：楚元王刘交者，高祖之同母少弟也，字游。
现代文：楚元王刘交，是高祖的同母小弟，字游。
English: Chu Yuan Wang Liu Jiao was Gao Zu's younger brother by the same mother.

古文：高祖兄弟四人，长兄伯，伯蚤卒。
现代文：高祖兄弟四人，大哥名伯，伯早就死了。
English: Four great-grandfather brothers, the eldest brother named Bo, Bo died a long time ago.

古文：始高祖微时，尝辟事，时时与宾客过巨嫂食。
现代文：当初高祖微的时候，曾经为了躲避难事，常常和宾客路过大嫂家去吃饭。
English: At first, when Gao Zuwei was very young, he often went to dinner with guests passing by his sister-in-law's house in order to hide.

古文：嫂厌叔，叔与客来，嫂详为羹尽，栎釜，宾客以故去。
现代文：大嫂讨厌小叔，小叔和宾客来家时，大嫂假装羹汤已吃完，用勺子刮锅，宾客因此离去。
English: The elder sister-in-law hated the younger brother-in-law. When the younger brother-in-law and guests came to the house, the elder sister-in-law pretended to have finished the soup and scraped the pot with a spoon. As a result, the guests left.

古文：已而视釜中尚有羹，高祖由此怨其嫂。
现代文：过后看锅里还有羹汤，高祖从此怨恨大嫂。
English: Later, he saw that there was also soup in the pot, and Gao Zu resented his sister-in-law from then on.

古文：及高祖为帝，封昆弟，而伯子独不得封。
现代文：等到高祖当了皇帝，分封兄弟，唯独不封大哥的儿子。
English: When Gao Zu became emperor, his brothers were given separate fiefs, but the eldest brother's son was not.

古文：太上皇以为言，高祖曰： 某非忘封之也，为其母不长者耳。 
现代文：太上皇为孙子说情，高祖说： 我不是忘记封他，因为他的母亲太不像长辈了。 
English: When the Empress Dowager interceded on behalf of her grandson, Gaozu said, "I didn't forget to give him the title because his mother is too different from the elders.

古文：於是乃封其子信为羹颉侯。
现代文：于是才封她的儿子信为羹颉侯。
English: As a result, her son was sent to prison.

古文：而王次兄仲於代。
现代文：封二哥仲为代王。
English: He appointed his second brother, Naka, as acting king.

古文：高祖六年，已禽楚王韩信於陈，乃以弟交为楚王，都彭城。
现代文：高祖六年，在陈县逮捕楚王韩信以后，就封小弟交为楚王，定都彭城。
English: In the sixth year of Gaozu's reign, after Han Xin, the King of Chu, was arrested in Chen County, his younger brother was given the title of King of Chu, and the capital was fixed at Pengcheng.

古文：即位二十三年卒，子夷王郢立。
现代文：交在位二十三年去世，儿子夷王郢继位。
English: He died 23 years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Yi Wangjun.

古文：王戊立二十年，冬，坐为薄太后服私奸，削东海郡。
现代文：夷王在位四年去世，儿子王戊继位。王戊即位二十年，冬天，因在为薄太后服丧期间犯了私罪，削去东海郡封地。
English: King Yi died four years into his reign, and was succeeded by his son, King Wu. In the winter of the 20th year of Wang Wu's reign, he was stripped of his fief in Donghai County for committing a private crime during the mourning period for the late Empress Dowager Bo.

古文：春，戊与吴王合谋反，其相张尚、太傅赵夷吾谏，不听。
现代文：第二年春天，戊和吴王合谋反叛，他的相国张尚、太傅赵夷吾谏阻，不听从。
English: In the spring of the following year, Wu Wang conspired with Wu Wang to rebel, but his compatriots Zhang Shang and Taifu Zhao Yiwu resisted and did not obey.

古文：戊则杀尚、夷吾，起兵与吴西攻梁，破棘壁。
现代文：戊杀了张尚、赵夷吾，起兵和吴王向西攻打梁国，攻占了棘壁。
English: Wu killed Zhang Shang and Zhao Yigu, raised an army and Wu Wang attacked Liang Province to the west, and captured the thorny wall.

古文：至昌邑南，与汉将周亚夫战。
现代文：行至昌邑南边，和汉将周亚夫接战。
English: He went to the south of Chang'e and fought with the Han general Zhou Yafu.

古文：汉绝吴楚粮道，士卒饥，吴王走，楚王戊自杀，军遂降汉。
现代文：汉军截断了吴、楚军的粮道，士兵饥饿，吴王败走，楚王戊自杀，吴、楚军就投降了汉军。
English: The Han army cut off the food supply of the Wu and Chu armies, the soldiers were starving, the Wu king was defeated, the Chu king committed suicide, and the Wu and Chu army surrendered to the Han army.

古文：汉已平吴楚，孝景帝欲以德侯子续吴，以元王子礼续楚。
现代文：汉军已经平定吴、楚叛乱，孝景帝想让德侯广的儿子继承吴国的王位，让元王的儿子礼继承楚国的王位。
English: The Han army had already quelled the rebellions in Wu and Chu. Emperor Xiao Jing wanted the son of Dehuang to succeed to the throne of Wu, and the son of Yuan Wang, Li, to succeed to the throne of Chu.

古文：窦太后曰： 吴王，老人也，宜为宗室顺善。
现代文：窦太后说： 吴王，是老一辈人，理应为宗室效忠从善。
English: Empress Dowager Dou said, "Wu Wang is from an older generation, so he should be loyal to his family and do good deeds.

古文：今乃首率七国，纷乱天下，柰何续其後！ 
现代文：如今却带头率领七国叛乱，扰乱天下，为什么还要接续他的后代！ 
English: Now, however, he is taking the lead in leading the Seven Kingdoms Rebellion and disrupting the world. Why should his descendants succeed him?

古文：不许吴，许立楚後。
现代文：不允许立吴王的后代，只准许立楚王的后代。
English: The descendants of King Wu are not allowed to be appointed, and only the descendants of King Chu are allowed to be appointed.

古文：是时礼为汉宗正。乃拜礼为楚王，奉元王宗庙，是为楚文王。
现代文：当时礼是汉朝的宗正，于是封礼为楚王，供奉元王的宗庙，这就是楚文王。
English: At that time, the ceremony was the Han Dynasty's Zongzheng, so the ceremony was the King of Chu, dedicated to the ancestral temple of King Yuan, which is the King of Chu Wen.

古文：文王立三年卒，子安王道立。
现代文：文王即位三年去世，儿子安王道继位。
English: King Wen died three years after ascending the throne, and his son King An Dao succeeded to the throne.

古文：安王二十二年卒，子襄王注立。
现代文：安王在位二十二年去世，儿子建王注继位。
English: King An died 22 years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, King Jian.

古文：襄王立十四年卒，子王纯代立。
现代文：襄王在位十四年去世，儿子王纯继位。
English: King Xiang died fourteen years into his reign, and was succeeded by his son, King Chun.

古文：王纯立，地节二年，中人上书告楚王谋反，王自杀，国除，入汉为彭城郡。
现代文：王纯继位后，地节二年，宦官上书告楚王谋反，楚王自杀，国号被废除，封地收归汉朝改为彭城郡。
English: Two years after Wang Chun succeeded to the throne, the eunuchs wrote a letter to accuse King Chu of plotting a rebellion, King Chu committed suicide, the country name was abolished, and the fief was returned to the Han Dynasty and changed to Pengcheng County.

古文：赵王刘遂者，其父高祖中子，名友，谥曰 幽 。
现代文：赵王刘遂，他父亲在高祖的儿子中排行居中，名友，谥号为 幽 。
English: Zhao Wang Liu Sui, his father ranked middle among the sons of Gao Zu, famous friends, nicknamed Yu.

古文：幽王以忧死，故为 幽 。
现代文：幽王因为忧伤而死，所以谥号为 幽 。
English: Yu Wang died of grief, so his nickname was Yu.

古文：高后王吕禄於赵，一岁而高后崩。
现代文：高后把吕禄封在赵地为王，一年而高后去世。
English: Gao Guo made Lu Lu the king of Zhao, but he died a year later.

古文：大臣诛诸吕吕禄等，乃立幽王子遂为赵王。
现代文：大臣诛杀吕禄等吕氏家族，于是立幽王的儿子遂为赵王。
English: The minister ordered the killing of Lulu and other members of the Lue family, so the son of King Liyu became King Zhao.

古文：孝文帝即位二年，立遂弟辟彊，取赵之河间郡为河间王，为文王。
现代文：孝文帝即位二年，立遂的弟弟辟彊，割去赵国的河间郡为河间王，这就是文王。
English: Two years after the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, the younger brother of Emperor Lixiu was dethroned, and the county of Kawama in Zhao Province was given to King Kawama. This was King Wen.

古文：立十三年卒，子哀王福立。
现代文：在位十三年去世，儿子哀王福继位。
English: He died 13 years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Aio Fu.

古文：一年卒，无子，绝後，国除，入于汉。
现代文：福一年去世，无子，绝后，国号被废除，封地收归汉朝。
English: Fu died a year later, childless and widowed, the country name was abolished, and the fief was returned to the Han Dynasty.

古文：遂既王赵二十六年，孝景帝时坐晁错以適削赵王常山之郡。
现代文：遂已经为赵王二十六年，孝景帝的时候，因为犯有过失被晁错削去他的常山郡。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of King Zhao's reign, at the time of Emperor Xiaojing, he was mistakenly sent to Changshan County for committing a crime.

古文：吴楚反，赵王遂与合谋起兵。
现代文：吴、楚叛乱，赵王就和他们合谋起兵。
English: When Wu and Chu rebelled, Zhao Wang conspired with them to raise an army.

古文：其相建德、内史王悍谏，不听。
现代文：他的相国建德、内史王悍谏阻，不听从。
English: His brother-in-law, Guo Jiande, the King of Inner History, stubbornly resisted and did not obey.

古文：遂烧杀建德、王悍，发兵屯其西界，欲待吴与俱西。
现代文：就烧死建德、王悍，发兵驻屯在赵国的西部边界，想等待吴军一起西进。
English: He burned Jian De and Wang Huan to death, and stationed troops on the western border of Zhao, hoping to wait for the Wu army to march westward together.

古文：北使匈奴，与连和攻汉。
现代文：并派人到北边的匈奴，想联合匈奴进攻汉朝。
English: He also sent people to the Huns in the north, hoping to join the Huns in attacking the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉使曲周侯郦寄击之。
现代文：汉朝派曲周侯郦寄攻击赵国。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Qu Zhou Hou to attack Zhao.

古文：赵王遂还，城守邯郸，相距七月。吴楚败於梁，不能西。
现代文：赵王遂退回来，据守邯郸，对峙七个月，吴、楚军在梁国被打败，不能西进。
English: Zhao Wang then retreated back, and according to the garrison, the confrontation lasted for seven months. The Wu and Chu armies were defeated in Liang Province and were unable to advance westward.

古文：匈奴闻之，亦止，不肯入汉边。
现代文：匈奴听到这个消息，也停止发兵，不肯进入汉朝边界。
English: When the Huns heard this news, they also stopped sending troops and refused to enter the Han Dynasty border.

古文：栾布自破齐还，乃并兵引水灌赵城。
现代文：栾布从打败齐国的前线返回来，就和郦寄合兵引水灌赵国的都城。
English: When Zeng Bu returned from the front where he had defeated Qi, he and his army led the troops to flood the capital city of Zhao.

古文：赵城坏，赵王自杀，邯郸遂降。
现代文：赵的都城被水泡坏，赵王自杀，邯郸于是投降。
English: Zhao's capital was ruined by blisters, and Zhao Wang committed suicide, after which he surrendered.

古文：赵幽王绝後。
现代文：赵幽王断绝了后代。
English: Zhao Youwang cut off his descendants.

古文：太史公曰：国之将兴，必有祯祥，君子用而小人退。
现代文：太史公说：国家将要兴起的时候，一定有吉祥的预兆，君子被重用，小人被斥退。
English: Taishigong said: When the country is about to rise, there must be an auspicious omen, the gentleman is reused, and the villain is rejected.

古文：国之将亡，贤人隐，乱臣贵。
现代文：国家将要灭亡的时候，贤人隐退，乱臣显贵。
English: When a country is about to perish, the wise retreat, and the unruly rise to prominence.

古文：使楚王戊毋刑申公，遵其言，赵任防与先生，岂有篡杀之谋，为天下僇哉？
现代文：如果楚王戊不刑罚申公，听了他的话，赵王任用防与先生，哪会有篡杀的阴谋，遭天下人杀戮呢?
English: If Chu Wang Wu did not punish Shen Gong and listened to his words, and Zhao Wang appointed him as defense and teacher, where would there be a conspiracy to kill and be killed by the world?

古文：贤人乎，贤人乎！
现代文：贤人啊！贤人啊！
English: Wise men! Wise men!

古文：非质有其内，恶能用之哉？
现代文：不是本质贤能的君王，怎能任用你们呢?
English: How can a king, who is not essentially virtuous, appoint you?

古文：甚矣， 安危在出令，存亡在所任 ，诚哉是言也！
现代文：太重要啦！ 国家的安危在于发出的政令，国家的存亡在于任用的大臣， 这话实在太对了。
English: It is so important! It is so true that the safety of the country depends on the decree issued, and the survival of the country depends on the minister appointed.

