古文：南荒人娶妇赵高韦少卿葛清三王子乐从训张从晦李仁矩李罕之韩伸李令孟弘微僧鸾路德延萧希甫
现代文：南荒人娶妇赵高韦少卿葛清三王子乐从训张从晦李仁矩李罕之韩伸李令孟弘微僧鸾路德延萧希甫
English: Nanba people marrying women Zhao Gaowei, Ge Qing, three princes, Le Zhang, Li Renchi, Han Sheng, Li Ling, Meng Hongwei, Lu Deyan, Xiao Xifu

古文：南荒人娶妇
现代文：南荒人娶妇
English: Nanbari man marries woman

古文：南荒之人娶妇，或有喜他室之女者，率少年，持刀挺，往趋虚路以侦之，候其过，即擒缚，拥归为妻。
现代文：南方荒蛮之地的人娶媳妇，或者是有人喜欢上别人家的女子，便率领一群年轻人，手持刀枪棍棒，悄悄地跑到那里，在没人的路上藏起来并进行侦探，等那女子从这里路过，就将她捉住绑上，抱回去之后就成了他的妻子。
English: When a man in the wilds of the south marries his daughter-in-law, or when someone falls in love with someone else's wife, he leads a group of young men, armed with knives, guns and clubs, and stealthily runs there. He hides on a deserted road and investigates. When the woman passes by, he catches her, ties her up and takes her back to be his wife.

古文：间一二月，复与妻偕，首罪于妻之父兄。
现代文：中间隔上一两个月，再偕同妻子一起，到娘家向妻子的父兄赔罪。
English: At intervals of one or two months, he and his wife would go to his wife's parents' home to make amends.

古文：常俗谓缚妇女婿。
现代文：俗称之为绑媳妇的女婿。
English: Commonly known as the son-in-law of the kidnapped daughter-in-law.

古文：非有父母丧，不复归其家。
现代文：此后不是遇上父母丧事，妻子是不能回娘家的。
English: After that, unless there was a death of a parent, the wife could not return to her mother's house.

古文：赵高
现代文：赵高
English: Zhao Gao

古文：李夷简，元和末在蜀。
现代文：李夷简，唐朝元和末年在四川任职。
English: Li Yijian served in Sichuan in the first and last years of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：蜀市人赵高好斗，尝入狱。
现代文：那里有个市民赵高十分好斗。
English: There is a citizen there, Zhao Gao, who is very combative.

古文：满背镂毗沙门天王，吏欲杖背，见之辄止。
现代文：曾被关押在监狱，他整个后脊背刺着一个毗沙门天王图像，衙吏要杖罚其背，见到此图像总是不得不停止。
English: He was once detained in prison, and he had an image of Vishamen Tianwang tattooed on his entire back. The guards had to punish his back with a cane, and he always had to stop when he saw this image.

古文：转为坊市害。
现代文：逃避了杖罚，出去之后又成为街市中一害。
English: After escaping the cane punishment, he became a pest in the street market.

古文：左右言于李，李大怒，擒就厅前，索新造筋棒，题径三寸，叱杖家打天王，尽则已，数三十余不死。
现代文：手下人把这件事告诉了李夷简，李夷简大怒，把赵高捉拿到堂上，取来新做的筋竹棒，直径就有三寸，喝令提杖的人打天王、已杖罚够数，痛打三十余杖竟然还未打死。
English: His subordinates told Li Yijian about this, and Li Yijian flew into a rage. He arrested Zhao Gao and brought him to the hall. He brought a newly-made bamboo stick with a diameter of three inches. He shouted at the person holding the stick to beat the king. He had already been punished enough with the stick. He beat him with more than thirty sticks and still did not beat him to death.

古文：经旬日，但袒而历门，乞修理破功德钱。
现代文：过了十来天，赵高光着背来到门前，讨取修理毁坏功德钱。
English: After about ten days, Zhao Gaoguang came to the front door with his back to the door to ask for money to repair the damage.

古文：韦少卿
现代文：韦少卿
English: Wei Shaoqing marches

古文：蜀小将韦少卿，韦表微堂兄也。少不喜书，嗜好扎青。
现代文：四川有一小将韦少卿，是韦表微的堂兄，年纪轻不喜欢读书，喜欢文身。
English: In Sichuan, there is a young general named Wei Shaoqing, who is the cousin of Wei Pengwei. At a young age, he doesn't like to read and likes tattoos.

古文：其叔父尝令解衣视之，胸上扎一树，树杪鸟集数十。其下悬镜，其鼻系，有人止于侧牵之。
现代文：他的叔父让他脱下上衣要看看，只见胸上刺了一棵大树，树稍落着数十只鸟，树下悬着一个镜子，镜鼻儿上扯出一条绳，有一个人在一侧牵着绳子的另一头。
English: His uncle asked him to take off his jacket to have a look, only to see a large tree sticking out of his chest, dozens of birds falling from the tree, a mirror hanging under the tree, a rope pulled out from the nose of the mirror, and a person holding the other end of the rope on one side.

古文：叔不解，问焉，少卿笑曰：叔曾读张燕出诗否？ 
现代文：他叔父不明白其中的意思，便问他，少卿笑着说：叔父曾读过张燕公的诗吗？
English: His uncle didn't understand what he meant, so he asked him. The young lord smiled and said, "Has your uncle ever read Zhang Yanzhong's poetry?"

古文：挽镜寒鸦集 也。
现代文：这不就是 挽镜寒鸦集 么。
English: Isn't this just a collection of mirrored jackdaws?

古文：葛清
现代文：葛清
English: Ge Qing

古文：荆州街子葛清，勇，自颈已下，遍扎白居易诗。
现代文：在荆州的大街上有一个人叫葛清，很勇敢，脖子以下全都刺满了白居易的诗。
English: In the streets of Jingzhou, there was a man named Ge Qing, who was very brave and was covered with Bai Juyi's poems from the neck down.

古文：段成式尝与荆客陈至，呼观之，令其自解，背上亦能暗记。
现代文：段成式曾与来荆州的游客陈至把他叫来观看。让他自己解释那些图案的意思，他连后背上的也能牢记不误，背过手去一一指出图案表达的诗意。
English: Duan Chengshih once invited Chen Zhi, a tourist from Jingzhou, to come and watch him. He asked him to explain the meaning of the patterns. He could even memorize the ones on his back, and point out the poetry expressed by the patterns one by one with his back turned.

古文：反手指其劄处，至不是花中偏爱菊，则有一人持杯临菊丛。
现代文：问到不是花中偏爱菊在哪里，他便指到一人端着酒杯站在菊丛旁的图给看。
English: When asked about the preference for chrysanthemums among flowers, he pointed to a picture of a person standing next to a bunch of chrysanthemums with a wine glass.

古文：黄夹缬窠寒有叶，则持一树，树上挂缬，缬窠胜绝细。
现代文：又问道：黄夹缬窠寒有叶在哪里？他指给一棵树让看，那树上挂着印有花纹的织锦，那锦上的花纹十分细密。
English: He also asked: "Where are the leaves of the yellow jackal?" He pointed to a tree, on which hung a tapestry of patterns, the patterns on which were very fine.

古文：凡扎三十余首，体无完肤，陈至呼为白舍人行诗图也。
现代文：一共刺出表达三十多首诗意的图案，真是体无完肤了。陈至称他是白舍人流动的诗图。
English: A total of more than thirty poetic motifs were engraved, which was really exhausting. Chen Zhi said that he was a poet of the flow of Baishe people.

古文：三王子
现代文：三王子
English: Three Princes

古文：杨虞卿为京兆尹时，市里有三王子，力能揭巨石。遍身图扎，体无完肤。
现代文：杨虞卿任京兆尹时，市内有个叫三王子的，力气很大，能举起巨石，全身却刺着图案，体无完肤。
English: When Yang Yuqing was in charge of Jing Zhaoyun, there was a man in the city called the Three Princes. He was very strong and could lift huge rocks, but his whole body was covered with tattoos.

古文：前后合抵死数四，皆匿军以免。
现代文：前后合起来已判过三四次死刑了，可是每次都潜藏到军队而躲过去。
English: Altogether, he has been sentenced to death three or four times, but each time he has managed to escape by hiding in the army.

古文：会有过，杨令所由数人捕获，闭关杖杀之。
现代文：恰巧他又犯了错，杨虞卿命令数人去逮捕，捕获之后即刻关上门将他杖杀。
English: As it happened, he made another mistake. Yang Yuqing ordered several people to arrest him, and after the arrest, they immediately closed the door and killed him with a cane.

古文：判云：刺扎四肢，口称王子，何须讯问？便合当辜。
现代文：他在判状上写道：刺扎四肢，口称王子，何须审讯，便应当抵罪。
English: He wrote on the verdict: "If you prick your limbs and call yourself a prince, there is no need for a trial, you should plead guilty."

古文：乐从训
现代文：乐从训
English: The music follows the drill

古文：王铎落都统，除滑州节度，寻罢镇。
现代文：王铎失去了都统职务后，被任命为滑州节度使，不久又罢职。
English: After Wang Yao lost his post in Tudong, he was appointed as the special envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China in the State Council of the People's Republic of China in the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：以河北安静，于杨全玖有旧，避地浮阳，与其幕客从行，皆朝中士子。
现代文：因河北很安静，并与杨全玖有深交，为避灾而移居浮阳。他与幕府中的僚属一起同行，这些幕僚都是朝中的士大夫。
English: Because Hebei was very quiet, and because he had a deep friendship with Yang Quanzhang, he moved to Fuyang to avoid the disaster. He went along with his colleagues in the shogunate, these staff officers were the sheriffs in the court.

古文：及过魏，乐彦祯礼之甚至，铎之行李甚侈，从客侍姬，有辇下升平之故态。
现代文：途经魏州时，乐彦祯给予隆重的礼遇。王铎携带的物品十分奢华，并有众多的从客姬妾，大有京城中歌舞升平的旧貌。
English: When passing through Weizhou, Le Yanju gave grand courtesy to Wang Yao. Wang Yao's goods were very luxurious, and there were many concubines and concubines from guests. There was a lot of singing and dancing in the capital.

古文：彦祯有子曰从训，素无赖，爱其车马姬妾，以问其父之幕客李山甫。
现代文：乐彦贞有个儿子叫从训，平素就是个无赖，此时他十分爱慕这些车马姬妾，于是征询于他父亲的幕客李山甫。
English: Lok Yan Zhen had a son named Congxun, who was always a ruffian. At this time, he was very fond of these concubines, so he asked his father's guest, Li Shan Fu.

古文：又咸通中，数举不第，尤私愤于中朝贵达，因劝从训图之。
现代文：李山甫曾在咸通年间多次应试而落榜，心中尤其憎恨朝廷中的达官贵戚，因而劝从训一是要谋取。
English: Li Shanfu had failed the examination several times during the reign of Emperor Xiantong. He especially hated the high-ranking officials and noblemen in the imperial court. Therefore, persuasion and training should be sought.

古文：伺铎至甘陵，以轻骑数百，尽掠其囊装姬仆而还，宾客皆遇害。
现代文：等到王铎行至甘陵，他便率数百轻骑兵，抢夺了所有的财物行装和姬妾而回来。随从的宾客全被杀死。
English: When Wang Hui went to Ganling, he returned with hundreds of light cavalry, robbed of all his belongings, baggage and concubines. The accompanying guests were all killed.

古文：及奏朝廷云：得贝州报，某日杀却一人，姓王，名令公。
现代文：等到上奏朝廷，在给朝廷一份公文中写道：得到贝州的报告，某日有一人被杀，这个人姓王名令公。
English: He waited until he could report to the imperial court, and wrote in a document to the imperial court: "I received a report from Bechuanaland that one person was killed one day. This person's name was Wang Ming Rongguang.

古文：其凶诞也如此。
现代文：其凶残荒诞竟达到这种地步。
English: This is the extent of its murderous absurdity.

古文：彦祯父子，寻为乱军所杀。
现代文：乐彦祯父子不久便在乱军中被杀。
English: Both father and son were soon killed by the rebels.

古文：张从晦
现代文：张从晦
English: Zhang Congwei

古文：梁祖图霸之初，寿州刺史江彦温以郡归我，乃遣亲吏张从晦劳其勤。
现代文：五代时，后梁太祖谋取霸权的初期，寿州刺史江彦温携带所辖之地归顺太祖。于是太祖便派遣自己的亲信官员张从晦去向他表示慰劳感谢。
English: In the fifth generation, in the early days of Emperor Taizu's pursuit of hegemony, Jiang Yanwen, the ruler of Shoushu, carried the land under his jurisdiction to Emperor Taizu. Therefore, Emperor Taizu sent his trusted official Zhang Congyu to express his condolences and gratitude to him.

古文：而从晦无赖酣酒，有饮徒何藏耀者与之偕，甚昵狎，从晦致命于郡。
现代文：而张从晦是好酗酒的无赖，还有个酒徒何藏耀与他一同前往，两人的关系超出正常的亲近。
English: But Zhang Conghui is an alcoholic scoundrel, and there is also an alcoholic He Zangyao who travels with him. The relationship between the two is closer than normal.

古文：彦温大张乐，邀不至，乃与藏耀食于主将家，彦温果疑恐曰：汴王谋我矣。不然，何使者如是也。
现代文：张从晦带着使命来到寿州，江彦温锣喜鼓喧天地迎接他。当江彦温设宴邀请他时，他竟然没有来，却与何藏耀一起到江彦温的主将家去吃饭。江彦温生疑，并恐惧的说： 看来汴王要谋害我啊，不然的话，为什么他的使者会这样呢？ 
English: Zhang Zonglu came to Shoushou with a mission, and Jiang Yanwen welcomed him with drums of joy. When Jiang Yanwen invited him to a banquet, he did not come, but went to eat with He Zangyao at the home of Jiang Yanwen's master. Jiang Yanwen was suspicious and said in fear: "It seems that the King of Gong is plotting to kill me, otherwise, why would his messenger do this?"

古文：乃杀其主将，连诛数十人，而以状白其事。
现代文：于是便杀了那个主将，又接连杀死数十人。并写下文字说明了这件事。
English: So he killed the captain, and then he killed dozens of people in succession, and he wrote a text to explain the matter.

古文：既而又疑惧曰：诉其腹心，亡我族。
现代文：既而又疑惧道： 应该道破他的心腹之事，他是要杀我的全家。 
English: At the same time, I was afraid and said, "I should reveal the secret of his heart. He wants to kill my whole family."

古文：乃自缢而死。
现代文：之后便上吊而死。
English: He then hanged himself.

古文：梁祖大怒，按其事，腰斩从晦，留何藏耀，裂其禁械，斩于寿春市。
现代文：梁太祖大怒，亲自审问了这件事，腰斩了张从晦，暂留何藏耀，劈裂禁锢他的枷锁，将他斩于寿春城大街上。
English: Liang Taizu flew into a rage, personally interrogated the matter, beheaded Zhang Congwei, temporarily detained He Zangyao, broke the shackles of his imprisonment, and beheaded him on Shuchuncheng Street.

古文：李仁矩
现代文：李仁矩
English: Li Rincang

古文：后唐明宗皇帝时，董璋授东川，将有跋扈之心。于时遣客省使李仁矩出使潼梓。
现代文：后唐明宗皇帝时代，董璋任职于东川，存有骄横霸道之心，当时朝中派遣客省使李仁矩出使潼梓。
English: In the era of Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty, Dong Xuan served in Dongchuan, and he was arrogant and domineering. At that time, the central government sent an envoy from the guest province to dispatch Li Renki.

古文：仁矩北节使下小校，骤居内职，性好狎邪。元戎张筵，以疾辞不至，乃与营妓曲宴。
现代文：李仁矩原是北方节度使手下的一个下级军官，刚刚到宫内任职，此人轻佻而又不正派，主帅在帐中设宴邀请他，他竟以粗暴的话语拒绝不来，其实是跟一个军妓在私下欢宴。
English: Li Renrui was originally a lower-ranking officer of the Northern Song Dynasty, who had just arrived at the palace. He was a frivolous and dishonest person. The commander-in-chief invited him to a banquet at his expense, but he refused to come with harsh words. In fact, he had a private banquet with a military prostitute.

古文：璋闻甚怒，索马诣馆，遽欲害之。仁矩鞹足端简迎门，璋怒稍解。
现代文：董璋听说后大怒，要来马立即赶到客馆，想当下就把他杀掉，可是见到仁矩正裹足捧着手板迎候于门前，气怒便有些清解。
English: After hearing this, Dong Ye was furious. He wanted to rush to the guest house immediately and wanted to kill him right away. However, when he saw Ren Rong waiting in front of the door with his hands and feet bound, his anger subsided somewhat.

古文：他日作叛，两川举兵，并由仁矩献谋于安重晦之所致也。
现代文：后来董璋叛乱，两川举兵讨逆，都是由于李仁矩向安重晦献计才有所准备的。
English: Later, the rebellion of Dong Xuan and the rebellion of the two rivers were all prepared by Li Ren Rong's contribution to An Zhenyu.

古文：李罕之
现代文：李罕之
English: Li Hanzhi

古文：李罕之，河阳人也。
现代文：李罕之，是河阳人，少年时就当了和尚，是个无赖，不管到哪儿去都不接纳他。
English: Li Hanzhi, a native of Heyang, became a monk when he was a boy. He was a scoundrel, and no matter where he went, he was not accepted.

古文：少为桑门，无赖，所至不容，曾乞食于滑州酸枣县，自旦及脯，无与之者，掷钵于地，毁僧衣，投河阳诸葛爽为卒，罕之即僧号，便以为名。
现代文：曾在滑州酸枣县讨过饭，可是从早到晚，没有人送吃的给他，于是他把钵盂扔在地上，毁掉袈裟，投奔河阳的诸葛爽当了兵。罕之本是他的僧号，他把僧号当作自己的名字。
English: Once, he begged for food in Luzhou's Jujube County, but from morning to night, no one brought him food. So he threw the bowl on the ground, destroyed the bowl, and joined Zhuge Shuang of Heyang as a soldier. Han is his monastic name, and he took the monastic name as his own.

古文：素多力，或与人相殴，殴其左颊，右颊血流。
现代文：他平素很有力气，有时跟人打架，打人家的左脸颊，右脸颊都能冒出血来。
English: He was always very strong, and sometimes he would get into fights with people. If he hit someone on the left cheek, the right cheek would bleed.

古文：爽寻署为小校，每遣讨贼，无不擒之。
现代文：诸葛爽很快给他安排暂当一个下级军官。每次派他出去讨伐贼寇，没有不被他话捉回来的。
English: Zhuge Shuang quickly arranged for him to temporarily serve as a junior officer. Every time he was sent out to fight against the bandits, he did not fail to be caught by his words.

古文：蒲绛之北，有摩云山，设堡于上，号摩云寨，前后不能攻取，时罕之下焉，由此号李摩云。
现代文：在蒲降的北边，有一座摩云山，贼寇在山上设有堡垒，号称摩云寨，不论从前边还是从后边，都无法攻克，可却被李罕之攻破，由此被称作李摩云。
English: On the north side of Pudong, there is a Moyun Mountain. Thieves and robbers had a fortress on the mountain, known as Moyunzhai. It could not be conquered from the front or from the back, but it was broken by Li Han, hence it was called Li Moyun.

古文：累历郡侯、河南尹、节将，官至侍中。
现代文：此后历任郡侯、河南节度使府将领，官一直做到侍中，死在汴州。
English: After that, successive county magistrates, Henan Festival envoy generals, officials have always been in the middle, died in Zhangzhou.

古文：卒于汴州，亦荆南成汭之流也。自唐仕梁。
现代文：此人也属于荆南成汭之流的人物，唐朝灭后又到梁朝去当了官。
English: This person also belonged to the Jingnan Chengyu lineage. After the Tang Dynasty was over, he went to the Liang Dynasty to become an official.

古文：韩伸
现代文：韩伸
English: Han Shin

古文：有韩伸者，渠州人也。善饮博，长于灼龟。
现代文：韩伸，渠州人，善于饮酒赌博，也很擅长烧龟占卜，经常游历拜访王侯权贵之家。
English: Han Shin, a native of Quzhou, was good at drinking and gambling. He was also good at burning turtles for divination. He often traveled to visit the homes of princes and dignitaries.

古文：游谒五侯之门，常怀一龟壳，隔宿先灼一龟。来日之兆吉，即博；不吉即已。
现代文：他常常怀揣一个龟壳，头一天先烧一龟壳占卜，如果明天显示出吉兆，就去赌；不吉利则不赌。
English: He often carries a tortoise shell with him. On the first day, he burns a tortoise shell for divination. If tomorrow is auspicious, he will gamble; if it is unlucky, he will not gamble.

古文：又或去某方位去吉，即往之；诸方纵人牵之不去。
现代文：或者显示出去哪个方向赌博吉利，不去那个方向赌博，其他方向的人纵然来拉他也不去。
English: Or to show which direction to go out and gamble for good luck, not to gamble in that direction, even if people from other directions come to pull him, he will not go.

古文：即取人钱货，如征赤债。
现代文：索取人家的钱财，就像征讨债物一样一扫而光。
English: Asking for money from people, just like collecting debts, is swept away.

古文：或经年忘其家而不归，多于花柳之间落魄。
现代文：有时候一年年地有家不回，多是在花街柳巷鬼混。
English: Sometimes they don't return home year after year, and most of them fool around in the flower streets and alleys.

古文：其妻怒甚，时复自来耻顿，驱趁而同归。
现代文：他的妻子十分愤怒，多次找上来羞辱他，驱赶他一起回去，这样的事经常发生。
English: His wife was furious and repeatedly sought him out to humiliate him, driving him back with her, as often happens.

古文：夜坐洽乐之际，其妻又自家领女仆一两人潜至，匿于邻舍，俟其夜会筵合，遂持棒伺于暗处。
现代文：有一回，他又游荡于东川，一年多没有回去，忽然有一天，他正聚集赌徒，携带着陪酒的妓女在一处幽会，晚上正坐在一起欢乐之时，他的妻子又带着一两个女仆从家偷偷地找上来。
English: On another occasion, he wandered around the Higashi-kawa River and did not return for more than a year. Suddenly, one day, he was gathering gamblers and prostitutes for a drinking party. While they were sitting together and enjoying the evening, his wife sneaked out of the house with one or two maids to find him.

古文：伸不知觉，遂塌声唱《池水清》，声不绝，脑后一棒，打落幞头，扑灭灯烛。
现代文：她先藏在邻居家，等到晚上他们聚在一起饮酒作乐时，她便手持木棒在暗处监视，韩伸完全没有察觉到，还在踏着拍节唱《池水清》，歌声不断，突然脑后挨了一棒，打落了他的头巾，又扑灭了灯火。
English: She first hid in a neighbor's house, and when they gathered in the evening to drink and make music, she watched in the dark with a wooden stick. Han Shin did not notice at all, he was still singing "Pond Clear" at the beat, the singing continued, and suddenly he received a blow to the back of his head, knocking off his headscarf and extinguishing the lights.

古文：伸即窜于饭床之下。有同坐客。暗中遭鞭挞一顿。
现代文：韩伸立即钻到饭桌下边，有个与他坐在一起的人，在黑暗中遭到一顿揍，吃尽了苦头。
English: Han Shin immediately burrowed under the dining table. A person who was sitting with him was beaten in the dark and suffered a lot.

古文：不胜其苦，□后遣二青衣，把髻子牵行，一步一棒决之，骂曰：这老汉，□落魄不归也！
现代文：随后她又让两个女仆牵着那个人的发髻行走，走一步打一棒子，并骂道： 你这汉子，到处鬼混，就是不回家！ 
English: Then she made two maids walk with the man by his hair, beating him with a stick as they went, and scolded him: "You fool, you go everywhere, but you don't come home!

古文：无何，牵至烛下照之，乃是同坐客。其良人尚□头潜于饭床之下。
现代文：不多时，把他牵到灯下一照，才知道是那个同席的人，她的丈夫仍然藏在饭桌下呢。
English: Not infrequently, she would take him to the lamp to take a picture, only to find out that it was the same person, and her husband was still hiding under the dining table.

古文：蜀人大以为欢笑矣，时辈呼韩为池水清。
现代文：蜀人对此事大为欢笑，当时人们都把韩伸叫做池水清。
English: The people of Shu had a good laugh about this. At the time, people called Han Sheng "Pond Water Clear."

古文：李令
现代文：李令
English: Li Ling

古文：渚宫有李令者，自宰延安。
现代文：渚宫有个叫李令的人，是从延安开始出任小官吏的。
English: There is a man called Li Ling in Nagisa Palace, who has been a minor official since Yan'an.

古文：本狡猾之徒也，强为篇章而干谒。
现代文：他是个很狡猾的人，勉强写了几篇文章便到处求见拜方。
English: He's a very cunning man, he's managed to write a few articles and then he's gone around begging for favours.

古文：时有归评事，任江陵鹾院，常怀恤士之心。
现代文：当时有个姓归的评事，任职于江陵鹾院，常怀有一种爱惜救济读书人的心意。
English: At that time, there was a reviewer surnamed Gui, who worked in Jiangling Yuyuan, and always cherished the spirit of a reader who cherished relief.

古文：李令既识归君，累求救贷，而悉皆允诺。
现代文：李令结识了归君，便一次又一次地向他请求救济或借钱，归评事全都应许。
English: When Li Ling got to know Guijun, he asked him again and again for relief or to borrow money, and Guijun promised everything.

古文：又曰：某寻亲湖外，辄假舍而安家族。
现代文：有一次李令对他说：我要到外地去寻访亲戚，一旦找到就借房安置家眷。
English: Once Li Ling said to him: I want to go to other places to look for relatives, and once I find them, I will borrow a house to settle my family.

古文：归君亦慜诺之。
现代文：归君也答应了他。
English: Guijun also agreed.

古文：李且乘舟而去，不二旬，其妻遣仆使告丐糇粮，归亦拯其乏绝。
现代文：李令坐船走了，不到二十天，李令的妻子便让仆人来求要干粮，归君仍旧对她的贫困给予了救济。
English: Li Ling took the boat and left. Less than twenty days later, Li Ling's wife asked the servants to come and ask for dry rations. Guijun still gave relief to her poverty.

古文：李忽寄书于鹾院，情况款密，是异寻常。
现代文：有一天李令忽然寄到鹾院一封信，情谊恳切，到了异乎寻常的程度。
English: One day, Li Ling suddenly sent a letter to the Summer Palace. The friendship was sincere to an unusual degree.

古文：书中有赠家室等诗一首，意欲组织归君。
现代文：而书中还有赠给家室的一首诗，暗示要罗织罪名陷害归君。
English: There is also a poem in the book that was given to his family, suggesting that he wanted to frame him.

古文：归君悔恨而不能自明，与武陵渠江之务，以糊其口焉。
现代文：归君十分悔恨而又讲不清楚，只好到武陵渠江去做事，以便能糊口维持生活。
English: Guijun was very remorseful and did not know what to say, so he had to go to Wuling River to work in order to make a living.

古文：举士沈擢每述于同院从宾，用兹戒慎也。
现代文：举人沈擢常常对鹾院的人们讲起这件事，以此来告诫大家交人要千万谨慎。
English: Shen Zhan often talked about this to the people in the Confucius Institute, in order to warn everyone to be very careful when handing over people.

古文：李令寄其妻诗曰：有人教我向衡阳，一度思归一断肠。
现代文：李令寄给他妻子的诗是这样写的：有人教我向衡阳，一度思归一断肠。
English: The poem Li Ling sent to his wife was written like this: Someone taught me to go to Hengyang, once I thought of returning, I was heartbroken.

古文：为报艳妻兼少女，与吾觅取朗州场。
现代文：为报艳妻兼少女，与吾觅取朗州场。
English: As the newspaper's glamorous wife and young girl, she and I sought out the Lanzhou market.

古文：孟弘微
现代文：孟弘微
English: Meng Hongwei

古文：唐孟弘微郎中诞妄不拘。
现代文：唐朝的郎中孟弘微，是个荒诞虚妄、无拘无束的人。
English: Meng Hongwei, a retainer of the Tang Dynasty, was an absurd, vain and unrestrained person.

古文：宣宗朝，因次对曰：陛下何以不知有臣，不以文字召用？
现代文：宣宗朝时，有一回他回答皇帝问话说：陛下为什么不知道我？为什么不看重我的文才而重用？
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, he once answered the emperor's question by saying: "Why does your majesty not know me? Why not value my literary talent and reuse it?

古文：上怒曰：卿何人斯，朕耳冷，不知有卿？
现代文：皇帝怒道：你是什么人？我耳朵沉，不知道有你这么个人！
English: The emperor angrily said, "Who are you? My ears are heavy, I didn't know you were such a person!"

古文：翌日，上谓宰臣曰：此人噪妄，欲求翰林学士，大容易哉！
现代文：第二天，皇帝对宰相说：此人鼓噪虚妄，想当翰林学士，想得太容易了！
English: The next day, the emperor said to the prime minister, "This man is making a lot of false noises. He wants to be a scholar of Hanlin. It's too easy to think about!

古文：于是宰臣归中书，贬其官，示小惩也。
现代文：于是宰相们把此事交由中书省处理，贬了他的官，示以小小的惩罚。
English: As a result, the prime ministers referred the matter to the Ministry of Education and Culture, demoted him and imposed a small punishment.

古文：又尝忿狷，挤其弟落井，外议喧然。乃致书告亲友曰：悬身井半，风言沸腾。
现代文：又有一回，由于愤怒，把他的弟弟推到井里，外面的议论声很大，他便写信告诉亲友们说：他不过只是身子悬在了井的半空，外面的传言就沸沸扬扬了。
English: On another occasion, in a fit of rage, he pushed his brother into a well. There was a lot of discussion outside, and he wrote a letter to his relatives and friends saying that he had only been suspended in mid-air in the well, and the rumours were rife outside.

古文：尺水丈波，古今常事。
现代文：本来只有一尺深的水，硬要掀起一丈高的浪，这是古今常有的事。
English: Originally, the water was only a foot deep, but the waves were so high that they had to be pushed up. This is a common occurrence from ancient times to the present.

古文：与郑讽邻居，讽为南海从事，因墙颓，侵入墙界五六丈。
现代文：他与郑讽是邻居，郑讽是南海的从事官。
English: He and Zheng Lian are neighbors, and Zheng Lian is an official in the South China Sea.

古文：知宅者有状，请退其所侵。判其状曰：海隅从事，少有生还。
现代文：由于围墙倒塌，他便乘机多占人家院地五六丈，管理房子的人给他写了文书，请他退回所占之地，他在文书上写的回答词是：在天崖海角当从事官的，很少有活着回来的。
English: As a result of the collapse of the fence, he took the opportunity to occupy more than five or six floors of people's courtyard. The person managing the house wrote a document to him, asking him to return to the place he occupied. The answer he wrote on the document was: Few people who work as officials in Tianya Cape come back alive.

古文：地势尖斜，打墙夹入。
现代文：是因为地势斜歪，砌墙的时候不得不从他的院地砌过去。
English: Because of the sloping terrain, the wall had to be built away from his courtyard.

古文：平生操履，率皆如此，不遭摈弃，幸矣哉。僧鸾
现代文：平生的操行，就是这样。没有被抛弃，也就算万幸了。僧鸾
English: That's the way it should be in everyday life. If you haven't been abandoned, you're lucky.

古文：僧鸾有逸才而无拘检，早岁称乡衔，谒薛能于嘉州。
现代文：僧鸾具有超人的才智，而行为却无拘无束，过去名叫乡衔，去嘉州拜见薛能，薛能认为他太颠狂，不能当举子去应试，随后他便出家当了和尚。
English: Sanghyeon had superhuman intelligence, but his behavior was unrestrained. He used to be called Xiangyi, and he went to Jiazhou to meet Xue Neng. Xue Neng thought he was too crazy to take the exam, and then he became a monk.

古文：能以其颠率，难为举子，乃佴出家，自于百尺丈像前披剃，不肯师于常僧也。后入京，为文章供俸，赐紫。
现代文：他自己在一个百尺高的石佛像前为僧，不肯拜普通的和尚为师。后来他去了京城，当了文章供奉，并赐给他紫色官袍，相当于三品以上朝官的荣誉。
English: He himself was a monk in front of a hundred-foot-tall stone Buddha statue, and refused to worship an ordinary monk as his teacher. Later, he went to the capital, became a monk, and was given a purple official robe, equivalent to the honor of a court official with three or more court ranks.

古文：柳玭甚爱其才，租庸张睿，亦曾加敬，盛言其可大用。
现代文：柳玭很爱惜他的才能，租庸张睿也曾备加地敬重他，盛赞他可以重用。
English: Liu Bei was very fond of his talent, and Zhang Rui also had great respect for him, praising him for his ability to reuse.

古文：由是反初，号鲜于凤，修刺谒柳，柳鄙之不接。
现代文：于是他还俗，名号叫做鲜于凤。当他再次递了名帖去拜见柳玭时，柳玭不接待他。
English: As a result, he became a layman, and his name was Shian Yu Feng. When he once again presented his famous letter to meet Liu Ye, Liu Ye did not receive him.

古文：又谒张，张也拒之。
现代文：又去拜见张睿，张睿也拒绝了他。
English: He also went to see Zhang Rui, but Zhang Rui also turned him down.

古文：于是失望，而为李铤江西判官，后为西班小将军，竟于黄州遇害。
现代文：因而他很失望，去投奔江西李铤当了判官。后来当了朝中的小将军。最终在黄州遇害。
English: As a result, he was very disappointed and went to Jiangxi to become a judge. Later, he became a minor general in the court. He was eventually killed in Huangzhou.

古文：路德延
现代文：路德延
English: Lu De Yan

古文：河中判官路德延，相国岩之侄，岳之子，时谓才俊。擢进士第，西平王朱友谦幕僚，放恣凌傲，主公容之。
现代文：河中节度使府的判官路德延，是宰相路岩的侄子，路岳的儿子，当时被称为才学出众的人，曾考中进士，后来做了西平王朱友谦的幕僚。此人放纵狂傲，主人都宽容了他。
English: Lu Deyan, the magistrate of the Caozhong Jiedu Envoy Office, was the nephew of the prime minister Lu Yan and the son of Lu Yue. At that time, he was known as a person who excelled in his studies. He had passed the middle school entrance examination and later became the staff member of King Zhu Youqian of Xiping. This person indulged in arrogance, and his masters tolerated him.

古文：友谦背梁，乞于晋阳。
现代文：后来朱友谦背叛了梁朝，求助于并州。
English: Later, Zhu Youqian betrayed the Liang Dynasty and turned to the Zhou Dynasty for help.

古文：并使初至，礼遇方谨，路公筵上，言语及之。
现代文：当并州节度使刚刚到来时，路德延在礼节上还较为谨慎，后来在宴席上，他的话便触及到并州节度使。
English: When the envoys for the annexation of the state had just arrived, Luther Yan was still more cautious in terms of etiquette. Later, at the banquet, his words touched on the envoys for the annexation of the state.

古文：友谦忧愤，因投德延于黄河，以纾祸也。
现代文：朱友谦很忧愤，因而把路德延投进了黄河，以便解除祸患。
English: Zhu Youqian was very sad and angry, so he threw Lu Deyan into the Yellow River in order to solve the disaster.

古文：先是纪纲之仆近判官入谒幕次，遂有请易舍之说。盖义兄弟同处，不欲闻郎官秽谈也。
现代文：先是让他的仆人到路德延的住处去拜见问候，接着就劝说他换一处居舍，去和他的结义兄弟住在一起，免得听那些郎官们噪杂的秽语脏话。
English: First, he had his servants go to Luther's house to greet him, and then he persuaded him to change his place of residence and go to live with his brother, so that he would not have to listen to the noisy foul language of the stewards.

古文：路子得非其人也？
现代文：路德延就是死在这个人手里。
English: Luther died at the hands of this man.

古文：萧希甫
现代文：萧希甫
English: Xiao Xifu

古文：萧希甫进士及第，有文才口辩，多机数。
现代文：萧希甫考中过进士，很有文才和口才，也很有心机。
English: Xiao Xifu passed the junior high school entrance examination, is very literate and eloquent, and is also very resourceful.

古文：梁时不得意，弃母妻渡河，易姓名为皇甫校书。
现代文：在梁朝时很不得志，于是丢下母亲和妻子渡黄河而去，并改名换姓叫皇甫校书。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, he was very discouraged, so he left his mother and wife to cross the Yellow River, and changed his name to Huangfu Shulingshu.

古文：庄宗即位于魏州，征希甫知制诰。
现代文：后唐庄宗在魏州即位时，选用萧希甫任中书舍人。
English: Later, when Emperor Zhuangzong of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne in Weizhou, he chose Xiao Xifu to be the scribe.

古文：庄宗平汴、洛，希甫奉诏宣慰青、齐，方知其母死妻嫁，乃持报于魏州。
现代文：庄宗平定汴洛后，希甫奉命去安抚青齐之地，才知道自己的母亲已死，妻子也改嫁，于是在魏州穿起了丧服。
English: After Zhuangzong had pacified Minluo, Xifu was ordered to pacify the land of Qingqi. Only then did he know that his mother had died and his wife had remarried, so he put on mourning clothes in Weizhou.

古文：时议者戏引李陵书云：老母终堂，生妻去室。
现代文：当时议论他的人引用李陵的话讽刺他说：老母终堂，生妻去室。
English: At that time, people who discussed him quoted Li Ling's words to satirize him, saying: "The old mother ends up in the hall, and the wife goes to the room."

古文：后为谏议大夫。
现代文：后来做了谏议大夫。
English: He later became a doctor of public opinion.

古文：性褊忿，躁于进取，疏宰臣豆卢革、韦说，至于贬斥。
现代文：因他性情狭小急躁，急于高升，便上书陈述宰相豆卢革、韦说的过失。
English: Because of his narrow and impatient nature, anxious to rise, he wrote a letter to state the fault of the Prime Minister, Doulu Ge and Wei Tong.

古文：又以毁誉宰相，责授岚州司马焉。
现代文：结果遭到斥责，又因为他犯了毁誉宰相的错误，被处罚而贬为岚州司马。
English: As a result, he was reprimanded, and because he made the mistake of discrediting the prime minister, he was punished and relegated to the post of Zhangzhou Sima.

