古文：凡治人之道，莫急于礼。
现代文：一切治理人民的措施，没有比礼更重要的。
English: Of all the measures for governing the people, none is more important than courtesy.

古文：礼有五经，莫重于祭。
现代文：礼有吉、凶、宾、军、嘉五种，其中没有比祭礼更重要的了。
English: There are five kinds of rites, including auspicious, inauspicious, guest, military and auspicious, and none of them is more important than the festival.

古文：夫祭者，非物自外至者也，自中出生于心也；心怵而奉之以礼。
现代文：祭礼，并不是由外在的因素迫使人这样做，而是人们发自内心的一种行动。春夏秋冬，时序推移，人们感物伤时，触景生情，不由地就会想起死去的亲人，这种感情的表达就是祭之以礼。
English: It is not an external factor that forces people to do so, but an action that comes from the heart. As the time goes by, in spring, summer, autumn and winter, when people are sentimental, when they touch the scene, they can't help but think of their dead relatives. This expression of emotion is the offering.

古文：是故，唯贤者能尽祭之义。
现代文：所以只有内心真诚的贤者，才能最充分地表达祭的意义。
English: Therefore, only a sincere sage can fully express the meaning of the festival.

古文：贤者之祭也，必受其福。非世所谓福也。
现代文：贤者的祭祀，一定会得到鬼神所赐的福，但这不是世俗人所说的福。
English: The sacrifice of a wise man will certainly receive the blessings bestowed by ghosts and gods, but this is not what worldly people call blessings.

古文：福者，备也；备者，百顺之名也。
现代文：贤者的福，是备的意思。所谓 备 ，就是一切事情都顺于道理。
English: The blessing of the wise is to be prepared, and to be prepared is to be reasonable in all things.

古文：无所不顺者，谓之备。
现代文：无所不顺，这就叫备。
English: If all else fails, it's time to prepare.

古文：言：内尽于己，而外顺于道也。
现代文：其意思是说，对自己，按着良知行事；对外界，按着道理行事。
English: That is to say, to oneself, to act in accordance with conscience; to the outside world, to act in accordance with reason.

古文：忠臣以事其君，孝子以事其亲，其本一也。
现代文：忠臣的事奉国君，孝子的事奉双亲，其忠其孝都来源于一个顺字。
English: A loyal vassal serves the sovereign, a filial son serves his parents, and their loyalty and filial piety are all derived from the same word.

古文：上则顺于鬼神，外则顺于君长，内则以孝于亲。如此之谓备。
现代文：对上则顺着鬼神，对外则顺着君长，对内则顺着双亲，这样做了才叫做备。
English: On the other hand, it follows the ghosts and gods, on the outside it follows the monarchs, and on the inside it follows the parents. Doing this is called preparation.

古文：唯贤者能备，能备然后能祭。
现代文：只有贤者才能做到备，能做到备然后才能做到必然得到鬼神赐福的祭。
English: Only the wise can be prepared, and only those who are prepared can receive the inevitable blessing of ghosts and gods.

古文：是故，贤者之祭也：致其诚信与其忠敬，奉之以物，道之以礼，安之以乐，参之以时。明荐之而已矣。不求其为。
现代文：所以贤者的祭祀，不过是竭尽自己的诚信与忠敬，奉献祭品，行其 典礼，和之以音乐，稽之以季节，洁净地荐献而已，并不存心要神保佑赐福。
English: Therefore, the sacrifices of the sages are nothing more than their sincerity and devotion, offering sacrifices, performing their ceremonies, and recommending offerings with music, according to the season, without intending to be blessed by God.

古文：此孝子之心也。
现代文：这才是孝子举行祭祀时的心情。
English: This is the state of mind of a filial son when he holds a religious service.

古文：祭者，所以追养继孝也。
现代文：孝子的祭祀，是用来完成对父母生前应尽而未尽的供养和孝道。
English: The sacrifice of filial sons and daughters is used to fulfill the obligation to provide for and show filial piety to one's parents.

古文：孝者畜也。
现代文：所谓孝，就是这种供养和孝道的积蓄。
English: The so-called filial piety is the accumulation of such offerings and filial piety.

古文：顺于道不逆于伦，是之谓畜。
现代文：一个顺字贯穿于父母的生前和身后，这才叫做孝的积蓄。
English: It is the accumulation of filial piety that runs through and behind the lifetime of a parent.

古文：是故，孝子之事亲也，有三道焉：生则养，没则丧，丧毕则祭。
现代文：所以孝子的事奉父母不外乎三件事：头一件是生前好好供养，第二件是身后依礼服丧，第三件是服丧期满要按时祭祀。
English: Therefore, the service of a filial son to his parents is nothing more than three things: the first is to make a good offering before he dies, the second is to follow the funeral rites, and the third is to perform the funeral rites on time.

古文：养则观其顺也，丧则观其哀也，祭则观其敬而时也。
现代文：在供养这件事上可以看出做儿子的是否孝顺，在服丧这件事上可以看出他是否哀伤，在祭祀这件事上可以看出他是否虔敬和按时。
English: In the matter of offering, it can be seen whether the son is filial, in the matter of mourning, it can be seen whether he is sad, and in the matter of sacrifice, it can be seen whether he is pious and punctual.

古文：尽此三道者，孝子之行也。
现代文：这三件事都做得很好，才配称作孝子的行为。
English: If these three things are done well, it is worthy of being called filial behavior.

古文：既内自尽，又外求助，昏礼是也。
现代文：祭祀不但要求自己尽心尽力，还要求求助于外，这就关系到婚礼了。
English: Sacrifices not only require you to do your best, but also to seek outside help, which is related to the wedding.

古文：故国君取夫人之辞曰： 请君之玉女与寡人共有敝邑，事宗庙社稷。 
现代文：所以国君在娶夫人之前的求婚辞是这样说的： 听说您有位贤淑的女儿，希望能嫁给我，和我一道治理国家，祭祀宗庙社樱。 
English: Therefore, the prince's marriage proposal before marrying his wife was as follows: "I have heard that you have a virtuous daughter, and I hope that you will marry me, work with me to govern the country, and worship the Imperial Family.

古文：此求助之本也。
现代文：这就是求助的目的。
English: That is the purpose of the call for help.

古文：夫祭也者，必夫妇亲之，所以备外内之官也；官备则具备。
现代文：祭祀这件事，必须由夫妇亲自共同参加，以便里里外外的事情都有人负责。
English: The couple must personally participate in the ritual, so that someone is responsible for everything inside and out.

古文：水草之菹，陆产之醢，小物备矣；三牲之俎，八簋之实，美物备矣；昆虫之异，草木之实，阴阳之物备矣。
现代文：事情都有人负责，就必然祭品齐备。水中产的、陆地产的酶菜、肉酱有了，这算是祭祀用的小吃类齐备了。牛羊猪三牲齐全，黍樱稻粱分装八碗，这算是美味齐备了。还有各种不同的昆虫，还有各种不同的瓜果，这算是世上之物都有了。
English: When there is someone in charge of everything, the sacrificial offerings are inevitably ready. Cattle produced in the water, enzyme vegetables produced on land, and meat sauce are available, which is considered to be the snacks for the sacrifice. Cattle, sheep and pigs are complete, and eight bowls of pickled cherry and rice dumplings are packaged, which is considered to be delicious. There are also various insects, as well as various different melons and fruits, which is considered to be everything in the world.

古文：凡天之所生，地之所长，茍可荐者，莫不咸在，示尽物也。
现代文：总而言之，只要是天下生的，地上长的，只要是可以用来进献的，没有一样没有，这表示祭品的极其丰盛。
English: All in all, as long as it is born in the world, grows on the ground, as long as it can be used for offering, there is nothing missing, which means that the offerings are extremely rich.

古文：外则尽物，内则尽志，此祭之心也。
现代文：从客观上来说是要求祭品极其丰盛，从主观上来说则要求极其虔诚，这才算是祭祀的用心。
English: From an objective point of view, the sacrificial offerings are required to be extremely rich, and from a subjective point of view, they are required to be extremely pious, which is the intention of the sacrifice.

古文：是故，天子亲耕于南郊，以共齐盛；王后蚕于北郊，以共纯服。诸侯耕于东郊，亦以共齐盛；夫人蚕于北郊，以共冕服。
现代文：因此之故，天子才在南郊亲耕籍田，以提供祭品；王后在北郊亲自养蚕，以提供祭服；诸侯在东郊亲耕籍田，也是用以提供祭品；夫人在北郊亲自养蚕，也是用以提供祭服。
English: For this reason, the son of heaven personally cultivated the family fields in the southern suburb to provide offerings; the queen personally raised silkworms in the northern suburb to provide sacrificial clothing; the princes personally cultivated the family fields in the eastern suburb to provide offerings; the wife personally raised silkworms in the northern suburb to provide sacrificial clothing.

古文：天子诸侯非莫耕也，王后夫人非莫蚕也，身致其诚信，诚信之谓尽，尽之谓敬，敬尽然后可以事神明，此祭之道也。
现代文：天子和诸侯并不是穷到了自己不亲耕就没有祭品，王后和夫人也不是穷到了自己不养蚕就没有祭服，之所以要那样做，是为了表达自己的诚信，有了诚信才算尽心，尽了心才算是虔敬。虔敬了，尽心了，然后才可以事奉神明。这便是祭祀的原则。
English: Princes and princes are not so poor that they have no offerings if they do not cultivate, and queens and wives are not so poor that they have no sacred vestments if they do not raise silkworms. The reason why they want to do that is to express their sincerity. With sincerity, they are sincere. With sincerity, they are pious. With piety, with sincerity, they can then serve the gods. This is the principle of sacrifice.

古文：及时将祭，君子乃齐。
现代文：到了将要举行祭祀的时候，君子就要斋戒。
English: When the time comes for the sacrificial rites to be held, the gentleman should fast.

古文：齐之为言齐也。齐不齐以致齐者也。
现代文：斋戒也可以说是整齐的意思，就是把身上和心里不整齐的东西整齐一下以求达到整齐。
English: Fasting can also be said to mean tidiness, that is, to tidy up the things that are not tidy on the body and in the heart in order to achieve tidiness.

古文：是以君子非有大事也，非有恭敬也，则不齐。
现代文：所以君子不是从事于祭祀，在不需要恭敬的场合，就不斋戒。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not engage in sacrifice, and does not fast on occasions that do not require reverence.

古文：不齐则于物无防也，嗜欲无止也。
现代文：不斋戒就做事没有禁忌，嗜欲也没有限制。
English: There is no taboo on doing things without fasting, and there is no limit to one's appetite.

古文：及其将齐也，防其邪物，讫其嗜欲，耳不听乐。
现代文：但到了要斋戒的时候，禁忌之事就不能做，嗜欲也要加以限制，耳不听音乐。
English: But when it's time to fast, you can't do things that are taboo, you have to limit your cravings, and you can't listen to music.

古文：故记曰： 齐者不乐 ，言不敢散其志也。
现代文：所以古书上说： 斋戒的人不举乐。 就是说斋戒的时候不敢分散心思。
English: That is why the ancient books say, "He who fasts does not make merry," which means that when he is fasting he does not dare to distract his mind.

古文：心不茍虑，必依于道；手足不茍动，必依于礼。
现代文：心无杂念，所思所想必然合乎正道；手足不乱动，抬手动脚必然合乎规矩。
English: The mind should be free from all impure thoughts, and the thoughts should be in accordance with the righteous path. The hands and feet should not be in disorder, and the lifting of the hands and the moving of the feet should be in accordance with the rules.

古文：是故君子之齐也，专致其精明之德也。
现代文：所以君子的斋戒，其目的就在于达到身心的纯洁。
English: Therefore, the purpose of a gentleman's fast is to achieve purity of body and mind.

古文：故散齐七日以定之，致齐三日以齐之。
现代文：为此目的，所以先散斋七天收敛一下心志，然后再致斋三天加以整齐。
English: For this purpose, it is best to break the fast for seven days to gather one's thoughts, and then to fast for three days to tidy up.

古文：定之之谓齐。
现代文：把心志收敛住了就叫做斋戒。
English: If you control your mind, it's called fasting.

古文：齐者精明之至也，然后可以交于神明也。
现代文：斋戒是高度的身心纯洁，然后才可以和神明打交道。
English: Fasting is a high degree of physical and mental purity, and then you can deal with the gods.

古文：是故，先期旬有一日，宫宰宿夫人，夫人亦散齐七日，致齐三日。
现代文：所以，在祭祀前十一天，宫宰要郑重地告诫夫人，于是夫人开始斋戒，先散斋七天，接着再致斋三天。
English: Therefore, on the eleventh day before the sacrifice, the palace steward had to solemnly admonish the lady, so the lady began fasting, first fasting for seven days, then fasting for three days.

古文：君致齐于外，夫人致齐于内，然后会于大庙。
现代文：国君在国君的正寝致齐，夫人在夫人的正寝致齐，到祭祀那天才会合于太庙。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, the Emperor and Empress would meet at the Imperial Temple, the Emperor at the Emperor's bedside and the Empress at her wife's bedside.

古文：君纯冕立于阼，夫人副袆立于东房。
现代文：国君身着礼服头戴礼帽站在昨阶，夫人头戴首饰身穿字服站在东房。
English: The sovereign, wearing a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat, stood on the last step, while his wife, wearing jewelry and a ceremonial dress, stood in the east room.

古文：君执圭瓒祼尸，大宗执璋瓒亚祼。
现代文：国君手执圭攒在尸前行裸礼，大宗伯手执璋攒在尸前行再裸礼。
English: The sovereign prostrated himself in front of the corpse, and the great-great-uncle prostrated himself again in front of the corpse.

古文：及迎牲，君执纼，卿大夫从士执刍。
现代文：到了迎牲入庙时，国君亲自牵着牛鼻绳，大夫紧跟在牲后，士抱着禾秆。
English: When it came to welcoming the animal into the temple, the sovereign himself led the bull by the nose, the doctor followed closely behind the animal, and the priest held the straw.

古文：宗妇执盎从夫人荐涚水。君执鸾刀羞哜，夫人荐豆，此之谓夫妇亲之。
现代文：宗妇捧着盎齐随在夫人身后，献上说水、国君亲执莺刀切取牲肺献给尸品尝，夫人则献上馈食之豆。
English: The mother-in-law followed behind the wife with an ozzi in her hand, offering water, the sovereign personally held a sickle to cut the animal's lungs and offered them to the corpse for tasting, and the wife offered beans as a gift.

古文：及入舞，君执干戚就舞位，君为东上，冕而揔干，率其群臣，以乐皇尸。
现代文：这就叫做夫妇一道亲自主持祭祀。到了舞乐开始的时候，国君手执干戚站到舞位上，国君站在靠东边的上位，头戴冠冕，手执盾牌，率领群臣起舞，供代表祖先的皇尸娱乐。
English: At the beginning of the dance, the sovereign stood on the dance floor, holding hands with his attendants. The sovereign stood in the upper tier on the eastern side, wearing a crown and holding a shield, and led the courtiers in a dance to entertain the royal corpse, which represented the ancestors.

古文：是故天子之祭也，与天下乐之；诸侯之祭也，与竟内乐之。
现代文：因此，天子的祭祀，是与天下人一道欢乐；诸侯的祭祀，是与国境内的臣民一道欢乐。
English: Therefore, the sacrifice of the heavenly son is to rejoice with the people of the world; the sacrifice of the princes is to rejoice with the subjects within the borders.

古文：冕而揔干，率其群臣，以乐皇尸，此与竟内乐之之义也。
现代文：诸侯祭祀的时候也要头戴冠冕，手执盾牌，率其群臣起舞，供皇尸娱乐，这就是与境内的人一道欢乐的意思。
English: When lords offer sacrifices, they should also wear crowns on their heads, hold shields in their hands, and lead their retainers in a dance to entertain the imperial corpse. This is the meaning of rejoicing with the people within the country.

古文：夫祭有三重焉：献之属，莫重于祼，声莫重于升歌，舞莫重于《武宿夜》，此周道也。
现代文：在祭祀过程中有三个最重要的节目：在奉献祭品活动中，没有比裸礼更重要的了；在歌唱演奏活动中，没有比登堂歌唱《清庙》更重要的了；在舞蹈活动中，没有比《武宿夜》之舞更重要的了。
English: There are three most important programs in the course of the sacrificial rites: in the sacrificial offering activities, there is nothing more important than the nude ceremony; in the singing performance activities, there is nothing more important than singing "Qing Temple"; in the dance activities, there is nothing more important than the dance of "Takejuku Night."

古文：凡三道者，所以假于外而以增君子之志也，故与志进退；志轻则亦轻，志重则亦重。
现代文：这是周代的规矩。这三个最重要的节目，都是用来借助于外部的动作以增强君子虔诚的内心。所以二者的关系是密切相关的，内心轻忽则外部动作也不带劲，内心端重则外部动作也随之端重。
English: This is the rule of the Zhou dynasty. These three most important programs are all used to strengthen the gentleman's pious heart with the help of external actions. So the relationship between the two is closely related. If the heart is light, the external action is not strong, and if the heart is heavy, the external action is also heavy.

古文：轻其志而求外之重也，虽圣人弗能得也。
现代文：内心轻忽而希望达到外部动作的端重，即令是圣人也做不到。
English: Even a sage cannot be light-hearted and hope to achieve the weight of external movements.

古文：是故君子之祭也，必身自尽也，所以明重也。
现代文：所以君子的祭祀，一定要自己竭尽诚心，这样才能使外部动作也端重起来。
English: Therefore, the sacrifice of a gentleman must be sincere to the best of his ability, so that the external actions can also be weighted.

古文：道之以礼，以奉三重，而荐诸皇尸，此圣人之道也。
现代文：遵循礼的要求，把三个最重要的节、目做好而博得皇尸的欢心，这才是圣人的祭祀之道。
English: Following the requirements of the ritual, doing the three most important feasts well and winning the favor of the royal corpse, this is the way of the saint's sacrifice.

古文：夫祭有馂；馂者祭之末也，不可不知也。
现代文：祭礼中有俊这码子事。虽然俊是祭祀末尾的事，但也不可不了解其意义。
English: At the end of the ritual, there is a performance of shun, but it is important to understand its meaning.

古文：是故古之人有言曰： 善终者如始。 馂其是已。
现代文：所以古人这样说过： 好的结束要像好的开始一样，饺这件事大概是最能说明这一点了。 
English: That's why the ancients said: A good ending should be like a good beginning, and the dumpling thing is probably the best illustration of this.

古文：是故古之君子曰： 尸亦馂鬼神之余也，惠术也，可以观政矣。 
现代文：所以古代的君子说： 尸虽然尊贵，但他也吃鬼神吃剩的东西。饺也是一种施惠之道，从中可以观察出政治意义来。 
English: Therefore, the ancient gentleman said: Although the corpse is noble, he also eats the leftovers of ghosts and gods. Dumplings are also a way of giving favors, from which political significance can be observed.

古文：是故尸谡，君与卿四人馂。君起，大夫六人馂；臣馂君之余也。大夫起，士八人馂；贱馂贵之余也。士起，各执其具以出，陈于堂下，百官进，彻之，下馂上之余也。
现代文：所以尸食毕起身离席，就由国君和卿四人吃尸剩下的祭品；国君吃罢起身，就由大夫六人吃国君吃剩的祭品，这叫做臣吃君之剩余；大夫吃罢起身，就由士八人吃剩下的，这叫做贱者吃贵者剩下的；士吃罢起身，各人端着盛有剩余祭品的食具出来，陈列在堂下，由各种当差的吃剩下的，吃毕撤掉，这叫做底下人吃在上位者之剩余。
English: Therefore, when the corpse-eater got up and left the table, the four of them, the sovereign and the lord, ate the leftover offerings; when the sovereign stopped eating and got up, the six doctors ate the leftover offerings, which is called the vassal's leftover; when the doctor stopped eating and got up, the eight scholars ate the leftover, which is called the commoner's leftover; when the scholars stopped eating and got up, each of them brought out the utensils containing the leftover offerings and displayed them in the hall, and the various attendants ate the leftover and took them away, which is called the commoner's leftover.

古文：凡馂之道，每变以众，所以别贵贱之等，而兴施惠之象也。
现代文：综观饺的全过程，是每变一次而俊的人数也就随之增多，这是要区别人有贵贱之分，而施惠的对象却越来越多。
English: Looking at the whole process of dumplings, it is clear that the number of beneficiaries increases with each change. This is to distinguish between the rich and the poor, but there are more and more beneficiaries.

古文：是故以四簋黍见其修于庙中也。
现代文：所以用四盘祭品就可以表现出恩惠遍施于庙中。
English: Therefore, with four plates of offerings, it is possible to show that grace is being spread throughout the temple.

古文：庙中者竟内之象也。
现代文：而庙中，乃是整个国境内的缩影。
English: The temple, however, is a microcosm of the entire country.

古文：祭者泽之大者也。
现代文：祭礼中的俊，是一种大的恩泽。
English: Shun in the festival is a great blessing.

古文：是故上有大泽则惠必及下，顾上先下后耳。非上积重而下有冻馁之民也。
现代文：所以上面有大的恩泽，就一定要惠及下面，只不过上面的先得到而下面的后得到而已，并不是把上面的都撑死而把下面的都饿死。
English: Therefore, if there is great grace above, it must benefit below, but the above is obtained first and the below is obtained later, it is not that the above are supported to death and the below are starved to death.

古文：是故上有大泽，则民夫人待于下流，知惠之必将至也，由馂见之矣。
现代文：所以上面有大的恩泽，民众就会个个在下面等待，相信恩泽也必定会落到他们头上。
English: Therefore, if there is great grace above, the people will wait below one by one, believing that grace will surely fall on their heads.

古文：故曰： 可以观政矣。 
现代文：这一切都是从饺这件事上反映出来的，所以说： 可以从中观察出政治意义来。 
English: All of this is reflected in the dumpling incident, so it can be said that political significance can be observed from it.

古文：夫祭之为物大矣，其兴物备矣。
现代文：祭祀作为一件事情可以说是够大的了，祭祀时荐献的供品够完备了。
English: As a matter of fact, it can be said that the ritual is big enough, and the offerings recommended at the time of the ritual are complete enough.

古文：顺以备者也，其教之本与？
现代文：孝顺的心再加上完备的祭品，这大概也就是教化的根本吧！
English: Filial piety, coupled with a complete offering, is probably the root of edification!

古文：是故，君子之教也，外则教之以尊其君长，内则教之以孝于其亲。
现代文：所以君子的施行教化，在社会上就教育人们尊敬君长，在家庭里就教育他们孝顺双亲。
English: Therefore, the implementation of the enlightenment of the gentleman educates people to respect the monarch in society, and educates them to be filial to their parents in the family.

古文：是故，明君在上，则诸臣服从；崇事宗庙社稷，则子孙顺孝。
现代文：所以圣明的君主在上，则大小臣工服从；尊敬地祭祀宗庙社樱，则子孙孝顺。
English: Therefore, when a saintly monarch is on high, the ministers of all ranks obey him; when he reverently worships the patriarchal shrine, his children and grandchildren are dutiful.

古文：尽其道，端其义，而教生焉。
现代文：竭尽祭祀之礼，端正祭祀之义，这就需要教化了。
English: Exhausting the ritual of sacrifice, correcting the meaning of sacrifice, this requires enlightenment.

古文：是故君子之事君也，必身行之，所不安于上，则不以使下；所恶于下，则不以事上；非诸人，行诸己，非教之道也。
现代文：所以君子事奉君王，一定要身体力行。自己感到上面有什么地方做得不对，就不要再让下面这样去做；自己厌恶下面的某些做法，就不要再这样地应付上面。不让人家去做，而自己却明知故犯，这不是教育的方法。
English: Therefore, a gentleman must serve the king by his own efforts. If you feel that something above is not done correctly, do not let the below do it again; if you detest certain practices below, do not deal with the above in this way. It is not a method of education not to let others do it, but to knowingly do it yourself.

古文：是故君子之教也，必由其本，顺之至也，祭其是与？
现代文：所以君子的施行教化，一定要从根本抓起，提纲絮领，这样的办法大慨非祭祀莫属吧！
English: Therefore, the implementation of the enlightenment of the gentleman must be grasped from the root, the outline of the outline, such a method is nothing but a sacrifice!

古文：故曰：祭者，教之本也已。
现代文：这就无怪乎人们说：祭祀是教化的根本。
English: It is no wonder that people say: Sacrifices are the foundation of enlightenment.

古文：夫祭有十伦焉；见事鬼神之道焉，见君臣之义焉，见父子之伦焉，见贵贱之等焉，见亲疏之杀焉，见爵赏之施焉，见夫妇之别焉，见政事之均焉，见长幼之序焉，见上下之际焉。
现代文：祭祀有十种意义：第一是体现事奉鬼神之道，第二是体现君臣之义，第三是体现父子关系，第四是体现贵贱有别，第五是体现亲疏有别，第六是体现爵赏的施行，第七是体现夫妇之别，第八是体现政事公平，第九是体现长幼有序，第十是体现上下关系。
English: Sacrifices have ten meanings: the first is to embody the way of serving ghosts and gods, the second is to embody the righteousness of kings and ministers, the third is to embody the relationship between father and son, the fourth is to embody the distinction between high and low, the fifth is to embody the distinction between relatives and strangers, the sixth is to embody the implementation of peerage, the seventh is to embody the distinction between husband and wife, the eighth is to embody fairness in political affairs, the ninth is to embody the order of the elder and younger, and the tenth is to embody the relationship between the upper and lower classes.

古文：此之谓十伦。
现代文：这就是祭祀的十种意义。
English: These are the ten meanings of worship.

古文：铺筵设同几，为依神也；诏祝于室，而出于祊，此交神明之道也。
现代文：下面分开来说。铺设筵席，设置同几，让鬼神凭依；在室内向神诏告祝辞，又在门外举行绎祭，这些都是雨神明交接的方法。
English: Let's break it down. Laying the table, setting the same number, letting the ghosts and gods follow; saying good-bye to the gods indoors, and holding a rite of passage outside the door, these are all methods of handing over the rain gods.

古文：君迎牲而不迎尸，别嫌也。
现代文：祭祀的时候，国君走出庙门迎接牲，但不走出庙门外迎尸，这是为了避开嫌疑。
English: During the ritual, the sovereign steps out of the temple gate to greet the animal, but does not step out of the temple gate to greet the corpse, in order to avoid suspicion.

古文：尸在庙门外，则疑于臣，在庙中则全于君；君在庙门外则疑于君，入庙门则全于臣、全于子。
现代文：因为尸在庙门外仍然是臣子的身份，而进到庙内就变成君父的身份了。同样，国君在庙门外仍然是国君的身份，一进入庙门就变成臣与子的身份了。
English: Because the corpse outside the temple gate is still the status of a vassal, and when it enters the temple, it becomes the status of the prince's father. Similarly, the sovereign outside the temple gate is still the status of the sovereign, and as soon as it enters the temple gate, it becomes the status of a vassal and son.

古文：是故，不出者，明君臣之义也。
现代文：所以不出门迎接尸，思为了明确君臣的名分。
English: Therefore, he did not go out to meet the body, in order to clarify the title of the monarch and the minister.

古文：夫祭之道，孙为王父尸。所使为尸者，于祭者子行也；父北面而事之，所以明子事父之道也。
现代文：祭祀中规定，通常由孙子充当代表祖父的尸，这样来讲那个充当尸的人，对于祭祀者来讲是儿子辈，而作为父辈的祭者倒要面朝北去事奉尸，这就是为了让人明白儿子应当如何侍奉父亲。
English: According to the rules of the sacrifice, the grandson usually serves as the representative of the grandfather's corpse. In this way, the person who serves as the corpse is the son's generation for the sacrificer, while the father's generation must face north to serve the corpse. This is to make people understand how the son should serve the father.

古文：此父子之伦也。
现代文：这便是体现父子间的伦常关系。
English: This is a reflection of the ethical relationship between father and son.

古文：尸饮五，君洗玉爵献卿；尸饮七，以瑶爵献大夫；尸饮九，以散爵献士及群有司，皆以齿。
现代文：上公之祭九献，尸饮酒五次之后，国君便洗净玉爵向卿献酒；尸饮酒七次之后，国君才用瑶爵向大夫献酒；尸饮酒九次之后，国君才用散爵向士和各种当差的献酒。
English: There are nine offerings for the priest's sacrifice, and after drinking the corpse five times, the sovereign will wash the yakitori and offer it to the lord; after drinking the corpse seven times, the sovereign will use the yakitori to offer it to the doctor; after drinking the corpse nine times, the sovereign will use the sanjaku to offer it to the priest and various attendants.

古文：明尊卑之等也。
现代文：这体现了尊卑有别。
English: This reflects the difference between superiority and inferiority.

古文：夫祭有昭穆，昭穆者，所以别父子、远近、长幼、亲疏之序而无乱也。
现代文：祭祀时，所有参加祭祀的子孙都是按照父昭子穆的辈分排列。昭穆的作用，就是用来区别父子、远近、长幼、亲疏的顺序而不使混乱。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, all the children and grandchildren who participated in the sacrifice were arranged according to the generation of the father, 昭子穆. The role of 昭穆 is to distinguish the order of father and son, far and near, elder and younger, and relative and not to cause confusion.

古文：是故，有事于大庙，则群昭群穆咸在而不失其伦。
现代文：所以在太庙中举行大祭的时候，尽管全体族人中的昭辈穆辈都在，也仍然是各就各位，有条不紊。这就叫做亲疏有别。
English: Therefore, when the grand festival is held in the Great Temple, even though all the members of the whole tribe are present, they still all take their places in an orderly manner. This is called "familiarity and difference."

古文：此之谓亲疏之杀也。古者，明君爵有德而禄有功，必赐爵禄于大庙，示不敢专也。
现代文：古时候明君对有德的人进爵对有功的人加禄，进爵加禄的典礼一定要在太庙中举行，这表示国君自已不敢独断专行。
English: In ancient times, the Ming Emperor gave knighthoods to virtuous people and additional stipend to meritorious people. The ceremony of awarding knighthoods and additional stipend must be held in the Great Temple, which meant that the Emperor himself did not dare to arbitrarily do so.

古文：故祭之日，一献，君降立于阼阶之南，南乡。所命北面，史由君右执策命之。再拜稽首。受书以归，而舍奠于其庙。
现代文：所以在祭祀的那天，第一次醋尸之后，国君就从堂上下来，立于昨阶之南，面朝南，受册封者面朝北，负责册命的史官从国君右边捧着册封文书宣读，被册封者行过再拜稽首的大礼后接过册命，然后回家，在自己的家庙中设奠察告祖宗。
English: Therefore, on the day of the sacrifice, after the first vinegar body, the sovereign came down from the hall and stood on the south of the last step, facing south, and the anointed one faced north. The historian in charge of the anointing held the anointing document and read it from the right side of the sovereign. The anointed one received the anointing after performing the grand ceremony of bowing his head again, and then went home and set up a memorial to his ancestors in his home temple.

古文：此爵赏之施也。
现代文：这就体现了爵赏的施行。
English: This reflects the implementation of the award.

古文：君卷冕立于阼，夫人副袆立于东房。
现代文：祭祀时，国君身穿礼服头戴礼帽立于昨阶，夫人头戴首饰身穿礼服立于东房。
English: During the ritual, the sovereign, wearing a ceremonial robe and ceremonial hat, stood on the last step, while his wife, wearing jewelry and a ceremonial robe, stood in the east room.

古文：夫人荐豆执校，执醴授之执镫。尸酢夫人执柄，夫人受尸执足。
现代文：夫人进献豆时，手握豆柄；而执醛者把豆交给夫人时，则是手握豆的底座。尸向夫人回敬酒时，手执酒爵的柄；夫人在接受时，手执酒爵的足。
English: When the hostess offers the beans, she holds the bean handle in her hand; when the server hands the beans to the hostess, it is the base of the hand holding the beans. When the corpse returns the toast to the hostess, he holds the handle of the wine goblet; when the hostess accepts the toast, she holds the foot of the wine goblet.

古文：夫妇相授受，不相袭处，酢必易爵。
现代文：夫妇之间授受祭器，不能拿着同一部位。
English: Couples should not hold the same part of the altar when they give and receive communion.

古文：明夫妇之别也。
现代文：夫妇互相回敬酒，一定要更换杯子。
English: Couples toasting each other, be sure to change the cup.

古文：凡为俎者，以骨为主。
现代文：这些都体现了夫妇有别。凡分配姐肉，以带骨的肉为主。
English: These all reflect the difference between husband and wife. Where sister meat is allocated, it is mainly meat with bones.

古文：骨有贵贱；殷人贵髀，周人贵肩，凡前贵于后。
现代文：牲体的骨，也分贵贱。殷人以后腿上部的骸为贵，周人则以前腿上部的肩为贵。对于周人来说，牲体前面的骨贵于后面的骨。
English: The bones of livestock are also divided into high and low value. For Yin people, the upper part of the upper leg is valuable, while for Zhou people, the upper part of the upper leg is valuable. For Zhou people, the front bone of the animal is more valuable than the back bone.

古文：俎者，所以明祭之必有惠也。
现代文：分配姐肉，就是要体现举行祭祀肯定对大家都有好处。
English: The distribution of the sister's meat is to reflect that the holding of the sacrificial rite is definitely beneficial to everyone.

古文：是故，贵者取贵骨，贱者取贱骨。贵者不重，贱者不虚，示均也。
现代文：所以在分配时，高贵的人取得贵骨，卑贱的人取得贱骨，高贵的人不拿双份，卑贱的人也不会空手，这就体现了公平。
English: Therefore, in the distribution, the noble people get the precious bones, the lowly people get the lowly bones, the noble people do not take double, and the lowly people do not empty their hands, which reflects fairness.

古文：惠均则政行，政行则事成，事成则功立。
现代文：每个人都能得到恩惠，政令就容易推行；政令得到推行，事情就容易办成；事情办成，就能建功立业。
English: If everyone can get favors, it will be easy to implement decrees; if decrees are implemented, it will be easy to accomplish things; if things are accomplished, it will be possible to make achievements.

古文：功之所以立者，不可不知也。
现代文：之所以能够建功立业，其原因不可不知。
English: The reason why he was able to establish his career is not unknown.

古文：俎者，所以明惠之必均也。
现代文：分配沮肉，就是要体现恩惠必定人人有份。
English: The distribution of the spoils is to reflect the bounty must be shared by all.

古文：善为政者如此，故曰：见政事之均焉。
现代文：善于治理国家者也就像分配沮肉那样，所以说： 可以体现政事的公平。 
English: Those who are good at governing the country are also like the distribution of carrion, so they say: it can reflect the fairness of government affairs.

古文：凡赐爵，昭为一，穆为一。昭与昭齿，穆与穆齿，凡群有司皆以齿，此之谓长幼有序。
现代文：旅酬时向助祭的众多兄弟众多子孙敬酒，这些人按昭穆排为二列：昭辈排为一列，穆辈排为一列；同是昭辈者再按年龄大小排列，同是穆辈者再按年龄大小排列。
English: When making a toast to the deacon's many brothers and many descendants, these people are arranged in two rows according to the name of the god: the name of the god is arranged in one row, the name of the god is arranged in one row; the same name of the god is then arranged by age, and the same name of the god is then arranged by age.

古文：夫祭有畀辉胞翟阍者，惠下之道也。
现代文：其他的来宾以及各种当差的，也都按年龄大小排列。
English: The other guests, as well as the various attendants, are also arranged by age.

古文：唯有德之君为能行此，明足以见之，仁足以与之。畀之为言与也，能以其余畀其下者也。
现代文：这就叫做长幼有序。祭祀末尾有赐俊之礼，这时要把神吃剩下的祭品分给皮匠、厨子、舞师和阁人，这是向下人施惠的方法。只有有道之君才能做到这一点，其聪明足以使他认识到这样做的重要，其仁慈足以使他采取实际的行动。所谓界，也就是赐与，也就是能把他多余的东西赐与他的下人。
English: This is called the order of the eldest and youngest. At the end of the ritual, there is the blessing of the youngest son. At this time, the god eats the rest of the sacrifice and distributes it to the cobbler, the cook, the dancer, and the courtier. This is a method of granting favors to those below. Only a virtuous prince can do this. His wisdom is enough to make him realize the importance of doing this, and his kindness is enough to make him take practical action. The so-called realm is the gift, that is, he can give his surplus to his subordinates.

古文：辉者，甲吏之贱者也；胞者，肉吏之贱者也；翟者，乐吏之贱者也；阍者，守门之贱者也。
现代文：皮匠，这是制造恺甲这类小官中的贱者；厨子，这是职掌屠宰这类小官中的贱者；舞师，这是教习乐舞这类小官中的贱者；阎人，这是掌管守门这类小官中的贱者，在古代不让受过刑罚的人守门。
English: The cobbler is the low-born of the petty officials who make armor; the cook is the low-born of the petty officials who slaughter; the dancer is the low-born of the petty officials who teach music and dance; and the demon is the low-born of the petty officials who control the gatekeepers, who in ancient times did not allow those who had been punished to guard the gate.

古文：古者不使刑人守门，此四守者，吏之至贱者也。尸又至尊；以至尊既祭之末，而不忘至贱，而以其余畀之。
现代文：干这四种差使的人，是小官当中最低贱的，而尸在庙中是最尊贵的，以最尊贵的身份在祭祀的末尾能够不忘记最低贱的人，并且把神吃剩下的东西赐与他们。
English: Those who do these four kinds of sending are the lowest among the minor officials, while the corpse in the temple is the most honorable, and with the most honorable status, at the end of the sacrifice, it can not forget the lowest people, and give them what the gods have left.

古文：是故明君在上，则竟内之民无冻馁者矣，此之谓上下之际。
现代文：所以如果一个国家由明君来领导，全国的老百姓就不会有受冻挨饿的。这就叫做体现了上下关系。
English: Therefore, if a country is led by a wise ruler, the common people throughout the country will not freeze and starve. This is called embodying the top-down relationship.

古文：凡祭有四时：春祭曰礿，夏祭曰禘，秋祭曰尝，冬祭曰烝。
现代文：祭祀也有四季的不同：春祭叫构，夏祭叫谛，秋祭叫尝，冬祭叫悉。
English: Sacrifices also vary according to the four seasons: the spring festival is called "Kofu," the summer festival is called "Toshi," the autumn festival is called "Tasaku," and the winter festival is called "Matsu."

古文：礿、禘，阳义也；尝、烝，阴义也。禘者阳之盛也，尝者阴之盛也。
现代文：构和谛，举行在阳气由起到盛之时，体现了阳的意义；尝和羔，举行在阴气由起到盛之时，体现了阴的意义。
English: 构和谛, held when yang is at its peak, embodies the meaning of yang; 尝和羔, held when yin is at its peak, embodies the meaning of yin.

古文：故曰：莫重于禘、尝。
现代文：谛是阳气最盛的祭，尝是阴气最盛的祭，所以说：没有比筛、尝更重要的。
English: Sutra is the most important festival of yang, and tantra is the most important festival of yin. Therefore, it is said that there is nothing more important than sieve and tantra.

古文：古者于禘也，发爵赐服，顺阳义也；于尝也，出田邑，发秋政，顺阴义也。
现代文：古时候，在举行谛祭时要颁发爵位，赏赐车服，这就是顺着阳气行事；在举行尝祭时要教民田猎，开始动用刑罚，这就是顺着阴气行事。
English: In ancient times, when holding a puja, a knighthood should be awarded and a chariot should be given, which is to act in accordance with the yang qi; when holding a tasting festival, the people should be taught to hunt, and the punishment should be used, which is to act in accordance with the yin qi.

古文：故记曰： 尝之日，发公室，示赏也；草艾则墨；未发秋政，则民弗敢草也。 
现代文：所以古书上说： 在举行尝祭之时，要拿出公家的东西，表示将要行赏。 到了可以割草打柴的时候，就可以动用轻刑了。
English: Therefore, the ancient book said: When holding a tasting festival, it is necessary to take out public property to indicate that it will be rewarded; when it is time to cut grass and make firewood, it is possible to use light punishment.

古文：故曰：禘、尝之义大矣。
现代文：尚未开始动用刑罚时，老百姓就不敢割草打柴。
English: When the penalty has not yet been applied, the common people do not dare to cut grass or collect firewood.

古文：治国之本也，不可不知也。
现代文：所以说：谛、尝二祭的意义很重大，涉及治国的根本，不可不知。
English: Therefore, it is said that the significance of the festival is very important and involves the fundamentals of governing the country.

古文：明其义者君也，能其事者臣也。
现代文：明白谛尝之义是君主的事，办好谛尝之事是臣子的事。
English: It is the sovereign's business to understand the meaning of the precepts, and it is the vassal's business to carry out the precepts well.

古文：不明其义，君人不全；不能其事，为臣不全。
现代文：不明白筛尝之义，作为国君就有所不足；办不好谛尝之祭，作为臣子就有所不足。
English: If you don't understand the meaning of sifting and tasting, you will fall short as a sovereign; if you can't perform the ritual of sifting and tasting, you will fall short as a vassal.

古文：夫义者，所以济志也，诸德之发也。
现代文：这里所说的 义气是用来实现自己的志尚，是各种德行的表现。
English: The "virtue" mentioned here is used to realize one's own ambition, and is a manifestation of various virtues.

古文：是故其德盛者，其志厚；其志厚者，其义章。其义章者，其祭也敬。
现代文：所以德行盛大的人他的思亲意念就强烈，思亲意念强烈的人他对祭祀意义的理解就透彻，对意义理解透彻的人他在祭祀时必然恭敬。
English: Therefore, a person with great virtue will have a strong sense of kinship, a person with a strong sense of kinship will have a thorough understanding of the meaning of the ritual, and a person with a thorough understanding of the meaning will necessarily be respectful during the ritual.

古文：祭敬则竟内之子孙莫敢不敬矣。
现代文：国君对祭祀恭敬，一那么国内的黎民百姓谁敢不恭敬呢。
English: The sovereign is respectful to the sacrificial rites, so who would dare not to be respectful to the people in the country?

古文：是故君子之祭也，必身亲莅之；有故，则使人可也。
现代文：所以君子的对待祭祀，一定要亲身参加。有特殊情况时让别人代替也是可以的。
English: Therefore, in order to be treated as a gentleman, it is essential to attend the ritual in person. In special circumstances, it is also possible to have someone else take your place.

古文：虽使人也，君不失其义者，君明其义故也。
现代文：虽然是让人代替，但效果却和国君亲临没有什么不同，原因就在于国君深明祭祀之义。
English: Although it is a substitute, the effect is no different from the presence of the sovereign in person. The reason is that the sovereign is well aware of the meaning of the ritual.

古文：其德薄者，其志轻，疑于其义，而求祭；使之必敬也，弗可得已。
现代文：道德浅薄的人他对祭祀的事就心不在焉，对祭祀的意义也半信半疑，在这种情况下让他去向神求祭，要求他做到毕恭毕敬是办不到的。
English: A person with shallow morality is absent-minded about the matter of sacrifice, and is half-believing and half-doubting about the meaning of sacrifice. In this situation, it is impossible for him to ask God for sacrifice and demand that he be respectful.

古文：祭而不敬，何以为民父母矣？
现代文：祭祀祖先而做不到恭敬，还有什么资格为民父母呢！
English: What are the qualifications to be the people's parents if you can't worship and respect your ancestors?

古文：夫鼎有铭，铭者，自名也。
现代文：作为祭器的鼎，其上经常铸有铭文。
English: As the top of a sacrificial object, it often has an inscription cast on it.

古文：自名以称扬其先祖之美，而明着之后世者也。
现代文：所谓铭文，就是首先称一扬先祖之功德而后再附己名于其下，自己附名于下以称扬先祖的美德，并使之明显地传于后世。
English: The so-called inscription is to first praise the merits of one's ancestors and then attach one's own name to it, to praise the virtues of one's ancestors by attaching one's own name to it, and to clearly pass it on to future generations.

古文：为先祖者，莫不有美焉，莫不有恶焉，铭之义，称美而不称恶，此孝子孝孙之心也。唯贤者能之。
现代文：那些作为先祖的人，没有一个没有优点，也没有一个没有缺点。而铭文的要求，是只赞美其优点而掩盖其缺点。这种孝子孝孙的用心，只有贤者才能办到。
English: Those who are ancestors, none of them have no merits, and none of them have no shortcomings. And the requirement of the inscription is to only praise their merits and cover up their shortcomings. This kind of filial piety can only be done by the wise.

古文：铭者，论譔其先祖之有德善，功烈勋劳庆赏声名列于天下，而酌之祭器；自成其名焉，以祀其先祖者也。
现代文：制作铭文，就是要论述自己先祖的美德、功业、勋劳、受到褒奖和荣誉，公布于天下，而斟酌其要点而刻之于祭器，同时附上自己的名字，用来祭祀其先祖。
English: To make an inscription is to discuss the virtues, achievements, honors, awards and honors of one's ancestors, to publish it to the world, and to engrave it on the altar according to its main points, and to attach one's own name to it, so that it can be used to worship one's ancestors.

古文：显扬先祖，所以崇孝也。身比焉，顺也。明示后世，教也。
现代文：赞扬先祖，表示自己的孝敬；自己附名其下，表示自己要效法他们；明白地晓喻后世，表示对子孙后代的教育。
English: To praise one's ancestors is to show one's filial piety; to attach one's name to them is to show that one wants to emulate them; to clearly understand future generations is to show one's education for future generations.

古文：夫铭者，壹称而上下皆得焉耳矣。
现代文：由此看来，制作铭文真是一举三得的事。
English: From this point of view, the production of inscriptions is really a one-two punch.

古文：是故君子之观于铭也，既美其所称，又美其所为。
现代文：所以君子在观看铭文时，既赞美铭文中称道的祖先美德，又赞美铭文制作这件事本身。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman looks at the inscription, he praises both the ancestral virtues praised in the inscription and the making of the inscription itself.

古文：为之者，明足以见之，仁足以与之，知足以利之，可谓贤矣。
现代文：制作铭文的人，其明察足以看到祖宗的美德，其仁爱足以使他能果断地决定此事，其智慧足以使他和他的子孙从这件事上得到好处，真可以说是聪明透顶了。
English: The man who made the inscription, whose insight is enough to see the virtues of his ancestors, whose benevolence is enough for him to decide the matter decisively, and whose wisdom is enough for him and his descendants to benefit from this matter, can really be said to be clever.

古文：贤而勿伐，可谓恭矣。
现代文：聪明透顶而又不自夸，真可以算是谦恭了。
English: To be so clever and yet not boastful, that is true humility.

古文：故卫孔悝之鼎铭曰：六月丁亥，公假于大庙。
现代文：所以卫国大夫孔惺的鼎上刻有下述铭文： 六月丁亥，卫庄公来到太庙行祭。
English: Therefore, the following inscription is engraved on the crown of the head of the doctor of the imperial guard, Confucius: In June, Dinghai, the Duke of Wei Zhuang came to the Grand Temple for a festival.

古文：公曰： 叔舅！
现代文：庄公说： 叔舅！
English: Zhuang Gong said, "Uncle!

古文：乃祖庄叔，左右成公。
现代文：你的远祖庄叔辅佐我的远祖成公。
English: Your distant ancestor Zhuang Shufu assisted my distant ancestor to become emperor.

古文：成公乃命庄叔随难于汉阳，即宫于宗周，奔走无射。
现代文：成公曾命令庄叔随他逃难到楚国，又曾随成公一道被囚禁在京师，庄叔东西南北地奔走，毫不懈怠。
English: Chenggong had ordered Zhuangshu to follow him to escape to Chu, and he had been imprisoned with Chenggong in Beijing. Zhuangshu ran from east to west, north to south, without slacking.

古文：启右献公。献公乃命成叔，纂乃祖服。
现代文：庄叔之功流于后世，又保佑我祖献公返回国内。献公于是命令成叔继承其祖庄叔的事业，忠君之事。
English: Uncle Zhuang's merits flowed to future generations, and he also blessed my ancestor Xiangguo to return to the country. Xiangguo then ordered Uncle Cheng to inherit the cause of his ancestor Uncle Zhuang, the matter of loyalty.

古文：乃考文叔，兴旧耆欲，作率庆士，躬恤卫国，其勤公家，夙夜不解，民咸曰： 公曰： 叔舅！
现代文：你的父亲文叔，又继承祖先的遗志，作为百官的表率，时刻想着如何把卫国搞好。他操劳国家事务，昼夜不敢懈怠，老百姓都夸他是好样的。 
English: Your father, Uncle Wen, also inherited the will of his ancestors, and as the leader of a hundred officials, he always thought about how to do a good job of defending the country. He worked on national affairs, day and night, he did not dare to slack off, and the people all praised him for his good behavior.

古文：予女铭：若纂乃考服。 
现代文：庄公又说： 叔舅，我现在给你这篇铭文，你要继承你父亲的精神，像他那样尽忠报国。 
English: Zhuang also said, "Uncle, I am now giving you this inscription. You should inherit the spirit of your father and serve the country loyally as he did.

古文：悝拜稽首曰： 对扬以辟之，勤大命施于烝彝鼎。 
现代文：孔懊于是下拜叩头说： 我将称扬君命以赞项我先祖之美德，努力实现您的厚望。
English: Kong Cai then bowed down and said, "I will praise Your Majesty's command, praise the virtues of my ancestors, and strive to fulfill Your lofty expectations."

古文：此卫孔悝之鼎铭也。古之君子论譔其先祖之美，而明着之后世者也。
现代文：所有这些，我都要把它刻在羔祭的彝鼎上。 ，这就是卫国孔哩的彝鼎上铭文。它也反映了古代的君子论述其先祖之美德并使之昭著于后世的这种情况。
English: All of this, I will engrave it on the steeple of the lamb sacrifice., This is the inscription on the steeple of the patriotic Kongli. It also reflects the situation of ancient gentlemen discussing the virtues of their ancestors and making them known to future generations.

古文：以比其身，以重其国家如此。
现代文：通过铭文，自己可以附名于下，可以把祖先所建功业在国家生活中所占有的重要意义颂扬一番。
English: Through the inscription, you can attach your name to it, and you can praise the importance of the achievements made by your ancestors in the life of the country.

古文：子孙之守宗庙社稷者，其先祖无美而称之，是诬也；有善而弗知，不明也；知而弗传，不仁也。
现代文：孔哩的铭文不过是一个例子而已。负有守卫宗庙社樱责任的子孙，其先祖如果没有优点而乱吹一通，那是欺骗；如果有优点而不知道，那是愚蠢；如果知道而不使流芳后世，那是麻木不仁。
English: The inscription of Kongli is just one example. The descendants of the ancestors who have the responsibility of guarding the family temple and shrine, if their ancestors have no merits and blow it, it is deception; if they have merits and do not know, it is stupidity; if they know and do not make it known to future generations, it is insensitive.

古文：此三者，君子之所耻也。
现代文：这三条中的任何一条，都是让君子感到耻辱的。
English: Any one of these three is a disgrace to a gentleman.

古文：昔者，周公旦有勋劳于天下。
现代文：从前周公为周代天下的巩固，建立了不朽的功勋。
English: From the previous Zhou Gong to the consolidation of Zhou Dynasty, he established an immortal merit.

古文：周公既没，成王、康王追念周公之所以勋劳者，而欲尊鲁；故赐之以重祭。外祭，则郊社是也；内祭，则大尝禘是也。
现代文：周公去世以后，周成王、周康王追念周公的不朽功勋，而打算在诸侯之中格外尊重鲁国，所以特赐鲁国可以提高其祭祀规格，具体地说，就是在郊外可以祭天，在太庙里可以以啼礼祭周公。
English: After the death of Zhou Gong, King Zhou Cheng and King Zhou Kang remembered the immortal merits of Zhou Gong, and intended to respect Lu in particular among the princes. Therefore, Lu can improve its sacrificial specifications, specifically, it can sacrifice heaven in the suburbs, and Zhou Gong can be sacrificed in the temple.

古文：夫大尝禘，升歌《清庙》，下而管《象》；朱干玉戚，以舞《大武》；八佾，以舞《大夏》；此天子之乐也。
现代文：以谛礼祭周公时，乐工登堂所唱的《清庙》，管乐队在堂下演奏的《象》，舞者手执红色盾牌和玉做的斧锁所跳的《大武》之舞，还有由八列舞队所跳的《大夏》之舞，这些统统都是天子才能使用的乐舞。
English: The "Clear Temple" sung by the musicians entering the hall, the "Elephant" played by the pipe band under the hall, the "Great Warrior" dance danced by the dancers holding red shields and jade ax locks, and the "Great Summer" dance danced by the eight-line dance team, all of which are music and dance that can only be used by God.

古文：康周公，故以赐鲁也。
现代文：为了褒奖周公，所以把这一套天子乐舞赐给了鲁国。
English: In order to reward Zhou Gong, this set of heavenly music and dance was given to Lu.

古文：子孙纂之，至于今不废，所以明周公之德而又以重其国也。
现代文：周公的子孙继承了这一套东西，直到今天还在使用，就是为了颂扬周公之德，同时又提高了鲁国在诸侯中的地位。
English: Zhou Gong's descendants inherited this set of things, which is still in use today, in order to praise Zhou Gong's virtue, while at the same time raising the status of Lu among the princes.

