古文：荀彧字文若，颍川颍阴人也。
现代文：荀彧字文若，是颍川郡颍阴县人。
English: He is a native of Suyin County, Suichuan County.

古文：祖父淑，字季和，朗陵令。
现代文：他的祖父荀淑，字季和，曾是郎陵县的县令。
English: His grandfather, Jishu, also known as Jihe, was once the county magistrate of Langling County.

古文：当汉顺、桓之间，知名当世。
现代文：在汉顺帝、桓帝时期就很有名望。
English: It became famous during the reigns of Emperor Han Shun and Emperor Kuan.

古文：有子八人，号曰八龙。
现代文：他有八个儿子，号称 八龙 。
English: He had eight sons, known as the Eight Dragons.

古文：彧父绲，济南相。
现代文：荀彧的父亲荀绲，担任过济南国相。
English: Zou's father, Zou, once served as Jinan's minister of state.

古文：叔父爽，司空。
现代文：叔父荀爽，担任过司空。
English: My uncle, Hao Shuang, used to be a flight attendant.

古文：彧年少时，南阳何颙异之，曰： 王佐才也。 
现代文：荀彧年少的时候，南阳的何颙就认为他是个奇才，评价说： 荀彧是辅佐帝王的人才啊。 
English: When he was very young, He Zhan of Nanyang thought he was a prodigy, saying: "He is a talent to assist the emperor."

古文：永汉元年，举孝廉，拜守宫令。
现代文：永汉元年，荀彧被推举为孝廉，被任命为守宫令。
English: In the first year of the Yonghan Dynasty, Zou was promoted to the rank of filial piety and was appointed as the palace guard.

古文：董卓之乱，求出补吏。
现代文：董卓作乱时，他请求出京到地方任职。
English: When Dong Zhuo caused a disturbance, he asked to be sent to Beijing to take up a local post.

古文：除亢父令，遂弃官归，谓父老曰： 颍川，四战之地也，天下有变，常为兵冲，宜亟去之，无久留。 
现代文：他被任命为亢父县令，就辞官回乡，并对当地百姓说： 颍川地理位置重要，是四面受敌的地方，现在天下出现动乱，这里就会成为军事要地，大家应该尽快离开不要久留。 
English: He was appointed as the magistrate of Shichifu County, and he returned to his hometown as soon as he resigned, and said to the local people: Shichuan's geographical location is important, it is a place that is subject to enemies on all sides. Now that there is turmoil in the world, it will become a military important place. Everyone should leave as soon as possible and not stay for a long time.

古文：乡人多怀土犹豫，会冀州牧同郡韩馥遣骑迎之，莫有随者，彧独将宗族至冀州。
现代文：但这里的百姓大多怀恋故地，犹疑不定，刚好冀州牧同郡人韩馥派遣骑兵来迎接他们转移，但没有人愿意跟随离开，只有荀彧带着族人迁到冀州。
English: But most of the people here are nostalgic for their hometowns and hesitant. It just so happened that Han Zheng, a Jizhou herdsman and county resident, sent cavalry to welcome their transfer, but no one was willing to leave with them. Only Zheng took the tribesmen and moved to Jizhou.

古文：而袁绍已夺馥位，待彧以上宾之礼。
现代文：但这时袁绍已经占据了韩馥的位置，对待荀彧依然很尊重。
English: However, at that time, Yuan Shao had already occupied Han Zheng's position, and still treated Zheng Zheng with great respect.

古文：彧弟谌及同郡辛评、郭图，皆为绍所任。
现代文：荀彧的弟弟荀谌和同郡人辛评、郭图都被袁绍任用。
English: Zou's younger brother Zou and fellow county residents Xin Cao and Guo Tu were all appointed by Yuan Shao.

古文：彧度绍终不能成大事，时太祖为奋武将军，在东郡。
现代文：荀彧估计袁绍最终也不会能成就功业，当时太祖还担任奋武将军，在东郡驻守。
English: Zou estimated that Yuan Shao would not be able to achieve his career in the end. At that time, his great-grandfather was still stationed in Dong County as General Fenwu.

古文：初平二年，彧去绍从太祖。
现代文：初平二年，荀彧离开袁绍前去追随太祖。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Yao left Yuan Shao to follow his grandfather.

古文：太祖大悦曰： 吾之子房也。 
现代文：太祖很高兴地说： 荀彧就是我的张良啊。 
English: The great-grandfather happily said, "Zhang Liang is my Zhang Liang."

古文：以为司马，时年二十九。
现代文：并任命他为司马，这时荀彧二十九岁。
English: and appointed him Sima, who was 29 years old at the time.

古文：是时，董卓威陵天下，太祖以问彧，彧曰： 卓暴虐已甚，必以乱终，无能为也。 
现代文：当时，董卓倚仗权势威慑天下，太祖问荀彧对此该怎么办，荀彧说： 董卓的残暴已经非常严重了，最后一定因为动乱灭亡，现在也做不了什么。 
English: At that time, Dong Zhuo relied on his power to intimidate the world. The great-grandfather asked Zou what to do about this. Zou said: Dong Zhuo's brutality has been very serious, and he will eventually perish because of the turmoil. There is nothing that can be done now.

古文：卓遣李傕等出关东，所过虏略，至颍川、陈留而还。
现代文：董卓派李傕等人率军出关东，经过的地方都大肆掳掠，直到颍川、陈留才返回。
English: Dong Zhuo sent Li Jie and others to lead the army out of Guandong, and they plundered and pillaged everywhere they passed. They did not return until they reached Shichuan and Chenlu.

古文：乡人留者多见杀略。
现代文：当初留在颍川的百姓大多都被杀了。
English: Most of the people who initially remained in the Lugu River were killed.

古文：明年，太祖领兖州牧，后为镇东将军，彧常以司马从。
现代文：第二年，太祖兼任兖州牧，后来又担任镇东将军，荀彧常常都是以司马的官职跟随太祖左右。
English: In the second year, Taizu concurrently served as the Bozhou magistrate, and later as the Zhendong general. He often followed Taizu around with the official post of Sima.

古文：兴平元年，太祖征陶谦，任彧留事。
现代文：兴平元年，太祖率军征讨陶谦，让荀彧留下来主持事务。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xingping, Emperor Taizu led an army to recruit Tao Qian, leaving Yao to preside over affairs.

古文：会张邈、陈宫以兖州反，潜迎吕布。
现代文：刚好遇上张邈、陈宫依据兖州造反，暗中奉迎吕布。
English: When he happened to meet Zhang Ye, Chen Gong rebelled on the basis of Bozhou and secretly supported Lü Bu.

古文：布既至，邈乃使刘翊告彧曰： 吕将军来助曹使君击陶谦，宜亟供其军食。 
现代文：吕布来到兖州以后，张邈才派使者刘翊对荀彧说： 吕将军是前来帮助曹使君讨伐陶谦的，应该尽快为他提供粮饷物资。 
English: It was only after Lü Bu came to Zhangzhou that Zhang Ye sent an envoy, Liu Ye, to say to Lü: General Lü has come to help Cao Shijun fight Tao Qian, and he should be provided with grain and supplies as soon as possible.

古文：众疑惑。
现代文：众人都心存疑虑。
English: Everyone has their doubts.

古文：彧知邈为乱，即勒兵设备，驰召东郡太守夏侯惇，而兖州诸城皆应布矣。
现代文：荀彧知道张邈是打算反叛的，立刻整肃军队，准备好装备，迅速召来东郡太守夏侯惇，但这时兖州的各县都已经顺应吕布了。
English: Yao knew that Zhang Ye was planning to rebel, so he immediately purged the army, prepared the equipment, and quickly summoned the governor of Dong County, Xia Houyao, but by this time, all counties in Zhangzhou had complied with Lvbu.

古文：时太祖悉军攻谦，留守兵少，而督将大吏多与邈、宫通谋。
现代文：当时太祖全军围攻陶谦，留下守卫的兵力较少，军中的将领和掌管大多都和张邈、陈宫串通了。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizu's entire army besieged Tao Qian, leaving fewer troops to guard it. Most of the generals and commanders in the army colluded with Zhang Ye and Chen Gong.

古文：惇至，其夜诛谋叛者数十人，众乃定。
现代文：夏侯军率部赶到，当晚就诛杀了数十个计划反叛的人，军中才平定下来。
English: Xia Hou's army arrived and killed dozens of people who were planning to rebel that night, and the army was finally pacified.

古文：豫州刺史郭贡帅众数万来至城下，或言与吕布同谋，众甚惧。
现代文：豫州刺史郭贡带领数万人马来到兖州城下，有人说他和吕布是同谋，城中人都十分害怕。
English: Guogong, the governor of Yuzhou, led tens of thousands of people to the city of Zhangzhou. Some people said that he and Lv Bu were accomplices. People in the city were very afraid.

古文：贡求见彧，彧将往。
现代文：郭贡请求和荀彧会面，荀彧准备前往。
English: Guo Gong requested a meeting with Zhai, and Zhai prepared to go.

古文：惇等曰： 君，一州镇也，往必危，不可。 
现代文：夏侯惇等人说： 您是镇守一州的人，若是前去一定很危险，不能去。 
English: Xia Houyao and others said: You are a person who guards one state, if you go forward it must be very dangerous, you can't go.

古文：彧曰： 贡与邈等，分非素结也，今来速，计必未定；及其未定说之，纵不为用，可使中立。
现代文：荀彧说： 郭贡和张邈等人，原来就不是一直互相勾结的，现在他率军赶来，一定是还没有下定决心；趁他还没下定决心的时候去游说他，就算不能为我们所用，也至少能让他保持中立。
English: Zou said: Guo Gong and Zhang Ye and others did not always collude with each other. Now that he has arrived with his army, he must not have made up his mind. If we can't use him for us, we can at least keep him neutral by lobbying him while he hasn't made up his mind.

古文：若先疑之，彼将怒而成计。 
现代文：如果现在就怀疑他，他一定会因恼怒而下决心的。 
English: If you doubt him now, he'll get angry and make up his mind.

古文：贡见彧无惧意，谓鄄城未易攻，遂引兵去。
现代文：郭贡看荀彧一点都不害怕，认为鄄城不容易攻占，就率军离开了。
English: Guo Gong was not afraid at all when he saw Handan. He thought that Handan was not easy to capture, so he led his army and left.

古文：又与程昱计，使说范、东阿，卒全三城，以待太祖。
现代文：荀彧又和程昱计划，让程昱去游说范县和东阿县，最终三座城都得以保全，等待太祖回军。
English: Zou and Cheng planned to have Cheng lobby Fan County and Dong'a County. In the end, all three cities were preserved, waiting for Taizu to return to the army.

古文：太祖自徐州还击布濮阳，布东走。
现代文：太祖率军从徐州返回，中途在濮阳和吕布交战，吕布失利，往东逃走。
English: Taizu led the army back from Xuzhou, and fought with Lvbu in Fenyang. Lvbu lost and fled eastward.

古文：二年夏，太祖军乘氏，大饥，人相食。
现代文：兴平二年夏天，太祖在乘氏驻军，但发生了饥荒，出现了人吃人的惨象。
English: In the summer of the second year of Xingping, Taizu was garrisoning troops with his clan, but a famine occurred, and a man-eating-man tragedy occurred.

古文：陶谦死，太祖欲遂取徐州，还乃定布。
现代文：陶谦死后，太祖想要趁机占据徐州，再返回讨伐吕布。
English: After the death of Tao Qian, Taizu wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to occupy Xuzhou and then return to attack Lvbu.

古文：彧曰： 昔高祖保关中，光武据河内，皆深根固本以制天下，进足以胜敌，退足以坚守，故虽有困败而终济大业。
现代文：荀彧说： 从前高祖皇帝保有关中，汉光武帝占据河内，都是依靠着坚实的基业去控制天下，这样进攻可以制敌，退守也足以坚守，所以虽然途中遭遇过失败但最终还是成就了大业。
English: Hao said: From the time of Emperor Gaozu to the time of Emperor Bao, Han Guangwu's occupation of Hanoi relied on a solid foundation to control the world. In this way, the attack could subdue the enemy, and the retreat was enough to hold firm. Therefore, although there were failures on the way, the great cause was finally achieved.

古文：将军本以兖州首事，平山东之难，百姓无不归心悦服。
现代文：将军您本来是依据兖州起事，平定了山东地区的动乱，百姓没有不心悦诚服的。
English: General, you originally calmed the unrest in Shandong based on the Zhangzhou Uprising, and the people were not unsatisfied.

古文：且河、济，天下之要地也，今虽残坏，犹易以自保，是亦将军之关中、河内也，不可以不先定。
现代文：况且兖州横跨黄河、济水，是兵家重地现在虽然破败，但以其自身实力自保，还是容易的，这就是您的关中和河内，不可以不先平定。
English: Moreover, Zhangzhou straddles the Yellow River and Jishui. Although the military stronghold is now ruined, it is still easy to protect itself with its own strength. This is your Guanzhong and Hanoi, which must first be pacified.

古文：今以破李封、薛兰，若分兵东击陈宫，宫必不敢西顾，以其间勒兵收熟麦，约食畜谷，一举而布可破也。
现代文：现在李封、薛兰已经被攻破，如若分出一部分兵力往东攻打陈宫，陈宫一定不敢再往西，我们可以在这期间率兵收割麦子，储备粮食，就可以全力出击，那一定就能攻破吕布。
English: Now that Li Feng and Xue Lan have been defeated, if we allocate a part of our forces to attack Chen Gong to the east, Chen Gong will definitely not dare to go west again. During this time, we can lead our troops to harvest wheat and store grain, and then we can attack with all our strength. Then we will definitely be able to defeat Lvbu.

古文：破布，然后南结扬州，共讨袁术，以临淮、泗。
现代文：打败吕布后往南联合扬州的刘繇，合军讨伐袁术，将势力扩展到淮水、泗水地区。
English: After defeating Lvbu, he went south to unite with Liu Bei in Yangzhou, joined forces to fight Yuan Shu, and expanded his power to Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：若舍布而东，多留兵则不足用，少留兵则民皆保城，不得樵采。
现代文：如果放弃攻打吕布而往东进攻徐州，那留守的兵力多，就不够攻城，如果留守的兵力少，那就要百姓都来守城，就没有办法砍柴收麦。
English: If you give up attacking Lvbu and attack Xuzhou to the east, the remaining troops will not be enough to attack the city. If the remaining troops are few, then the people will have to defend the city, and there will be no way to cut wood and collect wheat.

古文：布乘虚寇暴，民心益危，唯鄄城、范、卫可全，其馀非己之有，是无兖州也。
现代文：吕布如果趁机侵犯施暴，就会导致民心不稳，如果只保全了鄄城、范、卫三城，其它地区都不为我们所有，那也就等于失去了兖州。
English: If Lvbu takes advantage of the opportunity to invade and commit violence, it will lead to instability in the hearts of the people. If only the three cities of Handan, Fan and Wei are preserved, and other areas are not owned by us, then it is tantamount to losing Handan.

古文：若徐州不定，将军当安所归乎？
现代文：如果到时候徐州不能攻破，将军您要在哪里安身呢？
English: If Xuzhou cannot be broken at that time, General, where will you settle down?

古文：且陶谦虽死，徐州未易亡也。
现代文：况且陶谦虽然死了，但徐州也不是容易攻占的。
English: Moreover, although Tao Qian is dead, Xuzhou is not easy to capture.

古文：彼惩往年之败，将惧而结亲，相为表里。
现代文：他们会借鉴往年失败的教训，会因工具而紧密联系，互相照应。
English: They will learn from the failures of previous years, will be closely linked by tools, and will take care of each other.

古文：今东方皆以收麦，必坚壁清野以待将军，将军攻之不拔，略之无获，不出十日，则十万之众未战而自困耳。
现代文：现在徐州已经开始收麦，一定会巩固壁垒，清楚郊野来等待将军，将军您进攻不能取胜，抢夺也没有收获，不到十天，我军十万人马还没交战就已经疲乏不堪了。
English: Now Xuzhou has begun to harvest wheat, it will surely consolidate the barriers, clear the countryside to wait for the general. General, you cannot win the attack, and there is no gain in the snatch. In less than ten days, our army of 100,000 people is already exhausted before the battle.

古文：前讨徐州，威罚实行，其子弟念父兄之耻，必人自为守，无降心，就能破之，尚不可有也。
现代文：上次征讨徐州，实行以刑罚治理的措施，徐州人想到父兄被杀的耻辱，一定会自发守城，没有投降的想法，就算攻占了徐州，也是不能拥有的。
English: The last time Xuzhou was conquered, the measures of governance by punishment were implemented. Xuzhou people, thinking of the shame of their father and brother being killed, will certainly spontaneously defend the city. There is no idea of surrender. Even if Xuzhou is conquered, it cannot be owned.

古文：夫事固有弃此取彼者，以大易小可也，以安易危可也，权一时之势，不患本之不固可也。
现代文：天下之事，本来就有舍弃这个去拿那个的，只要是用大的换取小的，用平安的换掉危险的就可以了，权衡现在的局势，不担心根基不牢固也是可以的。
English: In the world, there are always people who give up this to get that, as long as they exchange the big for the small, and the safe for the dangerous. It is also possible to weigh the current situation and not worry about the foundation not being solid.

古文：今三者莫利，愿将军熟虑之。 
现代文：现在这三方面没有一个是有利的，希望将军您好好考虑吧。 
English: Now none of these three aspects is favorable, I hope you will consider it well.

古文：太祖乃止。
现代文：太祖才才打消了攻徐州的念头。
English: It was only then that the great-grandfather gave up the idea of uniting with Yuan Shao.

古文：大收麦，复与布战，分兵平诸县。
现代文：全力收割麦子，然后再次和吕布交战，同时分出人马平定各县。
English: They did their best to harvest the wheat, and then they fought with Lvbu again, and at the same time, they were able to subdue the counties.

古文：布败走，兖州遂平。
现代文：吕布战败逃走，太祖就平定了兖州。
English: When Lvbu was defeated and fled, Taizu pacified Zhangzhou.

古文：建安元年，太祖击破黄巾。
现代文：建安元年，太祖率军攻破黄巾军。
English: In the first year of Jianan, Taizu led the army to defeat the Yellow Turban Army.

古文：汉献帝自河东还洛阳。
现代文：汉献帝从河东返回洛阳。
English: Emperor Han Xian returned to Luoyang from Hedong.

古文：太祖议奉迎都许，或以山东未平，韩暹、杨奉新将天子到洛阳，北连张杨，未可卒制。
现代文：太祖想要将献帝迎到许县，有人认为山东地区还没平定，韩暹、杨奉刚将天子迎到洛阳，往北又与张杨联合，还不能立刻控制他们。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to welcome the emperor to Xu County. Some people think that Shandong has not yet been pacified. Han Siem and Yang Bong just welcomed the emperor to Luoyang, and then united with Zhang Yang to the north. It is not possible to immediately control them.

古文：彧劝太祖曰： 昔晋文纳周襄王而诸侯景从，高祖东伐为义帝缟素而天下归心。
现代文：荀彧劝说太祖： 从前晋文王奉迎周襄王，诸侯无不跟随，汉高祖东征项羽之时，为义帝穿丧服，天下万民都愿意归顺。
English: He persuaded the great-grandfather: In the past, when the King of Jin and the King of Wen followed the King of Zhou and the princes all followed, when the Emperor of Han and the Emperor of Gao led the Eastern Expedition, they wore mourning clothes for the righteous emperor, and all the people in the world were willing to submit.

古文：自天子播越，将军首唱义兵，徒以山东扰乱，未能远赴关右，然犹分遣将帅，蒙险通使，虽御难于外，乃心无不在王室，是将军匡天下之素志也。
现代文：自从天子开始逃亡，将军您是第一个呼吁起兵的，只是因为山东地区乱象纷纷，所以一直未能奔向关右地区，但还是分兵，派出将领冒着风险和朝廷联络，虽然在外努力挽救朝廷危难，但心里一直牵挂着王室，这是一直以来匡扶天下的志向。
English: Since Tianzi began to flee, General, you were the first to call for troops. However, because of the chaos in Shandong, you have not been able to rush to the Guanzhong area, but still sent detachments of troops. The dispatched generals took the risk of liaising with the imperial court. Although they tried to save the imperial court from danger, they have always been concerned about the royal family. This has always been the aspiration of supporting the world.

古文：今车驾旋轸，东京榛芜，义士有存本之思，百姓感旧而增哀。
现代文：现在天子返回洛阳，但洛阳破败荒芜，城中义士都有保存朝廷的想法，百姓更因感念天子而哀伤不已。
English: Now the heavenly son has returned to Luoyang, but Luoyang is ruined and desolate. The righteous in the city all have the idea of preserving the imperial court, and the people are even more saddened by their feelings for the heavenly son.

古文：诚因此时，奉主上以从民望，大顺也；秉至公以服雄杰，大略也；扶弘义以致英俊，大德也。
现代文：应该趁着这个时机，奉迎天子回归，顺应民意，这是很好的做法；怀着大公无私的想法，就会使天下英雄豪杰都信服，这就是雄才大略；匡扶正义，使天下英杰都前来归顺，这是有大德。
English: It is a good practice to take advantage of this opportunity to welcome the return of the Son of Heaven and conform to public opinion; with the idea of selflessness, the heroes of the world will be convinced, which is a great talent; supporting justice and making the world's heroes come to submit, this is a great virtue.

古文：天下虽有逆节，必不能为累，明矣。
现代文：这样就算天下有人反叛，也一定不会成为我们的祸患，这是很明确的。
English: In this way, even if there are rebels in the world, it will definitely not be our misfortune, this is very clear.

古文：韩暹、杨奉其敢为害！
现代文：韩暹、杨奉这些人又怎么敢作恶呢！
English: Han Siem and Yang Bong, how dare these people do evil!

古文：若不时定，四方生心，后虽虑之，无及。 
现代文：现在如果不趁实际平定，各地的人都生出狼子野心，那就算以后再来考虑，也是来不及的。
English: If we don't take advantage of the fact that things are calming down now, and people all over the country are developing werewolf ambitions, then it will be too late to think about it later.

古文：太祖遂至洛阳，奉迎天子都许。
现代文：太祖就到了洛阳，奉迎天子迁都许县。
English: The great-grandfather arrived in Luoyang and moved the capital to Xu County.

古文：天子拜太祖大将军，进彧为汉侍中，守尚书令。
现代文：天子授予太祖大将军之职，提升荀彧为汉侍中，代理尚书令。
English: Heaven's Son conferred the position of Grand Patriarch General and promoted him to Han Chamberlain, acting for Shang Shuling.

古文：常居中持重，太祖虽征伐在外，军国事皆与彧筹焉。
现代文：荀彧一直在朝中处理政务，太祖虽然在外征讨，但军国大事都和荀彧商讨。
English: Yao has always been in charge of government affairs between the two countries. Although Taizu fought abroad, he always discussed military affairs with Yao.

古文：太祖问彧： 谁能代卿为我谋者？ 
现代文：太祖问荀彧说： 有谁能代替你为我谋划事情呢？ 
English: My great-grandfather asked, "Who can plan for me instead of you?"

古文：彧言 荀攸、锺繇 。
现代文：荀彧说： 荀攸、钟繇可以。 
English: The dragonfly said, "You can sing, and so can the bell."

古文：先是，彧言策谋士，进戏志才。
现代文：之前，荀彧谈到谋士，推荐了戏志才。
English: Previously, Hao talked about a mentor and recommended the role of a playwright.

古文：志才卒，又进郭嘉。
现代文：戏志才死后，又举荐了郭嘉。
English: It was only after the playwright's death that Guo Jia was recommended for the role.

古文：太祖以彧为知人，诸所进达皆称职，唯严象为扬州，韦康为凉州，后败亡。
现代文：太祖认为荀彧善于识人，他所举荐的人都是称职的，只有推荐严象为扬州刺史，韦康为凉州刺史后，他们之后都战败身亡了。
English: The great-grandfather thought that Zou was good at recognizing people, and the people he recommended were all competent. Only after recommending Yan Zi for Yangzhou and Wei Kang for Liangzhou, they were all defeated and died.

古文：自太祖之迎天子也，袁绍内怀不服。
现代文：自从太祖将天子迎到许县，袁绍心中不服气。
English: Ever since the great-grandfather welcomed the heavenly son to Xu County, Yuan Shao was not convinced.

古文：绍既并河朔，天下畏其强。
现代文：袁绍已经占据了河朔地区，天下都畏惧他的强大。
English: Yuan Shao has already occupied the Hexuo region, and the whole world is afraid of his power.

古文：太祖方东忧吕布，南拒张绣，而绣败太祖军於宛。绍益骄，与太祖书，其辞悖慢。
现代文：太祖正在为东面的吕布担忧，又要抵抗南边的张绣，而张绣又在宛城大败太祖军队，袁绍日益骄横，给太祖的书信上，言语很狂悖轻慢。
English: The great-grandfather was worried about Lvbu in the east and wanted to resist Zhang Xiu in the south, and Zhang Xiu defeated the great-grandfather's army in Wancheng. Yuan Shao became increasingly arrogant. In his letters to the great-grandfather, his words were very arrogant.

古文：太祖大怒，出入动静变於常，众皆谓以失利於张绣故也。
现代文：太祖非常生气，出入的言行举止都和往常不同，众人都说是因为跟张绣交战失败。
English: The great-grandfather was very angry, his words and actions were different from usual. Many people said that it was because of his failed battle with Zhang Xiu.

古文：锺繇以问彧，彧曰： 公之聪明，必不追咎往事，殆有他虑。 
现代文：锺繇将这件事问荀彧，荀彧说： 以曹公的聪慧，一定不会追究责怪过去的事，大概是有其他忧虑的事情。 
English: When I asked him about this, he said, "With Cao Gong's wisdom, he will not investigate and blame the past. He probably has other worries."

古文：则见太祖问之，太祖乃以绍书示彧，曰： 今将讨不义，而力不敌，何如？ 
现代文：于是在拜见太祖的时候就问了这件事，太祖就将袁绍的信件拿给荀彧看，说： 我现在打算讨伐这些不义之人，但是力量不足，该怎么办呢？ 
English: So he asked about it when he visited the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather showed the letter from Yuan Shao to Zou and said, "I now intend to fight these unjust people, but I don't have enough strength. What should I do?"

古文：彧曰： 古之成败者，诚有其才，虽弱必强，苟非其人，虽强易弱，刘、项之存亡，足以观矣。
现代文：荀彧说： 古往今来较量的人，如果确实有才能，虽然暂时弱小也会强盛起来，如果没有才能，即使刚开始时强盛，也会渐渐衰弱，看刘邦和项羽的成败生死，就知道了。
English: Zou said: People who compete from ancient times to the present, if they really have talent, although temporarily weak, will become strong. If they do not have talent, even if they are strong at the beginning, they will gradually weaken. You can see the success or failure of Liu Bang and Xiang Yu.

古文：今与公争天下者，唯袁绍尔。
现代文：现在和您争夺天下的，只有袁绍而已。
English: Now, only Yuan Shao is competing with you for the world.

古文：绍貌外宽而内忌，任人而疑其心，公明达不拘，唯才所宜，此度胜也。
现代文：但袁绍看起来宽和实际上内心猜忌，任用贤人却总是怀疑他们的用心，但您明白通达不拘小节，只要是人才都重用，这是您在度量上胜过袁绍的。
English: However, Yuan Shao seems broad-minded and is actually suspicious at heart. He always doubts the intentions of the wise men he appoints, but you understand that no matter what, as long as the talent is reused, you are better than Yuan Shao in terms of measurement.

古文：绍迟重少决，失在后机，公能断大事，应变无方，此谋胜也。
现代文：袁绍犹疑不定，缺少决断，总是错失先机，但您遇事有决断，不拘于应变方法，这是您在谋略上胜过袁绍的。
English: Yuan Shao hesitates, lacks determination, and always misses the opportunity, but you have a decision in case of trouble, regardless of the contingency method, which is your advantage over Yuan Shao in strategy.

古文：绍御军宽缓，法令不立，士卒虽众，其实难用，公法令既明，赏罚必行，士卒虽寡，皆争致死，此武胜也。
现代文：袁绍治军不严，没有确立军中法令，所以军中人数虽多，但实际上很难发挥作用，但您法令严明，有功必赏有过必罚，所以士兵虽然少，但都愿意为您效死力，这是您在武力上胜过袁绍的。
English: Yuan Shao was not strict in governing the army and did not establish military regulations, so although the number of soldiers in the army was large, it was actually difficult to play a role. However, your regulations are strict, and if there is merit, there must be reward and if there is punishment, so although there are few soldiers, they are all willing to do their best for you. This is because you are better than Yuan Shao in terms of military power.

古文：绍凭世资，从容饰智，以收名誉，故士之寡能好问者多归之，公以至仁待人，推诚心不为虚美，行己谨俭，而与有功者无所吝惜，故天下忠正效实之士咸愿为用，此德胜也。
现代文：袁绍仗着世家公子的资本，从容不迫，美化自己的才智，沽名钓誉，所以谋士里缺少能人但追求虚名的人大多愿意归附他，而您以至高的仁德待人，推心置腹不求虚名，行为上严谨恭俭，对待有功的将士不吝啬赏赐，所以天下间忠诚正直努力实干的人才都愿意为您所用，这是在德行上胜过袁绍的。
English: Yuan Shao, relying on the capital of the son of the family, took it easy, beautified his talent, and sought fame and reputation. Therefore, there is a lack of capable people among the advisers, but most of those who pursue a false name are willing to join him. And you treat people with the highest benevolence, put your heart and soul into not seeking a false name, are strict and frugal in your behavior, and do not begrudge rewards to meritorious soldiers. Therefore, the world's loyal, honest and hard-working people are willing to be used for you. This is superior to Yuan Shao in virtue.

古文：夫以四胜辅天子，扶义征伐，谁敢不从？
现代文：凭借这四个方面辅佐天子，匡扶正义征伐四方，有谁敢不听从？
English: With these four aspects to assist the Son of Heaven, to support the righteous conquest of the four directions, who would dare not to obey?

古文：绍之强其何能为！ 
现代文：袁绍强大，又能做什么呢？ 
English: Yuan Shao is powerful, but what can he do?

古文：太祖悦。
现代文：太祖很高兴。
English: The great-grandfather was delighted.

古文：彧曰： 不先取吕布，河北亦未易图也。 
现代文：荀彧说： 不先打败吕布，河北地区也不容易攻占。 
English: Zhai said: Without defeating Lvbu first, it is not easy to occupy the Hebei region.

古文：太祖曰： 然。
现代文：太祖说： 你说得对。
English: The great-grandfather said, "You are right.

古文：吾所惑者，又恐绍侵扰关中，乱羌、胡，南诱蜀汉，是我独以兖、豫抗天下六分之五也。
现代文：我所疑惑的，是担忧袁绍又进犯关中地区，使羌、胡等少数民族作乱，又引诱南面的蜀汉，那我就只能凭借兖州、豫州两地抵御天下六分之五的兵力，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: What I doubt is that I am worried that Yuan Shao will invade the Guanzhong region again, make the Min, Hu and other ethnic minorities rebel, and lure Shu Han to the south. Then I can only rely on Zhangzhou and Yuzhou to resist five-sixths of the world's troops. What should I do?

古文：为将奈何？ 彧曰： 关中将帅以十数，莫能相一，唯韩遂、马超最强。
现代文：荀彧说： 关中地区的将领统帅有几十个，没有人能将他们联合起来，其中只有韩遂和马超是最强的。
English: Zou said: There are dozens of generals and commanders in Guanzhong District, and no one can unite them. Among them, only Han Sui and Ma Chao are the strongest.

古文：彼见山东方争，必各拥众自保。
现代文：他们看见山东地区正在相争，一定会拥兵自保。
English: They see that the Shandong region is in conflict, and they will certainly support the troops to protect themselves.

古文：今若抚以恩德，遣使连和，相持虽不能久安，比公安定山东，足以不动。
现代文：现在如果以恩德招抚他们，派出使者和他们联络交好，互相牵制虽然不能长久安定，但在您平定山东地区之前，足够让他们不妄动了。
English: Now, if you appease them with benevolence, send emissaries to contact and make friends with them, and restrain each other, although it cannot be stable for a long time, it will be enough for them not to make any rash moves until you have pacified the Shandong region.

古文：锺繇可属以西事，则公无忧矣。 
现代文：而可以将西边的事务托付给锺繇，那您就没有什么忧虑的了。 
English: On the other hand, you can entrust the affairs of the west side to Zou, then you have nothing to worry about.

古文：三年，太祖既破张绣，东禽吕布，定徐州，遂与袁绍相拒。
现代文：建安三年，太祖攻破张绣之后，又率军往东生擒了吕布，平定了徐州，然后和袁绍对峙。
English: In the third year of Jian'an, after Taizu broke through Zhangxiu, he led the army to Dongsheng, captured Lvbu, leveled Xuzhou, and then confronted Yuan Shao.

古文：孔融谓彧曰： 绍地广兵强；田丰、许攸，智计之士也，为之谋；审配、逢纪，尽忠之臣也，任其事；颜良、文丑，勇冠三军，统其兵，殆难克乎！ 
现代文：孔融对荀彧说： 袁绍地盘广大，兵强马壮；田丰、许攸都是有智谋的人，为他出谋划策；审配、逢纪都是尽忠职守的良臣，为他所用；颜良、文丑都是勇冠三军的，为他统率军队，只怕很难攻克啊！ 
English: Kong Rong said to Yao: Yuan Shao's territory is vast and his army is strong and powerful; Tian Feng and Xu You are both men of wisdom and strategy, and they have made plans and suggestions for him; Qiu Bao and Feng Ji are both good ministers who are loyal to their duties, and they are used by him; Yan Liang and Wen Jiu are both champions of the three armies, and they lead the army for him, and it is very difficult to defeat them!

古文：彧曰： 绍兵虽多而法不整。
现代文：荀彧说： 袁绍兵力岁多但军法不严整。
English: Zou said: Yuan Shao's military strength is more than years old, but the military law is not strict.

古文：田丰刚而犯上，许攸贪而不治。
现代文：田丰刚戾又好冒犯上级，许攸贪婪而不能约束。
English: Tian Feng Gangyao is also good at offending superiors. He is greedy and cannot be restrained.

古文：审配专而无谋，逢纪果而自用，此二人留知后事，若攸家犯其法，必不能纵也，不纵，攸必为变。
现代文：审配专权而没有智谋，逢纪果决而刚愎自用，这两人被留下来管理后方，如果许攸家违背法令，他们一定不会纵容，那许攸一定叛变。
English: The two men were left in charge of the rear, and if Xu Youya violated the law, they would not tolerate it, and Xu Youya would certainly rebel.

古文：颜良、文丑，一夫之勇耳，可一战而禽也。 
现代文：颜良、文丑，只不过是匹夫之勇，一战就可以生擒他们。 
English: Yan Liang, Wen Jiu, are just the courage of a peacock, and they can be killed in a single battle.

古文：五年，与绍连战。
现代文：建安五年，太祖和袁绍多次交战。
English: In the 5th year of Jianan, Taizu and Yuan Shao fought many times.

古文：太祖保官渡，绍围之。
现代文：太祖固守官渡，袁绍率军将他包围。
English: Emperor Taizu held fast to Guandu, and Yuan Shao and his army encircled him.

古文：太祖军粮方尽，书与彧，议欲还许以引绍。
现代文：太祖军粮快要吃完的时候，写信给荀彧，商议着打算率军退回许县来引开袁绍军队。
English: When Taizu's army was about to run out of food, he wrote to Yao, discussing his plan to lead the army back to Xu County to lead Yuan Shao's army away.

古文：彧曰： 今军食虽少，未若楚、汉在荥阳、成皋间也。
现代文：荀彧说： 现在军粮虽然少，但也还不像楚汉相争之时在荥阳、成皋之间那样艰难。
English: Zou said: Although there is less military food now, it is not as difficult as it was between Shenyang and Chengdu when Chu and Han were fighting.

古文：是时刘、项莫肯先退，先退者势屈也。
现代文：那时刘邦和项羽没有谁愿意先撤军，因为先退走的人就落了下风。
English: At that time, neither Liu Bang nor Xiang Yu was willing to withdraw first, because those who retreated first lost the advantage.

古文：公以十分居一之众，画地而守之，扼其喉而不得进，已半年矣。
现代文：现在您仅依靠着只是袁绍军队十分之一的队伍就地死守，扼住袁绍咽喉使他不能前进，已有半年之久。
English: Now you only rely on a team that is only one-tenth of Yuan Shao's army, and you have been holding Yuan Shao's throat so that he cannot advance for half a year.

古文：情见势竭，必将有变，此用奇之时，不可失也。 
现代文：现在已经了解敌人的状况，知道他的声势正在衰竭，局势一定会发生变化，这就是用奇计的时机，千万不要错失啊。 
English: Now that we understand the enemy's situation and know that his momentum is waning, the situation is bound to change. This is the time to use a stratagem. Don't miss it.

古文：太祖乃住。
现代文：太祖才留在在官渡。
English: The great-grandfather only stayed in Kanto.

古文：遂以奇兵袭绍别屯，斩其将淳于琼等，绍退走。
现代文：然后派出奇兵偷袭袁绍驻扎在别处得到部队，斩杀他的大将淳于琼等人，袁绍败走。
English: He then sent a special force to attack Yuan Shao, who was stationed elsewhere, and killed his general, Chun Yu Qiong, and others. Yuan Shao was defeated and fled.

古文：审配以许攸家不法，收其妻子，攸怒叛绍；颜良、文丑临阵授首；田丰以谏见诛，皆如彧所策。
现代文：审配因为许攸不受法令，将他的妻儿都收押起来，许攸大怒，背叛了袁绍；颜良、文丑在阵前被斩首；田丰因为劝谏被杀，都像荀彧所说的那样。
English: Because Xu Youyou was not subject to the law, the judge detained his wife and children, and Xu Youyou was furious and betrayed Yuan Shao; Yan Liang and Wenyu were beheaded before the battle; Tian Feng was killed for persuading Yu, all as Yu said.

古文：六年，太祖就谷东平之安民，粮少，不足与河北相支，欲因绍新破，以其间击讨刘表。
现代文：建安六年，太祖到东平国的安民县筹集军粮，但粮食太少，不足以和河北相比，太祖想要趁着刚打败袁绍，利用这个时间征讨刘表。
English: In the sixth year of Jian'an, Taizu went to Anmin County in Dongping Province to collect military grain, but the grain was too small to compare with that in Hebei. Taizu wanted to take advantage of the fact that he had just defeated Yuan Shao and use this time to solicit Liu Biao.

古文：彧曰： 今绍败，其众离心，宜乘其困，遂定之；而背兖、豫，远师江、汉，若绍收其馀烬，承虚以出人后，则公事去矣。 
现代文：荀彧说： 现在袁绍一定失败，部下离散，应该趁着他人马困乏的时候，一举平定他；而我们现在背靠兖州、豫州，如果兴师动众远征江汉地区，要是袁绍趁机召集余众，乘着我们后方空虚大举进攻，那您的大业就没有指望了。 
English: Zhai said: Now Yuan Shao is sure to fail, his subordinates are scattered, and he should take advantage of the time when other people's horses are exhausted to pacify him in one fell swoop; and we are now backed by Zhangzhou and Yuzhou, if we mobilize the expeditionary force to the Jianghan region, if Yuan Shao takes the opportunity to gather the rest of the people and take advantage of the emptiness behind us to attack, then your great cause will have no hope.

古文：太祖复次于河上。
现代文：于是太祖又在黄河岸边驻扎。
English: As a result, the great-grandfather was stationed on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：绍病死，太祖渡河，击绍子谭、尚，而高幹、郭援侵略河东，关右震动，锺繇帅马腾等击破之。
现代文：袁绍因病去世后，太祖率军渡过黄河攻打袁绍的儿子袁谭、袁尚；而高干、郭援进犯河东郡，关右地区都被震动，锺繇率领马腾等人大败了高干等人。
English: After Yuan Shao died of illness, Taizu led an army across the Yellow River to attack Yuan Shao's sons Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang; while Gao Gan and Guo Yuan invaded Hedong County, Guanzhong District was shaken, and Zou led by Ma Teng and others defeated Gao Gan and others.

古文：语在繇传。
现代文：这件事《钟繇传》中有详细记载。
English: This event is recorded in detail in "The Tale of the Bell Jar."

古文：八年，太祖录彧前后功，表封彧为万岁亭侯。
现代文：建安八年，太祖统计荀彧先后立下的功劳，上表请求封荀彧为万岁亭侯。
English: In the eighth year of Jian'an, the great-grandfather of the statistics of the merit of successively setting up, the above table requested the seal of the Long-lived Pavilion.

古文：九年，太祖拔邺，领冀州牧。
现代文：建安九年，太祖攻占了邺城，兼任冀州牧。
English: In the ninth year of Jian'an, Taizu conquered Lucheng and also served as the leader of Jizhou.

古文：或说太祖 宜复古置九州，则冀州所制者广大，天下服矣。 
现代文：有人对太祖说： 应该恢复古代制度，设立九州，那么冀州州所控制的地盘广大，天下就会服从您了。 
English: Someone said to Taizu: If you should restore the ancient system and establish Kyushu, then the vast territory controlled by Jizhou will obey you.

古文：太祖将从之，彧言曰： 若是，则冀州当得河东、冯翊、扶风、西河、幽、并之地，所夺者众。
现代文：太祖即将听从他的建议，荀彧说： 如果是这样。那冀州就会包括现在河东、冯诩、扶风、河西、幽州、并州的地域，那来争夺的人就会多了。
English: The great-grandfather was about to follow his advice, and Zou said, "If this is the case, then the province of Naji will include the regions of Hedong, Fengye, Fufeng, Hexi, Yuzhou, and Bianzhou, and there will be more people competing for it."

古文：前日公破袁尚，禽审配，海内震骇，必人人自恐不得保其土地，守其兵众也；今使分属冀州，将皆动心。
现代文：不久前您击败袁尚，生擒了审配，天下惊惧，必定每个人都担心不能保有自己的地盘，守住自己的军队；现在让他们分属冀州，都已经心生想法。
English: Not long ago, you defeated Yuan Shang, won the audition, and the world was shocked. Everyone must be worried about not being able to keep their own territory and keep their own army. Now let them belong to Jizhou, they have already thought about it.

古文：且人多说关右诸将以闭关之计；今闻此，以为必以次见夺。
现代文：况且很多人都说关右地区的将领将要以闭关自守为计；现在听说这样的消息，一定认为会被一个一个吞并。
English: Moreover, many people said that the generals in the Guan Yu region would close the gate for self-preservation; now that I have heard such news, I must think that they will be annexed one by one.

古文：一旦生变，虽有守善者，转相胁为非，则袁尚得宽其死，而袁谭怀贰，刘表遂保江、汉之间，天下未易图也。
现代文：一旦发生变故，就算有坚守正道的人，在威逼利诱之下也会助纣为虐，那么袁尚的死期就会推迟，而袁谭也会生出二心，刘表趁机固守江汉的地盘，天下就不容易夺取了。
English: In the event of a change of fortune, even if there are people who adhere to the right path, they will also help the tyrant under the temptation of coercion and profit. Then Yuan Shang's death will be delayed, and Yuan Tan will also give birth to two hearts. Liu table will take the opportunity to firmly defend the territory of Jianghan, and the world will not be easy to seize.

古文：愿公急引兵先定河北，然后修复旧京，南临荆州，责贡之不入，则天下咸知公意，人人自安。
现代文：希望您迅速率军，先平定河北地区，再修整洛阳，往南发兵荆州，指责刘表不向朝廷进贡，那天下之人都能明白您的想法了，人人都会安心。
English: I hope that you will quickly lead the army, first pacify the Hebei region, then rectify Luoyang, send troops to Jingzhou in the south, and accuse Liu Biao of not paying tribute to the imperial court. Then everyone in the world will understand your thoughts, and everyone will be at ease.

古文：天下大定，乃议古制，此社稷长久之利也。 
现代文：天下安定之后，再商议恢复古代制度，这才是对江山社稷长久有利的办法。 
English: After the world is stable, then discuss the restoration of the ancient system, which is a long-term beneficial way for the country and society.

古文：太祖遂寝九州议。
现代文：于是太祖停止了恢复九州的计划。
English: As a result, Taizu stopped the plan to restore Kyushu.

古文：是时荀攸常为谋主。
现代文：当时荀攸是太祖主要的谋士。
English: At that time, Zou You was the main strategist of the great ancestor.

古文：彧兄衍以监军校尉守邺，都督河北事。
现代文：荀彧的兄长荀衍以监军校尉的身份留守邺城，督领河北地区事务。
English: Zou's elder brother, Zou Yan, stayed in Zoucheng as a supervising army lieutenant, supervising the affairs of the Hebei region.

古文：太祖之征袁尚也，高幹密遣兵谋袭邺，衍逆觉，尽诛之，以功封列侯。
现代文：太祖征讨袁绍的时候，高幹暗中派兵偷袭邺城，荀衍事先就察觉了，将高幹等人全部诛杀，因为这一功劳被封为列侯。
English: When the Great Ancestor was conquering Yuan Shao, Gao Gan secretly sent troops to attack the city of Handan. Handan noticed this in advance and killed all of Gao Gan and the others, for which he was made a vassal.

古文：太祖以女妻彧长子惲，后称安阳公主。
现代文：太祖将自己的女儿嫁给荀彧的长子荀恽，后被称为安阳公主。
English: The great-great-grandfather married his daughter to the eldest son of Yao, Yao, and was later known as the Anyang Princess.

古文：彧及攸并贵重，皆谦冲节俭，禄赐散之宗族知旧，家无馀财。
现代文：荀彧和荀攸都位高权重，但都谦虚谨慎，也很节俭，将得到的俸禄和赏赐分散给族人旧交，家中没有什么多余的财物。
English: Although both Zou and Zou Youdu were high-ranking officials, they were modest, prudent and frugal. They distributed their salaries and rewards to their old friends, and there were no superfluous belongings in their homes.

古文：十二年，复增彧邑千户，合二千户。
现代文：建安十二年，朝廷又为荀彧增加食邑一千户，和之前的一共两千户。
English: In the twelfth year of Jian'an, the imperial court added another thousand households to the food villages, bringing the total to two thousand.

古文：太祖将伐刘表，问彧策安出，彧曰： 今华夏已平，南土知困矣。
现代文：太祖即将征讨刘表，询问荀彧有什么好的计划，荀彧说： 现在中原各地已经平定，南方的就知道处境困难了。
English: The great-grandfather was about to collect Liu's watch, and asked Zou what good plans he had. Zou said: Now that the Central Plains have been pacified, the South knows the situation is difficult.

古文：可显出宛、叶而间行轻进，以掩其不意。 
现代文：可以表面上出兵宛城、叶县，但暗中过小路轻装前进，趁其不备攻打。 
English: On the surface, it is possible to send troops to Wancheng and Ye County, but secretly cross the road and advance lightly, taking advantage of their unpreparedness to attack.

古文：太祖遂行。
现代文：太祖就按照这个计划实行。
English: The great-grandfather took action.

古文：会表病死，太祖直趋宛、叶如彧计，表子琮以州逆降。
现代文：适逢刘表病死，太祖按荀彧的计策率军直奔宛城、叶县，刘表的儿子刘琮献出荆州投降。
English: At the time of Liu Biao's death from illness, Liu Biao's son Liu Biao surrendered Jingzhou and led the army straight to Wancheng and Ye County.

古文：十七年，董昭等谓太祖宜进爵国公，九锡备物，以彰殊勋，密以谘彧。
现代文：建安十七年，董昭等人认为太祖应该晋爵位为国公，并赏赐九锡，以彰显他巨大的功绩，并秘密地询问荀彧这件事。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jianan, Dong Zhao and others believed that the great-grandfather should be promoted to the title of Duke, and awarded Jiuxi to highlight his great achievements, and secretly inquired about the matter.

古文：彧以为太祖本兴义兵以匡朝宁国，秉忠贞之诚，守退让之实；君子爱人以德，不宜如此。
现代文：荀彧认为太祖本来起兵就是要匡扶朝政，平定天下，心怀忠贞诚意，保持谦让的行为；君子欣赏人的品德，不应该这样赏赐。
English: Zou believed that the great-grandfather originally raised an army to support the government, pacify the world, cherish loyalty and sincerity, and maintain humble behavior; a gentleman should not be rewarded for appreciating people's character.

古文：太祖由是心不能平。
现代文：太祖于是心中愤愤不平。
English: The great-grandfather was furious.

古文：会征孙权，表请彧劳军于谯，因辄留彧，以侍中光禄大夫持节，参丞相军事。
现代文：适逢要讨伐孙权，太祖上书请求派荀彧到谯县慰劳军队，趁机将荀彧留下，让他担任侍中、光禄大夫，持符节，参与决定丞相军事。
English: When it was time to fight against Sun Quan, the great-grandfather sent a letter to request that Quan be sent to the comfort troops in Jixian, and took advantage of the opportunity to leave Quan behind, allowing him to serve as an attendant, a doctor of honor, to hold the festival of symbols, and to participate in the decision of the prime minister's military.

古文：太祖军至濡须，彧疾留寿春，以忧薨，时年五十。
现代文：太祖大军开到濡须，荀彧因病留在扬州寿春，后来抑郁而死，时年五十岁。
English: His great-grandfather's army reached Wushu, but he stayed in Yangzhou Shuchun due to illness, and later died of depression, at the age of fifty.

古文：谥曰敬侯。
现代文：谥号为敬侯。
English: His posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：明年，太祖遂为魏公矣。
现代文：第二年，太祖就成为了魏公。
English: The following year, Taizu became Wei Gong.

古文：子惲，嗣侯，官至虎贲中郎将。
现代文：荀彧的儿子荀惲，继承了侯位，做官到了虎贲中郎将。
English: Yao's son, Yao, inherited the lordly title and rose to the position of vice-commander of the Tiger Clan.

古文：初，文帝与平原侯植并有拟论，文帝曲礼事彧。
现代文：当初，文帝和平原侯曹植都被拟立为太子，文帝对荀彧以礼相待。
English: At first, Emperor Wen and Prince Cao Zhi of Pingyuan were both proposed as princes, and Emperor Wen treated Yao with courtesy.

古文：及彧卒，惲又与植善，而与夏侯尚不穆，文帝深恨惲。惲早卒，子甝、霬以外甥故犹宠待。
现代文：等到荀彧死后，荀惲又和曹植交好，而与夏侯尚不和，文帝心中很怨恨荀惲，荀惲早年就去世了，他的儿子荀甝、荀霬和他的外甥仍然深受恩宠。
English: After Yu's death, Yu became friends with Cao Zhiwu again, but was still at odds with Xia Hou. Emperor Wen held a grudge against Yu. Yu died at an early age, but his sons Yu, Yu and his nephew were still deeply favored.

古文：惲弟俣，御史中丞，俣弟诜，大将军从事中郎，皆知名，早卒。
现代文：荀惲的弟弟荀俣，是御史中丞，荀俣的弟弟荀诜，是大将军从事中郎，两人都很出名，但死的早。
English: Shun's younger brother, Shunmata, was the vice-commander of the imperial army, and Shunmata's younger brother, Shun, was a general engaged in middle management. Both were very famous, but died early.

古文：诜弟顗，咸熙中为司空。
现代文：荀诜的弟弟荀顗，咸熙年间担任司空。
English: Zou's younger brother, Zou, served as the head of the Space Administration during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：惲子甝，嗣为散骑常侍，进爵广阳乡侯，年三十薨。
现代文：荀惲的儿子荀甝，继承了散骑常侍的职位，后又进封为广阳乡侯，三十岁时就去世了。
English: Zou's son, Zou, inherited the position of horseback riding attendant, and later became a Guangyang villager. He died at the age of thirty.

古文：子頵嗣。
现代文：荀甝的儿子荀頵承袭了爵位。
English: Zou's son Zou inherited the title of nobility.

古文：霬官至中领军，薨，谥曰贞侯，追赠骠骑将军。
现代文：荀霬官至中领军，去世后谥号为贞侯，追赠骠骑将军。
English: He was a eunuch who rose to the rank of middle-ranking military leader. After his death, his posthumous name was Zhenhou, and he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Horse.

古文：子恺嗣。
现代文：他的儿子荀恺承袭爵位。
English: His son, Lu Ye, succeeded him.

古文：霬妻，司马景王、文王之妹也，二王皆与亲善。
现代文：荀霬的正妻，是司马师、司马昭妹妹，两人和荀霬关系都很好。
English: Yao's legal wife is Sima Shi and Sima Zhao's younger sister. Both of them have a good relationship with Yao.

古文：咸熙中，开建五等，霬以著勋前朝，改封恺南顿子。
现代文：咸熙年间，朝廷将爵位分为五等，荀霬因为在先帝朝有很大功绩，被改封为恺南顿子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianxi, the imperial court divided the title of nobility into five classes. Because of his great achievements during the reign of Emperor Xianxi, he was given the title of "Cheng Nan Dongzi."

古文：荀攸字公达，彧从子也。
现代文：荀攸字公达，是荀彧的侄子。
English: Gongda is the nephew of Gong Yu.

古文：祖父昙，广陵太守。
现代文：荀攸的祖父荀昙，担任过广陵太守。
English: Zou You's grandfather Zou, served as the governor of Guangling.

古文：攸少孤。
现代文：荀攸年少时父亲就去世了。
English: His father died when he was young.

古文：及昙卒，故吏张权求守昙墓。
现代文：等到祖父荀昙去世，荀昙从前的下属张权请求去看守他的墓地。
English: When his grandfather died, Zhang Quan, a former subordinate of Zhang, asked him to watch over his grave.

古文：攸年十三，疑之，谓叔父衢曰： 此吏有非常之色，殆将有奸！ 
现代文：荀攸这时十三岁，心中怀疑，对叔父荀衢说： 这个人脸上神色不正常，恐怕心中有奸诈之意！ 
English: Yu Yu, who was 13 years old at the time, was suspicious and said to his uncle Yu: "This man's face is not normal, I'm afraid he has treachery in his heart!"

古文：衢寤，乃推问，果杀人亡命。
现代文：荀衢明白了，就追查审问，果然问出他是杀人的逃犯。
English: When he understood, he pursued the investigation and interrogation, and finally found out that he was a fugitive who had committed murder.

古文：由是异之。
现代文：因此人们都认为荀攸有奇才。
English: As a result, people all agree that Gong Youyou is a prodigy.

古文：进秉政，徵海内名士攸等二十馀人。
现代文：何进掌权时，征召天下名士荀攸等二十多人。
English: When He Jin was in power, he conscripted more than 20 famous people from all over the world.

古文：攸到，拜黄门侍郎。
现代文：荀攸到了之后，被任命为黄门侍郎。
English: After Yu Yu arrived, he was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：董卓之乱，关东兵起，卓徙都长安。
现代文：董卓作乱，关东地区纷纷起兵讨伐董卓，董卓将都城迁到长安。
English: Dong Zhuo started a riot, and troops were raised in the Kanto region to fight Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo moved the capital to Chang'an.

古文：攸与议郎郑泰、何颙、侍中种辑、越骑校尉伍琼等谋曰： 董卓无道，甚於桀纣，天下皆怨之，虽资强兵，实一匹夫耳。
现代文：荀攸和议郎郑泰、何颙、侍中种辑、越骑校尉伍琼等人商讨说： 董卓暴虐无道，比夏桀、商纣更严重，天下都对他心怀怨恨，虽然掌握强大的兵力，但实际上只是一个匹夫罢了。
English: Zou You and his councilors Zheng Tai, He Yu, the chamberlain Zeng Ju, the Vietcong captain Wu Qiong, and others discussed and said: Dong Zhuo is a ruthless tyrant, more serious than Xia Yu and Shang Yu. The whole world holds a grudge against him. Although he has a strong military force, he is actually just a cowherd.

古文：今直刺杀之以谢百姓，然后据殽、函，辅王命，以号令天下，此桓文之举也。 
现代文：现在我们杀了他向百姓谢罪，然后占据崤山、函谷关，辅佐天子以号令天下，这就是当年齐桓公、晋文公曾做过的。 
English: Now we have killed him to apologize to the people, and then occupied Shaoshan and Hantan Pass, and assisted Tianzi to rule the world with a slogan, which is what Qi Kuan Gong and Jinwen Gong did that year.

古文：事垂就而觉，收颙、攸系狱，颙忧惧自杀，攸言语饮食自若，会卓死得免。
现代文：但事情即将成功时却被发觉了，董卓将何颙、荀攸都关进大牢，何颙在狱中又担心又恐惧，最后自杀，但荀攸言谈举止、吃饭睡觉都和平常一样，刚好董卓在这时被杀了，荀攸就被赦免了。
English: However, it was discovered when things were about to be successful. Dong Zhuo put He Ying and He You both in prison. He Ying was worried and afraid in prison and finally committed suicide. However, He You's speech, behavior, eating and sleeping were all the same as usual. It was just at this time that Dong Zhuo was killed, and He You was pardoned.

古文：弃官归，复辟公府，举高第，迁任城相，不行。
现代文：后来辞官回乡，又被官府征召，科举成绩名列前茅被提升为任城相，但他没有赴任。
English: Later, the resigning officer returned to his hometown, and was again called up by the government. He was promoted to the post of city minister after ranking first in the science examination results, but he did not take up the post.

古文：攸以蜀汉险固，人民殷盛，乃求为蜀郡太守，道绝不得至，驻荆州。
现代文：荀攸因为蜀汉地区地势险固，百姓富庶繁盛，请求担任蜀郡太守，但路上道路断绝，没有能到达，就停留在荆州。
English: Because of the precariousness of the terrain in Shuhan and the prosperity of the people, Zou You requested to serve as the governor of Shuhan County. However, the road was cut off and he could not reach there, so he stayed in Jingzhou.

古文：太祖迎天子都许，遗攸书曰： 方今天下大乱，智士劳心之时也，而顾观变蜀汉，不已久乎！ 
现代文：太祖奉迎天子迁都许昌，给荀攸写信说： 现如今天下动乱不安，正是有智谋的人劳心劳力的时候，但您在蜀汉地区观察情势变化，不是已经很久了吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather wrote a letter to Zou You saying, "As the current situation is turbulent and uneasy, it is precisely the time for people with wisdom to work hard, but haven't you been observing the changes in the situation in the Shuhan area for a long time?

古文：於是徵攸为汝南太守，入为尚书。
现代文：于是征召荀攸担任汝南太守，并入京担任尚书。
English: As a result, Zou You was called up to serve as the governor of the south of the country, and he went to Beijing to serve as Shangshu.

古文：太祖素闻攸名，与语大悦，谓荀彧、锺繇曰： 公达，非常人也，吾得与之计事，天下当何忧哉！ 
现代文：太祖一直都听说荀攸的名声，跟他交谈后很高兴，对荀彧、锺繇说： 公达，不是普通人啊，我能和他商讨大事，天下还有什么可担忧的呢！ 
English: The great-grandfather had always heard of Gongyou's reputation, and was very happy after talking with him. He said to Gongda and Gong: "Gongda, you are not an ordinary person. I can discuss important matters with you. What else is there to worry about in the world?"

古文：以为军师。
现代文：然后以荀攸为军师。
English: Then, he took Shanyou as his strategist.

古文：建安三年，从征张绣。
现代文：建安三年，荀攸跟随太祖讨伐张绣。
English: In the third year of Jian'an, Zou You followed his great-grandfather to fight against Zhang Xiu.

古文：攸言於太祖曰： 绣与刘表相恃为强，然绣以游军仰食於表，表不能供也，势必离。
现代文：荀攸对太祖说： 张绣和刘表互相倚仗，都很强大，但张绣的流动部队要依靠刘表供给粮食，等到刘表无法供应的时候，两人一定会背离。
English: Zou You said to Taizu: Zhang Xiu and Liu Biao rely on each other, both are very powerful, but Zhang Xiu's mobile force must rely on Liu Biao to supply grain, and when Liu Biao is unable to supply, the two will surely depart.

古文：不如缓军以待之，可诱而致也；若急之，其势必相救。 
现代文：我们不如慢慢进军，可以引诱张绣前来；如果我们迅速攻打，刘表一定会前来援救。 
English: If we advance slowly, we can lure Zhang Xiu to come forward; if we attack quickly, Liu Biao will certainly come to the rescue.

古文：太祖不从，遂进军之穰，与战。
现代文：太祖没有听从，就进军到了穰县，和张绣交战。
English: The great-grandfather didn't listen, so he marched into Min County and fought with Zhang Xiu.

古文：绣急，表果救之。军不利。
现代文：张绣情况危急，刘表果然赶来救援，太祖军失利。
English: Zhangxiu was in a critical situation, Liu Biao came to the rescue, and the Taizu Army was defeated.

古文：太祖谓攸曰： 不用君言至是。 
现代文：太祖对荀攸说： 我没有听从你的建议才导致这样的局面。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Yu Yu: I didn't follow your advice, which led to this situation.

古文：乃设奇兵复战，大破之。
现代文：又布置奇兵再次交战，大获全胜。
English: He also arranged for strange soldiers to fight again, and won a complete victory.

古文：是岁，太祖自宛征吕布，至下邳，布败退固守，攻之不拔，连战，士卒疲，太祖欲还。
现代文：这一年，太祖率军从宛城出发进攻吕布，行军到下邳，吕布败退，守城不出，太祖攻城也未能攻克，连续作战，军中人马困乏，太祖打算率军返回。
English: In this year, Taizu led the army from Wancheng to attack Lvbu, marching to the lower moat. Lvbu was defeated and could not defend the city. Taizu also failed to conquer the city and fought continuously. The army was short of manpower. Taizu planned to lead the army back.

古文：攸与郭嘉说曰： 吕布勇而无谋，今三战皆北，其锐气衰矣。
现代文：荀攸和郭嘉说： 吕布有勇无谋，现在多次交战他都战败而回，他的锐气已经减弱。
English: Zou You and Guo Jia said: Lv Bu is brave and reckless. He has been defeated in many battles, and his spirit has weakened.

古文：三军以将为主，主衰则军无奋意。
现代文：三军将士以将帅为主，统帅疲敝，那军队也失去奋战的意志。
English: The soldiers of the three armies are dominated by the commander, the commander is tired, and the army has lost the will to fight.

古文：夫陈宫有智而迟，今及布气之未复，宫谋之未定，进急攻之，布可拔也。 
现代文：陈宫有智谋但行动迟缓，现在趁着吕布的锐气还没恢复，陈宫的计谋还没确定，我们出兵快速进攻，吕布一定能攻破。 
English: Chen Gong had a clever plan but was slow to act. Now he is taking advantage of the fact that Lvbu's spirit has not yet recovered, and Chen Gong's plan has not yet been determined. We will send troops to attack quickly, and Lvbu will certainly be able to break through.

古文：乃引沂、泗灌城，城溃，生禽布。
现代文：于是就将沂水、泗水引来灌入城中，城被攻破，将吕布生擒。
English: So they brought hail and rain into the city, and the city was breached, and Lvbu was taken.

古文：后从救刘延於白马，攸画策斩颜良。
现代文：后来荀攸又跟随太祖到白马援救刘延，荀攸献计斩杀了颜良。
English: Later, Yan You followed the great-grandfather to Baima to rescue Liu Yan, and Yan You killed Yan Liang.

古文：语在武纪。
现代文：这件事在《武帝纪》中有详细记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：太祖拔白马还，遣辎重循河而西。
现代文：太祖攻占白马后率军返回，让运输物资的部队沿着黄河往西。
English: After conquering Baima, Taizu led the army back, and let the troops transporting goods go west along the Yellow River.

古文：袁绍渡河追，卒与太祖遇。
现代文：袁绍率军渡过黄河追击，突然和太祖相遇。
English: Yuan Shao and his army crossed the Yellow River in pursuit, and suddenly encountered Taizu.

古文：诸将皆恐，说太祖还保营，攸曰： 此所以禽敌，奈何去之！ 
现代文：曹军将领都惊恐，劝说太祖回军固守军营，荀攸说： 这些东西就是用来引诱敌人的，为什么要回去！ 
English: The generals of Cao's army were terrified, and they persuaded Taizu to return to the army to hold the camp. Yao You said: These things are used to lure the enemy, why go back!

古文：太祖目攸而笑。
现代文：太祖看着荀攸笑了。
English: The great-grandfather looked at Yu Yu and smiled.

古文：遂以辎重饵贼，贼竞奔之，陈乱。
现代文：就派将士们用各种器械物资做诱饵引诱贼人，敌人果然奔走争抢，阵势大乱。
English: He sent his soldiers to lure the thieves with all kinds of equipment and materials, and the enemy ran and fought, and the situation was chaotic.

古文：太祖曰： 谁可使？ 攸曰： 徐晃可。 
现代文：太祖就派出步兵和骑兵进攻，大败袁军，将骑兵统领文丑斩杀了，太祖就和袁绍在官渡对峙。
English: The great-grandfather sent infantry and cavalry to attack, defeated Yuan's army, and killed the cavalry leader Wen Yuxi. The great-grandfather confronted Yuan Shao in Guandu.

古文：乃遣晃及史涣邀击破走之，烧其辎重。会许攸来降，言绍遣淳于琼等将万馀兵迎运粮，将骄卒惰，可要击也。
现代文：军中粮食快要吃完，荀攸对太祖说： 袁绍运粮的车队很快就到了，统率的将领韩，韩退走，徐晃将他运输的物资全都烧毁。恰好这时许攸前来投降，告知他们袁绍派淳于琼率领一万多人马运送军粮，但将领自满士兵懒惰，可以中途截击。
English: As the army was about to run out of food, Zou You said to Taizu: Yuan Shao's food convoys soon arrived, the commander-in-chief Han Han retreated, and Xu Qiang burned all the goods he transported. Just then, Xu You came to surrender and told them that Yuan Shao sent Jun Yujion to lead more than ten thousand people to transport military food, but the general was complacent and the soldiers were lazy and could intercept them halfway.

古文：众皆疑。
现代文：众人都半信半疑。
English: Everyone is half-believing, half-doubting.

古文：唯攸与贾诩劝太祖。
现代文：只有荀攸和贾诩劝说太祖相信。
English: Only Yu Yu and Jia Yu persuaded Taizu to believe.

古文：太祖乃留攸及曹洪守。太祖自将攻破之，尽斩琼等。
现代文：太祖就让荀攸和曹洪留守军营，自己率军前去攻打，大胜，将淳于琼等人都斩杀了。
English: The great-great-grandfather let Yuyou and Cao Hong stay in the military camp, and led his own army to attack, and won a great victory, killing Junyujiong and others.

古文：绍将张郃、高览烧攻橹降，绍遂弃军走。
现代文：袁绍部下张郃、高览将将进攻用的器具都烧毁，向曹军投降，袁绍只能丢下军队逃走。
English: Yuan Shao's subordinates Zhang Qian and Gao Zhang will burn the offensive equipment and surrender to Cao's army. Yuan Shao can only leave the army and flee.

古文：郃之来，洪疑不敢受，攸谓洪曰： 郃计不用，怒而来，君何疑？ 
现代文：张郃前来投降时，曹洪心中怀疑，不敢接纳，荀攸对曹洪说： 因为袁绍没有采纳张郃的计策，他一怒之下前来投奔，您还怀疑什么呢？ 
English: When Zhang Ye came to surrender, Cao Hong doubted in his heart and did not dare to accept. Zou You said to Cao Hong: Because Yuan Shao did not adopt Zhang Ye's strategy, he came to flee in anger. What else do you doubt?

古文：乃受之。
现代文：曹洪才接纳了他们。
English: It was only then that Cao Hong accepted them.

古文：七年，从讨袁谭、尚於黎阳。
现代文：建安七年，荀攸跟随太祖到黎阳征讨袁谭、袁尚。
English: In the seventh year of Jian'an, Zou You followed his grandfather to Liyang to recruit Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang.

古文：明年，太祖方征刘表，谭、尚争冀州。
现代文：第二年，太祖正在征讨刘表时，袁谭、袁尚争夺冀州。
English: In the second year, when the great-grandfather was fighting for Liu Biao, Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang were fighting for Jizhou.

古文：谭遣辛毗乞降请救，太祖将许之，以问群下。
现代文：袁谭派辛毗来向太祖投降并请求援兵，太祖想答应他，将这件事询问部下。
English: Yuan Tan sent Xin Pi to surrender to Taizu and ask for reinforcements. Taizu wanted to agree to this and asked his subordinates about it.

古文：群下多以为表强，宜先平之，谭、尚不足忧也。
现代文：部下大多都认为刘表势力强大，应该先平定他，袁谭、袁尚还没有值得忧虑的。
English: Most of his subordinates believe that Liu Biao's influence is strong, and he should be pacified first. Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang are not worth worrying about.

古文：攸曰： 天下方有事，而刘表坐保江、汉之间，其无四方志可知矣。
现代文：荀攸说： 现在天下正是多事之秋，但刘表却在江汉地区安稳不动，可以知道他没有夺取天下的志向。
English: Zou You said: Now the world is in the autumn of many things, but Liu Biao is stable in the Jianghan region. It can be known that he does not have the ambition to seize the world.

古文：袁氏据四州之地，带甲十万，绍以宽厚得众，借使二子和睦以守其成业，则天下之难未息也。
现代文：而袁氏占据四个州的地盘，有十万装备良好的士兵，袁绍依靠他的宽和仁厚得人心，假如他的两个儿子相处和睦，守住已经打下的基业，那天下的动乱就不会停止。
English: On the other hand, the Yuan clan occupied the territory of four states and had 100,000 well-equipped soldiers. Yuan Shao relied on his generosity and benevolence to win the hearts and minds of the people. If his two sons get along well and keep the foundation that has been laid, the turmoil of that day will not stop.

古文：今兄弟遘恶，此势不两全。
现代文：现在他们兄弟二人交恶，势必不能两全。
English: Now that the two brothers are on bad terms, they can't have it both ways.

古文：若有所并则力专，力专则难图也。
现代文：如果他们联合起来，那势力就会更强大，这样就更不容易打败了。
English: If they unite, that force will be stronger, so it will be more difficult to defeat.

古文：及其乱而取之，天下定矣，此时不可失也。 
现代文：趁着他们内乱攻占他们，天下就能平定了，这个机会不能失去啊。 
English: Take advantage of their civil strife to conquer them, and the world will be leveled. This opportunity must not be lost.

古文：太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：太祖说： 确实是这样。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "All right.

古文：乃许谭和亲，遂还击破尚。
现代文：就答应袁谭和他联姻，然后率军回击袁尚，顺利打败了他。
English: He promised Yuan Tan to marry him, and then led the army to fight back against Yuan Shang, successfully defeating him.

古文：其后谭叛，从斩谭於南皮。
现代文：后来袁谭又叛离，荀攸又跟随太祖到南皮斩杀了袁谭。
English: Later, Yuan Tan also defected, and Zou You followed his great-grandfather to Nanpi to kill Yuan Tan.

古文：冀州平，太祖表封攸曰： 军师荀攸，自初佐臣，无征不从，前后克敌，皆攸之谋也。 
现代文：冀州平定后，太祖上书请求封赏荀攸，说： 军师荀攸，从一开始就辅佐臣，没有哪次出征是不跟随的，我军得以先后多次战胜敌人，都是依靠荀攸的计谋。 
English: After the subjugation of Jizhou, the great-great-grandfather sent a letter to request the award of the title of Shanyou, saying: Shanyou, the military strategist, has assisted the vassals from the very beginning, there is no expedition that does not follow, our army has been able to defeat the enemy many times in succession, all of which rely on Shanyou's strategy.

古文：於是封陵树亭侯。
现代文：于是朝廷封荀攸为陵树亭侯。
English: As a result, the imperial court made him the lord of Neoshu-tei.

古文：十二年，下令大论功行封，太祖曰： 忠正密谋，抚宁内外，文若是也。
现代文：建安十二年，朝廷下令大行论功行赏，太祖说： 忠诚正直缜密谋划，安抚人心，首先是文若，其次就是公达。 
English: In the twelfth year of Jian'an, the imperial court ordered a large-scale discussion on the merits and rewards, and the great-grandfather said: Loyalty, honesty, and conspiratorial planning, to appease the hearts of the people, first of all is Wenrao, followed by Gongda.

古文：公达其次也。 增邑四百，并前七百户，转为中军师。
现代文：朝廷给荀攸增加封邑四百户，加上之前封赏的一共七百户，转任中军师。
English: The imperial court increased the number of fiefs and counties awarded to Yu You by 400, adding to the previous award of a total of 700, and he was transferred to the Chinese military division.

古文：魏国初建，为尚书令。
现代文：魏国刚建立时，荀攸担任尚书令。
English: When the State of Wei was first established, Zou You served as Shang Shuling.

古文：攸深密有智防，自从太祖征伐，常谋谟帷幄，时人及子弟莫知其所言。
现代文：荀攸思虑深远有智谋，又能保守机密，自从跟随太祖四处征讨，常常运筹帷幄，当时的人和各子弟都没有人能知道他的意思。
English: He was thoughtful, far-sighted, and able to keep secrets. Since he followed his great-grandfather everywhere, he often made plans, and no one at that time or his children could know what he meant.

古文：太祖每称曰： 公达外愚内智，外怯内勇，外弱内强，不伐善，无施劳，智可及，愚不可及，虽颜子、甯武不能过也。 
现代文：太祖常常称赞说： 公达表面上愚笨实际上胸怀谋略，表面上怯懦实际上勇武，表面上力弱实则刚强，不夸耀自己的长处，不炫耀自己的功劳，他的智谋别人能达到，但他表面上的愚陋别人是比不上的，就算是颜子、宁武也不能胜过他。 
English: The great-grandfather often praised: Gundam is stupid on the surface, but actually has a strategy in mind; cowardly on the surface, but actually brave; weak on the surface, but really strong; he does not boast of his strengths, does not show off his merits; his wisdom can be achieved by others, but his stupidity on the surface cannot be matched by others; even if he is handsome, he cannot be defeated by Ningwu.

古文：文帝在东宫，太祖谓曰： 荀公达，人之师表也，汝当尽礼敬之。 
现代文：文帝还是太子时，太祖对他说： 荀公达，是众人的榜样，你应该以礼相待。 
English: When Emperor Wen was still crown prince, his great-grandfather said to him: "You, Emperor Wen, are a role model for everyone. You should treat each other with courtesy.

古文：攸曾病，世子问病，独拜床下，其见尊异如此。
现代文：荀攸曾有一次生病，太子前去探望，独自在床下礼拜，他被人特殊礼待到这种程度。
English: Once when Gong You was ill, the crown prince came to visit him and prayed alone under his bed. He was treated with such special courtesy.

古文：攸与锺繇善，繇言： 我每有所行，反覆思惟，自谓无以易；以咨公达，辄复过人意。 
现代文：荀攸和锺繇关系密切，锺繇说： 我每次将要有所行动，都会反复思量，自认为没有什么要改变的了；但一拿去向公达询问，他的回复总是超出我的预料。 
English: Gong Yu and Gong Da are closely related, Gong said: Every time I want to do something, I will think over and over again, and I think there is nothing to change; but when I go to inquire from Gong Da, his reply always exceeds my expectations.

古文：公达前后凡画奇策十二，唯繇知之。
现代文：公达前后策划奇谋妙计共十二条，只有锺繇知道。
English: There are a total of twelve conjuring tricks planned around the time of the Gundam, but only Toad knows about them.

古文：繇撰集未就，会薨，故世不得尽闻也。
现代文：锺繇将他们编辑成本，但还没有完成就去世了，所以世人都不能完全知道里面的内容。
English: He edited them, but died before they were finished, so the world may never know the full extent of their contents.

古文：攸从征孙权，道薨。
现代文：荀攸跟随太祖征讨孙权，在路上就去世了。
English: Zou You followed the great-grandfather to fight for the grandson's rights and died on the way.

古文：太祖言则流涕。
现代文：太祖每次一说起来就流泪。
English: My great-grandfather shed tears every time he said it.

古文：长子缉，有攸风，早没。
现代文：荀攸的长子荀缉，有荀攸的风范，但早早就去世了。
English: Yuanyou's eldest son, Yuanzhe, had Yuanyou's demeanor, but died early.

古文：次子適嗣，无子，绝。
现代文：次子荀適承袭荀攸的爵位，但无子，断绝了延续。
English: His second son, Shuxi, inherited Shanyou's title, but had no children, ending the line of succession.

古文：黄初中，绍封攸孙彪为陵树亭侯，邑三百户，后转封丘阳亭侯。
现代文：黄初年间，朝廷下诏封荀攸的孙子荀彪为陵树亭侯，食邑三百户，后又改封为丘阳亭侯。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the imperial court granted the title of Neoshu Tinghou (陵树亭侯) to Jiao Biao, the grandson of Jiao You, who had 300 households in his hometown. Later, the title was changed to Qiuyang Tinghou.

古文：正始中，追谥攸曰敬侯。
现代文：正始年间，追谥荀攸为敬侯。
English: At the beginning of the year, the pursuit of egrets was a matter of respect.

古文：贾诩字文和，武威姑臧人也。
现代文：贾诩字文和，武威郡姑臧县人。
English: He is a native of Guye County, Wuwei County.

古文：少时人莫知，唯汉阳阎忠异之，谓诩有良、平之奇。
现代文：年少时没有什么名气，只有汉阳人阎忠欣赏他，说他有张良、陈平的奇才。
English: When he was young, he didn't have any fame. Only the Hanyang people and Yan Zhong appreciated him, saying that he had the genius of Zhang Liang and Chen Ping.

古文：察孝廉为郎，疾病去官，西还至汧，道遇叛氐，同行数十人皆为所执。
现代文：后来贾诩被推举为孝廉，因生病辞去官职，往西返回汧，路上遇上反叛的氐人，与他同行的几十个人都被抓起来。
English: Later, Jia Jun was elected as a filial son, resigned from his official post due to illness, and returned to Handan in the west. On the way, he encountered rebellious Handan people, and dozens of people traveling with him were arrested.

古文：诩曰： 我段公外孙也，汝别埋我，我家必厚赎之。 
现代文：贾诩说： 我是段公的外孙，你们不要活埋我，我家一定会拿丰厚的财物来赎我。 
English: Jia Wei said, "I am Duan Gong's grandchild. Don't bury me alive. My family will surely take a lot of wealth to ransom me."

古文：时太尉段颎，昔久为边将，威震西土，故诩假以惧氐。
现代文：当时的太尉是段赹，之前在边关担任将军很多年，声威震动西边疆域，所以贾诩假借他的名号来威慑氐人。
English: The captain at that time was Duan Qian, who had previously served as a general at the border for many years, and his voice shook the western border area, so Jia Qian borrowed his name to intimidate the Xiang people.

古文：氐果不敢害，与盟而送之，其馀悉死。
现代文：氐人果然不敢加害他，反而和他定下盟约然后送他离开，其余的人都被杀害了。
English: The eunuchs did not dare to harm him, but instead made a covenant with him and sent him away. The rest of the people were killed.

古文：诩实非段甥，权以济事，咸此类也。
现代文：贾诩实际上并不是段赹的外甥，但他善于随机应变来完成事情，这件事就是例子。
English: Jia Wei is not actually Duan Wei's nephew, but he is good at improvising to get things done, and this is an example.

古文：董卓之入洛阳，诩以太尉掾为平津都尉，迁讨虏校尉。
现代文：董卓攻入洛阳的时候，贾诩太尉掾的身份任平津都尉，后被提升为讨虏校尉。
English: When Dong Zhuo invaded Luoyang, Jia Yu Taifeng's status was that of Pingjin captain, and he was later promoted to Tairu captain.

古文：卓婿中郎将牛辅屯陕，诩在辅军。
现代文：董卓的女婿、中郎将牛辅驻守在陕县，贾诩也在牛辅军中。
English: Dong Zhuo's son-in-law, Zhong Lang, stationed Niu Fu in Shaanxi, and Jia Wei was also in Niu Fu's army.

古文：卓败，辅又死，众恐惧，校尉李傕、郭汜、张济等欲解散，间行归乡里。
现代文：董卓兵败，牛辅又死了，军中众人都很担忧害怕，校尉李傕、郭汜、张济等人打算解散部队，抄小路返回故地。
English: Dong Zhuo was defeated, Niu Fu died again, and everyone in the army was very worried and afraid. Lieutenants Li Jun, Guo Jun, Zhang Ji and others planned to disband the troops and return to their hometowns.

古文：诩曰： 闻长安中议欲尽诛凉州人，而诸君弃众单行，即一亭长能束君矣。
现代文：贾诩说： 听说长安城中商议要将所有凉州人都杀掉，而各位脱离队伍只身行动，只需要一名亭长就能抓住你们了。
English: Jia Wei said, "I heard that there was a discussion in the city of Chang'an to kill all the people of Liangzhou, but you broke away from the group and acted alone. It only takes one leader to catch you.

古文：不如率众而西，所在收兵，以攻长安，为董公报仇，幸而事济，奉国家以征天下，若不济，走未后也。 
现代文：不如率军往西进，所经过的地方都招兵买马以攻打长安，为董公报仇，要是侥幸事情成功了，就以奉朝廷之命的名义征战天下，如若事情没办成，到时候再走也不迟。 
English: It would be better to lead the army to the west, and recruit soldiers and horses to attack Chang'an in all the places he passed. If by chance things were successful, he would invade the world in the name of obeying the orders of the imperial court. If things were not accomplished, it would not be too late to leave.

古文：众以为然。
现代文：众人都认为他说的有道理。
English: Everyone thought he had a point.

古文：傕乃西攻长安。
现代文：李傕就率军西行进攻长安。
English: Li Gan led his army westward to attack Chang'an.

古文：语在《卓传》。
现代文：这件事在《董卓传》中有详细记载。
English: This incident is recorded in detail in "The Biography of Dong Zhuo."

古文：后诩为左冯翊，傕等欲以功侯之，诩曰： 此救命之计，何功之有！ 
现代文：后来贾诩被任命为左冯翊，李傕等人希望因为他的功劳封他为侯，贾诩说： 这是救命的计策，有什么功劳呢！ 
English: Later, Jia Jun was appointed as Zuo Fengjun, and Li Jun and others hoped to have him knighted for his services. Jia Jun said: This is a life-saving strategy, what is the merit?

古文：固辞不受。
现代文：坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: Sun Qian resolutely refused to accept soldiers.

古文：又以为尚书仆射，诩曰： 尚书仆射，官之师长，天下所望，诩名不素重，非所以服人也。
现代文：又任命他为尚书仆射，贾诩说： 尚书仆射，是官员的老师，天下瞩目，我的名望向来不高，不能使人信服。
English: He also appointed him as Shang Shuxu's assistant, Jia Wei said: Shang Shuxu's assistant is an official's teacher, the world is watching, my reputation has never been high, I can't convince people.

古文：纵诩昧于荣利，奈国朝何！ 
现代文：纵然我被富贵名利引诱愿意担任，但国家怎么办呢！ 
English: Even if I am tempted by wealth, fame and fortune and am willing to serve, what about the country?

古文：乃更拜诩尚书，典选举，多所匡济，傕等亲而惮之。
现代文：又改为任命他为尚书，主持官员的选拔举荐，做了很多扶危济困的事，李傕等人对他即亲近有畏惧。
English: He was reappointed as Shangshu and recommended to preside over the selection of officials, and did a lot of things to help the poor and needy. Li Wei and others were afraid of his closeness.

古文：会母丧去官，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：刚好遇上贾诩母亲去世，他辞去官职，又被授予光禄大夫之职。
English: Just as Jia Jia's mother passed away, he resigned from his official post and was awarded the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：傕、汜等斗长安中，傕复请诩为宣义将军。
现代文：李傕、郭汜等人在长安争斗不休，李傕又请贾诩担任宣义将军。
English: Li Yu, Guo Yu and others fought ceaselessly in Chang'an, and Li Yu also asked Jia Yu to serve as General Xuan Yi.

古文：傕等和，出天子，祐护大臣，诩有力焉。
现代文：李傕等人和好，释放天子，保护大臣，贾诩在这些事都出了力。
English: Li Xi and others made peace, released Tianzi, protected the minister, and Jia Xi played a role in all of these things.

古文：天子既出，诩上还印绶。
现代文：天子被释放后，贾诩向天子交还官印绶带。
English: After Tianzi was released, Jia Wei returned the official seal ribbon to Tianzi.

古文：是时将军段煨屯华阴，与诩同郡，遂去傕讬煨。
现代文：这时候将军段煨在华阴县驻军，和贾诩的故乡同在一郡，贾诩就离开李傕投靠了段煨。
English: At this time, General Duan Rong stationed troops in Huayin County, which was the same county as Jia Rong's hometown. Jia Rong left Li Rong and joined Duan Rong.

古文：诩素知名，为煨军所望。
现代文：贾诩向来名声在外，是段煨军队所期盼的。
English: Jia Wei has always been famous, which is what Duan Wei's army is looking forward to.

古文：煨内恐其见夺，而外奉诩礼甚备，诩愈不自安。
现代文：段煨心中担忧兵权会被贾诩夺走，但表面上对待贾诩依然礼节周全，贾诩心中越来越不安。
English: Duan Rong was worried that the military power would be taken away by Jia Rong, but on the surface, he still treated Jia Rong with perfect etiquette. Jia Rong was more and more uneasy.

古文：张绣在南阳，诩阴结绣，绣遣人迎诩。
现代文：张绣在南阳的时候，贾诩暗中和他联络，张绣派人迎接贾诩。
English: When Zhang Xiu was in Nanyang, Jia Jun secretly contacted him, and Zhang Xiu sent someone to meet Jia Jun.

古文：诩将行，或谓诩曰： 煨待君厚矣，君安去之？ 
现代文：贾诩准备动身，有人对贾诩说： 段煨厚待于您，您怎么能离开他呢？ 
English: As Jia Wei prepared to leave, someone said to Jia Wei: Duan Wei Hou is waiting for you, how can you leave him?

古文：诩曰： 煨性多疑，有忌诩意，礼虽厚，不可恃，久将为所图。
现代文：贾诩说： 段煨生性多疑，对我有所猜忌，礼节虽然周到，但并不可靠，时间久了会被他算计。
English: Jia Wei said: Duan Wei is suspicious and has suspicions about me. Although his etiquette is thoughtful, it is not reliable. After a long time, it will be calculated by him.

古文：我去必喜，又望吾结大援於外，必厚吾妻子。
现代文：我离开，他心中一定欣喜，又希望我在外结交有利的援兵，一定会厚待我的妻子孩子。
English: When I leave, he must be happy in his heart. He also hopes that I will make good reinforcements outside, and will treat my wife and children well.

古文：绣无谋主，亦愿得诩，则家与身必俱全矣。 
现代文：张绣并没有主要的谋士，也希望能得到我，那么我自身和家小一定都能保全。 
English: Zhang Xiu didn't have a main strategist, and he also hoped to get me, so I would be able to protect myself and my family.

古文：诩遂往，绣执子孙礼，煨果善视其家。
现代文：贾诩就前往张绣那里，张绣以后辈礼节接待他，段煨果然善待贾诩的家人。
English: Jia Wei went to Zhang Xiu there, Zhang Xiu received him with courtesy, Duan Wei treated Jia Wei's family well.

古文：诩说绣与刘表连和。
现代文：贾诩游说张绣和刘表联络合兵。
English: Jia Yu lobbied Zhang Xiu and Liu Biao to contact and join forces.

古文：太祖比征之，一朝引军退，绣自追之。
现代文：太祖连续讨伐张绣，一天早上率军退走，张绣打算亲自率兵追击。
English: The great-grandfather continuously fought against Zhang Xiu, and one morning he led the army to retreat. Zhang Xiu planned to personally lead the soldiers to pursue.

古文：诩谓绣曰： 不可追也，追必败。 
现代文：贾诩对张绣说： 不能追，否则一定失败。 
English: Jia Wei said to Zhang Xiu: You can't chase, otherwise you will surely fail.

古文：绣不从，进兵交战，大败而还。
现代文：张绣没有听从，出兵追击，两军交战，大败而回。
English: Zhang embroidered did not listen, sent troops to chase, the two armies fought, defeated and returned.

古文：诩谓绣曰： 促更追之，更战必胜。 
现代文：贾诩对张绣说： 立刻再次追击，再战一定得胜。 
English: Jia Wei said to Zhang Xiu: Pursue again immediately, and you will surely win the next battle.

古文：绣谢曰： 不用公言，以至於此。
现代文：张绣推辞说： 之前没有听从您的话，才导致大败的结果。
English: Zhang Xiu said: I did not listen to your words before, which led to the result of a crushing defeat.

古文：今已败，奈何复追？ 
现代文：现在已经败了，为什么还要追呢？ 
English: Now that we've lost, why are we still chasing?

古文：诩曰： 兵势有变，亟往必利。 
现代文：贾诩说： 两军的形势发生了改变，赶快追击一定有利。 
English: Jia Wei said: The situation of the two armies has changed, and it will be advantageous to pursue quickly.

古文：绣信之，遂收散卒赴追，大战，果以胜还。
现代文：张绣相信了他，就召集散兵疾速追击，两军大战，果然得胜而回。
English: Zhang Xiu believed him, so he called up the scattered soldiers to pursue at high speed. The two armies fought a great battle, and returned victorious.

古文：问诩曰： 绣以精兵追退军，而公曰必败；退以败卒击胜兵，而公曰必剋。
现代文：问贾诩说： 我以精锐士兵追击败走的军队，而您说一定失败；退回来后，又以刚才的败军追击刚取胜的部队，而您说一定能取胜。
English: He asked Jia Wei: I used my elite soldiers to chase and defeat the retreating army, and you said that I would definitely fail; after I returned, I used the defeated army to chase and defeat the newly victorious army, and you said that I would definitely win.

古文：悉如公言，何其反而皆验也？ 诩曰： 此易知耳。
现代文：结果都像您说的那样，为什么这些与常理相反的事情却全都应验了呢？ 贾诩说： 这个是容易知道的。
English: It all turned out as you said. Why did all these things that are contrary to common sense come true? Jia Wei said: This is easy to know.

古文：将军虽善用兵，非曹公敌也。
现代文：将军您虽然善于用兵，但还不是曹公的对手。
English: General, although you are good at using soldiers, you are not yet Cao Gong's rival.

古文：军虽新退，曹公必自断后；追兵虽精，将既不敌，彼士亦锐，故知必败。
现代文：曹军刚刚撤退，曹公一定会亲自断后；追击的将士虽然精良，将领既然比不上，对方的士气就强大起来，所以知道您一定会失败。
English: Cao's army has just retreated, Cao Gong will certainly personally break off the pursuit; although the pursuing soldiers are excellent, since the generals are not comparable, the other side's morale will be strong, so know that you will certainly fail.

古文：曹公攻将军无失策，力未尽而退，必国内有故；已破将军，必轻军速进，纵留诸将断后，诸将虽勇，亦非将军敌，故虽用败兵而战必胜也。 
现代文：曹公攻打您的时候并没有失算的计策，力量没有衰减却要撤退，一定是京城发生了变故；既然已经战胜将军，一定轻装疾行，纵然留下将领压阵断后，这些将领虽然勇武，但不是您的对手；所以虽然是用败军追击但一定能取胜。 
English: Cao Gong did not make a miscalculation when he attacked you. His strength did not decline, but he had to retreat. There must have been a change in the capital. Since he had already defeated the generals, he must travel lightly. Even if he left the generals to lead the pressure group, these generals, although brave, are not your opponents. Therefore, although he chased with the defeated army, he will surely win.

古文：绣乃服。
现代文：张绣才服气了。
English: Zhang Xiu only gave in.

古文：是后，太祖拒袁绍於官渡，绍遣人招绣，并与诩书结援。
现代文：这之后，太祖和袁绍在官渡对峙，袁绍派人前来招揽张绣，并给贾诩写信希望能结交以相互援助。
English: After that, Emperor Taizu and Yuan Shao confronted each other in Guandu. Yuan Shao sent someone to recruit Zhang Xiu and wrote to Jia Jia hoping to make friends and help each other.

古文：绣欲许之，诩显於绣坐上谓绍使曰： 归谢袁本初，兄弟不能相容，而能容天下国士乎？ 绣惊惧曰： 何至於此！ 窃谓诩曰： 若此，当何归？ 
现代文：张绣想要应允，贾诩在张绣面前公开对袁绍的使臣说： 回去后帮我们向袁本初推辞，他们兄弟间容不下彼此，难道能容纳天下谋士吗？ 张绣惊慌地说： 怎么至于说这样的话！ 并偷偷问贾诩说： 已经这样了，我们该依附谁呢？ 
English: Zhang Xiu wanted to agree, but Jia Jiao openly said to Yuan Shao's envoy in front of Zhang Xiu: "After returning, help us to reject Yuan Benchu. Their brothers can't tolerate each other, can they accommodate the world's strategist?" Zhang Xiu panicked and said: "How can you say such a thing!" and secretly asked Jia Jiao: "It's already like this, who should we rely on?"

古文：诩曰： 不如从曹公。 
现代文：贾诩说： 不如跟随曹公。 
English: Jia Wei said: It is better to follow Cao Gong.

古文：绣曰： 袁强曹弱，又与曹为雠，从之如何？ 
现代文：张绣说： 袁绍势强，曹公力弱，我们又曾和曹公结下仇怨，为什么要依附他呢？ 
English: Zhang Xiu said: Yuan Shao is strong, Cao Gongli is weak, and we once had a grudge with Cao Gong, why should we cling to him?

古文：诩曰： 此乃所以宜从也。
现代文：贾诩说： 这就是应该依附他的原因。
English: Jia Wei said: This is the reason why you should cling to him.

古文：夫曹公奉天子以令天下，其宜从一也。
现代文：曹公奉迎天子，号令天下，这是应该依附的第一个原因。
English: This is the first reason why Cao Gongbong should be adhered to.

古文：绍强盛，我以少众从之，必不以我为重。
现代文：袁绍兵强马壮，我们以这么少的人去依附他，一定不会看重我们。
English: Yuan Shao's army was strong and powerful. If we cling to him with such a small number of people, he will certainly not value us.

古文：曹公众弱，其得我必喜，其宜从二也。
现代文：曹公人少力弱，得到我们的依附一定欣喜，这是应该依附的第二个原因。
English: Cao Gongren is weak and feeble, and he must be delighted to get our attachment. This is the second reason why he should be attached.

古文：夫有霸王之志者，固将释私怨，以明德於四海，其宜从三也。
现代文：那些有成为霸主志向的人，一定会摒弃私人恩怨，以向天下展示他的德行，这是应该依附的第三个原因。
English: The third reason to cling is that those who aspire to be overlords must abandon personal grudges in order to demonstrate their virtue to the world.

古文：愿将军无疑！ 
现代文：希望将军不要再犹疑了！ 
English: I hope the general will stop hesitating!

古文：绣从之，率众归太祖。
现代文：张绣采纳了他的话，率部归降太祖。
English: Zhang Xiu accepted his words and led the troops to surrender to Taizu.

古文：太祖见之，喜，执诩手曰： 使我信重於天下者，子也。 
现代文：太祖见到他们，很是欣喜，拉着贾诩的手说： 让我天下都得到信任和尊重的，是您啊。 
English: When the great-grandfather saw them, he was very pleased and took Jia Ye's hand and said, "You are the one who has gained the world's trust and respect."

古文：表诩为执金吾，封都亭侯，迁冀州牧。
现代文：上表请求让贾诩担任执金吾，封为都亭侯，提升为冀州牧。
English: The above table requests that Jia Wei be appointed as the executive king, be appointed as the governor of the capital, and be promoted to the leader of Jizhou.

古文：冀州未平，留参司空军事。
现代文：当时冀州尚未平定，留任参司空军事。
English: At that time, Jizhou had not yet been pacified, and he remained a member of the Air Force.

古文：袁绍围太祖於官渡，太祖粮方尽，问诩计焉出，诩曰： 公明胜绍，勇胜绍，用人胜绍，决机胜绍，有此四胜而半年不定者，但顾万全故也。
现代文：袁绍在官渡围攻太祖，太祖军粮食快吃完了，问贾诩该怎么办，贾诩说： 您智谋胜过袁绍，勇武胜过袁绍，知人善用胜过袁绍，判断时机胜过袁绍，有这四方面胜过袁绍但半年之内还未能将他平定，是因为只想找一个万全之策。
English: Yuan Shao besieged Taizu at Guandu. The food of the Taizu army was almost finished. He asked Jia Wei what to do. Jia Wei said: You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are braver than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao. You are wiser than Yuan Shao.

古文：必决其机，须臾可定也。 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：一定要在必要时机做出决断，用不了多久就能平定他。 太祖说： 说得有道理。 
English: You must make a decision at the right time, and it won't take long to subdue him.

古文：乃并兵出，围击绍三十馀里营，破之。
现代文：就合兵出击，围攻了袁绍三十里外的营地，大获全胜。
English: They attacked together, besieged Yuan Shao's camp thirty miles away, and won a complete victory.

古文：绍军大溃，河北平。
现代文：袁绍军中溃散，河北地区因此平定。
English: Yuan Shao's army was dispersed, and the Hebei region was thus pacified.

古文：太祖领冀州牧，徙诩为太中大夫。
现代文：太祖兼任冀州牧，调任贾诩为太中大夫。
English: The great-great-grandfather concurrently served as the pastor of Jizhou, and Jia Wei was transferred to the position of the great-great-grandfather.

古文：建安十三年，太祖破荆州，欲顺江东下。
现代文：建安十三年，太祖平定荆州，想顺江往东。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianan, Taizu conquered Jingzhou and wanted to go east along the river.

古文：诩谏曰： 明公昔破袁氏，今收汉南，威名远著，军势既大；若乘旧楚之饶，以飨吏士，抚安百姓，使安土乐业，则可不劳众而江东稽服矣。 
现代文：贾诩进谏说： 明公之前击垮了袁绍，现在又收复汉南地区，声威远播，军队势力已经很强大；如果依靠过去楚国的富庶，来犒赏兵丁士人人，镇抚安定百姓，让他们安居乐业，那就可以不用劳师远征而江东地区都稽首拜服了。 
English: Jia Bingjing said: The Ming Dynasty had defeated Yuan Shao before, and now it has recovered the Hannan region. Its prestige has spread far and wide, and its military power is already very strong. If we rely on the wealth of the Chu Kingdom in the past to reward soldiers, pacify and stabilize the people, and let them live and work in peace, then there is no need for a laborious expedition, and the Jiangdong region will bow down before it.

古文：太祖不从，军遂无利。
现代文：太祖不听，于是军队失利。
English: The great-grandfather did not listen and the army was defeated.

古文：太祖后与韩遂、马超战於渭南，超等索割地以和，并求任子。
现代文：后来太祖和韩遂、马超等人在渭南地区交战，马超等人要求太祖割让一块地盘以停止交战，并要派一个儿子来作为人质。
English: Later, Taizu and Han Sui, Ma Chao and others fought in the southern part of Hunan. Ma Chao and others demanded that Taizu cede a piece of land to stop the fighting and send a son as a hostage.

古文：诩以为可伪许之。
现代文：贾诩认为可以假装应允他们。
English: Jia Wei thought he could pretend to agree with them.

古文：又问诩计策，诩曰： 离之而已。 
现代文：太祖又问贾诩该如何做，贾诩说： 离间他们而已。 
English: The great-grandfather also asked Jia Jun how to do it. Jia Jun said, "Just separate them."

古文：太祖曰： 解。 
现代文：太祖说： 理解了。 
English: The great-grandfather said: I understand.

古文：一承用诩谋。
现代文：全部采纳了贾诩的计谋。
English: All of them adopted Jia Wei's stratagem.

古文：语在武纪。
现代文：这件事在《武帝纪》中有详细记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：卒破遂、超，诩本谋也。
现代文：最终攻破了马超、韩遂，贾诩就是计策的谋划者。
English: In the end, Ma Chao and Han Sui were defeated, and Jia Wei was the mastermind of the strategy.

古文：是时，文帝为五官将，而临菑侯植才名方盛，各有党与，有夺宗之议。
现代文：这时候，文帝还是五官中郎将，而临菑侯曹植的才名正盛，两人各自有支持他们的势力，都有夺取王位的想法。
English: At this time, Emperor Wen was still a middle-ranking official, and Linyi Hou Cao Zhi's reputation was at its peak. Both men had their own forces to support them, and both had the idea of seizing the throne.

古文：文帝使人问诩自固之术，诩曰： 愿将军恢崇德度，躬素士之业，朝夕孜孜，不违子道。
现代文：文帝派人向贾诩询问巩固自己地位的方法，贾诩说： 希望将军您将德行品格发扬光大，亲自参与普通士人的修习，早晚孜孜不倦，不要违背为人子的道义。
English: Emperor Wen sent someone to ask Jia Rong about how to consolidate his position. Jia Rong said, "I hope that you will carry forward your virtue and character, personally participate in the training of ordinary scholars, work tirelessly in the morning and evening, and do not violate the morality of being a son.

古文：如此而已。 
现代文：这样而已。 
English: That's it.

古文：文帝从之，深自砥砺。
现代文：文帝听取了他的意见，努力修炼自己。
English: Emperor Wen listened to his advice and worked hard to cultivate himself.

古文：太祖又尝屏除左右问诩，诩嘿然不对。
现代文：太祖又曾经屏退左右侍从然后问贾诩，贾诩沉默不回答。
English: The great-grandfather once screened the attendants left and right and then asked Jia Yu, but Jia Yu remained silent and did not answer.

古文：太祖曰： 与卿言而不答，何也？ 
现代文：太祖说： 和你交谈你却不回答，为什么？ 
English: The grandfather said, "I talk to you, but you don't answer. Why?"

古文：诩曰： 属適有所思，故不即对耳。 太祖曰： 何思？ 
现代文：贾诩说： 我刚才在思考事情，所以没有立刻回答罢了。 太祖说： 思考什么？ 
English: Jia Wei said: I was just thinking about something, so I didn't answer right away. Grandfather said: Thinking about what?

古文：诩曰： 思袁本初、刘景升父子也。 
现代文：贾诩说： 我在想袁本初、刘景升父子。 
English: Jia Wei said: I am thinking of Yuan Benchu, Liu Jing Sheng, father and son.

古文：太祖大笑，於是太子遂定。
现代文：太祖大笑，于是太子人选就确定下来。
English: The great-grandfather laughed loudly, so the prince candidate was confirmed.

古文：诩自以非太祖旧臣，而策谋深长，惧见猜疑，阖门自守，退无私交，男女嫁娶，不结高门，天下之论智计者归之。
现代文：贾诩自认为不是太祖旧臣，但又出谋划策，思虑深远，担心会被猜忌，于是就在家闭门自守，私下也不与人结交，家中孩子的嫁娶，也不和高门大户结亲，天下论及智谋计略的人当之无愧。
English: Jia Wei thought that he was not the great-grandfather of the old minister, but he also made a plan, thought far and wide, and feared that he would be suspected. Therefore, he kept himself at home behind closed doors, did not make friends with people in private, did not marry the children in his family, and did not marry the high-ranking family. The world is talking about people who are clever and well-deserved.

古文：文帝即位，以诩为太尉，进爵魏寿乡侯，增邑三百，并前八百户。
现代文：文帝登基后，任命贾诩为太尉，晋爵为魏寿乡侯，增加封邑三百户，连同之前封赏的一共八百户。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, he appointed Jia Jun as the first lieutenant and Jin Jie as the governor of Wei Shou Township, increasing the number of fiefs by 300, together with the previous 800.

古文：又分邑二百，封小子访为列侯。
现代文：又分出两百户食邑，封贾诩的小儿子贾访为列侯。
English: In addition, two hundred households were divided into food villages, and Jia Jia, the youngest son of Jia Jia, was made a vassal.

古文：以长子穆为驸马都尉。
现代文：封他的大儿子贾穆为驸马都尉。
English: He made his eldest son, Jamu, a lieutenant.

古文：帝问诩曰： 吾欲伐不从命以一天下，吴、蜀何先？ 
现代文：文帝贾诩： 我打算讨伐那些不服从王命的人统一天下，东吴和西蜀，应该先攻打哪一个？ 
English: Emperor Wen: I intend to fight those who disobey the king's order to unify the country. Dongwu and Xishu, which one should I attack first?

古文：对曰： 攻取者先兵权，建本者尚德化。
现代文：贾诩回答说： 要进攻夺取的，应以军事实力为先，要建设根本，应推崇德行教化。
English: Jia Wei replied: In order to attack and seize, military strength should be the first, fundamental construction should be carried out, and morality and enlightenment should be promoted.

古文：陛下应期受禅，抚临率土，若绥之以文德而俟其变，则平之不难矣。
现代文：陛下您顺应期运接受禅让，安抚治理天下，如果用德行教化来安抚他们，然后等待他们的改变，那平定他们就不难了。
English: Your majesty, you should conform to the timing of the movement to accept Zen and appease and govern the world. If you appease them with virtue and enlightenment, and then wait for them to change, then it will not be difficult to pacify them.

古文：吴、蜀虽蕞尔小国，依阻山水，刘备有雄才，诸葛亮善治国，孙权识虚实，陆议见兵势，据险守要，汎舟江湖，皆难卒谋也。
现代文：东吴、西蜀虽然是弹丸小国，但隔山临水，刘备有雄才大略，诸葛亮善于治理国家，孙权看得透虚和实，陆议懂得军事形势，他们依据险要地势固守，我们要攻打，应该依靠水中船只，这都是难以快速夺取他们的原因。
English: Although Dongwu and Xishu are very small countries, they are separated by mountains and water. Liu Bei had great talent in general, Zhuge Liang was good at governing the country, Sun Quan saw through falsehood and reality, and Lu Wei understood the military situation. They defended themselves according to the critical situation. If we want to attack, we should rely on ships in the water. These are all reasons why it is difficult to capture them quickly.

古文：用兵之道，先胜后战，量敌论将，故举无遗策。
现代文：用兵的道理，先确定会取胜再出击，估计敌人的实力再商议将领人选，所以每次都不会失策。
English: The principle of using soldiers is to first determine that you will win and then attack, estimate the strength of the enemy and then discuss the selection of generals, so you will not make a mistake every time.

古文：臣窃料群臣，无备、权对，虽以天威临之，未见万全之势也。
现代文：我私下认为，朝中大臣，没有刘备、孙权的对手，即使以天子的威势亲临，也不一定就是万全之策。
English: Privately, I believe that even if the Minister of the DPRK and the ROK does not have an opponent such as Liu Bei and Sun Quan, even if he comes with the authority of the Son of Heaven, it is not necessarily a perfect solution.

古文：昔舜舞干戚而有苗服，臣以为当今宜先文后武。 文帝不纳。
现代文：从前舜帝挥舞盾牌和斧器，使有苗氏臣服，我认为现在应该先文教，再使用武力。 文帝没有采纳他的话。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Gao waved shields and axes to subjugate the Miao people, but I think we should teach literature before using force. Emperor Wen did not accept his words.

古文：后兴江陵之役，士卒多死。诩年七十七，薨，谥曰肃侯。
现代文：后来发动江陵之战，士兵伤亡众多、贾诩七十七岁的时候去世，谥号为肃侯。
English: Later, he launched the Battle of Gangneung, in which many soldiers were killed and wounded. Jia Ye passed away at the age of 77, and his posthumous name was So Hau.

古文：子穆嗣，历位郡守。
现代文：他的儿子贾穆承袭了爵位，担任过太守。
English: His son, Jamu, inherited the title of nobility and served as governor-general.

古文：穆薨，子模嗣。
现代文：贾穆去世后，他的儿子贾模承袭爵位。
English: After the death of Jamu, his son Jamu inherited the title.

古文：评曰：荀彧清秀通雅，有王佐之风，然机鉴先识，未能充其志也。
现代文：评曰：荀彧清雅俊秀，温文尔雅，有辅佐帝王的风范，但在洞察先机，预料形势上，没有能充实他的志向。
English: The review said: Zou Qingya is handsome, mild-mannered, and has the demeanor of assisting the emperor, but in terms of insight and anticipation of the situation, he has not been able to fulfill his aspirations.

古文：荀攸、贾诩，庶乎算无遗策，经达权变，其良、平之亚欤！
现代文：荀攸、贾诩，几乎可以说是精密准确，从来没有失算，行事能顺应情况的变化，懂得变通，大概是仅次于张良、陈平的人吧！
English: Yu Yu, Jia Yu, can almost be said to be precise and accurate, never miscalculated, able to adapt to changes in the situation, know how to be flexible, probably second only to Zhang Liang and Chen Ping!

