古文：天子玉藻，十有二旒，前后邃延，龙卷以祭。
现代文：天子所戴的冕，其前端悬垂着十二条玉串，冕顶有一块前后突出的延板。
English: The crown worn by the heavenly son has twelve strings of beads hanging from its front end, and at the top of the crown there is a protruding plate.

古文：玄端而朝日于东门之外，听朔于南门之外，闰月则阖门左扉，立于其中。
现代文：天子在祭天地和宗庙时，就要头戴这种冕，身穿衰龙之袍。在春分的那天，天子则头上戴冕，身穿玄衣鬓裳，在国都的东门之外举行迎日之祭。
English: On the day of the vernal equinox, the heavenly son, wearing a crown on his head and a white robe, held a festival to welcome the sun outside the east gate of the capital.

古文：皮弁以日视朝，遂以食，日中而馂，奏而食。日少牢，朔月大牢；五饮：上水、浆、酒、醴、酏。
现代文：每月的初一，天子要穿戴同样的服装，以特牲告于明堂，而颁布一月的政令于南门之外；如果是闰月的初一，则要阖上明堂门的左边一扇，只打开其右边一扇，天子站在门中行听朔之礼。
English: On the first day of each month, the emperor should wear the same clothes, and announce a special sacrifice in the Ming Hall, and issue the January decree outside the south gate; if it is the first day of the leap month, the left door of the Ming Hall door should be bolted, and only the right door should be opened, and the emperor should stand in the middle of the door to listen to the New Year's greeting.

古文：卒食，玄端而居。
现代文：天子平日视朝，只穿皮弃之服。
English: Tenshi usually looks at the morning and only wears clothes made of discarded leather.

古文：动则左史书之，言则右史书之，御瞽几声之上下。年不顺成，则天子素服，乘素车，食无乐。
现代文：这样做是为了使天子谨言慎行，及时了解政令的得失。如果年成不好，则天子也要率先节俭，穿素服，乘素车，吃饭时也不奏乐。
English: This is done in order to make the heavenly son be prudent and timely understand the gains and losses of the decree. If the year is not good, the heavenly son should also take the lead in being frugal, wear plain clothes, take a plain car, and do not play music when eating.

古文：诸侯玄端以祭，裨冕以朝，皮弁以听朔于大庙，朝服以日视朝于内朝。
现代文：诸侯在祭先君的时候，要穿戴玄冕之服；在朝见天子的时候，要穿戴裨冕之服；在太庙颁布一月政令的时候，要穿戴皮弃之服；每日在内朝视朝的时候，要穿戴朝服。
English: Princes should wear the imperial crown robe when they offer sacrifices to their ancestors; they should wear the imperial crown robe when they meet the emperor in the morning; they should wear the imperial crown robe when the emperor promulgates the January Decree in the Imperial Temple; and they should wear the imperial robe when they see the emperor in the Inner Court every day.

古文：朝，辨色始入。君日出而视之，退适路寝，听政，使人视大夫，大夫退，然后适小寝寝，释服。
现代文：群臣上朝较早，在天色刚亮时就开始进入锥门；国君上朝稍后，在日出以后才上朝与群臣相见。相见礼毕，国君就退到路寝听政，众大夫也在治朝各理其事。国君派人去看大夫，如果大夫无事奏议，事毕退朝，这时国君才可回到内寝休息，脱下朝服，换上玄端。
English: The group of courtiers arrived early in the morning and began to enter the cone gate when the sky was just bright; the sovereign arrived later in the morning, after sunrise, to meet with the group of courtiers. After the meeting, the sovereign retreated to the road to listen to the government, and the doctors were also in charge of the government. The sovereign sent someone to see the doctor, and if the doctor did not have anything to discuss and the matter was withdrawn, then the sovereign could go back to sleep and rest, take off the royal robe, and put on the mask.

古文：又朝服以食，特牲三俎祭肺，夕深衣，祭牢肉，朔月少牢，五俎四簋，子卯稷食菜羹，夫人与君同庖。
现代文：进早餐时，还要穿上朝服。早餐的品种是猪肉、鱼肉、干肉三种；将食，先要祭肺。中午，也要以早餐的剩饭作为加餐。进晚餐时，要穿上深衣；将食，先要把猪肉切为小段而祭之。
English: For breakfast, you should also wear a morning suit. There are three kinds of breakfast: pork, fish and dried meat; for dinner, you should first sacrifice the lungs. At noon, you should also use the leftover rice from breakfast as a side dish. For dinner, you should put on a dark suit; for dinner, you should first cut the pork into small pieces and sacrifice it.

古文：君无故不杀牛，大夫无故不杀羊，士无故不杀犬、豕。
现代文：每月的初一，膳用羊、采二牲，五个菜，即羊肉、猪肉、鱼肉、干肉和猪肉皮，主食是黍、授各二篡。
English: On the first day of the month, there are five dishes, namely, mutton, pork, fish, dried meat and pork rind. The staple food is two yakitori and two yakitori.

古文：君子远庖厨，凡有血气之类，弗身践也。至于八月不雨，君不举。
现代文：遇到子卯忌日，国君要降低膳食标准，不得杀牲，只可以傻为饭，以菜为羹而已、国君夫人与国君同牢进餐，不再单独为夫人杀牲。
English: On the day of Zi Yu's death, Guo Jun wanted to lower the standard of meals. He was not allowed to kill animals. He could only eat dumplings and soup with vegetables. Guo Jun's wife and Guo Jun dined together in prison, and no longer killed animals for his wife alone.

古文：年不顺成，君衣布搢本，关梁不租，山泽列而不赋，土功不兴，大夫不得造车马。
现代文：没有特殊的原因，诸侯不得杀牛，大夫不得杀羊，士不得杀狗和猪。凡有仁爱之心的君子，都离危厨远远的，以免耳闻目睹禽兽之被宰杀。
English: Without any special reason, lords may not kill cows, doctors may not kill sheep, and judges may not kill dogs and pigs. All gentlemen with a heart of benevolence are far away from dangerous kitchens, so as not to hear or witness the slaughter of animals.

古文：卜人定龟，史定墨，君定体。
现代文：对于一切有生命的动物，君子是不会亲自动手宰杀的。
English: For all living animals, a gentleman will not slaughter with his own hands.

古文：君羔幦虎犆；大夫齐车，鹿幦豹犆，朝车；士齐车，鹿幦豹犆。
现代文：如果连续八个月不下雨，形成旱灾，国君的膳食就不得杀牲。
English: If it does not rain for eight months in a row, creating a drought, the diet of the sovereign must not include the killing of animals.

古文：君子之居恒当户，寝恒东首。若有疾风迅雷甚雨，则必变，虽夜必兴，衣服冠而坐。
现代文：如果年成不好，国君要自我贬损，穿麻布之衣，插竹制之漪，在关口和过桥之处不收租税；不到节令不准进入山泽采伐渔猎，到了节令则不加禁止任其采伐渔猎也不征税，不兴土木工程。大夫也不许造新车。
English: If the year is not a good one, the sovereign should be self-deprecating, wear linen clothes, insert bamboo shoots, do not collect taxes at checkpoints and bridge crossings; not allowed to enter the mountains and lakes for harvesting, fishing and hunting before the festival, but not prohibited from harvesting, fishing and hunting during the festival, and not taxed, and no civil engineering. The doctor is not allowed to build a new car.

古文：日五盥，沐稷而靧粱，栉用椫栉，发曦用象栉，进禨进羞，工乃升歌。
现代文：占卜时，由卜人审视龟甲上旁出的细小裂纹，由太史审视龟甲上显示龟兆的粗大裂纹，由国君审视这些粗大的裂纹意味着什么。国君的斋车用鹿皮覆盖车轼大夫的斋车同饰用羔皮覆盖车轼，又用虎皮镶边。大夫的斋车，又用豹皮镶边。
English: During divination, the diviner examines the small cracks that appear on the tortoise shell, the astrologer examines the large cracks on the tortoise shell, and the sovereign examines what these large cracks mean. The sovereign's chariot is covered with deerskin and the doctor's chariot is covered with lambskin and trimmed with tiger skin. The doctor's chariot is also trimmed with leopard skin.

古文：浴用二巾，上絺下绤，出杅，履蒯席，连用汤，履蒲席，衣布曦身，乃屦进饮。
现代文：大夫的朝车，士的斋车，都与即用鹿皮覆轼，用豹皮镶边。君子的燕坐之处总是对着门户，睡眠的时候总是头朝东方。
English: The doctor's morning carriage and the priest's evening carriage are both covered with deerskin and edged with leopard skin. The gentleman's seat is always facing the portal, and when sleeping, his head always faces the east.

古文：将适公所，宿齐戒，居外寝，沐浴，史进象笏，书思对命；既服，习容观玉声，乃出，揖私朝，辉如也，登车则有光矣。
现代文：若有大风、电闪雷鸣、暴雨，这是上天发怒，君子就要改变常态，心怀惊惧，即令是已经就寝也要起床，穿戴整齐，肃然端坐。
English: If there is a strong wind, lightning, thunder, or heavy rain, it is the wrath of heaven, and the gentleman should change his normal state and be alarmed. Even if he has gone to bed, he should get up, dress neatly, and sit solemnly.

古文：天子搢挺，方正于天下也，诸侯荼，前诎后直，让于天子也，大夫前诎后诎，无所不让也。
现代文：每天要洗五次手。
English: Wash your hands five times a day.

古文：侍坐，则必退席；不退，则必引而去君之党。
现代文：用淘樱的水洗发，用淘粱的水洗脸。梳理刚洗过头的湿发，要用白理木作的梳子；头发干了以后容易发涩，这时要用象牙梳子。
English: Wash your hair with the water of Taozhuang, and wash your face with the water of Taozhuang. To comb wet hair that has just been washed, use a comb made of white wood; after the hair dries, it is easy to astringent, then use an ivory comb.

古文：登席不由前，为躐席。
现代文：洗过之后，要喝点酒，吃点东西，同时命乐工升堂唱歌，这对恢复疲劳有好处。
English: After washing, you should drink some wine, eat some food, and at the same time sing a song, which is good for recovering fatigue.

古文：徒坐不尽席尺，读书，食，则齐，豆去席尺。
现代文：洗澡的时候，要用两种浴巾擦身：擦上体用细葛巾，擦下体用粗葛巾。
English: When taking a bath, you should use two kinds of bath towels to wipe your body: wipe the upper body with a fine cloth, and wipe the lower body with a coarse cloth.

古文：若赐之食而君客之，则命之祭，然后祭；先饭辩尝羞，饮而俟。
现代文：从浴盆中出来，要先立在蒯席上面，用热水冲洗双脚，然后再脚踏蒲席，穿上布衣以吸干身上水滴，最后穿上鞋子，接着再喝点酒，吃点东西，听听音乐，以恢复疲劳。
English: Coming out of the tub, you must first stand on the table, rinse your feet with hot water, then step on the cushion, put on a cloth to dry the water droplets on your body, and finally put on shoes, then drink some wine, eat something, listen to music to recover fatigue.

古文：若有尝羞者，则俟君之食，然后食，饭，饮而俟。
现代文：做臣子的将去朝见国君，就要在前一天斋戒，沐浴，在外寝将息。
English: If a vassal is to go to see the sovereign in the morning, he must fast, bathe, and sleep outside the day before.

古文：君命之羞，羞近者，命之品尝之，然后唯所欲。
现代文：史呈上记事用的茹，大夫就将面君时想要告诉国君的话、君有所问则自己将如何回答、执行君命的情况等等都简要地写在上面，以防临事有所遗忘。
English: The history is a book for recording things, and the words that the doctor wants to tell the sovereign when he sees him, how he will answer if he has a question, the status of the execution of the sovereign's order, etc. are all briefly written on it, in case the incident is forgotten.

古文：凡尝远食，必顺近食。君未覆手，不敢飧；君既食，又饭飧，饭飧者，三饭也。
现代文：朝服穿戴整齐之后，要先练习一下自己的仪容举止，使佩玉之声和行步的节拍相合，然后才出发。
English: After the morning dress is neatly put on, you must first practice your appearance and demeanor, so that the voice of Pei Yuping and the rhythm of walking match, and then set off.

古文：君既彻，执饭与酱，乃出，授从者。
现代文：由于做了上述准备，所以在私朝和家臣揖别时，就显得神采飞扬；到了登车时，就更是容光焕发了。
English: As a result of the above-mentioned preparations, when I bid farewell to my vassal, I appeared to be in high spirits; when I boarded the train, my face was even more radiant.

古文：凡侑食，不尽食；食于人不饱。
现代文：天子插于绅带之间的纷叫挺，其形状四角皆方，这是要向天下显示天子的方正无私；诸侯插的笛叫茶，其形状是上端两角呈圆形，下端两角呈方形，这是表示诸侯降于天子；大夫所插的姿，其上下四角都是圆的，这表示大夫既要降于天子，又要降于国君。
English: Tianzi, inserted between the gentleman's belts, is square-shaped, and its four corners are all square, which is to show the world that Tianzi is upright and selfless; the flute, inserted by the lords, is called tea, and its shape is that the upper two corners are round and the lower two corners are square, which means that the lords have descended to Tianzi; the figure inserted by the doctor, the upper and lower four corners are round, which means that the doctor has to descend to the son of heaven and to the sovereign.

古文：唯水浆不祭，若祭为已侪卑。
现代文：臣子陪侍国君坐，一定要把自己的坐席向侧后退一点。
English: If a courtier is to sit with the sovereign, he must move his seat a little to the side.

古文：君若赐之爵，则越席再拜稽首受，登席祭之，饮卒爵而俟君卒爵，然后授虚爵。
现代文：如果国君不让后退，也一定要向后坐，离开国君所坐之处。 登席入坐，一要按顺序，由下而升，否则就是跟席。
English: If the sovereign does not allow you to step back, you must also sit backwards, away from the place where the sovereign is sitting.

古文：君子之饮酒也，受一爵而色洒如也，二爵而言言斯，礼已三爵而油油以退，退则坐取屦，隐辟而后屦，坐左纳右，坐右纳左。
现代文：空坐的时候，身子要与席的前缘保持一尺的距离。读书时为了使尊者听到读书声，吃饭时为了避免弄脏席子，所以在这两种情况下，身子要坐得与席缘齐。盛食物的豆离席有一尺远。
English: When sitting, the body should be one foot away from the front edge of the seat. When reading, in order to let His Holiness hear the sound of reading, and when eating, in order to avoid soiling the mat, so in both cases, the body should sit flush with the edge of the seat. The beans containing food are one foot away from the seat.

古文：凡尊必上玄酒，唯君面尊，唯飨野人皆酒，大夫侧尊用棜，士侧尊用禁。
现代文：如果国君赐臣子吃饭，而且是以客礼对待臣子，那么臣子在进食之前要祭食，但也要先奉君命，然后再祭。祭过之后，臣子要先遍尝各种食品，然后慢慢地喝汤，以等候国君先吃。
English: If the sovereign gives a meal to a vassal, and treats the vassal with courtesy, then the vassal must make a sacrifice before eating, but must first obey the sovereign's order, and then make a sacrifice. After the sacrifice, the vassal must first taste all kinds of food, and then slowly drink soup to wait for the sovereign to eat first.

古文：始冠，缁布冠，自诸侯下达，冠而敝之可也。
现代文：如果有膳宰尝食，则臣子既不须祭，也不须尝，而是等候国君吃过之后再吃，在等候国君吃饭时，自己可以喝点汤。
English: If there is a meal to taste, then the vassal does not need to sacrifice or taste, but wait for the sovereign to eat before eating. While waiting for the sovereign to eat, he can drink some soup.

古文：玄冠朱组缨，天子之冠也。
现代文：国君命令臣子吃菜，臣子应该先吃就近的菜。
English: The sovereign ordered the vassal to eat vegetables, and the vassal should eat the nearest vegetables first.

古文：缁布冠缋緌，诸侯之冠也。
现代文：国君命令臣子遍尝各种菜，然后臣子才可以想吃什么菜就吃什么菜。
English: The sovereign ordered the courtiers to taste all kinds of dishes, and then the courtiers could eat whatever they wanted.

古文：玄冠丹组缨，诸侯之齐冠也。
现代文：不论国君是否以客礼相待，凡是想取用远处的菜肴，一定要从近处开始，按着顺序，由近而远。
English: Regardless of whether the sovereign treats you with courtesy or not, if you want to use dishes from far away, you must start from near, in order, from near to far.

古文：玄冠綦组缨，士之齐冠也。
现代文：臣子陪侍国君吃饭，在国君没有表示吃饱之前，臣子不敢先饱。
English: When a vassal accompanies the sovereign to dinner, the vassal does not dare to eat until the sovereign says he is full.

古文：缟冠玄武，子姓之冠也。
现代文：在国君表示吃饱以后，臣子还要向国君劝食。
English: After the sovereign has indicated that he has had enough to eat, the vassal still has to persuade the sovereign to eat.

古文：缟冠素纰，既祥之冠也。
现代文：劝食的礼数是臣子用汤浇饭吃，但以吃三口为限。
English: The recommended number of servings is for a courtier to eat rice with soup, but limited to three mouthfuls.

古文：垂緌五寸，惰游之士也，玄冠缟武，不齿之服也。居冠属武，自天子下达，有事然后緌。
现代文：国君吃完退席之后，侍食的臣子就可以携带吃剩的饭与酱，出门授给自己的随从以带回家，因为这是国君恩赐的呀。
English: After the sovereign has finished eating and left the table, the courtier serving the meal can take the leftover rice and sauce with him and give it to his retinue to take home, because this was a gift from the sovereign.

古文：五十不散送，亲没不髦，大帛不緌。
现代文：凡是陪侍尊者吃饭，不可自己尽兴地吃。凡是作客吃饭，不可吃饱。
English: If you eat with your host, do not eat to your heart's content. If you eat as a guest, do not eat to your heart's content.

古文：衣冠紫緌，自鲁桓公始也。朝玄端，夕深衣。
现代文：在地位相等的人家吃饭，所有食品都应先祭，只有水和浆不祭，因为水、浆并非盛撰，如果也祭，就显得太降低自己身份了。
English: When eating at the home of someone of equal status, all foods should be offered first. Only water and starch should not be offered, because water and starch are not well selected. If they are also offered, it seems to lower one's status too much.

古文：深衣三袪，缝齐倍要，衽当旁，袂可以回肘。
现代文：臣子侍饮子君，君若赐之饮酒，臣子就应离开坐席，向国君行再拜稽首之礼，恭恭敬敬接过酒杯，然后回到自己的坐席，先祭酒，然后干杯。
English: When a vassal serves wine to a vassal, if the vassal drinks the wine given by the vassal, the vassal should leave the table, bow to the sovereign, respectfully receive the wine glass, and then return to his own table, first offering the wine, and then making a toast.

古文：长中继掩尺。
现代文：千杯之后，等待国君干杯，然后将空杯交给赞者。
English: After a thousand cups, wait for the sovereign to make a toast, and then give the empty cup to the praise.

古文：袷二寸，祛尺二寸，缘广寸半。以帛裹布，非礼也。
现代文：君子饮酒，饮第一杯时神色庄重，饮第二杯时神色和气恭敬；臣侍君饮，按礼是三杯为止，所以喝罢第三杯后，就应高高兴兴恭恭敬敬地退下。
English: When a gentleman drinks alcohol, he looks solemn when he drinks the first cup, and respectful when he drinks the second cup; when a minister drinks alcohol, it is polite to drink up to three cups, so after drinking the third cup, he should cheerfully and respectfully step down.

古文：士不衣织，无君者不贰采。
现代文：退下以后要跪着取鞋，而且到堂下隐蔽处去穿。
English: After retreating, you should kneel to take off your shoes, and go to the hiding place under the hall to wear them.

古文：衣正色，裳间色。
现代文：穿右脚时要左腿跪下，穿左脚时要右腿跪下。
English: When wearing the right foot, the left leg should kneel down, and when wearing the left foot, the right leg should kneel down.

古文：非列采不入公门，振絺绤不入公门，表裘不入公门，袭裘不入公门。纩为茧，缊为袍，褝为絅，帛为褶。
现代文：用新丝绵套到夹衣里制成的衣叫茧，用陈旧丝绵套到夹衣里制成的衣叫袍，有面无里的单衣叫纲，用帛做面和里但中间任何东西也不套的衣叫褶。
English: A dress made of new silk that is put into a jacket is called a corset, a dress made of old silk that is put into a jacket is called a robe, a single dress that has no middle is called a corset, and a dress that is made of satin and has no middle is called a corset.

古文：朝服之以缟也，自季康子始也。
现代文：朝服本是用麻布做的，改为用编来做，是从鲁国的季康子开始的。
English: The morning suit was originally made of linen, but it was changed to be made of knitted fabric. It was started by Ji Kangzi from Russia.

古文：孔子曰： 朝服而朝，卒朔然后服之。 
现代文：孔子说： 上朝时都应穿朝服。国君在听朔时要穿皮弃服，听朔礼毕又换上朝服。 
English: Confucius said: The emperor should wear the imperial robe when he ascends the throne. The sovereign should discard the robe when he is crowned, and put on the imperial robe when he is crowned.

古文：曰： 国家未道，则不充其服焉。 
现代文：又说： 在国家多灾多难的时候，国君的礼服就不必求其全备了。 
English: He also said, "In times of national calamity, there is no need for the sovereign's ceremonial dress to be complete.

古文：唯君有黼裘以誓省，大裘非古也。
现代文：只有国君才可以穿着脯裘去参加为祭社而举行田猎的仪式，而有的人竟然穿着天子祭天的大裘去参加，这不符合古制。
English: Only the sovereign can wear a yakitori to participate in the ceremony of field hunting for the shrine, but some people actually wear a yakitori to participate, which is not in line with the ancient system.

古文：君衣狐白裘，锦衣以裼之。
现代文：国君穿狐白裘的时候，外面要配以锦衣作罩衣。
English: When the sovereign wears a fox-white coat, it should be matched with a brocade coat for the outer layer.

古文：君之右虎裘，厥左狼裘。
现代文：国君右边的卫士穿虎裘，其左边的卫士穿狼裘。
English: The guards on the right side of the sovereign wear tiger skirts, while the guards on the left side wear wolf skirts.

古文：士不衣狐白。
现代文：士贱，没有资格穿狐白裘。
English: A lowly scholar is not qualified to wear the fox-white coat.

古文：君子狐青裘豹褎，玄绡衣以裼之；麑裘青豻褎，绞衣以裼之；羔裘豹饰，缁衣以裼之；狐裘，黄衣以裼之。
现代文：大夫士如果里边穿的是狐青裘，用豹皮给袖口镶边，外面就要配上玄绢衣作罩衣；如果穿的是魔裘，用青歼皮给袖口镶边，外面就要配上编素色的罩衣；如果穿的是黑色羔裘，用豹皮给袖口镶边，外面就要配上黑色的罩衣。如果穿的是狐裘，外面就要配上黄色的罩衣。
English: Doctor, if you wear a fox fur coat on the inside and use leopard skin to hem the cuffs, you must pair it with a black satin coat on the outside; if you wear a witch fur coat and use blue suede to hem the cuffs, you must pair it with a plain-colored coat on the outside; if you wear a black lamb fur coat and use leopard skin to hem the cuffs, you must pair it with a black coat on the outside; if you wear a fox fur coat, you must pair it with a yellow coat on the outside.

古文：锦衣狐裘，诸侯之服也。
现代文：用锦衣作罩衣来配狐裘，这是只有诸侯才能穿的衣服。
English: With brocade as a smock to match the fox fur, this is a dress that can only be worn by princes.

古文：犬羊之裘不裼，不文饰也不裼。
现代文：犬羊之裘是平民穿的，用不着惕。
English: Dog and sheep kisses are worn by commoners, so there is no need to be cautious.

古文：裘之裼也，见美也。
现代文：在不需要文饰的场合，也用不着褐。
English: In situations where there is no need for decoration, there is no need for brown.

古文：吊则袭，不尽饰也；君在则裼，尽饰也。
现代文：褐裘是为了显露内服之美。吊丧时要有悲痛的表情，所以要袭，不可显露文饰。在国君面前要有恭敬的表情，所以要褐，显露文饰。
English: The brown coat is to reveal the beauty of the inner clothing. When mourning, it is necessary to have a sad expression, so it is necessary to attack, not to reveal the decoration. In front of the sovereign, it is necessary to have a respectful expression, so it is necessary to be brown, to reveal the decoration.

古文：服之袭也，充美也，是故尸袭，执玉龟袭，无事则裼，弗敢充也。
现代文：袭服是为了掩盖内服之美。尸是象征鬼神的，要显示尊严，所以要袭；玉和龟甲是宝瑞，所以手执玉和龟甲时要袭。但在行礼完毕后要褐，不敢掩盖内服之美。
English: In order to hide the beauty of the inner dress, the body is a symbol of ghosts and gods, and it is necessary to show dignity, so it is necessary to attack; the jade and tortoise shell are precious, so it is necessary to attack when holding the jade and tortoise shell. However, it should be brown after the performance of the salute, so as not to hide the beauty of the inner dress.

古文：笏：天子以球玉；诸侯以象；大夫以鱼须文竹；士竹本，象可也。
现代文：笏的制作，天子是用美玉；诸侯是用象牙；大夫是用竹，但要用有斑纹的鳖鱼皮来纹饰；士也是用竹，但其下端可以用象牙。
English: To make a dragonfly, the emperor uses gems; the princes use ivory; the doctor uses bamboo, but it must be decorated with a striped eel skin; the scholar also uses bamboo, but its lower end can be decorated with ivory.

古文：见于天子与射，无说笏，入大庙说笏，非古也。
现代文：总而言之，大夫、士的贫不敢和天子、诸侯的蛋那样，使用纯一的材料。
English: All in all, the poverty of doctors and scholars does not dare to use the same pure material as that of heavenly sons and princes.

古文：小功不说笏，当事免则说之。
现代文：诸侯、大夫和士朝见天子、参加射礼，因为这些都是吉事，用不着脱纷。
English: Princes, magistrates and nobles visit the emperor and take part in the fireworks, because these are all auspicious events, and there is no need to take off their clothes.

古文：既搢必盥，虽有执于朝，弗有盥矣。
现代文：在太庙中行祭礼时也不应脱笛，现在有的大夫进入太庙脱笋，并不符合古礼。
English: It is also not proper to take off the flute when performing a ritual in the Great Temple. Nowadays, some doctors enter the Great Temple and take off the flute, which is not in accordance with the ancient rite.

古文：凡有指画于君前，用笏造，受命于君前，则书于笏，笏毕用也，因饰焉。
现代文：办丧事是要脱贫的，否则就不便于捶胸顿足地号哭。但小功以下的丧事哀浅，可以不脱贫。
English: To hold a funeral is to get rid of poverty, otherwise it is not convenient to beat one's chest and cry loudly. However, if the funeral is less than a small effort, it is not enough to get rid of poverty.

古文：笏度二尺有六寸，其中博三寸，其杀六分而去一。
现代文：当殡硷时要捶胸顿足地哭，应该脱笛。将要插笛于带而入朝见君，一定要先洗手，洗过以后，在朝中需要执贫时就不必再洗手了。
English: When attending a funeral, you should beat your chest and weep profusely, and you should take off your flute. If you are going to bring your flute into the court to meet the emperor, you must first wash your hands. After washing, you do not have to wash your hands again when you need to practice poverty in the court.

古文：韠：君朱，大夫素，士爵韦。圜杀直，天子直，公侯前后方，大夫前方后挫角，士前后正。
现代文：凡是在国君面前需要指指画画以说明问题时，要用笛；凡是进到国君面前接受命令时，要写在资上。
English: Whenever you need to point and draw in front of the sovereign to explain a problem, you should use a flute; whenever you come in front of the sovereign to receive an order, you should write it on money.

古文：韠下广二尺，上广一尺，长三尺，其颈五寸，肩革带博二寸。一命缊韨幽衡，再命赤韨幽衡，三命赤韨葱衡。
现代文：笛是作为记事的竹简来用的，所以要纹饰。笋的长度是二尺六寸，其中间一段宽三寸，诸侯的茹上端要削减六分之一，大夫、士的笛上下两端都要削减六分之一。
English: The flute is used as a bamboo stick for taking notes, so it needs to be decorated. The length of the flute is two feet and six inches, with a three-inch wide section in the middle. The upper end of the lords' flute should be reduced by one-sixth, and the upper and lower ends of the doctor's flute should be reduced by one-sixth.

古文：天子素带朱里终辟，而素带终辟，大夫素带辟垂，士练带率下辟，居士锦带，弟子缟带。
现代文：天子的大带用生帛制成，衬里是朱红色，整个大带的两则都镶边。诸侯的大带也是用生帛制成，也全部镶边，但没有朱红色的衬里。
English: The Great Belt of the Son of Heaven is made of ginger, the lining is vermilion red, and both sides of the entire Great Belt are edged. The Great Belt of the Princes is also made of ginger, also all edged, but without the vermilion lining.

古文：并纽约，用组、三寸，长齐于带，绅长制，士三尺，有司二尺有五寸。
现代文：大夫的大带也是用生帛制成，只有下垂的绅镶边。士的大带用熟帛制成，带的两边密缉，只在绅的下端镶边。
English: The doctor's sash was also made of rusty birch, only with a drooping hem. The gentleman's sash was made of seasoned birch, both sides of the sash were sewn, only the hem at the bottom of the sash.

古文：子游曰： 参分带下，绅居二焉，绅韨结三齐。 大夫大带四寸。
现代文：有道艺的人服用锦制的大带，在校读书的学生服用生绢制的大带。以上的大带，在将其束腰的两端结到一块时，使用的都是三寸宽的丝带，丝带下垂部分的长度与绅相齐。
English: Daoists use brocade ribbons, and school students use raw silk ribbons. When tying the two ends of the ribbon together, the ribbons are three inches wide, and the length of the hanging part of the ribbon is the same as that of a gentleman.

古文：杂带，君朱绿；大夫玄华，士缁辟，二寸，再缭四寸。
现代文：绅的长度规定是：士三尺，有司则二尺五寸。子游说： 绅的长度是，把从带到脚的长度分成三份，绅占三分之二。 
English: The regulation of the length of the gentry is: the length of the gentry is three feet, and the length of the gentry is two feet and five inches. The son lobbied: The length of the gentry is to divide the length from the foot to the foot into three parts, and the gentry accounts for two-thirds.

古文：凡带，有率无箴功，肆束及带勤者，有事则收之，走则拥之。
现代文：绅、蔽膝、丝带的下垂部分都是三尺长，三者的下端相齐。大带的宽度是四寸。
English: The sash, the knee cover, and the hanging part of the ribbon are all three feet long, and the lower ends of the three are even. The width of the large band is four inches.

古文：王后袆衣，夫人揄狄；君命屈狄，再命袆衣，一命襢衣，士褖衣。
现代文：说到大带的镶边，天子和国君一样，都是带侧镶朱，绅侧镶绿；大夫则带的外面用玄色，里面用红色；士的大带里外都是细色。
English: When it comes to the edging of the ribbon, the emperor and the emperor are both with side inlaid with vermilion, and the gentleman with side inlaid with green; the doctor is with black on the outside and red on the inside; the gentleman's ribbon is fine inside and out.

古文：唯世妇命于奠茧，其它则皆从男子。凡侍于君，绅垂，足如履齐，颐溜垂拱，视下而听上，视带以及袷，听乡任左。凡君召，以三节：二节以走，一节以趋。
现代文：用一个符节来召，表示事情较缓，臣子快步前往也就行了凡是国君召唤，臣子如果是当班，就要不等穿上鞋子就去；如果不当班，就要不等备好车子就去：士对于大夫的光临，不敢出门拜迎，因为那是双方身份相等才有的礼节，但可以在大夫告别时拜送。
English: To be summoned with a single chime indicates that matters are moving slowly, and it is fine for the vassal to go at a brisk pace. Whenever the sovereign summons, the vassal, if he is on duty, must go without putting on his shoes; if he is not on duty, he must go without preparing his car: the gentleman does not dare to go out to welcome the doctor's visit, because that is the etiquette that exists only when both parties are of equal status, but he can send his regards when the doctor says goodbye.

古文：在官不俟屦，在外不俟车。士于大夫，不敢拜迎而拜送；士于尊者，先拜进面，答之拜则走。士于君所言，大夫没矣，则称谥若字，名士。
现代文：士去拜访卿大夫，应在门外先拜，然后进门见面，如果卿大夫在门内答拜，士要赶快跑开，表示不敢当。士在国君处讲话，如果涉及已故的大夫，就要称其溢号，或者称其字，不可称名；如果涉及的是士，则可以称名。
English: When a priest visits a noble doctor, he should first bow to him outside the door, and then meet him inside the door. If the noble doctor responds by bowing to him inside the door, the priest should quickly run away, saying that he dare not. When a priest speaks in the presence of the sovereign, if the deceased doctor is involved, he should call him by his prefix, or by his name, and not by his name; if a priest is involved, he may call him by his name.

古文：与大夫言，名士字大夫。
现代文：士与大夫讲话，提到活着的大夫、士，对士可以称名，对大夫则要称字。
English: When talking to a doctor and mentioning a living doctor or doctor, you can call the doctor by his or her name, but you should call the doctor by his or her title.

古文：于大夫所，有公讳无私讳。
现代文：士在大夫的踉前，谈话中只避公讳，不避私讳。
English: In front of the doctor's bedside, they only avoided public speaking, but not private speaking.

古文：凡祭不讳，庙中不讳，教学临文不讳。
现代文：凡祭祀群神，不须避讳。庙祭的祝瑕之辞，也不避先人之讳。
English: There is no need to be shy when offering sacrifices to the gods, just as there is no need to be shy when making a wish at a temple festival.

古文：古之君子必佩玉，右征角，左宫羽。
现代文：正因为君子在乘车时能够听到鸳和的铃声，在步行时又能够听到佩玉的鸣声，所以一切邪僻的念头也就无从进入君子的心灵了。
English: It is precisely because a gentleman can hear the ringing of the bell when he is riding in a car, and can hear the ringing of the jade when he is walking, that all perverse thoughts cannot enter the gentleman's mind.

古文：趋以《采齐》，行以《肆夏》，周还中规，折还中矩，进则揖之，退则扬之，然后玉锵鸣也。故君子在车，则闻鸾和之声，行则鸣佩玉，是以非辟之心，无自入也。
现代文：臣下在国君面前不佩玉，一所谓 不佩玉 ，是说把左边的佩玉用丝带给结起来，右边还照常佩玉。在家闲居时，腰的左右都佩玉；上朝面君时，就要给起左佩。
English: In the presence of the sovereign, the vassals do not wear the beads. The so-called "not wearing the beads" means that the beads on the left are tied with a ribbon, while the beads on the right are still worn as usual. When idling at home, beads are worn on the left and right sides of the waist; when meeting the sovereign, it is necessary to wear the left beads.

古文：君在不佩玉，左结佩，右设佩，居则设佩，朝则结佩，齐则綪结佩而爵韨。
现代文：斋戒时须要绝对肃静，所以要把左右佩都屈折向上掖到革带上，以免发出任何声响，同时要服玄端，用赤而微黑的蔽膝。
English: When fasting, it is necessary to be absolutely silent, so the right and left cuffs should be folded up to the leather belt to avoid making any noise, and the cuffs should be worn, and the knees should be covered with red and slightly black.

古文：凡带必有佩玉，唯丧否。
现代文：从天子到士，他们的革带上一定有佩玉，只有在办丧事时例外。
English: From the heavenly son to the priest, their leather belts must have a pearl on them, except when they are carrying out a funeral.

古文：佩玉有冲牙；君子无故，玉不去身，君子于玉比德焉。
现代文：佩玉上有个部件叫冲牙。君子如果没有特殊原因，玉不离身，因为君子是以玉来象征德行的。
English: There is a component on the pearl bead called a punch. If there is no special reason for a gentleman, the bead will not leave his body, because a gentleman is a symbol of virtue with a bead.

古文：天子佩白玉而玄组绶，公侯佩山玄玉而朱组绶，大夫佩水苍玉而纯组绶，世子佩瑜玉而綦组绶，士佩瓀玟而缊组绶。
现代文：天子佩白玉，用玄色的丝带；诸侯佩山玄色的玉，用朱红色的丝带；大夫佩水苍色的玉，用细色的丝带；太子佩美玉，用苍白色的丝带；士佩孺玫，用赤黄色的丝带。
English: The son of heaven wears a white jade, with a black ribbon; the princes wear a mountain black jade, with a scarlet ribbon; the doctor wears a watery pale jade, with a fine ribbon; the prince wears a beautiful jade, with a pale white ribbon; and the scholar wears a yellow ribbon.

古文：孔子佩象环五寸，而綦组绶。
现代文：孔子闲居，佩的玉是直径五寸的象环，用赤黄色的丝带。
English: Confucius is lounging, wearing a jade ring with a diameter of five inches, tied with a red and yellow ribbon.

古文：童子之节也，缁布衣锦缘，锦绅，并纽锦，束发皆朱锦也。
现代文：童子的礼节与成人不同。童子穿的是绷布深衣，用锦镶边，绅带和带纽也用锦镶边，束发也用锦。
English: A boy's etiquette is different from that of an adult. A boy wears a banded dark robe with brocade edging, a gentleman's belt and tie with brocade edging, and a bundle of hair with brocade.

古文：童子不裘不帛，不屦絇，无缌服。
现代文：以上所用的锦，都是朱红色的锦。童子不穿裘衣，不穿丝帛，因为裘帛温热，担心伤其壮气。
English: The brocades used above are all vermilion brocades. The boy does not wear a fur coat or silk socks, because the fur is warm and he is worried about hurting his strength.

古文：听事不麻，无事则立主人之北面，见先生从人而入。
现代文：童子的鞋头没有绚。童子幼小不懂事，有绍麻亲属死了，也不必硬叫他穿丧服。到有丧事的人家去帮忙，身上也不加麻经。
English: There is no brilliance in the boy's shoes. The boy is too young to understand, and there is no need to force him to wear mourning clothes when a relative of Shaoma died. If you go to the funeral home to help, you don't have to wear the sutra.

古文：侍食于先生异爵者，后祭先饭。
现代文：没有事的时候要站在家长之南，面向北。
English: When there is nothing to do, stand to the south of your parents, facing north.

古文：客祭，主人辞曰： 不足祭也。 
现代文：去拜见老师的时候，要跟着成人进去。陪侍先生或者地位高于自己的人吃饭，要后祭，先尝食。
English: When visiting a teacher, you should go in with an adult. If you are dining with a waiter or someone of a higher status than yourself, you should have a dessert and taste the food first.

古文：客飧，主人辞以疏。
现代文：客人祭的时候，主人要谦让说： 不值得祭。 
English: When a guest offers a sacrifice, the host should humbly say, "It is not worthy of a sacrifice."

古文：主人自置其酱，则客自彻之。
现代文：客人吃好以后赞美主人做的饭菜可口，主人要谦让地说：粗茶淡饭，承蒙过奖。
English: After the guests have eaten well, they should praise the delicious meal made by the host. The host should humbly say: "The coarse tea and light meal was well received.

古文：一室之人，非宾客，一人彻。
现代文：主人敬客，亲自设酱于席，客人作为回敬，就要在吃过以后自己动手撤掉。
English: The host, out of respect for the guests, personally sets out the sauce on the table. The guests, in return, have to remove the sauce themselves after eating.

古文：壹食之人，一人彻。凡燕食，妇人不彻。
现代文：同事们在一块吃饭，其间没有宾主之分，吃过以后，由年龄最小的一人撤下撰具。大家为了办事而聚食，吃过以后，也由年龄最小的一人撤下撰具。
English: Colleagues have a meal together, during which there is no guest of honor. After eating, the youngest person removes the utensils. Everyone gathers to do business, and after eating, the youngest person also removes the utensils.

古文：食枣桃李，弗致于核，瓜祭上环，食中弃所操。
现代文：凡平常的朝食、夕食，不用妇人撤除撰具，因为妇人质朴，不能备礼。
English: For ordinary breakfasts and dinners, it is not necessary for the woman to remove the utensils, because the woman is simple and cannot prepare the meal.

古文：凡食果实者后君子，火孰者先君子。
现代文：吃枣子、桃子、李子，不要把核随地乱扔。
English: Eat dates, peaches, and plums, and don't throw the seeds around.

古文：有庆，非君赐不贺。孔子食于季氏，不辞，不食肉而飧。
现代文：吃瓜的时候要先祭，祭时要用连着瓜蒂的那半个，然后吃瓜瓤，至于手拿着的瓜皮部分就抛掉了。
English: When eating melon, you should first sacrifice, and when sacrificing, you should use the half that is attached to the melon, and then eat the melon pod. As for the part of the melon skin that you hold in your hand, throw it away.

古文：君赐车马，乘以拜赐；衣服，服以拜赐；君未有命，弗敢即乘服也。
现代文：凡吃果实，要让君子先吃，因为果实是大地所生，好坏容易分辨，用不着自己先尝；凡吃熟食，要先为君子尝食，因为熟食是人所加工，味道如何，必尝而后知，家里有了喜庆之事，但如果没有国君的赏赐，就不敢接受亲友的道贺。
English: Anyone who eats fruit should let the gentleman eat it first, because the fruit is born from the earth. It is easy to tell whether it is good or bad, and there is no need to taste it first. Anyone who eats cooked food should first taste it for the gentleman, because cooked food is processed by people. How does it taste, you must taste it and then know. There is a festive event at home, but if there is no reward from the sovereign, you will not dare to accept congratulations from relatives and friends.

古文：君赐，稽首，据掌致诸地；酒肉之赐，弗再拜。
现代文：孔子在季氏那里吃饭，季氏作为主人，应该讲的客气话一句也没有，孔子也以非礼相答，尚未食肉就说已经吃饱了。
English: Confucius ate at Ji's place. Ji, as the host, did not say a single polite word. Confucius also responded with rudeness, saying that he had eaten enough before eating meat.

古文：凡赐，君子与小人不同日。凡献于君，大夫使宰，士亲，皆再拜稽首送之。
现代文：国君赐给臣下车马，臣下除了当时拜受外，第二天还要乘着一所赐车马再去拜谢；国君赐给臣下衣服，臣下除了当时拜受外，第二天还要穿上所赐的衣服再去拜谢。
English: The sovereign gave the vassal a horse and carriage, and the vassal, in addition to receiving the horse and carriage, had to ride a horse and carriage the next day to give thanks. The sovereign gave the vassal clothes, and the vassal, in addition to receiving the clothes, had to wear the clothes the next day to give thanks.

古文：膳于君，有荤桃茢，于大夫去茢，于士去荤，皆造于膳宰。
现代文：对于国君所赐的车马和衣服，在行过再拜礼之后，如果国君没有再下可以乘、服的命令，臣下就不敢乘、服，只能收藏起来。
English: As for the chariot, horse, and clothes given by the sovereign, if the sovereign did not give the order to ride and wear them again after performing the second rite, the vassals would not dare to ride and wear them, and could only collect them.

古文：大夫不亲拜，为君之答己也。
现代文：对于国君的赏赐，臣下要行再拜稽首之礼。此礼的行法是，把左手按在右手之上，手着地，头也着地。
English: For the reward of the sovereign, the vassals must perform the bowing of the head. The practice of this ceremony is to press the left hand on the right hand, the hand on the ground, and the head on the ground.

古文：大夫拜赐而退，士待诺而退，又拜，弗答拜。
现代文：对于国君的酒肉之赐，由于赐物较轻，只要当时拜受就行，不须要次日登门再拜。
English: For the gift of meat and wine from the sovereign, since the gift is light, it is enough to bow down at the time, and there is no need to go to the door the next day to bow again.

古文：大夫亲赐士，士拜受，又拜于其室。
现代文：凡国君赐物，不能在同一天里既赐君子又赐小人，以致贤与不肖无别。
English: All the gifts of the sovereign cannot be given to the great and the small in the same day, so that there is no difference between the wise and the foolish.

古文：衣服，弗服以拜。敌者不在，拜于其室。
现代文：凡向国君进献物品，大夫要派自己的总管去送，士要亲自去送，送到国君门外，交与国君的小臣，然后行再拜稽首之礼。
English: For those who bring gifts to the sovereign, the doctor should send his chief steward to deliver them, and the scholar should personally deliver them, take them outside the sovereign's gate, hand them to the sovereign's ministers, and then perform the bowing of the head.

古文：凡于尊者有献，而弗敢以闻。士于大夫不承贺，下大夫于上大夫承贺。
现代文：向国君进献美食，要同时附上荤、桃、茹；如果是向大夫进献美食，只附上荤、桃，去掉茹；如果是向士进献美食，只附上桃，去掉荤、苟。
English: When presenting food to the sovereign, it is necessary to add ginger, peach and boiled yakitori at the same time; when presenting food to the doctor, only ginger and peach should be added, and boiled yakitori should be removed; when presenting food to the scholar, only peach should be added, and ginger and ginger should be removed.

古文：亲在，行礼于人称父，人或赐之，则称父拜之。
现代文：所有进献的美食，都由主管膳食的官员负责接受。大夫之所以不亲自去向国君进献物品，是担心劳动国君答拜自己。
English: The official in charge of the meal is responsible for receiving all the food offerings. The reason why the doctor does not personally go to offer items to the sovereign is that he is worried that the laboring sovereign will reward himself.

古文：礼不盛，服不充，故大裘不裼，乘路车不式。父命呼，唯而不诺，手执业则投之，食在口则吐之，走而不趋。
现代文：大夫拜谢国君的赏赐，只要在国君门口请君之小臣入内通报己意，行了拜谢之礼，不必等待小臣回报国君的意思，就可以退下了；士拜谢国君的赏赐，就必须等待小臣回报国君的意思，才能退下，临走时还要对国君的这个诺报进行拜谢，而国君则不须答拜。
English: When a doctor thanks the sovereign for a gift, all he has to do is ask his vassal to come to the door of the sovereign and announce his intention. Once he has offered his thanks, he does not have to wait for the vassal to reciprocate the sovereign's intention before he can leave. When a servant thanks the sovereign for a gift, he has to wait for the vassal to reciprocate the sovereign's intention before he can leave. When leaving, he also has to thank the sovereign for his promise, and the sovereign does not have to reciprocate.

古文：亲老，出不易方，复不过时。
现代文：大夫亲自赏赐东西给士，士不仅当时拜受，而且第二天还要到大夫家中表示再次拜谢。
English: The doctor himself gave something to the priest. The priest not only bowed to him at that time, but also went to the doctor's home the next day to express his thanks again.

古文：亲癠色容不盛，此孝子之疏节也。
现代文：如果赏赐的是衣服，不用像对待国君那样穿到身上去拜谢。
English: If the reward is clothing, you don't have to wear it on your body to say thank you, as you would with a sovereign.

古文：父殁而不能读父之书，手泽存焉尔；母殁而杯圈不能饮焉，口泽之气存焉尔。
现代文：身份相等的人前来馈赠东西，如果自己在家，则在家拜受；如果自己不在家，则于次日往赠者家中拜谢。
English: People of equal status come to give something as a gift. If they are at home, they will receive it at home; if they are not at home, they will thank the donor's home the next day.

古文：君入门，介拂闑，大夫中枨与闑之间，士介拂枨。宾入不中门，不履阈，公事自闑西，私事自闑东。
现代文：凡对于尊者有什么东西进献，一定要避开 进献 的字眼，只能婉转地说是赠给尊者的随从等等。
English: If you have something to offer to His Holiness, be sure to avoid the word "offering," and only say that it is a gift to His Holiness's entourage, etc.

古文：君与尸行接武，大夫继武，士中武，徐趋皆用是。
现代文：士有喜庆之事，不敢接受大夫亲自光临祝贺，由于二者地位悬殊。
English: Due to the disparity in status between the two, when there is a joyous occasion, they do not dare to accept the doctor's personal visit and congratulations.

古文：疾趋则欲发而手足毋移，圈豚行不举足，齐如流，席上亦然。端行，颐溜如矢，弁行，剡剡起屦，执龟玉，举前曳踵，蹜蹜如也。
现代文：下大夫有喜庆之事，可以接受上大夫的亲临祝贺，因为二者地位相近。父亲健在，向别人赠送礼品要以父亲的名义；同理，如果别人赠送自己什么东西，也要以父亲的名义拜受。
English: If the junior doctor has a joyous occasion, he can accept the congratulations of the senior doctor in person, because the two are of similar status. If the father is alive, gifts should be given to others in the name of the father; in the same way, if others give themselves something, they should also receive it in the name of the father.

古文：凡行容愓愓，庙中齐齐，朝庭济济翔翔。君子之容舒迟，见所尊者齐遬。足容重，手容恭，目容端，口容止，声容静，头容直，气容肃，立容德，色容庄，坐如尸，燕居告温温。
现代文：坐要如尸一般的端正。
English: Sit up straight like a corpse.

古文：凡祭，容貌颜色，如见所祭者。
现代文：闲居时教导别人，态度要温和可亲。
English: Teach others when you are idle, and be gentle and amiable.

古文：丧容累累，色容颠颠，视容瞿瞿梅梅，言容茧茧，戎容暨暨，言容詻詻，色容厉肃，视容清明。
现代文：凡参加祭祀者，其容貌颜色要像是真正看到了所祭的鬼神，切不可有虚应故事的神态。孝子在居丧期间，总要显出一副疲惫不堪的样子，满脸愁容，眼神是惊愕而又茫然，说话的声音也有气无力。身着戎装时就要神态果毅，发号施令，表情严厉，虎虎生威，眼神明察秋毫。
English: All those who participate in the sacrificial rites should have the appearance and color as if they really saw the ghosts and gods that were sacrificed, and must not have the appearance of falsely responding to the story. During the mourning period, the filial son must always show a look of exhaustion, full of sorrow, the eyes are surprised and dazed, and the speaking voice is also weak. When wearing a military uniform, it is necessary to look resolute, give orders, have a stern expression, be strong, and the eyes are clear.

古文：立容辨，卑毋谄，头颈必中，山立时行，盛气颠实，扬休玉色。
现代文：在尊者面前，虽然站立时应有自我贬卑的姿态，但也不能过火，以致近乎诌媚。平常站立时头颈必保持正直，如山一般地屹立，当行则行，显得浑身是劲，扬美于外，脸色温润如玉。
English: In front of His Holiness, although there should be a self-deprecating posture when standing, it should not be overdone to the point of being almost charming. When standing normally, the head and neck must be kept upright, standing like a mountain, and when walking, it should be done so that the whole body appears vigorous, beautiful, and the face is warm and smooth.

古文：凡自称：天子曰予一人，伯曰天子之力臣。
现代文：凡自称：天子自称为 予一人 ，州长自称为 天子之力臣 。
English: Anyone who claims to be the son of heaven claims to be the only one, and the governor claims to be the powerful minister of the son of heaven.

古文：诸侯之于天子曰某土之守臣某，其在边邑，曰某屏之臣某。
现代文：诸侯去朝见天子时，自称为 某地之守臣某 ；如果是封在边陲的诸侯，自称为 某方的屏卫之臣某 。
English: When princes went to see the emperor, they called themselves the "guardian of a certain place"; if they were princes sealed in the borderlands, they called themselves the "guardian of a certain side."

古文：其于敌以下曰寡人，小国之君曰孤，摈者亦曰孤。
现代文：诸侯对于和自己身份相等或低于己者，自称为 寡人 。小国的国君自称 孤 ，摈者为他传话也称 孤 。
English: Princes call themselves "few people" for those who are equal or lower than themselves. The sovereign of a small country calls himself "lonely," and those who pass on messages to him are also called "lonely."

古文：上大夫曰下臣，摈者曰寡君之老，下大夫自名，摈者曰寡大夫。
现代文：上大夫对于自己的国君自称 下臣 ，如果出使他国晋见主国之君，其介在传话时称他为 寡君之老 。下大夫在自己的国君面前自称己名，如果出使他国，其介在传话时称他为 寡大夫 。
English: The senior doctor calls himself a vassal to his sovereign, and if he goes to see the sovereign of his country, he calls him the elder of the vassal. The junior doctor calls himself by his name in front of his sovereign, and if he goes to another country, he calls him the elder of the vassal.

古文：世子自名，摈者曰寡君之适，公子曰臣孽。
现代文：太子在国君面前自称己名，如果出使他国，其介在通报时称之为 寡君之嫡子 。公子在国君面前自称 臣孽某 。
English: The crown prince calls himself by his own name in front of the sovereign, and if he travels to another country, his representative calls him "the legitimate son of the widowed sovereign" at the time of notification. The prince calls himself "a vassal" in front of the sovereign.

古文：士曰传遽之臣，于大夫曰外私。
现代文：士在国君面前自称为供驱使的 传遵之臣 ，在他国大夫面前自称, 卜私 。
English: In the presence of a sovereign, a samurai calls himself a "vassal of Tsunemune" who is to be driven, and in the presence of a doctor from another country, he calls himself a "Budai."

古文：大夫私事使，私人摈则称名，公士摈则曰寡大夫、寡君之老。大夫有所往，必与公士为宾也。
现代文：大夫因自己的私事派人出使他国，使家臣通报则称大夫之名；倘奉国君之命出聘 ，则由公士通报，称之为 寡大夫 ，或者 寡君之老 大夫如果出聘，一定要以公士为介。
English: When a doctor sends someone to a foreign country for his own private business, he will inform his vassal, who will then call him by the doctor's name. If he is hired by order of the sovereign, he will be notified by a courtier, who will call him 寡大夫, or 寡君之老. If a doctor is hired, he must be mediated by a courtier.

