古文：轮人为轮，斩三材必以其时。
现代文：轮人制作车轮，砍伐用作毂、辐、牙的三种木材必须依照一定的季节。
English: The wheelman makes the wheel, and the three types of wood used for the hub, spoke and teeth must be felled according to a certain season.

古文：三材既具，巧者和之。
现代文：三种木材具备之后，心灵手巧的工匠将它们加工组合而成为车轮。
English: Once the three types of wood were available, skilled craftsmen combined them into wheels.

古文：毂也者，以为利转也。辐也者，以为直指也。牙也者，以为固抱也。
现代文：毂，要使它利于车轮的转动；辐，要使它直指车牙；牙，要使它牢固紧抱。
English: The beak, that it may work for the wheel; the spoke, that it may point to the teeth; and the teeth, that it may be firmly fixed.

古文：轮敝，三材不失职，谓之完。
现代文：轮子即使磨损坏了，毂、辐、牙也不松动变形，称之为完美。
English: Even if the wheel is damaged by the grinding, the hub, spoke and teeth are not loosened and deformed, which is called perfection.

古文：望而眡其轮，欲其幎尔而下迤也。
现代文：远看车牙，要能够从中间向两旁均匀地下斜；走近来看，要着地面积小：这没有别的什么可取法，只有取法于圆才能做到。
English: Looking at the cog from a distance, it should be able to slope evenly downwards from the middle to both sides; looking closer, it should have a small footprint: there is no other way to do this, it can only be done by taking the method in a circle.

古文：无所取之，取诸易直也。望其毂，欲其眼也，进而眡之，欲其帱之廉也。无所取之，取诸急也。
现代文：远看车辐，向牙的一端要削得较细小；走近来看，要每根车辐的粗细都很均匀：这没有别的什么可取法，只有取法于平直才能做到。远看车毂，要像凸出的大眼睛；走近来看，要缠革的地方显出毂端的木棱：这没有别的什么可取法，只有取法于紧固才能做到。
English: Looking at the spokes from a distance, one end of the teeth should be whittled down to a smaller size; looking closer, the thickness of each spoke should be uniform: there is no other way to do this, it can only be done by taking it straight. Looking at the rim from a distance, it should be like a protruding big eye; looking closer, the edge of the rim should appear where the leather is to be wound: there is no other way to do this, it can only be done by tightening.

古文：眡其绠，欲其蚤之正也，察其菑蚤不龋，则轮虽敝不匡。
现代文：看车牙的绠处，要绠内侧的蚤安得很正。观察辐的蕾和蚤成直线相对而没有不齐，那么即使轮用坏了也不会变形。
English: Look at the beak of the cog, the flea on the inside of the beak should be very stable. Observe that the buds of the spokes and the fleas are in a straight line and not uneven, so even if the wheel is broken, it will not be deformed.

古文：凡斩毂之道，必矩其阴阳。
现代文：凡砍伐毂材的方法，必须刻记下树的背阳面和向阳面。
English: For all methods of felling eucalyptus, the dorsal and sunward sides of the tree must be recorded.

古文：阳也者，稹理而坚；阴也者，疏理而柔。是故以火养其阴，而齐诸其阳，则毂虽敝不蒿。
现代文：向阳面的木材纹理较密而木质坚硬，背阳面的木材纹理较疏而木质柔软，因此要用火烘烤背阳的一面，而使木质变得与向阳面一样坚硬，那么毂即使用坏了木材也不会缩耗而致使裹在上面的皮革鼓起。
English: The wood texture of the sun-facing side is dense and the wood is hard, and the wood texture of the back sun-facing side is sparse and the wood is soft. Therefore, it is necessary to bake the back sun-facing side with fire, so that the wood becomes as hard as the sun-facing side, then even if the bad wood is used, it will not shrink and cause the leather wrapped on it to bulge.

古文：毂小而长则柞，大而短则挚。
现代文：毂小而长辐间的距离就狭窄，大而短车轮就不安稳。
English: The distance between the small and long spokes is narrow, and the large and short wheels are unstable.

古文：是故六分其轮崇，以其一为之牙围，参分其牙围，而漆其二。
现代文：因此用轮高六尺六寸的六分之一做牙围。牙围的三分之二加油漆。
English: Therefore, one-sixth of the wheel height of six feet and six inches is used to make the gears. Two-thirds of the gears are painted.

古文：椁其漆内而中诎之。以为之毂长，以其长为之围，以其围之阝力捎其薮。
现代文：度量轮两边白油漆以内的长度而从中折分，用以作为毂的长度，又用毂的长度作为毂的周长。依照毂的周长的三分之一挖除毂心而为薮。
English: Measure the length within the white paint on both sides of the wheel and divide it by the middle, which is used as the length of the hoop, and the length of the hoop is used as the circumference of the hoop. According to one third of the circumference of the hoop, dig out the core of the hoop and make it a hoop.

古文：五分其毂之长，去一以为贤，去三以为轵。
现代文：把毂的长度分为五等分，去掉二等分就是贤的周长，去掉三等分就是轵的周长。
English: Divide the length of the beak into five equal parts, remove the second equal part is the circumference of the beak, remove the third equal part is the circumference of the beak.

古文：容毂必直，陈篆必正，施胶必厚，施筋必数，帱必负干。
现代文：整治毂一定要它直，毂上所刻的篆的排列一定要正，毂上所涂的胶一定要厚，所缠的筋一定要稠密，所缠裹的皮革一定要紧紧地贴附着毂干。
English: The straightening roller must be straight, the arrangement of the roller engraved on the roller must be positive, the glue coated on the roller must be thick, the strands wrapped must be dense, and the wrapped leather must be tightly attached to the roller.

古文：既摩，革色青白，谓之毂之善。
现代文：在此革上先涂丸漆，丸漆干后再用石块打磨，打磨之后，皮革显出青白色，这就叫做好车毂。
English: This leather is first painted with round paint, and after the round paint is dry, it is polished with a stone. After grinding, the leather appears bluish-white, which is called doing a good turn.

古文：参分其毂长，二在外，一在内，以置其幅。
现代文：把毂长分成三等分，使二分在外，一分在内，在这两者之间的地方安置车辐。
English: Divide the length of the yoke into three equal parts, so that two parts are outside and one part is inside, and place the spokes in the space between them.

古文：凡辐，量其凿深以为辐广。
现代文：凡辐，度量毂上凿的深度来确定辐的宽度。
English: For each spoke, measure the depth of the chisel on the roller to determine the width of the spoke.

古文：辐广而凿浅，则是以大扤，虽有良工，莫之能固。
现代文：辐宽而凿浅，辐就会因此而摇动，即使有好的工匠，也不能使之牢固；凿深而辐狭小，就会使辐牢固有余而强度不够。
English: If the spoke is wide and the chisel is shallow, the spoke will shake because of this, and even if there is a good craftsman, it cannot be made firm; if the chisel is deep and the spoke is narrow, it will make the chisel inherently redundant and not strong enough.

古文：凿深而辐小，则是固有余，而强不足也，故竑其辐广，以为之弱，则虽有重任，毂不折。
现代文：因此度量辐的宽度以作为蕾宽的尺寸，而蕾端则削成尖笋状，那么即使有重载，毂也不会折断。
English: Therefore, the width of the measuring spoke is taken as the size of the bud width, and the bud end is whittled into a pointed beak shape, so even if there is a heavy load, the beak will not break.

古文：参分其辐之长而杀其一，则虽有深泥，亦弗之溓也。
现代文：把辐长分成三等分而把靠近牙处的一等分的内侧削得细小些，即使遇有深泥，辐上也不会黏泥。
English: Divide the length of the spoke into thirds and cut the inside of the first third close to the tooth into smaller pieces. Even if there is deep mud, there will be no mud on the spoke.

古文：参分其股围，去一以为围，揉辐必齐，平沈必均，直以指牙，牙得，则无槷而固，不得，则有槷必足见也。
现代文：把股围长分成三等分，去掉一等分就是骰的围长。用火烤煤做辐的木材必须使它们一律笔直，把辐材沉入水中，入水的深度要均平如一。辐要直指牙凿，使蚤与凿密合，无须加楔子就会牢固了。
English: Divide the perimeter of the stem into three equal parts, and remove one equal part, which is the perimeter of the beak. The wood used to make the spokes with fire-roasted coal must make them all straight, sink the spokes into the water, and the depth of the water should be uniform. The spoke should point straight at the tooth chisel, so that the flea is close to the chisel, and it will be firm without adding a wedge.

古文：六尺有六寸之轮，绠参分寸之二，谓之轮之固。
现代文：如果蚤与牙不能密合，就要加楔子，楔子的末端一定会从牙践地一边的凿眼中露出来。六尺六寸高的轮，留出三分之二寸宽的绠，这就可以称得上轮子牢固。
English: If the flea and the tooth are not close together, a wedge is added, the end of the wedge must come out of the chisel eye on the side of the tooth. The six-foot-six-inch-high wheel leaves a two-thirds-inch-wide beak, which can be called a wheel firmly.

古文：凡为轮，行泽者欲杼，行山者欲侔。
现代文：凡制作车轮，行驶在泽地的轮牙践地的一边要削得较薄，行驶在山地的轮牙的上下要厚薄均等。
English: When making a wheel, the side of the cog that runs in the forest should be made thinner, and the top and bottom of the cog that runs in the mountains should be of equal thickness.

古文：杼以行泽，则是刀以割涂也，是故涂不附。侔以行山，则是搏以行石也，是故轮虽敝不甐于凿。
现代文：轮牙践地的一边削薄而行驶在泽地，就像用刀切割涂泥一样，因此涂泥不会黏附车轮；轮牙上下厚薄均等而行驶在山地，就是用圆厚的轮牙仃驶在山石上，因此轮子即使用坏了，也不会使凿孔两侧的牙磨损变薄而致使凿中的辐蚤松动。
English: When driving in the forest, the teeth of the wheel are cut thin on one side of the ground, just like cutting mud with a knife, so the mud will not stick to the wheel; when driving in the mountains, the teeth of the wheel are equally thick on the top and bottom, that is, driving on the rock with a round thick wheel, so even if the wheel is broken, it will not cause the teeth on both sides of the chisel hole to wear thin and cause the fleas in the chisel to loosen.

古文：凡揉牙，外不廉而内不挫，旁不肿，谓之用火之善。
现代文：凡用火烤燥牙材，朝外的一边木材的纹理不断绝，而朝内的连不挫损，两旁也不肿出，叫做善于用火。
English: When dry-toothed wood is roasted with fire, the texture of the wood on the outer side of the morning is constantly exhausted, while the inner side of the morning is not damaged and the sides are not swollen. It is called being good at using fire.

古文：是故规之以眡其圜也，萭之以眡其匡也。县之以眡其幅之直也，水之以眡其平沈之均也，量其薮以黍，以眡其同也，权之以眡其轻重之侔也。
现代文：用规测量以观察轮子圆不圆，用矩测量以观察辐与牙相交处是否成直角，悬垂线以观察上下车辐是否成一条直线，用水来测量两只轮子沉入水中的深度是否相等，用黍来测量两毁的毂孔以观察它们的大小是否相同，称量两轮以观察它们的重量是否相等。
English: Measure with a gauge to observe whether the wheel is round or not, measure with a moment to observe whether the intersection of the spoke and the tooth is at a right angle, the overhanging line to observe whether the upper and lower spokes are in a straight line, use water to measure whether the two wheels sink into the water to the same depth, use a plow to measure the two broken holes to observe whether they are the same size, and weigh the two wheels to observe whether their weight is equal.

古文：故可规、可萭、可水、可县、可量、可权也，谓之国工。
现代文：因此所制作的轮子可以经得起圆规、曲尺、水、垂线、黍、称的检验，这样的工匠就可以称之为国工了。
English: Therefore, the wheels produced can withstand the test of the compass, the ruler, the water, the vertical line, the yoke, and the balance. Such craftsmen can be called national craftsmen.

古文：轮人为盖，达常围三雨，桯围倍之，六寸。
现代文：轮人制作车盖，盖柄的上节围长三寸，盖柄的下节围长增大一倍，为六寸。
English: The wheel man makes the cover, the upper circumference of the cover handle is three inches long, and the lower circumference of the cover handle is doubled to six inches.

古文：信其桯围以为部广，部广六寸。
现代文：用盖柄下节的围长作为上面盖斗的直径，盖斗的直径为六寸，盖斗下的柄长二尺。
English: Use the circumference of the lower section of the lid handle as the diameter of the upper lid bucket. The diameter of the lid bucket is six inches, and the handle under the lid bucket is two feet long.

古文：部长二尺，桯长倍之，四尺者二。
现代文：盖柄的下节比上节长一倍为四尺而又加一倍而为八尺。
English: And the lower part of the stem of the mercy-seat was twice as long as the upper part, four cubits; and the second was twice as long as the first, eight cubits.

古文：十分寸之一，谓之枚，部尊一枚，弓凿广四枚，凿上二枚，凿下四枚，凿深二寸有半，下直二枚，凿端一枚。
现代文：一寸的十分之一叫做枚。盖斗的上部高出一枚，盖斗周围安弓的凿孔大四枚，凿孔的上边留出二枚，凿孔的下边留出四枚；凿孔深二寸半，凿孔内减于凿口处二枚，凿孔顶端宽一枚。
English: One tenth of an inch is called a sheet. The upper part of the lid is one inch higher, and there are four large holes drilled for the bow around the lid. Two holes are left on the upper side of the hole, and four holes are left on the lower side of the hole. The depth of the hole is two and a half inches. There are two holes inside the hole, and one hole is wide at the top.

古文：弓长六尺谓之庇轵，五尺谓之庇轮，四尺谓之庇轸，参分弓长而揉其一，参分其股围，去一以为蚤围。
现代文：盖弓长六尺，叫做庇轵，长五尺叫做庇轮，长四尺叫做庇轸。把弓长分成三等分，而把靠近盖斗的一等分用火烤燥而变得平直。
English: The six-foot-long cover bow is called the palisade, the five-foot-long one is called the palisade wheel, and the four-foot-long one is called the palisade. Divide the length of the bow into three equal parts, and dry the first part near the cover bucket with fire to make it straight.

古文：参分弓长，以其一为之尊，上欲尊而宇欲卑，上尊而宇卑，则吐水，疾而霤远。
现代文：把弓股的围长分成三等分，去掉一等分就是弓蚤的围长。把弓长分成三等分，以靠近盖斗的一等分作为高出而平伸的部分。近盖斗的部分要高而宇曲、的部分要低。近盖斗的部分高而宇曲的部分低，雨水就流淌得快而且流得远。
English: Divide the circumference of the bow stock into three equal parts, and remove one equal part to get the circumference of the flea. Divide the length of the bow into three equal parts, and take the first equal part near the lid as the high and flat part. The part near the lid is high, and the curved part is low. The part near the lid is high, and the curved part is low, and the rainwater flows fast and far.

古文：盖已崇，则难为门也，盖也卑，是蔽目也。
现代文：车盖过高就难以通过宫室的大门，车盖过低就会遮住人的视线，因此盖的高度设计为十尺。
English: If the cover is too high, it will be difficult to pass through the gate of the palace room, and if the cover is too low, it will cover people's line of sight, so the height of the cover is designed to be ten feet.

古文：是故盖崇十尺，良盖弗冒弗纮，殷亩而驰，不队，谓之国工。
现代文：好的车盖上即使不蒙幕、不用绳栓系幕，车子横驰在垄亩间盖弓也不会脱落，有这种技艺的工匠就可以称之为国工了。
English: Even if a good car cover is not covered with a curtain and does not use a rope to fasten the curtain, the car will not fall off when driving across a ridge, and the cover bow will not fall off. An artisan with this skill can be called a national worker.

古文：舆人为车，轮崇、车广、衡长参，如一，谓之参称。
现代文：舆人制作车箱，使车轮的高度、车箱的宽度、车衡的长度，三者如一，叫做三称。
English: When people make a car box, the height of the wheel, the width of the box, and the length of the scale are all the same, which is called the three names.

古文：参分车广，去一以为隧。
现代文：把车箱的宽度分成三等分，去掉一等分就是车箱的纵长。
English: Divide the width of the car box into three equal parts. The vertical length of the car box is the vertical length if the first equal part is removed.

古文：参分其隧，一在前，二在后，在揉其式。
现代文：把车箱的纵长分成三等分，一等分在前作为车轼短边的长度，二等分在后作为安置车輈和较木的长度，用火燥制车轼。
English: Divide the longitudinal length of the box into three equal parts, one equal part at the front as the length of the short side of the rim, and the second equal part at the back as the length of the rim and the wood, and make the rim with fire.

古文：以其广之半为之式崇，以其隧之半为之较崇。
现代文：用车箱宽度的一半作为轼高的尺度。用车箱纵长的一半作为较的高出于轼的尺寸。
English: Use half the width of the box as a measure of the height of the frame. Use half the length of the box as a measure of the height of the frame.

古文：六分其广，以一为之轸围。
现代文：把车箱的宽度分成六等分，用一等分的长度作为轸木的围长。
English: Divide the width of the car box into six equal parts and use the length of one equal part as the circumference of the birch tree.

古文：参分轸围，去一以为式围。
现代文：把轸木的围长分为三等分，去掉一等分就是轼木的围长。
English: Divide the girth of the birch into three equal parts. If you remove one equal part, the girth of the birch is zero.

古文：参分式围，去一以为较围。
现代文：把轼木的围长分成三等分，去掉一等分就是较木的围长。
English: Divide the girth of the birch into three equal parts. If one part is removed, the girth of the tree is reduced.

古文：参分较围，去一以为轵围。
现代文：把较木的围长分成三等分，去掉一等分就是轵木的围长。
English: Divide the circumference of the larger tree into three equal parts, and remove one equal part, which is the circumference of the root stock.

古文：参分轵围，去一以为轛围。
现代文：把轵木的围长分成三等分，去掉一等分就是树木的围长。
English: Divide the girth of a birch tree into three equal parts. If you remove one part, you have the girth of the tree.

古文：圜者中规，方者中矩，立者中县，衡者中水，直者如生焉，继者如附焉。
现代文：凡车箱上所用之木，圆木圆得符合规，方木方得符合矩，立木直得符合垂线，横木平得如同水平，直立之木如同从地里生长出来的，纵横相交之木如同附着为一体。
English: For the wood used on the car box, the round wood should be round, the square wood should be square, the upright wood should be vertical, the crossbeam should be horizontal, the upright wood should be grown from the ground, and the intersecting wood should be attached as one.

古文：凡居材，大与小无并，大倚小则摧，引之则绝，栈车欲弇，饰车欲侈。
现代文：凡处置造车的木材，粗大的木材不要同细小的木材相并而用；粗大的木材倚附于细小的木材，细小的木材就会折断，用力拉时会把细小的木材拉断栈车的车箱要向里收，饰车的车箱要向外张。
English: When disposing of wood for making cars, coarse wood should not be used together with fine wood; coarse wood adheres to fine wood, fine wood will be broken, and when pulling hard, it will pull the fine wood. The box of the stacked car should be closed inwards, and the box of the decorative car should be opened outwards.

古文：辀人为辀。
现代文：輈人制作輈。
English: A lot of people make a lot of money.

古文：辀有三度，轴有三理。
现代文：輈有三种高度，轴有三项要求。
English: There are three heights for the yoke and three requirements for the shaft.

古文：国马之辀，深四尺有七寸，田马之辀深四尺，驽马之辀，深三尺有三寸。
现代文：国马的輈下距轸高四尺七寸，田马的輈下距轸高四尺，驽马的輈下距轸高三尺三寸。
English: The underarm height of the national horse is 4 feet 7 inches, the underarm height of the field horse is 4 feet, and the underarm height of the draught horse is 3 feet 3 inches.

古文：轴有三理：一者，以为也；二者，以为久也；三者，以为利也。
现代文：制作车轴有三项要求：一要光洁好看，二要经久耐用，三要利于旋转。
English: There are three requirements for the production of axles: the first is to be smooth and good-looking, the second is to be durable, and the third is to be conducive to rotation.

古文：軓前十尺，而策半之。
现代文：輈在前轨之前的长度为十尺，而马鞭的长度是它的一半。
English: The length of the stirrup before the front rail is ten feet, and the length of the horse whip is half of it.

古文：凡任木、任正者，十分其辀之长，以其一为之围。衡任者，五分其长，以其一为之围。
现代文：凡承受重力的木材，承受车箱重力的钒木，把輈长分为十等分，用一等分作为钒木的围长；两轭之间受力处的衡木，把它的长度分为五等分，用一等分作为它的围长。
English: For any wood that can withstand the force of gravity, for example, a piece of elm that can withstand the force of gravity of a car box, divide the length of the elm into ten equal parts and use one equal part as the circumference of the elm; for a piece of timber that is under stress between two pieces of elm, divide its length into five equal parts and use one equal part as its circumference.

古文：小于度，谓之无任。
现代文：如果围长小于这个长度，就叫做不胜任。
English: If the circumference is less than this length, it is called incompetence.

古文：五分其轸间，以其一为之轴围。
现代文：把左、右两轸木间的宽度分为五等分，用一等分作为轴的围长。
English: Divide the width between the left and right rafters into five equal parts, and use one equal part as the circumference of the shaft.

古文：十分其辀之长，以其一为之当兔之围。
现代文：把輈长分为十等分，用一等分作为当兔的围长。
English: Divide the beak length into ten equal parts, and use one equal part as the circumference of the rabbit.

古文：参分其兔围，去一以为颈围。
现代文：把伏兔的围长分为三等分，去掉一等分就是輈颈的围长。
English: Divide the circumference of the hare into three equal parts, and remove one equal part to get the circumference of the neck.

古文：五分其颈围，去一以为踵围。
现代文：把輈颈的围长分为五等分，去一等分就是輈踵的围长。
English: Divide the circumference of the nape of the neck into five equal parts. The first equal part is the circumference of the heel.

古文：凡揉辀，欲其孙而无弧深。
现代文：凡用火烤輈木，要顺着木材的纹理而弯曲的弧度不要太深。
English: When using fire to bake birch, it is necessary to follow the texture of the wood and the curvature should not be too deep.

古文：今夫大车之辕挚，其登又难，既克其登，其覆车也必易。
现代文：现在大车的辕低，上坡感到困难；就是能爬上去，也容易造成翻车。
English: Now the car is low, it is difficult to climb uphill; even if it can climb up, it is easy to cause a rollover.

古文：此无故，唯辕直且无桡也。
现代文：这没有别的原因，只是因为辕直而不弯曲的缘故。
English: This is for no other reason than the fact that it is straight and not curved.

古文：是故大车，平地既节轩挚之任，及其登阝也，不伏其辕，必缢其牛。
现代文：因此大车行走在平地上，车辕平衡适于任载，到上坡的时候，不向下伏压车辕，就一定会悬勒牛脖子。
English: Therefore, the truck walks on the flat ground, the balance of the cart is suitable for any load, and when going uphill, if the cart is not pressed downwards, it will definitely overhang the cow's neck.

古文：此无故，唯辕直且无桡也。
现代文：这没有别的原因，只是因为辕直而不弯曲的缘故。
English: This is for no other reason than the fact that it is straight and not curved.

古文：故登阤者，倍任者也，犹能以登，及其下阤也。不援其邸，必緧其牛后。
现代文：因此大车上坡，虽然要加倍用力，还是能够爬上去；到下坡的时候，不拉住大车的后边，牛后的革带一定会兜勒牛的臀部。
English: Therefore, when the cart goes uphill, although you have to work twice as hard, you can still climb up; when you go downhill, instead of pulling the back of the cart, the cow's leather belt will definitely pull the cow's buttocks.

古文：此无故，唯辕直且无桡也，是故辀欲颀典，辀深则折，浅则负。
现代文：这没有别的原因，只是因为辕直而不弯曲的缘故。因此輈要很坚韧。輈弯曲的弧度过深就会折断，过浅就会倚负而磨压马的股部。
English: There is no reason for this other than the fact that the stirrup is straight and not curved. Therefore, the stirrup must be very strong. If the arc of the stirrup is too deep, it will break, and if it is too shallow, it will lean and grind the horse's groin.

古文：辀注则利准，利准则久，和则安。
现代文：輈的弯曲弧度适中如同水下注一般就会使车的行驶便利而又平稳，便利而又平稳就经久耐用，輈的曲直调和乘车人就安稳。
English: The moderate curvature of the yoke, just like a faucet under water, will make the driving of the car convenient and smooth, convenient and smooth will be durable, and the straightness of the yoke and the passenger will be stable.

古文：辀欲百无折，经而无绝，进则与马谋，退则与人谋，终目驰骋，左不楗行数千里马不契需，终岁御，衣衽不敝。此唯辀之和也。
现代文：輈要有一定的弧度而不致折断，要顺着輈木的纹理糅曲而不使纹理断绝。想要使车前进的时候同马想前进的意思正相应，想要使车后退的时候又能符合人的意思而后退，前进和后退都能随心所欲，十分便利，整天奔跑不息，在车左边的尊者也不会感到疲倦；行驶几千里，马也不会因为马蹄开裂受伤而畏惧；成年驾车，衣下的裳也不会磨破：这只是因为輈的曲直调和的缘故。
English: The yoke should have a certain curvature without breaking, and it should bend along the texture of the birch without breaking the texture. When you want to make the car move forward, it is the same as the horse wants to move forward. When you want to make the car move back, it can move back in accordance with the person's will. It can move forward and backward as you like. It is very convenient. You can run all day long, and the venerable person on the left side of the car will not feel tired. If you travel thousands of miles, the horse will not be afraid because the horse's hoof is cracked and injured. If you drive an adult car, the clothes

古文：劝登马力，马力既竭，辀犹能一取焉，良辀环灂，自伏兔不至軓，七寸，軓中有灂，谓之国辀。
现代文：輈的曲直调和就能助马用力前进，即使马力已经用尽想停下来，輈还能促使马前进好几步。好的辑上漆饰的环形纹理，在伏兔的前边、不到前轨约七寸的地方，前钒内能保持这漆饰的环形纹理长久不被车箱底板磨灭，就可称之为国輈。
English: Even if the horsepower has been exhausted and you want to stop, the yoke can still make the horse advance several steps. A good ring texture of the paint decoration on the front of the hare, less than about seven inches from the front rail, can keep the ring texture of the paint decoration in the front yoke for a long time without being rubbed out by the bottom plate of the car, and can be called a national yoke.

古文：轸之方也，以象地也；盖之圜也，以象天也；轮辐三十，以象日月也；盖弓二十有八，以象星也；龙旂九斿，以象大火也；鸟旟七斿；以象鹑火也；熊旗六斿，以象伐也；龟蛇四斿，以象营室也；弧旌枉矢，以象弧也。
现代文：轸的方形，以象征地。盖的圆形，以象征天。轮辐三十根，以象征日月三十日合宿。盖弓二十八根，以象征二十八宿。龙旃饰有九存，以象征大火之次的尾宿九星。鸟旃饰有七存，以象征鹑火之次的星宿七星。熊旗饰有六脖，以象征参宿中伐星的六颗星。龟旒饰有四旃，以象征营室与东壁连体构成的四颗星。
English: The square shape of the cormorant symbolizes the earth. The round shape of the lid symbolizes the sky. The 30 spokes of the wheel symbolize the 30th day of the training camp. The 28 bows on the lid symbolize the 28 camps. The dragon beak is decorated with 9 stars, symbolizing the 9th star of the tail lodge after the fire. The bird beak is decorated with 7 stars, symbolizing the 7th star of the star lodge after the bonfire. The bear flag is decorated with 6 necks, symbolizing the 6 stars of the middle star of the camp. The turtle beak is decorated with 4 fins, symbolizing the 4 stars that make up the

