古文：仲尼居，曾子侍。
现代文：孔子在家里闲坐，他的学生曾参侍坐在旁边。
English: Confucius was sitting idly at home, and his student was sitting next to him.

古文：子曰： 先王有至德要道，以顺天下，民用和睦，上下无怨。
现代文：孔子说∶ 古代的圣德贤王有至高无上的品行，掌握着最重要的事物之理，以其使天下人心归顺，百姓和睦相处。人们无论是尊贵还是卑贱，上上下下都没有怨恨不满。
English: Confucius said, "The ancient sage-kings had supreme virtue and mastered the principle of the most important things, with which they made the hearts of the people of the world submit, and the people lived in harmony. People, whether they were noble or lowly, had no resentment or dissatisfaction.

古文：汝知之乎？ 
现代文：你知道这是为什么吗？ 
English: Do you know why?

古文：曾子避席曰： 参不敏，何足以知之？ 
现代文：曾子站起身来，离开自己的座位恭敬回答到∶ 学生我不够聪敏，哪里能知道其中的道理呢？ 
English: Zeng Zi stood up, left his seat and respectfully replied, "Student, I am not smart enough. How can I know the reason?"

古文：子曰： 夫孝，德之本也，教之所由生也。
现代文：孔子说： 孝，是道德的根本，对百姓的教化也是从孝中产生的。
English: Confucius said: Filial piety is the foundation of morality, and the enlightenment of the people is also derived from filial piety.

古文：复坐，吾语汝。
现代文：你先回到位置上坐下，我来告诉你。
English: You just get back in your seat and I'll tell you.

古文：身体发肤，受之父母，不敢毁伤，孝之始也。
现代文：人的身体四肢、毛发皮肤，都是父母赐予我们的，不敢予以损毁伤残，这是遵从孝道的开始。
English: Human body, limbs, hair and skin are all given to us by our parents. We dare not damage or mutilate them. This is the beginning of filial piety.

古文：立身行道，扬名于后世，以显父母，孝之终也。
现代文：人在世上遵循仁义道德，有所建树，显扬名声于后世，从而使父母显赫荣耀，这是孝的终极目标。
English: It is the ultimate goal of filial piety for a person to follow the principles of benevolence, righteousness, and morality in this world, to accomplish something, and to gain fame and glory in the next life, thereby glorifying his or her parents.

古文：夫孝，始于事亲，中于事君，终于立身。
现代文：所谓孝，最初是从侍奉父母开始，然后效力于国君，最终建功立业，功成名就。
English: The so-called filial piety initially starts with serving one's parents, then working for the sovereign, and finally making contributions and achieving fame.

古文：《大雅》云： 无念尔祖，聿修厥德。 
现代文：《诗经·大雅·文王》篇中说过∶ 怎么能不追念你先祖的德行呢？要称述修行先祖的美德啊！  
English: It was said in the "Song of Songs, Great Elegance, King Wen" passage: "How can you not remember the virtues of your ancestors? Describe the virtues of practicing ancestors!"

