古文：鲁仲连者，齐人也。
现代文：鲁仲连是齐国人。
English: Lu Zhonglian is from Qi Province.

古文：好奇伟俶傥之画策，而不肯仕宦任职，好持高节。
现代文：长于阐发奇特宏伟卓异不凡的谋略，却不肯作官任职，愿意保持高风亮节。
English: He is good at expounding strange, magnificent and extraordinary strategies, but he is not willing to serve as an official and is willing to maintain a high wind and bright festival.

古文：游於赵。
现代文：他曾客游赵国。
English: He once traveled to Zhao Province.

古文：赵孝成王时，而秦王使白起破赵长平之军前後四十馀万，秦兵遂东围邯郸。
现代文：赵孝成王的时候，秦昭王派遣白起领兵打败赵国长平的军队，先后共斩杀四十多万，于是，秦国的军队向东挺进，围困了赵国都城邯郸。
English: When Zhao Xiaocheng became king, Qin Zhao sent Baiqi to lead the army to defeat the army of Zhao Changping, killing more than 400,000 people in succession. As a result, the army of Qin advanced eastward and besieged the capital city of Zhao.

古文：赵王恐，诸侯之救兵莫敢击秦军。
现代文：赵王很害怕，个诸侯国的援兵也没有谁敢攻击秦军。
English: King Zhao was very scared, and no one dared to attack the Qin army, not even the reinforcements from the vassal states.

古文：魏安釐王使将军晋鄙救赵，畏秦，止於荡阴不进。
现代文：魏安釐王派出将军晋鄙领兵营救赵国，结果因为畏惧秦军，驻扎在汤阴不敢前进。
English: King Wei of Anhui dispatched General Jinnan to lead an army to rescue Zhao. As a result, because of his fear of the Qin army, he was stationed in Tangyin and did not dare to advance.

古文：魏王使客将军新垣衍间入邯郸，因平原君谓赵王曰： 秦所为急围赵者，前与齐湣王争彊为帝，已而复归帝；今齐已益弱，方今唯秦雄天下，此非必贪邯郸，其意欲复求为帝。
现代文：魏王派客籍将军新垣衍从隐蔽的小路进入邯郸，通过平原君的关系见赵王说： 秦军所以急于围攻赵国，是因为以前和齐湣王争强称帝，不久齐湣王又取消了帝号；如今齐国也更加衰弱了，当今只有秦国称雄天下，这次围城并不是贪图邯郸，他的意图是要重新称帝。
English: The king of Wei sent a guest general, Xinqi Yan, to enter Zhao from a hidden path, and through the relationship of the plains king, he saw Zhao Wang said: The reason why the Qin army is eager to besiege Zhao is because it used to compete with the Qin king for the title of emperor, and soon the Qin king canceled the title of emperor; now the Qin state is even weaker. Today, only the Qin state is dominant in the world. This siege is not about coveting Zhao, his intention is to reclaim the title of emperor.

古文：赵诚发使尊秦昭王为帝，秦必喜，罢兵去。 
现代文：倘若赵国能派遣使臣尊奉秦昭王为帝，秦王一定很高兴，就会撤兵离去。 
English: If Zhao could send an envoy to serve Qin Zhao as emperor, Qin Zhao would be so happy that he would withdraw his troops.

古文：平原君犹预未有所决。
现代文：平原君犹豫不能决断。
English: Hirahara-kun hesitates and can't decide.

古文：此时鲁仲连適游赵，会秦围赵，闻魏将欲令赵尊秦为帝，乃见平原君曰： 事将柰何？ 
现代文：这时，鲁仲连游历到赵国，正赶上秦军围攻邯郸，听说魏国想要让赵国尊奉秦昭王称帝，就去晋见平原君说： 这件事打算怎么办？ 
English: At this time, Lu Zhonglian traveled to Zhao and was catching up with the Qin army's siege of Yunnan. When he heard that Wei wanted Zhao Guotongjun to serve Qin Zhao Wang as emperor, he went to Jin to see Pingyuan Jun and said: What do you plan to do about this?

古文：平原君曰： 胜也何敢言事！
现代文：平原君说： 我国哪里还敢谈论这样的大事！
English: Mr. Plains said: How dare our country talk about such a big thing!

古文：前亡四十万之众於外，今又内围邯郸而不能去。
现代文：前不久，在国外损失了四十万大军，如今又被秦军包围邯郸，又不能使之退兵。
English: Not long ago, it lost 400,000 troops abroad, and now it is encircled by the Qin Army and cannot withdraw its troops.

古文：魏王使客将军新垣衍令赵帝秦，今其人在是。
现代文：魏王派客籍将军新垣衍让赵国尊奉秦昭王称帝，眼下这个人还在这里。
English: The Wei king sent a guest general, Xinqi Yan, to have Zhao Guotong worship Qin Zhaowang as emperor, and this person is still here.

古文：胜也何敢言事！ 
现代文：我哪里还敢谈论这样的大事！ 
English: How dare I talk about something so important!

古文：鲁仲连曰： 吾始以君为天下之贤公子也，吾乃今然後知君非天下之贤公子也。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 以前我认为您是天下贤能的公子，今天我才知道您并不是天下贤能的公子。
English: Lu Zhonglian said, "In the past, I thought you were a virtuous man, but today I realized that you are not a virtuous man.

古文：梁客新垣衍安在？
现代文：魏国的客人新垣衍在哪儿？
English: Where is Wei's guest, Niigaki Yan?

古文：吾请为君责而归之。 
现代文：我替您去责问他并且让他回去。 
English: I'll scold him for you and send him back.

古文：平原君曰： 胜请为绍介而见之於先生。 
现代文：平原君说： 我愿为您介绍，让他跟先生相见。 
English: Mr. Hirahara said, "I would like to introduce him to you and let him meet you."

古文：平原君遂见新垣衍曰： 东国有鲁仲连先生者，今其人在此，胜请为绍介，交之於将军。 
现代文：于是平原君见新垣衍说： 齐国有位鲁仲连先生，如今他就在这儿，请让我给您介绍，让他和将军认识交个朋友。 
English: So, when he saw Niigaki Yan, he said, "Qi State once had Mr. Lu Zhonglian, and now he is here. Please let me introduce you to him, and let him get to know the general and make a friend."

古文：新垣衍曰： 吾闻鲁仲连先生，齐国之高士也。
现代文：新垣衍说： 我听说鲁仲连先生，是齐国志行高尚的人。
English: Aragaki Yan said: I have heard that Mr. Lu Zhonglian is a man of high moral character.

古文：衍人臣也，使事有职，吾不原见鲁仲连先生。 
现代文：我是魏王的臣子，奉命出使身负职责，我不愿见鲁仲连先生。 
English: I am a courtier of the Wei King, and I have been ordered to be on duty. I do not want to see Mr. Lu Zhonglian.

古文：平原君曰： 胜既已泄之矣。 
现代文：平原君说： 我已经把您在这儿的消息透露了。 
English: Mr. Hirahara said, "I have already revealed the news that you are here.

古文：新垣衍许诺。
现代文：新垣衍只好应允了。
English: Arakaki Yan had no choice but to agree.

古文：鲁连见新垣衍而无言。
现代文：鲁仲连见到新垣衍却一言不发。
English: Lu Zhonglian saw Niigaki Yan but did not say a word.

古文：新垣衍曰： 吾视居此围城之中者，皆有求於平原君者也；今吾观先生之玉貌，非有求於平原君者也，曷为久居此围城之中而不去？ 
现代文：新垣衍说： 我看留在这座围城中的，都是有求于平原君的人；而今，我看先生的玉貌，不像是有求于平原君的人，为什么还长久地留在这围城之中而不离去呢？ 
English: Aragaki Yan said, "I think that the people who stayed in this besieged city were all those who sought the Lord of the Plain; but now, I think that Mr. Gyokucho, unlike those who sought the Lord of the Plain, why did he stay in this besieged city for a long time and not leave?

古文：鲁仲连曰： 世以鲍焦为无从颂而死者，皆非也。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 世人认为鲍焦是因为气度狭小才自杀的，这种看全都不对。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: The world thinks that Bao Jiao committed suicide because of his small stature. This view is completely wrong.

古文：众人不知，则为一身。
现代文：一般人不了解他耻居浊世的心意，认为他只是为个人打算。
English: Ordinary people don't understand his desire to live in disgrace, and think he's just doing it for himself.

古文：彼秦者，弃礼义而上首功之国也，权使其士，虏使其民。
现代文：那秦国，是个抛弃礼仪而只崇尚战功的国家，用权诈之术对待士卒，像对待奴隶一样役使百姓。
English: Nakhchivan was a country that abandoned etiquette and only revered military exploits. It treated its soldiers like slaves and its people like servants.

古文：彼即肆然而为帝，过而为政於天下，则连有蹈东海而死耳，吾不忍为之民也。所为见将军者，欲以助赵也。 
现代文：如果让它无所忌惮地恣意称帝，进而统治天下，那么，我宁可跳入东海死掉，也不忍心作它的顺民，我之所以来见将军，是打算帮助赵国啊。 
English: If it is allowed to unbridledly and arbitrarily proclaim itself emperor and rule the world, then I would rather jump into the East Sea and die than be its obedient subject. The reason why I came to see the general is to help Zhao.

古文：新垣衍曰： 先生助之将柰何？ 
现代文：新垣衍说： 先生打算怎么帮助赵国呢？ 
English: Arakaki Yan said: How does the teacher plan to help Zhao Guo?

古文：鲁连曰： 吾将使梁及燕助之，齐、楚则固助之矣。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 我将请魏国和燕国帮助它，齐、楚两国本来就帮助赵国了。 
English: Lu Zhonglian said: I will ask Wei and Yan to help it. Qi and Chu have already helped Zhao.

古文：新垣衍曰： 燕则吾请以从矣；若乃梁者，则吾乃梁人也，先生恶能使梁助之？ 
现代文：新垣衍说： 燕国嘛，我相信会听从您的；至于魏国，我就是魏国人，先生怎么能让魏国去帮助赵国呢？ 
English: Aragaki Yan said, "As for Yan Guo, I believe he will listen to you; as for Wei Guo, I am a Wei Guo, how can you let Wei Guo help Zhao Guo?

古文：鲁连曰： 梁未睹秦称帝之害故耳。使梁睹秦称帝之害，则必助赵矣。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 魏国是因为没看清秦国称帝的危害罢了，让魏国看清秦国称帝的危害，就一定会帮助赵国了。 
English: Lu Zhonglian said: Wei is just because it did not see the harm of Qin's claim to be emperor. If Wei sees the harm of Qin's claim to be emperor, it will definitely help Zhao.

古文：新垣衍曰： 秦称帝之害何如？ 
现代文：新垣衍说： 秦国称帝后会有什么祸患呢？ 
English: Arakaki Yan said, "What kind of disaster will happen after Qin claims to be the emperor?

古文：鲁连曰： 昔者齐威王尝为仁义矣，率天下诸侯而朝周。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 从前，齐威王曾经奉行仁义，率领天下诸侯而朝拜周天子。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: Once upon a time, King Qi Wei once pursued benevolence and righteousness, led the princes of the world and worshiped Zhou Tianzi.

古文：周贫且微，诸侯莫朝，而齐独朝之。
现代文：当时，周天子贫困又弱小，诸侯们没有谁肯去朝拜，唯有齐国去朝拜。
English: At that time, Zhou Tianzi was poor and weak, and none of the princes were willing to go to worship, only Qi Guo went to worship.

古文：居岁馀，周烈王崩，齐後往，周怒，赴於齐曰： 天崩地坼，天子下席。东籓之臣因齐後至，则斮。 
现代文：过了一年多，周烈王去世，齐王奔丧去迟了，新继位的周显王很生气，派人到齐国报丧说： 天子逝世，如同天崩地裂般的大事，新继位的天子也得离开宫殿居丧守孝，睡在草席上，东方属国之臣田婴齐居然敢迟到，当斩。 
English: After more than a year, King Zhou Li passed away, King Qi was late to go to the funeral, and the newly enthroned King Zhou Xian was very angry. He sent someone to Qi to report the funeral and said: The death of the son of heaven is as important as the collapse of the earth. The newly enthroned son of heaven also had to leave the palace to stay in mourning and filial piety, sleeping on a straw mat. Tian Ying Qi, a vassal of the eastern country, dared to be late and should be beheaded.

古文：齐威王勃然怒曰： 叱嗟，而母婢也！ 
现代文：齐威王听了，勃然大怒，骂道： 呸！你母亲只不过是个婢女！ 
English: Upon hearing this, King Qi Wei flew into a rage and cursed, "Oh! Your mother is just a maid!

古文：卒为天下笑。
现代文：齐威王最终被天下人耻笑。
English: In the end, King Qi Wei was ridiculed by the world.

古文：故生则朝周，死则叱之，诚不忍其求也。
现代文：齐威王所以在周天子活着的时候去朝见，死了就破口大骂，是因为实在忍受不了周天子的苛求啊。
English: That's why King Qiwei went to see the emperor when Zhou Tianzi was still alive, and when he died, he cursed loudly, because he really couldn't bear Zhou Tianzi's demands.

古文：彼天子固然，其无足怪。 
现代文：那些作天子的本来就是这个样子，也没什么值得奇怪的。 
English: Those who are the sons of heaven are like this in the first place, and there is nothing strange about it.

古文：新垣衍曰： 先生独不见夫仆乎？
现代文：新垣衍说： 先生难道没见过奴仆吗？
English: Arakaki Yan said, "Hasn't the teacher ever seen a servant?"

古文：十人而从一人者，宁力不胜而智不若邪？
现代文：十个奴仆侍奉一个主人，难道是力气赶不上、才智比不上主人吗？
English: Do not ten servants serve one master? Are they not equal in strength? Are they not wiser than their master?

古文：畏之也。 鲁仲连曰： 呜呼！
现代文：是因为害怕他啊。 鲁仲连说： 唉！
English: It was because they were afraid of him. Lu Zhonglian said: Alas!

古文：梁之比於秦若仆邪？ 新垣衍曰： 然。 
现代文：魏王和秦王相比，难道就像仆人跟主人一样吗？ 新垣衍说： 是。 
English: Compared to the kings of Wei and Qin, are they like servants and masters? Niigaki Yan said: Yes.

古文：鲁仲连曰： 吾将使秦王烹醢梁王。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 那么，我就让秦王烹煮魏王，把他剁成肉酱？ 
English: Lu Zhonglian said, "Then, I will let Qin Wang cook Wei Wang and make him into meat sauce?"

古文：新垣衍怏然不悦，曰： 噫嘻，亦太甚矣先生之言也！
现代文：新垣衍很不高兴不服气地说： 哎呀！先生的话，也太过份了！
English: Unhappy and unconvinced, Arakaki Yan said, "Oh! Your words are too excessive!

古文：先生又恶能使秦王烹醢梁王？ 
现代文：先生又怎么能让秦王烹煮了魏王，并把他剁成肉酱呢？ 
English: How could the teacher let the Qin King cook the Wei King and turn him into meat sauce?

古文：鲁仲鲁曰： 固也，吾将言之。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 当然能够，我说给您听。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: Of course I can, I'll tell you.

古文：昔者九侯、鄂侯、文王，纣之三公也。
现代文：从前，九侯、鄂侯、文王是殷纣的三个诸侯。
English: In the past, Jiuhou, Ehou, and Wenwang were the three princes of Yinzhou.

古文：九侯有子而好，献之於纣，纣以为恶，醢九侯。
现代文：九侯有个女儿长得姣美，九侯就把她献给殷纣，可是纣王却认为她不美，就把九侯剁成肉酱。
English: The nine lords had a daughter who was very beautiful. The nine lords offered her to Yin Xuan, but the king of Yin thought she was not beautiful, so he turned the nine lords into meat sauce.

古文：鄂侯争之彊，辩之疾，故脯鄂侯。
现代文：鄂侯刚直诤谏，激烈辩白，又把鄂侯杀死做成肉干。
English: E Hou was stubborn, fiercely argued, and killed E Hou to make minced meat.

古文：文王闻之，喟然而叹，故拘之牖里之库百日，欲令之死。
现代文：文王听到这件事，只是长长地叹息，因此纣王就把他关在牖里牢狱里一百天，想将他置于死地。
English: When King Wen heard about this, he only sighed for a long time, so King Yao locked him up in the prison of Baoli for a hundred days and wanted to put him to death.

古文：曷为与人俱称王，卒就脯醢之地？
现代文：为什么和人家同样称王，最终落到被剁成肉酱、做成肉干的地步呢？
English: Why is it that it is just as famous as the others, and finally falls to the point of being made into meat sauce and jerky?

古文：齐湣王之鲁，夷维子为执策而从，谓鲁人曰： 子将何以待吾君？ 
现代文：齐湣王前往鲁国，夷维子替他赶着车子作随员。他对鲁国官员们说： 你们准备怎样接待我们国君？ 
English: King Qizong went to the State of Lu, and Yivizi drove the car for him as an attendant. He said to the officials of the State of Lu: How are you preparing to receive our sovereign?

古文：鲁人曰： 吾将以十太牢待子之君。 
现代文：鲁国官员们说： 我们打算用十副太牢的礼仪接待您的国君。 
English: Lu officials said: "We plan to receive your king with the most solemn of ceremonies.

古文：夷维子曰： 子安取礼而来吾君？彼吾君者，天子也。
现代文：夷维子说： 你们这是按照哪来的礼仪接待我们国君，我那国君，是天子啊。
English: Yiwuizi said, "You are receiving our sovereign according to the etiquette of where you come from. My sovereign is the Son of Heaven."

古文：天子巡狩，诸侯辟舍，纳筦籥，摄衽抱机，视膳於堂下，天子已食，乃退而听朝也。 
现代文：天子到各国巡察，诸侯例应迁出正宫，移居别处，交出钥匙，撩起衣襟，安排几桌，站在堂下伺候天子用膳，天子吃完后，才可以退回朝堂听政理事。 
English: When the Prince of Heaven visits various countries, the princes should move out of the main palace, move to another place, hand over the keys, take off their collars, arrange a few tables, stand under the hall and wait for the Prince of Heaven to eat. After the Prince of Heaven has finished eating, he can return to the court to listen to the political director.

古文：鲁人投其籥，不果纳。
现代文：鲁国官员听了，就关闭上锁，不让齐湣王入境。
English: Lu officials listened and closed the lock to prevent Qi Xuan Wang from entering the country.

古文：不得入於鲁，将之薛，假途於邹。
现代文：齐湣王不能进入鲁国，打算借道邹国前往薛地。
English: King Qizong could not enter Lu, and he planned to travel to Xue.

古文：当是时，邹君死，湣王欲入吊，夷维子谓邹之孤曰： 天子吊，主人必将倍殡棺，设北面於南方，然后天子南面吊也。 
现代文：正当这时，邹国国君逝世，王想入镜吊丧，夷维子对邹国的嗣君说： 天子吊丧，丧主一定要把灵柩转换方向，在南面安放朝北的灵位，然后天子面向南吊丧。 
English: It was at this time that the ruler of the State of Min passed away, and Wang wanted to be photographed at the funeral. Yiwu Zi said to the heir of the State of Min: The heavenly son is in mourning, and the mourners must change the direction of the coffin and place the north-facing coffin in the south, and then the heavenly son faces south for the funeral.

古文：邹之群臣曰： 必若此，吾将伏剑而死。 
现代文：邹国大臣们说： 一定要这样，我们宁愿用剑自杀。 
English: The ministers said: "We must do this, we would rather kill ourselves with our swords."

古文：固不敢入於邹。
现代文：所以王不敢进入邹国。
English: Therefore, the king did not dare to enter the country.

古文：邹、鲁之臣，生则不得事养，死则不得赙襚，然且欲行天子之礼於邹、鲁，邹、鲁之臣不果纳。
现代文：邹、鲁两国的臣子，国君生前不能够好好地侍奉，国君死后又不能周备地助成丧仪，然而想要在邹、鲁行天子之礼，邹、鲁的臣子们终于拒绝齐湣王入镜。
English: The courtiers of the two kingdoms of Qi and Lu could not serve the king well when he was alive, and could not fully support the funeral ceremony after the king's death. However, the courtiers of Qi and Lu finally refused to put the king of Qi into the mirror when they wanted to perform the ceremony of the son of heaven in Qi and Lu.

古文：今秦万乘之国也，梁亦万乘之国也。
现代文：如今，秦国是拥有万辆战车的国家，魏国也是拥有万辆战车的国家。
English: Today, Qin is a country with 10,000 chariots, and Wei is also a country with 10,000 chariots.

古文：俱据万乘之国，各有称王之名，睹其一战而胜，欲从而帝之，是使三晋之大臣不如邹、鲁之仆妾也。
现代文：都是万乘大国，又各有称王的名分，只看它打了一次胜仗，就要顺从地拥护它称帝，这就使得三晋的大臣比不上邹、鲁的奴仆、卑妾了。
English: All of them were great states, and each of them had the title of king. Just because it had fought a victorious battle, it was necessary to obediently support it and proclaim it emperor. This made the ministers of the Three Dynasties no better than the servants and concubines of the Zhou and Lu dynasties.

古文：且秦无已而帝，则且变易诸侯之大臣。
现代文：如果秦国贪心不足，终于称帝，那么，就会更换诸侯的大臣。
English: If Qin wasn't greedy enough to finally make him emperor, then he would replace the vassals' ministers.

古文：彼将夺其所不肖而与其所贤，夺其所憎而与其所爱。
现代文：他将要罢免他认为不肖的，换上他认为贤能的人，罢免他憎恶的，换上他所喜爱的人。
English: He will replace what he considers ugly with what he considers wise, what he hates with what he loves.

古文：彼又将使其子女谗妾为诸侯妃姬。处梁之宫。梁王安得晏然而已乎？
现代文：还要让他的儿女和搬弄事非的姬妾，嫁给诸侯做妃姬，住在魏国的宫廷里，魏王怎么能够安安定定地生活呢？
English: He also had to let his children and daughters-in-law marry princes and live in the court of Wei. How could the king of Wei live a stable life?

古文：而将军又何以得故宠乎？ 
现代文：而将军您又怎么能够得到原先的宠信呢？ 
English: And how, General, did you manage to get the original favour?

古文：於是新垣衍起，再拜谢曰： 始以先生为庸人，吾乃今日知先生为天下之士也。
现代文：这时候新垣衍站起来，向鲁仲连连拜两次谢罪说： 当初认为先生是个普通的人，我今天才知道先生是天下的贤士。
English: At this time, Arakaki Yan stood up, bowed twice to Lu Zhonglian and said: At first, I thought my teacher was an ordinary person, but today I know that my teacher is a sage of the world.

古文：吾请出，不敢复言帝秦。 
现代文：我将离开赵国，再不敢谈秦王称帝的事了。 
English: I will leave Zhao and will no longer dare to talk about Emperor Qin's enthronement.

古文：秦将闻之，为卻军五十里。
现代文：秦军主将听到这个消息，为此把军队后撤了五十里。
English: When the Qin general heard this news, he withdrew his army fifty miles back.

古文：適会魏公子无忌夺晋鄙军以救赵，击秦军，秦军遂引而去。
现代文：恰好魏公子无忌夺得了晋鄙的军权率领军队来援救赵国，攻击秦军，于是秦军就撤离邯郸回去了。
English: It just so happened that Wei Gongzi seized the military power of the Jin Dynasty and led the army to rescue Zhao and attack the Qin army, so the Qin army withdrew and went back.

古文：於是平原君欲封鲁连，鲁连辞让者三，终不肯受。
现代文：平原君要封赏鲁仲连，鲁仲连再三辞让，始终不肯接受。
English: Hirahara wanted to reward Lu Zhonglian, but Lu Zhonglian repeatedly refused to accept the offer.

古文：平原君乃置酒，酒酣起前，以千金为鲁连寿。
现代文：平原君就设宴款待他，当喝得酒酣耳热时，平原君起身向前，献上千金酬谢鲁仲连。
English: Mr. Plains set up a banquet to entertain him, and when he was drunk with wine, Mr. Plains stood up and offered a thousand gold rewards to Sheru Zhonglian.

古文：鲁连笑曰： 所贵於天下之士者，为人排患释难解纷乱而无取也。
现代文：鲁仲连笑着说： 杰出之士之所以被天下人崇尚，是因为他们能为人排除祸患，消释灾难，解决纠纷而不索取报酬。
English: Lu Zhonglian said with a smile: The reason why outstanding people are revered by the world is because they can eliminate disasters, eliminate disasters, and resolve disputes without asking for remuneration.

古文：即有取者，是商贾之事也，而连不忍为也。 
现代文：如果索取报酬，那就成了商人买卖的行为，我鲁仲连是不忍心那样做的。 
English: If you ask for payment, it's the act of a merchant, and I, Lu Zhonglian, can't bear to do that.

古文：遂辞平原君而去，终身不复见。
现代文：于是辞别平原君走了，终身不再相见。
English: So Hirahara left, and they never saw each other again.

古文：其後二十馀年，燕将攻下聊城，聊城人或谗之燕，燕将惧诛，因保守聊城，不敢归。
现代文：这事过后二十多年，一位燕将攻克齐国聊城。聊城有人在燕王面前说燕将的坏话，燕将害怕被诛杀，就据守聊城不敢回去。
English: More than twenty years after this event, a swan will conquer Liaocheng, Qi Province. Someone in Liaocheng spoke ill of the swan in front of the king of swans. The swan was afraid of being killed, so he did not dare to go back to Liaocheng.

古文：齐田单攻聊城岁馀，士卒多死而聊城不下。
现代文：齐国田单攻打聊城一年多，士兵们死了很多，却攻不下聊城。
English: Qi Guotian single-handedly attacked Liaocheng for more than a year. Many soldiers died, but Liaocheng could not be attacked.

古文：鲁连乃为书，约之矢以射城中，遗燕将。
现代文：鲁仲连就写了一封信，系在箭上射进城去给燕将。
English: Lu Zhonglian wrote a letter and shot an arrow into the city to send it to Yan.

古文：书曰：
现代文：信上写道：
English: The letter reads:

古文：吾闻之，智者不倍时而弃利，勇士不却死而灭名，忠臣不先身而後君。
现代文： 我听说，明智的人不会违背时势而放弃有利的时机，勇敢的人不回避死亡而损灭名声，忠臣不先顾及自己后顾及国君。
English: I have heard that a wise man does not go against the current and give up a favorable opportunity, a brave man does not avoid death and ruin his reputation, and a loyal subject does not take care of himself first and then the sovereign.

古文：今公行一朝之忿，不顾燕王之无臣，非忠也；杀身亡聊城，而威不信於齐，非勇也；功败名灭，後世无称焉，非智也。
现代文：如今您发泄一时的气忿，不顾及燕王无法驾驭臣子，是不忠；战死身亡，丢掉聊城，威名不能在齐国伸张，是不勇；功业失败，名声破灭，后世无所称述，是不智。
English: Now that you are venting your momentary anger, regardless of the fact that King Yan cannot control his vassals, it is disloyal; if you die in battle and lose Liaocheng, your prestige cannot be extended in Qi, it is not brave; if you fail in your career, your reputation is ruined, and you have nothing to say in the future, it is not wise.

古文：三者世主不臣，说士不载，故智者不再计，勇士不怯死。
现代文：这三种人，当世的君主不会用他们作臣子，游说之士不会为之记载，所以聪明的人不会犹豫不决，勇士不会贪生怕死。
English: These three kinds of people, the current monarch will not use them as courtiers, the lobbyists will not record them, so the smart people will not hesitate, the warriors will not be greedy for life and death.

古文：今死生荣辱，贵贱尊卑，此时不再至，原公详计而无与俗同。
现代文：如今是生死荣辱，贵贱尊卑的关键，这时不能决断，时机将不会再出现，希望您详加计议而不要和俗人一般见识。
English: Now is the key to life and death, honor and disgrace, nobility and inferiority. At this time, it is impossible to decide, the opportunity will not appear again. I hope you will discuss it in detail and not see it with the laity.

古文：且楚攻齐之南阳，魏攻平陆，而齐无南面之心，以为亡南阳之害小，不如得济北之利大，故定计审处之。
现代文：况且，楚国进攻齐国的南阳，魏国进攻齐国的平陆，而齐国并没有向南反击的意图，认为丢掉南阳的损失小，比不上夺得济北的利益大，所以作出这样的决策来执行。
English: Moreover, Chu attacked Nanyang of Qi, Wei attacked Pinglu of Qi, and Qi did not intend to counterattack to the south, believing that the loss of Nanyang was small, but the gain of Jibei was large, so they made such a decision to implement.

古文：今秦人下兵，魏不敢东面；衡秦之势成，楚国之形危；齐弃南阳，断右壤，定济北，计犹且为之也。
现代文：如今秦国派出军队，魏国不敢向东进军；秦国连横的局面就形成了，楚国的形势就危险了；齐国放弃南阳，割舍右边的国土而不救，平定济北，是权衡得失定后定下的决策。
English: Now Qin has sent troops, and Wei does not dare to march to the east; the situation of Qin's succession is formed, and the situation of Chu is dangerous; Qi abandons Nanyang, abandons the right side of the country without help, and pacifies Jibei. It is a decision made after the balance is out of balance.

古文：且夫齐之必决於聊城，公勿再计。今楚魏交退於齐，而燕救不至。
现代文：况且齐国决心夺回聊城，您不要再犹豫了，现在楚、魏两国军队都先后从齐国撤回而燕国救兵又没到。
English: Moreover, the State of Qi is determined to recapture Liaocheng. You should not hesitate any longer. Now both the Chu and Wei armies have withdrawn from the State of Qi one after another, and the rescuers from the State of Yan have not arrived.

古文：以全齐之兵，无天下之规，与聊城共据期年之敝，则臣见公之不能得也。
现代文：齐国全部的兵力，对天下别无谋求，全力攻打聊城，如果还要据守已经围困了一年多的聊城，我看您是办不到的。
English: The entire armed forces of Qi have nothing else to seek from the world, and they will attack Liaocheng with all their might. If you want to defend Liaocheng, which has been besieged for more than a year, I don't think you can do it.

古文：且燕国大乱，君臣失计，上下迷惑，栗腹以十万之众五折於外，以万乘之国被围於赵，壤削主困，为天下僇笑。
现代文：而且燕国发生动乱，君臣束手无策，上下迷惑，栗腹带领十万大军在国外连续打了五次败仗，拥有万辆兵车的大国却被赵国包围，土地削减，国君被困，被天下人所耻笑。
English: Moreover, there was turmoil in Yan's country, the monarch and his ministers were helpless and confused, and Li Gang led the 100,000-strong army abroad and lost five consecutive battles. The big country with 10,000 chariots was surrounded by Zhao's country, the land was reduced, and the sovereign was trapped and ridiculed by the world.

古文：国敝而祸多，民无所归心。
现代文：国家衰败，祸患丛起，民心涣散不齐。
English: The country is in decline, disasters are piling up, and the people's hearts are scattered.

古文：今公又以敝聊之民距全齐之兵，是墨翟之守也。
现代文：如今，您又用聊城疲惫的军民抵抗整个齐国军队的进攻，这是像墨翟守宋城一样。
English: Now, you are using the tired soldiers and civilians of Liaocheng to resist the attack of the entire Qi army, which is like the defense of Songcheng by the Mongols.

古文：食人炊骨，士无反外之心，是孙膑之兵也。
现代文：粮草尽绝的时候吃人肉充饥，没有柴烧，烧人的骨头，士兵却没有叛离之心，这是像孙膑一样擅长带兵了。
English: When the grain and grass are exhausted, they eat human flesh to satisfy their hunger. There is no wood to burn, no human bones to burn, but the soldiers do not have a rebellious heart. This is because they are as good at leading soldiers as Sun Yat-sen.

古文：能见於天下。
现代文：您的本领已在天下显现。
English: Your prowess has been revealed to the world.

古文：虽然，为公计者，不如全车甲以报於燕。
现代文：虽然如此，可是替您考虑，不如保全兵力用来答谢燕国。
English: Nevertheless, for your consideration, it is better to conserve troops to thank Yan Guo.

古文：车甲全而归燕，燕王必喜；身全而归於国，士民如见父母，交游攘臂而议於世，功业可明。
现代文：兵力完好回归燕国，燕王一定高兴；身体完好地回归本国，百姓好像重见父母，朋友们到一起都会振奋地称赞、推崇，功业可得以显扬。
English: If the troops return to Yan's country with their strength intact, Yan Wang must be happy; if they return to their country with their bodies intact, the people seem to see their parents again, and their friends will be excited to praise and respect them, and their achievements can be displayed.

古文：上辅孤主以制群臣，下养百姓以资说士，矫国更俗，功名可立也。
现代文：对上，辅佐国君统率群臣；对下，既养百姓又资游说之士，矫正国事，更换风俗，事业名声都可以建立。
English: On the one hand, it is to assist the monarch of the country to lead a group of courtiers; on the other hand, it is to raise people and lobbyists, rectify state affairs, change customs, and build reputation.

古文：亡意亦捐燕弃世，东游於齐乎？裂地定封，富比乎陶、卫，世世称孤，与齐久存，又一计也。
现代文：如果没有回归燕国的心志，就放弃燕国，摒弃世俗的议论，向东到齐国来，齐国会割裂土地予以分封，使您富贵得可以和魏冉、商鞅相比，世世代代称孤道寡，和齐国长久并存，这也是一种办法。
English: If you do not have the will to return to Yan Guo, you should give up Yan Guo, abandon worldly discussions, and go east to Qi Guo. Qi Guo will divide the land and assign it to you, making you rich enough to be compared to Wei Ran and Shang Hui. For generations, you have been lonely and poor, and coexist with Qi Guo for a long time. This is also a way.

古文：此两计者，显名厚实也，原公详计而审处一焉。
现代文：这两种方案，是显扬名声丰厚实惠的好主意，希望您仔细考虑之后，审慎地选择其中一条。
English: Both of these options are reputable, cost-effective ideas, and I hope you will carefully choose one of them after careful consideration.

古文：且吾闻之，规小节者不能成荣名，恶小耻者不能立大功。
现代文：我听说，谋求小节的人不能成就荣耀的名声，以小耻为耻的人不能建立大的功业。
English: I have heard that those who seek small gains cannot achieve a glorious reputation, and those who are ashamed of small gains cannot build a great career.

古文：昔者管夷吾射桓公中其钩，篡也；遗公子纠不能死，怯也；束缚桎梏，辱也。
现代文：从前管仲射中桓公的衣带钩，是犯上；放弃公子纠而不能随他去死，是怯懦；身带刑具被囚禁，是耻辱。
English: It is a crime to be caught with the belt hook of Prince Huan, who was once shot in the middle; it is cowardice to give up the correction of the prince and not be able to die with him; it is a disgrace to be imprisoned with the torture device.

古文：若此三行者，世主不臣而乡里不通。
现代文：具有这三种情况的人，国君不用他作臣子而乡亲们不会跟他来往。
English: If a person has these three conditions, the sovereign will not use him as a vassal, and the villagers will not associate with him.

古文：乡使管子幽囚而不出，身死而不反於齐，则亦名不免为辱人贱行矣。
现代文：当初假使管子长期囚禁死在牢狱而不能返回齐国，那么也不免落个行为耻辱、卑贱的名声。
English: If Guanzi had been imprisoned for a long time and died in prison without being able to return to Qi, then he would inevitably fall into a disgraceful and despicable reputation.

古文：臧获且羞与之同名矣，况世俗乎！
现代文：连奴卑和他同名都感到羞耻，何况社会上的舆论呢！
English: Even his namesake is ashamed of his servility, let alone public opinion!

古文：故管子不耻身在縲绁之中而耻天下之不治，不耻不死公子纠而耻威之不信於诸侯，故兼三行之过而为五霸首，名高天下而光烛邻国。
现代文：所以管仲不因为身在牢狱感到耻辱，却以天下不能太平感到耻辱，不以未能随公子纠去死感到耻辱，却以不能在诸侯中显扬威名感到耻辱，因此他虽然兼有犯上、怕死、受辱三重过失，却辅佐齐桓公成为五霸之首，他的名声比天下任何人都高，而他的光辉照耀着邻国。
English: Therefore, Guanzhong did not feel humiliated because he was in prison, but felt humiliated that the world could not be peaceful. He did not feel humiliated that he could not die with his lord, but felt humiliated that he could not show his prestige among the princes. Therefore, although he committed, feared death, and suffered humiliation, he assisted Qi Huan to become the head of the Five Dynasties. His reputation was higher than anyone else in the world, and his brilliance shone on neighboring countries.

古文：曹子为鲁将，三战三北，而亡地五百里。
现代文：曹沫作鲁国的将领，多次打仗多次失败，丢掉了五百里的土地。
English: Cao Miao was the general of the State of Lu. He fought many wars and suffered many defeats, and lost five hundred miles of land.

古文：乡使曹子计不反顾，议不还踵，刎颈而死，则亦名不免为败军禽将矣。
现代文：当初假使曹沫不反复仔细地考虑，仓促计议就刎颈自杀，那么，也不免落个被擒败将的丑名了。
English: At first, if Cao Mo did not repeatedly and carefully consider, and hastily planned to commit suicide, then he would inevitably fall into the disrepute of a defeated general.

古文：曹子弃三北之耻，而退与鲁君计。
现代文：曹沫不顾多次战败的耻辱，却回来和鲁君计议。
English: Cao Mo, despite the shame of repeated defeats, returned to consult with Lu Jun.

古文：桓公朝天下，会诸侯，曹子以一剑之任，枝桓公之心於坛坫之上，颜色不变，辞气不悖，三战之所亡一朝而复之，天下震动，诸侯惊骇，威加吴、越。
现代文：趁桓公大会天下诸侯的机会，曹沫凭借一把短剑，在坛台上逼近桓公的心窝，脸色不变，谈吐从容，多次战败丢掉的土地，一会儿功夫收回来，使天下振动，诸侯惊骇，使鲁国的威名在吴、越之上。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity of Huan Gong's meeting of the world's princes, Cao Miao, with the help of a short sword, approached Huan Gong's heart on the altar. His face was unchanged, he spoke calmly, the land lost in many battles was regained in a short time, the world was shaken, the princes were shocked, and the prestige of Lu was above that of Wu and Yue.

古文：若此二士者，非不能成小廉而行小节也，以为杀身亡躯，绝世灭後，功名不立，非智也。
现代文：像这二位志士，不是不顾全小的名节和廉耻，认为一死了之，身亡名灭，功业不能建立，不是聪明的做法。
English: Like these two patriots, it is not a clever practice to disregard all small fame and shame, and to think that one's death, death and name can not be established.

古文：故去感忿之怨，立终身之名；弃忿悁之节，定累世之功。
现代文：所以摒弃一时的愤怒，树立终身的威名；放弃一时的愤怒，奠定世世代代的功业。
English: Therefore, abandon the momentary anger and establish a lifelong reputation; abandon the momentary anger and lay the foundation for generations to come.

古文：是以业与三王争流，而名与天壤相弊也。
现代文：所以这些业绩和三王的功业争相流传而名声和天地共存。
English: Therefore, these achievements and the exploits of the three kings have been passed down one after another, and fame and heaven and earth coexist.

古文：原公择一而行之。
现代文：希望您选择其中一个方案行动吧！ 
English: I hope you will choose one of these plans and take action!

古文：燕将见鲁连书，泣三日，犹豫不能自决。
现代文：燕将看了鲁仲连的信，哭了好几天，还是犹豫不能做出断绝。
English: Yan Zheng read Lu Zhonglian's letter, cried for several days, and still hesitated to break off the relationship.

古文：欲归燕，已有隙，恐诛；欲降齐，所杀虏於齐甚众，恐已降而後见辱。
现代文：想要回归燕国，已经产生了嫌隙，怕被诛杀；想要投降齐国，杀死和俘虏的齐人太多了，恐怕降服后被污辱。
English: If you want to return to Yan, you have already created a rift and are afraid of being killed; if you want to surrender to Qi, there are too many Qi people to kill and capture, and you may be humiliated after surrendering.

古文：喟然叹曰： 与人刃我，宁自刃。 
现代文：长长地叹息说： 与其让别人杀死我，不如自杀。 
English: With a long sigh, he said, "I'd rather kill myself than let someone else kill me."

古文：乃自杀。
现代文：就自杀了。
English: He killed himself.

古文：聊城乱，田单遂屠聊城。
现代文：聊城大乱，于是田单进军血洗聊城。
English: Liaocheng was in turmoil, so Tian Shan marched into Liaocheng to wash away the blood.

古文：归而言鲁连，欲爵之。
现代文：归来向齐王报告鲁仲连的事，齐王想要封他爵位。
English: He returned to report Lu Zhonglian to King Qi, who wanted to give him a title of nobility.

古文：鲁连逃隐於海上，曰： 吾与富贵而诎於人，宁贫贱而轻世肆志焉。 
现代文：鲁仲连听后潜逃到海边隐居起来，他说： 我与其富贵而屈身侍奉于人，还不如贫贱而轻视世俗放任自己的心志啊。 
English: After hearing this, Lu Zhonglian absconded to the seashore to live in seclusion. He said, "I would rather be poor and despise the world than rich and bow down to serve others.

古文：邹阳者，齐人也。
现代文：邹阳，是齐国人。
English: Shenyang, is a native of Qi.

古文：游於梁，与故吴人庄忌夫子、淮阴枚生之徒交。
现代文：游历到梁国时，和原吴国人庄忌、淮阴人枚乘等人往来。
English: When he traveled to Liang Province, he came into contact with the original Wu people Zhuoyi and Huaiyin people Mabi and others.

古文：上书而介於羊胜、公孙诡之间。
现代文：上书自荐，在羊胜、公孙诡之间同为粱孝王门客。
English: Self-recommended by letter, he is also a guest of Gong Xiao Wang between Yang Sheng and Gongsun Qi.

古文：胜等嫉邹阳，恶之梁孝王。
现代文：羊胜等人妒嫉邹阳，在梁孝王面前说他的坏话。
English: Yang Sheng and others were jealous of Puyang and spoke ill of him in front of Liang Xiao Wang.

古文：孝王怒，下之吏，将欲杀之。
现代文：梁孝王很生气，把邹阳交给下属官吏办罪，想要杀死他。
English: Liang Xiaowang was very angry and wanted to kill him, so he handed Shenyang over to subordinate officials to handle the crime.

古文：邹阳客游，以谗见禽，恐死而负累，乃从狱中上书曰：臣闻忠无不报，信不见疑，臣常以为然，徒虚语耳。
现代文：邹阳在梁国游历，因为遭到诽谤被抓起来，担心死后承担莫须有的罪名，就从牢狱里写信给梁孝王，信中写道：我听说忠诚的人无不得到回报，诚信的人不会遭到猜疑，过去我总认为是对的，今天看来不过是一句空话罢了。
English: Shanyang traveled in Liang Province, was arrested for defamation, and, fearing that he would be charged with groundless accusations after his death, wrote a letter to Liang Xiao Wang from prison. In the letter, he wrote: I heard that those who are loyal will be rewarded, and those who are honest will not be suspected. In the past, I always thought it was right, but today it seems to be nothing more than an empty phrase.

古文：昔者荆轲慕燕丹之义，白虹贯日，太子畏之；卫先生为秦画长平之事，太白蚀昴，而昭王疑之。
现代文：从前荆轲仰慕燕国太子丹的高义前去行刺秦王，尽管天空出现白虹贯日的征兆，可是燕太子丹仍然担心荆轲反悔不敢前去；卫先生替秦王谋划长平之事，也出现了金星遮掩昴星的预兆，而秦昭王仍然疑虑重重。
English: Once upon a time, Jing Zhe admired the high-mindedness of Prince Dan of Yan to go and assassinate King Qin. Although there were signs of a white rainbow in the sky, Prince Dan of Yan still feared that Jing Zhe would not dare to go; Mr. Wei planned the Changping Incident for King Qin, and there was also a sign of Venus covering the Pleiades, but King Qin Zhao was still full of doubts.

古文：夫精变天地而信不喻两主，岂不哀哉！
现代文：他们的精诚所至感天动地显示出征兆，却不被燕丹、昭王两主所理解，这难道不是可悲的吗！
English: Isn't it sad that their sincerity is so deeply felt that it shows signs, but is not understood by Yandan and Zhao Wang?

古文：今臣尽忠竭诚，毕议原知，左右不明，卒从吏讯，为世所疑，是使荆轲、卫先生复起，而燕、秦不悟也。
现代文：如今我竭尽忠诚，尽其计议，希望大王采纳。您周围的人不了解情况，终于把我交给官吏审讯，被世人误解，即使让荆轲、卫先生复活，而燕丹、秦昭王也不会醒悟。
English: Now, I am trying my best to be loyal and considerate, hoping to be accepted by the great king. The people around you do not understand the situation, and finally hand me over to the officials for interrogation. They are misunderstood by the world. Even if Mr. Jing Tao and Mr. Wei are revived, Yandan and Qin Zhao Wang will not wake up.

古文：原大王孰察之。
现代文：希望大王仔细地审察这种情况。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will carefully examine this situation.

古文：昔卞和献宝，楚王刖之；李斯竭忠，胡亥极刑。
现代文：从前卞和进献宝玉，楚王砍掉他的脚；李斯竭尽忠诚，胡亥却把他处以极刑。
English: Once upon a time, Li He donated precious gems, and King Chu chopped off his foot; Li Si tried his best to be loyal, but Hu Hai sentenced him to capital punishment.

古文：是以箕子详狂，接舆辟世，恐遭此患也。
现代文：因此箕子装疯，接舆隐居避世，他们都怕遭到这种灾祸啊。
English: So the cripples pretended to be mad and went into seclusion to avoid the world. They were all afraid of this calamity.

古文：原大王孰察卞和、李斯之意，而後楚王、胡亥之听，无使臣为箕子、接舆所笑。
现代文：希望大王仔细地审察卞和、李斯的诚意，不要像楚王、胡亥那样轻信谗言，不要让我被箕子、接舆耻笑。
English: I hope that the great king will carefully examine the sincerity of Yu He and Li Si, and not be as gullible as King Chu and Hu Hai, and not let me be mocked and ridiculed by the public.

古文：臣闻比干剖心，子胥鸱夷，臣始不信，乃今知之。
现代文：我听说比干被剖心，伍子胥的尸体被装进皮袋子扔进江里，当初我并不相信，现在我才知道有这样的事。
English: I heard that Bi Gan's heart had been cut out and that Wu Zixuan's body had been put in a leather bag and thrown into the river. At first I didn't believe it, but now I know it happened.

古文：原大王孰察，少加怜焉。
现代文：希望大王仔细地审察，略微给我一点怜悯吧！
English: I hope the king will examine me carefully and show me a little mercy!

古文：谚曰： 有白头如新，倾盖如故。 
现代文：俗话说： 有的人相处到老还是陌生的，有的人停车交谈便一见如故。 
English: As the saying goes: Some people remain strangers until they grow old, while others stop for a chat and are instantly friends.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是什么愿意呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：知与不知也。
现代文：就在于知心与不知心啊。
English: It's all about knowing and not knowing.

古文：故昔樊於期逃秦之燕，藉荆轲首以奉丹之事；王奢去齐之魏，临城自刭以卻齐而存魏。
现代文：所以，从前樊於期从秦国逃往燕国，便把首级借给荆轲用来奉行燕丹刺杀秦王的使命；王奢离开齐国前往魏国，在登城自刎用来退去齐军保全魏国。
English: Therefore, in the past, Zou fled from Qin to Yan in time, and lent his head to Jing Zou to carry out the mission of Yandan to assassinate the Qin king; Wang Shu left Qi for Wei, and hanged himself in the city to retreat to the Qi army to protect Wei.

古文：夫王奢、樊於期非新於齐、秦而故於燕、魏也，所以去二国死两君者，行合於志而慕义无穷也。
现代文：王奢、樊於期不是因为跟齐、秦是新交，跟燕、魏是老相识，他们之所以离开齐国和秦国，为燕、魏二君去死，是行为和志向相合而对正义无限仰慕啊！
English: Wang Xiao and Zou did not leave Qi and Qin because they were new friends, and Yan and Wei were old acquaintances. The reason why they left Qi and Qin to die for Yan and Wei was because their actions and aspirations coincided, and they had infinite admiration for justice!

古文：是以苏秦不信於天下，而为燕尾生；白圭战亡六城，为魏取中山。
现代文：所以苏秦不被天下人信任却对燕国像尾生一般守信；白圭战败丢掉六国城池，却为魏国夺取了中山。
English: Therefore, Su Qin was not trusted by the world, but he kept his word to Yan's country like a pupil; Bai Gui lost the battle of the Six Kingdoms, but he captured Zhongshan for Wei.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诚有以相知也。
现代文：实在是因为相知的原因啊。
English: It's really because we know each other.

古文：苏秦相燕，燕人恶之於王，王按剑而怒，食以夬騠；白圭显於中山，中山人恶之魏文侯，文侯投之以夜光之璧。
现代文：苏秦出任燕国的宰相，燕国有人在国君面前诽谤他，燕王手按宝剑发怒，还宰杀心爱的马，赐肉给他吃；白圭在中山名声显扬，中山有人到魏文侯面前毁谤他，文侯却拿出夜光璧赠给他。
English: Su Qin served as the prime minister of Yan. Some people in Yan slandered him in front of the king. Yan was angry and killed his beloved horse and gave it to him to eat. Bai Gui became famous in Zhongshan. Some people in Zhongshan slandered him in front of Wei Wen, but Wen took out Yaguang Bi and gave it to him.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：两主二臣，剖心坼肝相信，岂移於浮辞哉！
现代文：两主二臣之间，剖心披胆，深信不疑，怎么会被流言所动摇呢！
English: Between two masters and two ministers, they are so confident and confident, how can they be shaken by rumors!

古文：故女无美恶，入宫见妒；士无贤不肖，入朝见嫉。
现代文：所以女子不论美丑，进入宫廷就被妒嫉，士子不论贤还是不肖，入朝作官就被嫉妒。
English: Therefore, whether a woman is beautiful or ugly, she is envied when she enters the court, and whether a scholar is wise or not, he is envied when he becomes a court official.

古文：昔者司马喜髌脚於宋，卒相中山；范睢摺胁折齿於魏，卒为应侯。
现代文：从前司马喜在宋国遭到割去膝盖骨的刑罚终于出任了中山国的宰相，范睢在魏国被折断肋骨，打掉牙齿，终于被秦国封为应侯。
English: Once upon a time, Sima Xi was punished by having his kneecap cut off in Song and eventually became the prime minister of Zhongshan, while Fan Yu had his ribs broken and teeth knocked out in Wei and was finally made a vassal of Qin.

古文：此二人者，皆信必然之画，捐朋党之私，挟孤独之位，故不能自免於嫉妒之人也。
现代文：这两个人，都信守一定之规，摒去结党营私的勾当，处于孤独的地位，所以不能身免嫉妒小人的迫害。
English: These two men, both adhering to certain rules and refraining from party and personal activities, are in a lonely position, so they cannot escape the persecution of jealous villains.

古文：是以申徒狄自沈於河，徐衍负石入海。不容於世，义不苟取，比周於朝，以移主上之心。
现代文：申徒狄所以投河自尽，徐衍抱着石头投海，是因为他们不被当世所容，信守正义不苟且迎合，不在朝廷里结党营私，来动摇国君的心志。
English: The reason why Shintu Di committed suicide by jumping into the river and Xu Yan fell into the sea holding a stone was because they were not tolerated by the world, adhered to justice and meticulously catered to it, and did not form a party in the imperial court to shake the prince's will.

古文：故百里奚乞食於路，缪公委之以政；甯戚饭牛车下，而桓公任之以国。
现代文：所以百里奚在路上行乞，秦穆公把国政托付给他；宁戚在车下喂牛，齐桓公把国事交给他治理。
English: Therefore, Bai Lijuan went begging on the road, and Qin Mu Gong entrusted him with the affairs of state; Ning Qi fed the cattle under the car, and Qi Huan Gong entrusted him with the affairs of state.

古文：此二人者，岂借宦於朝，假誉於左右，然後二主用之哉？
现代文：这两个人，难道是在朝中借助官宦的保举、左右亲信的吹捧，才博得穆公、桓公重用他们吗？
English: Did these two people win the respect of Mu Gong and Huan Gong through the promotion of officials and the praise of close friends in the court?

古文：感於心，合於行，亲於胶漆，昆弟不能离，岂惑於众口哉？
现代文：感召在心，相合在行，亲密如同胶漆，像亲兄弟一样不能分开，难道还能被众多的谗言迷惑吗？
English: Inspired in heart, united in action, close as glue, inseparable as brothers, can they still be confused by the numerous criticisms?

古文：故偏听生奸，独任成乱。
现代文：所以，只听一面之词就要产生邪恶，只任用个别人就要酿成祸乱。
English: Therefore, listening to only one side of the word will produce evil, and only appointing individuals will lead to disaster.

古文：昔者鲁听季孙之说而逐孔子，宋信子罕之计而囚墨翟。
现代文：从前鲁君只听信季孙的话，赶走了孔子；宋君只相信子罕的计策，囚禁了墨翟。
English: Once upon a time, Lu Jun only listened to Ji Sun and drove away Confucius; Song Jun only believed in Zi Han's stratagem and imprisoned Mo Xuan.

古文：夫以孔、墨之辩，不能自免於谗谀，而二国以危。
现代文：像孔子、墨子的辩才，都不能自免谗言的伤害，因而鲁、宋两国出现了危机。
English: The debating talents of Confucius and Mozi were not immune to the harm of slander, and as a result, a crisis arose in the two countries of Lu and Song.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：众口铄金，积毁销骨也。
现代文：众口一词，就是金石也会熔化，毁谤聚集多了，就是亲骨肉的关系也会销毁。
English: When words are spoken by many, even gold and stones are melted; when slanders are multiplied, even the ties of kinship are broken.

古文：是以秦用戎人由余而霸中国，齐用越人蒙而彊威、宣。
现代文：所以秦穆公任用了戎人由余，而称霸中国，齐国任用了越人蒙，而使威王、宣王两代强盛。
English: Therefore, Qin Mu Gong appointed Rongren Yu Yu to dominate China, and Qi appointed Yue Ren Meng to make Wei Wang and Xuan Wang two generations strong.

古文：此二国，岂拘於俗，牵於世，系阿偏之辞哉？
现代文：秦、齐两国，难道是拘泥于流俗，牵累于世风，束缚于阿谀偏执的谗言吗？
English: Are the two countries of Qin and Qi constrained by customs, influenced by the world's fashion, and bound by the bigotry of the grandma?

古文：公听并观，垂名当世。
现代文：他们能公正地听取意见，全面地观察事情，在当世一直保持好的名声。
English: They can listen to opinions fairly, observe things comprehensively, and maintain a good reputation in the modern world.

古文：故意合则胡越为昆弟，由余、越人蒙是矣；不合，则骨肉出逐不收，硃、象、管、蔡是矣。
现代文：所以心意相合，就是胡人越人，也可以亲如兄弟，由余和越人蒙就是这样的；心意不能相合，就是至亲骨肉也赶走不留，朱、象、管、蔡就是这样的。
English: Therefore, if the minds are compatible, even if Hu and Yue are more compatible, they can be close as brothers. This is the case with Yu and Yue. If the minds cannot be compatible, even if the closest relatives are driven away, they will not remain. This is the case with Zhu, Xiang, Guan and Cai.

古文：今人主诚能用齐、秦之义，後宋、鲁之听，则五伯不足称，三王易为也。
现代文：如今，国君如果能用齐、秦合宜的做法，摒弃宋、鲁偏听偏信的错误，那么，五霸的功业就不值得称颂，三王的功业是容易实现的。
English: Today, if the ruler of the country can use the appropriate practices of Qi and Qin, and abandon the errors of Song and Lu, then the work of the Five Emperors is not worthy of praise, and the work of the Three Kings is easy to achieve.

古文：是以圣王觉寤，捐子之之心，而能不说於田常之贤；封比干之後，修孕妇之墓，故功业复就於天下。
现代文：因此，英明的国君头脑清醒，摒弃子之那种虚伪的心肠，能不赏识田常那种假贤明；效法周武王封忠臣比干的后代，整修无辜孕妇的坟墓，那么他必定可成就治理天下的功业。
English: Therefore, if the wise sovereign has a clear mind and abandons the hypocritical heart of his son, if he can not appreciate the false wisdom of Tian Chang, and if he can follow the example of the descendants of the loyal vassal Bi Gan of King Zhou Wu and renovate the grave of an innocent pregnant woman, then he will surely be able to achieve the cause of governing the world.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：欲善无厌也。
现代文：要从善如流是没有满足的。
English: There is no satisfaction in following the herd.

古文：夫晋文公亲其雠，彊霸诸侯；齐桓公用其仇，而一匡天下。
现代文：晋文公亲近他的仇人，就能够在诸侯中称霸；齐桓公任用他原来的仇人，却能使天下纳入正轨。
English: When Jinwen Gong was close to his enemies, he was able to dominate among the princes; when Qi Kuan Gong appointed his former enemies, he was able to put the world on the right track.

古文：何则，慈仁殷勤，诚加於心，不可以虚辞借也。
现代文：这是为什么呢？心地仁慈，对人恳切，用真诚感化人心，不是用虚浮的言词能代替的。
English: Why is this? Kindness of heart, earnestness to others, and sincerity can move people's hearts, and cannot be replaced by empty words.

古文：至夫秦用商鞅之法，东弱韩、魏，兵彊天下，而卒车裂之；越用大夫种之谋，禽劲吴，霸中国，而卒诛其身。
现代文：到秦国任用商鞅推行变法，向东削弱了韩、魏，他的军队在天下称强，而终于把他车裂而死；越国采纳大夫种的计谋，攻灭了强大的吴国，称霸中国，而终于遭到杀身之祸。
English: In the East, he weakened Han and Wei, and his army was considered the strongest in the world, but he was eventually killed when his chariot was torn apart; in the East, he adopted the strategy of a doctor to defeat the powerful Wu Kingdom and dominate China, but he was finally killed.

古文：是以孙叔敖三去相而不悔，於陵子仲辞三公为人灌园。
现代文：因此，孙叔敖三次离开相位而不懊悔；于陵子仲推辞了三公的职位去替别人浇水灌园。
English: Therefore, Sun Shuxuan left the phase three times without remorse; Yu Lingzizhong resigned from the post of the three princes to water the garden for others.

古文：今人主诚能去骄泬之心，怀可报之意，披心腹，见情素，堕肝胆，施德厚，终与之穷达，无爱於士，则桀之狗可使吠尧，而蹠之客可使刺由；况因万乘之权，假圣王之资乎？
现代文：如今国君果真能去掉倨傲的情绪，心里存有让别人效力的意念，披露心腹，以见真情，披肝沥胆，施以厚德，始终和别人共甘苦，爱戴士子，那么，就是桀养的狗也可以让它咬尧，而蹠的门客可以让他行刺许由；何况您依仗大国的权势，凭借圣王的才能呢？
English: Now, if the sovereign can really get rid of the arrogant mood, have the idea of making others effective in his heart, reveal his heart to see the truth, wear the liver and gallbladder, give virtue, always share with others, and love the scholar, then even the foster dog can let it bite the dragonfly, and the dragonfly's doorman can let him stab the dragonfly; what's more, you rely on the power of the great country, with the talent of the holy king?

古文：然则荆轲之湛七族，要离之烧妻子，岂足道哉！
现代文：既然如此，那么荆轲甘冒灭七族的大祸，要离烧死妻子儿女，难道还有什么值得称道的吗！
English: That being the case, is there anything praiseworthy about Jing Ronggan's braving the great disaster of the seven nations to burn his wife and children to death?

古文：臣闻明月之珠，夜光之璧，以闇投人於道路，人无不按剑相眄者。
现代文：我听说夜明珠和夜光璧虽是珍宝，如果在黑夜的路上将其掷向行人，人们没有不惊异地按剑斜着眼睛看的。
English: I have heard that although the night pearl and the luminous gem are precious, if they are thrown to pedestrians on the road in the dark, people will not be surprised to look at them cross-eyed.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：无因而至前也。
现代文：是因为宝物无端地被抛到面前。
English: Because the treasure was thrown in front of him for no reason.

古文：蟠木根柢，轮囷离诡，而为万乘器者。
现代文：盘曲的树根，屈曲奇特，却可以成为国君鉴赏的器物。
English: The twisted roots of trees, with their peculiar twists and turns, can, however, become objects of the sovereign's appreciation.

古文：何则？
现代文：又是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以左右先为之容也。
现代文：是因为国君周围的人事先把它雕刻、美化过了啊！
English: It's because the people around the sovereign carved and beautified it in advance!

古文：故无因至前，虽出随侯之珠，夜光之璧，犹结怨而不见德。
现代文：所以宝物无端地抛到眼前，即使抛出的是随候明珠，夜光之璧，还是要结怨而不讨好。
English: Therefore, if a treasure is thrown in front of your eyes without any reason, even if it is a pearl, the gem of the night, you should still hold a grudge and not please.

古文：故有人先谈，则以枯木朽株树功而不忘。
现代文：所以若是事先有人予以推荐，就是枯木朽株也会有所建树而不被人遗忘。
English: Therefore, if someone recommends it in advance, even the dead wood will not be forgotten.

古文：今夫天下布衣穷居之士，身在贫贱，虽蒙尧、舜之术，挟伊、管之辩，怀龙逢、比干之意，欲尽忠当世之君，而素无根柢之容，虽竭精思，欲开忠信，辅人主之治，则人主必有按剑相眄之迹，是使布衣不得为枯木朽株之资也。
现代文：如今那些平民百姓和穷居陋巷的士人，处在贫贱的环境中，即使有尧、舜的治国之道，持有伊尹、管仲那样的辩才，怀有龙逢、比干那样的心志，打算尽忠于当世的国君，而平素没有人加以推荐美言，即使是用尽心思，献出自己的忠信，辅佐国君治国安邦，那么，国君一定会像对待投掷宝物的人那样按剑斜视你了，这便是使得布衣贤士无法获得枯木朽株那样的价值啊！
English: Nowadays, the common people and the scholars who live in the slums are living in a poor environment. Even if you have a shrewd way of governing the country, have the ability to argue like Yi Yin and Guanzhong, and have the spirit of long-term friendship and comparison, and intend to be loyal to the current sovereign, and there is no one to recommend you. Even if you put your heart and soul into helping the sovereign to govern the country, then the sovereign will surely look at you with a sword like a treasure thrower. This is what makes the clothed sages unable to obtain the value of dead wood!

古文：是以圣王制世御俗，独化於陶钧之上，而不牵於卑乱之语，不夺於众多之口。
现代文：所以圣明的君主治理国家，如同陶人运钧运转，自有法度，教化天下，而不被鄙乱的议论所左右，不为众人口舌所改变。
English: Therefore, a holy and wise monarch governs the country like a potter operates a potter's wheel. He has his own laws and enlightens the world, but he is not swayed by scornful discussions and is not changed by the tongues of the masses.

古文：故秦皇帝任中庶子蒙嘉之言，以信荆轲之说，而匕首窃发；周文王猎泾、渭，载吕尚而归，以王天下。
现代文：所以秦始皇听信了中庶子蒙嘉的话，才相信了荆轲谎话，荆轲才能乘人不备偷偷地取出匕首行刺；周文王在泾、渭地区狩猎，用车载回吕尚，才能够称王于天下。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qin listened to the words of Mengjia, the middle child, and only then did he believe Jingyao's lies. Only then could Jingyao secretly take out the dagger and stab him; only then could King Zhou Wen hunt in the areas of Yunnan and Shandong and take it back to Lushan by car, and only then could he be proclaimed king of the world.

古文：故秦信左右而杀，周用乌集而王。
现代文：所以秦王偏听了近臣的话，险些被杀；周文王却事出偶合而王天下。
English: Therefore, King Qin listened to the words of his closest vassal and was almost killed; King Zhouwen, however, coincided with events and became king of the world.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以其能越挛拘之语，驰域外之议，独观於昭旷之道也。
现代文：因为周文王能超越左右牵制的言论，摆脱世俗拘束的议论，卓然独立地看到宽宏豁达的光明大道。
English: Because Zhou Wenwang can transcend the speech of the left and right, get rid of the discussion of secular constraints, and independently see the bright road of magnanimity and open-mindedness.

古文：今人主沈於谄谀之辞，牵於帷裳之制，使不羁之士与牛骥同皁，此鲍焦所以忿於世而不留富贵之乐也。
现代文：如今，国君沉湎于阿谀谗媚的言词之中，牵制于姬妾近侍的包围之下，使卓异超群的士人，混同于骏马和老牛同槽。这就是鲍焦为什么对世道忿懑不平，对富贵毫不留恋的原因啊。
English: Nowadays, the sovereign indulges in flattering words, is constrained by the encirclement of his concubine's close attendants, and confuses the outstanding outstanding scholar with the horse and the ox. This is the reason why Bogio is angry with the world and has no nostalgia for wealth.

古文：臣闻盛饰入朝者不以利汙义，砥厉名号者不以欲伤行，故县名胜母而曾子不入，邑号朝歌而墨子回车。
现代文：我听说庄重严整上朝的人，不会贪图利禄而玷污道义；追求名誉的人，不会放纵私欲败坏自己的品行，因此，县名叫作 胜母 而曾子就不进去；城邑的名字叫 朝歌 而墨子就回车离去。
English: I have heard that those who solemnly and solemnly prepare to ascend the throne will not be greedy for profits and tarnish morality; those who pursue honor will not indulge in selfishness and corrupt their own behavior. Therefore, the county is named "Shengmu" but Zengzi will not enter; the name of the city is "Changge" but Mozi will return to the car and leave.

古文：今欲使天下寥廓之士，摄於威重之权，主於位势之贵，故回面汙行以事谄谀之人而求亲近於左右，则士伏死堀穴岩之中耳，安肯有尽忠信而趋阙下者哉！
现代文：如今，让抱负远大的人，被威重的权势所震慑，被高位大势所压抑，有意用邪恶的面目、肮脏的品行来侍奉阿谀献媚的小人而求得亲近于大王左右，那么有志之士就会老死在岩穴之中了，怎么肯竭尽忠诚信义追随大王呢！
English: Nowadays, if ambitious people are deterred by the power of authority, suppressed by the great power of high position, and intentionally use evil faces and dirty manners to serve and flatter the small people to get close to the great king, then the aspirants will die in the rock cave. How can they follow the great king faithfully?

古文：书奏梁孝王，孝王使人出之，卒为上客。
现代文：这封信进献给梁孝王，孝王派人从牢狱中把邹阳放出来，终于成为梁孝王的贵宾。
English: This letter is dedicated to Prince Liang Xiao Wang. Prince Liang Xiao Wang sent someone to release Shen Yang from prison, and he finally became Liang Xiao Wang's honored guest.

古文：太史公曰：鲁连其指意虽不合大义，然余多其在布衣之位，荡然肆志，不诎於诸侯，谈说於当世，折卿相之权。
现代文：太史公说：鲁仲连的议论主要旨意即使不合大义，可是我赞许他能以平民百姓的身份，纵横快意地放浪形骸，不屈服于诸侯，评论当世，却使大权在握的公卿宰相们折服。
English: Taishigong said, "Even if Lu Zhonglian's main intention is not in accordance with the Great Righteousness, I approve of him being able to, as a commoner, roam freely, not succumbing to the princes, commenting on the current world, but making the powerful nobles and prime ministers bow down.

古文：邹阳辞虽不逊，然其比物连类，有足悲者，亦可谓抗直不桡矣，吾是以附之列传焉。
现代文：邹阳的言词即使不够谦逊，可是他连缀相类的事物，进行比较，确实有感人之处，也可以说是坦率耿直不屈不挠了，所以我把他附在这篇列传里。
English: Even if Shenyang's words are not humble enough, his comparison of similar things is really touching, and can be said to be frank and unyielding, so I have attached him to this biography.

