古文： 国之大事，在祀与戎 。
现代文： 国家的大事，在于祭祀和军事 。
English: The important things of the country lie in the rituals and the military.

古文：自书契经典，咸崇其义，而圣人之德，莫大于严父者也。
现代文：从有文字记载开始到儒家经典，都尊崇这一宗旨，而圣人的道德，没有比尊敬父亲更重要的。
English: From the beginning of written records to the Confucian classics, this purpose is revered, and the morality of the sage is no more important than respect for the father.

古文：故司马迁著《封禅书》，班固备《郊祀志》，上纪皇王正祀，下录郡国百神。司马彪又著《祭祀志》，以续终汉。中兴以后，其旧制诞章，粲然弘备。
现代文：所以司马迁撰作《封禅书》，班固详尽记述《郊祀志》，上记皇帝的正祭，下录郡国百神的祭祀司马彪又撰《祭祀志》以续完汉朝的祭祀礼典东晋以后，旧有的礼制大的典章，都明白而完善地备载。
English: Therefore, after Sima Qian wrote "The Book of Seals," Ban Gu wrote "The History of Suburban Rituals" in detail, the Emperor's main festival was recorded above, and the sacrifice of hundreds of gods in the county was recorded below. Sima Biao also wrote "The History of Rituals" to continue the sacrifice ceremony of the Han Dynasty. After the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the old ceremonial system was clearly and perfectly prepared.

古文：自兹以降，又有异同，故复撰次云尔。
现代文：自此以后，祭祀礼仪又有变化，所以再加编撰。
English: Since then, the ritual etiquette has changed, so it has been compiled again.

古文：汉献帝延康元年十一月己丑，诏公卿告祠高庙。
现代文：汉献帝延康元年十一月己丑曰，献帝命令公卿祭祀产担庙。
English: Han Xian Di Yan Kang in November of the first year of the year said that the emperor ordered the nobles to sacrifice the temple.

古文：遣兼御史大夫张音奉皇帝玺绶策书，禅帝位于魏。
现代文：派遣兼御史大夫张音奉皇帝印玺及策书，禅让帝位给曹魏。
English: Zhang Yin, who was also the imperial historian, was dispatched to present the emperor's seal and imperial rescript, and the throne was given to Cao Wei.

古文：是时魏文帝继王位，南巡在颍阴。
现代文：当时魏文帝曹丕继承了重旺的王位，南巡停留在颖阴。
English: At that time, Wei Emperor Cao Pi inherited the throne of Chongwang, and the Southern Patrol stayed in Yingyin.

古文：有司乃为坛于颍阴之繁阳故城。庚午，登坛。
现代文：主事官员于是在题渣的篮荡旧城建造坛台。庚午日，魏王登上坛台。
English: The responsible official then built the altar in the old city of the basket. On the afternoon of the seventh day, Wei Wang ascended the altar.

古文：魏相国华歆跪受玺绂以进于王。
现代文：曹魏的相国华歆跪着接受了皇帝的印玺奉进给重担。
English: Cao Wei's brother-in-law Huayu kneeled down and accepted the emperor's seal to carry the burden.

古文：既受毕，降坛视燎，成礼而返，未有祖配之事。
现代文：接受印玺完毕之后，魏文帝走下坛台观看柴燎，礼毕之后返回。没有举行以先祖配祭的祭祀。
English: After receiving the seal, Emperor Wei Wendi stepped down from the altar to look at the firecracker, and returned after the ceremony. There was no sacrificial rite to match the offerings of the ancestors.

古文：魏文帝黄初二年正月，郊祀天地明堂。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年正月，在郊外祭祀天地和明堂。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Weiwen of the Yellow Emperor, the worship of Heaven and Earth and the Ming Hall began in the suburbs.

古文：是时魏都洛京，而神祇兆域明堂灵台，皆因汉旧事。
现代文：当时萱逸的都城在盗堡，而天地神灵、墓地、明堂、灵台都依照汉朝的旧例。
English: At that time, the bustling capital city was in the castle, and the deities of heaven and earth, cemeteries, Myeongdong and Lingdae were all in accordance with the old Han Dynasty.

古文：四年七月，帝将东巡，以大军当出，使太常以一特牛告祠南郊，自后以为常。
现代文：黄初四年七月，魏塞壶将要到束境巡视，因为大军将要出动，便派太常官用一头公牛在南郊祭天，从此之后便成为常制。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Wei Sai Jian was about to go on a tour of the Shu region, and because a large army was about to be dispatched, he sent the Grand Steward to sacrifice the sky with a bull in the southern suburbs. From then on, it became a regular practice.

古文：及文帝崩，太尉钟繇告谥南郊，皆是有事于郊也。
现代文：到魏文帝逝世时，太尉钟繇在南郊举行追赠谧号的礼仪，这都是在郊外举行的祭祀礼节。
English: After the death of Saedong, Taifu Zhongxun passed away in the southern suburbs, all because of major events and suburb worship.

古文：明帝太和元年正月丁未，郊祀武皇帝以配天，宗祀文皇帝于明堂以配上帝。
现代文：明帝太和元年元年正月丁末日，在郊外祭祀魏武皇帝以配祭天帝，在明堂举行宗庙祭祀以魏文皇帝配祭上天。
English: On the last day of the first month of the first year of the Ming Dynasty and the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：是时二汉郊禋之制具存，魏所损益可知也。
现代文：当时两汉时期升烟祭祀天地的仪制都还保留，曹魏对两漠祭礼的沿革便可知了。
English: At that time, during the Han Dynasty and Han Dynasty, the ritual system of the smoke-raising ritual of heaven and earth was still preserved, and the history of Cao Wei's two desert rituals can be seen.

古文：四年八月，帝东巡，过繁昌，使执金吾臧霸行太尉事，以特牛祠受禅坛。
现代文：太和四年八月，魏明帝到东境巡视，经过繁昌县。派遣执金吾臧霸兼理太尉的职事，他用一头公牛祭祀接受禅让的坛台。
English: In August of the 4th year of the Taisho era, Emperor Wei Ming went on a tour of the eastern border, passing through Hanchang County. He dispatched the eunuch-in-charge of the Jin and Wu Dynasties to accept the altar of Zen concession with a bull sacrifice.

古文：《后汉纪》，章帝诏高邑祠即位坛。
现代文：《后汉纪》裹说，汉章帝诏令在高邑县祭祀即帝位的坛台。
English: According to the "Post-Han Dynasty Chronicle," the Imperial Edict of the Han Dynasty was written on the altar of the Imperial Throne in Gaoyu County.

古文：此虽前代已行之事，然为坛以祀天，而坛非神也。
现代文：逭虽然是前代已实行的事，然而筑坛是为了祭天，而坛并不是神。
English: Although it is something that has been practiced in previous generations, the altar is built to offer sacrifices to the heavens, and the altar is not a god.

古文：今无事于上帝，而致祀于虚坛，未详所据也。
现代文：现在不对上天祭祀，而对坛墟致祭，不知道根据的是什么。
English: Now, instead of offering sacrifices to the heavens, they offer sacrifices to the altar. I don't know what the reason is.

古文：景初元年十月乙卯，始营洛阳南委粟山为圆丘，诏曰： 盖帝王受命，莫不恭承天地，以彰神明；尊祀世统，以昭功德。
现代文：景初元年十月乙卯曰，开始在洛阳南郊的委粟营建圆厅。皇帝下诏令说： 帝王接受天命，都恭敬地奉承天地，以彰显神明；尊敬祭祀世代继统的先祖，以昭明功德。
English: The construction of the round hall began in the southern suburb of Luoyang in October of the first year of the Jing Dynasty. The emperor issued a decree saying: The emperor accepted the mandate of heaven, and respectfully flattered heaven and earth to highlight the gods; respected and sacrificed the ancestors of successive generations to show their merits.

古文：故先代之典既著，则禘郊祖宗之制备也。
现代文：所以前代祭祀的礼典撰著之后，就使郊祭祖先以配祭皇天上天的仪制完备了。
English: Therefore, after the ceremony of the previous generation's sacrifice was written, the ancestors of the suburb festival completed the ceremony with the matching sacrifice.

古文：昔汉氏之初，承秦灭学之后，采摭残缺，以备郊祀。
现代文：从前在汉朝的初年，承接秦朝焚书灭绝学术之后，便收集残缺的礼制经典，以完备郊祀的礼仪。
English: Once upon a time, in the first year of the Han Dynasty, after inheriting the Qin Dynasty's book-burning and academic extinction, they collected the incomplete classics of the etiquette system to complete the etiquette of suburban worship.

古文：自甘泉、后土、雍宫、五畤神祗兆位，多不经见，并以兴废无常，一彼一此，四百余年，废无禘礼。
现代文：从甘泉、后土、雍宫、到五峙原祭天地神灵的处所，大多在经典上见不到，并且因为这些祭祀一兴废而无常制，一一彼一此而有变化，四百多年间，废止而没有了郊外椅祭皇天上天的礼仪。
English: From Ganquan, Houtu, Yonggong, to Wujieyuan, most of the places where the gods of heaven and earth were sacrificed are not seen in the classics, and because these sacrifices are impermanent, they change one after another. For more than 400 years, the suburban chair ritual of the emperor and heaven has been abolished.

古文：古代之所更立者，遂有阙焉。
现代文：古代所改立的祭祀礼仪，于是有了阙失。
English: As a result, the sacrificial rites that were revised in ancient times have been lost.

古文：曹氏世系，出自有虞氏。
现代文：萱魏的世系，出于直垦氐，现在祭祀圆丘，以始祖爱童配祭，称圆丘为皇皇帝天。
English: The lineage of direct pressure is passed down from the Jiaxing pressure.

古文：今祀圆丘，以始祖帝舜配，号圆丘曰皇皇帝天；方丘所祭曰皇皇后地，以舜妃伊氏配；天郊所祭曰皇天之神，以太祖武皇帝配；地郊所祭曰皇地之祗，以武宣皇后配；宗祀皇考高祖文皇帝于明堂，以配上帝。 
现代文：方丘所祭的称为皇皇后地，以舜帝的妃子伊氏配祭。郊外祭天所祭的称为皇天之神，以太祖武皇帝配祭。郊外祭地所祭的称为皇地之衹，以武帝的宣皇后配祭。在明堂举行宗庙祭祀祭已故皇父高祖文皇童，以配祭上天。 
English: The one dedicated by Fangqiu is called the Emperor's Empress, and is accompanied by the consort of Emperor Xizang. The one dedicated by the Suburban Temple of Heaven is called the God of Emperor Xizang, and is accompanied by the God of Emperor Wu. The one dedicated by the Suburban Temple of Heaven is called the God of Emperor Xizang, and is accompanied by the Empress Xuan of Emperor Wu. The ancestral temple ritual of the late Emperor Gaozouwen Wangdong is held in the Ming Hall, and is accompanied by the sacrifice.

古文：十二月壬子冬至，始祀皇皇帝天于圆丘，以始祖有虞帝舜配。
现代文：十二月壬子冬至，开始在圆丘祭祀皇皇帝天，以始祖有虞氏舜帝配祭。
English: At the winter solstice in December, people began to offer sacrifices to Emperor Tian at the round mound, with the founder of the Yu clan, Emperor Yao, as the officiant.

古文：自正始以后，终魏世，不复郊祀。
现代文：白正始年以后，直到曹魏终结，再没有举行郊祀。
English: After the first year of Baizheng, until the end of Cao Wei, there was no more suburban worship.

古文：孙权初称尊号于武昌，祭南郊告天。
现代文：孙权开始在武昌称帝号时，在南郊告祭天帝。
English: When Sun Quan began to use the imperial title in Wuchang, he offered sacrifices to the Heavenly Emperor in the southern suburbs.

古文：文曰： 皇帝臣孙权，敢用玄牡，昭告皇皇后帝。
现代文：告祭辞说： 皇帝臣孙权，冒昧地用黑色的公牛祭祀，明白告知皇皇后帝。
English: The eulogy said: Emperor Sun Quan had the temerity to use a black bull as a sacrificial animal, clearly informing the emperor and empress.

古文：汉飨国二十有四世，历年四百三十，行气数终，禄胙运尽，普天弛绝，率土分崩。
现代文：汉朝享国二十四世，经历四百三十四年，它运行的天命气数已终结，它的福禄气运已竭尽，普天之下已废弛，四海之内分崩离析。
English: The 24th emperor of the Han Dynasty, after 434 years of history, has reached the end of his life span, exhausted his fortune, exhausted the world, and disintegrated across the four seas.

古文：孽臣曹丕，遂夺神器；丕子睿继世作慝，窃名乱制。
现代文：邪恶之臣曹丕，于是夺取了帝位。直至的儿子茎壑继承帝位而作恶，盗窃名位扰乱礼制。
English: The evil vassal Cao Pi then seized the imperial throne, until his son Zhu Xi inherited the throne and committed evil, stealing the title and disturbing the etiquette.

古文：权生于东南，遭值期运，承乾秉戎，志在拯世，奉辞行罚，举足为民。
现代文：我孙权出生于东南，适逢机运，承奉天道掌握军队，志向在于拯救世道，奉皇天上天的正辞实行讨伐惩恶，一举一动都是为了民众。
English: My grandson, Sun Quan, was born in southeast China. He seized the opportunity, followed the heavenly way and mastered the army. His aspiration was to save the world. He carried out the crusade and punishment of evil in the name of the emperor. Every move he made was for the people.

古文：群臣将相州郡百城执事之人，咸以为天意已去于汉，汉氏已终于天。皇帝位虚，郊祀无主，休征嘉瑞，前后杂沓，历数在躬，不得不受。权畏天命，敢不敬从。
现代文：群臣百官各位将相以及各州郡各城镇执掌职事的官员，都认为天意已对汉朝厌弃，汉朝已丧失天运，皇帝的位置空缺，郊祀没有主祀人，美好的征兆嘉善的瑞应，前后纷繁地出现，上天的气运在我身上，我不得不接受我孙权敬畏天命，岂敢不恭敬奉从。
English: Hundreds of ministers, generals and officials, as well as officials in charge of duties in every state, county and town, all believe that the will of heaven has abandoned the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty has lost its heavenly fortune, the position of the emperor is vacant, there is no main worshiper in the suburbs, the beautiful signs of auspiciousness have appeared in various places, and the luck of heaven is on me. I have to accept my grandchild's right to fear the fate of heaven, and dare not disobey.

古文：谨择元日，登坛柴燎，即皇帝位。
现代文：我恭谨地选择吉曰，登上坛台并举行柴燎祭天，即皇帝位。
English: I respectfully choose the auspicious day, ascend the altar and hold the Firecracker Festival, that is, the emperor's throne.

古文：唯尔有神飨之！
现代文：敬希你天神赐福!
English: May the gods bless you!

古文：左右有吴，永绥天极。 
现代文：东吴四方，永远安保于天际。 
English: East, west and south, forever secure in the sky.

古文：其后自以居非中土，不复修设。
现代文：在这以后的时期，孙权自认为所居不是中原地方，便不再举行郊祀。
English: In the period after this, Sun Quan considered that he did not live in the Central Plains, so he no longer held suburban worship.

古文：中年，群臣奏议，宜修郊祀，权曰： 郊祀当于中土，今非其所。 
现代文：中年时，群臣奏议，应该举行郊祀。孙权说： 郊祀应当在中原土地上举行，我们现在不是在中原土地上。 
English: When he was middle-aged, a group of ministers proposed that a suburban worship should be held. Sun Quan said: The suburban worship should be held in the Central Plains, but we are not in the Central Plains now.

古文：重奏曰： 普天之下，莫非王土。王者以天下为家。
现代文：群臣再次奏议说： 普天之下，没有一地不是帝王的领土：帝王以大下为家。
English: The courtiers petitioned again, saying, "In the whole world, there is no place that is not the emperor's territory: the emperor's home is the lower house."

古文：昔周文、武郊于禜、镐，非必中土。 
现代文：古代周文王、周武王在酆、镝举行郊祀，不是一定要在中原土地上。 
English: In ancient times, King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu held suburban religious services in Handan and Handan, but not necessarily in the Central Plains.

古文：权曰： 武王伐纣，即阼于镐京，而郊其所也。
现代文：孙权说： 周武王伐纣时，即帝位于镝京，而在镐京举行郊祀。
English: Sun Quan said: When King Zhou Wu was on a pilgrimage, the emperor was in Beijing, and the suburban worship was held in Beijing.

古文：文王未为天子，立郊于禜，见何经典？ 
现代文：周文王没有成为天子，在酆邑举行郊祀，见于哪部经典呢? 
English: King Zhou Wen did not become the son of heaven, and held a suburban worship in Zouyi. In which classic is it found?

古文：复奏曰： 伏见《汉书·郊祀志》，匡衡奏徙甘泉河东郊于长安，言文王郊于禜。 权曰： 文王德性谦让，处诸侯之位，明未郊也。
现代文：群臣又奏议说： 我们得见于《汉书郊祀志》。匡街上奏请求将甘泉宫回曲的郊祀迁徙到铝，说驰王曾在腿举行郊。 ，虽说： 周文王品性谦让，他处于诸侯的地位，分明是没有举行郊祀。
English: The group of courtiers also made a report saying: We can see it in the "History of Suburban Rituals in Chinese Literature." Kuang Jie requested that the suburb rituals of the Ganquan Palace Eulogy be moved to Alumin, saying that Qi Wang once held a suburb on his leg., Although: Zhou Wen Wang's character is humble, he is in the position of a vassal, it is clear that there was no suburb ritual.

古文：经传无明文，由匡衡俗儒意说，非典籍正义，不可用也。 
现代文：经传没有明文记载，由匡衡这个俗儒凭个人意见造说，不是经典的本义，不可用。 
English: There is no explicit record in the sutra, and it was fabricated by Kuangheng, a vulgar Confucian, based on his personal opinion. It is not the original meaning of the classic, and cannot be used.

古文：虞喜《志林》曰： 吴主纠驳郊祀，追贬匡衡，凡在见者，莫不慨然称善也。 
现代文：虞直《志林》裹说： 束吴君主孙权纠举驳正郊祀的记载，追贬匡衡，凡是得见的人，无不感慨地叫好。 
English: Gu Zhi "Zhilin" said: "From the records of the Wu monarch Sun Quan's persecution of the Zhengxiang worship, to the persecution of the Kuangheng worship, anyone who can see it will be moved to say hello."

古文：何承天曰： 案权建号继天，而郊享有阙，固非也。
现代文：何承天说： 考察孙权已建立帝号承继帝位，而郊祀享祭有阙失，本来是不对的。
English: He Chengtian said: It is not right to consider that Sun Quan has established the imperial title and succeeded to the throne, while the suburb worship and festival have been lost.

古文：末年虽一南郊，而遂无北郊之礼。
现代文：他在位的末年虽然举行了一次南郊祭祀，而竟无北郊祀享之礼。
English: In the last years of his reign, although he held a festival in the southern suburbs, there was no celebration in the northern suburbs.

古文：环氏《吴纪》： 权思崇严父配天之义，追上父坚尊号为吴始祖。 
现代文：环氏的《吴纪》裹说： 孙权想尊崇父亲以配享天帝的本义，给他的父亲孙坚追加尊号为束吴始祖。 
English: The "Wu Ji" of Huan said: Sun Quan wanted to honor his father by sharing the true meaning of the Emperor, and gave his father Sun Jian an additional honorific as the ancestor of the Wu Dynasty.

古文：如此说，则权末年所郊，坚配天也。
现代文：依照这一说法，那么孙权末年所举行的郊祀，足以系坚配享天帝。
English: According to this argument, then the suburban worship held by Sun Quan in his later years is enough to be worthy of enjoying the heavenly emperor.

古文：权卒后，三嗣主终吴世不郊祀，则权不享配帝之礼矣。 
现代文：孙权去世之后，三位继位的君主直到束吴灭亡都没有举行郊祀，那么逊护也就没享有配祭天帝的礼仪了。 
English: After the death of Sun Quan, the three monarchs who succeeded to the throne did not hold suburban worship until the death of Sok Wu, so Sun Quo did not enjoy the ritual of offering sacrifices to the emperor.

古文：刘备章武元年，即皇帝位，设坛。 建安二十六年夏四月丙午，皇帝臣备，敢用玄牡，昭告皇天上帝、后土神祗。
现代文：刘备章武元年，备即皇帝位，筑造坛台告祭天帝。告祭辞说 建安二十六年夏季四月丙午口，皇帝臣刘备，冒昧地以黑色公牛献祭，昭告皇天上帝、后土神灵。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu, Liu Bei, who was then the emperor, built an altar to offer sacrifices to the heavenly emperor. The sacrificial speech said that in the summer of Jian'an in April 26th, at noon, the emperor's vassal Liu Bei had the temerity to sacrifice a black bull to announce the emperor's god and the gods of the hinterland.

古文：汉有天下，历数无疆。
现代文：汉朝享有天下，它的天命气运无限。
English: The Han Dynasty enjoyed the whole world, and its destiny was boundless.

古文：曩者王莽篡盗，光武皇帝震怒致诛，社稷复享。
现代文：先前王莽篡夺汉朝政权，光武皇帝震怒出兵讨伐，社稷宗庙再次得到享祭。
English: Wang Mang usurped the power of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Guangwu sent troops to fight in anger, and the Shifang Temple once again enjoyed the festival.

古文：今曹操阻兵安忍，子丕载其凶逆，窃居神器。
现代文：现在曹操依仗武力肆意残忍地对待人民，他的儿子曹丕施展他的凶逆图谋，窃取帝位。
English: Now Cao Cao is using force to treat the people with wanton cruelty, and his son Cao Pi is carrying out his heinous plot to steal the imperial throne.

古文：群臣将士以为社稷堕废，备宜修之，嗣武二祖，龚行天罚。
现代文：群臣百官和将士们认为国家社稷已被废弃，刘备应该整治它，应该承接汉高祖和汉光武皇帝，恭敬地奉行皇天上帝对曹丕的惩罚。
English: Hundreds of courtiers, officials and soldiers believed that the national social system had been abandoned, and Liu Bei should rectify it, should succeed Han Gao Zu and Han Guangwu Emperor, and respectfully follow the punishment of Cao Pi by the Emperor God.

古文：备惟否德，惧忝帝位，询于庶民，外及蛮夷君长，佥曰天命不可以不答，祖业不可以久替，四海不可以无主，率土式望，在备一人。
现代文：我刘备思量自己道德鄙薄，怕有愧于这皇帝之位，便向庶民询问，并问及边外的蛮夷各族的君长，他们都说天命不可以不回报，祖宗的帝业不可以长久被废弃，四海之内不可以没有君主，天下四境之内的人所仰望的，在于我型备一人。
English: I, Liu Bei, considering my own low moral standards, and fearing that I might be unworthy of the position of this emperor, asked the common people, and also asked the rulers of the barbarian tribes outside the country. They all said that the destiny of heaven must not be unrequited, that the imperial inheritance of the ancestors must not be abandoned for a long time, that there must not be a monarch within the four seas, and that the people within the four borders of the world look up to me.

古文：备畏天之威，又惧汉邦将湮于地。
现代文：我型借敬畏皇天的威严，又惧怕汉朝将在大地上灭亡。
English: I am inspired by reverence for the majesty of the emperor and fear that the Han Dynasty will perish on earth.

古文：谨择元日，与百僚登坛，受皇帝玺绶。
现代文：我恭谨地选择吉，与群臣百官登上坛台，接受皇帝的御玺。
English: I respectfully chose to be at the altar with hundreds of officials to receive the imperial scepter from the emperor.

古文：修燔瘗，告类于大神。
现代文：修造柴燎的坛台，挖掘埋藏祭牲的瘗坎，向天神举行告祭。
English: They repaired the altar of the pyre, excavated the burial mound of the sacrificial animal, and held a sacrifice to the sky god.

古文：惟大神尚飨！祚于汉家，永绥四海。 
现代文：敬希天神享用祭品给汉朝赐福，永远安保四海。 
English: May the heavenly deities enjoy the offerings, bestow blessings on the Han Dynasty, and keep the four seas safe forever.

古文：章武二年十月，诏丞相诸葛亮营南北郊于成都。
现代文：章武二年十月，皇帝刘备命令丞相诸葛亮，在成都营建南、北郊祭的坛台。
English: In October of the second year of Zhangwu, Emperor Liu Bei ordered the chancellor Zhuge Liang to build the altar for the southern and northern suburb festivals in Chengdu.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年十二月甲子，使持节侍中太保郑冲、兼太尉司隶校尉李喜奉皇帝玺绶策书，禅帝位于晋。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年十二月甲子日，使持节侍中太保郑冲、兼太尉司隶校尉李憙奉持皇帝的印玺和策书，禅让帝位给西晋。
English: On December 1st, the second year of the reign of Emperor Han of the Wei-Yuan Dynasty, Zheng Chong, who served as the Vice-Commander of the Central Military Commission, and Li Xi, who served as the Vice-Commander of the Central Military Commission, were sent to hold the Emperor's seal and strategy book, and to transfer the throne to the West Jin Dynasty.

古文：丙寅，晋设坛场于南郊，柴燎告类，未有祖配。
现代文：丙寅曰，西晋在南郊筑造坛场，举行柴燎告祭天帝，没有用祖先配祭。
English: Hsin Yin said that the Western Jin Dynasty built an altar in the southern suburbs and held the Firecracker Festival for the Heavenly Emperor, but did not use the ancestors to match the sacrifice.

古文：其文曰： 皇帝臣炎，敢用玄牡，明告于皇皇后帝。
现代文：其告祭词说： 天帝之臣皇帝司马炎。冒昧地以黑色公牛献祭，昭告皇皇后帝。
English: Its proclamation said: Emperor Sima Yan, a vassal of the Heavenly Emperor, had the temerity to sacrifice a black bull to the Emperor.

古文：魏帝稽协皇运，绍天明命，以命炎曰： 昔者唐尧禅位虞舜，虞舜又以禅禹，迈德垂训，多历年载。
现代文：曹魏皇帝查验了皇位的气运，接受上天圣明的命令，命令我司马炎说： 古代卢童禅让帝位给虞爱，虞灵又将帝位禅让给夏鱼，他们勤勉地树立圣德垂训后世，经历了很多年代。
English: Emperor Cao Wei checked the imperial succession and accepted the order of Heaven's Holy Light. He ordered Sima Yan to say, "In ancient times, Lu Tongzen gave the imperial throne to Yu Ai, and Yu Ling gave the imperial throne to Xia Yu. They diligently established sacred virtue and passed down the teachings to future generations, and experienced many years.

古文：暨汉德既衰，太祖武皇帝拨乱济民，扶翼刘氏，又用受禅于汉。
现代文：到了汉朝政道衰败时，魏太祖武皇帝平定祸乱救助人民，扶持辅助汉朝刘压政权，又从还曲接受了挥让。
English: When the political system of the Han Dynasty was in decline, Emperor Wei Taizhuwu calmed the calamity and rescued the people, supported and assisted the Han Dynasty's Liu Bei regime, and accepted concessions from Wei Qu.

古文：粤在魏室，仍世多故，几于颠坠，实赖有晋匡拯之德，用获保厥肆祀，弘济于艰难，此则晋之有大造于魏也。
现代文：但当我曹魏之时，历代多有变乱，几乎到了灭亡的地步，实在是仰仗了置翅匡救的恩德，因而得保曹魏宗庙的祭祀，在艰难时广为救助，这实在是晋朝对魏有大的功德。
English: Wei's family suffered many hardships over the years and almost fell into ruin, but they relied on Jin Kuang to help them save their lives. As a result, they were able to keep their family name and survived the hardships. This shows that Jin owed a great deal to Wei.

古文：诞惟四方之民，罔不祗顺，开国建侯，宣礼明刑，廓清梁、岷，苞怀扬、越，函夏兴仁，八纮同轨，遐迩弛义，祥瑞屡臻，天人协应，无思不服。
现代文：天下四方的人民，没有不敬服顺从的，立国家建诸侯，宣明礼教严明刑律，肃清梁山、岷山，包容了扬州、南越，全国兴举仁义，八方边境统一，远近向往仁义而归服，祥瑞接连出现，天人同应，没有不顺服的。
English: There are no people in the four quarters of the world who do not respectfully obey and obey, establish a country, build provinces, preach morality and strict criminal law, clean up Liangshan and Lushan, contain Yangzhou and South Vietnam, promote benevolence and righteousness throughout the country, unify the borders of the eight directions, yearn for benevolence and obedience from far and near, and have good luck appear one after another. Heaven and man are the same, and there is no disobedience.

古文：肆予宪章三后，用集大命于兹。 
现代文：天命宣示我要效法唐尧、虞舜和汉朝禅让的皇帝，因此布天命于此。 
English: The Mandate of Heaven declared that I should emulate the emperors of Tang Dynasty, Yu Dynasty and Han Dynasty, so the Mandate of Heaven came into being.

古文：炎惟德不嗣，辞不获命。
现代文：我司马炎思量不足以继承魏帝皇位，辞让没有获得同意。
English: Sima Yan thought that he was not good enough to succeed the throne of the Wei Emperor, and his resignation was not approved.

古文：于是群公卿士，百辟庶僚，黎献陪隶，暨于百蛮君长，佥曰： 皇天鉴下，求民之瘼，既有成命，固非克让所得距违。 
现代文：于是三公卿士，群臣百宫，黎民百姓和役隶，以至各蛮族的君长，都说： 皇天明察下民，了解下民的困苦，皇天既有成命，本来不是克己谦让所能抗拒的。 
English: As a result, the three nobles, hundreds of courtiers, the common people of Lai and the subordinates, as well as the rulers of various barbarian tribes, all said: Emperor Tian clearly observes the people and understands the hardships of the people. Since Emperor Tian has a destiny, he is not able to resist self-restraint.

古文：天序不可以无统，人神不可以旷主，炎虔奉皇运，畏天之威，敢不钦承休命，敬简元辰，升坛受禅，告类上帝，以永答民望，敷佑万国。
现代文：帝位不可以没有继统，入神不可以空缺君主，我司马炎虔敬地遵奉皇位的气运，我畏惧天帝的威严，岂敢不恭敬地承接天帝美善的命令，我恭谨地选择吉曰，登上坛台接受禅让，告祭上帝，以永远报答人民的厚望，广布德泽佑助天下四方各地人民。
English: The imperial throne cannot be vacant without a successor, and a vacant monarch cannot enter into God. I, Sima Yan, devoutly follow the fortune of the imperial throne. I am afraid of the majesty of the heavenly emperor, and dare not disrespectfully accept the order of the heavenly emperor's goodness. I respectfully choose the auspicious day, ascend the altar to accept the Zen concession, sacrifice to God, and forever repay the people's high hopes, and help the people in all parts of the world.

古文：惟明德是飨。 
现代文：我向往美善之德。 
English: I aspire to the virtue of beauty.

古文：泰始二年正月，诏曰： 有司前奏郊祀权用魏礼。
现代文：泰始二年正月，皇帝下命令说： 主事官员前时奏请郊祀权且采用曹魏的礼制。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taizhi era, the emperor issued an order saying: The leading officials should ask for the right to worship in the suburbs and adopt the Cao Wei system of etiquette.

古文：朕不虑改作之难，今便为永制。
现代文：我不想承受改建礼制的艰难，现在便以曹魏的礼制作为永远实行的制度。
English: I don't want to bear the hardships of reforming the etiquette system, so now I will take Cao Wei's etiquette system as the system to be implemented forever.

古文：众议纷互，遂不时定，不得以时供飨神祀，配以祖考，日夕叹企，贬食忘安。
现代文：众人议论纷纭，于是没有按时议定，也就不能按时供享祭神，以已故祖、父配祭，我早晚都在慨叹和期望，饮食减少，心中不安。
English: Everyone was arguing about different things, so we didn't reach an agreement on time, so we couldn't offer sacrifices to the gods on time. I was always lamenting and looking forward to offering sacrifices to my late ancestors and father. My diet was reduced, and my heart was uneasy.

古文：其便郊祀。 
现代文：现在应当守即举行郊祀。 
English: Now it is time to hold the suburban worship immediately.

古文：时群臣又议： 五帝，即天也。五气时异，故殊其号。
现代文：当时群臣又议论说： 五方天帝，就是天，五行之气时令不同，所以它们的称号不同。
English: At that time, the courtiers also argued that: the Five Heavenly Emperors are heaven, and the Five Elements are different in different seasons, so their titles are different.

古文：虽名有五，其实一神。
现代文：虽然有五个名称，其实是一个神。
English: Although he has five names, he is actually one god.

古文：明堂南郊，宜除五帝之坐。
现代文：明堂和南郊，应该除去五帝的神座。
English: In Myeongdong and the southern suburbs, the seats of the Five Immortals should be removed.

古文：五郊改五精之号，皆同称昊天上帝，各设一坐而已。
现代文：五郊改为五精的称号，都同称为吴天上帝，各设一座而已。
English: The name of the five suburbs was changed to the five spirits, and they were all called Wu Tian Guo, with only one being set up in each.

古文：北郊又除先后配祀。 帝悉从之。
现代文：北郊祭祀又当除去先肚皇后的配祭， 皇帝全都依从。
English: The northern suburb's sacrificial rites should also remove the first belly and the queen's matching sacrifice, and the emperor all complied.

古文：二月丁丑，郊祀宣皇帝以配天，宗祀文皇帝于明堂，以配上帝。
现代文：二月丁丑，郊祀宣皇帝以配祭天，在明堂举行宗庙祭祀祭文皇帝以配祭上帝。
English: In February of Dingwuxi, the suburb worshiped Emperor Xuan with the matcha god, and the ancestral temple worshiped Emperor Wen with the matcha god in the Ming Hall.

古文：是年十一月，有司又议奏： 古者丘郊不异，宜并圆丘方泽于南北郊，更修治坛兆。
现代文：这年的十一月，主事官员又奏议： 古时候圆丘的祭祀和郊祀没有区别，应该将圆丘方泽的祭祀合并于南北郊祀，另外修造祭祀坛场。
English: In November of the same year, the leading officials also made a report: In ancient times, there was no difference between the round mound and suburban worship. The round mound and suburban worship should be combined with the north and south suburban worship, and the sacrificial altar should be built separately.

古文：其二至之祀，合于二郊。 
现代文：而冬至、夏至的祭祀，合并于南郊、北郊的祭祀。 
English: On the other hand, the winter solstice and summer solstice festivals are combined with the festivals in the southern suburbs and northern suburbs.

古文：帝又从之，一如宣帝所用王肃议也。
现代文：皇帝又依从了。一概都依照宣帝所采用的王肃的议论。
English: The emperor agreed again, exactly the same as Emperor Xuan's adoption of Wang Lu's proposal.

古文：是月庚寅冬至，帝亲祠圆丘于南郊。
现代文：逭一个月的庚寅曰冬至，皇帝亲自到南郊祭祀圆丘。
English: This month's Geng Yin Day is the winter solstice, and the emperor himself is in the southern suburbs to celebrate the day.

古文：自是后，圆丘方泽不别立至今矣。
现代文：自此之后，圆丘方泽不另行设立一直延续到今天。
English: Since then, the round hill has continued to be set up to this day.

古文：太康十年十月，乃更诏曰： 《孝经》 郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂，以配上帝 。而《周官》云： 祀天旅上帝。 
现代文：太康十年十月，皇帝又下命令说： 《孝经》裹记载 郊祀丘铿以配祭天，在明堂举行宗庙祭祀祭周文王以配祭上帝，而《周礼》裹说： 祭天是陈列祭品祭上帝。 
English: In October of the 10th year of Taikang, the emperor also issued an order saying: "The Filial Piety Sutra" recorded that the suburb worshiped the hill to match the sacrificial offering, and the ancestral temple held the sacrificial offering of King Zhouwen to match the sacrificial offering to God in the Ming Hall, while the "Weekly Ritual" said: The sacrificial offering is a display of sacrificial offerings to God.

古文：又曰： 祀地旅四望。 
现代文：又说： 祭地是陈列祭品向四方遥祭山。 
English: He also said: The place of the festival is the mountain where the offerings are displayed far and wide.

古文：四望非地，则明上帝不得为天也。
现代文：四方遥祭不是指地，那么分明上天不能是天了。
English: The Sifangyao Festival does not refer to the earth, so it is clear that the sky cannot be the sky.

古文：往者众议除明堂五帝位，考之礼文正经不通。
现代文：前时众人议论去除明堂五帝的神位，查考礼书的记载和正式的经文这种做法行不通。
English: At the time, people were discussing the removal of the divine status of the five emperors from Myeongdong, and the practice of checking the records of the ritual books and the official scriptures did not work.

古文：且《诗序》曰： 文、武之功，起于后稷。 
现代文：况且《诗序》裹说： 周文王、周武王的功业，起于后稷。 
English: Moreover, the "Sequence of Poems" says: The exploits of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu originated in Houyi.

古文：故推以配天焉。
现代文：所以推论以后稷配祭天。
English: Therefore, it can be deduced that 配祭天 comes from 配祭天.

古文：宣帝以神武创业，既已配天，复以先帝配天，于义亦不安。
现代文：宣帝以英武创业，他既已配祭天，后来又以先帝配祭天，在道理上也不妥当。
English: Emperor Xuanwu started his business with Yingwu, he was already a match for the sacrificial day, and later he was a match for the sacrificial day with the previous emperor, which is not reasonable.

古文：其复明堂及南郊五帝位。 
现代文：应该恢复明堂及南郊五帝神位。 
English: or to restore the divine status of the Five Emperors in Myeongdong and the southern suburbs.

古文：晋武帝太康三年正月，帝亲郊礼。皇太子、皇弟、皇子悉侍祠，非前典也。
现代文：晋武帝太康三年止月，武帝亲自举行郊祀皇太子、皂弟、皇广全都陪侍祭祀，这不是前代的礼典。
English: At the end of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jimmu Taikang, Emperor Jimmu himself held a suburb ritual in which the crown prince, his younger brother, and the emperor were all accompanied by attendants. This was not a ritual of the previous generation.

古文：愍帝都长安，未及立郊庙而败。
现代文：愍帝定都长安，还没有建立郊祀及宗庙祭祀便已败亡。
English: The Fallen Children built the capital in Dansai, but before they could build the suburb temple, they were defeated.

古文：元帝中兴江南，太兴元年，始更立郊兆。
现代文：元帝中兴于江南，太兴元年，开始改建郊祀坛场。
English: Emperor Zhongxing of the Yuan Dynasty was in the south of the Yangtze River, and Emperor Taixing began to rebuild the suburb's sacrificial altar in the first year.

古文：其制度皆太常贺循依据汉、晋之旧也。
现代文：其制度都是太常贺循依据汉朝、西晋的旧制所定。
English: Its system is based on the old system of the Han Dynasty and the Western Jin Dynasty.

古文：三月辛卯，帝亲郊祀，飨配之礼，一依武帝始郊故事。初，尚书令刁协、国子祭酒杜夷，议宜须旋都洛邑乃修之。
现代文：三月辛卯曰，元帝亲自举行郊祀，配祭的礼仪，概依照武帝开始举行郊祀时的先例当初尚书令刁协、国子祭酒杜夷，建议应该等待还都迢旦之后再修建。
English: In March, Xin Wu said that Emperor Yuan personally held the suburb worship, and the etiquette of the sacrificial offering was generally in accordance with the precedent when Emperor Wu began to hold the suburb worship. At first, it was suggested that the imperial edict should be issued, and the national son's festival should be held. It was suggested that it should be built after the emperor's death.

古文：司徒荀组据汉献帝居许，即便立郊，自宜于此修奉。
现代文：司徒荀组根据汉献帝居许员时，便立即建立郊祀坛场，现在自然应该在汀茵修造。
English: According to the Han Dynasty, when the emperor's residence was built, the Szczelin group immediately established a suburban shrine. Now, of course, it should be built in Tingying.

古文：骠骑王导、仆射荀崧、太常华恆、中书侍郎庾亮皆同组议，事遂施行。
现代文：骠骑玉婆、仆射苞盛、太常茎恒、中书侍郎廖毫都与苞蛆的议论相同。
English: The story of the horse-riding woman, the servant-shooting hero, the emperor's son-in-law, and the scribe-servant are all the same as that of the horse.

古文：按元帝绍命中兴，依汉氏故事，宜享明堂宗祀之礼。
现代文：修建祀坛的事便施行了按元帝继承天命而中兴，依照汉朝的先例，应该举行享祭明堂和宗庙祭祀之礼。
English: The construction of the altar was carried out in accordance with Emperor Yuan's inheriting the Mandate of Heaven, and in accordance with the precedent of the Han Dynasty, the rituals of the festival hall and the ancestral temple should be held.

古文：江左不立明堂，故阙焉。
现代文：束晋没有立明堂，所以缺享祭明堂和宗庙祭祀之礼。
English: Sokujin did not build a Myeongdong, so he did not enjoy the Myeongdong festival and the ritual of the ancestral temple.

古文：明帝太宁三年七月，始诏立北郊。
现代文：明帝太宁三年七月，开始诏令建郊祭坛。
English: In July of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, the construction of the suburb altar began.

古文：未及建而帝崩，故成帝咸和八年正月，追述前旨，于覆舟山南立之。
现代文：还没有进行建造而明帝便逝世了，所以成帝越和八年正月，追述以前的意旨，在覆舟山南建立祭坛。
English: Emperor Ming died before the construction was completed, so Emperor Cheng Yue and the first month of the eighth year, recounting the previous intention, built an altar in the south of Fuzhou Mountain.

古文：是月辛未，祀北郊，始以宣穆张皇后配地。
现代文：当月辛未，祭祀北郊，开始以宣穆张皇后配祭地神。
English: In the same month of Xinwei, the Northern Suburbs began to offer sacrifices to the earth god with the help of Empress Xuan Mu Zhang.

古文：魏氏故事，非晋旧也。
现代文：这是曹魏时的先例，不是西晋的旧制。
English: This is the precedent of Cao Wei, not the old system of the Western Jin Dynasty.

古文：康帝建元元年正月，将北郊，有疑议。
现代文：康帝建元元年正月，将要在北郊祭祀，有怀疑的议论。
English: In the first month of the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, it was planned to hold a religious service in the northern suburbs, but there were doubts about this.

古文：太常顾和表曰： 泰始中，合二至之祀于二郊。
现代文：太常题和上表说： 蠢始年间，把夏至冬至的祭祀合并于南郊北郊的祭祀。
English: According to the above table: In the beginning of the year, the summer solstice and winter solstice rituals were combined in the southern suburb and northern suburb.

古文：北郊之月，古无明文，或以夏至，或同用阳复。
现代文：北郊祭祀的月份，古代没有明文记载，有的用夏至，有的同用冬至。
English: In ancient times, there was no explicit record of the month of the Hokkien festival. Some used the summer solstice, while others used the winter solstice.

古文：汉光武正月辛未，始建北郊，此则与南郊同月。
现代文：汉光武正月辛末日，开始建立北郊祭坛。这就与南郊祭祀同月了。
English: In the first month of Han Guangwu's reign, the Northern Suburbs Festival began, and the Southern Suburbs Festival followed a month later.

古文：及中兴草创，百度从简，合北郊于一丘。
现代文：到束晋草创之时，一切事情都从简，把北郊祭祀合并于圆丘祭祀中。
English: By the time of Sokujin's creation, everything had been streamlined, and the Hokujo ritual had been merged with the Round Mound ritual.

古文：宪章未备，权用斯礼，盖时宜也。
现代文：礼制不完备，权且用造一礼仪，大体上是合乎时宜的。
English: The etiquette system is not complete, and the right to use it to create a etiquette is generally timely.

古文：至咸和中，议别立北郊，同用正月。
现代文：到了咸和年间，提议另立北郊祭祀，祭祀同用正月。
English: At the time of the Hamon New Year, it was agreed that the northern suburb would be set up separately, which was carried out in the first month of the year.

古文：魏承后汉，正月祭天，以地配，而称周礼，三王之郊，一用夏正。 
现代文：曹魏承续后汉，正月祭天，以地神配祭，而称说周礼，三王的郊祭，一概用夏正。 
English: Cao Wei continued the tradition of the Western Han Dynasty. The New Year's Day Festival, with the earth god as the matchmaker, was called the Zhou Festival, and the Three Kings' Suburban Festival was called the Summer Festival.

古文：于是从和议。
现代文：于是依从顾和的议论。
English: Therefore, the proposal of the theme sculpture was adopted.

古文：是月辛未，南郊。
现代文：这个月的辛末日，祭祀南郊。
English: On the bitter end of this month, the southern suburbs will be sacrificed.

古文：辛巳，北郊。
现代文：辛巳日，祭祀北郊。
English: On Shinshi Day, a ritual is held in the northern suburbs.

古文：帝皆亲奉。
现代文：皇帝都亲自奉祭。
English: The emperor himself offered the sacrifice.

古文：安帝元兴三年三月，宋高祖讨桓玄走之。
现代文：安帝元兴三年三月，宋高祖征讨桓玄并赶走了桓玄。
English: In March of the third year of An Di Yuanxing, Song Gaozhu defeated and drove away Kuan Xuan.

古文：己卯，告义功于南郊。
现代文：己卯日，庆贺功勋在南郊祭祀。
English: On the day of his death, a memorial service was held in the southern suburbs to celebrate his achievements.

古文：是年，帝蒙尘江陵未返。
现代文：这一年，皇帝逃亡江陵没有返回。
English: That year, the emperor fled Jiangling and never returned.

古文：其明年应郊，朝议以为宜依周礼，宗伯摄职，三公行事。
现代文：次年应该举行郊祀。朝廷议论认为应该依照周礼，由宗伯代理皇帝的职事，由三公施行祭祀。
English: The following year, a suburban ritual was to be held. The Imperial Court deliberated that it should be in accordance with the weekly ritual, with the patriarch acting as the emperor and the three officials performing the ritual.

古文：尚书左丞王纳之独曰： 既殡郊祀，自是天子当阳，有君存焉，禀命而行，何所辨也。
现代文：尚书左丞王讷之独自说： 殡殓之后举行郊祀，自然是天子主持，有君主在，禀承君主的命令而行祭，有什么可辩白的呢。
English: Shangshu Zuozhe Wang Nanzhi said independently: After the funeral, the suburb worship was held. Naturally, it was presided over by the Son of Heaven, there was a monarch, and the sacrifice was carried out according to the monarch's order. What is there to justify?

古文：斋之与否，岂如今日之比乎？
现代文：是不是举行斋戒祭祀，岂可以与今天的事相比呢。
English: Is the performance of the fast and sacrifice comparable to what happened today?

古文：议者又云今宜郊，故是承制所得命三公行事。
现代文：议论的人又说现在应该郊祀，而事理应是秉承皇帝的旨意才能命令三公行祭。
English: The commentators also said that it is now time for suburban worship, and that it is only by upholding the emperor's will that the three public processions can be ordered.

古文：又郊天极尊，唯一而巳，故非天子不祀也。
现代文：况且祭天是极尊高的事，衹有天子一人可以举行而已，所以不是天子不可以祭天。
English: Moreover, it is a very lofty thing to offer sacrifices to the heavens. Only the Son of Heaven can do it, so it is not the Son of Heaven who cannot offer sacrifices to the heavens.

古文：庶人以上，莫不蒸尝，嫡子居外，庶子执事，礼文炳然。
现代文：庶民以上的人，无不举行祭祀，当嫡子在外时，由庶子掌理祭祀，礼书裹记载得很明白。
English: All people above the rank of commoners held a ritual, and when the legitimate son was away, the illegitimate son was in charge of the ritual, which was clearly recorded in the book of etiquette.

古文：未有不亲受命而可祭天者。
现代文：没有不亲自接受了天子的命令而祭天的。
English: He did not sacrifice to heaven without personally accepting the order of the Son of God.

古文：又武皇受禅，用二月郊，元帝中兴，以三月郊。
现代文：又武皇帝接受禅让后，于二月郊祀，亘童在遍中兴，于三月郊祀。
English: In addition, after Emperor Wu accepted Zen's concession, he was enshrined in the suburbs in February, while Watanto was enshrined in Henzhongxing and in the suburbs in March.

古文：今郊时未过，日望舆驾。
现代文：现在郊祀的时限还没有超过，人们天天盼望着皇帝。
English: Now, the time limit for suburban worship has not yet passed, and people look forward to the emperor's return every day.

古文：无为欲速而无据，使皇舆旋返，更不得亲奉。 
现代文：不可以没有根据地想急速举行郊祀，使得皇帝返回后，再不能亲自奉祭。 
English: There is no reason to rush to hold suburban religious services, so that after the emperor returns, he can no longer personally offer sacrifices.

古文：遂从纳之议。
现代文：于是依从丁王讷之的议论。
English: So he followed the advice of Ding Wangna.

古文：晋恭帝元熙二年五月，遣使奉策，禅帝位于宋。
现代文：晋恭帝五盘二年五月，摹帝派遣使臣奉持策书，禅让帝位给刘宋。
English: In May of the 5th year of the 5th month of the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Gao sent an envoy to uphold the policy, and transferred the imperial throne to Liu Song.

古文：永初元年六月丁卯，设坛南郊，受皇帝玺绂，柴燎告类。
现代文：永初元年六月丁卯曰。在南郊建造坛场，接受皇帝的印玺，举行柴燎以祭天。
English: In June of the first year of the Yongzheng era, Dingwu said, "Build an altar in the southern suburb, accept the emperor's seal, and hold a firecracker to worship the heavens."

古文：策曰： 皇帝臣讳，敢用玄牡，昭告皇皇后帝。
现代文：告祭策书说： 皇天上帝的臣子皇帝刘裕，冒昧地用黑色公牛献祭，昭告皇皇后帝。
English: The proclamation said: Emperor Liu Yu, a vassal of the Emperor of Heaven and God, had the temerity to use a black bull to make a sacrifice.

古文：晋帝以卜世告终，历数有归，钦若景运，以命于讳。
现代文：晋帝以占卜得知王朝气数已终结，新王朝的气运已有所归，敬顺遣好的时运，以命令我刘裕。
English: The Jin emperor learned from divination that the dynasty's auspicious number had ended, and that the auspiciousness of the new dynasty had returned, and ordered Liu Yu to respect the good fortune.

古文：夫树君司民，天下为公，德充帝王，乐推攸集。
现代文：立君主以治理人民，天下为公，德操足以立为帝王，而被人民一致拥戴。
English: A monarch is established to govern the people, the world is public, and morality is enough to establish an emperor, which is unanimously supported by the people.

古文：越俶唐、虞，降暨汉、魏，靡不以上哲格文祖，元勋陟帝位，故能大拯黔黎，垂训无穷。
现代文：从卢尧、虞爱开始，直到汉朝、萱垫，没有不是以圣哲的人感通文祖，有卓绝功勋的人登帝位，因此能够大力拯救人民，垂训于万世。
English: From the time of Lu Xun and Gu Ai to the Han Dynasty and Xiu Mat, there was no literary ancestor who was not inspired by the human feelings of saints, and no person with outstanding merits ascended to the throne. Therefore, he was able to vigorously save the people and pass on the teachings to future generations.

古文：晋自东迁，四维弗树，宰辅焉依，为日已久。
现代文：晋朝自从束迁以来，礼、义、廉、耻的德操没有树立，宰辅大臣没有依托，日子已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since the Jin Dynasty was relocated, and the virtues of propriety, righteousness, honesty, and modesty have not been established, and the Vice-Minister has not been supported.

古文：难棘隆安，祸成元兴，遂至帝王迁播，宗祀湮灭。
现代文：隆安年间艰险，元兴年间酿成祸乱，以致帝王迁徙，宗庙祭祀灭绝。
English: During the Longan period, hardships and dangers, and during the Genxing period, calamities occurred, resulting in emperors migrating and the extinction of ancestral temple rituals.

古文：讳虽地非齐、晋，众无一旅，仰愤时难，俯悼横流，投袂一麾，则皇祚克复。
现代文：刘裕虽然地方不是齐、晋大国，部众没有一旅，但上则愤恨时势艰险，下则痛惜动乱不止，他甩袖一挥，就使皇朝恢复。
English: Although Liu Yu did not visit all the provinces of the Jin and Qin Dynasties, nor did he visit all the provinces of the Jin and Qin Dynasties, the former resented the difficult situation, while the latter deplored the continuous turmoil. With a wave of his sleeve, he restored the imperial dynasty.

古文：及危而能持，颠而能扶，奸宄具歼，僭伪必灭。
现代文：在危难时能扶持，在覆亡时能扶助，为非作乱的都被歼灭，越礼犯分的人一定被消灭。
English: Those who can support others in times of danger and help others in times of disaster will be supported. Those who do not make trouble will be annihilated, and those who violate etiquette will definitely be eliminated.

古文：诚否终必泰，兴废有期。
现代文：真是否极必泰，振兴废败残局应运而来。
English: Is it really necessary to revitalize the situation of waste and defeat?

古文：至于拨乱济民，大造晋室，因藉时运，以尸其劳。
现代文：至于平定祸乱救济人民，恩施晋朝，凭藉时运，而舒展他的勋劳。
English: As for calming down the calamity and relieving the people, he extended his meritorious service to the Jin Dynasty by virtue of the time.

古文：加以殊俗慕义，重译来款，正朔所暨，咸服声教。
现代文：加以四境殊风异俗的各族人民仰慕仁义，语言不通的荒远地方人民前来诚服，帝王历法所行的地方，都敬服声威教化。
English: In addition, people of all ethnic groups from all over the world with different customs and customs admire benevolence and righteousness, and people in remote places who do not speak the language come to sincerely obey, and the places where the imperial calendar is performed are all obeying and educating.

古文：至乃三灵垂象，山川告祥，人神和协，岁月兹著。
现代文：以致、月、星辰显示美好的征兆，山出现祥瑞，入神和睦协同，岁月彰着。
English: As a result, the moon and stars show good signs, the mountains appear auspicious, the gods harmoniously cooperate, and the years go by.

古文：是以群公卿士，亿兆夷人，佥曰皇灵降监于上，晋朝款诚于下；天命不可以久淹，宸极不可以暂旷。
现代文：因此王侯卿士、亿万平民，都说皇天神灵在上俯察，晋朝在下敬致诚，天命不可以长久被延误，帝位不可一刻空着。
English: Therefore, emperors, princes, nobles, and hundreds of millions of common people all say that the Emperor's divine spirit is looking down from above, and the Jin Dynasty is paying tribute to sincerity, and the fate of heaven cannot be delayed for a long time, and the imperial throne cannot be vacant for a moment.

古文：遂逼群议，恭兹大礼。
现代文：于是被众人的议论所逼，我恭敬地举行这受天命即帝位的礼仪。
English: Thus, compelled by the discussions of many people, I respectfully held this rite, which was ordained by heaven, that is, the imperial throne.

古文：猥以寡德，托于兆民之上。
现代文：谬误地以我这薄德之人，托身于亿万人民之上。
English: It is a fallacy that I, a man of little virtue, should place myself above hundreds of millions of people.

古文：虽仰畏天威，略是小节，顾深永怀，祗惧若厉。
现代文：虽然上畏皇天的威严，忽略这小节，我深深地永远怀念，恭敬恐惧如同遇到危险一样。
English: Though awestruck by the majesty of the heavens, ignoring this subsection, I deeply and eternally remember, revering fear as encountering danger.

古文：敬简元日，升坛受禅，告类上帝，用酬万国之嘉望。
现代文：敬择吉日，登坛受禅，祭告天帝，以实现万国美好的希望。
English: Respectfully choose the auspicious day, ascend the altar to receive Zen, and worship the heavenly emperor to realize the beautiful hope of all nations.

古文：克隆天保，永祚于有宋。
现代文：上天保佑我们昌盛，永远给我刘宋赐福。
English: May Heaven bless us with prosperity, and bestow blessings on Liu Song forever.

古文：惟明灵是飨。 
现代文：我恭敬地飨祭圣明的神灵。 
English: Only those who have the Holy Spirit can enjoy its worship.

古文：永初元年，皇太子拜告南北郊。
现代文：永初元年，皇太子在南、北郊拜祭。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, the crown prince attended festivals in the southern and northern suburbs.

古文：永初二年正月上辛，上亲郊祀。
现代文：永初二年正月上旬辛，皇帝亲自举行郊祀。
English: In the first half of the first month of the second year of Yongchu, the emperor himself held a suburb worship.

古文：文帝元嘉三年，车驾西征谢晦，币告二郊。
现代文：文帝元嘉三年，皇帝率军西征谢晦，备礼品在南、北郊祭祀。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wen's reign, Yuan Jia, the emperor led the army to the west to offer thanks and prepare gifts for the sacrifices in the southern and northern suburbs.

古文：孝武帝孝建元年六月癸巳，八座奏： 刘义宣、臧质，干时犯顺，滔天作戾，连结淮、岱，谋危宗社。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年六月癸巳曰，朝廷重臣上奏说： 刘义宣、邀质，违逆时势背离正道，发动暴乱罪恶滔天，串连淮、岱两地逆党，阴谋危害国家。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of Xiaojian in June of the first year of the Twentieth Century said that the imperial court chieftain delivered a report saying: Liu Yixuan, invited to pledge allegiance, violated the current situation and deviated from the right path, launched a riot, committed a heinous crime, linked Huai and Yan to the two opposing parties, and plotted to harm the country.

古文：质反之始，戒严之日，二郊庙社，皆已遍陈。
现代文：当臧质开始反叛时，朝廷宣布戒严的时候，南、北郊的祭祀及宗庙社祭，都已陈设周备。
English: When the Jurchens began to rebel and the imperial court declared martial law, preparations had already been made for the sacrificial rites in the southern and northern suburbs, as well as for the festivals of the family, temples and shrines.

古文：其义宣为逆，未经同告。
现代文：因刘盏宣作乱，没能同时举行祭祀。
English: Due to the disturbance caused by Liu Zhenxuan, it was not possible to hold the ritual at the same time.

古文：舆驾将发，丑徒冰消，质既枭悬，义宣禽获，二寇俱殄，并宜昭告。
现代文：当皇上将要出发亲征时，叛逆党徒已冰释瓦解，臧质既已被枭首示众，型义宣也被擒获，两个寇逆都已消灭，南、北郊祭祀及宗庙祭祀都应该昭彰举行。
English: When the emperor was about to set out on a personal expedition, the rebellious partisans had already been frozen and disintegrated, the enfeeblement had already been shown to the public with a dagger, the type of declaration of righteousness had also been captured, the two robbers had been eliminated, and the southern and northern suburb sacrifices and the ancestral temple sacrifices should have been held.

古文：检元嘉三年讨谢晦之始，普告二郊、太庙。
现代文：考察亘塞三年诛讨迎每之初，遍祭南、北郊和太庙。
English: The three-year-long investigation of the celebration of the first day of the new year, the festival throughout the south, the northern suburbs and the Great Temple.

古文：贼既平荡，唯告太庙、太社，不告二郊。 
现代文：当逆党平定之后，衹祭太庙和太社。不举行南、北郊祭祀。 
English: After the subjugation of the traitorous party, the sacrificial rites of the Great Temple and the Great Shrine were abolished, and the sacrificial rites of the southern and northern suburbs were not held.

古文：礼官博议。
现代文：希望礼宫们全面深入地商议。
English: It is hoped that the ceremonial palaces will have comprehensive and in-depth discussions.

古文：太学博士徐宏、孙勃、陆澄议： 《礼》无不报。
现代文：太学博士徐宏、孙勃、陆澄议论说： 《礼》书裹没有不举行回报祭祀的记载。
English: Dr. Xu Hong, Dr. Sun Bo, and Dr. Lu Cheng, the deans of the school, discussed: There is no record in the "Rite" book of not holding a return sacrifice.

古文：始既遍告，今贼已禽，不应不同。 
现代文：开始时对南、北郊和宗庙既普遍给予祭祀，现在逆贼已擒获，祭祀不应有所不同。 
English: At the beginning, sacrifices were generally given to the south, the northern suburbs and the ancestral temple, but now that the traitors have been captured, the sacrifices should not be different.

古文：国子助教苏玮生议： 案《王制》，天子巡狩， 归，假于祖祢 。又《曾子问》： 诸侯适天子，告于祖，奠于祢，命祝史告于社稷宗庙山川。
现代文：国子助教苏璋生议论说： 据《礼记。王制》记载，天子外出巡狩， 返回时，给祖庙父庙祭祀，又《礼记曾子问》裹说： 诸侯前往天子那裹去，先到祖庙祭祀，向父庙陈设祭品祭祀，命令祝史向社稷宗庙山川祭祀。
English: Kuniko assistant professor Su Shansheng commented: According to the "Rituals. Royal System" records, the emperor went on a hunting tour, and when he returned, he offered sacrifices to the ancestral temple. Also, the "Rituals of the Ancestors" said: The princes went to the emperor, first went to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices, offered sacrifices to the father temple, and ordered the priests to offer sacrifices to the temple of the Shoshu sect.

古文：告用牲币，反亦如之。
现代文：祭祀时用牲和缯帛，返回时也是如此。
English: During the ritual, the animal and yakitori are used, and the same is true when returning home.

古文：诸侯相见，反必告于祖祢，乃命祝史告至于前所告者。 
现代文：诸侯相见，返回后一定到祖庙父庙祭祀，并命令祝史向前时所祭祀过的山等神举行告至之礼。 
English: The princes saw each other, and after returning, they certainly went to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices, and ordered the mountain gods that had been sacrificed in the past to hold a ceremony.

古文：又云： 天子诸侯将出，必以币帛皮圭，告于祖祢。
现代文：《礼记曾子问》裹又说： 天子和诸侯将要外出的时候，一定要用缯帛毛皮玉圭等祭品，到祖庙父庙祭祀。
English: "The Book of Rites and Decrees" also says: When the emperor and princes are about to go out, they must use offerings such as egrets' fur to make sacrifices at the ancestral temple.

古文：反必告至。 
现代文：返回后一定要举行告至之礼。 
English: When you return, be sure to hold a farewell party.

古文：天子诸侯，虽事有小大，其礼略钧，告出告至，理不得殊。
现代文：天子与诸侯外出，虽说事有大小的不同，但它的礼仪大体相同，出之前祭祀而返回后举行告至之礼，道理上不得有差别。
English: When a prince and a vassal go out, although the size of the event is different, the etiquette is generally the same. There should be no difference in principle between holding a sacrifice before going out and holding a proclamation ceremony after returning.

古文：郑云： 出入礼同。 其义甚明。
现代文：郑玄说： 外出及返回的礼仪相同，它的本义十分明白。
English: Zheng Xuan said: The etiquette of going out and returning is the same, and its true meaning is very clear.

古文：天子出征，类于上帝，推前所告者归必告至，则宜告郊，不复容疑。
现代文：天子出征时，向上帝祭祀，推论前时所祭祀过的返回后一定要为之举行告至之礼，那么就应该举行郊祭，不容再有怀疑。
English: When the Son of Heaven went to war, he offered sacrifices to God. Therefore, after returning from the war, he must hold a ceremony to announce his arrival. In that case, a suburb festival should be held, and there should no longer be any doubt.

古文：元嘉三年，唯告庙社，未详其义。
现代文：丞矗三年，衹祭太庙和太社，不知道它的道理在哪裹。
English: For the past three years, the dragonfly festival has been held at the Grand Temple and Grand Shrine. I don't know what the reason is.

古文：或当以《礼记》唯云 归假祖祢 ，而无告郊之辞。
现代文：或者当是因《礼记》裹衹说 返回后到祖庙父庙祭祀 ，而没有郊祭的话。
English: Or if there is no suburb festival because "Ryoki" says that after returning to the ancestral temple, there will be a sacrifice.

古文：果立此义，弥所未达。
现代文：如果这一论点成立，那就更是不通。
English: If this argument is true, it is even more incoherent.

古文：夫《礼记》残缺之书，本无备体，折简败字，多所阙略。
现代文：《礼记》是残缺的书，本来就没有完备的版本，断简壤字，多有缺略。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" is a fragmentary book. Originally, there was no complete version. It is very concise, and there are many omissions.

古文：正应推例求意，不可动必征文。
现代文：正应当类推寻求它的本义，不可动辄都要征引它的文字。
English: It is necessary to seek its original meaning by analogy, and it is imperative to quote its text.

古文：天子反行告社，亦无成记，何故告郊，独当致嫌。
现代文：天子返回后祭祀太社，也没有成文记载，是什么原因郊祭该单独招致嫌疑呢。
English: There is also no written record of the ritual held at Taisha after the heavenly son's return, so why should the suburban festival alone attract suspicion?

古文：但出入必告，盖孝敬之心。
现代文：但是外出及返回后一定祭祀，都是表示孝敬的诚心。
English: However, going out and returning after a certain sacrifice are all expressions of filial piety and sincerity.

古文：既以告归为义，本非献捷之礼。
现代文：既然是以返回后祭祀为本意，本来就不是凯旋后献捷的礼仪。
English: Since the original intention was to hold a memorial service after the return, it was not originally a ceremony to celebrate the victory after the return.

古文：今舆驾竟未出宫，无容有告至之文；若陈告不行之礼，则为未有前准。
现代文：现在皇帝毕竟没有出宫，就不容许有外出返回后举行告至的礼仪。如果是陈设不出行而祭祀的礼仪，那却是以前没有这样的先例。
English: After all, now that the emperor has not left the palace, it is not allowed to have a ceremony to announce the arrival after returning from a trip. If it is a ceremony to offer a sacrifice without going out, then there is no such precedent.

古文：愚谓祝史致辞，以昭诚信。
现代文：我认为祝史致辞，用以昭显诚信。
English: I think the congratulatory speech is to show sincerity.

古文：苟其义舛于礼，自可从实而阙。
现代文：如果辞义违背礼制，自然可以从实而缺略。
English: If the meaning of the words violates the etiquette, they can be omitted from the text.

古文：臣等参议，以应告为允，宜并用牲告南北二郊、太庙、太社，依旧公卿行事。 
现代文：我们参酌审议，以应该举行祭祀为允当，应当都用牲畜献祭南北二郊及太庙、太社，依旧由公卿施行祭祀之事。 
English: We participated in the deliberation and agreed that the sacrifice should be held, and that the sacrifice should be made with livestock in the two suburbs in the north and south, as well as in the temple and shrine, and that the sacrifice should still be performed by the nobles.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下命令表示同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：孝建二年正月庚寅，有司奏： 今月十五日南郊。
现代文：孝建二年正月庚寅日，主事官员上奏说： 本月十五日举行南郊祭祀。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Xiao Jian, the leading official made a report saying: The Nanjiao festival will be held on the 15th of this month.

古文：寻旧仪，庙祠至尊亲奉，以太尉亚献；南郊亲奉，以太常亚献。
现代文：考查旧时的仪制，宗庙祭祀由皇上亲自奉祭，由太尉第二次献酒告祭；南郊祭祀由皇上亲自奉祭，由太常第二次献酒告祭。
English: Examining the ceremonial system of the old days, the ancestral temple sacrifice was first offered by the emperor himself, and the second offering of wine and sacrifice was made by the captain; the southern suburb sacrifice was offered by the emperor himself, and the second offering of wine and sacrifice was made by the chief priest.

古文：又庙祠行事之始，以酒灌地；送神则不灌。
现代文：又宗庙祭祀开始时，把酒洒在地上，送神的时候就不洒。
English: In addition, at the beginning of the temple ritual, the wine is sprinkled on the ground, but it is not sprinkled when the god is sent.

古文：而郊初灌，同之于庙，送神又灌，议仪不同，于事有疑。
现代文：而郊祀在开始时把酒洒在地上，同宗庙祭祀是一样的，而送神时又要把酒洒在地上，议论的人认为宗庙祭祀与郊祀仪式不相同，对这件事有疑问。
English: However, the suburb ritual sprinkles wine on the ground at the beginning, and the same temple ritual is the same, but when the god is sent, the wine should be sprinkled on the ground. Some people argue that the temple ritual is different from the suburb ritual, and there are doubts about this matter.

古文：辄下礼官详正。 
现代文：现在交付礼官们审议裁定。 
English: It is now up to the clerics to decide.

古文：太学博士王祀之议： 案《周礼》，大宗伯 佐王保国，以吉礼事鬼神祗，禋祀昊天。 
现代文：太学博士王祀之议论说： 根据《周礼》的记载，大宗伯 佐助君主保护国家，用吉礼敬祀鬼和天地神灵，祭祀苍天 。
English: The discussion of Wang Xi, the dean of the university, said: According to the records of the "Weekly Ritual," the great patriarch Sasuke protected the country, worshiped the ghosts and gods of heaven and earth with the auspicious ritual, and sacrificed to the heavens.

古文：则今太常是也。
现代文：也就是指今天的太常。
English: That is to say, today's too often.

古文：以郊天，太常亚献。
现代文：在郊祀祭天时，太常第二次献酒告祭。
English: At the time of the suburb ritual, it is customary to make a second offering of wine.

古文：又《周礼》外宗云： 王后不与，则赞宗伯。 
现代文：又《周礼》的外宗条下说： 当王后不参与祭祀时，就佐助宗伯。
English: In addition, the outer article of the "Weekly Ritual" says: When the queen does not participate in the ritual, Sasuke becomes the patriarch.

古文：郑玄云： 后不与祭，宗伯摄其事。 
现代文：郑玄说： 王后不参与祭祀，宗伯替代王后行事。
English: Zheng Xuan said: The queen does not participate in the ritual, and the patriarch acts in place of the queen.

古文：又说云： 君执圭瓚稞尸，大宗伯执璋瓚亚献。 
现代文：又说： 君主拿着玉制的圭瓒盛酒并把酒洒向尸主，大宗伯拿着玉制璋瓒盛着酒第二次献酒告祭。
English: He also said: The monarch took the jade-shaped gong and poured the wine to the corpse, and the great-great-grandfather took the jade-shaped gong and poured the wine for the second time.

古文：中代以来，后不庙祭，则应依礼大宗伯摄亚献也。
现代文：从中世以来，王后不参加宗庙祭祀，就应该按照礼制由大宗伯代行第二次献酒告祭。
English: Since the Middle Ages, if the queen does not participate in the ancestral temple ritual, the great-great-great-great-grandfather should perform the second offering of wine in accordance with the ritual system.

古文：而今以太尉亚献。
现代文：然而现在由太尉第二次献酒告祭。
English: Now, however, it was the captain's turn for a second toast.

古文：郑注《礼·月令》云： 三王有司马，无太尉。
现代文：郑玄注《礼记。月令》说： 夏、商、周三代有司马，没有太尉。
English: Zheng Xuan's annotation of "Li Ji. Yue Ling" said: Xia, Shang, and the third generation have Sima, but there is no captain.

古文：太尉，秦官也。 
现代文：太尉，是秦朝设置的官。
English: Second lieutenant is an official post set up by the Qin Dynasty.

古文：盖世代弥久，宗庙崇敬，摄后事重，故以上公亚献。 
现代文：因为世代承传很久远，崇敬宗庙祭祀，替代王后祭祀的事情重要，所以由上公第二次献酒致祭。 
English: Because it has been passed down from generation to generation for a long time, it is important to venerate the ancestral temple sacrifice and replace the queen's sacrifice, so the second offering of wine to the sacrifice was made by the upper prince.

古文：又议： 履时之思，情深于霜露；室户之感，有怀于容声。
现代文：又议论说： 顺时而生的思念，情怀比霜露还要深厚；宗庙之内祭祀时，肃敬的感情，在举止行动发出的声音中表现出来。
English: He also said, "Thoughts born in accordance with the times are deeper than the frost and dew; when performing religious rites in the ancestral temple, the feelings of reverence are expressed in the sounds emitted by the actions.

古文：不知神之所在，求之不以一处。
现代文：不知道神在什么地方，便不能在一个方位上去求神。
English: If you don't know where God is, you can't go to Him in one direction.

古文：郑注《仪礼》有司云，天子诸侯祭于祊而绎。
现代文：郑玄注《仪礼》的有司条裹说，天子诸侯在宗庙门内祭祀又绎祭。绎。
English: Zheng Xuan's commentary on the "Rite" says that the sons of heaven and lords in the gate of the ancestral temple worship and interpret the festival.

古文：绎又祭也。
现代文：是指第二日再祭。
English: It refers to the second day of the festival.

古文：今庙祠阙送神之稞，将移祭于祊绎，明在于留神，未得而杀。
现代文：现在的宗庙祭祀缺少了送神时洒酒于地的仪式，将改在枋绎祭，明在于留神，不得而省。
English: The ceremony of sprinkling wine on the ground when sending a god is missing from the current ancestral temple rituals, and will be changed to the purification ceremony. It is clear that it is important to pay attention.

古文：礼郊庙祭殊，故灌送有异。 
现代文：礼制裹郊祀与宗庙祭祀的仪制不同。
English: The etiquette of the Wrapped Suburban Ritual is different from that of the ancestral temple ritual.

古文：太常丞硃膺之议： 案《周礼》，大宗伯使掌典礼，以事神为上，职总祭祀，而昊天为首。
现代文：因此送神时洒酒于地的仪制有差别。 太常丞朱庐之议论说： 查考《周礼》的记载，大宗伯执掌典礼，以敬奉神灵为上，职务是总管祭祀，而以祭苍天为首要。
English: Therefore, there is a difference in the ceremonial system of sprinkling wine on the ground when sending a deity. Too often, Zhu Xi's discussion said: Check the records of "Weekly Rituals," the great patriarch presided over the ceremony, with respect for the gods as the top, the position is the head of the sacrificial rites, and the sacrifice to the heavens as the first priority.

古文：今太常即宗伯也。
现代文：现在的太常就是《周礼》裹的宗伯。
English: Nowadays, it is all too common to see Zou Bo wrapped in "Zhou Li."

古文：又寻袁山松《汉·百官志》云： 郊祀之事，太尉掌亚献，光禄掌三献。
现代文：又查考袁山松的《后汉书。百官志》裹说： 郊祭的礼仪，是由太尉掌管第二次献酒告祭，光禄掌管第三次献酒告祭。
English: In addition, Yuan Shansong's "Post-Han Shu. The History of the Hundred Officials" says: The etiquette of the suburb festival is that the captain presides over the second wine offering and the third wine offering and the third sacrifice.

古文：太常每祭祀，先奏其礼仪及行事，掌赞天子。 
现代文：太常每当祭祀的时候，先上奏祭祀的礼仪及行事，掌管赞助天子祭祀。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, it is customary to first play the liturgy and actions of the service, and then preside over the Sponsorship of the Immaculate Conception.

古文：无掌献事。
现代文：没有掌管献酒的事。
English: He had no control over the pouring of wine.

古文：如仪志，汉亚献之事，专由上司，不由秩宗贵官也。
现代文：依照《百官志》的记载，汉朝掌管第二次献酒的事，专由三公担任，不是由主管宗庙祭祀的秩宗贵官来掌管。
English: According to the records of the "Hundreds of Officials," the Han Dynasty was in charge of the second offering of wine, which was exclusively handled by the three princes, not by the Chichibu dignitary in charge of the ancestral temple ritual.

古文：今宗庙太尉亚献，光禄三献，则汉仪也。
现代文：现在宗庙祭祀由太尉第二次献酒，光禄第三次献酒，即为汉朝的仪制。
English: At present, the ritual of the ancestral temple consists of the second offering of wine by the captain and the third offering of wine by Guanglu, which is the ritual system of the Han Dynasty.

古文：又贺循制太尉由东南道升坛，明此官必预郊祭。
现代文：又贺循规定太尉由东南方登上坛台，表明这太尉官一定是参与郊祭。
English: He also stipulated that the captain should ascend the altar from the southeast, indicating that the captain must participate in the suburb festival.

古文：古礼虽由宗伯，然世有因革，上司亚献，汉仪所行。
现代文：古礼虽然是由宗伯掌管第二次献酒，然而历代有沿袭也有变革，由三公掌管第二次献酒，是汉朝所实行的仪制。
English: Although the ancient rite was that the second offering of wine was presided over by the patriarch, there have been changes over the ages. The second offering of wine was presided over by the three patriarchs, which was the ceremony implemented in the Han Dynasty.

古文：愚谓郊祀礼重，宜同宗庙。
现代文：我认为郊祀的典礼重大，应该与宗庙的祭祀相同。
English: I think that the ceremony of the suburb worship is important and should be the same as that of the ancestral temple.

古文：且太常既掌赞天子，事不容兼。
现代文：况且太常既已掌管赞助天子祭祀，他就不可兼管第二次献酒的事。
English: Moreover, since he was already in charge of sponsoring the Tenshi ritual, he could not also be in charge of the second offering of wine.

古文：又寻灌事，《礼记》曰： 祭求诸阴阳之义也。殷人先求诸阳。  乐三阕然后迎牲。 
现代文：又查考洒酒于地的仪式，《礼记》裹说： 祭祀是讲求阴祀和阳祀的问题殷产时期是先讲求南郊及宗庙祭祀的阳祭 ， 奏完三首乐曲之后迎牲 。
English: The ritual of sprinkling wine on the ground was also examined, and "Riki" said: The sacrificial rite is a matter of asking for yin and yang rites. During the fertile period, the yang festival of the southern suburbs and the ancestral temple was first discussed, and after the three pieces of music were played, the sacrifice was accepted.

古文：则殷人后灌也。 周人先求诸阴 ， 灌用鬯，达于渊泉。既灌，然后迎牲。 
现代文：那么商朝是把洒酒于地的仪式放在后面。 周朝先讲求祭北郊及宗庙的阴祀 ， 洒酒于地所用的是香酒。酒深入到土壤裹。酒洒之后迎牲 。
English: So the Shang Dynasty put the ceremony of sprinkling wine on the ground at the back. The Zhou Dynasty first talked about the worship of the north suburb and the ancestral temple, and the wine used for sprinkling wine on the ground was fragrant wine. The wine went deep into the soil. After the wine was sprinkled, it was sacrificed.

古文：则周人先灌也。
现代文：那么周朝是把洒酒的仪式安排在前面。
English: So the Zhou Dynasty arranged the ceremony of sprinkling wine in front.

古文：此谓庙祭，非谓郊祠。
现代文：这裹说的是宗庙祭祀，不是说郊祀。
English: This refers to the ancestral temple worship, not the suburban worship.

古文：案《周礼》天官： 凡祭祀赞王祼将之事。 
现代文：查考《周礼。天官》裹说： 凡是祭祀时赞助君王举行裸礼。
English: An examination of "Zhou Li. Tian Guan" shows that: Whenever there is a ritual, the king is sponsored to hold a nude ceremony.

古文：郑注云： 祼者，灌也。
现代文：郑玄注说： 裸，是洒酒灌地。
English: Zheng Xuan said: Nakedness is like pouring wine on the floor.

古文：唯人道宗庙有灌，天地大神至尊不灌。 
现代文：衹有关涉人事的宗庙祭祀才有洒酒灌地的仪式。祭天神地神时君王不举行洒酒灌地的仪式。 
English: Only the ritual of sprinkling the ground with wine is related to the rituals of the ancestral temple that involve personnel matters. The king does not hold the ceremony of sprinkling the ground with wine when the gods of heaven and earth are celebrated.

古文：而郊未始有灌，于礼未详。
现代文：而郊祀不曾有洒酒灌地的仪式，这在礼制裹无法考知。
English: However, suburban shrines did not have a ceremony of pouring wine on the ground, which cannot be ascertained from the etiquette.

古文：渊儒注义，炳然明审。
现代文：学识广博的儒者所注释的大义，昭然明察。
English: The great righteousness expounded by the learned Confucians is clearly evident.

古文：谓今之有灌，相承为失，则宜无灌。 
现代文：认为今天有洒酒灌地的仪式，是长期相承传所造成的失误，那么原本就应该是没有洒酒灌地的仪式。 
English: They think that today's ceremony of pouring wine on the ground is a mistake caused by long-term inheritance, so originally there should have been no ceremony of pouring wine on the ground.

古文：通关八座丞郎博士，并同膺之议。
现代文：通报给朝廷重臣及丞、郎、博士等，他们都同意朱膺之的议论。
English: It was reported to the imperial court's senior vassals, as well as chō, ro, hakase, etc. They all agreed with Zhu Xi's argument.

古文：尚书令建平王宏重参议，谓膺之议为允。
现代文：尚书令建平王刘宏重新参酌审议，认为朱膺之的议论允当。
English: Shang Shu ordered the king of Jianping, Liu Hong, to re-participate in the deliberation, believing that Zhu Xi's discussion was appropriate.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏令表示同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大明二年正月丙午朔，有司奏： 今月六日南郊，舆驾亲奉。
现代文：太明二年正月丙午曰初一，主事官员上奏说： 本月初六南郊祭祀，皇上要亲自奉祭。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the first month of the second year of Taiming, the leading official reported: At the beginning of this month, there will be a sacrifice in the southern suburbs, and the emperor will personally offer the sacrifice.

古文：至时或雨。
现代文：到时候可能会下雨。
English: It might rain then.

古文：魏世值雨，高堂隆谓应更用后辛。
现代文：曹魏时期郊祭曾遇到下雨，高堂建认为应改期于当月下旬的辛曰祭祀。
English: During the Cao Wei period, the suburb festival once encountered rain, and Gaodong Jian thought that the festival should be rescheduled to the end of the month.

古文：晋时既出遇雨，顾和亦云宜更告。
现代文：晋朝时皇帝已经出动参加郊祀，适逢下雨，顾和也说应该另行选择吉曰举行祭祀。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, the emperor had already set out to participate in the suburb worship. When it rained, Gu He also said that it was necessary to choose another auspicious day to hold the worship.

古文：徐禅云： 晋武之世，或用丙，或用己，或用庚。 
现代文：徐挥说： 晋武帝时，祭祀有时用丙日，有时用己曰，有时用庚日。 
English: Xu Wei said: During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, sacrifices were sometimes held on the C day, sometimes on the Zi day, and sometimes on the G day.

古文：使礼官议正并详。
现代文：这些让礼官们议论裁正并上报。
English: This caused the etiquette officials to discuss the issue and report it.

古文：若得迁日，应更告庙与不？ 
现代文：如果可以改变郊祀日期，是不是也应该改变宗庙祭祀的日期呢? 
English: If it is possible to change the date of suburban worship, should the date of ancestral temple worship also be changed?

古文：博士王燮之议称： 遇雨迁郊，则先代成议。
现代文：博士王燮之议论说： 遇到下雨而改变郊祀日期，是前代已有的定论。
English: Dr. Wang Xizhi's argument said: In the event of rain, changing the date of suburban worship is a foregone conclusion.

古文：《礼》传所记，辛日有征。
现代文：《礼》书的传注所记述的，在辛曰举行郊祀是有根据的。
English: According to the transcript of the "Rite" book, there is a basis for holding a suburban worship in Xinzhai.

古文：《郊特牲》曰： 郊之用辛也，周之始郊日以至。 
现代文：《礼记郊特牲》裹说： 郊祀用辛曰，周朝开始举行郊祀是在冬至日。 
English: "Reki Suburban Special Sacrifice" says: Suburban worship is hard. Suburban worship began to be held in the Zhou Dynasty on the winter solstice.

古文：郑玄注曰： 三王之郊，一用夏正。
现代文：郑玄注说： 夏、商、周三代的郊祀，一概用夏历正月。
English: Zheng Xuan said: Summer, Shang and the third generation of suburban worship, all use the lunar new year.

古文：用辛者，取其斋戒自新也。 又《月令》曰： 乃择元日，祈谷于上帝。 
现代文：用辛曰的原因，是取其斋戒自新的意思，又《礼记月令》裹说： 于是选择元日，祭祀苍天上帝祈求五谷丰熟。 
English: The reason for the use of "Xin" is to take its meaning of fasting and self-renewal, and "Rites of the Month" says: So choose the first day of the year, worship the God of Heaven and pray for rich harvest.

古文：注曰： 元日，谓上辛。
现代文：注解说： 元曰是指上旬的辛曰。
English: The commentary says: "元曰" refers to the first half of "辛曰."

古文：郊祭天也。 
现代文：举行郊祭祭天。 
English: The Suburban Festival will be held.

古文：又《春秋》载郊有二，成十七年九月辛丑，郊。
现代文：又《春秋》裹记载郊祀的有两次，成公十七年九月辛丑，郊祀。
English: In addition, "Spring and Autumn" recorded the suburb worship twice, and in September of the seventeenth year of Chenggong, the suburb worship.

古文：《公羊》曰： 曷用郊？用正月上辛。 
现代文：《公羊传》说： 何时举行郊祀用正月上旬的辛曰举行郊祀。 
English: "The Story of the Ram" says: When to hold a suburb worship, it is best to hold a suburb worship in the first half of the new year.

古文：哀元年四月辛巳，郊。
现代文：哀公元年四月辛巳曰，郊祀。
English: In April of the year of mourning, the suburb worship came to an end.

古文：《谷梁》曰： 自正月至于三月，郊之时也。
现代文：《谷梁传》说： 从正月直至三月，是举行郊祀的时期。
English: "The Tale of Gu Liang" says: From the first month of the year to March is the period for holding suburban religious services.

古文：以十二月下辛卜正月上辛，如不从，以正月下辛卜二月上辛；如不从，以二月下辛卜三月上辛。 以斯明之，则郊祭之礼，未有不用辛日者也。
现代文：以十二月下旬的辛曰占卜而定正月上旬辛曰郊祀。如果小依从，于正月下旬辛曰占卜改为二月上旬辛日郊祀如果不依从，就于二月下旬辛曰占卜而定三月上旬辛曰郊祀，这已表明，郊祀的礼仪，都是在辛曰举行。
English: According to the late December Shin-sai divination, the early January Shin-sai sub-shrine is held. If there is little compliance, the late January Shin-sai divination is changed to the early February Shin-sai sub-shrine. If there is no compliance, the late February Shin-sai divination is used to determine the early March Shin-sai sub-shrine. This has shown that the etiquette of the sub-shrine is held on Shin-sai.

古文：晋氏或丙、或己、或庚，并有别议。
现代文：晋代有时用丙曰，有时用己，有时用庚，都是因为另有议论。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, C was sometimes used, sometimes Zi was used, and sometimes Geng was used, all because there were other arguments.

古文：武帝以十二月丙寅南郊受禅，斯则不得用辛也。
现代文：逮壹于十二月丙寅曰在南郊祭天接受禅让，造就是祭祀不能用卒的例子。
English: The arrest of Hsin Yin in December, who said that he accepted Zen Buddhism at the Southern Suburbs Festival, is an example of how sacrifices should not be made.

古文：又泰始二年十一月己卯，始并圆丘方泽二至之祀合于二郊。
现代文：又泰始二年十一月己卯曰，开始把圆丘方泽的祭祀、冬至夏至曰的祭祀与南北郊的祭祀合并举行。
English: In addition, in November of the second year of the Taisho era, the rituals of the round hill of Fangze and the rituals of the winter solstice and the summer solstice were combined with the rituals of the northern and southern suburbs.

古文：三年十一月庚寅冬至祠天，郊于圆丘。
现代文：泰始三年十一月庚寅曰冬至曰祭天，在圆斤举行郊祭。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Tai, in November, the winter solstice, a suburb festival was held in Yongjin.

古文：是犹用圆丘之礼，非专祈谷之祭，故又不得用辛也。
现代文：这是仍然用圆丘祭祀的礼仪，不是专门为祈求五谷丰熟的祭祀，因此又不能用辛曰祭祀。
English: This is a ritual that still uses the round mound, and is not specifically a ritual to pray for a plentiful harvest, so it cannot be called a spice ritual.

古文：今之郊飨，既行夏时，虽得迁却，谓宜犹必用辛也。
现代文：现在的郊祭享祀，既已按夏历实行，虽然祭祀的日期可以改变推迟，但认为仍然是定在辛曰举行。
English: The current suburb festival has already been implemented according to the summer calendar, and although the date of the festival can be changed or postponed, it is still considered to be held in Xin.

古文：徐禅所据，或为未宜。又案《郊特牲》曰： 受命于祖庙，作龟于祢宫。 郑玄注曰： 受命，谓告退而卜也。 则告义在郊，非为告日。
现代文：徐撵所根据的，或许有不当的地方又根据《礼记郊特牲》的记载说： 在祖庙受命，在父庙裹灼龟甲而占卜，艳注释说： 受命，是指先祭告祖庙，然后退下来进行占，那么求的本义是卜郊祭这件事，而不是卜求郊祀的日子。
English: According to the records of the "Rites and Rituals of the Suburbs," the possibly inappropriate place based on Xu Xi said: "Instructed in the ancestral temple, divination in the father temple while wrapped in a turtle shell, Yan annotated: "Instructed" refers to the first sacrifice to the ancestral temple, and then retreating to carry out divination, so the real meaning of the request is the matter of the Suburban Festival, not the day of the Suburban Festival.

古文：今日虽有迁，而郊祀不异，愚谓不宜重告。 
现代文：现在祭祀的日期虽然有所改变，而郊祀的本义不变，我认为不应该再次求卜。 
English: Now, although the date of the ritual has changed, and the original meaning of the suburban ritual remains unchanged, I don't think we should ask again.

古文：曹郎硃膺之议： 案先儒论郊，其议不一。
现代文：曹郎朱膺之议论说： 考察前代儒者所论说的郊祀，他们的议论各有不同。
English: Cao Lang Zhu Xi's discussion said: Examining the suburban worship discussed by the previous generation of Confucians, their discussions are different.

古文：《周礼》有冬至日圆丘之祭。
现代文：《周礼》里有冬至日圆丘的祭祀。
English: In the "Weekly Rituals," there is a ritual for the winter solstice at Nichiyaku.

古文：《月令》孟春有祈谷于上帝。郑氏说，圆丘祀昊天上帝，以帝喾配，所谓禘也。
现代文：《礼记月令》裹有为祈求五谷丰熟而祭祀苍天上帝郑玄说，在圆丘祭祀苍天上帝，以帝营配祭，这是所说的筛祭。
English: "The Book of Rites and Decrees of the Month" contains the story of Zheng Xuan, who offered sacrifices to the God of Heaven to pray for a plentiful harvest. He said that he offered sacrifices to the God of Heaven in a round mound, and that he accompanied the sacrifice with an imperial camp. This is the so-called sieve festival.

古文：祈谷祀五精之帝，以后稷配，所谓郊也。二祭异时，其神不同。
现代文：为祈求五谷丰熟祭祀五精天帝，以后稷配祭，这是所说的郊祀，这两种祭祀举行的时间不同，它们所祭的神也不相同。
English: In order to pray for the richness of the grain, the Five-Spirit-Gods were sacrificed, later followed by the Feast of the Five-Spirit-Gods, which is the so-called suburban ritual. These two kinds of sacrifices were held at different times, and the deities they sacrificed were also different.

古文：诸儒云，圆丘之祭，以后稷配。
现代文：儒士们说，在圆丘举行的祭祀，以后稷配祭。
English: The Confucianists said that the sacrificial rites held in the round mound would be followed by the matching festival.

古文：取其所在，名之曰郊。
现代文：取圆丘所在的地点在郊，称之为郊祭。
English: The place where the mound is located is in the suburbs, and it is called the Suburban Festival.

古文：以形体言之，谓之圆丘。
现代文：以圆丘的形体而言，称之为圆丘的祭祀。
English: In terms of the shape of the round mound, it is called the round mound ritual.

古文：名虽有二，其实一祭。
现代文：名称虽然有两个，其实就是一种祭祀。
English: Although it has two names, it is actually a kind of worship.

古文：晋武舍郑而从诸儒，是以郊用冬至日。
现代文：晋武帝舍弃郑玄的说法而依从儒士们的说法，因此郊祀用冬至曰。
English: Emperor Jinwu abandoned the theory of Zheng Xuan and followed the theory of the Confucians, so the winter solstice was used for suburban worship.

古文：既以至日，理无常辛。
现代文：既然用了冬至曰，按理就不可能总是在辛曰。
English: Since the winter solstice has been used, it is logically impossible to always use the winter solstice.

古文：然则晋代中原不用辛日郊，如徐禅议也。
现代文：那么晋代在中原地区郊祀不用卒曰，就像徐惮所议论的那样。
English: Then it is not necessary to say that the Jin Dynasty was worshipped in the suburbs of the Central Plains, as Xu Shuang argued.

古文：江左以来，皆用正月，当以传云三王之郊，各以其正，晋不改正朔，行夏之时，故因以首岁，不以冬日，皆用上辛，近代成典也。
现代文：从束晋以来，都用正月，当是《春秋》传裹所说的夏、商、周的郊祀，全都用正月，晋代不改正朔，实行夏历，因此安排在年初，不用冬曰，全都用上旬的辛曰，这是近代的成规。
English: Since Succin, the New Year's Day has been used, and when it is the suburban worship of summer, business, and week, which is said to be "Spring and Autumn" in Succin, they all use the New Year's Day, and the Jin Dynasty does not correct the New Year's Day, but implements the summer calendar. Therefore, it is arranged at the beginning of the year, without the winter day, they all use the early Xin day, which is a modern rule.

古文：夫祭之礼， 过时不举 。今在孟春，郊时未过，值雨迁日，于礼无违。
现代文：祭祀的礼仪， 过了时限就不举行，现在是正月，郊祀的时限还没有过，遇上下雨改变祭祀日期，对礼制没有违背。
English: As for the ritual of sacrifice, it will not be held after the time limit has passed. It is the first month of the year, and the time limit for suburban worship has not yet passed. In the event of rain, the date of the sacrifice will be changed. There is no violation of the ritual system.

古文：既已告日，而以事不从，禋祀重敬，谓宜更告。
现代文：既已卜求了祭祀的日子，然而因事不能顺遂，里祀苍天是很敬重的事，应该再卜求祭祀的日期。
English: If you have already prayed for the day of the sacrifice, but things do not go well, it is very respectful to pray for the sky. You should pray again for the date of the sacrifice.

古文：高堂隆云： 九日南郊，十日北郊。 是为北郊可不以辛也。 
现代文：高堂隆说： 九日在南郊祭祀，十曰在北郊祭祀、 造就是说北郊祭祀可以不在辛曰举行。 
English: Kodo Takashi said, "On the 9th day, there will be a sacrifice in the southern suburb, and on the 10th day, there will be a sacrifice in the northern suburb. Therefore, the sacrifice in the northern suburb can be held on a day other than Shin."

古文：尚书何偃议： 郑玄注《礼记》，引《易》说三王之郊，一用夏正。
现代文：尚书何偃议论说： 郑玄注《礼记》，引用《易经》说夏、商、周三朝的郊祀，一概都用夏历。
English: Shangshu He Rong said: Zheng Xuan annotated "Li Ji" and quoted "Yi Jing" to say that summer, business, and Wednesday morning's suburban worship all use the summer calendar.

古文：《周礼》，凡国大事，多用正岁。
现代文：《周礼》记载，凡是国家的大事，多用正月。
English: "Zhou Li" records that the New Year is mostly used for important national events.

古文：《左传》又启蛰而郊。
现代文：《左传》又说在惊垫举行郊祀。
English: Zuo Zhuan also said that the suburban worship was held in the shock pad.

古文：则郑之此说，诚有据矣。
现代文：那么郑玄的这种论说，实在是有根据的。
English: Then Zheng Xuan's argument is indeed well-founded.

古文：众家异议，或云三王各用其正郊天，此盖曲学之辩，于礼无取。
现代文：各家的议论不同，有的说夏、商、周各朝都用它们的正月郊祭苍天，这是浅薄之士的辩说，对于礼制来说不可取。
English: Each family's argument is different. Some say that Xia, Shang and Zhou all used their New Year's Eve suburb festival Cangtian. This is the argument of shallow people, and it is not desirable for the ritual system.

古文：固知《谷梁》三春皆可郊之月，真所谓肤浅也。
现代文：本来已知道《谷梁传》裹说春季三个月都是可以举行郊祀的月份，真可以说是肤浅了。
English: Originally, I already knew that "Guliangzhuan" said that the three months of spring are the months when suburban worship can be held, which can be said to be superficial.

古文：然用辛之说，莫不必同。晋郊庚己，参差未见前征。
现代文：然而用辛曰祭祀的说法，全都相同晋朝用庚曰己曰郊祀，说得纷纷扬扬，但就是没有见到前代施行的证据。
English: However, the use of "sin" for "sacrifice" is the same as the Jin dynasty's use of "g" for "self" for "suburban worship," and they are said one after another, but there is no evidence of the previous generation's practice.

古文：愚谓宜从晋迁郊依礼用辛。
现代文：我认为应该信从晋代推迟郊祀，仍按礼制是用辛曰。
English: In my opinion, it should be believed that the suburb worship should be postponed from the Jin Dynasty, and it should still be done according to the etiquette.

古文：燮之所受命作龟，知告不在日，学之密也。 右丞徐爰议以为： 郊祀用辛，有碍迁日，礼官祠曹，考详已备。
现代文：王燮之以为在祖庙受命在父庙灼龟占卜，他知道卜求的本义，不在卜求郊祭的日子，他的学识缜密 右丞徐爰的议论认为： 郊祀用辛曰，对改变郊祀期有妨碍，礼官和主管祭祀的官员，已作了很周备的考察。
English: Wang Xizhi thought that he was ordered to do divination in the ancestral temple by burning a turtle in the father's temple. He knew the true meaning of divination, not in the days of the suburban festival of divination. His scholarly knowledge was meticulous. Yu Cheng Xu's discussion held that: the suburban ritual is difficult to use, there are obstacles to changing the suburban ritual period, and the etiquette official and the official in charge of the ritual have made a very thorough investigation.

古文：何偃据礼，不应重告，愚情所同。寻告郊克辰，于今宜改，告事而已。
现代文：何偃根据礼制，认为不应该再行卜求，我的看法与他相同考察卜求郊祭而限定时曰，到了今天这种办法应该改变，卜求应衹是卜郊祭这件事而已。
English: According to the etiquette, he thought that it was no longer appropriate to perform the supplication, and my opinion was the same as his when I examined the suburban festival and said that today this method should be changed, and that the supplication should be the suburban festival.

古文：次辛十日，居然展斋，养牲在涤，无缘三月。
现代文：辛日前十曰，已安然地为郊祀而斋戒沐浴，祭祀用的牲畜，已养在涤宫裹，没理由超过三月。
English: On the tenth day before Xin, they had already safely fasted and bathed for the suburb worship, and the livestock used for the sacrifice had been raised in polyester wraps. There was no reason to exceed three months.

古文：谓毛血告泬之后，虽有事碍，便应有司行事，不容迁郊。 
现代文：他认为祭祀的牺牲已完全准备之后，虽然有事妨碍祭祀，也应该让主事官昌举行祭祀，不容许改变郊祭的日期。 
English: He thought that after the sacrifice of the ritual had been fully prepared, although there was something hindering the ritual, it should also be allowed to hold the ritual by the responsible official, and it was not allowed to change the date of the suburban festival.

古文：众议不同。
现代文：众人的议论各不相同。
English: Opinions vary widely.

古文：参议： 宜依《经》，遇雨迁用后辛，不重告。
现代文：参酌审议后认为： 应该依据《经》书的记载，遇到下雨就改用下旬的辛曰祭祀，不需要再次去卜求。
English: After deliberation, it was considered that: According to the records of the "Ching" book, in the event of rain, it should be changed to the late Shinshaya sacrifice, and there is no need to go to pray again.

古文：若杀牲荐血之后值雨，则有司行事。 
现代文：如牲畜已杀，准备陈祭之后正遇着下雨，就可让主事官员去举行祭祀。 
English: If the livestock has been killed and it is raining after the preparation of the old festival, the responsible official may be allowed to hold the sacrifice.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下韶令表示同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：明帝泰始二年十一月辛酉，诏曰： 朕载新宝命，仍离多难，戎车遄驾，经略务殷，禋告虽备，弗获亲礼。
现代文：明帝泰始二年十一月辛酉曰，皇帝下诏令说： 我接受天命时，连续遭遇了很多艰难，战车急速地出动，要谋划的事务很多，里祭苍天的事虽然准备好了，可我没能亲自去举行祭礼。
English: In November of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi of the Ming Dynasty, Xin Xin said, the emperor issued a decree saying: When I accepted the fate of heaven, I encountered many difficulties in succession, the chariots were rapidly dispatched, there were many matters to be planned, and although the heavenly things were ready, I was not able to hold the festival in person.

古文：今九服既康，百祀咸秩，宜聿遵前典，郊谒上帝。 
现代文：现在全国已经安定，各种祭祀都巳举行，应该遵循以前的典制，举行郊祀拜谒上帝。 
English: Now that the whole country has been stabilized and all kinds of religious services have been held, we should follow the previous ceremony system and hold suburban religious services to worship God.

古文：有司奏检，未有先准。
现代文：主事官员查考之后上奏说，这事没有先例。
English: After an investigation, the leading official reported that there was no precedent for this.

古文：黄门侍郎徐爰议： 虞称肆类，殷述昭告。
现代文：黄门侍郎徐爰议论说： 卢舜的时候称为类祭上帝，殷商的时候称为昭告上帝。
English: Huangmen waiter Xu Xi said: "In Lu Xi's time, it was known as a kind of sacrifice to God, and in Yin Shang's time, it was known as a proclamation to God.

古文：盖以创世成功，德盛业远，开统肇基，必享上帝。
现代文：都是因为创业成功，德操和业绩隆盛而弘远，开创国统奠定皇家基业，一定要享祭上帝。
English: It is all because of the success of entrepreneurship, the prosperity and prosperity of morality and performance, the founding of the national unification and the laying of the royal foundation, we must enjoy the sacrifice of God.

古文：汉、魏以来，聿遵斯典。
现代文：从汉朝、曹魏以来，都遵循这一典制。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and Cao Wei, this system has been followed.

古文：高祖武皇帝克伐伪楚，晋安帝尚在江陵，即于京师告义功于郊兆。
现代文：高祖武皇帝征伐伪楚，置玄童还在堰，便在京师建郊祀坛台，祭上帝告成功。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu's conquest of the pseudo-Ch'u, with Ge Xuan Tong still at the weir, built a suburb worship altar in Beijing, and the god was successfully sacrificed.

古文：伏惟泰始应符，神武英断，王赫出讨，戎戒淹时，虽司奉弗亏，亲谒尚阙。
现代文：我以为泰始年间应了天帝的符瑞，皇帝神武明断，王者耀武出征，战事经过了一段时间，虽然奉祀神灵做得周到，但皇上还没有亲自祭祀拜谒天帝。
English: I thought that in the early years of the Taizhi era, the heavenly emperor's fury had been answered, the emperor's shenwu was decisive, and the king went out to fight, and the war had gone on for some time. Although the worship of the gods was well done, the emperor had not personally sacrificed to worship the heavenly emperor.

古文：谨寻晋武郊以二月，晋元禋以三月。
现代文：我认真查考晋武帝时郊祀是在二月，晋元帝时里祀祭天是在三月。
English: I carefully checked that the suburb worship at the time of Emperor Jinwu was in February, and the worship at the time of Emperor Jinyuan was in March.

古文：有非常之庆，必有非常之典，不得拘以常祀，限以正月上辛。
现代文：有特殊的庆祝，一定有特别的典礼，不可拘泥于平常的祭祀，把祭祀限定在正月上旬辛日举行。
English: If there is a special celebration, there must be a special ceremony. Don't stick to the usual rituals. Limit the rituals to the first half of the first month of the year.

古文：愚谓宜下史官，考择十一月嘉吉，车驾亲郊，奉谒昊天上帝，高祖武皇帝配飨。
现代文：我认为造事应交付史宫，让他们认真选择十一月的吉日，皇帝亲自举行郊祭，祭祀拜谒苍天上帝，以高祖武皇帝配祭。
English: I think that the construction work should be handed over to the Palace of History, let them carefully choose the auspicious day in November, the emperor himself will hold a suburb festival, sacrifice to worship the God of Heaven, and match the sacrifice with Emperor Gao Zuwu.

古文：其余祔食，不关今祭。 
现代文：其余配亨的，不列入本次的祭祀。 
English: The rest of the matchmakers are not included in this year's ritual.

古文：尚书令建安王休仁等同爰议。
现代文：尚书令建安王刘休仁等赞司叁羞的议论。
English: Shang Shu ordered Jianan King Liu Xuren and others to praise the shyness of the discussion.

古文：参议为允，诏可。
现代文：经过参酌审议都认为允当。
English: After consideration, it was deemed appropriate.

古文：泰始六年正月乙亥，诏曰： 古礼王者每岁郊享，爰及明堂。
现代文：皇帝下诏令表示同意。泰始六年正月乙亥曰，皇帝下诏令说： 按照古代的礼制，帝王每年都举行郊祀享祭，以及举行明堂的祭祀。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the Emperor issued a decree saying, "In accordance with the ancient etiquette, the Emperor holds a suburb festival and a Myeongdong festival every year.

古文：自晋以来，间年一郊，明堂同日。
现代文：从晋朝以来，每隔一年举行一次郊祀，明堂的祭祀在同一天举行。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, a suburb ritual has been held every other year, and the Myeongdong ritual is held on the same day.

古文：质文详略，疏数有分。
现代文：因为质朴与华饰详略不同，稀疏和细密有区别。
English: Because the details of rustic and ornate are slightly different, there is a difference between sparse and fine.

古文：自今可间二年一郊，间岁一明堂。
现代文：从今以后每隔两年举行一次郊祀，每隔一年举行一次明堂的祭祀。
English: From now on, the suburb ritual will be held every two years, and the main hall ritual will be held every other year.

古文：外可详议。 
现代文：下面可作详细商议。 
English: This can be discussed in detail below.

古文：有司奏： 前兼曹郎虞愿议： 郊祭宗祀，俱主天神，而同日殷荐，于义为黩。
现代文：主事官员上奏说： 前兼曹郎虞愿议论说： 郊祀和明堂的宗庙祭祀，都是主祭天神，而在同一天繁复地献祭，按情理说是轻慢。
English: The leading official made a report, saying: The former concubine, Cao Lang Yu, was willing to discuss, saying: Both the suburb worship and the ancestral temple worship of the Ming Hall are the main festival of Tenjin, and the complex sacrifice on the same day is, according to reason, frivolous.

古文：明诏使圆丘报功，三载一享。
现代文：皇帝的诏令是让圆丘祭祀向天神报告成功，三年举行一次享祭。
English: The emperor's edict was to report the success of the round mound sacrifice to the gods, and to hold a festival once every three years.

古文：明堂配帝，间岁昭荐。
现代文：明堂配祭先帝，每隔一年献祭一次。
English: The Myeongdong holds a sacrificial offering for the former emperor once every other year.

古文：详辰酌衷，实允懋典。 
现代文：斟酌情况选定吉曰，实在切合祭祀盛典。 
English: According to the circumstances, the auspicious day is selected, which is really in line with the festival.

古文：缘谘参议并同。
现代文：通过咨询参酌审议一致同意虞愿的议论。
English: Through consultation, participation, deliberation, and unanimous agreement, the discussion of the will of the state was made.

古文：曹郎王延秀重议： 改革之宜，实如圣旨。
现代文：曹郎王延秀重加议论说： 改革的事宜，就像皇帝诏令所说的那样。
English: Cao Lang Wang Yanxiu reiterated his argument and said, "The matter of reform has begun, just as the Emperor's edict said.

古文：前虞愿议，盖是仰述而已，未显后例。
现代文：前时虞愿的议论，实在祇是述说皇帝的诏令而已，未曾显示后来的事例。
English: The previous discussion of Yu Xiang is really only a description of the emperor's edict, and does not show the later cases.

古文：谨寻自初郊间二载，明堂间一年，第二郊与第三明堂，还复同岁。
现代文：我认真查考，最初的郊祀是每隔两年举行一次，明堂祭祀每隔一年举行一次，第二次郊祀与第三次明堂祭祀，便回复到同一年举行。
English: I carefully checked. The first suburb ritual was held every two years, the Myeongdong ritual was held every other year, and the second suburb ritual and the third Myeongdong ritual were held in the same year.

古文：愿谓自始郊明堂以后，宜各间二年。
现代文：虞愿说从开始举行郊祀和明堂祭祀之后，应该各隔两年举行一次祭祀。
English: Yu said that from the beginning, after holding the suburb ritual and the Myeongdong ritual, a ritual should be held every two years.

古文：以斯相推，长得异岁。 通关八座，同延秀议。 
现代文：以此推论，那么郊祀和明堂祭祀总是在不同年岁举行，通报给朝廷重臣之后，他们都同意王延秀的议论。 
English: Based on this reasoning, then the suburb ritual and the Myeongdong ritual are always held at different times of the year, and after they were reported to the chief ministers of the imperial court, they all agreed with Wang Yanxiu's argument.

古文：后废帝元徽二年十月丁巳，有司奏郊祀明堂，还复同日，间年一修。
现代文：后废帝王巡二年十月丁巳曰，主事官员奏请把郊祀和明堂祭祀，回复到同一天举行，每隔一年举行一次。
English: After the abolition of the imperial inspection, in October of the second year of Ding Si, the responsible official requested that the suburb worship and the Myeongdong worship be held on the same day, and held every other year.

古文：汉文帝初祭地祇于渭阳，以高帝配；武帝立后土社祠于汾阴，亦以高帝配。
现代文：汉文帝时初次在遭坜祭祀地神，以昼担配祭，汉武壶时在噬祭祀后土社神，也以高祖配祭。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwen, the earth god was sacrificed for the first time in the sacrificial rite, with the noon offering. At the time of Emperor Hanwu, the earth god was sacrificed after the sacrificial rite, and the high ancestor was also sacrificed.

古文：汉氏以太祖兼配天地，则未以后配地也。
现代文：龃以太祖配祭天神和地神，那么就没有以已故先帝皇后配祭地神了。
English: If the ancestors had offered sacrifices to the gods of heaven and earth, then there would have been no need to offer sacrifices to the gods of the earth in the name of the deceased empress.

古文：王莽作相，引《周礼》享先妣为配北郊。
现代文：王莽出任丞相时，引据《周礼》的记载，享祭已故先帝皇后为北郊的配祭。
English: When Wang Mang served as chancellor, according to the "Weekly Rituals," the late empress dowager's festival was the matching festival for the northern suburbs.

古文：夏至祭后土，以高后配，自此始也。
现代文：夏至曰祭后土之神，以高祖吕后配祭就是从这时开始的。
English: The summer solstice is said to be the god of the soil after the festival, and it is from this time that the matching of the festival with Emperor Gaozu began.

古文：光武建武中，不立北郊，故后地之祇，常配食天坛，山川群望皆在营内，凡一千五百一十四神。
现代文：光武皇帝建武年间，不举行北郊的祭祀，因此已故皇后及土地之神，经常是在天坛祭祀时配享，山的一切望祭也都在祭坛的区域之内举行，共有一千五百一十四神。
English: During the reign of Emperor Guangwu Jianwu, the sacrifices in the northern suburbs were not held, so the deceased empress and the gods of the land were often distributed at the altar of heaven, and all the offerings to the mountain were also held in the area of the altar, with a total of one thousand five hundred and fourteen gods.

古文：中元年，建北郊，使司空冯鲂告高庙，以薄后代吕后配地。
现代文：建毖史五元年，立北郊祭祀，派遣司空冯鲂祭高担庙，以莲昼代替旦后配祭地神。
English: In the 5th year of Jianye history, the North Suburbs Festival was established, and the Sikuo Fengye Festival was sent to the Gaotan Temple, with the Lotus Day replacing the Dangou Festival.

古文：江左初，未立北坛，地祇众神，共在天郊也。
现代文：塞置初，没有设立北郊祭坛，各土地神衹，都在郊祭天帝时一起祭祀。
English: At the beginning of the construction, there was no northern suburb altar set up, and the local deities were all worshipped together at the Suburban Festival of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：晋成帝立二郊，天郊则六十二神，五帝之佐、日月五星、二十八宿、文昌、北斗、三台、司命、轩辕、后土、太一、天一、太微、钩陈、北极、雨师、雷电、司空、风伯、老人六十二神也。
现代文：晋成帝时设天地二郊的祭祀，南郊祭天有六卜神，即五帝之佐、日月五星、二十八宿、文昌、北斗、三台、司命、轩辕、后土、太一、天一、太微、钩陈、北极、雨师、雷、电、司空、风伯、老人等六十二神。
English: At the time of Emperor Jincheng, sacrifices were held in the two suburbs of heaven and earth. In the southern suburb, there were six deities, namely, the Five Emperors, the Sun, the Moon, the Five Stars, the Twenty-eight Mansions, Wenchang, the Big Dipper, Sandai, Simei, Xuanwu, Houchi, Taichi, Tianichi, Taimi, Huachen, the North Pole, the Rainmaker, Thunder, Electricity, the Sky, the Wind, the Old Man, and other sixty-two deities.

古文：地郊则四十四神，五岳、四望、四海、四渎、五湖、五帝之佐、沂山、岳山、白山、霍山、医无闾山、蒋山、松江、会稽山、钱唐江、先农凡四十四也。
现代文：北郊祭地有四十四神，即五岳、四望、四海、四渎、五湖、五帝之佐、沂山、岳山、白山、霍山、毙无间山、蒋山、松江、会稽山、钱唐江、先农等共四十四神。
English: There are forty-four deities in the North Suburbs Festival Grounds, namely, the five mountains, the four seas, the four seas, the four seas, the five lakes, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors, the five emperors,

古文：江南诸小山，盖江左所立，犹如汉西京关中小水，皆有祭秩也。
现代文：江南各小山之神，是柬晋所立，就好像汉朝时西京关中各小河，都有祭祀等级。
English: The gods of the small mountains in the south of the Yangtze River were established by the Khmer Jin Dynasty, just as the small rivers in Xijing Pass during the Han Dynasty had different levels of worship.

古文：二郊所秩，官有其注。
现代文：南北二郊所祭祀之神，官家都有记载。
English: There are records of officials and families in both the northern and southern suburbs worshipping the deity.

古文：宋武帝永初三年九月，司空羡之、尚书令亮等奏曰： 臣闻崇德明祀，百王之令典；宪章天人，自昔之所同。
现代文：宋武帝永初三年九月，司空徐羡之、尚书令傅亮等人上奏说： 我听说崇奖有功德的人及举行隆重的祭祀，是历代帝王善美的典制；效法天人，从古代至今都是一致的。
English: In September of the third year of Songwu Emperor Yongzheng's reign, Siku Xu Enzhi, Shang Shuling Fu Liang and others made a report saying: I have heard that honoring people of merit and holding grand sacrifices are the formalities of emperors of all ages; imitation of heavenly beings has been consistent from ancient times to the present.

古文：虽因革殊时，质文异世，所以本情笃教，其揆一也。
现代文：虽然在不同时期会有因循有变革，在不同的时代或重视质朴或提倡文饰，而其本意是在致力于教化，其道理都是一样的。
English: Although in different periods there will be changes, in different times or emphasis on simplicity or promotion of decoration, and its intention is to work on enlightenment, the reason is the same.

古文：伏惟高祖武皇帝允协灵祗，有命自天，弘日静之勤，立蒸民之极，帝迁明德，光宅八表，太和宣被，玄化遐通。陛下以圣哲嗣徽，道孚万国。
现代文：想到已故高祖武皇帝和协神灵，秉受天命，弘扬每都谋事安邦的勤奋精神，树立了民众所崇仰的最高品德，皇帝以美好的德操教导人民，领上广大直达八方边远地区，和顺之气涵养天下四方，圣德教化畅达远方：陛下以圣哲继承帝业，以道义感通四海。
English: Thinking of the late Emperor Gao Zuwu and the gods of harmony, adhering to the mandate of heaven, carrying forward the diligent spirit of seeking peace and prosperity everywhere, and establishing the highest moral values revered by the people, the emperor taught the people with a beautiful morality, leading the people to the remote areas in the eight directions, nurturing the world in the four directions with a harmonious spirit, and reaching far and wide with the teaching of virtue: His Majesty inherited the empire with the sages, and passed through the four seas with a sense of morality.

古文：祭礼久废，思光鸿烈，飨帝严亲，今实宜之。
现代文：祭祀的礼仪已废止了很久，想光大国家宏大的功业，享祭皇帝陛下已放的双亲，现在实在应该举行祭祀的礼仪。
English: The ritual of sacrifice has been abolished for a long time. If we want to glorify the great achievements of the country and enjoy the sacrifice of His Majesty the Emperor's parents, we really should hold the ritual of sacrifice now.

古文：高祖武皇帝宜配天郊；至于地祗之配，虽礼无明文，先代旧章，每所因循，魏、晋故典，足为前式。谓武敬皇后宜配北郊。
现代文：高祖武皇帝应该在南郊祭天帝时配享，至于北郊祭地神时的配祭，虽然礼书裹没有明文记载，但是前代旧的典章，常常被遵循施行，魏、晋两朝原有的典制，便可以作为前代留下的准则我们认为武敬皇后应该在北郊祭祀时配祭。
English: Emperor Gaozhuwu should share the sacrificial offerings during the Southern Suburbs Festival of the Heavenly Emperor, and as for the Northern Suburbs Festival of the Earthly God, although there is no explicit record in the ritual booklet, the previous generation's old regulations are often followed and implemented. The Wei and Jin dynasties' original regulations can be used as a guideline left behind by the previous generation. We believe that Empress Wu Jian should share the sacrificial offerings during the Northern Suburbs Festival.

古文：盖述怀以追孝，跻圣敬于无穷，对越两仪，允洽幽显者也。
现代文：为了表达追念先人孝顺先人的情怀，使崇高的敬意传之久远，以答谢及赞扬天地，以协和阴阳。
English: In order to express the feelings of nostalgia for the ancestors' filial piety and obedience, the lofty respect has been passed down for a long time, to thank and praise heaven and earth, and to harmonize yin and yang.

古文：明年孟春，有事于二郊，请宣摄内外，详依旧典。 
现代文：明年的正月，将在南郊和北郊祭祀天地，应该晓谕朝廷内外，认真遵循旧的典制。 
English: In the first month of next year, heaven and earth will be sacrificed in the southern and northern suburbs. It should be made clear to both inside and outside the imperial court that the old ceremonial system should be carefully followed.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏令表示同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：晋武帝太康二年冬，有司奏： 三年正月立春祠，时日尚寒，可有司行事。 诏曰： 郊祀礼典所重，中间以军国多事，临时有所妨废，故每从奏可。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年冬季，主事官员上奏说： 主尘三年止月立春曰举行祭祀，当时天气还很寒冷，可让主事官员主持祭祀 皇帝下诏令说： 郊祀是重要的典礼，一段时间以来因国家多事，到临举行郊祀时因事情有妨碍而废止了，所以往往是依从了主事官员的奏请而停祀。
English: In the winter of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the leading official made a report saying: The main ritual will be held at the beginning of spring in three years. At that time, the weather was still very cold, so the leading official could preside over the ritual. The emperor issued a decree saying: The suburb ritual is an important ceremony. For some time, due to many national events, when the suburb ritual was held, it was canceled due to obstacles, so it was often stopped in accordance with the request of the leading official.

古文：自今方外事简，唯此为大，亲奉禋享，固常典也。 
现代文：从今以后因边境战事减少，衹有这祭祀的典礼为最重要，亲自奉祭天地，这本来就是固定的制度。 
English: From now on, due to the reduction of border wars, the ceremony of this sacrifice is the most important, personally offering sacrifices to heaven and earth, which is originally a fixed system.

古文：成帝祠南郊，遇雨。
现代文：成帝时在南郊举行祭祀，遇上下雨。
English: When he became emperor, he held a religious service in the southern suburbs, which was interrupted by rain.

古文：侍中顾和启： 宜还，更克日。 
现代文：侍中顾和启奏说： 应该返回宫廷。
English: Courtier Gu He Kai So said: It is time to return to the court.

古文：诏可。
现代文：再选择日子举行祭祀。 
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：汉明帝据《月令》有五郊迎气服色之礼，因采元始中故事，兆五郊于洛阳，祭其帝与神，车服各顺方色。
现代文：皇帝下诏令表示同意。汉明帝根据《礼记。月令》有五郊迎接节气和定服色的礼仪，因而采用元始年间的旧制，在洛阳建立五郊祭祀的坛台，祭祀各方天帝和神灵，车服都依照各方位的颜色。
English: Emperor Han Mingdi agreed with the Emperor's edict. According to the "Rituals. Lunar Calendar," there are five suburbs to meet the solar terms and the etiquette of the set dress color. Therefore, using the old system in the early years, the altar of the five suburbs was established in Luoyang. The celestial emperors and deities of all parties were sacrificed, and the car clothes were in accordance with the color of each party.

古文：魏、晋依之。
现代文：魏、晋两朝都遵循这种制度。
English: Both the Wei and Jin dynasties followed this system.

古文：江左以来，未遑修建。
现代文：束晋以来，没有时间顾及修建五郊祭祀坛台。
English: Since Sokjin, there has been no time to take into account the construction of five suburban sacrificial platforms.

古文：宋孝武大明五年四月庚子，诏曰： 昔文德在周，明堂崇祀；高烈惟汉，汶邑斯尊。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明五年四月庚子日，皇帝下诏令说： 古代周朝有文德，大祭明堂；汉朝业绩隆盛，敬祭汶水上所建的明堂。
English: On April Geng Zi Day in the fifth year of Emperor Song Xiaowu's reign, the emperor issued a decree saying: In the ancient Zhou Dynasty, there was Wen De, and the great festival was the Ming Hall; in the Han Dynasty, the performance was prosperous, and the Ming Hall built on the Wenshui River was revered.

古文：所以职祭罔愆，气令斯正，鸿名称首，济世飞声。
现代文：因为主持祭祀的没有越分过度，端正了节令，大名卓著，救世而扬名。
English: Because the person who presided over the sacrificial rites did not go too far, the festival was correct, the daimyo was outstanding, and the world was saved.

古文：朕皇考太祖文皇帝功耀洞元，圣灵昭俗，内穆四门，仁济群品，外薄八荒，威憺殊俗，南脑劲越，西髓刚戎。
现代文：我已故的父王太祖文皇帝功德光耀苍天，威灵昭示俗民，在国内能端庄恭敬地接待四方诸侯，以仁德救助百姓，对外能影响到八方边远的地区，威势能震动各方异风殊俗的人民，在南方能击碎强越君长的头颅，在西方能使强大的戎族君长脑碎髓流。
English: My late father, Emperor Taizouwen, whose merits shone in the sky and whose spirit inspired the common people, was able to receive the princes of the four directions in a dignified and respectful manner at home, and to help the people with benevolence and virtue. Externally, he was able to influence the remote areas of the eight directions, and his power could shake the people of different customs in all directions. In the south, he was able to smash the heads of the powerful monarchs, and in the west, he was able to make the powerful emperors of the armed forces have their brains crushed.

古文：裁礼兴稼穑之根，张乐协四气之纪。
现代文：创制礼仪振兴农耕的本业，陈乐器奏乐曲使四季顺适。
English: Create etiquette to invigorate the business of farming, Chen musical instrument music to make the four seasons smooth.

古文：匡饰坟序，引无题之外；旌延宝臣，尽盛德之范。
现代文：补正典籍序传，在无题之外作申述；表彰并聘用贤明之臣，让深厚完美的道德广为垂范。
English: To amend the canonical books, to make appeals in addition to the untitled ones, to commend and employ wise ministers, and to let the profound and perfect morality be widely exemplified.

古文：训深劭农，政高刑厝。
现代文：训导勉励奖劝农桑，政风清明不用刑罚。
English: exhort farmers and mulberry trees with exhortation and encouragement. The political style is clear and there is no need for punishment.

古文：万物棣通，百神荐祉。动协天度，下沿地德。
现代文：万物通和，百神降福，行事上协皇天轨范，下能顺随地神的德泽。
English: All things are harmonious, a hundred gods bestow blessings, act in accordance with the emperor's heavenly pattern, and can follow the virtue of the earth god.

古文：故精纬上灵，动殖下瑞，诸侯轨道，河溓海夷。
现代文：因此精诚贯通上天神沾，行事而生瑞兆，诸侯循道守义，河海恬静平和。
English: As a result, the virtuous conduct is imbued with the spirit of heaven, the actions are auspicious, the principals are methodical and righteous, and the rivers and seas are tranquil and peaceful.

古文：朕仰凭洪烈，入子万姓，皇天降祐，迄将一纪。思奉扬休德，永播无穷。
现代文：我仰赖先王的大业，登上帝位统治百姓，皇天上帝赐下福佑，到现在已有十二年了我冀望宣扬先帝的美德，使它传播到永远。
English: I rely on the great cause of the former king, ascended the throne to rule the people, the emperor God bestowed blessings, and now it has been twelve years I hope to promote the virtues of the former emperor and spread it forever.

古文：便可详考姬典，经始明堂，宗祀先灵，式配上帝，诚敬克展，幽显咸秩。
现代文：群臣百官可详细稽考周朝的典制，开始兴建明堂，以便在宗庙裹祭祀先帝神灵，使之配祭皇天上帝，诚敬的心得以抒发，阴阳百神都能各得其所。
English: A group of ministers and officials can examine the ceremonial system of the Zhou Dynasty in detail and begin to build a Ming Hall, so that they can wrap the ancestral gods in the ancestral temple and sacrifice them to the Emperor God, so that the sincere heart can be expressed, and the yin and yang hundreds of gods can each have their own place.

古文：惟怀永元，感慕崩心。 
现代文：我永远怀念先帝，感激仰慕先人我悲伤心碎。 
English: I will always miss the former emperor, I am grateful and admire the predecessors, I am sad and heartbroken.

古文：有司奏： 伏寻明堂辟雍，制无定文，经记参差，传说乖舛。
现代文：主事官贝上奏说： 我们查考有关明堂辟雍的事，在制度上没有明确的定论，营造也不一致，传说也很乖妄。
English: The leading official, Bei Shangsoo, said: We have investigated the matter of the Ming and Tang dynasties, and there is no clear conclusion on the system, the construction is inconsistent, and the legend is very absurd.

古文：名儒通哲，各事所见，或以为名异实同，或以为名实皆异。
现代文：著名的儒士和博通的学者，各举所见，有的认为明堂与辟雍名称不同而其实质相同，有的以为名称和实质都是各不相同。
English: Some famous Confucianists and well-versed scholars believe that the names of Myeongdong and Pyeongyong are different but the essence is the same, while others believe that the names and essence are different.

古文：自汉暨晋，莫之能辨。
现代文：从汉朝直至晋朝，没有人能考辨明白。
English: From the Han Dynasty to the Jin Dynasty, no one could tell the difference.

古文：周书云，清庙明堂路寝同制。
现代文：周代的书裹说，清庙、明堂、路寝的体制相同。
English: According to Zhou's book, the system of the Qing Temple, the Ming Hall, and the sleeping on the road were the same.

古文：郑玄注《礼》，义生于斯。
现代文：郑玄注《礼书》，它的本义就是在这周代书里产生的。
English: Zheng Xuan annotated "The Book of Etiquette," and its original meaning was born in this book.

古文：诸儒又云明堂在国之阳，丙巳之地，三里之内。
现代文：而儒士们又说明堂在国都的南面，属南方阳气之地，在国都三里之内。
English: The Confucianists also explained that the hall is in the south of the capital, a place of southern yang, within three miles of the capital.

古文：至于室宇堂个，户牖达向，世代湮缅，难得该详。
现代文：至于明堂的堂屋及侧室、门户、窗户的开向等，因世代遥远而记载湮灭，难得全面详尽考明。
English: As for the hall of Myeongdong and the side rooms, the portal, the opening direction of the windows, etc., due to the distant generation, the records have been destroyed, and it is rare to fully investigate in detail.

古文：晋侍中裴頠，西都硕学，考详前载，未能制定。
现代文：晋朝的侍中裴顿，是长安一带的博学之士，他详尽地查考了前代的记载，也没能确定。
English: Peyton, an attendant of the Jin Dynasty, was a learned man in the Chang'an area. He examined the records of the previous generation in detail, but could not be sure.

古文：以为尊祖配天，其义明著，庙宇之制，理据未分，直可为殿，以崇严祀。
现代文：他认为尊崇先祖以配祭天帝，它的意义昭著，明堂庙宇的体制，理论根据不够分明，径直可建为殿堂，以尊崇天帝及先祖先帝的祭祀。
English: He believed that the system of Ming-tang temples, the theoretical basis of which was not clear enough, could be built directly as a hall of fame to honor the emperor and the sacrifice of the ancestors.

古文：其余杂碎，一皆除之。
现代文：其余不重要的祭祀，一概都可废止。
English: The rest of the unimportant rituals can be abolished altogether.

古文：参详郑玄之注，差有准据；裴頠之奏，窃谓可安。
现代文：参酌考证郑玄所作的注，没有什么凭据；裴颁的奏议，我认为可信。
English: The comment made by Zheng Xuan with reference to the examination of evidence has no evidence; I think Pei's appeal is credible.

古文：国学之南，地实丙巳，爽垲平暢，足以营建。
现代文：在国学地址的南面，实在是南方属阳的土地，平畅干燥，可以营建。
English: On the south side of the Chinese language school address, it is really the land of the south that belongs to the sun, smooth and dry, and can be built.

古文：其墙宇规范，宜拟则太庙，唯十有二间，以应期数。
现代文：所建造墙屋的规范，应该依照太庙的体制，衹建十二间，以对应一周年十二个月的数字。
English: The specification of the walled house to be built should be in accordance with the system of the ancient temple, with twelve rooms, corresponding to the twelve months of the first anniversary.

古文：依汉汶上图仪，设五帝位，太祖文皇帝对飨。
现代文：按照汉朝在汶水上所建明堂的图式，设置五帝神位，以太祖文皇帝配享。
English: According to the plan of the Ming Hall built by the Han Dynasty on the Wenshui River, the five emperors were set up, and the Emperor of the East and the Emperor of the West shared the throne.

古文：祭皇天上帝，虽为差降，至于三载恭祀，理不容异。
现代文：祭祀皇天上帝，虽有简省，但到三年大祭时，按理不可有差别。
English: Although sacrifices to the Emperor God are simplified, by the time of the three-year grand festival, there should not be any difference.

古文：自郊徂宫，亦宜共日。
现代文：从郊祭至宫庙祭祀，也应该在同一天之内举行。
English: From the suburb festival to the temple festival, it should also be held within the same day.

古文：《礼记》郊以特牲，《诗》称明堂羊牛，吉蠲虽同，质文殊典。
现代文：《礼记》记载郊祭奉献一头牛，《诗经》裹说明堂祭祀享献牛和羊，沐浴斋戒选择祭祀的吉日的这些程序虽然相同，但质朴与繁饰却显然有所不同。
English: "Li Ji" records the dedication of a cow at the suburb festival, and the "Shi Jing" describes the procedures of the hall sacrifice to enjoy the sacrifice of cattle and sheep, bathing, fasting, and choosing the auspicious day for the sacrifice, although these procedures are the same, but the simplicity and decoration are obviously different.

古文：且郊有燔柴，堂无禋燎，则鼎俎彝簋，一依庙礼。
现代文：况且郊祭有燎柴祭天的仪式，而明堂祭祀却没有燎柴祭天的事，那么鼎俎彝簋等礼器的配置，一概都应依照宗庙祭祀的礼仪而定。
English: Moreover, the suburb festival has a ceremony for the day of the firewood festival, while the Myeongdong ritual has nothing to do with the day of the firewood festival, so the arrangement of ceremonial objects such as the tripod should be determined in accordance with the ritual of the ancestral temple.

古文：班行百司，搜材简工，权置起部尚书、将作大匠，量物商程，克今秋缮立。 
现代文：布告群臣百官，准备建筑材料挑选工人，暂时设置起部尚书、将作大匠，以商量物资使用及营建工程等事宜，在今年秋季一定要按期建成。 
English: A proclamation was issued to the ministers and officials to prepare the construction materials, select the workers, and temporarily set up the construction department to discuss the use of materials and construction projects. This autumn, it must be completed on schedule.

古文：乃依頠议，但作大殿屋雕画而已，无古三十六户七十二牖之制。
现代文：于是依照盏逊的议论，衹建造大殿屋宇并加雕画装饰而已，没有采用古代三十六个门户七十二个窗户的体式。
English: Therefore, according to the argument of Qian Xun, he only built the main hall building and decorated it with carvings, and did not adopt the ancient style of thirty-six portals and seventy-two windows.

古文：六年正月，南郊还，世祖亲奉明堂，祠祭五时之帝，以文皇帝配，是用郑玄议也。
现代文：左型六年正月，南郊祭祀完毕返回后，世担亲自奉祭明堂，祭祀五时天帝，以文皇帝配祭，这是采用了郑玄的议论。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the left type, after returning from the completion of the southern suburb sacrifice, Shitan himself offered a sacrifice to Myeongdong, a sacrifice to the Five Heavenly Emperors, and a sacrifice to the Emperor Wen, which was adopted from Zheng Xuan's discussion.

古文：官有其注。
现代文：官府有其记录。
English: The government has no record of a ceremony in this regard.

古文：大明五年九月甲子，有司奏： 南郊祭用三牛；庙四时祠六室用二牛。
现代文：大明五年九月甲子曰，主事官员上奏说： 南郊祭祀用三头牛。四季祭祀宗庙六室用两头牛。
English: In September of the 5th year of the Daming Dynasty, Koji said that the leading official made a report saying: Three cows will be used for the southern suburb ritual. Two cows will be used for the four-season ritual in the sixth room of the ancestral temple.

古文：明堂肇建，祠五帝，太祖文皇帝配，未详祭用几牛？ 
现代文：明堂开始建成，祭祀五帝，以太祖文皇帝配祭，不知道祭祀时要用几头牛? 
English: Myeongdong began to be built. The Five Emperors and Emperor Aether Zuwen were sacrificed. I don't know how many cows should be used for the sacrifice.

古文：太学博士司马兴之议： 案郑玄注《礼记大传》：称 《孝经》郊祀后稷以配天，配灵威仰也。宗祀文王于明堂，以配上帝，配五帝也。 夫五帝司方，位殊功一，牲牢之用，理无差降。
现代文：太学博士动屋兴之议论说： 据塑玄注《礼记大传》说： 《孝经》裹记载郊祭丘逻以配祭天帝，是配祭玺盛在明堂举行宗庙祭祀祭塞王，以配祭上帝，是配祭五帝，五帝主管五方，方位不同功能一致，所奉用的牺牲，按理不得有所减少。
English: The discussion by Dr. Doushaku Motsuya: According to the commentary on "The Biography of Rites," "The Filial Piety Sutra" recorded that the suburb festival was held with the sacrifice of the Heavenly Emperor, the sacrifice was held with the sacrifice of the King of Siam, the sacrifice was held with the sacrifice of the King of Siam, the sacrifice was held with the sacrifice of the Five Emperors, the five emperors were in charge of the five directions, and the different directions had the same function. The sacrifice that was offered should not be reduced.

古文：太祖文皇帝躬成天地，则道兼覆载；左右群生，则化洽四气。
现代文：太祖文皇帝亲统天地，那么他的德泽兼有天覆和地载；抚养众生，那么它的教化能协和春、夏、秋、冬四时节气。
English: If Emperor Taizowen is the progenitor of heaven and earth, then his virtue is both heaven-covering and earth-bearing; if he nurtures all beings, then his enlightenment can harmonize the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter.

古文：祖、宗之称，不足彰无穷之美；金石之音，未能播勋烈之盛。
现代文：祖和宗的称呼，不足以彰显先人无限的美德；钟磬金石演奏的乐曲，不能播扬先人功勋业绩的盛大。
English: The title of Zuhezong is not enough to highlight the infinite virtues of the ancestors; the music played by Zhongyao Jinshi cannot promote the grandeur of the ancestors' meritorious achievements.

古文：故明堂聿修，圣心所以昭玄极；泛配宗庙，先儒所以得礼情。
现代文：因此修建明堂，帝王宽广的心怀可以显彰于天际；广泛地在宗庙配祭，是前代儒士们把握礼制本义的体现。
English: Therefore, the construction of Myeongdong, the emperor's broad-mindedness can be shown in the sky; the extensive matching of festivals in the ancestral temple is the embodiment of the previous generation of Confucianists grasping the true meaning of the ritual system.

古文：愚管所见，谓宜用六牛。 
现代文：以我浅薄的见解，认为应该用六头牛。 
English: In my humble opinion, six cows should be used.

古文：博士虞龢议： 祀帝之名虽五，而所生之实常一。
现代文：博士虞稣议论说： 祭祀天帝的名称虽然有五个，而所产生的实效经常是一致的。
English: Dr. Yu Xiu commented: Although there are five names for the worship of the heavenly emperor, the actual effects are often the same.

古文：五德之帝，迭有休王，各有所司，故有五室。
现代文：五德各帝，往往有善美的王君，五帝各有主管的方面，因此设置有五室。
English: Each of the five emperors often had a benevolent ruler, and each of the five emperors had a superior aspect, so there were five chambers.

古文：宗祀所主，要随其王而飨焉。
现代文：宗庙祭祀的主神，要随其王君而定献享。
English: The main god of the ancestral temple's worship should be dedicated according to the king's wishes.

古文：主一配一，合用二牛。 
现代文：主祭一牛配祭一牛。应该用二头牛。 
English: The main offering is one ox, and the second offering is one ox. Two oxen should be used.

古文：祠部郎颜奂议： 祀之为义，并五帝以为言。
现代文：祠部郎颜奂议论说： 祭祀的本义，是包括五帝的祭祀而称呼的。
English: "The true meaning of the ritual is that it includes the ritual of the five emperors," said the head of the ancestral hall.

古文：帝虽云五，牲牢之用，谓不应过郊祭庙祀。
现代文：虽说是有五帝，但祭祀所用的牛，不应该超过郊祭和宗庙祭祀的牛。
English: Although there are five emperors, the cattle used in the sacrificial rites should not exceed the cattle used in the suburb festival and the ancestral temple.

古文：宜用二牛。 
现代文：应该用两头牛。
English: They should have used two cows.

古文：明帝泰始七年十月庚子，有司奏： 来年正月十八日，祠明堂。
现代文：明帝泰始七年十月庚子曰，主事官员上奏说： 明年正月十八，要举行明堂的祭祀。
English: In October of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, Geng Zi said that the leading official made a report saying: On the 18th day of the first month of the next year, the ritual of the Ming Hall should be held.

古文：寻旧南郊与明堂同日，并告太庙。
现代文：查考以前南郊祭祀和明堂祭祀是在同一天举行，并且还要祭太庙。
English: According to the investigation, the Nanjiao Festival and the Myeongdong Festival were held on the same day, and the temple festival was also held.

古文：未审今祀明堂，复告与不？ 
现代文：不知道现在明堂祭祀，是不是还要祭太庙? 
English: I don't know if the Myeongdong ritual is still being held, or if it's still being held at the Grand Temple.

古文：祠部郎王延秀议： 案郑玄云： 郊者祭天之名，上帝者，天之别名也。
现代文：祠部郎王延重议论说： 据郑玄说： 郊祭是祭天的名称，上帝，是天的别名。
English: Wang Yan, the curator of the ancestral hall, said: According to Zheng Xuan, the suburb festival is the name of the festival of heaven, and God is another name for heaven.

古文：神无二主，故明堂异处，以避后稷。 
现代文：神没有两个主神，因此明堂设置在别的地方，以回避励坚之神。 
English: God does not have two main deities, so Myeongdong was set up in a different place to avoid the god of encouragement.

古文：谨寻郊宗二祀，既名殊实同，至于应告，不容有异。 
现代文：认真查考郊祭和宗庙祭祀这两种祭祀，既是名称不同而实质相同，至于应该告祭太庙，不可有所不同。 
English: It is necessary to carefully examine the two kinds of sacrificial rites, the suburb festival and the ancestral temple sacrifice, which are different in name but the same in essence. As for the temple sacrifice, there should be no difference.

古文：守尚书令袁粲等并同延秀议。
现代文：守尚书令袁粲等人都赞同王延秀的议论。
English: Yuan Qi and others all agreed with Wang Yanxiu's argument.

古文：魏明帝世，中护军蒋济奏曰： 夫帝王大礼，巡狩为先；昭祖扬祢，封禅为首。
现代文：魏明帝统治时期，中护军蒋济上奏说： 帝王举行的重大礼典，以巡狩为首要之事；彰显先祖和先父的功业，就以封禅为首要典礼。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty, the middle protector Jiang Ji said: The major ceremony held by the emperor takes the hunting tour as the first thing; to highlight the achievements of ancestors and forefathers, the first ceremony takes the seal of Zen.

古文：是以自古革命受符，未有不蹈梁父，登泰山，刊无竟之名，纪天人之际者也。
现代文：因此从古以来，在改朝换代新的帝王接受天帝的符命时，没有不是亲自上銮父山，登泰山，刻石颂德传之永远，记述这天上人间盛大功业的。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, no one has changed the dynasty and generation to accept the destiny of heaven, no one has not gone to the father of Liang, no one has not climbed Mount Tai, no one has not written down the name that has been passed down forever, and no one has not recorded the moment of the meeting of heaven and man.

古文：故司马相如谓有文以来七十二君，或从所由于前，谨遗迹于后。
现代文：因此司马相如说，有文字记载以来有七十二位君主，也许依据的是以前的传扬，郑重地给后世留下了遗迹。
English: Therefore, Sima Xiangru said that there have been seventy-two monarchs since written records, perhaps based on previous propaganda, solemnly leaving a legacy for future generations.

古文：太史公曰： 主上有圣明而不宣布，有司之过也。 然则元功懿德，不刊山、梁之石，无以显帝王之功，布生民不朽之观也。
现代文：太史公说： 君主有圣明的功业而不宣扬传布，这是主事官员的过失，那么伟大的功业美好的德行，不在泰山及梁父山刻石歌颂，就不能彰显帝王的功绩，不能给民众展布不朽的鉴仰。
English: Taishikong said: The monarch has a sacred deed and does not propagate it, which is the fault of the leading officials. So great deeds and good deeds, if they are not engraved on Mount Tai and Mount Liangfuzhong, cannot highlight the emperor's merits and cannot spread immortal admiration to the people.

古文：语曰，当君而叹尧、舜之美，譬犹人子对厥所生，誉他人之父。
现代文：俗语说，当了君主而赞叹唐尧、虞舜的美德，就好像是儿子面对他生身之父，赞誉别人的父亲一样。
English: As the saying goes, being a monarch and praising the virtues of Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan is like a son praising the father of others in front of his biological father.

古文：今大魏振前王之弊乱，拯流遁之艰危，接千载之衰绪，继百世之废始。
现代文：现在我大魏朝廷振兴了历代的败乱政局，拯救了流亡而陷入艰险危难的人民，承接千年来的衰世，以及百代以来荒废的政治。
English: Now, the Great Wei Dynasty has revived the ruined political situation of all times, saved the people who have fallen into hardships and perils in exile, inherited the decline of a thousand years, and the desolate politics since a hundred generations.

古文：自武、文至于圣躬，所以参成天地之道，纲维人神之化，上天报应，嘉瑞显祥，以比往古，其优衍丰隆，无所取喻。
现代文：从我朝的武帝、文帝直至现今圣明的皇上，能够协成天地的大德，主宰维系人神的教化，上天给予了报应，嘉祥的瑞兆得以显现，和古代相比，现今的优越隆盛，不可相提并论。
English: From the emperors of my dynasty, Emperor Wu and Emperor Wen, to today's Emperor Shenming, emperors have been able to co-create the great virtue of heaven and earth, dominate and maintain the enlightenment of gods and mortals. Heaven has given retribution, and auspicious signs have been manifested. Compared with ancient times, today's superior prosperity cannot be compared.

古文：至于历世迄今，未发大礼。
现代文：而竟然从历代到今天。还没有举行过封禅的大典。
English: And yet, from past generations to the present day, there has never been a grand ceremony to enshrine Zen.

古文：虽志在扫尽残盗，荡涤余秽，未遑斯事。
现代文：虽然心意在扫清残贼，荡涤余秽，没有时间顾及这封禅的事。
English: Perhaps it can be inferred that the intention is to sweep up the remaining thieves, to clean up the remaining filth, and there is no energy to take care of this matter.

古文：若尔，三苗堀强于江海，大舜当废东巡之仪；徐夷跳梁于淮、泗，周成当止岱岳之礼也。
现代文：如果是这样的理由，那么三苗在江海一带崛起时，舜帝就应该废止束巡的礼仪，徐夷在淮水、泗水一带横行作乱时，周成王就应该停止到泰山行祭礼。
English: If this is the reason, then when the three seedlings rose in the Jianghai area, Emperor Zhou should have abolished the etiquette of the inspection tour, and when Xu Yi rampaged in the Huai Shui and Surabaya areas, Zhou Cheng Wang should have stopped going to Mount Tai for the festival.

古文：且昔岁破吴虏于江、汉，今兹屠蜀贼于陇右。
现代文：况且往年在江、漠一带打败了吴贼，现今在陇西一带又屠杀了蜀贼。
English: Moreover, in previous years, the Wu bandits were defeated in the areas of the Jiang and the desert, and now the Shu bandits have been slaughtered in the area of Shaanxi.

古文：其震荡内溃，在不复淹，就当探其窟穴，无累于封禅之事也。
现代文：那战事震荡了吴、蜀，其内部已经溃乱，应该不再停顿，应当立即就去攻取它的窟穴，以便对封禅的大礼不造成拖累。
English: That war has shaken Wu and Shu, and they have been in turmoil internally. They should not pause any longer, but should immediately go and capture its caves, so as not to create a drag on the grand ceremony of the enthronement.

古文：此仪久废，非仓卒所定。
现代文：封禅的礼仪废止已经很久了，并不是仓猝之间所能议定的。
English: This etiquette has been abandoned for a long time, and it is not something that can be determined in a short time.

古文：宜下公卿，广纂其礼，卜年考时，昭告上帝，以副天下之望。
现代文：应该交付给公卿大臣，广泛纂定封惮的礼仪，通过占卜选定举行封禅礼仪的时，祭祀上帝，以满足天下人民的期望。
English: It should be handed over to the noblemen and ministers to extensively compile the sealing ceremony, and through divination to select the time to hold the sealing ceremony, and to sacrifice to God, so as to meet the expectations of the people around the world.

古文：臣待罪军旅，不胜大愿，冒死以闻。 
现代文：我在军旅中任职，非常向往，冒死上奏。 
English: I served in the military, and I can't fulfill this great desire to risk my life to say what I think.

古文：诏曰： 闻济斯言，使吾汗出流足。
现代文：皇帝下诏令说： 听到蒋济的这番议论，使得我出汗，汗水直流至脚下。
English: The emperor issued a decree saying, "Hearing Jiang Jie's speech made me sweat, and the sweat ran down to my feet.

古文：自开辟以来，封禅者七十余君尔。
现代文：自从开天辟地以来，举行过封禅的衹有七十多位君主而已。
English: Since the creation of heaven and earth, there have only been more than seventy monarchs who have held a fuzen.

古文：故太史公曰： 虽有受命之君，而功有不洽，是以中间旷远者，千有余年，近数百载。
现代文：因此太史公说： 虽然有受了天命的君主，然而他的功业不广大，因此君主中间能封惮的相距久远的，有一千多年，时间距离近的也有几百年。
English: Therefore, Taishigong said: Although there is a monarch who has received the mandate of heaven, his achievements are not extensive. Therefore, there is a long distance between the monarchs that can be sealed, which is more than a thousand years, and the time distance is also several hundred years.

古文：其仪阙不可得记。 
现代文：封挥的礼仪因而阙失不能详记。 
English: As a result, the etiquette of the seal-waving ceremony cannot be recorded in detail.

古文：吾何德之修，敢庶兹乎！
现代文：我修行了什么善德呢，岂敢冀望举行这封挥大典呢。
English: What virtue have I that I dare to do this?

古文：济岂谓世无管仲，以吾有桓公登泰山之志乎？
现代文：蒋济难道认为当世没有管仲，又认为我有齐担公登泰山祭天那样的意向吗。
English: Did Jiang Jie really think that there was no intercession in the present world, and that I had the intention of ascending Mount Taishan and worshipping Heaven together?

古文：吾不敢欺天也。
现代文：我不敢欺骗天帝。
English: I dare not deceive the Emperor.

古文：济之所言，华则华矣，非助我者也。
现代文：蒋济所说的话，说它华丽却真是华丽了，但它不是帮助我。
English: What Jiang Jie said, beautiful is beautiful, but it does not help me.

古文：公卿侍中、尚书、常侍省之而已。
现代文：公卿侍中、尚书、常侍要省察他所说的话罢了。
English: Court nobles, courtiers, and attendants only need to reflect on what he said.

古文：勿复有所议，亦不须答诏也。 
现代文：不要再有议论，也不要等待我的答覆。 
English: Don't argue or wait for my answer.

古文：帝虽拒济议，而实使高堂隆草封禅之仪。
现代文：明帝虽然拒绝了蒋济的议论，而实际上却命令高堂隆草拟封惮的礼仪。
English: Although Emperor Ming rejected Jiang Ji's argument, he actually ordered Gaodanglong to draft the etiquette for sealing.

古文：以天下未一，不欲便行大礼。
现代文：因为天下还没有统一，不想立即举行封禅大典。
English: Because the world is not yet unified, I don't want to hold a grand ceremony right away.

古文：会隆卒，故不行。
现代文：又遇上高堂隆去世，因此没有举行封禅。
English: In another incident, Kodo Takashi passed away, so there was no Hozan.

古文：晋武帝平吴，混一区宇。
现代文：晋武帝平定了吴境，统一了天下。
English: Emperor Jinwu leveled Wu and unified the country.

古文：太康元年九月庚寅，尚书令卫瓘、尚书左仆射山涛、魏舒、尚书刘实、张华等奏曰： 圣德隆茂，光被四表，诸夏乂清，幽荒率从。
现代文：太康元年九月庚寅曰，尚书令卫罐、尚书左仆射山涛、右仆射魏舒、尚书刘宫、张华等人上奏说： 皇上的德泽隆盛，光照四方边境，华夏各地平静，北方荒远地区的人民都顺从。
English: In September of the first year of Taikang, Geng Yin said that Shang Shuling Wei Can, Shang Shuling Shaoshan Tao, Shang Shuling Wei Shu, Shang Shuling Liu Gong, Zhang Hua and others made a report: Emperor Dezer is prosperous, the four-sided border is bright, all parts of China are calm, and the people in the remote areas of the north are obedient.

古文：神策庙算，席卷吴越，孙皓稽颡，六合为家，巍巍之功，格于天地。
现代文：皇上的神策庙算，以至军队席卷吴越大地，孙皓叩头顺服，天下四方成为一家，崇高的功绩，播及天地之间。
English: The emperor's divine strategy was so successful that the army swept through the land of Wu Yue, Sun Yat-sen bowed down and obeyed, and the four quarters of the world became one family. The lofty achievements spread between heaven and earth.

古文：宜同古典，勒封东岳，告三府太堂为仪制。 
现代文：现在应该遵循古代典制，在束岳泰山刻石封惮，要通告三府太常草拟封挥的仪制。 
English: Now it is necessary to follow the ancient ceremony system, seal the stone engraving in Taishan, Shukou, and notify the three prefectures of the ceremony system.

古文：瓘等又奏： 臣闻肇自生民，则有后辟，载祀之数，莫之能纪。
现代文：卫罐等人又上奏说： 我们听说从有人类以来，就有君主，其间经历的年数有多少，没有人能计算清楚。
English: "We have heard that since the beginning of mankind, there have been monarchs, and no one can calculate the number of years they have been in power.

古文：立德济世，挥扬仁风，以登封泰山者七十有四家，其谥号可知者，十有四焉。
现代文：立德操救世人，发扬仁爱之风，以至能登卜泰山举行封禅的有七十四位君主，他们中间谧号可以考明的，衹有十四人。
English: There are seventy-four emperors who saved the world by their virtue and promoted benevolence, so much so that they were able to ascend Mt. Bhutto to hold the Fuzhen meditation. Among them, there are only fourteen emperors whose names can be found.

古文：沉沦寂寞，曾无遗声者，不可胜记。
现代文：而沉寂无闻，没有留下声名的，不可计数。
English: But the silence of the unknown, without leaving a reputation, is incalculable.

古文：自黄帝以前，古传昧略，唐、虞以来，典谟炳著。
现代文：在黄帝之前，古代的传记渺茫缺略，庐袁、谜以来，典谟训诰等史籍记载彰着。
English: Before the Yellow Emperor, ancient biographies were vague and incomplete, but since the Yuan Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, historical records such as the Jianmu Xunlong and other historical records have been outstanding.

古文：三王代兴，体业继袭，周道既没，秦氏承之，至于汉、魏，而质文未复。
现代文：夏、商、周三代相继兴起，国家的体制业绩相连续，刮统治沦落，秦朝承接而起，直至汉塑和萱邈，文质彬彬的礼制都没有恢复。
English: The Xia, Shang and San dynasties successively arose, the country's institutional performance was continuous, the rule fell, the Qin Dynasty succeeded, and until the Han Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, the polite and courteous etiquette was not restored.

古文：大晋之德，始自重、黎，实佐颛顼。至于夏、商，世序天地，其在于周，不失其绪。
现代文：晋朝立国的德运，开始于重、黎在世的时期，实际上是辅佐题堕，到了夏、直两朝，世世代代都主管测度天地，在刮目时期，仍然不失本业。
English: The German movement, which led to the establishment of the Jin Dynasty, began during the reigns of Chung and Lê, and was actually a subsidiary movement. By the time of the Xia and Zhi Dynasties, generations of emperors had been in charge of measuring the heavens and the earth, and they still did not lose their profession in times of crisis.

古文：金德将升，世济明圣，外平蜀汉，海内归心，武功之盛，实由文德。
现代文：我晋朝金德的德运升起，历世接连出现圣明的君主，对外平定了；墅选，四海之内的人民心向朝廷，武功的隆盛，实际上是山来于文德。
English: Jin's virtue is on the rise, the world is helping Ming Sheng's people, Shu Han has been pacified externally, within the four seas, people's hearts are inclined towards Jin, and military victory actually relies on virtue.

古文：至于陛下受命践阼，弘建大业，群生仰流，唯独江湖沅湘之表，凶桀负固，历代不宾。
现代文：到了陛下受天命即帝位之后，广建业绩，百姓仰承流风而归顺。惟独昼辽、回庭翅、远丞、挝丞的边际，凶贼负隅顽抗，历代都不顺服。
English: After His Majesty ascended to the throne by the mandate of heaven, the people followed the trend and submitted to His Majesty. However, the marginalized people such as the Liao, Hui, Yuan, Lao, and Liao were stubbornly opposed by the villains, and they did not submit to His Majesty.

古文：神谋独断，命将出讨，兵威暂加，数旬荡定，羁其鲸鲵，赦其罪逆。
现代文：陛下神谋独断，任命将领出兵征讨，兵威，几十日内便将凶贼荡平，拘捕凶贼魁首，宽赦作逆的罪徒。
English: His majesty acted arbitrarily, appointed generals to lead the army to investigate, and within a few decades, he leveled the criminals, arrested the leader of the criminals, and pardoned the traitorous criminals.

古文：云覆雨施，八方来同，声教所被，达于四极。
现代文：云布雨施，八方人民都来归附，陛下声威教化所及，已达到四方极辽远的地方。
English: The people from all over the world have come to adhere to the teachings of His Majesty, and His Majesty's teachings have reached as far as the most distant places in the four directions.

古文：虽黄轩之征，大禹远略，周之奕世，何以尚今。
现代文：即使是轩辕黄帝的征战，夏禹远大的谋略，厘朝世世代代国祚长久，又怎能超过今天呢?
English: Even if it was Emperor Xuanzong's war of conquest and Xia Yu's far-reaching strategy that kept the dynasty in power for generations, how can it surpass today?

古文：若夫玄石素文，底号前载，象以姓表，言以事告，《河图》、《洛书》之征，不是过也。
现代文：至于刻石颂德、素文传信，著称于以前的记载，刻石以表姓，据事实而记述，古代出现的《河图》、《洛书》的征兆，也不能超过今天这样的功德。
English: As for the carving of the stone for the celebration of virtue and the transmission of the Sutra, it is known from the previous records. The carving of the stone with the first name is recorded according to the facts. The signs of the "River Map" and "Book of Luo" that appeared in ancient times cannot exceed today's merit.

古文：加以驺虞麟趾，众瑞并臻。
现代文：加上有骄虞善兽、麟趾信物等等，许多瑞兆一起出现。
English: In addition, many auspicious signs appear together, such as the proud and virtuous beast, the unicorn and so on.

古文：昔夏、殷以丕崇为祥，周武以乌鱼为美，咸曰休哉；然符瑞之应，备物之盛，未有若今之富者也。
现代文：古代夏、殷两朝以尊崇天神为吉祥，周武王时以鱼跃入舟、火化为乌为美事，都称为善美；然而符瑞的显现，实物的盛多，没有像今天这样丰富的。
English: In ancient Xia and Yin dynasties, it was considered auspicious to venerate deities, and in the time of King Zhouwu, it was considered a good deed to jump into a boat with a fish and be cremated; however, the appearance of auspiciousness and the abundance of objects were not as abundant as they are today.

古文：宜宣大典，礼中岳，封泰山，禅梁父，发德号，明至尊，享天休，笃黎庶，勒千载之表，播流后之声，俾百代之下，莫不兴起。
现代文：现在就应该举行封挥大典，祭中岳嵩山，封泰山，禅梁父山，启用王朝德运称号，崇敬皇上，享祭上帝，抚爱黎民百姓，镌刻流传千载的石碑，播扬流传后世的声威，使百代之后，世世振兴。
English: Now is the time to hold a grand ceremony to celebrate the founding of the Song Dynasty, the founding of Mount Tai, and the founding of the Zen Dynasty, to inaugurate the title of the Dynasty of the German Youth, to venerate the emperor, to enjoy the sacrifice of God, to cherish the people of Li, to engrave the stone monument that has been passed down for thousands of years, to spread the fame that has been passed down to posterity, and to revitalize the world after hundreds of generations.

古文：斯帝王之盛业，天人之至望也。 
现代文：这是帝王盛大的业绩，是天上人间最崇高的期望。 
English: This is the grand cause of the emperor, the greatest wish of heaven and man.

古文：诏曰： 今逋寇虽殄，外则障塞有警，内则民黎未康，此盛德之事，所未议也。 
现代文：皇帝下诏令说： 现在流窜的寇贼虽然被消灭，但在边境上的障塞仍然有警报，内地的民众也还不康宁，这歌颂盛德的礼仪，不应该议论丁。 
English: The emperor issued a decree saying: Although the bandits who are now in exile have been eliminated, there is still an alarm at the barrier on the border, and the people in the interior are not well. This etiquette of praising prosperity should not be discussed.

古文：瓘等又奏： 今东渐于海，西被流沙，大漠之阴，日南北户，莫不通属。茫茫禹迹，今实过之，则天人之道已周，巍巍之功已著。
现代文：卫璀等人又上奏说： 现在的国土束境到了海边，西境达到流沙，在大沙漠的北面，南境到了日南郡的北产，四境之内无不交往归属，夏禹足迹所到的茫茫之地，现在实际已经超过它了，天上人间的治道已很周备，崇高的功业已经卓著。
English: Wei Wei and others also made a report saying: The present national territory extends to the seashore, the western border reaches the quicksand, north of the great desert, the southern border reaches the northern production of Nichinan County, within the four borders there is no affiliation, the vast land reached by Xia Yu's footprints has now actually exceeded it, the heavenly and human justice has been very thorough, and the noble achievements have been outstanding.

古文：宜有事梁父，修礼地祗，登封泰山，致诚上帝，以答人神之愿。
现代文：应该到梁父山致祭，向土地之神行礼，登上泰山封挥，向皇天上帝致以诚敬，以报答入神的期望。
English: It is necessary to go to Mount Liangzhi to make a sacrifice, pay homage to the god of the land, climb Mount Tai to wave the seal, and pay sincere respects to the Emperor God to repay the expectations of the god.

古文：乞如前奏。 
现代文：请求像先前上奏的那样举行封挥大典。 
English: I beg you to do as you did in the previous section.

古文：诏曰： 今阴阳未和，政刑未当，百姓未得其所，岂可以勒功告成邪！ 
现代文：皇帝下韶令说： 现在阴阳还不协和，政治与刑狱还不当，百姓还没有各得其所，怎么可以刻石颂德告成功呢! 
English: The emperor's edict said: "Nowadays, yin and yang are still not in harmony, politics and imprisonment are still inappropriate, and the people have not yet found their place. How can carving a stone to praise virtue be successful?"

古文：瓘又奏： 臣闻处帝王之位者，必有历运之期，天命之应；济生民之大功者，必有盛德之容，告成之典。
现代文：卫璇又上奏说： 我听说身处帝王之位的人，一定有国家命数的期限，有天帝授命的符瑞；赈济人民立有大功德的人，一定有品德高尚的仪容，有敬告成功的大典。
English: Wei Wei also wrote: I have heard that a person who is on the throne of the emperor must have a deadline for the death of the country, and must have the evidence of the emperor's order; a person who has made great contributions to the people must have a noble appearance, and must have a grand ceremony to announce his success.

古文：无不可诬，有不可让，自古道也。
现代文：没有这些的不可加以指责，有这些的不能责备，从古以来都是这个道理。
English: Without these, one cannot be blamed, and with these, one cannot be reproached. This has been the principle since ancient times.

古文：而明诏谦冲，屡辞其礼。
现代文：而圣明的诏令非常谦虚，一再推辞封禅的礼仪。
English: However, the edict of Saint Ming was very modest, repeatedly rejecting the etiquette of sealing Zen.

古文：虽盛德攸在，推而未居。
现代文：虽然高尚的品德依然在身，但却推辞而不白许。
English: Although the noble character is still in the body, it is not in vain to refuse.

古文：夫三公职典天地，实掌民物，国之大事取议于此。
现代文：三公的职责是掌管天地的，实际上是掌管人民和万物，国家的大事，在这里议定。
English: The duty of the three princes is to govern heaven and earth, in fact, to govern the people and all things, the important affairs of the country, agreed here.

古文：汉氏封禅，非是官也，不在其事。
现代文：汉朝时候的封禅，凡不属管理封禅的官员，就不参与封禅的事。
English: During the Han Dynasty, anyone who was not an official in charge of fuzan did not participate in fuzan.

古文：臣等前奏，盖陈祖考之功，天命又应，陛下之德，合同四海，述古考今，宜循此礼。
现代文：我们先前的上奏，大抵都是陈述陛下已故祖、父的功德，陛下又顺应了天命，陛下的功德，使四海之内合力同心，无论是考古或论今，现在都应该举行这封禅大礼。
English: Most of our previous recitals have been presentations of the merits of His Majesty's late ancestors and father, and His Majesty has also complied with the Mandate of Heaven, and His Majesty's merits have made the four seas work together. Whether it is archaeology or theory, this Zen ceremony should be held now.

古文：至于克定岁月，须五府上议，然后奏闻。
现代文：至于确定举行封禅礼的年月，需要五府加以议论，然后奏报。
English: As for the determination of the year and month, it must be discussed by the captain, taifu, seto, tsuko, general and so on, and then reported.

古文：请写诏及奏，如前下议。 
现代文：请求书写韶书及奏议，像先前一样交付臣下议论。 
English: The request to write an imperial edict and petition, as before, was submitted to the vassals for discussion.

古文：诏曰： 虽荡清江表，皆临事者之劳，何足以告成。
现代文：皇帝下诏令说： 虽然已荡平了辽南，造都是主持战事者的功劳，哪裹够得上祭天告成功呢。
English: The edict said: Although the sweeping has stabilized the south of the Yangtze River, it is all the credit of the parties concerned, and it is not enough to report the success to heaven.

古文：方望群后，思隆大化，以宁区夏，百姓获乂，与之休息，此朕日夜之望。
现代文：我正希望群臣百官，认真思量振兴教化，以使华夏康宁，百姓获得平安，与民休养生息，这是我日夜夜的期望。
English: I just hope that the ministers and officials will seriously consider the revitalization of education and enlightenment, so that China can be peaceful, the people can be safe, and the people can rest and recuperate. This is my expectation day and night.

古文：无所复下诸府矣。勿复为烦。 
现代文：不必再交付各府曹议论了。不要再作烦扰。 
English: You don't have to hand it over to the prefectural governors for discussion. Don't make any more trouble.

古文：瓘等又奏： 臣闻唐、虞二代，济世弘功之君，莫不仰答天心，俯协民志，登介丘，履梁父，未有辞焉者，盖不可让也。
现代文：卫璀等人义上奏说： 我们听说唐尧、虞舜两代，救济世人弘扬功德的君主，没有不是对上回报天意，对下协同民心，登介丘山，上梁父山，没有推辞的，因为这是不可谦让的。
English: Wei Wei and others said: We have heard that the two generations of emperors, Tang Xi and Yu Xi, who helped the world and promoted merit, did not refuse to climb Mount Qiu or Mount Liangzhi, because it was not acceptable.

古文：今陛下勋高百王，德无与二，茂绩宏规，巍巍之业，固非臣等所能究论。
现代文：现在皇帝陛下的功勋比历代君主都高，德操无与伦比，宏规盛绩，功业崇高，本不是我们所能详细评说的。
English: Today, His Majesty's merits surpass a hundred kings, his virtues are unrivaled, and his magnificent feats and illustrious career are certainly not something that we can comment on clearly.

古文：而圣旨劳谦，屡自抑损，时至弗应，推美不居，阙皇代之上仪，塞神祇之款望，使大晋之典谟，不同风于三、五。
现代文：然而皇上圣明的诏令，再表示谦让，屡次都自我贬抑，时机已到却不顺应天意，推让美德而不自许，使我晋朝的盛大典礼空缺，阻碍了天地神明款诚的期望，使得我大晋的典谟训诰之政教，与五帝、三王的风韵不同。
English: However, Emperor Shengming's edict, in addition to expressing modesty, repeatedly self-deprecating, the time has come but did not conform to the will of heaven, pushed virtue without self-condemnation, made the grand ceremony of my promotion to the throne vacant, hindered the sincere expectations of the gods and goddesses of heaven and earth, and made the politics and religion of my promotion to the throne different from the five emperors and three kings.

古文：臣等诚不敢奉诏，请如前奏施行。 
现代文：我们实在不敢遵奉皇上的韶令，请求按照我们先前所上奏的施行。 
English: We really dare not follow the edict. Please implement it according to the previous edict.

古文：诏曰： 方当共弘治道，以康庶绩，且俟他年，无复纷纭也。 
现代文：皇帝下诏令说： 现在正应当共同弘扬治道，以使政绩康泰。暂且等待到将来再举行大礼，现在不要再纷纷议论了。 
English: The emperor issued a decree saying: Now is the time to jointly promote the way of governance, so that the government's performance is stable. For the time being, wait until the grand ceremony is held in the future, and do not talk about it now.

古文：太康元年冬，王公有司又奏： 自古圣明，光宅四海，封禅名山，著于史籍，作者七十四君矣。
现代文：太康元年冬季，王公和主事官员上奏说： 从古代以来圣明的帝王，有四海之广，在著名的山岳封禅，记载在史籍裹的有七十四位君主。
English: In the winter of Taikang in the first year of the year, the prince and the leading officials made a report: Since ancient times, the emperors of the Holy Light have had the breadth of the four seas, and in the famous mountain Fuzhen, there are seventy-four monarchs recorded in the historical books.

古文：舜、禹之有天下，巡狩四岳，躬行其道。
现代文：虞忧、夏叠得天下之后，巡狩四岳，亲自施行他们的政道。
English: After Gu Zhen and Xia Jia conquered the world, they went on a tour of the four mountains and personally implemented their policies.

古文：《易》著 观民省方 ，《礼》有 升中于天 ，《诗》颂 陟其高山 ，皆载在方策。
现代文：《易经》裹记载 体家人民省视四方 ，《礼》书裹记载有 向天帝享祭以告成功 ，《诗经》裹说 登上那高山，这些都是记载在典册中的。
English: The "I Ching" contains the record of the Taika People's Provincial Review of the Four Directions, the "Rite" contains the record of offering sacrifices to the Heavenly Emperor to achieve success, and the "Song of Songs" contains the record of climbing that high mountain, all of which are recorded in the manual.

古文：文王为西伯，以服事殷；周公以鲁蕃，列于诸侯，或享于岐山，或有事泰山。
现代文：旦塞王为西伯的时候，服事殷朝，周公以自己的封邑垦国为因天子的屏藩，列于诸侯的地位，他有时在岐山享祭，有时在泰山祭天。
English: When King Dansai was Xibe, he served the Yin Dynasty, and Zhou Gong took his fiefdom and country as Pinghan, the son of Heaven, and was listed in the status of princes. He sometimes celebrated the festival in Qishan, and sometimes celebrated the festival in Taishan.

古文：徒以圣德，犹得为其事。
现代文：衹因为有圣德，就可能举行封禅祭天的礼仪。
English: Because of the sacredness, it is possible to hold the ceremony of the Fuzen Festival.

古文：自是以来，功薄而僭其义者，不可胜言，号谥不泯，以至于今。
现代文：从那之后，功德浅薄而越礼举行祭天仪式的人，不计其数，他们的谧号也传扬不息，直至今天。
English: Since then, there have been countless people who have performed the rite of sacrificing to the heavens with less merit and more ceremony, and their nickname has been propagated to this day.

古文：况高祖宣皇帝肇开王业，海外有截；世宗景皇帝济以大功，辑宁区夏；太祖文皇帝受命造晋，荡定蜀汉；陛下应期龙兴，混壹六合，泽被群生，威震无外。
现代文：便何况我们的高祖宣皇帝始建王朝基业，海外都得到治理；世宗景皇帝继续建立宏大的功业，使华夏和平安宁；太祖文皇帝接受天命建立置勉，荡平蜀选；皇帝陛下你应运而起，统一了天下四方，布德泽于民众，声威震动于辽远无边的地方。
English: Moreover, our great-great-grandfather Emperor Xuan began to build the foundation of the dynasty, and overseas countries were governed; Emperor Shizongjing continued to build a grand cause, bringing peace and tranquility to China; Emperor Taizouwen accepted the mandate of heaven to establish and stabilize Shuxuan; His Majesty the Emperor rose to the occasion, unified the four corners of the world, brought prosperity to the people, and made his voice vibrate in the boundless place.

古文：昔汉氏失统，吴、蜀鼎峙，兵兴以来，近将百年。
现代文：从前选朝沦落，呈、蜀鼎立，战争爆发至今，已将近有一百年了。
English: It has been nearly a hundred years since the Yuan Dynasty fell, and the Shu Dynasty rose, and the war broke out.

古文：地险俗殊，民望绝塞，以为分外，其日久矣。
现代文：险绝的边远地区，不同风俗的地区，人民困厄绝望，以为处于治道之外，造日子已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since the remote areas in danger of extinction, the areas with different customs, the people in distress and despair, thought they were outside the path of governance.

古文：大业之隆，重光四叶，不羁之寇，二世而平。
现代文：帝业的昌盛，使四个世代以来重布光明，逞凶而不顺服的寇贼，经两世便被平定。
English: The prosperity of the empire has made the four generations bright again, and the bandits who are stubborn and disobedient have been subdued after two generations.

古文：非聪明神武，先天弗违，孰能巍巍其有成功若兹者欤！臣等幸以千载，得遭运会，亲奉大化，目睹太平，至公之美，谁与为让！
现代文：如果不是皇上聪明神武，如果不是皇上在天时到来之前行事，而天意也不违背皇上，又有谁能像这样达到崇高无比的成功呢我们得到千载一时的幸运，遇到这样的机会，能够亲自遵从圣明的教化，亲自目睹太平盛世，至公无私的美德，无可推让。
English: If it were not for the Emperor's wisdom and wisdom, if it were not for the Emperor to act before the time of heaven, and the will of heaven does not contradict the Emperor, who would be able to achieve such a sublime and incomparable success? We are lucky for a thousand years, and when we encounter such an opportunity, we can personally follow the enlightenment of the Holy Wisdom, personally witness the peace and prosperity of the world, the public and selfless virtue, and there is no room for compromise.

古文：宜祖述先朝，宪章古昔，勒功岱岳，登封告成，弘礼乐之制，正三雍之典，扬名万世，以显祖宗。
现代文：应该效法以前的朝廷，效法古时的圣王，到泰山刻石颂德，行封禅礼以告成功，弘扬礼乐制度，端正明堂、辟雍、灵台的典制，扬名于万世，以光宗耀祖。
English: It should follow the example of the former imperial court, follow the example of the ancient holy king, go to Mount Tai to carve a stone tribute to virtue, conduct the enthronement Zen ceremony to achieve success, promote the ritual music system, and carry out the ceremony system of the righteous Ming Hall, Biyong, and Lingtai, and make a name for itself in the world, and glorify the ancestors with light.

古文：是以不胜大愿，敢昧死以闻。
现代文：因此怀着厚望，敢冒死上奏。
English: Therefore, with high hopes, I dared to play.

古文：请告太常具礼仪。 
现代文：请通告太常草拟礼仪。 
English: Please inform us as soon as possible to draft the etiquette.

古文：上复诏曰： 所议诚前烈之盛事也；方今未可以尔。
现代文：皇上又下诏令说： 所奏议的确实是前代帝王们的盛事。当今是不可以如此的。
English: The emperor also issued a decree, saying: "What has been proposed is indeed a grand event of the previous emperors. Today, it is not allowed to do so.

古文：便报绝之。 
现代文：即此回答，今后应停止这种议论。 
English: This is the answer, and this kind of talk should be stopped in the future.

古文：宋太祖在位长久，有意封禅。
现代文：宋人祖在位时间长久，有意举行封惮仪式。
English: Song Renzhu, who reigned for a long time, intentionally held a sealing ceremony.

古文：遣使履行泰山旧道，诏学士山谦之草封禅仪注。其后索虏南寇，六州荒毁，其意乃息。
现代文：他派遣使者循行泰山的旧路，下诏令让学士山谦之草拟封禅的仪式后来因为北方敌军南侵，六州的土地荒毁，宋太祖想举行封惮的意向才搁置下来。
English: He sent an envoy to follow the old path of Mount Tai, and issued a decree to let the scholar Shan Qian draw up the ceremony of sealing Zen. Later, because of the northern enemy's invasion of the south and the land devastation in the six states, Song Taizu's intention to hold a sealing ceremony was shelved.

古文：世祖大明元年十一月戊申，太宰江夏王义恭表曰： 惟皇天崇称大道，始行揖让。
现代文：世祖大明元年十一月戊申日，太宰江夏王刘盏苤上表说： 皂天称誉正道，开始实行揖让的礼仪。
English: In November of the first year of the founder of the Daming Dynasty, on the day of Wushin, the Dazai of the Jiangxia King, Liu Maring, said on the table: So Tian praised the righteous path and began to implement the etiquette of concession.

古文：迄于有晋，虽聿修前绪，而迹沦言废，蔑记于竹素者，焉可单书。
现代文：直到晋朝，虽然继续发扬前代事业，然而旧时的事迹已沦落废弃，没有记载在史册上的，岂能全部都书写出来。
English: Until the Jin Dynasty, although they continued to carry forward the cause of the previous generation, the deeds of the old days had fallen into disuse and were not recorded in the annals of history. How could they all be written down?

古文：绍乾维，建徽号，流风声，被丝管，自无怀以来，可传而不朽者，七十有四君。
现代文：继承了帝位，建树了旌旗，传播风教名声，演奏乐曲，自从无怀氏以来，可以传扬不朽的，共有七十四位君主。
English: A total of seventy-four monarchs have inherited the imperial throne, established the imperial banner, spread the fame of the etiquette, and played music, which can be propagated since the time of Mu Huai.

古文：罔仁厚而道灭，鲜义浇而德宣，钟律之先，旷世绵绝，难得而闻。
现代文：没有深仁厚义，道德便灭绝，缺少仁义，风气浮薄而道德便得到宣扬，在钟律出现之前，在很久远的时代，人们已难得知晓。
English: Without deep benevolence and righteousness, morality would die out. Without benevolence and righteousness, morals would be promoted. Before the appearance of the clock, in a long-ago era, it was difficult for people to know.

古文：《丘》、《索》著明者，尚有遗炳。
现代文：《九丘》、《八索》所记载明白的，它的遣辉还存在。
English: It is clear from the records of "Jiuqiu" and "Hasso" that its glory still exists.

古文：故《易》称先天弗违，后天奉时。
现代文：因此《易经》裹说圣君在天时出现之前行事，天意也不违抗他，在天时出现之后行事，是尊奉天时。
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" says that the saint acts before the appearance of the heavenly time, and the will of heaven does not defy him, and acts after the appearance of the heavenly time is to honor the heavenly time.

古文：盖陶唐姚姒商姬之主，莫不由斯道也。
现代文：大抵唐尧帝、疆壶、曼昌以及直曲、台目的君主们，没有不是遵循这一治道的。
English: Most of the emperors, such as Emperor Tang, Emperor Jian, Emperor Manchang, as well as the emperors of the Zhengyu and Taimu Dynasties, followed this rule.

古文：是以风化大洽，光熙于后。
现代文：因此风俗教化很和协，光照于后世。
English: Therefore, the custom of enlightenment is very harmonious and shines on future generations.

古文：炎汉二帝，亦踵曩则，因百姓之心，听舆人之颂，龙驾帝服，镂玉梁甫，昌言明称，告成上灵。
现代文：酉选的彦担，塞选的光武壶，也继续实行以前的法则，顺随百姓的愿望，听取众人的歌颂，坐着帝王乘坐的车舆，在梁父山刻玉致祭用善美的言词宣称，向皇天上帝报告成功。
English: The Hikotan chosen by the emperor, the light and martial jug chosen by the emperor, also continue to implement the previous rules, follow the wishes of the people, listen to the songs of the people, sit in the chariot that the emperor rides, and declare with the words of kindness and beauty in the Liangchishan carved jade sacrifice, and report success to the Emperor God.

古文：况大宋表祥唐虞，受终素德，山龙启符，金玉显瑞，异采腾于轸墟，紫烟蔼于邦甸，锡冕兆九五之征，文豹赴天历之会。
现代文：何况我刘宋朝廷祭告唐尧、虞舜，承接丁纯正的德泽，山龙为主开启祥符，金玉出现显示瑞兆，神异的华彩出现在整个区域，紫色的祥云荫盖着邦土，上帝赐下冕服是得帝位的征兆，纹豹奔赴天命的期会。
English: What's more, I, Liu Song's imperial court, consecrated Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan, inheriting the pure virtue of Ding Zhe, the mountain dragon was the main initiator of the auspicious symbols, the appearance of gold and jade showed auspicious signs, the miraculous gorgeous colors appeared in the entire region, the purple auspicious clouds covered the national soil, the God-given crowned robe was a sign of gaining the throne, and the striped leopard rushed to the meeting of destiny.

古文：诚二祖之幽庆，圣后之冥休。
现代文：这实在是两位先祖九泉之下的欢庆，是先皇后的阴福。
English: This is really a celebration of the two ancestors under the nine springs, and a blessing for the former empress.

古文：道冠轩、尧，惠深亭毒；而犹执冲约，未言封禅之事，四海窃以恧焉。
现代文：治道为轩辕黄帝及尧帝以来之冠，恩惠深而化育了万物；然而却仍然坚持俭约，不提封惮的事，四海之内的人私下裹都为之惭愧。
English: Governance has been the crown since Emperor Xuan of the Yellow Dynasty and Emperor Xuan of the Song Dynasty. Benevolence is deep and has nurtured all things; however, it still adheres to frugality, does not mention the matter of sealing, and people within the four seas are privately ashamed of it.

古文：臣闻惟皇配极，惟帝祀天，故能上稽乾式，照临黔首，协和穹昊，膺兹多福。
现代文：我听说衹有皇帝才能配享宗庙，祭祀天神，因此能对上稽考天道，光照百姓，协和苍穹，接受这样的大福。
English: I heard that only an emperor can enjoy the ancestral temple and worship the gods, so he can examine the heavenly way, illuminate the people, harmonize with the sky, and receive such a great blessing.

古文：高祖武皇帝明并日月，光振八区，拯已溺之晋，济横流之世，拨乱宁民，应天受命，鸿徽洽于海表，威棱震乎沙外。
现代文：高祖武皇帝的圣明与日月齐同，光辉普照天下八方，拯救了沦丧的晋朝，救济了动乱不堪的人世，把祸乱平定使人民安宁，顺应天时，接受天命，他至美至善的品德使海协和，他的威势震撼了沙漠之外的地区。
English: The holy light of Emperor Gao Zuwu is the same as that of the sun and the moon, and his radiance shines all over the world. He saved the ruined Jin Dynasty, relieved the turbulent human world, calmed the calamity, calmed the people, conformed to the time of day, and accepted the destiny of heaven. His beautiful and good character made the sea harmonious, and his power shook the areas outside the desert.

古文：太祖文皇帝体圣履仁，述业兴礼，正乐颂，作象历，明达通于神祇，玄泽被乎上下。
现代文：太祖文皇帝圣体仁厚，继承前代的功业振兴礼教，端正了乐舞，制订了历法，他的圣明旷达与神明相通，他那深厚的恩泽荫盖着朝野上下。
English: Emperor Taizu-Wen was benevolent and benevolent, he inherited the work of the previous generation and revitalized the ritual, perfected the music and dance, and established the calendar. His holiness and vastness communicated with the gods, and his deep grace shadow covered the court and the country.

古文：仁孝命世，睿武英挺，遭运屯否，三才湮灭，乃龙飞五洲，凤翔九江，身先八百之期，断出人鬼之表，庆烟应高牙之建，风耀符发迹之辰，亲翦凶逆，躬清昏，天地革始，夫妇更造，岂与彼承业继绪，拓复禹迹，车一其轨，书罔异文者，同年而议哉！今龙麟已至，凤皇已仪，比李已实，灵茅已茂，雕气降雾于宫榭，珍露呈味于禁林，嘉禾积穗于殿甍，连理合干于园御，皆耀质离宫，植根兰囿。
现代文：陛下的仁孝著名于世，陛下的武德出众，遭遇国家艰难困苦的厄运，三才泯灭，于是五洲神龙腾飞，江河之上丹凤翱翔，身为八百诸侯的先导而赴会师之期，出现在人鬼之外，牙旗顺应吉庆的彩云而建树，威风在显达发迹的时期显耀，亲自消灭了为凶作逆之徒，亲自扫清阴霾，天地开始更新，普天之下的男女又获得新生，难道可与那些继承帝业，拓展和恢复夏禹的疆土，实现车同轨，书同文的君主们，同曰而论吗现在神龙和瑞麟已经出现，凤凰已经飞来，连理李树已结果实，菁茅已经茂盛，彩云已降落到宫廷台榭，露珠已出现在禁苑裹，嘉禾在殿屋中结穗，连根合干的树在御园墙垣之内成长，它们都在离宫中显露异质和风辨，在兰苑中植根。
English: His majesty's benevolence and filial piety are famous in the world. His majesty's martial arts are outstanding. He encountered the country's hardships and hardships, and only three times was annihilated. Therefore, the five continents of the gods and dragons took off. Danfeng soared above the rivers. As the forerunner of the eight hundred princes, he went to the period of association, appeared outside the ghosts and goblins. The tooth flag conformed to the auspicious clouds and built trees. The prestige shone in the period of achievement. He personally eliminated the villains who did evil deeds, and personally cleared the haze. The world began to

古文：至夫霜毫玄文，素翮赪羽，泉河山岳之瑞，草木金石之祥，方畿憬涂之谒，抗驿绝祖之奏，彪炳杂沓，粤不可胜言。
现代文：至于白色的兽毛黑色的纹彩，白色的翼羽赤色的羽绒，山岳流泉的瑞兆，草木金石的祯祥，邦畿之内的人赶了遥远的路途前来谒见进言，乘驿马急速奔赴而来奏请，辉煌万般，实在不可尽言。
English: As for the white animal hair, the black patterns, the white wings and feathers, the red down, the auspiciousness of the mountain springs, the auspiciousness of the plants and trees, the people in Gyeonggi Province have come a long way to see and listen to the speech, and they have come by horse to play the speech. The splendor is indescribable.

古文：太平之应，兹焉富矣。宜其从天人之诚，遵先王之则，备万乘，整法驾，修封泰山，瘗玉岱趾，延乔、松于东序，诏韩、岐于西厢，麾天阍，使启关，谒紫宫，朝太一，奏《钧天》，咏《云门》，赞扬幽奥，超声前古，岂不盛哉！伏愿时命宗伯，具兹典度。 
现代文：天下太平的瑞应，这时已是很多很多的了陛下应该顺随天上人间的一片至诚，遵循先王的典则，准备万乘车舆，整饰帝王乘坐的法驾，到泰山举行封禅的礼仪，在泰山脚下瘗埋瑞玉，延请王子乔、赤松子等仙人到束厢房，诏令征召仙人韩众、岐伯到西厢房，指挥天帝的守门人，让他们开启殿门，拜谒天宫，朝见太一天神，奏《钧天》大乐，咏唱《云门》乐舞，赞扬苍穹，颂声超过远古时期，这是多么盛美啊我愿意命令宗伯，草拟好造盛典的仪式。 
English: At that time, the world was at peace, and there was already a lot of happiness. His majesty should follow a piece of sincerity between heaven and earth, follow the precepts of the former king, prepare to travel by car, decorate the emperor's ride, go to Mount Tai to hold the ceremony of sealing Zen, bury the precious jade at the foot of Mount Tai, invite Prince Qiao, Red Pine and other immortals to the casket room, and order the summoning of the immortals Han Zong and Qibo to the west compartment, command the gatekeepers of the emperor, let them open the temple door, worship the heavenly palace, see the sun god in the morning, play

古文：诏曰： 太宰表如此。
现代文：皇帝下诏令说： 太宰如此盛情表奏。
English: The emperor issued a decree saying: "Dazai is so generous.

古文：昔之盛王，永保鸿名，常为称首，由斯道矣。
现代文：古代的圣王，永远保有大名，常常被称誉，都是由于这种典制。
English: The holy kings of antiquity, who always retained the title of daimyo and were often praised, were all due to this system.

古文：朕遭家多难，入纂绝业，德薄勋浅，鉴寐崩愧。顷麟凤表祯，茅禾兼瑞，虽符祥显见，恧乎犹深，庶仰述先志，拓清中宇，礼祇谒神，朕将试哉。 
现代文：我遇着皇家多难，进朝廷继承帝位，德行浅薄，功勋微小，我常常不能安睡，心碎惭愧，近来麟凤都显现祯祥，茅和嘉禾都同时出现瑞兆，虽说符瑞已经显现，但我惭愧之心仍然深重，希望能继续发扬先王的心志，拓清中原，行礼拜谒神明，我将会努力去做。 
English: I have encountered many difficulties in the royal family. I entered the imperial court to succeed the throne. My virtue is shallow and my merits are small. I often can't sleep peacefully, my heart is broken and I am ashamed. Recently, the unicorns and the phoenixes have all appeared auspicious, and the maple and the jiahe have all appeared auspicious at the same time. Although the auspiciousness has already appeared, my heart of shame is still heavy. I hope to continue to carry forward the aspirations of the former king, clarify the Central Plains, and worship the gods. I will work hard to do so.

古文：四年四月辛亥，有司奏曰：臣闻崇号建极，必观俗以树教；正位居体，必采世以立言。
现代文：四年四月辛亥，主事官员上奏说：我听说帝王即位的时候，一定要考察风俗以确立教化；已居帝王之位的人，一定要汲取当世的舆论而提出施政纲领。
English: In April of the fourth year of Xinhai, the leading official made a report saying: I heard that when the emperor ascends the throne, he must examine the customs to establish enlightenment; those who have been on the throne of the emperor must draw on the current public opinion and propose a policy program.

古文：是以重代列圣，咸由厥道。
现代文：因此历代的列位圣王，都遵循了这个法则。
English: For this reason, all successive kings have followed this rule.

古文：玄勋上烈，融章未分，鸣光委绪，歇而罔臧。
现代文：元勋最崇高的功业，没有分明记载以显赫，他遗留下来的卓著业绩，也消失而没有记载。
English: Yuan Xun's most noble work has not been clearly recorded as prominent, and the outstanding achievements he left behind have also disappeared without being recorded.

古文：若其显谥略腾轨，则系缀声采，征略闻听。
现代文：如果是谧号彰显事迹得到传扬，那么就会记载他的名声和风采，得以征考当时的传闻。
English: If it is a nickname, it means that his reputation and style will be recorded, and he will be able to solicit the rumors of the time.

古文：爰洎姬、汉，风流尚存，遗芬余荣，绵映纪纬。
现代文：自周朝、选朝以来，其流风余韵依然存在，留下的荣耀和光辉，连绵不绝地映照于史册。
English: Since the Zhou Dynasty and the Qian Dynasty, the aftertaste of its style still exists, and the glory and brilliance left behind are continuously reflected in the historical record.

古文：虽年绝世祀，代革精华，可得腾金彩，奏玉润，镂迹以熏今，镌德以丽远。
现代文：虽然年代相隔久远，历代精华更替，仍然能够呈金彩，颂德泽，铭刻事迹熏染后人，铭刻德泽以光照久远。
English: Although the years are far apart, and the essence of the past generations is changing, it can still be golden, a tribute to Dezawa, an inscription of deeds to infect future generations, and an inscription of Dezawa to shine for a long time.

古文：而四望埋禋歌之礼，日观弛修封之容，岂非神明之业难崇，功基之迹易泯。
现代文：然而今天遥祭祝颂四方山川的礼仪还没有举行，泰山曰观峰封惮的礼仪也已停止，岂不是使神明的业绩难于被崇仰，创建基业的功迹容易被泯减吗?
English: However, today, the ceremony of celebrating the four-sided mountains and rivers of the Faraway Festival has not yet been held, and the ceremony of watching the peaks of Mount Tai has also stopped. Isn't it true that the performance of the gods is difficult to be revered, and the creation of the foundation is easy to be reduced?

古文：自兹以降，讫于季末，莫不欲英弘徽位，详固洪声。
现代文：从此之后，直至近代的帝王，总是想光大帝王之位，审慎保持声威。
English: From then on, until modern times, emperors have always wanted to become great emperors and have carefully maintained their prestige.

古文：岂徒深默修文，渊幽驭世而已。
现代文：哪里衹是静默地实行文治，深沉地统治人世而已呢?
English: Where is the country that quietly practices civil government and deeply governs the world?

古文：谅以縢非虚奏，书匪妄埋，击雨恕神，淳廕复树，安得紫坛肃祗，竹宫载伫，散火投郊，流星奔座。
现代文：应该以为封禅文书和封禅礼仪不是虚妄，遇雨击则恕神，让淳厚的庇荫再次树立，怎么能在紫色的祭坛前肃敬，在竹制的祭宫前凝望伫立，流散的火光投向郊野，流星奔出星座。
English: It should be thought that the seal of Zen and the seal of Zen etiquette are not false. In case of rain, it is better to forgive the gods and let the thick shade stand again. How can you stand in front of the purple altar, gaze at the bamboo festival palace, the scattered firelight cast to the countryside, and the meteor run out of the constellation.

古文：宝纬初基，厌灵命历，德振弛维，功济沦象，玄浸纷流，华液幽润，规存永驭，思详树远。
现代文：国家基业刚刚奠定，应神灵定年号，以美德振起废弛的纲维，以功勋拯救了沦落的法度，材王的恩德流芳，功业深厚润泽，法度能长保国家的治理，谋划周密建树了未来的远景。
English: The foundation of the country has just been laid. In response to God's predetermined year, we should use virtue to lift up the slack, and use merit to save the fallen law. The king's benevolence has spread far and wide, the work is deep and rich, the law can keep the country's governance for a long time, and the future vision has been carefully planned.

古文：太祖文皇帝以启遘泰运，景望震凝，采乐调风，集礼宣度，祖宗相映，轨迹重晖。
现代文：太祖文皇帝开始遇上大好的时运，他那崇高的威望震撼了边远之地，采风谣调乐舞，集礼仪宣法度，光耀祖宗，治道重现昌明。
English: Emperor Taizowen began to meet with good fortune, and his lofty prestige shook the outlying areas. He adopted the style of ballads, music and dance, collected etiquette, promulgated laws, glorified his ancestors, and restored the rule of law.

古文：圣上韫箓蕃河，伫翔衡汉，金波掩照，华耀停明，运动时来，跃飞风举，澄氛海、岱，开景中区，歇神还灵，颓天重耀，储正凝位于兼明，哀岳蕃华于元列。
现代文：圣明的皇上在诸侯之位上接受天命，翱翔奋起冲向天漠，月亮停止照耀，光华停止出现，冲动之时，有如大风之迅猛，澄清海、岱的妖气，开拓中原的光明，消失的神明冉次显灵，失色的苍天重现光辉。太子定位而更加贤明，诸侯贵臣荣盛而列位。
English: On the throne of princes, the emperor of the holy light accepted the destiny of heaven, soaring up and rushing to the sky, the moon stopped shining, the brightness stopped appearing, when the impulse was like the swiftness of the wind, clarifying the sea, the evil spirits of the dragonflies, opening up the light of the Central Plains, the disappearing gods appeared one after another, and the discolored sky regained its brilliance. The prince was positioned more wisely, and the princes and dignitaries were ranked in glory.

古文：故以祥映昌基，系发篆素。
现代文：因此祥瑞辉映昌盛的基业，飞雁传送篆字书写的帛书。
English: Therefore, Xiang Ruihui reflected the foundation of prosperity, and the flying geese transmitted the syllabary written by the syllabary.

古文：重以班朝待典，饰令详仪，纂综沦芜，搜腾委逸，奏玉郊宫，禋珪玄畤，景集天庙，脉壤祥农，节至昕阳，川丘夙礼，纲威巡止，表绥中甸，史流其咏，民挹其风。
现代文：加以整肃朝列等待礼仪的举行，修饰完善礼仪制度，综合纂集散乱的礼文，搜集并传布遣佚的有关礼仪的记载，在郊祭之宫献玉，在北峙进奉玉珪以祭天。祥光会集于太庙，土地润泽农事佳吉，到了听阳时节，礼敬河川山丘，以天子声威巡行视察，显耀威武安定中原，史册流传着对他的咏颂，人民称赞他的风雅。
English: He also rectified the imperial line waiting for the ceremony to be held, embellished and perfected the etiquette system, comprehensively compiled scattered liturgical texts, collected and disseminated records of the relevant etiquette of the imperial edict, presented jade at the palace of the suburban festival, and offered jade to the north. Xiangguang would gather at the Great Temple, the land was moist and the agricultural work was auspicious, and when it was the time to listen to the sun, he paid respect to the rivers and hills, marched and inspected with the voice of the heavenly son, and showed the mighty and stable Central Plains. The history books circulated his eulogy

古文：于是涵迹视阴，振声威响，历代之渠，沉□望内，安侯之长，贤王入侍，殊生诡气，奉俗还乡，羽族卉仪，怀音革状，边帛绝书，权光弛烛。
现代文：于是巡视北方，声威震响，历代的酋长，诚心顺服仰望朝廷，藩国的村长，以其贤王入朝奉侍，异地风气奇特的人民，奉行风俗而还乡，异域民族不同礼俗的人民，变音革状，边境上再没有缣帛书写的紧急文书，烽火也已很少点燃。
English: As a result, the north was inspected, the prestige was resounding, the chiefs of all generations sincerely obeyed and looked up to the imperial court, the village heads of the feudal state entered the service of the imperial court with their wise kings, the people with strange customs in different places returned to their hometowns, the people of different ethnic groups with different etiquette were like leather, there were no more emergency documents written in ink on the border, and bonfires were rarely lit.

古文：天岱发灵，宗河开宝，崇丘沦鼎，振采泗渊，云皇王岳，离藻□汉，并角即音，栖翔禁御，衮甲霜味，翾舞川肆，荣泉流镜，后昭河源，故以波沸外关，云蒸内泽。
现代文：泰山生灵气，童回出国宝，高丘沉鼎，于泗水中捞取，云天高山，饰彩天际，飞鸟走兽，流连于禁苑宫垣，鳞甲鱼群，翻舞在川流之中，美泉清澈，映照河水之源，因此波涌于外关，云烟升腾于内泽。
English: Mount Tai has a spiritual aura, children return from the national treasure, high hills are high, fish are caught in the brackish water, the sky is high, the sky is decorated, birds and animals linger in the palace walls of the Forbidden City, groups of scaly turtles dance in the middle of the stream, beautiful springs are clear, reflecting the source of the river, so the waves are surging in the outer pass, and clouds are rising in the inner lake.

古文：若其雪趾青毳，玄文硃彩，日月郊甸，择木弄音，重以荣露腾轩，萧云掩阁，镐颍孳萌，移华渊禁，山舆伫衡，云鹣竦翼，海鲽泳流，江茅吐廕。
现代文：至于白趾青羽之鸟，黑纹朱彩之禽，日曰月月在畿郊，择木栖息而和呜。加以华露升腾于毫轩，稀疏的云彩掩映楼阁，箍丞、墨丛孳长萌芽，移华于深禁之中。山车伫立等待，比翼之鸟展翅，比之鱼泳流，江茅生长茂盛。
English: As for the white-toed bird with blue feathers and the black-striped bird with vermilion feathers, day by day, month by month, they roost in the suburbs of Gyeonggi-do, choose a tree to perch on, and live happily. Then, the dew rises in Myeonghyeon, the sparse clouds cover the pavilion, the chrysanthemums and ink bushes sprout, and move to the deep-forbidden. The roller coaster stands waiting, the bird with wings spreads its wings, the fish with wings swims, and the riverside grows luxuriantly.

古文：校书之列，仰笔以饰辞，济、代之蕃，献邑以待礼。
现代文：校书之人，恭谨地秉笔修饰辞藻，济、代等地的藩王，献出封邑以致礼。
English: The person who wrote the school book, respectfully wrote down and embellished the words, and the lords of the domain in places such as Jie and Dai offered their fiefs as a gift.

古文：岂非神勰气昌，物瑞云照，蒱轩龟轸，□泉淳芳。
现代文：这难道不是神明协和祥气昌盛，众物呈瑞祥云普照，蒲轩龟轸，甘泉淳芳。
English: Isn't this the prosperity of the divine harmony and auspicious qi, and all things are shining with auspicious clouds, and the turtles of Pu Xuan and Jun Fang of Ganquan are at their best.

古文：太宰江夏王臣义恭咀道遵英，抽奇丽古，该润图史，施详载，表以功懋往初，德耀炎、昊，升文中岱，登牒天关，耀冠荣名，摛振声号。
现代文：太宰江夏王刘义恭体味圣典遵循经义，引据先王的精粹，依循古代的法典，博通图书秘籍，熟悉珍藏的典籍，他的表奏以为皇上往日建立功勋，圣德光耀炎帝和太吴，应该祭泰山告成功，发布文书致达天门，以显扬冠首的盛名，传播声威。
English: Liu Yigong, the King of Dazai and Jiangxia, tasted the holy scriptures, followed the sutras, quoted the essence of the former king, followed the ancient code, read the secret books, and was familiar with the treasured classics. His performance believed that the emperor had built up merits in the past, and the holy virtues had glorified the Emperor and the Emperor Wu. It was necessary to sacrifice Mount Tai and succeed, and release the documents to reach the gate of heaven, so as to show the glory of the crowned head and spread the fame.

古文：而道谦称首，礼以虚挹，将使玄祇缺观，幽瑞乖期，梁甫无盛德之容，介丘靡声闻之响。
现代文：然而皇上以谦逊之道为首事，没有举行揖拜之礼，将使天地神灵不能显耀，潜藏的瑞物不能按时出现，凿一生丛没有举行盛大祭祀的景象，介丘山没有祭告天帝的声音。
English: However, the emperor took the path of modesty as the first thing, and did not hold a wreath-laying ceremony, which would make the gods and spirits of heaven and earth unable to shine, the hidden treasures could not appear on time, there was no scene of a grand sacrifice held in the life-long bush, and there was no sound of proclaiming the heavenly emperor on the mountain.

古文：加穷泉之野，献八代之驷，交木之乡，奠绝金之楛，肃灵重表，珍符兼贶。
现代文：加之西域深泉之野，进献享有盛名的驷马，肃慎之乡，奉献坚利能穿铁的楛木之矢，神明再次显灵，珍奇的符瑞一同赐福。
English: In addition, the western region of the field of deep springs, the presentation of the famous horse, the town of solemnity, the dedication of the arrow of the beech tree that can pierce iron, the gods appear again, and the rare fury bless together.

古文：伏惟陛下谟详渊载，衍属休章，依征圣灵，润色声业，诹辰稽古，肃齐警列，儒僚展采，礼官相仪，悬蕤动音，洪钟竦节，阳路整卫，正途清禁。
现代文：陛下的谟诰周详该博，显扬了美好的典章，取据圣灵，使声名和业绩增光，选取吉日考察古礼，整肃警卫，儒士僚佐展示其宫职，礼官协理仪典，悬垂的绫饰动音，洪钟振起节奏，向南之路整肃设卫，正途沿线清道设禁。
English: His Majesty's Moo-hyun elaborated on the exposition, highlighting the beautiful ceremony, relying on the Holy Spirit to enhance the reputation and performance, selecting the auspicious day to inspect the ancient rites, rectifying the guards, showing the palace duties of the Confucian scholars, the ceremony of the assistant of the etiquette officer, the hanging gong decoration moving sound, the Hong bell vibrating rhythm, the road to the south was rectified and guarded, and the clear road along the right route was prohibited.

古文：于是绩环佩，端玉藻，鸣凤伫律，腾驾流文，间彩比象之容，昭明纪数之服。
现代文：于是整理随身的佩玉，理正冕冠前后垂悬的玉藻，凤凰定音律，乐奏和谐，以缀有比照百物的文彩，显耀庄重的服物。
English: Therefore, they tidied up the jade beads they carried with them, straightened the crowns and crowns of the hanging jade algae, the phoenixes set the melody, the music played in harmony, and adorned the solemn clothing with the paintings of hundreds of objects.

古文：徽焯天阵，容藻神行，翠盖怀阴，羽华列照。
现代文：光辉照耀天神的阵伍，华彩映照天神的行列，翠羽车盖庇荫，羽葆华盖映照。
English: The radiance shines on the ranks of the gods, the colors reflect the procession of the gods, the green feathered chariot covers the shade, and the feathered feathered covers the reflection.

古文：乃诏联事掌祭，宾客赞仪，金支宿县，镛石润响。
现代文：于是下诏令让官府联事掌管祭祀，宾客赞礼，乐器预先悬挂，钟磬和润呜奏。
English: As a result, a decree was issued to let the government joint committee take charge of the sacrificial rites, the praise of the guests, the musical instruments hanging in advance, the carillon and the rune.

古文：命五神以相列，辟九关以集灵，警卫兵而开云，先雨祇以洒路。
现代文：命令五方之神排列，开启九重天门以集合神灵，卫士警戒云开见天，事先让雨神清洒道路。
English: He ordered the gods of the five directions to line up, opened the nine-storey Heaven's Gate to gather the gods, and the guards warned the clouds to open and let the rain god sprinkle the road in advance.

古文：霞凝生阙，烟起成宫，台冠丹光，坛浮素霭。
现代文：彩霞凝聚而成阙，烟云升腾而成宫，高台覆盖着霞光，坛台浮涌起白雾。
English: The colored haze condenses and forms a cocoon, the smoke clouds rise and form a palace, the high platform is covered with haze, and the platform is covered with white fog.

古文：尔乃临中坛，备盛礼，天降祥锡，寿固皇根，谷动神音，山传称响。
现代文：于是到临坛中。备置丰盛的礼物，天帝降赐祥瑞，长久保全皇家的基业，谷中发出神祇的福音，山中传出赞誉。
English: So he went to the altar. He prepared rich gifts, the heavenly emperor bestowed auspiciousness, the royal inheritance was preserved for a long time, the gospel of the gods was sent out in the valley, and praise was spread in the mountains.

古文：然后辨年问老，陈诗观俗，归荐告神，奉遗清庙。
现代文：然后察辨年龄慰问长老，采集进献民间诗歌，用以观察民风民俗，返归后享祭神灵，献祭太庙。
English: Then, they will identify the age of the elders to be consoled, collect folk poems to be presented, use them to observe folk customs, enjoy the offerings to the gods after returning, and offer sacrifices to the Great Temple.

古文：光美之盛，彰乎万古；渊祥之烈，溢乎无穷。岂不盛欤！
现代文：光美的盛德，显耀万古；深广的业绩，永世流传难道不是很伟大吗!
English: Isn't it great that the virtue of brilliance and beauty will shine forever and ever; that profound and wide-ranging achievements will be handed down from generation to generation?

古文：臣等生接昌辰，肃懋明世，束教管闻，未足言道。且章志湮微，代往沦绝，拘采遗文，辩明训诰□□□□簉访邹、鲁，草縢书堙玉之礼，具竦石绳金之仪，和芝润瑛，镌玺乾封。
现代文：我们生逢盛世，谨慎勤勉于政治清明的时代，学识浅薄见闻不广，不足于论说圣道况且典章制度已湮没，时代逝去，现在征集前代典制遣文，表述明白训诰之本义口口口口造访邹、鲁先圣之地，撰写封禅玉册及堙玉的礼仪，起草竦石及绳金的仪礼，和润的芝草和美玉，镑刻玺印以祭祀。
English: We were born in a prosperous time, prudently and diligently in an era of clear politics. Our knowledge is shallow and not widely known. It is not enough to discuss the status of the sacred path and the award system has disappeared. The era has passed. Now we are collecting the previous generation's envoys to make envoys, express the true meaning of the teachings, visit the sacred places of Lu and Lushan, write the etiquette of sealing the zen jade book and the jade, draft the ceremony of the jade and the rope gold, and the moist turf grass and the beautiful jade, and engrave the seal with the sacrifice.

古文：惧弗轨属上徽，辉当王则。
现代文：我们惧怕没能遵奉皇朝善美的仪制，不能弘扬皇朝的典则。
English: We are afraid that we have not been able to follow the good and beautiful rituals of the imperial dynasty, and we cannot promote the principles of the imperial dynasty.

古文：谨奉仪注以闻。
现代文：恭谨地将所撰写的仪则奏报。
English: I respectfully submit the written report of the ceremony.

古文：诏曰： 天生神物，昔王称愧，况在寡德，敢当鸿贶。
现代文：皇帝下诏令说： 天生的神物，先王都自以为惭愧而不敢接受，更何况我这个缺少德行的人，怎敢接受这巨大的恩惠。
English: The emperor issued a decree saying, "The previous emperors were ashamed to accept a natural deity, and how dare I, who lack virtue, accept this great boon.

古文：今文轨未一，可停此奏。 
现代文：现在国家还没有安定统一，应该停止这样的奏议。 
English: Now that the country is not yet stable and unified, such appeals should be stopped.

古文：汉献帝建安十八年五月，以河北十郡封魏武帝为魏公。
现代文：汉献帝建安十八年五月，把河北十郡封给魏武帝为魏公。
English: In May of the 18th year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jianan awarded ten counties in Hebei to Emperor Wu of Wei as Wei Gong.

古文：是年七月，始建宗庙于鄴，自以诸侯礼立五庙也。
现代文：这一年的七月，开始在邺建立宗庙，是魏公自己以诸侯礼建立五庙。
English: In July of that year, he began to build a family temple in Handan, and he set up five temples according to the etiquette of the princes.

古文：后虽进爵为王，无所改易。
现代文：后来虽然进升爵号为王，也没有更改。
English: Later, although he was ennobled and given the title of king, he did not change.

古文：延康元年，文帝继王位。七月，追尊皇祖为太王，丁夫人曰太王后。
现代文：延康元年，文帝继承了魏王王位，七月，追尊皇祖为太王，称丁夫人为太王后。
English: In the first year of the Yan Kang era, Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of the Wei King. In July, the Emperor's ancestor was named the Great King, and Lady Ding was named the Great Queen.

古文：黄初元年十一月受禅，又追尊太王曰太皇帝，皇考武王曰武皇帝。
现代文：黄初元年十一月接受汉帝禅让，又追尊太王为太皇帝，已故父亲武王称为武皇帝。
English: In November of the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, he accepted the Emperor's abdication, and revered the Great King as the Great Emperor. His late father, King Wu, was known as Emperor Wu.

古文：明帝太和三年六月，又追尊高祖大长秋曰高皇，夫人吴氏曰高皇后，并在鄴庙庙所祠。
现代文：明帝太和三年六月，又追尊高祖大长秋为高皇，夫人吴氏为高皇后，都在邺县宗庙的庙裹祭祀。
English: In June of the 3rd year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Ming and Empress Wu honored Gaozhu Dajangqiu as Emperor Gao and his wife as Empress Gao, and both were enshrined in the ancestral temple of Jixian County.

古文：则文帝之高祖处士、曾祖高皇、祖太皇帝共一庙。
现代文：于是文帝的高祖为处士、曾祖为高皇、祖父为太皇帝，他们共同供奉在一个庙裹。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen's great-great-grandfather was a priest, his great-great-grandfather was Emperor Gao, and his grandfather was Emperor Taizong, and they were all enshrined together in one temple.

古文：考太祖武皇帝特一庙百世不毁，然则所祠止于亲庙四室也。
现代文：已故父亲太祖武皇帝独立一庙，后世历代不毁弃，那么所祭祀衹限于亲族庙共四室。
English: Emperor Taizongwu, the late father of Emperor Taizongwu, built a temple independently, which was not destroyed by later generations. Therefore, the place of worship was limited to a total of four rooms in the family temple.

古文：至明帝太和三年十一月，洛京庙成，则以亲尽迁处士主，置园邑，使令丞奉荐。
现代文：到了明帝太和三年十一月，洛京的宗庙建成，就因血亲关系世代悬远而迁出处士的神主，建置园邑，派遣令丞奉祭。
English: When Emperor Ming and Empress Dowager Cixi arrived in November of the third year, the ancestral temple in Luojing was completed. Because of the distant blood relationship between the generations, the priest moved out, built a garden village, and dispatched a priest to perform the sacrifice.

古文：而使行太傅太常韩暨、行太常宗正曹恪持节迎高皇以下神主共一庙，犹为四室而已。
现代文：另外派遣行太傅太常韩暨、行太庙宗正曹恪持节奉迎高皇以下各神主牌位共供奉于一庙内，仍然衹有四室而已。
English: In addition, it was dispatched to the Taifu Taizhang Hanji and the Taifu Taimiao Zongzheng Cao to hold the festival, and the main deities, including the Emperor Yinggao, were all enshrined in one temple, but there were still only four rooms.

古文：至景初元年六月，群公有司始更奏定七庙之制，曰： 大魏三圣相承，以成帝业。
现代文：到了景初元年六月，公卿们及主事官员才上奏改立七庙的制度，他们的上奏说： 我人魏三位圣王相承续，建成帝业。
English: In June of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Qun Gong and Shi Cai also petitioned for the establishment of a seven-temple system, saying, "The three holy lords of Dadin have succeeded each other, thus achieving imperial succession.

古文：武皇帝肇建洪基，拨乱夷险，为魏太祖。
现代文：武皇帝开始创建宏大的基业，拨乱世平艰险，为魏太祖。
English: Emperor Wu created a grand foundation, called Wei Taizu.

古文：文皇帝继天革命，应期受禅，为魏高祖。
现代文：文皇帝继续奉承天意革旧图新，顺应机遇接受汉帝的惮让，为魏高祖。
English: Emperor Wen accepted the will of heaven and accepted the position of the emperor in accordance with the current situation, known as Wei Gaotan.

古文：上集成大命，清定华夏，兴制礼乐，宜为魏烈祖。 
现代文：皇上集成大命，安定华夏，兴建礼乐制度，应该称为魏烈祖。 
English: The emperor fulfilled his great mission, pacified China, and reformulated the ritual music. He should be called Wei Lei Zu.

古文：更于太祖庙北为二祧，其左为文帝庙，号曰高祖，昭祧，其右拟明帝号曰烈祖，穆祧。
现代文：又在太担庙北建立两座祖庙，左边的为文帝庙，庙号为直担，是昭庙，右边的预定为明帝庙，庙号为烈担，是穆庙。
English: In addition, two ancestral temples were built in the north of the Taitang Temple. The left one is the Wendi Temple, the temple name is Zhitang, which is the Zhaotang Temple, and the right one is designated as the Ming Dynasty Temple, the temple name is Yeotang, which is the Mu Temple.

古文：三祖之庙，万世不毁，其余四庙，亲尽迭迁，一如周后稷、文、武庙祧之礼。
现代文：左担、直担、型担等三祖庙，千秋万代不毁弃，具余的四庙，当血亲关系疏远之后依次迁出，一概依照周朝的后稷、文王、武王远祖庙的礼仪制度。
English: The three ancestral temples such as Zuotan, Zhitangan and Shitangan will not be destroyed for thousands of years, and the remaining four temples will be moved out one after another when the blood relationship is alienated, all in accordance with the ceremonial system of the Houyi, King Wen and King Wu Yuan ancestral temples of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孙盛《魏氏春秋》曰： 夫谥以表行，庙以存容，皆于既殁然后著焉。
现代文：孙盛的《魏氏春秋》说： 谧号是用来表示行为的，庙号是用来显示礼仪的，都是在人已死之后确定的。
English: Sun Sheng's "The Spring and Autumn of the Wei Dynasty" said: The nickname is used to indicate behavior, the temple name is used to show etiquette, and they are all determined after a person has died.

古文：所以原始要终，以示百世者也。
现代文：因此都是依据人始终一贯的行为，确定称号以昭示千秋万代的。
English: Therefore, it is based on people's consistent behavior to determine the title to reflect the ages.

古文：未有当年而逆制祖宗，未终而豫自尊显。
现代文：没有在君王在世的当年预先决定其为某祖某宗的庙号的，也没有在未终之时自己预先设定尊显庙号的。
English: There is no temple name that was predetermined to be that of a certain ancestor of a certain sect in the year when the monarch was alive, and there is no temple name that was predetermined to be that of a certain ancestor of a certain sect when the monarch was alive.

古文：昔华乐以厚敛致讥，周人以豫凶违礼，魏之群司，于是乎失正矣。 
现代文：过去华乐以厚葬而招到讥刺，周朝人以预设凶礼而违背礼制，曹魏的官员们，在这件事情上失之偏颇了。 
English: In the past, Hua Le invited ridicule with a large funeral, and the Zhou Dynasty violated the etiquette by presupposing a violent eulogy. Cao Wei's officials were biased in this matter.

古文：文帝甄后赐死，故不列庙。
现代文：文帝的甄氏皇后被赐死，因而没有列入祠庙。
English: Emperor Wen's Empress Zhen was put to death, so she is not listed in the temple.

古文：明帝即位，有司奏请追谥曰文昭皇后，使司空王朗持节奉策告祠于陵。
现代文：明帝即位后，主事官员一奏请求给她追加谧号为文昭皇后，派遣司空王朗持节奉策书到她陵墓前致祭。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, a scribe was asked to track down the Empress Wen Zhao, and he sent the scribe Kuang Lang to deliver the imperial edict to the mausoleum.

古文：三公又奏曰： 自古周人始祖后稷，又特立庙以祀姜嫄。
现代文：朝廷三公又上奏说： 在古代周朝的始祖为后稷，而又另外建立祠庙以祭祀姜螈。
English: The three princes of the imperial court also reported: In ancient times, the founder of the Zhou Dynasty was Houyi, and another ancestral temple was built to worship Jiang Yu.

古文：今文昭皇后之于后嗣，圣德至化，岂有量哉！
现代文：现在的文昭皇后对于后嗣来说，她圣明的德操崇高的教养，难道是可以估量的吗。
English: Is the present Empress Wenzhao's holy, virtuous and noble upbringing measurable for her heirs?

古文：夫以皇家世妃之尊，神灵迁化，而无寝庙以承享祀，非以报显德，昭孝敬也。
现代文：她以皇家一代正妃的尊贵，死后超化为神灵，而没有建立寝庙以承接享祭，不足以报答她的圣德，不足以昭示孝敬之心。
English: With the dignity of a princess of the royal generation, she was transmuted into a deity after her death, but she did not build a sleeping temple to receive the sacrifice, which was not enough to repay her holiness and show her filial piety.

古文：稽之古制，宜依周礼，先妣别立寝庙。 
现代文：查考古代的制度，应该依照周代礼制，已故皇母文昭皇后要另立寝庙。 
English: The examination of the ancient system should be in accordance with the Zhou Dynasty etiquette system. The late Empress Wen Zhao should set up a separate sleeping temple.

古文：奏可。以太和元年二月，立庙于鄴。
现代文：上奏得到皇帝的同意在太和元年二月，于邺建立了寝庙。
English: After obtaining the emperor's consent, a sleeping temple was built in Yunnan in February of the first year of the Taihe Dynasty.

古文：四月，洛邑初营宗庙，掘地得玉玺方一寸九分，其文曰： 天子羡思慈亲。 
现代文：四月，洛邑开始营建宗庙，在挖掘地基时获得一枚玉玺，一寸九分见方，上面的文字为： 天子羡思慈亲。 
English: In April, Luoyang began to build the ancestral temple. During the excavation of the foundation, a jade plaque was obtained, one inch and nine minutes square, with the words: "Heavenly Son Envy Compassionate Relative."

古文：明帝为之改容，以太牢告庙。
现代文：塱童为此而动容。便以太牢享祭祠庙。
English: When Emperor Ming saw the seal, he was so excited that his face turned pale. He went to the temple to make an offering.

古文：至景初元年十二月己未，有司又奏文昭皇后立庙京师，永传享祀。
现代文：到了量勿元年十二月己末日，主事官员又上奏请求在京师建立文昭皇后庙，永远承续享祭。
English: By the end of December of the first year, the leading officials made a request to build a temple for Empress Wenzhao in Beijing to continue the festival forever.

古文：乐舞与祖庙同，废鄴庙。
现代文：祭祀的乐舞与祖庙的相同。废弃邺县所建的祠庙。
English: The music and dance of the ritual is the same as that of the ancestral temple.

古文：魏文帝黄初二年六月，以洛京宗庙未成，乃祠武帝于建始殿，亲执馈奠如家人礼。
现代文：魏文帝董翅二年六月，因为盗京的宗庙还没有建成，于是在建始殿祭祀魏武帝，皇上亲自主持祭奠如同行家人之礼。
English: In June of the second year of Emperor Wei Wen's reign, because the imperial family's temple had not yet been built, Emperor Wei Wudi was sacrificed in the newly built First Hall. The emperor himself held the ceremony as a family gift.

古文：何承天曰： 案礼，将营宫室，宗庙为先。
现代文：何承天说： 根据礼制，在营建宫室之前，先要营建宗庙。
English: He Chengten said: According to the etiquette, before building a palace, it is necessary to build a family temple.

古文：庶人无庙，故祭于寝。
现代文：庶民百姓没有宗庙，因此在居寝祭祀。
English: The common people did not have a family temple, so they worshipped at home.

古文：帝者行之，非礼甚矣。 
现代文：帝王实行寝殿祭祀，太违背礼制了。 
English: For the emperor to perform the ritual of sleeping in the hall is too much of a violation of etiquette.

古文：汉献帝延康元年七月，魏文帝幸谯，亲祠谯陵，此汉礼也。
现代文：汉献帝延尘元年七月，魏文帝巡行到了谯题，亲自到矗陆祭祀，这是汉朝的礼制。
English: In July of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Weiwen marched to Shantai and personally went to Shantou to offer sacrifices, which was the Han Dynasty's ceremonial system.

古文：汉氏诸陵皆有园寝者，承秦所为也。说者以为古前庙后寝，以象人君前有朝后有寝也。
现代文：汉朝各陵都建庙的原因，是继承了秦朝的做法谈论的人以为古人建立前庙后寝，以象征国君前有朝堂后有寝宫。
English: The reason why all the tombs of the Han Dynasty built temples is that the people who inherited the practice of the Qin Dynasty thought that the ancients built the front temple and the back temple to symbolize that the king had a temple before and a sleeping palace after.

古文：庙以藏主，四时祭祀，寝有衣冠象生之具以荐新。
现代文：庙是用于藏置神主牌位，春、夏、秋、冬四时祭祀，寝庙裹有衣冠象征生时的用物，以新鲜祭品祭祀。
English: Temples are used for the storage of the god card rank, spring, summer, autumn, winter four-hour sacrifice, the sleeping temple is wrapped with a crown symbolizing the use of life, with fresh sacrifices.

古文：秦始出寝起于墓侧，汉因弗改。陵上称寝殿，象生之具，古寝之意也。
现代文：秦朝时开始把寝庙移；力建造在陵墓侧，汉朝因循秦朝没有改变陵墓上的称为寝殿，象征生时的物具，这是占代寝的本义。
English: The Qin Dynasty began to move the sleeping temple and built it on the side of the mausoleum. The Han Dynasty, following the Qin Dynasty, did not change the name of the mausoleum, which was called the sleeping hall, symbolizing the utensils of life. This is the true meaning of sleeping.

古文：及魏武帝葬高陵，有司依汉，立陵上祭殿。
现代文：到了魏武帝安葬在高陵时，卞事官员依照汉朝的制度，建立陵墓上的祭殿。
English: When Emperor Wu of Wei was buried in Gaoling, the anecdotal officials built a shrine on the mausoleum in accordance with the Han Dynasty system.

古文：至文帝黄初三年，乃诏曰： 先帝躬履节俭，遗诏省约。
现代文：到文帝黄初一三年，便卜诏令说： 先帝亲自实行节俭，他的遣韶说要节省和俭约。
English: Three years after the death of Emperor Dongying, he issued the following edict: The former emperor personally performed thrift, and issued an edict to save money.

古文：子以述父为孝，臣以系事为忠。
现代文：儿子以继承父亲的遣志为孝顺，臣子以留心政事为忠诚。
English: A son is loyal to his father by inheriting his filial piety, and a vassal is loyal by performing his duties.

古文：古不墓祭，皆设于庙。
现代文：占代不祭墓，都在庙裹设祭。
English: The ancient non-tomb festivals are all held in temples.

古文：高陵上殿屋皆毁坏，车马还厩，衣服藏府，以从先帝俭德之志。 
现代文：高陵上的殿屋都毁坏，车马送回马厩，衣服藏入府库，以顺从先帝俭约的心愿。 
English: The palace buildings on the hill were destroyed, the chariots and horses were sent back to the stables, and the clothes were hidden in the treasury, in obedience to the wishes of the former emperor.

古文：及文帝自作终制，又曰： 寿陵无立寝殿，造园邑。 
现代文：到了文帝自己写遣诏时，又说： 寿陵上不要建立寝殿，不要建造园邑。 
English: When Emperor Wen himself wrote the imperial edict, he also said: Do not build a mausoleum on the tomb, do not build a garden.

古文：自后至今，陵寝遂绝。
现代文：从此之后直至今天，陵寝的建造便停止了。
English: From then until now, the construction of the mausoleum has stopped.

古文：孙权不立七庙，以父坚尝为长沙太守，长沙临湘县立坚庙而已。
现代文：孙权没有建立一庙，因为他的父亲孙坚曾经任长沙郡太守，便祇在长沙郡临湘县建立孙坚庙而已。
English: Sun Quan did not build a temple, because his father, Sun Jian, once served as the governor of Changsha County. He only built the Sun Jian Temple in Linxiang County, Changsha County.

古文：权既不亲祠，直是依后汉奉南顿故事，使太守祠也。
现代文：孙权既不亲自到庙裹祭祀，衹是依照后濩时期供奉南顿君的旧例，派遣太守前往祭祀。
English: Since Sun Quan did not personally go to the temple to offer sacrifices, it was in accordance with the old example of offering Nantongjun in the late Heian period, sending the ruler to the sacrifice.

古文：坚庙又见尊曰始祖庙，而不在京师。
现代文：逊坚庙又被尊称为始祖庙，而又不建在京师。
English: Sun Jian Temple is also revered as the Temple of the First Ancestors, but it was not built in Beijing.

古文：又以民人所发吴芮冢材为屋，未之前闻也。
现代文：又将人民所发掘的吴芮冢中的材木建造为屋室，这是前所未辟的。
English: In addition, the timber from Wuzhong, which was excavated by the people, was used to build a house, which was unprecedented.

古文：于建鄴立兄长沙桓王策庙于硃爵桥南。权疾，太子所祷，即策庙也。
现代文：在建邺的朱爵桥南建立了兄长长沙担迗逊箠的庙。逐护得了疾病时，太子所祷告的，就是彊策庙。
English: In the south of Jianye's Zhuzheqiao, he established a temple for his elder brother Changsha Dangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdangdang.

古文：权卒，子亮代立。
现代文：孙权逝世后，儿子孙亮继立为帝。
English: After the death of Sun Quan, his son Sun Liang succeeded him as emperor.

古文：明年正月，于宫东立权庙曰太祖庙，既不在宫南，又无昭穆之序。
现代文：第二年的正月，在皇宫的束面建立了孙权庙，称之为太祖庙，既不是修建在皇宫南面。又不排昭穆次序。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Sun Quan Temple was built in front of the Imperial Palace, called the Grand Ancestor Temple, which was neither built in the south of the Imperial Palace, nor in the order of precedence.

古文：及孙皓初立，追尊父和曰文皇帝。
现代文：当孙皓初立为帝时，追尊他的父亲瑟扣为主皇奁。
English: When Sun Yat-sen was first enthroned as emperor, he revered his father, Shigaku, as the main emperor.

古文：皓先封乌程侯，即改葬和于乌程西山，号曰明陵，置园邑二百家。
现代文：逐壁先前被封为乌程侯，于是便将逐扣改葬于昼崔的厘山，称为组腔，设置园邑共有百户。
English: Zhiguo was formerly known as Wucheng Hou, so he was buried in Lishan in the afternoon of Cui, known as the group cavity. A total of 100 households were set up in the garden village.

古文：于乌程立陵寝，使县令丞四时奉祠。
现代文：在乌登建立丁孙和的陵寝，派遣县裹的令丞在春、夏、秋、冬四时举行祭祀。
English: The mausoleum of Ding Sun He was built in Wudeng, and the county-wrapped emperor was dispatched to hold sacrifices at four o'clock in spring, summer, autumn and winter.

古文：宝鼎元年，遂于乌程分置吴兴郡，使太守执事。
现代文：宝盛元年，就在乌程特别设置了吴兴郡，让郡太守执掌祭祀的事务。
English: In the first year of Baosheng, Wuxing County was specially set up in Wucheng, and the county governor was put in charge of the religious affairs.

古文：有司寻又言宜立庙京邑。
现代文：主事官员不久又匕奏说，应该在京邑建立噩扣庙。
English: The official in charge of the matter soon went on to say that a temple should be built in Kyoto.

古文：宝鼎二年，遂更营建，号曰清庙。
现代文：宜虫二年，于是又进行营建，称之为清庙。
English: Two years later, construction was resumed, and it was called the Qing Temple.

古文：遣守丞相孟仁、太常姚信等备官僚中军步骑，以灵舆法驾迎神主于明陵，亲引仁拜送于庭。
现代文：派遣守丞相孟仁、太常姚信等人带领官府僚局中军步兵骑兵，用囊车法驾到明陆去迎接逊和的神主牌位，孙皓亲自在庭中接见并告别盂仁。
English: Sun Yat-sen dispatched Meng Ren, the Minister of Defense, and Yao Xin, the Premier of the State Council, to lead the infantry and cavalry of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) to the Ming and Lu Dynasties to welcome Sun He, the god of war, in person. Sun Yat-sen personally met and bid farewell to Sun Ren in the court.

古文：比仁还，中吏手诏日夜相继，奉问神灵起居动止。
现代文：当最仁从乌捏返回时，中吏送出的皇帝亲笔诏令连续不断，诏令询问神灵在路途中的起止等情状。
English: When the most benevolent returned from Wuqin, there was a continuous stream of the emperor's personal edicts sent by the middle-ranking officials, which inquired about the status of the gods on the road.

古文：巫觋言见和被服颜色如平日，皓悲喜，悉召公卿尚书诣皞下受赐。
现代文：男女巫祝都说看见孙和所穿衣服及容貌和平时一样，孙皓听到后又悲又喜，便召集所有公卿和尚书到殿阁下接受赏赐。
English: Both witches and wizards said that they saw that Sun He was wearing the same clothes and his appearance was the same as usual. After hearing this, Sun Yat-sen was both sad and happy, and summoned all the nobles and monks to his palace to receive the reward.

古文：灵舆当至，使丞相陆凯奉三牲祭于近郊。
现代文：当灵车将要到达时，便派遣丞相陆凯供奉三牲在近郊祭祀。
English: When the hearse was about to arrive, the prime minister, Lu Kai, was dispatched to offer the three sacrificial animals in a nearby suburb.

古文：皓于金城外露宿。
现代文：孙皓就在金城外露宿。
English: Sun Yat-sen camped just outside Jincheng.

古文：明日，望拜于东门之外，又拜庙荐飨。
现代文：第二天，便在束门外仰望跪拜，又到庙里拜祭献飨。
English: The next day, he looked up and knelt down outside the bunch gate, and then went to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：比七日，三祭，倡伎昼夜娱乐。
现代文：接连七天，祭祀三次，侣伎夜不停地娱乐。
English: For seven days in a row, there will be three sacrificial rites, and there will be non-stop entertainment at night.

古文：有司奏：  祭不欲数，数则黩 ，宜以礼断情。 
现代文：主事官员上奏说：  祭祀不能过多，过多就是繁黩 ，应该依循礼制割断私情。 
English: The official in charge said in his report: Sacrifices should not be too much, too much is tedious, and personal feelings should be cut off according to the etiquette.

古文：然后止。
现代文：从主事官员上奏之后祭祀便停止。
English: After the chief official's report, the ritual was stopped.

古文：刘备章武元年四月，建尊号于成都。
现代文：刘备的章武元年四月，在成都称帝号。
English: In April of the first year of Liu Bei's reign, he was called Emperor in Chengdu.

古文：是月，立宗庙，袷祭高祖已下。备绍世而起，亦未辨继何帝为祢，亦无祖宗之号。
现代文：当月建立宗庙，将高祖以下的神主在宗庙里合祭刘备承袭前代而立为帝，也没辨明以漠代哪一个皇帝为自己的祖宗，又没有立祖宗的庙号。
English: That month, the ancestral temple was built, and the deities below Gaozu were enshrined in the ancestral temple, and Liu Bei succeeded the previous generation and became the emperor. He did not identify which emperor of the desert era was his ancestor, and there was no temple name for the founding of the ancestral temple.

古文：刘禅面缚，北地王谌哭于昭烈之庙，此则备庙别立也。
现代文：后主刘惮投降时，北地王刘谌在昭烈帝刘备庙痛哭，造就是说刘备的庙足独立的。
English: Later, when Liu Shuo surrendered, the King of the North, Liu Ye, wept bitterly at the Liu Bei Temple of the Zhaorai Emperor, which meant that Liu Bei's temple was independent.

古文：魏元帝咸熙元年，增封晋文帝进爵为王，追命舞阳宣文侯为晋宣王，忠武侯为晋景王。是年八月，文帝崩，谥曰文王。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙元年，增封晋文帝晋爵为王，追授舞阳宣文侯为晋宣王，忠武侯为晋景王，当年八月，文帝逝世，谧号文王。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hanxi of the Wei-Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Jin Dynasty was awarded the title of Duke of Jin, Emperor Wu of the Yang Dynasty was awarded the title of Duke of Jin, Emperor Wu of the Zhongwu Dynasty was awarded the title of Duke of Jin, and Emperor Wen died in August of the same year.

古文：武帝泰始元年十二月丙寅，受禅。
现代文：武帝泰始元年十二月丙寅，接受曹魏的禅让。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, Emperor Cui accepted Cao Wei's surrender.

古文：丁卯，追尊皇祖宣王为宣皇帝，伯考景王为景皇帝，考文王为文皇帝，宣王妃张氏为宣穆皇后，景王夫人羊氏为景皇后。
现代文：丁卯，追尊皇祖宣王为宣皇帝，已故伯父景王为景皇帝，先父文王为文皇帝，宣王之妃张氏为宣穆皇后，景王的夫人羊氏为景皇后。
English: Dingwu, the ancestor of Emperor Xuan Wang is Emperor Xuan, the late uncle King Jing is Emperor Xuan, the father King Wen is Emperor Wen, the wife of King Xuan, Zhang, is Empress Xuan Mu, and the wife of King Jing, Yang, is Empress Jing.

古文：二年正月，有司奏天子七庙，宜如礼营建。
现代文：泰始二年正月，主事官员上奏说天于立七庙，应该按照礼制营建庙。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taizhi era, the leading official made a report saying that seven temples should be built in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：帝重其役，诏宜权立一庙。于是君臣奏议： 上古清庙一宫，尊远神祇，逮至周室，制为七庙，以辨宗祧。
现代文：皇帝以营建七庙的工役重要，下诏令说暂且建立一庙于是群臣奏议说： 上古时期立清庙一宫，以尊敬远世神灵，到了周朝，定为七庙，以辨别近宗和远祖。
English: The emperor considered the construction of seven temples to be important, and issued a decree saying that one temple would be built for the time being, so the ministers made a report saying: In ancient times, the Qing Dynasty established one temple to respect the gods of the past, and in the Zhou Dynasty, it was designated as seven temples to distinguish between the near and distant ancestors.

古文：圣旨深弘，远迹上世，敦崇唐、虞。舍七庙之繁华，遵一宫之尊远。
现代文：皇帝的圣旨深远宏大，远追上古之世，尊崇壁灵、卢爱，舍弃七庙的繁华，遵循一宫的制度以尊重远祖。
English: The emperor's sacred edict is far-reaching and grand, far surpassing the ancient world, revering the spirits of the wall and Lu Ai, renouncing the prosperity of the seven temples, and following the system of one palace to respect the ancestors.

古文：昔舜承尧禅，受终文祖，遂陟帝位，盖三十载，月正元日，又格于文祖。此则虞氏不改唐庙，因仍旧宫。
现代文：古时候虞舜承接尧帝的惮让，在文祖庙裹受命，于是登上帝位，大约经过三十年，正月初一，又回命于文祖庙造就是说虞霾不改变卢蠢的文祖庙，依旧因循旧的宫庙。
English: In ancient times, Emperor Wu's successor, Emperor Wu, was ordered to wrap himself in the Temple of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the

古文：可依有虞氏故事，即用魏庙。 
现代文：可以依照有虞氏的旧例，就沿用曹魏的庙。 
English: You can follow the old example of the Ariyu clan and use Wei's ancestral temple.

古文：奏可。
现代文：上奏得到皇帝的同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：于是追祭征西将军、豫章府君、颍川府君、京兆府君，与宣皇帝、景皇帝、文皇帝为三昭三穆。
现代文：于是追祭征西将军、豫章府昼？京兆府君，与童皂壶、基皇童、塞皇壶依次排列为三昭三穆。
English: As a result, the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Yuzhang Prefecture, the governor of Yingchuan Prefecture, the governor of Jingzhao Prefecture, as well as the Emperor Xuan, the Emperor Jing, and the Emperor Wen are the three Zhaozhanmu.

古文：是时宣皇未升，太祖虚位，所以祠六世与景帝为七庙，其礼则据王肃说也。
现代文：当时宣皇没有进入宗庙，太祖的位次空缺，所以祭祀六世祖与景帝共为七庙，这个礼制是根据王肃的说法。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan did not enter the ancestral temple, and the rank of the great-grandfather was vacant, so there were seven temples dedicated to the sixth-generation ancestor and Emperor Jing. This ritual system was based on Wang Su's theory.

古文：七月，又诏曰： 主者前奏就魏旧庙，诚亦有准。
现代文：七月，皇帝又下诏令说： 主事的人先前上奏仍旧用曹魏的旧庙，确实也有根据。
English: In July, the emperor issued another edict, saying: "The person in charge still used the old temple of Cao Wei for the previous performance, and there is indeed a reason for this.

古文：然于祗奉神明，情犹未安。宜更营造，崇正永制。 
现代文：然而对于敬奉神明来说，情理上还是有不妥的地方应该另外营造新庙，尊崇正礼作为永远的制度。 
English: However, for the worship of the gods, there is still something wrong in the sense that a new temple should be built separately, and formal etiquette should be respected as an eternal system.

古文：于是改创宗庙。十一月，追尊景帝夫人夏侯氏为景怀皇后。
现代文：于是改建宗庙十一月，追尊景帝的夫人夏侯氏为景怀皇后。
English: As a result, the ancestral temple was rebuilt in November, and Emperor Jing's wife, Empress Xia Hou, became Empress Jinghuai.

古文：太康元年，灵寿公主修丽祔于太庙，周、汉未有其准。
现代文：太康元年，灵寿公主修丽在太庙里拊祭，凰朝和选朝没有这样的先例。
English: In the first year of the Taikang era, Princess Ling Shou Shouli held a sacrificial rite in the Taimiao Temple. There was no such precedent in the Phoenix Dynasty or the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：魏明帝则别立庙，晋又异魏也。
现代文：魏堕查却另外建立庙，晋朝又与曹魏不同了。
English: However, Wei Qiancha built another temple, and the Jin Dynasty was different from Cao Wei.

古文：六月，因庙陷当改治。
现代文：八年，因为庙的地基下陷应当改造。
English: Eight years, because the foundation of the temple was sinking and had to be rebuilt.

古文：群臣又议奏曰： 古者七庙异所，自宜如礼。 
现代文：群臣又奏议说： 古时候七庙不在一个地方，自然应该按照礼制建庙。 
English: The ministers also made a report, saying: In ancient times, the seven temples were not in one place, so it was natural to build a temple according to the ritual system.

古文：诏又曰： 古虽七庙，自近代以来，皆一庙七室，于礼无废，于情为叙，亦随时之宜也。
现代文：皇帝又下诏令说： 古代虽然有七庙，但是从近代以来，都是一庙七室，对礼制没有损害，对情理来说是合乎事理，也是随时制宜的办法。
English: The emperor also issued a decree saying: Although there were seven temples in ancient times, but since modern times, there have been seven rooms in one temple. There is no damage to the etiquette, it is reasonable for the situation, and it is also a way to control the situation at any time.

古文：其便仍旧。 至十年，乃更改筑于宣阳门内，穷壮极丽。
现代文：应该依旧不改为好 到了太康十年时，便在宣屋蜡内改建，建造得极为壮丽。
English: It should still be good not to change When Taikang was ten years old, it was rebuilt in Xuanwu Wax, and it was extremely magnificent.

古文：然坎位之制，犹如初尔。
现代文：然而祭祀用的坎穴位次，仍然像当初的一样？
English: However, is the order of the ritual pit still the same as it was originally?

古文：庙成，帝率百官迁神主于新庙，自征西以下，车服导从，皆如帝者之仪。
现代文：庙建成后，皇帝率领群臣百官把神主牌位迁入新庙里，先祖自征西将军以下的神主牌位，都有车马引导跟随，都像皇帝所用的仪仗。
English: After the completion of the temple, the emperor led a group of ministers and officials to move the god card into the new temple. The god card below the ancestors of General Zicheng Xi were guided by chariots and horses, all of which were like the ceremonial battle used by the emperor.

古文：挚虞之议也。
现代文：这是出自挚虞的议论。
English: This is an argument born out of fear.

古文：至世祖武皇帝崩，则迁征西；及惠帝崩，又迁豫章。
现代文：到世祖武皇帝逝世时，便把征西将军的神主牌位从庙中迁出；当惠帝逝世时，又将豫章府君的神主牌位从庙中迁出。
English: When Emperor Shizuo died, the position of the God of the Western Conquest was moved out of the temple; when Emperor Hui died, the position of the God of Yozhangfukun was moved out of the temple.

古文：而惠帝世，愍怀太子、太子二子哀太孙臧、冲太孙尚并祔庙。元帝世，怀帝殇太子又被庙，号为阴室四殇。
现代文：而在惠帝时期，愍怀太王、及太子的两个儿子，即哀太孙司马臧、冲边逊司马尚都在宗庙里拊祭元帝时期，怀帝的疆左王又在庙中拊祭，合称为阴室四殇。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hui, Emperor Huai and the two sons of Emperor Huai, namely, Emperor Huai's grandson Sima Yi and Prince Chongbian's grandson Sima Shang, both made offerings to Emperor Yuan in the ancestral temple. Emperor Huai's son King Jia Zuo also made offerings in the temple, collectively known as the four offerings to the netherworld.

古文：怀帝初，又策谥武帝杨后曰武悼皇后，改葬峻阳陵侧。
现代文：怀帝初年，又策命定逮童扰皇后的谧号为武悼皇后，将她改葬在峻阳陵的侧面。
English: In the first year of Emperor Huai's reign, Emperor Huai also ordered that the nickname of the Empress Dowager be changed to the Empress Dowager Wu, and that she be reburied on the side of the Yongyang Mausoleum.

古文：别立弘训宫，不列于庙。
现代文：另外建立弘训宫，不将她列入庙中。
English: In addition, the Hongxun Palace was established, and she was not included in the temple.

古文：元帝既即尊位，上继武帝，于礼为祢，如汉光武上继元帝故事也。
现代文：五帝即帝位之后，他上继武帝，从礼制上来说是已死的父辈，就像束汉光武帝上继两汉元帝的事例。
English: After the Fifth Emperor, that is, the imperial throne, he succeeded Emperor Wu, and from the point of view of etiquette, it was the dead fathers, just like the case of Emperor Guangwu of Han Dynasty succeeding the two Han Dynasty Emperors.

古文：是时西京神主堙灭虏庭，江左建庙，皆更新造。
现代文：当时西晋的神主牌位已被别的民族政权所堙灭，娄置建庙时，都是重新建造。
English: At that time, the deities of the Western Jin Dynasty had been destroyed by other national regimes, and when temples were built, they were all rebuilt.

古文：寻以登怀帝之主，又迁颍川。位虽七室，其实五世，盖从刁协，以兄弟为世数故也。
现代文：不久将堕壶神主牌位列入宗庙，又将颖川府昼的神主牌位迁出宗庙设位虽说是七室，其实祇有五世，这大概是依从刁协的议论，将兄弟作为世代计数的缘故吧。
English: Soon, the position of the fallen pot deity will be included in the ancestral temple, and the position of the deity of Yingchuan will be moved out of the ancestral temple. Although there are seven rooms, there are actually only five generations, which is probably due to the argument of the Han Association that brothers are counted as generations.

古文：于时百度草创，旧礼未备，三祖毁主，权居别室。太兴三年，将登愍帝之主，于是乃定更制，还复豫章、颍川二主于昭穆之位，以同惠帝嗣武帝故事；而惠、怀、愍三帝自从《春秋》尊尊之义，在庙不替也。
现代文：当时各种制度都在草创中，旧有的礼制不完备，三位先祖毁去神主牌位，暂且放置在另建的宫室中太兴三年，将要把整查的神主牌位升入宗庙，于是改定制度，又将豫章府君、题川应昼两个神主牌位回复到宗庙昭穆的位次上，以便与惠帝继承武帝的事例相一致。而蛊查？医查、曼瞳这三位皇帝从《春秋》书中尊敬尊长的本义而言，他们在庙中的神主是不可迁出的。
English: At that time, all kinds of systems were in the process of being created. The old ritual system was incomplete. The three ancestors destroyed the god card rank and temporarily placed it in a separate palace for three years. The god card rank of the rectification was going to be promoted to the ancestral temple. Therefore, the system was revised, and the two god card ranks of Yu Zhangfukun and Tiechuan Yinglun were restored to the rank of the ancestral temple, so as to be consistent with the case of Hui Di inheriting Emperor Wu. And the three emperors from the "Spring and Autumn" book respect the original meaning of the patriarch, and their gods in the temple cannot be moved.

古文：至元帝崩，则豫章复迁。
现代文：到了元帝逝世时，豫章府君的神主牌位又被迁出。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan's death, the position of Yuzhangfukun's god master was moved out again.

古文：然元帝神位，犹在愍帝之下，故有坎室者十也。
现代文：然而元帝的神位，仍然排在愍帝之下，因此有坎室的共有十个。
English: However, the throne of the Yuan Emperor was still ranked below that of the Qian Emperor, so there were a total of ten kanshitsu.

古文：至明帝崩，而颍川又迁，犹十室也。
现代文：当明帝逝世后，颖川府君的神主牌位又被迁出，仍然保持十室。
English: When Emperor Ming died, the position of the god of Yingchuan Prefecture was moved out again, but the ten rooms remained.

古文：于时续广太庙，故三迁主并还西储，名之曰祧，以准远庙。
现代文：当时继续扩建太庙，因此三位迁出的神主都被送回西储室，称之为桃，当作为远祖庙。
English: At that time, the expansion of the ancient temple continued, so the three relocated priests were sent back to the west storeroom, called the peach, as a distant ancestor temple.

古文：成帝咸和三年，苏峻覆乱京都，温峤等入伐，立行庙于白石，告先帝先后曰： 逆臣苏峻，倾覆社稷，毁弃三正，污辱海内。
现代文：成帝咸和三年，苏峻扰乱京都，温娇等人率军进京都讨伐，在白石建立行庙，祭告先帝先后说： 叛逆的臣子苏峻，颠覆国家，毁弃天地神明，污辱海内人民。
English: In the third year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, Su Jun disrupted Kyoto, and Wenjiao and others led an army into Kyoto to fight, and built a temple in Shiroishi, and told the former emperor successively: The rebellious vassal, Su Jun, subverted the country, destroyed heaven and earth and gods, and insulted the inland people.

古文：臣亮等手刃戎首，龚行天罚。
现代文：我庾亮等亲手杀死叛贼首领，恭敬地执行皇天上帝的惩罚。
English: I am eager to personally kill the leader of the traitors and respectfully carry out the punishment of the Emperor God.

古文：惟中宗元皇帝、肃祖明皇帝、明穆皇后之灵，降鉴有罪，剿绝其命，翦此群凶，以安宗庙。
现代文：中宗元皇帝、肃宗明皇帝、明穆皇后的神灵，明鉴有罪之人，剿灭他们的性命，剪除了这帮凶逆之徒，安定丁宗庙。
English: It is hoped that Emperor Zhongzongyuan, Emperor Su, Emperor Ming's son, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming

古文：臣等虽陨首摧躯，犹生之年。 
现代文：我们即使捐躯陨旨，死而犹生。 
English: Even if a vassal's head falls off and his body is broken, it's just like when he was alive.

古文：咸康七年五月，始作武悼皇后神主，祔于庙，配飨世祖。
现代文：咸康七年五月，开始做武悼皇后的神主牌位，放入太庙合祭，配享世担。
English: In May of the seventh year of Xiankang, he began to make the god card of the Empress Wuyi, put it into the temple festival, and enjoy the world.

古文：成帝崩而康帝承统，以兄弟一世，故不迁京兆，始十一室也。
现代文：盛壶逝世后尘查继位，因为以兄弟为一世，因此不把京兆府君神主迁出，才开始有十一室。
English: As the brothers are counted as one generation, the lord of the god did not move out of Saigon, and there are now eleven rooms.

古文：康帝崩，京兆迁入西储，同谓之祧，如前三祖迁主之礼。
现代文：壁童逝世后，京兆府君神主迁入西储室，同样称之为祧，与以前三位祖先的神主迁入西储室的礼仪相同。
English: After the death of Kido, the Kyosho prefectural god moved into the west storeroom, also known as, the same as the previous three ancestors of the god moved into the west storeroom.

古文：故正室犹十一也。
现代文：因此正室仍然是十一室。
English: Therefore, the legal wife is still the eleventh wife.

古文：穆帝崩而哀帝、海西并为兄弟，无所登降。
现代文：穆帝逝世后哀查和迤酉公都是兄弟，没有升降的问题。
English: After the death of Mu Di, Ancha and Zeng Gong were brothers, and there was no question of promotion or demotion.

古文：咸安之初，简文皇帝上继元皇帝，世秩登进。
现代文：咸安初年，个塞皇童上继五皇童，世次上升。
English: In the first year of Xian'an, Shaxi Wangdong became the successor of Wu Wangdong and was promoted to the next generation.

古文：于是颍川、京兆二主，复还昭穆之位。
现代文：于是题业疽昼、京兆府君二位神主，又返回宗庙昭穆的位次。
English: As a result, the two Shinto deities, Keicho-fukun and Themyo-koryo, returned to the rank of Shomu of the ancestral temple.

古文：至简文崩，颍川又迁。
现代文：到简文帝逝世后，颖川府君神主又迁出。
English: By the time of Jianwen's death, Yingchuan was moved out again.

古文：孝武皇帝太元十六年，改作太庙，殿正室十六间，东西储各一间，合十八间。
现代文：孝逮皇壶左五十六年，改建太庙，殿的正室有十六问，东西储室各一间，共有十八间。
English: In the fifty-sixth year after the death of Emperor Xiaotang, the Imperial Temple was rebuilt. There are sixteen rooms in the main hall, one each in the east and west storerooms, for a total of eighteen rooms.

古文：栋高八丈四尺，堂基长三十九丈一尺，广十丈一尺。
现代文：栋高八丈四尺，堂基长三十九丈一尺，宽十丈一尺。
English: The building is 8 jo 4 shaku in height, the foundation of the hall is 39 jo 1 shaku in length and 10 jo 1 shaku in width.

古文：堂集方石，庭以砖。
现代文：堂集结方石，庭用砖。
English: The hall is built of square stone, and the garden is made of bricks.

古文：尊备法驾，迁神主于行庙。
现代文：备有法驾车马，将神主迁入行庙。
English: There is a horse-drawn carriage ready to move the deity into the temple.

古文：征西至京兆四主，及太子太孙，各用其位之仪服。
现代文：从征西将军到京兆府君四位神主，以及太子太孙，各用其本位的服用仪制。
English: The four deities, from the Western General to the Prince of Kyoto, as well as the prince's great-grandson, each use their own standard ceremony.

古文：四主不从帝者之仪，是与太康异也。
现代文：四位神主不依照皇帝的仪制，这是与太康年间不同的。
English: For the four gods, they do not use the ceremony for people with the emperor's name, which is different from the Taikang year.

古文：诸主既入庙，设脯醢之奠。
现代文：各神主迁入庙之后，摆设干肉及肉酱以祭奠。
English: After the deities enter the temple, they are set up with urns and palanquins to pay their respects.

古文：及新庙成，帝主还室，又设脯醢之奠。
现代文：当新庙建成之后，先帝的神主返还室内，又摆设干肉及肉酱以祭奠。
English: When the new temple was completed, the god of the former emperor was returned to the room, and dried meat and meat sauce were set up to pay homage.

古文：十九年二月，追尊简文母会稽太妃郑氏为简文皇帝宣太后，立庙太庙道西。
现代文：十九年二月，追尊简文帝的母亲会稽太坦郑压为简文皇帝宣太后，在太庙道路西边建立庙。
English: In February 1919, the mother of the revered Emperor Jianwen, Empress Dowager Zheng, who was the Empress Dowager of Emperor Jianwen, set up her temple on the west side of the road.

古文：及孝武崩，京兆又迁，如穆帝之世四祧故事。
现代文：到孝武帝逝世后，直兆府君神主又迁出，依照垄童时期立四祧庙的旧例行事。
English: By the time of the death of Emperor Xiaowu, the patron deities of Beijing and Zhao had been moved out, just like the precedent of the Four Emperors at the time of Emperor Mu.

古文：安帝隆安四年，以孝武母简文李太后、帝母宣德陈太后祔于宣郑太后之庙。
现代文：安帝隆安四年，以孝武帝的母亲即简文帝的李太后、以及安帝的母亲宣德陈太后在宣郑太后庙裹合祭。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Ande Longan, Empress Dowager Li, the mother of Emperor Xiaowu, and Empress Dowager Xuan De Chen, the mother of Emperor Ande, took part in the Wrapping Festival at the Temple of Empress Dowager Xuan Zheng.

古文：元兴三年三月，宗庙神主在寻阳，已立新主于太庙，权告义事。
现代文：元兴三年三月，宗庙神主在寻阳，在太庙又已立了新的神主，衹能权宜地举行祭祀。
English: In March of the third year of the Genxing era, the god of the ancestral temple was looking for the sun, and a new god had been established in the ancient temple, which made it possible to hold the sacrifice in an expedient manner.

古文：四月，辅国将军何无忌奉送神主还。
现代文：四月，辅国将军何无忌奉送神主返回。
English: In April, the general of the auxiliary country did not hesitate to send the god back.

古文：丙子，百官拜迎于石头。
现代文：丙子曰，群臣百官到石头城礼拜迎接。
English: Cun Zi said that hundreds of officials came to Stone Town to pray and welcome him.

古文：戊寅，入庙。
现代文：戊寅曰，神主奉入庙中。
English: According to Wu Yin, the deity will be enshrined in the temple.

古文：安帝崩，未及禘，而天禄终焉。
现代文：安帝逝世，还没有举行大祭，国家政权便已终结了。
English: An Di passed away, and before the grand festival was held, the national regime had ended.

古文：宋武帝初受晋命为宋王，建宗庙于彭城，依魏、晋故事，立一庙。
现代文：宋武帝开始接受晋朝的任命为宋王，在彭城建立宗庙，依照曹魏和晋朝的先例，衹建立一庙。
English: Emperor Songwu began to accept the appointment of King Song of the Jin Dynasty, established a family temple in Pengcheng, and established a temple in accordance with the precedent of Cao Wei and the Jin Dynasty.

古文：初祠高祖开封府君、曾祖武原府君、皇祖东安府君、皇考处士府君、武敬臧后，从诸侯五庙之礼也。
现代文：最初祭祀高祖开封府君、曾祖武原府君、皇祖东安府君、先父处士府君？左堑避后，这是依从了诸侯建立五庙的礼制。
English: At first, sacrifices were made to the high ancestor Kaifeng Fuchun, the great ancestor Takehara Fuchun, the emperor's ancestor Dongan Fuchun, and the forefather Shishi Fuchun, but later, this followed the five-temple ritual system established by the lords.

古文：既即尊位，及增祠七世右北平府君、六世相国掾府君为七庙。
现代文：武帝即帝位之后，便加祭世祖右北平府君、六世祖相国掾府君，共为七庙。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, the seventh temple was added, dedicated to the ancestor of the right north, Pingfukun, and the sixth ancestor of the country, Shifu.

古文：永初初，追尊皇考处士为孝穆皇帝，皇妣赵氏为穆皇后。
现代文：永初初年，追尊先父处士府君为孝穆皇壶，亡母趟旦为穆皇后。
English: In the first year of the Yongchun era, the revered forefather, the official Fu Jun, became the filial son of Emperor Mu, and the deceased mother, Watan, became the Empress of Mu.

古文：三年，孝懿萧皇后崩，又祔庙。
现代文：三年，圣懿盖皇后逝世，又合祭于宗庙。
English: Three years later, after the death of Empress Senggei, the festival was held again at the ancestral temple.

古文：高祖崩，神主升庙，犹从昭穆之序，如魏、晋之制，虚太祖之位也。
现代文：高祖逝世后，他的神主牌位进入宗庙，仍然依照左昭右穆的次序排列，如同曹魏和晋朝的制度，空缺着太祖的神位。
English: After the death of Gaozu, his god card rank entered the ancestral temple and was still arranged according to the order of Zuo Zhao Yu Mu, just like the system of Cao Wei and Jin Dynasty, the god rank of Taizu was vacant.

古文：庙殿亦不改构，又如晋初之因魏也。
现代文：宗庙的殿屋也不改建，这又像晋朝初年依循曹魏一样。
English: The main hall of the ancestral temple will not be rebuilt, which is like the first year of the Jin Dynasty following Cao Wei.

古文：文帝元嘉初，追尊所生胡婕妤为章皇太后，立庙西晋宣太后地。
现代文：塞帝元嘉初年，追尊自己的生母胡婕奸为章皇太后，在里置宣太后墓地建立祠庙。
English: In the first year of Emperor Seti's reign, Emperor Seti established an ancestral temple at the tomb of Empress Dowager Xunzhu, in memory of Emperor Seti's own birth mother, Empress Dowager Zhang.

古文：孝武昭太后、明帝宣太后并祔章太后庙。
现代文：孝武昭太后、旦姬宣左后都在章左后庙中合祭
English: Empress Dowager Xiaowu Zhaozhao and Empress Dowager Tang Xi Xuan Lougou both attended the mid-year festival at Zhang Lougou Temple

古文：晋元帝太兴三年正月乙卯，诏曰： 吾虽上继世祖，然于怀、愍皇帝，皆北面称臣。
现代文：晋元帝叁里三年正月乙卯日，元帝下诏令说： 我虽然是继承了世祖，然而对于怀帝、愍童而言，我都是居于臣子的地位。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Emperor Yuan issued a decree saying: Although I have inherited the ancestor, I am in the position of a vassal for Emperor Huai and Emperor Xing.

古文：今祠太庙，不亲执觞酌，而令有司行事，于情礼不安。
现代文：现在祭祀太庙，不亲自举爵致礼，而让主事官员行礼，于情理不合。
English: Now, at the temple festival, it is inappropriate from the point of view of etiquette not to personally offer wine and perform the ritual, but to have a priest perform the ritual.

古文：可依礼更处。 太常华恆议： 今圣上继武皇帝，宜准汉世祖故事，不亲执觞爵。 
现代文：应该根据礼制另作安排 太常华恒议论说： 现在皇上是上承武皇帝，应该按照汉世担的先例，不亲自举杯爵。 
English: A different arrangement should be made according to the etiquette, Tai Changhua Heng argued: Now that the emperor is the Shangchengwu Emperor, he should follow the precedent of the Han Dynasty and not personally raise the cup.

古文：又曰： 今上承继武帝，而庙之昭穆，四世而已。
现代文：又说： 现在皇上是上承逮董，而宗庙所列的昭穆，衹有四世而已。
English: He also said, "Nowadays, the emperor is a shangcheng dong, and the Shomu listed in the ancestral temple is only the fourth generation.

古文：前太常贺循、博士傅纯以为惠、怀及愍宜别立庙。
现代文：前太常贺循、博士凄越认为惠帝、堡壶及愍壶应该另立祠庙。
English: Former Taizang He Xun and Dr. Pan Yue believed that Hui Di, Castle Jug and Ying Jug should be separate temples.

古文：然臣愚谓庙室当以客主为限，无拘常数。
现代文：然而我认为庙室应当以容纳的神主为限，不必拘泥于常数。
English: However, I believe that the size of a temple should be limited to the number of deities it can accommodate, and there is no need to stick to a fixed number.

古文：殷世有二祖三宗，若拘七室，则当祭祢而已。
现代文：殷商时期有二祖三宗，如果拘泥于天子七室的常数，那么衹当祭父庙而已。
English: There are two ancestors and three sects in the Yin Dynasty. If you stick to the seventh house, you only need to make up the sacrifice to the father.

古文：推此论之，宜还复豫章、颍川，全祠七庙之礼。 
现代文：据此推论，应当让豫章府君、题川座君复还宗庙，以完备祭七庙的礼制。 
English: If we consider this point, we should restore the sacrifices to Yuanzhang and Yingchuan, and improve the etiquette of the seven temple festivals.

古文：骠骑长史温峤议： 凡言兄弟不相入庙，既非礼文。
现代文：骠骑长史温崤议论说： 凡是说兄弟的神主不互相入庙，这本来不是礼书的明文记载。
English: Shi Wenjun, the chief of the imperial cavalry, said, "It is not a clear record in the book of etiquette to say that brothers should not enter the temple together.

古文：且光武奋剑振起，不策名于孝平，豫神其事，以应九世之谶；又古不共庙，故别立焉。
现代文：况且光武帝武装起事，在芒查时不列名于臣属，为了使事情神化，以应证九世的谶言，又因为古代不共入一庙，因此另外立庙。
English: Moreover, Emperor Guangwu rose up in arms and was not listed as a vassal at the time of the investigation. In order to deify the matter, he responded to the slander of the ninth generation, and because he did not enter a temple in ancient times, he built another temple.

古文：今上以策名而言，殊于光武之事，躬奉烝尝，于经既正，于情又安矣。
现代文：现在皇上从列名为臣属这一点来说，跟光武帝的情况不同，自己亲身主持祭祀，既对礼经有正确的态度，又合乎情理。
English: Now that the emperor is listed as a vassal, unlike the situation with Emperor Guangwu, he personally presides over the sacrificial rites, which is not only the correct attitude towards the ritual, but also reasonable.

古文：太堂恆欲还二府君以全七世，峤谓是宜。 
现代文：太常华恒想让豫章、颖二位府君的神主返回宗庙以配全七世之数，我温崤认为是合理的。 
English: I think it's reasonable for Taizhang Hua Heng to want the deities of the two prefectures of Yuzhang and Ying to return to the ancestral temple to match the total number of seven generations.

古文：骠骑将军王导从峤议。
现代文：骠骑将军王导依从温崤的议论。
English: General Wang Du, the commander of the cavalry, agreed with Wen Pu's opinion.

古文：峤又曰： 其非子者，可直言皇帝敢告某皇帝。
现代文：温崤又说： 凡是不属于儿子的，可以直说皇帝敢于祭告某皇帝。
English: Wen Rong also said, "Anything that does not belong to the son, it can be said that the emperor dared to denounce a certain emperor.

古文：又若以一帝为一世，则不祭祢，反不及庶人。 
现代文：又如果是以一位皇帝即为一世，那么就不祭父庙，造反而比不上庶民百姓。 
English: Also, if one emperor is regarded as a lifetime, then there will be no temple dedicated to the emperor's father, and the construction will not be comparable to that of the common people.

古文：于是帝从峤议，悉施用之。孙盛《晋春秋》曰： 《阳秋传》云， 臣子一例也 。
现代文：于是皇帝同意了温崤的议论，全都照着施行，孙盛的《晋春秋》说： 《春秋传》说， 臣和子是同等的 。
English: So the emperor agreed to Wen Xuan's arguments and implemented them all. Sun Sheng's "Jin Chun Qiu" said: "The Spring and Autumn Annals" said that the vassal and the son are equal.

古文：虽继君位，不以后尊，降废前敬。
现代文：虽然继位为君主，不可以自己尊高的地位，减降废弃对前帝的尊敬。
English: Although the successor to the throne is the monarch, it is not possible to diminish or discard the respect for the former emperor from one's lofty position.

古文：昔鲁僖上嗣庄公，以友于长幼而升之，为逆。
现代文：古代鲁僖公上承鲁庄公，以兄弟长幼而入庙，为失理。
English: In ancient times, it was unreasonable for the Prince of Lushan to enter the temple with his elder brother and younger brother.

古文：准之古义，明诏是也。 
现代文：根据古代礼制的本义，皇上的诏令是正确的。 
English: According to the original meaning of the ancient etiquette, the Emperor's edict is correct.

古文：穆帝永和二年七月，有司奏： 十月殷祭，京兆府君当迁祧室。
现代文：穆帝永和二年七月，主事官员上奏说： 十月大祭宗庙，京兆府君的神主应当迁入远祖的祧室。
English: In July of the second year of Mu Di Yonghe, the leading official made a report saying: In the October Grand Festival ancestral temple, the deity of Kyoshofukun should move into the ancestral room.

古文：昔征西、豫章、颍川三府君毁主，中兴之初，权居天府，在庙门之西。
现代文：以前征西将军、豫章府君、颖川府君这三府君的神主毁去，束晋初年，暂且置于祖庙的天府中，天府在宗庙门的西边。
English: In the first year of Sokujin, the deities of the three deities, Seisei Shogun, Yoshofukun, and Yingkawafukun, were temporarily placed in the heavenly palace of the ancestral temple. The heavenly palace was on the west side of the ancestral temple gate.

古文：咸康中，太常冯怀表续奉还于西储夹室，谓之为祧，疑亦非礼。
现代文：咸康年间，太常冯怀表奏请求再奉回西储的夹室中，称之为祧，我们怀疑这也不合礼制。
English: During the Han and Kang dynasties, it was often suggested that the emperor should be sent to the Western Storage Room, known as the Shackle Room, which may also be inappropriate.

古文：今京兆迁入，是为四世远祖，长在太祖之上。
现代文：现在京兆府君的神主迁入，这是四世远祖，居于太祖之上。
English: Now, the god of Jing Zhao has moved in. Zou is the fourth generation ancestor, always higher than the great ancestor.

古文：昔周室太祖世远，故迁有所归。
现代文：古代周朝时太祖的世系久远，因此神主迁出安排合理。
English: The great-grandparents of the previous generation are long gone, so they have a place to return to after moving away.

古文：今晋庙宣皇为主，而四祖居之，是屈祖就孙也。殷袷在上，是代太祖也。 
现代文：现在晋朝的宗庙以宣皇为主，而四世远祖神主安排在宗庙，这是委屈太祖而迁就孙辈宗庙大祭时四祖神主安排在宗庙中，这是替代了太祖。 
English: The ancestral temple of the present Jin Dynasty is mainly dedicated to Emperor Xuan, but the fourth-generation distant ancestor deity is arranged in the ancestral temple. This is an injustice to the great-grandfather, and the four-generation distant ancestor deity is arranged in the ancestral temple during the grand festival of the grandchildren's ancestral temple. This is a substitute for the great-grandfather.

古文：领司徒蔡谟议： 四府君宜改筑别室，若未展者，当入就太庙之室。
现代文：领司徒蔡谟议论说： 京兆府君、征西将军、豫章府君、颖川府君等四位府君的神主应该另建庙室，如果有不曾列入宗庙祭祀的神主，就应当送进太庙的室中。
English: The leader of the priests, Jaume, argued that: the deities of the four deities, including Jingzhao Fuchun, General Xie Xi, Yu Zhang Fuchun, and Yingchuan Fuchun, should build a separate temple room, and if there are deities that have not been included in the ancestral temple worship, they should be sent to the room of the Great Temple.

古文：人莫敢卑其祖，文、武不先不窋。
现代文：人们不敢卑视自己的祖宗，周文王、周武王不把不宙列于后稷之前。
English: People dare not look down on their ancestors. King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu do not put their ancestors ahead of their posterity.

古文：殷祭之日，征西东面，处宣皇之上。
现代文：我晋朝举行宗庙大祭的时候，征西将军的神主在束面，处于宣皇之上。
English: On the day of the Yin Festival, the god of conquering the West was placed in the East, higher than the emperor.

古文：其后迁庙之主，藏于征西之祧，祭荐不绝。 
现代文：后来迁出宗庙的各位神主，安放于征西将军的祧庙中，世代给予祭祀。 
English: Since he moved out of the temple, the deity of the temple has been hidden in the place of the peach festival of the Western Conquest, and the sacrifice and worship cannot be interrupted.

古文：护军将军冯怀表议： 《礼》， 无庙者，为坛以祭 。
现代文：护军将军冯怀表奏说： 《礼》书里说， 没有列入宗庙的先人，建造坛台给予祭祀 。
English: Feng Huai, the escort general, said: "In the Book of Rites, it says that the ancestors who were not included in the ancestral temple built the altar to give sacrifices.

古文：可别立室藏之，至殷禘，则祭于坛也。 
现代文：可以另外建立安放神主的藏室，将神主保存，到了宗庙大祭之时，就在坛台举行祭祀。 
English: It is possible to build a separate storage room for the enshrined deity, preserve the deity, and hold a ritual on the altar at the time of the grand festival of the ancestral temple.

古文：辅国将军谯王司马无忌等议： 诸儒谓太王王季迁主藏于文、武之祧，如此，府君迁主，宜在宣皇帝庙中。
现代文：辅国将军谯王司马无忌等议论说： 儒士们说大王王季的神主迁出之后藏放在周文王、周武王的祧庙中，这样，各位府君的神主迁出后，应该放在宣皇帝的庙中。
English: The general of the Auxiliary Provinces, Wang Sima Wu Boi, said, "The Confucianists say that the deities of the great emperors Wang Ji and Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang were stored in the imperial temples after they moved out. In this way, the deities of the governors should be placed in the temple of Emperor Xuan after they moved out.

古文：然今无寝室，宜变通而改筑。
现代文：但是现在宗庙中没有后殿，应该变通而改建。
English: However, now there is no room for the god, so it should be modified and built separately.

古文：又殷袷太庙，征西东面。 
现代文：又太庙举行大祭时，征西将军神主应在束面。 
English: Also, when the grand festival is held in the Great Temple, the god of the Western Conquest should be in the middle.

古文：尚书郎孙绰与无忌议同，曰： 太祖虽位始九五，而道以从暢，赞人爵之尊，笃天伦之道，所以成教本而光百代也。 
现代文：尚书郎孙绰与司马无忌的议论相同。他们说： 太祖虽然位居人间帝王，然而天道通畅，去除尊贵的爵禄，以深化天伦情义，可以成为教化的根本而光照万世。 
English: Shang Shulang, Sun Cao, and Sima Mugu made the same argument. They said: Although the great-grandfather was an emperor on earth, the heavenly way was smooth. By removing the noble title and deepening the sense of the heavenly family, he could become the fundamental and shining light of enlightenment for all ages.

古文：尚书郎徐禅议： 《礼》， 去祧为坛，去坛为鸑，岁袷则祭之 。今四祖迁主，可藏之石室。
现代文：尚书郎徐惮议论说： 《礼》书裹说， 去除桃庙筑造坛台，去除坛台划出祭祀场地，每年宗庙祭祀时在场地祭祀远祖，现在已迁出的四位府君神主，可藏放在石室中。
English: Shang Shulang Xu Shu said: "The "Rite" book says, remove the peach temple to build the altar, remove the altar to mark out the sacrificial site, and sacrifice the ancestors in the site every year during the ancestral temple. The four prefectural monarchs who have now moved out can be hidden in the stone room.

古文：有祷则祭于坛鸑。 
现代文：当要祷祭时就在坛场中祭祀。 
English: When a prayer service is called for, it is held in the chancel.

古文：又遣禅至会稽访处士虞喜。
现代文：又派遣徐禅到会稽访询处士虞喜。
English: In addition, Xu Zen sent Yu Xi, an inquiry clerk, to the meeting.

古文：喜答曰： 汉世韦玄成等以毁主瘗于园。
现代文：虞喜回答说： 汉朝韦玄成等人认为毁庙的神主要埋藏在园中。
English: Yu Xi replied: Wei Xuancheng and others in the Han Dynasty believed that the main deity of the destroyed temple was buried in the garden.

古文：魏朝议者云应埋两阶之间。
现代文：曹魏时期议论的人却说应该埋藏在两阶之间。
English: During the Cao Wei period, however, people who discussed it said that it should be buried between the two levels.

古文：且神主本在太庙，若今别室而祭，则不如永藏。又四君无追号之礼，益明应毁而无祭。 
现代文：况且神主本来是在太庙襄，如果现在在另外的庙室为之祭祀，就不如永世埋藏又四位府君没有追加封号的礼仪，更加表明应该毁庙而不予以祭祀。 
English: Moreover, the deity was originally in the main temple, and if it is now being sacrificed in another temple room, it is not as good as the ritual of burying another four prefects forever without an additional seal, which further indicates that the temple should be destroyed without being sacrificed.

古文：于是抚军将军会稽王司马昱、尚书刘劭等奏： 四祖同居西祧，藏主石室，禘袷乃祭，如先朝旧仪。 
现代文：于是抚军将军会稽王司马昱、尚书型勤等人上奏说： 四位府君一同安置于西祧庙室，神主藏放在石室中，到宗庙举行大祭时就给予祭祀，就像以前各朝代旧有的仪制一样。 
English: As a result, Fushun's generals, King Sima Qian, Shang Shuxing Qin and others made a report, saying: The four prefects were placed together in the Xidi temple room, the god was stored in the stone room, and when the grand festival was held in the ancestral temple, sacrifices were given, just like the old ceremonial system of each dynasty.

古文：时陈留范宣兄子问此礼。
现代文：当时速鱼人菹宣的侄子询问造一礼仪。
English: At that time, the nephew of the fast fisherman Yu Xuan inquired about the etiquette.

古文：宣答曰； 舜庙所祭，皆是庶人。
现代文：范宣回答说： 叠避庙中所祭祀的，部属庶民百姓。
English: Fan Xuan replied, "Those who are enshrined in the Jianye Temple belong to the common people.

古文：其后世远而毁，不居舜上，不序昭穆。
现代文：因为他们后来世系疏远而毁去神主，不在虞主之上，也不在宗庙裹排列昭穆次序。
English: Because they later alienated the lineage and destroyed the god, they are not above the state lord, nor are they in the order of Shomu in the ancestral temple.

古文：今四君号犹依本，非以功德致礼也。
现代文：现在四位府君的称号仍然像原来的一样，不是因为有功德而致礼。
English: Now the titles of the four prefectural governors are still the same as the original ones, not because of their merits.

古文：若依虞主之瘗，则犹藏子孙之所；若依夏主之埋，则又非本庙之阶。
现代文：如果按照卢主的瘗埋，那就当藏入子孙之地，如果依照星朝神主瘗埋，那又不是本庙位序。
English: If the practice of burying the deity in the garden according to the yuans, it would be like a place to bury the descendants; if the practice of burying the deity according to the Xia people, it would not be suitable for the current situation of the ancestral temple.

古文：宜思其变，别筑一室，亲未尽则禘袷，处宣帝之上；亲尽则无缘下就子孙之列。 
现代文：应该想出一种变通的办法，要另外筑造一室，当亲近关系还没有淡亡以前就在宗庙给予祭祀，位居宣查之上；当亲近关系淡漠之后，就不必与子孙之辈同列。 
English: They should come up with a workable solution by building a separate room. When the close relationship has not yet faded away, they should give sacrifices at the ancestral temple and be above the censors; when the close relationship has faded away, they do not have to be in the same rank as their descendants.

古文：其后太常刘遐等同蔡谟议。
现代文：后来太常型遐等人赞同整谟的议论。
English: Later, too often, Liu Ye and others shared the same opinion with Zaimu.

古文：博士张凭议： 或疑陈于太祖者，皆其后毁之主。
现代文：博土退坜议论说： 有人怀疑陈列在太祖神位的，都是在他之后撤除的神主。
English: "Some people suspect that all the deities displayed on the throne of the great ancestor were the deities that were removed after him.

古文：凭案古义，无别前后之文也。
现代文：我考查古代原本没有区别前后的记载。
English: I checked the records of ancient times, and there was no difference between before and after.

古文：禹不先鲧，则迁主居太祖之上，亦可无疑矣。 
现代文：夏禹不先列于鲧，那么迁出的神主列于太祖之上，也就无可怀疑了。 
English: If Xia Yu is not listed first in the imperial edict, then there is no doubt that the relocated deity is listed above the great ancestor.

古文：安帝义熙九年四月，将殷祭，诏博议迁毁之礼。
现代文：安帝义熙九年四月，将要举行宗庙祭祀皇帝下诏令让群臣广泛议论迁出和撤除神主的礼仪。
English: In April of the ninth year of Emperor Andei Yixi, there will be a ceremony to celebrate the departure and removal of Shinto priests from the ancestral temple in accordance with the Emperor's edict.

古文：大司马琅邪王司马德文议： 泰始之初，虚太祖之位，而缘情流远，上及征西，故世尽则宜毁，而宣皇帝正太祖之位。
现代文：大司马琅邪王司马德文议论说： 泰始初年，太祖之位空缺，而依照情理推溯远祖，上至征西将军，因此世系远隔的就应该撤除其神主，而宣皇帝正为太祖之位。
English: Sima Dewen, the grand secretary of the evil king Sima Ye, argued: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the position of the great-grandfather was vacant, and according to reason, the great-grandfather was traced back to the general of the Western Conquest. Therefore, the distant lineage should remove its god, and Emperor Xuan is the great-grandfather's position.

古文：又汉光武帝移十一帝主于洛邑，则毁主不没，理可推矣。
现代文：又漠光武帝迁移十一个皇帝的神主到洛阳，那么撤除的神主不设祭，便可推论了。
English: In addition, Emperor Mu Guangwu relocated eleven emperors' deities to Luoyang, so it can be inferred that the removed deities did not set up a festival.

古文：宜从范宣之言，筑别室以居四府君之主，永藏而不祀也。 
现代文：应该依从范宣的议论，建造另室以安放四位府君的神主，永远藏放而不祭祀。 
English: According to Fan Xuan's argument, a separate room should be built to house the deities of the four prefectures, and they should be kept forever without being sacrificed.

古文：大司农徐广议： 四府君尝处庙室之首，歆率土之祭。
现代文：大司农徐广议论说： 四位府君的神主曾经安放在庙室之首，受皇室的享祭。
English: Senior farmer Xu Guang commented: The heads of the four deities of the prefectures were once placed at the head of the temple room to receive offerings from the imperial family.

古文：若埋之幽壤，于情理未必咸尽。
现代文：如果将神主埋藏在深上中，在情理上未必都合理。
English: If the deity is buried in the depths, it may not be reasonable.

古文：谓可迁藏西储，以为远祧，而禘飨永绝也。 
现代文：我认为可以将神主移藏在西储内，作为远祖，而永远不给予享祭。 
English: It can be moved and kept in the West Reserve, as a distant gourd, but the persimmon festival will never be held again.

古文：太尉谘议参军袁豹议： 仍旧无革。
现代文：太尉谘议参军袁豹议论说： 应该依照旧的典制不必更改。
English: Yuan Bao, a captain who advises soldiers to join the army, said: It should be in accordance with the old system and there is no need to change it.

古文：殷祠犹及四府君，情理为允。 
现代文：宗庙祭祀时仍然要祭祀四位府君，在情理上更为允当。 
English: At the time of the ancestral temple's ritual, it is still necessary to sacrifice the four prefectural governors, which is more reasonable.

古文：祠部郎臧焘议： 四府君之主，享祀礼废，则亦神所不依。
现代文：祠部郎臧焘议论说： 四位府君的神主，享祭的礼仪废止，那也是神所不允许的。
English: The chief priest of the ancestral hall said, "The gods of the four prefectures have abolished the ritual of celebrating the festival, which is also not allowed by the gods."

古文：宜同虞主之瘗埋矣。 
现代文：应该与虞主的瘗埋相同。 
English: It should be the same as that of the investor.

古文：时高祖辅晋，与大司马议同。
现代文：当时高祖辅佐晋朝，与大司马琅邪王司马德文的议论相同。
English: At that time, Gao Zu Fu Zi Jin Dynasty was the same as the discussion of the evil king Sima Dewen.

古文：须后殷祀行事改制。
现代文：等待后来宗庙祭祀举行时再作改变。
English: It is expected that the changes will be made later, when the ancestral temple's ritual is held.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十二年五月壬戌，诏曰： 昔建太庙，每事从俭约，思与率土，致力备礼。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十二年五月壬戌曰，皇帝下韶令说： 以前建造太庙时，一切都履行俭约，想同境内百姓，致力于完善礼典。
English: According to the imperial edict issued by Emperor Jinxiaowu in May of the 12th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, "When the Great Temple was built in the past, everything was done to fulfill the frugality agreement, and to work with the people in the country to improve the ceremony.

古文：又太祖虚位，明堂未建。
现代文：现在太祖之位还空缺，明堂也还没有建造。
English: Now the position of the great-grandfather is still vacant, and the Ming Hall has not yet been built.

古文：郊祀，国之大事，而稽古之制阙然。
现代文：郊祭，是国家的大事，而考查古代有。
English: Suburban festivals are important events for the country, and they have been examined in ancient times.

古文：便可详议。 
现代文：关制度的事也未能进行。应该详加商议。 
English: The matter of the customs system has also not been carried out. It should be discussed in detail.

古文：祠部郎徐邈议： 圆丘郊祀，经典无二，宣皇帝尝辨斯义。
现代文：祠部郎徐邈议论说： 圆丘祭祀和郊祀，经典的记载是合并为一的，宣皇帝曾经考辨了它的本义。
English: The head of the ancestral hall, Xu Xi, said: The classic records of the round mound ritual and the suburb ritual are merged into one, and Emperor Xuan once examined and distinguished its true meaning.

古文：而检以圣典，爰及中兴，备加研极，以定南北二郊，诚非异学所可轻改也。
现代文：而稽检儒学典制，以至到东晋时期以来，深入研究，论定了南郊和北郊祭祀的礼仪，这实在不是其他学说所能轻易改变的。
English: However, since the revision of Confucianism and the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the etiquette of the southern and northern suburbs has been thoroughly studied and discussed. This is not something that other doctrines can easily change.

古文：谓仍旧为安。
现代文：我认为应该依旧不改为妥。
English: It is appropriate that the old system should be followed.

古文：武皇帝建庙，六世三昭三穆，宣皇帝创基之主，实惟太祖，亲则王考，四庙在上，未及迁世，故权虚东向之位也。
现代文：武皇帝建立宗庙时，定为六世排列为三昭三穆，宣皇帝是创建基业的君主，实在应为太祖，从亲近关系而言，是武皇帝的父亲，还有四位先祖在其上，四位先祖都还没有到迁世换代的时候，因此暂且将向东之位空缺。
English: When Emperor Wu established the ancestral temple, he was designated as the sixth generation and ranked as the third Zhao and third Mu. Emperor Xuan is the monarch who founded the foundation, and should really be the great-grandfather. From the point of view of close relationship, he is the father of Emperor Wu. There are four ancestors above him. The four ancestors have not yet reached the time of reincarnation, so the eastward position is temporarily vacant.

古文：兄弟相及，义非二世，故当今庙祀，世数未足，而欲太祖正位，则违事七之义矣。
现代文：兄弟之间相承帝位，本来不属于两个世代，所以现在的宗庙祭祀，世代的数额还不够，而想让太祖正位，就违背了供奉七世祖的本义。
English: The imperial succession between brothers did not originally belong to two generations, so the current ancestral temple sacrifice, the amount of generations is not enough, and if you want to make the great-grandfather enthroned, it violates the original meaning of worshiping the seventh-generation ancestor.

古文：又《礼》曰 庶子王亦禘祖立庙 。盖谓支胤授位，则亲近必复。
现代文：又《礼》书裹说 庶子王也要祭祖立庙，这是说后代子孙得位之时，其近亲之祖一定要复立祭室。
English: The Book of Rites also says that the king's son-in-law must also build a temple, which means that when the descendants of the descendants succeed to the throne, the ancestors of their close relatives must restore the hall.

古文：京兆府君于今六世，宜复立此室，则宣皇未在六世之上，须前世既迁，乃太祖位定尔。
现代文：京兆府君至今已有六世，应该复立祭室，那么宣皇帝就不在六世之上，要等前一世代迁出之后。太祖之位便确定了。
English: Since Kyoshofukun is now the sixth generation, it is necessary to restore the ritual room, and then Emperor Xuan will not be above the sixth generation, but will have to wait until the previous generation has moved out. The position of the great-grandfather will then be determined.

古文：京兆迁毁，宜藏主于石室。
现代文：京兆府君的神主迁移撤除，应该将其神主藏在石室。
English: If the deity of Kyoshofukun is removed, it should be hidden in the stone room.

古文：虽禘袷犹弗及。
现代文：即使是宗庙大祭也不能给予祭祀。
English: Even the grand festival of the ancestral temple can't offer sacrifices.

古文：何者？传称毁主升合乎太祖，升者自下之名，不谓可降尊就卑也。
现代文：这是为什么呢，书传裹说撤除的神主升迁合祭于太祖，升是自下而上的称谓，不是说可以降尊而就卑。
English: Why is this? According to the legend, the gods that were removed were elevated and sacrificed to the ancestors. Elevation is an appellation from the bottom up, not to say that they can be degraded and become inferior.

古文：太子太孙阴室四主，储嗣之重，升祔皇祖所配之庙，世远应迁，然后从食之孙，与之俱毁。
现代文：太子太孙这阴室的四殇主，是重要的继嗣，应该升迁合祭于皇祖所依托的庙中，世系远隔之后神主应该迁出，然后附享的孙子，一同都撤除神主。
English: The prince, the great-grandson, and the four great-great-grandsons of this netherworld are important heirs. They should be promoted and enshrined in the temple supported by the emperor's ancestors. After the lineage is separated, the god should move out, and then the grandchildren who share the inheritance should remove the god together.

古文：明堂圆方之制，纲领已举，不宜阙配帝之祀。
现代文：明堂圆丘方泽等制度，大的仪制已经确定，不应该阙失配享先帝的祭祀。
English: The great ceremonial system has already been established in the Myeongdong Round Mound Square and other systems, and it should not be lost to enjoy the sacrifices of the former emperor.

古文：且王者以天下为家，未必一邦，故周平、光武无废于二京也。
现代文：况且帝王以天下为家，不必为一个邦域，因此周：丝和汉光武帝包含于塞酉周和塞玺选。
English: Moreover, those who claim to be kings have the whole world as their home and are not necessarily limited to one country, so King Zhou Ping and Emperor Guangwu did not abolish the divine right of kings during the Nijing period.

古文：周公宗祀文王，汉明配以世祖，自非惟新之考，孰配上帝。 
现代文：且公宗庙祭祀且塞王，选盟壶以世祖光武皇帝配祭上帝，如果不是确立新王朝的先父，怎能够配祭上帝呢。 
English: Moreover, the Kongzong Temple was dedicated to King Sai, and the ancestor Emperor Guangwu was chosen to be the sacrificial god. If he was not the forefather who established the new dynasty, how could he be the sacrificial god?

古文：邈又曰： 明堂所配之神，积疑莫辨。
现代文：涂邈又说： 明堂所配祭的神，历来疑惑难于辨明。
English: Tu Ying also said: The deities associated with the Ming Hall have always been difficult to identify.

古文：按《易》， 殷荐上帝，以配祖考 。祖考同配，则上帝亦为天，而严父之义显。
现代文：根据《易经》裹说， 祭享上帝，以先祖先父配祭，先祖先父一同配祭，而上帝也都是天，而尊崇父亲的意义便显现出来了。
English: According to the "I Ching," the meaning of honoring one's father is revealed when it is said that offering and enjoying God is the same as offering and sharing sacrifices with one's ancestors, and that God is also heaven.

古文：《周礼》，旅上帝者有故，告天与郊祀常礼同用四圭，故并言之。
现代文：按《周礼》裹的意思，旅祭上帝有原委，祭天与郊祀的常礼都是用四个玉圭，所以一起提及。
English: According to the meaning of the "Weekly Rites," the traveling festival of God has the original committee, and the regular rites of the festival of heaven and the suburban worship are all with four Gyokwe, so they are mentioned together.

古文：若上帝者五帝，经文何不言祀天旅五帝，祀地旅四望乎？
现代文：如果上帝指的是五帝，经文中为何不说是祭天旅祭五帝，祭地旅祭四方山川呢?
English: If God refers to the Five Emperors, why does the text not say that the Festival of the Heavenly Journey is the Festival of the Five Emperors, and the Festival of the Earthly Journey is the Festival of the Four Square Mountains and Rivers?

古文：人帝之与天帝，虽天人之通谓，然五方不可言上帝，诸侯不可言大君也。
现代文：人帝与天帝，虽是天人的通称，然而五方之帝不可称为上帝，诸侯不可称为大君。
English: Although human emperors and heavenly emperors are common names for heavenly beings, the emperor of the five directions cannot be called God, and princes cannot be called overlords.

古文：书无全证，而义容彼此，故太始、太康二纪之间，兴废迭用矣。 侍中车胤议同。
现代文：书裹没有完全的证据，而解义可以不一致，因此童盘、主尘两个年号之间，实行或不实行便互相交替出现了。  侍中的议论相同。
English: There is no complete proof of the book wrapping, and the interpretation may be inconsistent, so the children's plate and the main dust appear alternately between the two years, whether they are implemented or not.

古文：又曰： 明堂之制，既其难详。
现代文：又说： 明堂的制度，已经难于详考。
English: He also said, "The Ming-tang system is already difficult to study in detail.

古文：且乐主于和，礼主于敬，故质文不同，音器亦殊。
现代文：况且乐是主协和的，礼是主礼敬的，因此礼仪的质朴和文饰不相同，音乐配器也不相同。
English: Moreover, music is the main harmony, and etiquette is the main courtesy, so the simplicity and decoration of etiquette are different, and the musical instruments are also different.

古文：既茅茨广厦，不一其度，何必守其形范，而不知弘本顺民乎！
现代文：既然茅茨之室与宏广大厦，其制度不相一致，又何必死守形式规范，而不知弘扬根本顺应民众呢。
English: Since the system of the Moutz's room and the grand mansion is not consistent, why do they have to stick to formal norms, but do not know how to promote the fundamental compliance with the people.

古文：九服咸宁，河朔无尘，然后明堂辟雍，可崇而修之。 
现代文：到了全国都安宁时，回塑没有战事时，然后对明堂辟雍。可尊崇而修建。 
English: When there is peace in the whole country, when there is no war, then the Ming Hall will be built. It can be built with respect.

古文：中书令王珉意与胤同。
现代文：中书令王举的意见与车胤的议论相同。
English: Wang Qiu's opinion is the same as Che Zhe's.

古文：太常孔汪议： 太始开元，所以上祭四府君，诚以世数尚近，可得飨祠，非若殷、周先世，王迹所因也。
现代文：太常孔旦议论说： 泰始元年，之所以要上祭四位府君，实在是因为世系的位数还接近，可以给予享祭，不像殷茵和飓目的先世远祖，是帝王大业的起始。
English: Too often, Confucius argued: In the first year of the Tai Dynasty, the reason why the four prefectural princes were to be sacrificed was really because the number of generations was still close, and they could be given sacrifices. Unlike the ancestors of Yin Yin and Hai Rui, it was the beginning of the emperor's great cause.

古文：向使京兆尔时在七世之外，自当不祭此四王。
现代文：假使京兆府君当时在七世之外，自然就不会祭祀这四位府君。
English: If Keicho-fukun was beyond the seventh generation at that time, it would not be natural to sacrifice these four fukun.

古文：推此知既毁之后，则殷禘所绝矣。 
现代文：据此而推论便可明白，既撤除了神主之后，那么宗庙祭祀便被断绝了。 
English: From this, it can be deduced that after the removal of the Shinto priest, the ancestral temple worship was discontinued.

古文：吏部郎王忱议： 明堂则天象地，仪观之大，宜俟皇居反旧，然后修之。 
现代文：吏部郎王忱议论说： 明堂的形制仿照天地，它的景观规模的扩大，要等待返回旧的皇宫之后修筑。 
English: Wang Zhen, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, said: The shape of the Ming Hall is modeled after heaven and earth, and the expansion of its landscape scale should wait for the construction after returning to the old imperial palace.

古文：骠骑将军会稽王司马道子、尚书令谢石意同忱议，于是奉行，一无所改。
现代文：骠骑将军会稽王司马道子、尚书令谢石的意见与王忱的议论相同。于是照旧制奉行毫无改变。
English: The opinion of Wang Zhen and Wang Zhen's comments were the same as Wang Zhen's. Therefore, there was no change in the old system.

古文：晋安帝义熙二年六月，白衣领尚书左仆射孔安国启云： 元兴三年夏，应殷祠。
现代文：晋安帝义熙二年六月，白衣领尚书左仆射孔安国启奏说： 元兴三年的夏季，应当举行宗庙大祭。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinnan, the white-collar disciple Shoshu's left-hand man, Shoko Ankoku, said: "In the summer of the third year of the Genko era, the grand festival of the ancestral temple should be held.

古文：昔年三月，皇舆旋轸。
现代文：往年的三月，皇帝返回。
English: In March of the previous year, the emperor returned.

古文：其年四月，便应殷，而太常博士徐乾等议云： 应用孟秋。 
现代文：当年的四月就应当举行宗庙大祭，而太常博士徐干等人议论说： 应该在孟秋之月祭祀。 
English: In April of that year, the grand festival of the ancestral temple should be held, and Dr. Xu Gan and others argued: It should be held in the month of Mengqiu.

古文：台寻校自太和四年相承皆用冬夏，乾等既伏应孟冬，回复追明孟秋非失。
现代文：尚书台查考得知，从立和四年起连续至今，都是在冬季或夏季举行宗庙大祭，徐干等人已经上奏应将孟冬祭祀回改恢复为孟秋之月没有失误。
English: An investigation by Shang Shudai revealed that since the fourth year of the Heian period, the grand festival of the ancestral temple has been held in winter or summer. Xu Gan and others have reported that there was no mistake in changing the Meng Dong ritual back to the Meng Qiu month.

古文：御史中丞范泰议： 今虽既祔之后，得以烝尝，而无殷荐之比。
现代文：御史中丞范泰议论说： 现在虽是合祭祖庙之后，得于秋冬祭祀，而没有大享祭的先例。
English: Fan Tai, the chief historian, commented: Although it is now after the ancestral temple festival, it is held in the autumn and winter, and there is no precedent for the grand festival.

古文：太元二十一年十月应殷，烈宗以其年九月崩。
现代文：太元二十一年十月应该举行宗庙大祭，而烈宗于当年九月逝世。
English: In October of the 21st year of the Taigen era, the grand festival of the ancestral temple was to be held, but Ryozo died in September of that year.

古文：至隆安三年，国家大吉，乃修殷事。
现代文：到了隆安三年，国家大吉，于是举行宗庙大祭。
English: In the third year of the Longan era, when the country was prosperous, the grand temple festival was held.

古文：又礼有丧则废吉祭，祭新主于寝。
现代文：又根据礼制有丧事就应废止吉祭，在寝庙祭祀新的神主。
English: Also, according to the ritual system, if there is a funeral, the auspicious festival should be abolished, and a new god should be worshipped in the sleeping temple.

古文：今不设别寝，既祔，祭于庙。
现代文：现在不另建寝庙，既合祭于祖庙，便在宗庙祭祀。
English: Nowadays, there is no need to build a separate mortuary temple, and since the ceremony is held in the ancestral temple, it is held in the ancestral temple.

古文：故四时烝尝，以寄追远之思，三年一禘，以习昭穆之序，义本各异。
现代文：因此春、夏、秋、冬四时祭祀，以寄托追思远祖的心情，三年举行一次柿祭，以省察祖宗昭穆的次序，四时祭祀与樯祭的本义从来都是各不相同的。
English: Therefore, there are four-hour sacrifices in spring, summer, autumn, and winter to remember the feelings of the ancestors, and a persimmon festival is held once every three years, in the order of the ancestors. The four-hour sacrifice and the original meaning of the burnt offering have always been different.

古文：三年丧毕，则合食太祖，遇时则殷，无取于限三十月也。
现代文：天子三年的丧事完毕之后，就与太祖合享，遇着宗庙大祭时就祭祀，没有所谓三十个月的时限。
English: After the three-year funeral of the son of heaven is over, he shares it with the great-grandfather, and when it comes to the grand festival of the ancestral temple, there is no so-called thirty-month time limit.

古文：当是内台常以限月成旧。 
现代文：衹是尚书省常常以三十个月设限而成惯例。 
English: It is customary for the Ministry of Education and Culture to set a time limit of 30 months.

古文：就如所言，有丧可殷。
现代文：就依范泰所言，有丧事也可举行宗庙大祭。
English: According to Fan Tai, if there is a funeral, the grand festival of the ancestral temple can also be held.

古文：隆安之初，果以丧而废矣。
现代文：隆昼初年，果然因丧事而废止大祭。
English: In the early afternoon of the first year, the grand festival was cancelled due to a funeral.

古文：月数少多，复迟速失中。
现代文：月数少多，又快慢失中。
English: The number of months is fewer and fewer, and they are slowly fading away.

古文：至于应寝而修，意所未譬。 
现代文：至于应修寝庙的事，意思不明。 
English: As for the matter of whether to build a sleeping temple, the meaning is unclear.

古文：安国又启： 范泰云： 今既祔，遂祭于庙，故四时烝尝。 如泰此言，殷与烝尝，其本不同。
现代文：孔安国又启奏说： 范泰说： 现在已合祭于太祖，便在宗庙祭祀，因此在四时祭祀，依范泰的这种说法，殷祭即宗庙大祭与燕尝四时之祭，它们的本义各不相同。
English: Kong An Guo also said: Fan Tai said: Now that it has been dedicated to the great ancestor, it is sacrificed in the ancestral temple, so it is sacrificed at four o'clock. According to Fan Tai, the Yin Festival, that is, the ancestral temple festival, and the Yangtze Festival at four o'clock, their original meanings are different.

古文：既祔之后，可亲烝尝而不得亲殷也。
现代文：既附入先祖宗庙祭祀之后，可亲自参加熏尝四时之祭，而不得亲自参与宗庙大祭。
English: After joining the ancestral temple ritual, you can personally participate in the four-hour festival, but you are not allowed to personally participate in the ancestral temple festival.

古文：太常刘瑾云： 章后丧未一周，不应祭。 
现代文：太常刘瑾说： 章后丧亡还没有到一周年，不应该举行祭祀。 
English: Liu Wei said, "The first anniversary of Zhang Hou's death has not yet come, so there should not be a memorial service.

古文：臣寻升平五年五月，穆皇帝崩，其年七月，山陵，十月，殷。
现代文：我查考升平五年五月，穆皇童逝世，当年七月，建造陵墓，十月，举行宗庙大祭。
English: According to my research, in May of the fifth year of Shangping, Mu Wangdong passed away, in July of that year, the mausoleum was built, and in October, the grand festival of the ancestral temple was held.

古文：兴宁三年二月，哀皇帝崩，太和元年五月，海西夫人庾氏薨，时为皇后，七月，葬，十月，殷。
现代文：兴宁三年二月，哀皇帝逝世，太和元年五月，逛酉夫人座压逝世，当时她是皇后，七月，安葬。十月，祭祀。
English: In February of the 3rd year of Xingning, Emperor Aye passed away. In May of the 1st year of Tahe, Lady Zhaozhou passed away, at that time she was the empress. In July, she was buried. In October, she was enshrined.

古文：此在哀皇再周之内，庾夫人既葬之后，二殷策文见在庙。
现代文：这是在哀皇帝逝世后两周年之内，庾夫人安葬之后，两次大祭的策文现存在庙中。
English: This is within the two-year anniversary of the death of Emperor Ai, after the burial of Lady Zou, the outline of the two festivals now exists in the temple.

古文：又文皇太后以隆安四年七月崩，陛下追述先旨，躬服重制，五年十月，殷。
现代文：又文皇太后于隆安四年七月逝世，陛下追行先帝的意旨，亲自服重丧服，隆安五年十月，举行殷祭。
English: In addition, Empress Dowager Wen passed away in July of the fourth year of Longan. His Majesty followed the will of the former emperor and personally served the funeral rites. In October of the fifth year of Longan, the Yin Festival was held.

古文：再周之内，不以废事。
现代文：在两周年之内，不废止祭祀。
English: Within two years of the anniversary, the ritual will not be abolished.

古文：今以小君之哀，而泰更谓不得行大礼。
现代文：现在以诸侯夫人的丧事，而范泰却说不可举行大祭。
English: Now it is the funerals of the princes' wives, but Fan Tai says that the grand festival should not be held.

古文：臣寻永和十年至今五十余载，用三十月辄殷，皆见于注记，是依礼，五年再殷。
现代文：我查考永和十年至今的五十多年裹，实行三十个月便可殷祭，这都见于记载中，这事按照礼制，五年再举行祭祀。
English: I checked the records of Yonghe for the past ten years and more than fifty years, and the implementation of the thirty-month festival can be seen in the records. According to the etiquette, the festival will be held for another five years.

古文：而泰所言，非真难臣，乃以圣朝所用，迟速失中。
现代文：而范泰所上奏的内容，不是真正恭谨的臣子，竟以为皇朝所实行，迟早失度。
English: However, the content presented by Fan Tai was not that of a truly respectful courtier, and he actually thought that the imperial court would lose its temper sooner or later.

古文：泰为宪司，自应明审是非，群臣所启不允，即当责失奏弹，而愆堕稽停，遂非忘旧。
现代文：范泰是御史，自然应当明辨是非，如果臣子启奏内容不当，就应该责备其过失并弹劾上奏。而他却违反事理并拖延，坚持错误忘记国家旧典。
English: Fan Tai is an imperial historian, he should naturally distinguish right from wrong, if the content of a vassal's recital is improper, he should be reproved for his fault and impeached for the recital, but he violated the facts and delayed, insisting on the mistake of forgetting the old national classics.

古文：请免泰、瑾官。 
现代文：请皇上罢免范泰和刘瑾的宫职。 
English: Please ask the emperor to remove Fan Tai and Liu Ye from their palace posts.

古文：丁巳，诏皆白衣领职。
现代文：丁巳。皇帝下诏令让范泰和刘瑾以受处分官员的身份管理自己的职事。
English: Ding Si. The emperor issued a decree to let Fan Tai and Liu Ye manage their duties as officials subject to punishment.

古文：于是博士徐乾皆免官。
现代文：于是博士徐干也都被免去官职。
English: As a result, Dr. Xu Gang was also removed from office.

古文：初，元兴三年四月，不得殷祠进用十月，计常限，则义熙三年冬又当殷；若更起端，则应用来年四月。
现代文：当初，在元兴三年四月时，将不得举行殷祭的时限改为十个月，如果以正常的时限计算，那么义盐三年的冬季又要举行殷祭，如果改为按新时限开始计算，那就应该在来年的四月举行殷祭。
English: Originally, in April of the third year of the Genxing Dynasty, the time limit for the Yin Festival to be held was changed to ten months. If the normal time limit was used, the Yin Festival would be held in the winter of the third year of the Yishan Dynasty. If the new time limit was used, the Yin Festival should be held in April of the next year.

古文：领司徒王谧、丹阳尹孟昶议： 有非常之庆，必有非常之礼。
现代文：领司徒工箠、且坠尹垂翅议论说： 有不同寻常的喜庆，就一定要有不同寻常的典礼。
English: The chief priest, the apprentice carpenter, and the fallen Yin, the winged dragon, argued: If there is an unusual celebration, there must be an unusual ceremony.

古文：殷祭旧准不差，盖施于经常尔。
现代文：殷祭旧有的标准没有差错，但那都是在平常施行的。
English: There is nothing wrong with the old standards of Yin Festival, but they were all carried out in an ordinary way.

古文：至于义熙之庆，经古莫二，虽曰旋幸，理同受命。愚谓理运惟新，于是乎始。
现代文：至于义毖元年击败叛贼的喜庆，是自古以来独一无二的，虽说足胜利返回皇都，但按情理如同受天命得帝位我认为更新的机运，在这时开始。
English: As for the celebration of defeating the traitors in the first year of the reign of Emperor Yihong, it was unique since ancient times. Although it was a triumphant return to the imperial capital, it was the beginning of what I believe to be a new era of imperial succession.

古文：宜用四月。 
现代文：应该于四月举行殷祭。 
English: The Yin Festival should be held in April.

古文：中领军谢混、太常刘瑾议： 殷无定日，考时致敬，且礼意尚简。
现代文：中领军谢混、太常刘瑾议论说： 殷祭没有一定的子，选择时以敬祭。而且祭礼崇尚简约。
English: The leader of the middle group, Xie Ming, and the leader of the second group, Liu Xuan, argued that the Yin Festival does not have a certain number of children, and the choice is made by worship. Moreover, the festival advocates simplicity.

古文：去年十月祠，虽于日有差，而情典允备，宜仍以为正。 
现代文：去年十月祭祀，虽然在时曰上不够准确，然而典礼恰当完备，仍然应该认为是正期举行的祭祀。 
English: Last October's ritual, although it is not accurate enough in terms of time, but the ceremony is appropriate and complete, it should still be considered a regular ritual.

古文：太学博士徐乾议： 三年一袷，五年一禘，经传记籍，不见补殷之文。 
现代文：太学博士徐干议论说： 三年举行一次夹祭，五年举行一次柿祭，经籍传记裹，不见补行殷祭的记载。 
English: Dr. Xu Gan, the dean of the university, commented, "The clip festival is held once every three years, and the persimmon festival is held once every five years.

古文：员外散骑侍郎领著作郎徐广议： 寻先事，海西公泰和六年十月，殷祠。
现代文：员外散骑侍郎领着作郎途尘议论说： 考查先前的事例，海西公太扣六年十月，殷祭。
English: The non-member horseback riding attendant led the way to the dust and discussed: Examining the previous cases, Haixi Grandmother buckled in October of the sixth year, Yin Festival.

古文：孝武皇帝宁康二年十月，殷祠。
现代文：孝武皇帝宁康二年十月殷祭。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of Ningkang celebrated the Yin Festival in October of the second year.

古文：若依常去前三十月，则应用四月也。
现代文：如果按照平常的时限距离前一次三十个月，就应该在四月举行祭祀。
English: If the usual time limit is thirty months from the previous time, the sacrifice should be held in April.

古文：于时盖当有故，而迁在冬，但未详其事。
现代文：当时大概是有别的缘故，而移到冬季举行祭祀，但不知道究竟是什么缘故。
English: At that time, there was probably another reason for moving the festival to winter, but it is not known what the reason was.

古文：太元元年十月殷祠，依常三十月，则应用二年四月也。
现代文：左五元年十月殷祭，按照平常三十个月的时限，就应该在二年四月举行祭祀。
English: According to the usual thirty-month time limit, the October Yin Festival in the year of the Five Elements should be held in April of the second year.

古文：是追计辛未岁十月，来合六十月而再殷。
现代文：造追计辛未年十月，不合六十个月而举行两次殷祭。
English: In October of the following year, it took sixty months to complete the construction, and two Yin festivals were held.

古文：何邵甫注《公羊传》云，袷从先君来，积数为限。 自僖八年至文二年，知为袷祭 。
现代文：何邵甫注《公羊传》说，夹祭是从前代君王以来，积累月数而为祭祀期限。 从鲁僖公八年到鲁文公二年，明知当年的大事是夹祭 。
English: He Shaofu said in his commentary on "The Story of the Ram" that the festival of the pinching was a period of time for the accumulation of months since the previous generation of monarchs. From the eighth year of Lu Yongguo to the second year of Lu Wenguo, knowing that the big event of the year was the pinching festival.

古文：如此，履端居始，承源成流，领会之节，远因宗本也。
现代文：这样，推算其起始之曰，承接本源而推移，领悟的关键，是追溯其本始。
English: In this way, when calculating its beginning, the key to understanding is to trace its origin.

古文：昔年有故推迁，非其常度。
现代文：往年因有别的缘故推移了殷祭的时间，这不是正常的期限。
English: In previous years, due to other reasons, the time of the Yin Festival has been delayed. This is not a normal time limit.

古文：宁康、太元前事可依。
现代文：宁康、太元年间的事例可作为依据。
English: The cases of Ningkang and Taiyuan can be used as a basis.

古文：虽年有旷近之异，然追计之理同矣。
现代文：虽然年代有远近的差异，然而追计以前月份的道理是一致的。
English: Although there are far and near differences in the years, the principle of counting the previous months is consistent.

古文：愚谓从复常次者，以推归正之道也。 
现代文：我认为恢复殷祭正常的次序，足使殷祭返回正期举行的办法。 
English: I think that restoring the normal order of the Yin Festival is enough to return the Yin Festival to the normal time.

古文：左丞刘润之等议： 太元元年四月应殷，而礼官堕失，建用十月。
现代文：左丞刘润之等人议论说： 太元元年四月应该举行殷祭，而礼官怠惰失误，改在十月举行。
English: Zuoxing Liu Runzhi and others argued: The Yin Festival should have been held in April of the first year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, but the etiquette officials made a lazy mistake and held it in October instead.

古文：本非正期，不应即以失为始也。
现代文：这本不是殷祭正期，不应该就以失误的时日作为起始。
English: This is not the main period of Yin Festival, and it should not start with the time and date of the mistake.

古文：宜以反初四月为始。
现代文：应该返回当初的四月作为起始。
English: It should go back to the original April as a starting point.

古文：当用三年十月。 
现代文：应当在三年十月举行殷祭。 
English: Yin Festival should be held in October of the third year.

古文：尚书奏从王谧议，以元年十月为始也。
现代文：尚书上奏认为要依从王谧的议论，以太元元年十月为起始。
English: Shang Shuxu wrote that it was necessary to follow Wang Yao's argument, starting in October of the first year of the Edo period.

古文：宋孝武帝孝建元年十二月戊子，有司奏： 依旧今元年十月是殷祠之月，领曹郎范泰参议，依永初三年例，须再周之外殷祭。
现代文：宋孝武帝孝建元年十二月戊子曰，主事官员上奏说： 按照旧例今年十月是举行殷祭的月份。领曹郎范义参与议论说，按照永初三年的先例，需要两周年之后才举行殷祭。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Xiaojian of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu Zi of the Song Dynasty said that the leading official came forward and said: According to the old practice, this October is the month for holding the Yin Festival. The leading official, Emperor Fan Yi, participated in the discussion and said that according to the precedent of the first three years of the Yongle Dynasty, it was necessary to hold the Yin Festival after the second anniversary.

古文：寻祭再周来二年三月，若以四月殷，则犹在禫内。 
现代文：考查两周年后殷祭当在来年即二年三月举行，如果在四月殷祭，却仍然在掸祭的时限内。 
English: After the examination of the second anniversary, the Yin Festival should be held in March of the next year, that is, the second year. If the Yin Festival is held in April, it is still within the time limit of the burnt offering.

古文：下礼官议正。
现代文：遣事交付礼官们商议确定。
English: The delivery of the ceremonial officer was agreed.

古文：国子助教苏玮生议： 案《礼》，三年丧毕，然后袷于太祖。
现代文：国子助教苏璋生议论说： 根据《礼》书的记载，三年丧事完毕，然后在太祖庙中举行夹祭。
English: Kuniko assistant professor Su Yansheng commented: According to the records of the "Rite" book, the three-year funeral was completed, and then a festival was held in the Great Ancestor Temple.

古文：又云 三年不祭，唯天地社稷，越绋行事 。且不禫即祭，见讥《春秋》。
现代文：《礼》书裹又说 守丧三年不参与祭祀，衹是对天地社稷，可以不受丧事限制而举行祭祀，况且不行掸祭就举行宗庙祭祀，被《春秋》书中所讥刺。
English: The "Rite" book also said that if a mourner does not participate in the ritual for three years, it is against heaven and earth and society, and the ritual can be held without the restriction of the funeral. Moreover, if the mourner does not participate in the ritual, the ritual will be held in the ancestral temple, which was ridiculed in the "Spring and Autumn" book.

古文：求之古礼，丧服未终，固无祼享之义。
现代文：探求古礼，服丧没有完毕，本无裸享祭祀的事。
English: Exploring ancient rites, the funeral is not over, there is no naked ritual.

古文：自汉文以来，一从权制，宗庙朝聘，莫不皆吉。
现代文：自从汉文帝以来，一概都实行权宜之制，宗庙祭祀和朝聘等礼仪，一概都用吉礼。
English: Since the time of Emperor Hanwen, a system of expediency has been implemented, and rituals such as ancestral temple sacrifices and court appointments have all used the auspicious rite.

古文：虽祥禫空存，无缟之变，烝尝荐祀，不异平日。
现代文：虽然空有祥祭禅祭，祥祭掸祭时也没有把朝服改换为白色丧服，四时的献祭，也与平常时期没有区别。
English: Although there was no Shosai Zen Festival, and the Imperial robes were not changed to white mourning clothes during the Shosai Bon Festival, the offering at four o'clock was no different from the usual period.

古文：殷祠礼既弗殊，岂独以心忧为碍。 
现代文：殷祭的礼仪既然没有不同，难道惟独以心忧为妨碍吗? 
English: Since there is no difference in the rites of the Yin Festival, is it only the sorrow of the heart that hinders it?

古文：太学博士徐宏议： 三年之丧，虽从权制，再周祥变，犹服缟素，未为纯吉，无容以祭。
现代文：太学博士徐宏议论说： 三年守丧的制度，虽然按照权宜改变的办法，第二年祥变，仍然要穿缟素之服，不穿祭祀的吉服，不容许参与祭祀。
English: Dr. Xu Hong, the dean of the university, commented: Although the three-year mourning system was changed in accordance with the expedient method, and the second year was changed, it was still necessary to wear the clothes of camphor, not the clothes of sacrifice, and it was not allowed to participate in the sacrifice.

古文：谓来四月，未宜便殷，十月则允。 
现代文：我认为来年四月，不应当就举行殷祭，十月举行殷祭却是允当的。 
English: I think that the Yin Festival should not be held in April next year, but it is appropriate to hold the Yin Festival in October.

古文：太常丞臣硃膺之议： 《虞礼》云： 中月而禫，是月也吉祭，犹未配。 
现代文：太常丞臣朱膺之议论说： 《虞礼》襄说： 间隔一个月举行禅祭，这一个月是吉祭，仍然没有配祭的。 
English: Zhu Xi, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, said in a discussion: "The Zen festival is held every month, and this month is the auspicious festival, and there is still no matching festival.

古文：谓二十七月既禫祭，当四时之祭日，则未以其妃配，哀未忘也。
现代文：是说二十七个月掸祭之后，当春、夏、秋、冬四时祭祀时，没有将他的妃子配祭，是没有忘记哀伤。
English: That is to say, after the twenty-seven-month burnt offering, when the spring, summer, autumn, and winter four-hour offerings were made, he did not match his concubine with the offering, and he did not forget his sorrow.

古文：推此而言，未礻覃不得祭也。
现代文：据此推论，没有举行禅祭便不得举行殷祭。
English: According to this reasoning, the Yin Festival should not be held without the Zen Festival.

古文：又《春秋》闵公二年，吉禘于庄公。
现代文：又《春秋》记载闵公二年，吉樯祭鲁庄公。
English: In addition, "Spring and Autumn" records that in the second year of Zang Gong, the Ji Zang Festival was held in Luzhong.

古文：郑玄云： 闵公心惧于难，务自尊成以厌其祸，凡二十二月而除丧，又不禫。 
现代文：郑玄说： 闵公对国家乱难心中震惧，想着以自尊消除祸难的影响，二十二个月便除去丧服，又不掸。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: Shao Gong was shocked by the turmoil and difficulties in the country, and thought of using self-respect to eliminate the impact of the disaster. Twenty-two months later, he removed his mourning clothes and did not grieve.

古文：云又不禫，明禫内不得禘也。
现代文：所说的又不掸，表明在掸祭之内不得举行吉梢。
English: What is said is not correct, indicating that the auspicious wreath-laying ceremony should not be held within the wreath-laying ceremony.

古文：案王肃等言于魏朝云，今权宜存古礼，俟毕三年。
现代文：根据王肃等人对魏朝所说，现在权且保存古礼，等待三年丧事完毕。
English: According to what Wang Su and others said to the Wei Dynasty, it is now time to preserve the ancient rites and wait for the three-year funeral to be over.

古文：旧说三年丧毕，遇禘则禘，遇袷则袷。
现代文：旧时说三年丧事完毕，遇扫祭时就梢祭，遇夹祭时就夹祭。
English: In the old days, it was said that three years after the funeral, when the sweeping ceremony was held, the cutting ceremony was held, and when the pinching ceremony was held, the pinching ceremony was held.

古文：郑玄云： 禘以孟夏，祫以孟秋。 今相承用十月。
现代文：郑玄说： 椭祭在孟夏之月，夹祭在孟秋之月，现在相承是在十月。
English: Zheng Xuan said: The Ellipse Festival is in the month of Mengxia, the Pincer Festival is in the month of Mengqiu, and now it is in October.

古文：如宏所上《公羊》之文，如为有疑，亦以鲁闵设服，因言丧之纪制尔。何必全许素冠可吉禘。
现代文：依徐宏所上奏的《公羊传》的记载，如果有疑问，也可用鲁闵公设定的二十二个月的丧服，由此论说丧服的纪纲制度，何必完全认可着素冠也可举行吉梢的礼仪呢?
English: According to the record of "The Story of the Ram" played by Xu Hong, if in doubt, you can also use the twenty-two months of mourning clothes set by Lu Xun. Thus, the disciplinary system of mourning clothes is discussed. Why not fully recognize the etiquette of wearing plain crowns and holding auspicious events?

古文：纵《公羊》异说，官以礼为正，亦求量宜。 
现代文：纵使《公羊传》是不正道之说，而官应以礼为准，也要探求考量适当。 
English: Even though "The Ram" is an unorthodox saying, and officials should be guided by etiquette, they should also explore appropriate considerations.

古文：郎中周景远参议： 永初三年九月十日奏傅亮议： 权制即吉，御世宜尔。
现代文：郎中周景远参与议论说： 永初三年九月十日所奏尽亮的议论说： 以权宜的办法除去丧服举行吉祭，对治理天下是恰当的。
English: Zhou Jingyuan, his son-in-law, took part in the discussion and said: The discussion that was played out on September 10th, Yongchun 3rd, said: It is appropriate for the governance of the world to hold the auspicious festival by removing the mourning clothes in an expedient manner.

古文：宗庙大礼，宜依古典。 
现代文：宗庙大祭的礼仪，应该依照古代的典制。 
English: The etiquette of the grand festival of the ancestral temple should be in accordance with the ancient ceremony.

古文：则是皇宋开代成准。
现代文：这是刘宋皇朝开国已成的准则。
English: This is the principle that has become the founding principle of the Liu Song Dynasty.

古文：谓博士徐宏、太常丞硃膺之议用来年十月殷祠为允。 
现代文：我认为博士徐宏、太常丞朱膺之建议在来年十月举行殷祭是允当的。 
English: I think that the suggestion of Dr. Xu Hong and Dr. Zhu Xi to hold the Yin Festival in October next year is reasonable.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏令表示同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：宋殷祭皆即吉乃行。
现代文：宋殷时期殷祭都是在除去丧服可行吉礼时便举行。
English: During the Song and Yin dynasties, the Yin Festival was held whenever it was possible to perform auspicious rites without the use of mourning clothes.

古文：大明七年二月辛亥，有司奏： 四月应殷祠，若事中未得为，得用孟秋与不？ 
现代文：大明七年二月辛亥曰，主事官员上奏说： 四月应该举行殷祭，如果因事而没有举行，是不是可以在孟秋之月举行? 
English: In February of the 7th year of the Daming Dynasty, Xinhai, the leading official made a report saying: The Yin Festival should be held in April. If it is not held due to circumstances, can it be held in the month of Mengqiu?

古文：领军长史周景远议： 案《礼记》云： 天子祫禘祫尝祫烝。 
现代文：领军长史周景远议论说： 根据《礼记》裹说： 天子夹椅夹尝夹燕。 
English: Zhou Jingyuan, the leader of the Long March, commented: According to the "Rituals," it is said that: "Heavenly sons clutch chairs and swallow swallows."

古文：依如礼文，则夏秋冬三时皆殷，不唯用冬夏也。
现代文：依照《礼记》这一记载，那么夏秋冬三季都举行殷祭，不衹是在冬夏举行殷祭。
English: According to the record of "Li Ji," the Yin Festival was held in all three seasons of summer, autumn and winter, but the Yin Festival was held in winter and summer.

古文：晋义熙初，仆射孔安国启议，自泰和四年相承殷祭，皆用冬夏。
现代文：晋朝义基初年，仆射孔安国启奏说，从太和四年相承举行殷祭，都在冬夏举行。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yiji, the disciple of Confucius, An Guoqi, said that the Yin Festival had been held for four consecutive years since Tahe, all of which were held in winter and summer.

古文：安国又启，永和十年至今五十余年，用三十月辄殷祠。
现代文：孔安国又启奏说，从永和十年至今五十多年裹，都是用三十个月为限便举行殷祭。
English: Kong An Guo also said that from Yonghe 10 years ago to now, more than 50 years later, the Yin Festival has only been held for 30 months.

古文：博士徐乾据《礼》难安国。
现代文：博士途茧依据《礼》书反驳孔安国。
English: On the basis of the "Ritual" book, Dr. Tu Yao refuted Kong An Guo.

古文：乾又引晋咸康六年七月殷祠，是不专用冬夏。
现代文：鱼逦又引据置朝盛尘六年七月举行殷祭，证明殷祭是不专在冬夏举行。
English: Yu Yu also cited the fact that the Yin Festival was held in July of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Sheng, proving that the Yin Festival was not exclusively held in winter and summer.

古文：于时晋朝虽不从乾议，然乾据礼及咸康故事，安国无以夺之。
现代文：当时晋朝虽然不依从徐干的议论，然而险茧引据礼书和咸康年间的先例，孔安国也无法否定。
English: At that time, although the Jin Dynasty did not follow Xu Gang's argument, however, according to the precedent of the Reishi and Hamkang years, Kong An Guo could not be denied.

古文：今若以来四月未得殷祠，迁用孟秋，于礼无违。
现代文：现在如果在来年四月未能举行殷祭，移到孟秋之月举行，对礼书没有违背。 
English: Now, if the Yin Festival cannot be held in April next year, it will be moved to the month of Mengqiu, and there will be no violation of the letter.

古文：参议据礼有证，谓用孟秋为允。 
现代文：参酌审议后认为引据礼书有佐证，并认为用孟秋之月举行殷祭为允当。
English: After taking part in the deliberation, it was considered that the citation of the letter of commendation was supported by evidence, and that it was appropriate to hold the Yin Festival in the month of Mengqiu.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下韶令表示同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：晋武帝咸宁五年十一月己酉，弘训羊太后崩，宗庙废一时之祀，天地明堂去乐，且不上胙。
现代文：晋武帝盛宁五年十一月己酉日，弘训羊太丘逝世，宗庙为此废止了一个季度的祭祀，祭天地祭明堂去除了乐舞，而且不奉享酒肉。
English: Emperor Jinwu Shengning died in November of the fifth year of the Jin dynasty, and the ancestral temple abolished a quarter of the sacrifices for this reason. The Heaven and Earth Festival Hall removed the music and dance, and did not enjoy wine and meat.

古文：升平五年十月己卯，殷祠，以穆帝崩后，不作乐。
现代文：升平五年十月己卯，举行殷祭，因为是在穆帝逝世之后举行，所以不奏乐。
English: In October of the fifth year of the enthronement, the Yin Festival was held, but since it was held after the death of Mu Di, no music was played.

古文：初，永嘉中，散骑常侍江统议曰： 《阳秋》之义，去乐卒事。 
现代文：当初，在永嘉年间，散骑常侍辽面议论说： 《春秋》书裹的本义，是去除乐舞以完成祭祀。 
English: At the beginning, during the Yongjia era, Liao Liao, a horseback riding attendant, said: The original meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is to remove music and dance to complete the ritual.

古文：是为吉祭有废乐也，故升平末行之。
现代文：造就是说吉祭有废止乐舞的情况。所以在王陉末年实行。
English: Zou is to say that the auspicious festival has the situation of abolishing music and dance. Therefore, it is implemented in the last year of Wang Yao.

古文：其后太常江逌表： 穆帝山陵之后十月殷祭，从太常丘夷等议，撤乐。
现代文：后来太常江迪表奏说： 玉继安葬之后十月举行殷祭，依从太常丘裹等人的议论，撤除了乐舞。
English: Later, Taizhang Jiang Di said: After the funeral, the Yin Festival was held in October, and the music and dance were removed in accordance with the discussion of Taizhang Yau Wai and others.

古文：逌寻详今行汉制，无特祀之别。
现代文：我考察现在实行的是遵曲的制度，没有单独向新死者祭祀的区别。
English: According to my research, what is currently practiced is a system of following the music, and there is no difference between sacrificing to the newly deceased alone.

古文：既入庙吉禘，何疑于乐。 
现代文：既已入宗庙吉椅，为什么对奏乐舞心存疑虑呢。 
English: Once you have entered the auspicious chair of the ancestral temple, why do you have doubts about the heart of music and dance?

古文：史臣曰：闻乐不怡，故申情于遏密。
现代文：史臣曰：听到奏乐而心中不乐，因此以停止举行乐舞来抒发思念先人之情。
English: Shichen said, "I was not happy when I heard the music, so I stopped the music and dance to express my feelings for my ancestors."

古文：至于谅闇夺服，虑政事之荒废，是以乘权通以设变，量轻重而降屈。
现代文：至于在守丧期间因为顾及国家大事而除去丧服，实在是忧虑政事荒废，因此以权宜处置的办法加以变通，考量轻重之后而减降服丧。
English: As for the removal of mourning clothes during the mourning period because of national affairs, it is really a worry that political affairs will be wasted. Therefore, it should be made flexible by means of expedient disposal, and the mourning clothes should be reduced after consideration.

古文：若夫奏音之与寝声，非有损益于机务，纵复回疑于两端，固宜缘恩而从戚矣。
现代文：至于是奏乐还是撤除乐舞。对于军国大事没有利害关系，反复在这两者之间疑惑不定，本来就应该顺乎先人的恩情而依从悲戚。
English: As for whether to play music or remove music and dance, they had no interest in military affairs, and repeatedly doubted and vacillated between the two. Originally, they should have complied with the grace of their ancestors and followed their relatives.

古文：宋世国有故，庙祠皆悬而不乐。
现代文：宋国时期每当国家有事时，宗庙祭祀都悬挂钟磬乐器而不演奏。
English: During the Song Dynasty, whenever there was a national emergency, the bell and gong musical instruments were hung up in the ancestral temple without being played.

