古文：师子国，元嘉五年，国王刹利摩诃南奉表曰：
现代文：师子国，即今天的斯里兰卡，元嘉五年，国王刹利摩诃南上表说：
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Jia, the king of Shishi Province, which is today's Sri Lanka, said:

古文：谨白大宋明主，虽山海殊隔，而音信时通。
现代文： 我恭敬地启明大宋英明皇帝，虽然我们被山海所隔，但常常交流音信。
English: I respectfully enlightened the Great Song Emperor Yingming that although we are separated by mountains and seas, we often exchange messages.

古文：伏承皇帝道德高远，覆载同于天地，明照齐乎日月，四海之外，无往不伏，方国诸王，莫不遣信奉献，以表归德之诚。或泛海三年，陆行千日，畏威怀德，无远不至。
现代文：我虔诚地拥戴陛下，陛下道德崇高，覆天盖地，英明照映日月，四海之外，无国不服，方外各国国王，无不派使者贡献，以表示他们归顺崇敬之心，或者渡海三年，或者在陆地上走几千里，畏惧皇上神威，心怀皇上恩惠，无论哪里，都来朝拜。
English: I devoutly embrace Your Majesty. Your Majesty's morality is lofty, covering the heavens and the earth, wisely reflecting the sun and the moon. Beyond the four seas, no country is disobedient, and kings of foreign countries all send emissaries to contribute to show their submission and reverence. They may cross the sea for three years, or walk thousands of miles on land, fearing the emperor's divine power and cherishing the emperor's grace, and come to worship wherever they are.

古文：我先王以来，唯以修德为正，不严而治，奉事三宝，道济天下，欣人为善，庆若在己，欲与天子共弘正法，以度难化。
现代文：从我先王以来，只以修养道德为目的，不施行刑罚却达到治理人的局面。遵循三宝，用道德治理天下，以养育天下百姓为宗旨，别人的快乐，好比是自己的快乐，我们想和宋国天子共同宏扬正义，以度过人世间的艰难。
English: Since the time of my ancestors, we have only pursued the goal of cultivating morality, but without imposing punishment, we have reached the situation of governing people. We follow the Three Jewels, use morality to govern the world, and aim to nurture the people of the world. The happiness of others is like our own happiness. We want to jointly promote justice with the Son of Heaven of Song to overcome the hardships of the human world.

古文：故托四道人遣二白衣送牙台像以为信誓，信还，愿垂音告。
现代文：所以托付四个道人、二个白衣人送象牙雕成的神像作为信物。使者返回，希望得到皇上的指示。 
English: Therefore, four Taoists and two white-robed men were entrusted with delivering an ivory statue of the god as a token.The envoy returned, hoping to receive instructions from the emperor.

古文：至十二年，又复遣使奉献。
现代文：到十二年，又派人贡献国产。
English: By the twelfth year, they sent someone to contribute domestic wax.

古文：天竺迦毗黎国，元嘉五年，国王月爱遣使奉表曰：
现代文：天竺迦毗黎国，元嘉五年，国王月爱派使者上表：
English: In the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Yuanjia of the State of Jiafei, the king sent an envoy to the moon to express his love.

古文：伏闻彼国，据江傍海，山川周固，众妙悉备，庄严清净，犹如化城，宫殿庄严，街巷平坦，人民充满，欢娱安乐。
现代文：据人传说： 你们国家，在大海旁边，长江流域，山川险固，所有美妙的东西都具备，庄严肃穆，清静无为，好比经过佛神教化过一般。宫殿雄伟，街道平坦，人民到处都是，一片欢乐景象。
English: According to legend: Your country, next to the sea, the Yangtze River basin, the mountains and rivers, has all the wonderful things, solemn and solemn, quiet and inactive, as if it had been educated by the Buddha. The palace is majestic, the streets are flat, the people are everywhere, a happy scene.

古文：圣王出游，四海随从，圣明仁爱，不害众生，万邦归仰，国富如海。
现代文：圣明的国王出游的话，四海百姓都随同前往，圣明而仁爱，兴务利民，万国景仰，国家的富裕像大海一样，无所不有。
English: When the holy king travels, the people of the four seas go with him. Holy and benevolent, prosperous and beneficial to the people, admired by all nations, the country's wealth is like the sea, omnipresent.

古文：国中众生，奉顺正法，大王仁圣，化之以道，慈施群生，无所遗惜。
现代文：国内人民，奉承皇帝遵循正义，大王仁明神圣，用道教育人民，给人民施恩，一点儿也不求回报。
English: The people of the country flatter the emperor to follow justice, the great king Renming is sacred, educate the people with the way, give the people grace, and do not seek return at all.

古文：帝修净戒，轨道不及，无上法船，济诸沈溺，群僚百官，受乐无怨，诸天拥护，万神侍卫，天魔降伏，莫不归化。
现代文：皇帝修养，清净戒律，一般人修行远远不如，无比神妙的法船，普济群生，众官百姓，欢乐无怨，天神保佑，百灵护卫，魔鬼驯服，无不归顺。
English: The emperor cultivates, the precepts are pure, the practice is far inferior to that of ordinary people, the law ship is incomparably miraculous, the Pu Zi crowd, the officials and the people, the joy is without complaint, the angels bless, the larks guard, the devils are tamed, and there is no surrender.

古文：王身庄严，如日初出，仁泽普润，犹如大云，圣贤承业，如日月天，于彼真丹，最为殊胜。
现代文：皇帝端庄严肃，如刚出来的太阳，仁恩普降，好比天上的云彩，圣贤代代相继，如日月行天江河行地，对于真理，体会最为深刻。
English: The emperor is dignified and serious, like the newly-emerged sun, benevolence and benevolence are like the clouds in the sky, and sages succeed each other from generation to generation, like the sun and the moon, the rivers and the earth, for the truth, the experience is the most profound.

古文：臣之所住，名迦毗河，东际于海，其城四边，悉紫绀石，首罗天护，令国安隐。
现代文：我们居住的地方，叫迦毗河，东与大海相连，我们的城市的四周，都用紫绀石做成，首罗天神保护，使我们国家的人民安宁。
English: The place where we live is called the Kabi River, which is connected to the sea in the east, and the four sides of our city are made of red ochre, protected by the god Shura, to keep the people of our country peaceful.

古文：国王相承，未尝断绝，国中人民，率皆修善，诸国来集，共遵道法，诸寺舍子，皆七宝形像，众妙供具，如先王法。
现代文：历代国王相继从未断绝过。我国人民，都是全心修善，各小附属国真诚归顺，都遵守法道，各寺内的佛神雕像，都是用七种宝物凿成的。各种妙物都具备，像先王们做出来的模样。
English: The succession of kings has never been broken. The people of our country are all wholeheartedly cultivating good deeds, the small dependent countries are sincerely obedient and abide by the Dharma, and the Buddha statues in the temples are made of seven kinds of treasures. All kinds of wonderful things are available, like the appearance made by the former kings.

古文：臣自修检，不犯道禁，臣名月爱，弃世王种。
现代文：我自己很守规矩，从不违犯规矩。我的名字叫月爱，属于弃世王的儿子。
English: I myself am a stickler for rules and never break them. My name is Yue Ai, and I am the son of a renegade king.

古文：惟愿大王圣体和善，群臣百官，悉自安隐。
现代文：我希望大皇帝陛下身体健康，各位大臣们都安宁幸福。
English: I hope that His Majesty the Great Emperor is in good health and all the ministers are in peace and happiness.

古文：今以此国群臣吏民，山川珍宝，一切归属，五体归诚大王足下。
现代文：今天我把我国的人民、山川和珍宝，一切的一切，包括我的身体的每一个部分都献给大王。
English: Today, I offer my people, mountains, rivers and treasures, everything, including every part of my body, to the Great King.

古文：山海遐隔，无由朝觐，宗仰之至，遣使下承。使主父名天魔悉达，使主名尼驼达，此人由来良善忠信，是故今遣奉使表诚。
现代文：但是我们相隔千山万水，无法到贵国朝拜，但对陛下崇拜到极点，派使者前来通信，正使叫天魔悉达，副使叫尼礐达，这两个人一贯忠诚善良，所以现在派他们上表投诚。
English: However, we are separated by thousands of mountains and rivers, and cannot go to your country to worship, but we worship your majesty to the utmost, and send messengers to come and correspond. The chief envoy is called the Devil Siddar, and the deputy envoy is called Nyidar. These two people have always been loyal and kind, so now we are sending them to the table to pledge their allegiance.

古文：大王若有所须，珍奇异物，悉当奉送，此之境土，便是王国，王之法令，治国善道，悉当承用。
现代文：大皇帝如果有什么需要的话，我们这里的珍奇异宝，全部都应该承送给你，我们的国土也是皇帝的国土；皇帝治国的方法、治民的法律，我们都将全部遵循。
English: Great Emperor, if there is any need, all of our treasures here should be sent to you. Our country is also the emperor's country. We will all follow the emperor's methods of governing the country and the laws governing the people.

古文：可车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，持节、常侍、都督、王、公如故。 太宗泰始、后废帝元徽中，贡献不绝。
现代文：我希望我们两国使者往来不绝。我们的使者回来时，请皇帝也派一个使者前来，宣布皇帝的命令，要求我们做的事都告诉我们，我们真诚的希望不会遭至破灭，这便是我说的，愿皇上加以考虑。 
English: I hope that the envoys of our two countries will not cease to come and go. When our envoys return, please ask the emperor to send an envoy to announce the emperor's order and tell us what we are required to do. Our sincere hope will not be dashed. This is what I said, may the emperor consider it.

古文：百济国，本与高骊俱在辽东之东千余里，其后高骊略有辽东，百济略有辽西。百济所治，谓之晋平郡晋平县。
现代文：天竺国使者奉献金钢指环、摩勒金环等宝贝，红白鹦鹉一样一只。太宗泰始二年，又派人贡献，明帝让天竺两个使者竺扶大和竺阿弥都当建威将军。百济国，本来和高丽国都在辽东以东一千多里，以后高丽国占领辽东，百济国占领辽西，百济国的都城叫做晋平郡晋平县。
English: The envoys from Baekje and Goryeo offered precious items such as gold-and-steel rings and molybdenum rings, as well as a red-and-white parrot. In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Taizong, Emperor Ming also sent people to make contributions. Emperor Ming asked the two envoys from Baekje to help Da and Ami to become General Jian Wei. Baekje and Goryeo were originally more than a thousand miles east of Liaodong. Later, Goryeo occupied Liaodong, Baekje occupied west Liaodong, and the capital of Baekje was called Jinping

古文：义熙十二年，以百济王余映为使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇东将军、百济王。
现代文：义熙十二年，朝廷以百济王余映当使持节，都督百济诸军事、镇东将军、百济王。
English: In the 12th year of Yixi, the imperial court sent Baekje King Yu Ying as an envoy to hold the festival. He was the military governor of Baekje, the general of Zhendong and the King of Baekje.

古文：高祖践阼，进号镇东大将军。
现代文：高祖称帝，余映晋号镇东大将军。
English: Gao Zu was proclaimed emperor, and Yu Ying Jin became the general of the Eastern Dynasties.

古文：少帝景平二年，映遣长史张威诣阙贡献。
现代文：少帝景平二年，余映派长史张威到建康贡献。
English: In the second year of the young Emperor Jingping, Yu Ying sent Changshi Zhang Wei to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：元嘉二年，太祖诏之曰： 皇帝问使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军、百济王。
现代文：元嘉二年，太祖下诏书说： 皇帝问使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇军大将军、百济王，历代都忠诚顺从。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, the imperial edict issued by the great-grandfather said: The emperor asked the envoys to hold the festival, the governor of Baekje to the military, the general of the town army, and the king of Baekje, and all generations were loyal and obedient.

古文：累叶忠顺，越海效诚，远王纂戎，聿修先业，慕义既彰，厥怀赤款，浮桴骊水，献騕执贽，故嗣位方任，以籓东服，勉勖所莅，无坠前踪。
现代文：渡过大海忠诚归顺，努力维持先人大业，道义昭著，心怀赤诚。渡过骊水，贡献珠宝，所以能承担先人事业，维持我们东方的秩序，你兢兢业业，不要辜负前人的重托。
English: Cross the sea, faithfully submit, strive to maintain the great cause of the ancestors, have a good moral character, and have a sincere heart. Cross the Surabaya, contribute jewels, so you can undertake the cause of the ancestors and maintain the order of our East. You are diligent, and do not fail to live up to the heavy trust of the predecessors.

古文：今遣兼谒者闾丘恩子、兼副谒者丁敬子等宣旨慰劳称朕意。 
现代文：现在派使者闾丘恩子、副使丁敬子等宣传诏书以表达我的心意。 
English: Now, I am sending envoys such as Zouqiu Enzi and vice-envoy Ding Keizi to propagate the edict and express my will.

古文：其后，每岁遣使奉表，献方物。
现代文：这之后，百济国每年派使者上表，贡献国产。
English: After that, Baekje sent emissaries to the table every year to contribute domestic products.

古文：七年，百济王余毗复修贡职，以映爵号授之。
现代文：七年，百济王余毗继续贡献，宋朝将余映的爵位一同授给他。
English: In the seventh year of Yuan Jia, King Yufi of Baekje again paid tribute to the court, and the court awarded him the title of Yu Ying.

古文：二十七年，毗上书献方物，私假台使冯野夫西河太守，表求《易林》、《式占》、腰弩，太祖并与之。毗死，子庆代立。
现代文：二十七年，余毗上书贡献宝物，私下任命冯野夫为西河太守，上表请求《易林》、《式占》、腰箭，太祖都给了他们，余毗死去，儿子余庆继位。
English: In the 27th year, Yu Bi wrote a letter to contribute treasures, privately appointed Feng Nong as the governor of the West River, and requested "Yilin," "Shikizan" and "Waist Arrow" from the above table. The great-grandfather gave them all. Yu Bi died, and his son Yu Qing succeeded.

古文：世祖大明元年，遣使求除授，诏许。
现代文：世祖大明元年，派使者请求其余职务，诏书同意了。
English: In the first year of Shizu Daming, he sent an envoy to request the remaining posts, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：二年，庆遣使上表曰： 臣国累叶，偏受殊恩，文武良辅，世蒙朝爵。
现代文：二年，余庆派使者上表说： 我国历代，特别受到大宋王国的大恩，文武辅臣，代代享有朝廷爵位。
English: In the second year, Yu Qing sent an emissary to the table and said: Throughout the ages of our country, especially by the great grace of the Great Song Kingdom, Wenwu Vice-Minister, has enjoyed the imperial title for generations.

古文：行冠军将军右贤王余纪等十一人，忠勤宜在显进，伏愿垂愍，并听赐除。 
现代文：代理冠军将军右贤王余纪等十一人，忠正勤劳应该擢拔，希望给予同情，同时赐予有关物资。 
English: Eleven people, including the acting champion, General Uxian Wang Yu Ji, should be promoted for their loyalty, hard work, and hope to be given sympathy and relevant materials.

古文：仍以行冠军将军右贤王余纪为冠军将军。
现代文：仍以代理冠军将军右贤王余纪为冠军将军。
English: The acting champion, General Uhyun Wang Yu Ji, is still the champion.

古文：以行征虏将军左贤王余昆、行征虏将军余晕并为征虏将军。
现代文：以代理征虏将军左贤王余昆、代理征虏将军余晕都当征虏将军。
English: Acting conscript general Zuoxian Wang Yu Kun and acting conscript general Yu Huan were both acting as conscript generals.

古文：以行辅国将军余都、余乂并为辅国将军。
现代文：以代理辅国将军余都、余磖都当辅国将军。
English: Yu Du and Yu Han, acting as vice-governor generals, both became vice-governor generals.

古文：以行龙骧将军沐衿、余爵并为龙骧将军。
现代文：以代理龙骧将军沐衿、余爵都当龙骧将军。
English: The acting Dragon King General Mu Xuan and Yu Jie both became Dragon King Generals.

古文：以行宁朔将军余流、麋贵并为宁朔将军。
现代文：以代理宁朔将军余流、糜贵当宁朔将军。
English: Acting as the remnants of Ningshuo generals, Xing Gui as Ningshuo generals.

古文：以行建武将军于西、余娄并为建武将军。
现代文：以代理建武将军余西。余娄都当建武将军。
English: Acting for General Kenmu, Yusei. Yushido is acting for General Kenmu.

古文：太宗泰始七年，又遣使贡献。
现代文：太宗泰始七年，百济国又派使者贡献土产。
English: In the first seven years of Taizongtai, Baekje also sent an envoy to contribute to local production.

古文：倭国，在高骊东南大海中，世修贡职。
现代文：倭国在高丽东南方的大海之中。代代都规规矩矩地向中国贡献。
English: Wakoku is in the middle of the ocean southeast of Korea. It has been making contributions to China in an orderly manner from generation to generation.

古文：高祖永初二年，诏曰： 倭赞万里修贡，远诚宜甄，可赐除授。 
现代文：高祖永初二年，下诏书说： 倭王讠赞在万里之外，恭敬地贡献，远方人的忠诚就应该表彰，可以赐给他们物质，除授他官职。 
English: In the second year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, the following imperial edict was issued: "Wao Xizan is thousands of miles away and has made respectful contributions. The loyalty of those far away should be commended, and they should be given material gifts in addition to official positions.

古文：太祖元嘉二年，赞又遣司马曹达奉表献方物。
现代文：太祖元嘉三年，倭王讠赞又派司马曹达上表贡献国产。
English: In the third year of the great ancestor Yuan Jia, the king of Wa also sent Sima Cao Da to the table to contribute domestic products.

古文：赞死，弟珍立，遣使贡献。
现代文：倭王讠赞去世，弟弟倭珍继位，派使者贡献。
English: After the death of Wa King Shuzan, his younger brother Wa Zhen succeeded to the throne and sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：自称使持节、都督倭百济新罗任那秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王。
现代文：他自称使持节、都督倭、百济、新罗、任那、秦韩、慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王。
English: He claimed to be the envoy of Jisei, the governor of Wa, Baekje, Silla, Renna, Qin and Han, the military of the six countries of Mu and Han, General Anton, and the king of Wa.

古文：表求除正，诏除安东将军、倭国王。
现代文：上表请求正式任命。诏书同意他当安东将军、倭国王。
English: He asked for an official appointment in the above table, and the imperial edict agreed that he would be General Anton and King of Wa.

古文：珍又求除正倭隋等十三人平西、征虏、冠军、辅国将军号，诏并听。
现代文：倭珍又请求任命倭隋等十三个平西、征虏、冠军、辅国将军的称号，诏书同意了。
English: Wa Zhen also requested the appointment of Wa Sui and other thirteen Pingxi, Conscript, Champion, and Auxiliary General titles, and the edict agreed.

古文：二十年，倭国王济遣使奉献，复以为安东将军、倭国王。
现代文：二十年，倭国王倭济派人奉献，朝廷再次让他当安东将军、倭国王。
English: Twenty years later, the king of Wa, Wa Ji, sent people to offer sacrifices, and the imperial court once again made him General Anton, the king of Wa.

古文：二十八年，加使持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事，安东将军如故。
现代文：二十八年，加官使持节、都督倭、新罗、任那、加罗、秦韩、慕韩六国诸军事，安东将军照旧。
English: In the 28th year, General Anton was appointed as the military commander of six countries, including Jiji, the capital of Wa, Silla, Renna, Garo, Qin, Han, and Mu.

古文：并除所上二十三人军、郡。
现代文：同时任命他们要求的二十三人将军和郡太守的职务。
English: At the same time, they appointed the requested twenty-three generals and county governors.

古文：济死，世子兴遣使贡献。
现代文：倭济去世，世子倭兴派人贡献。
English: After Ji's death, Prince Heung sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：世祖大明六年，诏曰： 倭王世子兴，奕世载忠，作籓外海，禀化宁境，恭修贡职。
现代文：世祖大明六年，诏书说： 倭王世子倭兴，代代忠诚，在海外作藩国国王，秉承我国教化安定国内，虔诚地上贡，刚刚继承先人大业，应该授予爵位称号。
English: Six years after the death of the founder of the dynasty, the imperial edict said: "Wao Wang, the son of the founder of the dynasty, Wa Xing, loyal from generation to generation, overseas as the king of the domain, adhering to our country's education and stabilizing the country, devoutly paying tribute, just inheriting the great cause of the ancestors, should be awarded the title of knighthood.

古文：新嗣边业，宜授爵号，可安东将军、倭国王。 
现代文：可以当安东将军，倭国王。 
English: You can be General Anton, the king of Wa.

古文：兴死，弟武立，自称使持节、都督倭百济新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩七国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王。
现代文：诏书任命倭武为使持节、都督倭、新罗、百济、任那、罗、秦韩、慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭王。
English: After the death of Xing, his younger brother Wu succeeded to the throne, claiming to be the envoy of the Emperor, the governor of Baekje, Silla, Nagaro, Qin, Han, the military of the Seven Kingdoms of Korea, General Anton, and the king of Wa.

