古文：冉有问于孔子曰： 古者三皇五帝不用五刑，信乎？ 
现代文：冉有向孔子问道： 古代的三皇五帝不用五刑，这是真的吗？ 
English: Ran You asked Confucius: Is it true that the three emperors and five emperors in ancient times did not need five punishments?

古文：孔子曰： 圣人之设防，贵其不犯也。
现代文：孔子说： 圣人设置防卫措施，贵在让人不触犯。
English: Confucius said: A sage sets up defensive measures to prevent others from trespassing.

古文：制五刑而不用，所以为至治也。
现代文：制定五刑而不用，是为了做到最好的治理。
English: The reason for not using the five punishments is to achieve the best governance.

古文：凡夫之为奸邪、窃盗、靡法妄行者，生于不足。
现代文：凡是有奸诈邪恶抢劫盗窃违法妄行不法行为的人，产生于心中的不满足。
English: All those who are treacherous, evil, robbing, stealing, breaking the law, and committing illegal acts, arise from dissatisfaction in their hearts.

古文：不足生于无度，无度则小者偷盗，大者侈靡，各不知节。
现代文：不满足又产生于没有限度。没有限度，小的就会盗窃，大的则奢侈浪费，都是不知节制。
English: Dissatisfaction comes from having no limits. Without limits, the little ones will steal, the big ones will be extravagant and wasteful, and they all know no restraint.

古文：是以上有制度，则民知所止；民知所止，则不犯。
现代文：因此君王制订了制度，民众就知道了什么不能做，知道了什么不能做就不会犯法。
English: Therefore, the king established a system so that the people would know what they could not do, and if they knew what they could not do, they would not break the law.

古文：故虽有奸邪贼盗靡法妄行之狱，而无陷刑之民。
现代文：所以虽然制定了奸诈邪恶抢劫盗窃违法妄行的罪状，却没有陷入刑罚的民众。
English: Therefore, although the crimes of treachery, evil, robbery, theft and illegal activities have been formulated, there are no people who have fallen into criminal punishment.

古文：不孝者生于不仁，不仁者生于丧祭之无礼。
现代文：不孝的行为产生于不仁，不仁又产生于没有丧祭之礼。
English: Unfilial behavior arises from unkindness, and unkindness arises from the absence of a funeral rite.

古文：明丧祭之礼，所以教仁爱也。
现代文：所以明确规定丧祭之礼，是为了使人知道仁爱。
English: Therefore, the funeral rites are clearly stipulated in order to let people know about benevolence.

古文：能教仁爱，则服丧思慕，祭祀不解人子馈养之道。
现代文：能教人懂得仁爱，为父母服丧就会思念爱慕他们，举行祭礼表示人子还在不懈地赡养父母。
English: If you can teach people to understand benevolence and love, they will miss and love their parents when they are in mourning, and hold a festival to show that the Son of Man is still tirelessly supporting his parents.

古文：丧祭之礼明，则民孝矣。
现代文：丧祭之礼明确了，民众就会遵守孝道了。
English: When the funeral rites are clear, the people will observe the filial piety.

古文：故虽有不孝之狱，而无陷刑之民。
现代文：所以虽然制定了不孝的罪状，而没有陷入刑罚的民众。
English: Therefore, although the crime of filial piety has been established, the people who have not fallen into the penalty are not.

古文：弑上者生于不义，义所以别贵贱、明尊卑也。
现代文：以下犯上的行为产生于不义，义是用来区别贵贱表明尊卑的。
English: The following offenses arise from injustice. Justice is used to distinguish between the high and the low, to show superiority and inferiority.

古文：贵贱有别，尊卑有序，则民莫不尊上而敬长。
现代文：贵贱有别，尊卑有序，那么民众没有不尊敬上级和长辈的。
English: There is a distinction between high and low, and there is an order of superiority and inferiority, so the people do not disrespect their superiors and elders.

古文：朝聘之礼者，所以明义也。
现代文：诸侯定期朝见天子的朝聘之礼，是用来显明义的。
English: The ceremony of appointment to the imperial court, in which the lords regularly met with the emperor, was used to make the meaning clear.

古文：义必明则民不犯，故虽有弑上之狱，而无陷刑之民。
现代文：长幼有序，民众怀着敬让之心，即使设立了争斗变乱的罪状，也没有陷入刑罚的民众。
English: The elders and children are orderly, the people are respectful, and even if the crime of fighting and disorder is set up, there are no people caught in the punishment.

古文：斗变者生于相陵，相陵者生于长幼无序而遗敬让。
现代文： 相互欺压容易产生争斗变乱的行为，长幼无序忘记了尊重和谦让容易产生相互欺压的行为。
English: Mutual bullying is likely to lead to fighting and disorderly behavior. Disorderly parents and children forget respect and modesty, which is likely to lead to mutual bullying.

古文：乡饮酒之礼者，所以明长幼之序而崇敬让也。
现代文：乡饮酒之礼，就是用其来区分明确长幼顺序而推崇尊崇敬让的。
English: The township drinking ceremony is used to distinguish between the clear order of the eldest and youngest and to promote respect.

古文：长幼必序，民怀敬让，故虽有斗变之狱，而无陷刑之民。
现代文：长幼有一定的顺序，百姓心怀敬让，就算设置了争斗变乱的罪状，也没有百姓陷入刑罚。
English: Elders and children have a certain order, the people are respectful, and even if the crime of fighting and disorder is set up, no people are punished.

古文：淫乱者生于男女无别，男女无别则夫妇失义。
现代文：淫乱的行为产生于男女无别，男女无别夫妇间就失去了情义。
English: There is no difference between men and women when it comes to sexual misconduct. When there is no difference between a man and a woman in a marriage, the relationship loses its meaning.

古文：婚礼聘享者，所以别男女、明夫妇之义也。
现代文：婚礼和聘礼享礼，就是用来区别男女和显明夫妇情义的。
English: Wedding and betrothal gifts are used to distinguish between men and women and to show the couple's status.

古文：男女既别，夫妇既明，故虽有淫乱之狱，而无陷刑之民。
现代文：男女既已有别，夫妇情义既明，即使制定了有关淫乱的罪状，而民众也没有陷入刑罚的。
English: There is a difference between men and women, and the situation of married couples is clear. Even if the crime of fornication is established, the people will not be punished.

古文：此五者，刑罚之所以生，各有源焉。
现代文：这五种情况，是刑罚产生的原因，是各有根源的。
English: These five situations are the reasons for the penalty, and each has its own root cause.

古文：不豫塞其源，而辄绳之以刑，是谓为民设阱而陷之。
现代文：不预先堵住其根源，而动辄使用刑罚，这叫做给民设下陷阱来陷害他们。 
English: It is called setting a trap for the people to ensnare them, to use punishment without stopping the root cause in advance.

古文： 刑罚之源，生于嗜欲不节，失礼度者，所以御民之嗜欲，而明好恶顺天之道，礼度既陈，五教毕修，而民犹或未化，尚必明其法典以申固之。
现代文： 刑罚的根源，起于人们不能节制自己的欲望。礼制和法度，就是用来限制民众过度的欲望而显明善恶的。顺应天道，颁布礼制和法度，修明五教，但是还有一些民众没有被教化，那么还必须阐明法典，进一步申明法令使效果巩固。
English: The root cause of punishment stems from people's inability to restrain their desires. The etiquette and laws are used to restrict people's excessive desires and reveal good and evil. In accordance with the heavenly way, the etiquette and laws are promulgated, and the Five Teachings are revised. However, there are still some people who have not been educated, so it is necessary to clarify the code and further clarify the laws to consolidate the effect.

古文：其犯奸邪靡法妄行之狱者，则饬制量之度；有犯不孝之狱者，则饬丧祭之礼；有犯杀上之狱者，则饬朝觐之礼；有犯斗变之狱者，则饬乡饮酒之礼；有犯淫乱之狱者，则饬婚聘之礼。
现代文：有犯奸作科违法妄行行为的，就用制度法规来整治；有犯不孝之罪的，就用丧祭的礼仪来整治；有犯杀害君上之罪的，就用朝廷之礼来整治；有犯争斗扰乱治安之罪的，就用乡饮酒礼来整治；有犯淫乱之罪的，就用婚聘之礼来整治。
English: Those who have committed the crime of treachery, violation of discipline and law, will be rectified by the system and regulations; those who have committed the crime of filial piety, will be rectified by the funeral rites; those who have committed the crime of killing the prince, will be rectified by the court ceremony; those who have committed the crime of fighting and disturbing the peace, will be rectified by the village drinking ceremony; those who have committed the crime of fornication, will be rectified by the wedding ceremony.

古文：三皇五帝之所化民者如此，虽有五刑之用，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：三皇五帝教化民众就是这样做的。虽然有应用五刑的情况，不也可以吗？ 
English: This is what the Three Kings and Five Emperors did to enlighten the people. Although there are cases of applying the five punishments, isn't it possible?

古文：孔子曰： 大罪有五，而杀人为下，逆天地者罪及五世，诬文武者罪及四世，逆人伦者罪及三世，谋鬼神者罪及二世，手杀人者罪及其身，故曰大罪有五，而杀人为下矣。 
现代文：孔子又接着说： 大罪有五等，杀人为最低一等。犯悖逆天地罪行的要惩罚五代，犯诬蔑周文王、武王罪行的要惩罚四代，犯悖逆人伦罪行的要惩罚三代，犯用鬼神害人罪行的要惩罚二代，犯杀人罪行的只判他本人的罪。所以说大罪有五种，而杀人的罪是最低一等的。 
English: Confucius went on to say: "Major crimes have five grades, and murder is the lowest grade. Five generations should be punished for the crime of rebelling against heaven and earth, four generations should be punished for the crime of slandering King Zhouwen and King Wu, three generations should be punished for the crime of rebelling against human ethics, two generations should be punished for the crime of using ghosts and gods to harm people, and only the person himself should be sentenced for the crime of murder. Therefore, there are five types of major crimes, and the crime of murder is the lowest grade.

古文：冉有问于孔子曰： 先王制法，使刑不上于大夫，礼不下于庶人，然则大夫犯罪，不可以加刑，庶人之行事，不可以治于礼乎？ 
现代文：冉有问孔子说： 先王制定法律制度，规定刑罚不加到大夫身上，礼不用到平民身上。
English: Ran once asked Confucius: "The previous king established a legal system, stipulating that punishments should not be imposed on doctors, and that courtesy should not be imposed on commoners.

古文：孔子曰： 不然，凡治君子以礼御其心，所以属之以廉耻之节也，故古之大夫，其有坐不廉污秽而退放之者，不谓之不廉污秽而退放，则曰 簠簋不饬 ；有坐淫乱男女无别者，不谓之淫乱男女无别，则曰 帷幕不修 也；有坐罔上不忠者，不谓之罔上不忠，则曰 臣节未着 ；有坐罢软不胜任者，不谓之罢软不胜任，则曰 下官不职 ；有坐干国之纪者，不谓之干国之纪，则曰 行事不请 。
现代文：那么，大夫犯了罪就可以不加刑？平民行事就可以不用礼来约束了吗？ 孔子说： 不是这样的。凡治理君子，用礼来约束他的心，是因为把他们归属为有廉耻之节的人。所以古代的大夫，有犯了不廉污秽之罪而被罢免放逐的，不叫做因不廉污秽而放逐，而叫做 簠簋不饬 ；有犯淫乱或男女无别罪行的，不叫做淫乱或男女无别，而叫做 帷幕不修 ；有犯罔上不忠罪行的，不叫做对上不 忠，而叫做 臣节未着 ；有犯软弱无能不胜任其职之罪的，不叫不胜任其职做软弱无能，而叫做 下官不职 ；有触犯国家法纪之罪的，不叫做触犯国家法纪，而叫做 行事不请 。
English: Confucius said: "It is not so. Anyone who governs a gentleman and disciplines his heart with propriety does so because he regards him as a man of integrity. Therefore, in ancient times, a doctor who committed the crime of corruption and was dismissed and banished was not called banished for corruption and filth, but was called 不; one who committed adultery or a crime without distinction between men and women was not called adultery or a crime without distinction between men and women, but was called 幕幕不修; one who committed the crime of disloyalty on the throne was not called disloyalty to the emperor, but was called 臣节未着; one who committed

古文：此五者，大夫既自定有罪名矣，而犹不忍斥，然正以呼之也，既而为之讳，所以愧耻之，是故大夫之罪，其在五刑之域者，闻而谴发，则白冠厘缨，盘水加剑，造乎阙而自请罪。
现代文：这五种情况，大夫既已自定罪名了，仍不忍正面直呼他有罪，接着还要为他隐讳，这是为了让他们感到羞愧。因此大夫犯了罪，他的罪行在这五种之内的，知道自己要被谴责问罪，就会戴上用毛作帽带的白色帽子，穿上白色的丧服，端着盛水的盘子，上面放一把剑，自己走到君王那里，表示要谢罪。
English: So the doctor committed one of the five crimes, and knowing that he would be condemned, he put on a white cap with a brim made of hair, put on a white mourning robe, brought a dish of water, put a sword on it, and went to the king to confess.

古文：君不使有司执缚牵掣而加之也。
现代文：君王不派有关司法官吏施以刑罚。
English: The monarch does not send the relevant judicial officials to impose the punishment.

古文：其有大罪者，闻命则北面再拜，跪而自裁，君不使人捽引而刑杀。曰： 子大夫自取之耳，吾遇子有礼矣。 
现代文：犯有大罪的，听到君王的命令则面向北下拜，跪下自杀。君王也不派人按着他身体用刑，只是说： 这是大夫你自己咎由自取，我对你已经有礼了。 
English: When a man who had committed a great crime heard the king's order, he prostrated himself facing north and knelt down to commit suicide. The king did not send anyone to torture his body, but only said: "This is your own fault, doctor, I have already paid you a compliment."

古文：以刑不上大夫而大夫亦不失其罪者，教使然也。 
现代文：即使是刑不上大夫，而大夫犯罪也不能逃避处罚，这是教化的结果。
English: Even if the punishment is not a doctor, and the doctor can not escape punishment, this is the result of indoctrination.

古文：所谓礼不下庶人者，以庶人遽其事而不能充礼，故不责之以备礼也。 
现代文：所谓礼不下庶人，是因为雇人忙于生计的事不能很好地学习礼，所以不能要求他们有完备的礼仪。 
English: The so-called common people who can't follow proper etiquette is because those who are busy earning a living can't learn proper etiquette, so they can't be expected to have perfect etiquette.

古文：冉有跪然免席曰： 言则美矣，求未之闻，退而记之。 
现代文：冉有听完孔子的话，跪行离开了席位，说： 您说得太好了，我还从未听说过，回去后要记下来。 
English: After listening to the words of Confucius, Ran You knelt down and left the seat, saying: You said it very well, I have never heard of it before, I will write it down when I go back.

