古文：子墨子言曰：凡出言谈、由文学之为道也，则不可而不先立义法。
现代文：墨子说： 凡发表谈话、写文章的原则，不可以不先树立一个标准。
English: Mozi said: The principle of publishing a talk or writing an article cannot be changed without first establishing a standard.

古文：若言而无义，譬犹立朝夕于员钧之上也，则虽有巧工，必不能得正焉。
现代文：如果言论没有标准，就好象把测时仪器放在转动的陶轮上。即使工匠很聪明，也不能得到正确的答案。
English: If there is no standard for speech, it is like putting a timepiece on a spinning potter's wheel. Even if the craftsman is very clever, he cannot get the right answer.

古文：然今天下之情伪，未可得而识也。故使言有三法。
现代文：然而现在世上的真假，不能得到辨识，所以言论有三种法则。 
English: However, in today's world, truth and falsehood cannot be distinguished, so there are three rules for speech.

古文：三法者何也？
现代文：哪三种法则呢？
English: What are the three laws?

古文：有本之者，有原之者，有用之者。
现代文：有本原的，有推究的，有实践的。
English: There is the original, there is the deduction, there is the practice.

古文：于其本之也？
现代文：怎样求言论的本原呢？
English: How can we get to the root of speech?

古文：考天鬼之志，圣王之事；于其原之也？
现代文：用天帝、鬼神的意志和圣王的事迹来考察它。
English: Examine it with the will of the heavenly emperor, ghosts and gods, and the deeds of the holy king.

古文：徵以先王之书；用之奈何？
现代文：怎样推究言论呢？用先王的书来验证它。
English: How do you investigate a statement? Use the books of the ancients to verify it.

古文：发而为刑。
现代文：怎样把言语付之实践呢？用它来作为标准。
English: How to put words into practice? Use it as a yardstick.

古文：此言之三法也。
现代文：这就是言论的三条标准。
English: These are the three standards of speech.

古文：今天下之士君子，或以命为忘。
现代文：现在天下的士人君子，有的认为命是有的，有的认为命是没有的。
English: Nowadays, some of the world's nobles think that life exists, while others think that life does not exist.

古文：我所以知命之有与亡者，以众人耳目之情，知有与亡。
现代文：我之所以知道命的有或没有，是根据众人所见所闻的实情才知道有或没有。
English: The reason why I know whether there is life or not is that I know whether there is life or not based on what people have seen and heard.

古文：有闻之，有见之，谓之有；莫之闻，莫之见，谓之亡。
现代文：有听过它，有见过它，才叫 有 ，没听过，没见过，就叫 没有 。
English: If you've heard of it or seen it, it's a yes; if you haven't heard of it or seen it, it's a no.

古文：然胡不尝考之百姓之情？自古以及今，生民以来者，亦尝见命之物、闻命之声者乎？
现代文：然而为什么不试着用百姓的实际来考察呢：自古到今，自有人民以来，有曾见过命的形象，听过命的声音的人吗？
English: However, why not try to use the reality of the people to investigate: from ancient times to the present, since there have been people, have there been people who have seen the image of life and heard the voice of life?

古文：则未赏有也。
现代文：没有过的。
English: It never has been.

古文：若以百姓为愚不肖，耳目之情，不足因而为法；然则胡不尝考之诸侯之传言流语乎？
现代文：如果认为百姓愚蠢无能，所见所闻的实情不能当作准则，那么为什么不试着用诸侯所流传的话来考察呢？
English: If the people are thought to be stupid and incompetent, and what they have seen and heard cannot be taken as a standard, then why not try to use the words passed down by the princes to investigate?

古文：自古以及今，生民以来者，亦尝有闻命之声，见命之体者乎？
现代文：自古到今，自有人民以来，有曾听过命的声音，见过命的形体的人吗？
English: From ancient times to the present, since there have been people, have there been people who have heard the voice of life and seen the form of life?

古文：则未尝有也。然胡不尝考之圣王之事？
现代文：没有过的。那么为什么不用圣王之事来考察呢？
English: So why not use the matter of the holy king to investigate?

古文：古之圣王，举孝子而劝之事亲，尊贤良而劝之为善，发宪布令以教诲，明赏罚以劝阻。
现代文：古时圣王，举拔孝子，鼓励他事奉双亲；尊重贤良，鼓励他作善事，颁发宪令以教诲人民，严明赏罚以奖善止恶。
English: In ancient times, the holy king would elevate the filial son and encourage him to serve his parents; respect the virtuous and encourage him to do good deeds; issue constitutional decrees to educate the people; and strictly reward and punish the good and stop the evil.

古文：若此，则乱者可使治，而危者可使安矣。
现代文：这样，则可以治理混乱，使危险转为安宁。
English: In this way, chaos can be controlled and danger can be transformed into tranquility.

古文：若以为不然，昔者桀之所乱，汤治之；纣之所乱，武王治之。
现代文：若认为不是这样，古时侯，桀所搞乱的，汤治理了；纣所搞乱的，武王治理了。
English: If you don't think so, in ancient times, if you messed up, you were punished; if you messed up, you were punished.

古文：此世不渝而民不改，上变政而民易教，其在汤、武则治，其在桀、纣则乱。
现代文：这个世界不变，人民不变，君王改变了政令，人民就容易教导了。在武王时就得到治理，在桀、纣时则变得混乱。
English: The world does not change, the people do not change, the king changes the decrees, the people are easy to teach. In the time of King Wu, they are governed, and in the time of Zou and Zou, they become confused.

古文：安危治乱，在上之发政也，则岂可谓有命哉！
现代文：安宁、危险、治理、混乱，原因在君王所发布的政令，怎能说是 有命 呢？
English: How can tranquillity, danger, government, and confusion, which are caused by the decrees issued by the king, be said to have life?

古文：夫曰有命云者，亦不然矣。
现代文：那些说 有命 的，并不是这样。
English: Those who say they are alive, are not.

古文：今夫有命者言曰：我非作之后世也，自昔三代有若言以傅流矣，今故先生对之？
现代文：现在说 有命 的人说： 并不是我在后世说这种话的，自古时三代就有这种话流传了。先生为什么痛恨它呢？ 
English: Those who are now alive say, "It was not I who said this in the past, but it has been handed down for three generations. Why does my teacher hate it?"

古文：曰：夫有命者，不志昔也三代之圣、善人与？
现代文：答道： 说 有命 的人，不知是三代的善人呢？
English: He answered, "Do you not know that those who are said to be 'alive' are three generations of the good?

古文：意亡昔三代之暴、不肖人也？
现代文：还是三代的残暴无能的人？ 
English: Or three generations of brutal incompetence?

古文：何以知之？
现代文：怎么知道的呢？
English: How do you know this?

古文：初之列士桀大夫，慎言知行，此上有以规谏其君长，下有以教顺其百姓。
现代文：古时候有功之士和杰出的大夫，说话谨慎，行动敏捷，对上能规劝进谏君长，对下能教导百姓。
English: In ancient times, there were meritorious people and outstanding doctors who spoke cautiously and acted quickly. They could persuade their superiors and educate their subordinates.

古文：故上得其君长之赏，下得其百姓之誉。
现代文：所以上能得到君长的奖赏，下能得到百姓的赞誉。
English: Therefore, the higher one can get the reward of the ruler, and the lower one can get the praise of the people.

古文：列士桀大夫，声闻不废，流传至今，而天下皆曰其力也，必不能曰我见命焉。
现代文：有功之士和杰出的大夫声名不会废止，流传到今天。天下人都说： 是他们的努力啊！ 必定不会说： 我见到了命。 
English: The reputation of meritorious people and outstanding doctors will not be abolished, it will be passed down to this day. People all over the world say: it is their efforts! They will certainly not say: I have seen life.

古文：是故昔者三代之暴王，不缪其耳目之淫，不慎其心志之辟，外之驱骋田猎毕弋，内沈于酒乐，而不顾其国家百姓之政，繁为无用，暴逆百姓，使下不亲其上，是故国为虚厉，身在刑之中，不肯曰我罢不肖，我为刑政不善，必曰我命故且亡。
现代文：所以古时三代的凶暴君王，不改正他们过多的声色享受，不谨慎他们内心的邪僻，在外则驱车打猎射鸟，在内则耽于酒和音乐，而不顾国家和百姓的政事，大量从事无用的事，对百姓凶暴，使下位的人不敬重在上位的人。所以国家空虚，人民亡种，自己也受到刑戮的惩罚。不肯说： 我疲懒无能，我没做好刑法政事。 必然要说： 我命中本来就要灭亡。 
English: Therefore, the three generations of cruel kings in ancient times did not correct their excessive enjoyment of voice and color, did not pay attention to the eccentricity of their hearts, drove to hunt and shoot birds outside, indulged in wine and music inside, disregarded the country and the people's political affairs, engaged in a large number of useless things, were violent to the people, and made the lower-ranking people disrespect the higher-ranking people. Therefore, the country was empty, the people died, and they themselves were punished by torture. They refused to say: I am lazy and incompetent, I did not do a good job in criminal law and politics. They must say: I was destined to perish.

古文：虽昔也三代之穷民，亦由此也，内之不能善事其亲戚，外不能善事其君长，恶恭俭而好简易，贪饮食而惰从事，衣食之财不足，使身至有饥寒冻馁之忧，必不能曰我罢不肖，我从事不疾，必曰我命固且穷。
现代文：对内不能好好地对待双亲，在外不能好好地对待君长。厌恶恭敬勤俭而喜好简慢轻率，贪于饮食而懒于劳作。衣食财物不足，至使有饥寒冻馁的忧患。必不会说： 我疲懒无能，不能勤快地劳作。 一定说： 我命里本来就穷。 
English: One cannot treat one's parents well at home, and one cannot treat one's sovereign well abroad. One abhors respect and thrift, but likes simplicity and frivolity. One is greedy for food, but lazy in labor. One's food, clothing, and possessions are insufficient, so that one is plagued by hunger, cold, and shivering. One must not say, "I am too lazy to work diligently." One must say, "I am poor by nature."

古文：虽昔也三代之伪民，亦犹此也，繁饰有命，以教众愚朴人。
现代文：即使是三代虚伪的人，也都这样说。粉饰 有命 之说，以教唆那些愚笨朴实的人。
English: Even three generations of hypocrites say the same thing, twisting the word of life to make it palatable to the simple-minded.

古文：久矣！圣王之患此也，故书之竹帛，琢之金石。
现代文：圣王担忧这个问题已经很久了。所以把它写在竹帛上，刻在金石上。
English: The holy king had been worried about this for a long time, so he wrote it on a bamboo pole and engraved it on a stone.

古文：于先王之书《仲虺之告》曰： 我闻有夏人矫天命，布命于下，帝式是恶，用阙师。 
现代文：在先王的书《仲虺之告》中说： 我听说夏代的人诈称天命，宣布天命于世，所以天帝痛恨他，丧失了他的军队。 
English: In the book of the former king, "The Announcement of Zhonglu," he said: I heard that the people of the Xia Dynasty falsely claimed to be the destiny of heaven and announced the destiny of heaven to the world, so the Heavenly Emperor hated him and lost his army.

古文：此语夏王桀之执有命也，汤与仲虺共非之。
现代文：这是说夏朝的君王桀主张 有命 ，汤与仲虺共同批驳他。
English: This is to say that the king of the Xia Dynasty, Zhai, advocated the existence of life, and Tang and Zhongyi jointly refuted him.

古文：先王之书《太誓》之言然，曰： 纣夷之居，而不肯事上帝、弃阙其先神而不祀也，曰： 我民有命。
现代文：先王的书《太誓》也这样说，道： 纣很暴虐，不肯侍奉上天，抛弃他的先人的神灵而不祭祀。说： 我有命！ 
English: The Ancestor's book "The Great Oath" also says the same thing, saying: "He is very tyrannical, he refuses to serve the heavens, he abandons the gods of his forefathers and does not worship them. He says: I have life!

古文：毋其务，天不亦弃纵而不葆。 
现代文：不努力从事政事，天帝也抛弃了他而不去保佑。 
English: If he does not work hard to engage in politics, the heavenly emperor will abandon him and not bless him.

古文：此言纣之执有命也，武王以《太誓》非之。
现代文：这是说纣主张 有命 ，武王作《太誓》反驳他。
English: This is to say that Zou asserted that there was life, and King Wu countered him with the "Great Oath."

古文：有于三代不国有之，曰： 女毋崇天之有命也。 
现代文：在三代百国书上也有这样的话，说： 你们不要崇奉天是有命的。 
English: In the Book of the Three Generations and a Hundred Kingdoms, there is also a passage that says: "Do not worship heaven, for it is life.

古文：命三不国亦言命之无也。于召公之《执令》于然： 且！
现代文：三代百国也都说没有命。召公的《执令》也是如此： 去吧！
English: Three generations and hundreds of countries have also said that there is no life. This is also true of the summoning "executive order": Go!

古文：政哉，无天命！
现代文：要虔敬！不要相信天命。
English: Be religious! Don't believe in predestination.

古文：维予二人，而无造言，不自降天之哉得之。 
现代文：只有我俩而不能相互诫勉吗？吉利并不是上天降下的，而是我们自己得到的。 
English: Are we the only ones who can't admonish each other? Good fortune is not sent by the heavens, but we get it ourselves.

古文：在于商、夏之《诗》、《书》曰： 命者，暴王作之。 
现代文：在商夏时的诗、书中说： 命是凶暴的君王捏造的。 
English: In Shang Xia's poem, the book says: Life is fabricated by a cruel king.

古文：且今天下之士君子，将欲辩是非、利害之故，当天有命者，不可不疾非也。
现代文：现在天下的士人君子，想要辨明是非利害的原因，对于主张 有命 的人，不能不赶快批驳。
English: Nowadays, the world's scholar-gentlemen, who want to identify the reasons for the pros and cons, cannot help but quickly refute those who advocate "life and limb."

古文：执有命者，此天下之厚害也，是故子墨子非也。
现代文：主张 有命 的人，是天下的大害，所以墨子反对他们。
English: Those who advocate life are a great harm to the world, so Mozi opposed them.

