古文：韦璜薛万石范俶李浣张勍牛爽李咸李昼元载萧审
现代文：韦璜薛万石范俶李浣张勍牛爽李咸李昼元载萧审
English: Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei

古文：韦璜
现代文：韦璜
English: Wei Xuan

古文：潞城县令周混妻者，姓韦名璜，容色妍丽，性多黠惠。恒与其嫂妹期曰：若有先死，幽冥之事，期以相报。
现代文：潞城县令周混的妻子，姓韦名璜，容貌妍丽，性情聪明贤惠，常对她嫂妹定约说：若有先死的，幽冥的事，定期相报。
English: The wife of Lingshouqin of Lucheng County, surnamed Wei Nanyuan, beautiful in appearance, clever and virtuous in disposition, often made a promise to her sister-in-law: If there is a pre-death, dark matter, report it regularly.

古文：后适周氏，生二女，乾元中卒，月余，忽至其家，空间灵语，谓家人曰：本期相报，故以是来。
现代文：后来嫁给周混，生了两个女儿，乾元年中死了。过了一个多月，忽然到了她家，在空中显灵传语，对家人说：本来约好相报，所以就来了。
English: Later, she married Zhou Jian, gave birth to two daughters, and died in the middle of the first year of the Qian dynasty. After more than a month, she suddenly arrived at her home, appeared in the air and said to her family: I had an appointment to report to you, so I came.

古文：我已见阎罗王兼亲属。
现代文：我已见到阎罗王和亲人。
English: I have already seen the king of hell and his relatives.

古文：家人问见锅汤剑树否，答云：我是何人，得见是事？
现代文：家人问她是否被下油锅和上剑树？她回答说：我是什么样的人，能被这这样处置！
English: Her family asked her if she had been beaten with a frying pan and a sword, to which she replied: "What kind of person am I that I can be treated like this?"

古文：后复附婢灵语云：太山府君嫁女，知我能妆梳，所以见召。明日事了，当复来耳。
现代文：后来又附在婢女身上显灵说：太山府君嫁女儿，知道我会梳妆，所以被召去，明天事一完，还会再来。
English: Later, a spirit attached to the maid appeared and said, "The lord of Taishan married my daughter. He knew that I would do her makeup, so he called me to come. He will come again tomorrow once everything is over."

古文：明日，婢又灵语云：我至太山，府君嫁女，理极荣贵。令我为女作妆，今得胭脂及粉，来与诸女。
现代文：第二天，婢女又显灵说：我到了太山，府君嫁女儿，极其豪华，让我为他女儿梳妆，现得到胭脂和粉，来送给各位女友。
English: The next day, the maid appeared again and said, "I have arrived in Taishan, the prefect is marrying his daughter, it is extremely luxurious, let me dress up his daughter, now I have rouge and powder to give to my girlfriends."

古文：因而开手，有胭脂极赤，与粉，并不异人间物。又云：府君家撒帐钱甚大，四十鬼不能举一枚，我亦致之。因空中落钱，钱大如盏。
现代文：就摊开手，有极红的胭脂和粉，并不异于人间的东西，又说：府君家撒帐钱很大，四十个鬼不能举动一枚，我也到了，就向空中撒下钱，钱大得象小杯子。
English: He spread out his hand, and it was covered with crimson rouge and powder, no different from the things of the world. He also said, "Fujun's family has a large amount of money. Forty ghosts cannot move a single piece. When I arrived, I threw the money into the air. The money was as big as a small cup."

古文：复谓：府君知我善染红，乃令我染。我辞己虽染，亲不下手，平素是家婢所以，但承己指挥耳。
现代文：又说：府君知道我会染红，就让我染，我说自己虽然会染，不亲自动手，平时是家中的婢女所做，只是听从我的指挥罢了。
English: He also said: The governor knew that I would dye my hair red, so he let me dye it. I said that although I could dye, I didn't do it myself, it was usually done by the maid at home, I was just following my orders.

古文：府君令我取婢，今不得已，暂将婢去，明日当遣之还。
现代文：府君让我来取婢女，现在不得已，暂将婢女借去，明天就能送她回来。
English: The governor asked me to fetch the maid, and now I have no choice but to borrow the maid for the time being, so that I can send her back tomorrow.

古文：女云：一家唯仰此婢，奈何夺之？
现代文：女人说：一家人都只靠这个婢女，怎么能夺走她？
English: The woman said: "The whole family depends on this maid, how can they take her away?

古文：韦云：但借两日耳。若过两日，汝宜击磬呼之。夫磬一振，鬼神毕闻。
现代文：韦璜说：只借两天，要是过了两天，你们就击磬石召呼她，磬石一响，鬼神都能听到。
English: Wei Wei said, "I'll only lend you two days. If it takes longer than two days, you can hit the flint to summon her. If the flint makes a sound, the spirits can hear it."

古文：婢忽气尽，经二日不返，女等鸣磬。
现代文：婢女忽然气绝，过了两天没有回来，女人们敲响磬石。
English: The maid suddenly lost her breath and did not return after two days. The women rang a gong.

古文：少选，复空中语云：我朝染毕，已遣婢还，何以不至？
现代文：一会儿，韦璜又在空中语：我已染完，已经让婢女回去，怎么没到？
English: After a while, Wei Wei said again in the air: I have finished dyeing, I have already asked my maid to go back, why didn't she come?

古文：当是迷路耳。
现代文：可能是迷路了。
English: Maybe he got lost.

古文：须臾婢至，乃活，两手忽变作深红色。
现代文：一会儿，婢女到了，就活过来，两手忽然变成深红色。
English: A moment later, when the maid arrived, she came to life and her hands suddenly turned crimson.

古文：又制五言诗，与姊嫂夫数首，其寄诗云：修短各有分，浮华亦非真。
现代文：韦璜又写了五言诗，赠给姊妹、嫂子和丈夫几首，赠来的诗云：修短各有分，浮华亦非真。
English: Wei Wei also wrote five-character poems. She gave several poems to her sister, sister-in-law, and husband. The poems she gave them were all short and flashy.

古文：断肠泉壤下，幽忧难具陈。
现代文：断肠泉壤下，幽忧难具陈。
English: Under the soil of the gut-wrenching spring, it is difficult for melancholy to take root.

古文：凄凄白杨风，日暮堪愁人。
现代文：凄凄白杨风，日暮堪愁人。
English: Dreadful white poplar wind, gloomy at dusk.

古文：又二章寄夫，题云泉台客人韦璜。
现代文：又有两首赠给丈夫，落款云泉台客人韦璜。
English: Two more songs were given to her husband, signed by the guest of Yunquantai, Wei Wei.

古文：诗云：不得长相守，青春夭舜华。
现代文：诗云：不得长相守，青春夭舜华。
English: Shi Yun: You have to keep up appearances, youth is fleeting.

古文：旧游今永已，泉路却为家。
现代文：旧游今永已，泉路却为家。
English: The old you is now gone forever, but Izumi-ro is home.

古文：其一：早知别离切人心，悔作从来恩爱深。
现代文：另一首是：早知别离切人心，悔作从来恩爱深。
English: The other one is: It's never too early to say goodbye, and regret is never too deep.

古文：黄泉冥寞虽长逝，白日屏帷还重寻。
现代文：黄泉冥寞虽长逝，白日屏帷还重寻。
English: Although the gloom of the underworld is long gone, the curtains of daylight are yet to be drawn.

古文：赠嫂一章，序云《阿嫂相疑留诗》，曰：赤心用尽为相知，虑后防前只定疑。
现代文：赠嫂一首，序说，阿嫂相疑留诗，诗曰：赤心用尽为相知，虑后防前只定疑。
English: He presented his sister-in-law with a poem, the preface of which said that his sister-in-law had left a poem about her doubts. The poem said: "To know each other is to exhaust one's innermost feelings.

古文：案牍可申生节目，桃符虽圣欲何为。
现代文：案牍可申生节目，桃符虽圣欲何为。
English: A proposal can be made for a program, but a peach charm is nothing more than a holy desire.

古文：见其亲说云尔。
现代文：这事被她的亲属传开了。
English: The matter was brought to light by her relatives.

古文：薛万石
现代文：薛万石
English: Xue Wanshi

古文：薛万石，河东人。
现代文：薛万石，河东人。
English: Xue Wanshi, from Hedong.

古文：广德初，浙东观察薛兼训用万石为永嘉令。
现代文：广德初年，浙东观察使薛兼训启用薛万石为永嘉县令。
English: In the first year of Guangde, the East Zhejiang observation made Xue Qianxun enable Xue Wanshi to become the county magistrate of Yongjia.

古文：数月，忽谓其妻曰：后十日家内食尽，食尽时，我亦当死。
现代文：几个月后，万石忽然对他妻子说：十天后家中吃的东西就没了，那时，我也就会死了。
English: A few months later, Wanshi suddenly said to his wife: "In ten days, there will be nothing left to eat in our home. At that time, I will die."

古文：米谷荒贵，为之奈何？
现代文：粮食稀少很贵，怎么办？
English: What to do when food is scarce and expensive?

古文：妇曰：君身康强，何为自作不详之语？
现代文：妇人说：你的身体健康强壮，怎么能说不吉利的话呢？
English: The woman said, "You are healthy and strong. How can you say such an unlucky thing?

古文：万石云：死甚可恶，有言者，不得已耳。
现代文：万石说：死很可恶，有话相告，不得已啊！
English: Wanshi said, "Death is very abominable, I have something to tell you, I have to!"

古文：至期果暴卒，殓毕，棺中忽令呼录事佐史等。既至，谓曰：万石不幸身死，言之凄怆。然自此未尝扰君，今妻子饥穷，远归无路。所相召者，欲以亲爱累君。
现代文：到时万石果然暴死，盛殓完毕，棺中忽然命令招呼录事，佐史等人，他们就都到了，万石对他们说：万石不幸身死，说起来凄怆，但从前不曾打扰过你们，现在妻子孩子贫穷饥饿，无路可走，所以招呼你们的事，就是想把亲人托付给你们。
English: At that time, Wanshi died a violent death. After the funeral was over, the coffin was suddenly ordered to be recorded. Sashi and others arrived. Wanshi said to them: "Wanshi died a tragic death. It sounds terrible to say, but I never bothered you before. Now my wife and children are poor and hungry, and there is no way out. That's why I called you to entrust my relatives to you."

古文：尔时永嘉米贵，斗至万钱，万石于录事已下求米有差。吏人凶惧，罔不依送。迨至丞尉亦有赠。
现代文：那时永嘉年米贵，一斗达到一万钱。万石已经求录事供给他家粮食，差吏凶狠，但也无不依言相送，就连县丞、县尉也都有所赠送。
English: At that time, Yongjia's rice was expensive, reaching 10,000 yuan per barrel. Wanshi had already asked for a record to provide his family with grain. The officials were fierce, but they all sent it to him, even the county magistrate and the county lieutenant.

古文：后数日，谓家人曰：我暂往越州，谒见薛公。汝辈既有粮食，吾不忧矣。
现代文：几天后，万石就对家人说：我暂时去越州，拜见薛兼训公，你们既然有了粮食，我就无忧虑了。
English: A few days later, Wanshi said to his family: "I will temporarily go to Yuezhou to meet Xue Canxun. Since you have food, I don't have to worry."

古文：自尔十余日无言，妇悲泣疲顿，昼寝，忽闻其语，惊起曰：君何所求？
现代文：从此十多天没有消息，妇人悲泣疲困，白天睡觉，忽然听到他说话，惊讶起身说：您从什么地方来？
English: Since then, there has been no news for more than ten days. The woman was weeping and exhausted, sleeping during the day, when she suddenly heard him speak. Surprised, she got up and said, "Where are you from?"

古文：答云：吾从越还，中丞已知吾亡，见令张卿来迎，又为见两女择得两婿。
现代文：回答说：我从越州回来，中丞已经知道我死了，让张卿来迎接，又为两个女儿选择了两个女婿。
English: He replied, "When I came back from Yuezhou, my father-in-law already knew that I was dead, so he asked Zhang Qing to meet me, and he also chose two son-in-laws for his two daughters.

古文：兄弟之情，可为厚矣。宜速装饰，张卿到来，即可便发。不尔，当罹山贼之劫，第宜速去也。
现代文：兄弟之情，可谓深厚，快些整治行装，张卿到来，就立即出发，不然就会遇到山贼的打劫，所以快点离开。
English: Brotherly affection, can be described as profound, hurry to rectify and dress, when Zhang Qing arrived, he immediately set out, otherwise he would encounter bandits robbing, so hurry to leave.

古文：会卿至，即日首途，去永嘉二百里温州为贼所破。家人在道危急，即焚香谘白，必有所言。不问即否。亲见家人白之。
现代文：家人于是收拾行装，等张卿到时，当天就出发了。离永嘉二百里的温州被贼掳掠，家人在途中危急，就焚香告诉他，必有话说，不论怎样，万石亲自看见他家人说这件事了
English: The family then packed up and left, and when Zhang Qing arrived, they set out the same day. Wenzhou, 200 miles from Yongjia, was kidnapped by thieves, and the family was in danger on the way. They burned incense to tell him that there must be something to say. In any case, Wanshi personally saw his family say this

古文：范俶
现代文：范俶
English: Fan Ye

古文：范俶者，广德初，于苏州开酒肆。
现代文：范俶这个人，广德初年，在苏州开酒馆。
English: This person, Fan Qi, opened a pub in Suzhou in Guangde's first year.

古文：日晚，有妇人从门过，色态甚异。俶留宿，妇人初不辞让。乃秉烛，以发覆面，向暗而坐。
现代文：有天晚上，有个妇人从门口经过，面色神态非常奇怪，范俶留她住宿，妇人开始没有推辞，就手拿蜡烛，用头发盖住脸面，对着暗处坐着。
English: One evening, a woman passed by the door with a very strange look on her face. Fan Ye let her stay, and the woman did not refuse at first. She held a candle in her hand, covered her face with her hair, and sat facing the darkness.

古文：其夜与申宴私之好，未明求去，云失梳子。
现代文：这天晚上和范俶偷偷交好，天不亮请求离开，说丢失了梳子，找不到。
English: That evening, he secretly made friends with Fan Yu, and asked to leave before dawn, saying that he had lost his comb and couldn't find it.

古文：觅不得，临别之际，啮俶臂而去。及晓，于床前得一纸梳，心甚恶之。因而体痛红肿，六七日死矣。
现代文：临别之际，咬了范俶臂膀而去，待到天亮，范俶在床前找到了一个纸梳子，心里很讨厌它，于是身体红肿疼痛，过了六七天死了。
English: At the time of parting, he bit Fan Yao's arm and left. He stayed until dawn. Fan Yao found a paper comb in front of his bed. He hated it, so his body was red, swollen and painful. He died six or seven days later.

古文：李浣
现代文：李浣
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：河中少尹李浣，以广德二年薨。初七日，家人设斋毕，忽于中门见浣独骑从门而入。奴等再拜，持浣下马，入座于西廊。诸子拜谒泣，浣云：生死是命，何用悲耶？只搅亡者心耳。
现代文：河中少尹李浣，在广德二年死了，初七日，家人设祭完毕，忽然在门中看见李浣独自骑马从门外进来，仆人等一再行礼，扶李浣下马，入座在西廊，孩子们哭着拜见他，李浣说：生死是命，何必悲伤，只能搅扰死者的心。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, after the family had held a ceremony, they suddenly saw Li Qian riding a horse outside the gate. The servants bowed repeatedly, helped Li Qian dismount, and seated him in the west corridor. The children cried to see him. Li Qian said: "Life and death are life, why be sad, you can only disturb the heart of the deceased."

古文：判嘱家事久之。
现代文：教诲嘱咐家事很长时间。
English: Teachings enjoined housework for a long time.

古文：浣先娶项妃妹，生子四人。项卒，再娶河东窦滔女，有美色，特为浣所爱。
现代文：李浣先娶项妃的妹妹，生了四个孩子，项氏死后，又娶河南窦滔的女儿，有美色，特别被李浣宠爱。
English: Li Qian married the younger sister of Princess Xiang and had four children. After the death of Xiang, he married the daughter of Dou Tao of Henan Province. She was beautiful and was especially loved by Li Qian.

古文：尔窦惧不出，浣使呼之。逆谓之曰：生死虽殊，至于恩情，所未尝替，何惧而不出耶？
现代文：窦氏害怕不敢出来，李浣让人招呼她，迎着她对她说：生死虽然不一样，至于恩情，不能替换，何必害怕不出来？
English: Dou was too scared to come out, so Li Yao had someone call out to her. Li Yao greeted her and said, "Although life and death are not the same, as far as gratitude is concerned, it cannot be replaced, so why be afraid of not coming out?"

古文：每在地下，闻君哭声，辄令凄断。悲卿亦寿命不永，于我相去不出二年。夫妻义重，如今同行，岂不乐乎？
现代文：我每在地下听到你的哭声，就让我凄然，伤心你也寿命不长，和我相隔不过二年，夫妻情义深重，如今同行，岂不快乐吗？
English: Every time I hear you cry underground, it makes me so sad. You don't have long to live, and I'm only two years apart. We have a deep connection as husband and wife. Now that we're together, aren't we happy?

古文：人生会当有死，不必一二年在人间为胜。卿意如何？
现代文：人生都会有死，不必在乎一、二年在人间的乐趣，你意如何？
English: There will be death in life, you don't have to care about the fun of one or two years on earth, what do you think?

古文：窦初不言，浣云：卿欲不从，亦不及矣。后日，当使车骑至此相迎，幸无辞也。
现代文：窦氏开始没有说话。李浣说：你若不听从，也不能等你了，后天让车马到这相迎，不要推辞。
English: Dou didn't say anything at first. Li Yao said, "If you don't obey, I can't wait for you. Let's meet here the day after tomorrow. Don't refuse."

古文：遂呼诸婢，谓四人曰：汝等素事娘子，亦宜从行。
现代文：就召唤几个婢女，对他们四个人说：你们一向侍奉娘子，也应跟着一块走。
English: And he called unto him his four maidservants, and said unto them, Go ye also, and serve with them.

古文：复取其妻衣服，手自别之，分为数袋，以付四婢，曰：后日可持此随娘子来。
现代文：又拿来妻子的衣服，亲自分开，分为几袋，把它交给四个婢女，说：后天可拿这东西跟随娘子来。
English: And he brought forth his wife's raiment, and rent it; and he divided it into sacks, and gave them to his four handmaidens, and said, Bring them in the day after tomorrow with thy sons.

古文：又谓诸子曰：吾虽先婚汝母，然在地下殊不相见，不宜以汝母与吾合葬，可以窦氏同穴。若违吾言，神道是殛。
现代文：又对几个孩子说：我虽然先和你们母亲结婚，但在地下不能相见，不能把你们母亲和我合葬，可以把窦氏与我合葬，如果背叛了我的话，神通就杀掉了你们。
English: He also said to several children: Although I married your mother first, I can't meet you underground. I can't bury your mother and I together, but I can bury Dou together with me. If you betray me, Shintong will kill you.

古文：言毕便出。奴等送至门外，见浣驶骑走，而从东转西不复见。
现代文：说完就出来，仆人们送到门外，看见李浣骑马跑了，从东转西不再看到。
English: After he finished speaking, he came out, and the servants sent him outside the door. They saw Li Yao riding a horse and running away. He could no longer be seen from east to west.

古文：后日车骑至门，他人不之见，唯四婢者见之。便装束窦，取所选衣服，与家人诀，遂各倒地死亡。
现代文：后天车马到了门口，其他的人都没看见，只有四个婢女看见车马，就为窦氏准备，拿着所选的衣服，同家人告别，就各自倒地死了。
English: The day after tomorrow, the carriage arrived at the door, but no one else saw it. Only four maids saw the carriage, so they prepared for Mr. Dou, took the clothes they had chosen, said goodbye to their families, and fell to the ground and died.

古文：张勍
现代文：张勍
English: Zhang Ye

古文：代宗时，河朔未宁，寇贼劫掠。
现代文：代宗时，河朔一带不得安宁，寇贼劫掠。
English: At the time of Emperor Daizong, there was no peace in the area around Hexuo, and robbers plundered everything.

古文：张勍者，恒阳人也，因出游被掠。其后亦自聚众，因杀害行旅，而誓不伤恒阳人。
现代文：张勍是恒阳人，曾经因出游被掳掠，后来张勍自己也聚众抢劫，因而杀害行旅之人，但发誓不伤害恒阳人。
English: Zhang Rong, a resident of Hengyang, was once abducted and robbed while on a trip. Later, Zhang Rong himself gathered a group of robbers and killed the travelers, but he swore not to harm the residents of Hengyang.

古文：一日引众千人至恒阳东界，夜半月明，方息大林下，忽逢百余人，列花烛，奏歌乐，与数妇人同行。见勍，遥叱之曰：官军耶？
现代文：一天，张勍率一千人到了恒阳东部，夜半月明，才歇息在林中，忽然遇到一百多人，列举花烛，高奏歌乐，和几个妇人一齐走，看到张勍，远远地喝问：是官军？
English: One day, Zhang Xuan led a thousand people to the eastern part of Hengyang. At the stroke of midnight, he was resting in the forest. Suddenly, he encountered more than a hundred people, listing flowers and candles, singing songs, and walking together with several women. When he saw Zhang Xuan, he shouted from a distance: Is it the government army?

古文：贼党耶？
现代文：还是贼寇？
English: Or a bandit?

古文：勍左右曰：张将军也。
现代文：张勍左右的人说：是张将军。
English: People around Zhang Ye said, "It's General Zhang."

古文：行人曰：张将军是绿林将军耶？又何军容之整，士卒之整也？
现代文：行人说：张将军不过是绿林将军，又怎能军容整齐，士卒整齐呢？
English: Pedestrians said: General Zhang is just a green forest general, how can the military be neat and tidy?

古文：左右怒，白勍，请杀之，因领小将百人与战。
现代文：张勍左右的人很生气，就报告了张勍，请战杀他们，就率领士卒百余人出战。
English: The people around Zhang Rong were very angry, so they reported Zhang Rong, asked him to fight and kill them, and led more than a hundred soldiers to fight.

古文：行人持戈甲者不过三二十人，合战多伤士卒。
现代文：那一队人拿兵器的不过二三十人，交战起来士卒却多有损伤。
English: There were no more than twenty or thirty men with weapons in that group, but many of the soldiers were injured in the fighting.

古文：勍怒，自领兵直前，又数战不利。
现代文：张勍大怒，亲自领兵上前，再数战也未能取胜。
English: Zhang Ye was furious and personally led the troops forward, but he was not able to win any more battles.

古文：内一人自称幽地王，得恒阳王女为妻，今来新迎。此夜静月下涉原野，欲避繁杂，不谓偶逢将军。候从无礼，方叱止之。因不犯将军之怒。然素闻将军誓言，不害恒阳人。将军幸不违言。
现代文：行人中有一个自称幽地王，说他娶恒阳王的女儿做妻子，现在亲自来迎娶，趁着寂静的月色走过原野，想要躲避麻烦，不料偶然遇到张将军，随从无礼，正要训斥制止他们，别引起将军的愤怒，但一向听说将军发誓不伤害恒阳人，便上前请求，将军不要违背誓言。
English: One of the pedestrians, who called himself the King of the Hermitage, said that he had married the daughter of the King of Hengyang as his wife, and was now coming to marry her in person. He took advantage of the quiet moonlight to walk through the field, trying to avoid trouble. However, he accidentally met General Zhang. He was rude and was about to reprimand and stop them, so as not to arouse the general's anger. However, he had always heard that the general had sworn not to harm the people of Hengyang, so he came forward to ask the general not to break his oath.

古文：以恒阳之故，勍许舍之，乃曰：君辈皆舍，妇人即留。
现代文：因恒阳人的原因，张勍便准许放他们走，就说：你们这些人都可以走了，妇人要留下。
English: Due to the reasons of the hengyang people, Zhang Ye allowed them to leave, and said, "You can all leave, but the women should stay."

古文：对曰：留妇人即不可，欲斗即可。
现代文：对方回答说：留下妇人不行，想再打还可以。
English: The other man replied: "I can't leave my wife behind. If you want to fight again, that's fine.

古文：勍又入战，复不利，勍欲退。左右皆愤怒，愿死格。遂尽出其兵，分三队更斗，又数战不利。
现代文：张勍再次进行战斗，又未取胜，张勍想退却，左右的人都很生气，愿意以死相拼，就出动了全部兵力，分三队大战。
English: Zhang Ye fought again, but failed to win. Zhang Ye wanted to retreat. People on both sides were angry and willing to fight to the death, so he sent out all his troops and divided them into three large teams.

古文：见幽地王挥剑出入如风，勍惧，乃力止左右。勍独退而问曰：君兵士是人也？
现代文：又数战不利，只见幽地王挥剑象风一样出入战阵，张勍害怕了，就尽力制止了左右的人，独自退却问道：你的兵士是人？
English: Several more battles were unfavorable, only to see the king of the land of the dead waving his sword like the wind and entering and leaving the battle. Zhang Ye was afraid, so he tried his best to stop the people on his right and left, and retreated alone to ask: Is your soldier human?

古文：非人也？
现代文：还是非人？
English: Or inhuman?

古文：何不见伤？
现代文：怎么不受伤？
English: How not to get hurt?

古文：幽地王笑言曰：君为短贼之长，行不平之事，而复欲与我阴军竞力也。
现代文：幽地王笑着说：你是毛贼的首领，干不正当的事，还想和我们阴曹地府的士兵较量吗？
English: Yu Di Wang smiled and said, "You are the leader of the bandits, doing illegal things. Do you still want to compete with our soldiers from the Evil Empire?"

古文：勍方下马再拜。又谓勍曰：安禄山父子死，史氏僣命，君为盗，奚不以众归之，自当富贵。
现代文：张勍才下马一拜再拜，幽地王又对张勍说：安禄山父子已经死了，现在史思明发号施命，你是盗贼，怎么不率众归顺他？自然就富贵了。
English: Zhang Ye only dismounted once and bowed again, and the King of the Hidden Lands said to Zhang Ye: Anlu Mountain father and son have died, and now Shi Siming is giving orders. You are a thief, why don't you lead the people to submit to him? Naturally, you will become rich.

古文：勍又拜曰：我无战术，偶然贼众推我为长，我何可佐人？
现代文：张勍又拜谢说：我不懂兵法，偶然贼众推我为首领，我怎么能指挥人呢？
English: Zhang Yao also said to Bai Xie, "I don't understand the art of war. By chance, the thieves pushed me to be the leader. How can I command people?"

古文：幽地王乃出兵书一卷，以授之而去。
现代文：幽地王就拿出一卷兵书，给了他之后就走了。
English: Yu Di Wang took out a volume of military books, gave it to him, and then left.

古文：勍得此书，颇达兵术。寻以兵归史思明，果用之为将。数年而卒。
现代文：张勍得到了这部书，很精通兵法，不久率部归顺史思明，史思明果然启用他当将军，几年后死了。
English: Zhang Xuan obtained this book and was very proficient in the art of war. Soon, he became subordinate to Shun Shiming, who appointed him as a general and died a few years later.

古文：牛爽
现代文：牛爽
English: Niu Shuang

古文：永泰中，牛爽授庐州别驾。
现代文：永泰年中。牛爽被任命为庐州别驾，将要去上任。
English: In the middle of Yongtai year, Niu Shuang was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and will take office.

古文：将之任，有乳母乘驴，为镫研破股，岁余，疮不差。
现代文：他有个乳母骑驴磨破了大腿。一年多了生了疮也没好。
English: He had a nanny ride a donkey and break her thigh. It's not good to have sores for more than a year.

古文：一旦苦疮痒，抑搔之，若虫行状。忽有数蝉，从疮中飞出，集庭树，悲鸣竟夕。
现代文：一天早上，苦于腿疮的搔痒，就抓挠几下，疮象个虫子的形状，忽然有几只蝉从疮中飞出来，停在庭院中的树上哀叫到夜晚。
English: One morning, suffering from the itching of leg sores, he scratched a few times, the sores were in the shape of a worm, and suddenly several cicadas flew out of the sores and stopped on the trees in the courtyard and wailed into the night.

古文：家人命巫卜之，有女巫颇通神鬼，巫至。向树呵之，咄咄语。
现代文：家中让巫师卜算这事。有个女巫，很精通神鬼之道，巫师对着树咄咄训斥，人们问她，她回答说：看见一个鬼，穿戴着黑色衣帽，站在树枝上。
English: There was a witch who was well versed in the ways of the gods and the spirits, and when the witch scolded the tree, people asked her, and she replied, "I saw a ghost, wearing a black cap, standing on a branch."

古文：诘之，答：见一鬼黑衣冠，据枝间，以手指蝉以导，其词曰：东堂下，余所处。享我致福，欺我致祸及三女。
现代文：用手指着蝉传过话来： 东堂下面，是我居住的地方，供奉我就能得到福，欺负我就会有祸降临到三个女儿身上。
English: Using his finger to signal the cicadas, he said, "Below the East Hall is where I live. If I make offerings, I can receive blessings. If I am bullied, misfortune will befall my three daughters."

古文：巫又言，黑衣者灶神耳。
现代文：女巫又说：黑衣人是灶神。
English: The witch added: "The man in black is the god of the kitchen."

古文：爽不信之，网蝉杀之，逐巫者。
现代文：牛爽不信，用网捉住蝉杀死了它，赶走了巫师。
English: Niu Shuang did not believe it, he caught the cicada with a net and killed it, driving away the sorcerer.

古文：后岁余，无异变。
现代文：后来一年多没有变故。
English: After that, nothing changed for more than a year.

古文：爽有三女，在闺房。夏月夜褰闱，爽忽觉前床有一长大尸，白衾覆而僵卧。
现代文：牛爽有三个女儿在闺房中，夏天月夜关门在家，牛爽忽然发觉前床有一具很大的尸体，白衣覆盖僵卧在床。
English: Niu Shuang had three daughters in her boudoir. On a summer night, when the door was closed at home, Niu Shuang suddenly found a large corpse lying on the bed, covered with a white robe.

古文：爽大怖，私语其妻，妻见甚慑。
现代文：牛爽非常害怕，偷偷告诉了他的妻子。妻子见了也很害怕。
English: Niu Shuang was very scared and secretly told his wife, who was also scared when she saw him.

古文：爽尝畜宝剑，潜取击之，划然而内惊叫。
现代文：牛爽曾保存一把宝剑，偷偷拿出来刺杀鬼。划地一下被里发出大声惊叫，等点亮灯火鬼就消失了。
English: Niu Shuang had kept a sword and secretly took it out to stab the ghost. He screamed loudly when he scratched the ground, and when he lit the lamp, the ghost disappeared.

古文：及烛，失其鬼，而闺中长女腰断矣，流血满地，爽惊恸失据。
现代文：可是闺中长女的腰已经断了，血流满地，牛爽惊讶悲痛，举足失措。
English: However, the waist of the eldest daughter in the middle of the girlfriends has been broken, blood is flowing all over the ground, Niu Shuang is surprised and sad, and he is at a loss.

古文：大小乱哭，莫知其由。
现代文：一家大小乱哭，不知道其中的原因。
English: A family, big or small, is crying uncontrollably, without knowing why.

古文：又见前鬼在床，爽神迷，仓卒复刎之，断去。
现代文：以后半年，夜里昏暗，牛爽掌灯在屋子的西南角，刚刚就寝，心中一动有了警觉，看见以前的鬼又在床上。牛爽神迷不清，又挥剑刺杀。
English: After half a year, it was dark at night, Niu Shuang's hand lamp was in the southwest corner of the room, he had just gone to bed, his heart was alert, and he saw the former ghost in bed again. Niu Shuang was confused, and he swung his sword and stabbed.

古文：闺中乱喧，次女又断腰矣。
现代文：闺阁中混乱喧哗，次女又腰断了。
English: There is chaos and noise in the boudoir, and the second daughter has broken her hip again.

古文：举家惶振，议者令爽徙居，明鬼神不可与竞，爽终不改。
现代文：全家惊惶失措，议论的人让牛爽搬家。鬼神不能跟它争胜，牛爽始终不变。
English: The whole family panicked, and the people who were talking about it asked Niu Shuang to move. Ghosts and gods can't compete with it, and Niu Shuang has always been the same.

古文：明年又见，卒杀三女。
现代文：第二年鬼又出现了，杀死了三女儿。
English: The following year, the ghost reappeared and killed the three daughters.

古文：而亲友强徙之他第，爽抱疾亦卒，果如蝉言。
现代文：亲友们强行他搬了家。牛爽也染病死了，果然象蝉说的那样。
English: His relatives and friends forced him to move. Niu Shuang also got sick and died, just as the cicada said.

古文：后有华岳道士褚乘霞，善驱除，素与爽善，闻之而来。郡以是宅凶，废之。
现代文：后来有个华山道士褚乘霞善于驱除鬼，一向同牛爽友善，听说了这事就来到了这个州郡，这个郡的人以为这个宅子不吉利。
English: Later, there was a Huashan Taoist priest, Zou Jianxia, who was good at exorcising ghosts and had always been friendly with cows. When he heard about this, he came to this county. People in this county thought that this house was unlucky.

古文：霞至独入，结坛守。
现代文：要废掉它。褚乘霞到了这里单独进去，设坛守护。
English: You should discard it. When you get here, you should go in alone and set up the altar and guard it.

古文：其日暮，内闻雷霆，搜索及明，发屋拔木。
现代文：那天晚上，听到里边雷霆大作，搜索交战。等到天亮，废掉屋子，拔掉树木。
English: That night, they heard thunder inside and searched for the battle. When it was dawn, they demolished the house and uprooted the trees.

古文：道士告郡，命锹锸，发堂下丈余，得古坟，铭曰卓女坟。
现代文：道士告诉州郡，让用铁锹挖开堂下一丈多深，找到一座古坟，墓铭写道：卓女墓。
English: The Taoist priest told the prefectural government to use a shovel to dig down as deep as possible to find an ancient tomb. The epitaph read: "The tomb of Zhuo Niang."

古文：道士说，宵中，初有甲兵与霞战，鬼败而溃散。
现代文：道士说，刚到半夜有甲兵和他战斗，鬼败而溃散。
English: The spiritualist said that just after midnight, there was a battle between a warrior and him, and the demon was defeated and dispersed.

古文：须臾，有一女子，年二十许，叩头谢，言是卓女郎。
现代文：一会儿有个女子，年龄约二十左右，叩谢说她是卓女。
English: After a while, a woman in her twenties came up to me and thanked me, saying she was a great girl.

古文：霞让之，答曰：非某过也，宿命有素。值爽及女命尽，且不修德，而强梁诬欺，自当尔。
现代文：乘霞责怪她，她回答说：不是我的过错，命运如此，恰好该牛爽和女儿命到头了，并且不修德行而蛮横欺诈，自然该这样。
English: Taking advantage of Xia to blame her, she replied, "It's not my fault, it's fate. It just so happens that the life of the cowherd and his daughter has come to an end, and he did not practice virtue, but cheated outrageously. Naturally, it should be like this."

古文：乘霞遂徙其坟，宅后不复凶矣。
现代文：乘霞就迁走了她的坟，宅子后来就不再凶了。
English: She moved her grave, and the house was no longer haunted.

古文：李咸
现代文：李咸
English: Li Xian

古文：太原王容与姨弟赵郡李咸，居相卫间。
现代文：太原王容和表弟赵郡的李咸，居住在相州卫州一带。
English: Wang Rong of Taiyuan and his cousin Li Xian of Zhao County live in the Weizhou area of Xiangzhou.

古文：永泰中，有故之荆襄，假公行乘传。次邓州，夜宿邮之厅。
现代文：永泰中，有事去荆襄，利用公差去乘坐驿车，次日到了邓州，晚上住在邮驿的大厅。
English: In Yongtai, I went to Jingxiang when I had something to do. I took advantage of a business trip to take a tuk-tuk. The next day, I arrived in Dengzhou. In the evening, I stayed in the lobby of the post office.

古文：时夏月，二人各据一床于东西间，仆隶息外舍。
现代文：当时是夏夜，两人各占用一张床在东西间，仆隶在外屋休息。
English: It was a summer evening, and the two of them occupied a bed each in the east-west room, while the servants rested in the outer room.

古文：二人相与言论，将夕各罢息，而王生窃不得寐。三更后，云月朦胧，而王卧视庭木。荫宇萧萧然，忽见厨屏间有一妇人窥觇，去而复还者再三。
现代文：两人互相说话，快到晚上各自休息。王容睡不着觉，三更后，云月朦胧，王容躺着看庭院中的树，荫宇萧萧，忽然看见厨屏间有一妇人偷看，去而往返三次。
English: The two of them talked to each other and rested separately until late in the evening. Wang Rong could not sleep. After the third shift, the clouds and moon were hazy. Wang Rong lay looking at the trees in the courtyard. The shadows were thick. Suddenly, he saw a woman peeking between the kitchen screens. He went back and forth three times.

古文：须臾出半身，绿裙红衫，素颜夺目。时又窃见李生起坐，招手以挑之。
现代文：过了一会儿，现出半身，绿裙红衫，白脸夺目，又看见李咸起身坐起来，抬手来挑逗她。
English: After a while, a half-length body, a green skirt, a red shirt, and a white face appeared, and he saw Li Xian get up, sit up, and raise his hand to tease her.

古文：王生谓李昔日有契，又必谓妇人是驿吏之妻，王生乃佯寐以窥其变。
现代文：王容以为李咸以前和她有约。又以为妇人一定是驿站差吏的妻子，王容就假装睡觉来静观其变。
English: Wang Rong thought that Li Xian had an appointment with her before. He also thought that the woman must be the wife of the station attendant. Wang Rong pretended to be asleep to watch her change.

古文：俄而李子起就妇人，相执于屏间，语切切然。久之，遂携手大门外。
现代文：一会儿李咸起身走近妇人，手挽手在屏间，言语切切的样子，过了很久，就携手出了大门外。
English: After a while, Li Xian stood up and approached the woman. They walked arm-in-arm between the screens, and spoke earnestly. After a long time, they walked out of the gate hand in hand.

古文：王生潜行阴处，遥觇之。二人俱坐，言笑殊狎。
现代文：王容偷偷地走到暗处，远远地偷看，两人都坐看，说笑着互相调情。
English: Wang Rong secretly went to the dark place and peeped from a distance. Both of them sat and watched, talked and laughed, and flirted with each other.

古文：须臾，见李独归，行甚急，妇人在外屏立以待。
现代文：一会儿，看见李咸独自回来，走得很快，妇人在外面站着等待。
English: After a while, Li Xian was seen returning alone, walking quickly, while the woman stood outside waiting.

古文：李入厨取烛，开出书笥，颜色惨凄。取纸笔作书，又取衣物等，皆缄题之。
现代文：李咸到厨房取出蜡烛，打开书囊，面色凄惨，拿出纸笔写字，又拿出衣物，都署上名字。
English: Li Xian went to the kitchen, took out a candle, opened the book bag, looked miserable, took out a pen and paper to write, took out clothes, and signed his name.

古文：王生窃见之，直谓封衣以遗妇人，辄不忍惊，伺其睡，乃拟掩执。
现代文：王容偷偷看到，只以为把衣服送给妇人，就不忍心惊动他，想等他睡，就偷偷抓住。
English: Wang Rong secretly saw this and thought he was just giving the woman some clothes, but he couldn't bear to wake him. He wanted to wait for him to fall asleep, so he secretly grabbed him.

古文：封衣毕，置床上却出。顾王生且睡，遂出屏，与妇人语。
现代文：李咸安排完衣服，放在床上就出去了，看见王容已经睡了，就出屏和妇人说话。
English: Li Xian finished arranging the clothes, put them on the bed and went out. When he saw that Wang Rong had fallen asleep, he went out to talk to the woman.

古文：久之，把被俱入下厅偏院。院中有堂，堂有床帐，供树森森然。
现代文：过了很久，拿着被去了，来至偏院，院中有堂屋，堂屋有床帐，树木森森的样子，已经进去一顿饭的功夫。
English: After a long time, I took it with me and went to the branch hospital. There was a hall in the hospital, the hall had a bedspread, the trees looked dead, and it took a lot of effort to get in for a meal.

古文：既入食顷，王生自度曰：我往袭之，必同私狎。
现代文：王容想到：我去偷袭他们，他们一定睡在一起。
English: Wang Rong thought: I'll sneak up on them, they must be sleeping together.

古文：乃持所卧枕往，潜欲惊之。比至入帘，正见李生卧于床，而妇人以披帛绞李之颈，咯咯然垂死。
现代文：就拿着枕头去了，偷偷地走想去惊吓他们，等到了帘内，正看见李咸躺在床上，妇人用衣带绞了李咸的脖子，李咸的样子快要死了。
English: She went there with a pillow, sneaking around to scare them, and when she got to the curtain, she saw Li Xian lying on the bed. The woman had wrung Li Xian's neck with a belt. Li Xian looked like he was about to die.

古文：妇人白面，长三尺余，不见面目，下按悉力以勒之。
现代文：妇人白脸，三尺多长，不见面目，下边按住李咸用尽力气来勒他。
English: The woman, white-faced and more than three feet long, did not meet his eyes. She held down Li Xian and tried her best to seduce him.

古文：王生仓卒惊叫，因以枕投之，不中，妇人遂走。
现代文：王容突然惊叫起来，就用枕头打她。没打着，妇人就跑了。
English: Wang Rong suddenly screamed in shock and hit her with a pillow. When she didn't, the woman ran away.

古文：王生乘势奔逐，直入西北隅厨屋中。据床坐，头及屋梁，久之方灭。
现代文：王容趁势追逐，妇人径直进入西北角的厨房中，在床上坐着，脑袋触到了房梁，很久才消失。
English: Wang Rong took advantage of the situation and chased after her. The woman went straight into the kitchen in the northwest corner and sat on the bed, her head touching the beam of the room, before disappearing for a long time.

古文：童隶闻呼声悉起，见李生毙，七窍流血，犹心稍煖耳。
现代文：仆童听到叫声都起来了，看见李咸死了，七窍流血，只是心口还热。
English: Hearing the screams, the servant boy got up and saw that Li Xian was dead, bleeding from his seven orifices, but his heart was still warm.

古文：方为招魂将养，及明而苏。
现代文：就为他招魂抢救，到天亮才苏醒过来。
English: He summoned the spirits to rescue him, and he did not wake up until dawn.

古文：王生取所封书开视之，乃是寄书与家人，叙以辞诀，衣物为信念。
现代文：王容拿来他写的书信打开一看，竟是寄信给家人，叙述告别，衣物为想念之物，没说去什么地方，但词句郑重。
English: Wang Rong took the letter he had written and opened it to see that it was actually a letter to his family, describing farewell, clothing as something to miss, not saying where to go, but the words were solemn.

古文：不陈所往。
现代文：读信读来恻隐怆然。
English: When I read the letter, I was stunned.

古文：但词句郑重，读书恻怆。及李生能言，问之，都不省记。但言仿佛梦一丽人，相诱去耳，诸不记焉。
现代文：等到李咸能说话了，问他，他都不能记得，只说仿佛梦见一个丽人，引诱他离开，其他的事都不记得了。
English: When Li Xian was able to speak, he asked him about it, but he couldn't remember anything. He only said that it was as if he had dreamed of a beautiful woman who had lured him away, and he couldn't remember anything else.

古文：驿之故吏云，旧传厕有神，失天中，已曾杀一客使。
现代文：驿站的老吏说：以前传说厕所有鬼神，先天年间，曾经杀死一个客使。
English: The station's veteran clerk said: "There used to be a legend that the toilets were haunted. A few years ago, a messenger was killed.

古文：此事王容逢人则说，劝人夜不令独寐。
现代文：此事王容逢人就说，告诫别人夜晚不能独自睡觉。
English: Wang Rong told everyone about this and warned others not to sleep alone at night.

古文：李昼
现代文：李昼
English: Li Rong

古文：李昼为许州吏，庄在扶沟。
现代文：李昼是许州官吏，庄子在扶沟。
English: Li Rong is an official in Huzhou, and Zhuangzi is in Fuguo.

古文：永泰二年春，因清明归，欲至泊梁河。
现代文：永泰二年的春天，清明回家，将到伯梁河，路旁有座坟墓，离大道约二十步。
English: In the spring of Yongtai's second year, Qingming went home and went to the Boyang River. There was a grave by the roadside, about twenty paces from the road.

古文：先是路旁有冢，去路约二十步，其上无草，牧童所戏。其夜，李昼忽见冢上有穴，大如盘，兼有火光。
现代文：那上面没草，是牧童游戏的场所。这天晚上，李昼忽然看见坟上有洞穴，大小象盘石，还有火光。
English: There was no grass on it, it was a place for shepherds to play. That evening, Li Rong suddenly saw a cave on the grave, the size of which was like a stone slab, and a firelight.

古文：昼异之，下马跻冢焉。见五女子，衣华服，依五方，坐而纫针。俱低头就烛，矻矻不歇。
现代文：李昼诧异，下马登上坟墓，看见五个女子身穿华丽的衣服，按五个方位坐着缝补，低着头凑近灯光，孜孜不停。
English: Surprised, Li Lun dismounted from his horse and climbed onto the tomb, where he saw five women dressed in gorgeous clothes, sitting and sewing in five directions, with their heads bowed as they approached the light, tirelessly working.

古文：昼叱之一声，五烛皆灭，五女亦失所在。
现代文：李昼呵叱了一声，五个烛光都灭了，五个女子也消失了。
English: Li Ronghao scolded her, the five candles were extinguished, and the five women also disappeared.

古文：昼恐，上马而走。
现代文：李昼害怕，上马而逃。
English: Li Rong was scared and got on his horse and ran away.

古文：未上大路，五炬火从冢出，逐昼。
现代文：没走上大道，五炬火光从坟里出来追赶李昼。
English: He did not go to the avenue, but the five torches came out of the grave to chase Li Rong.

古文：昼走不能脱，以鞭挥拂，为火所爇。近行十里。
现代文：李昼跑不掉，用马鞭挥打，被火烧着了，走了十里，才到伯梁河。
English: Li could not run away in the afternoon, he was whipped with a horse whip, burned by the fire, and walked ten miles to get to Bolianghe.

古文：方达伯梁河，有犬至，方灭。明日，看马尾被烧尽，及股胫亦烧损。
现代文：有人来了，灯火才灭。第二天看马尾巴被烧没了，大腿和小腿也烧伤了。
English: Someone came and the lights went out. The next day I saw that the horse's tail was burned off, and its thighs and lower legs were also burned.

古文：自后遂目此为五女冢，今存焉。
现代文：从此后就把这个坟看成五女坟，现在还保存在那里。
English: Since then, this grave has been regarded as the tomb of the five women, and it is still preserved there.

古文：元载
现代文：元载
English: Originally uploaded by

古文：大历九年春，中书侍郎平章事元载，早入朝，有献文章者，令左右收之。
现代文：大历九年春天，中书侍郎平章事元载早起上朝，有个献文章的人，元载让随从收下来。
English: In the spring of the 9th year of the lunar calendar, the author of the book of Chinese calligraphy, Lang Pingzhang, got up early in the morning. There was a person who offered an article, and the author let the follower receive it.

古文：此人若欲载读，载云：侯至中书，当为看。
现代文：这人想让元载读，元载说：等回到中书省，再为你看。
English: This person wanted Yuan Zang to read it, and Yuan Zang said, "Wait until you get back to the Chinese Literature Department, and then I'll read it for you."

古文：人言：若不能读，请自诵一首。
现代文：那人说：若不能读，让我自诵一首。
English: The man said, "If you can't read, let me recite a song."

古文：诵毕不见，方知非人耳。诗曰：城东城西旧居处，城里飞花乱如絮。
现代文：诵完就不见了，诗曰：城东城西旧居处，城里飞花乱如絮。
English: After reciting it, it disappeared. The poem said: "East of the city, west of the city, the old residence, the city is full of flying flowers.

古文：海燕啣泥欲下来，屋里无人却飞去。
现代文：海燕衔泥欲下来，屋里无人却飞去。
English: The petrel tries to fly down, but there is no one in the room.

古文：载后竟破家，妻子被杀云。
现代文：元载后来竟然家道败落，妻子和孩子都被杀了！
English: After all these years, the family has fallen apart, and the wife and children have both been killed!

古文：萧审
现代文：萧审
English: Xiao Jian

古文：萧审者，工部尚书旻之子，永泰中，为长洲令，性贪暴，然有理迹，邑人惧惮焉。
现代文：萧审是工部尚书萧旻的儿子。永泰年中为长洲令，性情贪婪暴戾，但有规律可循。
English: Xiao Jian is the son of the Ministry of Industry's Shangshu Xiao Jian. Yong Tai was a middle-aged man from Changzhou, and his temperament was greedy and violent, but there were rules to follow.

古文：审居长洲三年，前后取受无纪极。
现代文：邑人非常惧怕他，萧审在长洲三年，前前后后收取贿赂，无法无纪已到极点。
English: The townspeople are very afraid of him. Xiao Jian has been collecting bribes for three years in Cheung Chau, and his lack of discipline has reached the extreme.

古文：四年五月，守门者见紫衣人三十余骑，从外入门。
现代文：永泰四年五月，守门人看见身穿紫衣人三十多骑马的人从外边进入门内。
English: In May of the 4th year of Yongtai, the gatekeeper saw more than 30 people dressed in purple and riding horses enter the gate from the outside.

古文：迎问所以，骑初不言，直至堂院。厅内治书者皆见。
现代文：门人迎上去问干什么？骑马的人开始不说话，径直到堂院厅内，管书的人都看见了。
English: The doorkeeper met them and asked what they were doing. The man on the horse began not to speak, and walked all the way into the hall of the court, where everyone in charge of the books could see him.

古文：门者走入，白审曰：适有紫衣将军三十骑直入，不待通。
现代文：门人走进去告诉萧审，说：刚才有紫衣将军三十个，直扑进来，来不及通报。
English: The doorkeeper went in and told Xiao Qian, saying: "Just now, there were thirty purple-clad generals who rushed straight in, and it's too late to inform them.

古文：审问：其人安在？
现代文：萧审问：那些人在哪儿？
English: Xiao questioned: Where are those people?

古文：焉得不见？
现代文：怎么不见？
English: Why can't I see him?

古文：门者出至厅，须臾，见骑从内出，以白衫蒙审。步行。
现代文：门人出来到厅堂，一会儿，看见骑马的人从里边出来，用白衣服蒙住萧审步行出来。
English: The doorkeeper went out to the hall, and a moment later, he saw a man on a horse come out from inside, cover Xiao Zhen with a white robe, and walk out.

古文：门者又白奇事，审顾不言。诸吏送至门，不复见。
现代文：门人又说：奇事。萧审看着不能说话，几位官吏送到门口，不再见到他们了。
English: The doorkeeper also said: "It's a miracle. Xiao Zhen looked speechless, several officials were sent to the door, and they were no longer seen.

古文：俄闻内哭，方委审卒。
现代文：过了一会儿，听到里面哭声，才知道萧审死了。
English: After a while, I heard crying inside and knew that Xiao Xian was dead.

古文：后七日，其弟宇复墓，忽倒地作审灵语，责宇不了家事，数十百言。又云：安胡者，将吾米二百石，绢八十匹，经纪求利。今幸我死，此胡辜恩，已走矣。明日食时，为物色捉之。
现代文：七天后，他弟弟萧宇去扫墓，忽然倒地成了萧审显灵传语，责怪萧宇不管家事，说了几百句话，又说：安胡这个人，将我的米二百石，绢八十匹，拿去经营挣钱，现在安胡庆幸我死了，他辜负我的恩情也跑了，明天吃饭的时候，准备抓他。
English: Seven days later, his younger brother Xiao Yu went to sweep the grave, and suddenly fell to the ground and became a preacher of Xiao Jin Xian Ling. He blamed Xiao Yu for not taking care of the housework, and said several hundred words. He also said: Anhu, this person, took my 200 kilos of rice and 80 yakitori to earn money. Now Anhu is glad that I am dead. He betrayed my kindness and ran away. I am going to catch him tomorrow at dinner time.

古文：宇还至舍，记事白嫂，嫂尔日亦灵语云然。
现代文：萧宇回家，将他所记得的这些事情说给嫂子听，嫂女也传灵语这样说。
English: Xiao Yu went home and told these things he remembered to his sister-in-law, and her sister-in-law also passed on the spirit to say so.

古文：宇具以白刺史常元甫，元甫令押衙候捉，果得安胡。
现代文：萧宇就详细地告诉了刺史常元甫。元甫命令衙役等候捉他，果然捉住了安胡。
English: Xiao Yu told his story in detail to the chief of police, Changyuanfu, who ordered the police to wait for him to be caught, and Anhu was indeed caught.

古文：米绢具在，初又云：米是己钱，绢是枉法物，可施之。
现代文：米、绢都在，萧审又说：米是自己的钱买的，绢是贪赃枉法之物，可以施舍给别人。
English: Both rice and bean curd were there, and Xiao Jian said, "The rice was bought with my own money, but the bean curd is something that can be given to others.

古文：宇竟施绢。
现代文：萧宇就全部施舍了绢。
English: Xiao Yu gave away everything.

