古文：分威者，神之覆也。
现代文：发挥威力，要效法伏在地上准备出击的熊。
English: To exert power, follow the example of a bear crouching on the ground ready to strike.

古文：故静意固志，神归其舍，则威覆盛矣。
现代文：只有在旺盛的精神笼罩之下，威力才能充分发挥。所以，要使志向坚定，思想安静，精神集中，威力才能盛大。
English: Only under the strong spirit can the power be fully exerted. Therefore, it is necessary to make the ambition firm, the thought quiet, the spirit concentrated, and the power can be grand.

古文：威覆盛，则内实坚；内实坚，则莫当；莫当，则能以分人之威而动其势，如其天。
现代文：威力发挥要盛大，凭着内部的充实坚定；内部充实坚定，威力发出便没有谁能抵挡。没有谁能抵挡就能以发出的威力震动别人，那威势像天一样无不覆盖。
English: The display of power should be grand, and it should be based on inner strength and steadfastness; if the inner strength and steadfastness are strong, no one can resist the power. If no one can resist, it can shake others with the power it emits. That power covers everything like the sky.

古文：以实取虚，以有取无，若以镒称铢。
现代文：这便是用坚实去对付虚弱，用有威力去对付无威力。这就好像 镒 和 铢 比较一样，相差悬殊。
English: This is to use the solid to deal with the weak, and to use the powerful to deal with the powerless. This is like comparing  and, the difference is very great.

古文：故动者必随，唱者必和。
现代文：所以，只要一动便一定有人跟从，一唱便一定有人附和。
English: Therefore, as long as there is a movement, there must be someone to follow, and there must be someone to sing.

古文：挠其一指，观其余次，动变见形，无能间者。
现代文：只要弯动一个指头，便可看到其他指头的变化。威势一发出，就可使情况发生变化，没有谁能够阻挡。
English: As long as you bend one finger, you can see the changes in the other fingers. Once the power is released, it can change the situation, and no one can stop it.

古文：审于唱和，以间见间，动变明而威可分也。
现代文：对唱和的状况进行周详考察可以发现对方的任何间隙明了活动变化的情况，于是威力就可以发挥出来。
English: A thorough examination of the situation of singing and chanting can find any gap in the other party's activity changes, so the power can be exerted.

古文：将欲动变，必先养志以视间。
现代文：自己要活动变化，一定先要培养志向、隐蔽意图，从而观察对方的间隙，把握住时机。
English: If you want to change your activities, you must first cultivate aspirations and hidden intentions, so as to observe the other side's gap and seize the opportunity.

古文：知其固实者，自养也。让己者，养人也。
现代文：使自己思想意志充实坚定，是养护自己的方法；自己讲求退让，便是使别人驯服的方法。
English: To enrich and strengthen one's mind and will is the way to preserve oneself; to ask for concessions oneself is the way to tame others.

古文：故神存兵亡，乃为知形势。
现代文：所以，能够 神存兵亡 ，即精神专注而进击之势毫不表现出来，那便是大有可为的形势。
English: Therefore, it is a very promising situation to be able to survive, that is, to concentrate the spirit and attack without showing any potential.

