古文：僧令因
现代文：僧令因
English: So-Ryoin is gone

古文：僧令因者，于子午谷过山，往金州。
现代文：令因和尚，从子午谷过山，到金州去。
English: Lingyin Monk, from the meridian valley over the mountain, go to Jinzhou.

古文：见一竹舆先行，有女仆服慷从之。
现代文：看见一个竹轿在前面行走，有个女仆穿着丧服跟着，好几天，始终看不见轿中的人。
English: I saw a bamboo cart go ahead, followed by a maid in mourning clothes. For several days, I couldn't see the people in the cart.

古文：数日，终不见人，令因乃急引帘窥之。一妇，人首而蛇身甚伟，令因甚惊。妇人曰： 不幸业重，身忽变化，上人何乃窥之？ 
现代文：令因于是急忙掀起帘子暗中看那轿子，里面是个妇女，长着人的头蛇的身子很是雄伟。令因非常吃惊，那妇女说： 我很不幸，因罪孽深重，身子忽然发生变化，上人你为什么偷看呢？ 
English: So Ling Yan hastily raised the curtain to secretly look at the palanquin. Inside was a woman. The body of the snake with a human head was very majestic. Ling Yan was very surprised. The woman said: "I am very unfortunate, because of my sins, my body has suddenly changed. Master, why are you peeping?

古文：问其仆曰： 欲送秦岭之上。 
现代文：问她的仆人，仆人说： 准备送到秦岭上去。 
English: He asked her servant, and the servant said, "Prepare to be sent to Qinling Mountain.

古文：令因遂与诵功德，送及秦岭，亦不见妇人之首，而入林中矣。
现代文：令因于是给她诵念功德经。一直送到秦岭，也没有再看见那妇女露头，而是进到树林中去了。
English: So he chanted the Meritorious Deeds to her. He drove all the way to Qinling and never saw the woman again. Instead, he went into the woods.

古文：卫中丞姊
现代文：卫中丞姊
English: Wei Zhongzheng's sister

古文：御史中丞卫公有姊，为性刚戾毒恶，婢仆鞭笞多死。
现代文：御史中丞卫公有个姐姐，为人性格刚烈乖戾而且恶毒，她的仆人有不少被她用鞭子和木杖打死。
English: The Imperial Historian, Chujo-Weigong, had an older sister, who was a stubborn, ill-tempered and vicious person. Many of her servants were beaten to death by her with a whip and a wooden cane.

古文：忽得热疾六七日，自云： 不复见人。 
现代文：忽然她得了热病六、七天了，自己说： 不再见人了。 
English: Suddenly she fell ill with a fever for six or seven days, and said to herself, "I shall never see another person again."

古文：常独闭室，而欲至者，必嗔喝呵怒。
现代文：常常独自一人关着屋子。那些想来看望她的人，一定会受到她的责备、喊叫、呵斥、怒骂。
English: She would often lock herself in her room, and anyone who tried to visit her would be scolded, shouted at, yelled at, and yelled at.

古文：经十余日，忽闻屋中窸窣有声，潜来窥之，升堂，便觉腥臊毒气，开牖，已见变为一大蛇，长丈余，作赤斑色，衣服爪发，散在床褥。
现代文：过了十多天，忽然听见屋子里窸窸窣窣的声音，有人暗中来看，走上堂屋的台阶，就觉得出腥气臊气毒气，打开窗户，就看见她变成了一条大蛇，长一丈多，身上是斑斑点点的红色，衣服和四肢头发，散放在床褥上。
English: After more than ten days, she suddenly heard a rattling sound in the house. Someone sneaked in to take a look, walked up the steps of the house, and felt a stench, a poisonous gas. When she opened the window, she saw that she had turned into a big snake. She was much taller, and her body was speckled with red spots. Her clothes and the hair of her limbs were scattered on the mattress.

古文：众共送之于野，盖性暴虐所致也。
现代文：那条蛇睁着一双生气的眼睛追赶人，一家人又惊又怕，大家就一起把蛇送到野外。这大概是性情暴虐导致的结果。
English: The snake chased the man with angry eyes. The family was shocked and afraid, so they sent the snake out into the wild together. This was probably the result of a violent temperament.

古文：蒲州人
现代文：蒲州人
English: People from Gushu

古文：蒲州人穿地作井，坎深丈余，遇一方石而不及泉。欲去石更凿，忽堕深坑。
现代文：有个蒲州人挖地打井，挖下去一丈多深，遇到一块方形石头，还没挖到泉水，想搬去石头再继续挖，忽然掉到一个深坑中去。
English: A man from the city of Puzhou was digging a well. As he was digging deeper and deeper, he came across a square stone. Before he had dug a spring, he wanted to move the stone and continue digging. Suddenly, he fell into a deep pit.

古文：蛰蛇如覆舟，小者与凡蛇等。
现代文：坑中，冬眠的蛇象翻倒的船一样，小蛇与平常的蛇大小相等。
English: In the pit, the hibernating snakes are like overturned boats, and the small snakes are the same size as ordinary snakes.

古文：其人初甚惊惧，久之稍熟。
现代文：那个人开始时很害怕，时间一长稍微熟悉了。
English: The man was scared at first, and over time became a little familiar.

古文：饥无所食。其蛇吸气，因亦效之，遂不复饥。
现代文：饿了没有吃的，那些蛇吸气，因而那个人也仿效蛇的作法，于是就不再饿了。
English: Hungry and with nothing to eat, the snakes inhaled, so the man did the same and was no longer hungry.

古文：积累月，闻雷声。
现代文：总共有一个月左右，听到雷声。
English: In total, I heard thunder for about a month.

古文：初一声，蛇乃起首，须臾悉动，顷之散去，大者前去，相次出复入。
现代文：第一声雷，蛇的头就抬起来了，一会儿全都动起来，不久全分散离开。
English: At the first clap of thunder, the snake's head lifted up, and for a moment they all moved, and soon they all dispersed.

古文：人知不害己，乃前抱其项，蛇遂径去。缘上白道，如行十里，前有烽火，乃致人于地而去。
现代文：大蛇往前走离开了，一个挨一个地出去后，又回来了，那人知道蛇不会害自己，就上前去抱住蛇的脖子，蛇就一直走开，爬上白道的时候，象是走了十里路，前面有烽火，就把那人放在地上离开了。
English: The big snake went ahead and left. After going out one by one, it came back. The man knew that the snake would not harm himself, so he went forward and hugged the snake's neck. The snake kept walking away. When he climbed the white road, it seemed like he had walked ten miles. There was a bonfire in front of him, so he put the man on the ground and left.

古文：人往借问烽者，云是平州也。
现代文：那人前去询问管烽火的人，说这里是平州。
English: The man went to ask the person in charge of the bonfire and said that this was Pingzhou.

古文：相魏贫民
现代文：相魏贫民
English: With the poor of Wei and Wei

古文：相魏有贫民，斸园荒地，见一大蛇，而杀之。寻见一大穴，穴中十余小蛇，又复杀而埋之，既毕归家。
现代文：相魏地方有个贫民，挖园里的荒地，看见了一条大蛇，用锄头把它打死了，不久又看见一个大洞穴，洞穴中有十多条小蛇，又杀了并埋了起来，事后就回家了。
English: There was a poor man in Xiangwei who was digging in the wasteland of his garden. He saw a big snake and killed it with a hoe. Soon after, he saw a big cave with more than ten small snakes in it. He killed and buried them, and then went home.

古文：明日，有人持状诉论云： 被杀一家大小，埋在园中。 
现代文：第二天，有人拿着状子起诉说：被杀的一家大小，埋在园子里。
English: The next day, someone came with a complaint and said: "A whole family was killed and buried in the garden."

古文：官捕获此人讯问，了然不伏。于园中验之，得一坑者，共十余人。
现代文：官府捉来那个贫民问情况，明明白白地说不服气，到园中检验，找到一个坑，共十多人。
English: The government caught the poor man to ask him about the situation, and he was clearly not convinced. He went to the park to inspect it, and found a pit, a total of more than ten people.

古文：但言昨打杀者十余条蛇，埋之于此，并不杀人，不知此祸何来。若为就决，实为大枉。
现代文：那个贫民只说昨天打死了十多条蛇，埋在这个地方，并没有杀人，不知这个祸灾是从哪里来的，如果因此而判我死刑，实在是太冤枉。
English: The poor man only said that he had killed more than ten snakes yesterday and buried them in this place. He did not kill anyone. I do not know where this evil came from. If I am sentenced to death for this, it would be too unjust.

古文：官疑之，勘本告者，寻觅无人，又令重就园，检验昨所埋之处，但见十余死蛇，不复见人，乃得免焉。
现代文：当官的对此事起了疑心，要核对一下原告人，找了半天没找到，又命令重新到园里去，检验一下昨天埋人的地方，只看见十多条死蛇，不再是人了，于是贫民被免了刑罚。
English: The officials became suspicious of this matter and wanted to check the plaintiff. After searching for half a day, they did not find him. They also ordered him to go to the garden again and check the place where people were buried yesterday. They only saw more than ten dead snakes, which were no longer people, so the poor man was exempted from punishment.

古文：番禺书生
现代文：番禺书生
English: Panyu's students sing

古文：有书生游番禺，历诸郡。
现代文：有个书生到番禺游玩，走遍了各个郡。
English: A student went to Panyu to play and traveled all over the counties.

古文：经山中，见有气高丈余，如烟。
现代文：经过山中的时候，看见有股一丈多高象烟一样的气柱。
English: As I passed through the mountains, I saw a column of gas as tall as a plume of smoke.

古文：乡人曰： 此冈子蛇吞象也。 
现代文：乡里人说： 这里冈子上的蛇在吞吃大象。 
English: The villager said, "Here, the snake on the hill is eating the elephant."

古文：遂告乡里，振鼓叫噪，而蛇退入一岩谷中。
现代文：于是遍告乡里，人们打鼓叫喊，蛇就退到一个山谷中去。
English: So they called out across the countryside, people beating drums and shouting, and the snake retreated into a valley.

古文：经宵，乡里人各持缻瓮往，见一象尚立，而肌骨皆化为水。遂针破，取其水。
现代文：过了一宿，乡里人各个带着缶和瓮前去。就见一只象还立着，可是肌肉骨头全化成水，就用针扎破，取里面的水。
English: After an overnight stay, the villagers each went with a can and a shovel. They saw an elephant still standing, but the muscles and bones had completely turned into water. They pricked it with a needle to get the water inside.

古文：里人云，此过海置舟中，辟去蛟龙。
现代文：乡里人说： 这种水在渡海的时候放在船里，能躲避蛟龙。 
English: The villager said, "This kind of water can be kept in the boat when crossing the sea to avoid the dragon.

古文：又有官人于南中见一大蛇，长数丈，径可一尺五寸。
现代文：又有一个做官的人在南中看见一条大蛇，长有好几丈。
English: There was also an official who saw a large snake, several feet long, in the middle of the South.

古文：腹内有物，如椓橛之类，沿一树食其叶，腹中之物，渐消无所有。
现代文：直径大约有一尺五寸，肚子里有个东西，象是木桩之类，顺着一棵树吃树叶，肚子里的东西，渐渐地消化没有了。
English: It was about a foot and a half in diameter, and it had something in its stomach, like a stake or something, and it was following a tree and eating leaves, and what was in its stomach was gradually digested and gone.

古文：而里人云： 此蛇吞鹿，此木叶能消之。 
现代文：乡里人说： 这条大蛇吞吃了鹿，这种树叶能助消化。 
English: The villager said, "This big snake swallowed a deer. This kind of leaf can help digestion."

古文：遂令从者采其叶收之，归后，或食不消，腹胀，乃取其叶作汤饮之。
现代文：于是命令跟从的人采下那树的叶子收藏起来。回家以后，有一次吃了饭消化不好，肚子胀，就拿出那树叶熬汤喝。
English: So he ordered his followers to pick up the leaves of the tree and store them. Once, after returning home, he had trouble digesting his meal and his stomach was distended, so he took out the leaves to make soup and drank it.

古文：经宵，及午不报。及撤被视之，唯残枯骸，余化为水矣。
现代文：过了一宿，到中午也没有反应，等到掀开被子看他，只剩下枯骨了，别的都成水了。
English: After one night, there was no response by noon. When I lifted the quilt to look at him, only dead bones remained, everything else had turned to water.

古文：郫县民
现代文：郫县民
English: Residents of Handan County

古文：郫县有民于南郭渠边得一小蛇，长尺余，刳剔五脏，盘而串之，置于火，焙之数日。
现代文：郫县有个农民在城南的水渠边捉到一条小蛇，长一尺多，剖开肚子取出五脏，然后盘起来串上，放到火上，烘烤了好几天。
English: A farmer in Handan County caught a small snake on the edge of a canal in the south of the city. It was more than a foot long. He cut open its belly and took out its guts. Then he put it on a skewer, put it on the fire, and baked it for several days.

古文：民家孩子数岁，忽遍身肿赤，皮肤炮破，因自语曰： 汝家无状杀我，刳剔腹中胃，置于火上。且令汝儿知此痛苦。 
现代文：农民家有个才几岁的孩子，忽然全身红肿，皮肤起泡破裂，接着自语说： 你们家无缘无故杀了我，剖开并剔除肚子里的脏胃，还放到火上烤，且让你的儿子知道一下这种痛苦。 
English: A farmer's son, who was only a few years old, suddenly became red and swollen, and his skin broke out in blisters. Then he said to himself, "Your family killed me for no reason. They cut open my stomach, removed the stomach lining, and roasted it on the fire. Let your son know the pain."

古文：民家闻之惊异，取蛇拔去刬竹，以水洒之，焚香祈谢，送于旧所。良久，蜿蜒而去，儿亦平愈焉。
现代文：农民家里听了这话很惊异，取来蛇拔去竹签，用水往蛇身上洒，烧香祈祷道歉，送到捉蛇的地方，很久后，弯弯曲曲地爬走了，孩子的病也好了。
English: The farmer's family was very surprised to hear this. They took the snake, pulled out the bamboo stick, sprinkled the snake with water, burned incense and prayed for an apology, and sent it to the place where the snake was caught. After a long time, it crawled away, and the child's illness was cured.

古文：游邵
现代文：游邵
English: You Shao

古文：汝州鲁山县所治，即元魏时西广州也。今子城东南有妖神祠，其前庭广袤数百步，古老云，当时大球场也。
现代文：汝州是鲁山县管辖的地方，就是元魏时期的西广州，现在鲁山县城的东南方有个妖神祠，祠庙前面的庭院面积有几百步见方。很古时传下来说，这是当时的大球场。
English: Ruzhou was under the jurisdiction of Lushan County, that is, West Guangzhou during the Yuan and Wei Dynasties. Now, there is a demon shrine in the southeast of Lushan County. The courtyard area in front of the temple is several hundred paces square. In ancient times, it was said that this was the grand stadium at that time.

古文：正门左右双槐各二十围，枝干扶疏，亦云当时植焉。
现代文：祠的正门左右两边有一对槐树，各有二十围粗，枝干长得茂盛分披，也说是当时栽种的。
English: On the right and left sides of the main gate of the ancestral hall, there is a pair of eucalyptus trees, each with a circumference of twenty meters, the branches and trunks grow luxuriantly, and it is also said that they were planted at that time.

古文：至中和初岁，衅起东夏，郡邑骚然。
现代文：到了中和初年，从东夏引起了事端，县城里的人一片混乱。
English: In the middle and first year, Dongxia caused an incident, and the people in the county town were in chaos.

古文：刺史游邵，许将也，令属县伐木为栅以自固，虽桑柘梓槚，靡有孑遗。
现代文：刺史游邵，是个受人赞许的将军，他命令所属的县，砍伐树木造成栅拦来保护自己，即使是桑、柘、梓、槚等珍贵树木，全都砍了，也准备砍这一对槐树。
English: Zhishiyu Shao, a popular general, ordered his county to cut down trees and build fences to protect themselves. Even precious trees such as mulberry, maple, wisteria, and alder have all been cut down, and they are preparing to cut down this pair of eucalyptus trees.

古文：将伐双槐，其夕，有巨蟒蟠于上，声若震霆，目若飞星。
现代文：那天晚上，有条巨蟒盘踞在树上，发出的声音象雷霆一样，双眼象闪烁的星星。
English: That night, a great egret perched on a tree emitted a sound like thunder and its eyes were like twinkling stars.

古文：镇将李璠主其事，璠武人也，闻之以为妖，且率徒亲斩之，下斧而流血雨迸，腥气薄人，亦心动而止。
现代文：镇守当地的将军李璠主持这件事，李璠是个武将，听说了这是妖怪，就亲自率领人杀蟒，斧子砍下去流血象大雨一样迸溅，腥气逼人，也就动了心停了手。
English: The town's local general, Li Yu, presided over the event. Li Yu was a military commander. When he heard that it was a monster, he personally led the people to kill the dragonfly. He cut it down with an axe, and the blood spattered like heavy rain. The stench was overpowering. He was moved and stopped his hand.

古文：双槐至今尚存。
现代文：那一对槐树到现在还活着。
English: The pair of eucalyptus trees are still alive.

古文：成汭
现代文：成汭
English: Succeeded by

古文：荆州节度使成汭领蔡州军，戍江陵，为节度使张璝谋害之，遂弃本都，奔于秭归。
现代文：荆州节度使成汭统领蔡州军，戍守在江陵，被江陵节度使张璝所谋害，就抛弃了自己的大本营，朝着秭旧奔去。
English: The Jingzhou Festival made Cheng Kuo lead the Caizhou Army, and he stayed in Jiangling. Zhang Kuo, who was killed by the Jiangling Festival, abandoned his base camp and ran towards the old city.

古文：一夜为巨蛇绕身，几至于殒，乃曰： 苟有所负，死生唯命。 
现代文：一天夜里被一条巨蛇缠住了身子，几乎送了命。就说： 假如我做了对不起你的事，是死是活全听你的。 
English: One night, he was entangled by a giant snake and almost lost his life. He said, "If I have done something to offend you, I am at your mercy whether I live or die."

古文：逡巡，蛇亦亡去。
现代文：一会儿，蛇也走开了。
English: After a while, the snake also walked away.

古文：迩后招缉户口，训练士卒，移镇渚宫。寻受节旄，抚绥凋残，励精为理。
现代文：这以后招集会合人口，训练士兵，转移地方镇守渚宫，接着又受到朝廷的承认，安抚残余部队，振奋精神进行治理。
English: After that, the assembly recruited and recruited people, trained soldiers, transferred local town guards to Nagisa Palace, and then received recognition from the imperial court, pacified the remaining troops, and encouraged the spirit to govern.

古文：初年，居民唯一十七家，末年至万户，勤王奉国，通商务农，有足称焉。
现代文：第一年，居民只有一十七家，到后来人口达到一万户。为朝廷尽力，遵奉国家，沟通商业从事农耕生产，很有值得称道的。
English: In the first year, there were only seventeen residents, and later the population reached ten thousand. It is very commendable to do one's best for the imperial court, obey the state, communicate business and engage in agricultural production.

古文：朝廷号北韩南郭。
现代文：朝廷称为北韩南郭。
English: The imperial court was called the North Korean South Fortress.

古文：孙光宪
现代文：孙光宪
English: Sun Guangxian

古文：孙光宪曾行次敍谷，宿于神山，见岭上板屋中，以木根为巨虺，前列香灯。
现代文：孙光宪曾经路过敍谷，住在神山，看见山岭上的木屋中，用树根雕成一条大蛇，前面排列着香和灯火。
English: Sun Guangxian once passed through Shibuya, lived in Kamiyama, and saw a large snake carved from tree roots in a wooden house on the mountain, with incense and lights arranged in front of it.

古文：因诘店叟： 彼何神也？ 
现代文：因而询问开店的老人说： 那是什么神？ 
English: So he asked the old man who owned the shop, "What kind of god is that?"

古文：叟曰： 光化中，杨守亮镇褒日，有一蛇横此岭路，高七八尺，莫知其首尾，四面小蛇翼之无数。每一拖身，即林木摧折，殆旬半方过尽，阻绝行旅。
现代文：老人说： 光化年间，杨守亮镇守褒地的时候，有一条蛇横在这山岭的路上，高有七八尺，不知道它从头到尾有多长，四面有无数小蛇簇拥着大蛇，每挪动一下蛇身，林中的树林就被压断一些，大约过了十五天才过完，阻挡隔断了旅行的人。
English: The old man said: During the Gwanghwa era, when Yang Shouliang was in charge of Baodi, there was a snake lying on the road of this mountain range. It was seven or eight feet high. I don't know how long it was from end to end. There were countless small snakes on all sides of the snake. Every time the snake moved, the trees in the forest were crushed a little. It took about fifteen days to pass, blocking the traveler.

古文：因聚草焚燎路隅，虑其遗毒，然后方行。 
现代文：接着聚些干草烧燎一下路面和角落，担心有蛇留下的毒气。然后才开始通行。 
English: Next, some hay is gathered to burn the pavement and corners, fearing the poisonous gas left by the snake. Then traffic begins.

古文：明年，杨伏诛。
现代文：第二年，杨守亮被诛杀。
English: The following year, Yang Shouliang was beaten to death.

古文：朱汉宾
现代文：朱汉宾
English: Zhu Hanbin

古文：梁贞明中，朱汉宾镇安禄之初，忽一日，曙色才辨，有大蛇见于城之西南。
现代文：五代梁贞明年间，朱汉宾镇守安禄的初期，忽然有一天，天刚露出一点曙色时，有条大蛇出现在城的西南方。
English: Five generations of Liang Zhen, in the early years of Zhu Hanbin's tenure, suddenly one day, when the sky was just beginning to brighten, a large snake appeared in the southwestern part of the city.

古文：首枕大城，尾拖于壕南岸土地庙中，其魁可大如五斗器，双目如电，呀巨吻，以瞰于城。
现代文：蛇头枕在大城上，尾巴拖在城壕南岸的土地庙里，它的头大得象能盛五斗米的器具，双目象闪电一样，张开巨口，向城里看。
English: The snake's head rests on the great city, its tail drags in the earth temple on the south bank of the trench. Its head is large like a device that can hold five buckets of rice, and its eyes are like lightning, opening its huge mouth and looking into the city.

古文：其身不翅百尺，粗可数围，跨于羊马之堞，兼壕池之上。其余尚蟠于庙垣之内。
现代文：蛇的身上没长翅，长有一百尺，有几围那么粗，横架在羊马城堞和城壕上，其余部分还盘踞在庙墙之内。
English: The body of the snake did not have long wings. It was a hundred feet long and several times as thick. It was suspended on the ramparts and trenches, and the rest of it was entrenched within the temple walls.

古文：有宿城军校，卒然遇之，大呼一声，失魂而逝。一州恼惧，莫知其由。
现代文：有个住在城里的士兵，突然遇上了蛇，吓得大叫一声，丧魂落魄就死去了，一州人都很害怕，不知道蛇的来由。
English: A soldier who lived in the city suddenly encountered a snake, screamed in fright, lost his soul and died. Everyone in Ichizhou was very scared and did not know the origin of the snake.

古文：来年，淮寇非时而至，围城攻讨，数日不破而返。
现代文：第二年，淮地的盗匪突然到了城下，把城围起来攻打，打了几天没有攻破城，就回去了。
English: In the second year, the bandits from Huai suddenly arrived at the foot of the city, surrounded the city and attacked it. After several days of fighting, they did not break through the city and went back.

古文：岂神祇之先告欤？
现代文：难道是这神预先发出的警告吗？
English: Was this God's pre-emptive warning?

古文：牛存节
现代文：牛存节
English: Cow Survival Day

古文：梁牛存节镇郓州，于子城西南角大兴一第。
现代文：梁代牛存节镇守郓州，在小城的西南角兴建一座大府第。
English: Liangdai Niu Cunjie Zhengu guarded Luzhou, and built a large prefecture in the southwest corner of the small city.

古文：因板筑穿地，得蛇一穴，大小无数。
现代文：因为用板筑法修墙，穿透了地面，底下是个蛇洞，洞里有无数的大蛇小蛇。
English: Because the wall was built using the board construction method, it penetrated the ground, and there was a snake pit underneath. There were countless snakes in the hole.

古文：存节命杀之，载于野外，十数车载之方尽。
现代文：牛存节命令把蛇全杀死，运到野外去，用十几辆车才装运完毕。
English: On the day of the cattle preservation festival, the order was given to kill all the snakes and transport them to the field. It took more than a dozen vehicles to complete the shipment.

古文：时有人云： 此蛇薮也。 
现代文：当时有人说： 这是蛇的聚居的地方。 
English: At the time, someone said: "This is a place where snakes live.

古文：是岁，存节疽背而薨。
现代文：这一年，牛存节背上生了个疽疮，接着死了。
English: That year, the cow developed a gangrene on its back and died.

古文：水清池
现代文：水清池
English: Suishinchi Pond

古文：太原属邑有水清池，本府祈祷雨泽及投龙之所也。
现代文：太原的属城有个水清池，是本府祈祷求雨，投拜龙神的地方。
English: The city of Taiyuan has a water purification pond, which is the place where the government prays for rain and worships the Dragon God.

古文：后唐庄宗未过河南时，就郡捕猎，就池卓帐，为憩宿之所。
现代文：后来唐庄宗还未打过河南时，在离郡不远处打猎，在水清池边上架立帐篷，作为休息睡觉的地方。
English: Later, when Tang Zhuozong had not yet been to Henan, he hunted not far from the county and set up a tent on the edge of the Suiqing Pool as a place to rest and sleep.

古文：忽见巨蛇数头自洞穴中出，皆入池中。
现代文：忽然就见有几条大蛇从洞穴中爬出来，都进水清池里去了。
English: Suddenly, he saw several large snakes crawling out of the cave, and they all went into the pond.

古文：良久，有一蛇红白色，遥见可围四尺以来，其长称是。
现代文：呆了很长时间，又有一条长着红白颜色的大蛇，远远地看粗有四尺左右，长度与粗细很相称。
English: After staying for a long time, there was another big snake with red and white stripes. From a distance, it looked about four feet thick, and the length was commensurate with the thickness.

古文：猎卒齐彀弩连发，射之而毙。
现代文：打猎的兵卒们一起连发弓箭，把大蛇射死了。
English: The hunting soldiers fired their bows and arrows in unison and shot the snake dead.

古文：四山火光。池中鱼鳖咸死，浮在水上。
现代文：城四面的山出现火光，水清池里的鱼鳖也全死了，浮在水面上。
English: The mountains on all sides of the city were ablaze, and the fish in the pool were dead, floating on the surface of the water.

古文：猎夫辈共刲剥食之，其肉甚美。
现代文：猎卒们就一起动手割肉剥皮吃蛇，蛇肉味道很美。
English: The hunters cut the meat, peel the skin and eat the snake together. The snake meat tastes very good.

古文：庄宗寻知之，于时谄事者，以为克梁之兆，有五台僧曰： 吾王宜速过河决战，将来梁祚，其能久乎？ 
现代文：庄宗不久也知道了这件事。当时有献媚讨好的人，认为这是打败梁国的预兆。有个五台山僧人说： 大王您应该快些过河与梁国决战。将来的梁国强大起来，还能打败吗？ 
English: Zhuangzong soon learned about this. At that time, there were flatterers who thought that this was an omen of defeating Liang. A Wutaishan monk said: Great King, you should quickly cross the river and fight a decisive battle with Liang. Will Liang become strong in the future, and can it be defeated?

古文：此亦断白蛇之类也。
现代文：这也是汉高祖斩白蛇一类的事啊。
English: This is also a kind of thing that Henkel's ancestors did.

古文：王思同
现代文：王思同
English: Wang Sitong

古文：后唐少帝朝，清泰王起于岐阳，朝廷诏西京留守王思同统禁旅征之。
现代文：后唐少帝主持朝政的时候，清泰王在岐阳起兵反叛。朝廷下命令让西京留守王思同统帅皇上的亲兵去征伐他。
English: When the Young Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty presided over the imperial government, the King of Qing Tai revolted in Qiyang. The imperial court ordered Wang Si, who remained in West Beijing, to lead the emperor's own soldiers to conquer him.

古文：王师西出之后，寻闻劘垒，雍京僚属日登西楼，望其捷书。
现代文：王师西征之后，不久就听说已经逼近叛军的营垒。留守京城的官僚们，天天登上西城门楼，盼望王思同的捷报。
English: After Wang Shih's expedition to the West, it was soon heard that the rebels' camp was approaching. The bureaucrats who remained in Beijing climbed the West Gate Tower every day, hoping for a good report from Wang Shitong.

古文：忽一日，官僚凭槛西向，见羊马城上有二大蛇，东西以首相向，为从者辈遥掷弹丸以警之。
现代文：忽然有一天，官僚们扶着槛栏向西看，只见羊马城上有两条大蛇，一东一西，蛇头相对着，随从人员扔弹丸给予警告。
English: Suddenly one day, the bureaucrats leaned on the threshold and looked to the west, only to see two large snakes in Yangma City, one to the east and one to the west, with the heads of the snakes facing each other, and the attendants throwing projectiles to give a warning.

古文：于时一人掷中东蛇之脑，蜿蜒然堕于墙下，挺然不动。
现代文：当时有一个人打中了东面那条蛇的脑袋，蛇就扭动着身子掉到羊马墙下，挺直着身子一动不动。
English: At that time, a person hit the head of the snake on the east side, and the snake wiggled its body and fell under the sheep and horse wall, straightening its body and not moving.

古文：使人视之，已卒矣。
现代文：派人去看那蛇，已经死了。
English: Send someone to check on the snake. It's dead.

古文：其西蛇徐徐入于穴巢之间。
现代文：西面那条蛇却慢慢地进入洞穴空隙之间。
English: The snake on the west side, however, slowly crawled into the gap between the caverns.

古文：识者窃议之曰： 潞王乙巳生，统帅王公亦乙巳生，俱为蛇相，今东蛇中脑而卒，岂非王师不利乎？ 
现代文：有明白的人私下议论说： 潞王是乙巳年出生，统帅王思同公也是乙巳年出生，都是蛇的象征，现在东面的蛇被打中脑袋死了，难道不是对王师不利吗？ 
English: Some clear-sighted people privately discussed, "King Zhai was born in the year of the snake, and commander Wang Sitonggong was also born in the year of the snake. They are both symbols of the snake. Now the snake in the east was hit in the head and died. Isn't that unfavorable to Wang Shi?"

古文：未逾旬日，群帅叛归潞王，思同腹心都将王彦晖已下，并投岐城纳欵。同单马而遁，竟没于王事焉。
现代文：还没过十天，王师方面的大批将军都背叛朝廷归顺了潞王。王思同的心腹将领王彦晖及其手下的人，一起投降到岐阳城里去，王思同单人一骑逃走，最后竟死在朝廷的事业上。
English: Before ten days had passed, a large number of generals around Wang Shizhi had betrayed the imperial court and surrendered to Shao Wang. Wang Shitong's confidant, the general Wang Yanju and his men, surrendered to the city of Qiyang together. Wang Shitong fled alone on horseback, and finally died in the cause of the imperial court.

古文：蛇亡之兆，得不明乎？
现代文：死蛇的兆头，能不明白吗？
English: The sign of a dead snake, can't you see it?

古文：徐坦
现代文：徐坦
English: Xu Tan

古文：清泰末，有徐坦应进士举，下第，南游渚宫，因之峡州，寻访故旧，旅次富堆山下。
现代文：后唐末帝清泰年间末期，有个徐坦参加进士考试，落榜了，向南到江陵去游玩，接着到峡州，寻访老朋友。
English: At the end of the late Tang Dynasty, the late Qing Dynasty and the late Thai Dynasty, there was a man named Xu Tan who took the entrance examination, failed, and went south to Jiangling to visit, and then to Xiaozhou to visit old friends.

古文：有古店，是夜憩琴书讫，忽见一樵夫形貌枯瘠，似有哀惨之容。
现代文：旅行途中暂时住在富堆山下的一个古老客店，这天晓上刚刚弹完琴写字，忽然看见一个形象枯瘦的樵夫，脸色愁苦象是有悲惨的事情。
English: During the trip, I temporarily stayed at an old inn at the foot of Mount Fuji. At dawn, I had just finished playing the piano and writing, when I suddenly saw a gaunt-looking woodcutter with a sad face, as if something tragic had happened.

古文：坦遂诘其由，樵夫濡瞍而答曰： 某比是此山居人，姓李名孤竹。有妻先遘沈疴，历年不愈。
现代文：徐坦于是询问事情的原由。樵夫的眼里流着泪说， 我就居住在这个山里，姓李名叫孤竹，有个妻子先前得了重病，一年多了也不好。
English: With tears in his eyes, the woodcutter said, "I live in this mountain, my surname is Li, and my wife was seriously ill for more than a year.

古文：昨因入山采木，经再宿未返，其妻身形忽变，恐人惊悸，谓邻母曰： 我之身已变矣，请为报夫知之。 
现代文：昨天我因为进山砍树，过了两晚没回家，妻子的身形忽然发生变化，害怕惊吓了别人，对邻居家的大娘说： 我的身子已经变化了，请替我告诉丈夫。 
English: Yesterday, because I went into the mountains to cut down trees, I didn't return home for two nights. My wife's body suddenly changed. Afraid of frightening others, I said to the neighbor's eldest daughter: My body has changed, please tell my husband for me.

古文：及归语曰： 我已弗堪也，唯尸在焉，请君托邻人舁我，置在山口为幸。 
现代文：等我回家，又对我说： 我已经不能忍受了，只有尸体还在，请你托邻居家的人抬着我，放在山口处，就是我的幸运事。 
English: When I got home, he said to me: "I can't bear it any longer, only the corpse is still there, please ask a neighbour to carry me and put me at the mountain pass, that would be my good luck."

古文：如其言，迁至于彼。逡巡，忽闻如大风雨声，众人皆惧之。
现代文：照她说的做了，把她送到山口，不多一会，忽然就象是听见大风雨的声音，众人都很害怕。
English: They did as she said and sent her to Yamaguchi. Not long after, they suddenly heard what sounded like a heavy storm, and everyone was very scared.

古文：又言曰： 至时速回，慎勿返顾。 
现代文：她又说： 到时候赶快回去，千万不要回头看。 
English: She also said: When the time comes, hurry back and never look back.

古文：遂叙诀别之恨。
现代文：于是互相叙说永别的遗憾。
English: So they told each other of their regret at having to say goodbye.

古文：俄见群山中，有大蛇无数，竞凑其妻。
现代文：不久就见群山之中，有无数条大蛇，争着凑到妻子的旁边。
English: Soon he saw countless snakes in the mountains, fighting to get close to his wife.

古文：妻遂下床，伸而复曲，化为一蟒，与群蛇相接而去。
现代文：妻子就下了床，伸开身子又一弯曲，变成了一条大蟒蛇，与群蛇会合在一起走开了。
English: The wife got out of bed, stretched herself out and bent over again to become a boa constrictor, joined the snakes and walked away.

古文：仍于大石上捽其首，迸碎在地。 
现代文：还在一块大石头上碰头，人的头骨迸碎了掉在地上。 
English: They also hit their heads on a large rock, and the man's skull broke and fell to the ground.

古文：至今有蛇种李氏在焉。
现代文：到现在还有蛇种李氏的传说。
English: To this day, the legend of the snake-breeding Li clan still exists.

古文：张氏
现代文：张氏
English: Mr. Zhang

古文：王蜀时，杜判官妻张氏，士流之子。与杜齐体数十年，诞育一子，寿过六旬而殂殁。
现代文：王氏在蜀地称帝时，有一个杜判官的妻子，是读书人家的女儿，和杜判官结婚几十年，生育了一个儿子，过了六十岁死了。
English: When Wang was crowned emperor in Shu, he had a wife named Du Gangan, who was the daughter of a scholar. They were married for several decades, had a son, and died at the age of 60.

古文：洎殡于家，累旬后，方窆于外，启攒之际，觉其秘器摇动，谓其还魂。剖而视之，见化作大蛇，蟠蜿屈曲，骨肉奔散，俄顷，徐徐入林莽而去。
现代文：等到在家里收殓好，几十天以后才下葬在野外。启动棺材的时候，就觉得棺材在摇动，以为是张氏还魂了，打开一看，只见张氏变成了一条大蛇，盘绕弯曲着，全身的骨肉都迸散着，不一会，就慢慢地爬进密林中去了。
English: When they started the coffin, they felt that the coffin was shaking, and thought that Mr. Zhang had regained his soul. When they opened it, they saw that Mr. Zhang had turned into a big snake, coiled and bent, with all his flesh and bones scattered. After a while, he slowly crawled into the dense forest.

古文：又兴元静明寺尼曰王三姑，亦于棺中化为大蛇。
现代文：兴元地方的静明寺有个尼姑叫王三姑，也是在棺材里变成大蛇的。
English: Jingming Temple in Xingyuan has a nun named Wang Sanwu, who also turned into a big snake in the coffin.

古文：其杜妻，即晚年不敬其夫，老病视听步履，皆不任持，张氏顾之若犬彘，冻馁而卒。
现代文：那个杜判官的妻子，是因为她晚年不敬重丈夫，丈夫年老有病，看东西，听说话以及走路，都不能自己照顾自己，张氏象对猪狗一样地对待他，因此她的丈夫受冻挨饿而死。
English: That judge Du's wife, because she did not respect her husband in his old age. Her husband was old and sick, and could not see, hear, or walk on his own. Zhang treated him like a pig and a dog. As a result, her husband froze and starved to death.

古文：人以为化蛇其应也。顾遂
现代文：人们认为变成蛇是她的报应。顾遂
English: It is believed that turning into a snake was her punishment.

古文：郎中顾遂尝密话，其先人尝宰公安，罢秩后，侨寄于县侧荆江之壖。
现代文：有个叫顾遂的郎中曾秘密地说，他的祖先曾经主管过公安县，辞官以后，就客居在公安县附近的荆江边了。
English: A vassal named Gu Sui once said in secret that his ancestor had been in charge of the public security county, and after leaving the post, he lived in Jingjiang near the public security county.

古文：四面多林木芦荻，月夜未寝，徐步出门，见一条物，巨如椽，横于地。
现代文：住处的四面有很多树林和芦荻，一个有月亮的晚上还未睡觉，慢慢地走出门外。
English: There are many woods and reeds on all sides of the residence. One moonlit night, still awake, I slowly walked out the door.

古文：谓是门关，举足踢之，其物应足而起，自胸背至于腰下，缠缴数十匝，仆于地，懵无所知。
现代文：看见有一个条形东西，象个大椽子，横在地上，以为是门上的横闩，抬起脚来踢那东西，那个东西顺着脚跳起来，从胸背一直到腰的下面，缠绕了几十圈，仆倒在地上，就迷迷糊糊地什么也不知道了。
English: He saw a bar-shaped object, like a large dice, lying on the ground, thought it was a crossbar on the door, lifted his foot to kick the object, the object jumped up along the foot, from the back of the chest to the bottom of the waist, wrapped around dozens of circles, fell to the ground, and he did not know anything in a daze.

古文：其家讶其深夜不归，使人看之，见腰间皎晶而明。来往碣于地上。
现代文：他的家里人惊讶他深夜不归，派人去看看他，只见他的腰里皎洁明亮，在地上来回地滚动。
English: His family, surprised by his late-night absence, sent someone to check on him, only to find him limp and bright from the waist down, rolling around on the floor.

古文：逼而视之，见大蛇缠其身，解之不可。
现代文：走近一看，只见一条大蛇缠着他的身子，不能解开。
English: When he looked closer, he saw that a large snake was wrapped around his body and could not be untied.

古文：于是取利刃断其蛇，一段段置于地，弯弯然不展，缴勒闷绝，因而失喑，旬日而卒。
现代文：于是拿来锋利的刀砍断了蛇，一块块地放在地上，弯着身子伸展不开，被缠绕勒得气闷昏死过去，接着就说不出话来，十天后就死了。
English: So he took a sharp knife and cut the snake, put it on the ground piece by piece, bent his body so that he could not stretch it, and was strangled by the coils until he passed out, and then he could not speak, and died ten days later.

古文：瞿塘峡
现代文：瞿塘峡
English: Shantang Gorge

古文：有人游于瞿塘峡，时冬月，草木乾枯，有野火燎其峰峦，连山跨谷，红焰照天。
现代文：有人在瞿塘峡游玩，当时是冬月，草木都干枯了，有野火在山峰上燃烧，连着山烧过山谷，红色的火焰照亮了天空。
English: Someone was playing in the Qutang Gorge. It was a winter moon, and the plants and trees were withered. Wildfires were burning on the peaks, burning through the valleys along with the mountains, and the red flames lit up the sky.

古文：忽闻岩崖之间，若大石崩坠，輷磕然有声。
现代文：忽然听见在岩石山崖之间，象是大石头崩裂落地，轰隆隆互相碰撞着发出声音。
English: Suddenly, between the rocks and cliffs, I heard what sounded like large boulders crashing to the ground, crashing into each other.

古文：遂驻足伺之，见一物圆如大囷，碣至平地，莫知其何物也。
现代文：就停下脚步去察看，看见一个东西圆圆地象个谷仓，滚落在平地上，不知那是个什么东西。
English: He stopped to look and saw something round, like a barn, tumble to the ground. He didn't know what it was.

古文：细而看之，乃是一蛇也。遂剖而验之，乃蛇吞一鹿，在于腹内。野火烧然，堕于山下。
现代文：仔细地观察它，竟是一条蛇，就剖开检验它，原来是蛇吞吃了一只鹿在肚子里，野火燃烧，掉在山下。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a snake. They cut it open and examined it. It turned out to be a snake that had swallowed a deer in its stomach, a wildfire was burning, and it had fallen down the mountain.

古文：所谓巴蛇吞象，信而有之。
现代文：人们常说的巴蛇吞象，相信会有这样的事。
English: People often say that the snake swallows the elephant, I believe there will be such a thing.

古文：靳老
现代文：靳老
English: Zhao Lao

古文：恒州井陉县丰隆山西北长谷中，有毒蛇据之，能伤人，里民莫敢至其所。
现代文：恒州的井陉县丰隆山西北方的一个很长的山谷中，有毒蛇盘据在那里，能伤人，乡里百姓没有人敢到那里去。
English: In a long valley in the northwest of Fenglong Mountain, Jingye County, Hengzhou, there are poisonous snakes that can hurt people. No one in the village dares to go there.

古文：采药人靳四翁入北山，忽闻风雨声，乃上一孤石望之，见一条白蛇从东而来，可长三丈，急上一树，蟠在西南枝上，垂头而歇。须臾，有一物如盘许大，似虾蟆，色如烟熏，褐土色，四足而跳，至蛇蟠树下，仰视，蛇垂头而死。
现代文：有个采药的人叫靳四翁进入北山，忽然听到有刮风下雨的声音，就登上一个孤石向远处看去，只见有一条白蛇从东面爬来，大约三丈长，急急地爬到一棵树上，盘在树的西南方的树枝上，垂着头歇着，一会儿，有一个东西象盘子那么大，样子象是蛤蟆，象烟熏的褐土色，用四个脚跳着，到了大蛇盘踞的树下，抬起头看，大蛇垂着头死了。
English: A medicine-gatherer called out to the four of them to go into the North Mountain. Suddenly, he heard the sound of wind and rain. He climbed onto a lonely rock and looked into the distance. He saw a white snake crawling from the east, about three feet long. It hurriedly climbed onto a tree, coiled itself on the southwestern branch of the tree, and rested with its head hanging down. For a moment, there was something as big as a plate, looking like a dragonfly, smoky brown-colored, and hopping on four legs. When it reached the tree where the snake was coiled, it looked up, and the snake died with its head hanging down.

古文：自是蛇妖不作。
现代文：从此蛇妖的事就没有了。
English: Since then, there has been no more talk of the snake demon.

古文：前沣州有鹍鵊雏，为蛇所吞。有物如虾蟆，吐白气直冲，坠而致死，得非靳老所见之物乎？
现代文：从前沣州有鹍鵊的雏鸟，被蛇吞吃了，有个东西象蛤蟆，直冲着蛇吐出白气，蛇从树上掉下来死了。莫不是靳老所看见的东西吗？
English: Once upon a time, there was a young bird with a beak in Luzhou that was eaten by a snake. There was something like a beak that spat white gas straight at the snake, and the snake fell from the tree and died. Wasn't that what the old man saw?

古文：凡毒物必有能制者，殆天意也。
现代文：凡是有毒的动物一定有克制它的东西，全是天意呀。
English: Every poisonous animal must have something to restrain it, it is all the will of heaven.

古文：景焕
现代文：景焕
English: Jinghwan

古文：景焕为壁州白石县令，行陟巴岭，峻险万仞。约七八程，达玉女庙，或有巨虺横亘其前，径可七八尺，鳞甲不啻开扇许大，头尾垂在山下，唯闻折木，震响山谷。
现代文：景焕做壁州的白石县县令，步行攀登巴岭山，山岭险峻高万仞，走了约七八里路程，走到了玉女庙，这时有巨蛇横在路上，直径大约七八尺，身上的鳞甲有展开的扇子那么大，头和尾巴都垂在山下，只听见树木折断的声音，在山谷之中震响。
English: Jing Huan, the county magistrate of Shiroishi County in Bishu, climbed Mount Baling on foot. The mountain range is steep and high, and he walked about seven or eight miles to reach the Jade Lady Temple. At that time, there was a giant snake lying on the road, with a diameter of about seven or eight feet. The scales on its body were as big as an unfurled fan, and its head and tail were hanging below the mountain. All he could hear was the sound of trees breaking, and there was a tremor in the valley.

古文：童仆辈尽股栗惊骇，莫能前进。
现代文：僮仆们全都吓得两腿颤抖，不能走路，因此大白天停在山洞里休息。
English: The servants were all so terrified that their legs were shaking and they could not walk, so they stopped to rest in the cave in broad daylight.

古文：于是旦驻山穴，因登高望之，竟目方见其尾。
现代文：接着又登上高处看那条蛇，目光的尽头才知看见蛇的尾巴。
English: Then he climbed up again to look at the snake, and only at the end of his gaze did he see the snake's tail.

古文：欲谓之龙，龙之行动，必有风雨随之，其日晴明，方见是蛇也。
现代文：想叫它是龙，但龙的行动，必然有风和雨伴随着，那天天气晴朗，才看见的乃是蛇。
English: I wanted to call it a dragon, but the actions of a dragon are inevitably accompanied by wind and rain. It was only on a sunny day that I saw a snake.

古文：因知吞舟之鱼，翳天之鸟，虫禽之绝大者，信有之焉。
现代文：由此可知，能吞掉小船的大鱼，翅膀能遮蔽天空的大鸟，爬虫类飞禽类中长得极大的，确实是存在的。
English: From this it can be seen that large fish that can swallow small boats, large birds with wings that can cover the sky, and reptiles that grow extremely large among birds do exist.

古文：舒州人
现代文：舒州人
English: People from Shuzhou

古文：舒州有人入灊山，见大蛇，击杀之。
现代文：舒州有个人进入灊山，看一条大蛇，就打死了它。
English: A man in Shuzhou went into Lushan, saw a big snake and killed it.

古文：视之有足，甚以为异，因负之出。
现代文：看那条蛇，长着脚，对此他觉得很奇怪，因而背着蛇出了山，准备把蛇带给大家看。
English: He thought it was strange to see a snake with legs, so he carried the snake out of the mountain and prepared to show it to everyone.

古文：将以示人，遇县吏数人于路，因告之曰： 我杀此蛇而有四足。 
现代文：在路上遇到了几个县吏，就告诉他们说： 我杀的这条蛇有四只脚。 
English: On the way, he met several county officials and told them: "This snake I killed has four legs.

古文：吏皆不见，曰： 尔何在？ 
现代文：县吏们都看不见他，说： 你在哪里？ 
English: The county officials couldn't see him and said, "Where are you?

古文：曰： 在尔前，何故不见。 
现代文：回答说： 就在你们眼前，为什么看不见我？ 
English: And he said, Behold, I am before your eyes: why do you not see me?

古文：即弃蛇于地，乃见之。
现代文：就把蛇扔到地上，才看见了他，因此背着这条蛇的人谁都看不见。
English: He threw the snake on the ground, and then he was seen, so no one could see who was carrying the snake.

古文：于是负此蛇者皆不见，人以为怪，乃弃之。案此蛇生不自隐其形，死乃能隐人之形。
现代文：人们认为是件怪事，就扔掉了蛇。据考查：这条蛇活着时不能隐藏自己的身形，死后却能隐藏人的身形。
English: People thought it was a strange thing and threw the snake away. According to the investigation: this snake could not hide its body when it was alive, but it could hide the human body after death.

古文：此理有不可穷者。
现代文：这种道理是不能彻底弄明白的。
English: The reason for this cannot be fully understood.

古文：贾潭
现代文：贾潭
English: Jia Tan

古文：伪吴兵部尚书贾潭，言其所知为岭南节度使，获一桔，其大如升。
现代文：非法的吴国的兵部尚书贾潭，说起他的一个朋友是岭南节度使，曾得到一个桔子，桔子象一升那么大。
English: Shang Shujia Tan, a member of the illegal military department of the State of Wu, said that a friend of his who was an envoy to the Lingnan Festival once received an orange that was as big as a liter.

古文：将表上之，监军中使以为非常物，不可轻进。
现代文：准备写篇表文把桔子献给皇上，监军中使认为是不平常的东西，不能轻易地献上去。
English: He was preparing to write a proclamation to present oranges to the emperor, but the overseer of the troops thought it was something unusual and could not be easily presented.

古文：因取针微刺其蒂下，乃蠕而动，命破之，中有小赤蛇长数寸。
现代文：于是拿过针来刺桔子的蒂部，蒂部竟然能蠕动，让人切开桔子，桔子里有条几寸长的小红蛇。
English: So he took a needle to prick the orange's stem. The stem could actually wriggle, allowing people to cut the orange. Inside the orange was a small red snake a few inches long.

古文：姚景
现代文：姚景
English: Yao Jing

古文：伪吴寿州节度使姚景，为儿时，事濠州节度使刘金，给使厩中。
现代文：非法的吴国的寿州节度使姚景，在他小的时候，事奉濠州节度使刘金，在马厩中干活。
English: When he was a child, Yao Jing, who was illegally sent to Shuzhou from Wuzhou, served Liu Jin, who was sent to Ganzhou, and worked in the stables.

古文：金尝卒行至厩，见景方寝，有二小赤蛇戏于景面，出入两鼻中。良久景寤，蛇乃不见。
现代文：刘金曾经突然地走到了马厩的地方，看见姚景刚刚睡下，有两条小红蛇在姚景的脸上游戏，从两个鼻孔中进进出出，很长时间后姚景醒了过来，小蛇就不见了。
English: Liu Jin once suddenly went to the stables and saw that Yao Jing had just fallen asleep. There were two small red snakes playing on Yao Jing's face, coming in and out of the two nostrils. After a long time, Yao Jing woke up and the small snake was gone.

古文：金由是骤加宠擢，妻之以女，卒至大官。
现代文：刘金从此就特别地对姚景宠信和提拔，并把女儿嫁给了他，姚景最后终于做了大官。
English: From then on, Liu Jin especially favored and promoted Yao Jing, and married his daughter to him. Yao Jing finally became a high-ranking official.

古文：王稔
现代文：王稔
English: Wang Yao

古文：伪吴寿州节度使王稔，罢归扬都，为统军。
现代文：非法的吴国的寿州节度使王稔，免官回到扬州，做统军官，坐在厅堂里，和客人说话。
English: The illegal Shoushou Festival in Wuzhou made Wang Yao, who was dismissed from his post, return to Yangzhou as a uniformed officer, sitting in the hall and talking to guests.

古文：坐厅事，与客语，忽有小赤蛇自屋坠地，向稔而蟠。
现代文：忽然有一条小红蛇从屋顶掉到地上，向着王稔蟠踞着。
English: Suddenly, a small red snake fell from the roof to the ground and crawled towards the king.

古文：稔令以器覆之，良久发视，唯一蝙蝠飞去。
现代文：王稔让人用器具扣住小蛇，很久以后打开看，只有一只蝙蝠飞走了。
English: Wang Yao had someone hold the small snake with a tool. After a long time, he opened it to see that only a bat had flown away.

古文：其年，稔加平章事。
现代文：那一年，王稔被委任兼作平章。
English: That year, Wang Xuan was appointed as the second-ranked official.

