古文：孟尝君名文，姓田氏。文之父曰靖郭君田婴。
现代文：孟尝君姓田名文。田文的父亲是靖郭君田婴。
English: Meng Yakun's family name was Tian Meiwen. Tian Meiwen's father was Jing Guo's son, Tian Jiao.

古文：田婴者，齐威王少子而齐宣王庶弟也。
现代文：田婴，是齐威王的小儿子、齐宣王庶母所生的弟弟。
English: Tian Yu is the youngest son of King Qi Wei and the younger brother of King Qi Xuan's stepmother.

古文：田婴自威王时任职用事，与成侯邹忌及田忌将而救韩伐魏。
现代文：田婴从威王时就开始任职当权，曾与成侯邹忌以及田忌带兵去救援韩国，攻伐魏国。
English: Tian Ying began to serve in power from the time of King Wei, and once led troops with Cheng Hou and Tian Ying to rescue South Korea and invade Wei.

古文：成侯与田忌争宠，成侯卖田忌。
现代文：后来成侯与田忌争着得到齐王的宠信而嫌隙很深，结果成侯出卖了田忌。
English: Later, Cheng Hou and Tian Bo vied with each other to win the favor of King Qi, but the rift was too deep. As a result, Cheng Hou betrayed Tian Bo.

古文：田忌惧，袭齐之边邑，不胜，亡走。
现代文：田忌很害怕，就偷袭齐国边境的城邑，没有拿下，便逃跑了。
English: Terrified, Tianyi raided the border towns of Qi, but did not take them and fled.

古文：会威王卒，宣王立，知成侯卖田忌，乃复召田忌以为将。
现代文：这时正赶上齐威王去世，宣王即位，宣王知道是成侯陷害田忌，就又召回了田忌让他担任将军。
English: At this time, it was just in time for the death of King Qiwei and the ascension of King Xuan to the throne. Knowing that it was Cheng Hou who had framed Tengi, King Xuan recalled Tengi and made him a general.

古文：宣王二年，田忌与孙膑、田婴俱伐魏，败之马陵，虏魏太子申而杀魏将庞涓。
现代文：齐宣王二年，田忌跟孙膑、田婴一起攻打魏国，在马陵打败魏国，俘虏了魏国太子申，杀了魏国将领庞涓。
English: In the second year of King Qixuan, Tian Bo attacked Wei together with Sun Quan and Tian Ying, defeated Wei at Maling, captured Wei's prince Shen, and killed Wei's general Pang Quan.

古文：宣王七年，田婴使於韩、魏，韩、魏服於齐。
现代文：宣王七年，田婴奉命出使韩国和魏国，经过他的一番活动使韩国、魏国归服于齐国。
English: In the seventh year of King Xuan, Tian Zi was ordered to send envoys to South Korea and Wei, and through his activities he made South Korea and Wei submit to Qi.

古文：婴与韩昭侯、魏惠王会齐宣王东阿南，盟而去。
现代文：田婴陪着韩昭侯、魏惠王在东阿南会见齐宣王，三国结盟缔约后便离开了。
English: Tian Ying accompanied Han Zhaohu and Wei Hui Wang to meet with Qi Xuan Wang in East Anan, and left after the three countries signed an alliance.

古文：明年，复与梁惠王会甄。
现代文：第二年，宣王又与梁惠王在甄地盟会。
English: The following year, Xuan Wang and Liang Hui Wang met again at the Land Surveying Association.

古文：是岁，梁惠王卒。
现代文：这一年，梁惠王去世。
English: In the same year, Liang Hui Wang passed away.

古文：宣王九年，田婴相齐。
现代文：宣王九年，田婴出任齐国宰相。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Xuanwu's reign, Tian Ying served as the Prime Minister of Qi.

古文：齐宣王与魏襄王会徐州而相王也。
现代文：齐宣王与魏襄王在徐州盟会互相尊称为王。
English: Qi Xuan Wang and Wei Xiang Wang respectfully called each other "king" in the Xuzhou League.

古文：楚威王闻之，怒田婴。
现代文：楚威王知道这件事情后，对田婴很恼火，认为是他一手策划的。
English: After King Chu Wei learned about this, he was very angry with Tian Ying, believing that he had planned it all by himself.

古文：明年，楚伐败齐师於徐州，而使人逐田婴。
现代文：第二年，楚国进攻齐国，在徐州打败了齐国军队，便派人追捕田婴。
English: The following year, Chu attacked Qi, defeated the Qi army in Xuzhou, and sent people to hunt down Tian Rong.

古文：田婴使张丑说楚威王，威王乃止。
现代文：田婴派张丑去劝说楚威王，楚威王才算罢休。
English: Tian Ying sent Zhang Xi to persuade King Chu Wei, and only then did King Chu Wei give up.

古文：田婴相齐十一年，宣王卒，湣王即位。
现代文：田婴在齐国任相十一年，宣王去世，湣王即位。
English: Tian Ying served as the prime minister of Qi for eleven years. King Xuan died, and King Yao ascended to the throne.

古文：即位三年，而封田婴於薛。
现代文：湣王即位三年，赐封田婴于薛邑。
English: Three years after the enthronement of King Min, Tian Ying was given a fief in Xueyuan.

古文：初，田婴有子四十馀人。其贱妾有子名文，文以五月五日生。
现代文：当初，田婴有四十多个儿子，他的一个小妾生了个儿子叫文，田文是五月五日出生的。
English: At first, Tian Ying had more than forty sons. One of his concubines gave birth to a son named Wen. Tian Wen was born on May 5th.

古文：婴告其母曰： 勿举也。 
现代文：田婴告诉田文的母亲说： 不要把他养大。 
English: Tianying told Tianwen's mother, "Don't bring him up.

古文：其母窃举生之。
现代文：可是田文的母亲还是偷偷把他养大了。
English: However, Tianwen's mother secretly raised him.

古文：及长，其母因兄弟而见其子文於田婴。
现代文：等他长大后，他的母亲便通过田文的兄弟把田文引见给田婴。
English: After he grew up, his mother introduced Tianwen to Tianying through Tianwen's brother.

古文：田婴怒其母曰： 吾令若去此子，而敢生之，何也？ 
现代文：田婴见了这个孩子愤怒地对他母亲说： 我让你把这个孩子扔了，你竟敢把他养活了，这是为什么？ 
English: When Tianying saw this child, he angrily said to his mother: I told you to throw this child away, how dare you feed him, why is that?

古文：文顿首，因曰： 君所以不举五月子者，何故？ 
现代文：田文的母亲还没回答，田文立即叩头大拜，接着反问田婴说： 您不让养育五月生的孩子，是什么原因呢？ 
English: Tianwen's mother had not yet answered, and Tianwen immediately bowed down and worshiped, and then asked Tianying: What is the reason for not letting you raise a child born in May?

古文：婴曰： 五月子者，长与户齐，将不利其父母。 
现代文：田婴回答说： 五月出生的孩子，长到跟门户一样高的时候，会对他的父母不利。 
English: Tianying replied, "A child born in May, when he grows as tall as a portal, will be unfavorable to his parents.

古文：文曰： 人生受命於天乎？
现代文：田文说： 人的命运是由上天授予呢？
English: Tian Wen said: Is a person's destiny bestowed by heaven?

古文：将受命於户邪？ 
现代文：还是由门户授予呢？ 
English: Or is it awarded by the portal?

古文：婴默然。
现代文：田婴不知怎么回答好，便沉默不语。
English: Tianying didn't know how to answer, so he remained silent.

古文：文曰： 必受命於天，君何忧焉。
现代文：田文接着说： 如果是由上天授予的，您何必忧虑呢？
English: Tianwen continued, "If it is bestowed by heaven, why should you worry?

古文：必受命於户，则可高其户耳，谁能至者！ 
现代文：如果是由门户授予的，那么只要加高门户就可以了，谁还能长到那么高呢！ 
English: If it is granted by the portal, then it is enough to raise the portal, who can grow that high!

古文：婴曰： 子休矣。 
现代文：田婴无言以对便斥责道： 你不要说了！ 
English: Tianying was speechless and rebuked him, "Don't say it!

古文：久之，文承间问其父婴曰： 子之子为何？ 
现代文：过了很久，田文趁空问他父亲说： 儿子的儿子叫什么？ 
English: After a long time, Tian Wen took the opportunity to ask his father, "What is the name of your son's son?"

古文：曰： 为孙。 
现代文：田婴答道： 叫孙子。 
English: Tian Ying replied, "Call him Sun Tzu."

古文： 孙之孙为何？ 
现代文：田文接着问： 孙子的孙子叫什么？ 
English: Tian Wen then asked: What is the name of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson?

古文：曰： 为玄孙。 
现代文：田婴答道： 叫玄孙。 
English: Tian Rong replied, "My great-great-grandson."

古文： 玄孙之孙为何？ 
现代文：田文又问： 玄孙的孙叫什么？ 
English: Tian Wen also asked: What is the name of the great-great-grandson's grandson?

古文：曰： 不能知也。 
现代文：田婴说： 我不知道了。 
English: Tianying said: I don't know anymore.

古文：文曰： 君用事相齐，至今三王矣，齐不加广而君私家富累万金，门下不见一贤者。
现代文：田文说： 您执掌大权担任齐国宰相，到如今已经历三代君王了，可是齐国的领土没有增广，您的私家却积贮了万金的财富，门下也看不到一位贤能之士。
English: Tian Wen said: You have been holding the power as the prime minister of Qi for three generations now, but the territory of Qi has not expanded, but your private family has accumulated a wealth of millions of dollars, and you can't see a capable person under you.

古文：文闻将门必有将，相门必有相。
现代文：我听说，将军的门庭必出将军，宰相的门庭必有宰相。
English: I have heard that a general must appear in the courtyard of a general, and a prime minister must appear in the courtyard of a prime minister.

古文：今君後宫蹈绮縠而士不得褐，仆妾馀粱肉而士不厌糟糠。
现代文：现在您的姬妾可以践踏绫罗绸缎，而贤士却穿不上粗布短衣；您的男仆女奴有剩余的饭食肉羹，而贤士却连糠菜也吃不饱。
English: Now your concubines can trample on the satin satin, but the wise men can't put on the coarse cloth shorts; your servants have leftover meat soup, but the wise men can't even eat enough stew.

古文：今君又尚厚积馀藏，欲以遗所不知何人，而忘公家之事日损，文窃怪之。 
现代文：现在您还一个劲地加多积贮，想留给那些连称呼都叫不上来的人，却忘记国家在诸侯中一天天失势。我私下是很奇怪的。 
English: Now you are still diligently accumulating more and more, wanting to leave it to those who cannot even be called, but forgetting that the country is losing ground day by day among the princes. I am privately very strange.

古文：於是婴乃礼文，使主家待宾客。
现代文：从此以后，田婴改变了对田文的态度，器重他，让他主持家政，接待宾客。
English: From then on, Tian Ying changed his attitude towards Tian Wen, treating him with respect, letting him preside over housekeeping and receive guests.

古文：宾客日进，名声闻於诸侯。
现代文：宾客来往不断，日益增多，田文的名声随之传播到各诸侯国中。
English: The guests kept coming and going, increasing day by day, and Tianwen's fame spread to all the provinces.

古文：诸侯皆使人请薛公田婴以文为太子，婴许之。
现代文：各诸侯国都派人来请求田婴立田文为太子，田婴答应下来。
English: All of the vassal states sent people to ask Tian Ying to make Tian Wen the crown prince, and Tian Ying agreed.

古文：婴卒，谥为靖郭君。
现代文：田婴去世后，追谥靖郭君。
English: After Tianying's death, he chased after Zou Jingguo.

古文：而文果代立於薛，是为孟尝君。
现代文：田文果然在薛邑继承了田婴的爵位。这就是孟尝君。
English: Tian Wen did indeed inherit the peerage of Tian Ying in Xueyip. This is Meng Yaojun.

古文：孟尝君在薛，招致诸侯宾客及亡人有罪者，皆归孟尝君。
现代文：孟尝君在薛邑，招揽各诸侯国的宾客以及犯罪逃亡的人，很多人归附了孟尝君。
English: In Xueyun, Meng Yuqun invited guests from various states as well as criminal fugitives, and many people joined Meng Yuqun.

古文：孟尝君舍业厚遇之，以故倾天下之士。
现代文：孟尝君宁肯舍弃家业也给他们丰厚的待遇，因此天下的士人都慕名而来。
English: Meng Yijun would rather give up the family business and also give them rich treatment, so scholars from all over the world come to admire his name.

古文：食客数千人，无贵贱一与文等。
现代文：他的食客有几千人，待遇不分贵贱一律与田文相同。
English: He has several thousand diners and treats them all the same as Tian Wen, regardless of whether they are rich or poor.

古文：孟尝君待客坐语，而屏风後常有侍史，主记君所与客语，问亲戚居处。
现代文：孟尝君每当接待宾客，与宾客坐着谈话时，总是在屏风后安排侍史，让他记录孟尝君与宾客的谈话内容，记载所问宾客亲戚的住处。
English: Whenever Meng Yuqun received guests and had a sit-down conversation with them, he always arranged a secretary behind the screen, and asked him to record the conversation between Meng Yuqun and the guests, and record the residence of the relatives of the guests.

古文：客去，孟尝君已使使存问，献遗其亲戚。
现代文：宾客刚刚离开，孟尝君就已派使者到宾客亲戚家里抚慰问候，献上礼物。
English: As soon as the guests left, Meng Yaojun sent an envoy to the guests' relatives' home to offer consolation and greetings and present gifts.

古文：孟尝君曾待客夜食，有一人蔽火光。客怒，以饭不等，辍食辞去。
现代文：有一次，孟尝君招待宾客吃晚饭，有个人遮住了灯亮，那个宾客很恼火，认为饭食的质量肯定不相等，放下碗筷就要辞别而去。
English: Once, Meng Yuqun invited guests to dinner, and someone covered up the lights. The guest was very annoyed, thinking that the quality of the meal was definitely not equal, and he had to put down his dishes and chopsticks to say goodbye.

古文：孟尝君起，自持其饭比之。客惭，自刭。士以此多归孟尝君。
现代文：孟尝君马上站起来，亲自端着自己的饭食与他的相比，那个宾客惭愧得无地自容，就以刎颈自杀表示谢罪。贤士们因此有很多人都情愿归附孟尝君。
English: Meng Yacun immediately stood up and personally brought his own meal to compare with his. The guest was so ashamed of himself that he committed suicide by strangling himself. As a result, many sages were willing to follow Meng Yacun.

古文：孟尝君客无所择，皆善遇之。
现代文：孟尝君对于来到门下的宾客都热情接纳，不挑拣，无亲疏，一律给予优厚的待遇。
English: Meng Yuqun warmly welcomes all guests who come to the door, does not pick and choose, does not alienate, and always gives preferential treatment.

古文：人人各自以为孟尝君亲己。
现代文：所以宾客人人都认为孟尝君与自己亲近。
English: Therefore, the guests all think that Meng Yaojun is close to them.

古文：秦昭王闻其贤，乃先使泾阳君为质於齐，以求见孟尝君。
现代文：秦昭王听说孟尝君贤能，就先派泾阳君到齐国作人质，并请求见到孟尝君。
English: When Qin Zhao Wang heard of Meng Yaojun's ability, he first sent Puyang Jun to Qi as a hostage and asked to see Meng Yaojun.

古文：孟尝君将入秦，宾客莫欲其行，谏，不听。
现代文：孟尝君准备去秦国，而宾客都不赞成他出行，规劝他，他不听，执意前往。
English: Meng Yijun was preparing to go to Qin, but the guests did not approve of his trip and tried to persuade him, but he did not listen and insisted on going.

古文：苏代谓曰： 今旦代从外来，见木禺人与土禺人相与语。
现代文：这时有个宾客苏代对他说： 今天早上我从外面来，见到一个木偶人与一个土偶人正在交谈。
English: At this time, a guest named Su Dai said to him, "This morning, I came from outside and saw a puppet and a clay figurine talking.

古文：木禺人曰： 天雨，子将败矣。 
现代文：木偶人说： 天一下雨，你就要坍毁了。 
English: The puppeteer said, "If it rains, you will collapse."

古文：土禺人曰： 我生於土，败则归土。
现代文：土偶人说： 我是由泥土生成的，即使坍毁，也要归回到泥土里。
English: The clay figurine said, "I am made of clay, and even if I collapse, I will return to the clay."

古文：今天雨，流子而行，未知所止息也。 
现代文：若天真的下起雨来，水流冲着你跑，可不知把你冲到哪里去了。 
English: If it really rains, the water will rush towards you, but you don't know where it will take you.

古文：今秦，虎狼之国也，而君欲往，如有不得还，君得无为土禺人所笑乎？ 
现代文：当今的秦国，是个如虎似狼的国家，而您执意前往，如果一旦回不来，您能不被土偶人嘲笑吗？ 
English: Today's Qin is a country of tigers and wolves, and you are determined to go there. If you can't come back, will you not be ridiculed by the local people?

古文：孟尝君乃止。
现代文：孟尝君听后，悟出了个中道理，才停止了出行的准备。
English: After listening to Meng Yijun, he realized the truth and stopped preparing for the trip.

古文：齐湣王二十五年，复卒使孟尝君入秦，昭王即以孟尝君为秦相。
现代文：齐湣王二十五年，终于又派孟尝君到了秦国，秦昭王立即让孟尝君担任秦国宰相。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of King Qizong, Meng Yuqun was finally sent to Qin. King Qin Zhao immediately made Meng Yuqun the Prime Minister of Qin.

古文：人或说秦昭王曰： 孟尝君贤，而又齐族也，今相秦，必先齐而後秦，秦其危矣。 
现代文：臣僚中有人劝说秦王道： 孟尝君的确贤能，可他又是齐国宗室，现在担任了秦国的丞相，谋划事情必定是先替齐国打算，然后才考虑秦国的利益，这样秦国就危险了。 
English: Some of his courtiers persuaded the Qin king: Meng Yuqun was indeed a great man, but he was also the ancestor of Qi, and now he was the prime minister of Qin. He must have planned for Qi first, and then considered the interests of Qin, otherwise Qin would be in danger.

古文：於是秦昭王乃止。囚孟尝君，谋欲杀之。
现代文：于是秦昭王就罢免了孟尝君的宰相职务。
English: As a result, King Qin Zhao dismissed Meng Yaojun from the post of prime minister.

古文：孟尝君使人抵昭王幸姬求解。
现代文：他把孟尝君囚禁起来，想要杀掉孟尝君。
English: He imprisoned Ms. Meng and tried to kill her.

古文：幸姬曰： 妾原得君狐白裘。 
现代文：孟尝君知道情况危急就派人冒昧地去见昭王的宠妾请求解救。
English: Knowing that the situation was critical, Meng Yuqun sent someone to see Zhao Wang's favorite concubine to request rescue.

古文：此时孟尝君有一狐白裘，直千金，天下无双，入秦献之昭王，更无他裘。
现代文：那个宠妾提出条件说： 我希望得到孟尝君的白色狐皮裘。 孟尝君来的时候，带有一件白色狐皮裘，价值千金，天下没有第二件，到秦国后献给了昭王，再也没有别的皮裘了。
English: That favorite concubine made a condition, saying: I hope to get Meng Yaojun's white fox fur coat. When Meng Yaojun came, he brought a white fox fur coat, worth thousands of dollars, there is no second one in the world, it was dedicated to King Zhao after he came to Qin, and there was no other fur coat.

古文：孟尝君患之，遍问客，莫能对。
现代文：孟尝君为这件事发愁，问遍了宾客，谁也想不出办法。
English: Meng Yijun was worried about this matter. After asking all the guests, no one could think of a solution.

古文：最下坐有能为狗盗者，曰： 臣能得狐白裘。 
现代文：有一位能力差但会披狗皮盗东西的人，说： 我能拿到那件白色狐皮裘。 
English: "I can get that white fox fur coat," said one of the less-skilled but dog-skinned thieves.

古文：乃夜为狗，以入秦宫臧中，取所献狐白裘至，以献秦王幸姬。
现代文：于是当夜化装成狗，钻入了秦宫中的仓库，取出献给昭王的那件狐白裘，拿回来献给了昭王的宠妾。
English: So that night, disguised as a dog, he broke into the warehouse in the Qin Palace, took out the piece of foxy white fur that was dedicated to King Zhao, and brought it back to dedicate it to King Zhao's favorite concubine.

古文：幸姬为言昭王，昭王释孟尝君。
现代文：宠妾得到后，替孟尝君向昭王说情，昭王便释放了孟尝君。
English: After obtaining a favorite concubine, he pleaded for Meng Yuqun to King Zhao, and King Zhao released Meng Yuqun.

古文：孟尝君得出，即驰去，更封传，变名姓以出关。
现代文：孟尝君获释后，立即乘快车逃离，更换了出关凭证，改了姓名逃出城关。
English: After Meng Yuqun was released, he immediately fled by express train, changed his exit certificate, changed his name and fled the city.

古文：夜半至函谷关。
现代文：夜半时分到了函谷关。
English: At midnight, we arrived at the Hakotan Pass.

古文：秦昭王後悔出孟尝君，求之已去，即使人驰传逐之。
现代文：昭王后悔放出了孟尝君，再次派人寻找他，发现他已经逃走了，就立即派人驾车追赶。
English: Zhao Wang regretted that he had let Meng Yaojun go, and sent someone to look for him again. When he discovered that Meng Yaojun had run away, he immediately sent someone to chase him by car.

古文：孟尝君至关，关法鸡鸣而出客，孟尝君恐追至，客之居下坐者有能为鸡鸣，而鸡齐鸣，遂发传出。
现代文：孟尝君一行到了函谷关，按照关法规定鸡叫时才能放来往客人出关，孟尝君恐怕追兵赶到万分着急，宾客中有个人级别很低但能模仿鸡叫，他一学鸡叫，附近的鸡也跟着啼叫起来，便立即出示了证件逃出函谷关。
English: Meng Yuqun and his party arrived at the Hantang Pass. According to the provisions of the Pass Law, chickens can only be released to guests when they crow. Meng Yuqun was probably in a hurry to chase the soldiers. One of the guests had a very low level but could imitate the crowing of chickens. As soon as he learned to crow, the nearby chickens also crowed, and he immediately showed his certificate to escape from the Hantang Pass.

古文：出如食顷，秦追果至关，已後孟尝君出，乃还。
现代文：出关后约摸一顿饭的工夫，秦国追兵果然到了函谷关，但已落在孟尝君的后面，就只好回去了。
English: After leaving the pass, it took about an hour to have a meal. The Qin pursuers did indeed arrive at Hakodate Pass, but they had already fallen behind Meng Yakun, so they had to go back.

古文：始孟尝君列此二人於宾客，宾客尽羞之，及孟尝君有秦难，卒此二人拔之。
现代文：当初，孟尝君收留这两个人做宾客的时候，宾客无不感到羞耻，觉得脸上无光，等孟尝君在秦国遭到劫难，终于靠着这两个人脱险。
English: At first, when Meng Yuqun received these two people as guests, the guests were all ashamed and felt that their faces were dull. After Meng Yuqun suffered a disaster in Qin, he finally escaped with the help of these two people.

古文：自是之後，客皆服。孟尝君过赵，赵平原君客之。
现代文：自此以后，宾客们都佩服孟尝君广招宾客不分人等的做法。孟尝君经过赵国，赵国平原君以贵宾相待。
English: Since then, the guests have been impressed by Meng Yaojun's practice of inviting guests from all walks of life. Meng Yaojun passed through Zhao Guo, while Zhao Guo Pingyuan treated each other as honored guests.

古文：赵人闻孟尝君贤，出观之，皆笑曰： 始以薛公为魁然也，今视之，乃眇小丈夫耳。 
现代文：赵国人听说孟尝君贤能，都出来围观想一睹风采，见了后便都嘲笑说： 原来以为孟尝君是个魁梧的大丈夫，如今看到他，竟是个瘦小的男人罢了。 
English: When the people of Zhao heard of Meng Yaojun's ability, they all came out to watch and admire him. When they saw him, they all laughed and said, "I thought Meng Yaojun was a big man, but now I see that he is actually a small man."

古文：孟尝君闻之，怒。
现代文：孟尝君听了这些揶揄他的话，大为恼火。
English: Meng Yuqun was very angry when he heard these insults.

古文：客与俱者下，斫击杀数百人，遂灭一县以去。
现代文：随他同行的宾客跳下车来，砍杀了几百人，毁了一个县才离去。
English: He jumped out of the car with his fellow guests, slaughtered several hundred people, and destroyed a county before leaving.

古文：齐湣王不自得，以其遣孟尝君。
现代文：齐泯王因为派遣孟尝君去秦国而感到内疚。
English: King Qianlong felt guilty for sending Meng Yu to Qin.

古文：孟尝君至，则以为齐相，任政。
现代文：孟尝君回到齐国后，齐王就让他做齐国宰相，执掌国政。
English: After Meng Yaojun returned to Qi, the king of Qi made him the prime minister of Qi and took charge of state affairs.

古文：孟尝君怨秦，将以齐为韩、魏攻楚，因与韩、魏攻秦，而借兵食於西周。
现代文：孟尝君怨恨秦国，准备以齐国曾帮助韩国、魏国攻打楚国为理由，来联合韩国、魏国攻打秦国，为此向西周借兵器和军粮。
English: Meng Yijun resented Qin, and planned to unite Korea and Wei to attack Qin on the grounds that Qi had helped Korea and Wei attack Chu. To this end, he borrowed weapons and military supplies from Western Zhou.

古文：苏代为西周谓曰： 君以齐为韩、魏攻楚九年，取宛、叶以北以彊韩、魏，今复攻秦以益之。
现代文：苏代替西周对孟尝君说： 您拿齐国的兵力帮助韩国、魏国攻打楚国达九年之久，取得了宛、叶以北的地方，结果使韩、魏两国强大起来，如今再去攻打秦国就会越加增强了韩、魏的力量。
English: Su, on behalf of Xi Zhou, said to Meng Yuqun: You have been helping Korea and Wei attack Chu for nine years with the military forces of Qi, and have gained places north of Wan and Ye. As a result, Korea and Wei have become strong. Now, if you attack Qin, you will further strengthen the strength of Korea and Wei.

古文：韩、魏南无楚忧，西无秦患，则齐危矣。
现代文：韩国、魏国南边没有来自楚国的担忧，北边没有秦国的祸患，那么齐国就危险了。
English: South Korea and the south of Wei have no worries from Chu, and the north does not have the scourge of Qin, so Qi is in danger.

古文：韩、魏必轻齐畏秦，臣为君危之。
现代文：韩、魏两国强盛起来必定轻视齐国而畏惧秦国，我实在替您对这种形势感到不安。
English: If Han and Wei become strong, they will despise Qi and fear Qin. I am really worried about this situation for you.

古文：君不如令敝邑深合於秦，而君无攻，又无借兵食。
现代文：您不如让西周与秦国深切交好，您不要进攻秦国，也不要借兵器和粮食。
English: You might as well let Xizhou have a deep friendship with Qin. Do not attack Qin, and do not borrow weapons and grain.

古文：君临函谷而无攻，令敝邑以君之情谓秦昭王曰 薛公必不破秦以彊韩、魏。
现代文：您把军队开临函谷关但不要进攻，让西周把您的心情告诉给秦昭王说 薛公一定不会攻破秦国来增强韩、魏两国的势力。
English: You have brought your army to Hanzhong Pass, but do not attack, let Xi Zhou tell your feelings to Qin Zhao Wang and say that Xue Gong will definitely not break through Qin to strengthen the forces of Han and Wei.

古文：其攻秦也，欲王之令楚王割东国以与齐，而秦出楚怀王以为和 。
现代文：他攻打秦国的目的，不过是想要大王责成楚国把东国割给齐国，并请您把楚怀王释放出来来达成和解。 
English: The purpose of his attack on Qin was simply to ask the Great King to order Chu to cede Dongguan to Qi, and to ask you to release King Chu Huai to reach a settlement.

古文：君令敝邑以此惠秦，秦得无破而以东国自免也，秦必欲之。
现代文：您让西周用这种做法给秦国好处，秦国能够不被攻破又拿楚国的地盘保全了自己，秦国一定想这样做。
English: You let Xizhou use this approach to benefit Qin. Qin could not be defeated and took the territory of Chu to protect itself. Qin must have wanted to do this.

古文：楚王得出，必德齐。
现代文：楚王能够获释，也一定会感激齐国。
English: If King Chu can be released, he will surely be grateful to Qi Guo.

古文：齐得东国益彊，而薛世世无患矣。
现代文：齐国得到东国自然会日益强大，薛邑也可以世代没有忧患了。
English: With the acquisition of Dongguan, Qi Province will naturally become more and more powerful, and Xueyun can also have no worries for generations.

古文：秦不大弱，而处三晋之西，三晋必重齐。 
现代文：秦国不会被过度削弱，而且处在韩国、魏国的西邻，韩、魏两国必定依重齐国。 
English: Qin will not be unduly weakened, and it is located in the western neighborhood of Korea and Wei, and Korea and Wei will certainly be on an equal footing.

古文：薛公曰： 善。 
现代文：孟尝君听了后，立即说： 好。 
English: After listening, Meng Yijun immediately said: Good.

古文：因令韩、魏贺秦，使三国无攻，而不借兵食於西周矣。
现代文：于是让韩、魏向秦国道贺，避免了一场兵灾，使齐、韩、魏三国不再发兵进攻，齐国也不向西周借兵器和军粮了。
English: As a result, Han and Wei sent congratulations to Qin, averting a military disaster, so that Qi, Han and Wei would no longer send troops to attack, and Qi would no longer borrow weapons and military supplies from West Zhou.

古文：是时，楚怀王入秦，秦留之，故欲必出之。
现代文：这个时候，楚怀王已经到了秦国，秦国扣留了他，所以孟尝君一定要让秦国释放他。
English: At this time, King Chu Huai had already arrived in Qin. Qin detained him, so Meng Yuqun had to get Qin to release him.

古文：秦不果出楚怀王。
现代文：但是秦国并没有这么办。
English: However, Qin did not do so.

古文：孟尝君相齐，其舍人魏子为孟尝君收邑入，三反而不致一入。
现代文：孟尝君任齐国宰相时，一次他的侍从魏子替他去收封邑的租税，三次往返，结果一次也没把租税收回来。
English: When Meng Yijun was the prime minister of Qi, his servant Wei Zi once went to collect the tax of the fief for him. He went back and forth three times, but did not return the tax once.

古文：孟尝君问之，对曰： 有贤者，窃假与之，以故不致入。 
现代文：孟尝君问他这是什么缘故，魏子回答说： 有位贤德的人，我私自借您的名义把租税赠给了他，所以没有收回来。 
English: Meng Yijun asked him why this was so, and Wei Zi replied: There was a virtuous man, and I gave him the tax in your name, so I didn't get it back.

古文：孟尝君怒而退魏子。
现代文：孟尝君听后发了火一气之下辞退了魏子。
English: After hearing this, Meng Yuqun became angry and dismissed Wei Zi.

古文：居数年，人或毁孟尝君於齐湣王曰： 孟尝君将为乱。 
现代文：几年之后，有人向齐湣王造孟尝君的谣言说： 孟尝君将要发动叛乱。 
English: A few years later, someone told King Qi of the rumor that Meng Yaojun had been created by King Qi: Meng Yaojun is going to start a rebellion.

古文：及田甲劫湣王，湣王意疑孟尝君，孟尝君乃奔。
现代文：等到田君甲劫持了湣王，湣王便猜疑是孟尝君策划的，为避免殃祸孟尝君出逃了。
English: When Tian Junjia abducted King Gong, King Gong suspected that it was planned by Meng Yuqun, and in order to avoid disaster, Meng Yuqun fled.

古文：魏子所与粟贤者闻之，乃上书言孟尝君不作乱，请以身为盟，遂自刭宫门以明孟尝君。
现代文：曾经得到魏子赠粮的那位贤人听说了这件事，就上书给湣王申明孟尝君不会作乱，并请求以自己的生命作保，于是在宫殿门口刎颈自杀，以此证明孟尝君的清白。
English: When the wise man, who had once received a gift of grain from Wei Zi, heard about this, he sent a letter to the king of Wei stating that Meng Yaojun would not make trouble, and asked for his own life as a guarantee, so he committed suicide by cutting his neck at the palace gate to prove Meng Yaojun's innocence.

古文：湣王乃惊，而踪迹验问，孟尝君果无反谋，乃复召孟尝君。
现代文：湣王为之震惊，便追查考问实际情况，孟尝君果然没有叛乱阴谋，便召回了孟尝君。
English: Shao Wang was shocked, so he investigated the actual situation of the examination and interrogation, and Meng Yaojun did not have a rebellion plot, so he recalled Meng Yaojun.

古文：孟尝君因谢病，归老於薛。
现代文：孟尝君因此推托有病，要求辞官回薛邑养老。
English: As a result, Meng Yuqun put off his illness and asked the official to return to Xueyur for retirement.

古文：湣王许之。
现代文：湣王答应了他的请求。
English: The king agreed to his request.

古文：其後，秦亡将吕礼相齐，欲困苏代。
现代文：此后，秦国的逃亡将领吕礼到齐国担任齐国宰相，他想要陷苏代于困境。
English: After that, the fugitive general of Qin, Luli, came to Qi to serve as the prime minister of Qi. He wanted to trap the Soviet Union in a difficult situation.

古文：代乃谓孟尝君曰： 周最於齐，至厚也，而齐王逐之，而听亲弗相吕礼者，欲取秦也。
现代文：苏代就对孟尝君说： 周最对于齐王，是极为忠诚的，可是齐王把他驱逐了，并听信亲弗的意见让吕礼做宰相，其原因就是打算联合秦国。
English: The Su Dynasty said to Meng Yaojun: Zhou was extremely loyal to King Qi, but King Qi expelled him, and heeded the advice of his brother-in-law to make Lulei the prime minister, the reason for which was to unite Qin.

古文：齐、秦合，则亲弗与吕礼重矣。
现代文：齐国、秦国联合，那么亲弗与吕礼就会受到重用了。
English: If Qi and Qin were to unite, then the pro-Fu and pro-Li would be put to good use.

古文：有用，齐、秦必轻君。
现代文：他们受到重用，齐国、秦国必定轻视您。
English: They are heavily used, and Qi and Qin will certainly despise you.

古文：君不如急北兵，趋赵以和秦、魏，收周最以厚行，且反齐王之信，又禁天下之变。
现代文：您不如急速向北进军，攻打赵赵国来促使秦、魏讲和，招回周最来显示您的厚道，还可以挽回齐王的信誉，又能防止天下的时局发生变化。
English: It would be better for you to rapidly march northward and attack Zhao and Zhao Guo to encourage Qin and Wei to make peace, and invite Zhou back to show your benevolence. You can also restore the credibility of King Qi and prevent the current situation in the world from changing.

古文：齐无秦，则天下集齐，亲弗必走，则齐王孰与为其国也！ 
现代文：齐国不去依傍秦国，那么各诸侯都会归附齐国，亲弗势必出逃，这样一来，除了您之外，齐王还能跟谁一起来治理国家呢？ 
English: If the State of Qi does not side with the State of Qin, then all the princes will be attached to the State of Qi, and the pro-Fu will inevitably flee. In this way, in addition to you, with whom can the King of Qi govern the country?

古文：於是孟尝君从其计，而吕礼嫉害於孟尝君。
现代文：于是孟尝君听从了苏代的计谋，因而吕礼嫉恨并要谋害孟尝君。
English: As a result, Meng Qijun listened to the scheme of the Soviet Union, so Luli was jealous and wanted to kill Meng Qijun.

古文：孟尝君惧，乃遗秦相穰侯魏厓书曰： 吾闻秦欲以吕礼收齐，齐，天下之彊国也，子必轻矣。
现代文：孟尝君很害怕，就给秦国丞相穰侯魏冉写了一封信说： 我听说秦国打算让吕礼来联合齐国，齐国，是天下的强大国家，齐、秦联合成功吕礼将要得势，您必会被秦王轻视了。
English: Meng Yuqun was very scared, so he wrote a letter to Qin's prime minister, Gong Hou Wei Ran, saying: I heard that Qin planned to have Luli unite with Qi. Qi is the most powerful country in the world. If Qi and Qin succeed in uniting, Luli will gain power, and you will certainly be despised by the Qin king.

古文：齐秦相取以临三晋，吕礼必并相矣，是子通齐以重吕礼也。
现代文：如果秦、齐相与结盟来对付韩、赵、魏三国，那么吕礼必将为秦、齐两国宰相了，这是您结交齐国反而使吕礼的地位显重啊。
English: If Qin and Qi formed an alliance to deal with Han, Zhao, and Wei, then Luli would certainly become the prime minister of Qin and Qi. It is your friendship with Qi that makes Luli's status prominent.

古文：若齐免於天下之兵，其雠子必深矣。
现代文：再说，即使齐国免于诸侯国攻击的兵祸，齐国还摇雳会深深地仇恨您。
English: Moreover, even if Qi is spared from the military disaster of the attack of the vassal states, Qi will still hate you deeply.

古文：子不如劝秦王伐齐。
现代文：您不如劝说秦王攻打齐国。
English: You might as well persuade King Qin to attack Qi.

古文：齐破，吾请以所得封子。
现代文：齐国被攻破，我会设法请求秦王把所得的齐国土地封给您。
English: Since Qi has been broken, I will try to ask King Qin to give you the land of Qi.

古文：齐破，秦畏晋之彊，秦必重子以取晋。
现代文：齐国被攻破，秦国会害怕魏国强大起来，秦王必定重用您去结交魏国。
English: The Qin Dynasty feared that the Wei Dynasty would become powerful after the Qi Dynasty was defeated. The Qin King must have used you to make friends with the Wei Dynasty.

古文：晋国敝於齐而畏秦，晋必重子以取秦。
现代文：魏国败于齐国又害怕秦国，它摇雳推重您以便结交秦国。
English: Wei, defeated by Qi and afraid of Qin, is shaking its fist at you in order to make friends with Qin.

古文：是子破齐以为功，挟晋以为重；是子破齐定封，秦、晋交重子。
现代文：这样，您既能够凭攻破齐国建立自己的功劳，挟持魏国提高的地位；又可以攻破齐国得到封邑，使秦、魏两国同时敬重您。
English: In this way, you can not only establish your own merit by defeating Qi and hold Wei's improved status; you can also defeat Qi and obtain fiefs, so that both Qin and Wei countries respect you.

古文：若齐不破，吕礼复用，子必大穷。 
现代文：如果齐国不被攻破，吕礼再被任用，您摇雳陷于极端的困境中。 
English: If Qi is not defeated and Luli is reappointed, you will be in an extremely difficult situation.

古文：於是穰侯言於秦昭王伐齐，而吕礼亡。
现代文：于是穰侯向秦昭王进言攻打齐国，吕礼便逃离了齐国。
English: As a result, Yan Hou advised Qin Zhao Wang to attack Qi, and Lule fled Qi.

古文：後齐湣王灭宋，益骄，欲去孟尝君。
现代文：后来，齐湣王灭掉了宋国，愈加骄傲起来，打算除掉孟尝君。
English: Later, King Qizong annihilated the Song Dynasty and became more and more proud, planning to get rid of Meng Yaojun.

古文：孟尝君恐，乃如魏。
现代文：孟尝君很恐惧，就跑到了魏国。
English: Meng Yuqun was very scared and ran away to Wei.

古文：魏昭王以为相，西合於秦、赵，与燕共伐破齐。
现代文：魏昭王任用他做宰相，同西边的秦国、赵国联合，帮助燕国攻打并打败了齐国。
English: Wei Zhao Wang appointed him as prime minister and allied with Qin and Zhao in the west to help Yan attack and defeat Qi.

古文：齐湣王亡在莒，遂死焉。
现代文：齐湣王逃到莒县，最后死在了那里。
English: Qizhi Wang fled to Jixian County, where he eventually died.

古文：齐襄王立，而孟尝君中立於诸侯，无所属。
现代文：齐襄王即位，当时孟尝君在诸侯国之间持中立地位，不从属于任何一个国家。
English: When King Qixiang ascended the throne, Meng Yaojun held a neutral position among the vassal states and did not belong to any country.

古文：齐襄王新立，畏孟尝君，与连和，复亲薛公。
现代文：齐襄王由于刚刚即位，畏惧孟尝君，便与孟尝君和好，与他亲近起来。
English: As King Qixiang had just ascended the throne and was afraid of Meng Yaojun, he made peace with Meng Yaojun and became close to him.

古文：文卒，谥为孟尝君。
现代文：田文去世，谥号称孟尝君。
English: Tian Wen passed away, and his nickname was Meng Yaozhong.

古文：诸子争立，而齐魏共灭薛。
现代文：田文的几个儿子争着继承爵位，随即齐、魏两国联合共同灭掉了薛邑。
English: Several sons of Tianwen competed to inherit the title, and then Qi and Wei jointly destroyed Xueyun.

古文：孟尝绝嗣无後也。
现代文：孟尝君断绝了子嗣，没有了后代。
English: Meng Yaojun cut off his children and had no descendants.

古文：初，冯驩闻孟尝君好客，蹑蹻而见之。
现代文：当初，冯谖听说孟尝君乐于招揽宾客，便穿着草鞋远道而来见他。
English: At first, Feng Li heard that Meng Yijun liked to invite guests, so he came all the way to see him wearing straw sandals.

古文：孟尝君曰； 先生远辱，何以教文也？ 
现代文：孟尝君说： 承蒙先生远道光临，有什么要指教我的吗？ 
English: Meng Yijun said, "Thanks to Mr. Cheng's long-distance visit, do you have anything to teach me?

古文：冯驩曰： 闻君好士，以贫身归於君。 
现代文：冯谖回答说： 听说您乐于养士，我只是因为贫穷想归附您。 
English: Feng Yao replied, "I heard that you are willing to foster orphans. I just want to belong to you because I am poor.

古文：孟尝君置传舍十日，孟尝君问传舍长曰： 客何所为？ 
现代文：孟尝君没再说什么便把他安置在下等食客的住所里，十天后孟尝君询问住所的负责人说： 客人近来都做了什么？ 
English: Without saying anything else, Meng Yuqun placed him in the residence of a low-class diner. Ten days later, Meng Yuqun asked the person in charge of the residence: What have the guests done recently?

古文：答曰： 冯先生甚贫，犹有一剑耳，又蒯缑。
现代文：负责人回答说： 冯先生太穷了，只有一把剑，还是草绳缠着剑把。
English: The person in charge replied: Mr. Feng is too poor, he only has a sword, or a grass rope wrapped around the sword handle.

古文：弹其剑而歌曰 长铗归来乎，食无鱼 。 
现代文：他时而敲着那把剑唱道 长剑啊，咱们回家吧！吃饭没有鱼。  
English: Sometimes he tapped the sword and sang, Long sword, let's go home! There's no fish for dinner.

古文：孟尝君迁之幸舍，食有鱼矣。
现代文：孟尝君听后让冯谖搬到中等食客的住所里，吃饭有鱼了。
English: After listening to Meng Yijun, he asked Feng Ye to move to the residence of a medium-sized diner, and there was fish for dinner.

古文：五日，又问传舍长。答曰： 客复弹剑而歌曰 长铗归来乎，出无舆 。 
现代文：过了五天，孟尝君又向那位负责人询问冯谖的情况，负责人回答说： 客人又弹着剑唱道 长剑啊，咱们回去吧！出门没有车。  
English: Five days later, Meng Yaojun asked the person in charge about Feng Ye again. The person in charge replied, "The guest is again playing the sword and singing, "Long sword, let's go back! There is no car to go out."

古文：孟尝君迁之代舍，出入乘舆车矣。
现代文：于是孟尝君又把冯谖迁到上等食客的住所里，进出都有车子坐。
English: As a result, Meng Yuqun moved Feng Yu to the residence of a high-class diner, and there were cars coming and going.

古文：五日，孟尝君复问传舍长。
现代文：又过了五天，孟尝君再次询问那位负责人。
English: Five days later, Meng Yaojun asked the person in charge again.

古文：舍长答曰： 先生又尝弹剑而歌曰 长铗归来乎，无以为家 。 
现代文：负责人回答说： 这位先生又曾弹着剑唱道 长剑啊，咱们回家吧！没有办法养活家。  
English: The person in charge replied: This gentleman once again played a sword and sang: Long sword, let's go home! There is no way to feed the family.

古文：孟尝君不悦。
现代文：孟尝君听了很不高兴。
English: Meng Yuqun was very unhappy to hear this.

古文：居期年，冯驩无所言。
现代文：过了整一年，冯谖没再说什么。
English: After a whole year, Feng Yu did not say anything.

古文：孟尝君时相齐，封万户於薛。
现代文：孟尝君当时正任齐国宰相，受封万户于薛邑。
English: At that time, Meng Yuqun was the prime minister of Qi and received the title of Wanhu in Xueyun.

古文：其食客三千人。邑入不足以奉客，使人出钱於薛。
现代文：他的食客有三千人之多，食邑的赋税收入不够供养这么多食客，就派人到薛邑贷款放债。
English: He has as many as 3,000 diners, and the tax revenue of the food village is not enough to support so many diners, so he sent someone to Xueyur to lend money.

古文：岁馀不入，贷钱者多不能与其息，客奉将不给。
现代文：由于年景一年到头都不好，没有收成，借债的人多数不能付给利息，食客的需用将无法供给。
English: As the year-round situation is not good, there is no harvest, most borrowers cannot pay interest, and the needs of diners will not be able to be supplied.

古文：孟尝君忧之，问左右： 何人可使收债於薛者？ 
现代文：对于这种情况，孟尝君焦虑不安，就问左右侍从： 谁可以派往薛邑去收债？ 
English: For this situation, Meng Yuqun was anxious and uneasy, so he asked the attendants: Who can be sent to Xueyur to collect debts?

古文：传舍长曰： 代舍客冯公形容状貌甚辩，长者，无他伎能，宜可令收债。 
现代文：那个住所负责人说： 上等食客住所里的冯老先生从状貌长相看，很是精明，又是个长者，一定稳重，派他去收债该是合适的。 
English: The person in charge of the residence said: Mr. Feng Lao Rong in the residence of high-class diners, judging from his appearance, is very shrewd, and he is an elderly man. He must be stable. It would be appropriate to send him to collect debts.

古文：孟尝君乃进冯驩而请之曰： 宾客不知文不肖，幸临文者三千馀人，邑入不足以奉宾客，故出息钱於薛。
现代文：孟尝君便迎进冯谖向他请求说： 宾客们不知道我无能，光临我的门下有三千多人，如今食邑的收入不能够供养宾客，所以在薛邑放了些债。
English: Meng Yuqun then welcomed Feng Yuqun and pleaded with him: "The guests don't know that I am incompetent. More than 3,000 people have visited my door. Nowadays, the income of the restaurant can't support the guests, so I put some debts in Xueyue.

古文：薛岁不入，民颇不与其息。
现代文：可是薛邑年景不好，没有收成，百姓多数不能付给利息。
English: However, Xueyur is not a good year, there is no harvest, and most people can not pay interest.

古文：今客食恐不给，原先生责之。 冯驩曰； 诺。 
现代文：宾客吃饭恐怕都成问题了，希望先生替我去索取欠债。 冯谖说： 好吧。 
English: I'm afraid that all the guests' meals have become a problem, and I hope my husband will collect the debt for me.Feng Yao said: Okay.

古文：辞行，至薛，召取孟尝君钱者皆会，得息钱十万。
现代文：便告别了孟尝君，到了薛邑，他把凡是借了孟尝君钱的人都集合起来，索要欠债得到利息十万钱。
English: He said goodbye to Meng Yuqun, and when he arrived in Xueyun, he gathered all the people who had borrowed money from Meng Yuqun and demanded 100,000 yuan in interest on the debt.

古文：乃多酿酒，买肥牛，召诸取钱者，能与息者皆来，不能与息者亦来，皆持取钱之券书合之。
现代文：这笔款项他没送回去，却酿了许多酒，买了肥壮的牛，然后召集借钱的人，能付给利息的都来，不能付给利息的也来，要求一律带着借钱的契据以便核对。
English: He did not return the money, but he made a lot of wine, bought fat cattle, and then summoned the borrowers, those who could pay the interest, and those who could not pay the interest, and asked them to bring the loan deed for verification.

古文：齐为会，日杀牛置酒。
现代文：随即让大家一起参加宴会，当日杀牛炖肉，置办酒席。
English: Then let everyone take part in the banquet together, kill beef stew on the day, and arrange a banquet.

古文：酒酣，乃持券如前合之，能与息者，与为期；贫不能与息者，取其券而烧之。
现代文：宴会上正当大家饮酒尽兴时，冯谖就拿着契据走到席前一一核对，能够付给利息的，给他定下期限；穷得不能付息的，取回他们的契据当众把它烧毁。
English: At the banquet, just as everyone was drinking to their heart's content, Feng Yu took the deed and walked to the front of the table to check it one by one. If he could pay the interest, he would be given a deadline; if he was too poor to pay the interest, he would take back their deed and burn it in public.

古文：曰： 孟尝君所以贷钱者，为民之无者以为本业也；所以求息者，为无以奉客也。
现代文：接着对大家说： 孟尝君之所以向大家贷款，就是给没有资金的人提供资金来从事行业生产；他之所以向大家索债，是因为没有钱财供养宾客。
English: Then he said to everyone, "The reason why Meng Yaojun lends money to everyone is to provide funds to people who have no funds to engage in industrial production; the reason why he claims debts from everyone is because he has no money to support guests.

古文：今富给者以要期，贫穷者燔券书以捐之。
现代文：如今富裕有钱还债的约定日期还债，贫穷无力还债的烧掉契据把债务全部废除。
English: Nowadays, the rich and affluent pay their debts on the agreed date, and the poor and indebted burn their deeds to cancel all their debts.

古文：诸君彊饮食。
现代文：请各位开怀畅饮吧。
English: Please drink responsibly.

古文：有君如此，岂可负哉！ 
现代文：有这样的封邑主人，日后怎么能背弃他呢！ 
English: If there is such a feudal lord, how can you turn your back on him in the future?

古文：坐者皆起，再拜。
现代文：在坐的人都站了起来，连续两次行跪拜大礼。
English: Everyone who was sitting stood up and bowed twice in a row.

古文：孟尝君闻冯驩烧券书，怒而使使召驩。
现代文：孟尝君听到冯谖烧毁契据的消息，十分恼怒立即派人召回冯谖。
English: When Meng Yuqun heard the news that Feng Yu had burned the deed, he was very angry and immediately sent someone to recall Feng Yuqun.

古文：驩至，孟尝君曰： 文食客三千人，故贷钱於薛。
现代文：冯谖刚一到，孟尝君就责问道： 我有食客三千人，所以在薛邑放债。
English: As soon as Feng Yao arrived, Meng Yaojun asked: I have 3,000 diners, so I have to borrow money from Xueyue.

古文：文奉邑少，而民尚多不以时与其息，客食恐不足，故请先生收责之。
现代文：我的封地本来就少，而百姓还多不按时偿还利息，宾客们连吃饭都怕不够用，所以请先生去收缴欠债。
English: My fief is small, and many people do not pay back the interest on time. My guests are afraid that they will not have enough to eat, so please go and collect the debt.

古文：闻先生得钱，即以多具牛酒而烧券书，何？ 
现代文：听说先生收来钱就大办酒肉宴席，而且把契据烧掉了，这是为什么？ 
English: I heard that when you received the money, you held a big banquet and burned the deed. Why is that?

古文：冯驩曰： 然。
现代文：冯谖回答说： 是的。
English: Feng Yu replied: Yes.

古文：不多具牛酒即不能毕会，无以知其有馀不足。
现代文：如果不大办酒肉宴席就不能把债民全都集合起来，也就没办法了解谁富裕谁贫穷。
English: If you don't have a big banquet, you can't get all the debtors together, and there's no way to know who's rich and who's poor.

古文：有馀者，为要期。
现代文：富裕的，给他限定日期还债。
English: If he's rich, give him a deadline.

古文：不足者，虽守而责之十年，息愈多，急，即以逃亡自捐之。
现代文：贫穷的，即使监守着催促十年也还不上债，时间越长，利息越多，催逼得急了，他们就会用逃亡的办法赖掉债务。
English: The poor, even if they are kept under pressure for ten years, do not get into debt. The longer the time, the more interest. If they are forced to hurry, they will use the method of escape to get out of debt.

古文：若急，终无以偿，上则为君好利不爱士民，下则有离上抵负之名，非所以厉士民彰君声也。
现代文：如果太急，他们最终也无法偿还，对上就会认为您贪图小利不爱士民，对下则百姓弃君赖债的名声，这不是用来勉励士人和民众、彰显您声望的办法。
English: If it is too urgent, they will not be able to repay it in the end. On the one hand, it will be thought that you are greedy for small profits and do not love the people. On the other hand, the people will abandon the reputation of debt. This is not a way to encourage the people and the people and highlight your reputation.

古文：焚无用虚债之券，捐不可得之虚计，令薛民亲君而彰君之善声也，君有何疑焉！ 
现代文：我烧掉毫无用处的借据，废弃有名无实的帐簿，是让薛邑平民百姓信任您而彰扬您善良的好名声啊。您还有什么可怀疑的呢？ 
English: By burning useless IOUs and discarding fictitious account books, I am letting the common people of Xueyuan trust you and promote your good reputation. What else can you doubt?

古文：孟尝君乃拊手而谢之。
现代文：孟尝君听后，拍着手连声道谢。
English: After listening, Meng Yuqun clapped his hands together to say thank you.

古文：齐王惑於秦、楚之毁，以为孟尝君名高其主而擅齐国之权，遂废孟尝君。
现代文：齐王受到秦国和楚国毁谤言论的蛊惑，认为孟尝君的声望高于自己，独揽齐国大权，于是罢了孟尝君的官。
English: King Qi was bewitched by the slanderous remarks of the leaders of Qin and Chu, and thought that Meng Yaojun's reputation was higher than his own, and that he had monopolized the power of Qi, so he dismissed Meng Yaojun's official.

古文：诸客见孟尝君废，皆去。
现代文：那些宾客看到孟尝君被罢了官，一个个都离开了他。
English: When the guests saw that Meng Yaojun had been removed from office, they all left him.

古文：冯驩曰： 借臣车一乘，可以入秦者，必令君重於国而奉邑益广，可乎？ 
现代文：只有冯谖为他谋划说： 借给我一辆车，让我前往秦国，我一定会让您在齐国更加显贵，食邑更加宽广。你看可以吗？ 
English: Only Feng Jun planned for him and said: "Lend me a car and let me go to Qin, I will definitely make you more prominent in Qin, and the food will be more extensive." Can you see that?

古文：孟尝君乃约车币而遣之。
现代文：于是孟尝君便准备了马车和礼物送冯谖上了路。
English: So Meng Yakun prepared a carriage and gifts to send Feng Xuan on his way.

古文：冯驩乃西说秦王曰： 天下之游士冯轼结靷西入秦者，无不欲彊秦而弱齐；冯轼结靷东入齐者，无不欲彊齐而弱秦。
现代文：冯谖就乘车向西到了秦国游说秦王说： 天下的游说之士驾车向西来到秦国的，无一不是想要使秦国强大而使齐国衰弱；乘车向东进入齐国的，无一不是要使齐国强大而使秦国衰弱。
English: Feng Li took a car and drove west to Qin to lobby the Qin king. The Qin king said, "All the lobbyists in the world drive west to Qin to make Qin strong and Qi weak. They drive east to Qin to make Qi strong and Qin weak."

古文：此雄雌之国也，势不两立为雄，雄者得天下矣。 
现代文：这是两个不分上下的国家，它们是不可能并立称雄的，称雄的就可以统一天下了。 
English: These are two countries, regardless of whether they are at the top or bottom. It is impossible for them to be dominant at the same time. If they are dominant, they can be unified.

古文：秦王跽而问之曰： 何以使秦无为雌而可？ 
现代文：秦王听得入了神，挺直身子跪着问冯谖说： 您看要使秦国避免成为软弱无力的国家，该怎么办才好呢？ 
English: King Qin was so moved by what he heard that he straightened up, knelt down, and asked Feng Yu, "What do you think should be done to prevent Qin from becoming a weak and powerless country?"

古文：冯驩曰： 王亦知齐之废孟尝君乎？ 
现代文：冯谖回答说： 大王也知道齐国罢了孟尝君的官吧？ 
English: Feng Yao replied: The great king also knows that Qi is just Meng Yaojun's official, right?

古文：秦王曰： 闻之。 
现代文：秦王说： 听到了这件事。 
English: Qin Wang said, "I heard about this.

古文：冯驩曰： 使齐重於天下者，孟尝君也。
现代文：冯谖说： 使齐国受到天下敬重的，就是孟尝君。
English: Feng Yu said: It is Meng Yuqun who has made Qi respected by the world.

古文：今齐王以毁废之，其心怨，必背齐；背齐入秦，则齐国之情，人事之诚，尽委之秦，齐地可得也，岂直为雄也！
现代文：如今齐国国君听信了毁谤之言而把孟尝君罢免，孟尝君心中无比怨愤，必定背离齐国；他背离齐国进入秦国，那么齐国的国情，朝廷中下至君王下至官吏的状况都将为秦国所掌握。
English: Now, the ruler of Qi has listened to the slanderous words and dismissed Meng Yaojun. Meng Yaojun is extremely resentful and will surely leave Qi. If he leaves Qi and enters Qin, then the national conditions of Qi, the situation of the imperial court, the king, and the officials will all be controlled by Qin.

古文：君急使使载币阴迎孟尝君，不可失时也。
现代文：您将得到整个齐国的土地，何止是称雄啊！您赶快派使者载着礼物暗地里去迎接孟尝君，不要错过这次良机啊。
English: You will get the entire land of Qi, and what's more, you will be praised as a hero! You should quickly send an emissary with a gift to secretly meet Meng Yuqun, don't miss this good opportunity.

古文：如有齐觉悟，复用孟尝君，则雌雄之所在未可知也。 
现代文：如果齐王明白过来，再度起用孟尝君，那么胜败属于谁就不能预料了。 
English: If King Qi comes to understand and appoints Meng Yaojun again, then it is impossible to predict who will win or lose.

古文：秦王大悦，乃遣车十乘黄金百镒以迎孟尝君。
现代文：秦王听了非常高兴，就派遣十辆马车载着百镒黄金去迎接孟尝君。
English: King Qin was very pleased to hear this and sent ten carriages carrying hundreds of ounces of gold to welcome Meng Yu.

古文：冯驩辞以先行，至齐，说齐王曰： 天下之游士冯轼结靷东入齐者，无不欲彊齐而弱秦者；冯轼结靷西入秦者，无不欲彊秦而弱齐者。
现代文：冯谖告别了秦王而抢在使者前面赶往齐国，到了齐国，劝说齐王道： 天下游说之士驾车向东来到齐的，无一不是想要使齐国强大而使秦国衰弱的；乘车向西进入秦国的，无一不是要使秦国强大而使齐国衰弱的。
English: After bidding farewell to King Qin, Feng Xuan hurried ahead of the envoys to Qi. When he arrived in Qi, he tried to persuade King Qin as follows: All the lobbyists in the world who drove to Qi from the east wanted to make Qi strong and weaken Qin; when they drove to the west and entered Qin, they wanted to make Qin strong and weaken Qin.

古文：夫秦齐雄雌之国，秦彊则齐弱矣，此势不两雄。
现代文：秦国与齐国不分上下，秦国强大那么齐国必定软弱，这两个国家势必不能同时称雄。
English: Qin and Qi are equal, but if Qin is strong, then Qi must be weak. These two countries cannot be champions at the same time.

古文：今臣窃闻秦遣使车十乘载黄金百镒以迎孟尝君。
现代文：如今我私下里听说秦国已经派遣使者带着十辆马车载着百镒黄金来迎接孟尝君了。
English: Now I have heard in private that Qin has sent an envoy with ten wagons carrying hundreds of ounces of gold to welcome Meng Yuqun.

古文：孟尝君不西则已，西入相秦则天下归之，秦为雄而齐为雌，雌则临淄、即墨危矣。
现代文：孟尝君不西去就罢了，如果西去担任秦国宰相，那么天下将归秦国所有，秦国称雄，齐国就只能屈居其下，那么临淄、即墨就危在旦夕了。
English: If Meng Yuqun does not go to the West, the whole world will belong to Qin. If Meng Yuqun becomes the prime minister of Qin, the whole world will belong to Qin. If Qin dominates, Qi can only be subservient to Qin. If Meng Yuqun becomes the prime minister of Qin, Linyi will be in danger.

古文：王何不先秦使之未到，复孟尝君，而益与之邑以谢之？
现代文：大王为什么不在秦国使者没到达之前，赶快恢复孟尝君的官位并给他增加封邑来向他表示道歉呢？
English: Why didn't the great king apologize to Meng Yaqun by quickly restoring his official position and giving him more fiefs before the Qin envoy arrived?

古文：孟尝君必喜而受之。
现代文：如果这么做了，孟尝君必定高兴而情愿接受。
English: If he does, Meng Yaojun will surely be pleased and willing to accept.

古文：秦虽彊国，岂可以请人相而迎之哉！
现代文：秦国虽是强国，岂能够任意到别的国家迎接人家的宰相呢！
English: Although Qin is a powerful country, how can it arbitrarily go to other countries to welcome someone else's prime minister?

古文：折秦之谋，而绝其霸彊之略。 
现代文：要挫败秦国的阴谋，断绝它称强称霸的计划。 
English: It is necessary to defeat the conspiracy of Qin and cut off its plan to be strong and dominate.

古文：齐王曰： 善。 
现代文：齐王听后，顿时明白过来说： 好。 
English: After listening, Qi Wang suddenly understood and said: Good.

古文：乃使人至境候秦使。
现代文：于是派人至边境等候秦国使者。
English: So they sent someone to the border to wait for the Qin emissary.

古文：秦使车適入齐境，使还驰告之，王召孟尝君而复其相位，而与其故邑之地，又益以千户。
现代文：秦国使者的车子刚入齐国边境，齐国在边境的使臣立即转车奔驰而回报告了这个情况，齐王召回孟尝君并且恢复了他的宰相官位，同时还给了他原来封邑的土地，又给他增加了千户。
English: The car of the Qin envoy had just entered the border of Qi. The envoys of Qi at the border immediately changed cars and returned to report this situation. The king of Qi recalled Meng Yuqun and restored his position as prime minister. At the same time, he gave him the land of the original fief and added a thousand households to him.

古文：秦之使者闻孟尝君复相齐，还车而去矣。
现代文：秦国的使者听说孟尝君恢复了齐国宰相官位，就转车回去了。
English: When the Qin envoy heard that Meng Yuqun had been reinstated as prime minister of Qi, he changed trains and went back.

古文：自齐王毁废孟尝君，诸客皆去。
现代文：自从齐王因受毁谤之言的蛊惑而罢免了孟尝君，那些宾客们都离开了他。
English: Since King Qi dismissed Meng Yaojun because of the slanderous words, those guests have left him.

古文：後召而复之，冯驩迎之。
现代文：后来齐王召回并恢复了孟尝君的官位，冯谖去迎接他。
English: Later, King Qi recalled and restored Meng Yaojun's official position, and Feng Ye went to meet him.

古文：未到，孟尝君太息叹曰： 文常好客，遇客无所敢失，食客三千有馀人，先生所知也。
现代文：还没到京城的时候，孟尝君深深感叹说： 我素常喜好结交宾客，乐于养士，接待宾客从不敢有任何失礼之处，有食客三千多人，这是先生您所了解的。
English: Before arriving in Beijing, Meng Yatjun deeply lamented: I always like to make friends with guests, I like to nurture them, and I never dare to be rude when receiving guests. There are more than three thousand diners, as you know.

古文：客见文一日废，皆背文而去，莫顾文者。
现代文：宾客们一看到我被罢官，都背离我而离去，没有一个顾念我的。
English: As soon as the guests saw that I had been dismissed, they all turned their backs on me and left, not one of them thinking about me.

古文：今赖先生得复其位，客亦有何面目复见文乎？
现代文：如今靠着先生得以恢复我的宰相官位，那些离去的宾客还有什么脸面再见我呢？
English: Now, thanks to my husband, I have been able to resume my position as prime minister. What faces will those guests have when they see me again?

古文：如复见文者，必唾其面而大辱之。 
现代文：如果有再见我的，我一定唾他的脸，狠狠地羞辱他。 
English: If I ever see him again, I'll spit in his face and humiliate him.

古文：冯驩结辔下拜。
现代文：听了这番话后，冯谖收住缰绳，下车而行拜礼。
English: After listening to these words, Feng Yao closed the reins, got off the train and went to pray.

古文：孟尝君下车接之，曰： 先生为客谢乎？ 
现代文：孟尝君也立即下车还礼，说： 先生是替那些宾客道歉吗？ 
English: Meng Yuqun also got off the bus immediately to return the courtesy, saying: Is the gentleman apologizing for those guests?

古文：冯驩曰： 非为客谢也，为君之言失。
现代文：冯谖说： 并不是替宾客道歉，是因为您的话说错了。
English: Feng Yu said, "I'm not apologizing for the guests, but because what you said was wrong.

古文：夫物有必至，事有固然，君知之乎？ 
现代文：说来，万物都有其必然的终结，世事都有其常规常理，您明白这句话的意思吗？ 
English: In other words, everything has its inevitable end, and everything in the world has its regular common sense. Do you understand the meaning of this sentence?

古文：孟尝君曰： 愚不知所谓也。 
现代文：孟尝君说： 我不明白说的是什么意思。 
English: Meng Chakun said, "I don't understand what it means.

古文：曰： 生者必有死，物之必至也；富贵多士，贫贱寡友，事之固然也。
现代文：冯谖说： 活物都会有死亡的时候，这是活物的必然归结；富贵的人多宾客，贫贱的人少朋友，事情本来就是如此。
English: Feng Yao said: All living things will have a time of death, this is the inevitable conclusion of living things; rich people have more guests, poor people have fewer friends, this is how things are.

古文：君独不见夫趣市者乎？
现代文：您难道没看到人们奔向市集吗？
English: Don't you see people running to the market?

古文：明旦，侧肩争门而入；日暮之後，过市朝者掉臂而不顾。
现代文：天刚亮，人们向市集里拥挤，侧着肩膀争夺入口；日落之后，经过市集的人甩着手臂连头也不回。
English: At first light, people crowd into the bazaar, shoulder to shoulder, jostling for the entrance; after sunset, those who pass through the bazaar throw up their arms and don't look back.

古文：非好朝而恶暮，所期物忘其中。
现代文：不是人们喜欢早晨而厌恶傍晚，而是由于所期望得到的东西市中已经没有了。
English: It's not that people love the morning and hate the evening, it's that what they want is no longer available.

古文：今君失位，宾客皆去，不足以怨士而徒绝宾客之路。
现代文：如今您失去了官位，宾客都离去，不能因此怨恨宾客而平白截断他们奔向您的通路。
English: Now that you are no longer in office and your guests have left, you can't hold a grudge against them and cut off their access to you.

古文：原君遇客如故。 
现代文：希望您对待宾客像过去一样。 
English: I hope you will treat your guests as you have in the past.

古文：孟尝君再拜曰： 敬从命矣。
现代文：孟尝君连续两次下拜说： 我恭敬地听从您的指教了。
English: Meng Yuqun bowed down twice in a row and said: I have respectfully listened to your advice.

古文：闻先生之言，敢不奉教焉。 
现代文：听先生的话，敢不恭敬地接受教导吗。 
English: If you listen to your teacher, don't you dare to be taught disrespectfully?

古文：太史公曰：吾尝过薛，其俗闾里率多暴桀子弟，与邹、鲁殊。
现代文：太史公说： 我曾经经过薛地，那里民间的风气多有凶暴的子弟，与邹地、鲁地迥异。
English: Taishigong said: I once passed through Xue, where the folk customs have many violent children, which is very different from that of Shunde and Loudi.

古文：问其故，曰： 孟尝君招致天下任侠，奸人入薛中盖六万馀家矣。 
现代文：我向那里人询问这是什么缘故，人们说： 孟尝君曾经招来天下许多负气仗义的人，仅乱法犯禁的人进入薛地的大概就有六万多家。 
English: I asked the people there what was the reason for this, and they said: Meng Yuqun once attracted many people from all over the world who bear grudges and fight for justice. There are about more than sixty thousand people who have entered Xuedi just for breaking the law.

古文：世之传孟尝君好客自喜，名不虚矣。
现代文：世间传说孟尝君以乐于养客而沾沾自喜，的确名不虚传。
English: According to legend, Meng Yaojun was so pleased with himself for being able to feed his guests that his name was indeed true.

