古文：东坡称司空表圣诗文高雅，有承平之遗风，盖尝自列其诗之有得于文字之表者二十四韵，恨当时不识其妙。
现代文：苏东坡称赞司空表圣的诗歌文章清高典雅，有承平时遗留的风韵，曾要亲自列出他的诗中在语言文字仪范方面有收获的二十四韵，遗憾当时没有看出其中的佳妙。
English: Su Dongpo praised the clarity and elegance of Siku's poems, which have retained the charm of ordinary times. He once wanted to personally list the twenty-four rhymes in his poems that were fruitful in terms of language and grammar. Unfortunately, he did not see the beauty at the time.

古文：又云： 表圣论其诗，以为得味外味，如 绿树连村暗，黄花入麦稀 ，此句最善。
现代文：又说： 司空表圣谈论自己的诗歌时，认为得到了诗味之外的韵味，例如 绿树连村暗，黄花入麦稀 ，这两句最好。
English: He also said: When talking about his own poems, Sikuo Baisheng thought that he had obtained charms other than poetry, for example, "The green tree is connected to the village darkness, the yellow flower is mixed with wheat," these two sentences are the best.

古文：又 棋声花院闭，幡影石坛高 ，吾尝独入白鹤观，松阴满地，不见一人，惟闻棋声，然后知此句之工，但恨其寒俭有僧态。 
现代文：又如 棋声花院闭，幡影石坛高 ，我曾经独自进到白鹤观中，松树阴影满地，见不到一个人，只听到下棋的声音，这以后才体会到这两句诗的工妙，只可惜诗意清寒俭薄有僧人意态。 
English: For example, the flower garden was closed, the stone altar was high, I once went alone to see the white cranes, the shadow of the pine trees covered the ground, I could not see a person, I only heard the sound of playing chess. It was only later that I realized the ingenuity of these two poems, but unfortunately the poetry was cold and frugal and had a monk's attitude.

古文：予读表圣《一鸣集》，有《与李生论诗》一书，乃正坡公所言者，其余五言句云： 人家寒食月，花影午时天 ， 雨微吟足思，花落梦无憀 ， 坡暖冬生笋，松凉夏健人 ， 川明虹照雨，树密鸟冲人 ， 夜短猿悲减，风和鹊喜灵 ， 马色经寒惨，雕声带晚饥 ， 客来当意惬，花发遇歌成。 
现代文：我读司空表圣《一鸣集》，其中有《与李生论诗》一封书信，正是苏坡公所说的那些话，其余的诗五言诗句有： 人家寒食月，花影午时天  雨微吟足思，花落梦无谬  坡缓冬生笋，松凉夏健人  川明虹照雨，树密乌冲人  夜短狡悲减，风和鹊喜灵  马色经寒惨，雕声带晚饥  客来当意惬花发遇歌成。 
English: I read "A Collection of Poems" by Szu Kuo, which included a letter entitled "On Poetry with Li Sheng," which was the words spoken by Su Po. The remaining five-character poems include: People's cold food month, flower shadow noon time, rain faintly chanting feet, flower falling dream absurdity, Po slow winter germination, loose cool summer healthy people, River bright rainbow shining rain, dense trees darkening people, Night short cunning, sorrow diminishing, wind and gusts of wind joyful, Horse color through the cold, carving with late hunger, guests come to mind, flowers blooming, encountering song.

古文：七言句云： 孤屿池痕春涨满，小栏花韵午晴初 ， 五更惆怅回孤忱，由自残灯照落花 ，皆可称也。
现代文：七言诗句有： 孤屿池痕春涨满，小栏花韵午睛初  五更惆怅回孤枕，由自残灯照落花 ，都值得称道。
English: The seven-sentence poems include: The lonely pond is full of spring, the small column flower rhyme is at the beginning of the afternoon, the five-year-old returns to the lonely pillow, and the self-damaged lamp shines on the falling flowers, all of which are commendable.

