古文：◎职官四
现代文：职官四
English: Officer Four

古文：○南京宗人府吏部户部附总督粮储礼部兵部刑部工部都察院附提督操江通政司大理寺詹事府翰林院国子监太常寺光禄寺太仆寺鸿胪寺尚宝司六科行人司钦天监太医院五城兵马司应天府附上元江宁二县已上南京官王府长史司布政司按察司各道行太仆寺苑马寺都转运盐使司盐课提举司市舶提举司茶马司府州县儒学巡检司驿税课司仓库织染局河泊所批验所递运所铁冶所医学阴阳学僧纲司道纪司
现代文：南京宗人府吏部户部附总督粮储礼部兵部刑部工部都察院附提督操江通政司大理寺詹事府翰林院国子监太常寺光禄寺太仆寺鸿胪寺尚宝司六科行人司钦天监太医院五城兵马司应天府附上元江宁二县已上南京官王府长史司布政司按察司各道行太仆寺苑马寺都转运盐使司盐课提举司市舶提举司茶马司府州县儒学巡检司驿税课司仓库织染局河泊所批验所递运所铁冶所医学阴阳学僧纲司道纪司
English: The officials of the Nanjing Sohneng Prefecture, the household department attached to the governor, the grain reserve, the ceremonial department, the military department, the criminal department, the engineering department, the tutelary government, the governor of Jiangtong, the political secretary, the Dali Temple, the Zhanjifu, the Hanlin Institute, the national child supervisor, the Taizhong Temple, the Guanglu Temple, the Taifu Temple, the Honglu Temple, the Shangbo, the six sciences, the pedestrian, the Qin Tianguan, the Five-City Hospital, the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the Ying Tianfu attached to the Yuan Jiangning, the two counties

古文：南京宗人府。经历司，经历一人。
现代文：南京宗人府，经历司，经历一人。
English: Nanjing Sohenfu, experience department, experience one person.

古文：吏部。尚书一人，右侍郎一人。
现代文：玉登年间，每部增加侍郎一名。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gyokuden, one chamberlain was added to each section.

古文：其属，司务厅，司务一人。
现代文：崇祯年间革除。它的下属，司务厅，司务一人。
English: During the reign of Chongzhen, it was abolished, and its subordinate, the Office of the Secretary, lost one secretary.

古文：文选、考功、验封、稽勋四清吏司，各郎中一人，主事一人。
现代文：文选、考功、验封、稽勋四个清吏司，各有郎中一人，主事一人。
English: There are four officials responsible for the selection of literature, the appraisal of merit, the inspection of seals, and the examination of honors, each of whom has one subordinate and one supervisor.

古文：凡南京官，六年考察，考功掌之，不由北吏部。
现代文：验封、稽助二司主事，后来一并革除。所有南京官员，每六年考察一次，由考功掌管，不由北京吏部掌管。
English: All Nanjing officials were to be inspected once every six years, and the inspection was to be conducted by the Cao Gong, and not by the Beijing Personnel Department.

古文：户部。尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人，照磨一人。
现代文：户部，尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人，照磨一人。
English: The head of the household, one secretary, one right-hand man, one secretary, and one miller.

古文：十三司，郎中十三人，员外郎九人，主事十七人，所辖，宝钞提举司，提举一人。
现代文：十三司，郎中十三人，员外郎九人，浙江、江西、湖广、廑东、广西、福建、山西、陕西、云南九司各一人，嘉靖三十七年，革除山西、陕西二司员外郎各一人，隆庆年间，又革除瘇西、耋直二司员外郎各一人。
English: The 13th Division consisted of 13 officers, 13 junior officers, and 9 non-commissioned officers, including one each from Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hubei, Shandong, Guangxi, Fujian, Shanxi, Shaanxi, and Yunnan; in the 37th year of Jiajing, one non-commissioned officer from Shanxi and two from Shaanxi were dismissed, and in the year of Longqing, one non-commissioned officer from Shaanxi and two from Fujian were dismissed.

古文：广积库、承运库、赃罚库、甲乙丙丁戊五字库、宝钞广惠库、军储仓，各大使一人。
现代文：广积库、承运库、脏罚库、甲乙丙丁戊五字库、宝钞广惠库、军储仓，各有大使一人。
English: There is one ambassador for each of the warehouses, including the general storage warehouse, the transportation warehouse, the dirty penalty warehouse, the A, B, C, D and E warehouse, the banknote general benefit warehouse, and the military warehouse.

古文：长安门仓、东安门仓、西安门仓、北安门仓各副使一人。
现代文：长安门仓、东安门仓、西安门仓、北安门仓各有副使一人。
English: Chang'an Gate, Dong'an Gate, Xi'an Gate, and Beian Gate each have one deputy envoy.

古文：龙江盐仓检校批验所，大使一人。
现代文：龙江盐仓检校批验所，有大使一人。
English: Longjiang Yancang Inspection and Approval Center has one ambassador.

古文：总督粮储一人。礼部。
现代文：二十六年革除，以卢部右侍郎加都御史街兼任此职。
English: He was dismissed from his post in 1926, and assumed this post concurrently as the Right Attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, Kato Mishi-gai.

古文：尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人。
现代文：礼部，尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人。
English: There is one member of the Ceremonial Department, one member of the Secretariat, one member of the Right Attendant, and one member of the Secretariat.

古文：仪制、祠祭、主客、精膳四司，各郎中一人。
现代文：仪制、祠祭、主客、精膳四司，各有郎中一人。
English: Ceremonial, ancestral hall festival, host and guest, fine dining, four divisions, each with one roju.

古文：仪制、祠祭二司，各主事一人。
现代文：仪制、祠祭二司，各有主事一人。
English: There are two departments for ceremonies and ancestral hall festivals, each with one person in charge.

古文：所辖，铸印局，副使一人。
现代文：管辖有，铸印局，副使一人。
English: It is under the jurisdiction of the Stamp Bureau, with one deputy envoy.

古文：教坊司，右韶舞一人，左右司乐各一人。
现代文：教坊司，右韶舞一人，左、右司乐各一人。
English: The teacher of the classroom, one person of the right koto dance, one person of the left and right koto music.

古文：兵部。尚书参赞机务一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人。
现代文：兵部，尚书参赞机务一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人。
English: Military Department, Shangshu Counsellor, one clerk, one right-hand man, and one secretary.

古文：武选、职方、车驾、武库四司，郎中四人，员外郎二人，主事五人。
现代文：武选、职方、车驾、武库四司，郎中四人，员外郎二人，武选、武库无员外郎，主事五人，车驾司主事二人。
English: Wu Xuan, the staff, the driver and the armory had four divisions, four junior officers, two junior officers, Wu Xuan and the armory had no junior officers, five supervisors and two supervisors.

古文：所辖，典牧所，提领一人。
现代文：管辖有，典牧所，提领一人，正八品。
English: There is one person under the jurisdiction of the Tenki Pasture who has been promoted to the rank of Shihakuhin.

古文：会同馆、大胜关，各大使一人。
现代文：会同馆、大胜关，各有大使一人。
English: There will be one ambassador from each of the association, the museum and Dasheng Pass.

古文：按参赞机务，自宣德八年黄福始。
现代文：按参赞机务，从宣德八年黄福开始。
English: According to the councillor mechanism, it started from the eight years of Huangfu in Xuande.

古文：成化二十三年，始奉敕谕，专以本部尚书参赞机务，同内外守备官操练军马，抚恤人民，禁戢盗贼，振举庶务，故其职视五部为特重云。
现代文：成化二十三年开始奉敕谕，专门以本部尚书参赞机务，会同内外守备官操练军马，抚恤人民，查禁缉拿盗贼，整顿各种军务，因此他的职责与其它五部相比尤为重要。
English: In the 23rd year of Chenghua's reign, he began to serve as a special adviser to the headquarters, and together with the internal and external garrison officers, he trained horses, supported the people, investigated and arrested thieves, and rectified various military affairs. Therefore, his duties are particularly important compared to the other five departments.

古文：刑部。尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务、照磨各一人。
现代文：刑部，尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务、照磨各一人。
English: The head of the Department of Justice, one member of the Secretariat, one member of the Right Chamberlain's Office, one member of the Secretariat, and one member of the Board of Overseers.

古文：十三司郎中十三人，员外郎五人，主事十四人，分掌南京诸司，及公、侯、伯、五府、京卫所刑名之事。司狱二人。
现代文：十三司郎中十三人，员外郎五人，只有浙江、江西、河南、陕西、广东五司设有。主事十四人，广东司二人。分别掌管南京各司，以及公、侯、伯、五府、京卫所的诉讼事务司狱二人。
English: There are 13 members of the 13th Division and 5 members of the 5th Division. Only Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Henan, Shaanxi, and Guangdong have 5 divisions. There are 14 directors and 2 Guangdong Division. They are in charge of each division in Nanjing, and there are 2 prison wardens in charge of litigation affairs in public, county, city, 5 prefectures, and the Beijing Sanitary Commission.

古文：工部。尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人。
现代文：工部，尚书一人，右侍郎一人，司务一人。
English: Work department, Shang Shu one person, Right Attendant one person, Secretary one person.

古文：营缮、虞衡、都水、屯田四司，郎中四人，员外郎二人，主事八人。
现代文：营缮、虞衡、都水、屯田四司，郎中四人，员外郎二人，营缮司一人，都水司一人，塞靖三十七年，革除都水员外郎。
English: In the 37th year of the reign of King Sejong, there were four officials in charge of Yingxiao, Yuheng, Doushui and Tonden, four junior officials, two senior officials, one senior official in charge of Yingxiao and one senior official in charge of Doushui.

古文：所辖，营缮所，所正、所副、所丞各一人。
现代文：主事八，人，营缮司三人，屯田司一人，其余二司各二人。所管辖，营缮所，所正、所副、所丞各一人。
English: There were eight persons in charge, three camp superintendents, one field superintendent, and two persons in each of the other two departments. There was one person in charge of the camp superintendent, one person in charge of the superintendent, one person in charge of the deputy superintendent, and one person in charge of the assistant superintendent.

古文：龙江、清江二提举司，各提举一人。
现代文：龙江、清江二提举司，各有提举一人，副提举后来革除。
English: Longjiang and Qingjiang were the first two to nominate a secretary, and each had one person nominated, and the deputy nomination was later removed.

古文：文思院、宝源局、军器局、织染所、龙江抽分竹木局、瓦屑坝抽分竹木局，各大使一人。都察院。
现代文：文思院、宝源局、军器局、织染所、龙江抽分竹木局、瓦屑坝抽分竹木局，各有大使一人，嘉靖三十七年革除文思院大使。
English: Wensi Academy, the Bureau of Precious Resources, the Bureau of Military Equipment, the Weaving and Dyeing Institute, the Longjiang Extraction Bamboo and Wood Bureau, the Cement Scrap Dam Extraction Bamboo and Wood Bureau, each has one ambassador, and the 37th year of Jiajing Revolution removed the Wensi Academy ambassador.

古文：浙江、江西、河南、山东、山西、陕西、四川、云南、贵州九道，各御史二人。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年革除司狱一人。隆庆四年革除都事。浙江、江西、河南、山东、山西、陕西、四川、云南、贵州九道，各有御史二人。
English: In the 37th year of the Jiajing Revolution, one person was removed from the post of chief of prison. In the 4th year of the Longqing Revolution, one person was removed from the post of capital city. Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Sichuan, Yunnan and Guizhou nine provinces each had two persons removed.

古文：福建、湖广、广东、广西四道，各御史三人。
现代文：福建、湖尘、鏖东、广西四道，各有御史三人。
English: Fujian, Huzhen, Shandong and Guangxi are the four provinces, each of which has three people with imperial history.

古文：凡刷卷、巡仓、巡江、巡城、屯田、印马、巡视粮储、监收粮斛、点闸军士、管理京营、比验军器，皆叙而差之。
现代文：塾壶后不全设，常以一人兼任数道。凡是复查案卷、巡视仓场、巡察江防、巡视城池、屯田、印马、巡察储粮、监收粮斛、点查军士、管理京营、查验兵器，都依次派遣。
English: It was not always possible to have one person in charge of several duties at the same time. All of the duties of reviewing case files, inspecting warehouses, inspecting river defenses, inspecting cities, towns, and villages, inspecting grain stores, supervising the collection of grain sacks, inspecting soldiers, managing the capital camp, and inspecting weapons were dispatched in sequence.

古文：清军，则偕兵部、兵科。
现代文：清查军队，就偕同兵部、兵科。
English: The inspection of the army will be carried out jointly with the military department and the military science department.

古文：核后湖黄册，则偕户部、户科。
现代文：核察后湖黄册，就偕同户部、户科。
English: After the nuclear inspection, the Hubei Yellow Book was merged with the Household Department and the Household Science Department.

古文：提督操江一人。
现代文：提督操江一人，以副愈都御史担任，负责江、下江肪事务。
English: The Admiral was in charge of the Yangtze River, with the Deputy Governor of the Yangtze River in charge of the Yangtze River and the Lower Yangtze River.

古文：通政使司。通政使一人，右通政一人，右参议一人，掌收呈状，付刑部审理。
现代文：通政使司，通政使一人，右通政一人，右参议一人，掌管接受讼状，交付刑部审理。
English: The Minister of Justice, one Minister of Justice, one Right Minister of Justice, and one Right Counselor are in charge of accepting the complaint and submitting it to the Criminal Division for trial.

古文：经历一人。
现代文：经历一人。
English: One person went through it.

古文：大理寺。卿一人，右寺丞一人，司务一人，左、右寺正各一人，左、右评事各三人。
现代文：大理寺，卿一人，右寺丞一人，司务一人，左、右寺正各一人，左、右评事各三人。
English: Dali Temple, one chancellor, one chancellor of the right temple, one secretary, one each of the left and right temple, three commentators each of the left and right temples.

古文：詹事府。主簿一人。
现代文：詹事府，主簿一人。
English: Zhan Shifu, the chief clerk, is alone.

古文：翰林院。学士一人，孔目一人。
现代文：翰林院，学士一人，不常设，以翰林坊、局官员代理职务。孔目一人。
English: Hanlin Academy, one bachelor, non-permanent, with Hanlin Square, Bureau officials acting positions.

古文：国子监。祭酒一人，司业一人，监丞一人，典簿一人，博士三人，助教六人，学正五人，学录二人，典籍一人，学馔一人。
现代文：园子监，祭酒一人，司业一人，监丞一人，典簿一人，博士三人，助教六人，学正五人，学录二人，典籍一人，掌僎一人。
English: There is a garden supervisor, a person in charge of the sacrificial wine, a person in charge of the school, a supervisor, a person in charge of the register, three doctors, six teaching assistants, five students, two students, a person in charge of the classic books, and a person in charge of the palms.

古文：太常寺。卿一人，少卿一人，典簿一人，博士一人，协律郎二人，赞礼郎七人，司乐二人。各祠祭署合奉祀八人，祀丞七人。
现代文：山川坛、藉田奉祀一人。祖陵奉祀、祀丞各一人。皇陵奉祀、祀丞各二人。孝陵、扬王坟、徐王坟各有奉祀一人，祀丞一人。
English: One person is enshrined at the Yamakawa Altar and the Erita. One person is enshrined at the ancestral mausoleum and one person is enshrined at the Imperial mausoleum. Two people are enshrined at the Imperial mausoleum and two people are enshrined at the Imperial mausoleum. One person is enshrined at the Imperial mausoleum, one person is enshrined at the Yangwang tomb and one person is enshrined at the Xuwang tomb.

古文：光禄寺。卿一人，少卿一人，典簿一人。
现代文：嘉靖以后，革除天地坛、祖陵、扬王坟三个祠祭署的祀丞。光禄寺，卿一人，少卿一人，隆庆四年革除少卿。典簿一人。
English: After Jiajing, the three ancestral halls of the Temple of Heaven and Earth, the Ancestral Mausoleum, and the Tomb of Yang Wang were abolished. Guanglu Temple, one high priest, one junior high priest, and Longqing Temple, one junior high priest, were abolished.

古文：大官、珍羞、良酝、掌醢四署，各署正一人，署丞一人。
现代文：大官、珍羞、良酝、掌醢四署，各有署正一人，署丞一人。
English: Daikan, Zenki, Ryosaku, and Shoko are the four offices, each with one director and one secretary.

古文：太仆寺。卿一人，少卿二人，寺丞二人，鸿胪寺。卿一人，主簿一人。
现代文：太仆寺，卿一人，少卿二人，寺丞二人，隆庆年间，革除少卿一人，寺丞一人。
English: In Daju-ji Temple, there was one chancellor, two junior chancellors, and two chancellors. During the Ryukyuan period, there was one junior chancellor and one chancellor.

古文：司仪、司宾二署，各署丞一人，鸣赞四人，序班九人。
现代文：主簿一入。鸿胪寺，卿一人，主簿一人。司仪、司宾二署，各有署丞一人，鸣赞四人，序班九人。
English: One entry in the ledger. Hongye Temple, one chancellor, one ledger. Master of Ceremonies, two stewards, one steward each, four cheers, nine ushers.

古文：尚宝司。卿一人。
现代文：尚宝司，卿一人。
English: Shang Baoji, a noble one.

古文：吏、户、礼、兵、刑、工六科。
现代文：吏、户、礼、兵，刑、工六科。
English: There are six subjects: officials, households, rituals, soldiers, punishments, and engineering.

古文：给事中六人。
现代文：给事中六人。
English: There are six people involved.

古文：又户科给事中一人，管理后湖黄册。
现代文：又户科给事中一人，管理后湖黄册。
English: In addition, one person from the household science department is in charge of the management of the Houhu Yellow Book.

古文：行人司。左司副一人。
现代文：行人司，左司副一人。
English: Pedestrian Division, Left Division, one deputy.

古文：钦天监。监正一人，监副一人，主簿一人。
现代文：钦天监，监正一人，监副一人，主簿一人。
English: Qin Tian Guan, Guan Zheng, Guan Zi, Guan Zi, Guan Zi, Guan Zi.

古文：五官正一人，五官灵台郎二人，五官监候一人，五官司历一人。
现代文：五官正一人，五官灵台郎二人，五官监候一人，五官司历一人。
English: There is one official in charge of the five offices, two spiritual directors in charge of the five offices, one supervisor in charge of the five offices, and one secretary in charge of the five offices.

古文：太医院。院判一人，吏目一人。
现代文：太医院，院判一人，吏目一人。
English: Too hospital, hospital sentence one person, official eyes one person.

古文：惠民药局、生药库，各大使一人。
现代文：惠民药局、生药库，各有大使一人。
English: Huimin Pharmacy and Chinese Herbal Medicine Library each have one ambassador.

古文：五城兵马司。指挥各一人，副指挥各三人，吏目各一人。
现代文：五城兵马司，指挥各一人，副指挥各三人，吏目各一人。
English: Troops and horses of the five cities, one commander each, three deputy commanders each, one official each.

古文：应天府。
现代文：万历年间，革除副指挥每城各二人。
English: During the Wanli era, two deputy commanders were removed from each city.

古文：府尹一人，府丞一人，治中一人，通判二人，推官一人，经历、知事、照磨、检校各一人。
现代文：应天府，府尹一人，府丞一人，治中一人，通判二人，推官一人，经历、知事、照磨、检校各一人。
English: According to Tianfu, one person from Fuyin, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Zhizhong, two people from Tongzhan, one person from Puyang, one person from Xian, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, two people from Tongzhan, one person from Puyang, one person from Xian, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, one person from Fuzhong, two people from Tongzhan, one person from Pu

古文：儒学教授一人，训导六人。
现代文：儒学教授一人，训导六人。
English: There is one professor of Confucianism and six instructors.

古文：所辖，上元、江宁二县，各知县一人，县丞一人，主簿一人，典史一人。
现代文：所管辖，上元、江宁二县，各有知县一人，县丞一人，主簿一人，典史一人。
English: jurisdiction, two counties of Shangyuan and Jiangning, one person from each county, one person from the county magistrate, one person from the master, and one person from the court historian.

古文：司狱司，司狱一人。
现代文：司狱司，司狱一人。
English: A prison warden, a prison warden, from the ninth grade.

古文：织染局，大使一人，左、右副使各一人。
现代文：织染局，大使一人，左、右副使各一人。
English: Weaving and Dyeing Bureau, one ambassador, one left and one right deputy envoy.

古文：都税司、宣课司，税课局，各大使一人，副使或一人或二人。
现代文：都税司、宣课司，总共四个，龙江、江柬、聚寅门、立王至弓，税课局，总共两个，龙江、垄翌，各有大使一人，副使有的一人，有的二人。
English: There are a total of four tax departments and four education departments, namely, Longjiang, Jiangxi-Cambodia, Zhuyinmen, and Lijing, and a total of two tax bureaus, namely, Longjiang and Renhe, each of which has an ambassador, a deputy envoy, and sometimes two.

古文：龙江递运所，大使、副使各一人。
现代文：龙江递运所，大使、副使各一人。
English: Longjiang Delivery Station, the ambassador and the deputy envoy are leaving one by one.

古文：批验所，大使一人。
现代文：批验所，大使一人。
English: Approval laboratory, one ambassador.

古文：河泊所，官一人。
现代文：河泊所，官一人。
English: Kawaramachi, one official left.

古文：龙江关、石灰山关，各大使一人，副使四人。
现代文：龙江关、石灰山关，各有大使一人，副使四人。
English: Longjiang Pass and Lime Mountain Pass each have one ambassador and four deputy envoys.

古文：洪武三年，改应天府知府为府尹，秩正三品，赐银印。
现代文：洪武三年，改应天府知府为府尹，品级正三品，赐银印。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, it was changed from Tianfu Chifu to Fufu Yin, with a grade of three products and a silver seal.

古文：十三年，始立儒学。
现代文：十三年开始立儒学。
English: Confucianism was founded in the thirteenth year.

古文：南京官，自永乐四年成祖往北京，置行部尚书，备行在九卿印以从。
现代文：南京官，自从永乐四年成祖迁往北京，设置行部尚书，备办行在九卿印以相从。
English: Nanjing officials, since Yongle Chengzu moved to Beijing four years ago, set up the Department of Shangshu, and prepared the Department of Jiuqing Printing to follow suit.

古文：是时，皇太子监国，大小庶务悉以委之。
现代文：那时候，皇太子监国，大小各种政务全都委任于他。
English: At that time, the crown prince was in charge of the country, and all kinds of government affairs, large and small, were delegated to him.

古文：惟封爵、大辟、除拜三品以上文武职，则六科都给事中以闻，政本故在南也。
现代文：只有封爵、判死罪、授予三品以上文武官职，便由六科都给事中上奏，政权根本原来还在南方。
English: Only the knighthood, the death sentence, and the award of three or more civil and military officer positions were given by the six disciplines, and the regime was still in the south.

古文：十八年，官属悉移而北，南京六部所存惟礼、刑、工三部，各一侍郎，在南之官加 南京 字于职衔上。
现代文：十八年，官僚全都迁往北方，南京六部所存留的只有礼、刑、工三部，各有一侍郎，留在南方的官员加 南京 字样在官街上。
English: In the 18th year, all the bureaucrats moved to the north. Of the six departments in Nanjing, only the three departments of etiquette, punishment, and labor, each with a steward, remained. The officials who remained in the south were added to Nanjing. The words "Nanjing" are on the official street.

古文：仁宗时补设官属，除 南京 字。
现代文：仁宗时补设官职，除去 南京 字样。
English: At the time of Emperor Nanzong, an official post was added, and the words "Nanjing" were removed.

古文：正统六年，定制复如永乐时。
现代文：正统六年定下制度又如同永乐年间。
English: The system established during the six years of orthodoxy is the same as that during the Yongle era.

古文：王府长史司。左、右长史各一人。
现代文：王府长史司，左、右长史各一人，正五品。
English: Wangfuchang Shishi, left, and Right Shishi, one each, are the fifth grade.

古文：其属，典簿一人，所辖，审理所，审理正一人，副一人，典膳所，典膳正一人，副一人，奉祠所，奉祠正一人，副一人，典乐一人，典宝所，典宝正一人，副一人，纪善所，纪善二人，良医所，良医正一人，副一人，典仪所，典仪正一人，副一人，工正所，工正一人，副一人，伴读四人，教授无定员，引礼舍二人，仓大使、副使各一人，库大使、副使各一人。
现代文：仓大使、副使各一人，库大使、副使各一人。
English: Ambassador Kura and Deputy Envoy one each, Ambassador Kura and Deputy Envoy one each.

古文：郡王府，教授一人，典膳一人。
现代文：仓、库副使后来全都革除。郡王府，教授一人，从九品，典膳一人，正八品。
English: Later, the warehouse and the deputy warehouse clerk were all dismissed. In Guo Wangfu, one professor was promoted to the ninth grade, and one person was promoted to the eighth grade.

古文：镇国将军教授一人。
现代文：镇国将军，教授一人，从九品。
English: Zhenguo General, a professor, from Jiuping.

古文：长史，掌王府之政讼，辅相规讽以匡王失，率府僚各供乃事，而总其庶务焉。
现代文：长史掌管王府的政令，辅佐规劝讽谏，从而匡正王的过失，率领府中僚属各自供奉职事，并总管各种事务。
English: Chang Shi was in charge of the royal edicts, assisted by his aides and advisers to rectify the faults of the king, and led the middle-ranking officials of the palace to perform their duties, and was in charge of various affairs.

古文：凡请名、请封、请婚、请恩泽，及陈谢、进献表启、书疏，长史为王奏上。
现代文：凡是奏请赐名、赐封、赐婚、赐恩以及道谢、进献表章、疏奏，长史代替王上奏。
English: For all the performances, please give the name, give the title, give the marriage, give the grace and thank you, present the badge, slow down the music, and play the long history in place of the king.

古文：若王有过，则诘长史。
现代文：如若王有过失，就责问长史。
English: If Wang is at fault, he will be held accountable.

古文：曾经过犯之人，毋得选用是职。
现代文：曾经犯迥错误的人，不得选任此职。
English: Those who have made mistakes should not be elected to this post.

古文：审理，掌推按刑狱，禁诘横暴，无干国纪。
现代文：审理掌管侦讯案件，禁止横暴，不干涉国家法纪。
English: adjudicating and supervising the investigation of cases, prohibiting violence, and not interfering with national laws and regulations.

古文：典膳，掌祭祀、宾客，王若妃之膳羞。
现代文：典膳掌管祭祀、宴请宾客，王或者王妃的膳食。
English: The ceremonial meal presides over the rituals, banquets and guests, and is the meal of the king or queen.

古文：奉祠，掌祭祀乐舞。
现代文：奉祠掌管祭祀乐舞。
English: Bongsa Temple is in charge of the ritual music and dance.

古文：典宝，掌王宝符牌。
现代文：典宝掌管王府宝印符牌。
English: The Royal Treasury is in charge of the royal seal badges.

古文：纪善，掌讽导礼法，开谕古谊，及国家恩义大节，以诏王善。
现代文：纪善掌管讽喻引导礼法，开导谕告古义，以及国家恩泽仁义大节，以告诫王向善。
English: Ji Sheng presided over the simile guidance etiquette, the opening of the guide to the ancient meaning, as well as the national benevolence and benevolence festival to admonish Wang Xiang Sheng.

古文：良医，掌医。
现代文：良医掌管医疗。
English: The good doctor administers the medicine.

古文：典仪，掌陈仪式。
现代文：典仪掌管陈列仪式。
English: The master of ceremonies presides over the display ceremony.

古文：工正，掌缮造修葺宫邸、廨舍。
现代文：工正掌管营建修葺王府府邸、宫邸。
English: The construction manager is in charge of building and renovating royal residences and palaces.

古文：伴读，掌侍从起居，陈设经史。
现代文：伴读掌管侍从起居，陈说经史书籍。
English: Accompanied by the reading of books on the history of the scriptures.

古文：教授，掌以德义迪王，校勘经籍。
现代文：教授掌管以道德仁义启迪王，校勘经史书籍。
English: The professor is in charge of enlightening the king with morality, benevolence and righteousness, and checking the books of history.

古文：凡宗室年十岁以上，入宗学，教授与纪善为之师。
现代文：所有皇族年满十岁以上，进入宗学，教授与纪善担任他们的老师。
English: All members of the imperial family over the age of ten entered the patriarchal school, with the professor and the scholar serving as their teachers.

古文：引礼，掌接对宾客，赞相威仪。
现代文：引礼掌管接待宾客，赞唱导引礼仪。
English: The ushers are in charge of receiving guests, and they sing the guide etiquette.

古文：洪武三年，置王相府，左、右相各一人，左、右傅各一人。
现代文：洪武三年，设置王相府，左、右相各一人，正二品，左、右傅各一人，从二品。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Wang Sangfu was set up, with one Left and Right Sangfu, two Senior Fu, and one Left and Right Fu, two Junior Fu.

古文：参军府，参军一人，录事二人，纪善一人。
现代文：参军府，参军一人，正五品，录事二人，正七品，纪善一人，正匕品。
English: Sangunfu, one member of the military, five honorable mentions, two recorders, seven honorable mentions, one disciplinarian, three honorable mentions.

古文：各以其品秩列朝官之次。
现代文：各自按照自己的品级列于朝官之后。
English: According to their respective ranks, they are listed after the imperial officials.

古文：又置典签司、谘议官。
现代文：又设置典签司、咨议官。
English: It also set up a bookmarking department and a consultant.

古文：寻以王府武相皆勋臣，令居文相上，王相府官属仍与朝官更互除授。
现代文：不久因为王府武相都是功勋之臣，下令位居文相之上，王相府官员仍旧与朝官互相更换授官。
English: Soon, because the ministers of war of the royal court were all meritorious vassals, they were ordered to rank higher than the ministers of literature, and the officials of the royal court still exchanged awards with the imperial officials.

古文：是年置王府教授。
现代文：这一年设置王府教授。
English: This year, Wangfu Professorship was established.

古文：四年，更定官制。
现代文：四年，复位官制。
English: Four years later, the official system was restored.

古文：九年，改参军为长史，罢王傅府及典签司、谘议官，增设伴读四人，选老成明经慎行之士任之，侍读四人，收掌文籍，少则缺之。
现代文：左、右相，正二品，文武傅，从二品，参军，从五晶，录事，正七品，审理正，正六品，副，正七品，纪善，正七品，各署典祠正、典宝正、典仪正、典膳正、典服正、工正、医正，都为正七品，副，都为从七品，牧正，正八品，副，从八品，引礼舍人，省略记载。九年，改参军为长史，废除王傅府及典签司、咨议官，增设伴读四人，选拔为人老成，明习经义，行为谨慎的士人担任，侍读四人，收藏掌管文书簿籍，文籍少就空缺。
English: On the left and on the right, the pharaoh, the second-ranked official, the warrior, the second-ranked official, the soldier, the fifth-ranked official, the recorder, the seventh-ranked official, the judge, the sixth-ranked official, the second-ranked official, the scholar, the seventh-ranked official, the prefect of ceremonies, the prefect of treasures, the prefect of ceremonies, the prefect of meals, the prefect of ceremonial dress, the prefect of engineering, the prefect of medicine, were all seventh-ranked official, the second-ranked official, the soldier, the fifth-ranked official, the

古文：寻改王相府所属奉祠、典宝、典膳、良医、工正各所正并纪善俱正八品，副，从八品。
现代文：不久改王相府所属奉祠、典宝、典膳、良医、工正各所正及纪善都为正八品，副，从八品。
English: It was not long before the Fongxiao, Tienbao, Tienzen, Liangyi, Gongzheng, and Jishan schools affiliated with Wangxiangfu were all upgraded to the rank of Zhengyi eight products, and vice, Zhengyi eight products.

古文：十三年，并罢王相府，升长史司为正五品，置左、右长史各一人，典簿一人，定王府孳牲所、仓库等官俱为杂职。
现代文：十三年，一并废除王相府，升长史司马正五品，设置左、右长史各一人，典簿一人。确定王府孳牲所、仓库等官全都是杂职。
English: In the thirteenth year, Wang Xiangfu was abolished altogether, and five officials were promoted to the post of chief historian, Sima Zheng, with one left and one right chief historian, and one person in charge of the register. It was determined that the officials of the palace's animal husbandry and warehouse were all miscellaneous positions.

古文：二十八年，置靖江王府谘议所，谘议、记室、教授各一人。
现代文：二十八年，设置靖江王府咨议所，咨议、记室、教授各一人。
English: In the 28th year, the Jingjiang Wangfu Consultation Center was set up, with a consultation, a recording room, and a professor.

古文：建文中，增置亲王宾辅二人，伴读、伴讲、伴书各一人，长史三人。
现代文：建文年间，增设亲王宾辅二人，伴读、伴讲、伴书各一人，长史三人。
English: During the Jianwen period, two additional Princes Binfu were established, one for accompanying reading, one for accompanying lecture, and one for accompanying book, and three for long history.

古文：郡王宾友二人，教授一人，记室二人，直史一人，左、右直史各一人，吏目一人，典印、典祠、典礼、典馔、典药五署官各一人，典仪二人，引礼舍人二人，仪仗司，吏目一人。
现代文：郡王宾友二人，教授一人，记室二人，直史一人，左、右直史各一人，吏目一人，典印、典祠、典礼、典饿、典药五署官各一人，典仪二人，引礼舍人二人，仪仗司，吏目一人。
English: Guan Wang Bin You (郡王賓友) two, professor one, record room two, direct history one, left and right direct history one, official one, official five (典印,典祠,典礼,典饿,典藥) one, ceremony two, usher two, guard of honor, official one.

古文：其宾辅、三伴、宾友、教授进见时，侍坐，称名而不称臣，礼如宾师。
现代文：其中宾辅、三伴、宾友、教授进见时，陪坐，自称名而不称臣，礼节如同宾客师友。
English: Among them, when the guest assistant, the third companion, the guest friend, and the professor come to visit, they will sit with them, and they will call themselves by their names instead of their titles, and their etiquette will be like that of a guest teacher friend.

古文：成祖初，复旧制，改靖江王府谘议所为长史司。
现代文：成祖初年，恢复旧制，改靖江王府咨议所为长史司。
English: In the first year of Chengzu, the old system was restored, and the Jingjiang Wangfu Consultation Office was renamed the Long History Division.

古文：万历间，周府设宗正一人。
现代文：万历年间，周府设宗正一人。
English: During the Wanli years, Zhou set up a Zongzheng.

古文：郡王府增设教授一人。
现代文：后来各府也渐次增设。郡王府增设教授一人。
English: Later, other prefectures gradually added professors, and one professor was added to Guo Prefecture.

古文：又洪武七年，公主府设家令一人，司丞一人，录事一人。
现代文：又洪武七年，公主府设家令一人，正七品，司丞一人，正八品，录事一人，正九品。
English: In addition, in the seventh year of Hongwu, the princess's palace set up one house officer, senior seventh grade, one secretary, senior eighth grade, one recorder, and senior ninth grade.

古文：二十三年，改家令司为中使司，以内使为之。
现代文：二十三年，改家令司马中使司，用内使担任。
English: In 233, he changed his family name to Sima and became a middle-ranking envoy.

古文：承宣布政使司。左、右布政使各一人，左、右参政，左、右参议，无定员。
现代文：承宣布政使司，左、右布政使各一人，从二品，左、右参政，从三品，左、右参议，没有固定人数，从四品。
English: It was agreed to appoint a chief envoy, one from each of the left and right political envoys, from the second grade, from the left and right to participate in politics, from the third grade, from the left and right to participate in deliberation, without a fixed number, from the fourth grade.

古文：经历司，经历一人，都事一人。
现代文：参政、参议因事添设，各省不等，诤见各道。经历司，经历一人，从六品，都事一人，从七品。
English: Experienced division, experienced one person, from seven products, all things one person, eight products.

古文：照磨所，照磨一人，检校一人。
现代文：照磨所，照磨一人，从八品，检校一人，正九品。
English: Sunning mill, sunning one person, from nine products, inspection one person.

古文：理问所，理问一人，副理问一人，提控案牍一人。
现代文：理问所，理问一人，从六品，副理问一人，从七品，提控案牍一人。
English: The court of inquiry, one judge, six judges, one deputy judge, seven judges, and one prosecutor.

古文：司狱司，司狱一人，库大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：司狱司，司狱一人，从九品。库大使一人，从九品，副使一人。
English: A prison warden, a prison warden, one person from nine grades, a treasury ambassador, one person from nine grades, and a deputy envoy.

古文：仓大使一人。副使一人。
现代文：仓大使一人，从九品，副使一人。
English: There was one ambassador from Cang, one from Jiuping, and one vice-envoy.

古文：杂造局、军器局、宝泉局、织染局，各大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：杂造局、军器局、宝泉局、织染局，各有大使一人，从九品，副使一人。
English: The Miscellaneous Works Bureau, the Ordnance Bureau, the Hoquan Bureau, and the Weaving and Dyeing Bureau each had one ambassador, from the nine provinces, and one deputy envoy.

古文：布政使，掌一省之政，朝廷有德泽、禁令，承流宣播，以下于有司。
现代文：所辖衙门各省不同，详见杂职。布政使掌管一省的政务，朝廷有恩赏、禁令，秉承旨意宣布传播，下达到有关部门。
English: The provinces under the jurisdiction of the gate are different, see miscellaneous duties for details. The political envoy is in charge of the government affairs of a province, the imperial court has rewards, prohibitions, and announces the dissemination according to the will, and reaches the relevant departments.

古文：凡僚属满秩，廉其称职、不称职，上下其考，报抚、按以达于吏部、都察院。
现代文：凡是所属官员任职期满，访查称职、不称职，上上下下查证明自，报告巡抚、巡按以传达于吏部、都察院。
English: Upon the expiration of the term of office of all officials belonging to it, the competent and incompetent officials shall be inspected, the upper and lower inspection certificates shall be self-certified, and the reports of the supervisors and supervisors shall be conveyed to the Personnel Department and the Central Inspection Office.

古文：三年，率其府州县正官朝觐京师，以听察典。
现代文：每三年，率领治下府州县正官，到京师朝见，以听从考察。
English: Every three years, he led the officials of prefectures and counties under his administration to Beijing to see the emperor and listen to his inspection.

古文：十年，会户版以登民数、田数。
现代文：每十年，会合户口籍册以清查百姓人数、田亩数。
English: Every ten years, the association's household registration register is updated with an inventory of the number of people and the number of acres.

古文：宾兴贡，合省之士而提调之。
现代文：向朝廷推举人才，会集全省的读书人选拔调用。
English: To the imperial court to nominate talent, will gather the province's readers to select and call.

古文：宗室、官吏、师生、军伍，以时班其禄俸、廪粮。
现代文：皇族、官吏、师生、军人，按时发放他们的俸禄、麇粮。
English: The royal family, government officials, teachers and students, and military personnel should pay their salaries and rations on time.

古文：祀典神祗，谨其时祀。
现代文：祭祀神只，谨慎按时祭祀。
English: Offer sacrifices only to the gods, and be careful to offer them on time.

古文：民鳏寡孤独者养之，孝弟贞烈者表扬之，水旱疾疫灾祲，则请于上蠲振之。
现代文：百姓有孤老无依的人要供养他们，有孝顺友爱贞烈之人要表彰他们。遇上水旱灾害瘟疫，便奏请皇上怜悯免税赈济。
English: The people should support those who are lonely and old, and commend those who have filial piety, friendship, love and chastity. In the event of floods, droughts and plagues, they should appeal to the emperor for mercy to provide tax-free relief.

古文：凡贡赋役，视府州县土地人民丰瘠多寡而均其数。
现代文：所有上贡赋税徭役，视府州县土地肥瘠人民多少的情况来平衡数目。
English: The amount of all tributes paid to tax collectors will be balanced according to the number of land-rich people in prefectures and counties.

古文：凡有大兴革及诸政务，会都、按议，经画定而请于抚、按若总督。
现代文：凡是有重大的施行革除举措及各种政务，会同都御史、 按察使商议，经过谋划商定就向巡抚、巡按或者总督请示。
English: In the event of any major implementation of measures for the removal of officials and various government affairs, they will consult with the Metropolitan Historian and the Inspector of Taxes, and after planning and agreeing, they will request instructions from the Governor, the Inspector of Taxes, or the Governor.

古文：其国庆国哀，遣僚贰朝贺吊祭于京师。天子即位，则左布政使亲至。
现代文：国家有喜庆或丧事，派遣辅佐官到京城朝贺或吊祭。天子即位，便由左布政使亲自前往。
English: When there is a celebration or a funeral in the country, an assistant adjutant is dispatched to the capital for morning greetings or a hanging ceremony. When the emperor ascended to the throne, the political envoy of Zuo Bu personally went there.

古文：参政、参议分守各道，及派管粮储、屯田、清军、驿传、水利、抚民等事，并分司协管京畿。
现代文：参政、参议分守各道，以及派遣管理储粮、屯田、清军、驿站、水利、安抚百姓等事，一并以分司协助管理京郊地区。
English: They participated in politics and deliberation, and were assigned to each province, and dispatched to manage grain reserves, garrisons, the Qing army, stations, water conservancy, and pacification of the people. They also assisted in the management of the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：经历、都事，典受发文移，其详巡按、巡盐御史文书，用经历印。
现代文：两京不设布、按，没有参政、参议、副使、愈事，因此由邻近布、按分司带管，详见各道职官。经历、都事，掌管收发公文，审察巡按、巡盐御史文书，使用经历印章。
English: The two capitals did not set up cloth and press, and did not participate in politics, consultation, deputy envoy, or military affairs. Therefore, they were managed by the neighboring cloth and press subdivisions. For details, see the officials of each province. Experience, capital affairs, in charge of receiving and sending official documents, inspecting patrol stamps, patrol salt imperial history documents, and using experience seals.

古文：照磨、检校典勘理卷宗。
现代文：照磨、检校掌管校勘清理卷宗。
English: After polishing, inspect the school and take charge of the inspection and clean up the file.

古文：理问典刑名。
现代文：理问掌管诉讼案件。
English: The judge presides over the case.

古文：初，太祖下集庆，自领江南行中书省。
现代文：起初，太祖攻克集庆，亲自兼领江南行中书省。
English: At first, the great ancestor conquered Jieqing and personally traveled south of the Yangtze River to Zhongshuo.

古文：戊戌，置中书分省于婺州。
现代文：戊戌年，在婺州设置中书分省。
English: In the year of Bo Xilai, the Department of Chinese Calligraphy was set up in Ganzhou.

古文：后每略定地方，即置行省，其官自平章政事以下，大略与中书省同。
现代文：后来每攻克一地，就设置行省，官员从平章政事以下，大致与中书省相同。
English: Later, for each conquered place, a province was set up, with officials from Pingzhang government affairs and below, roughly the same as the Chinese Book Ministry.

古文：设行省平章政事，左、右丞，参知政事。
现代文：设行省平章政事，从一品，左、右丞，正二品，参知政事，从二品。
English: The government affairs of the province of Pingzhang were set up, starting from the first grade, the left, the right, the second grade, and the government affairs of Sanchi, starting from the second grade.

古文：左、右司，郎中，员外郎，都事、检校，照磨、管勾。
现代文：左、右司，郎中，从五品，员外郎，从六品，都事、检校，从七品，照么、管勾，从八品。
English: Left, right division, junior high school, fifth grade, junior high school, sixth grade, elementary school, middle school, seventh grade, junior high school, eighth grade.

古文：理问所，正理问，副理问，知事，寻改知事为提控案牍。
现代文：理问所，正理问，正四品，副理问，正五品，知事，从八品。不久改知事焉提控案牍，省略记载。
English: The interrogation room, the interrogation room, was ranked fourth, the interrogation room, the interrogation room, was ranked fifth, and the governor, was ranked eighth. The governor was soon replaced by the prosecutor, and the records were omitted.

古文：洪武九年，改浙江、江西、福建、北平、广西、四川、山东、广东、河南、陕西、湖广、山西诸行省俱为承宣布政使司，罢行省平章政事，左、右丞等官，改参知政事为布政使，秩正二品，左、右参政，从二品，改左、右司为经历司。
现代文：洪武九年，改浙江、江西、福建、北平、广西、四川、山东、广东、河南、陕西、湖广、山西各行省都为承宣布政使司，废除行省平章政事，左、右丞等官，改参知政事为布政使，品级正二品，左、右参政，从二品，改左、右司为经历司。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, the provinces of Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, Beiping, Guangxi, Sichuan, Shandong, Guangdong, Henan, Shaanxi, Hukang and Shanxi were reformed to undertake the proclamation of political envoys, abolishing the provinces of Pingzhang political affairs, left, right and other officials, changing the political affairs to cloth political envoys, the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of the grade of

古文：十三年改布政使，正三品，参政，从三品。
现代文：十三年，改布政使，正三品，参政，从三品。
English: Thirteen years later, he was promoted to the post of political envoy. He was promoted to Senior Third Rank, and became involved in politics.

古文：十四年，增置左、右参议，正四品。寻增设左、右布政使各一人。
现代文：十四年，增设左、右参议，正四品，不久增设左、右布政使各一人。
English: Fourteen years later, the Left and Right Councilors were added, as well as the Senior Fourth Rank, and soon the Left and Right Political Envoys were added one each.

古文：十五年，置云南布政司。
现代文：十五年，设置云南布政司。
English: Fifteen years later, the post of Yunnan Provincial Political Secretary was established.

古文：二十二年，定秩从二品。
现代文：二十二年，定品级为从二品。
English: Twenty-two years later, the cider is classified as a second-class product.

古文：建文中，升正二品，裁一人。
现代文：建文年间，升为正二品，裁革一人。
English: During the Jianwen period, it was raised to the second grade, with only one person cutting leather.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：永乐元年以北平布政司为北京。
现代文：永乐元年，以北平布政司为北京。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, Beijing was located in Beipingbu, the seat of government.

古文：五年，置交阯布政司。
现代文：五年，设置交肚布政司。
English: Five years later, the post of Deputy Prime Minister was created.

古文：十一年，置贵州布政司。
现代文：十一年，设置贵州布政司。
English: In the eleventh year, the Guizhou Political Bureau was set up.

古文：宣德三年，罢交址布政司，除两京外，定为十三布政司。
现代文：只设布政使一人，其它官员如同各布政司。宣德三年，废除交肚布政司，除两京以外，定为十三布政司。
English: Only one Bu Seongseong was set up, and other officials were the same as each Bu Seongseong. Three years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the post of Bu Seongseong was abolished, and in addition to the two capitals, thirteen Bu Seongseong were set up.

古文：初置藩司，与六部均重。
现代文：开始设置藩司，与六部并重。
English: The position of hanji began to be established, with equal importance given to the six divisions.

古文：布政使入为尚书、侍郎，副都御史每出为布政使。
现代文：布政使入朝任尚书、侍郎，副都御史常常出任布政使。
English: When the Bu Seishi entered the imperial court, he was assigned to the posts of Shosho (chief secretary) and Jiro (chamberlain), and often served as vice-governor of the capital.

古文：宣德、正统间犹然，自后无之。
现代文：宣德、正统年间仍然如此，从那以后就没有了。
English: This was still the case during the years of proclamation of virtue and orthodoxy, but has not been the case since then.

古文：提刑按察使司。按察使一人，副使，佥事无定员。
现代文：提刑按察使司，按察使一人，正三品，副使，正四品，愈事没有固定人数，正五品。
English: According to the inspector's division, one inspector is to be promoted to the third grade, the deputy is to be promoted to the fourth grade, and there is no fixed number of inspectors, but they are to be promoted to the fifth grade.

古文：经历司，经历一人，知事一人。
现代文：详见各道。经历司，经历一人，正七品，知事一人，正八品。
English: For details, please refer to the individual schools. A probation officer, a probationer, and a governor are all awarded the rank of Shichihon, and a governor is awarded the rank of Shichihon.

古文：照磨所，照磨一人，检校一人。
现代文：照磨所，照磨一人，正九品，检校一人，从九品。
English: Sunning mill, sunning one person, from nine products, inspection one person.

古文：司狱司，司狱一人，
现代文：司狱司，司狱一人，从九品。
English: A prison warden, a prison warden, from the ninth grade.

古文：按察使，掌一省刑名按劾之事。
现代文：按察使掌管一省诉讼纠察的事务。
English: According to the inspector, he is in charge of the affairs of a provincial litigation picket.

古文：纠官邪，戢奸暴，平狱讼，雪冤抑，以振扬风纪，而澄清其吏治。
现代文：纠察贪官污吏，缉捕奸恶强暴，平允诉讼案件，昭雪冤狱错案，从而振奋风纪，澄清吏治。
English: picketing corrupt officials, cracking down on rape, settling lawsuits, and clarifying cases of wrongful imprisonment, thus encouraging discipline and clarifying the treatment of officials.

古文：大者暨都、布二司会议，告抚、按，以听于部、院。
现代文：大案会同都御史、布政二司共同商议，报告巡抚、巡按，听从刑部、都察院。
English: The major case will be jointly discussed with the Second Division of the Metropolitan Government and the Second Division of the Political Bureau, and the report will be made by the inspector general and the inspector general, and will be subject to the Criminal Investigation Department and the Metropolitan Inspection Office.

古文：凡朝觐庆吊之礼，具如布政司。
现代文：所有朝拜觐见庆贺吊祭的礼仪，都如同布政司。
English: All the etiquette of the morning worship and the celebration of the hanging festival are the same as that of the political secretary.

古文：副使、佥事，分道巡察，其兵备、提学、抚民、巡海、清军、驿传、水利、屯田、招练、监军，各专事置，并分员巡备京畿。
现代文：副使、愈事，分道巡察，兵备、提学、抚民、巡海、清军、驿传、水利、屯田、招募训练、监军，各设专人分管，并分人巡察京郊地区。
English: Deputy envoys, military affairs, inspection of roads, military preparedness, education, people's livelihood, maritime patrol, Qing Army, Yunnan Province, water conservancy, military camps, recruitment and training, supervision of troops, each set up a special person to be in charge, and divided into people to inspect the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：明初，置提刑按察司。
现代文：明代初年，设置提刑按察司。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Department of Criminal Investigation was established.

古文：吴元年，置各道按察司，设按察使，正三品，副使，正四品，佥事，正五品。
现代文：吴元年，设置各道按察司，设按察使，正三品，副使，正四品，愈事，正五品。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, inspectors were set up in each province, inspectors were set up, senior inspectors were set up, deputy inspectors were set up, senior inspectors were set up, senior inspectors were set up, senior inspectors were set up.

古文：十三年，改使秩正四品，寻罢。
现代文：十三年，改按察使品级为正四品，不久废除。
English: Thirteen years later, it was changed to the fourth grade according to the inspector's grade, which was soon abolished.

古文：十四年复置，并置各道按察分司。
现代文：十四年，重叉设置，并设置各道按察分司。
English: Fourteen years later, the heavy fork was set up, and each province was set up according to the inspection division.

古文：十五年，又置天下府州县按察分司。
现代文：十五年，又设置天下府州县按察分司。
English: Fifteen years later, the prefectural and county inspection subdivisions were set up.

古文：以儒士王存中等五百三十一人为试佥事，人按二县。
现代文：以儒士王存中等五百三十一人为试愈事，每人巡察两县。
English: Five hundred and thirty-one Confucian scholars, including Wang Cunzhong, were sent to inspect the two counties.

古文：凡官吏贤否、军民利病，皆得廉问纠举。
现代文：所有官吏贤能与否、军队民间的利弊，都可以查问检举。
English: All officials can be investigated and prosecuted, whether they are good or bad, whether they are military or civilian.

古文：十六年，尽罢试佥事，改按察使为从三品，副使二人，从四品，佥事从五品，多寡从其分道之数。
现代文：十六年，完全废除试愈事，改按察使为从三品，副使二人，从四品，愈事，从五品，人员多少配合各分道的数目。
English: Sixteen years later, the probationary period was completely abolished, and the number of inspectors was changed to three, deputy inspectors to two, probationers to four, probationers to five, and the number of personnel to more or less cooperate with each branch.

古文：二十二年，复定按察使为正三品。二十九年，改置按察分司为四十一道。三十年，始置云南按察司。建文时，改为十三道肃政按察司。
现代文：湖广四道：为武昌道、荆南道、湖南道、湖北道。三十年，开始设置云南按察司。此前，命令布政司兼管。建文年间，改为十三道肃政按察司。
English: The four provinces of Hukang: Wuchang, Jingnan, Hunan, and Hubei. Thirty years ago, the Yunnan Inspection Department was set up. Previously, the Political Secretary was also in charge. During the construction period, it was changed to the Thirteen Provinces Political Inspection Department.

古文：成祖初，复旧。永乐五年，置交阯按察司，又增设各按察司佥事。十二年，置贵州按察司。
现代文：因为督察军卫屯粮，增设浙、辽旦、广东、广西、湖广、河南、云南、璺丛各一人，堕堕、福建、山东、山西各二人。这是增设监司的开始。十二年，设置贵州按察司。
English: Because the inspectors of the army guarded the grain, one person was added in each of Zhejiang, Liaodan, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hukang, Henan, Yunnan, and Yunnan, and two people in each of Hunan, Fujian, Shandong, and Shanxi. This was the beginning of the additional inspector. In 2012, the Guizhou inspector was set up.

古文：宣德五年革交阯按察司。
现代文：宣德五年，废除交肚按察司。
English: Xuande five years, the abolition of the inspection department.

古文：正统三年，增设理仓副使、佥事，又设佥事与布政司参议各一员于甘肃，监收仓粮。
现代文：除两京不设，共十三个按察司。正统三年，增设理仓副使、愈事，又设愈事与布政司参议各一员于甘肃，监收仓粮。
English: In addition to the two capitals, a total of thirteen inspectors were not set up. After three years of orthodoxy, a deputy warehouse manager and a senior clerk were added, and a senior clerk and a senior clerk were each set up in Gansu to supervise the collection of grain.

古文：八年，增设佥事，专理屯田。
现代文：八年，增设愈事，专闩管理屯田。
English: Eight years later, he was given additional responsibilities and was put in charge of the management of military cantonments.

古文：景泰二年，增巡河佥事。
现代文：景泰二年，增设巡河食事。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, a river cruise meal was added.

古文：自后，各省因事添设，或置或罢，不可胜纪。
现代文：从逭以后，各省因事添设，有时设置有时革除，不可胜记。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, various provinces have added facilities, and sometimes removed them, due to various reasons.

古文：今总布、按二司所分诸道详左。
现代文：现在总述布、按二司所分各道详列于左。
English: Now, the general outline and the details of each course according to the two divisions are listed on the left.

古文：布政司参政、参议分司诸道。
现代文：布政司参政、参议分管各道。
English: The Secretary of State for Political Affairs participates in politics, and the Senate is in charge of each province.

古文：督粮道，督册道，分守道：浙江杭嘉湖道，宁绍台道，金衢严道，温处道。
现代文：督粮道，十三布政司各有一人，都驻节省城。督册道，江西、陕西等问或设置。分守道：浙江杭嘉湖道，宁绍台道，都驻节省城。
English: There will be one person from each of the Dugong Road and the 13th Bu Zheng Di stationed in the city of economy. The Dugong Road, Jiangxi, Shaanxi, etc. will be set up. The branch guards: Zhejiang Hangzhou Jiahu Road, Ningxia Shaotai Road, are stationed in the city of economy.

古文：江西南瑞道，湖东道，湖西道，饶南九江道，赣南道。
现代文：江西南瑞道，驻节省城，湖柬道，驻节广信，湖西道，驻节临江，钟南九江道，驻节九江，赣南道，驻节南塞。
English: Rui Road, Southwest Jiangsu Province, stationed in Sosheng City, Hukman Road, stationed in Guangxin Section, Huxi Road, stationed in Linjiang Section, Zhongnan Jiujiang Road, stationed in Jiujiang Section, South Fujian Province, stationed in Nansei Section.

古文：山东济南道，东兖道，海右道。
现代文：山东济南道，东兖道，海右道，都驻节省城。
English: Shandong Jinan Road, Dongtao Road, and Haizhu Road are all located in the city.

古文：山西冀宁道，河东道，冀北道，冀南道。
现代文：山西冀宁道，驻节省城，河东道，驻节蒲州，冀北道，驻节大同，冀南道，驻节汾州。
English: Shanxi Jining Road, stationed in the city of economy, Hetao, stationed in the festival of Puzhou, Hebei North Road, stationed in the festival of Datong, Hebei South Road, stationed in the festival of Bozhou.

古文：陕西关内道，关西道，西宁道，关南道，河西道，陇右道。
现代文：陕西关内道，驻节省城，关西道，驻节凤翔，西宁道，驻节凉州，关南道，驻节兴安，河西道，驻节庆阳，陇右道，驻节圣旦。
English: Shaanxi Guanei Road, stationed in the city of economy, Kansai Road, stationed in the festival of Fengxiang, Xining Road, stationed in the festival of Liangzhou, Guannan Road, stationed in the festival of Xing'an, Hexi Road, stationed in the festival of Qingyang, Shizhu Road, stationed in the festival of Santan.

古文：河南大梁道，河南道，汝南道，河北道。
现代文：河南大梁道，驻节省城，河南道，驻节迎壶，汝南道，驻节南阳，河北道，驻节怀庆。
English: Henan Dayang Road, stationed in the city of economy, Henan Province, stationed in the festival of welcome pot, Runan Province, stationed in the festival of Nanyang, Hebei Province, stationed in the festival of Huaiqing.

古文：湖广武昌道，下荆南道，上荆南道，荆西道，上湖南道，下湖南道，上江防道，下江防道。
现代文：湖广武昌道，下剂南道，驻节鄙阳，上剂南道，兼兵备，驻节涂州，剂西道，兼兵备，驻节安陆，上湖南道，下湖南道，上江防道，有时驻节剂州、垂丛，下江防道。
English: Hukang Wuchang Road, Shijiazhuang South Road, Jiemianyang Station, Shangzhuang South Road, Jianbei, Jiemuzhou Station, Jiaozhou West Road, Jianbei, Jieanlu Station, Shangzhuang South Road, Shijiazhuang South Road, Shangjiang Defense Road, sometimes Jiezhuang, Dangcong, Shijiazhuang Defense Road.

古文：福建兴泉道，福宁道，漳南道，建南道，汀漳道。
现代文：福建兴泉道，驻节泉州，福宁道，驻节兴化，漳南道，驻节漳州，建南道，驻节延平，汀漳道，驻节上蕴逊。
English: Fujian Xingquan Road, stationed in Quanzhou, Funing Road, stationed in Xinghua, South Fujian Road, stationed in Quanzhou, Jiannan Road, stationed in Yanping, Dingyuan Road, stationed in Shangxing.

古文：广东岭东道，岭西道，罗定道，岭北道，岭南道。
现代文：广东岭东道，驻节潮州，岭西道，驻节高州，罗定道，兼兵备，驻节罗定州，岭北道，嵌南道，驻节南雄。
English: Guangdong Lingdao, stationed in Chaozhou, West Lingdao, stationed in Gaozhou, Luoding, concurrently stationed in Luoding, North Lingdao, South Yingdao, stationed in Nanxiong.

古文：四川川西道，川北道，上下川东道，上川南道，下川南道，广西桂平道，苍梧道，左江道，右江道，贵州安平道，贵宁道，新镇道，思仁道，云南临安道，腾冲道，澜沧道。
现代文：四川川西道，川北道，驻节保宁，上下川东道，驻节涪州，上川南道，雅州、嘉定二署，下川南道，叔州、滤州二署。广西桂平道，驻节省城，苍梧道，驻节梧州，左江道，驻节浔州，右江道，驻节柳州。贵州安平道，贵宁道，驻节省城，新镇道，驻节平越，思仁道，驻节思南。云南临安道，腾冲道，澜沧道。
English: Sichuan West Sichuan Road, Sichuan North Sichuan Road, stationed in Boryeong, Dongchuan Dongdao, stationed in Bozhou, Shangchuan South Sichuan Road, Yazhou, Jiading 2nd Station, South Sichuan Road, Shuzhou, Fuzhou 2nd Station; Guangxi Guiping Road, stationed in Shanzhuang, Cangwu Road, stationed in Wuzhou, Zuojiang Road, stationed in Shanzhuang, Zuojiang Road, stationed in Liuzhou; Guizhou Anping Road, Guining Road, stationed in Shanzhuang, Xinzhen Road, stationed in Pingyue, Shiren Road

古文：按察司副使、佥事分司诸道。
现代文：以上有的是参政，有的是参议。按察司副使、愈事分营各道。
English: Some of the above are involved in politics, some are involved in deliberation, including the deputy inspector general and the division of military affairs.

古文：提督学道，清军道，驿传道，分巡道：浙江杭严道，宁绍道，嘉湖道，金衢道。
现代文：提督学道，清军道，驿传道，十三布政司全都各有一人，只有湖广提学有两人，浙江、山西、陕西、福建、广西、贵州清军兼管驿传，江西右布政使兼管清军。分巡道：浙江杭严道，宁绍道，嘉湖道，金衢道。
English: Admiral Xue Dao, the Qing military, Zou Chuan Dao, and the 13th Bu Secretary of State all had one person each, but there were only two people from Hubei, Guangxi and Guizhou, Zhejiang, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Fujian, Guangxi and Guizhou. The Qing army was also in charge of Zou Chuan, and the Jiangxi Right Bu Secretary of State was also in charge of the Qing army. The inspection routes were: Zhejiang Hangyan Road, Ningshao Road, Jiahu Road, and Jinshan Road.

古文：江西饶南九江道，湖西道，南昌道，湖东道，岭北道。
现代文：江西饶南九江道，驻节饶州，湖西道，驻节吉安，南昌道，湖束道，岭北道。
English: Jiangxi Rao Nan Jiujiang Road, stationed in Raozhou, Huxi Road, stationed in Ji'an, Nanchang Road, Hucu Road, Lingbei Road.

古文：山东兖州道，济宁道，青州海防道，济南道，海右道，海道，登莱道，辽海道。
现代文：山东充州道，驻节沂州，济宁道，青州海防道，济南道，移驻德州，海右道，驻节省城，海道，驻节莱州，登莱道，辽海道。
English: Shandong Chenzhou Road, stationed in Jiezhou, Jining Road, Qingzhou Coastal Defense Road, Jinan Road, moved to Dezhou, Haiyu Road, stationed in Shanzheng, Road, stationed in Jielaizhou, Denglai Road, Liaohai Road.

古文：山西冀宁道，冀南道，雁门道。
现代文：山西冀宁道，冀南道，驻节潞安，雁门道。
English: Shanxi Jining Road, South Jining Road, Jieyuan Road, Yanmen Road.

古文：陕西关内道，驻邠州，关西道。陇右道，河西道，西宁道。
现代文：陕西关内道，驻节合州，关西道，驻节平凉，陇右道，驻节秦州，河西道，驻节墉州，西宁道。
English: Shaanxi Guanzhong Road, stationed in Hezhou, Kansai Road, stationed in Pingliang, Shandong Right Road, stationed in Qinzhou, Hexi Road, stationed in Bozhou, Xining Road.

古文：河南大梁道，汝南道，河南道，河北道。
现代文：河南大梁道，汝南道，驻节信匿坦，河南道，驻节汝州，河北道，驻节磁州。
English: Henan Dalyang Road, South Rongdao, stationed in Shennantan, Henan Province, stationed in Ruzhou, Hebei Province, stationed in Zhengzhou.

古文：湖广武昌道，荆西道，上荆南道，下荆南道，湖北道，上湖南道，下湖南道，沅靖道。
现代文：湖广武昌道，剂西道，驻节沔坠，剂南道，下剂南道，湖北道，上湖南道，下湖南道，沅靖道。
English: Wuchang-Wuchang Road, West Hunan Road, Jiejing-Fengcheng Road, South Hunan Road, South Hunan Road, North Hunan Road, South Hunan Road, South Hunan Road, Jiejing Road.

古文：福建巡海道，福宁道，兴泉道，建南道，武平道，漳南道，建宁道，海道，汀漳道。
现代文：福建巡海道，兼管粮储，福宁道，兴泉道，驻节泉州，建南道，驻节建宁，武平道，漳南道，驻节上塑暨，建宁道，海道，驻节漳州，汀漳道。
English: Fujian Highway, also in charge of grain storage, Funing Road, Xingquan Road, stationed in Quanzhou, Jiannan Road, stationed in Jianning, Wuping Road, South Fujian Road, stationed in Shangpu Ji, Jianning Road, Highway, stationed in Quanzhou, Tingtao Road.

古文：广东岭东道，岭西道，岭南道，海北道，海南道。
现代文：广东岭束道，驻节惠州，岭西道，驻节肇庆，岭南道，驻节省城，海北道，驻节雷州，海南道，驻节琼州。
English: Guangdong Lingzhu Road, stationed at Huizhou Festival, Lingxi Road, stationed at Zhaoqing Festival, Lingnan Road, stationed at Sasebo City, North Hainan Road, stationed at Leizhou Festival, Hainan Road, stationed at Qiongzhou Festival.

古文：四川上东道，下东道，川西道，川北道，下川南道，上川南道。
现代文：四川上束道，驻节重庆，下束道，驻节达州，川西道，川北道，驻节保宁，下川南道，上川南道。
English: Sichuan Shangzhuang Road, stationed in Chongqing, Shangzhuang Road, stationed in Dazhou, West Sichuan Road, North Sichuan Road, stationed in Boryeong, South Sichuan Road, South Sichuan Road.

古文：广西府江兵巡道。桂林兵巡道，苍梧兵巡道，左江兵巡道，右江兵巡道，贵州贵宁道，思石道，都清道。
现代文：广西府江兵巡道，驻节平乐，桂林兵巡道，驻节省城，苍梧兵巡道，驻节梧州，移驻郁林州，左江兵巡道，驻节南宁，右江兵巡道，驻节宾州。以上五道都兼领兵备。
English: Guangxi Province's River Soldiers' Tour, stationed at Pingle Festival, Guilin's River Soldiers' Tour, stationed at Shengcheng, Cangwu's River Soldiers' Tour, stationed at Wuzhou Festival, stationed at Yulin Festival, Zuo River Soldiers' Tour, stationed at Nanning Festival, Right River Soldiers' Tour, stationed at Pennsylvania Festival. The above five provinces are also receiving troops.

古文：云南安普道，临沅道，洱海道，金沧道。
现代文：贵州贵宁道，思石道，驻节锢仨，壑清道，兼理兵备，驻节都匀。云南安普道，临沅道，洱海道，金沧道。
English: Guizhou Guining Road, Shishi Road, Jiezhuang Road, Jieqing Road, Jianli Military Preparation Road, Jiezhuang Duyun Road, Yunnan Ampu Road, Linyi Road, Minhai Road, Jincang Road.

古文：整饬兵备道：浙江宁绍道，嘉兴道，温处道，台海道。
现代文：整饬兵备道：浙江宁绍道，嘉兴道，温处道，台海道。
English: Zheijian Ningsao Road, Jiaxing Road, Wenshu Road, Taiwan Highway.

古文：江西南瑞道，广建道，山东临清道，武德道，曹濮道，沂州道，辽东道。
现代文：江西南瑞道，广建道，驻节建昌。山东临清道，武德道，驻节武定州，曹濮道，驻节曹州，沂州道，辽东道。
English: Rui Road, Guangjian Road, stationed in Jianchang, Southwest Jiangsu Province; Linqing Road, Wude Road, stationed in Wudingzhou, Caozhou Road, stationed in Caozhou, Zhangzhou Road, Liaodong, Shandong Province.

古文：山西雁北道，大同道，阳和道，潞安道，岢岚道。
现代文：山西雁北道，驻节代州，大同道，两人，一个驻节大同，一个驻节朔州，阳和道，潞安道，岢岚道。
English: Shanxi Yanbei Road, stationed in Daizhou, Datong Road, two people, one stationed in Datong, one stationed in Shuozhou, Yanghe Road, Handan Road, Handan Road.

古文：陕西肃州道，固原道，临洮道，洮岷道，靖远道，榆林中路道，榆林东路道，宁夏河西道，宁夏河东兵粮道，庄浪道，汉羌道，潼关道。
现代文：陕西肃州道，固原道，临洮道，驻节兰州，洮岷道，驻节亟盟，靖远道，榆林中路道，榆林东路道，驻节神木县，宁夏河西道，驻节宁夏，宁夏河东兵粮道，驻节花马池，庄浪道，漠羌道，潼关道。
English: Shaanxi Suzhou Road, Guyuan Road, Linyi Road, Lanzhou Section, Shandong Road, Shandong Alliance Section, Jingyuan Road, Yulin Middle Road, Yulin East Road, Shenmu County Section, Ningxia River West Road, Ningxia Section, Ningxia River East Military Grain Road, Hanamachi Section, Zhuanglong Road, Mudan Road, Shouguan Road.

古文：湖广辰沅道。
现代文：湖广辰沅道。
English: Huguangcheng Road.

古文：河南睢东道。
现代文：河南睢东道。
English: Henan Province is the host.

古文：福建兵备道，巡海道。
现代文：福建兵备道，巡海道。
English: Fujian Military Preparation Road, patrol road.

古文：广东南韶道，南雄道。
现代文：广东南韶道，南雄道。
English: Guangdong Nanxun Road, Nanxiong Road.

古文：四川松潘道，威茂道，建昌道，重夔道，安绵道，叙泸道。
现代文：四川松潘道，威茂道，建昌道，重夔道，安绵道，叔泸道。
English: Sichuan Songpan Road, Weimao Road, Jianchang Road, Chongxuan Road, Anmian Road, Shuxuan Road.

古文：广西，分巡兼兵备。
现代文：广西，分巡兼管兵备。
English: Guangxi, sub-inspector and in charge of military preparations.

古文：贵州威清道，毕节道。
现代文：五道都参见分巡道。贵州威清道，驻节安顺，毕节道。
English: For the five roads, please refer to the sub-routes. Guizhou Weixing Road, Jieshuan Road, Bijie Road.

古文：云南曲靖道。
现代文：云南曲靖道。
English: Yunnan Qujing Road.

古文：其外又有协堂道，水利道，屯田道，管河道，盐法道，抚治道，监军道，招练道。
现代文：另外又有协堂道，副使，河南、浙江间或设置，水利道，浙垄，屯田道，婆耍、河南、旦址三省屯田兼理驿传，管河道，河南，盐法道，抚治道，陕西抚治商盗道，湖广又有抚民、抚苗道，监军道，因事而不常设，招练道，韭棰有时设置。
English: In addition, there are Xitang Road, Vice Envoy, between Henan and Zhejiang or set up, Water Conservancy Road, Zhejiang Ridge, Tongtian Road, Bawang, Henan, Danzi, three provinces, Tongtian and Lijiang, Guanhe Road, Henan, Salt Road, Fuzhi Road, Shaanxi Fuzhi Road, Fuzhimin Road, Fuzhimiao Road, Supervision Road, not permanent due to circumstances, Recruitment Road, sometimes set up.

古文：其北直隶之道寄衔于山东者，则为密云道，大名道，天津道，霸州道；寄衔于山西者，则为易州道，口北道，昌平道，井陉道，蓟州、永平等道。
现代文：北直隶的道挂靠在山东的，便是密云道，大名道，天津道，霸州道；挂靠在山西的，便是易州道，口北道，昌平道，井陉道，蓟州、永平等道。
English: The roads of North Zhili that are connected to Shandong are Miyun Road, Daming Road, Tianjin Road, and Bazhou Road; those connected to Shanxi are Yizhou Road, North Kuching Road, Changping Road, Jingyao Road, Zhangzhou, and Yongping Road.

古文：南直隶之道寄衔于山东者，太仓道，颍州道，徐州道；寄衔浙江、江西、湖广者，苏松道，漕储道，常镇道，庐凤道，徽宁池太道，淮扬道。
现代文：南直隶的道挂靠在山东的有，太仓道，颖州道，徐州道；挂靠浙江、江西、湖广的有，蓝锉道，漕储道，常镇道，庐凤道，邀奎池太道，淮扬道。
English: The roads of Nan Zhi Li are connected to Shandong, including Taicang Road, Yingzhou Road, and Xuzhou Road; those connected to Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Hukang are: Lanluan Road, Caozhu Road, Changzhen Road, Fenfeng Road, Yingkuichidai Road, and Huaiyang Road.

古文：按明初制，恐守令贪鄙不法，故于直隶府州县设巡按御史，各布政司所属设试佥事。
现代文：按照明朝初年制度，担心郡守县令等行政长官贪脏枉法，因此在直隶府州县设置巡按御史，各布政司所辖地区设置试愈事。
English: According to the system of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, it was feared that the chief administrators such as the county governors and county magistrates would be corrupt, and therefore, in the prefectures and counties directly under the central government, the inspectors were set up, and in the areas under the jurisdiction of the administrative departments, the probationers were set up.

古文：已罢试佥事，改按察分司四十一道，此分巡之始也。
现代文：废除试愈事之后，改为按察分司四十一道，这是分巡的开始。
English: After the abolition of probation, it was changed to 41st Road, which is the beginning of the inspection.

古文：分守起于永乐间，每令方面官巡视民瘼。
现代文：分守开始于永乐年间，常常命令职能部门官员巡视民间疾苦。
English: Starting in the Yongle era, the governor often ordered officials from functional departments to inspect the hardships of the people.

古文：后遂定右参政、右参议分守各属府州县。
现代文：后来就定下右参政、右参议分守各自管辖的府州县。
English: Later, it was decided that the right to participate in politics and the right to participate in deliberation would be divided into prefectures and counties under their respective jurisdiction.

古文：兵道之设，仿自洪熙间，以武臣疏于文墨，遣参政副使沈固、刘绍等往各总兵处整理文书，商榷机密，未尝身领军务也。
现代文：兵道的设置，仿照试行于洪熙年间，因为武将文墨粗疏，便派遣参政副使沈固、刘绍等前往各总兵处整理文书，商量机密事务，自身不曾亲领军务。
English: The establishment of the military course was modeled on the trial run during the Hongxi era. Because the generals were not fluent in writing, they sent the deputy political attachés Shen Guo and Liu Shao to the general military offices to sort out the documents and discuss confidential matters. They did not personally lead the military affairs.

古文：至弘治中，本兵马文升虑武职不修，议增副佥一员敕之。
现代文：到弘治年间，兵部尚书马文升顾虑武职不整治，提议增设副愈事一名进行整饬。
English: By the time of the Hongzhi era, Shang Shuma Wen Sheng of the Military Department, concerned that military duties were not being rectified, proposed the addition of a deputy military affairs officer to carry out rectification.

古文：自是兵备之员盈天下。
现代文：从此兵备官员充盈天下。
English: Since then, the world has been filled with military officials.

古文：两京不设布、按二司，故督学以御史。
现代文：两京不设布、按二司，因此用御史督学。
English: The two capitals did not set up the cloth, according to the second division, so the use of historical supervision.

古文：后置守、巡诸员无所属，则寄衔于邻近省布、按司官。
现代文：后来添设的守、巡各类官员无从辖属，就挂靠在邻近行省布、按司官处。
English: Later, additional officials of various types, such as guards and patrol officers, without subordinates, were attached to the nearby provincial and magistrate offices.

古文：行太仆寺。卿一人，少卿一人，寺丞无定员，其属，主簿一人，掌各边卫所营堡之马政，以听于兵部。
现代文：行太仆寺，卿一人，从三晶，少卿一人，正四品，寺丞没有固定人数，正六品。它的下属，主簿一人，从七品。掌管各边防卫所营堡的马政，听命于兵部。
English: Go to the servant temple, one from the noble, one from the three crystal, one from the lesser noble, four from the superior, six from the superior. Its subordinate, one from the master, seven from the inferior. Ma Zheng, who is in charge of the fortresses of the frontier defense, obeys the orders of the military department.

古文：凡骑操马匹印烙、俵散、课掌、孳牧，以时督察之。
现代文：凡是军用马匹烙印、分发、钉掌、繁殖，按时监督视察。
English: All military horses are branded, distributed, pawned, bred, and supervised and inspected on time.

古文：岁春秋，阅视其增耗、齿色，三岁一稽比，布、按二司不得与。
现代文：每年春秋雨季，检查马匹增减、马龄，每三年考核一次，布、按二司不得干预。
English: Every year in the spring and autumn rainy season, check the increase and decrease of horses, horse age, assessment once every three years, cloth, according to the second division shall not intervene.

古文：有瘠损，则听兵部参罚。
现代文：有瘦弱损失，便听从兵部弹劾处罚。
English: If there is a loss of thinness, it will be subject to the impeachment punishment of the military department.

古文：苑马寺亦如之。
现代文：苑马寺也如此。
English: This is also the case for Yuanma Temple.

古文：洪武三十年，置行太仆寺于山西、北平、陕西、甘肃、辽东。
现代文：洪武三十年，设置行太仆寺于山西、北平、陕西、甘肃、辽东。
English: In the 30th year of Hongwu's reign, the lineage of Taipu Temple was established in Shanxi, Beiping, Shaanxi, Gansu, and Liaodong.

古文：山西、北平、陕西，每寺设少卿一人，丞三人；甘肃、辽东，每寺设少卿、丞各一人，择致仕指挥、千百户为之。
现代文：山西、北平、陕西，每寺设少卿一人，丞三人；甘肃、辽东，每寺设少卿、丞各一人，选择退休的指挥、千户或百户担任。
English: In Shanxi, Beiping, and Shaanxi, each temple shall have one Shaoqing and three Joes; in Gansu and Liaodong, each temple shall have one Shaoqing and one Joes, and the retired leaders shall be selected to serve one thousand or one hundred households.

古文：永乐四年，许令寺官按治所辖卫所镇抚首领官吏。
现代文：永乐四年，允许寺官惩办处理治所管辖的卫所镇抚首领官员。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, the temple officials allowed the disciplinary office to deal with the head officials of the town of Weizhou under the jurisdiction of the disciplinary office.

古文：十八年，以北京行太仆寺为太仆寺。
现代文：十八年，以北京行太仆寺为太仆寺。
English: In the 18th year, Beijing-style Taipu Temple was named Taipu Temple.

古文：宣德七年，发杂犯死罪应充军者，于陕西行太仆寺养马。
现代文：宣德七年，发配死囚犯应当充军的，到陕西行太仆寺养马。
English: Seven years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, prisoners sentenced to death who should have been conscripted into the army went to Shaanxi to raise horses at Taipu Temple.

古文：弘治十年，简推素有才望者补本寺官，视太仆寺官升擢。
现代文：弘治十年，选拔向来有才能名望的人补任本寺官，比照太仆寺官提拔。
English: In the tenth year of the Hongzhi era, talented and prestigious people have always been selected to fill the position of this temple official, such as the promotion of the servant temple official.

古文：嘉靖三年，从御史陈讲请，增设陕西、甘肃二寺各少卿一员，分管延绥、宁夏。
现代文：嘉靖三年，听从御史陈讲请求，增设陕西、甘肃二寺各少卿一人，分管延绥、宁夏。
English: In the third year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, he listened to the request of the Grand Historian Chen Jiao and added one Shaoqing to each of the two temples in Shaanxi and Gansu, in charge of Yancheng and Ningxia.

古文：二十九年，令寺官遇圣节，轮年赍进表文。
现代文：二十九年，命令寺官遇皇上生日，轮流每年进贡表文。
English: In the 29th year, the temple officials were ordered to make a tribute every year on the emperor's birthday.

古文：苑马寺。卿一人，少卿一人，寺丞无定员，其属，主簿一人，各牧监，监正一人，监副一人，录事一人。
现代文：苑马寺，卿一人，从三品，少卿一人，正四品，寺丞没有固定人数，正六品。他的下属，主簿一人，从七品。各牧监，监正一人，正九品，监副一人，从九品，录事一人。
English: At Yuanma Temple, there is one chancellor, three priests, one junior chancellor, four senior priests, and there is no fixed number of priests, six senior priests. His subordinates, one master, seven priests. Each overseer, one chief overseer, nine senior priests, one deputy overseer, nine priests, and one recorder.

古文：各苑，圉长一人。
现代文：各苑，圉长一人，从九品。
English: In each garden, there is one chief gardener, starting from the ninth grade.

古文：掌六监二十四苑之马政，而听于兵部。
现代文：掌管六监二十四苑的马政，听命于兵部。
English: Ma Zheng, who was in charge of the 24th courtyard of the Sixth Prison, followed orders from the military.

古文：凡苑，视广狭为三等：上苑牧马万匹，中苑七千，下苑四千。
现代文：所有马苑，视大小分为三等：上等苑牧马万匹，中等苑七千匹，下等苑四千匹。
English: All horse farms are divided into three classes according to their size: the upper class herds 10,000 horses, the middle class herds 7,000 horses, and the lower class herds 4,000 horses.

古文：凡牧地，曰草场，曰荒地，曰熟地，严禁令而封表之。
现代文：所有放牧之地，为草场、荒地、熟地，严格禁令并划界作标记。
English: All grazing land, whether pasture, wasteland or cultivated land, is marked with strict prohibitions and demarcations.

古文：凡牧人，曰恩军，曰队军，曰改编之军，曰充发之军，曰召募之军，曰抽选之军，皆籍而食之。
现代文：所有牧人，为恩军、队军、改编之军、充发之军、招募之军、抽选之军，都登记并且供养他们。
English: All the shepherds, for the army of grace, the army of teams, the army of adaptation, the army of replenishment, the army of recruitment, the army of selection, have registered and supported them.

古文：凡马驹，岁籍其监苑之数，上于兵部，以听考课。
现代文：所有马驹，每年登记牧养的数目，上报兵部，便于听从考核。
English: All stallions, the number of annual registration of shepherding, reported to the Ministry of the People's Armed Forces, easy to obey the assessment.

古文：监正、副掌监苑之牧事，圉长帅群长而阜蕃马匹。
现代文：水州、隆萃、大牧、遂宁，隶属金台监。沂池、鹿鸣、龙河、量墨，隶属涿鹿监。
English: Shuizhou, Longqi, Damu and Suining are under the supervision of the Jintai Supervision Bureau, while Dianchi, Lucheng, Longhe and Jiemo are under the supervision of the Yunnan Deer Supervision Bureau.

古文：永乐四年，置苑马寺凡四：北直隶、辽东、平凉、甘肃。
现代文：童阳、龙山、万安、蕃昌，隶属卢龙监。清流、广蕃、龙泉、松林，隶属香山监。
English: Tongyang, Longshan, Wan'an, and Yuchang are under the jurisdiction of Lu Longjing. Qingliu, Guanglu, Longquan, and Songlin are under the jurisdiction of Xiangshan.

古文：五年，增设北直隶苑马寺六监二十四苑。
现代文：迩塑、崇义、兴宁、永成，隶属逼丛监。六年，增设甘肃、平凉二寺监。每寺各六监二十四苑。
English: Gongsuo, Chongyi, Xingning, and Yongcheng are under the supervision of the Forced Congregation Supervisor. In six years, two supervisors were added in Gansu and Pingliang. Each of the six supervisors of each temple has 24 gardens.

古文：十八年，革北京苑马寺，并入太仆。
现代文：十八年，革除北京苑马寺，并入太仆寺。
English: In 18 years, Beijing Yuanma Temple was abolished and merged into Taipu Temple.

古文：正统四年，革甘肃苑马寺，改牧恩军于黑水口，隶长乐监。
现代文：正统四年，革除甘肃苑马寺，改调牧恩军到黑水口，隶属长乐监。
English: In the fourth year of orthodoxy, Gansu Yuanma Temple was expelled, and the Mu En Army was transferred to Heishikou, under the jurisdiction of the Chief Music Supervisor.

古文：弘治二年革平凉寺丞一员。
现代文：弘治二年，革除平琼寺丞一人。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, one person was purged, namely, Ping Qiong Jizhe.

古文：十七年，都御史杨一清奏请行太仆、苑马二寺员缺，简选才望参政、副使补升卿，参议、佥事补升少卿，以振马政。
现代文：十七年，都御史杨一清奏请行太仆、苑马二寺人员缺乏，选拔有才能名望的参政、副使补升为卿，参议、愈事补升为少卿，以振兴马政。
English: In the seventeenth year, Yang Yixing, the governor of the capital Shi, invited the lack of personnel in the two temples of Taigu and Yuanma, and selected the talented and famous to participate in politics, the deputy minister to be promoted to the lord, and the councillor and the doctor to be promoted to the junior minister, in order to revitalize horse politics.

古文：十八年又请添设寺员。
现代文：十八年，又奏请添设寺中人员。
English: In the 18th year, they asked for more staff to be added to the temple.

古文：嘉靖三十二年，以辽东寺卿张思兼辖金、复、盖州三卫军民。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年，以辽东寺卿张思兼管金、复、盖州三卫军民。
English: In the 32nd year of Jiajing, Zhang Sijian, the chief of Liaodong Temple, was put in charge of the military and civilians of Jin, Fu, and Gaizhou Sanwei.

古文：四十二年，又命带理兵备事。
现代文：四十二年，又命兼理兵备事。
English: Forty-two years later, he was again ordered to prepare for war.

古文：都转运盐使司。都转运使一人，同知一人，副使一人，判官无定员。
现代文：都转运盐使司，都转运使一人，从三品，同知一人，从四品，副使一人，从五品，判官没有固定人数，从六品。
English: All of them have a transfer agent, one from the third grade, one from the same grade, one from the fourth grade, one from the fifth grade, and there is no fixed number of judges, from the sixth grade.

古文：其属，经历司，经历一人，知事一人，库大使、副使各一人。
现代文：他的下属，经历司，经历一人，从七品，知事一人，从八品，库大使、副使各一人。
English: Among his subordinates, there was one experienced secretary, one experienced person from the seventh grade, one governor, one from the eighth grade, one ambassador to the treasury, and one vice-envoy.

古文：所辖，各场盐课司大使、副使，各盐仓大使、副使，各批验所大使、副使，并一人。都转运使。
现代文：所管辖，各场盐课司大使、副使，各盐仓大使、副使，各批验所大使、副使，都只有一人，都没有入流。
English: There was only one ambassador and deputy envoy from each salt class division, each salt warehouse ambassador and deputy envoy, and each examination institute ambassador and deputy envoy, and none of them joined the stream.

古文：掌盐监之事。
现代文：都转运使掌管盐监之事。
English: It was all transferred to the person in charge of the salt inspector.

古文：同知、副判分司之。
现代文：同知、副判分掌其职。
English: Ditto, the deputy judge is now in charge of his duties.

古文：都转运盐使司凡六：曰两淮，曰两浙，曰长芦，曰河东，曰山东，曰福建。
现代文：都转运盐使司共六个：为两淮、两浙、长芦、河东、山东、福建。
English: There are a total of six departments for the transfer of salt: two Huai, two Zhejiang, Changlu, Hedong, Shandong and Fujian.

古文：分司十四：泰州、淮安、通州隶两淮，嘉兴、松江、宁绍、温台隶两浙，沧州、青州隶长芦，胶莱、滨乐隶山东，解盐东场、西场、中场隶河东。
现代文：分司十四个：泰州、淮安、通州隶属两淮，嘉兴、松江、宁绍、温台隶属两浙，沧州、青州隶属长芦，胶莱、滨乐隶属山东，解盐东场、西场、中场隶属河东。
English: Fourteen subdivisions: Taizhou, Huai'an and Tongzhou belong to the two Huai'an, Jiaxing, Songjiang, Ningshao and Wentai belong to the two Zhejiang, Cangzhou and Qingzhou belong to Changlu, Gulai and Binle belong to Shandong, and Desalinization East Field, West Field and Midfield belong to Hedong.

古文：分副使若副判莅之，督各场仓盐课司，以总于都转运使，共奉巡盐御史或盐法道臣之政令。
现代文：分副使或者副判临任，督管各场仓盐课司，总属于都转运使，共同奉守巡盐御史或盐法道臣的政令。
English: Sub-deputy envoys or deputy judges take office, supervise all warehouses and salt departments, always belong to the transfer envoys, and jointly abide by the government orders of patrolling salt history or salt law.

古文：盐课提举司。提举一人，同提举一人，副提举无定员。
现代文：福建、山塞没有巡盐御史，其它详见《食货志，盐法》中。盐课提举司，提举一人，从五品，同提举一人，从六品，副提举没有固定人数，从七品。
English: There is no history of salt patrols in Fujian and Shanxi. For other details, see the "Food Diary, Salt Law." In the salt class, there is no fixed number of people to be promoted from the first to the second, one person from the fifth grade, one person from the sixth grade, and seven people from the seventh grade.

古文：其属，吏目一人，库大使、副使一人。
现代文：它的下属，吏目一人，从九品，库大使、副使一人。
English: Its subordinates, including one official, nine subordinates, a treasury ambassador and a deputy envoy.

古文：所辖，各盐仓大使、副使，各场、各井盐课司大使、副使，并一人。
现代文：所管辖，各盐仓大使、副使，各场、各井盐课司大使、副使，都只有一人。
English: There is only one ambassador and deputy envoy for each salt warehouse, and only one ambassador and deputy envoy for each field and each salt division.

古文：提举司凡七：曰四川，曰广东海北，曰黑盐井，曰白盐井，曰安宁，曰五井，曰察罕脑儿。
现代文：提举司共七个：为四川、广东海北、廉州，黑盐井、楚雄，白盐井、姚安，安宁、五井、全理，察罕脑儿。
English: There are a total of seven promotion offices: for Sichuan, Guangdong, Hebei, Lianzhou, Heyaitai, Chuxiong, Baiyaitai, Yao'an, Anning, Goi, Quanli, and Chahanneer.

古文：又有辽东煎盐提举司。
现代文：又有辽东煎盐提举司。
English: There is also a Liaodong salt-making company.

古文：其职掌皆如都转运司。
现代文：提举，正七品，同提举，正八品，副提举，正九品。它的职责全都如同都转运司。
English: It is promoted to the seventh grade, the same as the eighth grade, the second grade, and the ninth grade. Its duties are all the same as those of the Transportation Department.

古文：明初，置都转运司于两淮。
现代文：明朝初年，在两淮设置都转运司。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, transportation departments were set up in both provinces.

古文：吴元年，置两浙都转运司于杭州，定都转运使秩正三品，设同知，副使，运判，经历，知事，照磨、纲官，盐场设司令，司丞，百夫长。
现代文：昊元年，在杭州设置两浙都转运司，定都转运使品级为正三品，设同知，正四品，副使，正五品，运判，正六品，经历，正七品，知事，正八品，照磨、纲官，正九品。盐场设司令，从七品，司丞，从八品，百夫长，省略记载。
English: In the first year of the year of Hao, the two Zhejiang Transportation Departments were set up in Hangzhou, and the fixed-point transportation envoys were ranked as the third-ranked, the same-ranked, the fourth-ranked, the deputy envoys, the fifth-ranked, the transportation judges, the sixth-ranked, the experienced, the seventh-ranked, the governors, the eighth-ranked, the supervisors, the officials, and the ninth-ranked. The salt field was commanded by the commander, from the seventh-ranked, the secretary, from the eighth-ranked, the centurion, omitted records.

古文：洪武二年置长芦、河东二都转运司，及广东海北盐课提举司，寻又置山东、福建二都转运司。
现代文：洪武二年，设置长芦、河东二都转运司，及广东海北盐课提举司，不久又设置山东、福建二都转运司。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the Changlu and Hedong two capital transfer departments were set up, as well as the Guangdong North Sea salt project transfer department, and soon the Shandong and Fujian two capital transfer departments were set up.

古文：三年，又于陕西察罕脑儿之地置盐课提举司，后渐增置各处。
现代文：三年，又在陕西察罕脑儿的地方，设置盐课提举司，后来逐渐增加到各地。
English: Three years later, a salt class promotion division was set up in Shaanxi, and later it was gradually expanded to other regions.

古文：建文中，改广东提举为都转运司。
现代文：建文年间，改广东提举为都转运司。
English: During the Jianwen period, it was renamed the Guangdong Transportation Department.

古文：永乐初复故。
现代文：永乐初年恢复如故。
English: Yongle's first year of recovery continues as before.

古文：十四年，初命御史巡盐。
现代文：十四年，初命御史巡盐。
English: Fourteen years have passed since I was first assigned to patrol the salt flats.

古文：景泰三年，罢长芦、两淮巡盐御史，命抚、按官兼理。
现代文：景泰三年，废除长芦、两淮巡盐御史，命令抚、按官兼管。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, he abolished the Changlu and the two Huai patrols of salt, and ordered and appointed officials to be in charge.

古文：已复遣御史，其无御史者，分按察司理之。
现代文：纳溪、白渡二盐马司，洪武五年设置，以常任官为司令，内使为司丞。
English: Naxi, Baidu and Nishan Maizi were set up by Hongwu in the fifth year, with a permanent official as commander and an envoy as secretary.

古文：又洪武中，于四川置茶盐都转运司，纳溪、白渡二盐马司，后并革。
现代文：十三年废除，不久恢复。十五年，改设大使、副使各一人。后来一并革除。
English: It was abolished in 1913, but reinstated soon after. In 1915, one ambassador and one vice-ambassador were appointed, but later they were both dismissed.

古文：又有顺龙盐马司，亦革。
现代文：又有顺龙盐马司，也革除。
English: Shunlong Salt Horse Breeding Station was also eliminated.

古文：市舶提举司。提举一人，副提举二人。
现代文：市舶提举司，提举一人，从五品，副提举二人，徒六品。
English: The municipal shipping company will nominate an officer, one person will be promoted to the fifth grade, two people will be promoted to the second grade, and six people will be promoted to the sixth grade.

古文：其属，吏目一人。
现代文：它的下属，吏目一人，从九品。
English: Its subordinate, the number one official, was promoted from the ninth grade.

古文：掌海外诸蕃朝贡市易之事，辨其使人表文勘合之真伪，禁通番，征私货，平交易，闲其出入而慎馆谷之。
现代文：掌管海外各番国朝贡贸易的事务，辨识使者表文符契的真伪，禁绝与外番往来，征缴走私品，平衡交易，防卫进出并且恭敬地接待他们。
English: In charge of the affairs of the tribute trade of overseas countries, identify the authenticity of the envoy's form, forbid contact with outsiders, collect smuggled goods, balance transactions, defend entry and exit, and respectfully receive them.

古文：吴元年，置市舶提举司。
现代文：吴元年，设置市舶提举司。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Municipal Bureau of Shipping was established.

古文：洪武三年，罢太仓、黄渡市舶司。
现代文：洪武三年，废除太仓、黄渡市舶司。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the Taicang and Huangdu Shipping Departments were abolished.

古文：七年，罢福建之泉州、浙江之明州、广东之广州三市舶司。
现代文：七年，废除福建的泉州、浙江的明州、广东的广州三个市舶司。
English: In seven years, Quanzhou in Fujian, Mingzhou in Zhejiang, and Guangzhou in Guangdong were abolished.

古文：永乐元年复置，设官如洪武初制，寻命内臣提督之。
现代文：永乐元年恢复设置，设官如同洪武初年制度，不久命令内臣提督管理。
English: Yongle restored the system in the first year of the year, appointing officials as in the first year of the Hongwu system, and soon ordered the vassal admiral to manage it.

古文：嘉靖元年，给事中夏言奏倭祸起于市舶，遂革福建、浙江二市舶司，惟存广东市舶司。
现代文：嘉靖元年，给事中夏言奏报倭寇之祸起于市舶，于是就革除福建、浙江两个市舶司，祇留下广东市舶司。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the calamity of the Wokou occurred in the city of Haku, which was reported in the Xiayan report, so the two city shipping departments in Fujian and Zhejiang were abolished, leaving only the Guangdong city shipping department.

古文：茶马司。大使一人，副使一人，掌市马之事。
现代文：茶马司，大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品。
English: A tea master, an ambassador, and a vice-ambassador, each of whom is from the ninth grade.

古文：洪武中，置洮州、秦州、河州三茶马司，设司令、司丞。
现代文：掌管马匹交易的事务。洪武年间，设置洮州、秦州、河州三个茶马司，设司令、司丞。
English: He was in charge of horse trading. During the Hongwu era, three tea and horse departments were set up in Bozhou, Qinzhou and Hezhou, with a commander and secretary.

古文：十五年改设大使、副使各一人，寻罢洮州茶马司，以河州茶马司兼领之。
现代文：十五年，改设大使、副使各一人，不久废除洮州茶马司，以河州茶马司兼管。
English: In the fifteenth year, one ambassador and one vice-ambassador were appointed, and soon after, the Zhangzhou Tea Master's Office was abolished, with the Hezhou Tea Master's Office taking over.

古文：三十年，改秦州茶马司为西宁茶马司。
现代文：三十年，改秦州茶马司为西宁茶马司。
English: Thirty years later, Qinzhou Tea Horse Brewery was renamed Xining Tea Horse Brewery.

古文：又洪武中，置四川永宁茶马司，后革，复置雅州碉门茶马司。
现代文：又洪武年间，设置四川永宁茶马司，后来革除，又设置雅州碉门茶马司。
English: During the Hongwu era, the Sichuan Yongning Tea Master's Office was set up, and later it was abolished, and the Yazhou Qimen Tea Master's Office was set up.

古文：又于广西置庆远裕民司，市八番溪洞之马，后亦革。
现代文：又在广西设置庆速裕民司，洪武七年设置，设大使一人，从八品，副使一人，正九品。主管八番溪洞的马匹贸易，后来也革除。
English: In Guangxi, he also set up the Qinghai-Hubei People's Bureau, which was set up by Hongwu in the seventh year of his reign, with one ambassador and eight subordinates, one vice-envoy and nine subordinates. He was in charge of the horse trade in Bafangxidong, but was later dismissed.

古文：府。知府一人，同知，通判无定员，推官一人。
现代文：府，知府一人，正四品，同知，正五品，通判没有固定人数，正六品，推官一人，正匕品。
English: The prefecture, the prefectural governor, one person, the four-star general, the councillor, the five-star general, there is no fixed number of judges, the six-star general, the councillor, one person, the six-star general.

古文：其属，经历司经历一人，知事一人。
现代文：它的下属，经历司，经历一人，正八品，知事一人，正九品。
English: Its subordinates, experienced division, experienced one person, eight grade, governor one person, nine grade.

古文：照磨所，照磨一人，检校一人。
现代文：照磨所，照磨一人，从九品，检校一人。
English: Sunning mill, sunning one person, from nine products, inspection one person.

古文：司狱司，司狱一人。
现代文：司狱司，司狱一人。
English: A prison warden, a prison warden, from the ninth grade.

古文：知府，掌一府之政，宣风化，平狱讼，均赋役，以教养百姓。
现代文：所辖属见别处。知府掌管一府的政事，宣扬教化，公平诉讼案件，平均赋税徭役，教育生养百姓。
English: The chifu is in charge of the political affairs of a prefecture, propaganda of enlightenment, fair litigation cases, average tax collection, education and raising people.

古文：每三岁，察属吏之贤否，上下其考，以达于省，上吏部。
现代文：每三年，考察下属官吏贤能与否，考核业绩的上下等级，禀报行省，上呈吏部。
English: Every three years, the merit of subordinate officials is examined, and the upper and lower grades of performance appraisal are reported to the ministry, and the higher level is reported to the personnel department.

古文：凡朝贺、吊祭，视布政使司，直隶府得专达。
现代文：凡是朝贺、吊祭，比照布政使司，直隶府可以特许直达朝廷。
English: For all morning greetings and hanging ceremonies, the Imperial Household Agency can grant special permission to go directly to the Imperial Court, according to cloth envoys.

古文：凡诏赦、例令、勘劄至，谨受之，下所属奉行。
现代文：所育诏令赦书、律例法令、勘合札子到达，恭敬小心收下，下发所属部门实行。
English: When the Imperial edicts, laws and ordinances, and commemorative stamps arrive, they should be received respectfully and carefully, and then distributed to the relevant departments for implementation.

古文：所属之政，皆受约束于府，剂量轻重而令之，大者白于抚、按、布、按，议允乃行。
现代文：下属部门的政务，都受到府的管东，权衡轻重而下令，大事请示巡抚、巡按、布政使、按察使，商议许可纔能进行。
English: The administrative affairs of subordinate departments are all subject to the management of the prefectural government, and are ordered according to the weighting of importance. For major events, the inspector, the inspector, the political envoy, and the inspector can be consulted and discussed.

古文：凡宾兴科贡，提调学校，修明祀典之事，咸掌之。
现代文：所有推举贤才、科举考试、管理安排学校、整饬昭明祭祀典礼的事，都要掌管。
English: They should be in charge of all matters related to the selection of talents, the national science examination, the management and arrangement of schools, and the rectification of the Zhaoming ceremony.

古文：若籍帐、军匠、驿递、马牧、盗贼、仓库、河渠、沟防、道路之事，虽有专官，皆总领而稽核之。
现代文：至于帐册、军匠、驿传邮递、马牧、盗贼、仓库、河渠、沟防、道路之事，即使有专门的官员，都要总领并且考核。
English: As for the account books, the military artisans, the postal service, the horse herdsmen, the thieves, the warehouses, the canals, the ditches, and the roads, even if there are special officials, they must be led and examined.

古文：经历、照磨、检校受发上下文移，磨勘六房宗卷。
现代文：推官主管诉讼，辅助管理簿册。各府推官，洪武三年开始设置。经历、照磨、检校收发上下公文，校勘六房卷宗档案。
English: Supervisor in charge of litigation, auxiliary management of books. Supervisor of all prefectures, set up in the third year of Hongwu. Experience, polishing, inspection, receipt and issuance of official documents, inspection of six-room file archives.

古文：明初，改诸路为府。
现代文：明朝初年，改各路为府。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, it was changed to the prefecture.

古文：洪武六年，分天下府三等：粮二十万石以上为上府，知府秩从三品；二十万石以下为中府，知府正四品；十万石以下为下府，知府，从四品。
现代文：洪武六年，分天下的府为三等：交纳粮二十万石以上为上府，知府，品级从三品；交纳二十万石以下为中府，知府，正四品；交纳十万石以下马下府，知府，从四品。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, the provincial capitals were divided into three classes: the provincial capitals with a grain payment of 200,000 koku or more were the upper capitals, and the provincial capitals with a grade of three; the provincial capitals with a grain payment of 200,000 koku or less were the middle capitals, and the provincial capitals with a grade of four; the provincial capitals with a grain payment of 100,000 koku or less were the lower capitals, and the provincial capitals with a grain payment of 100,000 koku or less were the lower capitals, and the provincial capitals with a grade of four.

古文：已，并为正四品。
现代文：后来都为正四品。
English: Later, they all became four-course meals.

古文：七年，减北方府州县官三百八人。
现代文：七年，灭去北方府州县官三百零八人。
English: In seven years, three hundred and eight prefectural and county officials in the north were eliminated.

古文：十三年，选国子学生二十四人为府州县官。
现代文：十三年，选拔园子监学生二十四人为府州县官。
English: In 2013, 24 kindergarten supervisors were selected as prefectural and county officials.

古文：六月罢各府照磨。
现代文：六月，罢除各府照磨。
English: In June, all prefectures were abolished.

古文：二十七年复置。
现代文：二十七年恢复设置。
English: It was reinstated in 2007.

古文：自宣德三年弃交阯布政司，计天下府凡一百五十有九。
现代文：自宣德三年废除交趾布政司，总计天下的府共一百五十九个。
English: A total of 159 prefectures around the world have abolished the post of political secretary in the three years since the proclamation of the Constitution.

古文：州。知州一人，同知，判官无定员，其属，吏目一人，
现代文：一百一十家为一里，州中里敷未满三十，没有属县，裁减同知、判官。有属县，裁减同知。它的下属，吏目一人，从九品。
English: One hundred and ten families make up one li, and the area of the middle li of a prefecture is less than thirty li. If a family does not belong to a prefecture, its dongzhi and judges will be reduced. If a family belongs to a prefecture, its dongzhi will be reduced. Its subordinate, one official, will be reduced to nine pins.

古文：知州，掌一州之政。
现代文：所管辖见他处。知州掌管一州的政治。
English: For jurisdiction, see elsewhere. Chishu controls the politics of a state.

古文：凡州二：有属州，有直隶州。
现代文：所有的州都祇分两种：属州，直隶州。
English: All the states are divided into two categories: vassal states and tributary states.

古文：属州视县，直隶州视府，而品秩则同。
现代文：属州等同于县，直隶州等同于府，并且官品相同。
English: A subordinate prefecture is equivalent to a county, a directly subordinate prefecture is equivalent to a prefecture, and the official ranks are the same.

古文：同知、判官，俱视其事州之繁简，以供厥职。
现代文：同知、判官，都依据本州岛事务繁简，各司其职。
English: Tongzhi, judge, are all based on Honshu island affairs, each with their own duties.

古文：计天下州凡二百三十有四。
现代文：总计天下州共二百三十四个。
English: In total, there are two hundred and thirty-four provinces.

古文：县。知县一人，县丞一人，主簿一人，其属，典史一人。
现代文：县，知县一人，正七品，县丞一人，正八品，主簿一人，正九品。它的下属，典史一人。
English: County, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate, county magistrate.

古文：知县，掌一县之政。
现代文：所管辖见他处。知县掌管一县的政务。
English: For the jurisdiction, see other places. Chi County is in charge of the government affairs of one county.

古文：凡赋役，岁会实征，十年造黄册，以丁产为差。
现代文：所有赋税徭役，每年计算寅际征收，每十年修造黄册一次，按人丁田产有所差别。
English: All taxes and duties shall be calculated annually and levied intermittently, and the yellow book shall be revised once every ten years, and there shall be a difference according to the amount of farm produce per person.

古文：赋有金谷、布帛及诸货物之赋，役有力役、雇役、借债不时之役，皆视天时休咎，地利丰耗，人力贫富，调剂而均节之。
现代文：赋税有钱粮、布帛和各种货物的税收，徭役有力役、雇役、暂时借用的不固定劳役，都依据气候的好壤，地产的丰富损耗，人力的贫困富裕，调剂而平均分配。
English: Taxes, including taxes on money, grain, cloth, and all kinds of goods, laborers, hired laborers, and temporarily borrowed non-fixed laborers, are evenly distributed according to the good soil of the climate, the rich loss of real estate, the poverty of manpower, and the adjustment.

古文：岁歉则请于府若省蠲减之。
现代文：年成歉收就禀告府衙或行省请求减免。
English: to complain to the prefectural government or the provincial government to request reduction and exemption due to poor harvest in the year.

古文：凡养老、祀神、贡士、读法、表善良、恤穷乏、稽保甲、严缉捕、听狱讼，皆躬亲厥职而勤慎焉。
现代文：凡是赡养孤老、祭祀神只、选举人才、宣读法令、表彰良善、抚恤穷困贫乏、稽查保甲、严格缉捕、听讼断狱，都要亲自处理，勤勉谨慎从政。
English: All matters related to supporting the elderly and orphans, worshiping the gods, electing talents, reading out laws and regulations, commending good deeds, subsidizing the poor and needy, inspecting and protecting armor, strictly arresting and arresting, and hearing and terminating imprisonment should be handled personally, and they should be diligent and prudent in politics.

古文：若山海泽薮之产，足以资国用者，则按籍而致贡。
现代文：如果编入户籍的平民达不到二十个里的都裁革。
English: If the number of civilians registered for household registration is less than twenty, it will be cancelled.

古文：县丞、主簿分掌粮马、巡捕之事。典史典文移出纳。如无县丞，或无主簿，则分领丞簿职。吴元年，定县三等：粮十万石以下为上县，知县从六品；六万石以下为中县，知县正七品；三万石以下为下县，知县从七品。
现代文：吴元年，确定县为三等：交纳粮十万石以下为上县，知县为从六品；交纳六万石以下为中县，知县为正七品；交纳三万石以下马下县，知县为从七品。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the counties were determined to be of the third class: counties with a grain payment of 100,000 koku or less were the upper counties, and counties with a grain payment of 60,000 koku or less were the middle counties, and counties with a grain payment of 60,000 koku or less were the middle counties, and counties with a grain payment of 30,000 koku or less were the middle counties, and counties with a grain payment of 30,000 koku or less were the lower counties, and counties with a grain payment of 30,000 koku or less were the upper counties, and counties with a grain payment of 60,000 koku or less were the middle counties, and counties with a grain payment of

古文：已，并为正七品。
现代文：不久，都为正七品。
English: Soon, all of them were given the rank of Shichihon.

古文：凡新授郡县官，给道里费。
现代文：所有新任命的郡县官，发给路费。
English: All newly-appointed county magistrates to be paid travel expenses.

古文：洪武元年，征天下贤才为府州县职，敕命厚赐，以励其廉耻，又敕谕之至于再。
现代文：洪武元年，征召天下贤才任府州县官职，敕命丰厚赏赐，以此勉励他们廉洁奉公耻于贪私，又再三告谕他们。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he conscripted the world's sages to serve as officials in prefectures and counties, and rewarded them generously for their hard work. In this way, he encouraged them to be honest and shameless in their greed, and repeatedly admonished them.

古文：三十七年，定府州县条例八事，颁示天下，永为遵守。
现代文：三十七年，规定府州县条例八条，颁布告示天下，永远遵守。
English: In 1937, it stipulated eight prefectural and county regulations, promulgated a notice to the world, and always complied with.

古文：是时，天下府州县官廉能正直者，必遣行人赍敕往劳，增秩赐金。
现代文：这时，天下府州县官有廉洁贤能正直的，必定派遣行人奉敕前往慰劳，提升品级赏赐财物。
English: At this time, the world's prefectural and county officials are honest, virtuous and honest, and they will certainly send pedestrians to go to comfort labor, raise their rank and reward them with property.

古文：仁、宣之际犹然，英、宪而下日罕。
现代文：仁宗、宣宗时期依然如此，英宗、宪宗之后日渐稀少。
English: This was still the case during the period of Ninshu and Xuan Zong, and became increasingly rare after the time of Ying Zong and Kenzong.

古文：自后益重内轻外，此风绝矣。
现代文：此后更是看重京城官员而轻视地方官员，这种风气就绝迹了。
English: Since then, people have placed more importance on officials in the capital and despised local officials, and this culture has died out.

古文：计天下县凡一千一百七十有一。
现代文：总计天下的县共一千一百七十一个。
English: In total, there are 1,171 counties in the world.

古文：儒学。府，教授一人，训导四人。
现代文：儒学：府，教授一人，从九品，训导四人。
English: Confucianism: prefecture, one professor, nine grades, four instructors.

古文：州，学正一人，训导三人。
现代文：州，学正一人，训导三人。
English: State, one student, three instructors.

古文：县，教谕一人，训导二人。
现代文：县，教谕一人，训导二人。
English: County, one instructor, two instructors.

古文：教授、学正、教谕，掌教诲所属生员，训导佐之。
现代文：教授、学正、教谕，掌管教诲所管辖的生员，训导辅佐他们。
English: The professor, the dean of students, the instructor, and the students who are under the authority of the instructor are in charge of the instruction, and the instructor assists them.

古文：凡生员廪膳、增广，府学四十人，州学三十人，县学二十人，附学生无定数。
现代文：所有麇膳生员、增广生员，府学四十人，州学三十人，县学二人，附学生员没有固定人数。
English: There are 40 students in the prefecture-level school, 30 in the county-level school, two in the county-level school, and there is no fixed number of students.

古文：儒学官月课士子之艺业而奖励之。
现代文：儒学官每月考试生员的学业而奖励他们。
English: Confucian officials examine students monthly to reward them for their academic success.

古文：凡学政遵卧碑，咸听于提学宪臣提调，府听于府，州听于州，县听于县。
现代文：所有学政遵守卧碑所刻条例，都要听从提学宪臣提调，府听从于府，州听从于州，县听从于县。
English: All school administrations should abide by the regulations inscribed on the monument, and obey the instructions of the gendarmerie, the prefectural government should obey the prefectural government, the prefectural government should obey the prefectural government, and the county should obey the county.

古文：其殿最视乡举之有无多寡。
现代文：政绩的好坏要根据乡试中举人数的有无多少来确定。
English: The quality of political performance should be determined according to the number of candidates in the township test.

古文：明初，置儒学提举司。
现代文：明朝初年，设置儒学提举司。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, a Confucianism Promotion Division was established.

古文：洪武二年，诏天下府州县皆立学。
现代文：洪武二年，诏令天下府州县都设立儒学。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the Emperor issued an edict to establish Confucianism in all prefectures and counties.

古文：十三年，改各州学正为未入流。
现代文：十三年，改各州学正品级为未入流品。
English: In the thirteenth year, it was changed from the state-level genuine grade to the inferior grade.

古文：二十四年，定儒学训导位杂职上。
现代文：三十一年，诏令天下学官改授旁郡州县之官。
English: In the 31st year of the Heian period, the imperial edict changed the title of "school official" to "county official."

古文：三十一年诏天下学官改授旁郡州县。
现代文：正统元年，开始设置提督学校官，又有都司儒学，洪武十七年设置，从辽塞开始。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the admiral school official began to be set up, and there was also the Confucianism Department, set up in the seventeenth year of Hongwu, starting from Liaosai.

古文：正统元年始设提督学校官，又有都司儒学，行都司儒学，卫儒学，以教武臣子弟。
现代文：行都司儒学，洪武二十三年设置，从北平开始。卫需学，洪武十七年设置，岷瞳，二十三年设置，从左宁等卫开始。用以教导武臣子弟。
English: Confucianism, set up in the 23rd year of Hongwu, started from Beiping. Medicine, set up in the 17th year of Hongwu, and Confucianism, set up in the 23rd year of Hongwu, started from Zuoning and Wei. It was used to teach samurai children.

古文：俱设教授一人，训导二人。
现代文：都设教授一人，训导二人。
English: All of them have one professor and two instructors.

古文：河东又设都转运司儒学，制如府。
现代文：河东又设都转运司儒学，制度如同府。
English: In addition, the Department of Confucianism was set up in Hedong, and the system is similar to that of prefectures.

古文：其后宣慰、安抚等土官，俱设儒学。
现代文：后来宣慰、安抚等土官，都设置儒学。
English: Later, the local officials such as Xuan Tiao and An Fu set up Confucianism.

古文：巡检司。巡检、副巡检，主缉捕盗贼，盘诘奸伪。
现代文：巡检司，巡检、副巡检，都为从九品，主管缉捕盗贼，盘查奸邪伪诈之徒。
English: The chief inspector, inspector and deputy inspector are all from the Nine Departments, responsible for arresting thieves and investigating fraudsters.

古文：凡在外各府州县关津要害处俱设，俾率徭役弓兵警备不虞。
现代文：凡是在京外各府州县关隘渡口等要害处都设立，使他们率领兵士役夫警戒防备不测。
English: In all prefectures, prefectures and counties outside of Beijing, checkpoints and other critical points have been set up, so that they can lead soldiers and servicemen to alert and prevent accidents.

古文：初，洪武二年，以广西地接瑶、僮，始于关隘冲要之处设巡检司，以警奸盗，后遂增置各处。
现代文：起初，洪武二年，因为广西地理上连接瑶、僮地区，开始在关口险隘要冲之处设巡检司，以便警戒奸人盗贼，后来就增设到各地。
English: At first, in the second year of Hongwu, because Guangxi is geographically connected to the Min and Shan regions, a patrol division was set up at the narrowest point of the pass in order to guard against thieves and thieves, and later it was added to various regions.

古文：十三年二月，特赐敕谕之，寻改为杂职。
现代文：十三年二月，特别赐给敕命训谕，不久改为离职。
English: In February 13th, he was given a special order to retire, but he soon resigned.

古文：驿。驿丞典邮传迎送之事。
现代文：驿丞掌管邮递、迎送官员的事务。
English: Gongcheng is in charge of mail delivery and welcoming officials.

古文：凡舟车、夫马、廪糗、庖馔、裯帐，视使客之品秩，仆夫之多寡，而谨供应之。
现代文：所有车船、人力马匹、公家提供的粮食、被子床帐，根据使客的品级，仆夫的多少，而恭敬供给接待。
English: All the chariots and ships, the manpower and horses, the grain provided by the nobles, the quilts and bedspreads, according to the class of the messenger, the number of servants, but respectfully provide reception.

古文：支直于府若州县，而籍其出入。税课司。
现代文：向府或州县领取费用，并登记收支情况。巡检、驿丞，各府州县的有无多少不同。税课司，府称司，县称局。
English: Collect fees from the prefecture or prefecture-level county, and register the income and expenditure situation. Inspection, inspection, each prefecture-level county is not much different. Tax Division, prefecture-level division, county-level bureau.

古文：大使一人，典税事。
现代文：大使一人，从九品，主官税收事务。
English: One ambassador, from Jiuping, was in charge of tax affairs.

古文：凡商贾、僧屠、杂市，皆有常征，以时榷而输其直于府若县。
现代文：所有商人、屠夫、杂市，都有常规税收，按时征税上交于府或县。
English: All merchants, butchers, and miscellaneous stores have regular taxes and submit them to the prefecture or county on time.

古文：凡民间贸田宅，必操契券请印，乃得收户，则征其直百之三。
现代文：凡是民间买卖土地房屋，必须把契约拿去盖印章，纔能够遇户，就征收价钱的百分之三的税。
English: All non-governmental sale and purchase of land and houses must be stamped with the deed, and if the house is sold, a tax of three percent of the price will be levied.

古文：明初，改在京官店为宣课司，府州县官店为通课司，后改通课司为税课司、局。
现代文：明代初年，改在京的官店为宣课司，府州县官店为通课司，后来改通课司为税课司、局。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the government-run stores in Beijing were renamed as the Education Bureau, the government-run stores in prefectures and counties were renamed as the Education Bureau, and later the Education Bureau was renamed as the Taxation Bureau.

古文：仓。大使一人，副使一人，库大使一人。
现代文：仓，大使一人，府从九品，州县没有入流品，副使一人，库大使一人。
English: Cang, one ambassador, nine products from the prefecture, no products from the prefecture, one vice-envoy, one ambassador.

古文：织染杂造局。大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：州县设。织染杂造局设大使一人，从九品，州织染局役有入流品。副使一人。
English: State and county offices were established. The Weaving and Dyeing Miscellaneous Works Bureau set up an ambassador, from Jiuping, the State Weaving and Dyeing Bureau served imported goods. A deputy envoy was appointed.

古文：河泊所官，掌收鱼税；闸官、坝官，掌启闭蓄泄。
现代文：河泊所官掌管征收鱼税；闸官、坝官，掌管开启关闭闸坝、蓄水泄水。
English: The officials of river ports are in charge of levying fish tax; the lock officials and dam officials are in charge of opening and closing locks and dams, storing and discharging water.

古文：洪武十五年，定天下河泊所凡二百五十二。
现代文：洪武十五年，确定天下河泊所共二百五十二个。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, it was determined that there were a total of 252 river berthing stations in the world.

古文：岁课粮五千石以上至万石者，设官三人；千石以上设二人；三百石以上设一人。
现代文：每年征收税粮五千石以上至万石的，设官三人；干石以上设二人；三百石以上设一人。
English: In the case of collecting tax grain of more than 5,000 koku to 10,000 koku annually, three officials shall be set up; two officials shall be set up for dry stone and above; and one official shall be set up for 300 koku and above.

古文：批验所。大使一人，副使一人，掌验茶盐引。
现代文：批验所，大使一人，副使一人，掌管验证茶盐销售凭照。
English: An approving authority, one ambassador and one vice-envoy, is in charge of verifying tea salt sales certificates.

古文：递运所。大使一人，副使一人，掌运递粮物。
现代文：递运所，大使一人，副使一人，掌管运送粮草物资。
English: a forwarding office, one ambassador and one deputy envoy, in charge of transporting grain and grass materials.

古文：洪武九年始置。
现代文：洪武九年开始设置。
English: It was set up by Hong Wu nine years ago.

古文：先是，在外多以卫所戍守军士传送军囚，太祖以其有妨练习守御，乃命兵部增置各处递运所，以便递送。
现代文：此前，京城以外大多派卫所戍守军士押送军因，太祖因为这样做妨碍练兵守御，于是命兵部增设各处递运所，以便押运递送。
English: Previously, most of the guards stationed outside the capital were sent to escort the troops, but since doing so hindered the training of soldiers to guard the capital, Taizu ordered the military department to set up additional transport stations everywhere to facilitate escort delivery.

古文：设大使、副使各一人，验夫多寡，设百夫长以领之。
现代文：设大使、副使各一人，视人夫多少，设百夫长统领。
English: An ambassador and a deputy envoy shall be set up, one each, and a centurion shall be set up to lead, depending on the number of people.

古文：铁冶所。
现代文：后来汰除副使，革除百夫长。
English: Later, the deputy envoy was purged and the centurion was purged.

古文：大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：铁冶所，大使一人，副使一人。
English: Iron smelter, one ambassador, one deputy envoy.

古文：洪武七年初置。
现代文：洪武七年开始设置。
English: It was set up by Hongwu seven years ago.

古文：凡十三所，每所置大使、副使各一人。
现代文：共十三个所，每所设置大使、副使各一人。
English: There are a total of thirteen, each with an ambassador and deputy envoy.

