古文：人主有三守。三守完，则国安身荣；三守不完，则国危身殆。
现代文：君主有 三守 。 三守 完备，就能够做到国家安定而自身荣贵； 三守 不完备，就会使国家危亡而自身危险。
English: The monarch has three defenses. If the three defenses are complete, the country will be stable and the monarch will be honored; if the three defenses are incomplete, the country will be in danger and the monarch will be in danger.

古文：何谓三守？
现代文：什么叫 三守 呢？
English: What do you call the three guards?

古文：人臣有议当途之失，用事之过，举臣之情，人主不心藏而漏之近习能人，使人臣之欲有言者，不敢不下适近习能人之心，而乃上以闻人主，然则端言直道之人不得见，而忠直日疏。
现代文：臣子中有议论当权者的过失、执政者的错误以及揭发一般臣子的隐情，君主不把这些藏在心里而泄漏给左右亲信和善于钻营的人，使臣子中想向君主进言的人不得不先屈从于亲信权贵的心意，而后向君主进言。这样，讲话正直、办事诚实的人就不能见到君主，而忠诚耿直的人就一天天被疏远。
English: Some of the courtiers discuss the faults of those in power, the mistakes of those in power, and reveal the secrets of ordinary courtiers. The monarch does not hide these things in his heart, but divulges them to his close friends and those who are good at scheming, so that those courtiers who want to speak to the monarch must first succumb to the intentions of close friends and dignitaries, and then speak to the monarch. In this way, those who speak honestly and act honestly cannot see the monarch, and those who are loyal are alienated day by day.

古文：爱人，不独利也，待誉而后利之；憎人不独害也，待非而后害之。
现代文：君主喜爱一个人，不独自奖赏他，等到有人赞誉他后才加以奖赏；憎恶一个人，不独自处罚他，等到有人反对他后才加以处罚。
English: The sovereign loves a man, but does not reward him alone, until someone praises him; hates a man, but does not punish him alone, until someone opposes him.

古文：然则人主无威而重在左右矣。
现代文：这样，君主就没有威势而大权旁路于近臣了。
English: In this way, the monarch would not have the prestige and the power would be bypassed to the vassals.

古文：恶自治之劳惮，使群臣辐凑之变，因传柄移藉，使杀生之机，夺予之要在大臣，如是者侵。
现代文：君主厌恶亲理政事的劳累，使群臣归聚的核心出现变化，从而权柄和势位发生转移，使生杀予夺的要害控制在大臣手里，这样的话，君主就要受到侵害。
English: The monarch abhors the drudgery of personal government, so the core of the gathering of the courtiers is changed, and thus power and influence are transferred, so that the key to life and death is controlled by the minister. In this case, the monarch will be infringed.

古文：此谓三守不完。
现代文：以上所说就就是三守不完备。
English: All of the above means that the three defenses are incomplete.

古文：三守不完，则劫杀之征也。
现代文：三守不完备，就出现了劫杀君主、篡夺君位的征兆。
English: If the three guards are not complete, there will be a sign of robbing the monarch and usurping the throne.

古文：凡劫有三：有明劫，有事劫，有刑劫，人臣有大臣之尊，外操国要以资群臣，使外内之事非已不得行。
现代文：凡事篡夺君位的有三种情形：有公开篡权的，有通过政事篡权的，有专擅刑罚篡权的。臣子有了大臣的显要地位，在朝廷之外操纵国家大权来收买群臣，使朝廷内外的事情不通过自己就无法办理。
English: There are three types of usurpation of the throne: open usurpation, usurpation of power through political affairs, and usurpation of power through arbitrary punishment. When a vassal gains the prominent position of a minister, he manipulates the power of the state outside the imperial court to bribe other vassals, making it impossible for him to handle matters inside and outside the imperial court without himself.

古文：虽有贤良，逆者必有祸，而顺者必有福。
现代文：即使有贤能正直的人，违逆他的一定会遭祸，顺从他的一定得福。
English: Even if there is a virtuous and honest person, if you disobey him, you will surely suffer misfortune, and if you obey him, you will surely be blessed.

古文：然则群臣直莫敢忠主忧国以争社稷之利害。
现代文：这样一来，群臣中就没有敢于忠君忧国而为国家利益抗争的人了。
English: As a result, there was no one among the courtiers who dared to be loyal to the king, care for the country, and fight for national interests.

古文：人主虽贤，不能独计，而人臣有不敢忠主，则国为亡国矣。此谓国无臣。
现代文：君主虽然贤明，但不能独自决策，而臣子又不敢忠君，那国家就同灭亡了没什么却别了，这叫国家没有臣子。
English: Although the monarch is wise, he cannot make decisions alone, and the vassals do not dare to be loyal to the prince. Then the country will perish, but that is all. This means that the country has no vassals.

古文：国无臣者，岂郎中虚而朝臣少哉？
现代文：国家没有臣子，难道是郎中职位空缺而朝臣太少吗？
English: The country has no vassals. Is it because there are too few courtiers and the position of vassal is vacant?

古文：群臣持禄养交，行私道而不效公忠，此谓明劫。
现代文：群臣用俸禄去豢养党羽，营私谋利而不尽忠报国，这叫公开篡权。
English: It is open usurpation of power for a group of ministers to use their salary to nurture party members and seek personal gain without being loyal to the country.

古文：鬻宠擅权，矫外以胜内，险言祸福得失之形，以阿主之好恶。
现代文：卖弄君主对他的龙爱，独揽大权，假托外部势力来制服内部，危言耸听地渲染祸福得失的形势，用来迎合君主的好恶。
English: They show off the monarch's love for his dragon, monopolize power, rely on external forces to subdue the inside, and alarmingly play up the situation of misfortune, fortune and loss to cater to the monarch's likes and dislikes.

古文：人主听之，卑身轻国以资之，事败与主分其祸，而功成则臣独专之。
现代文：君主听了，就是降低身份轻视国家来资助他们。事情失败了，就让君主分担祸害；事情成功了，臣子就独占功劳。
English: If the monarch listened, he would lower his status and despise the state to finance them. If things failed, he would let the monarch share the misfortune; if things succeeded, the vassal would take all the credit.

古文：诸用事之人，壹心同辞以语其美，则主言恶者必不信矣。此谓事劫。
现代文：许多处理政事的人，众口同声地称赞他好，那么君主再说他不好就一定不被信服了，这叫通过政事篡权。
English: Many people who deal with political affairs praise him in unison, so if the monarch says he is not good, he will not be convinced. This is called usurping power through political affairs.

古文：至于守司囹圄，禁制刑罚，人臣擅之，此谓刑劫。三守不完，则三劫者起；三守完，则三劫者止。
现代文：至于职司监狱掌管刑罚，如果出现了臣下独揽专断的情况，就成为专擅刑罚来篡权的了。 三守 ，不完备， 三劫 就产生了； 三守 完备，三种篡权的情况就会发生。
English: As for the professional prison in charge of punishment, if there is a situation where the vassals monopolize the power, it will become an exclusive punishment to usurp power.Three guards, incomplete, three robberies will occur; three guards, complete, three cases of usurpation will occur.

古文：三劫止塞，则王矣。
现代文：三种篡权的情况禁止、杜绝，君主就可以统治天下了。
English: Three kinds of usurpation of power are prohibited and eliminated, and the monarch can rule the world.

