古文：二十有八年春，晋侯侵曹。
现代文：二十八年春季，晋文公准备攻打曹国。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, Emperor Jinwen was preparing to attack Cao.

古文：晋侯伐卫。
现代文：晋文公攻打卫国。
English: Jin attacked and defended the country.

古文：公子买戍卫，不卒戍，刺之。
现代文：公子买驻守在卫国，僖公害怕晋国，杀了公子买来讨好晋国。
English: The prince was stationed in the defense of the country, and the prince was afraid of Jin, so he killed the prince to please Jin.

古文：楚人救卫。
现代文：楚国援救卫国。
English: Chu Province came to the rescue of Wei Province.

古文：三月丙午，晋侯入曹，执曹伯，畀宋人。
现代文：单月丙午日，晋侯侵入曹国，抓住了曹国国君，交给了宋国。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month, Jin marched into Cao, captured Cao Guo Guojun, and handed him over to Song.

古文：夏四月己巳，晋侯、齐师、宋师、秦师及楚人战于城濮，楚师败绩。
现代文：夏季四月己巳日，晋国、齐国、宋国、秦国的军队与楚国军队在城濮交战，楚军大败。
English: On the last day of April in summer, the armies of Jin, Qi, Song and Qin fought the army of Chu in the city of Chenghuang. The Chu army was soundly defeated.

古文：楚杀其大夫得臣。
现代文：楚国杀了自己的大夫得臣。
English: The state of Chu killed its own doctor and minister.

古文：卫侯出奔楚。
现代文：卫侯逃到了楚国。
English: Wei Hou fled to Chu.

古文：五月癸丑，公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、蔡侯、郑伯、卫子、莒子，盟于践土。
现代文：五月癸丑日，僖公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、蔡侯、郑伯、卫子、莒子在践土盟会。
English: On the Day of the Ugly Goat in May, Gong Gong and Jin Hou, Qi Hou, Song Gong, Cai Hou, Zheng Bo, Wei Zi, and Zou Zi were at the Earthwork League.

古文：陈侯如会。
现代文：陈侯也来参加了盟会。
English: Chen Hou also came to participate in the alliance.

古文：公朝于王所。
现代文：晋文公带领各诸侯到周王都城朝见周王。
English: Prince Jinwen led all the princes to the capital city of Zhou to meet King Zhou.

古文：六月，卫侯郑自楚复归于卫。卫元咺出奔晋。
现代文：六月，从楚国回到卫国。卫国元咺逃到晋国。
English: In June, he returned to Weiguo from Chu. Weiguo Yuancheng fled to Jin.

古文：陈侯款卒。
现代文：陈侯款去世。
English: Chen Houxing passed away.

古文：秋，杞伯姬来。
现代文：秋季，杞伯姬来鲁国。
English: In autumn, Zou Boji came to Lu.

古文：公子遂如齐。
现代文：公子遂去齐国。
English: So he went to Qi Province.

古文：冬，公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、蔡侯、郑伯、陈子、莒子、邾子、秦人于温。
现代文：冬季，僖公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、蔡侯、郑伯、陈子、莒子、邾子、秦人在温地会见。
English: In winter, Gong Zhi met with Jin Hou, Qi Hou, Song Gong, Cai Hou, Zheng Bo, Chen Zi, Zang Zi, Zang Zi, and Qin people in Warmi.

古文：天王狩于河阳。
现代文：周天子在河阳狩猎。
English: Zhou Tianzi hunting in Kawayan.

古文：壬申，公朝于王所。
现代文：壬申日，僖公到周襄王的住处朝觐。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the first month of the year, Gong Zhou went to the residence of King Zhou Xiang for the morning meal.

古文：晋人执卫侯，归之于京师。
现代文：晋国抓住了卫侯，将其带回京师。
English: The Jin captured Wei Hou and brought him back to the capital.

古文：卫元咺自晋复归于卫。
现代文：卫国元咺从晋国再次回到卫国。
English: Emperor Gaozong returned from the Jin Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：诸侯遂围许。
现代文：各诸侯一起包围许国。
English: All the lords together besieged Xu Province.

古文：曹伯襄复归于曹，遂会诸侯围许。
现代文：曹伯襄再次回到曹国，于是与各诸侯一起包围许国。
English: Cao Bo Xiang once again returned to Cao, whereupon he and the other lords encircled Xu.

古文：二十八年春，晋侯将伐曹，假道于卫，卫人弗许。
现代文：二十八年春季，晋文公准备攻打曹国，向卫国借路。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, Emperor Jinwen was preparing to attack Cao, borrowing a path from the defense of the country.

古文：还，自南河济。侵曹伐卫。
现代文：卫国不答应。回来，从南河渡过黄河，入侵曹国，攻打卫国。
English: The defenders did not agree. He returned, crossed the Yellow River from the South River, invaded Cao, and attacked the defenders.

古文：正月戊申，取五鹿。
现代文：正月初九日，占取了五鹿。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, they occupied Wolu.

古文：二月，晋郤縠卒。
现代文：二月，郤縠死。
English: In February, Zeng died.

古文：原轸将中军，胥臣佐下军，上德也。
现代文：原轸率领中军，胥臣辅助下军，把原轸提升，是为了重视才德。
English: It was in order to attach importance to talent that Yuan Shao led the middle army, and his vassals assisted the lower army, and promoted Yuan Shao.

古文：晋侯、齐侯盟于敛盂。
现代文：晋文公和齐昭公在敛盂结盟。
English: Jinwen Gong and Qi Zhaogong formed an alliance in Zhuozhuang.

古文：卫侯请盟，晋人弗许。
现代文：卫成公请求参加盟约，晋国人不答应。
English: Weicheng requested to join the covenant, but the Jin people refused.

古文：卫侯欲与楚，国人不欲，故出其君以说于晋。
现代文：卫成公想亲附楚国，国内的人们不愿意，所以赶走了他们的国君，来讨好晋国。
English: Wei Chenggong wanted to personally annex the state of Chu, but the people in the country were not willing, so he drove away their sovereign to please Jin.

古文：卫侯出居于襄牛。
现代文：卫成公离开国都住在襄牛。
English: Wei Chenggong has lived in Xiangni since he left the country.

古文：公子买戍卫，楚人救卫，不克。
现代文：公子买驻守在卫国，楚国人救援卫国，没有得胜。
English: The boys were stationed in the defense of the country, and the Chu people came to the rescue of the defense of the country, but did not win.

古文：公惧于晋，杀子丛以说焉。
现代文：鲁僖公害怕晋国，杀了公子买来讨好晋国。
English: Lu Wei was afraid of Jin, so he killed the young man to buy favor with Jin.

古文：谓楚人曰： 不卒戍也。 
现代文：骗楚国人说： 他驻守没到期就想回来，所以杀了他。 
English: He lied to the people of Chu, saying, "He wanted to return before his term was up, so I killed him."

古文：晋侯围曹，门焉，多死，曹人尸诸城上，晋侯患之，听舆人之谋曰： 称舍于墓。 
现代文：晋文公发兵包围曹国，攻城，战死的人很多。曹军把晋军的尸体陈列在城上，晋文公很担心。听了士兵们的主意，声称 在曹国人的墓地宿营 。
English: Jinwen Gong sent soldiers to encircle Cao and besiege the city, and many people died in the battle. Cao's army displayed the dead bodies of the Jin army on the city, and Jinwen Gong was very worried. He listened to the soldiers' ideas and claimed to camp in the cemetery of Cao's people.

古文：师迁焉，曹人兇惧，为其所得者棺而出之。因其兇也而攻之。
现代文：军队转移。曹国人恐惧，把他们得到的晋军的尸体装进棺材运出来，晋军由于曹军恐惧而攻城。
English: The army was transferred. The people of Cao were afraid, so they put the dead bodies of the Jin army they had captured into coffins and transported them out. The Jin army attacked the city out of fear of Cao's army.

古文：三月丙午，入曹。数之，以其不用僖负羁而乘轩者三百人也，且曰： 献状。 
现代文：三月初八日，进入曹国，责备曹国不任用僖负羁，做官坐车的反倒有三百人，并且说当年观看自己洗澡，现在罪有应得。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month, he entered Cao's country and reproached Cao's country for not appointing him, but instead having 300 officials ride in a car. He also said that he had watched himself taking a shower that year, but now he deserved the blame.

古文：令无入僖负羁之宫而免其族，报施也。
现代文：下令不许进入僖负羁的家里，同时赦免他的族人，这是为了报答恩惠。
English: In order to repay the favour, he ordered that no one should enter the house of the man who had imprisoned him, and at the same time pardoned his relatives.

古文：魏犫、颠颉怒曰： 劳之不图，报于何有！ 
现代文：魏犫、颠颉发怒说： 不替有功劳或者苦劳的人着想，还报答个什么恩惠？ 
English: Wei Yao and Bumpsy said angrily, "If you don't think about people who have merit or hard work, what kind of favor will you repay?

古文：爇僖负羁氏。
现代文：放火烧了僖负羁的家。
English: Arsonists set fire to the home of Zou Zhouzhuang.

古文：魏犫伤于胸，公欲杀之，而爱其材，使问，且视之，病，将杀之。
现代文：魏犫胸部受伤，晋文公想杀死他，但又爱惜他的才能，派人去慰问，同时观察病情。如果伤势很重，就准备杀了他。
English: Wei Yao was wounded in the chest. Jin Wengong wanted to kill him, but he also cherished his talent. He sent someone to console him and observe his condition. If the injury was serious, he was prepared to kill him.

古文：魏犫束胸见使者曰： 以君之灵，不有宁也。 
现代文：魏犫捆紧胸膛出见使者，说： 由于国君的威灵，难道我敢图安逸吗！ 
English: Wei Wei clenched his chest when he saw the messenger and said, "Due to the sovereign's benevolence, do I dare to seek comfort?"

古文：距跃三百，曲踊三百。
现代文：说着就向上跳了很多次，又向前跳了很多次。
English: As he spoke, he jumped up and down many times and forward many times.

古文：乃舍之。杀颠颉以徇于师，立舟之侨以为戎右。
现代文：晋文公于是就饶恕了他，而杀死颠颉通报全军，立舟之侨作为车右。
English: Jinwen Gong then forgave him, and informed the whole army of the death of the jolt, and the overseas Chinese in the boat stood on the right as the vehicle.

古文：宋人使门尹般如晋师告急。
现代文：宋国派门尹般到晋军中报告危急情况。
English: Song sent Men Yinshan to report the critical situation to the Jin army.

古文：公曰： 宋人告急，舍之则绝。
现代文：晋文公说： 宋国来报告危急情况，不去救他就断绝了交往，请求楚国解围，他们又不答应。
English: Jin Wenkong said: Song came to report the critical situation, and cut off communication without rescuing him, and asked Chu to lift the siege, but they did not agree.

古文：告楚不许，我欲战矣，齐、秦未可，若之何？ 先轸曰： 使宋舍我而赂齐、秦，藉之告楚。
现代文：我们想作战，齐国和秦国又不同意。怎么办？ 先轸说： 让宋国丢开我国而去给齐国、秦国赠送财礼。
English: We want to fight, but Qi and Qin do not agree. What should we do? Xian Ye said: Let the Song Dynasty abandon China and give gifts to Qi and Qin.

古文：我执曹君而分曹、卫之田以赐宋人。
现代文：假借他们两国去请求楚国。我们逮住曹国国君，把曹国、卫国的田地分给宋国。
English: Pretending to use their two countries to ask for Chu, we captured Cao Guo Guojun and divided the fields of Cao and Wei into Song.

古文：楚爱曹、卫，必不许也。
现代文：楚国喜欢曹国、卫国，一定不答应齐国和秦国的请求。
English: The State of Chu likes the State of Cao and the State of Wei, and will definitely not agree to the request of the State of Qi and the State of Qin.

古文：喜赂怒顽，能无战乎？ 
现代文：齐国和秦国对宋国的财礼喜欢，而对楚国的固执很生气，能够不打仗吗？ 
English: The states of Qi and Qin are fond of Song's wealth and courtesy, but they are angry with Chu's stubbornness. Can they not fight?

古文：公说，执曹伯，分曹、卫之田以畀宋人。
现代文：晋文公很高兴，拘捕了曹共公，把曹国和卫国的田地分给了宋国人。
English: Jinwen Gong was very pleased, arrested Cao Gonggong, and distributed the fields of Cao Guo and Wei Guo to the Song people.

古文：楚子入居于申，使申叔去穀，使子玉去宋，曰： 无从晋师。
现代文：楚成王进入申城并住下来，让申叔离开穀地，让子玉离开宋国，说： 不要去追逐晋国军队！
English: King Chu Cheng entered Shencheng and stayed there. He asked Shenshu to leave the grain fields and Zidama to leave Song. He said, "Don't chase the Jin army!

古文：晋侯在外十九年矣，而果得晋国。
现代文：晋文公在外边，十九年了，终于得到了晋国。
English: It's been nineteen years since Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, but he has finally gained the right to ascend the throne.

古文：险阻艰难，备尝之矣；民之情伪，尽知之矣。
现代文：险阻艰难，都尝过了；民情真假，也都知道了。
English: They have experienced the perils, obstacles and hardships; they also know the true and false sentiments of the people.

古文：天假之年，而除其害。天之所置，其可废乎？《军志》曰： 允当则归。 
现代文：上天给予他年寿，同时除去了他的祸害，上天所设置的，难道可以废除吗？《军志》说： 适可而止。 
English: Heaven has granted him a long life, and at the same time removed his scourge. Can what Heaven has set up be abolished? "Military History" said: It can be stopped.

古文：又曰： 知难而退。 
现代文：又说： 知难而退。 
English: He also said, "When in doubt, retreat."

古文：又曰： 有德不可敌。 
现代文：又说： 有德的人不能抵挡。 
English: He also said, "A virtuous man cannot resist."

古文：此三志者，晋之谓矣。 
现代文：这三条记载，适用于晋国。 
English: These three records are applicable to Jin.

古文：子玉使伯棼请战，曰： 非敢必有功也，愿以间执谗慝之口。 
现代文：子玉派遣伯棼向成王请战，说： 不敢说一定有功劳，愿意借此堵塞奸邪小人的口。 
English: Zidama dispatched Hakuo to Chengwang to ask for battle, saying: I dare not say that there must be a merit, I am willing to use this to plug the mouth of the evil villain.

古文：王怒，少与之师，唯西广、东宫与若敖之六卒实从之。
现代文：楚成王发怒，少给他军队，只有西广、东宫和若敖的一百八十辆战车跟去。
English: King Chu Cheng became angry and gave him fewer troops, only 180 chariots from Xiguang, Donggong and Ruoqiao followed.

古文：子玉使宛春告于晋师曰： 请复卫侯而封曹，臣亦释宋之围。 
现代文：子玉派宛春到晋军中报告说： 请恢复卫侯的君位，同时把土地退还曹国，我也解除对宋国的包围。 
English: Ziyu sent Wanchun to report to the Jin army: Please restore the prince of Wei, and return the land to Cao. I will also lift the siege of Song.

古文：子犯曰： 子玉无礼哉！
现代文：子犯说： 子玉无礼啊！
English: The child offender said: "It's disrespectful!

古文：君取一，臣取二，不可失矣。 
现代文：给君王的，只是解除对宋国的包围一项，而要求君王给出的，却是复卫封曹两项。这次打仗的机会不可失掉了。 
English: The emperor was given only one item, the lifting of the siege of Song, but the emperor was asked to give two items, the restoration of the imperial fief, and the opportunity to fight this war must not be lost.

古文：先轸曰： 子与之。
现代文：先轸说： 君王应该答应他的请求。
English: The foreman said, "You should agree to his request."

古文：定人之谓礼，楚一言而定三国，我一言而亡之，我则无礼，何以战乎？
现代文：安定别人叫做礼，楚国人一句话安定三国，我们一句话而使它们灭亡。我们就无礼，拿什么来作战呢？
English: Stabilizing others is called courtesy. The Chu people stabilized the three countries with a word, and we destroyed them with a word. We are impolite, so what should we fight with?

古文：不许楚言，是弃宋也，救而弃之，谓诸侯何？
现代文：不答应楚国的请求，这是抛弃宋国；救援了又抛弃他，将对诸侯说什么？
English: If he does not agree to Chu's request, it is abandoning Song; if he rescues and then abandons him, what will he say to the princes?

古文：楚有三施，我有三怨，怨仇已多，将何以战？
现代文：楚国有三项恩惠，我们有三项怨仇，怨仇已经太多了，准备拿什么作战？
English: Chu has three favors, we have three grudges. There are already too many grudges. What are we going to fight with?

古文：不如私许复曹、卫以携之，执宛春以怒楚，既战而后图之。 
现代文：不如私下里答应恢复曹国和卫国来离间他们，逮了宛春来激怒楚国，等打起仗再说。 
English: It would be better to privately promise to restore Cao Guo and defend the country to separate them, arrest Wan Chun to infuriate Chu Guo, and then start a war.

古文：公说，乃拘宛春于卫，且私许复曹、卫。
现代文：晋文公很高兴。于是把宛春囚禁在卫国，同时私下里允诺恢复曹、卫。
English: Jinwen was very pleased, so he imprisoned Wanchun in Wei Province, and at the same time, he privately promised to restore Cao and Wei.

古文：曹、卫告绝于楚。
现代文：曹、卫就与楚国断绝邦交。
English: Cao Wei sent envoys to both countries to inform them of the severance of diplomatic relations with Chu.

古文：子玉怒，从晋师。
现代文：子玉发怒，追逐晋军。
English: Zidama got angry and chased the Jin army.

古文：晋师退。
现代文：晋军撤退。
English: The Jin army retreated.

古文：军吏曰： 以君辟臣，辱也。且楚师老矣，何故退？ 
现代文：军吏说： 以国君而躲避臣下，这是耻辱；而且楚军已经疲劳不堪，为什么退走？ 
English: The military official said, "It is a disgrace to use the country's ruler to hide from his subjects; moreover, the Chu army is already exhausted, why retreat?

古文：子犯曰： 师直为壮，曲为老。岂在久乎？
现代文：子犯说： 出兵作战，有理就气壮，无理就气衰，哪里在于在外边时间的长短呢？
English: The juvenile delinquent said: When soldiers are sent out to fight, if it is justified, they will be strong, if it is not justified, they will be weak. Where does the length of time abroad lie?

古文：微楚之惠不及此，退三舍辟之，所以报也。
现代文：如果没有楚国的恩惠，我们到不了这里。退三舍躲避他们，就是作为报答。
English: We couldn't have got here without the generosity of the state of Chu, so we're repaying them by doing everything we can to avoid them.

古文：背惠食言，以亢其仇，我曲楚直，其众素饱，不可谓老。
现代文：背弃恩惠而说话不算数，要用这个来蔽护他们的敌人，我们缺理而楚国有理，加上他们的士气一向饱满，不能认为是衰疲。
English: Turning one's back on favors and talking is not enough. They want to use this to shield their enemies. We are unreasonable, but the state of Chu is reasonable. In addition, their morale has always been full, and it cannot be considered exhaustion.

古文：我退而楚还，我将何求。
现代文：我们退走而楚军回去，我们还要求什么？
English: If we retreat and the Chu army returns, what else do we ask for?

古文：若其不还，君退臣犯，曲在彼矣。 
现代文：如果他们不回去，国君退走，而臣下进犯，他们就缺理了。 
English: If they don't go back, if the sovereign retreats and the vassals attack, they are irrational.

古文：退三舍，楚众欲止，子玉不可。
现代文：晋军退走三舍。楚国骑士要停下来，子玉不同意。
English: The Jin army retreated. The Chu knights wanted to stop, but Zidama disagreed.

古文：夏四月戊辰，晋侯、宋公、齐国归父崔夭、秦小子慭次于城濮。
现代文：夏季，四月初三日，晋文公、宋成公、齐国的国归父、崔夭、秦国的小子慭驻在城濮。
English: In the summer, on the third day of early April, Jinwen Gong, Songcheng Gong, Qi Guoqifu, Cui Xiao, and Qin Guoqifu were stationed in Chengdu.

古文：楚师背酅而舍，晋侯患之，听舆人之诵，曰： 原田每每，舍其旧而新是谋。 
现代文：楚军背靠着险要的地方扎营，晋文公担心这件事。听到士兵念诵说： 休耕田里的绿草繁茂，丢开旧草而对新的加以犁锄。 
English: The Chu army was encamped with their backs against a precarious place, and Jin Wengong was worried about this. He heard the soldiers chanting: The green grass in the fallow fields is flourishing, throw away the old grass and plow the new one.

古文：公疑焉。
现代文：晋文公很疑惑。
English: Jinwen Gong was puzzled.

古文：子犯曰： 战也。
现代文：子犯说： 出战吧！
English: The child criminal said: Let's go to war!

古文：战而捷，必得诸侯。若其不捷，表里山河，必无害也。 
现代文：战而得胜，一定得到诸侯；如果不胜，我国外有大河，内有高山，一定没有什么害处。 
English: If we win the war, we will surely gain the provinces; if we do not win, there will be rivers outside our country and mountains inside, and there will be no harm.

古文：公曰： 若楚惠何？ 
现代文：晋文公说： 对楚国的恩惠怎么办？ 
English: Jinwen Gong said: What about the favors to Chu?

古文：栾贞子曰： 汉阳诸姬，楚实尽之。
现代文：栾枝说： 汉水以北的姬姓诸国，楚国都把它们吞并完了。
English: Hao Zhi said: The states north of the Han River with the last name of Hime are all gone, and the state of Chu has swallowed them up.

古文：思小惠而忘大耻，不如战也。 
现代文：想着小恩惠，而忘记大耻大辱，不如出战。 
English: It is better to go to war than to think about small favors and forget great shame.

古文：晋侯梦与楚子搏，楚子伏己而盬其脑，是以惧。子犯曰： 吉。
现代文：晋文公梦中和楚王搏斗，楚王伏在自己身上咀嚼自己的脑浆，因而害怕。子犯说： 吉利。
English: In his dream, Jin Wengong was fighting with King Chu, and King Chu was afraid because he was chewing his own brains on his own body. The criminal said, "Good luck."

古文：我得天，楚伏其罪，吾且柔之矣。 
现代文：我得到上天，楚国伏罪，而且我们已经安抚他们了。 
English: I've been praised to the skies, the State of Chu has committed a crime, and we've pacified them.

古文：子玉使鬥勃请战，曰： 请与君之士戏，君冯轼而观之，得臣与寓目焉。 
现代文：子玉派遣鬬勃向晋国挑战，说： 请和君王的斗士作一次角力游戏，君王靠在车横板上观看，得臣可以陪同君王一起观看了。 
English: Zidam sent Zibo to challenge Jin, saying, "Please have a wrestling match with the king's fighter. The king can watch from the side of the chariot, and the vassal can watch with the king."

古文：晋侯使栾枝对曰： 寡君闻命矣。
现代文：晋文公派遣栾枝回答说： 我们国君知道您的意思了。
English: Jinwen replied, "Our sovereign knows what you mean.

古文：楚君之惠未之敢忘，是以在此。
现代文：楚君的恩惠，没有敢忘记，所以待在这里。
English: I didn't dare to forget Chu Jun's favor, so I stayed here.

古文：为大夫退，其敢当君乎？
现代文：我们以为大夫已经退兵了，臣下难道敢抵挡国君吗？
English: We thought the doctor had retired from the army. Would his subjects dare to stand up to the sovereign?

古文：既不获命矣，敢烦大夫谓二三子，戒尔车乘，敬尔君事，诘朝将见。 
现代文：既然大夫不肯退兵，那就烦大夫对贵部将士们说： 准备好你们的战车，忠于你们的国事，明天早晨将再见面。  
English: Since the doctor did not want to leave the army, the annoying doctor said to the officers of your department, "Prepare your chariots, be loyal to your country, and we will meet again tomorrow morning."

古文：晋车七百乘，韅、靷、鞅、靽。
现代文：晋国战车七百辆，装备齐全。
English: There are seven hundred Jin chariots, fully equipped.

古文：晋侯登有莘之虚以观师，曰： 少长有礼，其可用也。 
现代文：晋文公登上有莘的废城观看军容，说： 年少的和年长的，排列有序，合于礼，可以使用了。 
English: Jin Wengong ascended to the deserted city with a shovel to look at the troops and said: "The young and the old, arranged in an orderly manner, are suitable for use.

古文：遂伐其木以益其兵。
现代文：就命令砍伐山上的树木，以增加武器。
English: He ordered the trees on the mountain to be cut down to make room for more weapons.

古文：己巳，晋师陈于莘北，胥臣以下军之佐当陈、蔡。
现代文：初二日，晋军在莘北摆开阵势，胥臣让下军分别抵挡陈、蔡军队。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Jin army set up a position in the north of Shandong, and the minister of state allowed the lower army to resist the Chen and Cai armies respectively.

古文：子玉以若敖之六卒将中军，曰： 今日必无晋矣。 
现代文：子玉用若敖的一百八十乘率领中军，说： 今天一定灭掉晋国了。 
English: Zidama led the Chinese army with one hundred and eighty horsemen and said, "Today, we will definitely wipe out Jin."

古文：子西将左，子上将右。
现代文：子西率领左军，子上率领右军。
English: Zixi led the left army, and Shang led the right army.

古文：胥臣蒙马以虎皮，先犯陈、蔡。
现代文：胥臣把马蒙上老虎皮，先攻陈、蔡两军。
English: The vassal put a tiger skin on the horse and attacked Chen and Cai's two armies first.

古文：陈、蔡奔，楚右师溃。
现代文：陈、蔡两军奔逃，楚军的右翼部队溃散。
English: Chen and Cai's two armies fled, and the right-wing troops of the Chu army dispersed.

古文：狐毛设二旆而退之。
现代文：狐毛派出前军两队击退楚军的溃兵。
English: Foxtail dispatched the front army two teams to repel the rout of the Chu army.

古文：栾枝使舆曳柴而伪遁，楚师驰之。原轸、郤溱以中军公族横击之。
现代文：栾枝让车子拖着木柴假装逃走，楚军追击，原轸、郤溱率领中军的公族拦腰袭击。
English: Hao Zhi let the car dragging the firewood pretend to run away, the Chu army chased, and the publicans of the Chinese army led by the original Yao and Yao stopped and attacked.

古文：狐毛、狐偃以上军夹攻子西，楚左师溃。
现代文：狐毛、狐偃率领上军夹攻子西，楚国的左翼部队溃散。
English: Foxtail and Foxtail led the army to attack the west, and the left-wing troops of Chu broke up.

古文：楚师败绩。
现代文：楚军大败。
English: The Chu army was soundly defeated.

古文：子玉收其卒而止，故不败。
现代文：子玉及时下令收兵，得以不败。
English: Kodama ordered a timely withdrawal of troops and was able to go undefeated.

古文：晋师三日馆穀，及癸酉而还。
现代文：晋军休整三天，吃楚军留下的粮食，到初六日起程回国。
English: The Jin army rested for three days, ate the grain left by the Chu army, and left for home on the sixth day of the first month.

古文：甲午，至于衡雍，作王宫于践土。
现代文：二十七日，到达衡雍，为天子在践土建造了一座王宫。
English: On the 27th, he arrived in Hengyong and built a royal palace for the heavenly son.

古文：乡役之三月，郑伯如楚致其师，为楚师既败而惧，使子人九行成于晋。
现代文：这一战役之前的三个月，郑文公派军队到楚国助战，因为楚军已经失败而害怕了，派遣子人九和晋国讲和。
English: Three months before this battle, Zheng Wenkong sent troops to Chu to help in the war. Because the Chu army had already lost and was afraid, he sent his sons and daughters to Jiuhe and Jin to make peace.

古文：晋栾枝入盟郑伯。
现代文：晋国的栾枝进入郑国和郑文公订立盟约。
English: Jin's Yanshi entered Zheng and Zheng Wenkong signed a treaty.

古文：五月丙午，晋侯及郑伯盟于衡雍。
现代文：五月初九日，晋文公和郑文公在衡雍结盟。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, Jin Wengong and Zheng Wengong made an alliance in Hengyong.

古文：丁未，献楚俘于王，驷介百乘，徒兵千。
现代文：初十日，把楚国的战俘献给周襄王：驷马披甲的战车一百辆，步兵一千人。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he presented the prisoners of war from the state of Chu to King Zhou Xiang: one hundred armored chariots and one thousand infantrymen.

古文：郑伯傅王，用平礼也。
现代文：郑文公作为相礼，用的是周平王时的礼仪。
English: Zheng Wen Gong used the etiquette from the time of King Zhou Ping.

古文：己酉，王享醴，命晋侯宥。
现代文：十二日，周襄王设享礼用甜酒招待晋文公，又允许他向自己回敬酒。
English: On the twelfth day, King Zhou Xiang held a banquet to invite Jinweng with sweet wine, and allowed him to make a toast to himself.

古文：王命尹氏及王子虎、内史叔兴父策命晋侯为侯伯。赐之大辂之服，戎辂之服，彤弓一，彤矢百，玈弓矢千，秬鬯一卣，虎贲三百人。曰： 王谓叔父，敬服王命，以绥四国，纠逖王慝。 
现代文：周襄王命令尹氏和王子虎、内史叔兴父用策书任命晋文公为诸侯的领袖，赐给他大辂车、戎辂车以及相应的服装仪仗，红色的弓一把、红色的箭一百枝，黑色的弓十把和箭一千枝，黑黍加香草酿造的酒一卣，勇士三百人，说： 天子对叔父说： 恭敬地服从天子的命令，以安抚四方诸侯，惩治王朝的邪恶。  
English: King Zhou Xiang ordered the Yin clan, the Prince Tiger and the Uncle Xing of the Inner History to use the strategy book to appoint Jin Wengong as the leader of the princes, and gave him a large carriage, an army carriage and the corresponding clothing ceremony, a red bow, a hundred red arrows, ten black bows and a thousand arrows, a bowl of wine brewed with black wolfberry and vanilla, and three hundred warriors, saying: The Son of Heaven said to his uncle: Respectfully obey the orders of the Son of Heaven to appease the princes of the four directions and punish the evil of the dynasty.

古文：晋侯三辞，从命。曰： 重耳敢再拜稽首，奉扬天子之丕显休命。 
现代文：晋文公辞谢三次，然后接受命令，说： 重耳谨再拜叩头，接受和宣扬天子的重大赏赐和命令。 
English: Jinwen publicly thanked the emperor three times, and then accepted the order, saying: "Pay attention to your ears, bow down again, accept and proclaim the great reward and order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：受策以出，出入三觐。
现代文：接受了策书就离开成周。
English: After accepting the proposal, he left Cheng Zhou.

古文：卫侯闻楚师败，惧出奔楚，遂適陈，使元咺奉叔武以受盟。
现代文：从进入成周到离开，三次朝见周王。卫成公听说楚军失败，害怕，逃亡到楚国，又到了陈国，派遣元咺奉事叔武去接受盟约。
English: From the time he entered Cheng Zhou to the time he left, Wei Cheng Gong met with King Zhou three times. When Wei Cheng Gong heard that the Chu army had failed, he was afraid, fled to Chu and then to Chen, and sent Yuan Xuan to serve Shu Wu to accept the covenant.

古文：癸亥，王子虎盟诸侯于王庭，要言曰： 皆奖王室，无相害也。
现代文：二十六日，王子虎和诸侯在天子的庭院里盟誓，约定说： 全部辅助王室，不要互相伤害！
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the prince tiger and the princes swore in the courtyard of the heavenly son and agreed to say: All assist the royal family, do not hurt each other!

古文：有渝此盟，明神殛之，俾队其师，无克祚国，及而玄孙，无有老幼。 
现代文：谁要违背盟约，就要受到神的诛杀，使他军队颠覆，不能享有国家，直到你的玄孙，不论老小。 
English: And whosoever breaketh the covenant, God shall smite him, and overthrow his army, and his kingdom shall not be inhabited, even until thy seed, even the firstborn.

古文：君子谓是盟也信，谓晋于是役也能以德攻。
现代文：君子认为这次结盟是守信用的，认为晋国在这次战役中能够用道德来进攻。
English: The gentleman thought that this alliance was a trustworthy one, and that Jin Province could use morality to attack in this battle.

古文：初，楚子玉自为琼弁玉缨，未之服也。
现代文：当初，楚国的子玉自己制作了镶玉的马冠马鞅，还没有使用。
English: At first, Zidama of Chu made a horse crown and stirrup set with jade himself, but they have not been used yet.

古文：先战，梦河神谓己曰： 畀余，余赐女孟诸之麋。 
现代文：作战之前，梦见黄河河神对他说： 送给我，我赐给你孟诸的水草地。 
English: Before the battle, he dreamed that the river god of the Yellow River said to him, "Give it to me, I will give you the water meadows of Mengzhu."

古文：弗致也。
现代文：子玉没有送去。
English: The ball was not sent.

古文：大心与子西使荣黄谏，弗听。
现代文：他儿子大心和子西派荣黄劝谏，子玉不听。
English: His son Dashin and his son Xi sent Ronghuang to persuade him, but Ziyu did not listen.

古文：荣季曰： 死而利国，犹或为之，况琼玉乎？
现代文：荣黄说： 死而有利于国家，尚且还要去做，何况是美玉呢？
English: Ronghuang said, "It's good for the country to die, and we still have to do it. What's more, what about the beautiful jade?

古文：是粪土也，而可以济师，将何爱焉？ 
现代文：和国家比起来这不过是粪土罢了。如果可以使军队成功，有什么可惜的？ 
English: Compared with the country, it is nothing but dung. If it can make the army successful, what is there to be sorry for?

古文：弗听。
现代文：子玉仍然不肯。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：出告二子曰： 非神败令尹，令尹其不勤民，实自败也。 
现代文：荣黄出来告诉两个人说： 不是神明让令尹失败，令尹不以百姓的事情为重，实在是自取失败啊。 
English: Ronghuang came out and told the two men, "It wasn't the gods who caused Yin to fail. It was Yin who didn't prioritize the people's affairs. It was really a self-inflicted failure."

古文：既败，王使谓之曰： 大夫若入，其若申、息之老何？ 
现代文：子玉失败之后，楚成王派使臣对子玉说： 申、息的子弟大多伤亡了，大夫如果回来，怎么向申、息两地的父老交代呢？ 
English: After Zidama's defeat, Chu Cheng Wang sent an envoy to Zidama saying, "Most of the sons and daughters of Shin and his son have been killed or wounded. If the doctor returns, how will he explain to the fathers and sons of Shin and his son?

古文：子西、孙伯曰： 得臣将死，二臣止之曰： 君其将以为戮。  
现代文：子西、大心对使臣说： 子玉本来要自杀的，我们两个阻拦他说： 不要自杀，国君还准备杀你呢。  
English: Zixi and Dashin said to the envoy: Zidama was originally going to commit suicide, but we two stopped him and said: Don't commit suicide, the sovereign is still planning to kill you.

古文：及连穀而死。
现代文：到达连穀，子玉就自杀了。
English: After reaching Lianku, Zidama committed suicide.

古文：晋侯闻之而后喜可知也，曰： 莫余毒也已！
现代文：晋文公听说子玉自杀的消息以后，喜形于色，说： 没有人再来为害于我了。
English: After Jinwen heard the news of Ziyu's suicide, he was overjoyed and said, "No one will harm me again."

古文：蒍吕臣实为令尹，奉己而已，不在民矣。 
现代文：蔿吕臣做令尹，不过是维护自己罢了，并不是为了百姓。 
English: Yu Lyu Chen's order to Yin was just to protect himself, not for the people.

古文：或诉元咺于卫侯曰： 立叔武矣。 
现代文：有人在卫成公面前毁谤元咺说： 他已立了叔武做国君了。 
English: Someone slandered Yuan Shao in front of Wei Chenggong, saying, "He has set up Shu Wu as the sovereign."

古文：其子角从公，公使杀之。
现代文：元咺的儿子角跟随卫成公，卫成公派人杀了他。
English: Yuan Zang's son, Ang, followed Wei Chenggong, and Wei Chenggong sent someone to kill him.

古文：咺不废命，奉夷叔以入守。
现代文：元咺并没有因此而废弃卫成公的命令，还是奉事叔武回国摄政。
English: Yuan Shao did not therefore abandon the order of Wei Chenggong, but continued to serve as regent for Shu Wu's return to China.

古文：六月，晋人复卫侯。
现代文：六月，晋国人听任卫侯回国。
English: In June, the people of Jin Province listened to Ren Weihou and returned to the country.

古文：甯武子与卫人盟于宛濮，曰： 天祸卫国，君臣不协，以及此忧也。
现代文：甯武子和卫国官吏、大族等在宛濮结盟，说： 上天降祸卫国，君臣不和谐，所以才遭到这样的忧患。
English: Yan Wuzhong's warriors and warriors, the officials of the defense of the country, and the big clans all allied at Wanlu, saying, "The heavens have brought disaster to the defense of the country, and the princes and ministers are not in harmony, which is why they have suffered such sorrow."

古文：今天诱其衷，使皆降心以相从也。
现代文：现在天意保佑我国，让大家放弃成见而互相听从。
English: Now, God bless our country, let everyone abandon their prejudices and listen to each other.

古文：不有居者，谁守社稷？
现代文：没有留下的人，谁来守卫国家？
English: With no one left, who will defend the country?

古文：不有行者，谁扞牧圉？
现代文：没有跟随君王的人，谁去保卫那些牧牛养马的人？
English: Who will defend the cowherds and horse-breeders, if not those who follow the king?

古文：不协之故，用昭乞盟于尔大神以诱天衷。
现代文：由于不和协，因此乞求在大神面前明白宣誓，以求天意保佑。
English: Because of their discord, they begged to swear a clear oath in front of the great god in order to seek the blessing of heaven.

古文：自今日以往，既盟之后，行者无保其力，居者无惧其罪。
现代文：从今天订立盟约之后，在外的人不要仗恃自己的功劳，留下的人不要害怕有罪。
English: From today, after the conclusion of the covenant, those who are outside should not rely on their own merits, and those who remain should not be afraid of guilt.

古文：有渝此盟，以相及也。明神先君，是纠是殛。 
现代文：谁要违背盟约，祸害就降临到他头上。神明和先君在上，加以惩罚诛杀。 
English: Woe unto him that breaketh the covenant! the gods and the princes are against him, and have smitten him.

古文：国人闻此盟也，而后不贰。
现代文：国内的人们知道了这盟约，才没有二心。
English: When people in the country learned about this covenant, they did not have second thoughts.

古文：卫侯先期入，甯子先长牂，守门以为使也，与之乘而入。
现代文：卫成公比约定的日期先进入卫国，甯武子在卫成公之前，长牂把守城门，以为他是国君的使者，和他同乘一辆车进入。
English: Wei Chenggong entered the defense of the country earlier than the agreed date. Before Wei Chenggong, Yan Wuzi guarded the city gate with a long pole, thinking that he was the emissary of the sovereign, and entered with him in a car.

古文：公子歂犬、华仲前驱。叔武将沐，闻君至，喜，捉发走出，前驱射而杀之。
现代文：公子歂犬、华仲作为前驱，叔武正要洗发，听说国君来到，很高兴，用手抓着头发跑出来，前驱却把他射死了。
English: As the forerunner, Shu Wu was about to wash his hair when he heard that the sovereign was coming. He was very happy and ran out with his hands clutching his hair. The forerunner, however, shot him dead.

古文：公知其无罪也，枕之股而哭之。
现代文：卫成公知道他没有罪，把头枕在尸体的大腿上而哭他。
English: Wei Chenggong knew that he was not guilty. He put his head on the body's lap and cried.

古文：歂犬走出，公使杀之。
现代文：歂犬逃跑，卫成公派人把他杀死了。
English: The mastiff ran away, and Wei Chenggong's men killed it.

古文：元咺出奔晋。
现代文：元咺逃亡到晋国。
English: Yuan Shao fled to Jin Province.

古文：城濮之战，晋中军风于泽，亡大旆之左旃。
现代文：在城濮的战役中，晋军的中军在沼泽地遇到大风，丢掉了前军左边的大旗。
English: During the Battle of Chenghuang, the Chinese troops of the Jin Army encountered a strong wind in the marshes and lost the large flag on the left side of the former army.

古文：祁瞒奸命，司马杀之，以徇于诸侯。使茅茷代之。
现代文：祁瞒犯了军令，司马把他杀了，并通报诸侯，派茅茷代替他。
English: Zou Xie violated the military order, Sima killed him, and notified the lords to send Mao Xuan to replace him.

古文：师还。壬午，济河。舟之侨先归，士会摄右。
现代文：军队回来，六月十六日，渡过黄河，舟之侨擅自先行回国，士会代理车右。
English: When the troops returned, on June 16th, after crossing the Yellow River, the foreigners in the boat returned to China ahead of time without permission. The representative car of the Association of Korean Residents in Japan is on the right.

古文：秋七月丙申，振旅，恺以入于晋。献俘授馘，饮至大赏，征会讨贰。
现代文：秋季，七月某一天，胜利归来，高唱凯歌进入晋国，在太庙报告俘获和杀死敌人的数字，饮酒犒赏，召集诸侯会盟和攻打有二心的国家。
English: In the autumn, on a certain day in July, he returned in triumph, entered Jin with a triumphal song, reported the number of enemies captured and killed in the Imperial Temple, drank wine as a reward, convened the princes' alliance, and attacked a double-minded country.

古文：杀舟之侨以徇于国，民于是大服。
现代文：杀舟之侨并通报全国，百姓因此而大为顺服。
English: The killing of the boat's occupants was also reported nationwide, and the people were very obedient as a result.

古文：君子谓： 文公其能刑矣，三罪而民服。
现代文：君子认为： 晋文公能够严明刑罚，杀了颠颉、祁瞒、舟之侨三个罪人而百姓顺服。
English: The nobles believed that: Jinwen Gong could issue strict punishments, kill the three criminals of jolting, concealing, and boat, and the people would obey.

古文：《诗》云： 惠此中国，以绥四方。 不失赏刑之谓也。 
现代文：《诗》说： 施惠于中原国家，安定四方的诸侯 ，说的就是没有失去公正的赏赐和刑罚。 
English: "Poem" said: "Benefiting the Central Plains countries and stabilizing the provinces in the four directions" means that there is no loss of fair reward and punishment.

古文：冬，会于温，讨不服也。卫侯与元咺讼，甯武子为辅，鍼庄子为坐，士荣为大士。
现代文：冬季，僖公和晋文公、齐昭公、宋成公、蔡庄公、郑文公、陈子、莒子、邾子、秦同人在温地会见，商量出兵攻打不顺服的国家。卫成公和元咺争讼，甯武子作为卫成公的诉讼人，鍼庄子作为卫成公的代理人，士荣作为卫成公的答辩人。
English: In the winter, Emperor Gong and Jinwen, Qi Zhaogong, Songcheng, Caizhuang, Zhengwen, Chenzi, Zangzi, Zangzi, and Qin Tongtong met in Warmi to discuss sending troops to attack the disobedient countries. Weicheng and Yuan Zang had a dispute, with Zangwuzi as Weicheng's litigant, Jingzhuangzi as Weicheng's agent, and Shirong as Weicheng's respondent.

古文：卫侯不胜。
现代文：卫成公没有胜诉。
English: Wei Chenggong did not win the case.

古文：杀士荣，刖鍼庄子，谓甯俞忠而免之。
现代文：作为诸侯领袖的晋国杀了士荣，砍了鍼庄子的脚，认为甯武子忠诚而赦免了他。
English: As the leader of the princes, Jin killed Shirong, cut off the foot of Acupuncture Zhuangzi, and pardoned Xingwu Zi for his loyalty.

古文：执卫侯，归之于京师，寘诸深室。
现代文：逮捕卫成公，把他送到京师，关在牢房里。
English: Arrest Wei Chenggong, send him to Beijing Division and lock him up in a cell.

古文：甯子职纳橐饘焉。
现代文：甯武子负责给卫成公送衣食。
English: Zou Wu Zi is in charge of sending clothes and food to Wei Chenggong.

古文：元咺归于卫，立公子瑕。
现代文：元咺回到卫国，立公子瑕为国君。
English: When Yuan Shao returned to defend the country, he set up Kuchiko Kame as the sovereign.

古文：是会也，晋侯召王，以诸侯见，且使王狩。
现代文：这次温地的会盟，晋文公召请周襄王前来，并且带领诸侯朝见他，又让周襄王打猎。
English: In this warm-hearted alliance, Jinwen publicly invited King Zhou Xiang to come, and led the princes to meet him, and let King Zhou Xiang go hunting.

古文：仲尼曰： 以臣召君，不可以训。 
现代文：孔子说： 以臣下而召请君主，是不能作为榜样的。 
English: Confucius said, "It is not a good example to call a monarch by his subordinates.

古文：故书曰： 天王狩于河阳。 言非其地也，且明德也。
现代文：所以《春秋》记载说 天王狩于河阳 ，天下本都是周王朝的地方，而这里却不是周襄王的地方了，而且是为了表明晋国的功德而避讳的说法。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" records that the emperor hunted in Hayao, the world is originally the place of the Zhou Dynasty, but here is not the place of King Zhou Xiang, and it is a shunned saying in order to show the merits of Jin.

古文：壬申，公朝于王所。
现代文：十月初七日，僖公到周襄王的住处朝觐。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the first month of the year, Gong Zhou went to the residence of King Zhou Xiang for the morning meal.

古文：丁丑，诸侯围许。
现代文：十一月十二日，诸侯包围许国。
English: On the day of Dingushi, the lords besieged Xu.

古文：晋侯有疾，曹伯之竖侯獳货筮史，使曰： 以曹为解。
现代文：晋文公有重病，曹共公的侍从侯獳贿赂晋文公的筮史，让他把得病的原因说成是由于灭了曹国。
English: Jin Wengong was seriously ill, and Cao's attendant, Hou Yi, bribed Jin Wengong to say that the reason for his illness was due to the destruction of Cao.

古文：齐桓公为会而封异姓，今君为会而灭同姓。
现代文：他就对晋文公说： 齐桓公主持会盟而封异姓的国家，现在君王主持会盟而灭同姓的国家。
English: He said to Prince Jinwen: The country where Prince Qi Huan presided over the alliance and sealed a different surname, is now the country where the monarch presided over the alliance and destroyed the same surname.

古文：曹叔振铎，文之昭也。先君唐叔，武之穆也。
现代文：曹国的叔振铎，是文王的儿子；先君唐叔，是武王的儿子。
English: Cao's uncle, Zhen Rong, was the son of King Wen; the previous ruler, Uncle Tang, was the son of King Wu.

古文：且合诸侯而灭兄弟，非礼也。与卫偕命，而不与偕复，非信也。同罪异罚，非刑也。
现代文：而且会合诸侯而灭掉兄弟之国，这是不符合礼仪的；曹国和卫国一样得到君王的诺言，但是不能一同复国，这是不讲信用的；罪过相同而惩罚不同，这是不符合刑律的。
English: Moreover, it is not in accordance with etiquette for princes to meet and destroy a brotherly country; Cao and Wei received the same promise from the king, but they cannot restore the country together, which is not trustworthy; the same crime but different punishments, which is not in accordance with the criminal law.

古文：礼以行义，信以守礼，刑以正邪，舍此三者，君将若之何？ 
现代文：礼仪用来推动道义，信用用来保护礼仪，刑律用来纠正邪恶。丢开了这三项，君王准备怎么办？ 
English: Etiquette is used to promote morality, trust is used to protect etiquette, and criminal law is used to correct evil. Without these three items, what is the king going to do?

古文：公说，复曹伯，遂会诸侯于许。
现代文：晋文公很高兴，恢复了曹共公的君位，曹共公就在许国和诸侯会盟。
English: Jinwen Gong was very happy, he restored the throne of Cao Gonggong, and Cao Gonggong entered into an alliance with Xu Province and the princes.

古文：晋侯作三行以御狄，荀林父将中行，屠击将右行，先蔑将左行。
现代文：晋文公建立三个步兵师来抵抗狄人，荀林父将领中行，屠击将领右行，先蔑将领左行。
English: Emperor Jinwen established three infantry divisions to resist the Di people. General Yulin's father led the middle line, the slaughtering general led the right line, and the scorned general led the left line.

