古文：邢峦，字洪宾，河间鄚人也。
现代文：邢峦，字洪宾，河间莫阝人。
English: ,字Hongbin,河间莫人.

古文：五世祖嘏，石勒频征不至。
现代文：五世祖邢嘏，石勒频频征其为官，不去。
English: The fifth generation ancestor, Shi Le frequently signs him as an official, but he does not go.

古文：嘏无子，峦高祖盖，自旁宗入后。
现代文：邢嘏没有子嗣，邢峦高祖邢盖，从旁宗入门为其后人。
English: He had no children, but his great-great-grandfather, Zengai, was the head of a collateral line.

古文：盖孙颖，字宗敬，以才学知名。
现代文：邢盖孙子颖，字宗敏，以才学知名。
English: Zengai's grandson, Liangying, is famous for his ability to learn Zongjing.

古文：世祖时，与范阳卢玄、渤海高允等同时被征。
现代文：世祖时，与范阳卢玄、渤海高允等一起被朝廷征拜。
English: At the time of the founder, he was enlisted by the imperial court together with Fan Yang, Lu Xuan and Bohai Gaoyong.

古文：后拜中书侍郎，假通直常侍、宁朔将军、平城子，衔命使于刘义隆。
现代文：后来，朝廷拜授他为中书侍郎，假通直常侍、宁朔将军、平城子。受命出使刘义隆政权。
English: Later, the imperial court awarded him the title of Chusho-ziroro, Fudotsunao-no-sojishi, Ningshuo-no-sojishi, and Heijo-no-sojishi. He was dispatched by order to Liu Yilong's regime.

古文：后以病还乡里。
现代文：后因病还归乡里。
English: He later returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：久之，世祖访颖于群臣曰： 往忆邢颖长者，有学义，宜侍讲东宫，今其人安在？ 
现代文：很久以后，魏世祖向群臣问询邢颖说： 往忆邢颖长者，富有学义，适合侍讲东宫，而今他在什么地方？ 
English: A long time later, Emperor Wei inquired of his courtiers: "Remembering Emperor Wei, who was an elderly man, full of learning and wisdom, and suitable to serve and lecture at the East Palace, where is he now?

古文：司徒崔浩对曰： 颖卧疾在家。 
现代文：司徒崔浩回答说： 邢颖卧病在家。 
English: Szu Cui Hao replied: "Ling Ying is at home sick.

古文：世祖遣太医驰驿就疗。
现代文：魏世祖派太医前去医治。
English: Emperor Wei sent the Grand Physician to treat him.

古文：卒，赠冠军将军、定州刺史，谥曰康。
现代文：邢颖死后，朝廷赠他为冠军将军、定州刺史，谥称康。
English: After the death of Liang Ying, the imperial court presented him as a champion general, Dingzhou Zhishi, nicknamed Kang.

古文：子修年，即峦父也，州主簿。
现代文：子修年，即邢峦的父亲，任州中主簿。
English: His son, Xun Nian, the father of Zou, became the chief secretary of the middle school.

古文：峦少而好学，负帙寻师，家贫厉节，遂博览书传。
现代文：邢峦幼时好学，负笈寻师，家中贫困，励节志学，于是博览群书。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn, but he had to find a teacher. His family was poor, and he was encouraged to study, so he read a lot of books.

古文：有文才干略，美须髯，姿貌甚伟。
现代文：邢峦文才俊美、富有才干，长着修美的胡须，姿态容貌很是伟岸。
English: Hao Wencai is handsome, talented, has a well-groomed beard, and his posture and appearance are great.

古文：州郡表贡，拜中书博士，迁员外散骑侍郎，为高祖所知赏。
现代文：州郡推荐他，朝廷拜他为中书博士，迁任员外散骑侍郎，被魏高祖所赏识。
English: He was recommended by the state and county, honored by the imperial court as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, transferred to the position of foreign errand boy, and appreciated by Emperor Gaozu of Wei.

古文：兼员外散骑常侍，使于萧赜。还，拜通直郎，转中书侍郎，甚见顾遇，常参座席。
现代文：兼任员外散骑常侍，出使萧赜，还朝之后，朝廷拜授他为通直郎，转任中书侍郎，很被皇上恩顾礼遇，经常参坐帝边。
English: He also served as a member of the Foreign Riding Council, dispatched by Xiao Tong, and after returning to the court, the court awarded him the title of Tsundairo, and he was transferred to the position of Chushushizairo. He was treated with great courtesy by the emperor, and often sat at the emperor's side.

古文：高祖因行药至司空府南，见峦宅，遣使谓峦曰： 朝行药至此，见卿宅乃住，东望德馆，情有依然。 
现代文：高祖因服长生药，漫步行药到司空府南面，看见邢峦宅第，派使者对邢峦说： 朕早上行药到此，看见爱卿宅第才止步，东望德馆，情有依然。 
English: Gao Zu, after taking the elixir of life and walking for a long time, came to the south of Sikuofu, saw the house of Zou, and sent an envoy to Zou saying, "I came here in the morning to take the elixir of life, and only stopped when I saw the house of Aiqing. I still have feelings for the East Wangde Pavilion.

古文：峦对曰： 陛下移构中京，方建无穷之业，臣意在与魏升降，宁容不务永年之宅。 
现代文：邢峦回答说： 陛下移构中京，正建无穷之业，为臣意在与大魏同升降，哪能不造永年之宅。 
English: Zou replied, "Your Majesty is building an endless career by transforming Beijing. As a vassal, he wants to rise and fall with the Great Wei Dynasty. How can he not build a house that will last forever?"

古文：高祖谓司空穆亮、仆射李冲曰： 峦之此言，其意不小。 
现代文：高祖对司空穆亮、仆射李冲说： 邢峦这话，其意不小。 
English: Gao Zu said to Siku Mu Liang and Pusha Li Chong: "This is not a small thing.

古文：有司奏策秀、孝，诏曰： 秀、孝殊问，经权异策。邢峦才清，可令策秀。 
现代文：有关部门启奏策考秀才、孝廉之事，皇帝下诏说： 秀才、孝廉考问不同，经权异策，邢峦才学清正，可让其策考秀才。 
English: The relevant departments reported the matter of the examination of talent and filial piety, and the emperor issued a decree saying: Talent and filial piety are different in examination, and they are subject to different powers and policies. Only those who have learned to be pure and upright can be allowed to examine talent.

古文：后兼黄门郎。
现代文：后来兼任黄门郎。
English: Later, he also held the post of Huangmenro.

古文：从征汉北，峦在新野，后至。
现代文：跟随皇帝出征汉北，邢峦在新野，后到。
English: He followed the emperor on his expedition to Hebei Province, and arrived in Shinuo later.

古文：高祖曰： 伯玉天迷其心，鬼惑其虑；守危邦，固逆主，乃至如此。 
现代文：高祖说： 伯玉是天迷其心，鬼惑其虑，守持危邦，固奉逆主，才至今天。 
English: Gao Zu said: "It is only today that Baiyu has been fascinated by heaven, bewitched by ghosts, protected from danger, and adhered to the Lord.

古文：峦曰： 新野既摧，众城悉溃，唯有伯玉，不识危机，平殄之辰，事在旦夕。 
现代文：邢峦说： 新野既被摧灭，众城都要崩溃，只有伯玉，不识危机，平灭之日，只在旦夕。 
English: Zou said, "Since Xinyang has been destroyed, all the cities will collapse. Only Bo-Yu, who does not know the crisis, knows that the day of annihilation is only on the eve of the New Year.

古文：高祖曰： 至此以来，虽未擒灭，城隍已崩，想在不远。
现代文：高祖说： 到这里以来，我虽没擒获敌人，但敌城墙崩溃，想来也是不远的事了。
English: Gaozu said, "Since I came here, although I have not captured the enemy, the enemy's city wall has collapsed, and it is not far off.

古文：所以缓攻者，正待中书为露布耳。 
现代文：我之所以放慢进攻的节奏，正是为了等待中书你草拟告示罢了。 
English: The reason why I am not in a hurry to attack is that I am waiting for you to write a letter of surrender.

古文：寻除正黄门、兼御史中尉、瀛州大中正，迁散骑常侍、兼尚书。
现代文：不久又除授其为正黄门、兼御史中尉、瀛州大中正，迁任散骑常侍、兼任尚书。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Zhenghuangmen (正黄门), concurrently the title of Lieutenant of History, and the title of Vice-President of Zhangzhou University, and was transferred to the post of Sanzhi (散騎) regular attendant and concurrently the post of Shangshu (尚書).

古文：世宗初，峦奏曰： 臣闻昔者明王之以德治天下，莫不重粟帛，轻金宝。
现代文：世宗初年，邢峦启奏说： 臣听说过去明达的君王以德治理天下，无不重视粟帛，轻视金银财宝。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Jang Ki-soo said: "I have heard that in the past, wise kings governed the world with virtue. All of them valued millet and despised gold, silver and treasure.

古文：然粟帛安国育民之方，金玉是虚华损德之物。
现代文：粮食布匹是安定国家养育万民的药方，而金玉则是浮华损德的东西。
English: Grain cloth is a prescription for a stable country to nurture all people, while gold is a flashy thing that damages virtue.

古文：故先皇深观古今，去诸奢侈。
现代文：所以先皇深察古今，去除诸项奢侈。
English: Therefore, the first emperor deeply observed the past and the present, and removed various luxuries.

古文：服御尚质，不贵雕镂；所珍在素，不务奇绮。至乃以纸绢为帐扆，铜铁为辔勒。
现代文：服饰御驾以质朴为尚，不看重雕镂之功，所珍视的是素朴，不追求奇珍绮丽，甚至于以纸绢为帐帷，铜铁为马的辔勒。
English: The Emperor's attire was simple, and he did not value the skill of the sculptors. He valued simplicity, and did not pursue the exquisite. He even used a paper curtain as a curtain, and copper and iron as a horse's bridle.

古文：训朝廷以节俭，示百姓以忧务，日夜孜孜，小大必慎。
现代文：训教朝廷官员节省俭朴，以忧勤劳务示范百姓，日夜孜孜，小大事务必很审慎。
English: The imperial officials were trained to be thrifty and frugal, and to show the common people how to be diligent and hardworking. They worked hard day and night, and were always very prudent in small and large matters.

古文：轻贱珠玑，示其无设，府藏之金，裁给而已，更不买积以费国资。
现代文：轻贱珠玑，示其无设，府藏的金银，够用而已，不再购买聚积以耗费国家资财。
English: The government's hoard of gold and silver is just enough, and it will no longer buy and accumulate to consume the country's wealth.

古文：逮景明之初，承升平之业，四疆清晏，远迩来同，于是蕃贡继路，商贾交入，诸所献贸，倍多于常。
现代文：到景明初年，皇魏承继升平基业，四域清平，远近来同，于是各藩国贡奉继踵于路，商贾之人交相入京，诸路所献所交易的，成倍地多于往常。
English: In the first year of the Jingming Dynasty, the Emperor Wei succeeded in leveling the foundation, the four regions were leveled, and the far and near were the same. Therefore, the tributes of each domain and country followed the road, the merchants came to Beijing, and the roads offered and traded were exponentially more than usual.

古文：虽加以节约，犹岁损万计，珍货常有余，国用恆不足。
现代文：虽然加以节约，每年犹且损失万计资财，朝中珍货常常有余，而国家用度总是不足。
English: Although management has been strengthened, tens of thousands of money are lost every year. The country's precious foreign goods are more than enough, and the use of currency is often insufficient.

古文：若不裁其分限，便恐无以支岁。
现代文：如不裁决其限度，恐怕无法度过年去。
English: If we do not restrict its outflow, we may not be able to maintain normal spending.

古文：自今非为要须者，请皆不受。 
现代文：臣以为从今以后，如不是必需的东西，请陛下一律不要接受。 
English: From now on, please do not accept goods that are not absolutely necessary.

古文：世宗从之。
现代文：世宗接受了他的意见。
English: Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：寻正尚书，常侍如故。
现代文：不久邢峦为正尚书，常侍官职照旧。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of official courtier, but retained his position as a regular attendant.

古文：萧衍梁秦二州行事夏侯道迁以汉中内附，诏加峦使持节、都督征梁汉诸军事、假镇西将军，进退征摄，得以便宜从事。
现代文：萧衍政权的梁、秦二州行事夏侯道迁以汉中归附朝廷，皇帝下诏加授邢峦使持节，都督征梁汉诸军事，假镇西将军，征和进退，让他见机行事。
English: Xia Hou Dao, the leader of the Xiao Yan regime and the leader of the two states of Qin, moved to the Han Dynasty to join the imperial court. The emperor issued an imperial edict to confer the title of envoy to hold the festival. The governor conscripted the military of Liang Han and the general of Fuzhen Xi, conscripted and advanced and retreated, and let him see the opportunity to act.

古文：峦至汉中，白马以西犹未归顺，峦遣宁远将军杨举、统军杨众爱、氾洪雅等领卒六千讨之。
现代文：邢峦到了汉中，白马以西的地方仍未归附，邢峦派宁远将军杨举、统军杨众爱、汜洪雅等人领兵六千前去讨伐。
English: When he arrived in the Han Dynasty, the areas west of the White Horse had not yet been annexed, and he sent General Yang Jiu of Ningyuan, Yang Zong'ai of the United Army, Zou Hongya and others to lead six thousand soldiers to fight.

古文：军锋所临，贼皆款附，唯补谷戍主何法静据城拒守。
现代文：军队锋芒所至，敌人全都归附，只有补谷守将何法静据城拒守。
English: When the army's spearhead arrived, the enemy all surrendered, and only the governor of Meituan refused to defend the city.

古文：举等进师讨之，法静奔溃，乘胜追奔至关城之下，萧衍龙骧将军关城流杂疑李侍叔逆以城降。
现代文：杨举等挥师讨伐，法静溃逃，杨举等乘胜追到关城之下，萧衍的龙骧将军关城李侍叔举城归降。
English: Yang Jiu and others waged a crusade, Fa Jing routed and fled, Yang Jiu and others took advantage of the victory and chased down Guancheng, Xiao Yan's dragon general Guancheng Li Zhi Uncle surrendered the city.

古文：萧衍辅国将军任僧幼等三十余将，率南安、广长、东洛、大寒、武始、除口、平溪、桶谷诸郡之民七千余户，相继而至。
现代文：萧衍辅国将军任僧幼等三十多名将领，率领南安、广长、东洛、大寒、武始、除口、平溪、桶谷诸郡之民七千多户，相继前来归降。
English: More than 30 generals, including General Xiao Yanfu, led more than 7,000 people from Nan'an, Guangchang, Dongluo, Dagan, Wuchih, Deokou, Pingxi, and Deokgu counties to surrender one after another.

古文：萧衍平西将军李天赐、晋寿太守王景胤等拥众七千，屯据石亭。
现代文：萧衍平西将军李天赐、晋寿太守王景胤等拥众七千，屯军据守石亭。
English: Xiao Yan, Pingxi General Li Tian Zi, Jin Shou Governor Wang Jingyin and others were supported by a crowd of seven thousand, and the garrison was based in Shitei.

古文：统军韩多宝等率众击之，破天赐前军赵者，擒斩一千三百。
现代文：统军韩多宝等人率军打击，攻破天赐前军赵月者，擒斩敌人一千三百人。
English: Han Dobao and others of the Unified Army led the army to strike, broke through the heaven-sent former army Zhao Yue, and beheaded 1,300 enemies.

古文：遣统军李义珍讨晋寿，景胤宵遁，遂平之。
现代文：邢峦又派统军李义珍讨伐晋寿，王景胤在晚上逃走了，于是平定了晋寿。
English: Gong also sent the unified army of Li Yizhen to fight against Jin Shou. Wang Jingyin fled in the evening, so Jin Shou was pacified.

古文：诏曰： 峦至彼，须有板官，以怀初附。高下品第，可依征义阳都督之格也。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 邢峦到那里，必须封官，以怀归初附之人，高下等级，可依照征讨义阳都督时的格式。 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "Once you get there, you must seal the official, with the person who returns to the first attached, the higher and lower grades can be in accordance with the format of the conquest of the Yiyang governor.

古文：拜峦使持节、安西将军、梁秦二州刺史。
现代文：拜授邢峦为使持节、安西将军、梁秦二州刺史。
English: He was awarded the Medal of Honor for the Envoy's Day, General Anxi, and Liang Qin Erzhou.

古文：萧衍巴西太守庞景民恃远不降，峦遣巴州刺史严玄思往攻之，斩景民，巴西悉平。
现代文：萧衍巴西太守庞景民依仗路途遥远不降于魏，邢峦派巴州刺史严玄思前往攻讨，斩杀庞景民，巴西全部平定。
English: Xiao Yan sent the Brazilian governor, Pang Jingmin, to attack and kill Pang Jingmin, and the whole of Brazil was pacified.

古文：萧衍遣其冠军将军孔陵等率众二万，屯据深坑，冠军将军曾方达固南安，冠军将军任僧褒、辅国将军李畎戍石同。
现代文：萧衍派他的冠军将军孔陵等人率领二万人马，屯据深坑，冠军将军鲁方达固守南安，冠军将军任僧褒、辅国将军李畎戍守石同。
English: Xiao Yan sent his champion general Kong Ling and others, led by twenty thousand horses, to set up a base in Shenkeng, champion general Lu Fangda to defend Nan'an, champion general Ren Zengbo, and auxiliary general Li Xunshou Shitong.

古文：峦统军王足所在击破之，枭衍辅国将军乐保明、宁朔将军李伯度、龙骧将军李思贤，贼遂保回车栅。
现代文：邢峦的统军王足无往而不胜，萧衍辅国将军乐保明、宁朔将军李伯度，龙骧将军李思贤，于是在回车栅拒守。
English: Xiao Yan's unified army could not defeat Wang Zu, but Xiao Yan's auxiliary general Le Baoming, Ningshuo's general Li Baodu, and Longyu's general Li Sixian did, so they refused to defend themselves at the checkpoint.

古文：足又进击衍辅国将军范峻，自余斩获殆将万数。
现代文：王足又进击萧衍的辅国将军范峻，斩首俘获敌人将近一万。
English: Wang Zu also attacked Xiao Yan's auxiliary general, Fan Jun, beheading and capturing nearly ten thousand of the enemy.

古文：孔陵等收集遗众，奔保梓潼，足又破之，斩衍辅国将军符伯度，其杀伤投溺者万有余人。
现代文：孔陵等收拾残部，奔保梓潼，王足又破了，斩杀了萧衍的辅国将军符伯度，其中杀伤投水的一万多人。
English: Kong Ling and others cleaned up the debris and rushed to the scene. Wang Jiao broke his leg again and killed Xiao Yan's auxiliary general Fubo Du, killing and drowning more than 10,000 people.

古文：开地定民，东西七百，南北千里，获郡十四、二部护军及诸县戍，遂逼涪城。
现代文：邢峦率众开拓地盘，安定人民，东西长达七百里，南北长有千里，获得郡城十四座、二部护军以及众多县戍，于是兵逼涪城。
English: He led the people to explore the territory and stabilize the people. The east and west were as long as seven hundred miles, and the north and south were thousands of miles long. He obtained fourteen county towns, two military garrisons, and many county townships, so the soldiers forced Xingcheng.

古文：峦表曰：
现代文：邢峦上表说：
English: The table says:

古文：扬州、成都相去万里，陆途既绝，唯资水路。
现代文： 扬州、成都相距万里，陆路既已绝断，通行只有水路。
English: Yangzhou and Chengdu are thousands of miles apart, the land route has been cut off, and only the water route is passable.

古文：萧衍兄子渊藻，去年四月十三日发扬州，今岁四月四日至蜀。
现代文：萧衍的兄子萧渊藻，去年四月十三日从扬州出发，今年四月四日才到蜀地。
English: Xiao Yuanmao, the elder brother of Xiao Yan, set out from Yangzhou on April 13 last year and arrived in Shu on April 4 this year.

古文：水军西上，非周年不达，外无军援，一可图也。
现代文：水军西上，不到一年难以到达，蜀地外无援军，这是第一个可以图谋的理由。
English: When the naval force moved westward, it was difficult to arrive in less than a year, and there were no reinforcements from outside Shu. This was the first reason to plot.

古文：益州顷经刘季连反叛，邓元起攻围，资储散尽，仓库空竭，今犹未复。兼民人丧胆，无复固守之意，二可图也。
现代文：益州近年来经受刘季连反叛、邓元起攻围，州中资粮储备已经耗尽，仓库空竭，至今仍未恢复，加上百姓尽皆丧胆，不再有固守之意，这是第二个可以图谋的理由。
English: In recent years, Yizhou has been besieged by Liu Qilian's rebellion and Deng Yuanzhi's siege, the state's grain reserves have been depleted, the warehouses are empty and have not yet been restored, and the people are discouraged and no longer have the will to hold on. This is the second reason to plot.

古文：萧渊藻是裙屐少年，未洽治务，及至益州，便戮邓元超、曹亮宗，临戎斩将，则是驾驭失方。
现代文：萧渊藻是乳臭未干的少年，不懂治理政务，他一到益州，便杀了邓元起、曹亮宗，临战斩将，则是驾驭失方。
English: Xiao Yuanmao is a wet-behind-the-ears teenager who doesn't know how to run government affairs. As soon as he arrived in Yizhou, he killed Deng Yuanzhi and Cao Liangzong. He cut down generals on the verge of war, but he lost control.

古文：范国惠津渠退败，锁执在狱。
现代文：范国惠在津渠败退，今已锁禁在狱。
English: Fan Guohui was defeated in Tsu Canal and has now been locked up in prison.

古文：今之所任，并非宿将重名，皆是左右少年而已。既不厌民望，多行残暴，民心离解，三可图也。
现代文：而今所任，并非那些名将贵臣，都是些稚嫩的少年而已，老百姓既不满他们，他们又多行残暴，民心离解，这是第三个可图取的理由。
English: And those who are now in charge are not those famous generals and dignitaries, but are just immature boys. The common people are not only dissatisfied with them, but they are also often cruel and alienate the people. This is the third reason to be sought.

古文：蜀之所恃唯剑阁，今既克南安，已夺其险，据彼界内，三分已一。
现代文：蜀中所凭借的只有剑阁，而今既已克平南安，便已夺取其险，据守他的界内，三分已得其一。
English: Shu Zhong only relied on Jiange, and now that he has conquered Nan'an, he has captured its risk, and within his territory, three points have been won.

古文：从南安向涪，方轨任意，前军累破，后众丧魂，四可图也。
现代文：从安南向涪，道路众多，敌人前军累破，后众丧魂，这是第四个可图取的理由。
English: From Annan to Handan, there are many roads, the enemy's front line is broken, and many people are lost. This is the fourth reason to be taken.

古文：昔刘禅据一国之地，姜维为佐，邓艾既出绵竹，彼即投降。
现代文：从前刘禅据一国之地，姜维为佐将，邓艾既出绵竹，他即投降。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Zhen was in charge of a country, Jiang Wei was the second-in-command, and Deng Ai was just a pawn, so he surrendered.

古文：及苻坚之世，杨安、朱彤三月取汉中，四月至涪城，兵未及州，仲孙逃命。
现代文：到苻坚时代，杨安、朱彤三月拿下汉中，四月到涪城，兵未到州，仲孙逃命。
English: By the time of Yu Jian, Yang An and Zhu Xi won the Han Middle School in March, and went to Lucheng in April. The soldiers did not reach the state, and Zhong Sun fled for his life.

古文：桓温西征，不旬月而平。
现代文：桓温西征，不到十天就平定该地。
English: Kan'en led the western expedition, and the area was pacified in less than ten days.

古文：蜀地昔来恆多不守。
现代文：蜀地从来恒多不守。
English: Shu has never followed the majority.

古文：况渊藻是萧衍兄子，骨肉至亲，若其逃亡，当无死理。
现代文：何况渊藻是萧衍哥哥的儿子，骨肉至亲，如其逃亡，当无处死之理。
English: What's more, Yuan Cao was the son of Xiao Yan's elder brother, a close relative. If he had fled, he would have been sentenced to death.

古文：脱军克涪城，渊藻复何宜城中坐而受困？
现代文：如我军攻克涪城，萧渊藻怎么可能坐守城中而受其困？
English: If our army conquers Lucheng, how can Xiao Yuanmao sit in the city and be trapped by it?

古文：若其出斗，庸蜀之卒唯便刀槊，弓箭至少，假有遥射，弗至伤人，五可图也。
现代文：如其出关，庸、蜀士兵只善使刀鞘，弓箭至为短少，假如遥射，不至伤人，这是第五个可图取的理由。
English: If they leave the customs, the Yangtze and Shu soldiers are only good at using the scabbard, the bow and arrow are too short, and if they are fired from a distance, they will not hurt people. This is the fifth reason to be taken.

古文：臣闻乘机而动，武之善经；攻昧侮亡，《春秋》明义。
现代文： 臣听说乘机而动，用武常法；攻暗侮亡，《春秋》明义。
English: The vassal was said to have taken advantage of the opportunity and used martial law; to attack and kill, "Spring and Autumn" is clear.

古文：未有舍干戚而康时，不征伐而混一。
现代文：从未有舍弃干戈而能安康时势，不征伐而能统一天下的。
English: There has never been a time when we can be healthy without abandoning the war, or a time when we can unify the world without conquering it.

古文：伏惟陛下，纂武文之业，当必世之期；跨中州之饶，兼甲兵之盛；清荡天区，在于今矣。
现代文：伏思陛下总掌文、武之业，当必世之期，跨有富饶的中州，兼加甲兵之盛，清荡海内，在于今天了。
English: Today is the day when His Majesty Fuxi's generalship and military career, which spanned the bountiful Central Provinces, as well as the flourishing of armored soldiers and the cleanliness of the sea, are destined to last forever.

古文：是以践极之初，寿春驰款；先岁命将，义阳克辟。
现代文：所以陛下登极之初，寿春来降；前年命将，义阳克复。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of His Majesty's enthronement, Shuchun came down; the previous year's leader, Yiyang, recovered.

古文：淮外谧以风清，荆沔于焉肃晏。
现代文：淮河以外风宁天清，荆州沔水于是整肃清晏。
English: Outside the Huaihe River, the wind is calm and the sky is clear, and the water in Jingzhou is clean and clear.

古文：方欲偃甲息兵，候机而动，而天赞休明，时来斯速，虽欲靖戎，理不获已。
现代文：正要偃甲息兵，候机而动，然而天赞休明，时机来得过于迅速，陛下虽欲暂歇干戈，理不容已。
English: He was just about to arm and disarm the soldiers, waiting for his plane to take off, but it was clear as day that the time had come too quickly, and although His Majesty wanted to take a break from the war, it was no longer possible.

古文：至使道迁归诚，汉境伫拔。
现代文：致使道迁归降，汉境立拔。
English: As a result, Doken was relegated and Hanshin was promoted.

古文：臣以不才，属当戎寄，内省文吏，不以军谋自许，指临汉中，惟规保疆守界。
现代文：臣虽不才，属身戎伍，内省文吏，不敢以军谋自许，来到汉中，只求保疆守界。
English: Although the vassal was incompetent, he belonged to the army and was an introspective clerk. He did not dare to use military tactics. He came to the Han Dynasty and only asked for the protection of the borders.

古文：事属艰途，东西寇窃，上凭国威，下仗将士，边帅用命，频有薄捷。
现代文：然而事属艰途，东西寇窃，臣上凭国威，下仗将士，边帅用命，频有微捷。
English: However, things are difficult, things are stolen, the vassal relies on the national prestige, the soldier on the battlefield, the border guard uses his life, and there are often minor successes.

古文：藉势乘威，经度大剑，既克南安，据彼要险。前军长迈，已至梓潼，新化之民，翻然怀惠。瞻望涪益，旦夕可屠。
现代文：借势乘威，谋取大剑，克破南安，据有敌人要险，我前锋部队长驱直入，已到梓潼，新近归化之民，臣等翻然怀惠，遥望涪、益二州，旦夕即可屠破。
English: Taking advantage of the momentum, seeking to obtain a great sword, defeating Nan'an, according to the enemy to be dangerous, our forward commander drove straight in, has arrived in Zizhou, the newly naturalized people, the vassals and so on suddenly benefit, looking forward to Zizhou and Yizhou, and can be slaughtered as soon as possible.

古文：正以兵少粮匮，未宜前出。
现代文：正因兵少粮缺，没有出兵。
English: Due to the shortage of soldiers and food, no troops were sent.

古文：为尔稽缓，惧失民心，则更为寇。
现代文：为此而缓图，臣担心会失去民心，更是为贼寇帮忙。
English: To this end, he delayed the map, fearing that he would lose the people's hearts, and even helped the bandits.

古文：今若不取，后图便难，辄率愚管，庶几殄克，如其无功，分受宪坐。
现代文：今如不攻取，以后图取便很困难，臣请率领部下，很快克灭敌人，如果无功而还，臣愿受罪责。
English: If you do not attack now, it will be very difficult to attack in the future. Please lead your subordinates to quickly defeat the enemy. If you return without success, the vassal will be held responsible.

古文：且益州殷实，户余十万，比寿春、义阳三倍非匹，可乘可利，实在于兹。
现代文：况且益州富饶，民户十余万，与寿春、义阳相比，三倍有余，攻取的好处，实在于此。
English: Moreover, Yizhou is rich, with more than 100,000 private households. Compared to Shuchun and Yiyang, it is more than three times richer. This is the real benefit of conquering.

古文：若朝廷志存保民，未欲经略，臣之在此，便为无事，乞归侍养，微展乌鸟。
现代文：如果朝廷志在存保人民，不打算进攻，臣在这里，便是无事可做，为臣请求归家侍奉双亲，以尽孝子之情。 
English: If the imperial court's intention is to protect the people and does not intend to attack, and the vassal is here, then there is nothing to be done. The vassal asks the vassal to return home to serve his parents and fulfill his filial duty.

古文：诏曰： 若贼敢窥觎，观机翦扑；如其无也，则安民保境，以悦边心。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 如果敌人胆敢窥伺，见机歼灭；如果不是这样，则安民保境，以悦边民之心。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "If the enemy dares to spy, annihilate him at the first opportunity; if not, keep the people safe and secure, and please the hearts of the people along the border."

古文：子蜀之举，更听后敕。
现代文：你图蜀之举，更听以后的命令。
English: If you do this, you'll be more likely to obey future orders.

古文：方将席卷岷蜀，电扫西南，何得辞以恋亲，中途告退！
现代文：正当准备席卷岷、蜀，电扫西南，你怎么竟能以恋亲辞任，中途告退！
English: Just as you were preparing to sweep across Shandong, Shuxu, and sweep the southwestern part of the country, how could you resign as a lover and quit halfway!

古文：宜勖令图，务申高略。 
现代文：你应再展全图，务申高略。 
English: You should re-examine the whole picture and make a high-level appeal.

古文：峦又表曰：
现代文：邢峦又上表说：
English: and the above table says:

古文：昔邓艾、钟会率十八万众，倾中国资给，裁得平蜀。所以然者，斗实力故也。
现代文： 过去邓艾、钟会率领十八万人马，倾出中国所有资粮，才得以平定蜀地，之所以这样，这是拚斗实力的缘故。
English: In the past, Deng Ai and Zhong Hui led 180,000 men and horses and poured out all of China's resources and grain to be able to pacify Shu. The reason for this is the strength of the battle.

古文：况臣才绝古人，智勇又阙，复何宜请二万之众而希平蜀？
现代文：何况为臣之才远逊于古人，且又缺少智谋勇力，哪敢以手中所有的二万兵力而求平定蜀地？
English: What's more, his ability as a vassal was far inferior to that of the ancients, and he lacked wisdom and courage. How could he dare to seek to pacify Shu with all the twenty thousand troops in his hands?

古文：所以敢者，正以据得要险，士民慕义，此往则易，彼来则难，任力而行，理有可克。
现代文：为臣之所以敢于这样做，正因为臣据有敌人要塞，士民向慕义举，由此而往则易，敌人来攻则难，全力而行，理应可克。
English: The reason why the vassal dared to do this was precisely because the vassal had the enemy's fortress, and the scholars and the people raised their hands to the Muyi, so it was easy to go forward, but it was difficult for the enemy to attack, and it was necessary to go all out.

古文：今王足前进，已逼涪城；脱得涪城，则益州便是成擒之物，但得之有早晚耳。
现代文：如今王足前进，已经逼近涪城，只要得到涪城，则益州便是囊中之物，得到它只是早晚的问题。
English: Now that Wangfujing is advancing, it is already approaching Shicheng. As long as Shicheng is obtained, Yizhou is in the bag. It is only a matter of time before it is obtained.

古文：且梓潼已附，民户数万，朝廷岂得不守之也？
现代文：况且梓潼已经归附，民户数万，朝廷哪能不据守呢？
English: Moreover, Tzu Chi has been annexed, and there are tens of thousands of private households. How can the imperial court not defend it?

古文：若守也，直保境之兵则已一万，臣今请二万五千，所增无几。
现代文：如果据守，仅是保境之兵就已一万，为臣而今请兵二万五千，实际增加的兵力没有多少。
English: If they had held on, they would have had ten thousand soldiers just to protect the border, but now they are asking for twenty-five thousand soldiers. The actual increase in the number of soldiers is not much.

古文：又剑阁天险，古来所称，张载《铭》云： 世乱则逆，世清斯顺。 
现代文：又剑阁天险，自古出名，张载《铭》称： 世乱则据以叛逆，世清则顺从朝廷。 
English: There is also the Heavenly Peril of Jiange, which has been famous since ancient times. Zhang Zi's "Ming" said: Rebellion is the basis for world turmoil, and obedience to the imperial court is the basis for world peace.

古文：此之一言，良可惜矣。
现代文：这一句话，实可珍惜。
English: This sentence can really be treasured.

古文：臣诚知征戎危事，不易可为，自军度剑阁以来，鬓发中白，忧虑战惧，宁可一日为心。
现代文：臣知道征战是危险的事，不易做好，自从军队度越剑阁以来，为臣鬓发见白，忧虑战惧，不能片刻放松精神。
English: The vassal knows that it is dangerous to go to war, and it is not easy to do well. Since the army has crossed the Sword Pavilion, the vassal is worried, worried, and cannot relax his spirit for a moment.

古文：所以勉强者，既得此地而自退不守，恐辜先皇之恩遇，负陛下之爵禄，是以孜孜，频有陈请。
现代文：所以勉力而为之，是因为既然得到此地而退据不守，臣恐怕辜负陛下赐予的官禄，所以孜孜不倦，屡屡陈请。
English: Therefore, I tried my best to do it, because since I got this place and did not keep my promise, I am afraid that I will not live up to the official rank given by His Majesty, so I worked tirelessly and repeatedly asked.

古文：且臣之意算，正欲先图涪城，以渐而进。
现代文：而且为臣心里想，正欲先攻下涪城，渐次前进。
English: Moreover, I thought to myself, I really want to capture Shicheng first and advance gradually.

古文：若克涪城，便是中分益州之地，断水陆之冲。彼外无援军，孤城自守，复何能持久哉！
现代文：如攻下涪城，便是中分益州之地，截断水陆要冲，他们外无援军，独凭孤城，哪里能作持久打算呢！
English: If they capture Lucheng, it will be the land of Zhongbu Yizhou. They will have to cut off the water and land to rush. They have no reinforcements from outside, and only rely on the lone city. Where can they make a lasting plan?

古文：臣今欲使军军相次，声势连接，先作万全之计，然后图彼，得之则大克，不得则自全。
现代文：臣今天想让各军相次，前呼后应，先作万全之计，然后图谋敌人，能攻下城池，则获利巨大，攻不下，也可以自保。
English: Today, the vassal wants all the armies to march in succession, calling out before and answering after, first making a perfect plan, and then plotting the enemy. If you can capture the city, you will make a huge profit. If you can't, you can also protect yourself.

古文：又巴西、南郑相离一千四百，去州迢递，恆多生动。
现代文： 又加上巴西、南郑两郡相距一千四百里，离州遥远，经常动荡不安。
English: In addition, Brazil and South Zheng counties are 1,400 miles apart, far away from the state, and are often unstable.

古文：昔在南之日，以其统绾势难，故增立巴州，镇静夷獠，梁州藉利，因而表罢。
现代文：过去在南方的时候，因其统治很难，故增设巴州，镇治那里的边民，梁州因而得利，所以就停设了。
English: In the past, when he was in the south, he found it difficult to govern, so he added Ba Prefecture to govern the border people there. Liang Prefecture benefited from this, so it was discontinued.

古文：彼土民望，严、蒲、何、杨，非唯五三；族落虽在山居，而多有豪右。文学笺启，往往可观；冠带风流，亦为不少。
现代文：那里的民间望族，有严、蒲、何、杨，虽不是五帝三皇，他们的族落虽在深山之中，却多有豪强，文学笺启，往往很是可观，冠带风流之人，也很不少。
English: There are Yan, Pu, He, and Yang, who are not the Five Emperors and the Three Emperors, but they are respected by the people. Although they live in the mountains, many of them are brave and strong. Their literary works are often very impressive, and there are also many people with crowns.

古文：但以去州既远，不能仕进；至于州纲，无由厕迹。
现代文：但是因离益州遥远，无法仕进做官，至于州中政策，也无法达到那里。
English: But because it is far from Yixing, it is impossible to get into the government, and as for the policy in the state, it is also impossible to get there.

古文：巴境民豪，便是无梁州之分，是以郁怏，多生动静。
现代文：巴境民众豪强，便是因为没能从梁州分出，所以抑郁不快，多生是非。
English: The people of Baling are brave and strong, because they have not been able to separate from Liangzhou, so they are depressed and unhappy, and it is right and wrong to have many children.

古文：比建议之始，严玄思自号巴州刺史，克城以来，仍使行事。
现代文：到建议之始，严玄思自称巴州刺史，攻克该城以来，仍让他行州事。
English: At the beginning of the proposal, Yan Xuan Si claimed to be the governor of Bazhou, and since he conquered the city, he still let him do state affairs.

古文：巴西广袤一千，户余四万，若彼立州，镇摄华獠，则大帖民情。
现代文：巴西方圆一千里，户口总数四万，如果那里立州，镇摄华獠，则会大合民情。
English: Baxi has a radius of 1,000 kilometers and a total of 40,000 households. If it were to become a prefecture-level city, the town of Huayuan would be a great fit for the people.

古文：从垫江已还，不复劳征，自为国有。
现代文：军队从垫江以还，不复劳征，沿途自为国有。 
English: The army was nationalized along the way, and conscription was not reintroduced after the return of the troops from the Mat River.

古文：世宗不从。
现代文：魏世宗不同意。
English: Wei Shizong disagreed.

古文：又王足于涪城辄还，遂不定蜀。
现代文：又加上王足从涪城撤军，于是没能平定蜀地。
English: In addition, Wang Jie withdrew his troops from Shicheng, so he was unable to pacify Shu.

古文：峦既克巴西，遣军主李仲迁守之。
现代文：邢峦既已平定巴西，派军主李仲迁在那里据守。
English: He had already conquered Brazil and sent the general Li Zhongqian to guard it.

古文：仲迁得萧衍将张法养女，有美色，甚惑之。
现代文：李仲迁得到萧衍将领张法养的女儿，其女貌美，李仲迁为她所迷。
English: Li Zhongqian is the daughter of Xiao Yan general Zhang Fa. She is a beautiful woman, and Li Zhongqian is fascinated by her.

古文：散费兵储，专心酒色，公事谘承，无能见者。
现代文：李仲迁散费兵粮，专心酒色，人有公事找他，总见不到他的人影。
English: Li Zhongqian spent a lot of money on soldiers' food and concentrated on drinking. People came to him for business, but they never saw his shadow.

古文：峦忿之切齿，仲迁惧，谋叛，城人斩其首，以城降衍将谯希远，巴西遂没。
现代文：邢峦对他恨得咬牙切齿。李仲迁害怕了，谋叛，城里人砍下了他的脑袋，以城投降了萧衍将领谯希远，巴西于是陷没。
English: Zhai hated him so much that he gnashed his teeth. Li Zhongqian was afraid and plotted a rebellion, the townspeople cut off his head, Xiao Yan's general Zhai Xiyuan surrendered the city, and Brazil was trapped.

古文：武兴氐杨集起等反叛，峦遣统军傅竖眼讨平之，语在《竖眼传》。
现代文：武兴氐人杨集起等反叛，邢峦派统军傅竖眼讨伐平定了他，事在《傅竖眼传》中有载。
English: Wu Xing and his follower Yang Jiji rebelled, and the general troops of the Wei faction under the command of Fu Zhizhen fought and subdued him, which was recorded in "The Biography of Fu Zhizhen."

古文：峦之初至汉中，从容风雅，接豪右以礼，抚细民以惠。
现代文：邢峦初到汉中，行止从容、风度翩翩，接待豪绅们很注意礼节，抚慰平民也以慈惠。
English: When he first came to Hanzhong, his demeanor was calm and graceful. When he received the rich and powerful, he paid great attention to etiquette and comforted the common people with benevolence.

古文：岁余之后，颇因百姓去就，诛灭齐民，藉为奴婢者二百余口，兼商贩聚敛，清论鄙之。
现代文：一年多以后，因百姓背离他而去，他也诛灭平民，其中充为奴婢的二百多人，加上他经商作贩，聚敛财物。舆论普遍看不起他。
English: More than a year later, because the people had turned away from him, he also annihilated the civilians, of whom more than two hundred were enslaved, plus he was a merchant and gathered wealth. Public opinion generally despised him.

古文：征授度支尚书。
现代文：朝廷征授他为度支尚书。
English: The imperial court awarded him the post of Dudushi Shangshuo.

古文：时萧衍遣兵侵轶徐兗，缘边镇戍，相继陷没。朝廷忧之，乃以峦为使持节、都督东讨诸军事、安东将军，尚书如故。
现代文：当时萧衍派兵侵犯徐、兖，沿边镇戍相继陷落，朝廷很担忧，于是让邢峦为使持节，都督东讨诸军事、安东将军，尚书官职仍旧。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan sent troops to encroach on Xu and Handan, and towns along the border of Handan fell one after another. The court was very worried, so they let Handan be the envoy, the governor of the East to discuss with the military and General Anton, and Shang still held the post of secretary.

古文：世宗劳遣峦于东堂曰： 萧衍寇边，旬朔滋甚，诸军舛互，规致连戍陷没，宋鲁之民尤罹汤炭。
现代文：魏世宗慰劳遣送邢峦于东堂说： 萧衍犯我边境，越来越肆无忌惮，诸军相互抵触，以致许多边关连连失守。宋、鲁之地人民尤遭苦难。
English: Wei Shizong consoled and repatriated Xing in Dongtang and said: Xiao Yan violated our border more and more brazenly, and the armies clashed with each other, so that many border posts were lost one after another. The people of Song and Lu suffered particularly.

古文：诚知将军旋京未久，膝下难违，然东南之寄，非将军莫可。
现代文：朕诚知将军刚刚还京，家事难违，然而东南之事，非将军不行。
English: I sincerely know that the general has just returned to Beijing, and family affairs are hard to resist, but in southeastern affairs, it is not possible to be a general.

古文：将军其勉建殊绩，以称朕怀，自古忠臣亦非无孝也。 
现代文：将军再建大功，以称朕怀，自古以来忠臣也非无孝。 
English: The general has made great contributions to the reconstruction of the country, to which I would like to pay tribute. Since ancient times, his loyal subjects have not been without filial piety.

古文：峦对曰： 贼虽送死连城，犬羊众盛，然逆顺理殊，灭当无远。
现代文：邢峦回答说： 敌人虽然送死连城，人数也多，但逆顺之理不同，灭除敌人当为期不远。
English: Zhai replied: Although the enemy has killed many people, the number is also large, but the reason is different. The enemy should be eliminated in a short period of time.

古文：况臣仗陛下之神算，奉律以摧之，平殄之期可指辰而待。愿陛下勿以东南为虑。 
现代文：何况为臣凭仗陛下神机妙算，奉律以摧之，平定之期可指日而待，臣希望陛下不要为东南过分忧虑。 
English: What's more, for the vassal, by virtue of the war, His Majesty's divine cunning and calculation, and by obeying the rules to destroy it, the period of pacification can be expected. The vassal hopes that His Majesty will not worry too much about Southeast Asia.

古文：世宗曰： 汉祖有云 金吾击郾，吾无忧矣 。今将军董戎，朕何虑哉。 
现代文：魏世宗说： 汉祖有话说 金吾击郾，我无忧虑了 ，而今将军主管战事，朕还有什么可担心的呢。 
English: Wei Shizong said, "The Han Emperor had a saying, 'If I strike gold, I have nothing to worry about,' but now that a general is in charge of the war, what do I have to worry about?"

古文：先是，萧衍辅国将军萧及先率众二万，寇陷固城；冠军将军鲁显文、骁骑将军相文玉等率众一万，屯于孤山；衍将角念等率众一万，扰乱龟蒙，土民从逆，十室而五。
现代文：这以前，萧衍辅国将军萧及先率领人马二万，侵犯攻陷固城；冠军将军鲁显文、骁骑将军相文玉等率人马一万，驻守孤山；萧衍将领角念等人率领一万人马，扰乱龟蒙。老百姓归顺逆贼的，十中有五。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan's subordinate general Xiao and others led 20,000 men and horses to invade and capture the fortified city; champion general Lu Xianwen, cavalry general Xiang Wenyu and others led 10,000 men and horses to guard the lonely mountain; Xiao Yan led 10,000 men and horses to disturb the tortoise and the hare. Five out of ten people surrendered to the traitors.

古文：峦遣统军樊鲁讨文玉，别将元恆攻固城，统军毕祖朽讨角念。
现代文：邢峦派统军樊鲁讨伐文玉，别将元恒攻打固城，统军毕祖朽讨伐角念。
English: Zou sent the unified army of Jielu to fight against Wenyu. Don't attack Yuanheng and fortify the city. The unified army should fight against Bizu.

古文：樊鲁大破文玉等，追奔八十余里，斩首四千余级。
现代文：樊鲁大破文玉等人，追奔八十多里，斩敌四千多人。
English: Jialu defeated Wenyu and others, ran more than eighty miles, and killed more than four thousand enemies.

古文：元恆又破固城，毕祖朽复破念等，兗州悉平。
现代文：元恒又攻破固城，毕祖巧破角念等人，兖州尽被平定。
English: Yuan Heng also broke through Gucheng, Bi Zu skillfully broke through Jiao Nian and others, and Zhangzhou was completely subdued.

古文：峦破贼将蓝怀恭于睢口，进围宿豫。
现代文：邢峦在睢口大破敌将蓝怀恭，进围宿豫。
English: The dragonfly broke through the enemy at the mouth of the river, and the dragonfly flew into the enclosure.

古文：而怀恭等复于淮南造城，规断水陆之路。
现代文：而蓝怀恭等人又在清水南岸造城，切断水陆之路。
English: Meanwhile, Lan Huaiqong and others built a city on the south bank of the Clear Water, cutting off the land and water routes.

古文：峦身率诸军，自水南而进，遣平南将军杨大眼从北逼之，统军刘思祖等夹水造筏，烧其船舫。
现代文：邢峦亲率诸路军马，从水南挺进，派平南将军杨大眼从北面逼迫敌人，统军刘思祖等人夹水造筏，烧毁其船只。
English: Qian Qian led an army of horses and chariots to advance from the south of the water. He sent the general of Pingnan Province, Yang Dajian, to pursue the enemy from the north. Liu Sizu and other members of the united army made their way across the water and burned their ships.

古文：众军齐进，拔栅填堑，登其城。
现代文：各路军马一齐进击，拔栅木填起壕堑，登上敌城。
English: The horses of all the armies marched into the city at the same time, pulled up the trees, filled in the trenches, and ascended the enemy city.

古文：火起中流，四面俱击，仍陷贼城，俘斩数万。
现代文：火起中流，四面齐攻，陷落敌城，俘斩数万。
English: The fire started in the middle of the stream, attacked on all sides, felled the enemy city, and captured and killed tens of thousands.

古文：在陈别斩怀恭，擒其列侯、列将、直阁、直后三十余人，俘斩一万。
现代文：在阵别斩蓝怀恭，抓获他的列侯、列将、直、直后三十多人，俘获斩杀敌人一万。
English: He killed Lan Huaiqing at the front, and captured more than 30 people including his vassals, generals, and vassals, and killed and captured 10,000 enemies.

古文：宿豫既平，萧昞亦于淮阳退走，二戍获米四十余万石。
现代文：宿豫既平之后，董日丙也从淮阳退走，两关共获得米粮四十多万担。
English: After Sukuyuan was leveled, Dong Rihe also retreated from Huaiyang, and the two gates received a total of more than 400,000 catties of rice.

古文：世宗赐峦玺书曰： 知大龛丑虏，威振贼庭，淮外雾披，徐方卷蹠，王略远恢，混一维始，公私庆泰，何快如之！
现代文：世宗赐邢峦玺书说： 得知大平丑虏，威震贼庭，威披淮河以外，席卷徐州一方，为王大略远大恢弘，统一大业正在起步，公私庆泰，是何等畅快！
English: The Emperor's Letter of Commendation said: How delightful it is to learn that Daping is ugly, tremendously corrupt, tremendously beyond the Huai River, sweeping across the Xuzhou side, for Wang Dajiao is far-reaching and magnificent, the great cause of unification is taking off, and public and private celebration is high!

古文：贼衍此举，实为倾国。
现代文：贼敌萧衍这一举动，实是倾其国有。
English: This move by the bandit enemy Xiao Yan is actually a move to nationalize the country.

古文：比者宿豫陷殁，淮阳婴城，凶狡侜张，规抗王旅。
现代文：前者宿豫沦陷，淮阳遭戮，敌人气焰嚣张，竟然抵抗王旅。
English: In the former, Suyuan fell, Huaiyang was slaughtered, and the enemy was so arrogant that they even resisted Wang Liao.

古文：将军忠规协著，火烈霜摧，电动岱阴，风扫沂峄。遂令逋诛之寇，一朝歼夷；元鲸大憝，千里折首。
现代文：将军忠诚我魏，弘韬大略，火烈霜摧，电动岱阴，风扫沂、峄，遂让逃诛之寇，一朝歼灭；元凶大恶，千里折首。
English: The general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me, the general is loyal to me.

古文：殊勋茂捷，自古莫二。
现代文：将军您的殊功茂捷，自古无二。
English: General, your great achievements are unparalleled in history.

古文：但扬区未安，余烬宜荡，乘胜掎角，势不可遗。
现代文：然而扬州未安，余烬应该扑灭，乘胜犄角，势不可遗。
English: However, Yangzhou is not yet stable, the embers should be extinguished, take advantage of the victory, the momentum is inexhaustible.

古文：便可率厉三军，因时经略，申威东南，清彼江介，忘此仍劳，用图永逸，进退规度，委之高算。 
现代文：将军您可率领三军，因时图谋，申信威风于东南，清扫长江之表，朕望卿不辞劳苦，以图长远，进退攻否，全由将军掌握。 
English: General, you can lead the three armies, make plans according to the time, express confidence in the southeast, sweep the table of the Yangtze River, I hope you will spare no effort to make a long-term plan, and whether to advance or retreat is all controlled by the general.

古文：又诏峦曰： 淮阳、宿豫虽已清复，梁城之贼，犹敢聚结。事宜乘胜，并势摧殄。
现代文：又下诏书给邢峦说： 淮阳、宿豫虽然已经平定，但梁城的敌人，还在疯狂集结，事宜乘胜追击，一鼓作气地摧毁他们。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to Yu, saying: Although Huaiyang and Sukuyuan have been pacified, the enemies of Liangcheng are still frantically assembling, taking advantage of the situation to pursue and destroy them.

古文：可率二万之众渡淮，与征南掎角，以图进取之计。 
现代文：你可率二万人马渡过淮河，与征南部队结成犄角之势，以图剿灭之计。 
English: You can lead twenty thousand people across the Huaihe River and form an uneasy alliance with the Southern Expeditionary Force in an attempt to defeat them.

古文：及梁城贼走，中山王英乘胜攻钟离，又诏峦帅众会之。峦表曰： 奉彼诏旨：令臣济淮与征南掎角，乘胜长驱，实是其会。
现代文：等到梁城敌人败走，中山王英乘胜攻打钟离，皇帝又下诏让邢峦率领人马与之会合，邢峦上表说： 奉圣上诏书，令臣渡淮河与征南结成犄角之势，乘势长驱敌境，臣很荣幸。
English: When Liangcheng's enemies were defeated and Liangcheng's enemies fled, Zhongshan Wang Ying took advantage of the victory to attack Zhongli, and the emperor issued an edict to let Zou lead the troops to meet with him. The edict said: "According to the sacred edict, it is a great honor for the minister to cross the Huaihe River and conquer the south, and take advantage of the situation to drive the enemy away.

古文：但愚怀所量，窃有未尽。
现代文：但愚臣心中有话，也应申述。
English: But if a fool has something to say, he should say it.

古文：夫图南因于积风，伐国在于资给，用兵治戎，须先计校。
现代文：大凡图取南方在于声势，攻打它国在于粮草兵械的供给，用兵打仗，必须先考虑这些问题。
English: If you want to conquer the south, you must first consider these issues. If you want to attack another country, you must first consider the supply of grain, grass and weapons, and the use of soldiers.

古文：非可抑为必胜，幸其无能。
现代文：不是因可以觉得一定会获胜，就对军需的无力供给心存侥幸。
English: It is not because we can feel that we will win that we are taking a chance on the inability to supply the military needs.

古文：若欲掠地诛民，必应万胜；如欲攻城取邑，未见其果。
现代文：如想占地诛民，必然应该万胜；如果攻取城池，不见得能达到效果。
English: If you want to occupy land and subdue the people, you must win; if you capture the city, you may not be able to achieve results.

古文：得之则所益未几，不获则亏损必大。萧衍倾竭江东，为今岁之举，疲兵丧众，大败而还，君臣失计，取笑天下。
现代文：得到了那所增加的力量不见得有多大，而不能得到则亏损的必定很大，萧衍倾出江东所有人力物力，采取今年的侵略行动，疲劳兵士，丧失民众，结果大败而还。君臣失算，大败而归，被天下人所取笑。
English: Those who have gained the increased strength are not necessarily great, but those who cannot gain it will certainly lose a lot. Xiao Yan poured out all the manpower and material resources of Jiangdong to take this year's invasion action, tired soldiers, lost the people, and as a result was defeated. Monarchs and ministers lost their way, were defeated, and were made fun of by the people of the world.

古文：虽野战非人敌，守城足有余，今虽攻之，未易可克。
现代文：而今他们野战敌不过我魏，但守据城池则足足有余，今天攻打他们，不一定能够拿下。
English: But now they are no match for us in the field, but they are more than capable of defending the castle. If we attack them today, we may not be able to win.

古文：又广陵悬远，去江四十里；钟离、淮阴介在淮外，假其归顺而来，犹恐无粮艰守；况加攻讨，劳兵士乎？
现代文：又广陵地处遥远，离长江四十里，钟离、淮阴都在淮河以南，假如他们归顺我魏，臣仍担心无粮据守，更何况而今加以攻打讨伐，劳累士兵呢？
English: Guangling is also far away, forty miles from the Yangtze River, Zhongli and Huaiyin are both south of the Huaihe River. If they surrender to Wei, the minister is still worried about having no grain to defend, let alone attacking and fighting them now, and tiring the soldiers?

古文：且征南军士从戎二时，疲弊死病，量可知已。
现代文：而且征讨南方的士兵已经打了很长时间的仗，疲劳怠惫，战死生病的已经不少，我们也应心中有数。
English: Moreover, the soldiers who have been fighting to conquer the south have been fighting for a long time. There are already many who are tired, lazy, and sick to death, and we should be aware of this.

古文：虽有乘胜之资，惧无远用之力。
现代文：而今虽然有乘胜追出的气势，但为臣担心无远涉打仗的力量了。
English: And now, although there is a momentum of chasing victory, the vassal is worried about the strength of the far-reaching war.

古文：若臣之愚见，谓宜修复旧戍，牢实边方，息养中州，拟之后举。
现代文：依为臣的愚见，臣以为应该修整兵力，巩固边防，息养中州之民，以后再图攻取为上。
English: According to the foolish view of the vassal, the vassal thought that it was necessary to improve the military strength, consolidate the border defense, and nurture the people of Zhongzhou, and then try to conquer them in the future.

古文：又江东之衅，不患久无，畜力待机，谓为胜计。 
现代文：又江东的破绽，不怕其长久不出现，我们养蓄兵力，等待时机，就一定能取得胜利。 
English: If we do not fear that the trouble in the east of the Yangtze River will not appear for a long time, we will build up our forces and wait for the right time, and we will surely achieve victory.

古文：诏曰： 济淮掎角，事如前敕。何容犹尔盘桓，方有此请！
现代文：皇帝诏书说： 济淮犄角，事如前番所敕，不许犹犹豫豫，以致又上这样的疏请！
English: The Emperor's edict said, "As things have been going well, do not hesitate to make such an invitation again!

古文：可速进军，经略之宜听征南至要。 
现代文：迅速进军，一切大计以征伐南方为第一要务。 
English: Rapidly march into the army, and make the conquest of the south the first priority in all plans.

古文：峦又表曰： 萧衍侵境，久劳王师，今者奔走，实除边患。斯由灵赞皇魏，天败寇竖，非臣等弱劣所能克胜。
现代文：邢峦又上表说： 萧衍侵犯我魏边境，已久劳我王兵马，而今逃走，实是除却皇魏边患，这是由于神灵辅赞我皇魏，上天要败贼寇，不是为臣等愚笨的力量所能做到的。
English: Zou also said on the table: Xiao Yan violated our Wei border, has long worked my king soldiers and horses, and now fled, in fact, is to remove the imperial Wei border, this is because the gods supported my emperor Wei, the heavens want to defeat the bandits, not for the vassals and other stupid forces can do it.

古文：若臣之愚见，今正宜修复边镇，俟之后动。
现代文：依为臣的愚见，今天正应该修复边镇，等待时机，然后行动。
English: According to the minister's stupid opinion, today is the day to repair the border town, wait for the opportunity, and then act.

古文：且萧衍尚在，凶身未除，螳螂之志，何能自息。
现代文：而且萧衍还在，凶首未除，他的螳螂之志，怎能自得息除。
English: Moreover, Xiao Yan is still there, his evil head has not been removed, his cockroach's will, how can he get rid of it?

古文：唯应广备以待其来，实不宜劳师远入，自取疲困。
现代文：我们所能做的只是充分准备以备其来，实在不该劳师远入，自取疲乏困惫。
English: All we can do is to fully prepare for it. We really shouldn't go to great lengths to exhaust ourselves.

古文：今中山进军钟离，实所未解。若能为得失之计，不顾万全，直袭广陵，入其内地，出其不备，或未可知。
现代文：而今中山进军钟离，实是为臣不能理解的，如能权衡得失，孤注一掷，直袭广陵，进入萧衍内地，出其不备，也许还能获胜。
English: Now that Zhongshan is marching into Zhongli, it is really incomprehensible for a vassal. If you can weigh the gains and losses, make a desperate bet, directly attack Guangling and enter Xiaoyan inland, if you are not prepared, you may still win.

古文：正欲屯兵，萧密余军犹自在彼；欲言无粮，运船复至。
现代文：而今正想屯兵，萧密残部仍在钟离；他们只要没有粮草，运粮船只很快就到了。
English: But now they want to garrison, the remnants of Xiao Mi are still far away; as long as they do not have grain and grass, grain ships will soon arrive.

古文：而欲以八十日粮图城者，臣未之前闻。
现代文：而我军想以八十天的军粮去攻取敌人城池，为臣还没有听说过。
English: And our army wants to use eighty days of rations to capture the enemy's castle, which the minister has not heard of.

古文：且广陵、任城可为前戒，岂容今者复欲同之？
现代文：况且广陵、任城可为前车之鉴，哪里还能允许今天重蹈复辙。
English: Moreover, Guangling and Rencheng can serve as a model for the future, where else can we allow today to repeat the same mistakes.

古文：今若往也，彼牢城自守，不与人战，城堑水深，非可填塞，空坐至春，则士自敝苦。
现代文：现在如前去，敌人固城自守，不与我接战，城壕水深，不是轻易可以填塞起来的，我军空坐到来年春天，那就会让士兵不胜劳疲。
English: Now we are moving forward, the enemy is entrenched and defending itself, and will not engage me, the trenches are deep and cannot be easily filled, and our army will be sitting empty in the spring of next year, which will exhaust the soldiers.

古文：遣臣赴彼，粮何以致？
现代文：派为臣到那里，粮草怎样运输？
English: How will the grain and grass be transported?

古文：夏来之兵，不赍冬服，脱遇冰雪，取济何方？
现代文：夏天的士兵，都没准备冬天的服装，如遇上冰雪天气，到哪里去取冬装？
English: Summer soldiers are not prepared for winter clothing. If there is snow and ice, where will they get winter clothing?

古文：臣宁荷怯懦不进之责，不受败损空行之罪。
现代文：为臣宁愿背上胆小怕事、不敢进攻的罪责，也不愿遭受败军损兵空劳远行的罪名。
English: I would rather bear the responsibility of cowardice and not dare to move forward, rather than accept the failure and injury, the crime of acting in vain.

古文：钟离天险，朝贵所具，若有内应，则所不知，如其无也，必无克状。
现代文：钟离天险之地，是朝廷显贵都知道的；如有内应，则是为臣不能预料，如无内应，必定拿不下来。
English: The clock is far away from the place of natural danger, which is known to the dignitaries of the imperial court. If there is an inner response, it cannot be anticipated by the vassal, and if there is no inner response, it will certainly not be taken down.

古文：若其不复，其辱如何！
现代文：如果拿不下来，那将受到什么样的耻辱！
English: If we don't take it down, what a disgrace it will be!

古文：若信臣言也，愿赐臣停；若谓臣难行，求回臣所领兵统，悉付中山，任其处分，臣求单骑随逐东西。
现代文：陛下如果相信为臣之言，诚望让臣停止进攻；如果说臣不愿前去，为臣所统领的人马都交给中山指挥，任其调度，为臣请求单骑随之驱逐东西。
English: If His Majesty believed the words of the vassal, he sincerely hoped that the vassal would stop the attack; if the vassal did not want to go, the vassal would hand over all the men and horses under his command to the command of Zhongshan, allow him to dispatch, and request the vassal to ride alone to drive out the enemy.

古文：且俗谚云，耕则问田奴，绢则问织婢。
现代文：而且有谚语说，耕种的事问农人，布匹的活找织妇。
English: Moreover, there is a saying that farmers should be asked about farming, and weavers should be asked about weaving.

古文：臣虽不武，忝备征将，前宜可否，颇实知之。臣既谓难，何容强遣？ 
现代文：为臣虽然谈不上武人，然而忝居征将之位，对战场情况可否，还是知道一些，为臣既然说很难办到，岂容一再强遣。 
English: As a vassal, although he is not a warrior, he still knows something about the situation on the battlefield, and since it is said to be difficult for a vassal to do so, he will not tolerate repeated coercion.

古文：诏曰： 安东频请罢军，迟回未往，阻异戎规，殊乖至望。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 安东将军频请还军，犹豫不前，破坏军队规矩，辜负朕的殷切期望。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: General Anton frequently asked to return to the army, hesitated, destroyed the army rules, and failed to live up to my ardent expectations.

古文：士马既殷，无容停积，宜务神速，东西齐契，乘胜扫殄，以赴机会。 
现代文：兵马既已蓄势，不容再听停辍，而应火速赴敌，东西合击，乘胜扫敌，争取时机，以获胜利。 
English: Now that the troops and horses have gained momentum, it is no longer acceptable to wait and see. Instead, they should go to the enemy at full speed, strike east and west together, take advantage of the victory to sweep away the enemy, and strive for the opportunity to win victory.

古文：峦累表求还，世宗许之。
现代文：邢峦屡屡上表请求还朝，魏世宗答应了。
English: Wei Shizong agreed to the emperor's repeated request to return the table.

古文：英果败退，时人伏其识略。
现代文：中山王元英果然大败而归，当时人都很佩服邢峦的远见卓识。
English: Yuan Ying was defeated. At that time, people admired his insight and strategy.

古文：初，侍中卢昶与峦不平。昶与元晖俱世宗所宠，御史中尉崔亮，昶之党也。
现代文：当初，侍中卢昶与邢峦有矛盾，卢昶与元晖都受到世宗的宠幸，御史中尉崔亮，与邢峦同伙。
English: At first, there was a conflict between the chamberlains, Lu Wei and Zou. Lu Wei and Yuan Zou were both favored by Shizong, and Gu Shi's lieutenant, Cui Liang, was a comrade of Zou.

古文：昶、晖令亮纠峦，事成，许言于世宗以亮为侍中。
现代文：卢昶与元晖要崔亮弹劾邢峦，许诺说事成之后在世宗那里推荐他为侍中。
English: Lu Ye and Yuan Ye asked Cui Liang to impeach Yao, promising to recommend him to Sejong as an attendant after the matter was settled.

古文：亮于是奏劾峦在汉中掠良人为奴婢。
现代文：崔亮于是启奏说邢峦在汉中时掠夺平民为奴婢。
English: Cui Liang then opened his speech by saying that when he was in the Han Dynasty, he plundered civilians as slaves.

古文：峦惧为昶等所陷，乃以汉中所得巴西太守庞景民女化生等二十余口与晖。
现代文：邢峦害怕被卢昶等人陷害，于是让在汉中时所得到的巴西太守庞景民的女儿化生等二十多人给元晖。
English: He was afraid of being set up by Lu Xun and others, so he let the daughter of the Brazilian governor, Pang Jingmin, whom he got when he was in the Han Dynasty, give birth to more than twenty people to Yuan Xuan.

古文：化生等数人，奇色也，晖大悦，乃背昶为峦言于世宗云： 峦新有大功，已经赦宥，不宜方为此狱也。 
现代文：化生等人，容貌奇美，元晖得到之后，大为高兴，于是背着卢昶在魏世宗面前为邢峦说话： 邢峦新近立有大功，已经赦免其过，不应再把他关到牢里去了。 
English: After the Yuan Shao was obtained, Hua Sheng and the others, with their wonderful appearance, were very happy, so they spoke for the Shao in front of Wei Shizong behind Lu Shao's back: "The Shao has recently made great contributions, has been pardoned, and should no longer be put in prison."

古文：世宗纳之。
现代文：世宗接受了这个意见。
English: Sejong accepted the suggestion.

古文：高肇以峦有克敌之效，而为昶等所排，助峦申释，故得不坐。
现代文：高肇因邢峦有克敌之功，却被卢昶等人排挤，也为邢峦申诉，所以邢峦免于处分。
English: Gao Zhao was exempted from disciplinary action because he had the merit of defeating the enemy, but was ousted by Lu Yao and others, and also because of his appeal.

古文：豫州城民白早生杀刺史司马悦，以城南入，萧衍遣其冠军将军齐苟仁率众入据悬瓠。
现代文：豫州城民白早生杀了刺史司马悦，以该城投归南方，萧衍派他的冠军将军齐苟仁率领人马据入悬瓠城。
English: The citizens of the city of Yuzhou killed the assassin Sima Yue at an early age, and used the city to return to the south. Xiao Yan sent his champion general Qi Guoren to lead the troops into the city.

古文：诏峦持节率羽林精骑以讨之，封平舒县开国伯，食邑五百户，赏宿豫之功也。
现代文：皇帝下诏邢峦持节率领羽林精锐部队讨伐他们。封他为平舒县开国伯，食邑五百户，犒赏他宿豫城立下的战功。
English: Emperor Zhaozhong Jichijie led the elite troops of Ulin to fight them. He was named the founding father of Pingshu County and 500 households of food villages, and was awarded for his war service in establishing Suyu City.

古文：世宗临东堂，劳遣峦曰： 司马悦不慎重门之戒，智不足以谋身，匪直丧元隶贤，乃大亏王略。
现代文：世宗亲临东堂，劳慰邢峦说： 司马悦不慎重门之戒，智力不足以为身谋，非但丧失黎民百姓，而且大亏皇魏王略。
English: Sejong himself came to the East Hall and comforted the emperor, saying, "Sima Yue was not prudent enough to keep the precepts of the gate, and his intelligence was not enough to be a strategist. Not only did he lose the people of Lai, but he also greatly failed the Emperor Wei.

古文：悬瓠密迩近畿，东南籓捍，兼云□公在彼，忧虑尤深。
现代文：悬瓠与京畿近在咫尺，为帝都东南屏障，朕度公之在彼，忧虑更深。
English: The suspension bridge is close to Gyeonggi, it is the southeastern barrier of the imperial capital, and I am deeply concerned about it.

古文：早生理不独立，必远引吴楚，士民同恶，势或交兵。
现代文：早生不能独自为阵，必定远引吴、楚势力，官民同时趋恶，交兵势在必行。
English: Premature birth cannot fight alone, and the forces of Wu and Chu must be drawn far away. The government and the people will simultaneously become evil, and a military engagement is imperative.

古文：卿文昭武烈，朝之南仲，故令卿星言电迈，出其不意。
现代文：爱卿你文昭武烈，是我朝之南仲，所以朕令你风驰电掣，攻其不意。
English: Aicheng, you are a famous writer and a martial artist, and you are the Southern Zhong of my dynasty, so I let you ride the wind and storm, and attack it unexpectedly.

古文：卿言早生走也守也？
现代文：卿你说说早生是弃城而逃还是戮力守城？
English: My lord, did you say that you were born too early and fled the city or fought to defend it?

古文：何时可以平之？ 
现代文：我们何时可以平定？ 
English: When will we be able to calm down?

古文：峦对曰： 早生非有深谋大智。能构成此也，但因司马悦虐于百姓，乘众怒而为之，民为凶威所慑，不得已而苟附。
现代文：邢峦回答说： 早生并不是有什么深谋大略而走出今天这一步，只是因为司马悦残暴地对待老百姓，他乘众怒而杀了司马，老百姓则被凶威所震慑，不得已而暂且苟附罢了。
English: Zou replied, "It is not because I was born prematurely that I took this step today. It is just because Sima Yue treated the common people cruelly. He took advantage of the anger of the people and killed Sima. The common people were shocked by the ferocity and had no choice but to temporarily acquiesce.

古文：假萧衍军入应，水路不通，粮运不继，亦成擒耳，不能为害也。
现代文：如萧衍军队入城接应，水路不通，粮草运输接不上，也是成为被我擒拿之势，不能造成什么危害。
English: If Xiao Yan's army enters the city to respond, the waterway is impassable, and the grain and grass transportation cannot be connected, it will also become the trend of being captured by us, and can not cause any harm.

古文：早生得衍军之接，溺于利欲之情，必守而不走。
现代文：而早生得到萧衍军队的接应，耽于利欲之情，必然会固守而不肯离开。
English: However, since he was accepted by the Xiao Yan army at an early age and indulged in greed, he would inevitably stick to it and refuse to leave.

古文：今王师若临，士民必翻然归顺。
现代文：而今王师如到，士民必然会翻然归顺。
English: But now that Wang Shi has arrived, the scholars and the people will inevitably surrender.

古文：围之穷城，奔走路绝，不度此年，必传首京师。
现代文：我们围攻穷守之城，敌人奔走无路，不过今年，我们必定会传敌人的头颅于京师。
English: We are besieging a desperately defended city, the enemy is running out of road, but this year, we will certainly hand over the enemy's head to the Beijing division.

古文：愿陛下不足垂虑。 
现代文：愿陛下不必多虑。 
English: Your Majesty need not worry.

古文：世宗笑曰： 卿言何其壮哉！
现代文：世宗笑着说： 你的话是何等气壮！
English: Sejong smiled and said, "How powerful your words are!

古文：深会朕遣卿之意。
现代文：深明朕送你之意。
English: I send you my best wishes.

古文：知卿亲老，颇劳于外，然忠孝不俱，才宜救世，不得辞也。 
现代文：朕知道你双亲已老，而你频繁在外辛劳，然而忠孝不能两全，卿才足以救世，不得再行推辞了。 
English: I know that your parents are old, and you often work hard outside. However, loyalty and filial piety cannot be two different things. Being a gentleman is enough to save the world, and there is no need to apologize.

古文：于是峦率骑八百，倍道兼行，五日次于鲍口。
现代文：于是邢峦率领骑兵八百，日夜兼程，五天就到了鲍口。
English: So Shun led 800 cavalrymen on a day-and-night journey that took five days to reach Baokou.

古文：贼遣大将军胡孝智率众七千，去城二百，逆来拒战。
现代文：敌人派大将军胡孝智率军七千，离城二百里，前来迎战。
English: The enemy sent General Hu Xiaozhi with an army of seven thousand, two hundred miles away from the city, to meet the battle.

古文：峦击破孝智，乘胜长驱，至于悬瓠。
现代文：邢峦攻击打败胡孝智，乘胜长驱直入，到了悬瓠。
English: attack to defeat Hu Xiao Zhi, take advantage of the victory to drive straight in, to the hanging anchor.

古文：贼出城逆战，又大破之，因即渡汝。
现代文：敌人出城迎战，邢峦又大破敌军，因而接着渡过汝河。
English: The enemy came out of the city to meet the battle, and they defeated the enemy army, so they continued to cross the Ye River.

古文：既而大兵继至，遂长围之。
现代文：紧接着大兵继至，于是把敌人团团围了起来。
English: Immediately after, the soldiers arrived and surrounded the enemy.

古文：诏加峦使持节、假镇南将军、都督南讨诸军事。
现代文：皇帝下诏让邢峦为使持节、假镇南将军、都督南讨诸军事。
English: The emperor issued an edict to designate the day as the Festival of Envoys, and the generals of Fuzhen and Nan, as well as the governor of Nan, were drafted into the military.

古文：征南将军、中山王英南讨三关，亦次于悬瓠，以后军未至，前寇稍多，惮不敢进，乃与峦分兵掎角攻之。
现代文：征南将军、中山王元英南讨三关，也驻军悬瓠，因后军未到，前敌较多，害怕起来，不敢前进，于是与邢峦分兵结成犄角攻击敌人。
English: The general of the Southern Expedition, Zhongshan Wang Yuan Ying, went to the south to discuss the Three Passes, and the garrison was also suspended. Because the rear army did not arrive, there were more former enemies, they were afraid and did not dare to advance, so they formed a triangle with the soldiers of the division to attack the enemy.

古文：衍将齐苟仁等二十一人开门出降，即斩早生等同恶数十人。
现代文：萧衍将领齐苟仁等二十一人开门投降，邢峦斩了早生等同党数十人。
English: Twenty-one people, including Xiao Yan's general Qi Guoren, opened the door and surrendered, and dozens of party members, including those who were born prematurely, were beheaded.

古文：豫州平，峦振旅还京师。
现代文：豫州平定，邢峦率军返回京城。
English: Yuzhou was pacified, and he and his army returned to Beijing.

古文：世宗临东堂劳之曰： 卿役不逾时，克清妖丑，鸿勋硕美，可谓无愧古人。 
现代文：世宗亲临东堂慰劳他，说： 爱卿此番没有多久，就剿灭妖丑，鸿勋硕美，可以说是无愧古人。 
English: Sejong himself came to the East Hall to console him, saying, "Ai Ching, it didn't take long for him to vanquish the demons and monsters. He was a great warrior and a great beauty, and can be said to be a worthy ancient.

古文：峦对曰： 此自陛下圣略威灵，英等将士之力，臣何功之有。 
现代文：邢峦回答说： 这出自陛下的圣略威灵，元英等将士之力，为臣何功之有。 
English: Zou replied, "This comes from the power of your majesty's generals, Yuan Ying and others, who have done so much for their subjects.

古文：世宗笑曰： 卿匪直一月三捷，所足称奇，乃存士伯，欲功成而不处。 
现代文：世宗笑着说： 爱卿不只是一月三捷，足以称奇，功绩永著士宦之中，还想有功而不居。 
English: With a smile, Sejong said, "Aikyo is not only remarkable for his three victories in one month. His achievements are forever enshrined in history, but he also wants to be recognized for his merits.

古文：峦自宿豫大捷，及平悬瓠，志行修正，不复以财贿为怀。戎资军实，丝毫无犯。
现代文：邢峦自宿豫大捷，到平定悬瓠，志行修正，不再以财宝贿赂为怀，戎资军需丝毫无犯。
English: From self-sufficiency to great success, from victory to defeat, from self-improvement to correction, no longer relying on treasure and bribery, from military financing to military procurement, there is no crime.

古文：迁殿中尚书，加抚军将军。
现代文：迁任殿中尚书，加授抚军将军。
English: He was appointed to the post of courtier, and later promoted to the rank of general.

古文：延昌三年，暴疾卒，年五十一。
现代文：延昌三年，暴病而亡，享年五十一岁。
English: Yanchang three years, died of a violent illness, aged fifty-one.

古文：长子臧，在《文苑传》。
现代文：邢峦才兼文武，享誉朝野，死后，上上下下都十分痛惜。
English: He was a man of great talent, both literary and military, and was renowned in the court and the palace. After his death, everyone was very sorry for him.

古文：臧弟子才，武定末，太常卿。
现代文：皇帝下诏赐帛四百匹，朝服一套，赠车骑大将军、瀛州刺史。
English: The emperor issued an edict to bestow 400 yakitori, a set of imperial robes, a free carriage ride for the general, and a history of the state of Zhangzhou.

古文：虬从子策，亦有才学。卒于齐王仪同开府主簿。
现代文：当初，世宗想赠官冀州，但黄门甄琛因邢峦以前曾弹劾自己，于是说： 瀛州是邢峦的本邦，人心所向，应赠本州。 
English: At first, Shizong wanted to give away the official Jizhou, but Huangmen Zhen, who had previously impeached himself, said, "Jizhou is my home state. Whatever my heart desires, I should give away my home state."

古文：李平，字昙定，顿丘人也，彭城王嶷之长子。
现代文：皇帝听了他的意见。到甄琛拟诏书，于是说 优赠车骑将军、瀛州刺吏 ，谈论的人都笑甄琛的浅薄。谥称文定。李平，字昙定，顿丘人，彭城王李嶷的长子。
English: The emperor listened to his opinion. He went to Zhenya to draft an edict, and said, "You should give the general a chariot and cavalry, and Zhengzhou an assassin," and everyone laughed at Zhenya's shallowness. Zhenya is called Wending. Li Ping, Zhe Yu Ding, Dongqiu people, the eldest son of Pengcheng King Li Yu.

古文：少有大度。
现代文：少年即有大度。
English: The boy is generous.

古文：及长，涉猎群书，好《礼》、《易》，颇有文才。
现代文：等到长大，涉猎群书，喜好《礼》、《易》，很有文才。
English: When he grew up, he read a lot of books. He liked "Li" and "Yi" and was very talented in literature.

古文：太和初，拜通直散骑侍郎，高祖礼之甚重。
现代文：太和初年，朝廷拜授其为通直散骑侍郎，高祖待他的礼节相当厚重。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, the Imperial Court conferred on him the title of Tsuchida Sanzhijirō, and Emperor Gaozu treated him with great courtesy.

古文：频经大忧，居丧以孝称。
现代文：李平频历大丧，居丧以孝称。
English: Li Ping often experienced great sorrow, and his mourning was called filial piety.

古文：后以例降，袭爵彭城公。
现代文：后来以例降爵为彭城公。
English: After growing up, he read a lot of books, liked the "Book of Rites" and the "Book of Changes," and was very literate.

古文：拜太子中舍人，迁散骑侍郎，舍人如故，迁太子中庶子。
现代文：拜授太子中舍人，迁任散骑侍郎，舍人官职照旧，迁任太子中庶子。
English: The prince's junior vassal was conferred the title of crown prince and transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, while the vassal's official position remained the same, and the prince's junior illegitimate son was transferred to the same position.

古文：平因侍从容请自效一郡，高祖曰： 卿复欲以吏事自试也。 
现代文：李平乘着侍从的机会从容请求治理一郡，高祖说： 卿你也想在吏事上试试了。 
English: Li Ping took the opportunity of the attendant to calmly request the governance of a county. Gao Zu said: Sir, you also want to try your hand at being an official.

古文：拜长乐太守，政务清静，吏民怀之。
现代文：拜授他为长乐太守，任上，政务清静，吏民归心。
English: He was given the title of Changle Taishu (governor-general of Changle), and after taking office, the government affairs were calm, and the officials and people were reconciled.

古文：车驾南伐，以平兼冀州仪同开府长史，甚著声称，仍除正长史，太守如故。
现代文：皇帝车驾南征，任李平兼冀州仪同开府长史，很有政绩，又除正长史，太守官职照旧。
English: The emperor drove southward, and appointed Li Ping and Jizhou Yi Tong as prefectural governors, with great political achievements. In addition to the long history, the position of the governor remained unchanged.

古文：未几，遂行河南尹，豪右权贵惮之。
现代文：没多久，便行河南尹，权贵豪绅都很怕他。
English: It didn't take long before he became known as Henan Yin, and the powerful and wealthy feared him.

古文：世宗即位，除黄门郎，迁司徒左长史，行尹如故。寻以称职正尹，长史如故。
现代文：世宗即位，升任司徒左长史，行尹职务仍旧。不久以称转正尹，长史如故。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the position of Siddhu Zuo Changshi, and continued to perform the duties of Yin. Soon he was called Zheng Yin, and Changshi remained the same.

古文：车驾将幸鄴，平上表谏曰： 伏见己丑诏书，云轩銮辂，行幸有期，凤服龙骖，克驾近日。
现代文：皇帝车驾准备到邺城，李平上表疏谏： 臣伏见己丑时的诏书，皇驾云轩銮辂，行幸有期，风服龙骖，驱驾近日。
English: As the emperor was preparing to drive to Shicheng, Li Ping looked up from his desk and said: "The Emperor's edict when he saw his own ugliness, the Emperor's driving is cloudless, the trip is auspicious, the wind is calm, and the drive is recent."

古文：将欲讲武淇阳，大习鄴魏；驰骕騻于绿竹之区，骋麟骥于漳滏之壤。
现代文：陛下将欲讲武淇阳，大习邺魏，驰骏马于绿竹之区，骋烈骑于漳、滏之域。
English: His Majesty will want to talk about martial arts, study the Wei Dynasty, gallop horses in the green bamboo area, and ride vigorously in the fields of camels and donkeys.

古文：斯诚幽显同忻，人灵共悦。
现代文：这确为幽显同庆、人灵共悦的事情。
English: This is indeed a cause for celebration and joy.

古文：臣之愚管，窃有惑焉。
现代文：但为臣愚见，私有不解。
English: However, the vassal was stupid and did not understand what was going on.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：嵩京创构，洛邑俶营，虽年跨十稔，根基未就。
现代文：嵩京创构，洛邑始营，虽然年跨十载，但根基未成。
English: Songjing's creation, Luoyang's beginning, although ten years have passed, but the foundation has not been completed.

古文：代民至洛，始欲向尽，资产罄于迁移，牛畜毙于辇运；陵太行之险，越长津之难；辛勤备经，得达京阙。富者犹损太半，贫者可以意知。
现代文：代州民众迁居洛阳，始欲向尽，资产在迁移途中耗尽，牛畜在辗转路上死毙，攀太行之险，越长津之难，辛苦备至，才到京城，富裕的人犹且损财过半，贫家可以想见。
English: The people of Daizhou moved to Luoyang, but they ran out of money. Their assets were depleted on the way, and their cattle died on the way back. The risk of going too far and the difficulty of getting to Changjin made it hard to prepare before arriving in Beijing. The rich people still lost more than half of their wealth, and the poor people can imagine.

古文：兼历岁从戎，不遑启处，自景明已来，差得休息。
现代文：加上连年从戎，老百姓来不及寻得养息之所，自从景明年间以来，少得休息。
English: Coupled with the fact that they have been working in the fields for years on end, the common people have no time to find a place to rest. Since the beginning of the year, they have had little time to rest.

古文：事农者未积二年之储，筑室者裁有数间之屋，莫不肆力伊瀍，人急其务。
现代文：从事农耕的没能得到二年的粮食积储，建房的才有数间之屋，无人不勉力伊、之间，参加皇宫建设。
English: Those who were engaged in farming could not get two years of grain storage, and those who built houses only had a few rooms. No one could help but participate in the construction of the palace.

古文：实宜安静新人，劝其稼穑，令国有九年之粮，家有水旱之备。
现代文：而今实在应该安定民心，劝农耕种，让国家有九年之粮，家家有水旱储备。
English: But now it is really necessary to stabilize the people's hearts, encourage farmers to cultivate, so that the country has nine years of grain, and every family has water and drought reserves.

古文：若乘之以羁绁，则所废多矣。
现代文：如若再兴徭役，那就会所废甚多了。
English: If they continue to be restricted and harassed, the country will lose a lot.

古文：一夫从役，举家失业。
现代文：一夫从役，全家失业。
English: One husband in the service, the whole family out of work.

古文：今复秋稼盈田，禾菽遍野，銮驾所幸，腾践必殷。
现代文：现在又值秋禾满田，禾谷遍野时节，銮驾所经，腾践必定很多。
English: Now is also the time of autumn, when the fields are full of wheat, and the valleys are full of fields.

古文：未若端拱中天，坐招四海，耀武崧原，礼射伊洛，士马无跋涉之劳，兆民有康哉之咏。可不美欤？ 
现代文：陛下不如端居中央，坐招四海，耀武松原，礼射伊洛，士马无跋涉之劳、黎民有康哉之讠永，岂不是件很美的事。 
English: Wouldn't it be a beautiful thing if His Majesty were to be in the center, surrounded by the four seas, the pine plains, the Ilo River, the horses, and the people.

古文：不从。
现代文：帝不从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：诏以本官行相州事。
现代文：下诏令李平以本官行相州事务。
English: The imperial court ordered him to manage the affairs of Sangju with his former official position.

古文：世宗至鄴，亲幸平第，见其诸子。
现代文：魏世宗到邺城，亲临李平宅第，召见他的几个儿子。
English: Wei Shizong went to Shicheng, visited Li Ping's residence, and summoned several of his sons.

古文：寻正刺史，加征虏将军。
现代文：不久正除刺史，加授征虏将军。
English: Soon, he was demoted to the rank of general and given the title of general of conscripts.

古文：平劝课农桑，修饰太学，简试通儒以充博士，选五郡聪敏者以教之，图孔子及七十二子于堂，亲为立赞。
现代文：李平劝农耕桑，修饰太学，考选通儒充任博士，选择五郡聪慧敏捷的孩子们受学，图画孔子以及七十二弟子的画像于学堂之上，亲自为之立赞。
English: Li Ping exhorted the students to cultivate mulberry trees, embellished the study of Confucianism, selected the most talented Confucian scholars for doctorate, selected the smart and agile children from five counties to study, and painted the images of Confucius and his 72 disciples on the school building, personally praising them.

古文：前来台使颇好侵取，平乃画 履虎尾 、 践薄冰 于客馆，注颂其下，以示诫焉。
现代文：前任台使颇好搜刮民财，李平于是在客馆墙上画 履虎尾 、 践薄水 ，下面注颂，以示诫止。
English: The previous stationmaster was quite good at scrounging people's money, so Li Ping painted "Climbing Tiger's Tail" and "Trampling Thin Water" on the wall of the guest house, and wrote a eulogy below as a warning.

古文：加平东将军，征拜长兼度支尚书，寻正尚书，领御史中尉。
现代文：朝廷加授他为平东将军，征拜长兼度支尚书，不久正尚书，领御史中尉。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of General Pingdong, and he was also given the title of the Chief of Recruitment, and soon he was promoted to the rank of the First Lieutenant of the Imperial General Staff.

古文：冀北刺史、京兆王愉反于信都，以平为使持节、都督北讨诸军事、镇北将军、行冀州事以讨之。
现代文：冀州刺史、京兆王元愉在信都造反，帝任命李平为使持节、都督北讨诸军事、镇北将军，行冀州事以讨伐他。
English: Jizhou stabbed history, Jing Zhao Wang Yuan Yu rebelled in Xindu, and the emperor appointed Li Ping as the envoy, the governor of the north, the military, and the general of the north, and went to Jizhou to fight him.

古文：世宗临式乾殿，劳遣平曰： 愉，朕之元弟，居不疑之地，豺狼之心，不意而发。欲上倾社稷，下残万姓。
现代文：魏世宗亲临式乾殿，劳遣李平说： 元愉，朕的大弟，朕让他居守不疑之地，豺狼之心，没想到就发了，他想要上倾社稷，下残百姓。
English: Wei Shizong personally visited the Qian Hall, and Li Ping, the laborer, said: Yuan Yu, my elder brother, I let him stay in the land of no doubt, the wolf's heart, unexpectedly, was sent, he wanted to go up to the company, and the people left behind.

古文：大义灭亲，夫岂获止？
现代文：大义灭亲，夫岂能止。
English: Can a husband stop killing his relatives in the name of justice?

古文：周公行之于古，朕亦当行之于今。
现代文：周公行之于古，朕也应当行之于今。
English: What Zhou Gong did in the past, I should also do now.

古文：委卿以专征之任，必令应期摧殄，务尽经略之规，勿亏推毂之寄也。
现代文：朕委任你为专征之任，务必要应期摧灭。卿务必要克尽征战职守，不要辜负朕推心置腹的寄托。
English: I have appointed you as a special enlistment officer. You must destroy the enemy in time. You must fulfill your enlistment duties and live up to the trust placed in you by me.

古文：何图今日言及斯事。 
现代文：朕哪里想到今天说起这件事呢。 
English: Where did I get the idea to talk about this today?

古文：因嘘唏流涕。
现代文：因之欷流泪。
English: It brought me to tears.

古文：平对曰： 臣愉天迷其心，构此枭悖。
现代文：李平回答说： 臣元愉鬼迷心窍，大胆干出叛乱的事来。
English: Li Ping replied, "Subordinates are fascinated by the spirit of pleasure, and dare to rebel.

古文：陛下不以臣不武，委以总督之任，今大宥既敷，便应有征无战。
现代文：陛下您不觉得为臣不武，委以总督之任，而今大赦既行，便只应有征无战。
English: Your Majesty, don't you think that as a vassal of the Emperor, entrusted with the duties of the Governor-General, and now that an amnesty has been granted, there should only be conscription and no war?

古文：脱守迷不悟者，当仰凭天威，抑厉将士，譬犹太阳之消微露，巨海之荡荧烛，天时人事，灭在昭然。
现代文：倘若谁守迷不悟，便应当仰凭天威，激励将士，譬如太阳消散微露，巨海荡尽荧烛那样，天时人事，灭除道理昭然明了。
English: If anyone persists in his error, he should rely on the power of heaven to inspire his soldiers, just as the sun dissipates small dewdrops, and the great sea dissipates fluorescent candles. It is a matter of timing, and the principle of elimination is obvious.

古文：如其稽颡军门，则送之大理；若不悛待戮，则鸣鼓衅钟。非陛下之事。 
现代文：如果他顿首军门，就把他交送大理寺，如若有过不改，以待斩戮，则动用干戈，这是他自找其咎，与陛下无关。 
English: If he opened the gates, he would be sent to Dali Temple. If he did not change, he would be killed. If he did not change, he would be killed. This was his own fault and had nothing to do with His Majesty.

古文：平进次经县，诸军大集。
现代文：李平进军至经县，诸路大军汇集。
English: He led the army into Jing County, and the rebels also gathered here.

古文：夜有蛮兵数千斫平前垒，矢及平帐，平坚卧不动，俄而乃定。
现代文：夜晚有蛮兵数千人砍斫李平前营，流矢射到李平帐中，李平坚卧不动，不一会敌人就逃散了。
English: In the evening, thousands of barbarians attacked the camp in front of Li Ping's military camp. Arrows shot into Li Ping's military account, Li Ping lay there motionless, and only calmed down after a while.

古文：遂至冀州城南十六里。
现代文：于是军队进到冀州城南十六里处。
English: As a result, the army entered 16 miles south of Jizhou City.

古文：贼攻围济州军，拔栅填堑，未满者数尺。
现代文：敌人围攻济州军，拔去栅寨，填平沟堑，只差数尺沟就被填平了。
English: The enemy besieged the Jeju Army, pulled down the fence, and filled in the ditch. The ditch was filled in just a few feet away.

古文：诸将合战，无利而还，惮于更进。
现代文：诸将合战，无利而还，害怕再前进了。
English: The generals fight, fight back to no avail, and are afraid to go forward.

古文：平亲入行间，劝以重赏，士卒乃前，大破逆众。
现代文：李平亲自来到队伍中间，许以重赏，士兵于是又前进，大破叛贼。
English: Li Ping himself came to the middle of the team and promised a reward, so the soldiers advanced again and defeated the traitors.

古文：愉时坠马，乃有一人下马授愉，止而斗死。
现代文：元愉当时从马上掉下来了，于是有一个人下马救他，阻止攻势力斗而死。
English: At that time, Yuan Yu fell off his horse, so a man dismounted to save him and stopped the attacking forces from fighting and dying.

古文：乘胜逐北，至于城门，斩首数万级，遂围城烧门。
现代文：李平乘胜追击，到了冀州城门，斩敌数万人，便开始围城烧门。
English: Li Ping took advantage of the victory and pursued the attack. When he reached the Jizhou city gate, he defeated tens of thousands of enemies and began to besiege the city and burn the gate.

古文：愉与百余骑突门出走，遣统军叔孙头追之，去信都八十里擒愉。
现代文：元愉与百余名骑兵冲出城门逃走，李平派统军叔孙头追击敌人，在离信都十多里的地方捉住了元愉。
English: Yuan You and more than a hundred cavalrymen rushed out of the city gate and fled. Li Ping sent the uncle and grandson of the unified army to chase the enemy and caught Yuan You more than ten miles away from the capital.

古文：冀州平，世宗遣兼给事黄门侍郎、秘书丞元梵宣旨慰劳。
现代文：冀州平定后，世宗派兼给事黄门侍郎、秘书丞元梵宣读帝旨慰劳。
English: After the subjugation of Jizhou, the world sect also gave Huangmen Zhi Rong, secretary to the emperor, the consolation of reading the imperial edict.

古文：征还京师，以本官领相州大中正。
现代文：征回到京师之后，李平以本官领相州大中正。
English: After being conscripted back to the Beijing Division, Li Ping became a junior high school teacher at Soochow University.

古文：平先为尚书令高肇、侍御史王显所恨，后显代平为中尉，平加散骑常侍。显劾平在冀州隐截官口，肇又扶成其状，奏除平名。
现代文：李平一开始被尚书高肇、侍御史王显所恨，后来王显代李平为中尉，李平加散骑常侍，王显弹劾李平在冀州时隐截官家丁口，高肇又为之作证，启奏除李平名。
English: At first, Li Ping was hated by Shangshu Gao Zhao and Shi Wang Xian. Later, Wang Xian became Li Ping's lieutenant, Li Ping was promoted to non-commissioned officer, Wang Xian impeached Li Ping for secretly intercepting the official's conversation while he was in Jizhou, Gao Zhao testified to this, and Li Ping's name was removed.

古文：延昌初，诏复官爵，除其定冀之勋。
现代文：延昌初年，帝诏恢复李平官爵，去除他平定冀州的功劳。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, Emperor Xuanzong restored Li Ping's title of nobility and removed his merit of pacifying Jizhou.

古文：前来良贱之讼，多有积年不决。平奏不问真伪，一以景明年前为限，于是争讼止息。
现代文：一段时间以来良贱之人的诉讼，有很多拖延多年而得不到解决，李平启奏不问案情真伪，一律以景明年前为限，于是诤讼平息。
English: For some time, the lawsuits of high and low people have been delayed for many years and have not been resolved. Li Ping does not ask whether the case is true or false, and all cases are limited to the next year, so the litigation has subsided.

古文：武川镇民饥，镇将任款请贷未许，擅开仓赈恤，有司绳以费散之条，免其官爵。
现代文：武川镇百姓饥荒，镇将任款请求贷粮没有得到允许，擅自打开粮仓赈恤灾民，有关部门以费散官粮的条律将他绳之以法，免去他的官爵。
English: The people of Wuchuan Town were starving. The town did not receive permission to request a loan of grain, and opened the granary without permission to support the victims. The relevant departments brought him to justice with the rule of wasting official grain and removed his official title.

古文：平奏款意在济人，心无不善，世宗原之。
现代文：李平启奏说任款本意是在救济百姓，用意善良，世宗下诏原谅了任款。
English: Li Ping said that the intention of the appointment was to relieve the people, with good intentions, and the appointment was excused by the emperor.

古文：迁中书令，尚书如故。
现代文：李平迁任中书令，尚书职仍旧。
English: Li Ping was transferred to the post of secretary, but he still holds the post of clerk.

古文：肃宗初，转吏部尚书，加抚军将军。
现代文：肃宗初年，转任吏部尚书，加授抚军将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Suzong, he was transferred to the post of the secretary of the General Staff, and promoted to the post of the General of the General Staff.

古文：平高明强济，所在有声，但以性急为累。
现代文：李平为政技巧高超，所在都有声誉，但他的急脾气妨碍了他。
English: Li Ping has a reputation for being a highly skilled politician, but his quick temper gets in the way.

古文：尚书令、任城王澄奏理平定冀之勋，请酬以山河之赏。
现代文：尚书令、任城王元澄启奏讲述李平平定冀州的功劳，请求朝廷赏赐他邑地。
English: Shang Shuling and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng recited Li Ping's contribution to the pacification of Jizhou and requested the imperial court to reward him with a township.

古文：灵太后乃封武邑郡开国公，食邑一千五百户，缣二千五百匹。
现代文：灵太后于是封他为武邑郡开国公，食邑一千五百户，缣帛二千五百匹。
English: The Dowager Empress then made him the founding lord of Wuyi County, with 1,500 households and 2,500 cattle.

古文：先是，萧衍遣其左游击将军赵祖悦偷据西硖石，众至数万，以逼寿春。
现代文：这以前，萧衍派其左游击将军赵祖悦偷据西硖石，军力人数数万，逼迫寿春。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan sent his left-wing guerrilla general Zhao Zuyue to steal Xizhi, with a military force of tens of thousands, to persecute Shuchun.

古文：镇南崔亮攻之，未克，又与李崇乖贰。
现代文：镇南将领崔亮攻打，没拿下来，又与李崇闹了矛盾。
English: Zhenan general Cui Liang attacked, failed to take it down, and quarreled with Li Chong.

古文：诏平以本官使持节、镇军大将军、兼尚书右仆射为行台，节度诸军，东西州将一以禀之，如有乖异，以军法从事。
现代文：帝诏李平以本官使持节、镇军大将军，兼尚书右仆射为行台，节度诸军，东西州也受他节制，如有乖异，以军法处置。
English: Emperor Li Ping took his position as commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief of the town's army, and commander-in-chief's right-hand man as the platform for his actions. He controlled all the armies and the eastern and western provinces. If there were any deviations, they would be dealt with according to military law.

古文：诏平长子奖以通直郎从。赐平缣帛百段、紫纳金装衫甲一领，赐奖缣布六十段、绛衲袄一领。
现代文：诏李平长子李奖以通直郎职跟从，赐予李平缣帛百段、紫纳金装衫甲一领，赐予李奖缣布六十段、绛纳袄一领。
English: Li Ping's eldest son, Li Shou, followed him as Tong Naorong, and gave Li Ping a hundred-dan gold necklace, a purple and gold shirt and a necklace, and gave Li Shou a sixty-dan gold necklace and a gold necklace.

古文：父子重列，拜受家庭，观者荣之。
现代文：父子并列，拜受家中，观者以之为荣耀。
English: Father and son are side by side, worshipped at home, and the viewer takes it as an honor.

古文：于是率步骑二千以赴寿春。
现代文：于是李奖率领骑步兵二千人奔赴寿春。
English: As a result, Li Prize led 2,000 cavalry and infantry to rush to Shouchun.

古文：平巡视硖石内外，知其盈虚之所。
现代文：李平巡视硖口内外，观察到其虚实的地方。
English: Li Ping inspected the inside and outside of the cornice and observed the places where it was false and true.

古文：严勒崇、亮，令水陆兼备，克期齐举。
现代文：严令李崇、崔亮，令其水陆皆备，刻期齐攻。
English: Li Chong and Cui Liang were given strict orders to be ready on land and at sea and to attack at the same time.

古文：崇、亮惮之，无敢乖互。
现代文：李崇、崔亮心中害怕，不敢违令。
English: Li Chong and Cui Liang were afraid of him and did not dare to disobey the order, so they cooperated with each other.

古文：频日交战，屡破贼军。
现代文：连日交战，屡破敌军。
English: They fought for days on end and repeatedly defeated the enemy.

古文：安南将军崔延伯立桥于下蔡，以拒贼之援军。
现代文：安南将军崔延伯在下蔡架桥，以对付敌人援军。
English: Annan's General Choi Young-pyo was crossing the bridge to deal with the enemy reinforcements.

古文：贼将王神念、昌义之等不得进救，祖悦守死穷城。
现代文：敌将王神念、昌义之等不能救援，赵祖悦据守孤独无援的城池。
English: The enemy generals Wang Shennian and Chang Yi were unable to come to the rescue, and Zhao Zuyue was left to defend the city alone.

古文：平乃部分攻之。令崔亮督陆卒攻其城西，李崇勒水军击其东面，然后鼓噪，南北俱上。
现代文：李平于是布置攻打，命令崔亮督步兵攻打城西，李崇率水军攻其东面，然后大军鼓噪，南北两面一拥而上。
English: Li Ping then arranged the attack, ordered Cui Liangdu's infantry to attack the west of the city, Li Chong led the navy to attack its east, and then the army thundered, and the north and south sides rushed up.

古文：贼众周章，东西赴战。
现代文：敌人慌了手脚，东西赴战，穷于应付。
English: The enemy panicked and went to war, struggling to cope.

古文：屠贼外城，贼之将士相率归附。
现代文：攻下外城之后，敌人将士相继归附。
English: After capturing the outer city, the enemy successively annexed the soldiers.

古文：祖悦率其余众固保南城，通夜攻守，至明乃降。
现代文：赵祖悦率领余部固保南城，彻夜攻守，到天亮敌人才降。
English: Zhao Zuyue led the rest of Guobao Nancheng, attacked and defended all night, and the enemy did not fall until dawn.

古文：斩祖悦，送首于洛，俘获甚众。
现代文：斩杀赵祖悦，把他的头颅送到了洛阳，俘敌无数。
English: He killed Zhao Zuyue, sent his head to Luoyang, and captured countless enemies.

古文：以功迁尚书右仆射，加散骑常侍，将军如故。
现代文：因功李平迁任尚书左仆射，加授散骑常侍，将军如故。
English: For his service, Li Ping was transferred to the position of Shangshu Zuofu Zhao, and given the additional title of Sanzhi Zangjia Changzhi. He remained a general.

古文：平还京师，灵太后见于宣光殿，赐以金装刀杖一口。
现代文：李平还归京城，灵太后在宣光殿召见他，赐给他金装刀杖一口。
English: When Li Ping returned to Beijing, the Empress Dowager summoned him to the Xuan Guang Temple and gave him a gold-plated cane.

古文：时南徐州表云：萧衍堰淮水为患。诏公卿议之，平以为不假兵力，终自毁坏。
现代文：当时南徐州上表说，萧衍堵淮水形成祸患，帝诏官员讨论应付的办法，李平认为不用出兵，堤坝自会毁坏。
English: At that time, the Southern Xuzhou Municipal People's Government issued a notice saying that Xiao Yan's damming of the Huai River was a disaster. Officials from the imperial edict discussed how to deal with it. Li Ping believed that there was no need to send troops and that the dam would be destroyed by itself.

古文：及淮堰破，灵太后大悦，引群臣入宴，敕平前鸣箫管，肃宗手赐缣布百段。
现代文：等到淮河堤破，灵太后大为高兴，引群臣参加宴会，敕李平前鸣箫管，肃宗亲手赐予缣布百段。
English: When the embankment of the Huai River was broken, Empress Dowager Ling was very happy. She led a group of courtiers to attend the banquet, made Li Pingqian play the gong, and Su Zong personally bestowed a hundred pieces of cloth.

古文：熙平元年冬卒，遗令薄葬。
现代文：熙平元年冬天去世，遗嘱薄葬。
English: Heping died in the winter of the first year of the year, and his will was buried in a shallow grave.

古文：诏给东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、帛七百匹。
现代文：帝诏赐予东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一套、帛七百匹。
English: The emperor granted Dongyuan secret utensils, a morning suit, a set of clothes, and 700 horses.

古文：灵太后为举哀于东堂。
现代文：灵太后为他在东堂举哀。
English: The Reverend Mother mourned for him in the East Hall.

古文：赠侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史，谥文烈公。
现代文：赠给他侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史，谥称文烈公。
English: He was given the titles of Chamberlain, Grand Admiral of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Three Departments, and Grand Historian of Jizhou Province, and was nicknamed "Wen Rongguo."

古文：平自在度支，至于端副，夙夜在公，孜孜匪懈，凡处机密十有余年，有献替之称。
现代文：李平自在度支时起，官做至副丞相，日夜务公，孜孜不懈，在权要之地前后任官十多年，都被人交口称赞。
English: From the time when Li Ping was at ease, he rose through the ranks to become vice-minister of justice. He worked tirelessly day and night, and was praised by his colleagues for more than ten years before and after his appointment to important positions.

古文：所制诗赋箴谏咏颂，别有集录。
现代文：所写诗赋箴谏讠永颂，另外有集子流传。
English: The poem written by Fu Zhen is known as the Song of Eternity, and has been passed down by other poets.

