古文：刘毅，字仲雄，东莱掖人。
现代文：刘毅字仲雄，是东莱掖人。
English: Liu Yi Zi Zhongxiong is from Donglai.

古文：汉城阳景王章之后。
现代文：汉城阳景王刘章的后代。
English: He is a descendant of Liu Zhang, the King of Seoul.

古文：父喈，丞相属。
现代文：父亲刘喈，丞相属。
English: His father, Liu Ye, was a cabinet minister.

古文：毅幼有孝行，少厉清节，然好臧否人物，王公贵人望风惮之。
现代文：刘毅年幼孝顺，年少时磨炼高洁的节操，但喜欢评论人物，王公贵人望风而惧。
English: Liu Yi was filial and obedient when he was young. When he was young, he practiced noble and austere, but he liked to comment on people. Wang Gong was afraid of the wind.

古文：侨居平阳，太守杜恕请为功曹，沙汰郡吏百余人，三魏称焉。
现代文：奇居于阳，太守杜恕请他任功曹，淘汰郡吏百余人，被三魏之人所称道。
English: Qi Ju lived in the Yang Dynasty, and Emperor Du Shou asked him to serve as a meritorious person, eliminating more than a hundred county officials. He was praised by the people of the Third Wei Dynasty.

古文：为之语曰： 但闻刘功曹，不闻杜府君。 
现代文：评论他说： 衹闻刘功曹，不闻杜府君。 
English: Commenting on him, he said: "People have heard of Liu Gong Cao, but not of Du Fu Jun.

古文：魏末，本郡察孝廉，辟司隶都官从事，京邑肃然。
现代文：魏末，本郡推荐孝廉，征用为司隶都官从事，京城秩序井然。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, Xiaolian was recommended by the county and was requisitioned to work as a magistrate of the capital. The capital was in good order.

古文：毅将弹河南尹，司隶不许，曰： 攫兽之犬，鼷鼠蹈其背。 
现代文：刘毅将要弹劾河南尹，司隶不同意，说： 狗去扑兽，鼷鼠蹬其背。 
English: Liu Yi was going to impeach Henan Yin, but the subordinate disagreed, saying: "A dog will attack an animal, but a mole will stab it in the back."

古文：毅曰： 既能攫兽，又能杀鼠，何损于犬！ 
现代文：刘毅说： 既能捕兽，又能杀鼠，何损于狗! 
English: Liu Yi said, "A dog can catch animals and kill mice.

古文：投传而去。
现代文：扔下证件而去。
English: He threw down his papers and left.

古文：同郡王基荐毅于公府，曰： 毅方正亮直，介然不群，言不苟合，行不苟容。
现代文：同郡王基把刘毅推荐给公府，说： 刘毅正直诚实，超凡脱俗，言行不迎合对方。
English: Wang Ji of the same county recommended Liu Yi to the government, saying: Liu Yi is honest and honest, extraordinary, and his words and deeds do not cater to the other party.

古文：往日侨仕平阳，为郡股肱，正色立朝，举纲引墨，硃紫有分，《郑》、《卫》不杂，孝弟著于邦族，忠贞效于三魏。
现代文：以前为官平阳，为郡之要员，在公府端庄严肃，条理分明，朱紫有别，《郑》《卫》不乱，以孝悌闻名于州郡，因忠贞在三魏被仿效。
English: Formerly, he was an official of Pingyang, an important member of the county, dignified and serious in the public office, well-organized, Zhu Zi distinguished, "Zheng" "Wei" not chaotic, known for filial piety in the county, and was imitated for loyalty in the Third Wei Dynasty.

古文：昔孙阳取骐骥于吴坂，秦穆拔百里于商旅。毅未遇知己，无所自呈。
现代文：过去孙阳在吴坂得到骏马，秦穆公在商人中启用百里奚。刘毅未遇知己，没有自荐。
English: In the past, Sun Yang won a good horse in Wuzhankang, and Qin Mu Gong used a good horse among merchants. Liu Yi did not meet a confidant and did not recommend himself.

古文：前已口白，谨复申请。 
现代文：前面已经口头讲过，小心地再次申请。 
English: It has already been said verbally, so apply again with caution.

古文：太常郑袤举博士，文帝辟为相国掾，辞疾，积年不就。
现代文：太常郑袤推举其为博士，文帝征用为相国掾，以病推辞，多年不做官。
English: Zheng Yi often promoted him as a doctor, and Emperor Wen requisitioned him as a state councillor, but he was forced to resign due to illness and did not work as an official for many years.

古文：时人谓毅忠于魏氏，而帝怒其顾望，将加重辟。
现代文：人们说刘毅忠于魏氏，而皇帝恨他留恋旧朝，将处以极刑。
English: People say that Liu Yi is loyal to the Wei clan, and the emperor hates him for his attachment to the old dynasty and will punish him with capital punishment.

古文：毅惧，应命，转主薄。
现代文：刘毅害怕，应召，改任主簿。
English: Liu Yi was afraid, answered the call, and was reassigned as chief clerk.

古文：武帝受禅，为尚书郎、驸马都尉，迁散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
现代文：武帝接受禅让为帝，以刘毅为尚书郎、驸马都尉，升任散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen Zhen as emperor, with Liu Yi as Shang Shulang, Xingma Duifeng, promoted to Sanzhiyi Changzhu, and Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：帝以毅忠蹇正直，使掌谏官。
现代文：武帝认为刘毅忠诚正直，让他掌管谏官。
English: Emperor Wu believed that Liu Yi was loyal and honest, and put him in charge of the eunuchs.

古文：转城门校尉，迁太仆，拜尚书，坐事免官。
现代文：改任城门校尉，升任太仆，拜任尚书，因事获罪被免官。
English: He was reassigned to the post of castle gate captain, promoted to the post of eunuch, assumed the post of secretary, and was removed from his post after being convicted of a crime.

古文：咸宁初，复为散骑常侍、博士祭酒。
现代文：咸宁初年，再为散骑常侍、博士祭酒。
English: In the first year of Xianning, it was again used as a horseback riding attendant and a doctor's sacrificial wine.

古文：转司隶校尉，纠正豪右，京师肃然。
现代文：改任司隶校尉，纠举豪族，京师秩序井然。
English: He was reassigned to the post of captain of the division, the local ruling families were purged, and order in the capital was restored.

古文：司部守令望风投印绶者甚众，时人以毅方之诸葛丰、盖宽饶。
现代文：官员见势放下官印的很多，人们把他比作诸葛丰、盖宽饶。
English: There are many officials who give up their official seal when they see an opportunity. People compare him to Zhuge Feng and Gai Guangrao.

古文：皇太子朝，鼓吹将入东掖门，毅以为不敬，止之于门外，奏劾保傅以下。
现代文：皇太子入朝，乐队将入东掖门，刘毅认为不严肃，把他们挡在门外，上奏弹劾太子保傅以下官员。
English: When the crown prince entered the DPRK, the orchestra would enter Dongcheng Gate. Liu Yi thought it was not serious and blocked them from entering the gate. He then impeached the officials below the crown prince Bao Fu.

古文：诏赦之，然后得入。
现代文：诏令赦免他们，然后得以进入。
English: The Dahir pardoned them and they were allowed to enter.

古文：帝尝南郊，礼毕，喟然问毅曰： 卿以朕方汉何帝也？ 对曰： 可方桓、灵。 
现代文：皇帝曾到南郊祭天，礼仪完毕，对刘毅叹息道： 你把我比作汉朝的哪位皇帝? 刘毅答： 可比桓帝、灵帝。 
English: The emperor once went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to the heavens, and after the ceremony was over, he sighed to Liu Yi: Which emperor of the Han Dynasty are you comparing me to? Liu Yi replied: I can be compared to Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling.

古文：帝曰： 吾虽德不及古人，犹克己为政。
现代文：皇帝说： 我虽德不及古人，依然克己为政。
English: The emperor said: Although I am not as virtuous as the ancients, I still practice self-restraint.

古文：又平吴会，混一天下。
现代文：又平定吴会，统一天下。
English: He also quelled the Wu Association and unified the country.

古文：方之桓、灵，其已甚乎！ 
现代文：把我比作桓、灵二帝不是太过分了吗! 
English: Isn't it too much to compare me to Huan and Ling Erdi!

古文：对曰： 桓、灵卖官，钱入官库；陛下卖官，钱入私门。
现代文：刘毅答： 二帝卖官，钱入官库；陛下卖官，钱入私门。
English: Liu Yi answered: The Second Emperor sold officials, and the money went into the official treasury; His Majesty sold officials, and the money went into his private accounts.

古文：以此言之，殆不如也。 
现代文：就此而言，还不如他们呢。 
English: In that respect, we are not as good as them.

古文：帝大笑曰： 桓灵之世，不闻此言。
现代文：皇帝大笑说： 桓、灵之时，不闻此言。
English: The emperor laughed loudly and said, "I did not hear you say that when I was alive."

古文：今有直臣，故不同也。 
现代文：今有直臣，所以不同。 
English: Now there are direct reports, so it's different.

古文：散骑常侍邹湛进曰： 世谈以陛下比汉文帝，人心犹不多同。
现代文：散骑常侍邹湛进谏说： 人们把陛下比作汉文帝，仍多有异议。
English: "People often compare His Majesty to Emperor Hanwen, but there are still many objections," said the equestrian attendant Gong Zhan Jinjun.

古文：昔冯唐答文帝，云不能用颇牧而文帝怒，今刘毅言犯顺而陛下欢。
现代文：从前冯唐回答文帝，说不能用廉颇、李牧而文帝发怒，今刘毅冒犯陛下而陛下欢喜。
English: Once upon a time, Feng Tang replied to Emperor Wen, saying that one should not be corrupt, Li Mu and Emperor Wen were angry, now Liu Yi has offended His Majesty and His Majesty is happy.

古文：然以此相校，圣德乃过之矣。 
现代文：以此相比较，圣德却超过他了。 
English: Compared with this, holiness surpasses him.

古文：帝曰： 我平天下而不封禅，焚雉头裘，行布衣礼，卿初无言。
现代文：皇帝说： 我平定天下而不封挥，焚雉头裘，行布衣礼，你当初不说。
English: The emperor said, "You didn't say at first that I would pacify the world without making any proclamations, burning bonfires, and performing the cloth-wearing ceremony.

古文：今于小事，何见褒之甚？ 
现代文：今天在小事上，为何过分褒奖? 
English: Today, in small matters, why the excessive praise?

古文：湛曰： 臣闻猛兽在田，荷戈而出，凡人能之。
现代文：邹湛说： 猛兽在田，操戈而出，人人都能做到。
English: Yan Zhan said: "The beast is in the field, and everyone can do it.

古文：蜂虿作于怀袖，勇夫为之惊骇，出于意外故也。
现代文：蜂蔓在怀抱中出现，勇夫为之惊骇，这是出于意外的缘故。
English: The bumblebee appeared in his arms and the brave man was startled, this was due to an accident.

古文：夫君臣有自然之尊卑，言语有自然之逆顺。向刘毅始言，臣等莫不变色。
现代文：君尊臣卑理所当然，说话亦当如此。刘毅开始说时，臣等没有不变色的。
English: When Liu Yi began to speak, the officials did not change their color.

古文：陛下发不世之诏，出思虑之表，臣之喜庆，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：陛下发布罕有的韶令，出乎意料之外，我们高兴，不也是可以的吗厂
English: Your majesty has issued a rare royal decree, which is unexpected, we are happy, isn't it all right factory

古文：在职六年，迁尚书左仆射。
现代文：在任六年，升任尚书左仆射。
English: After six years in office, he was promoted to Shangshu Zuopu Zhao.

古文：时龙见武库井中，帝亲观之，有喜色。
现代文：当时龙出现在武库井中，皇帝亲自去看，面有喜色。
English: When the dragon appeared in the well of the arsenal, the emperor went to see it in person and was overjoyed.

古文：百官将贺，毅独表曰： 昔龙降郑时门之外，子产不贺。
现代文：百官将去道贺，刘毅独自上奏说： 过去龙降在郑国时门之外，子产不贺。
English: A hundred officials will go to congratulate, and Liu Yi will make a speech alone, saying: In the past, the dragon fell outside the time gate of Zheng Guo, and the child was not congratulated.

古文：龙降夏庭，沫流不禁，卜藏其漦，至周幽王，祸衅乃发。
现代文：龙降在夏朝的庭院中，涎沫不止，算卦说把它藏起来。到周幽王，灾难发生。
English: The dragon descends in the courtyard of the Summer Palace, the foam does not stop, the fortune-teller says to hide it. To Zhou Yu Wang, disaster occurs.

古文：《易》称 潜龙勿用，阳在下也。 
现代文：《易经》说 龙潜伏不作施展，是因为阳气低沉 。
English: "I Ching" says that the reason why the dragon lurks and does not perform is because the yang qi is low.

古文：证据旧典，无贺龙之礼。 
现代文：考之旧典，无贺龙之礼。 
English: If you look at the old texts, there is no mention of the dragon.

古文：诏报曰： 正德未修，诚未有以膺受嘉祥。
现代文：诏书回覆说： 正德不修，的确不能接受吉祥。
English: The imperial edict replied, "If you don't cultivate virtue, you really can't accept auspicious things."

古文：省来示，以为瞿然。
现代文：看到你的上表，感到惶恐。
English: When I saw your watch, I panicked.

古文：贺庆之事，宜详依典义，动静数示。 
现代文：庆贺之事，应该慎重地根据礼典行动。 
English: When celebrating, you should act carefully according to the ceremony.

古文：而毅乃引衰世妖异，以疑今之吉祥。
现代文：尚书郎刘汉等认为： 龙呈青色，夹有白色花纹，这是大晋偃武修文之兆。而刘毅却用衰世妖孽来怀疑当今吉祥。
English: Shang Shulang Liu Han and others believe: The dragon is blue with white patterns, which is a sign of the Great Jin Dynasty's military reform. Liu Yi, however, doubts the auspiciousness of the present day with the witchcraft of decadence.

古文：又以龙在井为潜，皆失其意。
现代文：又认为龙在井中是潜龙，都不正确。
English: It is also incorrect to think that the dragon in the well is a submerged dragon.

古文：潜之为言，隐而不见。
现代文：潜即隐而不见。
English: Submerge and disappear.

古文：今龙彩质明焕，示人以物，非潜之谓也。毅应推处。 
现代文：现在龙色彩鲜艳，示人以形，并不是潜。型堑应推究处理。 
English: Now the dragon is brightly colored and shows its shape, not its potential. The shape should be investigated and dealt with.

古文：诏不听。
现代文：韶不准。
English: Singing is not allowed.

古文：后阴气解而复合，毅上言： 必有阿党之臣，奸以事君者，当诛而不诛故也。
现代文：后来阴气散而又合，玺隧上言： 肯定是结党营私之臣，狡诈以侍君，当杀而没杀的缘故。 
English: Later, after the gloomy atmosphere had dissipated and the two sides had reached an agreement, Xun Xun said, "It must have been because I did not kill my vassal who formed a faction with me, and because I did not kill him when I should have.

古文：毅以魏立九品，权时之制，未见得人，而有八损，乃上疏曰：臣闻：立政者，以官才为本，官才有三难，而兴替之所由也。
现代文：刘毅认为魏建立九品中正制，是权宜之制，没有选到人才，而有八害，于是上疏说：我听说：执政者，以量才授官为本，此事有三难，但关系到国家的盛衰兴亡。
English: Liu Yi thought that Wei's establishment of the nine-rank, middle-ranking system was a system of expediency. It did not select talent, but caused eight harms. Therefore, Shang Shu said: I have heard that: the ruler should appoint officials based on quantity. There are three difficulties in this matter, but it is related to the rise and fall of the country.

古文：人物难知，一也；爱憎难防，二也；情伪难明，三也。
现代文：人物难知，这是一；爱憎难防，这是二；真伪难辨，这是三。
English: Character is difficult to know, this is one; love and hate are difficult to prevent, this is two; truth and falsehood are difficult to distinguish, this is three.

古文：今立中正，定九品，高下任意，荣辱在手。
现代文：如今设立中正，评定九品，高低随意，荣辱在手。
English: Today, Zhongzheng has been established, and nine products are rated, the level is arbitrary, and the honor and disgrace are in hand.

古文：操人主之威福，夺天朝之权势。爱憎决于心，情伪由于己。公无考校之负，私无告讦之忌。
现代文：有皇帝的威福和朝廷的权势。爱憎和虚实全在于己，对公不负考核之责，对私不怕告发。
English: They have the emperor's prestige and the power of the imperial court. Their love, hate and falsehood are all in their own hands. They are not responsible for the assessment of the public, and they are not afraid to report to me.

古文：用心百态，求者万端。
现代文：用尽心计，钻营各方。
English: They tried every trick in the book.

古文：廉让之风灭，苟且之欲成。
现代文：廉洁谦让的风气消失了，得过且过的习俗形成了。
English: The culture of chastity and modesty has disappeared, and the custom of taking things as they come has taken hold.

古文：天下讻讻，但争品位，不闻推让，窃为圣朝耻之。
现代文：天下纷乱，衹争品级和官位，没听说谦让，我为圣朝感到羞耻。
English: The world is in turmoil, there is competition for ranks and official positions, and there is no sign of moderation. I am ashamed of the Holy Temple.

古文：夫名状以当才为清，品辈以得实为平，安危之要，不可不明。
现代文：描述情况以抓住才能为清正，评价人物以实事求是骂公平，国家安危的关键，不可不明。
English: The description of the situation is to grasp the ability to be honest, and the evaluator is to seek truth from facts and scold fairness. The key to national security cannot be unclear.

古文：清平者，政化之美也；枉滥者，乱败之恶也，不可不察。
现代文：清正公平是政治教化的光明面；歪曲事实是动乱灭亡的阴暗面，不可不明察。
English: Honesty and fairness are the bright side of political education; distortion of facts is the dark side of turmoil and destruction, and must not be overlooked.

古文：然人才异能，备体者衅。
现代文：然而人各有所长，全才很少。
English: However, everyone has their strengths, and there are very few all-rounders.

古文：器有大小，达有早晚。
现代文：才有大小，成名有早晚。
English: It takes time to become big, and fame comes sooner or later.

古文：前鄙后修，宜受日新之报；抱正违时，宜有质直之称；度远阙小，宜得殊俗之状；任直不饰，宜得清实之誉；行寡才优，宜获器任之用。
现代文：过去德行鄙陋，以后修身向善的人，应该受到改过自新的报答;坚守正道而不和时俗的人，应该受到为人正直的称赞；计虑长远而过错微小的人，应该得到不同于一般人的评语;诚实正直而不虚假的人，应该得到廉洁忠实的称誉；德行出众而才能优异的人，应当受到重用。
English: Those who have been virtuous and despicable in the past, and have cultivated themselves to be good in the future, should be rewarded with reform and renewal; those who stick to the right path and do not conform to the times and customs should be praised for their honesty; those who think long-term and have minor mistakes should receive comments different from ordinary people; those who are honest and not false should be praised for their integrity and faithfulness; those who are virtuous and have outstanding talents should be reused.

古文：是以三仁殊途而同归，四子异行而均义。
现代文：所以三位仁者殊途而同归，四子异行却都很合义。
English: Therefore, the three benevolent people all return to the same path, but the four deviants are all righteous.

古文：陈平、韩信笑侮于邑里，而收功于帝王；屈原、伍胥不容于人主，而显名于竹帛，是笃论之所明也。
现代文：陈平、韩信在乡里被人取笑和侮辱，却为帝王建功立业；屈原、伍子胥不为君主所容，却名留青史，这是恰当的评论所要昭示的。
English: Chen Ping and Han Xin were made fun of and insulted in the countryside, but made contributions to the emperor; Qu Yuan and Wu Zixuan were not tolerated by the monarch, but their names remain in history, which is what the appropriate commentary should show.

古文：今之中正，不精才实，务依党利，不均称尺，备随爱憎。
现代文：现在的中正，不看真才实学，专门依靠帮派利益；处事不公，专门根据个人感情。
English: Today's Zhongzheng does not look at real talent and real learning, but relies exclusively on the interests of gangs; it does not deal with things fairly, but exclusively on the basis of personal feelings.

古文：所欲与者，获虚以成誉；所欲下者，吹毛以求疵。
现代文：想要给的，作假以助他成名；想要让他下的，便吹毛求疵。
English: If you want to give it to him, fake it to make him famous; if you want to let him down, nitpick.

古文：高下逐强弱，是非由爱憎。
现代文：品级的高下随着势力的强弱为转移，是非由个人的爱憎来决定。
English: The higher and lower ranks of the class shift with the strength and weakness of the forces, and are determined by personal likes and dislikes.

古文：随世兴衰，不顾才实，衰则削下，兴则扶上，一人之身，旬日异状。
现代文：追随世道的兴衰，不顾真才实学，衰弱则降下，兴盛则扶上，同一个人，十天之内就发生变化。
English: Following the rise and fall of the world, regardless of true talent and real learning, weakness will fall, prosperity will rise, and the same person will change within ten days.

古文：或以货赂自通，或以计协登进，附托者必达，守道者困悴。
现代文：或以贿赂使自己通达，或与计吏同行以求晋升，依托他人的人必能达到目的，恪守原则的人困窘悲伤。
English: Those who rely on others will surely achieve their goals, while those who adhere to principles will be embarrassed and saddened.

古文：无报于身，必见割夺。有私于己，必得其欲。
现代文：对己不利，必见残害；有利于己，定要得到。
English: If it is unfavorable to oneself, one is sure to see harm; if it is favorable to oneself, one is sure to get it.

古文：是以上品无寒门，下品无势族。
现代文：所以上品官员没有出自于贫贱之家的，下品官员没有出身于有权势的大族的。
English: Therefore, high-ranking officials did not come from a poor family, and low-ranking officials did not come from a powerful clan.

古文：暨时有之，皆曲有故。
现代文：即或有之，亦另有原因。
English: Even if there is, there is another reason.

古文：慢主罔时，实为乱源。
现代文：欺君欺世，实为乱世之源。
English: Deceiving the ruler and deceiving the world is indeed the source of chaos.

古文：损政之道一也。
现代文：这是九品中正制的弊病之一。
English: This is one of the drawbacks of the formal system in the Nine Articles.

古文：置州都者，取州里清议，咸所归服，将以镇异同，一言议。
现代文：设置中正，用州里之清议，大家都服从，可以镇住不服的，统一言论。
English: The setting is in the middle, with the clear discussion in the state, everyone obeys, can be reconciled, unified speech.

古文：不谓一人之身，了一州之才，一人不审便坐之。
现代文：不是说一人就能知道一州的人才，他如不知被品评者便不能被评。
English: It's not that one person can know the talent of a state, he can't be evaluated if he doesn't know the person being evaluated.

古文：若然，自仲尼以上，至于庖牺，莫不有失，则皆不堪，何独责于中人者哉！
现代文：如此，自孔子以上，至于庖牺，都有过失，都不行，为何祇责备平常人!
English: In this way, since Confucius and above, as far as the victims are concerned, all have faults, all are not acceptable, why only blame ordinary people!

古文：若殊不修，自可更选。
现代文：如果特别不善，自然可以重新选择。
English: If it is particularly bad, you can of course choose again.

古文：今重其任而轻其人，所立品格，还访刁攸。
现代文：现在重视他的职权而轻视其人，确立高下的等级后，回访刁攸。
English: Now he values his authority and despises his subordinates. After establishing a higher and lower level, he will pay a return visit to Youyou.

古文：攸非州里之所归，非职分之所置。
现代文：他既不是州里所归顺的，也不是职权所设置的。
English: He is neither a state-appointed nor an ex officio appointee.

古文：今访之，归正于所不服，决事于所不职，以长谗构之源，以生乖争之兆，似非立都之本旨，理俗之深防也。
现代文：现在询问他，让正确的归顺于不服的，让不主事的来决定事情，由此助长谗言，产生矛盾，这好像不是设立中正的本意，而是治理世俗耍深加防备的。
English: Now ask him, let the correct surrender to the disobedient, let the lack of initiative to decide things, thereby promoting criticism, creating contradictions, it seems that this is not the intention of establishing the center, but the governance of the secular play is deeply guarded.

古文：主者既善刁攸，攸之所下而复选以二千石，已有数人。
现代文：主事者与刁攸好，刁攸降下品级又被选为二千石的，已有数人。
English: The person in charge is on good terms with Yu Yu, and there are already several people who have been downgraded and elected to 2,000 koku.

古文：刘良上攸之所下，石公罪攸之所行，驳违之论横于州里，嫌雠之隙结于大臣。
现代文：刘良提高刁攸降下的品级，石苞惩处刁攸所干的事，全州到处是互相论难的言论，憎恶的仇怨在大臣中结下。
English: Liu Liang raised the rank of Zou You, who had been demoted, and Shi Zi punished Zou You for what he had done. The whole state was full of mutual criticism, and the hateful grudges were settled among the ministers.

古文：夫桑妾之讼，祸及吴、楚；斗鸡之变，难兴鲁邦。
现代文：妻妾诉讼，给吴、楚带来灾祸；斗鸡事件，使鲁国蒙受灾难。
English: The wife and concubine lawsuit brought disaster to Wu and Chu; the cockfighting incident brought disaster to Lu.

古文：况乃人伦交争而部党兴，刑狱滋生而祸根结。
现代文：于是便有人伦相争而朋党产生，刑狱滋生而祸根结下。
English: As a result, there was a conflict of ethics and a fraternal party was born. Imprisonment bred and the root of evil was sown.

古文：损政之道二也。本立格之体，将谓人伦有序，若贯鱼成次也。
现代文：这是其弊病之本着设立品级的原则，就是要使人伦有序，就像把鱼串成次第排列的样子。
English: This is the drawback of the principle of establishing grades, which is to make people have a sense of order, just like stringing fish in a gradual manner.

古文：为九品者，取下者为格，谓才德有优劣，伦辈有首尾。
现代文：设立九品，把下等也列入品级，就是说才能和德行有优劣，人伦辈分有前后。
English: Nine grades were established, and the lower grades were also included in the grade level, that is to say, talent and virtue have advantages and disadvantages, and human ethics are divided into before and after.

古文：今之中正，务自远者，则抑割一国，使无上人；秽劣下比，则拔举非次，并容其身。
现代文：现在的中正，为自己长远打算的，则压制一方，使无上品；淫乱卑劣下等的，则不按次序提拔，并能容纳他。
English: The present Zhong Zheng, who has a long-term plan for himself, suppresses one side and makes it unsuitable; fornicating, despicable and inferior, he does not promote in order and can accommodate him.

古文：公以为格，坐成其私。
现代文：公家的品级变成了私人的财产。
English: The dignity of the public house has become private property.

古文：君子无大小之怨，官政无绳奸之防。
现代文：君子无怨，国家政治无惩治奸臣的措施。
English: Nobles have no grievances, and national politics has no means of punishing traitors.

古文：使得上欺明主，下乱人伦。
现代文：使得上欺明主，下乱人伦。
English: The result is that those at the top deceive the Lord, and those at the bottom cause human relations to become chaotic.

古文：乃使优劣易地，首尾倒错。推贵异之器，使在凡品之下，负戴不肖，越在成人之首。
现代文：于是使优劣和前后颠倒，把高贵和优秀的人才定在平常品级以下，把背有不孝之名的人放在最前面。
English: As a result, the superiority and inferiority were reversed, the noble and excellent talents were set below the ordinary grade, and the people with the name of filial piety were put in the forefront.

古文：损政之道三也。
现代文：这是其弊病之三。
English: This is the third of its ills.

古文：陛下践阼，开天地之德，弘不讳之诏，纳忠直之言，以览天下之情，太平之基，不世之法也。
现代文：陛下登基，开启天地的善心，发布广开言路的韶令，采纳忠诚的言论，遍览天下的民情，这是太平之基，罕有之法呀。
English: His Majesty ascends to the throne, opens the goodwill of heaven and earth, issues a royal decree to open the road of speech, adopts a loyal speech, and surveys the people's sentiments around the world. This is the foundation of peace, a rare method.

古文：然尝罚，自王公以至于庶人，无不加法。
现代文：至于赏罚，自王公以至百姓，都用法来加以规定。
English: As for rewards and punishments, both the king and the people used the law to determine them.

古文：置中正，委以一国之重，无尝罚之防。
现代文：设置中正，委以一国的重任，却没有赏罚的准备。
English: It is in the middle of setting up, entrusted with the heavy responsibility of a country, but there is no preparation for reward and punishment.

古文：人心多故，清平者寡，故怨讼者众。
现代文：人心多诈，清平的很少，所以怨恨诉讼的很多。
English: People's hearts are deceitful, and there are few who are pure and fair, so there are a lot of resentment and lawsuits.

古文：听之则告讦无已，禁绝则侵枉无极，与其理讼之烦，犹愈侵枉之害。
现代文：听任它则揭人隐私不止，禁止它则侵犯无辜没有尽头，办案虽烦琐，仍胜过侵犯无辜。
English: If it is allowed, it will expose more and more people's privacy, and if it is prohibited, it will infringe on the innocent to no end. Although the handling of the case is tedious, it is still better than infringing on the innocent.

古文：今禁讼诉，则杜一国之口，培一人之势，使得纵横，无所顾惮。
现代文：现在禁止诉讼，则堵塞一国之口，培植一人势力，使得为所欲为，无所顾忌。
English: To prohibit lawsuits now is to close the mouth of a country, cultivate one-man power, and make it do whatever it wants without any scruples.

古文：诸受枉者抱怨积直，独不蒙天地无私之德，而长壅蔽于邪人之铨。
现代文：各被冤枉者揣着怨气和真心话，惟独没蒙受到天地无私的恩惠，而长期滞留在邪佞之人的选举之下。
English: Each of the wronged carries grudges and sincere words, but they have not received the selfless grace of heaven and earth, and have long remained under the election of evil people.

古文：使上明不下照，下情不上闻。
现代文：使得上明不下照，下情不上达。
English: so that the upper light cannot reach the lower light and the lower light cannot reach the lower light.

古文：损政之道四也。
现代文：这是其弊病之四。
English: This is the fourth of its ills.

古文：昔在前圣之世，欲敦风俗，镇静百姓，隆乡党之义，崇六亲之行，礼教庠序以相率，贤不肖于是见矣。
现代文：早在圣世之时，想要改善民风，安抚百姓，就要提高乡里的道德，推崇六亲的行为，礼教学校互相一致，这样便与不贤有了分别。
English: As early as the time of the holy world, if you wanted to improve the people's morals and appease the people, you had to improve the morals of the countryside, promote the behavior of the six relatives, and the schools of etiquette were consistent with each other. In this way, there was a difference from the wicked.

古文：然乡老书其善以献天子，司马论其能以官于职，有司考绩以明黜陟。
现代文：乡老写下他的善献给天子，司马根据他的能授予官职，有关部门考核业绩来决定升降。
English: The village elder writes down his good deeds and dedicates them to the heavenly son, the chief magistrate awards official posts according to his ability, and the relevant departments evaluate the performance to decide on promotion and demotion.

古文：故天下之人退而修本，州党有德义，朝廷有公正，浮华邪佞无所容厝。
现代文：所以天下人后退而自修其身，乡里有道德，朝廷有公正，浮华奸邪之人无处容身。
English: Therefore, people around the world retreat and self-cultivate, the countryside has morality, the court has justice, and there is no place for those who are flashy and treacherous.

古文：今一国之士多者千数，或流徙异邦，或取给殊方，面犹不识，况尽其才力！
现代文：现在一国之士数以千计，或流落他乡，或在异地谋求衣食，相貌尚且不认识，谈何充分发挥他们的才能!
English: Now there are thousands of people in one country, either living in another country, or seeking food and clothing in a different place, their faces are still unknown, how about giving full play to their talents!

古文：而中正知与不知，其当品状，采誉于台府，纳毁于流言。
现代文：不管中正知与不知，遇上应当品评之时，从官府采得美誉，从流言取得坏名。
English: Whether knowingly or unknowingly, when it is time to be evaluated, it receives a good reputation from the government and a bad reputation from rumors.

古文：任己则有不识之蔽，听受则有彼此之偏。
现代文：衹信自己就会被不了解所蒙蔽，听信别人就会被彼此的局限所限制。
English: To believe in oneself is to be blinded by ignorance, to believe in others is to be limited by mutual limitations.

古文：所知者以爱憎夺其平，所不知者以人事乱其度；既无乡老纪行之誉，又非朝廷考绩之课；遂使进宫之人，弃近求远，背本逐末。
现代文：对于认识的人仅凭爱憎，对于不认识的人仅凭关系。既不是乡老记录上的声誉，又不是朝廷的考核。于是使做官的人，舍近求远，弃本逐末。
English: For those who know, it is only by love and hate, and for those who do not know, it is only by relationship. It is neither the reputation on the record of the villagers, nor the assessment of the court. Therefore, the people who do the official work, give up the near and seek the far, and abandon the book one by one.

古文：位以求成，不由行立，品不校功，党誉虚妄。
现代文：官位靠乞求而得，不由行为确定，评定品级不考核功劳，朋党的吹捧不实。
English: Official rank is obtained by begging, not determined by behavior, grading is not based on merit, and the party's praise is not true.

古文：损政五也。
现代文：这是其弊病之五。
English: This is the fifth of its ills.

古文：凡所以立品设状者，求人才以理物也，非虚饰名誉，相为好丑。
现代文：一般之所以立品级看表现，是为了求人才以治民，并不是十叮羁名誉，分别好坏。
English: In general, the reason why the grade is set according to performance is to seek talent to govern the people, not a ten-pronged reputation, respectively good and bad.

古文：虽孝悌之行，不施朝廷，故门外之事，以义断恩。
现代文：孝悌本不能用于朝廷，所以家庭以外祇能讲义而不能讲情。
English: Filial piety cannot be applied to the imperial court, so outside the family it can only be a matter of courtesy and not of love.

古文：既以在官，职有大小，事有剧易，各有功报，此人才之实效，功分之所得也。
现代文：已经做官，职权有大小，事情有难易，各有功报，这正是人之实用，职务之所在。
English: Having been an official, authority has its size, things are difficult and easy, and each has its merits. This is precisely the practicality of people and the place of duties.

古文：今则反之，于限当报，虽职之高，还附卑品，无绩于官，而获高叙，是为抑功实而隆虚名也。
现代文：现在却相反，到了报功的期限，虽然职位很高，却处于很低的品级，没有政绩的，却获得很高的品级，造就压抑了有功劳的人而崇尚虚名。
English: Now, on the contrary, when it comes to the deadline for reporting merits, although the post is high, it is in a very low grade, and those who have no political achievements have obtained a high grade, creating a false reputation that suppresses people with merits.

古文：上夺天朝考绩之分，下长浮华朋党之士。
现代文：对上使朝廷的考核名存实亡，对下帮助了不务实际、拉帮结派的人。这是其弊病之六。
English: On the one hand, it has allowed the imperial court's reputation for assessment to survive and die, and on the other hand, it has helped those who are not pragmatic and pull together. This is the sixth of its ills.

古文：损政六也。凡官不同事，人不同能，得其能则成，失其能则败。
现代文：官职的设立要针对不同的事，人的能力也不相同，发挥了他的才能则成功，失去了则失败。
English: The establishment of official positions should be aimed at different things, and people's abilities are different. If he has exerted his talent, he will succeed, and if he has lost it, he will fail.

古文：今品不状才能之所宜，而以九等为例。
现代文：现在不问才能是否合适，衹管让他登上九品。
English: Now it doesn't matter whether the talent is suitable or not, the fistula has put him on the ninth grade.

古文：以品取人，或非才能之所长；以状取人，则为本品之所限。
现代文：依品级来选取人，并不是他的才能达到了；依表现又被品级所局限。
English: To select a man according to his rank is not the measure of his ability; according to his performance is the measure of his rank.

古文：若状得其实，犹品状相妨，系絷选举，使不得精于才宜。
现代文：如果表现符合实际情况，品级和表现仍相妨碍，就会被选举束缚，使不得专注才能。
English: If performance is in line with the actual situation, grade and performance are still hindered, it will be constrained by the election, making it impossible to focus on talent.

古文：况今九品，所疏则削其长，所亲则饰其短。
现代文：何况今天的中正，与他疏远的，就贬低人家的长处，与他亲近的，就掩饰人家的短处。
English: What's more, today's Zhong Zheng, those who are estranged from him, belittle the strengths of others, and those who are close to him, cover up the shortcomings of others.

古文：徒结白论，以为虚誉，则品不料能，百揆何以得理，万机何以得修？
现代文：专讲空话，以为虚名，则品级和能力不符，怎么能够处理事情。这是其弊病之七。
English: Speaks only empty words, thinks that a false name does not match the grade and ability, how to deal with things. This is the seventh of its ills.

古文：损政七也。前九品诏书，善恶必书，以为褒贬，当时天下，少有所忌。
现代文：以前为九品所颁的韶书，善恶必书，以为褒贬，当时很少有所忌讳。
English: In the past, the best books awarded for the nine grades, the good and evil books, were thought to be praiseworthy. At that time, there were few taboos.

古文：今之九品，所下不彰其罪，所上不列其善，废褒贬之义，任爱憎之断，清浊同流，以植其私。
现代文：今天的中正，降职不明示对方错误，晋升不罗列对方善举，废弃褒贬的宗旨，仅凭感情，清浊相混，以达到个人目的。
English: Today's Zhongzheng, demotion does not indicate the other side's mistakes, promotion does not list the other side's good deeds, abandoned the purpose of praise and criticism, only by emotion, clear and mixed to achieve personal goals.

古文：故反违前品，大其形势，以驱动众人，使必归己。
现代文：所以违反早期制度，大造声势，来煽动众人，使他们都归向自己。
English: Therefore, contrary to the early system, they made a lot of noise to incite people and make them all turn to themselves.

古文：进者无功以表劝，退者无恶以成惩。
现代文：晋升者没有功劳来激励他，降职者没有错误来惩戒他。
English: He who is promoted has no merit to encourage him, and he who is demoted has no fault to punish him.

古文：惩劝不明，则风俗污浊，天下人焉得不解德行而锐人事？
现代文：奖惩不明，则风气污浊，天下人又怎能不懈怠德行而专心于人情事故呢?
English: If the rewards and punishments are not clear, then the culture will be tainted. How can the people of the world not slack off their virtue and concentrate on human relations accidents?

古文：损政八也。
现代文：这是其弊病之八。
English: This is the eighth of its ills.

古文：由此论之，选中正而非其人，授权势而无尝罚，或缺中正而无禁检，故邪党得肆，枉滥纵横。
现代文：由此而论，立中正而没选对人，给他权势而无赏罚，或缺中正而无约束，所以奸邪猖狂，冤狱遍地。
English: From this, it can be said that it is wrong to set up a middle man without choosing the right man, to give him power without reward and punishment, and to set up a middle man without restriction. Therefore, treachery is rampant, and unjust imprisonment is everywhere.

古文：虽职名中正，实为奸府；事名九品，而有八损。
现代文：虽名为中正，实际是邪恶的处所；其事虽在九品，却有八害。
English: Although it is called Zhongzheng, it is actually a place of evil; although it is in Jiuping, it has eight harms.

古文：或恨结于亲亲，猜生于骨肉，当身困于敌雠，子孙离其殃咎。
现代文：或在亲戚中结下仇恨，或在骨肉中产生猜疑，当身陷于仇敌当中，子孙躲开祸害。
English: Or sows enmity among relatives, or sows doubt in the bones; when caught in the midst of an enemy, the children flee from the evil.

古文：斯乃历世之患，非徒当今之害也。
现代文：逭却是历代的而非仅是现在的灾祸。
English: The plague of boils, however, is not just a modern scourge, but an age-old one.

古文：是以时主观时立法，防奸消乱，靡有常制，故周因于殷，有所损益。
现代文：所以君主审时立法，防奸消乱，没有不变的制度，所以周沿袭殷，有所增减。
English: Therefore, there is no unchangeable system of legislation, prevention of treason and suppression of turmoil during the monarch's trial, so the Zhou Dynasty followed Yin, with some increase and decrease.

古文：至于中正九品，上圣古贤皆所不为，岂蔽于此事而有不周哉，将以政化之宜无取于此也。
现代文：到了中正九品，古代圣贤都不用它，难道是被此事蒙蔽而有不周全的吗，是注重政治教化而不用它。
English: When it came to Zhongzheng Jiupin, the ancient sages did not use it. Was it because they were blinded by this and did not complete it? It was because they focused on political enlightenment and did not use it.

古文：自魏立以来，未见其得人之功，而生雠薄之累。
现代文：自魏建立以来，没见它得到人的功劳，却带来仇恨和不厚道的毛病。
English: Since the establishment of the Wei Dynasty, it has not seen human merit, but has brought hatred and unseemly problems.

古文：毁风败俗，无益于化，古今之失，莫大于此。
现代文：伤风败俗，无益于教化，古今的失误，没有比遣更大的了。
English: There is no greater blunder than to offend morals and customs, which is not conducive to enlightenment, and which has been committed from ancient times to the present.

古文：愚臣以为宜罢中正，除九品，弃魏氏之弊法，立一代之美制。
现代文：我认为应当罢免中正，废除九品，放弃曹魏的有弊病之法，建立一代美好的制度。
English: In my opinion, Zhongzheng should be removed from office, the Nine Articles of the Constitution should be abolished, Cao Wei's faulty law should be abandoned, and a better system should be established.

古文：疏奏，优诏答之。
现代文：上奏后，皇帝优韶回答他。
English: After the recital, Emperor Youjun answered him.

古文：后司空卫瓘等亦共表宜省九品，复古乡议里选。
现代文：后来司空卫罐等共同建议应废除九品中正制，恢复古代的乡里议论推举制。
English: Later, Sikyong Wei Can and others jointly proposed that the nine-grade middle school system should be abolished and the ancient township discussion and selection system should be restored.

古文：帝竟不施行。
现代文：皇帝并没有实行。
English: The emperor did not carry it out.

古文：毅夙夜在公，坐而待旦，言议切直，无所曲挠，为朝野之所式瞻。
现代文：刘毅一心为公，从早到晚，言论诚恳，不转弯抹角，朝野都以他为榜样。
English: Liu Yi is dedicated to the public, from morning to night, his speech is sincere, and he does not turn a corner. The morning and evening are all based on his example.

古文：尝散斋而疾，其妻省之，毅便奏加妻罪而请解斋。
现代文：曾经在散斋期间生病，他的妻子去看他，刘毅便上奏治罪妻子解除斋戒。
English: Once, when he was ill during the break of the fast, his wife went to see him, and Liu Yi made a report to punish his wife for breaking the fast.

古文：妻子有过，立加杖捶，其公正如此。
现代文：妻子和孩子有错，马上杖打，其公正如此。
English: If a wife and child do something wrong, they are immediately beaten with a cane. It's only fair.

古文：然以峭直，故不至公辅。
现代文：但因严厉而耿直，所以官没做到三公。
English: However, because of the severity and straightforwardness, the officials did not achieve the three principles.

古文：帝以毅清贫，赐钱三十万，日给米肉。
现代文：皇帝因刘毅清贫，赏钱三十万，每供给米肉。
English: The emperor rewarded Liu Yi with 300,000 yuan and rice and meat for his poverty alleviation.

古文：年七十，告老。
现代文：七十岁时，要求退休。
English: At the age of seventy, he asked to retire.

古文：久之，见许，以光禄大夫归第，门施行马，复赐钱百万。
现代文：很久才被批准，以光禄大夫回家，门前设置拦阻人马通行的木栅，再赏钱一百万。
English: It took a long time for the approval to be granted, and the doctor went home with a gold watch, a wooden grate was set up in front of the door to block the passage of people and horses, and another million was awarded.

古文：后司徒举毅为青州大中正，尚书以毅悬车致仕，不宜劳以碎务。
现代文：后来司徒推举刘毅任青州大中正，尚书认为他已退休，不应再以琐事相烦。
English: Later, Szeto nominated Liu Yi to be the president of the Qingzhou University. Shangshu thought that he had retired and should no longer bother with trifles.

古文：陈留相乐安孙尹表曰： 礼，凡卑者执劳，尊得居逸，是顺叙之宜也。
现代文：陈留相乐安孙尹上奏说： 礼，凡位低者劳累，位尊者闲逸，这是合乎顺序的。
English: Chen Liu Xiangle and Sun Yat-sen said: "It is in order that the lowly should work hard and the eminent should enjoy leisure.

古文：司徒魏舒、司隶校尉严询与毅年齿相近，往者同为散骑常侍，后分授外内之职，资途所经，出处一致。
现代文：司徒魏舒、司隶校尉严询和刘毅年龄相近，以前同为散骑常侍，后来各在内外任职，资历一样。
English: Szu Wei Shu and Szu Li, both of whom are close in age to Liu Yi, used to be horseback riding attendants, and later served at home and abroad, with the same seniority.

古文：今询管四十万户州，兼董司百僚，总摄机要，舒所统殷广，兼执九品，铨十六州论议，主者不以为剧。
现代文：现在严询管四十万户州，兼督察主管百官，总掌机要，魏舒统治众多人口，兼管中正，权衡十六州的评论，主事者不以为繁重。
English: At present, the 400,000 households of the state are under strict supervision, and the inspectors are in charge of hundreds of officials, and the general is in charge of the machine. Wei Shu ruled a large population, and he was in charge of the central government, and he weighed the comments of 16 states. The person in charge did not think it was burdensome.

古文：毅但以知一州，便谓不宜累以碎事，于毅太优，询、舒太劣。
现代文：刘毅不过主持一州，便说他不适合以琐碎之事相牵累，对刘毅太好，对严询、魏舒太不好。
English: Liu Yi only presided over one state, and said that he was not suitable to be involved in trivial matters. He was too good for Liu Yi, and too bad for Yan Yan and Wei Shu.

古文：若以前听致仕，不宜复与迁授位者，故光禄大夫郑袤为司空是也。
现代文：如果以前听任退休，不应又授官或升官，原光禄大夫郑袤为司空就是这样。
English: If you were allowed to retire before, you should not be awarded or promoted again. This was the case with the former Guanglu doctor, Zheng Qi, who was promoted to Sikuo.

古文：夫知人则哲，惟帝难之。
现代文：知人之明，即使皇帝也感到不易。
English: Even the emperor found it difficult to come to terms with this.

古文：尚可复委以宰辅之任，不可谘以人伦之论，臣窃所未安。
现代文：尚且可再委以宰相的重任，却不可向他咨询人伦观点，我私下感到不安。
English: I am privately uneasy about the fact that the prime minister can be entrusted with the important task of prime minister, but he cannot be asked for his views on human ethics.

古文：昔郑武公年过八十，入为周司徒，虽过悬车之年，必有可用。
现代文：过去郑武公年过八十，入朝任周司徒，虽遇退休之年，必有可用。
English: In the past, Zheng Wukong was over 80 years old, and he entered the court as Zhou Sittu, although in the case of retirement, he must be available.

古文：毅前为司隶，直法不挠，当朝之臣，多所按劾。
现代文：刘毅以前为司隶校尉，执法如山，当朝大臣，多被弹劾。
English: Liu Yi used to be a sergeant, a law enforcement officer, a minister, and was often impeached.

古文：谚曰： 受尧之诛，不能称尧。 
现代文：谚语说： 被尧杀了，不能说尧好。 
English: A proverb says: If you are killed by a snake, you cannot say it was a good thing.

古文：直臣无党，古今所悉。
现代文：正直的大臣无派别，古今都知道。
English: Honest ministers have no faction, and this has been known since ancient times.

古文：是以汲黯死于淮阳，董仲舒裁为诸侯之相。
现代文：所以汲黯死于淮阳，董仲舒被削为诸侯之相。
English: Therefore, Qu Ying died in Huaiyang, and Dong Zhongshu was reduced to the status of a vassal.

古文：而毅独遭圣明，不离辇毂，当世之士咸以为荣。
现代文：而刘毅惟独遇到圣上，不离左右，当朝的士人都以为荣耀。
English: However, Liu Yi was the only one who met the saint and did not leave him. The scholars of that time all thought it was an honor.

古文：毅虽身偏有风疾，而志气聪明，一州品第，不足劳其思虑。
现代文：刘毅虽身体局部有风病，但聪明有志气，一州评论并分等次，不足劳他费神。
English: Although Liu Yi's body is partially affected by rheumatism, he is smart and ambitious. One state commented that he was equal in rank, and he did not work hard enough.

古文：毅疾恶之心小过，主者必疑其论议伤物，故高其优礼，令去事实，此为机阁毅，使绝人伦之路也。
现代文：刘毅嫉恶之心稍有过头，主事者必定怀疑他评论有损事物，所以给他很高的礼遇，不让他干实事，与世隔绝，使绝人伦之路。
English: Liu Yi's jealousy is a bit over the top. The person in charge must have suspected that his comments were detrimental to things, so he gave him a high courtesy, did not let him do real things, isolated him from the world, and made the road of perfect harmony.

古文：臣州茂德惟毅，越毅不用，则清谈倒错矣。 
现代文：臣州裹的优秀人才祇有刘毅，越过他不用，则公正的评论就要颠倒了。 
English: Liu Yi is the only outstanding talent in Wenzhou. If he is not used, the fair comment will be reversed.

古文：于是青州自二品已上凭毅取正。光禄勋石鉴等共奏曰： 谨按陈留相孙尹表及与臣等书如左。
现代文：于是青州自二品以上光禄勋石鉴等共同上奏说： 谨按陈留相孙尹和我们的奏章如下。
English: As a result, Qingzhou from more than two products of the Guanglu Medal and the Stone Appraisal jointly made a report, saying: I would like to express my respect to Chen Ruzi, Sun Yat-sen and our report as follows.

古文：臣州履境海岱，而参风齐、鲁，故人俗务本，而世敦德让，今虽不充于旧，而遗训犹存，是以人伦归行，士识所守也。
现代文：我们地处海岱之间，兼有齐、鲁之风，所以人心务本而崇尚谦让，现在虽不如过去浓厚，但遣训仍在，所以人人崇尚德行，士人坚持操守。
English: We are located between the sea gulls, and have both Qi and Lu styles, so people's minds are pragmatic and advocate modesty. Although it is not as strong as in the past, the training is still in place, so everyone advocates virtue, and scholars adhere to ethics.

古文：前被司徒符，当参举州大中正。
现代文：前些时得司徒符节，当参选州大中正。
English: Some time ago, on the day of St. Stephen's Day, I was a junior high school student running for election to a state university.

古文：佥以光禄大夫毅，纯孝至素，著在乡闾。
现代文：都认为光禄大夫刘毅，纯孝朴素，闻名乡里。
English: They all think that Guanglu doctor Liu Yi, pure and simple, is famous in the countryside.

古文：忠允亮直，竭于事上，仕不为荣，惟期尽节。
现代文：忠诚正直，尽力为皇帝效劳，做官不求荣誉，衹期望守住节操。
English: They are loyal and honest, they do their best to serve the emperor, they do not seek honor in their work, and they expect to keep the discipline.

古文：正身率道，崇公忘私，行高义明，出处同揆。
现代文：修身守道，公而忘私，道德高尚，进退有节。
English: Practice self-cultivation, keep to the path, be selfless in public, have high morals, and be disciplined in advance and retreat.

古文：故能令义士宗其风景，州闾归其清流。
现代文：所以能令义士仰望其风采，影响一州之风气。
English: Therefore, it can make the righteous look up to its style and influence the ethos of a state.

古文：虽年耆偏疾，而神明克壮，实臣州人士所思准系者矣。诚以毅之明格，能不言而信，风之所动，清浊必偃，以称一州咸同之望故也。
现代文：他虽然年老有病，却神清气壮，实在是臣本州的人望。的确以刘毅的磊落风格，能做到不言而信，影响所及，各界改观，这是一州榜样的缘故。
English: Although he is old and sickly, he is clean and vigorous, and is really a subject of the people of Honshu. Indeed, with Liu Yi's dignified style, he can achieve unspoken belief, influence, and change the outlook of all walks of life. This is the reason for the example of the state.

古文：窃以为礼贤尚德，教之大典，王制夺与，动为开塞，而士之所归，人伦为大。
现代文：窃以为礼遇贤人，崇尚道德，是教化的重要内容，朝廷之任免关系到选官之路是否通畅，而士人最注重人伦。
English: Stealing courtesy from the wise and advocating morality is an important part of enlightenment. The appointment and removal of the imperial court is related to the smoothness of the selection of officials, and the judges pay the most attention to human relations.

古文：臣等虚劣，虽言废于前，今承尹书，敢不列启。
现代文：臣等无能，虽然以前没有启奏，现在捧着还尹的奏章，敢不启奏。
English: The ministers are so incompetent that although there was no opening ceremony before, they are now holding Ho Yin's medal and daring not to open the ceremony.

古文：按尹所执，非惟惜名议于毅之身，亦通陈朝宜夺与大准。
现代文：茎尹所说，不衹是爱惜对于塑隧的评论，也是全面陈述朝廷选官的总的原则。
English: According to Zhu Yin, it is not only a comment on the Shaping Tunnel, but also a comprehensive statement of the general principle of the imperial court's selection of officials.

古文：以为尹言当否，应蒙评议。 
现代文：我们认为孙尹说的当否，应当评议。 
English: We believe that the appropriateness of what Sun Yin said should be discussed.

古文：由是毅遂为州都，铨正人流，清浊区别，其所弹贬，自亲贵者始。
现代文：于是型堑任州中正，选举人才，区别清浊，弹劾官吏，贬低官职，从亲戚、尊贵者开始。
English: As a result, the type of appointment of the state middle-ranking officials, the election of talents, the distinction of clean officials, the impeachment of officials, and the demeaning of official positions, starting from relatives and dignitaries.

古文：太康六年卒，武帝抚几惊曰： 失吾名臣，不得生作三公！ 
现代文：太康六年去世，武帝摸着停尸之床震惊地说： 我失去了一位名臣，他不能生为三公! 
English: When Taikang died six years later, Emperor Wu felt the mortuary bed and said in shock: "I have lost a famous minister, he cannot be born as the Three Princes!"

古文：即赠仪同三司，使者监护丧事。
现代文：即赠仪同三司，派人监护丧事。
English: That is, the bestowal ceremony and the three departments will send someone to supervise the funeral.

古文：羽林左监北海王宫上疏曰： 中诏以毅忠允匪躬，赠班台司，斯诚圣朝考绩以毅著勋之美事也。
现代文：羽林左监北海王宫上疏说： 皇上以为刘毅鞠躬尽瘁而追封，这是圣朝认为刘毅有显著功勋。
English: Wu Lin, the left supervisor of the Beihai Royal Palace, said: The emperor thought that Liu Yi bowed and did his best to pursue the seal, which was the Holy Dynasty's view that Liu Yi had significant merits.

古文：臣谨按，谥者行之迹，而号者功之表。今毅功德并立，而有号无谥，于义不体。
现代文：臣谨按，谧表其德，而号表其功。现在刘毅功德并立，却有号无谧，于义不符。
English: It is said that one's virtue is reflected in one's name, but one's virtue is reflected in one's deeds. Now, Liu Yi's virtue and deeds stand side by side, but his name and deeds do not match his righteousness.

古文：臣窃以《春秋》之事求之，谥法主于行而不系爵。
现代文：以《春秋》之例来论证，谧法主要依德行而不依爵。
English: Taking "Spring and Autumn" as an example, it is argued that the casting method is mainly based on virtue and not on peerage.

古文：然汉、魏相承，爵非列侯，则皆没而高行，不加之谥，至使三事之贤臣，不如野战之将。
现代文：但漠、魏相承，不是列侯，则都不计其高尚品德，不给加谧，以致位居丞相的贤臣，不如野战的将领，碑文亦大有区别。
English: However, in both the Western and the Eastern dynasties, if a person was not a vassal, his or her high moral character was not valued and he or she was not given a title, with the result that a wise retainer who held the title of chancellor was not as good as a field commander, and the inscriptions were also very different.

古文：铭迹所殊，臣愿圣世举《春秋》之远制，改列爵之旧限，使夫功行之实不相掩替，则莫不率赖。
现代文：臣愿圣世奉行《春秋》古制，改革颁爵位的旧的限制，使功劳和德行的真相不相掩盖，则没有不服从和依靠陛下的。
English: There is no disobedience and reliance on His Majesty if the vassal wishes the holy world to follow the "Spring and Autumn" ancient system, reform the old restrictions on the award of knighthoods, and make the truth of merit and virtue not be covered up.

古文：若以革旧毁制，非所仓卒，则毅之忠益，虽不攻城略地，论德进爵，亦应在例。
现代文：如果认为改革或废除旧制，不能仓促进行，那么刘毅的尽忠，虽不攻城掠地，但论德晋爵，亦应在列。
English: If it is believed that the reform or abolition of the old system cannot be carried out in haste, then Liu Yi's loyalty, although he did not attack the city to seize the land, should also be included in the list of De Jinzhe.

古文：臣敢惟行甫请周之义，谨牒毅功行如石。 
现代文：臣胆敢思考行甫请周之例，小心地写下刘毅的功劳和德行如上。 
English: The vassal dared to think about the example of Zhu Zhou, and carefully wrote down the merits and virtues of Liu Yi as above.

古文：帝出其表使八坐议之，多同宫议。
现代文：皇帝把奏章拿给尚书省讨论，多数同意王宫的建议。
English: The emperor brought the play chapter to Shang Shuxuan for discussion, and the majority agreed with the suggestion of the royal palace.

古文：奏寝不报。
现代文：奏章久压不报。
English: The score is long overdue.

古文：二子：暾、总。
现代文：两个儿子：刘暾、刘总。
English: Two sons: Liu Wei and Liu Zong.

古文：暾字长升，正直有父风。
现代文：刘暾字长升，正直有父亲的遣风。
English: Liu Xizhong's character is growing up, and he has his father's spirit.

古文：太康初为博士，会议齐王攸之国，加崇典礼，暾与诸博士坐议迕旨。
现代文：太康初年骂博士，正值讨论齐王司马攸去封国，增加礼仪一事，刘暾与诸位博士因议论违背旨意被治罪。
English: In the first year of Taikang's reign, he scolded the doctors. At the same time, they were discussing the issue of Qi Wang Sima You going to seal the country and increase the etiquette. Liu Wei and all the doctors were punished for discussing against the will.

古文：武帝大怒，收暾等付廷尉。
现代文：武帝大怒，收刘暾等交付廷尉。
English: Emperor Wu was furious and ordered Liu Ye and others to be handed over to a courtier.

古文：会赦得出，免官。
现代文：因大赦放出，免官。
English: Released as a result of an amnesty, dismissed from office.

古文：初，暾父毅疾冯紞奸佞，欲奏其罪，未果而卒。
现代文：当初，刘暾的父亲刘毅痛恨冯鱿奸佞，欲奏其罪，还没结果就去世了。
English: At first, Liu Yi's father, Liu Yi, hated Feng Xuan, the traitor, and wanted to play on his guilt, but he died before he could do so.

古文：至是，紞位宦日隆，暾慨然曰： 使先人在，不令紞得无患。 
现代文：现在，冯鱿官运亨通，刘暾感慨道： 假如父亲在世，不会让他如此自在。 
English: Now that Feng Yiguan is a successful businessman, Liu Yao said with emotion: "If my father were alive, I wouldn't let him be so comfortable.

古文：后为酸枣令，转侍御史。
现代文：后为酸枣令，改任侍御史。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Kizao-rei and changed his title to Samurai-Goshi.

古文：会司徒王浑主簿刘舆狱辞连暾，将收付廷尉。
现代文：正值司徒王浑、主簿刘舆的供词牵连到刘暾，将被交付廷尉。
English: It was at this time that the confessions of Wanghun Sittu and Liu Ying, the bookkeeper, implicated Liu Ye, who was to be handed over to the imperial lieutenant.

古文：浑不欲使府有过，欲距劾自举之。
现代文：王浑不想让司徒府有遇错，想抗拒弹劾便自己出来说。
English: Wang Hun didn't want to let the Stowe government make a mistake, and if he wanted to resist impeachment, he would come out and say it himself.

古文：与暾更相曲直，浑怒，便逊位还第。
现代文：与刘暾互争对错，王浑发怒，退位回家。
English: Wang Hun became angry and abdicated to go home.

古文：暾乃奏浑曰： 谨按司徒王浑，蒙国厚恩，备位鼎司，不能上佐天子，调和阴阳，下遂万物之宜，使卿大夫各得其所。
现代文：刘暾于是弹劾王浑说： 司徒王浑蒙国厚恩，位为三公，不能上佐天子，调和阴阳，下遂万物，使卿大夫各得其所。
English: Liu Bei then impeached Wang Hun and said, "Situ Wang Hun received the great favor of the country and was appointed as the Third Prince. He cannot ascend to the Son of Heaven, reconcile yin and yang, and subdue all things, so that the noble doctor can have his own place.

古文：敢因刘舆拒扞诏使，私欲大府兴长狱讼。
现代文：胆敢藉刘舆抵制天子使臣，个人想要让司徒府卷入诉讼。
English: He dared to use Liu Yiwu to resist the envoy of the Son of Heaven, and he personally wanted to involve Szeto Prefecture in the lawsuit.

古文：昔陈平不答汉文之问，邴吉不问死人之变，诚得宰相之体也。
现代文：昔日陈平不答汉文帝之间，邴吉不问死人之变，确实合乎宰相的身份。
English: In the past, Chen Ping did not answer questions between Han and Emperor Wen, and He Ji did not ask about the changes of the dead, which is indeed consistent with the identity of the prime minister.

古文：既兴刑狱，怨怼而退，举动轻速，无大臣之节，请免浑官。
现代文：而王浑却发动诉讼，怨恨而退，举动草率，无大臣之体。请免旦运官。
English: Wang Hun, on the other hand, launched a lawsuit, withdrew in resentment, acted hastily, and did not have the body of a minister.

古文：右长史、杨丘亭侯刘肇，便辟善柔，苟于阿顺，请大鸿胪削爵土。 诸闻暾此奏者，皆叹美之。
现代文：右长史、杨丘亭侯刘肇阿谀奉迎，请大鸿胪削除其爵位封地。 凡听说型坠奏章者无不赞美。
English: The Right Long History, Yang Qiu Ting, Liu Zhaozhao, the lord of Liu Zhaozhou, invited the Great Great Dragon to remove his peerage fiefdom.

古文：其后武库火，尚书郭彰率百人自卫而不救火，暾正色诘之。
现代文：这以后武器库着火，尚书郭彰率一百人自卫而不救火，刘暾严肃地责问他。
English: After that, the weapons depot caught fire, and Shang Shuguo Zhang led a hundred people to defend themselves and did not put out the fire. Liu Ye seriously reprimanded him.

古文：彰怒曰： 我能截君角也。 
现代文：郭彰发怒说： 我能裁你的角。 
English: Guo Zhang said angrily: I can cut your horns.

古文：暾勃然谓彰曰： 君何敢恃宠作威作福，天子法冠而欲截角乎！ 
现代文：刘暾勃然大怒说： 你怎敢恃宠作威作福，天子法冠你想要截角吗! 
English: Liu Ye flew into a rage and said, "How dare you take advantage of others, act as a tyrant, and seek blessings? You want to cut corners?

古文：求纸笔奏之，彰伏不敢言，众人解释，乃止。
现代文：要纸笔写奏章，郭彰伏地而不敢言，众人劝解，才停止。
English: When asked to write a musical score with a pen and paper, Guo Zhang cringed and didn't dare to speak, but was persuaded to stop.

古文：彰久贵豪侈，每出辄众百余人。
现代文：郭彰长期豪华奢侈，每次外出后面都跟着百余人。
English: Guo Zhang has been living in luxury for a long time. Every time he goes out, he is followed by more than 100 people.

古文：自此之后，务从简素。
现代文：从此以后，务求俭朴。
English: From now on, try to be frugal.

古文：暾迁太原内史，赵王伦篡位，假征虏将军，不受，与三王共举义。
现代文：刘暾升任太原内史，赵王司马伦篡位后，使之假征虏将军，不肯接受，与三王共同起义。
English: Liu Bei was promoted to Taiyuan Inner History, and after Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, he made him a fake conscripted general. He refused to accept it and revolted together with the three kings.

古文：惠帝复阼，暾为左丞，正色立朝，三台清肃。
现代文：惠帝复位，刘暾为左丞，正色立朝，三省清正肃穆。
English: Emperor Hui was restored to the throne, Liu Bei was appointed to the left of the emperor, a new dynasty was established, and the three provinces were restored to a state of purity and solemnity.

古文：寻兼御史中丞，奏免尚书仆射、东安公繇及王粹、董艾等十余人。
现代文：不久，兼任御史中丞，上奏免尚书仆射、束安公司马繇及王粹、董艾等十余人官。
English: Soon, he also served as the vice-president of the imperial history, and more than ten officials such as Shang Shufu, Shuan Ma, Wang Qi, and Dong Ai were appointed.

古文：朝廷嘉之，遂即真。
现代文：朝廷表扬他，于是正式任命。
English: The court praised him, and he was officially appointed.

古文：迁中庶子、左卫将军、司隶校尉，奏免武陵王澹及何绥、刘坦、温畿、李晅等。
现代文：升任中庶子、左卫将军、司隶校尉，上奏免武陵王司马澹及何绥、刘坦、温畿、李晅等人官。
English: He was promoted to middle illegitimate son, General of the Left Division of the Guards, Lieutenant of the Division of the Guards, and was pardoned by King Sima of Wuling and officials such as He Yao, Liu Tan, Wengui, and Li Yao.

古文：长沙王乂讨齐王冏，暾豫谋，封硃虚县公，千八百户。
现代文：长沙王司马义讨伐齐王司马同，刘暾参预谋划，封朱虚县公，给封户一千八百户。
English: Changsha Wang Simai's crusade against Qi Wang Simatong began, Liu Ying participated in the pre-planning, and Zhu Hui County was made public, with 1,800 households assigned to it.

古文：乂死，坐免。
现代文：司马义死，免官。
English: Sima died a peaceful death and was relieved of his duties.

古文：顷之，复为司隶。
现代文：不久，再为司隶校尉。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：及惠帝之幸长安也，留暾守洛阳。
现代文：惠帝到长安时，留刘暾守洛阳。
English: When Hui Di arrived in Chang'an, he left Liu Bei to guard Luoyang.

古文：河间王颙遣使鸩羊皇后，暾乃与留台仆射荀籓、河南尹周馥等上表，理后无罪。
现代文：河间王司马颙派人要鸩杀羊皇后，刘暾便与留台仆射荀藩、河南尹周馥等上表，说皇后无罪。
English: The king of Kawama, Sima Qian, sent someone to kill the Queen of Sheep, and Liu Qian then went to the table with the retainers of Shaoqian, Henan Yin Zhouqi, and others to say that the Queen was not guilty.

古文：语在《后传》。
现代文：奏章在《后传》。
English: The score is in the epilogue.

古文：颙见表，大怒，遣陈颜、吕朗率骑五千收暾，暾东奔高密王略。
现代文：司马题见表，大怒，派陈颜、吕朗率骑兵五千捉刘暾，刘暾东奔高密王司马略。
English: Enraged, he sent Chen Yan and Lulang with five thousand cavalry to capture Liu Ye, and Liu Ye went to the East to capture the high priest Sima Liu.

古文：会刘根作逆，略以暾为大都督，加镇军将军讨根。
现代文：正值刘根叛乱，司马略以刘暾为大都督，加镇军将军讨伐刘根。
English: At the time of Liu Gen's rebellion, Sima Liao made Liu Ye the grand governor, and dispatched the general of the town army to fight against Liu Gen.

古文：暾战失利，还洛。
现代文：刘根失利，回洛阳。
English: Liu Gen lost and returned to Luoyang.

古文：至酸枣，值东海王越奉迎大驾。
现代文：到酸枣，值东海王司马越奉迎皇帝。
English: To the sour jujube, it is worth the East Sea King Sima Yue to welcome the emperor.

古文：及帝还洛，羊后反宫。
现代文：等皇帝回洛阳，羊皇后也回皇宫。
English: When the emperor returned to Luoyang, the sheep queen also returned to the imperial palace.

古文：后遣使谢暾曰： 赖刘司隶忠诚之志，得有今日。 
现代文：皇后派使臣感谢刘坠说： 靠刘司隶的忠诚才有今天。 
English: The empress sent an envoy to thank Liu Sheng, saying: "It is thanks to Liu Sili's loyalty that we are here today.

古文：以旧勋复封爵，加光禄大夫。
现代文：以旧勋再次封爵，加光禄大夫。
English: With the old honor, he was knighted again, and became a doctor.

古文：暾妻前卒，先陪陵葬。
现代文：刘暾妻已死，先埋入陪葬地。
English: Liu Yao's wife had died and was buried first in the burial ground.

古文：子更生初婚，家法，妇当拜墓，携宾客亲属数十乘，载酒食而行。
现代文：儿子更生刚结婚，依家法，儿媳应当拜墓，全家带着敷十乘车的宾客亲属，还有酒食前去。
English: His son, Zeng Sheng, had just married, and according to family law, his daughter-in-law should visit the grave. The whole family went there with ten guests and relatives, as well as food and drink.

古文：先是，洛阳令王棱为越所信，而轻暾，暾每欲绳之，棱以为怨。
现代文：以前，洛阳令王棱被司马越信任，轻视刘暾，刘暾总想治他，他恨刘暾。
English: Previously, Luo Yangling Wang Ren was trusted by Sima Yue and despised Liu Yao. Liu Yao always wanted to cure him, and he hated Liu Yao.

古文：时刘聪、王弥屯河北，京邑危惧。
现代文：当时刘聪、王弥驻扎在河北，京城危险恐惧。
English: At that time, Liu Cong and Wang Ya were stationed in Hebei, and the capital was fearful of danger.

古文：棱告越，云暾与弥乡亲而欲投之。
现代文：王棱告诉司马越，说刘暾舆王弥是同乡，想要投奔他。
English: Wang Ren told Sima Yue that Liu Xiwangya was a fellow villager and wanted to join him.

古文：越严骑将追暾，右长史傅宣明暾不然。
现代文：司马越急令骑兵追刘暾，右长史傅宣说刘暾不会这样。
English: Sima Yue hurriedly ordered the cavalry to chase Liu Ye. The right-hand man, Shi Fu Xuan, said that Liu Ye would not do that.

古文：暾闻之，未至墓而反，以正义责越，越甚惭。
现代文：刘暾听说后，没到墓地而返回，以此行的目的责问司马越，司马越很惭愧。
English: After hearing this, Liu Ye did not go to the cemetery, but returned to question Sima Yue. Sima Yue was very ashamed.

古文：及刘曜寇京师，以暾为抚军将军、假节、都督城守诸军事。
现代文：等刘曜侵犯京城，以刘暾为抚军将军、假节、都督守城诸军事。
English: When Liu You invaded the capital, Liu Bei became the general of the army, the false festival, and the military governor of the city.

古文：曜退，迁尚书仆射。
现代文：刘曜撤退，升任尚书仆射。
English: Liu You retreated and was promoted to Shang Shufu.

古文：越惮暾久居监司，又为众情所归，乃以为右光禄大夫，领太子少傅，加散骑常侍。
现代文：司马越害怕刘暾久居监察部门。又为众望所归，于是以之为右光禄大夫，领太子少傅，加散骑常侍。
English: Sima Yue was more and more afraid of Liu Yijun's long-term residence in the supervision department. He was also highly regarded by the public, so he used him as the doctor of the right light, the leader of the prince, and the attendant.

古文：外示崇进，实夺其权。
现代文：表面上是晋升，实际夺了他的权。
English: On the surface it was a promotion, but in reality it took away his power.

古文：怀帝又诏暾领卫尉，加特进。
现代文：怀帝又令刘暾领卫尉，加特进。
English: Emperor Huai also made Liu Jian the captain of the guard, and Ga Tejin.

古文：后复以暾为司隶，加侍中。
现代文：后来再以刘暾为司隶校尉，加侍中。
English: Later, Liu Yao was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and became an attendant.

古文：暾五为司隶，允协物情故也。
现代文：刘暾五次任司隶校尉，这是因为人事和洽。
English: Liu Wei has been appointed to the rank of lieutenant for five times. This is due to personnel harmony.

古文：王弥入洛，百官歼焉。
现代文：王弥到洛阳，百官被杀。
English: Wang Ya went to Luoyang, where hundreds of officials were killed.

古文：弥以暾乡里宿望，故免于难。
现代文：王弥认为刘暾是乡里老成望重的人，所以没有加害他。
English: Wang Ya thought that Liu Ye was a respected person in the village, so he did not harm him.

古文：暾因说弥曰： 今英雄竞起，九州幅裂，有不世之功者，宇内不容。
现代文：刘暾乘机对王弥说： 当今英雄逐鹿，国家分裂，有奇功者被人不容。
English: Liu Wei took the opportunity to say to Wang Ya: Today's heroes chase deer, the country is divided, and those with miraculous feats are not tolerated.

古文：将军自兴兵已来，何攻不克，何战不胜，而复与刘曜不协，宜思文种之祸，以范蠡为师。
现代文：将军自发兵以来，攻无不克，战无不胜，却与刘曜不和，应当想想文种的灾祸，以范蠡为师。
English: Ever since he sent out his troops, the general has been relentless in attacking and invincible in battle, but he is not at peace with Liu You. We should think about the disaster of literature and take Fan Yu as a teacher.

古文：且将军可无帝王之意，东王本州，以观时势，上可以混一天下，下可以成鼎峙之事，岂失孙、刘乎！
现代文：况且将军怎能无称王之意，东王本州。以观形势，上可以统一天下，下可以成鼎立之事，做个刘备或孙权!
English: Moreover, how can a general not have the king's intention, the king of the East, Honshu. In view of the situation, the upper can unify the lower, and the lower can become a triumvirate, making a Liu Bei or Sun Quan!

古文：蒯通有言，将军宜图之。 
现代文：按蒯通谏刘邦的话，将军应早作打算。 
English: According to Liu Bang, the general should make plans early.

古文：弥以为然，使暾于青州，与曹嶷谋，且征之。
现代文：王弥认为有理，派刘暾到青州，与曹嶷谋划，且任用他。
English: Wang Ya thought it was reasonable and sent Liu Wei to Qingzhou to plan with Cao Wei and appointed him.

古文：暾至东阿，为石勒游骑所获，见弥与嶷书而大怒，乃杀之。
现代文：刘暾到柬阿，被石勒巡逻骑兵抓获，见王弥给曹嶷的信大怒，于是杀了他。
English: Liu Xuan went to Cambodia and was captured by the Shihle patrol cavalry. Seeing Wang Mi's letter to Cao Pi, he was furious and killed him.

古文：暾有二子：佑、白。
现代文：刘暾有两个儿子：刘佑、刘白。
English: Liu Yao has two sons: Liu You and Liu Bai.

古文：佑为太傅属，白太子舍人。
现代文：刘佑为太傅属，任太子舍人。
English: Liu You is a member of the imperial family, but he does not want to be a prince.

古文：白果烈有才用，东海王越忌之，窃遣上军何伦率百余人入暾第，为劫取财物，杀白而去。
现代文：刘皇刚直有才干，东海王司马越恨他，私自派上军鱼俭率一百余人到刘暾家，抢劫财物，杀了型皇离去。
English: Liu Wang Gang Zhi had talent, but Wang Sima of the East Sea hated him more and more. I personally sent more than a hundred soldiers to Liu Xuan's house, robbed his property, killed the model emperor and left.

古文：总字弘纪，好学直亮，后叔父彪，位至北军中候。
现代文：刘总字弘纪，好学，正直忠实，过继给叔父型彪，官至北军中候。
English: Liu Zongzha Hongji, studious, honest and faithful, was succeeded by his uncle Jian Biao, and rose to the rank of middle-ranking officer in the Northern Army.

古文：程卫，字长玄，广平曲周人也。
现代文：程卫字长玄，是广平曲周人。
English: Cheng Wei's character, Chang Xuan, is a descendant of Guangping Qu Zhou.

古文：少立操行，强正方严。
现代文：年少就建立操守品行，刚正严肃。
English: Establish integrity at a young age, and be upright and serious.

古文：刘毅闻其名，辟为都官从事。
现代文：刘毅闻其名，征用为都官从事。
English: Liu Yi heard of his name and was requisitioned to work as a magistrate.

古文：毅奏中护军羊琇犯宪应死。
现代文：刘毅上奏中护军羊琇违法应死。
English: Liu Yi plays the role of a middle-aged shepherd in the performance of "Violation is punishable by death."

古文：武帝与琇有旧，乃遣齐王攸喻毅，毅许之。
现代文：武帝与琇以前有交情，于是派齐王司马攸去说情，刘毅答应了。
English: Emperor Wu had a friendship with Zhai before, so he sent Wang Sima You to intercede, and Liu Yi agreed.

古文：卫正色以为不可，径自驰车入护军营，收琇属吏，考问阴私，先奏琇所犯狼藉，然后言于毅。
现代文：刘毅坚持以为不可，直接驾车到护军营中，拿下圭瑟属官，拷问隐情，先奏芏透的不检行为，然后报告刘毅。
English: Liu Yi insisted that it was impossible, drove directly to the escort camp, took down Guise's subordinate officer, tortured the secret, first played down the indiscipline, and then reported to Liu Yi.

古文：由是名振遐迩，百官厉行。
现代文：由此名震遐迩，百官严肃行事。
English: As a result, there was great consternation, and hundreds of officials acted seriously.

古文：遂辟公府掾，迁尚事郎、侍御史，在职皆以事干显。
现代文：于是征用为公府掾，升任尚书郎、侍御史，在职都以办事干练闻名。
English: As a result, he was requisitioned as a public official, promoted to Shoshuro and Samurai Goshi, and was known for his efficiency in his work.

古文：补洛阳令，历安定、顿丘太守，所莅著绩。
现代文：补洛阳令，历任安定、顿丘太守，所到之处，成绩显著。
English: Complementing Luoyang, successive stable, Dongqiu governor, everywhere he went, he achieved remarkable results.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：在任上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：和峤，字长舆，汝南西平人也。
现代文：和崤字长舆，是汝南西平人。
English: He is a native of Xiping, south of Yunnan.

古文：祖洽，魏尚书令。
现代文：祖父和洽，毯时任尚书令。
English: My grandfather was a diplomat, but he was also a calligrapher.

古文：父逌，魏吏部尚书。
现代文：父亲和迪，魏时任吏部尚书。
English: His father and Di, Wei, when he was in charge of the cadre department, are still writing.

古文：峤少有风格，慕舅夏侯玄之为人，厚自崇重。
现代文：和堕年少有风度，羡慕舅舅夏侯玄的为人，自重，有盛名于当时。
English: He was a man of few manners in his declining years and admired his uncle Xia Houxuan. He was self-respecting and had a good reputation at the time.

古文：有盛名于世，朝野许其能风俗，理人伦。袭父爵上蔡伯，起家太子舍人。
现代文：朝野称赞他能整治风俗，理顺人伦。继承父亲的爵位上蔡伯，开始做官为太子舍人。
English: Asano praised him for his ability to rectify customs and rationalize human relations. Tsai Bo, who inherited his father's title, began to work as a crown prince.

古文：累迁颍川太守，为政清简，甚得百姓欢心。
现代文：多次升任颖川太守，为政清平简约，很得百姓欢心。
English: He was promoted to governor of Yingchuan several times, and was popular with the people for his clean, simple politics.

古文：太傅从事中郎庾顗见而叹曰： 峤森森如千丈松，虽磥可多节目，施之大厦，有栋梁之用。 
现代文：太傅从事中郎庾颉见到他感叹道： 和堕高耸如千丈松，虽多节，用于大厦，是栋梁之材。 
English: When Tai Fu, who was engaged in the middle-aged man, saw him, he exclaimed, "He is as tall as a thousand-year-old pine tree. Although he is multi-jointed, he is used for buildings and is a material for beams.

古文：贾充亦重之，称于武帝，入为给事黄门侍郎，迁中书令，帝深器遇之。
现代文：买童亦看重他，在亘游面前称赞他，召入任给事黄门侍郎，升任中书令，武帝很器重他。
English: Buyers also valued him, praising him in front of Watayu, calling him to serve as a Yellow Gate waiter, and promoting him to the position of middle secretary. Emperor Wu valued him very much.

古文：旧监令共车入朝，时荀勖为监，峤鄙勖为人，以意气加之，每同乘，高抗专车而坐。
现代文：过去监和令同车入朝，当时苟勖任监，和崤鄙视他的为人，盛气凌人，每次入朝，和崤独坐一车。
English: In the past, the inspector and the warden went to the imperial court in the same car. At that time, Gou Jun was in charge of the inspector, and Gou Jun despised him as a person and bullied him. Every time he went to the imperial court, he and Gou Jun sat in the same car.

古文：乃使监令异车，自峤始也。
现代文：监、令不同车，自和崤开始。
English: Supervision and order are different cars, starting from Hezhen.

古文：吴平，以参谋议功，赐弟郁爵汝南亭侯。
现代文：吴平定，以参与谋划之功，赐弟弟和郁爵汝南亭侯。
English: Wu Pingding, in recognition of his participation in the planning, gave his younger brother and the Duke of Yunnan the title of prince.

古文：峤转侍中，愈被亲礼，与任恺、张华相善。
现代文：峤改任侍中，愈被信任厚待，与任恺、张华亲密。
English: The more he was trusted and treated well, the closer he became to Ren Zheng and Zhang Hua.

古文：峤见太子不令，因侍坐曰： 皇太子有淳古之风，而季世多伪，恐不了陛下家事。 
现代文：峤见太子不听命令，在旁边座位上说： 皇太子有淳朴之风，而衰世多虚伪，恐怕不明白陛下家事。 
English: On seeing that the crown prince did not listen to the order, the attendant said on the seat next to him: "The crown prince has a simple style, but he is very hypocritical. I'm afraid he doesn't understand your majesty's family affairs."

古文：帝默然不答。
现代文：武帝沉默不答。
English: Emperor Wu remained silent and did not answer.

古文：后与荀顗、荀勖同侍，帝曰： 太子近入朝，差长进，卿可俱诣之，粗及世事。 
现代文：后来舆荀顗、荀勖共同侍候，帝说： 太子最近入朝，稍有长进，你们可一起去，大概讲讲人世间事。 
English: Later, when Miao and Yao were waiting together, the emperor said, "The crown prince has recently entered the imperial court, and he has grown a little. You can go together and probably talk about worldly affairs."

古文：即奉诏而还。顗、勖并称太子明识弘雅，诚如明诏。
现代文：完毕而归，荀顗、荀勖共同称赞太子聪明高雅，的确如皇帝所说。
English: After returning home, Zou and Zou jointly praised the prince for his intelligence and elegance, just as the emperor had said.

古文：峤曰： 圣质如初耳！ 
现代文：和崤说： 气质如初啊! 
English: He said: "My temperament is the same as it was at the beginning!

古文：帝不悦而起。
现代文：皇帝不高兴地站起来。
English: The Emperor rose to his feet in displeasure.

古文：峤退居，恆怀慨叹，知不见用，犹不能已。
现代文：扣崤回到家裹，常常感慨，知道不被用，仍不能自己。
English: When I get home, I'm often filled with regret, knowing that I'm not being used and still can't be myself.

古文：在御坐言及社稷，未尝不以储君为忧。帝知其言忠，每不酬和。
现代文：在皇帝处谈到国家，总替太子担忧。皇帝知道他言辞忠诚，每次不以文字相酬答。
English: When the emperor talks about the country, he is always worried about the prince. The emperor knows that he is loyal to his words and does not answer with words every time.

古文：后与峤语，不及来事。
现代文：后舆歪 岖说话，不再提到将来。
English: He spoke haltingly, not mentioning the future.

古文：或以告贾妃，妃衔之。
现代文：有人告诉贾妃，妃恨他。
English: Someone told Jiafei that Fei hated him.

古文：太康末，为尚书，以母忧去职。
现代文：太康末年，任尚书，以母亲的丧事离职。
English: At the end of Taikang's life, Ren Shangshu resigned from his post, citing his mother's death.

古文：及惠帝即位，拜太子少傅，加散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
现代文：等到惠帝即位，拜任太子少傅，加散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
English: When Emperor Hui ascended the throne, he was given the title of prince's junior tutor, as well as the titles of knight's footman and doctor of the imperial household.

古文：太子朝西宫，峤从入。
现代文：太子拜见太后，和娇跟入。
English: The prince paid a visit to the empress dowager, and Jiao followed.

古文：贾后使帝问峤曰： 卿昔谓我不了家事，今日定云何？ 
现代文：贾后让惠帝问和崤： 你以前说我不明白家事，今天你定要说什么? 
English: Jia Hou asked Hui Di to ask Huan: You used to say that I don't understand housework, what are you going to say today?

古文：峤曰： 臣昔事先帝，曾有斯言。
现代文：和崤说： 臣以前侍奉皇帝，曾有此话。
English: He said, "A minister once served the emperor, and he said this.

古文：言之不效，国之福也。
现代文：话不奏效，是国家的福气。
English: If it doesn't work, it's a blessing for the country.

古文：臣敢逃其罪乎！ 
现代文：臣敢逃过此罪吗! 
English: How dare a minister get away with this crime!

古文：元康二年卒，赠金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，本位如前。
现代文：元康二年去世，追封金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，官位如前。
English: Yuan Kang died two years later. He was posthumously awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Daifu and the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon. His official rank remained the same.

古文：永平初，策谥曰简。
现代文：谧号简。
English: Her nickname is Jane.

古文：峤家产丰富，拟于王者，然性至吝，以是获讥于世，杜预以为峤有钱癖。
现代文：和崤家产丰富，可与王比，但吝啬，以此被人讥笑，杜预认为和崤有钱癖。
English: Huan's family was rich, comparable to Wang's, but stingy, which made him a target of ridicule. Du Yuanyuan thought that Huan was addicted to money.

古文：以弟郁子济嗣，位至中书郎。
现代文：以弟弟和郁的儿子和济继嗣，位至中书郎。
English: Kazuchika's younger brother, Kazuchika's son, Kazuchika's heir, became Chushiro.

古文：郁字仲舆，才望不及峤，而以清干称，历尚书左右仆射、中书令、尚书令。
现代文：和郁字仲舆，才干和名望赶不上和崤，却以清正干练闻名，历任尚书左右仆射、中书令、尚书令。
English: Although his talent and fame were not as great as that of his father, he was known for his honesty and hard work.

古文：洛阳倾没，奔于苟晞，疾卒。
现代文：盗阳陷落后，投靠苞堕，因病去世。
English: After the fall of Puyang, he took refuge in Shandong and died of illness.

古文：武陔，字元夏，沛国竹邑人也。
现代文：武陔字元夏，是沛国竹邑人。
English: Wuxi character, Yuan Xia, is a native of Zhuye, Pei Province.

古文：父周，魏卫尉。
现代文：父亲武周，魏时任卫尉。
English: His father, Wu Zhou, was a guard lieutenant in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：陔沈敏有器量，早获时誉，与二弟韶叔夏、茂季夏并总角知名，虽诸父兄弟及乡闾宿望，莫能觉其优劣。
现代文：武陔深沉敏锐有度量，早有声誉，与二弟武韶字叔夏、武茂字季夏孩童时就知名，即使父辈兄弟和乡里老成而有名望的人，也都分辨不出他们的优劣。
English: Wuchang was profound, keen, measured, and had a reputation early on. He and his two younger brothers, Wuchang Zi Xia and Wuchang Maozhi Xia, were well-known when they were children. Even their father's brothers and the well-established and famous people in the village could not distinguish their merits and demerits.

古文：同郡刘公荣有知人之鉴，常造周，周见其三子焉。
现代文：同郡刘公荣能鉴赏人物，常到武周家，武周让三个儿子出来见面。
English: Liu Gong Rong from the same county can appreciate figures, and often goes to Wu Zhou's house. Wu Zhou let his three sons come out to meet.

古文：公荣曰： 皆国士也。
现代文：公荣说： 都是国士。
English: Gong Rong said: They are all patriots.

古文：元夏最优，有辅佐之才，陈力就列，可为亚公。
现代文：元夏最优，有王佐之才，施展才力去做官，可为司徒。
English: Yuan Xia is the best, he has the talent of Wang Zuo, he can use his talent to become an official, he can be a scholar.

古文：叔夏、季夏不减常伯、纳言也。 
现代文：叔夏、季夏不次于常伯、纳。
English: Shuxia and Qixia are not inferior to Changbo and Na.

古文：陔少好人伦，与颍川陈泰友善。
现代文：武陔年少时喜欢品评人物，与颖川太守陈泰友善。
English: When he was young, he liked to evaluate people and was friendly with Chen Tai, the governor of Yingchuan.

古文：魏明帝世，累迁下邳太守。
现代文：魏明帝时，升任下邳太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ming of Wei, he was promoted to the position of the lower eunuch governor.

古文：景帝为大将军，引为从事中郎，累迁司隶校尉，转太仆卿。
现代文：景帝为大将军，引为从事中郎，多次升至司隶校尉，改任太仆卿。
English: Emperor Jing was a great general, was referred to as a middle-ranking official, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant-colonel several times, and was reappointed to the position of minister.

古文：初封亭侯，五等建，改封薛县侯。
现代文：先封为亭侯，立五等爵位时，改封薛县侯。
English: First, he was given the title of Prince of Ting, and when he was given the title of Fifth Rank, he was given the title of Prince of Xue County.

古文：文帝甚亲重之，数与诠论时人。
现代文：文帝很器重他，多次与他评论当时人物。
English: Emperor Wen held him in high esteem and often commented on contemporary figures with him.

古文：尝问陈泰孰若其父群，陔各称其所长，以为群、泰略无优劣，帝然之。
现代文：曾问陈泰和他的父亲陈群哪个更优。武陔各说他们的长处，认为陈群、陈泰差不多，文帝同意。
English: He once asked Chen Tai and his father Chen Qun which one was better. Wu Xuan said that they each had their strengths, and thought that Chen Qun and Chen Tai were similar. Emperor Wen agreed.

古文：泰始初，拜尚书，掌吏部，迁左仆射、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：泰始初年，拜任尚书，掌管吏部，升任左仆射、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Taishi, he assumed the post of Shangshu, in charge of the personnel department, and was promoted to Zuo Shu, Zuo Guanglu, and Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：陔以宿齿旧臣，名位隆重，自以无佐命之功，又在魏已为大臣，不得已而居位，深怀逊让，终始全洁，当世以为美谈。
现代文：武陔以年老是旧臣，名声和官位都很高，自认为无辅佐之功，又在魏已为大臣，不得已而做官，很想辞职，保全节操，当世以为美谈。
English: Wuxuan was an old minister, with a high reputation and official rank. He considered himself to be an unassisted achievement. He had been a minister in Wei, and was forced to become an official. He wanted to resign, to preserve discipline, but he thought it was a nice thing to do.

古文：卒于位，谥曰定。
现代文：在任上去世，谧号定。
English: He died in office, and his posthumous name remains unchanged.

古文：子辅嗣。
现代文：儿子武辅继嗣。
English: His son, Takefuke, succeeded him.

古文：韶历吏部郎、太子右卫率、散骑常侍。
现代文：武韶历任吏部郎、太子右卫率、散骑常侍。
English: Takeuchi successively held the posts of secretary, prince's right guard, and horseman.

古文：茂以德素称，名亚于陔，为上洛太守、散骑常侍、侍中、尚书。
现代文：亘递以品德和操行著称，名声次于亘瞪，任上洛太守、散骑常侍、侍中、尚书。
English: Watanabe was known for his moral character and conduct, and his reputation was second only to Watanabe's. He was appointed as the governor of Kyoto, a samurai, a chamberlain, and a courtier.

古文：颍川荀恺年少于茂，即武帝姑子，自负贵戚，欲与茂交，距而不答，由是致怨。
现代文：颖川荀恺比武茂小，是武帝姑姑的儿子，自恃是贵戚，想与武茂结交，武茂不肯，由此结怨。
English: Yingchuan Yao was younger than Wu Shao. He was the son of Emperor Wu's aunt. He considered himself a noble relative. He wanted to make friends with Wu Shao, but Wu Shao refused, which led to a grudge.

古文：及杨骏诛，恺时为仆射，以茂骏之姨弟，陷为逆党，遂见害。
现代文：等到杨骏被杀，荀恺当时任仆射，因武茂是杨骏的表兄弟，诬为叛党，于是被害。
English: By the time Yang Hui was killed, Zhai was a subordinate, and because Wu Mao, Yang Hui's cousin, was falsely accused of being a rebel, Zhou was killed.

古文：茂清正方直，闻于朝野，一旦枉酷，天下伤焉。
现代文：武茂清廉正直，闻名朝野，一旦含冤而死，天下痛心。
English: Wu Mao was honest and clean, and was famous for his chivalry. If he died unjustly, the whole world would be saddened.

古文：侍中傅祗上申明之，后追赠光禄勋。
现代文：侍中傅祗上奏为他申辩，后来追封为光禄勋。
English: The chamberlain Fu Ying played his defense, and was later posthumously awarded the Order of the Silver Star.

古文：任恺，字元褒，乐安博昌人也。
现代文：任恺字元褒，是乐安博昌人。
English: Ren Zhi Yuanbao is the star of Le Anbo Changren.

古文：父昊，魏太常。
现代文：父亲任昊，魏时任太常。
English: His father was Ren Hao, and his mother was Wei Shiren.

古文：恺少有识量，尚魏明帝女，累迁中书侍郎、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：任恺年少有见识和度量，娶魏明帝的女儿，多次升任中书侍郎、员外散骑常侍。
English: He married the daughter of Emperor Wei Ming, and was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the non-commissioned officer of the cavalry several times.

古文：晋国建，为侍中，封昌国县侯。
现代文：晋国建立，任侍中，封昌国县侯。
English: He established Jin Province, served as a chamberlain, and was given the title of county magistrate of Chang Province.

古文：恺有经国之干，万机大小多管综之。
现代文：任恺有治国的才干，大小事情都管。
English: Ren Zheng has the ability to govern the country. He is in charge of all matters, big and small.

古文：性忠正，以社稷为己任，帝器而昵之，政事多谘焉。
现代文：为人忠正，以国家属己任，皇帝器重而亲近他，政事多向他咨询。
English: He was a loyal and upright man, who regarded the state as his duty. The emperor was very close to him and consulted him on political affairs.

古文：泰始初，郑冲、王祥、何曾、荀顗、裴秀等各以老疾归第。
现代文：泰始初年，郑冲、王祥、何曾、荀颢、裴秀等各以老、病回家。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, Zheng Chong, Wang Xiang, He Zeng, Zou, Pei Xiu and others went home because of old age or illness.

古文：帝优宠大臣，不欲劳以筋力，数遣恺谕旨于诸公，谘以当世大政，参议得失。
现代文：皇帝优待宠信他们，不想劳其筋骨，多次派任恺告诉他们旨意，咨询当朝大事，参与议论得失。
English: The emperor favored and trusted them, and did not want to work his bones and sinews. He repeatedly sent Ren Qi to tell them his will, consult on the major events of the day, and participate in the discussion of gains and losses.

古文：恺恶贾充之为人也，不欲令久执朝政，每裁抑焉。
现代文：任恺讨厌贾充的为人，不想让他久执朝政，总压制他。
English: Ren Zheng hated Jia Chong as a person and did not want him to stay in power for a long time, so he always suppressed him.

古文：充病之，不知所为。
现代文：贾充恨他，却拿他没办法。
English: Jia Chong hated him, but there was nothing he could do about it.

古文：后承间言恺忠贞局正，宜在东宫，使护太子。
现代文：后趁空说任恺忠贞正直，宜在束宫，使照顾太子。
English: Later, he took advantage of the opportunity to say that Ren Xuan was loyal and honest, and that it was appropriate for him to take care of the prince in Sokong.

古文：帝从之，以为太子少傅，而侍中如故，充计画不行。
现代文：皇帝同意，以为太子少傅，侍中照旧，贾充的阴谋未得逞。
English: The emperor agreed, thinking that the prince was too young, the chamberlains were still the same, and Jia Chong's plot had failed.

古文：会秦、雍寇扰，天子以为忧。
现代文：正值秦、雍贼寇骚扰，天子担忧。
English: It was the time of Qin and Yongxiaoqiao's harassment, and Tianzi was worried.

古文：恺因曰： 秦、凉覆败，关右骚动，此诚国家之所深虑。
现代文：任恺乘机说： 秦、凉覆没，关右骚动，这的确值得国家深思。
English: Ren Hao took the opportunity to say: Qin, coolness covered, Guan Yu agitation, this is indeed worthy of the country's deep thought.

古文：宜速镇抚，使人心有庇。
现代文：应迅速镇守安抚，使人心稳定。
English: The town guard should be quickly pacified to stabilize the people's minds.

古文：自非威望重臣有计略者，无以康西土也。 
现代文：如果不是有威望、有计谋的重臣，无以收复西土。 
English: If it were not for the senior vassals with prestige and cunning, there would be no way to recover the West.

古文：帝曰： 谁可任者？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 谁可担当此任? 
English: The emperor asked: Who can take on this task?

古文：恺曰： 贾充其人也。 
现代文：任恺说： 买充可以。 
English: Ren Hao said, "You can buy rechargeable batteries.

古文：中书令庾纯亦言之，于是诏充西镇长安。
现代文：中书令庾纯亦说是，于是韶令贾充西镇长安。
English: According to the Chinese book of records, Jianzhong also said yes, so Jia Chongxi Town, Chang'an, was named after him.

古文：充用荀勖计得留。
现代文：贾充用萄勖的计谋得以留下来。
English: Jia Chong was able to stay with the help of some cunning tricks.

古文：充既为帝所遇，欲专名势，而庾纯、张华、温颙、向秀、和峤之徒皆与恺善，杨珧、王恂？华暠等充所亲敬，于是朋党纷然。
现代文：买充既然被皇帝所器重，就想控制权势，而庾纯、张华、温显、向秀、和崤等都和任恺友好，杨珧、王恂、华厅等都和买充亲近，于是朋党相争。
English: Since Maichong was valued by the emperor, he wanted to control the power, while Jun Jun, Zhang Hua, Wen Xian, Xiang Xiu, and He Zi were all friendly with Ren Zheng, and Yang Zheng, Wang Zheng, and Hua Hall were all close to Maichong, so they fought against each other.

古文：帝知之，召充、恺宴于式乾殿，而谓充等曰： 朝廷宜一，大臣当和。 
现代文：皇帝知道后，在式干殿宴请贾充、任恺，对贾充等说： 朝廷应当统一，大臣应当和睦。 
English: After the emperor learned of this, he invited Jia Chong and Ren Wei to a banquet at the Imperial Palace, and said to Jia Chong and the others: The imperial court should be unified, and the ministers should be harmonious.

古文：充、恺各拜谢而罢。
现代文：贾充、任恺对拜道歉作罢。
English: Jia Chong and Ren Qi should stop apologizing to Bai Zong.

古文：既而充、恺等以帝已知之而不责，结怨愈深，外相崇重，内甚不平。
现代文：接着贾充、任恺等因为皇帝已经知道而不责备，结怨越来越深，外表上互相推祟，内心却很不平衡。
English: Next, Jia Chong, Ren Hao, etc. because the emperor already knew and did not blame them, the grudge became deeper and deeper, and they pushed and shoved each other on the outside, but they were very unbalanced inside.

古文：或为充谋曰： 恺总门下枢耍，得与上亲接，宜启令典选，便得渐疏，此一都令史事耳。
现代文：有人给贾充出主意说： 任恺总管门下机要，得与皇帝亲近，应启奏皇帝令他主持选举，便能渐渐疏远，造就是一个都令史的事情。
English: Someone suggested an idea to Jia Zhen: Ren Zheng, the chief of the gate, should be close to the emperor. If the emperor ordered him to preside over the election, he would gradually become estranged. This is a historic event.

古文：且九流难精，间隙易乘。 
现代文：何况九品人物难弄清，有机可乘。 
English: What's more, it's difficult to figure out the nine characters, so you can take advantage of it.

古文：充因称恺才能，宜在官人之职。
现代文：买充于是称赞任恺有才能，应当主持选举。
English: He then praised Mr. Ren for his talent and said he should preside over the election.

古文：帝不之疑，谓充举得其才。
现代文：皇帝没起疑心，还说买充推荐了合适人选。
English: The emperor was not suspicious, and said that Meitong had recommended a suitable candidate.

古文：即日以恺为吏部尚书，加奉车都尉。
现代文：第二天就以任恺为吏部尚书，加奉车都尉。
English: The next day, he appointed Ren Zheng as the secretary of the cadre department, and added Feng Che as the captain.

古文：恺既在尚书，选举公平，尽心所职，然侍觐转希。
现代文：任恺在尚书任上，选举公平，尽心尽力，但见皇帝少了。
English: Ren Rong is still in office, the election is fair, and he is doing his best, but there are fewer emperors.

古文：充与荀勖、冯紞承间浸润，谓恺豪侈，用御食器。
现代文：贾充与荀勖、冯鱿乘机进谗言，说任恺奢侈，用皇帝的餐具。
English: Jia Chong took the opportunity to have a word with Zhai and Feng Yu, saying that Ren Yu was extravagant and used the emperor's tableware.

古文：充遣尚书右仆射、高阳王珪奏恺，遂免官。
现代文：买充让尚书右仆射、高阳王司马珪弹劾任恺，于是免官。
English: Meitong had Shang Shu's right-hand man, Gaoyang Wang Sima Yi, impeached and removed from office.

古文：有司收太官宰人检核，是恺妻齐长公主得赐魏时御器也。
现代文：有关部门逮捕太官宰人检查核实，结果是任恺的妻子齐长公主得到的用作赏赐的魏时的皇帝用品。
English: Relevant departments arrested the eunuch's assistant for inspection and verification, and the result was that Ren Zheng's wife, Qichang Princess, received the imperial goods of the Wei Dynasty as a reward.

古文：恺既免而毁谤益至，帝渐薄之。
现代文：任恺已被免了官，而诽谤却越来越多，皇帝渐渐疏远了他。
English: The emperor gradually distanced himself from Ren Zheng, who had already been dismissed from his post, as the slander increased.

古文：然山涛明恺为人通敏有智局，举为河南尹。
现代文：但山涛明白任恺为人旷达机敏有才智，推举为河南尹。
English: However, Shantao understood that Ren Rong was an open-minded, quick-witted and talented person, and elected him as Henan Yin.

古文：坐贼发不获，又免官。
现代文：因治贼无功，又被免官。
English: He was dismissed from his post for ineffectiveness in dealing with thieves.

古文：复迁光禄勋。
现代文：再次升任光禄勋。
English: He was promoted to Koroku-Honne again.

古文：恺素有识鉴，加以在公勤恪，甚得朝野称誉。
现代文：任恺向来能鉴赏人物，加上对公事尽力、谨慎，很得朝野称赞。
English: Ren Hao has always been able to appreciate people, coupled with diligence and prudence in public affairs, and has been highly praised by the court.

古文：而贾充朋党又讽有司奏恺与立进令刘友交关。
现代文：但贾充朋党又暗示有关部门弹劾任恺与立进令刘友勾结。
English: However, Jia Chongpeng's party also implied that the relevant departments had colluded with Liu You, the leader of the impeachment of Ren Wei.

古文：事下尚书，恺对不伏。
现代文：事下尚书，任恺不服。
English: After the fact, he wrote a letter, but Ren Yao was not satisfied.

古文：尚书杜友、廷尉刘良并忠公士也，知恺为充所抑，欲申理之，故迟留而未断，以是恺及友、良皆免官。
现代文：尚书杜友、廷尉刘良都是忠于职守的人，知道任恺被买充压制，想要替他申辩，所以迟迟不判，于是任恺和杜友、刘良都免官。
English: Shangshu Duyou and the courtier Liu Liang were both loyal to their duties. They knew that Ren Qi was being bought and suppressed, and they wanted to plead for him, so they delayed making a decision. As a result, Ren Qi, Duyou and Liu Liang were all dismissed.

古文：恺既失职，乃纵酒耽乐，极滋味以自奉养。
现代文：任恺既然丢了官，便纵酒享乐，尝尽滋味以保养自己。
English: Now that he has lost his official position, Ren Yao indulges in drinking and pleasure, savoring every taste to maintain himself.

古文：初，何劭以公子奢侈，每食必尽四方珍馔，恺乃逾之，一食万钱，犹云无可下箸处。
现代文：当初，何劭认为公子奢侈，每次进食必定凑齐四方佳肴，任恺更过分，一餐万金，还说没有可吃之莱。
English: At first, He Yao thought that the prince was extravagant. Every time he ate, he would make sure to get all the delicacies from the four directions. He even went as far as to say that the meal was worth a million dollars. He also said that there was nothing to eat.

古文：恺时因朝请，帝或慰谕之，恺初无复言，惟泣而已。
现代文：任恺有时去朝见，皇帝又慰问他，他开始不回答，衹是哭。
English: Sometimes Ren Rong went to see the emperor, and the emperor consoled him. He began not to answer, but to cry.

古文：后起为太仆，转太常。
现代文：后启用为太仆，改任太常。
English: Later, he was promoted to Taichu and then to Taojang.

古文：初，魏舒虽历位郡守，而未被任遇，恺为侍中，荐舒为散骑常侍。
现代文：当初，魏舒虽历任郡守，但未被器重，任恺为侍中，推荐魏舒为散骑常侍。
English: At first, although Wei Shu had served as county governor, he was not treated as an important person. He was appointed as an attendant, and Wei Shu was recommended as a leading horseback riding attendant.

古文：至是舒为右光禄、开府，领司徒，帝临轩使恺拜授。
现代文：至此魏舒为右光禄、开府，领司徒，皇帝走到殿前让任恺授官。
English: At this point, Wei Shu was Uguanglu, the head of the government, the leader of the magistrates, and the emperor walked to the front of the palace to let him be appointed as the magistrate.

古文：舒虽以弘量宽简为称，时以恺有佐世器局，而舒登三公，恺止守散卿，莫不为之愤叹也。
现代文：魏舒虽以宽宏大量著称，当时人却认为任恺有辅佐之才，而魏舒位至三公，任恺衹是有名无实的九卿，莫不为之愤慨。
English: Although Wei Shu was known for his magnanimity and generosity, people at the time were indignant at the fact that Ren Xuan was considered to have the talent of an assistant, while Wei Shu was third in line to the throne, and Ren Xuan was a mere nobleman.

古文：恺不得志，竟以忧卒，时年六十一，谥曰元，子罕嗣。
现代文：任恺不得志，最后因忧虑去世，终年六十一岁，谧号元，儿子任罕继嗣。
English: Ren Rong was discouraged, and finally died of anxiety, aged 61, with the surname Yuan and a son, Ren Han, as his successor.

古文：罕字子伦，幼有门风，才望不及恺，以淑行致称，为清平佳士。
现代文：任罕字王俭，年幼有家风，才能和名望不如任恺，以善良之举获得声誉，是清正公平的优秀士人。
English: Ren Han Zi Wang Jian is young and has a family tradition. His talent and fame are not as good as Ren Zi. He gained his reputation through his kindness. He is an excellent scholar who is honest and fair.

古文：历黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、兗州刺史、大鸿胪。
现代文：历任黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、兖州刺史、大鸿胪。
English: Successive attendants of the Yellow Gate, strolling attendants, Zhangzhou Sashimi, and Dahongyao.

古文：崔洪，字良伯，博陵安平人也。
现代文：崔洪字良伯，是博陵安平人。
English: Cui Hongzhilangbo is from Anping, Boling.

古文：高祖寔，著名汉代。
现代文：高祖崔宫，在汉代很著名。
English: Gao Zu Cui Gong, very famous in the Han Dynasty.

古文：父赞，魏吏部尚书、左仆射，以雅量见称。
现代文：父亲崔赞，魏时任吏部尚书、左仆射，以雅量著称。
English: His father, Cui Zan, was an official of the Shangshu and Zuofei Departments during the Wei Dynasty. He was known for his elegance.

古文：洪少以清厉显名，骨鲠不同于物，人之有过，辄面折之，而退无后言。
现代文：崔洪年少时以清正严肃出名，耿直遇人，人有过错，就当面批评，过后没有二话。
English: When he was young, Cui Hong was famous for his upright and serious demeanor. When he encountered someone who had made a mistake, he criticized them to their face and never said a word.

古文：武帝世，为御史治书。
现代文：武帝朝，为御史治书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was the chief historian.

古文：时长乐冯恢父为弘农太守，爱少子淑，欲以爵传之。
现代文：当时长乐冯恢的父亲为弘农太守，爱小儿子冯淑，想把爵位传给他。
English: At that time, Changle Feng Shu's father was the governor of Hongnong. He loved his youngest son Feng Shu and wanted to pass the title to him.

古文：恢父终，服阕，乃还乡里，结草为庐，阳喑不能言，淑得袭爵。
现代文：冯恢的父亲去世，冯恢服丧期满，便回乡里，用草编织成简陋的房屋，假装成哑巴，冯淑得以继承。
English: When Feng Shu's father passed away, Feng Shu returned to his hometown after the mourning period was over. He wove grass into a simple house and pretended to be a mute so that Feng Shu could inherit the house.

古文：恢始仕为博士祭酒，散骑常侍翟婴荐恢高行迈俗，侔继古烈。
现代文：冯恢开始做官为博士祭酒，散骑常侍翟婴推荐冯恢，说他有高尚的操行，超凡脱俗，有古烈士之风。
English: Feng Huai began to work as an official for the doctor's ritual wine, horseback riding often recommended Feng Huai to the baby, saying that he had a noble behavior, unearthly, with the style of ancient martyrs.

古文：洪奏恢不敦儒素，令学生番直左右，虽有让侯微善，不得称无伦辈，婴为浮华之目。
现代文：崔洪上奏说冯恢不能带头履行儒者的品德操行，令学生在左右轮流值班，虽有让侯的小善，却不能说盖世无双，翟婴是华而不实之流。
English: Cui Hong reported that Feng Wei could not take the lead in fulfilling the moral conduct of Confucians, so that the students took turns on duty on the left and right. Although there was a small good deed, it could not be said to be unparalleled. The baby shower was flashy but not real.

古文：遂免婴官，朝廷惮之。
现代文：于是免翟婴的官，朝廷害怕他。
English: As a result, the imperial court was afraid of the official who did not beat the baby.

古文：寻为尚书左丞，时人为之语曰： 丛生棘刺，来自博陵。
现代文：不久任尚书左丞，当时人评价他说： 丛生荆棘，来自博陵。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Shang Shuzo, and people said of him at the time: "He is a thorn in the flesh from Boling."

古文：在南为鹞，在北为鹰。 
现代文：在南为鹞，在北为鹰。 
English: In the south, it is the dragonfly; in the north, it is the eagle.

古文：选吏部尚书，举用甄明，门无私谒。
现代文：任吏部尚书，选官公平，没有私下求情的。
English: The appointment of officials is formal, the selection of officials is fair, and there is no private pleading.

古文：荐雍州刺史郤诜代己为左丞。
现代文：推荐雍州刺史却说代替自己任左丞。
English: However, he recommended Yongzhou Zhishi and said that he would take his place as the left jockey.

古文：诜后纠洪，洪谓人曰： 我举郤丞而还奏我，是挽弩自射也。 
现代文：邵说后来检举崔洪，崔洪对人说： 我推举邵丞而他反而弹劾我，这是挽弓射自己。 
English: Shao said that Cui Hong was later indicted, and Cui Hong said to people: I nominated Shao Zheng and he impeached me instead. This is shooting oneself in the foot.

古文：诜闻曰： 昔赵宣子任韩厥为司马，以军法戮宣子之仆。
现代文：邵说听说后说： 过去赵宣子以韩厥为司马，韩厥却以军法杀了宣子的仆人。
English: Shao said that after hearing this, he said: In the past, Zhao Xuan Zi used Han Jue as his steward, but Han Jue killed Xuan Zi's servant with martial law.

古文：宣子谓诸大夫曰： 可贺我矣，我选厥也任其事。 
现代文：宣子对各位大夫说： 可以祝贺我了，我选韩厥是要让他尽责任的。
English: Ms. Nobuko said to the doctors, "You can congratulate me now. I chose Han Jue because I wanted him to fulfill his responsibilities.

古文：崔侯为国举才，我以才见举，惟官是视，各明至公，何故私言乃至此！ 
现代文：崔侯为国选才，我以才被选，衹以官职为重，都表现得很公正，为什么要说这么不公道的话! 
English: Cui Hou is the country's selection of talent, I was selected by talent, and I took the official position as the most important, all of them behaved very fairly, why say such an unfair thing!

古文：洪闻其言而重之。
现代文：崔洪听说后很看重他。
English: After hearing this, Cui Hong thought highly of him.

古文：洪口不言货财，手不执珠玉。
现代文：崔洪口不言财物，手不握珠玉。
English: Cui Hongkou does not talk about wealth, and his hands do not hold jewels.

古文：汝南王亮常晏公卿，以琉璃钟行酒。
现代文：汝南王司马亮常宴请大臣，以琉璃钟行酒。
English: King Sima Liang of the south of the country invited the minister to a banquet and served wine with a glass bell.

古文：酒及洪，洪不执。
现代文：酒到崔洪处，他不拿。
English: When the wine arrived at Cui Hong's place, he did not take it.

古文：亮问其故，对曰： 虑有执玉不趋之义故尔 。
现代文：司马亮问原因，回答： 想到握玉不能快走的缘故。 
English: Sima Liang asked the reason and replied: I thought it was because the grip ball could not move fast.

古文：然实乖其常性，故为诡说。
现代文：但的确违背常理，所以是诡辩。
English: But it does go against common sense, so it's sophistry.

古文：杨骏诛，洪与都水使者王佑亲，坐见黜。
现代文：杨骏被杀，崔洪与都水使者王佑亲近，因牵连坐罪被黜落。
English: Yang Hui was killed, and Cui Hong was close to Wang You, the messenger of the capital's water, and was ridiculed for being implicated in the crime.

古文：后为大司农，卒于官。
现代文：后为大司农，在任上去世。
English: He later became the Chief Farmer and died in office.

古文：子廓，散骑侍郎，亦以正直称。
现代文：儿子崔廓，散骑侍郎，亦以正直闻名。
English: His son, Choe Guk, the horseback riding attendant, is also known for his honesty.

古文：郭奕，字大业，太原阳曲人也。
现代文：郭奕字大业，是太原阳曲人。
English: Guo Yizhe's great career is Taiyuan Yang Quren.

古文：少有重名，山涛称其高简有雅量。
现代文：年少有大名，山涛称赞他高超不凡有雅量。
English: He was a daimyo at a young age, and Shantao praised him for his extraordinary grace.

古文：初为野王令，羊祜常过之，奕叹曰： 羊叔子何必减郭大业！ 
现代文：最初任野王令，羊枯常路过，郭奕感叹道： 羊叔子何必次于郭大业! 
English: Guo Yi, who was originally a field marshal and often passed by the mutton, exclaimed: "Why should the sheep's uncle be inferior to Guo Daye!

古文：少选复往，又叹曰： 羊叔子去人远矣。 
现代文：没多久又去，郭奕又感叹道： 羊叔子不是凡人啊。 
English: After a short while, Guo Yi went again and lamented: Uncle Yang is not an ordinary person.

古文：遂送祜出界数百里，坐此免官。
现代文：于是送羊祜出界敷百里，被治罪免官。
English: As a result, he sent a shepherd out of bounds for a hundred miles and was punished and removed from office.

古文：咸熙末，为文帝相国主薄。
现代文：咸熙末年，为文帝相国主簿。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, he was the main bookkeeper for Emperor Wen.

古文：时钟会反于蜀，荀勖即会之从甥，少长会家，勖为文帝掾，奕启出之。帝虽不用，然知其雅正。
现代文：这时钟会在蜀反叛，荀勖是钟会的侄甥，小时候在钟会家长大，荀勖为文帝掾，郭奕启奏免他的官，文帝虽不听，但知道他公正。
English: At this time, the bell society rebelled in Shu. He was the nephew of the bell society. When he was a child, he grew up in a bell society family. He was the uncle of Emperor Wen. Guo Yiqi played the role of dismissing him. Although Emperor Wen did not listen, he knew that he was fair.

古文：武帝践阼，初建东宫，以奕及郑默并为中庶子。
现代文：武帝即位，初建东宫，以郭奕和郑默为中庶子。
English: Emperor Wu ascended the throne, the East Palace was first built, with Guo Yi and Zheng Mo as the middle child.

古文：迁右卫率、骁骑将军，封平陵男。
现代文：升任右卫率、骁骑将军，封平陵男。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right guard and the general of the cavalry.

古文：咸宁初，迁雍州刺史、鹰扬将军，寻假赤幢曲盖、鼓吹。
现代文：咸宁初年，升任雍州刺史、鹰扬将军，不久借给他赤幢曲盖、鼓吹。
English: In the first year of Xianning, he was promoted to the general of Yongzhou and the general of Yingyang, and soon lent him the red-roofed roof and the trumpet.

古文：奕有寡姊，随奕之官，姊下僮仆多有奸犯，而为人所纠。
现代文：郭奕有个寡妇姐姐，随郭奕去做官，她手下的奴仆有许多犯罪的，于是被人检举。
English: Guo Yi had a widow sister, who followed Guo Yi to become an official. The servants under her had committed many crimes, so they were reported.

古文：奕省按毕，曰： 大丈夫岂当以老姊求名？ 
现代文：郭奕审查完毕，说： 大丈夫岂能以老姐姐求名? 
English: Guo Yi finished the examination and said: Is it okay for a husband to ask for his elder sister's name?

古文：遂遣而不问。
现代文：于是送走不问。
English: So they sent him away without question.

古文：时亭长李含有俊才，而门寒为豪族所排，奕用为别驾，含后果有名位，时以奕为知人。
现代文：当时亭长李含有俊才，但门第低微被大族排挤，郭奕用为别驾，李含后来果然做了大官，当时人认为郭奕能识别人物。
English: At that time, Li Han, the chief of the pavilion, had talent, but his low-level followers were squeezed out by the big clans. Guo Yi was used as a guide, and Li Han later became a high-ranking official. At that time, people thought that Guo Yi could recognize other people.

古文：太康中，征为尚书。
现代文：太康年间，征用为尚书。
English: During the Taikang era, it was requisitioned as a royal library.

古文：奕有重名，当世朝臣皆出其下。
现代文：郭奕有大名声，当朝大臣都排在他下面。
English: Guo Yi had a great reputation, and the ministers of the time were all ranked below him.

古文：时帝委任杨骏，奕表骏小器，不可任以社稷。
现代文：当时武帝委任杨骏，郭奕说杨骏度量小，不可委以国家重任。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu appointed Yang Hui. Guo Yi said that Yang Hui was too small and could not be entrusted with important state responsibilities.

古文：帝不听，骏后果诛。
现代文：武帝不听，杨骏后来果然被杀。
English: Emperor Wu did not listen, and Yang Hui was later killed.

古文：及奕疾病，诏赐钱二十万，日给酒米。
现代文：等到郭奕病重，韶令赏钱二十万，每天给酒米。
English: When Guo Yi fell seriously ill, the emperor rewarded him with 200,000 yuan and gave him rice and wine every day.

古文：太康八年卒，太常上谥为景。
现代文：太康八年去世，太常上谧号景。
English: Taikang died in the eighth year, and Taizhong went on a pilgrimage.

古文：有司议以贵贱不同号，谥与景皇同，不可，请谥曰穆。
现代文：有关部门认为贵贱不同号，谧号与景皇同，不可，请求为穆。
English: The relevant departments believe that the noble and humble are different names, and the nickname is the same as the King of Kings, which is unacceptable, and the request is moot.

古文：诏曰： 谥所以旌德表行，按谥法一德不懈为简。
现代文：韶书说： 谧号所以表彰德行，按谧法固守道德不松懈为简。
English: The imperial edict said: "Therefore, it is necessary to commend virtue, and adhere to morality in accordance with the imperial edict.

古文：奕忠毅清直，立德不渝。 
现代文：郭奕忠诚刚毅，廉洁正直，守德不渝。 
English: Guo Yi is loyal and courageous, honest and upright, and unswervingly upholds morality.

古文：于是遂赐谥曰简。
现代文：于是赐谧号简。
English: As a result, she was given the nickname Jane.

古文：侯史光，字孝明，东莱掖人也。幼有才悟，受学于同县刘夏。
现代文：侯史光字型昌，是娄茎抠人。年幼聪明，拜同县型夏为师。
English: Hou Shiguang is a young and clever man. He is a disciple of Xia Tongxian.

古文：举孝廉，州辟别驾。
现代文：举孝廉，州裹用为别驾。
English: Raise the filial piety, and use the state as a driving force.

古文：咸熙初，为洛阳典农中郎将，封关中侯。
现代文：尘逦初年，任洛阳典农中郎将，封关中侯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiankui, Luoyang Tenyuan was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Agriculture, and Fugang Zhonghou was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Agriculture.

古文：泰始初，拜散骑常侍，寻兼侍中。
现代文：泰始初年，拜任散骑常侍，不久兼任侍中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was appointed as a samurai in charge of horseback riding, and soon he also served as a chamberlain.

古文：与皇甫陶、荀暠持节循省风俗，及还，奏事称旨，转城门校尉，进爵临海侯。
现代文：与皇直跑、苞廛拿着符节巡察风土人情，等到回来，汇报情况合乎皇帝旨意，改任城门校尉，进爵临海侯。
English: He ran straight ahead with the emperor and inspected the customs of the land and the people with a scepter, and when he returned, he reported the situation in accordance with the emperor's will, and was reappointed as the captain of the city gate and knighted as the marquis of Linhai.

古文：其年诏曰： 光忠亮笃素，有居正执义之心，历职内外，恪勤在公，其以光为御史中丞。
现代文：当年诏书说： 史光忠诚朴素，有正义之心，做过内、外官，恭敬辛劳，任命史光为御史中丞。
English: The imperial decree of that year said: Shiguang is loyal and simple, has a heart of justice, has served as an internal and external official, respects hard work, and appoints Shiguang as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：虽屈其列校之位，亦所以伸其司直之才。 
现代文：虽屈居列卿、校尉的官位，也是为了施展他司直的才干。 
English: Although he was promoted to the ranks of sergeant and lieutenant, it was also in order to demonstrate his ability to be a straight shooter.

古文：光在职宽而不纵。
现代文：侯史光在职宽松而不放纵。
English: Hou Shiguang is relaxed but not indulgent at work.

古文：太保王祥久疾废朝，光奏请免之，诏优祥而寝光奏。
现代文：太保王祥久病没上朝，侯史光奏请免他的官，诏令优待王祥而扣下侯史光的奏章。
English: After Wang Xiang, the imperial bodyguard, had been ill for a long time and had not yet ascended to the throne, Hou Shiguang requested that he be relieved of his duties, and the imperial edict treated Wang Xiang favourably and withheld Hou Shiguang's medal.

古文：后迁少府，卒官，诏赐朝服一具、衣一袭、钱三十万、布百匹。
现代文：后来升任少府，在任上去世，诏赐朝服一具、常服一件、钱三十万、布一百匹。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shōfu (Junior Prefect) and died in office. The emperor gave him a court uniform, a regular uniform, 300,000 yen, and 100 pieces of cloth.

古文：及葬，又诏曰： 光厉志守约，有清忠之节。
现代文：等到下葬，又下诏说： 史光刚毅清贫，有廉洁忠诚的节操。
English: When the funeral was over, he issued another edict, saying: Shi Guang was a man of fortitude, poverty, and integrity.

古文：家极贫俭，其赐钱五十万。 
现代文：家很贫穷，赐赏钱五十万。 
English: The family was very poor, and the reward money amounted to half a million.

古文：光儒学博古，历官著绩，文笔奏议皆有条理。
现代文：侯史光擅长儒学，通晓古代，在任上都有显著成绩，文笔奏章皆有条理。
English: Hou Shiguang is good at Confucianism and is familiar with ancient times. He has made remarkable achievements in his post, and his writings are well-organized.

古文：长子玄嗣，官至玄菟太守。
现代文：长子侯玄继嗣，官至玄菟太守。
English: The eldest son, Hou Xuan's successor, rose to the position of Xuan Zang's grand marshal.

古文：卒，子施嗣，东莞太守。
现代文：去世，儿子侯施继嗣，为东莞太守。
English: After his death, his son Hou Shi, the successor, became the governor of Dongguan.

古文：何攀，字惠兴，蜀郡郫人也。
现代文：何攀字惠兴，是蜀郡郫人。在州任主簿。
English: He Panzhi Huixing, a native of Shu County, is the chief accountant in the state.

古文：仕州为主薄。属刺史皇甫晏为牙门张弘所害，诬以大逆。
现代文：正值刺史皇甫晏被牙门张弘杀害，诬陷他谋反。
English: It was at this time that Emperor Fuxi was assassinated by Zhang Hong, and he was falsely accused of plotting rebellion.

古文：时攀适丁母丧，遂诣梁州拜表，证晏不反，故晏冤理得申。
现代文：当时何攀正赶上母亲的丧事，于是到梁州上奏章，证明皇甫晏没有谋反，所以皇甫晏的冤情得以申诉。
English: At that time, He Pang was just in time for his mother's funeral, so he went to Liangzhou to make a report to prove that the Empress Dowager did not conspire to rebel, so the grievances of the Empress Dowager could be appealed.

古文：王濬为益州，辟为别驾。
现代文：王浚为益州刺史，用为别驾。
English: Wang Jun is a historical figure in Yizhou and is used as an example.

古文：濬谋伐吴，遣攀奉表诣台，口陈事机，诏再引见，乃令张华与攀筹量进时讨之宜。
现代文：王浚谋划讨伐昱迩，派包攀带着奏章到中央，述时机，韶令再次引见，于是命张华舆他筹划讨伐事宜。
English: Wang Jun planned a crusade to cut down the cormorants. He sent a messenger with a cormorant to the center to report the time, and the imperial edict was reintroduced, so he ordered Zhang Huayu to plan the crusade.

古文：濬兼遣攀过羊祜，面陈伐吴之策。
现代文：王浚还派何攀经过羊祜处，面陈伐吴之策。
English: Wang Jun also sent Ho Pang to go through the sheep shed and face Chen Hu's strategy.

古文：攀善于将命，帝善之，诏攀参濬军事。
现代文：何攀善于传命，皇帝爱惜他，让他参王浚军事。
English: Ho Pang was good at passing on orders. The emperor took pity on him and allowed him to join the army.

古文：及孙皓降于濬，而王浑恚于后机，欲攻濬，攀劝濬送皓与浑，由是事解。
现代文：等到茎壁向王坛投降，王运却因晚到一步而生气，想要攻打王浚，何攀劝王浚把孙皓送给王潭，由此矛盾化解。
English: When the stem wall surrendered to the king's altar, Wang Yun got angry because he was one step late and wanted to attack Wang Jun. He persuaded Wang Jun to give Sun Yat to Wang Tan, thus resolving the conflict.

古文：以攀为濬辅国司马，封关内侯。
现代文：以何攀为王浚的辅国司马，封关内侯。
English: Ho Pang served as Wang Jun's assistant state secretary, and was the lord of the fief.

古文：转荥阳令，上便宜十事，甚得名称。
现代文：改任荣阳令，上奏对国家有利的十件事，很得赞誉。
English: His appointment as Rongyang Ruling and his report on the ten things that are beneficial to the country are very commendable.

古文：除廷尉平。时廷尉卿诸葛冲以攀蜀士，轻之，及共断疑狱，冲始叹服。
现代文：任廷尉乎，当时廷尉卿诸葛冲因他是蜀地人士，轻视他，等到共同审理疑难案件，才开始佩服他。
English: Ren Tingfu, at that time Tingfu Sir Zhuge Chong, despised him because he was a person from Shu, and waited until he jointly tried difficult cases before he began to admire him.

古文：迁宣城太守，不行，转散骑侍郎。
现代文：升任宣城太守，还没走，又改任散骑侍郎。
English: He was promoted to the position of the governor of Xuancheng, but before he left, he changed his position to that of a horseman.

古文：杨骏执政，多树亲属，大开封尝，欲以恩泽自卫。
现代文：荡坠执政，多用亲属，大搞封赏，想用恩惠自卫。
English: After falling from power, he often used relatives, made a big deal of rewards, and wanted to use favors to defend himself.

古文：攀以为非，乃与石崇共立议奏之。
现代文：剑!以为不妥，便与亘塞共同弹劾他。
English: Kensei! thought it was improper and impeached him together with Wataseki.

古文：语在崇传。
现代文：奏章见《石崇传》。
English: For the score, see "Shi Chong Chuan."

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇帝不采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：以豫诛骏功，封西城侯，邑万户，赐绢万匹，弟逢平卿侯，兄子逵关中侯。
现代文：因参预谋划杀握坠有功，封西城侯，食邑一万户，赏绢一万匹，弟弟包逢为平乡侯，侄子鱼逵为关中侯。
English: Due to the success of the premeditated plan to kill and capture, the western marquis, ten thousand households in the food village, and ten thousand yakitori were awarded. His younger brother Bao Feng was the Pingxiang marquis, and his nephew Yuyao was the Guanzhong marquis.

古文：攀固让所封户及绢之半，余所受者分给中外宗亲，略不入己。
现代文：鱼攀坚决让出所封户和绢各一半，剩余的分给亲戚，基本上没留给自己。
English: Yupan resolutely gave away half of the fenced-in house and half of the cocoon, and the rest was distributed to relatives. Basically, he did not keep it for himself.

古文：迁翊军校尉，顷之，出为东羌校尉。
现代文：升任翊军校尉，不久，出任束羌校尉。
English: He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel of the Shandong Army, and soon became the lieutenant colonel of the Shandong Army.

古文：征为扬州刺史，在任三年，迁大司农。
现代文：征用为扬州刺史，在任三年，升任大司农。
English: He was requisitioned as Yangzhou chief historian, and after three years in office, he was promoted to the post of chief secretary of agriculture.

古文：转兗州刺史，加鹰扬将军，固让不就。
现代文：改任蛮业刺史，加鹰扬将军，坚决推辞。
English: He resolutely refused to be reappointed to the post of barbaric industry assassin, General Jiayang Yang.

古文：太常成粲、左将军卞粹劝攀涖职，中诏又加切厉，攀竟称疾不起。
现代文：太常盛塞、左将军工控劝他就职，皇帝手韶又催得急，他却称自己有病而不赴任。
English: Too often, Sheng Sai and General Zuo urged him to take the post, and the emperor's handcuffs hurriedly urged him, but he said that he was ill and would not take the post.

古文：及赵王伦篡位，遣使召攀，更称疾笃。
现代文：等到赵王司马伦篡位，派人召见何攀，他越发说自己病重。
English: When Zhao Wang Simarun usurped the throne and sent someone to summon Ho Pang, he increasingly said that he was seriously ill.

古文：伦怒，将诛之，攀不得已，扶疾赴召。
现代文：司马伦发怒，将要杀他，他不得已，带病应召。
English: Simeon was so angry that he wanted to kill him. He had no choice but to call in sick.

古文：卒于洛阳，时年五十八。
现代文：在洛阳去世，年仅五十八岁。
English: He died in Luoyang, only fifty-eight years old.

古文：攀居心平允，氵位官整肃，爱乐人物，敦儒贵才。
现代文：何攀居心公允，为官严肃，鉴赏人物，尊儒爱才。
English: He is fair-minded, serious for officials, appreciates people, respects Confucius and loves talent.

古文：为梁、益二州中正，引致遗滞。
现代文：任梁、益二州中正，引用了被埋没的人才。
English: Ren Liang and Yik Erzhou Zhongzheng cited the buried talents.

古文：巴西陈寿、阎乂、犍为费立皆西州名士，并被乡闾所谤，清议十余年。
现代文：巴西陈寿、阎义、犍为费立都是西州名士，被乡里诽谤，评议了十余年。
English: Brazil Chen Shou, Yan Yi, and Zou Wei Feili are all famous people in Xizhou. They were slandered by the township and have been criticized for more than ten years.

古文：攀申明曲直，咸免冤滥。
现代文：何攀辩明曲直，洗清冤枉。
English: What is the use of arguing to set the record straight and clear one's name?

古文：攀虽居显职，家甚贫素，无妾媵伎乐，惟以周穷济乏为事。
现代文：何攀虽居高位，家很贫穷，没有小妾丫环、舞女乐器，衹做周济穷人的事。
English: Although He Pang held a high position, his family was very poor. There were no concubines, maidservants, or musical instruments. He only gave alms to the poor.

古文：子璋嗣，亦有父风。
现代文：儿子何璋继嗣，也有父亲的遗风。
English: His son, He Jie He, is also a descendant of his father.

古文：史臣曰：幽厉不君，上德犹怀进善；共驩在位，大圣之所不堪。
现代文：史臣曰：周幽王、周厉王丧失为君之体，德高者仍怀着进善之心；共工、骥兜在位，至圣不堪忍受。
English: Shichen said: Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang lost their bodies as princes, but those with high morals still have a good heart; the co-workers and instigators are still on the throne, which is unbearable.

古文：况乎志士仁人，宁求苟合！
现代文：何况志士仁人，难道会随便附和吗!
English: What's more, a man of honor and benevolence, would he just go along with it!

古文：怀其宠秩，所以系其存亡者也。
现代文：被君主宠爱并被授以官秩，就要想着他的存亡。
English: To be favored by the monarch and to be given a rank, one must think about his survival.

古文：虽复自口销金，投光抚剑，驰书北阙，败车犹践，而谏主不易，讥臣实难。
现代文：虽然用金来装饰百口剑，投光抚摸，飞报朝廷，败车依旧在践踏，而进谏国君不容易，讥讽朝臣实在难。
English: Although gold is used to decorate the hundred-mouthed sword, cast light, caress, fly to the court, the defeated car is still trampling, and it is not easy to enter the country, and it is really difficult to ridicule the courtier.

古文：刘毅一遇宽容，任和两遭肤受，详观余烈，亦各其心焉。
现代文：刘毅遇到宽容，任恺、和崤两次遭到谗言，详细地观察余下的刚烈之士，也各有自己的想法。
English: Liu Yi encountered tolerance, Ren Zheng and He Zheng were criticized twice, and the remaining brave soldiers were observed in detail, and each had their own ideas.

古文：若夫武陔怀魏臣之志，崔洪爱郤诜之道，长升劝王弥之尊，何攀从赵伦之命，君子之人，观乎临事者也。
现代文：像武陔仍把自己当作魏臣，崔洪喜欢却说讲的道理，刘暾劝王弥称霸，何攀听从趟王司马伦的命令，要知君子的人品，可以看他怎样对事。
English: Like Wu Xi still regards himself as Wei's vassal, Cui Hong likes to be the leader but speaks the truth, Liu Bei advises Wang Mi to dominate, and He Pang listens to Wang Simalen's orders, to know the gentleman's character, you can see how he deals with things.

古文：赞曰：仲雄初令，忠謇扬庭。
现代文：赞曰：仲雄初次出任，其忠诚就传遍朝廷。
English: Zang said: "When Zhong Xiong took office for the first time, his loyalty spread throughout the imperial court.

古文：身方诸葛，帝拟桓、灵。
现代文：自比诸葛亮，把皇帝比作汉桓帝、漠灵帝。
English: He compared himself to Zhuge Liang and compared the emperor to Emperor Han and Emperor Wu.

古文：大业非杨，元褒诮贾。
现代文：郭奕非难杨骏，任恺谴责贾充。
English: Guo Yi denounced Yang Zhe, Ren Zhe denounced Jia Chong.

古文：和氏条暢，堪施大厦。
现代文：和桥条理顺畅，可作栋梁之材。
English: And the bridge is smooth and can be used as a beam.

古文：崔门不谒，声飞朝野。
现代文：崔洪门前没有私下谒见的，其名声却飞遍朝野。
English: Cui Hong did not have a private audience in front of the gate, but his fame spread all over the country.

古文：侯史、武陔，辅佐之才。
现代文：侯史光、武陔也是辅佐之才。
English: Hou Shiguang and Wu Hao are also assistants.

古文：何攀平允，冤滥多回。
现代文：何攀公平，冤枉和酷滥多被纠正。
English: No matter how fair it is, injustice and abuse are often corrected.

