古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：自唐失其政，天下乘时，黥髡盗贩，衮冕峨巍。
现代文：自从唐王朝失去它的政权，天下人乘机而起，刺面剃发的罪犯和盗贼商贩，都身穿皇袍头戴皇冠。
English: Since the Tang Dynasty lost its political power, the world has risen to the occasion, with shaven-faced criminals and thieving merchants all wearing imperial robes and crowns.

古文：吴暨南唐，奸豪窃攘。
现代文：昊国和南唐国，奸豪们窃取争夺。
English: In Hao and Southern Tang, the traitors are competing to steal the crown.

古文：蜀险而富，汉险而贫，贫能自强，富者先亡。
现代文：前后蜀国地势险要而富有，束漠国地势险要却贫穷，贫穷却能自强，富有的却先灭亡。
English: In the past and present, the Shu Kingdom was prosperous and rich, the Shu Desert was poor but prosperous, poor but self-reliant, and rich but first to perish.

古文：闽陋荆蹙，楚开蛮服。
现代文：闽国狭小，剂南局促，楚国则开拓蛮人区域。
English: Shan State is too small, so the South Bureau is pushing, and Chu State is opening up the barbarian area.

古文：剥剽弗堪，吴越其尤。
现代文：人民不堪掠夺，要数昊越国到达极点。
English: The people are too weak to be plundered. How many Vietnams will it take for the country to reach its peak?

古文：牢牲视人，岭皞遭刘。
现代文：把人看作可任意宰割的牲畜，岭南蛮人不幸遇上了刘氏的南漠。
English: Seeing people as livestock that can be slaughtered at will, the Lingnan barbarians unfortunately encountered the Liu clan's Nanmo.

古文：百年之间，并起争雄，山川亦绝，风气不通。
现代文：百年之间，各地并起争雄，山河阻隔，风俗不通。
English: For hundreds of years, various regions fought for supremacy, mountains and rivers separated them, and customs did not mix.

古文：语曰：清风兴，群阴伏；日月出，爝火息。
现代文：俗语说：清风吹起，众多云翳消散；日月出来，火把就会灭掉。
English: As the saying goes: When the wind blows, many clouds will be dispersed; when the sun and moon come out, the torches will be extinguished.

古文：故真人作而天下同。
现代文：因此说，真人产生，而天下就会大同。
English: Therefore, it is said that when a real person is born, the whole world will be the same.

古文：作《十国世家》。
现代文：作《十国世家》。
English: He wrote "The Ten Kingdoms and Their Families."

古文：杨行密，字化源，庐州合淝人也。
现代文：杨行密字化源，庐州合淝人。
English: Yang Xing is the source of the Chinese characters, and Zhangzhou is the author of the characters.

古文：为人长大有力，能手举百斤。
现代文：他长得高大有力气，手能举起一百斤。
English: He was tall and strong and could lift a hundred kilos in his hands.

古文：唐乾符中，江、淮群盗起，行密以为盗见获，刺史郑棨奇其状貌，释缚纵之。
现代文：唐朝干符中，江、淮盗贼并起，杨行密作为盗贼被抓起来刺史郑柴觉得他的外貌不同一般，松绑放了他。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Jiang and Huai were thieves at the same time, and Yang Xingmi was arrested as a thief. Zheng Chai, the judge, felt that his appearance was different from the average, and loosely tied and released him.

古文：后应募为州兵，戍朔方，迁队长。
现代文：后来接受招募当州兵，戍守朔方，迁任队长。
English: Later, he accepted to be recruited as a National Guard soldier, and was assigned to the Shuo side as a captain.

古文：岁满戍还，而军吏恶之，复使出戍。
现代文：年满戍守归来，而军吏讨厌他，又让他外出戍守。
English: He returned after completing his military service, but the military officials hated him and made him go out again.

古文：行密将行，过军吏舍，军吏阳为好言，问行密行何所欲。
现代文：杨行密将要出发，到军吏房舍拜访，军吏假装说他好话，问杨行密去有什么要求。
English: Yang Xingmi was about to leave and visited the military official's house. The military official pretended to say nice things about him and asked Yang Xingmi what he wanted.

古文：行密奋然曰： 惟少公头尔！ 
现代文：杨行密激愤地说： 只是缺少你的头罢了！ 
English: Yang Xingmi said angrily, "It's just that your head is missing!"

古文：即斩其首，携之而出，因起兵为乱，自号八营都知兵马使。
现代文：就斩下军吏的头，提着出来，因而起兵作乱，自称八营都知兵马使。
English: He cut off the heads of the military officials and brought them out. As a result, the soldiers started a riot, claiming to be eight battalions of well-informed soldiers and horses.

古文：刺史郎幼复弃城走，行密遂据庐州。
现代文：刺史郎幼复弃城逃跑，杨行密就占据庐州。
English: Sashiro renounced the city and fled, and Yang Xingmi took possession of Zhangzhou.

古文：中和三年，唐即拜行密庐州刺史。
现代文：中和三年，唐朝就拜任杨行密为庐州刺史。
English: In the middle and third years of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Xingmi was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：淮南节度使高骈为毕师鐸所攻，骈表行密行军司马，行密率兵数千赴之。行至天长，师鐸已囚骈，召宣州秦彦入扬州，行密不得入，屯于蜀冈。
现代文：淮南节度使高骈受到毕师铎的进攻，高骈表奏杨行密任行军司马，杨行密率兵数千人奔赴高骈那里，走到天长，毕师铎已经拘囚高骈，召宣州秦彦进入扬州，杨行密不能进城，屯驻在蜀冈。
English: During the Huainan Festival, Gao Gan was attacked by Bi Shizhen. Gao Shizhen appointed Yang Xingmi as the commander of the marching army. Yang Xingmi led thousands of soldiers to Gao Gan and marched to Tianchang. Bi Shizhen had already imprisoned Gao Shizhen and summoned Xuanzhou Qinhan to enter Yangzhou. Yang Xingmi was not allowed to enter the city and was stationed in Shuanggang.

古文：师鐸兵众数万击行密，行密阳败，弃营走，师鐸兵饥，乘胜争入营收军实，行密反兵击之，师鐸大败，单骑走入城，遂杀高骈。
现代文：毕师铎敷万军队攻打杨行密，杨行密假装失败，放弃营寨逃跑，毕师铎的士兵饥饿，乘胜争相进入杨行密的营寨收缴军物，杨行密掉转军队攻打他们，毕师铎大败，一人骑着马逃进城，于是杀掉高骈。
English: Bi Shijie's army of ten thousand attacked Yang Xingmi, Yang Xingmi pretended to be defeated, abandoned the camp and fled, Bi Shijie's soldiers were hungry and took advantage of the victory to enter Yang Xingmi's camp to collect military supplies, Yang Xingmi turned the army to attack them, Bi Shijie was defeated, one person fled into the city on a horse, and then killed Gao Yao.

古文：行密闻骈死，缟军向城哭三日，攻其西门，彦及师鐸奔于东塘，行密遂入扬州。
现代文：杨行密获知高骈被杀死，让士兵穿上丧服向着城哭了三天，攻打扬州西门，秦彦和毕师铎逃奔到束塘，杨行密于是进入扬州。
English: When Yang Xingmi learned that Gao Yao had been killed, he had his soldiers put on mourning clothes and cry toward the city for three days. They attacked the West Gate of Yangzhou. Qin Yan and Bi Shizhen fled to Sangtang. Yang Xingmi then entered Yangzhou.

古文：新五代史·世家是时，城中仓廪空虚，饥民相杀而食，其夫妇、父子自相牵，就屠卖之，屠者刲剔如羊豕。
现代文：这时，城中仓库空虚，饥饿的百姓互相残杀而食，夫妇、父子互相牵拉，去屠户处卖掉，屠户像杀猎羊一样地剔割他们。
English: At this time, the warehouses in the city are empty, the hungry people kill and eat each other, couples, fathers and sons pull each other, go to the slaughterhouse and sell them, butchers cull them like hunting sheep.

古文：行密不能守，欲走。
现代文：杨行密不能坚守，想逃跑。
English: Yang Xingmi couldn't hold on and wanted to run away.

古文：而蔡州秦宗权遣其弟宗衡掠地淮南，彦及师鐸还自东塘，与宗衡合，行密闭城不敢出。
现代文：而蔡州秦宗权派他的弟弟秦宗衡劫掠淮南，秦彦和毕师铎从东塘返回，和秦宗衡会合，杨行密关闭城门不敢出来。
English: However, Caizhou Qin Zongquan sent his younger brother Qin Zongheng to plunder Huainan. Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan returned from Dongtang and met with Qin Zongheng. Yang Xingmi closed the city gate and dared not come out.

古文：已而宗衡为偏将孙儒所杀，儒攻高邮破之，行密益惧。
现代文：不久秦宗衡被副将孙儒杀掉，孙儒攻破高邮，杨行密更加惧怕。
English: Soon, Qin Zongheng was killed by the vice-commander Sun Ru, Sun Ru defeated Gaoyou, and Yang Xingmi was even more afraid.

古文：其客袁袭曰： 吾以新集之众守空城，而诸将多骈旧人，非有厚恩素信力制而心服之也。
现代文：他的门客袁袭说： 我们用新招集来的众兵把守空城，而将领们很多是高骈的老朋友，我们没有厚重的恩德和素来的信任有力地控制他们而让他们心服。
English: His protégé, Yuan Qi, said: "We used the newly recruited soldiers to guard the air city, and many of the generals are Gao Yao's old friends. We didn't have the profound benevolence and long-standing trust to effectively control them and win their hearts.

古文：今儒兵方盛，所攻必克，此诸将持两端、因强弱、择向背之时也。
现代文：如今孙儒的士兵正气盎，攻无不克，逭正是各位将领脚踩两只船顺强弃弱、选择向背的时候。
English: Today, Sun Ru's soldiers are in high spirits, attacking all and sundry. It is time for you to lead the way and step on the two boats, shun the strong, abandon the weak, and choose to turn back.

古文：海陵镇使高霸，骈之旧将，必不为吾用。 
现代文：海陵镇守使高霸，是高骈的旧将，一定不会为我们出力。 
English: Gaoba, the governor of Hailing Town, is an old general of Gaochun, and he will not do anything for us.

古文：行密乃以军令召霸，霸率其兵入广陵，行密欲使霸守天长，袭曰： 吾以疑霸而召之，其可复用乎？
现代文：杨行密于是用军令召高霸，高霸率领他的军队进入广陵，杨行密想让高霸改守天长，袁袭说： 我们因疑心高霸纔召他回来，能再任用他吗？
English: Yang Xingmi then issued a military order to summon Gao Ba, and Gao Ba led his army into Guangling. Yang Xingmi wanted Gao Ba to become the new ruler. Yuan Yuan said, "We summoned him back because of our suspicion of Gao Bao. Can we reappoint him?"

古文：且吾能胜儒，无所用霸，不幸不胜，天长岂吾有哉！
现代文：而且如果我们能够战胜孙儒，高霸就没有用处，如果不幸不能战胜孙儒，天畏难道还能是我们的吗！
English: Moreover, if we can defeat Sun Ru, Gaoba will be useless. If unfortunately we cannot defeat Sun Ru, can the fear of heaven still be ours?

古文：不如杀之，以并其众。 
现代文：不如杀掉他，兼并他的众兵。 
English: We might as well kill him and take over his army.

古文：行密因犒军擒霸族之，得其兵数千。
现代文：杨行密藉犒赏军队之机抓获高霸把他灭族，得到他的士兵数千人。
English: Yang Xingmi seized the opportunity to reward the army by capturing Gaoba and exterminating him, gaining thousands of his soldiers.

古文：已而孙儒杀秦彦、毕师鐸，并其兵以攻行密。
现代文：不久孙儒杀掉秦彦、毕师铎，兼并他们的军队攻打杨行密，杨行密想逃跑到海陵。
English: Soon after, Sun Ju killed Qin Yan and Bi Shijun and merged their armies to attack Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi wanted to escape to Hailing.

古文：行密欲走海陵，袭曰： 海陵难守，而庐州吾旧治也，城廪完实，可为后图。 
现代文：袁袭说： 海陵难守，而庐州是我们过去管辖的，城堡完备，仓库充实，可替以后作打算。 
English: Yuan Yuan said: Hailing is difficult to defend, but Zhangzhou was under our jurisdiction in the past, the castle is complete, the warehouse is full, and we can plan for the future.

古文：行密乃走庐州。
现代文：杨行密于是逃到庐州。
English: Yang Xingmi then fled to Ganzhou.

古文：久之，未知所向，问袭曰： 吾欲卷甲倍道，西取洪州可乎？ 
现代文：过了很久，不知该去哪里，问袁袭说： 我想收拾武器日夜兼程，向西攻取洪州，行吗？ 
English: After a long time, not knowing where to go, he asked Yuan Qi, "I want to pack up my weapons and travel day and night to capture Hongzhou in the west, is that okay?

古文：袭曰： 钟传新得江西，势未可图，而秦彦之入广陵也，召池州刺史赵锽委以宣州。
现代文：袁袭说： 锺传刚占据江西，必然不能谋取，而秦彦进入广陵时，召池州刺史赵镂把宣州交托给他。
English: Yuan Rui said, "Qian Qian had just occupied Jiangxi, so he couldn't get anything, but when Qin Yan entered Guangling, he called Chizhou's magistrate Zhao Wei to entrust Xuanzhou to him.

古文：今彦且死，锽失所恃，而守宣州非其本志，且其为人非公敌，此可取也。 
现代文：如今秦彦已死，赵鍟失去依靠，而把守宣州不是他的本意，况且他的才能不能和你相比，宣州可以攻取。 
English: Now that Qin Yan is dead, Zhao Wei has lost his reliance, and it was not his intention to defend Xuanzhou. Moreover, his talent cannot be compared to yours, Xuanzhou can be conquered.

古文：行密乃引兵攻锽，战于曷山，大败之。
现代文：杨行密于是率兵进攻赵鍟，在曷山交战，大败赵链。
English: Yang Xingmi then led his soldiers to attack Zhao Hui, fought in Shaoshan, and defeated Zhao Zhen.

古文：进围宣州，锽弃城走，追及杀之，行密遂入宣州。
现代文：进而包围宣州，赵鍟弃城逃跑，被迫上杀掉，杨行密于是进入宣州。
English: They then encircled Xuanzhou, Zhao Jun abandoned the city and fled. He was forced to kill them, and Yang Xingmi then entered Xuanzhou.

古文：龙纪元年，唐拜行密宣州观察使。
现代文：龙纪元年，唐朝拜杨行密为宣州观察使。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty sent Yang Xingmi as an observer to Xuanzhou.

古文：行密遣田頵、安仁义、李神福等攻浙西，取苏、常、润州。
现代文：杨行密派田颓、安仁义、李神福等人攻打浙西，夺取苏、常、润三州。
English: Yang Xingmi sent Tian Qi, An Renyi, Li Shenfu and others to attack western Zhejiang and capture the three states of Su, Chang and Run.

古文：二年，取滁、和州。
现代文：大顺二年，攻取滁、和二州。
English: In the second year of the Dashun era, he conquered Shandong and Shandong Province.

古文：景福元年，取楚州。
现代文：景福元年，攻取楚州。
English: In the first year of Gingfu, he conquered Chuzhou.

古文：孙儒自逐行密，入广陵，久之，亦不能守，乃焚其城。
现代文：孙儒自从赶跑杨行密，进入广陵后，时间长了，也不能坚守，于是焚毁广陵城。
English: Since Sun Ru chased away Yang Xingmi and entered Guangling, the time was long and he could not hold on, so he burned Guangling City.

古文：杀民老疾以饷军，驱其众渡江，号五十万，以攻行密。
现代文：杀掉老弱病残的百姓给军队吃，逼迫他的兵众渡过长江，号称五十万人，攻打杨行密。
English: He killed the old, weak and sick people to feed the army, and forced his soldiers to cross the Yangtze River, known as five hundred thousand people, to attack Yang Xingmi.

古文：诸将田頵、刘威等遇之辄败，行密欲走铜官。
现代文：田额、刘威等将领一遇上孙儒的军队就被打败，杨行密想逃到铜官。
English: Tian Ge, Liu Wei and other generals were defeated as soon as they encountered Sun Ju's army, and Yang Xing secretly wanted to escape to the bronze officer.

古文：其客戴友规曰： 儒来气锐而兵多，盖其锋不可当而可以挫，其众不可敌而可久以敝之。
现代文：他的门客戴友规说： 孙儒这次来兵多气盛，锐不可挡，却可以挫败他，他的兵众不可抗拒却可以持久来拖垮他们。
English: His protégé Dai You Gui said: "Sun Ru's troops this time are more energetic and unstoppable, but they can defeat him. His troops are irresistible, but they can drag them down for a long time.

古文：若避而走，是就擒也。 
现代文：如果躲避他们而逃跑，只能是束手就擒。 
English: If you run away from them, you're just going to get caught.

古文：刘威亦曰： 背城坚栅，可以不战疲之。 
现代文：刘威也说： 背城修筑坚牢的栅寨，可以不战拖疲他们。 
English: Liu Wei also said: building a solid stockade behind the city can exhaust them without a fight.

古文：行密以为然。
现代文：杨行密认为不错。
English: Yang Xingmi thought it was good.

古文：久之，儒兵饥，又大疫，行密悉兵击之，儒败，被擒，将死，仰顾见威曰： 闻公为此策以败我，使我有将如公者，其可败邪！ 
现代文：遇了很久，孙儒的士兵饥饿无食，又流行瘟疫，杨行密出动全部军队攻打他们，孙儒战败，被抓获，快死时，抬头望着刘威说： 听说你想出这个计策打败了我，如果我有像你这样的将领，能被打败吗？ 
English: It took a long time. Sun Ru's soldiers were starving and there was a plague. Yang Xingmi sent out the entire army to attack them. Sun Ru was defeated and captured. When he was about to die, he looked up at Liu Wei and said, "I heard that you came up with this strategy and defeated me. If I had a general like you, could I be defeated?"

古文：行密收儒余兵数千，以皁衣蒙甲，号 黑云都 ，常以为亲军。
现代文：杨行密收降孙儒的残兵数千人，用黑衣蒙上镗甲，号称 黑云都 ，常常作焉亲罩。
English: Yang Xingming gathered thousands of remnants of Sun Ju's soldiers, covered them with black clothing and armor, known as Hei Yundu, and often made them wear masks.

古文：是岁，复入扬州，唐拜行密淮南节度使。
现代文：这年，重新进入扬州，唐朝拜杨行密为淮南节度使。
English: This year, re-entering Yangzhou, the Tang Dynasty worshiped Yang Xingmi as Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：乾宁二年，加检校太傅、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：干宁二年，加授检校太傅、同中书门下平章事。
English: After two years of hard work, he was additionally awarded the title of Taifu of the inspection school and the title of Shimohei of the same school.

古文：行密以田頵守宣州，安仁义守润州。
现代文：杨行密任田颓守宣州，安仁义守润州。
English: Yang Xingmi was appointed as the governor of Xuanzhou and Anren as the governor of Runzhou.

古文：升州刺史冯弘鐸来附。
现代文：升州刺史冯弘铎前来归附。
English: Feng Hongtao, a member of the Shengzhou Shishi, came to annex it.

古文：分遣頵等攻掠，自淮以南、江以东诸州皆下之。
现代文：分派田颓等人攻城掠地，从淮河以南、长江以束各州都被攻克。
English: Tian Qi and others were assigned to attack the city and seize the land. From the south of the Huai River, the Yangtze River to the Sokou, all the states were conquered.

古文：进攻苏州，擒其刺史成及。
现代文：进攻苏州，抓获刺史成及。
English: Attacked Suzhou, captured the assassin Shi Chengyi.

古文：四年，兗州硃瑾奔于行密。
现代文：四年，兖州朱瑾投奔杨行密。
English: In four years, Zhangzhou Zhu Xi ran to Yang Xingmi.

古文：初，瑾为梁所攻，求救于晋，晋遣李承嗣将劲骑数千助瑾，瑾败，因与俱奔行密。
现代文：当初，朱瑾受到梁军的进攻，向晋军求救，晋军派李承嗣率强劲的骑兵敷千人援助朱瑾，朱瑾被打败，因而和李承嗣一道投奔杨行密。
English: At first, Zhu Xi was attacked by Liang's army and appealed to the Jin army for help. The Jin army sent a strong cavalry force of a thousand men led by Li Heihe to aid Zhu Xi. Zhu Xi was defeated, so he and Li Heihe joined Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密兵皆江、淮人，淮人轻弱，得瑾劲骑，而兵益振。
现代文：杨行密的士兵都是江、淮人，淮人身体轻弱无力，得到朱瑾强劲的骑兵，军队更加振奋。
English: Yang Xingmi's soldiers were all Jiang and Huai people. The Huai people were physically weak and feeble. Zhu Xi's cavalry was strong, and the army was more exhilarated.

古文：是岁，梁太祖遣葛从周、庞师古攻行密寿州，行密击败梁兵清口，杀师古，而从周收兵走，追至渒河，又大败之。
现代文：这年，梁太祖派葛从周、庞师古进攻杨行密的寿州，杨行密在清口打败梁兵，杀死庞师古，而葛从周收兵逃跑，被迫到淬河，又大败。
English: In this year, Liang Taizu sent Ge from Zhou and Pang Shigu to attack Yang Xingmi's Shuzhou. Yang Xingmi defeated Liang's soldiers at Qingkou and killed Pang Shigu, while Ge withdrew his troops from Zhou and fled. He was forced to go to Luohe and was defeated again.

古文：五年，钱镠攻苏州，及周本战于白方湖，本败，苏州复入于越。
现代文：五年，钱缪进攻苏州，在白方湖和周本开战，周本战败，苏州又归入越军。
English: In the fifth year, Qian Miao attacked Suzhou and went to war with Zhou Ben in Baifang Lake. Zhou Ben was defeated and Suzhou was incorporated into the Vietnamese army.

古文：天复元年，遣李神福攻越，战临安，大败之，擒其将顾全武以归。
现代文：天复元年，派李神福攻打越军，在临安作战，大败越军，抓获他们的将领顾全武而回。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Li Shenfu was sent to attack the Vietnamese army, fought in Lin'an, defeated the Vietnamese army, captured their general Gu Quanwu and returned.

古文：二年，冯弘鐸叛，袭宣州，及田頵战于曷山，弘鐸败，将入于海。行密自至东塘邀之，使人谓弘鐸曰： 胜败，用兵常事也，一战之衄，何苦自弃于海岛？
现代文：二年，冯弘铎反叛，袭击宣州，在曷山和田头作战，冯弘铎战败，准备逃入海中，杨行密亲自到东塘拦他，派人对冯弘铎说： 胜败，乃兵家常事，一仗挫败，何苦将自己抛弃在海岛？
English: In the second year, Feng Hongtao rebelled, attacked Xuanzhou, fought in Shaoshan and Tiantou, Feng Hongtao was defeated and prepared to flee into the sea. Yang Xingmi personally went to Dongtang to stop him and sent a person to Feng Hongtao saying: Victory and defeat are common things for soldiers, defeat in a battle, why abandon yourself on the island?

古文：吾府虽小，犹足容君。 
现代文：我的官府虽小，但还能容下你。 
English: My government office is small, but it can accommodate you.

古文：弘鐸感泣，行密从十余骑，驰入其军，以弘鐸为节度副使，以李神福代弘鐸为升州刺史。
现代文：冯弘铎感动哭泣，杨行密带着十多名骑兵，驰马进入他军中，任冯弘铎为节度副使，以李神福代冯弘铎任升州刺史。
English: Feng Hongtao was moved to tears. Yang Xingmi, with more than ten cavalrymen, galloped into his army, appointed Feng Hongtao as vice-envoy of the festival, and appointed Li Shenfu as the deputy of Feng Hongtao to ascend to the state.

古文：是岁，唐昭宗在岐，遣江淮宣谕使李俨拜行密东面诸道行营都统、检校太师、中书令，封吴王。
现代文：这年，唐昭宗在岐，派江淮宣谕使李俨拜杨行密为东面诸道行营都统、检校太师、中书令，封为昊王。
English: In the same year, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty sent Jianghuai to issue an edict to Li Zhibai and Yang Xingmi that they should be given the titles of Dongmen Zhuo Xingying Tudong, Jiankui Taishi, and Zhongshu Ling, and that they should be given the title of Hao Wang.

古文：三年，以李神福为鄂岳招讨使以攻杜洪，荆南成汭救洪，神福败之于君山。
现代文：三年，任李神福为鄂岳招讨使攻打杜洪，剂南成油救援杜洪，李神福在君山打败他。
English: In the third year, Li Shenfu was appointed to recruit and attack Du Hong for E Yue, and Nancheng Oil to rescue Du Hong. Li Shenfu defeated him in Junshan.

古文：梁兵攻青州，王师范来求救，遣王茂章救之，大败梁兵，杀硃友宁。
现代文：梁军进攻青州，王师范前来求救，派王茂章救援他，大败梁兵，杀死朱友宁。
English: Liang's army attacked Qingzhou, Wang Shifan came to ask for help, sent Wang Maozhang to rescue him, defeated Liang's soldiers, and killed Zhu Youning.

古文：友宁，梁太祖子也，太祖大怒，自将以击茂章，兵号二十万，复为茂章所败。
现代文：朱友宁，是梁太祖哥哥的儿子，梁太祖大怒，亲自率兵攻打王茂章，号称二十万大军，又被王茂章打败。
English: Zhu Youning was the son of Liang Taizu's elder brother. Liang Taizu was furious and personally led an army to attack Wang Maozhang, claiming to be a 200,000-strong army, which was defeated by Wang Maozhang.

古文：田頵叛，袭升州，执李神福妻子归于宣州。
现代文：田颓反叛，袭击升州，抓获李神福的妻子儿女回到宣州。
English: Tianyu rebelled, attacked Shengzhou, captured Li Shenfu's wife and children, and returned to Xuanzhou.

古文：行密召神福以讨頵，頵遣其将王坛逆之，又遣神福书，以其妻子招之。
现代文：杨行密召李神福讨伐田颉，田额派他的将领王坛迎战，又送信给李神福，拿他的妻子儿女招降他。
English: Yang Xingxing secretly summoned Li Shenfu to fight against the felling of rice fields, and Tian Yue sent his general Wang Tan to meet the battle, and also sent a letter to Li Shenfu, inviting him to surrender his wife and children.

古文：神福曰： 吾以一卒从吴王起事，今为大将，忍背德而顾妻子乎？ 
现代文：李神福说： 我从一个士兵随昊王超家，现在任了大将，忍心背弃昊王的恩德而顾惜妻子儿女吗？ 
English: Li Shenfu said: I have followed Hao Wang Chao's family since I was a soldier, and now I am a general. Can I bear to abandon Hao Wang's benevolence and spare his wife and children?

古文：立斩其使以自绝，军士闻之，皆感奋。
现代文：立即斩杀田额的使臣自绝后路，士兵们获知后都感动振奋。
English: The envoy, who immediately killed Tian Yuan, cut his losses, and the soldiers were all moved and excited when they learned of this.

古文：行至吉阳矶，頵执神福子承鼎以招之，神福叱左右射之，遂败坛兵于吉阳。
现代文：走到吉阳矶，田颓抓着李神福的儿子李承鼎招降他，李神福呵叱手下人射杀他们，于是在吉阳打败王坛的军队。
English: Walking to Jiyangye, Tian Qi grabbed Li Shenfu's son Li Chengding to invite him to surrender, Li Shenfu scolded his men to shoot them, and defeated Wang Tan's army in Jiyang.

古文：行密别遣台濛击頵，頵败死。
现代文：杨行密另派台蒙攻打田额，田额战败而死。
English: Yang Xingmi also sent Taimong to attack Tengger, but Tengger was defeated and died.

古文：初，頵及安仁义、硃延寿等皆从行密起微贱，及江、淮甫定，思渐休息，而三人者皆猛悍难制，颇欲除之，未有以发。
现代文：当初，田颓和安仁义、朱延寿等人都随杨行密在微贱中奋起，到江、淮初定，考虑逐渐休养生息时，而这三人都猛悍难以控制，杨行密很想除掉他们，但没有机会动手。
English: At the beginning, Tian Qi, An Renyi, Zhu Yan Shou and others all followed Yang Xingmi to rise up in a lowly position. When Jiang and Huai initially decided to consider gradually recuperating, these three were fierce and difficult to control. Yang Xingmi wanted to get rid of them, but did not have the opportunity to do so.

古文：天复二年，钱镠为其将许再思等叛而围之，再思召頵攻镠杭州，垂克，而行密纳镠赂，命頵解兵，頵恨之。
现代文：天复二年，钱锷因他的将领许再思等人反叛而包围他们，许再思召田颓攻打钱锷的杭州，快要攻克时，杨行密收纳钱锷的贿赂，命令田颓解兵休战，田额很遗憾。
English: Two years later, Qian Ye was besieged by his generals Xu Zai Si and others who rebelled. Xu Zai Si called on Tian Ye to attack Qian Ye's Hangzhou. When they were about to attack, Yang Xingmi accepted Qian Ye's bribe and ordered Tian Ye to disengage and call a truce. Tian Ye was very sorry.

古文：頵尝计事广陵，行密诸将多就頵求赂，而狱吏亦有所求。
现代文：田预曾在广陵商计事情，杨行密的将领们很多人找田颓索求贿赂，监狱的官吏也要索求。
English: Tian Yu had been involved in business in Guangling. Many of Yang Xingmi's generals went to Tian Yu to ask for bribes, and the prison officials also asked for bribes.

古文：頵怒曰： 吏欲我下狱也！ 
现代文：田颓发怒说： 这些官吏是想让我进监狱！ 
English: Tian Qi said angrily: These officials want to put me in jail!

古文：归而遂谋反。
现代文：回来后就谋反。
English: After returning, they plotted a rebellion.

古文：仁义闻之亦反，焚东塘以袭常州。
现代文：安仁义获知后也反叛了，焚毁束塘袭击常州。
English: When An Renyi learned of this, he also rebelled and attacked Changzhou by burning and destroying Shucutang.

古文：常州刺史李遇出战，望见仁义，大骂之。
现代文：常州刺史李遇出来迎战，望见安仁义后大骂他。
English: Changzhou assassin Shi Li came out to meet the battle, and scolded An Renyi after seeing him.

古文：仁义止其军曰： 李遇乃敢辱我如此，其必有伏兵。 
现代文：安仁义停下他的军队说： 李遇都敢如此侮辱我，他们必定有伏兵。 
English: An Renyi stopped his army and said: Li Yingduo dares to insult me like this, they must have an ambush.

古文：遂引军却，而伏兵果发，追至夹冈，仁义植帜解甲而食，遇兵不敢追，仁义复入润州。
现代文：于是率兵撤退，而伏兵果然出动，追到夹冈，安仁义把旗帜插在地上，脱下镗甲吃饭，李遇的士兵不敢追，安仁义又逃进润州。
English: As a result, he led the soldiers to retreat, and the ambush soldiers really set out, chased them to Jiagang, An Renyi planted the flag on the ground, took off his armor to eat, Li Ying's soldiers did not dare to chase, and An Renyi fled into Runzhou.

古文：行密遣王茂章、李德诚、米志诚等围之。
现代文：杨行密派王茂章、李德诚、米志诚等人包围他。
English: Yang Xingmi sent Wang Maozhang, Li Decheng, Mei Zhicheng and others to surround him.

古文：吴之军中推硃瑾善槊，志诚善射，皆为第一。
现代文：昊军中敷朱瑾擅长使长矛，米志诚擅长射箭，都是第一流的。
English: Zhu Xi, a member of Hao's army, is good at wielding spears, and Mi Zhicheng is good at archery. Both are first-class.

古文：而仁义尝以射自负，曰： 志城之弓十，不当瑾槊之一；瑾槊之十，不当仁义弓之一。 
现代文：而安仁义曾以擅长射箭自负，说： 米志诚的十把弓，抵不住朱瑾的一把长矛；朱瑾的十把长矛，抵不住我安仁义的一把弓。 
English: On the other hand, An Renyi once boasted that he was good at archery, saying: "Ye Zhicheng's ten bows cannot withstand Zhu Xi's one spear; Zhu Xi's ten spears cannot withstand my An Renyi's one bow."

古文：每与茂章等战，必命中而后发，以此吴军畏之，不敢进。
现代文：每次和王茂章等人打仗，必定射中后纔出兵，因此昊军怕他，不敢靠近。
English: Every time he fought with Wang Maozhang and others, he was sure to shoot and then send out soldiers, so the Hao army was afraid of him and did not dare to approach.

古文：行密亦欲招降之，仁义犹豫未决。
现代文：杨行密也想招降他，安仁义犹豫不决。
English: Yang Xingmi also wanted to recruit him, but An Renyi hesitated.

古文：茂章乘其怠，穴地道而入，执仁义，斩于广陵。
现代文：王茂章趁他松懈，挖地道进城，抓获安仁义，在广陵杀掉。
English: Wang Maozhang took advantage of his laxity, dug a tunnel into the city, captured An Renyi, and killed him in Guangling.

古文：延寿者，行密夫人硃氏之弟也。
现代文：朱延寿，是杨行密妻子朱氏的弟弟。
English: Zhu Yanshou is the younger brother of Yang Xingmi's wife Zhu.

古文：頵及仁义之将叛也，行密疑之，乃阳为目疾，每接延寿使者，必错乱其所见以示之。
现代文：田颓和安仁义将要反叛时，杨行密怀疑他，于是假装患了眼病，每次接待朱延寿的使臣，必定假装看错看昏什么东西以便做给使臣看。
English: When Tian Xuan and An Renyi were about to rebel, Yang Xingmu suspected him, so he pretended to have an eye disease. Every time he received Zhu Yanshou's envoys, he would pretend to see something wrong in order to show it to the envoys.

古文：尝行，故触柱而仆，硃夫人扶之，良久乃苏。
现代文：有次走路，故意碰上柱子倒地，朱夫人扶起他，很久纔苏醒。
English: Once, while walking, he deliberately bumped into a pillar and fell to the ground. Mrs. Zhu helped him up, and he took a long time to wake up.

古文：泣曰： 吾业成而丧其目，是天废我也！
现代文：哭泣着说： 我的事业成功了却失去了眼睛，这是老天要废弃哉！
English: Weeping, she said: "My career was successful, but I lost my eyes, this is a waste of God's time!

古文：吾兒子皆不足以任事，得延寿付之，吾无恨矣。 
现代文：我的儿子们都不配委以重事，得到朱延寿把大业交给他，我就没有遣憾了。 
English: My sons are not worthy of being entrusted with important matters. I have no regrets about entrusting my great career to Zhu Yanshou.

古文：夫人喜，急召延寿。延寿至，行密迎之寝门，刺杀之，出硃夫人以嫁之。
现代文：夫人很高兴，急忙召来朱延寿，朱延寿到，杨行密在卧室门口迎接他，把他刺死，把朱夫人嫁了出去。
English: His wife was very happy and quickly summoned Zhu Yanshou. When Zhu Yanshou arrived, Yang Xingmi greeted him at the bedroom door, stabbed him to death, and married off Mrs. Zhu.

古文：天祐二年，遣刘存攻鄂州，焚其城，城中兵突围而出，诸将请急击之，存曰： 击之复入，则城愈固，听其去，城可取也。 
现代文：天佑二年，派刘存进攻鄂州，焚毁州城，城中士兵突围出城，将领们请求猛打他们，刘存说： 攻打他们又会躲进城，那城就更加坚固，任他们离去，城就可以攻取。 
English: In the second year of Heaven's blessing, Liu Cun was sent to attack Ezhou and burn the provincial capital. The soldiers in the city broke out of the city, and the generals asked to beat them hard. Liu Cun said: If they are attacked, they will hide in the city, and the city will be more solid. Let them leave, and the city can be captured.

古文：是日城破，执杜洪，斩于广陵。
现代文：造天攻破州城，抓住杜洪，在广陵杀掉。
English: Zou Tian breached the state capital, captured Du Hong, and killed him in Guangling.

古文：九月，梁兵攻破襄州，赵匡凝奔于行密。
现代文：九月，梁兵攻破襄州，赵匡凝投奔杨行密。
English: In September, Liang's soldiers defeated Xiangzhou, and Zhao Kuangge threw himself into the arms of Yang Xingmi.

古文：十一月，行密卒，年五十四，谥曰武忠。
现代文：十一月，杨行密逝世，时年五十四岁，谧号叫武忠。
English: In November, Yang Xingmi passed away at the age of 54. His nickname was Wu Zhong.

古文：子渥立。
现代文：儿子杨渥继位。
English: His son Yang Wo succeeded to the throne.

古文：溥僭号，追尊行密为太祖武皇帝，陵曰兴陵。
现代文：杨溥越分自立为帝后，追尊杨行密为太祖武皇帝，陵墓叫兴陵。
English: Yang Huiyue became the empress dowager, and Yang Xingmi became Emperor Taizu. The mausoleum is called Xingling.

古文：渥字承天，行密长子也。
现代文：杨渥字承天，是杨行密的长子。
English: Yang Wo Zi Cheng Tian is the eldest son of Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密病，出渥为宣州观察使。
现代文：杨行密患病，让杨渥出任宣州观察使。
English: Yang Xingmi fell ill, so Yang Wo served as Xuanzhou observation envoy.

古文：右衙指挥使徐温私谓渥曰： 今王有疾而出嫡嗣，必有奸臣之谋，若它日召子，非温使者慎无应命。 
现代文：右衙指挥使徐温私下对杨渥说： 如今大王患病，却让嫡长子外出任职，必定有奸臣的阴谋，如果哪天召你，不是我的使臣千万不要应召而来。 
English: The commander of the Right Division ordered Xu Wen to say to Yang Wotong in private: "Nowadays, the great king is ill, but he has let his eldest son go out to serve. There must be a conspiracy of treacherous vassals. If you are summoned one day, don't be summoned by anyone who is not my envoy."

古文：渥涕泣谢温而去。
现代文：杨渥哭泣着告辞徐温离去。
English: Yang Wou wept as he bade farewell to Xu Wen.

古文：行密病甚，命判官周隐作符召渥，隐虑渥幼弱不任事，劝行密用旧将有威望者代主军政，乃荐大将刘威，行密未许。
现代文：杨行密病重，命令判官周隐作符召杨渥，周隐担心杨渥年幼体弱不能担任大事，劝杨行密任用有威望的旧将代任主持军政，于是推荐大将刘威，杨行密没有同意。
English: Yang Xingmi was seriously ill and ordered the judge Zhou Ying to summon Yang Wou. Zhou Ying was worried that Yang Wou was too young and weak to take on important tasks. He advised Yang Xingmi to appoint a prestigious former general to preside over military affairs. He then recommended General Liu Wei, but Yang Xingmi did not agree.

古文：温与严可求入问疾，行密以隐议告之，温等大惊，遽诣隐所计事。
现代文：徐温和严可求进来探病，杨行密把周隐的意见告诉他们，徐温等人非常震惊，于是到周隐那里商计事情。
English: Xu Wen and Yan Ke asked to come in for an examination, Yang Xingmi told them Zhou Yin's opinion, Xu Wen and others were very shocked, so they went to Zhou Yin to discuss things.

古文：隐未出，而温见隐作召符犹在案上，急取遣之。
现代文：周隐还没出来，而徐温看见周隐写的召符还在案桌上，急忙取来给杨渥送去。
English: Zhou Ying had not yet come out, and Xu Wen saw that the call sign written by Zhou Ying was still on the desk, and hurried to get it and send it to Yang Wo.

古文：渥见温使，乃行。
现代文：杨渥见到徐温的使臣，纔出发。
English: Yang Wo saw Xu Wen's envoys and set off.

古文：行密卒，渥嗣立，召周隐骂曰： 汝欲卖吾国者，复何面目见杨氏乎？ 
现代文：杨行密死，杨渥继位，召周隐骂道： 你是想出卖我国家的人，又有什么脸见杨氏呢？ 
English: After Yang Xingmi's death and Yang Wo's succession, he summoned Zhou Yin and scolded him: "You are the one who wants to sell out our country. How dare you look down on Mr. Yang?

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是杀掉他。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：以王茂章为宣州观察使。
现代文：任王茂章为宣州观察使。
English: Wang Maozhang was appointed as the Xuanzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：渥之入也，多辇宣州库物以归广陵，茂章惜而不与，渥怒，命李简以兵五千围之，茂章奔于钱塘。
现代文：杨渥进朝时，用车载了很多宣州仓库中的财物回到广陵，当时王茂章吝惜不想给他，杨渥发怒，命令李筒率兵五千人包围他，王茂章逃奔到钱塘。
English: When Yang Wo entered the court, he used his car to carry a lot of property from the Xuanzhou warehouse back to Guangling. At that time, Wang Maozhang grudgingly did not want to give it to him. Yang Wo became angry and ordered Li Zu to surround him with five thousand soldiers. Wang Maozhang fled to Qiantang.

古文：天祐三年二月，刘存取岳州。
现代文：天佑三年二月，刘存攻取岳州。
English: In February of the third year of Heaven's blessing, Liu Cun captured Yuezhou.

古文：四月，江西钟传卒，其子匡时代立，传养子延规怨不得立，以兵攻匡时。
现代文：四月，江西锺传死，他的儿子锺匡时代任，锺传的养子锺延规怨恨役能继任，率兵攻打锺匡时。
English: In April, Jiangxi Xuan Chuang died, and his son Xuan Kuang was appointed to succeed him. Xuan Chuang's adopted son, Xuan Yan Gui, resented the appointment and led the troops to attack Xuan Kuang.

古文：渥遣秦裴率兵攻之。
现代文：杨渥派秦裴率兵攻打他们。
English: Yang Wo sent Qin Pei and his soldiers to attack them.

古文：九月，克洪州，执匡时及司马陈象以归，斩象于市，赦匡时。
现代文：九月，攻克洪州，抓获锺匡时和司马陈象而回，在街上杀掉陈象，敖免锺匡时。
English: In September, after conquering Hongzhou and capturing Gong Kuang Shi and Sima Chen Xiang, he returned, killed Chen Xiang in the street, and pardoned Gong Kuang Shi.

古文：以秦裴为江西制置使。
现代文：任秦裴为江西制置使。
English: Qin Pei was appointed as the Jiangxi Provincial Commissioner.

古文：梁太祖代唐，改元开平，渥仍称天祐。
现代文：梁太祖取代唐朝，改年号焉开平，杨渥仍称天佑年号。
English: Liang Taizu replaced the Tang Dynasty, and the name of the year was changed to Yan Kaiping. Yang Wo still called it the Year of Heaven's Blessing.

古文：鄂州刘存、岳州陈知新以舟师伐楚，败于浏阳，楚人执存及知新以归。
现代文：鄂州刘存、岳州陈知逝率领水军伐楚，在浏阳被打败，楚人抓获刘存和陈知新而回。
English: Liu Cun and Chen Zhixin of Ezhou and Chen Zhixin of Yuezhou led the naval forces to attack Chu. They were defeated in Liuyang, and the Chu people captured Liu Cun and Chen Zhixin and returned.

古文：楚王马殷素闻其名，皆欲活之，存等大骂殷曰： 昔岁宣城脱吾刃下，今日之败，乃天亡我，我肯事汝以求活耶？
现代文：楚王马殷素来听说他们的名声，想让他们都活下来，刘存等人大骂马殷说： 往年你在宣城从我们刀下逃脱，今天的失败，是老天要消灭我们，我们肯跟随你求活吗？
English: Chu King Ma Yin had heard of their reputation and wanted them all to survive. Liu Cun and others scolded Ma Yin, saying: In previous years, you escaped from our sword in Xuancheng. Today's failure is God's will to destroy us. Are we willing to follow you to survive?

古文：我岂负杨氏者！ 
现代文：我们难道是背叛杨氏的人？ 
English: Are we the ones who betrayed Mr. Yang?

古文：殷知不可屈，乃杀之，岳州复入于楚。
现代文：马殷知道不能使他们屈服，于是杀掉他们，岳州又归入楚。
English: Ma Yin knew that he could not make them surrender, so he killed them, and Yuezhou was returned to Chu.

古文：初，渥之入广陵也，留帐下兵三千于宣州，以其腹心陈璠、范遇将之。
现代文：当初，杨渥进广陵时，留下手下士兵三千人在宣州，让他的心腹陈墦、范遇统率他们。
English: At the beginning, when Yang Wo entered Guangling, he left three thousand soldiers under his command in Xuanzhou, and let his confidants Chen Yao and Fan Yu lead them.

古文：既入立，恶徐温典牙兵，召璠等为东院马军以自卫。
现代文：登位后，讨厌徐温掌管牙兵，召陈墦等人组成束院马军用来自卫。
English: After ascending to the throne, Xu Wen hated to be in charge of the tooth soldiers, and summoned Chen Qi and others to form the Sakuin Horse Army for self-defense.

古文：而温与左衙都指挥使张颢皆行密时旧将，又有立渥之功，共恶璠等侵其权。
现代文：而徐温和左衙都指挥使张颢都是杨行密时的老将，又有拥立杨渥的功劳，都讨厌陈墦等人侵夺他们的权力。
English: But both Xu Wenming and Zuoying are veterans of Yang Xingmi's time, and have the merit of supporting Yang Wu, and they hate Chen Yu and others for encroaching on their power.

古文：四年正月，渥视事，璠等侍侧，温、颢拥牙兵入，拽璠等下，斩之，渥不能止，由是失政，而心愤未能发，温等益不自安。
现代文：四年正月，杨渥处理公务，陈墦等人在一旁侍立，徐温、张颢率牙兵闯进来，拉下陈墦等人，杀掉他们，杨渥不能阻止，因此不能控制政权而心中的气愤不能发泄，徐温等人心中也越发不放心。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Yang Wo was handling his official duties, while Chen Yao and others were standing by. Xu Wen and Zhang Ye led the soldiers to break in, pull down Chen Yao and others, and kill them. Yang Wo could not stop them, so he could not control the regime and could not vent his anger, and Xu Wen and others were more and more worried.

古文：五年五月，温、颢共遣盗入寝中杀渥，渥说群盗能反杀温等者皆为刺史。
现代文：五年五月，徐温、张颢共同派盗贼进入卧室中杀杨渥，杨渥劝说群盗：能反杀徐温等人的都任焉刺史。
English: In May of the fifth year, Xu Wen and Zhang Ye jointly sent thieves into the bedroom to kill Yang Wou. Yang Wou persuaded the group of thieves that if they could kill Xu Wen and others, they would be able to make history.

古文：群盗皆诺，惟纪祥不从，执渥缢杀之，时年二十三，谥曰景。
现代文：群盗都同意，只有纪祥不从命，捉住杨渥吊死，当时二十三岁，谧号叫景。
English: The group of thieves all agreed, only Ji Xiang did not follow his orders and caught Yang Wo and hanged him. He was 23 years old at the time, and his nickname was Jing.

古文：弟隆演立。
现代文：弟弟杨隆演登位。
English: His younger brother Yang Longyan ascended to the throne.

古文：溥僭号，追尊渥为烈宗景皇帝，陵曰绍陵。
现代文：杨溥越分自立为帝后，追尊杨渥为烈宗景皇帝，陵墓叫绍陵。
English: Yang Huiyue became the empress, Yang Wo became the emperor, and the mausoleum is called the Shao Mausoleum.

古文：隆演字鸿源，行密第二子也。
现代文：杨隆演字鸿源，是杨行密的第二个儿子。
English: Yang Long, played by Hong Yuan, is the second son of Yang Xingmi.

古文：初名瀛，又名渭。
现代文：原名杨瀛，又名杨渭。
English: His original name was Yang Hui, also known as Yang Hui Zong.

古文：初，温、颢之弑渥也，约分其地以臣于梁，及渥死，颢欲背约自立。
现代文：当初，徐温、张颢杀掉杨渥时，约定瓜分杨渥的土地做后梁的臣子，到杨渥死后，张颢想背约自立。
English: At first, when Xu Wen and Zhang Ye killed Yang Wo, they agreed to divide Yang Wo's land and make him a vassal of Hou Liang. After Yang Wo's death, Zhang Ye wanted to break the agreement and become independent.

古文：温患之，问其客严可求，可求曰： 颢虽刚愎，而暗于成事，此易为也。 
现代文：徐温对此担忧，征询他的门客严可求，严可求说： 张颢虽然刚愎自用，但做事愚蠢，这事容易对付。 
English: Xu Wen was worried about this. He asked his protégé, Yan Kuxuan, for advice. Yan Kuxuan said, "Although Zhang Ye is stubborn and self-serving, he does stupid things, which is easy to deal with.

古文：明日，颢列剑戟府中，召诸将议事，自大将硃瑾而下，皆去卫从然后入。
现代文：第二天，张颢在府中藏列剑戟，召将领们商议事情，从大将朱瑾以下，都摒去随行护卫的人然后纔能进去。
English: The next day, Zhang Ye hid a row of swords and shields in the palace and summoned the generals to discuss the matter. From General Zhu Ye on down, they all dismissed the escorting guards and then Zhang Ye was able to enter.

古文：颢问诸将，谁当立者，诸将莫敢对。
现代文：张颢问将领们，谁是应当拥立的人？将领们没有人敢回答。
English: Zhang Ye asked the generals, who is the person who should be supported? None of the generals dared to answer.

古文：颢三问，可求前密启曰： 方今四境多虞，非公主之不可，然恐为之太速。
现代文：张颢再三问，严可求上前密告说： 当今四境有很多忧患，不是你来作主不行，但怕这样做得太快了。
English: Zhang Ye repeatedly asked Yan to come forward and inform him, saying: Today, there are many troubles in the four regions. It's not up to you to decide, but I'm afraid it's too soon to do so.

古文：且今外有刘威、陶雅、李简、李遇，皆先王一等人也，公虽自立，未知此辈能降心以事公否。
现代文：而且现在在外的刘威、陶雅、李简、李遇都是先王的人，你即使自立，不知这些人能否心服辜奉你。
English: Moreover, Liu Wei, Tao Ya, Li Jian, and Li Yu, who are now outside, are the people of the first king. Even if you are self-reliant, I don't know if these people can serve you wholeheartedly.

古文：不若辅立幼主，渐以岁时，待其归心，然后可也。 
现代文：不如辅佐拥立年幼的君主，以较长时间慢慢争取，等到他们回心转意，然后就行了。 
English: It would be better to support and support the young monarchs, slowly strive for a longer period of time, wait until they change their minds, and then it's fine.

古文：颢不能对。
现代文：张颢不能回答。
English: Zhang Ye couldn't answer.

古文：可求因趋出，书一教内袖中，率诸将入贺，诸将莫知所为。
现代文：严可求因而快步走出，写了一张教令放在袖中，率领将领们进来祝贺，将领们不知他在做什么。
English: As a result, Yan Keku hurried out, wrote a edict and put it in his sleeve, leading the generals to come and congratulate him. The generals did not know what he was doing.

古文：及出教宣之，乃渥母史氏教，言杨氏创业艰难，而嗣王不幸，隆演以次当立，告诸将以无负杨氏而善事之。
现代文：到拿出教令向他们宣读，纔知道是杨渥的母亲史氏的教令，说杨氏创业艰难，而继承王位的杨渥身遭不幸，杨隆演依次应当继位，告诉将领们不要辜负杨氏，好好事奉他。
English: When he took out the edict and read it to them, Zou knew that it was the edict of Yang Wo's mother, Zhuang Shi, saying that it was difficult for Yang Wo to start a business, and Yang Wo, who inherited the throne, suffered misfortune, Yang Longyan should succeed in turn, and told the generals not to fail Yang Wo and serve him well.

古文：辞旨激切，闻者感动。
现代文：辞意激切，听的人受到感动。
English: His speech was impassioned, and those who listened were moved.

古文：颢气色皆沮，卒无能为，隆演乃得立。
现代文：张颢气色很沮丧，最终无能为力，杨隆演于是得以登位。
English: Zhang Xuan looked very depressed and ultimately powerless, so Yang Longyan was able to ascend to the throne.

古文：颢由此与温有隙，讽隆演出温润州。
现代文：张颢从此和徐温产生矛盾，暗示杨隆演把徐温调到润州。
English: Zhang Yao and Xu Wen have been at odds ever since, suggesting that Yang Longyan transferred Xu Wen to Runzhou.

古文：可求谓温曰： 今舍衙兵而出外郡，祸行至矣。 
现代文：严可求对徐温说： 如今舍弃衙兵而出任外郡，灾祸快到了。 
English: Yan can be asked to say to Xu Wen: Now abandoning the soldiers and leaving the county, the disaster is coming.

古文：温患之，可求因说颢曰： 公与徐温同受顾托，议者谓公夺其衙兵，是将杀之于外，信乎？ 
现代文：徐温对此担忧，严可求因而游说张颢说： 你和徐温共同接受委托，议事的人说你抢夺了他的衙兵，是准备把他杀死在外，是真的吗？ 
English: Xu Wen was worried about this, so he lobbied Zhang Xuan, saying: You and Xu Wen jointly accepted the commission, and the negotiator said that you snatched his soldiers and were preparing to kill him outside. Is it true?

古文：颢曰： 事已行矣，安可止乎？ 可求曰： 甚易也。 
现代文：张颢说： 事情已经做了，怎能停下呢？ 严可求说： 很容易。 
English: Zhang Jun said, "Things have already been done, how can we stop it? Yan can say, "It's easy."

古文：明日，从乂页与诸将造温，可求阳责温曰： 古人不忘一饭之恩，况公杨氏三世之将，今幼嗣新立，多事之时，乃求居外以苟安乎？ 
现代文：第二天，随张颢和将领们拜访徐温，严可求假意责备徐温说： 古人不忘一顿饭的恩情，何况你是杨氏三代的将领，如今年幼的继承人刚登位，多事之秋，能请求外任以便苟且偷安吗？ 
English: The next day, when Zhang Xuan and the generals visited Xu Wen, Yan can be assumed to blame Xu Wen and said: The ancients do not forget the grace of a meal. Besides, you are the general of the third generation of the Yang family. If this young heir has just ascended the throne, and there are many things to do, can you ask for an external appointment in order to stay safe?

古文：温亦阳谢曰： 公等见留，不愿去也。 
现代文：徐温也假意告谢说： 你们挽留，那我就不想离开了。 
English: Xu Wen also pretended to be grateful and said: If you stay, then I don't want to leave.

古文：由是不行。
现代文：因此徐温没有走。
English: Therefore, Xu Wen did not go.

古文：行军副使李承嗣与张颢善，觉可求有附温意，讽颢使客夜刺杀之，客刺可求不能中。
现代文：行军副使李承嗣和张颢关系好，察觉严可求有依附徐温的打算，暗示张颢派门客晚上去刺杀他，门客没有刺中严可求。
English: The marching deputy Li Chengzhi had a good relationship with Zhang Ye, and sensed that Yan Keqiu had the intention of adhering to Xu Wen. He hinted that Zhang Ye had sent a concubine to assassinate him in the evening. The concubine did not have a concubine, but Yan Keqiu did.

古文：明日，可求诣温，谋先杀颢，阴遣钟章选壮士三十人，就衙堂斩颢，因以弑渥之罪归之。
现代文：第二天，严可求到徐温那里，商量先杀掉张颢，暗中派锺章挑选壮士三十人，去衙堂斩了张颢，趁机把杀杨渥的事归罪于他。
English: The next day, Yan Keku went to Xu Wen to discuss killing Zhang Ye first, secretly sent Zhang Ye to select 30 strong men, and went to the hall to behead Zhang Ye, taking the opportunity to blame him for the murder of Yang Wo.

古文：温由是专政，隆演备位而已。
现代文：徐温从此专权，杨隆演只是个傀儡。
English: Xu Wen has been in power ever since, and Yang Longyan is just a puppet.

古文：六月，抚州危全讽叛，攻洪州，袁州彭彦章、吉州彭钎、信州危仔倡皆起兵叛。
现代文：六月，抚州危全讽反叛，进攻洪州，袁州彭彦章、吉州彭矸、信州危仔倡都起兵反叛。
English: In June, Fuzhou Guizhong rebelled and attacked Hongzhou. Yuanzhou Pengyanzhang, Jizhou Pengyuan, and Xinshou Guizhong all rebelled.

古文：隆演召严可求问谁可用者。
现代文：杨隆演召严可求询问可以任用谁去讨伐。
English: Yang Long called Yan Can to inquire about who could be appointed to go to the crusade.

古文：可求荐周本，时本方攻苏州败归，惭不肯出，可求强起之。
现代文：严可求推荐周本，当时周本正攻打苏州失败而归，羞惭不愿出任，严可求强行起用他。
English: Yan can be asked to recommend Zhou Ben. At that time, Zhou Ben was returning from a failed attack on Suzhou. Shy and unwilling to take office, Yan can be asked to forcibly appoint him.

古文：本曰： 苏州之败，非怯也，乃上将权轻，而下多专命尔。
现代文：周本说： 苏州的失败，不是因为胆怯，而是上将权力小，手下的人擅自指挥罢了。
English: Zhou Ben said: The failure of Suzhou is not because of cowardice, but because the general has little power, and his subordinates just command without authorization.

古文：若必见任，愿无用偏裨。 
现代文：如果一定要任用我，希望不要任用副手。 
English: If you must appoint me, I hope you don't appoint a deputy.

古文：乃请兵七千。
现代文：于是请求给他乇千士兵。
English: So he asked for three thousand soldiers.

古文：战于象牙潭，败之，执全讽、彦章，而玕奔于楚，仔倡奔于钱塘。
现代文：在象牙潭作战，打败他们，抓获危全讽、彭彦章，而彭圩逃奔到楚，危仔倡逃奔到钱塘。
English: He fought in the Ivory Pool, defeated them, and captured Gui Quanlian and Peng Yanzhang, while Peng Yao fled to Chu and Gui Zi Dian fled to Qiantang.

古文：全讽至广陵，诸将议曰： 昔先王攻赵锽，全讽屡饷给吴军。 
现代文：危全讽被抓到广陵，将领们商议说： 过去先王攻打赵鍟，危全讽多次供给呈军军饷。 
English: Guo Quanzhong was caught in Guangling, and the generals discussed: In the past, the former king attacked Zhao Bei, and Guo Quanzhong repeatedly provided military pay.

古文：乃释不杀。
现代文：于是放了他役杀。
English: So they let him go.

古文：初，全讽欲举兵也，钱镠送王茂章于梁，道过全讽，谓曰： 闻公欲大举，愿见公兵，以知济否。 
现代文：当初，危全讽想举兵反叛时，钱锷送王茂章到后梁，路上拜访危全讽，对他说： 听说你想大举出兵，希望能看看你的军队，以便知道行不行。 
English: At first, when Gui Quan Lian wanted to raise an army to rebel, Qian Ye sent Wang Maozhang to Houliang. On the way, he visited Gui Quan Lian and said to him, "I heard that you want to send a large number of troops, and I hope to see your army to see if it can be done."

古文：全讽阵兵，与茂章登城望之，茂章曰： 我素事吴，吴兵三等，如公此众，可当其下将尔，非得益兵十万不可。 
现代文：危全讽摆开兵阵，和王茂章登城观看，王茂章说： 我素来事奉昊，昊兵分成三等，像你这样的军队，只能相当于他们的下等兵将而已，非得增兵十万不行。 
English: Wang Maozhang said, "I have always served Hao. Hao soldiers are divided into three classes. An army like yours can only be equivalent to their junior soldiers. It is not possible to increase the number of soldiers by 100,000."

古文：而全讽卒以此败。
现代文：而危全讽果然因此被打败。
English: As a result, the dangerous irony was defeated.

古文：八年，徐温领升州刺史，治舟师于金陵。
现代文：八年，徐温兼任升州刺史，在金陵整治水军。
English: In the eighth year, Xu Wen concurrently served as the sheriff of Shengzhou, and reorganized the navy in Jinling.

古文：宣州李遇自行密时为大将，勋位已高，愤温用事，尝曰： 徐温何人？
现代文：宣州李遇从杨行密时就任大将，功勋职位很高，气愤徐温专权，曾说： 徐温是什么人？
English: Xuanzhou Li Rong took office as general when he took over from Yang Xingmi, with a high position of merit, angry at Xu Wen's exclusive power, and once said: Who is Xu Wen?

古文：吾犹未识，而骤至于此。 
现代文：我都不认识，而突然到了这地步。 
English: I don't know anyone and it's come to this.

古文：温闻之，怒，遣柴再用以兵送王坛代遇，且召之。
现代文：徐温听说后，发怒，派柴再用率兵护送王坛取代李遇，而且召他来。
English: After hearing this, Xu Wen became angry and sent Chai to escort the royal altar with his soldiers to replace Li Yu, and called him to come.

古文：遇疑不受命，再用围之，隆演使客将何荛谕遇使自归。
现代文：李遇疑心，不接受被替代的命令，柴再用包围他，杨隆演派客将何莞开导李遇让他自己回来。
English: Li Rongxin was suspicious and did not accept the order to be replaced. They surrounded him with firewood. Yang Longyuan sent a guest to guide Li Rongxin and let him come back.

古文：荛因说曰： 公若欲反，可杀荛以示众，若本无心，何不随荛以出？ 
现代文：何莞因而游说道： 你如果想反叛，可以杀掉我何莞示众，如果原本无心反叛，焉什么不随我何莞出来？ 
English: Therefore, He Guan said: If you want to rebel, you can kill me He Guan to show the public. If you do not want to rebel, why not come out with me He Guan?

古文：遇自以无反心，乃随荛出，温讽再用伺其出，杀之，并族其家。
现代文：李遇自己因无心反叛，于是随何莞出来，徐温暗示柴再用等李遇出来，就杀掉他，并把他家灭族。
English: When Li encountered him because of his unintentional rebellion, he followed He Guan out, and Xu Wen hinted that he would use firewood again, and when Li encountered him, he would kill him and exterminate his family.

古文：九年，温率将吏进隆演位太师、中书令、吴王。
现代文：九年，徐温率领将吏们进封杨隆演为太师、中书令、昊王。
English: In the ninth year, Xu Wen led the generals into Feng Yang Long to play the role of Taishi, Chushirei, and Hao Wang.

古文：温为行军司马、镇海军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：徐温任行军司马、镇海军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Xu Wen was appointed as the secretary of the marching army, the naval festival envoy of the town, and the deputy of the book gate of the town.

古文：陈章攻楚取岳州，执其刺史苑玫。
现代文：陈章进攻楚国夺取岳州，抓获岳州刺史苑玫。
English: Chen Zhang attacked Chu and captured Yuezhou, and captured Yuezhou's crown prince Mei.

古文：十年，越人攻常州，徐温败之于无锡。
现代文：十年，越人进攻常州，徐温在无锡打败他们。
English: Ten years later, the Viets attacked Changzhou, and Xu Wen defeated them in Wuxi.

古文：梁遣王茂章攻寿春，温败之霍丘。
现代文：后梁派王茂章攻打寿春，徐温在霍丘打败他们。
English: Hou Liang sent Wang Maozhang to attack Shouchun, and Xu Wen defeated them in Huoqiu.

古文：十二年，封徐温齐国公、两浙都招讨使，始镇润州。
现代文：十二年，封徐温为齐国公、两浙都招讨使，开始镇守润州。
English: In the 12th year, Xu Wen was appointed as the governor of Qi Province, and envoys were invited from both Zhejiang Provinces to begin the defense of Renzhou.

古文：留其子知训为行军副使，秉政，而大事温遥决之。
现代文：留下他的儿子徐知训任行军副使，执掌政权，而大事情由徐温在逮地决断。
English: He left his son, Xu Zhixun, as deputy military envoy, in charge of the regime, while major matters were decided by Xu Wen at the scene of the crime.

古文：冬，浚杨林江，水中出火，可以燃。
现代文：冬天，疏通杨林江，水中出火气，可以燃烧。
English: In winter, the Yanglin River is dredged, and fire gas is emitted in the water, which can be burned.

古文：十三年，宿卫将李球、马谦挟隆演登楼，取库兵以诛知训，阵于门桥。
现代文：十三年，宿卫将领李球、马谦挟持杨隆演登楼，夺取库中武器以诛杀徐知训，在门桥摆开战阵。
English: In the thirteenth year, Yang Longyan went up to the building with the guards Li Qiu and Ma Qian, seized the weapons in the warehouse to fight and kill Xu Zhixun, and set up a battle line at the gate bridge.

古文：知训与战，频却，硃瑾适自外来，以一骑前视其阵，曰： 此不足为也。 
现代文：徐知训和他们打仗，频频退却，朱瑾恰好从外归来，带着一个骑兵上前察看他们的战阵，说： 这不值一战。 
English: Xu Zhixun fought with them and often retreated. Zhu Xi happened to return from outside and went forward with a cavalryman to inspect their battle line and said, "This is not worth a battle."

古文：因反顾一麾，外兵争进，遂斩球、谦，而乱兵皆溃。
现代文：因而回头颅望一挥手，从外回来的士兵争相前进，于是斩李球、马谦，而作乱的士兵都溃逃了。
English: So he looked back at his head and waved his hand, and the soldiers who came back from outside rushed forward, so Li Qiu and Ma Qian were beheaded, and the soldiers who caused the disturbance fled.

古文：十四年，徐温徙治金陵。
现代文：四年，徐温调任治理金陵。
English: Four years later, Xu Wen was transferred to govern Jinling.

古文：十五年，遣王祺会洪、袁、信三州兵攻虔、韶，久之不克。
现代文：十五年，派王祺会合洪、袁、信三州军队攻打虔、韶二州，很久没能攻克。
English: In the fifteenth year, Wang Yao sent the combined armies of Hong, Yuan, and Xin of the three states to attack the two states of Qian and Jian, but they were unable to conquer them for a long time.

古文：祺病，以刘信代之。
现代文：王祺患病，任刘信接代他。
English: Wang Yao fell ill, and Liu Xin was appointed to succeed him.

古文：四月，副都统硃瑾杀徐知训，瑾自杀。
现代文：四月，副都统朱瑾杀掉徐知训，朱瑾自杀。
English: In April, Zhu Xi, deputy of the Central Government, killed Xu Zhixun, and Zhu Xi committed suicide.

古文：润州徐知诰闻乱，率兵入，杀唐宣谕使李俨以止乱，遂秉政。
现代文：润州徐知诰听说作乱，率兵而入，杀掉后唐宣谕使李俨以制止叛乱，于是执掌政权。
English: Renzhou Xu Zhisheng heard of the rebellion, led an army to enter, killed the post-Tang proclamation to make Li Xi to stop the rebellion, and then took control of the regime.

古文：徐氏之专政也，隆演幼懦，不能自持，而知训尤凌侮之。
现代文：徐氏专政时，杨隆演年幼懦弱，不能自立，而徐知训尤其凌侮他。
English: During Xu's dictatorship, Yang Longyan played a young coward, unable to stand up for himself, and Xu Zhixun especially insulted him.

古文：尝饮酒楼上，命优人高贵卿侍酒，知训为参军，隆演鹑衣髽髻为苍鹘。
现代文：曾在楼上饮酒，命艺人高贵卿侍酒，徐知训扮演参军，杨隆演穿着破旧的衣服，头顶两边梳成发髻，扮演苍鹊。
English: Once upstairs drinking, life artist Gao Guijie served wine, Xu Zhixun played the role of joining the army, Yang Longyan dressed in shabby clothes, the top of his head combed into a bun on both sides, playing a heron.

古文：知训尝使酒骂坐，语侵隆演，隆演愧耻涕泣，而知训愈辱之。
现代文：徐知训曾藉酒骂座，说话伤害杨隆演，杨隆演感到羞愧耻辱哭起来，而徐知训更加凌辱他。
English: Xu Zhixun had abused Yang Longyan with alcohol and words. Yang Longyan felt ashamed and cried, and Xu Zhixun abused him even more.

古文：左右扶隆演起去，知训杀吏一人，乃止。
现代文：手下人扶着杨隆演起身离开，徐知训杀掉一个役吏，纔罢休。
English: With the help of his subordinates, Yang Longyan got up and left, and Xu Zhixun killed an official and left.

古文：吴人皆仄目。
现代文：昊人都对他侧目相看。
English: They all looked at him sideways.

古文：知训又与硃瑾有隙，瑾已杀知训，携其首驰府中示隆演曰： 今日为吴除患矣。 
现代文：徐知训又和朱瑾产生矛盾，朱瑾杀掉徐知训后，提着他的头驰马到府中给杨隆演看说： 今天为昊铲除灾患了。 
English: Xu Zhixun and Zhu Xi also had a conflict. After Zhu Xi killed Xu Zhixun, he took his head and rode to the capital to show it to Yang Longyan and said: "Today, we have eliminated the disaster for Hao."

古文：隆演曰： 此事非吾敢知。 
现代文：杨隆演说： 这事不是我敢知道的。 
English: Yang Long said in his speech: I don't dare to know about this.

古文：遽起入内。
现代文：急忙起身入内。
English: He hurriedly got up and went inside.

古文：瑾忿然，以首击柱，提剑而出，府门已阖，逾垣，折其足，遂自刎死。
现代文：朱瑾气忿不平，用徐知训的头击打柱子，提剑出来，府门已关闭，翻越宫墙，摔断了脚，于是自杀。
English: Enraged, Zhu Rong hit the pillar with the head of Xu Zhixun, brought out his sword, the palace gate was closed, climbed over the palace wall, broke his foot, and then committed suicide.

古文：米志诚闻瑾杀知训，被甲率其家兵至天兴门问瑾所在，闻瑾死，乃还。
现代文：米志诚听说朱瑾杀了徐知训，穿上镗甲率领家兵到天兴门问朱瑾在哪里，听说朱瑾已死，纔返回。
English: When Yizhicheng heard that Zhu Xi had killed Xu Zhixun, he put on his armor and led his soldiers to Tianxing Gate to ask where Zhu Xi was. When he heard that Zhu Xi was dead, he returned.

古文：徐温疑志诚助瑾，遣使杀之。
现代文：徐温怀疑米志诚帮助朱瑾，派使臣杀他。
English: Xu Wen suspected Yizhicheng of helping Zhu Xi and sent an envoy to kill him.

古文：严可求惧事不克，使人伪从湖南境上来告军捷，召诸将入贺，擒志诚斩之。
现代文：严可求怕事情不能成功，派人假装从湖南前来报告打了胜仗，召将领们前来祝贺，擒获米志诚杀掉。
English: Yan could only hope that things wouldn't work out, so he sent someone to pretend to come from Hunan to report that the battle was won, called the generals to come and congratulate him, and got Yizhicheng killed.

古文：刘信克虔州，执谭全播以归。
现代文：刘信攻克虔州，抓获谭全播返回。
English: Liu Xin conquered Qianzhou, captured Tan Quanbo and returned.

古文：十六年，春二月，温率将吏请隆演即天子位，不许。
现代文：十六年，春二月，徐温率领将吏们请求杨隆演登天子位，杨隆演不同意。
English: In the spring and February of the 16th year, Xu Wen led the generals to ask Yang Longyan to ascend to the heavenly throne, but Yang Longyan did not agree.

古文：夏四月，温奉玉册、宝绶尊隆演即吴王位。
现代文：夏四月，徐温捧着玉册、宝绶尊杨隆演登昊王位。
English: In the summer of April, Xu Wen ascended the throne of Hao, holding the jade scroll and the treasure map.

古文：建宗庙、社稷，设百官如天子之制，改天祐十六年为武义元年，大赦境内，追尊行密孝武王，庙号太祖，渥景王，庙号烈祖。
现代文：建置宗庙、社稷，依照天子的制度设置百官，改天佑十六年为武义元年，在境内实行大赦，追尊杨行密为孝武王，庙号叫太祖，追尊杨渥为景王，庙号叫烈祖。
English: An ancestral temple and a shrine were built, a hundred officials were set up in accordance with the system of Tianzi, the 16th year of Tianyou was changed to the first year of Wuyi, and an amnesty was implemented in the territory. Yang Xingmi was honored as the king of filial piety, the temple was called Taizu, Yang Wo was honored as the king of Jing, and the temple was called Retsu.

古文：拜温大丞相、都督中外诸军事，封东海郡王，以徐知诰为左仆射、参知政事，严可求为门下侍郎，骆知祥为中书侍郎，殷文圭、沈颜为翰林学士，卢择为吏部尚书，李宗、陈章为左、右雄武统军，柴再用、钱镖为左、右龙武统军，王令谋为内枢密使，江西刘信征南大将军，鄂州李简镇西大将军，抚州李德诚平南大将军，庐州张崇安西大将军，海州王绾镇东大将军，文武以次进位。
现代文：拜徐温焉大丞相、都督中外诸军事，封为东海郡王，任徐知诰为左仆射、参知政事，严可求为门下侍郎，骆知祥为中书侍郎，殷文圭、沈颜为翰林学士，卢择焉吏部尚书，李宗、陈章为左、右雄武统军，柴再用、钱镖为左、右龙武统军，王令谋为内枢密使，江西刘信为征南大将军，鄂州李简焉镇西大将军，抚州李德诚焉平南大将军，庐州张崇为安西大将军，海州王绾为镇东大将军，文武官吏依次升位。
English: Xu Wenyan was the minister of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council

古文：封宗室皆郡公。
现代文：封宗室成员都为郡公。
English: All members of the Fong family are county magistrates.

古文：温之徙镇金陵也，以其养子知诰守润州。
现代文：徐温调任镇守金陵时，任他的养子徐知诰守润州。
English: When Xu Wen was transferred to guard Jinling, his adopted son Xu Zhisheng was put in charge of Renzhou.

古文：严可求尝谓温曰： 二郎君非徐氏子，而推贤下士，人望颇归，若不去之，恐为后患。 
现代文：严可求曾对徐温说： 二郎君不是徐氏的亲儿子，而推举贤能，礼贤下士，人心都很向着他，如不除掉他，怕成为后患。 
English: Yan Keqiu once said to Xu Wenlu: Jiro-kun is not Xu's own son, but a corporal promoted for his ability and courtesy. People's hearts are all for him. If we don't get rid of him, I'm afraid he'll become a scourge.

古文：温不能用其言。
现代文：徐温不能采用他的建议。
English: Xu Wen could not accept his suggestion.

古文：及知诰秉政，其语泄，知诰出可求于楚州，可求惧，诣金陵见温谋曰： 唐亡于今十二年，而吴犹不敢改天祐，可谓不负唐矣。
现代文：到徐知诰执掌政权时，严可求的话泄露，徐知诰让严可求出任到楚州，严可求害怕，到金陵见徐温商量说： 唐朝灭亡至今十二年了，而昊还不敢改变天佑这个年号，可说是不辜负唐朝了。
English: When Xu Zhisheng was in power, Yan Kui's words were leaked, Xu Zhisheng sent Yan Kui to Chuzhou, Yan Kui was afraid, and went to Jinling to see Xu Wen to discuss, saying: It has been twelve years since the Tang Dynasty was overthrown, and Hao still dares not change the name of the year, but it can be said to be worthy of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：然吴所以征伐四方，而建基业者，常以兴复为辞。
现代文：但昊之所以能征伐四方，建立基业，常常是以复兴唐朝为借口。
English: However, the reason why Hao was able to conquer the four directions and establish a foundation was often under the pretext of reviving the Tang Dynasty.

古文：今闻河上之战，梁兵屡绌，若李氏复兴，其能屈节乎？
现代文：如今听说黄河边打仗，后梁兵多次败退，如果李氏复兴，那怎么能向他屈节呢？
English: Now I have heard that there was a war along the Yellow River, and the soldiers of Houliang were defeated and retreated many times. If the Li clan is revived, then how can we give in to him?

古文：宜于此时先建国以自立。 
现代文：应当在现在先建国自立。 
English: We should build a country and become independent first.

古文：温深然之，因留可求不遣，方谋迫隆演僭号。
现代文：徐湿深以为然，因而留下严可求不派他去楚州，接下来谋划迫使杨隆演越位称帝。
English: Xu Shuxu was deeply convinced, so he asked Yan not to send him to Chuzhou, and then planned to force Yang Longyan to play offside.

古文：二年五月，隆演卒。
现代文：二年五月，杨隆演死。
English: In May of the following year, Yang Longyan died.

古文：隆演少年嗣位，权在徐氏，及建国称制，非其意，常怏怏，酣饮，稀复进食，遂至疾卒，年二十四，谥曰宣。
现代文：杨隆演年少继位，徐氏专权，到建国称王时，不是他的主意，常常怏怏不乐，过量饮酒，很少再吃什么，于是得病死去，时年二十四岁，谧号叫宣。
English: Yang Longyan succeeded to the throne at a young age, Xu's exclusive power, it was not his idea to become king when the country was founded, he was often unhappy, drank too much alcohol, and rarely ate anything, so he died of illness, at the age of twenty-four, his nickname was Xuan.

古文：弟溥立，僭号，追尊为高祖宣皇帝，陵曰肃陵。
现代文：弟弟杨溥登位，越位称帝后，追尊为高祖宣皇帝，陵墓叫肃陵。
English: His younger brother Yang Hui ascended to the throne, and was called Empress Dowager. He was revered as Emperor Gao Zuoxuan, and his mausoleum is called Shuling.

古文：溥，行密第四子也，隆演建国，封丹阳郡公。
现代文：杨溥，是杨行密的第四个儿子，杨隆演建国时，封焉丹阳郡公。
English: Yang Hui, the fourth son of Yang Xingmi, was the crown prince of Danyang County during the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：隆演卒，弟庐江公濛次当立，而徐氏秉政，不欲长君，乃立溥。
现代文：杨隆演死，弟弟庐江公杨蒙依次应当继位，而徐氏执掌政权，不想要年长的君主，于是拥立杨溥。
English: Yang Longyan died, and his younger brother Yang Meng, the Duke of the Li River, was next in line to succeed him. The Xu clan, which held power, did not want an elderly monarch, so they supported Yang Hui.

古文：七月，改升州大都督府为金陵府，拜徐温金陵尹。
现代文：七月，改升州大都督府为金陵府，拜徐温焉金陵尹。
English: In July, it was upgraded to Jinling Prefecture and renamed Jinling Yin Prefecture.

古文：明年二月，改元顺义，赦境内。
现代文：第二年二月，改年号焉顺义，境内实行大赦。
English: In February of the following year, the New Year was proclaimed, and an amnesty was implemented in the country.

古文：冬十一月，祀天于南郊。
现代文：冬十一月，在南郊祭天。
English: In winter, in November, the Southern Suburbs hold a festival.

古文：御天兴楼，大赦。
现代文：杨溥登天兴楼，实行大赦。
English: Yang Hui ascended to Tianxinglou, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：拜徐温太师，严可求右仆射。
现代文：拜徐温为太师，严可求为右仆射。
English: Pray for Xu Wen to be the grandmaster, and for Yan to be the right-hand man.

古文：三年，唐庄宗灭梁。遣司农卿卢苹使于唐，严可求密条数事授苹以行。
现代文：三年，唐庄宗消灭后梁，昊派司农卿卢苹出使后唐，严可求秘密条陈几件事给卢苹让他出发。
English: Three years later, after Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Hou Liang, Hao sent Lu Ping, the Secretary of Agriculture, to send an envoy to Tang. He could strictly ask for a secret and tell Lu Ping a few things to let him go.

古文：苹见洛阳，庄宗问之，苹次第以对，皆如所授。
现代文：卢苹到洛阳被接见，唐庄宗问他事情，卢苹依次回答，都和严可求授给他的话一样。
English: Lu Ping was received in Luoyang, Tang Zhuozong asked him about the matter, and Lu Ping answered in turn, all of which were the same as the words that Yan Ke could ask to be given to him.

古文：四年，溥至白沙阅舟师，徐温来见，以白沙为迎銮镇。
现代文：四年，杨溥到白沙检阅水军，徐温前来拜见，以白沙焉迎銮镇。
English: In four years, Yang Jie went to Baisha to inspect the navy, and Xu Wen came to visit, and welcomed the town with Baisha.

古文：五年，唐遣谏议大夫薛昭文使福州，假道江西，刘信出劳之，谓曰： 亚次闻有信否？ 
现代文：五年，后唐派谏议大夫薛昭文出使福州，借道江西，刘信出来慰劳他，对他说： 亚次听役听说过有我刘信呢？ 
English: Five years later, after the Tang Dynasty sent Xue Zhaowen to Fuzhou via Jiangxi, Liu Xin came to comfort him and said to him, "Has the Asiatic auditor heard of me, Liu Xin?

古文：昭文曰： 天子新有河南，未熟公名也。 
现代文：薛昭文说： 天子刚占据河南，还不熟悉你的大名。 
English: Xue Zhaowen said: Tianzi has just occupied Henan and is not familiar with your daimyo.

古文：信曰： 汉有韩信，吴有刘信，君还，其语亚次，当来较射于淮上也。 
现代文：刘信说： 汉代有个韩信，昊国有个刘佶，你回去后，告诉亚次，应当来到淮上比试射箭。 
English: Liu Xin said, "There was a Han Xin in the Han Dynasty, and a Liu Ye in the Hao Dynasty. When you go back, tell the Asians that you should come to Huaiyang to try archery.

古文：乃酌大卮，望牙旗鎞首百步，谓昭文曰： 一发而中，愿以此卮为寿，否则亦以自罚。 
现代文：于是倒一大杯酒，望着一百步速的牙旗镜头，对薛昭文说： 一箭射中，希望用这杯酒给你祝寿，否则也用遭杯酒罚我自己。 
English: So he poured a large glass of wine, looked at the hundred-step speed of the dental flag lens, and said to Xue Zhaowen: One arrow shot, I hope to use this glass of wine to wish you a happy birthday, otherwise I will punish myself with a glass of wine.

古文：言讫，而箭已穿矣。
现代文：说完，箭已穿遇镜头了。
English: With that, the arrow has passed through the lens.

古文：六年，追爵大丞相徐温四代祖考，立庙于金陵。
现代文：六年，为大丞相徐温的四代祖父追封爵位，在金陵建庙。
English: Six years later, the fourth-generation grandfather of Grand Chancellor Xu Wen was ennobled and a temple was built in Jinling.

古文：左仆射徐知诰为侍中，右仆射严可求同平章事。
现代文：左仆射徐知诰任侍中，右仆射严可求任同平章事。
English: His left-hand man, Sho Xu Zhisheng, was appointed as an attendant, and his right-hand man, Sho Yan, could be appointed as a peer.

古文：是岁，庄宗崩，五月丁卯，诏为同光主辍朝七日。
现代文：这年，唐庄宗死，五月丁卯，下诏为同光皇帝罢朝七天。
English: In the same year, Emperor Tangzhuanzong died, and in May, Emperor Tongguang was proclaimed emperor for seven days.

古文：七年，大丞相徐温率吴文、武上表劝溥即皇帝位，溥未许而温病卒。
现代文：七年，大丞相徐温率领昊国文武官吏上表劝杨溥登皇帝位，杨溥没有准许而徐温病死。
English: In the seventh year, the grand chancellor Xu Wen, led by the civil and military officials of Hao, went to the table to persuade Yang Hui to ascend to the throne. Yang Hui did not give permission, and Xu Wen died of illness.

古文：十一月庚戌，溥御文明殿即皇帝位，改元曰乾贞，大赦境内，追尊行密武皇帝，渥景皇帝，隆演宣皇帝。
现代文：十一月庚戌，杨溥到文明殿登皇帝位，改年号叫干贞，在境内实行大赦，追尊杨行密为武皇帝，杨渥为景皇帝，杨隆演为宣皇帝。
English: In November, Geng Zheng, Yang Hui ascended to the throne of the emperor in the Palace of Civilization, and changed his name to Gan Zhen. An amnesty was implemented in the territory, and Yang Xingmi was honored as the emperor of Wu, Yang Wo as the emperor of Jing, and Yang Longyan as the emperor of Xuan.

古文：以徐知诰为太尉兼侍中，拜温子知询辅国大将军、金陵尹，治温旧镇。
现代文：任徐知诰为太尉兼侍中，拜徐温的儿子徐知询为辅国大将军、金陵尹，管理徐温的旧镇。
English: Xu Zhisheng served as a captain and a chamberlain, and Xu Zhisheng, the son of Xu Wen, served as an assistant general and Jinling Yin, and managed Xu Wen's old town.

古文：诸子皆封王。
现代文：杨溥的儿子们都封王。
English: Yang Hui's sons were all crowned as kings.

古文：二年正月，封东海为广德王，江渎广源王，淮渎长源王，马当上水府宁江王，采石中水府定江王，金山下水府镇江王。
现代文：二年正月，封束海焉广德王，江渎为广源王，淮渎为长源王，马当上水神府为宁江王，采石中水神府焉定江王，金山下水神府为镇江王。
English: In the first month of the second year, the king of Guangde, the king of Guangyuan, the king of Changyuan, the king of Ma Dang Shangshui Shenfu, the king of Ningjiang, the king of Yan Dingjiang, the king of Jinshan Shishui Shenfu, and the king of Zhenjiang were sealed.

古文：六月，荆南高季兴来附，封季兴秦王。
现代文：六月，荆南高季兴前来归附，封直至基为秦王。
English: In June, Jingnan Gao Jixing came to annex it, sealing it until Ji became the Qin king.

古文：九月，季兴败楚师于白田，获其将吏三十四人来献。
现代文：九月，高季兴在白田打败楚军，抓获他们的将吏三十四人前来进献。
English: In September, Gao Jixing defeated the Chu army in Baita, and thirty-four of their captured generals came to offer sacrifices.

古文：三年十一月，金陵尹徐知询来朝，知诰诬其有反状，留之不遣，以为左统军，斩其客将周廷望。
现代文：三年十一月，金陵尹徐知询前来朝拜，徐知诰诬陷他有反叛的迹象，扣留他不让回去，任焉左统军，杀掉他的客将周廷望。
English: In November of the third year, Jinling Yin Xu Zhixuan came to pay homage to the emperor. Xu Zhixuan accused him of showing signs of rebellion, detained him and did not allow him to return, and ordered the United Left Army to kill his guest general Zhou Tingwang.

古文：以徐知谔为金陵尹。
现代文：任徐知译焉金陵尹。
English: Ren Xu Zhi translated into Jinling Yin.

古文：溥加尊号睿圣文明孝皇帝，大赦境内，改元大和，以徐知诰为中书令。
现代文：杨溥加封尊号为睿圣文明孝皇帝，境内实行大赦，改年号焉大和，任徐知诰焉中书令。
English: Yang Hui was given the honorary title of Emperor Rui Sheng, Civilization and Filial Piety, amnesty was implemented in the territory, the year was changed to the year of the Great Harmony, and the appointment of Xu Zhisheng was made in the middle of the letter.

古文：二年，册其子江都王琏为太子。
现代文：二年，册封他的儿子江都王杨珑为太子。
English: Two years later, his son, Jiangdu King Yang Xuan, was crowned crown prince.

古文：三年，以徐知诰为金陵尹，以其子景通为司徒，及左仆射王令谋、右仆射宋齐丘皆平章事。
现代文：三年，任徐知诰为金陵尹，任他的儿子徐景通为司徒，和左仆射玉全谌、右仆射宋齐丘一同任平章事。
English: In three years, he appointed Xu Zhisheng as Jinling Yin, and his son Xu Jingtong as Szeto, and together with his left servant Sha Yu Quanzhang and his right servant Sha Song Qiqiu as Ping Zhangji.

古文：四年，封知诰东海王。
现代文：四年，封徐知诰为束海王。
English: In four years, Xu Zhisheng was crowned as the king of Sokkai.

古文：五年，建都于金陵。
现代文：五年，在金陵建都。
English: Five years later, the capital was built in Jinling.

古文：六年闰正月，金陵火，罢建都，废临川王濛为历阳公，知诰遣亲信王宏以兵守之。
现代文：六年闰正月，金陵起火，停止建都，废临川王杨蒙为历阳公，徐知诰派亲信王宏率兵守着他。
English: In the first month of the leap year of the sixth year, Jinling caught fire and the construction of the capital was halted. The King of Linchuan, Yang Meng, was deposed and became the Prince of Liyang. Xu Zhisheng sent his close confidant, Wang Hong, to lead the troops to protect him.

古文：拜令谋司徒，宋齐丘司空。
现代文：拜王令谋焉司徒，宋齐丘为司空。
English: Baowang Lingshuan Shituo, Song Qiqiu as Sikuo.

古文：知诰召景通还金陵，为镇海军节度副使，以其子景迁为太保、平章事，与令谋等执政。
现代文：徐知诰召徐景通固到金陵，任为镇海军节度副使，任他的儿子徐景迁焉太保、平章事，和王令谋等人执政。
English: Xu Zhisheng summoned Xu Jing Tonggu to Jinling, appointed him as the vice-envoy of the town naval festival, and appointed his sons Xu Jing Qian Taibo, Ping Zhangji, and Wang Lingmou to govern.

古文：七年九月，溥加尊号曰睿圣文明光孝应天弘道广德皇帝，大赦，改元天祚。
现代文：七年九月，杨溥加封尊号叫睿圣文明光孝应天弘道广德皇帝，实行大赦，改年号为天祚。
English: In September of the seventh year, Yang Zhe added the honorific title of Rui Sheng, Wenming Guangxiao, and Tianhongdao Guangde Emperor, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Tianyao.

古文：知诰进位太师、天下兵马大元帅，封齐王。
现代文：徐知诰升位焉太师、天下兵马大元帅，封为齐王。
English: Xu Zhisheng was promoted to the rank of grand marshal of the world's armies and horses, and was given the title of Qi Wang.

古文：二年，景迁病，以次子景遂为门下侍郎、参政事。
现代文：二年，徐景迁患病，任徐知诰的次子徐景遂焉门下侍郎、参政事。
English: Two years later, Xu Jingqian fell ill, and Xu Zhisheng's second son, Xu Jing, became Sui Yan's personal attendant and political advisor.

古文：三年，知诰建齐国，立宗庙、社稷，置左、右丞相已下，以金陵为西都，广陵为东都。
现代文：三年，徐知诰建立齐国，设立宗庙、社稷，设置左、右丞相以下官吏，以金陵为西都，广陵为束都。
English: In the third year, Xu Zhisheng established Qi Province, set up the ancestral temple and shrine, and set up officials from the left to the right of the prime minister, with Jinling as the western capital and Guangling as the capital.

古文：冬十月，溥遣江夏王璘奉册禅位于齐王。
现代文：冬十月，杨溥派江夏王杨璘奉册禅让帝位给齐王。
English: In the winter of October, Yang Hui sent the king of Jiangxia, Yang Hui, to offer the throne to the king of Qi.

古文：十二月，溥卒于丹阳，年三十八，谥曰睿。
现代文：十二月，杨溥死在丹阳，时年三十八岁，谧号叫睿。
English: In December, Yang Hui died in Danyang, at the age of thirty-eight, his nickname was Rui.

古文：升元六年，李昪迁其子孙于海陵，号永宁宫，严兵守之，绝不通人。
现代文：升元六年，李鼻把杨氏子孙迁到海陵，号称永宁官，严兵把守，绝不让他们与人交往。
English: Six years after ascending the throne, Li Hna moved the descendants of the Yang clan to Hailing. Known as Yongning officials, they were strictly guarded and never allowed to socialize with others.

古文：久而男女自为匹偶，吴人多哀怜之。
现代文：时间长了，男女只好自成配偶，昊人多哀怜他们。
English: As time passed, men and women had to become their own spouses, and many people felt sorry for them.

古文：显德三年，世宗征淮南，下诏抚安杨氏子孙，而李景闻之，遣人尽杀其族。
现代文：显德三年，周世宗征伐淮南，下诏安抚杨氏子孙，而李景听说后，派人把杨氏家族全部杀掉。
English: In the third year of Xiande, Zhou Shizong conquered Huainan and issued an edict to appease the descendants of the Yang family. After hearing this, Li Jing sent someone to kill the entire Yang family.

古文：周先锋都部署刘重进得其玉砚、马脑碗、翡翠瓶以献，杨氏遂绝。
现代文：后周先锋都部署刘重进得到杨氏的玉砚、玛瑙碗、翡翠瓶进献，杨氏于是灭绝。
English: The following week, the vanguard deployed Liu Chongjin to get the Yang clan's jade bowl, agate bowl, and jade bottle, and the Yang clan was thus exterminated.

古文：徐温，字敦美，海州朐山人也，少以贩盐为盗，行密起合淝，隶帐下。
现代文：徐温字敦美，海州胸山县人。年轻时贩盐做盗贼，杨行密在合淝起兵，把他安置在手下。
English: Xu Wen Zi Dunmei, a native of Chestnut Hill County, Haizhou. When he was young, he sold salt and became a thief. Yang Xingmi raised an army in Hebei Province and placed him under his command.

古文：行密所与起事刘威、陶雅之徒，号三十六英雄，独温未尝有战功。
现代文：和杨行密一同起事的刘威、陶雅之流，号称三十六英雄，惟独徐温不曾有战功。
English: Liu Wei and Tao Ya, who fought together with Yang Xingmi, are known as the Thirty-six Heroes, but Xu Wen did not have any war achievements.

古文：及行密欲杀硃延寿等，温用其客严可求谋，教行密阳为目疾，事成，以功迁右衙指挥使，始预谋议。
现代文：到杨行密想杀朱延寿等人，徐温用他的门客严可求的计谋，教杨行密假装眼睛患病，事成后，因功迁右衙指挥使，纔开始参预谋议大事。
English: When Yang Xingmi wanted to kill Zhu Yanshou and others, Xu Wen used his disciple's rigorous strategy to teach Yang Xingmi to pretend to have an eye disease. After the success, due to the merits of the right-hand commander, he began to consult and discuss major events.

古文：及行密病，平生旧将，皆以战守在外，而温居帐下，遂预立渥之功。
现代文：到杨行密患病时，平生旧将，都因战事驻守在外，而徐温在他军帐中，于是有拥立杨渥的功劳。
English: When Yang Xingmi fell ill, all the generals were stationed outside due to the war, and Xu Wen was in his military account, so he had the merit of supporting Yang Wou.

古文：及弑渥，又与张颢有隙，使钟章杀之。
现代文：杀掉杨渥后，又和张颢产生矛盾，让锺章杀张颢。
English: After he killed Yang Wou, he had a conflict with Zhang Ye, so he asked Zou Zhang to kill Zhang Ye.

古文：章许诺，选壮士三十人，椎牛享之，刺血为盟。
现代文：锺章答应了，挑选壮士三十人，杀牛犒劳他们，刺血结盟。
English: Xingzhang agreed, selected thirty strong men, slaughtered the bulls, forced them to work, and stabbed the blood.

古文：温犹疑章不果，夜半使人探其意，阳谓曰： 温有老母，惧事不成，不如且止。 
现代文：徐温还疑心锺章不能做到底，半夜派人刺探他的想法，假意对他说： 徐温家有老母，怕不能成事，不如姑且作罢。 
English: Xu Wen was still suspicious that he could not do it, so he sent someone to spy on his thoughts in the middle of the night, and pretended to say to him: Xu Wen's family has an old mother, and if he is afraid of not being able to accomplish something, it is better to leave it alone.

古文：章曰： 言已出口，宁可已乎？ 
现代文：锺章说： 话已说出口，难道可以算了吗？ 
English: Zou Zhang said: The words have already been spoken, can they really be discounted?

古文：温乃安。
现代文：徐温纔安心。
English: Xu Wenjun is relieved.

古文：明日，钟章杀颢，温因尽杀纪祥等，归弑渥之罪于颢，以其事入白渥母史氏。
现代文：第二天，锺章杀掉张颢，徐温因而全部杀掉纪祥等人，把杀杨渥的事蹄罪张颢，把这事告诉杨渥的母亲史氏。
English: The next day, Xizhang killed Zhang Yao, and Xu Wen killed Ji Xiang and the others, blaming Zhang Yao for the murder of Yang Wou, and told this to Yang Wou's mother Shi.

古文：史悸而泣曰： 吾兒年幼，祸乱若此，得保百口以归合淝，公之惠也。 
现代文：史氏惊悸地哭泣说： 我儿年幼，如此祸乱，如果能够保全百口之家回到合淝，就是你的恩惠。 
English: Mr. Shi cried in shock and said, "My son is so young, it's such a disaster. If I can save a hundred-member family and bring them back together, it's your blessing."

古文：隆演立，温遂专政，迁升州刺史，治舟师于金陵。
现代文：杨隆演登位，徐温于是专权，迁任升州刺史，在金陵整治水军。
English: Yang Longyuan ascended to the throne, and Xu Wen was then given exclusive power, transferred to the post of the State Councilor, and reorganized the naval forces in Jinling.

古文：大将李遇怒温用事，出嫚言，温使柴再用族遇于宣州。
现代文：大将李遇对徐温专权非常愤怒，说话不尊重他，徐温派柴再用到宣州把李遇灭族。
English: General Li Rong was very angry with Xu Wen's autocratic power and spoke disrespectfully to him. Xu Wen sent Chai to Xuanzhou to exterminate Li Rong.

古文：行密旧将，人人皆自疑，温因伪下之，恭谨如见行密，诸将乃安。
现代文：杨行密的旧将，人人都心神不定，徐温因而假意谦让他们，就像见杨行密那样恭谨，将领们纔安心。
English: Yang Xingmi's old generals were all restless, so Xu Wen made them pretend to be humble, just as Yang Xingmi was respectful, and the generals were at ease.

古文：八年，温迁行军司马、润州刺史、镇海军节度使、同平章事。
现代文：八年，徐温迁任行军司马、润州刺史、镇海军节度使、同平章事。
English: In the eighth year, Xu Wenqian was appointed as the marching Sima, Renzhou Sisi, the town naval festival envoy, and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：十年，遣招讨使李涛攻越，战于临安，裨将曹筠奔于越，涛败被执。
现代文：十年，徐温派招讨使李涛攻打越，在临安作战，副将曹筠投奔到越，李涛战败被俘。
English: Ten years later, the Xu Wen faction recruited Li Tao to attack Yue, and he fought in Lin'an. Vice Admiral Cao Pi fled to Yue, and Li Tao was defeated and captured.

古文：温间遣人语筠曰： 吾用汝为将，汝军有求，吾不能给，是吾过也。 
现代文：徐湿暗中派人告诉曹筠说： 我任用你做将领，你的军队有求于我，我不能供给，是我的错。 
English: Xu Xi secretly sent someone to tell Cao Pi, "I appointed you as the general, your army is asking for something from me, I can't provide it, it's my fault."

古文：赦筠妻子不诛，厚遇之。
现代文：赦免曹筠的妻子儿女不杀，厚待他们。
English: Forgive Cao Pi's wife and children, do not kill them, and treat them well.

古文：秋，越人攻毘陵，温战于无锡，筠感温前言，临战奔归，遂败越兵。
现代文：秋天，越人攻打毗陵，徐温在无钖作战，曹筠对徐温以前的话很感激，临阵叛逃回来，于是打败越兵。
English: In autumn, the Viets attacked Viling, and Xu Wen was at the forefront of the battle. Cao Pi was very grateful for Xu Wen's previous words, defected from the front, and defeated the Viets.

古文：十二年，封温齐国公，兼两浙招讨使，始就镇润州，以升、润、宣、常、池、黄六州为齐国。
现代文：十二年，徐温被封为齐国公，兼两浙招讨使，开始镇守润州，以升、润、宣、常、池、黄六州为齐国。
English: In the twelfth year, Xu Wen was appointed as the governor of Qi Province, and also the two Zhejiang recruiting envoys, and began to guard Runzhou, with Sheng, Run, Xuan, Chang, Chi, and Huang as the six states of Qi Province.

古文：温城升州，建大都督府。
现代文：徐温筑城升州，建大都督府。
English: Xu Wen built the city of Shengzhou and built the great governor's office.

古文：十四年，徙治之，以其子知训辅隆演于广陵，而大事温遥决之。
现代文：十四年，从润州迁治升州，任他的儿子徐知训在广陵辅佐杨隆演，而大事由徐温在远地决断。
English: In the 14th year, he moved from Rongzhou to Shangzhou, and appointed his son Xu Zhixun to assist Yang Longyan in Guangling, while the important matters were decided by Xu Wen in the distance.

古文：知训为硃瑾所杀，温养子知诰自润州先入，遂得政。
现代文：徐知训被朱瑾杀掉，徐温的养子徐知诰从润州先入广陵，于是执政。
English: Xu Zhixun was killed by Zhu Xi, and Xu Wen's adopted son Xu Zhixun entered Guangling from Renzhou first, and then ruled.

古文：温虽奸诈多疑，而善用将吏。
现代文：徐温虽然奸诈多疑，但善于使用将吏。
English: Although Xu Wen is treacherous and suspicious, he is good at using generals.

古文：江西刘信围虔州，久不克，使人说谭全播出降，遣使报温，温怒曰： 信以十倍之众，攻一城不下，而反用说客降之，何以威敌国？ 
现代文：江西刘信包围虔州，很久不能攻克，派人游说谭全播出来投降，又派使臣报告徐温。徐温发怒说： 刘信率十倍于敌人的军队，不能攻下一个城，反而用说客让他们投降，拿什么威震敌国？ 
English: Jiangxi Liu Xin surrounded Qianzhou, but could not conquer it for a long time. He sent people to lobby Tan Quan to broadcast the surrender, and sent envoys to report to Xu Wen. Xu Wen said angrily: Liu Xin's rate is ten times that of the enemy's army, he can't attack a city, but he uses lobbyists to make them surrender. How can he intimidate the enemy country?

古文：笞其使者而遣之，曰： 吾以笞信也。 
现代文：鞭打他的使臣打发他走，说： 我已鞭打刘信了。 
English: The minister who had whipped him sent him away, saying, "I have whipped Liu Xin."

古文：因命济师，遂破全播。
现代文：因而命令渡军，于是攻破谭全播。
English: Therefore, he ordered the troops to cross the river, and thus defeated Tan Quanzhang.

古文：人有诬信逗留阴纵全播，言信将反者，信闻之，因自献捷至金陵见温，温与信博，信敛骰子厉声祝曰： 刘信欲背吴，愿为恶彩，苟无二心，当成浑花。 
现代文：有人诬告刘信逗留不前暗中放了谭全播，说刘信要反叛，刘信获知后，因而亲自到金陵报捷见徐温，徐温和刘信赌博，刘信收起骰子高声赌咒说： 如果我刘信想背叛昊，希望掷成恶彩，如果没有二心，应当掷成潭花。 
English: Someone falsely accused Liu Xin of not moving forward and secretly broadcasted a full-length play, saying that Liu Xin wanted to rebel. After Liu Xin learned of this, he personally went to Jinling to report to Xu Wen, Xu Wen and Liu Xin to gamble. Liu Xin put away the dice and said in a high-pitched voice: If Liu Xin wants to betray Hao, I hope to throw it into the bad luck, if there is no two hearts, it should be thrown into the pond flowers.

古文：温遽止之，一掷，六子皆赤，温惭，自以卮酒饮信，然终疑之。
现代文：徐温急忙阻止他，一掷，六个骰子都是红的，徐湿羞惭，亲自拿起一杯酒给刘信喝，但始绛怀疑他。
English: Xu Wen hurried to stop him. With one throw, all six dice were red. Embarrassed, Xu Xi personally picked up a glass of wine for Liu Xin to drink, but Shi Yan was suspicious of him.

古文：及唐师伐王衍，温急召信至广陵，以为左统军，托以内备，遂夺其地。
现代文：到后唐军攻伐王衍时，徐温急召刘信到广陵，任他焉左统军，借口让他防卫京城，于是夺取了他的地盘。
English: Later, when the Tang army attacked Wangyan, Xu Wen urgently summoned Liu Xin to Guangling, and allowed him to withdraw from the unified army, under the pretext of letting him defend the capital, and then seized his site.

古文：温客尤见信者，惟骆知祥、严可求，可求善筹画，知祥长于财利，温尝以军旅问可求，国用问知祥，吴人谓之 严、骆。 
现代文：徐温的门客特别受到信任的，只有骆知祥、严可求。严可求善于筹划，骆知祥长于理财谋利，徐温常向严可求询问行军打仗的事，向骆知祥询问国家财用的事，昊人称他们为 严、骆 。
English: Only Luo Zhixiang and Yan can be trusted. Yan is good at planning, Luo Zhixiang is good at financial management and seeking profits. Xu Wen often asked Yan about marching and fighting, and Luo Zhixiang about national financial affairs. Hao people called them Yan and Luo.

古文：温亦自喜为智诈，尤得吴人之心。
现代文：徐温也喜好智谋欺诈，很得昊国人心。
English: Xu Wen is also fond of scheming and deception, and has won the hearts of the Chinese people.

古文：初随行密破赵锽，诸将皆争取金帛，温独据余囷，作粥以食饿者。
现代文：当初随杨行密攻破赵锂，将领们都争相夺取金银绸缎，徐温偏偏占据剩下的粮食，作粥给挨饿的人吃。
English: At the beginning, with Yang Xingmi defeating Zhao Li, the generals were all vying for gold and silver, and Xu Wen occupied the remaining grain to make porridge for the starving people.

古文：十六年，温请隆演即皇帝位，不许，又请即吴王位，乃许，遂建国改元，拜温大丞相、都督中外诸军事，封东海郡王。
现代文：十六年，徐温请求杨隆演登皇帝位，没有应许，又请求登昊王位，纔准许，于是建立国家，改换年号，拜徐温焉大丞相、都督中外诸军事，封为东海郡王。
English: Sixteen years later, Xu Wen asked Yang Longyan to ascend to the throne of the emperor, but there was no promise, and he also asked to ascend to the throne of Hao, but he was not allowed, so he established a country, changed the year, paid tribute to Xu Wenyan, the minister of the grand secretary, the military governor of China and other countries, and was named the king of the East China Sea.

古文：隆演卒，温越次立其弟溥。
现代文：杨隆演死，徐温打破顺序拥立他的弟弟杨溥。
English: After the death of Yang Longyan, Xu Wen broke the sequence and supported his younger brother Yang Qi.

古文：顺义七年，温又请溥即皇帝位，溥未许而温病卒，年六十六，追封齐王，谥曰武。
现代文：顺义七年，徐温又请求杨溥登皇帝位，杨溥没有准许而徐温病死，时年六十六岁，追封为齐王，谧号叫武。
English: In the seventh year of Shunyi, Xu Wen again asked Yang Jie to ascend to the throne. Yang Jie did not give permission, and Xu Wen died of illness, at the age of 66, with the posthumous title of Qi Wang and the posthumous title of Wu.

古文：李昪僭号，号温为义祖。
现代文：李升越位称帝后，称徐温为义祖。
English: Li Sheng offside called Empress Dowager, called Xu Wen as Yizhu.

古文：呜呼，盗亦有道，信哉！
现代文：唉， 盗贼也有他们的道义 ，是真的啊！
English: Well, thieves have their morals, it's true!

古文：行密之书，称行密为人，宽仁雅信，能得士心。
现代文：关于杨行密的书，称赞杨行密的为人，宽厚仁慈、高雅诚实，能够得到士兵欢心。
English: The book about Yang Xingmi praises Yang Xingmi as a person who is generous, kind, elegant and honest, and can win the favor of soldiers.

古文：其将蔡俦叛于庐州，悉毁行密坟墓，及俦败，而诸将皆请毁其墓以报之。
现代文：他的将领蔡俦在庐州反叛，全部毁掉杨行密家的坟墓，到蔡俦被打败时，将领们都请求毁掉他家的坟墓报复他。
English: His general Cai Wei rebelled in Zhangzhou and destroyed all the tombs of Yang Xingmi's family. When Cai Wei was defeated, the generals all asked to destroy his family's tombs to avenge him.

古文：行密叹曰： 俦以此为恶，吾岂复为邪？ 
现代文：杨行密叹息说： 蔡俦以此作恶，我难道又作恶吗？ 
English: Yang Xingmi sighed and said, "Cai Ye used this to commit evil. Am I committing evil?

古文：尝使从者张洪负剑而侍，洪拔剑击行密，不中，洪死，复用洪所善陈绍负剑，不疑。
现代文：曾让随从张洪背着剑侍卫，张洪拔出剑刺杀杨行密，没刺中，张洪被杀死，又任用张洪亲善的陈绍背剑侍卫，没有疑心。
English: He had Zhang Hong's attendant stand guard with a sword on his back, Zhang Hong pulled out his sword and stabbed Yang Xingmi, but Zhang Hong was not stabbed and was killed, and he also appointed Zhang Hong's close friend Chen Shao to stand guard with a sword on his back. There was no suspicion.

古文：又尝骂其将刘信，信忿，奔孙儒，行密戒左右勿追，曰： 信负我者邪？
现代文：又曾骂他的将领刘信，刘信忿懑不平，投奔孙儒，杨行密告诫手下人不要追他，说： 刘信是辜负我的人吗？
English: He also scolded his general Liu Xin. Liu Xin was angry and disgruntled and defected to Sun Ru. Yang Xingmi warned his subordinates not to chase him, saying, "Is Liu Xin the one who failed me?

古文：其醉而去，醒必复来。 
现代文：他喝醉了离去，酒醒了必定又回来。 
English: He went away drunk, and when he sobered up he must have come back again.

古文：明日，果来。
现代文：第二天，刘信果然回来了。
English: The next day, Liu Xin did indeed return.

古文：行密起于盗贼，其下皆骁武雄暴，而乐为之用者，以此也。
现代文：杨行密出身盗贼，他的部下都是骁悍勇武、雄豪强暴的人，而乐于为他出力，就是因为这个原因。
English: Yang Xingmi was born a thief, and his subordinates are all brave, courageous, and violent people, and they are willing to work for him for this reason.

古文：故二世四主垂五十年。
现代文：因此在位两代人四个君主将近五十年。
English: As a result, two generations of four monarchs have been on the throne for nearly fifty years.

古文：及渥已下，政在徐温。
现代文：到杨渥以后，政权落在徐温手中。
English: After Yang Wo, the power fell into the hands of Xu Wen.

古文：于此之时，天下大乱，中国之祸，篡弑相寻，而徐氏父子，区区诈力，裴回三主，不敢轻取之，何也？
现代文：这时，天下大乱，中原有灾祸，篡位杀君接连不断，而徐氏父子，以微不足道的欺诈力量，左右着三个君主，却不敢轻易除掉他们，为什么呢？
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, there was a disaster in the Central Plains, and the usurpation and murder of princes continued one after another, but Xu father and son, with insignificant fraudulent power, controlled the three monarchs, but they did not dare to easily remove them, why?

古文：岂其恩威亦有在人者欤！
现代文：难道不是因为他们也有恩威在于国人中吗！
English: Isn't it because they also have the favor of the Chinese people!

