古文：高皇后吕氏，生惠帝。佐高祖定天下，父兄及高祖而侯者三人。
现代文：高皇后吕氏，生惠帝，辅助汉高祖平定天下，她的父兄在高祖时封侯的有三人。
English: Empress Gao Lv, born Emperor Hui, assisted Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty in pacifying the world. Her father and brother were three princes at the time of Emperor Gaozhu.

古文：惠帝即位，尊吕后为太后。
现代文：惠帝继位之后，尊奉吕后为太后。
English: After Emperor Hui succeeded to the throne, the Empress Dowager Lv became the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后立帝姊鲁元公主女为皇后，无子，取后宫美人子名之以为太子。
现代文：太后立惠帝之姊鲁元公主的女儿为皇后，无子，就将后宫美人所生之子立为太子。
English: The empress dowager made the daughter of Princess Lu Yuan, the sister of Emperor Hui, the empress. Since she had no son, she made the son of the harem beauty the crown prince.

古文：惠帝崩，太子立为皇帝，年幼，太后临朝称制，大赦天下。
现代文：惠帝驾崩，太子立为皇帝，皇帝年幼，吕太后临朝行天子事，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Hui passed away, the crown prince became the emperor, the emperor was young, and Empress Dowager Lyu came to the imperial court to perform the duties of the emperor.

古文：乃立兄子吕台、产、禄、台子通四人为王，封诸吕六人为列侯。
现代文：随后封其兄之子吕台、吕产、吕禄及吕台之子吕通四人为王，封诸吕六人为列侯。
English: Subsequently, four of his brother's sons, Lü Tai, Lü Sang, Lü Lu, and Lü Tai's son, Lü Tong, were made kings, and six of Lü's sons were made princes.

古文：语在《外戚传》。
现代文：其具体事见《汉书·外戚传》。
English: For the details, see "Hanshu, Gaozhi Zhuang."

古文：元年春正月，诏曰： 前日孝惠皇帝言欲除三族罪、妖言令，议未决而崩。
现代文：吕后元年春正月，下诏说：原来孝惠皇帝意图废除对重罪戮及三族、视过误之语为妖言的严酷法令，其议未决而去世。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Lü, the following imperial edict was issued: Originally, Emperor Xiaohui intended to abolish the severe decrees on serious crimes and the three ethnic groups, and regarded the wrong words as evil words, but the discussion was not resolved and he passed away.

古文：今除之。 
现代文：现在宣布将其废除。 
English: Announce its abolition now.

古文：二月，赐民爵，户一级。
现代文：二月，赏赐百姓爵级，每户一级。
English: In February, the people were awarded a peerage, one for each household.

古文：初置孝弟力田二千石者一人。
现代文：首次设置劝励天下的孝悌力田官年禄为二千石的官员一人。
English: For the first time, an official of 2,000 koku was appointed to encourage filial piety.

古文：夏五月丙申，赵王宫丛台灾。
现代文：夏季五月初四日，赵王宫的丛台发生火灾。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of summer, a fire broke out in the courtyard of the Zhao Royal Palace.

古文：立孝惠后宫子强为淮阳王，不疑为恒山王，弘为襄城侯，朝为轵侯，武为壶关侯。
现代文：立孝惠帝后宫之子刘强为淮阳王，刘不疑为恒山王，刘弘为襄城侯，刘朝为轵侯，刘武为壶关侯。
English: Liu Qiang, the son of Emperor Xiao Hui's harem, is the king of Huaiyang, Liu Doubtless is the king of Hengshan, Liu Hong is the lord of Xiangcheng, Liu Chao is the lord of Zou, and Liu Wu is the lord of Juguan.

古文：秋，桃李华。
现代文：秋季，桃李开花。
English: In autumn, peach and plum blossom.

古文：二年春，诏曰： 高皇帝匡饬天下，诸有功者皆受分弟为列侯，万民大安，莫不受休德。
现代文：吕后二年春，下诏说： 高皇帝统一天下，对各功臣都分赐封地与列侯之位，万民大安，无不受其恩德。
English: In the spring of the second year of the reign of Emperor Lv, the following edict was issued: Emperor Gao unifies the country, allocates fiefs and vassalage to all meritorious retainers, and brings great peace to the people. No one is immune to his grace.

古文：朕思念至于久远而功名不著，亡以尊大谊，施后世。
现代文：朕考虑到将来会因年代久远而功名无人记得，无以尊崇大义，传之后世。
English: I consider that in the future, due to the long history, no one will remember the achievements, and there will be no way to honor the great justice and pass it on to future generations.

古文：今欲差次列侯功以定朝位，臧于高庙，世世勿绝，嗣子各袭其功位。其与列侯议定奏之。 
现代文：现在朕想以各位列侯功劳的大小排定在朝中的地位，将功劳簿藏于高皇帝的祠庙之中，代代相传，其子孙世袭其功劳与爵位，请大家与列侯共同提出议案上报。 
English: Now I would like to rank the status of each feudal lord in the middle of the dynasty according to the size of his or her meritorious service. I would like to hide the book of meritorious service in Emperor Gao's ancestral temple and pass it down from generation to generation. His or her children and grandchildren will inherit his or her meritorious service and peerage. I would like to ask everyone to submit a motion together with the feudal lord.

古文：丞相臣平言： 谨与绛侯臣勃、曲周侯臣商、颍阴侯臣婴、安国侯臣陵等议：列侯幸得赐餐钱奉邑，陛下加惠，以功次定朝位，臣请臧高庙。 
现代文：丞相陈平上奏： 臣与绛侯周勃、曲周侯郦商、阴侯灌婴、安国侯王陵等共议，列侯蒙恩得赏租俸与食邑，陛下又格外加恩，以功劳高下定等级，臣等请将功劳簿藏于高庙。 
English: Chen Ping, chancellor of the imperial court, read from the report: The minister discussed with the princes Zhou Bo, Qu Zhou Hou Yi Shang, Yin Hou Han Yu, and An Guo Hou Wang Ling. The princes were rewarded with rent and food, and His Majesty was especially grateful for the high grade. The minister and others were asked to hide the book of merit in the high temple.

古文：奏可。
现代文：吕后批准此奏。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：春正月乙卯，地震，羌道、武都道山崩。
现代文：春正月二十七日，发生地震，武都道发生山崩。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of spring, an earthquake occurred and a landslide occurred in Wudu Road.

古文：夏六月丙戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏六月三十日，出现日偏蚀。
English: On the 30th day of the 6th month of summer, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：秋七月，恒山王不疑薨。行八铢钱。
现代文：秋七月，恒山王刘不疑去世，重新使用八铢钱。
English: In autumn and July, King Liu of Hengshan passed away, and the eight-baht coin was reintroduced.

古文：三年夏，江水、汉水溢，流民四千余家。
现代文：吕后三年夏，长江、汉水泛滥，淹没民舍四千余家。
English: In the summer of the third year of the reign of Emperor Lv, the Yangtze River and the Han River flooded, inundating more than 4,000 houses.

古文：秋，星昼见。
现代文：秋季，星星在白天出现。
English: In autumn, the stars come out during the day.

古文：四年夏，少帝自知非皇后子，出怨言，皇太后幽之永巷。
现代文：吕后四年夏，少帝私下知道自己不是皇后亲生，口出怨言。皇太后将他软禁于长巷之中。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of the reign of Queen Lyu, the young emperor privately knew that he was not the queen's biological son and complained. The empress dowager placed him under house arrest in the middle of a long alley.

古文：诏曰： 凡有天下治万民者，盖之如天，容之如地；上有欢心以使百姓，百姓欣然以事其上，欢欣交通而天下治。
现代文：下诏说： 凡是统驭天下治理万民的人，胸怀应像上天那样包罗，像大地那样容纳；皇上从爱护百姓出发以治理百姓，百姓心悦诚服方能尊奉皇上，上下一心才能国泰民安。
English: The following edict said: All those who rule the world and govern the people should have a heart that embraces as the heavens do and accommodates as the earth does. The emperor should govern the people from the perspective of loving the people. If the people are sincerely pleased, they will be able to honor the emperor. If they are sincerely pleased, they will be able to secure the safety of the country and the people.

古文：今皇帝疾久不已，乃失惑昏乱，不能继嗣奉宗庙，守祭祀，不可属天下。
现代文：当今少帝疾病长期不愈，甚至神经错乱，不能继承大统与奉祀宗庙及镇守社稷，不能够担当天下的重任。
English: Today, the young emperor is suffering from a long-term illness, and is even suffering from a nervous disorder. He is unable to succeed to the throne, to the temple he worships at, and to the position of guardian of the shrine, and is not able to take on the important tasks of the world.

古文：其议代之。 
现代文：请提议可以替代他的人。 
English: Please suggest someone to replace him.

古文：群臣皆曰： 皇太后为天下计，所以安宗庙、社稷甚深。
现代文：群臣都说： 皇太后是从国家根本利益考虑的，这对于宗庙社稷的稳定至关重要。
English: The courtiers all said: the Empress Dowager is considered from the fundamental interests of the country, which is crucial for the stability of the family temple and shrine.

古文：顿首奉诏。 
现代文：臣等俯首奉诏。 
English: The ministers bowed their heads to receive the edict.

古文：五月丙辰，立恒山王弘为皇帝。
现代文：五月十七日，立恒山王弘为皇帝。
English: On May 17th, Wang Hong of Hengshan was proclaimed emperor.

古文：五年春，南越王尉佗自称南武帝。
现代文：吕后五年春，南粤王尉佗自称南武帝。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Lv, the Southern Yue Emperor proclaimed himself the Southern Wu Emperor.

古文：秋八月，淮阳王强薨。
现代文：秋八月，淮南王刘强去世。
English: In autumn and August, Liu Qiang, King of Huainan, passed away.

古文：九月，发河东、上党骑屯北地。
现代文：九月，调动河东、上党骑兵屯驻北地。
English: In September, the cavalry of the Eastern and Western parties were transferred to the North.

古文：六年春，星昼见。
现代文：吕后六年春，星星在白天出现。
English: In the spring of the sixth year after Lü, the stars appeared in the daytime.

古文：夏四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏四月，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：秩长陵令二千石。
现代文：提升长陵一一一高祖陵守令为二千石。
English: The maintenance order for the Changling Mausoleum and Gaozu Mausoleum was raised to 2,000 koku.

古文：六月，城长陵。
现代文：六月，在长陵四周筑城。
English: In June, the city was built around Changling.

古文：匈奴寇狄道，攻阿阳。
现代文：匈奴入侵狄道，攻河阳。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Dido and attacked Heyang.

古文：行五分钱。
现代文：行使五分钱。
English: exercise of the five-cent piece.

古文：七年冬十二月，匈奴寇狄道，略二千余人。
现代文：吕后七年冬十二月，匈奴入侵狄道，掠走二千余户。
English: In the winter of December in the seventh year of the reign of King Lyu, the Xiongnu invaded Didao and plundered more than two thousand households.

古文：春正月丁丑，赵王友幽死于邸。
现代文：春正月十八日，赵王刘友在王宫中幽禁而死。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of spring, Zhao Wang Liuyou died in confinement in the palace.

古文：己丑晦，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：三十日，先出现日偏食，后出现日全食。
English: On the 30th, a partial solar eclipse will occur first, followed by a total solar eclipse.

古文：以梁王吕产为相国，赵王禄为上将军。
现代文：任命梁王吕产为丞相，赵王吕禄为上将军。
English: He appointed Liang Wang Liushan as chancellor and Zhao Wang Lulu as general.

古文：立营陵侯刘泽为琅邪王。
现代文：立营陵侯刘泽为琅琊王。
English: Liu Ze, the lord of the imperial mausoleum, is the king of eunuchs.

古文：夏五月辛未，诏曰： 昭灵夫人，太上皇妃也；武哀侯、宣夫人，高皇帝兄姊也。
现代文：夏五月十九日，下诏说： 昭灵夫人，是太上皇妃；武哀侯、宣夫人，是高皇帝的兄及姊。
English: On the 19th day of the 5th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: "Lady Zhaoling is the empress dowager; Wu Yehou and Lady Xuan are the brother and sister of Emperor Gao.

古文：号谥不称，其议尊号。 
现代文：谥号与身份不相称，请另议谥号。 
English: A nickname is not commensurate with one's status. Please come up with a different nickname.

古文：丞相臣平等请尊昭灵夫人曰昭灵后，武哀侯曰武哀王，宣夫人曰昭哀后，六月，赵王恢自杀。
现代文：丞相陈平等请尊昭灵夫人为昭灵后，武哀侯为武安王，宣夫人为昭哀后。六月，赵王刘恢自杀。
English: The prime minister Chen Pingliang invited the wife of the revered Zhaoling to be the queen of Zhaoling, Wu Yehou to be the king of Wu'an, and Xuan's wife to be the queen of Zhaoling. In June, Zhao Wang Liu Wei committed suicide.

古文：秋九月，燕王建薨。
现代文：秋九月，燕王刘建去世。
English: In autumn and September, Yan Wang Liu Jian passed away.

古文：南越侵盗长沙，遣隆虑侯灶将兵击之。
现代文：南越侵盗长沙，派遣隆虑侯周灶领兵驱逐。
English: South Vietnam invaded and plundered Changsha, and dispatched the grand marshal Zhou Zhao to lead the troops to expel them.

古文：八年春，封中谒者张释卿为列侯。
现代文：吕后八年春，封宦官张释卿为列侯。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Lv, the eunuch Zhang Xieqing became a vassal lord.

古文：诸中官、宦者令、丞皆赐爵关内侯，食邑。
现代文：宫中的宦官、主管宦官的令丞都赐爵关内侯，并食其邑的租税。
English: The eunuchs in the palace and the eunuchs in charge of the eunuchs were all given the title of Kansai marquis and paid taxes in their villages.

古文：夏，江水、汉水溢，流万余家。
现代文：夏季，江水、汉水泛滥，冲毁一万余家。
English: In the summer, rivers and streams flooded, destroying more than 10,000 homes.

古文：秋七月辛巳，皇太后崩于未央宫。遗诏赐诸侯王各千金，将、相、列侯下至郎吏各有差。大赦天下。
现代文：秋季七月三十日，皇太后一一一吕后驾崩于未央宫，遗诏赐给各侯王各千金，将相列侯下至郎吏按级分赐，大赦天下。
English: On the 30th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Empress Dowager passed away at the Weiyang Palace. In her last will and testament, she bestowed a large amount of money to all the princes and queens, and distributed it to all the subordinate princes and vassals according to their ranks, granting amnesty to the whole world.

古文：上将军禄、相国产颛兵秉政，自知背高皇帝约，恐为大臣、诸侯王所诛，因谋作乱。
现代文：上将军吕禄、丞相吕产专擅军政大权。自知违背高皇帝的 非有功而侯 的规定，恐为大臣及各侯王所害，因此阴谋作乱。
English: Shang general Lulu and chancellor Liusan were experts in military and political power. They knowingly violated Emperor Gao's "no meritorious service" regulation, fearing that they would be harmed by ministers and princes, and therefore plotted to cause chaos.

古文：时齐悼惠王子朱虚侯章在京师，以禄女为妇，知其谋，乃使人告兄齐王，令发兵西。
现代文：此时齐悼惠王之子朱虚侯刘章在京都，他是吕禄的女婿，知晓了阴谋，就立即派人告知其兄齐王，要他发兵西进。
English: At this time, Liu Zhang, the son of Zhu Xuhou, the son of Hui Wang, was in Kyoto. He was the son-in-law of Lu Lu. When he learned of the conspiracy, he immediately sent someone to inform his brother Qi Wang to send troops to the west.

古文：章欲与太尉勃、丞相平为内应，以诛诸吕。
现代文：刘章准备与太尉周勃、丞相陈平为内应，以诛除诸吕。
English: Liu Zhang is preparing to make a deal with Lieutenant Zhou Bo and Prime Minister Chen Ping to get rid of Zhu Lu.

古文：齐王遂发兵，又诈琅邪王泽发其国兵，并将而西。
现代文：齐王于是起兵，又策动琅王牙王刘泽调动其国之兵，会师西进。
English: King Qi then raised an army, and instigated Liu Ze, the king of Zhai, to mobilize the soldiers of his country and join the division to advance westward.

古文：产、禄等遣大将军灌婴将兵击之。
现代文：吕产、吕禄等派大将军灌婴领兵阻击。
English: Lv Sang, Lv Lu and others sent generals to block the attack.

古文：婴至荥阳，使人谕齐王与连和，待吕氏变而共诛之。
现代文：灌婴至荥阳，派人告知齐王并与之联合，等待吕氏发动政变时再进行诛讨。
English: He went to Fenyang and sent someone to inform King Qi and unite with him, waiting for the Lv clan to launch a coup before discussing the matter.

古文：太尉勃与丞相平谋，以曲周侯郦商子寄与禄善，使人劫商令寄绐说禄曰： 高帝与吕后共定天下，刘氏所立九王，吕氏所立三王，皆大臣之议。
现代文：太尉周勃与丞相陈平相谋，认为曲周侯郦商之子寄与吕禄关系密切，就派人强迫郦商令其子郦寄去骗吕禄道： 高帝与吕后共定天下，刘氏所立九王，吕氏所立三王，这都是通过大臣们讨论的。
English: The captain Zhou Bo conspired with the prime minister Chen Ping, believing that the son of the merchant Qu Zhou Hou Yi had a close relationship with Lu Lu, so he sent someone to force the merchant to send his son to deceive Lu Lu: Emperor Gao and Empress Lu jointly ruled the world, and the nine kings established by the Liu clan and the three kings established by the Lu clan were all discussed through the ministers.

古文：事已布告诸侯王，诸侯王以为宜。
现代文：讨论及决定都已经通报各侯王，各侯王都表示赞同。
English: The discussion and decision have been reported to all the princes, and all the princes have expressed their approval.

古文：今太后崩，帝少，足下不急之国守籓，乃为上将将兵留此，为大臣诸侯所疑。
现代文：今日太后崩驾，皇帝年少，各位不急于到自己的封国自守，却以上将军身份拥兵留京都，以致引起大臣与侯王们的猜疑。
English: Today, the empress dowager has passed away, the emperor is young, and you are not eager to go to your own fiefdom to defend yourselves, but you have stayed in Kyoto as generals, which has aroused the suspicion of ministers and princes.

古文：何不速归将军印，以兵属太尉，请梁王亦归相国印，与大臣盟而之国？
现代文：何不立即交还将军印，将兵权传给太尉，请梁王吕产也归还相印，和大臣们交代清楚后回到封国去？
English: Why not immediately hand over the seal of arms and military authority to the captain, ask Liang Wang Liusan to return the seal, and return to the fief country after clarifying with the ministers?

古文：齐兵必罢，大臣得安，足下高枕而王千里，此万世之利也。 
现代文：这样齐兵就可以后撤，大臣们也就可以放心，而足下高枕在千里之国称王，这才是万世之利啊！ 
English: In this way, the soldiers can retreat, the ministers can rest assured, and the foot pillow is king in the land of a thousand miles, this is the benefit of a lifetime!

古文：禄然其计，使人报产及诸吕老人。
现代文：吕禄同意了他的计策，派人转告吕产及吕氏父老。
English: Lulu agreed to his plan and sent someone to inform Liusan and his father.

古文：或以为不便，计犹豫未有所决。
现代文：有的以为不安，众说纷纭未作决断。
English: Some are uneasy, opinions are divided and no decision has been made.

古文：禄信寄，与俱出游，过其姑吕嬃。
现代文：吕禄相信郦寄，与他一道去劝说诸吕，到了吕后之妹吕须女家。
English: Lulu believed the messenger and went with him to persuade Zhu Lue, and arrived at the home of Lue's sister, Liusu.

古文：嬃怒曰： 汝为将而弃军，吕氏今无处矣！ 
现代文：吕须女怒道： 你作为大将军却放弃军权，吕氏将死无葬身之地了。 
English: Liusu's wife angrily said, "As a great general, you have given up military power. Lv will die without a place to go."

古文：乃悉出珠玉、宝器散堂下，曰： 无为它人守也！ 
现代文：就尽数取出珠玉宝器弃于堂下，她说： 我不必为别人保管这些东西了！ 
English: She took out as many jewels as she could and left them under the altar. She said: I don't have to keep these things for others anymore!

古文：八月庚申，平阳侯窋行御史大夫事，见相国产计事。
现代文：八月，平阳侯曹纜担任御史大夫，会见相国吕产商计国事。
English: In August, Cao Cao, a noble from Pingyang, served as the imperial historian and met with merchants from Lvshu, a neighboring country, to discuss matters of state.

古文：郎中令贾寿使从齐来，因数产曰： 王不早之国，今虽欲行，尚可得邪？ 
现代文：郎中令贾寿使齐归来，因而指责吕产说： 您不早日到自己的封国去，现在想走还能走吗？ 
English: His brother-in-law ordered all of Jia Shou's envoys to return, so he blamed Liusang and said, "You didn't go to your fiefdom early enough. If you want to go now, can you still go?

古文：具以灌婴与齐、楚合从状告产。
现代文：具体地将灌婴与齐、楚联合的情况告诉吕产。
English: He specifically told Liusan about the situation of infusing babies with Qi and Chu.

古文：平阳侯窋闻其语，驰告丞相平、太尉勃。
现代文：平阳侯曹纜听到后，急忙告知丞相陈平与太尉周勃。
English: After hearing this, Cao Jian, the lord of Pingyang, hurriedly informed the prime minister Chen Ping and the lieutenant Zhou Bo.

古文：勃欲入北军，不得入。襄平侯纪通尚符节，乃令持节矫内勃北军。
现代文：勃想进入北军，结果未成功，襄平侯纪通主管符节，就以天子的名义假传军令让周勃入营主持北军。
English: Bo wanted to enter the Northern Army, but the result was not successful. The head of Xiangping Hou Ji Tong, in the name of Tianzi, faked a military order to let Zhou Bo enter the camp to preside over the Northern Army.

古文：勃复令郦寄、典客刘揭说禄，曰： 帝使太尉守北军，欲令足下之国，急归将印，辞去。不然，祸且起。 
现代文：周勃又派郦寄、典客刘揭劝说吕禄，他们说： 皇上派太尉接管北军。想让各位都回到封国去，应将将军印辞职离开，不然就要大祸临头。 
English: Zhou Bo also sent envoys and invited guest Liu Jie to persuade Lulu to leave. They said: The emperor has sent a captain to take over the Northern Army. If you want everyone to return to the feudal country, you should resign the general seal and leave, otherwise a great disaster will befall you.

古文：禄遂解印属典客，而以兵授太尉勃。
现代文：吕禄就解下大将军印交给刘揭，而将兵权移交给太尉周勃。
English: Lu Lu gave Liu Jie the general's seal of approval and transferred the military power to Lieutenant Zhou Bo.

古文：勃入军门，行令军中曰： 为吕氏右袒，为刘氏左袒。 
现代文：周勃进入中军帐，传令军中说： 支持吕氏的右袒，支持刘氏的左袒。 
English: Zhou Bo entered the Chinese military account, and the messenger said to the troops: "Support the right arm of Lu, support the left arm of Liu."

古文：军皆左袒。
现代文：将士都左袒。
English: The generals all fell silent.

古文：勃遂将北军。
现代文：周勃于是掌握了北军。
English: Zhou Bo then took control of the Northern Army.

古文：然尚有南军，丞相平召朱虚侯章佐勃。勃令章监军门，令平阳侯告卫尉，毋内相国产殿门。
现代文：但是尚有南军，丞相陈平召朱虚侯刘章协助周勃，周勃派刘章监守军门，派平阳侯通知卫尉，不要让相国吕产进入殿门。
English: However, there was still the Southern Army. The Minister of War Chen Ping called Zhu Xiu and the Marquis Liu Zhang to assist Zhou Bo. Zhou Bo sent Liu Zhang to guard the military gate, and sent Ping Yang and the Marquis to inform the guards that they should not let the neighboring country Liushuang enter the gate of the palace.

古文：产不知禄已去北军，入未央宫欲为乱。
现代文：吕产不知吕禄已失去对北军的控制权，想进入未央宫发动政变。
English: Lu Zhanzhong did not know that Lu Lu had lost control of the Northern Army and wanted to enter the Weiyang Palace to launch a coup.

古文：殿门弗内，徘徊往来。
现代文：殿门守军不让他进去，他在殿外来回徘徊。
English: The guards at the palace gate would not let him in, and he wandered around outside the palace.

古文：平阳侯驰语太尉勃，勃尚恐不胜，未敢诵言诛之，乃谓朱虚侯章曰： 急入宫卫帝。 
现代文：平阳侯立即转报太尉周勃，周勃尚恐难以取胜，未敢公开宣布诛杀吕氏，就对朱虚侯刘章说： 迅速入宫保卫皇帝。 
English: Pingyang immediately relayed the news to the captain Zhou Bo. Zhou Bo, fearing that it would be difficult to win, did not dare to publicly announce the killing of Lü. He said to Zhu Xiu and Liu Zhang, "Quickly enter the palace to defend the emperor.

古文：章从勃请卒千人，入未央宫掖门，见产廷中。
现代文：刘章请周勃拨兵千人，入未央宫侧门，见吕产在廷中走动。
English: Liu Zhang asked Zhou Bo to send a thousand soldiers to enter the side gate of the Weiyang Palace and see Liusang walking around the court.

古文：餔时，遂击产，产走。
现代文：日午时，就对吕产发起攻击，吕产逃走。
English: At noon on the same day, they launched an attack on Liusan, and Liusan fled.

古文：天大风，从官乱，莫敢斗者。
现代文：此时狂风陡起，吕产的随从大乱，没有人敢进行抵抗。
English: At this time, a violent wind suddenly arose, and the followers of Liusang were in chaos, and no one dared to resist.

古文：逐产，杀之郎中府吏舍厕中。
现代文：刘章领兵追逐吕产，赶到郎中府吏厕中将他杀了。
English: Liu Zhang led the soldiers to chase Liusang and killed him in the officials' restroom.

古文：章已杀产，帝令谒者持节劳章。章欲夺节，谒者不肯，章乃从与载，因节信驰斩长乐卫尉吕更始。
现代文：刘章已杀吕产，汉帝派近侍持皇上符节慰劳刘章，刘章想夺节，近侍不肯，刘章就与近侍一同乘车，持着皇上符节驰入长乐宫斩杀长乐宫卫尉吕更始。
English: Liu Zhang had killed Liusan, and the Han emperor sent Liu Zhang, who was close to the emperor, to console him. Liu Zhang wanted to win the festival, but his close attendant refused. Liu Zhang and his close attendant took a car and drove into the Changle Palace holding the emperor's festival, and killed the guard of the Changle Palace, Lucheng Shi.

古文：还入北军，复报太尉勃。
现代文：刘章回到北军，将情况回报于周勃。
English: Liu Zhang returned to the Northern Army and reported the situation to Zhou Bo.

古文：勃起拜贺章，曰： 所患独产，今已诛，天下定矣。 
现代文：周勃起立拜谢并祝贺刘章，他说： 最害怕的是吕产，现在吕产已经被诛，天下就可定了。 
English: Zhou Er stood up and thanked and congratulated Liu Zhang. He said, "What I feared the most was Liusan. Now that Liusan has been taken away, the world is safe."

古文：辛酉，斩吕禄，笞杀吕嬃。
现代文：于是斩吕禄，笞杀吕须女。
English: So he beheaded Lu Lu and killed Lu Su's daughter.

古文：分部悉捕吕男女，无少长皆斩之。
现代文：分遣人马捕捉诸吕男女，不分老少一律斩杀。
English: The soldiers and horses were dispatched to capture men and women in Zhulu, and all of them were killed, regardless of age.

古文：大臣相与阴谋，以为少帝及三弟为王者皆非孝惠子，复共诛之，尊立文帝。语在周勃、高五王《传》。
现代文：大臣们相互进行私谋，认为少帝及他的三个为王的弟弟都不是惠帝的儿子，就一起杀掉，尊立文帝，其事记在《汉书·周勃、高五王传》中。
English: The ministers plotted against each other, thinking that the young emperor and his three younger brothers who were kings were not the sons of Hui Di, and killed them together, honouring Emperor Wen, which is recorded in the "Hanshu · Zhou Bo, High Five King Biography."

古文：赞曰：孝惠、高后之时，海内得离战国之苦，君臣俱欲无为，故惠帝拱己，高后女主制政，不出房闼，而天下晏然，刑罚罕用，民务稼穑，衣食滋殖。
现代文：班固评论：汉孝惠帝、高后之时，天下脱离战乱之苦，君臣都想无为而治，所以惠帝垂拱以安天下，高后以妇女主持朝政，不出宫门而天下安泰，刑罚少用，百姓也能只觉从事耕种，从而丰衣足食。
English: Ban Gu commented: When Emperor Han Xiao Hui and Empress Gao were in power, the world was free from the sufferings of war, and the monarchs and ministers wanted to do nothing but rule. Therefore, Emperor Hui sought to secure the peace of the world, Empress Gao used women to preside over the government, and the world was safe without going to the palace. Penalties were rarely used, and the people could only engage in farming, so they had enough food and clothing.

