古文：黄帝问曰：足阳明之脉病，恶人与火，闻木音则惕然而惊，钟鼓不为动。
现代文：黄帝问道：足阳明胃经发生病变，不愿见人与火，听到木器响动的声音就受惊，但听到敲打钟鼓的声音却不为惊动。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: "Foot Yang Ming's stomach has developed lesions. He does not want to see people and fire. He is alarmed when he hears the sound of wooden utensils, but he is not alarmed when he hears the sound of bells and drums.

古文：闻木音而惊，何也？
现代文：为什么听到木音就惊骇呢？
English: Why are we so startled by the sound of wood?

古文：愿闻其故。
现代文：我希望听听其中道理。
English: I want to know why.

古文：岐伯对曰：阳明者，胃脉也，胃者土也。故闻木音而惊者，土恶木也。
现代文：岐伯说：足阳明是胃的经脉，属土。所以听到木音而惊骇，是因为土受木克制的缘故。
English: Qi Bo said: "Foot yangming is the meridians of the stomach, belonging to the earth. Therefore, hearing the sound of wood and being shocked is because the earth is restrained by the wood.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：其恶火何也？
现代文：那么怕火是为什么呢？
English: So why the fear of fire?

古文：岐伯曰：阳明主肉，其脉血气盛，邪客之则热，热甚则恶火。
现代文：岐伯说：足阳明胃经主肌肉，其经脉多血多气，外邪侵袭则发热，热甚则所以恶火。
English: Qi Bo said: "The foot sun illuminates the stomach through the main muscle, and its meridians are more blood and gas, and the invasion of external evil causes fever, and the heat is very bad.

古文：帝曰：其恶人何也？
现代文：黄帝道：其恶人是何道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for the wicked?

古文：岐伯曰：阳明厥则喘而惋，惋则恶人。
现代文：岐伯说：足阳明胃经的气上逆，则呼吸喘促并有内热，内热则不喜欢见人。
English: Qi Bo said: if the foot sun is bright and the stomach meridian is on the opposite side of the atmosphere, then the breath is short and there is internal heat, and the internal heat does not like to see people.

古文：帝曰：或喘而死者，或喘而生者，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：有的人阳明厥逆喘促而死，有的人虽喘促而不死，这是为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said, "Some people die of dyspnea, while others have dyspnea but do not die. Why is this?

古文：岐伯曰：厥逆连脏则死，连经则生。
现代文：岐伯说：经气厥逆，若累及内脏，则病深重而死；若仅连及外在的经脉，则病轻浅可生。
English: Qi Bo said: If the internal organs are affected, the disease will be severe and the patient will die. If only the external meridians are affected, the disease may be mild.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：病甚则弃衣而走，登高而歌，或至不食数日，踰垣上屋，所上之处，皆非其素所能也，病反能者，何也？
现代文：有的阳明病重之时，病人把衣服脱掉乱跑乱跳，登上高处狂叫唱歌，或者数日不进饮食，并能够越墙上屋，而所登上之处，都是其平素所不能达到的，有了病反而能够上去，这是什么原因呢？
English: Sometimes, when a yangming is seriously ill, the patient takes off his clothes and runs around, climbs to a high place and sings wildly, or does not eat for several days, and can climb over the wall to the roof, and the places he climbs are all places that he cannot reach normally. If he is ill, he can go up instead. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：四肢者，诸阳之本也，阳盛则四肢实，实则能登高也。
现代文：岐伯说：四肢是阳气的根本。阳气盛则四肢充实，所以能够登高。
English: Qi Bo said: The four limbs are the foundation of yang qi. When yang qi is strong, the limbs are full, so they can climb high.

古文：帝曰：其弃衣而走者，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：其不穿衣服而到处乱跑，又是因为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said, "He is running around without clothes. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：热盛于身，故弃衣欲走也。
现代文：岐伯说：身热过于亢盛，所以不穿衣服而到处乱跑。
English: Qi Bo said: The body heat is too intense, so I run around without clothes.

古文：帝曰：其妄言骂詈，不避亲疏而歌者，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：其胡言乱语骂人，不避亲疏而随便唱歌，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for his gibberish and swearing, not avoiding intimacy and singing casually?

古文：岐伯曰：阳盛则使人妄言骂詈，不避亲疏而不欲食，不欲食，故妄走也。
现代文：岐伯说：阳热亢盛而扰动心神，故使其神志失常，胡言乱语，斥骂别人，不避亲疏，并且不知道吃饭，所以便到处乱跑。
English: Qi Bo said: Yang fever is rampant and disturbs the mind, so it makes him lose his sanity, talk nonsense, scold others, do not avoid relatives, and do not know how to eat, so he runs around.

