古文：王大将军年少时，旧有田舍名，语音亦楚。
现代文：大将军王敦年轻的时候，向来就有乡巴佬的称号，说的话口音也是土话。
English: When the great general Wang Dun was young, he always had the title of country bumpkin, and his accent was also local dialect.

古文：武帝唤时贤共言伎蓺事。人皆多有所知，唯王都无所关，意色殊恶，自言知打鼓吹。
现代文：晋武帝召见当时的名流一起谈论才艺的事，别人大多都懂得一些，只有王敦一点儿也不关心这些事，一句话也没有说，而且脸色很难看，自称只懂得打鼓。
English: Emperor Jinwu summoned the celebrities of the time to talk about talent together. Most of the others knew something about it. Only Wang Dun did not care about these things at all. He did not say a word, and his face was ugly. He said he only knew how to play the drums.

古文：帝令取鼓与之，于坐振袖而起，扬槌奋击，音节谐捷，神气豪上，傍若无人。
现代文：武帝叫人拿鼓给他，他马上从座位上挥袖而起，拿起鼓槌精神抖擞地用力敲击起鼓来，鼓音简洁和谐，气概豪迈，旁若无人。
English: Emperor Wu asked someone to bring him a drum, and he immediately rose from his seat, waved his arms, picked up the drumstick, and vigorously beat the drum. The drum sound was concise and harmonious, and the spirit was heroic, as if no one was around.

古文：举坐叹其雄爽。
现代文：满座的人都赞叹他的威武豪爽。
English: A full house of people applauded his mighty courage.

古文：王处仲世许高尚之目，尝荒恣于色，体为之敝。
现代文：王处仲，世人都用 高尚 来品评他。他曾经沉迷女色，身体也因此很虚乏。
English: Wang Shizhong, the world uses high-minded to evaluate him. He used to be addicted to women, so his body was very thin.

古文：左右谏之，处仲曰： 吾乃不觉尔。如此者，甚易耳！ 
现代文：身边的人规劝他，他说： 我都没有发觉。既然这样，也很容易解决呀。 
English: People around him advised him, and he said, "I didn't even notice it. Since it's like this, it's easy to solve."

古文：乃开后合，驱诸婢妾数十人出路，任其所之，时人叹焉。
现代文：于是打开侧门，把几十个婢妾都放出去，让她们爱到哪里就到哪里。当时的人很赞赏他。
English: So he opened the side door and let out dozens of concubines, letting them go wherever they wanted. People at the time admired him very much.

古文：王大将军自目： 高朗疏率，学通左氏。 
现代文：大将军王敦对自己的评价是：高尚开朗，通达直爽，学有专长，精通《左传》。
English: General Wang Dun's evaluation of himself is: high-minded and cheerful, straightforward and straightforward, learned expertise, proficient in "Zhuan Lu."

古文：王处仲每酒后辄咏 老骥伏枥，志在千里。烈士暮年，壮心不已 。
现代文：王敦每次喝酒后，就吟咏 老骥伏枥，志在千里；烈士暮年，壮心不已。 
English: After every drink, Wang Dun would sing the old folk song, Longing for a Thousand Miles; martyrs in their twilight years, strong-hearted.

古文：以如意打唾壶，壶口尽缺。
现代文：还拿如意敲着唾壶打拍子，壶口边沿全给敲缺了。
English: He also beat the spittoon as he pleased, and the edge of the spittoon was completely chipped.

古文：晋明帝欲起池台，元帝不许。
现代文：晋明帝想要建造池台，他父亲晋元帝不答应。
English: Emperor Jinming wanted to build a pool platform, but his father Emperor Jinwon did not agree.

古文：帝时为太子，好养武士。
现代文：当时明帝还是太子，喜欢招养武士。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming was still crown prince and liked to recruit samurai.

古文：一夕中作池，比晓便成。
现代文：有一晚半夜叫这些人挖池塘，到天亮就挖成了。
English: One night in the middle of the night, these people were asked to dig a pond. By dawn, the pond was full of fish.

古文：今太子西池是也。
现代文：这就是现在的太子西池。
English: This is the current Prince Nishiike.

古文：王大将军始欲下都处分树置，先遣参军告朝廷，讽旨时贤。
现代文：大将军王敦当初想领兵到建康去，处置朝臣，安插亲信。他先派一名参军禀报朝廷，并向当时的贤达暗示自己的意图。
English: General Wang Dun originally wanted to lead troops to Jiankang, dispose of courtiers, and install cronies. He first sent a member of the army to inform the court, and hinted at his intentions to the sages of the time.

古文：祖车骑尚未镇寿春，瞋目厉声语使人曰： 卿语阿黑：何敢不逊！
现代文：当时车骑将军祖逖还没有去镇守寿春，他怒视使者，厉声说： 你给我回去告诉阿黑，他敢无礼！
English: At that time, the chariot and cavalry general Zu Xi had not yet gone to the town to guard Shuchun, he glared at the messenger and said sharply: You go back and tell Ah He, he dares to be rude!

古文：催摄面去，须臾不尔，我将三千兵，槊脚令上！ 
现代文：赶紧收起老脸回去，如果不马上走，我带三千兵，用长矛戳他脚把他撵走！ 
English: If you don't leave at once, I'll take three thousand soldiers with me, poke him in the foot with a spear, and carry him away!

古文：王闻之而止。
现代文：王敦听说之后，只好打消了念头。
English: After hearing this, Wang Dun had to give up the idea.

古文：庾稚恭既常有中原之志，文康时权重，未在己。
现代文：庾翼早就有收复中原的志向，但他哥哥庾亮当政时，大权不在自己手里。
English: Zou Ying has long had the ambition to recover the Central Plains, but when his brother Zou Liang was in power, the power was not in his hands.

古文：及季坚作相，忌兵畏祸，与稚恭历同异者久之，乃果行。
现代文：庾冰做丞相时又害怕兵祸，两人政见不同，屡经争论，才决定出兵北伐。
English: When Yu Bing was prime minister, he was also afraid of military disaster. The two men had different political views and argued many times before deciding to send troops to the Northern Expedition.

古文：倾荆、汉之力，穷舟车之势，师次于襄阳。
现代文：庾翼倾尽荆州、汉水一带的全部人力物力，发动所有水陆军队。
English: He devoted all manpower and material resources in the Jingzhou and Hanshui regions, and mobilized all naval and land forces.

古文：大会参佐，陈其旌甲，亲授弧矢曰： 我之此行，若此射矣！ 
现代文：他率领部伍驻扎在襄阳，召集所有部将，陈列军队武器，亲自弯弓射箭，说： 这次北伐，如同此箭，有去无回！ 
English: He led the troops stationed in Xiangyang, summoned all the commanders, displayed the army's weapons, personally bent the bow and shot arrows, and said: This Northern Expedition, like this arrow, has no return!

古文：遂三起三叠，徒众属目，其气十倍。
现代文：连射三箭，每发一箭便擂起战鼓助威。士兵们为之瞩目，士气陡增十倍。
English: Three arrows were shot in quick succession, and a war drum was beaten for each arrow. The soldiers were captivated by this, and their morale increased tenfold.

古文：桓宣武平蜀，集参僚置酒于李势殿，巴、蜀缙绅，莫不来萃。
现代文：桓温平定蜀地后，在李势原先的宫殿里设酒和下属聚会，巴、蜀一带的大官全都邀请来聚会。
English: After Kuan Wen had subdued Shu, he held a wine and subordinate party in the former palace of Li Xian. All the dignitaries from Ba and Shu were invited to the party.

古文：桓既素有雄情爽气，加尔日音调英发，叙古今成败由人，存亡系才。其状磊落，一坐叹赏。
现代文：桓温不但一向有豪放的性情、直爽的气概，加以这一天的谈话语调英气勃勃，畅谈古今成败在人，存亡的关键在于人才，他仪态俊伟，满座的人都很赞赏。
English: Kuan Wen not only has always had a bold temperament and a straightforward temperament, but the tone of this day's conversation is heroic. He talked about success and failure in the past and present, and the key to survival lies in talent. He has a handsome demeanor, and everyone in the audience was very appreciative.

古文：既散，诸人追味余言。于时寻阳周馥曰： 恨卿辈不见王大将军。 
现代文：散会以后，大家还在回忆、玩味他的话，这时寻阳人周馥说： 遗憾的是你们没有见过王大将军！ 
English: After the meeting broke up, everyone was still reminiscing and playing with his words. At this time, Zhou Qi, the man-hunter, said: Unfortunately, you have not seen General Wang Da!

古文：桓公读高士传，至于陵仲子，便掷去曰： 谁能作此溪刻自处！ 
现代文：桓温读《高士传》时，读到放陵仲子的传记，便把书抛开，说： 谁能用这种苛刻的、不近情理的做法来对待自己！ 。
English: When Kuan Wen read "The Biography of Gao Shi" and came across the biography of Horyo Zhongzi, he threw the book aside and said, "Who can treat themselves in such a harsh and unreasonable way!."

古文：桓石虔，司空豁之长庶也。小字镇恶。
现代文：桓石虔是司空桓豁的庶出长子，小名叫镇恶。
English: Kanshikken was the eldest illegitimate son of Tsukuda Kanpaku, and his nickname was Zhenhong.

古文：年十七八未被举，而童隶已呼为镇恶郎。
现代文：十七八岁了，身分地位还没有得到承认，而奴仆们已经称呼他为镇恶郎了。
English: Seventeen-eight years old, his status unrecognized, and the servants are already calling him the town villain.

古文：尝住宣武斋头。
现代文：他曾住在桓温家里。
English: He used to live in Kanen's family.

古文：从征枋头，车骑冲没陈，左右莫能先救。
现代文：后来跟随桓温出征到枋头，在一次战斗中，车骑将军桓冲陷入敌阵，他手下的人没有谁能抢先去救他。
English: Later, he followed Huan Wen to Shantou. During a battle, General Huan Chong, a chariot and cavalry commander, fell into the enemy lines, and none of his men were able to rush to his rescue.

古文：宣武谓曰： 汝叔落贼，汝知不？ 
现代文：桓温告诉石虔说： 你叔父落入敌人阵里、你知道吗？ 
English: Kuan Wen told Shi Qian, "Your uncle fell into the enemy's camp, do you know?

古文：石虔闻之，气甚奋。命朱辟为副，策马于数万众中，莫有抗者，径致冲还，三军叹服。
现代文：石虏听了，勇气倍增，命令朱辟做副手，跃马扬鞭冲入几万敌军的重围中，没有谁能抵挡他，他径直把桓冲救了回来，全军都十分称赞佩服。
English: Upon hearing this, Shi Rui's courage multiplied. He ordered Zhu Bi to be his second-in-command and stormed into the heavy siege of tens of thousands of enemy troops. No one could resist him. He rescued Huan Chong and the whole army was very impressed.

古文：河朔后以其名断疟。
现代文：后来黄河以北的居民就拿他的名字来驱赶疟鬼。
English: Later, residents north of the Yellow River used his name to drive away the malarial ghosts.

古文：陈林道在西岸，都下诸人共要至牛渚会。
现代文：陈林道驻守在江北，京都诸友人一起邀他到牛渚山聚会。
English: Chen Lindo was stationed in Jiangbei, and his friends in Kyoto invited him to a party in Ushizugashiyama.

古文：陈理既佳，人欲共言折。
现代文：陈林道谈玄理谈得很好，大家想一同和他辩论，要驳倒他。
English: Chen Lin Dao spoke very well about metaphysics. Everyone wanted to debate with him and refute him.

古文：陈以如意拄颊，望鸡笼山叹曰： 孙伯符志业不遂！ 
现代文：陈林道却拿如意支着腮，远望鸡笼山感叹地说： 孙伯符志向、事业都没有如愿！ 
English: Chen Lin Dao, however, carried his shovel as he wished, gazed far and wide at the Jiguishan Mountains, and said with a sigh: Sun Bofu's ambition and career did not live up to his hopes!

古文：于是竟坐不得谈。
现代文：于是大家坐到散时也没机会谈论。
English: As a result, there was no opportunity to talk when everyone was seated.

古文：王司州在谢公坐，咏 入不言兮出不辞，乘回风兮载云旗 。
现代文：司州刺史王胡之在谢安那里做客，高声讽咏 入不言兮出不辞，乘回风兮载云旗 的诗句。
English: Wang Hu Zhi, the governor of Sichuan Province, was a guest at Xie An's place, and he mocked the poet's poem of "taking the wind and carrying the cloud flag" in a loud voice.

古文：语人云： 当尔时，觉一坐无人。 桓玄西下，入石头。外白： 司马梁王奔叛。 
现代文：在这里，则是表达了飘飘欲仙，不染俗尘的精神风貌。桓玄从西边直下，攻入石头城，外面的人报告说司马梁王已经叛逃了。
English: Here, it is the expression of the spirit of wandering desire immortals, not stained with the dust of the world. Huan Xuan went straight down from the west and entered the stone city. People outside reported that Sima Liang Wang had defected.

古文：玄时事形已济，在平乘上笳鼓并作，直高咏云： 箫管有遗音，梁王安在哉？ 
现代文：这时桓玄认为大局已经定了，在大船上鼓乐齐鸣，并不看重他的逃亡，只是高声朗诵道： 箫管有遗音，梁王安在哉！ 
English: At this time, Kuan Xuan thought that the overall situation had already been decided. Drums and music were playing in unison on the big ship. He did not value his escape, but only recited aloud: There is a sound left in the gong, and Liang Wang An is there!

