古文：富丁欲以赵合齐魏，楼缓欲以赵合秦楚。
现代文：富丁想要以赵国的名义联合齐国、魏国，楼缓想要以赵国的名义联合秦国、楚国。
English: Fuding wanted to unite Qi and Wei in the name of Zhao, while Louxiao wanted to unite Qin and Chu in the name of Zhao.

古文：富丁恐主父之听楼缓而合秦、楚也。
现代文：富丁害怕灵王听信楼缓的话和秦国、楚国联合。
English: Fuding was afraid that Lingwang would listen to Lou and join Qin and Chu.

古文：司马浅为富丁谓主父曰： 不如以顺齐。
现代文：司马浅替富丁对赵武灵王说： 不如以国家的名义顺从齐国。
English: Sima Asan said to King Zhao Wuling on behalf of Fuding: It is better to obey Qi in the name of the state.

古文：今我不顺齐伐秦，秦、楚必合而攻韩、魏。
现代文：如今我国不顺从齐国讨伐秦国，秦国、楚国必定联合起来进攻韩国、魏国。
English: Nowadays, our country does not obey the Qi country to fight against the Qin country, and the Qin and Chu countries will certainly unite to attack South Korea and Wei.

古文：韩、魏告急于齐，齐不欲伐秦，必以赵为辞，则伐秦者赵也，韩、魏必怨赵。
现代文：韩国、魏国向齐国求救，齐国不讨伐秦国，必定会用赵国作为推辞的借口，那不讨伐秦国的就变成赵国了，韩国、魏国一定会记恨赵国。
English: Korea and Wei asked for help from Qi. If Qi did not fight against Qin, it would certainly use Zhao as an excuse. If it did not fight against Qin, it would become Zhao. Korea and Wei would definitely hate Zhao.

古文：齐之兵不西，韩必听秦违齐。
现代文：齐国的军队不向西进攻，韩国一定听从秦国的指挥背叛齐国。
English: The army of Qi will not attack westward, and Korea will definitely obey the command of Qin and betray Qi.

古文：违齐而亲，兵必归于赵矣。
现代文：背叛齐国而亲近秦国，兵祸一定归到赵国头上了。
English: By betraying Qi and getting close to Qin, the military disaster must have fallen on the head of Zhao.

古文：今我顺而齐不西，韩、魏必绝齐，绝齐则皆事我。
现代文：如今我们顺从齐国而齐国不向西进攻，韩国、魏国必定断绝与齐国的邦交，断绝与齐国的邦交那就都会事奉我国。
English: Now that we obey Qi and Qi does not attack the West, South Korea and Wei will definitely break off diplomatic relations with Qi. If they break off diplomatic relations with Qi, they will all serve our country.

古文：且我顺齐，齐无而西。
现代文：况且我们顺从齐国，齐国不会不向西进攻的。
English: Moreover, we obey the Qigong, and the Qigong will not attack the west.

古文：日者楼缓坐魏三月，不能散齐、魏之交。
现代文：从前，楼缓在魏国住了三个月，没能拆散齐国、魏国的邦交。
English: In the past, Lou Ye stayed in Wei for three months and failed to sever the diplomatic ties between Qi and Wei.

古文：今我顺而齐、魏果西，是罢齐敝秦也，赵必为天下重国。 
现代文：如今我们顺从齐国，并且齐国、魏国果真肉西进攻，这是疲倦齐国破坏秦国的好办法，赵国一定会成为天下诸侯重视的国家。 
English: Now we are obedient to Qi, and Qi and Wei have really attacked the west. This is a good way for tired Qi to destroy Qin. Zhao will surely become a country valued by the princes of the world.

古文：主父曰： 我与三国攻秦，是俱敝也。 
现代文：赵武灵王说： 我跟三国一起进攻秦国，这是都会遭到破坏的。 
English: King Zhao Wuling said, "I will attack Qin together with the three kingdoms, and they will all be destroyed.

古文：曰： 不然。
现代文：司马浅说： 不是这样。
English: He wrote: "This is not the case.

古文：我约三国而告之秦，以未构中山也。
现代文：我们约结三国把情况告诉它们，用没有和中山讲和为借口不参与进攻秦国。
English: We agreed with the three countries to inform them of the situation and not to take part in the attack on Qin under the pretext that there was no peace treaty with Zhongshan.

古文：三国欲伐秦之果也，必听我，欲和我。
现代文：三国想要进攻秦国是真心，必定听信我们的话，想让我们和中山讲和。
English: If the three countries really want to attack Qin, they will listen to us and want us to make peace with Zhongshan.

古文：中山听之，是我以王因饶中山而取地也。
现代文：中出如果听从，这是我们依靠三国力量阻挠中山而取得土地的时机。
English: If you listen, this is an opportunity for us to obtain land by relying on the strength of the three countries to obstruct Zhongshan.

古文：中山不听，三国必绝之，是中山孤也。
现代文：如果中山不听从，三国一定和它断绝邦交，这是孤立中山的好办法。
English: If Zhongshan does not obey, the three countries will definitely break off diplomatic relations with it. This is a good way to isolate Zhongshan.

古文：三国不能和我，虽少出兵可也。
现代文：三国不能使我们和中山讲和，即使少出兵也是可以的。
English: The three countries can't force us to make peace with China, even if we send fewer troops.

古文：我分兵而孤乐中山，中山必亡。
现代文：我们分兵孤立中山使它削弱，中山一定灭亡。
English: Our detachment isolated Zhongshan and weakened it. Zhongshan will certainly perish.

古文：我已亡中山，而以余兵与三国攻秦，是我一举而两取地于秦、中山也。 
现代文：我们灭亡中吐以后，用剩余兵力与三国一起攻打秦国，这是我们一举从秦国、中山两处割取土地的好办法。 
English: After we vomited in defeat, we used the remaining troops to attack Qin together with the three countries. This is a good way to seize land from Qin and Zhongshan in one fell swoop.

