古文：张宗字诸君，南阳鲁阳人也。
现代文：◆张宗传，张宗字诸君，南阳鲁阳人。
English: ◆Zhang Zong Chuan, Zhang Zong Zi Zhu Jun, Nanyang Luyang Ren.

古文：王莽时，为县阳泉乡佐。
现代文：王莽时，做本县阳泉乡佐。
English: Wang Mangshi was the deputy of Yangquan Township of the county.

古文：会莽败，义兵起，宗乃率阳泉民三四百人起兵略地，西至长安，更始以宗为偏将军。
现代文：逢王莽失败，义兵四起，张宗便率领阳泉百姓三四百人起兵略地，西至长安，更始帝用张宗做偏将军。
English: After Wang Mang's defeat, four volunteer armies were raised, and Zhang Zong led 3,400 Yangquan people to raise an army to capture territory as far west as Chang'an. Emperor Qian used Zhang Zong as a partial general.

古文：宗见更始政乱，因将家属客安邑。
现代文：张宗看到更始政治紊乱，便将家属客居安邑。
English: Zhang Zong saw the political turmoil at the beginning, so he sent his family members to live in Anyi.

古文：及大司徒邓禹西征，定河东，定诣禹自归。
现代文：后来大司徒邓禹西征，安定了河东，张宗到邓禹那里后自己回去了。
English: Later, Deng Yu's Western Expedition stabilized Hedong, and Zhang Zong went back to Deng Yu after he got there.

古文：禹闻宗素多权谋，乃表为偏将军。
现代文：邓禹听说张宗素多权谋，于是上表推荐他做偏将军。
English: Deng Yu heard that Zhang Zong had more than one power strategy, so the above table recommended him as a partial general.

古文：禹军到栒邑，赤眉大众且至，禹以栒邑不足守，欲引师进就坚城，而众人多畏贼追，惮为后拒。
现代文：邓禹军到了邑，赤眉大军将至，邓禹认为邑不足守，想带军队进而坚守城邑，可是众人害怕贼人追赶，怕当后卫。
English: Deng Yu's army arrived at the town, and the Red Eyebrows' army was approaching. Deng Yu thought that the town was not strong enough to defend, and wanted to take the army to defend the town. However, the people were afraid of being chased by the thieves, and were afraid of being guards.

古文：禹乃书诸将名于竹简，署其前后，乱著笥中，令各探之。
现代文：邓禹便把诸将的名字写在竹简上面，写明前后次序，乱装在箧中，叫各人抽签。
English: Deng Yu then wrote the names of the generals on the bamboo slips, clearly indicating the order, randomly placed in the urns, and asked everyone to draw lots.

古文：宗独不肯探，曰 死生有命，张宗岂辞难就逸乎 禹叹息谓曰 将军有亲弱在营，奈何不顾 宗曰 愚闻一卒毕力，百人不当。万夫致死，可以横行。
现代文：张宗独不肯抽，他说： 死生有命，张宗难道是辞难就逸的人吗？ 邓禹叹息道 ：将军有老亲弱子在营里，怎么不考虑？ 张宗说： 我听说一个兵卒尽力，百人不能挡住；万夫舍得死，可以横行天下。
English: Zhang Zongdu refused to smoke. He said, "Life and death are intertwined. Is Zhang Zongdu a person who gives up and runs away?" Deng Yu sighed, "The general has old relatives and weak people in the camp, why doesn't he consider them?" Zhang Zongdu said, "I heard that one soldier can do his best, but a hundred people can't stop him. If a man is willing to die, he can run rampant in the world."

古文：宗今拥兵数千，以承大威，何遽其必败乎 遂留为后拒。
现代文：张宗今拥兵数千，承受大军的威力，何必马上料其必败呢！ 于是留为后拒。
English: Zhang Zongjin now has thousands of soldiers, bearing the power of a large army, why should he immediately expect his inevitable defeat! So he stayed behind.

古文：诸营既引兵，宗方勒厉军士，坚垒壁，以死当之。
现代文：诸营既引兵出发，张宗便督促军士，坚筑营垒，死守不退。
English: After the battalions had been led out, Zhang Zong urged the sergeants to fortify the camp and not retreat.

古文：禹到前县，议曰 以张将军之众，当百万之师，犹以小雪投沸汤，虽欲戮力，其势不全也 乃遣步骑二千人反还迎宗。
现代文：邓禹到前县，听人议论道 ：凭张将军的人力，挡百万之师，等于是把小雪投进沸汤，即使想尽力，也办不到啊。 于是派步兵骑兵二千人回来迎接张宗。
English: Deng Yu went to Qian County and listened to people discuss: With the manpower of General Zhang, a million-strong division, it is equivalent to throwing snow into boiling soup. Even if you try your best, you can't do it. So he sent two thousand infantry and cavalry back to meet Zhang Zong.

古文：宗引兵始发，而赤眉卒至，宗与战，却之，乃得归营，于是诸将服其勇。
现代文：张宗带兵出发，而赤眉军仓猝到来，张宗和他开战，把他们打退了，便得回营，于是诸将服其勇敢。
English: Zhang Zong set out with his soldiers, but the Red Eyed Army suddenly arrived. Zhang Zong fought with him, drove them back, and then returned to the camp, so the generals obeyed him bravely.

古文：及还到长安，宗夜将锐士入城袭赤眉，中矛贯胛，又转攻诸营保，为流矢所激，皆几至于死。
现代文：等到回到长安，张宗夜晚率领锐士入城袭击赤眉，被敌人射中两膊之间，又转攻诸营保，被流矢所击，差点死去。
English: When he returned to Chang'an, Zhang Zong led the warriors into the city at night to attack the Red Eyebrows. He was shot between the shoulders by the enemy, and then attacked the camp guards. He was hit by a stray arrow and almost died.

古文：及邓禹征还，光武以宗为京辅都尉，将突骑与征西大将军冯异共击关中诸营保，破之，还河南都尉。
现代文：等到邓禹被召回京，光武用张宗做京辅都尉，率领突骑与征西大将军冯异共击关中诸营保，攻破了，升为河南都尉。
English: When Deng Yu was recalled to Beijing, Guangwu used Zhang Zong as the Beijing auxiliary captain, led the cavalry charge and the Western Expeditionary Force General Feng Yixing to attack the Guanzhong camp guards, broke through, and was promoted to Henan captain.

古文：建武六年，都尉官省，拜太中大夫。
现代文：建武六年，都尉官省，拜为太中大夫。
English: Jianwu was six years old, he was a lieutenant of the provincial government, and he was promoted to Taizhong Doctor.

古文：八年，颍川桑中盗贼群起，宗将兵击定之。
现代文：八年，颍川桑中盗贼群起，张宗带兵击败平定了。
English: In the eighth year, a group of thieves rose up in Sangzhong, Beichuan, and Zhang Zong led an army to defeat them.

古文：后青、冀盗贼屯聚山泽，宗以谒者督诸郡兵讨平之。
现代文：后来，青州、冀州盗贼屯聚在山泽之中，张宗以谒者督促诸郡兵讨平了。
English: Later, the thieves from Qingzhou and Jizhou gathered in the mountains, and Zhang Zong urged the county soldiers to settle the dispute.

古文：十六年，琅邪、北海盗贼复起，宗督二郡兵讨之，乃设方略，明购赏，皆悉破散，于是沛、楚、东海、临淮群贼惧其威武，相捕斩者数千人，青、徐震栗。
现代文：十六年，琅笽、北海盗贼又起，张宗督两郡兵讨伐之，于是定出方略，明确奖励投降者，敌人都破散了，于是沛、楚、东海、临淮群贼害怕他的威武、互相捕斩者几千人，青州、徐州之敌怕得十分厉害。
English: In the 16th year, the northern and northern pirate bandits rose up again, and Zhang Zongdu led the soldiers of the two counties to fight against them. Therefore, he decided on a strategy and clearly rewarded those who surrendered. The enemies were scattered. Therefore, the bandits of Pei, Chu, Donghai and Linhuai were afraid of his mighty power and killed thousands of each other. The enemies of Qingzhou and Xuzhou were very afraid.

古文：后迁琅邪相，其政好严猛，敢杀伐。
现代文：后来张宗升为琅笽相，他的政策喜欢严猛，敢于杀伐。
English: Later, Zhang Zongsheng became the prime minister. His policies were tough and he dared to fight.

古文：永平二年，卒于官。
现代文：永平二年，死在官位上。
English: He died in office in the second year of Yongping.

古文：法雄字文彊，扶风郿人也，齐襄王法章之后。
现代文：◆法雄传，法雄字文强，扶风县人。齐襄王法章之后代。
English: ◆Haoxiong biography, Haoxiong character literary strong, Fufeng County people. Descendant of Qixiang Wang Fa Zhang.

古文：秦灭齐，子孙不敢称田姓，故以法为氏。
现代文：秦国灭了齐国，子孙不敢称田姓，所以用法做氏。
English: Qin State annihilated Qi State, and the descendants did not dare to call themselves Tian surnames, so the usage became a family name.

古文：宣帝时，徙三辅，世为二千石。
现代文：宣帝时，迁三辅，世代作二千石。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan, three subordinates were transferred, and each generation made 2,000 koku.

古文：雄初仕郡功曹，辟太傅张禹府，举雄高第，除平氏长。
现代文：法雄起初在郡里作功曹，后来升至太傅张禹府，举雄高第，授职平氏长。
English: At first, he was a meritorious student in the county. Later, he was promoted to the highest rank of Tai Fu Zhang Yu Fu, and was given the post of the head of the Taira clan.

古文：善政事，好发擿奸伏，盗贼稀发，吏人畏爱之。
现代文：法雄长于政事，喜欢揭发坏人，盗贼很少发生，官吏百姓畏爱他。
English: Hossong is good at politics, likes to expose bad people, thieves rarely occur, officials and people fear him.

古文：南阳太守鲍得上其理状，迁宛陵令。
现代文：南阳太守鲍得上其理状，升为宛陵县令。
English: Nanyang Daju Bao got what he deserved and was promoted to Wanling County.

古文：永初三年，海贼张伯路等三千馀人，冠赤帻，服绛衣，自称 将军 ，寇滨海九郡，杀二千石令长。
现代文：永初三年，海贼张伯路等三千多人，戴着红帽子，穿着红衣，自称 将军 ，进犯沿海九郡，杀了二千名令长。
English: In the third year of the Yongchu era, more than three thousand people, including the sea bandits of Zhangbo Road, wearing red hats and red clothes, and calling themselves generals, invaded nine counties along the coast and killed two thousand commanders.

古文：初，遣侍御史庞雄督州郡兵击之，伯路等乞降，寻复屯聚。
现代文：起初，朝廷派侍御史庞雄督促州郡兵士攻击他们，伯路等投降，不久又聚在一起。
English: At first, the imperial court sent the attendant Shi Pangxiong to urge the soldiers of the county to attack them, Bo Lu and others to surrender, and soon they came together again.

古文：明年，伯路复与平原刘文河等三百馀人称 使者 ，攻厌次城，杀长吏，转入高唐，烧官寺，出系囚，渠帅皆称 将军 ，共朝谒伯路。
现代文：第二年，伯路又与平原刘文河等三百多人称 使者 ，攻厌次城，杀长吏，转入高唐县，烧官寺，释放囚犯，头目都称 将军 ，一起朝见伯路。
English: In the second year, together with more than 300 people from the plain Liu Wenhe and others, called the messengers, Bo Lu attacked the second city, killed the officials, transferred to Gaotang County, burned the official temple, released the prisoners, and the leaders were called the generals, and together they went to see Bo Lu.

古文：伯路冠五梁冠，佩印绶，党众浸盛。
现代文：伯路戴五梁冠，佩印绶，党羽越来越多。
English: Bo Lu wears a five-beam crown and wears a seal, and the number of party members is increasing.

古文：乃遣御史中丞王宗持节发幽、冀诸郡兵，合数万人，乃征雄为青州刺史，与王宗并力讨之。
现代文：朝廷就派御史中丞王宗拿着符节调集幽州、冀州各郡兵马，共数万人，并提拔法雄做青州刺史，与王宗合力讨伐他们。
English: The imperial court sent the imperial historian Wang Zong to collect tens of thousands of soldiers and horses from the counties of Yuzhou and Jizhou, and promoted Hossong to be the imperial historian of Qingzhou to fight them together with Wang Zong.

古文：连战破贼，斩首溺死者数百人，馀皆奔走，收器械财物甚众。
现代文：连战破贼，斩首溺死好几百人，其余都逃跑了，收缴器械财物很多。
English: They even broke up the war bandits, beheaded and drowned several hundred people, the rest fled, and confiscated a lot of equipment and property.

古文：会赦诏到，贼犹以军甲未解，不敢归降。
现代文：恰逢赦免的诏书到了，贼人还认为军甲没有解除，不敢回来投降。
English: When the amnesty edict arrived, the thieves still thought that the armour had not been removed and did not dare to return and surrender.

古文：于是王宗召刺史太守共议，皆以为当遂击之。
现代文：于是王宗召集刺史太守共同商议，都认为应当马上进行攻击。
English: As a result, Wang Zong called together the governors of Jishi Province to discuss the matter, and they all agreed that the attack should be carried out immediately.

古文：雄曰 不然，兵，凶器。战，危事。
现代文：法雄说 ：不能这样。兵是凶器，战争是危险的事。
English: Hakuo said, "This can't be. Soldiers are deadly weapons, and war is a dangerous business."

古文：勇不可恃，胜不可必。
现代文：勇气不可仗恃，不能操必胜之权。
English: Courage does not depend on luck, nor does it have the power to win.

古文：贼若乘船浮海，深入远岛，攻之未易也。
现代文：贼人如果乘船出海，深入远岛，攻打就不那么容易。
English: If thieves go out to sea by boat and go deep into distant islands, it is not so easy to attack them.

古文：及有赦令，可且罢兵，以慰诱其心，势必解散，然后图之，可不战而定也 宗善其言，即罢兵。
现代文：等到赦令到了，可暂时收兵，来安慰引诱他们，势必解散，然后再想办法，可以不战而获得安定。 王宗同意，立即罢兵。
English: When the pardon arrived, he could temporarily gather his troops, comfort and entice them, and then disband them, and then try to find a way to achieve stability without war. Wang Zong agreed and immediately disbanded his troops.

古文：贼闻大喜，乃还所略人。
现代文：贼人听了大喜，于是发还掳掠的人。
English: The thieves were overjoyed, so they released the captives.

古文：而东莱郡兵独未解甲，贼复惊恐，遁走辽东，止海岛上。
现代文：而东莱郡兵独未解除兵甲，贼人又惊恐，逃至辽东，停留岛上。
English: However, Donglai County soldiers did not disarm, and the thieves panicked and fled to Liaodong, staying on the island.

古文：五年春，乏食，复抄东莱间，雄率郡兵击破之，贼逃还辽东，辽东人李久等共斩平之，于是州界清静。
现代文：五年春，缺乏粮食，又包抄东莱间，法雄率领郡兵攻破他们，贼人逃回辽东，辽东人李久等共起斩平他们，于是州界清静了。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, due to the lack of grain and encirclement of Donglai, Fa Xiong led the county soldiers to break them, the thieves fled back to Liaodong, and Li Jiu, a Liaodong man, and others worked together to level them, so the state border was quiet.

古文：雄每行部，录囚徒，察颜色，多得情伪，长吏不奉法者皆解印绶去。
现代文：法雄每次巡行各部，登记囚徒，观察颜色，多能得到案情的真假，长吏不执行法令的都被解除印绶而离职。
English: Every time Hossong went around the ministries, registering prisoners and observing the colors, he was able to get the truth or falsity of the case. The officials who did not enforce the law were relieved of their posts.

古文：在州四年，迁南郡太守，断狱省少，户口益增。
现代文：法雄在州四年，升为南郡太守，断狱省少，户口增多。
English: During his four years in the prefecture, he was promoted to the governor of Minami-gun, the number of people released from prison decreased, and the number of household registrations increased.

古文：郡滨带江沔，又有云梦薮泽，永初中，多虎狼之暴，前太守赏募张捕，反为所害者甚众。
现代文：郡临近江沔，又有云梦薮泽，永初年间，多虎狼的侵扰，前太守悬赏招募猎人捕捉，被虎狼之害的很多。
English: The county is adjacent to the Omi River, and there is also the Yunmeng Lake. During the first years of the Yongle Dynasty, there were many tiger and wolf invasions. The former governor offered a reward to recruit hunters to catch them, and many were harmed by tigers and wolves.

古文：雄乃移书属县曰 凡虎狼之在山林，犹人之居城市。
现代文：法雄便发公文给属屈道 ：凡虎狼之在山林，等于人民之居城市。
English: Hossong then sent an official document to his vassal Qu Dao: If there are tigers and wolves in the mountains and forests, it is equal to a city where people live.

古文：古者至化之世，猛兽不扰，皆由恩信宽泽，仁及飞走。
现代文：古时最开化的时代，猛兽不侵扰，都由于皇上恩信宽泽，仁德遍及飞禽走兽。
English: In ancient times, the most enlightened era, wild beasts did not intrude, all due to the emperor's generosity and benevolence throughout the birds and beasts.

古文：太守虽不德，敢忘斯义。
现代文：太守虽然不够仁德，但不敢忘记这种意义。
English: Although Taishou is not humane enough, he does not dare to forget this meaning.

古文：记到，其毁坏槛阱，不得妄捕山林 是后虎害稍息，人以狱安。
现代文：文件到达后，一律毁坏槛井，不得到山林乱捕野兽。 从此以后虎害稍止，百姓得到安居。
English: After the document arrived, all the wells were destroyed, and no wild animals were caught in the mountains and forests. From then on, the tiger damage stopped for a while, and the people were able to live safely.

古文：在郡数岁，岁常丰稔。
现代文：在郡几年，连年丰稔。
English: In the county for several years, it has been prosperous year after year.

古文：元初中卒官。
现代文：元初年间死于官位。
English: He died in office in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：子真，在《逸人传》。滕抚字叔辅，北海剧人也。
现代文：◆滕抚传，滕抚字叔辅，北海剧人。
English: ◆ Teng Fu Chuan, Teng Fu Zi Shu Fu, is a North Sea playwright.

古文：初仕州郡，稍迁为涿令，有文武才用。
现代文：起初在州郡做官，后来升为涿县令，有文武才用。
English: At first, he worked as an official in the prefecture and county, and later he was promoted to the county magistrate.

古文：太守以其能，委任郡职，兼领六县。
现代文：太守认为他能干，委任郡职，兼领六县。
English: Tai Shou thought he could do it, and appointed him to the county post, which also included six counties.

古文：风政修明，流爱于人，在事七年，道不拾遗。
现代文：政治修明，深受百姓爱戴，在职七年，道不拾遗。
English: Politically enlightened, deeply loved by the people, in office for seven years, he has left no trace.

古文：顺帝末，扬、徐盗贼群起，磐牙连岁。
现代文：顺帝末年，扬州、徐州盗贼四起，连年互相勾结。
English: In the last years of Emperor Shun, thieves from Yangzhou and Xuzhou banded together and colluded with each other year after year.

古文：建康元年，九江范容、周生等相聚反乱，屯据历阳，为江淮巨患，遣御史中丞冯绲将兵督扬州刺史尹燿、九江太守邓显讨之。燿、显军败，为贼所杀。
现代文：建康元年，九江范容、周生等相聚反叛，屯据历阳，成为江淮大祸。朝廷派御史中丞冯绲将兵督促扬州刺史尹火翟、九江太守邓显讨伐他们，耀、显军败，被贼所杀。
English: In the first year of Jiankang, Jiujiang Fan Rong, Zhou Sheng and others gathered to rebel and settled in Liyang, which became a great disaster for Jianghuai. The imperial court sent the imperial historian, the middle-ranked general, Feng Qi, to urge Yangzhou's imperial historian, Yin Huoqi, and the governor of Jiujiang, Deng Xian, to fight them. Yao and Xian were defeated and killed by thieves.

古文：又阴陵人徐凤、马勉等复寇郡县，杀略吏人。
现代文：又有阴陵人徐凤、马勉等又进犯郡县，杀掠官吏人民。
English: There were also Yinling people, such as Xu Feng and Ma Zhen, who invaded counties and counties and killed and plundered officials and people.

古文：凤衣绛衣，带黑绶，称 无上将军 ，勉皮冠黄衣，带玉印，称 黄帝 ，筑营于当涂山中。
现代文：徐凤穿红衣，带黑绶，自称为 无上将军 。马勉戴皮帽，穿黄衣，带玉印，称 黄帝 ，筑营垒在当涂山中。
English: Xu Feng wore a red robe and a black sash, and called himself the supreme general. Ma Mian wore a leather cap, a yellow robe, and a jade seal, and was called the Yellow Emperor. They built a camp in the middle of the Dangtu Mountains.

古文：乃建年号，置百官，遣别帅黄虎攻没合肥。
现代文：于是建年号，设百官，派别帅黄虎攻陷合肥。
English: As a result, the year of foundation, the establishment of a hundred officials, and the faction of the handsome yellow tiger invaded Hefei.

古文：明年，广陵贼张婴等复聚众数千人反，据广陵。
现代文：第二年，广陵贼张婴等又聚众数千人谋反，占据广陵。
English: In the second year, the Guangling thief Zhang Ying and others gathered thousands of people to rebel and occupy Guangling.

古文：朝廷博求将帅，三公举抚有文武才，拜为九江都尉，与中郎将赵序助冯绲合州郡兵数万人共讨之。
现代文：朝廷广泛征求将帅，三公推举滕抚说他有文武全才，拜为九江都尉，与中郎将赵序助冯绲联合州郡数万人一起讨伐。
English: The imperial court extensively solicited generals, and the three princes nominated Teng Fuzhu, saying that he had all-round talent in literature and martial arts, and he was worshiped as the captain of Jiujiang. He and the middle-ranking general Zhao Zongsu Feng Jun fought together with tens of thousands of people in Yingzhou County.

古文：又广开赏募，钱、邑各有差。
现代文：又广开赏募、钱、邑各有等差。
English: In addition, there is a wide range of rewards, money, and counties.

古文：梁太后虑群贼屯结，诸将不能制，又议遣太尉李固。
现代文：梁太后担心群贼屯驻勾结，诸将不能制服他们，又提议派遣太尉李固。
English: Empress Dowager Liang was worried that the bandits would stay and collude, and the generals would not be able to subdue them. She also proposed sending Lieutenant Li Gu.

古文：未及行，会抚等进击，大破之，斩马勉、范容、周生等千五百级，徐凤遂将馀众攻烧东城县。
现代文：没有出发，碰上滕抚等进兵击贼，大破之，斩马勉、范容、周生等一千五个首级，徐凤就带领余众攻烧东城县。
English: Without setting out, Xu Feng led the rest of the troops to attack and burn Dongcheng County after encountering Teng Fuzi and other marching soldiers and defeating the bandits, and decapitating Ma Zhen, Fan Rong, Zhou Sheng and other one thousand five heads.

古文：下邳人谢安应募，率其宗亲设伏击凤，斩之，封安为平乡侯，邑三千户。
现代文：下邳人谢安响应征募，率领他的宗亲设埋伏攻击徐凤，并斩了他的头。朝廷封谢安做平乡侯，邑三千户。
English: In response to the recruitment, Xie An, a native of the Lower Yunnan Province, led his relatives in an ambush attack against Xu Feng and beheaded him. The imperial court made Xie An the governor of Pingxiang, with 3,000 households in the county.

古文：拜抚中郎将，督扬、徐二州事。
现代文：拜滕抚为中郎将，督导扬州、徐州事。
English: Baitenfu served as a middle-ranking general, supervising the affairs of Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：抚复进击张婴，斩获千馀人。
现代文：滕抚又进击张婴，斩获千余人。
English: Teng Fuzhi also attacked Zhang Ying, capturing more than a thousand people.

古文：赵序坐畏懦不进，诈增首级，征还弃市。
现代文：赵序犯了畏懦不进的罪，又诈增首级，被召回杀头示众。
English: Zhao Zheng committed the crime of cowardice, and also fraudulently increased the head rank, and was recalled to kill the head to show the public.

古文：又历阳贼华孟自称 黑帝 ，攻九江，杀郡守。
现代文：又历阳贼华孟自称 黑帝 ，进攻九江，杀郡守。
English: Moreover, Liyang thief Hua Meng, calling himself the Black Emperor, attacked Jiujiang and killed the county governor.

古文：抚乘胜进击，破之，斩孟等三千八百级，虏获七百馀人，牛、马、财物不可胜算。
现代文：滕抚乘胜进击，击破了，斩了华孟等三千八百首级，虏获七百多人，牛马财物不可数计。
English: Teng Fu successfully attacked, broke and cut off 3,800 heads of Hua Meng and others, captured more than 700 people, and seized countless cattle and horses.

古文：于是东南悉平，振旅而还。
现代文：于是东南全部平定，整顿军旅而还。
English: As a result, all of Southeast Asia was pacified, and the rectification of the military brigade was successful.

古文：以抚为左冯翊，除一子为郎。
现代文：朝廷封抚做左冯翊，除一子为郎。
English: The imperial court fief was left to Feng Xuan, with the exception of one son.

古文：抚所得赏赐，尽分于麾下。
现代文：滕抚所得赏赐，全部分给了部下。
English: All of Tengfuz's rewards were given to his subordinates.

古文：性方直，不交权势，宦官怀忿。
现代文：滕抚性格端方正直，不结交权势，宦官们怀恨在心。
English: Teng Fuzi's character was upright, he did not make friends with the powerful, and the eunuchs held grudges.

古文：及论功当封，太尉胡广时录尚书事，承旨奏黜抚，天下怨之。
现代文：等到论功行赏，太尉胡广当时录尚书事，承旨上奏罢黜滕，天下都怨恨起来。
English: When it came to the discussion of merit and reward, the world resented the fact that Lieutenant Hu Guang had recorded the matter in writing at the time.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：后来，滕抚死于家中。
English: He died at home.

古文：冯绲字鸿卿，巴郡宕渠人也，少学《春秋》、《司马兵法》。
现代文：◆冯绲传，冯绲字鸿卿，马郡宕渠人。年少时学《春秋》、《司马兵法》。
English: ◆Feng Yu Chuan, Feng Yu Zi Hongqing, a man from Ma County. He studied "Spring and Autumn" and "Sima Hei Ho" when he was young.

古文：父焕，安帝时为幽州刺史，疾忌奸恶，数致其罪。
现代文：父亲冯焕，安帝时做过幽州刺史，痛恨奸恶之徒，多次责罚他们的罪。
English: Feng Huan, An Di's father, had made Yuzhou stabbing history, hated evil-doers, and punished them for their sins many times.

古文：时玄菟太守姚光亦失人和。
现代文：当时玄菟太守姚光也是人事关系不协调。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzang's eunuch Yao Guang also had an uncoordinated personnel relationship.

古文：建光元年，怨者乃诈作玺书谴责焕、光，赐以欧刀。
现代文：建光元年，怨恨者就伪造玺书谴责冯焕与姚光，并赐以欧刀。
English: In the first year of Jianguang, the haters forged an imperial edict to condemn Feng Huan and Yao Guang, and gave them European swords.

古文：又下辽东都尉庞奋使速行刑，奋即斩光收焕。
现代文：又下诏给辽东都尉庞奋使他赶快执行刑罚，庞奋就斩了姚光，拘留冯焕。
English: He also issued an edict to Liaodong captain Pang Fen that he should quickly carry out the punishment. Pang Fen then beheaded Yao Guang and detained Feng Huan.

古文：焕欲自杀，绲疑诏文有异，止焕曰 大人在州，志欲去恶，实无他故，必是凶人妄诈，规肆奸毒。
现代文：冯焕想自杀，冯绲怀疑诏文有假，便阻止冯焕道 ：大人在州时，本想除去奸恶，实在没有别的原故，一定是凶人进行讹诈，施展毒计。
English: Feng Huan wanted to commit suicide, but Feng Yao suspected that the edict was fake, so he stopped Feng Huan, saying: When the adult was in the state, he wanted to remove the evil, there is really no other reason, it must be the murderer who blackmailed and carried out the poison plan.

古文：愿以事自上，甘罪无晚 焕从其言，上书自讼，果诈者所为，征奋抵罪。
现代文：我愿把事情向上反映，如果是真的，甘心服罪也不晚。 冯焕听从儿子的话，上书自陈原故，果然是狡诈者所为，皇上召庞奋抵罪。
English: I am willing to reflect the matter upwards, and if it is true, it is not too late to be willing to confess. Feng Huan obeyed his son's words, and submitted the letter from Chen Yuan, and it was indeed the work of a cunning person, and the emperor summoned Pang Fen to confess.

古文：会焕病死狱中，帝愍之，赐焕、光钱各十万，以子为郎中。
现代文：恰逢冯焕死在狱中，皇帝很同情他。赐给冯焕、姚光钱各十万，以子作郎中。
English: When Feng Huan died in prison, the emperor was very sympathetic to him. He gave Feng Huan and Yao Guang 100,000 yuan each, and made his son his son-in-law.

古文：绲由是知名。
现代文：冯绲从此很著名。
English: Feng Xuan has been famous ever since.

古文：家富好施，赈赴穷急，为州里所归爱。
现代文：冯绲家富好施舍，赈救穷急之人，被州里所爱戴。
English: Feng Rong's family is rich in charity, helping the needy, and is loved by the state.

古文：初举孝廉，七迁为广汉属国都尉，征拜御史中丞。
现代文：起初，被举为孝廉，七次升迁成为广汉属国都尉，又被征召做御史中丞。
English: At first, he was raised as a filial son, promoted seven times to become a provincial captain of Guanghan Province, and was conscripted as a junior middle-ranking officer.

古文：顺帝末，以绲持节督扬州诸郡军事，与中郎将滕抚击破群贼，迁陇西太守。
现代文：顺帝末年，朝廷派冯绲持符节督促扬州诸郡军事，与中郎将滕抚一道击破群贼，迁为陇西太守。
English: In the last years of Emperor Shun, the imperial court sent Feng Xuan to hold a festival to urge the military of Yangzhou counties, and together with Zhonglang, he defeated the bandits and moved to the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：后鲜卑寇边，以绲为辽东太守，晓喻降集，虏皆弭散。征拜京兆尹，转司隶校尉，所在立威刑。
现代文：晓谕大家投降，胡虏都停止活动各自散归原处。后来冯绲做了京兆尹转司隶校尉，所在之处树立威刑。
English: He ordered everyone to surrender, and the hooligans all stopped their activities and dispersed to their original locations. Later, Feng Qi made Jing Zhaoyun transfer to the rank of lieutenant colonel, and established coercive punishment wherever he was.

古文：迁廷尉、太常。
现代文：后来升为廷尉、太常。
English: He was later promoted to the rank of court lieutenant.

古文：时，长沙蛮寇益阳，屯聚积久，至延熹五年，众转盛，而零陵蛮贼复反应之，合二万馀人，攻烧城郭，杀伤长吏。
现代文：这时长沙蛮人进犯益阳，屯聚很久，到延熹五年，徒众更多，而零陵蛮贼也与他们勾结，合共二万余人，攻烧城郭，杀伤长吏。
English: At this time, the barbarians of Changsha invaded Yiyang and stayed there for a long time. By the fifth year of Yancheng, there were more followers, and the barbarians of Luling also colluded with them, a total of more than 20,000 people, attacked and burned the castle, and killed and injured the elders.

古文：又武陵蛮夷悉反，寇掠江陵间，荆州刺史刘度、南郡太守李肃并奔走荆南，皆没。
现代文：又有武陵蛮夷全部反叛，抢掠江陵一带，荆州刺史刘度、南郡太守李肃都弃官逃走，荆南都陷于敌手。
English: In addition, all the barbarians in Wuling rebelled and plundered the Gangneung area, Liu Du, the governor of Jingzhou, and Li Su, the governor of Nan County, abandoned their posts and fled, and Jingnan fell into the hands of the enemy.

古文：于是拜绲为车骑将军，将兵十馀万讨之，诏策绲曰 蛮夷猾夏，久不讨摄，各焚都城，蹈籍官人。
现代文：朝廷于是拜冯绲为车骑将军，带十余万讨伐他们，诏书上写给冯绲道： 蛮夷进犯中国，久不讨摄，各焚都城，践踏官民。
English: The imperial court then hailed Feng Xuan as a chariot and cavalry general, and led more than one hundred thousand troops to fight them. The imperial edict was written to Feng Xuan: "The barbarians invaded China, and it did not take long to capture them. They burned the capital city and trampled on the officials and the people."

古文：州郡将吏，死职之臣，相逐奔窜，曾不反顾，可愧言也。
现代文：州郡将吏，死职之臣，相互逃窜，曾不回头，多么惭愧。
English: The state and county generals, the subordinates who died in the line of duty, fled from each other and never looked back. How ashamed.

古文：将军素有威猛，是以擢授六师。
现代文：将军素有威猛之名，因此提拔授以六师。
English: The shogun was known to be powerful, so he was promoted to the 6th division.

古文：前代陈汤、冯、傅之徒，以寡击众，郅支、夜郎、楼兰之戎，头悬都街，卫、霍北征，功列金石，是皆将军所究览也。
现代文：前代陈汤、冯、傅之徒，以少击多，郅支、夜郎、楼兰之敌，头颅挂在大街示众，卫青、霍光北征，功列金石，这都是将军所全知的。
English: The previous generation of Chen Tang, Feng and Fu's followers, with fewer attacks more, the enemies of Zou Zhi, Yelang and Lou Lan, their heads hanging in the streets for the public to see, Wei Qing, Huo Guang's Northern Expedition, and Gong Li Jinshi, are all well known to the general.

古文：今非将军，谁与修复前迹。
现代文：现在如果不是将军，谁能修复前朝的功绩？
English: Now, if it is not the generals, who can repair the achievements of the previous government?

古文：进赴之宜，权时之策，将军一之，出郊之事，不复内御。
现代文：进退之事，权时之策，都由将军专管，出郊之事，不再由内管理。
English: Advances and retreats, as well as the policy of the time of power, are all under the exclusive control of the generals, and the matter of moving out of the suburbs is no longer managed from within.

古文：已命有司祖于国门。
现代文：已经下令有司在国门设饯行之礼。
English: An order has been issued to have a division set up at the gate of the country.

古文：《诗》不云乎：进厥虎臣，阚如虓虎，敷敦淮濆，仍执丑虏。
现代文：《诗经》不是说过： 进厥虎臣，阚如九虎虎，敷敦淮坟，仍执酉鬼虏。 
English: Didn't the "Song of Songs" say: "If you go into a tiger's lair, you'll come out like a tiger? If you dig a grave, you'll still come out like a ghost?"

古文：将军其勉之 
现代文：将军勉励吧！ 
English: General, cheer up!

古文：时，天下饑馑，帑藏虚尽，每出征伐，常减公卿俸禄，假王侯租赋，前后所遣将帅，宦官辄陷以折耗军资，往往抵罪。
现代文：这时天下饥荒，国库空虚，每次出兵打仗，常减公卿奉禄，向王侯借租赋，前后派遣将帅，宦官常诬赖他们折耗军资，往往抵罪。
English: At this time, the country was starving, the treasury was empty, and every time troops were sent out to fight, the income of the court nobles was often reduced, they borrowed money from the princes, and sent generals back and forth. The eunuchs often accused them of wasting military funds, and they often confessed their sins.

古文：绲性烈直，不行贿赂，惧为所中，乃上疏曰 势得容奸，伯夷可疑。荀曰无猜，盗跖可信。
现代文：冯绲性情刚烈正直，不行贿赂，但害怕被宦官们中伤，于是上疏道： 听信谗言，伯夷也可怀疑，如果不被猜疑，盗跖也属可信。
English: Feng Yao's temperament is tough and honest, he can't bribe, but he is afraid of being slandered by eunuchs, so Shang Shu said: If you listen to slander, Bo Yi can also be suspicious, if you are not suspected, theft is also credible.

古文：故乐羊陈功，文侯示以谤书。
现代文：所以乐羊子立了阵功，文侯拿给一筐谤书。
English: Therefore, Le Yangzi made great achievements, and Wen Hou gave him a basket of slanderous books.

古文：愿请中常侍一人监军财费 尚书朱穆奏绲以财自嫌，失大臣之节。
现代文：愿请派中常侍一人监督军中财费。 尚书朱穆奏冯绲用财自避嫌疑，有失大臣之节。
English: I would like to ask you to send one of the regular attendants to supervise the financial expenses of the army. Shangshu Zhu Muso Feng Qi used money to avoid suspicion, and lost the minister's section.

古文：有诏勿劾。
现代文：有诏书下来不许弹劾。
English: The emperor ordered that he not be prosecuted.

古文：绲军至长沙，贼闻，悉诣营道乞降。
现代文：冯绲的军队到了长沙，贼人闻讯，全部到营道求降。
English: Feng Xuan's army arrived in Changsha. When the thieves heard the news, they all went to the camp to surrender.

古文：进击武陵蛮夷，斩首四千馀级，受降十馀万人，荆州平定。
现代文：冯绲进击武陵蛮夷，斩首四千余级，受降十多万人，荆州得以平定。
English: Feng Hui invaded Wuling barbarians, beheaded more than four thousand, suffered more than one hundred thousand people, and Jingzhou was able to be pacified.

古文：诏书赐钱一亿，固让不受。
现代文：诏书赐钱一亿，冯绲坚决不受。
English: The imperial edict granted 100 million yuan in money, which Feng Yu resolutely refused to accept.

古文：振旅还京师，推功于从事中郎应奉，荐以为司隶校尉，而上书乞骸骨，朝廷不许。
现代文：冯绲带着军队回到京师，推功劳给从事中郎应奉，荐他作司隶校尉，而自己上书请求退休，朝廷不答应。
English: Feng Xuan returned to the Beijing Division with the army, praised Zhong Lang Ying Bong for his service, and recommended him to be a lieutenant of the Division, but the court did not agree to his request to retire.

古文：监军使者张敞承宦官旨，奏绲将傅婢二人戎服自随，又辄于江陵刻石纪功，请下吏案理。
现代文：监军使者张敞秉承宦官旨意，奉冯绲将傅婢二人戎服自随，又常在江陵刻石纪功，请求下诏给官吏审理。
English: Zhang Cang, the emissary of the overseer of the army, adhered to the eunuch's will, and asked Feng Yao to send Fu and his two maids to the army. He also often carved stone records in Gangneung, and requested the official to examine them.

古文：尚书令黄俊奏议，以为罪无正法，不合致纠。
现代文：尚书令黄俊奏议，认为罪无正法，不应纠缠。
English: Shang Shu ordered Huang Jun to make a report, arguing that the crime was not legitimate and should not be entangled.

古文：会长沙贼复起，攻桂阳、武陵，绲以军还盗贼复发，策免。
现代文：恰逢长沙盗贼又起，攻桂阳、武陵，冯绲因为军还而盗贼复发，被免职。
English: At the same time, the Changsha thieves rose up again and attacked Guiyang and Wuling. As the army retaliated, the thieves relapsed and Feng Yu was dismissed.

古文：顷之，拜将作大匠，转河南尹。
现代文：不久，拜将作大匠，转升河南尹。
English: Soon, Bai will become a great craftsman and will be promoted to Henan Yin.

古文：上言 旧典，中官子弟不得为牧人职 ，帝不纳。
现代文：上书道： 旧典，中官子弟不得为牧人职。 帝不采纳。
English: Shang Shodao: According to the old scripture, the children of middle-ranking officials are not allowed to be shepherds. The emperor will not accept it.

古文：复为廷尉。
现代文：又做了廷尉。
English: He also became a court lieutenant.

古文：时山阳太守单迁以罪系狱，绲考致其死。
现代文：当时山阴太守单迁因罪坐牢，冯绲考查定其死罪。
English: At that time, Shanyin Taishou Shanqian was in prison for the crime, and Feng Yu's investigation determined that it was a capital crime.

古文：迁，故车骑将军单超之弟，中官相党，遂共诽章诬绲，坐与司隶校尉李膺、大司农刘祐俱输左校。
现代文：单迁，故车骑将军单超的弟，中官互相包庇，于是一共诬告冯绲，与司隶校尉李膺、大司农刘俱输左校。
English: Because of the single relocation, the younger brother of the chariot and cavalry general Shanchao and the lieutenant general covered up for each other, so they all falsely accused Feng Qi, and the Sifu school lieutenant Li Qi and the senior Sifu farmer Liu Qi lost the left school.

古文：拜降虏校尉，终于家。
现代文：应奉上疏为绲等说情，得免罪。后来拜屯骑校尉，又为廷尉，死在官位。
English: He was pardoned after pleading guilty to being a traitor. Later, he died in his official position as a cavalry lieutenant and a court lieutenant.

古文：度尚字博平，山阳湖陆人也。
现代文：◆度尚传，度尚字博平，山阴湖陆人。
English: ◆Doshang Chuan, Doshang Zi Boping, Shanyinhu Lucheng.

古文：家贫，不修学行，不为乡里所推举。
现代文：家贫，没有完成学业，不被乡里所推举。
English: They are poor, have not completed their studies, and are not promoted by the village.

古文：积困穷，乃为宦者同郡侯览视田，得为郡上计吏，拜郎中，除上虞长。
现代文：多年困穷，便替宦者同郡侯览看管田亩，做了郡上的会计，拜为郎中，授职上虞长。
English: Having been poor for many years, he took care of the mu of farmland on behalf of the deceased and the county magistrate, worked as the county's accountant, served as a tutor, and was appointed to the post of county magistrate.

古文：为政严峻，明于发擿奸非，吏人谓之神明。
现代文：他办事很严厉，很会发觉坏人坏事，吏人称他为神明。
English: He is very strict in his work, and is very good at spotting bad people and bad things. Officials call him a god.

古文：迁文安令，遇时疾疫，谷贵人饑，尚开仓廪给，营救疾者，百姓蒙其济。
现代文：后来升为文安县令，碰上疾病流行，谷贵人饥，度尚开仓拿出粮食，营救生病的人，百姓得到救济。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Wen'an County magistrate. When there was an epidemic of disease and the nobles were starving, he opened the storehouse and took out grain to rescue the sick, and the people received relief.

古文：时冀州刺史朱穆行部，见尚甚奇之。
现代文：当时冀州刺史朱穆来巡视，看见度尚很觉奇怪。
English: At that time, Jizhou Zhishu Zhu Mu came to inspect, and it was very strange to see the degree.

古文：延熹五年，长沙、零陵贼合七八千人，自称 将军，入桂阳、苍梧、南海、交阯，交阯刺史及苍梧太守望风逃奔，二郡皆没。
现代文：延熹五年，长沙、零陵盗贼共七八千人，逢称 将军 ，进犯桂阳、苍梧、南海、交阝止，交阝止刺史和苍梧太守望风逃跑，二郡都陷入贼手。
English: In the past five years, a total of seven or eight thousand thieves from Changsha and Luling have attacked Guiyang, Cangwu, Nanhai, Jiaojie, Jiaojie, Zhishi, and Cangwutai in Changsha and Luling, calling themselves generals. Both counties have fallen into the hands of thieves.

古文：遣御史中丞盛修募兵讨之，不能克。
现代文：朝廷派御史中丞盛修募兵讨伐，不能胜利。
English: The imperial court sent Imperial Historian Chujo Shengxiu to recruit soldiers for the crusade, but he could not win.

古文：豫章艾县人六百馀人，应募而不得赏直，怨恚，遂反，焚烧长沙郡县，寇益阳，杀县令，众渐盛。
现代文：豫章艾县人六百余人，应募而没有得到赏钱，怨恨在心，便反叛，焚烧长沙郡县，进犯益阳，杀了县令，徒众更加多起来。
English: More than six hundred people from Yuanzhangai County applied for recruitment but did not get the reward money. With resentment in their hearts, they rebelled, burned Changsha County, invaded Yiyang, killed the county magistrate, and the number of followers increased.

古文：又遣谒者马睦，督荆州刺史刘度击之，军败，睦、度奔走。
现代文：朝廷又派谒者马睦，督荆州刺史刘度去攻打，打了败仗，马睦、刘度都逃跑了。
English: The imperial court also sent the eunuch, Ma Mu, and the governor of Jing Province, Liu Du, to attack and fight. They were defeated, and both Ma Mu and Liu Du fled.

古文：桓帝诏公卿举任代刘度者，尚书朱穆举向，自右校令擢为荆州刺史。
现代文：桓帝诏公卿推举代替刘度的人，尚书朱穆推举度尚，从右校令提升为荆州刺史。
English: Emperor Huan Zhao nominated Gongqing to replace Liu Du, and Shangshu Zhu Mu nominated Du Shang, who was promoted from Right Reviewer to Jingzhou Historian.

古文：尚躬率部曲，与同劳逸，广募杂种诸蛮夷，明设购赏，进击，大破之，降者数万人。
现代文：度尚亲自率领部下，和部下同劳逸，同时广招杂种诸蛮夷，明令悬赏，进击贼人，把贼人打得大败，投降的有数万人。
English: Dushang personally led his subordinates, worked and lived with his subordinates, at the same time recruited a wide range of barbarians, explicitly offered a reward, attacked the thieves, defeated the thieves, and tens of thousands of people surrendered.

古文：桂阳宿贼渠帅卜阳、潘鸿等畏尚威烈，徙入山谷。
现代文：桂阳老贼子头目卜阳、潘鸿等害怕度尚的威风，逃到了山谷之中。
English: Guiyang old thief leader Bu Yang, Pan Hong and others were afraid of the pompous style and fled to the valley.

古文：尚穷追数百里，遂入南海，破其三屯，多获珍宝。
现代文：度尚穷追数百里，贼人就到了南海，破其三屯，获珍宝甚多。
English: After hundreds of miles of relentless pursuit, the thieves reached the South China Sea, broke through the three towns, and obtained a lot of precious treasures.

古文：而阳、鸿等党众犹盛，尚欲击之，而士卒骄富，莫有斗志。
现代文：可是卜阳、潘鸿等党羽还有不少，度尚想继续追击，可是士卒骄傲富足，没有斗志。
English: However, Bu Yang, Pan Hong and other party members still have a lot of feathers, and they still want to continue to pursue, but the soldiers are proud and rich, and have no fighting spirit.

古文：尚计缓之则不战，逼之必逃亡，乃宣言卜阳、潘鸿作贼十年，习于攻守，今兵寡少，未易可进，当须诸郡所发悉至，尔乃并力攻之。
现代文：度尚考虑缓兵就不能作战，逼迫作战就会逃亡，于是扬言卜阳、潘鸿作贼十年，习惯于进攻和退守，现在兵士太少，不易进攻，应等候诸郡调兵全部到来，你们才和他们一并进攻。
English: It is not possible to fight while considering delaying the troops, and it will flee if forced to fight. Therefore, he threatened that Bu Yang and Pan Hong have been thieves for ten years, and they are used to attacking and retreating. Now there are too few soldiers, and it is not easy to attack. You should wait for all the troops from counties to arrive, and then you can attack together with them.

古文：申令军中，恣听射猎，兵士喜悦，大小皆相与从禽。
现代文：并且申令军中，让他们去打猎。兵士高兴，大小都一同打猎去了。
English: And he commanded the people that they should go and hunt, and the people were glad, and all the people went and hunted.

古文：尚乃密使所亲客潜焚其营，珍积皆尽。
现代文：度尚于是秘密派出亲信偷偷地烧毁营垒，珍宝积蓄都付之一炬。
English: Du Shang then secretly sent his cronies to secretly burn down the camp, and the treasures and savings were all burned.

古文：猎者来还，莫不泣涕。
现代文：打猎的回来，没有人不痛哭流涕。
English: No one comes back from hunting without tears in their eyes.

古文：尚人人慰劳，深自咎责，因曰 卜阳等财宝足富数世，诸卿但不并力耳。
现代文：度尚便向大家慰劳，深深责备自己，于是说 ：卜阳等人财宝足够供几代人使用，你们只怕不尽力罢了。
English: Du Shang then consoled everyone and deeply reproached himself, saying: Bu Yang's and others' treasure is enough for several generations to use, you just have to do your best.

古文：所亡少少，何足介意 众闻咸愤踊，尚敕令秣马蓐食，明旦，径赴贼屯。
现代文：丢失的东西少得可怜，何必放在心上。 众人听了都愤慨踊跃，自告奋勇，度尚下令秣马吃早饭，第二天清早，径赴贼人住地。
English: The things that were lost were pitifully few, so why take them to heart. After hearing this, the people were filled with indignation, and they volunteered to do their best. However, they ordered the horses to have breakfast, and early the next morning, they went to the thief's place.

古文：阳、鸿等自以深固，不复设备，吏士乘锐，遂大破平之。
现代文：卜阳、潘鸿等自以为营垒深固，不再防备，吏士乘锐气进攻，于是大破贼人，匪巢踏平了。
English: Bu Yang, Pan Hong and others thought that the camp was deep and solid, no longer prepared, and the officials used their sharpness to attack. As a result, the thieves were defeated and the bandits' nest was flattened.

古文：尚出兵三年，群寇悉定。
现代文：度尚出兵三年，群寇全部平定。
English: After three years of dispatching troops, the bandits have all been subdued.

古文：七年，封右乡侯，迁桂阳太守。
现代文：七年，封为右乡侯，升为桂阳太守。
English: Seven years later, he was given the title of "Uxiang Hou" and promoted to "Guiyang Dazhou."

古文：明年，征还京师。
现代文：第二年，召回京师。
English: The following year, the Kyoto division was recalled.

古文：时荆州兵朱盖等，征戍役久，财赏不赡，忿恚，复作乱，与桂阳贼胡兰等三千馀人复攻桂阳，焚烧郡县，太守任胤弃城走，贼众遂至数万。
现代文：这时荆州兵朱善等，出征戍守时间很久，财力不足，士兵怨恨，又作乱，与桂阳贼胡兰等三千多人又进攻桂阳，焚烧郡县，太守任胤弃城逃走，贼众多至数万人。
English: At this time, Zhu Shan and other soldiers from Jing Province, who had been conscripted for a long time, had insufficient financial resources, were resented by soldiers, and caused chaos. Together with Guiyang thief Hulan and other more than 3,000 people, they attacked Guiyang again, burning counties and counties. Taizhu Renyan abandoned the city and fled, and there were tens of thousands of thieves.

古文：转攻零陵，太守陈球固守拒之。
现代文：转攻零陵，太守陈球坚守城池拒敌。
English: Turning to attack Ziling, the grand marshal Chen Ku adhered to the castle and refused the enemy.

古文：于是以尚为中郎将，将幽、冀、黎阳、乌桓步骑二万六千人救球，又与长沙太守抗徐等发诸郡兵，并势讨击，大破之，斩兰等首三千五百级，馀贼走苍梧。
现代文：朝廷于是派度尚为中郎将，率领幽州、冀州、黎阳、乌桓步兵骑兵二万六千人救陈球，又与长沙太守抗徐等调集各郡兵马，并势讨击，大破贼人，斩胡兰等三千五百首级，余贼逃到苍梧。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent Shang Du as the middle-ranking general, leading the 26,000 infantry and cavalry from Yuzhou, Jizhou, Liyang and Wuhuan to rescue Chen Qiu, and also mobilized the soldiers and horses from all counties with the Changsha Taishou to resist Xu, and counterattacked the situation, smashed the thieves, cut off Hulan and other 3500 heads, and the rest of the thieves fled to Gansu.

古文：诏赐尚钱百万，馀人各有差。
现代文：朝廷下诏赏赐度尚钱百万，其余的人各有不同奖励。
English: Under the imperial edict, millions of doshang money were awarded, and the rest of the people received different awards.

古文：时抗徐与尚俱为名将，数有功。
现代文：这时抗徐与度尚都是名将，多次有功。
English: At this time, both Guan Xu and Du are still famous generals, and have won many times.

古文：徐字伯徐，丹阳人，乡邦称其胆智。
现代文：徐字伯徐，丹阳人，乡邦称他有胆量与智慧。
English: Xu Zi Bo Xu, a Danyang man, was praised by his hometown for his courage and wisdom.

古文：初试守宣城长，悉移深林远薮椎髻鸟语之人置于县下，由是境内无复盗贼。
现代文：开始试守宣城长，全部把深林远薮椎髻鸟语的土人迁至县下，从此境内不再有盗贼。
English: He began to test the defences of the mayor of Xuancheng, and moved all the natives from the deep forest to the county. From then on, there were no more thieves in the territory.

古文：后为中郎将宗资别部司马，击太山贼公孙举等，破平之，斩首三千馀级，封乌程东乡侯五百户。
现代文：后来做了中郎将宗资别部司马，击太山贼公孙举等，破平他们，斩首三千多级，封乌程东乡侯，享邑五百户。
English: Later, he became a middle-ranking official of the Department of Sima of the General Fund of the Imperial Family, and defeated the Tai Shan bandits, including Gongsun, and leveled them, beheaded more than three thousand, and fenced Wuching East Township, enjoying five hundred households.

古文：迁太山都尉，寇盗望风奔亡。
现代文：后来升为太山都尉，寇盗望风逃跑。
English: Later, he was promoted to captain of Taishan, and he escaped.

古文：及在长沙，宿贼皆平。
现代文：到长沙后，宿贼都平定了。
English: After arriving in Changsha, the trespassers were all subdued.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死在官位。
English: He died in office.

古文：桓帝下诏追增封徐五百户，并前千户。
现代文：桓帝下诏追增封徐五百户，连以前共一千户。
English: Emperor Kan issued an edict to increase the number of fiefs by 500, bringing the total to 1,000.

古文：复以尚为荆州刺史。
现代文：朝廷又派度尚做荆州刺史。
English: The imperial court also sent Du Shang to do Jingzhou stabbing history.

古文：尚见胡兰馀党南走苍梧，惧为已负，乃伪上言苍梧贼入荆州界，于是征交阯刺中张磐下廷尉。
现代文：度尚看到胡兰余党南逃到苍梧，怕被自己打败，于是假造消息说苍梧贼进犯荆州界，于是召交阝止刺史张盘下廷尉。
English: Du Shang saw that Hulan Yu fled south to Cangwu, afraid of being defeated by himself, so he falsified the news that the Cangwu bandits invaded Jingzhou, and then summoned the courtier Zhang Pan.

古文：辞状未正，会赦见原。
现代文：辞状尚未写就，被赦免了。
English: He was pardoned before the resignation letter was written.

古文：磐不肯出狱，方更牢持械节，狱吏谓磐曰 天恩旷然而君不出，可乎 磐因自列曰 前长沙贼胡兰作难荆州，馀党散入交阯。
现代文：张盘不肯出狱，正是更牢持械节，狱吏对张盘说： 天恩空前而君不出，行吗？ 张盘于是自己辩白道： 从前长沙贼胡兰作难荆州，余党散入交阝止。
English: Zhang Pan did not want to be released from prison, it was the day of holding weapons more firmly. The prison officers said to Zhang Pan: "Heaven's grace is unprecedented, and you will not come out, okay?" Zhang Pan then defended himself: "Formerly, the Changsha thief Hulan made a difficult situation, and the rest of the party dispersed into the intersection.

古文：磐身婴甲胄，涉危履险，讨击凶患，斩殄渠帅，馀尽鸟窜冒遁，还奔荆州。
现代文：我身披甲胄，冒着危险，讨击凶恶的贼人，杀了他们的头目，余党全部鸟窜逃走，回到荆州。
English: I put on my armor and risked my life to fight the vicious thieves, killed their leader, and the rest of the party fled back to Jingzhou.

古文：刺史度尚惧磐先言，怖畏罪戾，伏奏见诬。
现代文：刺史度尚怕我先讲，怕招罪过，上奏冤枉我。
English: I'm afraid to speak first, afraid to offend, and I'm afraid to be wronged.

古文：磐备位方伯，为国爪牙，而为尚所枉，受罪牢狱。
现代文：我备位方伯，是国家的爪牙，而被度尚所冤枉，受罪牢狱。
English: I am a provincial official, a minion of the state, and I have been wronged and sentenced to prison.

古文：夫事有虚实，法有是非。
现代文：事情有虚有实，法律有是有非。
English: Things are both true and false, and laws are both right and wrong.

古文：磐实不辜，赦无所除。
现代文：我实在无过错，赦无所除。
English: I am truly blameless, beyond reproach.

古文：如忍以苟免，永受侵辱之耻，生为恶吏，死为敝鬼。
现代文：如果忍受下来，永受侵辱之耻，生为恶吏，死为敝鬼。
English: If you put up with it, you will forever suffer the shame of insult and humiliation, be born as a villain, and die as a scoundrel.

古文：乞传尚诣廷尉，面对曲直，足明真伪。
现代文：请求传度尚到廷尉这里，面对曲直，足明真伪。
English: The request has not yet been passed on to the courtier here, and in the face of distortion, it is clear that it is false.

古文：尚不征者，磐埋骨牢槛，终不虚出，望尘受枉 廷尉以其状上，诏书征尚到廷尉，辞穷受罪，以先有功得原。
现代文：度尚不征者，我埋骨牢槛，一辈子不出去，希望澄清冤枉。 廷尉把他的状子送上去，皇上下诏书召度尚到廷尉处，辞穷受罪，因先有功得到原谅。
English: For those who have not yet been conscripted, I have buried my bones firmly, and will not go out for the rest of my life, hoping to clarify the injustice.The imperial lieutenant sent his letter to the court, and the imperial edict summoned the duke to the imperial lieutenant's office, resigned to the crime, and was pardoned because he had meritorious service.

古文：磐字子石，丹阳人，以清白称，终于庐江太守。
现代文：张盘字子石，丹阳人，以清白著称，死在沪江太守任上。
English: Zhangpan Zhizi Shi, a native of Danyang, famous for his innocence, died in the position of Hujiang governor.

古文：尚后为辽东太守，数月，鲜卑率兵攻尚，与战，破之，戎狄惮畏。
现代文：度尚后来做了辽东太守，数月后，鲜卑人率兵攻度尚，和他作战，击破对方，从此戎狄都很害怕。
English: Du Shang later became the governor of Liaodong. A few months later, Xianbei led the troops to attack Du Shang, fought with him, and defeated the other side. From then on, Yongdi was very afraid.

古文：年五十，延熹九年，卒于官。
现代文：年五十，延熹九年，死于官位。
English: In 1950, nine years later, he died in office.

古文：杨璇字机平，会稽乌伤人也。
现代文：◆杨璇传，杨璇字机平，会稽乌伤人。
English: ◆Yang Xi Chuan, Yang Xi Zi Ji Ping, Cai Qi Wuxuan.

古文：高祖父茂，本河东人，从光武征伐，为威寇将军，封乌伤新阳乡侯。
现代文：高祖父杨茂，本河东人，跟随光武帝征伐，做了威寇将军，封为乌伤新阳乡侯。
English: His great-great-grandfather Yang Mao, a native of the east of the river, followed Emperor Guangwu in the conquest, became the general of Wiko, and was named the village head of Wuchai Xinyang.

古文：建武中就国，传封三世，有罪国除，因而家焉。
现代文：建武年间，到了国都，传封三世，后因有罪被革除，因此回了老家。
English: During the Jianwu era, he went to the national capital and was proclaimed the third generation of emperors. Later, he was excommunicated for his crime, so he returned to his hometown.

古文：父扶，交阯刺史，有理能名。
现代文：父亲杨扶，交阝止刺史，有办事能干的名声。
English: His father, Yang Fu, had a reputation for being able to get things done.

古文：兄乔，为尚书，容仪伟丽，数上言政事，桓帝爱其才貌，诏妻以公主，乔固辞不听，遂闭口不食，七日而死。
现代文：兄杨乔，做了尚书，容仪伟丽，多次上书议论政事，桓帝喜欢他的才貌，下诏要把公主嫁给他，杨乔坚决辞让，皇上不听，于是闭口不吃东西，七天竟死了。
English: His elder brother Yang Qiao, who was well-educated and had a beautiful appearance, wrote several times to discuss political affairs. Emperor Huan liked his talent and issued an edict to marry the princess to him. Yang Qiao resolutely refused to give in. The emperor did not listen, so he kept his mouth shut and did not eat, and died seven days later.

古文：璇初举孝廉，稍迁，灵帝时为零陵太守。
现代文：杨璇开始被举为孝廉，过了些时，灵帝时做了零陵太守。
English: Yang Xuan was initially raised as a filial son, and after some time, he became the guardian of Emperor Ling's tomb.

古文：是时苍梧、桂阳猾贼相聚，攻郡县，贼众多而璇力弱，吏人忧恐，璇乃特制马车数十乘，以排囊盛石灰于车上，系布索于马尾，又为兵车，专彀弓驽，克期会战。
现代文：这时苍梧、桂阳狡猾的盗贼相聚，攻打郡县、贼人众多而杨璇兵力薄弱，官吏百姓非常担心害怕。杨璇于是特制马车数十辆，用一排袋子盛石灰于车上，系布索于马尾，又做兵车，专彀弓弩，约定日期会战。
English: At this time, the cunning thieves of Cangwu and Guiyang gathered together to attack counties and counties. There were many thieves, but Yang Hui's army was weak. The officials and people were very worried and afraid. Yang Hui therefore made dozens of special carriages, used a row of bags to put lime on the car, tied a cloth at the horse's tail, and made a chariot, specially made bows and arrows, and set a date for the battle.

古文：乃令马车居前，顺风鼓灰，贼不得视，因以火烧布，布然马惊，奔突贼阵，因使后车弓弩乱发，钲鼓鸣震。群盗波骇破散，追逐伤斩无数，枭其渠帅，郡境以清。
现代文：于是叫马车在前面，顺风鼓灰，贼人不得张目，就用火烧布，马受惊，奔突贼阵，再叫后车弓弩乱发，征鼓鸣声震天，群贼惊骇四散，追逐伤斩贼人无数，将其头目枭首示众，郡境以内得以安宁。
English: So the carriage was called in front, the wind blew, and the thieves could not open their eyes, so they burned the cloth with fire, the horses were frightened, and they ran into the thieves, and then the rear carriage was called, and the bows and arrows were scattered, and the drums were sounded, and the band of thieves scattered in terror, chasing and injuring innumerable thieves, and showing the heads of the thieves to the public, so that there was peace within the county.

古文：荆州刺史赵凯，诬奏璇实非身破贼，而妄有其功。
现代文：荆州刺史赵凯，诬奏杨璇不是亲身破贼，而妄有其功。
English: Jingzhou assassin Zhao Kai, falsely played Yang Wei, did not personally break the thief, but had his own merit.

古文：璇与相章奏，凯有党助，遂槛车征璇。
现代文：杨璇相与章奏，赵凯有党羽相助，于是朝廷用槛车将杨璇召回。
English: Yang Yuxiang and Zhang Song, Zhao Kai had the help of the party, so the court used the threshold car to recall Yang Yuxiang.

古文：防禁严密，无由自讼，乃噬臂出血，书衣为章，具陈破贼形势，及言凯所诬状，潜令亲属诣阙通之。
现代文：防禁严密，没有机会辩明理由，于是咬臂出血，用血写成章奏，具体陈述破贼的形势，并且说到赵凯所诬状，暗地叫亲属到朝廷通报。
English: The ban was strictly enforced, and there was no opportunity to find out the reason, so he bit his arm until it bled, wrote a chapter in blood, specifically stated the situation of the thief, and secretly called his relatives to the imperial court to inform them of the false accusation made by Zhao Kai.

古文：诏书原璇，拜议郎，凯反受诬人之罪。
现代文：诏书原谅了杨璇，拜为议郎，赵凯反受诬告他人之罪。
English: The edict pardoned Yang Xuan, Bai for being a mediator, and Zhao Kai for the crime of falsely accusing others.

古文：璇三迁为勃海太守，所在有异政，以事免。
现代文：杨璇三次升迁做了勃海太守，所到之处都有异政表现，后因事免职。
English: Yang Hui was promoted three times to become the governor of Bohai, and there were signs of dissent everywhere he went. He was later removed from his post.

古文：后尚书令张温特表荐之，征拜尚书仆射。
现代文：后来尚书令张温特上表推荐他，征拜尚书仆射。
English: Later, Shang Shuling Zhang Winter recommended him to the table and solicited Shang Shuling.

古文：以病乞骸骨，卒于家。
现代文：因病请求退休，死在家中。
English: Due to illness, he asked to retire and died at home.

