古文：达奚武，字成兴，代人也。
现代文：达奚武，字成兴，代地人。
English: Darenwu, the character Chengxing, the actor.

古文：祖眷，父长，并为镇将。武少倜傥好驰射，贺拔岳征关右，引为别将。
现代文：他少年时倜傥潇洒，喜好骑马射箭。贺拔岳征讨关中，命他为副将。
English: When he was a boy, he was a dashing young man who liked to ride horses and shoot arrows. During the negotiations for the conquest of Mt. He Batur, he was appointed vice-general.

古文：及岳为侯莫陈悦所害，武与赵贵收尸归平凉，同翊载周文帝。从平悦，封须昌县伯。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦害死，他与赵贵替贺拔岳收尸并运至平凉，两人一起跟随宇文泰平定侯莫陈悦，他被封爵为须昌县伯。
English: He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue. He and Zhao Gui collected the corpse of He Batyue and transported it to Pingliang. The two of them together followed Yu Wentai in purging Hou Mo Chen Yue. He was knighted as the Count of Suchang County.

古文：大统初，自大丞相府中兵参军出为东秦州刺史。
现代文：大统初年，他出任东秦州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he served as the governor of East Qin.

古文：齐神武与窦泰、高敖曹三道来侵，周文欲并兵击泰，诸将多异议，唯武及苏绰与周文意同，遂禽之。
现代文：高欢与窦泰、高敖曹三路人马前来侵犯，宇文泰准备合力进击窦泰，将领们大多持不同意见，惟有他和苏绰与宇文泰的意见相同。两军交战，生擒窦泰。
English: Gao Huan, Dou Tai, and Gao Yao Cao all came to invade, and Wu Wentai prepared to jointly attack Dou Tai. The generals mostly held different opinions, but he and Su Cao shared the same opinion with Wu Wentai. The two armies fought, and Dou Tai was killed.

古文：周文进图弘农，遣武从两骑觇候。
现代文：宇文泰进而攻打弘农，派达奚武率两名骑兵前去侦察。
English: Uwentai then attacked Hongnong and sent two cavalrymen led by Dabing Wu to reconnoitre.

古文：武与其候奇遇，即交战，斩六级，获三人而反。
现代文：他们与敌人的侦察部队相遇，双方交手，达奚武等斩杀敌兵六名，俘获三名返回。
English: They met with the enemy's reconnaissance troops, and the two sides fought. Dabongwu and others killed six enemy soldiers and captured three.

古文：齐神武趣沙苑，周文复遣武觇之。
现代文：高欢进攻沙苑，宇文泰又派他去侦察。
English: Gao Huan attacked Sha Yuan, and Wu Wentai sent him to reconnaissance.

古文：武从三骑，皆衣敌人衣，至暮，下马潜听其军号，历营若警夜者，有不如法者，往往挞之。
现代文：他带了三名骑兵，都穿上敌人的服装，晚上，他们下马偷听敌军军号的内容，发现各营如果巡夜的不按规定执行，往往被鞭打。
English: He took three cavalrymen with him, all dressed in the enemy's clothing. In the evening, they dismounted to eavesdrop on the content of the enemy's bugle call and found that battalions were often whipped if they did not carry out night patrols according to regulations.

古文：具知敌情以告，周文遂从破之。
现代文：他了解到详细的敌情后回去报告，宇文泰便打败了敌人。
English: After he learned the details of the enemy situation, he went back to report, and Uwentai defeated the enemy.

古文：进爵高阳郡公。
现代文：他被晋爵为高阳郡公。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Goyang County.

古文：四年，周文援洛阳，武为前锋，与李弼破莫多娄贷文。
现代文：大统四年，宇文泰救援洛阳，他任前锋，与李弼一起大败莫多娄贷文。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, Yu Wentai came to the rescue of Luoyang. He played as a striker, and together with Li Wei, defeated Modo Yu Credit.

古文：及居重位，不持威仪，行常单马，左右从一两人而已，门外不施戟，恆昼掩一扉。
现代文：他又率军进至河桥，奋力作战，斩杀东魏司徒高敖曹。他没有显达时，生活奢侈浮华，身居高官重位之后，外出却不要仪仗。常单身独骑出去，最多带一两个随从。府第的大门外不设持戟的岗哨，白天大门只关上一扇。
English: He also led the army into the river bridge, fought hard, and killed the East Wei scholar Gao Bing Cao. When he did not show up, he lived a luxurious and flashy life. After being a high-ranking official, he did not want to go out. He often rode out alone, with a maximum of one or two followers. There was no sentry holding a scepter outside the gate of the prefecture, and only one gate was closed during the day.

古文：或谓曰： 公位冠群后，何轻率若是？ 
现代文：有人问他： 您位冠群臣，为何这样轻视自己？ 
English: Someone asked him: Your Excellency, why do you despise yourself so?

古文：武曰： 吾昔在布衣，岂望富贵！
现代文：他回答 ：我过去为布衣百姓时，哪里想着会有荣华富贵！
English: He replied: "When I was a commoner, I never thought I would become rich and famous!"

古文：今日富贵，不可顿忘畴昔。
现代文：今天有了荣华富贵，不能马上忘掉过去。
English: With today's prosperity and wealth, we cannot immediately forget the past.

古文：且天下未平，国恩未报，安可过事威容乎？ 
现代文：况且天下还未平定，朝廷的大恩大德还没有报答，怎么能过分地追求威仪呢？ 
English: Moreover, the world has not yet been pacified, and the great kindness of the imperial court has not yet been repaid. How can we excessively pursue dignity?

古文：言者惭而退。
现代文：劝告他的人很惭愧地退去。
English: Those who had advised him to leave were ashamed.

古文：武之在同州，时旱，武帝敕武祀华岳。
现代文：他在同州时遇上旱灾，武帝命他去华山祭祀求雨。
English: When he was in the same province, there was a drought, and Emperor Wu ordered him to go to Huashan to pray for rain.

古文：岳庙旧在山下，常所祈祷。
现代文：华岳庙过去就在山下，是人们经常祈祷的地方，他对僚属们说： 我位居三公，不能协调阴阳。
English: Huayue Temple used to be at the foot of the mountain, a place where people often prayed. He said to his colleagues: I am in the Three Kingdoms, and cannot coordinate yin and yang.

古文：武谓僚属曰： 吾备位三公，不能燮理阴阳，不可同于众人，在常祀所，必须登峰展诚，寻其圣奥。 岳既高峻，人迹罕通。
现代文：所以不能与别人一样也在山下庙内祭祀，必须登上峰顶以表达我的诚心，并寻找雨神的奥秘。 华山极为高峻，人迹罕至。
English: Therefore, I cannot offer sacrifices in the temple at the foot of the mountain like other people, but must climb to the top of the mountain to express my sincerity and search for the secrets of the rain god.

古文：武年逾六十，唯将数人攀藤而上，于是稽首祈请。
现代文：他年逾六十，只带着几个随从攀援葛藤登上峰顶，于是叩首祈祷降雨。
English: He is more than 60 years old, and he climbed to the top of the peak with only a few followers to help Kudoh, so he bowed his head and prayed for rain.

古文：晚不得还，即于岳上藉草而宿。
现代文：晚上无法下山，他们便在山顶铺上草住宿。
English: Unable to descend the mountain at night, they slept on the grass at the top of the mountain.

古文：梦一白衣来执武手曰： 快辛苦。 
现代文：他梦见一个白衣人握着他的手说： 好辛苦！ 
English: He dreamed of a man in white holding his hand and saying: "What hard work!

古文：甚相嘉尚。
现代文：极为夸赞。
English: Highly commendable.

古文：武遂惊觉，益用祗肃。
现代文：他被惊醒，更加虔诚严肃。
English: He was startled awake, more pious and serious.

古文：至旦，云雾四起，俄而澍雨，远近沾洽。
现代文：清晨，山中云雾四起，不久降下大雨，远近都被润泽。
English: In the early morning, clouds and fog rose in the mountains, and heavy rain soon fell. People far and near were drenched.

古文：武帝闻之，玺书劳武，赐彩百匹。
现代文：他的性情贪婪吝啬。他任大司寇，库房中有一根万钉金带，是当时的宝物，他却从库中拿回家。
English: He was greedy and miserly by nature. He was the grand steward, and in the storeroom there was a gold band with thousands of nails, which was a treasure at the time, but he took it home from the storeroom.

古文：祐性聪敏，有行检。袭之背贼东归，祐年十四，事母以孝闻。及长，有膂力。周文在原州，召为帐下亲信。
现代文：管理库房的人告诉了晋公宇文护，宇文护因为他功高勋重，不便张扬他的过失，因而把金带赐给了他。人们议论起来都很鄙视他。蔡祐，字承先，祖先为陈留国人，后来徙居高平。他聪明敏捷，颇有道德。长大后臂力过人，宇文泰将他召至帐下当作亲信。
English: The person in charge of the storehouse told Jin Gong about Uwentai. Uwentai gave him the gold belt because he was highly decorated and it was inconvenient to publicize his fault. People despised him. Cai Yu, the word inheritor, whose ancestors were from Chenliu, later moved to Gaoping. He was smart, agile, and quite moral. After he grew up, he was more powerful than others, and Uwentai called him to his account as a close friend.

古文：及迁夏州，以祐为都督。
现代文：宇文泰迁至夏州，任他为都督。
English: Uven Tai moved to Xiazhou and was appointed as the new governor.

古文：侯莫陈悦害贺拔岳，诸将迎周文，周文将赴之。
现代文：侯莫陈悦害死贺拔岳，诸将迎接宇文泰。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue caused the death of He Batyue, and all will welcome Yu Wentai.

古文：夏州首望弥姐元进等阴有异计。周文微知之，召元进等入计事，既而目祐。
现代文：宇文泰准备出发，夏州官吏弥姐、元进等人暗中酝酿计谋，宇文泰知道了，便召集元进等人到府中议事，不久用眼色暗示蔡祐。
English: As Wu Wentai prepared to set off, the officials of Xiazhou, including Mi Jie and Yuan Jin, were secretly plotting. When Wu Wentai learned of this, he summoned Yuan Jin and the others to the central government office for a discussion, and soon hinted to Cai Yu with his eyes.

古文：祐即出外，衣甲持刀直入，叱元进而斩之，并其党伏诛。
现代文：他立即到外面换上盔甲，握刀直接闯入，叱责元进并将他杀死，又将他的党羽全部处决。
English: He immediately went outside to change his armor, grabbed a knife and directly broke in, scolded the general and killed him, and executed all of his followers.

古文：一坐皆战栗。
现代文：在座的人都惊恐颤栗。
English: Everyone present was terrified and trembling.

古文：于是与诸将盟，同心诛悦。
现代文：宇文泰于是与将领们设盟发誓，要同心诛杀侯莫陈悦。
English: Therefore, Yu Wentai vowed to form an alliance with the generals and fight against Hou Mo Chen Yue with one heart.

古文：周文以此重之，谓祐曰： 吾今以尔为子，尔其父事我。 
现代文：宇文泰因此很看重他，对他说： 我今天把你看作儿子，你要把我当成你的父亲。 
English: As a result, Uwentai valued him very highly and said to him, "Today I see you as a son, you should see me as your father."

古文：栗迎孝武于潼关，以前后功封苌乡县伯。
现代文：他后来跟随宇文泰生擒窦泰，收复弘农，征战沙苑，都立有战功。
English: Later, he followed Uwen Tai Sheng and Dou Tai to recover Hongnong and fight in Shayuan. Both of them had distinguished themselves in battle.

古文：后从禽窦泰，复弘农，战沙苑，皆有功。
现代文：他又跟随宇文泰战于河桥。
English: He also followed Uven Thai to the Battle of Heqiao.

古文：授平东将军、太中大夫。又从战河桥，祐下马步斗，左右劝乘马以备急卒。祐怒之曰： 丞相养我如子，今日岂以性命为念？ 
现代文：他下马与敌兵决斗，随从的人劝他骑上马以应付紧急情况，他发怒说： 丞相待我如亲生儿子，今天怎么能考虑自己的生命？ 
English: He dismounted to fight a duel with the enemy soldiers, his attendants urged him to mount his horse to deal with the emergency, he angrily said: "Jose treated me like his own son, how can I consider my life today?

古文：遂率左右十余人，齐声大呼，杀伤甚多。
现代文：便率领身边的十多个人一齐大声呼喊，杀伤很多敌兵。
English: He then led more than ten people around him to shout loudly, killing and wounding many enemy soldiers.

古文：敌以其无继，围之十余重。
现代文：敌人认为他们没有后援，将他们包围十多重。
English: The enemy thought they had no support and surrounded them ten times.

古文：祐乃弯弓持满，四面拒之。
现代文：蔡祐弯弓搭箭，四面抵抗。
English: Cai Yu bent his bow and arrows, resisting on all sides.

古文：东魏人乃募厚甲长刀者，直进取祐。
现代文：东魏军便组织起穿厚甲拿长刀的人直接进攻蔡祐。
English: The Eastern Wei army then organized people wearing thick armor and carrying long swords to directly attack Cai Yu.

古文：去祐可三十步，左右劝射之。祐曰： 吾曹性命，在此一矢耳，岂虚发哉！ 
现代文：敌人离他只有三十步时，左右的人劝他射箭，他说 ：我们的性命就在这一支箭上啊，怎么能虚发呢？ 
English: When the enemy was only thirty paces away from him, the people around him urged him to shoot an arrow. He said, "Our lives depend on this arrow. How can we waste it?"

古文：敌人可十步，祐乃射之，中其面，应弦而倒，便以槊刺杀之。敌乃稍却。祐乃徐引退。
现代文：敌人距离他们只有十来步，他才将箭射出，射中敌兵的面部，敌兵倒下。蔡祐便用长矛刺杀，东魏军队才退却，蔡祐也带着人马慢慢退去。
English: The enemy was only about ten paces away from them when he shot the arrow, hitting the enemy soldier in the face, and the enemy soldier fell down. Cai Yu then stabbed him with a spear, and the Eastern Wei army retreated. Cai Yu also slowly retreated with his men.

古文：是战也，西军不利，周文已还。
现代文：这一战，西魏军队失利，宇文泰已经撤退。
English: In this battle, the West Wei army was defeated, and Wu Wentai withdrew.

古文：祐至弘农，夜与周文会。
现代文：蔡祐到达弘农，晚上与宇文泰会面。
English: Cai Yu arrived in Hongnong and met with Yu Wentai in the evening.

古文：周文字之曰： 承先，尔来吾无忧矣！ 
现代文：宇文泰写给他一句话： 承先，你来了我就没有忧虑了！ 
English: Uwentai wrote him a sentence: First of all, when you come, I won't have any worries!

古文：周文惊，不得寝，枕祐股上乃安。
现代文：宇文泰因为受惊，不能入睡，枕在蔡祐的大腿上才安稳熟睡。
English: Because he was frightened, he couldn't fall asleep, so he slept soundly with a pillow on Cai Yu's lap.

古文：以功进爵为公，授京兆郡守。
现代文：他因立功晋爵为公，被授予京兆郡太守的官职。
English: He was promoted to the peerage for his meritorious service to the public, and was awarded the official post of the governor of Jingzhao County.

古文：高仲密举北豫来附，周文率军援之，与齐神武遇于芒山。
现代文：东魏的高仲密献出北豫州降服，宇文泰率军接应他，与高欢的军队在邙山相遇。
English: Gao Zhongmi of the Eastern Wei Dynasty offered the surrender of North Henan Province, and Wu Wentai led the army to meet him, and met Gao Huan's army in Lushan.

古文：六官建，授兵部中大夫。
现代文：蔡祐这时身穿明光闪亮的铁甲，所向披靡。齐军都说 ：这是一只铁打的猛兽啊！ 
English: At this time, Cai Yu was wearing bright and shiny iron armor, and he was invincible. The Qi army all said: This is a ferocious beast!

古文：周文不豫，祐与晋公护、贺兰祥等侍疾。
现代文：纷纷躲避他。宇文泰患病，他与晋公宇文护、贺兰祥等人侍候他。
English: They all tried to avoid him.Uwentai fell ill, and he and Jin Gong Uwentao, Horan Xiang and others waited on him.

古文：及周文崩，祐悲慕不已，遂得气疾。
现代文：宇文泰去世，蔡祐悲痛不已，因此生病。
English: After the death of Uwentai, Cai Yu was overcome with grief and became ill.

古文：周孝闵帝践祚，拜少保。
现代文：周孝闵帝称帝，封蔡祐为少保。
English: Zhou Xiaohui was proclaimed emperor, and Cai Yu was appointed as a minor protector.

古文：祐与尉迟纲俱掌禁兵。
现代文：他与尉迟纲一起掌握禁军。
English: He and his subordinates controlled the Forbidden Army.

古文：时帝信任司会李植等，谋害晋公护。
现代文：这时闵帝信任司会李植等人，阴谋害死宇文护。
English: At this time, Li Zhi and other members of the Emperor Xizong's Trust Division plotted to kill Uwenguo.

古文：祐每泣谏，帝不听。
现代文：他常哭泣着劝谏，闵帝听不进去。
English: He often wept and pleaded with the emperor, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：寻而帝废。
现代文：不久闵帝被废除。
English: Emperor Xuan was soon deposed.

古文：明帝之为公子也，与祐特相友昵，及即位，礼遇弥隆。加拜小司马。
现代文：明帝没有即位前，与蔡祐关系亲密，即位后，对他的礼遇更加厚重，授予他小司马的职务。
English: Before he ascended the throne, Emperor Ming had a close relationship with Cai Yu. After he ascended the throne, he treated him with even greater courtesy, awarding him the position of Xiao Sima.

古文：御膳每有异味，辄以赐祐，群臣朝宴，每被别留，或至昏夜，列炬鸣笳，送祐还宅。
现代文：御膳中若有不同寻常的山珍海味，必分一份赐给蔡祐，群臣宴会，他常被明帝单独留下来，有时到深夜，明帝才派人排列火炬，吹着胡笳将他送回府第。
English: If there were unusual mountain and sea delicacies in the meal, a portion would be given to Cai Yu, a group of courtiers at the banquet. He was often left alone by Emperor Ming. Sometimes, it was late at night before Emperor Ming sent someone to line up the torches and send him back to the capital with a whistle.

古文：祐以过蒙殊遇，常辞疾避之。
现代文：他不愿过分地蒙受殊遇，因而常常称病避开。
English: He didn't want to be over-privileged, so he often avoided it by claiming to be ill.

古文：至于婚姻，尤不愿结于权要。
现代文：至于儿女婚嫁，更不愿与权臣政要们相联结。
English: When it comes to their children's weddings, they are even more reluctant to be associated with powerful officials and politicians.

古文：寻以本官权镇原州。
现代文：朝廷命他为宜州刺史，没有上任，便去世了。
English: The imperial court appointed him to write the history of Yizhou, but he died before taking office.

古文：顷之，授宜州刺史。未之部，卒于原州。祐少与乡人李穆布衣齐名，常相谓曰： 大丈夫当建立功名，以取富贵，安能久处贫贱。 
现代文：他少年时与同乡人李穆名望相等，二人常互相告诫说 ：大丈夫应当建立功名，以博取富贵，怎么能长久地处于贫贱之中呢！ 
English: When he was young, he was as famous as his fellow villager, Li Mu, and the two of them often admonished each other, "It's okay to build a reputation to gain wealth, but how can you stay poor for a long time!"

古文：言讫，各大笑。
现代文：说完便都仰天大笑。
English: After saying this, they all laughed out loud.

古文：后皆如言。及从征伐，为士卒先。
现代文：后来两个人的作为都如自己所立下的志向一样。每次征战，他都冲在士卒前面。
English: Later, the actions of the two men were the same as his own ambitions. Every time he went to war, he rushed in front of the soldiers.

古文：军还，诸将争功，祐终无所竞。
现代文：军队回来后，将领们都争夺功劳，他却从不自夸。
English: When the troops returned, the generals all claimed credit, but he never boasted.

古文：周文每叹之曰： 承先口不言勋，孤当代其论叙。 
现代文：宇文泰常感叹说 ：承先自己不夸说功勋，我当替他叙说。 
English: Uven Tai often lamented, "Since my predecessor did not boast of his merits, I should recount them for him."

古文：性节俭，所得禄秩，皆散宗族，身死之日，家无余财。
现代文：他生性节俭，得到的俸禄，都分给宗族里的人。去世时家里没有多余的钱财。
English: He was frugal by nature, and the salary he received was divided among the members of his family. At the time of his death, there was no extra money in the family.

