古文：五国约而攻秦，楚王为从长，不能伤秦，兵罢而留于成皋。
现代文：赵、楚、魏、燕、韩五国联合进攻秦国，楚考烈王作为五国联盟的头领，但是这次进攻没能击溃秦国，于是五国联军停止了进攻，驻扎在成皋。
English: The five countries of Zhao, Chu, Wei, Yan and Han jointly attacked Qin, with King Chu Kao as the leader of the five-nation alliance. However, this attack failed to defeat Qin, so the five-nation alliance stopped the attack and stationed in Chengdu.

古文：魏顺谓市丘君曰： 五国罢，必攻市丘，以偿兵费。
现代文：魏顺对市丘的长官说： 五国收兵之后必然会攻打市丘，以此来弥补军费。
English: Wei Shun said to the commander of the city hill: After the five countries withdraw their troops, they will inevitably attack the city hill in order to make up for the military expenses.

古文：君资臣，臣请为君止天下之攻市丘。 
现代文：您如果资助我，我愿意替您阻止诸侯来进攻市丘。 
English: If you support me, I am willing to stop the lords from attacking the city.

古文：市丘君曰： 善。 
现代文：市丘的长官就说： 好吧。 
English: And the magistrate of the hill said, All right.

古文：因遣之。
现代文：于是派遣他出使楚国。
English: So he sent Chunping back to Zhao.

古文：魏顺南见楚王曰： 王约五国而西伐秦，不能伤秦，天下且以是轻王而重秦，故王胡不卜交乎? 
现代文：魏顺南下拜见楚考烈王说： 大王邀集五国军队向西进攻秦国，却无功而返，天下人将因此看轻大王而尊重秦国，那么大王为什么不不测验一下诸侯对您的态度呢？ 
English: Wei Shun went south to see King Chu Kao, saying: The Great King invited the armies of five countries to attack Qin to the west, but they returned without success. The world will therefore look down on the Great King and respect Qin. So why doesn't the Great King test the attitude of the princes towards you?

古文：楚王曰： 奈何? 
现代文：楚王说： 应该怎么测验呢？ 
English: Chu Wang said: How should the test be done?

古文：魏顺曰： 天下罢，必攻市丘以偿兵费。
现代文：魏顺说： 此次战争停止之后，五国必然进攻市丘以补偿战争中的损失。
English: Wei Shun said: After the cessation of this war, the five countries will inevitably attack the hill to compensate for the losses in the war.

古文：王令之匆攻市丘。
现代文：大王何不命令他们不要进攻市丘。
English: Why doesn't the Great King order them not to attack the city?

古文：五国重王，且听王之言而不攻市丘；不重王，且反王之言而攻市丘。
现代文：五国如果尊重您，就会听从命令您的命令，不进犯市丘；如果他们不尊重您，就会违背大王的命令而进攻市丘。
English: If they respect you, they will obey your orders and not attack the city; if they do not respect you, they will violate the king's orders and attack the city.

古文：然则王之轻重必明矣。 
现代文：这样一来，大王声威的轻重必然可以看得分明了。 
English: In this way, the importance of Wang Shenwei can be clearly seen.

古文：故楚王卜交而市丘存。
现代文：楚王照此行动以测验五国的态度，而市丘也就因此保住了。
English: King Chu followed this action to test the attitude of the five countries, and the city hill was thus saved.

