古文：秦客卿造谓穰侯曰； 秦封君以陶，藉君天下数年矣。
现代文：秦国客卿造对秦国相国穰侯魏冉说： 自从秦王把陶邑封给您，至今您在秦国已经掌权好几年了。
English: Qin Guo Keqing Zou said to Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran, the vassal of Wei Ran.

古文：攻齐之事成，陶为万乘，长小国，率以朝天子，天下必听，五伯之事也；攻齐不成，陶为邻恤，而莫之据也。
现代文：如果你能攻下齐国的话，您的封地陶邑作万乘大国就指日可待了，这样您可以成为小国之长，小国的领袖，诸侯无不俯首听命，这可以同春秋时代的五霸相比啊！如不攻齐，邻国必然对陶邑虎视耽耽，从此永无宁日。
English: If you can conquer Qi, your fiefland, Tao, will become a great power in no time. In this way, you can become the head of a small country, the leader of a small country, and the princes will all bow down and obey your orders. This can be compared to the Five Dynasties in the Spring and Autumn Period! If you do not conquer Qi, the neighboring countries will inevitably hold back from attacking Tao, and there will never be peace.

古文：故攻齐之于陶也，存亡之机也。
现代文：所以进攻齐国，这对陶邑来说，是存亡的关键。
English: Therefore, attacking Qi Province is the key to survival for Tao Yu.

古文： 君欲成之，何不使人谓燕相国曰： 圣人不能为时，时至而弗失。
现代文：您如果想得到成功，为什么不派人去燕国对燕国相国公孙操说：即使是品格、智慧最高超的圣人，他也不能创造时势，时机来了就不能把它放过。
English: If you want to succeed, why don't you send someone to Yan Guo to say to Yan Guo's father-in-law Sun Quan: Even if he is a saint of the highest character and wisdom, he can't create the situation, and when the time comes, he can't miss it.

古文：舜虽贤，不遇尧也，不得为天子；汤、武虽贤，不当桀、纣不王。
现代文：虞舜虽贤，如果不遇到唐尧，他们也不会成为天子，商汤、周武王虽贤，如果不是遇到昏君夏桀和商纣，他们也不会称王于天下。
English: Although Gu Yu was a wise man, if he had not met Tang Xuan, he would not have become the son of Heaven. Although Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu were wise men, if they had not met Emperor Xia and Shang Yu, they would not have become kings of the world.

古文：故以舜、汤、武之贤，不遭时，不得帝王。
现代文：所以即使是贤能的虞舜、商汤和周武王，他们如果不遇到时机，也都不可能成为帝王。
English: Therefore, even the virtuous Yuxuan, Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang could not become emperors if they did not have the opportunity.

古文：令攻齐，此君之大时也已。
现代文：现在诸侯要进攻齐国，这是您的大好时机啊！
English: Now the princes want to attack Qi, this is your great opportunity!

古文：因天下之力，伐雠国之齐，报惠王之耻，成昭王之功，除万世之害，此燕之长利，而君之大名也。
现代文：凭借诸侯之力，攻打敌对的齐国，既可以报复燕惠王以前的耻辱，又可以完成燕昭王未尽的功业，还可以为燕国除掉万世之害，这是燕国长远的利益所在，也是您建成大名的良好时机。
English: Relying on the power of the princes to attack the hostile state of Qi, you can not only avenge the previous disgrace of Yan Hui Wang, but also complete the unfinished work of Yan Zhao Wang, and also remove the eternal harm for Yan Guo. This is the long-term interest of Yan Guo, and it is also a good opportunity for you to build a great name.

古文：《书》云，树德莫如滋，除害莫如尽。
现代文：《尚书》上说： 做好事要愈多愈好除祸害要愈彻底愈好。 
English: "Shangshu" said: The more good deeds you do, the better. The more thoroughly you eliminate evil, the better.

古文：吴不亡越，越故亡吴；齐不亡燕，燕故亡齐。
现代文：吴国不乘势灭掉越国，越国反而灭了吴国；齐国不乘势灭掉燕国，燕国反而几乎灭了齐国。
English: Wu did not take advantage of the situation to wipe out Yue, but Yue wiped out Wu; Qi did not take advantage of the situation to wipe out Yan, but Yan almost wiped out Qi.

古文：齐亡于燕，吴亡于越，此除疾不尽也。
现代文：齐国几乎被燕国所灭，吴国终于被越国灭掉，这都是因为除害不彻底的缘故。
English: Qi State was almost wiped out by Yan State, and Wu State was finally wiped out by Yue State, all of which were due to incomplete elimination of harm.

古文：以非此时也，成君之功，除君之害，秦卒有他事而从齐，齐、赵合，其雠君必深矣。
现代文：您如果不乘此时机完成您的功业，除掉您的祸害，一旦秦国发生其他的变故，而与齐国联合，您的敌对势力就更加强大了。
English: If you do not take advantage of this opportunity to complete your work and eliminate your scourge, once other changes occur in Qin and you unite with Qi, your hostile forces will become even stronger.

古文：挟君之雠以诛于燕，后虽悔之，不可得也已。
现代文：以这样的仇敌来讨伐燕国，到那时，后悔也来不及了。
English: With such an enemy to fight against Yan's country, by that time, it is too late to regret.

古文：君悉燕兵而疾僭之，天下之从君也，若报父子之仇。
现代文：如果您动员燕国的兵力，马上消灭齐国，诸侯也一定会像父子报仇那样，争先恐后地响应您的行动。
English: If you mobilize the military forces of Yan and immediately destroy Qi, the princes will surely scramble to respond to your actions, just like a father and son taking revenge.

古文：诚能亡齐，封君于河南，为万乘，达途于中国，南与陶为邻，世世无患。愿君之专志于攻齐，而无他虑也。  
现代文：如果真正能够灭掉齐国，我们将把黄河以南一带作为您的封地，您将会比作万乘之国，身居中原，四通八达，南与陶邑为邻，永世没有祸患，希望您专心攻打齐国，不要再有其它的想法了。 
English: If we can really eliminate Qi, we will regard the area south of the Yellow River as your fiefdom. You will be compared to the country of Wanxiang. You live in the Central Plains, have access to all directions, and the south is adjacent to Taoyuan. There will never be any disaster. I hope you will concentrate on attacking Qi and not have any other thoughts.

