古文：吉为相，有驭吏嗜酒，从吉出，醉呕丞相车上。
现代文：原文西汉丙吉担任丞相时，有一个嗜酒如命的车夫随侍其外出，酒醉后呕吐在他的车上。
English: When the Western Han Dynasty's Heung-Gil served as chancellor, there was an alcoholic coachman who accompanied him on a trip and vomited in his car after getting drunk.

古文：西曹主吏白欲斥之。
现代文：西曹主吏将这件事情告诉丞相，想责罚车夫。
English: The chief magistrate told the chancellor about the incident and wanted to punish the driver.

古文：吉曰： 以醉饱之失去士，使此人复何所容？
现代文：丙吉阻止他说： 因为酒醉的小过错而惩罚一个勇士，以后哪里还能有他容身之处呢？
English: Bingji stopped him and said, "If you punish a warrior for a minor drunken mistake, where will there be room for him in the future?

古文：西曹第忍之，此不过污丞相车茵耳。 
现代文：西曹你忍耐一下吧，他不过是弄脏了丞相的车垫子罢了。 
English: Sicao, please be patient. He just soiled the Prime Minister's car cushion.

古文：此驭吏，边郡人，习知边塞发奔命警备事。
现代文：这个车夫来自边塞，熟悉边塞紧急军情传递文书到京城的过程。
English: This coachman comes from the border town and is familiar with the process of passing emergency military information from the border town to the capital.

古文：尝出，适见驿骑持赤白囊，边郡发奔命书驰至。
现代文：有一次外出，他正好看见传递军书的人拿着红、白两色的袋子，就知道边塞的郡县肯定有紧急军情发生。
English: Once, when he was out, he happened to see the person handing over military documents holding a red and white bag, and he knew that there must be a military emergency in the border counties.

古文：驭吏因随驿骑至公车刺取，知虏入云中、代郡，遽归。见吉白状，因曰： 恐虏所入边郡，二千石长吏有老病不任兵马者，宜可豫视。 
现代文：于是车夫就跟着传书的人到官署去打探消息，果然得到了匈奴攻入了云中郡和代郡的消息，于是他立刻回府见丞相说了这件事，还建议说： 胡虏所进攻的边郡恐怕有不少年老多病、无法打仗的官员，大人应该先了解一下有关情况。 
English: So the coachman followed the courier to the government office to find out the news, and sure enough, he got the news that the Huns had invaded Yunzhong County and Dai County. So he immediately went back to the government to see the prime minister and told him about the matter. He also suggested, "I'm afraid that there are many officials in the border counties attacked by the Huns who are too old and sick to fight. Adults should first understand the situation."

古文：吉善其言，召东曹案边长吏科条其人。
现代文：丙吉认为他的话很对，便立刻召集东曹官员，查询两郡官吏的档案，分条记录下他们的年纪、经历等。
English: Bingji thought his words were right, so he immediately summoned Dong Cao officials, inquired into the files of officials in the two counties, and recorded their ages, experiences, etc.

古文：未已，诏召丞相、御史，问以所入郡吏。
现代文：果然，事情尚未完全办好时，皇帝便下诏召见丞相和御史大夫，询问有关受到匈奴侵袭的边郡的官吏情况。
English: Indeed, when the matter was not completely settled, the emperor issued an imperial edict summoning the prime minister and the chief historian to inquire about the officials in the border counties that had been invaded by the Huns.

古文：吉具对。御史大夫卒遽不能详知，以得谴让；而吉见谓忧边思职，驭吏力也。
现代文：丙吉回答得有条有理，而御史大夫因仓促间无法知道详情，遭到了皇帝的责备；而丙吉之所以能得到称赞，被认为关心边塞、尽忠职守，其实是靠了车夫的帮助。
English: Bungei answered in a well-organized manner, and the imperial historian was reproached by the emperor for being unable to know the details in a hurry; and Bungei was praised for being concerned about the border and being faithful to his duties, but he actually relied on the help of the coachman.

古文：进任山西巡检，有军校诣阙讼进者。
现代文：宋朝人郭进担任山西巡检时，有一个手下军官进京告御状，控告郭进不守法度。
English: When Guo Jin, a person of the Song Dynasty, was in charge of Shanxi inspection, one of his subordinate officers went to Beijing to lodge a complaint, accusing Guo Jin of not abiding by the law.

古文：上召，讯知其诬，即遣送进，令杀之。
现代文：天子召入询问，知道他是诬告，就立即将他遣返，交给郭进，让他任意处置。
English: Tianzi was called in for questioning. Knowing that he was making a false accusation, he was immediately sent back and handed over to Guo Jin for him to deal with as he saw fit.

古文：会并寇入，进谓其人曰： 汝能讼我，信有胆气。
现代文：当时正赶上并州贼寇入侵，郭进就对这个军官说： 你敢诬告我，胆量的确不小。
English: At that time, he was just catching up with the invasion of the bandits from Anhui Province, and Guo Jin said to this officer: "You dare to falsely accuse me, you really have a lot of guts."

古文：今赦汝罪，能掩杀并寇者，即荐汝于朝；如败，即自役河，毋污我剑也。 
现代文：现在我暂时不杀你，如果你能将并州敌寇消灭掉，我就上书朝廷推荐你；如果战败，你就自己去投河，不要玷污了我的宝剑。 
English: Now I won't kill you for the time being. If you can wipe out the Nianzhou enemy bandits, I will recommend you to the imperial court in a letter. If you are defeated, you can go and throw yourself into the river. Don't tarnish my precious sword.

古文：其人踊跃赴斗，竟大捷。
现代文：于是，这个军官奋不顾身，拼死作战，最终大获全胜。
English: As a result, the officer gave his all, fought to the death, and ultimately won a complete victory.

古文：进即荐擢之。
现代文：郭进也果真推荐他升了官。
English: Guo Jin also really recommended him for promotion.

古文：容小过者，以一长酬；释大仇者，以死力报。
现代文：冯述评容忍小的过失，能得到对方以长处作为回报；饶恕大仇人，更能得到对方不顾生死的报答。
English: Feng Shuo commented that if one tolerates small faults, one can get the other side's strengths in return; if one forgives a great enemy, one can get the other side's rewards regardless of life and death.

古文：唯酬报之情迫中，故其长触之而必试，其力激之而必竭。
现代文：对方回报的心意聚集在内心，平时他会慢慢寻找机会报答你，而到了紧急关头，他更会竭尽全力来帮助你。
English: The other person's desire to repay is concentrated in his heart. In normal times, he will slowly look for opportunities to repay you, but in an emergency, he will do his best to help you.

古文：彼索过寻仇者，岂非大愚？
现代文：那些睚眦必报的人，难道不是很愚蠢吗？
English: Aren't those who have to publish everything stupid?

