古文：东昏侯东昏侯宝卷，字智藏，高宗第二子也。
现代文：东昏侯萧宝卷字智藏，是高宗的第二个儿子。
English: Xiao Bao, the second son of Gao Zong, was the second son of Gao Zong.

古文：本名明贤，高宗辅政后改焉。
现代文：本名明贤，高宗辅政后改为现在的名字。
English: His real name was Myoken, but he changed it to his current name after he became Gao Zongfu's assistant.

古文：建武元年，立为皇太子。
现代文：建武元年立为皇太子。
English: Kenmu became crown prince in 1861.

古文：永泰元年七月，己酉，高宗崩，太子即位。
现代文：永泰元年七月三十日，高宗逝世，太子即皇帝位。
English: On July 30, Yongtai I, Gaozong died, and the crown prince became emperor.

古文：八月，丁巳，诏雍州将士与虏战死者，复除有差。
现代文：八月初八，下诏雍州凡与索虏战死的将士家属，免除赋税徭役等。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：又诏辨括选序，访搜贫屈。
现代文：又诏考察搜求选拔晋升人才，调查了解贫穷委屈之人。
English: He also ordered an inspection to search for talents to be selected and promoted, and to investigate people who understand the grievances of poverty.

古文：庚申，镇北将军晋安王宝义进号征北大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十一日，命镇北将军晋安王萧宝义进号征北大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Northern General of Jinan, King Xiao Baoyi, issued a call to the Northern General, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：南中郎将建安王宝夤为郢州刺史。
现代文：任命南中郎将建安王萧宝寅为郢州节度史。
English: The appointment of Nan Zhongro will make Jian'an King Xiao Baotang the history of the festival in Zhangzhou.

古文：冬，十月，己未，诏删省科律。
现代文：冬十月十一日，立褚氏为皇后，赐给王公以下官员钱数量不等。
English: In the winter, on October 11th, Lijun became the empress, and gave varying amounts of money to officials below the prince.

古文：诏三品清资官以上应食禄者，有二亲或祖父母年登七十，并给见钱。
现代文：永元元年春正月初一，大赦天下，改元。诏研究策试选拔秀才、孝廉，考评各级各部门政绩。十四日，皇帝来到南郊举行祠祭。诏三品清资官员以上应当食禄的人员，如果双亲中有二位祖父母年满七十岁，一律赐给现钱。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the year of Yongyuan, the emperor pardoned the whole country and changed the era. He made a study of the measures to try to select outstanding talents, filial piety, and evaluate the political achievements of various departments at all levels. On the 14th, the emperor came to the southern suburb to hold the ancestral shrine festival. He gave cash to all those who should receive a stipend if they have two grandparents who are over seventy years old.

古文：癸卯，以冠军将军南康王宝融为荆州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，任命冠军将军南康王萧宝融为荆州刺史。
English: On the 26th, the champion general Nankang Wang Xiao Bao Rong was appointed as the history of Jingzhou.

古文：二月，癸丑，以北中郎将邵陵王宝攸为南兖州刺史。
现代文：二月初七，任命北中郎将邵陵王萧宝攸为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the Northern Middle Lord appointed the Shaolin King, Xiao Baoyu, as the governor of Southern Luzhou.

古文：是月，太尉陈显达败绩于马圈。
现代文：本月，太尉陈显达在马圈战败。
English: This month, Second Lieutenant Chen Xianda was defeated in a horse race.

古文：夏，四月，己巳，立皇太子诵，大赦，赐民为父后爵一级。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，立萧诵为皇太子，大赦天下，赐老百姓为父后者爵一级。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month of the summer, Xiao Zheng made Xiao Zheng the crown prince, pardoned the world, and gave the people a first-class peerage for the latter's father.

古文：甲戌，以宁朔将军柳惔为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命宁朔将军柳忄炎为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Ningshuo General Liu Xuanyan as the leader and Southern Qin Erzhou as the historian.

古文：五月癸亥，以抚军大将军始安王遥光为开府仪同三司。
现代文：五月癸亥日，任命抚军大将军始安王萧遥光为开府仪同三司。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in May, the general of the Fuzhou army, Shi'an Wang Xiao Yaoguang, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：六月，己酉，新除右卫将军崔惠景为护军将军。
现代文：六月初五，任命新上任的右卫将军崔惠景为护军将军。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the newly appointed right guard general Cui Huijing was appointed as the escort general.

古文：癸亥，以始兴内史范云为广州刺史。
现代文：十九日，任命始兴内史范云为广州刺史。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Fan Yun, the chief historian of Shixing, as the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：甲子，诏原雍州今年三调。
现代文：二十日，下诏免除雍州地区今年各项赋税徭役。
English: On the 20th, the Yongzhou region was exempted from all kinds of taxes and fees this year.

古文：秋，七月，丁亥，京师大水，死者众，诏赐死者材器，并赈恤。
现代文：秋七月十三日，京师发大水，淹死大量人众，下诏赐给死者棺材葬器，并赈济灾民。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, a large amount of water was released in Beijing, drowning a large number of people. The emperor gave coffins and funerals to the dead and provided relief to the victims.

古文：八月，乙巳，蠲京邑遇水资财漂荡者今年调税。
现代文：八月初二，宽免京城遭水灾资财漂荡之人今年的税役。
English: On the second day of August, those who suffered from the floods in Beijing and lost their money were exempted from this year's tax.

古文：又诏为马圈战亡将士举哀。
现代文：又诏为马圈战亡将士举哀。
English: He also issued a proclamation to mourn the fallen soldiers of the Horse Circle.

古文：丙午，扬州刺史始安王遥光据东府反。诏曲赦京邑，中外戒严。
现代文：十三日，扬州刺史始安王萧遥光凭据东府举兵反叛，下诏权且赦免京城，内外实行戒严。
English: On the 13th, King Xiao Yaoguang of Yangzhou, who is said to have initiated the history of Yangzhou, raised an army and rebelled, and issued an edict to pardon the capital city. Martial law was imposed both at home and abroad.

古文：尚书令徐孝嗣以下屯卫宫城。
现代文：尚书令徐孝嗣以下都要驻守宫城。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Xu Xiaozhi and his subordinates to be stationed in Miyagi.

古文：遣领军将军萧坦之率六军讨之。
现代文：派遣领军将军萧坦之统率全军讨伐反叛。
English: He dispatched the leading general Xiao Tianzhong to lead the whole army to fight against the rebels.

古文：戊午，斩遥光，传首。
现代文：十五日，斩杀萧遥光并传首示众。
English: On the 15th, he killed Xiao Yaoguang and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：己未，以征北大将军晋安王宝玄为南徐、兖二州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任命征北大将军晋安王萧宝玄为南徐、兖二州刺史。
English: On the 16th, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Jinan Wang Xiao Bao Xuan, was appointed as the governor of Nanxu and Jian Erzhou.

古文：己巳，尚书令徐孝嗣为司空，右卫将军刘暄为领军将军。
现代文：二十六日，任命尚书令徐孝嗣为司空，右卫将军刘暄为领军将军。
English: On the 26th, Shang Shuling appointed Xu Xiaozhi as the second-in-command and the right-guard general Liu Wei as the leading general.

古文：闰月，丙子，以江陵公宝览为始安王。
现代文：闰八月初三，封江陵公萧宝览为始安王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the leap year, Xiao Baozhang, the Prince of Jiangling, was appointed as the King of Shi'an.

古文：虏伪东徐州刺史沈陵降，以为北徐州刺史。
现代文：任命投降的虏伪为东徐州刺史，沈陵为北徐州刺史。
English: Krupo, who surrendered, was appointed as the governor of East Xuzhou, and Shenling as the governor of North Xuzhou.

古文：九月，丁未，以辅国将军裴叔业为兖州刺史，征虏长史张冲为豫州刺史。
现代文：九月初五，任命辅国将军裴叔业为兖州刺史，征虏长史张冲为豫州刺史。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the year, Baishuye, the general of the Auxiliary Army, was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and Zhang Chong, the chief historian of the Conscript Army, was appointed as the chief historian of Henan.

古文：壬戌，以频诛大臣，大赦天下。
现代文：十日，有感于频繁诛杀大臣而大赦天下。
English: On the 10th, he pardoned the world because he was moved by the frequent assassinations of ministers.

古文：辛未，以太子詹事王莹为中领军。
现代文：二十九日，任命太子詹事王莹为中领军。
English: On the 29th, Prince Zhan Zhi Wang Ying was appointed as the middle leader.

古文：冬，十月，乙未，诛尚书令、新除司空徐孝嗣，右仆射、新除镇军将军沈文季。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，诛杀新任司空尚书令徐孝嗣及新任镇军将军右仆射沈文季。
English: On the winter of October 23rd, Xu Xiaozhi, the newly appointed Secretary of the Air Force, and Shen Wenzhi, the newly appointed general of the town army, were killed.

古文：乙巳，以始兴内史颜翻为广州刺史，征虏将军沈陵为越州刺史。
现代文：乙巳日，任命始兴内史颜翻为广州刺史，征虏将军沈陵为越州刺史。
English: On the same day, Yan Fu, a historian from Shixing, was appointed as the historian of Guangzhou, and Shen Ling, a conscript general, was appointed as the historian of Yuezhou.

古文：丙寅，以冠军将军王鸿为徐州刺史。
现代文：十一月十五日，太尉江州刺史陈显达在寻阳举兵反叛。
English: On November 15th, Chen Xianda, a lieutenant of the Jiangzhou Provincial Military Region, raised an army and rebelled in Huanyang.

古文：十二月，癸未，以前辅国将军杨集始为秦州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，派遣护军将军崔慧景加平南将军、都督众军南讨事。二十五日，任命冠军将军王鸿为徐州刺史。
English: In December, Yang Jishu, the former general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the chief historian of Qin.

古文：甲申，陈显达至京师，宫城严警，六军固守。
现代文：十三日，陈显达兵逼京师，宫城实行戒严，全军固守。
English: On the 13th, Chen Xianda's soldiers forced the Beijing Division to retreat, martial law was imposed in Miyagi, and the entire army held fast.

古文：乙酉，斩陈显达，传首。
现代文：十四日，斩杀陈显达并传首示众。
English: On the 14th, Chen Xianda was beheaded and his head displayed to the public.

古文：丁亥，以征虏将军邵陵王宝攸为江州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任命征虏将军邵陵王萧宝攸为江州刺史。
English: On the 16th, the conscript general Shao Ling Wang Xiao Baoyu was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：二年春，正月，壬子，以辅国将军张冲为南兖州刺史。
现代文：永元二年春正月十二日，任命辅国将军张冲为南兖州刺史。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the second year of the Spring of Yongyuan, Zhang Chong, the general of the Auxiliary Province, was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：庚午，诏讨豫州刺史裴叔业。
现代文：庚午日，下诏讨伐豫州刺史裴叔业。
English: On the morning of the second day of the seventh lunar month, the imperial edict was issued to crack down on the Yuanzhou assassin Pei Shuhei.

古文：二月，癸未，以黄门郎萧寅为司州刺史。
现代文：二月十三日，任命黄门郎萧寅为司州刺史。
English: On February 13th, Huangmen Lang Xiao Yin was appointed as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：乙卯，遣平西将军崔慧景率众军伐寿春。
现代文：十六日，任命卫尉萧懿为司州刺史，征讨寿春。
English: On the 16th, he appointed the guard lieutenant Xiao Jun to be the secretary of the state to collect the history of Shuchun.

古文：丁未，以新除冠军将军张冲为南兖州刺史。
现代文：十九日，裴叔业病死，其兄子裴植向索虏献寿春城投降。三月初三，任命辅国将军张冲为司州刺史。
English: On the 19th, Pei Shuye died of illness, and his elder brother Pei Zhi surrendered Spring City to the Sorbs. On the 3rd of March, Zhang Chong, the general of the Auxiliary Province, was appointed as the governor of the province.

古文：崔慧景于广陵举兵袭京师。
现代文：崔慧景在广陵举兵南齐书袭击京师。
English: Cui Huijing raised an army in Guangling to attack the Beijing Division.

古文：壬子，右卫将军左兴盛督京邑水步众军。
现代文：十二日，任命右卫将军左兴盛都督京城水步各军。
English: On the 12th, he appointed the right guard general Zuo Xingsheng as the governor of the capital, and the troops marched to the capital.

古文：南徐州刺史江夏王宝玄以京城纳慧景。
现代文：南徐州刺史江夏王萧宝玄打开京城放崔景慧进来。
English: Xiao Baoxuan, the king of southern Xuzhou and Jiangxia, donated the capital to Cui Huijing.

古文：乙卯，遣中领军王莹率众军屯北篱门。
现代文：十五日，派遣中领军王莹率众军驻守北篱门。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Ying, the leader of the middle army, sent troops to garrison the North Hedgerow.

古文：壬戌，慧景至，莹等败绩。
现代文：二十二日，崔景慧后至，王莹大败。
English: On the 22nd, Cui Huijing arrived, and Wang Ying was defeated.

古文：甲子，慧景入京师，宫内据城拒守。
现代文：二十四日，崔景慧攻入京师，宫内据城死守。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Cui Jinghui entered the capital division, and the imperial palace was defended to the death.

古文：豫州刺史萧懿起义救援。
现代文：豫州刺史萧懿起兵救援。
English: Xiao Wei, the governor of Yuzhou, started a rescue operation.

古文：夏四月，癸酉，慧景弃众走，斩首。
现代文：夏四月初四，崔景慧放下部队逃跑了，被抓住斩首。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 4th month of the 5

古文：诏曲赦京邑、南徐兖二州。
现代文：下诏权且赦免京城、南徐、兖二州。
English: He issued a decree and pardoned Beijing, Nanxu and Handan.

古文：乙亥，以新除尚书右仆射萧懿为尚书令。
现代文：初六，任命新上任的尚书右仆射萧懿为尚书令。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the newly-appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Jie Xiaoqi, as Shang Shuling.

古文：丙子，以晋熙王宝嵩为南徐州刺史。
现代文：初七，任命晋熙王萧宝嵩为南徐州刺史。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, King Xiao Baosong of Jinxi was appointed as the leader of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：五月，乙巳，以虏伪豫州刺史王肃为豫州刺史。
现代文：五月乙巳日，任命虏伪为豫州刺史，王肃为豫州刺史。
English: On May 21st, Rui Guo was appointed as the Henan Provincial Historian, and Wang Su was appointed as the Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：戊申，以桂阳王宝贞为中护军。
现代文：初九，任命桂阳王萧宝贞为中护军。
English: In the ninth month of the year, Xiao Baozhen, the king of Guiyang, was appointed as the middle protector.

古文：己酉，江夏王宝玄伏诛。
现代文：初十，诛杀江夏王萧宝玄。
English: Xiao Baoxuan, the king of the Southern Qi River, is said to have been killed by a sword.

古文：壬子，大赦。
现代文：十三日，大赦天下。
English: Jinshi, Nanqi is the leader of the world.

古文：乙丑，曲赦京邑、南徐兖二州。
现代文：二十六日，权且赦免京城、南徐、兖二州。
English: On the 26th, the authority also pardoned Beijing, Nanxu, and Zhangjiakou.

古文：戊辰，以始安王宝览为湘州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命始安王萧宝览为湘州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Xiao Baozhang, the King of Xi'an, was appointed as the historian of Hunan.

古文：六月，庚寅，车驾于乐游苑内会，如三元，京邑女人放观。
现代文：六月二十二日，皇上来到乐游苑举行内会，如三元节，允许京城女人出来观看。
English: On June 22, the emperor came to Le Youyuan to hold a private meeting, such as the Three Yuan Festival, and allowed the women of Beijing to come out to watch.

古文：戊戌，以新除冠军将军张冲为郢州刺史，守五兵尚书陆慧晓为南兖州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命新授职的冠军将军张冲为郢州刺史，守五兵尚书陆慧晓为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 30th, Zhang Chong, the newly appointed champion general, was appointed as the history of Zhangzhou, and the guard of five soldiers, Shang Shul, Lu Huixiao, was appointed as the history of South Zhangzhou.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，以骠骑司马张稷为北徐州刺史。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命骠骑司马张稷为北徐州刺史。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhang Ye, the rider of the horse, was appointed as the chief historian of North Xuzhou.

古文：八月，丁酉，以新除骠骑司马陈伯之为豫州刺史。
现代文：八月三十日，任命新授职的骠骑司马陈伯之为豫州刺史。
English: On August 30th, Chen Boching, the newly-appointed horse rider, was appointed as the official historian of Yuzhou.

古文：甲申夜，宫内火。
现代文：十七日夜，宫内失火。
English: On the evening of the 17th, a fire broke out in the palace.

古文：冬，十月，己卯，害尚书令萧懿。十一月，辛丑，以宁朔将军张稷为南兖州刺史。
现代文：冬十月初五，任命宁朔将军张稷为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the winter, Ningshuo General Zhang Ye was appointed as the first governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：甲寅，西中郎长史萧颖胄起义兵于荆州。
现代文：十八日，西中郎长史萧颖胄在荆州举兵起义。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Yingyao, the West Middle School's headmaster, led an uprising in Jingzhou.

古文：十二月，雍州刺史梁王起义兵于襄阳。
现代文：十二月，雍州刺史梁王在襄阳举兵起义。
English: In December, the prince of Yongzhou, Liang Wang, raised an army and revolted in Yangyang.

古文：戊寅，以冠军长史刘绘为雍州刺史。
现代文：十三日，任命冠军长史刘绘为雍州刺史。
English: On the 13th, the champion, Liu Meng, was appointed as the leader of the history of Yongzhou.

古文：三年春，正月，丙申朔，合朔时加寅漏上八刻，事毕，宫人于阅武堂元会，皇后正位，阉人行仪，帝戎服临视。
现代文：永元三年春正月初一，当日月相会之时加寅漏上八刻，事毕之后，宫人在阅武堂举行元会，皇后居于正位，太监们列行仪式，皇帝身着军装也来观看。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3

古文：丁酉，以骠骑大将军晋安王宝义为司徒，新除抚军将军建安王宝夤为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：初二，任命骠骑大将军晋安王萧宝义为司徒，任命新授职的建安王萧宝寅为车骠将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Jinan Wang Xiao Baoyi, the general of the cavalry, was appointed as the leading disciple, and the newly appointed Jianan Wang Xiao Baoying was appointed as the general of the chariot, the keeper of the imperial residences, and the third secretary.

古文：甲辰，以宁朔将军王珍国为北徐州刺史。
现代文：初九，任命宁朔将军王珍国为北徐州刺史。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Ningshuo General Wang Zhenguo was appointed as the chief historian of North Xuzhou.

古文：辛亥，车驾祀南郊，诏大赦天下，百官陈谠言。
现代文：十六日，皇帝来到南郊举行祠祭，下诏大赦天下，百官有正直意见只管说。
English: On the 16th, the emperor came to the southern suburbs to hold an ancestral shrine festival, and issued a decree to pardon the whole world. If the officials have honest opinions, they should just say so.

古文：二月，丙寅，乾和殿西厢火。
现代文：二月初二，乾和殿西厢失火。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the west wing of the Inui Hall caught fire.

古文：壬午，诏遣羽林兵征雍州，中外纂严。
现代文：十八日，下诏遣皇帝警卫部队征讨雍州，内外实行戒严。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict dispatched the Ulin Army to march to Yongzhou, and martial law was imposed inside and outside the capital.

古文：乙酉，以武烈将军胡元进为广州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，任命威烈将军胡元进为广州刺史。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, General Hu Yuanjin was appointed as the first president of Guangzhou.

古文：三月，己亥，以骠骑将军沈徽孚为广州刺史。
现代文：三月初五，任命骠骑将军沈徽孚为广州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of March, General Shen Huifu was appointed as Guangzhou's chief historian.

古文：甲辰，以辅国将军张欣泰为雍州刺史。
现代文：十日，任命辅国将军张欣泰为雍州刺史。
English: On the 10th, Zhang Xintai, the general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the prefect of Yongzhou.

古文：丁未，南康王宝融即皇帝位于江陵。
现代文：十三日，南康王萧宝融在江陵即皇帝位。
English: On the 13th, Nankang King Xiao Baorong ascended to the throne in Jiangling.

古文：癸丑，遣平西将军陈伯之西征。
现代文：十九日，派遣平西将军陈伯之西征。
English: On the 19th, Pingxi General Chen Bozhi was dispatched to the Western Expedition.

古文：六月，京邑雨水，遣中书舍人、二县官长赈赐有差。
现代文：六月，京城发水，派遣中书舍人、二县官长赈济不一。
English: In June, the capital city of Hansui was dispatched to send Chinese scholars and officials from two counties to help.

古文：萧颖胄弟颖孚起兵庐陵。
现代文：萧颖胄弟弟萧颖孚在庐陵起兵。
English: Xiao Yingqi's younger brother, Xiao Yingfu, raised an army in Fuling.

古文：戊子，曲赦江州安成、庐陵二郡。
现代文：二十六日，权且赦免江州的安成、庐陵二郡。
English: On the 26th, he also pardoned two counties of Ancheng and Fuling in Jiangzhou.

古文：秋，七月，癸巳，曲赦荆、雍二州。
现代文：秋七月初一，权且赦免荆州、雍州。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Jingzhou and Yongzhou were pardoned.

古文：甲午，雍州刺史张欣泰、前南谯太守王灵秀率石头文武奉建安王宝夤向台，至杜姥宅，宫门闭，乃散走。
现代文：初二，雍州刺史张欣泰、前南谯太守王灵秀率石头文武官员护送建安王萧宝寅往朝廷而来，至杜姥宅，宫门闭，于是散去。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Zhang Xintai, the Yangzhou chief historian, and Wang Lingxiu, the former Southern Wei Empress Dowager, led by stone military and civilian officials, escorted King Xiao Baotian of Jian'an to the imperial court. They came to Du Baotian's house, the palace gate was closed, and they dispersed.

古文：己未，以征虏长史程茂为郢州刺史，骁骑将军薛元嗣为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，任命征虏将军程茂为郢州刺史，骁骑将军薛元嗣为雍州刺史。
English: On the 27th, the conscript general Cheng Mao was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the cavalry general Xue Yuanxi was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：是日，元嗣以郢城降义师。
现代文：本日，薛元嗣连同郢城投降了义师。
English: Today, Xue Yuanxi, together with Shicheng, surrendered to Yishi.

古文：八月，丁卯，以辅国将军申胄监豫州事。
现代文：八月初五，任命辅国将军申胄监豫州事。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, he appointed Vice-Governor General Shen Qi to supervise the affairs of Henan Province.

古文：辛巳，光禄大夫张瑰镇石头。
现代文：十九日，任命光禄大夫张瑰镇守石头。
English: On the 19th, Guanglu doctor Zhang Jizhen was appointed to guard the stone.

古文：辛未，以太子左率李居士总督西讨诸军事，屯新亭城。
现代文：初九，任命太子左率李成士总督西讨诸军事，驻军新亭城。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the prince's left-hand lieutenant, Li Chengshi, as the governor of the West, and sent troops to garrison Xintingcheng.

古文：九月，甲辰，以居士为江州刺史，新除冠军将军王珍国为雍州刺史，车骑将军建安王宝寅为荆州刺史。
现代文：九月十三日，任命李居士为江州刺史，新授职的冠军将军王珍国为雍州刺史，车骑将军建安王萧宝寅为荆州刺史。
English: On September 13th, Li Guosi was appointed as the historian of Jiangzhou, the newly appointed champion general Wang Zhenguo as the historian of Yongzhou, and the cavalry general Jian'an Wang Xiao Baoying as the historian of Jingzhou.

古文：以辅国将军申胄监郢州，龙骧将军马仙琕监豫州，骁骑将军徐元称监徐州。
现代文：命辅国将军申胄监郢州，龙骧将军马仙王卑监豫州，骁骑将军徐元称监徐州。
English: General Shen Xuan, the commander of the Auxiliary Army, oversaw Yuzhou, General Ma Xian Wang Bei, the commander of the Long March, oversaw Yuzhou, and General Xu Yuan, the commander of the Horse Cavalry, oversaw Xuzhou.

古文：是日，义军至南州，申胄军二万人于姑熟奔归。
现代文：本日，义军到达南州，申胄军二万人从姑熟跑去归附。
English: Today, the rebels arrived in Nanzhou, and 20,000 soldiers of the Shenyang Army ran away from their aunts to join them.

古文：戊申，以后军参军萧璝为司州刺史，前辅国将军鲁休烈为益州刺史，辅国长史赵越尝为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命后军参军萧王贵为司州刺史，前辅国将军鲁休烈为益州刺史，辅国长史赵越尝为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Xiao Wanggui, a former member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, was appointed as the prefectural historian of Shizhou, former vice-governor Lu Xurye as the prefectural historian of Yizhou, vice-governor Zhao Yueqi as the prefectural historian of Liang, and the prefectural historian of the two prefectures of Southern Qin.

古文：丙辰，李居士与义军战于新亭，败绩。
现代文：二十五日，李居士在新亭与义师交战，失败。
English: On the 25th, Li Jushi fought with Yishi in Xinting and lost.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，王珍国与义军战于朱雀桁，败绩。
现代文：冬十月十三日，王珍国与义军在朱雀桁交战，失败。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, Wang Zhenguo and the rebel army fought in Suzakuji, and failed.

古文：戊寅，宁朔将军徐元瑜以东府城降。
现代文：十七日，宁朔将军徐元瑜献出东府城投降。
English: On the 17th, Ningshuo General Xu Yuanyu surrendered Dongfu Town.

古文：青、冀二州刺史桓和入卫，屯东宫，己卯，以众降。
现代文：青、冀二州刺史桓和回兵来保卫皇帝，驻兵东宫。十八日，率众投降。
English: On the 18th, he led the troops to surrender.

古文：光禄大夫张瑰弃石头还宫。
现代文：光禄大夫张瑰放弃石头逃回宫来。
English: Dr. Guanglu Zhang abandons the stone and returns to the palace.

古文：于是闭宫城门自守。
现代文：于是紧闭宫城门自守。
English: As a result, they closed the palace gates to protect themselves.

古文：庚辰，以骁骑将军胡虎牙为徐州刺史，左军将军徐智勇为益州刺史，游击将军牛平为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十九日，任命骁骑将军胡虎牙为徐州刺史，左军将军徐智勇为益州刺史，游击将军牛平为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 19th, he appointed the cavalry general Hu Huya as the prefect of Xuzhou, the general of the Left Army Xu Zhiyong as the prefect of Yizhou, the guerrilla general Niu Ping as the prefect of Liang, and the prefect of the two states of Southern Qin.

古文：李居士以新亭降，琅邪城主张木亦降。
现代文：李居士献出新亭投降，琅笽城主将张木也投降了。
English: Li Guosi surrendered Xinting, and Zhang Mu, the lord of Zoucheng, also surrendered.

古文：义师筑长围守宫城。
现代文：义师筑起长围守宫城。
English: Yishi built a long enclosure to defend Miyagi.

古文：十二月，丙寅，新除雍州刺史王珍国、侍中张稷率兵入殿废帝，时年十九。
现代文：十二月初六，新任雍州刺史王珍国、侍中张稷率兵冲入殿中除掉了皇帝，当时他十九岁。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Wang Zhenguo, the newly-appointed prince of Yongzhou, and Zhang Ye, his chamberlain, stormed into the palace and killed the emperor, who was 19 years old at the time.

古文：尝夜捕鼠达旦，以为笑乐。高宗临崩，属以后事，以隆昌为戒，曰： 作事不可在人后！ 
现代文：皇上在做太子的时候就喜欢游戏，不喜欢看书学习，高宗也不觉得有什么不对，只是勉励他学习些家庭言行。高宗临死时，向他交待后事，告诉他要以隆昌皇帝为戒，说： 做事情要先发制人！ 
English: When he was crown prince, the emperor liked games and did not like reading and studying. Gaozong did not think there was anything wrong, but encouraged him to learn some family words and deeds. When Gaozong was about to die, he told him about the aftermath and told him to take Emperor Longchang as a warning, saying: Do things to preempt others!

古文：故委任群小，诛诸宰臣，无不如意。
现代文：因此上台后便委任一群小人，诛杀各位大臣，随心所欲。
English: Therefore, he appointed a group of villains to kill all the prime ministers, and they succeeded.

古文：性重涩少言，不与朝士接，唯亲信阉人及左右御刀应敕等，自江祏、始安王遥光诛后，渐便骑马。
现代文：皇上为人羞涩少言，不和朝廷中人士交流，只信任亲近太监和身边拿着兵器听候命令的一帮人，自从诛杀了江纏、始安王萧遥光之后，便逐渐迷上了骑马。
English: The Emperor was shy and reticent, did not communicate with people in the court, and only trusted close eunuchs and a group of people holding weapons around him to listen to orders. Since he killed Jiangzhai and Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang, he gradually fell in love with horse riding.

古文：日夜于后堂戏马，与亲近阉人倡伎鼓叫。常以五更就卧，至晡乃起。
现代文：日夜在后堂戏马，和亲近太监倡伎等鼓吹呼叫，经常是天快亮时才上床睡觉，天快黑时才起床。
English: Playing horses in the back hall day and night, and being close to the eunuch advocating call, often go to bed when it's almost dawn, and get up when it's almost dark.

古文：王侯节朔朝见，晡后方前，或际暗遣出。
现代文：王侯们在一定的日子前来朝见，往往是天黑了才近前接待，或者是到了天黑要闭门时把大家赶走。
English: Princes and queens came to see the emperor on certain days, and were often not received until it was getting dark, or they were chased away when it got dark and they had to close the doors.

古文：台阁案奏，月数十日乃报，或不知所在。
现代文：中央各部门的奏案，一弄个把两个月不作批示，有时竟不知放哪儿去了。
English: The case files of the cabinet were not reported for a month or dozens of days, and some of them have been lost.

古文：二年元会，食后方出，朝贺裁竟，便还殿西序寝。自巳至申，百僚陪位，皆僵仆菜色。比起就会，匆遽而罢。
现代文：永元二年举行元会，吃完饭才出来，群臣朝贺刚完，他便又回到殿西睡觉去了，自上午九点到下午五点，文武百官陪侍坐在那里等候，许多人坐得麻木跌倒，面有饥色，等他起床来开始朝会，又匆忙结束了。
English: In the 2nd year of Yongyuan, the Yuan meeting was held, and he came out after eating. The courtiers had just finished the morning greeting, and he went back to the west side of the palace to sleep. From 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., hundreds of civil and military officials sat there waiting with their attendants. Many people sat numb and hungry. When he got up to start the morning meeting, it was over in a hurry.

古文：陈显达事平，渐出游走，所经道路，屏逐居民，从万春门由东宫以东至于郊外，数十百里，皆空家尽室。
现代文：陈显达事件平息之后，皇上便渐渐跑出去游走，他所经过的地南齐书方，都要把居民赶走，从万春门到东宫以东直至郊外，数十近百里路附近都弄得空家尽室没有人烟。
English: After the Chen Xianda incident subsided, the emperor gradually ran out for a walk. The provinces he passed through, including Shufang, all wanted to drive away the residents. From Wanchun Gate to the east of the East Palace to the suburbs, dozens of houses near Baili Road were empty and there was no one there.

古文：巷陌悬幔为高障，置仗人防守，谓之 屏除 。
现代文：在巷子里悬挂布幔为高障，设置仗人防守，称这叫 屏除 。
English: Hanging a cloth curtain in the alley as a high barrier, setting up a warrior defense, calling it "screening."

古文：或于市肆左侧过亲幸家，环回宛转，周遍京邑。
现代文：或者跑到市场左侧他所亲幸的人家里，东游西转，跑遍京城。
English: Or run to the left side of the market to his lucky relative's house, turn east and west, and run all over the capital.

古文：每三四更中，鼓声四出，幡戟横路，百姓喧走相随，士庶莫辨。
现代文：经常是夜里三四更时，鼓声响彻，幡戟横路，老百姓喧呼着跟着跑，也分辨不出是士人还是平民。
English: It is often three or four o'clock at night, the drums are loud, the flags are flying, the people are shouting and running, and they can't tell whether they are soldiers or civilians.

古文：出辄不言定所，东西南北，无处不驱人。
现代文：皇上出门往往不说一定的地方，东西南北，无处不去。
English: Emperors often go out without mentioning a certain place, from east to west, from north to south, there is nowhere to go.

古文：高障之内，设部伍羽仪。复有数部，皆奏鼓吹羌胡伎，鼓角横吹。
现代文：在高障里面，设置军队仪仗，还有好几部，都演奏鼓吹羌胡歌舞，鼓角乱吹。
English: Inside the high barrier, there are military ceremonial battles, and there are several others, all of which are played to promote the singing and dancing of the egrets, and the drums are blown.

古文：夜出昼反，火光照天。
现代文：夜里出去，白天回来，火光照天。
English: Go out at night, come back during the day, the fire lights up the sky.

古文：拜爱姬潘氏为贵妃，乘卧舆，帝骑马从后。
现代文：让爱姬潘氏做贵妃，让她乘着卧车，皇帝则骑着马跟在后头。
English: Let Aiko Pan be a noblewoman, let her ride in a sleeper car, and the emperor will ride behind.

古文：著织成袴褶，金薄帽，执七宝缚槊，戎服急装，不变寒暑，陵冒雨雪，不避坑阱。驰骋渴乏，辄下马解取腰边蠡器酌水饮之，复上马驰去。
现代文：身着上等丝织行军便服，头戴金簿帽，手执七宝缚槊，全副武装，不管是寒是暑，他都这样，不论是下雨下雪，也不管是坑是井，他都纵马驰骋，渴了累了，便下马从腰边取下盛水的器物舀水喝，然后再上马急驰而去。
English: Dressed in high-grade silk marching civilian clothes, wearing a gold book cap, holding a seven-treasure shackle, fully armed, whether it is cold or hot, he is like this, whether it is raining or snowing, whether it is a pit or a well, he is galloping, thirsty and tired, he dismounts from the waist to remove the water container to drink water, and then gets on the horse and gallops away.

古文：马乘具用锦绣处，患为雨所沾湿，织杂彩珠为覆蒙，备诸雕巧。
现代文：马的乘具使用锦绣的地方，为了不被雨水沾湿，都用各色采珠编织物覆盖起来，配备各种雕弓。
English: Where horse harnesses were embroidered with brocade, in order not to get wet by rain, they were covered with all kinds of beaded fabric and equipped with various carved bows.

古文：教黄门五六十人为骑客，又选无赖小人善走者为逐马，左右五百人，常以自随，奔走往来，略不暇息。
现代文：教黄门五六十人为 骑客 ，又选拔些善于奔走的无赖小儿为 逐马 ，左右五百来人经常随从着，奔走往来，忙个不停。
English: He taught the Yellow Gate fifty or sixty people to be riders, and selected some rogue children who were good at running to be horse riders, and about five hundred people often followed, running back and forth, busy all the time.

古文：置射雉场二百九十六处，翳中帷帐及步鄣，皆袷以绿红锦，金银镂弩牙，瑇瑁帖箭。
现代文：设置射雉场二百九十六处，翳障中的帷帐和步障，都礻夹绿红锦，配有金银雕花弓弩，象牙王毒瑁贴箭。
English: There are 296 archery sites, including a curtain and a step barrier, a Tudor with green and red brocade, a bow and arrow with gold and silver carvings, and an arrow with an ivory king toadstool.

古文：郊郭四民皆废业，樵苏路断，吉凶失时；乳妇婚姻之家，移产寄室，或舆病弃尸，不得殡葬。
现代文：郊区附近的士农工商都不能正常做事情，弄得打柴割草的人不能上路，有吉事有凶事都不能及时办理，要生孩子要结婚的人家，只能搬到别处去，有的死了人也不能下葬。
English: Officials, farmers, and businesses near the suburbs can't do things normally, people who have to chop wood and cut grass can't go on the road, good and bad things can't be handled in time, people who want to have children and get married can only move to other places, and some dead people can't be buried.

古文：有弃病人于青溪边者，吏惧为监司所问，推置水中，泥覆其面，须臾便死，遂失骸骨。
现代文：有的把病人扔在青溪边上，当地官吏怕被有关监司追查，便把病人推到水里，用泥盖住其面孔，一会儿就死掉了。
English: Some threw the patients on the edge of the Qingchuan River. Local officials were afraid of being tracked down by the relevant supervisors, so they pushed the patients into the water, covered their faces with mud, and died in an instant.

古文：后宫遭火之后，更起仙华、神仙、玉寿诸殿，刻画雕彩，青灊金口带，麝香涂壁，锦幔珠帘，穷极绮丽。
现代文：尸体也找不着。后宫失火后，又造起来仙华、神仙、玉寿等殿，刻画雕纟采，用青褈金装饰门窗等口边，用麝香粉刷墙壁，锦幔珠帘，极其绮丽。
English: Bodies could not be found either. After the fire in the harem, halls such as the Hall of Immortals, the Hall of Immortals, and the Hall of Jade Immortals were built, with carvings and engravings, doors and windows decorated with lapis lazuli, walls painted with musk, and brocade beaded curtains, all of which were extremely beautiful.

古文：絷役工匠，自夜达晓，犹不副速，乃剔取诸寺佛刹殿藻井仙人骑兽以充足之。
现代文：参加施工的工匠，夜以继日地干，仍然说太慢，便把各寺刹的藻井、仙人、骑兽等拆了来作装饰。
English: The craftsmen who participated in the construction, working day and night, still said it was too slow, so they tore down the wells, hermits, and riding animals of each temple to decorate them.

古文：世祖兴光楼上施青漆，世谓之 青楼 。帝曰： 武帝不巧，何不纯用琉璃。 
现代文：世祖兴光楼上用青漆，世人称之 青楼 ，皇上还说： 武帝还不算聪明能干，为什么不全都用上琉璃。 
English: Emperor Xingguang used blue paint on the building, known as the Blue Building, and the emperor also said: Emperor Wu is not smart and capable, why not use all the glaze.

古文：潘氏服御，极选珍宝。主衣库旧物，不复周用，贵市民间金银宝物，价皆数倍。
现代文：潘氏的衣服用具，都挑那些最珍贵的，主衣库里现有的东西，已不够用，便出高价到民间去买，价高数倍。
English: Mr. Pan's clothes and utensils are all selected from the most precious, the existing things in the main wardrobe are no longer enough to use, so he pays a high price to the people to buy, the price is several times higher.

古文：虎魄钏一只，直百七十万。
现代文：虎珀钏一只价值一百七十万。
English: A tiger tamarin is worth 1.7 million yuan.

古文：京邑酒租，皆折使输金，以为金涂。
现代文：京城的酒税，都折算成金钱征收，为的是好做金钏。
English: Beijing's liquor taxes are converted into money and levied, in order to make a profit.

古文：犹不能足，下扬、南徐二州桥桁塘埭丁计功为直，敛取见钱，供太乐主衣杂费。
现代文：这还不能满足，又命扬、南徐二州征收桥、桁、塘、埭之税，折成现钱，拿来供太乐主的衣杂费。
English: This was still not enough, and Yang and Nan Xu ordered the two states to collect taxes on bridges, girders, ponds, and piers, and convert them into cash to provide the entertainer's clothing and miscellaneous expenses.

古文：由是所在塘渎，多有隳废。
现代文：因此当地的塘渎，大多废弃。
English: As a result, the local reservoirs are mostly abandoned.

古文：又订出雉头鹤氅白鹭缞。亲幸小人因缘为奸利，课一输十，郡县无敢言者。
现代文：又征收雉头鹤氅白鹭，身边被亲幸的小人们，便借机奸取谋利，派一征十，郡县也没有人敢吭声。
English: In addition, the tax was levied on hoes, cranes, and egrets, and the lucky little people around them took advantage of the opportunity to make a profit and sent ten soldiers. No one in the county dared to say a word.

古文：三年夏，于阅武堂起芳乐苑。山石皆涂以五采；跨池水立紫阁诸楼观，壁上画男女私亵之像。
现代文：永元三年，皇上又在阅武堂建造芳乐苑，山石都用五彩涂画，跨池水中，建有紫阁等楼观，壁上都画有男女调情猥亵的形像。
English: In the third year of the Yongyuan era, the emperor also built the Fangle Garden in the Reading Martial Arts Hall. The mountains and rocks were all painted in five colors, across the pond, there were buildings such as the Purple Pavilion, and the walls were all painted with indecent images of men and women flirting.

古文：种好树美竹，天时盛暑，未及经日，便就萎枯；于是征求民家，望树便取，毁撤墙屋以移致之。朝栽暮拔，道路相继，花药杂草，亦复皆然。
现代文：栽种各种好树美竹，当时正是盛暑，不过一天，便都枯萎了。于是到民家征取，看到树便挖，不惜折墙扒屋，这样早上栽，晚上拔，道路上来往不断的都是为这事，其他花药杂草，情况也与此类似。
English: planted all kinds of good trees and bamboo, it was the heat of the day, but one day, they all withered. So I went to the people's homes to collect, saw the trees and dug them up, and broke down the wall of the shop, so I planted them in the morning and pulled them out at night. This was the reason for the constant traffic on the road. Other anther weeds, the situation is similar.

古文：又于苑中立市，太官每旦进酒肉杂肴，使宫人屠酤。潘氏为市令，帝为市魁，执罚，争者就潘氏决判。
现代文：又在苑中开设市场，太官每天弄些酒肉杂肴来，让宫人在那儿宰杀卖酒，潘氏做市令，皇上做市场管理人员，执行处罚，有争议就去找潘氏判决。
English: They also opened a market in the middle of the garden. The eunuch brought some meat and wine and miscellaneous dishes every day, and let the palace people slaughter and sell wine there. Mr. Pan was the mayor, and the emperor was the market manager. They enforced punishments, and if there was a dispute, they would go to Mr. Pan for a ruling.

古文：帝有膂力，能担白虎幢。自制杂色锦伎衣，缀以金花玉镜众宝，逞诸意态。
现代文：皇上的四肢很有力气，能担起白虎木童，他自制杂色锦伎衣，上面缝着金花玉镜各种宝物，以满足各种愿望和行为。
English: The emperor's limbs were strong enough to carry the White Tiger Wood Boy, and he made his own multi-colored jingle dress with various treasures sewn on it to satisfy all kinds of wishes and behaviors.

古文：所宠群小党与三十一人，黄门十人。
现代文：他所宠幸的群小党羽有三十一人，黄门十人。
English: There are thirty-one members of his favoured small faction and ten members of the Yellow Gate.

古文：初任新蔡人徐世檦为直阁骁骑将军，凡有杀戮，皆其用命。
现代文：先是任命新蔡人徐世木票为直阁骁骑将军，只要行杀戮，都由他去干。
English: First, the new Cai person, Xu Shimu, was appointed as the general of the Zhaogu cavalry, and as long as he killed, he would do it.

古文：杀徐孝嗣后，封为临汝县子。
现代文：杀徐孝嗣后，被封为临汝县子爵。
English: After killing Xu Xiaozhe, he was named the Viscount of Linru County.

古文：陈显达事起，加辅国将军。
现代文：陈显达事件暴发，又被任命为辅国将军。
English: Chen Xianda raised an army and rebelled, and Shijiazhuang was also given the title of vice-governor.

古文：虽用护军崔慧景为都督，而兵权实在世檦。
现代文：虽然让护军崔慧景任都督，兵权实际控制在徐世木票手里。
English: Although he allowed the military escort Cui Huijing to serve as the governor, the actual control of military power was in the hands of Xu Shimuqi.

古文：及事平，世檦谓人曰： 五百人军主，能平万人都督。 
现代文：等到事件平息，徐世木票对人说： 别看我手下只有五百人，但能够平定手下万人的都督。 
English: When the incident subsided, Xu Shiguang said to the people: Don't look at me, there are only five hundred people under me, but I am the governor who can pacify ten thousand people under me.

古文：世檦亦知帝昏纵，密谓其党茹法珍、梅虫儿曰： 何世天子无要人，但阿侬货主恶耳。 
现代文：世木票也知道皇上昏庸放纵，私下对他的党羽茹法珍、梅虫儿说： 哪朝哪代的天子能不任用重要人物呢？
English: The world's wooden tickets also knew that the emperor was indulgent, and privately said to his followers, Zhu Fazhen and Mei Zueri: Which dynasty and generation of heavenly sons can not appoint important figures?

古文：法珍等争权，以白帝。
现代文：我们只是在把皇上劣迹抖落出去罢了。 
English: We're just shaking off the emperor's bad deeds.

古文：帝稍恶其凶强，以二年正月，遣禁兵杀之，世檦拒战而死。
现代文：法珍等为了争权，又把这话报告了皇上，皇上开始讨厌世木票的凶悍，在永元二年正月里，派禁兵去杀世木票，世木票拒战而死。
English: In order to fight for power, Fa Zhen and others reported this to the emperor. The emperor began to hate the fierce Se Muxin. In the first month of the second year of the Yong Yuan, he sent forbidden soldiers to kill Se Muxin. Se Muxin refused to fight and died.

古文：自是法珍、虫儿用事，并为外监，口称诏敕；中书舍人王咺之与相唇齿，专掌文翰。
现代文：从此茹法珍、梅虫儿便掌了大权，同为外监，口口声声是皇上的指示；中书舍人王口亘之和他们互相配合，专掌各种文件机要。
English: From then on, Zhu Fazhen and Mei Zueri held great power and were both overseers, and their words were the emperor's instructions. Wang Guoqi, the chief of the Chinese Academy of Letters, cooperated with them and was in charge of all kinds of document machines.

古文：其余二十馀人，皆有势力。
现代文：其余二十多人，也都很有势力。
English: The remaining twenty or so people are also very powerful.

古文：崔慧景平后，法珍封余干县男，虫儿封竟陵县男。
现代文：崔慧景被平定后，茹法珍被封为余干县男爵，梅虫儿被封为竟陵县男爵。
English: After Cui Huijing was subdued, Ru Fazhen was made a baron of Yugang County, and Meizuer was made a baron of Qiongling County.

古文：及义师起，江、郢二镇已降，帝游骋如旧，谓茹法珍曰： 须来至白门前，当一决。 
现代文：直到义师大起，江、郢二镇已经投降了，皇上仍然游乐如旧，对茹法珍说： 等他们来到白门前，我再和他们决一死战。 
English: By the time Yishi University was established, the towns of Jiang and Handan had already surrendered, but the emperor was still as happy as ever. He said to Zhu Fazhen, "When they come to the White Gate, I will fight them to the death."

古文：义师至近郊，乃聚兵为固守之计。
现代文：义师到了近郊，才聚兵准备固守。
English: When Yishi arrived in the suburbs, he gathered soldiers and prepared to hold fast.

古文：召王侯朝贵分置尚书都座及殿省。
现代文：召集王侯朝贵分别负责尚书都座和殿省工作。
English: The princes and courtiers were summoned to be responsible for the work of the Imperial Palace and the Ministry of the Palace respectively.

古文：又信鬼神，崔慧景事时，拜蒋子文神为假黄皞、使持节、相国、太宰、大将军、录尚书、扬州牧、钟山王。
现代文：又相信鬼神，崔慧景起事时，皇上拜蒋子文神为假黄钺、使持节、相国、太宰、大将军、录尚书、扬州牧、钟山王。
English: He also believed in ghosts and gods. When Cui Huiqing rose to power, the emperor worshipped Jiang Ziwen as the false god of the Yellow Dragon, the Envoys' Festival, the Fatherland, the Dazai, the Great General, Luo Shangshu, Yangzhou Mu, and the King of Zhongshan.

古文：至是又尊为皇帝，迎神像及诸庙杂神皆入后堂，使所亲巫朱光尚祷祀祈福。
现代文：到了这时，又尊之为皇帝。把神像和各庙杂神都迎入后堂，让所亲近的巫师朱光尚祷祀祈福。
English: At this time, he also revered it as the emperor. He welcomed the statues of gods and all the temple gods into the back hall, and let the wizard Zhu Guangshan, who was close to him, pray for blessings.

古文：以冠军将军王珍国领三万人据大桁，莫有斗志，遣左右直长阉竖王宝孙督战，呼为 王长子 。
现代文：让冠军将军王珍国率领三万人据守大桁，见没有斗志，又派左右直长太监王宝孙督战，称他为 王长子 。
English: Let the champion general Wang Zhenguo lead 30,000 people to defend the large squares. Seeing that there was no fighting spirit, he also sent the left and right direct eunuchs Wang Baosun to fight, calling him the eldest son of Wang.

古文：宝孙切骂诸将帅，直阁将军席豪发愤突阵死。豪，骁将，既毙，众军于是土崩，军人从朱雀观上自投及赴淮死者无数。
现代文：王宝孙切齿斥骂各位将帅，直阁将军席豪发愤冲入阵中战死，席豪是位骁勇战将，他一死，众军便土崩瓦解，官兵从朱雀观上跳楼和投淮水而死的人，不计其数。
English: Wang Baosun scolded the generals with his teeth. General Zhiakou rushed into the battle in anger and died. General Zhiakou was a brave general. As soon as he died, the army collapsed. There are countless people who have died from jumping from the Suzakugan Tower and throwing themselves into the water.

古文：于是闭城自守，城内军事委王珍国。
现代文：于是只得闭城自守，城内的军事都交给王珍国来执掌。
English: As a result, the city was closed for self-defense, and the military commission in the city was assigned to Wang Zhenguo.

古文：兖州刺史张稷入卫京师。以稷为副，实甲犹七万人。
现代文：兖州刺史张稷回来保卫京师，被任为王珍国的副帅，当时城里实际兵力还有南齐书七万人。
English: Zhang Jian, a Zhangzhou statesman, returned to defend the capital and was appointed vice-commander of Wang Zhenguo. At that time, the actual number of troops in the city was still 70,000.

古文：帝乌帽袴褶，备羽仪，登南掖门临望。
现代文：皇上戴乌帽，穿军装，羽仪护从，来到南掖门上观望。
English: The emperor, wearing a black cap, military uniform, and feathered escort, came to the South Gate to watch.

古文：又虚设铠马斋仗千人，皆张弓拔白，出东掖门，称蒋王出荡。
现代文：又虚设皇帝的铠马仪仗侍卫上千人，都拔刀张弓，出东掖门，诈称是蒋王出来扫荡敌人。
English: It also falsely claimed that a thousand horse-riding warriors, all with bows and swords drawn, came out of the East Gate of the Forbidden City, claiming that Chiang Kai-shek had sent troops to sweep the area.

古文：素好斗军队，初使宫人为军，后乃用黄门。
现代文：皇上平时就好玩军队游戏，起初是使宫人为军队，后来用黄门为军队。
English: In ordinary times, the emperor enjoyed playing army games. At first, he used the palace as an army, and later he used the Yellow Gate as an army.

古文：亲自临陈，诈被创，使人舆将去。
现代文：皇上亲自上阵，诈言受伤，命人抬出去。
English: The emperor himself went into battle, was injured and ordered to be carried out.

古文：至是于阅武堂设牙门军顿，每夜严警。
现代文：到如今，便在阅武堂设置牙门军营，每夜严密警戒。
English: To this day, a military camp has been set up in the hall of martial arts, with a strict vigil every night.

古文：帝于殿内骑马从凤庄门入徽明门，马被银莲叶具装铠，杂羽孔翠寄生，逐马左右卫从，昼眠夜起如平常。
现代文：皇上在殿内骑马从凤庄门到徽明门，马身上披盖着银莲叶装成的铠甲，杂羽孔翠寄生，驱使左右卫从人员，仍像平时那样昼眠夜起。
English: The emperor rode a horse from Fengzhuang Gate to Huiming Gate in the palace. The horse was covered with armor made of silver lotus leaves, and the mixed feathers were parasitic, driving the left and right guards from the staff, still sleeping day and night as usual.

古文：闻外鼓叫声，被大红袍登景阳楼屋上望，弩几中之。
现代文：听到外面有鼓响人叫，他便披上大红袍登上景阳楼屋顶，差点被箭弩射中。
English: When he heard drums and shouts outside, he put on a red robe and climbed onto the roof of Jingyang Building, where he was almost shot by an arrow.

古文：众皆怠怨，不为致力。
现代文：众官兵懈怠怨尤，不为他出力。
English: All the officers and soldiers were lazy and resentful, and did not do their best for him.

古文：募兵出战，出城门数十步，皆坐甲而归。
现代文：招募兵士出战，才出城门数十步，战士都披甲而坐，然后再跑回来。
English: Recruiting soldiers for battle, only a few dozen steps out of the city gate, the soldiers are wearing armor and sitting, and then run back.

古文：虑城外有伏兵，乃烧城傍诸府署，六门之内皆荡尽。
现代文：怕城外有伏兵，便把城旁各中央机构的办公楼都烧掉，于是六门之内，一片荡然。
English: Fearing an ambush outside the city, they burned down the office buildings of the central institutions next to the city, so that within six doors, everything was deserted.

古文：城中阁道西掖门内，相聚为市，贩死牛马肉。
现代文：城中阁道西掖门内，变成了市场，贩卖死牛马。
English: Inside the West Gate of Chengzhong Pavilion Road, it has been turned into a market, selling dead cattle and horses.

古文：帝初与群小计议，陈显达一战便败，崔慧景围城退走，谓义师远来，不过旬日，亦应散去，敕太官办樵米为百日粮而已。
现代文：皇上开始与群小计议时，以为陈显达一战便败走，崔慧景围了城很快也退去，这回义师来，最多不过十天，也就会散去，因而命太官只准备了百日柴米。
English: When the emperor began to discuss with the small group, he thought that Chen Xianda was defeated in the first battle and left, Cui Huiqing surrounded the city and quickly retreated, this time, if the righteous teacher came, it would take at most ten days to disperse, so the eunuch only prepared a hundred days of firewood.

古文：大桁败后，众情凶惧，法珍等恐人众惊走，故闭城不复出军。
现代文：大桁战败后，群情恐惧，茹法珍等怕众人惊慌都跑掉了，故意紧闭城门不许出军。
English: After the large-scale defeat, the fear of the crowd, the fear of everyone panicked and ran away, deliberately closing the gate and not allowing the army to go out.

古文：既而义师长围既立，堑栅严固；然后出荡，屡战不捷。
现代文：而义师长期围困已经形成壕堑栅栏十分严固，这时皇上再派兵出来扫荡，屡战屡败。
English: However, Yishi's long-term siege had already formed a trench and the fence was very strict. At this time, the emperor sent soldiers out to sweep, and they were repeatedly defeated.

古文：帝尤惜金钱，不肯赏赐。法珍叩头请之，帝曰： 贼来独取我邪？
现代文：皇上还特别爱惜金钱，不肯赏赐下人，茹法珍叩头请求，皇上却说： 贼来难道就针对我一个人么？
English: The emperor was also particularly parsimonious with money, refusing to reward subordinates, and bowing to the request of Zhu Fazhen. However, the emperor said: Did the thief come to target me alone?

古文：何为就我求物！ 
现代文：为什么要向我要东西？ 
English: Why should I be rewarded with something?

古文：后堂储数百具榜，启为城防；帝云拟作殿，竟不与。
现代文：后堂的储藏钱有数百具榜，将帅要求启用作城防，皇上说那是留着造殿用的，终于不给。
English: There are hundreds of piles of money stored in the back hall. The commander asked for it to be used for city defense, but the emperor said it was for the construction of the temple, and finally refused to give it.

古文：又催御府细作三百人精仗，待围解以拟屏除。
现代文：又催着御府工匠三百人，等围解后便拟作屏除。
English: He also urged three hundred craftsmen from the Imperial Palace to come, and after the round-up, he planned to make a screen removal.

古文：金银雕镂杂物，倍急于常。
现代文：金银雕镂杂物等，比平常倍加急于搜求。
English: Gold and silver carving and other miscellaneous tasks are twice as urgent as usual.

古文：王珍国、张稷惧祸及，率兵入殿，分军又从西上阁入后宫断之，御刀丰勇之为内应。
现代文：王珍国、张稷害怕祸及自己，便率兵冲进殿里，又分兵从西上阁入后宫断其退路，御前执刀丰勇之为内应。
English: Wang Zhenguo and Zhang Qian were afraid of bringing misfortune to themselves, so they rushed into the palace with their soldiers, and another detachment of soldiers entered the harem from the west pavilion to cut off their escape route. Feng Yong, who wielded a sword in front of the emperor, agreed.

古文：是夜，帝在含德殿吹笙歌作《女儿子》。
现代文：这天夜里，皇上正在含德殿吹笙歌唱《女儿子》，上床还没睡熟。
English: On this night, the Emperor was singing "The Female Son" in the Hande Hall. He had not yet gone to bed.

古文：卧未熟，闻兵入，趋出北户，欲还后宫。
现代文：听说有兵攻进来了，忙往北门跑，想回后宫。
English: Hearing that soldiers were invading, she hurried to the north gate, wanting to return to the harem.

古文：清曜阁已闭，阉人禁防黄泰平以刀伤其膝，仆地。
现代文：这时清曜阁已被关闭，太监禁防黄泰平用刀砍伤了皇上的膝部，跌倒在地。
English: At this time, the Qingyang Pavilion had been closed, and Huang Taiping, the warden of the prison, cut the emperor's knee with a knife and fell to the ground.

古文：顾曰： 奴反邪？ 
现代文：皇上还转脸问他： 恶奴你想造反么？ 
English: The emperor also turned to him and asked: You villain, do you want to rebel?

古文：直后张齐斩首送梁王。
现代文：之后张齐斩下了皇上的首级送给了梁王。
English: After that, Zhang Qi cut off the emperor's head and gave it to Liang Wang.

古文：宣德太后令曰： 皇室受终，祖宗齐圣，太祖高皇帝肇基骏命，膺录受图，世祖武皇帝系明下武，高宗明皇帝重隆景业，咸降年不永，宫车早晏。
现代文：宣德太后下令说： 我们萧齐自从从刘宋那里接过皇权，几代祖宗都很圣明。太宗高皇帝应运受命，开创基业，世祖武皇帝紧紧追随，发扬光大，高宗明皇帝再度振兴，推向前进，可惜他们都享国不久，便离开人世，皇家重任，都交给了后代。
English: Empress Dowager Xuande ordered, "Since Xiao Qi took over the imperial power from Liu Song, several generations of our ancestors have been very holy. Emperor Taizong Gao received the mission to create a foundation, Emperor Shizuo followed closely and carried forward the glory. Emperor Gao Zongming reinvigorated and pushed forward. Unfortunately, they all passed away shortly after their reigns, and the royal responsibilities were handed over to future generations.

古文：皇祚之重，允属储元；而禀质凶愚，发于稚齿。
现代文：可是这个萧宝卷禀质凶愚，幼年时代便已养成。
English: However, this Xiao Bao roll is tough and fierce, and has been nurtured since childhood.

古文：爰自保姆，迄至成童，忍戾昏顽，触途必著。
现代文：从孩提到成童，残忍暴戾，昏庸顽固，其恶迹显著。
English: From children to adults, they are cruel, violent, stupid and stubborn, and their evil deeds are obvious.

古文：高宗留心正嫡，立嫡惟长，辅以群才，间以贤戚，内外维持，冀免多难，未及期稔，便逞屠戮。
现代文：高宗从立嫡惟长的原则出发，让他继位，让群才辅弼，又安排了贤能的亲戚，这样内外维护，希望能够避免出现危难，可是不到一年，他便大肆屠戮。
English: Gaozong started from the principle of appointing the eldest son to succeed to the throne, letting a group of talented people assist him, and arranging virtuous relatives to protect him both at home and abroad, hoping to avoid a crisis, but less than a year later, he carried out a large-scale massacre.

古文：密戚近亲，元勋良辅，覆族歼门，旬月相系。
现代文：密戚近亲，元勋良辅，灭族的灭族，斩门的斩门，十天半月，便来一回儿。
English: Close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative, close relative.

古文：凡所任仗，尽慝穷奸，皆营伍屠贩，容状险丑，身秉朝权，手断国命，诛戮无辜，纳其财产，睚眦之间，屠覆比屋。
现代文：他身边亲信，尽是些奸佞的兵痞屠贩，心怀险诈行为丑恶，但他们都掌握着朝廷的大权和国家的命运。他们诛杀无辜，收其财产，稍有不顺眼的，便遭屠杀。
English: His closest confidants were all treacherous soldier-butchers, with treacherous intentions and vile deeds, but they all held the power of the imperial court and the fate of the country in their hands. They killed the innocent, took their property, and if there was the slightest inconvenience, they were slaughtered.

古文：身居元首，好是贱事，危冠短服，坐卧以之。
现代文：身为元首，却好干些贱事，行走坐卧，不是高冠，就是短服。
English: As the head of state, he did a lot of vulgar things, walking, sitting, lying down, wearing either a high crown or a short dress.

古文：晨出夜反，无复已极，驱斥氓庶，巷无居人。老细奔遑，置身无所。东迈西屏，北出南驱，负疾舆尸，填街塞陌。
现代文：早晨出去夜里才回，放纵到了极处，驱赶群众斥逐居民，弄得街巷没有人住，老少奔逃，无处安身，东西南北，四处驰驱，弄得疾身死尸，到处都是。
English: They go out in the morning and come back at night. They are extremely indulgent. They drive away the masses and drive away the residents, leaving the streets and lanes unoccupied. The old and the young run away and have nowhere to hide. They go from east to west and from north to south. They drive everywhere, leaving dead bodies everywhere.

古文：络以随珠，方斯巳陋；饰以璧榼，曾何足道！时暑赫曦，流金铄石，移竹艺果，匪日伊夜，根未及植，叶已先枯，畚锸纷纭，勤倦无已。
现代文：大兴土木，日夜不停，晨构夕毁，朝开暮塞，用最昂贵的珠宝作装饰，仍嫌不足。炎夏盛暑，移种竹木，不分日夜，很快就枯干，弄得工役纷纭，勤苦不已。
English: Large-scale civil engineering, non-stop day and night, morning construction and evening destruction, morning opening and evening closing, decorated with the most expensive jewelry, is still not enough. Hot summer, hot summer, transplanted bamboo and wood, regardless of day and night, soon dried up, causing laborers to be varied and hardworking.

古文：散费国储，专事浮饰，逼夺民财，自近及远，兆庶恇患，流窜道路。
现代文：花费国库，专搞浮饰，逼夺百姓钱财，弄得远近民众，人心惶惶，四处流浪。
English: They spent the national treasury, specialized in floating decorations, forced the people to take money, made the people far and near, panicked, and wandered around.

古文：府帑既竭，肆夺市道，工商裨贩，行号道泣。
现代文：官库用尽了，就肆意掠夺市场道路，弄得工商裨贩，叫号哭泣，不绝于道路。
English: When the treasury is exhausted, they wantonly plunder the market roads, causing the merchants and traders to cry and wail on the roads.

古文：屈此万乘，躬事角抵，昂首翘肩，逞能橦木，观者如堵，曾无怍容！
现代文：以万乘之尊，去干摔跤游戏，昂头翘肩，对着木逞能，观者如堵，他也没一点自觉。
English: With the respect of Mansei, he went to the wrestling game, head held high, and was able to stand up to the wood. The spectators were stunned, and he was not at all self-conscious.

古文：芳乐、华林，并立阛阓，踞肆鼓刀，手铨轻重。干戈鼓噪，昏晓靡息，无戎而城，岂足云譬！
现代文：在芳乐、华林等楼苑中，都设立市场，在那里开店做生意，还亲自过问缺斤短两的事情。
English: In Hongle, Waring and other housing estates, markets have been set up, stores have been opened to do business there, and people have personally inquired about things that are in short supply.

古文：至于居丧淫宴之愆，三年载弄之丑，反道违常之衅，牝鸡晨鸣之慝，于事已细，故可得而略也。
现代文：一天到晚，干戈鼓噪，又没有军事活动，搞这些算得上是什么呢？至于他居丧期间的淫讠燕，三年生儿育子的丑行，违反常道的罪过，老婆当家的过错等等，由于事情太细密，这里便从略不谈了。
English: As for the adultery during his funeral, the scandalous behavior of raising a three-year-old child, the sin of violating the normal way, the fault of the wife as the head of the family, and so on, because the matter is too delicate, it is never discussed here.

古文：罄楚、越之竹，未足以言，校辛、癸之君，岂或能匹！征东将军忠武奋发，投袂万里，光奉明圣，翊成中兴。
现代文：总之他的罪恶罄竹难书，是比商纣夏桀更糟糕的君主。征东将军忠武奋发，立即举兵，要光奉明圣，实现中兴。
English: In short, his sins are beyond description, and he is a worse monarch than the merchant Xia Xuan. The general of the Eastern Expedition is loyal and diligent, and immediately raises an army to achieve enlightenment and rejuvenation.

古文：乘胜席卷，扫清京邑，而群小靡识，婴城自固，缓戮稽诛，倏弥旬月。宜速剿定，宁我邦家！
现代文：乘胜进军，席卷而来，一举扫清京城。可是群小不能认识到形势，还据城自守，使得进军的步伐受到了阻碍而延缓，应当迅速剿定群小，宁我邦家。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, they swept into the capital and swept it clean in one fell swoop. However, the small group could not recognize the situation, but still relied on the city to defend itself, so that the pace of the advance was hindered and delayed. It is necessary to quickly establish the small group, rather than our state.

古文：可潜遣间介，密宣此旨，忠勇齐奋，遄加荡扑，放斥昏凶，卫送外第。
现代文：可以暗中派间谍人员到守军中，悄悄传达我的旨意，促使忠勇之士，一齐奋起，迅速荡平这帮小人。把昏顽的元凶斥到别处。
English: You can secretly send spies to the defenders, quietly convey my will, prompt the loyal and brave men to rise up together, quickly level this gang of villains, and expel the drowsy culprits to other places.

古文：未亡人不幸，骤此百罹，感念存没，心焉如割。
现代文：作为先帝的遗孀，碰到了这样令人无限忧惧的不幸时候，想到死去的和活着的，我便心如刀割。
English: As the widow of the former emperor, when faced with such an infinitely worrying misfortune, thinking of the dead and the living, my heart is like a knife.

古文：奈何！
现代文：怎么办呀怎么办？ 
English: What to do?

古文：奈何！ 又令依汉海昏侯故事，追封东昏侯。
现代文：又下令比照汉代海昏侯的先例，追封萧宝卷为东昏侯。
English: He also ordered to follow the precedent of the Han Dynasty's maritime dynasties, and to seal the Xiao Bao scroll for the Eastern dynasties.

古文：茹法珍、梅虫儿、王咺之等伏诛。
现代文：茹法珍、梅虫儿、王口亘之等一并处死。
English: Ru Fazhen, Mei Zhi Er, Wang Kou Wai and others were executed together.

古文：丰勇之原死。
现代文：丰勇免死。
English: Fengyong escaped death.

古文：史臣曰：汉宣帝时，南郡获白虎，获之者张武，言武张而猛服也。
现代文：史臣曰：汉宣帝时，南郡捕获了白虎，捕获的人名叫张武，这事件的寓意便是说张武使猛兽服了。
English: Shichen said: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, Nan County captured a white tiger, and the captured person was named Zhang Wu. The moral of this incident is that Zhang Wu was a fierce beast.

古文：东昏侯亡德横流，道归拯乱，躬当翦戮，实启太平。推阉竖之名字，亦天意也。
现代文：东昏侯胡作非为导致灭亡，天道归于拯救乱亡的人，但他自己却被翦戮了，实在是开启了太平，如果推究一下这几个太监的名字含义，便知道这也是天意呀。
English: Dongwu Hou's misdeeds led to his downfall. Heaven's will was to save the people from chaos and death, but he himself was killed, which really opened the way to peace. If you look into the meaning of the names of these eunuchs, you will know that this was also God's will.

古文：赞曰：东昏慢道，匹癸方辛。
现代文：赞曰：东昏侯肆行无道，如同夏桀和商纣。
English: Zang Zai said: "Dong Xiu Hou is running wild, just like Xia Yao and Shang Yao.

古文：乃隳典则，乃弃彝伦，玩习兵火，终用焚身。
现代文：他毁坏了帝王的典范，也抛弃了天下人伦。他喜欢玩习兵火，终于是引火自焚。
English: He destroyed the model of the emperor and abandoned the world's human relations. He liked to play with fire and eventually set himself on fire.

