古文：长孙绎韦虚心裴镜微李虞武德县妇人怀州民武德县民张司马李适之
现代文：长孙绎韦虚心裴镜微李虞武德县妇人怀州民武德县民张司马李适之
English: Li Yu, the eldest grandson of Li Yu, a woman from Wude County, Waizhou, a woman from Wude County, Zhang Sima, a woman from Zhang Sima, a woman from Zhang Sima, a woman from Zhang Sima, a woman from Zhang Sima, a woman from Zhang Sima, a woman from Zhang Sima, and Li Shizhi, a woman from Zhang Sima

古文：李林甫杨慎矜姜皎晁良贞李氏张周封王丰房集张寅燕凤祥王生
现代文：李林甫杨慎矜姜皎晁良贞李氏张周封王丰房集张寅燕凤祥王生
English: Li Linfu, Yang Sheng, Jiang Qian, Li Liangzhen, Zhang Zhoufeng, Wang Fengfang, Zhang Ting, Yan Feng, Xiang Wang Sheng

古文：梁仲朋
现代文：梁仲朋
English: Leung Chung-pho

古文：长孙绎
现代文：长孙绎
English: Eldest grandson deduction

古文：长孙绎之亲曰郑使君，使君惟二子，甚爱之。
现代文：长孙绎的亲戚是郑使君。郑使君只有两个儿子，他很爱他们。
English: Zheng Jijun is a relative of the eldest grandson, Yu Yu. Zheng Jijun has only two sons, and he loves them very much.

古文：子年十五，郑方典郡，常使苍头十余人给其役，夜中，苍头皆食，子独坐，忽闻户东有物行来，履地声甚重，每移步殷然。俄到户前，遂至床下。
现代文：不一会儿，那东西来到窗前，就走到床下。
English: After a while, the thing came to the window and went under the bed.

古文：乃一铁小儿也，长三尺，至粗壮，朱目大口。
现代文：原来是一个小铁孩儿，三尺高，极粗壮，红眼大口。
English: It turned out to be a small iron child, three feet high, extremely robust, with large red eyes.

古文：谓使君子曰：嘻！阿母呼，令吮乳来。
现代文：它对郑使君的儿子说：喂，你妈叫你，让你来吃奶！
English: It said to Zheng Zichun's son: "Hey, your mother is calling you to come and suckle!

古文：子惊叫，跳入户。
现代文：儿子吓得大叫，跳到门里去。
English: His son screamed in fright and dived for the door.

古文：苍头既见，遽报使君。
现代文：奴仆们知道以后，急忙向使君报告。
English: When the servants found out, they hurried to report to the vassal.

古文：使君命十余人，持棒击之，如击石。
现代文：使君派十多人拿大棒打那小铁孩，象打石头一样。
English: So the prince sent more than ten men with big sticks to beat the little iron child, as if he were a stone.

古文：徐而下阶，望门南出。
现代文：它慢慢地下了台阶，朝门南走出。
English: It slowly descended the steps and walked out of the south entrance.

古文：至以刀斧锻，终不可伤。
现代文：甚至用刀斧砍它，也到底没有砍伤它。
English: Even if you cut it with a knife and an axe, you haven't cut it at all.

古文：命举火爇之，火焚其身，则开口大叫，声如霹雳，闻者震倒。
现代文：又让人用火烧它，它就开口大叫，声象打雷一样。听到的人都震倒地上。
English: And it was given to it to burn with fire, and it opened its mouth and cried out with a voice like thunder, so that all who heard it were thrown down to the earth.

古文：举足蓦一车辙，遂灭，其家亦无休咎。
现代文：于是用火驱赶它。走出衙门之后，它抬脚忽然踩进车辙里，就消失了。他家也没发生什么福事和祸事。
English: So he drove it away with fire. After going out of the gate, it raised its foot and suddenly stepped into the rut and disappeared. Nothing good or bad happened to his family.

古文：韦虚心
现代文：韦虚心
English: Wei Xuxin

古文：户部尚书韦虚心，有三子，皆不成而死。
现代文：户部尚书韦虚心，有三个儿子，都不到成年就死了。
English: Humble and modest, he had three sons, all of whom died before reaching adulthood.

古文：子每将亡，则有大面出手床下，嗔目开口，貌如神鬼。
现代文：每个儿子要死的时候，就有一张大脸从床下伸出手来，瞪眼张口，样子象鬼神。
English: When each son was about to die, a large face would reach out from under the bed, eyes wide and mouth open, looking like a ghost.

古文：子惧而走，大面则化为大鸱，以翅遮拥，令自投于井。
现代文：儿子害怕逃跑，大脸就变成一只猫头鹰，用翅子遮拦推拥着他，让他自己投到井里去。
English: His son was afraid to run away, so the big face turned into an owl, which covered him with its wings, pushed him around, and told him to throw himself into the well.

古文：家人觉，遽出之，已愚，犹能言其所见，数日而死。
现代文：家人发现了，立刻救出来，已经变得愚傻了，但是还能说出他看到了什么。
English: His family found him, rescued him immediately, and he has become stupid, but he can still tell what he saw.

古文：如是三子皆然，竟不知何鬼怪。
现代文：几天后他就死了。三个孩子都这样，到底也不知是什么鬼怪。
English: He died a few days later. All three children were like this, and I don't know what the hell it was.

古文：裴锦微
现代文：裴锦微
English: Pei Jinwei

古文：河东裴镜微，曾友一武人，其居相近。
现代文：河东的裴镜微，曾经和一个练武人交朋友。
English: Fei Jingwei from Hedong Province once made friends with a martial arts practitioner.

古文：武人夜还庄，操弓矢，方驰骑，后闻有物近焉。
现代文：他们的住处相近。练武人夜里回庄，拿着弓箭，正骑马前进，听到身后有什么东西走近了。
English: They live in the same neighborhood. A martial arts practitioner was riding back to his village at night, holding a bow and arrow, when he heard something approaching behind him.

古文：顾而见之，状大，有类方相，口但称渴。
现代文：回头一看，那东西挺大，有点类似纸扎神象。它嘴里只称口渴。
English: Looking back, the thing was quite large, somewhat resembling a papier-mâché deity. All it had in its mouth was thirst.

古文：将及武人，武人引弓射，中之，怪乃止。
现代文：要到练武人眼前时，他拉弓射它。射中了，怪物便停止了。
English: When he was about to get in front of the warrior, he drew his bow and shot it. When he hit it, the monster stopped.

古文：顷又来近，又射之，怪复住，斯须又至。
现代文：不一会它又走近了，他又射，怪物又停住。不一会儿又到了。
English: A moment later it approached again, he fired again, the monster stopped again. A moment later it was there again.

古文：武人遽至家，门已闭，武人逾垣而入。
现代文：练武人急忙来到家门前，但是门已经关了。
English: The martial arts practitioner hurried to the front of the house, but the door was already closed.

古文：入后，自户窥之，怪犹在。
现代文：他跳墙进去，从门缝往外偷看，那怪物还在。
English: He jumped over the wall and peeked through the crack in the door. The monster was still there.

古文：武人不敢取马，明早启门，马鞍弃在门，马则无矣。
现代文：练武人不敢出去取马。第二天早晨开门，见马鞍子丢在地上，马却不见了。
English: The warrior did not dare to go out to fetch the horse. The next morning, he opened the door and saw the saddle on the ground, but the horse was gone.

古文：求之数里墓林中，见马被啗已尽，唯骨在焉。
现代文：找到几里外的墓地里，见马已经被吃光，只剩下骨头了。
English: A few miles away, in a graveyard, they found the horse had been eaten and only the bones were left.

古文：李虞
现代文：李虞
English: Li Yu

古文：全节李虞，好大马，少而不逞。
现代文：全节的李虞，喜欢大马。他年轻但是不逞强。
English: Li Yu, who is in the whole section, likes horses. He is young but not strong-willed.

古文：父尝为县令，虞随之官，为诸漫游。
现代文：他父亲曾经做过县令，李虞随父来到官署。为的是能够四处游历。
English: His father once served as a county magistrate, and Li Yu came to the government office with his father. In order to be able to travel around.

古文：每夜，逃出自窦，从人饮酒。
现代文：常常在夜里，从一个地道里钻出来，跟别人去喝酒。
English: He would often sneak out of a tunnel at night to go drinking with others.

古文：后至窦中，有人背其身，以尻窒穴，虞排之不动，以剑刺之，剑没至镡，犹如故。
现代文：后来他来到地道，见有人背向他，用屁股堵在洞口。
English: Later he came to the tunnel and saw someone with his back to him, plugging the hole with his buttocks.

古文：乃知非人也，惧而归。
现代文：李虞用手推也推不开。
English: Li Yu couldn't push it with his hand.

古文：又岁暮，野外从禽，禽入墓林。
现代文：他用剑去刺，剑没到剑柄，那东西还不动，才知道不是个人。他害怕，就返回来了。
English: He stabbed it with his sword, but it didn't reach the hilt, and the thing didn't move, so he knew it wasn't a person. He was afraid, so he went back.

古文：访之林中，有死人面仰，其身洪胀，甚可憎恶，巨鼻大目，挺动其眼，眼仍光起，直视于虞。
现代文：另外，在一个年末，他在野外追赶一只鸟，鸟逃到墓丛中。他追到墓丛中去找，见有一个死人仰面倒在那里，身上肿胀，非常可怕。那死人大鼻子大眼睛。挺动一下那死人的眼睛，他眼里仍然有光亮，直看着李虞。
English: In addition, at the end of a year, he chased a bird in the wild, and the bird escaped into the tombs. He chased it into the tombs to find it, and saw a dead man lying on his back, his body swollen, very terrible. The dead man had a big nose and big eyes. If you move the dead man's eyes, there is still light in his eyes, looking straight at Li Yu.

古文：虞惊怖殆死，自是不敢畋猎焉。
现代文：李虞吓得差一点死过去，从此不敢再打猎了。
English: Li Yu was so scared that he almost died. Since then, he has not dared to go hunting again.

古文：武德县妇人
现代文：武德县妇人
English: Women in Wude County

古文：开元二十八年，武德有妇娠，将生男。
现代文：开元二十八年，武德县有一位妇人怀了孕，将要生一个男孩。
English: In the 28th year of the first century, a woman in Wude County became pregnant and was going to give birth to a boy.

古文：其姑忧之，为具储糗。
现代文：她的婆母很担心，为她准备一些吃的东西。
English: Her worried mother-in-law prepared some food for her.

古文：其家窭，有面数豆，有米一区。
现代文：这一家很穷，有几升面有几斗米。
English: The family is very poor, with only a few liters of flour and a few buckets of rice.

古文：及产夕，其夫不在，姑与邻母同膳之。
现代文：临产那天晚上，她的丈夫不在家，她的婆母和邻居的老太太为她做饭。
English: On the night she was due to give birth, her husband was not at home, so her mother-in-law and an elderly neighbour cooked for her.

古文：男既生，姑与邻母具食。
现代文：男孩生下来之后，婆母与邻居老太太给她端上吃的东西来。
English: After the boy was born, his mother-in-law and an elderly neighbor lady brought her something to eat.

古文：食未至。妇若饥渴，求食不绝声。
现代文：饭还没吃完，她就象很渴很饿似的，不住声地要吃的。
English: Before the meal was over, she kept asking to eat, as if she were very thirsty and hungry.

古文：姑馈之，尽数人之餐，犹言馁。
现代文：婆母就赶紧给她拿来。她吃了几个人的饭，还说饿。
English: Her mother-in-law quickly brought it to her. She had eaten several people's meals and was still hungry.

古文：姑又膳升面进之，妇食，食无遗，而益称不足。
现代文：婆母又用一升面做熟给她送来，她又吃了个一点没剩，还说不够。
English: Her mother-in-law brought her another liter of noodles cooked to perfection, and she ate just a little bit more, saying it wasn't enough.

古文：姑怒，更为具之。
现代文：婆母生气了，又去给她准备。
English: My mother-in-law got angry and went to prepare it for her.

古文：姑出后，房内饼盎在焉，归下床，亲执器，取饼食之，饼又尽。
现代文：婆母出去后，房中装饼的器具还在。妇人走下床，亲自拿过来，打开取饼吃。饼又吃光了。
English: After her mother-in-law had gone out, the utensils in the room containing the bread were still there. The woman got out of bed, fetched them herself, opened them to take the bread and eat it. The bread was gone again.

古文：姑还见之，怒且恐，谓邻母曰：此妇何为？
现代文：婆婆回来见了，又生气又害怕，对邻居老太太说：这媳妇是怎么了？
English: When my mother-in-law returned, she was angry and scared. She said to the old lady next door, "What happened to this daughter-in-law?

古文：母曰：吾自幼及长，未之见也。
现代文：邻人老太太说：我从小到大，从来没见过这样的。
English: An elderly neighbour said: "I've never seen anything like it since I was a child.

古文：姑方询怒，新妇曰：姑无怒，食儿乃已。
现代文：婆婆正生气地询问，妇人说：婆母不要生气，我把孩子吃了就不饿了。
English: My mother-in-law was asking angrily, and the woman said, "Mother-in-law, don't be angry. If I eat my child, I won't be hungry.

古文：因提其子食之，姑夺之不得，惊而走。
现代文：于是她提起孩子就吃。婆婆上去夺没夺下来，吓跑了。
English: So she picked up the child and ate it. When her mother-in-law went to take it away, she scared her away.

古文：俄却入户，妇已食其子尽，口血犹丹。
现代文：不一会儿返回来，妇人已把孩子吃光了，嘴上的血还通红的。
English: When she returned a short time later, the woman had already eaten the child, and the blood on her mouth was still red.

古文：因谓姑曰：新妇当卧且死，亦无遗。
现代文：妇人对婆母说：我应该倒下去死了。也不拉屎了？
English: The woman said to her mother-in-law: "I should have fallen down and died. How come I don't shit anymore?"

古文：若侧，犹可收矣。
现代文：如果拉屎，还可以收回去呢！
English: If you shit, you can take it back!

古文：言终，仰眠而死。
现代文：说完，仰倒而死。
English: After saying this, he fell on his back and died.

古文：怀州民开元二十八年，春二月，怀州武德、武陟、修武、三县人，无故食土，云，味美异于他土。
现代文：怀州民开元二十八年，春二月，怀州武德、武陟、修武、三县人，无故食土，云，味美异于他土。
English: In the spring and February of the 28th year of the founding of the People's Republic of Huizhou, the people of the three counties of Huizhou, Wu De, Wu Xi, and Xiu Wu, had no reason to eat soil that was cloudy and tasted different from other soil.

古文：先是武德期城村妇人，相与采拾，聚而言曰： 今米贵人饥，若为生活！ 
现代文：先是武德期城村妇人，相与采拾，聚而言曰：今米贵人饥，若为生活！
English: First, a woman from a city and village in the Wude period said, "Nowadays, the nobles are hungry for rice, if it is for life!

古文：有老父，紫衣白马，从十人来过之，谓妇人曰： 何忧无食？
现代文：有老父，紫衣白马，从十人来过之，谓妇人曰：何忧无食？
English: There was an old man, dressed in purple and riding a white horse, who came from ten people. The woman said: "Why worry about not having food?

古文：此渠水傍土甚佳，可食，汝试尝之。 
现代文：此渠水傍土甚佳，可食，汝试尝之。
English: The soil by the water of this canal is very good and can be eaten. Please try it.

古文：妇人取食，味颇异，遂失老父。
现代文：妇人取食，味颇异，遂失老父。
English: The woman took the food, which tasted quite different, and lost her father.

古文：乃取其土至家，拌其面为饼，饼甚香。
现代文：于是老头不见了。妇人就把土带回家去，拌上面做成饼，饼非常香。
English: So the old man disappeared, and the woman took the clay home with her, and kneaded it into a loaf of bread, which tasted very good.

古文：由是远近竟取之，渠东西五里，南北十余步，土并尽。
现代文：从此，远近的人争相挖取。河的东西两边五里之内，南北十余步内，土全被取光。
English: Since then, people from near and far have been competing to dig it up. Within five miles on both sides of the river, and within more than ten steps from north to south, the soil has been stripped bare.

古文：牛肃时在怀，亲遇之。
现代文：牛肃当时在怀州，亲自遇到过这种事。
English: At that time, Giusu was in Waizhou, and he personally encountered this kind of thing.

古文：武德县民
现代文：武德县民
English: Wude County residents

古文：武德县逆旅家，有人锁闭其室，寄物一车。
现代文：武德县的一家旅店，有人锁闭了一间屋子，寄存了一车东西。
English: In a hotel in Wude County, someone locked a room and stored a carload of things.

古文：如是数十日不还，主人怪之，开视囊，皆人面衣也，惧而闭之。
现代文：这样锁了十几天也没回来。店主人感到奇怪，打开屋子，看屋里的口袋。一看，口袋里全是远行专用的寒衣。因害怕而裹起来。
English: After locking himself in this way for ten days, he did not return. The shop owner felt strange, opened the door and looked in his pockets. At a glance, his pockets were full of cold clothes for long journeys. He wrapped himself up in fear.

古文：其夕，门自开，所寄囊物，并失所在。
现代文：那天晚上，门自己开了，里边寄放的东西，都消失了。
English: That night, the door opened by itself, and everything that had been stored inside disappeared.

古文：张司马
现代文：张司马
English: Zhang Sima

古文：定州张司马，开元二十八年夏，中夜与其妻露坐。闻空中有物飞来，其声頨頨然，过至堂屋，为瓦所碍。宛转屋际，遂落檐前。
现代文：定州的张司马，开元二十八年夏天，半夜和妻子在露天地坐着，听到空中有什么东西飞来，那声音象翅翼飞动。那东西来到堂屋，被瓦阻碍，在屋外萦绕，于是就落到檐前，就跑。
English: In the summer of 1928, Zhang Sima from Dingzhou was sitting in the open air with his wife in the middle of the night. He heard something flying in the air, and the sound was like wings flying. The thing came to the house, was hindered by the tiles, lingered outside, and then fell to the ground and ran away.

古文：因走，司马命逐之，逐者以蹴之，乃为狗音。
现代文：张司马让人去追。追者用脚踢那东西，是狗的声音。
English: Zhang Sima sent someone to chase it. The chaser kicked the thing with his foot. It was the sound of a dog.

古文：擒得火照，则老狗也，赤而鲜毛，身甚长，足甚短，可一二寸。
现代文：捉到后用火一照，就是一条老狗，红色、毛很少，身体很长，腿很短，能有一二寸。
English: If you catch it and light it on fire, it's an old dog, red, with very little hair, a long body and very short legs, maybe an inch or two.

古文：司马命焚之，深忧其为怪。
现代文：张司马让人用火烧它，深怕它作怪。
English: Zhang Sima let people burn it with fire, deeply afraid of it acting strangely.

古文：月余，改深州长史。
现代文：一月以后，张司马改任深州长史。
English: After January, Zhang Sima was reappointed as governor of Shandong Province.

古文：李适之
现代文：李适之
English: Li Shizhi

古文：李适之既贵且豪，常列鼎于前，以具膳羞。一旦，庭中鼎跃出相斗，家僮告适之，乃往其所，酹酒自誓，而斗亦不解，鼎耳及足皆落。
现代文：一天早晨，院中的鼎跳出来互相打斗。家僮报告给李适之。李适之就来到院中，祭酒明誓。但是鼎还是打斗不止，鼎的耳和脚都打落了。
English: One morning, the Ding in the hospital jumped out and fought with each other. The family concubine reported to Li Shizhi. Li Shizhi came to the hospital and vowed to drink the sacrificial wine. However, the Ding still continued to fight, and the Ding's ears and feet were knocked off.

古文：明日，适之罢知政事，拜太子少保。
现代文：第二天，李适之被罢相，改任太子少保。
English: The next day, Li Shizhi was dismissed from the position of the prime minister and was appointed as the crown prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：时人知其祸未止也。
现代文：当时人们知道他的祸事还没停止。
English: At the time, it was known that his troubles were far from over.

古文：俄为李林甫所陷，贬宜春太守，适之男霅，为卫尉少卿。亦贬巴陵郡别驾。
现代文：不久，他被李林甫陷害，贬为宜春太守。李适之的儿子李霅，是卫尉少卿，也被贬为巴陵郡别驾。
English: Soon after, he was framed by Li Linfu and demoted to the position of Yichun governor. Li Shizhi's son, Li Yu, who was a guard lieutenant, was also demoted to the position of Baling County governor.

古文：适之至州，不旬月而终。
现代文：李适之到了州上，不到十天就死了。
English: Li Shizhi went to the state and died less than ten days later.

古文：时人以林甫迫杀之。
现代文：当时人们认为是李林甫迫害死的。
English: At that time, it was believed that Li Linfu died as a result of the persecution.

古文：霅乃迎丧至都，李林甫怒犹未已，令人巫告，于河南府杖杀之。
现代文：李霅就去把父亲的灵柩运回京都。李林甫怒气未消，让人诬告李霅，在河南府把他打死了。
English: Li Lan then went to carry his father's coffin back to Kyoto. Li Linfu, still angry, had someone falsely accuse Li Lan and beat him to death in Henan Province.

古文：适之好饮，退朝后，即速宾朋亲戚，谈话赋诗，曾不备于林甫。
现代文：李之好喝酒，退朝之后，就找亲戚朋友，谈话赋诗，不曾防备李林甫。
English: Li Zhi liked to drink, and after retiring from the imperial court, he would look for relatives and friends, and talk and compose poems. Li Linfu was not prepared.

古文：初适之在相位日，曾赋诗曰：朱门长不备，亲友恣相过。
现代文：当初李适之在相位上的时候，曾赋诗说：朱门长不备，亲友恣相过。
English: At the beginning, when Li Shizhi was on the stage, he once said in a poem: Zhu Menchang is not prepared, relatives and friends pass each other.

古文：今日过五十，不饮复如何。
现代文：今日过五十，不饮复如何？
English: Today is your 50th birthday, how about not drinking?

古文：及罢相，作诗曰：避贤初罢相，乐圣且啣杯。
现代文：等到他罢了相位，作诗说：避贤初罢相，乐圣且啣杯。
English: When he died, he wrote a poem, saying, "Avoid the wise at first sight, but rejoice when the cup is empty."

古文：借问门前客，今朝几个来。
现代文：借问门前客，今朝几个来。
English: By the way, I'd like to ask some of our previous guests to come this morning.

古文：及死非其罪，时人冤叹之。
现代文：他到死也不是那种罪名，当时人们都叹他太冤枉。
English: It wasn't the kind of charge he died with, when people lamented that he had been so wronged.

古文：李林甫
现代文：李林甫
English: Li Linfu

古文：李林甫宅，亦屡有怪妖。
现代文：李林甫的宅子里，也屡次发生妖怪。
English: In Li Linfu's house, there have also been repeated occurrences of monsters.

古文：其南北隅沟中，有火光大起，或有小儿持火出入，林甫恶之，奏于其地立嘉猷观。
现代文：那南北两边的沟中，有火光发出，时或还有小孩拿着火把出出入入。李林甫讨厌这种现象，奏请皇帝，在那里建起嘉猷观。
English: In the ditch on both sides of the north and south, there were flames emitting, and sometimes there were children holding torches coming and going. Li Linfu hated this phenomenon and asked the emperor to build Jiayuguan there.

古文：林甫将疾，晨起将朝，命取书囊，即常时所要事目也。
现代文：他忽然觉得书囊很重。侍从打开书囊一看，就有两只老鼠跑出来。
English: He suddenly felt that the satchel was very heavy. When the servant opened the satchel, two mice ran out.

古文：忽觉书囊颇重于常，侍者开视之，即有二鼠出焉，投于地，即变为狗，苍色壮大，雄目张牙，仰视林甫。
现代文：把老鼠扔到地上，立刻变成狗。
English: Throw a mouse on the ground and it instantly turns into a dog.

古文：命弓射之，殷然有声，狗形即灭。
现代文：两只狗都是苍色的，又壮又大，张牙瞪眼，仰视着李林甫。李林甫让人用箭射它们，发出很响的声来，狗的形体便消失了。
English: The two dogs, both pale, strong and large, stared at Li Linfu with their teeth bared. Li Linfu had them shot with arrows, which made a loud noise, and the dogs disappeared.

古文：林甫恶之，称疾不朝，其日遂病，不逾月而卒。
现代文：李林甫讨厌这件事，称病不上朝。那天他就病了。没过一个月他就死了。
English: Li Linfu hated this and said that he would not go to the emperor when he was ill. That day he fell ill. He died less than a month later.

古文：又平康坊南街废蛮院，即李林甫旧第也。
现代文：又平康坊南街的废蛮院，就是李林甫的旧宅第。
English: Also, Ping Kangfang South Street's Abandoned Barbarian Asylum is Li Linfu's former residence.

古文：林甫于正寝之后，别创一堂，制度弯曲，有却月之形，名曰偃月堂。
现代文：李林甫在正堂的后面另造一堂，结构是弯弯曲曲的，有弯月的形状，名叫偃月堂，土木建筑华美，雕刻精巧，当时是世上无双的。
English: Li Linfu built another hall at the back of the main hall. The structure is curved and has the shape of a crescent moon. It is called the Crescent Moon Hall. The civil architecture is gorgeous and the carvings are exquisite. At that time, it was unparalleled in the world.

古文：土木华丽，剞劂精巧，当时莫俦也，林甫每欲破灭人家，即入月堂，精思极虑，喜悦而出，其家不存矣。及将败，林甫于堂上，见一物如人，遍体被毛，毛如猪立，锯身钩瓜，长三尺余，以手戟林甫，目如电光而怒视之。
现代文：等到李林甫要衰败的时候，他在堂上看到一个象人的东西，遍身长毛，毛就象猪毛那样立着，身子蹲踞着，脚爪钩曲着，三尺多高，并且用手来抓挠李林甫，目光如电怒视着他。李林甫连声喝喊呵叱它，它动也不动。
English: When Li Linfu was about to decline, he saw a humanoid in the hall, covered with long hair. The hair stood up like a pig's hair, the body crouched, the paws hooked, more than three feet high, and he scratched Li Linfu with his hand. His eyes looked at him like an electric fury. Li Linfu shouted and scolded it, but it did not move.

古文：林甫连叱不动，遽命弧矢，毛人笑而跳入前堂，堂中青衣，遇而暴卒。
现代文：他急忙让人用箭射它。它笑着跳到前堂去，堂中的一位婢女，与它相遇而暴死。
English: He hurried to have someone shoot it with an arrow. Laughing, it jumped into the vestibule, where a servant girl met it and died.

古文：经于厩，厩中善马亦卒，不累月而林甫败。
现代文：它经过马厩，厩中的好马也死了。不到一个月，李林甫就败落了。
English: It passed through a stable, and a good horse in the stable also died. In less than a month, Li Linfu was defeated.

古文：杨慎矜
现代文：杨慎矜
English: by Yang Shengkun

古文：杨慎矜兄弟富贵，常不自安，每诘朝礼佛象，默祈冥卫。
现代文：杨慎矜兄弟二人很富贵，平常很不放心，常常去朝拜诘问佛像，默默地祈求神仙保祐。
English: The two Yang brothers are very rich and usually very worried. They often go to pay homage to the Buddha statue and silently pray for divine protection.

古文：一日，像前土榻上，聚尘三堆，如冢状，慎矜恶之，且虑儿戏，命扫去。
现代文：一天，神像前的土床上，聚积了三堆灰尘，样子象坟堆。杨慎矜感到讨厌，又以为是小孩的游戏，让人扫了。
English: One day, on the dirt bed in front of the statue, three piles of dust accumulated, looking like a pile of graves. Yang Shenyao felt disgusted, and thought it was a child's game, so he had it swept away.

古文：一夕如初，寻而祸作。
现代文：一夜之后，三堆灰尘如旧。不久，祸事就发生了。
English: One night later, the three piles of dust were still there, and soon, disaster struck.

古文：姜皎
现代文：姜皎
English: Jiang Chen

古文：姜皎常游禅定寺，京兆办局甚盛。
现代文：姜皎常常到禅定寺玩。京兆一带很盛行设宴聚餐。
English: Jiang Chen often went to play at the Zenjing Temple. In the Beijing-Shanghai area, it is very popular to have banquets and gatherings.

古文：及饮酒，座上一妓绝色，献酒整鬟，未尝见手，众怪之。
现代文：等到喝酒的时候，座上有一位绝美的妓女，整理头发献上酒来，却不曾见到她的手，大伙感到奇怪。
English: When it came time to drink, there was a stunningly beautiful prostitute on the table, arranging her hair to present the wine, but they never saw her hands, and everyone was surprised.

古文：有客被酒，戏曰：非支指乎？
现代文：有一位客人乘着酒兴，开玩笑说：你不是六指吧？
English: One of the guests, enjoying a glass of wine, joked: "You don't have six fingers, do you?"

古文：乃强牵视，妓随牵而倒，乃枯骸也，姜竟及祸焉。
现代文：就硬拉过来看。那妓女随着被拉而倒下，原来是一具枯骨架子。姜皎竟然遭到祸事。
English: The prostitute fell down as she was being pulled, and turned out to be a skeleton. What a misfortune for Jiang Chen.

古文：晁良贞
现代文：晁良贞
English: 良貞

古文：晁良贞能判知名，性刚鸷，不惧鬼。
现代文：晁良贞以善于判案而知名。他性情刚烈勇猛，不怕鬼。
English: Yao Liangzhen is known for being good at judging cases. He has a strong and brave temperament and is not afraid of ghosts.

古文：每年，恒掘太岁地竖屋，后忽得一肉，大于食魁，良贞鞭之数百，送通衢。
现代文：每年，他总是挖掘太岁地盖房子。后来他忽然挖到一块肉，比食魁还大。晁良贞打了它几百鞭子，送到大道上。
English: Every year, he always digs too deep to build a house. Later, he suddenly digs up a piece of meat, which is bigger than a cormorant. Hao Liangzhen beats it with hundreds of whips and sends it to the main road.

古文：其夜，使人阴影听之。
现代文：那天夜里，他派人在阴影里听着。
English: That night, he sent someone to listen in the shadows.

古文：三更后，车骑众来至肉所，问太岁：兄何故受此屈辱，不仇报之？
现代文：三更之后，很多车马骑士来到放肉的地方，问道：太岁兄为什么受这样的屈辱？不报仇吗？
English: Three days later, many chariot and horse riders came to the place where the meat was put and asked: Why did the old man suffer such humiliation?

古文：太岁云：彼正荣盛，如之奈何？
现代文：太岁说：他正在荣耀旺盛时期，能把他怎样？
English: The old man said, "He is at the height of his glory. What can I do with him?"

古文：明失所在。
现代文：天亮的时候，那肉就不见了。
English: By dawn, the meat was gone.

古文：李氏
现代文：李氏
English: Mr. Li

古文：上元末，复有李氏家，不信太岁，掘之，得一块肉。
现代文：上元末年，又有一家姓李的，不相信太岁。挖地，挖出来一块肉。
English: At the end of the 19th century, there was another family with the surname Li, who did not believe in being too old. They dug up the ground and dug out a piece of meat.

古文：相传云，得太岁者，鞭之数百，当免祸害。
现代文：民间传说，得到太岁的，打它几百鞭子，就能免除祸患。
English: According to folklore, if you get too old, give it a few hundred lashes and it will be spared from harm.

古文：李氏鞭九十余，忽然腾上，因失所在。
现代文：李氏打了它九十多鞭子，它忽然腾空而起，于是就不知哪儿去了。
English: Mr. Li whipped it with more than ninety whips, and it suddenly took off into the air, and I don't know where it went.

古文：李氏家有七十二口，死亡略尽，惟小蒯公尚存，李氏兄弟恐其家灭尽，夜中，令奴悉作鬼装束，劫小蒯，便藏之。
现代文：李氏家有七十二口人，差不多死光了，只有小蒯公还活着。李氏兄弟怕他家死绝了，夜间，让奴仆全穿上鬼的衣服，把小蒯藏起来。
English: The Li family, which had 72 members, was almost completely wiped out, with only Xiao Yao still alive. Fearing that his family was extinct, the Li brothers had their servants dress in ghostly clothes at night and hide Xiao Yao.

古文：唯此子得存，其后袭封蒯公。
现代文：只有这个儿子活下来了。他后来世袭封为蒯公。
English: This son was the only one to survive, and he later became the hereditary lord of the manor.

古文：又宁州有人，亦掘得太岁，大如方，状类赤菌，有数千眼。
现代文：又宁州有一个人，也挖到了太岁，大小象写字的方板，样子象赤菌，有几千只眼睛。
English: There is also a man in Ningzhou who was dug up when he was too old. He is the size of a writing tablet, looks like a red fungus, and has several thousand eyes.

古文：其家不识，移至大路，遍问识者。
现代文：他家不认识，把它移到大道上，四处向认识的人打听。
English: He didn't know the family, so he moved it to the main road and asked around for people he knew.

古文：有胡僧惊曰：此太岁也，宜速埋之。
现代文：有一位胡僧吃惊地说：这是太岁，应该赶快埋起来！
English: Surprised, one of the monks said, "It's too old, it should be buried quickly!"

古文：其人遽送旧处，经一年，人死略尽。
现代文：那人急忙把太岁送回原处。一年之后，这一家几乎死光了。
English: The man hurriedly sent the two-year-old back to the original place. A year later, the family was almost dead.

古文：张周封
现代文：张周封
English: Zhang Zhoufeng

古文：工部员外张周封，言旧庄在城东狗架觜西，尝筑墙于太岁上，一夕尽崩。
现代文：工部员外张周封，说他的旧庄在城东狗架觜西，曾经在太岁上砌了墙。
English: Zhang Zhoufeng, a member of the engineering department, said that his old village in the east of the city and the west of Shensi, once built a wall on Taishi.

古文：且意其基虚，工不至。
现代文：一天晚上，墙全倒了，还以为它基础不实，做工不精。
English: One night, the entire wall fell down, and he thought that the foundation was not solid and the workmanship was not fine.

古文：率庄客，指挥复筑之。高未数尺，炊者惊叫曰：怪作矣！
现代文：就率领庄客再砌。砌了不到几尺高，做饭的人惊叫道：妖怪发作啦！
English: He led the villagers to build another one. It was less than a few feet high, and the cook exclaimed, "A monster has appeared!"

古文：遽视之，饭数斗，悉跃出列地著墙，匀若蚕子，无一粒重者，矗墙之半，如界焉。
现代文：人们急忙看去，几斗米的饭，全都跳出来排在地上，附在墙上，均匀得象蚕产的子，没有一粒重复的。一直排列到墙的一半，就象有分界似的。
English: People rushed to take a look. Several buckets of rice all jumped out and lined up on the ground, attached to the wall, uniformly like the offspring of a silkworm, without a single grain repeating. They were lined up halfway up the wall, as if there was a demarcation.

古文：因谒巫，酹地谢之，亦无他。
现代文：于是就请来巫师，祭祝祷告。也没发生别的事。
English: So they invited a sorcerer to come and offer a prayer, and nothing else happened.

古文：王丰
现代文：王丰
English: Wang Feng

古文：莱州即墨县，有百娃王丰，兄弟三人。
现代文：莱州即墨县，有个叫王丰的百姓，兄弟三人。
English: In Laizhou's Jimo County, there is a peasant named Wang Feng, the third of three brothers.

古文：丰不信方位所忌，尝于太岁上掘坑，见一肉块，大如斗，蠕蠕而动。
现代文：王丰不相信方位有什么禁忌，曾经在太岁上挖坑。挖见一块肉，斗那么大，蠕蠕地动。
English: Wang Feng does not believe that there is any taboo on the position. He once dug a pit on Tai Lai. He found a piece of meat that was so big that it was squirming.

古文：遂填其坑，肉随填而出，丰惧弃之，经宿肉长，塞于庭。
现代文：于是就把那坑又填上了。但是那块肉随着填土而露出来。王丰害怕，把它扔掉。经过一宿，肉长大了，堵在院子里。
English: So he filled the hole again, but the piece of meat came out with the filling. Wang Feng was afraid and threw it away. After one night, the meat grew and got stuck in the yard.

古文：兄弟奴婢，数日内悉暴卒，惟一女子存焉。
现代文：王氏兄弟三人以及奴婢，几天内全都暴死，只剩一个女孩还活着。
English: The three Wang brothers and their servants all died within a few days. Only one girl is still alive.

古文：房集
现代文：房集
English: House Collection

古文：唐肃宗朝，尚书郎房集，颇持权势。
现代文：唐朝肃宗的时候，尚书郎房集很有权势。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suizong of the Tang Dynasty, Shang Shulang Fushu was very powerful.

古文：暇日，私弟独坐厅中，忽有小儿，十四五，髡发齐眉，而持一布囊，不知所从来，立于其前。
现代文：闲暇之日，独坐在自家厅堂里，忽然有一个十四五岁头发齐眉的小男孩，拿着一个布袋，不知从什么地方走来，站在他的面前。
English: On a day of leisure, he was sitting alone in the hall of his house, when suddenly a little boy of fourteen or fifteen years of age, with greying hair and holding a cloth bag, came from somewhere and stood in front of him.

古文：房初谓是亲故家遣小儿相省，问之不应。
现代文：房集一开始以为是亲戚朋友家打发小孩来看望。他问小孩话小孩不应，又问口袋里装的什么东西。
English: At first, he thought it was a relative or a friend who had sent a child to visit. He asked the child if it was inappropriate and what he had in his pocket.

古文：又问囊中何物，小儿笑曰：眼睛也。
现代文：小男孩笑道：是眼睛。于是就把口袋倒过来，里边有几升眼睛。
English: The little boy laughed and said, "They are eyes." So he turned the bag upside down, and inside were several liters of eyes.

古文：遂倾囊，中可数升眼睛，在地四散，缘墙上屋。
现代文：倒出来之后，在地上散放着，有的顺着墙到了屋顶上。
English: After being poured out, the waste was scattered on the ground, and some went along the wall to the roof.

古文：一家惊怪，便失小儿所在，眼睛又不复见。
现代文：一家人又惊又怪的时候，不知小男孩哪里去了。眼睛也不见了。
English: As the family watched in shock and disbelief, they wondered where the little boy had gone. His eyes were gone.

古文：后集坐事诛。
现代文：后来房集因事被杀。
English: Fusa was later killed as a result.

古文：张寅
现代文：张寅
English: Zhang Yin

古文：范阳张寅尝行洛阳故城南，日已昏暮，欲投宿故人家。
现代文：范阳的张寅经在洛阳故城的南边走路，天已到了黄昏时刻，想到朋友家投宿，经过一条狭窄的道路时，马忽然惊惧地四顾，很拘束，不肯前行。
English: Fan Yang's Zhang Yin was walking on the southern edge of the old city of Luoyang. It was already dusk, and he thought of lodging at a friend's house. When he passed through a narrow road, Ma suddenly looked around in fear, very restrained, and refused to go forward.

古文：经狭路中，马忽惊顾蹐局不肯行，寅疑前有异，因视路旁坟，大柱石端有一物，若似纱笼，形大如桥柱上慈台，渐渐长大，如数斛。及地，飞如流星，其声如雷。
现代文：张寅怀疑前面有异常情况，于是看到路边的坟地上，大石柱的一头有一个东西，好象纱笼，形状大小象桥柱上慈台，渐渐地长大，象几斛那么大，一直到地，飞起来象流星一样。它的声音象雷。
English: Zhang Yin suspected that there was an abnormal situation ahead, so he saw a crane on the roadside cemetery. At one end of the large stone pillar, there was something like a sarong, the size of which was like a bridge pillar. It gradually grew, as big as several cormorants, all the way to the ground, and flew up like a meteor. Its sound was like thunder.

古文：所历林中宿鸟惊散，可百余步，堕一人家。
现代文：它所经过的林子里宿鸟都惊散了。能有一百步远的地方，它毁了一户人家。
English: It scares away the wild birds in the woods it passes, and destroys a house a hundred paces away.

古文：寅窃记之，乃去。
现代文：张寅暗暗地记在心里，就离开了。
English: Zhang Yin secretly remembered the scene and left.

古文：后月余，重经其家，长幼无遣矣。
现代文：后来过了一个多月，张寅重又经过那户人家。一看，男女老少一个没剩。
English: Later, after more than a month, Zhang Yinsong passed by that family again. At first glance, there was not a single man, woman or child left.

古文：乃询之邻人，云：其妇养姑无礼，姑死，遂有此祸。
现代文：就向邻人打听。邻人说，那家的媳妇对婆婆不好，婆婆死了，就发生了这种祸事。
English: The neighbour said that the daughter-in-law of the family was not good to the mother-in-law, and that the mother-in-law died, and that's when the disaster happened.

古文：燕凤祥
现代文：燕凤祥
English: Yan Fengxiang

古文：平阳燕凤祥，颇涉六艺，聚徒讲授。
现代文：平阳的燕凤祥，很懂得六艺，就召集弟子讲学。
English: Yan Fengxiang of Pingyang, who knew the six arts very well, summoned his disciples to give a lecture.

古文：夜与其妻在家中，忽闻外间喑鸣之声。
现代文：夜里他与妻子在家中，忽然听到外间屋里有呜呜的声音，以为是盗贼，就轻手轻脚地窥视，正好看到一个东西。
English: At night, he and his wife were at home when they suddenly heard a whimpering sound in the outer room. Thinking it was a thief, they peered around and happened to see something.

古文：以为盗，屣履视之，正见一物，白色，长丈许，在庭中，遽掩入户。渐闻登阶，呼凤祥曰：夜未久，何为闭户？
现代文：那东西是白色的，一丈多高。它在院子里，很快就闪进门来，渐渐听到它登上台阶。它喊燕凤祥说：夜不深，为什么关了门？
English: The thing was white, a foot tall. It was in the courtyard, and soon it flashed into the door. Gradually, I heard it climb the steps. It called Yan Fengxiang and said, "It's not late at night, why is the door closed?"

古文：默不敢应，明灯自守。
现代文：燕凤祥默默地不敢出声，点着灯守在那里。
English: Yan Fengxiang silently dared not utter a word, and kept the lamp lit.

古文：须臾，门隙中有一面，如猴，即突入。
现代文：一会儿，门缝中出现一张脸，象猴。
English: A moment later, a face appeared in the crack of the door, like a monkey.

古文：呼其侣数百头，悉从隙中入。皆长二尺余，著豹皮犊鼻褌，鼓唇睚目，貌甚丑恶。
现代文：于是就突了进来，喊来它几百个同伴，都从门缝中进来，都二尺多高，穿着豹皮牛鼻子裤，鼓唇瞪眼，样子非常丑恶。
English: So he burst in and called out to his hundreds of companions, all of whom came through the cracks in the door, all of whom were more than two feet tall, wearing leopard-skin breeches, with bulging lips and staring eyes, looking very ugly.

古文：或缘屋壁，或在梁栋间，跳踯在后，势欲相逼。
现代文：有的爬到屋墙上，有的跳到梁栋之间，徘徊在他的身后，想要逼近他。
English: Some climbed onto the roof wall, others jumped between the beams, hovering behind him, trying to get close to him.

古文：凤祥左右，惟有一枕，及妇琵琶，即以掷之，中者便去。
现代文：燕凤祥的身边，只有一个枕头，以及妻子的一个琵琶。燕凤祥立刻把枕头和琵琶扔过去，被打中的就离去了。
English: Beside Yan Fengxiang, there was only a pillow and a lute belonging to his wife. Yan Fengxiang immediately threw the pillow and the lute over and left when he was hit.

古文：至明方尽，遂得免。
现代文：到天亮才走光，他这才得免。
English: It was not until dawn that he was able to escape.

古文：恍惚常见室中有衣冠大人，列在四壁，云：我平阳尧平使者。
现代文：他恍恍惚惚地，常常看到屋里有衣冠楚楚的大人物，出现在四面墙上，说：我是平阳尧平的使者。
English: In a trance, he often saw large, well-dressed figures in the room, appearing on the four walls, saying: "I am the messenger of Pingyang Xuping.

古文：诸巫祝祠祷之，终不能去。
现代文：燕凤祥请巫师祭祝祷告，到底也没有除掉，就避到精舍之中。
English: Yan Fengxiang invited the wizards to the festival to wish and pray, but he did not get rid of them at all, so he avoided them.

古文：乃避于精舍中，见佛榻下有大面，瞪目视之。
现代文：他看到佛榻下有一张大脸，瞪眼看着他。他又要逃到别处去。刚出门。
English: He saw a big face under the Buddha's bed, staring at him. He was going to run away again. He had just left the house.

古文：又将逃于他所，出门，复见群鬼，悉戏巷中。直赴凤祥，不得去。
现代文：又看见一群鬼，全在胡同里嬉戏，直扑向燕凤祥，让他没法离开。
English: He also saw a group of ghosts, all playing in the alley, rushing straight at Yan Fengxiang, making it impossible for him to leave.

古文：既无所出，而病转笃。
现代文：已经出不去了，病就变重了。
English: I couldn't go out and my illness got worse.

古文：乃多请僧设斋，结坛持咒。
现代文：就请了许多和尚设斋，筑坛念咒。
English: He invited many monks to set up a fast, build an altar and chant mantras.

古文：亦迎六丁道士，为作符禁咒，鬼乃稍去。
现代文：又请了六个道士，为他画符念咒，鬼才慢慢离去。
English: He also invited six Taoist priests to chant incantations for him, and the ghost slowly left.

古文：数日，凤祥梦有一人，朱衣墨帻，住空中，云：还汝魂魄。
现代文：几天之后，燕凤祥梦见一个红衣服黑头巾的人，住在空中，说：还给你魂魄。
English: A few days later, Yan Fengxiang had a dream about a red-clothed, black-hooded man who lived in the sky and said, "I'll give you back your soul."

古文：因而以物掷凤祥，有如妇人发者，有如绛衣者数十枚，凤祥悉受，明日遂愈焉。
现代文：就把什么东西扔给燕凤祥。有像女人头发的，有像红衣的几十枚，燕凤祥全都接受，第二天就好了。
English: He would throw something to Yan Fengxiang. There were dozens of pieces of hair that looked like a woman's, and dozens of pieces that looked like a red coat. Yan Fengxiang would accept all of them, and it would be fine the next day.

古文：王生
现代文：王生
English: Wang Sheng

古文：永泰初，有王生者，住杨州孝感寺北。
现代文：永泰初年，有一个姓王的年轻男子，住在扬州孝感寺北。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, there was a young man surnamed Wang who lived in the north of Yangzhou Xiaogan Temple.

古文：夏日被酒卧，手垂于床，其妻恐风射，举之。
现代文：夏天他喝完酒躺在床上，手垂在床下，他妻子怕他伤风，把他的手举起来。
English: In the summer he would lie drunk on his bed with his hands under the covers, and his wife, fearing he had a cold, would hold his hands up.

古文：忽有巨手出于床前，牵王臂坠床，身渐入地。
现代文：忽然有一只大手从床前伸来，把王生拉到床下，身体渐渐地没入地里。
English: Suddenly, a large hand reached out from in front of the bed, pulled Wang Sheng under the bed, and his body gradually sank into the ground.

古文：其妻与奴婢共曳之，不禁。
现代文：他妻子和奴婢们一起去拽他，也不能禁止。
English: His wife and maidservants go together to drag him, and cannot be barred.

古文：地如裂状，初余衣带，顷亦不见。
现代文：地象裂开了似的，起初还露着衣带，不一会儿也不见了。
English: It was as if the earth had cracked open, and at first he emerged with his clothes still on, but soon he was gone.

古文：其家并力掘之，深二丈许，得枯骨一具，已如数百年者。
现代文：他家全力往外挖他。挖到两丈深的时候，挖到一具枯骨，已经像埋了几百年了似的。
English: His family did their best to dig him out. When they reached a depth of two meters, they found a dead bone that looked as if it had been buried for hundreds of years.

古文：竟不知何怪。
现代文：到底也不知是什么东西作怪。
English: In the end, we don't know what caused it.

古文：叶县人梁仲朋，家在汝州西郭之街南。
现代文：叶县有一个人叫梁仲朋，家住在汝州西郭的街南。
English: In Ye County, there is a man named Liang Zhongpeng, who lives in the south of Xiguo Street in Ruzhou.

古文：渠西有小庄，常朝往夕归。
现代文：渠西有个小村庄，他常常早晨去晚上回来。
English: There is a small village to the west of the canal. He often goes there in the morning and comes back in the evening.

古文：大历初，八月十五日，天地无氛埃。
现代文：大历初年，八月十五日，天地间没有云雾和尘埃。
English: On the fifteenth day of the eighth month in the first year of the Chinese calendar, there was neither cloud nor dust in the sky.

古文：去十五六里，有豪族大墓林，皆植白杨。
现代文：十五六里外，有一个大家族的墓林，栽种的全是白杨树。
English: Fifteen or six miles away, there is a large family cemetery, planted entirely with poplar trees.

古文：是时，秋景落木，仲朋跨马及此。
现代文：这时候，秋景里到处是落叶的树木。梁仲朋骑着马来到这里，已经是二更天。
English: At this time, there are deciduous trees everywhere in the autumn scenery. It has been two days since Liang Zhongpeng came here on horseback.

古文：二更，闻林间槭槭之声，忽有一物，自林飞出。
现代文：他听到林子里有槭槭的声音。忽然有一个东西，从林子里飞出来。
English: He heard the sound of crickets in the forest. Suddenly, something flew out of the forest.

古文：仲朋初谓是惊栖鸟，俄便入仲朋怀，鞍桥上坐。
现代文：梁仲朋起初以为是惊起来的栖鸟。不一会那东西飞到梁仲朋怀中，坐到了鞍桥上。
English: At first, Liang Zhongpen thought it was a startled roosting bird. After a while, the thing flew into Liang Zhongpen's arms and sat on the bridge.

古文：月照若五斗栲栳大，毛黑色，头便似人，眼肤如珠。
现代文：月照之下，见它就象能装五斗米的箩筐那么大，毛是黑色的，头就象人，眼睛鼓起象个圆球。
English: Under the moonlight, it looked like a basket big enough to hold five buckets of rice. Its fur was black, its head was like a human's, and its eyes bulged like a round ball.

古文：便呼仲朋为弟，谓仲朋曰：弟莫惧。
现代文：它就称梁仲朋为弟，对梁仲朋说：老弟不要怕。
English: It called Liang Zhongpeng its younger brother, and said to Liang Zhongpeng: "Don't be afraid, little brother.

古文：颇有膻羯之气，言语一如人。
现代文：它身上有很大的腥膻气，说话完全象人。
English: He had a great air of authority about him, and spoke exactly like a man.

古文：直至汝州郭门外，见人家未寐，有灯火光。其怪歘飞东南去，不知所在。
现代文：一直走到汝州城门外，见城中人家还没睡觉，还有灯火的光亮，那怪物就忽然向东南飞去了，不知它飞到什么地方去了。
English: When he walked all the way to the outskirts of the city gate of Ruzhou and saw that people in the city were still awake and the lights were still on, the monster suddenly flew to the southeast, and I don't know where it went.

古文：如此仲朋至家多日，不敢向家中说。
现代文：就这样梁仲朋到家好多天，也不敢向家里人讲这件事。
English: So Liang Zhongpeng stayed at home for many days, not daring to tell his family about the incident.

古文：忽一夜，更深月上，又好天色，仲朋遂召弟妹，于庭命酌，或啸或吟，因语前夕之事。
现代文：忽然有一天夜里，更深了，月亮升起来，而且天色很好。梁仲朋于是就召弟弟妹妹们，在院子里饮酒，有的长啸，有的吟诵。
English: Suddenly, one night, it was getting darker, the moon was rising, and the sky was beautiful. Liang Zhongpeng then called his younger brothers and sisters to drink in the courtyard. Some were shouting, others were chanting.

古文：其怪忽从屋脊上飞下来，谓仲朋曰：弟说老兄何事也？
现代文：于是他就讲了前几天晚上的那件事。那怪物忽然从屋顶上飞下来，对梁仲朋说：老弟说我什么事啊？
English: So he told the story of the previous night. The monster suddenly flew down from the roof and said to Liang Zhongpeng: "What did my brother say about me?

古文：于是小大走散，独留仲朋。
现代文：于是老老少少都散去，只有梁仲朋留下来。
English: As a result, everyone dispersed, leaving only Liang Zhongpeng.

古文：云：为兄作主人。
现代文：那怪物说：我做东儿它不停地要酒。
English: The monster said, "I'll be the host, it keeps asking for wine."

古文：索酒不已，仲朋细视之，颈下有瘿子，如生瓜大，飞翅是双耳，又是翅，鼻乌毛斗轄，大如鹅卵。
现代文：梁仲朋仔细地看了看它，见它脖子下面有个瘤，象瓜那么大，飞翅既是它的两耳，又是它的两翅。它鼻上的黑毛交杂，鼻大如鹅蛋。
English: Liang Zhongpeng took a closer look at it and saw that there was a lump under its neck, as big as a melon. The flying wings were both its two ears and its two wings. The black hair on its nose was mixed, and the nose was as big as a goose egg.

古文：饮数斗酒，醉于杯筵上，如睡着。
现代文：它喝了几斗酒，醉在酒桌上，象睡着了。
English: He had drunk several glasses of wine, was drunk on the wine table, and fell asleep.

古文：仲朋潜起，砺阔刃，当其项而刺之，血流迸洒。
现代文：梁仲朋悄悄起来，磨一把大刀，向它的脖子刺去，血流迸洒。
English: Liang Zhongpeng quietly got up, sharpened a big knife, stabbed it in the neck, and the blood flowed.

古文：便起云：大哥大哥，弟莫悔。
现代文：它就起来说：大哥大哥，老弟别后悔。
English: It stood up and said: "Big brother, big brother, don't regret it.

古文：却映屋脊，不复见，庭中血满。
现代文：它退出去躲上屋顶，不再出现。院子里到处是血。
English: He retreated to the roof and never came back. There was blood all over the yard.

古文：三年内，仲朋一家三十口荡尽。
现代文：三年内，梁仲朋家三十口人全都死尽。
English: Within three years, all 30 members of the Liang Zhongpeng family were dead.

