古文：起旃蒙单阏，尽强圉大荒落，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。梁纪十三梁武帝大同元年
English: A total of three years.

古文：高祖武皇帝十三大同元年
现代文：春季正月，戊申朔，梁武帝下令大赦天下，改年号为大同。
English: In the first month of spring, Wu Shenshuo, Emperor Liang Wu ordered a general amnesty, and the year was changed to Datong.

古文：春，正月，戊申朔，大赦，改元。是日，魏文帝即位于城西，大赦，改元大统，追尊父京兆王为文景皇帝，妣杨氏为皇后。
现代文：这一天，西魏文帝在长安城西郊祭天以后登上了皇位，随即下令大赦天下，改年号为 大统 ，追尊他的父亲京兆王为文景皇帝，母亲杨氏为皇后。
English: On this day, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty ascended to the throne after the Western Suburbs Festival in Chang'an City. He immediately issued a general amnesty to the world, changed the year name to Datong, honored his father, King Jingzhao, as the Emperor of Literature, and his mother, the Yang Clan, as the Empress.

古文：魏渭州刺史可硃浑道元先附侯莫陈悦，悦死，丞相泰攻之，不能克，与盟而罢。
现代文：原北魏渭州刺史可朱浑道元起先依附于侯莫陈悦，侯莫陈悦死后，西魏的丞相宇文泰对他发起了进攻，没能取得胜利，便与他订立盟约，自己放弃了占领渭州的念头。
English: Zhu Hundu, the former Northern Wei governor of Ganzhou, initially adhered to Hou Mo Chen Yue. After the death of Hou Mo Chen Yue, the Western Wei chancellor, Yu Wentai, launched an attack on him. When he failed to achieve victory, he signed a treaty with him and gave up the idea of occupying Ganzhou.

古文：道元世居怀朔，与东魏丞相欢善。又母兄皆在鄴，由是常与欢通。
现代文：可朱浑道元一家世代居在怀朔，本人与东魏的丞相高欢关系密切，又因为母亲、哥哥都在邺城，所以常常与高欢进行联系。
English: However, Zhu Hun Do Yuan's family had lived in Waishuo for generations, and he had a close relationship with Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and because his mother and brother were in Lucheng, he often contacted Gao Huan.

古文：泰欲击之，道元帅所部三千户西北度乌兰津抵灵州，灵州刺史曹泥资送至云州。
现代文：宇文泰想要攻打他，可朱浑道元就率领手下的三千户人家从西北的乌兰津渡河到达灵州，灵州的刺史曹泥出资将他送到了云州。
English: Wu Wentai wanted to attack him, but Zhu Hun Dogen led his three thousand households from the northwest Ulanjin River to Lingzhou. Lingzhou's stingy Cao Di sent him to Yunnan.

古文：欢闻之，遣资粮迎候，拜车骑大将军。
现代文：高欢听到了这一消息，派人准备好粮食、财物前去迎接。还授予他车骑大将军的职衔。
English: When Gao Huan heard the news, he sent people to prepare food and goods to welcome him. He was also awarded the title of General of the Cavalry.

古文：道元至晋阳，欢始闻孝武帝之丧，启请举哀制服。
现代文：可朱浑道元来到晋阳之后，高欢才知道孝武帝已经去世，他就上书孝静帝请求为孝武帝举哀服丧。
English: However, it was only after Zhu Hun Dogen came to Jinyang that Gao Huan learned that Emperor Xiaowu had passed away. He wrote to Emperor Xiaojing to request that a mourning ceremony be held for Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：东魏主使群臣议之，太学博士潘崇和以为： 君遇臣不以礼则无反服，是以汤之民不哭桀，周武之民不服纣。 
现代文：东魏国主孝静帝叫各位大臣商议此事，太学博士潘崇和认为： 君主如果对臣子不以礼相待，在他死后，臣子就不用为他服丧，所以商汤的百姓不哭吊夏朝的王，周武王的百姓也不为商朝的纣王服丧。 
English: Emperor Xiaojing, the ruler of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, called the ministers to discuss the matter. Pan Chonghe, a doctor of science, believed that if the monarch did not treat his vassal with courtesy, after his death, the vassal would not have to mourn for him. Therefore, the people of Shang Tang did not cry for the king of the Xia Dynasty, and the people of King Zhou Wu did not mourn for the king of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：国子博士卫既隆、李同轨议以为： 高后于永熙离绝未彰，宜为之服。 
现代文：国子博士卫既隆、李同轨建议，认为： 高皇后与孝武帝断绝联系的事没有公布过，应该为孝武帝服丧。 
English: Dr. Kuniko Wei Yelong and Dr. Li Tonglu suggested that: The fact that Empress Gao cut off contact with Emperor Xiaowu had not been announced, and Emperor Xiaowu should be mourned.

古文：东魏从之。
现代文：孝静帝采纳了他们的意见。
English: Emperor Xiaojing accepted their opinion.

古文：魏骁骑大将军、仪同三司李虎等招谕费也头之众，与之共攻灵州，凡四旬，曹泥请降。
现代文：西魏骁骑大将军、仪同三司李虎等人招抚费也头的兵马，与他们一道攻打灵州，共持续了四十天，曹泥坚守不住，请求投降。
English: The general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, the general of the

古文：己酉，魏进丞相略阳公泰为都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台，封安定王；泰固辞王爵及录尚书，乃封安定公。以尚书令斛斯椿为太保，广平王赞为司徒。
现代文：己酉，西魏提升丞相略阳公宇文泰为都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台，还封他为安定王。宇文泰坚决推辞掉王爵与录尚书的职务，西魏文帝就封他为安定公，还任命斛斯椿为太保、广平王元赞为司徒。
English: At the same time, the Western Wei Dynasty promoted the warlord and strategist Yang Gong U Wentai to the governor of the armies at home and abroad, recorded the records of the war, and the grand march, and also appointed him as the king of stability. U Wentai resolutely refused the duties of the king and the record of the records of the war, and the Western Wei Dynasty Emperor appointed him as the prince of stability, and also appointed Jing Shizhong as Taibo, and Guangping Wangyuan Zan as Sitoru.

古文：乙卯，魏主立妃乙弗氏为皇后，子钦为皇太子。
现代文：乙卯，西魏文帝把他的妃子乙弗氏立为皇后，儿子元钦立为皇太子。
English: Meanwhile, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty made his concubine Yifu the empress and his son Yuan Qin the crown prince.

古文：后仁恕节俭，不妒忌，帝甚重之。
现代文：皇后仁爱宽厚，勤俭节约，从不妒忌，文帝非常敬重她。
English: The empress was benevolent and generous, diligent and thrifty, and never jealous. Emperor Wen respected her very much.

古文：稽胡刘蠡升，自孝昌以来，自称天子，改元神嘉，居云阳谷；魏之边境常被其患，谓之 胡荒 。
现代文：稽胡部落的刘蠡升，从孝昌年间以来，就自封为皇帝，将年号改为 神嘉 ，居住在云阳谷；魏国的边境地区经常受到他的侵扰，被称为 胡荒 。
English: Liu Bingsheng of the Qihu tribe, since the reign of Xiaochang, has proclaimed himself emperor, changed his era name to Shenjia, and lives in the Yunyang Valley; the border areas of Wei are often disturbed by him and are called Huarao.

古文：壬戌，东魏丞相欢袭击，大破之。
现代文：壬戌，东魏丞相高欢对刘蠡升发起袭击，将他们打得大败。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan launched an attack on Liu Shusheng and defeated them.

古文：勃海世子澄通于欢妾郑氏，欢归，一婢告之，二婢为证。
现代文：勃海王高欢的嫡长子高澄与他的小妾郑氏私通。高欢袭击稽胡之后回来，一个婢女把这一情况告诉了他，还有两个婢女在一旁作证。
English: Gao Huan's eldest son, Gao Cheng, was having an affair with his concubine, Zheng Shih. When Gao Huan returned from attacking Qihu, one of his maids told him about the affair, and two other maids testified on his behalf.

古文：欢杖澄一百而幽之，娄妃亦隔绝不得见。
现代文：高欢打了高澄一百大棍，并把他关押起来。娄妃也被隔离开来，不允许她见高欢。
English: Gao Huan beat Gao Cheng with a hundred big sticks and detained him. Gongfei was also isolated and was not allowed to see Gao Huan.

古文：欢纳魏敬宗之后尔硃氏，有宠，生子浟，欢欲立之。
现代文：高欢以前把孝庄帝的皇后尔朱氏收纳为妾，非常宠爱她，他们生了一个儿子叫高，高欢想要立他做自己的继承人。
English: Gao Huan used to keep Emperor Xiaozhuang's Empress Lzhu as a concubine and loved her very much. They had a son named Gao, and Gao Huan wanted to make him his heir.

古文：澄求救于司马子如。
现代文：高澄就向司马子如求救。
English: Takasumi called out to Simako for help.

古文：子如入见欢，伪为不知者，请见娄妃；欢告其故。
现代文：司马子如来到王府拜见高欢，假装不知道内情，请求见一见娄妃，高欢就把详细情况告诉了司马子如。
English: When Sima Zi came to the palace to meet Gao Huan, he pretended not to know the inside story and asked to see Gongfei. Gao Huan told Sima Zi Ru the details.

古文：子如曰： 消难亦通子如妾，此事正可掩覆。
现代文：司马子如说道： 消难也和我的小妾私通了，这件事只能掩盖起来。
English: Sima Zi said: Shi Nong also had sexual intercourse with my concubine, this matter can only be covered up.

古文：妃是王结发妇，常以父母家财奉王；王在怀朔被杖，背无完皮，妃昼夜供侍；后避葛贼，同走并州，贫困，妃然马矢自作靴；恩义何可忘也！
现代文：娄妃是王爷的结发妻子，当初经常把父母亲家里的财物拿出来给您。您在怀朔的时候被人用木杖责打，背上没有一块完好的皮肉，娄妃在旁边不分白天黑夜地侍侯您，后来为了躲避葛荣这个奸贼，你们一同出走到并州，生活贫困，王妃点燃马粪作饭，亲自制作靴子；这样的恩义怎么可以忘掉呀？
English: You were beaten with a wooden cane when you were in Waishuo, and there is not a single piece of intact flesh on your back. Princess Gongfei was by your side, serving you day and night. Later, in order to avoid Ge Rong, the traitor, you went to Bianzhou together and lived in poverty. Princess ignited horse manure to cook and made boots by yourself. How can you forget such kindness?

古文：夫妇相宜，女配至尊，男承大业。且娄领军之勋，何宜摇动！
现代文：你们夫妇二人相互适合，所生的女儿嫁给了最尊贵的皇帝，儿子高澄则继承了您的大业，况且王妃的弟弟娄领军功勋突出，怎么可以轻易动摇得了呢？
English: You and your husband are well suited to each other. Your daughter is married to the most distinguished emperor, and your son, Gaocheng, has inherited your great career. What's more, the brother of the empress is a distinguished military leader. How can you be so easily swayed?

古文：一女子如草芥，况婢言不必信邪！ 
现代文：一个女人就象小草一样，没有必要多么看重，何况婢女的话也没有必要去相信！ 
English: A woman is like a blade of grass, there is no need to value her, and there is no need to believe what a maid says!

古文：欢因使子如更鞫之。
现代文：高欢听后，就叫司马子如重新查问这件事情。
English: After listening to Gao Huan, he asked Sima Ziru to re-examine the matter.

古文：子如见澄，尤之曰： 男儿何意畏威自诬！ 
现代文：司马子如见到高澄，便责怪他道： 你身为男子汉，怎么可以因为害怕威严就自己诬蔑自己！ 
English: If Sima Zi saw Gaocheng, he would blame him, saying: You are a man, how can you slander yourself for fear of authority!

古文：因教二婢反其辞，胁告者自缢，乃启欢曰： 果虚言也。 
现代文：与此同时，他又教那两位婢女推翻自己的证词，胁迫告状的婢女上吊自杀，然后向高欢报告说： 那些话果然是无中生有。 
English: At the same time, he also instructed the two maids to overturn their own testimony, forced the accused maid to hang herself, and then reported to Gao Huan: Those words really came out of nowhere.

古文：欢大悦，召娄妃及澄。
现代文：高欢听了非常高兴，派人去叫娄妃和高澄。
English: Gao Huan was very happy to hear this and sent someone to summon Gongfei and Gao Cheng.

古文：妃遥见欢，一步一叩头，澄且拜且进。父子、夫妇相泣，复如初。
现代文：娄妃远远看见高欢，便走一步叩一个头，高澄也是一边跪拜一边向前，父亲与儿子，丈夫与妻子相互都流下了眼泪，从此又和好如初。
English: Seeing Gao Huan in the distance, Empress Dowager Yan walked one step at a time and bowed her head. Gao Cheng also kneeled and bowed forward. Father and son, husband and wife, shed tears for each other. From then on, they were as good as ever.

古文：欢置酒曰： 全我父子者，司马子如也！ 
现代文：高欢安排了酒宴，说道： 成全我们父子两人关系的，是司马子如呀！ 
English: Gao Huan arranged the wine banquet and said, "It is Sima Ziru who perfected the relationship between our father and son!

古文：赐之黄金百三十斤。
现代文：于是便赠给司马子如一百三十斤黄金。
English: So he gave Sima Zi the equivalent of one hundred and thirty catties of gold.

古文：甲子，魏以广陵王欣为太傅，仪同三司万俟受洛干为司空。
现代文：甲子，西魏任命广陵王元欣为太傅，仪同三司万俟寿洛干为司空。
English: At the same time, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed Guangling Wang Yuanxin as Taifu, and Yi Tong Sanshi Wanxu Luo Gan as Sikuo.

古文：己巳，东魏以丞相欢为相国，假黄钺，殊礼；固辞。
现代文：己巳，东魏任命丞相高欢为相国，让他可以使用皇帝的仪仗，赐以特殊礼遇，高欢坚决推辞不受。
English: After all, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed the chancellor Gao Huan as a partner country, allowing him to use the emperor's ceremonial war and giving him special courtesy. Gao Huan was resolutely not rejected.

古文：东魏大行台尚书司马子如帅大都督窦泰、太州刺史韩轨等攻潼关，魏丞相泰军于霸上。
现代文：东魏的大行台尚书司马子如率领大都督窦泰、太州刺史韩轨等人攻打潼关，西魏的丞相宇文泰在不远的霸上驻扎了军队。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Dangdai Shang Shuxi Ma Zi led by Dadu Guo Tai, Taizhou Shishi Hanluo and others to attack Shaoguan, while the Western Wei Dynasty's chancellor, Yu Wentai, stationed troops in nearby Hegang.

古文：子如与轨回军，从蒲津宵济，攻华州。
现代文：司马子如与韩轨带着人马回过头来，从蒲津连夜渡河，攻打华州。
English: Sima Zi and Han Luo returned with men and horses, crossing the river from Buzin overnight to attack Huazhou.

古文：时修城未毕，梯倚城外，比晓，东魏人乘梯而入。
现代文：此时，华州城还没有修筑完毕，云梯倚在城墙的外边，拂晓，东魏的将士攀着云梯突袭进城。
English: At this time, the construction of Huazhou City had not yet been completed. The ladder was leaning on the outside of the city wall. At dawn, the Eastern Wei soldiers climbed the ladder and stormed into the city.

古文：刺史王罴卧未起，闻阁外匈匈有声，袒身露髻徒跣，持白梃大呼而出，东魏人见之惊却。
现代文：刺史王罴躺在床上还没起来，听到屋外一片喧扰声，顾不上穿衣服，包发髻，赤着双脚，手持白色大棒，就大叫着冲了出去，东魏的将士见了他连忙惊慌地退却。
English: Zhi Shi Wang Yao was lying in bed and hadn't gotten up yet when he heard a commotion outside. He couldn't be bothered to get dressed, he had his hair tied up, his feet were bare, and he was holding a big white stick. So he rushed out shouting. When the East Wei soldiers saw him, they immediately retreated in panic.

古文：罴逐至东门，左右稍集，合战，破之，子如等遂引去。
现代文：王罴一直追逐到东门，部下渐渐集结起来，双方交战，打垮了敌人的进攻，于是司马子如人等便带领部队撤退。
English: Wang Qian chased him all the way to the east gate. His subordinates gradually gathered. The two sides fought and defeated the enemy's attack, so Sima Zi led the troops to retreat.

古文：二月，辛巳，上祀明堂。
现代文：二月，辛巳，梁武帝在明堂举行祭祀典礼。
English: In February, Emperor Liangwu held a religious ceremony in the Ming Hall.

古文：壬午，东魏以咸阳王坦为太傅，西河王悰为太尉。
现代文：壬午，东魏任命咸阳王元坦为太傅，西河王元为太尉。
English: In Renpo, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Xianyang Wang Yuantan as Taifu and Xihe Wang Yuantan as Taifu.

古文：东魏使尚书右仆射高隆之发十万夫撤洛阳宫殿，运其材入鄴。
现代文：东魏指派尚书右仆射高隆之征调十万民工拆除洛阳的宫殿，将拆下的材料运到邺城。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty assigned Shang Shu's right-hand man, Gao Long Zhao, to recruit 100,000 migrant workers to dismantle the palace in Luoyang and transport the dismantled materials to Lucheng.

古文：丁亥，上耕籍田。
现代文：丁亥，梁武帝举行亲耕藉田的仪式。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Liangwu held the ceremony of personally cultivating the fields.

古文：东魏仪同三司娄昭等攻兗州，樊子鹄使前胶州刺史严思达守东平，昭攻拔之。
现代文：东魏的仪同三司娄昭等人攻打兖州，樊子鹄派遣以前的胶州刺史严思达守卫东平，娄昭攻克了该城。
English: Yi of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, together with the Third Division of Zhi Zhao and others, attacked Zhangzhou. Zi Zi sent the former Jiaozhou general Yan Sida to defend Dongping. Zhi Zhao conquered the city.

古文：遂引兵围瑕丘，久不下，昭以水灌城；己丑，大野拔见子鹄计事，因斩其首以降。
现代文：然后，他又指挥部队包围了瑕丘，由于很长时间攻不下来，便用水灌城；己丑，大野拔乘樊子鹄议事之机，便砍掉他的脑袋向娄昭投降。
English: Then, he also commanded the troops to encircle Keguchi, and since he could not attack it for a long time, he poured water on the city; he was so ugly that Ohno took advantage of the opportunity to cut off his head and surrender to Yu Zhao.

古文：始，子鹄以众少，悉驱老弱为兵，子鹄死，各散走。
现代文：最初，樊子鹄因为部队人数少，把年老体弱的人都赶来当兵，樊子鹄一死，他们各自都散开逃走了。
English: At first, because of the small number of troops, the cripple drove the old and weak people to become soldiers. Once the cripple died, they all scattered and fled.

古文：诸将劝娄昭尽捕诛之，昭曰： 此州不幸，横被残贼，跂望官军以救涂炭。今复诛之，民将谁诉！ 
现代文：众位将领都劝娄昭把他们全都抓来杀掉，娄昭回答说： 这个州不幸，横遭残害，人们都踮起脚尖，盼望官家的军队把他们从水火之中解救出来，今天再杀掉他们，百姓将向谁申诉？ 
English: The generals all advised Zou Zhao to capture and kill them all. Zou Zhao replied, "This state is unfortunate and has been ravaged. People are on their tiptoes, hoping that the official army will rescue them from the fire and water. If you kill them again today, who will the people complain to?

古文：皆舍之。戊戌，司州刺史陈庆之伐东魏，与豫州刺史尧雄战，不利而还。
现代文：大家听了这番话，都放弃了追杀的打算。戊戌，梁朝司州刺史陈庆之讨伐东魏，与东魏豫州刺史尧雄交战，失利后返回。
English: After listening to these words, everyone gave up the idea of chasing and killing. Wu Xuan, Liang Chaozhou, Chen Qingzhi's crusade against the Eastern Wei Dynasty, fought with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Yuzhou, Shixiong, and returned after defeat.

古文：三月，辛酉，东魏以高盛为太尉，高敖曹为司徒，济阴王晖业为司空。
现代文：三月，辛酉，东魏任用高盛为太尉，高敖曹为司徒，济阴王元晖业为司空。
English: In March, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Goldman Sachs as the first lieutenant, Gao Yu Cao as the tutor, and Zi Yin Wang Yuan Rongye as the secretary.

古文：东魏丞相欢伪与刘蠡升约和，许以女妻其太子。
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢假装与刘蠡升订立和约，答应让自己的女儿做他的太子的妻子。
English: Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, pretended to conclude a peace treaty with Liu Xinsheng and promised to let his daughter become the wife of his prince.

古文：蠡升不设备，欢举兵袭之。辛酉，蠡升北部王斩蠡升首以降。
现代文：刘蠡升没有进行防备，高欢大举进兵袭击了他，辛酉，刘蠡升手下的北部王将刘蠡升斩首向高欢投降。
English: Liu Shusheng did not take precautions, Gao Huan attacked him with a large number of soldiers. Xin Yu, the northern king under Liu Shusheng, beheaded Liu Shusheng and surrendered to Gao Huan.

古文：馀众复立其子南海王，欢进击，擒之，俘其皇后、诸王、公卿以下四百馀人，华、夷五万馀户。
现代文：刘蠡升残余的将士又拥立他的儿子南海王为皇帝，高欢再加攻击，捉住了南海王，俘虏皇后、各位藩王、公卿以及以下的官员共达四百余人，另外还有华、夷各族的百姓五万余户。
English: Liu Shusheng's remaining soldiers also supported his son Nanhai Wang Rong as emperor. Gao Huan then attacked and captured Nanhai Wang, capturing more than four hundred empresses, lords, nobles and other officials, as well as more than fifty thousand households of Chinese and Yi people.

古文：壬申，欢入朝于鄴，以孝武帝后妻彭城王韶。
现代文：壬申，高欢来到邺城的皇宫朝拜孝静帝，将自己的女儿即孝武帝的皇后许配给彭城王元韶作妻子。
English: In Jinshin, Gao Huan came to the imperial palace in Handan to pay homage to Emperor Xiaojing, and betrothed his daughter, the empress of Emperor Xiaowu, to King Yuan of Pengcheng as his wife.

古文：魏丞相泰以军旅未息，吏民劳弊，命所司斟酌古今可以便时适治者，为二十四条新制，奏行之。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰考虑到战事得不到平息，官吏百姓已经疲劳，就命令有关部门斟酌参照古往今来既利于目前情况、又适合于治理天下的制度，制订出二十四项新的法令，上书得到文帝的批准后开始实行。
English: Taking into account that the war could not be calmed down and that the officials and the people were tired, the Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, ordered the relevant departments to draw up twenty-four new decrees, taking into account the system that has been beneficial to the current situation and suitable for governing the world from ancient times to the present, and to begin implementation after the petition was approved by Emperor Wen.

古文：泰用武功苏绰为行台郎中，居岁馀，泰未之知也，而台中皆称其能，有疑事皆就决之。
现代文：宇文泰任用武功人苏绰为行台郎中，一年多之后，宇文泰自己对苏绰还不大了解，但是行台官署中的人都称赞苏绰能力强，遇上有疑难的事情都去请他帮助决策。
English: After more than a year, Uwentai himself still did not know much about Su Chao, but people in the Taiwan Affairs Office praised Su Chao's strong ability and asked him to help make decisions in difficult situations.

古文：泰与仆射周惠达论事，惠达不能对，请出议之。
现代文：宇文泰与仆射周惠达讨论一件事，周惠达不能回答宇文泰的问题，就请求允许他出去跟别人一起商议此事。
English: Wu Wentai and his assistant Zhou Huida were discussing something. Zhou Huida couldn't answer Wu Wentai's question, so he asked permission to go out and discuss the matter with others.

古文：出，以告绰，绰为之区处，惠达入白之，泰称善，曰： 谁与卿为此议者？ 
现代文：周惠达出门后，把情况告诉了苏绰，苏绰为周惠达作了分析解答，周惠达进去后按照苏绰的意见作出回答。
English: After Zhou Huida went out, he told Su Qiao about the situation. Su Qiao made an analysis and answer for Zhou Huida. After Zhou Huida went in, he answered according to Su Qiao's opinion.

古文：惠达以绰对，且称绰有王佐之才，泰乃擢绰为著作郎。
现代文：宇文泰认为周惠达回答的非常好，问道： 谁和你一道作出了这番议论？ 周惠达说出了苏绰的名字，并且称赞苏绰具有辅佐君王成就大业的才能，宇文泰便提拔苏绰为著作郎。
English: U Wentai thought that Zhou Huida's answer was very good and asked: Who made this discussion with you? Zhou Huida said Su Qiao's name and praised Su Qiao's ability to help the king achieve great things, and U Wentai promoted Su Qiao as a writer.

古文：泰与公卿如昆明池观渔，行至汉故仓池，顾问左右，莫有知者。
现代文：宇文泰与公卿一起去昆明池观赏捕鱼，走到汉代传下来的仓池时，回过头来询问身旁的人，他们中没有一个知道仓池的情况。
English: When he went to Kunming Pond to watch the fishing with the nobles, he turned around to ask the people around him when he came to the storage pond handed down from the Han Dynasty. None of them knew the situation of the storage pond.

古文：泰召绰问之，具以状对。
现代文：宇文泰就把苏绰叫来，向他提问，苏绰把一件件事都讲得绘声绘色。
English: Yu Wentai called Su Qiao and asked him questions. Su Qiao told him everything in detail.

古文：泰悦，因问天地造化之始，历代兴亡之迹，绰应对如流。
现代文：宇文泰很高兴，就一直娢实教斓乜即丛旎庇惺裁淳跋螅耸⒂朊鹜龅木绾危沾率贾对答如流。
English: Yu Wentai was very pleased. He had been teaching the class for a long time, that is, he had been teaching the class for a long time.(15)

古文：泰与绰并马徐行，至池，竟不设网罟而还。
现代文：宇文泰与苏绰一道骑着马慢慢地并行，到了昆明池，竟然没有撤网就返回了。
English: Yu Wentai and Su Qiao rode slowly side by side until they arrived at Kunming Pool. They returned without removing the nets.

古文：遂留绰至夜，问以政事，卧而听之。
现代文：在丞相府，宇文泰将苏绰一直留到晚上，就一些军政大事征求苏绰的意见，苏绰讲述，宇文泰躺着倾听。
English: In the prime minister's office, Uwentai kept Su Qiao until the evening, solicited Su Qiao's opinion on some military and political events, Su Qiao told, and Uwentai lay down to listen.

古文：绰指陈为治之要，泰起，整衣危坐，不觉膝之前席，语遂达曙不厌。
现代文：当苏绰指出治理国家有哪些关键之处的时候，宇文泰从睡榻上起来，整理好衣服端正地坐着，不知不觉他的膝头已经在席子上往前移动，苏绰的话从晚上又持续到第二天清晨，宇文泰还听得不满足。
English: When Su Qiao pointed out the key points of governing the country, Wu Wentai got up from the bed, arranged his clothes and sat neatly. Unconsciously, his knee had moved forward on the mat. Su Qiao's words continued from the evening to the next morning, and Wu Wentai was still not satisfied.

古文：诘朝，谓周惠达曰： 苏绰真奇士！吾方任之以政。 
现代文：第二天早上，宇文泰对周惠达说： 苏绰真是个奇特的人，我这就让他管理重要的政务。 
English: The next morning, Wu Wentai said to Zhou Huida: Su Qiao is really a strange person, I will let him manage important government affairs.

古文：即拜大行台左丞，参典机密，自是宠遇日隆。
现代文：他随即任命苏绰为大行台左丞，让他参与掌管处理机密大事，从此苏绰越来越受到宇文泰的宠信。
English: He immediately appointed Su Chaozhou as the left-hand man of the Grand Trunk, and let him participate in the management of confidential matters. Since then, Su Chaozhou has been increasingly favored by Yu Wentai.

古文：绰始制文案程式硃出、墨入及计帐、户籍之法，后人多遵用之。
现代文：苏绰开始制订处理文书的程序如用红笔批出，用黑笔签收，还有关于计帐、户籍的一些办法，这些程序、办法后来的人大多遵照沿用了。
English: Su Biao began to develop procedures for handling documents, such as approving them with a red pen and signing them with a black pen, as well as some methods for accounting and household registration. These procedures and methods were mostly followed by later people.

古文：东魏以封延之为青州刺史，代侯渊。
现代文：东魏任用封延之为青州刺史，取代侯渊。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, he was appointed to be the official historian of Qingzhou Province, replacing Hou Yuan.

古文：渊既失州任而惧，行及广川，遂反，夜，袭青州南郭，劫掠郡县。夏，四月，丞相欢使济州刺史蔡俊讨之。
现代文：侯渊失去了一州长官的职务后心里惧怕，走到广川的时候就造反了。在夜间，他袭击了青州城南的外城，又到郡县大肆抢劫掠夺，夏季，四月，丞相高欢派遣济州刺史蔡俊讨伐侯渊。
English: Houyuan was afraid after losing the post of governor, and he rebelled when he came to Guangchuan. At night, he attacked the outer city south of the city of Qingzhou, and went to the county to loot and plunder. In the summer, in April, the prime minister Gaohuan sent the Jeju statesman Cai Jun to fight Houyuan.

古文：渊部下多叛，渊欲南奔，于道为卖浆者所斩，送首于鄴。
现代文：侯渊的部下大多数都背叛了他，他自己想要跑到南方去，在路上让一个卖浆的人杀死，首级被送到邺城。
English: Most of Hou Yuan's subordinates betrayed him, and he himself wanted to run away to the south. On the way, he was killed by a man selling syrup, and his head was sent to Lucheng.

古文：元庆和攻东魏城父，丞相欢遣高敖曹帅三万人趣项，窦泰帅三万人趣城父，侯景帅三万人趣彭城，以任祥为东南道行台仆射，节度诸军。
现代文：梁朝的元庆和攻打东魏的城父城，东魏丞相高欢派遣高敖曹统率三万人马赶往项县，窦泰统率三万人赶往城父城，侯景统率三万人马赶往彭城，又任命任祥为东南道行台仆射，统一指挥管辖这几支军队。
English: The Yuan Qing Dynasty of the Liang Dynasty attacked the city of Chengdu in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and the Eastern Wei Minister Gao Huan sent Gao Wei Cao Tong to rush to Xiang County with 30,000 horses, Dou Tai Tong to rush to Chengdu with 30,000 horses, and Hou Jing Tong to rush to Pengcheng with 30,000 horses. He also appointed Ren Xiang as the Southeastern Road Gangtai Pusha, unified command and jurisdiction of these several armies.

古文：五月，魏加丞相泰柱国。
现代文：五月，西魏加封丞相宇文泰为柱国大将军。
English: In May, the Western Wei Dynasty promoted the Minister of War, Wu Wentai, to the post of General of the Column.

古文：元庆和引兵逼东魏南兗州，东魏洛州刺史韩贤拒之。
现代文：元庆和指挥兵马逼近东魏的南兖州，东魏洛州刺史韩贤领兵抵抗。
English: Yuan Qinghe's commanding troops and horses approached the Southern Luzhou of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Han Xian's leading troops resisted in Luozhou of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：六月，庆和攻南顿，豫州刺史尧雄破之。
现代文：六月，元庆和又进攻南顿，东魏豫州刺史尧雄打败了他。
English: In June, Yuan Qinghe attacked Nantong again, and the East Wei and Yuzhou vassal Shixiong defeated him.

古文：秋，七月，甲戌，魏以开府仪同三司念贤为太尉，万俟受洛干为司徒，开府仪同三司越勒肱为司空。
现代文：秋季七月，甲戌，西魏任命开府仪同三司念贤为太尉，万俟寿洛干为司徒，开府仪同三司越勒肱为司空。
English: In the autumn of July, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and Sanji Nianxian as the first lieutenants, Manju Shulogan as the tutor, and Kaifu Yi and Sanji Yuelu as the tutor.

古文：益州刺史鄱阳王范、南梁州刺史樊文炽合兵围晋寿，魏东益州刺史傅敬和来降。
现代文：梁朝益州刺史鄱阳王萧范、南梁州刺史樊文炽带领部队联合行动，包围了晋寿，西魏的东益州刺史傅敬和前来投降。
English: Wang Xiao Fan of the Liang Dynasty and the Southern Liang Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Southern Liang Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Southern Liang Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei Dynasty and the Eastern Liang Dynasty and the Western Wei

古文：范，恢之子；敬和，竖眼之子也。
现代文：萧范是萧恢的儿子。傅敬和是傅竖眼的儿子。
English: Xiao Fan is the son of Xiao Huai. Fu Jinghe is the son of Fu Zhizhong.

古文：魏下诏数高欢二十罪，且曰： 朕将亲总六军，与丞相扫除凶丑。 
现代文：西魏文帝颁下诏书，历举了高欢的二十条罪行，并且声明： 朕将亲自统领六军，与宇文丞相一道扫除凶恶的国贼。 
English: Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty issued an edict, enumerating the twenty crimes of Gao Huan, and declared: I will personally command the Six Armies, and together with Minister Yu Wenzheng, I will sweep away the vicious traitors.

古文：欢亦移檄于魏，谓宇文黑獭、斛斯椿为逆徒，且言： 今分命诸将，领兵百万，刻期西讨。 
现代文：高欢也向西魏传布声讨文书，说宇文黑獭、斛斯椿是叛徒，并且扬言： 现在我将分头命令各位将领，率领百万人马，定下日期西讨逆贼。 
English: Gao Huan also spread rumours to the Western Wei Dynasty about the documents, saying that Uwen Heihe and Jinshchun were traitors, and threatened: "Now I will separately order the generals, leading a million people, to set a date for the West to fight the traitors."

古文：东魏遣行台元晏击元庆和。
现代文：东魏派遣行台元晏袭击梁朝的元庆和。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched the Taiyuan Yuan Shao to attack the Yuan Qing He of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：或告东魏司空济阴王晖业与七兵尚书薛琡贰于魏，八月，辛卯，执送晋阳，皆免官。
现代文：有人告发东魏的司空济阴王元晖与七兵尚书薛与西魏有勾结，八月，辛卯，他们被捉住并且押送到晋阳，高欢将二人的官职都免去了。
English: Some people denounced that Wang Yuanjun, the East Wei's Secretary of the Air Force, and the seven soldiers, Shang Shuxue, had colluded with the West Wei. In August, Xinwu, they were caught and escorted to Jinyang. Gao Huan removed both of them from their official positions.

古文：甲午，东魏发民七万六千人作新宫于鄴，使仆射高隆之与司空胄曹参军辛术共营之，筑鄴南城周二十五里。
现代文：甲午，东魏征调七万六千名民工在邺城建造新的皇宫，叫崐仆射高隆之与司空胄曹参军辛术一道负责营建，在邺城的南面又修筑起一座周长二十五里的新城。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the Eastern Wei Dynasty conscripted 76,000 migrant workers to build a new imperial palace in Lucheng, and ordered the servant Gao Longzhi to be responsible for the construction together with the officer of the Air Force Zhao Cao and the army Xin Shu. In the south of Lucheng, a new city with a circumference of 25 miles was built.

古文：术，琛之子也。
现代文：辛术是辛琛的儿子。
English: Xinzhu is the son of Xinzhu.

古文：赵刚自蛮中往见东魏东荆州刺史赵郡李愍，劝令附魏，愍从之，刚由是得至长安。
现代文：赵刚从蛮人住的地方去见东魏的东荆州刺史赵郡人李愍，规劝他归附西魏。李愍听从了赵刚的规劝，赵刚因此得到机会去长安。
English: Zhao Gang went from the place where the barbarians lived to see the East Wei's East Jingzhou chief, Zhao County's Li Yao, and persuaded him to join the West Wei. Li Yao listened to Zhao Gang's persuasion, and Zhao Gang got the opportunity to go to Chang'an.

古文：丞相泰以刚为左光禄大夫。
现代文：丞相宇文泰任命赵刚为左光禄大夫。
English: Zhao Gang was appointed as the doctor of the Left Guanglu District by the Minister of Justice, Yu Wentai.

古文：刚说泰召贺拔胜、独孤信等于梁，泰使刚来请之。
现代文：赵刚劝说宇文泰将贺拔胜、独孤信等人从梁朝召回来，宇文泰委托赵刚前去邀请。
English: Zhao Gang persuaded Yu Wentai to recall He Baxing, Du Guoxin and others from the Liang Dynasty, and Yu Wentai entrusted Zhao Gang to invite them.

古文：九月，丁巳，东魏以开府仪同三司襄城王旭为司空。
现代文：九月，丁巳，东魏任命开府仪同三司襄城王元旭为司空。
English: In September, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and the Third Division of Xiangcheng Wang Yuanxu as Siku.

古文：冬，十月，魏太师上党文宣王长孙稚卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，西魏的太师上党文宣王长孙稚去世。
English: In the winter, in October, the grandmaster of the Western Wei Dynasty, the party's top scholar, Wang Changsun, passed away.

古文：魏秦州刺史王超世，丞相泰之内兄也，骄而黩货，泰奏请加法，诏赐死。
现代文：西魏的秦州刺史王超世是丞相宇文泰的内兄，他骄横自大而且贪污财物，宇文泰上书请求绳之以法，西魏文帝颁下诏书命令王超世自杀。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Wang Chao Shih of Qin State was the brother-in-law of the chancellor Yu Wentai. He was arrogant and corrupt. Yu Wentai petitioned to be brought to justice, and the Western Wei Emperor issued an edict ordering Wang Chao Shih to commit suicide.

古文：十一月，丁未，侍中、中卫将军徐勉卒。
现代文：十一月，丁未，梁朝的侍中、中卫将军徐勉去世。
English: In November, Ding Wei, an aide-de-camp of the Liang Dynasty and the general of the Middle Guard, Xu Mian, passed away.

古文：勉虽骨鲠不及范云，亦不阿意苟合，故梁世言贤相者称范、徐云。
现代文：徐勉的骨气虽然还不象范云那么硬，但是也从不阿谀奉承，所以有此一说： 梁一代够得上贤相的只有范云和徐勉二人。 
English: Although his backbone is not as hard as Fan Yun's, he is never flattering, so there is this saying: "In Liang's generation, there are only two people who can look like a sage: Fan Yun and Xu Min."

古文：癸丑，东魏主祀圜丘。
现代文：癸丑，东魏的孝静帝在圜丘祭天。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty's Emperor Xiaozhing is said to have performed a divine rite in Shaoqiu.

古文：甲午，东魏阊阖门灾。
现代文：甲午，东魏的阊阖门发生了火灾。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, a fire broke out in the gate of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：门之初成也，高隆之乘马远望，谓其匠曰： 西南独高一寸。 
现代文：阊阖门刚刚建成的时候，高隆之骑着马从远处一望，就对修门的工匠说： 西南面比其它地方高了一寸。 
English: When the gate was just completed, Gao Longzhi looked from a distance on horseback and said to the craftsman who repaired the gate: The southwest side is one inch higher than the rest.

古文：量之果然，太府卿任忻集自矜其巧，不肯改。
现代文：一量果然如此。但是太府卿任忻集很看重这个门的精巧，不肯改动。
English: This is exactly what happened. However, the Grand Mufu Ren Shuxi valued the delicacy of this gate and refused to change it.

古文：隆之恨之，至是谮于丞相欢曰： 忻集潜通西魏，令人故烧之。 
现代文：因此，高隆之便怀恨在心，到火灾发生后便去丞相高欢那儿进谗言，说： 任忻集暗中与西魏联络，故意叫人烧掉了阊阖门。 
English: Therefore, Gao Longzhi harbored a grudge, and after the fire broke out, he went to the prime minister Gao Huan to make a speech, saying: Ren Yuxi secretly contacted the West Wei Dynasty and deliberately asked someone to burn down the gate.

古文：欢斩之。
现代文：于是，高欢就下令杀掉了任忻集。
English: As a result, Gao Huan gave the order to kill Ren Yuxi.

古文：北梁州刺史兰钦引兵攻南郑，魏梁州刺史元罗举州降。
现代文：梁朝的北梁州刺史指挥将士攻打南郑，西魏的梁州刺史元罗率领全州军民投降。
English: Northern Liangzhou Zhi Shi of the Liang Dynasty commanded his soldiers to attack Nan Zheng, and Liangzhou Zhi Shi Yuan Luo of the Western Wei Dynasty led the military and civilians of the whole state to surrender.

古文：东魏以丞相欢之子洋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，封太原公。
现代文：东魏任命丞相高欢的儿子高洋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，并封他为太原公。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed the son of the chancellor Gao Huan, Gao Yang, as the commander of the cavalry, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments, and made him the ruler of Taiyuan.

古文：洋内明决而外如不慧，兄弟及众人皆嗤鄙之；独欢异之，谓长史薛琡曰： 此儿识虑过吾。 
现代文：高洋内心既果断而又精明，可是外表上看起来好象智力不够，他的兄弟以及其他的许多人都嗤笑鄙视他，唯独高欢认为他与众不同，曾经对长史薛说： 这孩子的见识与思考问题的能力都超过我。 
English: Gao Yang's heart is resolute and shrewd, but on the outside he seems to lack intelligence. His brothers and many others laugh and despise him, but Gao Huan thinks he is different. He once said to Chang Shi Xue: This child's insight and ability to think about problems are beyond me.

古文：幼时，欢尝欲观诸子意识，使各治乱丝，洋独抽刀斩之，曰： 乱者必斩！ 
现代文：还在高洋幼小的时候，高欢曾经想观察一下各位儿子的智能如何，让他们各自整理一团乱丝，唯独高洋一人抽出刀来砍断了乱丝，说： 乱的东西就一定要砍断！ 
English: When Gao Yang was still a child, Gao Huan once wanted to observe the intelligence of each of his sons and let them sort out a mess of yarns. However, only Gao Yang took out a knife to cut the mess of yarns and said: "You must cut the mess!"

古文：又各配兵四出，使都督彭乐帅甲骑伪攻之，兄澄等皆怖挠，洋独勒众与乐相格，乐免胄言情，犹擒之以献。
现代文：高欢还给儿子们各自配备了兵力让他们四面出击，又叫都督彭乐率领戴盔裹甲的骑兵假装进攻，长兄高澄等人都害怕得乱了阵脚，只有高洋布置兵力与彭乐对抗，彭乐脱去盔甲叙述情况时，高洋还擒拿了彭乐，将他献给高欢。
English: Gao Huan also equipped his sons with troops so that they could attack in all directions. He also asked the governor, Peng Le, to lead the armored cavalry to pretend to attack. The eldest brother, Gao Cheng, and others were afraid of being disorganized. Only Gao Yang arranged troops to confront Peng Le. When Peng Le took off his armor to describe the situation, Gao Yang also captured Peng Le and dedicated him to Gao Huan.

古文：初，大行台右丞杨愔从兄岐州刺史幼卿，以直言为孝武帝所杀，愔同列郭秀害其能，恐之曰： 高王欲送卿于帝所。 
现代文：当初，大行台右丞杨的堂兄、岐州刺史杨幼卿，因为言语直率，被孝武帝下令杀害。同僚郭秀妒嫉杨的才能，就吓唬杨说： 高王要把您送到皇上那里去。 
English: At the beginning, Yang's cousin, Yang Yuqing of Qizhou, was killed by order of Emperor Xiaowu because of his outspokenness. His colleague Guo Xiu, jealous of Yang's talent, threatened Yang and said: Gao Wang wants to send you to the emperor.

古文：愔惧，变姓名逃于田横岛。
现代文：杨害怕了，便更改了姓名逃到田横岛。
English: Afraid, Yang changed his name and fled to Tianyou Island.

古文：久之，欢闻其尚在，召为太原公开府司马，顷之，复为大行台右丞。
现代文：很久以后，高欢听说他崐还在人世，把他叫了回来，任命他为太原公开府司马，没有多少时间，又恢复了他的大行台右丞的职务。
English: After a long time, Gao Huan heard that he was still alive, called him back and appointed him as the chief of the Taiyuan Public Security Bureau. In a short time, he resumed his duties as the head of the Taiyuan Public Security Bureau.

古文：十二月，甲午，东魏文武官量事给禄。
现代文：十二月，甲午，东魏根据文武百官承担事务的轻重，给予相应的俸禄。
English: In the afternoon of December, the Eastern Wei Dynasty began to give the corresponding salary according to the importance of the affairs undertaken by the civil and military officials.

古文：魏以念贤为太傅，河州刺史梁景睿为太尉。
现代文：西魏任命念贤为太傅，河州刺史梁景睿为太尉。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Nian Xian as Taifu, and Hezhou Jishi Liang Jing Rui as Taifu.

古文：是岁，鄱阳妖贼鲜于琛改元上愿，有众万馀人。
现代文：这一年，鄱阳地区的妖贼鲜于琛将年号改为 上愿 ，他的属下共有一万多人。
English: In this year, the demon thief in the Poyang region, Sheng Yuqi, changed the year name to Shangyi, and his subordinates totaled more than 10,000 people.

古文：鄱阳内史吴郡陆襄讨擒之，案治党与，无滥死者。
现代文：梁朝鄱阳内史吴郡人陆襄前去讨伐，捉住了鲜于琛，并按照罪行大小分别惩治了他的同伙，没有出现滥杀无辜的现象。
English: Liang Zhaohui, a scholar from Wuxi County, went to fight against Lu Xiang, caught him, and punished his accomplices separately according to the size of the crime. There was no indiscriminate killing of innocents.

古文：民歌之曰： 鲜于平后善恶分，民无枉死赖陆君。 
现代文：老百姓都歌唱道： 鲜于平后善恶分，民无枉死赖陆君。 
English: The common people all sang: Rarer than in the Heian period is the distinction between good and evil, the people did not die in vain because of Lu Jun.

古文：柔然头兵可汗求婚于东魏，丞相欢以常山王妹为兰陵公主，妻之。
现代文：柔然的头兵可汗向东魏求婚，丞相高欢封常山王的妹妹为兰陵公主，将她许配给头兵可汗作妻子。
English: The soft-hearted head soldier Khan proposed marriage to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. The chancellor Gao Huan designated the sister of the King of Changshan as Lanling Princess, and betrothed her to the head soldier Khan as his wife.

古文：柔然数侵魏，魏使中书舍人库狄峙奉使至柔然，与约和亲，由是柔然不复为寇。
现代文：柔然多次侵扰西魏，西魏委派中书舍人库狄峙带着使命到达柔然，与头兵可汗订立了和亲条约，从此柔然不再入侵西魏。
English: Juran repeatedly invaded the Western Wei Dynasty. The Western Wei Dynasty sent the scholar Ku Diqi to Juran with a mission, and concluded a peace treaty with the head soldier Khan. From then on, Juran would no longer invade the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：高祖武皇帝十三大同二年春，正月，辛亥，魏祀南郊，改用神元皇帝配。
现代文：二年春季，正月辛亥，西魏文帝在南郊祭天，改以神元皇帝配享。
English: In the spring of the second year, the first month of Xinhai, the Western Wei Emperor Wen in the southern suburb of the festival, changed to the Emperor Shenyuan.

古文：甲子，东魏丞相欢自将万骑袭魏夏州，身不火食，四日而至，缚槊为梯，夜入其城，擒刺史斛拔俄弥突，因而用之，留都督张琼将兵镇守，迁其部落五千户以归。
现代文：甲子，东魏丞相高欢亲自率领一万名骑兵袭击西魏的夏州，一路急行军，没有停下生火做饭，跑了四天便赶到了目的地，他们将长矛绑起来结成云梯，连夜攻入城中，抓住了刺史斛拔俄弥突，高欢设法把斛拔俄弥突争取过来后又起用了他。接着，高欢留下都督张琼领兵镇守夏州，又下令迁移斛拔俄弥突部落中的五千户人家，由自己带着返回晋阳。
English: Gao Huan, the Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan personally led ten thousand cavalry to attack West Wei's Xiazhou, marching rapidly all the way. They did not stop to make fire for cooking, ran for four days and arrived at their destination. They tied their spears together to form a ladder, entered the city overnight, and captured Zi Shi Zi Bao Mi Du, Gao Huan tried to win Zi Bao Mi Du over and then used him. Next, Gao Huan left the governor Zhang Qiong to lead the troops to guard Xiazhou, and ordered the relocation of five thousand households in the Zi Bao Mi Du tribe, returning to Jin

古文：魏灵州刺史曹泥与其婿凉州刺史普乐刘丰，复叛降东魏，魏人围之，水灌其城，不没者四尺。
现代文：西魏的灵州刺史曹泥与他的女婿凉州刺史普乐人刘丰又投降了东魏，西魏的兵马包围了他们，用水灌他们的州城，城外积水只差四尺就要淹过城头了。
English: The Lingzhou statesman Cao Di of the Western Wei Dynasty and his son-in-law Liangzhou statesman Liu Feng also surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. The soldiers and horses of the Western Wei Dynasty surrounded them and flooded their state capital with water. The accumulated water outside the city was only four feet away from flooding the city.

古文：东魏丞相欢发阿至罗三万骑径度灵州，绕出魏师之后，魏师退。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢派阿至罗三万名骑兵越过灵州，绕到西魏军队的背后出击，西魏的军队撤退了。
English: The Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan sent thirty thousand cavalrymen to cross Lingshou and attack around the back of the Western Wei army. The Western Wei army retreated.

古文：欢帅骑迎泥及丰，拔其遗户五千以归，以丰为南汾州刺史。
现代文：高欢率领骑兵迎接曹泥与刘丰，并把他们遗留下的五千户人家迁到晋阳。高欢任命刘丰为南汾州的刺史。
English: Gao Huan led the cavalry to welcome Cao Di and Liu Feng, and moved the five thousand households they left behind to Jinyang. Gao Huan appointed Liu Feng as the governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：东魏加丞相欢九锡；固让而止。
现代文：东魏孝静帝赐给丞相高欢九锡，高欢坚决推让，于是作罢。
English: Emperor Xiaozhing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty gave the chancellor Gao Huan nine pennies, Gao Huan resolutely gave in, and then quit.

古文：上为文帝作皇基寺以追福，命有司求良材。
现代文：梁武帝为了使他已故的父亲文皇帝祈求冥福，准备给他建造一座皇基寺，于是命令有关的官员去寻找上等的木材。
English: In order to pray for the repose of the soul of his late father, Emperor Wen, Emperor Liangwu ordered officials to find the best wood to build a temple for him.

古文：曲阿弘氏自湘州买巨材东下，南津校尉孟少卿欲求媚于上，诬弘氏为劫而杀之，没其材以为寺。
现代文：曲阿人弘氏从湘州买了巨型木材往东边运送，南津校尉孟少卿想用这些木材向梁武帝献媚，就诬蔑弘氏是抢劫犯，杀掉了他，将他的木材没收后用来建造寺庙。
English: Qu A Ren Hong bought huge timber from Hunan and transported it to the east. Meng Shaoqing, the captain of Nanzin, wanted to use this timber to flatter Emperor Liang Wudi, so he slandered Hong as a robber, killed him, and confiscated his timber to build a temple.

古文：二月，乙亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：二月，乙亥，梁武帝在藉田耕作。
English: In February, in the Year of the Boar, Chen Xuandi held a cultivation ceremony in a rented field.

古文：东魏勃海世子澄，年十五，为大行台、并州刺史，求入鄴辅朝政，丞相欢不许。丞相主簿乐安孙搴为之请，乃许之。
现代文：东魏勃海王高欢的嫡长子高澄，年仅十五岁，就已经成为大行台、并州刺史。他要求到国都邺城辅助处理朝中的政务，丞相高欢没有答应，丞相主簿乐安人孙搴替高澄请求，高欢这才同意。
English: The eldest legitimate son of the East Wei Bohai King Gao Huan, Gao Cheng, was only fifteen years old, and had already become a great scholar and a state historian. He asked to go to the national capital of Lucheng to help deal with the government affairs of the central government, but the prime minister Gao Huan did not agree. The prime minister's main book, Sun Yat-sen, a man of peace, asked to replace Gao Cheng, and Gao Huan agreed.

古文：丁酉，以澄为尚书令，加领军、京畿大都督。魏朝虽闻其器识，犹以年少期之。既至，用法严峻，事无凝滞，中外震肃。
现代文：丁酉，孝静帝任命高姵挝惺榱罴媪炀⒕╃艽蠖级健撼舷滤淙欢荚潘牟拍苡胧都瑣但还是把他看成孩子，没想到高澄上任之后，执法严厉，办起事来雷厉风行，朝廷内外的人们都为此感到震惊，同时肃然起敬。
English: However, Emperor Xiaojing appointed Gao Jizhen as the 14th and 14th grade of Jianzhen, but he still regarded him as a child. It did not occur to him that after Gao Jizhen took office, the law enforcement was strict and the handling of affairs was vigorous. People inside and outside the imperial court were shocked by this, and at the same time, they were awestruck.

古文：引并州别驾崔暹为左丞、吏部郎，亲任之。
现代文：高澄引荐并州别驾崔暹为左丞、吏部郎，非常亲近信任他。
English: Takasumi recommended and appointed Choi Siam as his left-hand man and secretary, and trusted him very closely.

古文：司马子如、高季式召孙搴剧饮，醉甚而卒。
现代文：司马子如、高季式叫了孙搴一同痛饮，孙搴醉得不省人事，一命呜呼。
English: Sima Zi Ru, a high-ranking official, ordered Sun Yao to drink heavily together. Sun Yao was so intoxicated that he lost consciousness and died.

古文：丞相欢亲临其丧。
现代文：丞相高欢亲自到孙搴的灵堂哀悼。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan personally went to Sun Yat-sen's funeral hall to mourn.

古文：子如叩头请罪，欢曰： 卿折我右臂，为我求可代者！ 
现代文：司马子如向高欢叩头请罪，高欢说道： 你折断了我的右臂，现在得替我找一个能够代替他的人！ 
English: If Sima Zi bowed to Gao Huan and pleaded guilty, Gao Huan said: You broke my right arm, now I have to find someone who can replace him!

古文：子如举中书郎魏收，欢以收为主簿。
现代文：司马子如举荐中书郎魏收，高欢便任命魏收为丞相主簿。
English: If Sima Zi recommended Wei Jie, the middle school teacher, Gao Huan appointed Wei Jie as the chief secretary of the prime minister.

古文：收，子建之子也。
现代文：魏收是魏子建的儿子。
English: Wei Shu is the son of Wei Zijian.

古文：它日，欢谓季式曰： 卿饮杀我孙主簿，魏收治文书不如我意；司徒尝称一人谨密者为谁？ 
现代文：有一天，高欢对高季式说道： 你喝酒时害死了我的孙主簿，眼下魏收处理公文不合我的意，司徒曾经说一个人办事谨慎、严密，指的是谁？ 
English: One day, Gao Huan said to Gao Jizhi: You killed my grandchild when you were drinking. At the moment, Wei's collection and handling of official documents is not to my liking. Sitou once said that a person should be careful and strict in his work. Who is he referring to?

古文：季式以司徒记室广宗陈元康对，曰： 是能夜中闇书，快吏也。 召之，一见，即授大丞相功曹，掌机密，迁大行台都官郎。
现代文：高季式回答说是司徒记室广宗人陈无康，还介绍道： 他能够在夜间昏暗无光的情况下撰写公文，是一个办事麻利、效率很高的官员。 高欢把陈元康叫来，一见面就授予他大丞相功曹的官职，让他掌握机密要事，很快又提升为大行台都官郎。
English: Gao Ji replied that it was Chen Wu Kang, a member of the Guangzong family of the Stud Book Office, and also introduced: He is able to write official documents in the dark at night, and is a very efficient and efficient official. Gao Huan called Chen Yuan Kang, and at the first meeting, he awarded him the official position of Senior Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, let him master confidential important matters, and soon promoted him to Da Xiangtai.

古文：时军国多务，元康问无不知。
现代文：当时，国家的军政事务繁多，只要问到陈元康，陈元康没有不知道的。
English: At that time, the military and political affairs of the country were numerous. As long as Chen Yuankang was asked, there was nothing that Chen Yuankang did not know.

古文：欢或出，临行，留元康在后，马上有所号令九十馀条，元康屈指数之，尽能记忆。
现代文：高欢有一次外出，临行前把陈元康带在身后，自己在马上下达了九十多条指示，陈元康屈着指头一一道来，都记得一清二楚。
English: Gao Huan once went out. Before leaving, he took Chen Yuankang behind him. He immediately issued more than 90 instructions. Chen Yuankang bent his fingers and memorized them all.

古文：与功曹平原赵彦深同知机密，时人谓之陈、赵。
现代文：他与功曹平原人赵彦深一同掌握重要机密，当时的人们把他们称作陈、赵。
English: He held important secrets together with Zhao Yanshen, a native of the Gongcao Plain. People at that time called them Chen and Zhao.

古文：而元康势居赵前，性又柔谨，欢甚亲之，曰： 如此人诚难得，天赐我也！ 
现代文：陈元康的地位在赵彦深的前头，而且陈元康生性又很柔顺严谨，所以高欢跟他非常亲近，曾感叹道 这样一个人实在难得，是上天恩赐给我的。 
English: Chen Yuankang's status is ahead of Zhao Yanshen, and Chen Yuankang's birth nature is very soft and strict, so Gao Huan is very close to him. He once lamented that such a person is really rare and was given to me by God.

古文：彦深名隐，以字行。
现代文：赵彦深名叫赵隐，通常用表字。
English: Zhao Yanshen's name is Zhao Ying, usually written with a capital letter.

古文：东魏丞相欢令阿至罗逼魏秦州刺史万俟普，欢以众应之。
现代文：东魏丞相高欢命令阿至罗进逼西魏的秦州刺史万俟普，高欢本人又率领了大队人马策应阿至罗。
English: Gao Huan, the Eastern Wei chancellor, ordered A Zhi Luo to enter Qin State to force out the Western Wei, and Gao Huan himself led a large group of soldiers to seize A Zhi Luo.

古文：三月，戊申，丹杨陶弘景卒。
现代文：三月，戊申，梁朝的丹阳人陶弘景去世。
English: In March, Tao Hongjing, a Danyang resident of the Liang Dynasty, passed away.

古文：弘景博学多艺能，好养生之术。
现代文：陶弘景学识渊博，多才多艺，对养生术有特殊的兴趣。
English: Tao Hongjing is well-educated, multi-talented and has a special interest in health care.

古文：仕齐为奉朝请，弃官，隐居茅山。
现代文：他在南齐担任过奉朝请的官职，后来又主动放弃，在茅山隐居起来。
English: He once held an official position in Nanzhi at the request of the imperial court, but later gave it up voluntarily and went into seclusion in Mao Shan.

古文：上早与之游，及即位，恩礼甚笃，每得其书，焚香虔受。
现代文：梁武帝早年曾经和他一同游处，等到登上皇位以后，总是给予他很不寻常的恩惠与礼遇，每次收到他的信，都要点上香后才虔诚地阅读。
English: Emperor Liangwu used to travel with him in the early years. After he ascended the throne, he always gave him very unusual favors and courtesies. Every time he received a letter from him, he had to burn incense before reading it religiously.

古文：屡以手敕招之，弘景不出。
现代文：梁武帝多次亲自写信邀请陶弘景到朝廷做官，陶弘景始终没有出山。
English: Emperor Liangwu personally wrote to Tao Hongjing several times to invite him to work as an official in the imperial court, but Tao Hongjing never went to the mountain.

古文：国家每有吉凶征讨大事，无不先咨之，月中常有数信，时人谓之 山中宰相 。
现代文：每当国家出现吉祥或不祥的征兆的时候，或有出征、讨伐这样大事的时候，梁武帝必定要先向他咨询，有时一个月里面两人要通好几封信，当时的人们称他是 山中宰相 。
English: Whenever auspicious or ominous signs appeared in the country, or when there was a major event such as a campaign or crusade, Emperor Liangwu would certainly consult him first. Sometimes the two would exchange several letters in a month. People at that time called him the prime minister of the mountains.

古文：将没，为诗曰： 夷甫任散诞，平叔坐论空；岂悟昭阳殿，遂作单于宫！ 
现代文：陶弘景去世之前，写了这样一首诗： 王衍任情放诞，何晏议论虚空。岂能想到昭阳殿，竟然作了单于宫。 
English: Before the death of Tao Hongjing, he wrote such a poem: "Wang Yan Ren indulged in sensual indulgence, why did he talk about emptiness. Couldn't he have thought of Shoyang Palace, and even made it into the palace?"

古文：时士大夫竞谈玄理，不习武事，故弘景诗及之。
现代文：那个时代，大小官员都竞相谈论玄理，不愿意学习练兵打仗方面的东西，所以陶弘景写诗用魏晋时期的事情来影射梁朝。
English: At that time, officials of all ranks were eager to talk about metaphysics and unwilling to learn about military training and warfare, so Tao Hongjing wrote poems using the events of the Wei and Jin Dynasties to allude to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：甲寅，东魏以华山王鸷为大司马。
现代文：甲寅，东魏任命华山王元鸷为大司马。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Huashan Wang Yuanxuan as the grand steward.

古文：魏以凉州刺史李叔仁为司徒，万俟洛为太宰。
现代文：西魏任命凉州史李叔仁为司徒，万俟洛为太宰。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Liangzhou Shi Li Shuren as a scholar and Wan Jiao Luo as Dazai.

古文：夏，四月，乙未，以骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪元法僧为太尉。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙未，梁朝任命骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司之仪元法僧为太尉。
English: In the summer, in April, the Liang Dynasty appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the monk Yi Yuan of the Three Departments as the first lieutenants.

古文：尚书右丞考城江子四上封事，极言政治得失。
现代文：梁朝尚书右丞考城人江子四向梁武帝呈上用袋封好的秘密奏折，里面详尽地论述了国家在政治方面的得失。
English: Liang Zhaozhong (梁朝尚書右丞), a member of the imperial court, presented a sealed secret report to Emperor Liangwu (梁武帝), which discussed in detail the country's political gains and losses.

古文：五月，癸卯，诏曰： 古人有言， 屋漏在上，知之在下 。朕有过失，不能自觉，江子四等封事所言，尚书可时加检括，于民有蠹患者，宜速详启！ 
现代文：五月，癸卯，梁武帝颁下诏书，说： 古人有一句话，叫做 屋顶上漏雨，屋下人察觉 ，我有过失的话，自己不一定察觉得到，江子四等人在密封的奏折中说到的情况，尚书可时时加以检查，凡是于人民有害的事，应该及时启奏。 
English: In May, Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty issued an edict, saying: The ancients had a saying, "If there is a leak on the roof, people under the roof will notice it. If I am at fault, I may not notice it myself. The situation mentioned by Jiang Zi and others in the sealed report can be checked from time to time. Anything that is harmful to the people should be played in time.

古文：戊辰，东魏高盛卒。
现代文：戊辰，东魏的高盛去世。
English: Wang Chen, the Goldman Sachs of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, passed away.

古文：魏越勒肱卒。
现代文：西魏的越勒肱去世。
English: Western Wei's Yue Lecheng passed away.

古文：魏秦州刺史万俟普与其子太宰洛、豳州刺史叱干宝乐、右卫将军破六韩常及督将三百人奔东魏，丞相泰轻骑追之，至河北千馀里，不及而还。
现代文：西魏的秦州刺史万俟普与他担任太宰的儿子万俟洛、豳州的刺史叱干宝乐、右卫将军破六韩常以及他们所督率的将领三百人一起投奔了东魏，丞相宇文泰带着轻装的骑兵追赶，一直追到黄河以北一千多里的地方，但是没有追上，只好返回。
English: The Western Wei chancellor of Qin, Wanzhong Pu, together with his son Wanzhong Luo, who served as Dazai, the Western Wei chancellor of Qin, Wanzhong Ganbao Le, the Western Wei general of the 6th Han, and 300 generals under their supervision, rushed to the Eastern Wei. The chancellor of the Western Wei, Yu Wentai, with lightly armed cavalry, chased them all the way to a place more than a thousand miles north of the Yellow River, but did not catch up, and had to return.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，东魏大赦。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚子，东魏孝静帝下令大赦天下。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Gaozi of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty issued a general amnesty.

古文：上待魏降将贺拔胜等甚厚，胜请讨高欢，上不许。
现代文：梁武帝给予北魏降将贺拔胜等人优厚的待遇，贺拔胜请求带兵讨伐高欢，梁武帝没有允许。
English: Emperor Liangwu gave generous treatment to the Northern Wei general He Bansheng and others. He Bansheng requested to lead an army to fight Gaohuan, but Emperor Liangwu did not allow it.

古文：胜等思归，前荆州大都督抚宁史宁谓胜曰： 硃异言于梁主，无不从，请厚结之。 
现代文：贺拔胜等人想回到北方去，前荆州大都督抚宁人史宁对贺拔胜说： 凡是朱异讲的话，皇上没有不听从的，请你好好地结交他。 
English: When He Baxian and others wanted to return to the north, the former governor of Jingzhou, Fanning Shi Ning, said to He Baxian, "The emperor does not disobey anything Zhu Xi says. Please make good friends with him."

古文：胜从之。
现代文：贺拔胜接受了他的意见。
English: He Baxing accepted his opinion.

古文：上许胜、宁及卢柔皆北还，亲饯之于南苑。
现代文：后来，梁武帝允许贺拔胜、史宁以及卢柔都返回北方，还亲自在南苑为他们饯行。
English: Later, Emperor Liangwu allowed He Baxian, Shining and Lu Rong to return to the north, and personally escorted them to the South Courtyard.

古文：胜怀上恩，自是见鸟兽南向者皆不射之。
现代文：贺拔胜牢记着梁武帝的大恩，从此再看见往南面去的飞禽走兽，都不放箭射杀。
English: He Baxing kept in mind the great kindness of Emperor Liangwu, and from then on, when he saw birds and beasts heading south, he would shoot them with arrows.

古文：行至襄城，东魏丞相欢遣侯景以轻骑邀之，胜等弃舟自山路逃归，从者冻馁，道死者太半。
现代文：他们路过襄城的时候，东魏的丞相高欢派遣侯景带着轻装骑兵前来拦截，贺拔胜等人丢弃了木船沿着小路逃了回去，跟随的人又冷又饿，有一大半死在了路上。
English: When they passed Xiangcheng, the Eastern Wei chancellor Gao Huan sent Hou Jing with light cavalry to intercept them. He Baxing and others abandoned the wooden boat and fled back along the path. Those who followed were cold and hungry, and more than half of them died on the way.

古文：既至长安，诣阙谢罪。魏主执胜手歔欷曰： 乘舆播越，天也，非卿之咎。 
现代文：他们历尽千辛万苦，到达长安之后，去皇宫请罪，西魏文帝拉住贺拔胜的手，一边抽泣一边说： 朕流离颠沛，这是天意，不是你们自己的过错。 
English: They went through a lot of hardships. After arriving in Chang'an, they went to the imperial palace to plead guilty. Emperor Weiwen grasped He Baxian's hand, sobbing as he said: "I'm a wanderer. This is God's will, not your own fault."

古文：丞相泰引卢柔为从事中郎，与苏绰对掌机密。
现代文：丞相宇文泰推荐卢柔为从事中郎，与苏绰一道掌握重要机密。
English: The chancellor, Uwentei, recommended that Lu Rong be engaged as a middle-ranking official, and together with Su Zuo, mastered important secrets.

古文：九月，壬寅，东魏以定州刺史侯景兼尚书右仆射、南道行台，督诸将入寇。
现代文：九月，壬寅，东魏任命定州刺史侯景兼任尚书右仆射、南道行台，督率各位将领侵犯梁朝。
English: In September, in Ren'in, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Dingzhou assassin Hou Jing to serve as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha and Nan Dao's right-hand man Xingtai, and led the generals to invade the Liang Dynasty.

古文：魏以扶风王孚为司徒，斛斯椿为太傅。
现代文：西魏任命扶风王元孚为司徒，斛斯椿为太傅。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Fu Feng Wang Yuan Fu as the tutor, and Gong Shi Qin as the grand tutor.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，诏大举伐东魏。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙亥，梁武帝颁下诏书命令大举讨伐东魏。
English: In the winter, October, Yihai, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict ordering a large-scale campaign against the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：东魏侯景将兵七万寇楚州，虏刺史桓和；进军淮上，南、北司二州刺史陈庆之击破之，景弃辎重走。
现代文：东魏的侯景统率七万兵马入侵楚州，俘虏了刺史桓和；接着又向淮河的上游地区进军，南、北司二州的刺史陈庆之击败了这支东魏部队，侯景丢弃了各种不便随身携带的军用物资，逃跑了。
English: The Eastern Wei's Hou Jingtong led seventy thousand soldiers and horses to invade Chuzhou and captured the assassin Shi Huanhe; he then marched to the upper reaches of the Huai River. The assassin Chen Qingzhi of the two states of South and North defeated this East Wei force. Hou Jingtong discarded all kinds of military materials that were inconvenient to carry with him and fled.

古文：十一月，己亥，罢北伐之师。
现代文：十一月己亥，梁武帝下令让讨伐北方的部队停止进军。
English: In November Jihai, Emperor Liangwu ordered the troops fighting in the north to stop marching.

古文：魏复改始祖神元皇帝为太祖，道武皇帝为烈祖。
现代文：西魏又重新改为尊始祖神元皇帝为太祖，道武皇帝为烈祖。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, it was again changed to Emperor Shingen as the great-grandfather, and Emperor Daowu as the great-grandfather.

古文：十二月，东魏以并州刺史尉景为太保。
现代文：十二月，东魏任命并州刺史尉景为太保。
English: In December, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed the eunuch of the state, Shifu Jianjing, as Taibo.

古文：壬申，东魏遣使请和，上许之。
现代文：壬申，东魏派遣使者去梁朝求和，梁武帝答应了。
English: In Jinshin, the Eastern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty to sue for peace, and Emperor Wu of Liang agreed.

古文：东魏清河文宣王亶卒。
现代文：东魏的清河文宣王元去世。
English: Wang Yuan of the East Wei Dynasty's Qing Dynasty, Wen Xuan, passed away.

古文：丁丑，东魏丞相欢督诸军伐魏，遣司徒高敖曹趣上洛，大都督窦泰趣潼关。
现代文：丁丑，东魏的丞相高欢督率各路军队讨讨伐西魏，便派遣司徒高敖曹前往上洛，大都督窦泰前往潼关。
English: Ding Yuxi, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Huan, led the armies of all directions to fight against the Western Wei Dynasty, and then sent Stou Gao Yao Cao to Shangluo, and the grand governor Dou Tai to Shaoguan.

古文：癸未，东魏以咸阳王坦为太师。
现代文：癸未，东魏任命咸阳王元坦为太师。
English: Soon after, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Xianyang Wangyuan Tan as Grand Master.

古文：是岁，魏关中大饥，人相食，死者什七八。
现代文：这一年，西魏的关中地区发生了大饥荒，出现了人吃人的现象，每十人之中就七八个死去。
English: In this year, the Guanzhong region of the Western Wei Dynasty suffered a great famine, and the phenomenon of people eating people appeared. Seven or eight out of every ten people died.

古文：高祖武皇帝十三大同三年春，正月，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：大同三年春季，正月，梁武帝在国都的南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the third year of Datong, in the first month, Emperor Liangwu held a grand festival in the southern suburb of the capital.

古文：东魏丞相欢军蒲坂，造三浮桥，欲度河。
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢把部队驻扎在蒲坂，建造了三座浮桥，准备渡黄河。
English: Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, stationed troops in Pusan and built three floating bridges to cross the Yellow River.

古文：魏丞相泰军广阳，谓诸将曰： 贼掎吾三面，作浮桥以示必度。此欲缀吾军，使窦泰得西入耳。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰把部队驻扎在广阳，他对手下的各位将领说： 贼兵从三个方向牵制我们，又建造了浮桥来表明他们一定要渡河，其实他们的用意不过是想在这里牵制我军，使窦泰得以西进。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, stationed his troops in Guangyang. He said to the generals under him: The bandits held us back from three directions and built a pontoon bridge to show that they must cross the river. In fact, their intention was just to hold back our army here, so that Dou Tai could advance westward.

古文：欢自起兵以来，窦泰常为前锋，其下多锐卒，屡胜而骄，今袭之，必克。克泰，则欢不战自走矣。 
现代文：高欢自从起兵以来，窦泰经常充当他的先锋，手下有许多精锐的士兵，他们打了几次胜仗以后已变得骄傲起来，现在要是进行袭击的话，一定能够打败他们，而打垮了窦泰，高欢就会不战而撤逃。 
English: Gao Huan had Dou Tai as his vanguard since the beginning of the war. He had many elite soldiers under his command. They had become proud after winning several battles. If they attacked now, they would surely defeat them. If they defeated Dou Tai, Gao Huan would retreat without a fight.

古文：诸将皆曰： 贼在近，舍而袭远，脱有蹉跌，悔何及也！
现代文：各位将领都说： 贼兵就在近处，我们舍弃近处的敌人而去袭击远处的，假如出现失误，那就后悔莫及了！
English: All the generals said: the bandits are close by, we are abandoning the enemy close by to attack the enemy far away, if we make a mistake, we will regret it!

古文：不如分兵御之。 丞相泰曰： 欢再攻潼关，吾军不出灞上，今大举而来，谓吾亦当自守，有轻我之心。乘此袭之，何患不克！
现代文：不如分兵抵御他们。 丞相宇文泰又说道： 高欢第二次攻打潼关的时候，我们的军队始终没有离开灞上，现在他们向我们发起大规模的进攻，会认为我们当然也要作自我防守，由此产生轻视我们的心意，借这个机会袭击他们，还怕不能取得胜利吗？
English: It is not as good as a detachment of soldiers to resist them. The prime minister, Yu Wentai, also said: When Gao Huan attacked Shaoguan for the second time, our army never left Shaoguan. Now that they have launched a large-scale attack on us, they will think that of course we must also defend ourselves. This will lead to contempt for us. Take this opportunity to attack them. Are you afraid that you will not be able to win?

古文：贼虽作浮桥，未能径度，不过五日，吾取窦泰必矣！ 
现代文：贼兵虽然搭起了浮桥，但还不能径直渡河，用不了五天，我将一定捉住窦泰！ 
English: Although the bandits have built a pontoon bridge, they still can't cross the river directly. It will take less than five days. I will definitely catch Dou Tai!

古文：行台左丞苏绰、中兵参军代人达奚武亦以为然。
现代文：行台左丞苏绰、中兵参军代州人达奚武也认为宇文泰的话很有道理。
English: The march's left-hand man, Su Qiao, and the middle-ranking soldier, Dashengwu, who joined the army on behalf of the state, also thought that Uventhai's words were very reasonable.

古文：庚戌，丞相泰还长安，诸将意犹异同。
现代文：庚戌，丞相宇文泰返回长安，各位将领中有同意宇文泰意见的，也有不同意的。
English: Geng Xuan and General Secretary Wu Wentai returned to Chang'an. Some of the generals agreed with Wu Wentai's opinion, while others disagreed.

古文：丞相泰隐其计，以问族子直事郎中深，深曰： 窦泰，欢之骁将，今大军攻蒲坂，则欢拒守而泰救之，吾表里受敌，此危道也。
现代文：丞相宇文泰先不提自己的计谋，而是找到担任直事郎中的侄子宇文深，问他有什么打退敌军的办法，宇文深回答说： 窦泰是高欢手下骁勇的将领，如今我们的大军要是攻打蒲坂，高欢坚守不出，窦泰前来救援，那么我们就会出现里外受敌人威胁的局面，这是一条危险的道路。
English: First, the chancellor, Uwentei, did not mention his own strategy, but found his nephew, Uwenshin, who served as the middle son of Naoji, and asked him what was the way to beat back the enemy army. Uwenshin replied: Dou Tai was a brave general under Gaohuan. Now, if our great army attacks Busan, Gaohuan cannot hold out, and Dou Tai comes to the rescue, then we will have a situation where we are threatened by the enemy both at home and abroad. This is a dangerous path.

古文：不如选轻锐潜出小关，窦泰躁急，必来决战，欢持重未即救，我急击泰，必可擒也。
现代文：不如选出一支轻装的精锐部队悄悄地从小关出去，窦泰性格急躁，必定要来同我们进行决战，而高欢老成持重不会立即救援，这样的话，我们迅速出击窦泰，就一定能够捉住他。
English: It would be better to choose a lightly armed elite force to quietly go out from the small gate. Dou Tai is impatient and will definitely come to fight a decisive battle with us, while Gao Huan Rongcheng will not immediately rescue. In this case, we will quickly attack Dou Tai and will definitely be able to catch him.

古文：擒泰则欢势自沮，回师击之，可以决胜。 
现代文：捉住了窦泰，高欢的进攻自然就被阻止，我们再调过头来袭击他们，就一定可以取得胜利。 
English: Caught Dou Tai, Gao Huan's attack will naturally be stopped, and if we turn around and attack them, we will surely win.

古文：丞相泰喜曰： 此吾心也。 
现代文：丞相宇文泰听了之后说道： 这也是我的想法。 
English: After listening to this, Prime Minister Uwentei said, "That's what I thought, too."

古文：乃声言欲保陇右。辛亥，谒魏主而潜军东出，癸丑旦，至小关。窦泰猝闻军至，自风陵度，丞相泰出马牧泽，击窦泰，大破之，士众皆尽，窦泰自杀，传首长安。
现代文：于是他就声称要保住陇右地区，辛亥，拜见了西魏文帝后悄悄地带领部队从东面出去了，癸丑早娚希酱锪诵亍ｑ继┩蝗惶档芯搅耍Υ臃缌甓晒嘶坪樱┫嘤钗泰出兵马牧泽，攻击窦泰，打得他一败涂地，全军覆没，最后窦泰自杀了，宇文泰叫人把他头颅送到了长安。
English: So he claimed that he wanted to protect the right-hand region, Xinhai, after meeting the West Wei Emperor, quietly led the troops out of the east, the ugly morning, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the locusts, the

古文：丞相欢以河冰薄，不得赴救，撤浮桥而退，仪同代人薛孤延为殿，一日之中斫十五刀折，乃得免。
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢因为黄河上的冰太薄，无法赶去救援，只好拆除浮桥撤退，仪同代州人薛孤延担任全军后卫，一天之内连续激战，砍坏了十五把战刀，才得以撤回。
English: Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, had to dismantle the pontoon bridge and retreat because the ice on the Yellow River was too thin to be able to rush to the rescue. Xue Kuoyan, a contemporary of Yi Shuzhou, served as the guard of the whole army. In one day of continuous fierce fighting, he broke fifteen battle swords before being able to withdraw.

古文：丞相泰亦引军还。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰也率领部队返回长安。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, also led the troops back to Chang'an.

古文：高敖曹自商山转斗而进，所向无前，遂攻上洛。
现代文：高敖曹从商山边战边进，一路所向无敌，于是他就攻打上洛。
English: Gao Bing Cao entered the battlefield from Shangshan, and he was invincible all the way, so he attacked Shangluo.

古文：郡人泉岳及弟猛略与顺阳人杜窋等谋翻城应之，洛州刺史泉企知之，杀岳及猛略。
现代文：本郡人泉岳和他弟弟泉猛略，还有顺阳人杜等密谋翻城出去响应高敖曹，洛州刺史泉企知道了这一情况后，杀了泉岳和泉猛略。
English: The people of this county, Quan Yue and his brother Quan Meng Rong, as well as the people of Shunyang, Du, and others, plotted to go over the city to respond to Gao Rong Cao. After Quan Kie, the governor of Lozhou, learned of this situation, he killed Quan Yue and Quan Meng Rong.

古文：杜窋走归敖曹，敖曹以为乡导而攻之。
现代文：杜逃跑后归附了高敖曹，高敖曹以他为向导攻打上洛。
English: After Du's escape, he joined Gao Bing Cao, and Gao Bing Cao used him as a guide to attack Shangluo.

古文：敖曹被流矢，通中者三，殒绝良久，复上马，免胄巡城。
现代文：高敖曹中了流箭，射穿身体的有三支，他昏死过去很久，醒来后骑上马，没有穿戴盔甲就巡视全城。
English: Gao Bing Cao was hit by a stray arrow, three arrows pierced his body, he passed out for a long time, woke up and rode a horse, without wearing armor to inspect the whole city.

古文：企固守旬馀，二子元礼、仲遵力战拒之，仲遵伤目，不堪复战，城遂降。
现代文：泉企坚守了十几天，他的两个儿子泉元礼、泉仲遵奋力战斗抵抗敌人的进攻，后来泉仲遵的眼睛受伤，无法继续打仗，于是上洛城陷落了。
English: Quanqi held out for ten days. His two sons, Quan Yuanli and Quan Zhongzong, fought hard to resist the enemy's attack. Later, Quan Zhongzong's eyes were injured and he could not continue to fight, so Shangluo City fell.

古文：企见敖曹曰： 吾力屈，非心服也。 
现代文：泉企见到高敖曹时说； 我是没有力量而屈服，不是心服。 
English: When Quanqi saw Gao Bing Cao, he said, "I gave in without strength, not with my heart."

古文：敖曹以杜窋为洛州刺史。
现代文：高敖曹任用杜为洛州刺史。
English: Gao Ying Cao appointed Du to write the history of Luozhou.

古文：敖曹创甚，曰： 恨不见季式作刺史。 
现代文：高敖曹的伤势很重，他说道： 遗憾的是我见不到我的弟弟季式当刺史了。 
English: Gao Rong Cao, who was seriously injured, said: "Unfortunately, I can't see my brother Ji Shih Dang Zhishi anymore.

古文：丞相欢闻之，即以高季式为济州刺史。
现代文：丞相高欢闻讯之后，立即任命高季式为济州刺史。
English: After hearing the news, the chancellor Gao Huan immediately appointed Gao Ji as the governor of Jeju.

古文：敖曹欲入蓝田关，欢使人告曰： 窦泰军没，人心恐动，宜速还。路险贼盛，拔身可也。 
现代文：高敖曹想要进入蓝田县，高欢派人告诉他说： 窦泰全军覆没，人心恐怕会有所浮动，现在你应该迅速返回，道路险峻，贼兵势大，你独自脱身就可以了。 
English: Gao Bing Cao wanted to enter Lantian County, Gao Huan sent a person to tell him: Dou Tai's entire army has been wiped out, people's hearts will probably be swayed, now you should quickly return, the road is steep, the bandits are strong, you can escape alone.

古文：敖曹不忍弃众，力战，全军而还，以泉企、泉元礼自随，泉仲遵以伤重不行。
现代文：高敖曹不忍心丢下大家，经过奋力拼杀，终于带着全部人马回来。他让泉企、泉元礼跟着自己，泉仲遵因为伤势严重没有让他同行。
English: Gao Yu Cao couldn't bear to leave everyone behind, and after a hard-fought battle, he finally returned with all the men and horses. He let Quan Qi and Quan Yuan Li follow him, but Quan Zhong Zun didn't let him go with him because of his serious injury.

古文：企私戒二子曰： 吾馀生无几，汝曹才器足以立功。勿以吾在东，遂亏臣节。 
现代文：泉企曾经暗中告诫两个儿子： 我这一辈子剩不下几年了，以你们俩的才能，足以建功立业，你们不要因为我在东魏，就缺少做臣子的气节。 
English: Quanqi once warned his two sons in secret: I have only a few years left in this life, and with the talent of both of you, it is enough to make achievements. You should not lack the stamina to be a courtier because I am in Eastern Wei.

古文：元礼于路逃还。
现代文：泉元礼在途中逃了回去。
English: Izumi Motorei ran away on the way back.

古文：泉、杜虽皆为土豪，乡人轻杜而重泉。
现代文：泉企、杜虽然都是本地豪强，但是乡里人都轻视杜而尊重泉企。
English: Although both Quanqi and Du are local heroes, the villagers despise Du and respect Quanqi.

古文：元礼、仲遵阴结豪右，袭窋，杀之，魏以元礼世袭洛州刺史。
现代文：后来，泉元礼、泉仲遵兄弟暗中联络一批豪门大族，袭击杜，并且杀掉了他，西魏就让泉元礼一家世袭洛州刺史。
English: Later, the brothers Quan Yuanli and Quan Zhongzong secretly contacted a group of powerful families, attacked Du, and killed him. The Western Wei Dynasty allowed the Quan Yuanli family to inherit the history of Luozhou.

古文：二月，丁亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：二月，丁亥，梁武帝在藉田耕作。
English: In February of the Year of the Boar, Emperor Liang Wudi was working in a rented field.

古文：己丑，以尚书左仆射何敬容为中权将军，护军将军萧渊藻为左仆射，右仆射谢举为右光禄大夫。
现代文：己丑，梁武帝任命尚书左仆射何敬容为中权将军，护军将军萧渊藻为左仆射，右仆射谢举为右光禄大夫。
English: At the same time, Emperor Liangwu appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant, He Jingrong, as the general of the Central Powers, the general of the escort, Xiao Yuanmao, as the left-hand servant, and the right-hand servant, Ya Xie, as the right-hand doctor.

古文：魏槐里获神玺，大赦。
现代文：西魏的槐里县得到一块神玺，文帝下令大赦天下。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Baili County received a piece of sacred relics, and Emperor Wen ordered a general amnesty.

古文：二月，辛未，东魏迁七帝神主入新庙，大赦。
现代文：二月，辛未，东魏将七位已故皇帝的灵位移进了新庙，大赦天下。
English: In February, Xinwei, the Eastern Wei Dynasty moved the spirit places of seven deceased emperors into the new temple, pardoning the world.

古文：魏斛斯椿卒。
现代文：西魏的斛斯椿去世。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty's Gong Shizhong passed away.

古文：夏，五月，魏以广陵王欣为太宰，贺拔胜为太师。
现代文：夏季五月，西魏任命广陵王元欣为太宰，贺拔胜为太师。
English: In the summer of May, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed Guangling Wang Yuanxin as Dazai and He Basseng as Taishi.

古文：六月，魏以扶风王孚为太保，梁景睿为太傅，广平王赞为太尉，开府仪同三司武川王盟为司空。
现代文：六月，西魏任命扶风王元孚为太保，梁景睿为太傅，广平王元赞为太尉，开府仪同三司、武川王元盟为司空。
English: In June, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed Fu Feng Wang Yuan Fu as Taibo, Liang Jing Rui as Taifu, Guangping Wang Yuan Zan as Taifu, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Wuchuan Wang Yuan Meng as Siku.

古文：东魏丞相欢游汾阳之天池，得奇石，隐起成文曰 六王三川 。
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢游玩汾阳的天池时，得到了一块奇异的石头，隐隐约约形成文字 六王三川 。
English: When Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, toured the Heavenly Pool in Shenyang, he obtained a strange stone, which vaguely formed the words "six kings and three rivers."

古文：以问行台郎中阳休之，对曰： 六者，大王之字；王者，当王天下。
现代文：他向行台郎中阳休之询问其意，阳休之回答说：  六 是指大王您的表字； 王 的意思是应该统治天下。
English: He inquired about the meaning of the number six from Yang Xiu, who replied, "Six means great king, and king means you should rule the world."

古文：河、洛、伊为三川，泾、渭、洛亦为三川。
现代文：河、洛、伊是三条河流，泾、渭、洛也是三条河流。
English: He, Luo, and Yi are three rivers, and Zou, Zou, and Luo are also three rivers.

古文：大王若受天命，终应奄有关、洛。 
现代文：大王您要是接受上天赋予你的使命，终究应该拥有关、洛的大片土地。 
English: Great King, if you accept the mission given to you by Heaven, you should eventually own a large piece of land in Luo.

古文：欢曰： 世人无事常言我反，况闻此乎！
现代文：高欢听后说道： 世上的人们在没事的时候，都常常说我要谋反，何况听了这番话之后！
English: After listening, Gao Huan said: People in the world often say that I want to rebel when things are going well, let alone after hearing these words!

古文：慎勿妄言！ 
现代文：请你慎重些，不要胡说！ 
English: Please be careful, don't talk nonsense!

古文：休之，固之子也。
现代文：阳休之是阳固之子。
English: Yang Xiu is the son of Yang Gu.

古文：行台郎中中山杜弼承间劝欢受禅，欢举杖击走之。
现代文：行台郎中中山人杜弼乘机劝说高欢接受禅让，高欢举起棒子打跑了他。
English: Du Qian, a villager from Zhongshan, took the opportunity to persuade Gao Huan to accept the offer of Zen, and Gao Huan picked up a stick and beat him.

古文：东魏遣兼散骑常侍李谐来聘，以吏部郎卢元明、通直侍郎李业兴副之。
现代文：东魏派遣兼任散骑常侍的李谐为正使，吏部郎卢元明、通直侍郎李业兴为副使，出使梁朝。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched Li Hani, who also served as a knight errant, as the chief envoy, the secretary, Lu Yuanming, and the secretary, Li Ye Xing, as deputy envoys, and the envoy was Liang Dynasty.

古文：谐，平之孙；元明，昶之子也。
现代文：李谐是李平的孙子，卢元明是卢昶的儿子。
English: Li Jing is the grandson of Li Ping, and Lu Yuanming is the son of Lu Yao.

古文：秋，七月，谐等至建康，上引见，与语，应对如流。
现代文：秋季，七月，李谐等人抵达建康，梁武帝接见了他们，并和他们作了交谈，他们都对答如流。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Hani and others arrived in Jiankang. Emperor Liang Wu received them and had a conversation with them, and they all responded enthusiastically.

古文：谐等出，上目送之，谓左右曰： 朕今日遇勍敌。卿辈尝言北间全无人物，此等何自而来！ 
现代文：李谐等人出门了，梁武帝目送着他们远去后，对身旁的人说道： 我今天可遇上了劲敌，你们这些人曾经说北方没有一个象样的人物，那么现在这几位是从哪里来的呢？ 
English: After Li Hani and the others had left, Emperor Liang Wu saw them off and said to the people around him, "I have met a strong opponent today. You people used to say that there is not a decent person in the north, so where did these people come from?

古文：是时鄴下言风流者，以谐及陇西李神俊、范阳卢元明、北海王元景、弘农杨遵彦、清河崔赡为首。
现代文：当时，东魏的国都邺城内够得上称作 风流人物 的，要以李谐以及陇西人李神俊、范阳人卢元明、北海人王元景、弘农人杨遵彦、清河人崔赡为首。
English: At that time, his subordinates commented on the fashionable people, and thought that Li Jing and Li Shenjun of Shaanxi, Lu Yuanming of Fanyang, Wang Yuanjing of the North Sea, Yang Zunyan of Hongnong, and Cui Yan of Qinghe were the most outstanding.

古文：神俊名挺，宝之孙；元景名昕，宪之曾孙也；皆以字行。
现代文：李神俊的名字叫李挺，是李宝的孙子；王元景的名字叫王昕，是王宪的曾孙子；他们通常都用表字。
English: Li Shenjun's name is Li Ting, the grandson of Li Bao; Wang Yuanjing's name is Wang Yao, the great-grandson of Wang Xian; they usually use the table characters.

古文：赡，凌之子也。
现代文：崔赡是崔悛的儿子。
English: Cui Yan is the son of Cui Yao.

古文：时南、北通好，务以俊乂相夸，衔命接客，必尽一时之选，无才地者不得与焉。
现代文：此时，南方与北方已经沟通和好，在交往中，务必要让对方夸己方的人贤能，所以奉命出使或接待客人的，必定是精选出的当时最杰出的人，才能门第不高的参与不了这些事情。
English: At this time, the South and the North had already communicated and reconciled. In the exchanges, it was imperative to let the other side praise the people of their own side. Therefore, those who were ordered to dispatch or receive guests must be the most outstanding people at that time, and those with low talent could not participate in these things.

古文：每梁使至鄴，鄴下为之倾动，贵胜子弟盛饰聚观，礼赠优渥，馆门成市。
现代文：每当梁朝的使者来到邺城的时候，城内为之轰动，那些高门贵族家庭的子弟都要打扮得珠光宝气，聚集在一起围观，赠送给对方的都是优厚的礼品，宾馆的门口简直变成了集市。
English: Whenever the emissaries of the Liang Dynasty came to Lucheng, the city was stirred up. The children of those high-ranking aristocratic families would dress up in pearly splendor and gather around to watch. They gave each other generous gifts. The entrance to the hotel was transformed into a bazaar.

古文：宴日，高澄常使左右觇之，一言制胜，澄为之拊掌。
现代文：举行宴会的日子，高澄经常叫身旁的人看他们，每当有惊人妙语压倒了来使，高澄就为他们鼓掌。
English: On the day of the banquet, Takasumi often asked the people around him to look at them, and whenever a surprising witticism overwhelmed them, Takasumi applauded them.

古文：魏使至建康亦然。
现代文：东魏的使者到梁朝的建康时也是这样。
English: This was also the case when the emissaries of the Eastern Wei Dynasty came to Jiankang in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：独孤信求还北，上许之。
现代文：独孤信要求回到北方，梁武帝允许了。
English: Du Guoxin asked to return to the north, and Emperor Wu of Liang gave him permission.

古文：信父母皆在山东，上问信所适，信曰： 事君者不敢顾私亲而怀贰心。 
现代文：独孤信的父母都在山东，梁武帝问他将去哪里，他回答说： 为君王服务的人不敢因顾念自己的亲人而对君王三心二意。 
English: Duoluxin's parents were both in Shandong. When Emperor Liang Wu asked him where he was going, he replied: "Those who serve the king dare not be half-hearted about the king because they are concerned about their relatives.

古文：上以为义，礼送甚厚。
现代文：梁武帝听了认为独孤信很忠义，送给他非常丰厚的礼物。
English: Emperor Liang Wudi thought that Du Guoxin was very loyal and gave him a very rich gift.

古文：信与杨忠皆至长安，上书谢罪。
现代文：独孤信与杨忠都到了长安，向西魏文帝呈上请罪的文书。
English: Du Guoxin and Yang Zhong both arrived in Chang'an and submitted a petition to the Western Wei Emperor.

古文：魏以信有定三荆之功，迁骠骑大将军，加侍中、开府仪同三司，馀官爵如故。
现代文：文帝认为独孤信有平定三荆地区的功劳，晋升他为骠骑大将军，加侍中、开府仪同三司，其余的官爵跟过去一样。
English: Emperor Wen believed that Du Guoxin had the greatest contribution to the pacification of the Sanjing region, and promoted him to the general of the cavalry. He was also given the titles of chamberlain, keifuyi and sanshi, and the rest of the officials and nobles were the same as before.

古文：丞相泰爱杨忠之勇，留置帐下。
现代文：丞相宇文泰喜爱杨忠的勇猛，将他留在自己的身边。
English: The prime minister, Yu Wentei, loved Yang Zhong's bravery and kept him by his side.

古文：魏宇文深劝丞相泰取恒农。八月，丁丑，泰帅李弼等十二将伐东魏，以北雍州刺史于谨为前锋，攻盘豆，拔之。
现代文：西魏的宇文深劝说丞相宇文泰夺取恒农，八月，丁丑，宇文泰统率李弼等十二位将领讨伐东魏，任命北雍州刺史丁谨担任先锋，攻打并占领了盘豆。
English: Yu Wenshen of the Western Wei Dynasty persuaded the chancellor Yu Wentai to seize Heng Nong, and in August, Ding U, Yu Wentai led by Li Xi and other twelve generals to fight against the Eastern Wei Dynasty, appointed the leader of the Northern Yongzhou Zhisheng Ding Gong as the vanguard, attacked and occupied Panzu.

古文：戊子，至恒农。庚寅，拔之，擒东魏陕州刺史李徽伯，俘其战士八千。
现代文：戊子，到达恒农，庚寅，攻下了该城，捉住了东魏的陕州刺史李徽伯，俘虏了他的八千名士兵。
English: Wu Zi, reached Heng Nong, Geng Yin, captured the city, captured the East Wei's Shaanxi leader Li Huibao, and captured his eight thousand soldiers.

古文：时河北诸城多附东魏，左丞杨檦自言父猛尝为邵郡白水令，知其豪杰，请往说之，以取邵郡；泰许之。
现代文：当时，黄河以北地区的各城大多依附于东魏，左丞杨自称他的父亲杨猛曾经当过邵郡的白水县令，与那里的一些豪杰有交结，所以请求去游说他们，以便夺取邵郡；宇文泰答应了。
English: At that time, most of the cities in the region north of the Yellow River were attached to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Zu Rong Yang claimed that his father Yang Meng had once been the governor of Baishui County in Shao County and had contacts with some heroes there, so he asked to lobby them in order to seize Shao County; Yu Wentai agreed.

古文：檦乃与土豪王覆怜等举兵，收邵郡守程保及县令四人，斩之，表覆怜为郡守，遣谍说谕东魏城堡，旬月之间，归附甚众。东魏以东雍州刺史司马恭镇正平，司空从事中郎闻喜裴邃欲攻之，恭弃城走，泰以杨剽行正平郡事。
现代文：杨就与土豪王覆怜等人开始起兵，捉住了邵郡的郡守程保以及四位县令，把他们都杀了。杨上书请求任命王覆怜为郡守，让王覆怜带着西魏的文告去游说东魏的城堡，不到一个月，归附西魏的城堡非常多，东魏派东雍州刺史司马恭镇守正平，司空从事中郎闻喜人裴邃准备攻打正平，司马恭弃城而逃，宇文泰叫杨兼管正平郡的事务。
English: Yang, together with local strongman Wang Shulei and others, began to raise an army, captured the county governor of Shao County, Cheng Bao, and four county magistrates, and killed them all. Yang submitted a letter requesting that Wang Shulei be appointed as the county governor, and that Wang Shulei take the West Wei's message to lobby the East Wei's castle. Less than a month later, there were a lot of castles belonging to the West Wei. The East Wei sent the East Yongzhou to assassinate Sima Qiong, the town guard of Zhengping. Sikuo was engaged in the middle man, Baizhang, preparing to attack Zhengping.

古文：上修长干寺阿育王塔，出佛爪发舍利。
现代文：梁武帝派人修缮长干寺的阿育王塔时，挖出了佛爪佛发和舍利。
English: When Emperor Liangwu sent people to repair the Ashoka Pagoda of Changkang Temple, they dug out the Buddha's claws, hair and relics.

古文：辛卯，上幸寺，设无碍食，大赦。
现代文：辛卯，梁武帝来到长干寺，设置无碍食，大赦天下。
English: Xinwu, Emperor Liangwu came to Changgan Temple, set up a no-obstacle diet, and pardoned the world.

古文：九月，柔然为魏侵东魏三堆，丞相欢击之，柔然退走。
现代文：九月，柔然人替西魏入侵东魏的三堆，东魏的丞相高欢发起攻击后，柔然人撤退了。
English: In September, the Jurchens invaded the Three Kingdoms of the Eastern Wei Dynasty on behalf of the Western Wei Dynasty. After the Eastern Wei Dynasty's chancellor Gao Huan launched an attack, the Jurchens retreated.

古文：行台郎中杜弼以文武在位多贪污，言于丞相欢，请治之。
现代文：行台郎中杜弼发现文武百官中的许多人在位时都贪污公家的财产，就将这一情况告诉了丞相高欢，请他好好管一管。
English: When Du Xuan, a courtier, discovered that many of the hundred civil and military officials had embezzled public property when they were in power, he told this to the prime minister Gao Huan and asked him to take good care of it.

古文：欢曰： 弼来，我语尔！
现代文：高欢说道： 杜弼你过来，我对你讲吧！
English: Gao Huan said, "Cuckoo, come here, let me tell you a story!"

古文：天下贪污习俗已久。
现代文：天下的官员贪污公家的财物，很久以前就已经成为一种习俗。
English: It has long been customary for officials around the world to embezzle public funds.

古文：今督将家属多在关西，宇文黑獭常相招诱，人情去留未定；江东复有一吴翁萧衍，专事衣冠礼乐，中原士大夫望之以为正朔所在。
现代文：眼下都督、将军们的家属大多数在西魏的关西地区，宇文黑獭经常对他们进行招抚和引诱，从他们的内心来说，以后是离开还是留在这里都还确定不了；江东地区还有老头儿萧衍，他专门倡导推行儒家礼乐，以致中原地区的士大夫们产生向往之情，认为他那里才是正统之所在。
English: At the moment, most of the families of the governors and generals are in the Kansai region of the Western Wei Dynasty. Uwen Heixuan often caresses and seduces them. From their hearts, it is still uncertain whether to leave or stay here in the future; in the Jiangdong region, there is also the old man Xiaoyan, who specifically advocates the implementation of Confucian liturgy, so that the scholars in the Central Plains have a yearning feeling, thinking that he is the place of orthodoxy.

古文：我若急正纲纪，不相假借，恐督将尽归黑獭，士子悉奔萧衍。人物流散，何以为国！
现代文：假如我操之过急地整顿法制，不采取宽容态度的话，那么都督、将军们都得归附宇文黑獭，士大夫们全去投奔萧衍，人材都失去了，还怎么成为一个国家呀？
English: If I over-hastily rectify the legal system and do not take a tolerant attitude, then the governor and generals will have to join Uwen Heihe, the scholars and officials will all go to Xiao Yan, and the human resources will be lost. How can we become a country?

古文：尔宜少待，吾不忘之。 
现代文：你最好暂且等待一段时间，我不会忘掉你的提议的。 
English: You wait a minute, I won't forget this.

古文：欢将出兵拒魏，杜弼请先除内贼。
现代文：高欢将要出兵抵抗西魏，杜弼请求先请除内部的奸贼。
English: Gao Huan is going to send troops to resist the Western Wei Dynasty, and Du Juan requests that the internal traitors be removed first.

古文：欢问内贼为谁，弼曰： 诸勋贵掠夺百姓者是也。 
现代文：高欢问他谁是内部的奸贼，杜弼回答说： 就是那些掠夺老百姓的功勋权贵们。 
English: Gao Huan asked him who were the internal traitors, Du Juan replied: They were the meritorious dignitaries who plundered the common people.

古文：欢不应，使军士皆张弓注矢，举刀，按槊，夹道罗列，命弼冒出其间，弼战忄栗流汗。
现代文：高欢听了没有吭声，转身吩咐士兵们拉开弓，搭上箭，举起刀，握住矛，排成面对面的两行，又叫杜弼从他们中间通过，杜弼吓得浑身发抖，冷汗直流。
English: When Gao Huan heard that there was no beeping, he turned around and ordered the soldiers to draw their bows, mount their arrows, raise their swords, hold their spears, and line up in two rows facing each other. He also asked Cuckoo to pass between them. Cuckoo was trembling with fright and sweating profusely.

古文：欢乃徐谕之曰： 矢虽注不射，刀虽举不击，槊虽按不刺，尔犹亡魄失胆。
现代文：高欢这才慢慢地告诉他： 箭虽然安在弓上但还没有发射，刀虽然举起但还没攻击，矛虽然握在手里但还没有刺出，你就已经吓得失魂落魄，胆战心惊。
English: Gao Huan then slowly told him: Although the arrow is attached to the bow, it has not yet been fired; although the knife is raised, it has not yet attacked; although the spear is held in the hand, it has not yet pierced; you are already scared out of your mind and heart.

古文：诸勋人身犯锋镝，百死一生，虽或贪鄙，所取者大，岂可同之常人也！ 
现代文：而那些立下战功的人身体要和刀锋和箭头打交道，真是百死一生，他们中间有的人确实贪婪卑鄙，使用他们所取的是大处，怎么可以象要求普通人那样要求他们呢？ 
English: As for those who have made war exploits, they have to deal with the blade and arrow for a lifetime. Some of them are indeed greedy and despicable. What they have taken is a big deal. How can you ask them as you would ask ordinary people?

古文：弼乃顿首谢不及。
现代文：杜弼连忙向高欢叩头谢罪。
English: Du Wei quickly bowed to Gao Huan and apologized.

古文：欢每号令军士，常令丞相属代郡张华原宣旨，其语鲜卑则曰： 汉民是汝奴，夫为汝耕，妇为汝织，输汝粟帛，令汝温饱，汝何为陵之？ 
现代文：高欢每次向将士们发布命令的时候，常常叫丞相属代郡人张华原宣读他的旨意，要是面对鲜卑人就说： 汉人是你们的奴隶，男人为你们耕作，妇女为你们纺织，输送给你们粮食和绢帛，让你们得到温饱，你们为什么还欺侮他们？ 
English: Every time Gao Huan issued an order to his generals, he often asked Zhang Hua Yuan, a deputy county official who belonged to the prime minister, to read out his will. If he was faced with a commoner, he would say: The Chinese are your slaves, the men farm for you, the women weave for you, and send you grain and straw so that you can have food and clothing. Why do you still bully them?

古文：其语华人则曰： 鲜卑是汝作客，得汝一斛粟、一匹绢，为汝击贼，令汝安宁，汝何为疾之？ 
现代文：要是面对汉族人就说： 鲜卑人是你们的佃客，得到你们十斗粮食，一匹娋畈臀忝谴蚧鞯腥耍媚忝腔竦冒材忝俏裁椿挂春匏牵俊
English: If confronted with Han Chinese, they would say: "The lowly are your guests, you get ten buckets of grain, a horse is a horse's rump, you are a horse, you are a horse, you are a horse, you are a horse"

古文：时鲜卑共轻华人，唯惮高敖曹。欢号令将士，常鲜卑语，敖曹在列，则为之华言。
现代文：当时鲜卑人普遍轻视汉族人，但是唯独害怕高敖曹；高欢向将士们发布号令的时候，经常说的是鲜卑话，不过只要高敖曹在队列里，就专门为他说汉话。
English: At that time, the Xianbei people generally despised the Han people, but only feared Gao Bing Cao; when Gao Huan issued orders to the generals, he often said Xianbei words, but as long as Gao Bing Cao was in the queue, he would speak Chinese for him.

古文：敖曹返自上洛，欢复以为军司、大都督，统七十六都督。
现代文：高敖曹从上洛返回以后，高欢又任命他为军司、大都督，让他统领七十六都督。
English: After Gao Bing Cao returned from Shangluo, Gao Huan also appointed him as the military secretary and the grand governor, and let him command the seventy-six governor.

古文：以司空侯景为西道大行台，与敖曹及行台任祥、御史中尉刘贵、豫州刺史尧雄、冀州刺史万俟洛同治兵于虎牢。
现代文：同时任命司空侯景为西道大行台，与高敖曹以及行台任祥、御史中尉刘贵、豫州刺史尧雄、冀州刺史万俟洛一同在虎牢整顿部队。
English: At the same time, he appointed Sikuo Houjing as the West Road Grand Gangdai, and together with Gao Bing Cao and Gangdai Ren Xiang, Mishi Lieutenant Liu Gui, Yuzhou Sashihong and Jizhou Sashihong Wanluo, he reorganized the troops in Hougang.

古文：敖曹与北豫州刺史郑严祖握槊，贵召严祖，敖曹不时遣，枷其使者。
现代文：高敖曹与北豫州刺史郑严祖闲着没事，玩 握槊 游戏，刘贵派人来叫郑严祖，高敖曹没立即放他，还把刘贵的使者用木枷锁住了。
English: Gao Yu Cao and Zheng Yan Zu, the North Henan Provincial Governor, were idle, playing a game of shakuhachi. Liu Gui sent someone to call Zheng Yan Zu. Gao Yu Cao did not release him immediately, but also chained Liu Gui's envoy with wooden shackles.

古文：使者曰： 枷则易，脱则难。 
现代文：使者说道： 用木枷锁上我容易，到您想要给我开枷时就难了。 
English: The messenger said: It is easy to put me in chains, but it is difficult when you want to unshackle me.

古文：敖曹以刀就枷刎之，曰： 又何难！ 
现代文：听到这话，高敖曹就拔出刀来，顺着木枷砍断了使者的脖子，然后说道： 这又有什么难的？ 
English: Hearing this, Gao Yu Cao pulled out his sword, cut the messenger's neck along the wooden shackles, and then said: What's so difficult about this?

古文：贵不敢校。
现代文：刘贵对此不敢计较。
English: Liu Gui did not dare to consider this.

古文：明日，贵与敖曹坐，外白治河役夫多溺死，贵曰： 一钱汉，随之死！ 
现代文：第二天，刘贵与高敖曹坐在一起，外面有人说治理黄河的民工有很多都淹死了，刘贵说道： 只值一个钱的汉人，死就死了吧！ 
English: The next day, Liu Gui was sitting with Gao Rong Cao. Someone outside said that many of the migrant workers managing the Yellow River had drowned. Liu Gui said: A Chinese is only worth one money, so let him die!

古文：敖曹怒，拔刀斫贵；贵走出还营，敖曹鸣鼓会兵，欲攻之。
现代文：高敖曹一听非常愤怒，拔出刀就向刘贵砍去，刘贵赶紧跑开，返回了营寨。
English: Hearing this, Gao Yao Cao was very angry. He pulled out a knife and slashed Liu Gui. Liu Gui quickly ran away and returned to the camp.

古文：侯景、万俟洛共解谕，久之乃止。
现代文：高敖曹下令敲响军鼓，集合部队，准备攻打刘贵，侯景、万俟洛一同劝解了很久，高敖曹才没有发兵。
English: Gao Bing Cao ordered the military drums to be sounded and the troops to be assembled in preparation for attacking Liu Gui. Hou Jing and Wan Jiao Luo spent a long time together in persuasion, but Gao Bing Cao did not send troops.

古文：敖曹尝诣相府，门者不纳，敖曹引弓射之，欢知而不责。
现代文：以前，高敖曹曾有一次去丞相府，守门的人不放他进去，高敖曹就拉弓射死了他，高欢知道后也不责怪高敖曹。
English: In the past, Gao Yu Cao once went to the prime minister's residence. The gatekeeper would not let him in, so Gao Yu Cao drew a bow and shot him to death. Gao Huan did not blame Gao Yu Cao after he found out.

古文：闰月，甲子，以武陵王纪为都督益、梁等十三州诸军事、益州刺史。
现代文：闰月，甲子，梁武帝任命武陵王萧纪为都督益、梁等十三州诸军事及益州刺史。
English: In the leap month, Emperor Wu of Liang appointed King Xiao Ji of Wuling as the military governor of the thirteen states including Yi and Liang.

古文：东魏丞相欢将兵二十万自壶口趣蒲津，使高敖曹将兵三万出河南。
现代文：东魏丞相欢将兵二十万自壶口趣蒲津，使高敖曹将兵三万出河南。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Cao Cao sent 200,000 soldiers from Puting to Guizhou and 30,000 soldiers from Henan to Guizhou.

古文：时关中饥，魏丞相泰所将将士不满万人，馆谷于恒农五十馀日，闻欢将济河，乃引兵入关，高敖曹遂围恒农。
现代文：时关中饥，魏丞相泰所将将士不满万人，馆谷于恒农五十馀日，闻欢将济河，乃引兵入关，高敖曹遂围恒农。
English: At that time, Guan Zhong was starving, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng.

古文：欢右长史薛琡言于欢曰： 西贼连年饥馑，故冒死来入陕州，欲取仓粟。
现代文：欢右长史薛言于欢曰： 西贼连年饥馑，故冒死来入陕州，欲取仓粟。
English: Xueyan Yu Huan, the chief historian of Huan Yu, said: Western thieves have been starving for years, so they risked their lives to enter Shaanxi, wanting to take a warehouse of millet.

古文：今敖曹已围陕城，粟不得出。但置兵诸道，勿与野战，比及麦秋，其民自应饿死，宝炬、黑獭何忧不降！
现代文：今敖曹已围陕城，粟不得出，但置兵诸道，勿与野战，比及麦秋，其民自应饿死，宝炬、黑獭何忧不降！
English: Now that Cao Cao has encircled Shaanxi City, millet cannot come out, but soldiers are stationed in all directions, do not compare with field battles, and wheat autumn, its people should starve to death, why worry about the torch and black scythe!

古文：愿勿渡河。 
现代文：愿勿渡河。 
English: Please do not cross the river.

古文：侯景曰： 今兹举兵，形势极大，万一不捷，猝难收敛。不如分为二军，相继而进，前军若胜，后军全力；前军若败，后军承之。 欢不从，自蒲津济河。
现代文：现在高敖曹已经包围了陕城，粮食无法再运出去，所以我们只要在各条道路上布置兵力，而不要和他们在旷野作战，待到麦子熟了的时候，他们的百姓很自然地要饿死，这一下我们还愁元宝炬、宇文黑獭不投降吗？希望丞相您不要下令渡黄河。 侯景则对高欢说： 我们眼下这一次出兵，规模非常大，万一不能取得胜利，就很难控制住局面了。不如分成两支部队，相继前进，如果前面的部队得胜，后面的就全力支持；如果前面的部队失败，后面的就顶替它上去。 高欢没有听从他们的劝告，从蒲津渡过了黄河。
English: Now Gao Bing Cao has encircled the city of Shaanxi, and grain can no longer be shipped out, so we just need to deploy troops on all roads, and not fight with them in the wilderness. When the wheat is ripe, their people will naturally starve to death. At this time, are we still worried about Yuan Bao Torch and Uwen Heihei not surrendering? I hope you don't order the prime minister to cross the Yellow River. Hou Jing said to Gao Huan: This time we are sending troops, the scale is very large, and if we can't achieve victory, it will be difficult to control the situation. It is better to divide into two

古文：丞相泰遣使戒华州刺史王罴，罴语使者曰： 老罴当道卧，貉子那得过！ 
现代文：丞相泰遣使戒华州刺史王罴，罴语使者曰： 老罴当道卧，貉子那得过！ 
English: Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to rebuke Huazhou Jishi Wang Yao. The envoy said: "The old man should lie down, and the young man should get over it!"

古文：欢至冯翊城下，谓罴曰： 何不早降！ 
现代文：欢至冯翊城下，谓罴曰： 何不早降！ 
English: When he arrived at the foot of Fengye Castle, he said, "Why don't you come down early?"

古文：罴大呼曰： 此城是王罴冢，死生在此。
现代文：罴大呼曰： 此城是王罴冢，死生在此。
English: He shouted: "This city is Wang Yao, life and death are here."

古文：欲死者来！ 
现代文：欲死者来！ 
English: Let the dead come!

古文：欢知不可攻，乃涉洛，军于许原西。
现代文：欢知不可攻，乃涉洛，军于许原西。
English: Huanchi is impregnable, but wading into Luo, the army is moving west of Xuyuan.

古文：泰至渭南，征诸州兵，皆未会。
现代文：达渭河南岸，向各州征召兵马，可是他们都没有到来。
English: On the south bank of the Dadu River, soldiers and horses were recruited from various states, but they did not come.

古文：欲进击欢，诸将以众寡不敌，请待欢更西以观其势。
现代文：他想要进攻高欢到，手下的将领们都认为敌众我寡，无法打击对方，请求等高欢再往西进时，观察一下动向再作打算。
English: He wanted to attack Gaohuan. The generals under his command all thought that they were outnumbered and could not attack the other side. He asked them to wait until Gaohuan moved further west, observe the movement and then make a plan.

古文：泰曰： 欢若至长安，则人情大扰；今及其远来新至，可击也。 
现代文：宇文泰对他们说： 高欢如果到了长安，那么人们的心绪就会受到很大干扰；现在他刚刚从远道而来，我们可以出击。 
English: "If Gao Huan arrived in Chang'an, people's moods would be greatly disturbed; now that he has just come from a long way away, we can attack," he said.

古文：即造浮桥于渭，令军士赍三日粮，轻骑度渭，辎重自渭南夹渭而西。
现代文：他立即下令在渭河建造浮桥，又叫将士们准备三天的干粮，然后带着他们骑着马轻装渡过渭河，辎重物资则让人从渭河南岸沿着渭河往西运送。
English: He immediately ordered the construction of a pontoon bridge on the Wei River, and ordered the soldiers to prepare three days of dry rations, and then took them on horseback to cross the Wei River lightly loaded. Heavy materials were transported from the south bank of the Wei River along the Wei River to the west.

古文：冬，十月，壬辰，泰至沙苑，距东魏军六十里。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬辰，宇文泰到达沙苑，离开东魏的部队仅仅六十里路。
English: In the winter, October, Renchen, Uwentai arrived in Shayuan, leaving the Eastern Wei forces only sixty miles away.

古文：诸将皆惧，宇文深独贺。
现代文：各位将领都感到恐惧，唯独宇文深表示祝贺。
English: All the generals were horrified, except for Yu Wenshen, who expressed his congratulations.

古文：泰问其故，对曰： 欢镇抚河北，甚得众心。以此自守，未易可图。
现代文：宇文泰问为什么要祝贺，宇文深回答说： 高欢镇守安抚河北一带，很得人心，假如他凭借这一点守卫原有的疆土，倒还不容易算计他。
English: When asked why he wanted to congratulate Gao, Yu Wenshen replied: Gao Huanzhen's efforts to pacify the Hebei region are very popular. If he can use this to defend the original territory, it will not be easy to count him out.

古文：今悬师渡河，非众所欲，独欢耻失窦泰，愎谏而来，所谓忿兵，可一战擒也。
现代文：但是眼下他率领一支孤军渡过黄河深入我方，这并不是许多人所愿意的，唯独高欢一人对失去窦泰一事觉得耻辱，不接受劝告坚持要来，这就是所谓的愤怒之师，只要一次交战即可擒拿。
English: But now he is leading a lone army across the Yellow River and into our country, which is not what many people want. However, Gao Huan is the only one who feels ashamed of losing Dou Tai and does not accept the advice and insists on coming. This is the so-called angry division, which can be captured in just one battle.

古文：事理昭然，何为不贺！
现代文：这道理明明白白，为什么不祝贺呢？
English: It's so obvious, why not congratulate them?

古文：愿假深一节，发王罴之兵邀其走路，使无遗类。 
现代文：希望丞相您能够授予我一个符节，让我作为使者去调王罴的部队，要他们在高欢逃跑的路上拦截，不叫一个东魏的人漏网。 
English: I hope, Prime Minister, that you will grant me a rune, so that I can act as an emissary to summon Wang Xuan's troops and ask them to intercept Gao Huan on his way to escape, so that not a single East Wei person can slip through the net.

古文：泰遣须昌县公达奚武觇欢军，武从三骑，皆效欢将士衣服，日暮，去营数百步下马，潜听得其军号，因上马历营，若警夜者，有不如法，往往挞之，具知敌之情状而还。
现代文：听完宇文深的话，宇文泰派须昌县公达奚武去侦察高欢的军队，达奚武带领三名骑兵，都穿上跟高欢的将士一样的衣服。傍晚，他们在距离敌营几百步的地方下了马，偷偷听到了对方的军中口令，然后就上马穿越军营，好象是夜间执行警戒任务的，发现有不守军规的士兵，往往上去抽打一顿，通过这种方式详细了解了敌情之后返回了。
English: After listening to Yu Wenshen's words, Yu Wentai sent Suchang County's public official Dazhongwu to scout Gaohan's army. Dazhongwu led three cavalrymen, all dressed in the same clothes as Gaohan's soldiers. In the evening, they dismounted their horses a few hundred paces from the enemy camp, secretly heard the other side's military slogan, and then rode through the camp, as if they were on a night patrol mission. When they found soldiers who did not abide by military regulations, they often went to beat them up. In this way, they learned about the enemy's situation in detail

古文：欢闻泰至，癸巳，引兵会之。
现代文：高欢听到了宇文泰已经来临的消息，癸巳，指挥兵马准备与宇文泰交战。
English: Gao Huan heard the news that Uwentai had arrived, and immediately, the commander of the soldiers and horses prepared to fight with Uwentai.

古文：候骑告欢兵且至，泰召诸将谋之。
现代文：西魏军队那边，外出侦察的骑兵回来报告说高欢的部队快要到达，宇文泰马上召集各位将领商量对策。
English: On the other side of the West Wei army, the cavalrymen who went out to reconnoiter came back to report that Gao Huan's troops were about to arrive, and Yu Wentai immediately summoned the generals to discuss countermeasures.

古文：开府仪同三司李弼曰： 彼众我寡，不可平地置陈，此东十里有渭曲，可先据以待之。 
现代文：开府仪同三司李弼说道： 眼下敌众我寡，所以我们不能在平坦的地方布置战阵，此处以东十里地有一个叫渭曲的地方，可以先占据那里等待高欢的人马。 
English: Kaifu Yi and Third Secretary Li Yan said: At the moment, we have few enemies, so we can't set up battle lines in a flat place. There is a place called Zongqu ten miles east of here. We can first occupy the people and horses waiting for the gala.

古文：泰从之，背水东西为陈，李弼为右拒，赵贵为左拒，命将士皆偃戈于苇中，约闻鼓声而起。
现代文：宇文泰根据李弼的意见，在渭曲背靠河水的东西两面布置了战阵，由李弼指挥右边的方阵，赵贵指挥左边的方阵，同时命令将士们持长兵器隐蔽在芦苇丛中，约定听到鼓声响起之后再起来。
English: According to Li Qiye's opinion, Yu Wentai arranged the battle lines on both sides of the bend of the river. Li Qiye commanded the square on the right, and Zhao Gui commanded the square on the left. At the same time, he ordered the soldiers to hide the long weapons in the reed bushes, and agreed to rise again after hearing the drums.

古文：晡时，东魏兵至渭曲，都督太安斛律羌举曰： 黑獭举国而来，欲一死决，譬如猘狗，或能噬人。且渭曲苇深土泞，无所用力，不如缓与相持，密分精锐径掩长安，巢穴既倾，则黑獭不战成擒矣。 
现代文：大约快到傍晚的时候，东魏的兵马来到了渭曲，都督太安人斛律羌举对高欢说道： 崐宇文黑獭把全国的部队都差不多带了出来，要和我们决一死战，就好象一条疯狗一样，有时候也能咬人一口，况且渭曲这个地方芦苇丛深，烂泥淤积，无法用力，我们还不如暂缓与他们相持，先秘密地分出精锐部队径直突袭长安，一旦他们的老窝翻倒之后，则宇文黑獭可以不战而擒。 
English: Around late afternoon, the Eastern Wei's soldiers and horses arrived in Langqu. The governor of Taian said to Gao Huan: "Yu Wen Hei has brought almost all the troops from all over the country. If he wants to fight us to the death, he is like a mad dog. Sometimes he can even bite someone. Moreover, the reeds in Langqu are deep and the mud is silted up, making it impossible to use force. We might as well bear with them for the time being. First, secretly separate the elite troops and directly raid Chang'an. Once their nest is overturned, then Yu Wen Hei can leave without a fight."

古文：欢曰： 纵火焚之，何如？ 
现代文：高欢问道： 放火焚烧芦苇丛，怎么样？ 
English: Gao Huan asked: How about setting fire to reed bushes?

古文：侯景曰： 当生擒黑獭以示百姓，若众中烧死，谁复信之！ 
现代文：侯景接上去说道： 我们应当活捉宇文黑獭，把他带到老百姓面前展示，如果他被烧死在人群中，谁会相信他真的完了？ 
English: Hou Jing went on to say: We should capture Uwen Heiying alive and bring him to the people to show them. If he is burned to death in the crowd, who will believe that he is really dead?

古文：彭乐盛气请斗，曰： 我众贼寡，百人擒一，何忧不克！ 
现代文：彭乐更是盛气凌人地请求出战，他说： 我们人多，敌军人少，一百人抓一个人，还有什么必要担心打败不了他们？ 
English: Peng Le even more arrogantly requested to go to war. He said: We have more people, fewer enemy soldiers, a hundred people catch one person, what else is there to worry about if we can't defeat them?

古文：欢从之。
现代文：高欢接受了他的意见。
English: Gao Huan agreed to Hou Jing's request.

古文：东魏兵望见魏兵少，争进击之，无复行列。
现代文：东魏的士兵看到西魏的士兵人数少，便争先恐后的冲上前去袭击对方，原来的队列已经乱哄哄不成样子。
English: The soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty saw that the number of soldiers of the Western Wei Dynasty was small, so they rushed forward to attack each other. The original queue had become chaotic.

古文：兵将交，丞相泰鸣鼓，士皆奋起，于谨等六军与之合战，李弼等帅铁骑横击之，东魏兵中绝为二，遂大破之。
现代文：等两方的人马刚要交战的时候，西魏的丞相宇文泰敲响了战鼓，战士们都奋勇而起，于谨等人的六支部队与敌兵交锋作战，李弼率领裹着铁甲的骑兵横向打击敌军。东魏部队的中间被切开，成为两部分，于是一败涂地。
English: When the two sides were about to engage in battle, the Western Wei chancellor Yu Wentai sounded the war drum, and the soldiers all bravely stood up. Six troops led by Yu Ji and others fought with the enemy soldiers. Li Jun led the cavalry wrapped in iron armor to strike the enemy troops horizontally. The middle of the Eastern Wei troops was cut open and became two parts, so they were defeated.

古文：李弼弟檦，身小而勇，每跃马陷陈，隐身鞍甲之中，敌见皆曰： 避此小儿！ 
现代文：李弼的弟弟李虽然身材瘦小而勇猛异常，他屡屡跃马冲入敌阵，把自己的身体隐藏在鞍甲之中，敌兵看见了都要叫道： 避开这个小孩子！ 
English: Although Li Yao's younger brother, Li, was small in stature and unusually brave, he repeatedly leapt into the enemy lines, hiding his body in his saddle armor. When the enemy soldiers saw him, they would shout, "Avoid this little child!"

古文：泰叹曰： 胆决如此，何必八尺之躯！ 
现代文：宇文泰感叹道： 胆量、决心都大到这种程度，何必还非得要八尺高的身躯呀！ 
English: Uwentai sighed, "My courage and determination are so great, why do I have to be eight feet tall?"

古文：征虏将军武川耿令贵杀伤多，甲裳尽赤，泰曰： 观其甲裳，足知令贵之勇，何必数级！ 
现代文：征虏将军武川人耿令贵杀伤的人数很多，铠甲与衣裳都成了红颜色，宇文泰说道： 光看他的铠甲与战袍，就足以使人知道耿令贵的勇敢，何必再数他砍下的头颅呢？ 
English: The number of people killed and injured by Geng Linggui, the conscript general of the Takechon people, is large. His armor and clothes have become red in color. Yu Wentai said: Just looking at his armor and battle robes is enough to show that Geng Linggui is brave. Why do we need to count the number of heads he cut off?

古文：彭乐乘醉深入魏陈，魏人刺之，肠出，内之复战。
现代文：彭乐带着酒意深入到西魏的军阵之中，西魏人刺伤了他的腹部，肠子都流了出来，但是他把肠子塞回腹中，继续作战。
English: Peng Le went deep into the West Wei army with the intention of drinking. The West Wei stabbed him in the abdomen and his intestines came out, but he stuffed the intestines back into his stomach and continued to fight.

古文：丞相欢欲收兵更战，使张华原以簿历营点兵，莫有应者，还，白欢曰： 众尽去，营皆空矣！ 
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢准备暂且收兵再战，于是派遣张华原带着登记簿穿梭在各个军营之中清点官兵人数，可是没有答应之声，只好回去向高欢报告： 大家都已经跑光，各处军营全空了！ 
English: Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, prepared to temporarily withdraw the troops and fight again, so he sent Zhang Huahuan with a registration book to shuttle between the various military camps to count the number of officers and soldiers. However, there was no response, so he had to go back and report to Gao Huan: Everyone has run out, all the military camps are empty!

古文：欢犹未肯去。
现代文：高欢还是不肯离去。
English: Gao Huan still refused to leave.

古文：阜城侯斛律金曰： 众心离散，不可复用，宜急向河东！ 
现代文：阜城侯斛律金劝高欢，说： 众人的心已经离散，无法再利用了，我们应该尽快赶往河东。 
English: Fucheng Houyu Liujin advised Gao Huan, saying: The hearts of the people have been scattered and can no longer be used. We should rush to Hedong as soon as possible.

古文：欢据鞍未动，金以鞭拂马，乃驰去，夜，渡河，船去岸远，欢跨橐驼就船，乃得渡。
现代文：高欢依然坐在马鞍上一动不动，斛律金干脆挥鞭抽打他的马，高欢这才迅速离开。夜间，开始渡黄河，船距离河岸较远，高欢骑着骆驼挨到船边，这才得以渡过黄河。
English: Gao Huan was still sitting motionless in the saddle. Zhaorujin simply whipped his horse, and Gao Huan quickly left. At night, he began to cross the Yellow River. The boat was far from the riverbank, and Gao Huan rode a camel to the side of the boat. Only then was he able to cross the Yellow River.

古文：丧甲士八万人，弃铠仗十有八万。
现代文：这一仗，高欢丧失了八万名士兵，丢弃了十八万副盔甲与兵器。
English: In this battle, Gao Huan lost eighty thousand soldiers and discarded one hundred and eighty thousand pairs of armor and weapons.

古文：丞相泰追欢至河上，选留甲士二万馀人，馀悉纵归。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰追赶高欢一直到了黄河边上，他在被打散的东魏的军人中挑选留下了二万多名士兵，其余的都释放回去。
English: The chancellor of the Western Wei Dynasty, Uwen Tai, pursued Gao Huan all the way to the edge of the Yellow River. He selected more than twenty thousand soldiers from the dispersed soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and released the rest.

古文：都督李穆曰： 高欢破胆矣，速追之，可获。 
现代文：都督李穆对宇文泰说： 高欢这下子吓破胆了，我们迅速追赶的话，可以俘虏他。 
English: Governor Li Mu said to Yu Wentei: Gao Huan is now scared, if we chase him quickly, we can capture him.

古文：泰不听，还军渭南，所征之兵甫至，乃于战所人种柳一株以旌武功。
现代文：宇文泰没有听取李穆的意见，带领军队回到了渭河以南，那些被征的士兵刚到，就让他们在交战的地方每人栽种一棵柳树，以纪念这场战役的胜利。
English: Yu Wentai did not listen to Li Mu's advice and led the army back to the south of the Min River. As soon as those conscripted soldiers arrived, he asked them to each plant a willow tree in the place where they fought to commemorate the victory of this battle.

古文：侯景言于欢曰： 黑獭新胜而骄，必不为备，愿得精骑二万，径往取之。 
现代文：侯景对高欢说道： 宇文黑獭新近取得了胜利，难免会有些骄傲，肯定不会进行防备，我愿意率领二万名精锐的骑兵，径直去捉住他。 
English: Hou Jing said to Gao Huan, "Uwen Heixuan has recently won a victory, it is inevitable that he will be a little proud, and he will certainly not take precautions. I am willing to lead twenty thousand elite cavalry and go straight to catch him.

古文：欢以告娄妃，妃曰： 设如其言，景岂有还理！得黑獭而失景，何利之有！ 
现代文：高欢将侯景的话讲给他的妻子娄妃听，娄妃说道： 假如结果真的能够象侯景所说的那样，他哪里还有回来的道理，得到了宇文黑獭而失去侯景，能有什么好处？ 
English: Gao Huan told Hou Jing's words to his wife, Gong Fei, and Gong Fei said: If the result can really be as Hou Jing said, where is the reason for him to come back, what good can it do to lose Hou Jing after gaining Uwen Heiqi?

古文：欢乃止。
现代文：高欢就没有让侯景出兵。
English: So Gao Huan did not send him.

古文：魏加丞相泰柱国大将军，李弼等十二将皆进爵增邑有差。
现代文：西魏加封丞相宇文泰为柱国大将军，李弼等十二位将领则根据功劳的大小，分别进爵增邑。
English: The Western Wei Emperor Gaofenzheng and his minister Umentai were promoted to major generals, while twelve other generals, including Li Xi, were promoted to peerages and counties according to their merits.

古文：高敖曹闻欢败，释恒农，退保洛阳。
现代文：高敖曹听到高欢战败的消息，放弃了恒农，退后一步守护洛阳。
English: When Gao Bing Cao heard the news of Gao Huan's defeat, he gave up Heng Nong and stepped back to guard Luoyang.

古文：己酉，魏行台宫景寿等向洛阳，东魏洛州大都督韩贤击走之。
现代文：己酉，西魏的行台宫景寿等人出兵向洛阳，东魏的洛州大都督韩贤带兵出击，赶走了他们。
English: Ji Kun, the Western Wei Emperor Xingtai Gong Jing Shou and others sent troops to Luoyang, and Han Xian, the Eastern Wei Emperor's governor of Luoyang, led troops to attack and drive them away.

古文：州民韩木兰作乱，贤击破之。
现代文：该州的百姓韩木兰领人作乱，韩贤打败了他们。
English: Han Mulan led the people of the state in a riot, and Han Xian defeated them.

古文：一贼匿尸间，贤自按检收铠仗，贼欻起斫之，断胫而卒。
现代文：一个贼人躲藏在尸体之间，韩贤亲自检查验收铠甲兵器，贼人忽然跳起来向韩贤砍去，韩贤脖颈被砍断而死。
English: A thief hid between the bodies, Han Xian personally checked the acceptance of armor weapons, the thief suddenly jumped up and slashed at Han Xian, Han Xian's neck was cut and he died.

古文：魏复遣行台冯翊王季海与独孤信将步骑二万趣洛阳，洛州刺史李显趣三荆，贺拔胜、李弼围蒲坂。
现代文：西魏再次派遣冯翊王元季海与独孤信一起率领二万名步兵和骑兵出兵向洛阳，洛州刺史李显出兵向三荆，贺拔胜、李弼围攻蒲坂。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty once again sent Feng Xuan Wang, Yuan Ji Hai, and Du Guoxin to Luoyang, leading 20,000 infantry and cavalry troops. Li Xian, the governor of Luoyang, sent troops to Sanzhong, He Bi Sheng, and Li Yao besieged Busan.

古文：东魏丞相欢之西伐也，蒲坂民敬珍谓其从祖兄祥曰： 高欢迫逐乘舆，天下忠义之士皆欲剚刃于其腹。今又称兵西上，吾欲与兄起兵断其归路，此千载一时也。 
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢前去讨伐西魏的时候，蒲坂的百姓敬珍对他的族兄敬祥说道： 高欢赶起了皇上，天下的忠义之士都想把刀刺进他的腹部，现在他又向西大举进兵，我想和兄长您一道起兵，切断他回归的路途，这可是千载难逢的好时机。 
English: When Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, went to fight against the Western Wei Dynasty, the people of Pusan, Jing Zhen, said to his elder brother, Jing Xiang: Gao Huan chased the emperor, and all the loyal people in the world wanted to stab the knife into his abdomen. Now he is marching westward. I want to join my brother and you to raise an army to cut off his way back. This is a golden opportunity.

古文：祥从之，纠合乡里，数日，有众万馀。
现代文：敬祥接受了敬珍的建议，他们便在邻近的乡村召集人马，几天里面，响应他们的已经有一万多人。
English: Jing Xiang accepted Jing Zhen's suggestion, and they then called for volunteers in a nearby village. Within a few days, more than 10,000 people had responded to them.

古文：会欢自沙苑败归，祥、珍帅众邀之，斩获甚众。
现代文：刚好遇上高欢在沙苑吃了败仗后回来，敬祥、敬珍率领兵马在路上截击，结果杀死、俘虏了许多人。
English: He just happened to meet Gao Huan coming back after losing the battle in Shayuan, and led the troops and horses to intercept on the road, killing and capturing many people as a result.

古文：贺拔胜、李弼至河东，祥、珍帅猗氏等六县十馀万户归之，丞相泰以珍为平阳太守，祥为行台郎中。
现代文：贺拔胜、李弼到达河东地区之后，敬祥、敬珍又带着猗氏等六个县的十几万户百姓归附了他们，西魏的丞相宇文泰任命敬珍为平阳太守，敬祥为行台朗中。
English: After He Basing and Li Jie arrived in the Hedong area, Jing Xiang and Jing Zhen took more than a hundred thousand households in six counties, including the Jie clan, to join them. The Western Wei chancellor, Uwentai, appointed Jing Zhen as the governor of Pingyang and Jing Xiang as the middle-ranking official of Xingdailang.

古文：东魏秦州刺史薛崇礼守蒲坂，别驾薛善，崇礼之族弟也，言于崇礼曰： 高欢有逐君之罪，善与兄忝衣冠绪馀，世荷国恩，今大军已临，而犹为高氏固守。
现代文：东魏的秦州刺史薛崇礼负责卫蒲坂，他手下的别驾薛善是他的同族弟弟。薛善对薛崇礼说： 高欢犯有驱逐君王的大罪，我薛善和兄长列于高门大族，世世代代都得到国家给予的恩惠，现在大军已经来临，而我们还替姓高的努力防守。
English: Xue Chongli, a Qin state official in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, was in charge of Wei Po Slope, and his second-in-command, Xue Shan, was his younger brother of the same family. Xue Shan said to Xue Chongli: Gao Huan committed the great crime of expelling the king. I, Xue Shan, and my elder brother are listed in the Gaomen family, and have been favored by the state for generations. Now the great army has arrived, and we are defending the efforts of Gao.

古文：一旦城陷，函首送长安，署为逆贼，死有馀愧。
现代文：这座城一旦被攻破的话，我们的脑袋就得被人用匣子装了送到长安，外面还得被定为叛贼，那可真是死而有愧。
English: If this city were to be breached, our heads would have to be packed in a box and sent to Chang'an, and we would have to be branded as traitors outside. That would really be a shameful death.

古文：及今归款，犹为愈也。 
现代文：现在我们弃暗投明，还不晚呀。 
English: It's not too late to come clean.

古文：崇礼犹豫不决。
现代文：薛崇礼听了有些犹豫不决。
English: Xue Chongli listened with some hesitation.

古文：善与族人斩关纳魏师，崇礼出走，追获之。
现代文：薛善就和他同族的人杀掉守卫关卡的将士迎接西魏的部队，薛崇礼逃跑了，后来又被追上抓获。
English: Xue Shan and his compatriots killed the soldiers guarding the checkpoint to meet the West Wei forces. Xue Chongli ran away and was later caught.

古文：丞相泰进军蒲坂，略定汾、绛，凡薛氏预开城之谋者，皆赐五等爵。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰进军蒲坂，攻占平定了汾、绛两地，他对所有参与打开城门这一计划的薛氏家族的人，都封了五等爵位。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, Uwen Tai, marched into Puzhan, conquered and leveled the two places of Zou and Zou, and he sealed the fifth-class knighthood for all the Xue family members who participated in the plan to open the city gate.

古文：善曰： 背逆归顺，臣子常节，岂容阖门大小俱叨封邑！ 
现代文：薛善对宇文泰说： 背弃叛逆者，归附君王，这是做臣子的必须具备的节操，怎么能允许我们所有的人都接受封地呢？ 
English: Xue Shan said to Wu Wentai, "Renouncing the rebels and adhering to the monarch is the necessary discipline for a courtier. How can all of us be allowed to accept fiefdoms?

古文：与其弟慎固辞不受。
现代文：他和他的弟弟薛慎坚决推辞不接受。
English: He and his brother Xue Shen resolutely refused to accept.

古文：东魏行晋州事封祖业弃城走，仪同三司薛修义追至洪洞，说祖业还守，祖业不从。
现代文：东魏兼管晋州事务的封祖业丢弃州城逃跑，仪同三司薛义追他一直追到洪洞，劝他回去守城，但是他没有听从。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Fong Zuye, who was also in charge of Jinzhou affairs, abandoned the state capital and ran away. Yi Tong and San Si Xue Yi chased him all the way to Hongdong and advised him to go back and defend the city, but he did not listen.

古文：修义还据晋州，安集固守。
现代文：于是薛义回兵占据晋州，安定百姓稳固防守。
English: As a result, Xue Yi's troops occupied Jinzhou, and the stable people mounted a solid defense.

古文：魏仪同三司长孙子彦引兵至城下，修义开门伏甲以待之。子彦不测虚实，遂退走。
现代文：西魏的仪同三司长孙子彦指挥人马攻到城下，薛义打开城门，埋伏了将士等待对方；长孙子彦摸不透城中的虚实，就撤走了。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Sun Zihang, the chief of the Third Division, led troops and horses to attack the city. Xue Yi opened the city gate and ambushed the soldiers to wait for the other side. Sun Zihang could not fathom the truth in the city, so he withdrew.

古文：丞相欢以修义为晋州刺史。
现代文：东魏的丞相高欢任命薛义为晋州刺史。
English: Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, appointed Xue Yi to be the crown prince of Jinzhou.

古文：独孤信至新安，高敖曹引兵北度河。
现代文：独孤信到达新安，高敖曹则指挥部队北渡黄河。
English: Duxunxin arrived in Xin'an, and Gao Bing Cao commanded the troops to cross the Yellow River.

古文：信逼洛阳，洛州刺史广阳王湛弃城归鄴，信遂据金墉城。
现代文：接着，独孤信逼近洛阳，担任洛州刺史的广阳王元湛丢弃了州城逃到国都邺城，独孤信就这么占据了金墉城。
English: Next, Du Guoxin approached Luoyang. Guangyang Wang Yuan Zhan, who served as Luoyang's chief historian, abandoned the state capital and fled to the national capital, Handan. Du Guoxin thus occupied Jinyuan City.

古文：孝武帝之西迁也，散骑常侍河东裴宽谓诸弟曰： 天子既西，吾不可以东附高氏。 
现代文：孝武帝当初迁往西边的时候，散骑常侍河东人裴宽对他弟弟们说： 皇上既然已经去了西面，我就不能去东面归附高欢。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowu initially moved to the west, Pei Kuan, a straggler and regular attendant from the east of the river, said to his brothers: Since the emperor has gone to the west, I can't go to the east to join Gao Huan.

古文：帅家属逃于大石岭。独孤信入洛，乃出见之。
现代文：于是带着全家逃到了大石岭；独孤信进入洛州之后，裴宽才出来与他相见。
English: So he fled with his whole family to Dashiling. Only after Du Guoxin entered Lozhou did Pei Guang come out to meet him.

古文：时洛阳荒废，人士流散，唯河东柳虬在阳城，裴诹之在颍川，信俱征之，以虬为行台郎中，诹之为开府属。
现代文：此时洛阳已经荒废，名门士族流亡离散，只有河东籍的柳虬还在阳城，裴诹之还在颍川，独孤信都征召他们，任命柳虬为行台郎中，裴诹之为开府属。
English: At this time, Luoyang had already been abandoned, and the famous warriors were scattered in exile. Only Liu Ye, a citizen of Hedong, was still in Yangcheng, and Pei Xizhi was still in Beichuan. Du Guoxin conscripted them all and appointed Liu Ye as one of the governors of Xingtai, and Pei Xizhi as one of the governors.

古文：东魏颍州长史贺若统执刺史田迄，举城降魏，魏都督梁回入据其城。前通直散骑侍郎郑伟起兵陈留，攻东魏梁州，执其刺史鹿永吉。
现代文：东魏的颍州长史贺若统抓住了刺史田迄，率领全城军民投降西魏，西魏的都督梁迥进入并占据了这座州城，以前的通直散骑侍郎郑伟在陈留起兵，攻打东崐魏的梁州，捉住了梁州刺史鹿永吉。
English: The governor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Shi Hera, led the entire city's army and people to surrender to the Western Wei Dynasty. The Western Wei Dynasty's governor, Liang Jun, entered and occupied the state capital. The former imperial equerry Zheng Wei raised an army in Chenliu, attacked the Eastern Wei Dynasty's Liangzhou, and captured Liangzhou's governor, Shilu Yongji.

古文：前大司马从事中郎崔彦穆攻荥阳，执其太守苏淑，与广州长史刘志皆降于魏。
现代文：从前的大司马从事中郎崔彦穆攻打荥阳，捉住了荥阳太守苏淑，接着与广州长史刘志一起投降了西魏。
English: The former grand steed engaged the middle brother Cui Yanmu to attack Poyang, captured the governor of Poyang, Su Shu, and then surrendered to the West Wei together with the governor of Guangzhou, Liu Zhi.

古文：伟，先护之子也。
现代文：郑伟是郑先护的儿子。
English: Zheng Wei is the son of Zheng Xianyou.

古文：丞相泰以伟为北徐州刺史，彦穆为荥阳太守。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰任命郑伟为北徐州刺史，崔彦穆为荥阳太守。
English: Western Wei chancellor Wu Wentai appointed Zheng Wei as the governor of North Xuzhou and Cui Yanmu as the governor of Shenyang.

古文：十一月，东魏行台任祥帅督将尧雄、赵育、是云宝攻颍川，丞相泰使大都督宇文贵、乐陵公辽西怡峰将步骑二千救之。
现代文：十一月，东魏行台任祥率领督将尧雄、赵育、是云宝攻打颍川。西魏丞相宇文泰派遣大都督宇文贵、乐陵公辽西人怡峰带着二千名步、骑兵前去救援。
English: In November, the Eastern Wei Dynasty marched to Taiwan, and Ren Xiang led the viceroy to attack Hun Xiong, Zhao Yu and Ye Yun Bao in Hunchuan. The Western Wei Dynasty prime minister, U Wentai, sent the grand duke, U Wengui, and Le Ling Gong, Liao Xi Ren Yifeng, with two thousand infantry and cavalry to the rescue.

古文：军至阳翟，雄等军已去颍川三十里，祥帅众四万继其后。
现代文：西魏部队到达阳翟的时候，尧雄等人的部队已距颍川只三十里远近了，任祥率四万兵马紧继其后。
English: By the time the Western Wei forces arrived at Yangtze River, the troops of Shao Xiong and others were only 30 miles away from the Yangtze River, followed by Ren Xiang's 40,000 soldiers.

古文：诸将咸以为 彼众我寡，不可争锋 。
现代文：西魏的将领们都认为 敌军人多，我方人少，所以不可交战 。
English: The generals of the Western Wei Dynasty all believed that there were many enemy soldiers and few people on our side, so they could not fight.

古文：贵曰： 雄等谓吾兵少，必不敢进。
现代文：宇文贵则对大家说： 尧雄等人觉得我们的部队人数少，一定不敢进攻他们。
English: On the other hand, Uwengui said to everyone, "Hao Xiong and others think that the number of our troops is small, so they must not dare to attack them.

古文：彼与任祥合兵攻颍川，城必危矣。
现代文：要是让他们和任祥联合起来攻打颍川，这座城必定危险了。
English: If they and Ren Xiang were to join forces to attack Luohe, the city would be in danger.

古文：若贺若统陷没，吾辈坐此何为！
现代文：如果贺若统真的落了个城破人亡的结局，那我们坐在这儿干什么？
English: If Herao-tung really did end in a city destroyed and people killed, then what are we doing sitting here?

古文：今进据颍川，有城可守，又出其不意，破之必矣！ 
现代文：现在我们要是能够占领颍川的话，有城可以防守，又能够出乎敌人的意料，这样我们就一定能够打败他们。 
English: Now, if we can occupy Suechuan, we will have a city to defend, and we will be able to surprise the enemy, so we will definitely be able to defeat them.

古文：遂疾趋，据颍川，背城为陈以待。
现代文：说罢，他便指挥部队快速进军，占领了颍川，然后背靠城墙，严阵以待。
English: Having said that, he led his troops in a quick march, occupied the Li River, and then backed up against the city wall, waiting in a tight line.

古文：雄等至，合战，大破之。
现代文：尧雄等人的部队来到，宇文贵的部队迎战，使敌人遭到了惨败。
English: The troops of Hao Xiong and others arrived, and Wu Wengui's troops fought against them, causing the enemy to suffer a crushing defeat.

古文：雄走，赵育请降，俘其士卒万馀人，悉纵遣之。
现代文：尧雄逃跑，赵育请求投降，这一仗共俘虏了一万多名东魏的士兵，宇文贵把他们全部遣散了。
English: Shao Xiong fled, Zhao Yu asked for surrender, this battle captured a total of more than ten thousand Eastern Wei soldiers, and Yu Wengui dismissed them all.

古文：任祥闻雄败，不敢进，贵与怡峰乘胜逼之，祥退保宛陵；贵追及，击之，祥军大败。
现代文：任祥听到尧雄失败的消息，不敢继续前进，宇文贵与怡峰乘胜向他发起进攻，任祥撤退到宛陵进行防守；宇文贵追到了宛陵，向任祥发起进攻，任祥的部队被打得一败涂地。
English: When Ren Xiang heard the news of Huan Xiong's defeat, he did not dare to continue his advance. Uwen Gui and Yifeng Heng Sheng attacked him, and Ren Xiang retreated to Wanling to defend; Uwen Gui caught up with Wanling and attacked Ren Xiang, and Ren Xiang's troops were beaten to a pulp.

古文：是云宝杀其阳州刺史那椿，以州降魏。
现代文：是云宝杀掉了他所在的阳州刺史那椿，和全州军民一道投降了西魏。
English: It was Yun Bao who killed Yangzhou Jishi Natchan, where he was stationed, and surrendered to the Western Wei together with the soldiers and civilians of the whole state.

古文：魏以贵为开府仪同三司，是云宝、赵育为车骑大将军。
现代文：西魏任命宇文贵为开府仪同三司，是云宝、赵育为车骑大将军。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Yu Wengui as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and Yun Bao and Zhao Yu as the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：都督杜陵韦孝宽攻东魏豫州，拔之，执其行台冯邕。
现代文：梁朝都督杜陵人韦孝宽攻打东魏的豫州，占领了州城，俘虏了行台冯邕。
English: Wei Xiaokuan, the Liang dynasty's governor of Tulin, attacked Eastern Wei's Yuzhou, occupied the provincial capital, and captured Xingtaifeng.

古文：孝宽名叔裕，以字行。
现代文：韦孝宽本名为韦叔裕，以字行于世。
English: Wei Xiaokuan's real name was Wei Shuyu, and he went through life as a character.

古文：丙子，东魏以骠骑大将军、仪同三司万俟普为太尉。
现代文：丙子，东魏任命骠骑大将军、仪同三司万俟普为太尉。
English: Bing Zi, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Zou Jie as the general and Yidong Sanshi Wan Rongpu as the lieutenant.

古文：司农张乐皋等聘于东魏。
现代文：梁朝司农张乐皋等人到东魏聘问。
English: Liang Chaozhi, farmer Zhang Lejuan and others went to the Eastern Wei Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：十二月，魏行台杨白驹与东魏阳州刺史段粲战于蓼坞，魏师败绩。
现代文：十二月，西魏行台杨白驹与东魏阳州刺史段粲在蓼坞交战，西魏的军队大败。
English: In December, Yang Bailuan of the Western Wei Dynasty and Yang Zhi Duan of the Eastern Wei Dynasty clashed in the dock, and the army of the Western Wei Dynasty suffered a major defeat.

古文：魏荆州刺史郭鸾攻东魏东荆州刺史清都慕容俨，俨昼夜拒战二百馀日，乘间出击鸾，大破之。
现代文：西魏荆州刺史郭鸾攻打东魏东荆州刺史清都人慕容俨，慕容俨日夜抵抗，持续了二百多天之后，他乘机出击，打垮了郭鸾。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, the Jingzhou assassin Guo Wei attacked the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the Eastern Jingzhou assassin Qingdu assassin Murong Wei. Murong Wei resisted day and night, and after more than 200 days, he took the opportunity to attack and defeat Guo Wei.

古文：时河南诸州多失守，唯东荆获全。
现代文：当时东魏黄河以南地区的各个州大多数失守了，唯独东荆州得以保全。
English: At that time, most of the states south of the Yellow River in the Eastern Wei Dynasty were lost, except for East Jingzhou.

古文：河间邢磨纳、范阳卢仲礼、仲礼从弟仲裕等皆起兵海隅以应魏。
现代文：河间人邢磨纳、范阳人卢仲礼，还有卢仲礼的堂弟卢仲裕等人都在海边起兵，策应西魏。
English: Lu Zhongli of Fanyang, Lu Zhongyu, and Lu Zhongli's cousin, Lu Zhongyu, all raised an army on the coast to deal with the Western Wei.

古文：东魏济州刺史高季式有部曲千馀人，马八百匹，铠仗皆备。
现代文：东魏济州刺史高季式有部曲一千多人，战马八百匹，铠甲与兵器统统齐备。
English: There are more than a thousand people, eight hundred war horses, armor and weapons all ready.

古文：濮阳民杜灵椿等为盗，聚众近万人，攻城剽野。
现代文：濮阳的百姓杜灵椿等人干起了强盗勾当，纠集了将近一万人，又是攻城又是在野外抢劫。
English: The people of Fenyang, such as Du Lingchun and others, engaged in banditry, gathered nearly ten thousand people, and attacked the city and robbed in the open.

古文：季式遣骑三百，一战擒之，又击阳平贼路文徒等，悉平之，于是远近肃清。
现代文：高季式派出三百名骑兵一仗就捉住了杜灵椿，又袭击了阳平的盗贼路文徒等人，将那些盗贼一一平定，于是远近的盗贼都被肃清了。
English: Gao Ji dispatched three hundred cavalrymen to capture Du Lingqin in a single battle, and attacked the thieves Lu Wenqin and others in Yangping, and subdued those thieves one by one. As a result, the thieves near and far were eliminated.

古文：或谓季式曰： 濮阳、阳平乃畿内之郡，不奉诏命，又不侵境，何急而使私军远战！万一失利，岂不获罪乎！ 
现代文：有人对崐高季式说： 濮阳、阳平的两个郡属于京城管辖，你没有得到讨伐盗贼的命令，盗贼也没有侵犯济州的土地，你为什么这么着急，派出私家军队出远门作战，万一失利的话，岂不是要白白承担罪责？ 
English: Someone said to Gong Gao Ji: The two counties of Fenyang and Yangping are under the jurisdiction of Beijing. You did not receive an order to fight the thieves, and the thieves did not invade the land of Jeju. Why are you in such a hurry to send a private army to fight far away? In case of defeat, wouldn't you have to bear the blame?

古文：季式曰： 君何言之不忠也！
现代文：高季式回答说： 您怎么会说出这种不忠的话来？
English: Gao Ji replied: "How could you say such a disloyal thing?

古文：我与国家同安共危，岂有见贼而不讨乎！
现代文：我和国家同安危，共命运，哪有见到盗贼不去讨伐的道理？
English: I and the country are in the same danger and share the same fate. Is there any reason why thieves should not fight back?

古文：且贼知台军猝不能来，又不疑外州有兵击之，乘其无备，破之必矣。
现代文：而且盗贼知道朝廷军队仓促间不会到来，又不疑心别的州郡的官兵会攻击他们，所以乘他们没有作准备，我们一定能够消灭他们。
English: Moreover, the thieves knew that the imperial army would not arrive in a hurry, and they had no doubt that officers and soldiers from other states would attack them, so by taking advantage of their lack of preparation, we would definitely be able to eliminate them.

古文：以此获罪，吾亦无恨！ 
现代文：即使因为这事而承担罪责，那我也没有什么遗憾的。 
English: Even if I take the blame for this, I have no regrets.

