古文：清泰主仆射陂李泳子谯乂俊刘峭袁州父老朱廷禹僧德林司马正彝
现代文：清泰主仆射陂李泳子谯乂俊刘峭袁州父老朱廷禹僧德林司马正彝
English: Qing Tai's master and servant, Li Yongzi, Liu Qiao, Liu Qiao, Yuan Zhou's father, Zhu Tingyu, the monk Dering, Sima Zhengqi

古文：刘宣黄鲁张鋋郭厚浔阳县吏朱元吉沽酒王氏鲍回刘皞崔练师
现代文：刘宣黄鲁张鋋郭厚浔阳县吏朱元吉沽酒王氏鲍回刘皞崔练师
English: Liu Xuanhuanglu Zhangye Guo thick Liyang County official Zhuyuanqizhuang Wang Bao Hui Liuye Cui drill instructor

古文：清泰主
现代文：清泰主
English: Qing Emperor Taizong

古文：唐清泰主，乃晋高祖之妇兄也。
现代文：唐清泰君主，是晋高祖妻子的哥哥。
English: Emperor of Tang, Qing and Tai dynasties, was the elder brother of the wife of Emperor Gaozu.

古文：明宗始为太原将帅，二主军职未高。
现代文：明宗起初是太原将帅，清泰主当时只是一个军职不高的人。
English: At the beginning, Mingzong was the commander of Taiyuan, while Ching Tai was just a low-ranking military officer.

古文：因击鞠，入赵襄子庙，俱见土偶避位而立，甚讶之，潜亦自负。
现代文：有一次因为玩击球游戏，他进了赵襄子庙，看见庙里的土神像都离了座位站起来向他致意，十分惊讶，也感到很自负。
English: Once, because he was playing a game of batting, he entered the Zhao Xiangzi Temple and saw that the statues of the earth gods in the temple had all left their seats to stand up and greet him. He was very surprised and felt very proud.

古文：及明宗功高，常危惧。二主曰：赵襄子终能致福邪？
现代文：后来看到明宗军功很高，常担心害怕即不了皇位，说，难道赵襄子终于能保佑我得到大福吗？
English: Later, when he saw that the Ming Dynasty's military exploits were very high, he was often worried and afraid that he would not be able to succeed to the throne. He said, "Can Zhao Xiangzi finally bless me to get the great blessing?"

古文：尔后二主迭享大位。
现代文：后来清泰主终于登极当了皇帝。
English: Later, the ruler of Qing Tai finally ascended the throne and became emperor.

古文：仆射陂
现代文：仆射陂
English: Drum roll, please

古文：乙未岁，契丹据河朔，晋师拒于澶渊。
现代文：乙未年间，契丹进犯河朔一带，晋朝军队在澶渊一带与契丹对峙。
English: During the Yi years, the Khitan invaded the area around Hexuo, and the Jin Dynasty army confronted the Khitan in the area around Gongyuan.

古文：天下骚然，疲于战伐。
现代文：当时天下人都很恐慌，怕又要受兵慌马乱之苦。
English: At that time, people all over the world were panicking, fearing that they would have to suffer from the soldiers' panic.

古文：翰林学士王仁裕，奉使冯翊，路由于郑，过仆射陂。见州民及军营妇女，填咽于道路，皆执错彩小旗子，插于陂中，不知其数。
现代文：这时翰林学士王仁裕奉命出使到冯翊去，经过郑州的仆射陂时，见老百姓和军营的眷属们都涌在大道上，手里拿着各种颜色的小旗子，并把旗子插在仆射陂的水塘岸边。
English: At this time, Wang Renyu, a scholar of Hanlin, was ordered to go to Fengye, and when he passed through Zhengzhou, he saw the people and the relatives of the military camp flocking on the avenue, holding small flags of various colors in their hands, and planting the flag on the shore of the pond.

古文：询其居人，皆曰：郑人比家梦李卫公云： 请多造旗幡，置于陂中。我见集得无数兵，为中原剪除戎寇，所乏者旌旗耳。
现代文：王仁裕就问是怎么回事，回答说，郑州每家人都梦见仆射李卫公托梦说， 请大家多多制造些军营里用的旗幡，我现在已经集合起大批的军队，为中原扫荡进犯的契丹强寇。但是就缺乏军旗。
English: Wang Renyu asked what was going on, and replied that every family in Zhengzhou had dreamt of a servant shooting Li Weigong, saying, "Please make more flags for the military camp. I have now gathered a large number of troops to sweep the Central Plains for the invading Khitan invaders. But there is a lack of military flags."

古文：是以家别献此幡旗。
现代文：所以家家都为李卫公献旗。
English: Therefore, every family raised a flag for Li Weigong.

古文：初未之信，以为妖言，果旬月之间，击败胡虏。
现代文：王仁裕起初不相信，认为是妖言惑众。可是不到一个月，传来捷报，契丹已被击败。
English: At first, Wang Renyu didn't believe it and thought it was a trick. However, less than a month later, the news came that the Khitan had been defeated.

古文：及使回，过其陂，使仆者下路，访于草际，存者尚多。
现代文：王仁裕完成使命后回去又经过仆射坡，让仆人到陂里草丛中去察看，小彩旗还有很多插在那里。
English: After Wang Renyu completed his mission, he went back and passed the foot of the slope, and asked his servant to go to the bushes to see, there are still many small colored flags there.

古文：李泳子
现代文：李泳子
English: Li Yongzi

古文：蜀大理少卿李泳，尝归郫城别墅。
现代文：西蜀大理少卿李泳，有一次到他在郫城的别墅去，过桥时看见一个婴儿，用芭蕉叶子包着。
English: Li Yong, the Shaoqing of West Shuxu Dali, once went to his villa in Lushan and saw a baby wrapped in a plantain leaf when he was crossing the bridge.

古文：过桥，见一婴儿，以蕉叶荐之，泳怜其形相貌异，哺养为子。
现代文：李泳看这孩子长得貌相不凡，就抱回家去，当成自己的儿子哺养。
English: When Li Yong saw the child's extraordinary appearance, he took him home and nursed him as if he were his own son.

古文：六七年，能书，善读笑，父母钟爱之，过于亲子。
现代文：六七岁时这孩子就能写字，能说会道，父母十分疼爱他，待他比亲生儿子还要好。
English: At the age of six or seven, this child could write and speak fluently. His parents loved him very much and treated him better than their own son.

古文：至十二岁，经史未见者，皆览之如夙习，人皆谓之神智。
现代文：到了十二岁，不论是什么没见过的经书史籍，这孩子看时都象是读熟过的一样，人们都称这孩子是神童。
English: By the age of twelve, no matter what books of scripture or history he had not seen, the child looked as if he had read them well. People called him a child prodigy.

古文：尝独居一室中阅书，父母偶潜窥之，见一人持簿书，复有二童子接引呈过，其子便大书数行，却授之去。
现代文：有一次儿子在一个屋里独自读书，李泳和妻子偷偷在窗外看。只见有一个人拿着公文卷宗，还有两个童子接过卷宗呈递给自己的儿子，儿子就挥动大笔在公文上写上几行字，然后交给童子拿走。
English: Once, when his son was reading alone in a room, Li Yong and his wife secretly looked out of the window. They saw a man holding a document file, and two boys took the file and handed it to their son. The son waved a large pen to write a few lines on the document, and then handed it to the boy to take away.

古文：父母异之，来日，因待立，泳疑曲谓之曰：吾夜来窃有所睹，汝得非判阴府事乎？
现代文：李泳和妻子非常奇怪。第二天，儿子来请安侍立一旁，李泳就委婉地问儿子，昨夜我偷偷看见了你的事情。你莫非是在处理阴曹地府的公事吗？儿子说，是的。
English: Li Yong and his wife were very strange. The next day, his son came to ask An to stand aside. Li Yong asked his son politely, "Last night, I secretly saw your business. Aren't you handling the business of the Evil Empire?" His son said, "Yes."

古文：曰：然。重问则唯拜不对。
现代文：李泳再问，儿子就只是作揖不回答了。
English: When Li Yong asked again, his son just pretended not to answer.

古文：泳曰：阴府人间，事意不同，吾不欲苦问，汝宜善保。
现代文：李泳说，阴府和人间是不同的，我不便算追问什么，希望你多多珍重好自为之吧。
English: Li Yong said that the underworld and the human world are different, and it is not convenient for me to inquire about anything. I hope you will cherish it as much as you can.

古文：子又拜。
现代文：儿子又作揖不语。
English: My son was speechless.

古文：却后六年，一旦白于父母：儿只合与少卿夫人为儿一十八年，今则事毕。
现代文：又过了六年，一天儿子忽然说，我只该给你们做十八年儿子，现在时间已经到了。
English: Another six years passed, and one day my son suddenly said, "I should have been your son for eighteen years, but now the time has come."

古文：来日申时，却归冥司。
现代文：明天申时，我就要回冥府去了。
English: Tomorrow at dusk, I'm going back to Hades.

古文：因泣下久之，父母亦为之出涕。
现代文：说完就哭了半天，李泳和妻子也哭了一场。
English: After saying that, he cried for half a day, and Li Yong and his wife also cried.

古文：泳问曰：吾官至何？
现代文：李泳问儿子，我官能做到多大？
English: Li Yong asked his son, how much can I do?

古文：答曰：只在大理少卿。
现代文：儿子说，你只能作到现在的大理少卿，不会再升了。
English: My son said, "You can only be Dali Shaoqing until now, you won't be promoted again."

古文：果来日申时，其子卒，故泳有退闲之志。未久，坐事遂罢。
现代文：果然第二天申时，儿子就死了。李泳也想辞去官职，没过多久，就因为牵涉到一件公案里被罢了官。
English: Sure enough, his son died the next day at lunchtime. Li Yong also wanted to resign from his official position, but it didn't take long before he was ousted because he was involved in a lawsuit.

古文：谯乂俊
现代文：谯乂俊
English: 俊

古文：罗江县道士谯乂俊，壮年。
现代文：罗江县有个道士叫谯乂俊，正值壮年。
English: In Luojiang County, there is a Taoist monk named Gong Jun, who is in his prime.

古文：忽梦太山府君追之，赐以黄敕，补为杖直。
现代文：有一次他忽然梦见太山府君把他召去，赐给他一个黄色的公文，任命他为阴府的杖直官，让他白天在阳间，夜晚到阴府。
English: Once he suddenly dreamed that the ruler of Taishan called him, gave him a yellow document, appointed him as a staff officer of the underworld, and told him to be in the sun during the day and to go to the underworld at night.

古文：昼归阴间，夜赴冥府，如此二十余年。
现代文：他就这样过了二十年。
English: That's how he spent the last twenty years.

古文：常说人间有命未终为恶者，追生魂笞之，其人在阳间之病或贫乞是也。
现代文：他常对人说，凡是在阳间生了病或受穷乞讨的人，都是自己阳寿没尽却做了坏事，被阴间把魂灵抓去受拷打的结果。
English: He often told people that anyone who got sick or suffered from poverty and begging in the afterlife was the result of being tortured by the underworld, which had taken away their souls because they had done bad things while they were still alive.

古文：往见亲戚及里人被笞者，明旦往视之，皆验，然恒愿得免。
现代文：这道士只要在阴间看见被拷打的是亲戚或邻居，第二天去看，果然是那么回事，就劝告他们做好事以赎罪免得生病或受穷。
English: As long as the Taoist saw in the underworld that it was a relative or a neighbor who was being tortured, and when he looked the next day and saw that it was indeed the case, he would advise them to do good deeds to atone for their sins so that they would not get sick or become poor.

古文：忽于冥间遇道士，不言姓名，谓曰：尔何不致名香？
现代文：有一次他在阴间见一个道士，道士说，你为什么不给神烧有名的好香？
English: Once he met a Taoist in the underworld. The Taoist said, "Why don't you burn some famous incense for the god?"

古文：昼于阳间上告南辰北极，必得免。
现代文：现在阴间要为此而惩罚你了。明天你回阳间去，赶快烧上好香，向南辰北极神求告，你的罪就能免。
English: Now, the underworld is going to punish you for this. Tomorrow, go back to the sun world, quickly burn some good incense, and appeal to the North and South God, and your sin will be forgiven.

古文：乂俊依此虔告。
现代文：谯乂俊道士就按那道士的话作了。
English: Gong Jun Daoist did as the Daoist said.

古文：忽尔太山府君却追黄敕，自是遂免。
现代文：后来太山府君追回了任命他的文书，他便不再在阳间阴间来回奔波了。
English: Later, Taishanfukun recovered the document appointing him, and he no longer ran back and forth between the sun and the underworld.

古文：因入道攻易，年八十余。
现代文：后来他专门攻读《易经》，活到八十多岁。
English: Later, he devoted himself to studying the I Ching and lived to be over eighty years old.

古文：刘峭
现代文：刘峭
English: Liu Qiao

古文：辛酉岁，金水主簿刘峭，因游云顶山，睹山庙盛饰一堂，有土偶，朱衣据鞍。
现代文：辛酉这年，金水县主簿刘峭到云顶山游玩。看见山庙中被装饰了个新的庙堂，其中新供奉了一个神像，这神像穿着红衣服骑在马上。
English: In the year of Hsinchu, Liu Qiao, the chief official of Jinshui County, visited Mount Genting. He saw that a new temple was decorated in the mountain temple, in which a new god was enshrined. This god was dressed in red and rode on a horse.

古文：峭讶之，诘于山主昭讷，昭讷曰：余三夕连梦见王，语近辟一判官，宜设堂宇，塑朱衣一官而祀之。
现代文：刘峭很奇怪，就问庙里的主持昭讷。昭讷说，我连着三个夜晚梦见云顶山神对我说： 最近将有一个新的判官到云顶山来上任，你要新设一个庙堂，并塑一个穿红衣的神象供祀 。
English: Liu Qiao was very puzzled, so he asked the presiding deity of the temple, Zhao Na. Zhao Na said, I dreamed for three consecutive nights that the god of Mount Genting said to me: Recently, a new judge will come to Mount Genting to take office. You must build a new temple and make a god dressed in red for worship.

古文：故有此作。峭不之信。
现代文：我就是按照云顶山王的吩咐作的。刘峭不信。
English: I just did it according to the order of the king of Yunding Mountain. Liu Qiao didn't believe me.

古文：明年秩满，还成都，遇都官员外孙逢吉。
现代文：第二年刘峭任满回成都，遇见都官员外孙逢吉，就说了这件事。
English: The following year, Liu Qiaoren returned to Chengdu and met the grandson of the city official, Fang Ji, and told him about the incident.

古文：言其事，逢吉曰：顷为安仲古弥留之际，语长幼云： 顶山王已具书马聘礼，辟吾作判官。言绝，俨然端坐长逝。
现代文：孙逢吉说，那正是安仲古将死的时候昭讷做了那个梦。安仲古死前曾对家里人说，云顶山王已派来车马带着聘礼迎接他到云顶山庙去当判官，说完后，立刻就端端正正地坐着死去了。
English: Sun Fengji said that it was precisely when An Zhonggu was about to die that Shona had that dream. Before his death, An Zhonggu had told his family that the king of Mount Genting had sent a carriage and horses with a bride price to welcome him to the temple of Mount Genting to be a judge. After saying that, he immediately sat down and died.

古文：袁州父老
现代文：袁州父老
English: Yuanzhou's parents and elders

古文：袁州城中有老父，性谨厚，为乡里所推，家亦甚富。
现代文：袁州乡村里有位老父，为人谨慎厚道，乡里人都很尊敬他，家里也很富。
English: In the village of Yuanzhou, there was an old man who was prudent and kind. The villagers respected him very much, and his family was also very rich.

古文：一日有紫衣少年，车仆甚盛，诣其家求食。
现代文：一天，有个穿紫袍的少年，带着不少车马仆从，来到老父家要些吃的。
English: One day, a young man in a purple robe, accompanied by many servants, came to the old man's house to ask for some food.

古文：老父即延入，设食甚至，徧及仆者。
现代文：老父立刻把少年请进屋里，拿来很多好吃的东西，连仆从们都给了吃食。
English: The old man immediately invited the boy into the house and brought a lot of delicious food, even the servants were given food.

古文：老父侍食于前，因思长吏朝使行县，当有顿地，此何人哉？
现代文：老父一面安排酒饭一面想，如果是州里或朝里的官员到县里来，都会有接待食宿的地方，这位少年是什么人呢？
English: While arranging the banquet, the old man thought, if an official from the state or the government comes to the county, there will be a place for reception and accommodation. Who is this young man?

古文：意色甚疑。
现代文：这样想着脸上就露出了怀疑的神色。
English: That thought brought a look of incredulity to his face.

古文：少年觉之，谓曰：君疑我，我不能复为君隐。
现代文：少年察觉到了，就对老父说，你既然怀疑我了，我也就不隐瞒了。
English: The boy noticed this and said to his father, "Since you suspect me, I won't hide it.

古文：仰山神也。
现代文：我就是仰山的山神。
English: I am the mountain god of Yangshan.

古文：父悚然再拜，曰：仰山日厌于祭祀，奈何求食乎？
现代文：老父吃惊地赶快叩头，并问道，仰山神庙里是不是祭祀供奉酒食的人越来越少了，才使得你不得不出来求食呢？
English: Surprised, the old man quickly bowed his head and asked, "Is it because there are fewer and fewer people offering food and wine in the Yangshan Temple that you have to go out to look for food?"

古文：神曰：凡人之祀我，皆从我求福。
现代文：仰山神说，人们祭祀我，都是向我求福的。
English: The mountain god said, "People offer sacrifices to me, and they are all seeking blessings from me.

古文：我有力不能致者，或非其人不当受福者，我皆不敢享之。
现代文：凡是我力量不及办不到的，和那些命中不该有福的人供奉的食物，我都不敢享用。
English: I do not dare to partake of any food that is beyond my ability, or that is offered to those who are not blessed in life.

古文：以君长者，故从君求食耳。
现代文：你是一位可敬的老人，没有什么求我的事了，所以才敢向你求食。
English: You are a respectable old man, and have nothing to ask of me, so I dare to ask you for food.

古文：食讫，辞让而去，遂不见。
现代文：吃完后，再三拜谢辞别，然后就不见了。
English: After eating, he repeatedly said his goodbyes and then disappeared.

古文：朱廷禹
现代文：朱廷禹
English: Zhu Tingyu

古文：江南内臣朱廷禹，言其所亲泛海遇风，舟将复者数矣。
现代文：江南有位在朝里作官的朱廷禹，说他的亲戚有一次乘船在海上航行，突然遇见了风暴。
English: Zhu Tingyu, a high-ranking official in Jiangnan Province, said that his relative was once sailing on the sea and suddenly encountered a storm.

古文：海师云：此海神有所求。可即取舟中所载，弃之水中。
现代文：船被大浪颠簸得好几次都要翻了，掌舵的海师说这是海神在要东西，快把船里的东西往海里扔一些。
English: The ship was tossed several times by the big waves and had to turn over. The seaman at the helm said that this was the sea god asking for something, quickly throw some of the ship's contents into the sea.

古文：物将尽，有一黄衣妇人，容色绝世，乘舟而来，四青衣卒刺船，皆朱发豕牙，貌甚可畏。
现代文：船上东西快扔尽时，见一个容貌十分美丽的妇人坐着小船赶来，有四个侍女为她划船。个个是红头发猪牙齿，面目十分可怕。
English: When they were about to throw everything overboard, they saw a very beautiful-looking woman coming in a little boat, rowed for her by four maids, all red-haired, snaggle-toothed, and very scary-looking.

古文：妇人竟上船，问有好发髢，可以见与。
现代文：那妇人的小船靠拢后，妇人上了大船，问，船上有没有好假发？
English: After the woman's small boat came closer, the woman got on the big boat and asked if there were any good wigs on the boat.

古文：其人忙怖，不复记，但云：物已尽矣。
现代文：当时船上的人又慌乱又害怕，不记得她说的什么假发有没有。
English: At that time, the people on board were confused and scared, and could not remember what kind of wig she said.

古文：妇人云：在船后挂壁箧中。
现代文：然而那妇人却说，就在你们船后舱挂在墙上的梳妆匣里。
English: But the woman said, "It's in the dresser that hangs on the wall in your aft cabin."

古文：如言而得之。
现代文：船上的人按她的话一找，果然找到了假发。
English: The people on board did as she asked and found the wig.

古文：船屋上有脯腊，妇人取以食四卒。
现代文：船篷上放着些干鱼腊肉，那妇人就拿了给那四个划船的兵吃。
English: There was some dried fish and bacon on the canopy, and the woman took it and gave it to the four soldiers who were rowing.

古文：视其手，乌爪也。
现代文：看那女人的手，竟是鸟的爪子。
English: Look at that woman's hand. It's a bird's claw.

古文：持髢而去，舟乃达。
现代文：那女人拿了假发走了，船才平安地前行到达了目的地。
English: The woman took the wig and walked away, and the boat sailed safely to its destination.

古文：廷禹又言，其诸亲自江西如广陵，携十一岁儿，行至马当泊，登岸晚望。
现代文：朱廷禹又说，有一次他的亲属从江西坐船到广陵，还带着个十一岁的孩子。船到了马当泊，大家停船上岸游玩。
English: Zhu Tingyu also said that once his relatives took a boat from Jiangxi to Guangling with an eleven-year-old child. The boat arrived at Madang, and everyone stopped to play on the shore.

古文：及还船，失其儿。
现代文：等回到船上时，发现那孩子丢了。
English: When they returned to the boat, they discovered that the child was missing.

古文：遍寻之，得于茂林中，已如痴矣。
现代文：四下分头去找，才在密林中找到，孩子已经象傻子一样了。
English: After searching far and wide, they found him in a dense forest. The child already looked like an idiot.

古文：翌日，乃能言。云：为人召去，有所教我。
现代文：第二天孩子才能说话，说是被人领走以后，教他吹很长的口哨。
English: The next day, the child was able to speak. After he was taken away, he was taught to whistle a long whistle.

古文：乃吹指长啸，有山禽数十百只，应声而至，毛彩怪异，人莫能识。
现代文：一吹起口哨，就有好几百只山中的怪鸟应声而至。这些鸟毛色十分奇异，认不出来是什么鸟。
English: If you blow a whistle, you will be greeted by hundreds of strange birds in the mountains, whose fur is so strange that you can't tell what kind of bird they are.

古文：自尔东下，时时吹啸，众禽必至。
现代文：后来这孩子跟着船往东走，常常吹口哨，引得那些怪鸟都飞到船头。
English: Then the boy followed the ship eastward, whistling so often that the strange birds flew to the bow.

古文：至白沙，不敢复入。
现代文：后来船到了白沙，鸟就没敢再来。
English: Later, when the boat reached Baisha, the bird did not dare to come back.

古文：博访医巫治之，久乃愈。僧德林
现代文：到广陵后，家里人到处请医生和巫师给那孩子看病，过了很长时间，才把病治好。僧德林
English: After arriving at Guangling, the family went everywhere to ask doctors and sorcerers to treat the child, and it took a long time to cure the disease.

古文：浙西僧德林，少时游舒州，路左见一夫，荷锄治方丈之地。左右数十里不见居人，问之，对云：顷时自舒至桐城。
现代文：浙西有个和尚叫德林，年轻时游舒州时，在路边看见一个人正拿着锄头清理一块一丈多大小的土地，周围几十里没有人家，觉得很奇怪，就问那人。
English: In western Zhejiang, there was a monk named Delin. When he was young and traveling in Shuzhou, he saw a man on the side of the road who was clearing a small piece of land with a hoe. There were no houses for dozens of miles around. He thought it was very strange and asked the man.

古文：至此暴得痁疾，不能去，因卧草中。
现代文：那人说，过去我有一次从舒州往桐城去，走到这里突然发起了疟疾。走不动了，就躺在草丛里。
English: The man said, "In the past, I once went from Shuzhou to Tongcheng. When I got here, I suddenly came down with malaria. I couldn't walk, so I lay down in the grass.

古文：及稍醒，已昏矣。
现代文：等稍清醒过来时，天已黑了。
English: When I came to my senses, it was already dark.

古文：四望无人烟，唯虎豹吼叫，自分必死。
现代文：四望没有人烟，只听得虎豹吼叫，心里想我是非死在这里不可了。
English: There was no one around, but I heard the roar of the tiger and leopard, and I thought to myself that I had to die here.

古文：俄有一人，部从如大将，至此下马。据胡床坐。
现代文：突然有一个人骑着马来到我跟前，看那样子象个将军，带着不少人。将军下马后，坐在胡床上。
English: Suddenly, a man rode up to me, looking like a general, with a lot of people. The general got off his horse and sat down on a straw bed.

古文：良久，召二卒曰： 善守此人，明日送至桐城县下。
现代文：过了一会儿，他叫来两个兵，对他们说， 好好保护这个人，明天把他送到桐城去。
English: After a while, he called two soldiers and said to them, "Take good care of this man and send him to Tongcheng tomorrow."

古文：遂上马去，倏忽不见，唯二卒在焉。
现代文：说完就上马走了，转眼已不见影，只剩下两个兵守着我。
English: After saying this, I mounted my horse and rode away. In the blink of an eye, there was no longer a shadow, and only two soldiers remained to guard me.

古文：某即强起问之，答： 此茅将军也，常夜出猎虎，忧汝被伤，故使护汝。
现代文：我勉强坐起来问他们，他们说， 那是茅将军，经常夜里出来猎虎。怕你被虎伤，特派我们保护你。
English: I forced myself to sit up and asked them. They said, "That's General Mao. He often comes out at night to hunt tigers. If you're afraid of being injured by a tiger, we'll send someone to protect you."

古文：欲更问之，困而复卧。
现代文：我想再仔细问问，因为太难受又躺下了。
English: I wanted to ask more questions, because I was so uncomfortable that I lay down again.

古文：及觉，已日出。不复见二卒，即起而行，意甚轻健，若无疾者。
现代文：等我醒时，太阳已出来了，两个兵也不见了，我就爬起来赶路。只觉得两腿特别轻快，跟没病时一样。
English: When I woke up, the sun had come out and the two soldiers were gone, so I got up and went on my way. I only felt my legs were very light, just like when I wasn't sick.

古文：至桐城，顷之疾愈。
现代文：到了桐城，病完全好了。
English: By the time I got to Tongcheng, my illness was completely over.

古文：故以所见之处，立祠祀之。
现代文：所以我就在遇见茅将军的地方给他修个小祠庙祭祀他。
English: Therefore, I built a small ancestral temple for General Mao to worship him at the place where I met him.

古文：德林上舒州十年，及回，则村落皆立茅将军祠矣。
现代文：德林和尚到舒州呆了十年，等回来时一看，村子里到处都建有茅将军的祠庙。
English: Derin Monk stayed in Shuzhou for ten years. When he came back, he saw that the ancestral temple of General Mao was built everywhere in the village.

古文：司马正彝
现代文：司马正彝
English: Sima Zhengyi

古文：司马正彝者，始为小吏。
现代文：司马正彝在没有当县令前是个小官。
English: Sima Zhengqi was a minor official before he became a county magistrate.

古文：行溧水道中，去前店尚远，而饥渴甚，意颇忧之。
现代文：有一次他到溧水县去，离投宿的地方还很远，又饿又渴，十分焦虑。
English: Once he went to Surabaya County, far away from the place where he was staying. He was hungry, thirsty, and very anxious.

古文：俄而遇一新草店数间，独一妇人迎客，为设饮食，甚丰洁。
现代文：忽然看见道旁有个客店，只有一个女子出来迎客，就进了店。女子做了很丰盛洁净的饭菜招待他，他十分感谢。
English: Suddenly, he saw an inn on the side of the road. Only one woman came out to welcome the guests, and he entered the inn. The woman made a very hearty and clean meal to invite him, and he was very grateful.

古文：天彝谢之，妇人云：至都，有好粉胭脂，宜以为惠。
现代文：女子说，不用谢，到了京城里，有那好的胭脂和粉给我捎点来就行。
English: The woman said, "No thanks, when I get to the capital, I'll just get some of that good rouge and powder.

古文：正彝许诺。至建业，遇其所知往溧水，因市粉脂诣遗之。
现代文：司马正彝到了南京，正好遇到一个朋友要回溧水，就买了些脂粉托朋友捎给那个开店的女子，并详细的说了那客店的位置。
English: When Sima Zhengyi arrived in Nanjing, he happened to meet a friend who wanted to go back to Surabaya, so he bought some lipstick to give to the woman who opened the shop, and told her the location of the inn in detail.

古文：具告其处，既至，不复见店，但一神女庙，因置所遗而去。
现代文：朋友到那地方找，根本没有旅店，而是一个神女庙，就把脂粉放在庙里然后走了。
English: When my friend went there to look for it, there was no hotel at all, but a goddess temple, so he put the fat powder in the temple and left.

古文：正彝后为溧水令，相传云，往往有遇之者，未知其审。
现代文：司马正彝后来当了溧水县令，听人们传说，常常有人遇见那个女子，但都不知道她就是神女。
English: Sima Zhengqi later became the governor of Surabaya County. According to legend, people often met that woman, but they did not know that she was a goddess.

古文：刘宣
现代文：刘宣
English: Liu Xuan

古文：戊寅岁，吴师征越，败于临安。
现代文：戊寅那年，吴地的军队征讨越地，在临安大败。
English: In the year of Wu Yin, the army of Wudi conquered Yueji and suffered a great defeat in Lin'an.

古文：裨将刘宣伤重，卧于死人中。
现代文：副将刘宣受了重伤，卧在乱尸堆里。
English: Vice Admiral Liu Xuan was seriously injured and lay in a pile of corpses.

古文：至夜，有官吏数人，持簿书至，遍阅死者。
现代文：夜间来了几个官员，拿着个本子一一对照查看死尸。
English: During the night, several officials came with a book to inspect the corpses one by one.

古文：至宣，乃扶起视之曰：此汉非是。
现代文：查到刘宣时说，这家伙不在本子上。
English: When Liu Xuan was found, he said that this guy was not in the book.

古文：引出十余步，置路左而去。
现代文：把他拖出去十几步，扔在道旁走了。
English: He dragged him out a dozen steps, threw him on the roadside and walked away.

古文：明日贼退，宣乃得归。
现代文：贼兵退后，刘宣才得以归营。
English: After the bandits retreated, Liu Xuan was able to return to camp.

古文：宣肥白如瓠，初伏于地，越人割其尻肉，宣不敢动。
现代文：刘宣长得又白又胖象个大葫芦，他躺在死尸堆里时，越兵割下了他一半屁股，他也没敢动。
English: Liu Xuan was as white and fat as a large gourd. While he was lying in a pile of dead bodies, the Viet Minh soldiers cut off half of his buttocks. He did not dare to move.

古文：后疮愈，肉不复生，臀竟小偏。十余年乃卒。
现代文：后来伤好了，但屁股是歪的。十几年后刘宣才死。
English: Later, the injury was healed, but the buttocks were crooked. Liu Xuan only died a dozen years later.

古文：黄鲁
现代文：黄鲁
English: Huanglu

古文：徐三诲为抚州录事参军，其下干力黄鲁者，郡之俚人。
现代文：抚州的录事参军名叫刘三诲，他手下有个很能干的人叫黄鲁，是个乡下人。
English: The record of Fuzhou's entry into the army is named Liu Sanchong. He has a very capable person under him called Huang Lu, who is a villager.

古文：年少，颇白皙，有父母在乡中，数月一告归，归旬日复来。
现代文：黄鲁很年轻，皮肤白净，他的父母都在乡下。黄鲁每过几个月就请假回去探家，十几天后就回来。
English: Huang Lu is very young, with fair skin, and his parents are both in the countryside. Every few months, Huang Lu takes time off to visit his family, and returns after a dozen days.

古文：一旦，归月余不至，三诲遗吏至其家召之。家人云：久不归矣。
现代文：有一次，请假回家一个多月也没回来。刘三诲派人到黄鲁家去找，他家人说，黄鲁已经很久没回来过了。
English: On one occasion, he did not return home for more than a month. Liu Sanchi sent someone to Huang Lu's home to look for him. His family said that Huang Lu had not returned for a long time.

古文：于是散寻之。
现代文：于是派人四下去找。
English: So they sent people out to look for it.

古文：又月余，乃见在深山中，黄衣屣履，挟弹而游。与他少年数人，皆衣服相类。
现代文：找了一个多月，财在深山中见到。黄鲁这时穿着黄衣服黄鞋，挟着个弹弓正在游逛，和他一起还有几个少年，衣服打扮都一样。
English: After searching for more than a month, Cai saw Huang Lu deep in the mountains. At that time, Huang Lu was wearing yellow clothes and yellow shoes, and was wandering around with a slingshot in his hand. He was accompanied by several boys, all dressed in the same way.

古文：捕之不获。
现代文：人们抓不住黄鲁，跑掉了。
English: People couldn't hold onto Huang Lu and ran away.

古文：鲁家富，乃多募人，伏草间以伺之。
现代文：黄鲁家很富，雇了很多人上山藏在草从里等着，几天后才把他抓住了。
English: Huang Lu's family was very rich, and they hired many people to go up the mountain, hide in the grass and wait for him, and only caught him a few days later.

古文：既归，问其故，曰：山中有石氏者，其家如王公。纳我为婿。
现代文：带回家来，问他怎么回事。他说，山里有个姓石的，家里象王公一样富，招我作了女婿。
English: He said that there was a man in the mountains whose surname was Shi, and his family was as rich as that of a king, and he invited me to be his son-in-law.

古文：他无所言。
现代文：再问就不说了。
English: I won't ask again.

古文：留数日，复失去，又于山中求得之，如是者三。后一日竟去，遂不复见。
现代文：在家里呆了几天，又没了。只好再到山里去抓，回来还是呆几天就没，后来就再也找不到了。
English: I stayed at home for a few days, and then it was gone. I had to go back to the mountains to catch it. When I came back, it was still gone for a few days, and then I couldn't find it again.

古文：寻石氏之居，亦不能得。此山乃临川人采石之所，盖石之神也。张鋋
现代文：找姓石的家也找不到。这山是临川人采石的地方，那石氏，其实就石神。张鋋
English: I can't find a family with the surname of Shi. This mountain is a place where the people of Linchuan quarried stone, and the Shi clan is actually a stone god.

古文：张鋋者，任邑宰，以廉直称。后为彭泽令，使至县宅。
现代文：张鋋曾当过几任邑宰，廉洁正直，后来升为彭泽令。
English: Zhang Ye had been several times the mayor of the town, he was honest and upright, and later he was promoted to the Pengze order.

古文：当洁清县署，以奉居人，奈何腥秽如是邪？
现代文：县衙后面有个庙，庙前是树林，乌鸦老鹰等野鸟在树上搭窝，弄得县衙到处是鸟粪。
English: There is a temple behind the county seat, and in front of the temple is a forest. Wild birds such as crows and eagles build nests in the trees, making the county seat full of bird droppings.

古文：尔三日中，当尽逐众禽。不然，吾将焚庙而伐树矣！
现代文：人们说鸟是神庙的，不敢管它们，张鋋十分厌恶，让女巫在庙里祝祷说，你是这一方的土地神，应该保证县衙的清洁，使住在这里的人畅快。
English: People said that the birds belonged to the temple and dared not handle them. Zhang Ye was so disgusted that she had the witch pray in the temple, saying, "You are the god of this side of the land, you should ensure the cleanliness of the county seat and make the people who live here happy."

古文：居二日，有数大鹗，奋击而至，尽坏群巢，又一日大雨。
现代文：现在弄得又腥又臭你怎么不管？请神在三天之内把鸟都赶走，不然我就要烧庙砍树了。过了两天，突然来了几只大鹰向鸟群猛攻，把鸟窝也都毁了。
English: Don't you care that it is now dirty and smelly? Please God, drive away the birds within three days, otherwise I will burn the temple and cut down the trees. Two days later, several large eagles suddenly attacked the birds and destroyed the nest.

古文：粪秽皆净。自此宅居清洁矣。
现代文：第三天又来了一场大雨把鸟粪都冲走，从此县衙就干净了。
English: On the third day, a heavy rain came again to wash away the bird droppings. Since then, the county has been clean.

古文：郭厚
现代文：郭厚
English: Guo Hou

古文：李宗为舒州刺史，重造开元寺。
现代文：李宗当舒州刺史后重新修造开元寺。
English: Li Zongdan rebuilt Kaiyuan Temple after his death in Shuzhou.

古文：工徒始集，将浚一废井。
现代文：工匠们刚集中后，要清理庙里的一口废井。
English: After the craftsmen had just gathered, they had to clean up a waste well in the temple.

古文：井土寇犯阙，天下乱。
现代文：贼寇进犯京城，天下大乱。
English: Kleptocrats invaded the capital, and the world was thrown into turmoil.

古文：僧辈利吾行资，杀我投此井中，今骸骨在是。
现代文：和尚们抢去我的盘缠钱和行李，把我杀死后扔到这井里，这副骨头就是我。
English: The monks took my money and luggage, killed me and threw me into this well. This bone is me.

古文：为我白李公，幸葬我，无见弃也。
现代文：请替我向李宗刺史请求把我埋葬，千万别再抛掉我。
English: Please ask Li Zongzhi for me to bury me, and never throw me away again.

古文：主者以告宗，翌日亲至井上，使发之，果得骸骨。
现代文：管事的报告给李宗，第二天李宗就来到井边，命人下去挖，果然有一副骨殖。
English: The steward reported to Li Zong. The next day, Li Zong came to the well and ordered someone to go down and dig. Sure enough, there was a pair of bones.

古文：即为具衣衾棺椁，设祭而葬之。
现代文：就作了衣服棺材，祭奠之后把骨殖埋葬了。
English: It was made into a clothes coffin, and the bones were buried after a memorial service.

古文：葬日，伍伯复仆地。
现代文：埋的那天，伍伯又扑倒在地说，鬼魂说： 请为我向李刺史致谢。
English: On the day of the burial, Wu Bo fell to the ground and said, the ghost said: Please thank Li Zhishi for me.

古文：鬼告曰：为我谢李公，幽魂处此，已三十年，籍公之惠，今九州社令，已补我为土地之神，配食于此矣。
现代文：我的幽魂在井中已呆了三十年，由于李刺史的恩德，我现在已经补任为土地神，就在这庙里上任了。
English: My ghost has stayed in the well for thirty years, and thanks to the kindness of Li Zhishi, I have now been appointed as the land god, and I have taken office in this temple.

古文：寺中至今祀之。
现代文：开元寺至今还供奉着这个土地神。
English: Kaigen-ji Temple still worships this land god.

古文：浔阳县吏
现代文：浔阳县吏
English: Shenyang County official

古文：庚寅岁，江西节度使徐知谏，以钱百万施庐山使者庙。浔阳令遣一吏典其事。
现代文：庚寅年间，江西节度使徐知谏给庐山使者庙布施了百万钱，浔阳县令派了一个小县吏到庐山庙去主管这件事。
English: During the Geng Yin era, the Jiangxi Festival made Xu Zhisheng give a million money to the Lushan Envoy Temple, and the Liyang County government sent a small county official to the Lushan Temple to supervise the matter.

古文：此吏尝入城，召一画工俱往，画工负荷丹彩杂物从之。
现代文：县吏进城找了一个画工一同去，画工背着颜料画具跟着走。
English: The county official went to the city to find a painter to go with him, and the painter followed with paint tools on his back.

古文：始出城，吏昏然若醉，自解腰带投地。
现代文：刚出城，那县吏就象喝醉了酒似地昏昏沉沉，把腰带解下来扔了。
English: As soon as he left the city, the county official, dazed as if he were drunk, took off his belt and threw it away.

古文：画工以为醉，而随之。
现代文：画工以为他醉了，就拾起腰带跟着走。
English: Thinking he was drunk, the painter picked up his belt and followed him.

古文：须臾，复脱衣弃帽，比至山中，殆至裸身。
现代文：不一会儿县吏又脱了衣服扔了帽子。走到庐山里时，县吏已脱得精光。
English: A short while later, the county official took off his clothes and threw away his hat. By the time he reached Shaoshan, the county official was completely naked.

古文：乃执之。画工救之曰：此醉人也。
现代文：走到庙前的河边，看见有一个鬼卒，穿青衣，白皮子护膝，一把就抓住了县吏。画工忙上前救县吏，说：他喝醉了。
English: Walking to the river in front of the temple, he saw a ghostly figure, dressed in a blue suit and white leather knee pads, grab the county official with one hand. The painter rushed forward to save the county official, saying, "He's drunk."

古文：卒怒曰：交交加加，谁能得会。
现代文：鬼卒说，罗索些什么，谁管那一套！
English: The devil's pawn says, what about Rosso, who is in charge of that set!

古文：竟擒之，坐于水中。
现代文：把县吏拖到河水里坐着。
English: He dragged the county official into the river and sat on him.

古文：工知其非人也，走往庙中告人。
现代文：画工知道那是个鬼卒，就到庙里找人。
English: The painter knew it was a ghost and went to the temple to look for someone.

古文：竞往视之，已不见，其吏犹坐水中，已死矣。
现代文：人们跑出来看，鬼卒已经不见，县吏还坐在水里，已经死去。
English: People ran out to see that the ghost policeman had disappeared and the county official was still sitting in the water, already dead.

古文：乃阅其出给之籍，则已乾没过半。
现代文：人们查看他身上带的帐本，才发现他已经把给庙里的钱贪污了一多半。
English: People checked the account books he was carrying, only to discover that he had embezzled more than half of the money given to the temple.

古文：进士谢岳亲见之。
现代文：这件事是进士谢岳亲自见到的。
English: This matter was witnessed by Jin Shi Xie Yue in person.

古文：朱元吉
现代文：朱元吉
English: Zhu Yuanji

古文：乌江县令朱元吉，言其所知泛舟至采石，遇风。
现代文：乌江县令朱元吉说，他的朋友某人有一次乘船到采石矶，遇上大风，同行的好几条船都沉没了。
English: Zhu Yuanji, the magistrate of Wujiang County, said that a friend of his once took a boat to Quarry Rock, encountered a strong wind, and several of his fellow boats sank.

古文：同行者数舟皆没，某既溺，不复见水，道路如人间。
现代文：某人也落了水。但掉到江里后就没有水了，有一条路象人间的路一样，他就沿着路往东走。
English: Someone also fell into the water, but after falling into the river, there was no water, and there was a road like a human road, and he walked along the road to the east.

古文：其人驱之东行，可在东岸山下，有大府署，门外堆坏船板木如丘陵，复有人运诸溺者财物入库中甚众。
现代文：到了东岸山下，看见一个很大的衙门，门外象小山似地堆着破船烂板，还有些人把淹死者的财物往仓库里运。
English: At the foot of the mountain on the east coast, I saw a large gate. Outside the gate, there was a mountain-like pile of shipwrecked planks, and some people were transporting the drowned man's belongings to the warehouse.

古文：入门，堂上有官人，遍召溺者，阅籍审之。
现代文：他进了衙门，见大堂上有个官，把淹死的都召了来，按着卷宗一个个地审查。
English: When he entered the court, he saw an officer in the lobby, who summoned all the drowned people and examined them one by one according to the file.

古文：至某独曰：此人不合来，可令送出。
现代文：审到他时，官员说，这个人不该来，把他送回去。
English: When he was brought to trial, officials said the man should not have come and sent him back.

古文：吏即引去，复至舟所。舟中财物，亦皆还之。
现代文：他就被人领出来，又来到船边，把船上的东西也还给了他。
English: Then they brought him out, and brought him again to the ship, and gave him again the things that were in the ship.

古文：恍然不自知，出水，已在西岸沙上矣。举船俨然，亦无沾湿。
现代文：他忧恍惚惚的什么也不觉就出了水，发现自己已经在西岸沙滩上，船也完好无损，一点也没湿。
English: In a daze, he stepped out of the water and found himself on the beach on the west coast, his boat intact and not at all wet.

古文：沽酒王氏
现代文：沽酒王氏
English: The Sake King Clan

古文：建康江宁县廨之后，有沽酒王氏，以平直称。
现代文：建康江宁县衙的后面有个王氏酒店，以买卖公平闻名。
English: There is a Wang's Hotel behind Jiankang, Jiangning County, which is famous for its fair trade.

古文：癸卯岁，二月既望夜，店人将闭外户，忽有朱衣数人，仆马甚盛，奄至户前，叱曰：开门，吾将暂憩于此。
现代文：癸卯年二月十六日夜里，店里刚要关门，忽然有几个穿红衣服的人带着不少车马仆从，来到店前，大喊：开门，我们要在这里歇一会儿。
English: On the night of February 16th in the year of the Rooster, the shop was just about to close, when suddenly several people in red clothes, accompanied by a number of servants, came to the front of the shop, shouting: Open the door, we want to rest here for a while.

古文：店人奔走告其主。其主曰出迎，则已入坐矣。
现代文：伙计赶快跑去告诉主人王氏，王氏说快快接进来，到店里一看，都已进来坐下了。
English: The employee quickly ran to tell the owner, Mr. Wang. Mr. Wang said to come in quickly. When he looked inside the store, everyone had already come in and sat down.

古文：主人因设酒食甚备，又犒诸从者，客甚谢焉。
现代文：王氏赶快端上了好多酒菜殷切招待，连随从们也都一样招待。
English: Mr. Wang quickly brought a lot of wine and dishes to warmly invite, and even the attendants were invited as well.

古文：顷之，有仆夫执捆绳百千丈，又一人执橛杙数百枚，前白：请布围。
现代文：红衣人们都很感谢。不一会儿有个仆从拿着几百丈一捆的绳子，另一个拿着几百个木橛子，请示道，现在就围起来吗？
English: The people in red were very grateful. Soon a servant came with a bundle of rope several hundred lengths long, and another with several hundred wooden rakes. "Please," he asked, "shall we surround them now?"

古文：紫衣可之。
现代文：一个紫衣人说可以。
English: A man in purple said yes.

古文：即出，以钉地，系绳其上，围坊曲人家使遍。
现代文：那两个人就出去，把木橛钉在地上，把绳子拴在橛上，把整个一条街的住户都围在绳圈里了。
English: The two men went out, nailed the stake to the ground, tied a rope to the stake, and encircled the entire population of a street in a rope ring.

古文：良久白事讫，紫衣起至户外。
现代文：过了很久有人报告说都弄好了，紫衣人就出去了。
English: After a long time, someone reported that everything was ready, and the man in purple went out.

古文：从者曰：此店亦在围中矣。
现代文：一个仆从对紫衣人说，这家酒店也围在里面了。
English: A servant told the purple-robed man that the hotel was also surrounded.

古文：紫衣相谓曰：主人相待甚厚，免此一店可乎？
现代文：紫衣人说，店主人侍咱们很好，免了这家怎样？
English: The man in purple said that it was very nice of the owner to wait on us, but what about this place?

古文：皆曰：一家尔，何为不可？
现代文：大家都说，就免这一家有什么不行呢？
English: Everyone said, what can't we do without this family?

古文：即命移杙，出店于围外。顾主人曰：以此相报。
现代文：于是就让人把木橛子挪开，把酒店让在绳子外，然后对店主王氏说，就算对你的报答吧。
English: So they asked someone to move the raft away, leaving the hotel outside the rope, and then said to the shopkeeper Mr. Wang, let it be a reward for you.

古文：遂去，倏忽不见？顾视绳杙，已亡矣。
现代文：说完就转眼消失了，再看地上的绳子木橛也都没了。
English: After saying that, he disappeared in the blink of an eye, and when I looked at the rope and raft on the ground, they were also gone.

古文：俄而巡使欧阳进逻巡夜，至店前，问何故深夜开门，又不灭灯烛何也。
现代文：这时巡使欧阳进带人巡夜来到酒店前，问王氏为什么深夜开着门还点着灯烛，王氏就都说了。
English: At this time, the inspector Ouyang Jin came to the hotel with a night patrol and asked Mr. Wang why he opened the door late at night and lit the candle, and Mr. Wang said it all.

古文：主人具告所见，进不信。执之下狱，将以妖言罪之。
现代文：欧阳进不信，把王氏抓走了关进监狱，准备判他妖言感众罪。
English: Ouyang did not believe him and took Mr. Wang away and put him in prison, preparing to convict him of inciting the public to sin.

古文：居二日，建康大火，自朱崔桥西至凤台山，居人焚之殆尽。
现代文：两天后，建康发生大火灾，从朱崔桥往西直到凤台山烧了个片瓦无存。
English: Two days later, a large fire broke out in Jiankang, burning a single tile from Zhucui Bridge to the west to Fengtai Mountain.

古文：此店四邻皆为煨烬，而王氏独免。
现代文：但王氏酒店安然无恙，周围却是一片灰烬。
English: But Mr Wang's hotel is safe and sound, surrounded by a cloud of ash.

古文：鲍回
现代文：鲍回
English: 鲍回

古文：鲍回者，尝入深山捕猎，见一少年，裸卧大树下，毛发委地。
现代文：鲍回有一次进深山打猎，看见一个少年，光着身子躺在大树下，很长的毛发拖在地上。
English: Once, Bao Bao went deep into the mountains to hunt and saw a boy lying naked under a big tree, with his long hair dragging on the ground.

古文：回欲射之，少年曰：我山神也，避君不及。勿杀我，富贵可致。
现代文：鲍回想射死他，少年说，我是山神，没来得及躲开你，请别杀我，我可以使你富贵。
English: Bao recalled thinking about shooting him. The boy said, "I am a mountain god. I didn't have time to avoid you. Please don't kill me. I can make you rich."

古文：回以刃刺其口，血皆逆流，遂杀之。
现代文：鲍回一刀刺进少年的嘴里，血却又倒着流回嘴里。
English: Bao Gui stabbed a knife into the boy's mouth, but the blood flowed backwards into his mouth.

古文：无何回卒。
现代文：鲍回终于把少年杀了，不一会他自己也死了。
English: Bao Wei finally killed the boy, and he died soon after.

古文：刘皞
现代文：刘皞
English: Liu Xuan

古文：汉宗正卿刘皞，忽梦一人，手执文簿，殆似冥吏，意其知人命禄，乃诘之，仍希阅己将来穷达。
现代文：后汉宗正卿刘皞，有一次他忽然梦见一个手拿文簿的人，看样子是冥府的官员，就向他请求查查自己的未来官运。
English: Liu Xuan, later Han Zong Zhengqing, once dreamed of a man holding a book, who looked like an official of the Hades, and asked him to check his future career.

古文：吏曰：作齐王判官，后为司徒宗正卿。
现代文：官员说，先作齐王判官，后来升任司徒宗正卿。
English: The official said that he was first the judge of Qi Wang, and later he was promoted to the position of Stuzong Zhengqing.

古文：皞自以朝籍已高，不乐却为王府官职。
现代文：刘皞自认为朝官职位很高，不愿当王府的官职。
English: Liu Ye thought that the position of a court official was very high and did not want to be an official of the royal court.

古文：梦觉，历历记之，亦言于亲友。
现代文：梦醒后，仔细记下，并告诉了亲友。
English: After waking up from a dream, carefully write it down and tell your relatives and friends.

古文：后衔命使吴越，路由郓州，忽于公馆染疾。
现代文：后来他被派出使吴越，走到郓州，忽然病在公馆里。
English: Later, he was sent to Wuyue, went to Ganzhou, and suddenly fell ill in the mansion.

古文：恍惚意其曾梦为齐王判官，恐是太山神天齐王也。乃令亲侍就庙，陈所梦，炷香掷茭以质之。
现代文：病中恍惚地想到过去作梦说自己当齐王判官，怕是指的到阴间给太山神天齐王作判官吧，就让侍从到庙里去向神述说了梦，并烧上香后用菰米扔卦请神说明。
English: During the illness, I vaguely remembered that I had a dream in the past that I would be the judge of King Qi. I was afraid that it meant that I would go to the underworld to be the judge of King Qi, the god of heaven and earth, so I asked the attendant to go to the temple to tell the god about the dream, and after burning the incense, I used glutinous rice to throw the riddle to ask the god to explain.

古文：一掷果应，宗卿以家事未了，更将明恳神祈，俟过海回，得以从命。
现代文：一扔，卦就应验了，他也就知道自己马上要死了，就向神恳求，说家里有事没办完，等自己过海回来后，再归阴上任，但连扔了好几卦，神都不答应。
English: He knew that he was going to die soon, so he pleaded with God, saying that there was unfinished business at home, and that after he returned from crossing the sea, he would return to Yin to take office, but God did not agree even after he had thrown out several gossips.

古文：频掷不允，俄卒于邮亭。
现代文：不久他就死在官驿的旅舍里了。
English: He died soon after in a government guesthouse.

古文：崔练师
现代文：崔练师
English: Choe Ryong Seong

古文：晋州女道士崔练师，忘其名，莫知所造何道。
现代文：晋州女道士崔练师，忘了叫什么名，也不知道她是什么道门。
English: Cui Linshi, a female Taoist from Jinzhou, has forgotten her name and doesn't know what sect she belongs to.

古文：置辎车一乘，佣而自给。
现代文：崔练师有一辆牛车租给别人拉脚，用这钱维持生活。
English: Cui Renshi rented an ox cart to pull others, and used the money to sustain his life.

古文：或立小小阴功，人亦不觉。
现代文：也许她有些阴功，但人们不了解。
English: Maybe she has some influence, but people don't know about it.

古文：欲以其牛车偿死儿之家，其人曰：此物是崔练师处租来。官司召练师，并絷之。
现代文：有一天，牛车压死了一个小孩，小孩父母告了官，官府把车夫抓来押起来，并宣判把牛车给小孩家做赔偿。车夫说这车是租崔练师的，官府就把崔练师也抓了起来。
English: One day, a bullock cart crushed a child to death. The child's parents sued the authorities. The authorities arrested the driver and sentenced him to pay compensation to the child's family. The driver said that the car was rented by Cui Renshi. The authorities also arrested Cui Renshi.

古文：太守栾元福，夜梦冥司崔判官谓曰：崔练师我之侄女，何罪而絷之？
现代文：太守栾元福夜里梦见冥府一位崔判官说，崔练师是我侄女，她有什么罪要抓起来？
English: Grand Marshal Yan Yuanfu dreamed at night that a Cui judge in Hades said, Cui Renshi is my niece, what crime does she have to be arrested for?

古文：梦觉，召练师，以梦中之言告之。
现代文：太守梦醒后把崔练师召来并把梦告诉她。
English: After awaking from the dream, the Empress Dowager summoned Cui Renshi and told her about the dream.

古文：练师对曰：某虽姓崔，莫知是何长行。
现代文：崔练师说，我虽然姓崔，却不知道冥府的崔判官是我的那门子长辈亲戚。
English: Cui Linshi said that although my surname was Cui, I did not know that Judge Cui of Hades was my elder relative.

古文：俄尔死儿复活。
现代文：然而不久那个被辗死的孩子却复活了。
English: However, the strangled child soon came back to life.

古文：周高祖闻而异之，召崔练师入京，仍择道士，往晋州紫极宫修斋焉。
现代文：周高祖听说这事很惊奇，召崔练师进京。仍令其为道士，到晋州紫极宫持斋修行。
English: Zhou Gaozu was surprised to hear of this and summoned Cui Jianshi to Beijing. He still made him a Taoist and made him practice fasting at the Zhigu Shrine in Jinzhou.

