古文：秦召魏相信安君。信安君不欲往。
现代文：秦国召见魏国相国信安君，信安君不想前往。
English: Qin summoned Wei's foreign minister, Nobuyasu, but he did not want to go.

古文：苏代为说秦王曰： 臣闻之，忠不必当，当不必忠。
现代文：苏代为他游说秦王说， 臣下听说，忠心不二不一定是同党，是同党不一定就忠心耿耿。
English: Su Dai lobbied Qin Wang for him and said, "My subjects have heard that loyalty is not necessarily to the same party, and loyalty is not necessarily to the same party.

古文：今臣愿大王陈臣之愚意，恐其不忠于下吏，自使有要领之罪。愿大王察之。
现代文：现在臣下愿意为大王谈一下臣下的愚见，臣下担心信安君不忠于大王属下的官吏，使自己犯下杀头之罪，希望大王明察。
English: Now the vassals are willing to talk about the stupidity of the vassals for the great king. The vassals are worried that Nobuyasu was not loyal to the officials under the great king and made himself commit the crime of beheading, and hope that the great king will take a closer look.

古文：今大王令人执事于魏，以完其交，臣恐魏交之益疑也。
现代文：现在大王派人到魏国执掌政事，来保全与魏国的邦交，臣下担忧与魏国的邦交更加难以建立。
English: Now that the Great King has sent someone to take charge of the affairs of state in Wei to maintain diplomatic relations with Wei, his subjects are worried that it will be even more difficult to establish diplomatic relations with Wei.

古文：将以塞赵也，臣又恐赵之益劲也。
现代文：将要以此来遏止赵国，臣下又担忧赵国更加强大。
English: This will be used to contain Zhao, and the vassals are worried that Zhao will become more powerful.

古文：夫魏王之爱习魏信也，甚矣；其智能而任用之也，厚矣；其畏恶严尊秦也，明矣。
现代文：魏王爱惜信安君，很厉害；他选拔任用有才能的人，礼遇丰厚；他畏惧尊敬秦国，是很清楚的。
English: The Wei king's love for Xinanjun is very strong; he selects and appoints talented people and treats them with great courtesy; it is clear that he fears and respects Qin.

古文：今王使人入魏而不用，则王之使人入魏无益也。
现代文：如果大王派人进入魏国而不被任用，那么大王派人入魏就徒劳无益。
English: If the great king sends someone to enter Wei without being appointed, then the great king sends someone to enter Wei in vain.

古文：若用，魏必舍所爱习而用所畏恶，此魏王之所以不安也。
现代文：如果被任用，魏国一定是舍弃爱惜的而任用所畏惧的，这就是魏玉会感到不安的原因。
English: If he is appointed, Wei Guo will definitely abandon what he cherishes and fear what he fears, which is why Wei Yu will feel uneasy.

古文：夫舍万乘之事而退，此魏信之所难行也。
现代文：放弃治理拥有万辆兵车国家的政事而退隐，这是魏国信安君所难做到的。
English: It is difficult for Wei Guo Xin'anjun to give up governing the political affairs of a country with 10,000 chariots and retreat into seclusion.

古文：夫令人之君处所不安，令人之相行所不能，以此为亲，则难久矣。
现代文：使人家的国君坐卧不安，使人家的褶国行止受到约束，以此来亲善，就很难持久了。
English: It is difficult to maintain cordial relations with someone who makes other countries' sovereigns uneasy and restricts other countries' behavior.

古文：臣故恐魏交之益疑也。
现代文：所以废下担忧与魏国的邦交难以建立。
English: As a result, it is difficult to establish diplomatic relations with Wei.

古文：且魏信舍事，则赵之谋者必曰： 舍于秦，秦必令其所爱信者用赵。 是赵存而我亡也，赵安而我危也。
现代文：况且信安君舍弃魏国的政事，那么赵国的谋臣一定会说： 信安君被秦国除去了相位，秦国一定会派秦王宠爱信任的人来执掌赵国，这是使赵国虽在而我们已经灭亡了，赵国平安而我们却危险了。 
English: Moreover, if Xin Anjun abandoned the political affairs of Wei, then the strategists of Zhao will surely say: Xin Anjun was removed from the phase by Qin, and Qin will surely send a person who is favored and trusted by Qin to take charge of Zhao. This is because although Zhao is here and we have perished, Zhao is safe and we are in danger.

古文：则上有野战之气，下有坚守之心，臣故恐赵之益劲也。
现代文：就会使在上位者有在外作战的士气，下面的人也会有坚守国土的决心，所以臣下担心赵国更加强大起来。
English: This would give those at the top the morale to fight abroad, and those below would have the determination to hold on to the land, so the vassals worried that Zhao would become even stronger.

古文： 大王欲完魏之交，而使赵小心乎?
现代文：大王想保全与魏国的关系，而使赵国不敢轻举妄动吗？
English: Did the emperor want to preserve the relationship with Wei, so that Zhao would not dare to act rashly?

古文：不如用魏信而尊之以名。
现代文：不如任用信安君，用相国的名声使他尊贵。
English: It would be better to appoint Nobuyasu-kun and use his country's reputation to make him respectable.

古文：魏信事王，国安而名尊；离王，国危而权轻。
现代文：信安君服事大王，就能使魏国平安并能使自己名声尊贵；他背离大王，魏国就会出现危险他自己的名声也会有损。
English: He believed that if he served the Great King, he could keep the state of Wei safe and make his own reputation honorable; if he turned away from the Great King, the state of Wei would be in danger and his own reputation would be damaged.

古文：然则魏信之事主也，上所以为其主者忠矣，下所以自为者厚矣，彼其事王必完矣。
现代文：那么信安君就会服事大王，在上位的人之所以为他们的国君办事是为了尽忠，下面的人之所以为自己奔波是因为俸禄优厚，信安君服事大王一定会尽心尽力。
English: Then, Nobuyasu will serve the great king. The reason why those in the upper ranks work for their sovereigns is to be loyal, and the reason why those below work for themselves is because the salary is generous. Nobuyasu will serve the great king with all his heart.

古文：赵之用事者必曰： 魏氏之名族不高于我，土地之实不厚于我。
现代文：赵国的当权者一定会说： 魏国的名门望族并不比我们高贵，土地上的出产并不比我们丰厚。
English: The people in power in Zhao will certainly say: The famous families in Wei are not more noble than us, and the production on the land is not more abundant than us.

古文：魏信以韩、魏事秦，秦甚善之，国得安焉，身取尊焉。
现代文：信安君用魏国服事秦国，秦国对他很友善，魏国得到了平安，信安君自己也取得尊贵的地位。
English: Xin Anjun used Wei to serve Qin. Qin was very kind to him. Wei gained peace, and Xin Anjun himself gained a noble status.

古文：今我讲难于秦兵为招质，国处削危之形，非得计也。
现代文：现在我们同秦国结怨，土兵成为人家的靶子，国家处在被削弱的危险形势当中，这并非是合理的策略。
English: Now we have a grudge with Qin, our soldiers have become a target, and the country is in a dangerous situation of being weakened. This is not a reasonable strategy.

古文：结怨于外，主患于中，身处死亡之地，非完事也。 
现代文：在外面结仇，祸患在国内产生，我们身处绝境，这并非宠好地处理了政事。 
English: Wreaking vengeance abroad, creating disasters at home, we are in a desperate situation, this is not a kind way of handling political affairs.

古文：彼将伤其前事，而悔其过行；冀其利，必多割地以深下王。则是大王垂拱之割地以为利重，尧、舜之所求而不能得也。
现代文：他们将痛惜自己以前做的事，后悔自已以前的行动；希望自己能得到好处，一定多割让土地来服事大王，那么就是大王垂衣拱手，得到割让的土地也会更加多起来，尧、舜想求得也不能得到。
English: They will regret what they have done in the past, regret their actions in the past; hoping that they can get benefits, they must cede more land to serve the great king, then even if the great king abdicates, there will be more land to be ceded, and they can't get what they want.

古文：臣愿大王察之。 
现代文：臣下愿大王明察臣下所说的。 
English: Subordinates, may the great king pay close attention to what his subordinates say.

