古文：凡人之所以为人者，礼义也。
现代文：人之所以成其为人，在于有礼义。
English: The reason why people are the way they are is because they are polite.

古文：礼义之始，在于正容体、齐颜色、顺辞令。
现代文：礼义从哪里做起呢？应从举止得体、态度端庄、言谈恭顺作起。
English: Where does etiquette begin? It should begin with proper behavior, a dignified attitude, and courteous speech.

古文：容体正，颜色齐，辞令顺，而后礼义备。
现代文：举止得体，态度端庄，言谈恭顺，然后礼义才算完备。
English: Behave properly, have a dignified attitude, speak respectfully, and then politeness is complete.

古文：以正君臣、亲父子、和长幼。
现代文：以此来使君臣各安其位、父子相亲、长幼和睦。
English: In this way, the ruler and the vassal would each be secure in his position, the father and son would be close to each other, and the elder and younger generations would be in harmony.

古文：君臣正，父子亲，长幼和，而后礼义立。
现代文：君臣各安其位，父子相亲，长幼和睦，然后礼义才算确立。
English: Princes and ministers each secure their place, father and son are close, the eldest and youngest are in harmony, and then the etiquette is established.

古文：故冠而后服备，服备而后容体正、颜色齐、辞令顺。
现代文：所以说，只有行过冠礼以后才算服装齐备，服装齐备以后才能做到举止得体、态度端庄、言谈恭顺。
English: Therefore, it is only after performing the coronation that the clothing is complete, and after the clothing is complete, it is possible to behave properly, have a dignified attitude, and speak courteously.

古文：故曰：冠者，礼之始也。
现代文：所以说，冠礼是礼的开始。
English: Therefore, the crowning ceremony is the beginning of the ceremony.

古文：是故古者圣王重冠。
现代文：所以古时候的圣王很重视冠礼。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, the holy king attached great importance to the coronation.

古文：古者冠礼筮日筮宾，所以敬冠事，敬冠事所以重礼；重礼所以为国本也。
现代文：行过冠礼以后，对冠者要称字而不称名，这因为他已经是个成年人了。
English: After the crowning ceremony, the winner should be called by name, not by name, because he is already an adult.

古文：故冠于阼，以着代也；醮于客位，三加弥尊，加有成也；已冠而字之，成人之道也。
现代文：加冠以后去拜见母亲，母亲答拜；去见兄弟，兄弟对他再拜：这都是因为他已是成人而与之施礼。
English: When he is crowned, he bows to his mother, and his mother bows back to him; when he is crowned, he bows to his brother, and his brother bows back to him: all because he is an adult.

古文：见于母，母拜之；见于兄弟，兄弟拜之；成人而与为礼也。玄冠、玄端奠挚于君，遂以挚见于乡大夫、乡先生；以成人见也。
现代文：戴上淄布冠，穿上玄端服，拿着礼品去拜见国君，把礼品放在地上，表示不敢直接授受；接着又拿着礼品去拜见乡大夫和乡先生，都是以成人的身份前去拜见。
English: They put on a crown of scarlet cloth, put on a ceremonial robe, take a gift to visit the sovereign, put the gift on the ground to show that they do not dare to give it directly, and then take a gift to visit the town doctor and the town master, all of whom come to visit as adults.

古文：成人之者，将责成人礼焉也。
现代文：既然是成人的身份，那就要以成人的礼数来要求他。
English: Since he is an adult, he should be treated with adult courtesy.

古文：责成人礼焉者，将责为人子、为人弟、为人臣、为人少者之礼行焉。
现代文：所谓以成人的礼数来要求他，也就是将要要求他做一个合格的儿子，做一个合格的弟弟，做一个合格的臣子，做一个合格的后辈。
English: The so-called adult courtesy is required of him, that is, he will be required to be a qualified son, a qualified younger brother, a qualified courtier, and a qualified younger generation.

古文：将责四者之行于人，其礼可不重与？
现代文：将要要求他具备这四个方面的德行，冠礼能不重要吗！
English: He will be required to have these four aspects of virtue, and the crown ceremony is not important!

古文：故孝弟忠顺之行立，而后可以为人；可以为人，而后可以治人也。
现代文：一个人做到，了对父母孝顺，对兄长友爱，对国君忠诚，对长辈顺从，然后才能被称为真正的人。能被称为真正的人，然后才可以治理别人。
English: A person can only be called a real person if he is filial to his parents, fraternal to his elder brothers, loyal to the sovereign, and obedient to his elders. Only then can he be called a real person and govern others.

古文：故圣王重礼。
现代文：所以圣王很重视礼。
English: Therefore, the holy king attaches great importance to the rite.

古文：故曰：冠者，礼之始也，嘉事之重者也。
现代文：所以说，冠礼是成人之礼的开始，是嘉礼当中重要的一项。
English: Therefore, the crowning ceremony is the beginning of the adult ceremony, and is an important part of the ceremony.

古文：是故古者重冠；重冠故行之于庙；行之于庙者，所以尊重事；尊重事而不敢擅重事；不敢擅重事，所以自卑而尊先祖也。
现代文：在宗庙之内进行，是表示郑重其事。由于郑重其事，所以不敢擅自处理此事。因为不敢擅自处理此事，所以要在宗庙之内进行，表示自卑，表示对先祖的尊重。
English: To do it in the ancestral temple is to show that it is a serious matter. Because it is a serious matter, you dare not handle it without permission. Because you dare not handle it without permission, you must do it in the ancestral temple to show inferiority and respect for your ancestors.

