古文：袁淑袁淑，字阳源，陈郡阳夏人，丹阳尹豹少子也。
现代文：袁淑,字阳源，陈郡阳夏人。丹阳尹袁豹的小儿子。
English: Yuan Shu, Zi Yang Yuan, Chen County Yang Xia Ren. The youngest son of Danyang Yin Yuan Bao.

古文：少有风气，年数岁，伯湛谓家人曰： 此非凡兒。 
现代文：袁淑小时就有风致，没有几岁他的伯父袁湛对家人说： 袁淑不是一般的小孩。 
English: Yuan Shuxu already had an air of elegance. When he was just a few years old, his uncle Yuan Zhan said to his family: "Yuan Shuxu is not an ordinary child.

古文：至十余岁，为姑夫王弘所赏。
现代文：到了十几岁被姑父王弘赏识。
English: In his teens, he was recognized by his uncle Wang Hong.

古文：不为章句之学，而博涉多通，好属文，辞采遒艳，纵横有才辩。
现代文：他不研究章句之学，而是旁征博览，学习各种知识。喜欢写文章，文辞艳丽，风格遒劲，气势纵横，极富学识才气。
English: He does not study the science of chapters and sentences, but side by side with the exposition, learning all kinds of knowledge. He likes to write articles, the rhetoric is bright, the style is vigorous, the momentum is vertical and horizontal, and he is very knowledgeable.

古文：本州命主簿，著作佐郎，太子舍人，并不就。
现代文：州里任命他为主簿，著作佐郎、太子舍人，都未接受。
English: The prefectural government appointed him as the chief librarian, but he did not accept the titles of Sauro or Taishi Shonin.

古文：彭城王义康命为军司祭酒。
现代文：彭城王刘义康任命他为司徒祭酒。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, appointed him as the priest of the sacrificial wine.

古文：义康不好文学，虽外相礼接，意好甚疏。
现代文：义康不喜欢文学，虽然对他以礼相待，但终究比较疏远。
English: Liu Yikang does not like literature. Although outwardly they treat each other with courtesy, inwardly they are rather distant.

古文：刘湛，淑从母兄也，欲其附己，而淑不以为意，由是大相乖失，以久疾免官。
现代文：刘湛是袁淑叔母的哥哥，想要袁淑投靠他，但袁淑却不愿意，从此两人关系很不好。袁淑不久因病被免官。
English: Liu Zhan was the elder brother of Yuan Shu's aunt. He wanted Yuan Shu to rely on him, but Yuan Shu did not want to. From then on, the relationship between the two was very bad. Yuan Shu was soon removed from office due to illness.

古文：补衡阳王义季右军主簿，迁太子洗马，以脚疾不拜。
现代文：后补任衡阳王义季右军主簿，迁任太子洗马，因脚有疾病未接受。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief accountant of Hengyang Wang Yizi's right army, and was transferred to the position of the prince to wash horses, but was not accepted due to a foot disease.

古文：卫军临川王义庆雅好文章，请为谘议参军。
现代文：卫军临川王刘义庆非常爱好文学，请他任咨议参军。
English: Liu Yiqing, the guardian of the Linchuan King, was very fond of literature and asked him to advise him to join the army.

古文：顷之，迁司徒左西属。
现代文：不久，调任司徒左西属。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Satsuma Shogunate.

古文：出为宣城太守，入补中书侍郎，以母忧去职。
现代文：出朝任宣城太守，入补中书侍郎，因服母丧而辞职。
English: Entered the imperial court and was appointed as the governor of Xuancheng, and became the assistant to the chancellor, but resigned due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，为太子中庶子。
现代文：丧期完毕后任太子中庶子。
English: After the period of mourning was over, he became the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：元嘉二十六年，迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：元嘉二十六年调任尚书吏部郎。
English: In the 26th year of Yuan Jia, he was transferred to the position of Shang Shuliriburo.

古文：其秋，大举北伐，淑侍坐从容曰： 今当鸣銮中岳，席卷赵、魏，检玉岱宗，今其时也。
现代文：这年秋天，宋大举北伐，袁淑在陪同皇帝时镇定自若地说： 如今我们北伐，定会在中岳鸣銮，横扫赵魏的敌人，正是到泰山封禅的大好时机。
English: In the autumn of that year, Song launched the Northern Expedition, and Yuan Shu said calmly and confidently when he accompanied the emperor: "Now that we are on the Northern Expedition, we will surely make war on Zhongyue and sweep away the enemies of Zhao Wei. It is a great opportunity to go to Mount Tai for Fuzhen.

古文：臣逢千载之会，愿上《封禅书》一篇。 
现代文：我欣逢这千年一遇的盛事，愿进献一篇《封禅书》。 
English: I am delighted to be able to participate in this once-in-a-thousand-year event, and I would like to present a copy of "Fu Zen Book."

古文：太祖笑曰： 盛德之事，我何足以当之。 
现代文：太祖笑着说： 那可是盛德伟业才能做的事，我怎么配得上！ 
English: The great-grandfather smiled and said, "That's something only a great scholar can do, how do I deserve it!

古文：出为始兴王征北长史、南东海太守。
现代文：袁淑出朝任始兴王征北长史，南东海太守。
English: Yuan Shuxu was appointed to the position of Shixing Wang Zheng Bei Changshi and the governor of the South East China Sea.

古文：淑始到府，浚引见，谓曰： 不意舅遂垂屈佐。 
现代文：他刚到府衙时，始兴王刘浚引见他，对他说： 想不到你屈尊低就。 
English: When he first arrived at the palace, Liu Jun, the Prince of Shixing, brought him to see him and said to him, "I never thought you would stoop so low.

古文：淑答曰： 朝廷遣下官，本以光公府望。 
现代文：袁淑答道： 朝廷派下官来本来就是要光耀你的府衙。 
English: Yuan Shu replied, "The reason why the imperial court sent a subordinate official here was to make your capital shine.

古文：还为御史中丞。
现代文：还朝任御史中丞。
English: He was also appointed Imperial Historian Junior Middle Officer.

古文：元凶将为弑逆，其夜淑在直，二更许，呼淑及萧斌等流涕谓曰： 主上信谗，将见罪废。
现代文：袁淑喜欢说大话，常被当时人嘲笑。始兴王刘浚曾送三万钱币给袁淑作为饷金，一夜之后又派人去追回，说是送的人搞错了，想以此戏弄袁淑。袁淑调任太子左卫率。元凶将要杀君叛逆时，那日晚上袁淑值班，二更多时，元凶召集袁淑和萧斌等人，他痛哭流涕地说： 皇帝听信谗言，要废弃我。
English: Yuan Shu liked to talk big, and was often ridiculed by the people of the time. Liu Jun, the King of Shixing, once sent thirty thousand yuan to Yuan Shu as a bribe. One night, he sent someone to recover it, saying that the person who sent it had made a mistake and wanted to play a trick on Yuan Shu. Yuan Shu was transferred to be the leader of Prince Zuo Wei. When the culprit was going to kill the prince and rebel, Yuan Shu was on duty that night. Two more hours later, the culprit called Yuan Shu and Xiao Bin and others. He said with tears: The emperor listened to his words and wanted to discard me.

古文：内省无过，不能受枉。
现代文：我自省并没有过错，怎能受这个冤枉。
English: I didn't do anything wrong in my self-reflection, how can I be wronged by this.

古文：明旦便当行大事，望相与戮力。 
现代文：明天我就要行大事，希望你们鼎力相助。 
English: Tomorrow I'm going to do something big, and I hope you'll help me.

古文：淑及斌并曰： 自古无此，愿加善思。 
现代文：袁萧二人说： 从古到今没有这样做的道理，希望你三思。 
English: Yuan Xiao and the two said: From ancient times to the present, there is no reason to do so. I hope you will think twice.

古文：劭怒变色，左右皆动。
现代文：刘劭勃怒变色，手下就要动手。
English: Liu Xingbo's anger turned white, and his men were about to take action.

古文：斌惧，乃曰： 臣昔忝伏事，常思效节，况忧迫如此，辄当竭身奉令。 
现代文：萧斌害怕了，说： 我过去在你手下供职，总想为你效力，何况现在情况如此紧迫，我会竭力听从你的号令。 
English: Xiao Bin was scared and said, "I used to work under you, and I always wanted to serve you. Moreover, now that the situation is so urgent, I will do my best to follow your orders."

古文：淑叱之曰： 卿便谓殿下真有是邪？
现代文：袁淑斥责萧斌说： 你就觉得殿下真会这样做吗？
English: Yuan Shuko scolded him, "You're supposed to be His Highness, is this really happening?

古文：殿下幼时尝患风，或是疾动耳。 
现代文：殿下小时候曾中风，可能这时是他的病又发了。 
English: When he was a child, His Royal Highness once suffered from a mental illness, which is likely to have been a relapse.

古文：劭愈怒，因问曰： 事当克不？ 
现代文：刘劭更加愤怒问袁淑： 这事能不能成功？ 
English: Liu Yao became even more angry and asked, "Can this succeed?

古文：淑曰： 居不疑之地，何患不克。
现代文：袁淑说： 你处在不被怀疑的位置上，还担心不能成功吗？
English: Yuan Shu said: You are in a position where you are not suspected, are you still worried about not being able to succeed?

古文：但既克之后，为天地之所不容，大祸亦旋至耳。
现代文：但是，成功之后会为天地不容，大祸也就随即临头了。
English: However, after success, it will be intolerable for heaven and earth, and disaster will be imminent.

古文：愿急息之。 
现代文：希望你迅速打消这个念头。 
English: I hope you quickly dispel this idea.

古文：劭左右引淑等袴褶，又就主衣取锦，截三尺为一段，又中破，分斌、淑及左右，使以缚袴。淑出环省，绕床行，至四更乃寝。
现代文：刘劭手下的人抓住袁淑的衣领说： 这是什么样的事，怎么能说不干！ 袁淑出来回到其官署，围着椅子不停走动，一直到四更才睡。
English: Liu Ye's men grabbed Yuan Shu by the collar and said, "What kind of thing is this, how can you say no!" Yuan Shu came out and went back to her government office, walking around the chairs non-stop, and didn't sleep until four o'clock.

古文：劭将出，已与萧斌同载，呼淑甚急，淑眠终不起。
现代文：劭就要出发，已经与萧斌一起上了车子，急切地呼喊袁淑，袁淑睡着不起来。
English: Liu Wei was about to go out and was already sitting in the same car as Xiao Bin. He called Yuan Shu and shouted very urgently. Yuan Shu fell asleep and could not get up.

古文：劭停车奉化门，催之相续。
现代文：劭将车子停在奉化门，催促袁淑出来的人接二连三。
English: Liu Yao parked his car at Fenghua Gate, urging him to quickly catch up.

古文：徐起至车后，劭使登车，又辞不上。
现代文：袁淑慢慢起床，走到他们的车后，劭让他上车，袁淑拒绝了。
English: Yuan Shu slowly got up and walked to their car. Zou asked him to get in, but Yuan Shu refused.

古文：劭因命左右： 与手刃。 
现代文：劭就令手下： 用刀砍了他！ 
English: He ordered his men: "Cut him with a knife!"

古文：见杀于奉化门外，时年四十六。
现代文：袁淑即被杀于奉化门外，时年四十六岁。
English: Yuan Shu was killed outside Fenghua Gate at the age of 46.

古文：淑及徐湛之、江湛、王僧绰、卜天与四家，于是长给禀禄。
现代文：袁淑以及徐湛之、王僧绰、卜天与四家从此长期得到朝廷的俸禄。
English: Yuan Shuxu, as well as Xu Zhanzhi, Wang Sochao, Bu Tian and the four families, received the imperial salary for a long time.

古文：文集传于世。
现代文：袁淑有文集流传于世。
English: A collection of his works has been handed down to posterity.

