古文：足太阳之疟，令人腰痛头重，寒从背起，先寒后热，熇熇暍暍然，热止汗出，难已，刺郄中出血。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经的疟疾，使人腰痛头重，寒冷从脊背而起，先寒后热，热势很盛，热止汗出，这种疟疾，不易痊愈，治疗方法，针刺足太阳膀胱经的委中穴出血。
English: Malaria of the foot and sun bladder makes people suffer from back pain and heavy head, cold starts from the spine, first cold and then hot, the heat is very strong, heat stops sweating, this kind of malaria is not easy to recover from, treatment method, acupuncture of the foot and sun bladder through the middle of the committee hole bleeding.

古文：足少阳之疟，令人身体解㑊，寒不甚，热不甚，恶见人，见人心惕惕然，热多汗出甚，刺足少阳。
现代文：足少阳胆经的疟疾，使人身倦无力，恶寒、发热都不甚厉害，怕见人，看见人就感到恐惧，发热的时间比较长，汗出亦很多，治疗方法，针刺足少阳胆经的穴位。
English: Malaria of the plantar fascia makes people tired and weak, chills and fever are not very severe, afraid to see people, they feel fear when they see people, fever time is relatively long, sweating is also a lot, treatment, acupuncture points of the plantar fascia.

古文：足阳明之疟，令人先寒洒浙，洒浙寒甚，久乃热，热去汗出，喜见日月光火气，乃快然，刺足阳明跗上。
现代文：足阳明胃经的疟疾，使人先觉怕冷，逐渐恶寒加剧到极点，很久才发热，退热时便汗出，这种病人，喜欢亮光，喜欢向火取暖，见到亮光以及火气，就感到爽快，治疗方法，针刺足阳明胃经在足背上最高处的冲阳穴。
English: Foot-and-Mouth Malaria is a disease that makes people afraid of the cold at first, gradually intensifying the chills to the extreme. It takes a long time to get a fever, and when the fever is gone, they sweat. This kind of patient likes light, likes to warm up by the fire, and feels refreshed when they see the light and the fire. The treatment method is to prick the foot-and-mouth with a needle through the highest point on the instep.

古文：足太阴之疟，令人不乐，好太息，不嗜食，多寒热，汗出；病至则善呕，呕已乃衰，即取之。
现代文：足太阴脾经的疟疾，使人闷闷不乐，时常要叹息，不想吃东西，多发寒热，汗出亦多，病发作时容易呕吐，吐后病势减轻，治疗方法，针刺足太阴脾经的穴位。
English: The malaria of the pediculosis pallidus causes people to be gloomy, often sighing, not wanting to eat, frequent colds and fevers, and sweating a lot. It is easy to vomit when the disease attacks, and the condition is alleviated after vomiting. The treatment method is to prick the pediculosis pallidus acupoints.

古文：足少阴之疟，令人呕吐甚，多寒热，热多寒少，欲闭户牖而处，其病难已。
现代文：足少阴肾经的疟疾，令人发生剧烈呕吐，多发寒热，热多寒少，常常喜欢紧闭门窗而居，这种病不易痊愈。
English: Foot-and-shin-kidney malaria causes people to vomit violently, have frequent colds and fevers, and often like to live with their doors and windows closed. This disease is not easy to recover from.

古文：足厥阴之疟，令人腰痛，少腹满，小便不利，如癃状，非癃也。
现代文：足厥阴肝经的疟疾，使人腰痛，小腹部胀满，小便不利，似乎癃病，而实非癃病。
English: Foot-in-mouth malaria causes low back pain, bloated abdomen, and poor urination. It seems to be rickets, but it is not.

古文：数便，意恐惧，气不足，腹中悒悒，刺足厥阴。
现代文：小便频数不爽，病人心中恐惧，正气不足，腹中郁滞不畅，治疗方法，针刺足厥阴肝经的穴位。
English: The frequency of urination is not satisfactory, the patient's heart is full of fear, lack of righteousness, depression in the abdomen is not smooth, treatment methods, acupuncture points of the feet and legs.

古文：肺疟者，令人心寒，寒甚热，热间善惊，如有所见者，刺手太阴、阳明。
现代文：肺疟，使人心里感到发冷，冷极则发热，热时容易发惊，好像见到了可怕的事物，治疗方法，刺手太阴肺经、手阳明大肠经。
English: People with pulmonary malaria feel chills in their hearts, while extreme cold makes them feverish. When they are hot, they are easily startled, as if they have seen something terrible. Treatment methods: stabbing hands are too cold for the lungs, and hands are too hot for the large intestines.

古文：心疟者，令人烦心甚，欲得清水，反寒多，不甚热，刺手少阴。
现代文：心疟，使人心中烦热得很厉害，想喝冷水，但身上反觉寒多而不太热，治疗方法，刺手少阴心经。
English: Malaria of the heart makes people feel very hot and bothered. They want to drink cold water, but they feel more cold than hot.

古文：肝疟者，令人色苍苍然，太息，其状若死者，刺足厥阴见血。
现代文：肝疟，使人面色苍青，时常叹息，厉害的时候，形状如死，治疗方法，刺足厥阴肝经出血。
English: Hepatic malaria, makes a person look pale, often sighs, when severe, the shape is like death, treatment methods, stabbing feet, Jue Yin liver bleeding.

古文：脾疟者，令人寒，腹中痛，热则肠中鸣，鸣已汗出，刺足太阴。
现代文：脾疟，使人发冷，腹中痛，待到发热时，则脾气行而肠中鸣响，肠鸣后阳气外达而汗出，治疗方法，刺足太阴脾经。
English: Spleen malaria, causes people to have chills, abdominal pain, and when the fever comes, the temper goes and the intestines ring, and after the intestines ring, the yang reaches out and sweats, treatment method, stinging feet is too yin spleen.

古文：肾疟者，令人洒洒然，腰脊痛宛转，大便难，目眴眴然，手足寒，刺足太阳、少阴。
现代文：肾疟，使人畏寒怕冷，腰脊疼痛，难以转侧，大便困难，目视眩动不明，手足冷，治疗方法，刺足太阳膀胱经、足少阴肾经。
English: Renal malaria, makes people afraid of cold, pain in the lumbar spine, difficult to turn sideways, difficult to defecate, unclear visual glare, cold hands and feet, treatment methods, stabbing foot sun bladder, foot less yin kidney.

古文：胃疟者，令人且病也，善饥而不能食，食而支满腹大，刺足阳明、太阴横脉出血。
现代文：胃疟，发病使人中脘壅塞，易觉饥饿但又不能进食，进食就感到脘腹胀满膨大，治疗方法，取足阳明胃经、足太阴脾经横行的络脉，刺出其血。
English: Stomach malaria, the onset of which causes people to be constipated, easy to feel hungry but unable to eat, and when eating, they feel bloated, bloated, and swollen. The treatment method is to take the meridians of the foot-yang bright stomach meridian, the foot-yang bright stomach meridian, and the foot-yang bright stomach meridian, and prick out the blood.

古文：疟发身方热，刺跗上动脉，开其空，出其血，立寒。
现代文：治疗疟疾，在刚要发热的时候，刺足背上的动脉，开其孔穴，刺出其血，可立即热退身凉。
English: In the treatment of malaria, when the fever is just about to occur, prick the artery on the back of the foot, open its hole, prick out its blood, and you can immediately warm yourself and cool down.

古文：疟方欲寒，刺手阳明、太阴，足阳明、太阴。
现代文：如疟疾刚要发冷的时候，可刺手阳明、太阴和足阳明、太阴的腧穴。
English: For example, when malaria is just about to get cold, it can sting the hands of yangming, too yin and the feet of yangming, too yin.

古文：疟脉满大急，刺背俞，用中针，傍五胠俞各一，适肥瘦，出其血也。
现代文：如疟疾病人的脉搏满大而急，刺背部的腧穴，用中等针按五胠俞各取一穴，并根据病人形体的胖瘦，确定针刺出血的多少。
English: If the pulse of a person with malaria is large and rapid, prick the anus on the back of the sting, use a medium needle to press the five gills to take one hole each, and according to the patient's body fat and thin, determine the amount of pinprick bleeding.

古文：疟脉小实急，灸陉少阴，刺指井。
现代文：如疟疾病人的脉搏小实而急的，艾炙小腿部的少阴经穴，并刺足趾端的井穴。
English: For example, the pulse of a person with malaria is small and rapid, and the small pharyngeal sinus in the lower leg and the well at the tip of the toe are pricked.

古文：疟脉满大急，刺背俞，用五胠俞、背俞各一，适行至于血也。
现代文：如疟疾病人的脉搏满大而急，刺背部的腧穴，取五胠俞、背俞各一穴，并根据病人体质，刺之出血。
English: For example, if the pulse of a person with malaria is large and rapid, the puncture hole in the back of the sting is taken, one hole is taken from each of the five gills and the dorsal fin, and according to the patient's constitution, the bleeding from the sting.

古文：疟脉缓大虚，便宜用药，不宜用针。
现代文：如疟疾病人的脉搏缓大而虚的，就应该用药治疗，不宜用针刺。
English: If the pulse of a person with malaria is slow and feeble, it should be treated with medication, not with acupuncture.

古文：凡冶疟，先发如食顷，乃可以治；过之，则失时也。
现代文：大凡治疗疟疾，应在病没有发作之前约一顿饭的时间，予以治疗，过了这个时间，就会失去时机。
English: In the treatment of malaria, it should be treated about one meal time before the disease does not occur. After this time, the opportunity will be lost.

古文：诸疟而脉不见，刺十指间出血，血去必已。
现代文：凡疟疾病人脉沉伏不见的，急刺十指间出血，血出病必愈。
English: If there are no signs of malaria, a quick prick will cause bleeding between the ten fingers, and the bleeding will be cured.

古文：先视身之赤如小豆者，尽取之。
现代文：若先见皮肤上发出像赤小豆的红点，应都用针刺去。
English: If you see red spots on the skin that look like red beans, you should prick them with a needle.

古文：十二疟者，其发各不同时，察其病形，以知其何脉之病也。
现代文：上述十二种疟疾，其发作各有不同的时间，应观察病人的症状，从而了解病属于哪一经脉。
English: The above-mentioned twelve types of malaria, each of which has a different time of onset, should observe the patient's symptoms to understand which meridian the disease belongs to.

古文：先其发时，如食顷而刺之，一刺则衰，二刺则知，三刺则已。
现代文：如在没有发作以前约一顿饭的时候就给以针刺，刺一次病势衰减，刺二次病就显著好转，刺三次病即痊愈。
English: If acupuncture is given about one meal before the onset, the disease will be attenuated by the first injection, the second injection will be significantly improved, and the third injection will be cured.

古文：不已，刺舌下两脉出血；不已，刺郄中盛经出血，又刺项已下侠脊者，必已。
现代文：如不愈，可刺舌下两脉出血；如再不愈，可取委中穴和足太阳膀胱经充血的穴位刺出其血，并刺足太阳膀胱经的项部以下脊椎两旁的腧穴，这样病一定会痊愈。
English: If it does not heal, the two veins under the tongue can be pricked with blood; if it does not heal, it is recommended to prick out the blood from the middle hole and foot of the solar bladder through the congested point, and prick the anus on both sides of the spine below the neck of the solar bladder, so that the disease will definitely be cured.

古文：舌下两脉者廉泉也。
现代文：上面所说的舌下两脉，就是指的廉泉穴。
English: The two veins under the tongue mentioned above are referred to as "Lianquan Cave."

古文：刺疟者，必先问其病之所先发者，先刺之。
现代文：凡刺疟疾，必先问明病人发作时最先感觉症状的部位，给以先刺。
English: For all malaria stings, the patient must first be asked to identify the site where the symptoms were first felt at the time of the attack, and then be given the first sting.

古文：先头痛及重者，先刺头上及两额、两眉间出血。
现代文：比如：先发头痛头重的，就先刺头上及两额、两眉间出血。
English: For example: if you have a severe headache, first prick your head and forehead, bleeding between the eyebrows.

古文：先项背痛者，先刺之。
现代文：先发项脊背痛的，就先刺颈项和背部。
English: If the back pain comes first, then the neck and back should be treated first.

古文：先腰脊痛者，先刺郄中出血。
现代文：先发腰脊痛的，就先刺委中穴出血。
English: If you have an early onset of low back pain, you should first prick the hole in the middle for bleeding.

古文：先手臂痛者，先刺手少阴、阳明十指间。
现代文：先发手臂痛的，就先刺手少阴、手阳明的十指间的井穴。
English: If the arm pain comes first, first stab the well between the ten fingers of the hands of the yin and yang.

古文：先足胫酸痛者，先刺足阳明十指间出血。
现代文：先发小腿酸痛的，就先刺足阳明十趾间的井穴出血。
English: If calf soreness occurs first, first prick the hole between the toes for bleeding.

古文：风疟，疟发则汗出，恶风，刺三阳经背俞之血者。
现代文：风疟，发作时是汗出怕风，可刺三阳经背部的腧穴出血。
English: Wind malaria, when the attack is sweating fear of the wind, can stab Sanyang through the back of the anus bleeding.

古文：胻酸痛甚，按之不可，名曰胕髓病，以馋针，针绝骨，出血立已。
现代文：小腿酸疼剧烈，而且拒按的，名叫 胕髓病 ，可用鑱针刺绝骨穴出血，其痛可以立止。
English: Calf soreness is severe, and those who refuse to press it, called myelodysplastic syndromes, can be pricked with a hypodermic needle to stop bleeding from the bone hole, and the pain can be stopped.

古文：身体小痛，刺至阴。
现代文：如身体稍感疼痛，刺至阴穴。
English: If the body feels a little pain, prick to the pussy.

古文：诸阴之井，无出血，间日一刺。
现代文：但应注意，凡刺诸阴经的井穴，皆不可出血，并应隔日刺一次。
English: However, it should be noted that all wells that are pierced should not bleed, and should be pierced once every other day.

古文：疟不渴，间日而作，刺足太阳；渴而间日作，刺足少阳。
现代文：疟疾口不渴而间日发作的，刺足太阳经；口渴而间日发作的，刺足少阳经。
English: Malaria without thirst and intermittent, prickly solstice; with thirst and intermittent, prickly solstice.

古文：温疟汗不出，为五十九刺。
现代文：温疟而汗不出的，用 五十九刺 的方法。
English: If you have chilblains and can't sweat, use the method of the fifty-nine thorns.

