古文：杨廷和梁储蒋冕毛纪石珤
现代文：杨廷和，字介夫，四川新都人。
English: Yang Tinghe, nicknamed Kaifu, is a native of Xindu, Sichuan.

古文：杨廷和，字介夫，新都人。父春，湖广提学佥事。
现代文：他的父亲叫杨春，做过湖广提学佥事。
English: His father's name is Yang Chun, and he used to work as a schoolteacher in Guangxi.

古文：廷和年十二举于乡。
现代文：廷和本人十二岁就乡试中举。
English: At the age of twelve, Ting and I took the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：成化十四年，年十九，先其父成进士。
现代文：成化十四年，在他父亲之前中了进士，才十九岁。
English: Chenghua was only nineteen years old when he became a junior high school student ahead of his father.

古文：改庶吉士，告归娶，还朝授检讨。
现代文：选任为翰林院庶吉士。请假回乡娶妻，回朝以后当上检讨。
English: He was appointed as the second-in-command of Hanlin-in. He took a leave of absence to return to his hometown to marry his wife, and after returning to the Imperial Court, he was put on probation.

古文：廷和为人美风姿，性沉静详审，为文简畅有法。
现代文：廷和风度翩翩，性格安静慎重，所作文章明白畅达，很有法度。
English: Ting He has a graceful demeanor, a quiet and cautious personality, and his articles are clear and easy to understand, and very legal.

古文：好考究掌故、民瘼、边事及一切法家言，郁然负公辅望。
现代文：他喜欢考究史事、民间疾苦、边防战事和所有正统的著作，才能优裕，有可至位三公首辅的声望。
English: He likes to study history, folk diseases, border wars and all orthodox works. He is talented and has the reputation of being the first and second of the three princes.

古文：弘治二年进修撰。
现代文：弘治二年，升为修撰。
English: In the second year of Konji, he was promoted to Shoseki.

古文：《宪宗实录》成，以预纂修进侍读。
现代文：《宪宗实录》成书，因为他参与编写，升为侍读。
English: "Kenjong Jitsuroku" was made into a book, and since he was involved in the writing, he was promoted to a reader.

古文：改左春坊左中允，侍皇太子讲读。
现代文：后来改官左春坊左中允，侍奉皇太子讲解、读书。
English: Later, he changed his post to Sahunbo Sahujongun, and served the crown prince as a lecturer and reader.

古文：修《会典》成，超拜左春坊大学士，充日讲官。
现代文：撰写《会典》完毕，被破格提升为左春坊大学士，充任日讲官。
English: After he finished writing the "Charter," he was promoted to ZuoChunFang University and served as a Japanese lecturer.

古文：正德二年由詹事入东阁，专典诰敕。
现代文：正德二年，由詹事府进入东阁，专掌皇帝的命令起草。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, Zhan Shifu entered the East Cabinet and was in charge of drafting the emperor's orders.

古文：以讲筵指斥佞幸，忤刘瑾，传旨改南京吏部左侍郎。
现代文：因为他在讲筵上指责皇帝宠爱的幸臣，触犯了刘瑾，刘瑾就传令让他去担任南京吏部左侍郎。
English: Because he offended Liu Bei by criticizing the emperor's favorite favorite subject, Liu Bei sent him to serve as the top left-hand man of the Nanjing cadre.

古文：五月迁南京户部尚书。
现代文：五月又升为南京户部尚书。
English: In May, he was promoted to the position of Nanjing household secretary.

古文：又三月召还，进兼文渊阁大学士，参预机务。
现代文：又过了三个月被召回北京，升任文渊阁大学士，参与政府的机密大事。
English: After another three months, he was called back to Beijing, promoted to the post of Professor of Wenyuan Pavilion University, and participated in the government's confidential affairs.

古文：明年加少保兼太子太保。
现代文：第二年加官少保兼太子太保。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to Shōhō and Taibō.

古文：瑾摘《会典》小误，夺廷和与大学士李东阳等俸二级。
现代文：刘瑾摘取《会典》里面的小差错，扣下廷和与大学士李东阳等二级俸禄。
English: Liu Wei picked up a small error in the "Code of the Association" and deducted the second-class salary of the court and the university scholar Li Dongyang.

古文：寻以成《孝宗实录》功还之。
现代文：不久因为撰写《孝宗实录》的成功被归还原来的俸禄。
English: Soon, because of the success of writing "The True Record of the Filial Piety," he was returned to his original salary.

古文：明年加光禄大夫、柱国，迁改吏部尚书、武英殿大学士。
现代文：第二年又加官光禄大夫、柱国，升任吏部尚书、武英殿大学士。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to the posts of Guanglu Doctor and Zhu Guo, and was promoted to the posts of Shoshu of the Personnel Department and Daishi of the Buying Hall.

古文：时瑾横益甚，而焦芳、张纟采为中外媾。
现代文：当时刘瑾更加专横起来，而焦芳、张彩在宫内、宫外得到宠爱。
English: At that time, Liu Ye became more domineering, while Jiao Fang and Zhang Cai were favored inside and outside the palace.

古文：廷和与东阳委曲其间，小有剂救而已。
现代文：廷和与东阳两人只能从中委曲求全，稍微有些补救而已。
English: Tinghe and Dongyang can only seek perfection from the CPC Central Committee, only a little remedial.

古文：安化王寘鐇反，以诛瑾为名。
现代文：安化王蜫钅番起来叛乱，以诛杀刘瑾为旗号。
English: Wang Xuan of Anhua rebelled, using the killing of Liu Xuan as a banner.

古文：廷和等草赦诏，请擢边将仇钺，以离贼党。
现代文：廷和等起草了赦免他们反罪的诏书，并请提拔边防大将仇钺，以便于瓦解乱党。
English: Ting He and others drafted an edict to pardon them for their counter-crimes, and requested the promotion of the border guard general, Qiu Jun, in order to facilitate the disintegration of the rebel party.

古文：钺果执寘鐇。
现代文：仇钺果然活捉了蜫钅番。
English: The enemy dragonfly caught the dragonfly alive.

古文：会张永发瑾罪，瑾伏诛，廷和等乃复论功，进少傅兼太子太傅、谨身殿大学士，予一子中书舍人。
现代文：正好张永揭发了刘瑾的罪行，刘瑾被除掉，廷和等人于是论功晋升，做了少傅兼太子太傅、谨身殿大学士，武宗恩准他推荐一个儿子做中书舍人。
English: It was Zhang Yong who exposed Liu Ye's crime, Liu Ye was eliminated, and Ting He and others were then promoted on merit, and became Shao Fu and Daifu of the Crown Prince, and a scholar of the Imperial Household, and Wu Zong En allowed him to recommend a son to be a scholar.

古文：流贼刘六、刘七、齐彦名反，杨一清荐马中锡讨之。
现代文：流民刘六、刘七、齐彦名起来造反，杨一清推举马中锡前往讨伐。
English: The exiles Liu VI, Liu VII, and Qi Yan rose up in revolt, and Yang Iqing chose Ma Zhongxi to go to the crusade.

古文：廷和言： 中锡，文士也，不任此。 
现代文：廷和说： 中锡是个文人，不能胜任。 
English: Ting He said: Zhong Xi is a man of letters and is not competent.

古文：时业已行，果不能平贼。
现代文：当时已经出发，无法制止，后来果然没能平定这些盗贼。
English: At that time, they had already set out and could not be stopped, and later they did not succeed in subduing these thieves.

古文：廷和请逮中锡下狱，以陆完代之，而斩故受赇纵贼者参将桑玉。
现代文：廷和请把中锡逮捕下狱，由陆完接任，杀掉过去接受贿赂故意纵敌的参将桑玉。
English: Tinghe, please arrest Zhongxixi and put him in prison, and let Lu Gan take over the post, and kill Sangjun Sangyu, who accepted bribes and deliberately incited enemies in the past.

古文：已，又用学士陈霁言，调诸边兵讨河南贼赵鐩等，而荐彭泽为总制。
现代文：后来又采纳学士陈霁的建议，征调各路边防部队讨伐河南的盗贼赵遂等人，又推荐彭泽做总制。
English: Later, he also adopted the suggestion of the bachelor Chen Qi to conscript the border guards of various roads to fight against the thieves of Henan, Zhao Sui and others, and recommended Pengze as the general system.

古文：贼平论功，录廷和一子锦衣卫千户。
现代文：平贼之后论功，拟录用廷和一个儿子为锦衣卫千户。
English: After the petty theft, they discussed the merits and planned to hire Ting and one of his sons as a brocade guard.

古文：辞，特加少师、太子太师、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：廷和推辞，就特别加封他为少师、太子太师、华盖殿大学士。
English: As a result of the court's approval and recommendation, he was specially awarded the titles of Junior Teacher, Crown Prince Teacher, and Hua Jia Dian University Scholar.

古文：东阳致政，廷和遂为首辅。
现代文：东阳退休后，廷和就做了首辅大臣。
English: After Dongyang's retirement, Tinghe became First Vice-Minister.

古文：张永既去瑾而骄，捕得男子臂龙文者以为功，援故太监刘永诚例，觊封侯。
现代文：张永除掉刘瑾后骄傲起来，他捉了一名臂上刺龙的男子作为大功，援用以前太监刘永诚的例子，企图为自己封侯。
English: After Zhang Yong got rid of Liu Ye, he became proud. He captured a man with a dragon tattoo on his arm as a great achievement, citing the example of the former eunuch Liu Yongcheng in an attempt to make himself a feudal lord.

古文：廷和言 永诚从子聚自以战功封伯耳，且非永诚身受之也 ，乃止。
现代文：廷和说 永诚的侄儿刘聚是因为战功才封为伯，连及永诚，也不是永诚自己受的封赏 ，张永这才罢休。
English: Ting He said that Yongcheng's nephew Liu Ju was only awarded the title because of his war service. Even if Yongcheng was awarded the title, it was not because of Yongcheng himself. Zhang Yong only resigned because of this.

古文：彭泽将西讨鄢本恕，问计廷和。廷和曰： 以君才，贼不足平，所戒者班师早耳。 
现代文：彭泽将要西讨鄢本恕时向廷和问计，廷和说： 凭你的才干，平定盗贼不是难事，应该防备的是太早班师。 
English: When Peng Ze was about to go to the West to investigate the theft, he asked Ting He about the plan. Ting He said, "With your talent, it is not difficult to subdue the thief. What you should beware of is being too early."

古文：泽后破诛本恕等即班师，而余党复猬起不可制。
现代文：彭泽后来打败并杀掉了本恕等人，立即班师，而残余的盗贼又纷纷起来，无法压制。
English: Penza later defeated and killed Honjo and others, and the remaining thieves rose up again and could not be suppressed.

古文：泽既发复留，乃叹曰： 杨公先见，吾不及也。 
现代文：彭泽已经动身又留了下来，这才感叹道： 杨先生的先见之明，我比不上呀。 
English: Peng Ze had already left and stayed behind, only to lament: I can't match Mr. Yang's foresight.

古文：乾清宫灾，廷和请帝避殿，下诏罪己，求直言。
现代文：乾清宫发生灾害，廷和请武宗避居侧殿，下诏自我批评，并求大臣上书直言。
English: When a disaster occurred at the Qianqing Palace, the imperial court and the emperor asked Emperor Wuzong to evacuate to a side palace, issue an edict of self-criticism, and ask the minister to speak out in writing.

古文：因与其僚上疏，劝帝早朝晏罢，躬九庙祭祀，崇两宫孝养，勤日讲。
现代文：借此机会他和同僚们一起上书，劝武宗早朝，用膳以后，要亲自到祖庙举行祭祀，并加强对两宫太后的孝敬，勤于每天的经筵讲习。
English: Taking this opportunity, he and his colleagues wrote a letter together, advising Wu Zong to personally go to the ancestral temple to hold a sacrifice in the early morning after the meal, and to strengthen the filial piety of the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces, and to be diligent in the daily economic study.

古文：复面奏开言路、达下情、还边兵、革宫市、罢皇店、出西僧、省工作、减织造，凡十余条，皆切至。
现代文：又当面建议广开言路，了解下情，收还边疆的过多兵力，革除侵害百姓的宫市，关闭皇家商场，放出宫内的僧人，减少修建的工程，裁削织造的项目，共十多条，都很切中要害。
English: He also proposed in person to broaden the way of speech, understand the situation, recover the excessive troops in the frontier, eliminate the palace market that infringed on the people, close the royal market, release the monks in the palace, reduce the construction project, and cut the weaving project, a total of more than ten items, are very crucial.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：但是武宗不觉悟。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：寻以父卒乞奔丧，不许。
现代文：不久廷和因为父亲去世请奔丧回家，武宗不答应。
English: Soon after, Ting and Wu Zong did not agree to his request to go home to mourn his father's death.

古文：三请乃许。遣中官护行。
现代文：多次申请才得到批准，武宗并派宦官护送他回乡。
English: He had to apply several times before he was approved, and the Emperor sent eunuchs to escort him back to his hometown.

古文：旋复起之，三疏辞，始许。
现代文：不久又召他出来，他多次上书推辞，才得以辞掉。
English: They soon called him out again, and he was only able to resign after repeatedly sending in a letter of resignation.

古文：阁臣之得终父母丧者，自廷和始也。
现代文：阁臣能为父母守完丧的，是从廷和开始的。
English: Cabinet ministers can complete the mourning for their parents, starting from the Imperial Court.

古文：服甫阕，即召至。
现代文：丧服刚刚脱下，廷和就应诏入朝。
English: As soon as the mourning clothes were taken off, the imperial couple entered the imperial palace.

古文：帝方猎宣府，使使赐廷和羊酒、银币。
现代文：武宗当时正在宣府打猎，派使者回来赐给廷和羊肉、美酒、银币。
English: At that time, Emperor Wuzong was hunting in Xuanfu and sent an envoy back to give the imperial court mutton, fine wine, and silver coins.

古文：廷和疏谢，因请回銮，不报。
现代文：廷和上书感谢，并请武宗回京，武宗未予答复。
English: The Imperial Court thanked him for his letter and asked him to return to Kyoto, but he did not reply.

古文：复与大学士蒋冕驰至居庸，欲身出塞请。
现代文：廷和又与大学士蒋冕骑马到居庸关，想亲自走到塞外请求。
English: Ting He also rode to Juyongguan with Jiang Guan, a university scholar, and wanted to go out of Tibet to make a request.

古文：帝令谷大用扼关门，乃归。
现代文：武宗已命令谷大用把守关门，他们只好回来。
English: Wu Zong had ordered the gatekeeper to close the gate, so they had to come back.

古文：帝命回銮日群臣各制旗帐迎，廷和曰： 此里俗以施之亲旧耳。
现代文：武宗命令在他回京时大臣们要自做旗帐欢迎，廷和说： 这是乡村百姓用来迎接亲旧的东西。
English: Emperor Wu Zong ordered the ministers to make their own banners to welcome him when he returned to Beijing. The emperor said, "This is what the villagers use to welcome their relatives."

古文：天子至尊，不敢渎献。 
现代文：天子尊贵无比，我不敢同意这样随便。 
English: The Son of God is infinitely precious, and I dare not agree to something so casual.

古文：帝再使使谕意，执不从，乃已。
现代文：武宗又派使臣来告知自己的意思，廷和坚决不听，这才算罢了。
English: Emperor Wuzong also sent envoys to convey his intentions, but the court flatly refused to listen, and that was that.

古文：当廷和柄政，帝恒不视朝，恣游大同、宣府、延绥间，多失政。
现代文：当廷和执政的时候，武宗长期不理朝政，放心大胆地在大同、宣府、延绥间游玩，朝廷大事多有缺失。
English: When he was at court and in power, Emperor Wu Zong ignored court politics for a long time, and boldly and confidently traveled between Datong, Xuanwu, and Yancheng. Most of the important events of the imperial court were lacking.

古文：廷和未尝不谏，俱不听。
现代文：廷和未尝不劝，但武宗一概听不进去。
English: Ting He did not try to persuade, but Bu Zong did not listen at all.

古文：廷和亦不能执奏。以是邑邑不自得，数移疾乞骸骨，帝亦不听。
现代文：廷和也无法坚持己意，不停地上奏，因此心情忧郁，很不满意，几次称病请求退休，武宗也不允许。
English: Ting He was also unable to stick to his intention and kept playing, so he was in a gloomy mood and very dissatisfied. He called in sick several times and asked to retire, but Bu Zong did not allow it.

古文：中官谷大用、魏彬、张雄，义子钱宁、江彬辈，恣横甚。
现代文：宦官谷大用、魏彬、张雄及其义子钱宁、江彬等人，很是放肆、专横。
English: The eunuchs Gu Dayong, Wei Bin, Zhang Xiong, and their stepsons Channing and Jiang Bin were very arrogant and domineering.

古文：廷和虽不为下，然亦不能有所裁禁，以是得稍自安。
现代文：廷和虽然没被他们压服，但也不能对他们有所制裁，他自己只因此能稍稍自安于其位罢了。
English: Although Ting He was not subdued by them, he could not impose any sanctions on them, and he was only able to calm himself down a little.

古文：御史萧淮发宁王宸濠反谋，钱宁辈犹庇之，诋淮离间。
现代文：御史萧淮揭发宁王宸濠的造反阴谋，钱宁等人还包庇他，攻击萧淮挑拨离间。
English: Chief historian Xiao Huai exposed the rebellion plot of Ning Wangyao, but Channing and others also covered up for him and attacked Xiao Huai for sowing discord.

古文：廷和请如宣宗谕赵王故事，遣贵戚大臣赍敕往谕，收其护卫屯田。
现代文：廷和请仿效宣宗当年告诫赵王的故事，派遣亲近大臣带着皇上的指示前去教导宁王，并收回他护卫的庄田。
English: The imperial court asked the emperor to follow the example of the story of Emperor Xuanzong's admonition to King Zhao of that year, and send a close minister with the emperor's instructions to teach King Ning, and take back his escort, Shoda.

古文：于是命中官赖义、驸马都尉崔元等往，未至而宸濠反。
现代文：于是派了宦官赖义、驸马都尉崔元等前去，人还没到宸濠就已经反了。
English: So they sent eunuch Lai Yi, eunuch Captain Cui Yuan, and so on, but before they arrived, they had already turned back.

古文：帝欲帅师亲征，廷和等力阻之。
现代文：武宗想率兵亲征，廷和等竭力劝阻。
English: Emperor Wu Zong wanted to lead the troops to enlist himself, but Emperor Ting He and others tried their best to dissuade him.

古文：帝乃自称总督军务、威武大将军、总兵官、后军都督府、太师、镇国公朱寿，统各京边将士南讨。
现代文：武宗竟然自称总督军务、威武大将军、总兵官、后军都督府、太师、镇国公朱寿，统率京军和各路边防部队南下讨伐。
English: Wu Zong actually claimed to be the Governor of Military Affairs, the Great General Wu, the Commander-in-Chief, the Commander-in-Chief of the Rear Army, the Grand Master, and Zhu Shou, the Governor of the Province, and led the Beijing Army and various border defense forces to the south.

古文：而安边伯许泰为威武副将军、左都督刘晖为平贼将军前驱，镇守、抚、按悉听节制。
现代文：由安边伯许泰为威武副将军，左都督刘晖为平贼将军前驱，各处镇守、巡抚、巡按都听从管制。
English: With Anbian Buxu Tai as Vice-General Weiwu, and Left-wing Governor Liu Wei as the forerunner of General Pingye, all the town guards, governors, and inspectors obeyed the control.

古文：命廷和与大学士毛纪居守。
现代文：命令廷和与大学士毛纪驻京防护。
English: He ordered Ting He and the scholar Mao Ji to stay in Beijing for protection.

古文：以乾清、坤宁二宫工成，推恩录一子锦衣卫副千户，辞。
现代文：后来因为乾清、坤宁两宫工程完毕，武宗开恩封赏，拟登用廷和一个儿子为锦衣卫副千户，廷和辞掉了。
English: Later, due to the completion of the Qianqing and Kunning two palaces project, Emperor Wuzong granted rewards, and proposed to appoint the Emperor and one of his sons as vice-emperors of Jin, Yi and Wei. Emperor Tinghe resigned.

古文：时廷和当草大将军征南敕谕，谢弗肯，帝心恚。
现代文：当时廷和本应起草大将军南下征伐的命令，他不肯起草，武宗心里很恼火。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizu was supposed to draft an order for the general to go to the south to conquer, but he refused to draft it, and Emperor Wuzong was very angry.

古文：会推南京吏部尚书刘春理东阁诰敕，以廷和私其乡人，切责之。
现代文：等到他推荐南京吏部尚书刘春办理东阁中皇帝命令起草一事时，武宗就以廷和偏护本乡人为理由，严厉批评了他。
English: When he recommended Liu Chun, the secretary of the Nanking Cadre Department, to handle the drafting of the emperor's order in the East Pavilion, Emperor Wuzong severely criticized him on the grounds of favoring the court and protecting his hometown.

古文：廷和谢罪，乞罢，不许。
现代文：廷和上书谢罪，并请罢免自己，武宗没答应。
English: The imperial court sent a letter of apology and asked him to remove himself from office, but Takemune did not agree.

古文：少师梁储等请与俱罢，复不许。
现代文：少师梁储等请连自己一齐罢免，也没得到批准。
English: The minor teacher Liang Chu and others even asked to be dismissed together, but they did not get approval.

古文：廷和方引疾不入，帝遂传旨行之。
现代文：廷和正称病不入朝，武宗就传下圣旨，带兵南下了。
English: Ting He Zheng said that he would not enter the imperial court due to illness, so Emperor Wuzong passed down the sacred edict and marched south with his soldiers.

古文：时十四年八月也。
现代文：当时是十四年八月。
English: It was August 2014.

古文：帝既南，两更岁朔。
现代文：武宗南下以后，两次改定元旦。
English: After Emperor Wuzong went to the south, the date was changed twice to New Year's Day.

古文：廷和颇以镇静持重，为中外所推服。
现代文：廷和把持朝政，很注意镇静、沉稳，为朝野上下所佩服。
English: The Emperor and Empress, who hold the reins of government, are very careful to maintain calm and stability, which is admired by people at all levels.

古文：凡请回銮者数十疏，皆不复省。帝归，驻跸通州。
现代文：前后请求武宗回京的上书总共有几十篇，武宗都不理睬，回来后又在通州停下来。
English: There were a total of dozens of petitions asking Buson to return to Kyoto. Buson ignored all of them and stopped in Tongzhou after his return.

古文：廷和等举故事，请帝还大内御殿受俘，然后正宸濠等诛，而帝已不豫。趋召廷和等至通州受事，即行在执宸濠等僇之，驾乃旋。
现代文：廷和等列举故事，请武宗还京，在宫内大殿上接受大臣献上的俘虏，然后把宸濠等正法，而武宗已经生了病，急令廷和等到通州接受教导，就在行宫里把宸濠等杀掉，然后武宗才回到京城。
English: Ting He and others recounted the story and asked Bu Zong to return to Beijing to receive the captives presented by the minister in the palace hall, and then to rectify Zhai and others. But Bu Zong was already ill, and he ordered Ting He and others to wait until Tongzhou received instruction, and then to kill Zhai and others in the palace, and then Bu Zong returned to Beijing.

古文：明年正月，帝郊祀，呕血舆疾归，逾月益笃。
现代文：第二年正月，武宗在郊外举行祭祀时吐血，被马上拉回宫中，过一个月病更重了。
English: In the first month of the second year, Emperor Wuzong vomited blood while holding a religious service in the suburbs, and was immediately pulled back to the palace. A month later, he became even more ill.

古文：时帝无嗣。
现代文：当时武宗没有儿子。
English: At that time, Buson did not have a son.

古文：司礼中官魏彬等至阁言： 国医力竭矣，请捐万金购之草泽。 
现代文：司礼中官魏彬等到内阁说，太医已无能为力了，请拿出万两银子从乡村中招募名医。
English: Wei Bin, the Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, went to the cabinet and said, "There is nothing the Grand Physician can do. Please take out ten thousand taels of silver to recruit famous doctors from the countryside."

古文：廷和心知所谓，不应，而微以伦序之说风之，彬等唯唯。
现代文：廷和心中知道他们的意思，却不答他们的碴，而是含蓄地以皇室的伦理等级秩序的问题暗示他们，魏彬等人唯唯听命。
English: The court and the heart knew what they meant, but did not respond to their request, but implicitly hinted at them with the issue of the royal ethical hierarchical order. Wei Bin and others only obeyed.

古文：三月十四日丙寅，谷大用、张永至阁，言帝崩于豹房。以皇太后命，移殡大内，且议所当立。
现代文：三月十四日，谷大用、张永到内阁中来，说武宗在豹房中逝世，按照皇太后的命令，已在宫中入殓，现在该讨论谁来即位了。
English: On March 14th, Gu Dayong and Zhang Yong came to the cabinet and said that Emperor Wuzong had died in the Leopard Room. According to the order of the Empress Dowager, he had been buried in the palace. Now it was time to discuss who would ascend the throne.

古文：廷和举《皇明祖训》示之曰： 兄终弟及，谁能渎焉！
现代文：廷和拿《皇明祖训》对他们说 ：哥哥死后由弟弟即位，谁敢坏这个规矩？
English: Ting Huan took the "Emperor's Ancestor's Teaching" and said to them: When a brother dies, his younger brother takes the throne. Who would dare to break this rule?

古文：兴献王长子，宪宗之孙，孝宗之从子，大行皇帝之从弟，序当立。 
现代文：兴献王的儿子，是宪宗的长孙，孝宗的侄子，已逝皇帝的堂弟，照排行应当立为皇帝。 
English: He Xingxian Wang's son is the eldest grandson of Xianzong, the nephew of Xiaozong, the cousin of the deceased emperor, and should be appointed as emperor according to the ranking.

古文：梁储、蒋冕、毛纪咸赞之。乃令中官入启皇太后，廷和等候左顺门下。
现代文：梁储、蒋冕、毛纪都赞成，于是派宦官进宫告诉皇太后，廷和等在左顺门外等候。
English: Liang Yuan, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji all agreed, so they sent eunuchs into the palace to tell the empress dowager that Ting He and others were waiting outside Zuo Shun Gate.

古文：顷之，中官奉遗诏及太后懿旨，宣谕群臣，一如廷和请，事乃定。
现代文：不多时间，宦官拿着遗诏和太后的懿旨，向群臣作了宣布，一切都和廷和的请求相一致，大事就此确定下来。
English: Before long, the eunuch, holding the imperial edict and the empress dowager's edict, announced to the courtiers that everything was in accordance with the request of the imperial court, and the matter was thus settled.

古文：廷和遂以遗诏令太监张永、武定侯郭勋、安边伯许泰、尚书王宪选各营兵，分布皇城四门、京城九门及南北要害，广卫御史以其属扦掫。
现代文：廷和于是根据遗诏命令太监张永、武定侯郭勋、安边伯许泰、尚书王宪挑选各营兵马，分布在皇城的四门、京城的九门及南北要害地带，厂、卫御史安排他们的部下四处巡逻防备。
English: Therefore, according to the posthumous order, the imperial court and the eunuchs Zhang Yong, Wuding Hou Guo Xun, Anyuan Bo Xutai, and Shangshu Wang Xian selected the battalions of soldiers and horses, distributed in the four gates of the imperial city, the nine gates of the capital and the north-south key areas, and the factories and guards arranged their subordinates to patrol and prepare everywhere.

古文：传遗命罢威武营团练诸军，各边兵入卫者俱重赉散归镇，革皇店及军门办事官校悉还卫，哈密、土鲁番、佛郎机诸贡使皆给赏遣还国，豹房番僧及少林僧、教坊乐人、南京快马船、诸非常例者，一切罢遣。
现代文：又传达武宗死前的命令，裁汰威武营的各团练部队；周边部队入卫京师的都给以重赏，然后各归本镇；废除皇家商店和军门办事官校，原办事人员全部遣回家乡所在的卫所；哈密、吐鲁番、佛郎机各国进贡使臣都给以奖励，送他们回国；豹房的番僧及少林僧、教坊的乐队、南京的快马船等，凡不是经常例设置的，一切都被裁撤、解散。
English: It also conveyed the order before the death of Emperor Wuzong to abolish the regimental training troops of Weiwuying; the surrounding troops entering the Beijing Division were all given a heavy reward, and then each returned to their own town; the royal store and the military school were abolished, and all the former clerks were sent home to the military academy in their hometowns; the tributary envoys from Hami, Turpan, and Furochi countries were given awards and sent back to their home countries; the guard monks and Shaolin monks of the Leopard House, the band of the teaching school, and the fast horse ship of Nanjing, all of which were not set up regularly, were abolished

古文：又以遗诏释南京逮击囚，放遣四方进献女子，停京师不急工务，收宣府行宫金宝归诸内库。
现代文：又按照武宗的遗诏，释放了南京被逮捕、关押的囚犯；送回各地进献来的女子；停止京城里不急需的工程建设；收回了宣府行宫中的金银宝贝，放回到内库中去。
English: In accordance with the last will and testament of Emperor Wuzong, he also released the prisoners who had been arrested and detained in Nanjing; sent back the women who had come from all over the country; stopped the construction of non-urgent projects in the capital; and recovered the gold and silver treasures in the Xuanfu Palace and returned them to the inner vault.

古文：中外大悦。
现代文：这些措施使朝野上下人心大快。
English: These measures made the morning and evening people's hearts beat faster.

古文：时平虏伯江彬拥重兵在肘腋间，知天下恶之，心不自安。
现代文：当时平虏伯江彬在京郊拥有重兵，知道天下人厌恶自己，心里很不安稳。
English: At that time, Pingru Bo Jiangbin had a heavy army in the suburbs of Beijing. Knowing that people around the world detested him, he was very insecure.

古文：其党都督佥事李琮尤狠黠，劝彬乘间以其家众反，不胜则北走塞外。
现代文：他的党羽都督佥事李琮尤其贪狠、狡猾，这时劝江彬乘机带领家兵起来造反，不能成功就往北跑到塞外去。
English: His henchman, the governor of the capital, Li Xi, was particularly greedy and cunning. At this time, he advised Jiang Bin to take the opportunity to lead the family soldiers to rebel, and if he was not successful, he would run to the north and go outside of Tibet.

古文：彬犹豫未决。
现代文：江彬犹豫不决。
English: Jiang Bin hesitated.

古文：于是廷和谋以皇太后旨捕诛彬，遂与同官蒋冕、毛纪及司礼中官温祥四人谋。
现代文：于是廷和打算用皇太后的命令逮捕、杀掉江彬。他和同事蒋冕、毛纪及司礼中官温祥四个人在一起商量。
English: Therefore, Ting He planned to use the order of the Empress Dowager to arrest and kill Jiang Bin. He and his colleagues Jiang Guan, Mao Ji, and the Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, Wen Xiang, discussed together.

古文：张永伺知其意，亦密为备。
现代文：张永侦察到他们的意图，也在宫中秘密做了准备。
English: Zhang Yong detected their intentions and secretly made preparations in the palace.

古文：司礼魏彬者，故与彬有连。
现代文：司礼魏彬这个人，以前和江彬有关系。
English: The man, Sirei Wei Bin, used to be related to Jiang Bin.

古文：廷和以其弱可胁也，因题大行铭旌，与彬、祥及他中官张锐、陈严等为详言江彬反状，以危语怵之。
现代文：廷和认为他软弱，可以胁迫，就题写好武宗灵柩前的旗幡，交给魏彬、温祥及其他宦官张锐、陈严等人，为他们详细说明了江彬造反的罪状，并用危险性后果吓唬他们。
English: Ting He thought that he was weak and could be coerced, so he inscribed the banner in front of the tomb of Emperor Wuzong and gave it to Wei Bin, Wen Xiang and other eunuchs Zhang Rui, Chen Yan and others, explaining in detail the charges of Jiang Bin's rebellion and scaring them with dangerous consequences.

古文：彬心动，惟锐力言江彬无罪，廷和面折之。
现代文：魏彬被说动了心，只有张锐极力说江彬无罪，廷和当面喝责，使他服了。
English: Wei Bin was moved by the speech, only Zhang Rui insisted that Jiang Bin was not guilty, and Tinghe rebuked him in person, which made him obey.

古文：冕曰： 今日必了此，乃临。 
现代文：蒋冕说： 今天一定了却这件事，然后再去祭吊皇上。 
English: Jiang Guanyin said, "This matter is certain to happen today, and then we will go to pay homage to the emperor."

古文：严亦从旁赞决，因俾祥、彬等入白皇太后。
现代文：陈严也在一旁鼓动，于是让温祥、魏彬等进宫去告知皇太后。
English: Chen Yan was also agitating on the sidelines, so he let Wen Xiang, Wei Bin and others enter the palace to inform the empress dowager.

古文：良久未报，廷和、冕益自危。
现代文：很久没有回话，廷和、蒋冕感到自己处境危急。
English: After a long time without a reply, Ting He and Jiang Guan Yu felt that they were in a critical situation.

古文：顷之，严至曰： 彬已擒矣。 
现代文：不一会儿，陈严才来说： 江彬已经被活捉了。 
English: It wasn't long before Chen Yan said: Jiang Bin has been captured alive.

古文：彬既诛，中外相庆。
现代文：江彬被除后，朝野内外举国欢庆。
English: After Jiang Bin was removed from office, the whole country celebrated joyfully both at home and abroad.

古文：廷和总朝政几四十日，兴世子始入京师即帝位。
现代文：廷和总揽朝政近四十天，兴世子才入京登上帝位。
English: It took nearly forty days for Ting He to take over the imperial government, and only then did Xing Shizi ascend to the throne in Beijing.

古文：廷和草上登极诏书，文书房官忽至阁中，言欲去诏中不便者数事。
现代文：廷和起草了登极诏书递上去，文书房的官员忽然到内阁来，说想把诏书中几件不便利的事删除。
English: After the imperial edict of enthronement was drafted and submitted to the emperor, officials from the clerk's office suddenly came to the cabinet and said that they wanted to delete several inconvenient things from the edict.

古文：廷和曰： 往者事龃龉，动称上意。
现代文：廷和说 ：以前有了不同意见，你们动不动说是皇上的意思。
English: Ting He said, "Previously, when there was a difference of opinion, you always said it was the Emperor's will.

古文：今亦新天子意耶？
现代文：现在也是新天子的意思？
English: Does it now also mean a new heavenly son?

古文：吾侪贺登极后，当面奏上，问谁欲削诏草者！ 
现代文：我们一会祝贺新天子即位后，当面上奏，要问一问是谁想删削诏书草稿。 
English: After congratulating the new emperor on his enthronement, we asked who wanted to delete the draft of the imperial edict.

古文：冕、纪亦相继发危言，其人语塞。
现代文：蒋冕、毛纪也相继陈述利害，来人无言以对。
English: Jiang Guanyin and Mao Ji also successively stated their interests, leaving everyone speechless.

古文：已而诏下，正德中蠹政厘抉且尽。
现代文：过后诏书发布下来，正德年间的弊端几乎被淘汰净尽。
English: After the edict was issued, the evils of the Zhengde era were almost eliminated.

古文：所裁汰锦衣诸卫、内监局旗校工役为数十四万八千七百，减漕粮百五十三万二千余石。其中贵、义子、传升、乞升一切恩幸得官者大半皆斥去。
现代文：所裁减的锦衣各卫所、内监局的旗校工役人数达十四万八千七百，节省漕运粮食达一百五十三万二千余石，那些宦官、义子及奉特别诏命而侥幸做了官的人大半以上被排除了。
English: The number of flag school workers of the Jinling Sanitary Station and the Internal Control Bureau was reduced to 148,700, and the savings in grain transportation amounted to more than 1,532,000 koku. Those eunuchs, sons-in-law, and those who were lucky to become officials by special imperial order were more than half eliminated.

古文：中外称新天子 圣人 ，且颂廷和功。
现代文：朝廷内外都称颂新天子是个圣人，并且称赞廷和的功德。
English: Both inside and outside the court praised the new emperor as a saint, and praised the merits of Ting He.

古文：而诸失职之徒衔廷和次骨，廷和入朝有挟白刃伺舆旁者。
现代文：而那些丢了官的人们对廷和恨入骨髓，廷和上朝时有人身带利刃在轿旁窥视。
English: And those who have lost their officialdom hate the imperial court to the marrow of their bones. During the reign of the imperial court and the last dynasty, there were people with sharp blades peering out from the saloons.

古文：事闻，诏以营卒百人卫出入。
现代文：世宗知道后，命令从京营中选一百名士卒保护廷和出入。
English: After Sejong learned of this, he ordered that one hundred soldiers be selected from the imperial camp to guard the palace and the entrances and exits.

古文：帝御经筵，廷和知经筵事。
现代文：世宗到经筵讲习，廷和负责经筵的事情。
English: Shizong went to the court to learn about the court, and was in charge of the court affairs.

古文：修《武宗实录》，充总裁。
现代文：编《武宗实录》，也由廷和担任总裁。
English: He also edited "Bujong Shihro" and served as president of the company.

古文：廷和先已加特进，一品满九载，兼支大学士俸，赐敕旌谕。
现代文：廷和以前已被加封为特进，一品官满九年时，同时领取大学士的俸禄，武宗还亲自颁布敕令做了表彰。
English: Ting He had previously been awarded the title of special promotion, and when he was nine years old, he received the salary of a university scholar at the same time. Wu Zong also personally issued a royal decree to commend him.

古文：至是加左柱国。
现代文：这时，又被加封为左柱国。
English: At this time, it was added as a left pillar country.

古文：帝召对者三，慰劳备至。
现代文：世宗再三召见他谈话，对他格外加以慰劳。
English: Sejong repeatedly called him to talk to him and comforted him in particular.

古文：廷和益欲有所发摅，引用正人，布列在位。
现代文：廷和因此更加想要有所主张，便提拔正直的官员上来，在朝廷中分掌各种事务。
English: As a result, the imperial court wanted to assert itself even more, so they promoted honest officials to take charge of various affairs in the imperial court.

古文：给事、御史交章论王琼罪状，下诏狱。
现代文：给事中、御史们递上奏章检举了王琼的罪证，王琼被投入京城的大牢中。
English: During the case, the historians submitted a report and reported Wang Qiong's criminal record, and Wang Qiong was thrown into the big jail in Beijing.

古文：琼迫，疏讦廷和以自解。
现代文：王琼被逼急了，就上书攻击廷和，来为自己解脱。
English: Wang Qiong was in a hurry, so she wrote a letter attacking the imperial court and came to liberate herself.

古文：法司当琼奸党律论死，琼力自辨，得减戍边。
现代文：法司用奸党的条例判王琼死刑，王琼极力为自己辩护，得以减免罪过，充军边疆。
English: The Department of Justice sentenced Wang Qiong to death according to the regulations on traitors. Wang Qiong tried his best to defend himself and was pardoned. He was sent to the frontier.

古文：或疑法司承廷和指者。
现代文：有人怀疑法司断案得到过廷和的示意。
English: Some people suspect that the Justice Department's decision to dismiss the case was a gesture of reconciliation with the court.

古文：会石珤自礼部尚书掌詹事府，改吏部，廷和复奏改之掌詹事司诰敕。
现代文：正好石珤以礼部尚书的名义掌詹事府的事，现在要改任吏部尚书，廷和又奏请皇上改派他掌管詹事司的诰敕。
English: It just so happened that Shi Hao was in charge of the affairs of the General Office under the name of the Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies. Now he is to be changed to the Secretary of the General Office of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies. The Imperial Household also requested the Emperor to reassign him to be in charge of the General Office of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：人或谓廷和太专。
现代文：有人因此说廷和太独断了。
English: Some people therefore say that Ting He is too dogmatic.

古文：然廷和以帝虽冲年，性英敏，自信可辅太平，事事有所持诤。
现代文：然而廷和认为世宗虽然年轻，但天性灵明，所以他自信可以辅佐皇上致天下于太平，因而事事都有所劝谏。
English: However, Tinghe thought that although Shizong was young, he had a bright nature, so he was confident that he could assist the emperor in bringing peace to the world, so he advised Shizong in everything.

古文：钱宁、江彬虽伏诛，而张锐、张忠、于经、许泰等狱久不决。
现代文：钱宁、江彬虽被杀掉了，可是张锐、张忠、于经、许泰等的官司久不能决。
English: Although Channing and Jiang Bin were killed, the cases of Zhang Rui, Zhang Zhong, Yu Jing and Xu Tai could not be resolved for a long time.

古文：廷和等言： 不诛此曹，则国法不正，公道不明，九庙之灵不安，万姓之心不服，祸乱之机未息，太平之治未臻。 
现代文：廷和等人说 ：不杀了这些人，国家的法律就不算正大，天下的公道就不算彰明，祖庙的神灵不安，百姓的心里不服，祸乱的根源还算未除，太平政治就不会实现。 
English: Ting and others said: If these people are not killed, the laws of the country will not be regarded as upright, the justice of the world will not be regarded as clear, the gods of the ancestral temple will be uneasy, the hearts of the people will not be satisfied, the root cause of the disaster will not be eliminated, and the peaceful politics will not be realized.

古文：帝乃籍没其资产。
现代文：世宗于是命令抄没了他们的家产。
English: Sejong then ordered the confiscation of their family property.

古文：廷和复疏请敬天戒，法祖训，隆孝道，保圣躬，务民义，勤学问，慎命令，明赏罚，专委任，纳谏诤，亲善人，节财用。
现代文：廷和又上书请世宗严肃对待上天的告诫，遵循祖上的家训，弘扬孝道，善保身体，教育人民知理行义，自己也要勤于学问，谨慎地发号施令，严明地推行赏罚，任用人要专一，不好听的劝告也要听，亲近好人，节约财用。
English: Tinghe also wrote to ask Shizong to take seriously the admonitions of heaven, follow the family teachings of his ancestors, promote filial piety, protect his body, educate the people to act rationally and righteously, be diligent in learning, issue orders prudently, strictly implement rewards and punishments, appoint people to be single-minded, listen to advice that is difficult to listen to, be close to good people, and save money.

古文：语多剀切，皆优诏报可。
现代文：语言大多正直、切实，世宗的诏书都以赞扬的口吻说可以。
English: Most of the language is honest and practical, and Sejong's edicts can be said with a tone of praise.

古文：及议 大礼 ，廷和持论益不挠，卒以是忤帝意。
现代文：等到讨论 大礼 的时候，廷和对自己的意见更加坚持不挠，终于因此触犯了世宗的心意。
English: When it came time to discuss the grand ceremony, the court became even more adamant about its own opinions, and finally violated Sejong's will.

古文：先是，武宗崩，廷和草遗诏。言皇考孝宗敬皇帝亲弟兴献王长子某，伦序当立。
现代文：在此之前，武宗逝世，廷和起草了遗诏，说父王孝宗敬皇帝亲弟弟兴献王的大儿子，按照辈份、排行应该立为皇帝。
English: Prior to this, after the death of Emperor Wuzong, Ting He drafted a last will and testament, saying that the eldest son of Emperor Wuzong's father, Emperor Xiaozong, and his own brother, Emperor Xingxian, should be made emperor according to the lineage and ranking.

古文：遵奉《祖训》兄终弟及之文，告于宗庙，请于慈寿皇太后，迎嗣皇帝位。
现代文：按照《祖训》哥哥死后弟弟即位的条例，在宗庙里祭告祖宗，向慈寿皇太后告请之后，可迎接他来即皇帝位。
English: According to the regulations of the "Ancestor's Teaching" that a younger brother takes the throne after the death of an older brother, after the ancestor is worshiped in the ancestral temple and the request is made to the Empress Dowager Cixu, he can be welcomed to the throne.

古文：既令礼官上礼仪状，请由东安门入居文华殿。
现代文：既而让礼官奏上登基即位的礼仪程式，请新皇帝由东安门进入文华殿小住。
English: After the etiquette officials had performed the formalities of enthronement, the new emperor was invited to enter the Hall of Literature from Dongan Gate.

古文：翼日，百官三上笺劝进，俟令旨俞允，择日即位。
现代文：次日，百官数次递上劝进表，等新皇帝答应后，再选择好日子即位。
English: The next day, the centurion submitted several times to persuade the table, such as the new emperor agreed, and then choose a good day to ascend the throne.

古文：其笺文皆循皇子嗣位故事。
现代文：劝进表文字都按照皇子继位的惯例。
English: The words of the imperial edict were written in accordance with the usual practice of imperial succession.

古文：世宗览礼部状，谓： 遗诏以吾嗣皇帝位，非为皇子也。 
现代文：世宗看了礼部的奏章，说： 遗诏让我即皇帝位，没有让我做皇子嘛。 
English: Sejong looked at the ceremonial music and said, "The imperial edict made me emperor, but it didn't make me a prince.

古文：及至京，止城外。
现代文：等到了京师，停在城外不进去。
English: When you get to Beijing Division, stop outside the city and don't go in.

古文：廷和固请如礼部所具仪，世宗不听。乃御行殿受笺，由大明门直入，告大行几筵，日中即帝位。
现代文：廷和坚决请求按礼部拟定的仪式办，世宗不听，竟到行殿中接受了劝进表，由大明门直入京城里边，拜见了已逝皇帝的神前案几，中午就即了帝位。
English: At the firm request of the imperial court, the ceremony was carried out according to the ritual prepared by the Ministry of Ceremonies, but Shizong did not listen, and he went to the hall to accept the persuasion form, went straight into the capital from the Great Gate, and visited the deceased emperor's shrine. At noon, he was enthroned.

古文：诏草言 奉皇兄遗诏入奉宗祧 ，帝迟回久之，始报可。
现代文：诏书草稿中说到 接受皇兄的遗诏入宫供奉宗庙 。世宗思索、犹豫了半天，才表示 可以 。
English: In the draft of the imperial edict, it was said that he accepted the imperial brother's imperial edict to enter the palace and offer it to the ancestral temple. Sejong pondered and hesitated for half a day before saying yes.

古文：越三日，遣官往迎帝母兴献妃。
现代文：过了三天，派遣官员前去迎接世宗的母亲兴献妃。
English: Three days later, officials were dispatched to welcome Shizong's mother, Xingxianfei.

古文：未几，命礼官议兴献王主祀称号。
现代文：没多少天，让礼官讨论兴献王神主的称号。
English: In a few days, let the etiquette officers discuss the title of King of God.

古文：廷和检汉定陶王、宋濮王事授尚书毛澄曰： 是足为据，宜尊孝宗曰 皇考 ，称献王为 皇叔考兴国大王 ，母妃为 皇叔母兴国太妃 ，自称 侄皇帝 名，别立益王次子崇仁王为兴王，奉献王祀。
现代文：廷和拿出汉代定陶王、宋代濮王的故事递给礼部尚书毛澄说： 这是足够的根据了。应该让皇上尊称孝宗为皇考，称献王为皇叔考兴国大王，母妃为皇叔母兴国太妃，自称侄皇帝。另外改立益王的第二个儿子崇仁王为兴王，供奉献王的祭祀。
English: Ting He took out the stories of King Ding Tao of the Han Dynasty and King Gong of the Song Dynasty and handed them to the ceremonial department, Shang Shu Mao Cheng, saying, "This is sufficient basis. It is appropriate for the emperor to honorably call Xiaozong the imperial examination, call Xian Wang the imperial uncle examination, Xing Guo Da Wang, his mother the imperial aunt, Xing Guo Taifei, and call himself the nephew emperor. In addition, the second son of King Yi, King Chongren, should be named Xing Wang for the sacrificial offering of the king.

古文：有异议者即奸邪，当斩。 
现代文：对此有不同意见的人就是奸臣邪佞，应当杀掉。 
English: Anyone who has a different opinion is a traitor and should be killed.

古文：进士张璁与侍郎王瓒言，帝入继大统，非为人后。
现代文：进士张璁与侍郎王瓒说，世宗入继的是皇帝位，不是做了别人的后裔。
English: Zhang Jun and his servant Wang Jun said that Shizong succeeded to the emperor's throne, not someone else's descendant.

古文：瓒微言之，廷和恐其挠议，改瓒官南京。
现代文：王瓒含蓄地提到这一点，廷和怕他干扰了讨论，就把他改派到南京做官去了。
English: Wang Yao mentioned this implicitly, and Ting He, fearing that he was interfering with the discussion, reassigned him to Nanjing as an official.

古文：五月，澄会廷臣议上，如廷和言。
现代文：五月，毛澄综合大臣们的意见做出决议，和廷和所说一样。
English: In May, the opinions of the Mao-Cheng synthesis ministers led to a resolution, which was the same as what Tinghe had said.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：世宗不高兴了。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：然每召廷和从容赐茶慰谕，欲有所更定，廷和卒不肯顺帝指。
现代文：但是每次召见廷和时还是从容自得地赐茶慰问，想改定献王的尊号，廷和最终不肯顺着世宗的意思来。
English: However, every time he was summoned to the imperial court, he would calmly offer tea and condolences, and wanted to change the honorary title of the king. The imperial court eventually refused to follow the will of the world.

古文：乃下廷臣再议。
现代文：世宗于是下达指示让大臣们再次讨论。
English: Sejong then instructed the ministers to discuss the matter again.

古文：廷和偕蒋冕、毛纪奏言： 前代入继之君，追崇所生者，皆不合典礼。惟宋儒程颐《濮议》最得义理之正，可为万世法。
现代文：廷和和蒋冕、毛纪一起上书说 ：前代过继的君主尊崇自己的亲生父母，都不合乎典礼，只有宋儒程颐的《濮议》，表达了最正确的道理，可以作为千秋万世的师法。
English: Together with Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Ji, Ting Wo wrote, "The previous generation of monarchs who succeeded to the throne revered their own biological parents, which was not in accordance with the ceremony. Only Song Ju Chengyi's "Discussion" expressed the most correct principle, which can be used as a teaching method for thousands of years.

古文：至兴献王祀，虽崇仁王主之，他日皇嗣繁衍，仍以第二子为兴献王后，而改封崇仁王为亲王，则天理人情，两全无失。 
现代文：至于兴献王的祭祀，虽有崇仁王主持，以后生了皇子，还是把第二个皇子作为兴献王的后人，再改封崇仁王为亲王。这样，无论天理还是人情，两全其美，没一头有缺憾。 
English: As for the dedication of the prince, although it was presided over by King Chongin and later a prince was born, the second prince was considered to be the heir of King Chongin and was then renamed Prince Chongin. In this way, whether it was a matter of divine or human nature, it was the best of both worlds, and there was no shortcoming on either side.

古文：帝益不悦，命博考典礼，务求至当。
现代文：世宗更加不高兴，让他们从古籍中广泛考证，一定求得至当才是。
English: Shizong was even more displeased, telling them that they should do extensive research on ancient books to make sure they got what they wanted.

古文：廷和、冕、纪复言： 三代以前，圣莫如舜，未闻追崇其所生父瞽瞍也。
现代文：廷和、蒋冕、毛纪又说 ：三代以前的圣人莫过于舜，没听说过他怎么尊崇自己的生身父亲瞽瞍。
English: Tinghe, Jiang Guanlong, and Mao Ji also said, "Three generations ago, there was no greater sage than Yu, and no one had heard of how he revered his own biological father Yu."

古文：三代以后，贤莫如汉光武，未闻追崇其所生父南顿君也。
现代文：三代以后的贤君莫过于汉光武，也没听说过他尊崇他的亲生父南顿君为皇帝。
English: Three generations later, there was no more virtuous ruler than Han Guangwu, and no one had heard of him revering his own father, Nantong, as emperor.

古文：惟皇上取法二君，则圣德无累，圣孝有光矣。 
现代文：希望皇上向大舜、光武帝学习，那么陛下的品德就不会有玷瑕，陛下的孝心也可以光大于天下了。 
English: It is hoped that the Emperor will learn from the Daesung and Guangwu Emperors, so that His Majesty's moral character will not be tarnished, and His Majesty's filial piety can shine brighter than the world.

古文：澄等亦再三执奏。
现代文：毛澄等人也再三上奏，坚持原来的决议。
English: Mao Cheng and others also repeatedly raised the issue, insisting on the original resolution.

古文：帝留中不下。
现代文：世宗把这些奏章留在宫中，不予发放。
English: King Sejong kept these records in the palace and did not issue them.

古文：七月，张璁上疏谓当继统，不继嗣。
现代文：七月，张璁上书说应当是继承王位，而不是过继给人当后裔。
English: In July, Zhang Rong wrote a letter saying that he should be the heir to the throne, not the adopted son.

古文：帝遣司礼太监持示廷和，言此议遵祖训，据古礼，宜从。
现代文：世宗让司礼太监拿了张璁的奏章给廷和看，说这种议论既遵守祖训，又依据古礼，应该听取。
English: Sejong asked the eunuch to take Zhang Ye's transcript to the imperial court, saying that this kind of speech should be listened to in accordance with the ancestral teachings and ancient etiquette.

古文：廷和曰 秀才安知国家事体 ，复持入。
现代文：廷和说 秀才怎么知道国家的重大事务 ，又送回宫中去。
English: Ting He said, "How can a scholar know the important affairs of the country?" and sent him back to the palace.

古文：无何，帝御文华殿召廷和、冕、纪，授以手敕，令尊父母为帝、后。
现代文：不久，世宗到文华殿召见廷和、蒋冕、毛纪，给他们一个亲笔指示，要他们尊崇自己的亲生父母为皇帝、皇后。
English: Soon after, Shizong summoned Ting Ho, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji to the Palace of Literature and Art, and gave them a personal instruction to respect their own parents as emperor and empress.

古文：廷和退而上奏曰： 《礼》谓为所后者为父母，而以其所生者为伯叔父母，盖不惟降其服而又异其名也。
现代文：廷和退出以后上书说： 《礼》说：在前为君的就是父母，亲生父母应称为伯父母或叔父母。不仅丧服等次要降格，称号也应有不同。
English: After Tinghe withdrew, he wrote: "Li" said: in the past, it was the parents who were the sovereign, and the biological parents should be called the grandparents or the grandparents. Not only should the mourning clothes and other minor demotions, but the title should also be different.

古文：臣不敢阿谀顺旨。 
现代文：我不敢阿谀奉承，顺着圣旨办。 
English: I dare not flatter and do as I am told.

古文：仍封还手诏。
现代文：又密封归还了世宗的手诏。
English: He also returned Shizong's handwritten edict in a sealed envelope.

古文：群臣亦皆执前议。帝不听。
现代文：朝廷中大臣们也都坚持原先的决议，世宗就是不听。
English: The middle ministers of the imperial court also insisted on the original resolution, but Shizong just wouldn't listen.

古文：迨九月，母妃至京，帝自定仪由中门入，谒见太庙，复申谕欲加称兴献帝、后为 皇 。
现代文：等到九月份，母妃到了京城，世宗亲自确定仪式，由中门入城，访问祖庙，又再次说明想尊称兴献帝、后为皇帝、皇后。
English: In September, when his mother arrived in the capital, Shizong personally confirmed the ceremony, entered the city through the middle gate, visited the ancestral temple, and once again stated that he wanted to be called Emperor Xingxian and later Emperor and Empress.

古文：廷和言： 汉宣帝继孝昭后，谥史皇孙、王夫人曰悼考、悼后，光武上继元帝，钜鹿、南顿君以上立庙章陵，皆未尝追尊。
现代文：廷和说 ：汉宣帝继承孝昭做了皇帝以后，加史皇孙、王夫人谥号为悼考、悼后；光武往上承继元帝的统绪，巨鹿、南顿君以上立庙于章陵，都没有追加尊号。
English: Ting He said: After Emperor Han Xuan succeeded Emperor Xiao Zhao as emperor, Emperor Gaishi's grandson and Empress Wang's wife were given the honorary titles of mourner and mourner; Emperor Guangwu followed Emperor Yuan's line of succession, and Emperor Juguang and Emperor Nantong built temples at Zhangling, but they did not have any additional honorary titles.

古文：今若加皇字，与孝庙、慈寿并，是忘所后而重本生，任私恩而弃大义，臣等不得辞其责。 
现代文：现在献王、母妃如果追加尊号为皇帝、皇后，与孝庙、慈寿并列，就是忘记了先皇帝而看重亲生父母，采用私人间的情感而放弃国家的大义。我们这些大臣对此无法推卸责任。 
English: If the honorific titles of emperor and empress are now added to the names of the king and empress, alongside the honorifics of filial piety and benevolence, it is forgetting the former emperor and valuing the biological parents, using private emotions and abandoning the great cause of the country. We ministers cannot shirk our responsibility.

古文：因自请斥罢。
现代文：就此自请罢免官职。
English: In this regard, he asked to be removed from office.

古文：廷臣诤者百余人。
现代文：大臣谏诤的有一百多人。
English: More than a hundred people were invited by the minister.

古文：帝不得已，乃以嘉靖元年诏称孝宗为 皇考 ，慈寿皇太后为 圣母 ，兴献帝、后为本生父母，不称 皇 。
现代文：世宗迫不得已，于是在嘉靖元年下诏，称孝宗为皇考、慈寿皇太后为圣母，兴献帝、后为本生父母，不称为皇帝、皇后。
English: As a last resort, Sejong issued an edict in the first year of the Jiajing Emperor, declaring that he would not call himself emperor or empress, and that he would refer to the Emperor as Koko, Empress Dowager Cixu as the Virgin Mary, Emperor Xingxian as Emperor Xizong, and Empress Dowager Cixu as the True Parents.

古文：当是时，廷和先后封还御批者四，执奏几三十疏，帝常忽忽有所恨。
现代文：在这段时间里，廷和先后四次把世宗的亲笔批示密封退回，坚持自己的意见，上了近三十篇奏章，世宗常常愤愤不平。
English: During this time, Ting He returned Shizong's written instructions four times in a row, sealed, and insisted on his own opinion, writing nearly thirty musical pieces. Shizong was often indignant.

古文：左右因乘间言廷和恣无人臣礼。
现代文：他身边的亲近人物因而得以批评说廷和放肆，失掉了对皇上应有的礼貌。
English: As a result, people close to him were able to criticize the court and its arrogance, and they lost the courtesy they should have shown to the emperor.

古文：言官史道、曹嘉遂交劾廷和。
现代文：谏官史道、曹嘉于是交互揭发廷和的罪过。
English: The eunuchs Shido and Cao Jia then mutually exposed the sins of the imperial court.

古文：帝为薄谪道、嘉以安廷和，然意内移矣。
现代文：世宗为此把史道、曹嘉轻轻贬了一下，用以稳住廷和，但是心中对廷和的意思已经转变了。
English: For this reason, Shizong lightly downgraded Shidao and Cao Jia to stabilize the peace of the court, but the meaning of the peace of the court in his heart has changed.

古文：寻论定策功，封廷和、冕、纪伯爵，岁禄千石，廷和固辞。
现代文：不久评定辅立新君的功绩，封廷和、蒋冕、毛纪为伯爵，每年俸禄一千石，廷和坚决谢绝。
English: Soon after, the merits of the newly crowned emperor were evaluated, and the imperial court, Chiang Kai-shek, and Mao Ji were made into earls, with an annual stipend of one thousand koku, which the imperial court firmly refused.

古文：改荫锦衣卫指挥使，复辞。
现代文：改为荫封锦衣卫指挥使，又推辞不受。
English: It was changed to the commanding officer of the Imperial Guard, and he was not rejected.

古文：帝以赏太轻，加荫四品京职世袭，复辞。
现代文：世宗以为封赏太轻，改加为荫封四品京官世袭，廷和又推辞了。
English: The Sejong thought the award was too light, so it was changed to a hereditary four-star imperial seal, and the Imperial Court declined again.

古文：会满四考，超拜太傅，复四辞而止。
现代文：适逢复职满了四年，就破例加封他为太傅，他又四次辞让，才算作罢。
English: When four years had passed since his reinstatement, he was given the title of Taifu as an exception. He had to resign four more times before he could be dismissed.

古文：特赐敕旌异，锡宴于礼部，九卿皆与焉。
现代文：世宗特地颁发诰敕对他予以表彰，并在礼部为他赐酒宴一次，九卿都参加作陪。
English: Sejong specially awarded him a gong to commend him, and gave him a wine banquet in the ceremonial department. All nine nobles attended to accompany him.

古文：帝颇事斋醮。
现代文：世宗很喜欢请僧、道设斋坛祈祷。
English: Sejong is very fond of inviting monks and setting up altars to pray.

古文：廷和力言不可，引梁武、宋徽为喻，优旨报纳。
现代文：廷和极力说它没用，引用梁武帝、宋徽宗的事例来做论说。
English: Tinghe insisted that it was useless, citing the examples of Emperor Liangwu and Emperor Songhuizong.

古文：江左比岁不登，中官请遣官督织造。
现代文：世宗以赞赏的语气诏告可以采纳。江南近年来欠收，宦官又请求派人到那里督办织造。
English: In an appreciative tone, Shizong announced that it could be adopted. In recent years, the southern part of the Yangtze River has been short of income, and the eunuch requested that someone be sent there to supervise the weaving.

古文：工部及给事、御史言之，皆不听，趣内阁撰敕。
现代文：工部及给事中、御史提出谏劝，世宗不听，催促内阁为此起草命令。
English: Shizong did not listen to the advice of the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the Minister of History, and urged the Cabinet to draft an order for this.

古文：廷和等不奉命，因极言民困财竭，请毋遣。
现代文：廷和等人不接受命令，并且极力说江南百姓贫困，财富枯竭，请不要派遣宦官前去。
English: Ting He and others did not accept the order, and insisted that the people in the south of the Yangtze River were poor and their wealth had dried up, so please do not send eunuchs.

古文：帝趣愈急，且戒毋渎扰执拗。
现代文：世宗这下催得更急了，并且告诫廷和不要执拗、干扰这件事。
English: The sejong became more urgent, and warned the court not to persist in interfering with the matter.

古文：廷和力争，言： 臣等与举朝大臣、言官言之不听，顾二三邪佞之言是听，陛下能独与二三邪佞共治祖宗天下哉？
现代文：廷和竭力争辩说 ：我们几个人同满朝大臣、谏官说的话皇上不听，却愿意听二三个邪佞的话，皇上能跟这二三个小人一起治理祖宗打下的天下吗？
English: Tinghe argued strenuously, "The emperor does not listen to what a few of us say together with the ministers and eunuchs of the Manchu Dynasty, but he is willing to listen to two or three evil words. Can the emperor govern the world created by his ancestors together with these two or three villains?"

古文：且陛下以织造为累朝旧例，不知洪武以来何尝有之，创自成化、弘治耳。
现代文：况且陛下以为织造是历朝的旧例，不知道洪武以来哪有这旧例，只不过创始于成化、弘治年间罢了。
English: Moreover, His Majesty thought that weaving was an old practice of all the dynasties. He did not know where this old practice had been since Hongwu, but it was founded during the Chenghua and Hongzhi dynasties.

古文：宪宗、孝宗爱民节财美政非一，陛下不取法，独法其不美者，何也？
现代文：宪宗、孝宗爱护人民、节约财用的好政策不少，陛下不去采用，偏偏仿效这不好的措施，这是为什么？
English: There are many good policies to protect the people and save money that originated from the Kenzong and Xiaozong dynasties. Instead of adopting them, Your Majesty chose to emulate these bad measures. Why is that?

古文：即位一诏，中官之幸路绌塞殆尽，天下方传诵圣德，今忽有此，何以取信？ 
现代文：陛下即位的诏书，把宦官侥幸的门路堵塞得差不多没有了，天下人正在传诵陛下的美德，现在忽然出现此事，怎么能向天下人取信呢？ 
English: Your Majesty's imperial edict of enthronement has blocked the eunuch's lucky path to almost nothing. People all over the world are preaching Your Majesty's virtues. Now that this matter has suddenly come up, how can we get letters from people all over the world?

古文：因请究拟旨者何人，疑有假御批以行其私者。
现代文：进而请追究拟写圣旨的是什么人，怀疑有人假借御批的名义偷偷地推行他的个人主张。
English: Furthermore, please investigate who is the person who is going to write the will, suspecting that someone is surreptitiously promoting his personal views under the guise of the approval of the emperor.

古文：帝为谢不审，俾戒所遣官毋纵肆而已，不能止也。
现代文：世宗为此道歉说自己不仔细，让他们告诫所派宦官不要放肆就是了。这件事最终还是没能制止。
English: Sejong apologized for this, saying that he had not been careful, and asked them to warn the eunuchs they had sent not to be impudent. In the end, the matter could not be stopped.

古文：廷和先累疏乞休，其后请益力。
现代文：廷和过去曾屡次上书请求退休，后来就更加坚决了。
English: In the past, Ting He had repeatedly written to request retirement, and later he became more resolute.

古文：又以持考献帝议不合，疏语露不平。
现代文：又因为献帝称考不称考一事与世宗的主张不一致，奏章中露出不平之气。
English: In addition, because the matter of dedicating the emperor and whether or not to take the imperial examination was inconsistent with the opinion of the sejong, there was an air of discontent in the composition.

古文：三年正月，帝听之去。
现代文：三年正月，世宗听任他离去。
English: In the first month of the third year, Shizong allowed him to leave.

古文：责以因辞归咎，非大臣道。
现代文：批评他因为言语的不同错怪君上，不合做大臣的道理。
English: To criticise him because of the difference in his speech and blame him is not appropriate for a minister.

古文：然犹赐玺书，给舆廪邮护如例，申前荫子锦衣卫指挥使之命。
现代文：不过仍然赐他加盖玉玺的书券，按照常例供给他车马、钱粮、护卫人员，重申以前荫封一子锦衣卫指挥使的任命。
English: However, he still gave him a book voucher stamped with a jade seal, provided him with a carriage, money, grain, and guards in accordance with the usual practice, and reaffirmed the appointment of the commanding envoy of the Jin Garment Guards.

古文：给事、御史请留廷和，皆不报。
现代文：给事中、御史请求挽留廷和，世宗都不予答复。
English: In the middle of the matter, the Imperial Historian asked for a truce, but the Sejong did not reply.

古文：廷和去，始议称孝宗为 皇伯考 。
现代文：廷和离开后，才开始讨论称孝宗为皇伯考。
English: It was only after Ting He left that they began to discuss naming Xiaozong as Emperor Bercow.

古文：于是，廷和子修撰慎率群臣伏阙哭争，杖谪云南。
现代文：在这个时候，廷和的儿子、修撰杨慎率领众大臣爬在宫门外哭争，被打了一顿大杖，贬往云南。
English: At this time, Ting Ho's son, Shosheng Yang Shen, led the ministers to crawl outside the palace gate to cry and fight. He was beaten with a big stick and banished to Yunnan.

古文：既而王邦奇诬讦廷和及其次子兵部主事惇、婿修撰金承勋、乡人侍读叶桂章与彭泽弟冲交关请属，俱逮下诏狱。
现代文：过后王邦奇诬蔑廷和和他的二儿子、兵部主事杨忄享，女婿、修撰金承勋，同乡、侍读叶桂章与彭泽的弟弟彭冲相互勾结、请托，他们全被抓进京城的大牢里，经审讯没有根据，才被释放。
English: Afterward, Wang Bangqi slandered Tinghe and his two sons, the head of the military department, Yang Bingxuan, the son-in-law, the scholar Jin Chengxun, the fellow villager, the attendant Ye Guizhang, and the brother of Pengze, Peng Chong, colluded with each other and asked for help. They were all arrested into the big jail in Beijing. After the trial, there was no basis for them to be released.

古文：鞫治无状，乃得解。七年，《明伦大典》成，诏定议礼诸臣罪。
现代文：七年，《明伦大典》编成以后，世宗诏令议定过去讨论 大礼 时反对君上的大臣的罪。
English: Seven years later, after the compilation of "Ming Lun Da Lian," the Emperor's edict decreed that it was a crime to oppose the king's minister when discussing the Great Rite.

古文：言廷和谬主《濮议》，自诡门生天子、定策国老，法当僇市，姑削职为民。
现代文：认为廷和错误地主张《濮议》之例，自我吹捧，把天子视同他的学生，把自己描绘成辅立天子的国家元老，依法应把他斩首，姑且削职为民算了。
English: He thought that Tinghe wrongly advocated the example of the "Renmei," boasted of himself, regarded Tianzi as his student, and portrayed himself as a national elder who assisted Tianzi. According to the law, he should be beheaded, even if he was dismissed.

古文：明年六月卒，年七十一。
现代文：第二年六月，廷和去世，终年七十一岁。
English: In June of the following year, Ting He passed away at the age of 71.

古文：居久之，帝问大学士李时： 太仓所积几何？ 时对曰： 可支数年。
现代文：过了很多年，世宗问大学士李时太仓里积蓄有多少，李时回答说： 可以支付几年。
English: After many years, Shizong asked Li Shih, a university scholar, how much he had saved in Taicang. Li Shih replied, "I can pay for a few years."

古文：由陛下初年诏书裁革冗员所致。 
现代文：这是由于陛下初年即位诏书裁减多余人员换来的。 
English: This is due to the fact that in the first year of His Majesty's accession to the throne, the Emperor issued an edict to reduce the number of superfluous personnel.

古文：子慎、惇，孙有仁，皆进士。
现代文：世宗感慨地说 ：这是杨廷和的功劳，是不能抹杀的啊。 
English: Sejong said with emotion: This is the merit of Yang Tinghe, it can't be erased.

古文：慎自有传。梁储，字叔厚，广东顺德人。
现代文：隆庆初，廷和被恢复官职，追赠太保，谥文忠。梁储，字叔厚，广东顺德人。
English: At the beginning of the Longqing Dynasty, Tinghe was restored to his official position, and was posthumously given the title of Taibo, and the surnames Wenzhong, Liangzhu, and Shuhuo. He was from Shunde, Guangdong.

古文：受业陈献章。举成化十四年会试第一，选庶吉士，授编修，寻兼司经局校书。
现代文：曾跟陈献章受业，中成化十四年会试第一名，选庶吉士，授职编修，不久兼任司经局校书。
English: He studied with Chen Xianzhang, won the first place in the 14th year of Chenghua, was elected as a good luck charm, was awarded the post of editor, and soon also served as a school book of the Bureau of Economic Affairs.

古文：弘治四年，进侍讲。改洗马，侍武宗于东宫。
现代文：弘治四年，他升为侍讲，又转为洗马，在东宫中侍奉武宗读书。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Hongzhi, he was promoted to attendant preacher, and then to horse washer. He served Emperor Wuzong in the East Palace to study.

古文：册封安南，却其馈。
现代文：后来曾奉命去册封安南国君，拒不接受他的送礼。
English: Later, he was ordered to register Annan as a national prince, but he refused to accept his gift.

古文：久之，擢翰林学士，同修《会典》，迁少詹事，拜吏部右侍郎。
现代文：又过了很久，被提拔为翰林学士，参加编撰《会典》，而后又升任少詹事、吏部右侍郎。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, participated in the compilation of the "Code," and then was promoted to Shozhanzhanzhi, the right hand man of the cadre.

古文：正德初，改左，进尚书，专典诰敕，掌詹事府。
现代文：正德初年，改为左侍郎，又进升为尚书，专门掌管皇帝命令的起草，掌管詹事府。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he was changed to the left attendant, and promoted to Shangshu, specifically in charge of drafting the emperor's orders, and in charge of Zhan Shifu.

古文：刘瑾摘《会典》小疵，储坐降右侍郎。
现代文：刘瑾摘取《会典》里的小毛病出来，梁储因此被贬为右侍郎。
English: Liu Wei found some minor faults in the "Charter," and Liang Chu was demoted to the position of the right-hand man.

古文：《孝宗实录》成，复尚书，寻加太子少保，调南京吏部。
现代文：《孝宗实录》成书后，恢复职务重为尚书，不久加官太子太保，调任南京吏部尚书。
English: After the publication of "The True Record of the Filial Piety," he resumed his duties as Shangshu, and was soon promoted to the position of Taibo and transferred to the position of Shangshu of the Nanjing Personnel Department.

古文：瑾诛，以吏部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：刘瑾被杀后，他以吏部尚书兼文渊阁大学士的身份入内阁参与军政大事。
English: After Liu Bei was killed, he entered the cabinet to participate in military and political affairs as a member of the General Staff and a scholar of Wenyu Academy.

古文：屡加少傅、太子太傅，进建极殿。
现代文：后又加官少傅、太子太傅，入建极殿为大学士。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shokan Shofu (Junior Master), Taishi Taifu (Senior Master), and entered Jianji Temple as a College Scholar.

古文：十年，杨廷和遭丧去，储为首辅。进少师、太子太师、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：正德十年，杨廷和死了父亲回家守丧，梁储做了首辅大臣，进官少师、太子太师、华盖殿大学士。
English: In the tenth year of Zhengde, Yang Ting and his dead father went home to hold a funeral, and Liang Yuan became the First Vice-Minister of the State Council, and was promoted to Junior Teacher, Prince Teacher, and Hua Jia Dian University Scholar.

古文：时方建乾清、坤宁宫，又营太素殿、天鹅房、船坞，储偕同官靳贵、杨一清切谏。
现代文：当时正在修建乾清、坤宁宫，接着又要营建太素殿、天鹅房、船坞，梁储和同事靳贵、杨一清严词规劝。
English: At that time, the Qianqing and Kunning Palaces were under construction, followed by the construction of the Tai Su Hall, the Swan House, and the dockyard. Liang Chu and his colleagues Zeng Gui and Yang Yiching made stern exhortations.

古文：明年春，以国本未定，请择宗室贤者居京师，备储贰之选，皆不报。
现代文：第二年春天，因为王位继承人还没确立，他上书请选择宗室中贤能的子弟来京城居住，作为皇储，武宗都没有作声。
English: In the spring of the following year, since the heir to the throne had not yet been established, he sent a letter requesting the selection of a capable son of the imperial family to live in the capital. As the crown prince, Emperor Wuzong did not speak out.

古文：其秋，一清罢，蒋冕代之。
现代文：那年秋天，一清罢了官，由蒋冕接替了他。
English: In the autumn of that year, I Ching retired from the government and was succeeded by Jiang Guan.

古文：至明年，贵亦罢，毛纪入阁。
现代文：到第二年，靳贵也罢了官，毛纪进入内阁来。
English: By the second year, Zeng Gui was no longer an official, and Mao Ji entered the cabinet.

古文：帝好微行，尝出西安门，经宿返。
现代文：武宗喜欢伪装外出，有一次曾走出西安门，过了一夜才回来。
English: Wu Zong likes to go out in disguise. Once he walked out of the Xi'an Gate and returned after one night.

古文：储等谏，不听，然犹虑外廷知。
现代文：梁储等加以劝谏，他不听，不过他还是怕被朝中大臣知道。
English: Liang Chu and others tried to persuade him, but he didn't listen, but he was still afraid of being found out by the Minister of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：是春，从近幸言召百官至左顺门，明告以郊祀毕，幸南海子观猎。
现代文：这年春天，他听了身边宠信宦官的话把百官召到左顺门来，明确告诉大家将在郊祀过后到南海子游览，打猎。
English: In the spring of this year, he listened to the words of the favorite eunuchs around him and called the eunuchs to the left-hand door, clearly telling everyone that they would visit Nanhaizi after the suburban worship and go hunting.

古文：储等暨廷臣谏，皆不纳。
现代文：梁储等和朝廷中的大臣规劝，都不肯听从。
English: Liang Chu and other ministers in the imperial court did not want to listen to their advice.

古文：八月朔，微服从数十骑幸昌平。
现代文：八月初一，他带了几十个人便装到昌平去。
English: On the first day of August, he took dozens of people and packed them off to Changping.

古文：次日，储、冕、纪始觉，追至沙河不及，连疏请回銮。越十有三日乃旋。
现代文：第二天，梁储、蒋冕、毛纪才发觉，他们追到沙河没追上，就连连上书请皇上回来，武宗还是过了十三天才回来。
English: The next day, Liang Yuan, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji only found out that they did not catch up to the Shahe River, and even sent a letter to the emperor to come back. It took Emperor Wuzong 13 days to come back.

古文：储等以国无储副，而帝盘游不息，中外危疑，力申建储之请，亦不报。
现代文：梁储等因为国家没有接班人，而武宗又不停地外出游玩，朝廷内外人心不安，就极力重申立太子的请求，武宗又不作声。
English: Because the country had no successor, Liang Chu and others, and Emperor Wuzong kept going out to play, people inside and outside the imperial court were uneasy, so they strongly reiterated the request for the crown prince, but Emperor Wuzong remained silent.

古文：九月，帝驰出居庸关，幸宣府，命谷大用守关，无纵廷臣出。
现代文：九月，武宗骑马走出居庸关，访问宣府，命令谷大用守住关门，不让朝中大臣跟出来。
English: In September, Emperor Wuzong rode out of Juyongguan to visit Xuanwu, and ordered Gu Datong to keep the gate closed and not let the ministers of the two Koreas come out.

古文：遂由宣府抵大同，遇寇于应州，几殆。
现代文：接着就又由宣府到达大同，在应州遇上了贼寇，差点出了乱子。
English: Next, he went from Xuanfu to Datong, where he encountered bandits in Yingzhou and almost got into trouble.

古文：储等忧惧，请回銮益急。
现代文：梁储等心中忧怕，更急切地请求武宗返回来。
English: Liang Chu and the others were worried in their hearts, and more urgently begged Wu Zong to return.

古文：章十余上，帝不为动，岁除竟驻宣府。
现代文：奏章上了十几次，武宗却不为所动，除夕竟驻于宣府未归。
English: He played the piece more than a dozen times, but Muso was not moved. On New Year's Eve, he actually stayed in Senshu and did not return.

古文：当是时，帝失德弥甚。群小窃权，浊乱朝政，人情惶惶。
现代文：这个时候，武宗越发无道失德，一群小人掌了权，使朝廷里的政治乱作一团，人心惶惶。
English: At this time, Emperor Wuzong became more and more immoral, and a group of villains took power, making the politics of the imperial court chaotic and panicked.

古文：储惧不克任，以廷和服阕，屡请召之。
现代文：梁储怕自己不能够胜任，就在廷和除丧服后屡屡请召他回来。
English: Fearing that he would not be able to fulfill his duties, Liang Chuang repeatedly called him back after he had removed his mourning clothes.

古文：廷和还朝，储遂让而处其下。
现代文：廷和回朝后，梁储就让开路，自己处在下边的位置上。
English: After Ting He returned to the imperial court, Liang Chu gave way and found himself in the lower position.

古文：凤阳守备中官丘德及镇守延绥、宁夏、大同、宣府诸中官皆乞更敕书兼理民事，帝许之。
现代文：凤阳守备宦官和镇守延绥、宁夏、大同、宣府的宦官们都请武宗再颁一道敕令让他们办理民事，武宗同意了。
English: The eunuchs of Fengyang garrison and the eunuchs of the garrisons of Yancheng, Ningxia, Datong, and Xuanfu all asked Emperor Wuzong to issue another imperial order for them to handle civil affairs, and Emperor Wuzong agreed.

古文：储等极言不可，弗听。
现代文：梁储等极力说不行，武宗不听。
English: Liang Chu and others tried their best to dissuade him, but Wu Zong would not listen.

古文：十三年七月，帝从江彬言，将遍游塞上。
现代文：正德十三年七月，武宗听了江彬的怂恿，将要到边塞上游玩个遍。
English: In July of the thirteenth year of Zhengde, Wu Zong listened to Jiang Bin's advice and was going to go upstream to the frontier fortress.

古文：托言边关多警，命总督军务、威武大将军、总兵官朱寿统六师往征，令内阁草敕。
现代文：就托言边关有很多战争警报，现在要命令总督军务、威武大将军、总兵官朱寿率领天子的军队前往征战，让内阁起草敕令。
English: There are many war warnings on the pretext of the border, and now we must order the Governor of Military Affairs, General Weiwu, and Chief Military Officer Zhu Shou to lead Tianzi's army to go to war, and let the cabinet draft a royal decree.

古文：阁臣不可，帝复集百官左顺门面谕。
现代文：阁臣不同意，武宗又召集百官到左顺门当面训话。
English: The cabinet ministers disagreed, and Emperor Takemune summoned hundreds of officials to the Zuo Shun Gate for a face-to-face lecture.

古文：廷和、冕在告，储、纪泣谏，众亦泣，帝意不可回。
现代文：廷和、蒋冕正在休假中，梁储、毛纪流着泪劝谏，大家也落了泪，武宗的决心仍不动摇。
English: Ting He and Jiang Guan are on vacation, Liang Zhuo and Mao Ji are in tears, and everyone is also in tears. Wuzong's determination is still unshaken.

古文：已而纪亦引疾。储独廷争累日，帝竟不听。
现代文：过后毛纪也称病告假，梁储一个人在殿上争了几天，武宗最终还是不听。
English: After that, Mao Ji also called in sick to take a leave of absence. Liang Kuo fought alone in the palace for several days, but in the end, Emperor Wu did not listen.

古文：逾月，帝以 大将军寿 肃清边境，令加封 镇国公 。
现代文：过了一个月，武宗说大将军朱寿已经肃清边境，命令加封他为镇国公。
English: A month later, Emperor Wuzong said that the great general Zhu Shou had cleared the border, and ordered him to be made the lord of the town.

古文：储、纪上言： 公虽贵，人臣耳。
现代文：梁储、毛纪上书说： 公虽然显贵，毕竟是别人的大臣。
English: Liang Chu and Mao Ji said in the letter: Although the public is distinguished, it is, after all, someone else's minister.

古文：陛下承祖宗业，为天下君，奈何谬自贬损。
现代文：陛下继承祖宗的事业，是国家的君主，怎么能这么荒唐地自我贬低呢？
English: How can His Majesty, who is inheriting the cause of his ancestors and is the sovereign of the country, debase himself so absurdly?

古文：既封国公，则将授以诰券，追封三代。祖宗在天之灵亦肯如陛下贬损否？
现代文：封国公后，就要发给诰券，追封三代，祖宗在天之灵也肯像陛下一样贬低身份吗？
English: When a princess is enthroned, she will be given a certificate of nobility, and she will be enthroned for three generations. Would the ancestors in the spirit of heaven be willing to degrade their status like His Majesty?

古文：况铁券必有免死之文，陛下寿福无疆，何甘自菲薄，蒙此不祥之辞。
现代文：况且铁券上一定有免死的说明，陛下您万寿无疆，何苦这样妄自菲薄，蒙受那样不吉利的免死文字。
English: Moreover, there must be a death-free explanation on the iron certificate. Your Majesty, you have boundless longevity, why suffer such an ill-fated death-free text?

古文：名既不正，言自不顺。
现代文：名称既不正当，话说起来自然也不顺口。
English: The name is not legitimate, and the words do not come naturally.

古文：臣等断不敢阿意苟从，取他日戮身亡家之祸也。 
现代文：我们断然不敢为讨您的欢心苟且听从您，换取来日杀身灭门的大祸。 
English: We absolutely do not dare to please you and obey you, in exchange for the disaster of killing people.

古文：不报。帝遂历宣府、大同，直抵延绥。
现代文：武宗也不回话，继续走过宣府、大同，直达延绥。
English: Wu Zong did not reply, but continued to walk past Xuanfu and Datong, all the way to Yancheng.

古文：储等疏数十上，悉置不省。
现代文：梁储等几十次上书规劝，都放置一边不加考虑。
English: Liang Zhu and other dozens of written exhortations were all put aside without consideration.

古文：秦王请关中闲田为牧地，江彬、钱宁、张忠等皆为之请。帝排群议许之，命阁臣草制。
现代文：秦王申请关中的闲田当牧场，江彬、钱宁、张忠等都替他请求，武宗力排众议答应了他，传令阁臣起草制文。
English: Qin Wang applied for Guanzhong's idle field to be used as a pasture, Jiang Bin, Channing, Zhang Zhong, etc. all requested it for him, Wu Zongli accepted the proposal, and ordered the cabinet minister to draft the document.

古文：廷和、冕引疾，帝怒甚。
现代文：廷和、蒋冕称病不写，武宗愤怒极了。
English: Ting He and Jiang Guan said that they would not write about the illness, and Bu Zong was furious.

古文：储度不可争，乃上制草曰： 太祖高皇帝著令，兹土不畀藩封。
现代文：梁储估计争也没用，就呈上制文草稿说： 太祖高皇帝规定，这块土地不得给与藩王。
English: Liang Chu estimated that the dispute was useless, so he submitted a draft document saying: Emperor Gao stipulated that this piece of land should not be given to the king of the domain.

古文：非吝也，念其土广饶，藩封得之，多蓄士马，富而且骄，奸人诱为不轨，不利宗社。
现代文：这不是吝啬，而是考虑到这块土地广大而且富饶，假使藩王得到，多养兵马，富贵而且骄横，在坏人引诱下图谋不轨，将大大不利于国家。
English: This is not stinginess, but considering that this piece of land is vast and rich, if the king of the domain gets it, he will raise more soldiers and horses, he will be rich and arrogant, and if he is tempted by bad people to plot, it will be greatly detrimental to the country.

古文：王今得地，宜益谨。
现代文：秦王你现在得到这块土地，应该较以前更加小心。
English: King Qin, now that you have obtained this piece of land, you should be more careful than before.

古文：毋收聚奸人，毋多蓄士马，毋听狂人谋不轨，震及边方，危我社稷，是时虽欲保亲亲不可得已。 
现代文：不要收召坏人，不要多养兵马，不要听信狂人之言图谋不轨，震动四方，危害我的国家，到那时我即使想保护亲戚也可是没办法了啊。 
English: Don't recruit bad people, don't raise more soldiers and horses, don't listen to the madman's words and schemes, shake the four directions, and endanger my country. By then, even if I wanted to protect my relatives, I couldn't do it.

古文：帝骇曰： 若是其可虞！ 
现代文：武宗看后惊惧地说 ：竟然这样可怕啊！ 
English: After watching, Takemune said in shock, "How terrible!

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：事情就这样搁下了。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：明年，帝将南巡。
现代文：第二年，武宗又要南巡。
English: In the second year, Buson also wanted to go on a southern tour.

古文：言官伏阙谏，储、冕、纪亦以为言。会诸曹多谏者，乃止。
现代文：谏官们爬在宫门前规劝，梁储、蒋冕、毛纪对此也说了话，正好各个部曹里都有很多劝阻的大臣，武宗方才罢休。
English: The eunuchs climbed in front of the palace gate to persuade him, and Liang Chuang, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji also said something about this. It just so happened that there were many dissuading ministers in various ministries, and it was only after that that Emperor Wuzong gave up.

古文：宁王宸濠反，帝南征，储、冕扈从。
现代文：宁王宸濠造起反来，武宗南下亲征，梁储、蒋冕一道陪同。
English: Ning Wangtao rebelled, and Wu Zong marched south, accompanied by Liang Zhuan and Jiang Guan.

古文：在道闻贼灭，连疏请驾旋。
现代文：路上听说反贼已经败灭，就连续上书请武宗起驾还宫。
English: On the way, he heard that the anti-thieves had been defeated, so he wrote to Emperor Wu Zong and asked him to return to the palace.

古文：抵扬州，帝议南京行郊礼。
现代文：到扬州时，武宗考虑到南京举行郊祀。
English: When he arrived in Yangzhou, Wu Zong considered holding a suburb worship in Nanjing.

古文：储、冕计此议行，则回銮益无日，极陈不可，疏三上始得请。
现代文：梁储、蒋冕考虑到此议一行，武宗回朝就更是有年无日了，所以极力说不行，上了三次书才达到目的。
English: Liang Kuang and Jiang Guan took this line of argument into consideration, and the return of Emperor Wuzong to the imperial court was all but inevitable. Therefore, they tried their best to say that it was impossible, and it took them three times to achieve their goal.

古文：帝以宸濠械将至，问处置之宜。
现代文：武宗因为宸濠即将解押来，问应该怎么处置他。
English: Because the shackles were about to be released, Bu Zong came and asked what should be done with him.

古文：储等请如宣宗征高煦故事，罪人既得，即日班师。
现代文：梁储等请学宣宗征讨高煦的故事，罪人既已抓到，就马上班师回朝。
English: Liang Chu and others asked Xu Xuan Zong to solicit the story of Gao Qi. Once the criminal was caught, he immediately returned to the imperial court.

古文：又因郊期改卜，四方灾异、边警，乞还乘舆。
现代文：又借着举行郊祭的时期改变、四方多灾、边疆有警报的名义，请武宗回京。
English: In addition, in the name of changing the period of holding the suburb festival, frequent disasters in all directions, and alarms on the border, he asked Wuzong to return to Beijing.

古文：疏八九上，帝殊无还意。
现代文：上了八九次书，武宗却很少回去的意思。
English: After writing the book for the 89th time, however, Buson rarely wanted to go back.

古文：是秋，行在有物若豕首堕帝前，色碧，又进御妇人室中，若悬人首状。
现代文：这年秋天，行宫中有一种像猪头一样的东西掉下来落在武宗面前，呈碧色，又跑进御妇的房里，像挂了一个人头的样子，这下人心惊动了。
English: In the autumn of that year, something resembling a pig's head fell down and landed in front of Bu Zong in the imperial palace. It was blue in colour, and ran into his wife's room, looking like a human head. This startled everyone.

古文：人情益惊。储、冕危言谏，帝颇心动。
现代文：梁储、蒋冕借此用吓人的话进谏，武宗很有点动心了。
English: Liang Chu and Jiang Guan used this as an opportunity to intimidate Wu Zong. Wu Zong was very moved.

古文：而群小犹欲导帝游浙西，泛江、汉。
现代文：可是一帮小人还想引导武宗游玩浙西，泛舟江、汉。
English: However, a group of villains still wanted to guide Wu Zong to visit western Zhejiang, cross the Zhouzhou River, and Han.

古文：储、冕益惧，手疏跪泣行宫门外，历未至酉。
现代文：梁储、蒋冕更怕了，就手拿奏章在行宫门前跪着哭泣，从中午直到傍晚时分。
English: Liang Yuan and Jiang Guan were even more afraid, so they knelt down and cried in front of the palace gate, holding the music in their hands, from noon until the evening.

古文：帝遣人取疏入，谕之起。叩头言： 未奉俞旨，不敢起也。 
现代文：武宗派人取了奏章进去，叫他们起来，他们叩头在地，说： 没有得到皇上的圣旨，我们不敢起来。 
English: They prostrated themselves on the ground and said, "We dare not get up without receiving the emperor's command."

古文：帝不得已，许不日还京，乃叩头出。
现代文：武宗迫不得已，答应不多天就回京，他们才叩头而出。
English: As a last resort, Emperor Wuzong agreed to return to Beijing within a few days, and only then did they bow their heads.

古文：帝崩，杨廷和等定策迎兴世子。
现代文：武宗逝世后，杨廷和等决计迎接兴世子即帝位。
English: After the death of Emperor Wuzong, Yang Tinghe and others decided to welcome Xing Shizi to the throne.

古文：故事，当以内阁一人与中贵勋戚偕礼官往。
现代文：按惯例，应当由内阁一名大臣和宦官、勋戚和礼官一起去。
English: According to the usual practice, a cabinet minister should accompany the eunuch, the courtier and the etiquette officer.

古文：廷和欲留蒋冕自助，而虑储老或惮行，乃佯惜储惫老，阻其行。
现代文：廷和想留下蒋冕帮助自己，考虑到梁储年老，或许他害怕出门，就假意惋惜梁储老了，不让他去。
English: Ting He wanted to leave Jiang Guan to help himself. Considering that Liang Zuo was old, perhaps he was afraid to go out, he pretended to be sorry for Liang Zuo's old age and did not let him go.

古文：储奋曰： 事孰有大于此者，敢以惫辞！ 
现代文：梁储激动地说 ：哪有比这还大的事，我怎么会用衰老来推辞呢？ 
English: Liang Kuo said excitedly, "There is nothing greater than this. How can I use aging as an excuse?"

古文：遂与定国公徐光祚等迎世子安陆邸。
现代文：于是他和定国公徐光祚等到安陆的王府迎接世子进京。
English: As a result, he and the Prince of Dingguo, Xu Guangyao, waited at the royal palace in Anlu to welcome the heir to the throne to Beijing.

古文：既即位，给事中张九叙等劾储结纳权奸，持禄固宠。
现代文：世子即位后，给事中张九叙等人弹劾梁储过去结交掌权的坏人，贪图荣禄。
English: After the enthronement of the emperor, Zhang Jiuxiu and others in the matter impeached Liang Zang, who had made friends with the bad people in power in the past and was greedy for glory.

古文：储三疏求去，命赐敕驰传，遣行人护行，岁给廪隶如制。
现代文：梁储连上三书请退休，世宗就命令给他敕令、车马，派行人把他送回家乡，每年按规定发放禄米、仆役给他。
English: When Liang Chu repeatedly wrote three letters asking for retirement, Shizong ordered him to give him an imperial edict, a carriage and horses, sent a messenger to take him back to his hometown, and distributed rice and servants to him every year according to regulations.

古文：又三年卒。
现代文：死后，他的儿子梁钧上书请加赠谥。
English: After his death, his son, Liang Qian, wrote to the emperor to ask for more money.

古文：赠太保，谥文简。子渠，进士，太仆卿。
现代文：吏部侍郎桂萼等说，梁储的为人和做官，有犯于公众舆论，进而把两京谏官弹劾梁储的奏章抄了递上去。
English: Katsura Tsubone, an attendant of the Ministry of Civil Service, said that Liang Zu, as a person and an official, was guilty of offending public opinion, and then copied the report of the impeachment of Liang Zu by the two Beijing eunuchs.

古文：石珤，字邦彦，藁城人。
现代文：世宗想到他是先朝旧臣，就特赠他为太师，谥文康。石珤，字邦彦，山东董城人。
English: Thinking that he was a former vassal of the previous dynasty, the Sejong specially presented him with the title of Grand Master, 文康.石,字邦彦,山东董城人.

古文：父玉，山东按察使。
现代文：父亲石玉，做过山东按察使。
English: His father, Shi Yu, served as the inspector of Shandong Province.

古文：珤与兄玠同举成化末年进士，改庶吉士，授检讨，数谢病居家。
现代文：石珤与哥哥石一起考中成化末年进士，改为庶吉士，授职检讨。后来他曾几次请病假在家闲住。
English: Shi Hao and his brother Shi took the junior high school entrance examination together and were promoted to junior high school students at the end of the year. Later, he took sick leave several times to stay at home.

古文：孝宗末，始进修撰。
现代文：孝宗末年，他才做到修撰。
English: It was not until the last years of the reign of Emperor Xiaozong that he was able to complete the work.

古文：正德改元，擢南京侍读学士。历两京祭酒，迁南京吏部右侍郎。
现代文：正德改元后，升为南京侍读学士，又出任过南北两京祭酒，然后升为南京吏部右侍郎。
English: After Zhengde changed its name, he was promoted to Nanjing attendant bachelor, and also served as the north and south Beijing festival wine, and then he was promoted to Nanjing cadre right attendant.

古文：召改礼部，进左侍郎。
现代文：应诏回朝改为礼部右侍郎，升左侍郎。
English: In response to the imperial edict, the title was changed back to Reibu Usaidairo, and later to Shosaidairo.

古文：武宗始游宣府，珤上疏力谏，不报。
现代文：武宗当初出游宣府，石珤曾上书极力谏劝，武宗不听。
English: At the beginning of his visit to Xuanfu, Buson did not listen to Shi Yan, who had written to him to try to persuade him.

古文：改掌翰林院事。
现代文：后来他改管翰林院。
English: Later, he was put in charge of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：廷臣谏南巡，祸将不测，珤疏救之。
现代文：朝中大臣谏阻南巡，怕会有不测之祸，石珤曾上书挽救他们。
English: The ministers of the two Koreas opposed the southern inspection, fearing that there would be an unforeseen calamity, Ishizaki wrote a letter to save them.

古文：十六年拜礼部尚书，掌詹事府。
现代文：十六年，他名义上做了礼部尚书，实掌詹事府。
English: For 16 years, he nominally held the title of the Minister of Ceremonies, but in reality he was in charge of the General Affairs Office.

古文：世宗立，代王琼为吏部尚书。
现代文：世宗即位后，他代替王琼做了吏部尚书。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he replaced Wang Qiong as Secretary of the General Staff.

古文：自群小窃柄，铨政混浊。
现代文：过去一群小人掌权，人才选拔一事混浊不堪。
English: In the past, a group of villains were in power, and the selection of talent was chaotic.

古文：珤刚方，谢请托，诸犯清议者多见黜，时望大孚，而内阁杨廷和有所不悦。
现代文：石珤为人刚正，拒绝请托，那些触犯清议的人大多被降了职，一时很合众望，不过内阁杨廷和有些不高兴。
English: Shi Hao was an upright person and refused to ask for permission. Most of those who violated the agreement were demoted. For a while, they were very popular, but the cabinet of Yang Tinghe was somewhat unhappy.

古文：甫二月，复改掌詹事府，典诰敕。
现代文：所以才过两个月，他又改为掌詹事府，主管诰敕的收存。
English: So just two months later, he was put in charge of the General Affairs Office, in charge of the collection and storage of money.

古文：嘉靖元年遣祀阙里及东岳。
现代文：嘉靖元年，他受命前往祭祀阙里和东岳。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he was ordered to go to Baoli and Dongyue for worship.

古文：事竣还家，屡乞致仕。
现代文：事情过后他回到家乡，屡次请求退休。
English: After the incident, he returned to his hometown and repeatedly asked to retire.

古文：言官以珤望重，交章请留，乃起赴官。
现代文：谏官因为石珤名望很大，所以上书请予留用，于是他得以重新出来做官。
English: The eunuch, because of the great reputation of the eunuch, asked to be retained by letter, so he was able to come out again to be an official.

古文：三年五月，诏以吏部尚书兼文渊阁大学士入参机务。
现代文：三年五月，世宗诏命他以吏部尚书兼文渊阁大学士的身份入内阁参与机要大事。
English: In May of the third year, King Sejong gave him the order to enter the cabinet as a member of the Ministry of Personnel and Literature and a scholar of the University of Bunyukaku to participate in important events.

古文：帝欲以奉先殿侧别建一室祀献帝，珤抗疏言其非礼。
现代文：世宗想在奉先殿边侧另建一所房子祭祀献帝，石珤抗言上书说那样不合于礼制。
English: The Sejong wanted to build another house on the side of the Bongseonjeon to offer sacrifices to the emperor, but Sekiguchi protested in writing that this was not in accordance with the ritual system.

古文：及廷臣伏阙泣争，珤与毛纪助之。
现代文：等朝中大臣爬在宫门前哭泣谏诤时，石珤和毛纪也帮着大家。
English: When the chancellor crawled in front of the palace gate crying, Ishizaki and Mogi also helped everyone.

古文：无何， 大礼 议定，纪去位。
现代文：不久， 大礼 议定后，毛纪离职而去。
English: Soon after the grand gift was agreed upon, Mao Ji resigned from his post and left.

古文：珤复谏曰： 大礼一事已奉宸断，无可言矣。
现代文：石珤又上书谏道 ： 大礼 一事已经过陛下钦定，无可再说了。
English: Ishizaki wrote again, saying, "The matter of the grand reception has already been approved by His Majesty, and there is nothing more to be said."

古文：但臣反复思之，终有不安于心者。
现代文：但是我反复思考这件事，终觉得心中有所不安。
English: But I thought about it over and over, and eventually I felt uneasy in my heart.

古文：心所不安而不以言，言恐触忤而不敢尽，则陛下将焉用臣，臣亦何以仰报君父哉？
现代文：心中有所不安而不说，说了怕触犯您而不敢全部说出来，那么陛下用我哪一点呢？我又用什么来报效君父呢？
English: If I do not say what I feel uneasy about, and if I do say it, I dare not say it all for fear of offending you, then what will Your Majesty use me for? What will I use to repay Your Majesty?

古文：夫孝宗皇帝与昭圣皇太后，乃陛下骨肉至亲也。
现代文：孝宗皇帝和昭圣皇太后是陛下的骨肉至亲。
English: Emperor Xiaozong and Empress Dowager Zhaosheng are blood relatives of His Majesty.

古文：今使疏贱谗佞小人辄行离间，但知希合取宠，不复为陛下体察。
现代文：现在让几个远、贱而且谗佞的小人得以离间至亲，只知道迎合您，换取荣宠，也不为陛下设身处地想一想。
English: Now, let a few distant, low-born and shabby little people be able to become distant relatives, who only know how to cater to you in exchange for honor and favor, and do not think about putting themselves in the shoes of His Majesty.

古文：兹孟冬时享在迩，陛下登献对越，如亲见之，宁不少动于中乎？
现代文：现在十月份的祭享典礼临近了，陛下您登临皇陵捧出配称，孝宗皇帝如果亲眼看到，心中难道能没一点震动吗？
English: Now that the October celebration is approaching, Your Majesty, you have come to the imperial mausoleum to present the appropriate title. If Emperor Xiaozong saw it with his own eyes, wouldn't his heart be a little shaken?

古文：夫事亡如事存。
现代文：对待已逝的亲人应该像他还在世一样。
English: A dead relative should be treated as if he were still alive.

古文：陛下承列圣之统，以总百神，临万方，焉得不加慎重，顾听细人之说，干不易之典哉？ 
现代文：陛下继承祖先列圣的王统，而总领百神，驾御天下，怎么不加慎重，只听信小人的话，抵触千古不易的常典呢？ 
English: Your majesty inherits the kingship of your ancestors who have been canonized, but the leader of a hundred gods, who rules the world, how can he not be cautious, only listen to the words of a villain, and contradict the difficult scriptures of thousands of years?

古文：帝得奏不悦，戒勿复言。
现代文：世宗接到奏章很不高兴，告诫他不要再说了。
English: Sejong was not happy to receive the letter and told him to stop talking.

古文：明年建世庙于太庙东。帝欲从何渊言，毁神宫监，伐林木，以通辇道。
现代文：第二年祖庙在太庙东边建成，世宗听从何渊的建议，要拆毁神宫监的官署，砍伐林木，来修通辇道。
English: In the second year, the ancestral temple was built on the east side of the Great Temple. Sejong listened to He Yuan's suggestion to demolish the official office of the guardian of the sacred palace, cut down trees, and repair the causeway.

古文：给事中韩楷，御史杨秦、叶忠等交谏，忤旨夺俸。
现代文：给事中韩楷、御史杨秦、叶忠等交相劝阻，忤逆世宗被扣发俸禄。
English: Han Kai, goshi Yang Qin, Ye Zhong and others were dissuaded from communicating with each other, and the traitor Sejong was deprived of his salary.

古文：给事中卫道继言之，贬秩调外。
现代文：给事中卫道接着又行劝谏，被贬官外调。
English: He was reprimanded and demoted, and then transferred to a different post.

古文：珤复抗章，极言不可，弗听。
现代文：石珤又抗言上书极力说不行，世宗不听。
English: Shi Hao also wrote a letter of protest, saying that it was not possible, but Shizong did not listen.

古文：及世庙成，帝欲奉章圣皇太后谒见，张璁、桂萼力主之。
现代文：等祖庙修成以后，世宗想陪同章圣皇太后前往晋见，张璁、桂萼竭力促成此事。
English: After the completion of the ancestral temple, Shizong wanted to accompany Empress Dowager Zhang Sheng to meet Emperor Jin, and Zhang Ye and Gui Cai made every effort to facilitate this.

古文：礼官刘龙等争不得，诸辅臣以为言，帝不报，趣具仪。
现代文：礼官刘龙等争不过。内阁大臣们也说了话，世宗不做答复，只是催礼官安排晋见的仪式。
English: The ministers of the cabinet also spoke, but Shizong did not reply, only urging the ceremonial officer to arrange the ceremony.

古文：珤乃上疏曰： 陛下欲奉皇太后谒见世庙，臣窃以为从令固孝，而孝有大于从令者。
现代文：石珤于是上书说 ：陛下想陪同皇太后晋见祖庙，我认为听从皇太后的命令固然是孝顺，但是孝顺有比听话还重要的。
English: Ishizaki then wrote: "Your Majesty wants to accompany Empress Dowager Jin to see the ancestral temple. I think that it is certainly filial duty to obey the orders of the Empress Dowager, but filial duty is more important than obedience.

古文：臣诚不敢阿谀以误君上。
现代文：我实在不敢阿谀奉承，误了主上。
English: I really don't dare to flatter, I've made a mistake.

古文：窃惟祖宗家法，后妃已入宫，未有无故复出者。
现代文：我在想，按祖宗定下的家法，后妃入宫以后，没有无缘无故又走出过宫门的。
English: I was thinking that, according to the family law set by the ancestors, after the concubine entered the palace, she did not leave the palace gate without any reason.

古文：且太庙尊严，非时享祫祭，虽天子亦不轻入，况后妃乎？
现代文：况且太庙庄重而且威严，不是四时的祭祀、合祭祖先的典礼，即使天子也不应轻易出入，何况是后妃？
English: Moreover, the Great Temple is solemn and majestic. It is not a four o'clock sacrificial rite or a ceremony for ancestors. Even the Son of Heaven should not come and go easily, let alone the Empress Dowager.

古文：璁辈所引庙见之礼，今奉先殿是也。
现代文：张璁等所称述的庙见之礼，是针对现在的奉先殿来说的。
English: The temple greeting described by Zhang Xuan and others is for the current Fuxian Hall.

古文：圣祖神宗行之百五十年，已为定制，中间纳后纳妃不知凡几，未有敢议及者，何至今日忽倡此议？
现代文：我朝神圣的祖宗们推行了一百五十年，已经成为常规，中间纳娶过的后妃不知多少，没有敢说到要晋见太庙的，怎么现在忽然提这种倡议？
English: I have been promoting the holy ancestors for a hundred and fifty years, it has become a routine, I don't know how many empresses I have married in the meantime, I didn't dare to say that I wanted to see the imperial temple, how can I suddenly make such an initiative now?

古文：彼容悦佞臣岂有忠爱之实，而陛下乃欲听之乎？
现代文：那些受您宠爱的佞臣哪里有忠君爱国的行为，陛下竟然要听他们的话？
English: Where are the loyal and patriotic acts of your favorite courtiers, and why does Your Majesty want to listen to them?

古文：且阴阳有定位，不可侵越。
现代文：况且阴阳各有一定的位置，不能相互侵犯、超越。
English: Moreover, yin and yang each have a certain position, and cannot encroach on or surpass each other.

古文：陛下为天地百神之主，致母后无故出入太庙街门，是坤行乾事，阴侵阳位，不可之大者也。
现代文：陛下身为百神的主宰，让母后无故在太庙的街门前出入，就是母亲干了父王才能做的事，阴侵犯了阳的位置，这是大大不可行的事啊。
English: Your Majesty, as the presiding deity of a hundred deities, allowing the Empress Dowager to enter and exit in front of the street gate of the Great Temple without any reason, is what a mother can do for a father, and the yin has encroached on the position of the yang, which is a very unfeasible thing.

古文：臣岂不知君命当承，第恐上累圣德，是以不敢顺旨曲从，以成君父之过，负覆载之德也。 
现代文：我岂不知君上的命令应该接受，但是只恐怕有碍于皇上的美德，所以不敢曲意顺随，形成君父的过错，亏负您上覆下载、化育万物的美德。 
English: Don't I know that I should accept Your Majesty's order, but I'm afraid that it would be detrimental to Your Majesty's virtue, so I dare not follow Your Majesty's order, create Your Majesty's fault, and infringe on Your Majesty's virtue.

古文：奏入，帝大愠。
现代文：奏章递进宫里后，世宗大为恼火。
English: Sejong was very angry after the music was brought into the palace.

古文：珤为人清介端亮，孜孜奉国。
现代文：石珤为人清正、坚强，孜孜不倦，报效国家。
English: Shisheng is honest, strong, tireless, and devoted to the country.

古文：数以力行王道，清心省事，辨忠邪，敦宽大，毋急近效为帝言。
现代文：曾几度上书给世宗，要他努力推行王道，清心寡欲，减少事端，辨别忠臣与奸邪，敦行宽大政策，不要急功近利。
English: He had written to King Sejong several times, asking him to work hard to promote the royal way, be pure-hearted and have few desires, reduce incidents, distinguish between loyal subjects and traitors, pursue a lenient policy, and not be in a hurry to succeed.

古文：帝见为迂阔，弗善也。
现代文：世宗以为他迂阔，不怎么喜欢他。
English: The world thought he was a loose cannon and didn't like him very much.

古文：议 大礼 时，帝欲援以自助，而珤据礼争，持论坚确，失帝意，璁、萼辈亦不悦。
现代文：讨论 大礼 时，世宗想拉他帮自己的忙，可是石珤据理力争，所持意见坚不可摇，失去了世宗的心，张璁、桂萼对他也不高兴。
English: During the discussion of the grand salute, Shizong wanted to get him to help him, but Shisheng argued with him, his opinion was unshakable, and he lost Shizong's heart. Zhang Xi and Gui Caly were also unhappy with him.

古文：璁、萼朝夕谋辅政，攻击费宏无虚日，以珤行高，不能有所加。
现代文：张璁、桂萼日夜想入内阁辅政，攻击费宏几无虚日。因为石珤品行高尚，无法给他加罪。
English: Zhang Ye and Gui Caly day and night want to enter the cabinet of assistant politicians, and attack Feihong almost every day. Because Shi Ye is of high moral character, it is impossible to add to his guilt.

古文：至明年春，奸人王邦奇讦杨廷和，诬珤及宏为奸党，两人遂乞归。
现代文：到第二年春天，奸人王邦奇攻击杨廷和，诬蔑石珤和费宏也是奸党，他们两个于是请求离职还乡。
English: By the spring of the following year, the traitor Wang Bangqi attacked Yang Tinghe and slandered Shijun and Feihong as traitors. The two of them then requested to leave the post and return to their hometown.

古文：帝许宏驰驿，而责珤归怨朝廷，失大臣谊，一切恩典皆不予。归，装襆被车一辆而已。
现代文：世宗同意费宏乘坐驿站的官车，而指责石珤埋怨朝廷，不合乎大臣之义，一切恩典都不给他，他回家的行装只有载包裹、被子的一辆车子而已。
English: Sejong agreed to let Fei Hong take the official car from the station, but accused Shi Hao of complaining to the court, which was not in line with the minister's righteousness, and did not give him any grace. He went home with only a car loaded with packages and quilts.

古文：都人叹异，谓自来宰臣去国，无若珤者。
现代文：京城的人们既惊且叹，说从来宰臣离开京城，没有像石珤这个样子的。
English: The people of Kyoto were both surprised and sighed, saying that there had never been anything like Ishizuchi since Zaisen left Kyoto.

古文：自珤及杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪以强谏罢政，迄嘉靖季，密勿大臣无进逆耳之言者矣。
现代文：自从石珤和杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪因为强力谏诤被罢官后，一直到嘉靖末年，机要大臣没有再进逆耳忠言的了。
English: From the time Shi Yan, Yang Tinghe, Jiang Guan and Mao Ji were removed from office for strong-arm tactics until the last years of Jiajing, there was never a time when an important minister went against the advice of his loyal advisors.

古文：珤加官，自太子太保至少保。
现代文：石珤前后加官，从太子少保做到太保。
English: Around the time of Sekigahara, additional officials were appointed, from the Prince's Junior Protector to the Grand Protector.

古文：七年冬卒，谥文隐。
现代文：嘉靖七年冬天去世后，谥文隐。
English: After the death of Jiajing in the winter of the seventh year, Zou Wenyin died.

古文：隆庆初，改谥文介。
现代文：隆庆初年，改谥文介。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he changed his surname to Wensuke.

