古文：起重光赤奋若，尽昭阳大渊献，凡二十三年。慎靓王元年卫更贬号曰君。
现代文：起辛丑，止癸亥，共二十三年。慎靓王元年卫国卫成侯再次贬低自己的爵号，不再称 侯 ，而称 君 。
English: It took a total of 23 years from the beginning of the Heian period to the end of the Kamakura period. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Shennong, Prince Weiguo Weicheng once again downgraded his title of nobility, no longer calling himself 侯, but Jun.

古文：慎靓王二年
现代文：慎靓王二年
English: In the second year of King Shennong

古文：秦伐魏，取鄢。
现代文：秦国进攻韩国，夺取鄢陵。
English: Qin attacked South Korea and captured Baoling.

古文：魏惠王薨，子襄王立。
现代文：魏惠王逝世，他的儿子即位，即魏襄王。
English: King Wei Hui died, and his son, King Wei Xiang, ascended the throne.

古文：孟子入见而出，语人曰： 望之不似人君，就之而不见所畏焉。
现代文：孟子到宫内觐见，出来后对别人说： 远看不像个君王的样子，和他接近也没觉得有什么好畏惧的。
English: Mencius went to the palace for an audience, and when he came out, he said to others, "I hardly look like a king, and I don't feel any fear in approaching him.

古文：卒然问曰： 天下恶乎定？ 
现代文：他突然问我： 怎样才能平定天下？ 
English: He suddenly asked me: How can we make the world stable?

古文：吾对曰： 定于一。 
现代文：我答道： 天下统一才能平定。 
English: I replied: The world can only be pacified through unification.

古文： 孰能一之？ 
现代文：又问： 谁能够使天下统一呢？ 
English: He also asked: Who can unify the world?

古文：对曰： 不嗜杀人者能一之。 
现代文：我说： 不嗜好杀人的能够使天下统一。 
English: I also answered: A sovereign who does not like killing people can unify the country.

古文： 孰能与之？ 
现代文：又问： 谁愿意归附呢？ 
English: He also asked: Who would submit to a sovereign who does not like to kill?

古文：对曰： 天下莫不与也。
现代文：我回答说： 天下没有不愿归附的人。
English: And I said, There is not a man on earth that will not follow him.

古文：王知夫苗乎？
现代文：大王知道那稻苗吧？
English: Does the Great King know how the seedlings are growing?

古文：七八月之间旱，则苗槁矣。
现代文：七八月遇到天气干旱，稻苗快要枯死了。
English: When there is a drought between July and August, the seedlings will wither.

古文：天油然作云，沛然下雨，则苗浡然兴之矣。
现代文：只要天上浓云密布，降下大雨，稻苗就又会勃然生长、郁郁葱葱。
English: Suddenly, the sky was covered with dark clouds, and it rained heavily. The seedlings would grow vigorously again.

古文：其如是，孰能御之？  
现代文：治理国家如果能像这样，谁能阻止得了？  
English: If it is like this, who can stop it from growing?

古文：慎靓王三年
现代文：三年
English: Three years

古文：楚、赵、魏、韩、燕同伐秦，攻函谷关。
现代文：楚、赵、魏、韩、燕五个国家联合起来讨伐秦国，进攻函谷关。
English: Five countries, Chu, Zhao, Wei, Han, and Yan, united to fight against Qin and attack Hanzhiguan.

古文：秦人出兵逆之，五国之师皆败走。
现代文：秦国派出军队迎战，五国联军纷纷败退逃窜而回。
English: Qin dispatched troops to meet the war, and the allied forces of the five countries were defeated, fled, and returned.

古文：宋初称王。
现代文：宋国国君开始称王。
English: The sovereigns of the Song Dynasty began to claim the throne.

古文：慎靓王四年
现代文：四年
English: Four years

古文：秦败韩师于脩鱼，斩首八万级，虏其将叟、申差于浊泽。诸侯振恐。
现代文：秦国在脩鱼大败韩国军队，杀死八万余人，于浊泽俘虏韩军大将和申差。各诸侯国都感到震惊恐惧。
English: The Qin State defeated the Korean army in Huludao, killing more than 80,000 people, and captured the Korean army general and envoy in Heze. All the states were shocked and afraid.

古文：齐大夫与苏秦争宠，使人刺秦，杀之。
现代文：齐国大夫和苏秦争夺大权，派人把苏秦暗杀了。
English: Qi Guodong and Su Qin fought for power and sent someone to assassinate Su Qin.

古文：张仪说魏襄王曰： 梁地方不至千里，卒不过三十万，地四平，无名山大川之限，卒戍楚、韩、齐、赵之境，宁亭、障者不下十万，梁之地势固战场也。
现代文：张仪劝说魏襄王道： 魏国地方不满千里，士兵不足三十万，地势四下平坦，没有崇关大河的险要。防军分别守卫与楚、韩、齐、赵接壤的边界，用来扼守要塞的不过十万人，所以，魏国历来是厮杀的战场。
English: Zhang Yi persuaded Wei Xiang Wang that: Wei Province is short of thousands of miles, less than 300,000 soldiers, the terrain is flat everywhere, and there is no danger of the Chongguan River. The defense army guards the border with Chu, Han, Qi, and Zhao separately, and only 100,000 people are used to guard the fortress, so Wei Province has always been a battlefield for fighting.

古文：夫诸侯之约从，盟洹水之上，结为兄弟以相坚也。
现代文：各国约定联合抗秦，在洹水结盟，作为兄弟之邦互相救援。
English: The countries agreed to jointly resist the Qin Dynasty and form an alliance in Surabaya to help each other as brotherly countries.

古文：今亲兄弟同父母，尚有争钱财相杀伤，而欲恃反覆苏秦之馀谋，其不可成亦明矣。
现代文：然而同一父母的亲兄弟，有时还为争夺钱财互相残杀，各国之间，想靠反复无常小人苏秦的一番伎俩，就结成同盟，明显是不足恃的。
English: However, brothers and sisters of the same parents sometimes kill each other for money, and it is obviously not enough for countries to rely on the capricious villain Su Qin's trick of forming an alliance.

古文：大王不事秦，秦下兵攻河外，据卷衍、酸枣，劫卫，取阳晋，则赵不南，赵不南而梁不北，梁不北则从道绝，从道绝则大王之国欲毋危，不可得也。
现代文：大王您不与秦国结好，秦国就会发兵进攻河外，占据卷县、酸枣等地，袭击卫国，夺取阳晋。那时，赵国不能南下，魏国也不能北上，南北隔绝，就谈不上联合抗秦，大王您的国家想避免危险也不可能了。
English: If you, the great king, do not make peace with Qin, Qin will send troops to attack outside the river, occupy Wulian County, Jizhou and other places, attack the defense of the country, and seize Yangjin. At that time, Zhao cannot go south, Wei cannot go north, and the north and south are isolated, so there is no talk of a joint anti-Qin, and it is impossible for your country to avoid danger.

古文：故愿大王审定计议，且赐骸骨。 
现代文：所以我希望大王您能深思熟虑，拿定主意，让我辞去魏国相位，回秦国去筹划修好。 
English: Therefore, I hope that you, the king, can deliberate and make up your mind to let me resign from Wei and return to Qin to plan and repair.

古文：魏王乃倍从约，而因仪以请成于秦。
现代文：魏王于是背弃了联合抗秦的盟约，派张仪前往秦国去求和。
English: The Wei king then reneged on the alliance against Qin and sent Zhang Yi to Qin to sue for peace.

古文：张仪归，复相秦。
现代文：张仪回到秦国，再次出任国相。
English: Zhang Yi returned to Qin and resumed his position as Minister of State.

古文：慎靓王五年
现代文：鲁景公逝世，他的儿子姬旅即位，即鲁平公。
English: Lu Jing Gong died, and his son Hsi Tabi ascended to the throne, that is, Lu Ping Gong.

古文：巴、蜀相攻击，俱告急于秦。
现代文：五年巴、蜀两国进攻对方，都到秦国请求救援。
English: Five years later, when Ba and Shu attacked each other, they both went to Qin to ask for help.

古文：秦惠王欲伐蜀。以为道险狭难至，而韩又来侵，犹豫未能决。
现代文：秦惠王想征讨蜀国，但考虑到道路狭窄险峻，不容易到达，又担心韩国趁机侵扰，犹犹豫豫迟迟没有下决定。
English: Qin Hui Wang wanted to invade Shu, but considering the narrow and steep road, not easy to reach, and worried that South Korea would take the opportunity to intrude, he hesitated and hesitated to make a decision.

古文：司马错请伐蜀。张仪曰： 不如伐韩。 
现代文：司马错建议秦惠王攻打蜀国，张仪说： 还不如进攻韩国。 
English: Sima wrongly advised Qin Hui Wang to attack Shu, Zhang Yi said: It would be better to attack South Korea.

古文：王曰： 请闻其说。 
现代文：秦惠王说： 说说你的看法。 
English: Hui Wang said: I am willing to listen to your respective reasons.

古文：仪曰： 亲魏，善楚，下兵三川，攻新城、宜阳，以临二周之郊，据九鼎，按图籍，挟天子以令于天下，天下莫敢不听，此王业也。
现代文：张仪说： 与魏国、楚国保持亲善友好的关系，然后出兵三川地区，进攻新城、宜阳，直达东西二周的国都近郊，持有九鼎以及九州版图，挟持周天子以号令天下诸侯，天下没有不顺从的，这是王霸之业啊。
English: Zhang Yi said: Maintain goodwill and friendly relations with Wei and Chu, and then send troops to the Sanchuan region, attack Xincheng and Yiyang, directly to the suburbs of the national capital around the east and west, hold Jiuding and Kyushu territory, and hold Zhou Tianzi to order the world's princes by name. There is no disobedience in the world. This is the king's business.

古文：臣闻争名者于朝，争利者于市。
现代文：臣听说要争夺功名的到朝廷上，要赚取利益的到市场上。
English: It is said that those who want to win fame go to the imperial court, and those who want to make profits go to the market.

古文：今三川、周室，天下之朝、市也，而王不争焉，顾争于戎翟，去王业远矣！ 
现代文：如今三川和周王室就好比天下的朝廷和市集，大王不去争夺这些，只顾着和戎狄小国争夺势力，这和霸王之业相差太远了。 
English: Today, the Mikawa and Zhou royal families are like the world's imperial court and market. The great king does not compete for these, but only competes for power with small countries. This is too far from the overlord's business.

古文：司马错曰： 不然，臣闻之，欲富国者务广其地，欲强兵者务富其民，欲王者务博其德，三资者备而王随之矣。
现代文：司马错说： 不对。我听说要想国家富强必须先开拓领土，想要使军力强大必须先使百姓富足，想要成就霸业必须先广行德义，这三个条件满足自然就可以称霸于诸侯。
English: Sima mistakenly said, "That's not true. I heard that in order to make a country rich and strong, you must first develop the territory, in order to make the military strong, you must first make the people rich, and in order to achieve hegemony, you must first widely practice virtue. If you meet these three conditions, you can naturally dominate the princes."

古文：今王地小民贫，故臣愿先从事于易。
现代文：如今大王的疆土狭小，百姓穷困，所以我希望您先从小处做起。
English: Today, the territory of the great king is small and the people are poor, so I hope you will start from a small place.

古文：夫蜀，西僻之国而戎翟之长也，有桀、纣之乱，以秦攻之，譬如使豺狼逐群羊。
现代文：蜀，是西南偏远的蕞尔小国，戎狄的酋长，像桀、纣一样昏庸乱政，秦国进攻蜀国，就好像驱赶着豺狼追赶羊群。
English: Shu is a small country in the remote southwest of Mu, and the chieftain of the army of Di is as confused and chaotic as Yao and Yao. When Qin attacked Shu, it was like driving a wolf to chase a flock of sheep.

古文：得其地足以广国，取其财足以富民，缮兵不伤众而彼已服焉。
现代文：占领它的土地可以扩张秦国的疆域，夺取它的钱财可以使百姓富足，只需要稍微用兵不损伤一兵一卒就可以使它臣服。
English: Occupying its land can expand the territory of Qin, seizing its money and wealth can make the people rich, and it only takes a little use of troops without injuring a single soldier to subjugate it.

古文：拔一国而天下不以为暴，利尽西海而天下不以为贪，是我一举而名实附也，而又有禁暴止乱之名。
现代文：攻占一个国家而天下人不以为秦国残暴，得到全天下的利益世人也不认为秦国贪婪，这样我国一举即可得到威名又能收获实际的利益。
English: Conquering a country, people around the world do not think we are cruel; taking all the wealth of the West, people around the world do not think we are greedy. This dispatch of our army has increased our prestige and real profits, and we can also enjoy the good reputation of prohibiting riots.

古文：今攻韩，劫天子，恶名也，而未必利也，又有不义之名，而攻天下所不欲，危矣！
现代文：现在进攻韩国，挟持周天子，只会背负骂名，不一定对秦国有利，还会蒙受一个不仁义的坏名声，进攻天下人都不愿意进攻的地方，实在是危险。
English: To attack South Korea now, holding Zhou Tianzi hostage, will only bring a bad name, not necessarily beneficial to Qin, and will also suffer a bad reputation of unkindness and injustice. It is really dangerous to attack a place that people around the world do not want to attack.

古文：臣请论其故。周，天下之宗室也；齐，韩之与国也。
现代文：让我分析这中间的缘故：周，是天下诸侯的宗室所在。
English: Let me analyze this intermediate cause: Zhou is the ancestral home of the princes of the world.

古文：周自知失九鼎，韩自知亡三川，将二国并力合谋，以因乎齐、赵而求解乎楚、魏。以鼎与楚，以地与魏，王弗能止也。
现代文：齐国，与韩国是友好的邦国，周王室意识到将要丧失九鼎重器，韩国自知快要失去三川之地，两国必定会全力合作，通过齐、赵两国的渠道向楚国和魏国求援，把九鼎赐给楚国，把三川之地割让给魏国，这是大王您阻止不了的。
English: Qi is a friendly state with South Korea. The Zhou royal family is aware that it will lose the Jiuding heavy weapons. South Korea knows that it is about to lose the Three Rivers. The two countries will certainly cooperate fully. Through the channels of Qi and Zhao, they will ask Chu and Wei for help. They will give Jiuding to Chu and cede the Three Rivers to Wei. This is something that you, the king, cannot stop.

古文：此臣之所谓危也。
现代文：这才是我所说的危险。
English: That's the danger I'm talking about.

古文：不如伐蜀完。 
现代文：所以还是进攻蜀国较为稳妥。 
English: Therefore, it is more prudent to attack Shu.

古文：王从错计，起兵伐蜀。十月取之。
现代文：秦惠王采纳司马错的计策，出兵进攻蜀国，十个月就完全占领了。
English: Qin Hui Wang adopted Sima's wrong strategy and sent troops to attack Shu, which was completely occupied in ten months.

古文：贬蜀王，更号为侯，而使陈庄相蜀。
现代文：把蜀王的爵位降为侯，又派陈庄担任蜀相。
English: He reduced Shu Wang's title to marquis, and appointed Chen Zhuang as Shu Minister.

古文：蜀既属秦，秦以益强，富厚，轻诸侯。
现代文：蜀被秦国兼并后，秦国国力更加强盛富裕，对各诸侯国也更加轻视。
English: After Shu was annexed by the State of Qin, the national strength of the State of Qin became stronger, more prosperous, and more contemptuous of the various vassal states.

古文：苏秦既死，秦弟代、厉亦以游说显于诸侯。
现代文：苏秦死后，他的弟弟苏代、苏厉也以游说著称于各国。
English: After the death of Su Qin, his younger brothers Su Dai and Su Li are also famous for lobbying in various countries.

古文：燕相子之与苏代婚，欲得燕权。
现代文：燕国相子之便崐与苏代结为通姻亲家，想谋得燕国大权。
English: Yan Guo's son-in-law, who was related by marriage to the Su Dynasty, wanted to gain the supreme power of Yan Guo.

古文：苏代使于齐而还，燕王哙问曰： 齐王其霸乎？ 
现代文：苏代出使齐国归来，燕王姬哙问他： 齐王能称霸吗？ 
English: When Qi Guo, the envoy of the Su Dynasty, returned, Yan Wang Jixuan asked him: Can Qi Wang dominate?

古文：对曰： 不能。 
现代文：苏代回答： 不能。 
English: And he said, I cannot.

古文：王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：燕王又问： 为什么？ 
English: Zhou Dingwang asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 不信其臣。 
现代文：回答说： 他不信任臣僚。 
English: "A minister who doesn't trust him," he replied.

古文：于是燕王专任子之。
现代文：于是燕王把大权交给子之。
English: As a result, Yan Wang handed over the supreme power to his son.

古文：鹿毛寿谓燕王曰： 人之谓尧贤者，以其能让天下也。
现代文：鹿毛寿也对燕王说： 人们称道尧是贤明君主，就是因为他能让出天下。
English: Lu Mao Shou also said to Yan Wang: People say that Daojun is a wise monarch, because he can give away the whole world.

古文：今王以国让子之，是王与尧同名也。 
现代文：现在燕王您要是把国家让给子之，就能与尧有同样的名声。 
English: Now, Yan Wang, if you give the country to your son, you will have the same reputation as the dragonfly.

古文：燕王因属国于子之，子之大重。
现代文：燕王于是把国家嘱托给了子之。子之从此大权集于一身。
English: Yan Wang then entrusted the country to his son, and the son's status became even more prestigious.

古文：或曰： 禹荐益而以启人为吏，及老而以启为不足任天下，传之于益。
现代文：还有人对燕王说： 上古时禹推荐益为接班人，又任命儿子启的属下作益的官吏。到老时，禹说启不能胜任治理天下的重责，把君位传给益。
English: Another person said to King Yan: In ancient times, Yu recommended Yi as his successor, and appointed his son Qi's subordinates to serve as Yi's officials. In his old age, Yu said that Qi was not competent to handle the heavy responsibilities of governing the world, and passed the throne to Yi.

古文：启与交党攻益，夺之，天下谓禹名传天下于益而实令启自取之。
现代文：然而启勾结自己的党羽攻击益，很快夺取了君位。因此天下人都说禹明着是传天下给益，而实际上是安排儿子启去自己夺位。
English: However, Kai colluded with his own party to attack and soon seized the throne. Therefore, people around the world said that Yu was clearly passing the throne to Kai, but in fact he was arranging for his son Kai to take the throne for himself.

古文：今王言属国于子之而吏无非太子人者，是名属子之而实太子用事也。 
现代文：现在燕王您虽然说了把国家交给子之，但官员都是太子的人，这同样是名义属于子之而实权在太子手里啊！ 
English: Now, Yan Wang, although you have said that the country will be handed over to the son, the officials are all the prince's people, which is also nominally belonging to the son and the real power is in the prince's hands!

古文：王因收印绶，自三百石吏已上而效之子之。
现代文：燕王便下令收缴所有官印，把三百石俸禄以上的官职都交给子之任命。
English: King Yan then ordered the confiscation of all official seals and the appointment of his son to all official positions above the three hundred koku stipend.

古文：子之南面行王事，而哙老，不听政，顾为臣，国事皆决于子之。
现代文：从此，子之面南称王，姬哙年老，不再听理政事，反而成了臣子，国家大事都由子之来决断。
English: From then on, the younger son became king, and the elder son, no longer in charge of government affairs, became a vassal, and the major national events were decided by the younger son.

古文：慎靓王六年
现代文：六年，
English: Six years,

古文：王崩，子赧王延立。赧王上
现代文：周慎靓王去世，其子姬延即位为周赧王。赧王上
English: King Zhou Shennong died, and his son Ji Yan ascended to the throne as King Zhou Shennong.

古文：赧王元年
现代文：赧王元年
English: Year of the Dragon

古文：秦人侵义渠，得二十五城。
现代文：秦国入侵义渠，夺取二十五个城镇。
English: Qin invaded Yichuan and captured twenty-five towns.

古文：魏人叛秦。
现代文：魏国背叛秦国。
English: Wei betrayed Qin.

古文：秦人伐魏，取曲沃而归其人。
现代文：秦国起兵攻打魏，攻取曲沃而把魏国百姓送回。
English: Qin launched an attack on Wei, captured Quwo and sent the Wei people back.

古文：又败韩于岸门，韩太子仓入质于秦以和。
现代文：又在岸门击败韩军。韩国把太子仓送给秦国做人质，向秦国讲和。
English: They also defeated the Korean army at the shore gate. Korea gave the Prince's Warehouse to Qin as a hostage, and made peace with Qin.

古文：燕子之为王三年，国内大乱。将军市被与太子平谋攻子之。
现代文：燕国子之作国王三年，国内大乱，将军市被与太子姬平合谋攻打子之。
English: Three years after Yan Guo Zi became king, the country was in turmoil, and the generals were plotting with the crown prince Jiping to attack him.

古文：齐王令人谓燕太子曰： 寡人闻太子将饬君臣之义，明父子之位，寡人之国虽小，唯太子所以令之。 
现代文：齐王派人对燕太子说： 我听说您将要整饬君臣大义，申明父子名位，我的国家愿意支持您的号召，做坚强后盾。 
English: King Qi sent someone to say to Prince Yan: I have heard that you are going to rectify the great righteousness of kings and ministers and affirm the position of father and son. My country is willing to support your call and act as a strong backing.

古文：太子因要党聚众，使市被攻子之，不克。市被反攻太子。
现代文：燕太子于是聚集死党，派将军市被进攻子之，却没有得手，市被反倒戈攻打太子。
English: Prince Yan then gathered his closest allies and sent a general to attack the city, but he was unsuccessful. The city turned against him and attacked the prince.

古文：构难数月，死者数万人，百姓恫恐。
现代文：国内动乱几个月，死亡达几万人，人心惶惶。
English: The country has been in turmoil for months, tens of thousands of people have died, and people are panicking.

古文：齐王令章子将五都之兵，因北地之众以伐燕。
现代文：此时，齐王命章子为大将，率领国都周围五城的军队及北方的部队征伐燕国。
English: At this time, King Qi appointed Zhang Zi as the general and led the armies of the five cities around the capital and the northern troops to conquer Yan.

古文：燕士卒不战，城门不闭。
现代文：燕国士兵毫无战意，城门大开不守。
English: The soldiers of Yan had no intention of fighting and left the city gates wide open.

古文：齐人取子之，醢之，遂杀燕王哙。
现代文：齐国便捕获了子之，把他剁成肉酱。燕王姬哙也同时被杀。
English: The State of Qi then captured Zi Zi and made mincemeat of him. Yan Wang Hime was also killed at the same time.

古文：齐王问孟子曰： 或谓寡人勿取燕，或谓寡人取之。
现代文：齐王向孟子询问说： 有的人劝我不要占领燕国，有的人劝我兼并燕国。
English: King Qi asked Mencius: Some people advised me not to occupy Yan Province, and some people advised me to annex Yan Province.

古文：以万乘之国伐万乘之国，五旬而举之，人力不至于此；不取，必有天殃。
现代文：以拥有万辆战车的国家，进攻另一个同样拥有万辆战车的大国，五十天就攻克了，单单凭借人力是做不到的；不兼并燕国，一定会遭到天谴。
English: If a country with ten thousand chariots attacks another big country that also has ten thousand chariots, it will be conquered in fifty days. It cannot be done by manpower alone; if it does not annex Yan Province, it will certainly be punished by heaven.

古文：取之何如？ 
现代文：把燕国兼并了如何？ 
English: How to take the treatment of acupoints?

古文：孟子对曰： 取之而燕民悦由取之，古之人有行之者，武王是也；取之而燕民不悦则勿取，古之人有行之者，文王是也。
现代文：孟子回答说： 兼并燕国而燕国百姓感到高兴，就可以兼并，古时候就有这样做的人，周武王就是这样；兼并燕国而燕国人民不高兴就不要兼并了，古时候也有这样做的人，周文王就是这样。
English: Mencius replied: If you annex Yan Province and the people of Yan Province are happy, you can annex it. In ancient times, there were people who did this, such as King Zhouwu. If you annex Yan Province and the people of Yan Province are not happy, you should not annex it. In ancient times, there were people who did this, such as King Zhouwen.

古文：以万乘之国伐万乘之国，箪食壶浆以迎王师，岂有他哉？
现代文：齐国作为一个有万辆战车的大国攻打另一个有万辆战车的国家，百姓都端着食物、提着饮水来迎齐王的军队，难道有其他的原因？
English: As a big country with tens of thousands of chariots, Qi attacked another country with tens of thousands of chariots. The people brought food and drinking water to meet the king's army. Is there any other reason?

古文：避水火也。
现代文：只是为了躲避如水似火的暴政。
English: It's just that I don't want to go through those dark days again.

古文：如水益深，如火益热，亦运而已矣！ 
现代文：假如新的统治者更加残暴，比之前的还要厉害，人民肯定又要转而投奔其他国家了！ 
English: If the new rulers turn out to be even more brutal, even worse than the previous ones, the people will surely turn to other countries!

古文：诸侯将谋救燕。
现代文：各诸侯国想要救助燕国。
English: Other vassal states are plotting to come to Yan's rescue.

古文：齐王谓孟子曰： 诸侯多谋伐寡人者，何以待之？ 
现代文：齐王向孟子征求意见，说： 诸侯各国大都打算讨伐我国，该怎么应付呢？ 
English: King Qi asked Mencius for advice, saying: Most of the princes of various countries are planning to attack our country, how should we deal with it?

古文：对曰： 臣闻七十里为政于天下者，汤是也。未闻以千里畏人者也。
现代文：孟子回答道： 我曾听说过凭借七十里的土地而获取天下的，说的就是商汤；没有听过拥有数千里的广阔国土反而畏惧他人的。
English: Mencius replied, "I have heard of a man who obtained the whole world by virtue of seventy miles of land, that is, Shang Tang; but I have never heard of a man who possessed a vast land of thousands of miles and feared others.

古文：《书》曰： 徯我后，后来其苏。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 等候我的君主，君主来了就可以把我们拯救出来了。 
English: "Wait for my sovereign," he said in the Shangshu. "When the sovereign comes, he can save us."

古文：今燕虐其民，王往而征之，民以为将拯己于水火之中也，箪食壶浆以迎王师。
现代文：如今燕王对待百姓十分暴虐，大王去讨伐他，百姓都以为您要把自己从水火之中拯救出来，都准备好粮食和饮用的水迎接大王的军队。
English: Now Yan Wang treats the people very brutally, the great king goes to fight him, the people all think that you want to save yourself from the water and fire, and are ready to prepare food and drinking water to meet the great king's army.

古文：若杀其父兄，系累其子弟，毁其宗庙，迁其重器，如之何其可也！
现代文：如果杀害他们的父兄，逮捕他们的子弟，破坏他们的宗庙，抢夺他们的国宝，这样做怎么行呢？
English: If we kill their parents and brothers, arrest their children, destroy their ancestral temples, and rob their national treasures, how can this be done?

古文：天下固畏齐之强也，今又倍地而不行仁政，是动天下之兵也。
现代文：天下人向来就畏惧齐国的强势，现在疆域又扩张了一倍，却不实行仁政，这样必定会招来天下各国的讨伐。
English: The people of the world have always feared the strength of Qi. Now that its territory has doubled, but it does not practice benevolent politics, this will inevitably lead to a crusade by all countries in the world.

古文：王速出令，反其旄倪，止其重器，谋于燕众，置君而后去之，则犹可及止也。 
现代文：希望你赶紧下令，释放燕国的老弱百姓，妥善安置燕国的国宝，与燕国人民商议，推选出新的国君之后退出燕国，这样还可以及时防止诸侯的讨伐！ 
English: Great King, you should quickly issue an order to release the old and young captives of Yan, stop transporting the treasures of Yan, and then consult with the people of all walks of life in Yan to elect a sovereign for them, and then withdraw the army. Then it will be time to stop the rise of the armies of all countries.

古文：齐王不听。
现代文：齐王没有听从。
English: King Qi did not listen.

古文：已而燕人叛。
现代文：没过多久，燕国人民果然反叛齐国。
English: Before long, the people of Yan rebelled against Qi.

古文：齐王曰： 吾甚惭于孟子。 
现代文：齐王说： 我实在是愧对孟子。 
English: King Qi said, "I am truly ashamed of Mencius."

古文：陈贾曰： 王无患焉。 
现代文：陈贾说： 大王不要担忧。 
English: Chen Jia said, "Don't worry, Your Majesty.

古文：乃见孟子，问曰： 周公何人也？ 
现代文：于是去见孟子，说： 周公是怎么样的人？ 
English: So he went to see Mencius and said, "What kind of person is Zhou Gong?

古文：曰： 古圣人也。 
现代文：孟子说： 是古代的圣人。 
English: Mencius said, "He is an ancient sage."

古文：陈贾曰： 周公使管叔监商，管叔以商畔也。周公知其将畔而使之与？ 
现代文：陈贾说： 周公派管叔监管殷商故地，管叔却依恃殷商的遗民反叛，周公是不是早就知道他会反叛才让他去的呢？ 
English: Chen Jia said: Zhou Gong sent Guan Uncle to supervise the hometown of Yin Shang. Guan Uncle, however, leaned on the remnants of Yin Shang to rebel. Did Zhou Gong know that he would rebel before he let him go?

古文：曰： 不知也。 
现代文：孟子说： 周公不知道。 
English: Qi Wang said: I don't know.

古文：陈贾曰： 然则圣人亦有过与？ 
现代文：陈贾说： 那么圣人也有错误了？ 
English: Chen Jia said: So did the sage also make a mistake?

古文：曰： 周公，弟也；管叔，兄也，周公之过不亦宜乎！
现代文：孟子说： 周公是弟弟，管叔是兄长，周公犯错不也是正常的吗？
English: Mencius said: Zhou Gong is a younger brother, Guan Xiu is an older brother. Isn't it normal for Zhou Gong to make mistakes?

古文：且古之君子，过则改之；今之君子，过则顺之。
现代文：况且古代的君子，有过错能够及时改正；现在所谓的君子，犯了错误则继续错下去。
English: Moreover, in ancient times, a gentleman would correct his mistakes; today's gentleman, knowing that he was wrong, would continue to be wrong.

古文：古之君子，其过也如日月之食，民皆见之。及其更也，民皆仰之。今之君子，岂徒顺之，又从为之辞！ 
现代文：古代的君子，他的过失好像日食、月食，百姓都能看见，等他改正了，百姓都会敬仰他；现在所谓的君子，不但将错就错，还为自己的过错编造借口！ 
English: The ancient gentleman, his fault is like a solar eclipse, a lunar eclipse, the people can see it, and when he corrects it, the people will admire him; nowadays, the so-called gentleman not only makes mistakes, but also makes up excuses for his mistakes!

古文：是岁，齐宣王薨，子湣王地立。赧王二年
现代文：这一年，齐国齐宣王去世，其子田地即位为齐王。二年
English: In the same year, King Qi Xuan of Qi died, and his son Tianchi ascended to the throne as King Qi.

古文：秦右更疾伐赵。
现代文：秦国派名叫疾的右更官员，率军讨伐赵国。
English: Qin sent an official named Jing, who led an army to invade Zhao.

古文：拔蔺，虏其将庄豹。
现代文：攻占蔺地，俘虏赵将庄豹。
English: The capture of Shantian and the capture of Zhao Zhaozhuangpao.

古文：秦王欲伐齐，患齐、楚之从亲，乃使张仪至楚，说楚王曰： 大王诚能听臣，闭关绝约于齐，臣请献商於之地六百里，使秦女得为大王箕帚之妾，秦、楚娶妇嫁女，长为兄弟之国。 
现代文：秦王想举兵攻打齐国，又害怕齐、楚两国之间合纵的约定，就派张仪为使者到楚国游说楚王，说： 大王假如真的能听从我的建议，断绝和齐国之间的邦交，毁弃盟约，我愿把商於地区六百里的土地献给楚国，并把秦国的女子送给大王做洒扫侍妾，秦、楚两国互相通婚，永远结为兄弟之邦。 
English: King Qin wanted to raise an army to attack Qi, but he was afraid of the alliance between Qi and Chu, so he sent Zhang Yi as an emissary to Chu to lobby King Chu, saying: "If the Great King can really listen to my advice, break off diplomatic relations with Qi, and abandon the treaty, I would like to dedicate the land of the merchants in the region of six hundred miles to Chu, and send the women of Qin to the Great King to be concubines. Qin and Chu intermarried and became a brotherly nation forever.

古文：楚王说而许之。
现代文：楚王很高兴，答应了张仪。
English: King Chu was very pleased and agreed to Zhang Yi's request.

古文：君臣皆贺，陈轸独吊。
现代文：群臣纷纷为楚王庆贺，唯独陈轸一个人闷闷不乐。
English: The courtiers celebrated for King Chu one after another, except for Chen Xi, who was sullen and unhappy.

古文：王怒曰： 寡人不兴师而得六百里地，何吊也？ 对曰： 不然。
现代文：楚王十分恼怒地说： 我没有动用一兵一卒就得到六百里的国土，有什么不高兴的？ 
English: King Chu was very angry and said, "I got six hundred miles of land without using a single soldier. What is there to be unhappy about?"

古文：以臣观之，商於之地不可得而齐、秦合。齐、秦合则患必至矣！ 
现代文：陈轸道： 不见得是这样，在我看来，商於之地不仅得不到，还会致使齐、秦两国联合，齐、秦两国联合肯定就有外患到来。 
English: Chen Xuandao: This is not necessarily the case. In my opinion, not only will there be no local merchants, but it will also lead to the unification of Qi and Qin, and the unification of Qi and Qin will definitely bring foreign diseases.

古文：王曰： 有说乎？ 
现代文：楚王说： 有什么说法吗？ 
English: Chu Wang said: Is there any explanation?

古文：对曰： 夫秦之所以重楚者，以其有齐也。
现代文：陈轸回答说： 秦国不敢轻视楚国的原因，是楚国有齐国作为同盟。
English: Chen Yu replied: The reason why Qin did not dare to despise Chu was that Chu had Qi as an ally.

古文：今闭关绝约于齐，则楚孤，秦奚贪夫孤国，而与之商於之地六百里？
现代文：现在假如和齐国断绝邦交，毁弃盟约，楚国就要陷入孤立的境地，秦国怎么会对一个孤立的国家友善并且送给它六百里的商於之地呢？
English: Now, if we break off diplomatic relations with Qi and abandon the treaty, Chu will fall into an isolated situation. How can Qin be friendly to an isolated country and give it 600 miles of trade?

古文：张仪至秦，必负王。
现代文：张仪回到秦国，肯定会背弃与您的约定。
English: If Zhang Yi returns to Qin, she will definitely renege on her agreement with you.

古文：是王北绝齐交，西生患于秦也。两国之兵必俱至。
现代文：这样楚国北面与齐国断绝邦交，西面又新产生秦国作为外患，两国的军队肯定纷纷前来进攻楚国。
English: Thus, in the north, the State of Chu broke off diplomatic relations with the State of Qi, and in the west, the State of Qin was newly created as an external threat. The armies of both countries must have come to attack the State of Chu.

古文：为王计者，不若阴合而阳绝于齐，使人随张仪。苟与吾地，绝齐未晚也。 
现代文：我为大王考虑，不如只是表面上与齐国断交，暗中依旧合作，派人和张仪一起回去，假如真的把土地割让给楚国，再与齐国断交也为时未晚！ 
English: I think for the great king, it is better to just break off diplomatic relations with Qi on the surface, secretly still cooperate, send people back together with Zhang Yi. If you really cede land to Chu, it is not too late to break off diplomatic relations with Qi!

古文：王曰 愿陈子闭口，毋复言，以待寡人得地！ 
现代文：楚王说： 还是请陈先生闭上尊口，别再啰唆，等着看我怎么得到土地吧！ 
English: King Chu said: I still ask Mr. Chen to shut his mouth, stop instigating, and wait to see how I get the land!

古文：乃以相印授张仪，厚赐之。
现代文：于是授给张仪楚国宰相的大印，并赏赐他丰厚的财物。
English: Therefore, the Great Seal of the Prime Minister of Chu State was bestowed on Zhang Yi, and he was rewarded with rich wealth.

古文：遂闭关绝约于齐，使一将军随张仪至秦。
现代文：随之关闭关口，与齐国断绝邦交关系，毁弃盟约，派遣一名将军和张仪一起回到秦国。
English: He then closed the pass, broke off diplomatic relations with Qi, renounced the treaty, and sent a general to return to Qin together with Zhang Yi.

古文：张仪佯堕车，不朝三月。
现代文：张仪佯装从车上跌落，三个月都没有上朝。
English: Zhang Yigang fell from the car and did not get up for three months.

古文：楚王闻之，曰： 仪以寡人绝齐未甚邪？ 
现代文：楚王听说了这件事，说： 难道张仪认为我与齐国断交不够彻底？ 
English: When King Chu heard about this, he said, "Does Zhang Yi think that my severance of diplomatic relations with the State of Qi is not thorough enough?

古文：乃使勇士宋遗借宋之符，北骂齐王。
现代文：于是让武士宋遗借用宋国的兵符，到北边边境上对齐王大骂。
English: So he asked the samurai Song Zi to borrow the military insignia of Song and go to the northern border to confront the king and scold him.

古文：齐王大怒，折节而事秦，齐、秦之交合。
现代文：齐王非常恼怒，不惜降低自己的身份讨好秦国，齐、秦两国之间的关系变得友好。
English: King Qi was very angry and lowered his status to ingratiate himself with Qin. The relationship between Qi and Qin became friendly.

古文：张仪乃朝，见楚使者曰： 子何不受地？
现代文：这个时候张仪才去上朝，见到楚国的使者问道： 你怎么不去接手土地？
English: It was at this time that Zhang Yi went to Shang Dynasty, and when he saw the envoy from the State of Chu, he asked: Why don't you take over the land?

古文：从某至某，广袤六里。 
现代文：从某地到某地，有六里之广。 
English: It's six miles from somewhere to somewhere.

古文：使者怒，还报楚王。
现代文：楚国使者大怒，回来向楚王报告。
English: The envoy of Chu was furious and returned to report to the King of Chu.

古文：楚王大怒，欲发兵而攻秦。
现代文：楚王勃然大怒，想要起兵进攻秦国。
English: King Chu flew into a rage and wanted to raise an army to attack Qin.

古文：陈轸曰： 轸可发口言乎？
现代文：陈轸说： 我现在可以开口说话吗？
English: Chen Yao said, "Can I open my mouth to speak?"

古文：攻之不如因赂以一名都，与之并兵而攻齐，是我亡地于秦，取偿于齐也。
现代文：攻打秦国还不如给他一座大的城池，与秦国联合去进攻齐国，这样我们在秦国损失的土地，在齐国手中可以得到偿还。
English: It would be better to give him a large castle to attack Qin, and to attack Qi jointly with Qin. In this way, the land we lost in Qin can be repaid in the hands of Qi.

古文：今王已绝于齐而责欺于秦，是吾合秦、齐之交而来天下之兵也，国必大伤矣！ 
现代文：现在您和齐国已经断绝邦交关系，再去责问秦国为什么欺骗楚国，这样会使齐、秦两国联和，而招致天下的进攻，国家必然会受到重创。 
English: Now that you and the State of Qi have broken off diplomatic relations, if you ask the State of Qin why it deceived the State of Chu, this will bring about the unification of the State of Qi and the State of Qin, which will invite attacks from all over the world, and the country will inevitably suffer heavy losses.

古文：楚王不听，使屈匄帅师伐秦。
现代文：楚王不肯听从，派屈匄统率军队进攻秦国。
English: King Chu refused to obey, and sent Qu Rong to lead the army to attack Qin.

古文：秦亦发兵使庶长章击之。
现代文：秦国也派出魏章任庶长，起兵迎战楚军。
English: Qin also sent Wei Zhang as deputy commander to lead the troops against the Chu army.

古文：赧王三年
现代文：三年
English: Three years

古文：春，秦师及楚战于丹杨，楚师大败，斩甲士八万，虏屈匄及列侯、执珪七十馀人，遂取汉中郡。
现代文：春天，秦国和楚国军队在丹阳作战，楚国大败；八万多楚国甲兵被杀，俘虏屈匄、列侯以及朝官共七十多人，又占领了汉中郡。
English: In the spring, the armies of Qin and Chu fought in Danyang, resulting in a crushing defeat for Chu. More than 80,000 Chu soldiers were killed, and more than 70 people, including princes and court officials, were taken prisoner. They also occupied Hanzhong County.

古文：楚王悉发国内兵以复袭秦，战于蓝田，楚师大败。
现代文：楚王发动全国兵力再次攻打秦国，在蓝田展开激战，楚军再次溃败。
English: King Chu launched the national army to attack Qin again, launching a fierce battle in Lantian. The Chu army was once again defeated.

古文：韩、魏闻楚之困，南袭楚，至邓。
现代文：韩、魏两国听闻楚国局势危急，也向南侵袭楚国，一直打到邓地。
English: Hearing that the situation in Ch'u was critical, the two countries of Han and Wei also invaded Ch'u to the south and fought all the way to Dengdi.

古文：楚人闻之，乃引兵归，割两城以请平于秦。
现代文：楚国接到这个消息，于是率兵返回国内，割让给秦国两座城池来求和。
English: Upon receiving this news, the State of Chu led its soldiers back to China and ceded two cities to the State of Qin to sue for peace.

古文：燕人共立太子平，是为昭王，昭王于破燕之后即位，吊死问孤，与百姓同甘苦，卑身厚币以招贤者。
现代文：燕国族人共同把太子姬平拥立为燕昭王。昭王即位是在燕国被攻破之后。他亲自哀悼死去的人，慰问孤身的百姓，和百姓同甘共苦，降低自己的身份，以厚禄寻求贤能的人才。
English: The Yan nationality people jointly set up the prince Khiping as the Yan Zhaowang. The Zhaowang ascended to the throne after the Yan country was defeated. He personally mourned the dead, comforted the lonely people, shared the joys and sorrows with the people, lowered his status, and sought talented people with a generous salary.

古文：谓郭隗曰： 齐因孤之国乱而袭破燕，孤极知燕小力少，不足以报。然诚得贤士与共国，以雪先王之耻，孤之愿也。
现代文：对郭隗说： 齐国趁我国内乱而攻破燕国。我深知燕国国土狭小、国力贫弱，没有报仇的能力；然而如果真的能求得贤士一起治理政事，一雪先王的屈辱，这是我的心愿。
English: He said to Guo Zhe: "Qi Guo took advantage of our domestic turmoil to break through Yan Guo. I am well aware that Yan Guo's land is small, its national strength is weak, and it does not have the ability to take revenge; however, if I can really get sages to govern together, it will be the humiliation of the Snow King. This is my heart's desire.

古文：先生视可者，得身事之！ 
现代文：先生如果遇到合适的人，我一定要亲自侍奉他。 
English: Sir, if I meet the right person, I will definitely serve him myself.

古文：郭隗曰： 古之人君有以千金使涓人求千里马者，马已死，买其首五百金而返。
现代文：郭隗说： 古时候有一位君王派涓人带着千斤黄金求购千里马，找到一匹千里马却已经死了，就花了五百斤黄金把马头买回去。
English: Guo Wei said: In ancient times, there was a king who sent a man with a thousand pounds of gold to buy a thousand horses. When he found a thousand horse but it was already dead, he spent five hundred pounds of gold to buy the horse's head back.

古文：君大怒，涓人曰： 死马且买之，况生者乎？
现代文：国君非常愤怒，涓人说： 连死的千里马都买，更别说是活马了！
English: The sovereign was very angry, and the eunuch said, "I would even buy a dead horse, let alone a live one!"

古文：马今至矣。 
现代文：千里马很快就会得到了。 
English: You'll get your pony soon enough.

古文：不期年，千里之马至者三。
现代文：不到一年的时间里，就得到了三匹千里马。
English: In less than a year's time, I got three thoroughbreds.

古文：今王必欲致士，先从隗始。况贤于隗者，岂远千里哉？ 
现代文：如今大王你要招揽贤士，应该先从厚待我开始，那些比我贤良的人，难道会因路途遥远就不来吗！ 
English: Now, great king, if you want to recruit sages, you should first treat me with kindness. Will those who are more virtuous than me not come because they are too far away?

古文：于是昭王为隗改筑宫而师事之。
现代文：于是燕昭王给郭隗重修宫室，以尊奉老师的礼节对他。
English: As a result, King Zhao rebuilt a gorgeous house for Guo Jun, and served him with the highest level of courtesy as if he were a teacher.

古文：于是士争趣燕。乐毅自魏往，剧辛自赵往。
现代文：从这以后，贤德之士都争先到燕国：乐毅由魏国而来，剧辛自赵国而来。
English: From then on, all the virtuous people rushed to Yan's country: Le Yi came from Wei, and He Xin came from Zhao.

古文：昭王以乐毅为亚卿，任以国政。
现代文：燕昭王任命乐毅为亚卿，把国家大权委托给他。
English: King Yan Zhao appointed Le Yi as Yajing and entrusted him with the power of the state.

古文：韩宣惠王薨，子襄王仓立。赧王四年
现代文：韩宣惠王逝世，他的儿子韩仓即位，即韩襄王。四年
English: Han Xuan Hui Wang died, and his son Han Cang ascended the throne, that is, Han Xiang Wang. Four years

古文：蜀相杀蜀侯。
现代文：蜀国国相杀死封侯的国君。
English: The minister of state of Shu killed the lord of the fief.

古文：秦惠王使人告楚怀王，请以武关之外易黔中地。
现代文：秦惠王派人对楚怀王说，请求用武关之外的土地来交换黔中。
English: King Qin Hui sent a messenger to King Chu Hui, requesting that land outside of Wuguan be exchanged for Jiu Zhong.

古文：楚王曰： 不愿易地，愿得张仪而献黔中地。 
现代文：楚王说： 我不愿意拿土地交换，只要能得到张仪就愿意献出黔中之地。 
English: King Chu said, "I am not willing to exchange land. As long as I can get Zhang Yi, I am willing to give up the land in Yunnan."

古文：张仪闻之，请行。
现代文：张仪听到这件事，请求派他前去。
English: When Zhang Yi heard about this, she asked to be sent to him.

古文：王曰： 楚将甘心于子，奈何行？ 
现代文：秦惠王说： 楚国只有杀了你才能甘心，怎么还要去呢？ 
English: Qin Hui Wang said, "Chu can only be satisfied with killing you. How can I still go there?"

古文：张仪曰： 秦强楚弱，大王在，楚不宜敢取臣。且臣善其嬖臣靳尚，靳尚得事幸姬郑袖，袖之言，王无不听者。 
现代文：张仪说： 秦国强盛而楚国弱小，大王您在位一天，楚国是不敢把我杀了的，况且我和楚王的宠臣靳尚关系友好，靳尚平时伺侯楚王的爱妾郑袖，郑袖说的话楚王没有不听从的。 
English: Zhang Yi said, "Qin is strong, but Chu is weak. If you were to reign for one day, Chu would not dare to kill me. Moreover, I have a friendly relationship with King Chu's favorite retainer, Gong Shang. Gong Shang usually served King Chu's beloved concubine, Zheng So, and King Chu did not disobey what Zheng So said.

古文：遂往。
现代文：于是就前往楚国。
English: So they went and saw King XVIII.

古文：楚王囚，将杀之。
现代文：楚王把张仪囚禁起来，要杀了他。
English: King Chu imprisoned Zhang Yi and wanted to kill him.

古文：靳尚谓郑袖曰： 秦王甚爱张仪，将以上庸六县及美女赎之。
现代文：靳尚对郑袖说： 秦王特别宠爱张仪，要用上庸六县和美女把他赎回。
English: Gao Shang said to Zheng So: The King of Qin especially loved Zhang Yi, and wanted to use Shangyong's six counties and beautiful women to redeem him.

古文：王重地尊秦，秦女必贵而夫人斥矣。 
现代文：大王看重土地又对秦国十分尊重，肯定会宠幸秦国的美女而冷落夫人。 
English: The great king valued land and had great respect for Qin. He would certainly favor the beautiful women of Qin and snub his wife.

古文：于是郑袖日夜泣于楚王曰： 臣各为其主耳。
现代文：于是郑袖日夜在楚王面前哭诉： 凡是臣子都要为各自的君王考虑。
English: Therefore, Zheng Sood cried day and night in front of King Chu: All courtiers should think about their respective kings.

古文：今杀张仪，秦必大怒。
现代文：如果现在杀了张仪，秦国肯定大怒。
English: If he killed Zhang Yi now, Qin would be furious.

古文：妾请子母俱迁江南，毋为秦所鱼肉也！ 
现代文：臣妾请求大王把我母子送往江南，免得受秦国宰割！ 
English: My vassal and concubine asked the Great King to send my mother and son to the south of the Yangtze River, so that they would not be slaughtered by the Qin State!

古文：王乃赦张仪而厚礼之。
现代文：于是楚王就赦免了张仪，而以丰厚的礼遇对待他。
English: As a result, King Chu pardoned Zhang Yi and treated him with abundant courtesy.

古文：张仪因说楚王曰： 夫为从者无以异于驱群羊而攻猛虎，不格明矣。
现代文：张仪劝楚王说： 让各国合纵对抗秦国，无异于驱赶羊群去攻击猛虎，很明显是打不过的。
English: Zhang Yi advised the King of Chu, "Allowing all countries to unite against the Qin State is tantamount to driving the sheep to attack the fierce tiger. It is obviously impossible to fight.

古文：今王不事秦，秦劫韩驱梁而攻楚，则楚危矣。
现代文：如今大王您不肯向秦国臣服，秦国迫使韩国、驱使魏国联合攻打楚国，楚国就危险了。
English: Now that you, the great king, refuse to submit to Qin, Qin forces Korea and Wei to jointly attack Chu, and Chu is in danger.

古文：秦西有巴、蜀，治船积粟，浮岷江而下，一日行五百馀里，不至十日而拒扞关，扞关惊则从境以东尽城守矣，黔中、巫郡非王之有。
现代文：秦国西边有巴、蜀两国，修造船只囤积粮食，顺岷江而下，一天之内可行五百多里，用不了十天就可抵达扞关，扞关受到惊扰后从这里以东都要进入戒备状态，最后连黔中、巫郡都不再为大王所有了。
English: On the west side of Qin, there were Ba and Shu states. They built ships to hoard grain and sailed down the Li River. They could travel more than five hundred miles in one day, and it took less than ten days to reach Shaoguan. After Shaoguan was disturbed, they had to enter a state of alert to the east of here. In the end, even Luzhong and Wushun were no longer owned by the great king.

古文：秦举甲出武关，则北地绝。
现代文：如果秦国再发兵由武关出击，楚国北境之地就要全部失守。
English: If Qin sent troops to attack from Wuguan again, the northern border of Chu would be completely lost.

古文：秦兵之攻楚也，危难在三月之内，而楚待诸侯之救在半岁之外。
现代文：秦国再进攻楚国，三个月之内楚国便会灭亡，楚国等待其他诸侯国的援助又要半年之久。
English: If Qin attacked Chu again, Chu would be destroyed within three months, and Chu would have to wait another six months for help from other provinces.

古文：夫待弱国之救，忘强秦之祸，此臣所为大王患也。
现代文：等待弱国的援兵，却忘记强秦的威胁，这才是我替大王忧虑的事。
English: Waiting for reinforcements from a weak country, but forgetting the threat of a strong Qin, that's what worries me about the Great King.

古文：大王诚能听臣，请令秦、楚长为兄弟之国，无相攻伐。 
现代文：如果大王真心肯听从我的建议，我可以使秦、楚二国结为兄弟之邦，彼此不再互相攻伐。 
English: If the great king is truly willing to listen to my suggestion, I can make the two countries of Qin and Chu into a brotherly country, and they will no longer fight each other.

古文：楚王已得张仪而重出黔中地，乃许之。
现代文：楚王尽管已经得到了张仪，但不舍得割让黔中之地，就答应了张仪。
English: Although King Chu had already obtained Zhang Yi, he was not willing to cede the land in Yunnan, so he agreed to Zhang Yi.

古文：张仪遂之韩，说韩王曰： 韩地险恶山居，五谷所生，非菽而麦，国无二岁之食，见卒不过二十万。
现代文：于是张仪又前去韩国，劝说韩王： 韩国地势险峻，百姓大多依山居住，生产的粮食，不是大豆就是麦子，国家的存粮不够两年食用，现有的兵卒不超过二十万人。
English: So Zhang Yi went to Korea again to persuade King Han: Korea's terrain is precipitous, most of the people live in the mountains, the grain produced is either soybeans or wheat, the country's grain reserves are not enough to eat for two years, and there are no more than 200,000 soldiers.

古文：秦被甲百馀万。
现代文：秦国身穿铠甲的军队超过百万。
English: Qin's armoured army numbered more than a million.

古文：山东之士被甲蒙胄而会战，秦人捐甲徒裼以趋敌，左挈人头，右挟生虏。
现代文：崤山以东的军队要身披铠甲才肯作战，而秦国军队则脱下铠甲赤臂就可驱敌，左手提着人头，右臂挟着战俘。
English: The armies east of Mount Lushan had to wear armor before they were willing to fight, while the Qin army could drive away the enemy by taking off the armor and red arm, holding a human head in their left hand and a prisoner of war in their right arm.

古文：夫战孟贲、乌获之士以攻不服之弱国，无异垂千钧之重于鸟卵之上，必无幸矣。
现代文：用孟贲、乌获一样的勇士来进攻不肯臣服的弱小国家，无异于把千钧的重量压在鸟蛋上，必定没有侥幸保全的可能。
English: To attack a weak country that refuses to submit with warriors like Meng Xuan and Wu Guo is tantamount to putting the weight of thousands of oars on a bird's egg. There must be no chance of saving it.

古文：大王不事秦，秦下甲据宜阳，塞成皋，则王之国分矣。
现代文：大王不愿向秦国臣服，秦国假如发兵占据宜阳，堵住成皋的道路，那么大王的国家就会一分为二。
English: The great king did not want to submit to Qin. If Qin sent troops to occupy Yiyang and block the road to Chengdu, the great king's country would be split in two.

古文：鸿台之宫，桑林之宛，非王之有也。
现代文：鸿台的宫室、桑林的园林，将不再属于大王所有。
English: The palace of Hongtai and the gardens of the mulberry forest will no longer belong to the great king.

古文：为大王计，莫如事秦而攻楚，以转祸而悦秦。
现代文：我为大王考虑，不如向秦国称臣而攻打楚国，转移灾祸来取悦秦国，没有比这更完美的办法了。 
English: For the sake of the great king, I thought it would be better to attack Chu as a vassal of Qin and divert the disaster to please Qin. There is no more perfect way than this.

古文：计无便于此者。 
现代文：韩王答应了张仪。
English: Han Wang agreed to Zhang Yi's request.

古文：韩王许之。张仪归报，秦王封以六邑，号武信君。
现代文：张仪回到秦国向秦王汇报，秦王把六座城池封赏给他，赐武信君的称号。
English: Zhang Yi returned to Qin to report to the Qin king, who awarded him the fief of six cities and gave him the title of Wu Xinjun.

古文：复使东说齐王曰： 从人说大王者必曰： 齐蔽于三晋，地广民众，兵强士勇，虽有百秦，将无奈齐何。 
现代文：又派他去东方游说齐王，说： 那些主张合纵的谋士，必定对您说： 齐国西边有三晋之地作为掩护，国土广阔，人口繁盛，士兵精猛勇敢，即便有一百个秦国也奈何不了齐国。 
English: He also sent him to the East to lobby the king of Qi, saying, "Those strategists who advocate the merger of Qin and Qin will surely say to you: There are three Jin lands on the west side of Qin as a cover, the land is vast, the population is prosperous, the soldiers are fierce and brave, even if there are a hundred Qin states, there is nothing but Qin.

古文：大王贤其说而不计其实。
现代文：大王以为他说得很对却不曾考虑到现实的情形。
English: The king thought their argument was very clever, but failed to take into account the actual situation.

古文：今秦、楚嫁女娶妇，为昆弟之国；韩献宜阳；梁效河外；赵王入朝，割河间以事秦。
现代文：如今秦、楚两国互相通婚，成为兄弟之国；韩国把宜阳献给秦国；魏国将河外送给秦国；赵国也向秦国朝见，把河间割让给秦国以表示臣服。
English: Nowadays, Qin and Chu countries have intermarried and become brotherly countries; South Korea dedicated Yiyang to Qin; Wei gave Hebei to Qin; Zhao also met with the Qin court and ceded Hebei to Qin to show submission.

古文：大王不事秦，秦驱韩、梁攻齐之南地，悉赵兵，渡清河，指博关，临菑、即墨非王之有也！
现代文：如果大王不向秦国臣服，秦国将驱使韩、魏两国军队进攻齐国南部地区，发动赵国全国之兵，横渡清河，大军直指博关，到时候临淄、即墨等地就不再是大王的属地了！
English: If the great king does not submit to Qin, Qin will drive the armies of Han and Wei to attack the southern region of Qi, launch the soldiers of Zhao, cross the Qing River, and direct the army to Boguan. At that time, Linyi, that is, Mo and other places will no longer belong to the great king!

古文：国一日见攻，虽欲事秦，不可得也！ 
现代文：齐国被攻击的那天，就算再想向秦国臣服，也不太可能了！ 
English: On the day that Qi was attacked, even if you wanted to submit to Qin, it would be impossible!

古文：齐王许张仪。
现代文：齐王采纳了张仪的意见。
English: King Qi accepted Zhang Yi's suggestion.

古文：张仪去，西说赵王曰： 大王收率天下以摈秦，秦兵不敢出函谷关十五年。
现代文：张仪从齐国离开，向西游说赵王： 大王率领天下诸侯对抗秦国，迫使秦军十五年不敢出兵函谷关。
English: Zhang Yi left Qi and lobbied King Zhao to the west: The great king led the princes of the world against Qin, forcing the Qin army not to dare to send troops to Hantouguan for fifteen years.

古文：大王之威行于山东，敝邑恐惧，缮甲厉兵，力田积粟，愁居慑处，不敢动摇，唯大王有意督过之也。
现代文：大王您的威名响彻崤山以东，秦国特别恐惧，整修铠甲训练兵卒，努力耕种囤积粮草，平日里也是非常忧虑不敢有一丝懈怠，唯恐大王您有意督责秦国过失。
English: Great King, your reputation is well-known to the east of Lushan Mountain. Qin State is particularly afraid of you. You are repairing armor and training soldiers, working hard to cultivate and hoard grain and grass. On weekdays, you are also very worried and dare not have a trace of slackness, lest you intentionally blame Qin State for mistakes.

古文：今以大王之力，举巴、蜀，并汉中，包两周，守白马之津。
现代文：如今秦国依托大王的力量，攻下巴、蜀，兼并汉中，围困二周，驻守白马渡。
English: Nowadays, the Qin State, relying on the strength of the great king, has attacked Jianba and Shu, annexed Hanzhong, besieged two enclaves, and garrisoned Baimadu.

古文：秦虽僻远，然而心忿含怒之日久矣。
现代文：秦国虽然地理位置偏远，然而内心愤怒又不敢表现出来已经太久了。
English: Although Qin is a remote and faraway place, the days of suppressing anger in the heart are too long.

古文：今秦有敝甲凋兵军于渑池，愿渡河，逾漳，据番吾，会邯郸之下，愿以甲子合战，正殷纣之事。
现代文：现在秦国在渑池驻扎有一批残兵败卒，想要横渡黄河，跨越漳水，据守番吾，到邯郸城下会合，希望在甲子之日与赵国交战，就像武王征讨殷纣一样。
English: Now Qin has a group of remnants of defeated soldiers stationed in Dianchi. They want to cross the Yellow River, cross the Surabaya River, and meet under the fortress of Fanwu. They hope to fight Zhao on the Day of the Goat, just like King Wu's conquest of Yin.

古文：谨使使臣先闻左右。
现代文：特意先让我来告诉您左右的大臣。
English: Let me first tell you about the ministers.

古文：今楚与秦为昆弟之国，而韩、梁称东籓之臣，齐献鱼盐之地，此断赵之右肩也。
现代文：如今楚和秦已结成兄弟之国，而韩、魏两国已向秦国称臣，齐国又将盛产鱼盐之地献给了秦国，这就好比斩断赵国的右臂。
English: Today, Chu and Qin have formed a brotherly country, while Han and Wei have declared their allegiance to Qin, and Qi has dedicated the land rich in fish and salt to Qin, which is like cutting off the right arm of Zhao.

古文：夫断右肩而与人斗，失其党而孤居，求欲毋危，得乎？
现代文：被斩断右臂还与人缠斗，失去党羽而孤立无援，还想要避免危险怎么可能？
English: How is it possible to be chopped off the right arm and still fight with people, to lose the party and be alone without help, and still want to avoid danger?

古文：今秦发三将军，其一军塞午道，告齐使渡清河，军于邯郸之东；一军军成皋，驱韩、梁军于河外；一军军于渑池，约四国为一以攻赵，赵服必四分其地。
现代文：如今秦国发动三军将士，其中一支大军截断午道，告知齐国让他们派军横渡清河，驻军在邯郸东边；另一路军队屯兵成皋，使韩、魏两国的军队进驻河外，再派一路军队驻扎渑池，联合四国合为一支大军来进攻赵国，攻克后必定将赵国土地瓜分为四份。
English: Now Qin launched three armies of soldiers. One of the large armies cut off the noon road and told Qi to let them send troops to cross the Qing River and station troops on the east side of the Yangtze River. The other army stationed troops in the Yangtze River, so that the troops of South Korea and Wei were stationed outside the river, and then sent the troops along the way to be stationed in Dianchi. The four countries united as a large army to attack Zhao. After the conquest, the land of Zhao would be divided into four parts.

古文：臣窃为大王计，莫如与秦王面相约而口相结，常为兄弟之国也。 
现代文：我私下替大王谋划，最好是当面与秦王订立约定，承诺协定，结为长久的兄弟之邦。 赵王也应允了。
English: Privately, I made a plan on behalf of the great king. It would be best to make an agreement with King Qin in person, a commitment agreement, and a long-term brotherly state. King Zhao also agreed.

古文：赵王许之。张仪乃北之燕，说燕王曰： 今赵王已入朝，效河间以事秦。
现代文：张仪又北上到燕国，游说燕王说： 现在赵王已经到秦国朝见秦王，奉上河间之地向秦国称臣。
English: Zhang Yi also went north to Yan Province to lobby Yan Wang and said: Now Zhao Wang has gone to Qin Province to meet with Qin Wang, and has offered the land between the rivers to Qin Province.

古文：大王不事秦，秦下甲云中、九原，驱赵而攻燕，则易水、长城非大王之有也。
现代文：大王不向秦国臣服的话，秦国即会出兵云中、九原，再驱使赵国进攻燕国，那么易水、长城就不再属于大王了！
English: If the great king does not submit to Qin, Qin will send troops to Yunzhong and Jiuyuan, and then drive Zhao to attack Yan, so Yishui and the Great Wall will no longer belong to the great king!

古文：且今时齐、赵之于秦，犹郡县也，不敢妄举师以攻伐。
现代文：况且如今齐、赵两国就好像是秦国的一个郡县，不敢随意出兵进攻别国。
English: Moreover, now the two countries of Qi and Zhao are like a county of Qin, and they dare not attack other countries at will.

古文：今王事秦，长无齐、赵之患矣。 
现代文：如今大王要是能臣事秦国，便长期免除齐、赵两国的威胁了。 
English: Nowadays, if the great king can be a subject of Qin, he will be free from the threat of Qi and Zhao for a long time.

古文：燕王请献常山之尾五城以和。
现代文：燕王就把恒山脚下的五座城池割让给秦国来请和。
English: King Yan ceded the five castles at the foot of Hengshan Mountain to Qin to invite peace.

古文：张仪归报，未至咸阳，秦惠王薨，子武王立。
现代文：张仪回国报告，还没到咸阳，秦惠王就去世了，其子秦武王继位。
English: Zhang Yi reported back home that Qin Hui Wang passed away before he arrived in Xianyang, and his son Qin Wu Wang succeeded to the throne.

古文：武王自为太子时，不说张仪，及即位，群臣多毁短之。
现代文：武王从做太子时就不喜欢张仪，等到他一即王位，郡臣中很多人便前来诽谤数说张仪的短处。
English: King Wu disliked Zhang Yi from the time he was crown prince. As soon as he ascended the throne, many of his courtiers came to slander Zhang Yi's shortcomings.

古文：诸侯闻仪与秦王有隙，皆畔衡，复合从。
现代文：各国听说张仪与秦王间发生矛盾,都放弃了对秦国的许诺，再次联合抗秦。
English: Upon hearing of the conflict between Zhang Yi and the Qin king, all countries renounced their promises to the Qin state and once again united to resist the Qin.

古文：赧王五年
现代文：赧王五年
English: Five Years of the Dragon King

古文：张仪说秦武王曰： 为王计者，东方有变，然后王可以多割得地也。
现代文：张仪向秦武王建议： 为大王您考虑，东方发生事变，大王才能乘机多割得土地。
English: Zhang Yi suggested to King Qin Wu: For the consideration of the great king, if there is an incident in the East, the great king can take advantage of the opportunity to cut more land.

古文：臣闻齐王甚憎臣，臣之所在，齐必伐之。
现代文：我听说齐王十分憎恨我，我居留在哪里，齐国必定要去攻打。
English: I heard that King Qi hated me very much, and wherever I stayed, the State of Qi would certainly attack me.

古文：臣愿乞其不肖之身以之梁，齐必伐梁，齐、梁交兵而不能相去，王以其间伐韩，入三川，挟天子，案图籍，此王业也。 
现代文：我请求让我这个不肖之人到魏国去，齐国必定要讨伐魏国，齐国、魏国正打得难解难分的时候，大王便可以乘机攻打韩国，进军三川，挟持天子，掌握天下的版图，这是帝王大业呀！ 
English: I request that this unsightly man of mine go to Wei. Qi will certainly fight against Wei. When Qi and Wei are fighting hard, the great king can take the opportunity to attack Korea, march into the Three Rivers, seize the heavenly son, and master the territory of the world. This is the emperor's great cause!

古文：王许之。
现代文：秦王允许张仪到魏国去。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：齐王果伐梁，梁王恐。
现代文：齐国果然出兵攻魏，魏王十分惊恐。
English: Qi really sent troops to attack Wei, and the Wei king was very alarmed.

古文：张仪曰： 王勿患也。
现代文：张仪安慰说： 大王不要担心！
English: Zhang Yi consoled: Don't worry, great king!

古文：请令齐罢兵。 
现代文：让我来退掉齐兵。 
English: Let me get rid of the soldiers.

古文：乃使其舍人之楚，借使谓齐王曰： 甚矣，王之托仪于秦也！ 齐王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：于是派他的手下人到楚国，借使臣之口对齐王说： 大王把张仪托付给秦国的办法真厉害呀！ 齐王问： 怎么讲？ 
English: So he sent his subordinates to the State of Chu, and through the mouth of an envoy said to King Qi: "What a great way for the Great King to entrust Zhang Yi to the State of Qin!" King Qi asked: "How can I put it?

古文：楚使者曰： 张仪之去秦也，固与秦王谋矣，欲齐、梁相攻而令秦取三川也。
现代文：楚国使者说： 张仪离开秦国本来就是与秦王定下的计谋，想让齐、魏两国互相攻击而秦国乘机夺取三川地方。
English: The emissary of Chu said: Zhang Yi's departure from Qin was originally a scheme set up with the Qin king to let Qi and Wei attack each other and Qin seize the opportunity to seize the Mikawa region.

古文：而仪、秦、衍最著。《孟子》论之曰：或谓： 张仪、公孙衍，岂不大丈夫哉！
现代文：现在大王您果然攻打魏国，正是对内劳民伤财，对外结仇邻国，而使张仪重新获得秦王的信任。 齐王听罢，下令退兵回国。张仪在魏国做了一年的国相，便去世了。孟轲论之曰：有人说： 公孙衍、张仪难道不是大丈夫吗？
English: Now that you, the great king, have attacked Wei, it is precisely because you have damaged the wealth of the domestic laborers and the people, and made enemies of the neighboring countries, that Zhang Yi regained the trust of the Qin king. King Qi listened and ordered the troops to return home. Zhang Yi served as the minister of state in Wei for one year, and then died. Meng Yao said: Some people say: Isn't Gongsunyan and Zhang Yi all right?

古文：一怒而诸侯惧，安居而天下熄。 
现代文：他一怒而使各国恐惧，安居时又能使兵火息灭。 
English: When they are angry, the princes take fright; when they are quiet, the strife of the world ceases.

古文：孟子曰： 是恶足以为大丈夫哉？
现代文：孟轲说： 那岂能称得上大丈夫！
English: Meng Yao said: That can't be called okay!

古文：君子立天下之正位，行天下之正道，得志则与民由之，不得志则独行其道，富贵不能淫，贫贱不能移，威武不能诎，是之谓大丈夫。 
现代文：君子处世堂堂正正，行天下之正道，得志便带领百姓，同行正道，不得志便洁身自好，独行正道，富贵不能淫，贫贱不能移，威武不能屈，这才能算得是大丈夫。 
English: A gentleman behaves in a dignified and upright manner in the world, walks the righteous path of the world, leads the people when he has the will to do so, and walks the righteous path. If he does not have the will to do so, he should be clean and self-righteous, and walk the righteous path alone. If he is rich, he should not be immoral, if he is poor, he should not be greedy, and if he is powerful, he should not be submissive. Only in this way can he be considered to be alright.

古文：扬子《法言》曰：或问： 仪、秦学乎鬼谷术而习乎纵横言，安中国者各十馀年，是夫？ 
现代文：扬雄的《法言》上说：有人问： 张仪、苏秦在鬼谷子身边学习纵横之术，使中国各自安定十几年，是真的吗？ 
English: Yang Xiong's "Legend" said: Some people ask: Is it true that Zhang Yi and Su Qin learned the art of vertical and horizontal along with the Devil Valley to make China stable for more than ten years?

古文：曰： 诈人也。圣人恶诸。 
现代文：答道： 都是骗人罢了，为圣人所厌恶。 
English: He replied, "It's all just deception. It's abhorrent to the saints."

古文：曰： 孔子读而仪、秦行，何如也？ 
现代文：又问： 读孔子的圣贤书却行张仪、苏秦那样的事，怎么样呢？ 
English: He also asked: What about those who read Confucius' book of sages but do things like Zhang Yi and Su Qin?

古文：曰： 甚矣凤鸣而鸷翰也！ 
现代文：回答说： 糟糕透了，这好比有着凤凰一般的叫声而长着鹰鹯的羽毛。 
English: He replied: "It's awful, it's like having a phoenix cry and eagle feathers.

古文： 然则子贡不为欤？ 
现代文：又问： 那么子贡不会做这样的事了？ 
English: He also asked: So Zigong wouldn't do such a thing?

古文：曰： 乱而不解，子贡耻诸。
现代文：他说： 天下纷乱而不能停息，子贡以这样的事为耻辱。
English: He said: "The world is in turmoil and cannot rest. The tributes are a disgrace.

古文：说而不富贵，仪、秦耻诸。 
现代文：到诸侯游说不能得到富贵，这是苏秦、张仪所感到耻辱的事。 
English: It is a shame for Su Qin and Zhang Yi not to be able to get rich by lobbying the princes.

古文：或曰： 仪、秦其才矣乎，迹不蹈已？ 
现代文：有人说： 张仪、苏秦他们的才术超群，行事没有因循前人吧？ 
English: Some people said: Zhang Yi, Su Qin, their talent is outstanding, they did not follow the predecessors, right?

古文：曰： 昔在任人，帝而难之，不以才矣。
现代文：回答道： 上古的帝王选用人才，对于奸佞必定要加以斥责。这难道不是任才使能吗？
English: He answered, "The emperors of ancient times selected talented people, and they would certainly reprimand the traitors. Isn't this just letting talent do its thing?

古文：才乎才，非吾徒之才也。 
现代文：你所说的才，和我所说的才并不是一回事啊！ 
English: What you say and what I say are not the same thing!

古文：秦王使甘茂诛蜀相庄。
现代文：秦王派甘茂刺杀蜀国宰相陈庄。
English: The king of Qin dispatched Ganmao to assassinate the prime minister of Shu, Chen Zhuang.

古文：秦王、魏王会于临晋。
现代文：秦王派甘茂诛杀蜀国国相陈庄。秦王与魏王在临晋举行会晤。
English: The Qin king sent Gan Maozhen to kill Chen Zhuang, the minister of state of Shu. The Qin king and the Wei king held a meeting in Linjin.

古文：赵武灵王纳吴广之女孟姚，有宠，是为惠后。生子何。
现代文：赵武灵王娶吴广的女儿吴孟姚为惠后，十分宠爱她，生下儿子赵何。
English: King Zhao Wuling married Wu Guang's daughter, Wu Mengyao, as a favor to her. He loved her very much, and she gave birth to his son, Zhao He.

古文：赧王六年
现代文：六年
English: Six years

古文：秦初置丞相，以樗里疾为右丞相。
现代文：秦国设置丞相职务，任命樗里疾为右丞相。
English: Qin set up the post of chancellor and appointed Balizhi as chancellor of the right.

古文：赧王七年
现代文：七年
English: Seven years

古文：秦、魏会于应。
现代文：秦国、魏国在应城举行会议。
English: Qin and Wei held a meeting in Yingcheng.

古文：秦王使甘茂约魏以伐韩，而令向寿辅行。
现代文：秦王派甘茂与魏国商议联合攻打韩国，又令向寿做副手同行。
English: The Qin king sent Ganmao to negotiate with Wei for a joint attack on Korea, and also ordered Xiang Shou to be his deputy.

古文：甘茂至魏，令向寿还，谓王曰： 魏听臣矣，然愿王勿伐！ 
现代文：甘茂令向寿返回秦国对秦王说： 魏国听从了我的建议，不过希望大王不要进攻韩国！ 
English: Kammao ordered Xiangshou to return to Qin and told the Qin king: Wei has listened to my suggestion, but I hope the king will not attack Korea!

古文：王迎甘茂于息壤而问其故。对曰： 宜阳大县，其实郡也。
现代文：秦王到息壤迎接甘茂并询问其中的原因，甘茂回答道： 宜阳是一个大县，实际上可以算作郡了。
English: Qin Wang went to Xijiang to meet Gammao and asked the reason for this. Gammao replied: Yiyang is a large county, in fact, it can be counted as a county.

古文：今王倍数险，行千里，攻之难。
现代文：如今大王冒着重重危险，行军千里，想要攻克是很难的。
English: Now that the great king has braved many dangers and marched thousands of miles, it is difficult to defeat him.

古文：鲁人有与曾参同姓名者杀人，人告其母，其母织自若也。
现代文：鲁国有一个和曾参同名同姓的人杀了人，有人告诉了曾参的母亲，他的母亲还是神情自若地在织布。
English: In the State of Lu, a man with the same name and surname as Zeng Zang killed someone. Someone told Zeng Zang's mother that his mother was still proudly weaving.

古文：及三人告之，其母投杼下机，逾墙而走。
现代文：直到先后有三个人都告诉她这件事，他的母亲才立刻丢下机杼，翻过墙逃跑了。
English: It wasn't until three different people told her about it that his mother immediately dropped the machete, climbed over the wall and ran away.

古文：臣之贤不若曾参，王之信臣又不如其母，疑臣者非特三人，臣恐大王之投杼也。
现代文：我比不上曾参那样贤能，大王对我的信任也比不上曾参的母亲，怀疑我的更不仅仅是三个人，我担心大王也会不信任我而丢下机杼啊。
English: I am not as capable as Zeng Zang, and the great king's trust in me is not as great as that of Zeng Zang's mother. There are more than three people who doubt me, and I am afraid that the great king will not trust me and throw away his cunning.

古文：魏文侯令乐羊将而攻中山，三年而拔之。
现代文：当年魏文侯派乐羊带兵攻打中山国，三年之后才攻克。
English: Wei Wenhou let Le Yang lead the troops to attack Zhongshan Province, and it took three years to conquer Zhongshan.

古文：反而论功，文侯示之谤书一箧。
现代文：乐羊回到国内论功行赏时，文侯把一大筐诋毁他的奏章拿出来给他看。
English: When Le Yang returned to China to discuss the award of merit, Wen Hou took out a large basket of songs that slandered him to show him.

古文：乐羊再拜稽首曰： 此非臣之功，君之力也。 
现代文：乐羊一再拜谢叩头说： 攻克中山国不是我的功劳，都是国君您的力量。 
English: Le Yang repeatedly bowed and said: Conquering Zhongshan is not my achievement, it is all the power of the sovereign.

古文：今臣，羁旅之臣也，樗里子、公孙奭挟韩而议之，王必听之，是王欺魏王而臣受公仲侈之怨也。 
现代文：如今我只是一个流落他国的臣子，樗里疾、公孙奭以进攻韩国的事儿来说事儿，大王必定会听信他们说的话，这样大王不但把魏王给欺骗了，我也会被韩国宰相公仲侈所怨恨啊。 
English: Now I'm just a vassal living in another country, and I'm sure the king will listen to what his sons and grandsons have to say about the attack on Korea. Not only did the king deceive the Wei king, but I'll also be resented by the Korean prime minister, Gong Zhong Liya.

古文：王曰： 寡人弗听也，请与子盟。 
现代文：秦王说： 我肯定不听信他们的话，可以与你订立盟誓！ 
English: King Qin said, "I will definitely not listen to their words, I can make an oath with you!"

古文：乃盟于息壤。
现代文：就在息壤歃血为盟。
English: They made an alliance on the basis of bloodshed.

古文：秋，甘茂、长封帅师伐宜阳。
现代文：秋天时，甘茂与庶长封统率军队攻打宜阳。
English: In the autumn, Kamo and his second-in-command Hoto led an army to attack Yiyang.

古文：赧王八年
现代文：八年
English: Eight years

古文：甘茂攻宜阳，五月而不拔。
现代文：甘茂率军进攻宜阳，五个月过去了还没有攻下。
English: Kammao led an army to attack Yiyang, but five months have passed and the city has yet to be taken.

古文：樗里子、公孙奭果争之。秦王召甘茂，欲罢兵。
现代文：樗里疾与公孙奭果然争着向秦王说他的坏话。
English: Balizhi and Gongsun Yao fought to say bad things about him to King Qin.

古文：甘茂曰： 息壤在彼。 
现代文：秦王派人把甘茂召回，想要休兵。甘茂说： 息壤还在那里。 
English: The king of Qin sent someone to call back Kammao, who wanted to take a leave of absence. Kammao said, "The rest is still there."

古文：王曰： 有之。 
现代文：秦王说： 确实有这件事。 
English: King Wu had to say: Very good.

古文：因大悉起兵以佐甘茂。斩首六万，遂拔宜阳。
现代文：于是又调遣大军辅佐甘茂，斩杀韩军六万余人，攻占宜阳。
English: As a result, he dispatched a large army to assist Ganmao, killed more than sixty thousand Korean troops, and captured Yiyang.

古文：韩公仲侈入谢于秦以请平。
现代文：韩国相国公仲侈亲自到秦国谢罪求和。
English: South Korean Minister of State Kim Jung Il personally went to Qin to apologize and sue for peace.

古文：秦武王好以力戏，力士任鄙、乌获、孟说皆至大官。
现代文：秦武王喜好习武较力，大力士任鄙、乌获、孟说都先后做了大官。
English: King Qin Wu liked to practice martial arts and compete in strength, and the strong men Ren Shan, Wu Guo, and Meng Said all became high-ranking officials.

古文：八月，王与孟说举鼎，绝脉而薨。
现代文：八月，秦王与孟说举大铜鼎时，用力过猛，血管破裂而死。
English: In August, Qin Wang and Meng said that when they were lifting a large bronze tripod, they used too much force, and the blood vessel ruptured and died.

古文：族孟说。
现代文：孟说及其家族被杀。
English: Qin Shi Meng said one family.

古文：武王无子，异母弟稷为质于燕。国人逆而立之，是为昭襄王。
现代文：秦武王没有儿子，异母弟弟嬴稷在燕国做人质，国中贵族于是迎回他立为秦昭襄王。
English: King Qin Wu did not have a son, his half-brother Yan was a hostage in Yan's country, and the nobles of the country welcomed him back and made him the king of Qin Zhaoxiang.

古文：昭襄王母羋八子，楚女也，实宣太后。
现代文：秦昭襄王的母亲芈八子，是楚国女子，封为宣太后。
English: The mother of Qin Zhaoxiang Wang, Zou Yachi Zi, was a woman from the State of Chu, and was crowned Empress Dowager.

古文：赵武灵王北略中山之地，至房子，遂之代，北至无穷，西至河，登黄华之上。
现代文：赵武灵王向北侵略中山国一带，大军到达房子城，又到代郡，向北直到塞外的无穷，向西直到黄河岸边，登上黄华山顶。
English: King Zhao Wuling marched north to invade the mountainous regions of China. His army reached the city of Jiaozuo, then the county of Dai, northward to the boundless expanse of Siberia, westward to the banks of the Yellow River, and up to the peak of Huanghua Mountain.

古文：与肥义谋胡服骑射以教百姓，曰： 愚者所笑，贤者察焉。
现代文：他与大臣肥义商量让百姓穿胡服，学习骑射，说： 愚人所讥笑的，贤人会理解我的用意的。
English: He discussed with the minister Feiyi to let the people wear Hu clothing and learn to ride and shoot, saying: What fools mock, wise men will understand my intention.

古文：虽驱世以笑我，胡地、中山，吾必有之！ 
现代文：即便是全天下人都讥讽我也无所谓，胡地和中山，我一定要占为己有！ 
English: Even if the whole world is mocking me, it doesn't matter. I must occupy Huti and Zhongshan for myself!

古文：遂胡服。
现代文：于是令赵国百姓改穿胡服。
English: As a result, the people of Zhao were ordered to change into Hu clothing.

古文：国人皆不欲，公子成称疾不朝。
现代文：国中的士人有不少反对，公子成假称有病，不来上朝。
English: There was a lot of opposition from the nobles in the country, and the prince pretended to be ill and did not come to the imperial court.

古文：王使人请之曰： 家听于亲，国听于君。今寡人作教易服而公叔不服，吾恐天下议之也。
现代文：赵王派人前去说服他： 家事听从父母，国政服从国君，现在我向人民宣传改变服装，而叔父您不穿，我担心天下人会议论我徇私情。
English: King Zhao sent someone to persuade him: "I obey my parents when it comes to family affairs, and obey the sovereign when it comes to state affairs. Now that I'm telling people to change their clothes, but your uncle doesn't wear one, I'm worried that the whole world will talk about my private life."

古文：制国有常，利民为本；从政有经，令行为上。
现代文：治理国家有一定章法，总以有利人民为根本；办理政事有一定常规，执行命令是最重要的。
English: Governing the country is routine, benefiting the people is fundamental; dealing with political affairs is routine, and following orders is most important.

古文：明德先论于贱，而从政先信于贵，故愿慕公叔之义以成胡服之功也。 
现代文：宣传道德要先针对卑贱的下层，而推行法令必须从贵族近臣做起。所以我希望能借助叔父您的榜样来完成改穿胡服的功业。 
English: The propagation of morality must first be aimed at the lowly lower class, and the implementation of laws must start from the noble courtiers. Therefore, I hope to use your uncle's example to complete the work of changing into Hu clothing.

古文：公子成再拜稽首曰： 臣闻中国者，圣贤之所教也，礼乐之所用也，远方之所观赴也，蛮夷之所则效也。
现代文：公子成拜谢道： 我听说，中国是在圣贤之人教化下，用礼乐仪制，使远方国家前来游观，让四方夷族学习效法的地方。
English: Gongzi Cheng Bai Xie said: I have heard that China is a place where, under the enlightenment of sages and sages, it uses liturgy and ritual to make distant countries come to visit and let the barbarians in the four directions learn to imitate.

古文：今王舍此而袭远方之服，变古之道，逆人之心，臣愿王熟图之也！ 
现代文：现在君王您舍此不顾，去仿效远方外国的服装，是擅改古代习惯、违背人心的举动，我希望您慎重考虑。 
English: Now that you, the monarch, are disregarding this, to imitate the clothing of a faraway foreign country is to arbitrarily change ancient customs and go against the will of the people. I hope you will consider this carefully.

古文：使者以报。
现代文：使者回报赵王。
English: The messenger went back and reported truthfully.

古文：王自往请之，曰： 吾国东有齐、中山，北有燕、东胡，西有楼烦、秦、韩之边。今无骑射之备，则何以守之哉？
现代文：赵王便亲自登门解释说： 我国东面有齐国、中山国；北面有燕国、东胡；西面是楼烦，与秦、韩两国接壤，如果没有骑马射箭的训练，怎么能守得住呢？
English: Zhao Wang himself came to the door to explain: In the east of our country, there are Qi Province and Zhongshan Province; in the north, there are Yan Province and Donghu; in the west, there is Loudui, bordering Qin and South Korea. If there is no horseback archery training, how can it be defended?

古文：先时中山负齐之强兵，侵暴吾地，系累吾民，引水围鄗；微社稷之神灵，则鄗几于不守也，先君丑之。
现代文：先前中山国倚仗齐国的强兵，侵犯我们领土，掠夺人民，又引水围灌城，如果不是老天保佑，城几乎就失守了。此事先王深以为耻。
English: Previously, Zhongshan relied on the strong soldiers of Qi to invade our territory, plunder the people, and bring water to surround the city. If it were not for God's blessing, the city would almost have been lost. Wang was deeply ashamed of this.

古文：故寡人变服骑射，欲以备四境之难，报中山之怨。
现代文：所以我决心改变服装，学习骑射，想以此抵御四面的灾难，一报中山国之仇。
English: So I decided to change my clothes and learn to ride and shoot. I wanted to use this as a way to fend off disaster on all sides and avenge Zhongshan.

古文：而叔顺中国之俗，恶变服之名，以忘鄗事之丑，非寡人之所望也。 
现代文：而叔父您一味依循中国旧俗，厌恶改变服装，已经忘记了城的奇耻大辱，我对您深感失望啊！ 
English: Your uncle, on the other hand, sticks to the old Chinese customs, hates to change his clothes, and has forgotten the great shame of the city. I am deeply disappointed with you!

古文：公子成听命，乃赐胡服，明日服而朝。
现代文：公子成翻然醒悟，欣然从命，赵王亲自赐给他胡服，第二天他便穿戴入朝。
English: Prince Zicheng suddenly woke up and gladly obeyed the order. The King of Zhao personally gave him Hu clothing, and the next day he wore it to the court.

古文：于是始出胡服令，而招骑射焉。
现代文：于是，赵王正式下达改穿胡服的法令，提倡学习骑马射箭。
English: As a result, King Zhao officially issued a decree to change to wearing Hu clothing, and advocated learning to ride horses and shoot arrows.

古文：赧王九年
现代文：赧王九年
English: In the ninth year of King Min's reign

古文：秦昭王使向寿平宜阳，而使樗里子、甘茂伐魏。
现代文：秦昭王派向寿去平抚宜阳，又令樗里子、甘茂去攻打魏国。
English: Qin Zhao Wang sent Xiang Shou to pacify Yiyang, and also ordered Yan Lizi and Gan Mao to attack Wei.

古文：甘茂言于王，以武遂复归之韩。
现代文：甘茂向秦王建议，把武遂归还给韩国。
English: Kammao proposed to King Qin that Wusui be returned to Korea.

古文：向寿、公孙奭争之，不能得，由此怨谗甘茂。
现代文：向寿、公孙坚决反对，但未能阻止，于是怨恨甘茂。
English: Xiang Shou and Gongsun resolutely opposed it, but were unable to stop it, so they resented Gan Mao.

古文：茂惧，辍伐魏蒲阪，亡去。
现代文：甘茂心中恐惧，便中断对魏国蒲阪的进攻，逃走了。
English: Fearful and apprehensive, Ganmao stopped attacking the Wei kingdom of Busan and took the opportunity to flee.

古文：樗里子与魏讲而罢兵。
现代文：樗里子只好与魏国讲和退兵。
English: He had no choice but to make peace with Wei and leave the army.

古文：甘茂奔齐。
现代文：结果甘茂投奔到齐国去了。
English: As a result, Ganmao fled to the State of Qi.

古文：赵王略中山地，至宁葭；西略胡地，至榆中。
现代文：赵王侵略中山国，大军到了宁葭；向西侵略胡地，一直到榆中。
English: King Zhao invaded Zhongshan, and the large army reached Ningbo; invaded the west of the Hudi, and went all the way to Yuzhong.

古文：林胡王献马。
现代文：林胡王以骏马献给赵王。
English: King Lin Hu presented horses.

古文：归，使楼缓之秦，仇液之韩，王贲之楚，富丁之魏，赵爵之齐。
现代文：回到赵国后，派使臣楼缓到秦国，仇液到韩国，王贲到楚国，富丁到魏国，赵爵到齐国。
English: After returning, he sent Lou Ye to Qin, Qianye to Korea, Wang Hui to Chu, Fuding to Wei, and Zhao Jue to Qi.

古文：代相赵固主胡，致其兵。
现代文：由代相赵固全权负责胡人地区，并招募胡人士兵。
English: Let Zhao Gu, the generation leader, take charge of the Huti and recruit Huti soldiers.

古文：楚王与齐、韩合从。
现代文：楚王与齐国、韩国订立同盟。
English: King Chu formed an alliance with Qi and Korea.

古文：赧王十年
现代文：十年
English: 10 years

古文：彗星见。
现代文：天空出现彗星。
English: A comet appears.

古文：赵王伐中山，取丹丘、爽阳、鸿之塞，又取鄗、石邑、封龙、东垣。
现代文：赵王起兵进攻中山国，攻占丹丘、爽阳、鸿等地的要塞，又占领鄗、石邑、封龙、东垣四座城池。
English: Zhao Wang raised an army to attack Zhongshan Province, capturing the fortresses of Dangqiu, Suoyang, Hong and other places, and occupied the four cities of Zou, Shiyou, Fenglong and Dongyuan.

古文：中山献四邑以和。
现代文：中山国献上四城求和。
English: Zhongshan Province offered four cities to make peace.

古文：秦宣太后异父弟曰穰侯魏冉，同父弟曰华阳君羋戎；王之同母弟曰高陵君、泾阳君。
现代文：秦国宣太后异父弟为穰侯魏冉，同父弟为华阳君芈戎；秦王的同母弟为高陵君、泾阳君。
English: The half-brother and half-sister of Qin Guoxuan's empress dowager were Gonghou Wei Ran and Hua Yangjun Gong Rong; the half-brother and half-brother of the Qin king were Gao Lingjun and Gong Yangjun.

古文：魏冉最贤，自惠王、武王时，任职用事。
现代文：其中魏冉最贤良，从秦惠王、秦武王时起，就担任要职。
English: Among them, Wei Ran was the most virtuous, and he held important positions from the time of Qin Hui Wang and Qin Wu Wang.

古文：武王薨，诸弟争立，唯魏冉力能立昭王。
现代文：秦武王死后，各兄弟间争夺王位，只有魏冉能独力扶立秦昭王。
English: After the death of King Qin Wu, the brothers competed for the throne, and only Wei Ran was able to single-handedly establish King Qin Zhao.

古文：昭王即位，以冉为将军，卫咸阳。
现代文：秦昭王即位后，任命魏冉为将军，守卫咸阳。
English: After Qin Zhao Wang ascended the throne, he appointed Wei Ran as a general to guard Xianyang.

古文：是岁，庶长壮及大臣、诸公子谋作乱，魏冉诛之；及惠文后皆不得良死，悼武王后出归于魏，王兄弟不善者，魏冉皆灭之。
现代文：当年，名叫壮的庶长及大臣、诸公子阴谋作乱，被魏冉镇压下去；因受到牵连，惠文后被害死，悼武王后也离开秦国流落到魏国。与秦昭王不和的兄弟，全都被魏冉处死。
English: In that year, a deputy chief named Zhuang and his ministers and nobles plotted to start a riot and were suppressed by Wei Ran. As a result of being implicated, Hui Wen died, and Queen Mu left Qin and went into exile in Wei. The brothers who did not get along with Qin Zhao Wang were all executed by Wei Ran.

古文：王少，宣太后自治事，任魏冉为政，威震秦国。
现代文：因秦昭王年幼，宣太后便亲自管理国家，任用魏冉执政，使他的威势震慑全国。
English: Because Qin Zhao Wang was young, Empress Dowager Xuan personally managed the country and appointed Wei Ran to govern, so that his power shocked the whole country.

古文：赧王十一年
现代文：十一年
English: Eleven years

古文：秦王、楚王盟于黄棘。秦复与楚上庸。
现代文：秦王、楚王在黄棘会盟，秦国把上庸归还给楚国。
English: The kings of Qin and Chu were allied at Huangxian, and Qin returned Shangyong to Chu.

古文：赧王十二年
现代文：十二年
English: Twelve years later

古文：秦取魏蒲阪、晋阳、封陵，又取韩武遂。
现代文：秦国攻占魏国蒲阪、晋阳、封陵三地，又攻占韩国武遂。
English: Qin conquered the three Wei provinces of Pusan, Jinyang and Huning, as well as the Korean province of Wusui.

古文：齐、韩、魏以楚负其从亲，合兵伐楚。
现代文：齐国、韩国、魏国因为楚国背叛抗秦同盟，联合出兵攻打楚国。
English: Because of Chu's betrayal of the anti-Qin alliance, Qi, Korea, and Wei jointly sent troops to attack Chu.

古文：楚王使太子横为质于秦而请救。
现代文：楚王派太子芈横作为人质，向秦国求救。
English: The King of Chu sent the Crown Prince Yu Heng as a hostage to appeal to Qin for help.

古文：秦客卿通将兵救楚，三国引兵去。
现代文：秦国派名叫通的客卿率军队援救楚国，三国联军于是退走。
English: Qin sent a guest lord named Tong to lead an army to rescue Chu, and the allied forces of the three countries then withdrew.

古文：赧王十三年
现代文：十三年
English: Thirteen years

古文：秦王、魏王、韩太子婴会于临晋，韩太子至咸阳而归；秦复与魏蒲阪。
现代文：秦王、魏王、韩国太子韩婴在临晋举行会议，韩国太子又前往秦国咸阳后才归去，秦国把蒲阪归还给魏国。
English: The Qin king, the Wei king, and the Korean prince Han Yong held a meeting in Linjin. The Korean prince went to the Qin state of Xianyang before returning. The Qin state returned Busan to the Wei state.

古文：秦大夫有私与楚太子斗者，太子杀之，亡归。
现代文：秦国有个大夫因私事与在秦国当人质的楚国太子芈横争斗，楚太子杀死秦大夫后，逃回楚国。
English: There was a feud between a doctor in Qin for personal reasons and the Crown Prince of Chu, who was a hostage in Qin. After Prince Chu killed Dr. Qin, he fled back to Chu.

古文：赧王十四年
现代文：十四年
English: Fourteen years

古文：日有食之，既。秦人取韩穰。
现代文：出现日全食。秦国夺取韩国穰城。
English: There is a total solar eclipse. Qin captures the South Korean city of Ye.

古文：蜀宁煇叛秦，秦司马错往诛之。
现代文：蜀郡太守宁背叛秦国，秦王让司马错前去把他杀了。
English: Shu County's Tai Shou Ning betrayed the Qin State, and the Qin King sent Sima ahead to kill him.

古文：秦庶长奂会韩、魏、齐兵伐楚，败其师于重丘，杀其将唐昧；遂取重丘。
现代文：秦国派名叫奂的庶长联合韩、魏、齐三国出兵攻打楚国，在重丘大败楚军，杀死楚将唐昧，夺取重丘。
English: Qin sent a deputy commander named Zou to join forces with Han, Wei, and Qi to attack Chu. They defeated the Chu army at Chongqiu, killed the Chu general Tangmai, and captured Chongqiu.

古文：赵王伐中山，中山君奔齐。
现代文：赵王发兵讨伐中山国，中山国国君投奔到齐国。
English: Zhao Wang sent troops to fight against Zhongshan, and the ruler of Zhongshan fled to Qi.

古文：赧王十五年
现代文：十五年
English: Fifteen years

古文：秦泾阳君为质于齐。
现代文：秦国把泾阳君送到齐国做人质。
English: Qin sent Shenyang to Qi as a hostage.

古文：秦华阳君伐楚，大破楚师，斩首三万，杀其将景缺，取楚襄城。
现代文：秦国派华阳君攻打楚国，大破楚军，杀死三万人，包括楚将景缺，夺取了襄城。
English: Qin sent Huayangjun to attack Chu, defeated the Chu army, killed thirty thousand people, including Chu general Jing Que, and captured Xiangcheng.

古文：楚王恐，使太子为质于齐以请平。
现代文：楚王十分恐惧，把太子送到齐国，请求和解。
English: King Chu was very afraid and sent the prince to Qi to ask for reconciliation.

古文：秦樗里疾卒，以赵人楼缓为丞相。
现代文：秦国的樗里疾逝世，秦王任命赵国人楼缓做丞相。
English: King Qin of Qin died of leprosy, and King Qin appointed Zhao Guorenlou to be the prime minister.

古文：赵武灵王爱少子何，欲及其生而立之。
现代文：赵武灵王宠爱幼子赵何，想趁自己在世时立他为国君。
English: King Zhao Wuling loved his young son, Zhao He, and wanted to use his time to make him the ruler of the country.

古文：赧王十六年
现代文：赧王十六年
English: In the sixteenth year of King Min

古文：五月戊申，大朝东宫，传国于何。
现代文：五月戊申，赵王在东宫举行盛大仪式，把国君之位传给赵何。
English: In May, King Zhao held a grand ceremony in the East Palace to pass the throne to Zhao He.

古文：王庙见礼毕，出临朝，大夫悉为臣。
现代文：赵何祭祀宗庙之后，登位治理政事，他属下的大夫都成为朝廷大臣。
English: After Zhao He dedicated the ancestral temple, he ascended the throne to govern political affairs, and the doctors under him all became ministers of the imperial court.

古文：肥义为相国，并傅王。
现代文：又任命肥义为相国，并尊称为国君老师。
English: He also appointed Feiyi as a relative of the country, and respectfully called him the teacher of the country.

古文：武灵王自号 主父 。
现代文：赵武灵王自称 主父 。
English: King Zhao Wuling claimed to be the father.

古文：主父欲使子治国，身胡服，将士大夫西北略胡地。
现代文：赵主父想让儿子在国中治事，身穿胡人服装率领文臣武将去攻打西北胡人领地。
English: Zhao's father wanted his son to govern the country, so he dressed in Hu costumes and led the scholar-warrior general to attack the northwest Hu territory.

古文：将自云中、九原南袭咸阳，于是诈自为使者，入秦，欲以观秦地形及秦王之为人。
现代文：他计划从云中、九原向南袭击秦都咸阳，便自己扮作使者，前往秦国，想借此来侦察秦国地形及秦王的为人。
English: He planned to attack the Qin capital of Xianyang from Yunzhong and Jiuyuan to the south, so he disguised himself as an envoy and went to Qin, hoping to use this opportunity to investigate the topography of Qin and the person of the Qin king.

古文：秦王不知，已而怪其状甚伟，非人臣之度，使人逐之，主父行已脱关矣。
现代文：秦王没有觉察，事后觉得此人相貌伟岸不凡，不像是臣子能有的风度，派人急忙去追赶他；而赵主父一行已经出了边关。
English: King Qin did not notice this, and later felt that this man's appearance was extraordinary, unlike the demeanor that a courtier could have, and sent someone to hurry to catch up with him; meanwhile, Zhao Shifu and his party had already left the border.

古文：审问之，乃主父也。秦人大惊。
现代文：经过一番盘问调查，秦国人才知道他就是赵主父，大惊失色。
English: After a cross-examination investigation, the Qin people knew that he was Zhao Shifu, and they were shocked.

古文：齐王、魏王会于韩。
现代文：齐王与魏王在韩国会面。
English: Qi Wang and Wei Wang met in South Korea.

古文：秦人伐楚，取八城。
现代文：秦国攻打楚国，夺取八座城市。
English: Qin attacked Chu and captured eight cities.

古文：秦王遗楚王书曰： 始寡人与王约为兄弟，盟于黄棘，太子入质，至欢也。
现代文：秦王派人给楚王送信，写道： 起初我与你约定两国为兄弟之邦，在黄棘盟誓，派楚太子到秦国为人质，彼此关系欢洽。
English: The King of Qin sent a letter to the King of Chu, writing: At first, I agreed with you that the two countries would be brotherly states. I swore an oath at Huangxian, and sent the Crown Prince Chu to Qin as a hostage. Our relations are cordial.

古文：太子陵杀寡人之重臣，不谢而亡去。寡人诚不胜怒，使兵侵君王之边。
现代文：不料楚太子辱杀我的重臣，不辞而别，使我无比愤慨，才派兵攻入你的境内。
English: Unexpectedly, Prince Chu humiliated and killed my chief minister and left without a word, which made me extremely indignant, before he sent troops to invade your territory.

古文：今闻君王乃令太子质于齐以求平。
现代文：现在听说你又让太子到齐国充当人质，以求和解。
English: Today, I heard that you asked the crown prince to go to Qi as a hostage to seek reconciliation.

古文：寡人与楚接境，婚姻相亲。而今秦、楚不欢，则无以令诸侯。
现代文：我国与你们楚国互相接壤，结为婚姻亲家，要是秦、楚关系如此恶化，就无法号令其他国家。
English: Our country shares a border with your country, Chu, and we are relatives by marriage. If the relations between Qin and Chu deteriorate to such an extent, we will not be able to order other countries around.

古文：寡人愿与君王会武关，面相约，结盟而去，寡人之愿也！ 
现代文：我想与你在武关会面，当面约定，结成友好同盟。这是我真心的愿望！ 
English: I want to meet with you in Wuguan, make a face-to-face appointment, and form a friendly alliance. This is my sincere wish!

古文：楚王患之，欲往，恐见欺，欲不往，恐秦益怒。
现代文：楚王很是担忧，想去又怕中了秦王的圈套，不去又害怕秦国更为生气。
English: King Chu was very worried. He wanted to go, but he was afraid of falling into the trap of King Qin. If he didn't go, he was afraid of Qin, which made him even more angry.

古文：昭睢曰： 毋行而发兵自守耳！
现代文：昭睢说： 千万不能去，同时还要出兵加强防御！
English: Zhaohui said, "You must not go. At the same time, you must send troops to strengthen the defense!"

古文：秦，虎狼也，有并诸侯之心，不可信也！ 
现代文：秦国像虎狼一样，心怀并吞诸侯的想法，不能相信啊！ 
English: Qin, like a tiger and a wolf, harbored the idea of devouring the princes. I can't believe it!

古文：怀王之子子兰劝王行，王乃入秦。
现代文：楚怀王的儿子子兰劝他前去，于是楚怀王就到了秦国。
English: King Chuhai's son Zilan advised him to go ahead, so King Chuhai went to Qin.

古文：秦王令一将军诈为王，伏兵武关，楚王至则闭关劫之，与俱西，至咸阳，朝章台，如籓臣礼，要以割巫、黔中郡。
现代文：秦王派一位将军假装成自己，在武关埋伏下军队，楚王刚到就立马紧闭关门劫持了他，带着他一路西行，直到咸阳，对着秦王的章台朝拜，与附属国朝见的礼节一样，并要挟楚王把巫郡及黔中郡割让出去。
English: King Qin sent a general to pretend to be himself and ambush the army in Wuguan. As soon as King Chu arrived, he immediately closed the door and kidnapped him, taking him all the way west to Xianyang. He bowed to King Qin's banner, the same as the courtesy of the subordinate country's imperial court, and forced King Chu to cede Wushun County and Yuzhong County.

古文：楚王欲盟，秦王欲先得地。
现代文：楚王想先订立盟约，秦王想先割让土地。
English: King Chu wanted to conclude a treaty first, while King Qin wanted to cede land first.

古文：楚王怒曰： 秦诈我，而又强要我以地！ 
现代文：楚王愤怒地说： 秦王欺骗我，又逼着我割让土地！ 
English: King Chu said angrily: King Qin deceived me and forced me to cede land!

古文：因不复许，秦人留之。
现代文：因此没有答应。秦国把他扣押了下来。
English: Therefore, he did not agree. Qin State detained him.

古文：楚大臣患之，乃相与谋曰： 吾王在秦不得还，要以割地，而太子为质于齐。齐、秦合谋，则楚无国矣。 
现代文：楚国的大臣们非常担忧，于是商量说： 我们的国君在秦国不能回来，被逼迫着要求割让土地，而太子又在齐国做人质；齐、秦两国要是联合算计楚国，那么楚国就要亡了。 
English: The ministers of the State of Chu were very worried, so they discussed and said: Our sovereign cannot return from the State of Qin, he is being forced to cede land, and the crown prince is being held hostage in the State of Qi; if Qi and Qin jointly take over the State of Chu, then the State of Chu will perish.

古文：欲立王子之在国者。
现代文：国人想要把尚在国中的王子拥立为王。
English: The people of the country want to make the prince who is still in the country the king.

古文：昭睢曰： 王与太子俱困于诸侯，而今又倍王命而立其庶子，不宜！ 
现代文：昭睢说： 怀王和太子都在其他诸侯国被困，如今又违背君王的意思而另立庶子，不合适！ 
English: Zhaohui said, "Wai Wang and Prince Wu are both trapped in other principalities, and now, against the monarch's wishes, they are raising another illegitimate child. This is not appropriate!"

古文：乃诈赴于齐。
现代文：就到齐国谎称楚王驾崩，想把太子迎回楚国。
English: He went to Qi Province and falsely claimed that King Chu had died, and wanted to welcome the prince back to Chu Province.

古文：齐湣王召群臣谋之，或曰： 不若留太子以求楚之淮北。 
现代文：齐湣王召集群臣商议，有的人说： 不如把楚国太子扣押下来要求楚国割让淮北地区。 
English: King Qizong gathered a group of courtiers for discussion, and some people said: It would be better to detain the prince of Chu and demand that Chu cede the Huaibei region.

古文：齐相曰： 不可。
现代文：齐国丞相说： 不可！
English: Minister Qi Guojun said: No!

古文：郢中立王，是吾抱空质而行不义于天下也。 其人曰： 不然。
现代文：楚国要是在郢中另立他人为王，这样我们只能掌握这没有任何价值的人质而被天下人耻笑我们不讲道义。 
English: If the State of Chu were to set up another person as king in Shizhong, we would only be able to control this worthless hostage, and the world would ridicule us for our lack of morality.

古文：郢中立王，因与其新王市曰： 予我下东国，吾为王杀太子。
现代文：又有人说： 不见得是这样，楚国在郢中另立新王，可以拿太子与新王做交易说： 把下东国割让给齐国，我替你把太子杀死。
English: Others said, "This is not necessarily so. The state of Chu has set up a new king in the middle of the Yangtze River. You can make a deal with the new king for the crown prince, saying, "Cede the Lower East to the state of Qi, and I will kill the crown prince for you."

古文：不然，将与三国共立之。  
现代文：否则，将联合秦、韩、魏三国拥立他为楚王。  
English: Otherwise, the three countries of Qin, Han and Wei will unite to support him as the King of Chu.

古文：齐王卒用其相计而归楚太子。
现代文：齐王最后还是采用了丞相的计策把楚太子护送回国。
English: King Qi finally used the strategy of the Minister of State to send back the Crown Prince of Chu.

古文：楚人立之。
现代文：楚国立他为王。
English: He is the king of Chu.

古文：秦王闻孟尝君之贤，使泾阳君为质于齐以请。
现代文：秦王听说孟尝君是贤能之人，就派泾阳君到齐国做人质把孟尝君请到秦国。
English: When the Qin king heard that Meng Yuqun was a man of virtue, he sent Puyang to Qi as a hostage and invited Meng Yuqun to Qin.

古文：孟尝君来入秦，秦王以为丞相。
现代文：孟尝君到秦国之后，秦王任用他为宰相。
English: After Meng Yuqun arrived in Qin, King Qin appointed him as prime minister.

古文：赧王十七年
现代文：十七年
English: Seventeen years.

古文：或谓秦王曰： 孟尝君相秦，必先齐而后秦。
现代文：有人对秦王说： 孟尝君在秦国做丞相，肯定把齐国的利益放在秦国之前。
English: Someone said to the Qin king: Meng Yuqun, as the prime minister of Qin, must have put the interests of Qi before Qin.

古文：秦其危哉！ 
现代文：秦国这样就危险了！ 
English: Qin is in danger!

古文：秦王乃以楼缓为相，囚孟尝君，欲杀之。
现代文：秦王于是改任楼缓做丞相，把孟尝君囚禁起来，想要杀了他。
English: King Qin then changed the post of prime minister to chancellor, imprisoned Meng Yuqun and tried to kill him.

古文：孟尝君使人求解于秦王幸姬，姬曰： 愿得君狐白裘。 
现代文：孟尝君派人求助于秦王的宠姬，宠姬说： 我想要您的狐皮白裘。 
English: Meng Yuqun sent someone to seek help from the Qin King's favorite aunt, who said, "I want your fox fur white coat.

古文：孟尝君有狐白裘，已献之秦王，无以应姬求。
现代文：孟尝君有一件狐皮白裘，之前已经献给了秦王，没有办法答应宠姬的请求。
English: Meng Yuqun had a fox skin white coat, which had previously been dedicated to King Qin, and was unable to grant Daming Ji's request.

古文：客有善为狗盗者，入秦藏中，盗狐白裘以献姬。
现代文：他的食客中有一个擅长盗窃的人，溜进秦国仓库，把狐皮白裘偷出来献给了宠姬。
English: One of his diners, who was good at stealing, slipped into the Qin warehouse and stole the white fox fur and presented it to Zhaohui.

古文：姬乃为之言于王而遣之。王后悔，使追之。
现代文：宠姬才在秦王面前替孟尝君求情让把他送回国去。秦王没过多久就后悔了，派人追赶他。
English: It wasn't long before Zhaojie pleaded for Meng Yaojun in front of King Qin for him to be sent back to his country. It didn't take long for King Qin to regret this and send someone to chase him.

古文：孟尝君至关。关法：鸡鸣而出客。
现代文：孟尝君逃到关隘下，按照秦国的边关法度，鸡鸣时分旅客才能出入。
English: Meng Yuqun fled to the pass under the pass. According to the border pass law of Qin, passengers can only enter and leave when the rooster crows.

古文：时尚蚤，追者将至，客有善为鸡鸣者，野鸡闻之皆鸣。
现代文：这时离天亮还早，后边的追兵就要到了，孟尝君的食客中有能模仿鸡叫的，乡野人家饲养的鸡听到他的叫声也都叫了起来。
English: At this time, it was still early in the morning, and the pursuers behind were about to arrive. Some of Meng Yaojun's diners were able to imitate chicken calls, and the chickens raised by the villagers also called out when they heard his calls.

古文：孟尝君乃得脱归。
现代文：孟尝君才得以逃脱回国。
English: It was only then that Meng Yuqun was able to escape and return home.

古文：楚人告于秦曰： 赖社稷神灵，国有王矣！ 
现代文：楚国通知秦国： 蒙上天神灵佑护，我们楚国又有君王了。 
English: The State of Chu informed the State of Qin: With the protection of the spirit of the gods, we have a king in the State of Chu.

古文：秦王怒，发兵出武关击楚，斩首五万，取十六城。
现代文：秦王恼羞成怒，发兵出武关进攻楚国，杀五万人，夺占十六座城。
English: King Qin's irritation turned to anger, and he sent troops to attack Chu, killing fifty thousand people and seizing sixteen cities.

古文：赵王封其弟胜为平原君。
现代文：赵王把他的弟弟赵胜封为平原君。
English: Zhao Wang appointed his brother Zhao Sheng as the Prince of the Plain.

古文：平原君好士，食客常数千人。
现代文：平原君喜欢结交贤能之士，门下的食客常有数千人之多。
English: Mr. Hirahara likes to make friends with people of merit, and there are often thousands of diners under his roof.

古文：有公孙龙者，善为坚白同异之辩，平原君客之。
现代文：其中有一个人，名为公孙龙，擅长 坚白同异 的辩论，平原君以对待客人的方式来对他。
English: One of them, named Gongsun Long, is good at the debate of the same and different, and Mr. Plains treats him like a guest.

古文：孔穿自鲁适赵，与公孙龙论臧三耳，龙甚辩析。子高弗应，俄而辞出，明日复见平原君。
现代文：孔穿从鲁国来到赵国，与公孙龙讨论奴婢三耳这个辩题，公孙龙的辩论十分精妙，孔穿不能做出回应，没过多久孔穿就告辞出来，第二天又去会见平原君。
English: Kong Peng came from the State of Lu to the State of Zhao to discuss with Gong Sun Long the issue of the three ears of slaves. Gong Sun Long's debate was very subtle, and Kong Peng was unable to respond. It didn't take long for Kong Peng to bow out, and the next day he went to meet with Pingyuan Jun.

古文：平原君曰： 畴昔公孙之言信辩也，先生以为何如？ 
现代文：平原君问道： 昨日公孙龙辩论的言论，先生您认为怎么样？ 
English: Mr. Hirahara asked, "What do you think of the remarks made by Gongsun Long in yesterday's debate, sir?"

古文：对曰： 然。
现代文：回答说： 是这样。
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：几能令臧三耳矣。
现代文：他几乎真的能让奴婢生出三只耳朵了。
English: He can almost literally make a slave girl have three ears.

古文：虽然，实难！
现代文：尽管如此，实际却是不可能的！
English: However, it is actually impossible!

古文：仆愿得又问于君：今谓三耳甚难而实非也，谓两耳甚易而实是也，不知君将从易而是者乎，其亦从难而非者乎？ 
现代文：我想再一次向您请教：如今辩论三耳这个话题成立十分不容易却又不合实际，论证两耳特别容易却符合事实，不知道您会相信简单而实在的，还是相信难得而不切实际的呢？ 
English: I would like to ask you once again: Today, it is very difficult but unrealistic to debate the topic of three ears, and it is particularly easy to argue two ears, but it conforms to the facts. I don't know if you will believe in simple and real, or believe in rare and unrealistic?

古文：平原君无以应。
现代文：平原君也没有什么说的。
English: Hirahara-kun didn't say anything either.

古文：明日，谓公孙龙曰： 公无复与孔子高辩事也！
现代文：第二天，平原君对公孙龙说： 先生别再跟孔穿辩论了！
English: The next day, Mr. Plains said to Gongsun Long, "Sir, stop arguing with Kongpeng!

古文：其人理胜于辞，公辞胜于理。辞胜于理，终必受诎。 
现代文：他的义理胜过言辞；您的言辞胜过义理，最终必定向别人屈服。 
English: His logic is better than his words; your words are better than your logic, and in the end you will have to give in to others.

古文：齐邹衍过赵，平原君使与公孙龙论白马非马之说。
现代文：邹衍路过赵国，平原君让他和公孙龙辩论 白马非马 的观点。
English: Yuanyan passed by Zhao Guo, and Pingyuan Jun let him and Gongsun Long debate the point of view that a white horse is not a horse.

古文：邹子曰： 不可。
现代文：邹衍说： 不行。
English: Hao Yan said, "No."

古文：夫辩者，别殊类使不相害，序异端使不相乱。抒意通指，明其所谓，使人与知焉，不务相迷也。
现代文：所谓辩论，应该区别不同类型，不相侵害；排列不同概念，不相混淆；抒发自己的意旨和一般概念，表明自己的观点，让别人理解，而不是困惑迷惘。
English: The so-called debate should distinguish different types, not infringe upon each other; arrange different concepts, not confuse; express one's own meaning and general concept, express one's own point of view, and let others understand, rather than being confused and confused.

古文：故胜者不失其所守，不胜者得其所求。若是，故辩可为也。
现代文：如此，辩论的胜者能坚持自己的立场，不胜者也能得到他所追求的真理，这样的辩论是可以进行的。
English: Such a debate can be conducted in such a way that the winner of the debate can maintain his position, and the loser can get the truth he is seeking.

古文：及至烦文以相假，饰辞以相惇，巧譬以相移，引人使不得及其意，如此害大道。
现代文：如果用繁文缛节来作为凭据，用巧言饰辞来互相诋毁，用华丽词藻来从偷换概念，吸引别人使之不得要领，就会妨害治学的根本道理。
English: If you use red tape and jargon as evidence, use clever words and phrases to denigrate each other, and use flowery words and phrases to steal concepts and attract others to make them irrelevant, it will interfere with the fundamental principle of studying.

古文：夫缴纷争言而竞后息，不能无害君子，衍不为也。 
现代文：那种纠缠不休，咄咄逼人，总要别人认输才肯住口的作法，有害君子风度，我邹衍是绝不参加的。 
English: That kind of persistent and aggressive badgering, always demanding that others concede defeat before they will shut up, is harmful to gentlemanly manners, and I will never participate in it.

古文：座皆称善。
现代文：在座的人听罢都齐声叫好。
English: Everyone present cried out in unison.

古文：公孙龙由是遂绌。
现代文：从此，公孙龙便受到了冷落。
English: Since then, Gongsunlong has been left out in the cold.

