古文：成王归自奄，在宗周，诰庶邦，作《多方》。
现代文：成王从奄地回来，到了宗周，训诫勉励诸侯众国，作《多方》。
English: When Chengwang returned from the election, he went to Zongzhou, exhorted and encouraged the princes and states, and wrote "Many Sides."

古文：惟五月丁亥，王来自奄，至于宗周。
现代文：五月丁亥这天，成王从奄地回来，到了宗周。
English: On the day of Dinghai in May, Chengwang returned from the polling place and arrived in Zongzhou.

古文：周公曰： 王若曰：猷告尔四国多方惟尔殷侯尹民。我惟大降尔命，尔罔不知。
现代文：周公说： 成王这样说：啊！告诉你们四国、各国诸侯以及你们众诸侯国治民的长官，我给你们大下教令，你们不可昏昏不闻。
English: Zhou Gong said: Cheng Wang said like this: Ah! Tell you four countries, lords of all countries, and all of you lords of all countries, I give you a big order, you must not be blinded.

古文：洪维图天之命，弗永寅念于祀，惟帝降格于夏。
现代文：夏桀夸大天命，不常重视祭祀，上天就对夏国降下了严正的命令。
English: Xia Yao exaggerated the fate of heaven, and did not often attach importance to sacrifices. Heaven then gave strict orders to Xia Guo.

古文：有夏诞厥逸，不肯慼言于民，乃大淫昏，不克终日劝于帝之迪，乃尔攸闻。
现代文：夏桀大肆逸乐，不肯恤问人民，竟然大行淫乱，不能用一天时间为上天的教导而努力，这些是你们所听说过的。
English: You have heard of Hachiko, that he made great merry, and would not be gracious to the people, but was a great fornicator, and would not spend one day in the service of the Lord.

古文：厥图帝之命，不克开于民之丽，乃大降罚，崇乱有夏。
现代文：夏桀夸大天命，不能明白老百姓归附的道理，就大肆杀戮，大乱夏国。
English: Xia Yao exaggerated the fate of heaven, and could not understand the reason for the people to attach themselves to him, so he killed a lot and made a big mess of Xia Guo.

古文：因甲于内乱，不克灵承于旅。罔丕惟进之恭，洪舒于民。
现代文：复桀因习于让妇人治理政事，不能很好地顺从民众，无时不贪取财物，深深地毒害了人民。
English: Because Fuxi was accustomed to letting women administer political affairs, he could not obey the people well, and always coveted wealth, which deeply poisoned the people.

古文：亦惟有夏之民叨懫日钦，劓割夏邑。
现代文：也由于夏民贪婪、忿戾的风气一天天盛行，残害了夏国。
English: It was also due to the greed and anger of the Xia people that prevailed day after day, ruining Xia.

古文：天惟时求民主，乃大降显休命于成汤，刑殄有夏。
现代文：上天于是寻求可以做人民君主的人，就大下光明美好的使命给成汤，命令成汤消灭夏国。
English: Heaven then sought someone who could be the people's monarch, and gave Cheng Tang a bright and beautiful mission, ordering him to destroy Xia.

古文：惟天不畀纯，乃惟以尔多方之义民不克永于多享；惟夏之恭多士大不克明保享于民，乃胥惟虐于民，至于百为，大不克开。乃惟成汤克以尔多方简，代夏作民主。
现代文：上天不赐给众位诸侯，就是因为那时各国首长不能常常劝导人民，夏国的官员太不懂得保护和劝导人民，竟然都对人民施行暴虐，至于各种工作都不能开展；就是因为成汤由于那时有各国邦君的选择，代替夏桀作了君主。
English: Heaven did not grant numerous princes, because at that time the heads of states could not always persuade the people, and the officials of Xia did not know how to protect and persuade the people, so they all tyrannized the people, and all kinds of work could not be carried out; that is because Cheng Tang became the monarch instead of Xia Xi due to the choice of the sovereigns of various countries at that time.

古文：慎厥丽，乃劝；厥民刑，用劝；以至于帝乙，罔不明德慎罚，亦克用劝；要囚殄戮多罪，亦克用劝；开释无辜，亦克用劝。
现代文：他慎施教令，是劝勉人；他惩罚罪人，也是劝勉人；从成汤到帝乙，没有人不宣明德教，慎施刑罚，也能够用来劝勉人；他们监禁、杀死重大罪犯，也能够用来劝勉人；他们释放无罪的人，也能够用来劝勉人。
English: He cautiously gives edifying orders, which can be used to exhort people; he punishes sinners, which can also be used to exhort people; from Cheng Tang to Emperor Bi, there is no one who does not proclaim moral teachings, and cautiously imposes punishments, which can also be used to exhort people; they imprison and kill major criminals, which can also be used to exhort people; they release innocent people, which can also be used to exhort people.

古文：今至于尔辟，弗克以尔多方享天之命，呜呼！ 
现代文：现在到了你们的君王，不能够和你们各国邦君享受上天的大命，实在可悲啊！ 
English: Now it has come to your monarchs, not being able to enjoy the great life of heaven with the sovereigns of your countries, how sad!

古文：王若曰： 诰告尔多方，非天庸释有夏，非天庸释有殷。
现代文：王这样说： 告诉你们各位邦君，并不是上天要舍弃夏国，也不是上天要舍弃殷国。
English: The king said, "I want to tell you, my lords, that it is not God's will to abandon the Xia Kingdom, nor is it God's will to abandon the Yin Kingdom.

古文：乃惟尔辟以尔多方大淫，图天之命屑有辞。乃惟有夏图厥政，不集于享，天降时丧，有邦间之。乃惟尔商后王逸厥逸，图厥政不蠲烝，天惟降时丧。
现代文：是因为你们夏、殷的君王和你们各国诸侯大肆淫佚，夸大天命，安逸而又懈怠；是因为夏桀谋划政事，不在于劝勉，于是上天降下了这亡国大祸，诸侯成汤代替了夏桀；是因为你们殷商的后王安于他们的逸乐生活，谋划政事不美好，于是上天降下这亡国大祸。
English: It is because the kings of Xia and Yin and the lords and princes of your various countries have been indulging in debauchery, exaggerating the fate of heaven, being comfortable and slacking off; because Xia and Yin planned political affairs, not by exhortation, so the heavens brought down this great disaster of ruining the country, and the princes and princes replaced Xia and Yin; because the queens of your merchants were content with their luxurious life, planning political affairs was not good, so the heavens brought down this great disaster of ruining the country.

古文： 惟圣罔念作狂，惟狂克念作圣。
现代文：圣人不思考就会变成狂人，狂人能够思考就能变成圣人。
English: If a sage does not think, he becomes a madman; if a madman thinks, he becomes a sage.

古文：天惟五年须暇之子孙，诞作民主，罔可念听。
现代文：上天用五年时间等待、宽暇商的子孙悔改，让他继续做万民之君主，但是，无法可以使他们思考和听从天意。
English: Heaven waits five years for the children of the libertine to repent, so that he may continue to be the ruler of the people, but it cannot make them think and obey the will of heaven.

古文：天惟求尔多方，大动以威，开厥顾天。惟尔多方罔堪顾之。
现代文：上天又寻求你们众诸侯国，大降灾异，启发你们众国顾念天意，你们众国也没有人能顾念它。
English: And the heaven seeketh you, O ye kingdoms, to bring upon you great plagues, that ye may be admonished, O ye nations, to remember the ordinance of the Lord, which none of you are able to remember.

古文：惟我周王灵承于旅，克堪用德，惟典神天。
现代文：只有我们周王善于顺从民众，能用明德，善待神、天。
English: Only we, King Zhou, are good at obeying the people, and can use wisdom and virtue to be kind to God and heaven.

古文：天惟式教我用休，简畀殷命，尹尔多方。
现代文：上天就改用休祥指示我们，选择我周王，授予伟大的使命，治理众国诸侯。
English: Heaven instructed us to change the name to "Shuxiang" and chose me, King Zhou, to be entrusted with the great mission of governing the nations.

古文：尔曷不夹介乂我周王享天之命？今尔尚宅尔宅，畋尔田，尔曷不惠王熙天之命？
现代文：现在我怎么敢重复地说？我有过发布给你们四国臣民的教令，你们为什么不劝导各国臣民？你们为什么不大大帮助我周王共享天命呢？现在你们还住在你们的住处，整治你们的田地，你们为什么不顺从周王宣扬上天的大命呢？
English: How dare I repeat it now? I have issued the edict to you, the subjects of the four kingdoms. Why don't you persuade the subjects of the four kingdoms? Why don't you greatly help King Zhou to share the Mandate of Heaven with me? Even now, you still live in your homes and cultivate your fields. Why don't you obey King Zhou and preach the Mandate of Heaven?

古文： 尔乃迪屡不静，尔心未爱。
现代文：你们竟然屡次教导还不安定，你们内心不顺。
English: You have actually repeatedly taught things that are not stable, and you are not well at heart.

古文：尔乃不大宅天命，尔乃悄播天命，尔乃自作不典，图忱于正。
现代文：你们竟然不度量天命，你们竟然完全抛弃天命，你们竟然自作不法，图谋攻击长官。
English: How dare you not measure up to the Mandate of Heaven, how dare you completely abandon the Mandate of Heaven, how dare you commit illegal acts and plot to attack officials.

古文：我惟时其教告之，我惟时其战要囚之，至于再，至于三。
现代文：我因此教导过你们，我因此讨伐你们，囚禁你们，至于再，至于三。
English: For this cause have I taught you, and for this cause have I fought against you, and have shut you up: and for this cause have I also afflicted you three times.

古文：乃有不用我降尔命，我乃其大罚殛之！
现代文：假如还有人不服从我发布给你们的命令，那么我就要重重惩罚他们！
English: If there are others who do not obey the orders I have issued to you, then I will punish them severely!

古文：非我有周秉德不康宁，乃惟尔自速辜！ 
现代文：这并不是我们周国执行德教不安静，只是你们自己招致了罪过！ 王说： 啊！
English: It is not that we, the people of Zhou, are not quiet in the implementation of moral education, but that you have brought the sin upon yourselves! The king said: Ah!

古文：王曰： 呜呼！猷告尔有方多士暨殷多士。今尔奔走臣我监五祀，越惟有胥伯小大多正，尔罔不克臬。
现代文：告诉你们各国官员和殷国的官员，到现在你们奔走效劳臣服我周国已经五年了，所有的徭役赋税和大大小小的政事，你们没有不能遵守法规的。
English: I would like to tell the officials of your countries and the officials of China that it has been five years since you have been working hard to serve and submit to our Zhou Kingdom. You have not failed to comply with the laws and regulations in all your duties, taxes, and political affairs, large and small.

古文：自作不和，尔惟和哉！
现代文：你们自己造成了不和睦，你们应该和睦起来！
English: You yourselves have caused the discord, you should make peace!

古文：尔室不睦，尔惟和哉！
现代文：你们的家庭不和睦，你们也应该和睦起来！
English: If your families don't get along, you should get along too!

古文：尔邑克明，尔惟克勤乃事。
现代文：要使你们的城邑清明，你们应该能够勤于你们的职事。
English: You shall purify your cities, that you may go about your business in peace.

古文：尔尚不忌于凶德，亦则以穆穆在乃位，克阅于乃邑谋介。
现代文：你们应当不被坏人教唆，也就可以好好地站在你们的位置上，就能够留在你们的城邑里谋求美好的生活了。
English: You should not be instigated by bad people, and you can stand your ground well, and you can stay in your cities and seek a better life.

古文：尔乃自时洛邑，尚永力畋尔田，天惟畀矜尔，我有周惟其大介赉尔，迪简在王庭。
现代文：你们如果用这个洛邑，长久尽力耕作你们的田地，上天会怜悯你们，我们周国会大大地赏赐你们。
English: If you use this Luoyang to cultivate your fields for a long time, Heaven will have mercy on you, and we will reward you greatly.

古文：尚尔事，有服在大僚。 
现代文：把你们引进选拔到朝廷来；努力做好你们的职事，又将让你们担任重要官职。 王说： 啊！
English: They will bring you to the court and select you, and if you work hard and do your job well, they will give you important posts.

古文：王曰： 呜呼！多士，尔不克劝忱我命，尔亦则惟不克享，凡民惟曰不享。
现代文：官员们，如果你们不能努力信从我的教命，你们也就不能享有禄位，老百姓也将认为你们不能享有禄位。
English: Officials, if you can't work hard to believe in and follow my teachings, you won't be able to enjoy your positions, and the people will think that you can't enjoy your positions.

古文：尔乃惟逸惟颇，大远王命，则惟尔多方探天之威，我则致天之罚，离逖尔土。 
现代文：你们如果放荡邪恶，大大地违抗王命，那就是你们各国妄图试探上天的惩罚，我就要施行上天的惩罚，使你们离开你们的故土。 
English: But if ye shall still do wickedly, and rebel against the commandment of the king, and rebel against the commandment of the king, then I will bring the curse of heaven upon you, and ye shall perish from off the face of the earth.

古文：王曰： 我不惟多诰，我惟祗告尔命。 
现代文：王说： 我不想重复地说了，我只是认真地把天命告诉你们。 
English: Wang said, "I don't want to repeat what I said, I'm just telling you about the Mandate of Heaven in earnest.

古文：又曰： 时惟尔初，不克敬于和，则无我怨。 
现代文：王又说： 好好地谋划你们的开始吧！若不能恭敬与和睦，那么你们就不要怨我了。 
English: And the king said, Appoint a day, and let it be established: and if there be no justice and no peace, see that ye have no complaint against me.

