古文：孝烈皇后方氏，世宗第三后也，江宁人。
现代文：孝烈皇后方氏，是明世宗的第三位皇后，江宁人。
English: Filial Empress Fang, the third empress of the Ming Dynasty, was from Jiangning.

古文：帝即位且十年，未有子。
现代文：世宗即位十年，仍没有儿子。
English: Ten years after the enthronement of King Sejong, there is still no son.

古文：大学士张孚敬言： 古者天子立后，并建六宫、三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，所以广嗣也。
现代文：大学士张孚敬劝世宗说 ：古代天子立后，并建六宫、三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，所以才多子嗣。
English: Zhang Fujing, a university scholar, advised Shizong, "In ancient times, the emperor had six wives, three concubines, nine concubines, twenty-seven concubines, and eighty-one wives. That is why he had so many children.

古文：陛下春秋鼎盛，宜博求淑女，为子嗣计。 
现代文：陛下正值壮年，为了子嗣之计，应当广求淑女。 世宗听从了他的建议。
English: His Majesty was in the prime of life, and for the sake of his heirs, he should seek out a wide range of ladies.

古文：从之。十年三月，后与郑氏、王氏、阎氏、韦氏、沈氏、卢氏、沈氏、杜氏同册为九嫔，冠九翟冠，大采鞠衣，圭用次玉，谷文，册黄金涂，视皇后杀五分之一。
现代文：嘉靖十年，方氏与郑氏、王氏、阎氏、韦氏、沈氏、卢氏、沈氏、杜氏一起被册封为九嫔，她们头戴九翟冠，身穿大彩鞠衣，被赐给作为九嫔凭信的玉圭，告文封册涂金，规格比皇后降低五分之一。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Fang, Zheng, Wang, Yan, Wei, Shen, Lu, Shen and Du were canonized as the Nine Immortals. They wore the Nine Immortals Crown on their heads, and wore the large-colored bowler hats. They were given to the Nine Immortals' confidant, Gyukgyi. The proclamation envelope was gold-plated, and its size was one-fifth smaller than that of the empress.

古文：至期，帝衮冕告太庙，还服皮弁，御华盖殿，传制，遣大臣行册礼。
现代文：届时，皇上穿戴礼服礼帽祭告太庙，回来后又换上皮弁，亲临华盖殿传下诏令，命大臣行册封礼。
English: At that time, the emperor wore a ceremonial dress and ceremonial hat to the Grand Temple, and after returning, he changed the epaulettes, personally delivered the edict to the Huagai Palace, and the minister of life performed the ceremonial sealing.

古文：既册，从皇后朝奉先殿。
现代文：册封之后，方氏等跟随皇后到奉先殿朝见皇上。
English: After the investiture ceremony, the Fang family and others followed the empress to the Bosenden Hall to meet the emperor.

古文：礼成，帝服皮弁，受百官贺，盖创礼也。
现代文：礼成，皇上穿着皮弁，接受百官朝贺，这些都是明代首创的礼制。
English: Li Cheng, the emperor wearing a flapper, receiving morning greetings from hundreds of officials, these are the first ceremonial systems in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：张后废，遂立为后，而封沈氏为宸妃，阎氏为丽妃。
现代文：后来张皇后被废，于是世宗便立方氏为皇后，而封沈氏为宸妃，阎氏为丽妃。
English: Later, Empress Zhang was dethroned, so Shizong became Empress of the Cube Clan, while Fuxing became Empress Dowager, and Yan became Empress Dowager.

古文：旧制：立后，谒内庙而已。至是，下礼臣议庙见礼。
现代文：按照旧制，册立皇后，只须拜谒内庙就行了，可是现在，皇上却将谒见宗庙的礼仪交付礼臣商议。
English: According to the old system, to be crowned empress, all one had to do was to visit the Inner Temple, but now, the emperor has handed over the etiquette of visiting the ancestral temple to the courtiers for deliberation.

古文：于是群臣以天子立三宫以承宗庙，《礼经》有庙见之文，乃考据《礼经》，参稽《大明集礼》，拟仪注以上。
现代文：于是群臣认为天子册立三宫是为了继承宗庙，而《礼经》上又有谒见宗庙的记载。他们便考据《礼经》，参考核对《大明集礼》，草拟礼仪条款呈给皇上。
English: As a result, the courtiers believed that the three palaces were established by the Emperor in order to inherit the ancestral temple, and there was a record of the ancestral temple in the "Rituals." They then examined the "Rituals" and, with reference to the verification of the "Great Collection of Rites," drafted the etiquette terms and presented them to the Emperor.

古文：至期，帝率后谒太庙及世庙。
现代文：届时，皇上带领方皇后拜谒太庙及世庙。
English: At that time, the Emperor led the Empress to visit the Imperial Temple and the World Temple.

古文：越三日，颁诏天下。
现代文：三日之后，颁诏天下。
English: Three days later, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：明日，受命妇朝。
现代文：第二天，接受命妇朝见。
English: The next day, I went to see her in the morning.

古文：二十一年，宫婢杨金英等谋弑逆，帝赖后救得免，乃进后父泰和伯锐爵为侯。
现代文：二十一年，宫婢杨金英等图谋弑君叛逆，世宗靠方皇后营救才得以幸免一死，乃将方皇后的父亲泰和伯方锐进爵为侯。
English: In 1921, the palace maidservant Yang Jin Ying and others plotted to rebel against Emperor Xizong. Emperor Xizong was only saved from death by the rescue of Empress Fang, who made Empress Fang's father Tai He Fang Rui a marquis.

古文：初，曹妃有色，帝爱之，册为端妃。
现代文：当初，曹妃很有姿色，世宗特别宠爱她，将她册封为端妃。
English: At first, Caofei was very beautiful, and Shizong especially loved her and had her crowned as a princess.

古文：是夕，帝宿端妃宫。金英等伺帝熟寝，以组缢帝项，误为死结，得不绝。
现代文：那天晚上，世宗夜宿端妃宫，杨金英等人待世宗睡熟之后，用丝带紧勒世宗的脖子，可是误打死结，世宗没有断气。
English: That night, after waiting for Sejong to fall asleep, Yang Jinying and others tied a ribbon around Sejong's neck. However, they tied the knot by mistake, and Sejong did not die.

古文：同事张金莲知事不就，走告后。后驰至，解组，帝苏。
现代文：同伙张金莲知道事情没有办成，便跑去报告方皇后，方皇后迅速赶到，解开丝带，世宗才苏醒过来。
English: Comrade Zhang Jinlian knew that the matter was not done, so he ran to report to Empress Fang. Empress Fang quickly arrived, untied the ribbon, and Shizong woke up.

古文：后命内监张佐等捕宫人杂治，言金英等弑逆，王宁嫔首谋。
现代文：事后，方皇后命令内监张佐等人搜捕宫女一同治罪，招出杨金英等人想谋害皇上，王宁嫔为主谋。
English: After the event, Empress Fang ordered the internal inspector Zhang Zuo and others to search for and arrest the concubine to jointly punish the crime, and invited Yang Jinying and others to attempt to assassinate the emperor, with Wang Ningya as the main plotter.

古文：又曰：曹端妃虽不与，亦知谋。
现代文：又说，曹端妃虽然没有参与此事，但也知道这一阴谋。
English: He also said that although Cao Duanfei was not involved in the matter, she also knew about the plot.

古文：时帝病悸不能言，后传帝命收端妃、宁嫔及金英等悉砾于市。并诛其族属十余人。
现代文：当时世宗受到惊吓，病情严重，不能说话，方皇后传达世宗命令，将端妃、王宁嫔及杨金英等人全部在街市上处以磔刑，还诛杀她们的亲属族人十余人。
English: At that time, Shizong was frightened, seriously ill and unable to speak. Empress Fang conveyed Shizong's order to lash Fangfei, Wang Ningya and Yang Jinying to death in the market, as well as to lash more than ten of their relatives.

古文：然妃实不知也。久之，帝始知其冤。
现代文：但是端妃确实不知内情，后来，世宗才知道端妃是被冤枉的。
English: However, the princess did not know the truth, and only later did Sejong learn that the princess had been wronged.

古文：二十六年十一月乙未，后崩。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年十一月十九日，方皇后去世。
English: On November 19th, the 26th year of Jiajing, Empress Fang passed away.

古文：诏曰： 皇后比救朕危，奉天济难，其以元后礼葬。 
现代文：世宗下诏说： 皇后当时救朕于危急之中，奉天济难，应按元配皇后的礼仪安葬。 
English: Emperor Sejong issued an edict saying, "The empress saved me in a critical situation at that time, and with the help of heaven, I should be buried according to the etiquette of the empress.

古文：预名葬地曰永陵，谥孝烈，亲定谥礼，视昔加隆焉。
现代文：将墓地预名为永陵，谥号孝烈，并亲定谥礼的规格，比以往皇后的谥礼更加隆重。
English: The cemetery will be pre-named Yongling, the posthumous name will be Xiaoling, and the specifications of the funeral service will be personally determined. The funeral service of the empress will be more grand than before.

古文：礼成，颁诏天下。
现代文：礼成，颁诏天下。
English: Li Cheng, issued an edict to the world.

古文：及大祥，礼臣请安主奉先殿东夹室，帝曰： 奉先殿夹室，非正也，可即祔太庙。 
现代文：等到服丧期满，礼臣请求将方皇后的牌位安放在奉先殿东夹室。世宗说道 ：奉先殿的夹室不是正位，可以将皇后附祭于太庙。 
English: When the period of mourning was over, the courtier requested that the plaque of the Empress Fang be placed in the east antechamber of the Hall of Worship.Sejong said, "The antechamber of the Hall of Worship is not a proper place, so the empress can be enshrined in the Imperial Temple."

古文：于是大学士严嵩等请设位于太庙东，皇妣睿皇后之次，后寝藏主则设幄于宪庙皇祖妣之右，以从祔于祖姑之义。
现代文：于是大学士严嵩等请求在太庙东侧设立方皇后的牌位，居于皇母睿皇后之后，皇后寝藏神主则设帐在宪庙皇祖母之右，以按照附祭于祖婆的礼仪原则。
English: As a result, the university scholar Yan Song and others requested that the plaques of the Fang Empress be set up on the east side of the Grand Temple, and that the Queen Mother Rui live behind the Empress, while the Empress Sleeping God is set up on the right of the Emperor's grandmother in the Constitutional Temple, in accordance with the etiquette principle of enshrining the ancestral grandmother.

古文：帝曰： 祔礼至重，岂可权就。
现代文：世宗说： 附祭之礼至关重要，岂能将就。
English: Sejong said, "The offering ceremony is very important.

古文：后非帝，乃配帝者，自有一定之序，安有享从此而主藏彼之礼！
现代文：皇后不是皇帝，而是与皇帝相配者，配祭自然要有一定的次序，哪有享受祭祀依照这样的礼制，而神主的安放却依照那样的礼制呢？
English: The empress is not the emperor, but the one who is compatible with the emperor. Naturally, there must be a certain order in the offering of sacrifices. How can one enjoy the sacrifice according to such a ritual, while the placement of the god is according to such a ritual?

古文：其祧仁宗，祔以新序，即朕位次，勿得乱礼。 
现代文：方皇后设祭于仁宗庙中，按照新的次序享受附祭，就在朕的位置之后，不要乱了礼制。 
English: Empress Fang set up the festival in the Jinzong Temple, and enjoyed the additional festival according to the new order. Just after my position, do not mess up the etiquette.

古文：嵩曰： 祔新序，非臣下所敢言，且阴不可当阳位。 
现代文：严嵩说道： 按新次序附祭，不是臣下所敢言的，况且阴位不同于阳位。 
English: Yan Song said, "According to the new order of offerings, it is not what the vassals dare to say, moreover, the female position is different from the male position.

古文：乃命姑藏主睿皇后侧。
现代文：于是世宗下令暂时将方皇后的神主放在睿皇后的旁边。
English: As a result, Shizong ordered that the deity of Empress Fang be temporarily placed next to that of Empress Rui.

古文：二十九年十月，帝终欲祔后太庙，命再议。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年十月，世宗终归还是想将方皇后附祭于太庙，命廷臣再议。
English: In October of the 29th year of Jiajing, Shizong finally wanted to enshrine Empress Fang in the Imperial Temple, and ordered the courtier to reconsider.

古文：尚书徐阶言不可，给事中杨思忠是阶议，余无言者。
现代文：尚书徐阶认为不能这么做，给事中杨思忠同意徐阶的意见，其余大臣都不说话。
English: Shangshu Xu Ju thought that this could not be done. In the middle of the matter, Yang Sizhong agreed with Xu Ju's opinion, and the other ministers did not speak.

古文：帝觇知状。
现代文：皇上从旁得知当时的情形。
English: The Emperor learned about the situation from a bystander.

古文：及议疏入，谓： 后正位中宫，礼宜祔享，但遽及庙次，则臣子之情，不唯不敢，实不忍也。
现代文：等到群臣将商议结果上奏，说： 皇后正位中宫，按礼应当享受附祭，但仓促排列庙次，依臣子之情，不只是不敢，确实是不忍心啊。
English: When the group of courtiers announced the result of their deliberation, he said, "The empress is enthroned in the middle of the palace, and according to etiquette, she should enjoy the supplementary offerings, but hastily arranging the temples according to the feelings of the courtiers is not only not daring, but it is really intolerant.

古文：宜设位奉先殿。 
现代文：还是设牌位于奉先殿为宜。 
English: It is still advisable to set up a signboard at Bongsendang.

古文：帝震怒。
现代文：世宗十分震怒。
English: The Emperor was furious.

古文：阶、思忠惶恐言： 周建九庙，三昭三穆。
现代文：徐阶、杨思忠非常惶恐，说 ：周朝建有九庙，天子以三昭三穆设庙祭祀祖先。
English: Xu Qia and Yang Sizhong were very frightened and said, "There were nine temples built in the Zhou Dynasty, and the Son of Heaven set up a temple to worship the ancestors with San Zhao and San Mu.

古文：国朝庙制，同堂异室，与《周礼》不同。
现代文：本朝宗庙制度，同堂异室，与《周礼》不同。
English: This temple system is different from that in Zhouli.

古文：今太庙九室皆满，若以圣躬论，仁宗当祧，固不待言，但此乃异日圣子神孙之事。
现代文：而今太庙九室都已排满，如果就圣上自己而论，应当附祭于仁宗的庙，固然不用说，但这是他日皇上子孙之事。
English: But now the nine rooms of the Imperial Temple are full. If it were up to His Holiness himself, he should make an additional offering at the temple of Emperor Nintsune. Of course, it goes without saying, but this is a matter for the children and grandchildren of His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：臣闻夏人之庙五，商以七，周以九。
现代文：臣等听说夏人有五庙，商有七庙，周有九庙。
English: It was said that Xia had five temples, Shang had seven temples, and Zhou had nine temples.

古文：礼由义起，五可七，七可九，九之外亦可加也。
现代文：礼制由道义而起，五可以为七，七可以为九，九之外也可以再加。
English: The etiquette system is based on morality. Five can be seven, seven can be nine, and nine can be added.

古文：请于太庙及奉先殿各增二室，以祔孝烈，则仁宗可不必祧，孝烈皇后可速正南面之位，陛下亦无预祧以俟之嫌。 
现代文：所以臣等请求在太庙及奉先殿各增二室，以附祭孝烈皇后，那么可以不必享祭于仁宗之庙，孝烈皇后可以尽快正南面之位，陛下也可以不必有预先设立空位的麻烦了。 
English: Therefore, the courtiers requested that two rooms be added to the Imperial Temple and the Hall of the Ancestors, so that the Emperor and Empress could enjoy the festival at the temple of the Rinzong without having to make an additional offering. The Empress and the Emperor could be seated facing south as soon as possible, and His Majesty would not have to go to the trouble of setting up a vacant seat in advance.

古文：帝曰： 臣子之谊，当祧当祔，力请可也。
现代文：世宗听后说道： 身为大臣，觉得该怎么祧庙怎么附祭，你们据理请求就可以了。
English: After listening, Sejong said, "As a minister, I feel that it is up to you to decide how the temple should be built and how the offerings should be made. All you have to do is make a reasonable request.

古文：苟礼得其正，何避豫为！ 
现代文：如果礼制安排正确，又何必去躲避犹豫这么去做呢？ 
English: If the etiquette arrangement is correct, why do you have to avoid hesitating to do so?

古文：于是阶等复会廷臣上言： 唐、虞、夏五庙，其祀皆止四世。
现代文：于是徐阶等再次会同廷臣一起上奏道 ：唐、虞、夏有五庙，其祭祀都只限于四世。
English: As a result, Xu Qia and others once again joined the courtiers in reciting the following sutra: Tang, Yu and Xia had five temples, and their sacrifices were limited to the fourth generation.

古文：周九庙，三昭三穆，然而兄弟相及，亦不能尽足六世。
现代文：周朝有九庙，为三昭三穆，但它是兄弟相承，祭祀也不能尽满六世。
English: There were nine temples in the Zhou Dynasty, three for Zhao and three for Mu, but it was a brotherly succession, and the sacrificial rites could not complete the sixth generation.

古文：今仁宗为皇上五世祖，以圣躬论，仁宗于礼当祧，孝烈皇后于礼当祔。
现代文：而今仁宗为皇上五世祖，以圣上自己而论，按照礼制应当祧庙于仁宗，孝烈皇后按礼应当附祭。
English: Now that Emperor Ninsong is the fifth generation ancestor of the emperor, according to the rite system, the temple should be dedicated to Emperor Ninsong according to the rite system, and the empress should make offerings according to the rite system.

古文：请祧仁宗，祔孝烈皇后于太庙第九室。 
现代文：所以臣等请求祧庙于仁宗，附祭孝烈皇后于太庙等九室。 
English: Therefore, the vassals and others requested that the gong temple be located in the Rinzong, and the subsidiary temple, the Xiaoling Empress, be located in the Taimiao and other nine rooms.

古文：因上祧祔仪注。
现代文：由此呈上祧庙附祭的礼仪条款。
English: The following are the rules of etiquette for the temple's festival.

古文：已而请忌日祭，帝犹衔前议，报曰： 孝烈继后，所奉者又入继之君，忌不祭亦可。 
现代文：不久，廷臣请求在忌日祭祀，世宗仍对前议耿耿于怀，所以答复说： 孝烈皇后是后立的皇后，她所侍奉的又是外藩入继的皇帝，忌日不祭祀也是可以的。 
English: Soon after, the courtiers asked for a memorial service to be held on the day of her death. Sejong was still angry about the previous suggestion, so he replied, "Empress Xiaoling is the empress of posterity, and she served the emperor who succeeded to the foreign domain. It is okay not to have a memorial service on the day of her death.

古文：阶等请益力，帝曰： 非天子不议礼。
现代文：徐阶等人更加极力请求，世宗说： 不是天子不议礼节。
English: Xu Ju and others made more strenuous requests, and Shizong said, "It's not that God doesn't care about etiquette.

古文：后当祔庙，居朕室次，礼官顾谓今日未宜，徒饰说以惑众听。 
现代文：方皇后应当附祭于太庙，排列在朕的庙室之后，礼官对我说今天安排不太合适，这不过是空口说好话以惑众听罢了。 
English: Empress Fang should be enshrined in the Great Temple, lined up behind my temple room. The etiquette officer told me that today's arrangement is not suitable. This is just empty talk to deceive the public.

古文：因谕严嵩等曰： 礼官从朕言，勉强耳。
现代文：因而对严嵩等人说道： 礼官听从我的话，是很勉强的。
English: Therefore, he said to Yan Song and others, "The etiquette official reluctantly obeyed my words.

古文：即不忍祧仁宗，且置后主别庙，将来由臣下议处。
现代文：既然他们不忍让皇后附祭于仁宗庙里，只有暂且将皇后的神主安放在其他庙室，将来再由大臣们去商议处理吧。
English: Since they can't bear to have the empress enshrined in the Rinzong Temple, they can only temporarily place the empress's deity in other temple rooms, and let the ministers discuss the matter in the future.

古文：忌日令奠一卮酒，不至伤情。 
现代文：皇后的忌日且下令以一杯酒祭奠，也不至于伤了感情。 
English: On the day of the Queen's death, he also ordered a glass of wine to commemorate the occasion, so as not to hurt her feelings.

古文：初，神宗在东宫，每晨谒奉先殿、朝帝及生母毕，必之后所问安，后闻履声辄喜。
现代文：于是礼臣不再敢言，只是请求按照皇上的命令行事，世宗这才表示同意。两年之后，杨思忠因上贺表时触犯忌讳，被处以杖责和削除官籍的惩罚。
English: As a result, the courtier no longer dared to speak, but only asked to act in accordance with the emperor's order, and only then did the sejong agree. Two years later, Yang Sizhong was punished with the cane and the removal of his official registration for violating taboos when sending a congratulatory letter.

古文：既嗣位，孝事两宫无间。二十四年七月崩，谥曰孝安贞懿恭纯温惠佐天弘圣皇后，祀奉先殿别室。
现代文：隆庆初年，方皇后与孝洁皇后在同一天被上尊谥号为孝烈端顺敏惠恭诚祗天卫圣皇后，方皇后的神主被移至弘孝殿。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Empress Fang and Empress Xiaojie were conferred the title of "Holy Empress of Heaven and Earth" on the same day, and the deity of Empress Fang was moved to Hongxiao Hall.

古文：孝定李太后，神宗生母也，漷县人。
现代文：孝定李太后是神宗的生母，氵郭县人。
English: Empress Dowager Xiaoding Li was the birth mother of Shenzong, a native of Shenguo County.

古文：侍穆宗于裕邸。
现代文：她侍奉穆宗于裕邸。
English: She served Mu Zongyu at his residence.

古文：隆庆元年三月封贵妃。生神宗。
现代文：隆庆元年三月，她被封为贵妃，生下神宗。
English: In March of the first year of the Longqing era, she was made a noble consort and gave birth to Shensong.

古文：即位，上尊号曰慈圣皇太后。
现代文：神宗即位，为她上尊号为慈圣皇太后。
English: When Shinso ascended the throne, she was given the honorific title Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：旧制：天子立，尊皇后为皇太后，若有生母称太后者，则加徽号以别之。
现代文：按照旧制，天子即位，尊皇后为皇太后，若有生母称太后的，则加上徽号以示区别。
English: According to the old system, the emperor ascends to the throne, the revered empress is the empress dowager, and if there is a birth mother called the empress dowager, a badge is added to show the difference.

古文：是时，太监冯保欲媚贵妃，因以并尊风大学士张居正下廷臣议，尊皇后曰仁圣皇太后，贵妃曰慈圣皇太后，始无别矣。
现代文：当时，大监冯保想讨好贵妃，因此以并尊两太后为名，暗示大学士张居正交付廷臣商议，尊皇后为李太后，尊贵妃为慈圣皇太后，皇后与贵妃两人便开始没有区别了。
English: At that time, the grand inspector Feng Bao wanted to please the empress dowager, so he suggested that Zhang Ju, a university scholar, was submitting to the courtiers for discussion in the name of respecting both empress dowagers. The empress dowager was the empress dowager Li, the empress dowager was the empress dowager Cixi, and there was no difference between the empress dowager and the empress dowager.

古文：仁圣居慈庆宫，慈圣居慈宁宫。
现代文：仁圣皇太后住在慈庆宫，慈圣皇太后住在慈宁宫。
English: Empress Dowager Cixing lived in Cixing Palace, and Empress Dowager Cixing lived in Cining Palace.

古文：居正请太后视帝起居，乃徙居乾清宫。
现代文：张居正请求仁圣皇太后看护皇上的起居，乃迁居乾清宫。
English: Zhang Juzheng asked Empress Dowager Ren Sheng to take care of the emperor's residence and moved to the Qianqing Palace.

古文：太后教帝颇严。
现代文：李太后管教皇上相当严格。
English: Empress Dowager Li was quite strict with the Pope.

古文：帝或不读书，即召使长跪。
现代文：神宗有时不愿读书，李太后便马上将他召来，让他长时间罚跪。
English: Shenzong sometimes didn't want to read, so Empress Dowager Li immediately summoned him and made him kneel for a long time.

古文：每御讲筵入，尝令效讲臣进讲于前。
现代文：每次神宗在经筵听儒臣讲授完毕，李太后总是让神宗在她面前模仿讲臣复述所讲内容。
English: Whenever Shenzong finished listening to a lecture by a Confucian scholar at the Great Hall of the People, Empress Dowager Li always asked Shenzong to repeat what he had said in front of her, imitating the lecturer.

古文：遇朝期，五更至帝寝所，呼曰 帝起 ，敕左右掖帝坐，取水为盥面，挈之登辇以出。
现代文：凡到上朝之日，李太后五更时就来到神宗的住处，招呼道 ：皇上应该起来了。 下令左右扶皇上起来坐下，取水为他洗脸，然后领着皇上乘车而出。
English: On the day of Emperor Jomei's enthronement, Empress Dowager Li would arrive at Emperor Shinso's residence at five o'clock in the morning and call out, "Emperor, you should get up." She would order everyone to help the Emperor get up and sit down, fetch water for him to wash his face, and then lead the Emperor out to the car.

古文：帝事太后惟谨，而诸内臣奉太后旨者，往往挟持太过。
现代文：神宗侍奉太后惟命恭谨，而那些奉太后之旨的宦官们，往往对他过分挟持管束。
English: Shenzong served the empress dowager according to her orders, and those eunuchs who served the empress dowager's orders often held him under excessive control.

古文：帝尝在西城曲宴被酒，令内侍歌新声，辞不能，取剑击之。左右劝解，乃戏割其发。
现代文：有一次，神宗在西城曲宴上喝多了酒，命内侍唱新曲给他听，内侍推辞说不会，神宗便取剑要杀内侍，幸亏左右加以劝解，才取笑割去内侍的头发。
English: On one occasion, Shinso drank too much wine at a banquet of Western music and ordered the chambermaid to sing a new song for him. When the chambermaid said no, Shinso took out his sword and wanted to kill the chambermaid. Fortunately, after some persuasion, he made fun of the chambermaid and cut off her hair.

古文：翼日，太后闻，传语居正具疏切谏，令为帝草罪己御札。
现代文：第二天，李太后听说此事，传话给张居正，让他上疏切谏，并令他为皇上起草罪己御札。
English: The next day, the Empress Dowager Li heard about the incident and sent a message to Zhang Juzheng, asking him to go to the imperial court and cut the imperial seal, and ordered him to draft a criminal charge sheet for the emperor.

古文：又召帝长跪，数其过。帝涕泣请改乃已。
现代文：又将皇上召来罚跪，一一列举他的过错，神宗哭着请求以后改过才算了结。
English: He also summoned the emperor to kneel for punishment and enumerated his faults one by one. After crying and begging, Shintsong changed his ways and the matter was settled.

古文：六年，帝大婚，太后将返慈宁宫，敕居正曰： 吾不能视皇帝朝夕，先生亲受先帝付托，其朝夕纳诲，终先帝凭几之谊。 
现代文：万历六年，神宗大婚，李太后将返回慈宁宫，她嘱咐张居正道： 我不能再早晚照护皇上了，先生亲受先帝的托付，望每天早晚都能对皇上有所教诲，不负先帝对你的信赖。 
English: After six long years, the great wedding of Emperor Shenzong, Empress Dowager Li will return to Cining Palace. She instructed Zhang Ju to take the right path: I can no longer take care of the emperor in the morning and evening. Sir, personally entrusted by the former emperor, I hope to be able to teach the emperor something every morning and evening, not to fail the former emperor's trust in you.

古文：三月加尊号曰宣文。
现代文：三月，加上李太后尊号为宣文。
English: In March, the honorary title of Empress Dowager Li was added to the proclamation.

古文：十年加明肃。
现代文：十年加上尊号明肃。
English: Ten years plus the honorific title Mingshu.

古文：十二年同仁圣太后谒山陵。
现代文：十二年，李太后同仁圣太后一起拜谒天寿山陵园。
English: In the twelfth year, Empress Dowager Li and Empress Dowager Jin paid a visit to the Jiu Tianshou Mountain Cemetery together.

古文：二十九年加贞寿端献。
现代文：二十九年，再加李太后尊号贞寿端献。
English: In 1929, the honorary title of Empress Dowager Li was added.

古文：三十四年加恭熹。
现代文：三十四年，又加上尊号恭熹。
English: Thirty-four years later, he was given the honorific title of Gongjun.

古文：四十二年二月崩，上尊谥曰孝定贞纯钦仁端肃弼天祚圣皇太后，合葬昭陵，别祀崇先殿。
现代文：四十二年二月，李太后去世，被上尊谥号为孝定贞纯钦仁端肃弼天祚圣皇太后，合葬于昭陵，另在崇先殿祭祀。
English: In February of the 42nd year, Empress Dowager Li passed away. She was given the title of "Holy Empress Dowager XiaodingzhenchunqinrenduanShuanTianyun" by the Supreme Leader. She was buried together with her husband in the Zhaoling Mausoleum, and was also enshrined in the Chongxian Hall.

古文：后性严明。
现代文：李太后性情严明。
English: Empress Dowager Li has a stern disposition.

古文：万历初政，委任张居正，综核名实，几于富强，后之力居多。
现代文：万历初年的政务，虽委任张居正，但综核名实，国家近于富强，李太后之功居多。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, although Zhang Jizheng was appointed as the head of the government, the overall assessment was that the country was close to being rich and strong, and Empress Dowager Li was mostly responsible for this.

古文：光宗之未册立也，给事中姜应麟等疏请被谪，太后闻之弗善。
现代文：光宗还未被册立为太子时，给事中姜应麟等上疏请求册封太子而被贬谪，李太后听说之后很不以为然。
English: When Emperor Guangzong had not yet been enthroned as crown prince, Jiang Yinglin and other high-ranking officials requested to be enthroned as crown prince and were demeaned. Empress Dowager Li was very disapproving after hearing about this.

古文：一日，帝入侍，太后问故。
现代文：有一天，神宗到慈宁宫陪侍太后，太后便问他不册立太子的原因。
English: One day, Shenzong accompanied the empress dowager to the Jining Palace. The empress dowager asked him why he did not become crown prince.

古文：帝曰： 彼都人子也。 
现代文：神宗回答： 他是都人之子。 
English: Shenzong replied: He is the son of a man from the capital.

古文：太后大怒曰： 尔亦都人子！ 
现代文：太后大怒道 ：你也是都人之子。 
English: The empress dowager said angrily, "You are also the son of a citizen of Tokyo."

古文：帝惶恐，伏地不敢起。
现代文：神宗听后惶恐不已，跪伏在地上不敢起来。
English: After hearing this, Shenzong was terrified. He knelt on the ground and did not dare to get up.

古文：盖内廷呼宫人曰 都人 ，太后亦由宫人进，故云。
现代文：原来后宫中叫宫女为 都人 ，李太后也是宫女出身，所以她才会这么恼怒。
English: Originally, harem maids were called "tōjin" (都人) in the imperial court, and Empress Dowager Li was also born to a harem maid, which is why she was so angry.

古文：光宗由是得立。
现代文：光宗因此才得以立为太子。
English: As a result, Mitsumune was able to become crown prince.

古文：群臣请福王之藩，行有日矣，郑贵妃欲迟之明年，以祝太后诞为解。
现代文：群臣请求让福王前往藩地，且行程已定，其生母郑贵妃想将出发日期推迟一年，以给李太后祝寿为理由。
English: The courtiers requested that Fu Wang be allowed to travel to the territory of the domain, and the trip was set. His birth mother, Zheng Guifei, wanted to postpone the departure date by one year in order to congratulate Empress Dowager Li on her birthday.

古文：太后曰： 吾潞王亦可来上寿乎！ 
现代文：李太后说道 ：我的儿子潞王也可以来京拜寿吗？ 
English: Empress Dowager Li said, "Can my son, King Gong, also come to Beijing to celebrate his birthday?"

古文：贵妃乃不敢留福王。
现代文：郑贵妃听她这么说，才不敢留住福王。
English: Hearing her say this, Zheng Guifei did not dare to keep Fu Wang.

古文：御史曹学程以建言论死。太后怜其母老，言于帝，释之。
现代文：御史曹学程因为进言而被判死罪，李太后怜惜他的母亲年老，为他在皇上面前讲情，将他免罪释放。
English: The Empress Dowager Li took pity on his mother's old age, interceded for him before the emperor, and he was acquitted.

古文：后父伟封武清伯。
现代文：李太后的父亲李伟被封为武清伯。
English: Empress Dowager Li's father, Li Wei, was named Wu Qingbo.

古文：家人尝有过，命中使出数之，而抵其家人于法。
现代文：李太后家人曾经犯有过失，她便命宦官前去列举其过，而将有罪家人依法处置。
English: When Empress Dowager Li's family members once committed a fault, she ordered an eunuch to go and enumerate their faults, and the guilty family members were dealt with according to the law.

古文：顾好佛，京师内外多置梵刹，动费钜万，帝亦助施无算。
现代文：不过太后十分信奉佛教，在京城内外多处建造庙宇，动辄耗费巨万，神宗也出资无数帮助修建。
English: However, the empress dowager was a great believer in Buddhism, building temples in many places inside and outside the capital, often at great expense, and the Shinshu sect also contributed countless funds to help with the construction.

古文：居正在日，尝以为言，未能用也。
现代文：张居正在世时，曾经为此进谏劝阻，但没有被太后采纳。
English: When Zhang Ju was alive, he was once discouraged from doing so, but was not adopted by the empress dowager.

