古文：凡与敌战，必先遣使约和。敌虽许诺，言语不一。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，战前必须先派使者伪与敌人议和；敌人虽然口头答应讲和，但其内部意见并不一致。
English: Whenever there is a war against an enemy, it is necessary to send an emissary to negotiate peace with the enemy before the war; although the enemy verbally promised to talk about peace, their internal opinions are not consistent.

古文：因其懈怠，选锐卒以击之，其军可败。
现代文：这样，我方就可以趁他松懈的时候，选派精锐部队进攻，敌军就会被打败。
English: In this way, we can take advantage of his slackness to send elite troops to attack, and the enemy will be defeated.

古文：法曰： 无约而请和者，谋也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 敌人尚未受挫屈困而主动来讲和的，必定是另有图谋。 
English: As it is said in the art of war: If the enemy has not yet been defeated and succumbed, but takes the initiative to make peace, there must be another plan.

古文：秦末，天下兵起。
现代文：秦朝末年，全国各地都纷纷起兵反秦。
English: In the last years of the Qin Dynasty, troops were raised all over the country against the Qin.

古文：沛公西入武关，欲以二万人击秦峣下军，张良曰： 秦兵尚强，未可轻。
现代文：沛公刘邦率军西向进入武关后，准备用二万兵力进击嶢关的秦军。谋士张良劝告他说： 秦朝的军队现在还很强大，不可轻视它。
English: After Liu Bang led his army westward into Wuguan, he prepared to use twenty thousand troops to attack the Qin army in Shaoguan. Counselor Zhang Liang advised him: The army of the Qin Dynasty is still very strong, do not underestimate it.

古文：闻其将多屠、贾子，易以利动。
现代文：我听说那里的守将多是屠夫、商人子弟，这些人最容易被钱财诱惑。
English: I heard that most of the keepers there are butchers and merchants' sons, and these people are most easily tempted by money.

古文：愿沛公且留壁，使人先行，为五万人具食，且日益张旗帜为疑兵，而使郦生持宝啖秦将。 
现代文：我希望您暂且留下坚守壁垒，可以派人先行一步，筹备五万人的粮食，并在嶢关附近的山上多多张挂旗帜，作为迷惑敌人的疑兵；同时，派遣郦食其携带贵重宝物前往嶢关收买秦将。 
English: I hope that you will stay behind to hold the barrier for the time being, and that you can send someone one step ahead to prepare food for fifty thousand people, and hang many flags on the mountains near Shaoguan, as a suspect to confuse the enemy; at the same time, send them to Shaoguan with valuable treasures to bribe Qin.

古文：秦将果叛，欲连和。沛公欲听之，良曰： 此独其将欲叛耳，恐士卒不从，不从必危，不如因其懈击之。 
现代文：秦军将领在郦食其的重利诱惑下，果然叛秦而要与刘邦军联合一起西向袭取秦都咸阳，刘邦于是同意秦将领的建议。但张良及时提醒刘邦说： 这仅仅是秦军将领想要反叛罢了，他们的士兵恐怕不会听从。士兵一旦不服从，必将给我们带来危险。因此，不如乘秦将麻痹松懈之隙而出兵袭击他们。 
English: The general of the Qin army, under the temptation of the heavy profits of the Qin emperor, really rebelled against the Qin and wanted to join forces with Liu Bang's army to attack the Qin capital Xianyang in the west. Liu Bang then agreed to the suggestion of the Qin general. But Zhang Liang promptly reminded Liu Bang that: This is just the Qin generals wanting to rebel, and their soldiers will probably not obey. If the soldiers disobey, it will certainly bring danger to us. Therefore, it is better to take advantage of Qin's laxity to attack them.

古文：沛公乃引兵出击秦军，大破之。
现代文：刘邦于是亲率大军袭击嶢关，大败秦军。
English: Liu Bang then led an army of relatives to attack Shaoguan, defeating the Qin army.

