古文：飞涎鸟
现代文：飞涎鸟
English: The song of the ostrich

古文：南海去会稽三千里，有狗国，国中有飞涎鸟似鼠，两翼如鸟而脚赤。
现代文：南海离会稽郡有三千里，那里有个狗国，狗国中有一种飞涎鸟像老鼠，两翅像鸟，爪是红色。
English: Nanhai is three thousand miles away from Hui County, where there is a dog country. In the dog country, there is a flying ostrich like a mouse, two wings like a bird, claws are red.

古文：每至晓，诸栖禽未散之前，各各占一树，口中有涎如胶，绕树飞，涎如雨沾洒众枝叶。
现代文：每到天亮时，各种飞禽还栖息在树上没飞散之前，飞涎鸟各自占一棵树，鸟的涎水像胶一样，它绕着树飞，涎水像雨一样洒下来，沾在树的枝叶上。
English: Every day at dawn, before the various birds have dispersed from their roosts in the trees, the flying ostriches each occupy a tree. The bird's saliva is like glue, it flies around the tree, and the saliva falls like rain, sticking to the branches and leaves of the tree.

古文：有他禽之至而如网也，然乃食之。
现代文：有其它禽鸟飞来，就被枝叶上的涎水沾住，像网一样。
English: When other birds came, they were caught in the salty water on the branches and leaves, like a net.

古文：如竟午不获，即空中逐而涎惹之，无不中焉。
现代文：飞涎鸟就吃被网住的鸟，如果到中午还没捉到鸟，就在空中追逐并用涎水往鸟身上洒，没有不中的。
English: The flying ostriches eat the birds caught in the net. If they haven't caught the bird by noon, they chase it in the air and sprinkle it with salty water. They never miss.

古文：人若捕得脯，治渴。
现代文：人若捉住此鸟，用它的肉作成脯，能治渴病。
English: If you catch this bird and use its meat to make a stew, it can cure thirst.

古文：其涎每布后半日即干，自落，落即布之。
现代文：它的涎水洒过半天后就干，干后便从枝叶上落下来，脱落后马上再洒。
English: Its brackish water dries after half a day of sprinkling, after drying it falls from the branches and leaves, and after falling off it is immediately sprinkled again.

古文：精卫
现代文：精卫
English: Jingwei

古文：有鸟如乌，文首白喙赤足，名曰精卫。
现代文：有一种鸟像乌鸦一样，头上有花纹，白色的嘴红色的爪，名字叫精卫。
English: There is a kind of bird like a crow, with a pattern on its head and white lips and red claws. Its name is Jingwei.

古文：昔赤帝之女名女婧，往游于东海，溺死而不返，其神化为精卫。
现代文：从前赤帝的女儿名叫女婧，到东海去游玩，淹死了没能回去，她的灵魂化为精卫鸟。
English: Once upon a time, a daughter of the Red Emperor, named Niang, went to the East Sea to play. She drowned and was unable to return, and her soul turned into a jade bird.

古文：故精卫常取西山之木石，以填东海。
现代文：所以精卫鸟常常衔来西山的木块和石头，用来填东海。
English: Therefore, the Jingwei bird often brings wood and stone from the West Mountain to fill the East Sea.

古文：仁鸟
现代文：仁鸟
English: Renjiao

古文：晋文公焚林以求介推，有白鵶绕烟而噪，或集介子之侧，火不能焚。
现代文：春秋时晋文公焚烧树林寻找介子推时，有只白鵶鸟绕着烟鸣叫，有时停在介子推的旁边，火就烧不着介子推。
English: During the spring and autumn, when Jin Wengong was burning the forest in search of meson pushers, there was a white stork singing around the smoke. Sometimes it stopped next to the meson pushers, and the fire could not burn the meson pushers.

古文：晋人嘉之，起一高台，名曰思烟台。
现代文：晋国人很赞美它，修建一座高台，起名叫思烟台。
English: The people of Jin praised it very much and built a high platform, which they called Shiyantai.

古文：种仁寿之木，木似柏而枝长软，其花堪食。
现代文：栽种象征仁爱、长寿的树木，这树像柏树，树枝长而柔软，开的花能吃。
English: planting trees that symbolize benevolence and longevity. This tree is like a cypress, with long, soft branches and edible flowers.

古文：故《吕氏春秋》云： 木之美者，有寿木之华。 即此是。
现代文：所以《吕氏春秋》上说：树木最美的，有寿木之华彩的，就是这种树。
English: Therefore, "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: the most beautiful trees, with the splendor of the longevity tree, are this kind of tree.

古文：或云，此鵶有识，于焚介之山，数百里不复织网罗。呼之曰仁鸟。
现代文：有人说，白鵶很有识辨能力。人们在烧死介子推的山上，几百里之内不再设罗网捕鸟，并称这种鸟叫 仁鸟 。
English: Some people say that the egret is very discerning. People no longer set up traps to catch birds within a few hundred miles of the mountain where the meson was burned to death, and call this bird the benevolent bird.

古文：俗亦谓仁鸟白臆为慈乌，则此类也。
现代文：人们也叫仁鸟中的胸部为为慈鸟，就是这一类鸟。
English: People also call the pectoral fins of the henbirds as the pectoral fins of the henbirds, which is this kind of bird.

古文：鸐
现代文：鸐
English: 

古文：幽州之墟，羽山之北，有善鸣禽。
现代文：幽州一带，羽山北面，有一种善于鸣叫的鸟。
English: In the Yuzhou area, north of Mount Hasan, there is a bird that is good at singing.

古文：人面鸟喙，八翼一足，毛色如雉，行不践地，名曰鸐，其声似钟磬笙竽也。
现代文：长着人面鸟嘴，八只翅膀一只爪，毛像野雉，行走时不踩地面，名叫鸐。它的叫声像乐器发出的声音。
English: It has a human-like beak, eight wings and one claw, and its fur resembles that of a wild baboon. It does not step on the ground when it walks. It is called a baboon. Its call sounds like that of a musical instrument.

古文：《世语》曰： 青鸐鸣，时太平。 
现代文：《世语》上说：青鸐鸣，天下太平。
English: "World Language" said: "When the young reed sings, the world is at peace."

古文：乃盛明之世，翔鸣薮泽，音中律吕，飞而不行。
现代文：就是昌盛繁荣的时代。它在沼泽上鸣叫，叫声符合音律。它只飞而不行走。
English: It is the era of prosperity and prosperity. It sings on the swamp, its cry is in tune with the music. It only flies but does not walk.

古文：禹平水土，栖于川岳，所集之地，必有圣人出焉。自上古铸诸鼎器，皆图象其形。铭赞至今不绝。韩朋
现代文：自从上古开始，铸造各种鼎器，都用鸐鸟的形象做图案，鼎器上铭文中的赞美之辞，流传至今。韩朋
English: Since ancient times, the image of an ostrich has been used as a pattern for the casting of various tripods, and the words of praise in the inscription on the tripod have been passed down to this day.

古文：韩朋鸟者，乃凫鹥之类。此鸟为双飞，泛溪浦。
现代文：韩朋鸟，本是野鸭水鸟一类的鸟，生活在溪水湖泊之中。
English: The Korean phoenix, originally a wild duck and waterfowl-like bird, lives in streams and lakes.

古文：水禽中鸂鹥、鸳鸯、鵁鶄，岭北皆有之，唯韩朋鸟未之见也。
现代文：水禽中的鸂鶒、鸳鸯、鶄等鸟，岭北全都有，只是没见过韩朋鸟。
English: Lingbei has all the waterfowl birds such as pelicans, cormorants and cormorants, but I haven't seen the Korean phoenix.

古文：案干宝《搜神记》云： 大夫韩朋，其妻美，宋康王夺之。朋怨，王囚之，朋遂自杀。
现代文：根据干宝《搜神记》上所说：大夫韩朋，他妻子很美，宋康王强夺到手，韩朋很怨恨，宋康王囚禁了他，韩朋就自杀了。
English: According to Gan Bao's "Record of Searching for the Gods," "Dr. Han Peng, his wife was very beautiful, Song Kang Wang Qiang got hold of her, Han Peng was very resentful, Song Kang Wang imprisoned him, and Han Peng committed suicide.

古文：妻乃阴腐其衣，王与之登台，自投台下，左右提衣，衣不胜手。
现代文：他的妻子私下里把衣服弄的很糟烂，宋康王和韩朋妻子一同登上高台，韩朋妻从高台上跳下去，康王手下人想扯她的衣服，但衣服一扯就烂，所以没拉住。
English: His wife secretly made the clothes very bad. Song Kang Wang and Han Bong's wife climbed the high platform together. Han Bong's wife jumped down from the high platform. Kang Wang's subordinates wanted to pull her clothes, but the clothes rotted as soon as they were pulled, so they didn't pull.

古文：遗书于带曰： 愿以尸还韩氏而合葬。 
现代文：她在衣带中留下遗书说；希望把我的尸体还给韩朋，与他合葬。
English: She left a suicide note in her waistband saying that she hoped to return my body to Han Bong and be buried with him.

古文：王怒，令埋之，以相望。
现代文：康王很生气，令人埋葬，却把她的坟埋在韩朋坟的对面，互相对望。
English: King Kang was very angry and had her buried, but he buried her grave on the opposite side of Han Bong's grave, and they looked at each other.

古文：经宿，忽见有梓木生二塚之上，根交于下，枝连其上。又有鸟如鸳鸯，恒栖其树。朝暮悲鸣。 
现代文：过了一夜，忽然看见有梓树从二人的坟上长出，树根在地下相交一起，树枝在地上相连，还有像鸳鸯一样的鸟，经常牺息在树上，从早到晚悲切的鸣叫。
English: After one night, they suddenly saw a tree growing out of the graves of the two people. The roots of the tree intersected underground, and the branches connected on the ground. There was also a bird like a dragonfly, which often perched on the tree and sang mournfully from morning to night.

古文：南人谓此禽即韩朋夫妇之精魂，故以韩氏名之。
现代文：南方人说这对鸟就是韩朋夫妻的灵魂，所以用韩朋的名字给这鸟命名。
English: The Nanfang people say that this pair of birds is the soul of Han Peng and his wife, so they named the bird after Han Peng.

古文：带箭
现代文：带箭
English: With arrows

古文：带箭鸟，鸣如野鹊，翅羽黄绿间错，尾生两枝，长二尺余，直而不枭，唯尾稍有毛，宛如箭羽，因目之为带箭鸟。
现代文：带箭鸟，叫声像野鹊雀一样，翅膀上的羽毛黄、绿交错。尾巴上长出两根长枝，二尺多长，挺直而有弹性，只有尾梢才长毛，很像箭羽，因此，人们称它为带箭鸟。
English: An arrow-bearing bird, its call is like that of a wild peregrine falcon, and the feathers on its wings are yellow and green. Two long branches grow on its tail, more than two feet long, straight and flexible. Only the tips of the tail grow hair, much like arrow feathers, which is why people call it an arrow-bearing bird.

古文：细鸟
现代文：细鸟
English: Little bird

古文：汉元封五年，勒毕国贡细鸟，以方尺玉笼盛数百头，大如蝇。
现代文：汉武帝元封五年，勒毕国进贡一种细鸟，用一尺见方的玉石笼子装了几百只。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, the state of Lebi paid tribute to a small bird, and hundreds of them were placed in a one-foot-square jade cage.

古文：其状如鹦鹉，闻声数里，如黄鹄之音。
现代文：大小如蝇子，形状像鹦鹉，叫声传出数里远，像黄鹄的叫声一样。
English: The size is like a fly, the shape is like a parrot, and the call can be heard miles away, like the call of a yellow warbler.

古文：国人常以此鸟候时，亦名曰候虫。
现代文：勒毕国的人常用此鸟判断时间，也把它叫做候虫。
English: The people of Lopi often use this bird to tell the time, and also call it a migratory insect.

古文：上得之，放于宫内，旬日之间，不知所止，惜甚，求不复得。
现代文：皇上得到后放在宫内，十天之间，不知飞到哪里，皇上很惋惜，再想要就得不到了。
English: After the emperor got it, he put it in the palace. For ten days, he did not know where to fly to. The emperor was very sorry, he could not get it if he wanted it.

古文：明年，此鸟复来集于帷幄之上，或入衣袖，因更名曰蝉鸟。
现代文：第二年，这些鸟又回到宫中聚集在帷幔上，有的钻入宫中人的衣袖里，因而又给它起名叫蝉鸟。
English: The next year, these birds returned to the palace and gathered on the curtains. Some of them got into the sleeves of people in the palace, so they called it the cicada bird.

古文：宫人婕妤等皆悦之，但有此鸟集于衣上者，辄蒙爱幸。
现代文：宫中的女官都喜欢这种鸟，只要这种鸟落到谁的衣服上，谁就会受到皇帝的宠爱。
English: The ladies of the palace all liked this bird, and as long as the bird landed on someone's clothes, that person would be favored by the emperor.

古文：武帝末，稍稍自死，人尤爱其皮，服其皮者，多为男子媚也。
现代文：汉武帝末年，它们自己默默地死掉了。人们尤其喜欢它的皮，凡是身上装饰着这种鸟皮的女人，多数会受到男人的喜爱。
English: In the last years of Emperor Hanwu, they themselves died quietly. People are particularly fond of its skin, and any woman whose body is adorned with the skin of this bird is likely to be loved by men.

古文：王母使者
现代文：王母使者
English: As soon as he ate it, his illness was cured.

古文：齐郡函山有鸟足青嘴赤，素翼绛颡，名王母使者。
现代文：齐郡函山有一种鸟，青爪，红嘴，白翅，紫脑门，名字叫王母使者。
English: There is a bird in Hanzhan, Qi County, with blue claws, a red beak, white wings and a purple beak. Its name is the Queen Mother's Messenger.

古文：昔汉武帝登此山，得玉函，长五寸，帝下山，玉函忽化为白鸟飞去。
现代文：从前，汉武帝曾登此山，得到一只玉匣，五寸长，武帝下山时，玉匣忽然变成一只白鸟飞走了。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wudi of Han ascended this mountain and obtained a jade box, five centimeters long. When Emperor Wudi descended the mountain, the jade box suddenly turned into a white bird and flew away.

古文：世传山上有王母药函，常令鸟守之。
现代文：人们传说山上有王母娘娘的一只药匣，让鸟常年守着它。
English: People say that there is a medicine chest of the Queen Mother's daughter on the mountain, and let the bird guard it all year round.

古文：鸳鸯
现代文：鸳鸯
English: 

古文：汉时，鄢县南门两扇，忽一声称 鸳 ，一声称 鸯 ，晨夕开闭，声闻京师。
现代文：汉代的时候，鄢县城南的两扇大门，忽然一扇发出 鸳 的声音，一扇发出 鸯 的声音，早晚开闭城门时，京城内都能听到这个声音。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the two gates in the southern part of the city of Jixian County, one of them suddenly emitted a beeping sound, and the other emitted a beeping sound. This sound could be heard in the capital when the gates were opened and closed in the morning and evening.

古文：汉末恶之，令毁其门，两扇化为鸳鸯，相随飞去，后遂改鄢为晏城县。
现代文：汉代末年时，人们厌恶这种声音，皇上命令毁掉这两门，两扇门变成了鸳鸯，互相追随着飞去了。后来就改鄢县为晏城县。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, people were disgusted by this sound, and the emperor ordered the destruction of the two doors. The two doors turned into cocoons and followed each other to fly away. Later, it was changed to Shicheng County.

古文：五色鸟
现代文：五色鸟
English: The Five-Coloured Bird

古文：杨震卒，未葬，有大鸟五色高丈余，从天飞下，到震棺前，举头悲鸣，泪出沾地。
现代文：杨震死了，没埋葬时，有一只一丈多高的五色大鸟，从天上飞下来，飞到杨震的棺前，抬头悲叫，泪水沾湿了地面。
English: When Yang Zhen died and was not buried, a five-colored bird, as tall as a man, flew down from the sky and landed in front of Yang Zhen's coffin. It looked up and wailed, and its tears wet the ground.

古文：至葬日，冲天上升。
现代文：到安葬那日，大鸟冲天飞去。
English: On the day of the funeral, a large bird flew into the sky.

古文：新喻男子
现代文：新喻男子
English: Xinyou Men's Gymnastics

古文：豫章新喻县男子见田中有六七女，皆衣毛衣。
现代文：豫章郡新喻县有个男子看见田野中有六七个女人，全都穿着羽毛做的衣服，他不知道是鸟。
English: A man in Xinyu County, Yuzhang County, saw six or seven women in a field, all wearing clothes made of feathers. He didn't know they were birds.

古文：不知是鸟，匍匐往，得其一女所解毛衣，取藏之。
现代文：匍匐着靠近她们，拿到了其中一个女子脱下的羽毛衣并藏了起来。
English: He crept closer to them, retrieved a down jacket one of the women had taken off and hid.

古文：即往就诸鸟，诸鸟各飞去，一鸟独不得去。
现代文：他又走出去自动靠近那些鸟，那些鸟都各自飞走了，只有一只鸟不能飞去，他就娶了这只鸟做妻子，生了三个女儿。
English: He went out again and approached the birds of his own accord. The birds flew away one by one, except for one bird that could not fly away. He married this bird and had three daughters.

古文：男子取以为妇，生三女，其母后使女问父，知衣在积稻下，得之，衣而飞去。
现代文：她们的母亲叫女儿问父亲，知道了她的羽毛衣藏在了稻谷下面，便取出穿在身上飞走了。
English: Their mother told her daughter to ask her father, and when she discovered that her down jacket was hidden under the rice, she took it off, put it on, and flew away.

古文：后复以衣迎三儿，亦得飞去。
现代文：后来，她又拿来羽毛衣迎接三个女儿，也都飞走了。
English: Later, she brought feather coats to greet her three daughters, who also flew away.

古文：张氏
现代文：张氏
English: Mr. Zhang

古文：京兆有张氏独处一室，有鸠自外入，止于床。
现代文：京城里有一张氏独居一室，忽然有一只鸠从外面飞进室内，落在床上。
English: In Beijing, there was a Zhang family living alone in a room. Suddenly, a dragonfly flew into the room from outside and landed on the bed.

古文：张氏祝曰： 鸠为祸也，飞上承尘；为福也，即入我怀。 
现代文：张氏祷告说： 鸠若是带来祸，就飞到帐幕上去；如果能带来福，就飞到我怀中。 
English: Mr. Zhang prayed: "If the dragonfly brings disaster, it will fly to the tent; if it brings blessing, it will fly to my bosom.

古文：以手探之，而得一金鉤。
现代文：果然飞到她怀中，用手去抚摸鸠鸟，竟得到一个金钩。
English: He flew into her arms, stroked the ostrich with his hand, and received a golden hook.

古文：是后子孙渐盛，资财万倍。
现代文：从此后她的子孙也逐渐发达兴盛起来，财产增加万倍。
English: Since then, her children and grandchildren have gradually developed and prospered, and their property has increased ten thousandfold.

古文：蜀贾客至长安，闻之，乃厚赂婢，婢窃鉤以与客。
现代文：有个蜀地的商人来长安听到了此事，就用重金收买张氏婢女，婢女便偷出金钩送给了商人。
English: A merchant from Shu heard about this in Chang'an and paid a lot of money to buy Zhang's maidservant. The maidservant then stole the golden hook and gave it to the merchant.

古文：张氏既失鉤，渐渐衰耗，而蜀客亦罹穷厄，于是赍鉤以反张氏，张氏复昌。
现代文：张氏失钩后，家境便逐渐败落，蜀地的商人也遭到了厄运，于是，又把金钩还给了张氏，张氏家族又昌盛起来。
English: After the Zhang family lost the golden hook, the family fortune gradually declined, and the merchants in Shu also suffered bad luck. Therefore, they returned the golden hook to the Zhang family, and the Zhang family became prosperous again.

古文：漱金鸟
现代文：漱金鸟
English: Soseki Kincho

古文：魏时，昆明国贡漱金鸟。
现代文：魏时，昆明国进贡了漱金鸟。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Kunming paid tribute to the golden bird.

古文：国人云： 其地去然州九千里，出此鸟，形如雀，色黄，毛羽柔密，常翾翔海上，罗者得之，以为至祥。
现代文：昆明国人说： 产此鸟的地方离然州九千里，这种鸟，形状如雀，黄色，羽毛柔软浓密。常在海上作短时飞翔，用网捕捉，认为此鸟是吉祥之物。
English: Kunming people said: The place where this bird was born is nine thousand miles away from Lanzhou. This bird, shaped like a sparrow, is yellow, with soft and dense feathers. It often flies for a short time at sea and is caught with a net. This bird is considered to be auspicious.

古文：闻大魏之德，被于荒远，乃越山航海，来献大国。 
现代文：听说大魏的德政，使偏远地区也受到恩惠，所以才越山渡海来献给大国。
English: I heard that the German policy of the Great Wei Dynasty also benefited remote areas, so I crossed the mountains to the sea to dedicate it to the great country.

古文：帝得此鸟，蓄于灵禽之圃，饴以真珠，饮以龟脑。
现代文：皇帝得此鸟后蓄放在灵禽园中，喂它珍珠，给它龟脑喝。
English: After the emperor obtained the bird, he kept it in the spiritual bird garden, fed it with pearls, and gave it turtle brains to drink.

古文：鸟常吐金屑如粟，铸之可以为器。
现代文：鸟常吐出米粒大小的金粒，可以用来制造器物。
English: The bird often spits out gold particles the size of a grain of rice, which can be used to make utensils.

古文：昔汉武时，有献大雀，此之类也。
现代文：从前汉武帝刘彻时，有来进贡大雀的，就是这一类鸟。
English: In the time of Liu Che, the former emperor of the Han Dynasty, it was precisely this type of bird that brought tribute to China.

古文：此鸟畏霜雪，乃起小室以处之，名曰辟寒台。皆用水晶为户牖，使内外通光，而常隔于风雨尘雾。
现代文：此鸟怕霜雪，便做个小屋让鸟住，名叫避寒台，用水晶石做门窗，内外通光，而能挡住风雨尘雾。
English: This bird is afraid of frost and snow, so he built a hut for the bird to live in, called the cold shelter, with crystal stone doors and windows, allowing light inside and out, and can block wind, rain, dust and fog.

古文：宫人争以所吐之金饰钗珮，谓之辟寒金，故宫人相嘲言曰： 不服辟寒金，那得君王心；不服辟寒钿，那得君王怜。 
现代文：宫女们争着用鸟吐出的金粒装饰钗和珮等饰物，并叫做避寒金。所以宫女们互相取笑说： 不戴避寒金，怎得君王心，不戴避寒钿，怎得君王怜。 
English: The ladies-in-waiting competed with each other to use the gold particles spit out by the birds to decorate ornaments such as beaks and beaks, which they called cold-sheltering gold. Therefore, the ladies-in-waiting teased each other, saying, "Without wearing cold-sheltering gold, how can you win the king's heart? Without wearing cold-sheltering gold, how can you win the king's pity?"

古文：于是媚惑争以宝为身饰，及行卧皆怀挟以要宠也。
现代文：于是想取得君王怜爱的人，便争着用避寒金做饰物，竟连行走坐卧都不离身，用来取宠。
English: Therefore, those who wanted to win the king's favor competed to use the cold-proofing gold to make ornaments, and even went as far as to walk, sit, and lie down in order to be favored.

古文：魏代丧灭，珍宝池台，鞠为茂草，漱金之鸟，亦自高翔。
现代文：魏灭亡后，当年珍贵的池台，荒草茂密，吐金的鸟，也远走高飞。
English: After the fall of the Wei Dynasty, the precious pond platform, the dense wild grass, and the gold-spitting bird also flew far away.

古文：鹙
现代文：鹙
English: 

古文：晋永嘉二年，有鹙集于始安县，木矢贯之，铁镞，其长六寸有半，以箭计之，其射者当身长丈五六尺。
现代文：唐代宗大历八年时，有只大鸟在武功地方出现，人们对大鸟乱嚷叫，行营将官张日芬射中了大鸟。它肉翅膀，狐狸头，四只脚，脚上有爪，四尺宽，形状象蝙蝠。
English: In the eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, a big bird appeared in a martial arts place. People shouted wildly at the big bird, and the camp commander Zhang Rifen shot the big bird. It had wings, a fox head, four feet, claws on its feet, four feet wide, and was shaped like a bat.

古文：营道令
现代文：营道令
English: Camp Road Order

古文：晋太元中，营道令何偕之去职，于县界山中得一鸟，大如白鹭，青色赤目，膝上髀下，自然有铜环形，大小刻画转辗如揽子，绝妙人功，于是京邑皆传观之。
现代文：东晋孝武帝太元年间，营道县令何偕之离任时，在县界山中得到一只鸟，像白鹭那么大，青色的羽毛，红色的眼睛，膝上大腿下自然生长着一个铜环形状，上面刻画着图案，取下来仔细观赏，真是巧夺天工，于是，京城里的人都来观看。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu, when the commander of Yingdao County, He Yanzhong, was leaving office, he obtained a bird in the mountains on the county border. It was as large as a white stork, with blue feathers, red eyes, and a copper ring shape naturally grew on its knees and under its thighs. A pattern was engraved on it. It was a truly ingenious work of nature to take it down and carefully observe it. As a result, people from the capital came to watch.

古文：营道经今属道州。
现代文：营道令现属道州管辖。
English: The camp road ordinance is now under the jurisdiction of the prefecture.

古文：纸鸢化鸟
现代文：纸鸢化鸟
English: Paper birds

古文：梁武太清三年，侯景围台城，远不通问，简文作纸鸢飞空，告急于外。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍太清三年，侯景领兵围台城。城内与外面不能通消息，简文制作了一只纸鸢放到了空中，向外面的人告急。
English: In the third year of Liangwu Emperor Xiao Yan's reign, Hou Jing led an army to encircle Taicheng. The city could not communicate with the outside world, and Jianwen made a paper gong and put it in the air to alert people outside.

古文：侯景谋臣王伟谓景曰： 此纸鸢所至，即以事达外。 
现代文：侯景的谋臣王伟对他说，这个纸鸢落下，便可把城内被围的消息传到外面。
English: Wang Wei, the adviser of Houjing, told him that if the paper curtain fell, it could spread the news of the city being surrounded to the outside.

古文：令左右善射者射之，及堕，皆化为鸟，飞入云中，不知所往。
现代文：侯景便命令射箭能手射纸鸢，射落后，那纸鸢都变成了鸟，飞到云中，不知飞到哪里。
English: Hou Jing then ordered an archery expert to shoot a paper kite. After the shot, the paper kite turned into a bird and flew into the clouds, I don't know where it went.

古文：鹑
现代文：鹑
English: 

古文：安定原土筑时，奠祭以觚爵，忽有一鹑飞于觚上，因名鹑觚城。
现代文：安定原用土筑城时，祭奠时曾用觚和爵盛酒举行仪式，忽然有一只鹑鸟飞落在觚上，因而起名叫鹑觚城。
English: When Anding Yuan was building the city with earth, a ceremony was held during the memorial service, in which an ostrich landed on the plow, and thus the city was named Anseong.

古文：后魏文帝大统中，立为鹑觚县。
现代文：后来魏文帝曹丕称帝时立为鹑觚县。
English: Later, the Wei Emperor Cao Wei called the Emperor Shili for the county.

古文：戴文谋
现代文：戴文谋
English: Dai Wenmu

古文：有戴文谋者，隐居阳城山中。曾于客堂食际，忽闻有呼曰： 我天帝使者，欲下凭君，可乎？ 
现代文：有个叫戴文谋的人，隐居在阳城山，曾经在客堂吃饭时，忽然听到有呼唤声说： 我是天帝的使者，准备到人间来依靠你，可以吗？ 
English: There was a man named Dai Wenmou, who lived in seclusion on Yangcheng Mountain. Once, when he was having dinner in the guest hall, he suddenly heard a calling voice saying: "I am the messenger of the Heavenly Emperor, preparing to come to the human world to rely on you, is that okay?

古文：文谋闻甚惊，又曰： 君疑我也？ 
现代文：文谋听后很吃惊。又听到说： 你是怀疑我？ 
English: After listening, Wen Mu was very surprised. He also heard: "Are you doubting me?

古文：文谋乃跪曰： 居贫，恐不足降下耳。 
现代文：戴文谋于是跪下说： 我的住处很贫困，恐怕不足以迎您降临寒舍。 
English: Dai Wenmou then knelt down and said: My residence is very poor, I am afraid it is not enough to welcome you to the poorhouse.

古文：既而洒扫设位，朝夕进食甚谨。
现代文：接着就进行洒扫，设置神位，一早一晚，很恭谨的进奉饮食。
English: Next, the sprinkling and sweeping was carried out, the altar was set up, and the food and drink were served very respectfully, morning and night.

古文：后谋于室内窃言之，其妇曰： 此恐是狐魅依凭耳。 文谋曰： 我亦疑之。 
现代文：后来，戴文谋在内室悄悄地向妻子说了此事，他妻子说： 这恐怕是鬼狐来附位。 文谋说： 我也很疑惑。 
English: Later, Dai Wenmou quietly told his wife about this in the inner room, and his wife said, "I'm afraid it's a ghost fox coming to claim the throne." Wenmou said, "I'm also very suspicious."

古文：乃祠飨之时，神乃言曰： 吾相从，方欲相利，不意有疑心异议。 
现代文：等到再进奉食物时，那神便说： 我来你这里，正想给你好处，没想到你疑心我，有了另外的想法。 
English: When it was time to serve the food again, the god said: I came to you to do you a favor, but I didn't expect you to suspect me and have other ideas.

古文：文谋辞谢之际，忽堂上如数十人呼声，出视之，见一大鸟，五色，白鸠数十随之，东北入云而去。瑞鸟
现代文：文谋正在道歉时，忽然堂上发出了像数十人的喊声。出来一看是一只大鸟，身有五色，随着数十只白鸠，往东北方向飞入云霄。瑞鸟
English: While Wen Mu was apologizing, suddenly there were shouts like dozens of people in the hall. Out came a big bird with five colors, flying into the sky in the northeast direction with dozens of egrets. Rui bird

古文：炀帝征辽回，次于柳城郡之望海镇。步出观望，有大鸟二，素羽丹嘴，状同鹤鹭，出自霄汉，翻翔双下，高一丈四五尺，长八九尺，徘徊驯扰，翔舞御营。
现代文：隋炀帝杨广征辽东回来时，住在柳城郡望海镇歇息，走出来观望时，看见两只大鸟，白毛红嘴，样子像白鹤和鹭鸶，从云中飞出来，翅膀翻飞，双双落下，有一丈四五尺高，八九尺长，很驯服地在地上徘徊，或者是在御营前飞舞。
English: When Emperor Yang Guangzheng of the Sui Dynasty came back to Liaodong, he stayed in the town of Wanghai in Liucheng County to rest. When he went out to watch, he saw two large birds, white-haired and red-billed, looking like a white crane and a stork, flying out of the clouds, wings flipping, both falling, four or five feet high, eighty-nine feet long, very tamely wandering on the ground, or flying in front of the imperial camp.

古文：敕著作佐郎虞绰制《瑞鸟铭》以进，上命镌于其所，仍敕殿内丞阎毗图写其状，秘书郎虞世南上《瑞鸟颂》，敕令写于图首。
现代文：隋炀帝命令著作佐郎虞绰写《瑞鸟铭》呈给他，皇上又命令将铭文刻碑立在瑞鸟飞翔的地方。又下令叫殿内丞阎毗画下鸟的图像，叫秘书郎虞世南献上《瑞鸟颂》，并命令将《瑞鸟颁》写在画像的上面。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan ordered the author, Sarang Yu Ji, to write "Rui Jiao Ming" and present it to him. The emperor also ordered the inscription to be engraved and erected in the place where the Rui Jiao was flying. He also ordered the secretary, Lang Yu Shennan, to present "Rui Jiao Song" and ordered "Rui Jiao Ming" to be written on top of the image.

古文：报春鸟
现代文：报春鸟
English: The Primavera

古文：顾渚山中有鸟如鸲鹆而小，苍黄色，每至正二月，作声云： 春起也！ 
现代文：顾渚山中有一种鸟像鸲鹆但体形小，青黄色。每到正月二月时，发出的声音像是：春起也。
English: In Guzhu Mountain, there is a kind of bird that looks like a dragonfly, but it is small and bluish-yellow. Every January and February, it makes a sound like: "Spring is coming."

古文：至三月四月，作声云： 春去也！ 
现代文：到了三四月，叫声又像是：春去也。
English: In March and April, the cry was again: spring is coming.

古文：采茶人呼为报春鸟。
现代文：采茶人叫它报春鸟。
English: The tea pickers call it the spring bird.

古文：冠凫
现代文：冠凫
English: 冠

古文：石首鱼，至秋化为冠凫，冠凫头中有石也。
现代文：石首鱼，到秋天就变成冠凫鸟，冠凫鸟的头里面有石头。
English: The stone-head fish turns into a crowned ostrich in the autumn. The crowned ostrich has a stone in its head.

古文：秦吉了
现代文：秦吉了
English: Qin Ji is gone

古文：秦吉了，容、管、廉、白州产此鸟，大约似鹦鹉，嘴脚皆红，两眼后夹脑，有黄肉冠，善效人言，语音雄大，分明于鹦鹉。
现代文：秦吉了，容州、管州、廉州、白州都产这种鸟。大小和鹦鹉相似，嘴、爪都是红色，两眼后夹着头，长着黄色的肉冠。善于模仿人的说话，语声高而厚重，比鹦鹉的声音还清晰。
English: Qin Ji, Yongzhou, Guanzhou, Lianzhou, and Baizhou all produce this bird. The size is similar to a parrot, the mouth and claws are red, the head is tucked behind the eyes, and it has a yellow crown of flesh. It is good at imitating human speech, the voice is high and thick, and it is clearer than the parrot's voice.

古文：以熟鸡子和饭如枣饲之。
现代文：用熟鸡蛋和饭，做成枣大小的饭团喂它。
English: With cooked eggs and rice, make a rice ball the size of a jujube and feed it.

古文：或云，容州有纯赤、纯白色者，俱未之见也。
现代文：有人说，容州有红色的、白色的秦吉了。但都没看见过。
English: Some people say that there are red and white Qin Ji horses in Yongzhou, but I haven't seen any.

古文：韦氏子
现代文：韦氏子
English: Wei's son grows up

古文：汘阳郡有张女郎庙。上元中，有韦氏子客于汘阳，途至其庙。遂解鞍以憩。
现代文：汘阳郡有个张女郎庙，唐高宗上元年间，有个姓韦的男子去汘阳作客，路过这座庙时，下马解鞍休息，忽然看见庙中有两只木底屐放在地上。
English: There is a Zhang Girls' Temple in Shenyang County. During the reign of Emperor Gaozong in the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a man surnamed Wei went to Shenyang as a guest. When he passed this temple, he dismounted and took a rest. Suddenly, he saw two wooden horses on the ground in the temple.

古文：忽见庙宇中有二屐子在地上，生视之，乃结草成者，文理甚细，色白而制度极妙。韦生乃收贮于橐中，既而别去。
现代文：韦先看那木底屐，是用草编成的，条纹很细密，白色，编制方法很巧妙。韦生就把这一对木底屐收起放在口袋中，不久就离开这里。
English: We first looked at the wooden clogs, made of grass, the stripes were very fine, white, and the preparation method was very clever.Wesson put the pair of wooden clogs in his pocket and soon left here.

古文：仆者惊愕，告于韦生，生即命升屋而取之。
现代文：等到了汘阳郡，郡守让韦先住在馆亭里。这天晚上，韦生把木底屐放在身边睡了，天亮却不见了，什么地方也没找到。
English: When he got to Poyang County, the county magistrate let Wei live in a pavilion. That night, Wei slept with the wooden pallet next to him, but it was gone by dawn. He couldn't find it anywhere.

古文：即得，又致于前，明日又失其所，复于瓦屋上得之。
现代文：仅吃顿饭的工夫，便在馆亭的瓦房上找到了。仆人很惊奇，便告诉了韦生，韦生叫人上房取下来，便得到了。睡觉时又放在身边，第二天又不见了，又在瓦房上得到，如此反复几次。
English: He only had time to eat one meal, and then he found it on the tile floor of the pavilion. The servant was surprised and told Wesson. Wesson asked someone to go to the house and take it down, and it was found. He put it next to him when he went to sleep, and the next day it was gone again, and he found it again on the tile floor, and so on and so forth.

古文：如是者三，韦生窃谓仆曰： 此其怪乎？可潜伺之。 
现代文：韦生偷偷地对仆人说，这事很怪，可暗中察看一下。
English: He whispered to his servant that it was a very strange thing, and that they should look into it.

古文：是夕，其仆乃窃于隙中伺之，夜将半，其屐忽化为白鸟，飞于屋上。
现代文：这天晚上，他的仆人便在暗处观察，快半夜时，这木底屐忽然变成了白鸟，飞到瓦房上。
English: That night, his servant watched in the dark, and at around midnight, the ground beetle suddenly turned into a white bird and flew to the tile house.

古文：韦生命取焚之，乃飞去。
现代文：韦生叫人取下木底屐烧掉，却变成鸟飞了。
English: Wei Sheng ordered someone to take down the wooden cocoon and burn it, but it turned into a bird.

古文：鸟贼
现代文：鸟贼
English: The Bird Thief

古文：李靖弟客师官至右武卫将军，四时从禽，无暂止息。京师之西南际澧水，鸟兽皆识之，每出，鸟鹊竞逐噪之，人谓之鸟贼。
现代文：李靖的弟弟李客师官作到右武卫将军。一年四季都愿捕猎禽鸟，没有一天停止的时候，京城西南的澧水一带，鸟兽都认识他，他每次出来，鸟鹊纷纷追逐而对之鸣叫，人们把他叫作鸟贼。
English: Li Jing's younger brother, Li Ke, became a general of the Right Division of Wei. He was willing to hunt birds and birds all year round, and there was never a day when he stopped. Birds and animals all knew him in the Surabaya area southwest of Beijing. Every time he came out, the birds chased him and chirped at him, and people called him a bird thief.

古文：鸟省
现代文：鸟省
English: Bird Province

古文：冯兖给事，亲仁坊有宅，南有山亭院，多养鹅鸭及杂禽之类极多，常遣一家人掌之，时人谓之鸟省。
现代文：冯兖给事，在亲仁坊有住宅，住宅南面有个山亭院，养了很多的鹅鸭和杂禽，常常派一个家人管理此事，当时人们叫这个地方为鸟省。
English: According to Feng Qi, there was a residence in Jianrenfang, and there was a mountain pavilion south of the residence. He raised a lot of geese, ducks and poultry. He often sent a family member to manage the matter. At that time, people called this place the bird province.

古文：刘景阳
现代文：刘景阳
English: Liu Jingyang

古文：天后时，左卫兵曹刘景阳使岭南，得吉了鸟，雄雌各一只，解人语。
现代文：武则天执政时，左卫兵曹刘景阳出使岭南，得到了吉了鸟，雌、雄各一只，能听懂人说的话。
English: When Wu Zetian was in power, the left guard Cao Liu Jingyang sent an envoy to Lingnan and obtained a lucky bird, one female and one male, who could understand what people said.

古文：至都进之，留其雌者，雄烦怨不食，则天问曰： 何乃无聊也？ 
现代文：到京城进献时，却留下了雌鸟。雄鸟烦躁不安不吃食。武则天问，为什么这样无聊？
English: When he came to the capital to make an offering, he left the female bird behind. The male bird was restless and did not eat. Wu Zetian asked, "Why is it so boring?"

古文：鸟为言曰： 其配为使者所得，今颇思之。 
现代文：鸟说，它的配偶被使者得去了，现在很思念它。
English: The bird said that his mate had been forced to leave by the messenger and that he missed her very much.

古文：乃呼景阳曰： 卿何故藏一鸟不进？ 
现代文：武则天便传呼刘景阳，说，你为什么藏一只鸟不进献呢？
English: Wu Zetian then summoned Liu Jingyang and said, "Why did you hide a bird and not present it as a gift?

古文：景阳叩头谢罪，乃进之，则天不罪也。
现代文：景阳便叩头谢罪，便把鸟献上来，武则天没有怪罪他。
English: Jingyang bowed his head in thanks and offered the bird. Wu Zetian did not blame him.

古文：食蝗鸟
现代文：食蝗鸟
English: Grasshopper-eating birds

古文：开元中，贝州蝗虫食禾，有大白鸟数千，小白鸟数万，尽食其虫。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，贝州蝗虫吞食禾苗，有数千大白鸟，数万只小白鸟，把蝗虫吃光了。
English: During the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, thousands of large white birds and tens of thousands of small white birds ate up the locusts.

古文：卢融
现代文：卢融
English: Lu Rong

古文：开元初，范阳卢融病中独卧，忽见大鸟自远飞来，俄止庭树，高四五尺，状类鸮，目大如柸，嘴长尺余。
现代文：唐玄宗开元初年，范阳人卢融有疾，独自一人躺着，忽然看见有只大鸟从远处飞来。一会儿，落在院中的树上，四五尺高，形状很像鸮，眼大如酒杯，嘴有一尺多长。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Lu Rong, a man from Fanyang, was ill and lying alone. Suddenly, he saw a large bird flying from a distance. A moment later, it landed on a tree in the courtyard. It was four or five feet tall, shaped like a dragonfly, with eyes as big as wine glasses and a beak more than a foot long.

古文：下地上阶，顷之，入房登床，举两翅，翅有手，持小枪，欲以击融，融伏惧流汗。
现代文：落到地上，走上台阶。一会儿，竟入房中上了床，举两翅，翅膀上长着手，手上拿小枪，想刺卢融，卢融趴在床上，吓得流了一身汗。
English: He fell to the ground and walked up the steps. A moment later, he actually entered the room and got on the bed, holding up his wings. He had his hands on the wings and a small gun in his hand, trying to stab Lu Rong. Lu Rong was lying on the bed, so scared that he was sweating profusely.

古文：忽复有人从后门入，谓鸟云： 此是善人，慎勿伤也。 
现代文：忽然又有人从后门进来，对鸟说，这人是个好人，千万不要伤了他。
English: Suddenly another man came in through the back door and said to the bird, "This man is a good man, do not hurt him."

古文：鸟遂飞去，人亦随出，融疾自尔永差。
现代文：大鸟便飞走了，人也随着出去了。卢融的病也从此永远地好了。
English: The big bird flew away, and the man went out with it. Lu Rong's illness was also cured forever.

古文：濮州刺史李全璋妻张，牛肃之姨也，开元二十五年，卒于伊阙庄。
现代文：张氏濮州刺史李全璋的妻子张氏，是牛肃的姨母。唐玄宗开元二十五年，死在伊阙庄。
English: Zhang, the wife of Li Quanzhang, the Zhang family's secretary in Zhangzhou, was the aunt of Niu Su. Tang Xuan Zong died in Ili Zhuang in the 25th year of the first century.

古文：张寝疾，有鸟止于庭树，白首赤足，黄腹丹翅。
现代文：张氏卧病不起的时候，有一只白鸟落在庭院的树上，白头，红爪，黄色的腹部，红色的翅膀。
English: When Mr. Zhang was ill, a white bird landed on a tree in the courtyard. It had a white head, red claws, yellow abdomen, and red wings.

古文：其鸣但云： 懊恨也母兮。 
现代文：它鸣叫时只是说，悔恨呀妈妈。 
English: When it tweets, it just says, sorry mom.

古文：如是昼夜不绝声。
现代文：就这样昼夜不停地叫。
English: It just screams like this, day and night.

古文：十余日，张殂，鸟遂不见。
现代文：十多天后，张氏死去，鸟也不见了。
English: More than ten days later, Mr. Zhang died, and the bird disappeared.

古文：王绪
现代文：王绪
English: Wang Xu

古文：天宝末，台州录事参军王绪病将死，有大鸟飞入绪房，行至床所，引嘴向绪声云： 取取。 
现代文：唐玄宗天宝末年，台州录事参军王绪有病将要死时，有大鸟飞入王绪房中，走到床前，伸嘴向着王绪出声叫：取。取。
English: In the last year of Tang Xuan Zong's Heavenly Treasure, when the Taizhou Records recorded that Wang Xue, a member of the army, was ill and about to die, a large bird flew into Wang Xue's room, walked to the bed, stretched out its beak and called out to Wang Xue: Take. Take.

古文：行营将张日芬射获之，肉翅狐首，四足，足有爪，广四尺，状类蝙蝠。
现代文：王绪便死了。
English: Wang Xu then died.

古文：鹳鹴
现代文：武功大鸟鹳鹴
English: Wu Gong big bird crows

古文：鹳鹴，一名堕羿，形似鹊。
现代文：鹳鹴，另一个名叫堕羿，形状像鹊。
English: , the other is called 堕落, shaped like a dragonfly.

古文：人射之，则衔矢反射人。
现代文：人用箭射它，它就衔住箭反过来射人。
English: If you shoot it with an arrow, it grabs the arrow and shoots you in return.

古文：吐绶鸟
现代文：吐绶鸟
English: The ostrich spits

古文：鱼复县南山有鸟大如鸲鹆，羽色多黑，杂以黄白，头颇似雉。
现代文：鱼复县的南山有一种鸟象鸲鹆那样大，羽毛大部黑色，夹杂着黄、白色，头像野鸡。
English: In Nanshan, Yufu County, there is a bird as big as a cormorant, with mostly black feathers mixed with yellow and white, and a head like a pheasant.

古文：有时吐物长数寸，丹采彪炳，形色类绶，因名为吐绶鸟。
现代文：有时吐出几寸长的一种东西，大红色十分鲜艳，形状像绶带，因而叫它吐绶鸟。
English: Sometimes it spits out a thing a few inches long, a big red very bright, shaped like an umbilical cord, so it is called spitting ostrich.

古文：又食必蓄嗉，臆前大如斗，虑触其嗉，行每远草木，故一名避株鸟。
现代文：另外，吃食后必存在嗉子里，前胸大得像酒斗，为防触碰它的嗉子，走时远避树林和草，所以，另一名叫避株鸟。
English: In addition, after eating, it must live in a cocoon. Its forechest is as big as a wine barrel. To avoid touching its cocoon, it avoids trees and grass when walking. Therefore, it is also called the avoidance bird.

古文：杜鹃
现代文：杜鹃
English: Cuckoo

古文：杜鹃，始阳相推而鸣，先鸣者吐血死。
现代文：杜鹃鸟，阳气上升时就一个接一个鸣叫，先叫的吐血死亡。
English: Cuckoo birds, when the yang qi rises, sing one after another. The first to sing vomits blood and dies.

古文：尝有人出行，见一群寂然，聊学其声，即死。
现代文：曾经有个人外出行走时见一群杜鹃静静地站在那里，就学杜鹃的叫声，他就死了。
English: There was once a man who was out walking and he saw a group of cuckoos standing there quietly, and he learned the cuckoo's call, and he died.

古文：初鸣，先听者主离别。厕上听其声，不祥。
现代文：若是听见杜鹃的初叫声主别离，在厕所听到叫声，不吉祥。
English: If you hear the cuckoo's first call, you should leave. If you hear it in the toilet, it is not auspicious.

古文：厌之之法，当为犬声应之。
现代文：避免这种不祥之兆的办法是学狗叫回应它。
English: The way to avoid this ominous sign is to train your dog to respond to it.

古文：蚊母鸟
现代文：蚊母鸟
English: Mosquito mother bird

古文：蚊母鸟，形如鹢，嘴大而长，池塘捕鱼而食。
现代文：蚊母鸟，形状象鹢，嘴大而且长，从鱼塘中捕鱼吃。
English: Mosquito mother bird, shaped like a beak, with a large and long beak, catches fish from the pond and eats it.

古文：每叫一声，则有蚊蚋飞出其口。
现代文：每叫一声，就有蚊、蚋从口中飞出来。
English: Every time he screams, mosquitoes and crickets fly out of his mouth.

古文：俗云，采其翎为扇，可辟蚊子。亦呼为吐蚊鸟。
现代文：人们传说，用它的翎毛做扇子，能避蚊子，也叫它吐蚊鸟。
English: According to legend, people use its mane as a fan to ward off mosquitoes, and also call it the mosquito spitting bird.

古文：桐花鸟
现代文：桐花鸟
English: Paulownia Bird

古文：剑南彭蜀间，有鸟大如指，五色毕具，有冠似凤。
现代文：剑南的彭水蜀郡之间，有一种像手指大的鸟，身上五颜六色，像凤凰似的冠。
English: Between the counties of Pengshui and Shu in the south of Jian'an, there is a bird as big as a finger, with a colorful body and a crown like a phoenix.

古文：食桐花，每桐结花即来，桐花落即去，不知何之，俗谓之桐花鸟。
现代文：吃桐树花，桐树开花时就飞来，花落就飞走，不知去了哪里。人们叫它桐花鸟。
English: If you eat the flowers of the Paulownia tree, the dragonfly will come when the tree is in bloom, and it will fly away when the flowers fall, and you won't know where it went. People call it the Paulownia bird.

古文：极驯善，止于妇人钗上，客终席不飞。人爱之，无所害也。
现代文：这鸟很驯服善良，常落在妇女的钗上，客走了席散了也不飞走，人们很喜爱它，它对人们没有害处。
English: This bird is very tame and kind. It often lands on the beak of a woman. It does not fly away when the guests leave the table. People love it very much. It is not harmful to people.

古文：真腊国大鸟
现代文：真腊国大鸟
English: The Great Bird of the Realm

古文：真腊国有葛浪山，高万丈，半腹有洞。先有浪鸟，状似老鸱，大如骆驼。
现代文：真腊国有座葛浪山，高万丈，山半腰有个洞，洞里先前有只浪鸟，样子像老鸱，像骆驼那么大。
English: In the state of Mana, there is a mountain called Ge Lang Shan. It is very high, and there is a cave halfway up the mountain. In the cave, there used to be a bird, which looked like a cormorant and was as big as a camel.

古文：人过，即攫而食之，腾空而去，百姓苦之。
现代文：有人经过，人便被抓去吃了，然后腾空飞去，老百姓很苦恼。
English: If someone passed by, the person would be caught and eaten, and then fly away. The people were very distressed.

古文：真腊王取大牛肉。中安小剑子，两头尖利，令人载行，鸟攫而吞之，乃死，无复种矣。百舌
现代文：真腊国王拿出大块牛肉，肉里放上两头带尖的小剑，让人背着走，大鸟抓来便吃，于是就死了，从此就绝了种。百舌
English: King Manwah took out a large piece of beef, put two small pointed swords in the meat, and let the people carry it on their backs. The big bird caught it and ate it, and then it died, and the species has been extinct ever since.

古文：百舌春啭，夏至唯食蚯蚓。
现代文：百舌鸟到春天时便婉啭地鸣叫着，夏天到来后它只吃蚯蚓。
English: When the spring comes, the tongue-and-groove hummingbird sings sweetly. When summer comes, it only eats grasshoppers.

古文：正月后冻开，蚓出而来。
现代文：正月以后解冻，蚯蚓出来百舌便飞来。
English: After the first month of the year, the ice thawed and the frogs came out.

古文：十月后，蚓藏而往。
现代文：十月以后，蚯蚓便进入土中，百舌就飞走。
English: After October, the earthworms enter the soil and the tongues fly away.

古文：盖物之相感也。
现代文：这就是因为物与物之间互相感应的关系。
English: This is because of the mutual induction relationship between things.

古文：鹳
现代文：鹳
English: 

古文：江淮谓群鹳旋飞为鹳井，鹳亦好旋飞，必有风雨。
现代文：江淮人说一群鹳鸟旋转着飞升就是鹳井。鹳鸟喜欢旋转着飞翔，它一旋飞便要刮风下雨。
English: Jianghuai people say that a group of ostriches spinning and soaring is a reed well. Ostriches like to spin and fly, and it will be windy and rainy as soon as it flies.

古文：人探巢取鹳子，六十里旱。
现代文：人若到巢中捉幼鹳，六十里内必然天旱。
English: If one were to go to the nest to catch the young, there would inevitably be a drought within sixty miles.

古文：能群飞，薄霄激雨，雨为之散。
现代文：鹳鸟能成群飞翔，飞到云中搅动云雨，云雨就搅散了。
English: Ostriches can fly in flocks, fly into clouds, stir up clouds and rain, and the clouds and rain disperse.

古文：又南方有鹳食蛇，每遇巨石，知其下有蛇，即于石前，如道士禹步，其石阞然而转，因得而噉。
现代文：另外，南方有一种鹳吃蛇，鹳鸟每当遇到大石头，知道石下有蛇，就在石间附近，像道士那样漫步，石头便也随着转动，于是就能捉着蛇吃掉。
English: In addition, there is a kind of dragonfly in the south that eats snakes. Whenever an ostrich encounters a large stone, it knows that there is a snake under the stone, and it walks around the stone like a Taoist. The stone also rotates, so it can catch the snake and eat it.

古文：里人学其法者，伺其养雏，缘树，以蔑絙缚其巢，鹳必作法而解之，乃铺沙树底，俾足迹所印而仿学之。
现代文：乡里人想学鹳的步法，趁鹳鸟育雏时，上树，用蔑网扣住它的巢，鹳鸟必定用法解开蔑网，就在树下铺沙子，使鹳鸟在沙上印上足迹，以便模仿学习。
English: The villagers want to learn the footstep of the stork. When the stork is raising its chicks, they climb up the tree and fasten its nest with a net. The stork must use the method of untying the net and spreading sand under the tree to make the stork imprint its footprints on the sand in order to imitate and learn.

古文：甘虫
现代文：甘虫
English: Sweetworm

古文：大中末，舒州奏众鸟成巢，阔七尺，高一丈，而燕雀鹰鹯，水禽山鸟，无不驯狎如一。
现代文：唐懿宗末年，舒州向皇帝上奏说一群鸟建立一个鸟巢，宽七尺，高一丈。而且燕、雀、鹰、鹯及水禽山鸟等，都驯服亲近的像一种鸟一样。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Shuzhou reported to the emperor that a group of birds had built a bird's nest that was seven feet wide and one foot high. Moreover, swallows, sparrows, eagles, storks and waterfowl and mountain birds were all tamed and close like a kind of bird.

古文：更有鸟，人面绿毛，嘴爪皆绀。其声曰 甘虫 ，因谓之甘虫。
现代文：还有一种鸟，长着人面绿毛，嘴和爪都是深青透红的颜色，它鸣叫的声音是 甘虫 ，因而就叫它甘虫。
English: There is also a bird with a human face and green fur, its beak and claws are dark blue and red, and its song is called "Sweetworm," which is why it is called "Sweetworm."

古文：时人画图，鬻于坊市。
现代文：当时有人把它画成图像，在集市上出卖。
English: At that time, someone drew a picture of it and sold it at the fair.

古文：戴胜
现代文：戴胜
English: Tai Sheng

古文：王蜀刑部侍郎李仁表寓居许州，将入贡于春官。时薛能尚书为镇，先缮所业诗五十篇以为贽，濡翰成轴，于小亭凭几阅之。未三五首，有戴胜自檐飞入，立于案几之上，驯狎。良久，伸颈亸翼而舞，向人若将语。
现代文：王建前蜀的刑部侍郎李仁表客居在许州，准备入礼部参加举试，当时是薛能尚书镇守许州，李仁表抄写了自己写的五十首诗作礼品，将诗书写在轴书上，在小亭子里靠在桌上阅读，还没看完三五首，就有一只戴胜鸟飞进亭子，站在桌上，很驯服亲近的样子，很久，又伸着脖子垂着翅膀跳起舞来，对着他像是要说话。
English: At that time, Xue Neng Shang Shuzhen was the governor of Huzhou. Li Renzhe copied fifty poems he had written to make gifts. He wrote the poems on a scroll and leaned on the table in a small pavilion to read. Before he had finished reading three or five poems, a hoopoe flew into the pavilion and stood on the table, looking very tame and familiar. It danced for a long time, stretching its neck and dangling its wings, as if it wanted to speak to him.

古文：久之，又转又舞。如是者三，超然飞去。
现代文：很久之后，又旋转又跳舞，这样反复做了三次，然后就轻轻地飞走了。
English: After a long time, it whirled and danced around three times, and then it flew away.

古文：心异之，不以告人，翌日投诗，薛大加礼待。
现代文：李仁表感觉很奇怪，也没把这事告诉别人。第二天去投递诗稿时，薛能很礼貌地接待了他。
English: Li felt very strange and did not tell anyone about it. The next day, when he went to deliver the poem, Xue Neng received him very politely.

古文：居数日，以其子妻之。
现代文：过了几天，便把女儿嫁给李仁表做妻子。
English: A few days later, he married his daughter to Li Ren as his wife.

古文：北海大鸟
现代文：北海大鸟
English: Big Bird of the North Sea

古文：北海有大鸟，其高千里，头文曰 天 ，胸文曰 候 ，左翼文曰 鹥 ，右翼文曰 勒 ，头向东正，海中央捕鱼。
现代文：北海有一只大鸟，身高一千里。头上有个 天 字，胸前有个 候 字，左膀有个 鹥 字，右膀有个 勒 字。头朝着正东方，到海中央捕鱼吃。
English: In the North Sea, there is a large bird, a thousand miles high. It has the Chinese character for "heaven" on its head, the Chinese character for "wait" on its chest, the Chinese character for "death" on its left arm, and the Chinese character for "death" on its right arm. Its head faces due east, and it catches fish in the middle of the sea.

古文：或时举翼飞，而其羽相切，如雷风也。
现代文：有时展翅飞翔，它的羽毛互相磨擦，像打雷刮大风一样。
English: Sometimes it flies with its wings outstretched, its feathers rubbing against each other like thunder and wind.

古文：鵶
现代文：鵶
English: 

古文：温璋为京兆尹，勇于杀戮，京邑惮之。
现代文：温璋任京兆尹时，常杀人，京城的人都怕他。
English: When Wen Xuan was in charge of Beijing, he often killed people. People in Beijing were afraid of him.

古文：一日，闻挽铃而不见有人，如此者三，乃一鵶也。
现代文：一天，听到拉铃声却看不见人，就这样连续三次，竟是一只鵶鸟。
English: One day, he heard the ringing of a bell but couldn't see anyone. Three times in a row, it turned out to be an ostrich.

古文：尹曰： 是必有人探其雏而来诉耳。 
现代文：京兆尹说，一定是有人去捉它的雏鸟而来投诉的。
English: Jing Zhaoyun said that someone must have come to catch its chicks to complain.

古文：命吏随鵶所在而捕之，其鵶盘旋，引吏至城外树间，果有人探其雏，尚憩树下。
现代文：于是命人随着鸟去的地方捉人。那只鵶鸟盘旋飞翔，把差吏引到城外树林间，果然有人捉了雏鸟，尚在树下休息。
English: The stork circled and flew, leading the officers to the woods outside the city, where someone caught the baby bird, which was still resting under a tree.

古文：吏执送之，府尹以事异于常，乃毙捕雏者。
现代文：差吏便把他捉住送官府，府尹觉得这事很特殊，就处死了捉雏鸟的人。
English: The policeman caught him and sent him to the government office. The government office thought this was a very special case and executed the person who caught the baby bird.

