古文：邹缉，字仲熙，吉水人。
现代文：邹缉，字仲熙，吉水人。
English: He was also known as Zhaozhi, Zhaozhongxi and Jishuijin.

古文：洪武中举明经，授星子教谕。
现代文：洪武年问考中明经科，授予国子教谕。
English: In the Hongwu Year of the Dragon, he was awarded the title of "Kokushi Kyokaku" (teacher of the son of the country).

古文：建文时入为国子助教。
现代文：建文时召入任国子助教。
English: At the time of the founding of the school, Kuniko was called in as an assistant teacher.

古文：成祖即位，擢翰林侍讲。
现代文：成祖即位，升任翰林侍讲。
English: Chengzu ascended to the throne and was promoted to the post of Hanlin's attendant.

古文：立东宫，兼左中允，屡署国子监事。
现代文：太子确立，兼任左中允，多次代管国子监事务。
English: The position of Prince Regent was established, and he concurrently held the position of Zuozhongyong, and was in charge of the affairs of the State Children's Supervisor for several times.

古文：永乐十九年，三殿灾，诏求直言，缉上疏曰：陛下肇建北京，焦劳圣虑，几二十年。
现代文：永乐十九年，三殿遭火灾，皇帝下诏征求直言，邹缉上疏说：陛下创建北京，精神焦虑烦劳，将近二十年。
English: In the 19th year of the Yongle Emperor, the Third Palace was set on fire. The emperor issued an edict to solicit frank talk, and Zhang Xiang said: "Your Majesty founded Beijing. Mentally, you have been anxious and tired for nearly 20 years.

古文：工大费繁，调度甚广，冗官蚕食，耗费国储。
现代文：工程浩大，费用繁多，微调范围很广，冗杂官吏蚕食财物，耗费国家储备。
English: The project is huge, the cost is numerous, the fine-tuning range is very wide, the red tape of officials erodes property and consumes national reserves.

古文：工作之夫，动以百万，终岁供役，不得躬亲田亩以事力作。
现代文：劳作的人夫动辄百万，整年服役，不能亲自到田间努力劳作。
English: The men and women who do the work number in the millions and are on duty for the entire year, unable to work hard in the fields themselves.

古文：犹且征求无艺，至伐桑枣以供薪，剥桑皮以为楮。
现代文：而且征收没有限度，以至于砍伐桑树枣木充当柴火，剥取桑皮用来造纸。
English: Moreover, there is no limit to the levy, so much so that mulberry jujube trees are cut down to be used as firewood, and the mulberry bark is peeled to make paper.

古文：加之官吏横征，日甚一日。
现代文：加上官吏横征暴敛，一天比一天厉害。
English: Coupled with rampant embezzlement by government officials, the situation is getting worse by the day.

古文：如前岁买办颜料，本非土产，动科千百。
现代文：如前一年置办颜料，本来不是本地生产，动辄征收成千上百。
English: As in the previous year, the purchase of paints, which were not originally produced locally, resulted in the imposition of hundreds of thousands of crowns.

古文：民相率敛钞，购之他所。
现代文：百姓竞相凑集钱财，到别的地方购买。
English: People are scrambling to get the money together to buy elsewhere.

古文：大青一斤，价至万六千贯。
现代文：大青一斤，价钱到一万六千贯。
English: A kilo of daqing can fetch up to 16,000 yuan.

古文：及进纳，又多留难，往复展转，当须二万贯钞，而不足供一柱之用。
现代文：等到进贡交纳，又多方刁难，反复周转，就须要二万贯钱，却不够一个柱子用。
English: By the time the tribute was paid, and after many difficulties and repeated turnarounds, twenty thousand crowns were needed, but not enough for a pillar.

古文：其后既遣官采之产所，而买办犹未止。
现代文：之后虽已派官吏到产地采办，但购买仍然役有停止。
English: After that, although officials were sent to the place of origin for procurement, the purchase was still suspended.

古文：盖缘工匠多派牟利，而不顾民艰至此。
现代文：大概因为工匠多报牟利，而如此不顾惜人民的艰辛。
English: Probably because the craftsmen are more interested in making a profit, and thus do not care about the hardships of the people.

古文：夫京师天下根本。
现代文：京城是天下的根本。
English: The capital city is the foundation of the world.

古文：人民安则京师安，京师安则国本固而天下安。
现代文：人民安定则京城安定，京城安定则国家的根本稳固而天下纔安定。
English: If the people are stable, the capital city will be stable. If the capital city is stable, the country will be fundamentally stable and the world will be stable.

古文：自营建以来，工匠小人假托威势，驱迫移徙，号令方施，庐舍已坏。
现代文：自从修建以来，工匠小人凭借威势，驱赶强迫人民迁徙，号令刚刚下达，房子已被破坏。
English: Since its construction, the artisan villain has used his power to drive and force people to migrate. The order has just been issued, and the house has been destroyed.

古文：孤儿寡妇哭泣叫号，仓皇暴露，莫知所适。
现代文：孤儿寡妇哭泣叫号，仓皇露宿，不知道到哪里去。
English: Orphans and widows weep and wail, desperate to find shelter, not knowing where to go.

古文：迁移甫定，又复驱令他徒，至有三四徙不得息者。
现代文：迁徙刚刚安定，又再次驱赶命令迁到他处，以至于有迁徙三四次都不能安定的。
English: The migration has just stabilized, and the expulsion order has been moved to another place again, so that there are three or four migrations that cannot be stabilized.

古文：及其既去，而所空之地，经月逾时，工犹未及。
现代文：等他们离去，而空出来的土地，经过很长时间，工程还没有顾及。
English: When they leave, the land that has been vacated, after a long time, has not been taken into account by the project.

古文：此陛下所不知，而人民疾怨者也。
现代文：这是陛下所不知道而人民特别怨恨的。
English: This was unknown to His Majesty and was particularly resented by the people.

古文：贪官污吏，遍布内外，剥削及于骨髓。
现代文：贪官污吏，遍布朝廷内外，剥削之重深入骨髓。
English: Corrupt officials are everywhere inside and outside the imperial court, and the weight of exploitation goes deep into the marrow of the bones.

古文：朝廷每遣一人，即是其人养活之计。
现代文：朝廷每派遣一个人，就是他生活的办法。
English: Every time the court sends a person, it is his way of life.

古文：虐取苛求，初无限量。
现代文：强制夺取过分征求，完全没有限度。
English: There is no limit to the extortion of excessive solicitation.

古文：有司承奉，惟恐不及。
现代文：有关官员奉承讨好，惟恐达不到要求。
English: Officials fawn over them for fear of falling short of their demands.

古文：间有廉强自守、不事干媚者，辄肆谗毁，动得罪谴，无以自明。
现代文：问或有廉正刚强、坚守节操、不去谄媚求荣的，就妄加谗毁，动不动就获罪被贬，没有办法表白自己。
English: If you ask whether someone is honest and strong, adheres to ethics and discipline, and does not seek glory through flattery, they will try to destroy you, and they will be blamed and demeaned at every turn, and they will have no way to express themselves.

古文：是以使者所至，有司公行货赂，剥下媚上，有同交易。
现代文：所以使者所到之地，有关官员公开进行贿赂，剥削人民谄媚上官，如同做生意。
English: Therefore, in the place where the envoy arrived, the relevant officials openly engaged in bribery, exploiting the people and flattering the superiors, as if doing business.

古文：夫小民所积几何，而内外上下诛求如此。
现代文：那百姓的积蓄能有多少，而内外上下的贪官却如此勒索。
English: How much savings can the people have, while corrupt officials up and down the country extort so much?

古文：今山东、河南、山西、陕西水旱相仍，民至剥树皮掘草根以食。
现代文：现在山东、河南、山西、陕西水旱相接，人民到了剥树皮掘草根当食物的地步。
English: At present, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi are in a state of drought, and the people have reached the point of stripping tree bark and digging grass roots for food.

古文：老幼流移，颠踣道路，卖妻鬻子以求苟活。
现代文：老幼流亡迁徙，颠沛于道路，卖妻卖子以求苟且生存。
English: The old and the young migrate in exile, bump into each other on the road, sell their wives and children in order to survive.

古文：而京师聚集僧道万余人，日耗廪米百余石，此夺民食以养无用也。
现代文：而京城聚集了僧人道士一万多人，每天消耗国库粮食一百多石，这是掠夺人民的食物来供养无用的人啊。
English: Meanwhile, more than 10,000 monks and humanitarians have gathered in Beijing, consuming more than 100 kilos of grain from the national treasury every day. This is looting the people's food to feed useless people.

古文：至报效军士，朝廷厚与粮赐。
现代文：至于报恩效力的将士，朝廷重赏他们粮食财物。
English: As for the soldiers who returned the favor, the imperial court rewarded them with grain and property.

古文：及使就役，乃骄傲横恣，闲游往来。
现代文：等到派遣服役，就骄傲蛮横，到处闲游。
English: When they are sent to serve, they are proud and arrogant, and roam around.

古文：此皆奸诡之人，惧还原伍，假此规避，非真有报效之心也。
现代文：这些都是奸邪狡诈之人，害怕回到原来的军队，藉这种办法逃避，并非真有报恩效力的心意。
English: These are treacherous and cunning people, afraid to return to the original army, and this way of escape is not really intended to return the favor.

古文：朝廷岁令天下织锦、铸钱，遣内官买马外蕃，所出常数千万，而所取曾不能一二。
现代文：朝廷每年命令各地织造、铸钱，派朝廷官员到外番买马，所花费用常常右数千万，而所得到的竟然还不能达到支出的十分之一二。
English: Every year, the imperial court ordered various regions to weave and mint money, and sent imperial officials to buy horses on an out-of-hours basis. The expenses often amounted to tens of millions, but the income did not even reach two-tenths of the expenditure.

古文：马至虽多，类皆驽下。责民牧养，骚扰殊甚。
现代文：买来的马虽然多，品种都是劣马，责令人民放牧饲养，扰民非常严重。
English: Although there were many horses bought, the breeds were all inferior horses, and the people were ordered to graze and feed them, which disturbed the people very seriously.

古文：及至死伤，辄令赔补。
现代文：等到马有死伤，就命令赔偿。
English: When a horse is killed or injured, compensation is ordered.

古文：马户贫困，更鬻妻子。
现代文：养马的人家贫困，竟至卖妻卖子。
English: The horse-breeder's family was so poor that he sold his wife and children.

古文：此尤害之大者。
现代文：这更是危害中最严重的。
English: This is the most serious of the hazards.

古文：漠北降人，赐居室，盛供帐，意欲招其同类也。
现代文：漠北归降的人，赐予住房，丰富的食物用具，意思是想要招徕他们同族的人。
English: Returnees from the north of the country were given housing, rich food and equipment, meaning that they wanted to attract people of their own race.

古文：不知来者皆怀窥觇，非真远慕王化，甘去乡士。
现代文：殊不知来的人都怀着窥测观望的心理，并不是真仰慕皇帝的教化，甘心离开故土。
English: However, the people who came were not really admiring the emperor's enlightenment and were willing to leave their homeland.

古文：宜求来朝之后，遣归本国，不必留为后日子孙患。
现代文：应该在他们来朝见之后，遣送回本国，不必留下来成焉日后子孙的祸患。
English: They should be sent back to their home countries after their visit to the DPRK. They should not be left behind to become a scourge for future generations.

古文：至宫观祷祠之事，有国者所当深戒。
现代文：至于佛寺道观祈祷求神的事情，治理国家的人应当深为警戒。
English: As for the matter of Buddhist temples, Taoism, praying and seeking God, the people who govern the country should be deeply vigilant.

古文：古人有言，淫祀无福。
现代文：古人有句话，过度祭祀没有福气。
English: The ancients had a saying that excessive sacrifice brings no good luck.

古文：况事无益以害有益，蠹财妄费者乎！
现代文：况且从事以无益之事损害有益之事，而又消耗钱财胡乱花费的事情呢！
English: Moreover, he engages in things that are useless, harming things that are useful, and wasting money!

古文：凡此数事，皆下失民心，上违天意。
现代文：大凡这些事，都是对下失去民心，对上违背天意。
English: All of these things are contrary to losing the people's heart and contrary to the will of Heaven.

古文：怨讟之兴，实由于此。
现代文：怨恨诽谤的兴起，实际上是来源于此。
English: This is where the rise of hate speech actually comes from.

古文：夫奉天殿者，所以朝群臣，发号令，古所谓明堂也。而灾首及焉，非常之变也。
现代文：奉天殿，是用来召见群臣，发号施令的地方，古代称之为明堂，而灾祸首先殃及到它，是不平常的事变。
English: The Bongten Hall, a place used to summon courtiers and issue orders, was called Myeongdong in ancient times, and it was an unusual event that the disaster hit it first.

古文：非省躬责己，大布恩泽，改革政化，疏涤天下穷困之人，不能回上天谴怒。
现代文：不自我反省，责备自己，大施恩惠，改革政治和教化，周济天下穷困的人，不能够挽回上天的谴责和愤怒。
English: Without self-reflection, self-reproach, great benevolence, political reform and enlightenment, and assistance to the world's poor, it is impossible to save oneself from God's condemnation and wrath.

古文：前有监生生员，以单丁告乞侍亲，因而获罪遣戍者，此实有亏治体。
现代文：以前有监生生员因没有兄弟而上疏请求侍养双亲，因而获罪被遣流放，这实在有损治国的体统。
English: In the past, there was a case of a prison warden who, because he had no brothers, went to the court and asked to be allowed to take care of his parents. As a result, he was convicted and sent into exile. This really undermines the dignity of governing the country.

古文：近者大赦，法司执滞常条，当赦者尚复拘系。
现代文：近来大加赦免，法司固执拘泥于常规法绦，应当赦免的人还被拘禁。
English: Recently, there have been a lot of pardons, but the justice department is still sticking to the regular laws, and people who should be pardoned are still being detained.

古文：并乞重加湔洗，蠲除租赋，一切勿征。有司百官全其廪禄，拔简贤才，申行荐举，官吏贪赃蠹政者，核其罪而罢黜之。
现代文：一并请求重加洗雪，免除租赋，一律不予征收，各级官员发全他们的糜米俸禄，选拔贤才，申明推行举荐，官吏贪赃败坏政治的人核实其罪行从而罢免他们。
English: At the same time, they requested that the snow should be washed again, the rent should be exempted, no taxes should be levied at all, officials at all levels should pay their full rice stipend, select talents, affirm the implementation of recommendation, and officials who are corrupt and corrupting politics should verify their crimes and remove them.

古文：则人心欢悦，和气可臻，所以保安宗社，为国家千万年无穷之基，莫有大于此者矣。
现代文：那么人心欢悦，人和可以形成，保护安定宗庙社稷，创立国家千万年无穷的基础的办法，没有比这个更重要的。
English: There is no more important way to make the hearts of the people happy, to educate the people, to protect and stabilize the dynasties, temples, and communities, and to establish the foundation of the country for tens of thousands of years.

古文：且国家所恃以久长者，惟天命人心，而天命常视人心为去留。
现代文：并且国家所依靠来达到长治久安的，只有天命人心，而天命常常根据人心决定去留。
English: Moreover, what the country relies on to achieve long-term stability is only the fate of the people, and the fate of the people often decides to stay according to the will of the people.

古文：今天意如此，不宜劳民。
现代文：现在天意是这样，不宜使人民劳累。
English: It is the will of Heaven that the people should not be overworked.

古文：当还都南京，奉谒陵庙，告以灾变之故。保养圣躬休息于无为。毋听小人之言，复有所兴作，以误陛下于后也。
现代文：应当还都南京，拜见皇陵宗庙，告诉灾变的缘故，在清静无为中保养圣体安心休息，不要听小人的语，再有所兴建，而耽误陛下以后的治理。
English: He should return to Nanjing, visit the imperial mausoleum and the ancestral temple, explain the cause of the catastrophe, maintain the sacred body and rest in peace and quiet, and not listen to the words of a villain and delay the future governance of His Majesty by building something.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：书上奏，没有回应。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：时三殿初成，帝方以定都诏天下，忽罹火灾，颇惧，下诏求直言。
现代文：当时三殿刚建成，皇帝正以定都诏命天下，忽然遭受火灾，非常害怕，下诏令征求直言。
English: At that time, the third hall had just been built, and the emperor was ordering the world with the edict of the fixed capital. Suddenly, he suffered a fire, was very afraid, and issued an edict to solicit frankness.

古文：及言者多斥时政，帝不怿，而大臣复希旨诋言者。
现代文：等到上疏的人多指责时政，皇帝不高兴，而大臣又迎合皇上的旨意诋毁上疏的人。
English: The emperor was not pleased, and the minister pandered to the emperor's will and slandered the people of Shangso.

古文：帝于是发怒，谓言事者谤讪，下诏严禁之，犯者不赦。
现代文：皇帝于是发怒，说上疏的人毁谤讥刺，下令严加禁止，违犯的人不赦免。
English: The emperor was enraged, saying that the people of Shangzhu were slandering and ridiculing, and ordered that it be strictly prohibited, and those who violated it would not be pardoned.

古文：侍读李时勉、侍讲罗汝敬俱下狱；御史郑维桓、何忠、罗通、徐瑢，给事中柯暹俱左官交阯。惟缉与主事高公望、庶吉士杨复得无罪。
现代文：侍读李时勉、侍讲罗汝敬都被投入监狱。御史郑维桓、何忠、罗通、徐璇，给事中柯暹都贬官到交趾，只有邹缉与主事高公望、庶吉士杨复没有获罪。
English: Li Shizhen, the reader-in-charge, and Luo Ruqing, the lecturer-in-charge, were both sent to prison. The scholars Zheng Weihuan, He Zhong, Luo Tong, and Xu Yao were also sent to prison. In the course of the incident, Ke Siam was demoted to a subordinate official. Only Zou Ji, Gao Gongwang, the supervisor, and Yang Fu, the secretary-general, were not convicted.

古文：是年冬，缉进右庶子兼侍讲。
现代文：这年冬天，邹缉升任右庶子兼侍讲。
English: In the winter of that year, Zou Jiao was promoted to the position of the second son of the right and the assistant lecturer.

古文：明年九月卒于官。
现代文：第二年九月死在任上。
English: He died in office in September of the following year.

古文：缉博极群书，居官勤慎，清操如寒士。
现代文：邹缉博览群书，为官勤勉谨慎，清廉高洁像清贫的士人。
English: He is a diligent and prudent official with an extensive collection of books. He is as clean and honest as a poor scholar.

古文：子循，宣德中为翰林待诏，请赠父母。
现代文：儿子邹循，宣德年间任翰林待诏，请求追赠父母。
English: His son followed suit, and during the Xuande era, Ren Hanlin waited for the imperial edict and requested that his parents be posthumously rewarded.

古文：帝谕吏部曰： 曩皇祖征沙漠，朕守北京，缉在左右，陈说皆正道，良臣也，其予之。 
现代文：皇帝告谕吏部说： 以前皇祖出征沙漠，朕守卫北京，邹缉跟随左右，陈述的都是纯正的道理，是个贤臣，给他追赠。 
English: The emperor told the officials: "In the past, the emperor's ancestors went to the desert, I guarded Beijing, and he followed me around. What I said was pure truth. He was a wise minister, so I gave him a posthumous gift.

古文：郑维桓，慈溪人。
现代文：郑维桓，慈溪人。
English: Zheng Weihan, from Cixi.

古文：永乐十三年进士。
现代文：永乐十三年进士。
English: Yongle, a 13-year-old junior high school student, passed the entrance examination.

古文：出知交阯南清州，卒。
现代文：出任交陂南清州知事，去世。
English: Took office as the governor of South Qingzhou, died.

古文：柯暹，池州建德人。
现代文：柯暹，池州建德人。
English: Ke Siam, the founder of Chizhou.

古文：由乡举出知交阯酹州。
现代文：由乡试中举出任交肚骥州知事。
English: He was elected as the governor of Handan Province in the township election.

古文：累官浙江、云南按察使。
现代文：历任浙江、云南按察使。
English: Successive Zhejiang and Yunnan inspectors.

古文：弋谦，代州人。
现代文：弋谦，代州人。
English: Zou Qian, from Daizhou.

古文：永乐九年进士。
现代文：永乐九年进士。
English: Yongle 9 years old, junior high school graduate.

古文：除监察御史。
现代文：任监察御史。
English: He was appointed Inspector-General of History.

古文：出按江西，言事忤旨，贬峡山知县。
现代文：出京巡察江西，上奏言事触犯了皇帝的旨意，贬为峡山知县。
English: He went to Beijing to inspect Jiangxi Province. When he made a speech, he violated the emperor's will and was relegated to the position of the leader of the Xiaoshan Zhixian.

古文：复坐事免归。
现代文：又因事获罪免官回家。
English: He was also exonerated and returned home.

古文：仁宗在东宫，素知谦骨鲠。
现代文：仁宗作太子时，一向知道弋谦耿直刚强。
English: When he was crown prince, Ninsong always knew how to be humble, straightforward and strong.

古文：及嗣位，召为大理少卿。
现代文：等到继位，召入任大理少卿。
English: Wait until the succession and be called to the post of Dai Li Shaoqing.

古文：直陈时政，言官吏贪残，政事多非洪武之旧，及有司诛求无艺。
现代文：直言陈述时政，说官吏贪婪凶残，政事大多不合洪武时的旧制，以及有关官员索求没有限度。
English: It bluntly stated the current politics, saying that the officials are greedy and cruel, most of the political affairs do not conform to the old system of Hongwu, and there is no limit to the demands of the relevant officials.

古文：帝多采纳。
现代文：皇帝大都采纳了。
English: These opinions were accepted by the emperor.

古文：既复言五事，词太激，帝乃不怿。
现代文：不久又上言五件事，言词遇于激烈，皇帝就不高兴了。
English: Soon, five more matters were brought up, and the emperor was not happy when the rhetoric became heated.

古文：尚书吕震、吴中，侍郎吴廷用，大理卿虞谦等因劾谦诬罔，都御史刘观令众御史合纠谦。
现代文：尚书吕震、昊中，侍郎昊廷用，大理卿虞谦等因而弹劾弋谦编造不实之词，都御史刘观令众御史联合检举弋谦。
English: Shangshu Lv Zhen, Hao Zhong, chamberlain Hao Ting Ying, Dali Lord Yu Qian and others impeached Zou Qian for fabricating untrue words, and the Grand Historian Liu Qian ordered all Grand Historians to jointly investigate Zou Qian.

古文：帝召杨士奇等言之，士奇对曰： 谦不谙大体，然心感超擢恩，欲图报耳。
现代文：皇帝召见杨士奇等谈这件事，杨士奇回答说： 弋谦不熟悉大政，然而内心戚激破格提拔的恩典，想要报答罢了。
English: The emperor summoned Yang Shiqi to discuss the matter, and Yang Shiqi replied: Zou Qian is not familiar with politics, but in his heart he wants to repay the grace of the extraordinary promotion.

古文：主圣则臣直，惟陛下优容之。 
现代文：主上圣明则大臣忠直，祇请陛下宽容他。 
English: Lord Shengming, the minister is loyal and upright. I only ask Your Majesty to be tolerant of him.

古文：帝乃不罪谦。
现代文：皇帝于是不惩罚弋谦。
English: Therefore, the emperor did not punish Zou Qian.

古文：然每见谦，词色甚厉。
现代文：然而每次见到弋谦，言词神色非常严厉。
English: However, every time I see Zou Qian, his expression is very stern.

古文：士奇从容言： 陛下诏求直言，谦言不当，触怒。
现代文：杨士奇很从容地进言说： 陛下下诏征求直言，弋谦言词不恰当，触怒了皇上。
English: Yang Shiqui very calmly said: His Majesty issued an edict to solicit frankness, and the words of modesty were inappropriate, which angered the emperor.

古文：外廷悚惕，以言为戒。
现代文：朝廷外的臣子都害怕，以进言为鉴戒。
English: All the courtiers outside the imperial court were afraid of him and took his advice as a warning.

古文：今四方朝觐之臣皆集阙下，见谦如此，将谓陛下不能容直言。 
现代文：现在四方朝觐的臣子都聚集在官阙下，看到弋谦这样，将会说陛下不能容纳直言。 
English: Now, the courtiers of the four directions of the imperial court are gathered under the imperial eaves, and when they see Zou Qian like this, they will say that His Majesty can't tolerate his outspokenness.

古文：帝惕然曰： 此固朕不能容，亦吕震辈迎合以益朕过，自今当置之。 
现代文：皇帝警觉省悟地说： 这固然是朕不能包容，也是吕震之流迎合朕而加重了朕的过失，从今当宽释他。 
English: The emperor, alert and reflective, said: Of course, this is something I cannot tolerate. It is also Lv Zhen's tendency to cater to me that has aggravated my fault. From now on, he should be pardoned.

古文：遂免谦朝参，令专视司事。
现代文：就免除弋谦上朝参拜，命令他专门管理官府事务。
English: He exempted Yao Qian from going to the imperial court to pay homage and ordered him to exclusively manage the affairs of the government.

古文：未几，帝以言事者益少，复召士奇曰： 朕怒谦矫激过实耳，朝臣遂月余无言。
现代文：不久，皇帝因为上疏论事的人越来越少，又召见杨士奇说： 朕不过是恼怒弋谦遇于偏激言遇其实罢了，朝中大臣就一个多月没有上言。
English: Not long after, the emperor summoned Yang Shichi again, saying, "I'm just annoyed and humbled to be confronted with such an impassioned speech. The minister of the DPRK and China hasn't made a speech for more than a month.

古文：尔语诸臣，白朕心。 
现代文：你告诉众臣，表明朕的心意。 
English: You should tell all your ministers and show them what I think.

古文：士奇曰： 臣空言不足信，乞亲降玺书。 
现代文：杨士奇说： 我空口说话不足作凭信，请求皇上亲自降旨。 
English: Yang Shichi said, "My empty words are not enough to prove my sincerity. I would like to ask the emperor to issue the order in person."

古文：遂令就榻前书敕引过曰： 朕自即位以来，臣民上章以数百计，未尝不欣然听纳。
现代文：于是命令在床榻前害写敕令承认过失说： 朕自即位以来，臣子百姓上奏章有数百份，没有不欣然听取采纳的。
English: Therefore, he ordered that the imperial edict be written in front of the bed to admit the fault, saying, "Since I ascended the throne, there have been hundreds of copies of the imperial edict sent to the people, and none of them have not been accepted with pleasure.

古文：苟有不当，不加谴诃，群臣所共知也。
现代文：如果有不恰当的，不加以谴责呵叱，这是群臣都知道的。
English: If there is any inappropriate, non-condemnatory chiding, the ministers know about it.

古文：间者，大理少卿弋谦所言，多非实事，群臣迎合朕意，交章奏其卖直，请置诸法。
现代文：近来，大理少卿弋谦所上奏的事，大多不是实事，群臣迎合朕的心意，相继上疏奏他故意表示忠直以酤名钓誉，请求依法惩处。
English: Recently, most of the matters reported by Dali Shaoqing Zou Qian are not true. A group of ministers catered to my wishes and successively omitted to report that he deliberately expressed his loyalty by stealing names and reputations, and requested that he be punished according to law.

古文：朕皆拒而不听，但免谦朝参。
现代文：朕都拒绝了而没有听从，只免除了弋谦上朝参拜。
English: I refused and did not obey, only exempting Yao Qian from visiting the imperial court.

古文：而自是以来，言者益少。
现代文：而从此以后，上言的人更少。
English: Since then, fewer people have come forward.

古文：今自去冬无雪，春亦少雨，阴阳愆和，必有其咎，岂无可言？
现代文：现在从去年冬天没有下雪，春天也少雨水，阴阳不和，必定有人的过错，怎能没有可上奏的事。
English: Now, since last winter there has been no snow, and there is little rain in the spring, the yin and yang are not in harmony, there must be someone's fault, how can there be nothing to play on.

古文：而为臣者，怀自全之计，退而默默，何以为忠？
现代文：而且做臣子的，怀着自我保全的想法，后退而不言，用什么来表示忠诚。
English: Moreover, as a courtier, with the idea of self-preservation, retreat without saying what to use to express loyalty.

古文：朕于谦一时不能含容，未尝不自愧咎。
现代文：朕对于弋谦一时不能宽容，未尝不自觉愧疚。
English: For a moment, I couldn't tolerate Zou Qian, and I felt guilty.

古文：尔群臣勿以前事为戒，于国家利弊、政令未当者，直言勿讳。
现代文：你们这些大臣不要以先前的事为鉴戒，对国家的利弊、政令不妥当的，直率地说不要忌讳。
English: You ministers, don't take the previous events as a warning, and don't shy away from speaking frankly about the country's advantages and disadvantages, and inappropriate government decrees.

古文：谦朝参如故。 
现代文：弋谦上朝参拜像往常一样。 
English: Zou Qian went to the morning worship as usual.

古文：时中官采木四川，贪横。
现代文：当时中官在四川采木，贪婪蛮横。
English: At that time, the lieutenant colonel was harvesting trees in Sichuan, and he was very greedy.

古文：帝以谦清直，命往治之。
现代文：皇帝因弋谦清廉耿直，命令他去治理。
English: The emperor ordered him to govern because of his modesty and integrity.

古文：擢谦副都御史，赐钞以行，遂罢采木之役。
现代文：提拔弋谦为副都御史，赏赐钱财去赴任，于是就废除了采木的工程。
English: Zou Qian was promoted to vice-governor of the capital, and was rewarded with money and resources to take up the post. As a result, the logging project was abolished.

古文：宣德初，交阯右布政戚逊以贪淫黜，命谦往代。
现代文：童德初年，交阻右布政使戚逊因贪污荒淫被罢免，命令弋谦去代理。
English: In the first year of Tongde, Qixiong, a right-wing political appointee, was removed from office for corruption and debauchery, and Zou Qian was ordered to act as his deputy.

古文：王通弃交阯，谦亦论死。
现代文：王通丢弃了交趾，弋谦也被判死罪。
English: Wang Tong was sentenced to death for abandoning his comrades and Zou Qian was also sentenced to death.

古文：正统初，释为民。
现代文：正统初年，释放为平民。
English: In the first year of Orthodoxy, he was released as a civilian.

古文：土木之变，谦布衣走阙下，荐通及甯懋、阮迁等十三人，皆奇才可用。
现代文：土木事变发生后，弋谦以平民身份到京都，举荐王通和宁懋、阮迁等十三人，都是奇才可以任用。
English: After the civil engineering incident occurred, Zou Qian went to Kyoto as a civilian and recommended Wang Tong, Ning Xi, Ruan Qian and other 13 people, all of whom are wizards and can be appointed.

古文：众议以通副石亨，谦请专任通，事遂寝。
现代文：众臣商议任王通为石亨副将，弋谦请专任王通，事情就搁置了。
English: The ministers discussed appointing Wang Tong as Vice-General Shi Heng, and Zou Qian asked Wang Tong to serve full-time, and the matter was put on hold.

古文：廷臣以谦负重名，奏留之，亦不报。
现代文：朝廷众臣因弋谦负有重名，奏请留任他，也没有回应。
English: The courtiers of the imperial court did not respond to his request to remain in office.

古文：景泰二年复至京，疏荐通等，不纳。
现代文：景泰二年，又到京城，上疏推荐王通等人，没有采纳。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, he went to Beijing again, and Wang Tong and others were recommended by Shang Shuo, but they were not adopted.

古文：罢归，未几卒。
现代文：事完回家，没多久就去世了。
English: After returning home, he died not long after.

古文：仁宗性宽大，容直言，谦以故得无罪，反责吕震等。
现代文：仁宗胸怀宽大，包容直言，弋谦因此得以无罪，反而责备吕震等。
English: Renzong was broad-minded, tolerant and outspoken, and therefore, Zou Qian was acquitted. Instead, he blamed Lv Zhengyu and others.

古文：而黄骥言西域事，帝亦诮震而行其言。
现代文：而黄骥上疏言西域的事情，皇帝也责备吕震而实行他的建议。
English: However, Huang Xuan neglected to mention the western region, and the emperor also reproached Lv Zhen for not implementing his suggestion.

古文：骥，全州人。
现代文：黄骥，全州人。
English: Huang Qi, a native of Jeonju.

古文：洪武中，中乡举。
现代文：洪武年问，乡试中举。
English: Hongwu year asked, township test raised.

古文：为沙县教谕。
现代文：任沙县教谕。
English: Rensha County edict.

古文：永乐时擢礼科给事中，常三使西域。
现代文：永乐年问升任礼科给事中，曾经三次出使西域。
English: Yongle Nian asked to be promoted to the etiquette department, and was sent to the western region three times.

古文：仁宗初，上疏言： 西域贡使多商人假托，无赖小人投为从者，乘传役人，运贡物至京师，赏赉优厚。
现代文：仁宗初年，上疏说： 西域来进贡的使节多是商人假冒，游手好闲的小人投奔为随从，乘坐驿车雇用人力，把贡品运送到京城，赏赐丰厚。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Nanzong, Shang Zuo said: Most of the envoys from the western region who came to collect tribute were counterfeit merchants, and idle villains rushed to be their followers, hired manpower by tuk-tuk, and transported the tribute to the capital, and were rewarded handsomely.

古文：番人慕利，贡无虚月，致民失业妨农。
现代文：番人追慕利益，进贡不隔月，致使人民不务本业妨碍农事。
English: The guards covet the profits, and the tribute is not paid every other month, causing the people to neglect their duties and hindering the agricultural work.

古文：比其使还，多赍货物，车运至百余辆。
现代文：等到他们出使回去时，多携带货物，用车运送达到一百多辆。
English: When they returned from their mission, they carried more goods and transported more than a hundred vehicles.

古文：丁男不足，役及妇女。
现代文：男子不够，就役使妇女。
English: There aren't enough men, so they use women.

古文：所至辱驿官，鞭夫隶，无敢与较者。
现代文：所到之地侮辱驿官，鞭笞役夫，没有敢与他们对抗的。
English: Wherever they went, they insulted the eunuchs and flogged the servants, and no one dared to oppose them.

古文：乞敕陕西行都司，惟哈密诸国王遣使入贡者，许令来京，止正副使得乘驿马，陕人庶少苏。
现代文：请求诏令陕西行都司，只有哈密等国国王派遣使节进贡的，允许来京，祇有正副使者可以乘坐驿马，这样陕西人有望稍微恢复。
English: Only the kings of Hami and other countries who sent envoys to pay tribute were allowed to come to Beijing, and only the principal and deputy envoys could ride on a horse, so the people of Shaanxi were expected to recover slightly.

古文：至西域所产，惟马切边需，应就给甘肃军士。
现代文：至者可以乘坐驿马，这样陕西人有望稍微恢复。至就近供给甘肃军队。
English: Those who have arrived can ride a horse, so that the people of Shaanxi are expected to recover a little.

古文：其碙砂、梧桐、硷之类，皆无益国用，请一切勿受，则来者自稀，浮费益省。 
现代文：那些碉砂、梧桐、碱之类，都对国家的使用没有好处，请一律不要接受，那么来的人自然会稀少，不必要的开支会逐渐节省。 
English: Those borax, sycamore, alkali and the like are not beneficial to the use of the country, please do not accept them at all, then people will naturally be scarce, and unnecessary expenses will gradually be saved.

古文：帝以示尚书吕震，且让之曰： 骥尝奉使，悉西事。
现代文：皇帝把疏奏给尚书吕震看，而且责备他说： 黄骥曾经奉命出使，熟悉西域的情况。
English: The emperor showed the play to Shangshu Lucheng, and scolded him, saying: Huang Qi had been sent on a mission and was familiar with the situation in the western region.

古文：卿西人，顾不悉邪？
现代文：你是西域人，难道不知道吗？
English: You're from the Western Regions, don't you know that?

古文：骥言是，其即议行。 
现代文：黄骥说得对，应即刻商议施行。 
English: Huang Qi is right, it should be discussed and implemented immediately.

古文：后迁右通政，与李琦、罗汝敬抚谕交阯，不辱命。
现代文：后来升任右通政，与李琦、罗汝敬安抚晓谕交肚，不辱役使命。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Utsunomasa, and became friends with Li Xi and Luo Rujing, so as not to disgrace his duty.

古文：使还，寻卒。
现代文：出使归来，不久去世。
English: He died shortly after returning from the mission.

古文：黄泽，闽县人。
现代文：黄泽，闽县人。
English: Huang Ze, from Jixian County.

古文：永乐十年进士。
现代文：永乐十年进士。
English: Yongle ten years, junior high school graduate.

古文：擢河南左参政。
现代文：升任河南左参政。
English: He was promoted to Henan Left Party Politician.

古文：南阳多流民，拊循使复业。
现代文：南阳有很多流亡的百姓，安抚他们，使他们恢复了生产。
English: Nanyang has a lot of exiled people, so appease them and let them resume production.

古文：尝率丁役至北京，周恤备至。
现代文：曾经率领服劳役的壮丁到北京，周济抚恤很周到。
English: He once led a young man to Beijing for forced labor, and he was very thoughtful about the Zhou Jizhi pension.

古文：久之，调湖广。
现代文：很久以后，调任湖广。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to Hukang.

古文：仁宗即位，入觐，言时政，多见采。
现代文：仁宗即位，入朝拜见，进言时政，多被采纳。
English: The enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, the entry into the imperial court, and the introduction of the current government were mostly adopted.

古文：宣宗立，下诏求言。
现代文：宣宗即位，下诏征求谏言。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and the following edict was issued to solicit his advice.

古文：泽上疏言正心、恤民、敬天、纳谏、练兵、重农、止贡献、明赏罚、远嬖幸、汰冗官十事。
现代文：黄泽上疏进言端正思想、体恤民情、尊敬天意、采纳谏议、训练军队、重视农业、废止进贡、严明赏罚、疏远嬖幸、淘汰闲官十件事。
English: Huang Zhaoxiao introduced ten things: correct thinking, sympathizing with the people's feelings, respecting the will of heaven, adopting deliberation, training the army, attaching importance to agriculture, abolishing tribute, strictly rewarding and punishing, alienating the fortunate, and eliminating idle officials.

古文：其言远嬖幸曰： 刑余之人，其情幽阴，其虑险谲。大奸似忠，大诈似信，大巧似愚。
现代文：其中上言疏远嬖幸说： 受过宫刑的人，他们的性情幽深阴暗，他们的想法阴险狡诈，特别奸险就近似忠诚，特别狡诈就近似可靠，特别机巧就近似愚钝。
English: Among them, the epitaph of Yuan Yuanhong said: Those who have been subjected to palace punishment, their temperament is dark and gloomy, their thoughts are insidious and cunning, especially treacherous is close to loyalty, especially cunning is close to reliability, especially clever is close to dullness.

古文：一与之亲，如饮醇酒，不知其醉；如噬甘腊，不知其毒。
现代文：一旦与他们亲近，就像喝了醇美的酒，不如道它能醉人；就像吃了美味的干肉，不知道它有毒。
English: Once you get close to them, it's like drinking mellow wine, it's better to say it's intoxicating; it's like eating delicious dried meat, not knowing it's poisonous.

古文：宠之甚易，远之甚难。
现代文：宠幸他们很容易，疏远他们就很难了。
English: It is easy to favour them, but hard to alienate them.

古文：是以古者宦寺不使典兵干政，所以防患于未萌也。
现代文：所以古代不让宦官统领军队干涉政治，是用以防患于未然。
English: That is why in ancient times, eunuchs who commanded armies were not allowed to interfere in politics. This was to prevent trouble from arising in the first place.

古文：涓涓弗塞，将为江河。
现代文：涓涓细流不堵塞，将成为江河。
English: If the trickle is not blocked, it will become a river.

古文：此辈宜一切疏远，勿使用事。
现代文：这些人应一律疏远，不要让他们当政。
English: These people should all be alienated, and they should not be allowed to enter politics.

古文：汉、唐已事，彰彰可监。 
现代文：汉、唐的旧事，非常明显，可以借鉴。 
English: The old stories of Han and Tang are very obvious and can be used as a reference.

古文：当成祖时，宦官稍稍用事，宣宗浸以亲幸。泽于十事中此为尤切。
现代文：在成祖时期，宦官渐渐当权，宣宗逐渐亲幸他们，黄泽在十件事中这条尤为切中时弊。
English: During the time of Cheng Zu, eunuchs gradually took power, and Xuanzong gradually favored them. Huang Ze was particularly concerned about this in the Ten Things.

古文：帝虽嘉叹，不能用也。
现代文：皇帝虽然嘉许赞叹，但没有能采用。
English: Although the emperor praised and admired it, he was unable to adopt it.

古文：其后设内书堂，而中人多通书晓文义。
现代文：之后设置内书堂，而宦官很多人精通典籍知晓文义。
English: After that, the inner library was set up, and many eunuchs were well versed in classics and knew the meaning of literature.

古文：宦寺之盛，自宣宗始。
现代文：宦官的兴盛，从宣宗开始。
English: The prosperity of eunuchs began with Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：宣德三年擢浙江布政使。
现代文：宣德三年，升任浙江布政使。
English: In the third year of Xuande, he was promoted to the post of Zhejiang cloth envoy.

古文：复上言平阳、丽水等七县银冶宜罢，并请尽罢诸坑冶，语甚切。
现代文：又上言平阳、丽水等七县炼银应该禁止，并请求全部废止各矿坑和冶炼厂，语气非常急切。
English: He also said that silver refining in seven counties including Pingyang and Lishui should be banned, and requested that all mines and smelters be abolished. The tone was very urgent.

古文：帝叹息曰： 民困若此，朕何由知？
现代文：皇帝长叹说： 百姓困顿成这样，朕从哪里知道。
English: The emperor said with a long sigh, "I don't know how the people have ended up in this predicament.

古文：遣官验视，酌议以闻。 
现代文：派官吏检验视察，斟酌商议上报。 
English: Send officials to inspect and inspect, and submit a report after deliberation.

古文：泽在官有政绩，然多暴怒，盐运使丁鎡不避道，挞之，为所奏。
现代文：黄泽在任时有政绩，然而常常暴躁发怒。盐运使丁铁遇到他没有让路，黄泽鞭笞他，被他奏报。
English: When Huang Ze was in office, he had political achievements, but he was often irritable and angry. When the Salt Campaign met Ding Tie and he did not give way, Huang Ze whipped him and was reported by him.

古文：巡按御史马谨亦劾泽九载秩满，自出行县，敛白金三千两偿官物，且越境过家。遂逮下狱。
现代文：巡按御史马谨也弹劾黄泽九年任职期满，自己出去巡行所管的县，聚敛白银三千两用来抵偿公家的财物，而且越过辖区境界回家，于是被捕下狱。
English: The inspector-general Shima Zhen also impeached Huang Ze at the end of his nine-year term of office, went on a tour of the counties under his jurisdiction, collected three thousand taels of silver to pay off the public's property, and crossed the jurisdictional boundary to go home, so he was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：正统六年黜为民。
现代文：正统六年，罢官为民。
English: Six years of orthodoxy, dismissal for the people.

古文：初，泽奏金华、台州户口较洪武时耗减，而岁造弓箭如旧，乞减免。
现代文：当初，黄泽上奏金华、台州户口比洪武时期减少，而每年打造弓箭像以前一样，请求减免。
English: At the beginning, the number of households in Huangze, Shangso, Jinhua and Taizhou was less than that in the Hongwu period, but the number of bows and arrows made each year was the same as before, and they requested relief.

古文：下部议得允，而泽已罢官逾月矣。
现代文：下部讨论得以允许，然而黄泽已被免除官职一个多月了。
English: Lower-level discussions were allowed, but Huang Ze has been removed from office for more than a month.

古文：孔友谅，长洲人。
现代文：孔友谅，长洲人。
English: Kong Youjun, a native of Cheung Chau.

古文：永乐十六年进士。
现代文：永乐十六年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 16th year of Yongle.

古文：改庶吉士，出知双流县。
现代文：改为庶吉士，到双流县出任知县。
English: He was changed to the second-in-command of Kishi, and went to Shuangliu County to serve as the chief of the county.

古文：宣宗初，上言六事：一曰，守令亲民之官，古者不拘资格，必得其人；不限岁月，使尽其力。
现代文：宣宗初年，上疏陈述六件事：一是，州县守令是亲近百姓的官，古代不拘泥于资格，一定要找到合适的人，不限定时日，让他全部发挥自己的能力。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zong, Shang Zuo stated six things: First, the state and county magistrates are officials who are close to the people. In ancient times, they did not stick to qualifications. They must find the right person, no time limit, and let him fully exert his ability.

古文：今居职者多不知抚字之方，而廉干得民心者，又迁调不常，差遣不一。
现代文：现在在任的人大多不知道安抚百姓的方法，而廉洁干练嬴得民心的人，又调动没有规律，差遣不同事务。
English: Most of the people currently in office do not know how to appease the people, and those who are honest and capable of winning the people's hearts are also mobilized irregularly and sent on different matters.

古文：或因小事连累，朝夕营治，往来道路，日不暇给。
现代文：有的因为小事连累，朝夕处理，往来奔波，每天都没有空闲。
English: Some are burdened with small matters, dealing with them morning and night, rushing back and forth, and have no free time every day.

古文：乞敕吏部，择才望素优及久历京官者任之。
现代文：请求下诏吏部，选择有才能声望向来优秀和久在京城做官的人担任。
English: I request that the Zhaozhili Department select a person with talent, prestige, who has always been excellent and who has long served as an official in Beijing.

古文：谕戒上司，毋擅差遣，假以岁月，责成治效。
现代文：告谕警戒上司，不要擅自差遣，给他时间，责成他达到治理的成效。
English: Warn your boss, do not send him without authorization, give him time, and instruct him to achieve the effect of governance.

古文：至远缺佐贰，多经裁减，独员居职。或遇事赴京，多委杂职署事，因循苟且，政令无常，民不知畏。
现代文：至于边远地方缺少辅佐主官昀副职，多是经过裁减，只有主官一人在任，有时遇到事情进京，多委托办事人员代理，这些人因袭旧制敷衍了事，政令时常变化，百姓不知道畏惧。
English: As for the shortage of assistant chief officers and deputy positions in remote areas, most of them are due to downsizing, only one chief officer is in office, and sometimes when things come to Beijing, more clerks are commissioned to act as agents. These people are perfunctory due to the old system, government orders change frequently, and the people do not know fear.

古文：今后路远之缺，常留一正员任事，不得擅离，庶法有常守。
现代文：今后边远地方有缺职的，应经常留一位正式编制内人员管事，不得擅自离开，这样有望法规得到稳定执行。
English: In the future, if there is a vacancy in a remote area, a person in charge of personnel within the formal establishment should always be retained and must not leave without authorization. This is expected to ensure the stable implementation of laws and regulations.

古文：二曰，科举所以求贤，必名实相副，非徒夸多而已。
现代文：二是，科举是用来征求贤才的，一定要名符其实，不能只夸耀数量多就行了。
English: Second, the imperial examination is used to solicit talents, it must be true to its name, and it cannot just boast of a large number.

古文：今秋闱取士动一二百人。
现代文：现在秋试选取士人动辄一二百人。
English: Now, in the autumn, they are trying to select one or two hundred people.

古文：弊既多端，侥幸过半。
现代文：弊端是多方面的，侥幸入选的超过一半。
English: The drawbacks are multifaceted, and more than half of them were chosen by chance.

古文：会试下第，十常八九，其登第者，实行或乖。
现代文：会试没考中的，十个人中常有八九个。那些考中的，实际品行有的叉不符。
English: There are often eight or nine out of ten people who do not pass the examination. Those who pass the examination do not match the actual character.

古文：请于开科之岁，详核诸生行履。
现代文：请在开考之年，详细核查考生的经历。
English: Please check the details of the candidate's experience in the year of the examination.

古文：孝弟忠信、学业优赡者，乃许入试。
现代文：孝顺父母敬爱兄长忠诚可靠、学业渊博丰富的，纔允许参加考试。
English: Filial piety, respect for one's parents, love for one's elder brother, loyalty and reliability, and a wealth of academic knowledge, are all allowed to take the exam.

古文：庶浮薄不致滥收，而国家得真才之用。
现代文：或许轻浮浅薄的人不至于被胡乱收录，而国家能得到有真才实学的人以供使用。
English: Perhaps frivolous and shallow people will not be randomly enrolled, and the country can get people with real talent for use.

古文：三曰，禄以养廉，禄入过薄，则生事不给。
现代文：三是，俸禄是用来供养官吏使之廉洁的，俸禄过于微薄，就不够奉养父母。
English: Thirdly, the salary is used to support officials to make them clean. If the salary is too meager, it is not enough to support parents.

古文：国朝制禄之典，视前代为薄。
现代文：本朝制定的俸禄制度，比前代微薄。
English: The salary system established by this government is more meager than that of the previous generation.

古文：今京官及方面官稍增俸禄，其余大小官自折钞外，月不过米二石，不足食数人。
现代文：现在京官和地方大员稍微增加了俸禄，其余大小官吏除折合成钱的部分外，每月供给的米不过二石，不够养活几个人。
English: Now, the salary of Beijing officials and local dignitaries has increased slightly, and the remaining officials, except for the part that is converted into money, are provided with only two kilos of rice per month, which is not enough to feed several people.

古文：仰事俯育，与道路往来，费安所取资？
现代文：上要事奉父母，下要养育子女，加上外出往来，花费从哪里取得。
English: On the one hand, it is necessary to serve the parents, on the other hand, it is necessary to raise the children, and in addition to traveling, where will the expenses come from?

古文：贪者放利行私，廉者终窭莫诉。
现代文：贪婪的人逐利营私，廉洁的人境遇艰难无处诉说。
English: Greedy people seek personal gain, while honest people have nowhere to complain about their difficult circumstances.

古文：请敕户部勘实天下粮储，以岁支之余，量增官俸。仍令内外风宪官，采访廉洁之吏，重加旌赏。
现代文：请求诏令户部核实天下的粮食储备，用每年支出的结余，酌情增加官俸，仍然命令朝廷内外监察法纪的官史，探间寻访廉洁的官吏，大力表彰奖赏。
English: He requested the Emperor to order the Household Department to verify the world's grain reserves, use the annual expenditure surplus to increase official salaries as appropriate, and still ordered the court inside and outside the court to monitor the official history of law and discipline, search for honest officials, and vigorously commend and reward.

古文：则廉者知劝，贪者知戒。
现代文：廉洁的人知道勉励，贪婪的人知道警戒。
English: An honest man knows how to encourage; a greedy man knows how to warn.

古文：四曰，古者赋役量土宜，验丁口，不责所无，不尽所有。
现代文：四是，古代征收赋税徭役要测量不同土地，检查人口，不索取没有的东西，不收尽所有的财物。
English: Fourthly, in ancient times, tax collectors had to measure different lands, check the population, and did not ask for things that did not exist, and did not collect all the property.

古文：今自常赋外，复有和买、采办诸事。
现代文：如今在一般赋税之外，还有预买、采办等事情。
English: Nowadays, in addition to general taxation, there are things such as advance purchase and procurement.

古文：自朝廷视之，不过令有司支官钱平买。
现代文：从朝廷来看，不过是命令有关官员支取公家的钱平价购买。
English: From the point of view of the imperial court, it was nothing more than ordering the relevant officials to withdraw public money to purchase at parity.

古文：而无赖之辈，关通吏胥，垄断货物，巧立辨验、折耗之名，科取数倍，奸弊百端。
现代文：而无赖的人，串通吏役，让断货物，巧立辨别验收、折合损耗的名目，征收数倍，奸邪弊端百出。
English: But rogues, colluding with officials, diverting goods, cleverly distinguishing acceptance, and calculating losses, are levied several times, and there are many evils.

古文：乞尽停采买，减诸不急务，则国赋有常，民无科扰。
现代文：请求完全停止采买，减少众多不紧急的事务，那么国家赋税有常规，百姓没有横征暴敛的骚扰。
English: If the request is to completely stop procurement and reduce many non-urgent matters, then the state taxation will have a routine, and the people will not be harassed by arbitrary collection.

古文：其二事言汰冗员，任风宪，言者多及之，不具载。
现代文：其余二件事进吉淘汰闲官，任用御史，进言的人多有涉及，不具体记载。
English: The other two things, the elimination of idle officials, the appointment of imperial historians, and the people who made suggestions are mostly involved, and are not specifically recorded.

古文：宣德八年，命吏部择外官有文学者六十八人试之，得友谅及进士胡端祯等七人，悉令办事六科。
现代文：宣德八年，命令吏部选择宫外百官中有文才的六十八人考核，得到孔友谅和进士胡端祯等七人，命令他们全部在六科任职。
English: In the eighth year of Xuande, he ordered the cadre department to select sixty-eight literary talents among the hundred officials outside the palace for examination, and seven people, including Kong Youyuan and Jin Shi Hu Danzhong, were selected. He ordered them all to serve in the six disciplines.

古文：居二年，皆授给事中，惟友谅未授官而卒。
现代文：遇了两年，都授予给事中，只有孔友谅没有授官就去世了。
English: In the past two years, all of them have been awarded, but only Kong Youyou passed away without being awarded.

古文：范济，元进士。
现代文：范济，元朝进士。
English: Fan Zhi, a member of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：洪武中，以文学举为广信知府，坐累谪戍兴州。
现代文：洪武年间，因有才学被举荐为广信知府，因受牵连获罪贬到兴州戍边。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was recommended to Guangxin Chifu for his talent in learning, and was demoted to Xingzhou Laibian for being implicated in a crime.

古文：宣宗即位，济年八十余矣，诣阙言八事：
现代文：宣宗即位，范济时年八十多岁了，入京进言八件事。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, Fan Zi, who was in his eighties at the time, came to Beijing to make eight speeches.

古文：其一曰楮币之法，昉于汉、唐。
现代文：第一是，纸币的发行，开始于汉、唐。
English: First, the issuance of paper money began in the Han and Tang dynasties.

古文：元造元统交钞，后又造中统钞。
现代文：元制造元统交钞，后来又制造中统钞。
English: The former produced Yuan Tongjiao banknotes, and later produced Zhong Tongjiao banknotes.

古文：久而物重钞轻，公私俱敝，乃造至元钞与中统钞兼行。子母相权，新陈通用。
现代文：时间一长实物价重而纸币价轻，公家私人都受到损害，就制造至元钞与中统钞共同流通，互相兑换，新旧通用。
English: As time goes by, the physical price is heavy and the banknote price is light, and the public and private sectors are damaged, it is made to circulate together with the yuan banknote and the central banknote, exchange each other, and the new and old are common.

古文：又令民间以昏钞赴平准库，中统钞五贯得换至元钞一贯。
现代文：又命令民间把破旧的纸币拿到平准库去，中统钞五贯可以换至元钞一贯。
English: He also ordered the people to take the worn-out banknotes to the banknote bank, and the middle-level banknotes can be exchanged for yuan banknotes.

古文：又其法日造万锭，共计官吏俸稍、内府供用若干，天下正税杂课若干，敛发有方，周流不滞，以故久而通行。
现代文：又规定每天制造纸币一万锭，共计官吏俸禄、内府使用若干，天下正税杂税若干，回收发行有办法，循环流通不阻滞，因而很久还在通行。
English: It also stipulates that the daily production of banknotes is 10,000 baht, a total of officials' salaries, the use of the inner government, the world's positive tax and miscellaneous taxes, there is a way to recover and issue, and the circulation is not blocked, so it is still in use for a long time.

古文：太祖皇帝造大明宝钞。以钞一贯当白金一两，民欢趋之。
现代文：太祖皇帝制造大明实钞，用纸币一贯当白银一两，百姓高兴地去兑换。
English: The great-great-great-grandfather emperor made large-denomination banknotes, and people were happy to exchange paper money for one or two pieces of silver.

古文：迄今五十余年，其法稍弊，亦由物重钞轻所致。
现代文：到如今五十多年，这种办法逐渐有了弊端，也是因实物价重纸钞价轻导致的。
English: For more than 50 years now, this method has gradually developed drawbacks, also caused by the fact that the physical price is heavy and the paper money price is light.

古文：愿陛下因时变通，重造宝钞，一准洪武初制，使新旧兼行。
现代文：希望陛下根据时代进行变通，重造宝钞，完全依照洪武初年的制度，使新旧币同时流通。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will make adjustments according to the times, remake the banknotes, and make the new and old coins circulate at the same time in full accordance with the system of the first year of Hongwu.

古文：取元时所造之数而增损之，审国家度支之数而权衡之。俾钞少而物多，钞重而物轻。
现代文：按照元时所造的数量而有所增减，审定国家计划开支的数量而斟酌权衡，使纸币少而实物多，纸币价重而实物价轻。
English: According to the quantity produced at the time of the Yuan Dynasty, there will be an increase or decrease, and the amount of approved national plan expenditure will be weighed and weighed, so that there will be fewer banknotes but more physical goods, and the price of banknotes will be heavy but the price of physical goods will be light.

古文：严伪造之条，开倒换之法，推陈出新，无耗无阻，则钞法流通，永永无弊。
现代文：严明惩罚伪造的条令，建立兑换的制度，推陈出新，没有耗费没有阻滞，那么纸币制度的通行，就会永远没有弊端。
English: Strictly punish counterfeiting regulations, establish an exchange system, introduce new ones, no cost, no blockage, then the passage of the banknote system will never have drawbacks.

古文：其二曰备边之道，守险为要。
现代文：第二是，防备边境的策略，守卫险隘最重要。
English: The second is the strategy of guarding the border. The most important thing is to guard the narrow strait.

古文：若朔州、大同、开平、宣府、大宁，乃京师之藩垣，边徼之门户。
现代文：像朔州、大同、开平、宣府、大宁，是京城的藩篱和垣墙，边界的门户。
English: Like Shuozhou, Datong, Kaiping, Xuanfu and Daning, it is the barrier and wall of Beijing, the gateway to the border.

古文：士可耕，城可守。
现代文：土地可以耕种，城池可以守卫。
English: The land can be cultivated, the castle can be guarded.

古文：宜盛兵防御，广开屯田，修治城堡，谨烽火，明斥堠。
现代文：应当派大军防御，大力开展屯田，修治城堡，慎用烽火，明晰侦察。
English: It is necessary to send a large army to defend, vigorously carry out the construction of military camps, repair castles, use campfires carefully, and conduct clear reconnaissance.

古文：毋贪小利，毋轻远求，坚壁清野，使无所得。
现代文：不要贪小便宜，不要轻视远国的要求，加固壁垦，清除转移周围的人口事物，使敌人得不到什么。
English: Don't be greedy and cheap, don't despise the demands of distant countries, strengthen the wall, remove the transfer of the surrounding population and things, so that the enemy can't get anything.

古文：俟其惫而击之，得利则止，毋穷追深入。
现代文：等他们疲惫再打击他们，得到胜利就停止，不要穷追不舍深入敌区。
English: Wait until they are tired and then strike them, stop when victory is achieved, and do not pursue them relentlessly deep into enemy territory.

古文：此守边大要也。
现代文：这是守卫边界最重要的。
English: This is the most important part of guarding the border.

古文：其三曰兵不在多，在于堪战。
现代文：第三是，士兵不在于多，在于能够打仗。
English: Thirdly, it is not the number of soldiers that matters, but the ability to fight.

古文：比者多发为事官吏人民充军塞上，非白面书生，则老弱病废。
现代文：近来多征集在职的官吏和百姓到塞上补充军队，不是白面书生，就是老弱病残。
English: Recently, more and more active officials and ordinary people have been recruited to supplement the army, whether they are white-collar students, or the elderly and the sick.

古文：遇有征行，有力者得免，贫弱者备数。
现代文：遇到征兵打仗，有办法的人得以免除，贫困衰弱的人用以充数。
English: In the event of conscription for war, those who have the means are exempted, and those who are poor and weak are used to make up the numbers.

古文：器械不完，糗粮不具。
现代文：器械不完备，粮食不充足。
English: The equipment is not complete and the food is not sufficient.

古文：望风股栗，安能效死？
现代文：听见风声就双腿发抖，怎能舍命效力。
English: When they hear the wind, their legs tremble. How can they risk their lives?

古文：今宜选其壮勇，勤加训练，余但令乘城击柝，趋走牙门，庶几各得其用。
现代文：如今应选择强壮勇敢的人，勤加训练，琪余的祇命令他们登城击柝，巡守营门，可望各自发挥他们的作用。
English: Now it is time to choose strong and brave people, train them diligently, and only order them to go to the city to fight and guard the camp gate. They are expected to play their respective roles.

古文：其四曰民病莫甚于勾军。
现代文：第四是，人民所困苦的莫过于征兵。
English: Fourthly, there is no greater hardship for the people than conscription.

古文：卫所差官至六七员，百户差军旗亦二三人，皆有力交结及畏避征调之徒，重贿得遣。
现代文：卫所中听候差遣的人有六七个，百户差遣管军旗的也有两三个，都是有能力结交官吏和畏惧逃避征调的人，重加贿赂得以差遣。
English: There were six or seven people waiting to be sent from the guardhouse, and two or three people from each of the hundred households who were sent to be in charge of the military banner. They were all people who had the ability to make friends with officials and were afraid of evading conscription, and they were able to be sent with heavy bribes.

古文：既至州县，擅作威福，迫胁里甲，恣为奸私。
现代文：到了州县，作威作福，逼迫乡里百姓，任意作奸营私。
English: When they arrived at prefectures and counties, they made a show of being good, persecuted the people in the countryside, and arbitrarily plotted against each other.

古文：无丁之家，诛求不已；有丁之户，诈称死亡。
现代文：没有男子的家庭，索求不止。有男子的家庭，欺骗谎称死亡。
English: Families without a male child are demanding more and more. Families with a male child are cheating and lying about the death.

古文：托故留滞，久而不还。
现代文：借故停留，很久都不回来。
English: Stopped for an excuse and didn't come back for a long time.

古文：及还，则以所得财物，遍贿官吏，朦胧具覆。
现代文：等到回来，就用所得到的财物，普遍贿赂官吏，含糊报告了事。
English: When he came back, he used the money and property he obtained to bribe officials in general, and vaguely reported the matter.

古文：究其所取之丁，十不得一，欲军无缺伍难矣。
现代文：探求他们所征集的壮丁，十个人中得不到一个，想要使军队不缺兵难呀。
English: If you enquire into the young men they have enlisted, you will not get one out of ten, and it will be difficult to keep the army supplied with soldiers.

古文：自今军士有故，令各卫报都督府及兵部，府、部谍布政、按察司。令府州县准籍贯姓名，勾取送卫，则差人骚扰之弊自绝。
现代文：从现在起兵士有事情不能入伍的，命令各卫报告都督府和兵部，都督府和兵部行文布政、按察司，命令府州县核实籍贯姓名，征取送到卫所，那么差人扰乱的弊端自然会断绝了。
English: From now on, soldiers who cannot enlist in the army for some reason should be ordered to report to the prefectural governor's office and the military department, and the prefectural governor's office and the military department should make a written report to the government and the inspector, and the prefectural and county governments should be ordered to verify the names of the soldiers, and the names should be collected and sent to the health center. Then the evil of disturbing the police will naturally be eliminated.

古文：其五曰洪武中令军士七分屯田，三分守城，最为善策。
现代文：第五是，洪武年间命令士卒七成屯田，三成守城，是最好的策略。
English: Fifthly, during the Hongwu era, it was the best strategy to order the soldiers to occupy 70% of the land and 30% of the castle.

古文：比者调度日繁，兴造日广，虚有屯种之名，田多荒芜。
现代文：近来调度日益频繁，建造日益广泛，虚有屯田的名义，田地大多荒芜。
English: Recently, scheduling has become increasingly frequent, construction has become increasingly extensive, there is a false name of Tonden, and the fields are mostly deserted.

古文：兼养马、采草、伐薪、烧炭，杂役旁午，兵力焉得不疲、农业焉得不废？
现代文：加上养马、采草、伐薪、烧炭，各种劳役纷繁，兵力怎能不疲惫，农业怎能不荒废。
English: In addition to raising horses, harvesting grass, cutting firewood, and burning coal, there are many kinds of labor services. How can the military not be exhausted, and how can agriculture not be wasted?

古文：愿敕边将课卒垦荒，限以顷亩，官给牛种，稽其勤惰，明赏罚以示劝惩。
现代文：希望诏令边防将领督促士卒开垦荒地，规定一定亩数，公家供给耕牛种子，考查他们的勤奋和懒惰，明确赏罚以昭示鼓励和惩罚。
English: It is hoped that the border guard generals will urge the soldiers to reclaim the wasteland, stipulate a certain number of mu, provide the public with the seeds of the oxen, examine their diligence and laziness, and clearly reward and punish them to show encouragement and punishment.

古文：则塞下田可尽垦，转饷益纾，诸边富实，计无便于此者。
现代文：那么塞下田地可全部得到开垦，运送军粮更加舒缓，各处边境富裕殷实策略中没有比这个更方便的。
English: Then all the fields can be cultivated, the transportation of military food is more comfortable, and there is no more convenient strategy for enriching the border than this.

古文：其六曰，学校者，风化之源，人材所自出，贵明体适用，非徒较文艺而已也。
现代文：第六是，学校是风俗教化的源泉，培养人才的地方，贵在明确大体适合应用，不只是考核文词撰述就行了。
English: Sixth, the school is the source of customs and education, and the place to train talents. It is important to make it clear that it is generally suitable for application, not just for writing essays.

古文：洪武中妙选师儒，教养甚备，人材彬彬可观。
现代文：洪武年问精选师儒，教育培养很完备，人才文质彬彬素质很高。
English: Hong Wu Nian asked a selection of teachers and scholars, the education and training is very complete, and the talent is of high quality.

古文：迩来士习委靡，立志不弘，执节不固。
现代文：近来士人风气委靡不振，志向不宏伟，节操不坚定。
English: Recently, the morals and ethics committee has been sluggish, the ambition is not grand, and the discipline is not firm.

古文：平居无刚方正大之气，安望其立朝为名公卿哉！
现代文：平时没有刚强正直言行正当的气魄，怎能指望他们立身朝廷成为有名望的大臣呢！
English: In ordinary times, they do not have the courage to be firm, honest, and do what is right. How can we expect them to stand up in the imperial court and become renowned ministers?

古文：宜选良士为郡县学官，择民间子弟性行端谨者为生徒，训以经史，勉以节行。俟其有成，贡于国学。
现代文：应选择贤良的士人任郡县学官，选择民间子弟品行端正严谨的作学生，用经书史籍教育他们，用节操品行勉励他们，等他们有了成就，选送到太学。
English: It is necessary to select virtuous scholars to serve as county and county school officials, to select students who are well-behaved and rigorous, to educate them with scriptures and historical books, and to encourage them to behave with integrity. After they have made achievements, they will be selected to be sent to Taigaku.

古文：磨砻砥砺，使其气充志定，卓然成材，然后举而用之，以任天下国家事无难矣。
现代文：刻苦锤炼，使他们正气充沛志向坚定，卓然成才，然后举荐任用他们，让他们担任天下国家的大事就不难了。
English: It is not difficult to train them diligently, make them righteous, ambitious, and talented, and then recommend and appoint them to serve as the important things of the country.

古文：其七曰兵者凶器，圣人不得已而用之。
现代文：第七是，打仗是凶残的事情，圣人没有办法时纔用它。
English: The seventh is that war is a terrible thing, and the wise use it when there is no other way.

古文：汉高祖解平城之围，未闻萧、曹劝以复仇；唐太宗御突厥于便桥，未闻房、杜劝以报怨。
现代文：汉高祖解除平城的包围，没有听说萧何、曹参劝他复仇；唐太宗在便桥抵御突厥，没听说房玄龄、杜如晦劝他报仇。
English: When Emperor Gaozu lifted the siege of Pingcheng, Xiao He and Cao San advised him to take revenge; when Emperor Taizong resisted the Turks at Benqiao, Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao advised him to take revenge.

古文：古英君良相不欲疲民力以夸武功，计虑远矣。
现代文：古代明君良相不想让民力疲惫来夸耀战功，考虑得很长远呀。
English: Ancient Ming, Jun and Liang didn't want to let the exhausted people boast of their war exploits, they thought about it for a long time.

古文：洪武初年尝赫然命将，欲清沙漠。
现代文：洪武初年曾经激昂地命令将领，想要清除沙漠元军。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he passionately ordered his generals to clear the desert of Yuan forces.

古文：既以馈运不继，旋即颁师。
现代文：不久因为运输跟不上，立即使军队回来。
English: Soon, because transport could not keep up, the army returned immediately.

古文：遂撤东胜卫于大同，塞山西阳武谷口，选将练兵，扼险以待。
现代文：就撤退束胜卫到大同，在山西阳武谷口建筑要塞，选将练兵，把守险要关口等待时机。
English: On the retreat, Sok Shengwei went to Datong, built a fortress in Yangwuigou, Shanxi Province, selected soldiers for training, and waited for the right time.

古文：内修政教，外严边备，广屯田，兴学校，罪贪吏，徙顽民。
现代文：对内搞好政令教化，对外严密防守边界，广泛屯田，兴建学校，惩治贪官，迁徙顽民。
English: Internally, we will carry out the edification of government decrees, and externally, we will strictly defend the borders, extensively occupy farmlands, build schools, punish corrupt officials, and relocate the "unruly people."

古文：不数年间，朵儿只巴献女，伯颜帖木儿、乃儿不花等相继擒获，纳哈出亦降。此专务内治，不勤远略之明效也。
现代文：不到数年，朵儿只巴贡献女儿，伯颜帖木儿、乃儿不花等相继被擒获，纳哈出也归降，这就是专心从事国内治理，不用力经略远方的明显效果。
English: In less than a few years, the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter of

古文：伏望远鉴汉、唐，近法太祖，毋以穷兵黩武为快，毋以犁庭扫穴为功。
现代文：恳请古代借鉴漠、唐，近代效法太祖，不要把穷兵黩武作为快乐，不要把扫平敌国作为功劳。
English: I implore the ancients to learn from the examples of the Miao and Tang Dynasties, and the moderns to follow the example of the Great Ancestors. Don't regard poor soldiers and martial arts as happiness, and don't regard sweeping the enemy country as a merit.

古文：弃捐不毛之地，休养冠带之民，俾竭力于田桑，尽心于庠序。
现代文：抛弃不长粮草的土地，让开化的百姓休养生息，使他们在田间努力劳作，在学校尽心学习。
English: Abandon the land that does not grow grain and grass, let the civilized people rest and recuperate, make them work hard in the fields, and study hard at school.

古文：边塞绝伤痍之苦，闾里绝呻吟之声。将无幸功，士无夭阏，远人自服，荒外自归。国祚灵长于万年矣。
现代文：边塞杜绝创伤的痛苦，里巷断绝呻吟的声音，将领不希图侥幸立功，士卒不会夭亡，远方的人自然降服，外族自然归顺，国运广速绵长可连万年。
English: The frontiers will be free from the pain of trauma, the alleys will be free from the sound of groans, generals will not hope to make meritorious achievements by chance, soldiers will not die young, distant people will naturally surrender, foreigners will naturally submit, and the national movement will continue for thousands of years.

古文：其八曰官不在众，在乎得人。国家承大乱后，因时损益，以府为州，以州为县。
现代文：第八是，官不在多，在于得到贤才国家继大乱之后，根据时代减少增加，以府为州，以州为县。
English: The eighth is that there are not many officials, but that the number of talented people in the country has decreased and increased according to the times after the turmoil, with the prefecture as the state and the state as the county.

古文：继又裁并小县之粮不及俸者，量民数以设官。
现代文：接着又裁减合并产粮不够支付俸禄的小县，按照百姓的数量来设置官位。
English: Next, small counties with insufficient grain production to pay salaries were reduced and merged, and official positions were set up according to the number of people.

古文：民多者县设丞薄，少者知县、典史而已。
现代文：百姓多的县设置县丞主簿，少的只设置知县、典史就行了。
English: For counties with more people, it is enough to set up the main book of county records, and for counties with fewer people, it is enough to set up the history book of county records.

古文：其时官无废事，民不愁劳。
现代文：那时官员没有荒废政事，百姓不为劳苦发愁。
English: At that time, officials did not waste political affairs, and the people did not worry about their hard work.

古文：近日食地震，阴盛阳微，谪见天地。望陛下总揽乾纲，抑宦寺使不得预政，遏小人俾不得居位，则阴阳顺而天变弭矣。
现代文：如今布政、按察二司和府州县官，是洪武年间的两倍，政事越来越混乱，人民越来越不安宁，奸邪弊端丛生，狡诈虚伪滋长。甚至有的官员不能断案，有的小吏不熟悉公文，就容留书写的人，在官府蒙混，贿赂公开进行，案件拖延，都是官员冗杂小吏泛滥所造成的。
English: Today, the number of political appointees, inspectors and prefectural and county officials is twice that of the Hongwu era. Political affairs are becoming more and more chaotic, the people are becoming more and more restless. Treachery and evil are rampant, and cunning and hypocrisy are growing. Even some officials cannot decide cases, some petty officials are not familiar with official documents, so they tolerate people who write, and there is collusion in government offices, bribery is openly carried out, and cases are delayed. All of these are caused by the overabundance of officials and petty officials.

古文：天下治乱，在君心邪正。
现代文：希望天下的安定和混乱，在于君主心地的邪僻和端正。
English: It is hoped that the stability and chaos of the world lie in the wickedness and rectitude of the monarch's heart.

古文：田猎是娱，宫室是侈，宦寺是狎，三者有一，足蛊君心。
现代文：娱游田猎，侈大宫殿，狎近宦官，三件中有一件，足以蛊惑君心。
English: Recreational hunting, luxurious palaces, and close relations with eunuchs. One of these three things is enough to captivate the heart of a prince.

古文：愿陛下涵养克治，多接贤士大夫，少亲宦官宫妾，自能革奢靡，戒游佚，而心无不正矣。
现代文：希望陛下修身养性成功，多接近贤良的士大夫，少亲近宦官宫妾，自然能够革除奢侈浪费，戒除优游安逸，而内心就不会不端正了。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will succeed in cultivating his body and mind. He will be closer to the virtuous scholar-officials and less close to the eunuchs and concubines. He will naturally be able to get rid of extravagance and waste, abstain from pleasure and ease, and his heart will not be improper.

古文：尧立谤木，恐人不言，所以圣；秦除谥法，恐人议己，所以亡。
现代文：尧树立诽谤之木让人写谏言，惟恐人们不进言，所以成为圣人；秦废除确定谧号的法则，恐怕人们议论自己，所以衰亡。
English: The Qin Dynasty abolished the law of assigning surnames, fearing that people would talk about themselves, and thus the dynasty declined.

古文：陛下广从谏之量，旌直言之臣，则国家利弊，闾阎休戚，臣下无所顾忌，而言无不尽矣。
现代文：陛下扩展纳谏的度量，表彰直言敢谏的臣子，那么国家的利弊，民间的喜乐忧虑，臣子无所顾忌，而进言就没有不说完的了。
English: His Majesty expands the measure of acceptance, and commends those courtiers who are outspoken. Then the country's advantages and disadvantages, the people's joys and worries, the courtiers have no scruples, and there is nothing left to say.

古文：苏子曰： 平居无犯颜敢谏之臣，则临难必无仗节死义之士。 
现代文：苏子说： 平日没有触犯龙颜敢于进谏的大臣，那么面临危难必定没有坚守节操为正义而死的人。 
English: Su Zi said: On an ordinary day, there is no minister who dares to offend Long Yan, so in the face of danger, there must be no one who adheres to discipline and dies for justice.

古文：愿陛下恒念是言而审察之。
现代文：希望陛下经常想到这些语而仔细考虑它。
English: I hope that His Majesty will think of these words often and consider them carefully.

古文：书奏，帝颇嘉纳之。
现代文：书上奏，皇帝非常赞赏地采纳了。
English: The Emperor accepted it with great appreciation.

古文：后四年，让登进士。
现代文：过了四年，聊让考中进士。
English: After four years, I was able to pass the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：官知县卒。
现代文：任知县去世。
English: Ren Zhi County passed away.

古文：景泰二年，监生郭佑亦上书言兵事，略曰：逆寇犯顺，上皇蒙尘，此千古非常之变，百世必报之仇也。
现代文：景泰二年，监生郭佑也上书谈论战事，大略是说： 敌寇侵犯正道，太上皇逃亡在外，蒙受风尘，这是千古以来十分异常的变故，是百世子孙必报的仇恨。
English: In the second year of King Taejo's reign, his son-in-law, Guo You, also wrote about the war, saying roughly: The enemy invaded the right path, the emperor fled abroad, and suffered the wind and dust. This is a very unusual change since time immemorial, and is a hatred that must be reported to the descendants of a hundred generations.

古文：今使臣之来，动以数千，务骄蹇责望于我，而我乃隐忍姑息，致贼势日张，我气日索，求和与和，求战与战，是和战之权，不在我而在贼也。
现代文：如今使臣来朝拜，动辄几千人，总是傲慢地对我们提出要求，而我们却克制忍耐姑息迁就，致使敌人气势日益嚣张，我们气势日益消索，他们要和我们就只能与他们和，他们求战我们就祇能与他们战，这样和战的权力，不在于我们而在于贼寇。
English: Now the envoys come to pay homage, thousands of them at a time, always arrogantly making demands on us, while we restrain our patience and acquiesce. As a result, the enemy's momentum is increasingly arrogant, and our momentum is increasingly dissipated. If they want to fight with us, they can only fight with us. If they want to fight, we can only fight with them. In this way, the power of war does not lie with us, but with the bandits.

古文：愿陛下结人心，亲贤良，以固国本，广储蓄，练将士，以壮国气。
现代文：希望陛下团结人心，亲近贤良，以巩固国家的根本；扩充储蓄，训练将士，以壮大国家的气势。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will unite the hearts of the people and be close to the wise and virtuous to consolidate the foundation of the country; expand savings, train soldiers to strengthen the country's momentum.

古文：正分定名，裁之以义。
现代文：辨正名分，以义衡量。
English: If you want to be righteous, measure yourself by righteousness.

古文：如桀骜侵轶，则提兵问罪。
现代文：如有桀骛不驯侵犯袭击，就兴兵讨伐。
English: If there is any aggression or attack, the army will be mobilized.

古文：使大漠之南，不敢有匹马阑入，乃可保百年无虞。
现代文：使大漠之南，不敢有一匹骂擅自进入，就可保证百年没有忧患。
English: In the south of the Great Desert, if one horse dares not enter without permission, it can guarantee that there will be no sorrow for a hundred years.

古文：不然西北力罢，东南财竭，不能一日安枕矣。
现代文：不这样西北力量疲惫，东南财力枯竭，就不能一天安稳入睡了。
English: Otherwise, if the strength of the northwest is exhausted and the financial resources of the southeast are exhausted, it will not be possible to sleep soundly for a day.

古文：昨以国用耗乏，谋国大臣欲纾一时之急，令民纳粟者赐冠带。
现代文：原来因为国家费用消耗缺乏，管理国事的大臣想纡缓一时的紧急，下令百姓交纳粮食的赐官位。
English: Originally, because of the lack of state expenditure, the minister in charge of state affairs wanted to alleviate the temporary emergency and ordered the people to pay grain to the government.

古文：今军旅稍宁，行之如故。
现代文：如今战争稍为安宁，行事又像以往一样。
English: Now that the war has calmed down a bit, they are back to business as usual.

古文：农工商贩之徒，不较贤愚，惟财是授。
现代文：农工商贩这些人，不考察他们贤良愚昧，只要有财就授官。
English: These people, farmers, merchants and traders, do not examine their virtue and stupidity, and they are awarded positions as long as they are rich.

古文：骄亲戚，夸乡里，长非分之邪心。
现代文：这些人对亲戚骄横，在乡里夸耀，增长了不正当的邪恶心思。
English: These people are arrogant to their relatives, boast in the countryside, and have grown up with unjustified evil thoughts.

古文：赃污吏罢退为民，欲掩闾党之耻，纳粟纳草，冠带而归。
现代文：贪官污吏被罢黜为平民，想掩盖在乡里的耻辱，就交纳粮草，得官而归。
English: Corrupt officials were ousted as civilians, and they wanted to cover up their disgrace in the countryside, so they paid for grain and grass and returned to their posts.

古文：前以冒货去职，今以输货得官，何以禁贪残、重名爵？
现代文：以前因为贪财离职，如今因为交钱得官，怎么能禁止贪婪残暴，推崇名声和爵位？
English: How is it possible to prohibit greed, brutality, and the promotion of fame and nobility, when in the past people left their jobs because of greed, and now they are in office because of money?

古文：况天下统一，藏富在民，未至大不得已，而举措如此，是以空乏启寇心也。
现代文：何况天下统一，财富藏在人民之中，并未到万不得已的时候，却采取这样的措施，这是用国力空虚来诱发敌寇的野心啊！ 
English: Moreover, the world is unified, wealth is hidden among the people, and such measures have not been taken until the last minute. This is the ambition of using national power to induce enemy invaders!

古文：章下廷议，格不行。
现代文：奏章下到朝廷商议，被抵制而没有施行。
English: The document was submitted to the Imperial Court for deliberation, but it was rejected and not implemented.

古文：又有胡仲伦者，云南盐课提举司吏目也。
现代文：又有个叫胡仲伦的人，云南盐课提举司吏目。
English: There is also a man named Hu Zhonglun, the head of the Yunnan salt class.

古文：缘事入都，会上皇北狩，也先欲妻以妹，上皇因遣广宁伯刘安入言于帝。
现代文：因有事进京，正碰上太上皇被劫持到北方，也先想把妹妹嫁给他为妻，太上皇因此派遣尘室伯刘安入朝告诉皇帝，胡仲伦上疏争辩。
English: Due to an incident in Beijing, he was confronted with the fact that the Emperor had been abducted to the north and wanted to marry his sister to him first. Therefore, the Emperor sent his uncle Liu An to the imperial court to tell the emperor that Hu Zhonglun was not willing to argue.

古文：仲伦上疏争之，言： 今日事不可屈者有七。
现代文：说： 今天的事不可以屈服的理由有七条。
English: He said: "There are seven reasons why today's events are unacceptable.

古文：降万乘之尊，与谐婚媾，一也。
现代文：降低万乘之尊的身份，和敌寇结亲，这是一。
English: It is one thing to lower the status of the Deity of Manjushri, and to make friends with the enemy.

古文：敌假和议，使我无备，二也。
现代文：敌人假装和议，使我们没有防备，这是二。
English: Two, the enemy pretends to negotiate and makes us unprepared.

古文：必欲为姻，骄尊自大，三也。
现代文：一定耍求结成姻亲，骄傲自大，这是三。
English: Striving to become in-laws, being arrogant, these are the three.

古文：索金帛，使我坐困，四也。
现代文：索求财物，使我们困乏，这是四。
English: Fourthly, the desire of riches, which wearieth all of us.

古文：以送驾为名，乘机入犯，五也。
现代文：以护送太上皇为名，乘机入侵，这是五。
English: Taking the opportunity to invade in the name of escorting the emperor, this is the fifth.

古文：逼上皇手诏，诱取边城，六也。
现代文：逼上皇亲笔下诏，诱骗夺取边城，这是六。
English: Forcing the emperor to issue an edict, tricking him into seizing a border town, this is six.

古文：欲求山后之地，七也。
现代文：想要索取山后的地方，这是七。
English: If you want to claim the place behind the mountain, it's seven.

古文：稍从其一，大事去矣。
现代文：稍稍顺从了一件，整个局势就无法挽回了。
English: One slight concession and the whole situation is irretrievable.

古文：曩上皇在位，王振专权。忠谏者死，鲠直者戍；君子见斥，小人骤迁。章奏多决中旨，黑白混淆，邪正倒置。
现代文：以前太上皇在位，王振专权，忠言直谏的人处死，耿直的人戍边，君子被排斥，小人很快升迁，奏章多根据宦官的意旨来决定，黑白混淆，邪正倒置。
English: In the past, the emperor was on the throne, Wang Zhen had absolute power, those who were loyal to the emperor were put to death, those who were loyal to the emperor were sidelined, the gentleman was ostracized, the villain was quickly promoted, the musical composition was mostly decided according to the will of the eunuch, black and white were confused, and evil was inverted.

古文：闽、浙之寇方殷，瓦剌之衅大作。
现代文：闽、浙的敌寇正多，瓦刺的祸乱大起。
English: There are more and more enemy invaders in Shandong and Zhejiang, and the scourge of tile thorns is on the rise.

古文：陛下宜亲贤远奸，信赏必罚，通上情，达下志。卖国之奸无所投隙，仓卒之变末由发机，朝廷自此尊，天下自此安矣。 
现代文：陛下应亲近贤良远离奸臣，赏罚严明，通报皇上的意愿，了解下民的意志，卖国的奸臣没有缝隙可乘，突然的事变没有发作的机会，朝廷由此得到尊重，天下从此安宁。 
English: His majesty should be close to the virtuous and distant from the treacherous, reward and punish severely, inform the emperor's will, understand the will of the people, there is no gap for the treacherous to take advantage of, there is no chance of a sudden incident, the imperial court is respected, and the world is peaceful.

古文：帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：皇帝赞赏地采纳了。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：又有华敏者，南京锦衣军余也。
现代文：又有个叫华敏的，南京锦衣卫的非正式军人。
English: There is also a man named Hua Min, an unofficial soldier of the Nanjing Garment Guards.

古文：意气慷慨，读书通大义，愤王振乱国，与侪辈言辄裂眦怒詈。
现代文：惠气慷慨，读过书通晓大义，愤恨王振扰乱国家，与同辈一谈论就非常愤怒地责骂。
English: He is generous, well-read and knowledgeable about justice. He resents Wang Zhen for disturbing the country, and angrily scolds his peers whenever they talk to him.

古文：景泰三年九月上书曰：近年以来，内官袁琦、唐受、喜宁、王振专权害政，致国事倾危。
现代文：景泰三年九月上书说： 近年来，宦官袁琦、唐受、喜宁、王振独揽大权，损害朝政，致使国家情况危急。
English: Jing Tai wrote in September of the following year: In recent years, the eunuchs Yuan Qi, Tang Shou, Xi Ning, and Wang Zhen have monopolized power, undermining the government and bringing the country into a critical situation.

古文：望陛下防微杜渐，总揽权纲，为子孙万世法。
现代文：希望陛下防微杜渐，总揽权力和朝纲，作为子孙万世的楷模。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will prevent micro-management and gradualism, and make a total grab for power and the imperial platform, as a role model for his children and grandchildren.

古文：不然恐祸稔萧墙，曹节、侯览之害，复见于今日。
现代文：不这样恐怕祸起萧墙，曹节、侯览的祸患又出现在今天。
English: Otherwise, I am afraid that the calamity of Xiaowan will arise, and the calamity of Cao Jie and Hou Shan will appear again today.

古文：臣虽贱陋，不胜痛哭流涕。
现代文：臣虽然卑贱鄙陋，禁不住痛哭流涕。
English: Although the vassal was despicable, he couldn't help but shed tears.

古文：谨以虐军害民十事，为陛下痛切言之。
现代文：谨以虐待士卒损害人民的十件事，向陛下沉痛而恳切地说出。
English: I would like to express to Your Majesty, with great sorrow and earnestness, the following ten things that have harmed the people through the use of torturers.

古文：内官家积金银珠玉，累室兼籝，从何而至？
现代文：宦官家中积蓄的金银珠宝，装满很多箱子，堆满很多屋子，从哪裹来的？
English: Where did the gold, silver, and jewels accumulated in the eunuch's household, which filled many chests and cluttered many rooms, come from?

古文：非内盗府藏，则外朘民膏。
现代文：不是对内盗窃官府的贮藏，就是对外搜刮民脂民膏。
English: It's either internal theft of government storage, or external scrounging of people's money.

古文：害一也。
现代文：这是害处之一。
English: That's one of the harms.

古文：怙势矜宠，占公侯邸舍，兴作工役，劳扰军民。
现代文：依仗势力炫耀所受宠爱，霸占公侯宅第，大兴土木所征的劳役，辛苦扰乱军民。
English: They are fond of showing off their military strength, occupy the homes of princes, force laborers to do heavy construction work, and disturb the military and the people.

古文：害二也。
现代文：这是害处之二。
English: This is the second harm.

古文：家人外亲，皆市井无籍之子，纵横豪悍，任意作奸，纳粟补官，贵贱淆杂。
现代文：家人外亲，都是街市中没有户籍的人，放纵强横，任意欺诈，交纳粮食补授官职，贵贱混杂。
English: Family members and relatives are all people without household registration in the street market, indulgent and domineering, arbitrary fraud, payment of grain supplement and official post, mixed noble and low.

古文：害三也。
现代文：这是害处之三。
English: This is the third harm.

古文：建造佛寺，耗费不赀，营一己之私，破万家之产。
现代文：建造佛寺，消耗的费用无法计算，钻营个人的私利，破坏万家的财产。
English: The construction of a Buddhist temple consumes incalculable costs, drills personal self-interest, and destroys the property of all families.

古文：害四也。
现代文：这是害处之四。
English: This is the fourth harm.

古文：广置田庄，不入赋税，寄户郡县，不受征徭，阡陌连亘，而民无立锥。
现代文：广泛地置办田庄，不交纳赋税，把户口挂名在郡县，不服徭役，田地广阔，而人民无立锥之地。
English: They extensively set up estates, did not pay taxes, kept their household registration in counties and counties, did not serve as magistrates, had vast fields, but the people had no place to stand.

古文：害五也。
现代文：这是害处之五。
English: This is the fifth harm.

古文：家人中盐，虚占引数，转而售人，倍支钜万，坏国家法，豪夺商利。
现代文：家人贩盐，凭空占有公盐盐自变量量，转而卖给他人，超过支出无数，破坏国家的法规，凭权势夺取商人的利润。
English: Family members sell salt, take possession of public salt from the independent variable amount of salt out of thin air, and sell it to others, exceeding the expenditure countless times, destroying the country's laws and regulations, and seizing the merchant's profits by power.

古文：害六也。
现代文：这是害处之六。
English: This is the sixth harm.

古文：奏求塌房，邀接商旅，倚势赊买，恃强不偿，行贾坐敝，莫敢谁何。
现代文：奏请开设货栈，拦截商旅，仗势赊销买卖，依仗强权不付钱，行商因此刁敝，无人敢管。
English: So please open a warehouse, intercept business travel, rely on power to sell and buy, rely on power not to pay, peddlers are therefore discouraged, no one dares to control.

古文：害七也。
现代文：这是害处之七。
English: This is the seventh harm.

古文：卖放军匠，名为伴当，俾办月钱，致内府监局营作乏人，工役烦重，并力不足。
现代文：受贿私放军中的工匠，名义上是差役，使其备办月钱，致使内府监局兴建制作缺乏人力，工役繁重并且人力不足。
English: The artisans in the army, who were bribed and released, were nominally dispatched to prepare monthly money, resulting in a lack of manpower in the construction and production of the Inner-prefectural Supervision Bureau, heavy labor and insufficient manpower.

古文：害八也。
现代文：这是害处之八。
English: This is the eighth harm.

古文：家人贸置物料，所司畏惧，以一科十，亏官损民。
现代文：家人买办货物材料，有关官员畏惧，以一当十，亏负公家损害人民。
English: Family members buy goods and materials, and the relevant officials are afraid that they will lose the public and harm the people.

古文：害九也。
现代文：这是害处之九。
English: This is the ninth harm.

古文：监作所至，非法酷刑，军匠涂炭，不胜怨酷。
现代文：监工所到之处，施以非法酷刑，军匠涂炭，无法忍受其残暴。
English: Wherever the overseers went, they inflicted illegal torture, and the military artisans raked them with coals. It was impossible to bear their brutality.

古文：害十也。
现代文：这是害处之十。 
English: This is the tenth harm.

古文：章下礼部，寝不行。
现代文：奏章下到礼部，废置没有施行。
English: The musical score was sent to the Ministry of Ceremonies, but the abolition did not go into effect.

古文：又有贾斌者，商河人，山西都司令史也。
现代文：又有个叫贾斌的，商河人，山西都司令史。
English: There is also a Shanghe person named Jia Bin, who is the commander of Shanxi Province.

古文：亦疏言宦官之害，引汉桓帝、唐文宗、宋徽钦为戒。
现代文：也上疏进言宦官的危害，引用汉桓帝、唐文宗、宋徽宗、宋钦宗作为教训。
English: He also minimized the harm caused by the eunuchs who were promoted to the post of prefect, citing Emperor Han, Emperor Wenzong of Tang, Emperor Huizong of Song and Emperor Qin of Song as a lesson.

古文：且献所辑《忠义集》四卷，采史传所记直谏尽忠守节之士，而宦官恃宠蠹政，可为鉴戒者附焉，乞命工刊布。
现代文：并且进献所辑录的《忠义集》四卷，采集史傅所记载的直谏尽忠坚守气节的志士，而宦官依仗宠幸损害朝政，可以作为鉴戒的人附在后面，请求命令工匠刊布。
English: Moreover, the four volumes of "The Collection of Loyalty" compiled by the presenter, collecting the patriots of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle of upholding the principle

古文：礼部以其言当，乞垂鉴纳，不必刊行。
现代文：礼部认为他的话妥当，请求皇上借鉴采纳，不必刊行。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies considered his words to be appropriate and requested the Emperor to adopt them as a reference and not to publish them.

古文：帝报闻。
现代文：皇帝答复知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：左鼎，字周器，永新人。
现代文：左鼎，字周器，永新人。
English: Zuo Ding, Zi Zhou Jie, Yong Xin Rui.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：正统七年进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：明年，都御史王文以御史多阙，请会吏部于进士选补。
现代文：第二年，都御史王文认为御史多有空缺，请知会吏部在进士中选人补缺。
English: In the second year, Wang Wen, the Metropolitan Historian, thought that there were too many vacancies in the Metropolitan Historian's Office, so he asked the cadre department to fill the vacancies by selecting people from the recruits.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：其余百执事，皆当慎择而久任之。
现代文：尚书王直考查左鼎和白圭等十多人，他们通晓熟悉刑律，都授任御史。而左鼎得以授任南京。
English: Shang Shu Wang directly investigated more than ten people, including Zuo Ding and Bai Gui, who were familiar with the criminal law, and all of them were awarded the title of Imperial Historian. Zuo Ding was awarded the title of Nanjing.

古文：帝颇嘉纳。未几，复言：国家承平数十年，公私之积未充。
现代文：不久，又进言说： 国家太平敷十年，公私的积蓄都不充足。
English: Soon, he added: After ten years of national Taiping, both public and private savings are insufficient.

古文：一遇军兴，抑配横征，鬻官市爵，率行衰世苟且之政，此司邦计者过也。
现代文：一旦遇到战事兴起，强行摊派横征暴敛，出卖官爵，大都施行衰败时代只顾眼前得过且遇的政策，这是焉国家谋划者的过错。
English: As soon as war broke out, they forcibly levied exorbitant levies, imposed austerity, betrayed the nobility, and generally pursued a policy of just muddling through in an era of decline. This was the fault of the planners of the failed state.

古文：臣请痛抑末技，严禁游惰，斥异端使归南亩，裁冗员以省虚糜。开屯田而实边，料士伍而纾饟。
现代文：臣请求彻底地抑制工商业，严厉禁止闲游懒惰，排斥异端使他们回归农田，裁减冗杂人员以节省不必要的浪费，开垦屯田而充实边疆，照料士卒而使军饷充足。
English: The minister requested that industry and commerce be completely suppressed, idleness and laziness be strictly prohibited, heresy be rejected so that they can return to farmland, redundant personnel be reduced to save unnecessary waste, the frontier be enriched by reclaiming abandoned fields, and the military pay be sufficient by taking care of soldiers.

古文：寺观营造，供佛饭僧，以及不急之工，无益之费，悉行停罢。
现代文：寺观营造，供佛养僧，以及不紧急的工程，没有好处的耗费，都予以停止罢除。
English: The construction of temples, the provision of Buddhas and the raising of monks, as well as non-urgent projects and unprofitable expenditures, will all be stopped and eliminated.

古文：专以务农重粟为本，而躬行节俭以先之，然后可阜民而裕国也。
现代文：专门以从事农业重视粮食为根本，并亲自实行节俭为表率，然后可使人民殷寅国家富裕。
English: Specializing in agriculture and attaching importance to grain as the foundation, and personally practicing thrift as a role model, can then make the people of Yin Yin countries rich.

古文：倘忍不加务，任掊克聚敛之臣行朝三暮四之术，民力已尽而征发无已，民财已竭而赋敛日增。
现代文：倘若忽视不努力去做，任凭搜刮聚敛的官吏施行朝三暮四的政策，人民的力量已用尽而征发没有止境，人民的财力已枯竭而赋税日益增加。
English: If we neglect and do not make efforts to do so, and let the officials who collect and collect implement the policy of morning and evening, the power of the people has been exhausted and there is no end to the collection and distribution, the people's financial resources have been exhausted and taxes are increasing day by day.

古文：苟纾目前之急，不恤意外之虞，臣窃惧焉。
现代文：如果只缓解目前的急情，不顾惜意外的忧患，我私下对此感到害怕。 
English: If only to alleviate the current urgency, regardless of the unexpected sorrow, I am privately afraid of this.

古文：章下户部。
现代文：奏章下到户部。
English: Go down to the front of the orchestra.

古文：尚书金濂请解职，帝不许。
现代文：尚书金濂请求解除职务，皇帝不允许。
English: Shangshu Jintao requested to be relieved of his duties, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：鼎言亦不尽行。
现代文：左鼎的进言也没有全部施行。
English: Not all of Zuoding's suggestions have been implemented.

古文：逾月，以灾异，偕同官陈救弊恤民七事。
现代文：过了一个月，因为灾害怪异，和同官陈述纠正弊端抚恤人民的七件事。
English: A month later, because of the strange disaster, and the same official statement to correct the shortcomings of the people's seven things.

古文：末言： 大臣不乏奸回，宜黜罢其尤，用清政本。 
现代文：末尾说： 大臣中不乏奸恶邪僻之人，应罢免其中最严重的，以使政权的根本清明。 
English: At the end, it said: "Among the ministers, there are many treacherous and perverse people, and the most serious of them should be dismissed in order to make the regime fundamentally clear."

古文：帝善其言，下诏甄别，而大臣辞职并慰留。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对，下诏甄别官吏，而大臣辞职都予以劝慰挽留。
English: The emperor thought he was right, and issued an edict to screen officials, while ministers who had resigned were persuaded to stay on.

古文：给事中林聪请明谕鼎等指实劾奏，鼎、聪等乃共论吏部尚书何文渊、刑部尚书俞士悦、工部侍郎张敏、通政使李锡不职状。
现代文：给事中林聪请求皇帝明确命令左鼎等人揞明实际的人弹劾上奏，左鼎、林聪等就共同上疏陈述吏部尚书何文渊、刑部尚书俞士悦、工部侍郎张敏、通政使李锡不称职的情况。
English: In the matter, Lin Cong requested the emperor to clearly order Zuo Ding and others to clarify the actual people to impeach the report. Zuo Ding, Lin Cong and others jointly made a brief statement on the incompetence of the officials Shang Shu He Wen Yuan, the criminal department Shang Shu Shi Yue, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry Zhang Min, and the political envoy Li Xi.

古文：锡罢，文渊致仕。
现代文：李锡被罢免，何文渊退休。
English: Li Xi was dismissed and He Wenyuan retired.

古文：鼎居官清勤，卓有声誉。
现代文：左鼎为官清廉勤奋，声誉卓著。
English: Zuo Ding is a clean and diligent official with an outstanding reputation.

古文：御史练纲以敢言名，而鼎尤善为章奏。
现代文：御史练纲以敢于进言闻名，而左鼎尤其善于书写奏章。
English: Historians are famous for daring to speak out, and Zuo Ding is particularly good at writing music.

古文：京师语曰： 左鼎手，练纲口。 
现代文：京城有句话说： 左鼎的手，练纲的口。 
English: There is a saying in Beijing: The left-handed hand is the mouth of practice.

古文：自公卿以下咸惮之。
现代文：从公卿以下都害怕他们。
English: Everyone from the nobility down is afraid of them.

古文：鼎出为广东右参政。
现代文：左鼎出任广东右参政。
English: Zuo Ding became Guangdong's right-wing politician.

古文：会英宗复位，以郭登言，召为左佥都御史。
现代文：恰逢英宗复位，因郭登进言，召入任左愈都御史。
English: Coinciding with the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Guo Deng was summoned to the position of Zuoyutou Imperial Historian due to Guo Deng's recommendation.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：过了一年去世。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：练纲，字从道，长洲人。
现代文：练纲，字从道，长洲人。
English: The training program, the word from the road, the Changzhou people.

古文：祖则成，洪武时御史。
现代文：祖父练则成，洪武时期的御史。
English: His grandfather, Ren Zecheng, was an imperial historian during the Hongwu period.

古文：纲举乡试，入国子监。
现代文：练纲乡试中举，进入国子监。
English: He passed the junior high school examination of the township examination and entered the National Children's Supervision Center.

古文：历事都察院。
现代文：任职都察院。
English: Served in the Metropolitan Inspection Office.

古文：郕王监国，上中兴八策。
现代文：邸王主管国事，练纲上奏转衰为盛的八项政策。
English: The king was in charge of state affairs, and he practiced the eight policies that would turn decline into prosperity.

古文：也先将入犯，复言： 和议不可就，南迁不可从，有持此议者，宜立诛。
现代文：也先将要入侵，又进言说： 和议不可签订，南迁不可听从，有持这种言论的，应立即斩首。
English: They also said that they would invade first, and then added: "Peace talks should not be signed, and migration to the south should not be listened to. Anyone who holds such views should be beheaded immediately."

古文：安危所倚，惟于谦、石亨当主中军，而分遣大臣守九门，择亲王忠孝著闻者，令同守臣勤王。
现代文：国家安危所依靠的，只有于谦、石亨当主率中军，而分别派遣大臣守卫九门，选择忠诚孝敬名声显著的亲王，命他们和守门大臣尽力于王事。
English: The country's safety and security depended only on Yu Qian and Shi Heng leading the central army, and they separately sent ministers to guard the nine gates, selected princes with outstanding loyalty and honor, and ordered them and the gatekeeper minister to do their best in royal affairs.

古文：檄陕西守将调番兵入卫。 
现代文：征召陕西守将调番兵入京保卫。 
English: The governor of Shaanxi Province was called up and sent soldiers to defend Beijing.

古文：帝悉从之。
现代文：皇帝都听从了他。
English: All the emperors agreed.

古文：纲有才辨，急功名。
现代文：练纲有才智善机辩，急于功名。
English: The training program has the ability to be witty, quick-witted, and eager for fame.

古文：都御史陈镒、尚书俞士悦皆纲同里，念纲数陈是政有声，且畏其口，遂荐之，授御史。
现代文：都御史陈镒、尚书俞士悦都是练纲的同乡，颅念练纲多次奏陈时政有名声，而且畏惧他的一张嘴，就推荐他，授任御史。
English: Both the Metropolitan Historian Chen Xi and Shang Shuxuan Shiyue were fellow townsmen who practiced the syllabus. Chen Shizheng was famous for repeatedly reciting the syllabus, and they were afraid of his mouth, so they recommended him and appointed him as the Metropolitan Historian.

古文：景泰改元，上时政五事。
现代文：景泰元年，练纲上奏时政五件事。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, five current affairs were played on the syllabus.

古文：巡视两淮盐政。
现代文：巡枧两淮盐政。
English: The cruising of the two Huai and Yan governments.

古文：驸马都尉赵辉侵利，劾奏之。
现代文：驸马都尉趟辉侵夺利益，弹劾上奏他。
English: Lieutenant Ma Zhihui plundered profits, and impeachment was brought against him.

古文：三年冬，偕同官应诏陈八事，并允行。
现代文：三年冬，和同官接受诏命陈述八件事，都应允施行。
English: In the winter of the third year, he and his colleagues accepted the imperial edict to state eight things, and they all agreed to implement it.

古文：亡何，复偕同官上言： 吏部推选不公，任情高下，请置尚书何文渊、右侍郎项文曜于理。
现代文：没多久，又和同官进言说： 吏部推荐选举不公正，任意评定高低，请求将尚书何文渊、右侍郎项文曜交予法办。
English: Not long after, he and his colleague also said: "The election recommended by the cadre department is not fair, and the evaluation is arbitrary. We request that Shangshu He Wenyuan and his right-hand man Xiang Wenyou be handed over to the legal department."

古文：尚书王直、左侍郎俞山素行本端，为文曜等所罔，均宜按问。 
现代文：尚书王直、左侍郎俞山素来行为耿直端正，被项文曜等诬罔，都应查究追问。 
English: Shangshu Wangnao and Zuozhirong Shaoshan have always behaved in a straightforward and upright manner, and have been falsely accused by Xiang Wenyao and others. They should be investigated and questioned.

古文：帝虽不罪，终以纲等为直。
现代文：皇帝虽然不惩处，最终认为练纲等忠直。
English: Although the emperor did not punish him, he eventually decided that the training program was too loyal.

古文：明年命出赞延绥军务，自陈名轻责重，乞授佥都御史。
现代文：第二年，命令出京辅助延绥军务，练纲自己陈述名分轻而责权重，请求授任愈都御史。
English: In the second year, he ordered to go to Beijing to assist Yancheng's military affairs, to practice his own presentation of the weight of responsibility and the weight of responsibility, and to request the appointment of Yudu Imperial Historian.

古文：帝曰： 迁官可自求耶？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 升官可以自己要求吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Can you ask for a promotion by yourself?

古文：遂寝其命。
现代文：于是废除对他的任命。
English: His appointment was therefore annulled.

古文：初，京师戒严，募四方民壮分营训练，岁久多逃，或赴操不如期，廷议编之尺籍。
现代文：当初，京城戒严，招募四方强壮的百姓分营训练，时间久了多有逃跑，有的参加操练不能按时，朝廷商议编入军籍。
English: At first, the capital was under martial law, and strong people from all over the country were recruited for battalion training. After a long time, many fled, some could not participate in the exercise on time, and the imperial court deliberated to enlist.

古文：纲等言： 召募之初，激以忠义，许事定罢遣。
现代文：练纲等进言说： 招募之初，以忠义激励，许诺事情平定就俘练遣归。
English: The training syllabus said: At the beginning of recruitment, inspire with loyalty, promise to settle the matter and return home.

古文：今展转轮操，已孤所望，况其逃亡，实迫寒馁，岂可遽著军籍。
现代文：如今反复操练，已经辜负众望，何况他们的逃亡，实在是迫于饥寒，哪可匆忙编入军籍。
English: Now, after repeated training, they have lived up to everyone's expectations. What's more, their escape was really forced by hunger and cold, which can be hastily incorporated into the military.

古文：边方多故，倘更召募，谁复应之？ 
现代文：边界多战事，倘若再次招募，谁又肯响应呢？ 
English: There is a lot of fighting on the border. If there is another recruitment, who will be willing to respond?

古文：诏即除前令。
现代文：下诏立即废除先前的命令。
English: The previous order is hereby revoked with immediate effect.

古文：五年巡按福建，与按察使杨珏互讦，俱下吏。
现代文：五年，巡察福建，与按察使杨珏互相揭发，都下发吏部处理。
English: Five years later, the inspector of Fujian Province and the inspector-general Yang Jie exposed each other, and both were dealt with by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：谪珏黄州知府，纲邠州判官。
现代文：谪降杨珏为黄州知府，练纲为郇州判官。
English: Yang Hui was demoted to governor of Huangzhou, and Jian Gang was promoted to judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：久之卒。
现代文：很久以后去世。
English: He died a long time later.

古文：曹凯，字宗元，益都人。
现代文：曹凯，字宗元，益都人。
English: Cao Kai, the character Zong Yuan, is from Yicun.

古文：正统十年进士。
现代文：正统十年进士。
English: Ten years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：授刑科给事中。
现代文：任刑科给事中。
English: The case is under investigation by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：磊落多壮节。
现代文：胸怀磊落多有壮烈的节操。
English: There is a lot of heart and determination, but also a lot of great discipline.

古文：英宗北征，谏甚力，且曰： 今日之势，大异澶渊。
现代文：英宗征讨北方，竭力上谏，并且说： 如今的形势，跟澶渊之盟时大不相同。
English: He said: "The situation today is very different from the time of the Alliance of the Abyss.

古文：彼文武忠勇，士马劲悍。
现代文：那时文官武将忠直勇敢，士卒马匹强劲剽悍。
English: At that time, the civil officers and generals were loyal and brave, and the soldiers and horses were strong and powerful.

古文：今中贵窃权，人心玩愒。
现代文：如今宦官窃取大权，人心贪图安逸，荒废时日。
English: Nowadays, eunuchs steal power, people crave comfort, and time is wasted.

古文：此辈不惟以陛下为孤注，即怀、愍、徽、钦亦何暇恤？ 
现代文：这些人不仅把陛下作为最后的赌注，而且即使是晋怀帝、晋愍帝、宋徽宗、宋钦宗又有什么闲暇顾及？ 
English: These people not only regard His Majesty as their last bet, but even Emperor Jinhuai, Emperor Jinbi, Emperor Songhuizong and Emperor Songqinzong, what leisure do they have?

古文：帝不从，乘舆果陷。
现代文：皇帝不听从，御驾果然陷入困境。
English: The emperor did not obey, and the emperor ended up in trouble.

古文：凯痛哭竟日，声彻禁庭，与王竑共击马顺至死。
现代文：曹凯终日痛哭，声音响彻朝廷，和王兹共同痛击马顺直到把他打死。
English: Cao Kai cried bitterly all day long, his voice echoing through the court, and together with Wang Zi, they beat Ma Shun until he was dead.

古文：景泰中，迁左。
现代文：景泰年间，升左给事中。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, Shogo left the troupe.

古文：给事中林聪劾何文渊、周旋，诏宥之。
现代文：给事中林聪弹劾何文渊、周旋，下诏宽恕他们。
English: In the matter, Lin Cong impeached He Wenyuan and Zhou Ying, and issued an edict to pardon them.

古文：凯上殿力诤，二人遂下吏。
现代文：曹凯上殿竭力谏诤，于是二人被交付吏部处置。
English: Cao Kai tried his best to dissuade them, so the two were handed over to the criminal investigation department.

古文：时令输豆得补官，凯争曰： 近例，输豆四千石以上，授指挥。
现代文：当时命令交纳豆子可以补官，曹凯争辩说： 近来的制度，交纳豆子四千石以上，授任指挥。
English: At that time, the order to pay beans could supplement officials, Cao Kai argued: The recent system, to pay beans more than four thousand, was awarded the command.

古文：彼受禄十余年，费已偿矣，乃令之世袭，是以生民膏血养无功子孙，而彼取息长无穷也。
现代文：那些人享受俸禄十多年，费用已经补偿了，还让他们世袭，是用百姓的血汗养活没有功劳的子孙，而他们获取的利息永远没有穷尽。
English: Those people have enjoyed the salary for more than ten years, the expenses have been compensated, and they have also made them hereditary, using the blood and sweat of the people to feed their children and grandchildren without merit, and the interest they earn is never exhausted.

古文：有功者必相谓曰：吾以捐躯获此，彼以输豆亦获此，是朝廷以我躯命等于荏菽，其谁不解体！
现代文：有战功的人必然相互说，我们以流血牺牲获得这一官位，他们以交纳豆子也获得这一官位，这是朝廷把我们的性命等同于豆子，有谁能不分崩离析！
English: Those who have distinguished themselves in battle are bound to say to each other, "We won this post by shedding blood, and they won this post by paying in beans. This is the imperial court equating our lives with beans. Who would not fall apart!"

古文：乞自今惟令带俸，不得任事传袭，文职则止原籍带俸。 
现代文：请求从现在祗准享受俸禄，不得任职世袭，文官则只能在原籍享受俸禄。 
English: From now on, civil servants will only be allowed to receive their salaries in their place of origin. Civil servants will not be allowed to inherit their positions.

古文：帝以为然，命已授者如故，未授者悉如凯议。
现代文：皇帝认为对，命令已经授任的仍像以前一样，没有授任的都按曹凯说的办。
English: The emperor thought that it was right. Those who had been appointed by the order were still the same as before, and those who had not been appointed would do as Cao Kai said.

古文：福建巡按许仕达与侍郎薛希琏相讦，命凯往勘。
现代文：福建巡按许仕达和侍郎薛希理相互揭发，皇帝命令曹凯前去勘察。
English: Xu Shida, the inspector of Fujian, and his servant Xue Xili exposed each other, and the emperor ordered Cao Kai to investigate.

古文：用荐，擢浙江右参政。
现代文：经推荐，升任浙江右参政。
English: Upon recommendation, he was promoted to the post of Zhejiang Right Party Politician.

古文：时诸卫武职役军办纳月钱，至四千五百余人，以凯言禁止。
现代文：当时各卫所武官役军备办交纳月钱的，达到四千五百多人，因曹凯上言禁止。
English: At that time, there were more than 4,500 people who paid monthly fees to the Military Attaché Service and Armament Office of each institute, which was prohibited by Cao Kai.

古文：镇守都督李信擅募民为军，糜饷万余石，凯劾奏之。
现代文：镇守都督李信擅自招募百姓组织军队，浪费军粮一万多石，曹凯弹劾真：奏他。
English: The town's governor, Li Xin, recruited people to form an army without authorization, wasting more than ten thousand stone worth of military food. Cao Kai's impeachment is real: play him.

古文：信虽获宥，诸助信募军者咸获罪，在浙数年，声甚著。
现代文：李信虽然得到宽恕，众多帮助李信招募士卒的人都曼到处罚。曹凯在浙江多年，名声很显著。
English: Although Li Xin was pardoned, many people who helped Li Xin recruit his followers were punished. Cao Kai has been famous in Zhejiang for many years.

古文：初，凯为给事，常劾武清侯石亨。
现代文：当初，曹凯任给事中，常常弹劾武清侯石亨。
English: At the beginning, Cao Kai often impeached Wu Qing Hou Shiheng when he was in charge.

古文：亨得志，修前憾，谪凯卫经历，卒。
现代文：石亨得志后，清理以前的怨恨，谪降曹凯为卫经历，去世。
English: After Shi Heng achieved his goal, he cleaned up the previous resentment, and learned from Cao Kai's experience, and passed away.

古文：许仕达，歙人。
现代文：许仕达，歙人。
English: Xu Shida, the eunuch.

古文：正统十年进士。
现代文：正统十年进士。
English: Ten years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：擢御史。
现代文：升任御史。
English: Promoted to goshi.

古文：景泰元年四月上疏言灾沴数见，请帝痛自修省。
现代文：暴泰元年四月，上疏进言自然灾害屡次出现，请求皇帝深切地反省。
English: In April of the first year of the Taizhou era, natural disasters repeatedly occurred in Shangxu and Jinan, and the emperor was asked to deeply reflect.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：皇帝深切地采纳了。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：未几，复请于经筵之余，日延儒臣讲论经史。
现代文：不久，又请在讲经的空隙，每天请儒臣讲论经史。
English: Not long after, he asked Confucius to give a lecture on the history of the sutras every day in between sermons.

古文：帝亦优诏褒答。
现代文：皇帝也褒嘉答复。
English: The emperor also responded with praise.

古文：巡按福建，劾镇守中官廖秀，下之狱。
现代文：许仕达巡按福建，弹劾镇守中官廖秀，把他关入监狱。
English: Xu Shida toured Fujian, impeached the town guard lieutenant general Liao Xiu, and put him in prison.

古文：秀讦仕达，下镇守侍郎薛希琏等廉问。
现代文：廖秀揭发许仕达，下交镇守侍郎薛希跶等察访审问。
English: Liao Xiu exposed Xu Shida, and Xue Xizhao, the town guard's servant, visited and interrogated him.

古文：会仕达亦劾希琏贪纵，乃命凯及御史王豪往勘。
现代文：正逢许仕达也弹劾薛希理贪婪放纵，就命令曹凯和御史王塞去核查。
English: Just when Xu Shida also impeached Xue Xili for greed and indulgence, he ordered Cao Kai and Gu Shi Wang Xie to check.

古文：还奏，两人互有虚实。
现代文：回京上奏，两人情况都有虚有实，而敷千老人请求留任许仕达。
English: Returning to Beijing to perform, both of them are in a precarious situation, and the elderly Shichisen pleads for Xu Shida to stay.

古文：而耆老数千人乞留仕达，给事中林聪，闽人也，亦为仕达言。
现代文：给事中林聪，闽人，也替许仕达说话。
English: In the middle of things, Lin Cong, a deaf person, also spoke for Xu Shida.

古文：乃命留任，且敕希琏勿构郤。
现代文：就命令留任，并且救命薛希链不要结怨。
English: Don't hold grudges if you are ordered to stay on, and save Xue Xizhe's life.

古文：仕达厉风纪，执漳州知府马嗣宗送京师。
现代文：许仕达严肃执行纲纪，拘捕漳州知府马嗣宗送到京城。
English: Xu Shida seriously implemented the outline discipline, arrested the governor of Zhangzhou, Ma Shizong, and sent him to Beijing.

古文：大理寺劾其擅执，帝以执赃吏不问。
现代文：大理寺弹劾他擅自拘捕，皇帝以拘捕贪官焉由不予追究。
English: Dali Temple impeached him for arresting without authorization, and the emperor did not investigate the reason for arresting corrupt officials.

古文：期满当代，耆老诣阙请留，不许。
现代文：任期屈满应当卸任，耆老到宫阙请求留任，没有允许。
English: When his term of office expired, he should have stepped down. He went to the Imperial Household Agency to request to stay in office, but was not allowed.

古文：未几，即以为福建左参政。
现代文：不久，就任命为福建左参政。
English: Soon, he was appointed as a Fujian left-wing politician.

古文：天顺中，历山东、贵州左、右布政使。
现代文：天顺年间，历任山东、贵州左、右布政使。
English: During the Tienshun era, the successors of Shandong and Guizhou left and right clothed political envoys.

古文：刘炜，字有融，慈溪人。
现代文：刘烽，字有融，慈溪人。
English: Liu Wei, the characters are harmonious, Cixi people.

古文：正统四年进士。
现代文：正统四年进士。
English: Four years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：授南京刑科给事中。
现代文：授任南京刑科给事中。
English: He is currently assigned to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Bureau.

古文：副都御史周铨以私憾挞御史。
现代文：副都御史周铨因私人怨恨鞭笞御史。
English: The vice-governor of the capital, Zhou Qi, lashed the governor out of personal resentment.

古文：诸御史范霖、杨永与尚褫等十人共劾铨，炜与同官卢祥等复劾之。
现代文：众御史范霖、杨永和尚褫等十人共同弹劾周铨，刘焯和同官卢祥等也弹劾他。
English: A total of ten people, including Wang Shi, Fan Lin, Yang Yong and Shang Qi, jointly impeached Zhou Yu, and Liu Yu and his colleague Lu Xiang also impeached him.

古文：铨下诏狱，亦讦霖、永及炜、祥等。
现代文：周铨被关入钦犯监狱，也揭发范霖、杨永和刘、卢祥等。
English: Zhou Qi was put into the Qin prison, and Fan Lin, Yang Yong and Liu Qi, Lu Xiang and others were also exposed.

古文：王振素恶言官，尽逮下诏狱。
现代文：王振一向憎恶谏官，都拘捕投入钦犯监狱。
English: Wang Zhen has always hated eunuchs, and has had them all arrested and thrown into the Qin prison.

古文：霖、永坐绞，后减死。
现代文：范霖、杨永被判绞刑，后来减罪免死。
English: Fan Lin and Yang Yong were sentenced to death by hanging, but their sentences were later commuted.

古文：他御史或戍或谪。
现代文：其它御史有的戍边有的谪降。
English: In other parts of history, there were ups and downs.

古文：炜、祥事白留任，而铨已先瘐死。
现代文：刘焯、卢祥事情清楚后留任，而周铨已经先在狱中病死。
English: Liu Wei and Lu Xiang remained in office after the matter became clear, while Zhou Wei died of illness in prison.

古文：炜累进都给事中。
现代文：刘多次升任至都给事中。
English: Liu Wei has been promoted many times and is still in the middle of things.

古文：景泰四年，户部以边储不足，奏令罢退官非赃罪者，输米二十石，给之诰敕。
现代文：景泰四年，户部以边境储备不足为由，奏请命令被罢免官员中没有贪污罪行的，缴纳粟米二十石，给予诰敕。
English: In the fourth year of Jing Tai, the Household Department, on the grounds that the border reserves were insufficient, requested that the dismissed officials who had not committed corruption crimes pay 20 koku of millet and be given a reward.

古文：炜等言： 考退之官，多有罢软酷虐、荒溺酒色、廉耻不立者，非止赃罪已也。
现代文：刘焯等进言说： 经考查罢免的官吏，多有散漫暴虐、沉溺酒色不讲廉耻的人，不只是贪污之罪而已。
English: Liu Wei and others said: After examination and investigation, the officials who were removed from office were mostly promiscuous, violent, addicted to alcohol and shameless people, not just the crime of corruption.

古文：赐之诰敕，以何为辞？
现代文：赐予他们诰敕，用什么为理由。
English: Give them a break, whatever the reason.

古文：若但褒其纳米，则是朝廷诰敕止直米二十石，何以示天下后世？
现代文：如果只是褒奖他们缴纳粟米，那么朝廷的诰敕就只值二十石米，用什么昭示天下后世。
English: If they were only rewarded for paying corn, then the imperial scepter would only be worth twenty kilos of rice, with which to show the world and future generations.

古文：此由尚书金濂不识大体，有此谬举。 
现代文：这是由于尚书金濂不识大体，有这样荒谬的举措。 
English: This is due to the fact that Shangshu Jintao does not know the general situation, and has such an absurd measure.

古文：帝立为已之。
现代文：皇帝为此立即禁止。
English: For this reason, the emperor immediately banned it.

古文：山东岁歉，户部以尚书沈翼习其地民瘼，请令往振。
现代文：山东年成歉收，户部以尚书沈翼熟悉那个地方民众的疾苦，请求派他去赈灾。
English: Shandong had a poor harvest last year, and the head of the household, Shen Ying, who was familiar with the suffering of the local people, requested that he be sent to help with the disaster.

古文：及往，初无方略。
现代文：等到去了，完全没有办法。
English: By the time we got there, there was nothing we could do.

古文：炜因劾翼，且言： 其地已有尚书薛希琏、少卿张固镇抚，又有侍郎邹干、都御史王竑振济，而复益之以冀，所谓 十羊九牧 。
现代文：刘烽因此弹劾沈翼，并进言说： 那个地方已经有尚书薛希跶、少卿张固镇守安抚，又有侍郎邹干、都御史王兹赈济，而又增加了沈翼，可称为 十只羊九个牧人 。
English: Liu Ye therefore impeached Shen Ying, and said: That place has already been pacified by Shang Shu Xue Xian, Shaoqing Zhang Gu Zhengu, and has also been pacified by Sui Lang Ying Gan, and Zhuo Shi Wang Zuo Ji, and has added Shen Ying, which can be called ten sheep and nine shepherds.

古文：乞还冀南京户部，而专以命希琏等。 
现代文：请求把沈翼召回南京户部，而专门把此事命令给薛希理等。 
English: They requested that Shen Ying be recalled to the Nanjing Household Department, and specifically ordered the matter to be passed to Xue Xili and others.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：平江侯陈豫镇临清，事多违制。
现代文：平江侯陈豫镇守临清，事情多违背法制。
English: The lords of Pingjiang, Chen Yuzhen, guarded Linqing, and most of the events violated the legal system.

古文：炜劾之，豫被责让。
现代文：刘弹劾他，陈豫被斥责。
English: Liu Bei impeached him and Chen Yu was reprimanded.

古文：明年，都督黄竑以易储议得帝眷，奏求霸州、武清县地。
现代文：第二年，都督黄珐因更换太子的奏议而得到皇帝的赏识，上奏要求霸川、武清县的土地。
English: The following year, the governor of the capital, Huang Qi, received the emperor's appreciation for his petition to replace the prince, and requested the land of Bagchuan and Wuqing County.

古文：炜等抗章言： 竑本蛮僚，遽蒙重任。
现代文：刘烽等直言上疏说： 黄珐本是蛮夷官员，突然蒙恩担当重任。
English: Liu Wei and others bluntly said: Huang Wei was originally a barbarian official, and suddenly he was entrusted with a heavy responsibility.

古文：怙宠妄干，乞地六七十里，岂尽无主者？请正其罪。 
现代文：仗恃恩宠狂妄要求利益，请求土地六七十里，难道都是没有主人的土地，请追究他的罪过。 
English: By virtue of his grace, he arrogantly demanded profit and asked for sixty or seventy miles of land. Isn't it all land without an owner? Please investigate his crime.

古文：帝宥竑，遣户部主事黄冈、谢昶往勘。
现代文：皇帝宽恕了黄珐，派户部主事黄冈、谢景前去勘察。
English: The emperor forgave Huang Qi and sent Huang Gang, the head of the household department, and Xie Jing to investigate.

古文：还奏，果民产。
现代文：回京上奏，果然是百姓的产业。
English: Returning to the capital to play, it is indeed the people's industry.

古文：户部再请罪竑，帝卒宥焉。
现代文：户部又请求惩治黄珐，皇帝最终宽恕了他。
English: The emperor eventually pardoned him after the head of the household requested that Huang Qi be punished.

古文：昶官至贵州巡抚，以清慎称。
现代文：谢呆任官至贵州巡抚，以清廉谨慎著称。
English: Xie Nian was appointed as the Guizhou governor and was known for his prudence.

古文：炜天顺初出为云南参政，改广东，分守惠、潮二府。
现代文：刘焯于天顺初年出任云南参政，改任尘塞，分别管理惠、潮二府。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Liu Wei took office as Yunnan's political participant, and was appointed as the dust plug, managing Hui and Chao two prefectures respectively.

古文：潮有巨寇，招之不服，会兵进剿，诛其魁。
现代文：潮有强大的寇贼，招降他们不归服，会集兵力进行围剿，杀了他们的头领。
English: The tide has powerful bandits, they will not surrender, they will gather forces to encircle and kill their leaders.

古文：改莅南韶。
现代文：改任南韶。
English: He was reassigned to the Southern District.

古文：会大军征两广，以劳瘁卒官。
现代文：正逢大军征伐两广，因辛苦劳累死在任上。
English: At the time of the great army's conquest of the two provinces, he died in office due to exhaustion.

古文：尚褫，字景福，罗山人。
现代文：尚褫，字景福，罗山人。
English: Shang Qi, Zi Jing Fu, Luo Shan Ren.

古文：正统四年进士。
现代文：正统四年进士。
English: Four years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：除行人。
现代文：除授行人。
English: In addition to teaching, he is also a practitioner.

古文：上书请毋囚系大臣。
现代文：上书请求不要拘禁大臣。
English: Petition not to detain the Minister.

古文：擢南御史。
现代文：升任南御史。
English: Promoted to Minami no goshi.

古文：以劾周铨下狱，与他御史皆谪驿丞，得云南虚仁驿。
现代文：因弹劾周铨关进监狱，和其它御史都谪降为驿丞，得任云南虚仁驿。
English: Due to the impeachment, Zhou Jun was put in prison, and other imperial historians were demoted to the position of Shunzheng, and he was appointed as the highest official of Yunnan Province.

古文：景泰五年冬因灾异上书陈数事，中言： 忠直之士，冒死陈言。
现代文：景泰五年冬因灾害怪异上书陈述数事，其中说： 忠诚正直的人，冒死进言。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of King Tae's reign, due to a strange disaster, a letter was sent to state several things, which said: Loyal and honest people, dare to speak out.

古文：执政者格以条例，轻则报罢，重则中伤，是言路虽开犹未开也。
现代文：执政的人用条例抵制，轻的上报罢免，重的恶言中伤，所以进言的途径虽已开放就像役开放一样。
English: The people in power use regulations to resist, light reports to dismiss, and heavy bad words to slander, so although the way to make a speech is open, it is just as open as the army.

古文：释教盛行，诱煽聋俗，由掌邦礼者畏王振势，度僧多至此，宜尽勒归农。 
现代文：佛教盛行，引诱煽动愚昧无知的世俗之人，由于掌管国家礼教的人畏惧玉亟的势力，出家僧人多到了这种程度，应全都勒令回乡务农。 
English: Buddhism is in the ascendant, seducing and inciting the stupid and ignorant of the world, and since those in charge of the state ritual fear the influence of the Jade Emperor, the number of ordained monks has reached such a level that they should all be ordered to return to the countryside to work in agriculture.

古文：章下礼部，尚书胡濙恶其刺己，悉格不行。
现代文：奏章下到礼部，尚书胡浚恨他指责自己，都抵制不施行。
English: When the play was submitted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Hujun, who hated it and blamed himself, refused to perform it.

古文：量移丰城知县，为邑豪诬构系狱，寻得释。
现代文：酌情调任丰城知县，被县中豪强诬陷投入监狱，不久得以释放。
English: He was transferred to Fengcheng County at his own discretion. He was falsely accused and thrown into prison by the county middlemen, and was soon released.

古文：成化初，大臣会荐，擢湖广佥事。
现代文：成化韧年，大臣集体推荐尚褫，升任湖广愈事。
English: After many years of hard work, the ministers collectively recommended Shang Qi, and he was promoted to the post of Hukang.

古文：初有诏，荆、襄流民，许所在附籍。
现代文：当初有诏令，剂、襄流亡的百姓，允许在所在地依附户籍。
English: At the beginning, there was a decree that allowed the people who had been exiled to attach their household registration to their current location.

古文：都御史项忠复遣还乡，督其急，多道死。
现代文：都御史项忠又遣送回乡，督促很急迫，多死在路上。
English: Metropolitan Shikotada was sent back to his hometown again, the supervision was very urgent, and many died on the road.

古文：褫悯之，陈牒巡抚吴琛请进止。
现代文：尚褫怜悯他们，向巡抚昊琛呈递公文请他进而制止。
English: Shang Yi took pity on them and submitted an official document to the patrol leader Hao Yu, asking him to stop them.

古文：琛以报忠，忠怒劾褫。
现代文：昊琛将此告诉项忠，项忠恼怒地弹劾尚褫。
English: Hao Wei told Xiang Zhong about this, and Xiang Zhong angrily impeached Shang Wei.

古文：中朝知其意在恤民，卒申令流民听附籍，不愿，乃遣还乡。
现代文：朝廷知道他意在抚恤百姓，最终申明命令流亡百姓听从依附户籍，不愿意的，纔遣送回乡。
English: The imperial court knew that he intended to support the people, and finally ordered the exiled people to obey the household registration, and if they did not want to, they were sent back to their hometowns.

古文：褫为佥事十年，所司上其治行，赐诰旌异。
现代文：尚褫任余事十年，有关部门上奏他的治理功绩，皇命赏赐诰书表彰。
English: After serving for ten years, the relevant departments reported on his governance achievements, and the imperial command awarded him with a written commendation.

古文：致仕卒。
现代文：退休去世。
English: He died after retirement.

古文：单宇。字时泰，临川人。
现代文：单宇，字时泰，临川人。
English: Sanyu, also known as Shitai, a native of Linchuan.

古文：正统四年进士。
现代文：正统四年进士。
English: Four years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：除嵊县知县。
现代文：除授嵊县知县。
English: In addition to Zhuye County, Zhixian County.

古文：驭吏严。
现代文：统御属吏严格。
English: His subordinates are strict.

古文：吏欲诬奏宇，宇以闻。
现代文：属吏想要诬告单宇，单宇听说了。
English: The subordinate official wanted to falsely accuse Shan Yu, and Shan Yu heard about it.

古文：坐不并上吏奏，逮下狱。
现代文：因不一块儿上呈属吏的奏章获罪，被逮下狱。
English: He was arrested and sent to prison after being found guilty of not presenting the official's badge at the same time.

古文：事白，调诸暨。
现代文：事情弄清楚后，调任诸暨。
English: After clarifying the matter, he was transferred to Zhuji.

古文：遭丧服除，待铨京师。
现代文：单宇遭遇丧事，服丧期满，在京城等待考察任命。
English: Shan Yu suffered a bereavement, the mourning period has expired, and he is waiting for an inspection appointment in Beijing.

古文：适英宗北狩，宇愤中官监军，诸将不得专进止，致丧师。疏请尽罢之，以重将权。
现代文：正碰上英宗被劫持往北方，单宇愤恨宦官掌管军权，众将领不能决定进退，导致战败，上疏请求罢免全部宦官，以此加重将领的权力。
English: When Emperor Yingzong was abducted to the north, and the eunuchs were in control of the military power, the generals could not decide to advance or retreat, leading to defeat. Shangsuo requested the removal of all eunuchs, thereby increasing the power of the generals.

古文：景帝不纳。
现代文：景帝不采纳。
English: Emperor Jing did not adopt it.

古文：初，王振佞佛，请帝岁一度僧。
现代文：当初，王振迷信佛教，请求皇帝每年一次颁发僧人度牒。
English: At first, Wang Zhen was superstitious about Buddhism and asked the emperor to issue a monk certificate once a year.

古文：其所修大兴隆寺，日役万人，糜帑数十万，闳丽冠京都。
现代文：他所修建的大兴隆寺，每天役使上万人，耗费金钱数十万，宏伟壮丽名冠京城。
English: The Daxinglong Temple, which he built, serves tens of thousands of people every day, consumes hundreds of thousands of money, and is a magnificent and magnificent capital city.

古文：英宗为赐号 第一丛林 ，命僧大作佛事，躬自临幸，以故释教益炽。
现代文：英宗为它赐号 第一丛林 ，命令僧人大作佛事，亲自临幸，因此佛教更加兴盛。
English: Emperor Yingzong gave it the name of the First Jungle and ordered the monks to do a lot of Buddhist activities and personally visit the temple, so Buddhism flourished even more.

古文：至是宇上书言： 前代人君尊奉佛氏，卒致祸乱。
现代文：这时单宇上言说： 前代帝王尊奉佛教，最终导致祸乱。
English: At this time, Shan Yu said: The previous emperor worshiped Buddhism, which eventually led to disaster.

古文：近男女出家累百千万，不耕不织，蚕食民间。
现代文：近来男女出家之人累计千百万，不耕种不织造，蚕食百姓资财。
English: Recently, the number of men and women who have become monks and nuns has reached tens of millions. They do not cultivate or weave, and they encroach on the people's resources and wealth.

古文：营构寺宇，遍满京邑，所费不可胜纪。
现代文：营造庙宇，遍布京城，所耗费用不可胜数。
English: Temples were built all over the capital, and the costs were incalculable.

古文：请撤木石以建军营，销铜铁以铸兵仗，罢遣僧尼，归之民俗，庶皇风清穆，异教不行。 
现代文：请求拆卸木头石料用来营建军营，销熔钢铁用来铸造兵器，罢除遣散僧人尼姑，使他们归还民间，可望将皇风清静肃穆，异教不再流行。 
English: Requests to dismantle the wood and stone used to build military camps, to melt the steel used to cast weapons, to dismiss the monks and nuns and return them to the people, are expected to make the imperial style quiet and solemn, and paganism will no longer be popular.

古文：疏入，为廷议所格。
现代文：奏章呈入，被朝廷商议抵制。
English: The memorial was submitted, but was boycotted by the imperial court.

古文：复知侯官。
现代文：又任侯官知县。
English: He also served as the magistrate of Wuchang County.

古文：而咸阳姚显以乡举入国学，亦上言： 曩者修治大兴隆寺，穷极壮丽，又奉僧杨某为上师，仪从侔王者。
现代文：而咸阳姚显因乡试中举进入国学，也上言： 以前修建大兴隆寺，极尽壮麓，又尊奉僧人杨某为上师，仪卫随从如同王侯。
English: However, Xianyang Yao Xian, who entered Chinese studies because of his hometown's middle school entrance exam, also said: Previously, the construction of Daxinglong Temple was extremely magnificent, and the monk Yang Mou was respected as a guru, and Yi Wei followed like a prince.

古文：食膏粱，被组绣，藐万乘若弟子。
现代文：吃肥美的食物，穿华丽的衣服，藐视皇帝如同弟子。
English: He ate rich food, wore splendid clothes, and defied the emperor like a disciple.

古文：今上皇被留贼庭，乞令前赴瓦剌，化谕也先。
现代文：如今太上皇被扣留在敌国，请求命令他前往瓦刺，教化晓谕也先。
English: Now the Emperor was detained in an enemy country, and he requested that he be ordered to go to Wasen, and that he be educated first.

古文：诚能奉驾南还，庶见护国之力。
现代文：如能保护太上皇南归，也许可以表现出护国的能力。
English: If you can protect the Emperor Nanfui, you may be able to show your ability to protect the country.

古文：不然，佛不足信彰彰矣。 
现代文：不然，佛教不可迷信就很明显了。
English: Otherwise, it is clear that Buddhism cannot be superstitious.

古文：当景泰时，廷臣谏事佛者甚众，帝卒不能从。
现代文：在景泰时期，朝廷大臣谏言供佛之事的很多，皇帝最终不能听从。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, there were a lot of things that the ministers of the imperial court advised him to offer to the Buddha, but the emperor could not listen to them.

古文：而中官兴安最用事，佞佛甚于振。请帝建大隆福寺，严壮与兴隆并。
现代文：而宦官兴安最有权，迷信佛教甚于王振，请求皇帝修建大隆福寺，庄严壮丽与大兴隆寺相同。
English: However, the eunuch Xing'an had the most power and was more superstitious about Buddhism than Wang Zhen. He asked the emperor to build the Great Longfu Temple, which was as majestic as the Great Longfu Temple.

古文：四年三月，寺成，帝克期临幸。
现代文：四年三月，佛寺建成，皇帝确定日期准备临幸。
English: In March of the fourth year, the Buddhist temple was completed, and the emperor set a date to prepare for the wedding.

古文：河东盐运判官济宁杨浩切谏，乃止。
现代文：河东盐运判官济宁人杨浩恳切谏言纔停止。
English: Yang Hao of Jining, the judge of the salt transportation in Hedong, earnestly told the rioters to stop.

古文：宇好学有文名，三为县，咸以慈惠闻。
现代文：单宇好学，有文才声誉，三次任知县，都以慈爱仁惠闻名。
English: Shanyu is good at learning, has a reputation for literary talent, and has been appointed to the position of county magistrate three times. He is known for his kindness and benevolence.

古文：居侯官，久之卒。
现代文：住在侯官，很久后去世。
English: He lived in Hofan and died a long time later.

古文：显后为齐东知县，移武城，公廉刚正。
现代文：姚显后来任齐束知县，调任武城，公正廉洁刚强正直。
English: Yao Xian was later appointed to Qi Sokzhi County and transferred to Wucheng. He was fair, clean, strong and honest.

古文：用巡抚翁世资荐，擢太仆丞。
现代文：因巡抚翁世资推荐，升任太仆丞。
English: On the recommendation of the governor, Weng Shizai, he was promoted to Daju Rong.

古文：浩初以乡举入国学，除官未行，遂抗疏，声誉籍甚。
现代文：杨浩开始因乡试中举进入国学，授官没有上任，就直言上疏，名声因此很大。
English: Yang Hao began to enter Chinese studies due to the township examination, and he did not take up the post, so he bluntly said that he was not qualified, and his reputation was therefore great.

古文：累官右副都御史，巡抚延绥。
现代文：多次提升至右副都御史，巡抚延绥。
English: He was promoted several times to Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of the Capital.

古文：张昭，不知何许人。
现代文：张昭，不知是什么地方的人。
English: Zhang Zhao, from I don't know where.

古文：天顺初，为忠义前卫吏。
现代文：天顺初年，任忠义前卫吏。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was appointed as a loyal guard.

古文：英宗复辟甫数月，欲遣都指挥马云等使西洋，廷臣莫敢谏。
现代文：英宗复辟纔几个月，想派遣都指挥马云等出使西洋，朝廷众臣役有人敢进谏。
English: A few months after the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Emperor Gaozong wanted to send Western envoys led by Ma Yun, and some courtiers of the imperial court dared to enter the imperial palace.

古文：昭闻之，上疏曰： 安内救民，国家之急务，慕外勤远，朝廷之末策。
现代文：张昭听说此事，上疏说： 安抚天下拯救人民，是国家的当务之急；仰慕外国出使远方，是朝廷的下策。
English: When Zhang Zhao heard about this, Shang Zuo said: To appease the world and save the people is the urgent task of the country; to admire the foreign envoys sent far away is the next step of the imperial court.

古文：汉光武闭关谢西域，唐太宗不受康国内附，皆深知本计者也。
现代文：漠光武帝闭关谢绝西域，唐太宗不接受康国归附朝廷，都是深知国家根本大计的做法。
English: Emperor Mu Guangwu's closing the gate to the West and Emperor Taizong's refusal to accept the annexation of Kangguo to the imperial court were both actions that were well aware of the country's fundamental plan.

古文：今畿辅、山东仍岁灾歉，小民绝食逃窜，妻子衣不蔽体，被荐裹席，鬻子女无售者。
现代文：如今京城附近、山东年年因灾害而歉收，百姓没有饭吃四处逃散，妻子儿女衣不蔽体，披草荐裹席子，出卖子女没有人买。
English: Nowadays, near Beijing and in Shandong, the harvest fails year after year due to disasters. The people have no food to eat and are scattered everywhere. Their wives and children have no clothes to cover their bodies. They have to wear straw hats and wrap themselves in mats. They have to sell their children because no one will buy them.

古文：家室不相完，转死沟壑，未及埋瘗，已成市脔，此可为痛哭者也。
现代文：家庭不能完整，辗转流离死于道路，役来得及埋葬，已成为市上零卖的肉，这是令人为之痛哭的事。
English: It is heartbreaking to see that a family cannot be complete, that a homeless person dies on the road, that he is not buried in time, and that he has become meat sold in the market.

古文：望陛下用和番之费，益以府库之财，急遣使振恤，庶饥民可救。 
现代文：希望陛下用与外国和好的费用，加上国库的财物，速派使者赈灾抚恤，灾民就可望得救了。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will use the cost of reconciliation with foreign countries, together with the wealth of the national treasury, to quickly send emissaries for disaster relief, and the victims are expected to be saved.

古文：奏下公卿博议，言云等已轻遣。宜籍记所市物俟命。
现代文：奏章下公卿集体商议，说马云等已停止派遣，应登记所买的货物等待命令。
English: The nobles discussed collectively under the report, saying that Ma Yun and others had stopped dispatching, and that they should register the goods they bought and wait for orders.

古文：帝命姑已之。
现代文：皇帝命令姑且停止。
English: The emperor ordered the performance to be stopped.

古文：天顺三年秋，建安老人贺炀亦上书论时事，言： 今铨授县令，多年老监生。
现代文：天顺三年秋，建安老人贺炀也上书议论时事，说： 如今选拔任命县令，多是年老的监生。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Tianshun, Jian'an old man He Xuan also wrote a letter to discuss current affairs, saying: Nowadays, the selection and appointment of county magistrates are mostly old students.

古文：逮满九载，年几七十，苟且贪污。
现代文：等到任满九年，年近七十，敷衍贪污。
English: He waited until he had been in office for nine years, when he was nearly 70 years old, to get away with corruption.

古文：宜择年富有才能者，其下僚及山林抱德士，亦当推举。
现代文：应选择年轻有为的人，那些下层僚属和隐居山林的贤士，也应当推举。
English: Those who are young and active should be chosen, and those who belong to the lower ranks and the sages who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests should also be elected.

古文：景泰朝，录先贤颜、孟、程、朱子孙，授以翰林博士，俾之奉祀。
现代文：景泰年间，录用先贤颜回、孟子、二程、朱熹的子孙，授任翰林博士，使他们奉行条祀。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, the descendants of the sages An Hui, Mencius, Ercheng, and Zhu Xi were hired and awarded the title of Dr. Hanlin, so that they would follow the rules.

古文：然有官无禄，宜班给以昭崇儒之意。
现代文：然而有官位没有俸禄，应给予俸禄以昭示尊崇儒道的心意。
English: However, there is an official position without a salary, and a salary should be given to show respect for Confucianism.

古文：黄干、刘龠、蔡沈、真德秀配祠朱子，亦景泰间从佥事吕昌之请，然未入祝辞，宜增补。
现代文：黄干、刘烩、蔡沈、真德秀陪祭朱子，也是景泰年问从愈事吕昌的请求，然而没有写入祝辞，应增加补充。
English: Huang Gan, Liu Ye, Cai Shen and Zhen Dexiu accompanied the sacrificial offering to Zhu Zi, which was also the request of Jing Tai Nian to ask Lü Chang for healing. However, the congratulations were not written, so they should be added.

古文：预备义仓，本以振贫民，乃豪猾多冒支不偿，致廪庾空虚。
现代文：预先备置备荒的粮仓，本是用来赈济贫民，而强横奸猾之人多虚报开支不予偿还，致使粮仓空虚。
English: Grain silos, which are pre-positioned to prepare for shortages, were originally used to feed the poor, but the strong-willed people often falsely reported expenses and did not reimburse them, causing the silos to be empty.

古文：乞令出粟义民，各疏里内饥民，同有司散放。 
现代文：请求命令拿出粮食抚恤百姓，各自舒缓乡里的灾民，会同有关官员一起发放。 
English: Requesting an order to provide grain to support the people, and to relieve the victims in the village individually, and to distribute it together with the relevant officials.

古文：未几，又言： 朝廷建学立师，将以陶熔士类。
现代文：不久，又进言： 朝廷建国学立师儒，用以陶冶造就人才。
English: Soon, he added: The imperial court founded the country by learning and setting up teachers and scholars to cultivate and nurture talent.

古文：而师儒鲜积学，草野小夫夤缘津要，初解免园之册，已厕鹗荐之群。及受职泮林，猥琐贪饕，要求百故；而授业解惑，莫措一词。
现代文：而师儒很少有博学之士，民间浅薄之人因攀附而占据要职，初解浅近的童蒙读本，已置身于被举荐的贤才之中，等到在国学任职，猥琐贪婪，要求多种多样，而传授知识解答疑难，不能说出一句话。
English: However, there are few erudite scholars among the teachers and scholars. Shallow people occupy important positions due to their attachment to the leaders. Children who have read books for the first time have been among the recommended talents. When they work in Chinese studies, they are greedy and demanding, and cannot say a word to impart knowledge and solve problems.

古文：生徒亦往往玩愒岁月，佻达城阙，待次循资，滥升太学，侵寻老耋，幸博一官。
现代文：学生也往往旷废时日，戏嘻于城阙，等待次序因循年资，混入太学。不久又年老了，侥幸地获得一个官位。
English: Students also tend to waste time, play in the city, wait for the order according to seniority, mix in too much learning, and soon become old, and luckily get an official position.

古文：但廑身家之谋，无复功名之念。
现代文：祇考虑自家的生计，没有建立功名的念头。
English: They only think about their own livelihoods and have no intention of building a reputation.

古文：及今不严甄选，人材日陋。士习日非矣。 
现代文：到今天不严格甄别选择，人才日益鄙陋，读书人的风气日益变壤了。 
English: To this day, there is no strict screening and selection, talent is increasingly despicable, and the culture of readers is increasingly changing.

古文：帝善其言，下所司行之。高瑶，字庭坚，闽县人。
现代文：皇帝认为他说的正确，下发有关部门施行。高瑶，字庭坚，闽县人。
English: The emperor thought that what he said was correct and sent it down to the relevant departments for implementation. Gao Jun, Ting Jian, and the people of Jixian County.

古文：由乡举为荆门州学训导。
现代文：因乡试中举任剂门州学训导。
English: Due to the township exam, the appointment of the agent of the door state school discipline.

古文：成化三年五月抗疏陈十事。
现代文：成化三年五月，直言上书陈述十件事。
English: In May, Chenghua made a straightforward written statement of ten things.

古文：其一言： 正统己巳之变，先帝北狩，陛下方在东宫，宗社危如一发。
现代文：其中一件是： 正统年问己巳之变，先帝巡狩北方，陛下正在东宫，国家形势危如千钩一发。
English: One of them is: the orthodox year asks itself what has changed, the former emperor is on a hunting tour in the north, His Majesty is in the East Palace, and the national situation is perilous.

古文：使非郕王继统，国有长君，则祸乱何由平、鉴舆何由返？
现代文：若不是邸王继承帝统，国家有年长者为君，那么祸乱怎能平定，太上皇怎能返回。
English: If it were not for the succession of emperors by retired emperors, and if the country had an elderly ruler, then how could the calamity be calmed down, and how could the retired emperor return?

古文：六七年间，海宇宁谧，元元乐业，厥功不细。
现代文：六七年间，天下安宁，百姓乐业，这功劳不小。
English: In the past 67 years, the world has been peaceful and the people have been enjoying their lives. This is no small achievement.

古文：迨先帝复辟，贪天功者遂加厚诬，使不得正其终，节惠隮祀，未称典礼。
现代文：等到先帝复辟，贪天功为已有的人就加以重重地诬陷，使他不能够寿终正寝，节日祇是列入祭祀，还称不上典礼。
English: By the time of the former emperor's restoration, those who were greedy for heavenly power and had already received it were falsely accused, so that they could not live a long life. The festival was only included in the sacrificial rites, and it was also said that it was not a ceremony.

古文：望特敕礼官集议，追加庙号，尽亲亲之恩。 
现代文：希望特别诏令礼官集体商议，追加庙号，尽到爱自己的亲属的恩德。 
English: It is hoped that the special edict will be discussed collectively by the etiquette officials, the temple number will be added, and the benevolence of loving one's relatives will be fulfilled.

古文：章下，廷议久不决。
现代文：奏章下，朝廷商议久久不能决定。
English: According to the score, the Imperial Court deliberated for a long time and could not come to a decision.

古文：至十二月始奏： 追崇庙号，非臣下敢擅议，惟陛下裁决。 
现代文：到十二月纔上奏： 追加推崇庙号，不是臣下敢擅自商议的，只有请陛下决定。 
English: To be played on the gong in December: To add the call to venerate temples. This is not something that subjects dare to discuss without permission. Only His Majesty can decide.

古文：而左庶子黎淳力争，谓不当复，且言： 瑶此言有死罪二：一诬先帝为不明，一陷陛下于不孝。
现代文：而左庶子黎淳竭力争辩，认为不应当恢复，并且说： 高瑶这些话犯两条死罪：一是诬陷先帝不英明，一是陷陛下于不孝的境地。
English: However, Gao's son-in-law, Li Jun, argued strenuously that Emperor Gaozong should not be reinstated, and said: Gaozong committed two capital offenses with these words: First, he accused the former emperor of not being wise, and second, he accused His Majesty of being unfilial.

古文：臣以谓瑶此举，非欲尊郕王，特为群邪进用阶，必有小人主之者。 
现代文：臣以为高瑶这一举动，不是想尊崇邸王，只是为众多奸邪搭进升的台阶，一定有小入主使他。 
English: The courtier thought that Gao Yao's action was not intended to honor the king, but only to build a ladder for many treacherous and evil people. There must be a small lord to make him.

古文：帝曰： 景泰往过，朕未尝介意，岂臣子所当言？
现代文：皇帝说： 景泰以前的遇错，朕没有介意，哪能是臣子应当说的。
English: The emperor said: I don't mind Jing Tai's previous mistakes, which is what a vassal should say.

古文：淳为此奏，欲献谄希恩耶？ 
现代文：黎淳上此奏折，想要献谄邀宠吧？ 
English: Li Jun, on this record, would you like to offer me a treat?

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：商议于是停止。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：然帝终感瑶言。
现代文：然而皇帝最终被高瑶的进言触动。
English: However, the emperor was finally moved by Gao Yao's suggestion.

古文：久之，竟复郕王帝号。
现代文：很久以后，最终恢复了邱王的帝号。
English: After a long time, Emperor Qiu's imperial title was finally restored.

古文：瑶后知番禺县，多异政。
现代文：高瑶后任番禺县知县，多有显著政绩。
English: Gao Jun later served as the governor of Panyu County, and had many notable achievements.

古文：发中官韦眷通番事，没其赀钜万于官。
现代文：揭发中官韦眷勾结外国一事，没收他的财产上万归公。
English: to expose the foreign collusion of Vice-Minister Wei Xuan and confiscate his property.

古文：眷憾甚，诬奏于朝。
现代文：韦眷很恨他，诬陷上奏于朝廷。
English: Wei Yan hated him very much, and the false accusation was reported to the imperial court.

古文：瑶及布政使陈选俱被逮，士民泣送者塞道。
现代文：高瑶和布政使陈选都被逮补，士人百姓哭泣送行的阻塞道路。
English: Gao Yao and Bu Zhengzhi Chen Zheng were both arrested, blocking the road as the nobles and commoners left crying.

古文：瑶竟谪戍永州。
现代文：高瑶最终谪降戍边到永州。
English: Gao Yao eventually moved to Yongzhou.

古文：释还，卒。
现代文：释放后回来，去世。
English: After his release, he returned and died.

古文：黎淳，华容人。
现代文：黎淳，华容人。
English: Lai Chun, Hua Rongjin.

古文：天顺元年进士第一。
现代文：天顺元年进士第一名。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was the first to be promoted.

古文：官至南京礼部尚书，颇有名誉。
现代文：任官至南京礼部尚书，很有名声。
English: He was appointed to the Nanjing etiquette department, and has a very good reputation.

古文：其与瑶争郕王庙号也，专欲阿宪宗意，至以昌邑、更始比景帝，为士论所薄。
现代文：他与高瑶争论邸王庙号，只是想讨好宪宗的心意，至于以昌邑、更始比景帝，被舆论所轻视。
English: He argued with Gao Gan about the name of the residence, Wang Miao, just trying to please the mind of the Emperor. As for the comparison of Changyi with Emperor Gyeongbokgung, he was despised by public opinion.

古文：当成化时，言路大阻，给事、御史多获谴。
现代文：在成化时期，进言门路大受阻碍，给事、御史多遭责备。
English: During the Chenghua period, the gate of the Jin Dynasty was greatly obstructed, and most of the officials and emperors were blamed.

古文：惟瑶以卑官建危议，卒无罪。时皆称帝盛德云。
现代文：只有高瑶以卑微的官位上奏激烈的建议，最终没有定罪，当时都称颂皇帝的大德。
English: Only Gao Jiong, who rose from a lowly official position to play a fierce advocate, was not convicted in the end. At the time, everyone praised the emperor's great virtue.

古文：又有虎臣者，麟游人。
现代文：又有叫虎臣的，麟游人。
English: There's also a guy called Koushin, a loner.

古文：成化中贡入太学。
现代文：成化年间被选为贡生进入太学。
English: During the Chenghua years, he was selected as a tribute student to enter the University of Taichung.

古文：上言天下士大夫过先圣庙，宜下舆马。
现代文：上疏说天下士大夫路过先圣宗庙，应下车下马。
English: Shang Zuo said that the world's scholar-doctor should get off the horse when passing the Holy Family Temple.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：省亲归，会陕西大饥，巡抚郑时将请振，臣赍奏行，陈饥歉状，词激切，大获振贷。
现代文：探亲回乡，正碰上陕西大闸饥荒，巡抚郑时正要请求赈济，虎臣携带奏章回京，陈述缺粮的状况，言词激烈迫切，获得很多赈济物资。
English: On his way back to visit his relatives, he was confronted with the famine in Shaanxi Province. The governor Zheng Shi was about to ask for relief, and Hu Zhen returned to Beijing with a report, stating the situation of grain shortage. His words were fierce and urgent, and he obtained a lot of relief materials.

古文：已，上言： 臣乡比岁灾伤，人相食，由长吏贪残，赋役失均。
现代文：事后，进言说： 臣家乡连年发生天灾伤害，人吃人，是由于官吏贪婪残酷，赋税徭役失衡。
English: After the fact, Jinyan said: The natural disasters that have occurred in my hometown year after year, and people eating people, are due to the greed and cruelty of government officials, and the imbalance in tax collection.

古文：请敕有司审民户，编三等以定科徭。 
现代文：请求诏令有关官员审查百姓户口，编为三个等级来确定征收赋税徭役。 
English: Request the relevant officials to review the people's household registration and compile it into three levels to determine the tax collection.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：孝宗践阼，将建棕棚万岁山，备登眺。
现代文：孝宗即位，将要在万岁山修建棕棚，以备登高眺望。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascends the throne, he will want to build a brown shed on Mount Wanlian so that he can climb up and look around.

古文：臣抗疏切谏。
现代文：虎臣直言上疏恳切谏议。
English: The tiger minister bluntly and earnestly discussed the matter.

古文：祭酒费訚惧祸及，锒铛絷臣堂树下。
现代文：祭酒费合害怕祸端殃及，用铁链将庑臣锁在堂中树下。
English: Fei He, fearing that evil would befall him, locked his vassals in chains under a tree in the hall.

古文：俄官校宣臣至左顺门，传旨慰谕曰： 若言是，棕棚已毁矣。 
现代文：不久官校传命叫虎臣到左顺门，传旨安慰晓论说： 你说得对，棕棚已拆毁了。 
English: Not long after, the government school sent an order to Hu Chen to Zuoshun Gate, and he consoled Xiao Tong by saying: You are right, the brown shed has been demolished.

古文：訚大惭，臣名遂闻都下。
现代文：费合很惭愧，虎臣的名声于是传遍都城。
English: Fei He was very ashamed, and the reputation of Hu Chen spread all over the capital.

古文：顷之，命授七品官，乃以为云南柷嘉知县，卒官。
现代文：不久，命令授任七品官，就任他为云南磅嘉知县，死在任上。
English: Soon after, the order was issued to appoint him as the seventh grade official, and he was appointed as the governor of Yunnan Province, Jiaqi County. He died in office.

古文：赞曰：明自太祖开基，广辟言路。
现代文：赞曰：明代自太祖开创基业，广开言路。
English: Zang said: The Ming Dynasty has created a foundation since the great-grandfather, and has opened up a broad path.

古文：中外臣寮，建言不拘所职。
现代文：朝廷内外群臣百官，建议上言不拘限于职责范围。
English: There are hundreds of officials inside and outside the Imperial Court, and the recommendation is not limited to the scope of duties.

古文：草野微贱，奏章咸得上闻。
现代文：草莽贱民，奏章全都能够上奏。
English: Grasshoppers are untouchable. They can play all the parts.

古文：沿及宣、英，流风未替。
现代文：沿袭到宣宗、英宗，流传的风气没有改变。
English: Tracing back to the Xuan Zong and Ying Zong, the culture that has been passed down has not changed.

古文：虽升平日久，堂陛深严，而逢掖布衣。刀笔掾史，抱关之冗吏，荷戈之戍卒，朝陈封事，夕达帝阍。
现代文：虽然太平时期很长，朝廷森严，而儒生平民，刀笔小吏，守关门的闲役，扛兵器的戍卒，早上陈上奏章，晚上就可送到宫中。
English: Although the period of peace lasted a long time, the imperial court was very strict, and the Confucian commoners, petty officials with swords and pens, idle servants who guarded the closed doors, and pawns who carried weapons, were allowed to present the imperial rescript in the morning, and it could be delivered to the palace in the evening.

古文：采纳者荣显其身，报罢者亦不之罪。
现代文：被采纳的身名荣耀显达，回复废置的也不追究罪过。
English: Those who are adopted are glorified, and those who are returned and discarded are not held accountable.

古文：若仁宗之复弋谦朝参，引咎自责，即悬鞀设铎，复何以加。
现代文：像仁宗恢复弋谦上朝参拜，引咎自责，即使古代设置征询民意的韬鼓木铎，也不能超过于此。
English: Even if the ancient times set up a gong, drum and wooden rim to solicit the people's opinion, it cannot exceed this.

古文：以此为招，宜乎慷慨发愤之徒扼腕而谈世务也。
现代文：以此作为号召，那些慷慨奋发的人激昂地谈论国事就是很自然的了。
English: With that as a rallying cry, it's only natural for those with the most to speak passionately about the state of the nation.

古文：英、景之际，《实录》所载，不可胜书。
现代文：英宗、景帝时期，《实录》所记载的，不能够全部写完。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Yingzong and Emperor Jing, it was not possible to write down everything that was recorded in the "True Record."

古文：今掇其著者列于篇。
现代文：如今选择其中显著的列于篇中。
English: Now a selection of the most notable are listed in the article.

古文：迨宪宗季年，阉尹擅朝，事势屡变，别自为卷，得有考焉。
现代文：等到宪宗晚期，宦官专权，形势多变，另外作为一卷，从中可以有所考查。
English: Wait until the late period of the Confucianism, the eunuch's exclusive power, the situation is changeable, in addition, as a volume, from which you can examine.

