古文：张仪相秦，谓昭睢曰： 楚无鄢、郢、汉中，有所更得乎? 曰： 无有。 
现代文：张仪做秦国相国的时候，曾对昭雎说： 如果楚国失掉鄢地、郢都、汉中，还能保住什么地方呢？ 昭雎说： 没有。 
English: When Zhang Yi was the Minister of the State of Qin, he once said to Zhaojun: If the State of Chu were to lose Shantian, Shedu, and Hanzhong, what would it be able to keep? Zhaojun said: Nothing.

古文：曰： 无昭睢、陈轸，有所更得乎? 
现代文：张仪说： 如果没有昭过、陈轸，还有什么人能够任用呢？ 
English: Zhang Yi said, "If there is no Zhao Ye and Chen Yao, who else can be appointed?

古文：曰： 无所更得。 
现代文：昭雎说： 没有什么人可以任用。 
English: "There is no one to appoint," Mr. Zhao said.

古文：张仪曰： 为仪谓楚王逐昭睢、陈轸，请复鄢、郢、汉中。 
现代文：张仪说： 请您替我告诉楚王，驱逐昭过、陈轸，我们就把鄢地、郢都、汉中归还给楚国。 
English: Zhang Yi said, "Please tell the King of Chu for me, expel Zhao and Chen Yao, and we will return Xuan Di, Xindu, and Hanzhong to the State of Chu."

古文：昭睢归报楚王，楚王说之。
现代文：昭瞧回去报告楚王，楚王听后很高兴。
English: Zhao Luo went back to report to King Chu. King Chu was very happy to hear this.

古文：有人谓昭睢曰： 甚矣，楚王不察于争名者也。
现代文：有人对昭过说： 真是太过分，楚王对争名夺利的人竟然毫无察觉。
English: Someone said to Zhaofeng, "It's really too much. King Chu is completely unaware of people competing for fame and profit."

古文：韩求相工陈籍而周不听；魏求相綦母恢而周不听，何以也?
现代文：从前，韩国要求工陈籍做相国而周朝不答应；魏国要求綦母恢做相国周朝也不答应，这是什么原因？
English: Once upon a time, South Korea asked the Zhou Dynasty not to accept the request of the Workers' and Peasants' Republic of China to become a sister country, and the Wei Dynasty did not accept the request of the Han Dynasty to become a sister country. What is the reason for this?

古文：周是列县畜我也。
现代文：周王说，这是把对我们的待遇降低到和他们的县一样了。
English: Zhou Wang said that this is to reduce our treatment to the same as that of their county.

古文：今楚，万乘之强国也；大王，天下之贤主也。
现代文：如今楚国，是拥有万辆兵车的强大国家；大王，是天下的贤明君主。
English: Today, the State of Chu is a powerful country with ten thousand chariots; the great king is the wisest monarch in the world.

古文：今仪曰逐君与陈轸而王听之，是楚自行不如周，而仪重于韩、魏之王也。
现代文：现在张仪说驱逐您和陈轸，而大王听信她的话，这是楚国使自己的行为不如周朝，然而张仪却比韩国、魏国的君王更高贵了。
English: Now Zhang Yi says to expel you and Chen Yao, and the great king listens to her words. This is because the State of Chu makes its own behavior inferior to the Zhou Dynasty, but Zhang Yi is more noble than the kings of Korea and Wei.

古文：且仪之所行，有功名者秦也，所欲贵富者魏也。
现代文：况且张仪的所作所为，是想要在秦国建立功名，又想在魏国取得富贵。
English: What's more, Zhang Yi's actions were motivated by the desire to establish a reputation in Qin and to become rich and famous in Wei.

古文：欲为攻于魏，必南伐楚。
现代文：如果他想要帮助魏国攻打其它国家，一定向南进攻楚国。
English: If he wants to help Wei attack other countries, he must attack Chu to the south.

古文：故攻有道，外绝其交，内逐其谋臣。
现代文：所以进攻其它国家的规律，必然对外断绝这个国家的邦交，对内驱逐这个国家的谋臣。
English: Therefore, according to the law of attacking other countries, it is inevitable to break off the diplomatic relations of this country to the outside world and expel the strategists of this country to the inside.

古文：陈轸，夏人也，习于三晋之事，故逐之，则楚无谋臣矣。
现代文：陈轸，是中原人，对三晋的事情很熟悉，所以张仪要驱逐他，这样楚国就没有谋臣了。
English: Chen Xi, a native of the Central Plains, was very familiar with the affairs of the Three Jin, so Zhang Yi wanted to expel him, so that the State of Chu would not have a strategist.

古文：今君能用楚之众，故亦逐之，则楚众不用矣。
现代文：如今您能管理指挥楚国的民众，所以张仪也要驱逐您，这样楚国的民众就没人管理指挥了。
English: Now you can manage and command the people of Chu, so Zhang Yi will also expel you, so there will be no one to manage and command the people of Chu.

古文：此所谓内攻之者也，而王不知察。
现代文：这就是所说的从内部进攻的办法，然面大王却不懂得认真考察。
English: This is the so-called method of attacking from within, but the great king does not know how to seriously investigate.

古文：今君何不见臣于王，请为王使齐交不绝。
现代文：现在您为什么不让我去见君王，请让我为大王出使齐国，使齐楚之交不断绝。
English: Now, why don't you let me go to see the king, please let me send Qi for the great king, so that the friendship between Qi and Chu will never end.

古文：齐交不绝，仪闻之，其效鄢、郢、汉中必缓矣。
现代文：齐国不断绝和楚国的邦交，张仪听到此事，他们献出鄢地、郢都、汉中的计划一定推迟进行。
English: When Zhang Yi heard that the State of Qi had severed diplomatic relations with the State of Chu, their plan to give away the provinces of Qi, Qi, and Hanzhong had to be postponed.

古文：是昭睢之言不信也，王必簿之。 
现代文：这样就使昭睢的话不可相信了，楚王一定会疏远他。 
English: In this way, Zhaohui's words could not be believed, and King Chu was sure to alienate him.

