古文：徐鹿卿，字德夫，隆兴丰城人。
现代文：徐鹿卿，字德夫，隆兴府丰城县人。
English: Xu Lucheng, also known as Dev, was from Fengcheng County, Longxing Prefecture.

古文：博通经史，以文学名于乡，后进争师宗之。
现代文：广泛地通晓经史，以擅长文学名于乡里，后来的学者争以他为宗师。
English: He was widely versed in the history of the scriptures, and was known in the village for his literary skills. Later scholars claimed him as their guru.

古文：嘉定十六年，廷试进士，有司第其对居二，详定官以其直抑之，犹置第十。
现代文：嘉定十六年，参加廷试，考中进士，有关官署按其对策决定他名列第二位，详定官因其直率压抑他，结果置第十位。
English: In the 16th year of Jiading, he took part in the court examination and passed the middle school entrance examination. The relevant government department decided that he ranked second according to the countermeasures. The detailed official suppressed him because of his directness, and the result was placed tenth.

古文：调南安军学教授。
现代文：徐鹿卿调南安军学教授。
English: Xu Lucheng is a professor of military science in Nan'an.

古文：张九成尝以直道谪居，鹿卿摭其言行，刻诸学以训。
现代文：张九成曾以直言相道被贬谪居，徐鹿卿选择他的言行，刻石树立在学校以此为校训。
English: Zhang Jiucheng was once ridiculed for his outspokenness, but Xu Lucheng chose his words and deeds and set them as the school motto in the school.

古文：先是周惇颐、程颢与其弟颐皆讲学是邦，鹿卿申其教，由是理义之学复明。
现代文：先辈前学周敦颐、程颢与他的弟弟程颐都在这里讲过学，徐鹿卿重申其教诲，于是理义之学又重昌明。
English: The predecessors of the previous school, Zhou Dunyao, Cheng Yao and his brother Cheng Yao, all taught here, and Xu Lucheng reiterated his teachings, so the study of reason and logic was re-emphasized.

古文：立养士纲条，学田多在溪峒，异时征之无艺，农病之，鹿卿抚恤，无逋租者。
现代文：建立养士的纲常条纪，学田多分布在溪峒，时时征赋没有准则、限度，农民为此感到痛苦不堪，徐鹿卿去抚恤民众，结果，没有拖欠租赋的人。
English: The establishment of a regular discipline for the training of nurses, the school fields are mostly distributed in the creeks, and there is no standard or limit for the levy. The farmers feel unbearable pain for this, and Xu Lucheng went to support the people. As a result, there are no people who are in arrears of rent.

古文：其后盗作，环城屋皆毁，惟学宫免，曰： 是无挠我者。 
现代文：后来盗贼作乱，围绕城邑的屋宇皆被毁坏，只有学宫幸免，故徐鹿卿说 ：是没有谁来扰乱我们的。 
English: Later, thieves caused a disturbance, and the buildings around the town were all destroyed. Only the Academy was spared, so Xu Luqing said, "No one disturbed us."

古文：辟福建安抚司干办公事。
现代文：徐鹿卿担任福建安抚司干办公事。
English: Xu Lucheng served as the head of the Fujian Pacification Department.

古文：会汀、邵寇作，鹿卿赞画备御，动中机会。避寇者入城，多方振济，全活甚众。
现代文：恰逢汀州、邵州寇盗作乱，徐鹿卿筹划备御，切中机会，对避寇者入城的人，多方赈济，民众因此无一伤亡。
English: The robberies in Tingzhou and Shaozhou coincided with the robberies, and Xu Lucheng took the opportunity to plan and prepare for the robberies. People who avoided the robberies and entered the city were helped in many ways. As a result, there were no casualties.

古文：郡多火灾，救护有方。
现代文：郡多火灾，救护有方。
English: There are many fires in the county, and there are many ways to be rescued.

古文：会都城火，鹿卿应诏上封事，言积阴之极，其征为火，指言惑嬖宠、溺燕私、用小人三事尤切。
现代文：逢都城失火，徐鹿卿应诏上封事，说积阴之极，其征候是火，指斥宠幸便嬖、沉溺于宴会、使用小人三事尤为厉害。
English: When the city of Fengdu caught fire, Xu Lucheng issued an imperial edict, saying that the worst symptom of the accumulation of negative energy was fire. He pointed out that the following three things were particularly serious: indulging in banquets, indulging in pamphlets, and using villains.

古文：真德秀称其气平论正，有忧爱之诚心。
现代文：真德秀称赞他的气平、言论正派，有忧国爱民的诚意。
English: Zhendexiu praised his calmness, decent speech, and sincerity of concern for the country and love for the people.

古文：改知尤溪县。
现代文：改任尤溪县知县。
English: Reassigned to Youxi County, Zhixian.

古文：德秀守泉，辟宰南安，鹿卿以不便养辞。
现代文：真德秀担任泉州知州，请他在南安任职，徐鹿卿以不便养母为借口推辞。
English: Zhendexiu served as Quanzhou Zhizhou, and he was asked to serve in Nan'an. Xu Luching used the inconvenience of raising his mother as an excuse to decline.

古文：德秀曰： 道同志合，可以拯民，何惮不来？ 鹿卿入白其母，欣然许之。
现代文：真德秀说 ：志同道合，可以拯民，你还担忧什么而不来呢？ 徐鹿卿把这件事告诉自己的母亲，她欣然答应了这个要求。
English: Zhen Dexiu said, "If you are like-minded, you can save the people, what are you worried about and not come?" Xu Luching told this to his mother, and she readily agreed to this request.

古文：既至，首罢科敛之无名者，明版籍，革预借，决壅滞，达冤抑，邑以大治。
现代文：到职后，首先就罢免了没有名目的科敛负担，注明版籍，革除预借，疏决壅塞阻滞，通达冤抑，其县邑大治。
English: After taking office, first of all, he removed the burden of scientific accumulation without a name, indicated the copyright, removed the advance loan, resolved the obstruction, resolved the grievances, and governed his county and town.

古文：德秀寻帅闽，疏其政以劝列邑。
现代文：真德秀不久担任福建路长官，疏列他的政绩，以劝勉各县。
English: Zhendexiu soon served as the governor of Fujian Province, and listed his achievements in order to encourage the counties to follow suit.

古文：岁饥，处之有法，富者乐分，民无死徙。
现代文：逢歉收年，处理得法，富有的愉快地分出财物，民众没有死亡、迁徙的。
English: In years of poor harvests, it was handled well, the rich happily distributed their wealth, and the people did not die or migrate.

古文：最闻，令赴都堂审察。
现代文：刚听说，令赴都堂审察。
English: I've just heard that I've been ordered to go to Tudo Hall for an inspection.

古文：以母丧去。
现代文：因为母亲丧事而离职。
English: She left her job because of her mother's death.

古文：诏服阕赴枢密禀议，首言边事、楮币。
现代文：徐鹿卿被诏赴朝廷任枢密禀议，首先议论边防事务、纸币。
English: Xu Luqing was ordered to go to the imperial court to serve as a privy councilor, and first discussed border defense affairs and banknotes.

古文：主管官告院，干办诸司审计司。
现代文：主管官告院，干办诸司审计司。
English: Director of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, in charge of various departments of the Audit Department.

古文：故相子以集英殿修撰食祠禄，又帮司农少卿米麦，鹿卿曰： 奈何为一人坏成法。 持不可。
现代文：过去的宰相之子以集英殿修撰职食祠禄，又帮司农少卿米麦，徐鹿卿说 ：为什么为一人而破坏成法？ 
English: The son of the former prime minister used the Jieying Hall to compile the official food shrine, and also helped the Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Yimai, and Xu Lucheng said: Why destroy the law for one person?

古文：迁国子监主簿。
现代文：认为不能这样做。迁任国子监主簿。
English: He thought it was not possible to do so. He was transferred to the post of chief inspector of state education.

古文：入对，陈六事，曰： 洗凡陋以起事功，昭劝惩以收主柄，清班著以储实才，重藩辅以蔽都邑，用闽、越舟师以防海，合东南全力以守江。 上皆嘉纳。
现代文：入朝应对，陈述六件事，说 ：清除浅陋的以起事功，昭示劝惩的以收权柄，清查班著以储备真才实学，重视藩辅以保护都邑，使用闽、越之地的水军以屏防海上，集合东南的全部力量来防守长江。 
English: In response to the invasion of the DPRK, he stated six things, saying: to eliminate the shallow ones, we should make great efforts; to show the power of persuasion and punishment, we should collect the power; the inspection team should reserve the real talents and practical knowledge, attach importance to the protection of the capital, and use the naval forces of Shandong and Yue to screen the sea, and gather all the forces in the southeast to defend the Yangtze River.

古文：改枢密院编修官，权右司，赞画二府，通而守法。
现代文：理宗皇帝对这些都予以赞扬、采纳。改任枢密院编修官，暂任右司，筹画枢密院西府、中书门下东府二府事宜，通而守法。
English: Emperor Rizong praised and adopted all of these. He was appointed as the editor of the Privy Council, temporarily as the right secretary, and planned the affairs of the West Prefect of the Privy Council and the two East Prefectures under the auspices of the Chinese Academy of Letters, all of which complied with the law.

古文：会右史方大琮、编修刘克庄、正字王迈以言事黜，鹿卿赠以诗，言者并劾之，太学诸生作《四贤诗》。
现代文：恰逢右史方大琮、编修刘克庄、正字王迈因为上书言事而被贬黜，徐鹿卿以诗相赠，奏事的人一起弹劾他们，太学的学生们做《四贤诗》。
English: At the same time, the right historian Fang Dazhao, editor Liu Kezhuang, and orthography Wang Mai were disparaged because of their writings and speeches. Xu Luqing presented them with poems. The people who reported the matter impeached them together, and the students of Taishu made "Four Virtuous Poems."

古文：知建昌军，未上，而崇教、龙会两保与建黎原、铁城之民修怨交兵，鹿卿驰书谕之，敛手听命。
现代文：担任建昌军知军，未上任，而崇教、龙会两保与建黎原、铁城的民众因积怨而兵刃相见，徐鹿卿急驰书布告他们，敛手听命。
English: He served as the military commander of the Jianchang Army, but did not take office, and the two guarantors of Zongjiao and Longhui met with the people of Jianliyuan and Tiecheng due to accumulated grudges. Xu Lucheng hurriedly issued a proclamation to them and obeyed their orders.

古文：既至，则宽赋敛，禁掊克。汰赃滥，抑强御，恤寡弱，黥黠吏，训戍兵，创百丈砦，择兵官，城属县，治行大孚，田里歌诵。
现代文：任职后，即宽赋薄敛，禁止掊克，裁汰赃滥，抑制豪强，抚恤寡孤弱小，惩罚贪官污吏，训练士卒，创建百丈寨，选练将帅、士卒，修筑城邑墙垣，治县行为大为人们信服，乡里田野都歌颂他的政绩。
English: After taking office, that is, he was lenient with the weak and restrained the powerful, forbade favoritism, curtailed extravagance, restrained the brave and the strong, gave alms to the rich and the poor, punished corrupt officials, trained officers and men, created Baizhangzhai, selected and trained generals and officers, built the walls of cities and towns, and governed counties. People were very convinced of his behavior, and the countryside all sang his political achievements.

古文：督府横取秋苗斛面，建昌为米五千斛。
现代文：督府横取秋苗斛面，建昌有上交五千斛的任务。
English: The governor's office seized the autumn seedlings, and Jianchang had the task of handing over 5,000 seedlings.

古文：鹿卿争之曰： 守可去，米不可得。 民恐失鹿卿，请输之以共命。
现代文：徐鹿卿为此相争说 ：我郡守职务可以免去，但是米得不到。 民众都担心失去徐鹿卿，请求输送米以共命运。
English: Xu Lucheng disputed this and said, "I can be relieved of my duties as county magistrate, but I can't get the rice." The people were worried about losing Xu Lucheng and asked for the rice to be transported to share the same fate.

古文：鹿卿曰： 民为守计则善矣。守独不为民计乎？ 卒争以免。
现代文：徐鹿卿说： 民众为我打算是好的，难道我就不为民众打算吗？ 
English: Xu Luching said, "It is good that the public plans for me. Shouldn't I plan for the public?"

古文：召赴行在，将行，盗发南丰，捕斩渠首二十人，余不问。
现代文：最后以抗争而免除了五千斛米的负担。召他赴朝，打算出发去京，南丰发生盗乱，他捕斩渠首二十人，其他的人都不问罪。
English: In the end, he protested and was relieved of the burden of five thousand baht. He was summoned to go to China and planned to set off for Beijing. A robbery occurred in Nanfeng, and he captured and beheaded twenty people. No one else was charged with a crime.

古文：擢度支郎官兼右司。
现代文：擢升度支郎官兼任右司。
English: He was promoted to the position of vice-governor and concurrently served as the right-hand man.

古文：入对，极陈时敝。
现代文：入对于朝，极陈时弊。
English: In the case of the morning, it is extremely bad.

古文：改侍右郎官兼敕令删修官，兼右司。
现代文：改任侍右郎官兼敕令删修官，兼任右司。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Samurai-Urorokan (Chamberlain of the Right) and Shoryo-Kisho-Kan (Chamberlain of the Right) and concurrently to the post of Utsukasa.

古文：鹿卿又言当时并相之敝。
现代文：徐鹿卿又说当时宰相并列的弊端。
English: Xu Lucheng also said that the prime minister at that time was a drawback.

古文：宰相以甘言诱鹿卿，退语人曰： 是牢笼也，吾不能为宰相私人。 言者以他事诋鹿卿，主管云台观。
现代文：宰相以甜言蜜语诱引徐鹿卿，徐退下后告诉别人说： 是牢笼，我不能为宰相的党人。 议事官以其他的事诋毁徐鹿卿，徐鹿卿主管云台观。
English: The prime minister lured Xu Lucheng with sweet words, and after Xu stepped down, he told others, "It's a cage, I can't be a member of the prime minister's party." The presiding officer slandered Xu Lucheng with other things, and Xu Lucheng was in charge of Yuntai Guan.

古文：越月，起为江东转运判官。
现代文：过了一个多月，起用为江东转运判官。
English: After more than a month, he was appointed as the judge of Jiangdong transshipment.

古文：岁大饥，人相食，留守别之杰讳不诘，鹿卿命掩捕食人者，尸诸市。
现代文：当年大饥，人以人肉为食，留守别之杰讳言不追问，徐鹿卿下令暗中捕拿吃人肉的人，悬尸于市示众。
English: During the great famine of that year, people ate human flesh, and those who stayed behind did not ask questions. Xu Luqing ordered that those who ate human flesh be secretly arrested, and their bodies were hung in the city for the public to see.

古文：又奏援真德秀为漕时拨钱以助振给，不报。
现代文：又奏援引真德秀为漕官时拨钱用以帮助赈给，没被向上报告。
English: It also quoted Zhendexiu as saying that when he was a rowing official, he allocated money to help the rowing team, but was not reported to the higher-ups.

古文：遂出本司积米三千余石减半贾以粜，及减抵当库息，出缗钱万有七千以予贫民，劝居民收字遗孩，日给钱米，所活数百人。
现代文：于是拿出本官司库米三千多石按半价出售，及减抵当作库息，又拿出缗钱一万七千赈送饥民，劝居民收养孤儿，每日给钱米，因此而活的孤儿有几百人。
English: Therefore, he took out the treasury rice of more than 3,000 koku to sell at half price, and deducted it as treasury interest, and took out 17,000 koku of money to send to the hungry, persuaded residents to adopt orphans, and gave money rice every day. As a result, there are hundreds of orphans alive.

古文：宴集不用乐。
现代文：宴饮或与人集聚时不用声乐。
English: Don't use vocal music when dining or socializing.

古文：会岳珂守当涂，制置茶盐，自诡兴利，横敛百出，商旅不行，国计反屈于初。
现代文：正当岳珂驻守当涂，制置茶盐，诡称为国谋利，横征暴敛百出，商旅不敢通行于此地，国家收入反不如其初。
English: At that time, Yue Ka was stationed in Dangtu, producing tea and salt, which was deceptively referred to as making profits for the country. There was rampant embezzlement, and business travelers did not dare to pass through this place. On the other hand, the country's income was not as good as it was at the beginning.

古文：命鹿卿核之，吏争窜匿。
现代文：朝廷命徐鹿卿核实这件事，官吏争相逃窜隐匿。
English: The imperial court ordered Xu Luqing to verify the matter, and officials scrambled to flee and hide.

古文：鹿卿宽其期限，躬自钩考，尽得其实。
现代文：徐鹿卿宽定其期限，亲自审查勾考，全部了解了其实际情况。
English: Xu Lucheng extended the deadline, personally reviewed the examination, and fully understood the actual situation.

古文：珂辟置贪刻吏，开告讦以罔民，没其财，民李士贤有稻二千石，囚之半岁。
现代文：岳珂辟置贪官酷吏，开告讠干检举的风气以诬陷民众，没收他们的财产，平民李士贤有稻二千石，被囚禁了半年。
English: Yue Ke purged corrupt officials and harsh officials, and denounced the culture of instigating investigations to frame people and confiscate their property. Li Shixian, a commoner, had 2,000 kilos of rice and was imprisoned for half a year.

古文：鹿卿悉纵舍而劝以其余分，皆感泣奉命。
现代文：徐鹿卿全部释放而劝他们将余财分给贫民，都感泣涕零，奉命而行。
English: Xu Lucheng released all of them and advised them to give their surplus money to the poor. They were all moved to tears and followed his orders.

古文：珂罢，以鹿卿兼领太平，仍暂提举茶盐事。
现代文：岳珂被罢职，任命徐鹿卿兼领太平知州，仍暂提举茶盐事。
English: Yue Ke was removed from his post and appointed Xu Lucheng concurrently as the leader of Taiping Chizhou. The matter of tea and salt was still temporarily raised.

古文：弛苛征，蠲米石、芜湖两务芦税。
现代文：松弛征敛，减免采石与芜湖两务芦花税。
English: Relaxation of collection and collection, reduction and exemption of stone quarrying and Wuhu two-business alfalfa tax.

古文：江东诸郡飞蝗蔽天，入当涂境，鹿卿露香默祷，忽飘风大起，蝗悉度淮。
现代文：江东诸郡飞蝗很多，蔽天遮日，进入当涂县境，徐鹿卿露天烧香默祷，忽飘风大起，蝗虫全部飞过淮河。
English: There are a lot of flying locusts in the counties in the east of the Yangtze River, covering the sky and blocking the sun. Entering the territory of Dangtu County, Xu Lucheng burned incense in the open air and prayed silently. Suddenly, the wind blew, and all the locusts flew across the Huai River.

古文：之杰密请移鹿卿浙东提点刑狱，加直秘阁兼提举常平。
现代文：别之杰密请朝廷要求徐鹿卿移任浙东提点刑狱，加直秘阁，兼任提举常平。
English: In addition, Jie Mi asked the imperial court to request that Xu Lucheng be transferred to the East Zhejiang Provincial Penitentiary, and that he be promoted to the cabinet of secretaries. He was also promoted to the position of Changping.

古文：鹿卿言罢浮盐经界硷地，先撤相家所筑，就捕者自言： 我相府人。 鹿卿曰： 行法必自贵近始。 卒论如法。
现代文：徐鹿卿倡议罢去浮盐经界卤地，先撤相家所筑，被捕者自己说： 我是相府人。 徐鹿卿说 ：行法一定得从近依富贵的人开始。 
English: At the initiative of Xu Luqing, the salt flats were removed from the barren land, and the houses built by the imperial family were evacuated first. The arrestee himself said, "I am a member of the imperial family." Xu Luqing said, "The practice of the law must begin with those who are close to the rich and noble."

古文：丞相史弥远之弟通判温州。利韩世忠家宝玩，籍之，鹿卿奏削其官。
现代文：最后还是依法处罚。丞相史弥远的弟弟担任温州通判，用韩世忠家传的珍宝玩物获利，籍没之，徐鹿卿奏请削夺了他的官职。
English: In the end, he was punished according to the law. The younger brother of the Minister of Justice Shi Yiyuan served as the Wenzhou magistrate, profited from the precious toys of Han Shizhong's family, and was not registered, and Xu Lucheng took away his official position.

古文：初，鹿卿檄衢州推官冯惟说决婺狱，惟说素廉平，至则辨曲直，出淹禁。
现代文：起初，徐鹿卿邀请衢州推官冯惟说来婺州断狱案，冯惟说平素廉洁、直率，到后则辨别曲直，查出湮没已久的禁查之事。
English: At first, Xu Luqing invited Feng Wei, the magistrate of Zhangzhou, to come to Zhangzhou to talk about the case of breaking out of prison. Feng Wei said that he was honest and straightforward. Later, he would distinguish between right and wrong and find out the long-lost forbidden investigation.

古文：大家不快其为，会乡人居言路，乃属劾惟说。
现代文：大家对他的所作所为感到不快，正值乡人聚集一起提意见，于是嘱请弹劾冯惟说。
English: Everyone was displeased with what he had done. As the villagers gathered to raise their opinions, Feng Wei said, "Please impeach him."

古文：州索印纸，惟说笑曰： 是犹可以仕乎？ 自题诗印纸而去。
现代文：州官索要告发冯惟说的盖有手印的文书，冯惟说笑道： 是不是还可以任官呀？ 自己在盖有手印的状纸上题诗后离开了。
English: The state official demanded that Feng Wei's hand-printed document be denounced. Feng Wei laughed and said, "Isn't it still possible to be appointed as an official?" He left after inscribing a poem on the hand-printed paper.

古文：衢州郑逢辰以缪举，鹿卿以委使不当，相继自劾，且共和其诗。
现代文：衢州郑逢辰因错误地举荐了人，徐鹿卿因为委任使者不当，两人相继自己奏请免职，又相互和诗酬唱。
English: Zhangzhou Zheng Fengchen for wrongly recommending a person, and Xu Luqing for improperly appointing an envoy, the two successively asked to be relieved of their duties and sang poems to each other.

古文：御史兼二人劾罢之。
现代文：御史把他们二人弹劾、罢免。
English: History will impeach and remove both of them.

古文：及知泉州，改赣州，皆辞。
现代文：后任泉州知州，改任赣州知州，都辞不就职。
English: Later, Quanzhou Chizhou, changed to Zhangzhou Chizhou, both resigned and did not take office.

古文：迁浙西提点刑狱、江淮都大坑冶，皆以病固辞，遂主管玉局观。
现代文：迁任浙西提点刑狱，江、淮都大坑冶，都因有病而力辞不就，于是主管玉局观。
English: After being transferred to the Zhejiang West Tidying Point Prison, Jiang and Huai were both unable to attend due to illness, so the head of the Bureau came to visit.

古文：及召还，又辞，改直宝章阁知宁国府，提举江东常平，又辞。
现代文：到召令还职，又辞，改任直宝章阁，担任宁国府知府，提举江东常平，又辞。
English: He resigned his post when he was summoned, then resigned again, and was reappointed as Zhibo Zhangge, served as the prefect of Ningguo Prefecture, and was promoted to Jiangdong Changping, then resigned again.

古文：淳祐三年，以右司召，犹辞。
现代文：淳三年，徐鹿卿以右司召还，还是辞而不就。
English: In June of the third year, Xu Luqing was summoned back as the right secretary, but he still did not resign.

古文：丞相杜范遗书曰： 直道不容，使人击节。
现代文：丞相杜范送书信给他说 ：直道不能被人所容，使人击节叹息。
English: The chancellor Du Fan sent him a letter saying: "Zhongdao cannot be tolerated and makes people sigh.

古文：君不出，岂以冯惟说故耶？
现代文：你不出任就职，难道是因为冯惟说的缘故吗？
English: If you do not take office, is it because of what Feng Wei said?

古文：惟说行将有命矣。 鹿卿乃出。
现代文：冯惟说即将有新的任命了。 徐鹿卿于是才出来任职。
English: Feng Wei said that there would be a new appointment soon. Xu Lucheng then came out to take office.

古文：擢太府少卿兼右司。
现代文：升任太府少卿兼右司。
English: He was promoted to Dafu Shoko (Minor Secretary of the Grand Council of State) and Uji (Minister of the Right).

古文：入对，请定国本、正纪纲、立规模， 时事多艰，人心易摇，无独力任重之臣，无守节伏义之士，愿蚤决大计 。
现代文：入朝应对，奏请稳定国本，端正纪纲，定立规模， 时事多艰，人心易摇，既没有独立承担重任的大臣，又没有守节伏义的儒士，希望早决定大计 。
English: In response to the accession to the throne, he requested that the country be stabilized, the discipline be rectified, and the scale be established. The current situation is difficult, and people's hearts are easily shaken. There is neither a minister who independently takes on important responsibilities, nor a Confucian scholar who keeps the rules. I hope to decide on the plan as soon as possible.

古文：上嘉纳之。兼中书门下省检正诸房公事，兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：理宗皇上赞扬了他的议论，兼任中书门下省检正诸房公事，兼任崇政殿说书。
English: Emperor Rizong praised his speech, and he also served as the provincial procurator of Zhongshu Gate and the procurator of Zhuofang Public Affairs, and also served as the procurator of Suzheng Palace.

古文：逾年，兼权吏部侍郎。
现代文：一年以后，暂兼任吏部侍郎。
English: A year later, he was also temporarily appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre.

古文：时议使执政分治兵财，鹿卿执议不可。
现代文：当时人们议论要求执政分别治理兵事与财政，徐鹿卿坚持认为不行。
English: At that time, people were talking about the need for the government to manage military affairs and finance separately, but Xu Lucheng insisted that this was not possible.

古文：以疾丐祠，迁右文殿修撰、知平江府兼发运副使。
现代文：因为疾病而请求担任祠官，迁右文殿修撰、知平江府兼发运副使。
English: Because of illness, he requested to serve as an ancestral hall official, moved to the Right Hall to write, and became the deputy envoy of dispatch and transportation of the Zhipingjiang Prefecture.

古文：力丐祠，上谕丞相挽留之。
现代文：执意请求祠职，理宗皇帝诏谕丞相挽留他。
English: He insisted on applying for the position of chief priest, and Emperor Ritsuzo ordered the prime minister to retain him.

古文：召权兵部侍郎，固辞，上令丞相以书招之，鹿卿至，又极言君子小人，切于当世之务。
现代文：召他暂任兵部侍郎，力求辞任，皇上诏令丞相以书信招他入朝，徐鹿卿到后，又极言君子小人，切于当世的时务。
English: He was called to temporarily serve as the attendant of the military department, and he tried to resign, but the emperor ordered the prime minister to invite him to the imperial court by letter. After Xu Luqing arrived, he spoke highly of the gentleman and the villain, and he was concerned about the current affairs of the world.

古文：兼国子祭酒，权礼部侍郎，兼同修国史，兼实录院同修撰，兼侍讲，兼权给事中。
现代文：兼任国子祭酒，暂任礼部侍郎，兼同修国史，兼实录院同修撰，兼侍讲，兼理权给事中。
English: He concurrently served as Kuniko Matsuri sake, temporarily as a ceremonial attendant, concurrently studied national history, concurrently wrote the history of the country, concurrently served as a lecturer, and concurrently served as a moderator.

古文：鹿卿言 琐闼之职无所不当问，比年命下而给舍不得知，请复旧制 。
现代文：徐鹿卿说 ：琐闼细小的官吏没有什么不应当过问的，近年，朝廷命令已下而给舍等官员不得而知，请求恢复旧制。 
English: Xu Lucheng said: There is nothing that should not be asked of small officials. In recent years, the imperial court has issued an order, but it is unknown to officials such as Xie, requesting the restoration of the old system.

古文：从之。
现代文：诏令按奏请的做。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：上眷遇冞笃而忌者浸多，有撰伪疏托鹿卿以传播，历诋宰相至百执事，鹿卿初不知也，遂力辨上前，因乞去，上曰： 去，则中奸人之计矣。 令临安府根捕，事连势要，狱不及竟。
现代文：理宗皇上对他诚恳地关心，以致渐渐引起越来越多的人妒忌，有的撰拟假的奏疏托请徐鹿卿给以传递，屡次诋毁宰相以及各种大小官员，徐鹿卿开始不知道，后来就在皇上面前洗刷自己，请求罢去官职，理宗皇上对他说： 你离职而去，正好中了奸人的计谋。 诏令临安府根绝捕拿造假疏的人，因事件与一些有势力的要人有牵连，狱事没有依法追查到底。
English: Emperor Rizong was sincerely concerned about him, which gradually aroused more and more people's jealousy. Some people asked Xu Lucheng to write a fake report and repeatedly slandered the prime minister and various officials. Xu Lucheng did not know at first, but later he washed himself in front of the emperor and asked to resign from the post. Emperor Rizong said to him: You left the post and just fell into the trick of the deceiver. He ordered Lin'an Prefecture to root out and arrest the person who made the fake report. Because the incident involved some powerful dignitaries, the prison officials did not investigate to the end according to the law.

古文：迁礼部侍郎。累疏告老，授宝章阁待制、知宁国府，而引年之疏五上，不允，提举鸿禧观，遂致仕，进华文阁待制。
现代文：迁升礼部侍郎后，徐鹿卿多次上疏辞职告老还乡，授任宝章阁待制，担任宁国府知府，而以年龄大了要求告老的奏疏上了五次，没有被批准，提举鸿禧观，于是致仕，进升华文阁待制。
English: After he was promoted to attendant of the ceremonial department, Xu Luqing repeatedly resigned from his post and returned to his hometown, and was awarded the title of Baozhang Pavilion, and served as the governor of Ningguo Prefecture. However, when he was old, he asked to be promoted to attendant of the ceremonial department five times, but it was not approved, and he was promoted to Hongxi Guan, so he was promoted to attendant of the Chinese Pavilion.

古文：卒，遗表闻，赠四官。
现代文：死时，遗表送闻，赠赐四官。
English: When he died, he bequeathed his watch to his son and gave him four government posts.

古文：鹿卿居家孝友，喜怒不形，恩怨俱泯，宗族乡党，各得欢心。
现代文：徐鹿卿居家忠孝友睦，喜怒不表露于形，恩怨都能泯灭不言，宗族亲属，乡里党人，都得欢喜之心。
English: Xu Lucheng is a loyal, filial and good-natured family man. He does not show his joy and anger, and he does not talk about his grudges. His family members and village Party members are all happy.

古文：梦观退然若不胜衣，然义所当为，奋往直前；其居败屋数间，布衣蔬食，而重名节云。
现代文：担任官职廉洁、简约、清正、严峻，不随便拿取一点点东西，一栋草庐刚能遮挡风雨。所写的著作有《泉谷文集》、奏议、讲义、《盐楮议政稿》、《历官对越集》，手编《汉唐文类》、《文苑菁华》，谥号 清正 。
English: He was honest, simple, upright, and stern in his official duties. He did not arbitrarily take a little thing, and a haystack could shield him from the wind and rain. His works include "Spring Valley Anthology," "Proposal," "Lecture Notes," "Yancheng Political Draft," "Collection of Records of Officials," "Han and Tang Dynasties," "Wen Yuan Jinghua," and his pen name was Qing Zheng.

古文：洪天锡，字君畴，泉州晋江人。
现代文：洪天锡，字君畴，泉州晋江县人。
English: Hong Tianxi, surnamed Junzhuang, from Jinjiang County, Quanzhou.

古文：宝庆二年进士。
现代文：是宝庆二年的进士。
English: He has been a trainee at Baoqing for two years.

古文：授广州司法。长吏盛气待僚属，天锡纠正为多。
现代文：授任为广州司法，长吏盛气凌人地对待僚属，洪天锡对此纠正指责的很多。
English: Appointed as Guangzhou's judicial chief, Hong Tianxi had to correct many accusations that officials treated their colleagues and subordinates in a domineering manner.

古文：丁内艰，免丧，调潮州司理。
现代文：因妻子死而辞职服丧，免丧后，调任潮州司理。
English: Due to the death of his wife, he resigned and went into mourning. After his wife was released from mourning, he was transferred to the post of Secretary of Chaozhou.

古文：势家夺民田，天赐言于守，还之。
现代文：势豪之家抢夺贫民的田地，洪天锡把这事告诉潮州知州，势豪之家渐返还民田。
English: The powerful family robbed the fields of the poor, Hong Tianxi told this to Chaozhou Chizhou, and the powerful family gradually returned to the people's fields.

古文：帅方大琮辟真州判官，留置幕府。
现代文：将帅方大琮担任真州判官，留洪天锡置于幕府。
English: He made General Fang Dazhao the judge of Zhenzhou, and placed Liu Hong Tianxi at the head of the shogunate.

古文：改秩知古田县。
现代文：改任官职为古田县知县。
English: His official position was changed to Gutian County magistrate.

古文：行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：行乡饮酒礼。
English: A drinking ceremony in the countryside.

古文：邑剧，牒诉猥多，天锡剖决无留难。
现代文：县邑大乱，上诉的很多，洪天锡剖析决断没有留下疑难积案。
English: Counties and towns were in turmoil, there were many appeals, and the analysis of Hong Tianxi's decision did not leave any difficult cases.

古文：有倚王邸势杀人者，诛之不少贷。
现代文：有依靠王府势力而杀人的，洪天锡诛惩他们毫不宽恕。
English: If there are those who rely on the power of the royal government to kill people, Hong Tianxi will punish them without mercy.

古文：调通判建宁府。
现代文：调任建宁府通判。
English: He was transferred to Jianning Prefecture.

古文：大水，擅发常平仓振之。
现代文：遇大水灾，擅自打开常平仓发粮赈济饥民。
English: In the event of a major flood, it opened the Changping warehouse without authorization to distribute grain to feed the hungry.

古文：擢诸司粮料院，拜监察御史兼说书。
现代文：擢升诸司粮料院，拜任为监察御史兼说书。
English: He was promoted to the various departments of the Grain Refinery, and was appointed to the post of inspector and historian.

古文：累疏言： 天下之患三：宦官也，外戚也，小人也。 劾董宋臣、谢堂、厉文翁，理宗力护文翁，天锡又言： 不斥文翁，必为王府累。 上令吴燧宣谕再三，天锡力争，谓： 贵幸作奸犯科，根柢蟠固，乃迟回护惜，不欲绳以法，势焰愈张，纪纲愈坏，异时祸成，虽欲治之不可得矣。 上又出御札，俾天锡易疏，欲自戒饬之。
现代文：多次上奏疏说： 天下的祸患有三种：即宦官、外戚、小人。 弹劾董宋臣、谢堂、厉文翁，理宗力护厉文翁，洪天锡又说 ：不斥逐厉文翁，一定会牵连到王府受累。 理宗皇上令吴燧宣旨告谕多次，洪天锡力争，说： 贵戚厉文翁作奸犯科，根底稳固，盘根错节，乃迟回护惜，不想把他绳之以法，他的气焰会更加嚣张，纲常法纪会更加被破坏，到以后祸事已成，虽想惩治他也不行了。 理宗皇上又传出御笔札令，要洪天锡改易奏疏，希望自己戒饬检点。
English: On several occasions, Songzhu said, "There are three kinds of disasters in the world: eunuchs, maternal relatives, and villains." Impeachment of Dong Songcheng, Xie Tang, and Li Wenweng; Li Zong's efforts to protect Li Wenweng; Hong Tianxi also said, "If Li Wenweng is not expelled one by one, the royal court will definitely be affected." Emperor Rizong ordered Wu Xi to issue an edict several times, and Hong Tianxi tried to argue, saying, "Your relative Li Wenweng is a criminal mastermind with a solid foundation and entangled roots, but you are too late to take pity on him and

古文：天锡又言： 自古奸人虽凭怙，其心未尝不畏人主之知，苟知之而止于戒饬，则凭怙愈张，反不若未知之为愈也。 章五上，出关待罪。
现代文：洪天锡又说 ：自古奸人虽然凭借势力作恶，其心里未曾不担忧皇上知道这些事，假如皇上知道而只是训诫一番，那么就会凭借势力作恶越猖狂，反而不如不知道的为好。 五次上奏章，结果，被逐出关待罪。
English: Hong Tianxi also said: Although traitors since ancient times have used their power to commit evil, they have never been worried in their hearts that the emperor knew these things. If the emperor knew but only admonished them, then they would use their power to commit more and more rampant evil. On the contrary, it is better not to know. Five times on the record, as a result, he was expelled from the customs to be punished.

古文：诏二人已改命，宋臣续处之。
现代文：诏令二人已改变成命而处罚，董宋臣继续留用。
English: According to the imperial edict, the two have been punished for changing their orders, and Dong Songchen will continue to be used.

古文：天锡言： 臣留则宋臣去，宋臣留则臣当斥，愿早赐裁断。 越月，天雨土，天锡以其异为蒙，力言阴阳君子小人之所以辨，又言修内司之为民害者。
现代文：洪天锡说： 我留则董宋臣就必须逐去，董宋臣留任，那么我就应被斥逐，希望皇上早赐诏书裁断。 过了一个多月，天下雨时伴有土，洪天锡以其异象为缘由，坚持说明阴阳、君子小人之所以要辨别清楚，又说要修整内司中之害民的人。
English: Hong Tianxi said: If I stay, then Dong Songchen must be expelled, if Dong Songchen remains, then I should be expelled, I hope the emperor has already issued an edict to adjudicate. After more than a month, when it rains, it is accompanied by soil, Hong Tianxi, with his vision as the reason, insisted on clarifying the reason why yin and yang and gentleman villains should be distinguished clearly, and said that he wanted to rectify the people who harmed the people in the Inner Division.

古文：蜀中地震，浙、闽大水，又言： 上下穷空，远近怨疾，独贵戚巨阉享富贵耳。
现代文：蜀中地震，江浙、福建一带发大水，洪天锡又说： 上下穷困如空，远近地区都怨愤疾苦，唯独贵戚、宠幸宦官享受富贵。
English: After the earthquake in Shuzhong and the floods in Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Fujian, Hong Tianxi also said: Poverty is like the sky above and below. Far and near regions are full of grievances and sufferings. Only the noble relatives and favored eunuchs enjoy wealth and luxury.

古文：举天下穷且怨，陛下能独与数十人者共天下乎？ 会吴民仲大论等列诉宋臣夺其田，天锡下其事有司，而御前提举所移文谓田属御庄，不当白台，仪鸾司亦牒常平。
现代文：全天下的人都穷困又怨恨，难道陛下能单独与几十个人共享天下吗？ 正逢吴地百姓仲大论等连连上诉董宋臣抢夺他们的田产，洪天锡要下属调查处理这件事，而御前提举所移送来的文书称这些田属皇帝御庄，不当告知有司处理，仪鸾司也拿出文牒证为常平田。
English: People all over the world are impoverished and resentful. Can His Majesty share the world with dozens of people all by himself? At the same time, the people of Wudi, including Zhongda, repeatedly appealed to Dong Songchen to rob their farmland. Hong Tianxi asked his subordinates to investigate and deal with the matter. The document sent by the imperial envoy said that these fields belonged to the emperor's imperial villa. He improperly informed the imperial secretary to deal with it. The imperial secretary also took out a certificate for Changping field.

古文：天锡谓： 御史所以雪冤，常平所以均役，若中贵人得以控之，则内外台可废，犹为国有纪纲乎？ 乃申劾宋臣并卢允升而枚数其恶，上犹力护之。
现代文：洪天锡说 ：御史是以昭雪冤狱，常平是以平均徭役，如果宦官得以控制它们，那么，内、外台官可以废除，这还能说国家有法纪、纲常吗？ 于是重新弹劾董宋臣与卢永升而历数他的罪恶，理宗皇上还尽力袒护他们。
English: Hong Tianxi said: History is based on the unjust imprisonment of Zhao Xue, and Changping is based on the average eunuch. If eunuchs can control them, then the inner and outer eunuchs can be abolished. Can it be said that the country has laws and regulations? So he re-impeached Dong Songchen and Lu Yongsheng and counted his sins. Emperor Li Zong also tried his best to protect them.

古文：天锡又言： 修内司供缮修而已，比年动曰 御前 ，奸赃之老吏，迹捕之凶渠，一窜名其间，则有司不得举手，狡者献谋，暴者助虐，其展转受害者皆良民也。
现代文：洪天锡又说 ：修整内司供缮修而已，近年动不动就说 御前 ，奸赃的老官吏，缉捕的凶首，都一一窜名于御前之中，以御前为幌子，则有司不得动手依法惩治他们，狡猾者为他们出谋献计，暴乱者助纣为虐，其辗转受害的都是良民。
English: Hong Tianxi also said: "The department of rectification is only responsible for repairs. In recent years, it has been said that emperors, traitors, old officials, and wanted criminals are all named in front of the emperor. Under the guise of emperors, some departments are not allowed to punish them according to the law. The cunning ones devise schemes for them, the rioters help them, and the victims are all good people.

古文：愿毋使史臣书之曰： 内司之横自今始。 疏上至六七，最后请还御史印，谓： 明君当为后人除害，不当留患以遗后人。
现代文：希望不要使史臣在史书上写道 ：内司宦官的横暴自今开始。  为此他上奏疏六七次，最后请求退还御史印，说 ：贤明的皇上应当为后人除害，不应当遗留祸患给后人。
English: He hoped that the historian would not be made to write in the history book: "The tyranny of the imperial eunuchs has begun from now on," and for this reason he petitioned the emperor sixty-seven times, finally requesting the return of the imperial seal, saying: "A wise emperor should eliminate harm for future generations, and should not bequeath misfortune to future generations."

古文：今朝廷轻给舍台谏，轻百司庶府，而北司独重，仓卒之际，臣实惧焉。 言虽不果行，然终宋世阉人不能窃弄主威者，皆天锡之力，而天锡亦自是去朝廷矣。
现代文：现在朝廷轻视给舍台谏等监察官，轻视百司庶府，而北司宦官独受重用，仓卒之际，我实在恐惧。 洪天锡的言论虽然没有完全被皇上接受照办，然而，最终董宋臣等宦官阉人不能窃弄皇上的威风权柄，这都是洪天锡的努力所致，而洪天锡也因此离开了朝廷。
English: Now that the imperial court is in a hurry to despise the procurators such as Xie Taiyi, and despise the hundreds of subordinate offices, while the North Division eunuchs are exclusively used, I am really afraid. Although Hong Tianxi's remarks were not fully accepted by the emperor, however, in the end, eunuchs such as Dong Songchen could not steal the emperor's prestige and power. This was all due to the efforts of Hong Tianxi, and Hong Tianxi also left the imperial court.

古文：改大理少卿，再迁太常，皆不拜。
现代文：改任大理少卿，再迁升太常，都不愿接受任命。
English: He did not want to be appointed to the post of Dali Shaoqing, nor did he want to move and be promoted again.

古文：改广东提点刑狱，五辞。
现代文：改命洪天锡担任广东提点刑狱，五次推辞不就。
English: Hong Tianxi was reappointed to serve as the Guangdong Provincial Penitentiary, and five refusals were not enough.

古文：明年，起知潭州，久之始至官。
现代文：第二年，起用他任潭州知州，好久以后他才到任。
English: The following year, he was appointed as the head of the Tanzhou-Chizhou region, but he did not take up the post until much later.

古文：戢盗贼，尊先贤，逾年大治。
现代文：缉拿盗贼，尊敬先贤，过一年多，潭州大治。
English: Seize the thieves, respect the sages, more than a year later, the Tanzhou revolution.

古文：直宝谟阁，迁广东转运判官，决疑狱，劾贪吏，治财赋，皆有法。
现代文：担任直宝谟阁，迁升广东转运判官，断决疑狱，弹劾贪官污吏，治理财赋，都有法则。
English: There are rules for serving as a direct treasure cabinet, moving up to the Guangdong transshipment judge, deciding whether to jail, impeaching corrupt officials, and managing wealth.

古文：召为秘书监兼侍讲，以聩辞，升秘阁修撰、福建转运副使，又辞。
现代文：召任为秘书监兼侍讲，以耳朵听力不灵敏而推辞，升任秘阁修撰、福建转运副使，又推辞。
English: He was appointed as a secretary and assistant speaker, but he resigned because his hearing was not sensitive. He was promoted to the post of cabinet secretary and vice-minister of transportation in Fujian, but he also resigned.

古文：度宗即位，以侍御史兼侍读召，累辞，不许，在道间，监察御史张桂劾罢之。
现代文：度宗即位，以侍御史兼侍读职诏令回朝，多次推辞，没有获准。在去京城的路上，监察御史张桂弹劾而罢免了他。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he returned to China with the imperial edict to serve as imperial historian and attend school. He repeatedly declined, but was not allowed to do so. On his way to the capital, he was impeached and dismissed by the imperial historian Zhang Gui.

古文：乃疏所欲对病民五事：曰公田，曰关子，曰银纲，曰盐钞，曰赋役。
现代文：于是上疏奏明所想说的病害民众的五件事，分别为公田、关子、银纲、盐钞、赋役。
English: As a result, the five things that Joso Sono wanted to say about the sick people were public fields, gates, silver, salt money, and forced labor.

古文：又言： 在廷无严惮之士，何以寝奸谋？
现代文：又说 ：在朝廷没有严惮的士大夫，何以停息奸谋？
English: He also said: "In the imperial court, there are no scrupulous magistrates, so why stop the intrigues?"

古文：遇事无敢诤之臣，何以临大节？
现代文：遇事没有敢谏诤的臣僚，何以面对大节？
English: Why do ministers, who do not dare to speak out in times of trouble, face the Great Festival?

古文：人物稀疏，精采销耎，隐惰惜已者多，忘身徇国者少。 进工部侍郎兼直学士院，加显文阁待制、湖南安抚使、知潭州，改潭州，皆力辞。
现代文：人物稀少疏阔，精采销削软弱，隐瞒懒惰，怜惜自己的人多，忘身殉国的人少。 进升工部侍郎兼直学士院，加显文阁待制、湖南安抚使、任潭州知州，改知漳州，都力辞不就。
English: The characters are sparse and broad, the eloquence is weak, the eloquence is weak, the laziness is concealed, there are many people who pity themselves, and there are few people who forget themselves and die for the country. It is not enough to be promoted to the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and directly to the Academy, to add Hsien Library to the waiting list, to be the pacifying envoy of Hunan, to be appointed to Tanzhou, Chizhou, and to be changed to Shanzhou.

古文：又明年，改福建安抚使，力辞，不许。
现代文：后年，洪天锡改任福建安抚使，尽力推辞，未获批准。
English: A year later, Hong Tianxi was reappointed as the Fujian Pacifying Envoy, and he tried his best to resign, but was not approved.

古文：亭户买盐至破家陨身者，天锡首罢之，民作佛事以报。
现代文：亭户买盐以致有的家破人亡，洪天锡首先罢除了此事，民众做佛事以报答他。
English: When a pavilion-dweller bought salt, causing the death of a family, Hong Tianxi was the first to put a stop to it, and the people rewarded him by performing Buddhist rites.

古文：罢荔枝贡。
现代文：罢免上贡荔枝事。
English: The dismissal of Shanggong Lai Chi.

古文：召为刑部尚书，诏宪守之臣趣行无虚日，不起。
现代文：召任刑部尚书，诏令宪守之臣急速去召他到京任职，没有赴任。
English: He was summoned to the Ministry of Justice by imperial edict, but he did not take up his post after the imperial edict ordered the constitutional governor's vassals to quickly summon him to take up his post in Kyoto.

古文：久之，进显文阁直学士，提举太平兴国宫，三降御札趣之，又力辞。
现代文：好久以后，进升显文阁直学士，提举太平兴国宫，三次下御札诏令催促他，又力求推辞。
English: After a long time, he promoted Jinsheng Xianwenge to the rank of direct scholar, promoted Taiping Xingguo to the palace, and issued three imperial edicts to urge him to resign.

古文：逾年，进华文阁直学士，仍旧宫观，寻致仕，加端明殿学士，转一官。
现代文：过了一年多，进升华文阁直学士，仍旧任宫观祠职，不久告老退职，加升端明殿学士，转一官阶。
English: After more than a year, he was promoted to the direct bachelor of Huayuan Pavilion, still held the post of Gongguancun, and soon retired, and was promoted to the bachelor of the Ming Dynasty, and transferred to the first official rank.

古文：疾革，草遗表以规君相。
现代文：因疾病免职，草拟遗表以规谏皇上、丞相。
English: Dismissed from office due to illness, he drafted a will to bequeath the throne to the emperor and the prime minister.

古文：上震悼，特赠正议大夫，谥文毅。
现代文：度宗为此震惊，并去悼念他，特赠正议大夫，谥号 文毅 。
English: Du Zong was shocked by this, and went to mourn him, presenting him with the honorary title of doctor, alias Wen Yi.

古文：天锡言动有准绳，居官清介，临事是非不可回折。
现代文：洪天锡言行举止有准绳、原则，居官清廉、正直，临事时是非问题从不马虎，从不屈服于人。
English: Hong Tianxi's words and deeds have standards and principles, and his officials are clean and honest. When it comes to issues of right and wrong, he is never careless and never gives in to others.

古文：所著奏议、《经筵讲义》，《进故事》、《通祀辑略》、《味言发墨》、《阳岩文集》。
现代文：所写的著作、奏议有《经筵讲义》、《进故事》、《通祀辑略》、《味言发墨》、《阳岩文集》。
English: Among the books he has written and discussed are "Lecture Notes on the Economy," "Story of Progress," "Summary of Common Rituals," "A Taste of Words and Ink," and "The Yangyan Collection."

