古文：费崇先魏世子何昙远陈秀远葛济之董青建齐竟陵王张逸释僧护僧澄空释慧侃释道积释法诚
现代文：费崇先魏世子何昙远陈秀远葛济之董青建齐竟陵王张逸释僧护僧澄空释慧侃释道积释法诚
English: Fei Chong, the forefather of the Wei dynasty, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong, the son of Fei Chong

古文：费崇先
现代文：费崇先
English: Fei Chongxian

古文：宋费崇先，吴兴人，少信佛法，精勤。泰始三年，受菩萨戒，寄斋于谢慧远家，二十四日，昼夜不懈。
现代文：宋朝费崇先是吴兴人，少年信奉佛法，精心勤奋，泰始三年，接受菩萨的戒规，在谢慧远家寄斋，二十四天昼夜坚持不懈。
English: Song Dynasty Fei Chong was originally from Wu Xing. He was a young man who believed in Buddhism and was meticulously diligent. In the first three years of his life, he accepted the precepts of the Bodhisattva, and fasted at Xie Huiyuan's home for 24 days and nights.

古文：每听经，常以鹊尾香炉置膝前，初斋三夕，见一人，容服不凡，径来举炉去。
现代文：每次听经，常把鹊尾香炉放在膝盖前。刚斋戒了三天，晚上，看见一个人，面容衣服不一般，一直来拿香炉而去。
English: Every time I listened to the sutras, I often put the incense burner in front of my knees. I had just fasted for three days. In the evening, I saw a man with an unusual face and clothes, who kept coming and going to get the incense burner.

古文：崇先视膝前，炉犹在，方悟神异。
现代文：崇先看膝前，香炉还在，才明白是神。
English: When Chongxian looked down at his knees, the incense burner was still there, and only then did he understand that it was God.

古文：自惟衣裳新濯，了无不净，唯坐侧有唾壶，既撤去壶。
现代文：自己的衣裳是新洗的，没有一点不干净的，只有坐侧有个唾壶，于是就撤去唾壶。
English: His clothes were freshly laundered, there was nothing unclean, only there was a spittoon on the side of the seat, so he removed the spittoon.

古文：即复见此人还炉于前，未至席，犹见二炉，既至即合为一，然则此神人所提者，盖炉影耳。
现代文：又看见这个人送回香炉于面前，还没到座位时，还看见两个香炉，已到时就合为一个了。那么神人所提的香炉，大概是香炉的影子吧。
English: He also saw the man put the incense burner back in front of him, and before he reached his seat, he saw two incense burners, which by that time had merged into one. So the incense burner that the man of God brought up was probably a shadow of the incense burner.

古文：崇先又尝闻人说，福远寺有钦尼者，精勤得道，欣然愿见，未及得往，属意甚至，常斋于他家，中夜，忽见一尼，容仪端俨，著赭布袈裟，正立斋席之前，食顷而灭。崇先及见此尼，状貌被服，即前夜所睹者也。
现代文：崇先此后见到这个尼姑，状貌打扮，就是前天夜里所看见的人。
English: Afterward, Chongxian saw this nun, her appearance and dress were exactly the same as the one he had seen the night before.

古文：魏世子
现代文：魏世子
English: Wei Shizi

古文：宋魏世子，梁郡人，奉佛精进，儿女尊修，唯妇迷执不信。
现代文：宋朝的魏世子是梁郡人，精心勤奋奉佛，儿女也敬奉佛法，只有妻子执意不信。
English: Wei Shizi of the Song Dynasty was from Liang County. He devoted himself to Buddhism with great diligence. His children also worshipped Buddhism, but only his wife did not believe in it.

古文：女年十四，病死，七日而苏，云： 可安施高座，并无量寿经。 
现代文：女儿年龄十四岁，病死，七天后而复苏说： 可以安设一个高座，并供放上无量寿经。 
English: A fourteen-year-old daughter died of illness and was resuscitated seven days later. She said, "We can set up a high seat and offer to put on the Immeasurable Sutra.

古文：世子即为具设经座，女虽持斋戒，未常看经，今即升座，诵声清利。
现代文：世子就为她准备了经和高座。他的女儿虽然持斋，而不常常看经，现在就升上高座，高声诵经。
English: His daughter, although she fasts and does not often read the Bible, now climbs onto the high seat and chants loudly.

古文：下启父言： 儿死便往无量国，见父兄及己三人，池中已有芙蓉大花，后当化生其中。
现代文：开导他的父亲说： 我死了后就去了无量国，看见父兄和自己三个人，池中已有芙蓉大花，以后当化生在那当中。
English: His father, who enlightened him, said, "After I died, I went to Mugengoku, and I saw my father, brother, and myself, three people, and there were large hibiscus flowers in the pool. Later, I was reborn in the middle of it.

古文：唯母独无。不胜此苦，故归启报。 
现代文：唯独母亲没有，受不了这般痛苦，所以回来禀报。 
English: But my mother didn't, she couldn't bear the pain, so she came back to report it.

古文：语竟，复绝。
现代文：说完，又死去。
English: And then he died.

古文：母于是敬信法教。
现代文：于是她的母亲也敬信佛法。
English: As a result, her mother also revered Buddhism.

古文：何昙远
现代文：何昙远
English: He Yanyuan

古文：何昙远，庐江人，父万寿，御史中丞。
现代文：何昙远是庐江人，父万寿是御史中丞。
English: He Yanyuan is a native of the Minjiang River, and his father, Wanzhou, is a member of the Central Military Commission.

古文：昙远奉法持菩萨戒，年十八，丁父艰。
现代文：昙远信奉佛法持菩萨戒，年龄十八岁，遇到父亲去逝，悲痛成病，将要死去。
English: Gongyuan believed in Buddhism and had the precepts of a Bodhisattva. He was 18 years old when his father passed away. He became ill with grief and was about to die.

古文：哀毁成疾，殆将灭性，号踊之外，归心净土，庶祈感应。时请僧数人，昙远向僧舍忏悔宿业，终无感徵。
现代文：昙远号啕之外，归心于净土，希冀祈求而得感应。当时请了几个和尚，昙远向僧舍忏悔过去的事业，始终没有感动的验证。
English: At that time, several monks were invited, and Yan Yuan went to the monastery to repent for his past deeds, but there was no evidence that he was moved.

古文：僧舍每加奖励，不令懈怠。
现代文：僧舍每次加以奖励，让他不要懈怠。
English: The monastery rewards him every time, so that he does not slack off.

古文：尔后因夜转经竟，众僧已眠，昙远忽自歌诵，僧舍惊而问之。昙远曰： 见佛身黄金色，光焰丈余，幡花翼从，充满虚空，佛自西至，呼令速去。 
现代文：以后有一夜诵完经，众和尚已睡了，昙远忽然自己吟诵。僧舍惊而问他，昙远说： 看见佛身是黄金色，火焰一丈多，幡花也象翅膀一样跟从他，充满了空中，佛从西面到来，叫他快去。 
English: Afterward, one night, after chanting the sutras, when all the monks had fallen asleep, Gongyuan suddenly chanted by himself. The monk was surprised and asked him, Gongyuan said, "I saw that the Buddha's body was golden, the flames were tall, and the fan-shaped flowers followed him like wings, filling the air. The Buddha was coming from the west, telling him to hurry.

古文：昙远素羸弱少力，此夕壮厉悦怿，便于合中取香著手中，并以园花散空。
现代文：昙远一向体弱无力，而这天晚上感到格外的健壮高兴，便在盒中拿出香在手中，并把园中的花撒向空中。
English: She had always been frail and weak, but that evening she felt extraordinarily strong and happy, so she took out the incense in the box in her hands and scattered the flowers in the garden into the air.

古文：母曰： 汝今若去，不念吾耶？ 
现代文：他的母亲说： 你如今如果走了，不想念我吗？ 
English: His mother said, "If you leave now, won't you miss me?"

古文：昙远无所言而顿卧，宿信家中，闻此灵异，亦皆欣肃，不甚悲惧。
现代文：昙远无所言而立刻卧倒，平常就取信于家中，听到这灵验的事而感到奇异，也都欣喜肃然。不十分悲伤害怕。
English: Xuan Yuan immediately fell to the ground without a word. He usually confided in his family, and they were all surprised and overwhelmed with joy upon hearing of this miracle.

古文：昙远至五更，忽然而终，宅中芬馨数日。
现代文：昙远到了五更天，忽然而死，房子的芬香一直数天不散。
English: He died suddenly when he was five days old, and the fragrance of the house lingered for several days.

古文：陈秀远
现代文：陈秀远
English: Chen Xiuyuan

古文：宋陈秀远，颍川人，尝为湘州西曹，客居临湘县。少信奉三宝，年过耳顺，笃业不衰。
现代文：宋朝的陈秀远是颍川人，曾经做湘州西曹，客居于临湘县，年少信奉三宝，年龄已过五十岁，忠守信奉而不减。
English: Chen Xiuyuan of the Song Dynasty was a native of Luochuan. He was once the Western Cao of Hunan Province and lived as a guest in Linxiang County. He believed in the Three Jewels when he was young, and now that he is over fifty years old, he still faithfully adheres to them.

古文：元徽二年七月中，宴卧未寐，叹念万品死生，流转无定，惟已将从何来，一心祈念，冀通感梦，时夕结阴，室无灯烛。有顷，见枕边如萤火者，明照流飞，俄而一室尽明，连空如昼，秀远遽兴，合掌喘息。见庭中四五丈上，有一桥阁，危栏彩槛，立于空中。
现代文：元徽二年七月间，闲居卧榻而未入睡，叹念万般死生，轮回不定，到底将凭那些，一心祈念，希望能感动托梦。当晚天阴，室内没有灯烛，过了一会，看见枕边就象萤光虫一样的东西，发光飞旋，一会整个屋子都通明，连空中也象白昼。秀远非常高兴，合掌喘息，只见在院子中四五丈之上，有一桥阁，高栏彩槛，立在空中。
English: In July of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was lounging on his bed without falling asleep, sighing about all kinds of life and death, the cycle is uncertain, in the end, he will rely on those, praying with all his heart, hoping to move the dream. That night, the sky was overcast, there was no candle in the room, after a while, he saw something like a glowworm on the pillow, the light was flying, and the whole room was clear for a while, even the sky was like daylight. Xiuyuan was very happy, breathing with his palms together, only to see in the yard at four or five heights, there was a bridge pavilion

古文：秀远了不觉升之，坐于桥侧，见桥上士女往还，衣装不异世人。
现代文：秀远一点也不觉得就升上去，坐在桥侧，看见桥上的男女往来，衣装和世人的不两样。
English: Xiuyuan didn't feel a thing, so he climbed up and sat on the side of the bridge. He saw men and women mingling on the bridge, and their clothing was no different from that of ordinary people.

古文：末有一妪，年可三十，青袄白裳，行至秀远而立。有顷，又一妇人纯衣白布，偏环髻，持香花前，语秀远曰： 汝前身即我也，以此花供养佛故，得转身作汝。 
现代文：最后有一妇人，年龄可有三十岁，青袄白衣，走到秀远前而站住，过了一会又有一个妇人穿着白布衣服，扎着环形发髻，拿着香花在前，告诉秀远说： 你的前身就是我，用这个花来供养佛的原因，才能轮回转世变作你。 
English: Finally, a woman in her thirties, dressed in blue and white, walked up to Xiuyuan and stood still. After a while, another woman, dressed in a white cloth, wearing a ring-shaped hairpin and holding a fragrant flower in front of her, told Xiuyuan, "Your predecessor is me. Use this flower to feed the Buddha's cause, so that you can be reincarnated as you."

古文：复指青白妪曰： 此即复是我前身也。 
现代文：又指着青袄白衣的妇人说： 这就是我的前身。 
English: And he said of the woman clothed in white raiment, This is my mother.

古文：言殚而去，后指者亦渐隐。
现代文：说完而去。后指的那个人也逐渐消失了。
English: He finished speaking and walked away. The person he was pointing to in the back also gradually disappeared.

古文：秀远忽不觉还下之时，光亦寻灭。
现代文：秀远不知不觉地回到原地时，光也都灭了。
English: When Xiu Yuan unknowingly returned to the original place, the light was also extinguished.

古文：葛济之
现代文：葛济之
English: Gezizhi

古文：葛济之，句容人，稚川之后。妻同郡纪氏，体貌闲雅，有妇德。
现代文：葛济之是句容人，葛稚川的后代，他的妻子是同郡的纪氏，体貌文雅，有妇人之德。
English: Ge Jizhi was a descendant of Gu Rong, a descendant of Ge Wechuan, and his wife was a descendant of Ji from the same county. She was elegant and had the virtue of a woman.

古文：济之世事神仙，纪亦慕而心乐佛法，常存诚不替。
现代文：济之一世信奉神仙，纪氏也敬慕而更乐佛法。经常守诚而不废。
English: Ji believed in gods and goddesses throughout his life. Ji also admired and enjoyed Buddhism. He was always honest and never wasted his time.

古文：忽一旦方织，俄觉云日开朗，空中清明，因投梭仰望四表，见西方有如来真形及宝盖幢幡映天，心独喜曰：经说无量寿者，即应此耶。
现代文：忽然一天正在织布，不一会就觉得天气晴朗，空气清新，于是就放下梭子仰望四方，看见西方有如来的真身以及宝盖幢幡满天，心里特别高兴地说： 经中提到无量寿佛，就应当是他了。 
English: All of a sudden, one day he was weaving, and after a while he felt that the weather was fine and the air was fresh. So he put down the shuttle and looked up to the four directions, and saw the true body of the Buddha-to-be in the west, as well as the stupa towering in the sky. In his heart, he said with great joy, "The Buddha of Immeasurable Life mentioned in the sutra must be him."

古文：便头面作礼，乃引济之，亦登时见半身及诸幡盖，俄而隐没。
现代文：便迎头作礼，就祈求引。这时立刻就出现了如来的半身和各个幡盖。不一会就不见了。
English: He bowed his head and prayed for guidance. At that moment, the half-length of the Buddha's body and the various hoods appeared. They disappeared in no time.

古文：于是云日鲜华，五色烛耀，乡里备睹，移时方歇焉。
现代文：于是云日鲜艳，五色照耀。乡里的人都看见了，一直到他走的时候才停止。
English: As a result, the cloudy day was bright and the five colors shone. People in the countryside saw it, and it didn't stop until he left.

古文：董青建
现代文：董青建
English: Dong Qing Jian

古文：齐董青建者，不知何许人。父字贤明，建元初，为越骑校尉。
现代文：齐朝的董青建，不知是什么地方的人，父叫贤明，建元年初，做越骑校尉。
English: Dong Qing Jian of the Qi Dynasty was from I don't know where. His father was named Xianming. At the beginning of the first year of the Jian Dynasty, he was a cavalry captain in Yue.

古文：初建母宋氏，孕建时，梦有人语云： 尔必生男，体上当有青志，可名为青建。 
现代文：起初青建的母亲宋氏，怀着青建时，梦见有人告诉她说： 你一定生男孩，身上有青痣，可取名为青建。 
English: At first, Qingjian's mother, Ru Song, dreamed of someone telling her while she was pregnant with Qingjian: "You will definitely give birth to a boy, you will have Qingjian on your body, you can name him Qingjian."

古文：及生如言，即名焉。
现代文：等生下来果真象说的那样，就取了名。
English: When he was born, he did as he was told and was given a name.

古文：有容止，美言笑，性理宽和，家人未尝睹其愠色，见者咸异之。至年十四而州辟主簿。
现代文：举止言谈文雅，性情宽厚温和，家人从未看见他的怒色。看见的人都感到他与众不同，到了十四岁而做州辟主薄。
English: His demeanor and speech were refined, his disposition was generous and gentle, his family never saw him angry, and everyone who saw him felt that he was different. At the age of fourteen, he became a state governor.

古文：建元初，皇储镇樊汉，为水曹参军，二年七月十六日寝疾，自云： 不振济。 
现代文：建元年初，皇储镇守樊汉，他做了水曹参军。第二年七月十六日得了病，自己说： 不用救治。 
English: At the beginning of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, when he was stationed in the imperial reserve town of Shuhan, he made a cup of water and joined the army. On July 16 of the following year, he fell ill and said to himself: "I don't need treatment."

古文：至十八日，临尽起坐，谓母曰： 罪尽福至，缘累永绝，愿母自爱。不须忧念。 
现代文：到了十八日，临死时坐起对他的母亲说： 罪尽了福就来了，我们的缘份永远断绝了，愿母亲自爱，不必忧愁思念。 
English: On the eighteenth day, as he was about to die, he sat up and said to his mother: "Blessed is he who has done his duty. Our fate is forever severed. May my mother love herself and not be sad and homesick."

古文：因失声大哭，声尽而绝。
现代文：于是失声痛哭，声断气绝。
English: As a result, she broke down in tears and lost her breath.

古文：将殡葬丧斋前，其夜灵语云： 生死道乖，勿安斋前，自当有造像道人来迎丧者。 
现代文：将要把他殡葬在丧斋前。那天夜里他在灵柩里说： 生死是两条道，不要安葬在斋前，自当有个建佛像的道人来迎接我。 
English: That night, he said in his coffin: "Life and death are two paths. Don't be buried before the fast. I would like to be greeted by a Taoist who builds a Buddha statue."

古文：明日，果有道人来，名昙顺，即依灵语，向昙顺说之。
现代文：第二天，果然有个道人来，名叫昙顺，即按灵柩的话，对昙顺说了。
English: The next day, a Daoist named Shun Shun did indeed come, and he spoke to Shun Shun according to the words of the coffin.

古文：昙顺曰： 贫道住在南林寺，造丈八像垂成，贤子乃有此感应，寺西有少空地，可得安葬也。 
现代文：昙顺说： 贫道住在南林寺，建了丈八像刚建成，贤子却有这样的感应，寺西面有一点空地，可以安葬他。 
English: Hao Shun said: "Poor Tao lived in Nanlin Temple, and the statue of Jiao Bao had just been built, but Xianzi had such an impression. There was a little open space on the west side of the temple where he could be buried.

古文：遂葬寺边。
现代文：于是就把青建葬在寺边。
English: So he buried Qing Jian next to the temple.

古文：三日，其母将亲表十许人，墓东见建如生，云： 愿母割哀还去，建今还在寺住。 
现代文：三天后，他的母亲领亲属十多个人。在墓的东边看见青建象活着的一样，说： 愿母亲不要悲哀，还是回去，青建现在还在寺中住。 
English: Three days later, his mother led more than ten relatives. On the east side of the grave, she saw Qing Jian as if he were still alive, and said, "May my mother not be sad, but go back. Qing Jian is still living in the temple."

古文：母即止哭而还，举家菜食长斋。至闰月十一日，贤明梦见建云： 愿父暂出东斋。 
现代文：母亲就止住了哭声而回，全家吃素而长久斋戒，到了闰月十一日，父贤明又梦见青建说： 愿父亲暂且到东斋。 
English: His mother stopped crying and came back. The whole family ate vegetarian food and fasted for a long time. On the 11th day of the leap month, his father, Zhenming, dreamed of Qingjian and said, "May my father go to the East Lent for the time being."

古文：贤明便香汤自浴，斋戒出东斋。至十四夜，于明中闻建唤声，惊起，见建在斋前如生时。
现代文：贤明便香汤沐浴，出东斋斋戒，到了十四的夜里，在光明中听见青建的叫喊声，惊起，看见青建在斋前象生前一样。
English: Xianming bathed in the fragrant soup, went out of the East Lent and fasted, and when he reached the fourteenth night, he heard the shouts of Qing Jian in the light, and was startled to see Qing Jian before the fast as he was before his death.

古文：父问汝住在何处，建云： 从亡来，住在练神宫中，满百日，当得生忉利天，建不忍见父母兄弟哭泣伤恸，三七日礼诸佛菩萨，请四天王，故得暂还。
现代文：父问： 你住在什么地方？ 建答： 从死中回来。住在练神宫中，已满了百日应当从忧愁中解脱而升天。建不忍见父母兄弟哭泣悲伤。三七日礼拜各位佛菩萨，请四天王，所以能够暂时回来。
English: Father asked, "Where do you live?" Jian replied, "I have come back from the dead. I have been living in the Jianjing Palace, and it has been a hundred days since I should have been liberated from sorrow and ascended to heaven. I can't bear to see my parents and brothers crying with sorrow. I will worship the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas on the thirty-seventh day, and pray to the four heavenly kings, so I can temporarily return."

古文：愿父母从今已后，勿复啼哭祭祠。
现代文：愿父母从今以后，不要再啼哭于祭祠了。
English: I hope that from now on, my parents will stop crying at the shrine.

古文：阿母已发愿求见建，不久当命终，即共建同生一处。
现代文：阿母已发下誓愿要见我，不久当命绝，就和我同在一起了。
English: She has vowed to see me, and soon, when she dies, she will be with me.

古文：父寿可得七十三，命终后，当三年受罪报，勤苦行道，可得免脱。 
现代文：父寿可得七十三年，命终后，应当受三年的罪，父要勤苦行道，就可解脱。 
English: If the father lives to be seventy-three years old, after his death, he should suffer three years of sin. If the father works hard, he can be released.

古文：问曰： 汝从夜中来，那得有光明？ 
现代文：父问： 你从黑夜中来，哪里来的光明。 
English: My father asked, "You came from the dark, where did the light come from?"

古文：建曰： 今与菩萨诸天同下，此其身光耳。 
现代文：青建说： 今天和菩萨诸天人同来。这是他们身上的光罢了。 
English: Qing Jian said, "Today I have come with the bodhisattvas and heavenly beings. This is just the light on their bodies."

古文：又问曰： 汝天上识谁？ 
现代文：又问到： 你天上认识谁？ 
English: He also asked: Whom do you know in heaven?

古文：建曰： 见王车骑、张吴兴、外祖宋西河。 
现代文：青建说： 看见王车骑，张吴兴。外祖宋西河。 
English: Qing Jian said: Seeing Wang Che riding, Zhang Wu Xing. Her maternal grandfather Song Xihe.

古文：建曰： 非但此一门中生，从四十七年以来，至七死七生，已得四道果。
现代文：青建说： 不只是从这一家中生，从四十七年以来，到七处死七处生。已经得到四道的成果了。
English: Qing Jian said: "Not only from this one birth, but from the past 47 years, to seven deaths and seven births, we have achieved four results.

古文：先发七愿，愿生人间，故历生死，从今永毕，得离七苦。
现代文：先发七愿，愿生在人间，所以经历了生死，从今后永远完结。
English: First, he made seven wishes. He wished to be born in the human world, so he experienced life and death, and from now on, he would be finished forever.

古文：建临尽时，见七处生死，所以大哭者，与七家分别也。 
现代文：虽然得到七次苦痛，我临死时，就看见七处生与死。所以大哭的原因，是和七家分别了。 
English: Although I received seven times of suffering, when I was about to die, I saw seven stages of life and death. Therefore, the reason for crying was that I was separated from the seven families.

古文：问云： 汝皆生谁家？ 
现代文：问道： 你都出生在谁家？ 
English: Question: In which family were you born?

古文：建曰： 生江吏部、羊广州、张吴兴、王车骑、萧吴兴、梁给事、董越骑等家，唯此间生十七年，余处止三五年耳。
现代文：青建说： 生在江吏部，羊广州，张吴兴，王车骑，萧吴兴，梁给事，董越骑等家。只在这里活了十七年。在别处只生活三、五年罢了。
English: Qing Jian said, "I was born in Jianglibe, Yang Guangzhou, Zhang Wuxing, Wang Cheji, Xiao Wuxing, Liang Zizhi, Dong Yueji and other families. I only lived here for seventeen years. In other places, I only lived for three or five years.

古文：自今已后，毒厉岁多，宜勤修功德，建见世人死，多堕三涂，生天者少。
现代文：从今以后，严酷的岁月很多，应当勤心修建功德。我看见世人死了，许多堕入三涂，生天的人少。
English: From now on, there will be many harsh years, and we should diligently build merits. I saw that the world has died, many people have fallen into the Three Evil Realms, and few people have been born.

古文：勤精进，可得免度，发愿生天，亦得相见，行脱差异，无相值期。 
现代文：勤勉精进，就可以免度。发誓愿升天，也能相见，只是去和来是不一样的，不能互相约定日期。 
English: If you are diligent and diligent, you can be exempted. If you swear to ascend to heaven, you can meet each other, but going and coming are different, and you can't agree on a date.

古文：又问云： 汝母忧忆汝垂死，可令见汝否？ 
现代文：又问到： 你母亲忧愁想你而欲死，可让她见见你？ 
English: Then he asked, "Could your mother see you, since she is so worried about you that she wants to die?"

古文：建曰： 不须相见，益怀煎苦耳，但依向言说之。
现代文：建说： 不必相见，更加使她伤感痛苦罢了，只按先前说的那样。
English: Jian said: You don't have to see each other, it will only make her sadder and more painful, just as you said before.

古文：诸天已去，不容久住。 
现代文：诸天人已去，不容我久留。 
English: The gods have gone, and they will not let me stay long.

古文：惨有悲色，忽然不见。
现代文：悲惨而伤感，忽然不见了。
English: Miserable and sad, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：去后竹林左右犹有香气，家人亦并闻余香焉。
现代文：去了之后竹林左右还有香气。家人也都闻到了香气。
English: After I went there, there was still fragrance around the bamboo grove. My family also smelled the fragrance.

古文：建云所生七家：江概、羊希、张永、王玄宋谟、萧惠明、梁季文也。
现代文：青建说所生的七家中江概、羊希、张永、王玄宋漠、萧惠明、梁季文家。
English: Qing Jian said that the seven children born to him were Jiang Zhou, Yang Xi, Zhang Yong, Wang Xuan, Song Mo, Xiao Huiming, and Liang Ji.

古文：贤明遂以出家，名法藏。
现代文：贤明也就出家了，名叫法藏。
English: Xianming also became a monk, and his name was Fangzang.

古文：齐竟陵王
现代文：齐竟陵王
English: Qi Jingling, the king of tombs

古文：齐竟陵王，崇信内典，得热病，夜中垂死。
现代文：齐朝竟陵王，崇信内典，得了热病，夜里将死。
English: The king of mausoleums in the Qi Dynasty, Chongxin Nai Dian, caught a fever and was going to die in the night.

古文：梦见金像，手灌神汤，因遂平复。
现代文：梦见了金像，手端神汤喂他，于是病就好了。
English: Dreamed of a golden statue, and fed it with divine soup, and the illness was cured.

古文：张逸
现代文：张逸
English: Zhang Yizhen

古文：张逸为事至死，预造金像，朝夕祈命。
现代文：张逸犯罪将死，先造了一个金像，早晚祈求请命。
English: Zhang Yizhong was on the verge of death, so he first made a gold statue and prayed for his life.

古文：临刑，刀折而项不伤。
现代文：临刑时，刀砍而脖子不伤。
English: At the time of his execution, he was slashed with a knife, but his neck was not injured.

古文：官问故，答曰： 唯以礼像为业。 
现代文：官吏问原因。回答说： 只是因为礼拜神像缘故。 
English: Asked why, the official replied: "It's just because of the worship of idols."

古文：其像项有二刀痕如血，因得免死。
现代文：那个神像脖子上有两个刀痕象有血一样，因而得免死。
English: The god had two knife marks on his neck that looked like blood, so he was spared.

古文：释僧护
现代文：释僧护
English: Shoseongu

古文：高齐时，有释僧护，守道直心，不求慧业，愿造丈八石像，咸怪其言。
现代文：高齐时，有个释僧护，正心守道。不求功业。愿造八丈大的石像。大家都对他的话感到奇怪。
English: At the time of Gao Qi, there was a monk named Xie Zanggu, who sincerely followed the path. He did not seek any merit. He was willing to build a stone statue eight feet tall. Everyone was surprised by his words.

古文：后于寺北谷中，见一卧石，可长丈八，乃顾匠营造。向经一周，面腹粗了，而背著地，以六具拗举之。
现代文：以后在寺北深谷中，看见一个卧石，长可八丈。于是叫工匠建造，经过了一周，脸面和身体的大概都造出来了，而后背着地，用六具拗举它，起初举不动。
English: Later, in the deep valley to the north of the temple, he saw a recumbent stone, which was very tall. So he asked a craftsman to build it. After a week, the face and body were mostly built, and the back hit the ground. He used six sticks to lift it, and at first it did not move.

古文：始初不动，经夜至旦，忽然自翻，即就营造，移置佛堂。
现代文：过了一夜到天亮忽然自己翻了身，就接着建造，移到佛堂。
English: After a night and into the morning, he suddenly turned himself inside out, and proceeded to build and move to the Buddhist temple.

古文：晋州陷日，像汗流地，周兵入齐，烧诸佛寺，此像独不变色。
现代文：晋州沦陷之日，像汗流满地。周兵入齐，焚烧了许多佛寺，唯独这个石像不变色。
English: On the day of the fall of Jinzhou, it was like sweating all over the ground. Zhou soldiers entered the city and burned many Buddhist temples, but this stone statue did not change color.

古文：又欲倒之，大牛六十头挽不动。
现代文：又想弄倒它，用六十头大牛拉不动。
English: And they sought again to cast it down, and pained it with threescore and ten bullocks.

古文：忽有异僧，以瓦木土墼垒而围之，寻失僧所在。
现代文：忽然有个奇异的和尚，用瓦木土坯垒而围上了它，不一会和尚不知何处去了。
English: Suddenly, a strange monk surrounded it with a mud-brick wall. After a while, the monk did not know where to go.

古文：像后降梦信心者曰： 吾患指痛。 
现代文：石像以后托梦给诚信忠心的人说： 我的手指痛。 
English: After the stone statue, he said to the honest and loyal people: My fingers hurt.

古文：其人寤而视焉，乃木伤其二指也。
现代文：那个人醒了而去看，是木击伤了他的二指。
English: The man woke up and saw that the tree had injured two of his fingers.

古文：遂即补之。
现代文：于是就立刻补上了。
English: So I immediately made up for it.

古文：开皇十年，盗像幡盖者，梦丈八人入室责之，贼大怖悔而谢焉。
现代文：开皇十年，盗像幡盖的人，梦见八丈高的人进入屋内责问他，贼非常害怕后悔而拜谢。
English: After ten years, the man who stole the image of the banner, dreamed of a tall man entering the house and scolded him. The thief was very afraid of regret and thanked him.

古文：其像见在。
现代文：那个像现在还在。
English: That statue is still there.

古文：僧澄空
现代文：僧澄空
English: The monk Cheng Ku

古文：隋开皇中，僧澄空，年甫二十，誓愿于晋阳汾西铸铁像，高七十尺焉。鸠集金炭，经求用度，周二十年，物力乃办。于是造报遐迩，大集贤愚，然后选日而写像焉。
现代文：隋开皇年中，和尚澄空，年龄才二十岁。誓愿在晋阳汾西铸一个铁像，高七十尺，筹集金炭，筹备费用，准备了二十年，准备好了，于是向远近广告要建造，大集贤人，然后选好日子造像。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, the monk Cheng Kuo, only twenty years old, vowed to cast an iron statue, seventy feet high, in the west of Jinyang County, to collect gold and coal, to pay for the preparation, to prepare for twenty years, to be ready, so he advertised far and near to build, to gather sages, and then to choose a good day to build the statue.

古文：及烟焰灭息，启炉之后，其像无成。
现代文：等到烟焰灭息了，开炉之后，那个像没有铸成。
English: After the flames died down and the furnace was turned on, the statue was not cast.

古文：澄空即深自咎责，稽首忏悔，复坚前约，再谋铸造。精勤艰苦，又三十年，事费复备，则又复写像焉。
现代文：澄空就深深地自责，磕头忏悔，又坚守前面的誓约，再商量铸造，他精心勤恳不畏艰苦，又三十年，用费又准备齐了，则又造像，等到打开炉，那个铸像又没有成功。
English: Cheng Kuo deeply reproached himself, bowed his head in repentance, adhered to the previous oath, and discussed the casting. He was meticulous and diligent and did not fear hardship. After another thirty years, the expenses were ready, and the statue was made. When the furnace was opened, the statue was not successful.

古文：及启铸，其像又复无成，澄空于是呼天求哀，叩头请罪，大加贬挫，深自勤励。
现代文：澄空于是呼天求地，叩头请罪，更加受到贬挫。
English: As a result, Cheng Kuo called on heaven and earth, bowed down and pleaded guilty, and was even more frustrated.

古文：又二十年，功力复集，然后选日，复写像焉。及期，澄空乃身登炉巅，百尺悬绝，扬声谓观者曰： 吾少发誓愿，铸写大佛，今虚费积年，如或踵前，吾亦无面见大众也。
现代文：而自己更加勤勉，又过了二十年，又准备了齐备，然后又选日子，再造佛像，等到到了日期，澄空就只身登上炉顶，百尺高绝之处，扬声对观看的人说： 吾年少发誓愿，铸造大佛，今已荒废多年，如果今天和以前一样，我也没脸面见大众了。
English: But he was more diligent. After another twenty years, he prepared everything again, and then chose a day to make another Buddha statue. When the date arrived, Cheng Kuo climbed to the top of the furnace, a hundred feet high, and said to the people watching: I swore a vow when I was young, casting a big Buddha. Now it has been abandoned for many years. If today is the same as before, I have no face to see the public.

古文：吾今俟其启炉，欲于金液而舍命焉，一以谢俧于诸佛，一以表诚于众善。
现代文：我今天等着开炉，想要舍命于金液之中，一是来谢罪于各个神佛，一是向大家的好心表示诚心的感谢。
English: Today, I am waiting for the furnace to be turned on, and I want to give my life to the golden liquid. On the one hand, I would like to thank all the gods and Buddhas for my sins, and on the other hand, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to everyone for their kindness.

古文：倘大像圆满，后五十年，吾当为建重阁耳。 
现代文：如果大像圆满铸成，以后五十年，我当为它修建重阁。 
English: If the statue is cast perfectly, I should build a pavilion for it in the next fifty years.

古文：时观者万众，号泣谏止，而澄空殊不听览。俄而金液注射，赫耀踊跃，澄空于是挥手辞谢，投身如飞鸟而入焉。
现代文：当时围观的人上万，都号哭劝止他，而澄空不听，不一会金液注射，强光闪烁，澄空于是挥手辞谢，象飞鸟一样跳进去了。
English: At that time, tens of thousands of onlookers were crying and persuading him to stop, but Cheng Kuo did not listen. He immediately injected gold liquid and flashed a strong light. Cheng Kuo then waved his thanks and jumped in like a bird.

古文：及开炉，铁像庄严端妙，毫发皆备。
现代文：等到开炉，铁像庄严端妙，眉发齐备。
English: Wait until the furnace is turned on, the iron will look solemn and elegant, and the eyebrows will be ready.

古文：自是并州之人，因起阁以覆之，而佛身洪大，功用极广，自非殊力，无由而致。
现代文：从此并州人准备为他筑起阁子，而佛身洪大，功用也极广，不是有特殊功力，不能建造。
English: From then on, the people of Ganzhou prepared to build a pavilion for him, but since the Buddha's body is huge and has a wide range of functions, it does not have special powers and cannot be built.

古文：唐开元初，李皓为太原军节度使，出游，因仰像叹曰： 如此好相，而为风日所侵，痛哉！ 
现代文：唐朝开元初年。李皓为太原军节度使。出游，因而仰视铁像而叹息说： 象这样的好相貌，而被风日侵蚀，痛心啊！ 
English: In the first year of the first century of the Tang Dynasty, Li Qian was the Taiyuan Army's festival envoy. He was on a trip, so he looked up at the iron statue and sighed and said: It's a pity that such a good-looking statue was eroded by the wind and sun!

古文：即施钱百万缗，周岁之内，而重阁成就，至今北都谓之平等阁者是也。
现代文：于是就出百万串钱，一年之内，而重阁建成，至今北都称它是平等阁的就是。
English: As a result, a million strings of money were issued, and within a year, the heavy pavilion was built, and so far the North has called it the equality pavilion.

古文：计僧死像成日至皓，正五十年矣。以佛法推之，则皓也得非澄空之后身欤。
现代文：从僧死像成日一直到李皓正好五十年，用佛法推论，那么李皓难道是澄空的后身啦！
English: It has been exactly fifty years from the death of the monk, Shingri, to the emergence of Li Qiye. Using the Buddhist method of deduction, then Li Qiye is the posterior body of Clear Sky!

古文：释慧侃
现代文：释慧侃
English: Explanation and explanation

古文：隋蒋州大归善寺释慧侃，曲阿人也，灵通幽显，世莫识之。
现代文：隋朝蒋州大归善寺释慧侃，是曲阿人。通神灵而显鬼神，世人没有不认识他的。
English: Sui Dynasty and Jiangzhou Dahuizhen Temple's exorcist was a Qua man. He channeled the spirit of the gods to reveal ghosts and gods, and the world did not know him.

古文：而翘敬尊像，事同真佛，每见立像，不敢辄坐，劝人造像，唯作坐者。
现代文：而仰敬尊像，敬事如同真佛一样，每次看见立像，总是不敢一坐，并劝别人建造佛像，只要作坐像。
English: On the other hand, he looked up to the statue and respected it like a true Buddha. Every time he saw a standing statue, he always dared not to sit down. He also advised others to build Buddha statues, as long as they were seated.

古文：后往岭南，修禅法，大有悟解。
现代文：后去岭南，修行禅法，大有提高。
English: Later, he went to Lingnan to practice Zen, and he improved a lot.

古文：住栖霞时，尝往扬都汤偲法师，偲异礼接之。
现代文：住在栖霞时，曾经去扬都拜见汤偲法师，偲法师用特殊的礼仪接待了他。
English: When he was living in Qixia, he once went to Yangdu to meet Tang Yao, and Tang Yao received him with special etiquette.

古文：将还山，偲请现神力。
现代文：将要回山，偲法师请他现神力，慧偲就从窗中伸出胳膊，解开齐熙寺佛殿上额。
English: When he was about to return to the mountain, Zou Mage asked him to demonstrate his divine power, and Hui Zou stretched out his arm from the window and opened the upper forehead of the Qixi Temple.

古文：侃即从窗中出臂，解齐熙寺佛殿上额，因语偲云： 世人无远识，见多惊异，故吾所不为耳。 大业元年，终于大归善寺。初侃终日，以三衣还众僧： 吾今死去，徒众好住。 
现代文：于是告诉偲法师说： 世人没有远见卓识，看见了都惊异，所以我不去做了。 大业元年，死在大归善寺。当初慧侃死之前，把三衣还给众僧说： 我将要死去，你们要好好活着。 
English: He then told Master Zou: "The world has no foresight or insight, and everyone is surprised when they see it, so I won't do it. In the first year of the Taiei era, he died at Daeguisen-ji Temple. Before he died, he returned the three robes to the monks and said: "I am about to die, you should live well."

古文：便还房内。
现代文：便回房内。
English: He then went back into the room.

古文：大众惊起追之，乃见房中白骨一具，跏坐床上，就而撼之，锵然不散。
现代文：大家惊起而追赶他，就看见房中一具白骨，盘坐床上，上前摇动他，锵然而不散动。
English: They were startled and ran after him, when they saw a white skeleton in the room, sitting cross-legged on the bed. They shook him, but he did not move.

古文：释道积
现代文：释道积
English: Explanation of the product

古文：唐蒲州普济寺释道积，河东安邑县人也。
现代文：唐朝蒲州普济寺的释道积，是河东安邑县人。
English: He was born in An'yih County, Hedong Province, and was a disciple of the founder of Puji Temple in Puzhou during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：博通经教，洞明玄旨，河东英俊，莫与同风。
现代文：精通经教，领会玄旨，河东的才子，没有人能与他相比。
English: No one can compare to him, who is well versed in the teachings of the sutras, understands the secret meaning, and is a talented person from Hedong.

古文：先是沙门宝澄于普济寺创营大像百丈，功愿未终而卒。
现代文：先前是僧人宝澄在普济寺创建百丈的大像，功愿没完成而死。
English: Previously, the monk Bao Cheng had created a large statue of Baizhang in Puji Temple, but he died before he could fulfill his vows.

古文：耆艾请积继之，积受众勤请，广行缘化，槐檀十迁，而大像成就，道俗庆赖，感彻人天。
现代文：耆艾请求道积继续他的事业，道积接受大家恳切的请求，广泛化缘，收集了上千的槐木和檀木，而大像建成，道家俗众共同庆贺，感动了人天。
English: Zou Ai asked Daozhe to continue his work. Daozhe accepted everyone's earnest request, expanded the relationship, collected thousands of eucalyptus and sandalwood, and when the statue was completed, the Taoist laity celebrated together, which moved people.

古文：初积受请之夕，梦二狮子于大像侧，连吐明珠，相续不绝，既寤叹曰： 兽王自在，则表法流无滞，宝珠自涌，又喻檀施不穷。
现代文：当初道积接受请求的那天晚上，梦见了两个狮子在大像侧，连吐明珠，相接不断。于是醒了感叹说： 兽王自在，那么标志着法流没有停止，自涌宝珠，又象征着檀主们施舍不断。
English: On the night that Dao Jie initially accepted the request, he dreamed of two lions on the side of the large statue, continuously spitting pearls, and then woke up and sighed, saying: "The Beast King is at ease, so it indicates that the flow of the Fa has not stopped, and the self-pouring pearl also symbolizes the constant giving of alms by the worshipers."

古文：冥运潜符，徵效斯在。 
现代文：是冥间暗送徵兆，验证成效就在这里。 
English: is a sign sent to the underworld, and the verification results are here.

古文：即命工匠，图所梦于弥勒大像前，今犹存焉。
现代文：就让工匠，在弥勒大像前画上自己所梦见的，现在还保存着。
English: Let the craftsmen paint what they dreamed of in front of the Maitreya statue, and it is still preserved.

古文：其寺在蒲坂之阳，高爽华敞，东临州里，南望河山。
现代文：那个寺在蒲坂的南面，高大宽敞，东面临州里，南面望着河山。
English: The temple is on the south side of the hill, tall and spacious. It faces the county to the east and the mountains to the south.

古文：像设三层，岩廊四合，上方下院，赫奕相临，园磑田蔬，周环俯就，佛事隆盛，咸积之功焉。
现代文：像设三层，四下岩廊，上院下院。交相辉映，善男信女送来的果品，环绕周围，佛事隆重，都是道积的功劳。
English: The three-storey, four-tiered rock gallery, the Senate and the House of Representatives, the mutual reflection, the fruits sent by the virtuous men and women, the surrounding area, and the grand Buddhist ceremony are all the achievements of the Taoist accumulation.

古文：释法诚
现代文：释法诚
English: Interpretation of the Law of Sincerity

古文：终南山悟真寺释法诚，雍州万年县人，事沙门僧和为师。
现代文：终南山悟真寺的和尚法诚，是雍州万年县人，拜僧人和为师，和也受到乡族人的推崇。
English: The monk Fa Cheng of the Nanshan Wujin Temple is a native of Yongzhou County, a monk and a teacher, and is also respected by the villagers.

古文：和亦乡族之所推奉，曾有人欲害和，夜诣门，见房内猛火，腾焰升帐，遂即追悔。
现代文：曾经有人想要害和，夜里进门，看见房内大火，烟腾升入帐中，然后就后悔了。
English: There was once someone who wanted to do harm to peace, entered the door at night, saw a fire in the room, smoke rising into the account, and then regretted it.

古文：诚奉佩训勖，常诵法华，翘心奉行，朝夕无懈。
现代文：法诚心敬奉佩训的勉励。常常诵读法华经，忠心奉行，早晚不懈怠。
English: Practice the Dharma sincerely, respect and admire the exhortation of the teachings, often recite the Lotus Sutra, faithfully practice, and do not slack off in the morning and evening.

古文：梦感普贤，劝书大教，既悟，即入净行道。重村工匠，令书八部般若，香台宝轴，庄严成就。
现代文：感动了普贤，梦见劝他写大教，醒来后，就诚心行道，大请工匠，让他写八部般若经，筑香台宝轴，庄严而成。
English: Moved by Pu Xian, he dreamed of persuading him to write the Great Teaching, and after waking up, he sincerely went out and invited the craftsman to write the eight parts of the Prajna Sutra, and to make the incense table, which was solemnly made.

古文：又于寺南横岭，造华严堂，凿山堙堑，列栋连甍，前对重峦，右临斜谷，吐纳云雾，下瞰烟虹，实奇观也。
现代文：又在寺南的横岭上，建造了华严堂，凿山堵涧，列栋连脊，前对重峦，右临斜谷。云雾缭绕，下视烟虹，的确是奇景。
English: Also, on the ridge to the south of the temple, Huayan Hall was built. The mountain is chiseled, the ridges are connected, the buildings are lined up, the front is heavy, and the right is near the valley. Surrounded by clouds, looking down at the rainbow, it is truly a wonderland.

古文：弘文馆学士张孝静者，善于书翰，诚乃请孝静写藏经，斋洁勤拳。大致感应，灵禽异兽，驯扰精庐。
现代文：弘文馆学士张孝静，善于书写，法诚就请孝静写藏经，斋戒洁净勤奋恳切，大受感应，灵禽异兽在精舍周围十分驯服。
English: Zhang Xiaojing, a scholar of the Hongwen Museum, is good at writing, so Ducheng asked Xiaojing to write the Tibetan sutra. His fasting is clean, diligent and earnest, and he was greatly impressed. The spirit birds and beasts around the hermitage are very tame.

古文：贞观十四年，忽谓侍者曰： 诸行无常，法缘有竭，九品往生，斯言验矣。
现代文：贞观十四年，忽然对侍者说： 各种行为无定，法缘有尽，九品往生这话灵验了。
English: In the fourteenth year of her chastity, she suddenly said to the waiter: "All kinds of behavior are uncertain, the Dharma lineage is exhausted, and the words of the past nine births have come to fruition.

古文：吾今去世，汝无忧恼。 
现代文：我现在去逝，你不要忧愁烦恼。 
English: I'm going now, don't worry.

古文：言毕，口光烛于楹，奄然而化。
现代文：说完，口中发光照在柱子上，默默而死。
English: With that, the glow from his mouth shone on the pillar, and he died in silence.

