古文：十有二年春，王正月，郕伯来奔。
现代文：十二年春季，周历正月，郕伯逃到鲁国。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Zibo fled to Lu.

古文：杞伯来朝。
现代文：杞桓公来鲁国朝见。
English: Prince Shokan came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：二月庚子，子叔姬卒。
现代文：二月庚子日，子叔姬去世。
English: In February, Geng Zi Day, Zixu Ji passed away.

古文：夏，楚人围巢。
现代文：夏季，楚国包围巢地。
English: In summer, the nests are surrounded by Chu.

古文：秋，滕子来朝。
现代文：秋季，滕昭公来鲁国朝见。
English: In autumn, Teng Zhaogong came to see the Imperial Court of Lu.

古文：秦伯使术来聘。
现代文：秦康公派遣西乞术前来聘问。
English: Qin Kangong sent Xigai to come and ask questions.

古文：冬十有二月戊午，晋人、秦人战于河曲。
现代文：冬季十二月戊午日，晋国、秦国、在河曲交战。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of winter in December, Jin and Qin fought in Hequ.

古文：季孙行父帅师城诸及郓。
现代文：季孙行父领兵在诸郓二地修筑城墙。
English: Ji Sun Xingfu led the troops to build the city wall in Zhuye.

古文：十二年春，郕伯卒，郕人立君。
现代文：十二年春季，郕伯死了，郕国人又立了国君。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, Zibo died, and the people of Zibo re-established the sovereign.

古文：大子以夫钟与郕邽来奔。
现代文：太子把夫钟和郕国的宝圭作为奉献而逃亡到鲁国来。
English: The prince fled to Lu with his husband, Zhong, and Bao Gui from Shandong as an offering.

古文：公以诸侯逆之，非礼也。
现代文：文公把他作为诸侯迎接，这不合于礼。
English: It is not proper for Wenguo to greet him as a lord.

古文：故书曰： 郕伯来奔。 不书地，尊诸侯也。
现代文：所以《春秋》记载说 郕伯来奔 ，不记载关于奉献土地的事情，把郕伯作为诸侯来尊重。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" records that Zibo came to run, does not record about the dedication of land, and respects Zibo as a vassal.

古文：杞桓公来朝，始朝公也。
现代文：杞桓公来鲁国朝见，这是第一次前来朝见鲁文公。
English: This is the first time that Prince Shokan has come to see Prince Reuben.

古文：且请绝叔姬而无绝昏，公许之。
现代文：同时又请求和叔姬离婚，但不断绝两国的婚姻关系，文公答应了。
English: At the same time, he asked for a divorce from his aunt and uncle, but the marriage relationship between the two countries continued, and Wenguang agreed.

古文：二月，叔姬卒，不言杞，绝也。
现代文：二月，叔姬死了。《春秋》不记载 杞 字，是由于杞国和她断绝了关系。
English: In February, Shuki died. "Spring and Autumn" does not record the character, because Shikoku severed ties with her.

古文：书叔姬，言非女也。
现代文：写明 叔姬 ，是说她已经出过嫁。
English: If it says 叔姬, it means that she has been married before.

古文：楚令尹大孙伯卒，成嘉为令尹。
现代文：楚国的令尹大孙伯去世，成嘉做了令尹。
English: After the death of the great-grandson of Emperor Yin of the State of Chu, Cheng Jia became Emperor Yin.

古文：群舒叛楚。
现代文：舒氏的一批人背叛楚国。
English: A group of people from the Shu clan betrayed the state of Chu.

古文：夏，子孔执舒子平及宗子，遂围巢。
现代文：夏季，子孔逮捕了舒子平和宗子，就乘机包围巢地。
English: In the summer, Zi Kong arrested Shuzi Heping and his son-in-law, and took the opportunity to surround the nest site.

古文：秋，滕昭公来朝，亦始朝公也。
现代文：秋季，滕昭公来鲁国朝见，也是第一次前来朝见文公。
English: In the autumn, Teng Zhaogong came to see the Imperial Court of Lu, and it was also the first time that he came to see Wengong.

古文：秦伯使西乞术来聘，且言将伐晋。
现代文：秦康公派遣西乞术前来聘问，而且说将要攻打晋国。
English: Qin Kangong sent Xigai to ask questions, and said that he would attack Jin.

古文：襄仲辞玉曰： 君不忘先君之好，照临鲁国，镇抚其社稷，重之以大器，寡君敢辞玉。 
现代文：襄仲不肯受玉，说： 贵国国君没有忘记和先君的友好，光临鲁国，镇定安抚我们这个国家，十分厚重地赠给我们大器，寡君不敢受玉。 
English: Xiang Zhong refused to accept the jade, saying: Your country's sovereign has not forgotten the friendship with the previous sovereign. He came to Lu, calmly pacified our country, and generously presented us with a large vessel. Few sovereigns would dare to accept the jade.

古文：对曰： 不腆敝器，不足辞也。 
现代文：西乞术回答说： 不丰厚的器物，不值得辞谢。 
English: The Western Beggar replied, "A ware that is not plentiful is not worthy of gratitude."

古文：主人三辞。宾答曰： 寡君愿徼福于周公、鲁公以事君，不腆先君之敝器，使下臣致诸执事以为瑞节，要结好命，所以藉寡君之命，结二国之好，是以敢致之。 
现代文：主人辞谢了三次，客人回答说： 寡君愿意在周公、鲁公这里求取福禄来事奉贵国国君，一点微薄的礼物，派遣下臣致送给执事，以作为祥瑞的信物，相约友好，把它用来表示寡君的命令，缔结两国之间的友好，因此才敢致送。 
English: The host thanked him three times, and the guest replied: "Your majesty is willing to solicit a reward from Zhou Gong and Lu Gong to serve your country's sovereign, a small gift, send a vassal to give to the deacon, as a token of friendship, and use it to express your majesty's order and conclude friendship between the two countries, so I dare to send it."

古文：襄仲曰： 不有君子，其能国乎？
现代文：襄仲说： 若没有这样的外交人才，难道能治理国家吗？
English: Xiangzhong said: If there is no such diplomatic talent, can the country be governed?

古文：国无陋矣。 
现代文：秦国不是鄙陋的国家。 
English: Qin is not a despicable country.

古文：厚贿之。
现代文：就用重礼赠送给西乞术。
English: and presented it to Xizhi with a heavy gift.

古文：秦为令狐之役故，冬，秦伯伐晋，取羁马。
现代文：秦国为了令狐那次战役的缘故，冬季，秦康公发兵攻打晋国，占取了羁马。
English: In the winter, Qin Kangong sent an army to invade Jin Province to occupy Guima in order to let the foxes win the battle.

古文：晋人御之。
现代文：晋国发兵抵御。
English: Jin sent troops to resist.

古文：赵盾将中军，荀林父佐之。
现代文：赵盾率领中军，荀林父作为辅佐。
English: Zhao Dun led the Chinese army, Yulin father as an assistant.

古文：郤缺将上军，臾骈佐之。
现代文：郤缺率领上军，臾骈作为辅佐。
English: Zou Gao led the army, Zou as an assistant.

古文：栾盾将下军，胥甲佐之。
现代文：栾盾率领下军，胥甲作为辅佐。
English: Xing Dun led the lower army, and Xing Jia acted as an assistant.

古文：范无恤御戎，以从秦师于河曲。
现代文：范无恤为赵盾驾御战车，在河曲迎战秦军。
English: Fan Wuxi drove a chariot for Zhao Dun and fought against the Qin army in Hequ.

古文：臾骈曰： 秦不能久，请深垒固军以待之。 
现代文：臾骈说： 秦军不能持久，请高筑军垒巩固军营等着他们。 
English: Zou said: The Qin army cannot last, please build high fortifications, consolidate military camps and wait for them.

古文：从之。
现代文：赵盾听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秦人欲战，秦伯谓士会曰： 若何而战？ 
现代文：秦军准备出战。秦康公对士会说： 用什么办法作战？ 
English: The Qin army is preparing to go to war. Qin Kangong would say to his soldiers: How should we fight?

古文：对曰： 赵氏新出其属曰臾骈，必实为此谋，将以老我师也。
现代文：士会回答说： 赵盾新近提拔他的部下名叫臾骈，必定是他出的这个主意，打算使我军久驻在外面感到疲乏。
English: The judges replied: Zhao Dun recently promoted his subordinate named Zou, it must be his idea to make our army feel tired after being stationed outside for a long time.

古文：赵有侧室曰穿，晋君之婿也，有宠而弱，不在军事，好勇而狂，且恶臾骈之佐上军也，若使轻者肆焉，其可。 
现代文：赵氏有一个旁支的子弟名叫穿，是晋国国君的女婿，受到宠信而年少，不懂得作战，喜好勇猛而又狂妄，又讨厌臾骈作为上军的辅佐。如果派出一些勇敢而不刚强的人对上军加以袭击，或许还有可能战胜赵穿。 
English: The Zhao clan had a son from a side branch named Zou, who was the son-in-law of the ruler of Jin, but he was too young to be trusted. He didn't know how to fight, he liked to be brave and arrogant, and he didn't like Zou as an assistant to the army. If they sent some brave but not strong people to attack the army, they might be able to defeat Zou.

古文：秦伯以璧祈战于河。
现代文：秦康公把玉璧丢在黄河里，向河神祈求战争胜利。
English: Qin Kangong threw the jade gem into the Yellow River and prayed to the river god for victory in the war.

古文：十二月戊午，秦军掩晋上军，赵穿追之，不及。
现代文：十二月初四日，秦国袭击晋军的上军，赵穿追赶秦军，没有追上。
English: On the 4th day of early December, Qin attacked the advancing Jin army. Zhao Zeng chased the Qin army, but did not catch up.

古文：反，怒曰： 裹粮坐甲，固敌是求，敌至不击，将何俟焉？ 
现代文：回来，发怒说： 装着粮食披着甲胄，就是要寻求敌人。敌人来了不去攻击，打算等待什么呢？ 
English: When he came back, he was angry and said, "If you are carrying grain and wearing armor, you should be looking for the enemy. If the enemy comes and does not attack, what are you going to wait for?

古文：军吏曰： 将有待也。 
现代文：军官说： 将要有所等待啊。 
English: The officer said: "We'll have to wait and see."

古文：穿曰： 我不知谋，将独出。 
现代文：赵穿说： 我不懂得计谋，我打算自己出战。 
English: Zhao Zeng said: I don't know how to strategize, I plan to go to war by myself.

古文：乃以其属出。
现代文：就带领他的士兵出战。
English: He led his soldiers into battle.

古文：宣子曰： 秦获穿也，获一卿矣。
现代文：赵盾说： 秦军要是俘虏了赵穿，就是俘虏了一位卿了。
English: Zhao Dun said: If the Qin Army captured Zhao Zhan, it would be the capture of a nobleman.

古文：秦以胜归，我何以报？ 
现代文：秦国带着胜利回去，我用什么回报晋国的父老？ 
English: Qin has returned home with victory. How can I repay the fathers and grandfathers of Jin?

古文：乃皆出战，交绥。
现代文：于是全部出战，双方刚一交战就彼此退兵。
English: As a result, they all went to war, and both sides withdrew from each other as soon as they fought.

古文：秦行人夜戒晋师曰： 两君之士皆未慭也，明日请相见也。 
现代文：秦军的使者夜里告诉晋国军队说： 我们两国国君的将士都还没有痛快地打一仗，明天请再相见。 
English: The emissary of the Qin army told the army of Jin in the middle of the night: The soldiers of our two sovereigns have not yet had the pleasure of fighting a battle. Please meet again tomorrow.

古文：臾骈曰： 使者目动而言肆，惧我也，将遁矣。
现代文：臾骈说： 使者眼神不安而声音失常，这是害怕我们，秦军将要逃走了。
English: Zou said: The messenger's eyes are uneasy and his voice is abnormal. This is because he is afraid of us. The Qin army is about to flee.

古文：薄诸河，必败之。 
现代文：我军把他们逼到黄河边上，一定可以打败他们。 
English: Our army has driven them to the edge of the Yellow River and will surely defeat them.

古文：胥甲、赵穿当军门呼曰： 死伤未收而弃之，不惠也；不待期而薄人于险，无勇也。 
现代文：胥甲、赵穿挡住营门大喊说： 死伤的人还没有收集就把他们丢弃，这是不仁慈。不等到约定的日期而把人逼到险地，这是没有勇气。 
English: Gong Jia and Zhao Jian blocked the gate of the camp and shouted: "It is not merciful to discard the dead and wounded without collecting them. It is not courageous to force people into danger without waiting for the agreed date.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是晋军就停止出击。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：秦师夜遁。
现代文：秦军夜里逃走了。
English: The Qin army fled in the night.

古文：复侵晋，入瑕。
现代文：后来又入侵晋国，进入瑕地。
English: Later, they invaded Jin Province and entered Cangde.

古文：城诸及郓，书时也。
现代文：鲁国在诸地和郓地筑城，《春秋》记载这件事，是由于合于时令。
English: Lu built cities in Zhuji and Handan. "Spring and Autumn" records this event, due to the time of year.

